Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. XXIV (1910-1912)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1910 Glasgow: Robert MacLehose and Co. edition (Parts LX-LXI and Appendix) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc24soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research


VOLUME  XXIV

(CONTAINING  PARTS  LX,  LXI  AND  APPENDIX)

I91O


The  responsibility  for  both  the  facts  aiid  the  reasonings  in  papers
published  in  the  P roceedings  rests  entirely  with  their  authors


PRINTED  FOR  THE  SOCIETY  BY

ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  &  COMPANY  LIMITED
UNIVERSITY  PRESS,  GLASGOW
1910

Ageyits  for  the  sale  of  publications  :

LONDON  :  FRANCIS  EDWARDS,  83  High  Street,  Marylebone,  W.
GLASGOW  :  JAMES  MACLEHOSE  &  SONS,  61  St.  Vincent  Street
AMERICA:  THE  W.  B.  CLARKE  CO.,  26-28  Tremont  Street,  Boston,*  Mass.


All  rights  reserved


CONTENTS.


PAET  LX.


March,  1910.


General  Meeting, - . -  -

Supplementary  Notes  on  the  First  Eeport  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.

By  Alice  Johnson,  --------

Supplementary  Notes  on  "A  Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms.''

By  J.  G.  PiDDIMGTON,

Further  Experiments  with  Mrs.  Piper  in  1908  :

Introduction. By Mrs. Henry Sidgwick, Mrs. A.  W.
Verrall,  and  J.  G.  Piddington, - - - -  -

I.  Classical  and  Literary  Allusions  in  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance.

By  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall, - . . -  _

II.  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings  :  Lethe  ;  The  Sibyl  ;

The  Horace  Ode  Question. By  J.  G.  Piddington,  -
III. Cross-Correspondences  between  Mrs.  Piper  and  Other
Automatists. By  Mrs.  Henry  Scdgwick,

Second  Eeport  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script. By  Alice  Johnson,  -

A  New  Group  of  Experimenters. By  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall,  -

Sequel  to  the  "Sesame  and  Lilies"  Incident. By  Alice  Johnson,  -

Postscript  to  the  Lethe  Incident. By  J.  G.  Piddington,  -


PAET  LXI.


August,  1910.


General  Meeting,


Presidential  Address. By  H.  Arthur  Smith,  -


■ 9 ■  .

iv  Contents^  ,

,_<■■ (. C c.L  r^ <' r'  J  t  '  '

Eeport  on  tbe  Jun'ot  ^sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper. By  Helen  de  G.


Verrall.  , . ,  '  .

■ : i: \ J  ;

Introdi^cticri, ''r  ^  /,  r  ' '- - - •  351

Detailed  Eecord  of  Sittings, -------  355

Supplement.

I. Some  Recent  Developments  in  Psychotherapy. By  T.  W.

Mitchell,  M.D.,  665

II. Review :

Mr.  Frank  Podmore's  "  Mesmerism  and  Christian  Science."

By  T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D., - - - - -  687

APPENDIX  TO  PART  LXI.
November,  1910.

Officers  and  Council  for  1910,  - - -  699

List  of  Members  and  Associates,  700
Index  to  Vol.  XXIV.,  741


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research.

PART  LX.
March,  1910.


PEOCEEDINGS  OF  GENEEAL  MEETING.

The  135th  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  in  the
Large  Hall,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.,  on  Monday,
January  31st,  1910,  at  5  p.m.;  the  President,  Mr.  H.
Akthue  Smith,  in  the  chair.

A  paper  entitled  "  Seeing  without  Eyes,"  by  Me.  Feank
PODMORE,  was  read  by  Miss  Alice  Johnson.


A


2


Alice  Johnson.


[part

V


SUPPLEMENTAEY  NOTES  ON  THE  FIRST  EEPOET  ON
MRS.  HOLLAND'S  SCRIPT.^

By  Alice  Johnson.

Pro'portion  of  Script  printed.

A  CORRESPONDENT,  Mr.  J.  Arthur  Hill,  asked  me  to  state  what
proportion  the  printed  parts  of  the  script  bear  to  the  whole
amount  produced  during  the  period  dealt  with  in  my  first
Report,  so  that  he  might  be  able  to  form  a  rough  estimate  of
the  proportion  of  evidential  matter  to  the  whole.

The  script  printed  (which  contained,  as  readers  will  have
seen,  a  considerable  quantity  of  non -evidential  matter)  amounts
to  about  65  per  cent,  of  the  whole.  This  may  be  divided
into  three  periods:  {a)  From  September,  1903,  to  February,
1904,  about  68  per  cent,  of  the  script  produced  is  printed
(see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXL  pp.  176-240);  ih)  From  January
to  December,  1905,  about  45  per  cent,  of  the  script  is  printed
{op.  cit.  pp.  241-278);  (c)  From  January  1st  to  April  15th,
1906,  about  90  per  cent,  of  the  script  is  printed  {op),  cit.
pp.  279-369).  It  is  to  be  noted  that  a  large  proportion  of
the  cross-correspondences  and  other  evidential  matter  belong
to  this  third  period.

Of  the  matter  unpublished:  (1)  the  greater  part  consists
of  general  reflections  more  or  less  similar  to  those  printed  in
the  early  part  of  the  Report  (pp.  192-219),  and  here  and
there  throughout  it.  (2)  There  are  also  allusions  to  Sir  Oliver
Lodge  and  others  of  Mr.  Myers's  friends,  a  few  of  which
were  printed.  Most  of  these  are  omitted,  partly  as  being  too
personal  to  print,  but  still  more  because they  could  not  in

^  See  Proceedinf/s,  Vol.  XXI.  pp.  166-391.  All  page  references  in  this  paper
are  to  this  volume,  in  connection  with  which  the  paper  must  be  read.


LX.] Supplementary  Notes  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.  3


any  case  be  regarded  as  evidential.  Thus,  though  Mrs.  Holland
did  not  know  either  Mr.  Myers  or  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  personally
(she  met  the  latter  for  the  first  time  at  the  end  of  the
period  of  my  first  Eeport),  she  was  acquainted  with  some
of  their  writings  and  had  come  to  know  that  they  were  intimate
friends.  Hence  she  could  form  a  pretty  correct  conception
of  their  relationship  to  each  other.  There  are  indeed  two
or  three  cases  relating  to  people  whose  special  associations
with  Mr.  Myers  were,  as  I  have  reason  to  believe,  much  further
beyond  Mrs.  Holland's  ken,  where  the  personal  relationship
is  hit  off  in  a  few  graphic  phrases,  suggestive  of  a  certain
degree  of  supernormal  perception,  such  as  the  description  of
Dr.  Verrall  (p.  327).  But  here  again,  it  is  impossible  to
prove  Mrs.  Holland's  complete  ignorance  of  the  matter,  and
further,  the  exactness  of  the  portraiture  must  be  more  or  less
a  question  of  opinion.

There  are  further  occasional  references,  as  I  stated,  to  Lady
Mount-Temple,  chiefly  about  matters  of  fact  known  to  Mrs.
Holland,  and  a  very  few  remarks  about  other  persons  known  to
her  or  included  in  the  circle  of  her  own  friends.

Of  the  matter  omitted,  only  a  very  small  proportion  consisted
of  definite  statements  which,  if  correct,  might  have  afforded
evidence  of  supernormal  knowledge ;  so  that,  in  considering  how
far  chance  may  account  for  the  evidential  statements  which  were
published,  the  omitted  portions  may  practically  be  disregarded.

"The  Eidolon"

I  find  that  the  word  "  Eidolon,"  Mrs.  Holland's  use  of
which  is  discussed  (pp.  215-218),  occurs  in  a  quotation  from
the  Iliad  in  a  paper  by  Mr.  Myers  "  On  recognised  Apparitions
occurring  more  than  a  year  after  death "  in  Proceedings  S.P.E.,
Vol.  VI.  p.  64.  In  his  discussion  there  of  the  true  nature
of  a  "  ghost "  two  lines  from  the  Iliad  are  quoted,  with
Dr.  Leaf's  translation  of  them :  "  There  is  some  soul  and
wraith  even  in  Hades,  but  there  is  no  heart  in  them,"  eidolon
being  rendered  as  vrraith.  The  next  paragraph  contrasts
Homer's  view  of  the  condition  of  the  dead  with  the  famous
passage  from  Plotinus  about  the  shade  of  Herakles,  cpioted
again  in  Human  Personality,  Vol. II. p. 290. The  word


4,


Alice  Johnson.


[part


"  Eidolon "  does  not,  I  think,  occur  in  Human  Personality,
which  Mrs.  Holland  has  read,  so  that  it  is  interesting  to  find
it  in  this  the  first  important  paper  published  by  Mr.  Myers
on  phantasms  of  the  dead,  in  the  Proceedings  which  she  has
not  read.  This  additional  fact  does  not  make  her  use  of
the  word  any  more  evidential  of  the  influence  of  Mr.  Myers,
since  there  are  of  course  many  other  books  in  which  the
word  is  used  in  the  same  sense ;  it  only  adds  somewhat  to
the  appropriateness  of  the  incident  in  connection  with  the
Myers  control.

Compare  Mr.  Piddington's  note  on  Mrs.  Verrall's  use  of
the  same  word  in  her  script  of  March  25,  1907,  below,
p.  17.

Quotations  identified.

(p.  260)  Poem  signed  "  L.  0."  Two  correspondents  have
drawn  my  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  two  last  lines  of  this
poem  (which  is  signed  with  the  initials  of  Laurence  Oliphant)  :

"  When  the  Invisible  grows  to  fulfilment
The  Woman  soul  leadeth  us  upward  and  on,"

are  apparently  a  translation  of  the  last  part  of  the  Chorus
Mysticus  at  the  end  of  Faust,  Part  II.,  which  is  as  follows  :

Das  Uuzulangliche,

Hier  wird's  Ereigniss ;

Das  Unbeschieibliche,

Hier  ist's  gethan  ;  ...

Das  Ewig-Weibliche

Zieht  uns  hinan.

Bayard  Taylor's  translation  of  these  lines  is  as  follows :

Earth's  insufKciency

Here  grows  to  Event;

The  Indescribable

Here  it  is  done ;

The  Woman-Soul  leadeth  us

Upward  and  on  !


LX.] Supplementary  Notes  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.  5


Thus  it  appears  that  the  last  line  in  the  automatic  poem  is
quoted  from  Taylor's  translation,  while  the  previous  line  (which
is  repeated  four  times  in  the  poem)  seems  like  a  loose  composite
rendering  of  the  previous  four  lines  of  the  Chorus  Mysticus.
Neither  Taylor  nor  the  script  gives  a  quite  literal  translation
of  these  four  lines,  but  the  script  is  rather  further  than  Taylor
from  the  original.  The  whole  of  the  automatic  poem  is  not,  I
think,  founded  on  Faiist ;  there  are  indeed  certain  superficial
resemblances  between  it  and  the  last  scene  in  Faust ;  but  its
central  conception  is  much  more  appropriate  to  Laurence
Oliphant.

(p.  291)  Script  of  Feb.  28th,  1906.  "The  Shameful
Hill"  (viz.,  Majuba  Hill).

Mr.  Andrew  Lang  tells  me  that  this  phrase  is  taken  from
a  poem  of  his  on  General  Sir  Ian  Hamilton  at  Majuba,  one
line  in  which  is :

"  The  mists  crept  o'er  the  shameful  hill."

References  to  Mr.  Baden  Noel.

In  regard  to  the  phrase,  "was  I  a  drone"  (p.  322),  a
correspondent  points  out  to  me  that  "  drone "  is  an  anagram
for  "  Kodon,"  which  confirms  my  view  that  the  passage  in
which  it  occurred  was  intended  to  relate  to  Eoden  Noel.

As  to  the  passage  "  Percival.  Roden  Noel— Settle — Seattle
Seittle — Cornwall — where  the  one  Ion"  street  seemed  to  lead
directly  to  the  blue  sea"  (p.  324),  Mr.  Noel's  daughter
writes  that  he  was  much  in  Cornwall  with  Mr.  Percy  Addleshaw,
who  says  :

Eoden  often  called  me  "Percival"  and  often  said  that  "Percy"
was  an  absurd  contraction  of  the  name.  The  word  "  Settle "  or
"Seattle"  is,  I  imagine,  "Wrinkle,"  where  he  did  stay  with  me
for  a  considerable  time,  and  there  is  a  street  of  the  nature  you
describe.  It  leads  to  the  edge  of  the  cliff,  and  there  is  a  path
from  the  edge  down  which  he  used  to  go  to  bathe.

Miss  Noel  remarks  that  the  description  of  her  father  that
follows  this  passage  in  the  script :  "  Clear  eyes  under  a  broad
brow — a  shock  of  grey  hair  that  was  still  thick"  (p.  324),


6


Alice  Johnson.


[part


is  not  very  accurate.  "  His  hair  was  very  thin  latterly,
though  curly,  and  it  was  hardly  grey."  My  own  recollection
of  the  one  occasion  on  which  I  saw  him  is  that  his  hair  was
then  decidedly  thick  and  curly,  as  shown  in  the  portrait
prefixed  to  his  Collected  Poems.

As  to  the  words  :  "  Gary — Carew — Fowey.  The  Duchy  "
(p.  350)  which  I  associated  with  Eoden  Noel,  Miss  Noel
observes  that  to  his  poem  "  Fowey "  in  the  collected  edition,
p.  435,  there  is  a  note: "Carew  says  that  Fowey  etc."

A  Latin  Passage  in  Mrs.  Verr all's  scrvpt.

Mr.  Andrew  Lang  kindly  sends  me  his  interpretation  of  a
Latin  passage  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  March  21st,  1901,
quoted  on  p.  379.  By  punctuating  the  Latin  somewhat
differently  from  what  Mrs.  Verrall  had  done,  he  arrives  at
the  following  translation :  "  Oh,  if  you  cannot  interweave,  keep
on  pertinaciously  writing.  Ponder  all  that  you  know.  Soon
will  come  the  inviolate  light  of  the  Sibyl,  etc."  ^  This  brings
out  more  clearly  what  Mrs.  Verrall  and  I  took  to  be  the
intention  of  the  passage,  as  referring  to  my  theory  of  cross-
correspondences.

Sovic  Cmwnients  on  Professor  Gardiner's  Peviciv.

In  the  Joicrncd  of  the  American  S.P.P.  for  November,  1908,
appeared  an  able  and  discriminating  analysis  and  criticism  of
my  Eeport  by  Professor  H.  Norman  Gardiner,  who  writes,  how-
ever, under  a  misapprehension  as  to  certain  matters  of  fact
which  have  an  important  bearing  on  the  evidence  and  which
I  wish  therefore  to  re-state.

First,  Professor  Gardiner  assumes  that  the  possibilities  of
leakage  of  information  in  Mrs.  Holland's  direction  were  much
greater  than  was  actually  the  case  at  the  time  her  script  was
produced.  With  the  two  or  three  exceptions  mentioned  below,
the  whole  of  her  intercourse  with  the  S.P.E.  (of  which  she  is

^Mr.  Lang  punctuates  the  passage  thus:  "0  iiexere  si  nequis,  pertinax
scribas.  Omne  scituni  perpeiicie,  mox  adveniet  lux  chalcidica  inviolabilis."
The  original  script  of  this  passage  contains  no  capital  letters  and  no
punctuation  points,  except  the  period  after  the  last  word  quoted.


LX.] Supplementary  Notes  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.  7

not,  and  never  has  been,  a  member)  was  carried  on  with  me,
and  with  me  only.  Almost  all  this  intercourse  was  in  writing;
I  preserved,  of  course,  everything  she  wrote  to  me,  often  without
even  acknowledging  it.  I  wrote  to  her  comparatively  seldom,
and  when  I  did  so,  generally  kept  copies  of  the  whole  of  my
letters.  But  in  any  case  I  always  kept  complete  verhatim
copies  of  any  statements  of  fact  I  made  to  her,  or  of  any
questions  I  asked  her  about  her  script,  (since  questions  may
always  be  suggestive),  or  of  any  remarks  made  about  persons
connected  with  the  S.P.E.  who  might  be  alluded  to  in  the
script.  The  parts  omitted  to  be  copied  consisted  simply  of
occasional  references  to  her  own  affairs,  encouragement  to  her
to  go  on  writing,  and  expressions  of  gratitude  for  the  trouble
she  took  to  help  in  the  experiments,  etc.

I  saw  her  four  times  only  during  the  period  in  question ;
Mrs.  Verrall  saw  her  twice  only,  on  both  occasions  in  my
presence  ;  Mr.  Piddington  saw  her  once  only,  and  that  in  my
presence ;  and  Mr.  Feilding  (who  at  that  time  knew  practically
nothing  of  the  scripts)  met  her  once  not  in  my  presence.
These  interviews  no  doubt  influenced  the  scripts  produced
subsequently  to  them ;  but  as  I  noted  fully  all  the  topics  of
conversation  and  facts  mentioned,  (Mr.  Feilding  having  told
me  of  what  occurred  on  the  occasion  when  he  met  Mrs.
Holland),  I  know  and  have  mentioned  in  my  Eeport  all  the
statements  of  any  definiteness  in  the  script  that  can  have
been  derived  from  them.

Mrs.  Holland  and  Mrs.  Verrall  have  corresponded  with  each
other  directly  only  on  the  two  occasions  mentioned  in  my
Pieport  (pp.  328-9  and  364),  where  practically  the  whole  of
the  correspondence  is  given.  I  have  also  seen  all  the  corre-
spondence—some three  or  four  letters  in  all — that  have  passed
between  her  and  Mr.  Piddington  and  Mr.  Peilding  up  to  the
present  date  (January,  1910).

This  comprises  the  whole  of  Mrs.  Holland's  intercourse  with
any  members  of  the  S.P.E.  who  had  any  acquaintance  whatever
with  the  experiments,  or  any  intimate  knowledge  of  the
Society's  general  work.  I  believe  in  fact  that  she  met  no
other  members  of  the  Society  at  all,  except  Sir  Oliver  Lodge
at  a  later  period  (see  p.  348).  The  effect  of  her  meeting
with Sir  Oliver  Lodge  is  described — with,  I  think,  the  most


8


Alice  Jolmson.


[part


ample  allowance  for  any  information  that  could  have  been
derived  from  it — on  pp.  348-359.

This  being  so,  the  words  used  by  Prof.  Gardiner  in  speaking
{Journal  of  the  American  S.P.R.,  p.  598)  of  "her  more  intimate
initiation  into  the  affairs  of  the  S.P.E.  and  acquaintance  with
its  personnel"  and  still  more  in  saying  (op.  cit.  p.  611)  "Mrs.
Holland  did  not  know  Dr.  Hodgson,  but  she  had  met  a
number  of  persons  who  did,"  give  a  very  misleading  impres-
sion of  the  actual  state  of  the  case.

I  fully  agree  with  Prof.  Gardiner  that  the  various  "  per-
sonations "  in  the  script,  however  realistic  and  however  closely
they  resemble  the  persons  represented,  cannot  be  treated,
strictly  speaking,  as  of  any  real  evidential  value.  My  view
of  this  was,  I  think,  made  clear  in  my  report.  The  persona-
tion of  Dr.  Hodgson  is  somewhat  more  impressive  than  the
others,  because  the  materials  for  it  within  Mrs.  Holland's
knowledge  were  apparently  far  more  scanty  than  in  the  other
cases,  but  it  is  impossible  to  state  positively  that  they  were
entirely  lacking.  The  most  striking  points  in  the  Hodgson
control  utterances  are,  I  think,  the  cryptic  mark  "K  57"
which  was  found  to  correspond  with  marks  used  by  Dr.  Hodg-
son in  some  rough  notes,  and  the  name  of  •'  Q ",  which  was
correctly  given  (pp.  30-4-310).  Prof.  Gardiner  asks  "Why
assume  that  that  name,  while  the  same  as,  was  intended  to
refer  to,  Dr.  Hodgson's  '  Q  '  ?  If  .  .  .  some  other  Christian
name  had  been  used,  would  it  not  have  been  possible  among
the  vast  mass  of  Dr.  Hodgson's  papers,  to  have  discovered
something  which  might  be  interpreted  as  an  equally  striking-
connection  ? "  The  reason  why  I  think  this  name  in  Mrs.
Holland's  script  refers  to  "  Q "  is  that  it  occurs  three  times
in  connection  with  Dr.  Hodgson  and  never  in  any  other  con-
nection, and  that  it  is  the  name  of  a  person  associated  in  a
very  special  manner  with  him.

Prof.  Gardiner  suggests  a  much  more  serious  possibility  of
"  leakage "  in  his  criticism  of  the  cross-correspondence  "  Ave
Eoma  Immortalis."  I  may  remind  readers  that  this  consisted
in  allusions  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  of  March  2nd,  4th,  and
5th,  and  Mrs.  Holland's  of  March  7th,  1906  (Pteport,  pp.
297-303). Of  this,  Professor  Gardiner  writes:

"  "We  may  surmise,  indeed,  that  the  evidence  is  not  all  in.


LX.] Supplementary  Notes  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.  9


\ye  may  suspect,  for  example,  some  hint  in  correspondence
between  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Holland  or  Miss  Johnson  and
Mrs.  Holland  during  the  interval  between  Mrs.  Verrall's  first
script  on  March  2  and  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  March  7  ;  Miss
Johnson  we  may  believe  was  '  discreet,'  but  discretion  is  a
relative  term  when  portions  of  the  script  of  one  automatist
are  being  sent  to  the  other  for  the  discovery  of  pertinent
incidents."

As  to  any  hints  "  in  correspondence  between  Mrs.  Verrall
and  Mrs.  Holland,"  no  correspondence  whatever  was  taking
place  between  them  at  this  time,  and  none  took  place  during
the  whole  period  of  my  paper,  except  on  the  two  occasions
mentioned  above.

As  to  any  possible  hints  in  my  own  correspondence  with
Mrs.  Holland,  I  had  not  myself  seen  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  of
March  2nd,  4th  and  5th,  until  some  time  after  Mrs.  Holland's
script  of  March  7th  was  produced.  No  indiscretion  of  mine,
therefore,  however  flagrant,  could  have  given  her  hints  con-
cerning them.  I  may  add  that  if  I  had  committed  any  such
indiscretion,  I  should  certainly  have  mentioned  it  in  my  Eepoi't,
as  I  have  mentioned  all  circumstances  known  to  me  that  have
any  bearing  on  the  evidence ;  for  no  one  could  fail  to  see  that
if  Mrs.  Holland  had  seen  or  heard  anything  of  Mrs.  Verrall's
scripts  before  she  wrote  her  own,  the  whole  evidential  value
of  the  case  would  have  been  destroyed.

Professor  Gardiner's  main  criticism  of  my  theory  of  cross-
correspondences  is  to  a  considerable  extent  vitiated  by  his
failing  to  take  into  account  the  order  in  which  the  events
occurred.  In  his  discussion  of  the  "  Ave  Eoma  Immortalis  "
cross-correspondence  he  says  that  the  two  automatists  were
"  experimenting  for  cross-correspondences  at  the  time,"  and
again,  "  there  is  at  least  the  fact  that  both  Mrs.  Holland
and  Mrs.  Verrall  had  at  this  time  the  thought  of  cross-
correspondences  in  mind."  But,  as  stated  clearly  in  my
paper,  one  reason  why  stress  was  laid  on  this  case  was
that  at  the  time  it  occurred,  no  one — as  far  as  I  have  been
able  to  discover — had  ever  thought  of  the  notion  of  cross-
correspondences.  The  experiments  between  Mrs.  Holland  and
Mrs.  Verrall  were  started  in  the  hope  of  obtaining  some
evidence  of  telepathy  between  them  (p.  250),  and  I  think  that


10


Alice  Johnson.


[part


a  good  deal  of  such  evidence  was  afforded.  It  was  hoped  that
they  might  produce  veridical  statements  ahout  each  other  (and
this  occurred)  or  that  identical  or  closely  similar  phrases  might
appear  contemporaneously  in  both  scripts.  That  this  was  in
their  minds  is  shown  by  the  phrase  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script
of  April  11th,  1906:  "There  is  an  effort  to  have  the  same
words  this  time,"  and  Mrs.  Holland's  remark :  "  I  can't  help
believing  that  we  shall  be  tuned  into  accord  some  day  and
register  the  same  messages"  (pp.  363-4).  This  is  a  kind  of
experiment  between  automatists  that  had  been  planned  by  Mr.
Myers  in  his  life-time  (p.  371)  and  is  what  was  apparently
attempted  in  the  cases  recorded  by  Mr.  Piddington  (p.  372).
The  notion  that  a  statement  in  one  script  might  be  intended
to  complevicnt  a  statement  in  another  came  to  me  just  after
all  the  experiments  recorded  in  my  first  Eeport.  Soon  after-
wards I  mentioned  my  theory  to  Mrs.  Verrall  and  then  to  Mrs.
Holland,  to  both  of  whom  it  came  as  an  entirely  novel  idea.
It  is  certain  that  neither  of  them  had  it  consciously  in  mind
at  the  time  of  the  experiments,  nor  had  any  of  the  persons
who  were  interested  in  their  scripts.

Since  that  time  the  idea  has  become  familiar  to  them  and
has  no  doubt  influenced  their  scripts,  so  that  it  is  a  factor  to
be  reclioned  with  in  the  future.

It  may,  however,  be  argued  that  Mrs.  Verrall's  subliminal
consciousness  had  really  evolved  the  idea  some  time  previously,
though  supraliminally  she  had  never  become  aware  of  it.  In
that  case,  the  cross-correspondences  might  conceivably  have  been
produced  by  telepathy  from  her  mind.  With  this  argument
and  with  some  of  my  later  critics  who  have  upheld  it  I  deal
in  the  discussion  on  the  theory  of  cross-correspondences  at  the
end  of  my  second  Eeport  on  Mrs.  Holland's  script  below.


LX.]  Supplementary  Notes  on  "  Concordant  Automatisms!'


11


SUPPLEMENTAEY  NOTES  ON "A  SEEIES  OF
CONCOEDANT  AUTOMATISMS."

By  J.  G.  PiDDINGTON.

Ereata  et  Corrigenda.

p.  54.^ Second  line. Eor  "  make  "  read  "  makes."

p.  83. 3 lines  from  bottom  of  page. For  "the  second  of

these  three  "  read  "  the  last  of  these  three."
p.  91. 6 lines  from  bottom  of  page. For  "  Desdemona  not

that  is  wrong  "  read  "  Desdemona  no  that "  etc.
p.  134. Last  line  but  one  of  first  paragraph. For  "  Myers^  "

read  "  MyerSp."
p.  274. Fourth  line. For  "my  wood"  read  "my  mood."
p.  288. Ninth  line. For  "hands"  read  "hand."

„ Seventeenth  line. For  "April  15"  read  "April  17."

(p.  34.)  The  words  "  This  witness  is  true "  occur,  as  the
Eev.  C.  A.  Goodhart  informs  me,  in  St.  Paul's  Episfcle  to  Titus,
I.  13.  The  comments  which  I  wrote  under  the  misapprehension
that  "  This  witness  is  true "  is  not  a  quotation  from  St.
Paul  must  be  modified  accordingly.

"  My  Star."

(pp.  67-8.)  On  Feb.  27,  1907  (see  p.  337),  MyerSp
mentioned  "  My  Star "  in  connexion  with  the  cross-corre-
spondence "Browning,  Hope  and  Star";  and  on  March  6
{p.  340)  "George  Pelham "  explained  that  "My  Star"  was  a
poem  of  Browning's  which  Myers  had  had  on  his  mind  "  because

1  All  page  references  in  this  paper,  except  where  otlierwise  indicated,  are  to
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXII.,  in  connection  with  which  tlie  paper  must  be
read.


12


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


it  was  one  of  his  test  experiments  with  a  lady  in  the  body  to
whom  he  refers  as  V."

Athougli,  of  course,  I  searched  the  scripts  of  the  automatists
for  allusions  to  My  Star,  I  failed  to  discover  any.  But  it
happened  that  an  acquaintance  of  Mrs.  Verrall's,  Miss  S.,  on
reading  the  Eeport,  though  not  looking  for  references  to  iiy
Star,  came  independently  to  the  conclusion  that  the  words
"  androsace,  Carthusian,  candelabrum "  in  Miss  Verrall's  script
of  Feb.  17,  1907  (p.  08),  were  allusions  to  that  poem,  which
runs  thus :

All  that  I  know

Of  a  certain  star
Is,  it  can  throw

(Like  the  angled  spar)
Now  a  dart  of  red,

Now  a  dart  of  blue ;
Till  my  friends  have  said  .

They  would  fain  see,  too,
My  star  that  dartles  the  red  and  the  blue  !

Then  it  stops  like  a  bird  ;  like  a  flower,  hangs  furled  :
They  must  solace  themselves  with  the  Saturn  above  it.

What  matter  to  me  if  their  star  is  a  world  1

Mine  has  opened  its  soul  to  me  ;  therefore  I  love  it.

It  was  Miss  S.'s  recollection  of  the  Alpine  flower  Androsace
as  resembling  a  constellation  of  bright  pink  stars,  of  which  one
here  and  there  had  faded  to  blue,  that  suggested  "  My  Star "  to
her ;  for  she  took  the  word  "  Androsace ",  followed  in  the
script  by  the  drawing  of  an  arrow-head  and  the  words  "  many
together ",  to  refer  both  to  the  flower  and  to  "  Now  a  dart  of
red,  Now  a  dart  of  blue  ".  The  other  two  words,  "  Carthusian^
candelabrum ",  are  both  names  of  flowers,  the  first  being  the
name  of  a  Dianthus  (Carthusianorum)  and  the  second  that  of
an  Acanthus.  Many  Dianthuses  have  a  candelabrum-like  inflor-
escence, and  Acanthus  flowers  might  be  described  as  "  hanging
furled  ",  so  that  these  words  also  have  a  certain  appropriateness
in  connexion  with  the  poem.  Miss  S.,  however,  interpreted
"  candelabrum  "  not  as  a  flower  but  as  an  attempt  to  introduce
the  notion  of  a  prism,  and  thereby  to  represent  "  the  angled


LX.]  Su2oiolementary  Notes  on  "Concordant  Automatisms."  13

spar "  of  the  poem.  As  it  happens,  when  Miss  Verrall,  before
being  acquainted  with  Miss  S.'s  conjectural  interpretation,  was
asked  what  the  word  "  candelabrum "  in  her  script  of  Feb.  1 7
suggested  to  her,  she  replied  at  once:  "One  of  those  old-fashioned
chandeliers  with  glass  prisms."  Possibly  "  candelabrum  "  might
be  taken  to  contain  a  double  reference :  that  is  to  say,  a
reference  both  to  "  iiower  "  and  to  "  angled  spar ".

The  word  "  dart ",  which  occurs  twice  in  the  poem  and  a
third  time  in  the  form  "  dartle ",  would  be  represented  in  the
script  by  the  drawing  of  the  arrow-head ;  nor  is  it,  I  think,
any  objection  to  this  interpretation  that  this  drawing  of  an
arrow-head  should  thus  have  to  perform  the  double  function
of  representing  "  dart "  and  also  one  of  the  elements  of  the
triple  cross-correspondence  "  arrow "  (see  Proc,  Vol.  XXII.
pp.  77-86).

Miss  Verrall's  script  of  Feb.  3,  1907  (see  p.  67)  is  clearly
connected  with  the  one  just  discussed.  This  earlier  script
contains  both  the  word  "  star "  and  a  drawing  of  a  star,  and
ends  with  the  drawing  of  a  bird  and  the  word  "  bird ",
suggesting  the  phrase  in  the  poem  "  Then  it  stops  like  a
bird ".  The  later  script  also  contains  the  word  "  star "  and
a  drawing  of  a  star,  followed  by  the  words  "  that  was  the
sign,  she  will  understand ".  ''  Star "  is  therefore  prominent  in
the  scripts,  as  in  the  poem.

I  am  not  prepared  to  endorse  Miss  S.'s  interpretation ;  but
I  think  it  certainly  deserves  consideration.

(pp.  82-83.) An  Analysis  of  Mks.  Verrall's  "Arrow"
Script  (Feb.  18,  1907).

I  believe  I  have  discovered  the  clue  to  some  obscure
associations  of  ideas  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Feb.  18,  1907.
If  my  solution  of  the  puzzle  is  right,  it  supports  the  view
expressed  in  my  paper  (pp.  83-85)  that  this  script  was  the
result  of  an  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  scribe  to  get  the  word
"  arrow "  written.  In  considering  the  analysis  which  follows,
the  reader  must,  however,  make  allowances  for  my  lack  of
literary  skill,  which  has  made  me  represent  in  too  downright
and  definite  terms  the  subtle  stages  of  a  mental  process  of
extreme  complexity.


14


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


"  do  no:"  The  scribe  tells  the  automatist  to  "  do  a  W  ",  i.e.
the  last  letter  of  "  arrow ".  (Cf.  the  remark  of  Hodgsoup  on
Feb.  19,  1907:  "After  that  I  saw  w  written  I  know"
(p.  78).^

"  iVb." The  scribe  says  that  "  ew  "  is  wrong.

"  Alcmhert "  1  take  to  be  the  result  of  the  scribe's  first
attempt  to  get  the  whole  word  "  arrow  "  written.  The  want
of  success  is  recognised  by  the  scribe  who  says  "  No "  after
Alembert.

From  the  fact  that  "  Alembert "  was  immediately  followed
by  "  Mont  alban "  and  "  Mont  auban ",  I  think  we  may  infer
that  the  name  "  Montalembert "  was  vaguely  present  in  the
scribe's  or  the  automatist's  consciousness.  I  suspect  that,
if  this  were  so,  it  w^as  the  village  (near  Melle,  in  the
department  of  Deux  Sevi'es)  and  not  the  well-known  writer  of
that  name  that  was  being  thought  of,  for  the  train  of  ideas
seems  to  be  concerned  at  this  i^oint  with  names  of  places,  and
not  with  names  of  people.

Mont  alian  or  Mont  auhan.  "  alban "  and  "  auban "  repre-
sent the  result  of  the  scribe's  second  and  third  attempts  to
get  "  arrow "  written.  This  time,  though  only  one,  the  initial,
letter  is  right,  the  right  number  of  letters  is  given.

Mont  Alban,  the  French  form  of  Mons  Albanus,  i.e.  the
hill  of  the  city  of  Alba  (Longa),  whose  name  is  derived  from
alha,  meaning  "  white ",  suggests  to  the  scribe  "  Mont  auban
i.e.  the  French  town  of  Montauban  in  Tarn-et-Garonne,  which
was  founded  on  the  site  of  a  Eoman  station  called  Mons
Alhanus.

"  Alembert  ",  "  Mont  alban  "  and  "  Mont  auban  "  introduce
the  idea  of  French.

"  The  white  hill."  These  words  show  that  the  scribe  or  the
automatist  was  thinking  of  the  original  significance  of  Mons
Albanus,  the  hill  of  the  White  City.

At  this  point  the  scribe  stops  trying  to  get  the  woirl  "  arrow  "
written,  because  he  suddenly  realises  that  certain  associations
of  ideas,  aroused  in  his  mind  by  what  has  appeared  in  the
script,  could  be  so  utilised — if  he  could  but  get  the  automatist
to  share  them — as  to  lead  on  to  an  idea  closely  and  frequently
allied  with  "  arrow ",  and  that  this  in  turn  might  lead  to
getting  "  arrow "  itself  expressed  as  well. By  which  I  mean


LX.]  Supplementc^y'i  'Nptfi'\4n>rGo\icbifdt^  1 5

that  the  appearance  pf.  thq  French  words  ("  Alembert ",  "Mont",
"alban",  and  "  aiiban  ",);  the:  ■  foim  iof^' ^Ke  - woitls' "  alban  "  and
"  auban ",  and  the  idea  of  whiteness  suggested  by  these  two
words,  had  brought  to  his  mind  Yillon's  lines,  which  speak  of
a  v:hitc  queen  and  close  with  the  word  "  antan " :

La  royne  Blanche  comme  ung  lys
Qui  chaiitoit  a  voix  de  sereine
Berthe  au  grand  pied,  Bietris,  AUys,
Harembourges  qui  tint  le  Mayne
Et  Jehanne  la  bonne  Lorraine
Qu'  Anglois  bruslerent  a  Eouen,
Oil  sont-ilz,  Vierge  souveraiue  ?
Mais  oil  sont  les  neiges  d'antan  1 ;

that  these  lines  had  provoked  the  thought  of  Jeanne  d'Arc
("  Jehanne  la  bonne  Lorraine  "),  and  finally  that  the  place-name
Arc  had  suggested  arc  in  the  sense  of  "  Bow ".

From  this  point  onwards  to  the  end,  then,  I  conceive  that
the  scribe  no  longer  tries  to  get  the  ivord  "  arrow "  directly
written,  but  tries  instead  to  make  the  automatist  seize  the
French  word  "  arc ",  in  the  hope  that  this  word  may  suggest
"  bow "  to  her,  and  "  bow "  in  turn  provoke  the  idea  of
"  arrow  ".

But  to  go  back  a  little.  "  Blanche  de  Lys "  is  followed  by
the  words  "  or  some  such  name — but  it  is  all  only  symbolic  ".
These  words  may  only  mean  that  "  Blanche  de  Lys "  is  a
mistake  for  "  la  royne  Blanche  comme  ung  lys  " ;  but  I  think
they  may  also  mean  that  it  is  not  the  name  of  the  "  Queen
white  as  a  lily "  which  is  wanted,  but  another  name ;  and
anyhow  they  imply  that  it  is  a  name  that  is  wanted.^  And
"  hut  it  is  all  only  symholic "  I  take  to  mean  that,  even  were
the name Jeanne d'Arc written, it would not  be the  real

^  llr.  J.  Arthur  Hill,  who  independently  suggested  that  the  script  con-
tained an  allusion  to  Joan  of  Arc  due  to  an  association  of  ideas  with  "arch"
and  "arrow",  points  out  that  "  de  Lys"  was  the  name  under  which  Joan
of  Arc"s  family  was  ennobled  after  her  death.  If  the  scribe  was  thinking
generally  of  the  verses  in  which  come  the  words  "  la  royne  Blanche  comme
ung  lys",  and  particularly  of  Joan  of  Arc,  "Blanche  de  Lys"  (note  that
"Lys"  is  written  with  an  initial  capital)  may  be  accounted  for  as  a
"portmanteau"  resulting  from  a  fusion,  which  was  also  a  confusion,  of  the
two  ideas.


■16  /%  II /^i,  0.l]^Mc/in(jt'Qfi'lfCl  [part

objective  (arrow)  and  would  only  indicate  symbolically  a  word
that  was  waijtred  :  (r.i?. Imeaning  be^j) .  io  orde^  to  lead  up
to  the  real  objective."  '  .  ..  c  , ,  .  ■

Now  to  continue  my  analysis  of  the  rest  of  the  script :
If,  as  I  suggest,  the  scribe  was  trying  to  approach  "  arrow  "
■Old  "  Jeanne  d'Arc ",  "  a?'c ",  and  "  bow  ",  it  explains  not  only
the  drawing  of  the  two  bows  back  to  back  which  immediately
follows  the  allusions  to  Villon's  lines,  but  also  the  repeated
stress  laid  in  the  sequel  upon  the  word  "  Arch "  and  the
words  beginning  vv'ith  a  r  c  h ;  for  arc  in  French,  like  arciis
in  Latin,  means  both  a  bow  and  an  arch.  The  scribe,  it
will  be  observed,  is  aware  that  though  the  word  "  Arch "
obsesses  him,  it  is  not  the  word  he  wants :  "  There  has  been
great  confusion  here,  and  I  do  not  think  anything  has  been
accurately  said."  The  probably  undesigned  use  of  the  word
"  accurately ",  which  contains  the  letters  arc,  helps  the  scribe
to  introduce  other  words  containing  the  same  three  letters,
namely,  "  accurate  "  and  "  aclcuranda  ".

To  me  it  seems  certain  that  the  scribe — whether  that  be
a  part  of  the  automatist's  consciousness  or  an  external  mind,
or  a  mixture  of  the  two — knew  that  the  word  wanted  was
ctrc.  The  automatist  appears  to  have  vaguely  apprehended  the
French  word  cere  (although  she  did  not  write  it),  for  both
meanings  of  it  are  expressed  in  the  script :  the  meaning
"  bow  "  by  the  two  bows  drawn  back  to  back,  and  the  mean-
ing "  arch "  repeatedly  in  the  last  part  of  the  script.  That
she  emphasised  the  second  meaning,  and  not  the  first,  may
have  been  due  to  her  having  been  put  on  to  a  wrong  scent
by  an  association  of  ideas  between  the  word  "  arch "  and  the
name  "  Archipiada ",  which  occurs  in  this  same  poem  of
Villon's,  though  not  in  the  passage  where  Jeanne  d'Arc  is
mentioned.

LiTEEARY  Personation.

(pp.  227-9.)  It  may  be  remembered  that  in  Mrs.  Verrall's
script  of  April  3,  1907,  MyerSy  leads  up  to  the  idea  of
"  wings "  by  a  quotation  from  Lucretius,  which  in  the  original
has  no  reference  to  wings,  but  into  a  poetical  paraphrase  of
which  Frederic  Myers  had  introduced  the  words  "  with  wings
unfurled."


LX.]  Supplementary  Notes  on  "  Ooncordcmt  Automatisms."  17


I  believe  this  coincidence  is  not  accidental,  and  that  it  forms
one  of  a  good  number  of  cases  of  what — ignoring  the  question
of  how  far  such  coincidences  may  contribute  towards  a  proof
of  identity — we  may  call  "  literary  personation "  of  Frederic
Myers,  by  not  only  MyerSy  but  also  Myers^y  and  ]\IyerSp.

Appended  are  some  of  these  parallel  instances :

(1)  Proc.  Vol.  XXII.  pp.  131-136,  where  MyerSp  approaches
the  name  Plotinus  by  first  mentioning  names  clearly  connected
therewith  in  Human  Personality.

(2)  id.  ih.  p.  135,  where  Myersp  connects  Plotinus  with  St.
Paul  and  Crossing  the  Bar,  just  as  Prederie  Myers  had  connected
them  on  p.  290  of  the  second  volume  of  Human  Personality.

(3)  id.  lb.  pp.  252,  253,  and  260,  where  Mrs.  Verrall's
script  of  March  25,  1907, — a  script  which  undoubtedly  pur-
ports to  be  inspired  by  Myers — displays  connexions  of  thought
manifested  by  Frederic  Myers ^  in  a  paper  published  in  Proc.
Vol.  VI.  p.  6-4  and  in  Human  Personality,  Vol.  II.  p.  290.

(4)  id.  ih.  p.  113,  where  MyerSy  leads  up  to  the  idea  of
the  external  calm  of  nature  by  quoting  the  title,  "  Faery  lands
forlorn  ",  of  one  of  Frederic  Myers's  poems  in  which  this  idea
is  emphasised.

(5)  id.  ih.  pp.  61-62  and  68,  where  MyerSy  and  Myers^y
produce  anagrams  in  automatic  script.  This  incident  should
be  compared  with  the  following  extract  from  Frederic  Myers's
article  on  The  Daemon  of  Socrates  {Proc.  Vol.  V.  p.  53  2): —

It  may  be  remembered  that  one  of  the  pieces  of  evidence  which
I  cited  in  order  to  show  that  ivritten  messages  were  not  always  the
mere  echo  of  expectation,  was  a  case  where  anagrams  were  automati-
cally written,  which  their  writer  was  not  at  once  able  to  decipher.
[The  reference  is  to  Proc.  Vol.  II.  p.  22G.]  Following  this  hint,  I
have  occasionally  succeeded  in  getting  anagrams  tilted  out  for  myself
by  movements  of  a  small  table,  which  I  alone  touched.  .  .  .  The
anagrams — or  rather  jumbles  of  letters  forming  a  short  word — which
I  have  myself  obtained,  have  been  of  the  simplest  kind.  .  .  .  This
is  a  kind  of  experiment  which  might  with  advantage  be  oftener
repeated ;  for  the  extreme  incoherence  and  silliness  of  the  responses
thus  obtained  does  not  prevent  the  process  itself  from  being  in  a
high  decree  instructive.

^  Cf.  Mrs.  Holland's  use  of  the  word  Eidolon,  see  above,  pp.  3-±.

B


18


/.  G.  Piddington.


[PAllT


(6)  id.  ib.  pp.  62,  75  (text  and  foot-note),  307-11,  326
and  410.  In  view  of  the  important  part  played  by  Browning's
AU  Voglcr  and  "  Music "  in  two  inter-related  communications
of  Myersv  {i.e.  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  of  Dec.  17,  1006,  and
Jan.  28,  1907),  and  by  AU  Voglcr  and  the  word  "Music"  in
the  responses  to  the  Latin  message  made  by  MyerSp,  the  follow-
ing extract  from  one  of  Frederic  Myers's  papers  on  Tlic  Sublimincd
Consciousness  {Proc.  Vol.  YIII.  pp.  343-4)  is  of  interest: —

There  exists  among  men  a  mighty  complex  of  conceptions  which
lie  apart  from, — some  say  beyond, — articulate  speech  and  reasoned
thought.  There  is  a  march  and  uprising  through  ideal  spaces  which
some  hold  as  the  only  true  ascent ;  there  is  an  architecture  which
some  count  as  alone  abiding, —

Seeing  it  is  built
Of  music,  therefore  never  built  at  all,
And,  therefore,  built  for  ever.

Whether  considered  in  relation  to  its  development  in  the  race,  or
to  its  activity  in  the  individual,  Music  resembles  not  so  much  a
product  of  terrene  needs  and  of  natural  selection  as  a  subliminal
capacity  attaining  to  an  accidental  manifestation  independently  of
the  requirements  or  of  the  external  stimuli  of  the  supraliminal  self.
We  know  the  difficulty  of  explaining  its  rise  on  any  current  theory
of  the  evolution  of  human  faculty.  We  know  that  it  is  like  some-
thing -discovered,  not  like  something  manufactured  ; — like  wine  found
in  a  walled-up  cellar,  rather  than  like  furniture  made  in  the
workshop  above.  And  the  subjective  sensations  of  the  musician
himself  accord  with  this  view  of  the  essentiall}^  subliminal  character
of  the  gift  with  which  he  deals.  In  no  direction  is  "  genius "  or
"inspiration"  more  essential  to  true  success.  It  is  not  from  careful
poring  over  the  mutual  relations  of  musical  notes  that  the  master-
pieces of  melody  have  been  born.  They  have  come  as  they  came
to  Mozart, — whose  often-quoted  words  I  need  not  cite  again, — in  an
uprush  of  unsummoned  audition,  of  unpremeditated  and  self-revealing
joy.  They  have  come,  as  to  Browning's  Aid  Vof/ler,  with  a  sense  of
irrecoverable  commingling  of  depths  of  soul  and  heights  of  heaven.

(7)  id.  ib.  p.  299,  where  in  a  script  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  full
of  allusions  to  Death  is  introduced  a  quotation  from  the  Acneid,
— Manibus  date  lilia  plenis — which,  together  with  its  context,
had  clearly  been  a  special  favourite  of  Frederic  Myers's.  (Cf.


LX.]  Supplementary  Notes  on  "  Concordant  Auto-niat isms."  19


Essays  Classical,  p.  116,  text  aud  foot-note-,  p.  117,  text  and
foot-note\  and  p.  176.)

(8)  id.  ib.  p.  251,  where  MyerSp  apparently  led  up  to  the
announcement  of  "  Harold  "  as  the  subject  of  a  cross-correspond-
ence experiment  by  first  giving  a  paraphrase  of  some  lines  from
Frederic  Myers's  poem  Harold  at  tvjo  years  old.

(9)  See  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  paper  below,  p.  186,  where  a  com-
bination of  topics  made  by  MyerSp — •"  Exile,  Moore,  Harp,
Orpheus  and  Eurydice " — appears  in  Miss  Verrall's  script  with
the  addition  of  "  willow '"  and  "  lute " :  significance  attaching
to  the  addition  because  in  Frederic  Myers's  Essay  on  Greek
Oracles  is  a  passage  combining  allusions  to  "  Orpheus  and
Eurydice"',  "lyre"  and  "willow  tree"  {Essays  Classical,  p.  54.)

Another  instance,  and  a  striking  one,  occurring  in  Mrs.
Piper's  trance,  will  be  found  in  connexion  with  the  "  Lethe "
case  in  my  paper  below,  pp.  128-133,  and  the  list  might  be
considerably  prolonged  ;  but  I  think  I  have  quoted  examples
enough  to  show  that  the  presence  in  the  conununications  of
MyerSp,  MyerSy  and  Myers^y  of  associations  of  ideas  once
familiar  to  Frederic  Myers  is  not  accidental,  and  that  they  are
introduced — often  with  considerable  delicacy  and  subtlety — for
the  purpose  of  suggesting  the  action  of  his  personality.

More  interest  attaches  to  the  literary  reminiscences  of  MyerSp
than  to  those  of  MyerSy  and  Myers^v  ;  for,  while  Mrs.  Verrall
is  familiar  with  Myers's  works,  and  Miss  Verrall  has  some
acquaintance  with  them,  and  lioth  are  classical  scholars,  Mrs.
Piper's  acquaintance  with  Myers's  writings  is  scanty,  her
literary  interests  are  small,  and  she  has  no  classical  knowledge.

(pp.  107-172.) The  Connexion  between  "In  Memokiam  "
AND  avTO<i  oiipapo?  ukv/j-wv.

It  was  the  occurrence  in  Mrs.  A^errall's  script  of  March  6,
1907  (see  Proc.  Yo\.  XXII.  p.  115)  of  a  quotation  from
Section  XL  of  In  Mnnoriam  that  first  suggested  a  connexion
between  aJro?  ovpavog  aKVfxwi'  and  its  context  (Plotinus,
Enneades  V.  2-3)  on  the  one  hand  and  Mcmoriaiu  on  the
other.  An  Associate  of  the  Society,  Miss  W.  B.  Hammond,
has  pointed  out  how  appropriate  it  is  that  the  quotation
should have  come  from this particular Section,  inasmuch  as


20


G.  Piddington.


[part


reference  is  made  in  it  to  three  of  the  conditions — calm  of
earth,  sea,  and  air  (see  Proc.  Vol.  XXII.  p.  126) — which
Plotinus  {loco  citato)  says  are  essential  to  ecstatic  communion
with  the  Divine. Thus :

"  Calm  and  deep  peace  on  this  high  wold "...

"  Calm  and  still  light  on  yon  great  plain "...

"  Calm  and  deep  peace  in  this  wide  air "...

"  Calm  on  the  seas,  and  silver  sleep,

And  waves  that  sway  themselves  in  rest "...

It  seems  possible,  then,  that  not  only  were  Sections  XCIV.
and  XCV.  of  In  Memoriavi,  as  Mrs.  Verrall  suggested  (see
Proc.  Vol.  XXII.  pp.  118-122),  influenced  by  the  Plotiaian
passage,  but  that  Section  XL  was  also.

Furthermore,  a  comparison  of  Sections  XI.  and  XII.  with
Sections  XCIV.  and  XCV.  seems  to  me  to  show  that  the
parallelism  between  the  passage  from  the  Pnncades  and  In
Memoriani  is  more  extensive  than  Mrs.  Verrall  supposed.
Plotinus  taught  that  before  communion  with  the  Great  Soul
could  be  attained  not  only  must  nature  be  at  peace,  but  the
soul  likewise  must  be  "  collected  into  calm."  Now  in  the
trance  described  in  Section  XII.  this  last  condition  is  lacking ;
for,  though  there  is  calm  of  a  kind — the  calm  of  despair —
in  the  poet's  heart,  he  is  at  the  same  time  filled  with  "  wild
unrest "  (Sections  XV.  and  XVI.).  Hence,  though  he  seems
to  himself  to  leave  the  body  and  hover  about  the  ship  that
bears  his  friend's  corpse  homewards  through  distant  seas,  there
is  no  true  Vision  :  the  experience  is  purely  subjective ;  nothing
is  contributed  to  it,  as  in  genuine  ecstasy,  from  outside ;  it
involves  no  contact  with  another  mind.  It  is  only  in  the
later  trance,  described  in  Sections  XCIV.  and  XCV.,  when  all
the  Plotinian  conditions  are  fulfilled  :  when,  that  is  to  say,  not
only  nature  is  at  peace  but  the  poet's  "  spirit  is  at  peace  with
all"  as  well,  that  communion  with  the  Divine  Soul  and  with
the  spirit  of  his  friend  ensues : —

"it  seem'd  at  last
The  living  soul  was  flash'd  on  mine.

And  mine  in  this  was  wound,  and  whirl'd
About  empyreal  heights  of  thought,
And  came  on  that  which  is.  .  .  ."


LX.]  SuiTplementary  Notes  on  "  Concordant  Automatisms."  21


(pp.  116,  145  and  238.) Mrs.  Verball's  Script  of  March

11,  1907.

I  remarked  (p.  116)  that  the  language  of  this  script  (quoted
on  p.  145)  is  reminiscent  of  the  last  stanza  of  F.  W.  H.  Myers's
Stanzas  on  Mr.  Watts  Collected  Works.  There  are,  besides,
Wordsworthian  touches  in  it,  as  comparison  with  two  passages
in  Wordsworth's  Prehide,  Book  I,  "  One  summer  evening  ...  a
trouble  to  my  dreams "  and  "  Ye  Presences  of  Nature  .  .  .
work  like  a  sea  ? ",  will  show.  It  probably  contains  as  well
reminiscences  of  the  following  lines  from  another  poem  of
Myers's,  The  Renewed  of  Youth :

"  Or  one  from  Plato's  page  uplifts  his  head
Dazed  in  the  mastering  parley  of  the  dead,
Till  at  dark  curfew  thro'  the  latticed,  gloom
What  presence  feels  he  in  his  lonely  room.
Where  mid  the  writ  words  of  the  wise  he  stands
Like  a  strange  ghost  in  many-peopled  lands,
Or  issuing  in  some  columned  cloister,  sees
Thro'  the  barred  squares  the  moon-enchanted  trees  ;
Till,  when  his  slow  resounding  steps  have  made
One  silence  with  their  echoes  and  the  shade,
How  can  he  tell  if  for  the  first  time  then
He  paces  thus  those  haunts  of  musing  men  "

The  phrase  "  the  lonely  hills,"  which  occurs  in  tlie  script,
is  Wordsworthian  also :

The  silence  that  is  in  the  starry  sky,
The  sleep  that  is  among  the  lonely  hills.

Song  at  tlie  Feeist  of  Brougham  Castle.

Phrases  indicating  Cross-Coreespondences.

(pp.  174,  176,  177.)  I  maintained  that  such  phrases  as
"  I  said  ",  "  he  said  ",  "  they  said  ",  were  used  in  the  waking-
stage  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trances  to  indicate  that  the  word  or
words  thus  "  said "  were  the  subjects  of  attempted  cross-
correspondences.  In  support  of  my  view  I  was  not  able  to
bring  forward  much  evidence ; but  that  my  conjecture  was


22


./.  G.  Piddington.


[part


right  has  been  amply  proved  by  Mr.  Dorr's  recent  sittings  in
America  (see,  e.g.,  below,  pp.  104,  105),  which  contain  dozens  of
absolutely  conclusive  instances  of  these  phrases,  and  especially  of
"  I  said  ",  being  used  not  only  in  the  waking-stage,  but  in  the
trance-script  as  well,  with  reference  to  cross-correspondences.
And  this  frequent  usage  was  not  due  to  any  suggestion  of
mine  (or,  for  that  matter,  of  any  one  else's),  as  neither  Mr.
Dorr  nor  Mrs.  Piper  was  aware  of  the  interpretation  I  had
put  upon  it.

(p.  182.) Mrs.  Vekrall's  Sciupt  of  March  20,  1907.

As  pointed  out  above  (p.  21),  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of
March  11,  1907,  probably  contains  reminiscences  of  Words-
worth's Prelude.  The  phrase,  "  the  Evangelist  is  oiir  patron  ",
in  her  script  of  March  20,  1907,  among  a  series  of  references
to  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge,  is  also  probably  reminiscent
of  a  line  in  Book  III.  of  the  Prelude,  in  which  Wordsworth,
speaking  of  his  life  at  Cambridge,  says  :  "  The  Evangelist
St.  John  my  patron  was."  Dr.  Hodgson — whose  acquaintance
with  the  English  poets  was  extensive — often  used  to  express
his  pride  at  having  been  a  member  of  the  same  college  as
Wordsworth.  Hence  it  is  appropriate  that  a  reminiscence
of  this  particular  line  of  Wordswortli's  should  appear  in  a
script  which  I  was  led  for  quite  other  reasons  to  attribute  to
Hodgsouy.

(p.  261.) Mrs.  Holland's  Script  of  March  27,  1907.

This  contained  the  words  :
Peter  is  the  second  one — •

On  March  25,  1907,  Mrs.  Verrall  had  written  a  script
which  opened  with  the  word  Clavigcr.  For  reasons  set  forth
on  pp.  253-6  of  my  paper  I  took  the  epithet  "  Claviger "  in
the  sense  of  Club-bearer  to  allude  to  Heracles,  and  in  the
sense  of  Key-bearer  to  allude  to  Janus  and  St.  Peter.

I  am  inclined  to  see  in  Mrs.  Holland's  "  Peter  is  the
second one "  a reference  to the  second Key-bearer  of  Mrs.


LX.]  Su23plementavy  Notes  on  "  Concordant  Automcttisms."  23


Verrall's  script.  Only  48  hours  separate  the  two  scripts,
and  Mrs.  Holland's  was  written  on  a  day  of  the  week,
Wednesday,  on  which  connexion  with  Mrs.  Verrall's  was
specially  aimed  at  (see  pp.  206-7,  225,  and  291).  More-
over, while  Mrs.  Verrall's  "  Claviger  "  script  refers  to
"  shadow "  and  indicates  that  it  is  the  subject  of  a  cross-
correspondence  ;  Mrs.  Holland's  "  Peter "  script  contains  the
word  "  Shadow  "  twice.  Accordingly  if  "  Peter  "  is  taken  as
an  allusion  to  "  Claviger ",  these  two  scripts  show  two  points
of  contact  at  least.  And  they  may  show  more,  for,  if  my
interpretation  of  the  group  of  automatic  writings  discussed
in  Section  XIX.  of  my  paper  is  right,  they  both  furnished
several  contributions  to  the  Concatenation  of  Ideas.  See
further  the  cross-correspondence  Janic/dam  in  Miss  Johnson's
paper  below%  p.  204.

(pp.  265-268.) Mrs.  Holland's  Script  of  April  8,  1907.

I  pointed  out  that  the  allusions  contained  in  this  script
to  Leah  and  Eachel,  and  Martha  and  Mary,  as  alternative
types  of  opposite  temperaments,  were  almost  certainly  borrowed
from  Dante,  partly  from  Convito  IV.,  17;  85-111,  and  partly
from  Purgatorio,  Canto  XXVII.  This  theory  as  to  their
source  was  strongly  supported  by  the  fact  that  in  Cantos
XXVII.  and  XXVIII.  of  the  Purgatorio  are  to  be  found
grouped  together  several  of  the  topics  which  emerged  about
this  time  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  and  Mrs.  Piper's  trance.
In  a  foot-note  to  p.  267  I  drew  attention  to  the  fact  that
Mrs.  Holland,  who  frequently  (I  might  have  said,  usually)
recognises  and  points  out  the  source  of  literary  allusions
and  quotations  contained  in  her  script,  did  not  know  the
source  of  the  allusions  to  Martha  and  Mary,  and  Leah  and
Eachel.  At  the  time  of  writing  I  supposed  that  Mrs.
Holland  must  at  some  time  or  other  have  read  Pa.rgatorio,
Canto  XXVII.,  and  either  Convito  IV.,  17;  85-111,  or  a
quotation  of  it  in  a  commentary  on  the  Purgatorio  passage ;
a'nd  that  .she  had  subconsciously  retained  and  reproduced
recollections  of  them,  although  they  had  passed  out  of  her
conscious  memory.  The  following  statement,  however,  made
by Mrs. Holland on April 9, 1909,  in response to  my


24


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


enquiries,  makes  it  very  difficult  to  maintain  this  supposi-
tion : —

My  knowledge — or  rather,  my  ignorance — of  Dante  is  that  of  the
man  in  the  street.  I  have  always  intended  to  read  the  Bivina
Commedia,  if  only  in  translation,  but  have  never  done  so.  When
I  was  in  [Italy]  eight  years  ago,  I  bought  a  little  velUmi-covered
Commedia,  and  found  it  far  too  difHcult  for  my  budding  Italian.
The  lady  who  gave  me  lessons  made  me  read  Tasso  with  her.
I  am  fairly  familiar  with  the  Vita  Nuova  because  of  Rossetti's
beautiful  translation  ;  but  I  do  not  even  know  the  scheme  of  the
Commedia.  It  will  be  simplest  to  set  down  the  little  I  know  of
it:  Virgil  is  Dante's  guide  through  the  Inferno,  and  over  its  gate
is  written  "All  hope  abandon,  ye  who  enter  here."  Of  course  I
know  the  Paolo  and  Francesca  story ;  and  some  Dore  illustrations
seen  long  ago  dealt  horribly  with  the  "  sea  of  thick  ribbed  ice,"
the  sinners  head  downward  in  flames,  and  the  enchanted  tree
that  bled  and  moaned  when  a  branch  was  broken.  Dante  meets
Beatrice  ultimately,  but  I  do  not  know  where.  I  cannot  remember
anything  else.

When  I  was  at  • last  month  I  glanced  through  a  translation

of  the  Commedia  to  see  if  I  could  find  the  "  Leah  and  Eachel "
passage,  but  I  could  not.  I  chanced  upon  the  "  sevens "  passage,
which  interested  me,  as  Miss  Johnson  had  told  me  of  a  reference
to  it  in  the  script  [see  Miss  Johnson's  paper,  p.  241],  and  I  am
certain  I  never  read  the  passage  before.  My  father  was  saying
lately  it  was  disgraceful  of  us  not  to  possess  a  translation  of
Dante.

This  statement  may  be  supplemented  by  an  extract  from
a  letter  addressed  to  Miss  Alice  Johnson  by  Mrs.  Holland
on  April  8,  1909  :

This  morning  came  a  note  from  Mr.  Piddington  asking  about
my  knowledge  of  Dante. I  shall  have  to  confess  my  ignorance.
My father was saying  just the other  day  that it was  rather
shocking  we  have  no  translation  of  Dante. "  Should  we  read  it
if  we  had?"  asked  I. "Well,  no";  and  there  we  left  it.


Lx.]  SuiDplementary  Notes  on  "Concordant  Automatisms."  25


(pp.  215-220). Mrs.  Holland's  Script  of  April  16,  1907.

In  this  script,  likewise,  there  appears  an  allusion  to  a
literary  passage  unknown  to  the  automatist.^  The  allusion
is  made  in  the  words  "Lucus(?)  To  iiy  to  find  Euripides
Philemon";  which,  as  explained  in  detail  on  p.  217,  clearly
relate  to  Browning's  Aristophanes'  Apology.  "  Euripides "  was
mentioned  by  Myersp  in  a  context  which  strongly  suggests
that  it  was  meant  to  be  a  cross-correspondence,  and  anyhow
Euripides  figured  prominently  in  two  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts.

A  triple  cross-correspondence  of  a  simple  and  direct  type
was  accordingly  created  by  the  appearance  of  the  name
Euripides  in  the  three  scripts.  The  allusion  to  Browning's
Aristophanes'  Apology,  however,  both  strengthened  the  coinci-
dence and  made  it  more  complex  and  less  direct ;  because  the
names  Euripides,  Lukos  {i.e.  "  Lucus ")  and  Philemon  point  to
the  verse-translation  of  the  Hercules  Furcns  incorporated  in
Aristophanes  Apology,  and  Mrs.  Verrall's  two  "  Euripides "
scripts  (March  4  and  25,  1907,  see  pp.  213-4)  both  explicitly
refer  to  the  Hercules  Furens  of  Euripides.  A  striking  point  was
therefore  made  by  the  allusion  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  to
Browning's  poem,  which  would  have  appeared  to  be  dragged  in
superfluously,  had  Mrs.  Verrall's  script,  like  Mrs.  Piper's,  men-
tioned "  Euripides  "  only,  and  not  the  Hercules  Furcns  as  well.

Yet  though  the  reference  in  her  script  to  Aristojjhanes'
Apology  is  clear,  it  would  seem  not  to  have  emanated  from
Mrs.  Holland's  mind.  Early  in  November  1907  Miss  Johnson
wrote  to  Mrs.  Holland,  and,  without  explaining  why,  put  this
question  to  her :  "  Have  you  read  Aristujjhanes  Apiology  ? "
On  November  24,  1907,  Mrs.  Holland  replied  as  follows:

I  have  not  yet  attempted  to  read  Aristophanes'  Apology.  It  and
Red  Cotton  Night  Cap  Country  and  the  person  whose  name  I  forget
who  worked  in  distemper  [i.e.  Pacchiarotfo],  are  three  peaks  in  the
Browning  range  I  still  wait  to  scale.

It  is  of  course  conceivable  that  in  casually  turning  over
the  leaves  of  her  Browning  Mrs.  Holland  may  have  noted
and  have  subconsciously  remembered  and  afterwards  reproduced

-'With  this  and  the  preceding  case  the  "  Roden  Noel''  incident  described
in  Proc.  Vol.  XXI.  pp.  316-327  should  be  compared.


26


./.  G.  Piddington.


[part


in  her  script  the  names,  Lukos,  Euripides  and  Philemon.  But,
if  this  is  tlie  true  explanation,  I  would  remark  that  her
retention  and  reproduction  of  these  three  names  were  singularly
fortunate ;  for  they  seem  nicely  calculated  to  fix  the  precise
reference  which  was  required  to  bring  about  a  complex
cross-correspondence.  Euripides  and  Philemon  without  Lukos
would  have  suggested  the  two  Greek  dramatists  of  those  names,
rather  than  l-5rowning's  Aristo-phancs  Ajjology.  Philemon  and
Lukos  alone  without  Euripides,  while  suggesting  Browning,
would  not  have  produced  the  triple  cross-correspondence  on  the
name  Euripides.  Euripides  and  Lukos  alone  without  Philemon,
while  fixing  the  reference  to  Euripides'  Hercules  Furens,  would
not  have  brought  in  Browning's  verse-translation  of  the  Hercides
Furens ;  whereas  part  of  the  complexity,  as  I  think,  of
the  cross-correspondence,  consisted  in  the  fact  of  one  script
referring  to  Euripides'  play  and  of  another  script  referring  to
Browning's  translation  of  the  play.

On  April  22,  1908,  a  year  after  the  allusion  to  Browning's
Aristophanes  Ap)ology  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script,  came  what
must,  I  think,  be  admitted  to  be  an  allusion  to  the  same  poem
in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  by  Myersp.  In  order  to  show  what
led  up  to  the  allusion  a  few  extracts  from  sittings  previous  to
that  of  April  22,  1908,  must  first  be  quoted:—

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  held  on
Apiril  13,  1908.

(Present:  G.  B.  Dorr.)i

G.  B.  D. Then  another  [cross-corresponding]  message, which I  will
speak  of  now  to  prepare  you  for  it,  is  "Atlas."

Globe  (Hand  draws  circles.)  Globe.

G.  B.  D. Good. I  see  you remember. See  if  you  can  also  recall
the  tale  of  Hercules  and  Atlas,  and  tell  it  to  me  later.

(Hand  makes  gesture  of  assent.)

On  April  14  and  21,  1908,  Mr.  Dorr  reminds  MyerSp  that
"  Atlas "  is be  given  as  a  cross-correspondence,  and  that  he

^For  an  account  of  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings  see  papers  below,  passim.


LX.]  Supplementary  Notes  on  "Concordant  Automatisms."  27


wants  Myersp  to  tell  him  about  the  story  of  Atlas.  The
next  reference  to  the  subject  was  as  follows :

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  loifJi  Mrs.  Piper  held  on  April

22,  1908.

(Present  :  G.  B.  Dorr.)

(G.  B.  D.  goes  through  the  list  of  cross-correspondences
that  have  been  arranged,  and  on  coming  to  "Atlas"  re-
minds MyerSp  that  the  story  of  Atlas  is  still  to  be  told
him.)

(MyerSp  communicating.)
He

G.  B.  D.  Best  not  take  it  up  now ;  it  would  interfere  with  the
messages.

Oh  yes it's  partly  myth.

Mrs.  Verrall  has  written  a  few  verses  from  Browning  which
I,  Myers,  gave  her  recently  from  Euripides.  Where  she
has  selected  the  verses,  the  words  appeal  to  me  and
describe  one  of  our  messages  here.

G.  B.  D.  Can  you  tell  me  what  play  it  was  from  wliich  Mrs.  Yerrall's
verses  were  taken

Let  me  think  it  over — . Pallas  Pedestal  hair.

G.  B.  D.  You  had  best  not  try  and  tell  me  now,  but  take  more  time
about  it.  [G.  B.  D.  apparently  thought  that  "  Pallas
Pedestal  hair  "  was  an  attempt  to  explain  which  play  the
verses  were  taken  from.  But  the}'  are  really  an  unmis-
takable recurrence  to  subjects  mentioned  at  the  sitting
of  April  1.3,  1908. Note  by  J.  G.  P.]

No,  I  am  only  telling  you

(G.  B.  D.  interrupts,  and  reads  a  few  lines  here  and  there
from  Browning's  translation  of  the  Hercules  Furens.  On
his  reading  the  lines  where  Hercules'  plucking  of  the
golden  apples  in  the  garden  of  the  Hesperides  is  described,
the  hand  wrote  :)

I  am  listening  carefully — Apple — correct.  She  [i.e.  Mrs.
Verrall]  quoted  it  in  answer  to  apple.

(G.  B.  D.  finishes  his  reading  from  the  Browning  translation.)


28


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Mr.  Dorr's  contemporaneous  note  on  this  incident  is  as
follows :  "  The  reference  to  a  translation  by  Browning  from
Euripides,  or  from  the  Greek  plays  at  all  in  fact,  is  interest-
ing, for  I  did  not  know  that  he  had  made  any  such  until  I
looked  it  up  at  the  sitting  ...  in  the  book  of  Greek  Ode
translations  which  I  had  brought  with  me  to  it.  Finding
there  a  translation  by  Browning  from  the  Hcrctdes  Furens  I
glanced  it  through,  and  read  a  few  lines  here  and  there  to
see  if  the  control  would  identify  the  ones  referred  to ;  but
nothing  was  identified,  unless  it  were  the  lines  in  which
Hercules'  coming  to  the  Hesperides  and  the  plucking  of  the
golden  apples  is  described."

Myersp,  it  will  be  noticed,  said  that  the  lines  from  Brown-
ing, written  by  Mrs.  Verrall,  "  describe  one  of  our  messages
here " ;  and  then  identified  the  lines  as  those  referring  to  the
apples  plucked  by  Hercules  in  the  garden  of  the  Hesperides ;
and  added,  "  She  quoted  it  in  answer  to  apple ".

IsTow  this  was  all  quite  consistent,  for  on  March  23,  1908,
Myersp  had  chosen  "  apple  "  as  a  cross-correspondence,  and  on
April  6,  1908,  had  claimed  to  have  given  "apple"  to  Mrs.
and  Miss  Verrall.^

We  find  then  that,  while  in  April,  1907,  Mrs.  Holland's
script  completes  and  elaborates  a  trijjle-correspondence  on  the
subject  of  Euripides  and  the  Hercules  Furens  by  an  allusion  to
Browning's  Aristophanes'  Ajjology ;  in  April,  1908,  MyerSp
claims  to  have  brought  about  a  cross-correspondence  on  the
subject  of  "  apple  "  by  making  Mrs.  A^errall  write  "  a  few  verses
from  Browning  which  I  gave  her  from  Euripides " ;  the  con-
text showing  that  he  meant  thereby  Browning's  translation  of
the  Hercules  Fttrens,  which  is  embodied  in  Aristophanes'
Apology.  Neither  Mr.  Dorr  nor  Mrs.  Piper  was  in  any  normal
way  aware  that  "Euripides"  or  the  "Hercules  Furens"  was  the
subject  of  a  cross-correspondence ;  and  neither  had  seen  or
been  told  about  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  of  March 4  and  25,

1907,  or  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  April  16,  1907.

Only  twice  was  Euripides  mentioned  in  the  course  of  Mr.
Dorr's sittings: first, in the passage quoted, on April  22,

1908,  and  a  second time  in  the  waking-stage  of  the  trance

^See  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  paper,  pp.  190-3,  for  a  reference  to  the  golden  apples
of  the  Hesperides  in  Miss  Verrall's  script  and  to  this  whole  incident.


LX.]  Su2^plementary  Notes  on  ''Concordant  Automatisms."  29


of  May  4,  1908,  when  the  name  only  was  uttered  discon-
nectedly. And  out  of  some  70  or  80  cross-correspondences
arranged  for  at  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings  MyerSp  claimed  to  have
given  Mrs.  Verrall  only  one  other  quotation  from  Browning,
and  that  was  on  May  8,  1908,  when  he  said  he  had  given
her  "  Grow  old  along  with  lue,"  which  is  a  line  from  JRahhi
hen  Ezra  (see  Miss  Johnson's  paper  below,  p.  223).

That  MyerSp  should  have  brought  up  the  subject  of  Brown-
ing's translation  of  the  Hercules  Furcns  just  after  Mr.
Dorr  had  made  a  reference  to  Hercules  and  Atlas  is,  I  think,
interesting  in  view  of  the  suggestion  put  forward  in  my  paper
(Proc.  Vol.  XXII.  pp.  257-8),  that  Atlas  might  be  impli-
cated in  the  references  to  Hercules  and  Prometheus  in  Mrs.
Verrall's  "  Euripides  "  and  "  Hercules  Furens  "  scripts.

I  know  that  some  people,  who  have  no  doubts  as  to  the
reality  of  telepathy,  nevertheless  hold  that,  though  an  idea
may  be  impressed  from  outside  on  an  automatist's  mind,  the
form  in  which  it  is  expressed  in  the  automatist's  script  is
not  determined  by  the  external  agency,  but  solely  by  the
automatist's  own  peculiar  mental  habits.  Thus,  in  the  first  of
these  two  cases,  while  they  would  readily  agree  that  the
abstract  idea  underlying  the  references  to  Leah  and  Rachel,
and  Martha  and  Mary,  was  impressed  on  Mrs.  Holland's  mind
by  the  agency  which  impressed  cognate  ideas  on  Mrs.  Piper's
and  Mrs.  Verrall's  minds,  they  would  argue  that  the  form  in
which  Mrs.  Holland's  script  clothed  it  was  determined  by  Mrs.
Holland's  own  recollections  of  two  Dante  passages.  That  the
form  in  which  an  idea  is  expressed  in  a  script  is  very  often
thus  determined,  I  do  not  for  a  moment  doubt ;  but  I  see  no
grounds  whatever  for  supposing  that  it  invariably  is.  If  tele-
pathy is  a  fact,  what  is  to  prevent  a  percipient  receiving  an
idea  in  a  particular  concrete  form  hitherto  unknown  to  him,
provided  that  this  novel  form  can  be  communicated  by  means
of  a  combination  of  words  or  other  symbols  already  familiar
to  him  ?  When,  then,  a  script  contains  a  quotation  or  an
allusion  to  a  passage  in  literature  which  we  have  good  reasons
for  thinking  was  unknown  to  the  automatist,  and  when,  as  in
these  instances,  there  is  evidence  to  show  that  the  automatist  is
a  good  telepathic  percipient;  when  she  has,  moreover,  given  ample


30


J.  G.  Pidd'mgton.


[part


proofs  of  candour  and  accuracy,  no  proofs  of  reluctance,  and
many  of  readiness, — nay,  of  eagerness — to  reveal  all  her  normal
sources  of  knowledge,  why  need  we  conclude  that  the  quotation
or  allusion  was  merely  a  revived  memory  rather  than  a  message
impressed  upon  the  automatist  ab  extra  ?

If  these  were  the  only  appearances  in  script  or  trance-
utterances  of  literary  allusions  apparently  unknown  to  the
automatist,  it  might  be  hazardous  or  premature  to  claim  them
as  anything  more  than  revivals  of  submerged  memories ;  but,
as  we  shall  see  later  (in  the  papers  by  myself  and  Mrs.  Verrall
below,  pp.  39-150,  jmssm),  they  do  not  stand  alone.

(pp.  296  and  304.) "Six  Tykannus."

With  regard  to  the  words  "  six  .  .  .  Tyrannus,"  "  semper
—  —  —  —  —  Tyrannus "'  uttered  in  the  waking-stage  of  Mrs.
Piper's  trance  of  April  17,  1907,  Miss  W.  B.  Hammond  points
out  tliat  they  are  clearly  intended  ibr  "Sic  semper  Tyrannis,"  the
motto  of  the  State  of  Virginia.  She  adds  :  "  These  words  were
spoken  by  John  Wilkes  Booth  when  he  shot  President  Lincoln,
April  14,  1865.  The  date,  which  few  Americans  would
forget,  might  have  something  to  do  with  the  appearance  of
this  quotation  in  the  trance  of  April  17."

It  is  worth  remarking  that  Mrs.  Piper  gave  these  words  in
the  same  context  as  Thanatos  (Death),  which  formed  the  subject
of  a  cross-correspondence  with  Mrs.  Holland  and  Mrs.  Verrall,
and  they  seem  to  reinforce  and  emphasise  her  mention  of
Death.  Mrs.  Holland's  contribution  to  the  same  cross-corre-
spondence was  also  found  by  Miss  Johnson  (see  her  paper
below,  p.  221)  to  be  more  complete  than  I  had  represented  it.

Miss  Hammond  also  tells  us  that  "  United  we  stand,  divided
we  fall"  (words  spoken  in  the  trance  of  January  2,  1907:
see  Proc.  Vol.  XXII.  pp.  316-317)  is  the  motto  of  another
State.


LX.] Further  Experiments  with  Mrs.  Piper  in  1908.  31


FUETHER  EXPERIMENTS  WITH  MRS.  PIPER  IN  1908.

Introduction.

By  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall  and

J.  G.  PiDDINGTON.

In  the  spring  of  1908  a  series  of  21  sittings  in  Boston  with
Mrs.  Piper  was  carried  out  by  Mr.  G.  B.  Dorr,  a  Vice-President  of
the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  he  being  himself  the  sole
sitter  throughout.  It  is  with  certain  results  of  this  series
of  sittings  that  the  following  three  papers  deal.

Mr.  Dorr  was  a  friend  of  Dr.  Hodgson's,  and  had  had
many  previous  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  On  this  occasion
his  object  was  twofold.  In  the  first  place  he  desired  to
continue  the  experiments  in  cross-correspondence  with  other
automatic  writers  on  the  lines  of  the  English  experiments
in  1906-1907,  described  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXII.,
with  a  modification  of  the  conditions  introduced  by  two  new
factors :  («)  the  other  automatists  were  wholly  ignorant  that
cross-correspondences  were  being  attempted,  or  even  that  sittings
were  being  held  at  all ;  ih)  the  sitter  was  not  in  communica-
tion with  any  of  the  other  automatists,  and  had  no  access
to  the  scripts  they  produced,  so  that  thought-transference
from  the  sitter  was  throughout  eliminated  as'  a  possible  cause
of  any  interconnexions  which  might  exist.  In  the  second
place  he  tried  the  very  interesting  experiment  of  "  reviving
the  literary  memories "  of  the  trance-personalities,  with  a  view
to  obtaining  statements  that  might  help  to  solve  the  problem
of  the  identity  of  those  personalities.

The  papers  that  follow,  by  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mr.  Piddington
respectively,  deal with the  second  of the  above  mentioned


32 Mr.'^.  SidgivicJc,  3f)'s.  Verrall,  and  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part


classes  of  experiment — Mrs.  Verrall's  giving  a  general  con-
spectus of  the  evidence  and  Mr.  Piddington's  dealing  mainly
v/ith  a  remarkable  special  case.  In  the  third  paper,  by  Mrs.
Sidgwick,  the  cross-correspondences  and  interconnexions  between
the  automatists  are  discussed.

It  is  hoped  that  for  students  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  utter-
ances the  cases  described  and  the  extracts  quoted  from  the
sittings  give  substantially  all  that  in  the  present  series  of
sittings  (which  if  printed  in  full  would  run  to  over  200  pages)
can  be  said  to  throw  new  light  on  the  nature  of  the  intelli-
gence at  work.  Without  describing  every  incident  falling
under  either  of  the  above  heads,  great  care  has  been  taken  to
give,  as  far  as  possible,  a  fair  general  impression  both  of  the
degree  of  success  attained  in  the  whole  series  of  experiments
and  of  the  extent  and  nature  of  the  failures,  and  we  have  been
careful  also  to  omit  nothing  that  bears  on  any  experiment
selected  for  full  description.  Moreover,  the  complete  records
will  of  course  be  preserved.

As  in  other  cases  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance,  of  which  accounts
have  recently  been  published,  the  communicating  intelligence
calls  itself  "  Myers "  or  "  Hodgson "  or  "  Eector,"  the  latter
professing  as  usual  to  act  as  amanuensis,  though  "  Myers "
and  "  Hodgson  "  also  at  times  write  directly.  In  the  waking-
stage,  as  before,  Mrs.  Piper  speaks  in  pro'prid  persond,  repeating
what  she  hears  or  describing  what  she  sees.  Neither  the
spoken  utterances  of  the  waking-stage,  nor  those  written  during
the  deeper  trance,  seem  to  remain  in  Mrs.  Piper's  normal  con-
sciousness when  she  has  returned  to  her  ordinary  waking  life.
What  psychological  facts  underlie  the  drama;  whether  the
personalities  who  appear  to  take  part  in  it  are  merely  phases
of  Mrs.  Piper's  consciousness ;  how  far  they  are  in  telepathic
communication  with  other  minds,  either  of  living  persons  or
of  persons  no  longer  in  the  body ;  and  if  they  are,  whether
there  is  any  truth  in  the  claim  that  intelligences  other  than
Mrs.  Piper's  are  actively  and  deliberately  concerned ;  and,
in  any  case,  what  are  the  relations  of  the  personalities  to
each  other ; — all  these  questions  which  recent  evidence  about
automatism  has  brought  so  prominently  forward  in  our  Pro-
ceedings are  again  raised  by  the  present  series  of  sittings.
And we think it will be generally admitted that  these


LX.] Further  Experiments  ivith  Mrs.  Piper  in  1908.


33


sittings  furnish  an  important  contribution  to  the  accumulating
evidence  in  which  answers  to  these  questions  must  be
sought.

It  is  hardly  necessary  again  to  remind  the  reader  that  in
giving,  e.g.  the  name  MyerSp  or  MyerSy,  or  even  Myers  by
itself,  to  the  communicating  intelligence,  we  are  not  doing  any-
thing so  question-begging  as  to  assume  that  that  intelligence
is  Frederic  Myers.  We  are  merely  giving  it  for  brevity  and
convenience  the  name  which  it  gives  itself,  adding  a  suffix  to
indicate  the  automatist  concerned.  Whether  its  account  of
itself  can  be  accepted  at  its  face  value  depends  on  its  cre-
dentials, and  these  are  mixed.  That  Myersp  is  not  Frederic
Myers  as  we  knew  him,  with  all  his  memories  and  associations
of  ideas  and  modes  of  expression  intact,  is  clear  from  in-
ternal evidence,  both  by  excess  and  defect.  Some  of  the
associations  of  ideas  and  modes  of  expression  (see  Mrs.  Verrall's
paper,  pp.  79,  80)  are  natural  in  Mrs.  Piper  but  not  in  the
supposed  communicator,^  and  some  of  the  confused  and  erro-
neous statements  would  have  Ijeen  quite  impossible  to  Frederic
Myers  in  the  full  possession  of  his  faculties.  There  is  then
unquestionably  at  least  some  degree  of  personation — conscious
•or  unconscious.  On  the  other  hand  there  is  knowledge  shown
which,  so  far  as  can  be  ascertained,  had  never  been  in  the
mind  either  of  Mrs.  Piper,  or  of  the  sitter  Mr.  Dorr,  or  of
other  living  persons  with  whom  there  is  evidence  of  telepathic
communication,  but  which  was  almost  certainly  possessed  by
Frederic  Myers.  The  high-water  mark  of  this  kind  of  evidence
is  reached,  so  far  as  the  present  sittings  are  concerned,  in  the
"  Lethe  "  incident  described  by  Mr.  Piddington.  And  not  only
was  the  knowledge  shown  in  this  case  almost  certainly  pos-
sessed by  Frederic  Myers,  but  the  arrangement  of  it,  fragmentary
though  it  be,  fits  in  well  with  his  associations  and  ways  of
looking  at  things. This  kind  of  evidence  certainly  points  to

^  There  is  one  incident,  outside  the  experiments,  worth  mentioning  in  this
•connexion.  At  the  first  sitting  of  the  series  (March  9th,  1908)  Myersr  made  a
spontaneous  attempt,  savouring  very  much  of  guesswork,  to  recall  the  occasions
when  Frederic  Myers  had  met  !Mr.  Dorr.  In  the  course  of  this  attempt  an
allusion  to  Cambridge  (where  by  the  way  Mr.  Dorr  had  not  visited  Mr.  Myers)  is
scarcely  expressed  as  Frederic  Myers  would  have  expressed  it.  Myersp  said  "I
wish  you  could  remember  my  showing  you  the  students'  liall  and  our  walk
<icross  the  little  bridge  over  the  river."

C


34 Mrs.  Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Verrall,  mid  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part


the  intelligence  of  Frederic  Myers  being  in  some  way  or  other
behind,  or  concerned  with,  Myersp.

The  successful  cross-correspondences  described  in  Mrs.  Sidg-
wick's  paper  are  interesting  and  important,  but,  as  will  be
seen,  they  are  not  of  a  kind  which  adds  weight  to  the  claim
that  a  third  intelligence  has  actively  intervened,  since,  so
far  as  we  can  see,  telepathy  between  the  two  automatists
concerned  would  sufficiently  account  for  the  facts.

It  is  important  to  observe  that  the  two  numbers  of  the
S.P.E.  Proceedings  which  deal  with  cross-correspondences  were
not  published  till  after  the  conclusion  of  these  sittings  with
Mrs.  Piper.  Part  LV.,  Miss  Johnson's  report  on  Mrs.  Holland's
script,  appeared  in  June  1908,  and  Part  LVII.  (Vol.  XXII.),  Mr.
Piddington's  report  on  the  experiments  with  Mrs.  Piper,  appeared
in  October  1908.  Mr.  Dorr  had  received  a  general  account  of
the  line  taken  in  the  English  experiments  with  Mrs.  Piper,  but
he  had  not  seen  the  record  of  the  sittings,  and  knew  nothing
in  detail  about  the  results.^  Neither  Mrs.  nor  Miss  Verrall
knew  anything  about  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings  till  long  after  their
conclusion.  It  was  only  when  Mrs.  Verrall  was  shown  the
record  of  these  sittings  in  October  1908,  that  she  had  any  idea
that  communications  from  MyerSp  had  been  obtained  or  aimed
at,  after  Mrs.  Piper's  return  to  America  in  the  summer  of
1907.

We  have  for  convenience  given  a  list  of  the  sittings  with
their  dates,  and  references  to  quotations  from  them.  This  is
intended  to  enable  the  reader  to  trace  the  chronological  sequence
of  topics  dealt  with  in  the  papers,  should  he  wish  to  do  so.
The  amount  of  matter  in  these  sittings  unconnected  with  the
two  kinds  of  experiments  with  which  these  papers  deal,  is —
apart  from  discussion  with  the  controls  about  arrangements
for  sittings,  etc. — very  small  And  what  there  is,  is  for  the
most  pai't  neutral  and  unevidential  in  character  ^ — uninstructive
to  those  who  already  know,  as  readers  of  the  Proceedings-
abundantly  do,  what  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  is  like.

^  For  an  account  of  communications  on  this  subject  with  Mr.  Dorr,  see  Mr.,
Piddington's  paper,  note  A,  p.  136.

-  An  exception  to  this  has  been  referred  to  in  a  foot-note  to  the  preceding;
page.


LX.] Further  Experiments  tvith  Mrs.  Piper  in  1908.  35

List  of  the  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  ivith  xohieh  this  Report  deals,
giving  the  elates  on  which  they  were  held,  the  headings
under  which  they  are  referred  to,  and  the  pages  where  they
arc  ([noted.

1908.

March  9.  The  whole  of  the  record  of  this  sitting,  so  far  as
it  is  concerned  with  the  two  kinds  of  experiments
discussed  in  this  paper,  is  quoted  on  pp.  171-7
a  propos  of  cross-correspondences  "  Neptune,"
"Troy,"  "Exile."
It  is  also  referred  to  in  the  Introduction,  p.  33
(foot-note).

And is referred to in  connexion with  "  Virgil's

Aeneid,"  pp.  61-3.
And  in  connexion  with  "  The  Horace  Ode  Question,"

p.  153.

March  10.  Aeneid,  pp.  64,  65,  67,  68,  145.
The  Sibyl,  p.  145.

The  Horace  Ode  Question,  pp.  153,  154.
Cross-correspondence:  "Neptune,"  p.  178.

March  16.  Aeneid,  pp.  67,  68,  69,  71-3,  145.
The  Sibyl,  p.  145.
The  Horace  Ode  Question,  p.  155.
Cross-correspondences:  "Neptune,"  p.  178;  "Troy,"
p.  182.

March  17.  Aeneid,  pp.  53,  74,  77.

The  Horace  Ode  Question,  p.  155.
Cross-correspondences  :  "  Neptune,"  p.  179;  "  Troy,"
p.  183;  "Apple,"  p.  192.

March  23.  The  Sibyl,  pp.  89,  146.

The  Lethe  Incident  (Cave,  Iris),  pp.  87-9.
Cross-correspondences: "Troy,"  pp.  183-4;  "Exile
and  Moore,"  p.  186; "  Pharaoh's  daughter,"  pp.
184,  189  ;  "  Apple,"  p.  192.
March  24.  Ajax  and  Ulysses,  p.  52.
Parthenon,  p.  56.

The  Lethe Incident (Cave of Sleep,  Iris,  Ceyx),
pp.  90-5.


36 il/r.s.  Siclgwick,  Mrs.  Verrall,  and  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part


March  24:.  The  Sibyl,  pp.  93,  146.

Cross-correspondence:  "Neptune,"  p.  l79.
March  30.  Ajax  and  Ulysses,  p.  53.

Cyclops,  Centaurs,  etc.,  p.  54.

Parthenon,  p.  57.

Aeneid,  p.  81.

The  Lethe  Incident  (Ceyx,  Janus,  Echo  and  Nar-
cissus, Orpheus  and  Eurydice),  pp.  95-7,  104-5.
The  Sibyl,  pp.  96,  146.

Cross-correspondences:  "Neptune,"  pp.  179-80;  "Exile
and Moore/' p. 186  ; "  Pharaoh's  daughter,"
p.  189;  "Palm  branches,"  p.  196.
March  31.  Agamemnon,  pp.  47,  52.

Ajax  and  Ulysses,  p.  53.

Cyclops  and  Centaurs,  p.  54.

Parthenon,  p.  57.

The  Horace  Ode  Question,  p.  157.

The  Lethe  Incident  and  0 vidian  Allusions  (Echo  and

Narcissus,  Orpheus  and  Eurydice),  pp.  105-6.
The  Sibyl,  p.  147.

April 6.  Agamemnon,  pp.  47,  52.

Ajax  and  Ulysses,  p.  53.
Parthenon,  p.  58.
Acneid,  p.  69.

The  Horace  Ode  Question,  p.  157.

The  Lethe  Incident  (Ceyx,  Hyacinthus,  Pygmalion),

pp.  97,  106-7.
The  Sibyl,  p.  147.

Cross-correspondences:  "Neptune,"  p.  180;  "Palm
branches,"  p.  196.

April 7.  Agamemnon,  pp.  48,  52.

Ajax  and  Ulysses,  p.  53.
Parthenon,  p.  58.

The  Lethe  Incident  (Ceyx,  Hyacinthus,  Pygmalion),

pp.  97,  107-9.
Cross-correspondence:  "Neptune,"  p.  180.

April 13.  Agamemnon,  pp.  48,  51-2.

Cyclops  and  Centaurs,  p.  55.
Aeneid,  p.  69.


Lx.] Further  Experiments  tvith  Mrs.  Piper  in  1908.  37

April  13.  The  Lethe  Incident  (Pygmalion,  Hyacinthus),  p.  109.
April 14.  Agamemnon,  pp.  49,  51-2.

Ajax  and  Ulysses,  p.  53.

Cyclops  and  Centaurs,  p.  55.

The  Lethe  Incident  (Hyacinthus),  p.  110.

Cross-correspondences:  "  Neptune,"  p.  180;  ''Apple,"
p.  192.

April 21.  Agamemnon,  pp.  49,  51.

Tavern  Club  Motto  (first  mention  of),  pp.  78  (foot-
note), 222.
The  Horace  Ode  Question,  p.  157.
The  Lethe  Incident  (Hyacinthus),  pp.  110-12.
Cross-correspondences :  "  Neptune,"  p.  180; "  Exile
and  Moore,"  p.  186; "Apple,"  p.  193.
April 22.  Shelley,  pp.  43-4.

Cyclops  and  Centaui's,  p.  55.
The  Horace  Ode  Question,  p.  15  8.
The Lethe Incident  (Hyacinthus,  Cave  of  Sleep),
p.  112.

Cross-correspondence:  "Apple,"  pp.  191-2.
April 27.  Comus,  pp.  45,  197.

Cyclops  and  Centaurs,  p.  55.

The  Lethe  Incident  (Hyacinthus),  p.  113,
May 4.  Comus,  pp.  45,  46,  197.

Cyclops  and  Centaurs,  p.  55.

The  Lethe  Incident  (Cave  of  Sleep),  p.  113.

Cross-correspondence:  "Harp,"  p.  188.
May 8.  Comus,  p.  197.

The  Lethe  Incident  (Hyacinthus,  Ovid),  pp.  113-14.

Cross-correspondence: "Seven,"  pp.  194,  223.

May 12.  Comus,  p.  197.

Cross-correspondences:  "Harp,"  p.  189;  "Seven,"
pp.  195,  224.

May 13.  Comus,  pp.  197-8.

Cross-correspondence:  "Harp,"  p.  189.

May 18.  (Not  referred  to  at  all  in  the  text.)

May 26.  The  Horace  Ode  Question,  p.  159.

Cross-correspondence: "Apple,"  p.  193.


38 Mrs.  Siclgwick,  Mrs.  Verrall,  and  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part


EXPLANATION OF ABBREVIATIONS AND  TERMS.

(a)  Used  in  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance-Scri'pt.

E,.  =  Rector,  a  Control  of  Mrs.  Piper.

Light  =a Medium; and also some kind  of

luminosity  by  which  a  medium  is
supposed  to  be  surrounded,  and  by
means  of  which  the  spirits  profess  to
effect  their  communications.

(b)  Used  in  this  Report.

G.B.D.  =Mr.  G.  B.  Dorr.

Scribe  =^the  personality  which  purports  to  be  the

author  or  inspirer  of  a  piece  of  auto-
matic script.

Waking-stage  =the  process  of  coming  out  of  trance,
during  which  Mrs.  Piper  speaks,  but
does  not  write.

Myersp  =the  personality  that  calls  itself  "Myers"

in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance.

Myersy  =  the  personality  that  calls  itself  "  Myei'S  "

in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script.

MyersjiY  =the  personality  that  calls  itself  "Myers"

in  Miss  Verrall's  script.

Myersii  —  the  personality  that  calls  itself  "  Myers  "

in  Mrs.  Holland's  script.

and  so  on  with  the  other  personalities.


LX.]  Classical  and  Literary  Allusions  in  M  rs.  Pipers  Trance.  39


I.

CLASSICAL  AND  LITEEAKY  ALLUSIONS  IN
MES.  PIPEE'S  TEANCE.

By  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.

As  has  been  said  in  the  Introduction,  this  paper  deals  with
the  second  of  the  two  classes  of  experiments  carried  out  by
Mr.  Dorr,  namely,  the  attempt  to  "revive  the  literary  memories"
of  certain  trance-personalities.  His  object  was  to  obtain  state-
ments showing  classical  or  literary  knowledge  such  as  might
be  possessed  by  the  persons  claiming  to  communicate,  but  not
by  the  medium.  The  method  employed  was  to  ask  questions
or  to  submit  small  problems  of  translation  from  Latin,  after
hrst  stimulating  the  interest  of  the  trance-personalities  in  the
subjects  introduced  by  conversation  and  by  reading  aloud
passages  from  authors  known  to  have  been  familiar  to  the
persons  supposed  to  be  communicating.  In  the  first  instance,
a  fortnight  before  these  sittings  began,  Mr.  Dorr  had  asked
Hodgsoup  to  translate  "  veni  vidi  vici "  and  "  arma  virum-
que  cano,"  these  two  very  familiar  Latin  phrases  being-
chosen  for  their  familiarity.  This  Hodgsoup  professed  himself
unable  at  the  sitting  to  do ;  but  at  the  first  sitting  of  this
series,  March  9th,  he  asked  to  have  the  words  repeated,  and
said  that  he  had  brought  Myers  to  help  in  their  translation.
From  this  time  it  was  with  Myersp  mainly  that  these  experi-
ments were  continued,  and  it  was  chiefiy  the  memories  of
Frederic  Myers  that  the  sitter  attempted  to  revive,  though
Hodgson  p  was  apparently  present  throughout  and  contributing
to  the  result.

The  experiment  was  novel  and  ingeniously  devised.  It  was
clearly  worth  trying  to  obtain  from  the  trance-personalities — ■


40


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


whatever  they  might  be — evidence  of  knowledge  palpably  not
attainable  by  Mrs.  Piper.  On  the  assumption,  suggested  1:  y
the  English  experiments/  that  the  trance-personalities  had  access
to  the  memories  of  Frederic  Myers,  it  was  possible  that
evidence  might  also  be  obtained  of  knowledge  not  possessed
by  the  sitter.  In  any  case  it  was  likely  that  in  the  course
of  this  new  type  of  experiment,  fresh  facts  might  be  obtained
bearing  on  the  obscure  problems  of  personality  presented  by
the  trance-phenomena.  That  in  all  these  three  directions
valuable  results  were  obtained,  and  that  fresh  material  has
been  added  for  the  examination  of  psychical  researchers  by
the  ingenuity  and  labour  of  Mr.  Dorr,  it  is  the  object  of  the
present  paper  to  show.

That  tlie  results  are  not  capable  of  exact  classification
or  brief  exposition  is  partly  inherent  in  the  nature  of  the
phenomena,  but  is  partly  also  due  to  defects  in  the  method
of  experimentation,  which  further  experience  may  remove
or  diminish.  It  is  probalile  that  in  any  future  attempt
to  revive  the  memories  of  a  supposed  communicator,  fewer
■  questions  will  be  asked  and  more  scope  will  be  given  for
spontaneous  statements  arising  after  reference  hj  the  experi-
menter to  topics  once  familiar.  In  this,  the  first  set  of
experiments,  too  many  topics  were  presented  at  a  time  to  the
control.  A  further  element  of  complexity  was  introduced  by
the  simultaneous  effort  at  experiment  along  another  line — the
so-called  cross-correspondences — though  it  is  to  be  noted  that
the  two  often  worked  in  together,  and  that  a  topic  produced
by  the  attempt  at  revival  of  memory  was  chosen  by  the
control  as  the  subject  of  successful  transmission.-  It  is  certain
that  on  the  mind  of  the  reader  the  first  effect  of  the  great
number  of  subjects  introduced  by  the  experimenter  is  bewildering
in  the  extreme,  and  perhaps  the  control  should  not  be  credited
with  more  faculty  for  keeping  them  disentangled  than  is  pos-
sessed by  the  student  of  the  record.  Careful  reading  of  the
record  shows  meaning  and  connexion  in  statements  at  first
sight  unintelligible,  and  this  suggests  that,  iinder  conditions
improved  by  the  experience  of  these  sittings,  clearer  results
might  1)6  obtained.

iSee  Proceedings  S.P.K.,  Vol.  XXII.  pp.  108-172;  397-407.
2  See  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  paper,  pp.  177,  182,  186.


LX.]  Classical  and  Literary  A  llusions  in  Mrs.  Piper  s  Trance.  41


The  method  pursued  by  Mr.  Dorr  was  as  follows :  During
the  trance  he  suggested  questions  on  literary  or  classical  topics
as  subjects  of  messages  to  be  transmitted,  or  asked  what
associations  they  had  for  the  control.  He  did  not  press  for
an  immediate  answer,  and  never  misled  the  control  or  laid
traps.  Throughout,  his  conduct  was  that  of  a  friend  trying
to  evoke  memoiies  dormant  or  forgotten,  and  he  made  this-
intention  abundantly  clear  to  the  trance-personalities.  It  was.
his  habit,  after  the  first  six  sittings  of  the  series,  at  the
beginning  of  the  trance  to  read  over  the  utterances  of  the-
preceding  waking-stage^  and  to  invite  comment  by  the  respond-
ing hand  on  the  disjointed  sayings  of  the  voice.  This  practice
arose  first  from  references  being  made  by  the  trance-personalities
to  statements  uttered  in  the  waking-stage  of  the  previous
sitting.  Sometimes  the  hand  explains  the  spoken  words,
sometimes  corrects  them,  sometimes  misinterprets  them ;  on
some  occasions  the  hand  disowns  all  recollection  of  the  words,
uttered  by  "  the  spirit  of  tlie  light  as  she  returned."  In  the-
course  of  the  sittings  the  waking-stage  tended  to  increase  in
length  and  importance.  The  relations  Ijetween  the  waking-stage-
and  the  trance  proper  would  in  themselves  furnish  material
for  a  separate  paper,  and  discussion  of  them  must  be  deferred
till  the  reader  has  some  acqiiaintance  with  the  actual  results
achieved,  whether  by  hand  or  voice.

It  is  difficult  within  the  limits  of  this  paper  to  deal  with
the  mass  of  detail  presented  in  the  record  of  the  21  sittings
between  March  9th  and  May  26th,  1908.  ISTor  is  it  possible
to  summarise  the  results,  or  to  classify  them  as  good,  bad,  or
indifferent.  The  important  point  to  discover  in  the  case  of
each  item  of  knowledge  shown  by  the  responding  intelligence
is  not  whether  the  information  given  is  correct  or  incorrect,
but  of  what  type  it  is.  A  partially  incorrect  answer  to  a
particular  question  may  somethnes  give  indications  of  under-
lying intelligence,  whereas  a  verbally  accurate  statement  ma}'

^  The  waking-stage  is  the  name  given,  as  readers  of  Vol.  XXII.  will  remember
(p.  29),  to  the  intermediate  stage  when  Mrs.  Piper  is  passing  out  of  trance
into  a  normal  condition.  During  this  period  there  is  no  writing,  but  phrases
more  or  less  disjointed  are  spoken.  The  phrases  are  of  three  types:  some
claim  to  be  the  verbatim  repetitions  of  utterances  by  the  "spirits",  others  to
be  Mrs.  Piper's  paraphrases  of  those  utterances,  and  the  rest  to  be  Mrs.,
Piper's  remarks  in  propria  persona.


42


Mrs.  A.  W.  VerraU.


[part


sometimes  be  due  to  an  accidental  acquaintance  with  the
■contents  of  a  book  of  reference,  or  even  to  chance.  It  has
therefore  seemed  best  to  select  some  typical  cases  for  presen-
tation, and  to  leave  the  reader  to  form  his  own  judgement.

Before  attributing  the  statements  to  a  third  unknown
intelligence,  it  is  necessary  to  eliminate  two  known  intelli-
gences, the  minds  of  medium  and  sitter.  The  knowledge
demanded  is  for  the  most  part  beyond  the  medium's  range,
and  it  is  comparatively  easy  to  exclude  her  agency.  Account
must  of  course  be  taken  of  any  information  acquired  either
directly  or  inferentially  from  Mr.  Dorr's  questions  or  remarks,
all  of  which,  I  need  not  say,  are  included  in  the  record.  It  is
more  difficult  to  exclude  the  mind  of  the  sitter  as  a  contribu-
tory cause.  'No  student  of  the  now  voluminous  records  can
fail  to  recognize  that  there  have  been  instances  of  direct
thought-transference  from  the  sitter,^  and  we  must  also  allow
for  changes  of  tone  and  other  involuntary  indications."'  In
judging  of  the  sitter's  knowledge,  we  have  to  reckon  with  the
subliminal,  as  well  as  the  supraliminal  memory,  and  therefore
we  must  suppose  that  a  good  deal  of  the  classical  information
shown  by  the  control  may  have  been  at  one  time  accessible
to  Mr.  Dorr  and  stored  in  his  subliminal  memory.^ Even  in

^See,  for  instance,  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXII.  p.  436.

-  Some  such  cases  are  noted  by  Mr.  Dorr.  On  the  general  question  of
thought-transference  from  the  sitter,  Mr.  Dorr,  in  a  letter  written  on
November  16th,  1909,  sums  up  as  follows  the  impression  derived  from  a  long
experience  of  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper:  "My  experience  with  the  Piper
trance  does  not  lead  me  to  believe  that  the  trance-consciousness — whatev^er  it
may  be — is  able  to  tap  my  mind  for  facts  or  thought,  except  what  I  express
in  some  way  to  the  normal  sense  perceptions,  by  word  or  tone  or  movement.
I  have  fairly  strong  grounds  for  thinking  that  it  .  .  .  rarely  if  ever  gets
subliminal  impressions  from  my  mind.  .  .  .  With  other  sitters  I  have  seen
instances  of  what  I  call  its  clairvoyant  faculty  shown  remarkably  now  and
then  .  .  .  but  this  does  not  seem  to  me  so  much  reading  the  sitters'  minds
as  seeing  things  in  some  way  associated  with  them — as  though  it  had  a
faculty  of  seeing  their  environment,  as  it  were.''

■^In  answer  to  an  enquiry  from  me,  Mr.  Dorr  sends  me  the  following  note
as  to  his  classical  reading:  "I  dropped  Latin  and  Greek  at  eighteen,  at  the
end  of  my  second  year  at  Harvard ;  I  have  never  read  Greek  since,  and
scarcely  any  Latin — none  for  a  long  time.  Virgil  I  read  the  first  three  or
four  books  of  at  school — I  mean  of  the  Aeneid — and  none  since  ;  no  Ovid,  and
very  little  Horace.  My  Greek  reading  was  still  more  limited  than  my  Latin,
and  I  have  forgotten  my  Greek,  alas,  quite  thoroughly  .  .  .  Translations  of


LX.]  Classical  and  Literary  A  Ihisions  in  Mrs.  Piper  s  Trance.  43

the  case  of  tlie  medium,  we  must  allow  for  a  similar  extension
of  knowledge,  especially  if  an  interval  elapses  between  the
question  and  the  answer.  I  am  not  suggesting  the  interven-
tion of  "  the  useful  book  that  knows."  But  it  is  not  safe  to
assume  that  no  trace  of  what  has  been  said  to  the  trance-
personalities  reaches  Mrs.  Piper's  normal  mind,'-  and  a  vague
recollection  might  suffice  to  draw  her  attention  to  a  particular
suliject,  and  so  focus  her  recollections  or  increase  her  informa-
tion before  the  next  sitting.  The  longer  the  interval  between
the  first  question  and  the  final  answer,  the  more  chance  there
is  of  hints  being;  obtained  from  Mr.  Dorr's  manner  as  to
whether  the  statements  correspond  with  his  expectations.  On
the  other  hand,  it  will  be  seen  in  some  cases  that  the
responding  intelligence  was  misled  by  the  sitter's  misunder-
standing or  ignorance.  Hence  the  importance  of  response  at
the  same  sitting  in  which  the  question  is  put.  This  does
not  usually  occur.  The  general  object  lieing  what  I  have
described,  the  experimenter's  main  desire,  as  he  pointed  out,
was  for  satisfactory  and  complete  rather  than  for  immediate
replies,  though  he  recognised  the  value  and  importance  of
these.  But  in  some  cases,  at  least  part  of  the  answer  was
produced  in  the  course  of  the  sitting  or  in  the  waking-stage.
Indeed  on  one  occasion,  which  I  proceed  to  describe,  the
response  was  complete  and  immediate.

Case  I.  Shelley.

On  April  22nd  Mr.  Dorr  read  ten  lines  from  Shelley's
translation  of  the  C'l/clojys  of  Euripides,  selected  from  a  book
which  he  had  brought  with  him  to  the  sitting,  namely  Mr.
A.  W.  Pollard's  collection  of  translations,  called  Odes  from
the  Greek  Dramatists.

Mr.  Dorr  brought  the  books  that  he  used  with  hiui  to
the  sittings  in  a  hand-bag,  and  only took them  out  after

the  Classics  I  have  hardly  read  at  all.  I  have  been  in  Greece,  once  and  too
briefly ;  in  Italy,  in  earlier  years,  a  good  deal."  See  also  Xote  A  of  Mr.
Piddington's  paper  below,  pp.  141-2.

^  This  is  specially  likely  to  be  the  case  in  the  waking-stage,  where  the
medium  is  passing  into  a  normal  condition  and  may  perceive  and  remember
indications  of  approval  or  dissatisfaction.


44


Mrs.  A.  W.  V err  all.


[part


Mrs.  Piper  had  gone  into  trauce.  During  the  trance  Mrs.  Piper's
liead  is  turned  away  from  the  hand  which  writes,  and  there-
fore also  from  the  sitter  who  is  placed  on  her  riglit,  and  her
eyes  are  closed.  Mr.  Dorr  however  took  care,  even  though
her  eyes  seemed  closed,  to  turn  away  from  her  the  page,  if
open,  or  the  back  with  the  title  upon  it,  of  any  book  used
during  the  sitting.  Mr.  Pollard's  Odes  he  obtained  from  the
Athenaeuin  Library  at  Boston,  an  old  Club  Library  to  which
Mrs.  Piper  had  no  access.  The  book  is  not  one  which  she
could  have  readily  found  in  the  places  open  to  her,  nor  would
she  be  likely  to  have  ever  come  upon  it  in  her  reading.
It  has  no  associations  with  Mr.  Myers,  and  would  not  there-
fore on  that  around  have  attracted  the  attention  of  Mrs.
Piper  had  she  accidentally  come  across  it.  It  is,  however,
within  my  personal  knowledge  that  the  book  was  known  to
Mr.  Myers ;  I  remember  his  talking  with  me  of  the  book  and
of  its  editor  about  the  time  of  its  production  in  1890.

Extract  from  Sitting  of  April  22nd,  1908.
(Myersp  communicating.)

G.  B.  D.  (reads) One  with  eyes  the  fairest
Cometh  from  his  dwelling,
Some  one  loves  thee,  rarest,
Bright  beyond  my  telling.
In  thy  grace  thou  shinest
Like  some  nymph  divinest.
In  her  caverns  dewy  : —
All  delights  pursue  thee.
Soon  pied  flowers,  sweet-breathing,
Shall  thy  head  be  wreathing.

You  read  well.

O.  B.  D.  Now  see  if  you  can  tell  me  whose  verses  these  are  that  I
have  just  read  you.  It's  a.  translation  from  the  Greek.
I  will  read  them  over  to  you  once  again. (Reads  again.)

Did  he  write  Ode  to  the  Skylark  1

G.  B.  D.  Yes,  that  is  splendid,  quite  wonderful  I  think.

Thank  you. If  I  am  not  Myers,  whom  [sic]  am  1 1


LX.]  Classical  and  Literary  Allusions  in  M  rs.  Pipers  Trance.  45

There  can  be  no  question  liere  of  accident.  Tnless  Mrs.
Piper  knew  and  recognized  Shelley's  translation,  in  which,  as
will  have  been  noticed,  no  name  occurs  distinctive  of  its
origin,  the  infoi'mation  came  from  the  sitter's  mind  or  from  a
third  intelligence.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  even  here,
where  the  knowledge  shown  is  unmistakably  correct,  no  attempt
is  made  to  give  the  name  of  the  writer,  Shelley.  He  is
described  by  naming  another  of  his  poems.  Many  parallel
cases  suggest  that  special  difficulty  is  found  in  giving  proper
names.-"-

Case  II. Com  us.

The  next  illustration  also  deals  with  English  literature.  ]\Ir.
Dorr  had  found  in  general  talk  that  ]\Irs.  Piper  knew  nothing
of  Milton's  but  Paradise  Lost,  and  he  had  for  some  time
intended  to  read  from  Comus.  The  opportunity  occurred  on
April  27th,  1908,  when  immediately  before  the  conclusion  of  the
trance  proper,  he  read  a  few  lines  from  the  opening  of  Comus
without  saying  anything  as  to  whence  the  lines  were  taken,
or  who  was  the  author.  Shortly  afterwards,  just  before  the
conclusion  of  the  waking- stage,  these  words  were  spoken  as
from  MyerSp :  "  I  had  it  in  my  mind  that  you  were  going
to  read  me  about  Comus. See  those  pretty  little  children."

It  is  clear  that  Myersp  recognized  the  passage  read.  It  is
moreover  evident  that  the  succeeding  words  "  pretty  little
children "  are  not  inappropriate  in  recalling  the  circumstances
of  the  production  of  Covins,  which  was  written  for  perform-
ance by  the  young  children  of  Lord  Bridgewater.

The  appropriateness  of  this  allusion  was  not  recognized  liy  Mr.
Dorr,  nor  apparently  by  the  trance-personality  communicating  on
May  4th.  On  that  day  when  Mr.  Dorr  read  over  to  jMyersp  the
utterances  of  the  preceding  waking-stage,  after  the  mention  of
"  Comus,"  MyerSp  wrote  :  "  Milton."  Then  Mr.  Dorr  said,  '•'  At
the  end  she  said  '  See  those  pretty  little  children.' "  To  which
MyerSp  replied,  "  I  was  thinking  of  my  own  dear  ones."  -

iSee  below,  pp.  48,  &1,  68.

-  Mr.  Myers's  o-\vn  children  -were  three  in  number,  a  sister  and  two  brothers,
like  the  Egerton  children.  Earlier  in  the  waking-stage,  before  the  allusion  to
Cormis,  the  names  of  Mr.  Myers's  three  children  had  been  spoken  by  Mrs.  Piper.


46


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


If  I  am  right  in  thinking  that  the  original  combination  of
Comus  and  children  is  due  to  a  recollection  of  the  circum-
stances which  produced  Milton's  poem,  this  affords  an
illustration  of  what  I  have  above  described  as  misinterpretation
l)y  the  hand  of  what  was  spoken  in  the  waking-stage.-^

Further  slight  indications  were  given  of  knowledge  of
Milton's  Comus— e.g.  "  tempted  her  with  wine "  emerged  on
May  4th — but  the  most  interesting  point  in  the  allusions  to
Comus  is  of  a  different  kind,  namely,  its  connexion  by  Myersp
with  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  name.  This  is  described  in  Mrs.  Sidg-
wick's  paper  (p.  197).

Case  III.  Agamemnon.

My  third  illustration  is  from  classical  literature.  I  give  the
whole  incident  in  detail,  as  it  is  short,  and  moreover  illus-
trates several  characteristics  of  these  sittings.  On  March
31st  Mr.  Dorr  announced  to  MyerSp  that  he  would  read  to
him  something  written  by  Mr.  Ernest  Myers.  He  then  read
a  translation  of  the  invocation  to  Zeus  from  the  Agamemnon
of  Aeschylus,  IL  160-183.  The  translation  is  published  in
Mr.  Pollard's  Odes,  and  it  was  from  this  book  that  Mr.  Dorr
read.  The  lines  are  quoted  below  and  the  reader  will  see  that,
as  Mr.  Dorr  noted  at  the  time,  there  is  nothing  in  them  to
suggest  either  the  name  of  Agamemnon  or  his  story.

Agamemnon,  11.  160-183.

Zeus,  whosoe'er  lie  be,  if  this  name  please  his  ear,

By  this  name  I  bid  him  hear :

Naught  but  Zeus  my  soul  may  guess.

Seeking  far  and  seeking  near.

Seeking  who  shall  stay  the  stress

Of  its  fond  and  formless  fear.

Yov  He,  who  long  ago  was  great,

Filled  with  daring  and  with  might,

Now  is  silent,  lost  in  night :

And  the  next  that  took  his  state

Met  his  supplanter  too,  and  fell,  and  sank  from  sight.

Tor  further  illustrations  see  below,  pp.  51,  82.


LX.]  Classical  and  Literary  Allusions  in  Mrs.  Pijoer's  Trance.  47


Zeus  Victorious  liail  we  then,

Zeus  that  leadeth  souls  of  men —

Thus  his  deep  decrees  ordain —

To  Wisdom's  goal  o'er  the  drear  road  of  Pain.

In  sleep  there  doth  before  the  heart  instil

A  grievous  memory  of  ill,

Making  the  unwise  wise  against  his  will.

So  unto  Man,  in  kind  compulsion  given,

Falls  the  high  grace  of  Gods  from  awful  tin-ones  of  Hea\'en.

Extract  from  sitting  of  March  '?>\st,  1908.

G.B.  D.  (reads  above  lines.)

(Myersp  communicating.)

Splendid,  I  recall.

G.  B.  D.  Now  I  want  you  to  try  whether  you  cannot  give  me  later,  in
the  waking-stage  perhaps,  the  name  of  the  old  Greek
play  from  which  these  lines  are  translated.  You  must
have  been  familiar  both  with  the  play  itself  and  with  these
lines  of  your  brother's  while  you  were  here.  (Hand  bows
assent.)

Wakiwi-stage.
(Very  low  whispering  not  caught.)
Agamemnon.  .  .  .

It's  a  dark  place  we're  coming  into.  Why  do  we  come  into
it  at  all  ?  Hodgson  says  "  Troubles  and  trials,  and  the
better  you  go  through  them,  the  better  your  [life]  here ;
and  if  you  don't  develop,  it's  your  own  fault.  He  said
he'd  sing  of  the  Odes  for  you."

Extract  from  sitting  of  April  Qth,  1908.

(G,  B.  D.  going  through  utterances  of  waking-stage.)

G.B.  D.  She  then  told  me  Hodgson  said  "Troubles  and  trials,  etc."

Yes  he  was  sending  the  light  back  to  its  earthly  body  [i.e.
they  were  messages  in  the  waking-stage  to  Mrs.  Piper's
'returning  spirit^].


48  .  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.  [part

G.  B.  D.  She  said  he'd  sinsr  of  the  Odes  for  rae.  AVhat  Odes  does  he
mean  ?

Do  you  recall  who  wrote  three  plays  1  (A  word  resembling
Achilles,  but  imperfectly  spelt,  is  now  written.)

G.  B.  D.  Spell  it.

A  E— wrote  three.  Something  you  read  to  me  brought  it  to
ni}'^  mind.

G.  B.  D.  Try  and  give  me  the  name  presently.  Your  speaking  of  the
three  plays  has  brought  another  question  to  my  mind  ;
there  was  a  famous  Greek  play  which  was  called  in
Latin  Nubes,  etc.

[Aristophanes'  play  called  the  Birds  was  also  mentioned  by
the  experimenter. Note  Inj  M.  de  G.  V.]

JVahing-stage.

Achilles,  no  ...  .  Achylus  wrote  three  plays  ....  Sad
pronunciation  !  not  right !  .  .  .  .  I  can't  think.  (Tries
name  again  and  fails.)

Extract  from  sitting  of  April  7fh.
JVakinr/siage.

Achylus  that  is  right  ....  He  says  no.  Well,  friend,  I
know  what  I  am  thinking.  •  •


Extract  from  sitting  of  Aioril  loth.

G.  B.  T).  Now  I  want  to  read  you  something  and  see  if  you  can  tell
me  who  wrote  it.

(Reads  again  Mr.  E.  Myers's  translation  of  Agamemnon,  11.
160-183.)

(MyerSp  communicating.)

I'll  tell  her.

JFaJcijig-stage.

Ernest  wrote  it. Oh  Zeus ! Ernest  wrote  it,  ti-anslated
it  .  .  .  my  brother.


LX,]  Classical  and  Literary  Allusions  in  Mrs.  Pipers  Trance.  49

[Later  a  fresh  attempt  was  made  by  Mrs.  P.  to  get  the  name
of  Aeschyhis,  but  without  better  success  than  previously.

iVote  hij  M.  cle  G.  V.]

 wrote.

Extract  from  sitting  of  April  14:th.
(Hodgsoup  communicating.)

(After reference to Aristophanes' play of the  Birds.)
Agamemnon — king.

JVaking-stage.

 Agamemnon — king  Aeschylus  (To  Mrs.

P.)  "I  have  told  you  that  twenty  times  and  you  have
just  got  it."

He  said  I  was  a  good  girl,  because  I  said  it  properly  ....

Mr.  Myers  keeps  holding  it  up. Crane  long  neck.

He  says,  my  friend  in  the  body  ought  to  know  about  it.

Ernest  wrote  about  it.
Jove

Extract  from  sitting  of  April  21st.

G.  B.  D.  (Going  through  waking-stage.)  In  what  connexion  was  it
that  you  spoke  of  Agamemnon  the  king  1

(Myersp  communicating.)

You  asked  me  who  he  was,  as  I  understood  it

G.  B.  D.  You  spoke  the  other  day,  in  the  waking-stage,  of  some
old  writer  who  wrote  three  plays,  three  plays  related
together  in  a  single  story,  as  I  understood  you  to  mean.
I  want  you  some  time  to  tell  me  who  that  writer  was,
and  what  plays  these  were,  if  you  can.  (Hand  signifies
comprehension  and  assent.)

G.  B.  D.  Then  she  said  "  Aeschylus."  And  then,  as  said  to  herself,
"  I  have  told  you  that  twenty  times  and  you  have  just
got  it " — '  He  said  I  was  a  good  girl  because  I  said  it
properly.'

Isn't  that  strange  '? I  did  compliment  her  when  I  understood
the  clear  pronunciation  [of  the]  word.

D


50  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.  [part

G.  B.  D.  'Crane  etc' 'Ernest  wrote  about  it.'

I  think  there  is  some  confusion  here.  Myers's  answer  that
'  Ernest  wrote  about  it '  was  in  reply,  I  think,  to  a  poem
you  read  about  Zeus.

G.  B.  D.  The  word  Jove  did  follow  it,  but  I  could  catch  nothing
more.


Before  commenting  in  detail  on  these  extracts,  it  will  be
desirable  to  form  an  opinion  as  to  the  associations  which  the
passage  read  by  Mr.  Dorr  would  have  for  a  classical  scholar.
I  take  it  that  the  thought  of  such  a  scholar  would  be :  "  The
translation  is  from  the  invocation  to  Zeus  in  the  great  Chorus
— the  -TTuOei  fxdOo?  Chorus — of  the  Agaviemncm"  and,  for  the
benefit  of  an  enquirer  not  familiar  with  Greek,  he  might
add  that  the  Agamemnon  was  written  by  Aeschylus,  and  was
the  first  of  a  Trilogy,  or  group  of  three  connected  plays,
of  which  this  Aeschylean  Trilogy  is  the  only  extant  specimen.

What  does  MyerSp  say  ?  A  minute  or  two  after  the  ques-
tion has  been  put,  the  first  word  audibly  spoken  in  the  waking-
stage  by  Mrs.  Piper  -is  the  name  Agamemnon.  A  week
later,  during  the  review  of  the  utterances  in  the  waking-stage,
MyerSp  tries  to  give  the  name  of  an  author  of  whom  he  was
reminded  by  something  read  to  him  by  the  sitter.  This
author  is  described  as  one  who  wrote  three  plays ;  the  name
resembles  Achilles,  but  begins  AE.  Further  attempts  to  give
this  name  end  in  its  successful  production  in  the  waking-stage
of  April  14  after,  though  not  immediately  after,  the  words
"  Agamemnon  king."

These  points  are  clear  and  unmistakable.  There  are  others
less  clear,  but  interesting  and  suggestive.  Thus  in  the  remarks
quoted  as  from  Hodgsoup  in  the  waking-stage  of  March  31st,
I  am  disposed  to  see  allusions  to  iraQei  /ulu6o9,  and  to  the
Choral  Ode  read  from  Pollard's  Odes,  in  the  words :  "  Troubles
and  trials,  and  the  better  you  go  through  them  the  better
your  [life]  here — He  said  he'd  sing  of  the  Odes  for  you."
That  this  is  the  intention  of  the  p)hrase,  "  Sing  of  the  Odes,"
is  probable  from  the  fact  that  the  mention  of  this  phrase  on
April  6th  at  once  leads  MyerSp  to  think  of  Aeschylus.  The
application  of  "  troubles  and  trials,"  etc.,  to  the -TrdOei  juaOo?,


LX.]  Classical  and  Literary  A llusions  in  Mrs.  Pij^er's  Trance.  51

"  wisdom  acquired  by  suffering,"  is  not  certain.  There  is  no
doubt  that  the  words  are  explained  by  the  control  on  April
6th,  and  were  probably  understood  at  their  utterance  by  the
"  spirit  of  the  light,"  as  advice  to  Mrs.  Pip)er.^  If  my  view
is  correct,  and  the  original  remark  was  meant  as  an  allusion  to
the  Choral  Ode,  we  have  here  another  instance  of  a  failure
on  the  part  of  the  writing  hand  to  understand  the  full  meaning
of  the  spoken  words.-

As  showing  the  persistence  in  the  trance  of  an  association
of  ideas  that  has  once  occurred,  we  may  note  a  statement  on
April  14th.  On  April  6th  Mr.  Dorr  had  passed  from  the
mention  of  "  three  plays "  to  questions  about  two  plays  of
Aristophanes  (not  mentioning  the  author's  name),  the  Clouds
and  Birds.  This  association  persisted  with  the  control,  for  on
April  14th  a  reference  to  the  play  of  the  Birds  is  im-
mediately followed  by  the  words  "  Agamennion  king,"  and  in
the  waking-stage  of  the  same  day  an  allusion  to  "  Crane "  is
interpolated  between  the  successful  attempt  at  "  Aeschylus "
and  the  statement  that  the  translation  was  by  Ernest  Myers.
That  the  connexion  between  the  Birds  and  the  Agaviemnon
was  not  intended  is  the  view  of  Myersp  on  April  21st.  He
definitely  dissociates  the  "  Crane  etc."  from  the  following
words.  Here,  then,  the  communicator  appears  to  have  a
clear  grasp  of  the  situation  and  to  be  able  to  disentangle  the
disjointed  sayings  of  the  waking-stage,  without,  however,
attempting  to  account  for  them.

On  April  13th,  the  answer  to  his  question  not  being  then
complete,  Mr.  Dorr  read  over  again  the  translation,  without
naming  the  translator.  His  intention  was  "  to  see  whether
the  recollection  of  the  lines  themselves,  whether  as  read
previously  or  from  former  memory,  was  clear  enough  to
identify  them  as  their  author's."  The  result  was  the  im-
mediate production  in  the  waking-stage  of  the  answer  to  this
question.  Similarly,  a  fortnight  earlier,  the  answer  to  the
first  question  had  been  produced  in  the  first  utterances  of  the
waking-stage.  The  cases  differ  essentially  in  evidential  value,
the required  answers  being  normally  known  in  the  one  case

^For  similar  instances  of  personal  application  combined  with  veridical  state-
ments, see  below,  p.  81.
^See  above,  p.  46.


52


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


and  not  in  the  other.  But  both  cases  iUustrate  the  close
C(jnnexion  between  trance  proper  and  waking-stage,  and  show  a
desire  to  reply  at  the  earliest  possible  moment  to  tire  question
put  by  the  experimenter.

To  enable  the  reader  to  judge  at  a  glance  how  far  the
answer  of  MyerSp  corresponds  with  that  of  my  supposed
classical  scholar,  I  place  the  statements  in  parallel  columns,
printing  in  brackets  words  representing  what  had  been  already
mentioned  by  the  experimenter,  or  could  be  inferred  from  the
passage  read :

Classical  scholar  Myers  p.

Translation  from  [Ernest  translated  it]  Apr.  13.

Invocation  to  Zeus  in  0  [Zeus]  Apr.  13.

Great  Chorus —  He'd  sing  of  the  Odes.  Mar.  31.

-jradei  judOo?  Chorus  of  [troubles  and  trials  etc.]  Mar.  31.

Agamemnon  by  Agamemnon  Mar.  31.

Aeschylus  who  wrote  Aeschylus  Apr.  6, 7,13,14.

Trilogy.  wrote  three  plays  Apr.  6.

Here  is  no  accident.  Either  Mrs.  Piper  knew  and  recog-
nized the  passage,  or  the  explanation  must  be  sought  in  the
knowledge  of  the  sitter,  or  in  a  third  intelligence,  or  in  a
combination  of  these  two.  The  reader  must  judge  which
hypothesis  is  probable.  My  own  view,  as  has  been  seen,  is
that  something  more  than  thought-transference  from  the  sitter
is  required  to  account  for  the  facts.

It  is  time  to  turn  to  the  failures.  There  are  very  few
instances  of  persistent  error  as  distinct  from  confusion — of
cases,  that  is,  wliere  the  only  correct  statements  ai'e  such
as  could  have  been  derived  from  the  medium's  knowledge,
or  inferred  from  indications  given  by  the  sitter.  The  following
are  the  only  cases  I  have  found :


Case  IV. Ajax  and  Ulysses.

In the waking-stage of March 24th these words  were

spoken  : "  I  am  the  power  that  they  say of  Ajax.  I

do  not  know  what  it  means at all." On March 30th,  in


LX.]  Classical  and  Literary  Allusions  in  Mrs.  Pipei's  Trance.  53

repeating  these  words,  Mr.  Dorr  added :  "  Who  was  Ajax,  can
you  tell  me  ? "  To  this  he  received  from  the  controls,
Hodgsonp  and  Myersp,  who  were  both  apparently  concerned,
the  reply :  "  Greek  god,  yes,  I  understand ;  old  Ajax.  I  said
to  the  spirit  [i.e.  to  Mrs.  Piper]  I  am  not  going  to  release
you  until  you  repeat  all  for  me.  I  will  hold  you,  I  will
hold  you  in  my  power,  the  power  of  Ajax."

These  words  appear  to  be  sheer  nonsense.  Ajax  was  not
a  Greek  god,  neither  was  he  old,  nor  had  he  any  special
power.  Nor  is  anything  contributed  by  the  reference  to  the
subject  in  the  waking-stage  of  the  next  sitting,  March  31st:
"  Ajax — Ulysses — took  them  in  a  boat  and  then  went  across  ;
he  would  not  be  outdone."  It  is  true  that  there  is  in
Homer  a  close  association  between  Ajax  and  Ulysses,  but
there  is  no  association  with  a  boat.  The  first  emergence  of
"  Ulysses "  and  the  "  boat "  was  earlier  in  the  same  sitting,
when  in  answer  to  a  question  about  the  Greeks  and  Persians
the  control  wrote :  "  Didn't  Ulysses  take  them  in  a  boat
across  ? "  The  ignorance  about  Ulysses  seemed  as  great  as
about  Ajax,  and  is  the  more  remarkable  in  that  on  March
17th,  during  a  talk  about  Acnnd  I.,  Ulysses  was  quite  correctly
associated  with  the  Wooden  Horse.

On  xipril  6  th  Mr.  Dorr,  reviewing  the  words  of  the  waking-
stage,  asked  whether  the  control  had  any  association  in  his
mind  between  Ajax  and  Ulysses.  But,  in  spite  of  this  lead,
the  only  reply  was :  "  Power,"  and  in  the  waking-stage  of  the
next  day,  April  7th,  Ajax  and  Ulysses  were  definitely
separated.  The  remarks  about  both  only  add  to  the  mistakes:
"  Ajax's  power,  the  power  of  Thor,  Tor  he  pronounces  it,"  and
again :  "  They  say  Minerva  was  angry  with  Ulysses  and  he
never  recovered — so  he  died.  So  the  story  goes,  and  he
knows  the  story."  The  story  is  not  known  to  me.  No
light  was  thrown  by  the  review  of  the  waking-stage  on  April
13th,  either  on  Ajax  or  Ulysses,  nor  by  the  statement  in  the
waking-stage  of  April  14th,  "  Ulysses  was  so  grieved  that  he
died."  Mr.  Dorr  renewed  the  attempt  to  obtain  further
information  about  Ajax  at  the  sitting  of  April  21st,  l^ut
nothing  further  was  said  by  the  controls.

As  has  been  said,  the  above  statements  seem  entirely
without  meaning,  and I only  hesitate to describe  them  as


/


54


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


sheer  nonsense  in  view  of  the  fact  that  in  some  other  cases,
notably  in  the  gronp  of  allusions  to  Lethe,  described  by  Mr.
Piddington,  the  possession  of  a  clue  has  enabled  the  student
to  see  sense  in  what  at  first  reading  seems  mere  disjointed
drivel.-^

Case  V. Cyclops,  Centaurs,  etc.

In  the  case  just  related  the  errors  are  left  uncorrected,
but  in  the  case  next  to  be  described  the  complete  confusion
shown  at  first  is  cleared  np  in  the  course  of  the  sittings.
Help  was  no  doubt  derived  from  indications  of  dissatisfaction
on  the  part  of  the  sitter,  and  the  knowledge  shown  is,  at
best,  elementary.  The  gradual  disentanglement,  however,  is
interesting  to  watch.

The  suggestion  by  Mr.  Dorr,  on  March  30  th,  of  the
"  Winged  Horse "  as  a  subject  for  a  message  to  transmit  to
other  automatists,  seems  to  have  produced  a  vague  recollection
of  most  of  the  fabulous  monsters  of  Greek  legend — Medusa,
the  Chimaera,  the  Minotaur,  the  Centaurs,  the  Sphinx,  and
the  Cyclops.^  The  control  says :  "  What  was  the  name  of  the
half-dragon  man  ? "  and  rejects  Mr.  Dorr's  suggestion  of  the
Sphinx.  On  March  3ist  the  subject  reappears,  when  the
control  says :  "  Do  you  recall  my  reference  to  a  mythological
subject — half-man  ? "  The  sitter  hereupon  suggested  that
Minotaur  might  be  the  word,  though,  as  his  note  subsequently
added said, it was equally likely that  the Centaurs  were

1  Since  this  paper  was  in  type  a  possible  clue  has  been  suggested  to  me.
Ajax,  though  not  a  god,  was  a  being  closely  akin  to  a  god,  and  possessed  of
peculiar  power,  a  Greek  "Hpws  (hero-divinity).  As  Hero  of  Salamis  he  received
veneration  and  worship,  and  in  that  aspect  he  might  well  be  called  a  god.
Herodotus  indeed  names  Ajax  among  "  the  gods"  to  whom  {Tolai  deolai)  after  the
defeat  of  the  Persians  three  Phoenician  triremes  were  dedicated  by  the  successful
Greeks.  The  other  two  "gods"  were  Poseidon  and  Athena  (Herod.  VIII.  64
and  121).  The  connexion  of  Ajax  with  the  island  Salamis,  familiar  to  readers
of  Herodotus  and  Sophocles,  may  lie  behind  these  confused  references.

^  For  the  benefit  of  readers  unfamiliar  with  these  monsters,  I  may  say  that
by  means  of  the  Winged  Horse,  sprung  from  the  blood  of  the  snaky-tressed
Gorgon  Medusa,  Bellerophon  slew  the  winged  Chimaera,  compounded  of  horse,
dragon,  and  goat.  The  Minotaur  is  half-man,  half-bull ;  the  Centaurs  half-man,
half- horse;  the  SjMnx  is  a  winged  figure  half- woman  and  half-lion,  and  the
Cydo-ps  a  one-eyed  giant.


LX.]  Classical  and  Literary  Allusions  in  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance.  55

intended.  The  control  very  judiciously  committed  himself  only
to  the  four  letters  common  to  the  two  woi'ds,  t  a  u  r.

Most  of  the  above  monsters,  familiar  to  the  sitter,  were
alluded  to  in  the  waking-stage  of  April  13th  :  "He  had  an  ox's
head  and  a  man's  body  .  .  .  Centaurs.  Sphinxes  .  .  .  woman's
head  and  a  lion's  body ; "  and  when  the  subject  came  up  on
April  14th  in  reviewing  the  preceding  waking-stage,  Mr.  Dorr
drew  attention  to  the  confusion,  and  asked  Myersp  to  recall
the  Centaurs  clearly,  if  he  could.  The  attempt  to  do  this
seems  to  have  produced  a  confusion  between  Centaurs  and
Cyclops,  for  after  drawing  an  object  described  as  a  Centaur
on  April  22nd,  the  hand  reached  out  and  touched  the  sitter
on  both  eyes,  and  then  upon  the  centre  of  the  forehead,
where  it  pressed  heavily.  This  suggested  to  Mr.  Dorr  a
creature  with  a  single  eye  in  the  centre  of  his  forehead,  and
the  hand  assented  to  this  ^dew.  Later  in  the  sitting,  when
Mr.  Dorr  proposed  Cyclops  as  a  message  for  transmission,  the
hand  drew  again  the  figure  which  it  had  described  earlier  as
a  Centaur,  and  the  confusion  still  persisted  in  the  waking-
stage,  as  is  shown  by  the  words :  "  Cyclops  —  — •  —  head,
sn'akes  .  .  .  Cyclops had one eye in his forehead  ...  I

did  tell  him,  but  he  doesn't  understand ' Cyclops  was

Centaur,  no,  that's  mixed '  Half-head  half-body ;  tell  him
that. Say  snakes  from  the  head."

On  April  27th,  during  the  trance-writing,  confusion  between
these  creatures  is  mentioned  by  Mr.  Dorr,  and  admitted  by  the
control.  In  the  waking-stage  the  first  words  caught  are :
"  Had  a  wicked  face,"  which  the  comment  on  May  4  applies
to  Medusa.  Later  in  the  waking-stage  of  April  27th,  a  protest
against  the  supposed  confusion  is  made  in  the  words :  "  Don't
you  think  I  know  the  difference  between  Cyclops  and  Centaur?"
and  on  May  4th,  when  these  words  are  read  to  Myersp,  he
clearly  distinguishes  between  them  in  the  words :  "  One  eye.
Half-horse  and  man."  Henceforth  the  distinction  is  maintained.
But  it  will  be  noted  that  by  this  time  much  help  had  probably
been  derived  from  the  indications  given  by  the  experimenter.


56


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


Case  YI.  Parthenon.

I  have  related  the  above  case  at  length  because,  if  it  stood
alone,  it  would  make  against  the  intervention  of  a  third
intelligence.  It  suggests  the  tentative  and  gradual  acquisition
by  some  one  starting  with  very  little,  if  any,  actual  knowledge
of  facts  known  to  the  sitter.  It  does  not  suggest  the  revival,
amid  difficulties  of  expression,  of  memories  once  familiar,
which  is  in  my  view  suggested  by  some  other  incidents.  In
this  respect  it  differs,  for  instance,  from  the  following  case,
where  a  transition  is  made  from  definite  errors — not  however
at  all  likely  to  be  due  to  guesses  by  the  medium — by  gradual
stages  to  a  statement  involving  a  knowledge  almost  certainly
exceeding  that  consciously  possessed  by  the  sitter.

Extract  from  sittimj  of  Marcli  24:th.

(The  control  to-day  is  apparently  K.  H.  throughout,  F.  W.  H.  M.
being  indicated  as  present  and  occasionally  speaking.)

[In  the  part  of  the  sitting  immediately  preceding  the  following
extracts,  G.  B.  D.  had  asked  questions  about  Aphrodite,
Poseidon  and  Plotinus  ;  his  last  remark  is  :J

G.  B.  D.  Best  leave  it  until  another  time.  I  would  like  to  have  him
think  it  over  and  tell  me  later  what  he  can  about  the
character  of  Plotinus's  writing.

Oh  yes ;  all  right.

(After  a  moment's  pause)

Parthenon.

G.  B.  D.  Is  that  Parthenon  ?

Yes.  (Word  follows  whose  reading  is  not  clear,  but  which,
in  view  of  what  comes  later,  is  probably  an  attempt  at
"Athena").  Pallis.  What  did  you  say  that  made  me
think  of  it? Aphrodite  and  her  Greek  name.

[At  this  point  Eros  is  suggested  by  the  sitter  as  a  cross-
correspondence  message  and  some  discussion  takes  place
about  ^ws.—Note  by  M.  cle  G.  V]


LX.]  Classical  and  Literary  Allusions  in  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance.  57

Who  was  Athea — he  says  Palks  Athea. Athene. (G.  B.  D.
reads  this  word  aloud)  Yes  Myers  said  it.

(In  waking-stage  of  same  day.)
....  Venus  chamber  Pallas — Parthenon.

Extract  from  sitting  of  March  3 0th,  1908.
(Gr.  B.  D.  going  through  utterances  of  waking-stage.)

G.  B.  D.  The  Light  next  said  "Pallas"  "Parthenon." Tell  me  the
meaning  of  the  word  Parthenon,  what  its  significance  is.

Yes  certainly. Venus  chamber. (G.  B.  D.  reads  as  above  ;
hand  listens,  and  then  writes  :)

Not  exactly.

Inhab—  bride.

G.  B.  D.  What  are  you  trying  to  exjsress  now?

Answer  Parthenon. (Two  straight  parallel  lines  now  drawn.)
Walk.

G.  B.  D.  Is  this  an  answer  to  my  question  about  Parthenon  ?

I  know  but  I  am  a  little  confused  over  your  various  Cjuestions.

Extract  from  sitting  of  March  31st,  1908.

(G.  B.  D.  having  mentioned  in  a  non-classical  connexion  a
marble  statue,  the  hand  writes  "like  Pallas  Athene,"
which  leads  G.  B.  D.  to  speak  of  a  statue  at  Athens  and
another  elsewhere  by  a  famous  sculptor  whose  name  he
asks  the  control  to  recall.)

I'll  think  it  over  a  little ;  perhaps  it  will  bring  it  to  my  mind.
Best  leave  these  awhile  and  I'll  recall  them.  .  .  .  Virgin.

G. B.  D.  Why  do  you  write  that?

Just  came  to  my  mind.
G.  B.  D.  Is  that  an  answer  to  a  question  ?

Yes. Parthenon. Just  this  moment  came  to  me.
G.  B.  D.  That  is  first-rate. That  is  exactly  what  I  wanted  to  get.

Extract  from  waking-stage  of  same  day.
.  .  .  Parthenon,  Virgin's  chamber.


58


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


Extract  from  sitting  of  A23ril  6th,  1908.
M'^aking-stage.

Came  a  knocking  at  my  chamber  door.  Virgin's  chamber —
Off  with  you — Mr.  Myers  piped  up  and  said,  suggested
chamber  door.

Extract  from  sitting  of  April  1th,  1908.

(G.  B.  D.  going  through  utterances  of  waking-stage.)

G.  B.  D.  "And  there  came  a  knocking  at  my  chamber  door."

And  I  came  to  this  beautiful  life.

G.  B.  D.  I  thought  the  words  were  a  memory  of  poetry  from  this
life.

Yes.  Poe.

My  eyes  my  beautiful  • — •  —  rapping  rapping.
G.  B.  D.  Then  she  said  "  Mr.  Myers  piped  up."

Oh  isn't  that  funny. I  must  say  it  sounded  familiar.
G.  B.  D.  "  Mr.  Myers  piped  up  and  said,  suggested  chamber  door."

Isn't  that  too  funny  for  words.  ,

Eecapitiilating  the  above,  then,  we  note  that  the  word
"  Parthenon  "  was  spontaneously  produced  on  March  24th,  and
connected  with  "  Pallas  Athena."  In  the  waking-stage  of  the
same  day  the  nnintelligible  words  "  Venus  chamber "  preceded
the  repetition  "  Pallas  Parthenon."  When  Mr.  Dorr  read  the
utterances  of  the  waking-stage,  he  did  not  mention  "  Venus
chamber,"  which  he  seems  to  have  connected  with  preceding
words  referring  to  a  question  about  Eros.  But  he  asked  for
the  meaning  of  the  word  Parthenon  or  its  significance.  The
word  represents  two  Greek  words :  the  accusative  case  of
Parthenos,  "  a  virgin,"  and  the  nominative  case  of  Parthenon,
which  means  "  maidens'  apartment,"  and  is  usually  employed
in  that  sense  in  the  plural.  In  the  singular  it  is  used  of  the
Maiden's  chamber,  namely,  the  Temple  of  Athena  Parthenos  at
Athens.


LX.]  Classical  and  Literary  Allusions  in  Mrs.  Piper  s  Trance.  59


The  attempt  to  give  the  meaning  of  the  word  Parthenon
produces  again  the  unintelligible  "  Venus  chamber,"  which,
however,  does  not  satisfy  the  control,  who  corrects  it  to
"  Inhab — bride,"  words  which  seem  to  approximate  to  the  ideas
suggested  by  Parthenon.  The  parallel  straight  lines  and  the
word  "  walk "  remain  unexplained,  and  the  control  recognizes
his  own  confusion.

On  March  31st  further  reference  to  Pallas  Athene  produces
from  the  control  the  word  "  virgin,"  which  he  definitely  states
is  "  an  answer  to "  Mr.  Dorr's  question  about  the  meaning  of
Parthenon.  This  answer  satisfies  the  experimenter,  his  intention
having  been  not  to  obtain  a  specific  translation  of  the  word
into  English,  but  to  find  out  whether  the  control  understood
that  the  name  was  due  to  the  fact  that  Athena  was  the
virgin  goddess.  But  the  control  utters  in  the  waking-stage  of
the  same  day  the  words  "  Parthenon  virgin's  chamber,"  which
give  the  second  meaning  of  the  Greek  word,  and  thus  complete
the  answer  to  Mr.  Dorr's  question.  It  is  noticeable  that  this
completion  is  produced  after  the  sitter  has  accepted,  as
"  exactly  what "  he  "  wanted  to  get,"  the  fii'st  answer  "  virgin."
I  am  disposed  to  see  in  the  original  "  Venus  chamber "  an
attempt  at  the  "  virgin  chamber "  ultimately  given,  and  the
interest  of  this  case  lies  partly  in  the  fact  that  the  informa-
tion given  exceeds  that  consciously  demanded  by  the  sitter.

The  later  references  on  April  6  th  and  7th  appear  to  me
to  show  the  influence  of  Mrs.  Piper's  own  knowledge.  Poe's
poem  of  the  Raven  is  a  familiar  one,  and  the  combination  of
a  virgin's  chamber  and  a  statue  of  Athena  produces  a
recollection  of  "  the  pallid  bust  of  Pallas  "  above  the  "  chamber
door."  This  recollection  leads  to  other  memories  of  Poe,  for,  as
Mr.  Dorr  points  out,  it  is  probable  that  the  words  "  my  eyes
my  beautiful "  on  April  7th  are  reminiscences  of  Annabel  Zee.

"  And  the  stars  never  rise  but  I  feel  the  bright  eyes
Of  my  beautiful  Annabel  Lee."

Case  VII. Virgil's  Aeneid.

Now  we  come  to  the  most  perplexing  of  all  the  topics,  the
most  difficult  to  deal  with  and  to  make  intelligible  to  any


60


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


but  a  classical  reader.  It  cannot,  however,  be  omitted,  for  it
is  crucial.  The  first  words,  anna  virumque  ccmo,  from  the
first  book  of  the  Aeneid  were  given  by  the  sitter  as  a  test
for  translation  by  the  control  two  weeks  before  these  sittings
began.  This  poem,  therefore,  formed  the  first  subject  of  his
attempt  to  revive  the  memories  of  the  control  and  to  elicit
information.  It  was  a  good  choice.  A  personality  claiming
to  have  access  to  the  memories  of  Frederic  Myers  ought  to  be
able  to  show  a  knowledge  of  this  poem  not  only  beyond
anything  attainable  by  the  medium,  but  considerably  exceeding
the  knowledge  of  the  sitter.  This  I  believe  to  have  been  the
case.  Amid  much  error  and  confusion  we  get  indications,
as  I  tliink,  that  the  increasing  knowledge  shown  is  due  to  the
revival  of  once  familiar  memories,  and  not  to  the  acquisition
of  information,  or  to  the  development  of  suggestion  from  the
sitter.  The  only  question  is  whether  the  knowledge  indicated
is  distinctive  enough  to  be  attributed  to  a  particular  source.

To  save  time  and  space,  I  condense  the  record  where  I  can,^
and  to  make  the  position  as  clear  as  possible,  I  quote  and
translate  the  opening  lines  of  tlie  poem.

Arma  virumque  cano,  Troiae  qui  prinnis  ab  oris
Italian! ,  fa  to  profugus,  Lavinaque  venit
Litora,  multum  ille  et  terris  iactatus  et  alto
Vi  superum,  saevae  memorem  Junonis  ob  iram,
Malta  quoque  et  hello  passus,  dum  conderet  urbem,
Inferretque  deos  Latio,  genus  unde  Latinum
Albanique  patres,  atque  altae  moenia  Eomae.

Musa,  mihi  causas  memora,  quo  numine  laeso,
Quidve  dolens,  regina  deum  tot  volvere  casus
Insignem  pietate  viruni,  tot  adire  labores
Impulerit. Tantaene  aniniis  caelestibus  irae  ?

Urbs  antiqua  fuit,  Tyrii  tenuere  coloui,
Karthago,  Italiam  contra  Tiberinaque  longe
Ostia,  dives  opum  studiisque  asperrima  belli ;
Quam  Juno  fertur  terris  niagis  omnibus  unam

1  Full  extracts  of  some  parts  of  the  sittings  concerned  will  be  found  in  Mrs.
Sidgwick's  paper,  pp.  171-8,  and  in  Mr.  Piddington's,  pp.  92,  93,  145,  and  these
will  enable  the  reader  to  check  my  summaries.


LX.]  Classical  and  Literary  Allusions  in  Mrs.  Pijyer's  Trance.  61

Posthabita  coluisse  Samo ;  hie  illius  arma,
Hie  currus  fuit ;

Arms  and  the  hero  I  sing,  who  first  from  the  shores  of  Troy,
exiled  by  fate,  came  to  Italy  and  the  Lavinian  coasts ;  much  way-
worn was  he  by  land  and  sea  through  the  might  of  the  gods  to  sate
the  unforgetting  wrath  of  fierce  Juno.  Much  stricken  too  in  war,  till
he  should  build  him  a  city,  and  bring  his  gods  to  Latium,  whence
came  the  Latin  race,  the  fathers  of  Alba,  and  the  walls  of  lofty
Eome.

Muse,  tell  me  the  causes,  for  what  outrage  to  her  godhead,  or
suffering  what  smart,  did  the  queen  of  gods  drive  a  hero,  renowned
for  goodness,  to  pass  through  so  many  mischances,  to  undertake  so
many  labours. In  heavenly  hearts  can  such  anger  be  1

There  was  an  ancient  cit}^  occupied  by  Tyrian  colonists,  Car-
thage, set  against  Italy  and  the  Tiber's  mouth  but  far  away,  rich  in
resource  and  hardened  in  war's  rough  arts ;  this  city  Juno  is  said  to
have  preferred  for  her  dwelling  to  all  the  earth,  even  Samos  coming
second. Here  were  her  aims,  here  was  her  chariot.

The  words  Arma  vinimque  cano  were  given  to  Hodgsonp  on
February  25th,  1908,  for  translation.  On  March  9th,  at  the
first,  namely,  of  this  series  of  sittings,  Hodgsonp  announced  that
he  had  brought  Myersp  to  help,  and  asked  to  have  the  words
repeated.-^  The  first  attempt  to  translate  this  phrase  goes  beyond
the  actual  words  given,  though  probably  hardly  beyond  the
knowledge  of  most  educated  persons.  The  literal  translation
is  "  Arms  and  the  man  I  sing " ;  the  translation  given  by
MyerSp  is  "I  sing  of  the  feats  of  the  exile,  who  by  fate;"
he  adds  the  words  "  Troy,"  "  arms,"  and  "  Juno,"  and  further
shows  knowledge  that  the  exile  wandered  and  came  to  the
shores  of  Italy.  Thus,  though  we  have  only  an  actual  trans-
lation of  the  words  viricm  .  .  .  cano  .  .  .  qui  .  .  .  fato  profugus,
knowledge  is  shown  such  as  would  be  derived  from  the  context
of  the  next  three  lines  {anna,  Troiac,  Italiam,  vcnit  litora,
Junonis).  Moreover  the  phraseology  of  the  actual  translation
given  is  not  what  one  would  expect  from  Mrs.  Piper,  nor  is

^  For  the  full  record  of  the  part  of  this  sitting  which  refers  to  the  Aeneid
see  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  paper  below,  pp.  171-8.


62


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrcdl.


[part


it  identical  witli  that  of  any  version  known  to  me.^  The  word
"  feats,"  for  instance,  which  is  quite  appropriate,  does  not  occur
in  any  translation  which  I  have  consulted.

Mr.  Dorr  then  asked  for  the  name  of  the  exile,  or  of  the
poem,  and  in  reply  obtained  many  attempts  at  the  word  Aeneid,
unmistakable  but  not  correct,  thus  :  "Enoid^ — Eid — I  did  not
get  all  tlie  letters  in — Eiod — Einid — not  quite  but  near  enough
Eind.  .  .  ."  And  even  after  the  sitter  had  spoken  the  word
at  the  control's  request,  the  repetition  by  the  hand  was,  "  Eiane
Aenid."  The  name  of  the  author  was  asked  for,  but  not
remembered  "  at  the  moment " ;  a  repeated  request  for  the
author's  name  produced  what  looks  like  a  confusion  with  Homer,
corrected  into  a  personal  statement:  "Blind — I  am  not  blind
or  deaf  but  I  hear  with  difficulty."

The  spontaneous  introduction  in  the  course  of  this  sitting
of  the  name  Jimo  is  a  good  point  (see  1.  4),  and  the  word
"  god  "  which  immediately  follows  Juno  recalls  the  vi  superum
of  the  same  line.  But  in  answer  to  Mr.  Dorr's  question  as
to  what  Juno  did  with  regard  to  Troy  and  the  exile,  we  have
a  series  of  incorrect  statements  showing  clearly  that  the  part
played  by  Juno  in  the  story  of  Aeneas  is  completely  misap-
prehended. The  exile,  called  Teusis  (?)  or  Torius,  wandered
and  thought  he  was  lost,  but  was  redeemed  and  saved  by
Juno.  Again,  the  control  speaks  of  Juno's  love  for  the  exile
and  v  olunteers  "  the  incident  of  Juno  and  her  saving  Torius "
as  a  proof  of  memory.  The  placing  together  of  the  words,
"  Exile,"  and  "  Saved  by  Juno "  as  successive  messages  to  be
used  for  transmission  may  have  enq^hasized  the  original  mis-
conception. But  in  spite  of  Mr.  Dorr's  recognition  of  the
mistake  about  Juno's  action,  and  even  after  the  trance-
personality  had  remembered  or  guessed  that  Juno  was  the
owner  of  the  "injured  form"  (1.  27)  asked  about  by  the  sitter,
the  mistake  still  persists.  It  is  not  corrected  till  the  next
day,  March  10th,  and  then  only  after  a  strong  hint  from  Mr.
Dorr.

^The  translations  consulted  by  me  are  those  of  Dryden,  Beresford  1794,
Syinmons  1817,  King  1847,  Rhoades,  W.  Morris,  Clayton,  Mackail,  Conington,
and  Fairfax  Taylor,  besides  several  editions  containing  translations  of  particular
phrases.

^  The  0  is  not  clear.


LX.]  Classical  and  Literary  Allusions  in  Mrs.  Pijjer's  Trance.  63


Perhaps  the  best  evidence  of  a  real  acquaintance  with  the
poem  is  found  in  the  spontaneous  introduction  in  this  sitting,
March  9th,  of  the  name  Neptune.  This  follows  immediately
upon  the  repetition  by  Mr.  Dorr  of  five  phrases  chosen  for
transmission  as  messages  for  cross-correspondence,  thiis :

G.  B.  D.  Troy,  the  city  in  flames,  exile,  saved  by  Juno,  the  face  in
flame.i

Yes.  Neptune.

G.  B.  D.  What  about  Neptune  1

ft

I  thought  it  would  fit  in  splendidly. As  it  all  goes  in.
(Pause.)

G.  B.  D.  Are  there  any  other  names  belonging  to  this  that  you  can
give  me  1

You  see  it  comes  back  to  my  memory  by  degrees.

Eeaders  of  the  Aeneid  will  remember  the  famous  passage
where  the  storm  sent  upon  Aeneas  by  Aeolus  at  Juno's  request,
is  calmed  by  the  appearance  of  Neptune  {Aen.  I.  125).  It  is
therefore  appropriate  that  the  name  Neptune  should  be  at
once  introduced  among  reminiscences  of  the  first  Aeneid.  The
name  is  repeated  with  emphasis  by  MyerSp  when  the  cross-
correspondence  messages  are  again  enumerated,  and  later  in
answer  to  a  suggestion  from  the  sitter  not  to  "  try  to  connect
things  together  unless  they  come  to  yon  so,"  Myersp  replies :
"  Like  Nejjtuner

No  definite  reminiscences  can  be  traced  in  the  later  remarks
at  this  sitting  about  "  her  love  of  the  exile  and  she  restores
him,"  and  "  built,  she  built  a, — she  goes  up  with  her  love  the
exile."  But  in  view  of  what  follows  in  subsequent  sittings
I  think  it  possible  that  we  have  here  a  first  emergence  of  Dido
and  her  part  in  the  poem.

At  the  risk  of  seeming  fanciful  I  hazard  conjectures  to
account  for  the  incorrect  or  unexplained  statements  above
described. At the first reading neither Torius  nor  Teusis

^  Of  these  five  phrases,  face  in  flame  was  suggested  by  Mr.  Dorr  before  these
sittings  began  ;  Troy  and  exile  were  spontaneously  suggested  by  Myersp  on  March
9th,  city  inflames  and  saved  hy  Juno  were  added  at  the  sitter's  suggestion.


64


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrcdl.


[part


conveyed  any  meaning  to  me,  but  Mr.  Piddington  suggested  that
the  word  which  appears  as  Torius  or  Tarius  ^  may  be  intended
for  Troius,  the  inversion  of  two  letters  l^eing  not  uncommon
in  Piper  script.  Aeneas  is  called  Troius  in  the  first  book
(I.  596).  The  followers  of  Aeneas  are  called  throughout  the
poem  indifferently  Trojans,  Teucrians,  and  Dardanians,  from  the
names  of  three  heroes  of  the  race,  Tros,  Teucer,  Dardanus.
If  Torius  recalls  Troius,  perhaps  Teusis  is  aimed  at  Teucer.

Again,  the  mistake  about  Juno  is  perhaps  explicable  if  we
suppose  a  confusion  between  two  passages  very  familiar  to
classical  readers,  in  the  first  Acncid  and  the  fifth  book
of  the  Odyssey!^  In  both  the  hero,  after  much  wandering,
is  lost  in  a  god-sent  storm  and  saved  by  the  interposition  of
a  god.  In  Odyssey  V.  Odysseus  is  saved  by  Ino  from  the
storm  sent  by  Poseidon  (Neptune).  In  Aeneid  I.  it  is  by
Neptune  that  Aeneas  is  saved  from  the  storm  roused  by
Juno's  wratli.  Possibly  the  similarity  of  the  names  Ino
and  Juno  may  have  aided  the  confusion.  That  there  was
confusion  in  the  trance  between  Homer  and  Virgil  is  clear,
for  though  the  name  of  the  poem  is  said  to  be  Acncid,  a
repeated  request  for  the  name  of  the  poet  produces  in  the
word  "  blind "  an  unmistakable  allusion  to  the  writer,  not
of  the  Aeneid,  but  of  the  Odyssey.^

On  March  10th  Mr.  Dorr  read  from  Fragments  of  Prose
and  Foetry  (p.  6)  the  eighth  line  of  Acncid  I.  and  the  pre-
ceding and  following  paragraphs  as  follows :

On  my  sixth  birthday  my  father  began  to  teach  me  Latin  ;  and  a
few  months  later  he  gave  me  the  First  Aeneid  of  Virgil  with  an
interlinear  translation.  The  scene  is  stamped  upon  my  mind  ;  the
ante  room  at  the  Parsonage  with  its  floor  of  bright  matting  and  its

^  The  first  vowel  is  doubtful,  but  at  least  once  is  plainly  o.

2  The  storm  in  the  Odysse;/  is  the  prototype  of  Virgil's  storm.  See,  for
instance,  Conington's  notes  on  Aeii.  I.  85:  "See  Horn.  Od.  V.  295";  Aen.
I.  102:  "  Virg.  continues  to  imitate  Horn.  Od.  V.  313  fol.";  Aen.  I.  124,
"  Ulysses  in  the  Odyssey  (V.  382)  is  saved,  etc.,  etc.".

^In  the  waking-stage  of  April  21,  in  anotlier  connexion,  the  words  were
spoken  "Odyssey — Homer — blind,"  showing  that,  at  least  on  that  day,  the
control  was  not  ignorant  of  the  well-known  fact  that  the  blind  poet  Homer
was  the  author  of  the  Odyssey.


Lx.]  Classical  and  Literary  A  llusions  in  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance.  65


glass  door  into  the  garden,  through  which  the  flooding  sunlight  came,
while  I  pored  over  the  new  revelation  with  awe-struck  joy ; —

Musa,  mihi  causas  memora,  quo  nnmine  laeso ; —

I  can  recall  the  reverent  emotion  v/ith  which  I  hung  on  the
rhythm  of  that  majestic  line.  The  invocation  of  the  Muse  came  to
me  as  absolutely  real  and  new ;  and  the  quo  numine  laeso  suggested
m3'steries  of  divinity  on  which  I  dimly  feared  to  dwell.  Not
Aeneas  himself  felt  his  own  piety  with  such  emotion  as  I  felt  that
insignem  pietate  vinim; — but  the  task  of  carrying  gods  into  Latium,i
and  especially  the  keeping  of  Juno's  carriage  at  Carthage  ^  were
incomprehensible  by  my  childish  Christianity.

jSTo  evidential  value  is  claimed  for  the  subsequent  mention
by  ]\IyerSp  of  the  names  occurring  in  these  paragraphs.
But  they  may  have  helped  the  reminiscences  of  the  poem
which  emerged  immediately  as  follows :  ......

Extract  from  Sitting  of  March  10th,  1908.

(Myersp  communicating.)

I  recall  so  well  the  emotions  which  first  stirred  within  me,
the  poem  as  I  translated  it,  the  exile  and  his  wanderings,
his  power  and  his  warriors.

Also  Dido — -feast — calm  waters  by  Neptune.

(Here  followed  a  drawing  of  a  trident  not  at  first  recognised
by  the  sitter. After  its  recognition  Myersp  continued)

I  remember  something  about  his  father.

G.  B.  D.  AVhat  was  his  father's  name  1

Let  me  think. (Pause.) Very  odd  and  rather  long.  (Another

pause.)
Juno  was  angered.

G.  B.  D.  Why  ?  ,  .

Powerful  not  to  be  angered.

^Aen.  I.  6.  -Am.  I.  17.

E


66  • Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall. -  [part

G.  B.  D.  Can  you  tell  me  anything  about  either  the  father  or  the
mother  of  the  exile  or  about  the  cause  of  Juno's  anger?

I  am  thinking,  thinking,  friend  about — Walls  of  Rome — fire
and  flee. Africa. She  did  not  wish  to  be  overpowered.

G.  B.  D.  Who?

Juno — Juno.
G.  B.  D.  What  was  the  cause  of  Juno's  anger?

Repeat  once  more  slowly.
G.  B.  D.  (Repeats  c|uestion.)

Oh  I  understand — she  got  Dido  to  listen.

G.  B.  D.  Did  Juno  take  part  in  the  siege  of  Troy  to  help  the  city
or  against  it?

Preserve  it.

G.  B.  D.  Is  that  your  answer  ?

No,  I  ask  if  that  is  your  question.

[The  impression  I  got  however  was  that  '  preserve  it '  was
really  intended  at  first  for  the  answer. — Note  by  G.  B.  D.]

G.  B.  D.  Yes.

No,  she  destroyed  because  she  did  not  wish  a  better  city
than  her  own. Africa  Africa.

G.  B.  D.  What  led  her  to  take  part?

Aeneas  was  a  Trojan  and  he  builded  the  wall  and  city,
which  angered  Juno  and  she  helped  destroy  it.  This
caused  Aeneas  to  flee.

G.  B.  D.  But  what  was  the  original  cause  of  all  this? What  first  led
to  it?

Love.

G.  B.  1).  Who  wrote  the  old  Greek  poem  about  Troj'  ?
Odessey?

G.  B.  D.  Who  wrote  it  ?  '  i

Homer.


LX.]  Classical  and  Literary  Allusions  in  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance.  67


G.  B.  D.  But  the  Odyssey  was  not  the  poem  that  told  about  the
destruction  of  Troy ;  there  was  another.

Illiad. I  remember don't  confuse  me.

G.  B.  D.  What  led  the  gods  to  take  part  ?

Juno  was  in  power  and  did  not  wish  a  finer  city.

G.  B.  D.  But  are  you  not  confusing  the  old  Greek  story  with  that
of  the  exile  Aeneas?

(The  hand  assents.)

Yes  !  I  have  to  clear  up  one  thing  first  I  think.

Further  remarks  were  made  on  March  16tli  and  at  later
sittings.  I  think  it  will  be  easier  for  the  reader  to  follow  if
I  divide  the  above  statements  into  groups  and  deal  in  order
with  the  various  topics,  including  later  allusions.  Five  points
emerged  on  March  10th,  in  the  passage  above  quoted,  viz.:
(«)  Dido.

(b)  Feast.

(c)  Calming  of  sea  by  Neptune,  and  Trident.

(d)  Aeneas'  father.

(c)  Cause  of  Juno's  anger.

{a  and  h)  It  will  Ije  convenient  to  take  together  a  and  b.
Besides  the  two  above-quoted  mentions  of  Dido,  the  name
emerged  again  on  March  16  th,  when  a  question  about  the
three  women  concerned  in  the  judgement  of  Paris  elicited  the
words,  "  Dido,  Juno,  and — (pause)."  In  the  waking-stage  of
March  16th  a  group  of  allusions  to  the  Aeneicl  emerged,
supplementary  to  the  statements  of  March  10th.  Thus:

Carthage  she  did  not  wish  [it]  to  be  more  beautiful

than  hers — Neptune  calmed  the  sea  for  Aeneas  —  —
don't  you  hear  me?  Mr.  Myers  is  whispering  in  one
ear  and  I  am  trying  to  get  it  out  at  the  other.  Set
to  watch  and  spy  on  Aeneas — she  sent  her  to  watch
Aeneas — and  then  to  feast  him.

G.B.  D,  Who?

goddess  !

Dido — she  fell  in  love — why  does  he  talk  so  much  ? I  don't
know  the  words.


68


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


The  allusions  to  Dido  on  March  10th  though  not  distinc-
tive, are  fairly  appropriate ;  Dido  gave  a  feast  in  honour  of
Aeneas,  and  was  "  got  to  listen."  ^  The  connexion  on  March
16th  of  Dido  with  Juno  and  the  judgement  of  Paris  is  of
course  sheer  nonsense.'-^  In  the  waking-stage  of  March  16th,
though  the  sentences  are  not  clear,  it  is  obvious  that  the
episode  of  Aeiieas'  reception  by  Dido  underlies  the  Awious
phrases.  Dido's  love  for  Aeneas  is  too  familiar  to  be  of
evidential  value.  Readers  of  the  Acncicl  will  remember  the
description  of  the  feast  at  Carthage  {Aen.  I.  637,  etc.)  and
the  meeting  between  Aeneas  and  Dido,  arranged  by  the
goddess  Venus,  who  sent  the  queen  to  watch  the  progress
of  her  new  city  and  Ijrought  Aeneas  to  the  same  spot  {Aen.  I.
340,  446,  494,  496,  etc.).  The  phrases  "set  to  watch  and
spy  on  Aeneas "  and  "  she  sent  her  to  watch  Aeneas "  are
not,  however,  accurate  accounts  of  what  occurred.

(c)  The  name  Neptune  emerged  at  once  on  March  9  th,
but  the  description  of  his  action  appears  for  the  first  time
on  March  10th.  The  original  introduction  of  the  name,  the
statement  that  it  was  appropriate,  the  emphasis  with  which
it  was  repeated,  and  the  allusion  to  his  calming  the  waters,
are  entirely  spontaneous.  So  too  is  the  introduction  on  March
10th  of  the  trident.  The  trident  is,  no  doubt,  naturally  asso-
ciated with  Neptune,  but  it  is  particularly  appropriate  in
connexion  with  the  early  part  of  the  first  Aeneid,  as  it  is  by
the  power  of  the  trident^  that  Neptune  claims  the  right  to
calm  the  seas  (Aen.  I.  138).

(d)  Again  it  is  appropriate  that  an  attempt  to  recall  the
Aeneid  should  produce  an  allusion  to  Aeneas'  father,  especially
to  any  one  just  reminded  by  the  passage  read  from  Fragments
of  the  pietcis  which  made  Aeneas  insignem  virum.'^  Here  as
elsewhere  there  is  difficulty  about  giving  the  name,  Anchises.

^If  the  "she  "  who  got  Dido  to  listen  is  referred  to  its  preceding  grammatical
subject,  Juno,  this  statement  is  incorrect.  But  I  believe  that  the  words  "she
got  Dido  to  listen  "  constitute  a  new  point  and  do  not  refer  to  what  has  preceded.
The  point  is  clearer  in  the  waking-stage  of  March  ]6th.

2  Great  confusion  was  caused  in  my  opinion  by  the  failure  of  the  sitter  to
understand  the  object  of  the  control. See  below,  p.  70.

•Tor  successful  cross-correspondences  on  Neptune  and  his  trident  see  Mrs.
Sidgwick's  paper,  p.  177.

^  The  passage  contains  no  allusion  to  Aeneas'  father.


LX.]  Classical  and  Literary  Allusions  in  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance.  69

The  words  "  very  odd  and  rather  long "  seem  to  come  from
Eector  rather  than  fx'om  Myersp.^  Some  approach  to  the  name
is  made  on  March  16  th"'  when,  after  Mr.  Dorr  has  asked,  in
quite  another  connexion,  if  the  control  can  tell  him  who
Charo7i  was  and  what  he  did,  Myersp  replies,  "  I  remember
father,  if  I  understand  the  name."  The  sitter  evidently  saw  no
point  in  this  remark  and  replied,  "  No,  you  have  not  got  it
yet."  But  MyerSp  persisted :  "  Oh  I  am  thinking  of  Aeneas'
father,"  and  then  produced  an  illegible  word  terminating  with
the  right  sound,  '  seas'

Readers  familiar  with  the  Acneid  will  see  at  once  why  the
name  of  Charon  should  recall  the  father  of  Aeneas.  For  it  is
on  his  visit  to  his  father  in  Hades  that  Aeneas  uses  the
services  of  Charon.  The  visit  to  Hades,  described  in  the
sixth  Aeneid,  is  the  centre  of  the  wliole  poem.  In  the  waking-
stage  of  March  30th,  the  first  word  uttered  is  "  Anchises,"
and  when  this  is  read  to  the  control  on  April  6  th  the
description,  "  Aeneas'  father,"  is  added.  In  the  waking-stage
of  March  31st  the  name  emerges  again,  immediately  after  the
name  Icarus,^  and  the  last  mention  of  the  name  is  on  April
13th,  when  in  the  waking-stage  the  words  "Anchises'
funeral "  were  spoken  just  before  allusions  to  disciis  throwing.
As  the  reader  will  remember,  the  funeral  games  of  Anchises
form  the  subject  of  the  fifth  Aeneid.  The  group  of  allusions
therefore  to  the  father  of  Aeneas  is  appropriate  throughout.

(e)  From  the  father  of  Aeneas,  MyerSp  passes  to  the  wrath
of  Juno,  whom  he  describes  as  powerful  and  not  to  be
angered, — a  phrase  possibly  reminiscent  of  saevae  memo7'em
Junonis  oh  iram,  "  on  account  of  the  unfoi'getting  wrath  of
stern  Juno "  (Aen.  I.  4),  though  sufficient  had  been  said  on
this  subject  on  March  9th  to  justify  a  guess  that  Juno  was
powerful  and  angered.  Something,  however,  beyond  a  guess
appears,  I  think,  in  the  subsequent  statements.  After  the
mention  of  the  walls  of  Eome  and  Africa,  MyerSp  adds  that

1  See  Mr.  Piddington's  paper,  p.  145.

^  For  record  of  such  of  the  statements  on  March  16th  as  concern  the  topics
(d)  and  (e),  see  below,  p.  71,  where  it  has  been  placed  in  order  not  to  interrupt
the  narrative.

5  See  Mr.  Piddington's  paper,  p.  148,  for  an  explanation  of  the  association  of
these  two  names.


70


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


Juno  did  not  wish  to  be  overpowered.  This  at  once  recalled
to  my  mind  Juno's  speech  (Acn.  I.  37-49)  and  the  reference
(Aen.  I.  15,  16)  to  Juno's  special  love  for  Carthage.  One  of
the  motives  of  Juno's  action,  as  represented  by  Virgil,  was
her  desire  to  prevent  the  founding  of  Eome,  the  city  destined
one  day  to  destroy  her  own  Carthage.  Thus  Conington's
analysis  of  Aeneicl  I.  8-22  runs  as  follows: — "Why  was  it.
Muse,  that  Juno  so  persecuted  so  pious  a  hero  ?  Juno  was
patroness  of  Carthage,  which  she  had  heard  was  destined  one
day  to  be  crushed  by  a  nation  of  Trojan  descent."

This  obscurely-worded  allusion  by  the  control  on  March
10th,  only  intelligible  to  some  one  very  familiar  with  the
poem,  was  not  observed  by  Mr.  Dorr.  Not  seeing  that  the
words  above  quoted  constituted  an  approach  to  the  answer  to
his  question,  and  expecting  an  allusion  to  the  judgement  of
Paris,  he  asked  again  what  was  the  cause  of  Juno's  anger.
After  the  irrelevant  remark  "  she  got  Dido  to  listen,"  the
repeated  question  produced  the  old  mistake  about  Juno's
action,  modified,  as  Mr.  Dorr  noted,  by  some  indication  that
it  failed  to  satisfy  him.  But  in  the  course  of  this  modifica-
tion, IMyerSp  returned  to  the  earlier  point  and  repeated  that
Juno  did  not  "  wish  a  better  city  than  her  own — Africa
Africa."

The  next  few  answers  repeat  the  confusion  and  error,  a
confusion  not  perhaps  surprising,  seeing  that  the  sitter  and
control  were  not  thinking  of  the  same  point.  But  the  control
to  the  end  maintains  the  view  that  what  led  the  gods  to  take
part  was  that  "  Juno  was  in  power  and  did  not  wish  a  finer
•  city."

On  March  16th  ^  this  ]Doint  is  again  suggested.  MyerSp
asked  for  a  repetition  of  the  question  which,  in  its  original
form,  ran :  "  What  was  the  cause  of  Juno's  anger  ? "  (March
10).  Mr.  Dorr  repeated  it  in  the  form,  "What  was  the  cause
which  led  Juno  to  take  part  against  Troy  ? "  Obviously  the
correct  answer  to  this  would  have  referred  to  the  "judgement
of  Paris."  It  is  equally  obvious  that  the  sitter  was  not
aware  that  he  had  modified  his  question.  But  MyerSp
carefully  distinguishes,  and  repeats  the  question  in  the  earlier
and  more  general  form,  to  which  the  answer  required  from  a

^  See  note  on  p.  72.


LX.]  Classical  and  Literary  Allusions  in  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance.  7 1


student  of  the  Aencid  would  be :  "  Juno's  partiality  for
Carthage ; "  Myersp  says :  "  What  caused  Juno's  wrath  ?
Because  she  did  not  wish  Aeneas  to  conquer  her,  l^ecause  she
thought  it  mioiit  "

o  o

Here  the  sitter  suggested  that  MyerSp  was  thinking,  not  of
Troy,  but  of  Eome,  exactly  what  a  student  of  the  Aeneicl  in
particular — as  distinguished  from  the  general  cycle  of  legends —
would  have  done.  Mr.  Dorr  then  introduced  the  subject  of
the  judgement  of  Paris,  telling  the  control  not  to  confuse  the
old  story  in  Homer  with  the  story  of  Aeneas.  To  this  the  not
unnaturally  bewildered  control  replies :  "  I  remember,  let  me
think  it  over,  don't  tell  me.  I  remember  it  caused  wrath
because  of  jealousy.  She  was  jealous  of — because — because  it —
she  was  not  selected."  In  these  remarks  the  sitter  found  the
unmistakable  allusion  to  the  judgement  of  Paris  which  he
wanted,  and  the  subject  was  not  revived.  But  I  tlo  not
think  that  it  can  be  doubted  liy  a  reader  thoroughly  familiar
with  the  Aeneid  that  the  first  attempts  of  the  control  to
explain  the  cause  of  Juno's  wrath  dealt  not  with  her  jealousy
of  Venus,  but  with  her  partiality  for  Carthage ;  in  other
words,  with  the  cause  of  her  enmity  not  against  Troy,  but
against  Eome.

I  append  the  record  of  such  parts  of  the  sitting  of  March
16  th  as  are  required  to  follow  this  comment.

Extract  from  Sitting  of  March  IQth,  1908.

(MyerSp  communicating.)

G.  B.  D.  Shall  I  ask  you  some  questions  now  to  bring  out  your  recol-
lection of  the  Classics  1

Yes,  anything  you  like. Shall  we  first  answer  your  previous
ones  if  I  can  1 .  .

Do  you  remember  the  Greek  name  of  Juno,  the  one  that  is
given  her  in  Homer?

No,  I  do  not  at  the  moment.

Can  you  get  it  later  1

Perhaps  I  can I'll  try.


72 . . ■  ■  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.  [part

ti.  B.  D.  Who  was  Charon  1  •

I  remember  Charon  perfectly  well.
(Name  Charon  not  clearly  written.)
G.  B.  D.  Please  spell  it  out.

Charon.  ...
G.  B.  D.  What  did  he  do  ?

I  remember  father,  if  I  understand  the  name.
G.  B.  D.  No,  you  have  not  got  it  yet.

Oh,  I  am  thinking  of  ^neas's  father.
(A  word  follows  impossible  to  read.)

Wrath

G.  B.  D.  What  is  that  word?

WRATH
G.  B.  D.  What  does  that  mean  ?

Juno. You  said  Juno,  did  you  not  1 . ■  .

G.  B.  D.  But  that  is  not  the  question  that  I  asked  you.

Oh  let  us  clear  up  what  is  on  ni}-  mind  first,  then  we  shall
keep  clear.

G.  B.  ]).  What  is  on  your  mind  ?

Juno,  Eneas,  wrath

G.  B.  1).  Was  that  word  ^^llneas '?

Yes. What  were  your  previous  c^uestions  1 I  am  trying  to
avoid  confusion.

G.  B.  I).  My  question  at  our  last  meeting  was.  What  was  the  cause
which  led  Juno  to  take  part  against  Troy  ?

What  caused  Juno's  wrath  1  ^ Because  she  did  not  wish
Eneas  to  conquer  her — because  she  thought  it  might

G.  B.  D.  But  you  are  now  thinking  of  Rome,  not  Troy. Do  you  want
me  to  suggest  a  little  more  to  you  ?

(Hand  makes  gesture  of  assent.)

^  "  What  was  the  cause  of  Juno's  anger?"  was  the  form  in  which  tlie  question
was  ijut  at  the  previous  sitting.


LX.]  Classical  and  Literary  Allusions  in  Mrs.  Pipers  Trance.  73

G.  B.  D.  Do  you  remember  about  Paris  1

(After  a  moment's  pause  hand  writes  very  vehemently  :)

Of  course  I  do. Tell  me —
G.  B.  D.  The  apple  which  was  to  be  given  to  the  fairest  ?

Oh  the  most  beautiful  woman — Yes  I  do.
G.  B.  D.  Who  were  the  three  women?

Dido,  Juno,  and  (pause)

G.  B.  D.  Do  not  confuse  the  story  of  ^neas  with  this ;  this  is  the
old  story  in  Homer.

I  remember,  let  me  think  it  over.  Don't  tell  me.  I  remember
it  caused  wrath  because  of  jealousy.

G.  B.  D.  What  word  is  that  1

Jealousy.  She  was  jealous  of — because — because  it — she  was
not  selected.  It  is  vague  but  I  can  recall  it  I  think
and  give  some  of  the  words  to  Mrs.  V.

On  the  same  day,  March  16th,  1908,  an  attempt  was  made
by  MyerSp  to  translate  the  line  {Aen.  I.  8),  quoted  on  March
10th  from  Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry.  The  literal  translation
runs:  "Muse,  tell  me  the  causes,  for  godhead  how  offended  .  .  ."
The  translation  given  by  Myersp  runs  thus  :  "  Oh  Muse,  oh  what
cause — affront — cause — cause,  with  what  affront.  It  is  in
my  mind.  Oh  Muse  with  cause — cause  for  what  affront — I
can't  get  it  exactly."  The  word  numcn  (godhead)  is  not
translated,  and  does  not  seem  to  have  been  understood  even
after  repetition.  The  general  meaning  of  the  line  is  unmis-
takably indicated,  and  here  as  in  the  earlier  translation  the-
phraseology  is,  as  far  as  I  know,  original ;  the  word  "  affront "
does  not  occur  in  any  translation  or  edition  that  I  have
consulted.

On  March  17  th  Mr.  Dorr  read  to  MyerSp  Dry  den's  trans-
lation of  the  opening  lines  of  the  first  Aeneid,  and  this,
produced  several  reminiscences  of  the  poem.  By  this  time
enough  had  been  said  at  previous  sittings  to  show  plainly
what  was  wanted,  and  therefore  references  to obvious  topics


74


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


ill  the  poem  are  of  little  evidential  value.  But  some  of  the
references  are  not  obvious.  Thus,  after  the  first  four  lines
have  been  read/  MyerSp  notes  three  points  as  follows  :  "  Fleet
behind  on  island, — soldiers  in  Horse.  Arrow  in  heel,"  the
first  two  points  being  plainly  connected."  Mr.  Dorr  numbers
these  points  as  three,  and  notes  that  the  second  was  in
answer  to  a  question  asked  previously  as  to  what  connexion
there  was  between  the  AVooden  Horse  and  Troy.  The  third
was  introduced  spontaneously,  nothing  having  been  said  pre-
viously to  bring  it  out.  It  alludes  to  the  death  of  Achilles,
a  story  familiar  to  inany  persons  who  have  no  first-hand
classical  knowledge.

The  interesting  point  is  No.  1,  "fleet  behind  on  [o?-  an]
island."  This  at  once  recalled  to  me  a  passage  (Aen.  II.  21),
describing  the  stratagem  by  which  the  Trojans  were  led  to
believe  that  the  Greeks  had  sailed  away.  The  Greek  fleet
was  concealed  behind  the  island  of  Tenedos,  and  the  Wooden
Horse  contained  the  only  Greeks  who  were  left  behind  on
the  mainland.  The  words,  est  in  conspedu  Tenedos,  notissima
fama  insula,  begin  one  of  the  most  famous  passages  in  the
Acneid,  and  follow  immediately  upon  the  description  of  the
Wooden  Horse.  The  conjunction  therefore  of  the  words  "  fleet
behind  an  island "  and  "  soldiers  in  Horse  "  is  appropriate,  and
plainly  indicates,  to  my  mind,  a  knowledge  of  the  story
■of  the  second  Aeneid.

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  allusion  to  Tenedos  was
not  at  the  time  perceived  by  the  sitter.  This  point  is  made
clear  by  Mr.  Dorr's  contemporary  notes. Commenting  on  the

^The  first  four  lines  of  Dryden's  translation  follow  closely  the  four  lines  of
the  original.

-I  have  here  strictly  followed  the  typewritten  record  of  the  sitting,  where
the  word  "soldiers''  has  a  small  and  the  first  full-stop  is  after  the  word
"Horse."  I  have  little  doubt  that  the  third  word  in  the  first  phrase  should
be  not  "on"  but  "an."  Mr.  Dorr,  whose  experience  of  the  script  is  extensive,
writes  on  November  29,  1909,  that,  "a  and  o  written  as  they  are  often  written
in  the  script,  not  rarely  need  the  help  of  the  context  to  distinguish  them  .  .  .
and  '  fleet  behind  on  island '  is  nonsense  of  a  kind  quite  foreign  to  the  general
character  of  what  is  said  or  written  in  the  Piper  trance."  The  tracing  of  the
original,  sent  to  me  by  Mr.  Dorr,  leaves  undetermined  the  vowel  in  the  third
word  ;  it  shows  that  the  punctuation  of  the  typewritten  copy  accurately  repre-
sents the  divisions  between  the  phrases  in  the  original  script.


LX.]  Classical  and  Literary  A llusions  in  M rs.  Piper  s  Trainee.  75

sitting  of  March  iTtli  he  writes:  "The  first  one  (i.e.  fleet
behind  on  island)  I  am  not  clear  about  myself,  hwt  have
supposed  it  to  refer  to  Aeneas'  leaving  the  ships  that  came
with  him  to  the  African  coast  behind,  when  he  went  to
Dido's  court.  This  does  not  seem  to  be  satisfactory  in  view
of  the  words  used,  as  the  ships  were  beached  in  a  bay  on
the  mainland,^  not  on  an  island,  but  I  can  recall  no  other
incident  it  might  refer  to."  On  April  6th  Mr.  Dorr  adds
the  following  note :  "  I  have  just  come  by  accident,  in  turning
over  the  pages  of  the  second  book  of  the  Aeneid,  upon  Aeneas'
description  of  how,  after  leaving  the  Wooden  Horse  upon  the
Trojan  plain,  the  Greek  fleet  apparently  sailing  for  home  re-
mained hidden  behind  the  island  of  Tenedos  until  the
stratagem  of  the  "Wooden  Horse  had  opened  the  way  for
storming  the  city.  My  note  upon  this  written  after  the  sit-
ting shows  my  total  lack  of  recollection  of  this  incident  at
that  time,  for  I  then  searched  my  memory  to  find  what  there
was  either  in  the  Aeneid  or  in  Homer  to  which  the  words,
'  fleet  behind  on  island,'  could  apply  and  recalled  nothing."

This  incident  then  appears  to  show  not  only  an  intimate
acqiiaintance  with  the  Aeneid,  but  one  beyond  the  conscious
possession  of  the  sitter.

This  being  so,  it  is  worth  considering  whether  any  explanation
will  account  for  the  immediate  transition  from  this  incident
to  the  death  of  Achilles,  who,  as  the  well-known  story  runs,
was  wounded  in  the  only  vulnerable  point,  his  heel,  by  an
arrow  shot  from  the  bow  of  Paris,  but  directed  by  the  god
Apollo.  To  classical  scholars  a  clue  to  the  association  of  the
two  incidents  is  given  in  "  Tenedos,"  the  name  of  the  island
behind  which  the  Greek  fleet  was  concealed.  The  ancient
fame  and  wealth  of  Tenedos,  noted  by  Virgil,  were  due  to
the  island's  possessing  a  temple  of  Apollo  Smintheus."  The
name  of  the  god  of  Tenedos,  Apollo  Smintheus,  is  rarely  found
in  classical  literature.  Twice,  and  twice  only,  does  his  name
occur  in  the  extant  accounts  of  the  Trojan  Epic.  To  the
archer  god  of  the  silver  bow,  lord  of  Chryse,  Killa  and  Tenedos,
addressed  as  "  Smintheus,"  the  old  priest  Chryses  prays  for

i^e?i.  I.  159,  etc.

-See  Conington's  note  on  Virgil,  Aeneid  II.  21.  "In  Homer's  time  (//.  I.  38)
the  island  is  famous  for  a  temple  of  Apollo  Smintheus."


7(J


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


vengeance  upon  the  Greeks,  and  the  arrows  of  Apollo  are
shot  forth  in  answer  to  those  prayers.  The  story  is  told  in
the  First  Iliad  (II.  I.  38,  452).  To  this  same  archer  god,
addressed  as  "  Smintheus,"  ISTeptune  appeals  to  slay  Achilles,
and  in  answer  to  this  prayer,  the  arrow  of  Paris  is  guided
by  Apollo  against  Achilles.  The  story  is  told  by  Ovid  (llet.
XII.  580),  in  the  only  passage  in  classical  literature  which
describes  in  detail  the  death  of  Achilles.^  •  •

Tenedos,  then,  the  island  which  concealed  the  Greek  fleet,
was  a  seat  of  the  worship  of  Apollo  Smintheus,  the  slayer  of
Achilles,  and  to  those  possessing  this  knowledge  the  transition
from  the  one  incident  to  the  other  is  natural.  But  the  history
of  Tenedos  is  not  "  common  knowledge "  even  to  classical
scholars.  Many  persons  familiar  with  Homer  and  Virgil  might
read  the  disjointed  utterances  of  the  trance-personality  on
March  17  without  perceiving  a  link  between  the  two  phrases, —
"  Fleet  l  )ehind  an  island, — soldiers  in  Horse,"  and  "  Arrow  in
heel."  Such  a  link,  however,  does  in  fact  exist.  Here,  as
elsewhere,  familiarity  with  classical  literature  shows  a  coherence,
where  a  first  reading  found  only  broken  fragments,  by  supply-
ing an  association  of  ideas  which  may  account  for  the  otherwise
arbitrary  juxtaposition  of  unconnected  allusions.^

The  next  point  requiring  comment  is  the  production  by
MyerSp  on  this  day  of  the  phrases  :  "  Is  there  such  anger  in
celestial  minds  ?  A  hero  for  piety  renowned — should  suffer  and
toil."  These  words  were  spoken  by  the  control  immediately  after
tlie  reading  of  lines  13-16  in  Dryden's  translation,  as  follows:

"  For  what  offence  the  queen  of  Heaven  began
To  persecute  so  brave,  so  just  a  man ;
Involved  his  anxious  life  in  endless  cares.
Exposed  to  wants,  and  hurried  into  wars."

They  represent  lines  8-11,  3h(sa  .  .  .  ivijnderit,  in  the  original.
The  first  sentence  spoken  by  the  control  translates  the  line

^  His  death  at  the  hands  of  Apollo  and  Paris  is  prophesied  in  the  Iliad
(XXII.  359)  and  alluded  to  by  Virgil  (Aen.  VI.  57).  Pindar  {Pyih.  III.  101)
and  Horace  (Od.  IV.  6,  3)  allude  to  Apollo's  share  in  the  death  of  Achilles^
and  Euripides  (Andr.  655,  Hec.  387)  attributes  it  to  Paris.

-For  similar  cases  see  Mr.  Piddington's  paper,  pp.  98-102.


LX.]  Classical  and  Literary  Allusions  in  Mrs.  Pipers  Trance.  77


that  was  to  come,  tantaene  animis  caelestihus  irae  ?  represented
by  Dryden  in  the  couplet,

"  Can  Heavenly  minds  such  high  resentment  show
Or  exercise  their  spite  in  human  woe."

It  is  certain  that  a  Virgilian  scholar,  hearing  a  translation
of  the  words  insignevi  23'ieiate  vincm,  tot  aclirc  labores  iminderit,
woidd  expect  the  words  tantaene  animis  caelestihus  irae.  And
it  is  a  remarkable  proof  of  faniiliarity  with  the  opening  lines
of  the  first  Aeneid  to  combine  phrases  which  translate  both
what  has,  and  what  has  not,  been  read  in  Dryden's  version.
Here,  again,  the  translation  does  not  reproduce  any  version
known  to  me.  "  A  hero  for  piety  renowned "  is  a  perfectly
accurate  rendering,  and  so  is  "  Is  there  such  anger  in  celestial
minds  ? "  The  words  "  should  suffer  and  toil "  accurately
represent  volvcre  casus  and  adire  labores.

When  the  name  Carthage  {Ac7i.  1.  13)  is  read,  the  control
adds  "  Africa,"  and  claims  with  justice  to  have  uttered  the
word  in  a  preceding  waking-stage.  The  mention  of  Paris
(Aen.  I.  27)  produces  an  allusion  to  Priam.  But  neither  of
these  connexions  is  beyond  the  range  of  ordinary  knowledge.

Here  ended  the  experiment  connected  with  the  first  Aeneid,
though  there  were  some  further  scattered  references  to  other
books.^

It  is  impossible  to  summarise  the  above  described  refer-
ences to  the  Aeneid,  but  the  four  following  points  seem  clear :

(1)  Considerable  knowledge  of  the  contents  of  the  poem
was  shown  by  the  trance-personality,  and  a  certain  familiarity
with  the  language ;

(2)  The  knowledge  shown  was  produced  in  a  form  sinmlating
revived  memory,  and  was  stimulated  by  quotations  from  the  poem;

(3)  The  answers,  so  far  from  representing  the  expectations
of  the  sitter,  were  in  some  cases  contrary  to  his  belief,  and
sometimes  maintained  persistently  in  spite  of  criticism  and
contradiction ;

(4)  The  errors  were  not  such  as  would  be  expected  from
hastily  acquired  or  superficial  knowledge,  but  rather  such  as
might  be  due  to  confusion  or  fargetfulness.

'For  one  of  these,  see  Mr.  Piddington's  paper,  pp.  144-50.


78  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrcdl.  [part

Here  ends  my  examination  in  detail  of  attempts  to  "  revive
the  literary  memories "  of  the  trance-xiersonalities.  One
experiment  was  tried  with  Greek ;  but  I  do  not  propose
to  disciTss  this  here,  for,  interesting  and  successful  though  it
was,  it  does  not  contrilxite  substantially  towards  the  problems
under  consideration.  The  sentence  chosen  and  repeated  to
Mrs.  Piper  in  the  original  was  the  line  from  the  Odyssey
which  Mr.  Myers  had  expressed  a  desire  to  have  "  graven  on
some  tablet  in "  his  memory.  This  wish  is  expressed  in
the  Fragments  published  in  1904;^  the  line  was  engraved
upon  his  tomb  at  Keswick  and  upon  a  memorial  tablet  to  him
in  the  Protestant  Cemetery  at  Eome ;  the  Greek  forms  the
motto,  and  its  translation  the  conclusion,  of  a  commemorative
notice  of  Mr.  Myers  delivered  in  London  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge
in  1901,  and  published  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XVII.  Under
these  circumstances,  if  Mrs.  Piper  had  heard  the  line  read
or  quoted,  it  is  impossible  to  be  sure  that  the  sound  of
the  Greek  would  not  recall  its  meairing.  Failure  to  under-
stand the  line  would,  it  is  true,  have  been  very  damaging  to
the  claims  of  MyerSp,  so  that  a  certain  value  attaches  to  the
completely  successful  result  of  this  experiment.  The  method
by  which  the  result  was  obtained  is  precisely  similar  to  that
employed  in  the  experiments  above  described.  There  is  there-
fore no  reason  to  distinguish  between  the  knowledge  shown
here  and  elsewhere ;  the  translation  emerges  in  fragments,
partly  in  the  trance-writing,  partly  in  the  waking-stage,  and
is  accompanied  by  allusions  thoroughly  appropriate  under  the
supposed  circumstances.

Other  topics  arising  in  these  sittings  deserve  careful
study.- As  in  the  instances  selected,  they  are  of  a  "  mingled

^  Frarpnents  of  Prose  and  Poetry,  p.  48.

-I  have  omitted  all  reference  to  one  topic  which  occupies  considerable  space
in  the  record, — an  attempt  to  obtain  from  Hodgsonp  a  translation  of  four  lines
of  medieval  Latin,  which,  on  certain  occasions,  were  printed  on  the  Menu
card,  at  dinners  of  the  Tavern  Club  in  Boston,  and  would  therefore  have  been
familiar  to  Dr.  Hodgson. My  chief  reasons  for  this  omission  are  :

(1)  That  many  of  the  leading  Latin  words  are  either  so  universally  familiar
(e.g.  Deus),  or  so  like  in  sound  or  spelling  to  English  words  (e.g.  Taverna,
Awielorum  chori,  propitma)  that  their  English  equivalents  could  be  easily
guessed  :


LX.]  Classical  and  Literary  A llusions  in  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance.  79

yarn,  good  and  ill  together."  But  the  disentangling  of  the
threads  is  a  lengthy  process.  I  will  therefore  here  further
quote  only  a  few  cases  in  illustration  of  particular  points.

Obviously  a  point  to  be  looked  for  in  an  examination  of
these  phenomena  is  the  effect,  if  any,  of  the  medium's  own
mind.  It  is  difficult  to  find  conclusive  instances  in  these  sit-
tings, but  there  are  two  or  three  cases,  in  addition  to  the
allusions  above  described  to  Poe's  poems,^  where  the  normal
knowledge  of  Mrs.  Piper  seems  to  have  entered  into  the  state-
ments of  the  trance-personalities.  Thus  on  April  6th  Mr.
Dorr  asked  the  controls,  both  Hodgsoup  and  Myersp  being
present :  "  Do  you  understand  what  Pilgrim  Fathers  means  ? "
To  this  came  the  amazing  answer :  "  Something  about  birds  or
turkeys."  The  explanation  occurred  later  to  Mr.  Dorr,  and
was  by  him  explained  to  the  trance-personalities  on  April
22nd:  "I  have  just  discovered  the  association  in  E.  H.'s  mind
between  turkeys  and  pilgrims,  that  made  the  Light  write  the
one  when  I  spoke  of  the  other — Pilgrim  Fathers,  Fast  Day,
Thanksgiving  and  Turkey."  The  associations  between  these
four  topics  were  probably  also  in  Mrs.  Piper's  own  mind ;  they
are  unfamiliar  to  the  English  reader.  At  any  rate  the  next
association  seems  more  likely  to  be  due  to  Mrs.  Piper  than  to
the  controls.  On  April  22nd,  on  passing  into  trance  Mrs.  Piper
whispered :  "  Ship  !  Three  ladies  on  top  of  it."  Myersp,  when
asked  to  explain  this,  said^  it  was  "  simply  a  recollection  of
Valkyrie — recollection  only."  Mr.  Dorr  points  out  that  the
connexion  between  a  ship  and  the  Valkyrie,  wholly  unaccountable

(2)  that  these  words,  if  guessed,  might  give  the  chie  to  their  context  to  anj'
one  who  had  seen  or  heard  the  Latin  verses  ;

(3)  that  it  is  impossible  to  prove  that  Mrs.  Piper  had  not  at  some  time
seen  or  heard  the  Latin  verses  ;

(4)  that  in  fact  she  probably  had  seen  the  first  line,  which  is  quoted  in  the
commemorative  notice  of  Richard  Hodgson  by  Mr.  M.  A.  de  Wolfe  Howe,
published  in  the  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIX.

Under  these  circumstances,  and  as  the  attempts  at  translation,  though  pre-
senting points  of  interest,  do  not  afford  conclusive  evidence  as  to  the  knowledge
possessed  by  the  trance-personalities,  it  seemed  useless  to  describe  the  incident
in  detail.  See,  however,  a  discussion  of  it  in  connexion  with  an  elaborate
cross-eorrespondence  in  Miss  Johnson's  paper  below,  p.  222.

^  See  p.  59. See  also  the  foot-note  on  p.  115.

-This  is  perhaps  another  instance  of  the  failure  of  the  ti'ance-personalities
when  using  the  hand  to  understand  the  utterances  spoken  in  the  waking-stage.


80


3Irs.  A.  W.  V  err  all.


[part


at  first  sight  and  not  traceable  in  the  old  Norse  stories  of
which  he  was  thinking,  may  corne  from  some  recollection  of
the  name  of  Lord  Dunraven's  yacht,  the  Valkyrie,  very  familiar
at  one  time  to  readers  of  the  daily  press.  On  May  8th,  in
the  waking-stage,  an  allusion  to  Longfellow's  ^  poem.  The  Old
Clock  on  the  Stairs,  intervenes  between  a  quotation  from  Words-
worth's We  are  Seven  and  from  Browning's  Rahhi  Ben  Ezra.
On  this  occasion  the  controls,  when  commenting  on  the  utter-
ances of  the  waking-stage,  repudiated  all  responsibility  for  the
allusion  to  Longfellow.

Another  point  of  some  interest,  but  requiring  a  paper  to
itself  for  adequate  treatment,  is  the  persistent  "  dramatization  "
by  means  of  which  Hodgsoup  and  Myersp  are  distinguished.
On  many  occasions  both  controls  are  represented  as  present.
But  sometimes  one  only  is  there,  and  sometimes,  even  when
both  are  present,  only  one  takes  part.  The  sitter  does
not  always  remember,  when  a  particular  subject  is  under  dis-
cussion, that  one  or  other  of  the  controls  was  absent  or
not  listening  when  the  subject  was  last  spoken  of.  But  so
far  as  I  have  been  able  to  discover,  no  mistake  on  this
point  is  ever  made  l)y  the  controls.  One  instance  must
suffice.  On  May  8th  Mr.  Dorr,  having  asked  who  was  con-
trolling, and  received  the  reply,  "  Both,  E.  H.  chiefly,"  read
four  lines  of  Mr.  Myers's  translation  of  Aeneid  VI.,  146-149,
a  passage  descriptive  of  the  Golden  Bough,  but  not  naming
it.  The  acknowledgement  of  the  reading  and  question  as
to  its  subject  came  from  Hodgsoup.  On  May  12  th,  both
controls  being  present  at  the  sitting,  Mr.  Dorr  read  the
same  four  lines,  introducing  them  with  the  words :  "  Now  I
want  to  read  you  something  which  I  read  you  once  before."
To  this  Myersp  replied :  "  Did  you  recite  it  to  me  before,
friend  ?  If  so,  I  did  not  fully  understand."  This  division
between  the  two  persons  may  be  a  device  to  account  for  in-
accuracies or  forgetfulness,  but  the  persistency  with  which  it
is  carried  through  is  in  any  case  remarkable.  No  answer  was
given  to  the  question  about  the  Golden  Bough,  which  was  put
near  the  end  of  the  series  of  sittings.  But  the  two  or  three
allusions  to  the  subject — which  show  no  knowledge  of  its
literary  associations — are  all  made  hy  Hodgsoup.

^  See  Miss  .Johnson's  paper,  pp.  22.3-4.


LX.]  Classical  and  Literary  Allusions  in  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance.  81

The  reader  will  have  already  observed  that  occasionally
words  required  to  answer  the  sitter's  question  appear  in  the
form  of  a  personal  allusion,  or  at  least  have  a  face-value
unlike  the  inner  meaning.^  Thus  the  sentence,  "  See  those
pretty  little  children,"  which,  in  my  view,  is  suggested  by
reminiscences  of  Comus,  appears  to  refer  to  something  quite
different.  Similarly,  I  believe  the  "  troubles  and  trials  "  of
March  31st  to  refer  to  a  passage  in  the  Agaviemnon,  but  they
take  the  form  of  an  address  to  the  medium  as  she  comes  out  of
trance.  A  similar  case  is  commented  on  by  Mr.  Piddington.'
In  the  waking-stage  of  March  30th  occur  the  words,  "Tell  Mr.
Dorr  I  say  my  utterances  echo  everywhere.  If  that  is  he,  I
think  he  will  understand  what  I  mean  by  echo,  if  that  is  he."
The  intention  here  seems  twofold ;  primarily  to  suggest  cross-
correspondences — a  subject  likely  to  interest  Ijoth  the  sitter  and
the  medium ;  secondarily  to  convey  the  word  Eclio  as  part  of
a  series  of  allusions  to  Ovid.

There  is  a  clear  instance  of  the  personal  application  of  a
Vii'gilian  phrase  on  March  30th.  Here  the  words  in  the
waking-stage  run,  "  He  says  tell  him  celestial  minds.  He
says  such  enmity  in  celestial  minds — he  says  not  so — there
isn't  any  in  their  minds."  Clearly  the  first  half  of  these
words  refer  to  the  translation  of  the  Virgilian  phi'ase  already
given  by  Myersp  on  March  l7tli.  But  the  latter  half  applies
the  phrase  to  the  presumed  situation  of  the  controls.  This  char-
acteristic is  far  more  freqiient  in  the  waking-stage  than  in  the
trance-writing.  I  have  not  found  in  the  trance-script  ^  any  in-
stances closely  parallel  with  those  above  quoted.  There  are
two  or  three  playful  remarks,  but  no  cases  in  which  a  whole
sentence  is  apparently  used  for  the  introduction  of  a  par-
ticular word.  This  is  one  of  several  points  of  distinction
between  the  methods  in  use  in  the  trance  proper  and  in  the
waking-stage.

The  waking-stage  developed  considerably  in  the  course  of
these  sittings.  Eeaders  familiar  with  the  trance  phenomena
of  Mrs.  Piper  will  remember  Dr.  Hodgson's  description  of  the
conditions.'* He says, "  she frequently repeats  statements

^  See  Mr.  Piddington's  paper,  p.  134.  -See  p.  116.

^  One  is  quoted  by  Mr.  Piddington  from  the  English  sittings  in  1906-7.

* Proceedinrjs  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XIII.  pp.  397-401.

F


82


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


apparently  made  to  her  by  the  coniinuiiicators  .  .  .  as  though
she  was  a  spirit  controlling  her  body  Ijiit  not  in  fidl  possession
of  it,  and,  after  her  supraliminal  consciousness  has  begun  to
surge  up  into  view,  she  frequently  has  visions  apparently  of
the  distant  or  departing  communicators."  In  other  words,  in
what  Mr.  Piddingtoir  has  called  the  waking-stage,  there  is  no
ostensible  intermediary  between  the  communicators  and  the
sitter,  except  Mrs.  Piper  herself.  As  the  waking-stage  pro-
gresses, the  part  played  by  Mrs.  Piper  increases  witli  her
returning  consciousness.

In  the  English  sittings  1906-1907,  it  became  obvious  that
some  of  tlie  most  distinctive  indications  of  cross-correspondences
with  other  automatists  were  given  in  the  waking-stage.  In
this  stage  emerged,  for  instance,  "  laurel  wreath,"  "  Crossing  the
Bar,"  "Arthur  Hallam,"  and  "Light  in  West."  ^  In  these
American  sittings  of  1908  the  development  of  the  waking-stage
was  continued  and  extended.  The  time  given  to  it  was  pro-
longed, the  sentences  became  more  coherent,  and  there  was
an  increasing  consciousness  shown  of  the  general  situation
and  in  particular  of  the  presence  of  the  sitter.  Some  of  the
clearest  and  most  definite  answers  to  questions  asked  during
the  trance  proper  were  given  in  the  waking-stage.

My  first  examination  of  these  records  led  me  to  observe
how  often  during  the  reading  over  to  the  trance-personalities
of  the  utterances  in  previous  waking-stages,  the  trance-script
failed  to  improve  upon  the  trance-speech.  Mr.  Piddington's
study  of  the  sittings  led  him  to  the  same  conclusion,  and  he
further  noticed  that  on  several  occasions  the  trance-personalities,
when  communicating  through  the  hand,  positively  misconstrued
what  had  previously  been  communicated  through  the  voice.
Some  instances  of  this  misconstruction  have  been  noted  above.
The  following  may  be  added  to  the  list.

In  the  waking-stage  of  March  24th,  1908,  came  these  words:
"  I  walked  in  the  garden  of  the  gods — entranced  I  stood  along
its  banks — like  one  entranced  I  saw  her  at  last  .  .  .  Elysian
shores."  Mr.  Piddington  has  suggested '  that  this  may  be  an
allusion  to  the  reunion  of  Orpheus  and  Eurydice  in  the  Fields
of  the  Blest ;  but  whether  it  be  or  not,  it  does  not  suggest

^  Procefdiiigs  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXII.  pp.  94,  126,  269.

^  See  his  paper,  p.  95.  ■  ■


LX.]  Classical  and  Literary  Allusions  in  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance.  83


what  MyerSp,  in  the  writing  part  of  the  sitting  of  March
30th,  said  it  was,  namely,  an  allusion  to  Venus.  Venus  had
been  mentioned,  though  in  quite  another  connexion,  in  the
waking-stage  of  March  24th,  and  this  seems  to  have  led  to  the
confusion.

In  the  waking -stage  of  March  24th,  Mrs.  Piper  enunciated
the  letters  C,  Y,  and  X,  apparently  dropping  a  letter  between
the  C  and  Y.  There  can,  I  think,  be  no  reasonable  doubt
that  this  was  an  attempt  to  produce  the  word  Ceyx.  When
however,  Mr.  Dorr,  at  the  sitting  of  March  30th,  asked  for
an  explanation,  the  answer  he  received — "  chariot " — was  hope-
lessly irrelevant  (see  below,  pp.  94-5).

In  the  waking-stage  of  April  6th^  came  the  words :  "  Inno-
cence, Faith.  He  has  a  bird  upon  his  hand.  .  .  .  Mr.  Myers
has  got  Pygmalion — birds — Paradise."  Later,  after  allusions  to
other  topics,  came,  "  There  were  two  pigeons  over  the  door.
Came  a-knocking  at  my  chamber  door.  Virgin's  chamber.''
Virgin's  chamber  is,  as  we  have  seen,  an  undoubted  allusion
to  the  Parthenon,-  so  that  the  second  utterance  itself  suggests
— and  subsequent  explanations  on  April  7th  make  this  plain —
that  two  pigeons  or  doves  are  associated  with  the  Parthenon.
The  first  utterance  seems  clearly  to  connect  "  birds "  with
"  Pygmalion."  What  the  meaning  of  either  sentence  is,  or
whether  there  is  any  meaning,  is  not  what  we  are  now  con-
sidering. The  point  is  that  the  trance-script  of  April  7th
threw  no  light  upon  the  words  of  the  waking-stage  of  April
6  th,  when  in  answer  to  Mr.  Dorr's  request  for  an  explanation
of  the  words,  "  he  has  a  bird  upon  his  hand  "  (see  below,  p.  108)
— which  belonged  to  the  Pygmalion  context — he  was  told  that
they  referred  to  the  Parthenon.-^

On  April  7th  in  the  waking-stage,  came  an  ob^dous  reference
to  the  story  of  Hyacinthus,^  "  A  lily  came  up  out  of  the  blood."
Yet,  when  questioned  by  Mr.  Dorr  on  April  13th  about  this,
Myersp  says, — tentatively  it  is  true,  or  perhaps  interrogatively, —
"  It  was  an  utterance  about  Prometheus."

^  See  p.  107.  -  See  above,  p.  59.

^See  above  (p.  59)  for  the  confusion  between  Venus'  chamber  anrl  Virgin's
chamber,  which  may  be  responsible  for  the  mention  of  two  pigeons  or  doves
(Venus'  birds)  over  the  door  of  the  Parthenon.

^  See  Mr.  Piddington"s  paper,  p.  109.


84


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


If  any  conclusion  may  be  based  iipon  the  above-described
and  other  similar  instances,  it  would  seem  to  be  that,  in  the
waking-stage,  a  trance-personality  sometimes  either  knows  more
or  can  express  himself  better  than  when  making  written
communications.  Mr.  Piddington  has  drawn  my  attention  to
three  points  of  distinction  between  the  phenomena  of  the
complete  trance  and  those  of  the  waking-stage : —

(1)  In  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings  (and  with  very  few  exceptions
this  is  equally  true  of  all  the  other  series  of  sittings  in  recent
years)  the  words  in  tlie  waking-stage  are  represented  as  delivered
directly  to  the  medium  by  the  communicating  spirits  themselves,
whereas  the  great  majority  of  their  written  communications  are
represented  as  first  delivered  l)y  them  to  Rector,  and  then  by
his  help  committed  to  writing.

(2)  Consistently  with  this  real  or  pretended  modus  operandi,
the  language  of  the  waking-stage  seems  nowhere  to  show  any
trace  of  Eector's  influence,  whereas  the  language  of  the  script  is
to  a  large  degree  coloured  by  Eector's  own  peculiar  phraseology.

(3)  Whereas  Rector  is  never  (or  very  rarely)  uncertain
as  to  what  has  been  written,  the  other  trance-personalities  are
often  uncertain  how  much,  if  any  part,  of  their  messages,
delivered  in  the  waking-stage,  lias  got  through ;  and  they
appear  to  be  often,  if  not  always,  unaware  of  what  the  medium
may  have  spontaneously  said,  wlien  speaking  in  her  own  person
during  the  waking-stage.

I  would  not  be  understood  as  saying  that  the  trance-script
never  improves  upon  the  trance-speech.  On  the  contrary,  where
progressive  knowledge  is  shown,  a  later  trance-script  often
adds  a  fresh  point  to  the  utterances  of  the  waking-stage.
What  is  conspicuous  in  a  study  of  the  record,  is  the  greater
facility  shown  in  the  waking-stage  for  the  production  of  par-
ticular points  that  can  be  briefly  expressed.  Names,  for
instance,  seem  much  more  easily  produced  in  the  waking-
stage.  The  remarks  of  the  sitter  are  more  easily  conveyed  to
the  controls,  and  long  answers  are  better  given,  in  the  course
of  the  trance-writing.  Communication,  in  fact,  between  sitter
and  "  control,"  whatever  that  word  denotes,  takes  place  more
freely  then.  The  waking-stage  seldom  permits  of  interchange
of  question  and  answer.


LX.]  Classical  and  Literary  Allusions  in  Mrs.  Pi2Jer's  Trance.  85

Without  pronouncing  on  the  degree  or  kind  of  dissociation
involved  in  the  waking-stage  and  during  the  trance-writing
respectively,  it  is  at  any  rate  clear  that  in  the  waking-stage
we  are  dealing  with  a  personality  conceiving  itself  as  Mrs.
Piper,  not  as  a  "  Eector "  or  a  "  Phinuit."  This  may  account
for  the  colloquialisms,  personal  turns,  and  ambiguous  phrases,
which  are  relatively  frequent  in  the  waking-stage.  Probably
here,  as  in  other  cases  of  automatic  phenomena  where  the
unconsciousness  of  the  automatist  is  not  complete,  an  allusion
so  worded  as  not  to  be  easily  compiehensible  by  the  automatist
has  more  chance  of  being  registered.


86  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part


II.

THREE  INCIDENTS  FROM  THE  SITTINGS:
Lethe  ; The  Sibyl  ;  The  Horace  Ode  Question.

By  J.  G.  Piddington.

I.

LETHE.

At  the  sitting  of  March  23,  1908,  Mr.  Dorr  talked  over  various
cross-correspondence  experiments  and  other  matters  which  had
come  up  at  previous  sittings  with  Myersp  and  Hodgsonp.
He  also  read  five  letters  to  them.^

Towards  the  end  of  the  sitting  Mr.  Dorr  for  the  first  time  put
this  question  to  Myersp :  "  what  does  the  word  lethb
SUGGEST  to  you  ? "  The  answers  given  were  in  part,  though  not
by  any  means,  as  Mr.  Dorr  supposed,  wholly  confused ;  and
Mr.  Dorr,  who  evidently  thought  that  the  frequent  change  of
subject  had  by  putting  an  undue  strain  on  the  attention  of  the
trance-personalities  conduced  to  the  confusion,  apologised  for
having  sprung  a  new  question  upon  Myersp  at  the  end  of  a
fatiguinfj  sitting.

I  shall  now  quote  in  chronological  order  the  various  refer-
ences to  the  question  about  Lethe  which  were  made  at  Mr.
Dorr's  sittings.  To  the  reader,  unless  he  should  happen  to  hit
on  the  clue  to  the  puzzle,  these  extracts  will  doubtless  seem
to  be  little  if  any  better  than  a  farrago  of  nonsense.  It  may,
therefore,  help  him  to  work  his  way  through  them  without  too
much  impatience,  if  I  first  assure  him  that  they  contain  an
unusually  complete  and  relevant,  though  very  far  from  obvious,
answer  to  the  question  put  by  Mr.  Dorr.

'  The  substance  of  these  letters  is  given  in  Note  A,  p.  136.


LX.]  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings:  Lethe.


87


Extract  from  record  of  sitting  held  on  March  23,  1908.

(Present:  G.  B.  Dorr.)

G.  B.  D.  Now  shall  I  ask  you  a  question  ? What  does  the  word
"  Lethe  "  suggest  to  you  1

(Myersp  communicating)  Leaflet?

G.  B.  D.  No,  "Lethe". (G.  B.  D.  spells  word.)

Lethe. Do  you  refer  to  one  of  my  poems,  Lethe  ?  ^

(A  word  was  then  written,  which  G.  B.  D.  could  not  decipher
with  certainty,  but  which  he  took  to  be  "Iliad".)

G.  B.  D.  No,  it  does  not  refer  especially  to  anything  in  the  Iliad,  but
it  belongs  to  the  old  mythology.

Yes,  yes,  ah  yes.  I  was  thinking  about  my  biography — you
referred  to  biography — auto — you  confused  me  a  little.
[G.  B.  D.  had  just  before  asked  two  questions  based  on
two  different  passages  in  the  autobiographical  portions  of
F.  W.  H.  Myers's  Fraijments  of  Prose  and  Poetry.  The
second  question  might  have  been  partially  answered  by  a
reference  to  Homer's  Odjjssey. Note  by  J.  G.  P.]

G.  B.  D.  Yes,  it  was  a  sudden  break. I  had  not  meant  to  bring  the
autobiography  up  just  then.

Winds.

G.  B.  D.  Do  not  hurry  on  it. See  if  the  sound  recalls  anything  to
you,  and  whether  you  can  tell  me  where  it  was

(Interrupting)  Greece.

G.  B.  D.  I  will  give  you  a  clue. It  was  in  the  same  region  with  the
Styx.

Olympus.

Greece Troy and  all. Winds  were  all  '  and

appear  and to  destroy  and  he  saved  them  by  taking

them  across  the  river.

^  Though  I  have  not  discovered  a  reference  to  Lethe  in  any  of  Frederic
Myers's  original  poems,  one  exists  in  his  verse-translation  of  Anchises'  famous
speech  in  Aeneid  VI.  7*24  et  seq.  [(See  Essays  Glassica/,  p.  17-1.)  As  we  shall
presently  see,  this  passage  in  the  Aeneid  aifords  an  explanation  of  one  of  the
points  in  the  answer  given  to  the  Lethe  question  {v.  p.  135).

^  Undeciphered  words.


88


J.  G.  Piddington .


[part


G.  B.  D.  These  last  words  are  not  clear  to  me.

he  saves  them  by  taking  them  across  River — Athens —
It  is  all  clear. Do  you  remember  Cave?

G.  B.  D.  I  think  you  are  confused  about  this.  I  ought  to  have
waited  until  another  day  to  bring  it  up,  when  the  Light
was  fresh.  It  was  a  water,  not  a  wind,  and  it  was  in
Hades,  where  the  Styx  was  and  the  Elysian  fields.  Do
j'ou  recall  it  now"?

Lethe. Shore — of  course  I  do. Lethe  Hades
beautiful  river — Lethe. Underground. —
What  is  the  matter  that  I  do  not  hear  better  ? Is  it  lack
of  Light  1 I  think  it  is.

G.  B.  D.  I  brought  this  question  up  too  late.  Let  us  drop  it  now
and  leave  it  until  another  day.  Before  the  Light  closes
there  is  one  thing  I  had  in  mind  to  say  which  this
brings  up  : — Answer  any  questions  you  can  the  day  I  ask
them.  (G.  B.  D.  then  explains  briefly  the  reason  for  this
request.)

Oh  I  see. I  understand,  the  world  would  say  the  Light

G.  B.  D.  (interrupting)  If  you  can  answer  them  [i.e.  questions]  at  all,
it  is  already  a  great  deal  ;  but  where  you  can  answer
them  during  the  sitting,  without  an  interval  between,  it
will  be  better  still.

Oh  yes. But  I  was  only  thinking  would  it  not  be  wiser  to
ask  questions  at  first  ?

G.  B.  D.  Much  better,  and  I  will  try  not  to  ask  you  any  so  late
another  day.  To-day  the  letters  from  England,  and  our
talk,  took  up  the  Light  at  the  beginning.  And  now  it
would  be  better  we  should  stop.

I  think  that  is  what  is  the  trouble,  what  makes  it  difficult.
(The  sci'ipt  has  now  become  obscure  and  faint.)

G.  B.  D.  Anything  more  that  comes  to  you,  say  in  the  waking-stage. ^

Yes. Remember,  friend,  this  is  exhausting  work — exhausting
work.

iMr.  Dorr  said  "  in  tlie  .subliminal".  Here  and  elsewhere  I  have  substituted
"  waking-stage  "  for  "  subliminal '".


LX.]


Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings:  Letlte.


89


Waking-stage.

Fish Mermaid Saturn  ^
Hero  * — Olympus

(Then  followed  a  word  which  was  written  down  as  "  pavia."
In  response  to  Mr.  Dorr's  requests  the  word  was
whispered  several  times,  but  never  distinctly  enough  to
be  caught  with  certainty.)

Sybil  — •  Olympus  — water — Lethe — delighted  —  sad — lovely —
mate. —

Put  them  all  together.  (This  was  followed  by  inarticulate
whispering.)

Entwined  love — beautiful  shores. — Ask  him  if  he  cannot
hear  me.

Muses. — I  wrote  "church"  long  ago  [see  Proc.  Vol.  XXII.
p.  44].  Olympus. — There's  Mercury*  —  Love  —  He  has
drawn  a  cross  with  ivy  over  it.  Pharaoh's  daughter  came
out  of  the  water* — Warm — sunlit — love.

Lime  leaf — heart — sword — arrow

I  shot  an  arrow  through  the  air
And  it  fell  I  know  not  where.

(Mrs.  Piper  then  puts  her  hands  up  befoie  her  face,  palms
outwards,  as  though  warding  something  off,  but  smilingly
like  a  child  in  play.)

Oh  !  point  it  the  other  way  !

G.  B.  D.  Whom  do  you  see  ?

Lad}'. — I  want  to  say  that  the  walls  came  out,  and  in  the
air  was  a  lady  who  had  no  clothes  on ;  and  in  her  hand
she  had  a  hoop  and  two  pointed  things,  and  she  pulled
a  string,  and  she  pointed  it  straight  at  me,  and  I  thought
it  would  hit  me  in  the  eye.  And  Mr.  Myers  put  his
hand  up  and  stopped  her.  She  had  a  hoop,  and  there
was  only  half  of  the  hoop  there.  .  .  .


^For  "Saturn''  see  p.  105.

*  For  explanations  of  these  words  see  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  paper,  pp.  184  and  190.


90


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Extract  from  record  of  sitting  held  on  March  24,  1908.
(Present:  G.  B.  Dorr.)

(HodgsoHp  communicating.)

Now  Myers  feels  a  little  distressed  because  he  thinks  you
did  not  quite  understand  his  replies  to  your  last  question
[i.e.  the  question  about  Lethe].

G.  B,  D.  I  ought  not  to  have  brought  any  questions  up  after  the
letters  and  the  talk  they  led  to.

No,  quite  riglit,  but  he  did  give  you  one  or  two  replies
which  he  and  I  both  fear  you  did  not  understand.

G.  B.  D.  No,  it  wasn't  clear. I  worked  over  the  sitting  yesterday  till
nearly  midnight,  trying  to  straighten  things  out.

I  am  rather  glad  G.  [i.e.  George,  meaning,  Mr.  George  B.  Dorr]

to  have  you  understand.
Let  Myers  explain  what  he  thinks  you  did  not  grasp.

(Before  allowing  Myers  to  explain,  Mr.  Dorr  first  refers  to
what  he  had  said  at  the  last  sitting  about  questions
being  answered  in  the  trance  on  the  same  day  as  they
are  put.)

[The  control  to-day  is  apparently  Hodgson  throughout,  Myers
being  indicated  by  him  as  present  and  occasionally  speak-
ing. Note  by  G.  B.  D.

I  think  it  is  clear  that  some  of  the  passages  that  follow  are
to  be  atti  ibuted.  to  Hodgsoup,  and  some  to  Myersp ;  but  I
do  not  think  it  necessary  to  attempt  to  apportion  their
respective  parts,  as  anything  which  Hodgsonp  says  about
the  Lethe  question  he  evidently  says  on  behalf  of  Myersp.
Note  by  J.  G.  P.]

I  wrote  in  reply  to  your  last  inquiry Cave — Lethe.

G.  B.  D.  I  asked  him  [i.e.  Myers]  whether  the  word  Lethe  recalled
anything  to  him.

He  replied  Cave — Banks — Shore.

G.  B.  D.  But  these  last  two  [i.e.  "  Banks  Shore "]  were  not  written
imtil  after  I  had  told  him  it  was  a  water.

Yes,  but  he  drew  the  form — a  picture  of  Iris  with  an  arrow.


LX.]


Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings:  Lethe.


91


G.  B.  D.  But  he  spoke  of  winds.

Yes,  clouds — arrow — I  r  i  s — Cave — Mor  M  O  R  Latin  for  sleep
Morpheus — Cave. Sticks  in  my  mind  can't  you  help  me  1

G.  B.  D.  Good.  I  understand  what  you  are  after  now.i  But  can't
you  make  it  clearer  what  there  was  peculiar  about  the
Avaters  of  Lethe  ?

Yes,  I  suppose  you  think  I  am  affected  in  the  same  way
but  I  am  not.2


^  Mr.  Dorr  saw  that  a  reference  was  intended  to  the  Cave  of  Sleep,  and
why  such  a  reference  might  be  vaguely  relevant ;  but  he  did  not  grasp  how
pointed  and  direct  it  really  was.

-  The  way  in  which  Myersp  here  withheld  the  obvious  and  commonplace
answer  until  pressed  to  give  it  by  Mr.  Dorr  is,  I  think,  deserving  of  the  utmost
attention  ;  for  the  fact  that  in  at  least  three  other  instances  this  same
avoidance  of  the  trite  and  obvious  is  to  be  found  in  the  communications  of
Myersp  creates  a  presumption  that  Myersp  deliberately  preferred  so  to  frame
his  messages  that  only  study  and  thought  would  render  them  intelligible.
In  one  of  these  three  cases  (see  p.  107)  Myersp,  wishing,  as  I  think,  to  make
not  a  general  allusion  to  the  well-known  story  of  Pygmalion  and  Galatea,  but
a  particular  allusion  to  the  story  as  told  by  Ovid,  who  gives  no  name  to  the
marble  statue  that  came  to  life,  at  first  mentioned  the  name  "  Pygmalion  "  only,
and  did  not  mention  "Galatea"  until  Mr.  Dorr  asked  for  an  explanation  of
"Pygmalion"  (see  pp.  108-9).

In  a  second  instance  (see  jip.  l-t6,  147),  instead  of  answering  the  question
"Where  did  the  Sibyl  live?",  by  saying  simply  "  Cumae ",  Myersp  indicated
by  means  of  two  proper  names,  Auchises  and  Icarus,  a  passage  in  the  sixth
book  of  the  Aeneid,  where  the  dwelling  place  of  the  Sibyl  is  described.

In  a  third  instance  (see  Proc.  Vol.  XXII.  pp.  397-407),  instead  of  answer-
ing the  question,  "Which  Ode  of  Horace  entered  deeply  into  your  inner  life?"
by  saying  simply  "Horace,  Odes  i.  28",  Myersp  alluded  to  a  poem  of  Frederic
Myers's  containing  phrases  reminiscent  of  this  Ode.  Yet  later  developments
strongly  suggest  that  Myersp  could  have  given  a  much  directer  response,  had
he  wished,  for  he  afterwards  showed  that  he  knew  that  the  Ode  of  Horace  to
which  the  question  related  contained  references  to  Neptune  and  Orion  (see
pp.  157,  158).

Similarly  here,  it  is  quite  clear  that  Myersp  knew  the  ordinary  associations
with  Lethe  and  could  have  answered  the  question  quite  simply  ;  yet  he  preferred
to  give  an  indirect  answer,  and  withheld  a  simple  and  obvious  answer  until  Mr.
Dorr  pressed  for  one.

In  three  instances  out  of  the  four,  then,  it  was  not  apparently  inability  to
send  a  plain  straightforward  message  that  was  the  cause  of  the  allusiveness.
Now,  in  discussing  the  form  in  which  the  answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  question
emerged,  I  argued  that  it  was  perhaps  due  to  a  desire  on  the  part  of  Myersp  to
frame  his  answer  in  terms  not  expected  by  his  questioner,  and  thus  to  circum-
vent as  far  as  possible  a  telepathic  explanation  of  the  phenomenon  (see  Journal


92


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


G.  B.  D.  Capital. That's  as  clear  as  can  be.

Did  you  understand  Cave"?
G.  B.  D.  Yes,  the  Cave  of  Sleep.

(Hand  bows  assent  energetically.)

Hoping  you  would  understand  clouds  IRIS

(A  bow  is  here  drawn  for  rainbow,  and  also  wavy  lines.
G.  B.  D.  asks  what  the  lines  mean.)

clouds— C  L  0  U  D  S

Why  did  you  not  understand  1  It  would  have  meant  so
much  to  you. We  agreed  upon  one  word  I  think.

G.  B.  D.  What  do  you  mean  1  Do  you  mean  we  selected  a  word  for
a  message  1

No,  you  said  if  I  could  give  you  one  word  in  reply  which
would  mean  something  it  would  be  better  than  anything.

G.  B.  D.  Let  me  read  you  some  Latin  verses,  from  Vergil,  which  will
tell  you  what  I  thought  Myers  had  in  mind  when  he
wrote  Cave.

(G.  B.  D.  then  reads  a  few  lines  in  Latin  describing  Juno's
visit  to  the  Cave  of  Aeolus  ;  and  Hodgsonp  makes  a  con-
fused response.  Thereupon  G.  B.  D.  proposes  to  give
him  "one  or  two  new  words  to  work  over",  and
Hodgson,,  replies  as  follows:)

Do  not  give  me  too  much,  George.  Let  us  go  slow  so  we
can  take  it  all  in. Elysian  came  in.

for  January  1909,  p.  23).  This  was  an  over-bold  conjecture,  perhaps;  but  I  think
the  cases  quoted  above  go  a  gond  way  towards  justifying  it.  And  in  this  con-
nexion it  is  fortunate  tliat  evidence  lias  now  come  to  hand  tending  to
show  that  the  allusiveness,  which  characterises  not  only  the  answer  to  the
Horace  Ode  question  but  also  several  of  the  complex  cross-correspondences,
may  represent  a  deliberate  plan  and  not  an  unskilful  attempt  to  hit  a  given
mark  ;  for  until  it  did  come  to  hand,  it  was  easy  to  argue  that  the  allusiveness,
far  from  being  designed,  was  merely  due  to  failure  on  the  part  of  the  automatist
to  get  a  direct  reproduction  of  an  idea ;  or,  in  other  words,  was  but  an
example  of  imperfect  telepathy.  That  imperfect  telepathy  is  the  true  explana-
tion of  some — perhaps  of  a  good  many — instances  of  allusiveness  I  do  not
doubt;  but  I  equally  do  not  doubt  that  it  is  not  the  explanation  of  them  all.


LX.]  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings :  Lethe.  93

G.  B.  D.  Yes,  I  spoke  of  that  yesterday  in  connexion  with  Hades  in
trying  to  locate  Lethe  for  you.

(G.  B.  D.  then  reads  some  lines  from  an  old  verse-translation
of  Aeschylus'  Prometheus.  He  asks  the  controls  to  think
over  them,  and  to  reply  later.)

Yes,  I  cannot  possibly  tell  you  all  my  thoughts  at  once.

G.  B.  D.  Tell  me  anything  that  any  of  the  questions  I  ask  you  may
bring  up.  Lethe  for  instance  may  bring  back  other
memories  to  3'ou.

(Hand  here  makes  drawings  upon  the  paper.)
G.  B.  D.  What  does  that  mean  ]

Flower — Banks
G.  B.  D.  Flowery  banks  1

(Hand  bows  assent.)

G.  B.  D.  There  is  another  line  I  should  like  to  give  you  in  Latin :
one  that  is  in  a  way  related  to  these  things  : — Facilis  est
[sic]  descensus  Averni.

.  .  .  Est  Est  [This  looks  as  if  the  trance-personality  were
querying  Mr.  Dorr's  superfluous  and  unmetrical  "  est ".
Note  by  J.  G.  P.]

G.  B  D.  Do  you  know  what  est  means  1

Is Ls  .  .  .

G.  B.  D.  Do  you  remember  where  the  Sibyl  lived  ?

I  told  the  Light  to  say  sybil  last  time.

G.  B.  D.  Yes,  the  light  did  say  Sibyl  in  the  waking-stage.

(Various  and  quite  diff'erent  topics  are  then  mentioned  and
discussed.)

G.  B.  D.  Now  with  regard  to  [cross  -  correspondence]  messages,  you
have  done  nothing  since  yesterday,  have  you,  in  taking
these  ?

Did  the  Light  quote  Picture  I  made  for  her  spirit  as  it
returned  [i.e.  in  the  waking-stage]  ]

G.  B.  D.  The  picture  of  Iris  ?
Yes.


94


/.  G.  Piddington.


[part


G.  B.  D.  Yes,  she  did.  But  I  thought  it  was  Diana.  She  told  me
about  it  very  clearly.  Now  will  you  tell  me  if  you  have
attempted  to  give  here  any  message  from  other  Lights,  so
that  I  can  make  note  of  it  ?

Oh  yes,  I  will glad  you  asked  me. I  was  given  the  lines  -
by  Piddington  which  I  gave  to  the  Light's  spirit  to  make
you  understand  my  meaning  of  Iris.

[This  undoubtedly  means  that  the  words  "I  shot  an  arrow
into  the  air",  etc.,  which  on  Feb.  25,  1907  (see  Proc.
Vol.  XXIL  p.  81)  I  had  suggested  to  Hodgsonp  as  a  way
in  which  he  might  try  to  get  Mrs.  Verrall  to  write
"arrow",  had  been  used  in  the  waking-stage  of  the  pre-
vious trance  to  convey  the  idea  of  a  figure  holding  a
bow,  i.e.  Iris. A''ote  hy  J.  G.  P.]

(G.  B.  D.  then  leads  the  communications  into  other  channels ;
and  the  writing  part  of  the  sitting  ends  thus  : — )

G.  B.  D.  Tell  me  whatever  yovi  can  in  the  waking-stage.

I  will  but  do  not  be  disappointed.  We  have  done  all  we
could  today.  Pax  vobiscum,  dear  friend,  and  may  God
be  with  you. R.  H.

F.  M.

Waking-stage.

(The  first  whispered  word  caught  is  the  same  as  that  not
understood  in  the  previous  waking  -  stage,  whose  sound
was  then  written  down  as  "  pavia  " ;  but  it  is  still  impos-
sible to  catch  it  clearly.)


Mr.  Myers  is  writing  on  the  wall.

G.  B.  D.  What  is  he  writing'?

(Mrs.  Piper  is  got  with  difficulty  to  repeat  "  C ",  and  then
afterwards,  as  though  something  came  in  between,
"YX".)

I  walked  in  the  garden  of  the  gods — entranced  I  stood  along
its  banks — like  one  entranced  I  saw  her  at  last.  .  .  .
Elysian  shores.  .  .  .


Lx.]  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings :  Lethe.


95


[This  may  be  an  allusion  to  the  reunion  of  Orpheus  and
Eurydice  in  the  Fields  of  the  Blessed  (cf.  Ovid.  Met.  XL
61-66),  in  spite  of  its  being  explained  subsequently  as
referring  to  Venus.  See  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper,  pp.  82,
83. Note  Inj  J.  G.  P.J

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  held  on  March  30,  1908.

(Present:  G.  B.  Dorr.)

G.  B.  D.  Shall  I  read  you  my  record  of  the  [utterances  made  in  the]
waking-stage  at  our  last  meeting  1

(Myersp  communicating.) Yes,  do  kindly.

(G.  B.  D.  then  goes  through  the  utterances  in  the  waking-
stage  of  the  trance  of  March  24,  1908,  seriatim,  omitting,
however,  to  ask  for  an  explanation  of  the  word  recorded
as  "pavia".)  ...  •

G.  B.  U.  The  next  thing  I  heard  .  .  .  was  that  Mr.  Myers  was
writing  on  the  wall.

Good.  -  ,

G.  B.  D.  All  that  I  could  get  Mrs.  Piper  to  repeat  was  C-y-x.

Chariot.  ; .  ■

G.  B.  D.  Is  that  the  meaning  of  the  word  which  he  was  writing  ?

Yes. Pronounce  the  word  for  me.
G.  B.  D.  I  do  not  know  the  word. Won't  you  spell  it  out  for  me  ?

Cynx— C  Y  N  X.
G.  B.  D.  Is  that  a  Greek  word  ^

Yes. [See  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper,  p.  83.] .  .

G.  B.  D.  I  can  make  nothing  out  of  it.  Shall  I  go  on  with  the
[record  of  the]  waking-stage  1

Thank  you.

G.  B.  D.  "  I  walked  in  the  garden  of  the  gods — entranced  I  stood
along  its  banks — like  one  entranced  I  saw  her  at  last."
Of  whom  are  you  speaking  now'?

Venus .  1


96


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


[This  explanation  is  obviously  rubbish.  Venus  had  been
mentioned  in  the  waking-stage  of  March  24  in  quite  a
different  connexion.  See  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper,  p.  83.
Note  htj  J.  G.  P.]

(G.  B.  D.  next  goes  over  the  utterances  made  in  the  waking-
stage  of  the  trance  of  March  23,  1908.)

G.  B.  D.  The  first  words  I  caught  .  .  .  were  "  fish  " "  mermaid."

I  was  reminded  of  them  by  Shores.


(G.  B.  D.  then  tries  once  more  to  get  the  word  beginning
with  a  J),  and  recorded  as  "pavia";  but  it  is  not
apparently  recalled,  or  else  the  question  is  not  clearly
understood,  for  the  following  word  is  written,  which  had
not  come  up  before  :)

POMONA.

G.  B.  D.  What  is  the  connexion  with  Pomona  1

Garden.  [It  looks  as  if  Pomona  got  dragged  in  owing  to
an  automatic  association  of  ideas  with  the  preceding  "I
walked  in  the  garden  of  the  gods".  If  " pavia "  =
papavera  (poppies),  "  garden "  and  "  poppies "  may  to-
gether have  given  rise  to  "  Pomona  ". Nute  by  J.  G.  P.]

G.  B.  D.  Now  let  me  read  you  some  words  which  you  told  the  Light
to  tell  me  to  put  together.

Yes,  one  by  one.
G.  B.  D.  "  Sybil  ".

prophetess.

G.  B.  D.  "  Olympus  ".

Previously  answered.  [No  explanation  of  "  Olympus "  had
been  given  before ;  and  none  was  subsequently  given.
Note  hi  J.  G.  P.]

G.  B.'D.  "Lethe  ".

iliver  etc.
G.  B.  D.  "  delighted  ".

Delighted  my  heart  to  read  it  when  in  your  life.

[This  seems  to  imply  that  a  passage  in  literature  is  in  the
thoughts  of  the  trance-personality. Note  by  J.  G.  P.]


LX.]  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings :  Lethe.  97

G.  B.  D.  "sad  ". Why  sad  ?

Because  of  its  effect.

G.  B.  D.  "  Lovely — mate — entwined  love  ".

We  walk  together,  our  loves  entwined,  along  the  shores.  In
beauty  beyond  comparison  with  Lethe.  Sorry  it  is  all
so  fragmentary  but  suppose  it  cannot  all  get  through.


G.  B.  D.  Then  came  the  picture  of  Iris  which  you  showed  the  Light
and  which  she  described  to  me  as  real.

Yes,  that  was  to  answer  your  question.

G.  B.  D.  But  I  see  no  connexion  between  Iris  and  Sleep,  or  Lethe
rather.

No,  only  Iris  shot  an  arrow  into  the  clouds  and  caused  a
rainbow.  ...  It  brought  it  to  my  mind  simply.

Extract  from  record  of  vjords  spoken  in  the  waJcing-siage
of  the  trance  of  April  6,  1908.

....  He keeps saying something about CYX.  Facilis
[i.e.  Facilis  descensus  Averni. See  p.  93].

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  held  on  Ap>ril  7,  190S.
(Present:  G.  B.  Dorr.)

G.  B.  D.  Let  us  take  up  [the  record  of]  yesterday's  waking-stage  and
go  over  it  together "  He  keeps  saying  some-

thing about  CYX."

(Myersp  communicating.)

SCYXCSYX.

G.  B.  D.  You  cannot  get  the  word  now,  can  you  1

(Hand  makes  gesture  of  dissent.)

WaJdng-stage.


Mr. Myers says  : "  No poppies ever grew on  Elysian
shores."

G


98


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


The  main  part  of  the  answer  given  to  the  question  about
Lethe  consists  of  allusions  to  a  passage  in  Ovdd's  Metamor-
jyhoses,  but  preceding  these  allusions  are  two  isolated  words,
"  Olympus  "  and  "  Sibyl  ",  which  do  not  belong  to  the  Ovidian
part  of  the  answer.  As  they  need  but  a  few  words  of  com-
ment, it  will  be  convenient  to  deal  with  them  before  entering
on  the  long  explanations  and  comments  which  the  remainder
of  the  answer  will  necessitate.

In  "Olympus"  I  can  trace  no  meaning.^  It  occurred  first
among  the  preliminary  and  muddled  attempts  to  give  an
answer ;  a  second  time,  thrice  repeated,  in  the  waking-stage
of  March  23,  1908,  and  a  third  time  in  the  waking-stage  of
March  31,  1908,  in  a  sentence  of  which  it  was  the  only  dis-
tinguishable word  (see  p.  106).  On  March  30,  1908,  in  response
to  an  enquiry  of  Mj'.  Dorr's,  Myersp  said  that  an  explanation
of  "  Olympus "  had  been  given  previously  ;  but,  if  so,  I  have
failed  to  find  it,  and  I  do  not  believe  that  any  was  given.

The  word  "Sibyl",  however,  is  intelligible  and  appropriate.
Mr.  IDorr,  it  must  be  remembered,  did  not  originally  ask  what
Lethe  was,  but  what  it  suggested ;  and  Lethe  might  well
suggest  the  Sibyl  of  Cumae  to  a  Veigiliau  scholar  (which
Myersp  professes  to  be),  for  v/hen  Aeneas,  as  described  in  the
sixth  book  of  the  Aeneid,  saw  the  river  of  Lethe  flowing  by
the  Elysian  Fields  and  the  souls  about  to  return  to  earth
drinking  of  its  waters,  he  was  in  her  company.  That  this  is
the  right  explanation  is  rendered  the  more  probable  by  the
fact  that  Myersp  later  on  answered  two  other  questions  by
means  of  allusions  to  two  other  incidents  told  in  the  sixth
book  of  the  Aeneid  {v.  pp.  145  and  147).  "Olympus"  and
"  Sibyl "  being  thus  disposed  of,  I  pass  on  to  the  remainder
of  the  answer.

The  only  point  which  Mr.  Dorr  saw  in  the  answers  to  his

question  was  the  allusion  to the  Cave  of  Sleep,  which  he

thought  was  probably  due  to  an  association  of  ideas  between

the  oblivion  produced  by  the  waters  of  Lethe  and  the  oblivion

of  sleep. In  November, 1908, Mrs. Verrall went  carefully

through  the  records  of  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings,  and — though  she

1  See,  however,  p.  327  for  an  explanation  of  "Olympus"  discovered  too  late
for  insertion  here.


LX.]  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings:  Letlie.  99

found  a  good  mauy  instances  where  answers  given  in  the
trance  to  questions  on  literary  and  classical  subjects,  which  to
Mr.  Dorr  had  seemed  vague  or  meaningless,  were  really  indica-
tive or  suggestive  of  real  knowledge — she  failed  to  trace  any
coherence  in  the  answei-s  given  to  the  question  about  Lethe.
Another  classical  scholai',  Mr.  Gerald  Balfour,  when  he  read
through  the  records,  likewise  saw  no  sense  in  these  answers.
Nor  did  I,  when  I  first  considered  them.  But  I  was  struck  by
the  way  in  which  Myersp  and  Hodgsoup  at  the  sitting  of  March
24,  1908,  spontaneously  repeated,  amplified  and  emphasised  the
answer  given  to  the  Lethe  question  on  the  previous  day  ;  and
showed  themselves  apprehensive  of  its  not  having  been  under-
stood, and  confident  of  its  relevancy.  When  confidence  of  this
kind  is  exhibited  by  the  trance-personalities  it  is  usually  well-
founded.  Accordingly  I  thought  it  worth  while  to  search  for
passages  in  classical  authors  which  might  throw  light  on  the
matter;  and  by  good  luck  came  on  a  passage  in  the  eleventh
book,  hitherto  unknown  to  me,  of  the  Metamorphoses  of  Ovid,
which  explains  and  justifies  the  main  part  of  the  answers  given
in  the  trance.  In  this  book  Ovid  tells  the  story  of  the  trans-
formation of  Ceyx,  king  of  Trachin,  into  a  kingfisher,  and
of  his  wife,  Alcyone,  daughter  of  Aeolus,  into  a  halcyon.  I
append  what  is  partly  a  summary  and  partly  a  literal  trans-
lation of  the  passage  in  question.

Summary  of  Ovid,  Metamorphoses  XL  410-748.

Ceyx,  in  order  to  consult  tlie  oracle  about  the  fate  of  liis  brother
Daedalion  who  had  been  changed  into  a  hawk,  starts  on  a  voyage
to  Clares  ;  but  is  shipwrecked  on  the  way  and  drowned.

Meanwhile,  Alcyone,  who  sorely  against  her  will  has  been  left
behind  at  home,  in  ignorance  of  her  husband's  death  importunes  the
gods  and  especially  Juno  for  his  safety.  But  to  make  supplication
on  behalf  of  one  who  is  dead  is  an  unholy  act,  and  so  unacceptable
to  Juno ;  who,  in  order  that  her  temple  may  no  longer  be  polluted
by  the  prayers  of  Alcyone,  bids  Iris,  the  messenger  of  the  gods,
"seek  speedily  the  drowsy  court  of  Somnus  \_i.e.  Sleep],  and  order
him  to  send  to  Alcyone  a  vision,  in  the  form  of  the  dead  Ceyx,  to
reveal  the  sad  truth."  Thereupon  "  Iris  clothes  herself  in  raiment
of  a  thousand  hues,  and,  imprinting  her  bended  bow  upon  the  sky,


100


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


seeks,  as  bid,  King  Sleep's  abode  that  lies  hidden  beneath  a  cloud.
Near  by  the  Cimmerians'  land  is  a  cave  with  deep  recess,  a  hollow
mount,  the  home  and  sanctuar}'  of  slothful  Sleep,  where  neither  at
dawn,  nor  noon,  nor  eve  can  Phoebus  enter  in.  From  out  the
ground  reek  mists  and  murky  fogs,  glimmering  in  a  doubtful  dusky
light.  .  .  .  Beasts  there  are  none,  nor  flocks,  nor  branches  waving
in  the  breeze ;  and  never  outcry  of  human  voice  awakes  the  echoes.
It  is  the  home  of  silent  rest.  Yet  [the  silence  is  not  absolute,  for]
from  the  foot  of  the  rock  issues  the  stream  of  the  water  of  Lethe,
and  as  the  wave  glides  purling  through  the  stream  among  the
babbling  pebbles,  it  invites  sleep.  Before  the  cavern's  entrance
abundant  poppies  bloom  and  herbs  innumerable,  from  the  juice
whereof  Night  brews  sleep.  .  .  .  No  watchman  on  the  threshold
stands ;  but  in  the  centre  is  a  couch,  .  .  .  whereon  lies  the  god
himself  [i.e.  Somnus]  with  limbs  in  languor  loosed."  .  .  .  Iris  enters
the  cave,  irradiating  it  with  the  colours  of  her  apparel,  delivers  her
message  to  Somnus,  and  quickly  departing  returns  to  the  heavens
along  the  rainbow-path  by  which  she  came.  From  among  his
thousand  sons,  Somnus  chooses  Morpheus,  whose  special  gift  it  is  to
mimic  the  form,  visage,  gait  and  speech  of  man,  to  execute  the  task
that  Iris  has  enjoined.  Morpheus  flies  to  Trachin,  and  appears  in
the  form  of  Ceyx  to  Alcyone,  who  thus  learns  her  husband's  fate.
Overcome  by  despair  Alcyone  goes  down  to  the  sea  to  drown  her-
self, and  as  she  stands  upon  the  shore  the  body  of  a  drowned  man
is  washed  up  close  to  her.  She  recognises  it  as  her  husband's  corpse,
and  flings  herself  into  the  water.  In  the  act  of  falling  she  is  trans-
formed into  a  halcyon.  The  gods  take  pity  on  her  sorrow,  and  after
a  time  transform  Ceyx  into  a  kingfisher ;  and  thus  Alcyone  rejoins
her  beloved  mate.  "  For  seven  tranquil  days  in  winter-time  Alcyone
sits  broodinij  on  her  nest  as  it  floats  on  the  face  of  the  waters.  Then
lulled  is  the  wave  of  the  sea ;  and  Aeolus  guards  and  confines  the
winds,  and  secures  a  calm  surface  for  his  daughter's  brood."

Let  me  now  compare  the  allusions  in  the  trance  with  Ovid's
story  :

Trance.  Ovid.  Met.  XI.

March  23.

(1)  Cave.  (1)  Cave  of  Sleep.

(2)  Vision  of  female  figure (2)  Iris  with  her  bow  (the  rain-

with  half  a  hoop.  bow).


LX.]  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings:  Lethe.  101


(3)  "  Sad  lovely  mate.  En-
twined love."


March  24.

(4)  "  Cave  —  banks — shore
— Flower banks —


Clouds.


(5)  "  Iris — Morpheus —

Latin for sleep "
[i.e.  Somnus].

(6)  C  yx  and  appai-ently

a  letter  lost  between

c  and  y.
March  30.  C  y  n  x.
April  6.  C  y  X.
April  7.  S  c  y  X,  c  s  y  x:

(7)  March  23.  ) Word  re-
March  24.  V corded  as
March  30.  ) "  pavia."
April 7.  "Mr.  Myers
says  no  poppies  ever
grew  on  Ely sian  shores  " :
a  remark  which  susr-
gests  (1)  that  they  grew
on  some  other  shores ;
(2)  that  this  was  not
the  first  mention  of  pop-
pies in the trance :
which it  was  not,  if
"  pavia  "  =papavera.


(3)  of.  11.  733-8,  especially  the

words  miserahilis — moe-
sto — rostro — dilectos  artus
amplexa,  and  the  whole
story  (11.  410-748)  gener-
ally for  the  passionate
love  of  Ceyx  and  Alcyone.

(4)  Ante  fores  antri  foecunda

papavera  fiorent  Innu-
meraeque  herbae  (11.
605-6).

Tecta  suh  nube  latentia,  (1.
591).  Nebulae  .  .  .  ex-
halantur  (11.  595-6).

(5)  Iris — Morpheus — Somnus.


(6)  Ceyx.


(7)  Papavera  (1.  605)  i.e.  the
poppies  which  grew  before
the  entrance  of  the  Cave  of
Sleep,  and  consequently
by  the  banks  of  the  Cim-
merian river  of  Lethe.


102


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


The  references  in  the  trance  to  "  cave ",  "  flower  banks ",
"clouds"  and  "poppies"  show  that  the  recollections  of  the
trance-personality  were  not  confined  to  the  general  outline  of
the  story  of  Ceyx  and  Alcyone,  but  extended  to  details  of
the  story  as  told  in  Ovid's  Metamorphoses,  and  especially  to
details  there  closely  connected  with  the  river  of  Lethe.

The  first  attempts  on  March  23,  1908,  to  answer  Mr.  Dorr's
question  are  hopeless  muddles ;  though  possibly  the  irrelevant
references  to  "  wipds  ",  "  Troy  "  and  a  "river"  betray  how  the
mind  of  the  trance-personality  was  struggling  towards  a  rele-
vant recollection.  Though  the  name  of  Aeolus  had  not  been
actually  mentioned,  Myersp  had  at  previous  sittings  (see
Mrs.  Verrall's  paper,  pp.  C3-6S)  spontaneously  made  an  allusion
to  the  storm  which  Aeolus  at  Juno's  bidding  let  loose  from
the  Cave  of  the  Winds  in  order  to  overwhelm  the  fleet  of
Aeneas,  who  was  "  carrying  Troy  and  her  household  gods
into  Italy "  (Verg.  Aen.  I.  50  et  seq.).  Confused  thoughts
of  "winds",  "Troy"  and  "river"  may  have  aroused  memories
of  the  Cave  of  Aeolus  and  of  how  Juno  and  Aeolus  tried
to  thwart  Aeneas'  escape  from  Troy ;  and  these  memories
in  turn  may  have  awakened  a  recollection  of  a  story  into
which  a  daughter  of  Aeolus^  {i.e.  Alcyone),  Juno,  the  Cave  of
Sleep  and  the  river  of  Lethe  enter.  Whether  this  was  so  or
not,  it  is  at  any  rate  noteworthy  that  when  after  the  pre-
liminary muddles  a  relevant  recollection  did  emerge,  it  was
heralded  by  the  words  "It  is  all  clear",  and  that  these  words
were  emphasised  by  being  underlined.  »

Neither  Mrs.  Piper  nor  Mr.  Dorr  had  read  any  Ovid.-  Ac-
cordingly, if  Mrs.  Piper's  own  memory  furnished  the  reminis-
cences of  the  Ceyx  and  Alcyone  story  displayed  in  the  trance,
or  if  she  obtained  them  telepathically  from  Mr.  Dorr,  our  next
step  must  be  to  enquire  what  book  or  books  other  than  Ovid
could  have  supplied  Mrs.  Piper  or  Mr.  Dorr  with  the  details  of
the  story  given  in  the  trance. I  think  we  may  with  confidence

^Alcj'one  is  twice  called  Aeolis,  i.e.  daughter  of  Aeolus,  by  Ovid.  See
3fet.  XI.  444  and  .573,  and  cf.  11.  747-8.

-The  evidence  for  this  statement  will  be  found  in  Note  B.  (pp.  138-42)
where  I  have  placed  it  in  order  not  to  interrupt  the  main  narrative.


LX.]  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings:  Lethe.


103


dispense  with  sci'utiuisiug  classical  dictionaries  of  the  ordinary
kinds,  for  though  doubtless  they  would  all  su6  voce  "Alcyone"
give  the  main  outlines  of  her  story,  and  though  some  might
(though  so  far  I  have  not  come  across  any  that  do)  suh  voce
"  Lethe "  refer  to  Ovid's  description  of  its  source,  it  is  most
unlikely  that  suh  voce  "Alcyone"  the}^  would  mention  Lethe
or  the  Cave  of  Sleep,  or  that  sub  voce  "  Lethe "  they  would
mention  Ceyx  and  Alcyone.

We  must  look  rather  to  the  kinds  of  books  which  would  be
likely  to  reproduce  the  Ceyx  and  Alcyone  story  in  consider-
able detail,  and  which  at  the  same  time  are  likely  to  have
come  within  the  range  of  Mr.  Dorr's  or  Mrs.  Piper's  reading.

In  dieither  of  Hawthorne's  Wonder  Books  are  Ceyx  and
Alcyone  mentioned,  nor  is  there  any  allusion  to  the  Cave  of
Sleep.  In  Kingsley's  Heroes  the  story  of  Ceyx  and  Alcyone
is  briefly,  and  in  Frederick  Tennyson's  Daphne  and  Other
Poems  diti'usely,  told ;  but  in  neither  is  there  the  slightest
allusion  to  Iris,  Somnus,  Morpheus,  the  Cave  of  Sleep,  the
river  of  Lethe  or  poppies  :  that  is  to  say,  to  any  of  the  dis-
tinctive details  of  Ovid's  version  which  wei'e  reproduced  in  the
trance.  The  story  is  also  very  briefly  and  baldly  told  in
Wordsworth's  Greece;  but  here  again  are  none  of  the  details
peculiar  to  Ovid's  version.  Chaucer  in  The  Dethe  of  Blaunche
the  Duchesse- tells  the  stor}'  of  Se3's  (i.e.  Ceyx)  and  Alcyone  at
considerable  length ;  but,  though  he  borrows  largely  from
Ovid,  he  makes  no  mention  of  Lethe  and  its  poppies,  and
Juno's  messenger  is  given  no  name  and  is  spoken  of  as  "  he  ".
Spenser  (Canto  I.  of  The  Faerie  Queene)  has  borrowed  several
of  the  details  of  his  "  House  of  Morpheus "  from  Ovid's
desci'iption  of  the  Cave  of  Sleep ;  but  Lethe  is  not  named,  nor
are  poppies,  and  there  is  no  reference  whatsoever  to  Iris  or
Juno,  or  to  Ceyx  and  Alcyone.  From  none  of  these  books
then  could  the  knowledge  shown  in  the  trance  have  been
derived.

I  know  of  two  books  only,  other  than  Ovid,  from  which
Mrs.  Piper  or  Mr.  Dorr  could  have  derived  the  details  of  the
Ceyx  and  Alcyone  story  as  given  in  the  trance.  These  two
books  are  Bulfinch's  The  Age  of  Fable  and  Gayley's  The
Classic  Myths  in  English  Literature :  the  latter,  as  stated  on


104


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


the  title-page,  being  "based  chiefly  on  Bulfinch's  Age  of
Fable  ",  and  being,  in  fact,  an  enlarged  and  modernised  edition
of  it.  •

Neither  Mrs.  Piper  nor  Mr.  Dorr  had,  until  I  mentioned  it
to  them,  ever  heard  of  Gayley's  book.  Mrs.  Piper  affirms  in
the  most  positive  manner  that  she  had  never  read,  seen  or
heard  of  Bulfinch's  book.^  Mi'.  Dorr,  however,  had  read  Bul-
finch  as  a  boy  (see  note  B,  p.  141),  and  consequently,  if  the
allusions  in  the  trance  had  been  confined  to  t'le  Geyx  and
Alcyone  story  only,  he  might,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  he
retains  no  recollection  of  it  and  failed  to  recognise  the  allu-
sions to  it  in  the  trance,  be  regarded  as  the  source  from
which  Mrs.  Piper  telepathically  deiived  her  knowledge.  »

But  the  allusions  in  the  trance  were  not  confined  to  the
story  of  Ceyx  and  Alcyone.  Allusions  to  other  Ovidian
stories  followed  them,  and  were  combined  with  them  and  with
each  other  in  such  a  way  as  to  leave  no  reasonable  doubt  that
the  person  responsible  for  this  combination  was  reproducing
his  recollections  of  a  combination  of  stories  peculiar  to  Ovid.

The  evidence  for  this  statement  is  to  be  found  in  the
appended  group  of  extracts  from  the  records  : —

References  to  Echo  and  Narcissus  ;  Janus  ;  Saturn  ;
AND  Orpheus  and  Eurydice.

Extract  from  record  of  ivords  spoken  in  the  waking -stage  of
the  trance  of  March  30,  1908.

 Janus. I  can't  hear  him. Tell  my  friend  I  said

Janus. He  will  understand  Laughing  winds.

I  love  the  beautiful  Echo.  Walking  through  the  forest
Echo  greets  me  everywhere.  Narcissus  smiles  at  my
feet,  and  I  am  surrounded  by  love.  His  shepherds
watch  over  me  Janus.

G.  B.  D.  Have  you  taken  Janus  [i.e.  as  a  cross-correspondence  mes-
sage] 1

(Head  nods  in  assent.)


iSee  Note  C,  pp.  142-4.


LX.]  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings:  Lethe.  105


Saturn Saturday Tell Mr. Dorr, I say  my

utterances  echo,  echo  everywhere,  if  that  is  he.  I  think
he  will  understand  what  I  mean  by  echo,  if  that  is  he.
Orpheus  and  Eurydice.  It  reminds  me  of  them.  He
says  it.  Tell  him  I  stand  here.  I  say  I  am  a  warrior
bold.  I  make  everything  out  of  my  head.  I  consult
the  gods  who  rule.  The  power  is  my  own.  Janus.  I
get  a  laughing  echo,  music.


Extract  from  record  of  sitting  of  March  31,  1908.

(Present:  G.  B.  Dorr.)

G.  B.  D.  There  were  two  great  statues  by  the  same  sculptor  [Pheidias],
the  most  famous  in  Greece  :  the  one  at  the  Parthenon  of
which  we  have  been  speaking ;  the  other  stood  elsewhere
in  a  famous  place,  and  I  want  to  see  if  you  cannot
recall  where  it  stood.

(Myersp  communicating.)

I'll  think  it  over  a  little.  Perhaps  it  will  bring  it  to
my  mind. Best  leave  these  a  while  and  I'll  recall  them —

Virgin.

G.  B.  D.  Why  do  you  write  that  ?

Just  came  to  my  mind.

G.  B.  D.  Is  that  an  answer  to  a  question  1

Yes.  Parthenon.!  Just  this  moment  came  to  me.  [The
Parthenon  is  so  called  because  it  was  sacred  to  Athene
Parthenos,  i.e.  Athene  the  Virgin.]

G.  B.  D.  Tiiat  is  first-rate. That  is  exactly  what  I  wanted  to  get.

Yes,  it  came  to  me  as  you  said —

G.  B.  D.  jSIow  to  add  one  word  more  about  the  statue.  The  place
where  the  other  statue  stood  was  one  which  was  very
famous  in  Greece  from  the  games  held  there.

Races. (Not  read  at  first.) RACES  MARATHON.


'  See  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper,  pp.  5(3-59,  for  discussiou  of  these  allusious.


106


G.  Piddington.


[part


G.  B.  D.  jSTo,  now  you  are  getting  confused. (The  subject  was  then
dropped.)


G.  B.  D.  Now,  I  have  just  recalled  from  3'esterday's  waking-stage  that
you  spoke  of  "  echo  "  repeatedly.  Was  that  a  [cross-corre-
spondence] message'?

Yes.  From  Mrs.  [Holland]  and  as  I  [in  error  for  "  my "]
own  utterances  to  the  spirit  of  the  Light  reminded  me
of  what  I  had  written  there  [i.e.  at  Mrs.  Holland's]  a  few
days  ago  I  brought  it  here  to  you.  "  Echo,  Echo  every-
where ! "  And  I  wrote,  "  As  I  wandered  through  wood-
land paths  Echo  greeted  me  and  Narcissus  sprang  up
about  my  feet." You  will  receive  this  era  long.


Waldng-stage.

 He's  gone  and  got  a  block,  and  it  looks  like  red

and  brown.  He's  holding  it  up  for  me  to  see  the  colour
of  it.  Light.  Make  it  on  the  other  side  of  Euroses  (?)
(Here  came  several  indistinguishable  words,  of  which  the
only  one  caught  was  Olympus.)

Eurydice.  Morpheus  and  Eurydice.  [Mr.  Dorr  notes  as
follows  :  "  Orpheus  and  Eurydice  came  through  clearly  in
the  waking-stage  of  March  30,  1908;  so  that  this  seems
plainly  due  to  confusion  in  repeating." But  see  p.  118.]


References  to  Hyacinthus;  Pygmalion.

Extract  from  record  of  words  spoken  in  the  waking-stage  of
the  trance  of  AjjrU  6,  1908.

Discobolus, Discus hit  me. Ask  him  to  interpret  it  for

me

Amor. Elysian — happy,  say

Dei  amor. (Inaudible  words)  and  rises

He  keeps  saying  something  about  Cyx.
Facilis  [i.e.  Fcicilis  descensus  Averni,  v.  p.  9.3],

G.  B.  D.  What?


LX.]


Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings :  Lethe.


107


That's  all

Innocence.  Faith.  He  has  a  bird  upon  his  hand.  You
don't  get  anything  clear  at  all.  Mr.  Myers  has  got
Pygmalion  birds  Paradise.  Ask  him  if  he  doesn't
understand  the  fragmentary  way  in  which  I  am  getting
the  sjDirit  [i.e.  the  spirit  of  Mrs.  Piper]  to  interpret  my
meaning

There  were  two  pigeons  over  the  door.  "  Came  a  knocking
at  my  chamber  door."  Virgin's  Chamber  [i.e.  an  obvious
allusion  to  the  Parthenon].  Off  with  you.  Mr.  Myers
piped  up  and  said — suggested  "  chamber  door ".  .  .  .

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  of  April  7,  1908.
(Present:  G.  B.  Dorr.)

G.  B.  D.  Now  let  us  take  up  [the  record  of]  yesterday's  waking-stage,
and  go  over  it  together.  The  first  word  I  caught  was
"Discobolus".

(Myersp  communicating.)

I  said  to  her  [i.e.  Mrs.  Piper],  go  and  say  Discobolus  in
answer  to  Paces  etc. You  asked  me  about  games.

(The  hand  draws  a  line  in  circles  on  the  paper,  and  then
reaches  out  and  touches  G.  B.  D.'s  hand,  and  makes  a
circling  movement  imitative  of  discus-throwing.)

G.  B.  D.  The  next  words  I  caught  were  "  Discus  hit  me.  Ask  him
to  interpret  it  for  me  ".  Now  it  would  be  much  better
that  Myers  should  interpret  this  for  me  himself,  and  tell
me  who  threw  the  discus  and  whom  it  hit.  This  would
be  good,  for  I  did  not  know  it  myself  when  he  said  it.

(Rector,  or  perhaps  Hodgsoup,  communicating.)


He  [i.e.


Myers"]  did.


G.  B.  D.  ,What?


Know  it  and  he  will  explain  it  for  you.


G.  B.  D.  Do  you  remember  whose  victory  it  was  [that  was  announced
by  Pheidippides]  1

(MyerSp  communicating.)  Yes,  Greek.


108  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

G.  B.  D.  And  over  whom  ?

Trojans  you  mean"? (Pause,  during  which  G.  B.  D.  remains
silent.)

PERSIA.

G.  B.  D.  Good. Now  can  you  tell  me  where  it  was  they  fought  1

Do  you  remember  Athens,  and  the  (word  not  fully  legible).

G.  B.  D.  Write  that  word  again. I  want  to  get  it  clear.
M  A  R  A  T  H  O  R  N.

G.  B.  D.  Almost  right,  but  not  quite. Try  again.
THORN T  H  0  N. No  R. T  H  O  N.


Do  you  remember  disk  1  (Hand  makes  circular  movement.)
And  spear  wrestling.  (Hand  makes  imitative  move-
ments.)

G.  B.  D.  By  "  wrestling  "  you  mean  struggle  1

Yes,  exactly. It  is  exactly  what  I  mean.  Marathon


G.  B.  D.  Then  "  He  has  a  bird  upon  his  hand  ".

I  said  it.  Birds  had  reference  to  Parthenon.  Doves  Refer-
ence. Birds  and  Chamber. I  cannot  listen  too  long.

G.  B.  D.  Shall  we  stop  reading  the  [record  of  the]  waking-stage '?

(Hand  dissents.)  Finish.
G.  B.  D.  "Pygmalion'"?

Greek  play.

G.  B.  D.  Tell  me  more  about  Pygmalion  later.

[Here  as  elsewhere,  for  reasons  explained  in  Mrs.  Verrall's
paper  (pp.  82-84),  I  prefer  the  original  spoken  utterance
in  the  waking-stage  to  the  subsequent  written  explanation
in  the  script.  I  believe  that  "Innocence — Faith — birds —
and  Pygmalion "  were  meant  to  be  associated  together  in
the  waking-stage  of  April  6,  and  that  these  associations  are
intelligible.  But  it  would  take  me  too  far  afield  to
explain  why. Note  hy  J.  G.  P.]


LX.]  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings :  Lethe.  109


Waking-stage.

 Pygmalion and Galatea. Struggle. Tell  him

struggle.  He  will  know  what  I  mean.  And  peace  at
last. Don't  you  remember  the  lamentations  of  Galatea  1

Sad — happy  in  time A  lily  came  up  out  of

the  blood.  Don't  you  remember  the  flower  that  grew
out  of  the  droD  of  blood  ?

I  am  going  away.  I  see  a  light — a  light.  I  see  a  cross
and  a  man  with  sandy  hair.  Why,  Mr.  Myers,  where
did  you  come  from?  I  thought  I  would  try  and  speak
for  you,  if  I  could  hear  from  your  side.

Oh  !  I  had  a  beautiful  time.  Oh  !  I  had  a  beautiful  time.
I  did  not  want  to  come  back  any  more.

Mr.  Myers  says  : "  No  poppies  ever  grew  on  Elysian  shores."

I  thought  I  had  ether  on  my  nose,  and  when  they  took  it
away  I  came  right  back.

(Trance  ends.)

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  held  on  April  13,  1908.
(Present :  G.  B.  Dorr).

G.  B.  D.  (going  over  the  record  of  the  waking-stage  of  the  trance  of
April  7,  1908).  Then  she  said  "Pygmalion  and  Galatea.
Don't  you  remember  the  lamentations  of  Galatea  ? "

(Myersp  communicating).

"  Pygmalion "  again  and  again  she  called.

[These  are  possibly  references  to  W.  S.  Gilbert's  play,  Pyg-
malion and  Galatea. Note  by  J.  G.  F.]


G.  B.  D.  Next  she  said  that  "  a  lily  came  up  out  of  the  blood.  Don't
you  remember  the  flower  that  grew  out  of  the  drop  of
blood?"  I  want  you  to  tell  me  some  other  time  what
flower  this  was  and  whose  was  the  blood.

(The  hand  questions  :)  It  was  an  utterance  about  Prometheus
[See  Mrs  Verrall's  paper,  p.  8-3].

G.  B.  D.  No ;  it  belonged  to  some  other  story,  I  think.

I'll  tell  her  as  she  returns  [i.e.  in  the  waking-stage].


110


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Wahing-stage.
.  .  .  .  Discus  hit  him — killed  him.  Quoits.


Extract  from  record  of  sitting  held  on  April  14,  1908.

(Present:  G.  B.  Dorr.)

G.  B.  D.  Now  there  is  another  thing  that  was  said  in  the  waking-
stage  which  I  would  also  like  to  follow  up:  "The  flower
that  sprang  from  a  drop  of  blood."  Whose  blood  was  it,
and  what  was  the  flower  1

(Myersp  communicating)  Lily.

G.  B.  D.  Take  that  off"  too  [i.e.  to  think  over],  and  tell  me  later.  [This
was,  of  course,  a  pretty  strong  hint  that  G.  B.  D.  thought
the  answer  "  lily  "  was  wrong. Note  by  J.  G.  P.]

Extract  from  record  of  luaking-stage  of  trance  held  on  April
14,  1908.

....  And  there  grew  out  a  lily

Extract  from  record,  of  sitting  held  on  April  21,  1908.

(Present  :  G.  B.  Dorr.)

(MyerSp  communicating).  Good  morning,  friend.  Hyacinthus.^

G.  B.  D.  Good. Now  what  about  Hyacinthus  ?

Blood. Just  come to me. Was  it  not  Apollo  who  hit
Hyacinthus  \

G.  B.  D.  First-rate  ! Now  what  did  he  hit  him  with  %
Quoit.

G.  B.  D.  It  could  not  be  better.
Thank  you.

1  Of.  Proc.  Vol.  XXII.  pp.  169-170  for  a  similar  instance  of  an  important
name — Plotinus — having  been  shot  out  by  Myersp  the  moment  he  began  to
communicate.


LX.]


Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings:  Lethe.  Ill


[Mr.  Dorr  contemporaneously  notes  as  follows  :  "  This  subject  is
one  brought  up  by  the  Myers  control  in  a  previous  waking-stage,
in  which  he  told  the  Light  to  say  '  Discus  hit  me '.  Nothing  had
been  previously  said  by  me  to  suggest  the  subject,  nor  was  it  in
my  mind ;  in  fact  I  had  forgotten  the  story,  and  only  found  out
who  it  was  that  was  referred  to  by  looking  up  the  references
under  '  Discus '  in  a  Latin  dictionary.  Since  then  I  have  asked
from  time  to  time,  to  keep  the  matter  in  recollection,  who  it  was
that  was  hit  by  a  discus.  But  nothing  has  come  of  it  till  now,  nor
has  the  name  of  Hyacinthus  till  now  come  up  in  any  way,  nor  that
of  Apollo,  in  connexion  with  this  story."

In  order  to  understand  the  present  position  and  the  subsequent
developments  it  must  be  explained  that  Mr.  Dorr  had  not  under-
stood the  reference  to  the  Hyacinthus  story  contained  in  the  words
"a  lily  came  up  out  of  the  blood".  He  took  them  to  refer  to  the
story  of  the  flower  that  sprang  from  the  blood  of  Ajax  ;  and  neither
at  this  point,  nor  at  any  later  period  of  the  sittings  did  he  realise  that
they  were  a  correct  allusion  to  the  flower  that  sprang  from  the  blood
of  Hyacinthus. Note  hj  J.  G.  P.]


G.  B.  D.  I  want  to  give  you  another  [cross-correspondence]  message
to  take  off"  with  you  before  we  part :  ''  The  Cave  of
Sleep."

Morpeus  [sic],  yes.  Good.


G.  B.  D.  Now  the  [cross-correspondence]  message  which  I  had  in  mind
to  send  to-day  has  just  come  back  to  me  :  "  Hyacinthus."

Blood. Hyacinthus Lilly Lyly not  a  lady's  name  but  a
flower.

G.  B.  D.  If  you  are  going  to  take  it  as  a  message,  try  and  get  the
letters  right.  L-i-l-y.

LYLY
G.  B.  D.  No,  not  quite  right  yet.

LILY. Yes,  I  hear  you  now,  Good.
G.  B.  D.  And  you  remember  what  shed  the  blood  ?

Quoit. (Hand  reaches  out  and  touches  G.  B.  D.'s  head  to
signify  that  the  quoit  hit  Hyacinthus  on  the  head.)


112  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

G.  B.  D.  And  don't  forget  what  you  have  just  told  me  about  Apollo
in  connexion  with  this.

He  hit  Hyacinthus.

G.  B.  D.  Now  there  is  one  other  thing  that  I  want  you  to  recall  if
possible  in  connexion  with  that  story.  One  of  the  Winds
loved  Hyacinthus  and  was  jealous  of  Apollo,  and  it  was
he  that  blew  the  quoit  so  that  it  hit  Hyacinthus.

Yes,  I  remember.

G.  B.  D.  Now  I  want  you  to  see  if  you  cannot  tell  me  presently  who
that  Wind  was  :  what  his  name  was.

(Hand  starts  as  if  to  write.)  '

G.  B.  D.  No,  don't  try  to  answer  it  now.  I'd  rather  you  took  it  off
with  you  and  thought  it  over.


Exto'cict  from  record  of  sitting  held  on  April  22,  1908.

(Present :  G.  B.  Dorr.)

G.  B.  D.  (Recapitulating the various cross-correspondence  messages

which have been arranged) "  Hyacinthus "

with  its  associations  of  the  Lily  that  sprang  from  his
blood,  the  discus  that  killed  him  and  Apollo  who  threw
it.  [It  might  naturally  be  inferred  from  these  words
that  Mr.  Doit  had  at  this  point  come  to  realise  that  the
association  of  a  lily  with  Hyacinthus  was  correct.  Such
an  inference,  however,  would  be  wrong ;  for,  as  Mr  Dorr
in  response  to  my  enquiries  informs  me  in  the  most
positive  manner,  he  was  simply  here  following  the  lead
of  Myersp  who  had  at  the  previous  sitting  connected  a
lily  with  Hyacinthus.  Note  by  J.  G.  P.]  "  The  Cave  of
Sleep ",  given  yesterday,  with  the  name  of  Morpheus
associated  with  it  and  the  river  Lethe,  the  river  of  for-
getfulness.  [Here  again  it  must  be  understood  that,  in
associating  the  Cave  of  Sleep  and  Morpheus  with  Lethe,
Mr.  Dorr  was  simply  following  the  lead  given  by  MyerSpj
and  that  he  did  not  understand  the  real  reason  for  the
association. Note  by  J.  G.  P.]


LX.]  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings:  Lethe.  113


Extract  from  record  of  sitting  held  on  Ajvil  27,  1908.

(Present:  G.  B.  Dorr.)

G.  B.  D.  (recapitulating  list  of  cross-correspondence  messages)  "  Hya-
cinthus."  Remember  that  the  hyacinth  is  a  flower  that
people  grow  still  in  their  gardens ;  this  may  help  you  in
giving  it.

(Myersp  communicating.)

We  thought  of  that.

[Mr.  Dorr  was  and  remained  under  the  impression  that  the
flower  that  sprung  from  the  blood  of  Hyacinthus  was  the
modern  hyacinth. Note  hy  J.  G.  P.]

G.  B.  D.  Now  tell  me  some  time,  if  you  can,  about  Galatea.
(Hand  assents.)

Wahing-stage.
....  Galatea,  bound.

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  held  on  May  4,  1908.
(Present:  G.  B.  Dorr.)
G.  B.  D.  (going  over  list  of  cross-correspondences)  "  The  Cave  of  Sleep  "
(MyerSp  communicating.)

I  wrote  Harp,  [The  reader  should  refer  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick's
paper,  pp.  186-9,  in  order  to  see  why  this  suggests  in  an
indirect  way  that  the  "  Cave  of  Sleep "  was  connected  in
the  mind  of  the  trance-personality  with  the  Orpheus  story.
Note  hy  J.  G.  P.]

Extract  from  record  of  sitting  held  on  May  8,  1908.
(Present:  G.  B.  Dorr.)

(G.  B.  D.  goes  over  the  various  cross-correspondence  messages
which  it  has  been  arranged  the  controls  should  be
trying  to  convey  to  Mrs.  Verrall,  Miss  Verrall  and  Mrs,
Holland.  He  talks  a  little  about  each  one,  and  suggests
literary  and  other  associations  connected  with  them  with
a  view  to  impressing  each  message  clearly  on  the
memory  and  imagination  of  the  trance-personality.)

H


114


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


G.  B.  D.  "  Pegasus "  seems  to  me  a  good  message ;  it  relates  itself  to
all  sorts  of  things  in  literature,  and  it  is  the  symbol  of
genius  and  of  the  Muses.  .  .  .  Ovid  wrote  about  him  too,

and Horace  "Hyacinthus" seems  to  me

a  good  message  too,  with  its  old  poetic  legend  and  its
relation  to  our  modern  gardens  in  the  flower  that  sprang

from his  blood  and  that  still bears his  name

And  that  too  is  a  story  Ovid  tells. ^

(Myersp  communicating.)  Capital.

G.  B.  D  "  Cyclops  "  ought  to  make  a  good  message,  with  the

one  eye  you  have  described  to  me  so  graphically,  and
with  the  part  he  plays  in  Homer's  Odyssey.  .  .  .

I  remember  well  OVID  [Up  to  this  point  in  this  sitting
G.  B.  D.  had  mentioned,  in  connexion  with  the  cross-
correspondence  messages,  Horace,  Homer  and  Aristophanes
as  well  as  Ovid.  It  should  be  noticed  that  out  of  the
four  classical  authors  Myersp  remarks  on  Ovid  only.  A^te
hj  J.  G.  P.]

It  will  be  observed  that  in  the  foregoing  extracts  Mj^ersp
mentioned  three  classical  stories  :  those,  namely,  connected  with
the  names  of  Orpheus  and  Eurydice,  Pygmalion,  and  Hyacin-
thus. It  will  further  be  observed  that  Myersp  did  not  explain
why  lie  referred  to  Orpheus  and  Eurydice  and  to  Pygmalion :
whereas,  though  he  cannot  be  said  to  have  definitely  explained
why  he  referred  to  Hyacinthus,  he  nevertheless  said  enough  to
let  it  be  seen  why  he  was  led  to  do  so.  Thus  on  March  31,
Mr.  Dorr  asked  where  a  certain  statue  stood ;  and  gave  a
clue  to  the  right  answer  by  saying  that  the  place  where
this  statue  stood  was  famous  for  its  games :  meaning  thereby
Olympia.  Myersp  at  once  replied,  "  Races  Marathon."  This
curious  reply  represents,  I  cannot  doubt,  an  approach,  by  way
of  a  very  modern  association  of  ideas,  to  the  right  answer,

'  The  knowledge  here  shown  by  Mr.  Dorr  of  the  fact  that  the  stories  of
Pegasus  and  Hyacinthus  are  treated  of  by  Ovid  was  acquired  only  after  references
to  them  had  first  been  made  by  the  trance-personality.  These  references  led
him  to  look  up  Pegasus  and  Hyacinthus  in  works  of  reference,  and  it  was  in
this  way  that  he  obtained  his  information.


LX.]  Thi'ee  Incidents  from  the  Sittings:  Lethe.  115


Olympia.^  At  the  next  sitting  on  April  G,  the  word  "Discobolus  "
("  discus-thrower "),  which  was  distinctly  stated  to  have  been
given  with  reference  to  the  place  famous  for  its  games  where
the  statue  stood,  may  be  regarded  as  representing  a  second
approach  to  Olympia  by  means  of  an  allusion  to  discus-
throwing  ;  for  discus-throwing  was  one  of  the  events  of  the
pentathlon,  and  the  pentathlon  was  first  introduced  at  Olympia.
That  this  is  the  right  interpretation  is  rendered  practically
certain  by  the  fact  that  the  reference  to  the  discus  on  April  7
was  accompanied  by  references  to  two  other  events  in  the
Olympic  pentathlon,  spear-throwing  and  wrestling:  "Do  you
remember  disk  ?  and  spear— wrestling  ".

But  meanwhile,  the  attempt  to  express  Olympia  having  first
of  all  suo-crested  disciis-throwino;,  discus-throwing  in  turn  had
reminded  Myersp  of  a  story — that  of  Hyacinthus — of  which
the  throwing  of  a  discus  forms  a  prominent  feature ;  for  the
word  "discobolus"  on  April  6  had  been  immediatel}'  followed
by  the  first  of  several  allusions  to  the  Hyacinthus  story,
namely,  "discus  hit  me".

Since  the  discus  figures  in  a  good  many  classical  stories,  it
might  be  thought  that  a  reference  to  any  one  of  these  stories
would  have  served  the  trance-personality's  purpose  just  as
well  as  the  one  actually  mentioned.  And  so,  no  doubt,  it
would,  had  the  ol)ject  been  merely  to  show  acquaintance
with  the  meaning  of  "discobolus".  But,  as  we  shall  presently
see,  this  particular  reference  to  the  Hyacinthus  story  seems  to
have  fulfilled  a  collateral  purpose  which  reference  to  none  of
the  other  stories  would  have  done  (v.  pp.  117-20).

Connexion  between  the  Foregoing  References.

I  will  now  proceed  to  explain  what  in  my  view  occasioned
the  references  to  Orpheus  and  Eurydice  and  to  Pygmalion,  and

1  There  was,  of  course,  no  such  connexion  in  classical  times  as  there  is
nowadays  between  Marathon  and  the  Olj'mpic  Games.  The  intrusion  of  this
unscholarly,  and  hence  inappropriate,  association  of  ideas  in  the  communica-
tions of  MyerSp  may  perhaps  be  accounted  for  by  supposing  that  Mrs.  Piper
failed  to  record  in  writing  the  word  Olympia,  with  which  nevertheless  her
mind  had  been  impressed  ah  extra,  and  recorded  instead  a  word  associated  in
her  own  mind  with  Olympia,  viz.  "Marathon."


116


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


how  they  throw  light  on  the  source  from  which  the  knowledge
of  the  Ceyx  and  Alcyone  story  was  derived.

The  question  about  Lethe,  it  will  be  remembered,  was  put
on  March  23,  and  the  answer  to  it — consisting  of  allusions  to
the  story  of  Ceyx  and  Alcyone  as  told  in  the  eleventh  book
of  Ovid's  Metamorplioses — ^was  begun  on  the  same  day  and
practically  completed  by  March  24.  On  March  30  Myersp,  in
the  waking-stage,  after  saying  "  Janus ",  which,  for  reasons  to
be  explained  presently,  I  take  to  be  an  allusion  to  an  Ovidian
passage,  speaks  of  Echo  and  Narcissus ;  then  mentions  Janus
again  in  conjunction  with  Saturn,  and,  almostly  directly  after-
wards, suggests  by  a  play  on  the  word  "  Echo "  that  the
preceding  "Echo  and  Narcissus"  is  a  cross-correspondence;
next  says  that  "it",  i.e.  apparently  "echo",  reminds  him  of
Orpheus  and  Eurydice ;  and  finally  mentions  both  "  Janus "
and  "Echo"  again  in  consecutive  utterances.  On  March  31
Myersp  explains  to  Mr.  Dorr  that  his  utterances  "  to  the  spirit
of  the  Light ",  i.e.  his  utterances  in  the  waking-stage,  reminded
him  that  he  had  written  about  Echo  and  Narcissus  through
Mrs.  Holland.

The  connexion  of  thought  between  these  utterances  becomes
at  once  intelligible,  if  we  assume  that  "  Janus  "  and  "  Saturn  ",
"  Echo  and  Narcissus "  and  "  Orpheus  and  Eurydice "  are  all
Ovidian  allusions:  Janus  and  Saturn  to  Fasti  1.  1-294;  Echo
and  Narcissus  to  Metamorphoses  IIL  339-510;  and  "Orpheus
and  Eurydice"  to  Metamoriohoses  X.  1-77  and  XI.  1-66.  The
Ovidian  reminiscences  evoked  by  the  question  about  Lethe  had
recalled  other  Ovidian  allusions,  of  which  Myersy  and  MyersH
had  made,  or  had  tried  to  make,  use  :  namely,  the  allusion  to
Janus  under  the  title  of  claviger  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of
March  25,  1907  (see  below,  p.  124,  and  Proc.  Vol.  XXIL
pp.  253  et  seq.),  and  an  allusion  to  Echo  in  Mrs.  Holland's
script  which  had  not  emerged  at  this  time  but  which  did
emeige  later  ;^  and  they  also  recalled  Ovid's  version  of  the
Orpheus  and  Eurydice  story.  But  while  Myersp  explains  why
he  was  reminded  of  Janus  and  Narcissus, — that  is,  he  claims
them  as  the  subjects  of  cross-correspondences, — he  does  not
explain  why  he  was  reminded  of  Orpheus  and  Eurydice.
^  This  case  will  be  dealt  with  later  by  Miss  Johnson.


Lx.]  Tliree  Incidents  from  the  Sittings:  Lethe.  117


In  the  waking-stage  of  April  6  two  more  Ovidian  reminis-
cences emerge:  to  Hyacinthus  in  the  words  "Discus  hit  me",
and  to  Pj^gmalion.  So  we  get  explanations  of  four  out  of
six  references  in  all  made  in  the  trance  to  stories  told  by
Ovid :  namely,  of  those  to  Ceyx  and  Alcyone,  Janus,  Echo
and  Narcissus,  and  Hyacinthus.  Of  the  remaining  two,
Orpheus  and  Eurydice,  and  Pygmalion,  no  explanation  was
vouchsafed.

The  tenth  book  of  Ovid's  Metamorphoses  opens  with  the
death  of  Eurydice,  and  Orpheus'  descent  into  Hades  in  quest
of  her.  Ovid  then  goes  on  to  relate  how  Orpheus  in  his
sorrow  retires  to  Mount  lihodope,  and  there  sings  of  the  rape
of  Ganymede ;  of  the  death  of  Hyacinthus  and  of  the  fiower
that  sprang  from  his  blood ;  of  the  transformation  of  the
Cerastae  into  bulls ;  of  the  Propoetides  changed  into  stones ;  of
Pygmalion's  statue  changed  into  a  living  woman;  of  Myrrha;
of  Venus  and  Adonis  ;  and  of  Atalanta  and  Hippomenes.  This
completes  the  tenth  book.

The  eleventh  book  opens  with  the  death  of  Orpheus  and  his
reunion  with  Eurydice  in  Elysium.  It  will  thus  be  seen  that
the  tenth  and  eleventh  books  are  very  intimately  connected  by
reason  of  Orpheus  and  Eurydice  being  a  common  subject  of
each.  Now  the  eleventh  book  contains,  besides  the  death  of
Orpheus,  the  story  of  Ceyx  and  Alcyone.  I  think,  then,  that
it  is  clear  that  the  references  made  in  the  trance  to  Orpheus
and  Eurydice,  to  Pygmalion  and  also  to  Hyacinthus,  are  reminis-
cences of  the  tenth  and  eleventh  books  of  the  Metamorphoses,
and  not  reminiscences  of  classical  dictionaries,  or  of  popular
collections  of  classical  myths,  or  of  Bulfinch's  Age  of  Fable,
or  Gayley's  Classic  Myths ;  for  although  in  these  two  latter
books  all  the  stories  in  question  are  mentioned,  they  are  not
in  any  way  held  together  by  any  common  bond,  as  they
are  in  the  Metamorphoses,  but  appear  disconnectedly,  and
without  anything  being  said  to  suggest  a  connexion  between
them.^

^  In  Bulfinch's  Age  of  Fahle  the  stories  appear  in  the  following  order:

Hyacinthus,  Ch.  VIII.,  pp.  91-93;
Pygmalion,  Ch.  VIII.,  pp.  97-99  ;


118


G.  Piddington.


[part


Moreover,  the  form  of  the  allusions  made  in  the  trance  to
these  stories  affords  evidence  partly  of  a  jjositive  and  partly  of
a  negative  character  in  favour  of  the  hypothesis  that  Ovid's
text  or  a  literal  translation  of  it,  and  not  any  work  of  refer-
ence, was  the  som'ce  on  which  Myersp  drew.

On  the  positive  side  are  the  persistent  references  to  "  lily  "
in  the  Hyacinthus  allusions.  In  Ovid  lilies  are  in  two  different
ways  associated  with  Hyacinthus. Thus,  first:

Ut  si  quis  violas  riguove  papaver  in  horto
Liliaque  infringat  fulvis  haerentia  virgis,
Marcida  demittant  suhito  caput  ilia  gravatum,
Nee  se  sustineant,  spectentque  cacumine  terram :
Sic  vultus  moriens  jaeet.

[As  violets  or poppy  in  a  well-watered  garden,  or  as  lilies
clinging  to  their  yellow  stalks,  that  some  hand  beats  down,  of
a  sudden  wither,  hang  their burdened  heads,  and  droop  and
earthwards  gaze,  so  sinks  the  dying  head  (of  Hyacinthus).]
Then,  secondly :

Ecce  cruor,  qui  fusus  humo  signaverat  herham,
Desinit  esse  cruor,  Tyrioque  nitentior  ostro
Flos  oritur,  formamque  capit  quam  lilia,  si  nan
Purpureus  color  his,  Ojrgenteus  esset  in  illis.

[Lo  !  the  blood  that  had  streamed  upon  the  ground  and  stained
the  grass  is  blood  no  longer ;  brighter  than  Tyrian  purple  a
flower  springs  up,  and  takes  the  shape  that  lilies  have,  albeit
its  hue  is  purple  while  theirs  is  silver-white.]

Secondly,  the  "  portmanteau ",  "  Morpheus  and  Eurydice  ",
which  occurred  in  the  waking-stage  on  March  31,  is,  I  think,

Ceyx  and  Alcyone,  Ch.  IX.,  pp.  100-108;
Orpheus  and  Eurydice,  Ch.  XXIV.,  pp.  254:--259.

In  Gayley's  Clasnc  Myths  the  stories  appear  in  the  following  order :
Hyacinthus,  Ch.  X.,  pp.  120-121.
Pygmalion,  Ch.  X.,  pp.  167-170.
Orpheus  aiid  Eurydice,  Ch.  XII. ,  pp.  185-188.
Ceyx  and  Alcyone,  Ch.  XIV.,  pp.  194-196.
Five  other  stories  taken  from  the  tenth  and  eleventh  books  of  the  Meta-
morphoses are  summarised  in  The  Age  of  Fable  and  in  Classic  Myths,  but  no
reference  to  any  one  of  them  was  made  in  the  trance.

For  the  order  of  the  stories  in  Ovid  see  foot-note  on  p.  131.


LX.]  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings:  Lethe.


119


more  like  an  automatism  produced  by  familiarity  with  a  con-
text which  embraces  both  the  Orpheus  and  Eurydice  and  the
Morpheus  stories,  than  a  confusion  between  two  names  of  like
terminations  ^ ;  for  "  Orpheus  and  Eurydice  "  had  been  articulated
without  difficulty  the  previous  day,  and,  besides,  there  is  no
other  sign  of  confusion  between  the  Orpheus  and  the  Morpheus
stories.  Thirdly,  the  details  spontaneously  given  in  the  trance
all  accord  with  Ovid's  versions.

Lastly,  though  occurring  in  a  different  connexion,  there  is  a
passage  in  tlie  sitting  of  May  S,  1908  (quoted  on  p.  114)  which
suggests  that  Myersp  was  aware  that  he  had  been  utilising
reminiscences  of  Ovid  in  his  communications;  for  when  Mr.
Dorr  mentioned  Homer,  Aristophanes,  Horace  and  Ovid  in  con-
nexion with  various  cross-correspondences,  it  was  Ovid's  name
alone  which  elicited  comment:  "I  remember  well  OVID."  And
this  comment,  made  just  after  Mr.  Dorr  had  spoken  of  the
Cyclops,  came  at  a  particularly  appropriate  point,  because  the
Cyclops  is  a  subject  of  frequent  recurrence  in  Ovid ;  though
nothing  said  by  Mr.  Dorr,  who,  on  the  contrary,  spoke  of
Homers  Cyclops,  suggested  any  connexion  between  the  Cyclops
and  Ovid.

On  the  negative  side,  it  appears  that  no  knowledge  of  details
not  contained  in  Ovid  is  spontaneously  shown  by  MyerSp.
Thus,  the  first  spontaneous  reference  to  Pygmalion  was  to
Pygmalion  only,  which  accords  with  the  vex'sion  in  Ovid,  who
gives  no  name  to  the  statue  that  came  to  life ;  whereas  in  other
versions  of  the  tale,  and  in  Gayley's  book,  and  in  some  of
the  Classical  Dictionaries,  her  name  is  given  as  Galatea.-
Moreover,  when  Mr.  Dorr  asked  about  a  detail  not  found  in
Ovid,  but  to  be  found  in  Bulfinch,  in  Gayley,  and  in  most
Classical  Dictionaries, — i.e.  the  name  of  the  wind  that  blew
the  quoit  against  Hyacinthus, — no  answer  was  given.

I  regard  it,  then,  as  established  that  the  allusions  in  the
trance  to  the  Cave  of  Sleep,  etc.,  Orpheus  and  Eurydice,
Pygmalion,  and  Hyacinthus  are  reminiscences  of  the  tenth  and

1  Cf.  the  significant  "portmanteau"  "  sphear " — a  compound  of  spear  and
sphere — in  Mrs.  Piper's  script  of  Feb.  4,  1902  (Proc.  Vol.  XX.  p.  215).

-It  was  only  when  Mr.  Dorr  asked  for  an  explanation  of  "Pygmalion"  that
Galatea  was  mentioned. See  foot-note  on  p.  91.


120


/.  G.  Piddington.


[part


eleventh  books  of  Ovid's  Metamorphoses.  And  I  consider  that
the  references  to  Orpheus  and  Eurydice  and  to  Pygmalion  were
introduced  in  order  to  indicate  the  source  of  the  allusions  to
Iris,  Cave  of  Sleep,  Morpheus,  Ceyx,  etc.,  which  constitute  the
answer  to  the  Lethe  question.^

Later  on  (see  pp.  129-32)  I  shall  suggest  a  reason  why  the
Orpheus  and  Pygmalion  stories  were  mentioned  rather  than
any  of  the  other  stories  contained  in  Metamorphoses  X.  and
XL,  to  indicate  the  source  of  the  answer  given  to  the  Lethe
question.-

^  I  do  not  think  that  the  allusions  to  Hyacinthus  were  introduced  primarily
to  serve  this  purpose.  I  believe  it  was  the  question  about  the  statue  that
evoked  them.  At  the  same  time  I  believe  they  would  not  have  been  evoked,
unless  Myersp  had  already  been  set  thinking  of  the  tenth  and  eleventh  books
of  the  Metaynorphoses  by  the  question  about  Lethe.  Or,  to  put  it  in  another
way  :  if  the  question  about  Lethe  only  had  been  asked  there  would  have  been
no  reference  to  Hyacinthus  ;  and  if  the  question  about  Lethe  had  not  been  asked,
and  only  the  question  about  the  statue,  there  would  equally  have  been  no
reference  to  Hyacinthus.  It  was  the  combination  of  questions  which  recalled
the  Hyacinthus  story.

^  It  may  occur  to  the  reader  at  this  point  to  enquire  what  warrant,  if  any,  I
have  for  grouping  the  references  to  Orpheus  and  Eurydice,  Pygmalion,  and
indirectly  those  to  Hyacinthus,  with  the  references  to  the  Ceyx  and  Alcyone
story.

No  positive  indication  was  given  in  the  trance  that  they  were  to  be  thus
grouped ;  but  three  considerations  can  be  adduced  in  justification  of  the
synthesis.

First,  these  references,  though  detached,  emerged  in  close  chronological
sequence :  namely,  Ceyx  and  Alcyone  on  March  2,3  and  24 ;  Orpheus  and
Eurydice  at  the  next  sitting  on  March  30;  "Morpheus  and  Eurydice"  at  the
next  sitting  on  March  31  ;  Hyacinthus  and  Pygmalion  at  the  next  sitting  on
April  6.  That  is  to  say,  no  sitting  was  allowed  to  pass  without  a  fresh  reference
being  made  to  stories  contained  in  the  same  part  of  the  Metamo7~phoses  as
contains  the  story  of  Ceyx  and  Alcyone.

Secondly,  the  context  of  each  reference  suggests  either  a  connexion  between
it  and  the  subject  of  Lethe,  or  between  it  and  one  of  the  other  references.
Thus,  after  Morpheus  had  been  mentioned  on  March  24,  and  Orpheus  and
Eurydice  on  March  30,  came  the  words  "Olympus,  Morpheus,  and  Eurydice"
on  March  31.  Since  "Olympus"  (though  I  do  not  know  why)  had,  like
"Morpheus",  been  clearly  connected  with  the  answer  to  the  Lethe  question,
this  odd  combination  of  the  three  names  suggests  that  some  link  existed  in  the
thoughts  of  the  trance-personality  between  his  answer  to  the  Lethe  question
and  the  Orpheus  and  Eurydice  story.

Again,  the  first  reference  to  the  Hyacinthus  story  ("Discus  hit  me")  and
the  first  reference  to  Pygmalion  were  made  in  the  same  waking-stage  ;  and  the
latter  occurred  in  a  context  embracing  three  words,  "  Elysian ",  "  Cyx  ",  and


LX.]  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings:  Lethe.


121


Did  Mrs.  or  Miss  Verrall  know  Ovid's
Metamorphoses  X.  and  XL  1

Now  although  neither  Mrs.  Piper  herself  nor  Mr.  Dorr  was
acquainted  with  Metamorphoses  X.  and  XI.,  a  considerable
number  of  other  living  persons  must  have  been  ;  and  to  the
minds  of  an}^  one  or  more  of  them  Mrs.  Piper  may  have  had
telepathic  access.  Yet  so  indeterminate  a  possibility  it  would
be  unprofitable  and,  indeed,  impracticable  to  discuss.  But  let
us  restrict  the  field  of  possible  candidates  for  the  post  of
telepathic  agent  to  those  classical  scholars,  between  whom  and
Mrs.  Piper  a  comparatively  regular  and  systematic  supernormal
TOtpport  is  known  to  have  been  established.  So  far  as  I  know,
the  only  persons  whom  this  description  would  fit  are  Mrs.  and
Miss  Verrall.^  It  becomes,  therefore,  desirable  to  ascertain  if
they  possessed  the  requisite  knowledge.

Mrs.  Verrall,  writing  on  March  19,  1909,  thus  describes  the
extent  of  her  acquaintance  with  Ovid's  works  : —

This  is  my  reading  : —

Fasti,  Books  I.  II.  and  III.,  I  lectured  on  in  1881  to  a  class  at
Newnham  College ;  so  I  knew  them  well  then.

Heroidum  Epistulae  I  read  about  1896  with  a  class  of  children.
Not  another  word  have  I  read  except  under  compulsion  :  e.g.  when
passages  have  been  set  in  unprepared  translation  papers.  And  I
read  the  death  of  Eurydice  about  four  years  ago,  because  my  husband
and  a  friend  had  views  on  Virgil's  account  of  that,  and  I  com-
pared it,  when  lecturing  on  the  Virgil,  with  Ovid.  But  I  hate  Ovid
beyond  words,  and  I  have  never  read  a  line  that  I  could  avoid.

Mrs.  Verrall,  then,  believes  she  has  not  read  the  Cave  of
Sleep  passage  in  Ovid  ;  and  an  additional  I'eason  for  thinking

"  Facilis  "  (v.  p.  106),  all  associated,  though  for  different  reasons,  with  the  Lethe
question.

Thirdly,  the  juxtaposition  {v.  p.  109)  of  "a  lily  came  up  out  of  the  blood",
and  "no  poppies  ever  grew  on  Elysian  shores",  suggests  that  the  two  subjects
to  which  these  phrases  relate  were  associated  in  some  way  in  the  thoughts  of
the  trance-personality.

^  Since  Mrs.  Piper  appears  to  have  occasionally  acquired  information  tele-
pathically  from  me,  it  should  be  stated  that  my  first  acquaintance  with  the
tenth  and  eleventh  books  of  the  Metamorphoses  dates  from  a  good  many  months
after  the  conclusion  of  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings.


122


J.  G.  Piddington.


[PAET


that  she  had  no  acquaintance  with  it  is  furnished  by  the  fact
that  when  she  went  over  the  records  of  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings,
with  tlie  special  object  of  elucidating  obscure  points  in  the
classical  allusions,  she  failed  to  make  head  or  tail  of  the  refer-
ences to  the  Cave  of  Sleep,  Iris,  Morpheus,  etc.

Miss  Verrall,  writing  on  April  12,  1909,  gives  the  following
account  of  her  knowledsje  of  Ovid  : —

Generally  speaking,  I  am  not  at  all  familiar  with  the  works  of
Ovid.  As  a  child  I  read  school  texts  containing  selections  from  the
Fasti  and  Meturiiorplioses.  I  have  also  read  the  Heroidmn  Epistulae
and  some  parts  of  the  Tristia.

The  book  of  selections  from  the  Metamorphuses  contained  nothing
from  Books  X.  and  XL,  except  Book  XL,  11.  89-192.1  I  am  almost
certain  that  I  have  never  read  any  other  part  of  these  books  unless
it  were  some  passage  set  for  unseen  translation.

Though  it  is  possible  that  Mrs.  Verrall  or  Miss  Verrall  may
have  come  across  the  Cave  of  Sleep  passage  in  an  unseen
translation  paper,  it  is  not  likely  ;  for  when  I  drew  their  atten-
tion to  it,  it  was  new  to  both  of  them,  and  neither  was  aware
that  any  writer — ancient,  medieval  or  modern — had  ever  located
the  source  of  the  river  of  Lethe  in  the  Cave  of  Sleep.  This
piece  of  mythological  topography  is,  I  believe,  peculiar  to  Ovid,
and  is  not  reproduced  in  any  of  the  classical  dictionaries  which
I  have  consulted.^  And  in  this  connexion  I  may  as  well  add
that  Ovid's  description  of  the  Cave  of  Sleep  is  not  one  of
those  hackneyed  passages  familiar  to  all  classical  scholars.

Moreover,  even  if  we  were  to  assume,  notwithstanding  Mrs.
and  Miss  Verrall's  statements,  that  one  or  both  of  them  had
known  the  Ceyx  and  Alcyone  story,  and  that  from  their  minds
it  passed  telepathically  into  Mrs.  Pijjei-'s,  this  would  still  leave
Mrs.  Piper's  knowledge  of  the  Pygmalion  and  the  Hyacinthus
stories  unexplained ;  and  it  is  surely  hardly  credible  that  Mrs.
or  Miss  VeiTall  can  at  one  time  have  read  all  these  three
Ovidian  stories  and  since  forgotten  having  done  so.

^  The  stories  told  in  this  passage,  viz.  how  Bacchus  granted  Midas  the  power
of  turning  everything  he  touched  into  gold,  and  of  how  a  pair  of  ass's  ears
was  bestowed  on  Midas  as  a  punishment  for  his  having  preferred  Pan's  pipes  to
Apollo's  lyre,  have  no  connexion  with  the  Ceyx  and  Alcyone  story.

"It  is  mentioned  incidentally  in  Bulfiuch  and  in  Gayley  ;  and  I  am  informed
that  it  is  given  in  Roscher's  new  and  unfinished  German  Lexicon.


LX.]  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings :  Lethe.  123


It  does  not,  then,  seem  likely  that  Mrs.  Piper  can  have  drawn
the  knowledge  shown  in  her  trance  from  either  Mrs.  or  Miss
Verrall.

Discussion  of  the  part  played  by  MyerSp  in  this  Case.

So  far  I  have  looked  for  the  source  of  the  answer  given
to  the  Lethe  question  in  the  minds  of  the  living.  The  pro-
fessed source,  however,  is  the  mind  of  a  dead  man,  Frederic
Myers.  From  this  source  for  some  years  past  there  have  pur-
ported to  come  series  of  communications  through  Mrs.  Verrall
and  Mrs.  Holland,  as  well  as  through  Mrs.  Pipei-.  There  has
been  a  considei-able  amount  of  coincidence  in  the  content  and
character  of  these  three  seiies  of  communications  ;  but  if  they
really  are  in  some  degree  the  product  of  one  and  the  same
mind,  we  might  reasonably  expect  them  to  show  similarity  or
identity  of  content  or  character  and  of  method  and  manner  of
presentment  as  well.

I  pi'opose,  then,  next  to  discuss  whether  the  method  by
which  MyerSp  answered  the  Lethe  question  is  marked  by  any
feature  distinctive  of  the  communications  of  Myersy  and  Myersy.^

In  connexion  with  the  Lethe  question  Myersp  mentioned
certain  disjointed  words,  names,  or  phrases,  which  in  their  dis-
iointed  state  conveyed  no  intelligible  answer.  Nor  was  a.i\y
intelligible  answer  deducible  from  them  until  two  literarv
passages— J. erieicZ  VI.  703-723,  and  Metamorphoses  X.  and  XI.
— were  discovered,  wherein  these  verbal  fragments  are  incor-
porate, and  whereby  they  can  be  blended  into  coherent  unity.

Now,  since  the  phenomena  of  Myersp,  Myersy  and  Myers^,
claim  to  emanate  from  one  and  the  same  source,  it  was  appro-
priate that  Myersp  sliould  convey  his  meaning  by  this  method  ;
for  the  same  method  had  been  four  times  employed  already
in  communications,  which,  though  unsigned,  thei'e  is  good
reason  for  assigning  in  two  cases  to  Myersy  and  in  two  to
Myersjj. If  a  second  example  of  the  same  method  being  used

^  If  an  affirmative  answer  can  be  given  to  this  question,  it  will  afford  an
additional  reason  for  thinking  that  the  knowledge  of  the  Metamorphoses
manifested  in  the  trance  was  not  derived  from  Mrs.  Piper's  memories,  but
reached  her  mind  in  some  supernormal  manner.


124


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


by  Myersp,  described  on  pp.  144-50,  is  included,  it  makes  six
instances  in  all ;  and  in  all  six  instances  this  distinctive  device
is  probably  to  be  attributed  to  a  "  Myers "  control.

And  let  it  not  be  supposed  that  the  three  automatists  con-
cerned, Mrs.  Verrall,  Mrs.  Holland,  and  Mrs.  Piper,  borrowed  this
plan  of  code-signalling  literary  passages  from  each  other,
at  least  in  any  normal  manner.  On  the  contrary,  each
gave  an  example  of  it  in  her  phenomena  without  having
seen  or  been  informed  of  the  parallel  examples  elsewhere.
Moreover,  none  of  the  automatists  suspected  that  any  such
cryptic  device  was  in  operation ;  it  being  in  each  case  left,
as  was  the  scheme  of  complex  cross-correspondences,'  for  a
student  of  the  phenomena  to  discover.  Besides  which,  the
automatist  did  not,  except  in  one  of  the  six  instances,  con-
sciously know  that  an  allusion  had  been  made  in  her  script
to  a  literary  context.

The  meaning  of  these  ratlier  obscure  abstract  statements  will
become  clear  when  read  in  the  light  of  the  concrete  facts  on
which  they  are  based.

The  first  instance  occurred  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  March
25,  1907  {v.  Proc.  Vol.  XXII.  pp.  252  et  seq.)  in  connexion
with  the  word  claviger.  The  discoveiy  that  this  word  is  used
in  Ovid,  Fasti  I.  in  two  different  senses  and  connexions,  gave
a  clue  to  the  meaning  of  the  script  as  referring  to  Janus,  and
also  threw  light  on  a  script  of  Mrs.  Holland's,  that  of  April  8,
1907,  and  on  an  utterance  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  of  the  same
date  {id.  ib.  pp.  253-7,  265-9,  271-2).

The  second  instance  occurred  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of
April  8,  1907,  which  refers  to  Martha  and  Mary  and  Leah  and
Rachel  {id,,  ih.  pp.  265-8).  Here,  when  the  literary  source
of  this  part  of  the  script  was  discovered,  its  context  was
found  to  embrace  various  topics  which  were  being  indepen-
dently mentioned  about  this  time  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  and  in
Mrs.  Verrall's  script.

The  third  iustance  is  furnished  b}'  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of
April  8,  1907  {id.  ih.  p.  271),  which  contains  a  quotation  from
Tennyson's  Maud.  This  quotation  formed  a  simple  cross-
correspondence  with  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  March  27,  1907
i.See  Proc.  Vol.  XXI.  p.  .377.


LX.]  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings :  Lethe.


125


{id.  ib.  p.  261),  inasmuch  as  the  latter  also  contained  a  quota-
tion— though  not  the  same  quotation — from  Maud ;  but  between
the  unquoted  context  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  quotation  and  the  theme
of  another  script  of  Mrs.  Holland's  (that  of  April  8,  1907,  just
mentioned)  which  was  illustrated  by  allusions  to  passages  in
Dante's  Convito  and  Purgatorio,  a  far  more  striking  cross-
correspondence  was  involved : — more  striking,  because  the  sub-
ject of  it,  the  identification  of  opposites,  being  far  more  removed
from  the  commonplace  is  less  likely  to  appear  about  the  same
time  in  two  different  scripts  than  are  different  quotations  from
a  well-known  poem,  and  less  likely  still  to  appear  in  two
different  scripts  of  the  same  date.

The  fourth  instance,  Mrs.  Holland's  reference  to  Browning's
Aristophanes'  Apology  in  her  script  of  April  16,  1907  {id.  ib.,
p.  215),  has  already  been  described  in  detail  in  my  Supple-
mentary Notes  above,  p.  25.

The  fifth  instance  is  the  one  under  discussion,  where,  by
tracing  to  their  literary  source  various  disjointed  words  and
phrases  connected  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  with  the  Lethe  ques-
tion, we  have  been  enabled  to  make  sense  out  of  what  at
first  sight  appeared  to  be  nonsense.

In  the  sixth  instance,  described  in  detail  below  on  pp.  144-50,
the  discovery  that  the  two  names  Icarus  and  Anchises  mentioned
together  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  are  both  embedded  in  a  passage
in  the  sixth  book  of  the  Aeneid  led  to  the  further  discovery
that  fi^om  this  particular  passage  an  apt  answer  could  be
supplied  to  a  question  put  to  Myersp  by  Mr.  Dorr.

Myersp,  Myersy,  and  Myers^,  all  three,  then,  adopted  the
same  distinctive  method.  I  speak  of  it  as  a  "method",  because
I  believe  it  to  be  due  to  design ;  but  if  objection  be  taken  to
the  term,  "  feature  "  can  be  used  instead.  I  call  it  "  distinctive  ",
because  I  believe  it  to  be  peculiar  to  these  three  manifestations
of  a  "  Myers "  control,  or  at  any  rate  to  the  group  of  "spirits"
associated  with  it.^

^  I  may  remark  in  passing  that  it  was  quite  appropriate  for  Myersp,  who  had
a  year  before  spontaneously  introduced  the  subject  of  "halcyon  days"  (see
Proc.  Vol.  XXII.  pp.  10.3-7,  110,  112,  131,  140  and  163),  to  display  in  his
answer  to  the  Lethe  question  acquaintance  with  a  passage  in  classical  literature
where  the  origin  of  halcyon  days  is  told.


126


/.  G.  Piddington.


[part


So  far  we  have  dealt  with  these  references  to  literary
passages  only  as  evidence  for  the  employment  of  a  common
method  by  Myersp,  Myersy  and  Myersu.  But  let  us  now  shift
our  point  of  view,  and  consider  whether  behind  these  passages,
selected  primarily,  no  doubt,  because  of  their  immediate  relev-
ance to  the  subject-matter  of  the  communications  to  wliich  they
belong,  there  may  not  lurk  an  ulterior  or  secondary  significance.

If  A,  B  and  C,  whose  circumstances,  education,  mental
endowments  and  pursuits  are  dissimilar,  were  independently
of  each  other  set  the  task  of  illustrating  different  topics  or
answering  different  questions  by  means  of  allusions  to  literary
passages,  in  all  probability  the  literary  sources  of  the  passages
selected  would  be  too  wide  and  too  promiscuous  to  be  covered
by  the  knowledge  of  any  single  one  of  the  three.  Similarly,
if,  instead  of  relying  on  their  own  literary  taste  and  know-
ledge, all  alike  employed  a  fourth  party,  X,  to  do  their  tasks
for  them,  though  certain  passages  selected  by  X  might  happen
to  be  known  to  one  or  two  or  all  three  of  them,  no  single  one  of
them  probably  would  know  all  X.'s  passages.  Moreover,  on  the
assumption  that  X  selected  the  passages  without  reference  to  the
individual  literary  attainments  of  A,  B  and  C,  it  would  be  just
as  likely  that  some  of  the  passages  which,  e.g.,  A  might  not
know,  should  occur  in  the  set  selected  for  him  by  X,  as  in  either
B's  or  C's  set.  Obviously,  however,  all  the  passages  in  all  tliree
sets  would  be  within  tlie  range  of  X's  reading,  and  would
probably  be  to  some  extent  symptomatic  not  only  of  his  in-
tellectual but  of  his  emotional  bent.^

The  phenomena  of  our  three  automatists  present  an  analogous
case.  In  each  instance  a  topic  has  been  illustrated  or  a  ques-
tion answered  in  their  scripts  or  trance-speech  by  means  of
allusions  to  passages  in  literature  ;  and  in  each  instance  not
the  automatist  herself  but  a  fourth  party,  Frederic  Mj^ers,  is
represented  as  responsible  for  the  selections.

Let  us  see  if  the  result  in  this  actual  case  accords  with  what  I
have  assumed  to  be  the  probable  result  in  my  imaginary  case.

1  If  among  my  readers  are  any  schoolmasters  who  have  been  led  to  suspect
that  behind  the  Latin  Prose  or  Verse  of  their  pupils,  A,  B  and  C,  lurks  a
common  author  X,  the  line  of  argument  which  I  am  here  pursuing  ought  to
appeal  to  them.


LX.]  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings :  Lethe.  127


For  convenience  of  reference  I  tabulate  the  passages.

No.  of ^.  ^  ,  .

,  ■  Literary  Passage.  Automatist.
instance.  ^  ^

(1)  Ovid. Fasti  I.  Mrs.  Verrall.

/(2a)  Dante.  Convito  IV.  17:  85-11.  Mrs.  Holland.

1(26) ,, Purgatorio. Cantos  XXVII.  and  „

XXVIII.

(3)  Tennyson. Maud.  Mrs.  Verrall.

(4)  Bi"owning. Aristophanes'  Apology.  Mrs.  Holland.
r(5c6)  Ovid. Metamorijhoses  X.  and  XL  Mrs.  Piper.
1(56)  Vergil. Aeneid  VI.  1-123.

(6)  Vergil. Aeneid  VI.  703-723.

In  the  third  instance  only  did  the  automatist  consciously
know  and  recognise  the  passage.  In  the  first  instance  she  had
once  been  familiar  with  it,  but  had  since  forgotten  it.  In  the
remaining  instances  the  automatist  concerned  denies  having
ever  consciously  known  the  passages.

To  Mrs.  Verrall  (1),  (3),  (56)  and  (G)  and  the  substance  of
(2a)  and  (26)  were,  or  had  at  one  time  been,  known  ;  (4)  was
unknown,  as  were  all  the  passages  grouped  under  (5a)  with  the
exception  of  the  Orpheus  and  Eurydice  passage  :

To  Mrs.  Holland  (3)  was  known,  and  (56)  and  (6)  must  be
assumed  to  have  been  known  ;  the  rest  were  unknown.

To  Mrs.  Piper  all  the  passages  except  (3),  which  I  shall
assume  she  did  know  or  might  have  known,  were  unknown.

To  all  the  three  automatists  collectively  one  passage  only,  (3),
was  known.

To  none  of  the  automatists  were  all  the  passages  known.^

1  For  Mrs.  Verrall's  ignorance  of  the  Ovid  passages,  except  tlie  Orpheus  and
Eurydice  ones,  see  p.  12J .  As  regards  Browning's  Arintophanes'  Apolor/y
Mrs.  Verrall,  in  a  letter  dated  June  5,  1909,  states  that  to  the  best  of  her
belief  she  had  never  read  it  before  the  allusion  to  it  appeared  in  Mrs.
Holland's  script,  and  she  gives  detailed  reasons  for  her  belief.  She  had  never
read  the  Convito,  but  she  had  read  in  ISSl  an  edition  (A.  J.  Butler's)
of  the  Purgatorio,  which  contains  a  note  in  the  appendix  to  the  effect
that  Martha  and  Mary,  like  Leah  and  Rachel,  are  types  of  the  Active  and
Contemplative  Life.  The  substance  of  Convito  TV.  17.  85-111,  must  accord-
ingly be  assumed  to  have  once  been  known  to  her.

Mrs.  Holland,  in  a  letter  dated  June  7,  1909,  infoi-ms  me  that  she  has  never
read  Ovid's  Fasti,  and  had  never  even  heard  of  it ;  that  she  had  never  read


128


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


A  Comparison  of  MyerSp  with  F.  W.  H.  Myers.

The  question  now  arises  whether  in  the  answer  given  by
MyerSp  to  the  Lethe  question  there  was  anything  appropriate
to  the  personality  whom  Myersp  claims  to  be.

We  may  first  consider  whether  all  the  passages  just
referred  to  were  known  to  Frederic  Myers.  The  Tennyson
and  the  Vergil  passages  certainly  were ;  and  it  is  scarcely
necessary  to  state  that  a  man  whose  knowledge  of  Dante
can  have  been  surpassed  by  few  of  his  English  contemporaries,
excepting  professed  Dante  scholars,  knew  the  closing  cantos
of  the  Pttrgatorio ;  but  if  any  reader  desires  proof  I  would
refer  him  to  Esmys  Classical,  pp.  173-176,  and  to  the  motto
of  The  Implicit  Promise  of  Immortality  in  The  Renewal  of
Youth,  p.  46.

I  can  produce  no  such  definite  evidence  that  Frederic
Myers  knew  Aristophanes  A^oology ;  but  that  he  was  familiar
with  Bi'owning's  poems  is  established  by  two  passages  in  his
writings,  Science  and  a  Future  life,  pp.  163,  and  167-8;  and
in  view  of  this  fact,  and  of  the  further  facts  that  he  was  a
personal  friend  of  Browning's,  and  was  deeply  interested  in
classical  subjects,  the  presumption  that  he  was  acquainted  with
Aristophanes  Apology  is  very  strong.

Neither  in  regard  to the particular  passages  from  Ovid's

Ovid's  Metamorphoses,  thougli  she  had  heard  of  it;  and  that  "years  ago"  she
"  scampered  through  a  translation  of  the  Aeneid'",  but  has  no  recollection  of  the
sixth  book.  For  the  evidence  as  to  Mrs.  Holland's  ignorance  of  the  Purgatorio
and  Convito  passages  and  of  Aristophanes'  Apology  see  pp.  24  and  25.

For  Mrs.  Piper's  ignorance  of  Aristophanes^  Apology  see  Proc.  Vol.  XXII.
pp.  41.5-16  ;  and  in  a  letter  addressed  to  me  on  June  26,  1909,  she  categorically
states  that  she  has  never  read  it.  In  the  same  letter  she  writes :  "  I  know-
nothing  about  Dante  nor  anything  he  wrote,  and  very  little  more  about
Browning." As  regards  the  Aeiieid  she  writes  on  August  7,  1909,  as  follows  :

"I  have  never  read  Vergil's  Aeneid.  I  could  not  read  it  if  I  wished.
Alta  [her  daughter]  says  it  is  written  in  Latin,  and  I  could  not  read  Latin
possibly.  I  do  not  undei-stand  or  read  Latin,  have  never  seen  a  translation,
and  am  not  in  the  least  familiar  with  it."  For  Mrs.  Piper's  ignorance  of
Ovid  see  pp.  138-41.  Mr.  Dorr,  moreover,  satisfied  himself  by  personal  enquiries
that  Mrs.  Piper's  knowledge  of  the  Classics  is  practically  nil.

Incidentally  it  may  be  noted  that  the  automatist  whose  knowledge  included
the  greatest  number  of  the  passages  was  the  one  whose  education,  pursuits
and  interests  resembled  the  most  closely  those  of  Frederic  Myers.


LX.]  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings:  Lethe.  129

Fasti  and  Metamorphoses,  can  I  produce  definite  evidence  that
Frederic  Myers  was  familiar  with  them  ;  but  the  following
extract  from  the  autobiographical  part  of  Fragments  of  Prose
and  Poetry  (p.  17)  is  evidence  of  his  familiarity  with  Ovid's
works  generally  : —

That  early  burst  of  admiration  for  Virgil  of  which  I  have  already
spoken  was  followed  by  a  growing  passion  for  one  after  another  of
the  Greek  and  Latin  poets.  From  ten  to  sixteen  I  lived  much  in
the  inward  recital  of  Homer,  Aeschylus,  Lucretius,  Horace,  and  Ovid.

Myers,  who  was  singularly  modest  concerning  his  literary
attainments,  would  not  have  so  expressed  himself,  had  he  not
meant  to  imply  that  his  knowledge  of  Ovid  was  out  of  the
common.

Yet  even  if  it  be  granted  that  all  the  passages  had  actually
been  within  Myers's  knowledge,  that  fact  alone,  though
striking,  leaves  something  to  be  desired ;  for  coming  as  they  all
do  from  classics,  ancient  or  modern,  collectively  or  singly  they
must  be  within  the  knowledge  of  many  living  persons  ;  and  so
it  is  possible  that  the  automatist  might  have  derived  them
telepathically  from  one  or  more  of  these  persons.  The  case
would  therefore  gain  in  impressiveness  if  traces  could  be
detected  in  the  choice  of  the  passages,  or  in  the  coroments
that  accompanied  them,  of  some  bias  characteristic  of  Myers's
mind  or  temperament.

Such  traces  I  believe  to  exist ;  and  I  will  do  my  best  to  bring
them  out,  after  first  warning  the  reader  not  to  expect  all  the
passages  to  be  significant  or  to  be  equally  significant,  for  pro-
bably the  predominant  factor  determining  the  choice  of  them
was  a  desire  to  allude  to  contexts  relevant  to  the  immediate
subject  of  the  communications.

In  the  first  place,  all  the  authors  from  whose  works  the  passages
come — Ovid,  Dante,  Tennyson,  Vergil,  and  Browning  —  were,
with  the  possible  exception  of  the  last,  the  objects  of  Myers's
special  admiration  or  aff'ection  ;  and  two  of  them — -Vergil  and
Tennyson — of  his  veneration  also.

In  the  second  place,  three  out  of  the  four  stories  told  in

Metamorphoses  X.  and  XI.  to  which  Myersp  alluded,  are  the

subject of  allusions  in  three  consecutive stanzas of  one  of

I


130


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Frederic  Myers's  poems;  and  the  order  in  which  the  allusions
emerge  in  the  trance  and  in  the  poem  is  the  same.

The  allusions  in  question  were  to  Iris,  Orpheus  and.  Eurydice,
and  Pygmalion.  They  emerged — and  emerged  spontaneously —
in  that  order  in  the  trance :  Iris  on  March  23  and  24,  Orpheus
and  Eurydice  on  March  30,  and  Pygmalion  on  April  6.

The  subject  of  the  third  stanza  of  Frederic  Myers's  Stanzas
on  Mr.  Watts  Collected  Works^  is  the  picture  entitled  The
Genius  of  Greek  Poetry,  with  its  "  rainbow  forms  that  span  the
sky  "  ;  the  subject  of  the  fourth  stanza  is  the  picture  entitled.
Orpheus  andj  Eurydice;  the  subject  of  the  fifth  stanza  is  the
picture  entitled  The  Wife  of  Pygmalion.

It  is  true  that  the  direct  reference  in  the  third  stanza  is
to  The  Genius  of  Greek  Poetry ;  but  there  is  as  well,  I  think,
an  implicit  collateral  allusion  to  Watts'  Pris.  To  make  this
clear  I  will  quote  the  first  four  lines  of  the  third  stanza :

Yet  oftenest  in  the  past  he  walked,

With  god  or  hero  long  gone  by,
Oft,  like  his  pictured  Genius,  talked

Witli  rainbow  forms  that  span  the  sky.

In  The  Genius  of  Greek  Poetry  a  symbolical  human  figure  is
gazing  at  the  forces  and  phenomena  of  Nature  as  they  pass
embodied  in  God-like  forms  before  his  eyes.  B}'  far  the  most
prominent  of  these  forms  is  a  rainbow  which  stretches  nearly
across  the  whole  picture.  A  classical  scholar  looking  at  this
picture  and  knowing  its  title  could  hardly  fail  to  be  reminded  of
Iris,  the  rainbow  goddess,  by  the  "  rainbow-form  " ;  and  if,  like
Frederic  Myers,  this  scholar  were  at  the  same  time  an  enthusi-
astic connoisseur  of  Watts'  work,  he  would  almost  inevitably
be  reminded  of  his  Iris.  I  think,  therefore,  that  in  Frederic
Myers's  mind  the  goddess  Iris  and  Watts'  picture  Iris  were
associated  with  Tlie  Genius  of  Greek  Poetry ;  and  this  pro-
bability is  heightened  by  the  words  in  the  third  stanza :

Oft,  like  his  pictured  Genius,  talked
With  rainbow  forms  that  span  the  sky.

Besides  the  broader  meaning  which  they  bear,  these  two  lines
mean,  I  take  it,  that  Watts  dealt  not  once  onl}^  in  The  Genius  of

'See  Frafiments  of  Prose  and  Poetry,  p.  190.


LX.]


Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings:  Lethe.


131


Greek  Poetry,  but  in  others  of  his  paintings  too,  e.g.  in  his
Iris  and  JJldra,  with  the  subject  of  the  rainbow.  Granted  the
correctness  of  this  interpretation,  we  get,  then,  in  successive
stanzas  of  Myers's  poem  an  implicit  allusion  to  Iris,  a  reference
to  Orpheus  and  Eurydice,  and  a  reference  to  Pygmalion.

The  order  in  which  these  three  subjects  emerge  in  the  poem
and  in  the  trance  is  not  the  order  in  which  they  emerge  in
Ovid's  Metamorphoses ;  (nor,  it  may  be  added  incidentally^  in
which  they  ai"e  to  be  found  in  Gayley's  Classic  Myths  or  in
Bulfinch's  Age  of  Fable).  If  it  had  been,  the  natural  inference
would  have  been  that  Myersp  and  Frederic  Myers  alike  (and
Bulfinch  and  Gayley  likewise)  had  simply  followed  Ovid's
order.  If  any  significance  attaches  to  the  coincidence,  it  lies  in
the  fact  that  the  order  adopted  in  the  trance  agrees  not  with
Ovid's  arrangement  1  but  with  that  adopted  in  Frederic  Myers's
poem.

But  since,  ex  hypothesi,  the  Iris  story  was  necessarily  men-
tioned first  in  order  in  the  trance,  and  since  there  were  con-
sequently only  two  possible  orders  in  which  the  other  two
stories  could  follow  it,  the  coincidence  in  the  order  of  arrange-
ment is  by  itself  not  worth  attention.  It  becomes  noteworthy
only  because  it  supplements  the  coincidence  in  the  choice  of
subjects :  of  which  chance  will  hardly  seem  a  satisfactory
explanation  when  the  large  number  of  different  combinations  of
three  stories  tvhich  might  have  been  formed  from  the  tivo
books  of  the  "  Metamorphoses "  is  taken  into  account.

I  do  not  believe  that  it  is  the  kind  of  coincidence  which
Mrs.  Piper  could  consciously  or  subconsciously  have  concocted  ;
for,  even  if  she  had  read  the  poem  (which  she had  not-),

^  The  references  to  Iris,  Orpheus  and  Eurydice,  and  Pygmalion  occur  in  the
following  order  in  the  3Ietamorphoies  : —

Death  of  Eurydice  and  Orpheus'  descent  iuto  the  Underworld,  Mel.  X.  1-85,

Pygmalion  and  the  Statue,  Met.  X.  243-297.

Death  of  Orpheus  and  his  reixnion  with  Eurydice,  Afef.  XI.  1-66.

Iris  (Ceyx  and  Alcyone  story),  Mel.  XI.  410-748.

"Mrs.  Pi^jer  wrote  to  me  ou  July  28,  1909,  as  follows:  "I  have  not  yet
seen  Fragments,  of  Prose  and  Poetry.  I  asked  my  father-in-law  to  get  me
a  copy.  He  later  told  me  he  would  have  to  send  to  England  for  it.  Since
then  I  have  not  even  thought  of  it,  and  he  too  must  have  forgotten  it,  as  he
has  never  mentioned  it  to  me."  It  was  the  references  to  it  in  Proc.  Vol.
XXII.  (see  pp.  109-110)  which  made  Mrs.  Piper  wish  to  read  Fragments.


132


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


I  do  not  believe  that  she  possesses  the  classical  scholar-
ship requisite  to  detect  the  indii'ect  allusion  implicit  in  the
third  stanza  to  Iris,  or  the  allusions  to  Orpheus  and  Eurydice
in  the  fourth,  and  to  Pygmalion  in  the  fifth. ^  Meanwhile,
it  is  precisely  the  kind  of  delicate  coincidence  which  might
be  expected  to  occur,  if  the  communications  of  Myersp  are
influenced  by  the  mind  of  the  author  of  Stanzas  on  Mr.
Watts  Collected  Works.

A  critic  might  here  remark :  "  But  how  about  the  allusion
to  the  Hyaciuthus  stoiy  ?  Y(ju  seem  to  have  overlooked  the
fact  that  in  spite  of  this  being  one  of  the  stories  contained
in  Metamorp] Loses  X.  and  XI.  to  which  Myersp  referred,  there
is  no  reference  to  it  in  the  poem  on  Watts'  pictures.  Had
Myersp  referred  to  Iris,  Orpheus  and  Eurj^dice,  and  Pygmalion
only,l  grant  the  coincidence  would  have  been  striking;  but  he
leferied  to  the  Hyaciuthus  story  too,  and  that  just  spoils  the
coincidence."

If  it  had  proved  to  be  the  case  that  the  Hyaciuthus  story
was  dragged  in  merely  for  the  same  purpose  as  the  Orpheus  and
Eurydice  and  Pygmalion  stories — namely,  to  serve  as  a  clue
to  the  source  of  the  allusions  to  Iris,  Cave  of  Sleep,  Morpheus,
etc. — this  criticism  would  liave  considerable  force ;  but,  as
previously  explained  (v.  pj).  117-20),  the  Hyaciuthus  story  was
introduced,  and  effectively  introduced,  to  serve  a  quite  distinct
purpose.

Incidentally  I  would  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  neither
Ovid,  Watts  nor  Fredeiic  Myers  gave  a  name  to  the  wife  of
Pygmalion  ;  and  that  Myersp  first  mentioned  Pygmalion  only,
and  did  not  mention  Galatea  until  asked  to  explain  "  Pygmalion  "
by  Mr.  Dorr,  who  evident!}'  thought  that  Myersp  was  merely
firino-  off  classical  reminiscences  at  random  and  without
method.  If,  as  I  have  suggested,  MyerSp  was  thinking  of  Ovid's
Metamorphoses,  of  Watts'  picture,  and  of  Frederic  Myers's
stanzas  on  Watts'  pictures,  it  is  intelligible  why,  in  the  first
spontaneous  reference,  Pygmalion  only  was  named.

In  the  third  place,  it  was  appropriate  to  represent  Frederic

'  In  the  poem  neither  Eurydice  nor  Pygmalion  is  named  ;  and  Orpheus  is
called  "The  Thracian"  simply.


LX.]


Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings:  Lethe.


133


Myers  as  remembering  and  utilising  in  his  communications  the
stories  of  Ceyx  and  Alcyone  and  of  Orpheus  and  Eurydice.
The  theme  of  both  stories  is  ad  jinem  servatos  amores  and
the  happy  reunion  of  two  lovers,  "  after  long  grief  and  pain
in  another  state  of  existence;  and,  as  must  be  apparent  to  any
careful  reader  of  Myers's  poems,  this  was  a  theme  very  near
indeed  to  his  heart;  and  the  Orpheus  and  Eurydice  story
had  evidently  taken  great  hold  upon  him.^

Moreover,  any  one  familiar  with  Myers's  writings  will  recognise
that  passages  in  classical  literature  which  concern  some  inci-
dent of  a  mystic  or  "supernormal"  kind  had  a  special  attraction
for  him.  I  do  not  base  this  statement  on  the  frequency  of
references  to  such  passages  to  be  found  in  places  whei'e  they
would  be  expected,  that  is  to  say,  in  writings  directly  dealing
with  "psychical  research,"  but  upon  the  frequency  with  which
they  occur  in  his  articles  on  classical  and  general  subjects.  An
incident  of  a  supernormal  kind,  Alcyone's  "veridical"  vision  of
her  husband's  death,  enters  into  Ovid's  story;  and  the  story  of
Orpheus  and  Eurydice  is  full  of  mysticism.  It  was,  then,  I
say,  appropriate  that  Frederic  Myers  should  be  represented  as
remembering  these  two  myths  and  utilising  them  in  his
communications.

"  No  Poppies  ever  grew  on  Elysian  Shores."

In  conclusion,  I  propose  to  discuss  a  phrase  uttered  in  the
waking-stage  of  April  7,  1008,  because,  if  it  can  really  bear
the  meanings  I  read  into  it,  it  cannot  have  been  coined
in  the  mint  of  Mi-s.  Piper's  mind,  but  must  have  issued  from
the  mind  of  a  scholar  versed  in  mysticism  and  symbolism.
The  phrase  I  mean  is :  "  Mr.  Myers  says  no  poppies  ever
grew  on  Elysian  shores"  (p.  109).  It  was  preceded  by  some
sentences  in  which  Mrs.  Piper  spealcs  about  herself  in  the  first
person :

I  am  going  awaj-.  I  see  a  light.  I  see  a  cross  and  a  man  with
sandy  hair. Why,  Mr.  Myers,  where  did  you  come  from  1 I  tliought

■■^See  Feror  Ingenti  Circiimdata  2\octe  and  Stanzas  on  Mr.  Watts''  Collected
Wo7-ks  in  Fragment.'^  of  Prose  and  Poetry,  pp.  136  and  191  ;  Essays  Classical,
pp.  53-54,  and  140-141  ;  and  The  Renewal  of  Youth,  pp.  '224-5.


134


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


I  would  try  and  speak  for  you  if  I  could  hear  from  your  side.  Oh !
I  had  a  beautiful  time  ! I  did  not  want  to  come  back  any  more.

These  sentences  had  been  immediately  pi'cceded  by  a  reference
to  the  Hyacinthus  story  :

A  lily  came  up  out  of  the  blood.  Don't  you  remember  the  flower
that  grew  out  of  the  drop  of  blood  ?

Now  these  words  obviously  do  not  belong  to  the  sentences
spoken  by  Mrs.  Piper  in  propria  persona;  but  were  certainly
meant  as  a  message  sent  to  Mr.  Dorr  by  Myersp.  We  get,  then,
after  eliminating  Mrs.  Piper's  own  remarks,  in  consecutive
utterances  by  Myersp  conjoined  references  to  a  lily  and  to
poppies.

The  primary  meaning  of  "  No  poppies  ever  grew  on  Elysian
shores  "  I  take  to  have  been  this :  "  Error  underlies  the  classic
legend  which  made  flowers  emblematic  of  oblivion  grow  in
the  Elysian  fields,  for  the  dead  do  not  forget  their  life  on
earth."  i

But  it  was  also,  I  suggest,  a  comment  prompted  partly  by  a
comparison  of  Vergil's  with  Ovid's  description  of  Lethe  and  partly

^  There  are  several  other  instances  where  Myersp  or  Hodgsoiip  has  given
just  the  same  kind  of  allegorical  twist  or  personal  application  to  a  subject
originally  mooted  in  a  litei'al  or  non-personal  connexion.  Four  illustrations
will  suffice  :

(1)  In  the  waking-stage  of  the  trance  of  April  17,  1907  (v.  Froc.  Vol.  XXII.
pp.  295-6)  between  repeated  utterances  of  the  word  "  Tyrannus "  (doubt-
less intended  as  a  cross-correspondence)  was  inserted  the  remark:  "Mr.
Hodgson  says  there  are  no  tyrants  over  here."

(2)  In  the  waking-stage  of  the  trance  of  April  29,  1907  (v.  Proc.  Vol.  XXII.
pp.  279-SO)  two  references  to  Dante's  Inferno  were  followed  by  the
comment:  "There's  no  Inferno  here."

(3)  On  May  1,  1907  (v.  Proc.  Vol.  XXII.  p.  405)  Myersp  after  making  an

unmistakable  allusion  to  two  lines  in  Aht  VogJer  : "the  wonderful

Dead  who  have  passed  through  the  body  and  gone.  But  were  back  once

more  to  breathe  in  an  old  world  worth  their  new"  adds  the  comment

"I  have  returned  to  breathe  in  the  old  world,  which  is  not,  however,
better  than  our  new."

(4)  On  March  17,  1908  (see  above,  p.  81),  Myersp  had  given  "Is  there  such  anger

in  celestial  minds  ?"  as  a  translation  of  Aeneld  I.  11.  In  the  waking-stage
of  March  30,  1908,  an  echo  of  this  rendering — "  He  says,  tell  him  '  Celestial
minds.'  He  says  'such  enmity  in  celestial  minds"" — was  followed  by
the  comment:  "He  says  'Not  so:  there  isn't  any  in  their  minds.'"


LX.]  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings:  Lethe.


135


by  a  comparison  of  the  "  Lethean  poppies "  of  the  Georgics
with  the  poppy-less  Lethe  of  the  Aeneid.  In  Metamorphoses  XL
the  river  of  Lethe  issues  from  the  Cave  of  Sleep  near  the
Cimmerians'  land,  and  before  the  Cave  grow  poppies;  whereas  in
Aeneid.  VI.  the  river  of  Lethe  flows  by  the  Elysian  fields,  and,
though  the  scenery  of  the  river  is  described,  no  mention  is
made  of  poppies — an  omission  the  more  noticeable  because  in
the  Georgics  (TV.  545)  Vergil  applies  the  epithet  "  Lethean  "  to
poppies.  No  matter  whether  this  omission  was  intentional  on
Vergil's  part  or  not,  it  is  exactly  the  kind  of  omission  which  a
Vergilian  scholar  with  mystic  leanings  and  interested  in
symbolism  might  seize  upon.

Whatever  the  reader  may  think  of  this  interpretation,  he
will,  I  hope,  at  least  admit  that  the  phrase  implies  knowledge
of  the  fact  that  both  Elysium  and  poppies  have  been  asso-
ciated with  Lethe ;  for  what  else,  unless  it  were  knowledge
that  poppies  were  a  Lethean  flower  and  that  according  to  one
vei'sion  of  the  story  Lethe  was  an  Elysian  river,  could  have
provoked  the  comment  that  "  no  poppies  ever  grew  on  Elysian
shores " ?


There  remains  a  small  point  to  which  I  would  draw  the
attention  of  those  readers  only  whose  interest  goes  beyond  the
purely  "  evidential "  side  of  the  phenomena.

Into  the  four  stories — Lethe,  Orpheus  and  Eurydice,
Pygmalion,  and  Hyacinthus — mentioned  by  Myersp,  poppies  or
lilies,  or  poppies  and,  lilies,  enter  in  one  way  or  another.

For  the  connexion  of  poppies  with  Lethe  see  Ovid,  3Iet.  XL
605  and  Vergil,  Georg.  IV.  544.

For  an  indirect  connexion  of  lilies  with  Lethe  see  Verofil,
Aeneid  VI.  708-9,  where  the  souls  that  crowd  about  its  banks
are  compared  to  bees  swarming  round  white  lilies.

For  the  connexion  of  poppies  with  the  Orpheus  and  Eury-
dice story  see  A^ergil,  Georg.  IV.  544,  where  Aristaeus  is  told
to  ofl'er  Lethean  poppies  to  Orpheus  to  placate  his  wrath.

For  the  connexion  of  lilies  with  Orpheus  and  Eurydice  see
the  Orpheus  and  Eurydice  of  G.  F.  Watts  (18G9),  in  which  a
lily  lies  at  the  feet  of  the  swooning  Eurydice.


136


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


For  the  connexion  of  lilies  with  the  Pygmalion  story,  see
Ovid,  Met.  X.  262,  where  Pygmalion  makes  gifts  of  lilies  to
the  marble  statue  ;  and  Watts'  picture,  Tli,e  Wife  of  PygmaUoUy
in  which  lilies  are  introduced  as  symbols  of  her  purity.

For  the  connexion  of  lilies  and  poppies  with  Hyacinthus,
see  Ovid,  Met.  X.  190-1  and  212  (quoted  on  p.  118).

I  am  not  for  a  moment  suggesting  that  Myersp  intended  to
bring  out  in  his  communications  the  odd  fact  of  the  intrusion
of  poppies  and  lilies  into  all  these  stories.  Nor  do  I  contend
that  he  was  even  conscious  that  the  coincidences  existed,
although  the  juxtaposition  of  allusions  in  successive  utterances
to  the  lily  that  grew  out  of  the  blood,  and  to  the  poppies
that  never  grew  on  Elysian  shores,  rather  suggests  that  he
may  have  been.  But  I  do  put  forward  the  conjecture  that  the
lilies  and  poppies  were  one  of  the  associations  which  led  him  un-
consciously to  group  these  four  particular  stories,  rather  than
any  others,  from  the  tenth  and  eleventh  books  of  the  Metamor-
phoses. At  the  same  time  I  readily  admit  that  poppies  and  lilies
are  so  regular  a  part  of  the  Roman  poet's  floral  stock-in-trade
that  chance  is,  perhaps,  a  sufficient  explanation  of  the  coinci-
dences ;  which  it  could  hardly  be,  had  i-arer  flowers  been  the
subject  of  them.

Note  A.

Letters  read  at  the  sitting  of  March  23,  1908. (See  p.  86.)

These  five  letters  were  as  follows:  (1)  A  letter  addressed  to
Mr.  Dorr  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  enclosing  (2)  a  letter  addressed
to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  by  myself;  (3)  a  letter  addressed  by  me
to  Mr.  Dorr ;  (4)  a  letter  addressed  to  Mr.  Dorr  by  Miss  Alice
Johnson  ;  and  (5)  a  letter  addressed  b}^  me  to  Hodgsoup.
There  was  nothing  in  (1)  or  (2)  that  need  concern  us  here  ;  that
is  to  say,  neither  conveyed  information  which  affected  the
evidential  value  of  anything  written  or  spoken  in  the  trance
subsequently.  In  (4)  Miss  Johnson  explained  that  it  was  difficult
to  reply  definitely  and  promptly  whether  cross-correspondences
had  been  successful  or  not  until  there  had  been  time  to  study
carefully  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall's  and  Mrs.  Holland's  scripts,  as
the  corresponding  messages  in these  scripts  sometimes  came


LX.]


Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings :  Lethe.


137


out  in  very  allusive  fashion  ;  and  she  quoted  as  an  illustration
the  case  of  "  Giant  and  Dwarf  "  (see  Proc.  Vol.  XXII.  pp.  87-94).
In  my  letter  to  Mr.  Dorr  I  asked  him  to  send  all  records  to
Miss  Johnson  instead  of  to  me,  and  to  read  a  letter,  which  I
enclosed,  to  the  Hodg-son  control.  This  letter  I  must  quote,  as
it  convej^ed  both  to  Mr.  Dorr  and  to  the  trance-personalities
information,  which  they  had  not  possessed  before,  of  some  of
the  results  of  the  English  series  of  sittings  in  1906-1907.  The
object  of  the  letter  was  to  pacify  Hodgsoup,  who  was  im-
patiently demanding  to  be  told  whether  cross-correspondences
which  he  and  MyerSp  had  been  trying  had  succeeded  or  not.

Dorr  has  told  me  what  you  have  been  saying  lately  about
cross-correspondences.  We  will  do  our  best  to  let  you  know
when  your  experiments  succeed,  with  as  little  delay  as  possible.
But  I  do  not  think  you  realise  in  the  least  the  difficulties  of
collating  the  various  scripts.  To  do  this  takes  a  long  time  and
much  careful  study.  What  is  said  or  written  through  this
Light  (Mrs.  Piper)  is  plain  and  straightforward  ;  but  what  Mrs.
Verrall,  Miss  Verrall,  and  especially  Mrs.  Holland,  write  is
nearly  always  of  an  exceedingly  cryptic  character,  and  only  hy
prolonged  and  patient  study  can  the  meaning  be  extracted.
Let  me  give  you  an  example  :  It  is  only  a  few  days  ago  that  I
have  at  last  traced  a  positively  amazing  series  of  cross-corre-
sponding messages  between  this  Light,  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.
Holland.  It  has  taken  nearly  a  year  to  discover  it.  This  was
a  series  of  corresponding  messages  worked  by  you  and  Myers,
and  I  think  Sidgwick  also,  on  the  subject  of  the  identification
of  opposites — a  subject  connected  with  the  ai'Tos  oi'pai'us  a/ci'/xaji-
business.  The  v/hole  thing  is  now  perfectlj'  plain, ^  and  you
have  scored  an  immense  success.  But  if  you  had  asked  me
even  a  few  weeks  ago  if  "Light  in  West,"  "Dante's  Inferno,'"'
"Aphrodite,"  "I  wander  lonely  as  a  Cloud,"  and  "Daffodils"
{i.e.  some  of  the  messages  given  through  this  Light  which
formed  part  of  this  series)  had  been  successfully  reproduced  by
the  other  Lights  I  should  have  said  "No"  imhesitatingly :
whereas  now  I  see  that  they  uvre  reproduced,  though  in  an

^  The  general  scheme  was  plain  to  me  at  the  time,  but  various  points  included
in  my  published  account  of  the  incident — among  others  the  connexion  of
Janus  and  Prometheus,  and  the  meaning  of  the  names  Leopold,  Silvia,  and
Harold — I  had  not  grasped  at  tlie  time  when  this  letter  was  written.


138


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


exceedingly  allusive  fashion.  The  allusiveness  of  which  I  speak
is,  I  imagine,  partly  the  result  of  your  own  intentions,  but  it
is  also,  I  am  sure,  partly  the  result  of  the  action  of  the  Lights'
own  minds.

Sometimes  a  cross-correspondence  is  quite  easy  to  trace  straight
off,  e.g.  "  Laurel  wreath " ;  but  this  is  rare.  Most  of  the  best
ones  are  traceable  only  after  long  study.  So  I  a.sk  you  to
work  on  with  both  faith  and  patience.  Be  assured  that  every
single  word  that  comes  from  you  or  Myers  or  the  others  will
receive  our  attention.  Bear  in  mind,  too,  that  Mrs.  Holland,
through  whom  you  have  succeeded  in  sending  some  of  the  very
best  things,  lives  at  a  great  distance  from  us,  as  does  this
Light  [i.e.  Mrs.  Piper]  also ;  and  all  this  causes  much  delay.

Whatever  you  do,  do  not  be  discouraged ;  you  have  suc-
ceeded far  beyond  our  hopes.  Peg  away,  and  bear  always  in
mind  that  our  silence  does  not  mean  want  of  interest.

Note  B.

Mrs.  Piper's  ignorcmce  of  Ovid,. {See  p.  102.)

On  March  29,  1909,  Mr.  Dorr,  at  my  suggestion,  put  to  Mrs.
Piper  the  questions,  and  received  from  her  the  answers,  recorded
below.  The  I'ccord  was  made  at  the  interview,  and  the  ques-
tions were  asked  exactly  as  noted.  At  the  time  when  Mr.
Dorr  interrogated  Mrs.  Piper  he  did  not  know  my  reasons
for  having  these  questions  asked,  and  at  my  suggestion  he  put
them  in  such  a  way  as  to  convey  the  impression  that  they  had
reference  to  subjects  which  had  been  mentioned  not  at  his  own
sittings  but  at  the  sittings  held  in  England  in  1906-07.

G.  B.  D.  What  do  you  know  about  Morpheus  1

Mrs.  p.  I  do  not  know  anything  about  Morpheus.  (Pause.)  I  can-
not at  the  moment  tell  you  who  Morpheus  was.  It  does
not  convey  anything  to  me.  (Another  pause.)  That  is
really  all  I  can  say.

G.  B.  D.  What  do  you  know  about  the  Cave  of  Sleep  1

Mks.  p.  About  the  Cave  of  Sleep  ?  I  do  not  know  anything  about
it.  Nothing!  (Pause.)  Is  there  such  a  place  as  the
Cave  of  Sleep,  Mr.  Dorr  ?


LX.]  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings:  Lethe.  139

G.  B.  D.  I  do  not  know  myself.

Mrs.  p.  Well,  I'm  sure  I  don't ;  I  never  heard  of  it.

G.  B.  D.  Have  you  ever  read  any  collection  of  classical  stories  ?

Mrs.  p.  What  do  you  mean  by  collection  of  classical  stories  1

G.  B.  D.  Well,  such  as  Kingsley's  Heroes,  for  example.

Mrs.  p.  I  have  read  sorne  stories  of  Kingsley's. llie  Back  of  the

North Wind for instance  or was that  George

MacDonald's  1  Which  was  it  who  wrote  The  Hack  of  the
North  Wind?

G.  B.  D.  What  do  you  know  about  Iris  1

Mrs.  p.  You  mean  about  the  plant  ?  Didn't  you  ask  me  about  that
once  before  1  I  think  I  know  as  much  as  people  generally
do  about  plants;  I  don't  know  more  than  that  about  it.

[G.  B.  D.  had  asked  this  question  in  the  spring  of  1908,  some
time  after  the  sitting  in  which  the  name  came  out — with
the  result  of  getting  a  similar  confusion  with  the  plant's
name.]

G.  B.  D.  Does  the  name  Ceyx  (Ce-yx)  suggest  anything  to  you  ?

Mrs.  p.  No,  it  is  all  Greek  to  me  !

G.  B.  D.  It  suggests  nothing  to  your  mind  ?

Mrs.  p.  No,  I  have  never  heard  of  it  before,  I  do  not  know  what
it  means.  I  could  not  answer  that  to  save  my  life.  Is
that  a  trick  question'?

G.  B.  D.  No,  just  something  that  has  come  up  in  connexion  with  the
work  in  England.  I  do  not  know  what  the  word  means
myself.

G.  B.  D.  Do  you  know  what  the  rainbow  was  called  by  the  Romans  ?

Mrs.  p.  No,  I  haven't  any  idea.  I  could  not  answer  it  at  all.  I  knov/
very  little  of  such  things.  (Pause.)  No,  I  can't  remem-
ber ever  having  heard  it  spoken  of  before.

G.  B.  D.  Have  you  ever  read  any  translation  of  Ovid  ']

Mrs.  p.  No.


140


J.  G.  Pidclington.


[part


G.  B.  D.  Think  a  moment.

Mrs.  p.  No,  I  have  never  read  any. 1  don't  know  who  Ovid  is  ;
the  name  says  nothing  to  me.

Two  days  later,  on  March  31,  1909,  Mr.  Dorr  wrote:—

Mrs.  Pipei'  has  just  written  me,  regarding  your  question
about  Iris,  that  she  does  recall  a  picture  of  some  sort
once  given  her — a  print  or  something  of  the  kind —
called  "  Iris  the  Cupbearer."  She  wanted  me  to  tell  you
this.

The  following  extract  from  a  letter  addressed  to  me  by  Mr.
Dorr,  on  May  22,  1909,  may  be  suitably  appended  : —

Last  spring,  when  these  writings  were  going  on,  I  went  over
the  subject  of  books,  without  telling  them  what^  I  wanted
otherwise  than  generally,  with  both  Mrs.  Piper  and  her
daughters ;  and  I  made  sure  then  they  had  no  books
bearing  on  [classical  subjects]  in  their  apartment,  and
that  Mrs.  Piper  had  read  none,  so  far  as  her  own  state-
ment is  to  be  relied  upon.  And  apart  from  this,  the
inherent  improbability  of  her  past  reading  having  fur-
nished her  with  memories  enabling  her  trance-consciousness
to  construct  what  came  in  the  sittings  seems  to  me  con-
clusive in  the  matter ;  and  would  seem  so,  I  think,  to  any
one  out  here  [i.e.  in  the  United  States]  familiar  with  the
little  interest  in  or  knowledge  of  such  subjects  that
exists  among  folks  here.

Of  course,  neither  this  nor  any  search  at  [Mrs.  Piper's]
apartment,  nor  any  statement  made  [by  Mi's.  Piper],
would  have  any  convincing  weight  in  a  discussion  of  the
question  of  possible  deliberate  deception.  But  this  could
not  have  taken  place  unless  the  trance-state  and  the  normal
state  supplied  each  other  luith  memories  and  material  mutually:
that  is,  unless  our  whole  conception  of  the  depth  and
oenuineness  of  the  trance-condition  has  been  erroneous,
and  unless  Mrs.  Pipei',  and  her  daughters  too  (almost  of
necessity),  have  carried  out  a  wonderful  piece  of  deception,
taking  us  all  in  like  children  from  Myers  and  Hodgson
on.


LX.]


Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings :  Ltthe.  141


And  again  : —

With  regard  to  Mrs.  Piper's  past  memories  being  the  source,
she  affirms  most  stronglj',  and  her  daughters  bear  her
out  in  it  as  strongly  too,  that  she  has  never  read  along
these  [i.e.  classical]  lines  at  all,  and  has  no  slightest  know-
ledge of  the  subject.  This  I  am  almost  certain  must  be
so,  too,  from  the  improbability  of  it — a  point  which  I
can  better  appreciate,  as  an  American,  than  you  in
England. People  do  not  read  these  things  out  here.

Dorr's  ignorance  of  Ovid. (See  x>.  102.)

Writing  on  March  8,  1909,  I  put  the  following  questions  to
Mr.  Dorr,  without  explaining  my  reasons  for  doing  so  : —

(a)  Have  you  read  much  oi-  any  Ovid  1

(6)  If  you  have  read  any,  with  which  of  his  works  are
you  most  familiar  ?

(c)  Have  you  read  Ovid  in  a  translation ;  or  have  you
ever  read  any  collection  of  classical  or  mythological
tales,  which  you  think  may  have  been  taken  from
Ovid  ?

Mr.  Dorr's  reply,  which  he  wi'ote  owt  before  interviewing
Mrs.  Piper  on  March  29,  1909,  was  as  follows : —  ■

I  have  never  read  any  Ovid  at  all,  as  it  happens,  unless
it  were  last  spring  in  looking  up  the  references  in
the  sittings  after  tlwj  had  come.  Ovid  was  not  used
in  the  school  courses  here  when  I  was  a  boy,  and  I
read  but  little  Latin  at  the  University — Livy,  Cicero,
and  Plautus  mainly,  and  a  few  odes  of  Horace.  The
only  collections  of  Greek  mythological  tales  which  I  read
as  a  boy  were  those  contained  in  Thomas  Bulfinch's
book  for  children  and  Kingsley's  Heroes.  The  Heroes  was
read  to  me  when  I  was  a  very  young  child ;  the
Theseus  story  in  them  is  the  one  that  I  recall  the  best
and  that  made  the  strongest  impression  on  me  at  the
time.  The  Bulfinch  tales  I  read  somewhat  later,  though
still  when  a  young  boy;  but  they  never  interested  me
as  did  his  Age  of  Ckivalrij  and  Legends  of  Charlemagne,


142


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


and  I  doubt  if  I  ever  could  have  repeated  much  from
them.  Of  Ovid  as  Ovid  I  know  really  nothing  at  first
hand.

On  learning  that  the  Cave  of  Sleep  story  was  contained  in
Bulfinch's  Age  of  Fable,  Mr.  Dorr  obtained  a  copy  of  the  book,
and  after  looking  it  through,  wrote  me  as  follows: —

The  book  seems  little  familiar  in  its  stories  to  me  now, — ■
unlike  other  books  that  interested  me  more  when  I  was
a  child,  and  whose  every  incident  still  comes  back  to  me
as  I  turn  the  pages  over.  The  one  part  of  it  that  I
remember  well  is  the  Norse  stories  at  the  end.  I  doubt
my  ever  having  read  the  others  wholly  through,  for
much  seems  new  to  me.


Note  C.

Mrs.  Piper's  ignorance  of  Bulfinch's  and  Gayley's  hooks.

(See  p.  104.)

The  statements  reproduced  in  Note  B  satisfied  me  that  neither
Mr.  Dorr  nor  Mrs.  Piper  was  acquainted  with  Ovid.  As,  how-
ever, the  Ovidian  version  of  the  story  of  Ceyx  and  Alcyone  is
outlined  in  Bulfinch' a  Age  of  Fable  and  Gayley's  Classic  Myths,
it  was  obviously  desirable  to  enquire  whether  Mrs.  Piper
possessed  a  copy  of,  or  had  at  any  time  read,  either  of  these
books.  Accordingly,  Mr.  Dorr,  acting  on  ray  suggestion,  called
upon  Mrs.  Piper,  and,  before  mentioning  either  book,  asked  her
permission  to  go  through  all  the  books  at  her  flat.  This  per-
mission Mrs.  Piper  most  kindly  gave ;  and  Mr.  Dorr  there  and
then  made  a  thorough  search.  He  found  no  copy  of  Bulfinch
or  Gayley,  nor  did  he  find  any  book  even  i-emotely  bearing  on
classical  myths.  He  then  asked  Mrs.  Piper  if  she  had  ever  read
either  the  Age  of  Fable  or  Classic  Myths,  and  received  in  reply
an  emphatic  negative,  Mrs.  Piper  at  the  same  time  assuring
him  that  she  had  never  even  heard  of  either.  Her  daughters,
Alta  and  Minerva,  had  both  heard  of  the  Age  of  Fable.  The
former  had  occasionally  consulted  it  at  school,  but  she  had
never  possessed  a  copy  of  her  own,  and  she  had  never  brought


LX.]


Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings:  Lethe.


143


home  the  school  copy,  which  it  was  forbidden  to  remove
from  the  school.  Neither  Mrs.  Piper,  nor  her  daughters,  nor
Mr.  Dorr  had  ever  heard  of  Gayley's  modernised  edition  of  the
Age  of  Fable.

These  statements  of  Mrs.  Piper's  to  the  effect  that  she  had
not  read  any  Ovid,  and  was  not  acquainted  with  Bulfiuch's
and  Gayley's  books,  carry  great  weight  with  me,  who  from  my
personal  intercourse  with  her  have  acquired  confidence  in  her
integrity  and  scrupulous  candour;  and  I  believe  they  will  carry
equal  weight  with  all  who  know  her.  Personal  impressions
of  this  kind  cannot,  however,  be  expected  to  carry  much  weight
with  people  not  acquainted  with  Mis.  Piper.  They  may  be
more  impressed  by  the  fact  that,  in  the  course  of  the  long
period — extending  now  over  nearly  a  quarter  of  a  centuiy —
during  which  Mrs.  Piper  has  been  under  the  scrutiny  of  experi-
enced observers,  no  slur  has  ever  been  cast  on  her  veracity.

I  say  "veracity"  advisedly,  for  it  seems  to  me  that  this  is
more  probably  a  question  of  veracity  than  of  accuracy  of
memory.  Had  the  references  in  the  trance  been  to  the  Ceyx
and  Alcyone  story  as  told  in  Metamorphoses  XI.  only,  I  could
have  believed  that  Mrs.  Piper,  straying  at  some  time  or  other  out-
side her  ordinary  range  of  reading,  had  lighted  on  and  cursorily
glanced  through  this  particular  story,  and  since  lost  all  con-
scious recollection  of  it.  But  the  references  in  the  trance  do  not
stop  at  the  Ceyx  and  Alcyone  story.  They  extend  to  three
other  stories  contained  in  the  same  or  in  the  preceding  book
of  the  Metamorphoses,  where,  however,  they  do  not  follow  one
another  consecutively,  but  are  separated  from  each  other  by
other  stories  intercalated  between  them.  So  I  cannot  think
that  a  casual  glance  through  Metamorphoses  X.  and  XL  could
have  supplied  even  the  subconsciousness,  still  less  the  subcon-
sciousness of  a  non-classical  reader,  with  such  systematised
memories  as  those  apparently  exhibited  in  the  trance.  If,  then,
Mrs.  Piper  ever  did  read  the  tenth  and  eleventh  books  of  the
Metamorphoses,  I  think  she  must  have  read  them  with  too
much  attention  to  have  allowed  her  to  forget  that  she  had
done  so.^

^  Mrs.  Piper  tells  me  she  has  an  excellent  memory,  and  her  daughters  bear
out  her  statement.


144


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Moreover,  it  must  not  be  lost  sio-ht  of  that  the  knowledo-e
of  Ovid's  Metamorphoses  manifested  in  the  trance  is  not  an
isolated  instance  of  the  manifestation  of  classical  learning.  The
problem  is  by  no  means  so  simple  a  one  as  that.  Classical
knowledge  was  shown  again  and  again  in  the  trance — and  some-
times, as  in  the  Lethe  case,  in  immediate  response  to  questions
— which  could  not  have  been  extracted  from  the  Metamorphoses
(see  Mrs.  Verrall's  pajier  above).  If  the  knowledge  of  the
Metamorphoses  is  to  be  attributed  to  Mrs.  Piper's  recollections,
it  is  to  be  inferred  with  practical,  if  not  with  absolutely
logical,  certainty  that  her  memory  likewise  supplied  these
other  non-Ovidian  references  or  a  large  part  of  them.  And  it
could  only  have  done  that,  if  Mrs.  Piper  has  a  fairly  exten-
sive acquaintance  with  classical  literature.  I  cannot  prove
that  she  has  not ;  but  I  am  quite  certain  that  no  one  who
knows  her  will  believe  that  she  has.


IF.

THE  SIBYL.

In  the  waking-stage  of  the  trance  of  March  23,  1908,  the
word  "Sibyl"  had  been  uttered  (see  p.  89);  and  this  led  Mr.
Dorr  to  ask  Myersp  at  the  next  sitting  (March  24,  1908)  where
"the  Sibyl"  (meaning  thereby,  the  Cumaean  Sibyl)  lived.  This
question  was  never  explicitly  answered  ;  but  I  believe  that
certain  disjointed  utterances  in  the  waking-stage  were  meant
to  convey  an  answer  to  it,  and  to  convey  it  by  means  of  an
allusion  to  a  Vergilian  context,  just  as  the  question  about
Lethe  was  answered  by  means  of  allusions  to  Vergilian  and
Ovidian  contexts.

Appended  in  chronological  order  are  the  relevant  passages
fiom  the  records,  either  quoted  in  full  or  summarised,
explanatory  comments  being  introduced  where  necessary.

As  stated  elsewhere  (see  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper,  p.  59),  a  good
part  of  Mr.  Dorr's  early  sittings  was  devoted  to  trying  to  obtain
from MyerSp  evidence  of  acquaintance  with  Vergil's  Aeneid.


LX.] Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings:  The  Sibyl.  145

Thus  on  March  10,  1908,  Mr.  Dorr  read  the  Sth  line  of  Book
I:

Musa,  rnihi  causas  memora,  quo  numine  laeso,
and  Myersp  ga,ve  a  pertinent  reply  by  saying  that  it  reminded
him  of  "  Eneas  [sic]  exile  .  .  .  Also  Dido  feast  calm  waters  by
Neptune",  this  being  followed  by  the  drawing  of  a  trident;
and  then  spontaneously  Myersp  added  :

I  remember  something  about  his  father.

G.  B.  D.  What  was  his  father's  name  1

Let  me  think  (pause).  Very  odd  and  rather  long.i  (Another
pause  follows,  and  no  further  attempt  to  get  the  name  is
made.)

Then  on  March  16,  1908,  Mr.  Dorr  put  another  question  to
Myersp,  and  was  answei'ed  as  follows:

G.  B.  D.  Who  was  Charon  1

I  remember  Charon  perfectly  well.  .  .  .
G.  B.  D.  What  did  he  do  1

I  remember  father,  if  I  understand  the  name.
G.  B  U.  No,  you  have  not  got  it  yet.

Oil,  I  am  thinking  of  Aeneas's  father.

Aeneas  had  not  been  previously  mentioned  at  this  sitting,
though  several  subjects  connected  with  the  first  book  of  the
Aeneicl  had  been.-  The  answer  given  by  Myersp — which  must
refer  not  to  the  first  but  to  the  sixth  book  of  the  Aeneid —
was  quite  intelligible  and  intelligent  ;  for  when  Aeneas,  guided
by  the  Sibyl,  descended  to  the  Underworld  and  came  to  the
banks  of  the  Styx,  Charon  at  first  refused  to  ferry  him  across,
until  appeased  by  the  Sibyl's  words :  '  "  Aeneas  of  Troy  ....
goes  down  to  meet  his  father  in  the  deep  shades  of  Erebus.
If  the  sight  of  such  affection  stirs  thee  in  nowise,  yet  this
bough  {i.e.  the  Golden  Bough]  thou  must  know." ' — Aen.  VI.
403-7.

On  March  23,  1908,  Mr.  Dorr  asked  MyerSp  what  the  word
Lethe  sucraested  to  him. With the answer oiven to  this

1  The  words  after  "think"  are  probably  a  comment  interjected  by  Eector.

-See  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper  above,  pp.  69,  71-3.

K


146


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


question  we  are  already  familiar  (see  pp.  87-9).  Part  of  it,  as
will  be  remembered,  was  cootained  in  the  following  utterances
made  in  the  waking-stage  of  the  trance  of  March  23,  1908  :

Hero  —  Olympus  —  Pavia  (?)  —  Sibyl  —  Olympus  —  water —  Lethe  —
delighted — sad  lovely  mate.  Put  them  all  together.  Entwined  love —
beautiful  shores — Ask  him  if  he  cannot  hear  me.  Muses — I  wrote
Church  long  time  ago — Olympus — There's  Mercury.

As  explained  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  {v.  ]).  184),  "  Hero "  and
"There's  Mercury"  are  probably  allusions  to  Wordsworth's
Laodamia.  For  "  Olympus "  see  below,  p.  327.  "  I  wrote
Church,"  etc.,  is  a  reminiscence  of  an  old  cross-correspondence
experiment  (v.  Proceedings,  Vol.  XX.II.  p.  45).  The  remain-
der, excepting  "Muses",  forms  part  of  the  answer  to  the
Lethe  question.

With  regard  to  these  utteiances  two  facts  should  be  noted :
(1)  that  Sibyl  was  not  first  mentioned  by  Mr.  iJorr,  but  was  fii-st
spontaneously  mentioned  by  a  trance-personality;  (2)  that  this
first  reference  to  the  Sibyl  was  closely  followed  by  a  reference  to
the  Muses,  to  whom  likewise  no  previous  reference  had  been
made.

This  reference  in  the  trance  to  the  Sibyl  led  Mr.  Dorr  to  put
the  following  question  to  Myersj,  at  the  next  sitting,  held  on
March  24,  1908  :—

G.  B.  D.  Do  3'ou  remember  where  the  Sibyl  lived  ?

I  told  the  Light  to  say  sibyl  last  time.
G.  B.  D.  Yes,  the  Light  did  say  "Sibyl"  in  the  waking-stage.

Mr.  Dorr  did  not,  however,  wait  for  an  answer  to  his  ques-
tion, but  passed  on  at  once  to  another  subject.

The  next  reference  to  the  Sibyl  was  made  on  March  30,
1908,  while  Mr.  Dorr  was  reading  over  the  record  of  the  words
uttered  in  the  wakiuo-.statje  of  March  23,  1908.  When  the  word
"  Sibyl "  was  read  out,  Myersp  wrote  "  prophetess "  (see  p.  96).
The  first  word  audibly  spoken  in  the  waking-stage  on  this  same
day,  March  30,  1908,  was  "  Anchises".  It  was  the  right  answer,
and  was,  I  take  it,  meant  as  the  answer,  to  the  question  asked  by
Mr.  Dorr  on  March  10,  1908  :  "  What  was  his  [i.e.  Aeneas's]
father's  name  ? "


LX.] Three  Incidents  from  tJie  Sitting.'^ :  The  Sibyl.  147


Thus  two  of  Mr.  Dorr's  questions  had  been  answered  ;  but  so
far  no  answer  had  been  given  to  the  question  :  "  Do  you  remem-
ber where  the  Sibyl  lived  ? "  I  find  the  answer  to  this  third
question  in  the  utterances  made  in  the  waking-stage  of  the  trance
of  March  31,  190S,  from  the  record  of  which  I  now  quote: —

Agamemnon.  [This,  the  first  audible  word,  was  a  correct  answer  to
a  question  asked  a  few  moments  earlier  during  the  writing  part  of
the  sitting. See  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper,  p.  50.]

Sibyls — Muses — Graces.  (Then  came  references  to  various  other
subjects.)  .  .  .

Muses,  Muses  (followed  by  three  words  not  caught)  and  Phyllis.
His  Mary  and  Phyllis — Icarus — Anchises.

"His  M&vy  and  Phyllis"  refers  to  a  subject  which  has  not  the
remotest  connexion  with  what  preceded  or  with  what  followed  it.

It  will  be  noticed  that  on  March  23,  1908,  "Sibyl"  and
"  Muses  "  had  been  mentioned  close  together.  This  time  not  the
singular  "  Sibyl "  but  the  plural  "  Sibyls  "  is  conjoined  with
"  Muses,"  and  with  '■'  Graces  "  as  well.  I  think  that  the  trance-
personality  wished  to  convey  that  he  knew  that  there  were
more  than  one  Sibyl  (although  the  form  of  Mr.  Dorr's  question
had  rather  implied  that  thei'e  was  only  one)  ;  and  that  he
knew  of  other  groups  of  feniale  legendary  characters  besides
the  Sibyls.  When  the  "  Muses  "  crop  up  a  second  time  neither
Sibyls  nor  Graces  are  mentioned  in  the  record.  The  names
may  have  been  spoken  and  not  heard  ;  but  anyhow  the
fact  remains  that  when  the  words  ("  Icarus  Anchises  ")  which
I  regard  as  implying  knowledge  of  where  the  Sib^d  lived  did
emerge,  they  had  been  immediately  preceded,  except  for  the
clear-cut  interpolation  "  His  Mary  and  Phyllis ",  by  the  word
"  Muses,"  which  had  twice  previously  been  conjoined  with
"  Sibyl  "  or  "  Sibyls  ".

The  last  extract  from  the  records  which  bears  on  the  subject
is  taken  from  the  sitting  of  April  G,  1908  :

G.  B.  D.  (reading  over  to  Myersp  the  record  of  the  waking-stage  of
March  31,  1908)  Next  slie  [i.e.  Mrs.  Piper]  said  "Icarus"
and  then  "Anchises".

(MyerSp  communicating.)

They  are  memories,  produced  by  your  refreshing  my  memory.


148


G.  Piddington.


[part


In  order  to  explain  why  I  think  the  words  "  Icarus  Anchises  "
indicate  knowledge  of  the  Sibyl's  habitation,  I  must  summarise
the  opening  passages  of  the  sixth  book  of  the  Aeneid.

Summary  of  Aeneid  VI.  1-123.

Aeneas  on  his  arrival  at  Cumae  at  once  seeks  the  Sibyl's  cave,
which  adjoined  a  temple  that  Daedalus,  the  father  of  Icarus,  had
built  and  dedicated  to  Apollo  after  his  escape  from  Crete.  On  the
doors  of  the  temple  Daedalus  had  depicted  the  tragedies  that  had
befallen  the  house  of  Minos,  and  had  twice  essayed  to  portray
thereon  the  fate  of  his  own  son,  Icarus ;  but  in  vain,  for  grief  had
paralysed  his  hands.

As  Aeneas  gazes  on  these  scenes,  the  Sibyl  accosts  him.  After
she  has  spoken,  Aeneas  implores  her  to  guide  him  through  the
Underworld  to  meet  his  beloved  father,  Anchises,  face  to  face.  He
tells  her  how  he  had  rescued  Anchises  from  Troy ;  how  Anchises
had  shared  his  wanderings  and  sufferings  ;  and  that  it  was  Anchises
who  had  besought  and  enjoined  him  to  seek  the  Sibyl's  aid.

It  is  in  this  Verffiliau  context  that  I  find  the  kev  to  the
puzzle.  For  my  part  I  cannot  suppose  either  that  the  con-
junction of  the  names  Icarus  and  Anchises  in  the  waking-
stage  of  the  trance  of  March  31,  1908,  was  fortuitous,  or  that
it  was  not  intended  as  a  reference  to  this  passage.  I  have
failed  to  trace  any  other  episode  in  classical  literature  wherein
Anchises  and  Icarus  figure  together ;  and  at  any  rate  the
combination,  if  not  unique,  must  at  least  be  very  rare,  as
there  is  nothing  in  tlieir  legendary  careers  likely  often  to
bring  them  to  a  literary  focus.

Why,  though,  should  the  question  have  been  answered  in
this  very  indirect  manner  ?  Possibly  because  the  trance-per-
sonality could  not  remember  the  word  "Cumae",  just  as  at
first  he  could  not  remember  the  name  "  Anchises  ".  But  more
probably  the  answer  was  thus  deviously  conveyed,  in  order  to
avoid  the  obvious :  as  was  done,  I  believe,  in  other  instances
(cf  the  answer  to  the  Lethe  question,  especially  note  on  p.  91,
and  Journal  for  January,  1909,  p.  23).

Even  a  person  of  no  classical  learning  might  casually  have
heard  of  the  Sibyl  of  Cumae,  but,  casually,  is  hardly  likely  to


LX.] Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings:  The  Sibyl.  149


have  picked  up  and  retained  such  knowledge  of  detail  as
appears  to  be  involved  in  the  mention  of  Anchises  and  Icarus.

But  what  purpose  was  to  be  served  by  avoiding  the  obvious?
The  simple  answer  would  have  been  "  Cumae  '":  an  answer  known
to  Mr.  Dorr,  and  also  to  other  people,  e.g.  Mrs.  and  Miss
Verrall,  with  whom  at  one  time  or  another  Mrs.  Piper  has
been  apparently  in  telepathic  raiyport.  Had,  then,  Myersp
simply  answered  "  Cumae ",  and  if  that  answer  were  tliought
to  be  beyond  the  range  of  Mrs.  Piper's  normal  knowledge,  it
would  have  been  attributable  to  telepathy  between  the  medium
on-  the  one  hand  and  Mr.  Dorr,  or,  say,  Mr.s.  or  Mi.ss  Verrall,
on  the  other.

But  from  Mr.  Dorr's  mind  it  seems  very  unlikely  that  the
allusive  answer  "  Anchises  Icarus "  was  derived,  for  he  never
saw  any  meaning  in  it,  although  he  devoted  much  thought  to
the  records.  And  the  same  is  true  of  Mr.s.  Verrall,  who  studied
the  records  most  carefully  and  thoroughly,  and  w^hose  classical
knowledge  is  far  wider  than  Mr.  Dorr's.

It  seems  hardly  necessary  to  add  that  it  was  dramatically
most  appropriate  to  represent  Frederic  Myers  as  answering  in
a  fashion  which  suggests  a  minute  acquaintance  with  a  pa.ssage
in  the  Sixth  Book  of  the  Aeneid.

The  remark  made  by  MyerSp  on  April  G,  190S,  about  the
names  Anchises  and  Icarus  deserves  attention.  It  may,  perhaps,
be  only  the  kind  of  vague  generality  likely  under  the  circum-
stances to  possess  some  degree  of  relevancy ;  but  it  has  proved
to  be  so  singularly  apposite  that  I  think  it  indicates  some
real  comprehension  of  the  true  inwardness  of  the  phenomenon.
I  understand  Myersp  to  have  meant  by  it  something  of  this
kind:  "First,  your  question  about  Charon  reminded  me  of
Aeneas's  meeting  with  Anchises  in  the  Underworld ;  next,  your
question  about  Lethe  reminded  me  of  how  Aeneas  and  Anchises,
accompanied  by  the  Sibyl,  watched  the  souls  about  to  be
reincarnated  di'inking  of  the  waters  of  Lethe ;  this  iti  turn
reminded  me  of  how  Aeneas  and  the  Sibyl  were  warned  by
Charon  that  they  were  come  to  'the  land  of  Shadows,  of  Sleep,
and  Slumberous  Night';  (and  incidentally  this  reminded  me  of
Ovid's  description  of  the  Cave  of  Sleep  and  the  River  of
Lethe). So  that,  when  you  asked  me  where  the  Sibyl  lived,


150  ■  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

my  recollections  of  the  sixth  book  of  the  Aeneid  had  been  so
much  refreshed  that  I  was  able  to  recall  that  Anchises  and
Icarus  come  into  Vergil's  description  of  the  Sibyl's  Cave."


Ill-

A  PRELUDE  AND  A  SEQUEL  TO  THE  HORACE  ODE

QUESTION.

Ill  my  paper  on  "  A  Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms "  in
Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.  (written  in  the  course  of  1907  and
1908  and  published  in  October,  1908),  I  discussed  (pp.  397-
407)  the  answer  made  by  Myersp  to  a  question  about  an  Ode
of  Horace  put  in  the  course  of  the  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper
in  1907.  I  have  since  become  aware  that  allusions  to  the
Ode  in  question  are  made  by  Myers^  in  some  of  Mrs.  Verralbs
earliest  scripts  in  1901  ;  and  further  that  references  to  an
Ode  of  Horace  spontaneously  made  by  MyerSp  in  1908  seem
to  support  the  interpretation  which  I  placed  on  the  answer
to  the  Horace  Ode  question  given  by  MyerSp  in  1907.  The
relations  between  these  various  communications,  and  between
them  and  Frederic  Myers's  thoughts  when  alive,  seem  to  me
important ;  and  I  accordingly  propose  to  set  out  the  various
facts  involved  briefly  in  chronological  order,  and  then  to  discuss
them  in  more  detail.

On  Dec.  31,  1884,  Frederic  Myers  addressed  a  letter  to  Dr.
A.  W.  A'errall,  in  the  course  of  which  he  said  that  the  first
six  lines  of  Hor.  C.  I.  28  had  "  entered  as  deeply  as  almost
any  Horatian  passage  into  "  his  "  own  inner  history  "  (see  Proe.
Vol.  XXII.  p.  400).  He  did  not,  however,  explain  why  this
particular  Ode  had  "  entered  into  his  inner  history ".

Mrs.  Verrall  read  this  letter  at  or  about  the  time  of  its
receipt.

On  Jan.  17,  1901,  Frederic  Myers  died.

A  few  weeks  after  his  death,  Mrs.  Verrall  for  the  first  time
developed  the  faculty  of  writing  automatically,  and  much  of
her  script  purports  to  emanate  from  him.


LX.]  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings :  Horace  Ode  Question.  151

Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  March  5,  1901 — the  iirst  piece  of
intelligible  script  she  ever  wrote — contains  an  allusion  to  the
fifth  iine  of  Hor.  C.  I.  28  ;  her  script  of  March  12,  1901,
contains,  besides  quotations  from  two  other  Odes  of  Horace,  an
allusion  to  the  medieval  Latin  phrase  adscri'ptus  glclae,  which
has  been  used  as  a  rendering  of  eiTapovpo<;,  a  word  occurring
only  in  Odyssey  XL  489  ;  her  script  of  March  15,  1901,
after  a  reference  to  a  book,  bids  her  "  reject  the  verses  which
I  wrote  in  my  presumption  " ;  and  her  script  of  April  27,
1901,  to  which  is  appended  one  of  the  regular  signatures  of
MyerSy,  bids  search  be  made  for  "  the  book ",  again  alludes  to
the  phrase  ccdscrijjtus  gkhae,  and  immediately  afterwards  to  the
fifth  and  sixth  lines  of  Hor.  C.  I.  28.

These  four  scripts  all  show  points  of  contact  with  each  other,
and  undoubtedly  belong  to  the  group  of  Mrs.  A^errall's  scripts
which  purport  to  be  inspired  by  Frederic  Myers.  Here  I
have  drawn  attention  to  a  few  points  only  in  them ;  but
later  on  I  shall  quote  them  in  full  and  discuss  them  in  some
detail.

In  October  1904,  Mrs.  Verrall  for  the  first  time  read  in
Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry  two  poems  of  Myers's  :  Imvior-
tality  and  On  a  Spring  Morning  at  Sea.  Pmmoiiality  had
been  published  before,  first  in  1870,  and  again  in  1875  ;  but
Mrs.  Verrall  is  quite  positive  that  she  never  read  it  till  1904,
and  had  never  seen  the  early  volumes  of  Myers's  poems  in
which  it  originally  appeared.  On  a  Spring  Moryiing  at  Sea  was
published  for  the  first  time  in  1904.

On  January  1,  1907,  Mrs.  Verrall,  while  going  through
an  accumulation  of  old  correspondence,  came  across  the  letter
addressed  by  Frederic  Myers  to  Dr.  Verrall  on  Dec.  31,  1884.
She  had  not  read  it  since  the  beginning  of  1885  and  had
forgotten  all  about  it ;  and  the  allusions  in  her  early  scripts
to  Hor.  C,  I.  28,  though  in  one  case  recognised  by  her,  had
not  provoked  in  her  mind  any  conscious  recollection  of  it.
The  discovery  of  the  letter  in  January  1907  led  her  to  ask
me  to  put  the  following  question  to  Myersp :  "Which  Ode  of
Horace  entered  deeply  into  your  inner  life  ? " ;  and  this  ques-
tion I  put  at  the  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  held  on  Jan,  23,
1907  (v.  Proc.  Vol.  XXII.  p.  3  97).  From  the  time  of  the
discovery  of  the  letter  until  April  10,  1908,  Mrs.  Verrall  was


152


J.  G.  P'idclington.


[part


under  the  impression  that  the  reason  why  Hor.  C.  I.  28  had
entered  deeply  into  Frederic  Myers's  inner  history  was  that
it  contained  an  allusion  to  reincarnation  (id.  ib.  p.  407).

On  April  17,  April  29,  May  1  and  May  6,  1907  (see  Proc,
Vol.  XXII.  pp.  369,  377,  379-381,  386-7),  Myer-Sp  gave  answers
to  the  question  about  the  Ode  of  Horace,  which  a  twelvemonth
afterwards  (April  25,  1908)^  I  interpreted  as  meaning  that
allusions  would  be  found  in  Frederic  Myers's  poem  Immor-
tality to  an  Ode  of  Horace,  and  that  this  Ode  was  the  one  of
which  the  first  six  lines  had  "  entered  as  deeply  as  any
Horatian  passage  into  his  inner  history ".

After  pointing  out  certain  verbal  resendDlances  between  Hor.
C.  I.  28  and  Immortality,  I  went  on  to  suggest  that  Myers
might  have  found  in  Hor.  C.  I.  28,  and  especially  in  the
first  six  lines  of  it,  an  expression  of  the  sentiment  which
forms  the  main  theme  of  Immortality :  namely,  dread  of  an
aimless  and  unprogressive  existence  in  the  after-life.  By  way
of  illustrating  the  interpretation  which  I  thought  Myers  might
have  put  upon  Hor.  C.  I.  28,  I  quoted,  in  Englisli,  bhe  lines
from  the  Odyssey  (XL  488-491),  in  whicii  occurs  the  word
eirdpovpo^,  which  some  commentators  render  by  adscriptus
glehac.  -

Between  Feb.  25  and  May  26,  1908 — that  is,  partly  before
and  partly  after  I  had  tliought  out  and  committed  to  writing
the  interpretation  of  the  answer  to  Mrs.  Verrall's  Horace  Ode
question  summarised  above  and  given  in  detail  in  Proc.  Vol.
XXII.  pp.  397-407— Mr.  G.  B.  Dorr  had  a  series  of  sittings
with  Mrs.  Piper  in  America,  and  in  the  course  of  them  read
to  MyerSp  passages  from  the  writings  of  Frederic  Myers,  and
also  passages  from  classical  authors,  for  the  purpose  of  dis-
covering what  response  MyerSp  would  make  to  these  sti7mdi.
Mr.  Dorr  knew  hardly  anything  about  the  results  of  the
sittings  given  by  Mrs.  Piper  in  England  beyond  the  fact  that
some  success  had  been  obtained  in  the  cross-correspondence
experiments ;  he  had  seen  none  of  the  records,  and  was
unaware  that  any  question  about  an  Ode  of  Horace  had  been

have  been  able  to  fix  the  exact  date  b}'  reference  to  niy  contemporaneous
correspondence  with  Mrs.  Verrall.

"Tlioiigh  well  aware  of  this  rendering  of  the  word,  I  deliberately  adopted
the  other  rendering,  "above  ground".


LX.]  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings :  Horace  Ode  Question.  153

put  to  Myersp.  I  proceed  to  show  in  detail  what  seem  to
me  to  be  references  in  these  sittings  to  Hor.  C.  I.  28,  to
the  above-named  passage  in  the  Gdyssey,  and  to  the  poem
Immortality.

On  March  9,  1908,  Mr.  Dorr  read  the  first  four  words  of
Vergil's  Aencid  to  Mj^ersp,  who  translated  them,  and  spon-
taneously gave  the  names  "Juno"  and  "Neptune"  in  relevant
connexion  with  them.  It  was  then  arranged  that  "  Neptune "
should  be  the  subject  of  a  cross-correspondence  experiment
with  Miss  H.  Veri'all  (see  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  paper,  pp.  175-7).

On  March  10,  1908,  Mr.  Dorr  read  to  MyerSp  Aeneid  I.  8,
Musa,  viihi  causas  racmora,  quo  nuriiinc  lacso,  and  MyerSp  in-
cluded among  the  associations  aroused  in  his  mind  by  these
words  "  Dido — feast — calm  waters  by  Neptune "  :  an  answer
which  suggests  that  he  recognised  the  source  of  the  Latin
words,  and  that  he  was  thinking  particularly  of  the  escape  of
Aeneas  and  his  fleet  from  the  storm  which  Neptune  had
calmed,  of  his  arrival  at  Carthage  and  of  his  hospitable  recep-
tion by  Dido  (see  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper,  p.  68).

A  few  minutes  later  Mr.  Dorr  read  to  MyerSp  the  follow-
ing words  from  Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry:  "From
ten  to  sixteen  I  [i.e.  Frederic  Myers]  lived  much  in  the
inward  recital  of  Homer,  Aeschylus,  Lucretius,  Horace,  and
Ovid."

As  the  name  Horace  was  spoken,  the  hand  wrote :

Ode  to  i motalty  imortality

....  Ode  Horace  to  MortaHty,

This  reply — which  naturally  conveyed  no  meaning  to  Mr.
Dorr — I  regard  as  affording  some  confirmation  of  the
correctness  of  my  conjecture  that  the  words,  "  Do  you
remember  immortality?" — written  by  MyerSp  on  April  17,
1907,  in  connexion  with  the  question  about  an  Ode  of
Horace — were  intended  as  an  allusion  to  Frederic  ]\Iyers's
poem  Immortality  (see  Proe.  Vol.  XXII.  p.  398).  Anyhow
it  is  clear  that  MyerSp  remembered  the  question  asked
a  year  before,  and  his  answer  to  it.  Mr.  Dorr  then  went  on
to  read  some  more  passages  from  pp.  17  and  18  of
Frarjonents,  the  last  sentence  read  being  this :  "  It  was  the
life of about the sixth century before Christ,  on the  isles


154


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


of  the  Aegean,  which  drew  me  most."  As  these  words  were
read  Myersp  wrote  :

A  Hfe  iiuvnqjlete.^  Oh  !  it  is  all  so  dear.  I  recall  so  well  my
feehngs,  my  emotions,  my  joy?,  my  pain  and  much  pain.  Oh  !  I
am  transported  back  to  Greece.  I  recall  it  all.  I  am  transported—
I  remember  before  my  marriage  all  my  imaginations,  my  pain,  my
longing,  my  unrest.  I  lived  it  all  out  as  few  men  did.  I  drank,
as  Omar  Kyam  [sic],  life  and  all  its  joys  and  griefs.  And  never
was  it  complete.  A  disappointing — long,  dreary  longing  for  a  fulfil-
ment of  my  dreamed  of  joys.  I  found  it  here  and  only  here.  'Men
may  come  and  men  may  go  but  I  go  on  for  ever.'  I  shall  be
delighted  to  complete  my  memories  of  Homer,  Horace  and  Vergil
until  you  are  satisfied  that  I  am  still  one  among  you,  not  a  fantasy
but  a  reality.

This  emotional  outburst,  it  should  be  observed,  is  closely
associated  with  "  memories  of  Homer,  Horace  and  Vergil ",  and
not  with  the  other  classical  autliors,  Ovid,  Lucretius  and
Aeschylus,  mentioned  in  the  passage  read  from  Fragments ;
and  into  it  is  introduced  a  quotation  from  Tennyson  whereby
the  trance-personality  proclaims  his  own  immortality.^

MyerSp  then  enumerates  the  cross-correspondence  experi-
ments on  which  he  is  at  present  engaged,  namely,
"  The  city  in  flames,  a  face  in  tiames,  exile,  Troy,  Juno,
Xeptune "  ;  and  then  immediately  asks  Mr.  Dorr  to  select  "  a
line  from  Horace  "  lor  the  purpose  of  a  fresh  experiment.  Mr.
Dorr  selected  instead  a  Vergilian  line ;  but  the  point  I  wish  to
be  noted  is  that  MyerSp  makes  his  request  for  a  Inie  from
Horace  immediately  alter  writing  "Neptune'',  and  soon  after
speaking  of  having  found  the  consummation  of  happiness  in
his  present  life  and  there  only.

On  March  16,  1908,  after  MyerSp  had  made  a  reference  to
Juno  and  Aeneas,  Mr.  Dorr  asked  him  who  Charon  was,  and
MyerSp  replied  that  he  was  "  thinking  of  Aeneas's  father " :  a
reply  which  suggests  knowledge  of  the  sixth  book  of  Acncul,

^The  italicised  words  represent  words  underlined  in  the  original  script.

-The  whole  passage  should  be  compared  with  what  was  said  by  Myersp  on
May  1,  1907,  (see  Proc.  Vol.  XXII.  pp.  379  and  403)  in  connexion  with  his
answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  question,  where,  as  here,  emphasis  is  thrown  upon
the  comidetioii  of  happiness  in  the  next  life  and  on  the  inferiority  of  life  on
earth  to  the  after- life.


LX.]  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings :  Horace  Ode  Question.  155

where  Aeneas'  vision  of  the  Underworld  and  his  meeting  with
his  father,  Anchises,  is  described  (see  above,  p.  145).  All  the
utterances  in  the  waking-stage  were  reported  as  from  Myersp,
and  ran  as  follows  :

...  I  am  not  a  phantom  nor  unreal — Carthage —  She  did  not
wish  [it]  to  be  more  beautiful  than  hers.  Neptune  calmed  the
sea  for  Aeneas My  soul  is  in  a  flame. All  God's  pro-

phecies have  been  fulfilled.  Nothing  in  Iliad  or  Odyssey  can  compare
with  my  soul  raptures,  but  they  are  all  in  tune  with  it.  Vivi  et
vivias  [so  recorded]  with  my  best  love.  .  .  .  Vivi  (pronounced
"  veevee  ")  et  vivias  [so  recorded].

Here  again  MyerSp  insistently  proclaims  the  reality  and  joy
of  his  present  state  of  existence  ;  he  is  no  phantom,  no  e'l^oAov,
not  one  of  a  throng  of  joyless  ghosts  such  as  peopled  the
Underworld  of  Homer,  or  of  A^ergil,  or  of  Horace.

Achilles.

On  March  17,  1908,  Mr.  Dorr  read  to  Myersp  the  following
lines  from  Tennyson's  Vastness,  which  Frederic  Myers  had
quoted  in  his  essay  on  "  Tennyson  as  Prophet "  in  Science
and  a  Future  Life  (pp.  152-3)  :

Many  a  hearth  upon  our  dark  globe  sighs  after  many  a  vanish'd
face,

Many  a  planet  by  many  a  sun  may  roll  with  the  dust  of  a  vanish'd
race.

Raving  politics,  never  at  rest — as  this  poor  earth's  pale  history
runs, —

What  is  it  all  but  a  trouble  of  ants  in  the  srleam  of  a  million
million  of  suns  ?

MyerSp  in  reply,  after  first  saying  it  "  sounds  like  one  of
my  quotations  from  Swinburne rightly  recognises  it  as  from
Tennyson ;  and  then  immediately  writes  "  Achilles ",  adding,
"  You  brought  him  to  my  mind  when  you  were  reading
Ho  mer." Mr.  Dorr  asks,  "  AVhat  about  Achilles  ?  "  and  Mj'erSp

iMrs.  Verrall  has  suggested  some  very  plausible  reasons  why  Myersp,  if
he  possessed  the  memories  of  Frederic  Myers,  should  have  attributed  these
lines  to  Swinburne,  but  I  will  not  enter  into  them  here.


15G


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


answers :  "  Why,  I  recalled  it  when  you  were  questioning  me.
Could  you  read  more  ?  "

Although  Mr.  Dorr  entirely  foiled  to  see  any  relevance
either  in  the  allusion  to  Achilles,  or  in  the  request  for  more  to
be  read,  I  think  it  was  extremely  significant  that  an  intelli-
gence representing  itself  as  that  of  Frederic  Myers  should
connect  Tennyson's  VaMness  with  Achilles.^  In  Odysscjj  XI.,
when  Odysseus  enters  the  Underworld,  he  meets  Achilles,  who
asks  "  how  durst  thou  come  down  to  the  house  of  Hades,
where  dwell  the  senseless  dead,  the  phantoms  of  men  out-
worn ? "  Odysseus  answers  him  in  consolatory  words,  which
draw  from  Achilles  this  response :  "  Nay,  speak  not  comfort-
ably to  me  of  death.  .  .  .  Rather  would  I  live  on  ground
[or,  "  as  a  serf  attached  to  the  soil,"  i.e.  eirapovpo<i  —  adscriptus
glchac]  as  the  hireling  of  another  .  .  .  than  bear  sway  among
all  the  dead  that  are  no  more."

This  passage — one  of  the  most  famous  in  ancient  literature
— would  almost  inevitably  be  recalled  to  a  classical  reader
by  the  whole  thought,  and  especially  by  one  of  the  concluding
stanzas  of  Tennyson's Vastncss  :

What  is  it  all,  if  we  all  of  us  end  but  in  being  our  own  corpse-
coffins  at  last,

Swallow'd  in  Vastness,  lost  in  Silence,  drown'd  in  the  deeps  of  a
meaningless  Past  ?

These  lines,  though  not  read  by  Mr.  Dorr,  actually  form  part
of  what  is  quoted  from  Vastness  in  "  Tennyson  as  Prophet " ;
and  the  fact  that  they  are  there  quoted  suggests  that  when
Myersp  asked  Mr.  Dorr  to  "  read  more "  he  may  have  meant
that  if  he  read  the  remainder  of  the  quotation  the  clue  to
the  connexion  of  thought  with  Achilles  would  be  revealed.

If  this  is  the  right  interpretation  of  the  mention  of  Achilles,
it  would  seem  as  if  the  "  Myers  "  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  here,
and  the  "Myers"  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  of  March  12  and
April  27,  1901,  through  the  phrase  adscripttis  glebae,  both
made  allusions  to  the  passage  in  the  eleventh  book  of  Odyssey,
where  the  meeting  of  Odysseus  with  Achilles  in  the  Under-
world is  described.-

1  There  is  no  allusion  to  Achilles  in  "Tennyson  as  Prophet".

2  This  passage  is  at  least  twice  referred  to  iu  Myers's  writings :  Essays
Classical,  p.  172,  and  Essays  Modurn,  p.  159.


]-X.]  Three  Incidents  from  theSittings :  Horace  Ode  Question.  157


Orion.

In  the  waking-stage  of  the  trance  of  March  31,  1908,  were
uttered  the  words  "  He  says  you  remind  him  of  Orion " ;  the
context  leaving  it  doubtful  whether  "  He "  meant  MyerSp  or
Hodgsonp.^

It  was  Mr.  Dorr's  practice  at  that  time  to  read  over  to  the
controls,  usually  at  the  next  sitting,  the  record  of  the  utter-
ances made  in  the  waking-stage  of  a  previous  trance,  in  order
to  obtain  comments  on  them  or  corrections  or  expansions  or
explanations  of  them  from  the  controls.  Thus  on  April  6,
1908,  Mr.  Dorr  asked  Myersp  about  the  mention  of  Orion  in
the  wakinsr-stage  of  March  31  :

G.  B.  D.  The  other  day  she  [i.e.  Mrs.  Piper  speaking  in  the  waking-
stage]  said  that  R.  H.  [i.e.  Hodgson]  said  I  reminded
him  of  Orion.  I  thought  that  probably  that  had  some
reference  to  some  message.

(MyerSp  communicating)  Most  certainly  it  did.  I  have  given
it  through  Mrs.  V.  [i.e.  Mrs.  Verrall]  several  times.
"  Orion's  head  "  is  what  I  wrote.

["Orion's  head"  may  refer  to  one  or  both  of  two  things.
It  may  refer  to  Aeneid  X.  763-767  :  "Vast  as  Orion  when,
with  planted  foot,  he  cleaves  his  way  through  the  vast
pools  of  mid-ocean  and  his  shoulder  overtops  the  waves,
or  carrying  an  ancient  mountain-ash  from  the  hilltops,
paces  the  ground  and  hides  his  head  among  the  clouds  '
(caput  inter  nuhila  condit) ;  or  to  the  story  (not,  however,
to  be  found  in  classical  literature)  of  how  Artemis,
challenged  by  Apollo  to  hit  an  object  far  out  at  sea,
aimed  and  struck  it,  only  to  find  that  it  was  the  head
of  Orion,  whom  she  loved. — }soie  hj  J.  G.  I'.j

On  April  21,  1908,  in  the  waking-stage,  came  another  and
disjointed  reference  to  Orion,  as  follows :  "  Orion,  son  of
Neptune."

^  Mr.  Dorr  took  "He"  to  mean  Hodgsonp.  I  tliiuk  it  more  likely  that
Myersp  was  meant,  as  the  next  utterance,  which  deals  with  a  difl'erent  topic,
is  preluded  by  "Hodgson  said",  as  if  to  denote  a  change  of  speaker.  But
the  point  is  not  material,  as  Mj'ers  and  Hodgson  are  always  represented  in
these  sittings  as  in  close  co-operation.


15S


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


On  April  22,  1908,  Mr.  Dorr  asked  Hodgsoiip  if  anything
liad  been  said  about  Orion  during  the  English  series  of  sittings
with  Mrs.  Piper.  Hodgsonp  replied,  correctly  and  with
emphasis,  "  No ".  Mr.  Dorr  then  asked  Myersp  for  his  com-
ments on  the  utterances  made  in  the  waking-stage  on  the
previous  day.  When  the  words,  "  Orion,  son  of  Neptune,"
were  read  out,  MyerSp  at  once  wrote :  "  Do  you  recall  an  Ode
of  Horace's  ?  "  Mr.  Dorr  replied :  "  I  do  not  know  my  Horace
well,  and  I  recall  none  in  special  at  the  moment.  Why  do
you  ask  me  ?  "  MyerSp  then  said  :  "  Because  you  ought  to
know  that  I  am  Myers  by  my  giving  all  such  proofs."

To  Mr.  Dorr  these  remarks  of  Myersp  must  have  seemed
hopelessly  irrelevant,^  as  indeed  they  must  have  seemed  to
any  one  who  did  not  know  both  that  a  year  before  a
question  had  been  asked  of  MyerSp  about  an  Ode  of  Horace,
and  to  which  of  Horace's  Odes  this  question  related.  As  a
matter  of  fact,  as  we  know,  the  question  asked  a  year
before  related  to  Hor.  C.  I.  28  ;  and  this  is  the  only  Ode  of
Horace's  in  xohich  Neptune  and  Orion,  are  hath  vientioned.
But  before  discussing  this,  the  culminating  point  of  the
episode,  I  had  better  first  describe  the  last  references  to  it  in
Mrs.  Piper's  trance.

Last  References  to  the  Subject  in  the  Trance.

Early  in  May  1908  I  wrote  to  Mr.  Dorr  and  asked
him  to  read  the  first  six  lines  of  Hor.  C.  I.  2S  in  Latin
to  MyerSp.  I  did  this  in  entire  ignorance  that  anything  had
been  said  at  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings  about  Orion  and  Neptune ;
for  I  had  seen  the  records  of  the  sittings  of  March  9  and  10,
1908,  only,  and  these  I  had  but  hastily  scanned. -

I  did  not  tell  Mr.  Dorr  why  I  wanted  him  to  read  these

1  Except  in  so  far  as  the  words  "Orion,  son  of  Neptune  "  sliovved  knowledge
of  one  of  the  various  versions  of  Orion's  parentage.

-The  words  "Ode  to  imortality '',  written  at  the  sitting  of  March  10,
1908,  in  connexion  with  the  mention  of  Horace's  name,  hail  conveyed  nothing
to  my  mind  wlien  I  read  them  on  March  .30,  190S,  for  the  first  time;  and  I
doubt  if  I  noticed  them  at  all,  for  whea  on  April  '25,  1908,  I  interpreted
the  phrase  used  by  Myersp  on  April  17,  1907,  "  Do  you  remember  immor-
tality?" as  referring  to  Frederic  Myers's  Immortality,  it  revived  no  recollection
of  the  words  "Ode  to  imortality  ".


LX.]  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings :  Horace  Ode  Question.  159


lines  to  MyerSp,  and  though  Mr.  Dorr  knew  the  source  of
them  he  did  not  reveal  it  or  give  any  hint  of  it  to  MyerSp
when  he  read  them  at  the  last  sitting  of  the  season  on
May  26,  1908.

After  Mr.  Dorr  had  read  the  first  six  lines  the  hand
wrote  :

ODE  Odes,  Beginning  of  end.  Myers.  Odyssey.  (After  a
pause)  Do  you  remember  a  book  Onar  ?  (G.  B.  D.  No,  I  recall
none  which  has  that  name.) I  understood  it  when  in  the  body.

That  "  ODE  Odes "  meant  an  Ode  of  Horace's  is  shown  by
the  following  extract  from  the  sitting  of  December  13,  1908.

G.  B.  D.  You  remember  our  reading  certain  things  together  before
the  Light  closed  for  the  summer  rest"?

(MyerSp  communicating.)  Yes,  your  last  reading  to  me  was
one  of  Horace's  Odes  and  pleased  me  greatly.  It  gave
me  courage  to  go  on.

Mr.  Dorr  read  the  lines  again  to  MyerSp  on  March  1,  1909,

but  they  elicited  no  response ;  and  here  for  the  present,  and
probably  for  good,  the  matter  stands.

It  will  be  observed  that,  on  May  2  6,  1908,  MyerSp,  after
"  ODE  Odes "  had  been  written,  added  "  Odyssey."  Now  at
the  sitting  of  May  1,  1907  {Froc.  Vol.  XXIT.  p.  381)  the
following  had  occurred  :

(Present:  Mrs.  Sidgwick.)

(Myersp  communicating)

I  went  over  those  Odes  very  careful!}'
and  remembered  one  in  particular
which  I  loved  very  much
Odes yes  it  was.

(Rector  communicating)

sounds  like  Odessus

E.M.S.  "Odessis"?

yes.

Odesesis
Odesia


160  /.  G.  Piddington.  [part

E.M.S.  "  Odesia"  ?  '
yes  like  it

(Myersp  communicating)

I  do  not  think  I  ever  told  you  before.

Odesu

Odesie

E.M.S.  "  Odyssey  "1
yes

Better  not  it  quite.
E.M.S.  Let  us  leave  it  for  next  time.
Good

In  my  comments  on  the  Horace  Ode  question  {Proc.  Vol.  XXII.
pp.  403-4:)  I  took  the  words  "  Odessus  Odesia,"  etc.,  to  be
unsuccessful  attempts  on  the  part  of  Rector  to  re- write  the
word  "  Odes,"  and  I  treated  the  incident  as  a  good  example  of
Eector's  readiness  to  accept  misleading  suggestions.  Now,  in
the  new  light  thrown  on  the  subject  by  Mrs.  Verrall's  early
scripts  and  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings,  I  am  disposed  to  regard  the
words  "  Odessus  Odesesis  Odesia  Odesu  Odesie "  written  on
May  1,  1907,  and  the  "Odyssey"  of  May  26,  1908,  as
attempts  to  connect  Odysseus  and  the  Odyssey  with  Hor.
C.  I.  1^8. I  see  no  meanins;  in  "beginning  of  end."

I  suspect  that  the  "  book  Onar "  means  the  Ruhaiyat  of
Omar  Khayyam,  to  which  Myersp  referred  on  March  10,  1908,
when  speaking  of  the  incompleteness  of  happiness  in  this  life
{v.  p.  154),  and  to  whicli  other  references  have  been  made  at
various  times  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance.  It  was  appropriate
enough  that  the  reading  of  the  first  six  lines  of  this  Ode
should  suggest  an  association  of  ideas  with  Omar's  Song,  whose
burden,  says  FitzGerald,  " — if  not  '  Let  us  eat ' — is  assuredly —
'  Let  us  drink,  for  To-morrow  we  die  ! '  "

Summary  and  Eeview  of  the  earlier  and  later  Answers
TO  THE  Horace  Ode  Question.

Let  us  now  first  consider  how  Myersp  answered  the  Horace
Ode  question  in  1907  and  then  how  in  1908  he  amijlified
and  added  to  his  original  answer.


LX.]  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings  :  Horace  Ode  Question.  161

In  1907  MyerSp  conveyed  his  answer  by  means  of  allusions
to  Frederic  Myers's  poem  Immortality  and  to  two  lines  in
Abt  Vogler :

.  .  .  the  wonderful  Dead  who  have  passed  through  the  body  and
gone,

But  were  back  once  more  to  breathe  in  an  old  world  worth  their
new ;

these  lines  being  followed  by  the  comment  that  though  he
had  returned  to  breathe  in  the  old  world  it  was  "  not  better
than  our  new"  (see  Froc.  Vol.  XXII.  pp.  369,  379-380).

There  is  a  possible  two-fold  point  in  alluding  to  these  two
lines  :  they  can  be  taken  to  indicate  knowledge  of  the  reference
to  the  reincarnation  of  Pythagoras  in  Hor.  C.  I.  28,  and  they
can  be  taken  to  intimate  that  the  gloomy  forecasts  in  Hor.
C.  I.  28  and  in  Immortaiity  of  what  existence  after  death
might  prove  to  be,  were  not  justified  by  the  reality.

Besides  this,  unless  it  is  mere  confusion,  there  would
appear  to  have  been  a  confused  attempt  to  connect  the  Ode
of  Horace  with  Odysseus  or  the  Odyssey.

In  1908,  Myersp  was  led  to  mention  Neptune  in  con-
nexion with  Vergil's  Aeneid,  not  once,  but  frequently ;  and
the  subject  of  Neptune  was  further  emphasised  by  its  being
chosen  for  a  cross-correspondence  experiment  (cf.  Mrs.  Sidg-
wick's  paper,  p.  177).  The  stress  thus  undesignedly  thrown
on  Neptune  provoked  apparently  in  the  mind  of  MyerSp  an
association  of  ideas  with  Orion.  At  first  it  seemed  as  if  this
association  of  Orion  with  Neptune  was  due  solely  to  a  revived
memory  of  an  out-of-the-way  mythological  story,  according  to
which  Orion  was  Neptune's  son;  but  later  (viz.  on  April  22,
1908,  see  above)  it  was  made  evident  that  it  was  due  to  a
memory  of  an  Ode  of  Horace's.  What  Ode  was  not  stated,
but  in  only  one  Ode  of  Horace's — C.  I.  28 — are  Neptune  and
Orion  both  mentioned,  and  that  Ode  is  the  Ode  which  formed
the  subject  of  the  question  put  to  MyerSp  in  1907.  No  help
could  have  been  given  by  the  experimenter,  Mr.  Dorr,  towards
the  identification  of  the  Ode  for  the  very  good  reason  that
he  knew  nothing  whatsoever  about  the  test  question  put  in
1907,  and  even  if  he  had  known  about  it,  he  would  not  have
known  what  the  right  answer  to  it  was.

L


162


J.  G.  Piddington.


[PAKT


In  addition  to  this,  the  mention  by  MyerSp  of  Achilles  in
connexion  with  a  quotation  from  Tennyson's  Vastness  on  March
17,  1908,  and  of  the  Odyssey  in  connexion  with  the  first  six
lines  of  Hor.  C.  1.  28  on  May  26,  1908,  seems  to  confirm,
or  at  any  rate  to  present  very  striking  coincidences  with,  the
interpretation  of  the  first  answer  given  in  1907  to  the  Horace
Ode  question  (see  Proc.  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  398-406),  which  I  first
thought  out  on  April  25,  1908.  The  mention  of  Achilles
made  on  March  17,  1908  seems  like  an  anticipation  as  well
as  a  confirmation  of  my  interpretation,  as  does  likewise  the
insistence  with  which,  in  the  communications  of  March  10  and
March  16,  1908,  MyerSp  claims  that  his  life  is  no  phantasmal
one  but  real,  and  that  his  joy  is  fulfilled.^

The  note  of  almost  triumphant  assurance  with  which  MyerSp
explained  to  Mr.  Dorr  why  he  had  asked  him  if  he  recalled
an  Ode  of  Horace's — "  because  you  ought  to  know  that  I  am
Myers  by  my  giving  all  such  proofs"  (p.  158) — suggests  that
Myersp  felt  assured  that  he  had  succeeded  in  getting  through
a  first-rate  piece  of  evidence,  and  he  certainly  cannot  have
acquired  this  assurance  from  any  sort  of  indication  furnished
by  Mr.  Dorr.

Mrs.  Vekeall's  Early  Eeferences  to  the  Horace  Ode.

I  must  now  deal  in  detail  with  the  four  early  scripts  of
Mrs.  Verrall's  which  I  have  so  far  only  summarised.

Mrs.  VermWs  script  of  March  5,  1901.'-

(«)  Evie  Myers  counsel  gear  neu  I  save  trouble  cant
keep  evie  vely  ten  yet  come  nomeu  et  ego  cum  multis
at  omnibus  ne  tristia  munera  [spelt  "nunera"]  fiunt  nee

^  These  anticipations  by  Myersp  of  conjectural  interpretations  put  forward
in  my  paper  On  a  Series  of  Concordant  Automatkma  do  not  stand  alone.  Two
other  incidents  that  occurred  at  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings  seem  to  me  to  be  of  the
same  kind ;  but  I  cannot  discuss  them  here.  If  the  coincidences  are  not
accidental,  and  if  they  are  to  be  explained  by  telepathy  between  the  living,
it  must  have  been  I  who  drew  on  Mrs.  Piper  or  Mr.  Dorr,  not  Mrs.  Piper
who  drew  on  my  mind.

2  This  and  the  three  other  scripts  Iiave  ah-eady  appeared,  either  in  whole  or
in  part,  in  Proc.  Vol.  XX.  The  versions  there  given  contained  some  omissions
and  one  or  two  slight  errors.  The  former  have  been  supplied,  and  the  latter
corrected  in  the  versions  given  here.


LX.]  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings:  Horace  Ode  Question.  163


ipse  postridie  morgeiistern  opus  rosea  angelica  notabilis
semper  vivo  paullatim  et  spice — ter  ad  mundum  quod
ubi  que

et  ego  et  ego  ne  tentaveris  aerias  cunctiter  gradu
pone  sequens  vestigia  deum  multipliciter  tuus  est  sumptus
mihi  et  ridens  imaginem  tui  crucis  alteram  mosse.

noli  vitare  quod  ego  tibi  dicam  et  semper  et  ubique
ne  semel  propositum  meum  fregeris.  mane  domi  dominio
videas  quem  tibi  miltam addio — dio  deo.

Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  March  12,  1901.

{h)  Attendite  nunc  quid  asperiam  tibi  omine  magno  nec  mihi
venienti  adsonat  glebis  adscripta  per  dulcia  resonantia
[altered  apparently  to  "  resonautis "  or  "  resonantes "]
chorea,  mox  et  tu  audies  videndum  et  paraudum  nec
sine  ofBcina  paupertas  egestate  confirmata  mansit  quis
adest  o  loquere  vocabulis  concinnatis  dehiscens  quod
modulor  magica  salutatio  abundat  gravevirens  cum  majes-
tate  splendidior  vitro  o  fons  possumne  ante  omnes  lag
lacuna  de  stilo  nihil  quod  attinet  modo  cecini  carmen
ineluctabile  auribus  tuis  satis  vocanti  plurimum  in  dies
eras  ingens  iterabimus  aequor vale  ter  vale.

Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  March  15,  1901.

(c)  Commendatio  unica  moderatione  neninem  [sic]  laedit.
quare  resignas  speciosa  recinet  lex  talionis  ulsciscendi
protervam  nodulo  invicem  noris  sed  mirabilis  sequitur
occupatio.  biblion  tibi  opsequor  dei  gratia  impigre  con-
futaris  massica  nec  sine  venustate  sperne  elegos  quos
audax  composui  nescio  qua  dulcedine  captus.  alter
alterum  ego  te  si  modo  cont  consenseris  optimo  dierura
procedas  elusione  nexis  spargedulis  etsi  infinitis.  nunc
tibi  redditae  partes  quoad  eliciet  mens  tua  seusus.  velle
posse  si  mihi  tibi  etiam.  capisco  auribus  puris  Pollux
Cappa  docus  ponit  tigillum —

Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  April  27,  1901.

(d)  Commensal  in  nitidillo  cecinit  carmen  irrefragabile
scientiae.  nonne  audis  ?  ausculta  aures  adhibeto  iam
proooraium  [spelt,  "  pooeuium  "j  incipit.  Fac,  Die,  faceto
dicto nomen  nescis — sed  non  semper  sic  erit.


164


/.  G.  Piddingto7i.


[part


Fred  to  Evie — The  book  is  there  look  for  it  well —
you  will  find  it  No  hurr}-.  tell  Mrs.  Sidgwick.  English
is  harder — Latine  loquere,  sed  tu  non  potes  interpretare
[sic],  ascripta  es  glebae  mente  vel  ingenio — o  libera
animam  per  niaria  per  polum  trauscurre  modo  cantoris
— omnia  ibi  plana,  omnia  rosea  suffusa  luce  vel  caecis
bene  videntia — oculi  autem  tui  caligine  circumfusi — why
cant  I  go  on.  It  seems  so  clear — put  it  down — wrapped
up — Look  both  of  you — non  alii — solae  solae — under
something  blue — loose  low — you  must  stoop — to  see  it.
Try  again.  Go  on — go  on.  Listen  at  night,  in  [s]leep
sopor  prodest  mortalibus — in  noctibus  Veritas,  ^ts  Tep  t
avvayXio.  Koi  jjiova-tK-i]  /xeAcoSta — fivs  vel  /xowcratos — magUS
etiam  eadem  omnia — nonne  vides  ?  M.  (two  drawings  of
two  eyes)  luna,  semper  luna. M —

Of  (a)  a  translation  of  a  few  words  only  can  be  offered,
the  rest  being  beyond  interpretation.  Thus,  semper  vivo :  "  I
live  for  ever "  ;  JVoli  vitare — mittam  :  "  Do  not  shun  what  I
shall  say  to  thee  both  always  and  everywhere  do  not  once
infringe  my  set  purpose.  Stay  at  home  on  Sunday(  ?).  See
whom  I  shall  send  to  thee."

JVe  tristia  m-unera  Jiunt.  If  fiant "  be  read  for  fitint,  this
would  mean  :  "  Let  not  the  last  sad  offices  to  the  dead  be
performed."

Nc  tentaveris  acrias  is  an  unmistakable  allusion  to  the  fifth
line  of  Hor.  C.  I.  28,  "  Aerias  tcntassc  domos" :  a  fact  which
makes  it  not  improbable  that  the  preceding  tristia  vmnera  is
a  reminiscence  of  the  parvci  niunera  of  the  same  Ode.

The  words  semper  vivo  may  be  compared  with  the  words
vivi  et  vivias  spoken  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  of  March  16,  1908,
which  seem  like  an  attempt  a,t  vivo  et  vivas,  "  I  live  and  rnay'st
thou  live"  {v.  p.  155).

Evie  vcly  ten  is  probably  an  attempt  at  Eveleen,  Mrs.
Myers's  Christian  name.

{h)  Listen  [plural]  now.  What  shall  I  unfold  [reading,  aperiam  for
asperiam]  to  thee  with  a  great  omen  ?  [Omen  is  frequently  used  in
the  script  when  a  message  is  given  of  which  the  meaning  is  to
become  intelligible  only  in  the  future.]  To  me  too  on  my  coming
(the  phrase)  glebis  adscripta  does  not  sound  through  the  sweetly


LX.]  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings :  Horace  Ode  Question.  165


echoing  choirs.^  Soon  shalt  thou  too  hear  [Videndum — majestate
untranslateable]  More  clear  than  crystal  0  spring  !  Cannot  I  before
all  (lag  lacuna  de  stilo)  There  is  nothing  that  belongs  Just  now  I
have  sung  an  ode  that  your  ears  cannot  fail  to  grasp  [satis — m
dies  untranslateable]  To-morrow  we  will  again  try  the  great  sea.
Farewell,  thrice  farewell.

glebis  adscripta.  The  phrase  adscriptus  glehac  means  in
medieval  Latin,  "one  attached  to  the  soil",  i.e.  "a  serf".
It  has  been  used  by  Merry  and  other  commentators  as  a
Latin  rendering  of  the  word  eirdpovpoi;  found  only  in  Odyssey,
XL  489.  To  the  best  of  her  belief  Mrs.  Verrall  did  not
learn  of  this  application  of  adscriptus  glehae  until  August  16,
1906;  when,  as  she  noted  at  the  time,  she  came  across  it  in
a  classical  dictionary,  and,  recalling  the  words  ascripta  es  glehae
in  her  scripts  of  March  12  and  April  27,  1901,  thought  they
might  be  meant  as  an  allusion  to  the  Homeric  passage.

Splendidior  vitro  o  fons  is  a  reminiscence  of  Hor.  C.  III.
13,  1,  and  eras  ingens  iterabimus  aequor  of  Hor.  C.  I.  7,  32.

(c)  [Commendatio — ocaqjatio  untranslateable]  Book  I  humour  you.
By  the  grace  of  God  thou  art  energetically  confuted.  Massic  [neut.  pi.
Apparently  a  meaningless  reference  to  the  Massic  wine  of  Horace
and  the  Georgics.]  Not  without  charm.  Reject  the  verses  which  I
'wrote  in  my  presumptuousness,  captivated  by  I  know  not  what
sweet  witchery.-  One  another.  I  thee  [si  modo — infinitis  untrans-
lateable] Now  it's  thy  turn,  in  so  far  as  thy  mind  shall  work  out
the  sense.  To  wish  is  to  be  able.  If  that's  true  of  me  it's  true  of
thee.  Capisco{1)  with  pure  ears.  Pollux  the  Cappadocian  affixes  the
seal  [reading  sigillavi  for  tigilluni\.

(d)  A  fellow  guest  in (1)  sang  a  song  that  science  cannot

gainsay. Dost  thou  not  hear  ? Listen. Incline  thine ears  then.

^  Resonantia  chorea  1  take  to  be  a  mistake  for  rcsonantes  choreas.  Chorea
properly  means  a  choral  dance  with  music.  The  phrase  is  perhaps  a  reminis-
cence of  Vergil,  Aen.  vi.  644.

-It  is  an  interesting  fact  that  the  phrase  "  diikedine  capitis"  here  used  by
Myersv  occurs  in  the  eleventh  book  of  Ovid's  Metamorphoses  (1.  170),  which
Mrs.  Verrall  in  1901  had  not  read,  and  from  which  there  is  reason  to  believe
that  the  answer  given  by  Myersp  to  the  Lethe  question  was  derived.  Although
in  her  report  on  her  own  automatic  writings  (Froc.  Vol.  XX.)  Mrs.  Verrall
gave  a  long  and  elaborate  list  of  quotations  and  literary  reminiscences  occurring
in  them,  she  did  not  recognise  "  dtdcedme  captus"  as  a  quotation.


166


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


The  prelude  begins  already.  Act,  speak,  with  witty  jest.  Thou
knowest  not  the  name. But  it  will  not  always  be  thus.

Fred  to  Evie  etc  .  .  .  Speak  Latin,  but  thou  canst  not  interpret
[reading,  interpretari]  Thou  art  bound  to  earth  in  mind  or  disposi-
tion. 0  free  thy  soul.  Range  o'er  the  seas,  o'er  the  heaven,  after
the  fashion  of  the  singer.  There  all  is  clear,  all  bathed  in  rosy
light,  plain  even  for  the  blind  to  see  [reading  evidential But  thine

eyes  are  shrouded  in  darkness. Why  cant  I  go  on  etc

Not  others — [you  two]  alone,  alone  [fem.  pL]  Under  something
blue  etc  ....  Sleep  is  beneficial  to  mortals.  Truth  comes  o'nights
and  musical  melody.  Mys  or  Musaeus.  The  magician  even  all
things  the  same. Do  you  not  see.  M.

The  moon,  ever  the  moon.  M.

The  words  per  maria  per  iiolurii  transcurre  are  an  unmistakable
reminiscence  of  the  opening  lines  of  Hor.  C.  I.  28,  "  Tc  maris
et  terrae  .  .  .  animoque  rotundum  Percurrisse  polum  morituro."

Modo  cantoris  literally  means  "  after  the  fashion  of  the
singer " ;  but  may,  I  think,  be  fairly  taken  as  meaning  "  as  the
poet  {i.e.  Horace)  has  it ".  The  Horatian  reminiscence,  it  should
be  noted,  is  preceded  by  the  phrase  ascriptci  es  glebae.

The  words  omnia  ibi  ij/ftjiff,  omnia  rosea  sioffusa  Ince  should
be  compared  with  the  words  rosea  angelica  in  (a).  If  both
phrases,  with  their  respective  contexts,  are  compared  with  a
poem  of  Frederic  Myers's,  called  "  On  a  Spring  Morning  at
Sea",  published  for  the  first  time  in  1904  in  Fragments  of
Prose  and  Poetry  (p.  54),  some  curious  coincidences  will  be
noticed. Thus,  while  the  script  has :

Postridie  morgenstcrn  opus  rosea  angelica  (i.e.  On  the  morrow
morning-star  optus'^  rosy  angelic).

Ovinia ibi  plana, omnicc  rosea  suffusa luce  vel caecis  bene
\_e'\videntia  oculi  autem  tui  ealigine  circumfusi  {i.e.  There  all  is
clear,  all  bathed  in  rosy  light,  plain  even  for  the  blind  to  see  ;
but  thine  eyes  are  shrouded  in  darkness.) ;
the  poem  runs :

"  And  such  a  sight  as  this  is,  I  suppose,

Shall  meet  thee  on  the  morrow  of  thy  death  ;
And  pearl  to  sapphire,  opal  into  rose

Melt  in  that  morn  no  heart  imagineth  ; —


Opufi  means  "work". Opalm  is  the  Latin  for  "opal".


LX.]  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings :  Horace  Ode  Qtcestion.  167


Fair  as  when  now  thine  eyes  thou  dar'st  nob  close
Lest  the  whole  joy  go  from  thee  at  a  breath,

And  the  sea's  silence  and  the  heaven's  repose
Evanish  as  a  dream  evanisheth."

These  four  scripts  are  interconnected  in  the  following-
ways  :

In  (a)  occurs  the  name  "  Evie  Myers "  and  an  allusion  to
Horace  C.  I.  28.

In  (&)  occur  the  words  "  glcbis  adscripta ",  "  carmen  inclnct-
abilc",  and  allusions  to  Hor.  C.  III.  13,  and  I.  7.

In  (c)  "  biUion ",  i.e.  "  book,"  is  mentioned.

All  these  points  recur  in  (d),  where  "  carmen  irrefragcdiile "
recalls  the  "  carmen  ineluctabilc "  of  (b) ;  the  words  "  Fred  to
Evie  "  are  followed  by  a  reference  to  "  the  book  "  mentioned  in
(c)  ;  "  AscrijJta  es  glebae  "  is  followed  by  an  allusion  to  the  open-
ing lines  of  Hor.  C.  I.  28,  a  similar  allusion  having  already
appeared  in  {a) ;  and  one  of  the  regular  signatures  of  MyerSy,
namely  M.,  is  twice  appended.

"  Fred "  means  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  and  "  Evie "  Mrs.  Myers.
Approximations  to  the  phrase  adscript^is  glebae  occur  twice ,
first,  in  {b)  in  combination  with  allusions  to  Hor.  C.  III.  13,
and  I.  7  ;  the  second  time  in  {d)  in  combination  with  an
allusion  to  Hor.  G.  I.  28.  When  on  the  first  occasion  "glcbis
adscri23ta"  was  accompanied  by  an  allusion  to  Hor.  C.  III.  13,
the  script  says  :  "  nihU  quod  attinct  modo  eccini  carmen
ineluctabilc  auribus  tuis."  This,  I  suggest,  may  mean,  that
the  allusion  to  Horace  C.  III.  13  was  not  to  the  point  ;
and  that  the  Ode  to  which  the  scribe  had  wanted  to  allude
in  connexion  with  "  glcbis  adscripta "  was  the  Ode  which  "  I
sang  but  a  little  while  back ",  i.e.  the  Ode  alluded  to  in  («-),
viz.  Hor.  C.  I.  28.

Mrs.  Myers  is  referred  to  in  {a)  and  {d) ;  that  is  in  the
only  scripts  which  allude  to  Hor.  C.  I.  28.  I  suggest  that
the  reason  of  this  may  have  been  that  Mrs.  Myers  possessed
a  copy  of  the  "small  volume,  which  was  published  in  1870,
and  has  for  a  long  time  been  out  of  print "  {Fragments,  p.
vi)  from  which  Immortcdity  was  reprinted.  The  "  verses
which  I  wrote  in  my  presumption "  and  which  Mrs.  Verrall
is  bidden  to  "  reject  ",  I  suggest  are  the  poem  Immortality.


168


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Mrs.  Myers's  name  is  also  connected  with  what,  I  suggest,
may  be  allusions  in  (a)  and  (d)  to  another  poem  of  Frederic
Myers's :  On  a  Spring  Morni7ig  at  Sea.  This  poem  was
published  by  Mrs.  Myers  for  the  first  time  in  Fragments  (p.  54).
Its  theme  is  a  forecast  of  the  after-life  as  couleur  de  rose  as
that  in  Immartality  is  sombre.

But  with  these  possible  allusions  to  On  a  Spring  Morning
at  Sea  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  name  is  also  connected.  If  the  reader
will  turn  to  Proc.  Vol.  XX.  pp.  195-198  he  will  see  that  Mrs.
Verrall,  who  was  at  the  time  quite  unable  to  interpret  the
script,  learnt  on  Jan.  1,  1905,  that  there  was  "a  privately
printed  pamphlet  in  a  sealed  envelope "  in  a  box  under  the
drapery  of  the  window-seat  in  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  drawing-room.
She  then  supposed  that  "the  book"  of  her  script  of  April  27,
1901,  referred  to  this  pamphlet.  It  had  been  given  in  a
sealed  envelope  into  Henry  Sidgwick's  charge  by  Erederic  Myers,
and  contained  among  other  matter  the  poem  On  a  Spring
Morning  at  Sea :  though  this  fact  was  unknown  both  to
Mrs.  SidQwick  and  to  Mrs.  Verrall,  neither  of  whom  had  seen
the  pamphlet,  at  the  time  the  script  was  produced.  Mrs.  Myers
naturally  possessed  a  copy  of  it  likewise.  It  did  not  contain
the  poem  Pniniortality.  I  suggest  that  there  was  an  endeavour
made  in  these  early  scripts  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  to  refer  to  two
different  books :  first  to  the  early  edition  of  Myers's  poems  con-
taining Immortality,  of  which  Mrs.  Myers  possessed  a  copy  ;  and
secondly,  to  the  privately  printed  pamphlet,  of  which  both  Mrs.
Sidgwick  and  Mrs.  Myers  had  a  copy,  containing  On  a  Spring
Morning  ai  Sea  ;  and  that  there  was  also  an  endeavour  made
to  allude  to  these  two  poems  in  particular,  and  at  the  same
time  to  Odyssey  XI.  489,  and  to  Hor.  C.  I,  28;  the  object
of  this  combination  of  allusions  being  to  contrast  the  gloomy
forebodings  of  Odyssey  XL,  Horace's  "  Archytas "  Ode,  and
Myers's  Immortcdity,  with  the  roseate  hopes  of  On  a  Spring
Morning  at  Sea,  and  thereby  to  imply  that  the  happy  and  not
the  gloomy  prevision  was  the  true  one.

The  interpretation  here  presented  is,  I  admit,  highly  con-
jectural. If  it  is  correct,  it  obviously  involves  the  assumption
that  Frederic  Myers  is  in  some  sense  behind  Myersy,  and,
I  may  add,  Myersp  also. This  is  the  assumption  which  at


LX.]  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings :  Horace  Ode  Question.  169

present  seems  to  me  to  account  most  simply  for  the  facts  which
I  have  set  before  the  reader.  But  I  hope  he  will  attempt  to
apply  other  hypotheses  to  them ;  for  it  is  only  by  testing
every  reasonable  hypothesis  that  we  can  hope  to  arrive  at  a
true  solution  of  the  problem.


170


Mrs.  Henry  SiclgtvicJc.


[part


III.

CROSS-CORRESPONDENCES  BETWEEN  MRS.  PIPER
AND OTHER  AUTOMATISTS.

By  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.

It  falls  to  me  to  describe  tlie  cross-correspondences  which
occurred  in  the  course  of  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper
in  America  in  March,  April,  and  May,  1908.  By  cross-
correspondence  I  mean  a  coincidence  in  the  content  of  the
scripts  of  two  automatists.  Those  I  have  to  describe  are  of
a  more  or  less  simple  kind, — the  same  ideas  or  nearly  so  in
both  scripts.  They  do  not  carry  out  the  programme  of  the
"Latin  message"  (see  Proceedings  S.P.R.  Vol.  XXII.  pp.  312-
416).  I  shall  limit  myself  to  coincidences  which  are  seemingly
intentional  on  the  part  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance-personalities.

It  may  be  as  well  to  note  that  in  none  of  these  experiments
in  cross-correspondence  can  thought-transference  between  the
sitter  and  Mrs.  Piper  have  intervened  as  a  complicating
element,  since  he  had  no  access  to  or  knowledge  of  the  scripts
of  the  other  automatists,  who  were  moreover  separated  from
him  by  the  width  of  the  Atlantic.  Also  active  participation
by  the  normal  consciousness  of  these  other  automatists  was
largely  excluded  by  their  ignorance  that  any  special  set  of
sittings  for  cross-correspondences  was  being  held.

In  a  note  to  the  first  sitting  of  the  series,  that  held  on
March  9th,  1908,  Mr.  Dorr  says  that  he  last  had  a  sitting
alone  with  Mrs  Piper

two  weeks  previous  to  the  sitting  of  the  9th  of  March  [actually
on  February  25th]  and  I  then  gave  [Hodgsoup]  the  two  Latin
sentences  to  translate,  tJien  if  he  could :  Vcni,  vidi,  vici  and  Anna
virumque  cano. I  chose  these  purposely  on  account  of  their  familiarity.


LX.]


Cross-Correspondences.


171


[HodgsoDp]  was  unable  to  translate  either  during  the  sitting,  but
memorised  them,  the  veni  vidi  vici  sentence  especially,  to  take
away  with  him  and  work  over.  In  the  sitting  of  the  9th  he
asks  me  to  repeat  them  and  says  that  he  has  brought  Myers  to
help  in  their  translation.  .  .  .

At  this  same  sitting  of  two  weeks  before  I  gave  [Hodgsonp]  or
Rector,  it  not  being  clear  which,  a  brief  description  of  two  visions,
seen  by  people  in  illness,  with  reference  to  using  certain  easily
visualised  impressions  in  them  in  conveying  messages  to  England,
and  told  the  control  that  I  spoke  of  it  then  with  that  reference.
The  images  derived  from  these  two  visions  were  "  face  in  flame "
and  "procession."

The foUowiDg is the  record of part of  the sitting  of


(Hodgsonp  communicating.)

Hello George. I brought  Myers  to  help  out ; will  you
kindly  repeat  that  Latin  for  me  ?

G.  B.  D.  Veni,  vidi,  vici.

Once  more,  and  again  repeat  in  Latin.

_ (G.  B.  D.  repeats  several  times  over  very  slowly.)

I  understand. I OA — I came, — let  me think  George — I
came  I  saw — once  more.

(G.  B.  D.  repeats  again.)

Iconquered.
G.  B.  D.  Right.

Right — good. Now  let  me  have  your  other.
G.  B.  D.  The  other  Latin?

Yes,  Myers  is  here  helping  me.

(G.  B.  D.  repeats  "Arma  virumque  cano.")

very  slowly.

(G.  B.  D repeats  again  very  slowly.)
I  sing  exile.


March


9th,  1908  :


172  3frs.  Henry  Sidgwick  [part

G.  B.  D.  Is  that  word  exile  1

(Hand  makes  gesture  of  assent  after  pausing  a  moment  out-
stretched as  though  towards  an  invisible  personality  in
the  room.)

I  sing  of  the  feats — Myers  said  it,  who  by  fate — I  forget —
etc.,  etc.

G.  B.  D.  Is  that  "  I  forget "  ?

Exactly,  but  "I  sing  of  the  feats  of  the  exile,"  etc.,  etc. —
exile.  We  cannot  get  it  exactly  but  if  we  can  give  you
enough  to  make  it  clear  that  we  understand  that  is  the
best  we  can  do  possibly.  ^

G.  B.  D.  Good. Don't  attempt  to  translate,  but  let  me  have  what
memories  you  can.

He  is  glad  you  understand.  He  says  Say  to  our  good
friend,  Troy.

(Letters  not  read  at  first  and  sense  not  taken.  Letters
rewritten  over  and  over  again  until  clear.)

Troy. I'll  go  give  that  to  Mrs.  Verrall.

G.  B.  D.  The  word  Troy  'I

Yes. And  ai'iits.
G.  B.  D.  Will  you  give  her  the  words  Exile  and  Troy  1

Yes.

G.  B.  D.  (to  Hodgsoup.) Had  he  better  attempt  any  more  ?
Yes.

G.  B.  D.  Who  was  exiled  ?

(A  word  written  which  it  was  impossible  to  read.)-

^  For  a  discussion  of  the  degree  of  understanding  shown,  see  Mrs.  Verrall's
paper,  pp.  61-64.

'■'Mr.  Piddington  suggests  that  this  word,  of  which  Mr.  Dorr  sent  tracings,
may  have  been  meant  for  Troius=:  Aeneas  (cf.  Aen.  I.  596).  See  Mrs.  Verrall's
paper  above,  p.  6-t.


LX.]  Gross-Correspondences.  173

G.  B.  D.  What  is  that  word  ? [This  was  not  answered,  and  no  attempt
was  made  at  the  moment  to  repeat  the  word.]

Juno  JUNO

G.  B.  D.  Who  was  Juno  ?

(Brief  word  not  read.)  god
G.  B.  D.  What  did  Juno  do  with  regard  to  Troy  and  exile'?

Reedemed  [sic]. It  is  difficult  to  express  but

(Pause)

Teusis — as  he  was — S— wandered  and  thought  he  was  lost.

G.  B.  D.  What  was  your  last  word  1

Lost. Do  you  get  my  idea? Juno  saved — saved  him.

(Word  follows  which  is  the  same  as  word  not  read  pre-
viously, and  which  again  cannot  be  read  but  which  looks
like  Tarius. Note  by  G.B.D.)

He  came  to  the  shores  of  Italy — shores  shores.
G.B.D.  Shores?

Yes  Italy  —  —  —  I  sing  of  the  arms  and  the  feats  of  the
exile  who  by  fate  was  etc.,  etc. No  more.

G.B.D.  That  is  all?

Yes  it  is  all  you  gave  me. But  I  remember  more.

G.  B.  D.  Will  you  give  me  what  more  you  remember  ?

Yes  I  remember  the  incident  of  Juno — incident —
G.B.D.  What  is  that  word?

Incident — and  her  saving

(Same  name  not  read  before  is  here  repeated,  and  apparently
quite  clearly  written.)

G.  B.  D.  I  can't  get  it. (Tries  different  readings.)

Not  quite —


174  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

G.  B.  D.  Means  name  ?
Yes  Exile.

G.  B.  D.  Can  you  remember  any  names  to  tell  me  ?

Name  several  and  he  will  tell  you  which  one  it  was.

G.  B.  D.  Can  he  give  me  the  name  of  the  exile  himself,  or  of  the
poem  ?

Enoid.  [Letter  here  transcribed  as  o  is  not  clear.]  Eid —
I  did  not  get  all  the  letters  in  Eiod — Einid — not  quite
but  near  enough.  Eind.

G.  B.  D.  Can  you  give  me  the  name  of  the  poef?
(Pause.)

0,  I  understand  you.  No,  I  can't  think  at  the  moment —
Pronounce  it  for  me  Einid.

G.B.  D.  Aeneid.

Yes. E  i  a  n  e.

(Gr.  B.  D.  spells  it  over.)

Aenid.

(G.  B.  D.  repeats  name  again.)

I  remember  it  so  well.

G.  B.  I).  Tell  Myers  he  translated  it. Ask  him  for  the  name  of  the
poet?

Blind — I  am  not  blind  or  deaf  but  I  hear  with  difl&culty.
G.  B.  D.  What  will  you  try  to  take  to  England  1

Give  him  a  message.  He  has  taken  'face  in  flame.'  TROY
Exile.

G.  B.  D.  Take  as  synonym  for  Troy — do  you  know  what  synonym
means  1

Yes  indeed.
G.  B.  D.  The  city  in  flames. Saved  by  Juno.

(Ct.  B.  D.  here  repeats  over  slowly  what  MyerSp  undertakes  to
take  to  England.)


LX.]  Gross-Correspondences.  175

Ver3'  good. Splendid. He  has  already  given  face  and  flame.
(Gr.  B.  D.  goes  over  the  words  agreed  upon  again.)
Yes,  I  understand  absolutely.
(G.  B.  D.  repeats  words  over  once  more.)
Yes,  I  am  already  working  over  this  with  Mrs.  Verrall.

O.  B.  D.  This  is  enough,  is  it  not  ?
Yes.  •

(G.  B.  D.  repeats  once  more  "Troy,  the  city  in  flames,  exile,
saved  by  Juno,  the  face  in  flame.")

Yes  NEPTUNE.

G.  B.  D.  What  about  Neptune?

I  thought  it  would  fit  in  splendidly. As  it  all  goes  in —

(Pause.)

G.  B.  D.  Are  there  any  other  names  belonging  to  this  that  you  can
give  me "?

You  see  it  comes  back  to  my  memory  by  degrees.
G.  B.  D.  Why  was  Juno  interested  1

LOVE.
G.  B.  D.  For  whom.

Exile.

[G.  B.  D.  made  no  attempt  to  correct  the  statement  with
regard  to  Juno's  part  in  the  drama,  but  he  thinks  his
consciousness  of  the  error  made  may  perhaps  have
suggested  what  came  next.]

Remember  where  I  am  and  where  you  are  and  give
allowances.

G.  B.  D.  Do  the  words "her  injured form"  suggest anything  to
your  mind  1

You  mean  my  Poem?


176


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgtvick.


[part


G.  B.  I).


I  mean  the  old  Latin  poem.

Yes. Her  injured  form,  yes  indeed.  Juno.


(Some  words  follow  which  cannot  be  read.)


her  love  of  the  exile  and  she  restores  him.  Re-


stores. Yes.

Built to  save  her  exile  who  by  fate — fled  and  she  met  him.

(These  last  words  G.  B.  1).  read  aloud  and  the  hand  banged
approval  on  the  table.)

Yes.  It  is  all  in  fragments  in  my  memory  as  it  comes  out
here,  but  if  I  could  speak  with  you  as  of  old  I  could
quote  it  backwards.

O.  B.  D.  Could  you  give  me  more  through  the  voice  1

Not  so  well,  as  your  words  often — your  words  often —

(Pause.)

She  built  a  (pause.)
G.  B.  D.  Are  you  about  to  write  further  1

Yes,  I  am  going  to  tell  you  how  she  goes  up  with  her  love

the  exile  —  —  Remember?  (pause.)
I can't take more to Mrs. Verrall but I will take  a

message  to  Helen  Verrall.

G.  B.  D.  Will  you  repeat  again  the  messages  for  Mrs.  Verrall.

Troy,  Exile,  City  in  flames,  Exile,  Face  in  flame,  and  Juno.
G.  B.  D.  Is  that  all  ?

Neptune.

G.  B.  D.  Troy,  Juno,  Neptune,  city  in  flame,  face  in  flame — to  be
given  to  Mrs.  Verrall.

Yes — yes,  this  is  clear;  send  it  to  Lodge.
I  have  written  I  came.  I  saw  —  —  through  Helen — I  did
not  repeat  the  last  word  yet.

G.  B.  D.  That  was  not  written  1 What  is  the  last  word  ]

CONQUERED— but  I  have  not  yet  got  that  through  Helen.


Gross-Correspondences.  177
Have  you  got  the  others  through  ?
Yes  —  I  came,  I  saw.

Do  you  mean  that  you  have  got  these  through  already  1
I  do.

I  did  this  several  days  ago — before  this  trial. Lodge  will
tell  you  all  about  it  —  —  —


G.  B.  D.  Had  you  not  better  stop  now  1

Yes, I  shall  go  and  give  my  messages  to Mrs.  V.  and
Helen.

G.  B.  D  Good,  but  do  not  hurrij  in  doing  so.  Try  and  get  it  clearly
tliroiujh.  Give  it  in  single  words  or  phrases  as  they
come.  Do  not  try  to  connect  things  together  unless
they  come  to  you  so.

Like  Neptune. Y'es,  I  understand.


Amoii"  the  words  here  rneutioned  as  written  or  to  be
written  through  Mrs.  or  Miss  Verrall,  jSTeptune,  Troy,  and  Exile
afford  clear  cases  (which  I  shall  describe  at  length)  of  corre-
spondence with  Miss  Verrall's  script — not  with  Mrs.  Verrall's.
Some  correspondence  might  perhaps  be  claimed  in  the  case  of
other  words,  but  it  will  be  more  profitable  to  dwell  on  the
clear  cases  only.

Neptune  and  Teident.

It  will  be  observed  that  Neptune  is  introduced  spontaneously  in
the  Piper  script  on  March  9,  1908,  not  through  any  suggestion
of  Mr.  Dorr's,  and  is  spontaneously  adopted  as  a  word  to  be
given  to  Mrs.  or  to  Miss  Verrall.  It  comes  in  quite  suitably,
however,  among  topics  suggested  by  the  first  book  of  the
Acneicl.  At  the  following  sitting  (March  10th)  Mr.  Dorr
again  introduces  the  subject  of  the  AcnrAd,  and  reads  aloud
from  Frederic  Myers's  autobiography  the  two  paragraphs  referring
to  his  first  accjuaintance  with  the  poem  as  a  child  {Fragments


LX.]
G.  B.  D.


178


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


of  Prose  and  Poetry,  pp.  6,  7;  the  passage  is  quoted  in  Mrs.
Verrall's  paper  above,  p.  64),  upon  which  MyerSp  writes:

I  recall  so  well  the  emotion  which  first  stirred  within  me
[incomplete  word]  the  poem  as  I  translated  it,  the  Exile
and  his  wanderings,  his  power  and  his  warriors.

G.  B.  D.  (reads  over.)

Yes. Also  Dido — feast — calm  waters  by  Neptune.

(Then  follows  a  drawing  which  conveys  nothing  to  Mr.  Dorr.)

3  3  three.

G.  B.  D.  What  three?

Trydent  [sic]  (Drawing  repeated  here).i  I'll  tell  Mrs.  V.  to
repeat  this  for  me.

G.  B.  D.  You  will  tell  Mrs.  V.  "Neptune"  and  "Trident"^

Yes.

Again,  later  in  the  sitting,  in  a  list  of  words  to  be  given
to  "  far-off  friends  "  comes  Neptune,  followed  by  an  attempt  ta
draw  a  trident  and  the  word  three.

At  the  next  sitting  with  Mr.  Dorr,  which  took  place  on
March  16th,  is  written:  "Neptune  has  not  yet  got  through,  but
we  are  trying  it."  A  few  minutes  later  the  following  remarks
are  made :

(MyerSp  communicating.)

G.B.I).  What  more  have  you  got  through?

Juno  Neptune.

G.  B.  D.  What  did  you  have  associated  with  Neptune  to  give  with  it?

(Draws  a  trident,  adding  the  figure  3.)  Trydent.  I  haven't
forgotten  anything.  I  am  extremely  interested  and
anxious  to  prove  conclusively  the  survival  of  bodily
death.

In  the  waking-stage,  after  this  sitting,  Mrs.  Piper  said :
"  Neptune  calmed  the  sea for Aeneas — Don't you  hear  me  ?

1  The  failure  to  interpret  the  drawing  was  due  to  the  stem  of  the  trident
not  being  attached  to  the  fork.  Tiie  writing  and  drawing,  it  must  be  remem-
bered, is  done  without  the  use  of  the  eyes.


I


LX.]


Gross-Correspondences.


179


Mr.  Myers  is  whispering  in  one  ear,  and  I  am  trying  to  get
it  out  at  the  other."

Again,  on  March  17th,  we  have:

(Myersp  communicating.)

 I  am  only  explaining  what  was  given  and  how  it

compares  with  what  you  gave  me.  Neptune.

G.  B.  D.  You  have  written  Neptune  %

Yes,  twice.  Juno.
G.  B.  D.  With  Neptune  you  made  a  drawing  ?

(A  drawing  of  a  trident  is  here  made.)
G.  B.  D.  Has  this  been  drawn  1

No. Give  me  more  time  on  this.

On  March  24th  Neptune  is  referred  to  in  connexion  with
the  Aeneicl,  and  later  in  the  sitting  is  stated  to  have  been
given  successfully  as  a  "  message  "  as  follows :

(Myersp  communicating.)

That  [Neptune]  has  been  received  by  her,i  and  Juno  by
Mrs.  Holland.

G.  B.  D.  But  you  have  not  yet  drawn  the  Trident  ?

Yes  in  part  (drawing  made  here  of  the  fork  part)  so  much
of  it. I  am  trying  on  this  (upright  straight  line  drawn)
■ part  now.

On  March  30th,  again,  Mr.  Dorr,  in  going  over  the  list
of  messages,  says :

(MyerSp  or  Hodgsoup  communicating.)

G.  B.  D.  Neptune  ?

(Hand  makes  sign  of  assent)  and  waters — blue.

^The  "her"'  referred  to  appears  from  the  previous  remarks  in  the  script  to
be  Mrs.  Holland  under  her  real  name  (Holland,  it  will  be  remembered,  is  a
pseudonym).  The  trance-personalities  (and  I  think  Mr.  Dorr)  refer  to  the  two
names  as  if  pertaining  to  different  persons ;  though  in  England  the  trance-
personalities  had  a  year  before  been  aware  from  what  had  been  said  to  them
that  the  two  names  belonged  to  the  same  person.


ISO  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick. ■  [part

(i.  B.  D.  Trident  1 You  have  not  drawn  this  yet,  have  you  1

Yes,  we  have  certainly.
O.  B.  D.  I  thought  you  had  only  drawn  the  trident  part  of  it  as  yet.

Whole,  now. (Drawing  of  trident  made.)

Similarly,  on  April  6th,  Mr.  Dorr  recapitulates  messages.
<4.  B.  D.  Neptune? (Hand  assents.)
O.  B.  D.  With  trident  1

(Hand  assents  vigorously,  and  then  writes:)  Complete.

In  the  waking-stage  after  this  sitting  Mrs.  Piper  remarks  :

He  is  drawing  a  long  thing  on  a  big  white  sheet ;  it's  a
long  stick  with  three  prongs  on  the  top  of  it  and
success  written  under  it. He  said  hydrant. — Archimedps.

<T.  B.  D.  Hydrant  1

More  about  hydrant  later. — M3'ers  says,  I  will  tell  you
more  when  the  light  returns.

At  the  sitting  on  the  following  day,  April  7th,  Mr.
Dorr  read  over  to  the  trance-personalities  his  notes  of  the
waking-stage  of  April  6th,  and  the  script  makes  comments.
The  following  is  what  passed  about  the  above.

G.  B.  D.  (reads)  "He  is  drawing  a  long  thing  like  a  stick  with
three  prongs  on  the  top  of  it,  and  success  written
under  it."

Trydent  (drawing  of  trident  follows).

G.  B.  D  Then  she  said  "Hydrant."

(Hand  makes  gesture  of  dissent.) Trydetit  not  Hydrant.^

Finally  Neptune  with  trident  is  ticked  off  as  complete  with
the  assent  of  the  controls  on  April  14th,  and  again  on
April  21st.

Now  on  February  21st,  1908,  more  than  a  fortnight  before
the  first  mention  of  Neptune  in  these  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper

^  This  confusion  is  analogous  to  the  transposition  of  letters  wliich  occasionally
occurs  in  the  script.  Possibly  the  transposition  may  have  been  facilitated
in  this  case  by  the  tendency  of  the  controls  to  spell  trident  with  a  y.


LX.]


Cross-  Correspondences.


181


and  four  days  before  Mr.  Dorr's  first  reference  to  the  Aencid,
Miss  Verrall's  script  contained  a  drawing  of  a  trident  followed
by  the  words  "  Neptune's  trident  that  completes  the  tale."  It
is  the  final  sentence  of  the  script  and  seems  disconnected  from
anything  else  written  that  day,  and  it  is  the  only  reference
made  anywhere  in  Miss  Verrall's  automatic  writing  to  Neptune.
It  seems  possible  that  the  words  "  that  completes  the  tale "
signify  that  a  cross-correspondence  was  intended,^  but  they
may  equally  well  indicate  the  end  of  that  piece  of  script.
No  stress  therefore  can  be  laid  on  them,  and  for  evidence  of
the  intentional  nature  of  the  coincidence  we  must  trust  to
Mrs.  Piper's  script.  The  intention  there  is  very  clear  and
marked  at  the  first  emergence  of  the  name  on  March  9  th.
Was  its  selection  and  emergence  on  that  day,  among  other
names  which  reference  to  the  Acneid  might  have  called  up,
due  to  a  double  association,  to  vague  recollections  of  the
poem  stimulated  by  a  telepathic  flash  either  from  Miss
Verrall  or  from  some  source  that  inspired  Miss  Verrall  also  ?
It  looks  rather  like  this.  That  it  was  not  more  than  a
rtash  seems  to  be  shown  by  the  ignorance  and  confusion
subsequently  displayed  as  to  when  and  how  and  to  whom  the
message  had  been  given,  and  the  inconsistency  of  the  state-
ments about  it  with  each  other  and  with  the  facts.  Probably
these  false  and  confused  statements  were  for  the  most  part
made  simply  because  the  Piper  script,  like  other  automatic
script,  almost  always  does  attempt  to  satisfy  a  questioner,
whether  the  true  answer  to  the  question  is  really  known  or
not.  Still  it  must  be  admitted  that  such  statements  diminish
the  evidential  force  of  successful  experiments,  as  also  do
the  numerous  statements  that  this  or  that  "  message "  has
successfully  appeared  in  cases  where  no  trace  of  success  can
be  discovered  by  us.  In  other  words,  if  any  value  could  be
attached  to  a  statement  by  the  trance- personalities  that  an
experiment  in  cross-correspondence  has  succeeded,  or  as  to  the

^  Compare  a  script  of  Miss  Verrall's  on  March  16th,  1908  (quoted  by  Mrs.
Verrall  in  her  paper  on  "A  new  Group  of  Experimenters,"  below,  p.  297),
where  the  quotation  of  the  second  stanza  of  a  two-stanza  poem  of  Victor
Hugo's  is  followed  by  the  words  "The  end  of  the  story."  In  this  case  the
phrase  does  not  occur  at  the  end  of  the  piece  of  script.  The  first  stanza
seems  to  be  referred  to  on  the  following  July  27th  in  the  Mac  script.


3,82


Mrs.  Henry  SidgtvicJc.


[part


time  and  mode  of  its  success,  the  improbability  of  chance
coincidence  would  be  greatly  increased.

Troy  and  Joy.

Troy,  like  Neptune,  is  a  word  associated  with  the  Aeneid,
but  spontaneously  written  {i.e.  not  suggested  by  Mr.  Dorr)  at
the  first  sitting  of  the  series,  March  9th,  1908,  in  the
course  of  the  passage  already  quoted ;  and  about  it  Myersp
spontaneously  says,  "  I'll  go  give  that  to  Mrs.  Verrall."
It  is  referred  to  at  the  next  sitting  (March  10th)  as  one  of
a  list  of  "  messages "  agreed  on,  but  without  comment.  At
the  third  sitting  (March  16th),  at  the  beginning  of  the  sitting,
after  the  usual  greetings,  the  following  dialogue  took  place :

(MyerSp  communicating.)  *

Good  morning. Peace  seems  to  reign  this  morning.  M.
Shall  we  take  up  where  we  left  off? Will  you  repeat  the
questions  you  gave  before  kindly  ?

G.  B.  D.  Do  you  want  me  to  go  over  the  messages  you  were  to
take,  or  the  questions  I  asked  you  '?

Both.  I  wish  you  to  repeat  your  previous  questions  to  me,
all  those  that  remained  unanswered.  I  have  given  Mrs.  V.
Troy,  Joy.

G.  B.  U.  And  joy?

Joy  Joy  Joy  Troy.

G.  B.  D.  Why  did  you  write  "joy?"

In  making  her  understand  Troy  she  misunderstood  and
wrote  Joy.

G.  B.  1).  Did  you  get  "  Troy  "  through  too  ?

Yes  she  finally  got  it  right,  and  wrote  Troy.  Neptune  has
not  got  through  but  we  are  trying  it.  She  under-
stood flames  and  wrote  head  instead  of  face

I  gave  her  my  first  initials  F.  M.  so  she  would  understand
who  was  writing.


Gross-  Correspondences:


183


It  is  again  stated  on  March  l7th  that  "Troy  has  been
[written,]"  and  later  on  the  same  day,  in  reply  to  Mr.  Dorr's
question  "  You  wrote  Troy  ? MyerSp  says  "  Yes,  and  joy."
At  the  next  sitting  held  (March  23rd),  at  a  certain  point  in
a  conversation  about  what  words  have  come  through,  Mr.
Dorr  asks  :

(Hodgsonp  communicating.)

G.  B.  D.  Anything  else  1

We  wrote  wreath  ^  and  Joy,  also  Joy  of  the  Gods.

G.  B.  D.  Did  you  do  this  in  any  allusive  fashion,  so  far  as  you  can
tell  ?

No.  That  is  good  and  by  itself,  as  we  wrote  archway  ^  for
P[iddington]  in  England.  Joy  was  written  in  the  same
way.

G.  B.  D.  Straight  out  1

In  the  same  way.

G.  B.  D.  But  the  word  archway  has  nothing  to  do  with  these  present
messages,  as  I  understand  you.

Nothing  at  all.  Only  I  am  telling  you  we  wrote  it  [joy]
straight  out  as  we  did  archway  long  ago.

^  "Laurel  wreath"  was  the  subject  of  a  concordant  automatism  in  the  Piper
sittings  in  England  (see  Mr.  Piddington's  paper,  Vol.  XXII.  p.  94),  and  earlier
in  this  sitting  of  March  '23rd  the  trance-personalities  had  referred  to  it.  Is  it
association  of  ideas  with  this,  or  experimental  zeal,  or  both,  that  leads  to  the
mention  of  wreath  here,  and  to  its  forming  again  part  of  a  successful  cross-
correspondence  ?

-  The  word  archway  did  not  occur  in  Mrs.  Piper's  sittings  in  England.  The
word  "  arch  "  and  other  words  of  which  "  arch  "  was  the  first  syllable  occurred  in
Mrs.  Verrall's  script,  as  Mr.  Piddington  informed  the  Piper  trance-personalities
(see  his  paper,  A  Series  of  Goncordant  Automatisms,  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXII.
p.  80),  with  the  suggestion  that  they  were  connected  with  an  attempt  to  write
the  word  "arrow."  That  it  is  this  that  Hodgsonp  here  refers  to  is  rendered
the  more  probable  by  the  fact  that  the  word  and  idea  of  arrow  and  also
Longfellow's  line,  "  I  shot  an  arrow  through  the  air,"  which  Mr.  Piddington  had
quoted  to  the  trance-personalities  in  connexion  with  this  cross-correspondence,
occur  in  Mrs.  Piper's  utterances  in  the  waking-stage  of  this  same  day.

It  is  important  to  remember  in  studying  these  sittings  of  Mr.  Dorr's  that
when  they  were  held  neither  Miss  Johnson's  paper  on  Mrs.  Holland's  script,
nor  Mr.  Piddington's  paper  on  concordant  automatisms  had  been  published.


184


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgiuick.


[part


In  the  waking-stage  of  this  sitting  the  following  broken
phrases  were  uttered :

Fish — Mermaid — Saturn — ^Hero — Olympus  —  [then  a  word
which  was  indistinctly  caught  hut  sounded  to  Mr.  Dorr
like  pavia^]  Sybil — -Olympus — water — Lethe — delighted —
sad — lovel}' — mate — put  them  all  together.  [Low  whisper-
ing here,  not  possible  to  catch]  Entwined  love — beautiful
shores — ask  him  if  he  cannot  hear  me.  Muses — I  wrote
church  long  time  ago — Olympus  There's  Mercury  ! — love
— He  has  drawn  a  cross  with  ivy  over  it.  Pharaoh's
daughter  came  out  of  the  water — warm — sunlit — love.
Lime  leaf — heart — sword — arrow — I  shot  an  arrow
through  the  air,  and  it  fell  I  knoAv  not  where.  [Mrs.
Piper  then  describes  a  lady  with  no  clothes  on  shooting
an  arrow  who,  as  the  trance-personalities  explain  later,
was  meant  for  Iris. See  Mr.  Piddington's  paper,  pp.  90-3.]

Of  these  words  fragmentarily  caught,  some — e.c/.  Olympus,
water,  Lethe — are  repetitions  of  what  had  been  written  in
the  course  of  the  sittiag.  Of  the  rest  some  would  certainly
be  appropriate  if  we  could  suppose  that  the  words  and  ideas
of  Wordsworth's  Laodcnnia  were  inhueuciug  the  communica-
tions. Consider  especially  the  third  stanza,  which  runs  :

0  terror  !  what  hath  she  perceived  ? — 0  joy  !
What  doth  she  look  on  1 — whom  doth  she  behold  ?
Her  Hero  slain  upon  the  beach  of  Troy  1
His  vital  presence  ?  his  corporeal  mould  1
It  is — if  sense  deceive  her  not — 'tis  He  !
And  a  god  leads  him,  winged  Mercury.

This  stanza  contains  the  words  "  Hero "  and  "  Mercury "  as
well  as  the  two  words  '  Troy  "  and  "  Joy  "  previously  mentioned
as  havino'  been  transferred  to  Mrs.  Verrall.

In  any  case,  whatever  we  may  think  of  Mrs.  Piper's  utter-
ance, this  story  of  Laodamia  undoubtedly  influenced  Miss
Verrall's  script  of  April  20th,  1908 — a  month  later.

Minos  and  Rhadamanthus  and  a  third
Ep/iT^s  j^u>^o7ro/x7ros  -

'  Attempts  to  get  this  word  repeated  or  interpreted  at  subsequent  sittings,
failed,  but  see  Mr.  Piddington's  paper,  p.  101.
^  Hermes,  leader  of  souls.


LX.]


Gross-Correspondences.


185


[The  herald's  staff,  the  symbol  of  Hermes'  office,  drawn  here
with  the  words  :J  the  symbol  of  his  oflfice
and  the  souls  follow

A  holly  leave  or  something  like  that  green  and  prickly  a  holly
wreath

Tro}'  Laodamia  saw  a  vision  too.^

The  word  here  rendered  "  Troy "  is  very  badly  written,  but
it  looks  more  like  Troy  than  anything  else ;  and  if  it  formed
part  of  a  sentence  in  which  Troy  completed  the  sense  we
should,  I  think,  have  no  hesitation  in  so  reading  it.  But  even
if  "  Troy  "  was  not  actually  written,  the  reference  to  Laodamia
implies  it,  and  through  the  reference  to  Wordsworth's  poem,  ''joy  "
is  implied  also.  We  have  further  the  word  "  wreath "  -  which
Hodgsonp  connected  with  joy  on  March  2ord  (see  p.  183).

"  Joy  of  the  gods,"  which  was  mentioned  by  Hodgsoup  in
the  same  connexion  on  March  23rd,  finds  its  parallel  in  Miss
Verrall's  script  of  April  1st,  1908,  when  she  wrote:

The  pillars  of  converging  fire
The  ministers  of  joy divine
Will  satisfy  the  hearts  desire
The  longing  for  a  stainless  shrine.

The  double  arch  and  the  flowing  river  ask  about  that.
The  stream  flows  swiftly  and  the  swirling  eddies  beat  against
the  pier.

Troy  and  Joy  are  mentioned  at  subsequent  sittings  with
Mrs.  Piper  in  April,  from  the  6th  onwards,  as  messages  that
have  been  finished,  but  nothing  more  of  interest  was  said
about  them.

^  Can  tliis  "too"  meau  "as  well  as  Alcyone''?  For  Alcyone's  vision  see
above,  pp.  99-100.  Mr.  Piddington's  paper  on  "Lethe"  sliows  that  Alcyone's
story  is  referred  to  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  of  March  23rd.

-The  word  "wreath"  does  not  occur  in  Wordsworth's  Laodamia,  and  it  affords
therefore  an  independent  instance  of  correspondence  between  Mrs.  Piper's  and
Miss  Verrall's  scripts.  A  reminiscence  of  Laodamia  is  not  the  sole  cause  of
the  agreement  between  them.

■'The  word  "joy"  had  previously  occurred  in  Miss  Verrall's  script  of  this
period  on  March  5th  thus:  "A  star  in  the  East  the  pledge  and  symbol  of
the  coming  day,  a  star  of  joy  to  those  that  watch.  The  firstfruits  of  the
morning  Nuntius  Aurorte  radiis  ubi  dissipat  umbras."


186


Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.


[part


Exile  and  Moore.

Exile  was  a  word  spontaneously  written  by  Hodgsonp  on
March  9th,  1908,  in  the  attempt  to  translate  "  Arma  virumque
cano "  (see  p.  I7l),  but  as  a  "message"  to  be  given  to  Mrs.
Verrall  it  was — unlike  "  jSTeptune  "  and  "  Troy  " — suggested  by
Mr.  Dorr.  On  the  following  day  (March  10th)  it  is  again
referred  to,  but  without  remark,  in  a  list  of  messages  to  be
taken  to  Mrs.  Verrall.  Tlie  next  reference  is  on  March  23rd
(the  sitting  so  important  in  connection  with  "  Troy ").  Mr.
Dorr  is  questioning  the  trance-personalities  about  what  messages
have  been  taken  : —

(HodgsoHp  communicating.)

G.  B.  D.  Did  you  write  "  Exile  "  ?

Yes,  long  ago. It  came  out  with  Moore.  MOORE.

Similarly  on  March  3 0th  Mr.  Dorr  asks:

<r.  B.  D.  Exile,  which  you  said  had  got  through  connected  with  the
word  Moore  ?

Yes,  both  through.

And  again  at  different  sittings  in  April  it  is  said  to  have
been  given,  and  is  finally  ticked  off  as  complete  by  Mr.  Dorr
on  April  21st,  together  with  Neptune  and  Troy,  and  also
with  a  number  of  other  words  and  phrases,  of  most  of  which
we  find  no  trace. This  is  recorded  as  follows :

(Myersp  communicating.)

Now  we  will  tur-n  to  messages.

(G.  B.  D.  takes  record  of  April  14th  and  reads  over  the
messages  then  declared  to  be  finished,  the  hand  assenting
to  the  list  as  it  is  read  through.  When  the  last  one  is
mentioned,  viz.,  parallel  lines  representing  Styx,  the  word
"  Styx  "  is  spelt  correctly  for  the  first  time,  it  having  been
previously  spelt  "Sticks.")

■G.  B.  D.  Now  these  are  dove  1

Yes  because  they  will  all  appear,  in  some  form  or  another,
through  the  other  Lights.


LX.]


Gross-Correspondences.


187


HodgsoHp  was  mistaken  when  he  said  on  March  23rd  that
Exile  had  come  out  long  ago,  but  on  April  27th,  and  again
on  May  16th,  Miss  Verrall's  script  quotes  Moore's  line  "The
harp  that  once  through  Tara's  halls,"  and  on  the  latter
occasion  also  mentions  Exile.  The  two  pieces  of  script  run
as  follows  :

J2ml  27 fh,  1908.

An  open  book.

Dominus  illuminatio  mea.^

A  golden  harp — the  harp  that  once  through  Tara's  halls
The  lute  with  a  single  string  Watts'  picture  -

MciT/  mh,  1908.

By  the  waters  of  Babylon

the  song  of  exile  in  a  strange  land — singing  in  a  tongue
unknown

but  the  music  is  sweet  and  music  is  a  universal  language

Garay  Mekon  no  it  is  useless

The  harps  upon  the  willow  write  that  too

the  harp  that  once  through  Tara's  halls

a  seven  stringed  lute  the  lute  of  Orpheus

Eurydice  clamat

The  first  part  of  this  second  script  is,  of  course,  a  reminiscence
of  the  137th  Psalm,  which  runs:

By  the  waters  of  Babylon,  there  we  sat  down.
Yea,  we  wept  when  we  remembered  Zion.

1  The  motto  of  Oxford  University.  An  open  book  is  part  of  the  Oxford
Arms.

-The  picture  by  Watts  which  these  words  first  suggest  is  the  well-known
representation  of  Hope — a  woman  lilindfolded  seated  on  a  sphere,  and  playing
on  a  lute  with  a  single  string,  which  is  an  important  feature  in  the  picture.
But  it  is  worth  noting  that  there  is  a  picture  by  Watts  of  Orpheus  and
Eurydice,  painted  in  1869,  and  now  hanging  in  the  Watts  Gallery  at  Compton,
in  which  Orpheus  holds  a  lute  with  all  the  strings  broken  but  one.
If  Mr.  Piddingtou  is  right  in  thinking  that  Watts'  picture  of  Orpheus  and
Eurydice  was  in  the  mind  of  Myersp  (see  above,  pp.  130,  132)  it  would  be  interest-
ing to  find  it  also  alluded  to  in  Miss  Verrall's  script ;  and  the  fact  that  the
line  from  Moore  leads  on  to  Orpheus  in  her  script  of  May  16th,  makes  it
tempting  to  assume  the  same  association  of  ideas  on  April  27th.  Miss  Verrall
had  not  seen  the  picture  of  Orpheus  and  Eurydice  in  question.


188  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

We  hanged  our  harps  upon  the  willows  in  the  midst  thereof.
For  there  they  that  carried  us  away  captive  required  of  us
a  song ;

And  they  that  wasted  us  required  of  us  mirth,
Saying,  Sing  us  one  of  the  songs  of  Zioii.
How  shall  we  sino-  the  Lord's  sona;
In  a  strange  land  1

Apart  from  questions  of  dates,  it  will  be  admitted,  I  think,
that  the  Piper  trance-personalities  wei"e  justified  in  saying  that
"  Exile  "  and  "  Moore  "  appear  together  in  the  script  of  another
automatist,  and  it  will  probably  be  felt  that  the  coincidence
can  hardly  be  due  to  chance.

But  further  examination  brings  out  other  coincidences.  In
Miss  Verrall's  script  of  May  16tli  we  have,  combined  with
Exile  and  the  quotation  from  Moore,  the  words  and  ideas  of
music,  of  harp,  and  of  Orpheus  and  Eurydice.  Music  and  harp
are  naturally  connected,  and  harp  is  the  common  idea  con-
necting Exile,  Moore,  and  Orpheus — if  we  admit  that  harp
easily  leads  to  lute,  as  it  seems  to  do  in  both  the  above
scripts  of  Miss  Verrall's."''  Now  the  words  "  music  "  and  "  harp  "
are  both  claimed  by  Myersp  as  successful  "  messages,"  and  as
regards  "  harp,"  Miss  Verrall  is  named  at  one  point  as  the
automatist  concerned.  On  May  4th,  when  in  reading  over  to
the  Piper  trance-personalities  a  list  of  words  and  phrases
that  had  been  agreed  on  at  a  previous  sitting  as  messages  to
be  transmitted,  Mr.  Dorr  comes  to  "  the  Cave  of  Sleep  with
the  name  of  Morpheus  associated  with  it,"  MyerSp  immediately
writes  "  I  wrote  harp,"  and  a  drawing  of  a  harp  is  made.
In  Mr.  Piddington's  paper  on  the  Lethe  incident  (see  above,
pp.  104-20)  it  will  be  seen  that  there  is  a  possible  reason  for  a
connexion  by  the  trance-personalities  of  Morpheus  and  Orpheus,
and  moreover  at  one  point  in  the  waking-stage  of  March  31st
Mrs.  Piper  seems  to  confuse  or  combine  the  names,  for  she  says
"  Eurydice,  Morpheus  and  Eurydice."  I  think,  therefore,  that
it  may  not  unfairly  be  said  that  harp  is  connected  in  the
Piper  script  with  Orpheus,  though  somewhat  indirectly.  Harp^
as  a  cross-correspondence  is  twice  again  referred  to,  but  each

'  Willow  was  also  an  idea  connected  with  Orpheus  in  classical  tradition.
See  F.  W.  H.  Myers's  Essays  Classical,  pp.  53,  54.


LX.]


Gross-  Correspondences.


189


time  in  connexion  with  Sappho.  Thus  on  May  12th  Mr.
Dorr  asks  MyerSp :

O.  B.  D.  Have  you  given  Sappho  'I

(Mrs.  Piper  makes  a  rough  drawing  of  a  harp.)
G.  B.  D.  Through  whom  did  you  draw  this  1

Helen  [i.f.  Miss  Verrall].  She  is  very  clear  at  times,  and
understands  us  very  well.

On  May  13,  in  the  waking-stage,  after  something  not
quite  heard  about  celestial  fields,  Mrs.  Piper  said  :

Helen,  Sappho — harp  I  drew.  I  said,  chain  him  down  and
let  them  feed  on  his  liver.i  I  said  fire,!  j  g^id  music,  I
said,  say  Princess  Sappho,  at  her  feet  a  wreath  of  laurel.

In  this  last  passage  "  music "  also  appears,  and  this  is  the
only  place  where  music  is  definitely  stated  to  be  a  subject
of  cross-correspondence  ;  it  was,  however,  mentioned  in  a
previous  waking-stage  (March  30),  and  then  in  more  or  less
connexion  with  Orpheus  (see  Mr.  Piddington's  paper,  p.  105).
We  have  then  in  Miss  Verrall's  script  Exile,  Music,  Harp,
Moore,  and  Orpheus,  connected  together  ;  and  in  Mrs.  Piper's
trance  four  of  these  are  claimed  as  cross-correspondences,  while
Exile  is  connected  with  Moore,  and  harp  and  perhaps  music
with  Orpheus.

Pharaoh's  Daughter.

It  will  be  remembered  that  in  the  waking-stage  of  March
23rd,  1908  (see  p.  184),  after  mentioning  Mercury  and  a  cross
with  ivy  over  it,  Mrs.  Piper  says,  apparently  d  propos  of  nothing  :
"Pharaoh's  daus-hter  came  out  of  the  water."  On  March  30th
Mr.  Dorr  reads  over  his  notes  of  what  was  said  in  the
waking-stage  of  March  23rd  to  the  trance-personalities,  with  a
view  to  getting  explanations.

(MyerSp  communicating.)
<jc.  B.  D.  (reading)  "  Pharaoh's  daughter  came  out  of  the  water  ?  "

It  was  written  by  Mrs.  V.  some  time  ago,  about  ten
Sabbaths. I  reproduce  it  here  for  evidence.

^Prometheus,  like  Sappho,  was  one  of  the  "messages"  undertaken;  but
it  can  only  doubtfully  be  claimed  as  having  had  any  success.  "I  said '' means
'•I  said  to  another  automatist.''


190


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


Here,  again,  there  seems  to  be  a  mistake  about  the  date,  as
there  certainly  is  about  the  person.  Mrs.  Verrall  wrote
nothing  about  Pharaoh's  daughter.  Some  months  later,  how-
ever, but  before  either  Mrs.  Verrall  or  her  daughter  had  seen
the  records  of  Mrs.  Piper's  script,  on  Sept.  6,  1908,  Miss
Verrall  wrote :

anno  domini  quinque  et  viginti  sed  cur  ab  aliis  disceditur?
non  super  hos  sed  mole  supposita  res  efficitur.  quare  omnia
patiamur  et  laborem  et  vincula  et  ipsam  mortem  o  domiue
servi  tui  te  invocant.^

At  the  river's  edge  in  the  thickest  sedge

his  mother  laid  him  down.  Pharaoh's  daughter  the  hand'
of  the  foe  shall  nurture  him  to  be  a  leader  of  the  people.

Note  that  there  is  not  only  the  coincidence  of  the  words
"  Pharaoh's  daughter,"  but  that  both  in  Mrs.  Piper's  utterances
and  in  Miss  Verrall's  script  the  tale  is  partly  told  in  jingling
rhymes  in  the  same  metre.

Pharaoh's  daughter
Came  out  of  the  water.

At  the  river's  edge
In  the  thickest  sedge.

I  hesitated  a  little  about  mentioning  this  among  the  clearest
cases  of  correspondence  because  of  the  considerable  interval
of  time — March  23  to  Sept.  6 — between  the  original  utterance
of  the  words  by  Mrs.  Piper  and  their  appearance  in  Miss
Verrall's  script.  But  the  corresponding  words  are  so  definite
and,  so  to  speak,  odd — I  mean,  so  out  of  the  ordinary  run  of
subjects  referred  to  by  either  automatist — that,  given  the
possibility  of  a  supernormal  connexion,  it  is  difficult,  I  think^
to  attribute  the  coincidence  to  chance.

I  am  disposed  to  iind  some  interest,  and  perhaps  some
confirmation  of  the  non-accidental  nature  of  the  coincidence
between  Miss  Verrall's  script  of  September  6th,  1908,  and
the  Piper  script,  in  the  fact  that  her  script  of  the  previous

1  In  the  year  of  the  Lord  twenty-five,  but  why  are  others  left  ?  not  above
these,  but  with  mass  set  below  is  the  matter  effected,  wherefore  let  us
endure  all  things,  toil  and  chains  and  death  itself.  0  Lord  thy  servants  call
upon  thee.


LX.]


Cross-Correspondences.


191


day,  September  5  th,  also  shows  a  certain  amount  of  corre-
spondence. The  latter  part  of  this  script  runs :

The  garden  of  the  sun  the  golden  apples  that  the  dragon  guarded
Who  stole  the  apples  froward  mortal  Hesperides  three  nymphs
no  no  go  not  to  Lethe  ^  and  the  river  of  wailing  too
Upon  the  shore  they  stood  and  stretched  their  arms.

Now  it  is  natural  enough,  considering  the  tendency  of  Miss
Verrall's  script  to  refer  to  classical  subjects,  that  it  should
mention  either  the  apples  of  the  garden  of  the  Hesperides,  or
the  river  of  Lethe ;  but  there  is  no  obvious  reason  why  they
should  be  combined.  It  is  therefore  interesting  to  find  a
possible  reason  for  their  combination  in  both  topics  having
been  mentioned  in  the  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  on  April  22nd,
1908.  Mr.  Dorr  on  that  day  suggested  Lethe  as  a  message
in  association  with  Morpheus  and  the  Cave  of  Sleep.-  Later
in  the  sitting,  the  following  incident  occurred :

(Myersp  communicating.)

Mrs.  Verrall  has  written  a  few  verses  from  Browning  which
I,  Myers,  gave  her  recently  from  Euripides.  Where  she
has  selected  the  verses,  the  words  appeal  to  me  and
describe  one  of  our  messages  here.

G.  B.  D.  Can  you  tell  me  what  play  it  was  from  which  Mrs.  Verrall's
verses  were  taken  ?

Let  me  think  it  over — Pallas — Pedestal — hair —

G.  B.  D.  You  had  best  not  try  and  tell  me  now,  but  take  more  time
about  it.

No,  I  am  only  telling  you —

(Mr.  Dorr  notes :  "  The  reference  to  a  translation  by  Browning
from  Euripides,  or  from  the  Greek  plays  at  all,  in  fact,  is  interesting,
for  I  did  not  know  that  he  had  made  any  such  until  I  looked  it
up  at  the  sitting  ...  in  the  book  of  Greek  Ode  translations  which  I
had  brought  with  me  to  it. Finding  there  a  translation  by  Browning

quotation  from  Keats's  Ode  on  Melancholy.
-I  liave  not  counted  "Lethe"  as  an  independent  "message,"  because  there
is  no  evidence  that  it  was  accepted  as  such  by  the  Piper  controls,  though
Morpheus  was.


192  ,  3Its.  Henry  Sidgivick.  [part

from  the  Hercules  Furens,  I  glanced  it  through  and  read  a  few  lines
here  and  there  to  see  if  the  control  would  identify  the  ones  referred  to,
Itut  nothing  was  identified,  unless  it  were  the  lines  in  which  his
coming  to  the  Hesperides  and  plucking  of  the  Golden  Apple  is
described." At  this  point  Myers,,  writes  :)

I  am  listening  carefully — Apple — correct. She  quoted  it  in
answer  to  apj^le.

There  had  been  no  attempt  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  nor  in
Miss  Verrall's  to  quote  from  Browning's  translation  of  the
Heracles  Furens.  There  had  been,  as  readers  of  Proceedings,
Vol.  XXII.i  know,  references  to  the  Hercules  Furens  in  Mrs.
Verrall's  script  of  a  year  before  (March  4th  and  25th,  1907);
and  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  the  same  period  (April  16th,
1907)  there  had  been  a  quotation,  or  rather  a  reminiscence  of
Browning's  poem,  Aristophanes'  A2Jology,  of  which  the  translation
of  the  Hercules  Furens  is  a  part.  But  in  these  scripts,  of  which
Mrs.  Piper  at  this  time  knew  nothing,  there  is  no  reference  to
apple."  "  Apple,"  however,  is  one  of  the  cross-correspondences
previously  attempted  in  the  set  of  sittings  we  are  now  dealing
with,  and  the  reference  by  Mr.  Dorr  to  the  golden  apple  would
naturally  recall  this.  It  is  therefore  impossible  to  say  whether
there  had  previously  been  any  connexion  intended  by  Myersp
between  the  "  apple "  taken  as  a  message  and  the  garden  of
the  Hesperides.

The  first  reference  to  "Apple"  was  on  March  l7th,  thus:

I  said  garden'^  and  the  word  apple  was  inadvertently  written.

Again,  on  Marcii  23rd  (MyerSp  communicating).
<\.  B.  ]).  What  else  have  you  given  1

Apple.
O.  B.  D.  To  whom?

Helen.

"  Apple "  is  on  several  subsequent  days  included  in  lists  of
messages  taken  and  is  ticked  off  as  completed  on  April  14th

1  See  Vol.  XXII.  pp.  210-2-20,  and  Mr.  Piddhigtoivs  paper  above,  pp.  25-29.
Tlie  word  "  garden  "  was  part  of  a  phrase  "  Sj'ringa  bush  in  mother's  garden  "
tliat  liad  been  agreed  on  as  a  message.


LX.]


Cross-Correspondences.


193


and  21st.  There  is  a  final  reference  to  "Apples,"  apparently  as
one  among  other  messages,  in  the  waking-stage  of  May  26th,
the  last  sitting  of  the  series.

Number  of  Successes  and  Failures.

The  correspondences  I  have  described  between  "  messages "
taken  by  Mrs.  Piper's  trauce-personalities  and  the  script  of
other  automatists,  form  only  a  small  proportion  of  the  whole
number  of  such  "  messages."  If  we  include  with  them  state-
ments  by  Mrs.  Piper,  in  script  or  in  the  waking-stage,  that
■certain  things  have  been  written  or  drawn  by  other  automatists,
there  were  about  80^  messages  "  during  the  series  of  sittings  in
question.  In  the  great  majority  of  cases  the  trance-personalities
claim  success,  but  in  only  about  2-J:  ^  of  them  has  anything
approaching  justification  for  the  claim  been  discovered.  This  is,
of  course,  quite  in  accordance  with  previous  experience,  and
so  is  the  fact  that  the  degree  of  success,  where  there  is  any,
varies  "reatlv.  I  have  described  the  cases  which  seem  to  me
the  most  successful,  and  we  descend  from  them  through  various
■degrees  to  the  complete  failures.

I  called  attention  in  connexion  with  the  Neptune  case  to
the  strange  contrast  between  the  exactness  of  the  correspondence
verbally,  and  the  erroneous  and  contradictory  assertions  as  to
who  has  received  and  reproduced  the  message,  and  when  she
has  clone  so.  Neptune,  which  is  spoken  of  as  to  be  written  in
the  future  by  Mrs.  Verrall,  had,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  been
written  by  Miss  Verrall  before  it  was  mentioned  by  Mrs.  Piper's
trance-personalities  at  all ;  and  we  have  no  reason  to  think
that  it  was  written  by  any  automatist  we  are  acquainted  with
afterwards.  Pharaoh's  daughter,  on  the  other  hand,  which  is
spoken  of  as  written  by  Mrs.  Verrall  months  before,  is  not
written  till  months after, and  then by Miss Verrall.  And

^  The  number  is  a  little  indefinite,  because  it  is  sometimes  difficult  to  decide
whether  a  message  in  which  two  words  are  linked  together  (as  e.g.  in  Joy
and  Troy)  is  to  count  as  one  or  two.  I  have  counted  it  as  one  when  the
statement  about  the  linking  seems  clear.

-In  these  24  I  include  the  cases  to  which  I  shall  refer  presently,  of
•emergence  in  Miss  Verrall's  and  Mrs.  Holland's  script  after  Mrs.  Verrall
had  studied  the  records.

N


194


Mrs.  Henry  Sid g wide.


[part


Troy  and  joy,  Exile  with  Moore,  are  neither  of  them  written
till  some  day^  after  it  has  been  asserted  in  the  Piper  script
that  they  have  got  through.  This  same  ignorance  as  to  writer
and  date,  accompanied  by  confident  assertion,  appears  in  the
less  clear  correspondences  as  well,  and  success  is  claimed  with
equal  confidence  in  the  cases  where  there  seems  to  be  no
correspondence  at  all.  Erroneous  guesses  confidently  expressed
may,  as  I  have  already  said,  be  sometimes  due  to  the  known
reluctance  of  the  subliminal  consciousness  to  admit  inability  to
answer  questions.  But  sometimes  the  assertions  are  made
gratuitously  without  any  question  being  asked  by  Mr.  Dorr.

With  so  much  confusion  as  to  date  and  persons  it  is
difficult  to  make  any  coherent  theory  as  to  the  processes
involved ;  and  I  think  the  matter  must  be  left  there  for  the
moment  as  one  of  the  puzzles  which  seem  at  present  to
stand  in  the  way  of  a  solution  of  the  problems  before  us,
but  which  may  ultimately  help  to  furnish  a  clue.

It  is  perhaps  worth  noting  that  in  the  cases  I  have  de-
scribed, with  the  partial  exception  of  "  Exile,"  the  idea  to  be
conveyed  is  chosen  by  the  Piper  trance-personalities — not  by
Mr.  Dorr.  Of  the  whole  number  of  80  "messages"  about
two-fifths  are  initiated  by  Mr.  Dorr,  and  the  rest  by  the
Piper  trance-personalities.

It  may  be  noticed  also  that  Miss  Verrall  is  the  partner
in  these  successful  experiments.  This  is  true  also  of  the
majority  of  the  more  doubtful  correspondences  occurring  within
six  months  of  the  Piper  sittings  in  question.  Mrs.  Verrall  was
much  more  often  referred  to  by  the  Piper  trance-personalities,
but  her  script  shows  very  little,  if  any,  correspondence  with
Mrs.  Piper's.

Connexion  with  Mrs.  Holland's  Script. ■  ..

Mrs.  Holland,  as  it  happens,  was  doing  very  little  automatic
writing  during  the  spring  and  summer  of  1908.  She  only  wrote
on  March  4th,  March  10th,  and  July  23rd.  There  is  nothing
connected  with  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings  in  the  scripts  of  March  4th
and  10th.  But  in  the  course  of  the  script  of  July  23rd
comes  the  reference  to  Seven,  which  must  be  read  in  connexion
with  references  by  Mrs.  Piper  to  "  We  are  seven  "  on  May  8th


LX.]


Cross-  Correspondences.


195


and  12th,  and  by  Miss  Verrall  to  the  number  seven  on
May  11th.  Miss  Johnson  has  dealt  fully  with  this  episode  in
her  paper  below  (pp.  222-258), and  I  need  not  enlarge  on  it  now.
I  have  not  included  it  in  enumerating  the  messages  above  only
because  it  was  not  claimed  on  Mrs.  Piper's  side  as  a  "  message  "
quite  so  definitely  as  they  were.  After  July  23rd  Mrs.  Hol-
land's next  script  was  produced  on  November  25th,  1908,  and
on  this  and  several  subsequent  days  up  to  April  14th,  1909,
there  are  passages  in  the  script  that  look  like  references  to  the
"  messages  "  of  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings — in  two  cases  with  a  distinct
reference  to  Mr.  Dorr  or  to  Mrs.  Piper.^  Before  the  middle  of
November,  however,  Mrs.  Verrall  had  read  and  made  notes  on
the  records  of  Mr.  Dorr's  sittings,  so  that  her  mind  had
become  a  possible  source  of  telepathic  information,  and  the
complication  of  the  problem  is  increased.

In  this  connexion  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  in  a  piece
of  script  produced  by  Miss  Verrall  on  November  12th,  1908,
in  the  presence  of  Mrs.  Verrall,  after  the  latter  had  read  Mr.
Dorr's  records,"-^  but  when  Miss  Verrall  was  ignorant  of  them,
two  of  the  subjects  of  "  messages  " — Iris  and  Palm  branches —
emerged.^ The  relevant  part  of  the  script  is  as  follows :

[Drawing  of  the  flower  Iris]  blue  and  purple  and  green  spikes
nuntius  ipse  ab  alio  emissus  haec  per  terras.'*

A  bough  of  green  leaves  palm  leaves  to  strew  upon  the  way  when
the  time  was  ripe  palm  leaves  super  sethera  notus  ^  fame  the  palm  of
fame  that  is  the  thought.

The  references  to  Iris,  the  messenger  of  the  gods,  in  the
Piper  sittings  will  be  found  in  Mr.  Piddington's  paper  above,

^  These  cases  will  be  discussed  in  a  future  paper.

-Mrs.  Verrall  first  heard  of  these  sittings  on  October  18th,  1908.  She  first
saw  the  records  of  them  some  days  later.

■'Miss  Verrall  had  had  a  reference  to  Iris  in  her  script  earlier,  namely,  on
August  17th,  1908.  "  The  curving  bow  butterfly  wings  light  as  gossamer  rainbow
hued  Butterflies  the  pied  meadows  buttercups  and  daisies  the  million  coloured
bow."  Disconnected  allusions  to  classical  subjects  are  common  in  Miss
Verralts  script,  so  that  it  is  difficult  to  judge  whether  a  reference  to  Iris,
such  as  this,  five  mouths  after  Iris  had  figured  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance,  should
not  be  attributed  to  chance  rather  than  to  any  supernormal  communication.

■*A  messenger  himself  sent  by  another  she  (or  these  things)  through  the
lands.

^Renowned  beyond  the  heavens.


196


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


(p.  89  et  seq.).  Mrs.  Verrall  had  been  specially  occupied  with
some  questions  about  Iris,  the  messenger  of  the  gods,  on  Nov.
11th.

The  references  by  Mrs.  Piper  to  palm  branches  are  as  follows :
(In  the  walung-stage  on  March  30th,  1908.)

Palm  branches — came  out  yesterday — Janus,
(and  a  little  later)

Oh  lovely  !  I  see  rows  and  rows  of  lovely  ladies — little
maidens  carrying  palm  branches  through  the  air.

On  April  6th  Mr.  Dorr  reads  over  to  Mrs.  Piper  in
trance  the  record  of  what  had  been  said  in  the  waking-stage
of  March  30  th.

(Myersp  communicating.)

G.  B.  D.  (reading) "Palm  branches." Have  you  given  this'?

Yes.

G.  B.  D.  To  whom  1

To  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Helen.  I  gave  palm  branches ;  you  will
understand  this  later.  I  wish  to  acquaint  you  with
independent  messages  as  they  appear  through  Mrs.  V.
you  understand


You  will  be  pleased  with  palm  branches.

COMUS.

There  is  one  more  thing  to  be  considered,  as  it  may  throw
light  on  the  whole  matter,  and  that  is  that  there  are  certainly
traces  in  these  records,  apart  from  deliberate  attempts  at  cross-
correspondence,  of  what  looks  like  knowledge  of  facts  or  of
thoughts  which  were  not  known  in  any  normal  way  to  Mrs.
Piper,  in  or  out  of  trance,  nor  to  Mr.  Dorr.  Mr.  Piddington
has  referred  (see  p.  162)  to  possible  connexions  of  this  kind
between  Mrs.  Piper's  utterances  in  the  series  of  sittings  under
consideration  and  ideas  in  the  paper  on  "  Concordant  Automa-
tisms "  which  he  was  at  the  time  engaged  in  writing.  I  will
here  describe  another instance  of  apparently telepathic  con-


LX.]


Cross-  Correspondences.


197


nexion  between  remarks  in  these  sittings  and  external
circumstances.

On  April  27  and  May  4,  1908,  Mr.  Dorr  read  to  Mrs.  Piper
in  trance  passages  from  Milton's  Covins — among  others  the  first
few  lines  of  the  address  to  Sabrina :

Sabrina  fair,

Listen  where  thou  art  sitting,
Under  the  glassy,  cool,  translucent  wave,

In  twisted  braids  of  lilies  knitting
The  loose  train  of  thy  amber-dropping  hair.

To  some  extent  in  the  waking-stage  on  April  27th,  and
in  the  course  of  the  script  on  May  4th  and  May  8th,  recog-
nition had  been  shown  by  the  trance  personalities  of  the
lines  read  being  by  Milton  and  coming  from  Comus  ^  ;  and  also
a  knowledge  of  the  names  Comus  and  Circe  which  Mr.  Dorr
had  suppressed  in  reading  aloud.

On  May  8th  Mr.  Dorr  said:

(Myersp  communicating.)
G.  B.  D.  Can  you  not  make  one  of  the  other  Lights  give  the  name
of  Comus,  or  of  Circe,  or  make  some  reference  to  the
poem — quote  some  lines  from  it  perhaps  1

Yes  we  could  say  [drawing  of  the  sun]  SUN

G.  B.  D.  Then  you  will  take  this  as  a  message,  and  associate  it  too
with  Milton,  will  you  not  ?

Yes  I  will.  Myers.

On  May  12th  Hodgsonp  professes  to  have  given  through
other  automatists  the  messages  Comus,  Circe,  and  to  have
drawn  the  sun — and  on  May  13th  MyerSp  or  Hodgsoup  vi^rites,
"  I  have  been  trying  to  get  that  [i.e.  Circe]  through  with
Helen."  Later  in  the  same  sitting  of  May  13th,  after  a  little
discussion  as  to  whether  the  trance  personalities  were  responsible
for  a  drawing  of  the  sun  which  had  been  made  in  connexion
with  Juno  by  another  automatist  in  the  United  States,  comes
a  pause,  and  the  script  proceeds :

(MyerSp  or  Hodgsonp  communicating.)
Caves,  nymphs,  water  nymphs

1  See  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper  above,  pp.  45-6.


198  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

G.  B.  D.  What  about  water  nymphs  ?

We  are  working  over  this.
G.  B.  D.  With  whom  1

Helen  and  Mrs.  Sidsrwick.

G.  B.  D.  I  read  j^ou  something  about  this  in  Comus,  as  you  may
remember.

(Hand  assents.)

We  were  trying  to  give  it  there  when  the  suggestion  came
from  Mrs.  Sidgwick  for  us  to  reproduce  it  here.

G.  B.  D.  I  read  you  "  Sabrina  fair,  listen  where  thou  art  sitting,
Under  the  glassy,  cool  translucent  wave."  Perhaps  this,
as  a  quotation,  may  help  you  to  give  it  to  the  other
Lights.

We  shall  say  Maid  of  the  Sea — Maid  of  the  Sea.

G.  B.  D.  You  recall  my  reading  you  the  lines  1

Yes,  I  do  very  well ;  it  all  came  from  this.

G.  B.  D.  You  mean  that  it  was  suggested  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  mind
by  your  own  thought  of  it  1

.  Because  we  were  trying  to  quote  those  lines  there.

G.  B.  D.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  thought  of  them  because  you  were  trying  to
give  them  to  her?

Yes,  because  we  were  present — woods — caves — nymphs.

In  the  waking-stage  of  the  same  day  Mrs.  Piper  said :

And  I  said.  Maidens  fair,  twining  their  golden  locks.  And
Mrs.  Sidgwick  said.  You  go  back  and  tell  that  to  Mrs.
Piper  and  then  see  what  comes  of  it.  That  is  as  I
understood  it,  and  I  think  she  is  very  clear  in  her
enunciation.

It  is  clear  from  these  passages,  I  think,  that  the  trance
personalities  connect  with  me  words  which  Mr.  Dorr  imme-
diately takes  to  refer  to  Covins,  and  which  they  accept  as  so
referring. I  may  say  at  once  that  I  was  entirely  unconscious


LX.]


Cross-  Correspondences.


199


of  any  attempt  at  thought-transference,  and  to  the  best  of
my  belief  never  thought  of  the  trance  personaHties  or  of  Mrs.
Piper  in  connexion  with  Comus.  At  the  same  time  I  think
it  is  difficult  to  suppose  that  the  reference  to  me  in  this
connexion  was  entirely  accidental,  because,  for  reasons  which
I  will  explain  presently,  Comus  was  in  my  mind  a  good  deal
about  this  time,  and,  moreover,  while  this  is  the  only  time  I
am  referred  to  at  all  by  the  trance  personalities  in  this  series
of  sittings,  Comus  is,  so  far  as  I  remember,  the  only  subject
among  the  many  touched  on  that  could  with  any  appropriate-
ness be  connected  with  me.

The  story  is  this.  The  year  1908  was  the  tercentenary
of  Milton's  birth  and  it  was  to  be  celebrated  at  his  College
—  Christ's  College,  Cambridge.  Some  of  the  younger  members
of  the  University  arranged  to  perform  the  masque  of  Comus
on  the  occasion.  It  is  usual  at  Cambridge  in  the  performances
of  University  dramatic  clubs  for  all  the  parts — female  as  well
as  male — to  be  played  by  men.  On  this  occasion,  however,  they
were  anxious  to  introduce  women,  and  as  they  also  wished  to
be  able  to  say  that  the  performers  were  students  at  the
University,  I  was  approached  to  ascertain  whether  as  Principal
of  Newnham  College  I  would  consent  to  certain  students  of
the  College  taking  part.  The  important  women's  parts,  it
will  be  remembered,  are  "  the  lady,"  and  Sabrina  the  water
nymph.  It  was  a  new  departure,  and  those  who  understand
the  circumstances  will  realise  that  the  question  thus  presented
to  me  was  one  of  those  which,  without  being  very  important,
give  a  great  deal  of  trouble  to  those  who  have  to  decide  them,
and  that  therefore  Comus  occupied  my  mind  in  a  way  it
certainly  never  did  before.  Exactly  when  the  question  first
came  before  me  I  cannot  now  remember,  but  it  must,  I
think,  have  been  before  the  middle  of  May.  The  performance
took  place  early  in  July.

It  certainly  seems,  therefore,  as  though  events  at  Cambridge
in  England,  or  at  least  thoughts  in  the  minds  of  persons
there,  did  somehow  affect  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  personalities  in
America.  It  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  that  there  was
telepathic  communication  with  me,  for  others,  including  Mrs.
and  Miss  Verrall,  were  aware  of  my  special  interest  in  the
subject  of  Comits  at  that  time.


200


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich


[part


With  this  I  will  conclude  my  paper.  There  were,  as  I
have  said,  many  failures,  and  there  are  some  more  or  less
successful  cross-correspondences  which  I  have  not  described.
But,  apart  from  those  with  Mrs.  Holland's  script,  to  be  discussed
later,  the  details  of  these  would  not,  I  think,  either  add  materi-
ally to  the  weight  of  evidence,  or  throw  new  light  on  the
processes  involved.


LX.]  Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Scrijjt.  201


SECOND  EEPOET  ON  MES.  HOLLAND'S  SCEIPT.
By  Alice  Johnson.
Introduction.

In  my  first  report  on  the  automatic  writing  of  Mrs.  Holland,
which  appeared  in  the  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXI.  (pp.  166-391),
a  general  account  of  the  development  of  the  case  was  given,
with  a  discussion  not  only  of  evidential  incidents,  but  also  of
a  good  many  features  that  appeared  to  me  instructive  from  a
psychological  point  of  view.  For  the  general  psychological
character  of  the  case  then  I  must  refer  my  readers  to  the
first  report ;  I  propose  to  confine  myself  in  this  paper  to
certain  of  the  evidential  or  would-be  evidential  incidents
belonging  to  a  period  subsequent  to  the  one  there  dealt  with.

The  period  covered  by  this  paper  is  a  little  over  two  years
in  length,  namely,  from  June  2Jth,  1906,  to  July  23rd,  1908.
During  practically  the  whole  of  this  period  Mrs.  Holland  was
in  India,  but  it  happens  that  the  first  script  quoted  was
written  while  she  was  at  sea  on  her  way  to  India,  and  the
last  one  quoted  was  written  while  she  was  at  sea  on  her  way
back  to  England.

All  Mrs.  Holland's  scripts,  with  any  communications  that
she  may  have  to  make  about  them,  are  sent  to  me,-^  and  are
always  kept  locked  up  in  my  office,  so  that  no  one  but  myself
has  access  to  them.

Up  to  Nov.  16th,  1906,  Mrs.  Verrall  sent  those  of  her
scripts  that  were  written  on  Wednesdays  to  me,  (that  being

1  Except  that  during  my  visit  to  America  in  1906  her  scripts  from  July  13th
to  October  31st  inclusive  were  sent  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  who  gave  them  all  to
me  on  my  return  ;  and  Mr.  Piddington  has  on  one  or  two  occasions  written  to-
iler direct  to  make  enquiries  on  certain  points  in  her  script  connected  with
his  paper  on  "A  Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms"  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.


202


Alice  Johnson.


[part


the  regular  weekly  day  for  Mrs.  Holland  to  write),  and  her
other  scripts  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  After  this  date  she  sent
them  all  to  Mr.  Piddington,  he  being  in  charge  of  the  English
sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  which  were  then  beginning.  Except
for  an  interval  during  1907  when  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  were
sent  to  me,  Mr.  Piddington  continued  to  receive  them  up  to
the  end  of  1907,  from  which  date  onwards  they  have  always
been  sent  to  me.

Miss  Verrall's  scripts,  when  she  first  began  to  write,  were
kept  by  her  mother.  Occasionally  when  a  script  of  hers
seemed  likely  to  have  evidential  value,  it  was  sent  with
Mrs.  Verrall's  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  Afterwards  all  Miss  Verrall's
scripts  were  sent  to  Mr.  Piddington  from  Nov.  20th,  1906,
to  the  end  of  1907,  (except  for  an  interval  during  1907
when  I  received  them),  after  which  date  they  have  all  been
sent  to  me.

Each  recipient  has  kept  the  scripts  locked  up,  as  long  as
they  remained  in  his  or  her  possession,  and  the  whole  of
both  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall's  scripts  from  the  beginning
have  now  been  put  into  my  charge  and  are  kept  in  my
office.

Both  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall  have  been  accvistomed  to  make
copies  of  their  scripts  before  sending  them  away,  and  at  stated
intervals  they  compare  notes  to  see  what  correspondences,  if
any,  have  occurred  between  their  scripts.  The  dates  of  com-
parison are  always  noted  and  the  observations  and  inter-
pretations made  then  or  at  any  future  time  are  always
recorded  with  their  dates,  so  that  the  writers  can  always  state
at  any  given  date  what  knowledge  of  each  other's  previous
scripts  they  then  possess.

In  regard  to  correspondences  between  Mrs.  Holland's  and
Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts,  or  traces  of  telepathy  between  them,  I
used  occasionally,  as  stated  in  my  first  report,  to  send  each
of  them  a  copy  of  the  other's  script  (always,  of  course,
recording  the  date  and  exactly  what  was  sent)  so  that  she
might  tell  me  if  anything  in  it  referred  correctly  to  her.
During  the  period  covered  by  this  paper,  I  sent  copies  of
only  nine  pieces  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  to  Mrs.  Holland,  all
written  between  April  18th  and  August  1st,  1906,  and  of
these  only  one,  viz,  that  of  June  20th,,  1906,  turned  out  to  be


LX.]  Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


203


connected  with  Mrs.  Holland's.  This  is  the  script  quoted  below
under  the  Cross-correspondence  entitled  "  Janiculum " ;  but  it
did  not  reach  Mrs.  Holland  in  India  until  some  time  after
her  corresponding  script  (that  of  June  24th)  was  written,  and
she  saw  no  point  in  it  when  she  did  read  it.

At  different  intervals  I  have  shown  Mrs.  Verrall  portions
of  Mrs.  Holland's  script,  but  always  noting  when  I  did  so.
Consequently  the  degree  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  knowledge  of  Mrs.
Holland's  script  at  any  given  time  is  always  ascertainable,
and  is  mentioned  in  my  reports  whenever  it  bears  on  the
evidence.

It  is  noteworthy  that  all  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  quoted  in
the  first  part  of  this  paper  were  written  on  Wednesdays,  the
days  on  which  she  was  trying  for  connections  with  Mrs.  Holland,
as  recorded  by  her  on  each  occasion  at  the  time,  except  the
script  of  Sept.  20,  1906,  about  which  a  note  in  her  record
states  that,  having  omitted  to  write  the  day  before,  she  had
fixed  her  attention  on  Mrs.  Holland  that  morning.  On  the
other  hand,  some  of  the  connections  with  Mrs.  Verrall  appear
in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  on  other  days  of  the  week.

As  before,  I  am  indebted  to  Mrs.  Verrall  for  translations
of  the  Latin  and  Greek,  and  information  about  the  classical
allusions,  contained  in  her  own  and  her  daughter's  scripts.

As  to  the  question  whether  chance  can  account  for  all  or
any  of  the  cross-correspondences,  it  is  obvious  that  the  data
necessary  for  any  exact  calculation  of  probabilities  are  entirely
lacking,  while  a  rough  empirical  judgment  of  what  one  might
expect  to  occur  by  chance  can  only  be  tentative  and  may
be  quite  untrustworthy.  But  in  most  of  the  cases  which  I
have  here  counted  as  cross-correspondences,  the  passages  in
the  scripts  are  marked  out  by  some  phrase  which  seems  meant
to  call  attention  to  them,  such  as,  "  Eera ember  the  word  and
the  date " ;  or  by  some  device  such  as  the  repetition  of  a
word,  or  its  being  written  in  specially  large  letters.  It  is
here  as  if  the  intelligence  guiding  the  script — whether  it  be
the  subliminal  self  of  the  automatist  or  some  external  intelli-
gence— is  putting  up  a  signal  to  apprise  us  of  its  intentions ;
and  the  signal  greatly  reduces  the  probability  that  the  coinci-
dence is  only  due  to  chance.  For  it  would  be  much  more
likely,  say,  that  a  passage  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  should


204


Alice  Johnson.


[part


accidentally  resemble  some  passage  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of
the  same  period  than  that  it  should  resemble  the  particular
passage  to  which  the  signal  is  attached.  And  if,  as  occasionally
happens,  we  find  a  signal  in  each  script  attached  to  the  passage
resembling  that  in  the  other  script,  the  probability  of  chance
coincidence  is  still  further  reduced.  Signals  of  this  kind,  as
shown  in  the  detailed  account,  are  to  be  found  in  the  following
cases :

(1)  "The  Janiculum  "  ;  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script.

(2)  "  Yellow  "  ;  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script.

(.3)  "  Franz  Joseph " ;  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script.
(4) "  Savonarola " ;  in Miss  Verrall's and Mrs.  Holland's
scripts.

(.5)  "  The  Blue  Flower  "  ; in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  (?).
(6)  "  Sevens " ; in  the  scripts  of  Mrs.  Piper,  Mrs.  Verrall„
Mrs.  Holland  and  Mrs.  Home.


Cross-Correspondence.  ,  .

"  Tlie  Janiculum."

Mrs.  Verrall,  being  then  in  Switzerland,  wrote  on  Wed-
nesday, June  20th,  1906  :

Angiolina  no  stone  disturbed — no  line  destroyed  Fata  Morgana
the  unseizable  kingdom  in  the  sky —

Sun  on  high  summits — mist  veils — then  reveals  the  great
Eternities, the  twin  Eternities  afar.^

The  upstanding  white  majestic  dome
On  buttress  borne  on  high
The  cloudcapped  towers  of  royal  Kome
Against  the  Italian  sky.

But  I  have  not  made  her  see  the  point  of  union  between  the
mountain  and  St.  Peter's  rock.

Upon  this  rock
Super  banc  petram

Leave  it  now.

'"The  twin  Eternities  unite  afar."  F.  W.  H.  Myers's  Pallida  Morte.
Fulura. (See  Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry,  p.  174.)


LX.]


Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


205


Mrs.  Holland,  being  then  at  sea  on  her  way  to  India,
wrote  on  Sunday,  June  24th,  1906  :

The  jagged  outline  of  the  Janiculuai  black  against  the  sunset  sky.

The  final  renouncement  of  the  summit  of  belief —

"  Life's  night  begins  let  him  never  come  back  to  us
There  would  be  doubt  hesitation  and  pain —
Forced  praise  on  our  part  the  glimmer  of  twilight
Never  glad  confident  morning  again — "  ^

To  you  the  half  and tion  of  the  sentence — the  sense  to

be  revealed.

The  last  phrase  quoted  seems  clearly  to  indicate  that  a
cross-correspondence  is  intended.

Both  scripts  describe  a  scene  in  Eome,  and  the  words
"  against  the  sky "  and  "  summit "  occur  in  both.  Mrs.
Verrall's  script,  however  (which  was  no  doubt  partly  inspired
by  the  scenery  of  her  surroundings),  clearly  alludes  to  St.  Peter's
Church  on  the  Vatican  Hill,  whereas  Mrs.  Holland  speaks  of  the
Janiculum.  The  two  hills,  the  Vatican  and  Janiculum,  are
connected  topographically,  in  that  they  adjoin  one  another  on
the  west  side  of  the  Tiber,  being  both  included  in  the  regie
trans  Tihcrinum  of  Augustus  :  there  is,  moreover,  a  St.  Peter's
church  on  the  Janiculum  as  well  as  on  the  Vatican,  both
being — according  to  different  traditions — the  scene  of  St.
Peter's  martyrdom.

Mrs.  Verrall's  phrase  "But  I  have  not  made  her  see  the
point  of  union  between  the  mountain  and  St.  Peter's  rock "
is  appropriate  if  applied  to  Mrs.  Holland's  mention  of  the
Janiculum,  for  Mrs.  Holland  says  nothing  about  St.  Peter.

In  his  analysis  of  a  later  script  of  Mrs.  Verrall's,  that
of  March  25th,  1907,  in  connection  with  the  experiments
with  Mrs.  Piper,  Mr.  Piddington  speaks  of  certain  analogies
between  Janus  and  St.  Peter.- The  script  begins :

"  Claviger  the  bearer  of  the  key  and  club.  The  Club  and
Key— East  and  West."

Claviger  in  the  sense  of  Cluh-hcarcr  is  an  epithet  often
applied  to  Hercules,  who  is  referred  to  in  the  same  script.

1  Browning,  The  Lout  Leader.
Proceeding.^  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXII.  p.  255.


206


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Claviger  in  the  sense  of  Kcy-hearcr,  says  Mr.  Piddington,  seems
to  be  used  only  by  Ovid  in  speaking  of  Janus,  whose  name
is  not  mentioned  in  the  script.  Janus  in  this  passage  of
Ovid  holds  in  his  right  hand  a  staff  and  in  his  left  a  key ;
he  locks  up  vi^ar  and  sends  forth  peace  ;  he  is  the  doorkeeper
of  the  courts  of  heaven.  Similarly  St.  Peter  bears  a  staff  as
well  as  a  key,  and  he  too  is  represented  as  the  doorkeeper
of  heaven.

Janus  alone  of  all  the  gods  looks  with  his  double  face  upon
both  the  East  and  the  West  at  the  same  time.  St.  Peter  as
an  Oriental  and  by  tradition  the  first  bishop  of  the  Western
Church  may  also  be  said  to  represent  the  union  of  the  East
and  West.

At  the  time  Mrs.  Verrall  wrote  this  later  script  about  the
"  key-bearer,"  she  was  aware  of  the  cross-correspondence  just
described  between  herself  and  Mrs.  Holland  when  she  wrote
of  the  Vatican  and  Mrs.  Holland  of  the  Janiculum,  but  she
had  only  regarded  it  as  a  slight  and  vague  connection,  con-
sisting merely  in  the  mention  of  two  adjoining  hills.  Mr.
Piddington,  with  no  reference  whatever  to  the  early  scripts,
worked  out  the  implications  in  the  later  one,  which  I  think
throw  Iv'^X,  back  upon  these.

Mr.  Piddington  now  suggests  (see  his  paper  above,  p.  22)
that  a  phrase  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  March  27,  1907
(quoted  in  full  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.  p.  261),  "Peter  is
the  second  one,"  is  connected  with  Mrs.  Verrall's  of  two  days
earlier,  meaning  that  St.  Peter  is  the  second  Clccviger.  If  so,
this  would  seem  to  confirm  still  further  the  cross-correspondence
between  the  two  scripts  of  1906  with  which  I  am  now  dealing.

Mrs.  Verrall  further  points  out  to  me  that  the  two-headed
Janus,  who  sees  both  the  past  and  the  future,  may  be  regarded
as  a  type  or  symbol  of  the  "  Twin  Eternities "  referred  to
in  her  script.

"  Twin  Eternities,"  as  mentioned  above,  is  a  quotation  from  a
poem  of  Mr.  Myers's,  in  which  it  is  used  in  a  different  sense,
the  context  being  as  follows :

My  soul  in  solitude  her  post  has  taken,

Between  the  two  seas,  on  the  narrowing  bar, — •

Sees  on  each  hand  the  stormful  waters  shaken,
The  twin  Eternities  unite  afar.


LX.]


Second  Rejyort  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


207


There  'mid  faiths  slain  and  idols  shattered  low,
And  many  a  fallen  friend  and  fallen  foe,

She  waits  by  night  the  flooding  tides  to  be.

I  would  suggest,  then,  that  while  the  main  point  of  the
cross-correspondence  consists  in  a  comparison  between  St.  Peter
and  Janus, — St.  Peter  being  mentioned  explicitly  and  Janus
perhaps  implicitly  (through  the  "  twin  Eternities "  and  "  the
mountain  "  connected  with  "  St.  Peter's  rock  ")  in  Mrs.  Verrall's
script,  and  the  Janiculum  explicitly  in  Mrs.  Holland's, — there
is  also  a  subsidiary  cross-correspondence  in  relation  to  Mr.
Myers's  poem ;  for  the  thoughts  expressed  in  the  lines  just
quoted  from  it  seem  to  be  re-echoed  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script
in  the  phrase,  "  The  final  renouncement  of  the  summit  of
belief,"  and  in  her  quotation  from  The  Lost  Leader.  The
immediate  context  of  this  latter  quotation,  and  the  end  of  the
poem,  is  as  follows :

Best  fight  on  well,  for  we  taught  him — strike  gallantly,

Menace  our  heart  ere  we  master  his  own ;
Then  let  him  receive  the  new  knowledge  and  wait  us

Pardoned  in  heaven,  the  first  by  the  throne  !

Here  we  see  that  the  Lost  Leader,  an  instance  of  "  idols
shattered  low,"  is  still  regarded  by  his  former  followers  as  a
"  fallen  friend  "  as  well  as  a  "  fallen  foe."

Ceoss-Correspondence.
"Yellmv."

The  next  case  is  a  slight  and  simple  triple  coincidence.

Mrs.  Holland  in  India  on  Monday,  August  6th,  1906,
towards  the  end  of  a  rather  long  piece  of  script  referring  to  a
number  of  different  topics,  writes  the  following  words,  marked
off  from  the  rest  by  a  space  and  a  change  in  the  hand-
writing :

y  e  1 0  [scribbles]
yellowed  ivory.


208  Alice  Johnson.  '  [part

Mrs.  Verrall,  on  Wednesday,  Aug.  8th,  in  Cambridge,  writes :


I  have  done  it  to-night y yellow  is  the  written  word

yellow
yellow
Say  only  yellow

The  word  "  yellow  "  is  written  larger  and  more  emphatically
each  time  it  occurs,  and  is  distinctly  claimed  by  Mrs.  Verrall's
script  as  the  word  that  was  intended  to  appear.  Such  a
claim  makes  it,  as  I  have  said,  much  less  likely  that  the
coincidence  was  merely  accidental.

Meanwhile  Miss  Verrall,  who  was  writing  at  the  same  time
and  in  the  same  room  with  her  mother  (each  taking  care  not
to  see  the  other's  writing)  produced  a  script  containing  the
following  sentence :

Camomile  and  resin  the  prescription  is  old  on  yellow  paper  in  a
box  with  a  sweet  scent  ,  .

Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall  were  just  then  both  writing  on
Wednesdays  with  the  express  purpose  of  getting  cross-corre-
spondences with  one  another  and  with  Mrs.  Holland.  On
August  29th  they  for  the  first  time  compared  the  scripts  thus
produced  on  Wednesdays  of  that  August,  and  noted  the  word
"  yellow "  as  a  possible  attempt  at  a  cross-correspondence  on
Aug.  8th.  They  did  not  of  course  then  know  anything  about
Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  Aug.  6th.

Cross-Cokrespondencb.

"Franz  Joseph  and  September  21st."

In  the  next  case  again  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  makes  a
statement  about  the  contents  of  Mrs.  Holland's  script.

Mrs.  Holland,  in  India,  writes  on  Wednesday,  Sept.  12th,  1906:

Tears — idle  tears  ?  ^  ,  .

When  that  great  Kings  return  to  clay
And  Emperors  in  their  pride —

'  Tennyson,  The  Princess.

-R.  Kipling,  The  Bw-iaL "And"  slionld  be  "Or."  .


LX.]


Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


209


Franz  Joseph — Sept  13th  to  25th — a  rally  on  the  21st  followed
by  a  complete  and  unlooked  for  collapse —
Hepatic  complications —

On  this  script  she  notes :

The  following  telegram  appeared  in  this  morning's  paper — "Lon-
don, Sept.  11th.  It  is  officially  announced  that  the  Emperor  Francis
Joseph  has  gone  to  Ischl  for  a  fortnight.  He  is  suffering  from  a
slight  chill.""

So  this  paragraph  is  clearly  the  source  of  the  prediction  in
the  script.

On  Thursday,  Sept.  20tli,^  ]\Irs.  Verrall  wrote:

.  .  .  Now  say  this  Mrs.  [Holland]  had  the  warning  more  than  a
week  ago  but  may  not  have  understood  what  was  meant  Two  red
lights  of  danger — and  surely  there  was  a  note  made  of  the  daj'
Sept.  21 — or  21st  of  some  month  was  named.

But  there  is  another  message  now  for  you,  try  to  get  the  hand
[i.f.  hand-writing — here  the  hand-writing  changes]  no  that  is  not
right.  It  should  slope  more,  Ijetter,  narrow,  and  the  long  letters
high  above  the  rest  .  .  .  And  in  this  hand  say  Hildesheim,  Klosterli
that  is  not  right  but  it  is  a  German  hand  that — name  that  is  wanted
.  .  .  Hildesbruder  is  more  like  Sept.  21  is  a  date  something  has
been  hindered  for  this  day. No  more,  I  can't  think.

This  script  correctly  states  that  Mrs.  Holland  more  than  a
week  before  had  had  a  warning  of  a  supposed  catastrophe  to
take  place  on  Sept.  21st,  that  this  was  somehow  connected
with  a  person  having  a  German  name  beginning  with  H.
(?  Hapsburg),  and  that  the  catastrophe  would  not  after  all  come
off  on  Sept.  21st.  There  is  no  indication  on  either  side  of
any  supernormal  knowledge  of  the  actual  affairs  of  the  Emperor
of  Austria.  What  is  said  about  him  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  is
a  mere  guess,  such  as  any  one  might  have  made,  based  on  the
newspaper  paragraph,  so  that  if  the  prediction  had  been  verified,
no  weight  could  have  been  attached  to  it.  Mrs.  Holland  is
interested  in  public  affairs  and  her  script  occasionally,  though
rarely,  refers  to  them. But  so  far  there  has  never  been  any-

^  A  note  at  the  head  of  this  script  reads  :  "  [Mrs.  Holland]  omitted  yesterday  ;
fixed  attention  on  [her]  this  morning.''

O


210


Alice  Johnson.


[part


thing  supernormal  in  these  references.  Whenever  supernormal
knowledge  of  persons  has  been  shown,  it  is  always  about  those
in  whom  one  or  other  of  the  controls  purporting  to  influence
the  script  were  personally  interested,  for  instance,  Sir  Oliver
Lodge,  Mr.  Eoden  Noel,  the  "  Mr.  Grove "  mentioned  in  my
first  Report,  Mrs.  Verrall,  Mrs.  Forbes,  and  Professor  Maitland
in  the  case  given  below  (p.  217).

B.  AND  THE  Walnut  Tree.

Here  knowledge  seems  to  be  shown  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script
of  some  trivial  matters  connected  with  Mrs.  Verrall.  Mrs.
Holland  writes  on  Wednesday,  Oct.  3rd,  1906  :

A  chill  and  windy  day  and  the  leaves  are  whirling  in  ray  garden —
Hardly  worth  while  for  B.  to  sweep  them  up  when  they  fall  so  soon
again — The  big  walnut  has  shed  its  leaves  very  early  this  year —

On  being  shown  this  later,  Mrs.  Verrall  wrote :

On  Sunday  Sep.  30th  and  again  on  Tuesday  Oct.  •2ud  and  possibly
Thursday,  Oct.  4  [the  script  having  been  written  on  Wednesday]  I
looked  for  walnuts  under  the  big  tree  in  the  [Trinity]  Fellows'
Garden,  and  noted  how  difficult  they  were  to  find,  because  the  leaves
had  fallen  thickly  with  the  fruit.

My  gardener,  Bowyer,  has  a  passion  for  tidying,  which  annoys  me
much,  especially  when  it  leads  to  his  sweeping  up  the  leaves  of  our
maple  trees.  The  leaves  were  finall}'  swept  away  earlier  than  usual
this  autumn,  as  we  noticed  when  the  bullfinches  appeared  on  Nov.  20th.

Note  that  "  B.",  mentioned  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script,  is  the
initial  of  Mrs.  A^errall's  gardener.  No  particular  garden  is
specified  in  the  script,  but  while  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mr.  Myers
were  both  much  interested  in  their  own  gardens,  which  were
near  together,  he  used  also  frequently  to  meet  her  and  Dr.
Verrall  in  the  Trinity  Fellows'  Garden.

Two  or  three  other  cases  were  given  in  my  first  report  on
Mrs.  Holland's  script  in  which  remarks  about  Mrs.  Verrall's
garden  (which  Mrs.  Holland  has  never  seen)  turned  out  rather
strikingly correct.^ By the time the one  just  quoted  was

■'See  also  the  "pink  may  blossom  on  the  trees  near  the  drive"  in  the  case
given  below,  p.  219.


LX.]  Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.  211


written,  Mrs.  Holland  knew  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  and  Mr.  Myers's
tastes  in  this  respect.  It  is  therefore  not  unnatural  that  this
topic  should  be  found  in  script  much  of  which  purports — im-
plicitly or  explicitly — to  be  influenced  by  Mr.  Myers,  and  much
of  which  is  addressed — implicitly  or  explicitly — to  Mrs.  Verrall.
It  is  also  possible  that  their  joint  interest  in  the  subject  may
tend  telepathically  to  the  production  by  Mrs.  Holland  of  correct
statements  about  it.

Cross-Correspondentce.

"  Savonarola."

The  next  case  is  a  triple  cross-correspondence  between  Miss
Verrall,  Mrs.  Holland  and  Mrs.  Verrall.

Miss  Verrall  wrote  on  Saturday,  Oct.  6th,  1906  (being
then  at  Bashley,  Hants) :

{In  Latin:  Let  the  rest  be  silent;  a  single  voice  of  one  proclaira-
ing.)i She  had  not  seen  it  before  but  memory  was  strong.

Reniembei'  the  word  and  the  date.  Carthusians  two  and  two
the  long  black  robes  and  the  candles  and  the  images  the  bright
sun  and  the  gaping  crowd  she  will  remember.

{In  Greek:  But  few  are  the  initiated.)-

Miss  A^errall  returned  to  Cambridge  on  Oct.  10th.
Mrs.  Verrall  on  Wednesday,  Oct.  10th,  after  her  daughter
had  returned  home,  but  before  seeing  the  latter's  script,  wrote :

See  [?]  Savonarola  all  wrapped  in  black  in  threes  and  threes  they
entered  till  the  place  was  full. Only  in  the  thoughts  of  the  free

On  the  following  day,  Oct.  11th,  at  5  p.m..  Miss  Verrall
showed  her  script  of  Oct.  6th  to  her  mother,  who  made  the
following  note  on  it :

Oct.  12,  1906.

This  suggests  a  reminiscence  of  something  not  actually  seen  by
H.  herself  The  Carthusians  wear  white,  so  there  ought  to  be  other
black-robed  persons  in  her  procession.

1  Cetera  sileant  vox  una  clamantis.  ^  iravpoi  5e  re  (iaKxoi.


212


Alice  Jolmson.


[pa  kt


My  sc[ript]  of  Oct.  10  seemed  to  us  to  rellect  H.'s  of  Oct.  6.
It  names  Savonarola;  that  fits  with  H.'s  vox  damantis  and  iravpoi.  Se
re  fio.Ky^oi.

I  find  that  Sav.  led  a  procession  round  the  square  of  S.  Mark  on
Xmas  Day  1497.  I  then  remembered  a  procession  in  Roinola  and
looked  it  up.  (I  read  li.  in  1880-1882  and  not  since.)  I  find
(Vol.  II.,  Cliap.  XLIIL,  Unseen  Madonna)  an  acct.  of  a  jjrocession
on  Oct.  30,  149G,  on  a  bright  day,  long  lines  of  monks,  an  image
carried. Can  H.'s  sc.  be  an  attempt  to  represent  that  scene  1

Mrs.  Verrall  also  thought  that  the  phrase  in  her  script,
"  Only  in  the  thoughts  of  the  free,"  suggested  a  telepathic
reflection  of  Miss  Verrall's,  "  Few  are  the  initiated."

In  the  procession  as  described  in  Rumola  there  came  first
a  band  of  Florentine  youth,  bearing  an  image  of  Christ,  then
the  Companies  of  Discipline ;  then  the  monks :  first  "  a  white
stream  of  reformed  Benedictines  [probably  Carthusians]  and
then  a  much  longer  stream  of  the  Frati  Minori  or  Franciscans,
in  that  age  all  clad  in  grey  .  .  .  perhaps  the  most  numerous
order  in  Florence.  .  .  .  And  after  the  grey  came  the  black  of
the  Augustinians  of  San  Spirito.  .  .  .  Then  the  white  over  dark
of  the  Carmelites  and  then  again  the  unmixed  black  of  the
Servites.  .  .  .  [Next]  black  mantles  over  white  scapularies
and  every  one  knew  that  tlie  Dominicans  were  coming.  .  .  .
In  the  long  line  of  black  and  white  there  was  at  last  singled
out  a  mantle  only  a  little  more  worn  than  the  rest."  The
wearer  of  this  was  Savonarola  and  the  crowd  fell  on  their
knees  as  he  passed.  Many  other  monks,  secular  priests,  etc.,
followed,  and  at  the  end  of  the  procession  was  carried  a  hidden
image  of  the  Madonna.

In  Miss  Verrall's  script  "  the  long  black  robes,  the  candles
and  the  images — the  bright  sun  and  the  gaping  crowd  "  are  all
appropriate  to  the  scene  in  Romola,  in  which  Savonarola —
mentioned  by  Mrs.  Verrall — was  the  most  noted  figure.

Meanwhile  Mrs.  Holland,  on  Monday,  Oct.  8th,  i.e.  on  a
date  intermediate  between  Miss  Verrall's  and  Mrs.  Verrall's
scripts,  wrote  :


Ask  his  daughter  about  the  dream — Grey  monks  of  long  ago —


LX.]


Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


213


Considering  how  very  frequently  Mrs.  Holland's  script  refers  to
]\Irs.  and  Dr.  Verrall,  "  his  daughter  "  here  may,  I  think,  fairly
be  interpreted  as  Miss  Verrall,  and  the  whole  phrase  suggests  that
a  cross-correspondence  is  being  attempted,  as  is  also  suggested
by  Miss  Verrall's  phrase  :  "  Kemember  the  word  and  the  date."
"  Grey  monks  of  long  ago "  may  then  be  regarded  as  Mrs.
Holland's  contribution  to  the  cross-correspondence.

In  the  procession  in  question,  as  said  above,  the  "  Franciscans,
in  that  age  all  clad  in  grey,"  played  a  conspicuous  part,  so
that  between  the  three  scripts  a  fairly  complete  outline  of  the
.procession  seems  to  be  given.

CliOSS-CORRESPONDENCE.

Greek  Procession  and  Funeral.

The  next  case  again  concerns  a  procession,  which  is  first
mentioned  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Wednesday,  Oct.  ord,  1906,
written  while  travelling  from  London  to  Cambridge,  as  follows  :

{In  Greek :  IiDpeachment  at  first,  and  then  disfranchisement  and
at  last  the  penalty  of  death. )i

The  sun  shone  in  the  north  at  midday  {In  Greek :  Sing  songs
of  good  omen,  all  of  you)  -  The  propomps  wave  their  torches  {In
Greek:  Sing  songs  of  good  omen,  all  of  you)

Oh  tell  the  tale  as  it's  told  to  j'ou  Man  is  born  to  trouble  as
the  sparks  fly  upward.  Perishing  like  the  grass  which  to-day  is
and  to-morrow  is  not.

After  this  comes  a  reference  to  the  funeral  of  Mr.  Forbes,
(the  husband  of  the  lady  with  whom  so  many  of  the  cross-
correspondences  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  early  script  were  connected),
showing  that  the  two  last  sentences  quoted  alluded  to  his
death.  Mrs.  Verrall  knew  of  his  death,  and  that  the  funeral
had  been  arranged  for  this  day  at  midday.

The  first  part  of  the  script  refers  also,  according  to  her  own
interpretation  noted  on  the  script  at  the  time,  to  a  subject
with  which  her  mind  was  then  preoccupied, — namely,  the
procession  in  the  closing  scene  of  the  Eumenidcs,  which  was

^  ei(jayye\ia  to  irpCoTov,  elra.  oe  arifjla,  Kal  Tf\os  davarov  f^Tj/uia.
'-  ev4>o.p.eiTe  oe  -Ko.vTes.


214


Alice  Johnson.


[part


to  be  performed  at  Cambridge  that  term.  The  Greek  line  she
gives  (not  quite  correctly^)  is  the  last  line  of  the  play,  and
the  word  "  propomp "  is  from  the  final  scene.  It  is  the  pro-
pomps  who  "  sing  songs  of  good  omen."

She  was  at  the  time  helping  to  arrange  about  the  dresses
for  the  play,  and  one  of  her  friends  had,  as  she  afterwards
heard,  called  that  afternoon  to  see  her  about  it.  Throughout
this  term  she  was  going  to  the  rehearsals  and  helping  in  the
preparations.

Mrs.  Holland  in  India  on  Wednesday,  Oct.  l7th,  1906,
wrote  as  follows  :

The  men  with  staves  head  the  procession — the  lictors — About
half  way  comes  the  litter — too  heavy  for  the  slaves  that  bear  it —
Garlands — but  not  of  triumph — What  liquor  do  those  great  jars
contain  What  unguent  that  golden  vase — Where  is  the  altar  for
this  sacrifice —

The  noonday  sun  has  dimmed  the  torches  flare

Here  then  is  a  description  of  some  kind  of  classical  pro-
cession, though  the  introduction  of  lictors  suggests  a  Roman,
not  a  Greek  scene.  The  litter  may  possibly  be  a  funeral
litter,  for  in  connection  with  it  there  are  "  Garlands — but
not  of  triumph."  But  Miss  Verrall,  on  reading  the  proofs
of  this  case,  suggested  to  me  that  the  latter  part  of  the
script  might  be  founded  on  reminiscences  of  Keats's  Ode  on
a  Grecian  Urn,  the  fourth  stanza  of  which  begins  thus  :

Who  are  these  coming  to  the  sacrifice?

To  what  green  altar,  O  mysterious  priest,
Lead'st  thou  that  heifer  lowing  at  the  skies,

And  all  her  silken  flanks  with  garlands  dresf?

This  verse,  like  the  script,  contains  the  words,  garlands,  altar,
and  sacrifice,  and  the  interrogative  form  is  characteristic  in  both.

The  last  sentence,  "  The  noonday  sun  has  dimmed  the
torches'  flare,"  may  possibly  be  interpreted  as  a  symbolic
allusion  to  the  Uumenides,  namely,  to  the  triumph  of  Apollo
over  the  Furies,  the  offspring  of  Night,  whose  dwelling  is  in

^  TrdvTes  (all)  should  be  7racoa|Ui'  (uuiversall)').

-The  part  of  the  script  here  omitted  relates,  as  interpreted,  to  Professor
Maitland,  and  is  quoted  below,  p.  217.


LX.]  Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


215


the  nether  regions,  lit  only  by  torches,  and  who  are  led  off  at
the  end  of  the  play  in  a  torchlight  procession  down  to  the
cave  under  the  Areopagus.  Whether  this  interpretation  be  a
fanciful  one  or  not,  the  sentence  has  at  least  a  considerable
resemblance  to  Mrs.  Verrall's  phrases  :

"  The  sun  shone  in  the  north  at  midday.  The  propomps
wave  their  torches,"

and  the  whole  script  seems  to  represent  a  generalised  conception
of  an  ancient  procession,  possibly  connected  with  a  funeral ;
whereas  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  the  two  topics  of  the  pro-
cession and  the  funeral  are  separate  and  disconnected.

I  wrote  to  Mrs.  Holland  on  March  8th,  1907,  saying  that
her  script  contained  a  description  of  a  procession  which  we
took  to  refer  to  the  Eununides  which  was  performed  at
Cambridge  in  the  autumn  of  1906,  and  asking  if  she  had  seen
any  references  to  the  performance  in  the  papers.  She  replied  on
March  26th,  1907,  that  she  had  no  recollection  of  seeing  any
references  to  the  Enmenidcs  in  the  papers.

Cross-Correspondence.

The  Blue  Flower.

The  next  case  is  a  straightforward  and  simple  connection
between  the  scripts  of  Mrs.  Holland  and  Mrs.  Verrall.

Mrs.  Holland  on  Wednesday,  Oct.  24th,  1906,  after  a  rough
drawing  of  a  flower,  writes,  in  a  line  by  itself  and  in  a  rather
peculiar  hand  :

The  Blue  Flower.

Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  the  same  day  seems  to  be  an  elaborate
variation  on  this  theme :

The  blue  is  to  be  preferred Blue  is  lier  colour
I  Then  come  some  verses,  all  on  the  same  topic,  of  which  I  will
only  quote  the  first  and  last]

Love  in  a  mist  lay  dying

His  heart  blood  stained  the  earth

With  Cupid's  arrows  flying
Departed  joy  and  mirth


216


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Where  others  see  tlie  flower

Bkie,  in  a  tangled  grey
He  knows  in  Love's  own  bower

The  god  they  thought  to  slay.

["  He "  being  apparently  the  lover.  By  the  side  of  these  verses  is
written  :]

That  is  the  story  of  Love  in  a  Mist  and  Love  lies  bleeding — the
little  Love  is  in  the  heart  of  the  misty  blue  veiled  flower  Let  him
that  has  eyes  see.

Mrs.  Verrall's  phrase,  "  Blue  is  her  colour,"  may  perhaps  be
interpreted  to  mean  that  something'  l)lue  is  the  subject  of  an
attempted  cross-correspondence.

The  Poison  Bottle.

On  JSTovember  7tb,  1906,  in  the  middle  of  a  script  treating
of  a  variety  of  topics,  Mrs.  Holland  wrote  :

On  the  ledge  of  the  squarish — no  oblong  window  is  not  a  safe
place  for  that  solution — Of  course  you  cannot  consider  poisons
out  of  place  in  a  laborator}^ — but  there  is  not  enough  locking  up —
this  one  should  be  locked  up — Towards  the  end  of  the  room — to
your  left — an  actinic  green  bottle.

I  took  this  to  refer  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  who  is  not
infrequently  mentioned  in  the  script,^  and  I  sent  it  to  him
for  comment  on  February  26th,  1907,  together  with  two  other
slighter  and  vaguer  passages  in  the  script  of  two  later  dates.
He  replied  to  me :

The  one  on  7  Nov.,  1906,  about  the  poison  bottle.
.  This  I  find  is  remarkably  correct.  My  two  youngest  boys  have
a  laboratory  adjacent  to  the  house — not  at  the  college  at  all — and
there  they  do  photography,  make  explosives,  and  many  other  things.
The  other  night  when  we  were  all  to<rether  I  asked  them  whether
they  had  a  green  bottle  of  poison  in  that  laboratory,  and  the  elder
said,  yes.  It  is  on  the  bench,  quite  accessible,  not  on  the  ledge  of
the  oblong  window,  but  near  it,  and  on  the  left.  He  says  it  has
been  there  nearly  all  the  winter,  and  is  Mercuric  Chloride  which
the  Doctor  gave  him  for  a  lotion, — not  one  of  their  own  chemicals.

'  See,  e.g.,  my  first  Report,  pp.  207,  241,  277-8.


LX.]  Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland' .s  Script.


217


I  have  told  him  that  it  must  be  either  thrown  away  or  locked  up.
He  agrees  that  it  is  too  accessible,  since  the  j'ounger  sisters  sometimes
enter  the  same  laboratory.

Professok  Maitland.

The  next  case  consists  of  apparent  allusions  in  Mrs.  Holland's
script  only  to  the  illness  and  death  of  Professor  F.  W.  Mait-
land,  Downing  Professor  of  the  Laws  of  England,  at  Cambridge.
His  name,  though  of  course  well  known  at  Cambridge  and
Oxford  and  to  scholars  of  Law  and  History  throughout  the
world,  was  probably  not  familiar  to  the  general  public,  and
Mrs.  Holland,  as  she  afterwards  told  me,  believed  that  she
had  never  heard  of  him  until  she  read  the  notice  of  his  death
in  the  papers.  He  was  a  special  friend  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Verrall's ;
also  of  Dr.  Sidgwick's,  Mr.  Myers's  and  Dr.  Myers's.

He  had  very  delicate  health  and  for  some  years  had  spent
the  winter  months  in  the  Canary  Islands.  He  went  there  as
usual  at  the  end  of  the  Michaelmas  Term,  1906,  and  died  there
on  Dec.  19th.

On  Oct.  l7th,  1906,  Mrs.  Holland  in  India  wrote  as
follows  :

[Wednesday,  12.30  p.m. Oct.  17th,  1906.]

Nina — A.  A  solitary  cypress  black  against  the  sunset.  Smooth
grass  at  its  foot  but  not  shaven  turf — Xor  guessed  what  flowers
would  deck  a  grave  ^ —

Downing —

A  bitter  wind  scourging  a  cold  grey  sea — Every  few  minutes
the  screw  is  half  out  of  water  and  a  sickening  vibration  jars  the
whole  fabric  of  the  ship — Cedric —

The  woven  vesture  of  nights  and  days-— This  is  one  of  the  days
that  matters —

"  They  are  waiting  by  the  sea — for  the  barque  to  beai-  them  o'er — "
Do  not  let  A  be  seriously  perturbed. This  will  be  a  slight  attack
and  a  very  brief  one — A.  T.  iM.

[Here  follows  the  passage  quoted  above  on  p.  214.]

'Gerald  Massey  ?

-Swinburne,  The  Triumph  of  Time: '•vesture''  should  be  "raiment."

^  Roden  Noel,  JJijimj  :

They  are  waiting  on  the  shore.

For  tlie  barque  to  take  them  home.  .  .


218


Alice  Johnson.


[part


"  Downing  "  is  written  in  a  line  by  itself,  as  if  to  attract  atten-
tion. As  said  above,  Professor  Maitland  was  Downing  Professor
of  the  Laws  of  England,  and  he  also  lived  at  Downing  College.

The  description  of  the  voyage  may  perhaps  be  taken  to  refer
to  his  journey  to  the  Canary,  which  his  friends  at  that  time
knew  was  to  be  undertaken  as  usual.  There  was  very  stormy
weather  the  day  before  he  started,  and  he  was  taken  ill  with
pneumonia  on  the  voyage.  He  did  not,  however,  travel  by  the
Cedric,  this  being  a  White  Star  American  liner.

Tn  regard  to  the  misquotation  from  Pioden  Noel's  poem,  it
may  be  noted  that  tlie  change  in  the  wording  makes  it  slightly
more  appropriate  to  Professor  Maitland's  circumstances  at  the
moment,  since  he  was  shortly  to  cross  the  sea  on  what  turned
out  to  be  his  last  voyage.

The  signature  "  A.  T.  M."  no  doubt  refers  to  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers,
and  I  take  "  A."  to  mean  Dr.  Verrall,  since  he  is  generally
referred  to  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  as  "A.  W."  or  "A."  The
combination  here  of  the  name  "Downing"  with  A.  and  A.  T.  M.
seems  to  indicate  clearly  the  pej'son  referred  to,  the  three  men
being  contemporaries  and  intimate  friends.  Or  at  least  it  is
certain  that  the  person  whom  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Verrall  would
associate  with  "Downing"  College  would  be  Professor  Maitland,
since  he  was  the  only  one  of  their  friends  living  at  that
College,  and  Dr.  Verrall  often  went  to  Downing  to  see  him.
It  happened  that  he  had  gone  on  the  day  of  the  script,
bein"  a  little  an.xious  because  Professor  Maitland  had  not  come
to  see  them  on  the  previous  Sunday,  as  was  his  usual  custom.
He  found  him  well  after  the  slight  attack  which  had  pre-
vented his  calling  on  the  Sunday.  This  corresponds  with  the
sentence  in  the  script,  "  This  will  be  a  slight  attack  and  a
very  brief  one,''  whereas  the  general  drift  of  the  script  may
be  supposed  to  reflect  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Verrall's  knowledge  that
in  Professor  Maitland's  state  of  health  any  illness  was  a  matter
for  anxiety.

All  this  information  was  supplied  to  me  by  Mrs.  A^errall
a  few  weeks  after  Professor  Maitland's  death,  the  dates  being
verified  from  her  diary.  I  did  not  at  the  time  of  receiving
the  script  associate  it  with  Professor  Maitland  at  all,  and  Mrs.
Verrall  did  not  see  it  or  know  anything  about  it  until  Jan.
29th,  1907. Consequently  no  comment  had  been  made  by


LX.]  Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


219


me  to  Mrs.  Holland  on  the  earlier  script  before  she  produced
the  later  one,  which  was  written  on  the  day  of  Professor
Maitland's  death,  Dec.  19th,  1906,  as  follows:

Pace.  Pax — It  is  only  in  appearance  that  the  life  appears
unduly  brief  or  all  too  swiftly  terminated  in  reality  the  wheel  had
run  full  circle — •

"Into  a  darkness  quieted  l)y  hope."^

Pink  may  blossom  on  the  trees  near  the  drive — Qui  bien  ayme
tard  oublye.

H. December  "2 1st — don't  you  remember'?
M.

^  ■  .  ■

[Tlie  passages  omitted  refer  to  other  topics.]

In  regard  to  this  script,  it  may  be  noted  :  Professor  ]\Iaitland
was  56  at  the  time  of  his  death.

There  is  a  pink  may  tree  near  the  drive  up  to  the  door  of
Mrs.  Verrall's  house,  which  Mrs.  Holland  has  never  seen.

"  H "  probably  means  Dr.  Hodgson.

"M"  is  ambiguous.  It  might  mean  Mr.  Myers,  but  he  is
generally  designated  by  "P."  This  "  M."  is  written  in  a
peculiar  way,  as  if  to  indicate  some  new  "  M."  If  we  take  it
to  mean  Professor  Maitland  and  "  H ''  Dr.  Hodgson,  the  sentence
"December  21st — don't  you  remember?"  becomes  significant,  for
it  was  on  Dec.  21st  of  this  year,  as  Mrs.  Verrall  afterwards
told  me,  that  she  heard  of  Professor  Maitland's  death,  whereas  on
Dec.  21st  of  the  previous  year  she  had  heard  of  Dr.  Hodgson's
death. This  date  is  also  her  birthday.

Thus,  though  there  is  no  exact  specification  of  the  person
referred  to,  all  these  passages  are  very  appropriate  to  Professor
Maitland's  death,  which  took  place  in  the  night  of  Dec.  19th-
20th,  the  script  having  been  produced  at  5.45  p.m.  in  India,
which  is  equivalent  to  about  11  a.m.  in  the  Canary  Isles.  Xews
■of  the  death  was  received  in  Cambridge,  as  just  said,  on  Dec.
21st,  and  it  was  in  the  papers  on  Dec.  22nd. The  news  was

^  Browning,  Sordello.


220


Alice  Johnson.


[part


also,  as  I  learnt  later  from  Mrs.  Holland,  telegraphed  to  India;
but  as  her  script  earne  enclosed  in  a  letter  bearing  the  Indian
postmark  Dec.  20th,  it  is,  I  tliink,  impossible  that  she  could
have  heard  of  it  before  sending  the  script.  She  told  me
that  she  thought  the  date  when  she  saw  the  news  was  Dec.
22nd  or  23rd,  and  (in  reply  to  a  question)  that  she  had  never
heard  of  the  Downing  Professorship.

I  may  add  that  though  the  script  of  Oct.  l7th  quoted  above
might  be  regarded  as  premonitory  of  the  death,  it  resembles
most  so-called  premonitions  in  affording  no  evidence  of  any
real  fore-knowledge  of  the  future ;  for  all  the  circumstances
alluded  to  were  known  at  the  time  to  Professor  Maitland's
friends,  who  were  well  aware  of  the  precarious  state  of  his
health.

Script  of  1  0  07.

The  evidential  incidents  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  this
period  have  already  been  dealt  with  by  Mr.  Piddington  in
his  report  on  the  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  in  England  from
November,  1900,  to  June,  1907.  (See  "A  Series  of  Con-
cordant Automatisms,"  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.)  The  following
is  a  list  in  chronological  order  of  Mrs.  Holland's  scripts  which
were  quoted  in  whole  or  in  part  in  connection  with  the
various  cross-correspondences  dealt  with  by  Mr.  Piddington.


Date  of  Script.

Dec.  4,  1906

Dec.  3J,  1906

Jan.  2,  1907

Jan.  IG,

Mai'.  13,  „

Mar.  19,  „

Mai-.  27,


Page  reference  to
Proc,  Vol.  XXII.


Cross-correspondence
concerned.


p.  46

p.  33

p.  35

[>.  205

[..  250

L).  191


pp.  225  an


d  261


Apr.  1  and  24,  1907  I  pp.  291  and  290
April 8,  1907  p
A[>ril  16,  ,,


Church
St.  Paul  and  St.  Petei'
Fiancis  and  Ignatius
Diana
Light  in  West
Cup

"Spirit  and  Angel"  and
"Linht  in  West"
Azure  and  Horizon
Liiiht  in  West
pp.  215,  278  and Euripides,  Light  in  West,
297  and  Tlianatos


LX]


Second  Rejwrt  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


221


Mrs.  Holland's  contribution  to  the  last  cross-correspondence  in
this  list  was  rather  more  complete  than  Mr.  Piddington  realised
at  the  time.  Mrs.  Piper  gave  the  word  Thanatos  (Death)
first  (not  quite  correctly)  on  April  l7th,  1907,^  and  repeated
it  (correctly)  on  April  23rd  and  oOth.  Mrs.  Verrall  on  April
29th  produced  a  script  containing  several  references  to  death,
partly  in  English  and  partly  in  Latin.  Mrs.  Holland  on
April  IGth  wrote  as  follows:

Maurice. Morris.  Mors.

And  with  that  the  shadow  of  death  fell  upon  him  and  his  soul
departed  out  of  his  limbs.

The  most  agreeable  sensation  of  which  I  was  at  first  conscious
was  that  I  was  no  longer  deaf.

[This  statement  is  signed  with  two  initials]
1875.

"  All  are  not  taken  there  are  left  behind
Living  Bidoveds  tender  looks  to  bring."-

One  steep  sharp  ledge  of  ice  above  the  grey  green  glacier  streaked
Avitli  ding}'  snow—

"No  sounds  save  at  moments
The  mountain  bee's  hum
I  come  oh  ye  forests

Ye  mountains  I  come."  ^

"  Maurice "  was  the  name  of  a  friend  of  Mrs.  Holland's,  who
had  died  many  years  before.

The  initials  omitted  above  are  those  of  a  literary  man,
unknown  personally,  and  but  little  known  by  reputation,  to
Mrs.  Holland.  She  had  not  identified  them,  and  when  I  first
told  her  whom  they  represented,  she  could  not  remember  that
she  had  ever  heard  of  him  ;  later  she  recollected  the  name  of
one  of  his  books.  He  had  died  about  three  years  previously,
and  I  think  it  probable  that  she  had  seen  an  obituary  notice
of  him  at  the  time. The  date  mentioned,  187"),  was  the  year

'  See  Mr.  Pidtlington's  note  on  this  above,  p.  30.

-E.  B.  Browning,  Consolation.

■'Matthew  Arnold,  Switzerland:  "Parting."

No  life  but,  at  moments.

The  mountain  bee"s  hum,
I  come,  0  ye  mountains  I
Ye  joine-woods,  I  come  !


222


Alice  Johnson.


[part


in  which  his  mother  had  died  and  also  liis  first  wife,  leaving
him  one  daughter.  In  a  letter  written  shortly  afterwards,  which
is  quoted  in  his  Li/e,'^  he  says :  "  I  liave  still  much  left  to
me.  .  .  .  There  is  my  little  girl  and  my  sister-in-law  .  .  .  and
my  own  sister."  The  quotation  that  follows  the  date  in  the
script  is  therefore  very  appropriate.  The  second  quotation  is
also  appropriate,  as  he  was  a  noted  Alpine  climber;  the  intention,
doubtless,  is  to  make  the  identification  of  the  man  still  more
certain.

The  idea  of  death  is  thus  more  prominent  throughout  the
script  than  Mr.  Piddington  represented  it  to  be.

Cross-Cokrespondence.
Seve7is.

This  is  an  elaborate  case  in  which,  not  only  was  the  subject
of  the  cross-correspondence  "  Seven,"  but  six  automatists, — namely,
Mrs.  Piper,  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall,  Mrs.  Frith  (a  friend  of
Mrs.  A^errall's),  Mrs.  Holland,  and  Mrs.  Home, — and  another
person,  making  seven  in  all,  were  concerned  in  it.

(1)  3frs.  Piper.

The  following  are  extracts  from  the  records  of  Mr.  Dorr's
sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  in  America.

On  April  21st,  1908,  and  again  on  April  27th  and  May  4th,
Mr.  J3orr,  with  a  view  to  reviving  the  memories  of  Hodgsoup,
had  repeated  to  him  the  following  set  of  Latin  verses  which
used  to  be  printed  on  special  occasions  on  the  menus  of  the
Tavern  Club  in  Boston.^

Meum  est  propositum  in  Taberna  mori
Et  vinum  appositum  sitienti  ori
Ut  dicant  cum  venerint  Angelorum  choii
Deus  sit  propitius  isti  potatori.'^

1  Tliis  had  been  published  towards  the  end  of  1906,  but  I  have  reasons  for
Vielieving  that  Mrs.  Holland  had  not  seen  it.

-See  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper  above,  p.  78,  foot-note,  for  a  discussion  of  this
experiment  and  explanation  of  its  non-evidential  character.

5  Translation.  It  is  my  intention  to  die  at  the  Inn  and  to  have  wine  served
to  my  thirsty  lips,  so  that  the  band  of  angels  may  say  when  they  come,  "May
God  be  propitious  to  this  drinker."


LX.]  Second  Report  on  3Irs.  Holland's  Script.


223


On  May  8th  Hodgsonp,  who  had  already  given  translations
of  two  or  three  words  in  the  verses,  spontaneously  gave  in
one  continuous  sentence  the  following  nearly  correct  rendering
of  the  whole  :

It  is  my  habit  at  the  inn,  according  to  custom,  when  serving  wine
to  my  thirsty  lips,  when  the  angel  band  comes  to  say  "  May  God
be  propitious  to  this  one."

Note  that  jrrojmsitum  (intention)  is  here  wrongly  translated
"  habit "  and  viori  (to  die)  is  wrongly  translated  "  according
to  custom."  These  mistranslations  are  of  importance  in  relation
to  the  cross-correspondence,  as  explained  later  (see  p.  257).

The  subject  was  resumed  in  the  waking-stage  of  this  day  as
follows  :

Wal'ing-Stage,  May  8fh,  1908.

(The  first  word  that  becomes  intelligible  is  "  Habit " ;  the  other
words  that  went  with  this  could  not  be  caught,  but  probably  were
a  fresh  attempt  ...  to  translate  the  Latin  verses).

We  are  Seven

I  said  Clock  ! Tick,  tick,  tick  !  Stairs.

I  said  "Grow  old  along  with  me."i  She  wrote  it,  Mrs.  V.
wrote  it.

Ernest  Saul — David. St.  Paul

Light — Life — Angel  band  ! Toast — my  toast  to  you  !
Catch  it  quickly  ! Oh,  George,  you  are  so  slow  ! What's  Brown-
ing got  to  do  with  iti

The  words  "  Clock !  Tick,  tick,  tick ;  Stairs,"  no  doubt
refer  to  Longfellow's  poem  The  Old  Clock  on  the  Stairs.  The
word  "  tick "  does  not  occur  in  this  poem,  but  it  has  the
refrain,  "  Forever,  never,  Never,  forever."

"  Angel  band  1  my  toast  to  you "  refers  to  the  Latin
verses.

For  comments  on  the  words  "  Habit "  and  "  tick,"  see
below,  pp.  245,  257.

^  R.  Browning,  Baibi  ben  Ezra.


224


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Sifting  of  May  I2fh,  1908.

[Tlie  first part of  this sitting was  taken up  with  a  further

attempt  to  obtain  a  translation  of  the  Latin  verses  ;  then  Mr.  Dorr

proceeded  to  read  over  to  the  trance-personalities  what  had  been
said  in  the  waking-stage  of  the  previous  sitting  :]

(i.  B.  D.  The  first  thing  she  said  was  "We  are  seven."

Tiiat  is  Wordsworth,  but  we  tvere  seven  in  the  distance  as  a
matter  of  fact.

G.  B.  D.  Then  she  said  "  Clock,  etc."

Was  it  confusion  ^ I  do  not  recall  saying  anything  about
clock.

G.  B.  D.  It  evidently  referred  to  Longfellow's  poem,  and  it  may  have
come  out  of  Mrs.  P.'s  own  mind.

I  do  not  know  what  it  meant. Possibly  .  .  .

G.  B.  D.  The  next  thing  she  said  was  "(how  old  along  with  me.
Mrs.  Verrall  wrote  it."

Mr.  Myers  gave  it  to  Mrs.  Verrall. Quite  right  .  .  .
G.  B.  D.  Then  she  said  "Ernest."

Seven  of  us — 7 — Seven

G.  B.  D.  Then  she  said  "Saul"  and  "David."

We  have  been  trying  these  experiments  with  [Mrs.  Hol-
land] ...

G.B.  D.  Then  she  said  "St.  Paul."

Yes  with  [Mrs.  Forbes]  and  others

An  attempt  to  explain  the  message  about  the  "  Clock  "  was
made  in  the  waking-stage  on  May  :^6th,  1908,  as  follows:

"  It  was  the  message  about  the  clock  they  gave  me.  Mrs.
A^'eirall  said,  '  Go  tell  Mr.  Dorr  the  clock  strikes  one,  and  Ave
Maria.'  "

I  may  state  at  once  that  Mrs.  A^errall  did  not  get  the
quotation  "  Grow  old  along  with  me,"  nor  any  reference  to
a  clock,  in  her  script  of  this  period.


LX.]  Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


225


The  cliief  point  in  the  extract  from  the  record  of  Mrs.
Piper's  sitting  of  May  12th  lies  in  the  number  Seven.  "We
are  Seven"  had  been  quoted  on  May  8th;  to  this  is  now
added  the  rather  enigmatic  phrase,  "  We  incrc  seven  in  the
distance  as  a  matter  of  fact,"  which,  after  comparing  with
Mrs.  Holland's  script  quoted  below  (p.  238),  I  take  to  mean  that
seven  persons  are  concerned  in  the  cross-correspondence.  Note
also  the  threefold  repetition  of  the  number,  which  seems  in-
tended to  lay  further  stress  on  it :  "  Seven  of  us — 7 — Seven."

(2)  Mrs.  VcrraU.

All  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  here  quoted  were  written  at
Cambridge,  except  that  of  May  Sth,  1908,  which  was  written
in  the  course  of  a  journey  from  London  to  Cambridge.

On  April  20th,  1908,  her  script  referred  to  "the  seven
hills "  of  Eome.^ The  next  one  was  as  follows  :

April  27,  1908.

[scrawl]  and  later  too — Do  not  try  to  attend
37603
7
6

72

Try  again
3
7
6

  41

13  +  3  17
—  361
^  16

495

I  can't  do  anything  but  these  figures They  seem  to  be  wanted
but  I  can't  tell  why.

Note  that  in  all  three  groups  of  figures  the  numbers  3,  7,  6
occur,  and  compare  with  Mrs.  Holland's  script  and  dream,  quoted
below.

^  She  noted  next  day  that  April  ■21st  was  the  date  of  the  founding  of  Rome,  a
date  very  familiar  to  her  from  her  girlhood.

P


226


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Afaij  8,  1908.

Ask  not  his  name  that  in  far  distant  ages

Lighted  the  nations  on  the  way  to  life
Enough  to  know  in  echoes  in  his  pages

Foretold  the  ending  of  the  earthly  strife

Ask  not  the  meaning  of  the  note  of  sorrow

That  sounds  and  echoes  through  the  music  sweet

He  knew  the  night,  he  only  hoped  the  morrow,
Longed  for  the  beauty  of  the  flying  feet.

Blest  are  the  messengers  that  bring  the  tidings

Lovely  their  feet  are,  lovely  is  their  face,
Borne  far  aloft  on  oarage  of  their  high  wings

Glorious  shining  in  majestic  grace.

Not  for  his  eyes  that  Vision  in  its  glory

Not  through  his  lips  such  promise  is  revealed

He  felt  the  sorrow  in  our  human  story

Heard  not  the  triumph  for  his  ears  were  sealed

On  the  back  oF  this  script  Mrs.  Verrall  noted  :

"  Virgil,  I  suppose,  is  the  name  not  to  be  asked.  I  had
been  reading  the  last  four  or  five  cantos  of  Dante's  Pargatorio.

M.  de  G.  V. May  8th,  1908. 2.30  p.m."

The  poem  no  doubt  refers,  as  Mrs.  Verrall  observed,  to  Virgil,
and  it  seems  equally  clear  that  it  was  prompted  by  her  reading
of  the  Purgatorio.  She  did  not,  however,  notice  until  I  pointed
the  fact  out  to  her  some  months  later,  that  it  is  in  the  metre
of  Mr.  Myers's  St.  Paul  (which  happens  to  be  much  more
familiar  to  me  than  to  her),  and  is  closely  imitated  from  that
poem ;  e.g.  cf.  the  last  line  of  her  second  verse  with  Mr.
Myers's  line,

"  Faint  for  the  flaming  of  thine  advent  feet."

and  note  in  the  script  the  alliterations  which  are  so  charac-
teristic a  feature  of  St.  Paul.

Mrs.  Piper,  as  stated  above,  in  the  waking-stage  of  May  8  th,
1908,  in  close  conjunction  with  Mrs.  Verrall's  name,  uttered
the  words  :


"St.  Paul— Light— Life— Angel  band,"


LX.]


Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


227


whereas  the  second  line  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  poem  in  imitation  of
St.  Paul  is :

"  Lighted  the  nations  on  the  way  to  life."

"  Angel  band "  I  have  already  explained  as  an  allusion
to  the  Latin  verses  read  by  Mr.  Dorr  to  Hodgsoni^.  This
seems  to  be  the  primary  intention  of  the  words.  But
in  view  of  the  connection  presently  to  be  explained  between
Mrs.  Verrall's  script  and  Miss  Verrall's  of  May  11th,  with
which,  again,  Mrs.  Piper's  is  connected,  I  am  inclined  to  think
there  may  be  a  secondary  intention,  and  that  the  words
"  Angel  band "  also  refer  to  the  third  verse  of  Mrs.  Verrall's
poem.

The  wording  of  the  first  half  of  this  verse  is  clearly  derived
from  Isaiah  Lii.  7,  How  beautiful  upon  the  mountains  are
the  feet  of  him  that  bringeth  good  tidings."  But  the  con-
nection with  Virgil  and  Dante  implies  that  something  more  is
meant,  and  the  further  description  of  the  messengers,  as

"  Borne  far  aloft  on  oarage  of  their  high  wings
Glorious  shining  in  majestic  grace,"

suggested  to  me  the  souls  descending  on  the  Jacob's  ladder  of
the  Paradiso  (see  Miss  Verrall's  script  of  May  11th  below);
for  this  was  a  vision  not  for  Virgil's  eyes,  since  he  left  Dante
before  the  latter  entered  Paradise.^

May  10,  1908.

I  have  wanted  for  some  time  to  tell  you  of  something  that  will
interest  you  greatl}^,  but  it  is  very  important  that  Helen  should  know
nothing  of  it.  It  concerns  her  more  closelj'  than  it  does  you  but
you  will  have  to  wait  some  time  to  hear  of  it.  She  has  got  quite
a  new  type  of  thing  in  her  writing — -it  is  she  who  will  lead  this
time  not  you — you  only  fill  in  her  gaps —

^  It  is  perhaps  worth  noting  that  "Angel "  was  one  of  the  cross-correspondences
occurring  in  the  Piper  sittings  in  England  a  year  before.  On  April  8,  1907,
Myersp  said  that  he  liad  given  the  word  "  Angel  "  to  Mrs.  Verrall.  Mrs.
Verrall's  script  of  April  .S,  1907,  consisted  of  a  description  of  angels,  and  on
April  28th  she  noted  that  this  was  probably  a  preliminary  attempt  at  Dante's
Paradiso.  (See  Proceedinris,  Vol.  XXII.  pp.  220,  227  and  264.)  Nothing  of
all  this  was  normally  known  to  Mrs.  Piper  at  the  time  of  her  sittings  with
Mr.  Dorr.


228


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Mrs.  Verrall  told  Miss  Verrall  on  June  G,  1908,  of  the
statement  just  quoted  that  she  had  "  got  quite  a  new  type  of
thing  in  her  writing,"  and  Miss  Verrall  said  that  the  new  thing
she  had  got  was  figures,  namely,  3,  8,  7  (see  below).  It  was
only  after  this  that  Mrs.  Verrall  showed  her  her  script  of
April  27.

(3)  Miss  Verrall

The  following  are  four  successive  scripts  by  Miss  Verrall,
all  written  in  London,  where  she  was  then  living :

April  29,  1908.

The  figure  3  that  seems  wanted.

May  4,  1908

8  eight  ....
A  a  triangle.

Mmj  11,  1908.

{(ly  A  branching  tree  not  a  real  tree  but  emblematical.  Scrolls
in  place  of  leaves.

(a)  Jacob's  ladder  and  the  angels  upon  it What  does  that  mean —
(h)  A  spinning  top  many  colours  but  as  it  spins  they  are  blended
into  one —

Mark  the  simile

(r.)  a  leaf  that  hangs  down  like  that  and  a  flower
small  and  white  I  think  and  a  sweet  scent  it  is  a
shrub — foreign — not  English- — Sciola  a  name  like  that.

((/)  The seven branched  candlestick  it is  an  image
— the  seven  churches  but  these  not  churches
seven  candles  united  in  one  light
and  seven colours  in the  rainbow  too.
Many  mystic  sevens
all  will  serve
We  are  seven

Wlio  (?) F.  W.  H.  Myers.

'The  letters  in  brackets  are  not  part  of  the  scripl",  but  refer  to  the  different
topics  of  it,  which  are  explained  below.


LX.]  Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Sc7'ipt.  229

On  this  Miss  Verrall  noted  at  the  time :  "  Tlie  number  7
runs  all  through  this  script."

The  next  script,  May  16th,  1908,  in  the  midst  of  a  passage
quoted  in  Mrs.  Sidgwiclc's  paper  in  connection  with  the  cross-
correspondence  "Exile  and  Moore"  (see  p.  187)  contains  the

P^^'''^^®'  "A  seven-stringed  lute,"

which  I  regard  as  an  echo  of  this  cross-correspondence  carried
on  into  another  one.

Note  here  the  figure  3  on  April  29th,  repeated  in  the  form
of  a  triangle  on  May  4th,  and  compare  with  Mrs.  Verrall's
script  of  April  27th  above,  and  Mrs.  Holland's  below  (p.  238).

The  script  of  May  11th  is  more  important.  Here  we  have
many  variations  on  the  theme  of  Seven,  ending  with  "  We  are
seven,"  which  had  been  given  by  Mrs.  Piper  on  May  8th  and
was  afterwards  emphasised  by  her  on  May  12  th.  This  script
of  Miss  Verrall's  was  seen  by  Mrs.  Verrall  on  June  7th,
when  she  identified  a  number  of  references  to  Dante  in  it,
which  she  and  I  have  since  worked  out  in  greater  detail.

(a)  "  Jacob's  ladder "  is  first  mentioned  by  Dante  in
Paradiso,  Canto  xxi.  (25-38).^

I  saw  rear'd  up,
In  colour  like  to  sun-illumin'd  gold,
A  ladder,  which  my  ken  pursu'd  in  vain
So  lofty  was  the  summit ;  down  whose  steps
I  saw  the  splendours  in  such  multitude
Descending,  every  light  in  heav'n,  methought.
Was  shed  thence. As  the  rooks,  at  dawn  of  day,
Bestirring  them  to  dry  their  feathers  chill,
Some  speed  their  way  a-field  ;  and  homeward  some,
Returning,  cross  their  flight ;  while  some  abide,
And  wheel  around  their  airy  lodge  :  so  seem'd
That  glitterancp,  wafted  on  alternate  wing,
As  upon  certain  stair  it  came,  and  clash'd
Its  shining.

And  again  at  the  end  of  the  same  Canto  (128-130),
I  at  those  accents  saw  the  splendours  down
From  step  to  step  alight,  and  wheel,  and  wax,
Each  circuiting,  more  beautiful.
^  This  and  the  following  passages  are  quoted  from  Gary's  translation.


230


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Compare,  with  this  description,  Mrs.  Verrall's :

Borne  far  aloft  on  oarage  of  their  high  wings
Glorious  shining  in  majestic  grace.

In  the  next  Canto  St.  Benedict  explains  to  Dante  that  this
is  Jacob's  Ladder :

Our  ladder  reaches  even  to  that  clime  ;  ^
And  so,  at  giddy  distance,  mocks  thy  view.
Thither  the  patriarch  Jacob  saw  it  stretch
Its  topmost  round  ;  when  it  appear'd  to  him
With  angels  laden.

(Canto  XXTi.  68-72.)

It  is  to  be  noted  that  this  ladder  is  seen  in  the  Seventh
Heaven,  of  which  it  is  the  main  feature.

(b)  "  A  spinning  top  many  colours  but  as  it  spins  they  are
blended  into  one."

Mrs.  Verrall  points  out  that  this  seems  to  be  the  "  wheel "
mentioned  in  Parcidiso  x.  140  ("Thus  saw  I  move  the  glorious
wheel")  and  further  described  in  xii.  1-16:

Soon  as  its  final  woid  the  blessed  flame  -
Had  rais'd  for  utterance,  straight  the  holy  mill^
Began  to  wheel  ;  nor  yet  had  once  revolv'd
Or  ere  another,  circling,  compass'd  it,
Motion  to  motion,  song  to  song,  conjoining  ;
Song,  that  as  much  our  muses  doth  excel,
Our  Syrens  with  their  tuneful  pipes,  as  ray
Of  primal  splendour  doth  its  faint  reflex.
As  when,  if  Juno  bid  her  handmaid  forth.
Two  arches  parallel,  and  trick'd  alike,
Span  the  thin  cloud,  the  outer  taking  birth
From  that  within  (in  manner  of  that  voice  ^
Whom  love  did  melt  away,  as  sun  the  mist,)
And  they  who  gaze,  presageful  call  to  mind
The  compact,  made  with  Noah,  of  the  world
No  more  to  be  o'erflow'd  ;

^The  highest  sphere,  or  Empyrean.

-Thomas  Aquinas.  ^The  circle  of  spirits.

■•The  nymph  Echo.


LX.]  Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


231


These  revolving  circles  are  referred  to  again  in  Paradiso
XXVIII.  Here  there  is  a  central  point  of  transcendent  brilliancy
with  concentric  circles  round  it :

And  over  this  [the  sixth  circle],  a  seventh,  following,  reach'd

Circumference  so  ample,  that  its  bow

AVithin  the  span  of  Juno's  messenger

Had  scarce  been  held  entire. Beyond  the  sev'uth

Ensued  yet  other  two.

Canto  XXVIII.  27-31.

Note  in  both  these  passages  the  association  of  the  Wheel
with  Juno's  messenger  (Iris,  the  Eainbow),  and  that  the
rainbow  is  specifically  referred  to  later  in  the  same  script
of  Miss  Verrall's.  Note  also  the  special  association  in  the
second  passage  of  the  Seventh  circle  with  the  Eainbow.  Mrs.
Verrall  points  out  to  me  that  Dante's  conception  is  based  on
Plato's  Myth  of  Er  in  the  BepuUic,  Book  x.  where  the
souls  about  to  be  re-incarnated  see  "  a  rainbow-coloured  light,
straight  like  a  pillar,  extended  from  on  high  throughout  the
Heaven  and  the  Earth."  This  is  the  axis  of  the  Cosmos,
passing  at  each  end  into  the  Spindle  of  Necessity,  which
causes  all  the  heavenly  revolutions.  The  axis  is  surrounded
by  eight  concentric  revolving  cups  or  rings,  on  each  of  which
is  mounted  a  Siren,  "  which  goeth  round  with  her  circle,
uttering  one  note  at  one  pitch ;  and  the  notes  of  all  the
eight  together  do  make  one  melody."

This  vision  illustrates  the  astronomical  theory  of  Plato's  age,
essentially  the  same  as  that  of  Dante's  age,  which  dominates
the  whole  of  the  Paradiso}  The  eight  circles  or  whorls  repre-
sent the  seven  planets  surrounded  by  the  fixed  stars.  "  The
.seven  planets  by  their  movements  were  supposed  ...  to  give
forth  sounds  corresponding  to  the  notes  of  the  Heptachord.  .  .  .
Later  it  was  held  that  the  circle  of  the  fixed  stars  had  also
a  note  of  its  own,  and  a  '  harmony '  or  '  mode '  resulted  like
that  of  the  Octachord."'  Cf.  Mrs.  Holland's  "  Tlien  an  octave
struck  the  answer"  below,  p.  241.

^See  the  discussion  of  tlie  Myth  of  Er  in  J.  A.  Stewart's  The  Myths  of  Plato,
pp.  139-169.

^  Bepiiblic  of  Plato,  edited  by  J.  Adam,  Vol.  II.  p.  452;  note  on  Pep.
167  B.


232


Alice  Johnson.


[part


(c)  "  A  leaf  that  hangs  down."  Mrs.  Verrall  tells  me  that
there  is  a  flower  called  "  Jacob's  ladder  "  described  in  Bentham's
British  Flora,  p.  304,  a  book  very  familiar  to  Miss  Verrall.
In  the  illustration  of  this,  a  long  pinnate  leaf  is  drawn  as
bent  over  at  the  top  and  the  number  of  leaflets  shown  hang-
ing down  is  seven,  as  in  Miss  Verrall's  script.  Her  description,
however,  does  not  seem  to  apply  to  this  plant  (Polnnonium
caernhuim),  and  at  the  time  she  and  her  mother  were  inclined
to  think  the  Jessamine  was  meant.  This  has  normally  seven
leaflets  in  each  group,  though  occasionally  the  end  one  is  sub-
divided. In  any  case,  the  primary  intention  of  the  script  was
probably  to  give  another  example  of  Seven.

(d)  "  A  branching  tree  not  a  real  tree  but  emblematical "  is
the  beginning  of  a  topic,  which  is  interrupted  in  the  script
by  the  mention  of  Jacob's  Ladder,  etc.,  and  resumed  at  the
words : — "  The  seven-branched  candlestick  ;  it  is  an  image — the
seven  churches;  but  these  not  churches,  seven  candles  united  in  one
light  and  seven  colours  in  the  rainbow  too. Many  mystic  sevens."

There  seems  here  first  a  reference  to  the  Mosaic  seven-
branched  candlestick  (see  Exodus  xxv.  31-40),  leading  on  to  the
seven  golden  candlesticks  of  St.  John's  vision :  "  The  seven
candlesticks  which  thou  sawest  are  the  seven  churches "
{Bcvelation  I.  20).  ISut,  says  the  script,  the  candles  really  meant
are  not  those  that  symbolise  the  seven  churches,  but  certain
candles  that  are  associated  with  the  seven  colours  of  the  rainbow,^
which  is  not  the  case  with  either  of  the  Biblical  seven  candle-
sticks. The  connection  of  the  rainbow  with  these  candles,
followed  by  the  phrase  "  Many  mystic  sevens,"  seems  to  me  to
show  that  the  reference  is  to  the  Pitrgatorio,  Canto  xxix.

In  this  Canto,  Dante's  vision  of  the  Procession  of  the  Car
is  described.  First,  he  sees,  as  he  thinks,  seven  trees,  but
these  on  nearer  view  turn  out  to  be  seven  tapers  of  gold,
which,  as  they  move  onwards,  leave  behind  them  trailing  pen-
nants of  light  of  the  seven  colours  of  the  rainbow.  Then  come
the  twenty-four  Elders  and  the  ibnr  mystic  Beasts  of  the
Apocalypse  ;  followed  by  seven  nymphs  (representing  the  seven

^Froni  the  point  of  view  of  exact  science,  there  are  not,  of  coirrse,  seven  colours
in  the  spectrum,  but  an  indefiiiite  number.  Nevertlieless  the  popular  view  that
the  rainbow  is  composed  of  seven  colours  is  so  widespread  and  longstanding  that
it  is  naturally  adopted  for  literary  purposes.


LX.]  Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.  233


virtues)  who  surround  the  Car,  and  seven  sacred  writers
following  it  complete  the  procession.

Miss  Verrall's  script  seems  to  specify  only  the  first  part  of
this  procession,  namely,  the  seven  golden  candlesticks  with  their
rainbow-coloured  lights,  which,  as  the  script  says,  are  not  an
image  of  the  seven  churches,  for  they  are  interpreted  variously
by  commentators  as  symbolising  the  seven  sacraments,  or  the
seven  gifts  of  the  Spirit.

It  appears  then  that  the  individual  topics  of  the  script  of
May  11th,  may  have  been  largely,  if  not  wholly,  derived  from
sources  familiar  to  Miss  A^errall ;  c.//.  the  many-coloured  spinning
top  from  Plato's  Rqniblic,  and  "  Jacob's  ladder  and  the  angels
upon  it,"  and  "  the  seven-branched  candlestick  "  from  the  Bible.
But  the  reason  why  I  take  the  script  to  refer  to  Dante  is  that
the  topics  which  appear  to  be  combined  in  it  in  a  purely
random  manner  are  actually  found  combined  in  Dante,  and,  so
far  as  I  know,  nowhere  else ;  while  similar  or  associated  references
to  Dante  occur  in  the  scripts  of  the  other  automatists.

Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall's  Knowledge  of  Dante.

It  may  be  convenient  to  interrupt  the  narrative  at  this
point  in  order  to  remind  the  reader  what  allusions  to  Dante
had  already  appeared  in  the  scripts  and  to  what  extent  they
had  been  identified.

Miss  Verrall  had  on  March  10th,  1907,  obtained  the  name
"  Geryon "  in  a  table-tilting  experiment  (see  Mr.  Piddington's
Eeport,  Proc.  Vol.  XXII.  p.  248).

Mrs.  Verrall  on  April  28th,  1907,  had  interpreted  two
scripts  of  her  own,  April  3rd  and  6th,  1907,  as  referring  to
the  Furgatorio  and  Paradiso  (op.  cit.  p.  264).

Mrs.  Holland,  in  her  script  of  April  8th,  1907,  had  mentioned
the  Paradiso,  and  Martha  and  Mary  and  Leah  and  Eachel  {op.
cit.  p.  265).

On  April  29th,  1907,  Mrs.  Piper  in  the  waking-stage  spoke
of  the  "  Inferno  .  .  .  Dante's  Inferno  .  .  .  There's  no  Inferno
here,"  after  the  sitter  (Mrs.  Verrall),  had  mentioned  Dante  to
her  during  the  sitting  {op.  cit.  pp.  162-5  and  279).  Myersp
on  this  occasion  said  that  he  had  "iven  the  name  to  Mrs.
Verrall  in  connection  with  his  answer  to  auro?  ovpapog  aKvfj.u)v.


234


Alice  Johnson.


[part


The  other  references  were  connected  by  Mr.  Piddington  with
the  complicated  cross-correspondence  "  Light  in  West."

Thus  the  allusions  to  Dante  had  hitherto  been  extremely
scanty,  and  were  not  generally  known  at  all,  since  Mr.
Piddington's  report  was  not  published  until  October,  1908.
It  was  on  February  15th,  1908,  that  Mr.  Piddington  first
learnt  that  the  passage  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  about  Martha
and  Mary,  and  Leah  and  Piachel,  was  to  be  traced  to  the
Purgatorio,  and  this  threw  light  on  the  other  Dante  allusions.
In  March,  both  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall  saw  the  first  draft  of
the  two  sections  of  Mr.  Piddington's  paper  dealing  with  the
cross-correspondences  Light  iyi  West  and  Euripides,  which  in-
clude this  topic.  Miss  Verrall  had  never  read  any  Dante,
either  in  Italian  or  English,  and  did  not  look  up  the  references
or  make  any  further  investigation.  Mrs.  Verrall,  on  the  other
hand,  during  the  first  week  in  May  was  reading  the  Purgatorio
in  connection  with  Mr.  Piddington's  paper,  and  had  finished  it
on  May  8th,  the  day  when  the  first  item  of  this  cross-
correspondence  of  Sevens  came  out  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance,  and
when  she  herself  wrote  the  script  quoted  above.

It  may  therefore  be  supposed  that  her  preoccupation  with
the  Purgatorio  had  some  telepathic  influence  in  causing  Miss
Verrall  (who  was  living  in  London  at  the  time  and  did  not
know  that  her  mother  had  been  reading  Dante)  to  refer  to  it
in  her  script  three  days  later.  But  whereas  the  references
dealt  with  by  Mr.  Piddington  (and  therefore  probably  most  in
Mrs.  Verrall's  mind)  were  to  the  27th  and  28th  Cantos,
Dante's  vision  of  the  Procession,  to  which  Miss  Verrall's  script
alludes,  is  in  the  29  th  Canto.

None  of  the  other  automatists  concerned  in  this  cross-
correspondence  knew  that  allusions  to  Dante  had  occurred  in
any  of  the  scripts,  except  that  Mrs.  Holland  knew  that  the
Paradiso  had  been  mentioned  in  her  own  script  of  April  8,
1907,  though  she  was  not  aware  that  Martha  and  Mary  and
Leah  and  Eachel  in  that  script  were  derivable  from  Dante.

(4)  3£rs.  Frith.

Mrs.  Frith  is  a  member  of  the  Society  and  a  friend  of
Mrs.  Verrall's,  who  has  practised  automatic  writing  for  some
little  time. She  sometimes  gets  "  messages  "  in  her  script  for


LX.]  Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


235


Mrs.  Verrall,  purporting  to  come  from  Dr.  Hodgson,  whom
she  had  never  known,  except  by  name.  There  have  been  a
few  indications  of  supernormal  connection  between  her  script
and  Mrs.  Yerrall's.

In  February  1908  Mrs.  Verrall  tried  an  experiment  with
her,  sending  a  contemporary  note  of  it  in  a  sealed  envelope
to  be  kept  at  the  S.P.R.  rooms.

After  having  been  told  of  this  experiment  by  Mrs.  A^errall
for  the  first  time  on  Dec.  31,  1909,  I  opened  the  envelope
on  Jan.  7,  1910,  and  found  that  it  contained  the  following
enclosure :

Copy  of  question.

Feb.  14,  sent  to  Mrs.  Frith.  In  view  of  Mrs.  Piper's  success
in  answering  Mrs.  V.'s  question  about  the  meaning  of  and  associa-
tions conveyed  by  3  Greek  words,i  I  should  like  to  try  a  similar
experiment  here.

Can  E.  H.  say  what  are  his  associations  with  the  words  :
"  Climb  the  Mount  of  Blessing."

Answer.

Quotation  from  Tennyson's  Ancient  Sage  in  last  Xmas  greeting
sent  by  R.  H.,  wh[ich]  arrived  after  I  heard  of  his  death  in  Dec./05.

No  one  knows  of  this  expt.  but  my  Sec[retary]  and  she  does  not
know  the  answer  nor  to  whom  I  put  the  question.

M.  de  G.  v.— Feb.  14,  1908.

The  context  of  this  quotation  from  The  Ancient  Sage  is  as
follows  :

And  lay  thine  uphill  slioulder  to  the  wheel,

And  climb  the  Mount  of  Blessing,  whence,  if  thou

Look  higher,  then — perchance — thou  mayest — beyond

A  hundred  ever-rising  mountain  lines.

And  past  the  range  of  Night  and  Shadow — see

The  high-heaven  dawn  of  more  than  mortal  day

Strike  on  the  Mount  of  Vision  !

So,  farewell.

Mrs.  Frith  did  not  recognise  the  quotation  and  only  learnt
its  source  accidentally  in  December,  1909.  She  could  not
then  remember  that  she  had  ever  read  The  Ancient  Sage  ;  but

^  ai'riis  ovpavhs  aKv/jLuiv. See  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.  pp.  107-172. — A.  J.


236


Alice  Johnson,


[part


it  is  of  course  possible  tliat  she  liad  seen  either  the  poem  itself
or  passages  quoted  from  it,  and  had  forgotten  it.  In  any  case
it  is  clear  that  the  next  script  but  one  ^  which  she  produced,
and  which  purported  to  come  from  Dr.  Hodgson  for  Mrs.
Verrall,  was  influenced  either  by  reminiscences  of  the  poem  or
by  ideas  suggested  by  the  phrase  "  Climb  the  Mount  of  Bless-
ing." This  script  was  not  produced  till  June  11th,  1908,  and
much  of  it  is  in  verse,  such  as  the  following :

Then  are  you  drawing  nearer  to  the  plane
The  plane  of  blessing  and  the  promised  land
Up  through  the  many  furrows  of  the  land
The  unyielding  rock  the  hot  and  scorching  sand
Rise  weary  traveller  till  the  rest  is  won

I  have  been  there,  been  there  at  morn  and  even
And  I  have  found  the  track  for  which  I  yearn
The  path  of  peace,  the  blessed  road  to  Heaven
The  spark  celestial  there  afar  doth  burn.

There  may  I  rest  may  rest  in  sight  of  heaven
Pisgah  is  scaled  the  fair  and  dewy  lawn
Invites  my  footsteps  till  the  mystic  seven
Lights  {sic)  up  the  golden  candlestick  of  dawn.

It  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  Mrs.  Verrall's  question
formed  the  jyoint  dc  reph'c  of  the  first  part  of  this  script,  but
the  last  four  lines  seem  connected  with  the  allusions  to
Dante  in  Miss  Verrall's  script.

"  Pisgah  is  scaled "  is,  of  course,  a  Biblical  reference
{Deuteronomy  ill.  27).  Just  as  Moses  from  the  top  of  Pisgah
saw  the  Promised  Land,  but  was  not  allowed  to  enter  it,  so
Dante's  Virgil  is  not  allowed  to  enter  Paradise  (see  Mrs.
Verrall's  script  of  May  8th  above).  I  take  Pisgah,  then,  to
be  the  Biblical  equivalent  of  the  Mount  of  Purgatory  whicli
Dante  had  to  scale  before  his  entrance  into  the  Earthly
Paradise  on  its  summit.  It  is  this  Earthly  Paradise  to  which
the  end  of  the  script  seems  to  refer.  (See  Purgatorio,  Cantos
XXVIII.  and  XXIX.)  Here  Dante  wandering  through  the  forest
sees Matilda on a liowery lawn on the other side of  the

'  She  wrote  some  automatic  verses  in  Marcli,  purporting  to  come  from  Dr.
Hodgson,  but  tliese  had  no  connection  with  Mrs.  Verrall's  question.


LX.]  Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.  237


narrow  stream  of  Lethe,  which  he  passionately  desires  to
cross.  He  is  not  yet  permitted  to  do  so,  but  moves  on  in
the  .same  direction  with  Matilda,  facing  the  east,  till  he  sees
a  brilliant  illumination,  the  coming  dawn,  in  the  midst  of
which  appear  the  seven  golden  candlesticks,  heralding  the
Procession  of  the  Car :

So  beautiful
A  car,  ill  Rome,  ne'er  graced  Augustus'  pomp,
Or  Africanus' ;  e'en  the  sun's  itself
Were  poor  to  tliis.

{Purgatorio,  xxix.  110-113.)

As  explained  above,  the  "  mystic  seven "  is  the  whole  note
of  this  vision  of  Dante's,  and  the  connection  of  Mrs.  Frith's
script  with  Miss  Verrall's  of  May  lltli  seems  clear.

Mrs.  Verrall's  question  about  "  Climb  the  Mount  of  Blessing  "
cannot,  I  think,  be  held  to  account  for  these  apparent  allusions
to  Dante ;  ibr  it  is  clear  from  the  whole  tenour  of  the
Ancient  Sage  that  Tennyson  in  writing  of  the  "  Mount  of
Blessing "  and  the  "  Mount  of  Vision "  had  no  particular
mountains  in  view,  but  was  speaking  in  a  purely  mystical
sense  of  his  own  experiences  and  aspirations.^

As  to  the  telepathic  agencies  that  may  have  influenced  Mrs.
Frith's  script,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  Mrs.  Verrall  saw  Miss
Verrall's  corresponding  script — that  of  May  llth^ — for  the  first
time  on  June  6th,  and  next  day  noted  the  references  to  Dante
in  it.  On  June  10th  she  wrote  to  Mr.  Piddington  about  it,
and  it  was  on  June  11th  that  Mrs.  Frith's  script  was  produced.

Mrs.  Verrall  asked  Mrs.  Frith  by  letter  on  August  oOtli
whether  her  script  suggested  a  literary  reminiscence  to  her,
and  she  said,  no.  Mrs.  Verrall  also  ascertained  that  she  had
not  read  more  of  Dante  than  a  few  cantos  of  the  Inferno.
On  more  explicit  enquiries  being  made  later,  Mrs.  Frith  wrote
(March  10th,  1909):  "I  know  a  few  scraps  of  Italian,  but
beyond  two  or  three  well-known  quotations  from  Dante,  I
have  never  read  a  word  of  him  in  either  En"lish  or  the
original,  often  as  I  have  meant  to  do  so."

This  script  of  Mrs.  Frith's,  though  written  on  June  11th
1908,  was  not  seen  by  Mrs.  Verrall  until  July 18th.  On

1  See  the  references  to  this  poem  in  his  Life,  Vol.  I.  p.  320  and  Vol.  II.
p.  319,  "The  whole  poem  is  very  personal,  etc."


238


Alice  Johnson.


[part


the  two  following  days,  Mrs.  Verrall  noted  the  Dante  allusions
in  it  and  its  resemblance  to  Miss  Verrall's  script  of  May
11th.

(5)  3Irs.  Holland.

The  script  about  to  be  quoted  was  the  only  one  produced
by  Mrs.  Holland  between  the  dates  March  10th  and  November
25th,  1908.  It  was  written  while  she  was  at  sea,  on  her
way  from  India  to  England.  In  her  letter  to  me  enclosing
the  script  was  also  enclosed  the  following  account  of  a  dream,
noted  by  her  at  the  time.  I  may  mention  that  she  very
rarely  tells  me  anything  about  her  dreams,  so  that  the  fact
of  her  relating  it  shows  that  it  made  an  unusually  strong
impression  on  her.

July  15th,  1908.

Last  night  I  dreamt  that  I  was  in  a  large  bare  room — rather  like
a  studio.  .  .  .

Some  one  showed  me  an  old  note  book — or  diary — in  which  was
written  in  a  small  neat  hand  :

"Since  in  1872  a  dear  friend  chose  as  a  sign  by  which
to  communicate  with  me  the  figure  6,  I,  in  my  turn,
will  try,  in  the  time  to  come,  to  send  the  figure  6,—
simply  the  sign  of  6."

I'or  comments  on  this  dream,  see  below,  p.  245.  The  script
enclosed  with  it  was  as  follows :

Thursday,  July  '23rd,  1908.  At  sea.

There  should  be  three  at  least  in  accord  and  if  possible  Seven —

The  Lady  and  the  learned  lady  and  the  maiden  of  the  crystal  and
the  scribe  and  the  professed  scribe — and  the  two  new  comers —
what  could  be  better  than  that"!

Take  this  for  token

"Green  beyond  belief."

A  certain  sense  of  humour  lacks  in  this?  No  not  the  garden —
The  view  from  the  house  in  an  aspect  of  evening —

Not  only  on  the  ocean  may  the  Green  Ray  appear —

Note  in  the  dream  and  script  the  numbers  6,  3,  7,  and
compare  with  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  April  27th,  1908,  quoted
above,  p.  225.


LX.]


Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


239


At  the  time  I  received  this  script,  I  knew  nothing  about
the  occurrence  of  Sevens  in  the  scripts  of  the  other  automatists
quoted  above,  but  I  interpreted  the  Seven  who  should  be  in
accord  respectively  as :  Mrs.  Forbes,  Mrs.  Verrall,  Miss  Verrall,
Mrs.  Holland,  Mrs.  Piper,  Mrs.  Frith  and  Mrs.  Home.  The
reason  why  I  took  "  the  two  new  comers "  to  be  Mrs.  Frith
and  Mrs.  Home  was  because  I  had  lately  heard  from  Mrs.
Verrall  that  she  had  got  some  interesting  writing  from  Mrs.
Frith  (she  did  not  tell  me  what)  and  I  had  myself  lately
received  from  Colonel  Taylor  a  report  of  Mrs.  Home's  trance
utterances  in  which  I  had  found  some  apparently  veridical
matter.  It  will  be  seen  that  six  out  of  these  seven  auto-
matists are  concerned  in  this  cross-correspondence,  Mrs.  Forbes
alone  makiuo  no  contribution  to  it.

The  statement  that  there  sliould  be  seven  in  accord  may  be
compared  with  Mrs.  Piper's  remark  "  We  were  seven  in  the
distance  as  a  matter  of  fact,"  see  above,  p.  224.

I  also  felt  sure  at  the  time  that  "Green  beyond  belief"  and
"  the  Green  Eay  "  had  some  special  meaning,  partly  because  of
the  repetition  of  the  word  "  Green  "  and  also  because  in  both
phrases  the  writing  was  rather  larger  and  more  widely  spaced
than  in  the  rest  of  the  script.  I  thought  therefore  that  some
cross-correspondence  was  being  attempted,  and  hoped  to  discover
it  later.

On  hearing  from  Mrs.  Verrall  on  November  18th,  1908,
that  she  had  found  a  connection  between  the  scripts  of  Mrs.
Piper,  Miss  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Frith,  in  regard  to  Sevens  and
to  various  mystic  sevens  mentioned  in  the  Purgatorio,  Canto
XXIX.,  I  looked  up  the  last  Cantos  of  the  Purgatorio  to
see  if  they  contained  any  marked  reference  to  Green,  and  found
what  I  took  to  be  such  in  Canto  xxxi.  Dante  is  drawn  over
the  river  of  Lethe  by  Matilda  and  presented  to  four  of  the
nymphs  who  surround  the  Car.

And  then  they  led  me  to  the  Gryphon's  breast,

Where,  turned  toward  us,  Beatrice  stood.

"  Spare  not  thy  vision. We  have  station'd  thee

Before  the  emeralds,  whence  love,  erewhile,

Hath  drawn  his  weapons  on  thee." As  they  spake

A  thousand  fervent  \\ishes  riveted

Mine  eyes  upon  her  beaming  eyes,  that  stood,


240


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Still  fix'd  toward  the  Gryphon,  motionless.
As  the  sun  strikes  a  mirror,  even  thus
Within  those  orbs  the  tvvyfold  being  shone ;
For  ever  varying,  in  one  figure  now
Reflected,  now  in  other.

Purgatorio,  Canto  xxxi.  112-123.1

On  this  passage,  in  which  the  eyes  of  Beatrice  are  compared
to  emeralds,  there  are  copious  notes  by  the  commentators,
who  quote  interesting  passages  from  a  number  of  old  poets
extolling  the  beauty  of  green  eyes.  The  Ottimo  Commento
remarks :  "  Dante  very  happily  introduces  this  precious  stone,
considering  its  properties.  .  .  .  The  emerald  is  the  prince  of
all  green  stones ;  no  gem  nor  herb  has  greater  greenness ;  it
reflects  an  image  like  a  mirror.  .  .  ."  Cf.  Mrs.  Holland's
"  Green  beyond  belief — the  Green  Eay."

Throughout  the  whole  poem,  as  well  as  in  the  Convito,
there  are  of  course  constant  references  to  the  eyes  and  the
smile  of  Beatrice  ("  It  is  by  the  eyes  and  smile  of  Beatrice "
says  A.  J.  Butler  in  a  note  on  this  passage,  "  that  Dante  is
carried  forward  and  instructed  in  Paradise.")  But  this  phrase
about  the  emeralds  is,  I  think,  the  one  touch  of  personal
description  of  her  in  all  Dante's  works.

The  highly  mystical  passage  in  which  it  occurs  is  full  of
the  idea  of  shining :  her  beaming  eyes  {occhi  rilucenti),  and
the  mystic  "  twyfold  being  "  (the  type  of  Christ — the  combination
of  the  divine  and  human  natures)  who  shines  {raggiava — a  word
which  has  the  same  root  as  rag)  reflected  in  her  eyes,  as  the
sun  is  reflected  in  a  mirror.

For  Mrs.  Holland's  knowledge,  "  which  it  would  be  more
descriptive  to  call  ignorance,"  of  Dante,  see  Mr.  Piddington's
paper  above,  p.  23-4.

'  Disser  :  "Fa  che  le  vi.ste  non  rispariiii,
posto  t'  avem  dinanzi  agli  smeraldi,
oikV  Amor  gia  ti  trasse  le  sue  armi."

Mille  disiri  piii  che  fiainma  caldi

strinsermi  gli  occhi  agli  occhi  rilucenti,
che  pur  sopra  il  grifone  stavan  saldi.

Come  in  lo  specchio  il  sol,  non  altrimenti
la  doppia  fiera  dentro  vi  raggiava,
or  con  uni,  or  con  altri  regginienti.

(Lines  115-12.3.)


LX.]


Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


241


I  had  an  interview  with  Mrs.  Holland  on  November  24th,
1908,  and  asked  her  if  she  attached  any  meaning  to  "Green
beyond  belief"  and  "the  Green  Eay."  The  only  suggestion
she  could  make  was  that  the  Green  Eay  might  refer  to  what
is  said  to  be  sometimes  seen  in  sunsets  at  sea.  Just  as  the
sun  is  sinking  below  the  horizon,  a  vivid  green  ray  may
appear  for  a  moment.  She  had  heard  of  this,  but  had  never
seen  it  herself.^

I  then  told  .  her  very  briefly  of  the  cross-correspondence
under  consideration,  mentioning  my  interpretation  of  the  seven
automati.sts  referred  to  in  her  script,  and  saying  that  Mrs.
Piper,  Miss  Verrall  and  "  the  two  new  comers "  were  involved
in  it,  that  it  included  allusions  to  the  Procession  of  the  Car
in  the  Purgatorio,  and  that  I  interpreted  her  "  Green  Eay  "
to  refer  to  the  eyes  of  Beatrice.

Mrs.  Holland  was  much  interested  in  this  case,  and  what  I
then  told  her  undoubtedly  influenced  the  next  piece  of  script
she  produced  (on  November  25th),  of  which  I  will  now  quote
only  the  opening  sentence  :

"Then  an  octave  struck  the  answer.'^

She  recognised  this  as  a  quotation  from  P)rowning's  "  A
Toccata  of  Galuppi,"  but  neither  she  nor  I  saw  any  point  in  it.

The  quotation  was  repeated,  with  an  additional  underlining,
in  her  script  of  January  20th,  1909,  which  opened  thus:

Resolute  persistence —
"Then  an  orMre  struck  the  answer."

I  think  this  is  intended  as  a  sort  of  finishing  touch  to  the
cross-correspondence.  An  octave  contains,  of  course,  seven
notes,  one  of  which  is  repeated,  with  a  new  and  completing
element,  as  the  eightli.  The  phrase  has  a  certain  interest  as
being  possibly  a  reference  to  the  harmony  of  the  celestial  spheres
referred  to  above,  p.  231.

(6) Mrs.  Home.

Mrs.  R.  Home  is  a  member  of  the  Society,  who  has  long
been  actively  interested  in  psychical  research. She  has  had  a

^  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  tells  me  that  this  is  probably  a  physiological,  rather  than
a  physical  effect,  since  sudden  changes  of  brightness,  like  a  flickering  light,
are  known  to  produce  a  sensation  of  colour.

Q


242


A  lice  Johnson.


[part


private  family  circle  for  many  years,  to  which  she  had  admitted
Colonel  Taylor,  who  has  kept  careful  records  of  all  the  experi-
ments.

On  July  24th,  1908,  Colonel  Taylor  and  only  one  other
friend,  Miss  H.,  being  present,  a  "  Myers  control,"  who  had
often  appeared  before,  purported  to  speak  through  Mrs.  Home,
who  was  in  the  trance  condition,  Colonel  Taylor  taking  notes.
The  words  spoken  were  as  follows  :

Seven  times  seven  and  seventy-seven
Send  the  burden  of  my  words  to  others.

(MissH.  To  whom  shall  we  send  1)

Souls  that  labour  for  your  earthly  wisdom
Send  no  names.

(MissH.  May  we  say  the  message  is  from  a  teacher?)

.No.  .  .  . Several  wait  to  hear. Some  say  they  do  not
mind  the  name  ;  others  seek  only. Omnia  vincit.

(Colonel  Taylor.  Shall  I send  this to Miss  Johnson, or to  Mrs.
Verrall  ?)

Miss  Johnson  likes  it  better ;  you  can  help  better  through

her.  '

Accordingly,  Colonel  Taylor  sent  a  copy  of  his  record  to
me  three  days  later.  At  the  time  of  this  sitting,  neither  he
nor  Mrs.  Home  knew  anything  whatever  of  any  of  the  un-
published scripts  of  the  other  automatists,  except  that  there
had  been  a  slight  coincidence  between  an  earlier  trance-
utterance  of  Mrs.  Home's  and  one  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts.

I  think  the  phrases :  "  Send  the  burden  of  my  words  to
others,"  and  "  Several  wait  to  hear,"  clearly  indicate  that  a
cross-correspondence  is  intended,  and  the  subject  of  this  can
be  no  other  than  the  opening  words,  "  Seven  times  seven  and
seventy-seven."  Besides  the  reiteration  of  the  number  Seven,
there  is  here  a  possible  reference  to  Dante's  vision  of  the
Procession  of  the  Car,  for  this  procession  consists  of  seven
sevens ;  namely,  the  7  golden  candlesticks,  the  24  Elders  and
4  Beasts,  the  7  nymphs  and  the  7  sacred  writers.  It  may
also  be  held  to  refer  to  the  fact  that  seven  persons  are  con-
cerned in  the  cross-correspondence,  each  of  them  giving  the
number  seven.


LX.]  Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Scri'pt.  243

As  with  some  of  the  other  factors  in  this  cross-correspond-
ence, the  phrase  itself  is  probably  of  Biblical  origin,  being,  I
take  it,  a  mis-recollection  of  St.  Matthew,  xviii.  21,  22.
("  How  oft  shall  my  brother  sin  against  me,  and  I  forgive
him  ?  till  seven  times  ?  Jesus  said  unto  him,  I  say  not  unto
thee,  Until  seven  times,  but.  Until  seventy  times  seven.")

(7)  Mr.  Piddington's  "  Posthumous  Letter."

It  was  not  until  November  18th,  1908,  that  I  heard  from
Mrs.  Verrall  that  she  had  found  a  cross-correspondence  of
Sevens,  with  various  Dante  allusions,  in  the  scripts  of  Mrs.
Piper,  Miss  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Frith.  I  then  concluded  that
the  Sevens  in  Mrs.  Holland's  and  Mrs.  Home's  scripts  quoted
above  belonged  to  the  same  cross-correspondence,  and  I  told  Mr.
Piddington  briefly  of  this  on  November  19th.  On  November
27th  he  questioned  me  further  about  it;  we  went  thoroughly
over  all  the  scripts  or  copies  of  scripts  in  my  possession,  and
I  told  him  all  the  details  of  the  case,  in  so  far  as  they  were
known  to  me  at  the  time.  He  then  told  me  that  the  subject
of  a  "posthumous  letter"  which  he  had  written  in  July,  1904,
and  had  himself  sealed  and  given  into  my  charge  as  Secretary,
was  variations  on  the  theme  of  Seven.

Afterwards  he  explained  to  me  that  the  reason  why  he
had  not  told  me  this  when  I  first  mentioned  the  cross-corre-
spondence was  that  he  thought  it  an  important  matter,  and
therefore  did  not  wish  to  act  in  a  hurry  about  it ;  he  was  not
sure  whether  the  coincidence  with  the  subject  of  his  letter
was  accidental  or  not ;  and  if  he  concluded  on  further  con-
sideration that  it  was  not  accidental,  he  was  not  sure  whether
to  tell  me  about  it,  or  to  say  nothing,  on  the  chance  of  fresh
developments  occurring  in  the  scripts.  Before  coming  to  see
me  the  second  time  he  had  made  up  his  mind  that  if,  on  going
fully  into  the  matter  of  the  scripts,  he  concluded  that  the
connection  between  them  and  his  letter  was  not  accidental,  he
would  then  tell  me  about  the  latter.

He  had  written  it  in  my  room  at  the  S.P.R.  offices  on
July  13th,  1904;  I  was  present  at  the  time,  but  no  one
else,  and  he  of  course  took  precautions  to  prevent  my  acci-
dentally seeing  what  he  was  writing. He  then  sealed  it  up


244


Alice  Johnson.


[part


himself  and  gave  it  into  my  charge  and  I  put  it  away  in  a
certain  locked  drawer  in  the  office  with  other  letters  of  the
same  kind,  where  it  had  been  kept  ever  since.  There  seems
therefore  no  possibility  that  any  one  but  Mr.  Piddington
could  have  known  anything  of  its  contents.  We  now
(November  27th,  1908)  examined  it  carefully  to  see  that  the
seals  were  intact  and  opened  it  together.^  The  letter  is  as
follows :

20  Hanover  Square,
London,  W.,  Uth  Jul//,  1904.

If  I  ever  am  a  spirit,  and  if  I  can  communicate,  I  shall  endeavour
to  remember  to  transmit  in  some  form  or  other  the  number
SEVEN.

As  it  seems  to  me  not  improbable  that  it  may  be  difficult  to
transmit  an  exact  word  or  idea,  it  may  be  that,  unable  to  transmit
the  simple  word  seven  in  writing  or  as  a  written  number,  7,  I
should  try  to  communicate  such  things  as :  "  The  seven  lamps  of
architecture,"  "The  seven  sleepers  of  Ephesus,"  "unto  seventy  times
seven,"  "  We  are  seven,"  and  so  forth.

The  reason  why  I  select  the  word  seven  is  because  seven  has
been  a  kind  of  tic  with  me  ever  since  my  early  boyhood.  I  would
walk  along  the  street  to  a  rhythm  formed  by  counting  1,  2,  3,  4,
5,  6,  7.  Though  never  superstitious,  I  also  have  already,"  in  a  play-
ful kind  of  way,  regarded  7  as  a,  or  my,  lucky  number.  Often,
playing  golf  at  Woking,  I  count  the  number  of  carriages  on  passing
trains,  and  if  a  train  passes  composed  of  7  cariiages  not  counting
tlie  engine,  I  regard  it  as  a  lucky  omen,  and  pretend  to  think
that  it  means  that  I  shall  win  my  match.

I  have  purposely  cultivated  this  tic,  of  which  I  have  never  spoken
to  anybody,  as  I  think  it  likely  in  the  event  of  survival  that  the
memory  of  it,  having  by  practice  been  frequentlj^  revived  in  my
lifetime,  may  survive  the  shock  of  death.

J.  G.  Piddington.

It  will  be  seen  that  while  the  main  theme  of  this  letter  is  the
same  as  one  theme  of  the  cross-correspondence,  there  are  certain
differences  of  detail. Neither  "  the  seven  lamps  of  architecture  "

'It  is  to  be  Tmder.stood  that  the  proofs  of  this  paper  have  been  submitted
to  Mr.  Piddington,  so  tliat  all  statements  relating  to  him  are  practically
first-hand.

-So  written  in  the  original. No  doubt  "always"  is  meant.


LX.]


Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.  245


nor  "  the  seven  sleepers  of  Ephesus "  are  to  be  found  in  any
of  the  scripts.  On  the  other  hand,  "  seventy  times  seven "  is
very  similar  to  Mrs.  Home's  "  Seven  times  seven  and  seventy-
seven  ; "  and  "  We  are  seven  "  occurs  both  in  Mrs.  Piper's  and
Miss  Verrall's  scripts.  But  there  is  nothing  about  the  seven
railway  carriages, — which  Mr.  Piddington  regards  as  the  most
characteristic  point  in  his  letter, — in  any  of  the  scripts,
while  the  Dante  allusions  which  are  conspicuous  in  three  of
the  scripts  (Mrs.  Verrall's,  Miss  Verrall's  and  Mrs.  Frith's)
and  possibly  to  be  found  in  the  three  others  (Mrs.  Piper's,
Mrs.  Holland's  and  Mrs.  Home's)  are  entirely  absent  from  the
letter.  Nevertheless  I  think  the  coincidence  too  marked  and
detailed  to  be  put  down  to  chance.

The  probability  that  it  did  not  occur  by  chance  is  considerably
strengthened  by  a  comparison  with  Mrs.  Holland's  dream  of  July
14th-15th,  1908,  given  above,  p.  238,  in  which  a  number  is
mentioned  as  the  subject  of  a  posthumous  communication.  It  is
true  that  the  number  given  in  the  dream  was  6,  whereas  Mr.
Piddington's  number  is  7,  but  that  any  number  at  all  should
be  chosen  for  such  a  purpose  seems  to  me  a  very  unlikely
thing  to  guess.

The  coincidence  is  further  strengthened'  by  the  use  of  the
uncommon  word  iic,  in  the  sense  of  mentcd  hcdjit,  in  Mr.
Piddington's  letter,  whereas  Mrs.  Piper  in  the  waking-stage  of
the  sitting  of  May  8th,  1908  (see  above,  p.  223),  uses  the
words  Hcdnt  and  Tick  in  close  connection  with  "  We  are  Seven."
I  have  already  explained  the  immediate  origin  of  these  words
in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance :  viz.  that  "  Habit "  was  part  of  an
attempt  to  translate  the  Latin  verses  quoted  to  her  by  Mr.
Dorr ;  while  "  Tick "  was  suggested  by  a  certain  poem  of
Longfellow's,  the  thought  of  which  seemed  to  have  come
spontaneously  into  her  mind.  But  I  believe  that  there  was
also  a  deliberate  intention  to  produce  through  these  words  a
connection  with  Mr.  Piddington's  letter.

In  any  case  it  appears  that  Mr.  Piddington  completes  the
Seven  who,  according  to  Mrs.  Holland's  script,  should  be  in
accord.


246


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Earlier  Eeferences  to  the  same  Topic.

In  considering  this  section,  it  is  important  for  the  reader  to
bear  in  mind  the  dates  at  which  the  references  in  the  scripts
were  recognised,  as  well  as  the  dates  when  they  were  written.
I  quote  them  in  the  latter  order.

In  January,  1910,  when  Mrs.  Verrall  was  reading  the  first
proofs  of  this  paper,  it  struck  her  that  the  date  of  Mr.
Piddington's  letter  (July  13,  1904),  was  one  on  which  she
had  produced  a  scri^^t  of  some  interest, — she  could  not  remember
on  what  subject.  She  looked  up  this  script  and  found  that
it  was  as  follows :

July  13,  1904. 11.15  a.m.
[After  some  nonsense  Latin  and  Greek  words  :]
But  that  is  not  right — it  is  something  contemporary  that  you
are  to  record — note  the  hour — in  London  half  the  message  has  come.

I  have  long  told  you  of  the  contents  of  the  envelope,  Myers'
sealed  envelope  left  with  Lodge  [Here  follows  a  statement  as  to  the
contents  of  this  envelope,  quoted  in  full  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  report  on
her  script,  Proceedings,  Vol.  XX.  pp.  424-5  ;  also  a  similar  statement
about  a  sealed  envelope  left  by  Professor  Sidgwick.  The  script
continues  :]

I  don't  know  what  you  want  more — why  can't  you  act  on  this  ?
You  ask  more  and  more  tests  and  it  is  hard  to  see  why.

Helen  could  probably  give  the  contents  of  the  envelope  too  if
you  want  confirmation.  Tell  her  to  write  down  a  reference  and
see  what  she  puts.  We  will  try  to  give  it  her  to-day.  Some  one
will  speak  of  it  to  her — will  that  do  for  you,  o  skeptics  !  Surely
Piddington  will  see  that  this  is  enough  and  should  be  acted  upon.

F.  W.  H.  M.

The  whole  episode  of  the  references  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script
to  Mr.  Myers's  sealed  envelope  is  given  fully  in  her  report
{o'p.  cit.  pp.  299-301).  Several  references  to  the  subject  had
occurred  in  February  and  March,  1903,  also  one  in  April
and  one  in  August  of  the  same  year.  After  August  18,  1903,
the  subject  was  not  mentioned  again  till  it  recurred  in  the
script  of  July  13,  1904,  just  quoted.  When  once  resumed,
it  was  referred  to  several  times  again.


LX.]  Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Rolland's  Scri'pt  247


Mi'S.  Verrall  naturally  saw  no  other  significance  in  this
script  beyond  its  description  of  the  sealed  envelope, — with
which  her  mind  had  been  much  occupied,- — and  following  out
its  instruction,  she  asked  her  daughter  ^  next  day  to  "  write
down  a  reference,"  without,  of  course,  telling  her  anything
about  her  own  script.  On  the  following  day,  July  15th,  1904,
Mrs.  Verrall  being  out  of  the  house  at  the  time,  Miss  Verrall
wrote  automatically  as  follows  r

Mother  has  made  a  mistake  the  letter  is  in  the  second  drawer
but  she  wiU  not  find  it  what  she  expected
Driving  round  the  pond

{In  Latin  :  Doubtless  among  the  dead  you  will  see  all  the  future)
that  is  wrong  {In  Latin:  you  will  perceive)^

{In  Latin  :  There  will  not  be  among  the  living  any  mind  but  the
empty  storm  of  it.
Aen  VI  383
1  The  whole  is  lacking)
In  the  Maderana  thai  an  accident
Enough  F.  W.  H.  Myers

The  first  paragraph  of  Mrs.  A^'errall's  script  applies  appropri-
ately to  what  Mr.  Piddington  was  doing  at  the  time ;  her
script  was  produced  at  11.15  a.m.  and  his  letter  was  written
during  the  middle  part  of  the  same  day,^  the  exact  hour  not
having  been  recorded.  It  is  significant  that  the  script  says :
"  In  London  half  the  message  has  come,"  for  Mr.  Piddington's
letter  only  contains  one  main  topic  (Seven)  of  the  cross-corre-
spondence, the  other  main  topic  (Dante)  being  absent  from  it.
But  Mrs.  Verrall,  as  I  have  said,  attached  importance  only  to
the  statement  about  the  sealed  envelope,  and  ignored  the  first

^  "  Helen "  (Miss  Verrall)  had  only  been  mentioned  in  the  script  15  times
previously  to  this  occasion,  and  was  not  then  in  the  habit  of  writing  auto-
matically, though  she  had  done  it  a  few  times,  beginning  in  the  spring  of
1903.

-  This  script  was  among  those  sent  at  the  time,  as  stated  above,  p.  202,  to
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  on  the  chance  that  it  might  turn  out  to  be  of  evidential  value.

Scilicet  in  functis  videbis  omne  f uturum  (that  is  wrong)  spectabis.

Non  erit  in  vivis  auimi  nisi  vana  procella  Aen  VI  383. deficit  omne.
find  from  my  diary  that  he  was  at  the  S.P.R.  rooms  during  the  late
part  of  the  morning  and  early  part  of  the  afternoon,  and  he  believes  that  he
wrote  the  letter  before  lunch.


248  •  Alice  Johvson.  [part

paragraph  of  her  script,  which  is  separated  by  a  space  from
the  rest,  as  if  to  indicate  that  it  referred  to  a  different  subject.

The  first  sentence  of  Miss  Verrall's  script  reads  like  a  con-
fused attempt  to  correct  Mrs.  Verrall's  misapprehension  :  "  Mother
has  made  a  mistake ;  the  letter  is  in  the  second  drawer,  but
she  will  not  find  it  what  she  expected."  This  may  perhaps  be
taken  to  refer  to  Mr.  Piddington's  letter  (which  was  actually  in
the  top  right-hand  drawer  of  a  cabinet  consisting  of  two  columns
of  drawers  with  a  set  of  pigeon-holes  on  the  top) ;  or  it  may
refer  to  the  fact  that  Mrs.  Verrall's  script,  as  was  afterwards
found,  had  not  stated  correctly  the  contents  of  Mr.  Myers's
sealed  envelope.

The  line  in  the  Acneid  referred  to  by  Miss  Verrall  is,  trans-
lated literally,

Grief  from  his  sad  heart ;  he  is  pleased  at  the  land  called  by  his
iiame.i

The  line  is  the  last  of  two  describing  the  pleasure  of  Palinurus
when  the  Sibyl  tells  him  that  a  tomb  shall  be  erected  to  him
in  Italy  and  that  the  place  shall  bear  his  name  for  ever.  The
name  "  Palinurus "  means  "  backward  (or,  returning)  breeze,"
and  there  seems  to  be  some  connection  between  this  name
and  the  word  procella  (storm-wind)  in  the  script.  The  whole
intention  of  the  Latin  phrases  seems  to  be  to  mark  an  opposi-
tion between  the  potency  of  the  dead  and  of  the  living :
"Among  the  dead  you  will  see  all  the  future;"  "There  will
be  no  mind  (breath)  among  the  living  but  an  empty  storm-
wind."  This  may  be  compared  with  Miss  Verrall's  script  of
August  6th,  1907,  quoted  immediately  below:  "Doubtless  he
himself  will  seem  to  have  transferred  this."  If  "  he  himself "
be  interpreted  as  the  living  experimenter,  Mr.  Piddiugton,  the
script  in  both  cases  would  seem  to  claim  that  the  success  of
the  experiment  would  be  due  not  to  his  agency,  but  to  the
influence  of  some  other  mind  planning  the  whole  scheme.

In  the  absence  of  any  context,  the  exact  meaning  of  the
phrase  "  deficit  ovine  "  (translated  above,  "  The  whole  is  lacking  ")
must  be  doubtful,  but  it  may  perhaps  be  regarded  as  equiva-
lent to  Mrs.  Verrall's  more  definite  statement,  "  In  London
half  the  message  has  come,"  which  I  take  to  refer  to  the  fact

1  Corde  dolor  tristi  ;  gaudet  cognomine  terra.


LX.]


Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


249


that  only  half  the  cross-correspondence  was  given  in  Mr.
Piddington's  letter.

I  must  repeat  that  the  interpretation  of  these  two  scripts
from  beginning  to  end  was  only  made  during  January,  1910,
and  that  none  of  the  persons  concerned  had  before  that  date
taken  into  consideration  anything  in  the  scripts,  except  the
obvious  reference  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  to  the  sealed  envelopes  of
Mr.  Myers  and  Professor  Sidgwick.  In  consequence  of  this
reference,  Mrs.  Verrall  invited  Mr.  Piddington  to  come  and  see
her,  so  that  she  might  consult  with  him  as  to  the  desirability
of  asking  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  to  open  Mr.  Myers's  envelope,  as
urged  by  the  script.  The  consultation  took  place  on  July  17,
1904,  but  the  whole  of  the  scripts  was  probably  not  shown
to  Mr.  Piddington ;  he  is,  at  all  events,  now  certain  that,
whatever  he  saw,  he  never  associated  anything  in  them  with
his  own  letter.

During  October,  1909,  Mr.  Piddington  was  studying  and
annotating  Miss  Verrall's  earlier  scripts  and  observed  a
reference  to  the  rainbow  and  the  number  7,  followed  by  a
Latin  sentence  which  clearly  indicated  that  a  cross-correspon-
dence was  being  attempted. The  script  is  as  follows  :

3£iss  VerraWs  Script,  Aug.  6th,  1907.

A  rainbow  in  the  sky

fit  emblem  of  our  thought
the  sevenfold  radiance  from  a  single  light

many  in  one  and  one  in  many

{In  Latin :  Doubtless  he  himself  will  seem  to  have  transferred  this
to  his  own  rule.  Wherefore  whatever  is  set  forth  must  be  co-
ordinated, lest,  being  scattered,  it  should  escape  notice.  What  one
thing,  that  all  people— So  Fortune  commands.)  ^

The  rainbow  and  the  sevenfold  radiance,  etc.,  may  possibly
involve some  of  the Dante allusions referred to  above,  and

1  Scilicet  ipse  videbitur  lioc  transtulisse  ad  saam  normam  quare  coordinandum
est  quodcuiique  expoiiatur  iie  diffusum  praetermittatiir
quod  unum  illud  omnes
Sic  Fortuna  jubet.

The  sentence  '"quod  unum  illud  omnes"'  requires  a  context  to  complete  it.


250


Alice  Johnson.


[part


there  are  several  other  phrases  in  scripts  of  the  same  month
which,  when  all  put  together,  suggest  a  thread  of  Dantesque
allusions  runnin"  throu2;h  the  whole.

But  I  quote  this  one  script  because  I  am  inclined  to  think
with  Mr.  Piddington  that  the  "  ipse "  (himself)  who  "  will
seem  to  have "  effected  the  cross-correspondence  is  Mr.  Pid-
dington himself,  and  that  the  reference  here  is  to  his  posthumous
letter,  which  was  not  opened  until  November,  1908.

If  this  interpretation  is  correct,  further  interest  attaches  to
the  following  script  by  Mrs.  Verrall,  though  it  is  important
to  note  that  daring  the  earlier  part  of  the  same  day  on
which  it  was  written,  Mrs.  Verrall  had  seen  all  the  scripts
produced  by  Miss  Verrall  in  August,  1907  (it  being  their
custom  to  compare  notes  of  their  scripts  at  stated  intervals).

3frs.  VerralVs  Script,  Aug.  28,  1907.

(In  Latin:  The  meaning  is  obvious;  you  have  touched  the  symbol)^
Tt'st  the  weakest  link  [drawing  of  three  links  of  a  chain]  the
chain  still  holds.  Not  ours  to  teach.  You  learn  alone  Place  the
question  in  the  midst  and  let  each  have  his  test  The  same  should
be  said  to  each — Try  this  new  experiment — Say  the  same  sentence  to
each  of  them  and  see  what  completion  each  gives  to  it.  Let  Pidding-
ton choose  a  sentence  that  they  do  not  know  and  send  part  to
each Then  see  whether  they  can  complete

Or  he  might  give  different  parts  of  the  same  sentence  to  each
of  them  if  the  sentence  is  long  enough — ■

After  Mr.  Piddington  and  1  had  opened  his  sealed  envelope
on  November  27th,  1908,  I  locked  it  up  again  in  my  office.
We  told  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  Mr.  Gerald  Balfour  in  strict
confidence  of  the  discovery,  but  it  was  mentioned  to  no  one
else  until  I  read  a  paper  at  a  Private  Meeting  of  the  Society
on  March  30th,  1909,  which  included  a  brief  summary  of
this  cross-correspondence.

During  this  interval  Mr.  Piddington  paid  a  visit  to  Mrs.
Verrall  at  Cambridge  from  January  15th-19th,  1909,  and
while  there  heard  from  her  of  certain  interesting  incidents  in
her  script,  in  no  way  connected  with  the  present  case,  but
strongly  suggestive  of  spiritistic  agency. He  then,  as  stated  by

^  Significatio  patet — symboluni  tetigisti


LX.]


Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


251


himself  in  a  note  sent  to  me  later,  '•  told  Mrs.  V.  not  to  be
too  spiritualistic,  as  a  recent  ease  told  rather  against  spirits.
He  was  thinking  of  the  '  We  are  Seven  '  case ;  but  deliberately-
refrained  from  oiving  any  hint  of  what  was  in  his  mind."

Shortly  afterwards,  namely  on  January  27,  1909,  Mrs.
Verrall  produced  the  following  script :

Fortunatus no  that  is  not  the  word —
Fortuna's  wheel  revolving

[Here  follow  further  remarks  on  Fortune's  wheel.]
Nothing  is  swifter  than  Thought,  nothing  more  sure — swifter  than
arrow  or  than  bullet,  thought  flies  from  mind  to  mind,  instantaneous
It  is  a  uow  and  a  now,  at  once,  no  pause,  no  then
Don't  you  understand  ?

And  ask  what  has  been  the  success  of  Piddington's  last  experiment  ?
Has  he  found  the  bits  of  his  famous  sentence  scattered  among  you
all  ?  and  does  he  think  that  is  accident,  or  started  by  one  of  you  1
Tell  him  to  look  carefully  and  he  will  see  a  great  difference  between
the  scripts  in  this  exp*-  and  in  the  others.  That  ought  to  help  the
theory. One  language  only  has  been  used  this  time.

But  even  if  the  source  is  human,  who  carries  the  thoughts  to  the
receivers  1 Ask  him  that.

F.  W.  H.  M.

This  script  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  seems  undoubtedly  to  refer  to
her  earlier  one  of  Aug.  28,  1907  ;  and  the  words  "Fortunatus,"
"  Fortuna,"  "  Fortune,"  seem  to  connect  it  with  the  "  Fortuna "
of  Miss  Verrall's  script  of  Aug.  6,  1907,  which  would  tend
to  confirm  Mr.  Piddington's  view  that  the  "  ipse "  of  that
script  is  himself,  though  this  interpretation  had  certainly  not
occurred  to  Mrs.  or  Miss  Verrall.

Further,  this  last  script  applies  very  appropriately  to  the  con-
nection between  Mr.  Piddington's  posthumous  letter,  (of  which
Mrs.  Verrall,  as  I  have  said,  knew  nothing),  and  the  cross-corre-
spondence of  Sevens  (of  which  she  did  know,  but  had  absolutely
no  ground  for  associating  it  with  Mr.  Piddington),  even  to  the
detail  that  "  one  language  only  has  been  used  this  time."

To  assist  the  reader  in  following  my  discussion  of  this  case,

I  here  give  a  chronological  resumS  of  it.  The  sentences  printed

in  italics  in  square  brackets  relate  to  the  events  bearing  on
the  scripts.


252


Alice  JoJmson.


[part


O

CO
5!
O

C»


P  ^

m  C

5  SI
m  "
O
Pi


03


O

o


o

>

o

O

-(-:>

Ot

see

cu

o

05

CD

CO


.1>


CO


c3  ^  *^  ^

^ cS  ■►J CP CD  £


s5  O


O  oi

O


_  cu

o


O  <D


c5


ft

o

O


2
C=3
>

CZ2


O


2  ^


o


en

CD

CD

CO

CD

CO

O

2

S

CO

O

CM

c

CD
>


03  «


CS


o
o

03


S  o

.2  C5


s:  Si,


CD
g
O


SB

cm


o


o

El

O


CD

CZ2

05

cS
<I>


o


Ph


c2


CD


CD
1>


05


o

CJ5


O


00


oo
O
Ci


05


O  £~

(M  <^"l


00


a,
<1


Lx.]  Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Scri2:)t.


253


■  •

i  £

to  SX3
o  ^

S  2

3-5


2  s


o

CO  :

(O  ■ — i
C

s  o
o)

be
C

o


2~  S


cc  (O


I «J  D  o

c  ^  -5

«J  C  «

O O  X


s

CO
CO


5  '


CD


I  03


o  S  c3
1-5


>  ?
03  o
CO  ^


CO

CU


CD


o

iD


<3


_Q  ID
>

CD  C


-

03  C5  >
i3  .02


>  CO
03

02  _C3

G3  *-3

^  'CO

c^

03  5


CO  'tJ


CO

3

S  O


S2


-2


o

CD


CD
>

13
'Jj


CO

s

£


53

I


03

>

03

03

^>

03

CO

03

>

03

lies

CO

o

03

«3

A9

03

03
>

D

CO


03


00

c

C35


3  '^^

_3

03

CS

03

—  03

Oil

03

03

)-H

CO

CO

CO

CO

CO

OS

o

1 — 1

1 — '

-in"

l-H

I— (

I— (

1— (  CM

CM

CM  (M

■Jj

1-5


>
o


254


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Bearing  of  the  Case  on  the  Theory
OF  Cross-Correspondences.

I  have  treated  this  case  at  length,  because  it  has,  I  think,
a  very  important  and  instructive  bearing  on  the  theory  of
cross-correspondences,  since  it  inchides  what  I  regard  as  all  the
elements  of  a  typical  cross-correspondence.

(1)  It  exhibits  clearly  the  part  played  by  the  automatists'
normal  knowledge ;  for  in  many  instances  we  can  trace  the
immediate  normal  source  of  the  individual  utterances :

(a)  Mrs.  Piper  derives  "  Habit "  and  "  Angel  band "  from

the  Latin  verses  given  her  by  Mr.  Dorr ;  and  "  We
are  Seven  "  and  "  Tick,  tick,  tick  ! "  from  two  poems
which  no  doubt  were  familiar  to  her.

(b)  Mrs.  Verrall  writes  of  the  seven  hills  of  Rome  on

the  day  before  the  date  of  the  founding  of  Rome ;
and  immediately  after  reading  the  last  part  of  the
Purgatorio  produces  a  poem  about  the  exclusion  of
Virgil  from  Paradise.  Into  the  third  verse  of  this
poem  is  introduced  a  familiar  text  from  Isaiah.

(c)  Miss  Verrall's most  important  script  seems  to  draw

on  the  Bible  for  Jacob's  ladder,  the  seven-branched
candlestick  and  the  seven  churches ;  on  Plato  for
the  spinning  wheel ;  on  Bentham's  British  Flora  for
the  drawing  of  the  seven  leaflets,  and  on  Wordsworth's
poem  for  "  We  are  Seven."

(d)  Mrs.  Frith's script was probably  influenced by  the

question  put  to  her  by  Mrs.  Verrall,  and  it  introduces
a  Biblical  reference  in  "  Pisgah  is  scaled."

(e)  Mrs.  Holland's  "  Grreen  Eay "  is  probably  due  to  her

script  having  been  written  at  sea.
(/)  Mrs. Home uses  a  variant  of  the  Biblical  phrase
"  Unto  seventy  times  seven."

(2)  Though  we  may  account  in  this  way  for  many  of  the
individual  utterances,  take^i  hy  themselves,  we  still  have  to
account  for  the  coincidences  between  them ;  and  the  chrono-
logical summary  suggests  that  telepathy,  especially  from  Mrs.
Verrall,  must  have  played  a  part  in  this  :


LX.]  Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.  255


(«)  Three  days  after  Mrs.  Verrall  has  finished  reading
the  Purgatorio,  Miss  Verrall's  script  alludes  to  one
of  its  final  cantos.

(6)  The  day  after  Mrs.  Verrall  has  written  to  Mr.
Piddington  of  these  Dante  allusions  in  Miss  Verrall's
script,  some  of  them  are  repeated  in  Mrs.  Frith's
script.

(c)  Within  three  or  four  days  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  having
seen  Mrs.  Frith's  script,  both  Mrs.  Holland  and
Mrs.  Home  write  about  Seven,  adding  some  possible
Dante  allusions.

Another  possible  telepathic  agent  in  the  case  is,  of  course,
Mr.  Piddington.  Against  the  supposition  of  his  agency  we
have  the  fact  that  no  time  coincidence  was  involved,  except
in  the  case  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  first  script ;  for  the  bulk  of  the
scripts  were  not  produced  until  some  years  later,  and  he  was
not,  as  far  as  he  is  aware,  specially  thinking  of  his  letter
at  any  time  during  the  period  covered  by  them.^  Yet  the
degree  of  correspondence  between  his  letter  and  the  scripts  is,
I  think,  too  remarkable  and  detailed  to  be  put  down  to  chance.

Accordingly,  Mr.  Piddington's  letter  might  be  held  to  account
for  the  Sevens  in  the  scripts,  while  Mrs.  Verrall's  pre-occupation
with  Dante,  and  her  own  scripts  (in  whicli  the  element  of
seven  is  very  inconspicuous)  might  be  held  to  account  for  the
Dante  allusions.

Are  we  to  suppose,  then,  that  the  unconscious  and  involun-
tary telepathic  efforts  of  Mrs.  Verrall  and  of  Mr.  Piddington,
acting  unconsciously,  involuntarily,  and  telepathically  in  combina-
tion with  each  other,  produced  the  whole  cross-correspondence  ?

A  careful  reader  will  see  that  even  this  hypothesis  does
not  cover  the  whole  ground,  for  there  are  details  in  the  other
scripts  not  to  be  found  either  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  or  in  Mr.
Piddington's ;  e.g.  Miss  Verrall's  "  spinning  top,"  Mrs.  Frith's
"Pisgah,"  and  Mrs.  Holland's  "Green  Pay,"  all  of  which
contribute  to  the  cross-correspondence.  There  are,  indeed,  two
or  three  items  which  some  of  the  automatists  may  be
supposed to have borrowed telepathically from one  another.

^He  writes  to  me:  "Few  days  of  my  life  passed  without  my  thinking  of
the  subject  of  my  'posthumous  letter';  but  I  certainly  was  not  thinking  of  it
more  than  usual  at  this  time."


256


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Thus,  both  Mrs.  Piper  and  Miss  Verrall  have  "  We  are  Seven,"
and  Miss  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Frith  have  the  phrase  "  mystic
seven."  But  looking  at  the  scripts  as  a  whole,  we  find  an
extraordinary  variety  in  the  methods  chosen  to  aj^proach  the
same  idea.

We  find,  moreover — in  Miss  Verrall's  script  especially — an
inextricable  interweaving  of  the  two  topics,  Seven  and  Dante ;
for  all  her  Dante  allusions,  if  analysed,  are  found  to  be  con-
nected, implicitly  or  explicitly,  with  Seven.  The  implicit
connections  have  been  pointed  out  above ;  viz.  that  "  Jacob's
ladder "  is  in  the  Seventh  Heaven  ;  and  the  "  spinning  top,"
or  wheel,  is  not  only  connected  with  the  rainbow  (in  Plato  as
well  as  in  Dante),  but  it  is  the  seventh  circle  of  this  wheel
which  is  specially  mentioned  by  Dante  in  connection  with  the
rainbow.

Can  this  interweaving  of  the  topics  be  put  down  to  the
action  of  two  separate  and  independent  agents,  Mr.  Piddington
and  Mrs.  Verrall,  or  must  we  go  further  afield  and  postulate :

(3)  Some  other  intelligence,  which,  surveying  and  selecting
from  these  diverse  elements, — namely,  the  ideas  normally
arising  in  the  minds  of  the  automatists  and  of  Mr.  Piddington,
and  the  play  of  telepathy  between  them, — diverted  them  all
to  its  own  purposes  and  so  shaped  the  event  ?

I  have  pointed  out  that  the  automatists  drew  on  a  number
of  different  sources :  on  the  Tavern  Club  Latin  verses,  on  a
poem  of  Wordsworth's,  and  on  one  of  Longfellow's,  on  Dante,
on  Plato,  on  various  passages  in  the  Bible.  What  was  it
that  from  each  and  all  of  these  miscellaneous  sources  extracted
the  strands  needed  for  the  interweaving  of  Seven  and  Dante  ?
The  task  would  not,  of  course,  be  very  difficult  for  any  one  who
had  such  a  plan  in  mind, — assuming  that  he  was  able  to
infiuence  the  automatists  to  carry  it  out.  I  maintain  only
that  there  is  strong  evidence  of  the  existence  of  such  a  plan,
and  I  think  it  looks  like  the  plan  of  one  mind,  and  not  of
two  or  more.

As  to  Mr.  Piddington's  letter,  Mrs.  Verrall's  contemporary
phrase,  "  In  London  half  the  message  has  come,"  can  hardly
be  explained  by  telepathy  from  Mr.  Piddington,  since  the
phrase  by  no  means  represents  his  own  conception  of  his
action,  for  he  was  planning  a  message  which  should  come  in


LX.]


Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


257


a  single  and  complete  form  after  his  death.  On  the  other
hand  the  phrase  fits  in  exactly  with  the  hypothesis  that  a
cross-correspondence  combined  out  of  the  ideas  of  Seven  and
r)ante  was  being  planned  by  another  intelligence,  which  took
advantage  of  Mr.  Piddington's  interest  in  the  number  Seven
to  enlist  his  telepathic  co-operation.

I  am  inclined  to  surmise  also  that  the  absence  of  Mr.
Piddington's  name  from  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  may  have  been
due  to  an  intentional  v^/ithholding  on  the  part  of  the  hypo-
thetical intelligence ;  for  if  it  had  appeared,  she  would  probably
have  made  enquiries  which  would  have  led  to  the  premature
disclosure  of  his  letter,  before  the  cross-correspondence  was
complete.

In  Mrs.  Piper's  case,  special  ingenuity  seems  to  have  been
shown  in  turning  to  account  the  unpromising  material  of  the
Latin  verses,  which  is  used  for  both  the  main  topics  of
the  cross-correspondence.  On  May  8  th  a  translation  of  the
verses  had  been  given  in  writing.  At  the  beginning  of  the
waking-stage  of  the  same  sitting  a  fresh  attempt  is  apparently
made  to  translate  them,  but  of  this  the  only  word  that
is  audible  is  "  Habit,"  followed  soon  after  by  "  Angel  band."
Now  it  is  remarkable  that  "  habit "  is  a  mistranslation  of  the
word  propositum,  the  proper  meaning  of  which  is  "  intention,"
and  that  earlier  in  the  sitting  the  same  mistranslation  was
accompanied  by  another  one, — mori  (to  die)  being  rendered  as
"according  to  custom"  (see  above,  p.  223), — as  if  the  trance-
personality  were  harping  on  the  idea  of  habit  or  custom.
Thus  out  of  these  irrelevant  verses  are  selected  the  very
fragments  that  correspond  (as  I  have  explained)  with  Mr.
Piddington's  letter  and  with  parts  of  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall's
scripts,  the  first  fragment  being  emphasised  by  the  fact  of  the
mistranslations,  just  as  we  have  found  in  previous  cross-
correspondences  that  misquotations  are  sometimes  especially
significant.

Again,  note  that  Mrs.  Piper's  reference  to  Longfellow's  poem  :
"  I  said  Clock  !  Tick,  tick,  tick  !  stairs,"  follows  immediately  after
"  Habit "  (except  that  "  We  are  seven  "  is  interpolated, — as  I
fancy,  to  clinch  the  correspondence),  whereas  "  Habit "  combined
with  "  Tick "  gives  the  connection  with  Mr.  Piddington's
letter,  in  which  the  word  tic  is  used  in  the  sense  of  habit.

R


258


Alice  Johnson.


[part


And  note  further  that  the  insertion  in  that  reference  of  the
word  "  Tick,"  vjJiich  is  contained  in  the  ijoevi  imj^licitly  and
not  explicitly,  is  just  what  is  wanted  at  this  point  for  the
connection.

Discussion  of  some  Criticisms  of  the  Theory.

Since  the  theory  of  cross-correspondences  was  first  put
forward  in  a  tentative  manner  in  my  first  report  on  Mrs.
Holland's  script,  followed  by  the  far  more  complicated  and
elaborate  instances  of  the  same  type  given  in  Mr.  Piddington's
"  Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms,"  two  important  criticisms
of  the  theory  have  appeared, — Professor  Pigou's  in  the  Proceedings,
Vol.  XXIII.  p.  286,  and  Mr.  Podmore's  in  the  Contemporary
Review  of  September,  1909.  In  my  original  report  I  pointed
out  that  if  the  plan  of  cross-correspondences  did  not  originate
with  some  intelligence  external  to  the  automatists — and  the
evidence  that  it  did  so  was,  I  observed,  very  far  from  being
complete — the  most  probable  alternative  hypothesis  was  that
it  originated  in  and  was  carried  out  by  Mrs.  Verrall's  subliminal
consciousness.  It  is,  naturally,  this  alternative  hypothesis  which
is  maintained  by  both  our  critics.

Professor  Pigou  argues  that  the  element  of  complementari-
ness  in  a  cross-correspondence,  which  I  adduced  as  evidence
of  the  intention  of  a  mind  other  than  those  of  the  auto-
matists, may  on  the  other  hand  be  purely  accidental  and
therefore  evidence  of  nothing  at  all.  He  instances  the  case
where  Dr.  Verrall  attempted  to  transmit  a  phrase  telepathically
to  Mrs.  A^errall,  whose  script  reproduced  it,  but  only  in  a
fragmentary  and  incomplete  form ;  and  says  that, — since  the
fragmentary  character  in  this  case  was  clearly  not  intended
by  the  agent,  but  was  only  the  result  of  the  imperfect
reception  of  the  idea  by  the  percipient, — the  mere  fact  that
different  fragments  of  the  same  idea  occur  in  the  scripts  of
two  different  automatists  cannot  be  held  to  indicate  any  purpose
in  the  fragmentariness.  If  the  subliminal  self  of  Mrs.  Verrall,
say,  were  trying  to  impress  some  idea  upon  her  own  script
and  on  that  of  some  other  automatist,  the  correspondence
achieved  would  often  not  be  exact :  "  The  two  scripts  would
indeed  be  orientated  about  the  same  idea ;  but  they  would  be


LX.]  Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


259


very  far  from  identical.  If  we  compare  the  word  aimed  at
to  the  bull  of  a  target,  it  is  in  a  high  degree  probable  that
attempts  to  hit  the  bull  would  result  in  shots  scattered  widely
round  it.  In  other  words,  mildly  complementary  corre-
spondences are  likely  to  result  from  attempts  at  simple
correspondences"  {Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIIT.  p.  295).

The  simile  is,  I  think,  a  very  apt  one ;  it  is  one  that  I
have  often  thought  of  applying  in  psychical  research,  and  I
propose  to  analyse  it  a  little  further.

Supposing — -to  make  the  analogy  with  our  cases  somewhat
closer — we  do  not  see  any  one  shooting  at  a  target,  but  find
a  target  marked  with  a  large  number  of  shots,  which  cluster
most  thickly  in  a  certain  region,  we  infer  that  an  attempt
was  being  made  to  hit  some  point  within  that  region.  It
matters  not  whether  the  attempt  was  made  by  one  or  by
several  persons ;  in  either  case  the  aim  or  design  was  one  and
the  same.

So,  if  Mrs.  Verrall's  subliminal  self  were  aiming  at  the
expression  of  a  single  word  or  simple  idea  through  herself
and  another  automatist,  a  similar  effect  might  be  produced,  and
we  should  infer  what  the  word  or  idea  was  by  observing  the
approximations  to  it,  just  as  we  discover  what  spot  on  the  target
was  aimed  at  by  observing  where  the  shots  cluster.

Now  Dr.  Verrall's  experiment  was  a  comparatively  simple
one,  and  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  suggests  nothing  more  than  a
series  of  straightforward,  though  somewhat  unskilful,  aims  at
his  central  idea — the  bull's-eye  of  his  target.

The  complex  correspondences,  however,  are  by  no  means
suggestive  of  any  such  simple  design  as  this.

The  scripts  containing  them  present  the  appearance  not  of
a  target  with  a  central  bull's-eye,  but  rather,  as  Mr.  Piddington
has  remarked,  of  a  mosaic, — broken  and  fragmentary  indeed,  but
showing  unmistakable  traces  of  a  pattern,  and  that  pattern
filled  in  by  several  different  hands,  whose  efforts  overlap,  but
each  of  whom  contributes  something  different  from  that  con-
tributed by  any  of  the  others.  Here  the  pattern  must  be
regarded  as  the  work  of  one  designer ;  for  it  can  hardly  be
supposed  to  result  from  the  accidental  concurrence  of  several
designs.

I  refer  especially  to  such  cases  as  Mr.  Piddington's  "  Light


260


Alice  Johnson.


[part


in  West"  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.  pp.  241-280)  and  the
"  Sevens  and  Dante  "  case  just  described.

Cases  of  the  target  type,  where  two  or  more  automatists  are
concerned,  may  no  doubt  be  attributed  to  the  design  or  agency
of  one  of  the  automatists,  for  there  exists  ex  loypothcsi  evidence
in  each  script  that  the  word  or  idea  to  be  expressed  is  present
in  some  part  of  the  writer's  consciousness.

Cases  of  the  mosaic  type  cannot  be  so  easily  disposed  of ;
for  in  them  we  can  find  evidence  of  only  ijart  of  the  design
in  the  mind  of  any  one  of  the  automatists.  There  is  con-
sequently no  evidence — still  less  is  there  any  proof — that  any
one  of  them  designed  the  whole :  so  that,  if  we  are  right
in  holding,  as  just  stated,  that  the  whole  must  be  the  work
of  one  designer,  there  is  no  evidence — still  less  is  there  any
proof — that  that  designer  is  one  of  the  automatists.  This
appears  to  me  the  fundamental  distinction  between  the  two
types  of  cross-correspondence.

But  arguments  from  analogy  may  easily  be  pressed  too  far,
and — if  the  analogy  be  admitted — the  question  at  once  arises
how  far  our  actual  cases  of  cross-correspondence  conform  to
these  two  ideal  types.

As  a  matter  of  fact,  we  find  a  number  of  gradations  between
them.

Of  the  cases  quoted  in  this  paper,  two,  viz.  (o)  "  yellow,"
Aug.  6,  1906,  p.  207,  and  (&)  "The  Blue  Flower,"  Oct.  24,
1906,  p.  215,  are  of  the  simple  target  type.

Two  others,  («)  "The  Janiculum,"  June  24,  1906,  p.  204,
and  (5)  "Savonarola,"  Oct.  8,  1906,  p.  211,  are  of  the  mosaic
type,  in  that  each  script  contributes  something  not  found  in
any  of  the  others ;  but  the  whole  design,  especially  in  the
second  case,  is  so  simple  that  it  may  be  supposed  to  be  con-
tained as  a  whole  (partly  expressed  and  partly  implied)  in
one  script  and  transferred  thence  telepathically  to  the  others.
Nevertheless,  it  is  noteworthy  that  the  interpretation  of  Miss
Verrall's  script  as  referring  to  a  scene  in  Roinola  was  only
made  after  the  independent  occurrence  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script
two  days  later  and  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  four  days  later  of
passages  which  can  be  interpreted  as  referring  to  other  parts
of  the  same  scene.  That  is,  taking  any  one  of  the  scripts
alone,  we  should  be  uncertain  what  it  referred  to,  and  con-


LX.]


Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.


261


sequently  we  cannot  assert  positively  that  the  whole  idea  was
in  the  mind  of  any  one  of  the  automatists ;  but  taking  all
together,  the  reference  is  almost  certain.

There  are  other  cases  in  which  a  definite  statement  in  one
script  points  us  to  the  interpretation  of  a  less  definite  one
occurring  earlier  in  cmother  script,  which  again  suggest  that
the  complete  idea  was  at  all  events  not  in  the  mind  of  the  auto-
matist  who  wrote  first.  Thus  Miss  Verrall's  mention  of  "  Jacob's
Ladder"  on  May  11th  (see  above,  p.  228),  points  to  the
interpretation  of  part  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  poem  of  May  8th,^
which  Mrs.  Piper's  mention  of  "  Angel  band "  on  the  same
day  tends,  I  think,  to  confirm.

So  long  as  any  topic,  whether  expressed  in  direct  terms  or
only  allusively,  can  be  found  in  a  script,  it  may,  I  think,
fairly  be  argued  that  it  must  have  been  present  in  some
part  of  the  consciousness  of  the  automatist,  and  may  have
been  transferred  thence  telepathically  to  other  automatists.  But
if  it  cannot  be  found  (as,  e.g.  neither  Miss  Verrall's  "  spinning
top "  nor  Mrs.  Holland's  "  Green  Eay "  can  be  found  in  Mrs.
Verrall's  script)  then  the  same  argument  cannot  be  used.
The  utmost  that  can  then  be  said  is  that  the  topic  7nay
have  been  in  the  automatist's  mind,  and  if  so,  may  have
been  transmitted  thence  telepathically ;  and  such  a  hypothesis
cannot,  I  think,  be  definitely  accepted  without  further  con-
firmation.

It  appears  to  me,  in  short,  that  many  of  the  items  of  this
cross-correspondence  afford  strong  evidence  of  the  design  or
agency  of  some  intelligence  which  was  cognisant  of  the  %vliole
scheme,  as  finally  revealed ; — I  refer  especially  to  the  use  made
of  the  Latin  verses  in  Mrs.  Piper's  case,  and  to  the  veiled
allusions  to  Mr.  Piddington's  letter  in  the  Verrall  scripts ; —
and  it  seems  to  me  difficult  to  attribute  so  complete  a  knowledge
of  it  to  the  subliminal  consciousness  either  of  Mrs.  Verrall  or
of  Mr.  Piddington.

What  has  been  said  of  Professor  Pigou's  main  contention

1  If  the  objection  be  made  that  my  interpretation  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  verse  as
referring  to  Jacob's  ladder  is  altogether  fantastic  and  unfounded,  I  will  reply
that  I  bring  it  forward  partly  in  order  to  make  the  greatest  possible  allowance
for  the  theory  of  telepathy  between  the  living.  For  the  more  items  of  the
cross-correspondence  can  be  found  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script,  the  easier  is  it  to
maintain  that  she  transferred  them  telepathically  to  the  others.


262


Alice  Johnson.


[part


will  apply  also  to  the  similar  conclusions  put  forward  by
Mr.  Podmore  in  his  able  and  sympathetic  review  of  the
evidence  derived  from  the  scripts/  and  I  will  now  only  deal
with  one  further  point.

Mr.  Podmore  concludes  that  the  Piper-Myers  is  not  identical
with  the  Verrall-Myers.  For  my  own  part  it  never  occurred
to  me  to  suppose  that  it  was.  It  never  occurred  to  me  to
imagine  that  in  the  scripts  we  could  find  anything  more  than
a  product  of  the  mental  interaction  of  two  personalities, — the
automatist  and  another.

To  attempt  to  formulate  the  meaning  of  such  an  interaction
would  be  rash  and  presumptuous  at  the  present  stage.  We
shall  only,  I  think,  approach  a  comprehension  of  it  by  studying
it  from  a  mental  standpoint,  and  our  mental  operations  are
limited  by  the  inelastic  nature  of  a  language  which  is  based  on
sensory,  material  and  spatial  terms.  It  is  hardly  possible  to  dis-
cuss the  subject  without  the  use  of  material  analogies  which  are
constantly  liable  to  be  mistaken  for  real  similarities.  The  best
method  perhaps  is  to  vary  the  analogies  as  much  as  possible,
so  as  to  avoid  confining  ourselves  to  fixed  grooves  of  thought.
In  particular,  any  analogy  referring  to  a  process, — such  as  the
comparison  of  telepathy  to  wireless  telegraphy, — is  to  be
deprecated,  as  it  inevitably  suggests  the  inference  that  the
processes  referred  to  are  essentially  similar.  It  is  better  to
confine  ourselves  to  analogies  which  relate  simply  to  the  facts
before  us  and  suggest  nothing  as  to  the  causes  that  produced
them.

I  will  then  compare  the  scripts  to  chemical  compounds  of
two .  or  more  elements  which  are  found  in  different  proportions
in  the  various  compounds.  Thus,  if  we  call  the  automatists
P.  and  v.,  and  the  hypothetical  external  intelligence  X.,  we
may  get  in  the  one  script  such  compounds  as  PX,  or  PgX,
or  PX,,  and  in  the  other  VX  etc.;  or  we  may  get  in  either
of  them  such  compounds  as  PVX,  PgVgX  etc.  We  may  also
get  such  compounds  as  PV,  or  PV„ ; or  we  may  get  the

^Mr.  Podmore's  summary  of  the  Latia  message  inciilent  (Proc,  Vol.  XXII.
pp.  312-416)  seems  to  me,  however,  incomplete,  for  he  omits  to  take  into
consideration  the  important  fact  that,  though  Myersp  failed  to  show  any  real
comprehension  in  the  abstract  of  the  plan  of  cross-correspondences,  he  pointed
out — and  maintained  his  point  in  the  face  of  every  discouragement — that
"Browning,  Hope,  and  Star"  was  an  instance  of  the  kind  required.


LX.]  Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script.  263

elements  P  and  V  by  themselves.  The  one  element  that  we
never  get  alone  is  X.

If  this  be  so,  the  Piper-Myers  is  not  and  never  could  be
identical  with  the  Verrall-Myers.  The  utmost  that  can  happen
will  be  that  the  same  element  is  found  in  both  scripts.  The
burden  of  proof  must  lie  with  those  who  maintain  that  it  is
there  to  be  found ;  but  our  methods  of  analysis  are  not  yet
so  far  perfected  that  we  can  assert  positively  either  its  presence
or  its  absence.


264


Mrs.  A.  W.  Vevrall.


[part


A  NEW  GEOUP  OF  EXPERIMENTERS.
By  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.

History  of  the  Mac  Script.

On  September  26th,  1908,  when  I  was  away  from  home,  T
received  a  letter  from  a  complete  stranger  in  Scotland,  enclosing
a  considerable  number  of  specimens  of  automatic  script,  obtained
by  the  writer  of  the  letter  in  combination  with  other  members
of  her  family.  The  writer,  who  is  here  called  Miss  Mac,  gave
a  brief  account  of  the  origin  and  development  of  the  script,  and
explained  that  lately  the  controls  had  urged  that  the  script
should  be  sent  to  Mrs.  Verrall.

Her  letter,  dated  September  23rd,  1908,  was  as  follows:

.  .  .  We  are  a  family  of  five  and  are  all  more  or  less,  as  well  as
our  parents,  able  to  write  to  a  certain  extent  with  Planchette.  .  .  .

It  is  about  nine  months  ago  that  I  read  Myers'  Human  Personality
for  the  first  time.  I  was  greatly  interested  in  it.  We  had  a  Planchette
in  the  house,  but  had  never  succeeded  in  writing  with  it  when  on
one  or  two  occasions  we  had  tried.  However  I  read  in  the  above
book  that  several  people  tried  for  a  considerable  period  before  getting
legible  writing,  so  that  I  felt  encouraged  to  try  again.  After  about
eight  weeks  of  practice,  generally  once  a  day,  the  huge  illegible
scrawling  gradually  decreased  in  size  and  then  changed  into  hand-
writing, words  and  then  sentences.  We  told  the  Planchette  to  stop
after  every  word  instead  of  stringing  them  together  as  at  first,  and
now  it  generally  refuses  to  go  on  until  lifted  and  replaced  after  everj^
word.

For  three  or  four  months  we  had  only  one  control,  Anne  Murry,
purporting  to  be  a  nun  who  lived  in  the  time  of  William  the
Conqueror  and  had  rather  a  tragic  history.  I  when  from  home
ceased  writing  for  three  months,  and  on  my  return  in  the  middle  of


LX.]


A  Ne%v  Group  of  Experimenters.


265.


May  I  practised  with  my  brother  A.,  with  the  result  that  I  cannot
now  write  legibly  with  any  other  member  of  the  family.  ...  A.
writes  more  or  less  with  every  member  .  .  .  but  best  with  me.

When  he  and  I  started  together  the  result  was  several  fresh
controls.  One,  Ellen  Bell,  seemed  to  be  a  perfect  lunatic,  as  indeed
the  other  controls  said  she  was.  She  was  so  pertinacious  for  a  while
that  she  used  to  interrupt  and  spoil  all  the  other  script,  apparently
refusing  to  let  any  one  else  write.  .  .  .  She  has  her  own  line  of
riddles,  epigrams,  Limericks,  etc.,  sometimes  very  witty,  at  other  times
utter  rubbish  .  .  .  She  draws  clever  caricatures  of  our  acquaintances,
in  a  few  instances  not  known  to  the  writers,  but  to  some  one  else
in  the  room.  .  .  .  She  appears  to  be  quite  subliminal  and  varies  in
character  with  the  various  writers.  .  .  .

Other  controls  called  themselves  "  Mr.  Evans,  a  "Welsh  parson,"'
who  "  seemed  anxious  to  be  identified,  but  we  find  that  the
churchyard  in  Aberystwitli  where  he  was  supposed  to  be  buried
does  not  exist,"  and  "  Eosa  Baughan,"  a  name  subsequently
found  to  be  that  of  a  "  character  delineator "  on  the  staff  of
The  Lady's  Pictorial.  This  control  seems  to  have  produced  some-
evidence  of  supernormal  acquaintance  with  "  palmistry."

In  June  Miss  Johnson's  report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  script
{Proceedings,  Vol.  XXI.,  Pt.  LV.  pp.  166  ci^  seep)  was  read  by  the-
Mac  i'amily,  and  three  weeks  later,  on  July  19,  1908,  they
developed  a  "  Sidgwick  "  control.  The  nature  of  the  phenomena
obtained  was  considerably  modified,  as  was  to  be  expected,  by
acquaintance  with  the  type  of  script  described  by  Miss  Johnson.
The  script  of  July  consisted  of  more  or  less  disconnected
sentences,  in  which,  however,  was  a  constant  recurrence  of
certain  easily  definable  topics ;  it  abounded  in  literary  allusions
and  quotations,  and  my  name  occurred  more  than  once.  The
marked  influence  of  the  reading  of  the  Holland  script  was
noted  in  Miss  Mac's  letter.

In  August  the  script  underwent  another  change,  and  con-
sisted mainly  of  attempts,  with  the  aid  of  a  large  number  of
controls,  to  relate  a  complicated  story  in  Italian  verse.  This
language  was  unknown  to  Mr.  A.  Mac,  and  Miss  E.  Mac,  the
other  automatist,  had  only  a  slight  knowledge  of  it.  The  Italian
of  the  script  is  fiuent,  but  inaccurate  and  ungrammatical ;  it
contains  words  not  to  be  found  in  dictionaries,  and  the  ter-
minations are  often  undecipherable. The  general  meaning  is,


266


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


however,  plain  enough.  But  it  is  difficult  to  say  with  certainty
that  it  shows  knowledge  beyond  that  possessed  by  Miss  Mac,
though  it  is  certainly  not  the  sort  of  thing  that  she  would  or
could  consciously  and  deliberately  write.

About  the  middle  of  September  there  arose  what  Miss  Mae
described  as  "  a  regular  clamour  of  entreaty,"  on  the  part  of  the
controls,  that  she  should  write  to  Mrs.  Verrall.  My  name  had
occurred  in  the  script  of  July,  and  the  idea  of  sending  some
of  the  "  Sidgwick  "  messages  to  me  had  arisen,  but  nothing  had
been  done,  as  Miss  Mac  did  not  think  the  messages  sufficiently
definite  to  warrant  her  in  writing  to  an  absolute  stranger.  "  It
was  only,"  as  she  writes,  "  planchette's  entreaties  that  have  made
us  change  our  minds."  At  the  direction  of  a  "  control,"  calling
itself  "  Eeynold  Carson,"  Miss  Mac  sent  to  me  the  whole  of  the
Sidgwick  script  and  of  the  Italian  attempts,  as  well  as  a  few
specimens  of  messages  from  earlier  controls.  On  September  18,
this  "  control "  had  urged  the  desirability  of  despatching  the
specimens  to  me,  so  that  they  might  reach  me  "  by  next
Saturday  week," — before,  that  is,  Saturday,  September  26,
1908 — and  this  was  done.  The  script  was  posted  from
Scotland  on  September  24th,  reached  Cambridge  on  September
25th,  and  was  re-directed  to  me  in  Hampshire,  reaching  me
on  September  26th.

Miss  Mac  wrote  that  before  reading  the  report  on  Mrs.
Holland's  script  the  automatic  writers  had  only  read  Human
Fersoncdity  and  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  among  what  she  described
as  "  volumes  of  the  Psychical  Research  Society."  In  reply  to
a  question,  she  wrote  on  September  29th  that  they  had  read
none  of  my  script  except  what  is  contained  in  Miss  Johnson's
Report  (Vol.  XXI.),  and  that  they  had  seen  no  reviews  except
of  that  Report.

Further  enquiries  as  to  the  occupations  and  interests  of  the
automatists  and  their  opportunities  of  reading  the  Proceedings
■of  the  S.P.R.,  confirm  the  belief  of  Miss  Mac  that  none  of  the
automatists  were  acquainted  with  my  Report  on  my  ov^n  script
(Proceedings,  Vol.  XX.)  published  in  October,  1906.  More-
over, the  very  fall  notes  sent  by  Miss  Mac,  at  my  request,  in
elucidation  of  her  script  contained  nothing  indicating  any  previous
acquaintance  with  two  or  three  points  presenting  obvious  resem-
blances with  the  contents  of  certain  scripts  mentioned  in  that


LX.]  A  Netv  Grmip  of  Experimenters.  267

Eeport,  and  two  supplementary  questions,  sent  with  several  others
to  Miss  Mac  in  October  and  purposely  framed  to  elicit  latent
knowledge  of  these  points,  failed  to  do  so.  It  may  therefore
be  taken  as  certain  that  no  knowledge  of  Proceedings,  Vol.  XX.
was  consciously  possessed  by  the  Mac  family.  At  the  same
time  it  cannot  be  proved  that  at  some  time  the  Eeport,  or  a
notice  of  it,  may  not  have  been  within  reach  of  one  or  other
of  the  automatists.  The  point  is  of  importance  in  connexion
with  some  allusions  in  the  Mac  script,^  but  does  not  affect  the
value  of  the  greater  part  of  its  contents,  including  the  principal
incident  here  described.

At  the  time  when  Miss  Mac  wrote  to  me  there  was  absolutely
no  acquaintance  between  any  members  of  the  two  families.  A
cousin  of  Miss  Mac's  was  a  college  friend  of  Miss  Yerrall's,
and  this  served  as  an  introduction  for  the  correspondence  that
began  with  the  sending  of  the  script.  The  principal  automatist
appears  to  be  Mr.  A.  Mac,  and  the  majority  of  the  messages
relating  to  cross-correspondences  were  obtained  by  him  in  com-
bination with  Miss  E.  Mac  (my  correspondent),  though  occasionally
one  or  more  other  member's  of  the  family  collaborated  with  him.

In  March,  1909,  I  made  the  acquaintance  of  Miss  D.  Mac,
the  eldest  of  the  family,  whose  work  had  brought  her  to
Cambridge  for  a  short  period.  After  I  had  written  out  the
account  of  this  incident  and  shown  it  to  Miss  Mac  and  her
family,  I  had  some  talk  on  the  subject  with  Miss  D.  Mac.
From  her  I  learnt  in  detail  more  of  the  instances  of  telepathy
between  various  members  of  the  family,  to  which  Miss  E.
Mac  had  referred  in  her  original  letter,  but  nothing  that  passed
between  us  has  thrown  any  further  light  on  the  incidents
here  related.

This  paper  deals  with  the  messages  claiming  to  come  from
the  "  Sidgwick  control,"  generally  referred  to  henceforth  as
Sidgwickji,  in  accordance  with  the  nomenclature  introduced  by
Mr.  Piddington.

The  messages  were  produced  between  July  19  and  July  29,
1908;  the  desire  that  the  script  should  be  sent  to  me  was
expressed  between  Sept.  12  and  18,  1908,-  it  being  particularly

igee  below,  p.  301.

-My  name  did  not  occur  after  July  29  till  Sept.  1,  and  then  again  on
Sept.  12  and  onwards  till  Sept.  18.


268


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


urged  that  the  script  should  reach  me  by  Saturday,
September  26.

This  latter  fact  at  once  struck  me.  My  daughter  and  I
were  engaged  in  an  experiment  necessitating  the  comparison  of
our  scripts  at  fixed  intervals  and  it  had  been  arranged  that  the
next  comparison  of  scripts  should  be  made  on  September  27,
the  reason  being  that  we  were  to  separate  on  September  28
for  some  weelvs.  It  was  accordingly  our  intention  to  compare
scripts  on  September  27  and  then  to  leave  the  subject  un-
discussed aud  the  scripts  unexamined  till  the  middle  of
December,  when  we  proposed  to  make  the  next  comparison.
If  therefore  any  question  were  raised  by  the  newly  received
script  which  necessitated  a  reference  by  me  to  Miss  Verrall's
script,  September  27  was  the  last  possible  day  on  which  that
reference  could  be  made.^  September  26  therefore  seemed
an  appropriate  day  to  be  named  for  the  arrival  of  the  new
script  at  my  house.  No  reason  can  be  suggested  why  this  day
should  have  commended  itself  to  the  writers  of  the  Mac  script,
and  in  view  of  the  appropriateness  of  another  date  named  in
the  Mac  script  -  this  date  may  perhaps  be  regarded  as  not  due
to  accident.

To  return  to  the  contents  of  the  Mac  script:  On  July  19,
1908,  there  appeared  for  the  first  time,  when  Miss  E.  Mac
and  Mr.  A.  Mac  were  using  Pianchette,  a  control  claiming
to  be  Professor  Henry  Sidgwick.  The  remarks  claimed  by
this  control  consisted  of  sentences  more  or  less  fragmentary.
The  first  piece  of  script,  which  announced  itself  at  the  outset
as  coming  from  '  Mr.  Sidgwick,'  was  signed  with  his  signature,
H.  S.,  as  well  as  with  the  initials  F.  W.  H.  M.  and  the  name
Harry.^  On  J uly  2  0  and  2 1  similar  script  claiming  to  come  from
'  Sidgwick '  was  obtained,  the  name  '  Mrs.  V.'  occurring  without
context  on  July  20,  and  on  July  23  similar  script  contained
both  the  name  Sidgwick  and  the  initials  F.  W.  H.  M.  On
July  24  was  written  only  a  single  sentence  from  the  Sidgwick

1  During  the  periods  between  comparison  of  scripts  tlie  record  of  each  writer's
productions  is  not  available  to  the  other.

-  See  below,  p.  305.
No  explanation  has  been  found  of  this  name,  which  occurs  nowhere  else
in  the  Mac  script. Miss  Mac  later  told  me  that  they  had  regarded  it  as  an
attempt  at  the  Christian  name  of  Dr.  Sidgwick.


LX.]


A  Neiu  Group  of  Experimenters.


2G9


control: "Tell  Mrs.  Verrall  to  think  of  me." On July  26
there  were  again  sentences  of  the  same  type  as  on  July  19-23.
The  script  of  July  27,  1908,  as  sent  to  me,  was  as  follows :

Sidgwick.  News  from  the  Occident.  [Drawing  of  rose.]  Roses —
dew-kissed — R.  S  ^

Sidgwick. Sesame  and  lilies — lotus  the  flower  of  repentance.

Sidgwick.  Vanity  of  vanities  all  is  vanity.  A  little  love  and
then  the  joy  fades  and  the  rose  is  crumpled  and  wither(s)  up — fane

[Automatists  ask,  "What  is  thaf?"]
French [accent  added  to  last  word,  making  "fane"  into  "fane."]
Bleeding  hearts  cannot  be  staunched  and  the  voice  of  death  echoes
through  the  brain  with  palling  monotony — Sidgwick. hollow  and
mortal  vain  is  life  without  a  meaning.

This  script,  all  from  the  same  control,  Sidgwickjj,  refers  to
four  topics,  each  of  which  has  been  found  to  form  the  subject
of  a  cross-correspondence  with  other  automatists :

(1)  "News  from  the  Occident"  refers  to  the  cross-correspon-
dence between  Mrs.  Piper,  Mrs.  Holland  and  myself,  described
under  the  title  "  Light  in  West "  in  Mr.  Piddington's  Report
■{P7'oceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  241,  d  seq.)  which  was  not  published
until  October,  1908  ;  see  below,  p.  299.

(2)  "Sesame  and  Lilies"  connects  with  the  scripts  of  both
myself  and  my  daughter,  and  forms  the  subject  of  the  next
section  of  this  paper.

(3)  and  (4)  "Vanity  of  vanities"  and  the  reference  to  a
French  poem  are  connected  with  scripts  of  Miss  Verrall's,  as
•described  below,  pp.  294,  297.

On  this  occasion,  therefore,  nothing  irrelevant  was  introduced
into  the  script.  The  whole  of  the  "  messages "  claimed  by
■Sidgwickjf — whose  name  occurs  four  times  -  in  the  course  of
the  69  words — were found to be  intimately  and  intelligibly

^  The  ....  mark  an  interruption  by  a  control,  "Bell."  Four  Italian  words
that  follow  are  part  of  a  lengthy  Italian  communication  from  a  group  of
-controls  of  whom  H.  S.  was  one,  and  who  occupied  the  Mac  script  in  August.

^I  had  made  the  above  division  into  four  subjects  of  the  topics  introduced
in  the  script  of  July  27  some  time  before  I  noticed  that  the  name  of  the
■control,  "Sidgwick,"  was  written  four  times.  In  view  of  other  instances  of
intelligent  direction  by  the  controls,  I  am  disposed  to  attribute  this  coincidence
act  to  accident  but  to  design.


270


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


connected  with  topics  that  had  already  been  mentioned  in
scripts  unpublished  and  inaccessible  to  the  new  automatists.

On  July  29  another  control,  "Evans,"  said  that  Mr.
Sidgwick  was  anxious  to  get  a  message  through  the  auto-
matists to  Mrs.  Verrall  and  was  trying  to  do  it  "  now."  Here
ended  the  Sidgwick  messages  for  the  time.  Although  Sidgwickj,
took  occasional  part  in  the  script  freely  produced  by  Mr.  and
Miss  Mac  in  August,  no  further  reference  to  me  was  made
till  September  1,  when  my  name  emerged  in  connexion  with
the  cross,  heart  and  anchor  which  several  times  in  this  script
occur  as  symbolic  of  Henry  Sidgwick  (probably  owing  to
recollections  of  Proceedings  Vol.  XXI.  p.  229).  It  was  not  till
some  days  later,  September  13,  that  the  definite  suggestion
was  made  that  the  Sidgwick  script  should  be  sent  to  Mrs.
Verrall.i

Sesame  and  Lilies.

Of  the  four  topics  in  the  script  of  July  27,  1908,  quoted
above,  I  deal  first  with  the  second,  which  is  the  most
interesting.  It  must  be  treated  at  some  length,  while  com-
paratively brief  comment  only  is  required  in  the  other  three
cases.-

Immediately  after  the  second  occurrence  of  the  name
Sidgwick  came  the  words  "  Sesame  and  Lilies."  This  phrase
is  the  title  of  a  book  by  Euskin.  Two  points  arise  for  con-
sideration :  Does  the  Mac  script  contain  any  further  references
to  Euskin's  book  ? — Is  there  any  point  in  sending  the  words
"  Sesame  and  Lilies "  as  a  messaire  to  me  ?

To  begin  with  the  first  question,  whether  there  are  allusions
in  the  Mae  script  to  Euskin's  Sesame  and  Lilies : — Two  lectures
were  delivered  by  Euskin  at  Manchester  in  1864  and  published
in  a  single  volume  under  the  title  of  Sesame  and  Lilies.  The
lectures  are  called  respectively,  "  Sesame :  of  Kings'  Treasuries,"
and  "  Lilies :  of  Queens'  Gardens,"  and  to  each  lecture  is
prefixed  a  motto  in  Greek. To  Sesame  is prefixed  parts  of

^  A  complete  copy  of  such  parts  of  the  Mac  script  as  concern  the  cross-
correspondences  here  described  will  be  found  in  the  Appendix  to  this  paper,
p.  307.

-  The  consideration  in  detail  of  the  whole  script  of  July  27,  190S,  is  postponed,
for  the  sake  of  clearness,  till  after  the  separate  topics  have  been  discussed.


LX.]


A  New  Grou}')  of  Experimenters.


271


the  fifth  and  sixth  verses  of  Job  xxviii.,  namely :  aJr^?
e^eXevcreTai  apTO<i  .  .  .  kui  ■^(Wfxa  y^pvirlov.  ("  Out  of  it  cometh
bread  .  .  .  and  .  .  .  dust  of  gold.")  To  Lilies  is  prefixed  the
second verse of Canticles ii., namely,  Kplvov ev  juea-w

UKuvQwv,  ouTwg  i)  irXtjcTLov  fxov.  ("  As  the  Lily  among  thorns,  so
is  my  love  .  .  .").  There  have  been  several  editions  of  this
work,  and  between  these  editions  there  is  a  good  deal  of
variation  in  small  points.  The  first  edition  and  its  re-issues
in  brown  cloth  binding  contained,  as  has  been  said,  the  two
Manchester  lectures,  with  the  mottoes  in  Greek  from  Job  and
Canticles.  In  1871  a  revised  and  enlarged  edition  was  pro-
duced as  part  of  a  general  issue  of  Euskin's  works.  The
volumes  were  bound  in  blue  leather  with  blind  tooling  on  the
two  covers  and  gold  letters  on  the  back.  The  volume  of
Sesame  and  Lilies  in  this  edition  contained  a  third  lecture
delivered  at  Dublin  in  1868.  The  original  mottoes  to  the
two  Manchester  lectures  were  altered,  and  for  them  were
substituted,  in  the  first  case,  a  motto  in  English,  from
Lucian's  Fisherman,  "  You  shall  each  have  a  cake  of  Sesame —
and  ten  pound,"  and,  in  the  second,  a  text  in  English  from
the  Septuagint  version  of  Isaiah  xxxv.  1,  "Be  thou  glad,  oh
thirsting  desert ;  let  the  desert  be  made  cheerful  and  bloom
as  the  lily ;  and  the  barren  places  of  Jordan  shall  run  wild
with  wood."  There  is  no  motto  to  the  third  lecture.  These
mottoes  seem  thenceforth  to  have  been  used  in  subsequent
editions,  except  in  the  1907  edition  in  Everyman's  Library,  this
returns  to  the  old  mottoes,  but  is  not  bound  in  blue  leather.

There  are  therefore  two  forms  of  Sesame  and  Lilies,  if  we
classify  the  types  by  their  mottoes :

(a)  The  two-lecture  form,  with  mottoes  in  Greek  from  Job
and  Canticles ;

(6)  The  three-lecture  form,  with  mottoes  to  the  two  Man-
chester lectures  in  English  from  Lucian  and  Isaiah  (Septuagint).

There  are  several  forms  of  Sesame  and  Lilies,  if  we  classify
the  types  by  their  binding.  Of  these  the  most  familiar  is  the
set  in  blue  leather  with  blind  tooling  and  gold  lettering.  But
in  that  binding  there  is  no  volume  containing  the  two  Man-
chester lectures  with  the  Greek  mottoes,  unless  some  private
individual  has  bound  the  earlier  edition  in  blue  leather  like
that  of  the  revised  edition.


•272


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


As  regards  the  contents  of  the  volume,  both  lectures  are
concerned  with  the  readmg  of  young  people,  the  second  being
specially  addressed  to  girls.  The  contents ,  of  Sesame :  of
Kings'  Trecistiries  are  described  by  their  author  as  being
"about  the  treasures  hidden  in  books"  {%  1);  the  analogy
between  wisdom  and  its  "physical  type  .  .  .  gold"  13)
is  kept  constantly  in  mind,  "  even  at  cost  of  tiresomeness "

14)  ;  just  as  pickaxe  work  and  smelting,  "sharpest,  finest
chiselling,  and  patientest  fusing are  required  "  before  you  can
gather  one  grain  of  the  metal"  14);  so  Euskin  insists  on
accurate examination of words, their philology and  history

15)  ,  and  illustrates  his  meaning  by  reference  to  passages
in  the  Bible  17,  18)  and  in  Milton,  comparing  Milton
with  Dante  24)  more  than  once  25).  Finally,  he
likens  the  Wisdom  which  he  is  urging  his  hearers  to  seek
to  "  a  Fourth  kind  of  treasure,  which  the  jewel  and  gold
could  not  equal,  neither  should  it  be  valued  with  pure  gold  "

45).  This  phrase  recalls  the  second  half  of  his  introduc-
tory motto  from  Job  ("  dust  of  gold "),  and,  returning  in
thought  to  the  first  half  of  that  motto  ("  out  of  it  cometh
bread ")  he  concludes  by  urging  the  establishment  of  a  Corn
Law  "  dealing  in  a  better  bread ; — bread  made  of  that  old
enchanted  Arabian  grain,  the  Sesame,  which  opens  doors ; —
doors  not  of  robbers'  but  of  Kings'  Treasuries"  (§  50).

In  the  second  lecture,  after  describing  types  of  womanhood
in  the  great  writers — Shakespeare,  Dante,  Homer,  and  others —
and  commending  the  education  of  Wordsworth's  Lucy  who
"grew  in  sun  and  shower"  70),  he  urges  women  to  leave
their  own  secluded  flower  gardens  and  go  forth  to  make  a
garden  of  the  world.  "  The  path  of  a  good  woman  is  indeed
strewn  with  flowers ;  but  they  rise  behind  her  steps,  not
before  them.  '  Her  feet  have  touched  the  meadows  and  left
the  daisies  rosy'  (^93)  .  .  .  Shall  morning  follow  morning,  for
you,  but  not  for  [the  poor] ;  and  the  dawn  rise  to  watch,  far
away,  those  frantic  Dances  of  Death ;  but  no  dawn  rise  to
.  .  .  call  to  you,  through  your  casement — call  (not  giving  you
the  name  of  the  English  poet's  lady,  but  the  name  of  Dante's
great  Matilda,  who,  on  the  edge  of  happy  Lethe,  stood,  wreath-
ing flowers  with  flowers),  saying :  Come  into  the  garden,
Maud"  (§94).


Lx.]  A  Netv  Group  of  Experimenters.  273


This  summary  of  the  contents  of  the  book  may  be  supple-
mented by  Euskin's  own  account  of  his  intention.  In  the
tifth  edition  of  Sesame  and  Lilies,  published  in  1882  with  a
new  preface,  Euskin  says  of  the  book  that,  "  if  read  in  con-
nection with  '  Unto  this  Last '  it  contains  the  chief  truths  I
have  endeavoured  through  all  my  past  life  to  display."

Other  Eeferekces  to  the  Book  in  the  Mac  Script.

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  consider  whether  there  are
other  references  to  the  book  in  the  Mac  script  besides  the
occurrence  of  the  unattached  phrase  "  Sesame  and  Lilies."  There
are,  as  it  seems  to  me,  two  groups  of  unmistakable  references
on  two  preceding  days,  namely,  as  follows :

July  19,  1908.  Where  is  the  little  blue  vase  with  the  lilies
that  grow  by  Sharon's  dewy  rose  (a)  .  .  .  Search  the  scriptures,  and
the  dust  shall  be  converted  into  fine  gold  (h).

July  26,  1908.  A  blue  book  bound  in  blue  leather  with  ended
paper  and  gold  tooling.

Let  us  consider  the  applicability  of  the  above  quotation
from  the  script  of  July  19,  and  take  first  the  second  clause,
"  Search  the  scriptures,  and  the  dust  shall  be  converted  into
fine  gold."

In  reply  to  a  request  from  me  to  identify  all  quotations  in
the  script.  Miss  Mac  quoted  to  illustrate  (b)  Job  xxii.  24,  and
xxviii.  6,  for  "dust"  and  "gold";  and  Psalms  xix.  10,  Prov.
XXV.  12,  Lam.  iv.  1,  for  "fine  gold,"

Let  us  see  if  we  can  fix  upon  one  of  these  five  passages
as  more  intimately  connected  than  the  others  with  the  phrase
in  the  script,  and  therefore  more  likely  to  be  its  source.  What
is  wanted  is  a  passage  contrasting  "  dust "  and  "  fine  gold."
"  Dust "  does  not  occur  in  the  passages  from  Psalms,  Proverbs,
and  Lamentations,  all  of  which  have  "  fine  gold."  "  Dust "  is
contrasted  with  "  gold "  in  both  the  passages  from  Job,  but  in
the  actual  verses  referred  to  in  Miss  Mac's  notes  the  "  gold  "
is  not  "  fine."  Closer  examination  of  the  context  of  Job  xxii.
gives  no  further  clue,  but  if  we  look  at  the  beginning  of
Job  xxviii.  we  find  that  the  verb  "  fine,"  though  not  the
adjective,  is  used  in  close  conjunction  with  "  gold." "  Surely

s


274


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


there  is  a  vein  for  the  silver,  and  a  place  for  gold  where
they  fine  it.  Iron  is  taken  out  of  the  earth  ...  as  for  the
earth,  out  of  it  cometh  bread  .  .  .  and  it  hath  dust  of  gold "
(Job  xxviii.  1-6).

This  therefore  is  the  passage  which  we  are  led  on  internal
evidence  to  regard  as  the  source  of  the  phrase  in  the  script,
and  the  latter  half  of  this  passage  is  the  motto  set  by  Euskin,
in  its  Greek  form,  at  the  head  of  his  essay  on  Sesame ;  or
Kings'  Treasuries.

Moreover,  "  Search  the  scriptures "  is  appropriate.  For,  as
has  been  said,  Euskin  insists  on  accurate  examination  of  the
written  word, — "  Search  the  scriptures  " — and  illustrates  his
meaning  by  quotations  from  the  Scriptures ;  only  so  can
reading  be  of  value,  only  so  can  "  one  grain  of  the  metal "  be
gathered.  In  fact,  Euskin's  first  lecture  might  be  summarised
in  the  words,  "  Search  the  scriptures  and  the  dust  shall  be
converted  into  fine  gold."

Let  us  turn  to  the  other  extract  from  the  script  of
July  19;  {a)  "  Where  is  the  little  blue  vase  with  the  lilies
that  grow  by  Sharon's  dewy  rose."

To  illustrate  this.  Miss  Mac  quoted  the  hymn

"  By  cool  Siloam's  shady  rill,
How  sweet  the  lily  grows,
How  sweet  the  scent  beneath  the  hill,
Of  Sharon's  dewy  rose."

The  hymn  is  of  course  based  on  the  famous  words  of
Canticles  ii.  1,

"  I  am  the  Eose  of  Sharon  and  the  Lily  of  the  valleys ",

the  second  verse  of  which  chapter  forms  Euskin's  motto  to  the
second  lecture.  Lilies ;  "  As  the  Lily  among  thorns,  so  is  my
love."

Thus  the  two  extracts  from  the  Mac  script  of  July  19
both  correspond,  one  completely  and  the  other  partially,  with
the  mottoes  prefixed  to  the  two  lectures  in  Euskin's  book — with
the  two  mottoes,  that  is,  prefixed  in  their  Greek  form  to  the
original  edition  of  Euskin's  Sesame  and  Lilies}

^  In  the  script  the  plural  "lilies"  occurs — a  modification  of  the  singular
"lily"  of  the  hymn  quoted  by  Miss  Mac,  and  of  Canticles  ii.  1,  perhaps  due
to  the  plural  "lilies"  of  the  title  of  the  book.


LX.]  A  New  Group  of  Experimenters.  275

The  words  "  Where  is  the  blue  vase  "  are  so  far  unexplained,
and  are  best  considered  in  conjunction  with  the  second  extract
quoted  above  from  the  Mac  script,  that  namely  of  July  26.
This  runs  as  follows :  "  A  blue  book  bound  in  blue  leather
with  ended  paper  and  gold  tooling."  "  Ended  "  paper,  though
intelligible,  is  not  the  technical  term  for  what  is  apparently
meant.  "  End  papers "  are  the  blank  leaves  added  at  each
end  of  the  book  by  the  binder.  The  description  is  not  very
definite,  but  the  implication  plainly  is  of  a  book  carefully
bound,  not  merely  put  into  a  cover  like  the  ordinary  book
of  commerce.  The  script  does  not  say  on  what  part  of  the
cover  the  "  gold  tooling "  is.  The  description,  however,  quite
fairly  fits  the  familiar  binding  of  Euskin's  works.  These  books
are  blue,  bound  in  blue  leather  with  end  papers  and  gold
letters  on  the  back.  There  is  tooling  on  the  covers  of  the  book,
but  blind  ^  tooling.

So  far  then  it  appears  that  the  references  on  July  19  and
on  July  26  in  the  Mac  script  are  appropriate  enough  to  the
inside  and  the  outside  of  Euskin's  Sesame  and  Lilies,  though
it  is  to  be  noted,  as  above  stated,  that  no  volume  has  been
discovered  which  combines  the  blue  binding  with  the  Greek
mottoes.  It  would  be  fanciful  to  press  a  meaning  from  the
interrogative  form  of  the  sentence,  but  it  is  permissible  to  see
in  the  "  blue  vase  "  which  holds  "  the  lilies  "  an  allusion  to  the
blue  binding  of  Euskin's  book.

Neither  blue  binding  nor  Greek  mottoes,  however,  were
associated  in  the  minds  of  any  of  the  automatists  themselves
with  Euskin's  book.  Their  copy  of  Sesame  and  Lilies  was
George  Allen's  green  cloth-covered  '  Eleventh  complete  edition,'
and  this  volume  contains  not  the  Greek  mottoes  referred  to
in  the  script,  but  the  English  mottoes  from  Lucian  and  Isaiah,
The  automatists  had  recognised  that  the  phrase  on  July  27,.
Sesame  and  Lilies,  was  a  reproduction  of  the  title  of  a  book

^  In  this  connexion  it  may  be  worth  noting  that  immediately  after  the
description  of  the  book,  when  the  automatists  asked,  "What  book  is  that?",
the  script  went  on  "  Blind,  blind,  blind,  wherefore  are  your  eyes  bound  witli
clay — every  man  has  his  .  .  .  ''  [sic).  Possibly  here  the  "blind"  and  "bound"
may  have  some  reference  to  the  Mind  tooling  on  tlie  blue  hound  Ruskin.
And  in  '■^  Everyman' s  Library"  there  has  been  a  recent  issue  of  Sesame  and
Lilies,  with  a  preface  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  an  edition  however  not  known  to
any  of  the  automatists.


276


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


by  Ruskiii,  and  in  their  annotations  had  described  the  book
as  "  known,  though  not  lately  read."^  But  they  did  not  recognise
the  previous  allusions  of  July  19  and  26,  and  had  no  idea
that  any  other  mottoes  had  ever  been  used  by  the  author
than  those  which  they  found  in  their  own  copy,  when,  at  my
request,  they  looked  out  the  mottoes  prefixed  to  the  lectures.
The  allusions  then  in  the  Mac  script  to  Ruskin's  Sesame  and
Lilies  do  not  appear  explicable  as  instances  of  revived  memory.
Nor  can  we  ascribe  to  accident  the  sequence  of  (1)  the
allusions  to  both  original  mottoes  of  the  Manchester  lectures,
(2)  the  description  of  a  blue  bound  book,  and  (3)  the  final
words  "  Sesame  and  Lilies."

Can  any  explanation  be  found  in  the  instructions  to  convey
tlie  words  to  me  ?  Here  I  come  to  my  second  question,  and
to  answer  this  an  account  must  be  given  of  the  contribution
made  to  the  subject  by  my  own  and  my  daughter's  scripts.


References  in  the  Vekhall  Scripts.

Between  October,  1907,  and  June,  1908,  as  has  been  said,
we  had  tried  experiments  for  obtaining  cross-correspondences
between  our  scripts.  Miss  Verrall  was  mainly  in  London  during
this  year.  At  three  pre-arranged  dates  scripts  had  been  com-
pared, no  communication  of  the  contents  being  made  in  the
intervals,  and  some  correspondence  was  observed  between  them.
Early  in  June  we  went  abroad  and  automatic  writing  was  dis-
continued. On  our  return  experiments  were  again  begun,  and
the  first  date  for  comparison  of  scripts  was  arranged  for
September  1,  1908.

The  circumstances  were  no  longer  so  favourable  for  experi-
mentation. During  the  months  of  July  and  August  we  were
in  the  same  house,  and  though  we  were  careful  not  to  speak
to  one  another  of  the  contents  of  our  scripts,  there  was  an
increased  chance  of  similar  associations  being  aroused  by
incidents  common  to  both.

1  Of  the  four  automatists  concerned,  one  had  not  read  Sesame  and  Lilies  at
all,  and  another,  Mr.  A.  Mac,  writes  that  he  had  not  read  it  all  or  recently,
and  had  no  recollection  whatever  of  it  except  of  an  extract  from  it  in  an  old
reading  book.


t

LX.]  A  New  Group  of  Experimenters.  277

On  September  1,  1908,  Miss  Verrall's  scripts^  were  com-
municated to  rae  and  some  of  mine  were  shown  to  her.
Each  writer  had  produced  thirteen  scripts.  The  comparison
of  scripts  showed  two  ^  instances  of  attempts  at  intercon-
nexion, of  which  one  was  as  follows.  Comparison  of  M.  V.
script  of  August  19  on  the  one  hand  with  H.  V.  script  of
August  19  and  two  other  H.  V.  scripts,  of  August  12  and
August  22,  closely  connected  with  it  by  internal  evidence,
led  us  to  the  conclusion  that  an  unsuccessful  attempt  had  been
made  to  produce  "  Sesame  and  Lilies,"  the  title  of  Euskin's
book,  as  the  subject  of  a  cross- correspondence  between  our
scripts.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  when  this  conclusion  was
reached  we  knew  nothing  of  the  Mac  script.

The  scripts  that  refer  to  Sesame  and  Lilies  are  as  follows ;
I  begin  with  my  own  script :

{August  19,  1908. Wednesday,  10.40  a.m.)
Let  your  hand  go  loose — let  the  words  come.

It  is  a  literary  allusion  that  should  come  to-day.  Think  of  the
words

Lih'astrum  Paradise- — Liliago  no  not  that.  Lilies  of  Eden —
Lilith  no.

Eve's  Lilies  all  in  a  garden  fair. Try  again.

Lilies  swaying  in  a  wind
Under  a  garden  wall
Lilies  for  the  bees  to  find
Lilies  fair  and  tall.

Then  besides  the  Lilies  there  is  to  be  another  word  for  you  and
for  her  Lilies  and  a  different  word — So  that  lilies  is  the  catchword
to  show  what  words  are  to  be  put  together.

And  your  second  word  is  gold.  Think  of  the  golden  lilies  of
France.

You  will  have  to  wait  some  time  for  the  end  of  this  story,  for
the  solution  of  this  puzzle — but  I  think  there  is  no  doubt  of  its
ultimate  success.  Yours.

'  I  use  the  letters  H.  V.  and  M.  V.  henceforth  to  describe  respectively  niy
daughters  script  and  mine.

The  attempts  at  correspondence  during  this  period  were  considerably  fewer
than  they  had  been  during  the  earlier  periods  when  we  were  not  in  daily
communication.


t

278


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


This  script,  purporting  by  the  form  of  its  signature^  to  come
from  Myersy,  in  its  first  half  emphasises  the  word  "  Lilies " :
Paracusia  Liliastriom  is  the  botanical  name  of  a  wild  Lily  of
the  Alps,  and  Liliayo  is  the  name  of  another  species.  Paradise,
the  garden,  leads  naturally  to  Eden,  and  the  Lilies  of  Eden
suggest  Lilith,  but  the  scribe  returns  to  Eve's  Lilies  in  a
garden  fair.  The  Lilies  and  the  garden  are  again  conspicuous
in  the  four  lines  of  verse.  In  the  second  half  the  script
plainly  indicates  that  a  cross-correspondence  is  being  attempted.
This  cross-correspondence  is  apparently  to  consist  of  Lilies  and
something  else.  Lilies  being  the  clue  indicating  what  scripts
are  to  be  combined.  The  wording  is  obscure,  but  what  is  unmis-
takable is  that  in  each  of  two  scripts  "  Lilies "  is  to  occur
in  combination  with  a  different  word.  The  second  word  in
M.  V.  script  is  "  gold,"  and  an  association  '  between  the  two
words  Lilies  and  Gold  is  suggested  in  the  French  coat  of  arms,
"  the  golden  Lilies  of  France."

A  comparison  of  the  M.  V.  script  of  August  19  with  the
H.  V.  script  of  the  same  date  ^  seems  to  show  a  certain
reflexion  of  the  M.  V.  script  in  the  H.  V.  script,  but  not  the
supplementary  matter  that  the  M.  V.  script  had  announced  as
intended. The  H.  V.  script  began  as  follows :  ^

{Aiigust  19,  1908. 9  p.m.)

Blue  and  gold  were  the  colours  golden  stars  on  a  blue  ground
like  a  night  sky.

It  appeared  to  us  that  the  French  arms  of  the  M.  V.  script —
golden  Lilies  on  a  blue  ground — were  reflected  in  the  opening
words  of  the  H.  V.  script,  the  fleurs-de-lys  being  not  unlike
stars  in  shape.  This  of  course  was  unsatisfactory  ;  the  catch-
word "  Lilies  "  was  absent  in  the  H.  V.  script,  and  its  absence
was  emphasized  by  the  substitution  of  "  stars "  for  "  lilies "  in
the  phrase  which  appeared  to  re-echo  the  allusion  to  gold
and the French arms in  M. V. script. The failure  was

iSee  Proc.  Vol.  XXII.  p.  115.

-  For  a  previous  attempt  in  M.  V.  script  to  tintl  associations  for  an  idea  to
be  transferred,  see  Proc.  XX.  p.  59.

''The  coincidence  of  day  was  accidental,  August  19  not  being  one  of  the
pre-arranged  days  for  obtaining  script.


LX.]


A  Nexo  Group  of  Experimenters.


279


the  more  annoying  in  that  the  next  H.  V.  script,  on
August  22,  contained  the  word  "  Lilies,"  and  plainly  suggested
that  some  cross-correspondence  had  failed,  or  been  misunder-
stood. This  script,  quoted  here  only  so  far  as  it  is  appropriate,
claimed  to  come  from  MyersHv.

{August  22,  1908. 10.5  p.m.)

Unto  this  la.st  that  was  the  message  to  be  given.
It  was  in  the  cemetery  where  the  lilies  grow — a  view  over  the
hills — blue  hills — in  love  with  death.^
Note  that  the  words  are  a  clue.

But  you  have  no  but  you  have  not  yet  written  the  most
important  of  all. But  do  not  hurry  or  guess  let  it  come  of  itself.

F.  W.  H.  M.

The  "  Lilies "  of  M.  V.  script  of  August  1 9  appear  here,
and  the  script  further  says  that  a  clue  has  been  given  but
that  "  the  most  important  of  all "  has  not  been  written.  This
suggested  that  the  scribe  had  this  time  succeeded  in  giving
the  catchword  "  Lilies,"  but  hjad  omitted,  and  knew  that  he
had  omitted,  the  distinctive  word.  The  connexion  between  this
script  of  August  22  and  the  M.  V.  script  of  August  19  seemed
further  indicated  by  a  similarity  of  phrase :  "  Let  the  words
come"  (M.  V.)  "let  it  come  of  itself"  (H.  V.);  and  the
identity  of  control,—"  Yours  "  (M.  V.)  and  "  F.  W.  H.  M."
(H.  V.).-^

It  will  be  noted  that  the  first  words  of  this  script  are
"  Unto  this  last  that  was  the  message  to  be  given."  Now
Unto  this  last  is  the  title  of  one  of  Euskin's  books.  A  remem-
brance of  that  fact  joined  to  the  statements  that  (1)  what
was  wanted  was  "  Lilies  and "  something,  and  (2)  that  it  was
"  a  literary  allusion  that  should  come  to-day "  suggested  to  me
that  the  intended  subject  for  the  cross-correspondence  was
Sesame  and  Lilies,  the  title  of  another  of  Euskin's  books.  This

1  Cf .  Keats,  Ode  to  a  Nirjhtiwjale,  "Half  in  love  with  easeful  death";  and
Shelley,  in  the  Preface  to  Adonais,  writing  of  the  Protestant  cemetery  at
Rome,  where  Keats  is  buried,  "in  love  with  death."

Only  two  scripts  within  the  period  under  consideration  were  signed  by
MyersHv — this  script  of  Aug.  22,  and  another,  on  July  27,  in  which  appeared
the  other  cross-correspondence  between  the  M.  V.  and  H.  V.  scripts  of  July
and  August,  1908. (See  above,  p.  277.)


280


Mrs.  A.


W.  Verrall.


[part


view  was  confirmed  on  further  investigation.  The  H.  V.  script
of  August  12,  which  by  internal  evidence  seems  closely  con-
nected with  the  scripts  of  August  19  and  22,^  begins  with  the
words  "  Praeterita  rediviva."  Praeterita  is  the  name  of  another
of  Euskin's  works.  There  is  a  certain  appropriateness  in  the
framing  in,  so  to  speak,  of  the  Sesame  and  Lilies  episode  in
the  H.  V.  script;  the  first  allusion,  on  August  12,  opens  with
the  words  "  praeterita  rediviva "  (the  past  revived),  and  the
last  allusion,  on  August  22,  opens  with  the  words  "Unto  this
last — that  was  the  messaoe  to  be  given."  In  both  cases  there
is  a  certain  play  upon  the  meaning  of  the  title :  "  things
past-by  "  live  again  ;  "  unto  this  last "  concludes  the  episode.

This  was  recognised  at  the  time,  but  the  singular  aptness
of  choosing  those  two  titles  in  particular  was  not  realised  till
my  researches  into  editions  of  Sesame  and  Lilies  led  me  to
make  acquaintance  for  the  first  time  with  the  preface  to  the
edition  of  1882,  already  quoted  (p.  273).  There  Euskin  says
of  Sesame  and  Lilies  that  "  if  read  in  connection  with  Unto
this  Last,  it  contains  the  chief  truths  I  have  endeavoured
through  all  my  imst  life  to  display."

In  this  sentence,  then,  Euskin  combines  with  "  Sesame  and
Lilies "  both  "  Unto  this  Last "  and  "  All  my  past  life,"  the
past  life  which  elsewhere  he  describes  as  "  Praeterita."  It  is
impossible  to  attribute  to  accident  the  selection  among  Euskin's
many  works  of  the  two  titles  which  are  so  especially  associated
with  Sesame  and  Lilies  in  the  mind  of  Euskin,  and  of  readers
of  his  1882  preface,  and  it  is  as  certain  as  anything  can  be
that  neither  I  nor  my  daughter  -  knew  any  reason  why  those
titles  should  be  so  associated.

That  the  intention  of  tlie  suggested  cross-correspondence
between  us  was  aimed,  not  at  the  mere  phrase,  but  at
Euskin's  title,  is  confirmed  by  the  emphasis  given  to  the
word  "  Garden "  in  connexion  with  "  Lilies  "  in  M.  V.  script  of
August  19. The  alternative  title  of  Euskin's  second  lecture,

1  See  Appendix  for  complete  copies  of  these  scripts.  Prominent  in  all  three  is
the  idea  of  Death ;  neither  the  topic  nor  the  word  death  occurs  in  any  other
H.  V.  script  of  the  period  ;  two,  those  of  August  P2  and  August  22,  have
(a)  drawings  of  a  lyre  and  (b)  allusions  to  the  "light  of  the  western  sky."

-For  a  statement  of  the  knowledge  of  Ruskin's  book  consciously  possessed
by  my  daughter  and  myself,  see  below,  p.  284.


LX.]


A  New  Group  of  Experimenters.


281


Lilies,  is  Queens'  Gardens  and  the  garden  is  the  central  idea
iu  the  concluding  paragraphs  of  his  lecture.

It  is  therefore  not  surprising  that  a  comparison  of  scripts
led  us  to  the  conclusion  that  there  had  been  an  attempt  and
a  failure  to  work  off  a  cress-correspondence  on  the  words
Sesame  and  Lilies.  We  spent  some  time  investigating  both
scripts  in  the  hopes  of  detecting  a  reference  to  Sesame,  but
could  find  none.

This  conclusion  was  not  recorded  at  the  time,  but  was
vividly  present  in  our  minds,  and  recorded  on  September  26,^
after  reading  the  Mac  script.  But  though  there  is  no  record
of  our  recognition  of  the  failure  of  this  cross-correspondence
in  our  scripts,  evidence  that  we  had  discussed  the  question
of  Sesame  and  Lilies  may  be  obtained  from  an  H.  V.  script  of
September  23rd.'^  This  script,  written  three  weeks  after  the
comparison  of  scripts  on  September  1,  and  before  anything
further  had  occurred  to  draw  attention  to  the  subject,  con-
cludes as  follows :

Note  the  literary  allusions  something  should  be  made  of  them
putting  one  with  another  the  clue  is  there  but  several  things  have
been  missed  but  try  again.

An  implement  of  peace  the  fork  of  the  husbandman — the  sowing
of  the  grain — a  star  flower  something  like  a  daisy  what  does  that
mean  the  message  was  confused  the  star  flower  and  the  lilies  too
look  back — the  open  door.

The  allusions  in  this  script  to  the  above  described  episode
are  unmistakable ;  "  liter'ary  allusions "  (see  M.  V.  script  of
August  19)  are  to  be  noted  and  put  together,  the  literary
allusions  being,  as  we  had  observed,  Praeterita,  and  Unto  this
Last ;  the  "  star  flower  something  like  a  daisy,"  and  again
"  star  flower  and  the  lilies  too "  recall  the  "  Liliastrum "  and
"  Liliago  "  of  M.  V.  script.  Clearly  the  "  sowing  of  the  grain  "
and  "the  open  door"  allude  to  Sesame,  as  a  grain,  and  as
a  magic  word.

To  sum  up  then :  between  August  1 2  and  August  2  2  the
V.  and  H.  V. scripts  seem  to  have  attempted  to  work

^  See  below.  Appendix,  p.  316.

"  Each  original  script  of  Jilrs.  or  Miss  Verrall's  is,  after  copying,  enclosed
in  an  envelope  and  posted  to  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  so  that  the  date
of  eacli  script  is  attested  by  the  post  mark.


282


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[PAllT


off  a  cross-correspondence  on  the  title  of  Euskin's  Sesame  and
Lilies,  introducing  by  the  way  into  Miss  Verrall's  script
appropriate  allusions  to  two  other  books  of  Euskin's  specially
associated  by  the  author  with  Sesame  and  Lilies,  but  not  so
associated  by  either  automatist.  This  attempt  was  recognised
by  us  on  September  1,  though  not  recorded.  Miss  Verrall's
script,  however,  repaired  that  omission  on  September  23.

Connexion  between  the  Mac  and  Verrall  Scripts.

So  far,  then,  it  is  clear  that  references  to  Euskin's  Sesame
and  Lilies  were  made  in  the  Mac  script  between  July  19
and  27,  and  in  the  M.  V.  and  H.  V.  script  between  August  12
and  22.  The  question  arises  whether  anything  in  the  method
of  presentation,  as  distinguished  from  coincidence  of  subject,
in  the  two  sets  of  scripts  suggests  inter-connexion  between
them  or  derivation  from  a  common  source.

The  allusions  in  the  Mac  script  combine  with  the  title  of
the  book  two  definite  ideas,  blue  and  gold.  "  Where  is  the
little  blue  vase  with  the  lilies "  etc.,  and  again,  "  The  dust
shall  be  converted  into  fine  ffold"  on  July  19;  and  on
July  26,  "Where  is  the  blue  book  with  gold  tooling."  The
M.  V.  script  of  August  19,  suggesting  that  lilies  is  half  of  a
message  adds,  "  Your  second  word  is  gold  think  of  the
(/olden  lilies  of  France."  The  French  shield  being  gold  lilies
on  a  bhie  ground,  it  is  evident  that  the  idea  gold  is  here
expressed  and  blue  implied.  Miss  Verrall's  contemporaneous
script  begins  "  Bhie  and  gold  were  the  colours,  golden  stars  on
a  blue  ground,"  and  her  next  script  combines  with  the  growing
lilies  a  view  over  blue  hills.

These  are  the  only  cases  in  the  scripts  of  the  period  which
contain  the  word  lilies.  The  conjunction  of  gold  and  blue
with  the  Euskin  title  in  all  three  sets  of  scripts  cannot  be
an  accident.  It  is  one  of  many  indications  of  intelligence  in
the  conduct  of  the  experiment.  The  word  "  golden "  occurs
once  in  the  M.  V.  script  of  the  period  in  question,  and  "  gold  "
or  "  golden "  six  times  in  the  H.  V.  script.^  The  mere  occur-
rence of  such  a  common  word  is  of  no  interest,  and  in  the

1  The  word  b/ne  occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  Mac  or  M.  V.  script  of  the  period,
but  once  in  the  H.  V.  script  of  Aug.  26,  in  quite  a  different  context.


LX.]


A  New  Group  of  Experimenters.


283


passages  in  the  H.  V.  script  ^  where  it  is  not  associated  with
"  blue ",  there  seems  no  trace  of  allusion  to  Sesame  and  Lilies.
This  cannot,  however,  be  said  of  the  one  passage  where  it  is
used  in  the  M.  V.  script,  though,  did  that  passage  stand
alone,  it  would  hardly  deserve  attention.  As,  however,  it
shows  some  trace  of  correspondence  with  the  Mac  script,  I
have  thought  it  best  to  transcribe  it  here  and  leave  the  reader
to  form  his  own  opinion.

On  August  11,  1908,  the  M.  V.  script  begins  with  the
words :

August's  ripened  sheaves  under  the  moon  reapers  in  the  field.
She  stood  breast  high  amid  the  golden  corn.  The  fidl  sheaves
ungarnered.  With  reaping  hook  and  sickle  who  stands  there.
But  now  write  something  quite  different.  .  .  . Good-b3''e.  Tuus.

The  "  she "  of  the  above  is  obviously  Euth.  The  line  of
verse  quoted  seemed  to  me  an  inaccurate  recollection  of  the
line  in  Keats'  Ode  to  the  Nightingcde,  "  She  stood  in  tears
amid  the  alien  corn,"  but  my  attention  has  been  drawn  by
Miss  Johnson  to  a  poem  of  Hood's  called  Buth  which  contains
the  lines,

"  She  stood  breast-high  amid  the  corn
Clasped  by  the  golden  light  of  morn."

As  I  have  read  Hood's  poems  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  source
of  the  phrase  is  to  be  found  in  Hood,  though  the  rhythm  of
the  line  is  unlike  that  of  Hood's  poem,  and  the  allusion  to
Keats  is  perhaps  made  more  probable  by  the  introduction  into
the  script  of  the  phrase  "  under  the  moon."  This  does  not  seem
an  obvious  idea  in  connexion  with  gleaning  or  reaping,  but  the
evening  time  is  naturally  present  in  a  reminiscence  of  Keats'
Ode,  whereas  Hood's  poem  distinctly  refers  to  morning.  How-
ever, the  crescent  moon  is  closely  associated  in  my  mind  with
Kuth,  owing  to  a  very  familiar  passage  in  Victor  Hugo's  L6gende
cles  Slides,  I.  ii.,  "  Booz  Endormi."

^Examination  of  tlie  complete  collection  of  H.  V.  scripts  shows  that  the
words  gold  and  golden  are  of  fairly  frequent  occurrence;  e.g.  there  are  five
instances  in  September,  1908,  two  of  which  are  quoted  in  the  Appendix,
p.  315.  It  is  the  combination  of  gold  with  blue  and  its  repetition  which
gives  point  to  the  scrijit  of  Aug.  19.


284


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


It  is  not  easy  to  determine  whether  this  script  has  any  con-
nexion with  the  group  of  scripts  referring  to  Sesame  and
Lilies.  On  the  one  hand  the  conjunction  of  gold  with  corn
suggests  Sesame,  and  the  reminiscence  of  Keats'  Oclc  is  paral-
lelled by  the  reminiscence  of  another  line  in  the  preceding
stanza  of  the  same  Ode,  in  the  H.  V.  script  of  August  21^,  which
is  certainly  one  of  the  Sesame  and  Lilies  group.^  There  may
be  an  attempt  at  connexion  with  the  Mac  script,  for  on  July  19,
the  day  when  allusions  to  the  liuskin  mottoes  were  made,  the
Mac  script  contained  the  words  "  Euth  7  2  chapter  7  verse  2."
There  is  no  such  chapter  in  Ruth  as  7 — a  fact  noted  by  the
automatists — and  it  is  conceivable  that  the  general  intention
of  the  script  was  to  refer  to  the  name  Euth  rather  than  to
any  particular  passage  of  the  book  of  liuth?  But  the  allusion  *
is  too  indefinite  to  be  interpreted  with  certainty.

Previous  Knowledge  on  the  paut  of  Automatists.

Before  discussing  some  further  points  which  arise  in  con-
nexion with  these  references  in  the  scripts,  it  will  be  convenient
to  state  exactly  what  was  the  conscious  knowledge  of  Euskin's
books  possessed  by  my  daughter  and  myself*  on  September  1,
1908,  when  we  discovered,  as  we  thought,  an  attempt  to  refer
to  Sesame  and  Lilies  in  our  scripts.

Miss  Verrall,  to  the  best  of  her  belief,  had  never  read  Sesame
and  Lilies,  Praeterita,  or  Unto  this  Last.  She  was  familiar
with  the  phrase  "  Sesame  and  Lilies  "  as  the  title  of  a  book  of
Euskin's,  but  did  not  recognise  any  allusions  to  his  books  in

'  See  above,  p.  279.

-If  we  suppose  an  inversion  of  the  figures  and  a  reference  to  Ruth  ii.  7,  the
text  is  not  inappropriate  as  a  general  reference  to  sheaves  and  reaping  :  "  And
she  said,  I  pray  you,  let  me  glean  and  gather  after  the  reapers  among  the
sheaves  :  so  she  came,  and  hath  continued  even  from  the  morning  until  now,  that
she  tarried  a  little  in  the  house."

"Four  times  in  the  Mac  script  there  are  references  by  chapter  and  verse  to
passages  in  the  Bible.  One  of  these  is  '  Ruth  7  2'  as  above.  The  other  three
cases  all  seem  to  have  some  relevance  or  intention.  Two  of  them  are  discussed
below,  p.  295,  and  there  again  it  seems  as  though  the  point  of  relevance  were
to  be  found  in  the  name  of  the  book,  Ecdesiastes,  rather  than  in  either  of
the  verses  indicated.

■*For  the  knowledge  of  Miss  Mac  see  above,  pp.  275-6.


LX.]  A  New  Group  of  Experimenters.  285

the  phrases  used  in  her  script.  She  was  familiar  with  Modern
Painters,  Stones  of  Venice,  Ariadne  Florentina,  and  most  of  the
books  on  Art,  but  had  read  none  of  the  biographical  or  socio-
logical works.  No  doubt  the  titles  had  been  seen  by  her,  but
no  suggestion  of  them  was  recalled  to  her  mind  by  the  appear-
ance in  the  script  of  the  words  "  praeterita  rediviva  "  on  August
12,  or  "Unto  this  last"  on  August  22.

I  read  Euskin's  Sesame  and  Lilies  in  the  second  edition
jDublished  in  1865.  This  edition,  covered  in  brown  cloth,
contains  the  two -Manchester  lectures  and  the  original  mottoes
from  Job  and  Canticles.  The  mottoes  are  printed  in  Greek
with  references  at  the  bottom  of  the  page  but  no  translations.
The  book  was  read  for  the  first  time  by  me  soon  after  its
purchase  by  my  mother  in  1866,^  and  was  probably  read
more  than  once  between  that  date  and  1870  or  1871.  At
that  time  I  knew  no  Greek  at  all,  and  if  therefore  I  became
acquainted  with  the  meaning  of  the  selected  mottoes  I  must
have  learnt  it  by  looking  up  the  references  given,  there  being
no  indication  whatever  in  the  book  itself  as  to  the  meaning
of  the  mottoes.  It  is  of  course  possible  that  I  did  look  up
these  references,  but  it  is  most  unlikely  that  a  child  of  my
age — 9  to  13 — should  have  done  so,  and  there  was  no  one
in  the  house  who  could  have  translated  the  Greek.  To  the
best  of  my  belief  I  did  not  read  the  book  after  this  period
till  October,  1908,  when  my  interest  in  it  had  been  revived
by  the  occurrences  above  described.

At  some  time,  probably  in  or  soon  after  1871,  the  revised
and  enlarged  edition,  bound  in  blue  leather  and  containing  the
three  lectures  and  the  mottoes  from  Lucian  and  Isaiah,  was
given  to  my  mother,  so  that  I  was  familiar  with  the  appear-
ance of  the  blue  bound  volume  as  well  as  with  the  small
early  brown  cloth-covered  volume  which  I  had  read.  Part
of  Praeterita  was  read  by  me  in  its  first  appearance  in  Fors
Clavigcra  about  1875  or  1876;  Unto  this  Last,  to  the  best
of  my  belief,  I  have  never  read ;  nor  did  I  read  the  preface
of  the  1882  edition  of  Sesame  and  Lilies  till  October  1908.

I  had  a  pretty  good  general  recollection  of  the  two  lectures
on  Kings'  Treasuries  and  Queens'  Gardens,  but  no  detailed
remembrance  of  the  contents  of  either.

^  The  date  is  noted  in  my  mother's  copy  now  belonging  to  Miss  Merrifield.


286


Mrs.  A.  W.  VerraCl.


[part


It  was  only  when  I  read  the  brown  cloth-covered  edition
at  my  father's  house,  where  I  went  on  September  28,  1908,
that  I  recognised  in  the  Mac  script  allusions  to  the  Greek
mottoes,  and  it  was  not  till  some  days  later  that  I  found
that  different  mottoes  had  been  used  in  the  later  edition  bound
in  blue  leather.  Nor  was  I  aware  that  in  1907  the  original
two  lectures  of  Sesame  and  Lilies  together  with  the  Two  Paths
and  the  King  of  the  Golden  River  had  been  published  in  Every-
vian's  Library,  with  a  preface  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.

Connexion  with  Earlier  Scripts.

The  question  arises  whether  the  phrase  "  Sesame  and  Lilies,"
thus  successfully  produced  by  a  combination  of  three  automatic
scripts,  is  to  be  regarded  as  an  isolated  incident,  or  as  forming
part  of  a  series.  The  reader  will  be  better  able  to  judge  this
after  considering  other  cases  of  cross- correspondence  between
the  Mac  scripts  and  other  scripts.^  But  apart  from  the  general
question  of  the  influences  underlying  the  Mac  script,  there  are
some  indications  that  this  particular  incident  forms  part  of  a
series  and  is  connected  with  other  successful  cross-correspondences.

The  first  point  to  notice  is  that  the  phrase  "  Sesame  and
Lilies "  appeared  in  an  earlier  script  of  Miss  Verrall's,  on
March  17,  1907,  in  the  course  of  the  experiments  with  Mrs.
Piper  described  in  Volume  XXII.  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.E.,.
published  in  October,  1908.  No  publication  of  Miss  Verrall's
script  of  March  17,  1907,  was  made  till  Mr.  Piddington's  Eeport
appeared,  and  it  is  therefore  impossible  that  the  phrase  should
have  been  known  by  Miss  Mac  and  her  brother  to  have  occurred
in  Miss  Verrall's  writing.^  The  phrase  occurs  after  a  reference
to  laurel  leaves  for  a  wreath  and  a  quotation  from  a  poem  of
Clough's,  "  Say  not  the  struggle  nought  availeth  " ;  it  is  followed

^See  below,  pp.  294-300.

-No  proof  sheets  of  Vol  XXII.  were  seen  by  Mis.s  Mac  or  her  brother,  iior
are  the  Mac  family  acquainted  with  any  of  the  very  small  number  of  persons
who  had  any  opportunity  of  seeing  Miss  Verrall's  script  before  its  publication
in  October,  1908.  The  script  of  March  17,  1907,  was  quoted  in  a  paper  read
by  Mr.  Piddington  at  a  private  meeting  for  S.P.R.  members  only  on  Nov.  7,
1907,  but  no  report  was  printed  in  the  Journal.  None  of  the  Mac  family  are
members  or  associates  of  the  S.P.R. ,  nor  have  they  ever  attended  any  S.P.R..
meetings.


LX.]


A  Neiv  Group  of  Experimenters.


287


by  the  words  "  Arum  Lilies,"  but  has  no  apparent  connexion
with  either  preceding  or  succeeding  context.  The  script  is  given
in  Proceedings  Vol.  XXII.  p.  99,  in  the  discussion  on  the
cross-correspondence  "  Laurel  Wreath,"  and  Mr.  Piddington
traces  some  associations  of  ideas  in  the  earlier  script  down  to
and  including  the  quotation  from  Clough,  but  has  no  explanation
to  offer  of  "  Sesame  and  Lilies "  or  the  words  that  follow.
The  script  of  March  17,  1907,  had  been  seen  by  me,  so
that  in  July,  1908,  the  fact  that  "Sesame  and  Lilies"  had
occurred  in  H.  V.  script  was  known  to  my  daughter  and  me,
and  was  recalled  to  my  mind  early  in  August,  1908,  when
I  read  in  proof  the  section  of  Mr.  Piddington's  paper  which
discussed  the  H.  V.  script  of  March  17,  1907.  The  references  in
the  Mac  script  to  "  Sesame  and  Lilies  "  were  completed  on  July
27,  some  days  before  I  received  the  proofs  of  Mr.  Piddington's
paper.  The  revival  of  my  recollection  of  the  H.  V.  script  of
March  17,  1907,  therefore,  though  it  preceded  the  emergence
of  "  Sesame  and  Lilies "  in  the  Verrall  scripts,  was  subsequent
to  its  appearance  in  the  Mac  sciipts.

On  July  20,  1908,  the  first  script  produced  by  me  as  part
of  the  experiment  in  cross-correspondence  between  M.  V.  and
H.  V.  script  during  Jvxly  and  August  contained  the  same  quota-
tion from  the  poem  of  Clough  as  had  appeared  in  my  daughter's
script  of  March  17,  1907.  The  M.  V.  script  of  JiUy  20,
1908,  ran  :  "Say  not  the  struggle  naught  availeth.  For  where
the  tired  waves,  vainly  breaking — and  so  on.  Conies  silent
— flooding  in — the  main."  The  reference  to  Clough 's  poem  was
noted  by  me  in  copying  the  script  on  July  21,  but  it  was
only  on  August  6,^  when  reading  the  proof  of  Mr.  Piddington's
paper,  Sec.  IX.,  that  I  remembered  that  the  same  poem  had
been  quoted  in  H.  V.  script  of  March  17,  1907.  It  is  con-
ceivable that  this  quotation  from  Clough  on  July  20,  1908,
represents  the  first  emergence  in  my  script  of  an  idea  already
formed  and  subsequently  defined  in  all  three  scripts  as  "  Sesame
and  Lilies,"  words  associated  long  before  in  H.  V.  script  with
the  poem  of  Clough's.

'  My  diary  and  other  contemporai'y  notes  show  the  dates  of  my  reading  the
proofs  of  Mr.  Piddington's  Report.  I  had  not  received  the  section  referring  to
my  daughter's  script  of  March  17,  1907,  when  my  own  script  of  July  20,  1908,
produced  the  quotation  from  Clough.


288


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


I  have  no  theory  to  offer  as  to  where  or  when  that  idea
was  formed.  I  mention  the  circumstance  here,  as  it  may  have
some  bearing  on  the  case  under  consideration.  The  words,
"  Sesame  and  Lilies,"  in  my  daughter's  script  of  March  17,
1907,  are  the  only  reference  before  August,  1908,  that  we
have  found  in  the  whole  of  her  script  to  Euskin  or  any  of
his  works.  Euskin's  name  occurs  once  in  my  script  of  March
19,  1905,  in  an  attempt,  possibly  veridical,  to  establish  a
■connexion  with  Mrs.  Holland.  The  object  described  is  a  picture
of  which  it  is  said  in  the  script  "  Euskin  has  written  of  it."^

It  is  a  point  worth  noting  that  the  development  of  the
Sidgwick  control  in  the  Mac  script  corresponded  closely  in
point  of  time  with  the  inauguration  of  the  new  cross-corre-
spondence experiment  between  my  daughter  and  myself  The
first  appearance  of  Sidgwick jj  is  on  July  19,  1908,  and  on  that
day  begin  the  allusions  in  the  Mac  script  to  "  Sesame  and
Lilies."  Our  first  contemporaneous  sitting  for  script  was  on
July  20,  1908,  and  on  that  day  in  my  script  emerges
the  quotation  from  Clough  which  sixteen  months  before  had
immediately  j)receded  in  Miss  Verrall's  script  the  words  "  Sesame
and  Lilies."  No  special  reason  has  been  found  by  any  of  the
automatists  concerned  for  associating  Sesame  and  Lilies  with
Dr.  Sidgwick.  Headers  of  his  biography  ^  or  of  his  collected
essays  might  easily  find  a  link  between  him  and  Clough,  and
to  me  and  my  daughter  the  names  of  Clough  and  Sidgwick
are  intimately  associated.  But  whereas  the  reference  to  Clough
occurs  in  her  script  of  March  17,  1907,  and  in  mine  of
July  20,  1908,  the  name  Sidgwick  is  found  only  in  the
Mac  script,  which  contains  no  allusion  to  Clough.

Eesemblances  in  Scripts  to  Contents  of  "  Sesame  and

Lilies."

The  next  point  to  notice  is  a  certain  similarity  between
the  contents  of  two  of  the  scripts^  and  the  concluding  paragraphs

iSee  Proceedimis  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXI.  p.  254.
-See,  for  instance,  Memoir,  p.  141.

^Between  the  verse  of  H.  V.  script  of  August  19,  and  sections  41-45  of  Sesame,
there  is  a  certain  similarity,  but  no  ascertainable  connexion,  such  as  might
for  instance  be  suggested  by  resemblance  in  vocabulary  or  phraseology.  The


LX.]


A  New  Group  of  Experimenters.


289


of  Euskin's  second  lecture.  Extracts  will  enable  the  reader  to
judge  whether  the  similarity  is  more  than  accidental.  The
first  script  (one  of  Miss  Verrall's)  falls  outside  the  period  of
"Sesame  and  Lilies"  scripts  (August  12-22,  1908).  It  was
produced  after  the  comparison  of  scripts  had  suggested  to  us
that  an  attempt  had  been  unsuccessfully  made  to  produce
"  Sesame  and  Lilies "  as  a  cross-correspondence,  but  before  the
reading  of  the  Mac  script  had  revived  any  interest  in  the
subject.  On  September  1-1,  1908,  the  H.  V.  script  contained
the  folio  win" :

o

In  the  meadows  where  bloom  the  daisies  and  young  maids'  feet
are  tripping  in  the  dance — around  the  Maypole  on  the  village  green —
our  English  may,  the  hawthorn's  scented  pride,  the  bridal  wreath  of
summer  Queen  of  May — the  light  fantastic  toe.

And  Holbein's  dance  too,  the  dance  of  Death.

Sections  93  and  94  of  Euskin's  second  lecture,  Queens
Gardens — never  read  by  Miss  Verrall — contain  the following  :

Have  you  ever  considered  what  a  deep  under  meaning  there  lies
...  in  our  custom  of  strewing  flowers  .  .  .  that  .  .  .  they  will  tread
on  herbs  of  sweet  scent  .  .  .  The  path  of  a  good  woman  is  indeed
strewn  with  flowers ;  but  they  rise  behind  her  steps,  not  before  them.
"  Her  feet  have  touched  the  meadows,  and  left  the  daisies  rosy."
.  .  .  Shall  morning  follow  morning,  for  you,  but  not  for  [the  poor] ;
and  the  dawn  rise  to  watch,  far  away,  those  frantic  Dances  of
Death.

The  two  passages  show  some  resemblances ;  the  "  meadows,"  the
"  daisies,"  the  "  feet,"  are  common  to  both,  the  "  scented  pride  "
perhaps  recalls  the  "  herbs  of  sweet  scent "  ;  possibly  the  "  May-
pole," "  English  may,"  and  "  hawthorn "  of  the  script  vaguely
represent  the  "  dawn "  and  general  setting  of  Euskin's  second
paragraph. 1  In  the  script  the  contrast  is  between  the  "  light
fantastic  toe  "  and  the  "  dance  of  Death  " ;  in  Euskin  (Section
94)  the  contrast  is  between  the  "freshness  of  dawn "  and  the

reader  who  wishes  to  investigate  further  the  question  of  connexion  between
the  contents  of  Ruskin's  volume  and  the  scripts  will  find  in  the  Appendix,
p.  316,  a  list  of  all  passages  in  Sesame  and  Lilies  which  appear  to  me  to
have  any  counterpart  in  the  scripts.

^"Hawthorn"  or  "may"  has  elsewhere  in  H.  V.  script  been  associated,
through  its  French  name,  Aiihipine,  with  dawn,

T


290


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


"  frantic  Dances  of  Death  "  as  terminatino-  the  outrageous  banquet
described  before,  and  referred  to  in  his  note  on  this  passage.

A  still  more  direct  connexion  seems  to  exist  between  the
Mac  script  and  the  Euskin  volume.  On  July  26,  1908,  the
same  day  on  which  was  produced  the  allusion  to  the  blue
leather-bound  book,  there  also  came  two  quotations  from
Tennyson's  poem  of  Maud.  A  first  hint  of  one  of  these
is  probably  to  be  traced  in  the  phrase  of  July  19,  "May
I  go  to  the  wind  kissed  hollow."  But  whether  that  be
so  or  not,  the  phrase  on  July  26,  "I  hate  the  little  hollow,"^
is  unmistakably  a  quotation  from  Maud,  and  was  recognised  as
such  in  Miss  Mac's  annotations.  The  second  quotation  from
Maud  on  July  26  is  as  follows:  "  Eoses  in  the  west,  Eoses  in
the  south,  Eoses  in  her  cheeks,  And  a  rose  her  mouth."
This  quotation  was  recognised  also  as  from  Maud ;  it  is  not
correctly  quoted ;  in  the  first  two  lines  "  Eoses  in "  should  be
"  Eosy  is,"  and  "  in  "  in  the  third  line  should  be  "  are."

From  no  other  poem  are  two  quotations  given  in  the  Mac
script ;  and  this  fact  in  itself  throws  emphasis  on  Tennyson's
Maud.  Eeaders  of  Mr.  Piddington's  Eeport — not  published  when
the  Mac  script  was  produced — will  not  need  to  be  reminded
of  the  important  part  played  in  the  most  elaborate  of  all  the
cross-correspondences,  "  Light  in  West  "  (Section  XIX.),  by  the
allusion  to  Maud  ;  "  Eosy  is  the  East  and  so  on,"  in  my  script
of  April  8,  1907  (Proc.  XXII.  p.  271).

It  is  therefore  of  some  interest  to  find  in  a  script  endeavour-
ing to  establish  cross-correspondence  with  me,  an  allusion  to  a
quotation  which  in  my  own  script  played  a  part  in  establishing
cross-correspondences  with  other  automatists.  But  there  is  a
special  suitability  in  this  particular  case  in  the  choice  of  this
quotation  from  Maud,  as  will  be  seen  by  a  reader  who  will
compare  some  sentences  from  Mr.  Piddington's  Eeport  with  the
concluding  paragraphs  of  Euskin's  Sesame  and  Lilies.  Mr.
Piddington  writes  (p.  276)  of

that  famous  passage  in  Maud  where  the  lover,  waiting  for  Maud
in  the  high  Hall-garden,  sees  just  before  the  dawn  (as  did  the  lover
Dante  waiting  on  the  Mount  of  Purgatory  to  begin  the  ascent  that
is  to  bring  him  finally  to  Beatrice)  the  planet  of  Love,

1  The  actual  phrase  in  Maud  is,  "I  hate  the  dreadful  hollow  behind  the
little  wood;"  in  the  script  it  runs,  "I  hate  the  little  hollow — woods  of  box."


LX.]


A  New  Group  of  Experimenters.


291


and  the  reader  will  remember  that  Dante  immediately  there-
after enters  the  Terrestrial  Paradise  and  sees  beyond  the  river
of  Lethe  Matilda  gathering  flowers. Euskin  writes  :

Shall  morning  follow  morning  .  .  .  but  no  dawn  rise  to  breathe
upon  these  living  banks  of  wild  violet,  and  woodbine,  and  rose  ;  nor
call  to  you,  through  your  casement — call  (not  giving  you  the  name
of  the  English  poet's  lady,  but  the  name  of  Dante's  great  Matilda,
who,  on  the  edge  of  happy  Lethe,  stood,  wreathing  flowers  with  flowers),
saying:  "Come  into  the  garden,  Maud."

It  cannot  be  an  accident  that  selects  as  a  subject  for  cross-
correspondence  between  Sidgwickji  (with  the  concurrence  ^  of
Myersji)  on  the  one  hand  and  Myersy  and  Myersjjv  on  the  other,
the  title  of  a  book  of  Euskin's  where,  in  a  most  characteristic
passage,  the  author  makes  use  of  a  twice  repeated  quotation  from
Tennyson,  to  introduce  a  comparison  between  the  English  poet's
Maud  in  her  garden,  and  Dante's  Matilda  in  the  Earthly  Paradise.

Further  Eeferences  in  the  Mac  Script.

One  further  reference  to  the  subject  of  this  cross-correspond-
ence was  made  by  Sidgwickji.  On  October  7th,  1908,  Miss
Mac  received  from  me  a  general  comment  on  the  script  sent
to  me,  but  no  reference  whatever  was  made  to  the  words,
"  Sesame  and  Lilies,"  or  to  Euskin,  nor  was  anything  said  that
could  have  suggested  to  the  automatists  that  I  was  interested
in  the  book.  The  Mac  script,  obtained  on  that  day,  after  the
arrival  of  my  letter,  contained  the  words :  "  The  crucial  test
is  the  lost  book  lost  lost  lost."  This  was  followed  by  a
drawing  of  a  book  twice  repeated.  The  drawing  shows  an
opened  book  with  a  floral  decoration  upon  the  binding.  It
is  impossible  to  name  the  flower  or  foliage  represented.

For  some  few  days'-  before  this  script  was  obtained  I  had
been  engaged  in  investigating  the  various  editions  of  Sesame
and  Lilies  in  connexion  with  the  question  of  introductory
mottoes  and  bindings,  and  in  particular  I  had  been  trying  to
trace,  but  without success, the  blue  leather-bound copy  of

1  See  above,  p.  268  and  Appendix,  p.  307.

^  See  above,  p.  286.  The  actual  date  of  my  investigation  of  all  the  editions
of  Ruskin  in  the  University  Library  veas  October  oth,  1908.


292


Mrs.  A.  W.  V  err  all.


[part


Piuskin's  Sesame  and  Lilies  wliich  had  been  given  to  my
mother.

It  thus  appears  that  there  was  some  point  in  a  reference
at  this  date  to  a  lost  book,  but  if  that  book  be  taken  to  refer
to  Sesame  anel  Lilies,  the  representation  of  it  must  be  symbolic.
On  no  discoverable  copy  of  Euskin's  book  is  there  a  floral
decoration  of  the  type  drawn  in  the  script.^  On  the  other
hand,  it  is  not  inconsistent  with  automatic  habits  to  describe
an  object  by  means  of  a  symbolic  picture.

But  whether  or  not  the  actual  drav^fing  was  intended  to
represent  Euskin's  book,  the  connexion  of  the  script  of  October
7  with  earlier  references  to  Sesame  eincl  Lilies  in  the  Mac
script  is  unmistakable.  Two  phrases  in  it  repeat  or  recall
phrases  used  in  the  allusions  on  July  19  and  26.  Thus
"  Your  eyes  are  still  clay  bound — V.  has  a  glimpse  of  the
meaning  "  recalls  the  allusion  to  "  Blind  Blind  Blind — wherefore
are  your  eyes  bound  with  clay "  that  followed  immediately
upon  the  description  of  the  book  bound  in  blue  on  July  26  ;
and  "  Search  the  scriptures  for  the  only  adequate  meaning "
repeats  words  forming  part  of  the  allusion  to  Euskin's  motto  to
Scseimc  on  July  19.  Under  these  circumstances  there  is  no
doubt  that  the  "  lost  book  "  which  is  the  "  crucial  test "  is  to  be
interpreted  as  Euskin's  Sesame  and  Lilies.^


Chronological  Eecapitulation.

A  recapitulation  in  chronological  order  of  the  main  incidents
above  described,  and  a  summary  of  the  writer's  conclusions,  may
help  the  reader  to  understand  the  whole  cross-correspondence.^

On  July  19,  1908,  in  the  writings  of  automatists  entirely
unconnected with any previous experimenters, a  "  Sidgwick

^  The  original  drawing  was  sent  to  me  by  Miss  Mac.  '

'■^The  script  also  contains  tlie  drawing  of  a  laurel  wreath,  not  elsewhere
contained  in  the  Mac  script.  Is  it  an  accident  that  whereas  the  cross-corre-
spoudence  on  "Sesame  and  Lilies"  between  the  Mac  and  Verrall  scripts  begins
on  March  17,  1907,  in  H.  V.  script  with  a  reference  to  a  laurel  wreath,
followed  by  Clough's  poem  and  the  words  "Sesame  and  Lilies,"  it  ends  on
October  7,  1908,  with  the  Mac  script  containing  drawings  of  a  laurel  wreath
and  Ruskin's  book  ?

3  For  a  chronological  table  of  incidents  see  Appendix,  p.  317.


LX.]


A  New  Group  of  Experimenters.


293


control "  developed.  This  control,  Sidgwickji,  used  phrases  re-
calling the  two  mottoes  prefixed  in  the  earlier  editions  of
Euskin's  Sesame  and  Lilies  to  the  two  lectures.  On  July  26
Sidgwickjj  referred  to  a  book  carefully  bound  in  blue  leather.
On  July  27  Sidgwickjj  gave  the  phrase  "Sesame  and  Lilies,"
and  on  July  29  said  that  he  was  now  trying  to  get  a  message
for  Mrs.  Verrall.  But  the  automatists  did  not  enter  into  com-
munication at  this  time  with  me.

On  August  19,  1908,  in  my  script,  MyerSy  produced  "Lilies"
as  half  of  a  message,  which  was  to  be  completed,  through  some
other  automatist,  with  another  word.  The  Lilies  were  described
as  being  in  a  garden,  and  it  was  stated  that  for  the  completion
of  the  incident  the  experimenter  must  wait  some  time.  Con-
temporaneously on  August  12,  19,  and  22,  Myers^y  produced
references  to  growing  lilies  and  other  connected  topics,  and  also
gave  two  titles  of  books  by  Euskin,  titles  which  were  subse-
quently found  to  have  been  intimately  associated  by  Euskin
himself  with  Sesame  and  Lilies.

On  September  1,  1908,  my  daughter  and  I  compared
our  recent  scripts  for  July  and  August,  and  recognised
that  about  the  middle  of  August  there  had  been  what  we
regarded  as  an  unsuccessful  attempt  to  give  Euskin's  title.
Sesame  and  Lilies,  as  a  cross-correspondence  between  the  two
scripts. But  we  made  no  note  of  this  opinion.

Between  September  12  and  18,  1908,  another  control  in  the
Mac  script  urged  that  the  messages  of  Sidgwickjj  should  be  sent
to  Mrs.  A^errall  by  September  26,  and  these  messages  were
despatched,  with  a  letter  from  Miss  Mac,  on  September  23.^

Meanwhile  on  September  23  there  were  allusions  in  Miss
Verrall's  script  to  Sesame  and  Lilies,  in  phrases  reminiscent  of
the  scripts  concerned  in  the  previous  attempt  at  cross-corre-
spondences between  her  scripts  and  mine.  This  script  therefore
serves  as  a  record  of  the  impression  formed  by  us  on  September
1,  but  not  then  recorded.

On  September  26  a  comparison  of  the  statements  by
Sidgwickjj  with  those  of  MyerSy  and  Myers^y  showed  that  the
phrase  suggested  in  the  Verrall  scripts  had  been  expressed  in
the  Mac  script.

1  Posted  September  24,  1908.


294


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


Conclusions.

It;  is  claimed  that  the  intimate  inter-connexions  of  this  episode
are  not  due  to  accident,  and  that  they  show  throughout  a
perception  of  the  general  situation,  as  well  as  a  knowledge  of
certain  facts  outside  the  range  of  the  automatists  concerned.
In  particular  it  is  claimed  that  intelligence  is  shown  in  the
following  points  :

(a)  In  the  division  of  the  subject  between  three  automatists
and  the  distribution  between  them  of  various  topics  ;  thus,  while
there  are  inter-connexions  between  all  the  scripts  of  the  ideas
Lilies,  Blue,  and  Gold,  the  titles  of  Ruskin's  two  other  books
occur  only  in  H.  V.  script,  the  full  title  Sesame  and  Lilies,  as
well  as  the  allusions  to  the  prefixed  mottoes,  occurs  only  in  the
Mac  script,  while  the  indication  that  Lilies  is  one  of  two  words
intended  for  a  cross-correspondence  is  suggested  in  M.  V.  script.

(b)  In  the  withholding  of  the  Mac  script  from  Mrs.  Verrall  till
after  the  comparison  of  M.  V.  and  H.  V.  scripts  on  September  1,
and  in  the  sending  of  the  Mac  script  before  the  separation  of
Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall.

(c)  In  the  registration  in  H.  V.  script  of  September  23  of
the  impression  produced  on  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall  by  the  com-
parison of  their  scripts  on  September  1,  but  not  recorded  by
them.

(d)  In  the  choice  of  titles  of  Euskin's  books  named  in  H.  V.
script,  these  two  titles  being,  as  was  subsequently  discovered,
intimately  associated  as  no  other  two  books  could  be  with  the
name  Sesame  and  Lilies.

(f)  In  the  choice  of  the  subject  of  the  cross-correspondence,
the  contents  of  Euskin's  Sesame  and  Lilies  being  linked  by  an
easy  association  of  ideas  with  other  subjects  already  successfully
used  in  cross-correspondences  by  MyerSp,  MyerSy,  and  MyerSjj.

Cross-Correspondence.

"  Vanity  of  Vanities."

The  name  of  the  control,  as  I  have  said,  was  introduced  four
times  into  the  script  of  July  27,  1908  (see  above,  p.  269).  The
phrase  "  Sesame  and  Lilies "  followed  upon its second  use.


1


LX.]


A  New  Group  of  Experimenters.


295


Immediately  after  its  third  use  came  the  words  :  "  Vanity  of

vanities  all  is  vanity,"  followed  by  a  line  . Between  this

phrase  and  a  phrase  in  H.  V.  script  I  am  disposed  to  see  a
correspondence ;  the  connexion  is  scarcely  disputable,  but  the
H.  V.  script  precedes  the  inception  of  the  Mac  script  by  some
six  weeks.

On  June  1st,  1908,-^  the  H.  V.  script  contained  the  following:

Lay  not  up  to  yourselves  treasure  upon  earth,  something  about
moth  and  corruption  and  the  worm  shall  devour  it.

Vanitas  vanitatum.

The  anchor  mark  that  well.

In  M.  V.  and  H.  V.  scripts  the  anchor,  the  symbol  of  hope,  has
long  been  connected  with  Dr.  Sidgwick.-  It  is  therefore  beyond
dispute  that  on  June  1,  1908,  the  H.  V.  script  connected  the
phrase  "  Vanitas  vanitatum  "  with  a  Sidgwick  symbol,  and  empha-
sised the  importance  of  the  connexion.^

On July  21, 1908, Sidgwickjf  wrote:  "Evelyn

faithful  unto  death.  Ecclesiastes  3.  2."  On  July  26  Sidgwickji,
immediately  after  the  description  of  the  blue  leather-bound  book,^
wrote  "Ecclesiastes  seven  and  three."  On  July  27  Sidgwick jj,
immediately  after  giving  the  words  "  Sesame  and  Lilies,"  wrote  :
"  Vanity  of  vanities  all  is  vanity."  ^

Ecclesiastes  3.  2  is  as  follows  :  "A  time  to  be  born  and  a  time
to  die ;  a  time  to  plant  and  a  time  to  pluck  up  that  which  is
planted."  Ecclesiastes  7.  3  is  as  follows  :  "  Sorrow  is  better  than
laughter :  for  by  the  sadness  of  the  countenance  the  heart  is
made  better."  It  is  of  course  possible  that  one  or  both  of  these
texts  were  intentionally  referred  to  in  the  script,  but  in  the
absence  of  verbal  quotation  and  in  view  of  the  fact  that  a  text
actually  quoted  without  reference  on  July  27,  1908,  is  from
Ecclesiastes,  it  is  more  probable  that  the  earlier  references  to  texts

^  One  piece  of  H.  V.  script  (on  June  10)  was  produced  after  this  before  Miss
Verrall  went  to  Switzerland. No  further  script  was  produced  till  July  20.

-  See  Proc.  XXI.  pp.  224  etc.
The  preceding  sentence  recalls  the  subject  of  Ruskin's  first  lecture,  Semme  :
or  Kings'  Treasuries,  in  particular  §  45.

4  See  above,  p.  275.  ^  Ecd.  i.  2;  xii.  8.  ,


296


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


in  Ucclesiastes  are  incorrect  preliminary  emergences  of  the  text
eventually  written  on  July  27.  The  reader  of  JEcclcsiastcs  will
remember  that  the  idea  of  Vanity  is  so  prevalent  throughout  the
book  that  by  a  common  association  of  ideas  an  approach  to  the
familiar  "Vanity  of  vanities"  might  easily  be  made  by  means
of  general  allusions  to  the  book  of  Ecclesiastes}

Another  reason  for  connecting  the  earlier  references  to
Ecclesiastes  on  July  21  and  26  with  the  quotation  of  July
27  is  to  be  found  in  the  context  of  the  three  scripts.
Throughout  the  Mac  script  the  Sidgwick  control  is  associ-
ated with  faith,  charity,  and  hope,  and  their  symbols — the
cross,  heart,  and  anchor.-  Thus  on  July  19,  the  first  com-
munication claimed  by  Sidgwickjf  was  headed  by  his  name  and

shortly  followed  by  the  drawing  of  a  cross  j^^"^  and  the

words  "faithful  unto  death."  On  July  21,  in  a  communication
from  Sidgwickjf,  this  was  repeated,  and  a  little  later,  just  before
the  reference  to  Ecclesiastes  3.  2,  came  the words,  "Evelyn

faithful  unto  death." The  same  script  later  contains

the  drawing  of  an  anchor.  On  July  23  the  script  begins,
"Sidgwick  These  three  hope  faith  chai-ity."  On  July  26  are
found  drawings  of  cross,  heart,  and  anchor,  and,  a  little  later,
the  star  is  drawn,  followed  again  by  the  words,  "  Faithful  unto
death."

Under  these  circumstances  there  is  no  doubt  that  both  the
earlier  references  to  Ecclesiastes,  as  well  as  the  actual  verbal
quotation  on  July  27,  are  claimed  by  Sidgwickjf.  Moreover,
in  the  script  of  July  so  claimed  there  are  two,  and  only  two
drawings  of  an  anchor,  and  these  come  upon  the  only  two
days  (out  of  nine  days  on  which  Sidgwickjj  wrote)  on  which
is  mentioned  the  name  Ecclesiastes.

When  it  is  remembered  that  in  the  H.  V.  script  of  June  1
the  phrase  "  vanitas  vanitatum "  was  immediately  followed  by
the  words  "  The  anchor  mark  that  well,"  it  will  be  seen  that

^  See  above,  p.  284,  for  a  similar  suggestion  to  explain  the  reference  to  a
non-existent  chapter  in  the  book  of  Ruth.

^See  Proc.  Vol.  XXI.  pp.  '2"24,  etc.,  which  had  been  read  by  the  automatists.


LX.]


A  New  Group  of  Experimenters.


297


there  was  good  reason  for  Sidgwickjj  to  include  in  the  four
topics  of  his  message  to  me  of  July  27,  the  words  "  A'anity
of  vanities  all  is  A^anity."

Ceoss-Coerespondence.
Poem  of  Victor  Hugo.

The  fourth  topic  again,  as  I  think,  constitutes  a  cross-
correspondence  with  my  daughter's  script,  for  Sidgwickji  refers
to  one  of  two  stanzas  of  a  poem  of  Victor  Hugo's,  of  which
the  other  stanza  had  occurred  in  Miss  Verrall's  (unpublished)
script.  The  interval  between  the  two  scripts  is  greater  than
in  the  last  instance,  being  rather  over  four  months.  On  the
other  hand,  the  connexion  is  definitely  marked  by  the  occurrence
in  both  scripts  of  a  similar  word,  irrelevant  to  the  poem,  but
with  a  certain  appropriateness  to  the  whole  situation.

On  March  16,  1908,  the  H.  V.  script  ran  as  follows:^

La  vie  est  breve
Un  pen  d'espoir
Un  pen  de  reve
Et  puis  bonsoir.

The  end  of  the  story.

Like  a  crimson  petalled  rose  the  rose  of  Sharon.

When  the  proof  was  sought  he  told  them  that  the  only  means
of  obtaining  it  was  to  persevere  in  the  attempt  to  prove  the
connexion.

Gautier  and  Hugo  those  together  types  to  be  compared.
Unless  there  is  a  possibiHty  of  setting  the  two  side  by  side  there
would  be  no  opportunity.

is  is  the

now  at  his  ease.

[drawing  of  flower] note  this  flower.

The  end  of  the  script  is  fragmentary  and  obscure.  But
what  comes  out  clearly  is  (1)  the  quotation  of  a  whole  stanza
from  a  two-stanza  poem  of  Victor  Hugo  ; (2)  an  allusion  to

^  The  whole  script  is  quoted.  In  the  original  the  last  word  of  the  second
line  was  originally  amour,  but  the  pencil  has  been  drawn  through  this  and
the  word  espoir  substituted.


298


Mrs.  A.  W.  V err  all.


[part


a  rose;  (3)  a  suggestion  that  some  attempt  to  prove  a  connexion
must  be  made,  that  some  two  things  are  to  be  set  side  by
side,  and  two  French  poets  compared.  The  script  was  at  the
time  interpreted  by  Miss  Verrall  as  suggesting  that  a  cross-
correspondence  of  some  kind  was  intended.  It  had  been
obtained  on  a  day  when  she  and  I  were  intending  to  write
simultaneously,  but  I  had  been  prevented  from  trying  for
script.

On  July  27,  1908,  the  Mac  script,  immediately  after  the
■words,  above  quoted,  "all  is  vanity  "  went  on:

A  little  love  and  then  the  joy  fades  and  the  rose  is  crumpled
and  wither(s)  up — fane.  [Here  the  automatists  asked  what  was  the
last  word  and  the  script  went  on:  "French,"  and  added  an  accent
to  the  e  of  the  preceding  word,  thus  converting  fane  into  fanL
It  then  concluded  :]  Bleeding  hearts  cannot  be  staunched  and  the
voice  of  death  echoes  through  the  brain  with  palling  monotony —
Sidgwick — hollow  and  mortal  vain  is  life  without  a  meaning.

This  script  at  once  reminded  me  of  the  first  stanza  of  the
poem  by  Victor  Hugo,  very  familiar  to  me,  of  which  the
second  stanza  has  been  quoted  above. The  first  stanza  runs :

"  La  vie  est  vaine
Un  peu  d'amour
Un  peu  de  haine
Et  puis  bonjour  !  "

The  allusions  are  unmistakable:  "A  little  love"  translates
un  peu  d'amour " ;  the  rhyme  is  given  by  "  fane,"  again
perhaps  by  "  brain,"  and  in  the  final  sentence  the  phrase
"  Vain  is  life  "  translates  "  la  vie  est  vaine  "  ;  "  French  "
suggests  the  language  wanted.

The  poem  was  known  to  Miss  Mac,  for  though  in  her  first
annotations  she  only  wrote  :  " '  Vain  is  life  without  a  meaning  '
seems  familiar:  origin  of  quotation,  if  it  be  one,  not  known,"
she  wrote  later  in  answer  to  my  question,  whether  the
automatists  knew  a  poem  of  Victor  Hugo's  which  begins
'  La  vie  est  vaine,' "  that  all  knew  it,  and  that  she  ought  to
have  mentioned  that  "  a  little  love "  in  the  script  recalled
this  poem  to  her,  but  that  what  followed  in  the  script  was
so  different  that  she  did  not  think  it  could  refer  to  the
Hugo  poem.


LX.]


A  Neiu  Group  of  Experimenters.


299


It  is  in  itself  not  remarkable  that  the  H.  V.  script  on
March  16,  1908,  and  the  Mac  script  on  July  27,  1908,
should  quote  from  a  poem  of  Victor  Hugo's  known  to  both
automatists.  It  is  more  remarkable  that  each  script  quotes  a
different  verse,  and  that  in  one  case,  the  H.  V.  script,  the  words
"  the  end  of  the  story  "  indicate  that  the  second  and  concluding
verse  is  deliberately  chosen.  Moreover,  in  this  case  it  was
plainly  indicated  that  a  cross-correspondence  was  intended,  and
that  unless  "  two "  could  be  set  side  by  side  some  opportunity
would  be  lost.  But  what  clinches  the  whole  matter  and  dis-
poses of  the  theory  that  the  correspondence  is  accidental,  is
the  introduction  into  both  scripts  of  the  word  "  rose,"  a  word
which  has  no  association  whatever  with  either  verse  of  the
original  poem.  And  the  rose  of  the  H.  V.  script  is,  it  should
be  observed,  the  "  rose  of  Sharon,"  a  phrase  which  occurs  in  the
Mac  script  in  connexion  with  the  allusions  to  Sesame  and  Lilies.

It  will  be  admitted  that  here  again  Sidgwickjj  had  good
reason  to  include  in  the  four  topics  of  his  message  to  me  of  July
27,  1908,  the  combination  of  a  rose  with  the  first  stanza  of
a  poem  of  which  the  second  stanza,  also  combined  with  a  rose,
was  known  by  me  to  have  occurred  four  months  before  in
my  daughter's  script.

Ke-echo  of  Peevious  Experiments.

I  now  return  to  the  first  of  the  topics  of  July  27,  1908,
in  which  I  see  not  a  cross-cori'espondence  with  a  contemporary
automatist — as  in  the  three  already  described — but  rather  a
reminiscence  or  re-echo  of  the  subject  of  a  previous  successful
•experiment  in  automatic  cross-correspondence.

The  Mac  script  of  July  27,  1908,  began  as  follows:

Sidgwick.  news  from  the  Occident  [drawing  of  stalked  rose
with  leaf]  Roses — dew-kissed. — R.  S.^

Neither  of  these  phrases  is,  as  far  as  I  have  been  able  to
discover, a quotation. The second recalls "  Sharon's  dewy

^  These  initials  which  were  not  looked  on  by  the  automatists  as  the  signature
of  a  control,  had  occurred  before,  on  July  20.  There  they  came  in  the  midst
of  the  script,  just  as  6.  V.  occurs  in  the  script  of  July  21  (see  Appendix).
The  initials  R.  S.  have  not  been  identified  or  explained.


300


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


rose"  of  the  script  of  July  19;  but  no  phrase  at  all  like
the  first  is  to  be  found  in  the  script.  Between  the  two  there
is  no  obvious  connexion,  but  the  whole  arrangement  of  the
script  indicates  that  they  form  part  of  a  single  topic,  the
next  topic,  Sesame  and  Lilies,  being  introduced  by  a  repetition
of  the  name  of  the  control.

Regarded  as  forming  a  whole,  the  two  clauses  seem  to
present  a  certain  contrast  or  opposition ;  news  is  announced
from  the  setting  sun,  whereas  it  is  rather  with  the  rising  of  the
sun  that  we  associate  dew-kissed  roses,  as  it  is  in  the  morning
that  we  find  dew  upon  the  roses.  It  is  in  this  contrast  that
I  conceive  to  be  the  point  of  the  message.  The  words  of
Sidgwicku  are  not  quotations,  it  is  true,  but  we  may  find
their  literary  prototype,  and  a  parallel,  not  only  to  "  news
from  the  Occident "  but  to  news  from  the  Occident  that  might
very  well  find  the  "  roses  dew-kissed  ",  in  the  poem  of  Maud,
where  the  poet  bids  the  happy  day

"  Pass  the  happy  news  .  ■

Blush  it  thro  the  West

Till  the  West  is  East,
Blush  it  thro'  the  West."

Here  then  is  '  news  from  the '  West,  and  news  intimately
associated  with  '  roses.'  Tennyson's  Maud,  as  I  have  already
said,^  is  the  only  poem  from  which  two  quotations  are  given
by  Sidgwickjj.  The  second  of  those  two  quotations,  after  a
preliminary  attempt  on  July  21,  emerged  on  July  26 — the
day  preceding  the  collected  messages  to  me — in  a  reproduction
of  the  four  lines

"Eosy  is  the  West
Eosy  is  the  South
Roses  are  her  cheeks
And  a  rose  her  mouth,"

with  the  substitution  in  the  first  two  lines  of  "  Eoses  in "
for  "  Eosy  is,"  and  in  the  third  of  "  Eoses  in "  for  "  Eoses
are.

iSee  p.  290.


LX.]


A  Neiv  Group  of  Experimenters.


301


At  the  time  that  the  Mac  script  was  produced,  Mr.
Piddington's  Eeport  {Proc.  Vol.  XXII.)  was  not  published,  and
no  paper  had  been  read  at  any  meeting  of  the  Society  on  the
subject  of  Section  XIX.,  "  Light  in  West,"  in  which  he  describes
the  series  of  complicated  cross-correspondences  between  the  trance
of  Mrs.  Piper  and  the  scripts  of  Mrs.  Holland  and  myself.
These  are  grouped  round  the  three  concordant  contributions
made  on  April  8,  1907  {o^o.  cit.  pp.  265-77);  the  contribution
of  my  script  was  the  substitution  of  "  east "  for  "  west "  in
a  quotation  from  the  same  poem  from  Maud  (l.  xvii.),  which
is  quoted  in  the  Mac  script  of  July  21  and  26,  1908.  The
automatists  had  no  knowledge  of  any  of  these  scripts,  or  of
Mr.  Piddington's  conclusions.  Whatever  view  we  may  hold  as
to  the  meaning  of  the  opening  words  of  the  Mac  script  of
July  27,  1908,  it  is  certain  that  on  July  26  the  script
quoted  the  same  line  which  had  been  referred  to  in  my
script  of  April  8,  1907.  But  to  me  it  appears  that  the
opening  sentence  of  Sidgwickji  on  July  27,  1908,  conveyed
an  unmistakable  allusion  to  the  "  concatenation  of  cross-
correspondences  "  described  by  Mr.  Piddington  as  "  Light  in
West,"  and  represented  in  the  Mac  script  as  "  News  from  the
Occident."

This  is  not  the  only  '  re-echo '  in  the  Mac  script.  There
is  in  the  script  of  July  26th,  1908,  an  unmistakeable  allusion
to  an  incident  described  in  my  Eeport  on  my  automatic  writing
{Proc.  S.P.R.  Vol.  XX.)  which  there  is  every  reason  to  believe
unknown  to  the  automatists.  The  Eeport  was  published  in
October,  1906,  and  it  is  therefore  impossible  to  be  certain
that  some  notice  of  the  volume  did  not  come  within  the
cognisance  of  one  of  the  automatists  concerned,  though  none
of  the  family  had  read  the  Eeport  in  question.^  The  reader
must  judge  how  far  it  is  probable  that  a  review,  or  notice,
or  even  a  perusal  of  the  Eeport  is  likely  to  be  responsible  for
the  incident  which  I  now  describe.

On  July  26,  1908,  the  Mac  script  passed  on  from  the
quotation  from  Maud  l.  xvii.  to an  allusion  to a  well-known

1  See  above,  p.  266,  for  a  statement  of  the  automatists'  previous  knowledge
of  the  publications  of  the  S.P.E.  Both  Miss  E.  Mac  and  Mr.  A.  Mac  state
that,  to  the  best  of  their  knowledge,  they  did  not  read  my  Report  or  any
review  of  it.


302


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


poem  of  Malherbe's  on  the  death  of  his  friend's  child.^  Then
came  the  following :

(illegible  Greek  characters)  Sennacherib  Assur  bani  pal O  star

of  the  dawn — to the porch of  the  east  ^aster  •  The

passionate  pilgrim.

Eeaders  of  Proceedings  Vol.  XX.  will  remember  that  during
some  weeks  in  1901  my  script  was  occupied  with  attempts  to
reproduce  three  Greek  words  chosen  by  my  husband  as  the
subject  of  an  experiment.  The  words  were  juovottoAop  e?  aco
("  to  the  one-horse  or  solitary  dawn ").  They  were  taken
from  a  chorus  in  the  Orestes  of  Euripides"  describing  a  reversal
of  natural  phenomena.  Both  the  meaning  and  the  sound  of
the  words  were  attempted  in  the  script.  Among  those  attempts
were  the  following^:

dawn -  J^^ly  '1-

towards  the  east  -A-ug.  16.

to  the  east  -^ug.  29.

in  the  east  like  stars  Sept.  7.

Banipal  and  Assur  .  .  .  Asta,  aster Sept.  7.

The  resemblance  between  my  Report  and  the  Mac  script
cannot  be  accidental,  and  that  Sidgwickjj  associated  the  phrases
with  me  is  manifest,  not  only  from  their  occurrence  in  script
which  the  automatists  were  told  to  send  to  me,  and  which
proved  to  be  full  of  "  messages "  appropriate  and  intelligible
to  me,  but  also  because  the  phrases  are  immediately  followed  by
the  words  "  the  passionate  pilgrim,"  words  which  in  my  script  of
Jan.  17,  1904,  had  been  associated  with  Dr.  Sidgwick.  This
latter  fact  was  known  to  the  automatists,  since  the  script  in
question  was  quoted  in  Miss  Johnson's  Beport,*  so  that  if  this
case  stood  alone,  it  would  be  difhcult  to  resist  the  conclusion
that  certain  passages  from  my  Eeport,  in  particular  the  copy  of
the  script  of  Sept.  7,  1901,  had  also  been  seen  at  some  time  by
one  of  the  automatists  and  retained  by  the  subliminal  memory.

But  the  case  does  not  stand  alone.  The  words  in  question
occur  in  the  same  Mac  script  which  contains  the  quotation

^This  incident  formed  part  of  a  series  of  allu.sions,  evidential  and  interesting
personally  to  me,  but  not  treated  here.

2Eiu-ipides,  Oreste-^  1004.  ^^ee  Proc.  S.P.R.  Vol.  XX.  pp.  387-93.

■»See  Proc.  Vol.  XXI.  pp.  227,  316.


LX.]  A  Neiu  Gtou.]}  of  Experimenters.  303


of  Maud  I.  xvii.,  re-echoing  the  quotation  of  the  same  passage
in  my  unpublished  script  of  April  8,  1907;  while  the  earlier
script  on  the  same  day  contains  allusions  to  Sesame  and  Lilies,.
and  also  to  Ecclesiastes  and  the  anchor,  constituting  cross-
correspondences  with  other  unpublished  scripts  of  my  daughter's
and  mine.  Under  these  circumstances  it  is  justifiable  to  point
out  that  there  appears  to  be  a  certain  intelligence  shown  in
the  selection  of  the  very  few  words  used  on  July  26,  1908,
to  recall  my  husband's  experiment.  These  words  are  not  an
exact  reproduction  of  anything  in  the  script.  They  summarise
the  account  in  my  Eeport  and  emphasise  with  remarkable
accuracy  the  chief  points ;  namely,  the  long  series  of  "  illegible
Greek  characters,"  ^  the  attempts  to  give  "  three  foreign  words  "
(Assur  bani  pal  -),  and  the  use  of  Latin  (aster)  in  the  script.
The  general  meaning  of  the  passage  selected  from  Euripides,
which  describes  the  reversal  of  natural  phenomena,  is  well
reproduced  in  the  phrase,  "  0  star  of  the  dawn  to  the  porch
of  the  east," — the  natural  progression  of  the  star  of  dawn,  as
of  other  stars,  being  from  the  porch  of  the  east.

I  have  now  described  the  four  topics  in  the  Mac  script  of
July  27,  1908,  which  accompany  the  four  uses  of  the  name
of  the  supposed  control.  But  before  concluding  the  whole
account,  it  remains  to  comment  on  five  words,  which  occur
after  the  phrase  "  Sesame  and  Lilies "  and  before  the  third
"  Sidgwick,"  thus :

Sidgwick  Sesame  and  Lilies  lotus  the  flower  of  repentance.

Eeference  to  "  lotus  "  is  very  frequent  in  the  preceding  script,
and  the  actual  words  of  July  27  had  occurred  on  July  19.

(July  19.) I  have  lost  the  precious  jewel  of  repentance.

Lotus — the  flower  of  repentance — Buddha.

See  the  little  lotus  flower  the  symbol  of  resignation.

(July  2L) lotus  buds — symbols  of  resignation.

(July  23.)  Lotus.

(July  27.) lotus  the  flower  of  repentance.

1  That  Sidgwickii  can  write  legible  Greek  letters  on  occasion  is  shown  by
the  introduction,  later  on  the  same  day,  of  the  words  yXvKvs  and  rjvprjxa  in
Greek  characters.

2  My  script  has  Banipal  and  Assur.


S04


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


Miss  Mac's  note  on  allusions  etc.,  in  the  script  runs  as
follows  :  "All  references  to  Lotus  thought  to  be  from  Holland
script."  The  passage  of  which  Miss  Mac  was  thinking  is  to  be
found  in  Miss  Johnson's  Eeport  (Proc.  Vol.  XXI.  p.  350):

From  the  ancient  lotus  symbol —

The  inevitable  lily —

Purity — immortality —

Detachment  from  Earthly  Care —

Karma — no —

Om  mani  pudmi  om  !

These  words  are  followed  by  a  "  rough  attempt  to  depict
the  ■  seed-vessel  of  the  lotus,  a  frequent  ornament  in  Buddhist
carving."  The  words  mean :  "  Oh  thou  jewel  in  the  lotus,
thou!"  and  the  "jewel  in  the  lotus"  symbolises  purity  as
well  as  heavenly  wisdom  and  is  sometimes  rendered  as  "  the
heart  of  the  lily."

There  seems  little  doubt  that  the  references  in  the  Mac
script  are  directly  traceable  to  the  above  passage  in  Miss
Johnson's  Eeport  on  the  Holland  script.  It  is  possible  that
the  association  there  and  elsewhere  of  lily  and  lotus  has
brought  in  the  "lotus"  just  after  the  "lilies"  of  "Sesame  and
Lilies"  on  July  27.  But  having  regard  to  the  relevance  of
all  the  other  script  on  July  27,  I  am  disposed  to  think  that
there  is  some  reason  not  hitherto  discovered  for  the  introduction
of  this  reminiscence  of  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  May  15,
1906.

Summary  and  Conclusion  of  Incident.

The  whole  script  therefore  of  July  27,  1908,  is  as  follows:
Sidgvvick. News  from  the  Occident. Roses — dew-kissed — R.  S.

Sidgwick. Sesame  and  Lilies — Lotus  the  flower  of  repentance —
Sidgwick. Vanity  of  vanities  all  is  vanity — A  little  love  and  then
the  joy  fades  and  the  rose  is  crumpled  and  wither[s]  up — fane.
(Automatists  ask  "  what  is  that  1  ")

French  [accent  added  to  last  word  making  fane  into  fane].  Bleeding
hearts  cannot  be  staunched  and  the  voice  of  death  echoes  through
the  brain  with  palling  monotony — Sidgwick — hollow  and  mortal  vain
is  life  without  a  meaning.


LX.]


A  Neiu  Group  of  Experimenters.


305


I  take  this  script  to  contain  four  topics,  each  purporting  to
come  from  Sidgwickjj :

(1.)  News  from  the  Occident.

(2.)  Sesame  and  Lilies.

(3.)  Vanity  of  vanities.

(4.)  One  stanza  of  Victor  Hugo's  poem.

These  four  topics  are  not  wholly  disconnected  among  them-
selves:  the  roses  of  (1)  are  repeated  by  the  rose  ^  of  (4),  which
is  not  suggested  by  the  poem.  Again  the  vanity  of  (3)  is
repeated  by  the  vain  of  (4).  In  the  case  of  topics  (2)  and
(4)  there  are  a  few  superfluous  words,-  but  in  both  those  cases
the  reference  to  the  main  topic  is  perfectly  definite.

Further,  I  take  the  script  of  July  27  to  be  a  summary  of
various  attempts  that  had  been  made  by  the  same  control
from  July  19,  1908,  onwards,  to  convey  verifiable  matter  of
evidential  value  that  would  be  comprehensible  to  me,  as  is
made  plain  by  the  script  of  July  29,  1908,  which,  pui'porting
to  come  from  another  control,  "  Evans,"  is  as  follows :

About  Mr,  Sidgwick's  script.  He  is  anxious  to  get  a  message
through  you  to  Mrs.  Verrall.

That  the  "  message "  is  intelligible  to  me — and  I  hope  to
others — it  is  the  object  of  this  paper  to  show.

A  few  words  will  describe  the  conclusion  of  the  incident
and  the  termination  for  the  time  of  communications  from
Sidgwickjj.  On  September  23,  1908,  as  has  been  said.  Miss
Mac  wrote  to  me  and  despatched  the  script  up  to  date.  On
September  27,  when  automatic  writing  was  attempted,  the
only  words  written  were  from  another  control,  not  Sidgwickjj,
"  Wait  till  V  writes  Wednesday  week,"  i.e.  till  October  7.
On  September  29  Miss  Mac  received  from  me  a  letter  of
acknowledgment,  in  which  I  wrote  that  it  would  be  some
time  before  I  could  comment  in  detail  on  the  script.  On
September  30  the  Mac  script  again  repeated,  as  from
Sidgwickjj,  "  Wait  till  Wednesday,  because  of  V's  preoccupation,"
the  "Wednesday"  being  again  October  7. On  October  7,  at

^  The  rose  also  appears  in  another  reference,  on  July  19,  to  topic  (2),  see
above,  pp.  273-4.

-'lotus  .  .  .  repentance,'  and  'Bleeding  liearts  etc'

U


306


Mrs.  A.  M^.  Verrall.


[PAKT


4  p.m.,  my  letter  commenting  at  length  on  the  script  was
received  by  Miss  Mac.  I,  who  of  course  knew  nothing  of  any
statements  in  the  Mac  script  subsequent  to  September  23,  had
finished  my  comment  earlier  than  I  had  expected  or  led  Miss
Mac  to  suppose.  So  that  the  original  directions  of  September
27,  repeated  on  September  30,  that  no  more  script  was  to  be
produced  till  "  V "  wrote  on  October  7,  were  justified  by  the
event.  The  Mac  script  of  October  7,  produced  after  the  receipt
of  my  letter,  contributed  only  one  sentence  referring  to  the
cross-correspondence  on  Sesame  and  Lilies,  namely  the  allusion
to  the  "  lost  book "  which  has  been  already  described.

Here  for  the  present  ends  the  account  of  the  communications
received  from  Miss  Mac.  At  a  future  time  I  hope  to  supple-
ment this  paper  by  notes  on  further  indications  in  the  Mac
script  of  telepathic  connexion  with  other  automatists,  including
some  re-echoes  of  recognised  but  unpublished  cross-correspon-
dences. The  experiments  are  being  continued  as  occasion  offers,
so  that  it  is  hoped  that  this  paper  will  be  but  the  first  of  a
series  of  reports  on  the  results  contributed  by  this  new  group
of  experimenters.


APPENDIX.

For  the  convenience  of  the  reader,  all  the  scripts  quoted  or
referred  to  in  the  foregoing  paper  are  here  arranged  in  chrono-
logical order,  within  the  two  groups  that  may  be  called  the
Mac  scripts  and  the  Verrall  scripts.  In  the  former  case,  the
scrijDt  being  produced  by  means  of  a  planchette  worked  by
Miss  Mac  and  one  or  more  other  members  of  the  family,  the
initials  of  the  automatists  concerned  are  given  before  each
script.  Questions  or  remarks  by  the  automatists  at  the  time
of  writing  are  within  inverted  commas ;  comments,  etc.,  by
Miss  Mac  written  on  the  copy  sent  to  me  are  in  round  brackets ;
comments,  etc.,  added  by  me  are  in  square  brackets.  I  have
given  the  context  of  the  passages,  but  omitted  such  parts  of
the  script  as  manifestly  refer  to  other  topics. All  omissions


LX.] Appendix  to  "  A  Neio  Group  of  Experimenters."  307

are  marked  with  .  .  .  The  facsimiles  represent  drawings  in
the  script  of  two  types  of  four-armed  figures,  namely  a  cross
and  a  star.  These  are  not  always  distinguishable.  The  original
drawings  have  been  sent  to  me  and  I  have  interpreted  each
case  as  best  I  could,  but  all  ambiguous  cases  are  marked
with  *.

Mac  Scpjpts.

July  19,  1908.

E.M.  AND  A.M. Grood  may  arise  from  the  intervention  of  spirits  for
many  are  susceptible  to  thought  waves  of  spirits.

"Who  writesr'

Mr.  Sidgwick. It  is  exceedingly  doubtful  if  there  will
ever  be  a  perfect  communication.


faithful unto death  .  .  .  When did  I


write — she  dwelt  beside  the  untrodden  ways,  beside  the
springs  of  Dove — I  have  lost  the  precious  jewel  of  repent-
ance .  .  .  May  I  go  to  the  wind  kissed  hollow  .  .  .
Lotus — the  flower  of  repentance — Buddha  .  .  .  See  the
little  lotus  flower  the  symbol  of  resignation.  Trust  in
the  Lord  O  ye  of  little  faith  .  .  .

Some  day  the  film  shall  be  torn  from  my  eyes  and
I  shall  astound  you — Where  is  the  little  blue  vase  with
the  lilies  that  grow  by  Sharon's  dewy  rose — Can  I  see
the  purple  heath  by — and  I  wasn't  for  I  shall  never
be —  ...  I  shall  tell  you  a  beautiful  poem  the  Bells
of  Edgar  Allen  Poe — Search  the  scriptures  and  the
dust  shall  be  converted  into  fine  gold — Should  I  stop
ere  I  be  awearied — .  This  is  my  name — Harry —
F.  W.  H.  M.— H.  S.

Can  I  see  the  rock  of  my  salvation — Ruth  72.  Chapter  7
Verse  2 — it  becomes  it  me  to  unveil  the  statue  of  the
living  God —

[Change  of  writing  here,  and  after  some  talk  about
the  new  control,  H.  S.,  another  control  writes  :]

He  is  the  only  interesting  person  you  will  get  you
are  not  psychic  enough  for  a  person  like  Gurney.


308  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.  [part

Juhj  21,  190S.

E.M.  AND  A.M. .  .  .  faithful  unto  death.


Roses  in  the  south  [two  undefined  drawings]  Lotus
buds — symbols  of  resignation.  .

La  pensee— Cau  a — G.  V.  -V.  S.— Evelyn
faithful  unto  death. Ecclesiastes  3.  2.  \j

Why  did  the  rose  fall  so  young  and  fresh —
I  am  tired.

"Ls  that  all?"

One  thing  more  [drawing  of  anchor]


July  23,  1908.

(Automatists  ask  for  H.  S.  control.)

E.M.  AND  A.M.  Yes — Sidgwick.  These  three  hope  faith  charity —
Sundown  on  the  face  of  the  craggy  hill.  [Same  undefined
drawings  as  on  July  21,  subsequently  identified  by  Miss
Mac  as  a  stringless  lyre.]  .  .  .  Lotus.

F.  W.  H.  M. Ce  n'est  pas  un  petit  idee
"What  is  that?"
It  is  French — Belle.

July  2J,,  190S.

E.M.  AND  L.L.M. Sidgwick. tell  Mrs.  Verrall  to  think  of  me.

July  26,  1908.

E.M.  AND  A.M. [After  drawings  of  cross  *  and  heart,  .  .  .  and  anchor:]
Wherefore  Wherefore  have  ye  forsaken  me  saith  the
Lord — A  blue  book  bound  in  blue  leather  with  ended
paper  and  gold  tooling.

"What  book  is  that?"


Blind  Blind  Blind  wherefore  are  your  eyes  bound  with
clay — Every  man  has  his — evil  that  good  may  come — ■
Look  now  at  this  text  Ecclesiastes  seven  and  three.


LX.] Appendix  to  "  A  JSeiu  Group  of  Experimenters."  309


L.M.,  D.M.  AND  A.M.  Sidgwick. — Erebus  and  terror — Hoc  fecit  Perse-
phone— Eheu  fugaces  postume  postume — Gandria^  super-
eminet  lacum  and  mi  ay  de  mi — weary  and  bitter  like
the  gall — [drawing  of  star  *]  Faithful  unto  death — She
died  young — Roses  in  the  west  Roses  in  the  south  Roses
in  her  cheeks  And  a  rose  her  mouth — Alas  for  the
faded  faded  petals — helas  elle  est  morte  dans  sa  jeunesse
quand  tout  est  frais  et  nouveau — (illegible  Greek  char-
acters) Sennacherib  Assur  bani  pal  0  star  of  the  dawn
— to  the  porch  of  the  east — aster — The  passionate
pilgrim — the  fuel  of  Life  is  repentance — Silesia  the—  .  .  .
7]vpi]Ka  ...  I  hate  the  little  hollow — Woods  of
box  in  the  Auvergne  where  the  summer  winds  sough
....  yAuKi'S  .  .

July  27,  1908.

E.M.  andA.M.  Sidgwick  News  from  the  Occident  [drawing  of  stalked
rose  in  profile  with  one  leaf]  Roses  dew-kissed — R.  S.

L.M.,  D.M.  AND  A.M.  Sidgwick.  Sesame  and  lilies — lotus  the  flower
of  repentance — Sidgwick.  vanity  of  vanities  all  is
vanity — A  little  love  and  then  the  joy  fades  and  the
rose  is  crumpled  and  wither(s)  up — fane

"What  is  that?"

French  (accent  added  to  last  word  making  "fane"
into  "fane")  Bleeding  hearts  cannot  be  staunched  and
the  voice  of  death  echoes  through  the  brain  with  palling
monotony — Sidgwick — hollow  and  mortal  vain  is  life
without  a  meaning.

July  29,  1908.

L.M.,  D.M.  AND  A.M. [Another  control  writing,  called  Evans:]

About  Mr.  Sidgwick's  script.  He  is  anxious  to  get
a  message  through  you  to  Mrs.  Verrall.  He  is  trying
to  do  it  now.

"What  message r'

How  could  I  give  you  his  message.  .  .  .  He  is
considering  an  authentic  message  to  send  you.

^Name  of  place  on  Lake  Lugano  visited  by  L.  M.  not  long  before.


310


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


Sept.  1,  1908.  , .  .

E.M.  AND  A.M.

Mrs.  Verrall  [drawing  of  anchor,  two  crosses  *,  and
heart.]

Sept.  13,  1908.

E.M.  AND  A.M. [Drawing  of  hand  and  five  pointed  finger  nails].
Verrall.

Sept.  13,  1908.  [later]
E.M.  AND  A.M. [Another  control  writing,  called  Reynold  :]

Verrall  is  waiting  for  you  to  send  her  an  abstract  of
your  script.  Take  my  advice  and  do  not  send  her  too  much
of  Bell  1  only  such  bits  as  seem  to  you  to  be  at  all  likely.
Send  the  conversations  of  Mr.  Evans,  and  Dr.  Sidgwick,
and  Dr.  Cassilis  ^  (new  name  to  us)  and  also  some  of
your  early  efforts.  You  must  mention  the  change  in
your  script  after  the  reading  of  Mrs.  Holland.  The
".  change  however  was  not  lasting.  Enijjhasise  the  Italian
and  point  out  the  lack  of  knowledge  of  the  tongue.
State  under  what  conditions  the  writing  is  easiest  and
if  it  ever  affords  you  pain.  Eeynold

You  must  write  you  know. Professor  Sidgwick.

"  Why  ? "

For  the  sake  of  science. Mr.  Evans.


Sept.  IJ^,  1908.

E.M.  AND  A.M. Reynold. I  have  one  message  for  you — You  must
both  send  specimens  of  your  real  writing.

[H.  S.  writing]  V — crystal  (drawing  of  eye).  When
will  the  day  come  oh  reaper  1  The  day  when  I  shall
behold  ray  jewels  1  [drawing  of  star,  heart  and  anchor]
when  shall  I  behold  my  jewels  1  My  pearl  of  great  price
.  .  .  [drawing  of  rose  and  leaf]  rich  and  rare  dear  [draw-
ing of  three  decorated  crosses]  jewel  [drawing  of  ring]
Ve  tired  now  Sidgwick.

^  Name  of  early  'control'.  "Nothing  further  known  of  this  'control'.


LX.] Ajypendix  to  "  A  Neiv  Group  of  Experimenters."  311


Sept  15,  1908.

E.M.  AND  A.M.  Reynold.  Mrs.  V.  will  nob  be  disappointed.  This
has  been  expected.  (Drawing  of  crystal  with  profile  of
lady— Mrs.  Verrall  ] — gazing  into  it).


Sept.  18,  1908.

E.M.  AND  A.M. [drawing  of  rose  and  leaf] Reynold. Is  there  any
possibility  of  our  Cambridge  friend  receiving  the  message
:  by  next  Saturday  week  1

"Every  possibility."

(Drawing  of  crystal  and  profile  of  lady.)

[All  the  above  scripts  were  seen  by  M.  de  G.  V.  and  H.  de  G.  V.
on  Sept.  26,  1908.]  .•  .  - ■  ^

Sept.  27,  1908.
E.M.  AND  A.M. (Reynold  writing).  .Reynold.

Wait  till  V.  writes  Wednesday  week.

Sept.  30,  1908.
E.M.  AND  A.M. .  .  . (Reynold  writing)

Wait  till  Wednesday  because  of  V's  preoccupation.  .  .  .

Oct.  7,  1908.
E.  M.  AND  A.  M. (H.  S.  writing)

Dig  a  grave  among  the  laurels  [drawing  of  wreath].  Your
eyes  are  still  clay  bound — V.  has  a  glimpse  of  the  meaning
— peace  perturbed  spirit  [drawing  of  owl]  Owl  like
phantasm — Search  the  scriptures  for  the  only  adequate
meaning — Farewell  said  she  farewell  and  once  more  sad
farewell — The  crucial  test  is  the  lost  book  lost  lost  lost
[drawing  of  open  book]  This  is  the  last  message  I  have.
Be  sure  of  this,  [drawing  of  open  book  with  V  on  it]
ale

[The  above  scripts  were  seen  by  M.  de  G.  V.  on  Oct.  24,  1908.]


312


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[PAKT


Verkall  Scripts.

March  16,  1908. 10  p.m.

H.  jUE  G.  V.  La  vie  est  breve

Un  pen  d'anjeoTr  espoir
Uii  peu  de  reve
Et  puis  bonsoir.

The  end  of  the  story.

Like  a  crimson  petalled  rose  the  rose  of  Sharon.

When  the  proof  was  sought  he  told  them  that  the
only  means  of  obtaining  it  was  to  persevere  in  the
attempt  to  prove  the  connexion.

Gautier  and  Hugo  those  together  types  to  be  compared.

Unless  there  is  a  possibility  of  setting  the  two  side
by  side  there  would  be  no  opportunity.

is  is  the  .  .

now  at  his  ease  .  .

[drawing  of  flower.] note  this  flower.

[The  above  script  was  seen  by  M.  de  G.  V.  on  March  22,  1908.]


June  1,  1908. 9.30  p.m.

Lay  not  up  to  yourselves  treasure  upon  earth,  some-
thing about  moth  and  corruption  and  the  worm  shall
devour  it.

Vanitas  Vanitatum.

The  anchor  mark  that  well.

[The  above  script  was  seen  by  M.  de  G.  V.  on  June  6,  1908.]


Aug.  11,  1908. 11.30  p.m.

M.  DE  G.  V.  August's  ripened  sheaves  under  the  moon  reapers  in
the  held. She  stood  breast  high  amid  the  golden  corn,
the  full  sheaves  ungarnered.

With  reaping  hook  and  sickle  who  stands  there  1
But  now  write  something  diflerent.

Try  regular  hours  for  writing  etc.  etc

Tuus.


[The  above  script  was  seen  by  H.  de  G.  V.  on  Sept.  12,  1908.]


Lx.] Appendix  to  "A  Neiv  Groujj  of  Experimenters."  313


August  12,  1908. 9.20  p.m.

H.  DE  G.  V.  praeterita  rediviva
0  mors  O  labies
Araby  the  perfumes  of  Araby

Sleep  Duncan.  Macbeth  hath  murdered  sleep — and
sleep  is  changed  to  death — Death  the  bell-ringer,  Death
who  rings  the  curfew  for  the  quenching  of  the  fire  upon
life's  central  hearth.  When  the  flames  burn  brightly
life  leaps  high  in  the  breast  but  as  they  flicker  and  die
away  so  life  too  sinks  and  smoulders  and  grows  cold.
A  light  in  the  Western  sky  the  last  flicker  of  the
dying  day  the  landscape  melts  before  our  eyes  the
colour  fades  away.

[drawing  of  two-stringed  lyre.]  A  lyre  two-stringed
mark  the  symbol  golden  voiced.

[scribbles.]

[The  above  script  was  seen  by  M.  de  G.  V.  on  Sept.  1,  1908.]

Aug.  19,  190S. 10.40  a.m.

M.  DE  G.  V.  Let  your  hand  go  loose — let  the  words  come.

It  is  a  literary  allusion  that  should  come  to  day.  Think
of  the  words

Liliastrum  Paradise — Liliago no  not  that. Lilies  of
Eden — Lilith  no
Eve's  lilies

all  in  a  garden  fair. Try  again.
Lilies  swaying  in  a  wind

under  a  garden  wall
Lilies  for  the  bees  to  find
Lilies  fair  and  tall
Then  besides  the  Lilies  there  is  to  be  another  word
for you  and  for  her  Lilies and  a  different  word — So
that  lilies  is  the  catchword  to  show  what  words  are  to
be  put  together.

And  your  second  word  is  gold,
think  of  the  golden  lilies  of  France.
You  will  have  to  wait  some time for the end  of
this  story,  for  the  solution  of  this  puzzle — but  I  think
there  is  no  doubt  of  its  ultimate  success.

Yours.

[The  above  script  was  seen  by  H.  de  G.  V.  on  Sept.  1,  1908.]


314


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


August' 19,  190S. 9.20  p.m.

H.  DE  G.  V.  Blue  and  gold  were  the  colours  golden  stars  on  a  blue
ground  like  a  night  sky — the  brimming  goblet  the
eagle's  prey  cupbearer  to  Zeus  himself,  but  it  availed
him  nothing  when  the  peril  came  (illegible  word).

Storks  upon  the  roofs  white  storks  that  was  part  of
the  scene.
Return  oh  king  to  thy  ancestral  halls
Let  there  be  revelry  amid  thy  thralls
For  now  thy  day  hath  come.
Naught  shall  avail  thee  that  thou  wert  so  great
Thy  boundless  kingdom  and  thine  high  estate
When  Death  shall  beat  the  drum.

The  fish  with  shining  scales — something — a  fish —
phosphorescent  light  upon  the  wat — upon  the  water.

[The  above  script  was  seen  by  M.  de  G.  V.  on  Sept.  1,  1908.]

August  22,  190S. 10.5  p.m.

H.  DE^G.  V.  Unto  this  last  that  was  the  message  to  be  given.  The
cross  and  sceptre  the  double  symbol  temporal  and
spiritual  but  the  cross  was  first.

Who  .said  "  I  will  go  before  that  ye  may  see  the  track."

It  was  in  the  cemetery  where  the  lilies  grow — a  view
over  the  hills — blue  hills — iu  love  with  death.

note  that  the  words  are  a  clue.

But  you  have  no  but  you  have  not  yet  written
the  most  important  of  all.  But  do  not  hurry  or  guess
let  it  come  of  itself.  Is  not  there  a  change  this  time.
You  should  consider  Avhat  it  was  that  made  you  feel
what  no  [drawing  of  lyre  without  strings].  An  oriel
window  beautifully  traced  the  Western  light  shines
through.

F.  W.  H.  M.

[The  above  script  was  seen  by  M.  de  G.  V.  on  Sept.  1,  1908.]

[On  Sept.  1,  1908,  u  couiparison  of  scripts  suggested  to  M.
de  G.  V.  and  H.  de  G.  V.  that  the  above  scripts  contained  an
unsuccessful  attempt  to  produce  Euskin's  Sesame  and  Lilies  as
the  subject  of  a  cross- correspondence.]


LX.] Appendix  to  "A  Neiv  Group  of  Experimenters."  315


September  1,  1908. 11.30  p.m.

H.  DE  G.  V.  a  Maltese  cross  crystal  and  gold  hung  on  a  fine  gold
chain — there  is  some  history  connected  with  it — a  royal
tragedy.  1

G  or  [illegible  letter]
with  foot  in  the  stirrup — boot  to  saddle  to  horse  and
away ere  break  of  day  .  .  .

[The  above  script  was  seen  by  M.  de  G.  V.  on  Sept.  26,  1908.
It  is  quoted  here,  although  it  contains  no  allusions  to  Sesame  and
Lilies,  because  it  perhaps  presents  points  of  connexion  with  the  Mac
script  of  Sept.  14  (above,  p.  310),  and  with  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of
Dec.  9,  1908,  quoted  and  commented  on  by  Miss  Johnson  below,
p.  320.]

Septemler  IJ^,  1908. 11.30  p.m.

H.  DE  G.  V.  vTrepcjivei  (TTevd^uii'  [Thou  excellest  in  lamentation].  A
golden  mace  the  insignia  of  office  but  wherefore  1  Aliis
disputetur  [let  others  dispute].

In  the  meadows  where  bloom  the  daisies  and  young
maids'  feet  are  tripping  . in  the  dance  around  the  Maypole
on  the  village  green  our  English  may  the  hawthorn's
scented  pride  the  bridal  wreath  of  summer  queen  of
May  the  light  fantastic  toe.

And  Holbein's  dance  too  the  dance  of  Death.

The  spider  and  the  fly  the  web  stretched  wide,
[illegible  word]  might  is  right  [scrawls].

[The  above  script  was  seen  by  M.  de  G.  V.  on  Sept.  26,  1908.]

Sept.  23,  1908. 9  p.m.
H.  DE  G.  V.  .  .  .  .  .

Note  the  literary  allusions  something  should  be  made
of  them  putting  one  with  another  the  clue  is  there  but
several  things  have  been  missed  but  try  again.

An  implement  of  peace  the  fork  of  the  husbandman
the  sowing  of  the  grain  a  star  flower  something  like  a
daisy  what  does  that  mean  1  the  message  was  confused
the  star  flower  and  lilies  too  look  back  the  open  door.

[The  above  script  was  seen  by  M.  de  G.  V.  on  Sept.  26,  1908.]

^  Probably  an  allusion  to  Rossetti's  poem,  The  King's  Tragedy.
^Browning,  Cavalier  Soiujfs.  .  :


«


316


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


Index  to  Sections  of  Sesame  (S.)  cmd  Lilies  (L.)  with  which
may  be  compared  phrases  in  the  above-quoted  scripts.'

July  19,  1908.


July  36,  1908.

June  1,  1908.
Aug.  19,  1908.

Aug.  22,  1908.

Sept.  li,  1908.
Sept.  23,  1908.

Note  on  ^'■Sesame  and  Lilies"  made  after  reading  the  Mac  scripts  of
July  19— Se^}tember  23,  1908.

September  26,  1908.

On  September  1  H.  and  I  compared  scripts,  as  we  had  for  some
time  intended  to  do.

I  took  my  script  of  August  19  to  mean  that  whereas  I  had  Lilies
and  gold  H.  was  to  have  Lilies  and  some  other  woi'd,  but  this  was  not
the  case.

H.'s  simultaneous  script  of  August  19  had  no  reference  to  Lilies
at  all,  but  it  had  the  word  gold,  and  it  also  apparently  alluded  to
the  French  arms  by  which  my  script  had  combined  the  two  ideas
of  lilies  and  gold.  It  thus  seemed  as  if  H.  had  done  exactly  what
my  script  did  not  want ;  but  there  seemed  a  plain  reflexion  in  her
script  (9.20  p.m.)  of  my  script  of  10.40  a.m.

H.'s  next  script,  August  22,  began  Unto  this  last"  and  had  the
word  Lilies.  When  we  talked  it  over  and  noticed  that  H.  script  of
August  12  had  Praeterita  we  were  reminded  of  Sesame  and  Lilies
and  said  that  our  script  seemed  to  have  failed  to  do  Sesame  and


Mac  Scripts.

L.  §  70. (Wordsworth's  Lucy).
Motto  to  L.  in  first  edition.
Motto  to  S.  in  first  edition.
S.  §§  15-20,  especially  §§17  and  18.

L.  §§  93,  94.

Verrall  Scripts.
S.  §  45.

(M.  V.)  Title  of  L.  ■
(H.V.)  S.  §§41-45.

S. §  25,  end  of,  (Dante,  stritggle  between
temporal  and  spiritual  powers).

L.  S8  93  and  94.

S.  §  50.


Lx.] Appendix  to  "  A  Neiv  Group  of  Experimenters."  317

Lilies.  We  looked  through  H.'s  script  to  see  if  we  could  find
Sesame,  but  without  success.

I  received  this  morning  the  automatic  script  of  the  Mac  family
in  which  I  find  that  on  July  27  "  H.  S."  produced  Sesame  and  Lilies,
and  on  July  29  another  of  their  controls  said  that  H.  S.  was  anxious
to  get  a  message  through  them  to  Mrs.  V.;  "he  is  trying  to  do  it
now."

M.  DE  G.  V.
H.  DE  G.  V.

Chronological  Table  of  Incidents  in  Cross-Correspondence
ON  "Sesame  and  Lilies."

1907.

(1)  March  17.  H.  V. Laurel  wreath,  Clough's  poem.  Sesame  and

Lilies.

1908.


(•'>')

0  uiy

1 1)

July

1  Q

ly.

iviac.

Reference  to  Motto  of  "Sesame"  (Job  xxviii.
5  Q)

(^)

July

20.

M.  V.

Clough's  poem.

(5)

July

26.

Mac.

Description  of  book  carefully  bound  in  blue
leather.

(6)

July

27.

Mac.

Sesame  and  Lilies.

{')

July

29.

Mac.

Sidgwick  control  anxious  to  get  a  message  to
Mrs.  Verrall  and  trying  to  do  it  now.

(8)

Aug.

6.

Mrs.  Verrall  reads  proof  of  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXIL,
Laurel  wreath.

(9)

Aug.

12.

H.  V.

Praeterita  etc.

(10)

Aug.

19.

M.  V.

Lilies  as  half  of  incomplete  message.  Lilies  in
a  garden  etc.

(11)

Aug.

16.

H.  V.

Golden  stars  on  blue  ground  etc.

(12)

Aug.

22.

H.  V.

Unto this  last etc.,  Lilies,  most  important
not  written.

(13)

Sept.

1.

Comparison  of  above  M.V.  and  H.V.  scripts.

(14)

Sept.

13.

Mac.

Script  of  July  to  be  sent  to  Mrs.  Verrall.

(15)

Sept.

15.

Mac.

Above  repeated.

318 '■• . Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.  [part

(16)  Sept.  18.  Mac. Script  to  be  sent  by  September  26.

(17)  Sept.  23.  H.  V. Reminiscence  of  impression  produced  by  com-

parison of  M.  V.  and  H.  V.  scripts.

(18)  Sept.  23.  Letter  written  by  Miss  Mac  enclosing  script.

(19)  Sept.  26.  Mac  script  received  by  Mrs.  Verrall.

(20)  Sept.  29.  Mrs. Verrall reads Sesame  and Lilies  and

notes  mottoes  in  early  edition.

(21)  Sept.  29.  Mrs.  Verrall seeks unsuccessfully for  blue-

bound  Sesame  and  Lilies.

(22)  Oct. 5.  Mrs.  Verrall  ascertains  change  of  mottoes  in

later  editions  and  finds  Ruskin's  preface
connecting  titles.

(23)  Oct. 7.  Mac. Reference  to  laurel  wreath  and  lost  book.


LX.]


Sequel  to  the  "  Sesame  and  Lilies "  Incident.


319


SEQUEL  TO  THE  "SESAME  AND  LILIES"  INCIDENT.

•  By  Alice  Johnson.

It  appears  that  Mrs.  Holland  made  certain  contributions  to  the
"  Sesame  and  Lilies "  cross-correspondence,  described  above  by
Mrs.  Verrall.  The  references  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  occurred
in  December,  1908,  whereas  the  chief  references  in  the  Mac
script  were  in  July,  and  in  the  Verrall  script  in  August,  1908.
Of  course  the  belatedness  of  Mrs.  Holland's  references  detracts
from  their  evidential  value  by  giving  more  opportunity  for  the
coincidences  to  occur  by  chance.  But  it  happened  that  Mrs.
Holland  produced  only  one  piece  of  script  between  March
11th  and  November  25th,  1908,  that  one  (dated  July  23,
1908),  being  concerned  with  the  cross-correspondence  of
"Sevens,"  given  in  my  paper  above  (pp.  222-263).

After  this  almost  blank  period,  she  began  to  write  again,
generally  once  a  week,  from  November  25,  1908,  onwards.
Erom  that  date  up  to  April  14,  1909,  she  produced  twenty
pieces  of  script,  in  which  have  been  found  nine  cross-corre-
spondences with  Mrs.  Piper's  script  of  a  few  months  before,
viz.  the  period  from  March  17  to  May  12,  1908,  besides
some  evidential  matter  connected  with  the  Verrall  scripts,  all
of  which  I  propose  to  deal  with  later.  It  looks,  therefore,  as
if  Mrs.  Holland,  on  resuming  her  script,  began  to  pick  up
the  topics  (all,  of  course,  unpublished  at  that  time),  treated  of
some  months  earlier  by  the  other  automatists,  for  the  connec-
tions then  appearing  seem  too  numerous  to  be  put  down  to
chance.  Consequently  I  think  that  the  occurrence  of  passages
in  her  script  referring  to  "  Sesame  and  Lilies  "  is  not  accidental,
but  has  some  supernormal  connection  with  the  analogous  pas-
sages in  the  scripts  of  the  other  automatists.


320


Alice  Johnson.


[part


It  must  be  noted  that  Mrs.  Holland's  references  did  not
occur  until  after  Mrs.  Verrall  had  seen  the  other  scripts  and
made  out  the  connections  between  them  and  the  various  topics
treated  of,  so  that  it  seems  likely  that  she  was  influenced  by
telepathy  from  Mrs.  Verrall.  The  influence  of  her  own  mind
is  also  obvious  here.  Her  range  of  poetical  reading  is,
as  I  have  already  said,  unusually  wide,  and  her  script  as  a
whole  is  characterised  by  a  profusion  of  quotations ;  but  in
this  case  her  contributions  to  the  cross-correspondence  consist
of  hardly  anything  else.  The  poetical  form  taken  by  the
script  may,  then,  be  attributed  to  her  own  mind  ;  but  for  the
selection  of  quotations  appropriate  to  the  subject  some  other  cause
must,  of  course,  be  found.  She  does  not,  it  will  be  seen,  quote
from  any  of  the  literary  sources  drawn  on  by  the  other  auto-
matists,  and  incidentally  she  introduces  certain  topics  belonging
to  the  subject,  but  not  to  be  found  in  any  of  the  other  scripts.

The  first  passage  to  be  considered  occurs  in  her  script  of
December  9th,  1908.

...  A  circling  diadem  of  quivering  star —
"Three  queens  with  crowns  of  gold  and  from  them  rose
A  cry  that  shivered  to  the  tingling  stars."  ^

[Here  follow  references  to  other  topics,  quite  unconnected  with  this.]
"Blame  not  the  Royal  Saint  for  vain  expense."
Charge  not  tlie  Roj'al  Saint — "
King—

Not  a  sign — the  actual  reliquary  with  the  jewels  and
dLy%  the  crystal — rock  crystal — It  is  in  the  Museum  now  and
T"*^  it  should  be  in  the  Library.
^  "Tax  not  the  Royal  Saint—"


The  third  attempt,  "  Tax  not  the  Eoyal  Saint  with  vain
expense,"  is  the  correct  rendering  of  the  first  line  of  Words-
worth's sonnet  on  the  "  Inside  of  King's  College  Chapel."

This  script  contains  two  words  that  are  prominent  in  the
other  scripts,  viz.:

(1)  Gold: which  occurs  both  in  the  Mac  and  the  Verrall

scripts.

(2)  Stars:  cf.  Miss  Verrall's  script  of  Aug.  19,  1908.

^Tennyson,  lilorte  cV Arthur.  \


LX.] Sequel  to  the  "Sesame  and  Lilies"  Incident.  321


It  also  gives  one  important  factor  of  the  whole  subject
"  Sesame  and  Lilies "  which  is  not  mentioned  by  any  of  the
other  automatists,  viz.:  "Queens:"  the  sub-title  of  the  essay
"  Lilies  "  being  "  Queens'  Gardens."

Note  further  the  word  "  Kino  "  associated  with  the  idea  of
some  kind  of  treasure,  the  jewels  and  the  crystal " :  the
sub-title  of  the  essay  "  Sesame "  being  "  Kings'  Treasuries."
In  this  essay  Euskin  complains  bitterly  of  the  English  nation
for  "  despising  literature,  despising  science,  despising  art  .  .  .
and  concentrating  its  soul  on  Pence,"  and  justifies  his  complaint
by  showing  what  a  very  small  proportion  of  the  national
wealth  is  spent  on  such  objects  as  libraries,  scientific  work
and  art. Compare  the  sonnet  quoted  from  by  Mrs.  Holland :

Tax  not  the  royal  Saint  with  vain  expense,

With  ill-matched  aims  the  Architect  who  planned —

Albeit  labouring  for  a  scanty  band

Of  white-robed  Scholars  only — this  innneuse

And  glorious  Work  of  fine  intelligence  !

Give  all  thou  canst ;  high  Heaven  rejects  the  lore

Of  nicely-calculated  less  or  more  ;

So  deemed  the  man  who  fashioned  for  the  sense

These  lofty  pillars,  spread  that  branching  roof

Self-poised,  and  scooped  into  ten  thousand  cells,

Where  light  and  shade  repose,  where  music  dwells

Lingering — and  wandering  on  as  loth  to  die ;

Like  thoughts  whose  very  sweetness  yieldeth  proof

That  they  were  born  for  immortality.

Again,  the  third  and  last  sonnet  on  King's  Chapel  begins  :

They  dreamt  not  of  a  perishable  home
Who  thus  could  build.

There  seems  a  possible  connection  between  this  script  and
Miss  Verrall's  of  Sep.  1,  1908,  which  describes  "a  Maltese
cross,  crystal  and  gold,  hung  on  a  fine  gold  chain "  and
connected  with  "a  royal  tragedy"  (see  above,  p.  315);  and
both  scripts  are  possibly  connected  with  the  Mac  script  of
Sep.  14,  1908,  which  has  the  words  "crystal,"  "jewels"  or
"  jewel "  (three  times  repeated)  and  a  drawing  of  three  decorated  «
crosses  (see  above,  p.  310), Further,  the  Mac  script  on  the

X


322


Alice  Johnson.


[part


next  two  clays,  Sep.  15  and  18,  had  drawings  of  a  crystal;
whereas  Mrs.  Holland's  next  script,  that  of  Dec.  16,  1908,
contains  the  words :

Crystal — the  terrible  crystal.^

The  next  references  occur  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of
December  23rd,  1908  :

.  .  .  Pentreath — Penarth — Penvoorth  [?].  Polwarth— Polwhede —
Penhaligon  Antony  Anthony — Carew — Gary

Leon  dore  Doreu  Lion  d'or  Leo  n  Leo  not  right — Pass
Honours — Well  we  have  waited  some  time  haven't  we —
Fresh  wreaths  and  garlands  new.
Fresh  woods  and  pastures  new — -
To  endure  for  ages —
"  Light  in  darkness — comfort  in  despair — "
"He  for  God  only  she  for  God  in  him —
"Farewell  the  flowers  of  Eden
Ye  shall  pick  nevermore —

The  curious  confusion  at  the  beginning  of  this  script  repre-
sents, I  think,  an  attempt  to  get  the  name  "  Roden  Noel "
through  the  medium  of  Cornish  place-names.''  A  number  of
interesting  references  to  Eoden  Noel  had  occurred  in  Mrs.
Holland's  earlier  scripts,  and  an  account  of  these  was  published
in  my  first  Eeport  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XXL  pp.  316-327).
Mrs.  Holland  had  read  this  report  and  therefore  knew  of  his
association  with  Cornwall,  and  that  the  names  "  Gary,  Carew "
had  occurred  in  her  script  in  connection  with  "  Fowey,"  which
I  had  interpreted  as  a  reference  to  a  poem  of  his  (op.  cit.
pp.  350-351).

Further,  for  some  reason  which  I  am  unable  to  conjecture,
she  seems  subliminally  to  associate  his  name  with  the  notion

^  Browning,  The  Englishman  in  Itnly  :

"  Oh  heaven  and  the  terrible  crystal  !
No  rampart  excludes
Your  eye  from  the  life  to  be  lived
In  the  blue  solitudes."
^Milton,  Lycidas.  ^Milton,  Paradise  Lost,  Book  iv.

*E.  B.  Browning,  A  Drama  of  Exile;  "pick"  should  be  "smell."
^Penhaligon  had  been  mentioned  in  connection  with  him  in  two  previous
scripts.


LX.] Sequel  to  the  "  Sesame  and  Lilies  "  Incident.  323

of  pixnning  and  enigmas  (oj).  cit.  pp.  320-1),  and  here  it
appears  under  the  anagram  "  Leon  Doren."

I  think  that  the  object  of  bringing  in  Koden  Noel's
name  here  is  twofold :

(1)  To  introduce  through  a  pun  the  notion  of  ffold  ("Lion

d'or  "),  and

(2)  To  suggest  implicitly  a  Sidgwick  control; for  in  Mrs.

Holland's  previous  script  the  two  men  are  generally
associated  together.  She  did  not  know  of  their  friend-
ship  at  the  time  when  her  script  first  associated  them,
but  had  since  learnt  of  it  from  my  Eeport.  It  will
be  remembered  that  it  was  a  Sidgwick  control  that
purported  to  inspire  the  Mac  script  in  this  cross-
correspondence.

In  regard  to  the  rest  of  the  script,  it  is  perhaps  worth
noting  that  a  passage  from  Lycidas  is  selected  by  Ruskin  to
illustrate  the  teaching  of  his  Sesame,  whereas  Mrs.  Holland
quotes  the  last  line  of  it  (a  line  not  included  in  Euskin's
quotation).  This,  however,  may  be  an  accidental  coincidence.
But  there  is,  I  think,  an  unmistakable  connection  between  her
last  two  quotations :

"  He  for  God  only,  she  for  God  in  him."
"Farewell,  the  flowers  of  Eden
Ye  shall  pick  nevermore,"

and  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  August  19th,  1908  (see  above,
pp.  277,  313),

Liliastrum  Paradise — Liiiago — No,  not  that.
LiHes  of  Eden — Lilith. No. Eve's  lilies  all  in  a  garden
fair.

and  a  certain  sentence  in  the  Mac  script  of  Oct.  7,  1908
(see  above,  p.  311),  viz.:

Farewell,  said  she,  farewell,  and  once  more  sad  farewell.

This  same  Mac  script  begins  with  the  words  "  Dig  a  grave
among  the  laurels,"  followed  by  a  drawing  of  a  wreath,  while
Mrs.  Holland  on  Dec.  2  3  has  "  Fresh  wreaths  and  garlands
new."  I  take  this  phrase  to  be  a  variant  or  misquotation  of
the  line  correctly  quoted  immediately  afterwards  :  "  Fresh  woods


324


Alice  Johnson.


[part


and  pastures  new  " :  if  so,  it  affords  yet  another  instance  of  the
special  part  played  in  cross-correspondences  by  the  apparently
deliberate  use  of  misquotations.^

Finally,  some  further  references  to  the  subject  of  Sesame
and  Lilies  are  to  be  found  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of
December  30th,  1908,  as  follows:

Con — Context  is  lacking — Nob  constant  remembrance — Con — "Art
thou  poor  yet  has  thou  golden  slumbers — oh  sweet  content — To
add to  golden numbers  golden  numbers

The  Pleiades — Stars  in  her  hair  were  7 — No  the  Muses  on  Helicon
— Coniston —

F.  W.  H.  M.

I  think  the  confusion  at  the  beginning  here  represents  an
attempt  to  get  the  two  words,  "  content "  and  "  Coniston,"
which  emerge  later.

The  next  part  of  the  script  is  a  fragmentary  quotation  from
a  poem  in  Thomas  Dekker's  Patient  Grissell,  Act.  I.,  Scene  i.
The  whole  verse  is  as  follows :

Art  thou  poor,  yet  hast  thou  golden  slumbers  ?

0  sweet  content !
Art  thou  rich,  yet  is  thy  mind  perplexed?

0  punishment !
Dost  thou  laugh  to  see  how  fools  are  vex'd
To  add  to  golden  numbers,  golden  numbers  ?

Besides  the  threefold  repetition  here  of  the  word  "  golden,"
one  of  the  leading  words  of  the  cross-correspondence,  the  whole
spirit  of  the  verse  re-echoes  the  sentiment  of  Sesame.

"  Stars  in  her  hair  were  7  "  is  a  fragmentary  quotation  from
Eossetti's  Blessed  Damozel,  the  first  two  verses  of  which  are
as  follows  :

The  blessed  Damozel  leaned  out

From  the  gold  bar  of  Heaven ;
Her  eyes  were  deeper  than  the  depth

Of  waters  stilled  at  even  ;
She  had  three  lilies  in  her  hand,

And  the  stars  in  her  hair  were  seven.

1  Mis.  Verrall  has  explained  above  (see  pp.  286-7,  and  '292,  foot-note)  the
connection  between  "Laurel  wreath"  and  Semme,  and  Lilies.


LX.] Sequel  to  the  "  Sesame  and  Lilies  "  Incident.  325


Her  robe,  ungirt  from  clasp  to  hem,

No  wrought  flowers  did  adorn,
But  a  white  rose  of  Mary's  gift.

For  service  meetly  woru  ;
Her  hair  that  lay  along  her  back

Was  yellow  like  ripe  corn.

The  script  then  explicitly  menfcious  "  Stars," — a  word  which
had  occurred  in  Miss  Verrall's  script  of  August  19,  1908, — •
and  gives  "  Lilies "  implicitly,  for  they  occur  in  the  line
previous  to  the  one  it  quotes.  "  Gold "  is  also  mentioned  in
the  second  line  of  the  poem ;  and  in  the  second  verse  is  found
the  word  "  Eose,"  which  is  prominent  in  the  leading  Mac
script,  that  of  July  27,  1908,  having  previously  appeared  in
their  script  of  July  26,  and  as  "Sharon's  dewy  rose"  in  that  of
July  19,  1908;  while  with  the  phrase,  ''yellow  like  ripe  corn,"
we  may  compare  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  August  1  1,  1908:

August's  ripened  sheaves  under  the  moon — reapers  in  the  field.
She  stood  breast  high  amid  the  golden  corn,

and  Miss  Verrall's  of  September  23,  1908:

The  sowing  of  the  grain  .  .  .  the  star  flower  and  lilies  too —
look  back — the  open  door,

which  gives  the  double  sense  of  Sesame,  as  a  grain,  and  as
a  magic  word  which  opens  doors ;  whereas  Mrs.  Holland's
script  can  only  be  said  to  contain  the  first  sense  of  the  word,
grain,  and  that  only  implicitly.

"  The  Muses  on  Helico/i. — Coniston "  seems  an  attempt  to
pass  from  the  general  habitat  of  the  Muses  to  one  particular
haunt  of  theirs  with  a  somewhat  similar  name ;  the  intention
being  shown  by  the  underlining  of  the  syllable  con  in  Helicon.
The  literary  associations  of  Coniston  are,  of  course,  above  all
with  Euskin,  who  lived  there  for  the  last  twenty-nine  years  of
his  life  and  died  and  was  buried  there.  This  phrase,  then,
which  is  the  only  allusion  made  by  any  of  the  automatists
to  the  author  of  Sesame  and  Lilies,  serves  to  complete  the  cross-
correspondence.

Mrs.  Holland's  whole  script  of  Dec.  30,  1908,^  is  signed

^  The  portions  of  the  script  omitted  from  the  extract  given  above  contain
two  cross-correspondences  with  Mrs.  Piper.


326


Alice  Johnson.


[part


"  F.  W.  H.  M."  Mr.  Myers,  who  was  a  great  admirer  and  also
a  personal  friend  of  Euskin's,  had  written  an  obituary  notice
of  him  which  was  printed  in  the  Journal  S.P.E.  At  the
beginning  of  this  he  speaks  of  Euskiu  as  a  "  man  dear  to
tlie  Muses,"  and  at  the  end  writes :

I  have  pictured  him  waiting  in  the  Coniston  woodlands,  as  Oedipus
in  Colonus'  Grove, — waiting  in  mournful  memory,  in  uncomplaining
calm, — till  he  should  hear  at  last  the  august  summons  ...  of  the
unguessed  accompanying  God,  "Come,  Q^dipus,  why  linger  on  our
journey'? Thou  hast  kept  me  waiting  long."

In  so  far  as  the  individual  items  of  this  script  go,  there  is,
as  in  most  cases,  nothing  that  could  not  have  been  supplied  by
Mrs.  Holland's  own  mind.  She  knew  the  two  poems  quoted
from ;  she  must  have  been  perfectly  familiar  with  the  fact  that
Euskin  lived  at  Coniston  ;  she  may  even  have  seen  Mr.  Myers's
obituary  notice  of  him,  since  this  was  reprinted  in  Fragments
of  Prose  and  Poetry,  which  she  had  once  spent  a  few  minutes
in  glancing  over.  But  the  intelligence  shown  in  selecting
from  the  stores  of  her  mind  elements  appropriate  to  the
cross-correspondence  and  fitting  them  together  to  confirm  and
supplement  what  had  been  given  by  the  other  automatists,
this  intelligence  must  clearly  be  attributed  to  some  source
external  to  her.


LX.]


Postscript  to  the  Lethe  Incident.


POSTSCEIPT  TO  THE  LETHE  INCIDENT:
Note  on  "  Olympus  ".

By J. G.  PiDDIKGTON.

{Althovugh  the  reader  is  referred  to  this  Note  from  j).  98,
above,  he  will  not  find  it  intelligible  until  he  has  finished  the
whole  account  of  the  Lethe  case.)

Sir  Oliver  Lodge  points  out  that  "  Olympus "  may  refer  to
the  word  Olympo  in  Metamorphoses,  XT.  571  ;  and  this  inter-
pretation I  accept.  The  context  of  this  line  is  concerned  with
the  drowning  of  Ceyx,  which  is  thus  described  :

Ceyx  himself  .  .  .  lays  hold  of  some  wreckage,  and  calls  upon  his
wife's  father  \i.e.  Aeolus]  and  upon  his  own  [i.e.  Lucifer],  though
alas !  in  vain.  But  the  name  most  often  on  his  lips  is  his  wife
Alcyone's.  Of  her  he  thinks,  her  face  across  his  fancy  comes ;
before  her  eyes  he  prays  the  waves  may  cast  him,  and  that  by
her  loving  hands  his  lifeless  corpse  may  be  entombed.  While  his
strength  holds  out,  he  speaks  her  name,  as  often  as  the  waves
allow  of  utterance,  or  breathes  it  under  the  water  with  shut  lips.
Lo  !  towering  high  aloft,  a  black  arch  of  waters  bursts,  and  engulphs
him  in  its  riven  flood.  Dark  was  Lucifer  that  night;  and,  since
he  might  not  quit  Olympus,  he  had  veiled  his  face  in  thick
clouds.

The  daughter  of  Aeolus  \i.c.  Alcyone],  meanwhile,  in  ignorance
of  these  cruel  adversities,  .  .  .  was  devoutly  offering  incense  to
all  the  gods  of  heaven.  Yet  chiefliest  did  she  frequent  Juno's
sanctuaries  .  .  .

The  fact  that  Aeolus  is  the  subject  of  direct  reference  a
few  lines  before,  and  of  indirect  reference  a  few  lines  after,
the  occurrence  of  the  word  Olympo  accords  well  with  the
conjecture,  advanced  on  p.  102,  that  the  trance-personality
was  helped  to  a  recollection  of  the  story  of  Ceyx  and  Alcyone
by  an  association  of  ideas  with  another  classical  story  in
which  Aeolus  plays  a  part.


328


G.  Piddingion.


[part  lx.


In  this  connexion  it  is  worth  noting  also  that  the  first
mention  of  "  Olympus "  in  the  trance  was  made  immediately
after  Mr.  Dorr  had  spoken  of  the  Styx  (see  p.  87),  for  Ovid
{Met.  XT.  500)  describes  the  stormy  sea  in  which  Ceyx's  ship
foundered  as  "  blacker  than  the  Stygian  wave ".

If  "Olympus"  was  an  allusion  to  Met.  XT.  571,  it  may
serve  to  explain  why  MyerSp  on  March  30,  1908  (see  p.  96)
said  that  he  had  "  previously  answered "  Mr.  Dorr's  request
for  an  explanation  of  "  Olympus ".  In  the  waking-stage  of
the  previous  sitting  (see  p.  94)  the  letters  of  the  name  Ceyx
had  been  all  but  correctly  pronounced,  and  MyerSp  may  have
thought  that  leading  words  like  "  Olympus "  and  "  Ceyx "
ought  together  to  furnish  a  sufficiently  easy  clue  to  his
meaning.

Neither  in  Bulfinch's  nor  in  Gayley's  version  of  the  Ceyx  and
Alcyone  story  does  the  word  Olympus  occur.  Bulfinch's  para-
phrase of  Md.  XI.  570-572  is:  "The  Day-star  looked  dim
that  night.  Since  it  could  not  leave  the  heavens,  it  shrouded
its  face  in  clouds."  Gayley  omits  the  lines  altogether.  This
enforces — I  might  almost  say,  proves — my  contention  that  the
knowledge  of  the  story  shown  in  the  trance  was  not  derived
from  either  Bulfinch's  or  Gayley 's  book.

The  reason  why  I  failed  to  detect  any  meaning  in  "  Olympus  "
is  that  my  own  text  of  Ovid  (Merkel's)  reads  caelo  in  place
of  Olympo.  Mrs.  Verrall  has  kindly  looked  up  the  textual
history  of  Met.  XI.  571  for  me,  and  from  her  investigation
the  following  appear  to  be  the  facts :

Both  readings,  ceiclo  and  Olyvvpo,  are  to  be  found  in  the  MSS.
Heinsius,  whose  edition  of  Ovid  was  published  in  1652,  adopted
the  reading  Ohpwpo ;  and  this  reading  seems  thenceforward  to
have  been  regularly  followed  {e.g.  in  the  Delphin  edition,  in
Lemaire's,  in  Baumgarten-Crusius',  and  in  the  old  Corpus  Poet.
Lat.)  till  Loers  in  1843  adopted  caelo,  the  reading  of  the  older
MSS.  Subsequent  editors  have  followed  Loers  {e.rj.  Merkel,
and  Postgate  in  the  new  Corpus  Poet.  Led.).  It  may  be  asserted
with  considerable  confidence  that  the  editions  of  Ovid  in
common  use  about  the  time  (1853-1859)  when  Frederic
Myers  has  described  himself  as  living  "  much  in  the  inward
recital  of  .  .  .  Ovid ",  would  have  contained  the  reading
Olym-po.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research.

PART  LXI.
August,  1910.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  GENERAL  MEETING.

The  136th  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the
Morley  Hall,  George  Street,  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.,  on
Thursday,  May  5th,  1910,  at  -1.15  p.m.;  the  President,  Mr.
H.  Akthur  Smith,  in  the  chair.

The  President  delivered  the  Address  which  is  printed  below.


Y


330


H.  Arthur  Smith.


[part


PEESIDENTIAL  ADDEESS.

Delivered  on  May  5th,  1910.

By  H,  Akthur  Smith.

When,  just  ten  years  ago,  Frederic  Myers  was  elected  to  the
Chair  of  our  Society,  he  prefaced  his  remarkable  presidential
address  with  these  words : — "  When  1  heard  that  the  Council  of
this  Society  had  done  me  the  honour  of  electing  me  as  its
President  for  the  current  year,  I  felt  that  a  certain  definite  stage
in  the  Society's  evolution  had  been  reached  at  an  earlier  date  than
I  should  originally  have  expected.  My  predecessors  in  this  chair
have  without  exception  been  men  of  the  highest  distinction.  The
list  has  included  men  whose  leadership  would  confer  honour  on
any  body  of  men  whatever ;  on  such  bodies,  for  instance,  as  the
British  Association  or  the  House  of  Commons.  We  have  been
grateful  to  these  eminent  persons  for  lending  the  sanction  of  their
names  to  our  early  beginnings.  And  we  have  other  names  of
similar  distinction ; — destined,  I  hope,  some  day  to  adorn  our  list
of  Presidents.  Yet  for  the  current  year  the  Council  have  preferred
to  choose  a  man  who  has  little  claim  to  such  a  distinction,  beyond
the  fact  that  he  has  worked  for  the  objects  which  our  Society
seeks,  from  days  even  before  the  Society's  formation,  and  that  he
is  determined  to  go  on  thus  working  so  long  as  his  faculties  may
allow.  .  .  .  The  time  has  come  when  we  may  fairly  indicate  to
the  world  that  we  believe  our  Society  can  stand  on  its  own
bottom  .  .  .  and  that  therefore  we  do  not  need  to  put  forward  in
its  prominent  positions  only  those  names  which  have  been  made
independently  illustrious  by  good  work  of  other  kinds  performed
elsewhere."

If  such  a  man  as  Frederic  Myers  thought  it  necessary  to  intro-
duce himself  to  this  office  in  such  modest  and  apologetic  fashion,


LXI.]


Presidential  Address.


331


how  much  more  is  it  incumbent  on  myself  to  justify  the  taking  of
a  place  in  such  a  succession  of  names,  at  the  invitation  of  your
Council !  Myers's  hope  as  to  his  successors  has  up  to  the  present
been  fulfilled.  Our  Society  has  been  served  by  a  succession  of
persons  distinguished  in  many  ways,  in  science,  in  philosophy,  in
education.  If  it  has  now  called  to  its  chief  office  one  whose  only
claim  to  such  a  position  is  his  intense  and  life-long  interest  in  the
work  before  us,  it  must  argue  a  great  confidence  in  the  present
strength  and  stability  of  the  Society.

There  is  abundant  evidence  before  us  that  our  Society  is  now
strong  and  stable;  and  I  am  sure  I  shall  provoke  no  jealousy
if  I  say  that  its  strength  is  due  to  Frederic  Myers  himself  more
than  to  any  one  else.  In  1882  we  began  with  a  small  company
indeed,  and  for  some  years  were  not  infrequently  the  butt  of
gibes  and  sneers.  At  present,  we  have  no  fewer  than  1284
names  on  our  books ;  and  these,  comprising  representatives  of
many  creeds,  are  to  be  found  scattered  over  the  whole  earth —
literally  from  China  to  Peru.  Happily,  moreover,  there  seems
to  be  no  decline  in  the  public  interest  which  our  investigations
attract.  The  supply  of  new  candidates  continues  steady,  or
rather  tends  to  increase  in  volume.

It  may  well,  then,  be  asked,  indeed  I  am  often  asked  by
persons  not  conversant  with  our  work,  what  our  Society  has
done,  or  what  it  is  doing  to  explain  or  justify  this  extended
interest  and  support.  To  answer  this  question  completely  would,
of  course,  involve  the  writing  of  the  Society's  history  through
eight  and  twenty  years.  To  attempt  such  an  undertaking  within
the  limits  of  time  and  space  which  I  must  impose  on  myself
would  be  absurd.  And  it  is  the  less  necessary,  since  I  am
addressing  myself  mainly  not  to  the  uninformed  but  to  those
who  have  already  convinced  themselves  that  there  is  a  sufficient
raison  cVStre  for  our  existence.  At  the  same  time,  in  view  of
the  continual  accretion  to  our  numbers  of  new  enquirers,  who
can  scarcely  be  expected  to  follow  all  the  steps  of  the  past,  I
have  often  been  impressed  with  the  desirability  of  presenting
from  time  to  time  something  in  the  form  of  a  resume  of  what
has  been  accomplished,  what  attempted  and  as  we  hope  in
process  of  accomplishment.  I  think,  then,  it  is  reasonable  and
may  serve  a  useful  purpose  to  adduce  a  brief  summing  up  of
the  results  of  our  labours  from  this  point  of  view.


332


H.  Arthur  Smith.


[part


The  original  programme  of  the  Society  comprised  six
subjects  as  appropriate  for  its  investigation  :

(1)  An  examination  of  the  nature  and  extent  of  any  influence
which  may  be  exerted  by  one  mind  upon  another,  apart  from
any  generally  recognised  mode  of  perception.

(2)  The  study  of  hypnotism  and  the  forms  of  so-called
mesmeric  trance,  with  its  alleged  insensibility  to  pain;  clairvoy-
ance and  other  allied  phenomena.

(3)  A  critical  revision  of  Eeichenbach's  researches  with  certain
organisations  called  "  sensitive,"  and  an  enquiry  whether  such
organisations  possess  any  power  of  perception  beyond  a  highly
exalted  sensibility  of  the  recognised  sensory  organs.

(4)  A  careful  investigation  of  any  reports,  resting  on  strong
testimony,  regarding  apparitions  at  the  moment  of  death  or
otherwise,  or  regarding  disturbances  in  houses  reputed  to  be
haunted.

(5)  An  enquiry  into  the  various  physical  phenomena  commonly
called  Spiritualistic,  with  an  attempt  to  discover  their  causes
and  general  laws.

(6)  The  collection  and  collation  of  existing  materials  bearing
on  the  history  of  these  subjects.

This  enumeration  of  our  original  objects  of  research  is,  of
course,  familiar  to  many,  especially  of  our  older  members,  but
I  refer  to  it,  partly  by  way  of  introduction  to  the  brief  review
of  our  progress  which  I  propose  to  present,  and  partly  because
it  seems  to  me  to  need  repetition  from  time  to  time  in  order
to  correct  misconceptions  which  one  often  meets  with  as  to  our
scientific  position.

Eepeatedly  have  I  been  asked  by  outsiders,  half  in  jest  and
half  in  earnest,  what  our  Society  has  discovered,  or  even  what
it  believes  on  this  or  that  occult  matter.  Some  seem  to  suppose
that  the  Society  is  possessed  of  a  kind  of  corporate  intelligence,
or  that  we  are  wont  at  our  meetings  to  recite  something  like
a  creed  which  we  regard  as  psychically  orthodox.  Even
stranger  misconceptions  than  these  may  be  met  with  in  some
quarters.  Some  seem  to  think  that  candidates  for  admission
are  required  to  go  through  something  like  a  Masonic  initiation
or  Eosicrucian  ordeal,  or  to  face  the  "Dweller  on  the  Threshold,"
as  described  in  Lytton's  Zanoni.  Now,  in  fact,  it  is  obvious
enough  that  if  we  were to confine  our  expositions to  such


LXI.]


Presidential  Address.


333


matters  as  all  of  us  believe,  our  curriculum  would  be  extremely
limited;  and  if  on  the  other  hand  we  were  to  pronounce  dog-
matically on  things  which  some  among  us  believe,  we  should
pretty  certainly  soon  be  worried  by  many  dissenters  from  our
ecclesiasticism.

But  to  return  to  our  programme.  The  inter-relation  of  the
various  subjects  mentioned  is  plain  enough.  That  they  have  not
all  received  equal  attention  is  also  plain,  and  the  reasons  for  this
are  not  far  to  seek.  In  some  cases,  notably  in  that  of  hypnotism
and  hypnotic  ansesthesia,  the  subjects  have  been  widely  taken  up
and  investigated  outside  our  Society.  In  the  earlier  days  of  our
existence  we  by  no  means  neglected  this  investigation,  as  our
Proceedings  clearly  show.  But  now  that  the  more  familiar
phenomena  of  hypnotism  at  any  rate,  have  tardily  forced  their
way  into  scientific  recognition — and  the  steps  leading  to  this
recognition  are  amongst  the  most  instructive  and  curious  in  the
history  of  science — now  that  these  effects  of  hypnotism  are  daily
being  applied  to  practical  purposes  in  various  parts  of  the  world,
it  seems  scarcely  incumbent  upon  us  to  devote  our  scanty
resources  of  time  and  treasure  to  the  further  proof  or  illustration
of  what  may  be  taken  to  be  already  established.

The  lieichenbach  researches,  again,  have  not  been  neglected.
Experiments  were  made  to  test  the  truth  of  the  allegations
that  to  certain  sensitives  a  luminosity  was  visible  around  the
poles  of  powerful  magnets.  But,  so  far  as  my  recollection
serves,  these  experiments  produced  few  if  any  satisfactory
results.-^  Moreover  the  interest  in  them  was,  I  think,  of  too
academic  a  character  to  affect  any  considerable  number  of  our
supporters ;  and  this,  of  course,  had  to  be  taken  into  consideration
in  the  application  of  the  energies  at  our  command.  But  a
subject  of  enquiry  which  was  not  specifically  mentioned  in  our
programme  but  which  is  of  a  nature  somewhat  analogous  to
that  just  now  mentioned,  inasmuch  as  it  involves  the  study
of  a  special  sensitivity,  more  or  less  widely,  but  not  univer-
sally possessed,  has  attracted  minute  attention,  which  has
produced  most  interesting  and  important  results.  I  refer  to
the  phenomena  of  the  dowsing  rod.  The  Society,  and  indeed
the  world  of  science  generally,  is  indebted  to  Professor  Barrett

^  I  have  been  informed  by  Professor  Barrett  that  of  recent  years  the
Reichenbach  experiments  have  been  renewed  with  success.


334


H.  Arthur  Smith.


[part


for  an  exhaustive  examination  of  this  strange  faculty,  the
operative  cause  of  which  must  still,  I  suppose,  be  deemed  to
remain  in  the  region  of  hypothesis.  The  dowsing  rod  has
indeed  for  ages,  some  would  say  from  the  time  of  Moses,  been
empirically  used  and  applied  in  the  search  for  water  and
mineral  lodes  for  commercial  and  other  purposes.  Fortunes
have  been  made  by  the  exercise  of  the  faculty.  But  never
before  has  any  one  devoted  so  much  time  and  careful  study
to  this  subject  as  has  Professor  Barrett  during  the  past  five
and  twenty  years.  As  a  result  we  have  in  our  Proceeclmgs
an  exposition  of  the  art,  a  discussion  of  the  theory,  and  a
collection  of  the  ancient  and  modern  bibliography  of  the
dowsing  rod,  such  as  had  not  before  been  presented  to  the
world.

These  are,  however,  but  by-products,  so  to  speak,  which
have  appeared  in  the  course  of  our  quest.  Beyond  all  doubt
the  subject  which  above  all  others  has  attracted  and  engrossed
the  attention  of  the  great  majority  of  our  supporters  is  to  be
found  in  our  investigation  of  the  evidence  for  the  continuance
of  life  after  death — "  The  Survival  of  Man."  In  one  depart-
ment of  this  enquiry,  specifically  mentioned  in  the  programme,
the  results  obtained  have  not  been  great,  namely  the  exami-
nation of  houses  reputed  to  be  haunted.  Stories  of  ghostly
disturbances  have  reached  us  from  time  to  time ;  and  thanks
largely  to  Mr.  Baggally's  and  Colonel  Taylor's  readiness  to
place  their  time  at  our  disposal,  some  of  these  have  been
tested ;  but  on  the  whole,  I  think  I  must  say,  with  meagre
and  unconvincing  results.  We  have  found  little,  if  any,
trustworthy  evidence  in  favour  of  what  I  may  call  the  "ghost
story  of  commerce,"  the  periodic  ghost,  or  the  ghost  which
appears  with  a  purpose.  Our  records,  indeed,  contain  a  valu-
able monograph  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  on  the  "  Phantasms  of  the
Dead  " ;  but  apart  from  this,  the  cases  which  have  come  before
us  have  been  too  sporadic  and  disconnected  to  suggest  any
very  definite  conclusions.

There  remains,  however,  the  great  subject  of  all,  the  demon-
stration of  thought  transference  among  the  living,  for  which
Myers  happily  invented  the  word  "telepathy";  and  the  collec-
tion of  voluminous  evidence  which  at  least  suggests  the
operation  of  telepathy  between  the  dead  and  the  living.  This


LXI.]  Presidential  Address.  335

branch  of  our  enquiry  has  produced  an  extensive  literature,
characterised  scarcely  more  by  the  evidence  which  it  presents
of  tireless  research  than  by  the  eloquence  with  which  the
results  have  been  propounded  and  discussed.  It  has  given  to
the  world  such  works  as  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Human
Personality,  and  lastly  The  Survival  of  Man.  It  has  influenced
many  of  the  pregnant  writings  of  Professor  William  James  of
Harvard,  and  it  has  called  forth  the  numerous  and  valuable
critical  essays  of  Mr.  Podmore  on  the  whole  subject — a  litera-
ture which  has  profoundly  influenced  the  world  of  thought  on
matters  psychical  and  psychological,  and  I  venture  to  thinlv  is
destined  to  do  so  for  many  years  to  come.  Moreover  a  great
mass  of  literature  has  sprung  up  and  is  almost  daily  being
added  to,  outside  the  ranks  of  our  Society,  but  almost  wholly
based  on  its  reports.  Some  of  these  works  are  valuable,  many
of  them  much  the  reverse,  but  they  all  tend  to  show  how
deep  an  impression  has  been  made  by  our  work.

"  Telepathy,"  as  I  have  indicated,  was  a  word  unknown  in  our
language  until  about  five  and  twenty  years  ago.  Now  it  is
scarcely  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  it  is  as  familiar  in  common
speech  as  "  telegram  "  and  "  photograph."  Telepathy  has  been
defined  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  as  "  the  apparently  direct  action  of
one  mind  on  another  by  means  unknown  to  science."  This  Sir
Oliver  regards  as  having  been  experimentally  proved,  at  any  rate
to  this  extent,  that  "  a  hazy  and  difficult  recognition  is  possible  by
one  person  of  objects  kept  as  vividly  as  possible  in  the  conscious-
ness of  another  person,"  and  in  this  conviction,  if  in  nothing  else,
I  think  all  who  have  followed  our  Society's  work  are  agreed.  I
suppose  that  the  admission  of  this  operation  of  mind  on  mind  is
not  yet  reckoned  orthodox  in  the  world  of  science,  or  deemed  to  be
a  proved  vera  causa  ;  but  it  is  obvious  that  in  the  world  at  large
its  recognition  is  very  widespread  and  is  increasing  day  by  day.
Now  I  contend  that  if  by  means  of  these  many  years  of  strenuous
work  our  Society  had  obtained  no  other  result  than  this,  this
alone  would  suffice  to  justify  its  formation  and  labour.  It
establishes  the  existence  of  a  factor  in  the  powers  of  the
human  mind  which  may  before  have  been  suspected,  but  never
before  came  within  measurable  distance  of  pi'oof ;  and  he  would
be  a  bold  man  who  would  venture  to  predict  what  results  may
accrue  from  it  in  the  generations  to  come. One  illustration


336


H.  Arthur  Smith.


[part


of  its  pretty  general  acceptance  may  be  given,  which  is  not
without  its  humorous  side.  Our  Society  through  its  various
workers  has  taught  the  world  all  it  knows  or  thinks  it  knows
about  telepathy,  as  well  as  giving  it  the  word.  And  now
what  do  we  see  ?  When  our  researches  carry  us  into  deeper
regions,  and  bring  to  light  occurrences  which  are  calculated  to
produce  more  exciting  effects  on  the  minds  of  the  observers, —
such,  for  example,  as  the  phenomena  associated  with  the  names  .
of  Mrs.  Piper,  Mrs.  Verrall  and  others,  especially  the  cross-
correspondences, — our  critics  lay  hold  of  our  own  discovery
and  use  it  to  cast  ridicule  or  pour  scorn  upon  the  conclusions
we  are  endeavouring  to  formulate  from  these  more  recondite
occurrences.  They  make  a  hurried  examination  of  a  most
complicated  series  of  facts  and  then  confidently  assure  the
world  that  there  is  nothing  in  them  but  "  telepathy."  They
beat  us,  or  try  to  do  so,  with  the  stick  which  we  have  made
for  them.  Having  jeered  at  telepathy  as  long  as  they  dared,
now  that  it  is  established  in  a  simple  form,  they  accuse  us  of
credulity  for  not  assuming  its  sufficiency  to  account  for  many
complicated  phenomena  for  which  its  aptitude  is  by  no  means
proved,  and  to  which  its  application  seems  more  than  doubtful.
We  are  not  in  such  a  hurry.  We  have  not  been  deterred  by
scoffs  in  the  past  and  we  shall  not  now  be  hurried  to  unwar-
ranted conclusions  by  impatience.  Our  motto  has  been,  and  I
hope  will  always  be,  "  Festina  Icntc."

Taking  telepathy,  then,  in  its  simplest  form  to  be  proved,  we
have  under  watchful  examination  the  possibility  of  much  more
complicated  manifestations  of  the  same  faculty.  That  there  are
such  in  operation  the  phantasms  of  the  living  and  still  more
impressively  those  of  the  dying  seem  strongly  to  suggest.  But
I  prefer  to  leave  the  analytical  examination  of  this  question  to
experts  in  science  and  philosophy,  among  whom  it  would  be  an
impertinence  for  me  to  claim  a  place.  Many  will  remember
the  ingenious  illustrations  presented  to  us  of  the  possibilities
of  telergy,  teltesthesia,  telekinesis,  genius,  inspiration,  etc.,  in  the
diagrams  expounded  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  at  one  of  our  meetings
in  1908,  an  exposition  which  personally  I  hope  to  see
reported  in  a  much  completer  form  than  was  possible  in  the
limited  space  of  our  Journal.  Nor  shall  I  go  at  any  length
into  a  consideration  of  the  Piper  phenomena  which of  late


txi.]


Presidential  Address.


337


years  have  figured  so  largely  iii  our  investigations.  I  have,
however,  been  asked  to  make  some  reference  to  the  evidence
for  the  identity  of  the  controls  from  a  lawyer's  point  of  view.
To  this  I  will  return  in  a  few  moments,  but  first  I  should
like  to  make  some  general  observations  bearing  on  the  same
subject.

One  of  the  commonest  objections  urged  against  the  genuine-
ness of  communications  claiming  to  come  from  the  dead,  is
based  on  the  triviality,  or  in  other  cases  the  want  of  consis-
tency in  the  messages  delivered.  True,  some  of  the  communi-
cations seem  trivial,  but  it  is  a  gross  exaggeration  to  assert,
as  some  have  asserted,  that  all  are  so.  This  objection,  again,  is
likely  to  be  more  striking  to  a  reader  of  the  reports  than  to
a  first-hand  witness.  No  doubt  it  gives  one  something  of  a
shock  to  find  in  a  message  purporting  to  come  from  Myers
solecisms  of  grammar ;  and  such  may  be  met  with.  But  apart
from  the  fact  that,  though  a  few  people  here  and  there  write
good  grammar,  no  human  being  speaks  it  in  general  conversa-
tion, how  little  as  yet  do  we  know  of  the  nature  of  the
difficulties  obstructing  these  communications,  if  communications
there  be,  or  of  the  extent  to  which  the  communications  are
influenced  by  the  personality  of  the  mediums  with  their  various
limitations !  That  there  are  difficulties  and  limitations  the
scripts  continually  assert.  Some  one  has  compared  them  to
the  difficulty  of  talking  through  an  imperfect  telephone,  and
everybody  who  has  tried  that  will  agree  that  the  exasperating
hindrances  met  with  are  more  conducive  to  forcibleness  of
expression  than  to  elegance  of  style.  Mrs.  Piper's  brain,  nerves,
and  muscles  may  perhaps  be  the  best  telephone  in  the  world
for  the  purpose  in  hand,  but  may  be  very  far  nevertheless  from
being  a  perfect  instrument.  And  then  again,  how  little,  if  any-
thing, we  have  learned  as  yet  of  the  conditions  on  the  other
side !  I  think  Dr.  Schiller  suggested  in  an  article  which
appeared  in  our  Proceedings  some  years  ago  that  a  life  newly
begotten  into  the  discarnate  state  may  have  to  go  through  a
period  analogous  to  infancy  in  this  life,  needing  again  to  learn
the  use  of  such  faculties  as  it  finds  itself  possessed  of — "  an
infant  crying  in  the  night "  and  sometimes  "  with  no  language
but  a  cry."  Or  on  the  other  hand,  though  this  would  seem
scarcely  in  the  same  accordance  with  the  processes  of  nature


338


H,  ArtJmr  Smith.


[part


as  we  know  them,  the  discaruate  spirit  may  suddenly  find
itself  endowed  with  senses,  faculties  and  powers  entirely
unknown  to  us,  and  so  may  have  to  cramp  itself  (if  I  may  use
an  Americanism)  to  communicate  with  us  at  all.  If  some  of
the  lower  forms  of  life  here  are  possessed  of  only  one  sense,
some  higher  forms  of  two  or  three  senses,  and  man  of  five  or
six,  why  may  not  the  liberated  spirit  enjoy  a  dozen,  or  a
hundred  for  the  matter  of  that  ?  For  we  must  assume,  if  we
are  to  consider  the  question  at  all,  that  the  exercise  of  senses
does  not  continue  to  depend  on  the  possession  of  physical
organs  of  sense  as  we  know  them.  How  should  we  succeed
if  we  tried  (reverting  to  our  comparison)  to  describe  through
a  buzzing  telephone  the  beauty  of  the  rainbow  to  a  man  blind
from  his  birth  ?  These  intelligences,  if  such  there  be,  may,
again,  be  as  conversant  with  the  fourth,  fifth,  or  higher  dimen-
sions of  matter,  as  we  are  with  the  first,  second  and  third.
Yet  once  more,  it  may  well  be  that  the  attempt  to  communi-
cate with  us,  if  such  attempt  there  be,  involves  a  heroic
act  of  self-denial  or  sacrifice  on  the  part  of  those  making
the  attempt.  Some  passages  in  the  scripts  more  than  hint
that  this  is  the  case.  In  short,  until  the  whole  study  has
progressed  much  further  than  it  yet  has,  we  must  remain
hopelessly  incompetent  to  estimate  the  value,  or  quite  as  pro-
bably the  valuelessness,  of  such  criticism  as  I  have  referred
to.  But  surely  with  such  facts  as  we  have  before  us,  this  is
no  sufficient  reason  for  discrediting,  still  less  for  abandoning
the  study.

And  now  let  us  briefiy  consider  the  evidence  for  identity
from  a  lawyer's  point  of  view,  which  subject  has  been  suggested
to  me.  My  first  comment  must  be  that  it  is  by  no  means
clear  that  a  lawyer's  is  the  most  important  point  of  view  in
a  case  like  that  before  us.  The  lawyer  is  conversant  with
certain  canons  which  in  the  aggregate  are  known  as  the  law
of  evidence,  the  exposition  of  which  by  some  writers  occupies
a  thousand  pages  or  so.  These  canons  are  no  doubt  based  on
the  principles  of  inductive  logic,  but  in  the  application  of  those
principles  they  are  cribbed  and  confined  on  all  sides  by  the
exigencies  of  forensic  practice.  It  is  far  from  being  certain
that  the  dialectic  methods  of  the  forum  are  the  methods  best
adapted  for  the  investigation  of  questions  not  subject  to  similar


LXI.]


Presidential  Address.


339


restrictions,  but  carried  on  under  entirely  different  conditions.
And  here  let  me  call  attention  to  the  important  ambiguity
which  lies  in  the  word  "evidence."  Probably  half  the  contro-
versies which  rage  in  the  regions  of  theology,  politics  and
philosophy  turn  on  the  fallacious  use  of  what  logicians  call  the
ambiguous  middle ;  and  possibly  one  reason  why  we  have  in
Britain  the  reputation  for  being  excessively  addicted  to  con-
troversy may  be  found  in  the  fact  that  our  language  is  peculiarly
and  unfortunately  rich  in  words  which  are  more  than  ambiguous.
The  word  "  church,"  for  instance,  has  eight  or  ten  distinct
meanings.  What  wonder  then  that  ecclesiastics  wrangle  when
they  come  to  talk  about  it  ?  If  half-a-dozen  politicians  meet
to  discuss  "  socialism,"  it  is  quite  likely  that  no  two  of  them  will
attach  the  same  meaning  to  the  word.  What  wonder  then  if
they  lose  their  tempers  ?  So  of  the  word  "  evidence."  As  Sir
James  Fitzjames  Stephen  points  out  in  the  introduction  to  his
Digest  of  the  Law  of  Evidence,  and  expounds  still  more  fully
in  his  Introduction  to  the  Indian  Evidence  Act,  the  word  some-
times means  relevancy,  sometimes  testimony,  and  sometimes
proof.  It  might  seem  plausible  to  argue  that  if  there  is  evidence
produced  as  to  an  alleged  fact,  the  truth  of  the  fact  is  thereby
made  evident.  The  fallacy  is  obvious  enough  v/hen  tested,  but
it  is  nevertheless  operative  in  the  minds  of  loose  thinkers,  and
nowhere  more  frequently  than  in  careless  dabblers  in  psychical
research.  One  brief  illustration  will  suffice.  The  notorious
Pigott  gave  testimony,  and  perfectly  relevant  testimony,  as  to
the  authorship  of  the  Parnell  letters.  But  half-a-dozen  questions
of  cross-examination  showed  how  very  far  this  relevant  testimony
fell  short  of  proof  He  gave  evidence  indeed,  but  made  nothing
evident  save  that  he  was  an  arrant  liar.  The  same  point  is
enlarged  upon  in  what  I  have  always  regarded  as  a  locus  classicus
for  the  expression  of  a  sane  view  of  some  of  the  problems
before  us  ;  I  refer  to  De  Morgan's  Preface  to  his  wife's  work
entitled  From  Matter  to  Spirit.  It  appeared  anonymously  some
five  and  forty  years  ago,  since  which  time  of  course  a  great
deal  of  water  has  passed  under  the  bridge  ;  but  its  authorship
is  now  an  open  secret,  and  its  wit  and  wisdom  are  worthy  of
the  writer  of  the  celebrated  Paradoxes.  I  believe  the  work
has  long  been  out  of  print  and  is  difficult  to  obtain,  so  that
a  quotation  at  some  length  is  the  more  justifiable.


340


H.  Arthur  Smith.


[part


De  Morgan  writes :

One  of  the  greatest  pursuits  of  the  world  is  the  study  of  evidence ;
we  are  all  engaged  upon  it  in  one  way  or  another.  But  as  generally
happens,  when  a  word  goes  much  about,  it  picks  up  more  than  one
meaning  in  its  travels.  Accordingly,  evidence  passes  for  that  which
is  given  and  intended  to  produce  an  effect,  and  also  for  that
which  does  produce  it  ■  there  is  the  quod  debet  monstrari,  that  which
may  properly  be  tendered  in  aid  of  a  conclusion,  and  the  quod  facit
videre,  that  which  gives  perception  of  truth  or  falsehood.  The  difference
and  the  fallacies  of  confusion  arising  therefrom  are  strikingly  illus-
trated in  courts  of  law.  "While  the  case  is  preparing  for  trial  it  is
the  lawyer's  business  to  collect  what  he  then  calls  the  evidence,  the
matter  which  is  to  be  offered  to  the  jury.  It  is  his  duty  to  see
that  the  evidence  is  quod  debet  monstrari,  not  onlj'  addressed  to  the
points  raised  by  the  pleadings,  but  in  conformity  to  certain  rational
ru.les  which  are  laid  down.

And  here  I  may  interject,  though  it  may  be  giving  away
one  of  the  rather  illicit  devices  of  the  profession,  that  counsel
advising  on  evidence  in  this  sense  will  sometimes  manaste  to
introduce  matter  tending  to  prejudice  the  jury  in  his  favour,
although  he  knows  it  not  to  be  in  strictness  admissible.  De
Morgan  continues  :

Thus  it  comes  before  the  jury,  who  are  sworn  to  give  a  true
verdict  according  to  the  "evidence,"  which  now  means  the  quod  facit
videre.  So  far  good  ;  the  law  must  decide  what  is  and  what  is  not
fit  to  be  offered  as  material  for  evidence.  But  it  may  happen  that
matter  slips  in  which  the  Court  would  have  prevented  if  it  could
(i.e.  matter  which  I  have  called  matter  of  prejudice),  but  could  not,
or  at  least  did  not,  prevent.  And  now  comes  one  of  those  coUisions
in  which  the  jury  mind  rules  contrary  to  the  legal  mind.  If  the
ghost  of  a  murdered  man  were  to  make  his  appearance  in  court  in
a  form  which  no  one  could  possibly  attribute  to  imposture,  optics  or
chemistry,  and  were  solemnly  to  declare  that  the  prisoner  was  not
the  murderer  and  then  to  vanish  through  the  roof,  the  judge  would,
no  doubt,  instruct  the  jury  that  they  must  dismiss  the  respectable
apparition  from  their  minds  altogether ;  that  even  if  the  spirit  had
offered  to  be  sworn  and  to  stand  cross-examination,  there  would  be
very  grave  doubt  whether  his  evidence  could  have  been  received,
from  his  probable  want  of  belief  in  a  future  state;  but  that,  as


LXI.]


Presidential  Address.


341


matters  stood,  it  was  clearly  their  duty  to  take  the  vision  pro  non
viso.  To  which  the  jury  would  reply,  if  they  believed  the  ghost,
by  a  verdict  of  7i^3t  guilty.  No  honest  men  would  ever  make  believe
that  they  do  not  believe  what  they  have  in  any  way  been  made  to
believe,  if  they  clearly  understand  what  they  are  doing.

So  far  De  Morgan ;  but  as  to  his  last  sentence  I  think  that
experience  of  the  courts  will  recall  many  cases  in  which  juries
have  yielded  to  judicial  direction,  and  been  induced  to  give
verdicts  conformable  to  legal  rules  of  evidence,  in  spite  of  con-
viction forced  upon  them  by  matter  which  I  have  described  as
matter  of  prejudice.

iSTow  let  us  try  to  apply  this  to  the  case  before  us,  to  the
evidence  tendered  to  prove  the  identity  of  controls,  or  spirits
speaking  or  writing  through  mediums.  Here  I  perhaps  may
interject  the  remark  that,  when  I  was  asked  to  deal  with  this
question,  it  was  suggested  to  me  that  I  might  find  some  help
by  consulting  and  refreshing  my  memory  with  the  report  of  the
famous  Tichborne  case  of  five  and  thirty  years  ago.  Well,  I
happen  to  have  in  my  Chambers  a  full  report  of  one  of  the
two  enormous  trials  which  arose  out  of  that  imposture.  But
when  I  tell  you  that  the  report  of  this  one  trial,  and  that  not
the  more  important,  occupies  five  quarto  volumes,  each  of  which
contains  nearly  a  thousand  closely  printed  double  column  pages,
I  think  you  will  e.xcuse  me  if  even  my  enthusiasm  for  Psychical
Eesearch  has  not  sufficed  to  induce  me  to  attempt  the  task  of
navigating  such  an  ocean.  I  must  content  myself  with  some  less
onerous  method.

It  is  clear  in  the  case  before  us, — the  proof  of  the  identity
of  our  instructors  who  claim  to  speak  from  behind  the  veil,
— that  though  there  is  much  evidence  ciuod  debet  monstrari,
that  is,  what  lawyers  call  evidence  to  go  to  the  jury,  there
is  absolutely  nothing  that  can  be  called  evidence  quod  facit
vidcre  (Professor  James  has  somewhere  called  it  "  knock-down
evidence")  from  a  lawyer's  point  of  view;  nor  can  I  conceive
that  there  is  ever  likely  to  be.  Apart  from  the  disqualifica-
tions of  the  supposititious  spectre  which  De  Morgan  humor-
ously introduced,  our  enquirers  are  hampered  and  restricted
on  every  side  by  the  want  of  powers  which  are  every  moment
available  to  a  judge  trying  an  issue.  If  a  witness  speaks
indistinctly  he  can be  required  to "  speak  up,"  and  if  he


342


H.  Arthur  Smith.


[part


refuses,  he  may  be  committed  for  contempt.  If  he  declines  to
give  a  direct  answer  to  a  direct  question,  he  subjects  himself
to  the  same  penalty.  He  can  be  cross-examined  in  detail  with
the  peril  of  a  prosecution  for  perjury  before  his  eyes.  But
notwithstanding  the  disabilities  under  which  our  enquirers
labour,  it  by  no  means  follows  that  we  (who  constitute  the
jury)  may  not  be  brought  reasonably  to  believe  the  evidence,
informal  though  it  be,  presented  to  us,  just  as  De  Morgan
supposes  the  jury  to  believe  the  ghost.

Direct  "  knock-down "  evidence  is  then  wanting  and  pro-
bably always  will  be  wanting.  But  circumstantial  evidence  of
a  kind  abounds ;  and  in  courts  of  law  experience  has  shown
that  in  many  respects  the  evidence  called  circumstantial  is
more  trustworthy,  safer  to  rely  on  than  direct  testimony.  For
instance :  the  question  for  a  jury  to  determine  is  the  identity
of  A.,  who  is  alleged  to  have  shot  B.  A  witness,  C,  may
come  forward  and  swear  that  in  l)road  day-light  he  saw  A.
fire  the  fatal  shot.  In  a  sense  this  seems  the  most  cogent
proof  possible ;  but  in  fact  it  is  not  so.  C.  may  have  an
interest  in  getting  rid  of  A.,  and  may  be  willing  to  perjure
himself  to  accomplish  his  object.  This,  of  course,  is  analogous
to  the  hypothesis  of  deliberate  fraud  as  applied  to  our  experi-
ments. Again  :  C.  may  have  very  defective  vision  and  may  be
honestly  mistaken  in  swearing  to  the  identification.  This
would  correspond  to  mal-observation  in  our  experiments.  But
if  on  the  other  hand  it  is  by  independent  witnesses  proved
that  shortly  before  the  murder  A.  purchased  a  revolver,  that
the  bullet  found  in  the  body  exactly  resembled  others  found
in  A.'s  possession,  that  foot-prints  of  a  peculiar  character  were
discovered  leading  to  and  from  the  spot  where  the  shot  was
fired  and  were  found  to  correspond  to  the  marks  made  by
boots  known  to  have  been  worn  by  A.  at  the  time,  and  so  on;
though  not  one  of  these  facts  taken  alone  would  be  quite
convincing,  their  cumulative  force  might  well  be  overwhelming
and  might  justify  a  much  more  confident  verdict  of  "guilty"
than  the  mere  unsupported  testimony  of  C,  however  clear.
As  Professor  James  has  pointed  out  in  his  report  on  the
Hodgson  control  {Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIIL),  this  is  precisely  the
character  of  the  evidence  before  us.  It  is  futile  to  take  it
item by item  and  to  proclaim  that  no  one  incident  in  it


LXI.]


Presidential  Address.


343


proves  anything.  The  evidence  must  be  considered  as  a  whole.
Juncta  juvant.  As  to  its  convincing  effect  when  so  regarded,
opinions  will,  of  course,  differ ;  but  in  determining  this  ques-
tion, we  may  reasonably  apply  the  principles  of  logic,  which
are  broader  than  the  technicalities  which  restrict  the  law  of
forensic  evidence.  All  this  is  indeed  somewhat  elementary,
but  some  of  our  critics  are  not  incapable  of  ignoring  what  is
elementary.

When  we  appeal  to  logic,  our  path  is  still  a  thorny  one.
We  are  very  far  from  being  in  a  position  to  apply  to  the  case
in  hand  the  four  canons  (or  indeed  any  one  of  them)  which
John  Stuart  Mill  lays  down  as  applicable  to  experimental
methods.  We  can  scarcely  even  act  on  the  Aristotelian  advice
to  proceed  to  the  unknown  from  what  is  known  to  us,
because  of  the  fact  that  so  little  as  yet  is  really  known.
For  example :  we  are  undertaking  to  enquire  into  the  causes
which  produce  the  effects  of  a  medium's  trance-speech  or
automatic  writing.  Before  we  can  reach  the  conclusion  that
the  cause  is  the  will  of  a  departed  human  spirit  to  communi-
cate with  us,  we  are  logically  bound  to  eliminate,  not  only
every  known  cause,  if  any  there  be,  but  also  any  suggested
cause  which  we  ought  to  regard  as  more  probable.  I  do  not
think  there  can  be  said  to  be  any  cause  for  these  phenomena
which  we  are  entitled  to  describe  as  knov:n ;  so  that  the
discussion  of  probabilities  is  all  that  is  left  to  us.  And  here
our  difficulties  thicken  around  us.  In  the  attempt  to  esti-
mate the  balance  of  probabilities  we  find  ourselves  without
the  known  quantities  which  we  need  to  enable  us  to  frame
even  an  indeterminate  equation.  Putting  fraudulent  conspiracy
out  of  view  as  a  cause  of  the  facts  we  are  investigating,  there
would  seem  to  be  at  least  three  possible  explanations  of  these
facts  to  be  considered,  other  than  the  hypothesis  of  actual
communications  from  the  dead.

The  first  which  I  would  mention  is  of  a  metaphysical
nature  and  will  not  perhaps  appeal  to  many  minds.  A  little
more  than  twenty  years  ago  Sir  Edwin  Arnold  published  in  the
Fortnightly  Review  a  brief  essay  entitled  "  Death — and  after-
wards," in  which  he  eloquently  discussed  some  aspects  of  the
question  before  us.  This  essay  was  shortly  afterwards  pub-
lished separately  and  has  since  run  through  many  editions.


344  H.  Arthur  Smith.  [part


To  it  are  appended  some  critical  examinations  of  his  thesis,
which  appear  anonymously,  but  which  are  evidently  the
production  of  acute  thinkers.  From  one  of  these  I  will  quote
a  statement  of  the  metaphysical  supposition  to  which  I  refer.
The  writer  says :

When  the  GaHleo  of  Time — surely  coming — shall  have  made  con-
ceivable, if  not  actually  accessible  to  us,  what  answers  in  the
temporal  sphere  to  the  antipodes  we  know  as  spatial  fact ;  when  we
have  begun  to  realise  that  "  past  and  future "  are  no  more  absolute
than  the  "over  and  under,"  the  "above  and  below,"  which  now  we
know  to  be  reversible,  not  only  in  conception,  but  in  physical
experience ;  then  perhaps  we  may  alter  somewhat  our  estimate  of
the  comparative  value  of  the  local  temporal  sensuous  character  of  a
fact,  and  our  notion  of  what  constitutes  its  real  significance.

Professor  Pigou  in  a  recent  number  of  our  Proceedings  has
alluded  to  the  same  idea  in  the  same  connexion.  Speaking  of
the  survival  of  man  he  says :

The  ambiguity  connected  with  "survive"  is  philosophical.  If  any
one  asks  whether  cats  survive  immersion  in  water,  it  does  not  occur
to  us  to  bring  to  bear  on  that  problem  a  metaphysical  discussion
concerning  the  reality  of  time  ;  we  assume,  in  fact,  that  time  is  real,
and  we  mean  by  "surviving  immersion,"  being  alive  after  immersion.
When,  however,  our  cpiestion  relates  to  men  and  women  and  bodily
death,  the  idealist  philosopher  enters  the  arena  and  claims  that  time
and  all  that  therein  is,  is  a  purely  subjective  condition  of  human
perception ;  that  in  reality  there  is  no  after  and  no  before ;  that
survival  and  death  alike  are  appearance ;  that  men  and  women,  as
spirit,  neither  survive  nor  die,  but  in  some  sense  eternally  are.

It  was  not  likely  that  such  a  deep  philosophic  thinker  as
Myers  should  have  overlooked  this  speculation ;  and  he  has
not  overlooked  it.  In  more  than  one  passage  in  Human
Personality,  and  also  in  his  essay  on  Wordsworth,  he  discusses,
but  does  not  accept,  the  suggestion.  I  dwell  on  it  now
because  there  seem  to  be  cases  before  us  to  which  it  may
conceivably  apply.  I  am  not  referring  to  prophecy  or  to  the
predictions  of  the  Delphic  oracle  or  to  the  legends  of  Mother
Shipton,  or  to  the  occasional  happy  shots  of  so-called  astrolo-
gers ;  but  I  recall  to  mind  what  we  know  as  "  the  Marmontel


LXI.]


Presidential  Address.


345


incident "  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script,  and  other  somewhat  analogous
premonitions ;  certain  striking  predictive  crystal  visions  which
have  come  under  my  own  notice,  and  also  some  occurrences
described  in  the  experiences  of  Swedenborg.  I  might  refer
also  to  the  seeming  confusion  between  past  and  future  which
sometimes  appears  in  the  automatic  scripts.  See  for  example
the  "  Neptune "  and  "  Pharaoh's  daughter "  references  in  Pro-
ceedings, Part  LX.,  p.  193.  If  the  conjecture  is  to  be  enter-
tained at  all,  it  would  point  to  the  idea  that  what  Aristotle
called  the  "  categories  "  and  the  schoolmen  the  "  predicaments  "
have  no  relation  to  things  as  they  are,  but  amount  only  to  a
rough  formulation  of  the  present  conditions  of  human  thought;
and  these  not  absolute  or  essential,  but  subject  to  extension  or
evolution  with  the  progress  of  knowledge,  so  that  a  conception
of  our  relation  to  space  (for  example)  which  may  have  been
unthinkable  to  Aristotle  or  Aquinas  has  now  become  the
common  property  of  every  school-boy ;  and  possibly  the  con-
ception of  our  relation  to  time  may  be  destined  to  a  similar
change.  I  am  not,  however,  as  confident  as  the  writer  above
quoted  that  the  Galileo  of  time  is  "  surely  coming."

A  second  conceivable  explanation  of  the  phenomena  before
us  is  of  a  quasi-theological  nature.  The  sacred  writings  of  many
religions,  and  the  folk-lore  of  many  nations  are  full  of
assertions  of  the  existence  of  beings  intelligent  and  potent,  in
a  sense  intermediate  between  this  world,  and  what  we  some-
times call  the  other  world  or  world  to  come.  Some  are  repre-
sented as  benevolent,  others  as  malevolent  to  man,  others  again
as  scarcely  the  one  or  the  other,  but  capricious,  tricksy  sprites
addicted  to  practical  jokes  and  petty  mischief  Cardinal  Xewman
seems  to  have  accepted  the  existence  of  such  a  race  of  beings;
in  his  Apologia  he  writes : — "  Also  besides  the  hosts  of  evil
spirits  I  considered  there  was  a  middle  race,  8uLfx6vLa,  neither
in  heaven  nor  in  hell,  partially  fallen,  capricious,  wayward,
noble  or  crafty,  benevolent  or  malicious  as  the  case  might  be."
To  such  beings  he  ascribed  potent  influence  in  matters  of
church  and  state.  A  similar  view  appears  in  Father  Hugh
Benson's  recent  work  The  Necromancers.  I  do  not  propose  to
discuss  such  vague  circumstantial  evidence  as  may  be  deemed
to  exist  in  favour  of  the  existence  and  operation  of  these  Sai/moi'ia,
elementals,  or  whatever  they  may  be  called. This,  however,

z


346


H.  Arthur  Smith.


[part


may  be  said  with  reference  to  them,  that  if  such  beings  exist
around  us,  their  operations  may  have  a  bearing  not  only  on
the  investigation  of  trance-speech  and  vv^riting,  but  also  on  the
occurrences  known  amongst  us  as  physical  phenomena,  and  of
the  pranks  so  often  recorded,  so  seldom  well  authenticated,
ascribed  to  poltergeists.  For  myself,  if  I  see  no  very  cogent
a  priori  reason  for  discrediting  the  hypothesis  of  such  powers
in  our  environment,  I  see  little  that  is  calculated  to  carry
conviction  on  the  affirmative  side.  But  this  may  be  added :  if  the
phenomena  of  trance  and  other  mediumistic  communications  can
conceivably  be  ascribed  to  such  a  cause  as  this,  we  may  well  despair
of  attaining  any  evidence  conclusive  of  the  identity  of  discarnate
human  beings  purporting  to  communicate  with  us.  Ignorant  as
we  are  of  the  powers  and  means  of  information  at  the  disposal
of  such  SaifjLovia,  if  such  there  be,  it  is  rather  hopeless  to  expect
to  find  any  personation  agent  to  put  in  our  polling  booths,  com-
petent to  detect  the  deceptions  which  may  be  practised.

The  third  alternative  to  the  reality  of  messages  from  discar-
nate human  beings  lies  in  the  possibilities  of  telepathy  among
the  living.  As  already  said,  simple  telepathy  so  far  as  experi-
mentally proved  is  not  sufficient,  is,  indeed,  far  from  sufficient
to  account  for  the  occurrences  which  we  seek  to  explain.  But
the  possibilities  of  this  faculty  are  at  this  moment  under  care-
ful observation,  as  you  all  know.  The  records  of  our  experi-
ments are  voluminous ;  they  are  being  added  to  and  placed
before  you  year  by  year,  and  it  would  serve  little  purpose  now  for
me  to  speculate  as  to  the  ultimate  results  of  an  enquiry  which
is  in  hands  much  more  competent  than  mine.  To  these  three
possible  explanations  other  philosophic  speculations  might  of
course  be  added ;  such  for  example  as  the  existence  of  what
has  been  called  a  Cosmic  reservoir  of  memories  to  which  the
subliminal  consciousness  has  access.  But  our  limits  prohibit  the
discussion  of  such  hypotheses.

And  now  we  come  back  to  the  primary  question:  Consider-
ing the  facts  before  us,  and  weighing  as  best  we  can  the
probability  of  the  alternative  explanations  which  I  have  tried
briefly  to  suggest,  are  we  entitled  to  say  that  Myers  "  being
dead  yet  speaketh  ? "  Personally,  I  am  not  convinced.  But
then  I  am  in  the  disadvantageous  position  analogous  to  that
of  a  person  who  tries  to  form  an  opinion  on  a  complicated


LXI.]


Presidentml  Address.


347


issue  at  law  from  merely  reading  the  evidence,  without  having
had  the  opportunity  of  seeing  or  hearing  the  witnesses  in  court.
And  one  cannot  but  be  impressed  by  the  fact  that  many  who
have  assisted  in  the  experiments  have  been  convinced.  More-
over, when  I  wrote  this  last  sentence,  I  had  not  read  the
latest  number  of  our  Proceedings  (Part  LX.)  which,  I  think,
carries  us  many  steps  forward.

Before  I  conclude  I  will  venture  to  call  attention  to  two
matters  which  seem  to  me  worthy  of  earnest  consideration,  and
to  point  in  the  direction  of  an  affirmative  conclusion.  First,
it  is  a  strange  thing,  as  was  pointed  out  by  De  Morgan  long
ago,  that  "  in  spite  of  the  inconsistencies,  the  eccentricities,
and  the  puerilities  which  some  of  them  (the  supposed  communi-
cating spirits)  have  exhibited,  there  is  a  uniform  vein  of
description  running  through  their  accounts,  which,  supposing  it
to  be  laid  down  by  a  combination  of  impostors,  is  more  than
remarkable,  is  even  marvellous.  The  agreement  is  one  part  of
the  wonder,  it  being  remembered  that  the  mediums  are
scattered  through  the  world;  but  the  other  and  greater  part  of
it  is  that  the  impostors,  if  impostors  they  be,  have  combined
to  oppose  all  current  ideas  of  a  future  state,  in  order  to  gain
belief  in  the  genuineness  of  their  pretensions ! "

The  second  point  is  this.  It  is  as  certain  and  demonstrable
as  anything  can  well  be  that  many  of  the  most  striking
developments  which  have  appeared  in  our  recent  investigations,
— I  refer  more  particularly  to  the  cross-correspondences,' — -have
not  originated  in  the  speculations,  the  ingenuity,  or  the  invention
of  any  of  the  enquirers  on  this  side, — at  any  rate,  not  in  their
supraliminal  consciousness.  These  methods  have  come  as  a
surprise  to  all  concerned,  and  I  cannot  but  consider  this  to  be
in  some  degree  an  argument  for  their  genuineness.  From  the
iirst,  perhaps,  the  unexpected  might  have  been  expected ;  and
this  is  not  such  a  Hibernianism  as  it  at  first  sight  appears.
What  it  means  is  that,  assuming  the  communications  to  be
real,  we  might  have  expected  surprises,  but  could  not  have
expected  to  forecast  their  nature.  And  this  is  just  what  in
fact  has  happened.

In  the  preceding  summary  of  our  work  and  its  results  it
may  be  observed  that  there  are  so  many  "ifs,"  so  many  instances
of  the  use  of  the  cautious  subjunctive,  that  some  may  be  dis-


348


H.  Arthur  Smith.


[part


posed  to  ask  whether  the  attainment  of  such  uncertain  results
after  so  many  years  is  sufficient  to  justify  our  labour.  Is  the
game  worth  the  candle  ?  As  to  this,  I  have  already  expressed
my  view  as  to  the  incalculable  value  of  the  discovery  of  tele-
pathy, even  in  its  most  elementary  form.  Now  I  will  go
further.  I  agree,  if  I  may  presume  to  say  so,  with  Professor
Barrett  that  we  seem  to  be  "On  the  threshold  of  a  new  world
of  thought."  I  agree,  if  again  I  may  presume  to  say  so,  with
Sir  Oliver  Lodge  that  we  seem  to  be  "  at  the  beginning  of
what  is  practically  a  new  branch  of  science."  And  if  these
weighty  estimates  of  the  results  attained  be  accepted,  what  be-
comes of  the  significance  of  the  phrase  "after  so  many  years?"
What  are  twenty-five  years  in  the  history  of  a  science,  a  discovery,
an  invention  ?  Is  not  this  history  in  all  its  course  a  protest
against  impatience  ?  I  believe  that  some  twenty-two  centuries
ago  Hero  in  Egypt  discerned  the  possibility  of  utilising  the
expansive  force  of  steam  as  a  means  of  driving  a  macliine ;  and
he  was  probably  not  the  first.  But  the  discovery  had  to  wait
all  those  centuries  before  it  was  taken  up  by  Watt  and  New-
comen,  Trevithick  and  Stephenson,  and  this  force  was  turned
to  account  to  do  so  great  a  portion  of  the  work  of  the  world
as  we  find  it  doing  to-day.  The  same  reflection  applies  to
magnetism  and  to  electricity,  the  first  observers  of  which  little
dreamed  of  the  results  which  would  accrue  from  their  groping
experiments ;  and  I  suppose  that  the  school-boy's  humble  kite,
after  playing  an  important  part  in  the  history  of  electricity,
may  be  regarded  as  the  progenitor  after  a  long  period  of  incu-
bation of  the  aeroplane ;  a  sort  of  protozoon  from  which  has
been  evolved  an  eagle.  Again,  it  is  easy  to  smile  over  the
crude  hypotheses  and  futile  labours  of  the  old  alchemists.  But
owes  modern  chemistry  no  deljt  to  those  patient  explorers  ?  It
is  likely  enough  that  a  century  or  so  hence  our  successors  in
these  enquiries  will  smile  at  our  methods  and  conjectures  much
as  does  the  modern  chemist  at  the  theories  and  dreams  of  the
alchemists;  but  we  shall  have  helped  them  nevertheless,  and  if
they  are  as  wise  as  we  hope  they  will  be,  they  will  not  despise
the  day  of  small  and  feeble  things.

But  we  need  not  elaborate  an  argument  to  justify  our  exist-
ence. We  are  not  called  upon  to  justify  our  existence  to
troglodytes ;  and  critics  who  have  no  higher  or  better  point  of


LXI.]


Presidential  Address.


349


view  for  estimating  the  value  of  a  scientific  discovery  than  by
calculating  its  immediate  commercial  or  utilitarian  value,  may
fairly  be  so  described.

Apart,  however,  from  any  such  questions  of  detail,  I  contend
that  our  studies  are  justified  on  the  ground  that  they  are  help-
ing us  to  a  wider  view  of  the  universe  in  which  we  live,  in
which  I  think  we  shall  always  live,  in  which,  perhaps,  in  a
sense,  we  have  always  lived ;  to  lift  us,  as  one  has  said,  from
"  a  mere  planetary  consciousness  which  naturally  starts  from
the  earth  as  a  mental  centre,  to  a  solar  or  systematic  conscious-
ness more  consistent  with  the  Copernicau  era,  or  yet  higher,  and
by  a  completer  generalisation  to  a  cosmical  consciousness,  of
which  indeed  the  foregleams  may  be  discerned  in  the  very
questions  we  ask,  in  the  very  doubts  suggested  to  us,  in  the
very  paradoxes  of  which  Nature  is  full."  We  have,  I  venture
to  think,  done  much  towards  undermining  the  gross  materialism
of  some  scientific  thought,  which  a  generation  ago  threatened
the  higher  conceptions  of  all  matters  psychological  and  spiritual.

Some  of  you  will  doubtless  remember  the  intensely  interesting
presidential  address  given  to  us  by  Sir  William  Crookes  fourteen
years  ago,  in  which  by  a  series  of  ingenious  speculations  he  demon-
strated the  folly  of  what  may  be  called  a  negative  dogmatism,
which  would  seek  to  discredit  the  exploration  of  regions  hitherto
unknown  or  but  imperfectly  known,  on  the  ground  of  the
seeming  inconsistency  of  the  phenomena  presented  with  the
ordinary  course  of  nature  familiar  to  us ;  or,  if  I  may  use  a
mathematical  comparison,  the  folly  of  attempting  to  frame  an
equation  to  a  curve,  before,  with  the  imperfect  instruments  of
observation  at  our  command,  we  have  been  able  sufficiently  to
discern  its  sweep  to  determine  whether  like  an  ellipse  it  returns
on  itself,  or  like  a  hyperbola  it  stretches  forth  into  the  infinite.
It  is  perhaps  somewhat  daring  to  attempt  to  add  an  illustra-
tion in  similar  vein  to  those  in  that  address  so  brilliantly
presented.  But  I  have  often  thought  that  the  prophecy  of
despair  with  which  the  materialist  would  depress  us  may  be
compared  to  the  despair  which  might  fall  on  an  ephemeral
insect  which  we  will  suppose  to  have  come  into  existence  at
the  noon-tide  of  a  sunny  day,  and  to  be  endowed  with  the
faculty  of  scientific  observation.  He  would,  after  living,  say,
a  quarter  of  his  life-time,  notice  that  the  sun,  the  source  of


350


H.  Arthur  Smith.


[part


light  and  heat  was  gradually  descending  towards  the  horizon  of
the  sea.  His  own  philosophy  would  tell  him  nothing  of  the
seqvience  of  day  and  night,  for  he  has  never  seen  the  sun
ascending.  His  science  then  would  boldly,  and,  from  his  point
of  view,  reasonably,  conclude  that  with  the  setting  sun  all  life
would  cease.  So  our  materialistic  science  tells  us  that  the  solar
system  which  we  know  is  slowly  wearing  itself  out  by  friction
and  radiation ;  that  the  time  surely  approaches  when  the  sun
will  be  dark  and  cold  with  all  its  planets  engulfed  in  its  mass,
and  that  universal  death  will  reign,  having  put  all  enemies  under
his  feet.  But  may  not  this  despairing  cry  be  as  false  as  that  of
the  ephemeris  which  mourned  the  setting  sun  ?  Who  can  deny
the  conceivability  of  another  cycle  of  existence  as  truly  growing
out  of  this  we  know  as  day  follows  day,  feon  following  seon
by  equally  natural  process,  marking  the  systole  and  diastole
of  the  heart  of  the  Eternal  ?  Are  there  not  indeed  ancient  words
which  declare  as  much,  when  of  the  visible  universe  we  read  "  as
a  vesture  shalt  Thou  fold  it  up  and  it  shall  be  changed,  but  Thou
art  the  same ;  Thy  years  fail  not."  "  The  things  which  are  not
seen  are  eternal  "  ?

In  conclusion  let  me  quote  again  from  Sir  Edwin  Arnold's
essay :

When  we  regard  the  stars  at  midnight,  we  veritably  perceive  the
mansions  of  nature,  countless  and  illimitable ;  so  that  even  our
narrow  senses  reprove  our  timid  minds.  If  such  shadows  of  an
immeasurable  and  inexhaustible  future  of  peace,  happiness,  beauty
and  knowledge,  be  but  ever  so  faintly  cast  from  what  are  real
existences,  fear  and  care  might,  at  one  word,  pass  from  the  minds
of  men,  as  evil  dreams  depart  from  little  children  waking  to  their
mother's  kiss ;  and  all  might  feel  how  subtly  wise  he  was  who  wrote
of  that  first  mysterious  night  on  earth  which  showed  the  unsuspected
stars ;  when

Hesperus  with  the  host  of  heaven  came,
And  lo  !  Creation  widened  on  man's  view  !

Who  could  have  thought  such  marvels  lay  concealed
Behind  thy  beams,  0  Suni  or  who  could  find —

Whilst  flower  and  leaf  and  insect  stood  revealed —
That  to  such  countless  orbs  thou  mad'st  us  blind  1

Why  do  we  then  shun  death  with  anxious  strife?
If  light  can  thus  deceive,  wherefore  not  Life  I


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  351


REPOET  ON  THE  JUNOT  ^ SITTINGS  WITH
MES.  PIPEE.

BY  HELEN  de  G.  VERRALL.

Introduction.

The  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  published  in  this  Eeport  are
amongst  those  that  were  held  in  America,  at  Arlington
Heights,  Boston,  under  the  management  of  Dr.  Hodgson.  They
extend  over  a  period  of  five  years  and  a  half,  from  June  19,
1899,  to  November  22,  1905,  the  last  of  the  series  having
taken  place  only  a  few  weeks  before  Dr.  Hodgson's  death.  All
the  communications  purport  to  come  either  from  a  young  man,
Bennie  Junot,  who  died  on  September  5,  1898,  aged  17  ;  or
from  persons  in  some  way  connected  with  him.  Dr.  Hodgson
himself  was  present  during  a  part  at  any  rate  of  all  the
sittings,  with  one  exception ;  sometimes  he  was  alone,  and
sometimes  the  father  or  mother  of  Bennie  Junot  or  other
members  of  his  family  were  present  as  sitters.  This  Eeport
includes  every  sitting  up  to  November  22,  1905,  at  which  any
reference  was  made  to  Bennie  Junot,  and  nothing  has  been
omitted  except  (1)  occasional  repetitions  due  to  the  sitters'
difficulty  at  the  time  in  deciphering  the  trance-writing,  (2)
remarks  which  do  not  purport  to  be  in  any  way  evidential,
such  as  "  I  won't  forget  to  send  you  a  message  occasionally,"
(3)  interruptions  by  other  communicators  not  connected  with
Bennie  Junot,  and  (4)  some  attempts  at  medical  diagnosis,
which  could  be  more  satisfactorily  discussed  in  connexion  with
similar  attempts  at  other  sittings.  It  will  therefore  be  possible
to  form  a  fair  judgment  of  the  whole  case  and  to  estimate  the
proportion  of  correct  and  incorrect  statements.

^This  name  and  also  the  name  '"Roble"  (see  below)  are  pseudonyms.


352


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


The  phenomena  here  discussed  were  produced  under  the
usual  conditions,  with  which  I  shall  assume  that  the  reader  is
familiar/  and  they  do  not  present  to  those  who  have  read  the
earlier  reports  on  Mrs.  Piper's  trance-phenomena  any  new  or
startling  features.  But  the  cumulative  effect  of  the  evidence,
taken  as  a  whole,  is  striking,  on  account  of  the  unusually  small
proportion  of  error,  confusion  and  irrelevance,  and  there  are
many  points  of  psychological  interest.  One  clearly  marked
characteristic  is  the  large  part  played  in  the  trance  utterances
by  the  association  of  ideas.  Dr.  Hodgson  has  referred  to  this
characteristic  in  his  Eeport  on  Mrs.  Piper  {Proc.  Vol.  XIII.  p.
333),  and  frequent  traces  of  it  are  to  be  found  in  the  sittings  now
under  consideration.  If  a  group  of  names  has  been  once  asso-
ciated together,  an  allusion  to  any  one  of  them  is  very  likely
to  produce  allusions  to  the  others.  The  human  mind  in  its
normal  condition  is  largely  influenced  by  such  associations,  but
their  force  is  controlled  by  consciousness  and  deliberate  choice.
In  the  case  of  Mrs.  Piper's  mind,  during  trance,  this  control  is
apparently  lacking,  so  that  associations  once  formed  will  often
recur  without  regard  to  their  immediate  relevance.  This  char-
acteristic will  also  explain  the  tendency  to  repeat  a  mistake
once  made.  For  instance,  the  confusion  between  "  Judge  "  and
"Major"  (see  p.  443)  persists  throughout  the  sittings,  in  spite
of  the  fact  that  some  part  of  the  medium's  mind  is  apparently
aware  of  it  (see  p.  470).

With  regard  to  the  sources  of  error,  it  is  worth  noting  that
amongst  the  statements  which  must  be  described  as  incorrect,
only  a  small  proportion  are  wholly  false  or  meaningless.  Many
contain  some  phrase  or  word  perfectly  relevant  and  intelligible,
round  which  is  woven  a  tissue  of  false  interpretations.  At
the  first  sitting,  for  instance,  the  following  communication
occurs  :

(Bennie  communicating.)
Do  you  remember  who  I  meant  by  John
N.  B.  J."  No,  tell  me  his  other  name.

Well  do  you  remember  Roberts

iThey  are  described  by  Dr.  Hodgson  in  Proc.  Vol.  XIII.  pp.  291  foil,  and
by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  in  Proc.  Vol.  XXIII.  pp.  1.30  foil.
^  Mr.  N.  B.  Junot,  the  communicator's  father.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  luith  Mrs.  Piper.  353


N.  B.  J.  No.

Roberts  there  is  more  to  it  Roberts
N.  B.  J.  "Where  <lid  3'ou  know  him  1

Here  and  he  has  two  brothers  FRAK  and  Charles

Frank  and  Charles  were  the  names  of  the  commuuicator's  two
most  intimate  friends,  so  that  it  was  quite  natural  that  he
should  mention  them  in  close  conjunction,  and  he  had  an  uncle
called  John.  All  these  facts  are  made  clear  at  later  sittings,
but  the  interpretation  first  put  upon  the  names  is  wrong.  It
is  as  though  vague  unattached  ideas  were  presented  to  the  mind
of  the  medium,  and  were  by  her  provided  with  an  imaginary
and  inappropriate  setting.  The  same  tendency  is  apparent
in  some  of  the  various  automatic  scripts  recently  published.

With  a  few  exceptions,  of  which  the  most  interesting  is  the
John  Welsh  incident  related  below,  no  information  was  given
in  the  trance  communications  that  had  not  been  known  at
some  time  to  some  members  of  Benuie  Junot's  family,  but
many  of  the  clearest  and  most  correct  statements  were  made
not  in  their  presence  but  when  Dr.  Hodgson  was  alone.  The
communicator  declares  that  he  often  visits  his  home  and  sees
what  happens  there ;  in  support  of  this  claim,  he  shows
knowledge  concerning  the  recent  thoughts  and  actions  of
various  members  of  his  family,  and  on  one  occasion  reference
is  made  to  a  contemporaneous  event  (see  p.  416).

It  will  be  noted  that  a  considerable  amount  of  information  as
to  names  and  other  details  was  deliberately  given  to  the  com-
municator by  the  sitters  in  the  course  of  the  sittings,  and  it  is
necessary  in  reading  the  report  to  distinguish  carefully  between
the  correct  statements  founded  on  this  information  and  others
which  originated  spontaneously  with  the  communicator.  I  have
given  page  references  and  notes  throughout  to  facilitate  the
distinction.

The  plan  was  no  doubt  adopted  by  Mr.  Junot  with  a  view  to
eliciting  memories  that  might  be  supposed  to  be  dormant.  It  is  a
plausible  hypothesis  that  if  the  communicator  were  reminded  of
certain  names  and  certain  incidents,  other  recollections  associated
■with  them  might  be  evoked,  and  the  results  obtained  are
consistent  with  this  hypothesis.

Nevertheless,  there  is  nothing  in  the  evidential  part  of  the


354


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


communications  which  provably  transcends  telepathy  between
living  minds,  if  we  suppose  this  faculty  to  possess  the
necessary  scope  and  extension.  Perhaps  the  incident  most
difficult  to  explain  in  this  way  is  that  concerning  John
Welsh,  which  I  will  briefly  recapitulate  here.  On  February  11,
1902  (see  p.  492),  Mr.  Junot  sent  a  message  through  his  son
Bennie  to  a  former  coachman  of  his,  Hugh  Irving,  who  had
been  dead  some  months,  asking  where  "  the  dog  Eounder "  was.
Hugh  Irving  had  left  Mr.  Junot's  service  about  two  months
before  his  death  and  taken  the  dog  with  him.  In  the  waking-
stage  on  April  2,  1902,  it  is  stated  that  "John  Welsh  has
Rounder."  Mr.  Junot  succeeded  after  some  difficulty  in  tracing
"  John  Welsh,"  but  unfortunately  it  proved  impossible  to  discover
whether  he  had  ever  had  the  dog  in  his  possession.  It  is
certain,  however,  that  he  was  closely  associated  with  the
coachman,  who  took  the  dog  away,  and  it  was  through  his
attempts  to  find  John  Welsh  that  Mr.  Junot  recovered  the
dog.  Moreover,  there  seems  good  reason  for  thinking  that
John  Welsh,  even  if  he  never  had  the  dog  himself,  knew
something  of  his  whereabouts,  and  could  have  helped  Mr.  Junot
to  recover  him.  Neither  Mr.  Junot  nor  any  of  his  family
had  ever  to  their  knowledge  heard  of  John  Welsh  (at  any  rate
under  that  name),  still  less  of  his  connexion  with  Hugh  Irving
and  possible  connexion  with  the  dog.  Doubtless  people  could
have  been  found  to  whom  all  these  facts  were  known,  but
they  were  not  people  with  whom  Mrs.  Piper  had  ever  been
brought  into  contact.  Until  we  know  to  what  limitations,  if
any,  telepathy  between  living  minds  is  subject,  we  cannot
determine  whether  it  is  a  sufficient  explanation  of  such
phenomena  as  this.

On  the  other  hand,  if  we  suppose,  as  the  controls  them-
selves declare,  that  the  source  of  the  information  is  the  minds
of  the  dead,  such  incidents  present  no  difficulty,  and  therefore,
though  they  cannot  be  said  to  prove  this  hypothesis,  they  would,
if  frequently  repeated,  render  it  more  probable.

Whatever  hypothesis  we  adopt  to  explain  the  veridical  part
of  the  phenomena,  the  confused  and  incorrect  statements  are
no  doubt  in  a  great  measure  to  be  accounted  for  by  mere
guessing  and  invention  on  the  part  of  the  medium's  subliminal
consciousness,  persistently  unwilling  to  admit  ignorance  or  failure.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Piper.  355


I  have  said  nothing  iu  this  report  as  to  the  identity  of
the  alleged  controls  (e.g.  Eector),  who  purport  to  influence  the
medium's  mind  directly,  or  as  to  their  relation  either  to  one
another  or  to  the  mind  of  the  medium,  or  to  the  communicators
(e.g.  Bennie  Junot),  whose  remarks  they  claim  to  transcribe,
and  who  rarely  act  as  '  controls  '  themselves,  because  I  do  not
think  this  question  can  be  satisfactorily  discussed  in  relation
to  a  particular  episode  such  as  is  dealt  with  here.  This  same
objection  applies  in  my  opinion  to  almost  all  theorizing  as  to
the  nature  of  the  phenomena,  and  therefore  in  my  comments  on
the  sittings  I  have  usually  confined  myself  to  a  statement  of  facts.

Dr.  Hodgson  regarded  these  sittings  as  amongst  the  most
interesting  of  those  held  with  Mrs.  Piper,  and  they  were
carefully  annotated  with  a  view  to  publication.  With  few
exceptions,  all  comments  by  the  sitters  were  obtained  within  a
week  or  two  of  the  sittings ;  wherever  the  dates  of  these
comments  are  of  importance  they  are  given.  There  are
occasionally  points  not  commented  on  at  the  time,  about
which  it  is  not  now  possible  to  obtain  any  information,  but
fortunately  they  are  few.

It  will  be  seen  that  most  of  the  evidence  as  to  the
veridical  character  of  these  sittings  has  been  obtained  from  Mr.
Junot.  Mr.  Junot  is  a  member  of  the  S.P.E.  who  was
formerly  a  member  of  the  American  Branch,  and  a  friend  of
Dr.  Hodgson's ;  he  is  also  known  personally  to  Mr.  Dorr.
The  study  of  these  records  will  show  that  his  comments  are
characterized  throughout  by  scrupulous  care  and  accuracy.

DETAILED  RECORD  OF  SITTINGS.

Note. — The  notes  in  round  brackets  were  made  at  the  sitting  by  the
person  responsible  for  the  management  of  it,  that  is,  in  almost  all  cases,
by  Dr.  Hodgson.  The  notes  in  square  brackets  are  comments  added
afterwards  by  the  persons  whose  initials  are  appended  to  them.

1st  Sitting.

J?me  19,  1899.  Present.-  N.B.  Junot  and  R.  H.

(S.i  remarked  before  the  trance  began  :  "  It  was  nearly  freezing
when  I  left  C  .")

^  Mr.  Junot  was  introduced  to  Mrs.  Piper  anonymously,  according  to  Dr.
Hodgson's  usual  practice.  He  is  therefore  referred  to  here  as  S.  ( =  sitter)  and
not  by  his  initials.


I


356


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


(Rector  writes.)


Hail  thou  friend  why  come  to  us  in  sorrow

Why  needst  thou  weep  when  all  is  well  and  ever  will  be.

We  will  find  thy  friends  for  thee  and  bring  them  here.


(Hand  speirs  out  inquiring


;iy-)


*


*


*


(Inquiry  by  R.  H.  as  to  arrangements  for  future  sittings.)

We  see  among  our  friends  here  a  young  man  who  seems
dazed  and  puzzled.  He  is  not  near  enough  to  us  for
us  to  give  him  much  help  at  the  moment  but  will  be
presently.

R.  H.  (to  S.)  Follow'?

S.  Yes,  I  understand.

George  ^  is  here  with  him  and  trying  to  urge  him  to  come
closer  as  .  .  .  that  he  may  see  into  thy  world  more
clearly.

I  hear  ... I  hear  some  thing. Where  is  my  mother  I

want  very  much  to  see  her.
I  can  breathe  easier  now.  .  ' . .  ■

I  want  to  go  home  now  .  .  .
And  take  up  my  studies  and  go  on

I  see  some  one  who  looks  like  my  father  I  want  to  see
him  very  much.

S.  Speak  on,  Bennie,  tell  us  all  about  yourself.

(Much  excitement.)
I  .  .

I  want  to  see  you  awfully  .  .  I  [My  son  used  "  awfully "
in  this  way  frequently. — N.  B.  J.]

R.  H.  Take  your  time. Take  your  time. Be  quite  calm.

^  Throughout  these  sittings  Eector  is  in  control  of  the  medium  and  acting  as
amanuensis,  except  where  there  is  a  statement  to  the  contrary.

-George  Pelham  (see  Proc.  Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  295  et  seq.),  who  is  frequently
represented  as  assisting  inexperienced  communicators.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  357

Father  papa  papa  Pa  Pa  father  I  hear  something
strange  .  . can  it  be  3  0ur  voice.

S.  Yes,  Bennie,  it's  daddy.

I  .  . You  hear  me  .  .  do  you  hear  me I  .  .  wonder  how
I  can  reach  you  as  I  long  to  do. I  heard  all  you  said  .  .
And  I  want  to  tell  you  where  I  am.
You  are  not  my  father. (Hand  moves  towards  R.  H.)

R.  H.  Kindly  listen  one  moment.  I  am  with  your  father,  and  I
have  brought  your  father  here  for  you  to  free  your  mind
to  him.

And  can  I  do  so  now.

R.  H.  Yes,  fire  away,  take  your  time  and  be  quite  calm.

do  you  .  . [undec] the  boys  [?]

And  if  they  will  be  glad  to  see  me

I  want  to  see  father  more  than  any  one  except  mama.

S.  Bennie,  tell  me  what  to  say  to  your  mother

Oh  she  is  so  sad,  tell  her  I  called  her  the  other  day  and  I
could  not  make  her  hear  me.  I  love  her  so,  but  .  .  .
wait  till  I  think  it  over  and  I  will  say  it  all.

S.  Are  you  happy  where  you  are  ?

* I  wish  I  could  hear  you. You  were  so  good  to  me  .  .
Do  you  ride  any  now.

S.  Yes,  swjeetheart,— yes,  sweetheart,  and  think  of  you  every  day
when  I  ride.

I  often  think  how  I  used  to  go  with  you.

S.  Do  you  remember  your  ride  in  the  West  1

(Much  excitement.)

I  do  very  well. Yes  I  do. I  remember  it  all  and  do  you

remember  what  happened  to  me.
Do  you  remember  anything  about  a  storm  dad.
[My  son  very  commonly  called  me  Dad — more  often  Papa

and  sometimes  Pa. — N.  B.  J.]


358 .  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

R.  H.  Write  that  word  again,  Rector,  please.

sounds  like  S 1 0  R  M  Rain

S.  Let  me  ask  Mm  a  question.

Oh  so  many  things  are  going  through  my  head.

S.  Who  went  with  you  on  your  ride  in  the  West  1

Will  you  say  it  again  .  .  who  was  with  me  .  . I  .  .

■R.  H.  The  father  says,  AVho  was  with  j'ou  in  your  ride  in  the
West  1

father  says  .  .  I  .  .  who  .  .
I  want  to  know  about  Harry.

[Harry  was  a  cowboy  friend  of  my  son  with  whom  he  took
a  long  horseback  journey  in  the  West. — N.  B.  J.]

S.  That's  right.

Tell  him  I  remember  it  well.  .  .  I  .  .

S.  Yes,  he  wrote  your  mother lately. Harry's  gone  South.
He's  gone  away  South.

And  he  a  good  fellow  and  do  you  know  I  liked  him  very
much  and  I  thought  he  sent  the  photograph  to  her.
[After  my  son's  death,  Harry  having  reached  a  town
sent  his  photograph. — N.  B.  J.]

S.  He  did,  yes,  he  did.

I  heard  her  say  it  looked  like  him. I  am  very  happy  now,

better  than  ever  before.
I  saw  her  when  she  was  so  ill.

[His  mother  suffered  an  illness  not  long  after  his  death. —
N.  B.  J.]

S.  Bennie,  what  are  you  doing  now  ? What  are  you  doing
now,  Bennie?

What  am  I  doing  why  pa  [1]  dear  I  am  doing  everything,
writing  reading  studying,  and  am  generally  happy.  Do
you  hear  me  I  am  getting  .  .  .  clearing  I  think.  I
often  ... I  often  think  I  hear  you  calling  me.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  ivitJi.  Mrs.  Piper.  359


S.  Yes,  we  call  for  you  often,  dearie.

And  when  mother  sits  in  that  chair  by  the  window  I  hear

her  say Oh  if  I  could  only  see  you  dear. Ask  her.
[This  statement  about  the  window  is  very  true. — N.  B.  J.]
(S.  had  brought  paper  package  over.)

What  have  you  got  there  .  .  my  .  .  .
cap  my  cap.

[The  package  of  articles  was,  when  the  cap  was  called  for,
still  placed  on  a  table  on  the  other  side  of  the  room.
Each  article  was  carefully  tied  up  in  soft  brown  paper
and  all  were  wrapped  for  a  long  journey  in  thick  brown
paper.  The  initials  A.  L.  were  written  before  the  cast
of  Lincoln  was  uncovered. — N.  B.  J.]

S.  Do  you  want  the  cap?

Yes,  I  think  I  do,  and  some  day  I  will  take  my  codac  and
make  a  picture  for  you.

S.  There  it  is. (Putting  forward  the  cap  which  he  had  taken
out  of  package.)

do  you  remember  it.
And  I  see

S.  Yes,  indeed. We've  got  lots  of  your  pictures,  dearie.

Do  you remember  .  .  . yes yes he  said  yes  .  .  yes

(Perhaps  Rector  to  communicator.)
and  tell  me  about

S.  Bennie,  who  is  with  you? Tell  me  who  is  with  youl

Rector  is  helping  me  and  do  you  know  him  and  that  he  is

here  with  .  .  A 1  .  .  A 1.
(Small  parcel  tied  with  ribbon  had  in  the  meantime  been

put  forward  near  the  hand  by  S.)

S.  Yes. That's  his  Abraham  Lincoln.
Do  you  remember  .  .  and  Al.


S.  Yes,  you  made  him. (Opening  parcel  and  showing  a  cast  of
face  of  Abraham  Lincoln  made  by  communicator.)


360


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


Yes  I  know  it  well  and

A 1  .  .  A  L  has  been  in  my  mind  for  a  .  .  .

[It  does  not  seem  to  me  certain  that  the  letters  A  L  refer
to  the  cast.  When  they  are  first  written,  only  the  A  is
a  capital  letter,  and  moreover  they  occur  in  a  connexion
which  suggests  that  Bennie  is  trying  to  give  the  name
of  some  one  present  with  Rector. — H.  de  G.  V.]

S.  Do  you  want  to  send  any  word  to  your  brother?

I  have  got  more  to  sa}^  than  I  can  tell  you  .  .

do  you  hear  me  .  .  . and  I  tell  you  about  Joh J  Jo

Jo  [?]
Joe
R.  H.  Joe  ?

not  quite  friend.
J  .  .  Joh  n

S.  John  1

Do  you  remember  who  came  here  before  I  did  'i

I  am  with  Char..  Char..

Robin  in  .  . I  will  have  to  wait  for  a  moment.

[Persons  referred  to  here  are  not  recognized  now. — N.  B.  J.]

Tell  my  dear  dear  mother  how  often  I  think  of  her,  and

how  I  wish  I  could  tell  her  where  I  am  and  make  her

hear  me.

Did  Harry  say  he  would  send  me  any  message  Speak
slowly  dad  or  I  cannot  hear  all  you  say.

S.  Mamma  wrote  and  told  Harry  that  you  had  gone  away  and
left  us.

I  wonder  what  he  thought  when  he  heard  that.  Give  him
my  love  and  tell  him  I  will  never  foi'get  the  good  times
we  had  together.

Hear  dad  do  you  remember  anything  about  fishing  ^

S.  No,  I  don't  remember  anything  about  fishing.

he  will  I'll  bet  .  .  .
S.  Do  you  want  this  1 (Parcel  put  to  hand.)

That  is  not  AL  .  .  .  (Contents  of  parcel, — a  spur,  a  large
Mexican  spur,  minus  its  rowel-wheel,  put  on  blockbook.)
(Hand  touches  over  it.)

1  See  p.  409.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Piper.  361
let  me  think  whose  that  was  .  .


Where  is  the  one  I  had  .  . I  want  my  cap.

(R.  H.  asks  if  above  letters  were  G.  W.  Dissent.^)

He  is  a  little  confused  for  the  moment. No  ...  let  him

rest  a  moment  and  repeat.
What  has  become  of  Arthur,  where  is  Arthur,

•S.  Must  be  from  some  other  sitting.

tell  .  .  tell  me  quick  I  am  going  now.

S.  Bennie,  do  you  want  this? (Parcel  containing  a  harmonica.)

Yes  I  do  ...  he  will  return  in  a  moment  and  answer.
Do  you  remember  George,  he  was  helping  me  before  I  went
Pa  where  is  my  wheel,  where  1

S.  Do  you  mean  out  of  the  spur  1:

Yes  I  do.

S.  I  don't  know  where  it  is. I  think  you  lost  it  yourself.

Well  I  know  it  but  have  you  not  found  it  yet.

S.  Do  you  know  what  this  is? Do  you  know  what  this  is!
(Parcel  containing  scarf  pin.)

father  if  you  don't  hear  me  speak.

was  that  not  my  stamp  .  . S  T  A  M  P  do  you  remember  it
S.  No,  I  don't  remember  your  stamp.

Well,  I  had  one  I  made  myself ask  mother.
S.  Oh,  I  guess  he  refers  to  the  Abraham  Lincoln.

Here  comes  another. (Harmonica  given.)

who  passed  out  long  ago.  Speak  again  slowly.  Father  I
am  still  coming  closer.  Do  you  remember  when  mother
was  so  ill.  And  what  has  become  of  Dick  I  say  do
you  hear  me. That  is  my  knife.

Dissent  and  assent  are  sometimes  conveyed  by  motions  of  the  hand.


Oh  I  remember


362  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.

S.  That's  right.


[part


I  see  it,  but  eveiything  is  so  dark  to  me.

S.  I  don't  know  whether  it  is  or  not. I'll  see.

Who  was  that  who  tried  to  call  me  back.  I  did  not  like
her. Who  was  that  wlio  tried  to  call  me  back.  I  did  ....

[This  harmonica  had  long  been  carried  by  my  boy.  I  learned
after  the  sitting  on  my  return  to  the  West  that  an  old
nurse  had  asked  for  it  and  had  carried  it  to  a  medium  of
lier  acquaintance,  hoping  for  some  communication,  but
had  returned  it  to  my  wife  saying  that  she  had  heard
nothing. — N.  B.  J.]

Where  are  you I  see  you  dad

S.  I  don't  think  his  knife  was  here  any  way.

Do  you  hear  me.

S.  Shall  I  speak  to  you?  I'm  on  earth  with  Dr.  Hodgson,,
trying  to  speak  to  you.  We're  having  a  hard  time.
You  must  help  us,  and  must  come  again  when  you  get  a
chance.

Yes  that  sounds  like  you  more  than  anything  yet.
Are  you  going  soon  1 You  see  father  my  head  is  not  quite
clear  yet.

S.  What  made  you  leave  us  ?  What  made  you  go  away  and
leave  us  1- Why  did  you  go  1

I  did  not  exactly  leave  you,  dad,  but  I  only  stepped  out  for
a  time^  *  *  my  head  bothers  me  when  I  try  to
think  and  speak. *  *

Papa  talk  to  me  as  you  did  before  I  left  so  suddenly.

S.  Well,  dearie,  I  want  you  to  study  and  work  hard  and  get
along  in  that  life  you're  in  now,  and  then  daddy'll  come
too  and  we  will  get  along  together  just  as  we  did  in
this  life.


iBennie  supposes  the  question  to  refer  to  his  having  gone  out  to  rest  for
a  moment  during  the  trance. See  p.  361.


Lxi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  tvith  Mrs.  Piper.  363

Yes,  but  ?ye  ivere  so  happy  together.  This  is  my  dear
father.  Do  you  see  him —  Do  you  remember  one  sum-
mer when  we  took  a  long  ride  together  near  the  mountain

S.  Yes,  I  think  I  do.

I  am  trying  to  recall  everything  for  you  that  you  may
know  I  am  all  right  here.

S.  Do  you  go  to  the  old  farm  1 Do  you  ever  go  to  our  old
farm  ? (Much  excitement.)

Farm  yes  that  is  what  I  was  thinking  about  a  moment
ago  .  .  .  and  do  you  remember  the  time  I  had  trying
to  make  the (Hand  moves  to  and  fro.)

S.  Can't  hit  it.

You  remember  I  used  to  take  up  the  tvafer  vjith.  I  cannot
think  of  the  name

S.  I  don't  remember. I  can't  think  of  the  name.

iVb — well  it  did  not  .  .
Chain.

S.  Do  you  mean  lifting  hay  in  the  barn?  (Dissent)
S.  Water?

Chain  .  .  yes  water.

I  mean  just  what  I  say. I  know  so  well. I  mean  the  chain

I  fixed  to  take  the  water  out  with.
Cannot  you  think  .  .

R.  H.  All  right.

I  am  still  here.  Do  you  remember  Aunt  May  [or  Mary.
Interpreted  by  E.  H.  as  Mary.] sounds  like  May  [Mary  ?]

S.  Yes. Cousin  May  I  should  think.

She  is  here.
S.  Don't  you  mean  Cousin  May  ?

Yes  I  do.


364 .  Helen  cle  G.  Verrcdl.  ^  [part

S.  Who  is  with  Cousin  May  ?

I  mean  Cousin  May,  yes  she  is  with  me.
Do  3'ou  remember  who  I  meant  by  John  1  ^

S.  No. Tell  me  his  other  name.

Well  do  you  remember  Roberts

S.  No.

Roberts  there  is  more  to  it.  Roberts
S.  Where  did  i/ou  know  him  1

here and  he  has  two  brothers F  R  A  K
R.  H.  Frank  ?
F  R  A  K

and  Charles —  [Not  recognized. — N.  B.  J.]  [These  are  the
names  of  two  intimate  friends  of  communicator,  constantly
referred  to  in  later  sittings. — H.  deG.V.]

Yes  both. I  will  have  to  speak  again  in  a  moment.

Friend  this  young  man  constantly  calls  for  his  mother,  he
says  mother (Rector  to  R.  H.)

S.  What  shall  I  tell  her  1 You  tell  me  what  to  tell  mother.
She  wants  to  know  that  you're  happy.

Well,  I  am  happy  and  don't  worry  about  me  will  you.  I
am  very  anxious  to  tell  you  everything  about  myself,
everything  I  can  remember.  Did  you  remember  when
she  was  so  ill  .  .  . Yes.  Mama

S.  Yes,  I  do. Were  you  there  1

every  day. I  tell  you  many  things  but  you  don't  seem  to

hear  me  do  you  dad
(R.  H.  explains  method  of  communication.)
Father  dear  do  you  remember  what  I  said  to  you  before  I

left.


^  See  p.  360  ;  see  also  p.  454,  where  the  name  is  given  correctly  as  that  of
communicator's  uncle.


Lxi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  365


S.  Bennie,  do  you  remember  the  walk  we  had  on  the  Sunday  ?
Do  you  remember  the  walk  we  had  on  the  last  Sunday?

(Hand  points  to  sheet  just  written  upon  as  though  to
indicate  that  was  what  he  referred  to.)

S.  Yes,  he  means  that.

Yes  very  well,  and  do  you  remember  what  I  said  to  you
on  that  day  and  how  I  felt.

S.  Where  was  it  that  we  were  walking?

What  was  it  well  we  walked  over  to  the  city  and  we  went
down  there  and  I  told  you  I  felt  as  though  some  thing
was  going  to  happen. Do  you  remember  this — speak.

[We  walked  from  the  hotel  at  the  shore  up  to  and  through
the  town  to  the  country  beyond. — N.  B.  J.]

S.  Do  you  remember  that  I  told  you  to  go  and  get  your  hat,
your  cap  1

Yes  I  do  well.
* *  (undec.)

take  cold,

S.  Did  you  go  and  get  your  hat  when  I  told  you  to  ?

Oh  I  remember.  No.
S.  That's  right.

I  did  not.

S.  What  did  you  tell  me  about  not  getting  your  hat?  What
did  you  say  to  me  ?

I  said  I  think  I  won't  need  it.

[The  answer  is  exactly  correct.  We  were  starting  for  a  ten
mile  walk  and  our  last.  He  went  without  a  hat. —
N.  B.  J.]


S.  Do you remember what happened to your boats  last
summer  ?


366  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

That  is  what  I  was  trying  to  say  some  time  ago  about  the
chain  and  the  water  .  .  the  water  .  .  we  went  down  to
the  water  ^  .  .  .

It  is  gone  from  my  memorj'  now.

Say  it  again.

S.  Who  was  with  you  in  the  boat  when  the  mast  blew  offi

I  cannot  catch  that,  dad.

Why why  were  you  not  there  1

I  cannot  remember  that  to  save  me  at  the  moment.  I  will
think  it  over  and  tell  you  who  it  was.

S.  Bennie,  you  think  it  all  over,  and  send  word  to  your  mother
what  to  do  with  your  things  in  the  house,  and  your
horse.

I  will,  yes  indeed,  but  you  know  what  I  want  done  with

him. I  will  tell  you  all  about  it.
Who  was  it  that  went  with  you  the  other  day  when  you

got  the  hair  clipped.
I  do  not  think  you  know  what  I  am  saying  do  you  1

8.  Do  you  mean  when  I  had  Alice's  horse  clipped  1

Yes. Yes  I  saw  you (much  excitement.)

S.  Do  you  mean  when  1  had  Aunt  Alice's  horse  clipped  1

but  could  not  make  out  who  it  was.
Well  it  is  queer.

S.  I  can't  remember. Was  it  man  or  boy  riding  the  horse  1

hoy  and  I.

S.  Did  you  see  any  one  with  me  riding  on  horse  on  the
boulevard  lately  ?

Yes  some  days  ago. SUNDAY  a  few  days  ago.

S.  Do  you  see  mother  and  papa  drive  out  South  sometimes

Of  course  I  do.  I  told  .  .  .  out  to  where  they  took  my
body

iSee  p.  363.


I.XI.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  tuith  Mrs.  Piper.  367

S.  Ah,  sure,  Bennie,  your  mind's  clear  enough.

And  I  see  the  flowers  mother  put  there  (not  read  at  once)
they  .  .

S.  But who's  the  boy  that  rides  horseback  with  me  ?  His
name,  can  you  give  his  name  1

No I  am  trying  to  think F  .  .  .

(R.  H.  inquires  about  the  writing  above  not  read.)

I  saw  the  flowers  mother  took  there —

Yes  and  put  over  it.

I  want  so  much  to  tell  you  more  but  how  can  I.  I  am
so  .  .

I  want  my  knife  .  give  .  .  No I  am  going  out  .  .
S.  Is  he  going  now  1

(S.  sounds  mouth  harmonium.)
hear  me  play

that  is  what  I  used  to  blow  on  for  the  boys  in  the  evening

on  the  water. [Correct. — N.  B.  J.]
HARMONICA

S.  Ah,  sure.

And  ask  mother  if  she  remembers  HOME  SWEET
Home  I  used  to  play  for  her. [Correct. — N.  B.  J.]

S.  Yes,  and  for  daddy  too. I  remember  well. Yes,  yes.

Something  about  the  water  or  River

S  W  A  N  E  E  River.  [Correct  and  states  with  curious  exact-
ness the  distinction  in  tunes  called  for  respectively. —
N.  B.  J.]

S.  You  used  to  play  that  also. I  remember.

Yes,  I  did  for  you. I  am  going  now. Will  I  see  you

again I  hope  to,  my  father  in  Heaven I  will  .  .
I  cannot  talk  more  .  .

-S.  Give  your  name  in  full,  if  you  can,  before  you  go.

I  will  think  it  all  over  and  tell  you  more


368


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


(Waking  Stage.^)
*  *  *

That  was  that  young  lady  and  that  tall  young  man  that
was  always * *  [■]

S.  Light  hair?

(Mrs.  P.  said  first  that  the  eyes  were  dark,  then)
gray  and  blue.

He  doesn't  look  cross * * he  has  a  happy  face>

You  don't  know  who  I  mean  ?

You  heard  that? I'll  tell  you  more.

S.  Was  there  something  peculiar  about  his  front  teeth  ?


2nd  Sitting.

June  20,  1899.  Present:  N.B.J,  and  R.H.

(Bennie  communicating.)

Did  you  know  what  I  meant  about  the  chain  -  .  .  could
you  make  it  out.

S.  No,  I  could  not.

I  pulled  it  in,  spliced  it,  while  George  held  the  sail  and  we
left  it  in  bow.

I  am  as  clear  about  this  as  I  can  be.':* I  know  it.  Now
let  me  .  .  .

Who  are  you  any  way,  you  are  not  my  father  are  you?
Is  he? Oh  yes. I  see. All  right Go  on. Yes,  I  don't
mind. (These  expressions  to  Eector.)

S.  Bennie,  I  am  here. Daddy's  here. This  other  gentleman  is
Dr.  Hodgson. He's  trying  to  help  me.

^  Tlie  communications  in  the  waking  stage  are  spoken  and  not  written.
^See  pp.  363  and  .366.

^When  a  comnumicator  asserts  that  he  is  clear,  it  often  means  that  he  is
conscious  of  confusion.  At  the  beginning  of  this  sitting  (omitted  here)  Mr.
.Junot  had  spoken  of  George  Pelham.  The  name  '  George '  is  perhaps  a  dreamy
echo  of  this.


LXI.] Rei^ort  on  the  Junot  Sittings  xvith  Mrs.  Pilfer.  369
Yes  they  told  me  just  now.

Well,  pa,  do  you  mind  if  I  tell  you  something  which  is  on
my  mind.

S.  No,  go  on,  Bennie,  tell  everything.

I  want  very  much  to  send  a  message  to  mother  who  knows
more  about  it  than  any  one.  Tell  her  dear  pa  that  I
left  two  or  three  letters  in  my  little  case  written  to  me
by  L,  and  I  do  not  wish  any  one  to  see  them  but  her.

S.  Yes,  dearie.

I  know  perfectly  well  what  I  mean,  and  she  will  know  too.
S.  Yes,  she  will  know.

Please  let  no  one  see  them,  and  they  are  in  a  pale  blue
envelope  and  marked  jmvaie.  Ask  her  to  go  there  at
once  and  take  them, read  and  destroy.

kS.  Yes,  dear  boy,  she  will.

I  am  anxious  about  this  as  I  did  not  realize  I  was  eoino"
to  leave  as  I  did.  There  is  nothing  else  on  my  mind
that  makes  me  feel  like  this.

S.  All  right,  dear  boy,  the  letters  will  be  destroyed.

[This  allusion  is  not  understood. — H.  de  G-.  V.]

And  I  want  to  say  one  thing  more  .  .  would  you  mind

going  out  .  .  .  come  here  dad I  want  to  speak  to  3  0U

about  .  .
(R.  H.  goes  out.)

S.  What  is  iti

Do  not  bother  me  now. I  want  to  speak  to  you  about  .  ,

S.  Write  on.

L  en  a [or  Laura do  you  remember  her  .  .
Laura  [?]  and  Harris  .  .  .  HARRIS,
do  you  know  what  I  mean


370  . Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

S.  I  do  not  know.

I  want  you  to  remember  .  .  .  Af  .  .  .  Alfred  .  .
where  is  he  .  .  at  home  ....

[A  near  neighbor  and  friend  of  my  son. — N.  B.  J.]

S.  He's  married  now.

since  I  left
S.  Yes,  since  you  left.

is  he  all  right

S.  No,  he's  not  well.

I  am  so  happy  to  see  you. I  never  felt  as  I  do  now,
I  am  telling  you  about  iilfred  .  .  about  Alfred  ...
I  .  .  .  yes  because  I  remember  all  about  him  .  .

S.  Do  you  remember  Roble  ? [Roble  is  his  brother. — N.  B.  J.]

Yes. I  have  been  trying  to  send  a  message  to  him  .  .  .

S.  Did  you  see  him  riding  with  me  1  ^

Yes  I  saiv  him  with  you  only  a  few  days  before  I  saw  you
here  dad.  He  was  with  you.  He  was  on  horse  back
and  I  hear  him  speak  of  me  .  .  . [Correct. — N.  B.  J.]

S.  Did  you  see  Roble  riding  with  any  one  else?

Yes,  I  tried  to  tell  you  of  that  yesterday. I  think  it  was
mother [or brother] and Carl [1] . . . Jarl  [1]
Jarl  [?]

S.  Was  it  a  boy  or  a  girl?

r/iii,  and

S.  Write  the  name.

Ell  .  .  .  E  .  .  . I  know  just  as  well  as  you  do,  dad,  I

1  See  p.  366.


LXi.] Re])OTt  on  the  Junot  Sittings  vjWi  Mrs.  Piper.  371


know  .  .  Elsie  [?]  .  .  yes  .  .  E. you  .  .  .  yes  I  mean

my  sister  .  .  * *  [undec]
[Helen  is  sister's  name  and  she  rides  on  horseback  much

with  Roble.— N.  B.  J.]
E  .  .  Elen  .  .  .  yes  and  I  see  my  brother  Roble  .  .  .
Yes,  and  I  was  wn'tli  them  and  I  want  her  to  have  my  horse,

want  her  to  have  my  horse  .  .  I  do  very  much.^

S.  She's  got  a  nice  new  horse  of  her  own.
/  know  it. I  know  it,  and

S.  And  your  horse  has  been  sent  to  be  sold.  I  think  it  has
been  sold.

.  has  it  .  .  I  don't  thinh  so.  [Horse  had  been  sold  but  not
delivered  and  was  recovered  by  telegram  sent  at  once.
— N.  B.  J.] I  wanted  her  to  have  it.

I  don't  care  about  Aunt  Ellen's  horse do  you  hear  me  .  .  .

[Perhaps  a  confusion  with  Aunt  Alice's  horse,  mentioned
on  p.  366— H.  deG.  v.]

Well  do  you  know  who * * * [undec]  is

S  W  E  N  S  0  N. [Not  recognized.— N.  B.  J.]

What  has  become  of  watch,  my  watch

S.  Your  mother  has  it.

Tell  her  to  keep  it  always.

And  do  you  know  where  all  my  photographs  are.  I  want
Elen  to  have  them.

S.  Do  you  mean  your  sister ']

Fes.  I  say  yes.  Oh  pa  if  you  would  only  know  what  I  want
to  say.  I  am  trying  so  hard  to  tell  you  what  I  want  to
say.  ,  .

S.  Go  on.

Tell  mamma  to  cheer  up  and  not  worry  about  me.  I  am
alive  and  happy.

1  See  p.  366  where  an  enquiry  about  the  horse  was  made  by  N.  B.  J.


372  Helen  cle  G.  Verrall.

S.  Bennie,  is  my  mother  with  you  1


[part


I  am  with  her  now,  and  Cousin  May  ^

(S.  thinks  he  asked  liere  if  there  were  any  messages  for

communicator's  brother  and  sister.)
And  Uncle  Will I  see  him  often.
[Uncle  Will  is  Mrs.  J.'s  brother.— H.  de  G.  V.]

S.  Where  is  he  now  ?

he  is  there  in  the  ...  on  the  other  side

[The  conjunction  of  names  here  suggests  that  Bennie  sup-
poses "Uncle  Will  "to  be  dead.  His  answer  in  reply  to
N.  B.  J.'s  question  "Where  is  he  now  1 "  is  ambiguous
(cf.  p.  394).  Mistakes  as  to  whether  persons  referred  to
are  alive  or  dead  are  not  uncommon. — H.  de  G.  V.]

S.  Do  you  know  where  Willie  is  staying  now  1

No  pa  I  do  not.  I  see  him  often,  and  I  often  wonder  if  he
ever  thinks  I  am  alive.

S.  Uncle  Willie's  down  on  the  farm  now  and  I  will  tell  him.

Oh  yes,  and  will  will  you  go  soon.

S.  Yes.

I  am  so  glad.  I  will  be  there  and  help  you  with  the  hay.'^
And  do  not  forget  what  I  say  about  it.

S.  Shall  not  Dr.  Hodgson  come  back  now,  as  I  can't  read  the
writing  ?

Yes  I  think  I  can  keep  clear  .  .
(R.  H.  returns.)

Don't  you  say  one  word  to  me  will  you  because  I  want  to
talk  more.

I  am  constantly  trying  to  reach  Elen Roble  and  Mamma.
8.  (to  R.H.)  He  means  Helen.


^See  p.  363.


2  See  p.  363.


liXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  tuith  Mrs.  Piper.  373

Yes  I  told  you  before  what  I  did  not  think  you  U  and

that  is  about  Mma  Mamma.
She  is  not  really  coming  over  to  this  life  very  soon.

S.  That's  right.

but  she  is  really  coming  to  see  me  some  day.

S.  Yes,  dear.

And  I  will  do  all  I  can  to  see  her  keep  well.
Tell  me  about  the  dog  and  ped  .  .  .  P  E  D  Ted.
Wait  a  moment  .  .  .
it  is  Uncle  Will  .  .
Ped  .  .  .

S.  Peg (Assent) Ah,  sure,
and,  and  I

S.  What's  her  other  name  1

he  is  speaking  it  dear  friend  .  .  (Rector  to  N.  B.  J.)
I  tell  you  about  Uncle  Will  and  Peg
I  have  it.

S.  Go  on.

and  D  .  .  .  D.

S.  Are  they  going  to  help  him  1

Wait,  he  is  thinking  of  P  e  d  g  i  e
S.  Peggie.

He  says  Peggie  .  .

[Peggie  is  his  cousin  about  his  own  age,  the  daughter  of
Mrs.  J.'s  sister.  Peggie  is  not  her  real  name  but  his
name  for  her. — N.  B.  J.]

Fen

S.  Yes,  go  on. That's  right.

\This  abbreviation  is  used  habitually  in  the  trance  writing  for  "  understand,"
-or  "understood."


374


Helen  de  G.  Verrcdl.


[part


n  0  .  .  .  o  .  .  sa.j  it  do
F  e  n  n  n  .  .

[These  letters  are  not  correct,  'enster'  (see  below)  is  perhaps
an  attempt  at  the  name.^  But  there  seems  to  be  some
confusion  on  the  part  of  the  controls  as  to  whether
they  are  giving  Peggie's  name  or  the  name  of  the  com-
municator, Bennie,  and  this  perhaps  accounts  for  the
"Fenn."— H.  de  G.  V.]

Speak  more  distinctly  .  .  .  you  know  who  I  mean  dad.
Don't  worry  me.

I  want  to  tell  you  about  her  awfully.

do  you  think  I  do  not  know  .  .  .  well  I  do  know  very  well.

It  is * [?]  enster  [?] F  e  n

I  cannot  seem  to  get  it  friend. (Rector  to  E.  H.)

R.  H.  Well,  never  mind  about  it

It  is  his  name.

S.  Oh,  he's  trying  to  write  his  name?

and  it  is  very  clear  to  him.

F  *  [1]  Fenn.  I  cannot  say  it  .  .  and  will  you  for-
give me  .  .  he  does  not  hear  it  .  .

S.  Bennie,  you  can  write  your  name. He's  got  three  names  all
in  one. Now  you  can  write  them.

I  know  it  all  right,  but  let  me.
I  am  trying  to

I  will  go  back  and * * [undec] what I  wanted  .
Harrison  [1]

S.  What's  that  name  ?

HAER

[Perhaps  an  attempt  at  Bennie's  middle  name,  a  three
syllabled  name  beginning  with  H  and  ending  in  -son.
The  name  '  Harris '  was  given  earlier  in  this  sitting,
see  p.  369.— H.deG.  v.]

^  This  name  and  several  other  names  also  have  been  omitted  from  the  published
report  at  Mr.  Junot's  request.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  375

Yes  I  will  go  back  to  my  sister  once  more  and  when  I  get

through  I  can  say  it  better.
Tell  me  where  my  Skates  are  and  Peggy. I  want  very  much

to know. And  then  I am thinking  about  the  new

clothes  I  never  wore.

S.  Your  skates  are  uj)  in  your  room,  I  th  .  .

Who  took  them  out. It  must  have  been  .  .
S.  I  don't  know. Perhaps  your  mother  gave  them  away.

I  cannot  see  them  anywhere.  [Skates  were  given  away. —
N.  B.  J.]  And  my  clothes  I  never  wore  .  .  wore  .  .
wore  but  once. Where  .  .  .

Pa  my  hair  is  light  you  know  i

S.  Yes.

Yes,  and  do  you  remember  of  my  getting  hit  with  some
thing  on  the  boat.

S.  Did  the  mast  hit  you  when  it  blew  ofF?^

struck  me  in  the  head.

S.  Ah,  I  thought  so.

I  feel  that  I  can  never  get  away  from  the  thought  of  that
day,  but  I  shall  in  time. Do  you  remember  it  1

S.  No,  I  was  not  there.

No,  but  did  they  not  tell  you.

I  often  think  of  the  good  times  I  used  to  have  and  the
times  we  drove  into  the  woods.

S.  Yes.

Come  nearer  to  me  pa.  I  hope  these  people  will  let  me
come  here  again  and  tell  you  more  I  am  really  a  little
confused  yet,  but  the}'  are  helping  me  much.

But  I  .  .  Uncle  Will Peggy I  must  say  more  to  you.

S.  Yes. Speak  to  them.


1  See  p.  368.


2  See  p.  366.


376


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


I  certainly  must  tell  )'ou  liovv  1  will  be  on  the  farm  with
3'ou  all  and  it  will  do  mama  so  much  good.

Pa  give  me  some  thing.  I  thought  I  saw  my  knife,  was  I
mistaken,  where  is  Washington  Pa  Where  is  Washing-
ton dad,  tell  me  where.

[Perhaps  a  mistake  for  "Lincoln." — H.  deG.  V.]

S.  I  do  not  know.  (S.  in  meantime  opens  package,  and  pro-
duces the  A.  L.  bust,  the  spur,  cap,  and  a  scarf-pin.
About  the  scarf-pin  placed  in  the  hand  he  asks :)

S.  What  is  this?

I  used  to  wear  it  in  my  tie.  Gone.  I  don't  believe  I  lost
it. My  pin  .  .

S.  Who  gave  it  to  you  ? AVho  gave  you  the  pin  ?

Who  gave  me  the  pin

Will  .  .  why  I  think  you  did.

S.  That's  right.

I  think  you  gave  it  to  me  on  Christmas  [1]  Was  it
Christmas  1

Let  me  think.  I  do  not  know  but  it  was  my  birthda}'
.  .  .  was  it  pa  .  .

S.  What  did  I  tell  you  about  the  pin?  Where  did  I  say  it
came  from? Where  did  I  say  the  gold  came  from?

this  came  from  .  .  . Oh  I  never  can  say  it  .  .  C  o  .  .
Was it my birthday  .  . I have forgotten  .  . I  have
forgotten.

Who  was  the  man  who  went  out  there  with  you  and  .  .  .
I  had  so  many  pieces  of  it.

S.  Do  you  mean  the  miner  man  1  (Assent.)

[The  scarf-pin  was  made  of  a  Colorado  nugget  presented
with  a  number  of  other  nuggets  by  a  miner  friend. —
X.  B.  J.]

Yes  I  do,  but  his  name  has  gone  from  me  completely.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  377
S.  Did  you  look  for  your  wheel, ^  for  your  spur'?
Yes,  I  did. Yes  I  did.

S.  Where  is  the  wheel  ?

the  wheel  .  .  I  saw  it  .  .  I saw  it some  where in  the

drawer  in  my  room  with  the  letters.
Tell  mama  to  look  there  and  she  will  find  it  for  me.  I

want  to  see  Elen  very  much  dad  and  tell  her  to  be  a

good  girl,  my  brother  Roble

S.  That's  right,
and  HELEN.

S.  That's  right.

Oh  my  head. I  cannot  think  more,  dad.
I  wish  you  would  come  here  and  talk  to  me.
There  were  two  small  figured  stones  on  my  desk do  you
remember  them.

S.  No,  I  do  not,  but  I  will  look.
All  right.

If  I  ever  get  straightened  out  so  I  can  remember  everything
I  will  be  very  glad.  I  have  no  bother  unless  I  try  to
speak,  then  it  all  goes  away  from  me  before  I  have  a
chance  to  say  it.

(From  Rector.)  Here  is  an  elderly  gentleman  with  him

and  a  dear  old  lady  who  is  very  sweet  to

S.  (to  R.  H.)  Shall  I  speak  now?

look  at  and  she  is  very  anxious  to  see

S.  Please  let  the  old  lady  speak  to  me.

her  daughter  and  son  in  the  body  two  sons — sends  great
love  to  Benjam  [?] and  Will.

R.  H.  Benjamin,  is  that  1

iSee  p.  361.
.  ,  2b


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


B  e  n  j  .  .  .  (dissent)

[There  is  some  confusion  here.  If  the  "old  lady"  is
N.  B.  J.'s  mother,  the  allusion  to  "Will"  is  incorrect,
Will  being  the  name  of  Mrs.  J.'s  brother.  It  is  true
that  Mrs.  J.  Sr.  had  a  daughter  and  two  sons. — H.  de
G.V.]

there  are  two  by  the  same  name  here  .  .  two

and  Eliza  .  .  Elizabeth  who  came  here  many  years  ago —

S.  Is  it  mother  and  grandmother  1

Yes  both  of  them. One  was  called  Elizabeth.

S.  What  was  the  name  of  the  other  in  life  ?

And  she  is  a  sister  to  this  young  man's  mother  .  .  Auntie

Aunt.

The  name  is  not  quite  right.

[Mrs.  J.  had  no  sister  called  Elizabeth.— N.  B.  J.]

I  am  here  again  father,  they  took  me  away  to  get  stronger.

S.  Yes,  Bennie,  now  tell  me  if  my  mothfer  is  with  you.

Grandma yes  she  is I  told  you  before  dad  .  .
Helen. Do  you  remember  Helen  ...  I

S.  Do  you  mean  our  Helen  that's  still  in  life  1

No  not  on  your  side,  not  my  sister  but  Aunt  Helen.

[If  Hattie  is  read  in  place  of  Helen  here,  all  is  clear ;  other-
wise not. — N.  B.  J.]  [Bennie  had  an  Aunt  Helen  but
she  was  still  living. — H.  de  G.  V.]

Not  my  sister,  not  Aunt  Helen.

S.  Another  one  ■? I  don't  remember  any  other  Helen.

Yes. Well  there  was,  and  she  is  here,  and  you  will  find

out  soon  what  I  mean.
Speak  to  me  of  Alfred  ^  and  tell  him  I  think  of  him  often.

S.  Do  you  mean  Alfred  W  ?

I  mean  him  of  course,  he  is  not  well.  Do  you  not  know
this.

1  See  p.  370.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  loith  Mrs.  Piper.  379

Have  you  not  forgotten  what  I  said  before.

*  *  *

(From  Eector)  Better  leave  him  for  a  moment  and  see  if
he  cannot  tell  me  distinctly  the  name  he  tried  to  give
me  before.

Dad  you  here  dear.

S.  Yes,  Bennie.
F  .  .

S.  Bennie,  listen  to  me. You  come  to  this  good  friend  here.
Dr.  Hodgson. He'll  help  you  to  talk  with  us.

B  B

S.  Yes,  go  on. Write  your  name.

Say  it  again,  sir. Come  to  him,  and  talk  it  over.
I  will  say  it  over  to  him.
Is  that  it.

S.  Write  a  letter  to  your  mother,  through  Dr.  Hodgson,  after
a  while.

Yes. I  will  write  .  .  BR

R.  H.  Rector,  it's  no  use  bothering  about  that  name  now.

No,  we  U  D  but  I  am  trying  to  hold  him  for  it,  but  +
says  come  so  I  suppose  I  must  do  so. However  I  will
ask  him  and  give  it  to  thee.

R.  H.  Yes.

*  *  *
3rd  Sitting.

July  6,  1899.  Present:  E.H.

(G.  P.  writes)  •
R,  H.  George,  any  message  from  Bennie  1 [Hand  reaches  out.]

^  +  =  Imperator.


380


Helen  cle  G.  Vervall.


[part


I  was  just  trying  to  hear  what  he  was  telling  me,  so  1

could  tell  you  after  Fred  got  through.
Yes. I  should  like  to  know  if  Mama  has  found  my  letters.^

R.  H.  I  have  not  yet  heard  from  your  father  since  he  got  home.

Well,  he  will  tell  you  soon  all  about  it.
Oh  give  my  love  my  dearest  love  to  papa  mama,  Roble  and
El  Helen.

R.  H.  I  will.

Oh  tell  them  I  love  them  oh  so  much  and  I  will  do  all  I
can  to  help  them  know  I  live.  I  am  so  glad  about  the
horse I  do  not  know  what  to  say.

[Extract  from  letter  of  N.  B.  J.,  July  12,  1899.  "When  I
was  with  you  Bennie  asked  that  his  horse  be  given  to

his  little  sister. I  .  .  .  wired  to  C  to  stop  the

sale  of  the  horse,  which  was  done  just  in  time  .  .  .  and
the  children  and  especially  '  Uncle  Willie '  have  been
using  him  a  great  deal." See  p.  371.]

R.  H.  Yes.

4th  Sitting.

March  5,  1900. Present:  Mr.  and  Mrs.  J.  and  R.H.

(Rector  writes.  Excitement  and  turmoil  in  hand.  Cross
in  air.  Much  excitement  at  first  in  the  following
writing.)

Dad  Dad  Dad  yes  I  am  coming  dear  .  .  wait  until  I
pass  through  the  light  and  I  will  meet  you  once  more.
It  is  I,  Bennie  don't  you  know  me.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  we  hear  you.

I  see  mama I  am  so  glad  so  glad  .  .  oh  do  you  know  all

I  feel  for  you  ....
Dad  dear,  do  you  remember  all  I  told  you  and  mama  about

myself  before.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  remember  all  you  said  before.


1  See  p.  369.


LXI.] Re'port  on  the  Junot  Sittivgs  ivith  Mrs.  Piper.  381

Did  you  hear  me  when  I  came  into  your  room  a  few  weeks
ago.

N.  B.  J.  I  thought  I  did. But  I  was  not  sure. What  did  you  do  ?

I  came  in  and  walked  over  to  you  and  )iiade  a  noise,  did
you  hear  it  1

N.  B.  J.  I  thought  I  did,  but  I  was  not  sure.

Well  you  may  be  sure  noiv. (Perturbation  in  hand.)
Mama  speak  also  dear  and  tell  me  what  you  were  doing
with  desk

Mrs.  J.  Do  you  mean  my  desk  where  I  have  your  things  1

[Mrs.  J.  had  been  lately  working  over  his  things  in  her  desk.
— N.  B.  J.]

Yes.  I  do,  I  heard  that  very  clearly  dear.  Oh  how  can  I
refrain  from  telling  you  how  dear  you  both  are  to  me
and  .  .  .

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  I  often  think  you  come  to  me. Do  yowl

Come  to  you  .  .  yes  indeed  I  do  and  mama  there  is  no
doubt  about  it.  I  do  see  and  know  a  great  deal  about
you  and  the  things  you  do.  I  see  all  the  pictures  of
myself  and  all  my  own  work.

[We  have  a  great  many  pictures  of  Bennie  lately  placed  in
our  rooms  —  also  various  pieces  of  his  handiwork.  —
N.B.J.]

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  are  you  happy'?

Happy,  yes,  very,  and  I  wish  you  to  be  also.  Promise  me
and  I  will  never  say  any  more  about  the  past,  believe
mama  dear  that  it  is  all  right. I  know  it  is.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  I  feel  happier  now  that  I  have  seen  you.

Well  you  will  dear  if  you  will  only  listen  and  in  a  way
talk  to  me.  I  would  like  something  at  this  moment
dear

(R.  H.  passes  parcel  of  articles  to  N.  B.  J.  to  undo.)
And  it  will  help  me  to  keep  clear  .  .  .  and  in  a  .  .  .


382


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  who  met  you  when  you  left  me  1  Who  met  you
in  the  light  that  you  are  now  in  1

Didn't  dad  tell  you  if  not  I  will  in  a  few  moments  .  .  just

give  me  something.
(Articles  felt  by  hand,  which  chooses  sjmr.)
I  only  wish  to  get  help  so  I  can  remain
Yes,  all  right  now how  is  Roble give  him  my  love  and

tell  him  I  am  so  glad  he  is  doing  well. And  then  I

have  a  few  things  to  tell  you  about  this  life.
Do  you  remember  the  letters  I  spoke  of  dear,  I  wish  to

know  if  you  ....

Mrs.  J.  What  letters  did  you  mean,  Bennie  ?

the  blue  ones.^
N.  B.  J.  (to  Mrs.  J.) Tell  him  you  couldn't  find  them.

They  are  yet  on  my  mind  and  I  hope  I  will  [be]  able  to  think
it  out  soon  .  .  .  what  did  you  think  I  meant  any  way
Tell  me  dear  and  it  will  not  trouble  me  .  .  .

I  left  two  or  three  short  letters  somewhere  about  .  .  .  .
coat  [?]  or

just  let  me  see  now  .  .  .

Mrs.  J.  I  couldn't  understand  about  the  letters,  Bennie.  Did  you
mean  the  two  or  three  you  left  on  the  bureau  at  Oster-
ville?

Yes  that  is  exactly  what  I  meant  and  I  do  remember  now,
I  wish  to  know  if  you  got  them  or  who  did.

(Interruption  due  to  difficulty  in  deciphering  the  writing.)

Tell  mama  dearest  that  I  will  never  forget  my  days  in
earth.  Never  and  about  the  letters  if  I  am  only  U.  D.
about  that  I  will  be  glad. Can  you  help  me  in  any  way

Mrs.  J.  I  found  two  or  three  letters  of  yours  on  the  bureau.

Yes  well  I  had  a  faint  recollection  of  leaving  some,  where
I  did  not  wish  any  one  to  get  them  but  my  mother
and  I  tried  to  make  it  clear  to  dad  because  they  were
on  my  mind. Did  you  destroy  them,  tell  me  dear.


iSee  p.  369.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  luith  Mrs.  Piper.  383

Mks.  J.  I  put  them  away,  Beniiie.  I  didn't  think  they  were  im-
portant.

No  I  do  not  know  as  they  were  only  I  felt  that  I  had
left  them  and  .  .  .

N.  B.  J.  Tell  him  who  they  were  to.

Mks.  J.  Yes.  I  will.  One  letter  was  to  grandma  from  you,  and
one  letter  was  a  chain  [  ?  ]  letter,  do  you  remember  ?
And  a  letter  from  Charlie.

Oh  dear  yes  of  course  but  for  the  life  of  me  I  could  not
explain  what  I  wished  you  to  know.  The  fact  was
mama  I  knew  I  had  left  some  letters  behind  me  in
a  way  that  troubled  me.

Yes,  do  you  U.  D.  dear  and  I  did  not  wish  any  one  to
touch  them  but  you.

Mrs.  J.  No.  I  read  them  and  put  them  away,  Bennie,  all  of  them,
to  keep  for  myself. Did  you  wish  me  to  destroy  them?

No  only  to  get  them  out  of  others'  way  dear.  Now  I  am
quite  happy  about  it,  and  I  will  not  think  about  it
any  more. You  have  .  .  .

That  is  all  right  now  dear. That  is  all  about  the  letters.

Mrs.  J.  Put  that  off  your  mind,  Bennie. Forget  about  the  letters.
Yes  I  have,  now  that  I  know  all  I  cared  to  know.

Mrs.  J.  Can  you  tell  me  about  the  last  few  days  you  spent  with
me,  Bennie  1 Do  you  remember  ?

Why  yes  I  do  very  well,  and  what  shall  I  tell  you  about
them  ? I  was  very  happy  ma  [  ^  ]  dear.

Mrs.  J.  Tell  me  what  you  talked  about,  Bennie.  Do  you  remember
that  day  you  were  sick  and  we  talked  so  long?

Oh  yes  I  do  very  well.  You  thought  you  knew  about  this,
and  I  remember  you  were  somewhat  troubled,  but  I  told
you  I  was  going  to  be  all  right.


Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  you  did  tell  me. You  said  you  were  better.


384  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

Yes  and  I  was  right. Believe  me  dear  I  am  all  right.

Do  you  remember  you  said  you  did  not  know  what  you
should  do  if  anything  should  happen  to  me,  and  I  an-
swered don't  worry  I  shall  come  out  all  right.

[This  is  recognized. — N.  B.  J.]

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  but  I  didn't  want  you  to  leave  us,  to  leave  me.

But  I  did  not  leave  you  dear,  don't  you  see.  I  I  did  not
leave I  am  really  Bennie  N  J  .  .  J.

Mrs.  J.  I  understand,  Bennie,  do  you  want  to  write  your  name?
Do  you  want  me  to  .  .

Mrs.  J.  Yes. Yes,  if  you  can.

BENJAMIN
Mrs.  J.  Good.

ROBLE  JUNOT.
Mrs.  J. Yes,  that  is  right. Do  you  remember  your  middle  name  ?

I  do  write  it  or  speak  .  .  .  H  .  .  H
Mrs.  J. Yes,  that  is  right.

HAEE  [1] [HHER  ?]
Mrs.  J.  No.

[Perhaps an attempt  to  repeat  Harrison. See  p.  374. —
H.  de  G.  v.]

R..  H.  (to  Mrs.  J.) Let  him  .  .  let  them  get  it  themselves.

Who  is  talking  .  .  .  H  E  .  .  .  D .  .  .

I  am  tired  a  little  ...  let  me  rest  and  I  will  tell  you
soon  dear.

Dad  why  are  you  so  quiet  and  why  don't  you  talk  to  me.
I  must  rest  a  little  because  I  cannot  think  now.

N.  B.  J.  Bennie, I  thought  you wanted to talk  to  your  mother.
Tell  me  about  the  old  farm  when  you  can.

1  See  note  on  p.  389.


LXI.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Piper.  385

Yes  indeed  I  will.  Do  you  remember  the  time  I  tried  to
tell  you.

N.  B.  J.  Yes. I  remember. But  we've  been  there  since.

Oh  yes  indeed,  that  I  know  too,  and  about  my  horse  dad
I  think  you  told  me  you  would  not  let  him  go.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  papa  kept  him.  Yes.

Yes,  I  know  it  very  well.  I  only  remind  him  that  I  do
not  forget  any  thing  he  says  to  me.  Do  you  not  tell
me  about  sister  .  .

[Some  remarks  here  made  by  sitters  which  I  did  not  catch.
— R.  H.]

And  Maria  [1]  .  .  do  you  remember  Aunt  Nain  [  ?  ]  .  .
Mary  .  .  May MaRy  ...  I  here  with  [^]

N.  B.  J.  Cousin  May,  you  mean.

Yes,  cousin  May. I  told  you  before  ^  .  .  and
Will  [  ^  ]  tell  me

Could  you  let  me  see  my  mother  all  alone.

R.  H.  Yes,  we  will  go  out  if  you  wish  and  Rector  thinks  well.

I  think  friend  he  is  confused  a  little  and  could  be  kept

very  quiet  by  letting  him  be  free  U.  D.
(N.  B.  J.  and  R.  H.  go  out.)

I  want  to  see  you.  Mamma,  as  I  did  before  I  came  here
and  he  confuses  me.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  can  read  it.

Well  Dearest  then  listen  to  me

(Hand  kept  motioning  and  sitter  said  "Do  you  want  me  to
write  1 ")

Yes  if  you  wish,  but  I  want  to  tell  you  who  I  met  here:
whom  I  have  met  here.  I  met  May  the  first  one  and
she  said  Come  to  me  Bennie  and  I  will  take  care  of  you

[His  cousin  May  passed  out  only  a  few  weeks  before  his
death.— N.  B.  J.]

And  do  you  remember  how  we  used  to  like  each  other


iSee  p.  363.


386  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

Mrs.  J. I  do  not  understand.

How  we  used  to  play  together.
[Bennie  knew  her  very  well. — N.  B.  J.]

Mrs.  J. I  cannot  read. Is  there  anything  I  can  do  1

Yes. Nothing  Dear,  only  U.  D.  me.
Mrs.  J. You  said  Cousin  May  met  you  ]  ,

Yes,  exactly.

Mrs.  J. Is  she  with  you  ?
Also  Grandpa.

[Sitter  took  this  to  refer  to  her  own  father,  who  had  died

since  Bonnie's  death. See  note  on  p.  399. — H.  de  G.  V.]

Mrs.  J.  Is  he  with  you  1
Yes  he  is.

Mrs.  J.  He  did  not  meet  you,  did  he  ?

No,  he  came  here  after  I  did  Dear yes  .  .  .  and  I  met
him  also.

Mrs.  .J. And  was  he  not  surprised  to  see  you  1

Yes  very. And  oh  Mamma  so  glad  .  .  .

Yes  Dear  he  sends  love  to  you  now  and  Grandma  also.

and Eliza  .  .  .  Elsie  [?]  .  .  she came  here  .  .  Lizzie  .  .  .

she  used  to  know  grandpa  ,  ...  in  the  body  .  .  .  her

name  was  Smith  .  .  .
[Not  recognized. — N.  B.  J.]
Don't  you  remember  now —

Mrs.  .J. No,  I  don't  understand — is  it  Lizzie  or  Eliza  Smith  'I

No. Never  mind  Dear  I  will  tell  you  of  our  own —
Yes  but  Mamma  I  want  to  assure  you  it  is  I.
Yes. Do  you  remember  a  cold  I  got.  Dear,
in  the  water —

Mrs.  .J. Was  that  the  beginning  of  your  sickness  1
Yes,  Dear,  it  was.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Pipe7\  387
Mrs.  J. Did  I  do  everything  I  could  for  you,  Beunie  i
Yes,  dear.

Oh  yes,  and  that  is  one  thing  I  wanted  to  tell  you.
Now  do  not  worry  any  more  about  it.
I  will  be  happier  if  you  do  not.

Mrs.  J.  I  will  not  worry  now. I  am  happy  to  have  heard  from
you.

Oh  I  am  so  glad  Dear.
Mrs.  J.  Was  it  time  for  you  to  go,  Bennie  ?

Yes — and  better  so — they  all  tell  me.
Mrs.  J.  Have  you  seen  Grandma  Junot  1

I  do  often.

— and  my  brother  Eoble  in  the  body — I  remember  our  little
Boat.  Yes  and  I  saw  it  go  over  once.  Do  you  remem-
ber Dear.

[Bennie  and  Roble  capsized  in  their  small  boat  not  long

before  his  death.— N.  B.  J.]
Well  it  all  came  from  that.
I  got  wet

Mks.  J.  I  have  forgotten  that.

Have  you  forgotten,  Mamma  dear.
I  did  sometime  before  I  came  here.

Mrs.  J. You  got  wet  many  times.

Yes,  but  when  I  lost  my  cap,  dear  ...

Mrs.  J. Do  you  mean  when  you  went  without  your  cap^^

Yes.  Y^es  I  say.  Yes,  Dear.  Yes,  and  Dad  told  me  to
take  it.

Mrs.  J.  When  you  went  for  the  long  walk  with  your  father  ?

Yes,  when  we  went  together,  when  we  went  together.
(N.  B.  J.  returns  and  says  "  Do  you  want  me  Bennie  1 ")

iSee  p.  365.


388  Helen  de  G.  VerralL.  [part

Yes  I  do.

Oh  I  am  so  glad. There  never  was  a  boy  so  glad.
I  want  to  keep  clear  and  tell  you  all.

I  want  you  would  hear  all  I  say  to  you  because  I  try  very
hard.

Pa  did  you  know  Grandpa  was  here  ^  and  sees  you  now.

N.  B.  J.  Which  grandpa  ^

Grandpa  Junot,  Dad, — and  he  sends  love  to  you.  I  looked
out  for  him  and  took  him  to  this  world.  .  .  .  Yes.

N.  B.  J.  Have  you  seen  my  mother  1

Yes  I  did  (hand  points  back  to  written  pages.) -

and  she  told  me  to  tell  you  dear  Dad  that  she  had  taken
care  of  you  ever  since  she  came  here,  and  no  matter
what  you  do  she  will  still  watch  over  you.  She  told  me
these  words  for  you  and  Helen.

Oh  dear  I  know  every  thing  so  well.

Do  you  miss  me  at  the  farm  when  you  go.

And  if  you  do,  you  need  no  more I  am  there  when  I  wish.

(N.  B.  J.  goes  away  to  get  more  writing  paper.)

Call  him  back  once  more  and  let  him  help  me.

Mrs.  J. Shall  we  not  call  back  Dr.  Hodgson  ? Do  you  want  him  t

Yes  I  do  now. (R.  H.  returns.)
B.  H.  J.

Mrs.  J.  "B.H.J." The  way  he  signed  his  name.

[The  signature  of  his  initials  is  wonderfully  like  his  own

signature. — N.  B.  J.]
I  .  .  I  am  all  I  claim  to  be.

*  *  *

(Waking  Stage.)
See  the  young  man  with  the  light  hair  up  in  the  clouds

with  Rector.
I  want  to  go  too. I  want  to  go  too.
Did  you  hear  the  song  that  boy  was  singing  1

R.  H.  What  was  it? What  was  he  singing?
Swanee  River — Swanee  River.^
iSee  pp.  386  and  399.  ^gee  p.  387.  ^See  p.  367.


lxl] Report  on  the  Junot  S'lttivgs  vnth  Mrs.  Pvper.  389


[The  communicator's  name  is  Benjamin  H.  Junot.  The  name
Bennie  was  mentioned  by  N.B.J,  (see  p.  356)  and  the  name
Koble  was  also  mentioned  by  him  and  identified  by  the  com-
municator as  that  of  his  brother.  With  regard  to  the  possibility
of  Mrs.  Piper  knowing  the  name  Junot,  N.  B.  J.  writes :

"  We  knew  nothing  of  Dr.  Hodgson  or  Mrs.  Piper  until  the
summer  before  Bennie's  death,  when  one  of  our  neighbours
gave  us  a  copy  of  the  S.  P.  E.  volume  which  contains  Dr.
Hodgson's  report  (2nd  I  think)  upon  Mrs.  Piper.  Some  time
after  Bennie's  death  I  wrote  to  Dr.  Hodgson,  applying  for
membership  in  the  American  Branch  and  asking  for  a  sitting.
He  and  Mrs.  Piper  knew  nothing  of  us.  We  resided  in  a  very
large  city  1000  miles  away  from  them.  Dr.  Hodgson  never
mentioned  our  names  in  Mrs.  Piper's  presence  for  four  or  five
years  after  our  first  sitting.

"Our  son  died  at  the  seashore  about  100  miles  away  from
Boston.  We  know  of  no  notice  of  his  death  in  any  Boston
paper.  It  is  certainly  very  unlikely  that  there  should  have
been  any  such  notice.  We  have  always  lived  in  the  West
and  have  little  acquaintance  in  or  about  Boston.

"  At  all  our  sittings  we  always  saw  Mrs.  Piper  before  the
trance,  but  only  for  a  few  moments  and  always  in  Dr.  Hodgson's
presence.  Mrs.  Piper  never  came  to  know  us  until  Mr.  Dorr
introduced  us  after  Dr.  Hodgson's  death."

If  Mrs.  Piper  had  ever  seen  jST.  B.  J.'s  name,  or  that  of  his
son  Eoble,  it  is  very  probable  that  the  mention  of  the  names
Bennie  and  Eoble,  would  have  revived  in  her  memory  the  name
Junot.  All  that  can  be  said  is  that  there  is  no  evidence  of
her  having  seen  the  name  and  some  reason  to  suppose  that  she
is  not  likely  to  have  seen  it. — H.  de  G.  V.]

5th  Sitting.

March  6,  1900.  Present:  Mr.  and  Mrs.  J.  and  E.  H.

(Bennie  communicating.)

Do  you  remember  the  things  I  used  to  make  when  I  was
in  body  and  some  of  the  things  I  placed  about  my  room.
[He  made  a  number  of  things,  many  of  which  are  now


390


Helen  de  0.  Verrall.


[part


in  his  room. — N.  B.  J.]  Good  night  mama,  dear,  I  just
spied  you  out. How  are  you  ...  I  see  you

Mrs.  J.  I  am  well,  Bennie. Do  you  want  to  ask  me  any  questions?

Yes,  only  a  few,  because  I  have  something  to  tell  you.  Ever
since  I  came  to  this  life  I  have  been  praying  that  j'ou
might  feel  that  I  was  still  with  you,  and  I  have  fol-
lowed you  many  times  and  especially  when  you  and  dad
have  been  out  driving.  I  sit  often  beside  you  and  hear
the  things  you  say  about  me.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  understand.

I  almost  never  see  you  but  that  you  do  not  speak  of  me
and  it  makes  me  very  happy.  Do  you  hear  me  now  .  .
the  Good  Priest  ^  is  helping  me  to  keep  my  thoughts  clear.

I  remember  in  the  summer  at  the  farm  how  I  used  to  sit
out  in  front  of  the  house  and  Charlie  and  Roble  were
with  me  often  and  I  used  to  play  on  this  thing  [Refer-
ence is  to  the  harmonica  and  the  statement  is  correct  as
to  Eoble  and  his  cousin  Charley — here  first  referred  to.
— N.  B.  J.]

[The  name  Charlie  had  been  mentioned  by  Mrs.  J.  at  the
previous  sitting,  see  p.  383.  At  later  sittings  there  are
frequent  allusions  to  a  friend  of  Bennie's,  Charlie  D.  ;  no
distinction  is  ever  made  by  the  controls  between  "  Charlie
D."  and  "Cousin  Charley"  and  there  is  nothing  to  show  to
which  of  the  two  reference  is  here  intended. — H.  de  G.  V.}

(Hand  listens  to  Mrs.  J.)

Mrs.  J.  Wait.

and  I  never  will  forget  those  days.  But  the  one  thing
which  has  troubled  me  more  than  anything  since  I  came
to  this  life  is  the  thought  of  dear  mamma's  feeling  that
she  could  do  more  for  me.  I  tell  you  now  that  she  did
all  she  could  and  nothing  could  have  kept  me  in  the
body. Do  you  hear  me  dear  .  .

And  the  time  is  coming  when  you  will  see  me  walking
about  with  you  mama. Remember  I  tell  you  so.


^Imperator.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  tvith  Mrs.  Piper.  391

Mes.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  hear  all  you  say.

Yes,  dearest  but  why  did  you  tell  pa  you  did  not  know
for  sure  that  I  was  with  you.  Tell  me  dear  because  it
will  help  me  to  feel  free.

Mrs.  J.  I  do  think  that  you  are  with  me. I  often  feel  that  you  ....
with  me.

But  that  touch.

Mrs.  J.  What  do  you  mean,  Bennie  1

When  I  touched  you  one  day  when  you  were  lying  down.

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie,  I  don't  feel  sure  about  you  touching  me.  Da
you  touch  me  ?

I  am  as  sure  of  it  as  I  can  be  of  anything  I  do.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  you  know  I  can't  see  you  as  you  see  me.

Did  you  hear  what  +  said  about  that  one  day.  God  hath
said  it  is  the  privilege  of  the  so-called  departed  and
only  theirs.  I  do  not  U.  D.  all  these  laws  yet  dear
but  I  am  going  to  in  time.

Tell  me  now  about  Eleu  (Hand  dissents  at  once)  Helen
and  what  .  .  .

Mrs.  J.  Do  you  mean  your  sister  Helen  1

I  do  indeed,  and  I  wish  you  to  know  that  it  was  I  who
helped  her  when  she  had  that  cold  as  you  and  pa
called  it.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. Why  do  you  ask  me  more  about  Helen  than
Eoble  ?

Because  I  saw  her  not  very  well  only  a  little  time  ago,
dear.  But  I  have  him  in  mind  also  and  will  ask  when
I  get  to  it.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

I  love  you  all  so  dearly  I  do  not  want  to  leave  out  any
one.


392  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

N.  B.  J.  That's  right,  sweetheart,

I  tell  you  Roble,  my  brother  I  mean,  will  be  a  great  comfort

to  you  so  do  not  miss  me. I  am  still  with  you.
Got  to  go  a  moment,  will  return  soon.

R,  H.  No  hurry.

(Slight  pause.)

(From  Rector.) Friend,  speaking  to  him,  kind  friend,  speak
slowly  kindly.

(Hand  touches  the  articles,  as  if  seeking  some  particular  one.)
Mrs.  J.  I  think  he's  looking  for  that, (cast  of  Lincoln.)
Yes,  back  again.

Mama  what did you do  with  that  piece [f] of  A.  L.
Abraham  Lincoln.

Mrs.  J.  This,  Bennie,  do  you  mean  1 (pushing  forward  the  cast  of
Lincoln.)

Mrs.  J.  Do  you  want  your  cast  of  Abraham  Lincoln  1

Yes. (Hand  fingers  cast.)
Yes,  all  right.

I  am  .  .  am  going  back  now do  you  remain.
Daisy.

Do  you  know  what  I  mean,  dad  dear.
N.  B.  J.  No. No,  I  do  not  know  what  you  mean.

Do  you  remember  1

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie,  I  don't  remember  Daisy.

What  was  the  name  we  used  to  call  the what  was  it  we
called  the  .  .  .  can't  [?]  cannot  you  help  me  think  .  .  .

Da  .  .  DA  .  .  DAN  .  .  .  Dan.i

[The  dog's  name  was  Don. We  could  not  remember  at
the  time.— N.  B.  J.]

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie.

1  See  note  on  p.  419.


LXI.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  393

Think  dear  and  you  will  know  what  I  mean.
N.  B.  J.  Daniel  Webster  he  means.

Mrs.  J.  No. .  •  '

No,  it  was  when  I  was  a  little  boj'.

Mks.  J.  Daisy

Oh  dear  no  one  knows  better  than  you  do
R.  H.  Bennie,  what  was  it  that  was  called  Daisy  1

dog  .  .  Dog  .  .
Mes.  J.  We  had  a  dog  called  Daisy  1
N.  B.  J.  Willie  had  a  little  one,  didn't  he '?

he  is  over  here  now. Oh  do  think

N.B.J,  {to  Mks.  J.)  What  was  the  name  of  the  dog  we  had  so  long?

Tramp  1
Mrs.  J.  Sport

Mrs.  J.  Do  you  mean  Crisp?

No  but  the  dog  I  used  to  like  so  much  when  I  was  a
little  fellow  .  .  .  and  .  .  .

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie,  I  can't  remember.

Do  you  remember  the  old  dog  we  used  to  have.
Well  if  you  cannot  help  me  I  will  let  it  go  but  .  .  and
tell  you  some  day. (Hand  indicates  R.  H.)

R.  H.  I  understand. I  shall  be  glad.

Yes  now  speak  to  me  dear  because  he  is  here  and  I  will
ask  what  R  is  doing  now.

Mrs.  J.  Do  you  want  me  to  speak  to  you  ?

Yes  I  do  very  much.

•2  c


394  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  -■ .  [part

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  can  you  remember  the  words  of  the  song  you  sang
so  much  before  you  left  us, — at  the  minstrel  show,  do
you  remember  ?

Oh  let  me  see,  I  did  sing  something. No  I  don't  believe
I,  I  do. I  will  think  about  it  and  it  will  come  back  to

me.

Mrs.  J.  Very  well,  Bennie. Bennie,  do  you  see  any  of  the  boys  ?

Oh  yes. I  do  often. I  told  Pa,  didn't  he  tell  you?

Mrs.  J.  Yes, Tell  me  the  names  of  some  of  them.

Well,  I told  you  about  Arthur  and  Frank  and  Charlie,^

and  do  you  remember  Eugene
[All  recognized  except  Arthur. — N.  B.  J.]
Gene.

Mrs.  J.  Gene, Gene. What  was  he  to  you  1

he  was  .  .  .  .  ■
with  Cousin  May.

Mrs.  J.  No  .  .  .

When  1  was  with  you  .  .  .
Wait  I  am  hearing  her  also.
Surely  you  know  him  dad  sj^eak  .  .

N.  B.  J.  Is  he  in  the  body,  in  this  world  ?  Is  he  with  you  in  [your]
world '? Is  he  in  our  world  or  in  your  world  ?

Yes  he  is,  dad,  and  I  see  him  often.

N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  is  Gene  in  our  world  or  in  your  world  1  Where  is
Gene?

He  is  here  dear

N.  B.  .J.  We  don't  know  him  then.

But  you  do,  and  so  does  Ma  .  .  .  perfectly.
I  see  him,  and  see  him  writing  once  in  a  while  and  you
must  hear  me  out.

i.See  pp.  .361  and  .364.


LXI.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  luith  Mrs.  Piper.  395

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  but  don't  you  mean  that  he  is  with  us,  not
with  you  ?

But  I  mean  dear  that  he  is  often  with  me  or  I  am  with

him  and  Roble  that  is  what  I  mean  .  .  .

R.  H.  Rector !

.  .  and  I  see  him  as  I  do  you.

R.  H.  Isn't  he  getting  confused  ?

No,  but  we  have  a  little  difficulty  in  explaining  the  differ-
ence between  being  immediately  here,  i.e.  present  and
being  at  a  distance,  but  he  is  perfectly  clear  about  it
friend  and  his  seeing  him.  He  is  on  the  material  side
of  life,  and  he  often  visits  him  as  he  does  his  father
and  mother.  When  we  go  we  will  explain  the  use  of
the  expression  spiritual  life  and  material  to  him,  and  it
v/ill  be  U.  D.  always.  But  tell  him  about  Helen,  and
if  she  still  speaks  of  him  as  when  he  was  in  the  body.

Mrs.  J.  Yes. Bennie,  Helen  is  well,  goes  to  school,  talks  about  you
often  and  is  growing  to  be  a  big  girl.

I  think  a  great  deal  of  her. I  saw  her  ill.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. She  is  well  now,  I  think.

Yes,  but  I  tell  you  dearest  I  helped  her  to  recover  as  .  .  .
I  say  it.

Mrs.  .J.  Yes,  Bennie. Will  you  always  help  her'?
Yes  always.

Does  she  remember  the  little  C  o  d  ac  I  used  to  take  pictures
with

Mrs.  J.  Yes. You  used  to  take  pictures  with  it  1

Yes,  does  she  remember  it,  and  did  I  not  see  her  have  it
at  the  farm  1

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  she  took  it  with  her,  but  she  doesn't  know
how.


396 •  "  Helen  cle  G.  Verrcdl.  [part

'  .  that  is  what  I  was  going  to  tell  you  dear  that  I  will  help
her  to  U.  D.  it  so  she  can  use  it. Tell  her  I  give  it
„ . to  her  ...

Mks.  J.  Yes,  Benuie,  I  will.

for  her  very  own. And  I  am  quite  clear  about  it.
Do  you  remember  the  one  I  took  of  the  boat

Mes.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. Do  you  remember  the  pictures  Eoble  took
of  you  on  the  boat  1

Yes,  I  do  very  vaguely  dear.  This  will  help  me  to  re-
member more  about  the  things  I  used  to  do  when  I
was  with  you  in  that  world  and  I  will  tell  (hand  moves
towards  R.  H.)  this  one  here  some  things  some  day  for
you  and  dad.

Mes.  J.  Yes.

R.  H.  I  shall  be  glad  to  take  them.

I  will  think  over  all  about  my  other  life  and  tell  you  all
I  can.

Mes.  J.  Bennie,  is  there  anything  you  want  me  to  do  for  you  ?

Yes.  Speak  to  me  when  you  are  at  home,  and  talk  to  me
when  you  are  sitting  up  in  your  room  and  I  will  hear
you  and  tell  this  man  what  you  say.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. Do  you  know  that  I  speak  to  you  often  now
Yes  indeed,  didn't  I  tell  you  so  before,  dear?

Mes.  J.  Yes,  you  did. When  I  talk  to  you,  shall  I  speak  out  loud
or  think  about  you  1

Well  speak  just  as  you  are  now,  only  to  me  and  not  to
the  man  who  speaks  for  me  and  does  not  hear  all  I  say.
Do  you  see  what  I  mean. Mama  dear  what  is

[in]  my  room  over  in  the  corner  where

(Hand  listens  to  Mrs.  J.)

Mes.  J.  Wait  a  moment,  Bennie,  until  we  read  this. One  moment.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Piper.  397
I  used  to  put  m)'  Rods  fishing

rods  .  .  it  is  all  taken  out  and  Roble  has  put  a  kind  of
chair  like
■  ■■■  Chair  there  ...

Mrs.  J.  Eoble  has  put  a  chair  there?  Bennie,  I  don't  quite  under-
stand what  you  mean.

Well  let  me  tell  you.  I  had  two  rods.  Do  you  remember
them. One  dad  gave  me.

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie.

Yes,  ask  dad. Do  you  remember.

N.  B.  J.  No.  No,  Bennie,  I  don't  remember.  Maybe  I  gave  you
the  money,  not  the  rods.

■  Well  that  is  so,  dear,  and  just  as  it  is.
Now  let  me  finish  and  you  will  remember.
Roble  and  I  put  the  rods  on  the  side  of  our  boat  and
I  .  .  .

took  one  the  new  one  and  put  it  up  in  my  room  before
I  was  ill.

Now  I  do  not  see  it,  but  I  see  a  chair  in  its  place.  Ask
Eoble  what  he  did  with  it,  and  you  will  see  I  know
dear.

Mrs.  J.  I  will  ask  Eoble  about  it.  Bennie  can  you  write  the  name
of  the  gentleman  you  went  fishing  with  at  Osterville,
the  one  we  ...  [I  could  not  get  down  all  the  words. —
R.H.]

I  cannot  U.  D. Do  you  speak  of  what  I  am  telling  you

now  .  .  do  you  think  now  of  Gene.
Help  me  to  keep  my  mind  clear  and  I  will  tell  you  .  .  .
Wood.

[The  second  name  of  the  friend  referred  to  by  Mrs.  J.  begins
with  "Good"  and  his  first  initial  is  W.  "Wood"  is
perhaps  a  "  portmanteau "  of  these  two  sounds.  Port-
manteau-words are  not  uncommon  in  the  trance  writing. —
H.  de  G.  v.]

What  is  the  trouble  with  Aunt  Helen's  ^  teeth.
(Sitters  laugh  a  little.)

1  See  p.  378.


398


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


Mks.  J.  Bennie, her  teeth trouble  her. That  is  all. (to  N.  B.  J.)
That's  very  funny.

Well  grandma  wanted  to  know  and  so  did  I  because  we
saw  her  walking  around  holding  on  to  her  teeth.

Mes.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  she  goes  to  the  dentist  very  often.


Well  }'ou  tell  her  not  worry  about  it  and  I  don't  think
they  will  trouble  her.


dearest  mother  .  .  I  love  to  see  you  only  you  look  differ-
ently to  me.

(From  Kector.)  We  shall  have  to  let  him  go  again  for  a
moment,  friend,  not  because  he  is  tired,  to  use  thy  ex-
pression, but  because  he  becomes  a  little  confused.

Better  talk  to  him  a  while.


Here  I  am  again.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. I  would  like  to  ask  you  some  questions.

Well  go  ahead  dear,  and  if  I  .  .

N.  B.  J.  Which grandpa was with you yesterday  1 Was it  my
father  ? Was  my  father  with  you  yesterday  ?

I  said  yes.

N.  B.  J.  Was  mama's  father  also  with  you  yesterday  1

Yesterday'.  Well  let  me  see  .  .  .  yesterday  .  .  why  yes  he
is  with  me  all  the  time,  and  he  is  well  aware  that  he  is
going  to  speak  some  day. I  .  .

N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  which  grandfather  sent  his  love  to  me

Why  dad  it  was  grandpa  J.  your  father  and  he  has  come
over  here  since  I  did. J. do  you  U.  D.

N.  B.  J.  No.
No.


Mrs.  J.


Wait  a  minute,  Bennie.


*


*


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  399

N.  B.  J.  Do  you  mean  grandpa  Junot  ?

Grandpa  Junot  I  said.

N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  but  grandpa  Junot  went  to  your  world  long  before
you  went  there.

but  when  I  spoke  of  the  grandpa  I  said  I  saw  him  when
he  came  and  so  I  did  dear  and  if  you  do  not  feel  so
troubled  pa  I  will  tell  you  all  about  it,— do  you  hear.

[See  note  below.]

B.  J.  Yes,  go  on.

(From  Eector.) Tell  the  young  lad  to  free  his  mind  now.
R.  H.  Bennie.
I  hear

R.  H.  We  shall  be  glad  for  you  to  free  your  mind  about  the
grandpa,  but  .  .  .

they  tell  me  to  think  it  over  when  my  thoughts  get  clear
again.

N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  do  you  remember  Aunt  Alice  Clark  1

Certainly,  I  told  you  something  about  her.

jS[.  B.  J.  Have  you  seen  her  children  over  in  your  world  1

In  the  spirit,  yes,  dear,  and  when  I  come  back  I  will  tell
you.

II.  B.  J.  Will  you  see  them  and  have  them  send  word  to  their
mother  ?

Yes,  I  will. Yes,  I  hear, But  I  cannot  think  dear.  Now

here  comes  the  Priest. What  will  I  do  ?
I  am  going  to  return.

*  *  *

[On  p.  386  Bennie  referred  for  the  first  time  to  "Grandpa."
Mrs.  J.,  who  at  that  moment  was  the  only  person  present
at  the  sitting,  assumed that  the  reference was to her  own


400


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


father  and  asked  a  question  implying  that  he  had  died  later
than  Bennie.  This  suggestion  was  accepted  by  tlie  com-
municator, who  did  not,  however,  make  any  statement  showing
to  which  of  his  grandfathers  he  had  referred.  At  a  later  stage
of  the  sitting  (p.  388)  he  speaks  again  of  "Grandpa,"  and  on
this  occasion  says  in  reply  to  a  question  that  lie  means
"  Grandpa  Junot."  "  I  looked  out  for  him  and  took  him  to
this  world."

At  the  sitting  of  March  6,  N.  B.  J.  informed  Bennie  that
Grandpa  Junot's  death  had  preceded  his  own  and  at  the  next
sitting  (see  below,  p.  401)  Bennie  says  that  "Grandpa  Junot
came  here  some  time  ago  and  since  then  I  iiave  seen  my
other  Grandpa."

It  seems  to  me  possible  that  it  was  Grandpa  Junot  that
Bennie  had  in  mind  when  he  first  alluded  to  "  Grandpa,"  but
that  his  statement  was  confused,  as  often  happens,  by  the
tendency  of  the  controls  to  acquiesce  in  the  sitter's  interpreta-
tion.—H.  de  G.  v.]

6th  Sitting.

March  7,  1900. Present:  Mr.  and  Mrs.  J.  and  R.H.
*  *  *

(Articles  given. Harmonica  placed  on  left  front  by  hand.)

(Bennie  communicating.)

Yes  I  hear  all  right,  do  not  feel  troubled  about  it.

Hello  dear  dad  is  that  you  dear. You  see  I  took  all  my

influences  with  me.
[At  end  of  previous  sitting  the  hand  fingered  some  of  the

articles  and  acted  as  if  "  drawing  some  influence "  from

them,  after  the  writing  ceased. — R.  H.]
And  I  am  better  now  and  perhaps  I  can  tell  you  more.
Just  you  talk  to  me  and  don't  mind  tliat  man.
Rector  knows  him. I  got  a  .  .  .

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

little  confused  about  grandpa  just  before  they  took  the  light
away.^


^See  p.  398.


LXI.]  Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  ivlth  Mrs.  Piper.  401
N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  understand.

Oh  I  am  glad.  Now  grandpa  Junot  came  here  some  time
ago.  So  did  grandma,  and  she  was  here  before  lie  was,
and  then  I  came  after  Cousin  May  and  then

R.  H.  "  before  he  was  "  ?

Yes,  I  mean  in  this  life,  not  in  the  body  life.

since  I  came  I  have  seen  my  other  grandpa  and  when  I  get
ready  I  will  tell  you  who  he  is  but  do  not  hurry  me
dear  because  I  am  thinking  very  fast,  and  do  you  .  .  .

R.  H.  "  talking  very  fast  "  1

thinking  I  said  sir. I  said  thinkinir  sir.

R.  H.  Thinking. Yes,  I  understand.  Clear.

Well,  you  must  be  all  right  but  I  cannot  seem  to  U.  D.  it.
Never  mind  I  will  go  on.  [Perhaps  from  Bennie  to
Rector  in  reply  to  some  statement  of  Rector  to  Bennie
upon  my  deciphering  talking  instead  of  thinking. — R.  H.]

Where  in  the  world  is  .  .  .  my  things  all  of  them  any  way.
I  told  you.  (Hand  makes  sudden  closure,  and  moves  a
little  towards  Mrs.  J.)

Hello,  mama,  dear,  I  just  spied  you  out.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

Were  you  here  all  the  time,  dear  1
Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  all  the  time.

Do  you  remember  Georgie  .  .  George.
Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  tell  me  more  about  him.

I  wanted  very  much  to  tell  you  I  have  seen  him.

N.B.J.  You  want  to  speak  to  me,  Bennie'! Do  you  want  dad  to
speak  1 You  go  on,  Bennie.

Well  I  will  dear.  I  know  perfectly  well  what  you  want  of
me  now,  because  Rector  told  me  .  .  Yes  and  I  think  if
I  .  .  .

do  you  remember  the  sore  tinoat  he  had  and  how  it
troubled  him.


402  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Berinie,  I  remember. (toN.  B.  J.)  George,  I  think.

[Mrs.  J.  took  this  to  refer  to  her  cousin  George  not  long
deceased.  He  had  some  throat  trouble,  but  it  was  not
thought  serious. — -N.  B.  J.]

Well  he  told  me  to  tell  you  and  .  .  .  before  I  left  and  I

forgot  it  because  I  was  ill  myself.
Now  I  am  all  right  and  so  is  he,  give  my  love  to  him

when  you  see  him  and  I  used  to  have  an  uncle  Gene.^

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  that's  right. That's  right,  go  on.

And  I  have  been  thinking  about  him  a  good  deal  Pa  since
I  last  spoke  to  you,  and  he  was  queer  wasn't  he.

]Sf.  B.  J.  Bennie,  do  you  remember  about  your  other  uncles ']

George. [Probably  G.  P.  arrives  at  this  point. — R.  H.]

R.  H.  Rector.

I  have  a  friend  here  at  this  moment  who  will  help  also.

R.  H.  If  Bennie  has  some  things  which  he  has  come  prepared  to
say,  perhaps  he  had  better  free  his  mind  of  these  first,
and  then  his  parents  can  ask  him  other  things  and  he
can  tell  about  his  experiences  when  he  was  in  the
material  body.

Yes. All  right,  he  seems  anxious  to  tell  all  he has  been

thinking  over  since  he  spoke  last.
Dad  do  you  remember  a  little  book  I  have  with  pictures

photographs  and  proofs  in  it  1
[We  have  this  photograph book. The  first  three  pages

contain  i)roofs. — N.  B.  J.]

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  remembered  that.

Well  some  day  will  you  put  it  on  the  little  table  in  my
room  and  you  and  mama  sit  there  for  me  to  come  to  you.

I  think  it  will  attract  and  help  me.  Mr.  George  -  says  so,
and  besides  do  you  remember  the  (Hand  makes  some
motion  touching  one  of  the  sitters,  I  think.)

1  «ee  p.  394.  =  G.  I".


LXI.]


Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  403


N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  go  on.
B  U  t  terfly

Mks.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  the  butterfly  was  in  Eoble's  room'?  (Hand


N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  Mama  says  that's  right.

Well  sit  or  have  Roble  put  it  where  I  can  see  it  when  I
come.

Dad  do  you  remember  the
Maples  where  I  put  a  little  seat

Mrs.  J.  I  don't  recall.  Probably.

I  am  not  sure  I  have  the  name  of  the  tree  but  you  know
.  .  but  ...  is  near  the  end  of  the  wall  down  almost  to
the  barn.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. In  the  spring  lot.

[Roble  remembers  the  seat  under  the  maple. Says  it  was

there  last  summer. — N.  B.  J.  J
All  right. Now  follow  me. And  do  you  remember  the  fun

we  used  to  have  in  putting  in  hay

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  remember.

Do  you  know  too (indicating  Mrs.  J.)

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  know.

Dear  mother,  I  cannot  help  telling  you  how  good  you  always

were  to  me. Can  you  see  me  dear  .  .
Oh  j'es  I  forgot  the  hay  and  the  rides  on  the  load  .
Oh  I  see  it  all  over  again.

And  I  also  see  the  new  part  of  the  barn,  do  you  remember


assents.)


that


N.  B.  J.


Yes,  Bennie,  go  on.


and  .  .  .  old  Spot  .  .  Spot
No  not  quite  but  I  mean


Mrs.  J.


Sport.


404


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


N.  B.  J.  That's  not  right.

I  mean  the  place  where  we  kept  the  horses.
R.  H.  The  old  spot.
N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

Did  you  say  yes,  dear.  Did  you  say  yes.  You  told  me  to
tell  you  about  the  farm,  dear.

[The  allusion  to  "Spot"  was  not  understood  at  the  time
but  we  have  a  large  Holstein  cow  called  Spot,  which
belonged  to  Bennie.  The  error  probably  arose  from  our
thinking  that  he  referred  to  one  of  our  dogs  named
Sport.— N.  B.  J.]  [The  fact  that  'Spot'  is  spelt  twice
ovei'  with  a  capital  S  makes  it  almost  certain  that  it
is  to  be  interpreted  as  a  name.  The  subsequent  con-
fusion shown  in  the  remark  "  I  mean  the  place  where
we  kept  the  horses "  is  probably  due  to  Mrs.  Piper's
subconscious  mind,  following  a  natural  association  of
ideas  in  its  attempt  to  explain  an  unrecognized  phrase. —
H.  de  G.  v.]

N.  B.  J.  That  is  right,  dear. Tell  about  your  pony.

Yes.  I  am  trying  to  think  all  about  him.  I  will  have  it
in  a  minute,  dear,  and  do  you  remember  the  little  brook
where  we  used  to  ride  down  to

N.  B.  J.  Yes. Yes,  Bennie,  go  on.

to  let  tliem  drink. And  we  went  over  the  .  .  .

Oh  let  me  tell  you  dear  .  .  do  you  remember  where  Roble

and  I  built  the  little  stone  wall  around  the  spring
We  put  about  a  dozen  there  and  one  flat  one

R.  H.  Bennie.

Oh  I  am  sure  I  know
R.  H.  First  rate,  Bennie. Your  father  will  find  out  from  Eoble.

Oh  doesn't  he  know.


Mrs.  J.  Yes


LXI.]  Report  ov  the  Junot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Piper.  405
N.  B.  J.  No,  I  do  not  remember,  Bennie.

Mrs.  J.  I  remember  you  and  Roble  used  to  play  about  the  creek.

Yes  of  course.  Well,  we  put  a  big  flat  stone  there  so  we
could  stand  on  it  and  not  get  wet.  Do  you  remember
this  at  all. If  you  do  not,  Roble  will,  I  know.

Mrs.  J.  I  have  an  indistinct  recollection  of  it. I  will  ask  Roble.

All  right  I  only  want  you  to  be  sure  I  am  not  out  of
mind  dear.

[Not  recalled  distinctly  by  Roble,  but  they  played  in  the

creek  every  summer. — N.  B.  J.]
And  dad  do  you  remember  the  new  stall  you  had  put  in

for  my  pony

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  that  is  right.
[This  is  correct. — N.  B.  J.]

I  do  wish  I  could  think  what  I  called  him. I  know  every
thing  so  well  before  I  speak,  then  I  lose  it  .  .  .  Helen
*  *  *

I  think  of  the  long  things  that  used  to  grow,  and  we  got
a  bunch  for  Helen  one  Sunday  before  we  went  home
and  she  took  them  home  with  her  tied  .  .  .  (pause)
tied  with  a  bit  of  ribbon  .  .  what  were  they  ma  .  .  long
brown  tops  .  .

Mrs.  J.  Cat  o'nine  tails. (Excitement  in  hand.)

Yes,  indeed,  that  is  just  what  they  were  dear  but  I  could
not  think  the  name. Do  you  remember  them  and  .  .  .

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  I  remember  them,  Bennie. You  got  them  for  Helen.

[This  is  very  distinctly  remembered by  all  the  family. —

N.B.  J.]
Yes  I  did."

And  now  let  me  see  who  Avas  it  we  called  Benjamin.
And  where  is  Frank,  give  him  my  love,  and  tell  him  I
think  of  him  often  and  the  good  times  we  used  to  have
[Frank  was  his  most  intimate  friend. — N.  B.  J.]
Now  I  am  going  for  a  moment. Will  you  wait  for  me  1


406


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. Yes. (Slight  pause. Hand  seems  to  indicate
new  communicator.)

*  *  *

Here  I  am  again. Just  got  straightened  out  a  little.
Now  I  wish  I  could  think  ...  do  you  remember  N  E  11
Yes,  now  I  am  not  going,  I  am  all  right  again.
She  is  going  .  .  that  lady  who  got  in  my  place.
How  I  wish  you  would  not  get  tired  dad,  it
Now can you help rae about the rod  .  .  fishing  rod,
at  ain.  .


R.  H.  Ask  him  to  say  what  he  is  thinking  about  his  fishing  rod,
and  .  .  .

(From  Rector.)  he  seems  to  think  that  a  brother  of  his  in
the  body  has  taken  it  away  and  put  some  thing  in  its
place.

R.  H.  Yes,  we'll  find  out  from  Roble.
You  do  not  really  know,  then?

N.  B.  J.  No,  we  do  not  remember  now.

Well do you remember what you have done  with  my

boat  .  .  .  truut  hooks
They  are  together,  the  rod  and  the  hooks  I  see  now.
How  is  Harry  ^  .  .  .  W  i  1  son

[Koble  suggests  that  the  reference  here  is  to  Wilson  D  ,

a  friend  of  Bennie's. — N.  B.  J.]

N.B.J,  (to  Mrs.  J.)  Harry  is  the  .... (not  heard)

Mrs.  J.  Bennie, I  think your  rod and boat  hooks  were  left  at
Osterville.

You  mean  the  farm. Well  I  know  but  don't  you  remember

where  I  used  to  sleep.
[He  has  fishing  rods  at  our  farm in the  West,  but  his

mother supposed  him  to  be  speaking  of  Cape  Cod.—

N.  B.  J.]

'See  p.  397.  =See  p.  .3.58.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  xvitli  Mrs.  Piper.  407

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. Do  you  mean  the  rods  you had  when  you
were  a  little  boy? Oh  yes,  I  remember  that.

Yes,  exactly.

Mrs.  J. Yes,  Bennie. I  don't  remember  where  I  put  them,  but  when
I  go  to  the  farm  I  will  look.

Yes,  I  will  be  glad.  I  am  not  worrying  about  them  only  I
want  you  to  know  I  have  not  forgotten  everything  dear.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  you  remember  better  than  I  do.

Well  I  don't  TJ.  D.  that  very  well,  but  I  think  I  would
rather  have  you  know  where  I  am  than  anything.
Are  you  happy  dad  dear.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  we're  happy  now,  since  we've  heard  from  you.

Are  you  going  to  get  worried  any  more  ?

K  B.  J.  Not  if  I  can  help  it.

Well  don't.  I  ask  you  not  to  worry  about  me.  I  asked
mama  that  many  times  befoi-e  I  came  here  and  I  want
you  to  say  you  won't. Speak,  dear. Say  you  will  not.

Mrs.  J.  I  will  not,  Bennie. I  will  not  worry  any  more.

And  will  you  tell  Roble  too

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  I  will  tell  Roble. Do  you  know  how  much  he  misses
you?

Yes,  I  do  indeed,  I  know  he  does,  and  I  only  hope  he  will
not  any  more.  It  troubles  me  to  have  you  worry,  and
it  is  the  only  thing  that  does  really  trouble  me  here.

I  know  so  well  when  you  do  worry,  dear,  and  no  one
could  know  better  than  I  do.

Mrs.  .T. Bennie,  I  will  try  not  to  worry.

Oh  I  will  be  glad,  but  when  I  tell  you  and  Pa  and  this
man  all  I  know,  I  will  not  have  to  be  troubled  any
more,  will  1 1


408


Helen  de  G.  VerralL  '  ■  •  '  •  [part


R.  H.  He  is  a  little  dreamy  now'?  ■ '  "

Yes,  and  going  for  a  moment.

Friend,  I  think  if  there  is  any  thing  we  can  do  we  will,  but
if  we  could  ask  thee  to  go  a  little  way  off"  for  a  time
it  might  help  us  to  keep  him.

(R.  H.  goes  out.)

+  We  will  now  prevent  confusion.
Come  back  .  .  . (Prolonged  pause.)
Yes  dad  here  I  am  again.

Mrs.  J. Yes,  Bennie,  what  will  you  say  to  me  1

I  will  tell  you  now  that  I  have  seen  you  and  dad  so  many
times  go  out  where  my  body  is  and  I  do  not  wish  you
to  think  of  me  as  being  there.

[We  often  drive  out  to  his  grave. — N.  B.  J.]

Dad  do  you  remember  M  a  jor  .  .

Mbs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  we  remember.  [A  great  friend  of  his  with
whom  he  went  fishing  a  great  deal. — N.  B.  J.]  (R.  H.
was  called.)

I  begin  to  think  again.
(R.  H.  returns.)

And  my  head  is  getting  clear  since  that  man  named  .  .  .

called  George  went  away  with  his  father.
That  is  thy  father  friend.

R.  H.  I  understand.

[Apparently  my  father  came  to  give  some  message  to  me,
and  G.  P.  took  him  away.  His  coming  or  his  presence
helped  to  confuse  Bennie. — R.  H.]

Mrs.  J.  I'd  like  to  ask  him  a  question.

Yes.

Now  tell  me  about  Major


Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  he  has  not  been  well  this  winter.  Can  you  tell
me  what  you  used  to  do  with  him  1  (Hand  points  over
to  right  front.)


LXi.] Report  on  the  J unot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Pijyer.  409

Yes  you  asked  me  before  dear  but  I  was  too  weak  to  tell
you I  used  to  fish  ^

Mes.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

I  tried  and  tried  to  tell  you  but  you  see  I  have  much  to
do  here.

Mama  do  you  remember  a  little  boy  who  came  here  before
I  did,  and  who  came  here  very  suddenly.  He  is  with
May  .  .

Ed  .  .  Ed  .  Ed  .  .  E  d  d  i  e .

Eddie  she  calls  him  all  the  time.  [Not  recognized. —
N.  B.  J.]

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  do  you  mean  a  boy  about  your  age  ?

I  do.
Mrs.  J.  Yes.

Ed  .  .  he  is  here  with  her  now  (Hand  points  over  to-
wards right  front.)

See  him  dear  ...  do  you  not  see  him  .  .  .  v/ith  May  .  .  .
(Hand  points  several  times.)

Ed  .  .  do  you  remember  a  very  little  one  who  came  here
soon  after  grandpa  .  .  b  .  .

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie. I  don't  remember,  Bennie.

but  it  was  a  little  girl  and  came  here  before  I  did  also

Yes  .  .  .  she  .  .  .  you know where and Will is  .  .  .

Cousin, and  Will  is  her  father.
Let  me  help  thee,  friend.

R.  H.  One  moment  please.  Rector.  Does  he  mean  that  there  is  a
little  girl  with  him  who  went  into  spirit  world  before
Bennie  1 2

Yes.

R.  H.  A  long  time  ago?

Yes  a  long  time  quite.

^  See  p.  397  ;  also  p.  .360,  where  fishing  was  wrongly  connected  with  'Harry.'
=^See  p.  496.

2d


410  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  ■  [part

R.  H.  Was  her  father  named  fnil  1
Yes,  he  was.

R.  H.  Does  Bennie's  father  or  mother  know  Will  ?
Yes,  both  very  well.

R.  H.  Does  Bennie  want  to  say  any  more  about  her  ?  They  do
not  j'et  at  this  moment  recall,  but  perhaps  will  do  so
later.

ask  them  if  they  remember  a  gentleman  by  that  name  who
used  to  teach.

Mrs.  J.  No,  I  can't  recall  him  now.

He  had  a  son  "\^"illie  who  went  to  school  with  this  young
man,  and  ask  the  gentleman  if  he  remembers  Atwood.

N.  B.  J.  No,  I  cannot  recall  Atwood.

Perhaps  R  will,  I  know  so  well,  and  .

(Hand  moves  towards  E,  H.)

this  is  all  right,  friend,  and  .  .  .  and

Lmorence

R.  H.  What  about  Lawrence  1
also  is  here.

[Lawrence  was  the  maiden  name  of  Cousin  May's  mother.
— N  B.  J.]

he  will  think  about  it  then  in  a  little  while.
Dad  do  you  remember  Lydia  ?

[Lydia  Atwell  (not  Atwood)  was  his  mother's  grandmother
dead  long  since  and  Maria  was  name  of  his  mother's
aunt.— N.  B.  J.]

N.  B.  J.  No,  Bennie,  I  do  not.

Nor  Marie

N.  B.  J.  No,  Bennie.


No  not  that  but  Maria  [1]


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  tvith  Mrs.  Piper.  411

R.  H.  Marie  ?
Mrs.  J.  Mamie?

M  a  n  ia  [V\
Mrs.  J.  Maria  1
N.  B.  J.  Do  you  mean  Maria  ?

I  am  telling  you  about  grandma.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  grandma's  .  .  .  mother's  name  was  Lydia.

Well  why  do  you  not  remember,  here  dear  they  are  all
here  now,  and  all  .  .  .

N.  B.J.  (to  Mrs.  J.)  .  .  .  .

Mrs.  J.  Atwell.

.  .  they  all  know  you  so  well  dearest  and  feel  it  because
you  do  not  speak  to  them.

I  found  them  and  asked  them  to  help  me  to  see  you,  dear,
and  Lydia,  Lawrence  .  .  Lawrence  and  Mama  (Read
first  with  ordinary  pronunciation  of  Mama,  —  dissent  —
then  as  Mama  —  assent.) all  send  love  to  you.

Do  you  not  know  them  now.

Mrs.  J.  Not  ver}'  clearlj^,  Bennie.

Well  I  hope  it  will  come  back  to  thee  p]
Dear friend as  +  has taken special  care to help  these
friends  to  find  thee I  am  back  all  .  .  .

R.  H.  Yes,  Rector.  Whatever  they  say  will  be  enquired  into
most  carefully,  .  .  .  but  the  friends  here  with  me  do
not  seem  to  recognize  these  fully.  They  will  be  glad
to  take  any  messages.  Can  they  give  their  names  or
further  relationship  1

Well,  one  is  Bennie's  grandma  and  the  other  is  an  aunt  .  .
the  other  is  .  .  .

a  son  Ed  E  .  .  .  cousin  of  the  (Difficulty  in  decipher-
friend  the  light  is  fading


412


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


(Waking  Stage.)

All  right.

There's  a  young  ....  young  man.

Hallo,  sir ! Can  .  .  .  Can  you  come  with  me  1

Sh  ! Don't  talk  so  fast.

That's  Rector,  sure  !

That's  -  er  .  .  .  That's  .  .  er  .  .  That  was  a  bunch  of
violets,  and  the  young  man  with  the  light  hair's  got
them.

Who's  the  old  lady^

*  *  *

7th  Sitting.

March  19,  1900.  Present:  R.H.

(Bennie  communicating.)

Well,  dad,  dear,  are  you  aware  that  I  went  with  you  and
mamma  the  day  before  this  to  see  the  old  lot  and

and  its  earthly  mound  [1] [Not  understood. — N.  B.  J.]

Well  I  heard  all  you  said,  but  do  not  feel  disturbed  about
me  any  more  or  in  any  way  because  I  am  better  than
you  can  possibly  know.

(Hand  makes  several  curious  slight  jerks  in  my  direction.)

Are  you  dad's  friend'?

R.  H.  Yes,  Bennie.  Your  father  is  well  known  to  me,  and  he  is
looking  forward  to  receiving  your  messages  to  him  and
your  mother  through  me.  He  will  write  you  a  letter,
and  another  time  when  I  get  it,  I  shall  read  it  to  you,
and  I  hope  also  from  your  mother.  But  you  remember
that  this  is  near  Boston,  and  they  must  write,  and  letters
will  take  time.

Is  Boston  East  of  West  ....  oh  yes  I  remember,  well  I
U.  D.  all  right I  have  much  to  tell  them  all.

R.  H.  Good.

You  are  a  friend  I  know  and  I  will  just  free  my  mind,

that  is  what  I'll  do
(Hand  moves  in  direction  of  bag  on  floor,  which  contains

parcel  of  Bennie's  things. I  place  them  on  table.)


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  tvith  Mrfi.  Piper.  413

R.  H.  Your  father  left  some  of  your  things  with  me.

(The  A.  L.  cast  and  the  harmonica  taken  and  placed  on  left

side  of  block-book.)
Tell  Mama  I  saw  her  take  .  .  .

my  photo  after  she  went  home  and  put  it  up  over  her
desk

and  say  Bennie  are  you  with  me  dear. I  want  you  to  see

me  and  come  and  tell  me  all  about  it.
[Did  put  his  photograph — but  words  not  correct. — N.  B.  J.]
Ask  dad  if  he  remembers  the  day  we  went  out  in  the
woods  and  got  the  fern  for  Mama  and  ask  him  if  he
will  try  find  the  rods  I  spoke  of.^  I  thought  I  heard
my  brother  say  they  had  been  gone  for  some  time,  is
that  so  ?

[Statement  about  ferns  correct — and  brother  did  say  on
inquiry  by  father  that  the  fishing  rods  had  been  taken
away  some  time  ago. — N.  B.  J.]

K.  H.  I  shall  tell  you,  Bennie,  as  soon  as  I  hear.  Your  father's
notes  have  not  reached  me  yet.

Well,  he  is  busy  and  he  will  do  all  he  can  for  you  and  me.
He  is  one  of  best  fathers  in  your  world.  I  thought
I  would  try  and  tell  mama  who  was  with  me,  but  I
could  not  make  her  U.  D.  me  quite.  Will  you  give  her
my  dearest  love  and  tell  her  what  I  meant  when  I  said
those  names  to  her.

R.  H.  Yes,  Bennie.  Your  parents  understood  afterwards  that  you
were  bringing  the  friends  and  relatives  with  whom  you
are,  so  to  say,  staying  at  present.  At  first  they  did  not
quite  see,  and  they  were,  as  you  will  understand,  anxious
to  get  all  they  could  M'ith  you.

Oh  yes  it  is  all  right  only  I  would  not  do  anything  if  I

knew  it  to  disturb  them  in  any  way.

I  only  want  them  to  know  I  am  perfectly  well  cared  for  and

very  happy  here.

R.  H.  Yes.  (pause.)


See  p.  397.


414


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


I  think  grandma  Atwell  ^  would  be  glad  to  know  that  I  did
what  she  asked  me  to  do,  and  I  will  tell  her  as  soon  as
I  get  through.

Ask  dad  if  he  sees  the  Major  to  give  him  my  love  and  tell
him  I  have  seen  his  father  over  here  and  ask  him  if  he
remembers  Thomas.

R.  H.  Yes. I  will  .  .  .

and  his  sister  is  Mary  Ellen.

[Extract  from  N.  B.  J.'s  letter  Nov.  14,  1900:  "The  Major
said  that  he  had  an  uncle  Thomas  who  died  long  ago,
also  two  sisters  dead,  one  named  Ellen  and  one  named
Mary  Ann."]

I  will  now  tell  you  that  I  have  not  forgotten  any  thing  I
ever  did,  but  it  will  take  me  some  time  to  tell  you  what
I  remember.

I  had  in  my  pocket-book  a  little  ten  cent  script  paper,  very
old,  [He  had  a  very  old  ten  cent  script  but  it  was  found
in  his  cabinet  along  with  old  coins. — N.  B.  J.]

one  had  for  a  very  long  time.  Will  you  ask  dad  what  he
did  with  it

R.  H.  Yes. 1  will,  and  let  you  know.

and  two  old  coins.

I  wish  Helen  to  have  the  coins  and  the  script  for  dad  to
keep.

Yes  I  think  it  is  pocket  book  he  gave  me  one  Christmas.

R.  H.  Yes.

When  I  was  quite  a  little  boy  Yes.
Is  pneumonia  dangerous  do  you  think  1
Well  I  am  only  telling  you.

[Perhaps  this  is  meant  to  imply  that  pneumonia  was  the
cause  of  communicator's  death  (see  p.  386,  where  sitter
suggested  that  a  cold  was  the  beginning  of  his  sickness).
If  so,  the  implication  is  not  correct.  He  died  of  con-
gestion of  the  brain. — H.  de  G.  V.]

I  will  go  in  and  get  my  cap.  Wait  a  moment.  I  will  be
back  soon. B  .  Yes.

[The  last  few  sentences  suggest  that  he  was  losing  conscious-
ness.— R.  H.]
^  See  p.  411,  where  this  name  was  mentioned  by  sitters.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Jimot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Piper.  415

(G.  P.  communicating.)  Hello,  H.  I  am  here  helping  out  a
little.

*  *  *

Here  comes  Prudens  with  B Adieu,  George.

R.  H.  Adieu  for  present,  George,  thanks.

(Bennie  communicating.)  Tell  Eoble  he  may  have  my  grey
suit  if  it  will  fit  him.  I  do  not  need  it  now.  And  when
he  sees  it  think  of  me.

[He  left  a  grey  suit  which  was  a  favourite  with  him. —
N.  B.  J.]

I  have  often  tried  to  tell  dad  about  the  long  shore  man  ^
but  I  never  could  think  of  him  when  I  wished  to  most.
He  will  know  what  I  mean  and  before  I  get  through
I  will  tell  you  all  about  him.

Now  I  am  thinking  of  the  SUNDAY  FPtANK  ROBLE
and  myself  went  out  to  the  camp  ground  and  heard
Mercer  preach. Ask  Roble if  he  remembers  it.  U.

Yes,  we  got  home  rather  late  and  I  went  over  to  Howes
afterwards  .  .  .

[Not  recognized. — N.  B.  J.]

What  has  he  done  with  the  new  oar  locks [Not  under-
stood fully.— N.  B.  J.]
and  the  Butterfly  Net [Not  understood  fully. — N.  B.  J.]

H.  H.  Yes,  is  this  for  Pi-oble  1
Yes.

I  am  thinking  of  so  many  things  I  wish  to  tell  you.

H.  H.  Yes,  it's  all  right.

It  was  I  who  killed  the  snake  down  in  the  meadow  and
put  him  on  the  rock  to  dry  in  the  sun  when  we  went
for  the  hay.

[Not  recalled.— N.  B.  J.]

You  may  not  know  about  these  but  my  brother  and  father
will.

R.  H.  Yes,  this  is  first  rate,  Bennie.  That  is  just  what  will  please
father  and  mother  so  much.  They  will  be  so  de-
lighted for  you  to  tell  them  these  incidents  of  your  life

1  See  p.  428.


6  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

in  the  body,  because  that  makes  them  feel  so  sure  that
you  are  there  telling  them  and  often  with  them,  and
are  your  ver}^  own  self.

Well,  I  am  glad  too.

I  am  my  very  own  self,  and  no  one  else,  and  you  should
see  the  kindly  men  who  are  teaching  me  how  to  find
the  way  to  speak  clearly.  You  would  be  as  glad  as  I
am  to  do  just  what  I  am  doing.

here  my  words  form  in  the  Gloria  and  they  speak  them
out  for  me.

Now  what  has  George  Sargent  ['?]  got  to  do  with  those
rods  any  way.

*  *  *

(Explanation  from  Rector  that  '  the  Gloria '  means  '  the
light.')

Do  ask  all  my  questions  and  I  will  do  a  great  deal  for
you.

I  can  hear  the  Piano  going  now,  is  it  Helen  (11.26  a.m.)
yes  it  is I  must  help  her  all  I  can.

[On  the  afternoon  of  March  19,  R.  H.  sent  the  following
telegram  to  Mrs.  Junot :

"Was  Helen  playing  piano  about  twenty-five  minutes  past
eleven  this  morning.

Hodgson  "

He  received  the  following  reply  from  Mrs.  J.,  which  was
delivered  at  his  office  the  next  morning :

"  Helen  was  playing  piano  this  morning  about  quarter  or  half
past  eleven.

K.  H.  Junot."]

[Extract  from  letter  from  N.B.J,  of  March  19,  1900.

"  Helen  is  usually  in  school  in  the  mornings,  but  this  morn-
ing she  had  a  cold  and,  as  the  weather  was  bad,  she
was  allowed  to  stay  home,  and  from  about  10.30  to
11.301  giie  -yy.^g  playing  on  the  piano."]

This  time  covers  the  hour  at  which  Bennie's  message  was  given,  allowing
the  difference  between  Boston  and  C time.  —  H.  de  G.  V.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  tvith  Mrs.  Piper.  417


I  do  not  like  Algebra  very  well,  but  if  I  have  to  do  it  I
will. I  told  Mama  that  I  should  be  able  to  go  again
next  year  to  the  farm.
Queer  she  did  not  remember  the  Smiths. They  were  queer

people  I  used  to  think. ^
I  found  a  hornet's  nest  on  a  birch  limb
And  took  the  pitch  fork  and  hooked  it  down.
[Not  recalled,  though  probable. — N.  B.  J.]
Such  fun  as  Roble  and  I  used  to  have  you  never  saw.

R.  H.  Yes,  I  used to  have  jolly  times  myself,  Bennie,  when  I
was  a  young  fellow.

Did  you,  did  you  have  a  brother  like  mine  ?

R.  H.  I  have  a  brother  about  seven  years  younger  than  myself.

One  of  my  chums  when  I  was  your  age  was  my  cousin
Fred.  Ask  Rector  to  introduce  him  to  you,  and  he  can
tell  you  about  some  of  the  fun  we  used  to  have.

Well  I  will, that  will  be  fine  for  me. He  perhaps  can
help  me.

Well  I  am  awfully  glad  I  know  you.
I  love  music  dearly,  do  you  .  .  .

R.  H.  Yes,  1  used  to  play  the  violin.

Oh  yes  jolly. King  of  instruments.

R.  H.  Yes.

Well,  we  have  great  music  here  1  tell  you,  can  j'ou  hear
it  at  all.

R.  H.  No,  my  senses  are  too  shut  in.

Well,  that  is  too  bad,  can  1  do  any  thing  for  you  ?

R.  H.  1  fear  not,  thank  you. I  must  wait  till  1  get  to  your
side.

Oh  yes  well  that  will  be  all  right  then  won't  it.  Yes.
Well,  I  begin  to  U.  D.  better  I  think. You  are  in  the

body. That  is  it. All  right. Now  let  me  tell  you  all

I  can  before  I  get  too  weak.  (Pause.)

'  See  p.  386.


418


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


It  was  not  Sport  nor  Daisy  but  Dandy  ^  I  was  thinking
about  .  .

Ask  Dad  if  lie  can't  remember  him,
R.  H.  Yes.

And  ask  him  if  he  remembers  the  fern  pot  we  made  and

put  out  at  the  corner  of  the  house.
[Not  remembered. — N.  B.  J.]

Did  you  see  my  watch  anywhere  1  It  was  on  the  side  of
bed.

R.  H.  I  will  ask.
before  I  left.

Wait  a  moment. One  more  thing  before  I  go  away.

Do  not  forget  to  see  that  they  find  out  about  the  fiat
stone  E.  and  I  put  near  the  little  spring  at  the  creek,
yes  .  .  also  the  ones  we  piled  up  in  a  kind  of  well  like
form.^

[Not  remembered  by  lioble,  but  they  plaj^ed  much  at  the

creek.— N.  B.  J.]
Ask  mama  if  she  remembers  a  kind  of  moss  we  used  to

get  with  little  red  tops  on  it  for  .  .
[This  is  well  remembered  and  accurate. — N.  B.  J.]
Helen  liked  the  little  red  caps  like,  I  remember  them  so

well. I  .  .

[This  is  well  remembered  and  accurate. — N.  B.  J.]
Ask  Roble  if  he  remembers  SCRUB.

[Not  understood  or  recognized  by  parents,  but  instantly
recognized  as  their  name  for  a  game  they  played  often,
when  read  by  Roble. — N.  B.  J.]

I  am  going  now.

R.  H.  Thanks,  Bennie. The  ne.xt  time  you  come  I  hope  to  have
some  letters  from  your  father  and  mother.

Well  before  I  go  I  wish  to  tell  you  I  often  see  every  thing
they  do  and  I  am  going  to  try  and  count  out  the  days
so  I  can  know  which  day  I  see  them  doing  things  on.

I  do  not  know  as  it  will  be  possible  but  I  can  try  at  least.

What  is  your  leal  name  if  you  do  not  mind  telling  me
before  I  get  too  far  away.

iSee  p.  .39-2,  also  below,  p.  419.  ^See  p.  404.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  419


R.  H.  My  name  is  Richard  Hodgson  .  .  Hodgson.

Not  HUDSON
R.  H.  No,  indeed.

but  HOD...  spell  it  again.

R.  H.  Hodgson (Articles  held  up  by  hand,  as  if  to  help  B  to
stay  a  little  longer.)

HODGSON

R.  H.  That's  right.

Good. I  won't  forget  it.

(Waking  Stage.)

*  *  *

There's  the  young  man  with  the  light  hair  in  the  light  of

the  spirit  world.
All  itchy (scratching  back  of  left  hand  with  right.)
Prudens,  George,  Bennie,  and  Lydia.^

*  *  *

[The  name  Dandy  was  not  recognized  at  the  time,  the
sitters  supposing  that  the  eommuuicator  was  attempting  to
give  the  name  of  another  dog  called  Don  (see  pp.  392  and
431).  In  a  letter  to  Dr.  Hodgson  however,  written  on
Nov.  24,  1900,  N.  B.J.  says:

"  You  may  remember  that  Bennie  in  speaking  about  the  dogs
named  one  as  Daisy  and  afterwards  said  that  it  was  '  Dandy.'
A  few  evenings  ago  we  started  his  uncle  Willie  upon  the
subject  of  our  children's  various  dogs.  He  is  a  dog  lover
and  all  our  dogs  had  come  to  us  through  him.  Without
knowing  why  we  inquired  he  gave  our  dog  history — stating
among  other  things  that  the  first  dog  our  children  ever  had
was  '  Dandy.'  This  was  when  Bennie  was  a  very  little  boy.
It  was  in  the  sitting  of  March  19,  1900,  that  he  corrected
the  name  from  Daisy  to  Dandy,  and  March  6th  said  it  was
'  when  I  was  a  little  fellov/.'  Neither  Mrs.  J.  or  myself
remember  anything  about  this  dog.  Long  after  the  sitting  we
recalled  that  they had had  a  dog  named  Don  at  one  time

iSee  p.  410.


420


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


and  I  think  that  I  wrote  you  that  Dan  probably  should  be
read  Don.  There  is  no  doubt  but  that  the  Uncle's  statement
is  correct  and  exact."]

8th  Sitting.

March  27,  1900.  Present:  B.  H.

(Bennie  communicating.)

Well  well  did  you  know  that  I  am  beginning  to  see  you
more  clearly  friend. It  is  I  Bennie.

R.  H.  Well,  Bennie,  do  you  want  to  tell  me  first  anything  that
you  have  ready,  or  .  .  .

(Hand  points  to  where  I  had  letter  on  chair  from  Mrs.
Junot.)

R.  H.  Read  ?

Yes,  dad's  letter  to  me  oh  do. Oh  I  will  do  all  I  possibly
can  to  help  liim  to  know  where  I  am  dear  friend.

R.  H.  Yes.  Bennie,  I  have  a  short  letter  from  your  mother,  and  I
think  that  your  father  must  have  sent  his  letter  to  my
office  instead  of  to  my  own  rooms.  So  I  will  read  your
mother's.

It  will  make  me  just  as  happy,  but  you  told  me  you  would
didn't  you  %

R.  H.  Yes.  I  thought  I  would  have  had  your  father's,  but  you
know  it  is  a  long  way  off.

Yes  from  Boston

R.  H.  Yes.

Yes  all  right  I  hear  and  it  is  all  right.

R.  H.  (reads)  "  My  dear  Bennie  :

As  I  shall  not  have  an  opportunity  to  talk
with  you  again  for  some  time,  perhaps  a  very  long  time,
I  want  you  to  send  me  a  message  b}'  Dr.  Hodgson  who


LXI.] Report  on  the  Jimot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  421


has  very  kindly  consented  to  receive  it  and  send  it  to
me.

Tell  me  of  some  incident  which  happened  during  the
last  year  of  your  life  on  earth  with  us,  either  during  the
summer  vacation  or  the  winter  before.  I  know  that  it  is
you,  but  I  should  like  to  have  something  which  would
be  a  strong  proof  of  your  identity  to  other  members
of  the  family.  I  have  not  yet  verified  all  that  you
told  me  when  I  last  talked  with  you,  but  some  of  the
incidents  I  remember  well,  particularly  that  of  the  cat
o'nine-tails,  and  I  well  remember  how  you  and  Roble
used  to  play  at  the  creek.  Do  you  remember  how  I
always  said  to  you  '  Be  a  good  boy  ? '  Well,  Bennie,
dear,  still  be  a  good  boy  and  some  day  we  shall  all  meet
together  and  be  even  happier  than  we  were  when  you
were  with  us  on  earth.

Your  loving  mother."

(Hand  assented  and  showed  emotion  at  several  places,
especially  at  the  "Be  a  good  boy.")

Oh  that  has  helped  me  so  much,  my  dear  good  friend  and
tell  her  God  knows  we  will  all  meet  again  here  in  His
presence  and  be  happier  than  she  can  ever  know  until
she  comes  and  tell  her  when  she  does  I  will  watch  for
her  and  be  at  the  door  with  my  arms  open  to  meet  her
and  show  her  where  to  go.  I  am  so  conscious  of  all  that
takes  place  with  her  that  it  is  like  being  with  her  all  the
time,  even  though  she  cannot  U.  D.  it.

I  have  been  thinking  of  Uncle  Gene  a  good  deal  of  late  and
wonderina;  if  he  was  comins;  over  here  to  meet  me  soon.
I  shall  know  before  he  does  come.

[Uncle  Gene  is  an  uncle  who  is  very  fond  of  young  people
and  to  whom  Bennie  was  much  attached. — N.  B.  J.]

Ask  Mama  if  she  remembers  just  before  we  went  on  our
vacation  of  our  riding  out  to  South  Park  one  Sunday
afternoon  on  horseback  and  I  got  off  and  tightened  up
my  saddle  and  then  we  sat  down  .  .

wait  a  moment  .  .  .

and  then  she  go

I  helped  her  get  off  and  we  sat  down  on  one  of  [the]  seats
and  .  .  sat  there  a  few  minutes  and  talked,  then  we  got
back  into  the  saddle  and  rode  out  to  the  side  of  the


422


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


Park. I  met  Frank  and  bowed,  then  we  got  some  pieces


the  OAK  the  fancy  white  OAK

[Above  statements  about  the  ride  are  not  correct. — N.  B.  J.]
I  do  not  really  remember  the  right  name,  but  it  was  very

handsome with little white things growing on  their

leaves,  like  hollow  apples.
Do  you  know  at  all  what  I  am  thinking  about  1

R.  H.  I  don't  think  I  do.

What  are  the  little  things  which  grow  on  the  oak  .  .  .
R.  H.  You  don't  mean  mistletoe  ? (Hand  dissents.)

No  not  at  all.

R.  H.  Acorns  1

No,  but  a  kind  of  hollow  false  burr
tell  her,  she  will  I  know  remember.

R.  H.  Yes.

And  I  took  them  home  and  pinned  them  in  my  room  over
the  bureau.

I  saw  a  woman  take  them  all  down  one  d&y  since  I  left
home,  and  here  is  one  more  thing  I  remember.  Ask
her  if  she  remembers  any  thing  about  Edna  and  if  so
what  she  asked  me  about  her.

[Not  understood,  unless  the  reference  is  to  a  name  which  an


old  colored  servant  gave  to  his  sister  Helen  when  she
was  a  baby.  This  servant  called  Helen  "Edna."  He
is  in  the  habit  of  giving  the  children  and  dogs  and
horses  names  to  suit  himself,  but  he  has  not  used  the
name  for  her  for  about  ten  years. — N.  B.  J.]


I  have  no  idea  what  Roble  will  say  when  he  hears  how  I
gave  things  away  about  him.


of


R.  H,


Yes.


R.  H,


Yes.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Jimot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Pijoer.  423


I  wonder  if  lie  will  like  it.  Tell  him  I  only  do  so  because
I  want  him  to  know  me.  And  ask  him  if  he  can  play
on  a  Jew's  harp  yet. or  the  bones.

[Not  recalled  or  understood. — N.  B.  J.]

R.  H.  I  will.

Ask  him  if  he  remembers  the  one  I  gave  him,  I  mean  harp.
R.  H.  Yes.

And  if  he  won't  laugh  to  think  how  he  played  on  the  boat
one  evening  with  me  while  I  played  the  harmonica.  It
was  the  last  time  we  ever  went  out  in  the  evening
together  on  the  boat  if  I  remember  rightly.

George  somebody  says  wait  a  moment.  I'll  be  here  in  a
moment.

(Hand moves as if  looking  for something. I  produce

articles. Cap  taken  and  clutched  and  held  up.)
I  saw  my  cap  and  came  back  soon  to  tell  you  that  Allie

Clark  is  here  with  me  now  and  sends  love  to  sister

Alice  ^  in  the  body
" Do  you  remember  dad  dear  any  thing  about  uncle  Thomas

and  how  he  looked
[Not  understood  at  all. No  Thomas  in  family  connexions

at  any  time. — N.  B.  J.] [Perhaps  some  confusion  over

the  'Thomas'  mentioned  in  connexion  with  the  Major.

See  p.  414.— H.  de  G.  V.]
if  you  see  Ernest  tell  him  Allie  sends  .  .  .  also  .  .  love
[Ernest  and  Alice  not  known. — N.  B.  J.]
Do  you  think  I  will  be  better  able  to  keep  my  thoughts

clear  soon  and  not  jump from  one  thing  to  another.

[The  communicator  seems  conscious  himself  that  he  is

not  clear  at  this  point. — H.  de  G.  V.]

R.  H.  Yes,  Bennie.  You  will  be  better  later  on.  I  shall  see  you
next  time,  you  know,  once  more,  I  think  to-morrow,  and
you  will  be  clearer  then  even  than  now.

Well  that  is  just  what  this  man  George  told  me.

^The  reference  here  is  probably  to  "Aunt  Alice  Clarke"  (see  p.  399),  but
the  statement  is  confused.


424


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


R.  H.  Yes.

And  I  begin  to  feel  at  home  with  you  ah'eady.
R.  H.  That's  first-rate.

(Hand  touches  sjnir  and  shakes  it  gently.)

Tell  mama  I  did  not  think  to  tell  her  I  did  not  eat  over
here,  and  ask  her  if  she  remembers  the  day  I  went  with
the  boys  and  got  some  .  .  .  now  what  is  that  name  .  .  .
can  you  help  me  oh  dear  if  I  do  not  tell  her  that  she
won't  really  know  it  is  I  .  .  .  they  grow  in  a  meadow
and  are  red  and  very  acid

...GRAIN  BERRIESi

R.  H.  "  Grain  berries "  .  .  Grain .?

No  that  isn't  just  what  they^  were.

R.  H.  Bennie,  I  think  I  know  what  you  mean  exactly,  but
perhaps  if  you  can  get  the  name  yourself  it  might  be
better. Do  you  mean  the  ones  that  grow  in  bogs'?

Yes  I  do  and  they  grow  not  far  from  where  we  used  to  get
our  hay,  but  I  think  I  am  a  little  weak  some  way
and  .  .  .

R.  H.  Bennie,  don't  mind  about  it  now.  Tell  me  next  time.  I
think  I  know  quite  well  what  you  want,  and  perhaps
you  don't  get  the  exact  sound  or  you  find  it  hard  to
convey  it  to  Rector. Never  mind,  it's  all  right.

I  will  think  it  over  .  .

R.  H.  Do  you  mean  what  we  make  up  into  a  sort  of  preserve
and  eat  with  turkey'?  (Excitement.)

Yes  I  do  just  those  and  I  will  think  about  it  and  when
they  let  me  return  I  will  tell  you.

R.  H.  Good. That's  all  right.

I  do  not  think  I  can  stay  here  much  longer,  my  friends
here  tell  me  I  may  stay  a  long  time  with  you  and
think  over  all  I  wish  to  tell  you  the  next  time.

^  See  pp.  426  and  470.


hXL] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Pi-per.  425


R.  H.  Yes,  so  you  can.

he  who  is  helping  me  is  calling  me  to  take  my  influences
and  give  it  up  for  now.

R.  H.  Yes,  quite  right.

I  am  very  glad  to  thank  you  for  all  you  are  doing  for  me.

R.  H.  Bennie, all  right,  you  are  welcome. See  you  to-morrow.

Bring  remembrances  to  tell  your  father  and  mother  and
Eoble  and  Helen  and  anything  that  occurs  to  you,  and
we  shall  have  a  good  lontr  talk  to2;ether.

Don't  forget  to  ask  them  about  the  coy  Ducks
Crood  bye  B.

R.  H.  " coy  ducks " ?

• C  .  .

R.  H.  "  the  decoy  ducks  "  perhaps,  decoj'.

[Not  recalled  or  understood  at  all. — N.  B.  J.]  [A  corres-
pondent suggests  that  this  may  be  a  mistake  for  '  codac,'
see  p.  395.— H.  de  G.  V.]

*  *  -f


9th  Sitting.
March  28,  1900.  Present:  R.  H.


(Bennie  writes.^)

(Movements  in  hand,  not  violent,  suggesting  new  control.
Same  pencil  given.  Fingers  feel  it,  place  it  on  block-
book,  so  that  it  lies  flat  on  book,  lift  it  up  and  down  a
little,  tapping  various  times  with  it  lengthways  trans-
versely across  book,  then  raise  it  and  cast  it  to  the  front
across  the  room.  Fresh  pencil  offered,  not  accepted,  but
hand  pats  block  book  over,  round  the  edges  and  over
surface  with  hand  slightly  hollowed,  palm  down,  patting
with  distal  joints  of  fingers.  Then  hand  is  held  up  as
if  the  back  were  being  inspected  by  some  one  just  behind
it,  then  turned  round  as  if  showing  the  palm  for  inspection,

^This  is  the  only  time  during  tiiese  sittings  that  Bennie  himself  acts  as
control.

2  E


426


Helen  ds  G.  Verrall.


[part


then  bent  backwards  and  forwards  at  the  wrist,  all  as  if
for  the  inspection  of  a  person  just  behind.  Finally  the
hand  took  up  the  ordinary  writing  position  on  the  block-
book.  The  time  occupied  by  these  movements  was  about
from  three  to  five  minutes.  I  was  about  to  place  the  fresh
pencil  in  the  usual  place,  between  first  and  second  fingers,
but  the  hand  moved  a  little,  as  if  rejecting  that  position,
and  seized  the  pencil  between  the  second  and  third
fingers,  so  that  it  passed  between  the  proximal  joints  of
the  second  and  third  fingers  and  was  held  near  the  point
by  the  ends  of  thumb  and  first  finger. — R  H.)

Yes,  here  I  am  Bennie  and  He  is  teaching  me  how  to  speak,
this  is  a  queer  place  I  think  and  I  am  wondering  how  I
got  here  with  you. I  feel  quite  happy  to  know  I  can
come  myself.
•  I  am  Bennie  and  you  are  Mr.  Hod  g  son.

They  tell  me  I  am  doing  well.  '  '

R.  H.  Yes,  very  good  indeed,  Bennie.  First-rate.

I  am  oh  so  glad  to  see  you  here  and  tell  you  about  the
Cranberries  ,  .

R.  H.  Yes.

I  got  in  my  hat.

R.  H.  Bennie,  did  you  gather  the  cranberries  in  your  hati

gather  them  in  my  hat  .  .  yes  I  did,  and  took  brought  them

home  in  my  hat  .  .  .
[These  statements  about  the  cranberries  were  not  understood

at  the  time,  but  see  note  on  p.  470. — H.  de  G.  V.]
tell  me  if  you  hear  me,  do  you  hear  me  or  do  you  see  me

or  how  do  you  do  'i

R.  H.  Suppose  that  you  went  to  see  a  lady  when  you  were  in  the
body.  And  she  went  hito  what  looked  something  like
sleep.  Now  suppose  while  she  was  resting  her  head  on
cushions,  her  right  hand  showed  signs  of  intelligence,  and
you  i)ut  a  pencil  in  it,  and  the  hand  should  begin  to
write  on  paper,  a  block-book  which  you  place  under  the
hand. Now  that  is  just  what  hapjjens.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  ivitli  Mrs.  Piper.  427

Well  that  is  queer  too  because  I  hear  you  and  I  see  you
ver}'  clearly  and  I  talk  to  you  because  I  am  using  my
own  mind  and  I  see  just  what  you  are  wishing  me  to  do.

R.  H.  Yes.

Yes  I  like  you  pretty  well  already  because  I  think  you  are
■  a  friend  of  dad's  aren't  you'?

R.  H.  Yes.  I  .  .  .  (Hand  starts  to  write,  turns  to  Spirit^  then  to
me  to  listen.)

R.  H.  Shall  I  read  his  letter  to  you  or  do  you  wish  first  to  tell
anything  special  yourself?

I  would  like  to  hear  from  him  as  it  may  help  me  to  think

more  clearly  than  I  do  now.
Did  you  hear  that  spirit  tell  me  to  look  up  when  He  spoke

to  me  ? (To  look  up  apparently  corresponds  to  stretching

up  the  hand  to  Spirit.)

R.  H.  No. (I  reach  for  Mr.  Junot's  letter.)

He  tells  me  to  keep  Cjuiet  and  hear  you.  Well  tell  me
something.

R.  H.  Your  father  writes  to  you.  He  meant  me  to  get  this  before
I  came  here  the  last  time,  I  think,  but  I  found  it  after
I  got  back  to  where  I  live. He  says  :

"  Dear  Bennie,

I  have  just  returned  from  a  visit  to  Aunt  AHce.
I  went  to  see  her  because  Uncle  Frank  is  very  sick  and
likely  to  pass  over  into  your  world  soon.  While  down
there  I  went  out  to  the  old  farm  and  had  a  beautiful
day.  I  saw  your  pony  Walter.  He  is  getting  old  but
is  fat  and  cheerful.  Can  you  not  remember  and  tell  Dr. .
Hodgson  " — that's  myself — "  who  it  was  who  gave  Walter
to  you  when  you  and  the  pony  were  each  only  5  years
old.

Roble  says  he  well  remembers  the  seat  that  you  made
by  the  maple  trees  up  near  the  locust  grove."  (Excitement)

Dear  dad. G-o  on.

^  The  hand  of  the  medium  sometimes  stretches  forward,  as  though  to  some  one
standina"  in  front  of  her. — H.  de  G.  V.


428

R.  H.  Yes.


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


excuse  me  if  I  weep  it  is  only  with  joy.

R.  H.  All right, Bennie. Roble "  says it was still there  last
summer,"  the  seat.
"  Also  Roble  says  that  '  Scrub '  was  the  name  of  the  game
of  ball  that  you  played  so  much."

Did  you  not  see  me  throw  one  when  I  came  in
[Perhaps  this refers to the throwing  of the pencil  across
the  room,  as  above  described. — li.  H.]

R.  H.  You  mean  this  time  1

Yes.  I  often  used  to  do  this  when  I  went  in  against  the
house.

[He  played  hand  ball  against  a  wall  often. — N.  B.  J.]

R.  H.  "and that by '  Wilson '  ^ you mean Wilson D who

played  with  you."

Yes,  did  Roble  not  remember  it  ?
R.  H.  Yes,  this  is  what  Roble  says.

"  I  remember,"  your  father  goes  on,  "  a  lot  of  things  that
you  refer  to,  such  as  the  trip  for  the  ferns  that  I  took
with  you  children,  when  Helen  rode  Walter  and  it  got
late  and  we  all  raced  home  for  sapper."  (Excitement.)

Yes  I  remember  it  so  well,  dad  dear,  and  I  am  glad  you
do.

Pv.  H.  "  I  don't  know  just  what  you  mean  in  relation  to  the
Long  shore  man.'-^  Please  tell  me  more  about  that  so  I  can
understand."

Do  you  remember  the  man  whom  we  used  to  call  Cap  and
Captain  and  who  used  to  tell  such  whopping  stories  about
his  life  at  sea

[Not  recognized — but  "whopping"  was  a  word  frequently  used
by  Bennie.— N.  B.  J.]

iSee  p.  406.  =See  p.  4:15.


LXi.]  Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  tuith  Mrs.  Pijjer.  429
R.  H.  That  will  make  your  father  understand  'I

Yes,  and  he  owned  the  little  white  and  red  striped  boat,
down  near  the  bridge.

R.  H.  All  ridit.

Oh  I  am  so  happy. I  cannot  tell  you  how  happy  I  am.

R.  H.  That  will  be  all  that  is  necessary  1

All  I  can  remember  just  now  .  .  .
I  have  so  much  to  say  .  .  .

R.  H.  Also  .  .  "Roble  wants  to  know  if  you  remember  the  slide
on  the  bull-pen."  (Excitement.)

Well  I think  I  do and  will  I  ever  forget  it. Ask  him
who  got  the  worst  of  it, — him  or  me.

R.  H.  "Also  whether  you  have  seen  Sammy."
Well  yes  I  have  and  sport  ^  also

[Sport  was  the  name  of  our  stable  dog  that  died  of  old

age  some  years  ago. — N.  B.  J.]
Yes,  I  am  glad  to  here  from  you Oh  so  glad. Ask  Roble

if  he  remembers  who  cut  the  hole  in  the  .  .
the  Barn  Yard  fence
[Not  recalled.— N.B.  J.]
and  what  it  was  done  for.

R.  H.  I  suppose  that's  one  on  Eoble  1

Well  it  is. I  have  two  or  three  which  I  will  just  remind
him  of  occasionally

R.  H.  Yes.  "Also  do  not  forget  to  tell  my  mother  that  I  received
and  understood  her  loving  words,  and  tell  my  father  that
I  thank  him  for  the  love  he  sent."

he  gave  me  Walter.

R.  H.  Your  grandfather  1

Yes.  ,

[Not  correct— N.  B.  J.]

^Mentioned  by  sitters. See  p.  393.


430


Helen  cle  G.  Verrall.


[part


R.  H.  "and  that  as  I  have  grown  older  I  have  learned  to  understand
him  better  "

he  will  be  so  glad  to  know  this  I  tell  you,  he  often  tells  me
of  dad.

R.  H.  "and  that  I  hope  to  meet  him  in  your  world  and  understand
him  better  still."

Well  you  will  dear  this  I  know  well.

he  often  says  your  father  is  very  dear  to  me  and  although
he  was  left  more  or  less  to  himself  I  will  take  him
to  my  heart  when  he  comes  to  us.

R.  H.  Good.  "  Give  my  love  to  all  our  friends  who  are  with  you,
and  do  not  forget  to  render  to  Imperator  and  Rector  and
George  and  all  others  who  have  aided  you  in  communi-
cating with  us  our  heartfelt  thanks  and  reverence  for
their  great  kindness.

You  have  not  yet  given  correctly  the  name  of  the
dog  that  figured  so  much  in  the  childhood  of  yourself,
Roble,  and  Peggy.  You  came  near  it  both  times. ^  Can
you  not  give  it  ?

Your  '  ten  cent  script '  is  now  in  your  little  cabinet
in  your  room.  Daddy  will  keep  it  in  memory  of  you.
Do  not  forget  us,  Bennie,  and  let  us  hear  from  you  when-
ever you  can  well  do  so. With  great  love,

Daddy."

(Assents)

Do  you  wonder  I  am  happy.

R.  H.  No,  indeed.

I  have  not  and  never  can  forget  my  dear  dad  and  his  tender
words  to  me  always.  I  never  wanted  for  any  thing  and
never  shall.  I  now  see  he  did  not  say  any  thing  about
the  hornet's  nest.

R.  H.  He  has  not  intended,  I  think,  Bennie,  to  make  a  complete
reply  to  all  that  you  said.


iSee  pp.  392  and  418.


Lxi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  431

Well  I  begin  to  .  . (Haud  talks  with  Spirit.)
U. (Hand  talks  with  Spirit.)
he Eector  says  do  it  so. U.  D.^

R.  H.  Yes.

Yes,  very  good.

What  I  said  was  DON.

[This  is  the  correct  name.  We  read  it  Dan  in  former
sitting.— N.  B.  J.]

R.  H.  Is  that  ...

Yes,  the  dog.  You  may  be  glad  to  know  I  have  seen  a  little
young  dog  here  who  often  comes  up  and  smells  about
j'ourself  ....  about  you  belonging  to  yourself.

K  H.  What  kind,  Bennie  1

A  little  yellow  looking  one  and  looks  like  a  little  bull  dog.
Do  you  remember  him  1

R.  H.  I  do  not  ...  [I  was  about  to  add  "remember  a  little  bull-
dog." I  remember  well  a  little  yellow  mongrel,  very
affectionate. — ii.  H.]

I  will  have  a  better  look  at  him  some  day  when  I  see  him
about  you  again  and  tell  you  more  about  him  I  did  not
notice  as  I  wish  I  had.

R.  H.  Yes,  all  right,  Bennie,  I  shall  be  very  pleased  if  you  will  take
a  good  look  at  him  and  tell  me  another  time.

Yes,  I  will.  Now  those  things  I  was  trying  to  think  of  Avere
oak  apples.-

Have  you  ever  been  at  Osterville  ^  if  you  have  you  will
remember  the  little  pier  we  built  down  on  the  water
edge.

[Reference  to  Osterville  all  right  and  Eoble  says  that  they
did  build  a  small  pier  for  their  boat. — N.  B.  J.]

^  This  is  a  good  instance  of  "dramatization." Bennie has  not  acted  as
control  before,  and  is  therefore  unfamiliar  with  this  abbreviation. — -H.  deG.  V.
2  See  p.  422.  s  jyieutiojjgj sitter. See  p.  397.


1


432


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


.  I  cannot  remain  myself  they  saj-  but  I  will  speak  to  Rector.
(Pencil dropped. Movements of hand. I think I  here
placed  the  articles  on  the  table.)

(Rector  writes.)

*  *  TT

We  were  obliged  to  release him  for  the present a  most

worthy  lad  ...
and  we  are  giving  him  all  the  help  possible.
It  is  always  wiser  to  act  under  our  conditions
We  .  .  We  U.  D.

(Articles  touched,  and  spar  placed  on  turned  sheets  of  book.)-
Yes  here  I  am  again  B

R.  H.  Bennie,  what  was  that  you  last  said  ?

Osterville  .  .  were  you  ever  at  .  .  if  so  you  will  remember
the  little  pier  we  built  down  on  the  water's  edge.

R.  H.  I  have  not  seen  the  place. Kindly  once  more  the  name.

0  S  T  E  E  Y  I  L  L  E  .

R.  H.  Yes,  thank  you.

And  I  intend  to  tell  you  about  Sammie,  and  it  was  Sammie

instead  of  Dandy,
but I cannot keep everything in m}-  memory  you  see

because  I  become  very  dizz_y  sometimes.
[Not  understood.— N.  B.  J.]

[On  p.  418  Benny  referred  to  a  dog  called  Dandy.  The
name  was  not  recognized  at  the  time.  (See  note  on
p.  419.)  On  p.  429  when  asked  whether  he  has  seen
"Sammy"  he  answers,  "Yes,  I  have,  and  sport  also,'"
Sport  having  been  mentioned  by  the  sitters  on  a  previous
occasion  as  another  of  their  dogs.  Finall}'  (see  above
and  also  p.  435)  he  explains  'Sammy'  as  a  correction
of  'Dandy.'  Evidently  the  similarity  of  the  two  names
suggested,  that,  since  Dandy  was  not  recognized  and
information  was  desired  about  Sammy,  mutters  might
be  put  right  b}-  identifying  the  one  with  the  other^
— H.  de  G.  Y.]

R.  H.  Yes. I  understand.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  433

and  when  I  try  to  tell  you  I  sometimes  tell  you  what  I
have  on  my  mind  instead  of  what  I  had  been  thinking
up  for  you,  but  I  will  always  tell  you  as  best  I  can
and  I  hope  you  know  it.

R.  H.  Yes,  indeed,  Bennie.

Ask  Roble  if  he  remembers  the Sc^uirrel's  hole  in  the  old

Beech  tree  .  .
aud  what  we  put  into  it

[Roble remembers the squirrel hole, but not of  putting

anything  in  it. — X.B.  J.]
I  will  tell  you.  apples.
But  ask  him  first.

And  what  has  become  of  the  Bracket  Saw  I  used  to  have.
R.  H.  Yes.

I  remember  remember  so  weU.

And  ask  him  if  he  remembers  any  thing  I  made  out  of  an
old  cigar  box.

[He  had  a  scrall  or  bracket  saw  with  which  he  worked  a
good  deal  when  he  was  a  small  boy,  using  cigar  boxes.
— N.  B.  J.]

R.  H.  Yes.

I  wish  him  to  keep  that  for  himself  always.

R.  H.  What  was  it,  Bennie  ?

It  was  a  bracket  in  the  shape  of  a  table  something  more
like  than  any  thing  else.

R.  H.  Yes.

Those  letters  1  I  first  told  dad  about  and  the  ones  that
were  on  my  mind  were  the  ones  I  left  on  my  bureau
so  carelessly,  but  I  knew  I  had  them  on  my  mind  and
I  am  glad  mama  found  them,  it  was  more  the  fact  of
having  lefo  them  there  than  the  contents  of  them.

R.  H.  Yes. I  understand.

Well  that  is  good.  You  must  be  prettj-  bright  I  think.
Did  you  ever  teach  school.

iSee  pp.  369  and  3S2.


434 .  Helen  de  G.  Verrcdl. ■ ,  [part

R.  H.  Yes,  I  have  taught  ...

I  thought  so. Did  you  like  Algebra.
R.  H.  Yes,  I  did.

I  am  glad  to  know  it. I  didn't.  '  *

K.  H.  Let  me  for  a  moment  or  two  see  if  you  have  finished  the
special  questions  in  your  father's  letter. Shall  1 1

Yes  oh  yes,  do,  kindly. I  wish  so  much  to  do  so  if  I  can.

R.  H.  If  you  still  feel  quite  clear,  all  right. If  .  .  .

Well I do not feel quite  so bright  as  I  did  but  I  can
think  it  over  you  see.

R.  H.  Yes.

I  think  I  can  do  more.  ■  .

R.  H.  Fii'st,  your  grandfather  gave  you  your  pony  Walter  1
Yes.

R.  H.  The  "longshoreman"  has  been  answered?
Yes.

R.  H.  The  slide  on  the  bull-pen. Any  more  about  that  1

No,  only  we  went  in.
R.  H.  In  what  1

the  pen.

R.  H.  "the  pen "  ?  '  '

Yes  of  course,  in  the  pen. Any  more.

R.  H.  Any  more  ...

I  think  a  great  deal  [about] uncle  Frank. Give him  my
love  and  I  will  help  him  when  he  gets  here.

R.  H.  Yes. Any  more  about  Sammy  1


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  %vitli  Mrs.  Piioer.  435

No, only he was a dog of ours [Wholly  incorrect.
— N.  B.  J.] that  is  all  just  now.

R.  H.  The  dog  that  used  to  play  with  you  and  Eoble  and  Peggy  .  .

yes  and  Frank  and  .  .  .  Don.  Don.
R.  H.  Yes.

Cousin  May  sends  love  to  all.

Yes,  hurrj^  up  please. (Writing  begins  to  get  dreamy.)

R.  H.  Well,  Bennie,  you  have  apparently  answered  all  that  your
father  asked.  I  thought  that  there  was  something  else,
but  apparently  not.

Well  do  not  forget  the  berries  in  the  hat.-

R.  H.  iSIo  fear.

And  remember  that  I  will  do  all  I  can.
but  Peggy  means  Helen.

R.  H.  Oh,  Peggy  is  Helen'?

don't  you  see. I  thought  you  would  Ije  glad  to  know
R.  H.  Yes.

[Peggy  does  not  mean  Helen. — N.  B.  J.]

[The  confusion  here  is  perhaps  caused  by  the  juxtaposition
just  above  of  the  names  '  Roble  and  Peggy,'  Eoble  and
Helen  having  been  constantly  spoken  of  together.
When  Peggy  is  first  alluded  to  on  p.  373  Bennie  seems
to  distinguish  her  clearly  from  his  sister  Helen. —
H.  de  G.  v.]

I  am  more  than  half  out  good  bye  kind  friend  and  heaps
of  love  to  all  at  home.

R.  H.  Good-bye,  Bennie,  for  the  present.  Come  again  some  time
when  you  get  the  chance  and  I  shall  be  glad  to  take
messages  to  your  father  and  mother  and  all  at  your
home.  And  I  say,  Bennie,  look  up  my  cousin  Fred.
George  Pelham  will  help  you,  and  he  will  tell  you  of
the  larks  we  used  to  have  together  in  Australia.

i.See  p.  432.  p.  426.


436  Helen  cle  G.  Verrall.  [part

Well,  that  will  be  jolly,  I  will.

I  hope  you  will  know  me  when  I  come  again.

R.  H.  Yes.

They  are  awfully  good  to  me  here  and  I  am  as  happy  as
I  can  be.

*  *  *

(Waking  Stage.)

*  *  -Si-
George * * * courtesy  *  jjQy

with  light  hair.

That black and white dog  was  wagging his tail  when  I
went  in.


10th  Sitting.
April  3,  1900.  Present:  IL  H.

(G.  P.  writing.)
And  now  here  is  B  .  . got  any  thing  to  say  to  him,  H.

■*  *

R.  H.  Have  you  anything  further  to  send  to  your  father  or  mother
or  any  others  at  home  1  Have  you  seen  them  do  any
thing  special,  or  have  you  an}'  fresh  matter  on  j'our
mind  ?

Only  one  thing  .  .  .

I  am  still  here  H  you  know. (G.  P.  acting  as  amanuensis.)

R.  H.  Yes. I  know.

I  heard  Eoble  trying  to  explain  something  about  the  camera
to  Helen  since  I  saw  you  here  and  she  is  going  to  learn
to  take  pictures.

R.  H.  Yes.


And  I  saw  mama  take  some  of  my  things  out  of  a  drawer
and  B  brush  them  put  some  papers  over  them  and  put
them back  again one  was  a pair  of  gloves  I  used  to


Lxr.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Pi'per.  437


wear  and  I  saw  them  very  distinctly,  tell  her  this  for
me

[Mrs.  J.  says  that  not  long  before  this  she  was  taking  some
things  out  of  the  trays  of  a  trunk  and  found  a  pair  of
western  riding  gauntlets  which  Bennie  used  on  his  long
horseback  trip.  She  took  them  out  and  brushed  them
carefully  and  put  them  back  just  as  described.— N.  B.  J.]

I  saw  Mr.  Hyde  and  I  like  him  mighty  well  ...  he  is  a
very  bright  fellow  and  has  been  helping  me  in  many
ways.

(I  here  for  the  first  time  thought  of  my  cousin  Fred  Hyde.)

K.  H.  Oh,  you  mean  my  cousin  Fred.

Yes  he  is  your  cousin  Fred  and  the  gentleman  ^  who  is
speaking  for  me  helped  me  to  find  him.

11th  Sitting.
June  5,  1900.  Present:  li.  H.

(Rector  communicating.)
Well  we  promised  Benny  as  he  says  he  spelled  it

R.  H.  Yes.  Benny.

Yes,  that  we  would  take  a  message  to  thee  for  him.

R.  H.  Yes.

[The  statement  about  the  spelling  is  not  correct.  The  com-
municator wrote  his  name  "  Bennie." — H.  de  G.  V.]

he  says  dad  could  not  make  out  all  the  things  but  he
thinks  he  did  very  well  with  the  light  we  gave  him.

R.  H.  Yes. I  think  he  did  famously.

*  *  *

^  George  Pelham.


438


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[PAKT


12th  Sitting.

Oct  29,  1900.  Present:  E.  H.

(Bennie  communicating.)

Just  one  word  from  me.
I  am  Benny

R.  H.  Yes.

Do  you  remember  me  '
R.  H.  Oh  Bennie,  well,  indeed.

*  *  *

Tell  dad  it  was  I  who  cured  Helen's  throat  and  I  knew  it
was  only  a  cold.

[Extract  from  letter  of  KB.  J.,  Nov.  14,  1900:  "Mrs.  J.  had
in  Sept.  been  at  the  seaside  where  Helen  had  an  ugly
sore  throat,  which  caused  her  mother  much  anxiety,  but
presently  ceased  to  be  serious."]

*  -;'r  *

13th  Sitting.
Oct.  31,  1900.  Present:  R.  H.

(Bennie  communicating.)

One  voice  is  calling  do  not  forget  me.  I  am  soon  coming  tO'
help  you  more.  Benny.

R.  H.  Good. I  shall  always  be  glad  to  hear  from  you.

I  suppose  you  told  dear  dad  about  the  horse.
R.  H.  Yes,  that  was  soon  after  you  first  saw  him  here '?

No,  but  after  I  saw  him  last.

[Probably  Bennie  here  refers  to  his  statement  that  his  grand-
father had  given  him  the  pony  Walter.  (See  p.  429) — H..
de  G.  v.]


Lxi.] Heport  on  the  Junot  SitUvgs  %vitli  Mrs.  PiiJer.  439


R.  H.  All  your  messages  were  given  to  him  faithfully,  and  he  was
very  much  rejoiced  and  your  mother  also.  I  do  not
remember  myself  every  detail.  I  have  also  sent  him  your
last  message,  bnt  have  not  yet  got  a  reply,  as  he  will

only  get  it  in  my  letter  abont  this  time  in  C  ,  and

his  answer  will  take  more  than  a  day  to  reach  me.
Oh  I  see,  well  thank  you  for  a  good  fellow  and  I  am  glad  I
met  you.

Pv.  H.  Bennie,  they  are  specially  glad  to  hear  from  you, — as  you
know,  Roble  is  now  away,  I  think,  at  college.

Yes  I  know  all  about  it  and  I  am  sending  heaps  of  love  to
them  that  they  may  know  I  do  not  live  afar  off.  And
although  Roble  cannot  see  them  nor  they  him  excepting
through  their  mortal  eyes,  I  can  see  them  always  and  at
any  moment.  I  was  somewhat  glad  when  they  changed
Helen's  teacher  because  she  will  gain  by  it.

R.  H.  "teacher"  is  that?
teacher  .  .  music  .  .

I  am  looking  after  her,  and  tell  them  all  that  I  will  soon  see
them  here  and  meanwhile  I  send  endless  love.

R.  H.  I  will.

[Extract  from  N.  B.  J.'s  letter,  Nov.  U,  1900.  "In  the  last
week  of  September,  Mrs.  Junot  and  Helen  returned  from
the  East  and  upon  Helen's  objecting  to  the  taking  of
music  lessons,  she  not  being  very  well,  it  was  agreed
between  them  that  for  the  present  she  should  go  to  hear
music  instead  of  taking  lessons.  "]

14th  Sitting.
Nffv.  12,  1900.  Present:  II  H.

Now  friend.  .  (hand  points  to  Spirit.)

the  young  man  doth  appear  for  one  word  from  his  father.

R.  H.  Dear  Bennie  . . I  have  not  received  word  yet  from  j^our
father. I  hope  to  get  some  letter  and  tell  you  before  I
.  • leave. (Cross  in  air.) It  is  a  long  way  off,  you  re-
member. (Cross  in  air.)


440


Helen  de  G.  Verrcdl.


[part


Well,  will  3'ou  give  my  love  to  them  all,  and  ask  Roble  if

he  prefers  a  torch  to  a
Jack  O  Lantein  .  .
If  he  does  I  do  not.

R.  H.  Good. Will  he  understand  that?

Well,  he  will  fully.  Good,
[Not  understood.— N.  B.  J.]

Ask  him  if  he  remembers  the  Poke  Bonnet  .  '
R.  H.  Yes.


and  what  happened  to  it.
[Not  understood. — N.  B.  J.]


15th  Sitting.
Jan.  30,  1901.  Present:  R.  H.

(Rector  communicating.)


but  in  speaking  of  Benny  he  is  attracted  by  it  and  greets
them  and  sends  love  to  dad  and  mother.

R.  H.  Yes,  I  .  .

(Bennie  communicating.)
found  my  last  messages  all  straight,  did  you  not  1

R.  H.  Practicall)' ;  Bennie.  Your  father  wrote  me  about  }'our  sister's
having  been  ill  with  a  cold  and  got  better,  and  about  her
attending  music  to  hear  it  and  giving  up  regular  lessons.
And  he  told  me  in  a  letter  about  meeting  the  Major,  and
the  Major  explained  to  him  about  some  of  the  persons
you  mentioned  long  ago.  And  your  father  also  mentioned
some  affectionate  messages  for  you,  but  they  only  found
me  in  England  after  my  meetings  here  were  over,  and  I
have  not  got  his  letter  i  with  me  just  now.

'  This  is  the  letter  referred  to  in  the  '  Cousin  Frank '  episode.  See  below,
p.  452.


LXi.] Rei^ort  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  441


16th  Sitting.

February  18,  1901.  Present:  Mr.  &  Mrs.  J.  and  B.  H.

(Bennie  communicating.)

Quiet  .  .

Coming  dad  all  is  well,  rest  and  wait  for  me.  B.
Oh  I  am  so  happy  to  see  you  once  again  here.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  we're  happy  to  hear  from  you.

*  *  *

Well  I  am  here  dear  and  I  see  you  better  to-day  than  I
ever  did  before.

Mrs.  .J.  Bennie,  have  you  seen  Frank  ?

Yes,  a  few  times,  but  he  is  not  with  us  yet  .  .
will  be  they  tell  me  soon.

[Frank  B.  (referred  to  in  earlier  sittings,  see  p.  405),  died
in  June  1900.— H.  de  G.  V.]

Mes.  .J.  Can  you  tell  me  something  of  him  1  ■

Of  him. yes. I  think  so.

Do  you  want  me  to  find  him  and  send  him  to  you,  dear.

Mrs.  J.  Not to-day, Bennie. Can you send a message to  his
father  1

Yes,  I'll  tell  you  all  presently.

Don't  bring  .  .  oh  don't  .  .  why  [?]  I  will  keep  clear.
N  is  that  you  1

[At  this  point  Bennie  evidently  retires  for  a  moment  'to
prepare  Frank';  his  place  is  taken  by  N.  B.  J.'s  father.
See  pp.  398  and  401.— H.  de  G.  V.]

N.  B.  J.  Yes. Who  is  it  speaking  %

Do  you  remember  anything  about  your  father.
Be  .  .  will  return  in  a  moment.

(Bennie  communicating.) Yes  I  am  here  all  right  now.  I
thought  I  would  go  and  tell  them  to  prepare  Frank.
Oh  I  am  so  glad  to  see  you  I  hardly  know  what  to
2f


442 ■  • ■ Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  .  "  [part

tell  you. Do  you  know  how  much  I  have  been  with

you  of  late.
(Hand  holds  up  spu?')  ■
1  hoped  I  would  see  Helen.

Mother  you  see  I  am  looking  at  you. Do  you  realize  how

clear  my  mind  is  getting.
Help  me  won't  you (Hand  listens  to  R.  H.)
Dad  did  you  think  I  had  forgotten  about  everything  I  ever

knew  ?

N.  B.  J  No,  Bennie, I  didn't  think  you  had  forgotten  much.  I
only  thought  it  was  hard  to  write.

To  write.  I  am  not  writing,  I  am  speaking  to  the  man
they  call  Rector  but  he  isn't  Rector  at  all  he  is  some-
body else  but  I  am  talking  as  fast  as  I  can  and  and  I
hope  you  will  hear  all  I  say  to  you.

Did  Roble  get  a  fall  P

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  I  think  he  did  on  the  ice.

Well,  I  tried  to  help  him  but  was  too  late.  I  saw  him
going  down.  I'll  have  a  care  next  time,  dad,  don't
worry.  .  -

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  when  did  you  see  Roble  falll

the  other  day.

When  did  you  say  .  . I  do  not  mean  a  long  time  ago.
Mrs.  J.  Do  you  mean  since  we  saw  him  last  night  1

I  do  not  think  I  can  tell  that,  ma  dear.

Mrs.  J.  Is  Roble  all  right  now  1

Oh  yes  perfectly  and  he  will  be,  I  know.

Keep  on  thinking  friend,  do  not  get  discouraged.

R.;H.  (to  sitters.) Probably  from  Rector  to  Bennie.

All is  well. I'll  take  care that  he  does not  interfere.
: .  (Probably  a  statement  by  Rector  that  he  will  keep  some

^  . other  communicator  from  interposing)

iSee  p.  480.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  443

Dad  you  look  tired, rest  cannot  youl
I  am  talking  now  to  you.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I'll  try  and  rest.

Mother  did  you  think  the  fall  was  to-day  1

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. I  was  afraid  something  had  happened  since  I
last  saw  Roble.

No.  he  is  all  right.  I  do  not  wish  to  worry  you  dear
mother  because  I  love  you,  and  he  is  not  ill  in  any
way  .  .  but  Helen  .  .  oh  the  farm  I  saw  you  at  the
farm  since  I  saw  you  here.

[Since  our  last  sitting  we  had  been  to  our  farm  for  the
summer  and  had  made  various  changes. — N.  B.  J.]

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  we  thought  of  you  often. What  did  you  see
us  doing  at  the  farm  ?

Well  what  didn't  I  see.  I  saw  nearly  everything  that  you
did.  Oh  by  the  way,  dad,  did  you  ask  about  the
boat,^  and  is  there  anything  I  can  do  to  clear  up  my
memories  1

N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  I  don't  understand  about  the  boat.

I  thought  you  were  puzzled.  I  heard  you  say  this  at
home.

Well  I'll  tell  you  do  you  remember  anything  about  a  little
,.  fishing  trip  we  had  at  0.  one  Saturday  afternoon  when

I  got  my  feet  wet.  I  told  you  this  before.  There  is
something  about  the  boat  I  am  anxious  to  recall  to
your  mind.

(Hand  holds  up  cap)

Cannot  you  think  what  I  am  trying  to  tell  you"?

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  who  went  with  you  on  this  fishing  trip  ?

The  Judge  dad  and  I  am  not  sure  who  else  but  in  time  I
can  tell  you.

[This  friend  is  called  by  us  "Major."  Sometimes  in  these
communications  it  comes  "Judge." Bennie  went  fishing

iSee  p.  387.


444


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


often  with  him  during  his  last  summer.  The  inter-
changing of  the  titles  Major  and  Judge  seems  to
indicate  a  curious  error  by  the  interpreter. — N.  B.  J.]

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie,  at  present  I  can't  recall  this.

Listen  dear  do  you  remember  the  last  summer  I  was  with
you.  We  went  out  for  some  fish.  It  rained.  I  got
my  feet  wet.

[After  consideration  we  clearly  remember  that  this  is  a
correct  reference  to  Bennies  last  trip  with  the  Major.
It  was  very  foggy  and  rainy  and  they  were  gone  two
or  three  days  on  a  hshing  trip. — N.  B.  J.]

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  I  remember  you  went  out  several  times.

No,  it  is  the  last  time  I  ever  went  .  .  think  it  over.

[If — as  seems  probable — this  statement  is  to  be  connected
with  the  allusion  to  a  boat  on  p.  387  there  would  appear
to  be  some  confusion  in  the  mind  of  the  communicator
between  his  fishing  trip  with  the  Major  and  the  cap-
sizing of  the  boat,  just  as  on  p.  387  he  passes  in  a
confused  way  from  the  incident  with  the  boat  to  the
last  walk  with  his  father. — H.  deG.  V.]

Mother  what  did  you  do  with  my  cap. Give  it  me.  I

am  going  out  a  moment  to  think.
(Hand  holds  up  cap)
What  about  Aunt  Alice.

I  think  Eoble  is  doing  splendidly  but  .  .  wait  till  I  return
and  I  will  tell  you  more,  will  you  speak  to  me  then  .  .

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

(Hand  talks  with  Spirit. Cross  in  air)

Here  I  am  again  and  I  thought  I  would  ask  you  what  you
were  trying  to  have  done  with  the  old  gate  this  summer.
Can  you  think  what  I  mean  ?

N.  B.  J.  No,  I  do  not  understand. Where  was  it  ?

At  the  back  of  the  barn.

N.  B.  J.  I  don't  understand,  Bennie.


LXi.] Rejoort  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  445

Think  what  you  had  pulled  up  and  put  in  its  place.  I
am  not  mistaken,  dear,  it  looks  differently  to  me  now.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  do  you  mean  the  calf shed  papa  and  Roble
built  last  summer"?

(N.  B.  J.  negatives  this)
Mks.  J.  That's  what  he  means,  I  think.
Yes,  I  do.

It  all  looks  so  changed  to  me  .  .  it  all  looks  so  changed
to  me  there.

N.B.J.  Yes.

and  the  little  yard  I  never  saw  until  the  change  was  made,
tell  me  about  it  do.

Mrs.  J.  I  think  you  mean  the  new  chicken  yard  and  shed  we  had
made  ?

N.  B.  J.  No,  you  mean  the  new  yard  back  of  the  kitchen,  don't
you  1

Mrs.  J.  No,  back  of  the  house,  I  expect.

Now  let  me  tell  you  what  I  do  mean. I  mean  that  where

the  Bull  pen  ^  used  to  be.
Do  you  know  now,  dad  1

N.  B.  J.  No,  I  don't  understand.

Well,  do  follow  me  .  .  the  farm  .  .  but  where  we  used  to
go  out  at  the  barn  there  has  been  a  change  made  in
the  floor  that  is  what  I  tried  to  think  .  .

Mrs.  J.  (to  N.  B.  J.)  He means  in the calf  [?]  where  you  built  on
that  shed.

and  I  called  it  gate,  and  it  is  all  open  there  now  and
something  put  in  its  place.  Now  I  am  trying  to  find
out  what  you  intend  to  call  it,

iSee  p.  429.


446  ' . ■ , Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  do  you  mean  the  garden  I  had  made  at  the  back
.  of  the  house  near  the  barn  ?

No,  I  know  that  perfectly,  but  it  is  at  the  barn  dear
mother.  There  are  two  windows  and  I  am  doing  my
best  to  have  you  see  what  I  mean  dear.  It  is  all  so
changed  to  me.

Dad  did  you  not  take  away  part  of  the  barn?

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  we  have  had  a  chicken  house  built  where  the  corn
crib  used  to  be.

Yes  of  course,  that  is  what  I  mean  exactly  but  they,  dad
and  Koble  and  another  man  took  out  the  little  door
leading  into  the  yard. Didn't  you  dad  ?

Mrs.  J.  (to  N.  B.  J.)  Yes,  you  did.

N.  B.  J.  I  don't  remember,  Bennie.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  you  are  right.

What  is  the  matter  dad,  are  you  forgetting?
Mrs.  J.  I  think  he  is  stupid,  Bennie.

Well,  he  never  used  to  be.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  when  we  were  here  last  you  spoke  about  Spot.'^
Did  you  mean  the  cow  ?

Yes,  of  course,  but  to  save  me  I  could  not  say  cow.  I
cannot  think  of  half  the  names  of  things  I  used  to
know  so  well.

Now  there  is  one  thing  more  dad.  Who  was  it  who  put
up  the  wall.

N.  B.  J.  I  don't  understand,  Bennie. Where  do  you  mean  ?

I  mean  out  back  of  the  house  this  time.  And  what  do
you  call  it  .  .  a  .  .  word  [?]  is  it.

N.  B.  J.  Fence. Do  you  mean  fhice  ?

Yes  exactly  and  dear  you  will  forget  the  names  of  things
when  you  get  here.

'  See  p.  403.


LXi.] Report  on  tJte  Junot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Piper.  447

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  I  understand  that,  Bennie.

I  like  it  all  though  so  much  better  than  before  and  I  only
wanted  to  recall  all  I  saw  you  do  and  the  changes  you
have  made  that  you  might  be  sure  I  was  with  you.
that  is  all U.  D.

N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  you  told  me  that  you  would  find  Alice  Clarke's
children  and  send  me  a  message  to  her  from  them.
Have  you  found  them  1

Yes  and  after  I  get  through  I  want  to  tell  you  something
about  her  and  them.  But  first  of  all  let  me  tell  you
what  is  on  my  mind.

Do  you  feel  that  I  am  losing  my  mind,  dad  1

N.  B.  J.  No,  but  we  feel  that  it  is  very  difficult  for  you  to
remember  names  and  communicate.

V  • Well  that  is  so. But  I  have  hunted  for  you  ever  since  I
left  the  body  and  I  said  if  I  could  reach  you  in  any
way  I  would  do  so,  and  here  I  am  if  I  am  imperfect.
How  is  R.  getting  on  at  college  P  ■  ■

Mrs.  J.  Splendidly,  Bennie,  and  is  very  happy  in  his  college  life.

I  am  so  glad  to  hear  it.  Give  him  my  love  and  tell  him
I'll  do  my  best  to  help  him.  Did  he  send  me  any
message  ?

N.  B.  J.  He  often  speaks  of  you  and  has  your  picture  hanging  in
his  room  at  college.

my  what  .  .  •  •  .

N.  B.  J.  Picture,  picture  of  you.

Mes.  J.  Photograph.

N.  B.  J.  Photograph.

Oh  yes  good.  '

Listen  a  moment.  When  I  told  you  all  about  who  was
with  me,-  why  didn't  you  know  mother  dear.  Speak
and  tell  me  .  .

Mother  why  didn't  you  know  .  .

^See  p.  439  where  R.  H.  mentioned  that  Roble  was  at  college. — H.  de  6.  V.
-See  pp.  410  and  413.


448  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  I  was  not  thinking  about  them.  I  was  thinking
about  you  and  your  last  days  with  me.

N.  B.  J.  (to  Mrs.  J.)  Ask  wlio  is  with  him  now.

Oh  yes  well  it  is  all  right  only  1  could  not  stay  here
longer.

Did  you  hear  me  when  I  called  you  the  other  night  ?

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  I  cannot  always  tell  when  you  call  me.  I  think  I
feel  you  near  me.  But  you  know  I  cannot  hear  you.
What  did  you  say  to  me  1

I  said  write  to  Roble.

[Not  long  before  this  one  evening  his  mother  suddenly
started  up  and  proceeded  to  write  to  Roble.  Her
motions  were  so  unusual  in  some  way  as  to  attract
comment  from  others  of  the  family. She  said  "  I  rnust

; write  to  Roble."— N.  B.  J.]

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  I  did  neglect  writing  to  Roble.

In  a  way  I  know  all  you  do. And  by  the  way  what  did
•  .  you  do  with  the  lot.  I  saw  the  .  .

It  is  where  they  put  my  body.^

R.  H.  ''lot"  ?

Yes  grandpa  told  me  to  ask.

Mrs.  J.  Which  grandpa,  Bennie  1 My  father  ? — (assent)

Mrs.  J.  You  know  your  body  is  not  in  the  same  lot  as  his  is.

I  know  but  tell  him,  do.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  think  he  means  the  stones  we  had  placed  in
his  lot  on  his  grave  and  over  the  others.

Wait  a  minute.

Yes  that  will  help  him  much. He  said  B  do  not  forget  to


■'If  we  suppose  that  when  he  says:  "It  is  where  they  put  my  body,"  Bennie^
is  quoting  his  grandfather's  words,  the  statement  becomes  clear. — H,  de  G,  V.


LXI.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  44f>

ask  your  mother  what  they  did  with  tlie  lot  and  it  has
all  been  arranged  very  nicely.
[New head stones, etc. had lately been placed in  the
cemetery  lot  of  Bennie's  maternal  grandfather. — N.  B.  J.]

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  a  number  of  changes  were  made,  new  stones
put  up  and  the  lot  made  in  order.  Does  he  want  to-
know  anything  more  1

No,  that  is  all,  but  he  would  give  me  no  peace  until  I
asked  about  it.

Tell  me  dear  do  you  hear  me  when  I  tell  you  about
Helen. Look  out  for  her.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.  In  what  way  shall  I  look  out  for  her?  She:
is  very  well  this  winter.

Yes,  but  I  told  you  she  would  be,  but  do  not  hurry  her.

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie.
But  you  do

Mrs.  J.  Do  you  think  so,  Bsnnie  ?

I  do,  yes. Why  mother.
Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  the  family  think  I  am  too  indulgent  with  her.

Well  I  do  not. I  see  you  hurry  her  to  school.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  sometimes  I  do.

Don't  do  it,  I  see.  Do  not  hurry  her  and  she  will  be
with  you  a  long  time  and  will  be  well.  Do  you  hear
me  dear?

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  and  I  will  do  as  you  say.

I  am  glad,  because  you  will  not  be  sorry  dear.

Oh  I  feel  so happy  now. I  am  glad  I  came  after  all.

Tell  me  do  you  not  think  she  is  doing  well  with  the

photos  ^

Mrs.  J.  I  don't  think  that's  right.

iRee  pp.  395  and  436.


450  ,  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  ' .  .  ,  \  .  [part

or  did  well  with  the  .  .  .  •  ;

Mother  do  you  remember  the  pine  cones.  .

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  tell  me  about  them.

I  mean  to  tell  you  everything  I  ever  knew  in  time.  I
mean  my  Pine  cones  and  what  I  used  to  get  them  for.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

'  Listen  is  this  word  pick  .  .  stick  or  pick  .  .  I  am  not  sure
which  .  .  them  together.

Mrs.  J.  For  what  purpose,  Bennie  1  •
I  made  [1]

do  you  remember  the  fire  place  .  .

There  is  a  little  confusion  here  friend  (Rector  to  K.  H.)
I  made  a  wreath.

Mrs.  .J.  Bennie,  I  remember  that  you  used  to  gather  pine  cones.
I  made  a  ring  one  year  and  left  it  in  my  room.

Mrs.  J.  I  remember  indistinctly,  Bennie,  I  will  try  and  recall  this
later.

Yes  all  right  and  for  the  fire  also.
Mrs.  J.  (to  N.  B.J.)  This  is  for  you.

and  do  you  remember  Charlie  Adams  1
Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie.  ■  ■  '

Chas.  .  .  it  is  not  Adams  but  Allen.-

Mrs.  J.  Is  Charlie  the  right  name,  Bennie  1 I  think  you  have  one
name  wrong,  the  first  name. Think  once  again.

[Mrs.  J.  thought  that  Bennie  might  be  referring  to  G.  Allen,

a  friend.— N.  B.  J.]
I  mean  Will  .  .

I  want  to  recall  more  about  him  for  you.
Mrs.  J.  Where  did  we  use  to  see  him  'I Do  you  remember  that  1
Yes  is  .  .  Osterville.


LXi.]  Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  451
Mrs.  J.  No,  Benriie.

Away  from  here  or  am  I  still  in  it  .  .  I  remember  our
home  so  well  and  he  vised  to  come  there  to  see  me.

Dad  are  you  still  here.  (N.  B.  J.  had  changed  his  seat  some
minutes  before  to  other  side  of  room)

N.  B.  J.  Yes. I'm  listening.  Bennie.

I  begin  to  feel  a  little  dizzy,  dad. Are  you  all  right  ?
(N.  B.  J.  comes  back  to  previous  place)

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  I'm  all  right,  Bennie,  but  I'm  weary  to-day.
Why  so. I  knew  you  were  tired.

N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  can  you  send  any  messages  to  Aunt  Alice's  children
now,  from  her  children  to  herl:

Yes. when  I  come  in  I  will  bring  it  to  you. I  will  see
them  and  tell  you  all  dad. I  see  what  you  want.

N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  who  are  you  with  all  the  time  now  1

I  am  mostly  with  grandpas  and  Frank  .  .

Do  you  remember  .  .  (Pause.)

sounds  like  .  .  Louie

LOUIEi

LOUISE

Both  names  are  right  as  pronounced  by  him.
Ask  dad  before  I  go. I  am  getting  .  .
far  away  now.

N.  B.  J.  I  do  not  know  to  whom  you  refer.

Friend  it  will  be  better  to  ask  him  again  when  he  is  nearer
the  light

I  should  explain  to  him  wliat  his  friends  desire.  Rector.

R.  H.  Yes.  I

I  will  and  he  will  know  father  where  are  you  now  and
will  I  speak  again  ?

R.  H.  Bennie,  your  father  and  mother  are  coming  again  next  time.

Now  if  you  will  kindly  wait  a  moment,  they  will  tell

, . 1  See  p.  456.


452


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


briefly  what  they  would  most  like  to  hear  from  you
about  next  time.  T  will  ask  them  to  tell  you  now
slowly  what  they  wish  you  to  tell  them  when  they
come  again.

They  will  tell  me  now. I  will  listen  with  all  my  spirit.

N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  when  you  come  again,  tell  us  about  your  three
uncles  that  you  loved  so  much  in  this  life  and  who
are still  here. (Hand  starts  to  write)

N.  B.  J.  Bennie  .  .  Bennie  .  .

One  minute  dad  let  me  say  it  over. All  right.

N.  B.  J.  Also  tell  us  about  the  little  pony  that  you  had  when  you
were  a  little  boy  and  who  gave  it  to  you.  Bennie,  also
tell  us  all  you  can  about  Frank  for  his  father.

Cousin  Frank,!  ygg

N.  B.  J.  No,  your  friend,  Frank.

Oh  yes. I  .  .  uncles  you  say,  and  pony  and  Frank.

*  *  *

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  bring  me  a  message  from  P'rank  which  will  be
evidential  to  his  father,  something  that  will  be  a  test.

What  has  Everett  got  to  do  with  it  1

[Prof.  C.  C.  Everett,  who  died  October  10,  1900,  announced
his  presence  at  my  sitting  of  February  13,  1901. — R.  H.]

R.  H.  Nothing. Ask  him  to  kindly  come  again  when  .  .

No  but  he  thinks  she  said  Everett  for
R.  H.  No  .  .  evidential  .  .  evidential  .  .  test

Oh  yes  .  .  all  right.

Good  bye  for  the  present  I  will  refresh  my  mind  and  .  .
and  recover  from  my  excitement  from  seeing  you  and
do  all  you  ask  of  me affectionately  Benny.

*  *  *
^  See  note  on  p.  4.33.


XXI.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Piper.  453

(Waking  Stage.)

*  *  *

I  saw  the  young  man  with  h'ght  hair  walking  all  around
me.

*  *  *

[The  allusion  to  "  Cousin  Frank "  is  interesting.  This  is
the  first  time  that  his  name  occurs  in  the  sittings  (the
name  Frank  which  had  occurred  several  times  was  always
supposed  by  the  sitters  to  refer  to  Frank  B.,  and  as  there
is  no  suggestion  of  a  relationship  between  Frank  and  Bennie
this  interpretation  is  probably  correct.)  On  November  14,
1900,  N.  B.  J.  wrote  a  letter  to  r)r.  Hodgson,  in  which
he  said :  "  Tell  Bennie  that  Aunt  Alice  sends  her  love  and
would  be  very  glad  to  hear  from  her  son  Frank  and  Uncle
Frank  Clarke  who  has  lately  passed  out  of  this  life."  At
the  next  sitting  at  which  Bennie  communicated,  January
30,  1901,  Dr.  Hodgson  told  Bennie  that  this  letter  from
N.  B.  J.  only  reached  him  after  he  was  in  England.  He
mentioned  several  of  the  messages  contained  in  it,  but  said
nothing  of  the  paragraph  quoted  above  (see  p.  440).  The
allusion  to  "  Cousin  Frank "  occurred  in  the  next  communica-
tion from  Bennie  on  Febniary  18,  1901,  and  at  the  sitting
of  February  19,  1901,  after  alluding  again  to  "Cousin
Frank "  he  says :  "  I  thought  Dad  asked  me  did  he  not  ? "
In  fact  his  language  is  just  such  as  might  have  been
expected,  if  the  message  sent  by  IST.  B.  J.  on  November  14,
1900,  had  been  duly  delivered.  In  view  of  the  great  care
shown  in  recording  these  sittings,  it  does  not  seem  prob-
able that  any  allusion  to  "  Cousin  Frank  '"  made  either  by
the  sitters  or  by  Dr.  Hodgson  would  have  passed  unnoted.
— H.  de  G.  v.]

ITtij  Sitting.

February  19,  1901.  Present.-  Mrs.  J.  and  II.  H.

(Bennie  communicating.)
I  am  here,  mother  dear.


Mks.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I'm  glad  to  see  you  this  morning.


454


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


Morning,  it  is  always  morning  dear.i  I  am  glad  to  see
you  once  more.  But  I  was  sad  to  hear  what  dad  said,
did  he  not  feel  well.

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie,  he  was  tired  yest  .  .  when  he  was  here.

Too  bad.

Oh  mother  I  saw  Frank  and  he  told  me  to  tell  you  to  tell
his  father  he  remembered  several  incidents.  One  was  to
ask  him  if  he  remembered  the  watch  he  gave  him
on  his  eighteenth  birthday.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

And  he  is  [his  ?]  saying  if  you  are  a  good  boy  when  you

are  twenty  one,  I  will  double  this  gift.
[These  statements  refer  to  Bennie's  friend  Frank,  but  we

have  not  been  able  to  verify  them  yet. — N.  B.  J.]
Mother  it  seems  so  good  to  see  you,  I  could  cry  with  joy.
Do  you  remember  what  I  said  when  you  told  me  I  was  ill.

Mrs.  J.  What  was  it,  Bennie?

I  said  Oh  no  not  very  .  .  I  do  not  think  I  will  be  ill  long

I  will  soon  be  better.
The  words  friend  are  a  little  obscure  but  nearly  correct.
Where  is  uncle  Tom  dear.

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie,  the  name  is  not  right.

John [John  is  correct. — N.  B.  J.]
Mrs.  J.  He  is  in  Florence,  I  think,  Bennie.

It  was  my  fault. R.^ (Hand  listens  to  R.  H.)
R.  H.  All  right.

Give  him  my  love  and  tell  him  I  will  not  forget  him.

^The  controls  often  protest  against  the  use  of  words  denoting  periods  of
time,  e.g.  morning,  week,  etc.,  and  sometimes  appear  unable  to  apprehend
their  meaning.  At  other  times,  however,  they  use  these  very  words  them-
selves and  their  attitude  does  not  seem  to  be  based  on  any  consistent
principle.

"An  apology  from  Rector  for  the  mistake  about  "Tom"  and  "John."


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Piper.  455-

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

Do  you  remember  College  1
I  saw  Frank  there  .  .

[Bennie  last  saw  Frank  at  Cambridge  where  Frank  was  pre-
paring for  College. — N.  B.  J.]

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  you  went  out  to  see  him.

Several  times  I  was  too  weak  to  answer  for  you  before.

Mrs.  J.  Yes.

Will  you  forgive  my  blunders  and  see  me  as  I  am  when  I
am  not  trying  to  whisper  to  you  dear.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  think  you  do  very  well.

But  I  try  and  that  is  all  I  can  do,  dear.  Do  you  remember
my  cousin  .  .  Oh  I  told  you  about  her  before,  and  when
1  said  Charles  I  meant  uncle.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  uncle  Charlie?  (Assent.)

[The  first  time  that  any  attempt  is  made  to  give  the  name
Charles  is  on  p.  360  where  the  phrase  occurs,  "I  am  with
Char  Char."  It  is  immediately  preceded  by  an  allusion  to
John.  On  p.  364  after  speaking  of  his  cousin  May,  Bennie
says,  "  Do  you  remember  what  I  meant  by  John  V  and  a
few  sentences  later  refers  to  Charles  in  connexion  with
Frank.  It  is  likely  therefore  that  he  has  a  confused
recollection  of  these  Dassai(es  in  his  mind  when  he  asserts
that,  "  When  I  said  Charles  I  meant  uncle."  For  this
remark  occurs  in  connexion  with  a  reference  to  his  cousin
and  just  after  allusions  to  Frank  and  his  uncle  John.
— H.  deG.  v.]

Mrs.  J.  Send  a  message  to  him,  give  me  .  .

I  remember  the  Pony,  ask  him  if  he  does.

[This  is  evidently  intended  as  a  tentative  suggestion  that  it

was  his uncle  Charlie  who gave  him  the pony,  see

p.  462.— H.  deG.  v.]


Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.


456  •  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

Give  my  dearest  love  to  dear  uncle  Charlie  and  tell  him  I
think  of  him  constantly  and  of  the  good  times  we  had
tosrether.

T  want  also  to  explain  about  the  cones.^  I  gathered  them
often  for  the  fire.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

How  is  aunt  Helen. -
Mrs.  J.  She  is  well.

Did  you  tell  her  I  was  alive.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  but  I  have  not  told  her  about  speaking  with
you.

I  thought  so,  but  when  you  do  and  if  you  do  tell  her  I  .  .
(hand  holds  up  spur)

send  love  to  her  also. I  thought  she  was  not  well  and  I

thought  she  might  come  here.
(Interruption  owing  to  superposition  of  one  line  of  writing  on

another.)

As  as  I  was  saying  .  .  Oh  by  the  way  where  is  dad  I  do
not  see  him.

Mrs.  .J.  He  was  called  home,  Bennie,  but  Dr.  Hodgson  has  a  letter
from  him  to  you  which  he  will  read.

Oh  I  am  so  glad.  Tell  me  do  you  remember  what  I  meant
by  Louise  ?  ^

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie.

I  was  thinking  of  that  little  friend  of  .sister  Helen's.
[Helen  has  a  friend,  Louise,  who  was  with  us  a  grea:t  deal
before  Bennie's  death. — N.  B.  J.]

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  that  is  right.

and  I  thought  perhaps  dad  would  know.

Mrs.  J.  Yes.

Do  you  remember  about  a  little  girl  who  came  here  long
ago  by  the  name  of  Alice.^

1  See  p.  450.  ^  See  p.  378.  ^See  p.  451.  -"See  p.  409.


LXI.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Piper.  457


Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie.

M  a  r  g  aret

Mrs.  J.  No,  B  .  .

Wait  .  .  Ma  .  .  gie  [?]  .  .  he  [?j

Oh  I  saw  her  only  a  few  moments  ago.

Do  you  remember  R  i  chard  .  .  Dick  .  .  Clarke.

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie,  Clarke  is  right. Is  Dick  the  right  name?

It  sounds  .  .

Oh  no  did  I  say  .  .

NE .  .

I  will  let  him  wait  a  moment,  his  voice  is  not  clear  now.
Why  do  I  feel  stifled  at  times  mother.

Mrs.  J.  I  cannot  tell  you,  Bennie.

R.  H.  Bennie,  this  is  from  your  father  to  you.

Will  you  talk  slowly  to  me

R.  H.  He  says  :

"  Dear  Bennie  :

I  am  called  suddenly  away.  I  cannot  remain.
This  makes  me  very  sad  because  I  intended  to  say  many
things  to  you.  Last  time  I  waited  for  you  to  speak  and
said  little  myself.  I  wanted  to  tell  you  how  much  we  love
you  and  how  dear  to  Dad  are  all  his  memories  of  you.
The  pictures  which  we  have  of  your  beautiful  face  are  our
dearest  treasures.  Do  not  think  that  Dad  will  ever  forget
you  for  a  moment  and  we  fondly  hope  that  you  will  not
forget  us.  When  Dad  comes  to  your  world  he  wants  you
to  meet  him  and  show  him  the  way.

When  you  can  I  want  you  to  tell  my  dear  mother  that  I
received  her  message  and  that  I  love  her  as  dearly  as  ever ;
and  to  Uncle  Frank  Clarke  I  also  send  love  and  greeting.

Dear  Bennie,  the  messages  that  we  have  received  from  you
have  given  us  great  joy  and  we  wish  you  to  thank  for  us  all
who  have  helped  you  to  do  so.  Also  we  hope  to  hear  from
you  often  again.  Tell  us  all  you  can  about  yourself,  for
that  makes  us  feel  sure  that  it  is  your  own  self. May  the

2g


458


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


blessing  of  the  Father  of  all  be  with  you  is  our  prayer.
Good-bye  for  a  time,  sweetheart.  Daddy."

Oh  how  like  you,  dear  dad,  and  if  you  will  wait  until  the
way  is  clearly  open  for  me  to  free  my  mind  I  will  tell
you  everything  I  ever  remembered  of  my  happy  life
with  you.  Father  dear  I  know  you  love  me  as  I
do  you  and  you  will  find  me  when  you  come  all  ready
to  greet  you.  Benny.

Ma  dear  this  has  comforted  me  more  than  I  can  tell.

Will  you  give  my  love  to  my  dear  Helen  and  Roble  and
tell  them  I  am  still  their  brother  Benny.

Mrs.  J.  Benuie,  tell  me  about  Helen. Do  you  not  think  her  well?
Yes,  very,  but  nervous  dear.

Mrs.  J.  How  shall  I  take  care  of  her  ?

Do  not  hurry  her,  mother  dear,  and  let  her  sleep.  She
says  she  wants  to  sleep  more.

[Helen  had  for  months  been  inclined  to  sleep  late  in  the
mornings  and  when  called  to  get  up  had  been  accus-
tomed to  say  that  she  was  still  sleepy. — N.  B.  J.]

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

I  hear  her  say  this  so  often.

Mrs.  J.  But,  Bennie,  she  ought  to  go  to  school.

Yes  dear  and  so  she  will,  but  every  chance  you  get  let
her  sleep,  dear  and  it  will  help  her  more  than  anything.
Mother,  she  is  going  to  be  all  right. I  know  she  is.  But
I  see  how  she  feels  and  I  want  you  to  know  what  to
do  for  her.

Bennie,  do  you  think  she  should  sleep  longer  at  night  ?
Yes,  I  do.

Should  she  go  to  bed  earlier,  or  stay  longer  in  the  morning  ?
Both.


R.  H.


R.  H.


LXi.] Rejjort  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  PijJer.  459


R.  H.  That  is  clear.  ....  .

and  she  will  be  strong  and  well. . .  '
R.  H.  Any  other  advice  about  her?  :. . , . . .V  . .  ..

No  that  is  all.

.■■ '  I Now  you  found  Roble  all  right,  didn't  you?  , ;  J
Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. Will  you  send  a  message  to  him  ?

Yes,  certainly  I  will.  Ask  Roble  if  he  would  like  a  game
at  leap  frog.

Mes.  J.  Yes.

And  tell  him  I  think  I  could  jump  the  faster  .  .

also  tell  him  I  am  glad  he  is  doing  so  well,  and  above

(Hand  holds  up  harmonica.)

all  is  happy.  - "  ■  ' '  '

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. Tell  me  now  about  yourself,  what  you  do.

Do  .  .  well  the  things  I  care  for  most  are  those  I  left
behind  in  the  body,  but  I  am  contented  here  dear  and
I  live  with  grandpa  and  grandma  Junot.  He  sometimes
says  he  was  a  little  difficult  for  the  boys U.  D.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

to  U.  D.  but  he  meant  well  and  loves  them  all  very  much.

I  am  learning  all  the  time  the  conditions  of  this  life,  the
reality  and  truth  of  our  having  to  live  in  one  life  to
be  able  to  in  this.  There  is  nothing  that  does  not
interest  me,  and  I  am  so  glad  to  be  able  to  feel  see
and  be  with  you  all.  I  do  not  know  what  it  is  to  ask
to  see  you  without  being  able  to  do  so  instantly,  dear.

Do  you  remember  Frank  .  .  I  spoke  of  cousin  Frank. ^

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  have  you  something  to  tell  about  him  ?

Yes  I  thought  Dad  asked  me,  did  he  not  1

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

He  often  sees  me,  did  you  know  it  dear  ?

^  See  p.  452.


460  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  .  [part

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie.

and  I  him. Speak  to  me  a  moment.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. Do  you  remember  anything  about  your  last
illness  1

Yes,  I  do dear. What  would  you  have  me  to  tell  you

about  it  dearest  1
Mother  do  you remember  what  I used  to say to  you

when  I  was  going  away  any  where  1

Mrs.  J.  What  was  it? What  was  it,  Bennie?

Good  bye,  be  back  soon,  don't  worry  about  me.
[He  had  a  habit  of  speaking  just  these  words  to  his  mother
when  going  away  even  for  a  few  hours. — N.  B.  J.]

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  that  is  just  right.

I  thought  you  would  be  glad  to  know,  and  I  say  it  still,
dear.

Mother,  do  you  realize  how  much  I  love  and  think  of  you.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  and  I  think  of  you  always.

Well  I  know  that  dear,  well. But  cannot  you  forget  my
last  illness  dear  and  think  of  me  as  I  am  now.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  but  if  you  can,  tell  me  the  cause  of  your  last
illness.

But  I  did  dearest  ma  I  told  you  I  caught  cold.^

Mrs.  J.  Was  it  only  that  ?

I  was  a  little  tired  dear. The  Sunday  I  went  out  without
my  cap.

Mrs.  .J.  Yes,  Bennie.

You  know  I  was  ill  immediately  after.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

[His  illness  began  the  day  after  the  walk. — H.  de  G.  V.]
1  See  p.  386.


lxl] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  461
It  was  really  that. Cannot  you  think  so  dear.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  and  I  will  think  no  more  of  your  illness.
Oh  I  will  be  so  glad.

Dear  one  I  want  you  to  feel  me  as  I  am.  Better  so  .  .
Better  so.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

You  will  all  come  some  day  and  we  shall  meet  and
know  each  other  perfectly,  and  you  will  know  all
that  I  am  telling  you  now  dear.

Do  not  cry.

Do  not  weep  dear. I  feel  it  all.
Mrs.  J.  No. Bennie,  do  you  know  sometimes  when  I  talk  to  you?

Yes  I  do  very  well.  I  heard  you  say  not  long  ago
Benny  dear  come  and  let  me  see  you.

[His  mother  says  that  she  has  often  spoken  this  aloud. —
N.  B.  J.]

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

and  I  was  at  your  side  then,  but  your  eyes  are  still
clothed  with  the  veil  of  flesh  and  you  do  not  really
see  me  but  I  hope  and  know  you  feel  me.

I  was  thinking  about  one  of  the  boys  at  school  .  .  Richard
Ellis.  1 Ask  Roble,  he  will  remember  him.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  I  will. I  will.

Also  ask  if  he  remembers  Eob.
Mrs.  J.  Yes.

Do  you  dear.

Mrs.  J.  Tell  me  something  about  him  to  recall  him  to  me.

He  came  over  to  the  house  one  evening  and  we  sat  on
the  rail  and  sang  together,  back  of  the  house.

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie. Perhaps  Eoble  will  remember.

^  See  p.  472.


462  . .  . ■ Helen  de  G.  Verrall. '<■■ : :  ^  .  [part

I  think  he  will.  '  .■ '. - ■  '

Oh  did  I  say  grandpa  gave  me  the  pony  1  ^

Mrs.  J.  No.

I  did  not  recall  just  what  I  did  say  to  dad  about  that  but
I  wanted  to  tell  him  about  Uncle  John  first.

R.  H.  Yes. Then  .  .  • .  ,

then  cousin  Frank  and  uncle  Charlie  and  it  .  .
;  I  think  uncle  Charlie  gave  it  to  me.-

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie,  that  is  wrong.

I  think  perhaps  he  better  not  try  to  recall  just  now  and
wait  a  moment  as  he  is  forgetting. Better  speak  to  him.

R.  H.  Bennie,  never  mind  about  that  now.  But  next  time,  perhaps
you  could  begin  when  you  come  in  and  say  so-and-so
gave  the  pony,  then  you  might  go  on  and  say  what
your  friend  Frank  who  has  recently  gone  to  your  side
has  to  say,  and  then  .  .

Yes,  wait  a  moment,  do  you  not  think  I  am  getting  clearer
any  way  my  good  friend.  It  is  hard  to  come  into  the
light  sometimes.

R.  H.  Yes,  don't  worry.  Don't  worry  about  it.  Then  you  might
end  up  with  your  uncles  in  the  body.

Mrs.  J.  (to  R.  H.)  I  want  to  ask  a  question.

(Hand  listens  to  Mrs.  J.)

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  bring  a  message  next  time  from  grandma  Junot  to
your  father.  Ask  her  why  she  never  comes  to  us  at
these  sittings.

But  she  has  dear,  only  I  fear  I  am  a  little  greedy  and  take
up  all  the  light  dear  mother,  but  I  do  not  mean  to.

Can  you  not  talk  to  me  as  you  did  when  I  was  in  the
body,  and  did  you  not  make  dad  U.  D.  what  I  was
driving  at  when  I  told  yoa  about  the  changes  on  the
old  place.

1  See  p.  429.  =  See  p.  455.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Piper.  463
Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  we  understood  that. Think  no  more  about  it.
All  right,  I  will  not  dear.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  all  that  you  have  said  to  me  to-day  has  made  me
very  happy.

Well  dearest  mother  I  am  glad  but  I  want  to  tell  you
more  and  more  about  myself  my  life  the  things  I  did
when  I  was  in  the  body  with  you  all,  and  prove  con-
clusively that  I  am  really  your  son  Benny,  and  that  my
mistakes  are  not  due  to  lack  of  memory  on  my  part  or
lack  of  love  for  j'ou,  but  due  to  a  misunderstanding  on
the  part  of  the  good  man  who  is  good  enough  to
repeat  my  words  to  you  and  other  spirits  who  some-
times interrupt  me  when  I  am  speaking.

Ma,  who  is  Billie  1

Mrs.  J.  Your  uncle  Willie  ? (Assent)  Yes.

I  only  mention  this  as  I  tried  to  say  it  as  I  went  out
before.

and  I  got  young  Allen  and  Will  i  in  my  mind  for  dad  and

I  could  not  say  what  I  wanted  to.
Uncle  Frank  has  just  told  . . nudged  me  and  said  go  tell

your  mother  about  Billie,  Benny,  and  see  what  she  will

say  to  that.

(R.  H.  reads  the  whole  sentence  over  in  a  natural  manner
as  if  speaking  it  himself  and  not  merely  slowly  decipher-
ing it.)

Yes,  this  is  exactly  right,  how  did  you  do  it  1  How  did
you  happen  to  hear  me  so  distinctly,  I  am  delighted.

R.  H.  Well,  Eector  made  the  machine  work,  and  although  I  could
not  read  it  at  first,  it  was  all  well  done  by  him.

All  right,  that  explains  about  my  affectionate  uncles.
Dear  mother,  speak,  I  am  getting  away  from  you,  dear.

*  *  *


^See  p.  450  where  allusion  to  Allen  is  followed  by  the  words  "I  mean  Will."
— H.  deG.  V.


464


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


18th  Sitting.
February  20,  1901. Present:  Mrs.  J.  and  R  H.
(Bennie  communicating.)

Good  morning  dearest  mother,  I  am  here  once  more,  thanks
to  our  Heavenly  Father,  and  I  am  glad  to  see  you,  and
glad,  very  glad,  that  you  can  U.  D.  me  better.

(Mrs.  J.  has  articles  on  table,  and  hand  holds  up  mould  of
Abraham  Lincoln.)

Is  this  A.  L.  .  .  friend  hold  this  before  him  .  .

Abraham  Lincoln.

(Mrs.  J.  holds  the  mould  up.)

Mks.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  am  glad  to  see  you  once  more.

I  am  glad  too.  Now  I  have  ever  so  many  things  to  tell
you,  and  if  they  can  hear  all  I  say  we  will  not  misunder-
stand each  other.

I  saw  Uncle  Frank,  had  a  long  talk  with  him,  he  sends
great  love  to  Aunt  Alice  and  although  you  may  as  he
U.  D.  not  be  able  to  tell  her  just  what  he  said,  he
sends  the  message  through  me  just  the  same.  Good
morning,  friend.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  I  will  take  the  message  to  Aunt  Alice.

And  do  you  remember  another  Benjamin  in  our  family,
dear  Mother?

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  tell  me  about  him.

I  want  to  tell  you  I  have  been  with  him  since  I  saw  you>
Mrs.  J.  Do  you  mean  your  grandfather"!

I  do,  and  he  sends  love  to  dad.
Mrs.  J.  Yes.

and  grandma  told  me  .  .
(Perturbation  in  hand)

Oh  I  hope  I  can  give  you  all  their  messages  straight,  dear.


LXI.]


Beport  on  the  Jimot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Piper.  465


Do  not  hurry  so  dear  boy  (To  Bennie  from  Rector.)  to  give
her  love  to  dad,  to  yourself,  to  all  her  dear  children,  and
tell  them  she  is  watching  over  them  constantlj'.

[This  is  characteristic. — N.  B.  J.]

Do  you  hear  me  dearest  ?

Mbs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

and  do  you  see  cousin  Frank.
Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie,  is  he  here"? (Hand  points  to  right  front.)
Mbs.  J.  Standing  over  there  ?

Right  by  my  side.  I  do  not  believe  I  can  keep  him  long,,
but  he  sends  love  to  his  mother.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  she  will  be  glad  to  hear  from  him.

and  wants  to  ask  her  if  she  remembers  the  queer  little
picture  she  has  of  him  when  he  had  little  trousers  .  .
ah  ah  ah  on  .  .  he  laughs.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  your  father  will  be  glad  too to  have  these
messages  for  Aunt  Alice.

She  will  know  how  he  loves  her,  will  she  not,  mother.  He

talks  of  her  constantly.
And  do  you  remember  of  my  speaking  of  George.^

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  yes.

He  sends  love  also.
Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  my  cousin  George  you  mean  ?

(Assent.)

he  told  me  not  to  forget  it.
Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  give  him  my  love.

he  used  to  be  so  jolly.
Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie.

^  See  p.  401.


466


Helen  de  G.  Verrall. ,  ■ .  [part


This  is  a  joke  dear  mother  because  he  was  never  known  to

smile  .  .  . •■  '.

[This cousin George had  not long  been deceased.  He

scarcely  ever  smiled  and  during  his  life  this  was  a  source

of  jokes  in  the  family. — N.  B.  J.J
and  we  often  remark  .  .  we  remark  it  here.
And  I  speak  it  in  particular  that  you  may  know  just  who

I  mean.

Yes,  all  right.  Go  on  I  hear  you.  (between  Bennie  and
Rector.)

Tell  mother  I  did  not  really  suffer  as  she  thought,  and
after  I  reach  here  I  feel  so  happy.  Ask  her  if  she  has
the  little  piece  of  hair  she  took  from  my  head.  I  saw
her  cut  it  off. F  [1] C  [?]

Mes.  J.  Is  it  Bennie  speaking  1

No  it  is  Frank  C  [?]  who  says  this,  not  I.

Mks.  J.  Very  good. I  will  ask  her.

and  ask  her  if  she  remembers  the  tune  I  used  to  whistle
that  she  did  not  like.

Mks.  J.  Yes. Is  this  Frank  talking  ?

Yes  it  is.
Mrs.  J.  Yes.

and  do  you  remember  me

Mrs.  J.  Oh  yes.

M^ell  do  you  remember  how  I  looked  aud  something  about
my  eyes.

Mrs.  J.  I  remember  how  you  looked,  but  I  cannot  recall  anything
about  your  eyes.  ,  ...

Don't  you  think  I  looked  like  my  dear  mother  in  this
particular  1

Mrs.  J.  I  do  not  know,  Frank.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Pvper.  467


Father  tells  me  so  every  day.

[The  cousin  Frank  who  communicates  above  died  of  a  linger-
ing illness.  His  messages  to  his  mother  were  reported  to
her,  but  were  not  understood  by  her. — N.  B.  J.]

Mother  dear  I  am  here  wailing.  Do  not  worry  dear  I
will  say  it  all  before  I  go.

Grandma  Junot  is  so  glad  to  see  you.  She  wants  very
much  to  have  dad  know  how  deeply  she  loves  him  and
how  glad  she  is  to  have  found  him  in  the  body.

U.  D.  me  if  you  can  because  my  mind  is  full  this  day.

I  think  she  is  a  dear  good  grandma  and  is  very  fond  of
you  all.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  knew  you  would  think  so.
Yes,  I  do.

Do  you  remember  how  patient  she  used  to  be  dear  ?

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

Mother  dear  is  tliat  not  grandma's  painting  you  had  in  the
sitting  room.

[We  have  long  had  in  our  sitting-room  a  little  childhood
-  ..,  -  .. painting  by  this  grandmother. It  is  kept  in  a  cabinet
with  some  family  keepsakes. — N.  B.  J.]

Mrs.  J.  Yes.  ,

She  told  me  it  was  and  to  refer  to  it  for  you  to  let  you
'■■  <  know  she  could  see  you  all  at  home  and  that  things

of  hers  attracted  her  to  you.  It  is  the  same  with  me.
She  says  tell  Aunt  Alice  not  to  feel  that  God  has  been
unjust  to  her,  but  to  feel  that  it  is  better  as  it  is.

[For  reasons  well  understood  in  the  family  these  words  are
very  significant.  It  Avould  be  difficult  for  our  mother
to  better  identify  herself  in  words. — N.  B.  J.]

Mrs.  J.  Yes. You  are  doing  splendidly,  Bennie.

I  am  glad  to  have you  hear  me  so  well. Prudens  ^  is

helping  me  greatly,  and  is  so  good  to  me.
Grandma  had  the  old  secretary,  didn't  she  ?

^Another  of  the  controls.


468  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

Mrs.  J.  I  don't  know  about  this.

Ask  Aunt  Alice,  she  knows  and  it  refers  to  her.
And  do  you  remember

Mks.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

I

another  boy  cousin  of  mine  here.
He  came  long  ago.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

Grandma  said  refer  to  him  too  dear  when  you  speak  be-
cause his  TBother  would  be  glad  to  know.  Do  not  forget
these  things  Benny  boy.

[We  understand  perfectly  who  this  cousin  is  and  why  our
mother  directed  that  word  be  sent  to  his  mother. —
N.  B.  J.]

You  see  he  came  here  before  Frank  did.

R.  H.  Do  you  mean  his  mother  is  in  the  body  ?

I  think  he  does. I  will  ask  again.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  I  understand  these  messages  perfectly.

All  right,  then  we  won't  bother  and  you  can  tell  him  later,
I  mean  my  good  friend  who  has  taken  so  many  mes-
sages of  mine  to  you.

R.  H.  Yes,  that's  all  right. Don't  bother.

And  by  the  way  before  I  forget  she  toM  me  to  tell  you
she  sent  her  love  to  uncle  Charlie  and  Uncle  Billie,  is
that  straight,  mother  dearl

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie.

[This  was  quite  natural  save  that  the  uncle  referred  to  as
Billie  is  commonly  called  "Willie"  in  the  family. — N.  B.  J.]

I  thought  not  quite.  Then  I  have  got  your  brothers  and
dad's  mixed  up  a  little,  haven't  1 1

Mrs.  J.  Yes.

[Uncle  Charlie  and  Uncle  Willie  are  brothers  of  Mrs.  Junot

— H.  de  G.  v.]
(Hand  holds  up  A.  L.  mould.)
Yes,  all  right. I  mean  uncle  Charlie.


LXi.] Re-port  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  469


Mrs.  J.  Do  you  wish  to  send  a  message  to  him'?

I  do. Tell  him  as  I  said  before  I  think  of  him  often,  and

wonder  if  he  knows  I  am  still  living  somewhere.
And  does  Uncle  Will  know  too  1

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

Give  him  my  love  and  Grandma's  too.

That's  not  for  him  but  for  uncle  John. He  is  dad's  brother

[Correct.— N.  B.  J.]
Friend  we  will  have  to  wait  a  moment
Better  speak  a  little  sentence  to  him  now  friend  or  re-read

his  father's  letter.
(Letter  of  Feb.  19  read  again.) (See  p.  457.)

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  does  it  give  you  as  much  pleasure  to  come  here  as
it  gives  to  us  1

I  think  it  does,  more  if  possible  dear,  because  I  am  very
glad  to  come  always,  and  they  are  all  so  good  to  me,
the  only  thing  that  troubles  me  is  the  imperfection  of
my  speech.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  these  talks  with  you  have  been  of  more  help  to  me
than  anything  else,  and  have  comforted  me  greatly.

And  also  me,  dearest.  .  You  know  how  I  love  you  and
how  happy  we  were  together  in  the  body,  do  you  not  1

Mrs.  J.  Oh  yes,  Bennie. Sometimes  I  think  I  cannot  live  without
you.

But  do  not  feel  like  that  any  more  because  I  am  really
^ with  you  although  you  cannot  see  me  dearest  mother.
I  often  hear  you  cry  out  to  me Benny  dear  where  are
you.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  but  I  feel  very  sure  that  you  are  with  me.

This  comforts  me  because  I  am  certainly,  and  I  never  fail
to  see  you  every  day  of  your  life.

And  when  I  hear  you  call  I  feel  as  though  I  could  touch
you,  dearest,  and  yet  I  know  you  could  not  feel  me  if
I  did  because  you  are  still  covered  by  your  body,  and
I  am  Benny  in  spirit  without  the  body  I  used  to  have


470


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


Mrs.  J.  Yes,  and  Bennie,  it  makes  me  very  glad  to  know  that  you
are  happy  in  your  life  on  the  other  side.

I  was  I  thought  as  happy  as  I  could  be  when  I  h  .  .
owned  the  body,  but  after  I  left  it  I  found  I  did  not
know  what  happiness  was.  I  found  I  had  not  drifted
away  into  some  dark  corner  where  I  could  not  see  you,
but  I  saw  you  almost  as  soon  as  I  lost  control  of  my
body,  and  I  was  so  happy,  and  I  was  told  that  I
should  see  clearer  and  clearer  [clear]  as  time  passed  and
so  I  have,  dear,  and  when  I  have  seen  you  grieve  I
.  -  have  said  Oh  well  it  is  not  for  long,  and  it  is  only  a
condition  of  the  body.

Mother  cannot  you  tell  me  of  Judge,i  I  wish  so  much  to
hear.  And  does  he  think  I  am  living  or  does  he  think
I  am  dead. Tell  me  if  you  think  it  right  to  do  so.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  do  you  mean  the  Major  ?

.  Yes, I do, but Rector always calls him judge  instead
although  he  has  once  or  twice  heard  it  right.

Mrs.  J.  The  Major  came  to  see  us  this  winter,  and  spoke  often  of
you. He  is  going  to  Osterville  next  .summer.

Well  I  am  glad  to  hear  this  and  I  will  certainly  be  there
too.

Mrs.  J.  Perhaps  I  may  go  there  again.  We  were  so  happj^
together  the  last  summer  you  were  with  us,  that  I
want  now  to  go  back.

I  wish  you  would  and  I  have  told  you  this  and  you  have

felt  it  dear.
I  am  so  glad.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  shall  certainly  go  now.

I  have  again  and  again  told  you  to  recover  from  the  past
and  go  back.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.  In  one  of  your  talks  with  Dr.  Hodgson,  you
spoke  of  Cranberries.^  What  did  you  mean  1  Do  you
remember  ?

iSee  p.  443.  ^See  p.  426.


LXi.] ' Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  471
Yes,  perfectly. I  meant  Blueberries.  ,

[In  a  former  sitting  "cranberries"  were  spoken  of,  but  not
understood.  But  the  explanation  brings  backs  to  his
mother's  memory  clearly  the  incident  during  liis  last
'  .  '  -  summer  at  Osterville.  One  day  he  brought  in  several
■.  :,•  clumps  of  blueberries  to  her  in  his  hat.  They  were  not
plenty  there,  though  they  were  at  Rye  Beach,  where  we
had  formerly  spent  our  summers. — ISI.B.  J.]

Mes.  J.  Oh  yes,  Bennie.

and  I  thought  after  I  said  it  I  would  rectify  it.

Mrs.  J.  Oh  yes,  Bennie. I  understand  now.

Do  you  remember  of  my  putting  them  in  my  hat  1
Mes.  J.  Oh  yes,  perfectly.

and  the  little  clumps  I  picked  on  their  stems  for  you

R.  H.  "clumps"  .  .  what  ofl
Blueberries.

They  were  so  thick  on  their  stems.
Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

Well  you  tell  dad  won't  you.  I  forget  names  of  things
like  that  now,  and  it  takes  me  a  long  time  to  recall
them  when  I  think  so  fast.

Mrs.  J. Yes, I will tell your  father. Bennie,  can  you  tell  me
anything  about  youi-  friend  Frank  now  1

Oh  yes  he  is  getting  used  to  this  life.  I  do  not  see  him
as  I  do  my  own  family  dear,  but  I  see  him  occasionally,
and  he  is  very  well  satisfied  with  this  life.  He  told  me
about  the  watch  dear  as  a  test  for  his  father.^

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  will  find  out  about  it  as  soon  as  I  can.

Do  you  remember  a  friend  of  ours  by  the  name  of  Wood.-

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie.

(Hand  listens  to  Spirit.)  .  .

1  See  p.  454.  See  p.  397.


472  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

Wood  .  .  1  .  .  wait  it  is  something  more.
(Hand  holds  up  cap.)

Where  is  my  gold  jjencil  .  .  I  had  better  write  it  for  you.
Woodley  [1]

Yes  he  and  Roble  myself  and  two  other  friends  played
ball  just  before  we  left  .  .  the  school  [?  fragmentary  at
end  of  line.]

R.  H.  "before  we  left  the  summer"?

for  the  summer. We  went  to  school  together

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  I  can't  recall  this ;  but  I  will  ask  Eoble  about  it.

Oh  yes,  that  will  do,  and  don't  forget  Rob  Eaton  .  .  Rob
Eaton  not  Ellis  .  .  Rob  Eaton.  [Names  not  known
to  any  of  us. — N.  B.  J.]

[Apparently  correction  from  name  Ellis  mentioned  on  p.  461.
— H.  de  G.  v.]

Mrs.  J.  I  do  not  recall  this  name  but  I  will  ask  Roble.
All  right  dear.

About uncle  John  again  I  wanted  to  rectify  any  errors

before  I  got  too  far  away.
Now  talk  to  me  a  moment.
Did  you  find  my  letters.^

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  found  your  letters  and  put  them away  as
you  told  me.

That  helps  me  greatly  dear.

I  wanted  Helen  to  have  the  Kodak.^

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  found  it  and  will  give  it  to  her.
I  am  glad. Was  it  all  right,  not  broken?

Mrs.  J.  No,  it  is  broken.

I  thought  I  heard  you  say  this,  and  it  bothered  me  a  little.
Mrs.  J.  I  will  have  it  mended  for  her  if  you  wish.

1  See  p.  382.  ^ p.  395.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Jvnot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  473

I  do  very  much  dear,  I  think  it  will  help  her  and  she  will
enjoy  using  or  learning  to  use  it.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  I  will  have  her  use  it. Bennie,  do  you  know  how
much  she  enjoys  skating  ?

(Excitement  in  hand.)
Yes,  I  do.

Mrs.  J.  Do  you  remember  how  you  used  to  like  it  ?

(Further  excitement  in  hand.)

Well  I  do  very  well.

Ask  dad  if  he  can  skate  now.

Mrs.  J.  Oh  no,  Bennie,  he  can't  skate,  but  he  goes  with  Helen
sometimes.

I  see  him,  but  skating  is  out  of  dad's  line  a  little.
But  Roble  got  a  tumble  I  see  not  so  long  ago.^

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  I  shall  see  him  in  a  few  days,  and  will  ask  him  about
it.

All  right,  that  will  be  splendid  because  I  often  watch  him

to  see  what  is  going  on.
He  is  a  good  boy,  mother  dear.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  and  he  misses  you  so  much, Bennie. You are  so
much  to  him.

Well,  we  had  splendid  times  together  and  got  on  splendidly,
don't  you  think  so  1

Mrs.  J.  Yes. I  thiidc  no  two  brothers  ever  got  along  together  so
well  as  you  and  Roble.

I  have  often  thought  myself  how  well  we  used  to  agree,
and  I  have  often  thought  of  the  good  times  we  had.  Oh
mother  it  was  not  all  due  to  ourselves  I  fear.  We  had
the  best  mother  that  ever  lives  also  father.  You  were
always  so  good  to  us.

1  See  p.  442.
2h


474


Helen  de  G.  VerraU.


[part


Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  I  must  go  soon  now,  and  may  not  see  you  again
for  a  long  time. Have  you  any  special  message  for  me  ?

I  have  much  to  say.  I  want  you  to  feel  dearest  that
although  I  seem  a  nonentity  so  far  as  your  sight  is
concerned  but  that  I  live  on  with  you  an  individual
and  spiritual  being  your  boy  just  .  .

and  when  you  are  at  home  and  call  out  for  me  I  will  be
near  and  in  my  own  way  answer  your  call.

♦  *  *  . , .  •

(Waking  Stage.)
Yes,  I  hear  you  .  .  Yes.

(Mrs.  P.  wafts  a  kiss  from  her  lips  with  her  fingers.)
That's  a  .  .  this  is  grandma,  this  is  grandpa  and  this  is  uncle.
There  was  a  young  man  almost  in  my  way. I  didn't  step
on  him,  did  1 1

19th  Sitting.

April  15,  1901.  Present:  R.  H.

(Rector  communicating.)

Whilst  we  are  preparing  Hugh  ^  we  wish  to  ask  thee
what  is  desired  of  Frank  Clark.  He  also  wishes  to
know,  and  Benny  has  asked  the  question  also.

R.  H.  His  mother,  Frank  Clarke's  mother,  says  that  the  questions
put  by  Frank  Clarke  as  tests  were  all  entirely  wrong.
But  she  asks  me  to  say  that  she  will  bear  whatever  life
has  in  store  for  her  in  future  with  more  fortitude  for
having  heard  from  him,  and  though  if  he  had  said
something  about  his  own  little  child  or  his  young  brother
it  would  have  been  better  as  a  test,  she  does  not  ask
it,  she  will  only  continue  to  pray  for  him  that  he  may
strive  always  after  the  noblest  things,  that  he  may
improve  his  opi^ortunities,  that  he  may  grow  in  grace
and  in  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  until  they  meet  again.

Amen.

Friend  we  can  sincerely  account  for  many  seeming  errors

because  of  our  lack  of  U.  D.  and  hearing  of  late.
*  *  *

What  were  the  questions  asked  of  Clark  ?

^  Another  communicator.


lxl]


Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  luith  Mrs.  Piper.  475


R.  H.  I  do  not  think  that  they  asked  questions  of  him.  He
asked  questions  as  tests.  I  think,  for  example,  he  said
something  like — ask  father  or  mother  if  they  remember
the  watch  I  had.

Ah  friend,  we  U.  D.  that  as  having  come  from  another

Frank.'^

R.  H.  I  do  not  know,  Eector,  that  may  be  so.  The  record  is
not  yet  returned  to  me  from  Bennie's  father  since  they
were  here,  so  that  I  could  not  examine  this  for  myself,
and  therefore  I  could  only  read  you  what  this  lady
wrote  to  me  some  time  ago.

+  Bring  this  before  us  as  soon  as  the  conditions  will  permit,
as  any  and  all  errors  will  be  completely  rectified  and
made  dear.

20th  Sitting.
January  13,  1902.  Present:  R.  H.

(Bennie  communicating.)
How  are  you  my  friend,  tell  Dad  there  was  some  mistake
about  the  Franks  but  I  will  clear  it  up  for  him  all
right  -  .  .

Glad  to  see  you  very  and  very  grateful  to  you.  R.^

R.  H.  "  R." Eoble. I  shall  be  pleased  to  take your  message.
You  will  see  your  father  I  trust  after  four  Sabbaths.

:  '  •  2  1st  Sitting.

Jamiary  15,  1902.  Present:  li.  H.

(Bennie  communicating.)
How  are  you  my  friend.
Ask  Dad  if  can  find  my  LeaTher  Bag.

1  The  recollection  of  the  conti'ols  is  correct  on  this  point. See  p.  454.
^  See  previous  sitting.

^  If  this  is  intended  as  a  signature  it  is  incorrect,  Bennie's  initials  being
B.  H.  J.  On  p.  3S4  he  gives  his  name  as  Benjamin  Roble  Junot,  but  afterwards
gives  his  initials  correctly.  ^ — H.  de  G.  V.


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

Yes.

I  left  a  few  letters  in  it.  Benny.

I  suppose  they  have  long  since  been  taken  but  I  happened

to  recall  it  a  few  minutes  ago.
Pretty  well  are  you

Yes,  Bennie,  thanks,  except  for  a  damaged  knee.

Take  a  ride  on  horseback  when  it  gets  better it  will  do
you  good.

Thanks,  I  will.

I'll  go  along  with  you  to  see  that  all  goes  well.
Thanks.

Tell  Dad  that  the  wreath  all  faded  very  soon  after  he  placed
it  there.

[Extract  from  N.  B.  J.'s  letter,  January  20,  1902.

"Just  after  Christmas  I  went  to  visit  Bennie's  grave.  I  did  not
place  a  wreath  there,  but  I  did  bring  and  place  upon  the  grave  a
bunch  of  flowers  and  some  one  else  had  very  lately  left  a  Christmas
wreath  there.  It  was  a  cold  and  windy  day  and  I  arranged  my
fresh  flowers  in  and  around  the  wreath.

His  letters  were  found  by  his  mother  after  his  death  carefully
tied  up,  but  they  were  not  in  a  leather  bag."]

22nd  Sitting.
January  29,  1902.  Present:  R.  H.

(Rector  communicating.)

Friend  what  news  from Benny's  father,  he  is  anxious  to
know.

R.  H.  They  were  delighted  to  be  able  to  come.  I  supposed  that
was  settled.

(Hand  shakes  as  if  to  indicate  doubt.)

R.  H.  But  perhaps  I  should  have  stated  before  that  they  said  at
once  that  they  would  be  here  and  looked  forward  to  it
very  much.  They  will  be  on  hand  after  second  Sabbath
as  arranged. They  .  .


476
R.  H.


R.  H.

R.  H.
R.  H.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Pi^yer.  477


(Hand  talks  energetically  with  Spirit  moving  fingers  much.)

R.  H.  The  leather  bag  they  don't  remember  finding  any  letters  in ;

the  wreath  was  on  Bennie's  grave  but  not  placed  there  by
his  father,  but  his  father  was  there  and  saw  the  wreath
and  twined  other  flowers  with  it.

(Hand  talks  with  Spirit  as  before.)

He  says  he  saw  his  father  there  and  saw  him  doing  some-
thing which  he  took  to  be  the  placing  of  the  wreath.

R.  H.  Yes,  I  understand.

friend  if  thou  couldst  know  the  delight  of  this  young  man
thou  wouldst  feel  at  peace  with  God  for  the  comfort
and  privileges  He  hath  given  thee  and  him  i.e.  enabling
them  to  speak  to  each  other

The  fact  of  this  young  man's  referring  constantly  to  letters
is  proof  to  us  of  a  recollection  of  some  which  he  left
and  which  have  not  to  his  mind  been  explained  satis-
factorily, otherwise  he  would  not  be  groping  in  his
memory  for  them  and  to  recall  where  he  left  them  .  .

We  hope  ere  long  this  will  be  cleared  up  for  his  sake.

It  is  a  lingering  memory.

R.  H.  His  father  said  that  since  Bennie  left  they  had  found  a
packet  of  letters,  although  they  were  not  in  a  leather
bag.  That  is  all  I  know.  I  will  ask  his  father  to  give
Bennie  such  information  as  he  can  when  they  meet.

This  will  greatly  assist  him  in  recalling  other  things,  i.e.

as  soon  as  his  mind  is  quite  clear  on  this  point.
Friend fancy thyself  coming to our side suddenly  and

leaving  important  letters  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  others

which  thou  wouldst  not  have  them  see,  and  thou  wilt

U.  D.  his  case  somewhat.

*  *  *  ■

23rd  Sitting.
Fehruary  10,  1902.
Present :  N.  B.  J.  mid  R.  H. ;  also  Ilohle  J.  in  course  of  sitting.
give  .  .

(Hand  moves  about  table  as  if  looking  for  something.)


478  ■ .  - Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  ,  [part

R.  H.  Rector,  Kector,  shall  I  mention  two  points  first

(Hand  moves  again  about  table.)  .  .

him  something  and  I  will  go  on.  R.

(I  get  parcel  out  of  bag  and  hand  it  to  N.  B.  J.  to  open.  It
contains  the  cap,  spur,  harmonica  and  medal,  which  N.  B,  J.
places  on  table.)

(Bennie  communicating.)

One  word  to  my  dear  father,  how  glad  I  am  to  see  you,  Dad.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  and  I  am  so  happy.

I  am  told  to  wait  a  moment  so  I  will. B .

*  *  *

I  have  looked  for  and  longed  to  speak  to  you  father  my
dear  father. God  bless  and  keep  you  ,

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

in  the  best  of  light  and  peace.  I  have  been  with  you  a
great  deal,  I  know  all  you  think  and  feel  and  when  you
are  tired  I  often  cheer  you.  I  heard  you  and  Roble
talking  about  me.  I  heard  you  say  he  had  better  study
a  while  longer  what  did  you  mean  by  that  was  it
studying.  Dad  ?

[I  feared  that  Roble  had  been  a  little  too  much  inclined  to
athletics  in  college  and  I  had  been  insisting  upon  more
study.— N.  B.  J.]

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  that's  it. I  told  him  to  study  more.

Yes,  and  he  will  now.  I  was  especially  attracted  to  that
myself. I  think  he  has  been  a  little  behind.

N.  B.  J.  Yes.

But  don't  worry  about  him  dad  he'll  get  there  sure.
I  am  so  far  .  .  not  so  far  removed  but  what  I  can  help
him.

Do  you  hear  me'?


LXi.]  Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  tvith  Mrs.  Piper.  479
N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. Yes,  Bennie. We  hear  you. Go  on.

And  I  saw  the  fall  he  got  could  you  make  it  out^
N.  B.  J.  On  the  ice  yoii  mean,  on  skates '?

Yes.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  he's  all  right  now.

Good. All  right  did  you  say.
N.  B.  J.  Yes.

I  heard  that  perfectly  dad.

N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  do  you  want  Roble  to  come  here  and  speak  ?

More  than  I  can  tell  you. I  told  .  .
(N.  B.  J.  calls  Roble,  who  was  waiting  downstairs.)
you  this  long  ago  in  your  own  mind. When  I  see  him
he'll  know  it.

(Roble  has  entered  while  previous  sentence  was  near  the
end.)

(Excitement  in  hand.)

Well  well  Roble  I  am  glad  to  see  you  once  more  my
brother. Did  you  think  I  was  lost  Roble  —

E.  No.

I  heard  something  and  told  you  steadily  don't  be  lazy,  R  —
study  on  and  I'll  help  you. got  it  .  .

R.  Yes,  I  heard  it.

I  hear  you  sounding  where  I  am.  I  am  right  here  beside
you.  do  you  remember  the  joke  I  made  about  the  Bull
Pen  ^

R.  The  bull  pen  down  at  V  1

Yes.

R.  I don't remember any  joke. Remember  the slide  down
there  ?

Yes  slide  and  fall

1  See  p.  442.  2  g^g  4-29.


480  . Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [pakt

R.  No,  I  mean  the  board  slide.

Yes  I  am  thinking  of  the  same  slide  and  the  fall  you  got
skating.  [Roble  had  lately  received  a  bad  stroke  on
the  head  while  playing  hockey  on  the  ice. — N.  B.  J.]

N.  B.  J.  Lately.

R.  I  didn't  fall,  I  got  hurt.

Yes  I  know  it  well.

Tell  me  are  you  better  R.  I  tried  my  best  to  prevent  it
Benny.

Going  for  a  moment  friend.

N.  B.  J.  (to  R. )  Ask  him  something  distinctive  about  your  childhood.
See  if  you  can't  call  up  his  memory.

Y"ou  almost  take  my  breath  away I  am  so  glad  to  see  you.
I  have  an  idea  you  feel  strange,  but  you  need  not.  Go
on  B .  .

R.  Do  you  remember  the  good  times  we  had  in  the  creek  at
V  wading  with  the  B— —  boysl

Yes  I  do  Koble,  do  you  remember  when  we  went  up  stairs

R.  No,  I  don't  understand.

and  I  took  up  the  stick.

Don't  talk  kindly,  let  me  think  my  thoughts.
Yes  I  remember  it  well. Do  you  remember  two  persons
whom  we  met  in  particular  .  .

R.  No,  I  don't.

and  anything  about  the  stick  I  hunted  for.
Don't  hurry,  think  and  you  will  remember.
Wait  .  .  Stick. Now  let  me  recall  what  I  wish  to  say.
Do  you  remember  Farred  p]

R.  H.  Again  please.

Farrd[?]  Farerr  [?]
R.  H.  "Farrar  ?"

Fred  and  Dvvight  .  .


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Piper.  481


R.  H.  "Fred  and  Dwight."
Dwight  yes.

[The  above  references  to  Dwight  and  later  to  the  wedding
are  well  understood.  Will  try  to  find  out  about  the
stick.— N.  B.  J.]

Cannot  you  U.  D.  me  R.  and  .  .

R..  No,  I  don't  understand.

what  I  am  thinking  about
I  am  .  .

Do  you  remember  the  Stick  or  cane  that  night  .  .
R.  No.
NO.

That  is  strange. I  am  perhaps  not  U.  D.  you.

I  perhaps  did  not  U.  D.  you.

Did  you  not  get  the  wrong  Stick,  E.

N.  B.  J.  I  don't  understand,  Bennie.

Strange  it  is  as  clear  to  me  as  it  can  be.

R.  H.  Bennie,  remember  that  we  all  sometimes  forget  little  inci-
dents. You  will  recall  some  that  Roble  does  not,  and
Roble  will  recall  some  that  you  do  not.  Perhaps
(Hand  turns  to  Spirit  a  moment.  R.  H.  pauses.)  he
will  remember  something  about  it  later.  Or  perhaps
you  can  say  something  more  particular  about  it  now  to
recall  it  to  him.  If  .  .  (Hand  turns  to  Spirit  a  moment)
if  not,  better  try  him  with  something  else.  If  necessary
go  out  a  moment  and  think  over  some  things  you  and
Roble  did  together.

Yes,  what  I  did  do. [Probably  meaning  that  he  went  away

a  moment  to  think  over. — R.  H.)
All  right. Thanks. I'll  have  a  try. (Cross in  air.  A

few  seconds'  pause.)
Yes,  bring  (between  Spirits).
Well  how  are  you  Roble  tell  me  this  first.

R.  I'm  very  well,  Bennie.

Glad  to  see  you  once  more,
like  college


482  Helen  de  0.  Verrall.  [part

R.  Are  you  happy  1

Yes  .  .  very. (In  reply  to  R.'s  question.)
R.  Yes,  very  much. (In  reply  to  Bennie's  question.)

I  am  more  pleased  to  see  you how  is  Helen  and  Mamma

R.  Very  well,  both.

Yes. Roble  do  you  remember  the  time  we  went  to  that

wedding  we  had  a  jolly  time.^
And  now  I  want  to  ask  you  if  you  remember  Dwight.

R.  Oh  I  know. Do  you  mean  when  you  went  on  a  boat  to
Buenna  Park  1

Yes  I  do  and  Stick

I  got  his  Stick. Roble  cannot  you  remember  this  and  the
hat

R.  Do  you  mean  Dwight  H  1

Yes  of  course  he  is  the  only  one  I  knew.
R.  H.  You  mean  the  only  Dwight  you  knew  1
Yes.

R.  Do you  mean  the  time  you  and  Frank  B.  went  out  on
the  boat  to  Buenna  Park  and  got  sick  ?

Yes  I  do  Rohle.

Do  you  remember  Dwight  H

R.  Yes,  I  remember.

Come  here,  let's  talk  it  over.

(R.  takes  place  directly  behind  arm  instead  of  N.  B.  J. R.  had

previously  been  a  little  further  to  riglit.)
Now  think  R.  do  you  remember  anything  about  my  taking
his  Stick  or  cane  .  .

R.  No.

and  putting  niy  hat  on  it  and  making  a  signal.
1  See  p.  481.


LXi.] Re'port  on  the  Junot  Siiti'hys  with  JlJrs.  Piper.  483

R.  No,  you  know  I  did  not  go  on  that  trijj  with  30U.  '

Oh  yes  certainly,  well  how  can  you  know  that,  I  forgot
about  that  I  was  thinking  you  went.  Ask  him  and  he
will  tell  you  what  I  mean.

R.  All  right.

and  it  will  be  quite  clear.  I  am  glad  to  get  it  off  my
mind.

N.  B  J.  (to  R.)  Ask  him  about  Frank.

Ride  any  now  R.

R.  Yes,  I  ride  in  the  summer.

Who  was  that  fellow  by  the  way  who  was  with  you  at
Osterville  since  I  saw  dad  .  .

R.  Do  you  mean  Barney  6  1

I  did  not  really  know,  Roble,  who  it  was.

R.  Bennie,  is  Frank  there  1 Have  you  seen  Frank  B.  1

Yes  every  day,  every  daj',  and  he  often  speaks  of  you.
Shall  I  tell  him  I  have  seen  you,  R  .  .

R.  Yes.  please. Have  you  also  seen  Sam  B  there  ?i

Yes,  and  he  came  very  much  confused
he  had  trouble  in  his  chest.

[This  is  a  friend  of  Bennie  lately  deceased.  His  mother  has
since  told  us  that  he  complained  constantly  of  pain  in
his  chest.— N.  B.  J.]

R.  Do you  remember  when we  and  the  three  B  boys

went  up  to  Fort  Knox  on  a  picnic  and  Sam  R  1

Picnic  .  .

Yes. Sam  does.

Do  you  want  to  see  him,  R. What  was  the  dream  about

.  .  me  .  .  was  it  I  .  .
here  he  comes.

^See  p.  429.


484  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

R.  H.  (to  R.)  Don't  speak  unless  the  hand  turns  to  us.

(Hand  moves  cap  and  spur  back.)
Yes.

(G.  P.  communicating.)  How  are  you  old  chap,  glad  to
see  you. What  is  it  H.  want  my  help.

R.  H.  Yes,  George,  I  think  we  do,
I  am  here  on  Deck. G.  P.

keep  my  thoughts  clear  now.  '
Do  you  remember  Grandpa  Junotl

R.  No, I don't remember him, but  do  you remember  his
picture  ?

Yes,  well  I  tried  to  tell  dad  about  it  since  I  came  here.

He  is  with  me  and  often  refers  to  father  and  is  anxious

to  help  him,  U.  D.
I  am  too  excited  I  think,  to  keep  my  thoughts  clear.
I  hope  you  hear  and  U.  D. me  as  I  am  now. Do  you

remember  the  bag  I  referred  to,  R.^

R.  No.

and  the  letters  I  cannot  keep  clear  about  .  .
Oh  if  I  could  only  get  this  cleared  up  I  would  be  glad.  I
often  think  how  I  would  .  .

(N.  B.  J.  produces  and  holds  up  a  packet  of  letters.)

R.  H.  Rector,  here  are  some  letters,  perhaps  they  are  the  ones  he
means.

He  will  know.  (R.  H.  gives  letters  to  hand  which  fingers
the  edges  of  the  envelopes,  all  enclosed  together  in  a
band,  holds  the  packet  up  a  little  in  the  air.  Hand
excited  and  trembling.)

N.  B.  J.  They  are  all  we  could  find.

Those  are  they  .  .  those  are  they  .  .

Yes  I  am  so  glad. Where  did  I  leave  them.

1  See  p.  475.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  luith  Mrs.  Piper.  485

N.  B.  J.  At  Osterville. At  Osterville  on  the  table,  there  I  think
your  mother  found  them.

The  last  thing  that  troubled  me  was  in  not  being  able  to

tell  her  destroy  them  .  .
before  I  left.

Was  there  none  in  the  bag.

N.  B.  J.  No. None  were  found  in  a  bag. Shall  your  mother  keep
these  ?

Yes  if  she  wishes,  but  what  good  are  they,  dad  t

N.  B.  J.  Your  mother  likes  them  as  a  keepsake  in  your  memory.

All  right,  let  it  be  so  then. I  am  glad  to  get  it  off  my

mind  that  is  all.
I  want  to  ask  you  Roble  about  the  .  .

now  if  you  remember  the  illness  I  had  and  how  suddenly
I  came.

R.  Yes,  I  remember  it,  Bennie,  and  do  you  remember  the  last
morning  we  had  together  at  Osterville,  that  last  morning
out  swimming?

Yes  I  do  well.  I  tried  to  tell  Mamma,  did  she  not  tell
you

R.  No,  she  didn't  tell  me,  but  I  thought  that  was  where  you
got  hurt  perhaps.

I  told  her  to  ask  you  if  you  remember  the  water  and  the

time  we  went  in.
Did  she  not  tell  you  or  did  that  gentleman  not  tell  you.

R.  No,  he  did  not  tell  me,  but  I  remember  it  very  well  there.

[It  is  not  clear  to  what  Bennie  here  refers.  On  p.  387
immediately  after  an  allusion  to  his  brother,  he  mentions
to  Mrs.  J.  the  capsizing  of  the  boat  and  his  getting  wet,
but  says  nothing  about  swimming. — H.  de  G.  V.]

Do  you  remember  the  dip  (Hand  makes  motion  down
suggesting  a  dive.)


486  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

R.  Dive?  '  .

Yes. What  was  it.  '

R.  Yes,  I  remember. Do  you  remember  the  dive  off  the  little
pier  when  you  cut  your  s  .  .

Yes  I  do.

R.  Oh,  yes,  I  remember  that.

I  felt  .  .  Do  you  remember  the  little  boat^  and  the  boat
house. Dad  could  not.

R.  Yes,  I  remember, I  remember  the  boat. Do  you  mean  at
Osterville  1

Yes  I  am  talking  about  Osterville  and  all  we  did  there
together.  Do  you  remember  that  morning  whom  we  met
when  we  came  out  of  the  water.

R.  Yes. Do  you  mean  Miss  N  1

I  tried  to  tell  this  also. I  think  Dad  will  remember.

N.  B.  J.  I  can't  remember,  Bennie.

Did  I  not  tell  you  of  the  boat  and  of  my  going  into  the
water.  ,

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  you  did.

I  thought  so,  but  Roble  will  remember  I  know.

R.  Yes,  do  you  mean  where  we  capsized  that  day  1

I  do  but  dad  could  not  think  about  it.

N  .B.  J.  I  remember  that  you  told  j'our  mother  that  you  got  sick
from  going  fishing.

fishing  .  .

do  you  remember  the  time  the week  before  I  got  sick

Eoble  .  .
it  rained

and  we  went  fishing.

1  See  pp.  387  and  443.


LXi.] Riqoort  on  the  Junot  Sittings  vjith  Mrs.  Piper.  487

R.  Fishing  with  Major  G.  1

Yes  I  said  the  Major.

This  is  where  I  first  felt  that  I  was  sick.

R.  Yes,  I  remember  that.

[The  fishing  expedition  took  place  about  two  weeks  before

Bennie's  death.— H.  de  G.  V.]
I  then  got  a  long  walk  with  dad  without  my  hat  on  Sunday

morning.

R.  Yes,  I  remember  when you and  he  went  walking  that
Sunday  morning.

And  he  told  me  to  go  and  get  my  hat.

R.  Yes,  I  remember  that  too.

N.  B.  J.  (to  R.)  Let  him  go  on.

I  did  not  feel  well  then.

Oh  I  wish  I  could  tell  you  all  I  remember  but  George
somebody  is  verj'  good  to  us  here  and  by  the  way  you
never  spoke  to  Sam  what  will  I  tell  him'?

N.  B.  J.  (toR.)  Ask  him  if  Sam's  there  now.

R.  Is  Sam  there  now  ?

Yes.  ■

N.  B.  J.  (to  R.)  Ask  him  if  he  wants  to  send  a  message  to  his  mother.

And  do  you  remember  Frank  Clark  he  is  here  also  and
sends  much  love  to  his  family U.  D.

R.  Yes,  I  remember  Frank.

Why  do  I  get  so  weak.

R.  Bennie,  do  you  mean  uncle  Frank  Clarke  or  cousin  Frank
Clarke  1

Cousin  .  .  Frank  Clark.

N.  B.  J.  (toR.)  Ask  him  what  message  he  sends  to  his  mother.


488  Helen  de  0.  Verrall.  [part

Eoble  he  is  wide  awake  and  tells  me  he  is  glad  to  see  you

and  wishes  you  to  tell  Aunt  Alice
that  she  is  in  his  thoughts  constantly  and  she  is  not  to

think  of  hira  as  dead U.  D.

R.  Yes.

Do  not  forget  this,  Roble.

R.  No,  I'll  tell  her,  I'll  tell  her.

like  Study  .  .  not  much  .  .

stick  to  it  and  good  times  later,  li.

I  have  seen  the  Major  ^  several  times  since  I  left  the  body.
R.  Major  G.  ?
Yes.

Will  you  get  time  to  tell  him  I  think  of  him  a  great  deal
and  the  good  times  we  had.

R.  Yes,  I'll  tell  him.

Tell  mother  I  love  her  dearly  will  you.

R.  Yes,  I'll  tell  her.

And  she  is  not  to  worry  about  anything.
What  happens  is  always  best.

R.  All  right,  I'll  tell  her.

Helen  had  a  sore  throat  ^
but  it  did  not  remain  long.
Did  you  know  it

R.  No,  I  didn't  know  it.

did  you  dad.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  I  knew  about  it,  Bennie.

I  took  care  of  that  myself.
Music  is  all  right  too.
I  am  still  with  you.

iSee  p.  408.  2. See  p.  438.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  489

I  forgot  to  talk  about  the  Picnic  but  I  will  tell  you  next
time.

Do  you  see  me  or  only  hear  me,  R.

R.  I  only  hear  you,  Bennie. [Of  course  he  doesn't,  he  only
sees  the  writing. — II.  H.]

Did  Mamma  tell  you  I  longed  to  see  you  where  I  could

speak  .  .
the  light  is  going.
More  anon.  Benny.

N.  B.  J.  He  always  writes  his  name  with  a  y  here.

Farewell.

24:TH  Sitting.

Februaru  11,  1902.  Present:  N.B.J,  aid  R.  H.

(Bennie  communicating.)

Dad  dear  do  you  realize  how  much  I  think  and  care  for
you.

N.  B.  .J.  Yes,  Bennie,  we  know  you  love  us.

Do  you  feel  me  when  I  am  near  you  at  home  or  are  you
too  heavy  to  know  it.

N.  B.  J.  Sometimes  at  home  I  think  I  feel  you,  but  I  am  not  sure.

Wait  for  me  and  in  time  you  will  I  know.
I  hear  almost  everything  you  say.

Do  you  remember  what  I  told  you  that  I  saw  at  the  grave. ^
N.B.J.  Yes,  Bennie,  were  you  there  when  I  was  there  1
quiet,  dear  boy (Rector  to  Bennie.)

Yes  I  stood  beside  you  there.  I  saw  the  wreath  and  as  I
saw  you  stoop  I  tried  to  see  the  shape  of  the  flowers
you  put  in  it.  Objects  sometimes  seem  quite  clear,
then  again  they  seem  to  lose  their  shape  completely.
How  is  father  .  .


'  See  ]3.  476.
2  I


490


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  did  you  hear  what  I  said  when  I  placed  the  dowers
on  your  grave

he  said  Bennie  these  are  for  you  dear  and  something
else.  I  will  think  it  over  and  tell  this  gentleman  some
day  and  .  .

N.  B.  J.  That's  just  what  I  did  say.

let  me  know

R.  H.  "let  me  know."

N.B.J,  (to  R.  H.)  "let  you  know"  he  means.

N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  don't  bother  about  it  any  more. You  have  said  it
right  now.

I  heard  it  quite clearly,  tell  Mr.  H.  you  said  something

about  Doctor  I  think  tell  Doctor  this.
[At  the  grave,  I  said  aloud  :  "  Dear  Bennie,  these  flowers

are  for  you. We  have  not  forgotten  you. Go  and  tell

Dr.  Hodgson  this."— N.  B.  J.]
(Hand  points  to  Spirit.)

and  Uncle  Frank  said  better  go  tell  him  soon,  B.,  so  I  came
and  told  him.  Now  Dad  as  I  saw  you  there  I  see  you
as  clearl}'  in  other  places  but  I  am  if  possible  nearer
when  j'our  spirit  calls  out  to  mine  or  when  you  handle
anything  I  owned.  Do  you  remember  I  think  it  was
one  Sunday  last  summer  I  saw  you  talking  at  the  Pier
with  Major.  Do  you  recall  it.  You  stood  for  a  while
and  then  walked  up  towards  the  grove.

I  was  near  enough  to  touch  you.  Think  about  it.  was  it
not  Sunday.  Do  you  remember  seeing  the  little  yacht
and  commenting  on  it.

[Not  understood  at  all— N.  B.  J.]

N.  B.  J.  I  do  not  remember. I  was  not  at  the  water  last  summer.
I  cannot  remember,  Bennie.

Yes,  you  were  I  know  think  if  possible  .  .  just  where  it
was  and  I  will  be  glad.

R.  H.  Bennie,  he  may  think  of  it  later.

You  remember  seeing  him  don't  you  ?


Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  491
I  did  not  see  Major  last  summer.
Well  how  long  ago  was  it.
Four  years  ago.

Think  of  the  day  and  you  will  know  what  I  mean.

Bennie,  have  you  any  message  for  your  uncle  Willie  1

Yes,  tell  him  I  have  often  thought  I  would  like  to  have
him  know  that  I  am  living  I  often  think  of  and  see
him.

Give  him  (harmonica  placed  by  N.  B.  J.  in  front  of  block-
book.)  A.  L.  (medal  bust  of  A.  L.  placed  in  front  of
blockbook.)

tell  uncle  Willie  to  come  here  some  time  if  possible  and  I

will  know  him. Give  him  my  love  meanwhile,
tell  me  about  the  new  Picture  father.

N.  B.  J.  What  picture  do  you  mean  1

mine.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  we  have  three  beautiful  pictures  of  you.
I  like  the  one  I  see  in  my  room.

N.  B.  J.  Yes.

ever  so  much.

I  see Mama  putting  flowers  near  it  sometimes  did  you

know  it.
Did  you  see  the  yellow  .  .
help  me (Hand  turns  to  R.  H.)
Vine

Yes  I  forget  the  name. Do  you  know,  if  not  ask  he7'.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I'll  ask  her. Bennie,  do you  know  where
Hugh  is  now  1

[Hugh  Irving  was  a  negro  coachman  who  lived  in  the
family  through  the  whole  of  Bennie's  life.  He  was
discharged  on  account  of  drinking  too  much  about  six
months  prior  to  this  sitting. He  died  about  four  months


Lxr.]

N.  B.  J.
N.  B.  J.
N.  B.  J.


492


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


prior  to  the  sitting. When  he  left  us  he  took  with  him
a  dog  that  we  vahied  much,  named  Rounder — referred
to  below.— N.  B.  J.]
Certainly  I  do I  am  here  dear. (Apparently  the  sentence
only  partly  caught,  and  Huijlt  interpreted  as  you.)

R.  H.  Rector,  he  says  do  you  know  where  Hugh  Ervvin  is  now  1
Oh  yes (in  excitement.)

I  have  seen  him  several  times. What  did  he  go  for.
N  B.  J.  Bennie,  tell  Hugh  that  we  want  the  dog  Rounder  back.

I  will  sure  and  if  you  will  wait  for  me  a  m.oment  I  vvill
attend  to  it  now  and  you  shall  have  him  siire.

N.  B.  J.  Good. That's  right. You  help  us  get  Rounder  back.

See  if  I  don't. Wait  a  moment  and  in  a  few  days  you

shall  have  him I'll  prove  it  dad
(Excitement  in  hand.)
What  did  he  go  for  he  asked.

he  has  gone  a  moment,  but  this  was  his  last  question  to
me.  R.

(Pencil  placed  on  table.  Hand  turns  round  palm  up  for  a
second  or  two,  then  makes  sign  of  writing.  Fresh
pencil  given.)

Yes,  father  are  you  still  here

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

You  shall  have  him  right  away. I  know  this  my  friend
(Hand  indicates  R.  H.)

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  you  have  Hugh  tell  you  where  Rounder  is,
we  want  Rounder  back.

They  will  give  him  back  to  you,  he  told  me  so  and  when

I  go  out  again  I'll  ask  liim  all  about  where  he  is.
Did  yOu  say  anything  about  Andrew.

N.  B.  J.  No,  I  did  not.

Did  you  know  him,  he  is  with  Hugh.


Lxr.] Report  on  the  Javot  Sittings  witk  Mrs.  Piper.  493

N.  B.  J.  I  don't  know  Andrew.

he  is  his  uncle  and  came  here  a  long  time  ago,  dad,  he
has  helped  him  much  to  U.  D.  how  to  be  contented
here.

[Hugh  was  born  in  slavery  in  the  South,  so  we  know
nothing  about  his  uncle  Andrew. — N.  B.  J.]

You  need  not  worry  about  the  dog.  You  will  have  him
sure. This  is  my  test  to  you  dear  father.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  dearie,  I  understand.

Do  you  remember  the  camera,  that  worried  me  so  I
wanted  Helen  to  have  it.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  she  has  it.
mended

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  it  has  been  mended.

Good,  tell  me  don't  you  think  she  is  doing  splendidl}'
I  am  very  much  taken  up  with  her  now.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  help  her  with  her  Latin.

Yes,  but  I  think  she  is  going  to  have  a  very  good  mind
in  time  father  which  pleases  me  greatly.

N.  B.  J.  Yes.

her  music  attracts  me  also  do  you  remember  the  little
harmonica  I  used  to  play  on  .  .

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

I  used  to  play  on  the  water.

N.  B,  J.  Oh  yes.  Here  it  is.  (N.  B.  J.  lifts  it  from  table  and  gives
it  to  hand  that  holds  it  up  a  moment,  then  replaces  it
front  of  block-sheets.)

Does  Roble  U.  D.  me  do  you  think.
N.  B.  J.  Only  partly. He  feels  sure  that  you  are  speaking.


494


Helen  de  G.  Yerrall.


[part


Oh  yes  I  am  sure  too  but  I  wondered  if  he  U.  D.  how
deeply  he  touched  me  and  all  my  old  thoughts  when
he  was  speaking.

I  could  not  say  half  I  wanted  to  tell  him  father.

Tell  me  a  little  about  Helen.

N.  B.  J.  Helen  goes  to  school  and  goes  skating  a  great  deal  and
wants  to  go  to  the  farm  all  the  time.

All  the  time.

N.  B.  J.  Yes.

Good,  the  dearest  spot  on  earth,  dad.

N.B.J.  She  drives  your  horse  in  a  cart.

1  gave  it  her.^
N.  B.  J.  Yes,  and  she  has  her  saddle-horse  still.

I  hope  you  will  all  go  there  soon  and  think  of  me.

N.  B.  J.  Indeed  we  will.

I  love  you  all  and  the  longer  I  remain  .  .  I  forget  some
things  about  my  earthly  life  but  I  never  forget  yon
how  good  you  were  to  me  father  .  .  .

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Beniiie,  and  we'll  not  foi-get  you.

Do  you  remember  what  mother  said  about  my  new
picture.

She  said  I  looked  as  if  I  was  going  to  speak,
don't  you  like  it

N.  B.  J.  Ye?,  very  much.

Ai'c  you  tired  dad  dear.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  a  little  tired,  too  much  work  all  the  time.

don't  let  it  worry  you,  it  will  all  be  right  soon.

father  do  you  remember  what  a  Stern  man  grandpa  was


^  See  p.  371.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Janot  Sittings  loith  Mrs.  Piper.  495
N.  B.  J.  Which  grandpa  ?
Your  father.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  he  was  stern.

he  is  as  good  to  me  as  he  can  possibly  be.

N.  B.  J.  And  I  thank  him  for  it.

father  he  met  me  when  I  came  and  showed  me  the  ^vay.
I  did  not  know  him  hardl)',  but  he  soon  made  me
know  him  and  took  me  with  him  home  where  I  am
happy  and  if  you  could  see  us  as  we  are  you  would  not
doubt  the  goodness  of  God  father.

N.  B.  J.  I  do  not  doubt  the  goodness  of  God,  Bennie.

to  let  us  live  and  know  each  other  here  and  the  friends  we
used  to  know  is  more  to  us  than  you  can  realize  father
.  dear.

I  wonder  if  you  can  U.  D.  all  I  say  I  have  remembered
nearly  everything  for  you  I  can  think  of  things  now  as
tests.

Do  you  wish  me  to  think  of  more  things  for  you.

N.  B.  J.  We  would  like  to  have  you  think  of  more  things  if  you
can.

All  right I'll  tell  this  gentleman  from  time  to  time  all  I  .  .

that  comes  to  me.
Do  you  remember  the  Alice  I  spoke  of  here.^

N.  B.  J.  Yes.

Do  you  remember  when  she  came.

She  wanted  me  to  send  her  love  to  her  mother.

N.  B.  J.  Who  is  her  mother  ?

She  is (beginning  of  a  word.)
she  is  in  .  .
Aunt  Alice.


'  See  pp.  409  and  456.


496


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  the  Alice  over  there  must  be  the  little  girl  who
didn't  live  in  this  life. Is  that  right  M

She  is,  but  she  lives  here  and  is  with  Uncle  Frank.
N.  B.  J.  Now  I  understand.

I  am  so  glad  he  would  not  let  me  go  till  I  repeated  this
for  you.

N speak  to  me  for  God's sake and  tell  me  if  it  is

really  you.

[The  sitter  for  some  reason  at  once  understood  that  this
was  his  brother-in-law  Frank  Clarke  called  by  Bennie
"Uncle  Frank."  The  words  and  their  use  were  charac-
teristic in  some  way  and  what  followed  identified  him
correctly — except  that  the  reference  to  insurance  was
not  understood.  He  had  been  dead  two  years.  We
had  had  many  long  talks  about  a  future  life  in  the
evening  at  his  home.  He  had  been  much  interested
in  Spiritualism. — N.  B.  J.]

N,  B.  J.  Yes,  Frank,  it  is  I.

I  am  delighted  to  see  you  I  took  Bennie's  place  for  a
moment,  a  good  boy  N .  .

N.  B.  J.  Go  on,  Frank.

one  of  the  best  I  ever  knew.

(The  writing  during  communication  from  Frank  larger  and
stronger.)

tell  Alice  I  am  sure  I  can  remember  everything  soon.  N

how  is  everything  with  you.

N.  B.  J.  All  well,  Frank,  all  well,  and  Alice  and  the  boy  are  walk
I  see  them  often.

Give  them  my  love  and  tell  them  I  would  not  have  left

them  from  choice,  but  it  better  so.
hear  me.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Frank.

tell  her  I  felt  sorry  about  the  insurance.  .  .

^  It  seems  to  me  probable  that  all  references  to  a  '  little  girl '  are  to  be  inter-
preted as  alluding  to  Miriam  Clarke,  see  p.  556 ;  see  also  p.  456.— H.  de  G.  V.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Pi'per.  497


N.  B.  J.  Yes,  go  oil.


bat  it  was  no  fault  of  mine,  it  came  out  all  right  I  hope.

N.  B.  J.  Yes. All  right.

Good.  Ask  her  if  she  remembers  what  I  told  her  about  my
coming  here. I  said  I  was  not  coming.

('Hand  turns  to  N.  B.  J.  who  makes  no  remark,  then  turns
to  IL  H.)

R.  H.  Yes,  you  mean  you  thought  you  would  stay  longer  in  the
body.

Yes,  so.

N tell  me  why  did  she  break  up. (read  at  sitting  as

"  tell  me  did  she  break  up.")

N.  B.  J.  No,  she  did  not. She's  living  in  the  homestead.  Business
is  all  well.

I  don't  mean  that,  I  mean  keep  up.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  pretty  well,  but  her  health  is  not  good.
No,  never  was  very.

Are  you  still  at  it  .  .  in  harness  . H  .  .
N.B.J.  Yes,  Frank,  I  am  working  too  hard  still

Don't  pay give  it  up.
N.  B.  J.  1  understand.

You  know  what  I  mean,  tried  hard  to  speak  before  but
could  not  seem  to  U.  D.  the  whys  and  wherefores.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  go  on.

I  got  an  inkling  that  perhaps  you  wouldn't  believe  I  was
anywhere  if  I  didn't  make  some  effort,  do  you  miss  me
any.

N.  B.  J.  Certainly,  every  time  I  go  to  your  home  I  miss  you  much.

do  you  know  where  we  used  .  .
where  we  .  .  drive  [1]
live  .  .


498  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

Pv.  H.  Not  clear.

Wait  a  moment he  lost  his  hold  so  to  speak.

Do  you  remember  the  evenings  we  spent  together  .  .

N.  B.  J.  Indeed  I  do.

and  the  talks  we  used  to  have.

N.  B.  J.  Do  you  remember  our  talks  about  another  life  'i

Yes  just  what  I  am  saying  N  .

about  this  life  and  its  possibilities.

N.  B.  J.  Yes.

I  found  all  better  than  I  ever  dreamed
N.B.J.  Who  came  to  meet  you,  Frank?

do  you  remember  my  boy

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  indeed.

he  is  my (hand  points  to  Spirit.)
right  hand.

N.  B.  J.  That's  right.

and  we  are  together  God  bless  him. Tell  Alice  this  .  .

N.  B.  J.  I  will.

N and  till  we  meet  again  may  God  sustain  you.

N.  B.  J.  Good-bye,  Frank.  Good-bye.

going  .  .  Farewell  .  .  don't  forget  your  .  .
F  H  Clar  ke  [?]

[He  usually  signed  his  name  "F  Clarke." — N.  B.  J.]
[•'F.  H."  are  the  initials  of  his  son,  Bennie's  cousin,  Frank.
— H.  de  G.  v.]

N.  B.  J.  Frank,  speak  to  us  again  hereafter  when  you  can.

Most  certuinl}'  I  will, (large  and  emphatic.)

(Noticeable  contrast  between  previous  large  and  somewhat

vehement  writing  and  the  c^uieter  smaller writing  ou

Bennie's  leturn.)


LXI.] Rcijort  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  499

Father  you  realize  I  know  the  desire  on  the  part  of  Uncle
F  to  meet  you  again that  is  why  I  left  so  suddenly.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  dear  Bennie,  I  understood  perfectly.

Here  is  Hugh  I  called  him  to  tell  you  himself  about  the
dog.

N.  B.  .J.  Hugh,  tell  us  wliere  to  find  Rounder,  we  want  Rounder,
lost  him.

N.  B.  J.  Lost  him  ? Did  you  lose  him  "?
Yes.

I  lost  him  N and  as  a  matter  of  fact  I  will  see  that  he

is  returned  to  you.

N.  B.  .J.  All  right.

as  true  as  you  live.

Tell  me  how  is  everything  with  yourself?
N.  B.  J.  J'Fe  are  all  right. How  are  you  ?

better,  head  clearer,  breathe  splendidly.
Do  you  know  how  I  suffered.

[Hugh  died  of  an  internal  cancer,  but,  strange  as  it  may  seem,
he  never  once  complained  of  pain  or  of  being  sick  during
his  last  months  with  us.  He  drank  very  hard  and  we
supposed  that  that  was  the  trouble.  So  that  what  he
says  here  is  of  great  interest  to  us.  Everything  that  he
says  is  quite  characteristic  (for  instance  calling  Bennie

"Mr. Ben") except reference to sitter as "N  ."

In  life  this  was  always  "  Mr.  Junot." — N.  B.  J.]

N.  B.  .J.  No,  you  never  said  you  were  sick.

but  I  would  not  tell  anybody  if  there  was  anything  I
hated  it  was  to  hear  a  man  complaining  about  his  heart
all  the  time.

N.  B.  J.  Hugh,  I  thought  you  were  druidv  all  the  time.

No,  not  drunk,  but  mighty  near  it,  the  worst  of  it  was  I
suffered  more  than  you  know,  hut  I've  got  straightened
out  here  and  I  want  to  do  the  best  I  can  .  .


500  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

N.  K.  J.  Tliat's  right,  Hugh. We  were  sorry  we  didn't  take  better
care  of  you.

now  for  evei'ybody.  I  worked  .  .
I  worked  faithfully  when  I  could.

N.  B.  J.  That's  right. You  did. (to  R.  H.) We  had  much  regret
about  this  man.

forgive  my  failings  as  Mr.  Ben  has  already.
Some  day  you'll  know  me  better.

N.  B.  J.  Hugh,  I  don't  think  you  had  a  fair  show  in  this  life.

Well,  I  guess  you're  about  right  my  friend,  but  I  have  no
fault  to  find  now.  I'm  glad  I'm  living  that's  all  I  I've
got  to  say,  and  I'll  find  Rounder  and  send  him  back  to
you.

N.  B.  J.  Good,  that's  all  right.

Think  of  me  as  I  am  and  not  as  I  was  if  you  can.
N.  B.  J.  That's  right,  we  will.

Can  I  do  anything  for  you.
N.  B.  J.  Only  help  take  care  of  Bennie.

sure  he's  all  right

a  right  good  lad.  I  often  with  him.  I'll  bid  you  good  bye
now  let  me  know  if  I  can  do  anything  for  you  H  E  ^
(at  end  of  line  and  sheet. Sheet  turned.)

N.  B.  J.  It's  H  I,  isn't  it  1

R.  H.  (to  N.  B.  J.) No. H  E.

(Meanwhile  was  written)  I.

[Query,  possible  connection  between  presence  of  N.  B.  J.'s
father  and  interpolation  of  N  in  above  communica-
tion of  Hugh.  A  few  words  from  N.  B.  J.'s  father  come
next.— R.  H.]

(Hand  makes  gentle  drawing  motion  as  if  pulling  on  some
delicate  threads.)

^  See  p.  492  where  the  name  "Irving"  is  given , by  R.  H.  as  "Erwin."


LXi.] Re-port  on  the  Junot  Sittings  vjith  Mrs.  Piper.  501

N.  B  J.  (to  Pv.  H.)  Something  wanted  here.

Well. My  son  glad  to  see  yon. Do  the  best  you  can.
Gone.

N.  B  J.  Who  was  it  1

Dad  are  you  here?

Grandpa  said  I  wonder  if  he  is  as  self  willed  as  he  used  to
be.

N.B.J.  Which  grandpa  1 Which  grandpa  was  itl

J  unot.
N.  B.  J.  Yes.

Speak  to  him  father. (Hand  points  to  Spirit.)
N.  B.  J.  Yes.

he  is  waiting.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  father,  I'm  glad  to  meet  you  here,  and  I  take  it  very
kindly  that  you  look  after  my  boy  so  well.

Do  you  remember  what  you  thought  al)Out  my  .  .
perhaps  you  thought  I  did  not  help  you  .  .
don't  you  think  so  .  .

[There  were  matters  to  be  regretted  in  the  treatment  by  the
sitter's  father  of  his  children  and  here,  as  a  number  of
times  elsewhere,  this  is  indicated  by  the  father  in  his
brief  communications. — N.  B.  J.]

N.  B.  J.  I  was  young  when  you  left  this  life.

Yes  true  but  rather  stubborn  weren't  you
N.  B.  J.  Probably.

forgot  it.

N.  B.  J.  Do  you  know  about  my  work  in  this  life  1

There  is  little  I  do  not  know  and  I  am  glad  you  have
made  your  life  so  useful.


502  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

N.  B.  J.  Thank  you.

It  is  the  best  reward  I  can  give  you.

gone.

father.

father  dear  they  tell  me  I  must  soon  stop  talking.

R.  H.  Yes,  time's  practically  up.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  and  I  shall  not  see  you  to-morrow.  Mother
will  come  alone. Don't  forget  daddie.

No not for a moment talk  to  me  father  when  you  go
to  the  grave  and  I  will  U.  I),  you.

25TfT  Sitting.

Februari/  12,  1902. Present: Mrs.  Junot  and  B.  H.

(Bennie  communicating.)

Well  my  dear  Mother  I  am  so  glad  to  meet  you  here  once
more.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  am  glad  to  be  with  you  once  again.

Are  you  well  dear  Mother.
Mrs.  J.  Pretty  well,  Bennie,  not  so  well  as  I  should  like  to  be.

Mother  I  see  what  I  do  not  like  to  see,  you  are  not  well

dear  and  I  must  now  help  you.
Oh  do  }ou can  you  know  how  much  we  are  together  I

have  enjoyed  dad  so  much  and  when  you  all  come  to

this  side  you  will  U.  D.  it  all
I  want  to  talk  with  you  dear.
Do  you  hear  me.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  it's  very  plain  and  clear.

I  have  looked  forward  to  seeing  you  since  Imperator  told

me  you  would  soon  speak.
Glad  to  see  lioble. I  wonder  if  he  U.  D.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Piper.  503
Mrs.  J.  Yes,  he  understands  and  thinks  that  lie  is  with  you.
Well  I  am  glad.

Mother  did  you  U.  D.  about  the  Yine.^

Mrs.  J.  No,  what  about  the  vine  1

The  Howers  I  saw  you  put  in  my  room.

R.  H.  (to  Mrs.  J.)  Bennie  said  yesterday  that  he  saw  you  putting
flowers  in  connection  with  his  picture  in  his  room,  and
he  could  not  recall  the  name,  he  saw  yelloio  something
and  Rector  got  the  word  vim.

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie,  but  it  may  come  to  me  as  I  think  it  over.

After  I  saw  you  here  I  saw  you  go  into  my  room  and  place
quite  near  one  of  my  pictures  some  yellow  blossoms  and
with  them  were  a  Yine  .  .  was.

[Not  long  after  the  sittings  of  the  prior  year  we  went  to
our  country  place  and  Mrs.  J.  was  in  the  habit  of  there
placing  honey-suckle  vines  with  the  flowers  under  Bennie's
picture  in  the  sitting  room,  but  not  in  Bennie's  room. —
N.  B.  J.]

Mrs.  J.  I  don't  remember,  Bennie,  but  I  may  have  done  so.  In
your  room,  was  it  ?

It  was  some  time  ago  and  I  will  not  be  positive  about  the
room  but  the  picture  flowers  etc. I  am  sure  of,  dear.

R.  H.  (to  Mrs.  J.)  Perhaps  he  means  about  a  year  ago.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  can  you  tell  me  any  time  when  you  were  with  me
so  that  I  can  recall  it?

this  was  one,  but  since  you  do  not  recall  it  I  will  remind
you  of  one  evening  as  we  used  to  speak  of  time,  when
Aunt  Alice  was  there  you  and  father  were  talking  about
me  and  you  got  one  of  my  books  and  showed  her  some-
thing in  it  remember.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  think  I  recall  the  flower  incident,  it  was
at  the  farm.

Yes,  dear  Mother,  it  was.

iSee  p.  491.


504  Helen  de  G.  Verrall. '  '  '  '  [part

Mrs.  J.  I  have  your  picture  on  the  wall,  and  put  flowers  near  it.
Is  that  the  time  you  mean  1

Yes  and  the  Vine.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

1  stood  just  behind  you  dearest  Mother  and  the  thoughts
you  sent  to  me  attracted  me  to  it  and  1  said  I  will
remember  this  and  tell  her  when  I  can  speak  through
the  lighted  window.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  tell  me  about  yourself.

Do  you  remember  the  evening  I  speak  of  dear.
Mks.  J.  No,  Bennie,  no.

Do  you  remember  C  ^  dear  Mother

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  we  live  in  C  . What  will  you  say  about

it^

Are  you  going  to  leave  it  1

[We  had  been  talking  a  great  deal  about  living  in  the
country. — N.  B.  J.]

Mrs.  J.  We  do  talk  jokingly  of  living  in  tlie  country,  but  not  at
present.

How  can  you  on  account  of  Helen.

Mrs.  J.  Helen  loves  the  country,

Yes  I  know  but  the  school.

Mrs.  J.  We  cannot  until  she  is  throuErh  school.

I  thought  so  dear,  don't  leave  her.  I  heard  all  this  talk
about  going  into  the  country  dear  but  I  could  not
make  it  clear  to  my  mind.

Got  it.

R.  H.  Yes.

'Mentioned  by  N.  B.  J.,  see  p.  355.


LXi.]  Report  on  the  Jimot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  505
Mes.  J.  Tell  me  about  Helen. I  have  not  seen  her  for  several  days.

Wait  a  moment  dear.
(Hand  disturbed.)

She  is  all  right. (Disturbance  in  hand. Sheet  turned.)
She  is  all  right.

I  see  you  elsewhere  and  nearer  Roble.
Mes.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. Roble  will  be  with  me  to  .  .  Sunday.
Sunday

Mes.  J.  Yes,  I  shall  see  him  to-day. I  had  forgotten.

Give  my  best  love  and  tell  him  to  keep  with  me  in  thought,
think  of  me  often.

Mes.  J.  Yes,  he  will.

Mother  I  am  very  happy  over  here.  They  are  all  very
good  to  me  and  when  we  go  to  church  we  think  of
you.  I  often  see  you  and  Helen  together  at  the  place
of  Music.

Mes.  J.  Sometimes,  Bennie.

I  love  to  watch  you  and  hear  you  talk  of  things  I  used  to
do.  Mother  I  think  you  feel  my  presence  sometimes  I
try  very  hard  to  make  you  see  me.

Mes.  J.  Oh  I  do  feel  your  presence,  Bennie,  but  I  wish  that  I  might
see  you.

I  wonder  if  j'ou  could. I'll  try  to  stand  before  you  very

soon  to  see  if  you  can  see  me.
I  am  glad  to  see  you  my  friend,  are  you  quite  well.  (To

R.  H.)

R.  H.  Yes,  thank  you,  Bennie.

Did  you  find  Mother  and  bring  her  to  me.

R.  H.  Yes,  they  came  together  from  their  home  to  Boston  and
met  me  there.

I  am  verj^  glad  to  know.

Mother  what  did  you  do  with  my  sleeve  buttons.

2k


500


Helen  cle  G.  Verrall.


[part


Mrs.  J.  I  gave  tliem  to  Charlie.^

Do  you  know  that  pleases  me  very  much.
What  else  of  mine  did  you  give  him.

Mrs.  J.  Do  you  remember  your  books,  Tlie  llirec  Musketeers.
Yes  very  well,  did  you  give  him  those.

Mrs.  J.  Yes.  You  remember  how  mucli  you  liked  them,  and  he
said  he  would  rather  have  one  of  your  books  than
anything  else.

Good.


Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  can you tell  me  anything between  yourself  and
Charlie,  any  incident  that  happened  .  .  tell  me  .  .

Did  you  say  accident  dear.

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie,  Mcident.

incident,  yes. I  think  so.

do  you  wish  to  help  him  to  know  where  I  am
Mrs.  J.  Yes.

Well  ask  Charlie  if  he  remembers  the  little  song  I  copied
out  for  him.

yes  and  the  walk  we  took  one  evening  in  the  or  through
the  park  when  we  whistled  the  tune  to  the  song  I
copied  out  for  him  and  the  laugh  we  had  over  the
discords.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  I  will  ask  him.

[We  have  as  yet  had  no  opportunity  to  speak  with  "Charlie"

about  the  above. — N.  B.  J.]
Oh  I  remember  it  so  well.

and  he  said  I  do  not  see  how  you  can  walk  so  fast  and
keep  it  up.

Mrs.  J.  Yes. Can  you  tell  me  the  nickname  he  had  for  you  1

1  Charlie  D. See  p.  390.


Lxr.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  luith  Mrs.  Pipei'.  507

Nick  B  .  .
Nick  name  .  .

Ask  him  if  he  remembers  B  .  .  S  [?]  .  .  what  is  that  .  .

(Pause)  •  •

B  .  .  Bee  .  .  let  me  see  .  .

BO  \1]  B..BOB..  Benjamin  .  .  Oh  it  is  coming  into
my  mind  now  I  have  not  thought  it  for  so  long.
I'll  tell  you  presently.  And  now  while  I  think  it  over
let  me  ask  if  you  remember  the  day  he  and  I  went
down  to  the  Meadow  together  for  the  Misses  .  .  M  .  .
Misses  .  .  no  M  0  S  S  es.

Mrs.  J.  I  will  ask  him  about  it.  Do  you  remember  the  time  you
made  him  a  visit  at  Chatham  1  Tell  me  something  you
did  at  .  .

(Hand  points  to  writing.)
Mrs.  J.  Tell  me  something  else.

We  had  such  fun  the  day  we  went  to  the  meadow  and
ask  him  if  he  remembers  the  Lobster  man.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.  Do  you  remember  going  with  Charlie  and  his
father  to  see  the  soldiers  ?

yes  soldiers  I  remember  Very  well  what  about  them  .  .
ask  Chat  [I]  if  he  remembers  the  Lobster  man.

R.  H.  "  ask  "  something.

Chas.
R.  H.  "Charles."
Mrs.  J.  Yes  Bennie.

and  the  net  we  saw  him  working  on.

I  have  got  to  go  a  moment,  will  be  back  soon  I  want  to
clear  up  a  little  what  I  had  in  my  mind  before  I  came
in.

I  wonder  if  you  will  remember  your  father.
Mrs.  J.  Oh,  yes.


508 •  > Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

Do  speak  to  me  and  tell  me  where  you  are  now.
(R.  H.  signs  to  Mrs.  J.  to  speak.)

Mks.  J.  Bennie  .  .

R.  H.  (to  Mrs.  J.)  No,  your  father.

Mrs.  J.  Oh,  is  that  my  father  ?

Mrs.  J.  I  am in Boston talking  to  Bennie  by  the  help  of  Dr.
Hodgson.

Boston  .  .  I  remember  Boston  very  well.
Mrs.  J.  Yes,  have  you  anj^  message  to  send  by  me  1

to  .  .  where  is  Willie  and  Mother  and  George  .  .  yes  and
do  you  remember  Clara.

Mrs.  J.  No,  not  Clara. Willie  is  in  Chicago  and  doing  well.

And  will  he  remember  me.

Mrs.  J.  Yes.

I  am  so  glad  to  speak  .  .  my  thoughts  run  so  fast  .  .
Caroline  .  .  . .  ,  '

Mrs.  J.  No.

Yes. Car  [i]
Mrs.  J.  For  Clara  I  think  he  means.
She  is  on  this  side.
R.  H.  Rector,  please  get  the  name  right  if  possible.

he  speaks  very  rapidly

and  .  .  do  you  remember  Clara  .  .

Mrs.  J.  No,  I  do  not  recognize  the  name.

She  was  my  mother's  sister.

Mrs.  J.  I  will  ask  about  it.

do  not  know  .  .

I  wish  to  know  about  Will


lxl]  Report  on  the  Jiniot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Prper.  509
Mrs.  J.  He  is  well  and  in  business  now.

Glad  to  hear  it. How  are  you  and  .  .

(Hand  motions  in  a  different  direction  towards  the  right.)

friend  here  comes  another.

Mother  how  .  .  [This  is  probably  Bennie  again. — R.  H.]

Mrs.  J.  Yes. Who  is  it?

Sister.

Mrs.  J.  Sister? (Hand  points  to  Spirit.)

Margaret  .  .  do  not  know  .  .  going  .  .
[Probably  an  interruption  from  some  other  communicator.—
H.  de  G.  v.]

Mother  I  am  here  again  .  .  ,  . .  .

R.  H.  (to  Mrs.  J.)  Bennie.

,^ Did  grandpa  keep  his  thoughts  clear  Mother.

Mrs.  J.  I  did  not  recognize  all  the  names  he  spoke,  but  they  may
be  his  relatives.

I  think  he  knows,  mother,  they  are  all  over  here,
how  is  .  .  how  are  tlie  Clarks  .  .  and  Charlie.

Mrs.  J.  They  .  .  I  think,  are  well. They  were,  the  last  I  heard
from  them.

help  me  a  moment I  am  labouring  under  difficulties
Where  is  my  Cabinet  .  .  I  w  [?]  speak.

Mrs.  J.  Your  cabinet  is  in  your  room  now. I  moved  it  from  the
hall  into  your  bedroom.

Oh  that  is  it,  things  look  differently  to  me  now.
Mother  do  you  think  of  me  as  I  am  and  do  you  think  if
I  came  closer  to  you,  you  could  see  me  possibly.

Mrs.  J.  It  is  my  one  desire,  Bennie. If  I  could  see  you  once  I
should  be  satisfied.


510


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


I  hope  you  will. Now  I  had  it  on  my  mind  to  tell  you

about  the  Picnic.  ^
Do  you  remember  the  N.  girls  .  .
[Miss  N.  mentioned  by  Roble. See  p.  486.— R.  H.]

N  -?

Mrs.  J.  No,  but  you  spoke  to  Roble  about  them  and  I  think  he
remembered.

You  do  not. do  you  remember  Sam.-

Mrs.  .J.  Tell  me  about  him.

he  is  with  me  a  great  deal  did  you  know  he  came  rather
suddenlj'  .  .

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  send  a  message  to  his  mother,
he  will  do  it. (Hand  points  to  Spirit.)

I  ask  you  if  you  are  Mrs.  Junot  to  tell  my  mother  I  am
well  and  happy  and  better  off  than  I  was  in  the  body,
tell  her  to  keep  the  mo  [I]  mor  [?]  .  .  can't  hear  it  .  .

Mansfield  Photographs  because  they  are  not  good  enough
to  let  go.  I  hope  I  have  made  it  clear  do  you  re-
member Carl

Boardman  .  .

Mrs.  J.  Is  this  from  Sam  1  i.
Yes. S  B.

Mrs.  J.  Yes. I  will  ask  about  him. Was  Sam  with  him  ?
Yes.

Mrs.  J.  I  will  try  to  find  out.

and  Dan  .  .
gone.

[Sam  B.  died  rather  suddenly  not  long  before  this  sitting.
His  mother  upon  reading  this  sitting  said  that  about
this  time  she  and  one  of  her  sons  had  been  looking
over  and  discussing  a  great  deal  the  various  photographs


i«ee  p.  483.


-See  p.  483.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Jimot  Sittings  with  Airs.  Piper.  511


of  Sam  to  determine  which  were  the  best.  They  con-
cluded that  the  ones  last  taken  were  not  good  enough
to  give  to  his  friends.  AVhen  speaking  she  was  awav
from  home  and  could  not  remember  the  name  of  the
photographer.

Mrs.  B.  also  said  that  "Carl"  and  "Dan"  were  friends  of
Sam  but  that  Carl's  name  was  not  "Boardman." — She
gave  the  name,  but  we  cannot  recall  it. — N.  B.  J.]

Mother  speak  to  me  dear.

I  feel  now  that  I  want  to  be  alone  with  3'ou.
■it  *  *

(R.  H.  goes  out.)
Speak  mother.

Mrs.  J.  I  want  you  to  help  lioble  and  Helen.

I  will  of  all  things. I  think  they  need  help.
Do  you  U.D.

Mks.  J.  I  understand.

I  remember  now  .  .  and  T  think  he  used  to  call  me  Ben.^

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  but  he  had  a  pet  name  for  you.

(Mrs.  J.  started  to  say  that  Bennie  could  think  it  over  and

tell  R.  H.  but  the  hand  interrupted  her  by  writing  :)
I  will  tell  that  gentleman  later.  Mother.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  tell  Dr.  Hodgson  and  he  will  send  word  to  us.

Yes  I  will  think  it  over  and  tell  him  .  .
better  so,  dear.

and  dear  dad  too  he  is  so  tired.

(Continuing  the  thought  about  helping  Roble  and  Helen
etc.  interrupted  by  the  recollection  of  the  cjuestion  about
the  nickname.)

Mrs.  J.  What  shall  I  do?

go  to  the  farm  for  a  long  time.

Mrs.  J.  We're  going  very  soon.


^  See  p.  506.


512


Helen  de  G.  Vermll.


[part


I  am  glad it  will  help  him  more  than  anything  else.
Oh  yes  dear  Mother  but  I  think  he  needs  rest.
And  Roble  will  do  better  now.

Mes.  J.  Yes,  he  is  doing  well.

Yes,  dear,  yes,  but  I  mean  in  Studying.^

Mrs.  J.  I  thought  he  studied.

his  studies  are  hard,  and  I  will  help  him  dear.
Oh  mother  I  cannot  say  all  I  wish.

Mrs.  J.  You  are  doing  very  well. The  writing  is  clear  and  plain.

better  than  it  was  before  I  found  you  dear.

Mrs.  J.  Do  you  like  to  have  me  come  here  and  talk  with  you  1

I  long  to  see  you  here.
God  has  been  good  to  me.

Mrs.  J.  I'm  thankful  and  grateful  to  be  permitted  to  come.

Yes  dear  Mother  we  have  found  each  other  once  more  and
I  live  to  thank  God  for  His  goodness  and  help.

(Mrs.  J.  remarks  to  effect  that  she  would  see  him  and  be
with  him  in  his  world  before  so  very  long.)

Yes  dear  only  a  short  few  years.

Mother  I  love  you  as  ever  and I  think  how  kind  you

were  to  me  before  I  left  mj^  body.
Do  you  remember  the  play  we  gave  .  .
we  got  up  .  .  ■  ■  ■

Mrs.  J.  Yes.

Do  you  remember  the  Song.-

Mrs.  .J.  Yes.

It  was  the  one  I  tried  to  recall.  I  sang  it  for  them  that
evening.

Mrs.  J.  Can  you  tell  me  the  icords  ?
I  sang  Home  .  .  HOME

^See  p.  478.  -See  p.  394.


LXi.]  lieport  on  the  Junot  Sittmgs  with  Mrs.  Piper.  513
Mrs.  J.  Yes.


once  more.

I  used  to  play  it  on  the  harmonica.
Swanee  River.^

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  but  that's  not  the  song  I  was  thinking  of.

and  that  is  the  one  I  sang  that  evening.
Oh  I  remember  it  so  well  but  when  you  asked  me  before
I  could  not  think  of  it  dear.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  what  are  you  doing  over  there  ?

I  am  progressing  dear  all  the  time,  living  in  the  highest

life,  it  is  one  steady  state  of  progression  all  the  time.
(R.  H.  returns.)

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  do  you  wish  Dr.  Hodgson?
Yes,  now  I  do.

I  have  got  C|uite  clear  again  my  good  friend.

and  I  am  going  to  surprise  you  some  time  with  my  Pet

name  from  Carlie
I  am  so  glad  I  can  think  it  over
Do  you  remember  what  I  meant  about  Spot.-

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  I  think  so,  Bennie. I  think  you  meant  the  Holstein
cow.  (Assent.)

Yes,  and  do  you  remember  S  p  i  der.

Mrs.  J.  No,  Benny. (Hand  negatives,  apparently  indicating  Rector's
consciousness  of  his  mistake.)

S  N  i  der.

I^Irs.  J.  Not  now,  Bennie,  but  it  may  come  to  me.

do  think  of  it  dear.
Mrs.  J.  I  will,  Bennie.

And  one  thing  more  dear,  is  Helen  better.

1  See  p.  367.  =  See  p.  403.


51-t .  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  she  is  much  stronger,  I  think.  '  .

Didn't  I  tell  you  I  would  help  he  .  .  her.
Mrs.  J.  Yes,  and  you  have  kept  your  word.

I  hope  to  always  dear  and  send  Rounder  back.
Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  if  you  can.

If  he  is  in  that  world  I  can.
Mrs.  .J.  Yes.

but  if  in  this  I  will  surely  let  you  know.
Mrs.  .J.  Yes,  Bennie,  we  would  like  to  have  him.

Do  you  remember  S  t  ar  .  .  Bright  .
Mns.  J.  No,  Bennie.

and  Gee  Bright.

Mrs.  .J.  No,  Bennie.

Mother  do  you  remember  the  0  X

Mrs.  .J.  Where  was  the  ox  1

At  the  farm  when  Uncle  Willie  had  it  I  think.
I  cannot  think  any  more  now,  dear.
(Writing  growing  fainter.)

R.  H.  No,  the  light's  nearly  over.

(Waking  Stage.)

(Mrs.  P.  tries  over  and  over  vainly  to  articulate  clearly  a

word  vaguely  like  :)
Peekun  .  .

R.  H.  Pee  what  ? Which  1

* * (not  caught) all  holding [?] Bennie  look  at
them.

One,  two,  three,  four.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Juvot  Sittings  with  ^Ifrs.  PiiDcr.  515


This  is  I ;  I,  m}-  name's  Bennie.
Tell  him,  tell  him,  not  to  worry.

["Peekun"  may  possibly  be  an  attempt  to  give  Bennie's
nickname.  See  p.  507,  where  the  letters  Bee  .  .  are
given.  These  attempts  bear  no  resemblance  to  the  real
name. — H.  de  G.  V.]

26th  SiTTlN'G.

March  12,  1902.  Presmit:  ILH.

One  word  about  Bennie.  he  followed  his  father  again  to
the  grave  and  saw  him  place  the  leaves  there  and  called
at  our  mansion  and  requested  us  to  mention  it  to  thee
at  our  first  meeting  with  thee  here.

R.  H.  Yes,  I  will  send  it.

[Extract  from  N.  B.  J.'s  letter,  March  17,  1902.

"  We  had  not  been  out  to  the  Cemetery  since  Dec.  27,
after  which  our  words  at  the  grave  were  accurately
reported  back  to  us  through  Mrs.  P.  But  on  Sunday
March  9th,  the  weather  being  good,  we  drove  out  and
placed  on  the  grave  a  bunch  of  roses.  They  were  "long
cut''  and  there  were  "leaves"  on  the  branches  of  the
long  stems.  Then  at  your  next  sitting  (alone)  after  our
visit  to  the  Cemetery  you  get  the  report."]

27th  Sitting.
April  2,  1902.  Present:  11  H.

(Waking  Stage.)
John  Welsh  has  Rounder.

R.  H.  "John  Welsh  was  round  her?"

John  Welsh  has  Rounder

Tell  this  .  .  tell  .  .  tell  .  .  tell  .  .

John  Welsh  has  Rounder.

R.  H.  "John  Welsh  is  rourd  her"?

has  .  .  has  .  .  It's  I,  Benny,  don't  you  see  me  ? I,  Benny.


516


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


R.  H.  "John  Welsh  has  Rounder."  Yes,  I  understand.  [I  here
recalled  Mr.  Junot's  enquiry  about  the  dog  Eounder.
See  p.  492.— R.H.]

Tell  Dad.

R.  H.  Yes,  I'll  tell  him.  (Pause)

Imperator  took  that  tall  young  man  with  the  light  hair
and  put  him  out,  put  his  hand  round  him,  and  pulled
the  shade  right  down  .  .  I  always  see  .  .  the  cross  .  .

I  didn't  know  you  Mr.  Hodgson.  Do  you  hear  my  head
snap  ?

[Letter  from  N.  B.  J. June  17,  1902.

"  You  will  rememlaer  that  I  reported  to  you  that  after  receiving
the  brief  communication  to  the  effect  that  '  John  Welch '  had  the
dog  '  Rounder,'  I  set  about  finding  John  Welch  and  was  unable
to  find  him,  but  in  the  process,  found  the  dog  in  the  hands  of
James  M.  and  recovered  him.  This  dog  is  a  champion  ratter.
Hugh  was,  I  am  told,  in  the  habit  of  entering  him  in  rat  killing
matches  for  money,  so  that  it  was  apparent  that  any  of  the  dog-
men  would  like  to  have  the  dog.  Men  who  are  in  the  dog  business
are  often  not  of  a  high  character  and  the  word  of  such  is  not
worth  much.

James  M.  was  formerly  a  coachman  in  our  neighborhood.  He
claims  that  Hugh  gave  hitn  the  dog.  He  seemed  over-anxious
that  I  should  not  think  that  he  had  come  by  the  dog  wrongfully,
and  I  was  not  much  impressed  with  his  statements.

About  teii  days  ago,  it  occurred  to  me  to  renew  my  inquiries
through  Walter  W.,  who  is  a  fine  fellow,  being  dejjuty  sheriff
for  our  immediate  district.  It  is  one  of  his  duties  to  keep  acquainted
with  every  one  in  the  neighbourhood.  I  asked  him  if  he  knew
John  Welch.  He  answered  at  once  as  follows:  'Yes;  that's  "old
Happy."  He  works  for  Conrad  M.  He  was  a  great  friend  of
Hugh.  They  "worked  the  growler"  together  of  nights.'  I  then
said:  'How  do  you  know  that  his  name  is  John  Welch?'  The
answer  was  :  '  That's  his  real  name.  I  had  him  registered  to  vote.
Everybody  knows  him  as  "  Old  Happy  "  but  his  right  name  is  John
Welch.'  I  then  told  Walter  W.  why  I  wanted  to  know  about
this,  and  he said he  would get  one  of  the  printed  lists  of  the


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  ivUIl  Mrs.  Fiper.  517


registered  voters  of  the  precinct  east  of  our  own  precinct,  and  it
■would  show  'Old  Happy '  registered  as  a  voter,  and  to-day  he  brought
me  the  list  Mdiich  I  enclose  to  you. It  shows  at  the  top  of  second

column  '  John  Walsh '  registered  from  2807 Avenue.  Walter

W.  says,  however,  that  '  Old  Happy  '  called  himself  '  Welch '  or
'Welsh,'  and  that  he  was  so  registered  on  former  registrations.
The  enclosed  list  is  for  the  last  election.  It  will  be  difficult  to  get
any  of  the  former  lists,  as  they  are  commonl}^  destroyed  after  the
respective  election,  but  I  will  get  one  if  practicable.

Walter  W.  said  that  he  talked  with  '  Old  Happy  '  this  morning
and  '  Old  Happy '  knew  all  about  the  dog,  but  became  suspicious,
and  demanded  to  know  why  W.  questioned  him,  because  he  said  :
'They've  got  the  dog  back  and  why  do  you  want  to  knowl'
W.  says,  'It's  no  use  to  bother  with  the  old  "boozer"  any  more.'"]

[List  Encloseil.

Registered  Voters
Election  of
April  1st,  1902.

Precinct  IS
Ward  2.

with  name  of  JoJin  JJ'alsh,  2807,


Issued  by
Board  of  Election
Commissioners
of  the
City  of  C.
—  Ave.

R.  H.l


[Letter  from  Walter  W.,  July  22,  1902.

"I  knew  Bennie  Junot  during  his  whole  life-time — having  always
lived  near  Mr.  Junot's  home.  I  also  knew  the  colored  man,  Hugh
Irving,  who  was  Mr.  Junot's  coachman  for  about  20  years.

Hugh  Irving  had  a  friend,  still  living  in  the  neighbourhood,  by
name  John  Walsh.  Walsh  is  a  working  man  who  lived  near.  He
and  Hugh  were  much  togethei'.  Walsh  is  commonly  known  as
'  Old  Happy.'  I  don't  know  whether  Bennie  Junot  knew  Walsh
or  not,  but  he  probably  did.  I  supposed  that  the  name  was  JFelsh
until  I  lately  made  enquiry  from  members  of  his  family  as  to  how
they  spelt  their  name,'  and  have  sometimes  addressed  him  as
Welsh.

At  Mr.  Junot's  recjuest  I  visited  Walsh,  or  Welsh,  and  asked


518


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


him  about  the  dog  Rounder.  He  quickly  became  suspicious  and
would  not  talk,  saying  '  What  are  you  asking  about  the  dog  for  ?
They  have  got  him  back.'

The  dog  liounder  is  well  known  in  the  neighbourhood.  Lately
I  have  again  called  on  Walsh  and  asked  about  Hugh  and  the  dog.
He  now  says  that  Hugh  not  long  before  his  death  gave  Rounder
to  a  colored  man,  whom  he  knows  by  sight,  but  not  by  name.
Some  time  ago  Walsh's  mother  in  talking  with  my  wife  called  their
name  as  Welsh."]

[It  will  be  seen  from  the  above  statements  that  Bennie's  asser-
tion about  Rounder  is  not  shown  to  be  accurate.  But  it  is  interesting
that  the  name  he  gives  should  be  that  of  a  man  closely  associated
with  Hugh  Irving  and  therefore  very  likely  to  have  known  the
whereabouts  of  the  dog,  even  if  he  never  had  it  in  his  own
possession. — H.  de  G.  V.]

28th  Sitting.
May  7,  1902.  Presevt:  R  H.

(Bennie  communicating.)

Give  my  dearest  love  to  daddie  mother  Roble  and  say  I
am  still  with  them  dail}-.  the  white  flowers  were
superb.  I  saw  mother  when  she  arranged  them  for  me
at  the  grave.

[Extract  from  N.  B.  J.'s  letter,  May  15,  1902.

"  Two  or  three  days  before  May  7,  Mrs.  J.  being  about
to  go  to  our  farm  for  the  season,  visited  Bennie's  grave
and  placed  there  a  lot  of  flowers — not  white  however—
but  pansies,  his  favourite  flowers."]

29th  Sitting.
June  10,  1902.  Present:  Sifter^  and  B.  H.

Bennie  saith  tell  thee  first  dad  Mother  and  Helen  went  to
the  grave  with  some  beautiful  flowers  on  Sunday,  the
pink  and  white  ones  were  especially  beautiful  the  spirits
of  which  he  now  has

^  The  sitter  present  on  this  occasion  was  not  in  any  way  connected  with  Bennie
Junot.— H.  de  G.  Y.


Lxi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  loitli  Mrs.  Piper.  51&
R.  H.  Yes.

*  *  *

[There  is  no  contemporary  note  as  to  the  correctness  of
this  statement.  When  Bennie  next  communicates  on
October  15,  1902,  and  asks  wliether  his  father  has  been
■  told  about  "  the  floAvers  I  told  you  I  saw  them  put
on  the  grave,"  R.  H.  replies  "  Yes,  it  was  all  right,"
see  below.  It  seems  probable  that  it  is  the  statement
of  June  10  that  is  here  alluded  to,  but  the  reference
is  not  clear. — H.  de  G.  V.]

30th  Sitting.

, Odoher  15,  1902.  Present:  R.  H.

Ere  we  go  we  wish  thee  to  give  Bennie's  love  to  all  his
friends  and  family  on  thy  side.

R.  H.  Yes,  I  heard  his  message  last  time  and  sent  it.

He  saw  dad  at  the  farm  not  long  ago  and  was  rejoiced.

R.  H.  Yes.

Did  you  tell  him  about  the  flowers  I  told  you  I  saw
them  put  on  the  grave.

R.  H.  Yes,  and  .  .  he  and  your  mother?  (Assent.)

R.  H.  Yes,  it  was  all  right.

Y^ou  told  him

thank  you  very  much.

3  1st  Sitting.

November  12,  1902.  Present:  B.H.

(Bennie  communicating.)

I  am  Bennie  and  I  wish  to  greet  you  my  dear  kind  friend
and  ask  you  if  you  will  kindly  tell  dad  I  thank  him
for  the  white  and  yellow  flowers  he  put  on  my  grave
recently.  I  think  it  was  on  a  Sunday  as  I  saw  every
one  in  the  body  praying.


520  . Helen  de  G.  Verrall.

R.  H.  Yes,  I  will,  Beniiie. Go  on.


[part


and  tell  him  I  saw  the  wreath  also  made  of  green  which

Aunt  Alice  suggested.
Tell  Dad  I  think  of  him  so  often,  and  Roble  mother  and

Helen. I  think  Roble  has  been  doing  better  .  work.

R.  H.  Yes.  Your  father  wrote  me  recently  to  say  how  pleased  he
was  to  get  your  messages  and  how  he  welcomes  any
news  about  you.  He  expects  to  come  to  meet  you  at
his  usual  time  somewhere  about  ten  Sabbaths  after
Xmas,  in  the  month  of  March.

Yes  I  U.  D.  thank  you  very  much.  I  hope  they  will  go
into  the  country  as  they  often  plan  to  do  as  dad  works
too  hard.

R.  H.  Yes.

I  often  wonder  if  spirits  from  our  world  will  ever  be  able
to  speak  without  the  light  as  we  often  try  to  do,  but
we  are  glad  to  welcome  any  of  our  friends  here.  I  can
tell  you.

Helen  never  seemed  so  well  as  she  does  now.

R.  H.  I'm  very  glad.

She  has  only  had  a  cold  and  you  know  what  colds  are  in
the  body.

R.  H.  Yes.

You  have  been  so  kind  to  me  always  I  feel  as  though  I
had  always  known  you.

R.  H.  I  feel  as  if  you  were  an  old  friend.
Well  I  think  I  am.

[Extract  from  N.  B.J.'s  letter,  Nov.  19,  1902.

"Everything  [in  the  communication  of  Nov.  12]  is  natural  and
right  save  the  reference  to  the  wreath.  You  will  remember  about
the  wreath  found  on  his  grave  during  the  holidays  last  year.  We
never  found  out  who  placed  it  on  his  grave. He  has  two  aunts


LXi.] Re-port  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Pi]oer.  521


named  Alice,  but  one  was  abroad  at  that  time  and  the  other  knows
nothing  about  any  wreath.

On  Sunday  morning  Oct.  12th,  I  was  moved  to  visit  the
Cemetery,  though  it  was  raining.  I  went  out  alone  and  placed  a
bunch  of  flowers  upon  his  grave.  My  recollection  is  that  they  were
all  white,  but  there  may  have  been  some  yellow  ones.  I  can't  be
certain  as  to  that. I  had  never  been  there  Sunday  morn'mg  before.

His  mother  and  I  drove  out  there  Sunday  afternoon  Nov.
2nd,  and  she  placed  some  white  flowers.  She  and  I  go  there  not
infrequently — always  on  Sunday  afternoons."]

32nd  Sitting.
December  2,  1902.  Present:  B.H.

(Bennie  communicating.)
did  you  tell  dear  old  dad  what  I  said  about  those  flowers.

R.  H.  Yes,  Bennie.  He  remembered  about  the  white  flowers,  I
think  he  said,  but  did  not  remember  the  yellow.  He
said  also  that  he  does  not  know  about  Aunt  Alice's
having  anything  to  do  with  a  wreath.

I  hope  he  will  later  as  I  know  what  I  mean  perfectly.

R.  H.  Which  Aunt  Alice  1

Aunt  Clarke. Aunt  Alice.

33rd  Sitting.

December  31,  1902.  Present  :  Mrs.  L.

*  *  *

and  a  young  man  here  sends  much  love  to  his  father  and
mother  and  thanks  them  for  the  green  wreath. B.  J.

B.  J.  tell  Hodgson  he  will  U.  D. B.  J.

[Extract  from  N.  B.  J.'s  letter,  Jan.  11,  1908.

"On  Christmas  day  (Dec.  25,  1902)  Mrs.  Junot  and  I  drove

out to 0 and placed a large  green wreath on  Bennie's

grave.

I  carried  the  wreath  from  the  carriage  and  placed  it  upon  the


522


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


grave.  Afterwurds  Mrs.  Junot  left  the  carriage  and  went  up  to
the  grave.  It  was  a  dark  cold  afternoon  and  she  remained  at
the  grave  only  a  few  moments."]

34th  Sitting.

January  28,  1903.  Present:  B.  H.

(Bennie  communicating.)

Good  morning  my  good  friend  I  am  so  glad  to  have  you
call  for  me  B

P^.  H.  Bennie  ...

Yes  I  am  here.

R.  H.  Your  flither  writes  this  :

"  Dear  Bennie,  our  good  friend  Dr.  Hodgson  has  sent
us  your  messages  and  they  give  us  gi'eat  happiness,  for
they  show  us  that  you  do  not  forget  us  in  your  new
life.  We  want  you  to  be  good  and  obedient  to  all  the
rules  and  laws  where  you  are,  but  we  also  hope  that  your
new  surroundings  and  interests  and  duties  may  not  lead
you  to  forget  us.  We  think  of  you  always,  and  always
will,  until  you  come  to  meet  us  when  we  leave  this  eaith
life.  I  often  think  of  my  dear  mother  when  thinking  of
you.  1  want  you  to  tell  her  that  I  hold  her  in  most
loving  memory  and  seek  to  live  in  this  life  in  such  way
as  she  desired  and  that  I  often  talk  of  her  with  Alice,
lioble  and  Helen  are  both  well  and  happy.  They  are
nearly  grown  up.  Helen  is  a  tall  beautiful  girl  and  last
summer  she  used  your  Kodak  as  you  wished  her  to  do
and  took  a  number  of  very  nice  pictui-es  down  at  the
farm.  Roble  is  a  large  man  now  in  size  and  is  more
than  half  way  through  college.  He  often  speaks  of  you.
Helen  drove  your  horse  Klondyke  a  great  deal  last
summer  and  had  much  pleasure  with  him.  I  am  about
to  buy  a  new  saddle  horse  for  her.  Roble  will  soon  be
home  for  Christmas."

Bennie,  your  father  wrote  this  several  weeks  before
Christmas.


Yes. I  U.  D. Xmas  is  over.


LXi.] Rejwrt  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  523


R.  H.  "also  Charlie  D.  Also,  your  cousin  Katie  is  going  to
be  married  soon.  Your  uncle  Willie  spends  much  time
with  us  at  the  farm  and  speaks  of  you.  Better  send  a
message  to  him.  Do  you  sometimes  go  to  the  farm  ?
One  day  not  long  ago  when  I  was  there  alone  I  thought
that  you  and  Mother  were  there.  You  never  told  me
who  gave  you  your  Shetland  pony  Walter.  Better  ask
Hugh.  He  may  remember  better  than  you.  And  tell
him  that  we  srot  Rounder  back  all  risrht  and  that
Rounder  is  very  happy,  but  is  getting  old.  Your  pony
Walter  is  fat  and  last  summer  I  got  on  him  and  made
him  carry  me  quite  a  Avay.  While  I  was  on  him  Helen
took  a  picture  of  me  with  the  Kodak.  Can  you  see
what  new  building  we  have  lieen  doing  at  the  farm
and  tell  Dr.  Hodgson?"

Yes,  it  looks  like  a  new  Shed,  it  is  very  near  the  ham.
I  saw  it  being  built.

R.  H.  Yes.

and  saw  the  man  at  work  there  just  before  you  went  there
last  summer.

R.  H.  "  We  are  coming  soon  to  talk  with  you  at  Dr.  Hodgson's.

So  don't  forget  us,  dear  Bennie,  and  may  God  have  you
in  his  Holy  keeping. With  much  love.  Daddy."

I  cannot  tell  you  how  happy  I  am  to  hear  from  you  in  this
way. I  am  well  dear  father  and  very  happy. I  spend

much  time  with  you  all  at  home  in  C  . I  often

see  you  reading  and  mother  talking  with  Helen  about
her  music.  I  think  she  has  done  splendidl}'  the  past
year  as  we  used  to  say  in  her  Studies.

Give  her  ever  so  much  love  and  tell  dear  mother  how  much
I  love  and  think  of  her.  tell  Uncle  Willie  I  shall  never
forget  the  good  times  we  had  to  gether  at  Osterville  and
tell  him  I  can  see  him  just  as  he  looks  now

ask  him  if  he  remembers  what  we  did  to  the  boat  one  Sunday.
I  will  tell  you

We  went  down  and  found  it  full  of  water.  We  took  our  .  .
an  old  can  we  found  and  bailed  it  all  out I  wonder  if


524


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


he  will  remember, the  day  was  sunny  and  bright,  after
a  heavy  rain  we  had  the  day  before. We  put  the  Sails
out  to  dry  also. I  am  sure  it  was  uncle  Willie.
Give  him  my  love.

Tell  Roble  not  to  forget  me  even  though  he  may  not  be

able  to  U.  D.  the  conditions  of  my  life.
Was  it  a  flute  Charlie  and  Roble  were  trying  to  play  on,
I  do  not  suppose  I  ought  to  stay  longer.

35th  Sitting,
February  23,  1903.  Present:  N.B.J,  and  R.H.

(Parcel  unwrapped  and  Bennie's  articles  placed  on  table.)

(Bennie  communicating.)
Good  morning  Dad.

N.  B.  .1.  Yes,  Bennie,  dear. Yes,  I'm  here. (N.  B.  J.  moves  the  L.

bust  back  a  little.  Hand  touches  it  and  pushes  it  again
slightl}'  forward.)

AL.

I  see  you  dear I  see  you.

I  am  so  glad  to  see  you so  glad

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie  dear,  we're  glad  too.

So  much  to  tell  you. S  0  much.

N.  B.  J.  Ye.s,  go  on,  dear.

I  pray  for  you  daily  dad  and  that  God  will  watch  over  you.
I  remember  your  prayer  too.  Grandma  was  so  glad  to
hear  from  you.  She  said  she  would  come  here  with  me
to  greet  you.

N.  B.  .J.  Is  she  here,  Bennie  ? Is  grandma  here  with  you  1

Yes  dad  she  is. and  she  will  speak  as  I  do  soon,
do  you  U.  D.

N.  B.  .J.  Yes,  Bennie.

tell  me  Dad  if  you  are  not  better  now.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Jtmot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  525

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. I'm  much  better.

I  know  it  dear. I  have  been  with  3-ou  all  the  time  since  *I
spoke  to  you  here  before.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  dear  boy. I  understand.

I  am  very  proud  of  Helen.
N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. So  are  Mamma  and  Papa.

She  will  be  a  great  comfort  to  you.
N.  B.  J.  Yes.

I  know  it.

do  you  hear  me  when  I  call  you  to  sleep,  dadi

N.  B.  J.  No, Bennie,  I  do  not  hear,  but  sometimes  I think  you
are  helping  me.

I  am  glad  you  feel  me  because  I  am  often  there.
I  remember  Charlie tell  me  is  he  going  away  dear.

N.  B.  J.  Which  Charlie  do  you  mean  ?

I  am  thinking  about  .  .  li  0  ble  and  Charlie  dad.

[Eoble  and  Charlie  D  ,  Bennie's  best  friend,  were  with

us  at  our  hotel  on  the  day  prior  to  this  sitting,  Boble
having  met  Charlie  unexpectedly. — N.  B.  J.]

N.  B.  J.  Yes. You  mean  Charlie  D  1

(Assents.)
Yes  I  do.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. Roble  and  Charlie  D were  with  us  last

night.

I  saw  them that  is  why  I  think  of  them  now.
N.  B.  J.  Bennie. What  other  boys  did  you  see  with  them  1

two. I  do  not  know  .  them.
N.  B.  J.  Oh,  yes,  you  do. You  know  the  other  tAvo.

Wait, and  I'll  tell  you  dear.


526


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


Is  Charlie  not  going  away.

[Charlie  spoke  of  going  to  Europe  in  the  summer  and  also
said  he  must  go  back  to  New  Haven  the  next  day. —
N.  B.  J.]

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Charlie  has  gone  back  to  school.

I  heard  him  say  he  was  going  away  tomorrow.
N.  B.  J.  Yes,  that's  what  he  said.

I  stood  at  his  back, and  heard  much  that  he  said.

I  must  wait  a  moment  dear. (Hand  turns  to  Spirit  then  to

N.  B.  J.  then  gives  a  slight  jerk.)
H.  how  are  you.^ I  sent  him  out  a  moment.

R.  H.  All  right,  George,
back  soon.

(Hand  points  to  Spirit.)

here  is  your  father  sir.  wishes  to  be  remembered  to  you
and  hopes  you  realize  he  is  ever  ready  to  help  you.

N.  B.  J.  Is  it  my  father  1

Yes  but  he  was  peculiar.

N.  B.  J.  I  thank  him,  and  wish  him  to  help  me  still,  while  I  am  in
this  life.

H. I  will  wait  B's  return,
here  is  Mrs.  J  U  n  o  t.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  dear  mother. Speak  to  me.

tell  me  do  you  realise  what  life  means  now.

N.  B.  J.  I  think  I  do,  more  than  ever  before. Speak  on.
do  you  remember  my  talks  with  you.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  nearly  all  of  them. Good  mother,
remember. I  believed  in  God  always.

■'George  Pelham  communicating.


LXi.] Report  on  tJte  Junot  Sittings  luith  Mrs.  Piper.  527

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  always. And  so  do  I.

and  His  great  goodness  to  us  all. keep  to  Him.
[Very  characteristic  of  her. — N.  B.  J.]

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  dear  mother. Send  word  to  Alice  about  her  daughter.

I  will.  I  feel  I  feel  she  has  not  been  well.  I  mean  Alice,
her  her  head  troubles  her  some  times  tell  her  not  to
worry  about  Frank I  wish  she  was  as  well  off.

Yes,  dear  Mother.  But  she  wants  to  hear  about  her
daughter.

Yes I'll  go  and  bring  her.
all  right, (between  Spirits.)

here  I  am  dear  father  was  it  the  addition  to  the  new  barn
you  meant  1

Have  you  been  at  the  old  farm  lately  1

Yes  I  go  often.  I  saw  you  working  there  last  summer  with
a  man.

N.  B.  J.  Yes.

What  was  it  you  did  to  the  house.
N.  B.  J.  Built  more.  .  .  added  more  house.

I  saw  a  shed  like  part  on  it. looks  strange  to  me.  can't

cjuite  make  it  out  dad.
[A  large  piazza  was  lately  built  at  end  of  the  house.  The

gable  roof  of  the  house  was  cariied  out  over  it  and

before  it  was  finished  it  had  a  peculiar  appearance. —

N.  B.  J.]

N.  B.  J.  Will  you  come  to  the  farm  next  summer  when  dad  is  there  1

Oh  yes  certainly  I  will. I  will.

I  forgot  my  horses  iiame. .  .  horse.

almost.

N.B.J.  What  is  it? What  is  the  name  I


N.  B.  J.


N.  B.  J.


i^ee  p.  523.


528


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


What  is  it.

Oh  I  never  can  U.  D.  it  E.
K.

N.  B.  J.  That  starts  right.

Come  on  B give  it  me. (Rector  to  Bennie)
K  .  .

yes  certainly. .  .  louder  dear. (Rector  to  Bennie)
L

N.  B.  J.  That's  right.
0

N.  B.  J.  That's  right.
N

N.  B.  J.  That's  right.
DI

N.  B.  J.  That's  right.
KE

N.  B.  J.  That's  right.

N.B.J,  (to  R.H.)  Can  you  read  it  now?

R.  H.  "  Klondike."

N.  B.  J.  That's  just  right.  [The  name  of  the  horse  Klondyke  is
given  in  the  letter  to  Bennie  read  aloud  by  R.  H.  See
p.  522.— R.  H.]

and  one  thing  more. dear, dad what  did  you  do  to  the
well.

N.  B.  J.  The  old  hundred-year-old  well  went  dry,  and  we  bored  a
new  one.

I  could  not  quite  U.  D.  bored, but  I  saw  them  working  on
it  last  summer.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  they  bored  the  well  with  a  great  derrick  and  engine.


LXI.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  luith  Mrs.  Piper.  529

I  saw  the  work  I  heard,  them  talk.  I  only  tell  you  dear
that  you  may  TJ.  D.  I  keep  up  my  interest  in  all  you  do.
I  love  the  place  and  all  in  it. you  know.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  that's  right. Don't  forget  us.

do  you  remember  the  Sunday  you  and  Mother  and  Helen
walked  in  the  ivoods.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

I  was  with  you.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

I  saw  Helen  P  i  ok  some  green  and  take  it  to  the  house  .  .

Vine. I  think.
[This  walk  when  we  got  the  vine  is  now  well  remembered,

but  was  not  recalled  at  the  time  of  the  sitting. — N.  B.  J.^

N.  B.  J.  Yes  ?

do  you  remember.

N.  B.  J.  Ferns.

Yes  ferns  he  said  ferns.  but  sounded  like  Vines.  [The
suggestion  of  the  sitter  is  here  accepted  by  the  controls,
though  it  appears  from  N.  B.  J.'s  note  that  the  original
statement  was  correct.  The  remark  "  Yes  ferns  .  .  .  like
Vines "  is  doubtless  from  Rector,  explaining  that  he  had
misunderstood  Bennie's  message.  At  a  later  sitting,  how-
ever, see  p.  550,  Bennie  referring  to  this  incident  says
"Do  you  remember  what  I  told  dear  father  about
Helen's  gathering  vines  1 "  thus  returning  to  his  original
statement. — H.  de  G.  V.]

I  also  saw  her  riding  my  horse  the  day  you  spoke  of  .  or
referred  to  in  your  letter  .  to  me.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  understand.

do  you  know  what  mother  did  with  my  Hat black  hat  dad.


N.  B.  J.


No,  I  do  not.


530


Helen  de  0.  Verrall.


[part


I  saw  her,  holding  it  in  her  hand  not  very  long  ago.  I
want  you  to  U.  D.  everything  I  think  about  and  see.

[A  few  days  before  going  to  Boston  for  this  sitting  Mrs.  J.
took  a  black  cap  of  Bennie's  out  of  its  drawer  and  con-
sidered carrying  it  to  the  sittings. — N.  B.  J.]

I  saw  them  plowing  up  out  by  the  barn  dad.


N.  B.  J.  When  ?


taking  up  Stone  .  Stone.

[At  the  time  of  this  sitting,  and  for  several  days  prior  thereto,
workmen  had  been  engaged  in  moving  a  large  old  barn
at  our  farm.  It  stands  upon  sand  stone  blocks  and  brick.
I  have  not  been  there  since  the  moving  began. — N.  B.  J.]


N.  B.  J.  Go  on.


when  you  went  there.

tell  Mother  I  like  the  wreath  she  put  near  my  picture
[Nothing  understood  as  to  the  wreath. — N.  B.  J.]
got  to  go  out  now  dear.
Helen  most  through  school.


N.  B.  J.  Yes,  nearly  through.
Stick  to  music.

I  am  Hugh^ God  forgive  me  why  not  you.

[At  this  point,  with  the  appearance  of  Hugh  Irving,  the
writing  changes  and  "  there  is  a  tendency  to  make  extra
curling  loops  to  the  strokes."  When  the  sitters  complain
of  illegibility,  Rector  apologizes  on  the  ground  that  "he
(that  is  H.  I.)  speaks  queerly."  It  appears  that  peculiarity
of  speech  on  the  part  of  a  communicator  is  here  repre-
sented by  peculiarity  of  writing  on  the  part  of  the  control.
— H.deG.  v.]

N.  B.  J.  Why,  of  course,  Hugh. You're  all  right. Speak  on.

I  want  to  know  if  I  can  do  anything  for  you.
[Owing  to  the  curious  looping,  neither  N.  B.  J.  nor  li.  H.
could  make  this  out  at  first. — E.  H.]

N.  B.  J.  (to  R.  H.)  Can't  read,  can  you  1

'  Hugh  Irving. See  p.  491.


lxl] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Piper.  531

R.  H.  One  moment.

(From  Rector.) AVait  a  moment,  Sir.
he  speaks  queerly  friend,
want  to  know  if  I  can  do  anything.
I  long  to  help  you.

N.B.J.  Who  is  it  speaking?

Your  boy  is  all  right, how  is  the  dog  now.

N.  B.  J.  Rounder  is  all  right,  Hugh. He's  so  glad  to  get  back.

faith  and  Im  glad  too.
did  Welch  have  him.

N.  B.  J.  No,  some  other  man  had  him  and  brought  him  back.

Welch.  Welch.

N.  B.  J.  Did  you  give  him  to  Welsh  ]

No  I  saw  him  at  Welchs  house  in  the  body,  and  prayed
him  to  send  him  to  you.  then  Mr  Benny  got  hold  and
we  worked  to  get  him  back.

I  hope  you  keep  him  now look  out  for  him.

(Hand  turns  to  Spirit. Cross  in  air.)

U.  D.

JSr.  B.  J.  Yes,  Hugh.

[The  next  two  phrases  probably  between  Spirits. — R.  H.]
I  held  to  it.

Getting  on  all  right. .  .  held
here  I  am  dad.

Dad  do  you  remember  what  I  said  about  putting  that
wreath  on  my  grave  dear.^

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

Do  you  remember  the  one  I  mean.

N.  B.  J.  The  first  one,  do  you  mean  ? Do  you  speak  of  the  first  one  1
(Dissent.)

^See  p.  521.


532  Helen  cle  G.  Verrall.  [part

N.B.J.  Of  the  last  one?  (Assent.)

last  one. I  told  liim. (Hand  turns  to  K.  H.)
did  you  tell  my  father.

R.  H.  Yes,  he  knows  all  about  it.

Oh father  by  the  way  dear, did  you  say  you  gave  my
desk  to  Helen.

N.  B.  J.  No,  /  have  your  desk.

I

I  wanted  you  to  use  it  always  just  as  long  as  you  were  in
the  body.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  I  will,  Bennie.

and  the  diary  I  had  .  .

R.  H.  What  about  the  diari/  ?

I  forgot  in  my  talks  to  tell  him  about  it. I  left  it  in  my
pocket.

N.  B.  J.  I  don't  know  about  that.
Mother  does. I  think.

do  you  remember  a  friend  of  mine  named  Dwight^  dad.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  I  know  whom  you  mean.

does  he  know  I  am  alive, or  any  the  rest  of  the  boys.

N.  B.  J.  I've  told  uncle Willie and  uncle  Charlie. That's  all  the
boys  I've  spoken  to.

give  my  love  to  Uncle  Willie  do  .  .
N.  B.  J.  Yes.

and  tell  him  I  never  forget  the  good  times  we  had  together
father  I  don't  believe  it  was  a  hurt  I  got  at  all. I  got
cold.2

N.  B.  J.  I  understand.

Im  so  glad  I  came, it  seems  as  though  I  could  not  say
half  I  have  in  my  mind.

'See  p.  480.  "See  p.  386.


LXI.]


Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  toith  Mrs.  Pi'per.  533


dad  what  did  you  tell  Aunt  Alice  about  giving  up  and
going  into  the  country.

N.  B.  J.  I  don't  remember  what  I  said.

you  said  you  wished  you  could  go  into  the  country  you
were  tired.  We  have  helped  you  to  get  over  being
tired.

got  to  go  now.

head  a  little  confused

want  to  say  so  much.

Annie.  (Pause.)

here  is  frank.

N,  B.  J.  Yes,  Frank.

and  L  0  u  i  se.
Where  is  Addie.
A  d  die.

this  belongs  to  the  young  mans  mother, in  the  body.
(Pause. Slight  thump  of  hand.)

[Bennie's  mother  has  two  sisters,  long  since  deceased,  whose
names  were  Annie  Louise  and  Hattie. — N.  B.  J.]

Dad  Roble  is  doing  finely  again.  I  never  saw  him  trying
to  do  better, he  is  not  lazy  now.

N.B.J.  Sure  no! Surely  no!

he  takes  to  his  work  like  a  soldier  and  is  looking  forward
to  getting  through,  father  he  appreciates  all  only  give
him  time  dear  he  is  all  right.

N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  did  you  not  see  Tommy  with  him  ?

(Excitement.)

SURE I  did. Why  do  you  ash  dad.
N.  B.  J.  Because  .  .  because  I  asked  and  you  did  not  answer.^

Well  dad  I  don't  mean  to  do  so  but  I  have  everything  on
my  mind.  When  I  get  here  and  they  don't  always  U.  D.
what  I  do  say.  you  will  know  when  you  get  here  how
hard  I  try  to  tell  you  all  that  you  may  it  it  is  really  I.


iSee  p.  525.


534  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  tell  me  about  yourself.

about  myself  dear.  Well  dad  I  am  progressing  all  the  time
I  am  very  happy  helping  others  learning  all  I  can
about  this  life  and  the  Philosophy  of  life  in  the  body
before  we  enter  this.

N.  B.  J.  Yes. Go  on. Tell  me.

I  look  over  my  life  in  the  body  and  wonder  what  I  could
have  done  more  for  you  and  Mother  dear.  I  wonder  if
you  U.  D.  all  I  feel  for  you  both.

N.  B.  J.  We  know  y^ou  love  us,  Bennie.
love  you  well  I  do  you  know.

before  the  light  grows  too  dark  I  want  to  ask  for  Mother
and  will  she  speak  with  me  soon.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  to-morrow,  next  time,  to-morrow.

Will  you  remember  that  I  am  working  for  those  who  come
to  this  world  and  who  do  not  U.  D.  as  much  about  it
as  /  do.  now.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  we  understand.

I  shall  watch  out  for  you  all  and  when  God  calls  you  to

this  world  I  shall  be  at  the  door  to  meet  you
and  you  will  know  me  instantly  dad.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

I  shall  not  go  so  far  away  but  what  I  will  meet  you.
Oh  the  boat  was  all  painted  new. when  I  went  to  the  pier
dear  .  .

R.  H.  "to  the  pier"  "pier"  ?

(From  Rector.)  shore  I  think  he  means,  he  U.  D.  do  you
remember  how  I  used  to  play  for  you  dad.

N.  B.  J.  Yes.  Bennie.


tell  me  about  my  Kodac  before  I  go  too  far  away.


Lxr.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  535-
N.  B.  J.  Helen  has  it,  Bennie. She  takes  pictures  now.
I  am  awfully  glad.

don't  you  think  she  is  a  fine  girl  now  dear.
N.  B.  J.  Yes,  indeed.

she  loves  you  dearly.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

and  when  she  plays  I U.  D.  perfectly, but  why  does  she
not  like  it  better.

N.  B.  J.  I  don't  know.

She  studies  that's  why.
too  much  work. I  U.  D.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  she  studies  too  much.

Yes  I  say  she  does, don't  crowd  her  so.
I  am  going  to  help  her. from  now  on  so  she  can  get
through  A  1.

N.  B.  J.  That's  right.
U.  D.

N.  B.  J.  That's  right,  Bennie.

dad  do  you  want  me  to  give  you  some  more  tests.

N.  B.  J.  Surely,  if  you  can.

W  [?] well  when  I  go  out  and  come  back  111  tell  you  a.
lot  of  things.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

you  and  dear  Mother  too.

Give  my  love  to  Roble  and  tell  him  I'll  never  forget  the
good  old  days  at  the  farm.

N.  B.  J.  He  sent  his  love  to  you,  Bennie.

God  bless  him  dad.

I  shall  not  forget  you 111  think  up  some  things  and  tell
you  next  time.


536  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

36th  Sitting.

February  24,  1903. Present:  Mr.  and  Mrs.  J.  and  R.H.

(Bennie  communicating.)
Got  all  over  your  cold  dear.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  I'm  better,  Bennie.

I  know  now  let  me  tell  you  one  thing,  don't  question  the
right  and  wrong  of  my  returning  because  there  are  no
wrongs  in  it.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  it  gave  us  a  little  anxiety  as  to  whether  we
were  doing  right  in  calling  you  to  us.

I  heard  it  all  and  it  made  me  uneasy  dear  so  thought  I
would  settle  it  for  you.

[We  had  upon  the  evening  before  been  asking  ourselves
whether  it  might  not  influence  him  away  from  his  duties
in  his  new  life  to  call  him  back  to  us.  The  conversation
on  this  subject  had  been  quite  extended. — N.  B.  J.]

Mrs.  J.  Thank  you,  Bennie.

I  pray  you  all  to  feel  that  I  am  all  right  and  doing  right.
N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  understand  you.

Don't  feel  troubled  any  more.
Mrs.  J.  No,  not  after  this. Can  you  tell  me  a  little  about  Helen  1

I  think  so  as  I  feel  I  know  a  good  deal  about  her  dear  But
first  promise  me  you  will  no  longer  question,  dear.

Mrs.  J.  No,  I  am  convinced  that  it  is  right  for  you  to  come  to  us,
and  that  it  helps  us.

I  am  freer  now  and  you  must  also  be.
let  me  help  you  dear.

one  thing  about  Helen  do  not  let  her  study  too  hard  as
she  will  get  through  finely I  see  it.

Mrs.  J.  I  will  watch  her  carefully. She  is  studying  hard  now.


LXI.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  537

She  will  come  out  all  right  Mamma  I  am  sure.  ,  ;

only  one  thing  her  throat.

Mrs.  J.  Her  throat 'i (Assent.)  :'

May  trouble  in  a  few  days  but  don't  mind. I  see  it  beginning.
[Upon  our  return  three  days  later  we  found  her  quite  ill
with  a  sore  throat  and  under  the  doctor's  care. — N.  B.  J.]

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  we  will  try  to  break  up  the  trouble  with  her  throat.

. I  hear  you  so  well  dearest  Mother.

her  music  helps  me  to  reach  her  at  home.
I  fear  she  has  neglected  it  of  late. She  is  going  to  be  a
fine  girl  and  a  comfort  to  yoii,  all. hear  me.

Mrs.  J.  I  think  that  we  do  not  appreciate  Helen  as  we  do  you  and
Roble.

I  think  it  so  dear.  I  feel  it  all  the  time.  So  I'll  stand
behind  her.  ,  .

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  it  is  not  that  we  do  not  love  her  as  well.

I  know  perfectly  dear  I  U.  D.  just  how  you  feel,  but  cling
to  her  I  love  her  dearly  dear.  I  see  her  thoughts  are  a
little  Stubborn  but  do  not  mind. She  will  out  grow  it.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  think  you  are  right.

But  you  humor  her  a  great  deal  and  it  is  better  so.  Roble
is  doing  splendidly.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  I  saw  him  yesterday.

I  think  he  is  growing  fine  and  and  handsome  as  well  the  im-
provement to  his  mind  tell  him  I  think  of  him  a  great
deal  and  the  good  times  we  had  at  the  farm  Mamma
do  you  remember  anything  about  a  Squirrel.

Mrs.  J.  A  Squirrel No,  Bennie.

Ask  Roble  if  he  remembers  the  Squirrel  hole  in  the  barn,
will  you.

2  M


538  •  Helen  de  G.  VerraJl. ■  [part

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  he  probably  will  remember.

[Not  remembered  in  connection  with  the  farm.. They  had
a  squirrel  in  the  stable  in  the  city. — N.  B.  J.]
Who  put  the  corn  cob  in  it.'

Mrs.  J.  Yes  ? I  will  ask  him  and  send  his  answer  to  Dr.  Hodgson.
(Hand  turns  enquiringly  to  E.  H.)

R.  H.  Yes.

We  had  two  Sleds.  Where  are  the}'  I  cannot  see  them
anywhere.  [They  had  2  sleds.  They  have  long  since
disappeared. — N.  B.  J.]

do  you  remember  the  visit  we  made  there  one  winter  dad.

N.  B.  J.  No,  Bennie,  I  don't  know  what  you  mean.

Mes.  J.  Do  you  mean  that  we  went  to  the  farm  in  winter  1

One  winter  before  I  came  to  this  world,
we  went  out  there  when  it  was  winter.

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie,  not  to  the  farm.

Yes  listen we  went  out  away  down  and  got
Roble  father  and  I  went  together  think,
don't  you  know  what  I  mean  dear.

Mrs.  J.  No,  I  don't,  Bennie. But  I  will  try  later  to  recall  this
incident.

N.  B.  J.  (to  Mrs.  J.)  Let  him  go  on. He  can  tell.

I  remember  going  perfectly  well  and  going  .  .
do  you  remember  who  took  care  of  the  horses,
we  went  to  see  him. [Not  remembered. — N.  B.  J.]

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie,  I  can't  seem  to  remember.

dad  ask  Roble,  if  he  remembers  the  time  we  went  down

opened  the  house, got  out  some  .  .
Oh  I  know  what  I  mean. We  Stayed  longer  behind  .  .

let  me  go  out  and  I'll  tell  you.


1  See  p.  433.


LXi.] Rejyort  on  the  Junot  Sittings  loith  Mrs.  Piper.  539


X.  B.  J.  Bennie,  when  you  come  back,  tell  us  who  gave  you  your
pony. Ask  Hugh.

(From  Rector.) friend  did  those  names  register  rightly.
R.  H.  Which?

those  he  spoke  .  as  he  went  out  last  time  ?  ^  R.
R.  H.  Do  you  mean  Annie  and  Addie  1  (Assent.)
Mrs.  J.  Not  quite  right.

he  was  speaking  about  his  cousin  he  told  me.  R.

Mrs.  J.  No. He  had  two  aunts, and  the  two  names  may  have
been  intended  for  their  names.

he  spoke  of  them  before  but  as  he  left  he  called  out  tell

father  I'll  find  Addie.
[On  p.  423  Bennie  says  "  Allie  Clark  is  here  and  sends  love
to  sister  Alice  in  the  body;"  on  p.  456  he  asks  "Do  you
remember  a  little  girl  who  came  here  long  ago  by  the
name  Alice  1 "  Eventually  (see  p.  495)  he  says  that
"  Alice  "is  "  Aunt  Alice's  "  daughter.  It  is  probably
a  confused  recollection  of  these  early  attempts  that
makes  Bennie  assign  the  name  Addie  to  his  cousin.
On  p.  533  where  the  name  first  occurs,  it  is  said
to  "belong  to  the  young  man's  mother,"  and  was
conjectured  to  be  an  attempt  at  "  Hattie,"  the  name  of
Mrs.  J.'s  sister.— H.  de  G.  v.]

Where  is  my  son  N tell  him  I  would  like  him  to  help

Alice  to  U.  D.

When  she  dreamed  of  light  .  that  we  were  there.

[Sister  Alice  states  that  she  has  often  dreamed  of  our  mother.
But  does  not  understand  about  the  light. — N.  B.  J.]

here  are  two  Spirits  a  lady  and  a  .  .  four  .  .  a  lady  a
young  lady  a  gentleman  and  a  young  gentleman  all
belonging  to  her.  Alice,  her  Mother  her  companion  .
her  son her  daughter.

[Correct.— N.  B.  J.]

iSee  p.  533.


540 ■ '  Helen  de  0.  VerralL  [part

N.'B.  J.  Yes. Please  give  the  names  for  Alice.  '  •

here  are  two  franks  .  .

[Alice  has  upon  the  other  side  her  husband  and  a  son  and
daughter.  Her  husband  and  son  each  bore  the  name  of
Frank.— N.  B.  J.]

N.  B.  J.  That's  right.

for  her.  ,  .  ,

Mrs.  J.  Will  you  send  her  a  message  from  her  daughter  1  She
wants  it  more  than  anything  else.

Yes  we  will  awaken  her  to  speak  to  thee,  certainly  we
will.

Mother  I  want  very  much  to  make  you  U.  D.  about  our
trip  to  the  farm  don't  you  remember  when  we  went
to  the  farm  together.

Mrs.  J.  That's  Bennie.  •  '  '

do  help  me  .  to  recall  it  I  know  so  well  vvhat  I  want  to
say.

Mrs.  J.  Who  is  this  speaking? . ' .  ,  •  :

It  is  I  Mamma, don't  you  remember  before  I  passed  out
:  you  and  I  and  Roble  went  together  dad.

N.  B.  J.  No,  Bennie,  I  do  not  remember.

Mrs.  J.  Not just now, Bennie, but I have  an indistinct  recol-
lection that  you  all  went  down  together.

I  know  we  did. I  wish  you  could  U.D.  it  would  help  me
so  well  never  mind  I  tell  you  something  else.
■  Yes  I  know  about  the  Pony  dad. and  who  gave  him  to
me.

N.  B.  J.  (sotto  voce  to  R.  H.) Ask  George  to  help  him  to  give  the
name  1

R.

better  spell  it  out  first  before  giving  it  me.  R.
JO  .  . JO  .  .


LXI.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  tvith  Mrs.  Piper.  541
can't  quite  U.  D.

think  about  something  else  and  it  will  seem  clearer  to  thee.
(Rector  to  Bennie.)

X.B.J,  (to  R.  H.)  What  are  those  two  letters'!

R.  H.  J  .  0.

N.  B.  J.  (to  R.  H.)  It  started  right.

JOHN.

N.  B.  J.  That's  right. (Assent.) Now  go  on.  ■  •

gave  it  me.  .  .

SON.

[These  letters  are  perhaps  intended  to  be  a  continuation  of
the  name  John,  N.  B.  J.'s  remark  "Now  go  on"  having
been  interpreted  as  meaning  that  the  name  was  not
yet  complete. — H.  de  G.  V.]

I  remember  so  well  our  last  talk  together

Mes.  J.  Yes'? Tell  me  about  it.

You  said  I  was  going. I  said  no.

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie,  I  had  no  idea.

■  You  said  I  vjas  sick, that  is  it. but  I  felt  strange  about
it. did  I  tell  you.

Mrs.  J.  No. But  I  think  you  felt  strange,  and  felt  that  you  were
very  sick.

Yes,  I  remember  how  I  felt  .  but  I  thought  you  said  I
feel  as  if  you  were  hurt  .  .  HURT.

Mrs.  J.  No,  your  father  thought  that  perhaps  you  had  been  hurt,
but  I  never  thought  it.

Oh  yes  but  it  was  a  cold  1  knoiv.  '  '

Mrs.  J.  Yes. Bennie,  you  gave  us  just  now  part  of  the  name  of
the  person  who  gave  you  the  pony. Can  you  give  us
; the  rest  of  the  name  ?

J.O.H.N.


542  Helen  cle  G.  Verrall.  [part

Mrs.  J.  That  is  right,  but  there's  .  is  another  name. Give  it  if  you
can. (Pause. Hand  listens  to  Spirit.)

M.  C.

N.  B.  J.  (to  R.  H.) Mr.  ?

R.  H.  No. M  .  0.
N.  B.  .J.  (to  R.  H.)  No,  that's * * (Not  caught.)

JO  .  .
L  .  .

N.B.J.  (toR.  H.) What's  that  letter.  Doctor?

R.  H.  (to  N.  B.  J.)  L.

N.B.J.  (toR.  H.)  It  wasn't  intended  for  that.

I  am  trying  to  spell  it  for  E,

Mes.  J.  Yes. Take  time.

don't  bother. Go  on. Where  is  Abraham  Lincoln.
(R.  H.  moves  the  bust  to  hand.)

N.B.J.  (toR.  H.)  Tell  him  to  get  Mr.  Pelham  to  help  him.

R.  H.  Rector,  better  perhaps  ask  George  to  get  it  and  bring  it
himself.

I'll  call  him  friend. (Hand  turns  to  Mrs.  J.)
Mrs.  J.  What  is  it,  Bennie'?

I  vpant  to  talk  to  you  so  much.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  did  you  know  that  Katie  was  married  lately  1

Yes  Dad  told  me.^
She  happy.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  very  happy. Do  you  know  all  that  happens  to  us,  and
that  interests  us  ?

All  to  my  immediate  family yes. i.e.  you  dad  Roble  Helen.

1  See  p.  523.  •  -


LXi.] Report  on  the  Jmiot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  543

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  but  others  do  not  concern  you. But  you  cannot  always
tell  what  happens  to  other  people  that  you  know  1

Yes  and  no. I  can  if  I  think  specially  about  any  one  friend
and  wish  to  know, otherwise  I  do  not.

Mrs.  J,  (to  R.  H.)  Can  I  ask  him  to  get  a  message  for  me  from  a
person  that  he  didn't  know  very  well '?

R.  H.  (to  Mrs.  J. )  Yes.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  I  wish  you  would  try  to  do  something  for  me.

do something for you. Well  I  will  dear  Mother  with
pleasure What  is  it.

Mrs.  J.  Get  a  message  from  a  young  boy,  Lawrence  L  ,  and  send

through  me  to  his  mother  who  is  grieving  for  him.
Your  messages  to  me  which  I  have  given  her  to  read
have  given  her  great  comfort.

Oh  yes.

hasn't  he  got  a  brother.
Mrs.  J.  Yes,  a  young  brother.

Yes  a  Httle  brother, i.e.  in  the  body.

Mrs.  J.  Yes. Yes. You  knew  this  boy  a  little.

Yes  I  vaguely  remember  him. I  will  find  him.

Arthur. After (slowly  Avritten. Evidently  Arthur  was  a

mishearing  for  after.)
I  go  out. do  you (Slight  disturbance  in  hand.)
S.

DA  .  .  Ni  .  .

Ill  give  it  up.

N.  B.  .J.  (to  R.  H.)  Tell  him  he  started  right  .  .  rightly.

if  you  don't  speak  louder  .  and  slower  dear  boy  .  .
(Pause.)

D. .  .  A. .  . (Hand  dissents.)

(From  G.  P.) I  don't  think  he  quite  remembers  himself.  H.

1  Interpreted  by  Sitters  as  a  further  attempt  at  the  name  of  the  man  who
gave  him  the  pony.


544  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

Mrs.  J.  Well,  George,  don't  bother  about  this  now. Talk  to  him,
and,  if  possible,  bring  it  to  his  mother  next  meeting.

Good  enough. I  uill.  • ■ -  «

Mrs.  J.  (to  R.  H.)  Tell  him  to  ask  Hugh.

Sure  I  will.

hes  got  the  boy.^

Mrs.  J.  Yes  ?

Who  is  Elmer,  tell
him I  am  all  right.

give  Mother  this ask  her  if  she  remembers  the  .  .  telling

me  not  to  go  over  to  Charlie  Richards.
And  ask  her  if  she  remembers  my  S  Kates,
love  to  her too  weak no  more  H.

[These  messages  were  not  understood  by  Mrs.  L  ,  who

suggests  however  that  "  Elmer "  may  be  an  attempt  to
give  her  husband's  name  Ellsworth. — H.  de  G.  V.]

R,  H.  George. What  is  the  Elmer  business  1

a  friend  of  his  in  the  body.
R.  H.  Of  Lawrence  L  1

Yes.

R.  H.  Sure  of  the  name  1
Yes  Elmer.

R.  H.  All  right.  ■  •  ■

speak  to  me. Mother  dear.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  does  Elmer  refer  to  Lawrence  L  ,  or  to  yourself?

to  both  dear. We  kneiv  him.

Mother  I  am  sorry  I  can't  say  more,  but  you  know  how  I
feel  dear.

do  you  remember  what  I  said  about  Rounder.

^i.e.  Lawrence  L  -.  •  . '  ■  '


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  vnth  Mrs.  Piiyer.  545


Mrs.  J.  Yes. We  have  Eounder,  and  are  taking  good  care  of  him.

*  *  *•

You  must  tell  me  more.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  you  gave  two  names,  Annie  and  Addie.  The  last
name  is  not  quite  correct.  Send  a  message  to  m?/
mother  from  them. Annie  and  Addie  I  mean,  if  you  can.

Yes  I  will.

(Waking  stage.)

*  *  *  (Not  caught.)

John  Junot  gave  him  to  me.^

Mr.  G over  there  .  .  Mr.  G over  there.

[This  is  the  name  of  an  old  friend  of  our  family  lately
deceased,  and  about  the  last  person  of  whom  we  would
think  in  connection  with  the  sitting. — N.  B.  J.]

37th  Sitting.
February  25,  1903.  Present:  Mrs.  J.

(Hand  gives  a  slight  thump.)
(G.  P.  communicating.)
How  are  you  H.

R.  H.  Hallo,  George.

Saw  B  ■  and  Hugh talked  with  them  both, found  the

name. J  U  D  D  .  .

[Judd — John  Judd  was  a  friend  of  Hugh  the  coachman. -
John  Judd  is  a  horse-shoer  who  shod  our  horses  all  during
Hugh's  service  of  twenty  years.  It  would  seem  that
George  P.  had  asked  Hugh  for  the  name  of  the  neighbor
who  gave  the  pony  and  Hugh  being  mixed  up  gave  the

horse-shoer's  name  instead  of  the  name  John  D  .

— N.  B.  J.]

[Evidently  John  Judd  is  a  correction  of  the  name  John  Junot

given  at  the  previous  sitting. — H.  de  G.  V.]
here  is  B

^  See  p.  540.

^In  connexion  with  the  "John  Welsh"  incident  (seep.  515)  it  is  interesting
to  find  another  allusion  to  a  "  friend  of  Hugh."


546  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

(Bennie  communicating.)
Good  morning  Mama  dear.

Mrs.  J.  Good  morning,  Bennie  dear.  It  is  good  to  speak  with  you
again.  Tell  me  first  this  morning  all  that  you  have
prepared  for  me.

I  want  to  tell  you  about  Alice  and  L  au  .  .  Lawrence.

he  says  tell  his  Mother  he  often  thinks  of  and  sees  her
and  remembers  the  good  advice  she  gave  once  when  he

had  objected  to  one  of  his  friends Willie .  and

helped  him  to  U.  D.

Mrs.  J.  Yes. Go  on,  Bennie.

he  also  said  her  dream  about  waking  with  him  he  U.  D.

perfectly. She  must  remember. Let  me  think  he  said

something  about  the  Polo  Stick.
Mother  do  you  remember  a  friend  of  ours  whom  we  called

Sargent.

Mes.  J.  No,  Bennie. Have  you  the  word  Sargent  right  1

D  i  ck  was  his  first  name  dear.
R.  H.  Bennie,  is  this  Sargent  from  you  or  from  Lawrence  1:

from  him  he  told  me  all  this.
R.  H.  Yes. Fire  ahead.

and  spoke  of  the  stick  he  gave  him.

R.  H.  Do  you  mean  that  Lawrence  gave  a  Polo  stick  to  a  fellow
named  Dick  Sargent  ?

No  he  gave  it  to  him.
R.  H.  Sargent  gave  it  to  Lawrence?  (Assent.)
R.  H.  Are  you  sure  that  the  name  is  correctly  registered?  (Assent.)

Yes.  SARGENT.
R.  H.  Yes  ?  •  •

that  is  about  all  I  remember.


LXi.] Re-port  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  547

[These  messages  from  Lawrence  L were  not  understood.

George  Sargent  was  spoken  of  at  an  earlier  sitting  in
connexion  with  Bennie's  fishing  rods,  see  p.  416.  The
name  was  not  recognized  by  the  sitters. — H.  de  G.  V.]

Mrs.  J.  Yes  ? It  is  very  good.

Mama  are  you  well.
Mrs.  J.  Yes.

do  you  think  I  like  the  horse.
Mrs.  J.  What  do  you  mean,  Bennie?

the  Pony  dear. I  see  him  often.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  I  don't  understand. What  pony  do  you  mean  ?
I  mean  my. Pony.  Walter.

Mrs.  J.  Yes. He  is  very  old  now.

Yes  but  fat.i
Mrs.  J.  Yes. Very  fat.

John  Judd  [?]  gave  him  to  me. did  he  not.
R.  H.  "John  Judd"?

JUDGE.2

I  wish  I  could  U.  D.  it.

Mrs.  J.  Never  mind  about  this  now,  Bennie. Tell  me  about  Alice's
daughter.

Yes. but  Aunt  Annie  first  said  tell  you  to  U.  D.  that
grandma  had  rheumatism. [Not  correct. — N.  B.  J.]

Mrs.  J.  Not  that  I  know  of,  Bennie.

got  it  in  her  kjiee.

Mrs.  J.  Perhaps  so. I  have  been  away  several  days.

You  will  know  dear,
does  she  remember  me.

iSeep.  523. . .  2  gee  p.  443.


548  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

Mrs.  J  0  yes,  Bennie.

and  will  she  U.  D.  about  my  new  life  here.

Mbs.  J.  Yes. She  understands.

Mother  dear  do  you  remember  M  a  r  i  o  n.^  ■
M  a  r  .  .  i  o  n.

Mrs.  J.  I  think  that  I  know  whom  you  mean,  but  the  name  is  not
quite  right.

did  I  speak  it  too  fast.
Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  who  is  Marion?

(Hand  points  to  Spirit.)
Mrs.  J.  She  is  standing  over  there? (Assent.) Who  is  she?

She  is  my  cousin. [Correct. — N.  B.  J.]
Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  to  whom  does  she  belong?

Uncle  Frank.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  that  is  right. Tell  me  more  about  her.
Mary  .  .  Ma  .  .  li  [?]

She  wants  very  much  to  send  her  love  and  greetings  to
Aunt  Alice. I  brought  her  here.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.  That  is  one  thing  that  I  asked  from  you
yesterday.  Bennie,  yesterday  you  said  you  would  go
and  awaken  her. What  did  you  mean  by  awaken  1

make  her  U.  D.  how  to  speak  to  you  here  dearest  Mother.
Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. Have  you  anything  more  to  tell  me  of  her?

Oh  yes  she  is  just  beginning  to  U.  D.  what  we  want  of
her.  She  sees  Aunt  Alice  often  and  yet  she  could  not
U.  D.  this  way  of  speech.

I  am  so  glad  to  see  you  dear.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  tell  me  about  yourself,  now.

I  thought  if  Mabl  .  .

^  See  p.  556. • •  ■


LXI.] Rejjort  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  549


R.  H.  Mabel? (Assent.) -  . ' ■  .::
Mes.  J.  No,  not  right. ..  .  \

Marg  .  .  Marion, could  finish I would tell you  all
about  it.

R.  H.  Yes.  Bennie,  perhaps  better  do  what  you  can  with  Alice's
.  .  ^  daughter,  and  afterwards  talk  freely  with  your  mother.

:  She  is  so  glad  to  U.  D.  now. I  talked  and  talked  with

her  insisting  upon  her  coming  with  me  here  now.  She
is  so  glad  to  come  and  see  you.

Mes.  J.  Bennie,  what  is  she  doing  in  your  world  ?

She  looks  after  some  of  the  other  children  here.
I  wish  I  could  make U  D  what  I  mean.
She  sends  great  love to  her  Mother do  you  remember
when  she  passed  out,  Mother.

Mes.  J.  Yes.

■  do  you  U.  D.  how  she  looks  now.  she  hopes  you  may
see  her.  here,  what  did  Aunt  Alice  mean  by  saying
if  I  were  here  why  did  she  not  come  too.
[His  Aunt  Alice  had  made  just  that  statement  to  N.  B  J.
and  that  led  to  our  insistence  at  this  sitting  that  a
message  should  be  sent  by  her  daughter. — N.  B.  J.]

Mes.  J.  Bennie,  she  thought  perhaps  her  daughter had  forgotten
about  her.

Oh  if  you  could  hear  her  speak  of  her  you  would  not  think
it. I  know.

Mes.  .J.  Bennie,  tell  me  how  she  looks.

She  looks  much  as  she  did  when  she  came  here, her  eyes
are  lovely  and  bright.

[Extract  from  Mrs.  Clarke's  letter,  March  23,  1903.

"Her  eyes  and  her  very  sweet,  gentle  disposition  were  her  only
beauties.  She  was  remarkably  kind  to  the  younger  children  and
Bennie  said  that  was  her  ofBce  now."]

■  ■ ^  Rector.


550  Helen  cle  G.  Verrall.  [part

She  hears she  is  laughing  at  my  words, about  her.  I
can't tell you just how she does look as as  she
/  stands  here, do  you  remember  a  little  round  photo  of

her.

Mrs.  J.  I  will  ask  Aunt  Alice,  Bennie.

it  was  taken  when  she  was  a  little  .  .  a  very  little  girl.
[Her  mother  has  only  two  photos  of her — one  of  which

is  a  baby  picture  and  has  always  been  in  a  small  round

walnut  frame. — N.  B.  J.]

R.  H.  Bennie,  does  she  look  now  older  than  you  ?

Yes  a  little.

She  came  here  first.

Mrs.  J.  Yes. That  is  right,
some  time  before.

[She  died  two  years  before  Bennie  was  born. — N.  B.  J.]

R.  H.  Bennie,  has  she  not  got  specific remembrances  about  her
mother  that  she  could  send  ?

I  am  not  quite  sure  as  she  only  just  begins  to  U.  D.
She  will  have  soon  and  I'll  tell  you  later.
When  Mother  is  not  here.

R.  H.  Yes. Bennie,  do  you  want  to  talk  with  your  mother  now
yourself,  and  leave  Alice's  daughter  for  the  present  1

May  I.
R.  H.  Yes. Go  on.

I  want  so  much  to  see  her. do  you  remember  now  about
our  going  to  the  country  dear.^

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie. I  have  not  seen  Roble  to  ask  him  about  it.

do  you  remember  what  I  told  dear  father  about  Helens
gathering  vines  dear.'-

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. We did go out one Sunday,  and  Helen
gathered  vines  and  we  brought  them  back  to  the  house.

iSee  p.  538.  -See  p.  529.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  rcith  Mrs.  Pi2:>er.  551
then  one  other  day

I  saw  you  dad  and  Helen  and  another  lady  going  for  a
'  drive.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  we  did. I  think  it  was  grandma  who  was  with  us.

Yes  I  think  so  too. but  I  saw  you heard  you  speak  of
me.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. We  often  speak  of  you.

Mother  what  do  you  think  of  the  new  house is  that  a
Piazza.i

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. We  have  built  a  piazza  at  one  end,  and  a
new  room  for  Helen.

The  piazza  confused  me  a  little I  mistook  it  for  a  Shed.

Mrs.  J.  Yes. Before  it  was  finished  it  looked  like  a  shed.

You  U.  D.  just  what  I  am  thinking  about  all  the  time.  I
am  so  near  you. do  you  know  dear  I  saw  the  gate  too.

Mrs.  J.  Which  gate,  Bennie  1
the  new  one.

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie. We  have  no  new  gate.

It  is  new  to  me. the  one  out  back  of  the  barn.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  we have one there, Bennie. I had a  new  fence
' built  and  a  gate.

Yes  I  know I  like  it  too.
You  hear  me  well.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  do  you  see  Uncle  Willie  when  he  is  with  us  at  the
farm  1

Oh  yes  often, how  good  he  used  to  be.
Mrs.  J.  Yes  ?

Give  my  love  to  him  won't  you.  -


552 ,. .  . Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  did  you  see  me  the  other  day  when  I  was  looking
over  some  of  your  things  and  reading  some  letters  1

Yes. some  days  ago.

Mrs.  J.  The  lettei's  were  some  you  had  written  to  your  father  the
summer  you  were  at  Osterville.  Do  you  remember  the
good  times  we  had  ?

0  yes  I  do  very  well,  dear  Mother  and  never  even  though
it  were  a  thousand  years  I  could  not  forget. .  .  Eoble.

Mrs.  .J.  Yes  ? Why  did  you  write  Eoble  ?

1  was  thinking  of  the  good  old  time  he  and  I  had  to-

gether.

Mrs.  .J.  Yes. We  were  all  so  happy  that  summer.

Yes  I  know  it. do  you  remember  how  I  used  to  come  in
playing  on  .  .  can't  you  call  it  something  else  I  .  .


[He  always  carried  a  harmonica  in  his  pocket  and  frequently
played  upon  it. — N.  B.  J.]

Mrs.  .J.  Yes,  Bennie,  that  is  the  right  shape.

do  you  remember  one  evening  Roble  and  I  went  out  on
the  water  with  some  other  fellows  I  think  Uncle  Willie
went  too.  and  we  came  home  and  I  played  on  it  as
we  came  into  the  yard.


Mrs.  J.  Yes,  I  remember,  Bennie.


tell  me  more  about  my  letters  to  dad. I  saw  you  putting
them  together.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.  They  are  with  a  number  of  your  things  that  I
treasured  dearly.  I  was  surprised  to  find  what  a  fine
manly  letter  you  had  written  to  your  father. ■  ■


Surprised. I  don't  know  as  they  were  particularly  were
they  dear.


Lxi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Piper.  553

Mrs.  J.  Yes.  I  had  not  read  them  for  some  time,  and  there  is  a
fine  manly  spirit  in  them  that  .  .  which  pleased  me
very  much.

Well  mother  I  am  glad  for  one  thing  i.e.  that  I  never  gave
you  any  more  trouble,  than  I  did.  I  hoped  to  do  the
best  I  could.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.  We  have  only  the  most  beautiful  memories
of  you.

don't  you  want  to  come  over  here  some  times.
Mrs.  J.  Oh  yes,  Bennie. At  any  time  now.

Mother  it  is  a  beautiful  world, if  you  can  only  U.  D.
Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  what  can  I  do  to  bring  you  near  me  ?

pray  for  me.

Mrs.  J.  Yes. Do  you  hear  me  when  I  ask  you  for  help  ?
Yes  I  often  do.

I  know  a  great  deal  that  goes  on  with  you  dear,  and  when
grandma  says  you  humor  Helen  I  think  she  don't  U.  D.

Mrs.  .J.  Yes?

I  help  you  with  her  often.

Mrs.  J.  I  want  you  to  watch  over  Helen  and  Roble  and  help
them  all  you  can.

1  will I  do. don't  you  see  how  well  E is  doing.

lately  dear, at  College.

Mrs.  J.  Yes. Are  you  helping  himl

Always.

there  was  a  time  when  he  got  a  little  careless  but  he  is
getting  over  it.

Mrs.  J.  Yes. He  is  more  interested  in  his  college  life  now.

We  all  prayed  for  it  here.  Mother  do  you  U.  D.  the
philosophy  of  prayer.

2n


554  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

Mrs.  J.  Just  what  do  you  mean,  Benniel

how  necessary  it  is  to  pray  for  what  you  wish. I  U.  D.  it
since  I  came  to  to  this  life.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Benaie. I  shall  pray  more  after  this.

prayer  is  everything  to  us  here.
(Hand  turns  to  Spirit.)
ready  1 (Hand  turns  again  to  Spirit.)
U.D.  me.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. I  will  obey.

Will  you  keep  Helen  to  music.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. She  is  very  bus3-  over  other  things  now.

Yes  I  know  it almost  too  busy, but  I will help  her.
Remember  she  goes  through  finely.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  she  is  doing  well.

Yes. I  am  so  glad  to  hear  you  say  it. I  U.  D.  perfectly.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  do  you  often  see  Grandma  Junot  1

Oh  yes  she  is  with  me  nearly  all  the  time.

Mother  do  you  realize  what  a  good  woman  she  really  is.

Mrs.  J.  Yes. She  had  much  trouljle  in  this  life,  but  she  always
believed  in  the  goodness  of  God.

Yes  and  she  docs  'now. She  often says Bennie dear  we
■ must  help  our  beloved  ones on the earth  and  teach

them  to  be  more  patient.
[Characteristic of  his grandmother to an exact  degree.

— N.  B.  J.]

Mrs.  J.  Is  Aunt  Alice's  daughter  with  Grandma  Junot  too?

Yes  a  great  deal.
Abbie  is  with  her  too.

Mrs.  J.  I  do  not  recognize  the  name  Abbie.

What  is  it.


LXi.]  Report  on  the  Jttnot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Piper.  555
Mes.  J.  I  do  not  know  the  name  of  Ahhie.

AddiEi  .  .  A.d.e  .  .  A.d.a.
R.  H.  Rector  .  .

A  d  d  i  e

R.  H.  The  name  is  not  right,  Rector.  Better  get  George  to  get
it  and  not  make  the  attempts  on  the  machine  in  this
way  to  get  the  sounds  registered  when  it  is  so  difficult.

We  thank  thee.  We  do  not  clearly  see  the  registering  as
thou  dost.  We  repeat  by  sound  and  it  tries  us  some
times  to  U.  D.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  I  am  very  grateful  to  have  had  these  talks  with
you.

I  feel  sorry  when  I  cannot  make  my  words  clear,  but  I
have  tried  to  remember  all  I  could  so  that  you  might
know  it  really  was  B —  speaking  to  you.

Mks.  J.  I  know  that  it  is. After  this,  when  you  can,  send  me  a
message  of  any  kind.

to  .  .  through  you. (Hand  turns  to  R.  H.)

R.  H.  Yes,  through  me.

You  certainly  are  good.

I  will  dear  Mother  you  may  be  sure.

Mother  is  there  anything  at  the  Farm  that  I  haven't  seen,
and  told  you  about  that  you  would  like  me  to  tell
you.  .  .

Mrs  J.  No. You  have  seen  and  spoken  about  all  the  changes  that
we  have  made.

Only  Helens  Garden.  Oh  what  does  she  call  it.  near  the
door.

Mrs.  J.  (to  R.  H.)  near  the  drive,  isn't  it  ?
as  we  enter.

iSee  p.  5.33.


556  , Helen  cle  G.  Verrall.  [part

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie,  the  garden  is  not  near  the  door.  ;

I  don't  mean  door  exactly, but  as  we  go  in.
Mes.  J.  I  think  I  know  what  you  are  trying  to  say.

it  is  in  the  .  .  yard  more.
Mrs.  J.  Yes. Near  the  old  drive.

Yes  drive  that  is  right. I  could  not  think  of  drive.
*  *  *

I  will  look  for  you  always.  Mother  I  will  try  and  get
all  those  names  straight  and  tell  him.

Mrs.  J.  I  know  how  hard  names  are.

I  do  myself  overlook  or  forget  some  things.  I  know  but
many  I  remember, look  out  for  the  new  horse.

Mrs.  J.  Yes, Bennie. The one papa  bought for Roble  ? Is  he
not  safe.

Oh  yes  only  he  is  pretty  fast  I  think.

Mrs.  J.  Yes  1 Shall  we  not  keep  him  ?

Oh  yes  I  would  dear,  do  not  be  alarmed  he  will  be  all
right  sure.

(Waking  Stage.)
There's  a  lady  .  .  .  Marian  .  .  Marian  .  .  Mirian  .  .  Miriam.

R.  H.  Miriam  1
Miriam.

[Miriam  is  the  name  of  Aunt  Alice's  daughter,  Bennie's
cousin;  she  was  always  called  "Mamie."  On  p.  409
Bennie  speaks  of  a  "  little  girl  who  came  here  before  I
did  "  and  then  tries  apparently  to  say  she  is  his  cousin.
Later  on  in  the  sitting  attempts  are  made  to  give  a
name  like  Marie,  Maria,  Mama.  On  p.  548  the  name
appears  as  Marion,  Mary,  Mali.  Finally  the  name  is
correctly  given  in  the  waking  stage. — H.  de  G.  V.]


LXi.] Report  on  the  Jtmot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  557

I've  seen  you  before.

I  want  to  go  .  .  I  want  to  go.

Mr. .  . Mrs.  .

G over  tliere.^

I  don't  know  who  John  is

R.  H.  John  wlio  1 John  what  1

I  don't  know  who  John  is.


38th  Sitting.

March  4,  1903.  Present:  B.E.

(Bennie  communicating.)

R.  H.  Your  father  and  mother  were  both  very  pleased. The  name
[Miriam]  came  through  the  light  herself  as  she  returned.

I  gave  it  to  a  spirit  returning  to  its  body.
R.  H.  Yes. Thank  you.

My  cousin  I  mean.
R.  H.  Yes. Alice's  daughter.

Yes.

39th  Sitting.

March  m,  Present R.  H.

and  Bennie  said  he  saw  a  man  digging  something  on  his
grave  also

he  saw  his  father  put  some  yellow  flowers  there,
and  green  leaves.

R.  H.  Yes. All  right.

he  saw  Helen  with  them.

R.  H.  Yes.  Good.

[Extract  from  N.  B.  J.'s  letter,  May  3,  1903.
"For some time prior to March 30 I  had  not visited  his
grave. Soon  after  receiving yours of  Mch. 31st  I  went  out  to

^  See  p.  545.


558


Helen  cle  G.  Verrall.


[part


the  cemetery  and  found  that  the  gardeners  had  lately  dug  over
and  cleaned  up  the  flower  bed  which  is  close  to  the  grave,  but  I
had  not  placed  any  flowers  on  the  grave  since  Christmas  nor  had
Helen  been  there  for  a  long  time.  I  had  no  way  of  finding  out
just  when  the  men  had  been  working  over  the  flower  bed."]

*  *  *

40th  Sitting.

April  22,  1903.  Present:  11  H.

(Rector  communicating.)

Bennie  wished  us  to  give  his  great  love  and  say  it  was
only  a  slight  cold  with  Aunt  Alice,  and  that  she  would
soon  be  all  right.

R.  H.  Yes. I  will  send.

[Extract  from  Mrs.  Clarke's  letter,  April  28,  1903.
"  I have been very unwell. Bennie is probably right  in
attributing  the  illness  to  'cold.' I  am  also  much  better."]

kindly  speak  to  Beiniie.

(Bennie  communicating.)

R.  H.  Bennie,  I  am  delighted  to  take  your  message.  I  have  a
word  that  your  aunt  sent  me  some  time  ago.  She,  I
think,  was  speaking  of  Miriam,  and  she  said,  what  about
her  old  playmates  Bertie  and  Charlie  1

I  told  mother  I  think  about  Charlie,
but  whats  the  other  one.

R.  H.  Bertie  .  .  Bertie.

what  is  the  question  kindly.

Iv.  H.  She  apparently  wants  to  know  if  Miriam  has  anything  to
say  about  those  persons,  Bertie  and  Charlie.
She  is  ivith  them.


R.  H.  "  with  them  "  ?


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  luitk  Mrs.  Piper.  559

Yes.  Charlie  I  hnow  for  a  fact,  the  other  I  will  find  out
about, and  let  her  hnow.

R.  H.  Well,  Bennie,  do  you  mean  that  Charlie  is  in  .  .

our  world  yes. lie  is.
[Not  correct. — A.  J.  C]

E.  H.  The  friend  of  Miriam?

Yes  the  friend  of  niy  cousin  Miriam.

R.  H.  All  right.  Can  you  tell  me,  I  mean  later,  unless  you
already  know,  anything  more  about  him  1  Charlie  is
a  common  name.

Yes  I  U.  D.  what  you  mean.  I  cannot  tell  you  at  the
moment  but  I  will  after  I  have  a  talk  with  her.

R.  H.  Yes  ?

*  *  *

tell  mother  I  am  delighted  with  Helens  work.

R.  H.  Yes.

She  is  doing  finely.  those  little  discouragements  mean
little.

thanks good  btje.

4  1st  Sitting.
April  29,  1903.  Present:  R.  H.

(Bennie  communicating.)
R.  H.  Any  news  about  Bertie  and  Charlie  ?
Oh  yes  glad  you  spoke.

I  saw  Charlie,  as  I  told  you  but  Bertie  is  still  in  the
Body.

H.  H.  Now,  Bennie  .  .

if  she  refers  refers  to  Bert  Hayes.  [Not  recognized.
— N.  B.  J.]  [Roble  and  Bennie  had  a  friend  called  Bert,
referred  to  again  at  a  later  sitting.  See  p.  637. —
H.  de  G.  v.]


560


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


R.  H.  Bonnie,  were  these— Bertie  and  Charlie— old  playmates  of
Miriam  1

Oh  no Bert  was  our  friend  Eobles  and  mine.  Yes.
R.  H.  Bennie  .  .

lie  and  Charlie  were  with  Roble  to  see  Dad  the  night
before  I  saw  him  here.^

Oh  you  refer  to  Clarke.  Yes  I  see.  I  will  ask  you  to  put
those  questions  to  me  again.  You  see  she  had  two
friends  one  Bertie  who  came  over  here  with  Scarlet
fever,  and  something  else  I  forget  the  name  of  it.  I
will  ask  Miriam, about  it.

R.  H.  Yes,  Bennie. Don't  .  .

Isn't  it  getting  too  dark don't  you  think  ?

R.  H.  Yes,  I  think  this  is  probably  not  very  clear.  Don't  say
anything  at  all  about  them  unless  you  have  got  the
exact  thing  clearly  from  Miriam.

Scarlet  fever  I  know.

R.  H.  Is  that  her  friend  Bertie  1

Yes  sure.

the  rest  111  find  out  again  and  tell  you  when  it  is  brighter
.  don't  forget  love  to  all  at  home.  Benny.

[It  is  evident  that  when  the  question  about  Bertie  and
Charlie  was  first  put  to  him,  Bennie  did  not  clearly
realise  the  import  of  it.  For  he  says,  "I  told  mother
I  think  about  Charlie,"  thus  showing  that  he  has  not
distinguished  this  "  Charlie "  from  the  two  boys  of  that
name  previously  mentioned,  his  cousin  and  his  friend.
On  the  other  hand  he  asserts  that  Charlie  is  a  friend  of
Miriam  and  is  "  with  her,"  that  is  to  say,  dead.  At  the
next  sitting  the  confusion  persists,  until  Bennie  at  last
realises  his  own  mistake  and  after  asking  that  the
questions  may  be  put  to  him  again,  makes  a  partly
correct  statement  about  Bertie. — H.  de  G.  V.]


igee  p.  525.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  luitJi  Mrs.  Piper.  561


[Extract  from  Mrs.  C.'s  letter,  May  9,  1903.


"  Miriam  died  24  years  ago  this  month.  The  next  May  just  the
next  year  the  two  youngest  children  in  this  family  of  our  neigh-
bors and  her  intimate  friends  died  of  scarlet  fever  both  within  one
week.  But  Bertie  had  scarlet  fever  and  recovered,  lived  to  be  grown
and  died  about  twelve  years  ago  of  some  form  of  consumption  or
scrofula.  Of  course  there  is  a  possibility  that  the  scarlet  fever  may
have  been  the  cause  of  Bertie's  later  illness."]

[It  should  be  noted  that  Bennie  does  not  give  scarlet  fever  as
the  only  cause  of  death,  but  says  there  Avas  "  something  else,  I
forget  the  name  of  it." — H.  de  G.  V.]


What  I  wished  to  say  was  that  Benny  Junot  and  myself
went  at  his  request  to  his  grave  and  saw  his  father  and
mother  placing  some  green  wreaths  upon  it  about  .  .
either  two  or  three  Sabbaths  ago.

R.  H.  Yes. I  ,  .

One  was  at  the  top  or  head  and  the  other  just  below  it.


42nd  Sitting.


October  28,  1903.


Present :  E.  H.


(G.  P.  communicating.)


something  like  that.


R.  H.  You  mean  one  near  the  other.


R.  H.  Did  you  try  to  give  that  before  ?


Yes  twice.


562  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

R.  H.  No,  I  did  not  get  that. I  got  practically  only  your  love  to
Mar}'  and  James. ^

But  I  called  Hodgson  three  times  and  said  Pelham.  wreaths.

R.  H.  I  heard  Felham  this  morning,  but  not  ivreaths. And  Mrs.
Piper  said  George  several  times,  meaning  you.

Yes  all  right.  We  both  came  and  called  to  3'ou  hoping  you
U.  D.

I  now  tell  you,  and  long  ago  before  the  light  closed "  or
about  that  time,  we  saw  his  Mother  and  father  and
sister, patting  some  Pansies  there.

that  is  all  for  the  present.

[Extract  from  N.  B.  J.'s  letter,  Nov.  3,  1903.

"  Sunday  Sept.  20.  Mrs.  Junot  and  I  visited  Bennie's  grave  and
placed  flowers — white  and  green — upon  his  little  mound.  No  wreath
Avas  placed  by  us,  but  my  wife  arranged  the  flowers  over  the  grave."]

[Extract  from  Mrs.  J.'s  letter,  Dec.  13,  1903.

■'You  sent  us  lately  a  record  in  which  Bennie  speaks  of  seeing
me  put  pansies  on  his  grave.  When  Mr.  Junot  wrote,  I  could  not
remember  the  exact  time  of  my  doing  so,  but  I  have  since  recalled
that  it  was  in  Jul}',  the  twentieth  day.  Pansies  were  his  favourite
flower,  but  this  was  only  known  by  me  and  I  am  the  only  one
who  ever  places  them  on  his  grave."]

4:3rd  Sitting.

Decemhcr  15,  1903.  Present:  li.H.

(Bennie  communicating.)

R.  H.  Beunis,  I  am  delighted  to  meet  you. I  will  read  the  letter
from  your  father.

It  is  mutual  I  assure  you. thanks, very  much.

R.  II.  (reads)  "Dear  Bennie,  We  think  of  you  all  the  time.  We
cannot  see  }'ou  or  hear  you  when  you  come  to  us  at

'Mr.  and  Mis.  Howard,  see  Proc.  Vol.  XIII.

-I.e.,  before  the  summer  break  in  the  sittings.  The  last  sitting  of  this
sumnaer  took  place  on  June  24th.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  loith  Mrs.  Pvper.  563


home.  The  only  words  we  get  from  you  come  to  us
through  Dr.  Hodgson,  our  good  friend.  We  wish  you
again  to  thank  Rector  and  George  Pelham  and  all  the
kind  and  loving  ones  upon  your  side  who  have  helped
us  to  hear  from  you.  What  they  have  done  for  us
has  been  of  inestimable  value.  It  has  given  us  the
greatest  happiness.  We  hope  that  it  may  be  per-
mitted that  you  some  day  make  yourself  heard  and
seen  directly  by  Mamma  and  Daddy.  Daddy  has  many
worldly  cares  and  is  very  often  very  weary.  He  is  sur-
rounded by  men  and  women,  manj'  of  whom  never
uttered  a  prayer  and  think  or  seem  to  think  that  there
is  no  life  but  this  life  in  the  body.  Daddy  is  strong
in  the  faith  that  there  is  a  better  life  after  the  death
of  the  body  and  that  God,  the  Father,  loA^es  and  will
keep  all  his  children  safe.  But  the  doubts  and  unbelief
of  others  make  Daddj'  want  always  and  again  to  hear
from  you  and  from  Daddy's  dear  Mother."

Grandma.

R.  H.  Yes.

dear  daddie  she  has  been  here  much  longer  than  I  have
but  she  never  forgets  you  for  a  moment  and  she  often
comes  with  me  here  also  when  I  visit  you  at  home.
I  shall  help  her  to  speak  with  you  when  I  see  you  again
at  the  end  of  tliis  line  over  which  I  speak  to  you  now
do  you  U.  D.

R.  H.  Yes.  (reads)  "  So  help  him  all  you  can  and  make  him  to
know  that  it  is  you  who  is  sending  the  words.  Roble  is
nearly  through  College  and  will  soon  be  home  with
us  to  study  and  follow  Daddy's  business.  He  is  a  large
fine  man  now  and  Helen  is  soon  to  go  away  to  school.
To-day  Helen  has  been  skating  where  you  used  to  go
skating  so  often."

I  think  we  talked  of  this  here,  did  we  not?^
R.  H.  I  have  a  vague  remembrance  only.


go  on.


1  See  p.  494.


564


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


R.  H.  (reads)  "  Cannot  yon  tell  us  about  the  boys  and  girls  you
used  to  meet  at  the  skating  pond,  and  tell  us  about
your  friend  Frank  who  lived  near  us  1  He  is  on  your
side  now ;  and  send  a  message  from  Daddy's  mother  when
you  can.  And  may  God  have  you  in  his  holy  keeping.
Much  love  from  Daddy. Don't  forget  us  ever."

I  shall  go  out  happy  and  think  this  all  over  and  think
about  the  boys  and  when  I  see  our  mutual  friend  again
I  will  tell  him  all  I  remember.  Meanwhile  I  will  talk
with  grandma  and  see  what  she  has  to  say.

44th  Sitting.
December  16,  1903.  Present:  11.  H.

[I  place  Bennie's  articles  to  ray  left,  behind  arm  of  Mrs.
P. — cap,  harmonica,  spur,  and  A.  L.  bust,  and  then  place
A.  L.  bust  immediately  in  front  of  sheets. — E.  H.]

(Bennie  communicating.)

I  see  it.  A.L.

[In  arranging  the  articles  my  hand  with  fountain  pen  in
it  passes  in  front  of  Mrs.  P.'s  hand,  which  takes  hold
of  cap  of  jmL,  and  this  cap  comes  off,  hand  retains  it,
and  moves  forward  with  it,  holding  it  up  somewhat  as
though  showing  it  to  Spirit. — E..  H.]

R.  H.  That's  mine.  Rector. That's  mine.

I  see let  him  have  a  look  at  it.

[I  then  move  my  hand  forward  in  front  of  and  close  to
Mrs.  P.'s  hand,  presenting  my  pen  for  inspection,  as  it
were. — R.  H.]

I  had  one  almost  the  same  .  .  yes. Almost  like  it  only

smaller  I  think  a  little  smaller.
[Bennie  had  a  fountain — the  ordinary  size. — N.  B.  J.]

R.  H.  "  Smaller."  Yes,  probably.  [This  fountain  pen  is  large  size
and  holds  perhaps  twice  as  much  ink  as  the  common-
sized  pen. — R.  H.]

Yes  ask  dad  if  I  didn't.  He  will  tell  you  right  quickly
that  I  did.


Lxi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  ivitli  Mrs.  Piper.  565

R.  H.  Yes. (Hand  moves  cap  to  pen  in  R.  H.'s  hand  and  puts  it  on
end. Hand  moves  spur  forward  to  the  A.  L.  bust.)

I  am  the  happiest  boy  in  all  this  world did  you  know  it.

R.  H.  I  am  very  glad.

I  wonder  if  I  got  the  messages  all  in  last  time.

Will  you  ask  dad  if  he  remembers  the  Mcliellan  [?]  boys.

R.  H.  the  "  Mac  "  something  "  boys  1  "

Mc  hellan[?]
R.  H.  Capitals,  please.

L  E  L  L  e  N.

R.  H.  "McLellan?"  (Assent.)

Greorge  and  Frank. I  know  them  both.
[We  do not  know  who  he  means  by "McClellan  boys."
— N.  B.  J.]

What  is  the  matter  with  D  ^  .  .

(Hand  touches  li.  H.'s  neck  undei-  jaw  on  left  side.)

R.  H.  Left  jaw  1

No  throat.
R.  H.  Oh.

I  will  help  him.

[Bennie's  friend  just  back  from  college  yesterday,  Dec.  20.
He  says  that  he  has  been  quite  well  and  looks  so.
— N.  B.  J.]

I  do  not  care  for  the  red  coat  Helen  wears, do  you.
R.  H.  I  have  not  seen  it.

[Helen  has  a  new  coat,  but  it  is  blue,  though  it  has  a  red

lining.— N.  B.  J.]
[The  red  coat  may  be  a  red  sweater  which  Helen  wore  last

fall  when  in  the  country. It  did  not  look  very  well.

— K.  H.  J.]

i«.e.  Charlie  D  .


566


Helen  cle  G.  Verrall.


[part


Ask  Mama  if  those  are  .  .
Chrysanthemums, near  my  desk.

R.  H.  Yes  1

they  are  very  beautiful.

[Cannot  understand  about  the  chrysanthemums. — N.  B.  J.]
Oil  I  want  to  tell  you  so  much, that  I  have  seen  since  I
was  here, last  time.

R.  H.  Take  your  time,  Bennie. I  shall  be  delighted. Tell  me
everything.  '

I  heard  them  talking  about  having  Aunt  Alice  spending
a  few  days  with  them.

R.  H.  Yes  1

very  soon,  almost  within  a  few  days  now.  what  do  you
call.  week.  I  forget.  I  wonder  if  she  will  and  I  see
Roble  there  too  later.  All  this  has  been  going  on
since  I  came  before.

[Roble  and  his  mother  were  talking  in  New  York  at
Thanksirivins;  about  a  visit  from  his  Aunt  Alice  and
she  has  been  visiting  us  for  several  days. — N.  B.  J.]

(Hand  holds  .'^x/r  up  two  or  three  seconds.)

my  things  help  me  very  much  .  .  (Pause.)

ask  Mama  if  she  remembers  the  friend  who  used  to  call
me  Benjamin.

R.  H.  Yes.

Charlie  .  did  but  don't  you  tell  her  I  said  it.

n.  H.  All  right.

[We  recall  rather  indistinctly  that  Charlie  D.  did  at  times

call  him  Benjamin. — N.  B.  J.]
[Bennie  had  been  asked  at  a  previous  sitting  to  give  the

nickname by  which '  Charlie '  called him,  see  p.  507.

Whilst trying,  unsuccessfully,  to  answer  this  question^

he  gave  the  name  Benjamin. — H.  de  G.  V.]
I  know  about  the  house  and  all  the  changes  they  made

last  summer.i

igee  p.  527.


LXi.] RejJort  on  the  Junot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Piper.  567


R.  H.  Yes  1

Ask  Eoble  if  he  got  his  hat  iuto  the  paint.
R.  H.  I  will.

[Roble  painted  his  old  straw  hat  green  and  wore  it  about

the  farm  all  summer. — N.B.  J.]
Read  to  me  please.

R.  H.  Your  mother's  letter  1

Yes. Rector  told  me  about  it.

[At  the  beginning  of  the  sitting  before  Bennie's  arrival,
R.  H.  had  told  Rector  that  he  had  a  letter  from  Mrs.
J.— H.  de  G.  v.]

R.  H.  (reads)  "  My  dear  Bennie,  I  long to see  and hear  you.

The  messages  you  send  are  my  great  consolation  and
they,  with  my  unshaken  belief  in  the  goodness  of
God,  sustain  and  comfort  me  in  all  my  sorrow.  I
want  you  to  be  with  me,  if  it  is  permitted  you ;  and
also  want  you  to  watch  over  and  help  Roble  and  Helen
always.  I  think  of  you  ever  and  always  with  a
feeling  of  happiness  and  gratefulness  for  all  that  you
were,  and  are,  to  me  that  nothing  can  take  away."

dearest  Mother  I  know  practically  all  that  goes  on  at
home  I  ain  there  a  great  deal  and  I  am  very  often
surprised  at  Helen's  wonderful  growth  she  is  such  a
big  tall  girl  but  she  does  not  keep  to  her  music  as
I  wish  she  did.  Won't  you  tell  her  I  wish  her  to
practise  more.  I  shall  always  look  out  fur  her  and
see  that  no  harm  comes  to  her.

[Helen's  music  is  burdensome  to  her. — N.  B.  J.]

R.  H.  (reads)  "  Send  me  a  message  whenever  you  can,  and  tell
me  how  I  can  come  nearer  to  you."

Only  through  prayer  dear.

R.  H.  (reads) "  Thank  your good  friends  who  are  helping  you,

for me,  and tell them  how unspeakably  glad  I  am

that  you  are  with  them.  Your  loving  mother."  [Dated,
December  13,  1903.]


568


Helen  cle  G.  Verrall.


[part


Oh  friend  can  you  U.  D.  what  this  all  means  to  me.  I
am  so  helped  by  their  words.  they  help  me  to  U.D.
better  how  to  reach  them.  I  often  hear  and  see
things  taking  place  at  home  and  fail  to  report  them
here.

R.  H.  Why,  Bennie,  I  shall  be  glad  and  your  father  and  mother
would be overjoyed for  you  to  tell  me  all  you  see,

especially  im  mediately.

Yes  well  this  is  a  little  thing  but  I  noticed  it  shall  I
tell  you  1  I  saw  Roble  fussing  about  his  clothes  the
other  day  and  I  wondered  what  it  was  all  about  when
I  learned  that  he  was  trying  on  a  new  suit  of  clothes
which  did  not  fit  to  suit  him  and  he  took  them
back.

R.  H.  I  understand.  Good.

I  stood  there  and  watched  him  for  some  time.

[At  Thanksgiving  time  in  New  York  Roble  tried  on  his
dress  suit  which  his  mother  had  brought  to  him.  He
said  it  needed  some  changes  and  his  mother  brought
it  home  to  have  it  changed  at  his  request. — N.  B.  J.]

He  is  going  home, and  I  with  him.

[Roble  starts  home  from  College  to-morrow,  Dec.  22. — N.  B.  J.]

Grandma  Junot  says. N  . is. getting  rather  tired.

and  should  try  and  rest  more.
How  is  Rounder, stiff, very  stiff.^

R.  H.  Do  you  mean  old  ?
in  his  legs.

R.  H.  Anything  the  matter  with  him  1

Yes  rheumatism.
R.  H.  Does  your  father  know?

I  am  sure  he  will  vvlien  you  tell  him.

R.  H.  Can't  he  run  well  ?

iSee  p.  523.


LXI.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Piper.  569


fairly,  but  stiff  after  lying  a  while.

I  often  pat  him.  and  talk  to  him.  I  think  he  sees  me.
really  I  do.

R.  H.  Does  he  wag  his  tail  ?

Yes  and  sniffs  at  me  when  I  approach  him.

[Rounder,  the  dog,  is  growing  old  and  stiff,  but  is  having

a  happy  old  age. He  seldom  leaves  the  stable  nov/,

— N.  B.  J.]

(Hand  touches  sj;;//',  then  holds  up  the  A.  L.  bust.)
May  I  stay  longer.

R.  H.  Certainly.

let  me  tell  you.  (Pause.)

R.  H.  Yes?

Mother  must  not  worry  about  me  at  all I  wish  they  were

all  as  well  off  and  as  happy  as  I  am.
do  you  hear  Helen  recite  to  dad  ?

R.  H.  No.

her  lessons. I  mean. /  do.

[Helen  has  frequentlj'  of  late  recited  poetr}'  to  me.  For-
merly this  occurred  very  seldom. — N.  B.  J.]

The  photographs  of  my  Pony  are  great.  I  like  them  ever
so  much. Ask  dad  to  send  you. you  one.

R.  H.  I  will.

Helen  took  them.
R.  H.  Really  !

Yes  isn't  it  splendid.
R.  H.  Yes.

[Helen  has  taken  two  or  three  pictures  of  his  pony — one

we  remember  particularly. — N.  B.  J.]
the  old  farm  looks  just  about  the  same  to  me. only  I

cannot  U.  D.  what  is  over  the  front  door  .  .


70

R.  H.  Yes  ?


Helen  cle  G.  Verrall.


[part


looks  like  posts, queer  isn't  it.
R.  H.  Yes.

I  think  I'll  go  and  have  another  look  at  it. and  report  later.

R.  H.  Yes,  do,  kindly.

(Hand  slowly  moves  slightly  forward  and  up,  as  though
following  some  upward  flight.)

*  *  *

Well  I  see  it  is  the  stoop.  I  saw.  It  is  stoop  I  see.  or
porch, it  confused  me  a  little  as  I  never  noticed  it  before.

[We  made  a  number  of  changes  last  summer  at  our  summer
home.  The  front  door  was  changed,  so  that  it  opens
westward,  instead  of  north,  and  a  large  porch  was  built
over  it.— N.  B.  J.]

by  the  way  please  ask  Roble  what  he  was  trying  to  do
with  the  sail  boat  one  Sunday  last  summer.  I  saw  him
and  two  other  fellows  trying  to  take  out  the  sails,  but
what  for  I  never  U.  D.

[Roble  tells  me  that  one  Sunday  early  last  fall  he  was
caught  out,  while  sailing,  in  a  very  severe  storm.  He
and  the  boys  with  him  were  very  busy  taking  in  the
sails. — K.  H.  J.]

that  is  all  I  can  say  now  on]y  send  my  love  to  all  at  home
tell  them  I  shall  be  with  them  watch  over  and  love
them  more  and  more  uncle  Frank  comes  with  me  and
sends  love  also.  When  I  see  anything  unusual  I  will
come  in  and  tell  you.

45th  Sitting.
December  30,  1903.  Present:  R.  H.

(Bennie  communicating.)
Did  you  tell  Dad  all  I  said.

R.  H.  Yes,  he  was  very  pleased. I  think  all  were  understood  but
two  points,  one  concerning  D  .


tell  me.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Jiniot  Sittivgs  tvith  Ilrs.  Piper.  571

R.  H.  I  am  not  sure  at  present  about  the  other. The  .  .  didn't
you  think  that  D  ■  was  hurt  1

You  may  leave  them  and  bring  them  to  me  later, and  let
me  straighten  them  all  out  for  you.

R.  H.  Yes,  better  another  time  when  the  light  is  good.

Yes  I  cannot  tell  you  now  just  as  I  wish. But  if  you  will
answer  me  one  question,  i.e.  about  Helens  coat.

R.  H.  Yes,  it  is  not  red,  but  it  has  a  red  lining.

Y'es  I  thought  it  was  not  quite  right  yet  what  attracted
me  was  the  red.

R.  H.  Yes,  and  Roble  had  painted  his  hat  green,  I  think,  with
some  green  paint.

Yes. I  laughed at  this, more than I  can tell  you  it

struck  me  as  being  so  funny.
What  about  his  suit.

R.  H.  Yes,  that  was  practically  all  right.

I  saw  him  wriggling  in  &  out  of  it  and  that  too  struck
me.

Well  my  friend  give  them  all  a  great  deal  of  love  and  tell
them  1  shall  be  with  them  always.

R.  H.  Y'^es. Rounder  is  old  and  stiff',  as  you  said,  and  I  think
your  Aunt  was  staying  with  them.

Oh  yes  I  know but  Rounder's  movements  when  he  lies
down  and  gets  up  attract  me  very  much.

R.  H.  Yes.

I  try  to  help  him  all  I  can  from  this  side.

46th  Sitting.

Januanj  11,  1904.  Present:  E.  11.

(Bennie  communicating.)

I  may  make  some  few  mistakes. I  do  not  claim  to  do
otherwise  when  I  see  so  much.


572


Helen  de  G.  Verrcdl.


[part


R.  H.  Your father did not know whom jou meant by  the
McClellan  boy?,^  but  he  said  he  would  ask  Koble.

Ask  Roble  for  me  if  he  does  not  remember  a  boy  or  two

boys  one  George  the  other  Frank  whose  names  were  if
I remember riyhtly McClellan. George and  Fraidi

McClellan.  tlie  name  if  not  quite  right  was  very  nearly
so.

R.  H.  Then  .  .

ask  him  if  he  remembers  hockej'.

R.  H.  Yes. D  ■  was  just  back  from  College  and  he  said  that

he  had  been  quite  well.

What  did  I  say  about  him.
R.  H.  I  am  not  sure  ;  I  think  you  said  that  he  had  .  .

got  hurt  .  .

R.  H.  Yes. Hurt  his  arm,  I  think.

I  saw  him  strike  his  elbow  or  a  part  of  his  arm  many
Sabbaths  ago perhaps  he  may  have  forgotten.

R.  H.  Yes.

but  this  is  a  fact.

R.  H.  Yes.

[Iv.  El.'s  memory  is  here  at  fault.  It  was  to  Charlie  D.'s
throat,  not  his  arm,  that  Beniiie  had  referred,  see  p.  565.
Heie,  however,  he  accepts  li.  H.'s  suggestion  and  even
provides  an  explanation  of  the  supposed  injury.  In-
stances of  this  kind  are  not  very  frequent,  tlie  memory-
of  the  controls  with  regard  to  statements  made  at  pre-
vious sittings  being  usually  good,  see  e.g.  p.  475. —
H.  de  G.  v.]

R.  H.  The^^ could not understand about the  chrysanthemums.'-'
You  said  what  .  .


See  p.  56.5.


2  See  p.  566.


LXI.] Report  on  the  Jwnot  Sittings  ivith  Afrs.  Pij^er.  573
Yes  I  remember.

Please  ask  mother  what  tlie  large  flowers  were  that  attracted
me. and  seemed  to  be  growing  in  a  pot.

R.  H.  Yes.

R.  H.  I  think  eveiything  else  was  understood.

[R.  H. then  enumerates  correct  statements made by  the
communicator  at  the  sitting  of  Dec.  16  (q.v.). — H.  deG.  V.]

47th  Sitting.

Fchnmry  22,  1904. Present:  N.B.J.,  R.B.J.,  and  R.H.
(Bennie  communicating.)
Get  all  the  paint  ofT  your  hatP

R.  No,  not  yet. That  was  funnj',  your  seeing  that  hat.

funny  oh  I  don't  know  about  it. I  see  you  often  when

you  don't  know  it.
I  am  always  with  you  R

R.  Did  you ever  come  into  my  room down  at  V  and

tap  on  the  bed?

Well  I  have  tried  hard  enough  but  why  don't  you  answer
me  .  .

R.  I  didn't  know  it  was  you,  Bennie,  I  didn't  think.

Well  111  try  it  again. You  ask  me  something  and  I'll
knock  twice.

R.  Yes,  I'll  do  that,  Bennie.

just  to  let  you  know  that  I  am  with  you,  see '?

R.  Yes,  Bennie,  I'll  do  that  some  day  and  answer  you.

H*bso (letters  scrawly  and  doubtful) you  here  .  .
[Possibly Bennie  said  Hodgson  or  some  approximation  to
it.— R.  H.]

why  I  just  noticed  you  .  .  I  just  noticed  you.
^See  p.  567.


574  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

R.  H.  All  right,  Bemiie,  never  mind  me.
No  I  won't  .  .

tell  nie  Koble  get  through  soon  I  am  al\va3's  interested  in
you  and  your  work.  Going  to  lieljj  Dad  when  you  are
throuifh  1

R.  Yes,  Bennie. I've  got  three  months  more,  then  I'm  going
to  work  in  the  office.

Good  enough  I  have  been  praying  for  you  do  you  U.  D.
what  it  is  to  pray  over  here  ?

R.  No,  Bennie,  I  don't  believe  I  do.

Don't  speak  too  fast  Roble  if  you  [do]  I  can't  hear  you
U.D.

R.  All  riirht,  Bennie.

I  came  to  see  you  three  different  times  knocked &  waited

for  you  to  answer  me  .  .
You  did  not  speak  so  I  went  awa}^ ask  me  next  time.

anything  you  wish  Si  I'll  reply.

R.  Bennie,  if  I  speak  out  loud  when  you  knock,  can  you  under-
stand me'i

surely I  shall  reply.
R.  How  will  you  reply,  Bennie?

(Interruption  on  account  of  super].>osing.)

to  go  back  and  answer  your  question  my  dear  fellow  I  shall

speak  if  possible  so  you  shall  hear  my  voice, if  not

possible  I  will  knock

R.  Good,  Bennie. I  will  know  when  you  come  next  time.
I  U.D.

two.  Remember  I  am  not  isolated  although  you  cannot
always  see  me. U.  D.

R.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  understand.

Now  let  me  ask  you  who  was  singing  in  your  room  the
other  day  1


LXi.] Report  on  the  Jmxot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Pilfer.  575

R.  I  don't  know. I  don't  know  just  what  day  you  mean,
Bennie.

about  four  Sabbaths  ago. if  I  remember  rightly.

R.  Yes,  Bennie,  but  we  sing  a  great  deal,  and  I  don't  know
just  who  it  was  that  day.

I  only  hope  you  will  U.  D.  because  it  will  help  you  when
I  hear  &  see  you  clearly  U.  D.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. Do  you  want  Daddie  to  speak  now  ?

Yes  do  speak  to  me. I  love  to  hear  you.
N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. Have  you  any  message  for  your  mamma  ?

Yes  a  good  many, first  let  me  ask  if  you  got  all  I  sent  you.  .

R.  H.  Yes,  everything.

N.  B.  J.  Yes  we  got  it  all, and  understood  all  except  about  the
McClellan  boys.

(Hand  turns  in  direction  of  E.  then  to  Spirit.)
I  will  not  take  light  to  tell  you  that  now  .  .
(Hand  turns  to  Spirit.  Assent.)

but  when  I  come  some  day  &  [I  think  R.  H.  was
indicated  here,  but  no  note  made  at  moment. — R.  H.]  is
alone  I  will  explain — U.  D.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  that's  right.

I  thought  Mama  had  a  cold.
N.  B.  J.  Yes,  but  she  is  well  now.

I  know  that  too. You  don't  forget  me  do  you.

N.  B.  J.  Never,  never,  and  you  must  not  forget  us  any.

Don't  worry  about  that.  I  wish  you  knew  how  much
nearer  I  am  to  you  as  time  goes  on.  that  is  why  I  see
so  many  things  clearly  U.  D.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  we  understand.

Papa  don't  get  tired  rest  &  it  will  do  me  good  too.


576  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  yes,  Bennie. I'll  try  to  rest.

I  am  gl.ad  Mama's  better.

I  also  see  Helen  every  day  of  her  life.

I  think  she  is  is  [evidently  for  a]  fine  great  girl.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. She's  growing  to  be  a  fine  girl. You  must
help  her  all  you  can.

surely  I  will.  I  know  she  will  be  a  great  help  &
comfort  to  you  all.

N.  B.  J.  Yes. She  works  over  her  music  all  the  time.

(Excitement  in  hand. Pencil  scrabbles  heavily  round  and

round  in  one  spot.)
that  is  what  I  long  for  her  to  do  U.  D.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. We  thought  you  helped  her.

I  do  I  do  I  will  I  will.  Music  is  the  inspiration  of  the
soul.  dad.

N  B.  J.  Yes  .  .

I  Avanted  you  to  U.  D.  how  happy  it  all  made  me.  can't
you  tell  her  I  love  to  hear  her  play  it  practise.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. That's  right.

Dad  is  that  coat  Blue.^

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  with  red  inside.

the  red  looked  so  funny  to  me  when  I  see  her  put  it  on
&  take  it  off.  you  see  I  often  help  her  give  my  love
love  to  dearest  Mother  &  tell  her  I  want  to  speak
with  her.  here.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. She  came  over  not  long  ago  here  but  could
not  speak  to  j^ou. She  will  come  again  before  long.

Meanwhile  will  you  tell  her  I  hear  every  prayer  she  says
&  I  know.

listen  to  me  .  .  (to  R.  H.  1  who  is  recording  N.  B.  J.'s  remarks.)

^See  pp.  565  and  571.  Note  that  R.  H.  did  not  mention  that  the  coat  was
blue.


Lxr.] Report  on  fJte  Jmiot  Sitthigs  iviilt  Mrs.  Piper.  577


N.  B  J.  Yes,  Betinie,  I  will.

tell  her  I  love  her  &  I  will  watch  over  &  care  for  her
alwa)  s  no  matter  where  she  is  or  how  long  I  seem  absent.

N.  B.  J.  That's  good,  Bennie.

I  shall  not  forget  her  nor  anything  concerning  her  ever  you
may  rest  assured  I  will  not.

N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  have  you  any  message  to  Aunt  Alice  from  Cousin
Frank  1

Oh  yes  but  may  I  give  it  Avhen  I  return.

N.  B.  J.  All  right,  all  right.

You  will  come  again.  &  let  me  finish  all  I  have  on  my
mind  1

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  dearie.

Tell  me  what  Mother  meant  when  she  paid  she  dreamed  I
was  with  her.

N.  B.  J.  I  think  that  she  thought  you  were  with  her.

Can't  she  U.  D.  when  I  speak  with  her  dad.

N.  B.  J.  No,  Bennie,  she  does  not  understand.

Well  I  am  going  to  do  something.  so  she  will  know,
when  I  see  her  sleeping  I  often  talk  with  her.  Do  you
U.  D.  what  a  beautiful  place  this  is  dad.

N.  B.  J.  We  do  not  fully  understand,  Bennie. Tell  us  when  you
can. (Hand  points  to  Spirit.)

Grandma  Junot.  says,  in  a  little  while  you  will  all  be
here, won't  that  be  great.

N.  B.  J.  Splendid,  Bennie,  when  we  all  meet  together  again.

Do  the  best  you  can  dad  &  don't  worry  about  anything
take  care  of  Mama  &  Helen  &  the  rest  will  all  go
right  until  you  come  over.

I  must  go  out  a  moment  but  I'll  be  light  back.


578


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


N.  B.  J.  (to  R.)  Very  clear.

(Hand  bows  on  block  book  as  if  in  pra3'er.)
I  do  not  want  to  seem  selfish  but  you  cannot  U.  D.  how
glad  I  am  to  speak.

R.  H.  Who  is  this'?

Oh  it  is  I  B can't  you  see  me  1

R.  H.  No.

Mr.  Pelham  came  back  with  me  to  help  me  until  I  go.
Did  Mama  say  anything  for  me.

N.  B.  J.  She  said  she  would  write  a  letter. I  think  it  will  come
to  morrow.

that's  fine.

I  shall  U.  D.  letter.

Dear  Mother  I  know  you  will  be  glad  if  I  send  you  one
little  word  from  this  side.  I  am  so  glad  to  see  you
well  again  &  if  3'ou  will  only  take  care  you  will  keep
well  for  a  very  long  while.  I  know  this  dear  because  I
can  see  it.  When  I  come  to  you  in  your  dream  do  not
be  afraid  I  shall  only  give  you  strength  to  U.  D.  give
my  love  to  Aunt  Alice  &  tell  her  I  have  a  message
■  from  uncle  Frank  &  cousin  Frank  which  I  will  give
to  dad  next  time

How  is  Charlie  D .  .

R.  Bennie,  Charlie  is  very  well. He  often  speaks  of  you  to  me
and  thinks  of  you.

Roble  did  you  gi\e  him  one  of  my  photographs.

N.  B.  J.  I  don't  know.

R.  I  don't  remember,  Bennie,  but  we  will  do  so.

I  wish  you  would  if  you  did  not  so  I  can  see  something
that  will  attract  me  to  him.  then  I  can  come  here
&  give  you  some  test  about  him. U.  D.

R.  Yes,  Bennie. He  lias  your  books,  the  Three  Musketeers.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  luith  Mrs.  Piper.  579

Good I  remember  them  very  well  but  jou  SL-e  I  want  liim
to  have  something  thut  looks  like  me  U  D  .  .

R.  Yes,  Bennie. I  will  give  him  jour  picture.

I  heard  every  word  so  clearly  thank  you.

R.  Yes,  Bennie. Are  you  ever  with  me  1

I  should  say  I  was. how  did  I  know  about  your  suit  if
I  am  not  with  you  tell  me  Roble  ?

R.  Yes,  Bennie,  that  was  good.  Tell  me  do  you  know  how
your  old  runaliout  was  broken  last  summer  ?  Did  you
see  that  1

Painabout  oh. Y^es  I  think  I  do. I'll  come  here  some  day
and  tell  H.  how  it  happened  will  that  do  lioble.

R.  Yes,  Bennie.

(Hand  turns  to  Spirit. Cross  in  air.)

You  see  Eoble they  say here  if  I tell think  is  .  .  gs
when  .  .

(Harmonica  falls  on  floor  as  block-book  is  shifted. R.  H.

replaces  it. Hand  seeks  excitedly  towards  articles,  and

begins  touching  them.)
Grive  me  A  L.

(R.  H. gives A.  L. bust to hand, which holds it up  a

moment  or  two,  then  rejilaces  it  in  front  of  sheets.)
It  is  better  so.

You  U.  D.  don't  you  1 (Hand  turns  to  R.  H.)

R.  H.  Yes,  I  understand.

R.  Yes,  Bennie.

Want  to  say  something.

R.  Yes,  Bennie.  Do  you  remember  the  school  where  you  made
the  head  of  Abraham  Lincoln  1

Most  certainly  I  do. I  remember  well,  do  you  remember,
what  I  said  about, about  that  party

R.  No,  Bennie. What  party  do  you  mean  1

Do  you  remember, about  skating.


580  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [paut

R.  Yes,  indeed. We  used  to  have  a  fine  time.

Do  you  remember  the  day  my  skate  came  off  .  .
R.  No,  Bennie.

You  were  there.  &  I  took  my  knife  made  a  hole  in
the  heel  of  my  (pencil  slips  over  edge  of  block-book.)

R.  No,  Bennie. I  can't  remember  that  day  specially.

how  clearly  I  hear  you.  I  am  speaking  of  the  last  time
I  ever  I  ever  went  .  .

R.  Yes,  Bennie.

skating  with  you  in  the  body.

R.  Yes,  Bennie. I  don't  remember  about  your  skate  coming
off,  though.

do  you  remember  sitting  down  on  my  coat,  my  sitting
down  on  my  coat  &  fixing  my  skate  .  .  remember
anything  about  the  water  on  the  ice.

R No,  Bennie. I  don't  remember  that.

Weren't  you  with  me. surely  you  were,
tliiiik  it  over  R

R Yes,  Bennie. Do  you  remember  the  last  time  we  went
swimming  down  at  Osterville  ?

Oh  yes  I  do  very  well.  You  always  thought  I  got  hurt
that  day  but  I  did  not  I  caught  cold  that  Sunday  going
without  my  cap.

R.  Yes,  Brnnie. You  mean  when  you  and  papa  went  walking.

Yes  &  he  told  me  to  go  back  &  get  my  caj).
R.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  remember  about  that.

Did  you  think  I  got  hurt  in  swimming  tell  me  right  out.

R.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  thought  you  got  hurt  because  you  tore  your
shirt  on  a  rock  on  the  bottom.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  tvith  3]rs.  Piper.  581

Oh  yes  I  remember  it  but  you  are  mistaken  really  I  know
Roble  dear.

You  must  feel  that  I  know. &  I  want  you  to  know  U.  D.
don't  worry  about  it  any  more.

R.  Yes,  Bennie. I  will  not  worry  any  more.

I  am  glad  to  hear  you  say this  L'. do  you  remember

about  the  hou  .  .  [■?]
HO  .  .

spell  it  I  do  not  U.  D.  Rector  .  .
HOCkEy . .

R.  Yes,  indeed. I  remember  about  playing  hockey.

N.  B.  J.  (to  R.)  Ask  him  about  when  he  was  a  little  boy.

Don't  you  think  I  was  a  good  shot  [?]
My  skate  came  off.

R.  Yes,  I  remember,
good  enough.

I  want  to  ask  you  about  a  boy  we  called  El  something

I  cannot  remember  his
other  name.
NED.

R.  I  remember  Ed,  but  I  can't  remember  his  last  name.

I  cannot  either  but  after  .  .

(Spur  falls  off  table. Pencil  drops  from  hand.)

R.  H.  Kindly  wait. (R.  H.  replaces  spur.)

(Pause.)

I  want  to  recall, liim  very  much  and  perhajis  I  shall  after
I  go  out,

do  you  remember. Sawyer, or  Saw  .  .
R.  Do  you  mean  Adrian  Sawyer  ?
Yes.

R.  Yes,  I  remember  him. He  went  to  school  with  you.
Yes  tell  me  if  if  you  know  what  became  of  him  .  .


582  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

R.  I  think  he  is  worlving  in  C  .

if  you  ever  see  him  again  ask  liim  if  he  remembers  ,Beiiny
Jmiot  will  3-011.

R.  Yes,  indeed. I  will  ask  him.

I  U.  D.  you  perfectly  now. but  when  they  take  my  things

away  it  confuses  me  greatly,
are  you  going  home  soon.

R.  Yes,  Bennie. Another  month  now.

how  many  Sundays  Roble.  would  that  be.  I  want  to  go
to  your  room  two  or  three  times  before  you  go.

R.  Three  Sundays  more,  Bennie.

then  I  shall  count  as  well  as  I  can  and  I  shall  go  with  you
then  but  meanwhile  I  sliall  see  j'ou  at  your  room.  Roble
tell  me  is  that  a  tree  or  plant.

R.  I  don't  quite  understand  what  thing  you  mean.

Well  listen.

near  j'our  bed  is  a  chair  &  a  kind  of  table,  near .  the
window  I  see  a  green  thing  which  looks  like  a  plant.

R.  No,  Bennie.

Is  it  a  cushion.

R.  Do  you  mean  the  sticks  in  my  bedroom  or  something  out
in  the  study  ?

in  your  bedroom,  they  must  be  sticks  I  think,  but  what
I  wanted  to  say  was  that  1  would  try  &  move  one  of
them, or  it  .  .

R.  Yes,  Bennie. There  are  two  hockey  sticks  in  the  corner  by
the  window.

I  shall  see  what  I  can  do  with  the  help  of  George.
R.  All  right,  Bennie. I  will  understand  when  it  happens,
dad  speak, do  you  remember  Gridley,


LXi.]  Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Piper.  583
N.  B.  J.  No,  Bennie,  I  do  not  understand.

do  you  remember  Gridlej'.
N.  B.  J.  Where  .  .  where  did  he  live  1

he  used  to  go  witli  Sawyer.

R.  No,  Bennie. I  don't  remember  him.

Was  it  spelled  wrong  .  .

help  me  keep  my  thoughts  clear  .  .

N.  B.  J.  We  do  not  understand  the  name.

Dad  who  is  the  boy  at  the  stable.

think  I  will  go  out  a  moment  &  think  it  over.

I  mean.

George  Gately.

I  do  not  think  I  have  got  it  just  right  friend  R.

N.  B.  J.  Wait,  Bennie. Is  he  in  our  world  or  your  world  1

he  is  in  your  world  now.
N.B.J.  Where  .  .  What  does  he  do?

Eoble  do  you  remember  a  fellow  who  wore  a  queer  shoe.

R.  No,  Bennie. But  when  we  go  home  we  will  look  up  the
name  in  your  school  catalogue.

All  right, then  tell  him  ^  Sc  he  will  tell  me.
I  want  very  much  to  return  here  again  &  finish  up  what  I
cannot  say  now  may  I  ?

R.  H.  Bennie,  your  father  is  coming  next  time,  but  Koble  Avill
come  also  if  you  wish  ?

I  want  to  see  him  very  much  U.  D.  this  time  so  I  can  go
with  him.  watch  him  &  tell  dad  what  I  see  him  doins
U.  D.

1  Probably  R.  H.


584


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


48th  Sitting.

February  23,  1904.  Present:  N.  B.  J.,  R.  B.  J.  and  It.  H.

(Bennie  communicating.)

I  had  a  long  talk  with  cousin  Frank  &  he  is  .  .  says  tell
(l)ause)  he  saj's  tell  his  mother  that  if  she  will  send
him  some  message  he  will  reply  with  earthly  remem-
brances Q.  D.  he  also  says  give  her  his  love  also  uncle
Franks  and  when  the  time  is  presented  he  will  meet  her
&  give  some  sign  of  his  existence. U.  D. got  it.

I  saw  Aunt  Alice,  so  did  he.  trying  to  .  .  to  write  some-
thing which  looked  like  Verses,  do  you  know  what
they  were  dad.

N.  B.  J.  She  wrote  a  message  to  you,  Bennie. I  have  it  here.

good please  give  it  me. papa  yourself.
.  .  papa.

N.B.J.  Yes,  here  it  is.  (reads)  "Say  to  Bennie  that  every  word
that  comes  from  him  is  a  pleasure  and  comfort  to  me,
and  thank  him  for  the  smallest  message.  Ti-ll  Frank
and  liis  father  that  in  my  troubles  I  have  turned  to
them."

thanks  to  God.

N".  B.  J.  "I  l>eg  them  to  help  me  take  care  of  Lucinda."  (Hand
shows  excitement.)

N.  B.  J.  "I  need  their  help  all  the  time."

(From  G.  P.)  You  will  not  only  awaken  these  two  friends
to  the  reality  of  communication  but  they  will  be  clearer
for  this  G.  P.

N.  B.  .J.  Yes,  Bennie.  Please  thank  Mr.  Pelham  for  Iielping  you
and  us.

All  he  U.  U.  &  he  likes  it  as  well  as  we  do.
now  give  me  Mamas.

N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  Mama's  letter  has  not  yet  come,  but  she  sent  her
love  and  will  soon  come  here  to  see  you.


LXI.] Report  on  the  Jimot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  585

thank  you  for  telling  me  I  shall  think  up  many  things  to
remind  her.

I  feel  for  Aunt  Alice  very  much  &  we  shall  do  all  in  our

power  jointly  to  help  her.
Hallo  Roble  how  goes  everything  with  you  1

R.  Hallo,  Bennie,  I'm  all  right.

I  have  been  thinking  if  I  could  play  Swanee  River  for  you.

it  would  help  you  to  U.  D.  me  when  I  come  to  you.

don't  you  think  so.
help  me  a  moment.

(Hand  moves  towards  R.  H.  who  repeats  the  sentence  above
"I  have  been  thinking,  etc.,"  but  hand  points  to  the  words
help  me  a  moment,  and  turns  to  R.  H.  again.  R.  H.  puts
his  hand  forward.  Hand  rests  lightly  on  it  for  two
or  three  seconds,  then  touches  articles.)

I  have  been  thinking  if  I  could  play  Swanee  River  for  you
even  though  faintly  you  would  U.  D.  me  better  when
I  come  to  you  do  you  think  I  could  possibly  make
you  U.  D.

R.  I  will  try  to  listen  for  you,  Bennie.

Just  as  you  try  to  sleep  I  will  watch  &  come  to  you.
if  you  have  light  &  I  think  you  have  enough  so  I
can  reach  you  strongly  I  shall  certainly  speak  or  whistle
or  do  something  that  you  may  be  sure  it  is  I.

R.  All  right,  Bennie.

Roble  why  do  you  put  your  feet  up  so  high.

R._  What  do  you  mean  I When  I  study  1

Yes  when  you  have  in  your  hands  a  book  'I

R.  I  put  my  feet  on  a  chair  to  be  comfortable.
I  see  you  almost  constantly, doing  this.

R.  Yes,  I  always  do  it  when  I  read.

how  -well  you  speak, to  me  today  R.
You  remember  cousin  Frank  Clark  don't  you.

,2p


586  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

R.  Yes,  Bennie.

he  wants  to  send  his  love  to  you. U.  D.
R.  Yes,  Bennie,  and  give  my  love  to  him  and  Uncle  Frank.
Surely.
R.  H.  One  moment.

(Pencil  dropped.  Hand  subsides  somewhat.  R.  H.  has  pre-
viously given  R.  a  pencil  to  hold  in  his  hands  and
rub  so  as  to  have  R.'s  "influence." This  is  given.)

I  like  this  better,  thanks.

Roble  did  you  have  Franks  knife.

R.  No,  Bennie. I  don't  know  about  his  knife.

tell  Aunt  to  give  it  to  j'ou  please.
R.  All  right,  Bennie.

Will  you.
R.  Yes,  I  will  tell  her.

he  says  so.

don't  forget  it  I  beg  of  you.

R.  No,  I  won't  forget.

Did  you  remember  who  Gridley  was.^
and  those  other  boys  were  McVeigh.

[Perhaps  McVeigh  is  intended  as  a  correction  of  McLellan.
See  pp.  565  and  572.— H.  de  G.  V.]

don't  you  remember  the  one  who  had  red  hair.
R.  No,  Bennie. Where  did  we  know  them  ?

in  C  .

R.  I  don't  remember  them  now.

You  will,  later.

remember  anything, about  the  minstrel  Show."
iSee  p.  583.

-See  p.  394,  where  "the  minstrel  show"  was  mentioned  by  Mrs.  J.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  luith  Mrs.  Piper.  587

R.  Yes,  I  do,  at  Harvard  school  1 (Assent.) Was  the  boy  Ed
in  this  show  1.

Yes  indeed.

R.  Do  you  mean  Ed  Cushberger  1

Oh  yes  I  forgot  his  name. I  remembered  Ed  all  right.

Who  was  interlocutor  [interlocturer]

I  cannot  exactly  get  that  word,  friend.

R.  It  was  Irwin  G  .

tell  me  about  the  one  who  had  red  hair  &  he  laughed
so  because  he  thought  it  would  give  him  away.

R.  I  remember  him  now,  but  don't  know  his  name.

When  you  go  back  to  your  room  think  it  over  &  it.
will  all  come  back  to  you.  you  see  you  have  one
advantage  over  me  R.  &  that  is  you  can  still  be
associated  in  actual  conversation  with  the  boys  while
I  have  to  speak  over  the  line  to  you  &  I  cannot
always  make  the  sounds  audible  to  those  to  whom  I
speak. You  ought  to  remember  better  than  I.

R.  Yes,  I understand,  and I  will try to think  who  these
boys  were.

do  you  remember.  Hill.
R.  N-no. Where  did  we  know  him  ?

he  skated, with  us. &  a  young  fellow  named.  Arthur.
R.  I  do  not  remember  them  now.

by  the  way  I  saw  you  skating  recently.

R.  Yes,  I  have  been  skating  often.

that  is  a  fine  place  too.  don't  get  hurt  I  am  watching
over  you.

R.  All  right. Thank  you,  Bennie.

tell  me  something  about, your  studies  can't  you.


588  , Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

R.  Yes,  I am  interested  in  the  courses  I'm  taking,  and  am
studying  law.

Yes  I  know, tliat  but  tell  me. about languages  &  latin
especially.

R.  I  haven't  had  any  Latin  for  three  years  now.
You  must  keep  up  &  help  Helen  U.  D.

R.  Yes,  papa  helps  her  with  her  Latin  now.

"Well  she  is  going  to  need  you  more  than  ever  later  .  .

R.  All  right. I  will  try  to  help  her.

Good  I  am  so  glad  to  hear  you  say  it.

Papa  dear  tell  me  what  she  got  so  excited  over,  the  other
day Was  it  essay.

N.  B.  J.  Yes. I think it  was  somethins;  she  was  goins;  to  write
about.

I  heard  her  fuming  about  it,  but  don't  mind  her  she  will
get  over  it  when  she  gets  through  school  U.  D.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. She  fusses  a  good  deal.
Well  I  think  I  know  it  dad.

You  see  I  am  doing  all  I  can  to  help  her  &  I  do  think
she  is  improving  don't  you  ?

N.B.J.  Yes,  indeed. She's  changing  every  day,  now.

Yes  &  I  do  Avish  Aunt  Alice  would  not  think  her  lazy.
She  is  not.  but  she  can't  do  everj'thing.  .  .  cannot
do  everything.  her  music  I  want  kept  up  U.  D.
I  Jiever  was  good  at  preaching  but  I  know  perfectly
well  what  is  best  for  her.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. We'll  try  to  keep  Tip  her  music.

they  [say]  Mama  humors  her  too  much  but  I  don't  think
so.  She  is  a  good  girl  &  if  she  is  nervous  she  can't
help  it.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  vjith  Mrs.  Piper.  589

N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  what  are  you  working  at  in  your  life  1

didn't  I  tell  you  1  ■

N.  B.  J.  Not  lately.

I  am  studying  the  laws  of  this  life,  and  the  ex  .  .  planation
of  returning.

N.  B.  J.  All  right. I  understand.

Well  I  am  not  sure  that  you  do.  but  I  hope  I  can
make  it  clear,  but  I  can't  stop  to  explain  it  now.  I
have  so  much  more  to  say  tell  Mama  I  wish  she  could
U.  D.  what  I  meant  about  the  flowers.^

N.  B.  J.  She  did  not  understand  about  flowers  on  cabinet.

What  is  the  earthly  word,  for  it.

N.B.J.  Perhaps  you  meant  your  grave,  was  that  it?

No  I  saw  those  too. but  I  saw  at  home.

some  flowers  just  before I  came  here  &  told  him.  (Hand

points  to  E.  H.)
and  they  were  standing  on  something  like  table  I  know  it

surely  .  .

N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  in  what  room  were  they  ?

they  were  in  the  the  room  where  you  .  .  ■"
near  [?]  .  .  dining  room,
dear  can't  you  remember  R.
Yes  dining  room  dad.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  we  had  flowers  there  on  the  table.

Well  what  is  the  name  of  the  thing  in  the  same  room  on
which  silver  thinirs  are.  .  -  .....

N.  B.  J.  Sideboard  ?  .  .

l'"es  sideboard,  cabinet.


1  See  p.  566.


590


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


N.  B.  J.  Yes,  we  sometimes  call  it  cabinet.

Well  I  saw. at  that  time  those  flowers  on  that  place  &

they  attracted  me  to  them,
do  you  U.  D.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  we  understand.

I  am  glad  you  do. even  if  yoa  can't  U.  D.  about  my  life

here  &  I  don't  believe  you  ever  will  quite.
Roble  did  Klondike  kick  ?

R.  Yes,  he  used  to  kick,  and  ran  away.
/  thought  so  .  .

R.  Bennie,  do  you  remember  now  how  your  old  runabout  was
broken  1 ^

surely  I  do  &  told  you  I  would  come  here  some  day  &
(Hand  points  to  R.  H.)  tell  him  just  how  it  happened.

R.  All  right,  Bennie.

then  you  can't  say  I  got  it  out  of  your  mind  see  .  .

[This apparently reproduces an old misapprehension  of

G.  P.  in  his  earliest  communications. See  Pm.  S.P.R.,

Vol.  XIII.,  p.  .303.— R.  H.]
[The  same  idea  was  evidently  in  the  communicator's  mind

when  the  question  about  the  runabout  was  asked  before.

— H.  de  G.  v.]

R.  Yes,  I  understand.

George  is  always  talking  about  this  to  me.

R.  All  right,  Bennie.
McVeigh.  2

I  speak  about  uncle  "Will.

R.  Do  you  mean  McVeigh  in  V  1

SURE . .

'See  p.  579.  -See  p.  ,586.


LXI.] Report  on  the  Jmiot  Sittings  ^vith  Mrs.  Piper.  591
R.  You  <lid  not  .  .

No  but  I  heard  you  say  this  again  &  again.
R.  You  mean  uncle  Willie  and  I  ?

Yes,  do  you  know  now  1

R.  Yes,  I  understand  about  McVeigh  now.

[Roble  says that "  Uncle Willie " was very friendly  at

V one summer with a young man  named

McVeigh.  This  intimacy  was  after  Bennie's  death. —
N.  B.J.]

[When  the  name  McVeigh  first  occurs,  it  appears  to  be
given  as  a  correction  of  the  name  McLellan.  Then  it
is  connected,  rightly,  with  Uncle  Will.  There  are  in
these  sittings  several  instances  of  the  preliminary  emer-
gence of  significant  names  together  with  some  imaginary
interpretation,  for  which  a  correct  or  partly  correct
interpretation  is  afterwards  substituted.  See  Intr.
p. 352.— H.  de  a.  v.]

I  am  gUnl  I  ha\'e  made  two  things  straight,
the  flowers  are  U.  D.  aren't  they.

R.  H.  Yes.

thank  you.

I  think  I  shall  go  out  a  moment  I  can't  quite  get  my
thoughts  clear.

(Hand  touches  cap  and  spur,  moving  the  spur  back,  then

returning  it  to  front.)
Hello  R

R.  Hallo,  Bennie.

Didn't  you  have  the  boat  painted  new  last  summer.
N.  B.  J.  Buggy.

What  do  you  call  the  thing  we  used  to  ride  in.
R.  Runabout.


Yes. didn't  you  have  it  painted  new  last  summer  1


592


Helen  de  G.  V err  all.


[part


R.  Yes,  we  had  it  painted  in  June.

June  dear  me  I  forgot  all  about  June,  but  I  want  to  be
sure  so  when  I  describe  the  break  down  I  can  make
it  clear  to  you.

R.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  understand  that.

[At  the  sitting  of  Feb.  23,  1903,  Bennie  said  that
"  the  boat  was  all  painted  new."  Perhaps  his  thoughts
have  here  gone  back  to  this.  His  question  as  to  "  the
name  of  the  thing  we  used  to  ride  in  "  is  subsequent  to
N.  B.  J.'s  suggestion  of  "Buggy"  and  does  not  therefore
prove  that  Bennie  had  the  runabout  in  his  mind  when
he  spoke  of  the  boat. — H.  de  G.  V.]

how  would  you  like  to  join  me  R.

R.  Yes,  I  would  like  to  see  yon  again  very  much,  Bennie.

I  tell  you  K.  it  is  not  all  over  with  us.
Well  I  will  go  on  with  my  remembrances.
Will  you  give  Charlie  the  photo  ?

R.  Yes,  we  will  give  him  one  of  your  pictures  at  once.

thank  you  and  be  sure  &  tell  Aunt  Alice  we  shall  help
her  but  she  must  give  you  the  knife,  the  next  time  I
see  you  here  Pa.  I  want  you  to  bring  something
belonging  to  her. Will  you  1

K  B.  J.  Yes,  I  will,  I  will.

It  will  help  us  so  much.

Y"ou  cannot  U.  D.  but  we  can.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

dad  what  happened  to  the  harness,  when  you  went  to  my
grave.

N.  B.  J.  I  don't  remember.
Ask  Mother.

You  drew  it  uji.  (Hand  makes  a  quick  drawing  up
motion.)


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  tuith  Mrs.  Piper.  593
I  saw  you  do  it.

Well  never  mind  you  will  remember  soon.
(Hand  points  to  Spirit.)

Grandma  sends  her  love  to  you  &  wants  to  know  if  she
can  help  you  any  ?

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  help  me  to  be  well  and  do  my  duty.

Well. Well  you  are  well  dad  &  not  so  tired  as  you  were

a  while  ago. You  see  I  am  looking  after  you.
I  feel  t. I  must  get. Mama  over  her  cold  too.

R.  H.  "I  felt  I  must  get  Mama  over  her  cold  too."

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. Thank  you.

Mr  H  listen  kindly.

Please  tell  ni}'  father  what  I  said  before  that  will  youl
(E.  H.  reads  over  again  from  "Grandma  sends"  down  to
"looking  after  you.")

R.  H.  (to  N.  B.  J.)  He  apparently  wants  your  comment  on  \o\iv  not
being  so  tired  as  before,  etc.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  am.

Please  tell  him.
N.B.J.  Bettor  than  heretofore,  but  am  often  very  tired.

Oh  yes  I  know  it  very  well, but  I  mean  generally  tired.
N.  B.  J.  My  health  is  generally  better.

thank  you.

Eoble  you  are  a  great  help  to  me  you  give  me  strength
did  you  know  it.

R.  No,  Bennie. But  I  wish  you  would  be  with  me  and  help
me  when  you  can.

I  shall  always  do  that. You  may  be  sure.

R.  Do  you  remember  you  said  before  you  would  help  me  to
what  I  wanted  in  college  ?

Yes  I  do. k  I  .  .


59:t  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

R.  Well,  I  have  gotten  what  I  wanted.

I  know  &  you  must  U.  D.  what  prayer  does.

R.  I  understand  what  it  is  with  us,  but  did  not  know  yesterday
quite  what  you  meant  by  prayer  in  your  life.

Ah  had  I  never  prayed,  I  should  not  be  speaking  with
you  now.

R.  I  understand,  I  think.

There is law in prnyer. & it means everything  to  us

on  our  side. &  whenever  we  see  our  friends  in  the

body  in  diificulty  we  pray  for  them  instantly,  which
often  helps  them  greatly  U.  D.  It.

R.  Yes,  I  understand  now,  Bennie.

I  went  away  &  followed  you  &  prayed  for  your  success,
as  we  shall  all  pray  now  for  Helen. &  Aunt  Alice.

R.  Good,  Bennie. I  understand  now.

give  all  my  love  to  dearest  mother  Si  tell  her  a  word
to  me  will  help  me  much.  When  she  can  you  will  take
it  to  me  won't  you  (Hand  turns  to  li.  H.)  .  .

R.  H.  Yes,  with  pleasure.

&  I  will,  when  I  see  you  alone  tell  you  some  more  good
things  about  my  people  it  what  goes  on  with  them,  this
will  be  my  way  of  repaying  you.

R.  H.  Good.
U.D.

R.  Yes,  Bennie,  we  understand.

tell  me  did  you  like  the  books  dad  gave  you  1

R.  Yes,  I  am  reading  it  now.
Isn't  it  fine.


Lxi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  luith  Mrs.  Piper.  595
R.  Yes,  I  like  it  very  much  so  far.

keep  straight  on. &  I  will  watch  over  your  shoulder.
R.  All  right,  Bennie.

have  a  good  time  while  you  may  .  .

Go  out  a  good  deal,  stick  to  your  studies  &  you  will  get
through  splendidly.

R.  All  right,  Bennie. Do  you  ever  see  me  on  the  river  'I

You  mean.  Water.

R.  Yes,  I  mean  the  water.

Oh  yes  often  but  not  for  a  long  time.

No,  I  have  not  been  on  the  water  for  several  months,
but  will  start  again  soon.

I  shall  be  with  you.  to  see  that  all  goes  well.  I  saw  you
with  a  lot  of  other  fellows  in  a  long  (pause)  something
a  Ions;  time  ago. cannot  remember  it.

You  mean  sail-boat  1 sailing  1

No.  ■  ■

R.  You  mean  canoe  1

Yes.

R.  I  often  go  canoeing  with  some  other  boys.

that  is  what  I  mean. &  that  is  why  I  go  with  you.
to  see  that  all  goes  well.

49th  Sitting.

Februarij  ii,  mn.  Present: R.  H.

(Rector  communicating.)

R.  H.  I  have  a  short  letter  to  Bennie  from  his  mother  which
was  intended  for  his  father  to  bring,  but  reached  him
only  after  he  left. (Hand  points  to  Spirit. Cross  in  air.)


596


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


Please  give  it  him  as  he  hath  asked  specially  for  it  several
times  during  this  intervening  period.  We  will  bring
him.

R.  H.  Yes. (Hand  talks  with  Spirit.)

(Bennie  communicating.)

How  are  you  ?

Got  something  for  me.

R.  H.  Yes,  Bennie. Your  father  .  .

here  is  George  perhaps  you  would  better  greet  him  too.  he
has  been  a  good  friend  to  me.  and  when  the  light  has
been  especially  drawn  upon  by  myself  he  has  been  my
support  .  .

R.  H.  Yes,  George,  very  grateful  for  all  your  help.

(G.  P.  communicating.)

Just  say  good  morning  that  will  do. yuu  know  I  U.  D.
it  is  only  to  please  the  boy  U.  D.

R.  H.  Yes.  Your  father,  Bennie,  got  this  at  his  hotel  after  his
return  yesterday.

I  U.  D.  thank  yon.

R.  H.  Your  mother  says :  "  My  dear  Bennie,  the  last  messages
received  from  you  were  full  of  interest  and  show  that
yuu  are  with  us  constantly.  I  wish  that  you  could  tell
us  more  concerning  your  life,  your  duties  and  your
pleasures.  Do  not  think  that  we  forget  you  as  the
years  pass.  On  the  contrary  we  think  of  you  constantly
and  you  become  dearer  every  day.  Send  a  message  to
me by your  father  and be with me  and help  me.

Watch  over  Roble  and  Helen  and  help  them  all  you

J?

can.

I  think  I  have  said  all  this?

R.  H.  Ye.«,  you  have,  Bennie.  Then  comes  just  her  signature
"Your  loving  mother,"  with  the  date  February  21,  that
is,  the  Sabbath  before  your  father  had  his  first  meeting.
The  letter  was  doubtless  delayed  by  the  slow  trains  in
bad  weathei'.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Piper.  597

Oh  yes  all  right. I  remember  a  little  about  such  things.
C  ?

R.  H.  Yes,  from  C  .

Oh  yes  thanks.

50th  Sitting.

June  27,  190+. Present:  Mrs.  J.,  Miss  Helen  J.,  and  E.  II.
(Bennie  communicating.)
I  see  some  one  in  the  body  with  you. I  think  .  .

Mrs.  J.  (to  H.  J.)  Move  over  a  little. (H.  J.  draws  closer  to  table.)

it  is  my  sister  .  .  Oh  I  am  so  glad  you  are  here,  tell  me
me  you  are  glad  to  see  me  I  am  so  glad  you  got  through
so  nicely.  I  saw  Eoble  too  &  I  helped  you  both  did
you  U.  D.  it.

H.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. I  am  glad  to  be  here.

I  U.  D.  you  do  not  see  me  but  I  look  about  the  same.
You  look  much  larger  Helen  havent  you  grown  .  .

H.  J.  Yes.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  yon  know  several  years  have  passed  since  you  left
us,  and  Helen  is  almost  a  young  lady.

I  U.  D.  isn't  that  fine  1  I  am  glad  she  is  so  well  &  you
also  mother  dear.  I  hope  you  will  keep  on  with  your
studies  Helen  &  do  all  you  can  .  .

H.  J.  I  thought  often  of  you  when  away  at  school.

I  was  often  with  you  when  you  did  not  know  it.  I  am
glad  Roble  is  through  &  I  am  glad  he  is  to  be  with  dad.^

Mrs.  J.  Yes. Your  father  could  not  be  with  us  to-day. Do  you
think  that  he  is  well  1

No  not  so  well  as  I  wish.  I  think  he  is  very  tired  &
needs  rest  greatly.

1  See  p.  .374.


598  Helen  de  G.  Vermll.  [part

Mrs.  J.  Can  you  not  influence  him  to  take  a  rest  ?

Uncle  Frank  &,  I  are  both  pra3'ing  for  this. We  will  make
him  do  so.

Mrs.  J.  I  wish  him  to  take  a  long  rest  this  summer.

Yes  so  do  we. &  I  think  he  will. I  am  much  concerned

about  him  &  I  have  been  for  some  weeks  1  think.
(Hand  takes  up  spur  and  feels  and  replaces  it.)
weeks  isn't  it.

R.  H.  Yes,  probabl}',  .  .  or  months  1

yes  months,  since  I  saw  him  here  ^  .  .

Mrs.  J.  What  can  /  do  for  him,  Bennie  1

tell  him  he  should  take  a  rest  because  he  owes  it  to  him-
self to  you  all  &  to  me.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  as  soon  as  I  go  back  we  are  going  to  the  farm.

I  know  it  it  I  want  dad  to  sleep  rest  ik  take  good  care  of
himself. I  will  help  him  do  so.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  is  the  farm  the  best  place  for  him  ?

Yes  for  the  present, tell  him  to  let  repairs  go  &  rest  this
summer.  .•  '•  '■>

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  I  will  do  so. Is  that  all  he  needs,  rest  alone  ?

Yes  .  .

don't  let  him  take  anything, he  is  all  right  except  very

tired, he  is  overdoing  all  the  time. &  his  talking  tires

him  very  much.
[The  weariness  of  N.  B.  J.  is  most  marked  in  consultations.

Talking  seems  to  be  the  main  source  of  the  weariness.

— N.  B.  J.]

Mrs.  J.  He is very  much troubled about some of  his  business
affairs.

AVell  dear  he  ought  not  to  be  because  dad  will  be  all  right
I  know  this.

'  It  was  on  February  23,  1904.


LXi.] Re-port  on  the  Jimot  Sittings  ivitli  Mrs.  Piyer.  599

Mrs.  J.  He  sent  his  love  to  you.

I  am  so  glad  give  mine  to  him  &  tell  him  I  love  him  very
dearly  I  am  happier  as  time  goes  on  &  I  live  to  wait
for  you  all.  We  shall  U.  D.  everything,  then  tell  him
so  for  me.

Helen  what  made  you  let  Klo  n  d  i  ke  run  away  .  .
Mes.  J.  (toH.  J.)  Tell  him  that  he  didn't  run  away — did  he?
H.  J.  I  don't  remember  .  .

he  did.
H.  J.  Last  summer  'I
Yes.  .

Mrs.  J.  He  did  not  behave  very  well,  Bennie.

he  turned  everything  upside  down. I  saw  him.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  I  think  that  was  Roble's  horse  that  ran  away.

So  it  was.  that's  so.  I  remember  now  but  mine  kicked
up  a  good  deal  .  .

H.  J.  Yes,  he  was  very  mean  last  summer.

Very  what  Helen  ?
H.  J.  Mean.

do  you  mean  that  .  .
H.  J.  He  was  ugly,  and  my  driving  worried  him.

Oh  yes. I  U.  D.  what  you  mean, but  he  is  getting  old  .  .

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  we  thought  best  to  sell  him,  because  your  father  was
afraid  he  would  hurt  Helen.

I  think  he  got  that  from  me.  because  I  tried  to  tell  him
to  look  out  for  him  &  I  say  it  now  more  than  ever.
Better  let  him  go  on  leave  him  alone  don't  try  to  drive
him  any  more  .  .


600  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  I  think  you  mean  Roble's  horse.

I  am  afraid  of  him  really  &  T  fear  the  worst  .  .

Mrs.  J.  I  do  not  think  he  is  a  safe  horse.

I  know  he  is  not  mother  &  I  tell  you  now  do  be  careful
it  tell  dad  also.

When  I  saw  Helen  it  brought  it  all  back  to  my  mind
because  I  wanted  her  to  have  my  horse. ^

Mrs.  J.  Yes  1 She  did  have  Klondike,  and  enjoyed  him.

Yes  I  remember. &  I  am  glad  hes  gone.

Mrs.  .J.  Is  Roble's  horse  safe  to  ride  horseback  ?

No  mother  dear  he  is  not.  &  he  will  hurt  him.  if  he
rides  him.

Mrs.  J.  I  will  tell  your  father  and  try  to  have  him  sold.

Oh  I  shall  be  so  glad  if  you  do. &  I  will  rest  in  peace.
jNIrs.  J.  Your  father  will  surely  sell  him.

I  shall  be  happier  then. I  know  many  things  I  cannot  say.

[Roble's  horse  ran  away  and  turned  his  run-about  upside
down.  This  was  not  Klondike,  but  the  latter  horse
became  ill-tempered  and  was  sold. — 'N.  B.  J.]

[At  the  sitting  of  Feb.  23,  1904,  Ruble  said  that  Klondike
ran  away,  see  p.  590.  This  discrepancy  in  the  statements
made  by  sitters  is  no  doul)t  partly  responsible  for
Bennie's  confusion  about  the  horses. — H.  de  G.  V.]

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  tell  us  about  Frank  B  .


he  .  .  do  you  mean  B or  C  .

Mrs.  J.  B  ,  Bennie. Frank  B  ,  I  mean.

I  will  in  a  moment  dear  let  me  tell  you  this  first  I
want  dad  to  know  that  I  saw  him  at  my  grave  &  I  saw
him  put  some  flowers  there  thank  him  for  me.


i.See  p.  .371.


LXi.] Re2?0Tt  on  the  Junot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Piper.  601

Mes.  J.  I  shall. He  wrote  me  that  he  went  out  to  your  grave  a
week  ago  yesterday. Was  that  the  time  you  saw  him?

I  don't  know  but  it  was  on  the  day  on  which  everybody
prays.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  we  call  that  day  Sunday.

Oh  yes  I  forgot  for  the  moment.

H.  J.  (to  Mrs.  J. )  Ask  him  if  I  ought  to  go  back  to  school  next  year.

I  saw  him  &  I  was  so  glad  to  see  him  there.  I  saw  him
stoop  &  lay  something  down,  he  seemed  to  be  without
you  because  I  looked  &  you  were  not  there.

Mrs.  J.  No,  I  was  not  with  him.

[Two  Sundays  before  this  sitting  I  visited  Bennie's  grave
alone  and  placed  some  flowers  there. — N.  B.  J.]

Ask  Roble  if  he  heard  me  a  few  days  before  his  examina-
tions I  was  in  his  room  &  I  saw  two  other  fellows  with
him  just  after  they  left  I  tried  to  speak  with  him.^

Mrs.  J.  I  shall  ask  him  and  will  tell  you  to-morrow.

ask  him  also  what  made  the  flag  fall  in  his  room.-
Mrs.  J.  Yes,  I  shall  ask  him.

Helen  what  do  you  wish  .  .

Mrs.  J.  (to  H.  J.)  Ask  him  now — tell  him  you're  going  to  school  next
year.

H.  J.  I  expect  to  go  back  to  school  next  year;  is  it  best?

I  am  very  glad  &  shall  help  you  all  I  can  .  .

don't  worry  about  your  studies  Helen  dear  you  will  get  on
first  rate  I  know  you  will.  I  know  how  you  feel  but
don't  mind  stick  to  it  &  you  will  be  glad  some  time.

Mrs.  J.  She  did  not  feel  very  well  this  spring  while  at  school.

I  know  it. but  do  be  careful  about  those  colds. Helen  &

never  mind  you  will  be  better  oft'  for  going  back.
You  don't  think  so  now.

^See  p.  607.  -See  p.  605.

2q


602  •  Helen  de  G.  VerralL.

H.  J.  Yes,  I  do. I  want  to  go  back.


[part


I  am  glad  very  very  glad. Eoble  can  help  you  now  he  is
through.

Mes.  J.  He  will  help  Helen  this  suraniei-. Is  that  what  you  mean?

Yes  &  help  her  for  the  next  term, or  year. U.  D.

I  will  go  out  a  moment  .  .

(Hand  takes  and  feels  over  cap.)

I  want  grandpa  Junot  to  give  his  message  first.

Please  give  my  love  to  N- &  his  children  in  the  body

&  assure  him  that  his  interests  are  mine,  tell  him  he
lias  a  great  deal  to  be  grateful  for  &  he  must  take  care
of  himself,  to  do  his  allotted  work,  in  that  life.  I
want  him  to  know  tliat  we  are  all  together  &  we  are
watching  over  you  all.  there  is  no  misunderstanding  in
this  life, his  mother  sends  much  love  also.

Mrs.  J.  I  shall  give  him  the  message.

all  right  dear.

[Characteristic,  and  reference  again  to  the  misunderstandings

of  mother  and  father  in  this  life. — N.  B.  J,]
Helen  how  about  those  photographs  .  .

H.  J.  What  photographs  do  you  mean  ?

I  saw  you  take  some  at  the  wharf  last  summer
]yiKS.  J.  (to  H.  J.)  At  Lake  Geneva?

Was  it  boat.
H.  J.  At  Lake  Geneva,  do  you  mean  ?

I  never  saw  the  place  before.
H.  J.  It  must  have  been  at  Uncle  Charlie's.

Oh  I  thiidv  it  was. tell  me  did  you  get  the  boat, in  one
of  them.


H.  .J.  I  did  not,  but  Aunt  Frances  did.


LXl.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  luith  Mrs.  Fiper.  603

Oh  I  saw  the  boat  &  the  photo,  quite  plainly,  at  the
time.  I  tell  you  that  you  may  know  I  am  near  you
often.

Mrs.  J.  Helen takes many  pictures  with her kodak  and  enjoys
doing  so  very  much.

I  knew  she  would  &  I  am  very  glad.
•  ■ tell  me  about  the  cart  .  .

H.  J.  I  still  have  the  cart,  but  have  not  ridden  in  it  this  year
yet.

When  you  do  I  shall  be  with  you  Helen  surely.

I  thought  I  would  tell  you  about  B  ■  because  he  is

all  right  .  .

Mrs.  J.  Yes^

Can't  you  U.  D.  that  when  he  returns  I  will  give  a
message  .  .

Mrs.  J.  Yes  *

tell  me  about  his  mother, did  she  ask  this.
Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie, His  mother  is  with  him.

his  mother  asked  dad  this  same  question.
Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  I  think  you  have  the  two  Franks  confused.

Oh  I  mean  Aunt  Alice  dear.

Mrs.  J.  Yes. Will  you  send  a  message  to  her'?

I  will  tell  her  how  glad  I  am  that  she  will  hear  what  I

have  to  tell  you  from  this  side.
[When  Mrs.  J.  asks  for  information  about  Frank  B  ,

see  p.  600,  Bennie  replies; "Do  you  mean  B or

C  ,"  showing  that  he  had  both  Franks  in  his  mind. —

H.  de  G.  v.]
My  thoughts  wander  111  go  out  a  moment.
(Hand  holds  cap  a  few  seconds.)

Helen  you  look  so  well  in  that  white.  I  like  it  so  much  I
mean  the  one  you  had  on  the  other  day  .  .


604  .  ' Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

H.  J.  You  mean  yesterday  on  the  beach  1
Yes  it  looked  so  pretty.

I  saw  your  coat  but  I  told  dad  I  did  not  care  for  it  the
red  I  mean  .  .

H.  J.  Did  you  see  Eoble  and  I  go  in  bathing  yesterday'?

I  [saw  the  water, quite  clearly. &  I  saw  you  in  white  .  .
Mes.  J.  Bennie,  Helen  has  not  been  very  well.

I  know  it  mother  but  she  will  be  now,  better  all  the  time.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  I  think  she  is  growing  stronger.

Ill  ask  Doctor  to  look  at  her.
[Medical  diagnosis  follows.]

Helen  skate  dear  when  you  can  do  you  remember  how  I
used  to  help  you.

Mes.  J.  Yes,  I  remember. And  I  remember  how  fond  you  were  of
skating.

great  fun  don't  you  think  so  H  .  .
H.  -J.  Yes,  I  like  it  better  than  anything  else.
Who  is  that  girl  you  call  Edith  .  .
Mes.  J.  (toH.  .J.)  Is  there  an  Edith  at  school"?
H.  J.  Edith  Waterman,  do  you  mean"?

I  do  not  care  for  her  for  j'ou  .  .  •
Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  do  you  mean  a  girl  at  school?
Yes  .  .

Mes.  J.  But  there  is  no  one  at  school  by  that  name.

Edith  was  with  Helen  on  the  ice.

H.  J.  I  do  not  know  her.

Yes  think  dear.
She  has  black  hair.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  605

•Mks.  J.  I  cannot  recall  her  now. Can  you  tell  me  something  about
her  1

Helen  tell  me  dear  which  girl  gave  you  two  little  books.

H.  J.  Elsa,  do  you  mean  ?
Yes  .  .

H.  J.  Do  you  not  like  her?

I  thought I did not. because I thought she  was  not
sincere.

K.  H.  I  think,  Bennie,  you  must  stop  this  time.
I  will  come  again.

["  Edith " not understood, though Mrs. Junot  possibly
knows  who  was  intended. — N.  B.  J.]

5  1st  Sitting.

June  28,  1904. Present:  Mrs.  J.,  B.  B.  /.,  and  B.  H.
(Bennie  communicating.)
Is  that  you  Roble  well  I  am  glad  to  see  you.

R.  Hallo,  Bennie,  I  am  glad  to  be  here  again.

I  have  seen  you  in  so  many  places  since  I  spoke  with  you.
You  got  on  finely  didnt  you.

R.  Yes,  Bennie,  very  well.
I  told  you  so.

[Roble  has  just  graduated  with  honors. — N.  B.J.]
Did  you  U.  D.  about  the  flag.^

R.  Do  you  mean  the  Hag  we  took  down  from  the  wall?
Yes  .  .

R.  Yes,  I  understood.

iSee  p.  601.


606


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


[We  had  several  college  fl  ags  in  our  room.  In  May  we
took  them  all  down  for  a  while,  and  at  another  time
one  was  blown  down  and  I  tacked  it  up  again. — R.  B.  J.]

going  to  the  farm  soon.

K.  Yes,  Bennie,  in  about  a  week.

Now  Roble  I  can  see  better  than  3'ou  can.  &  I  want  you
to  look  out  for  that  horse  U.  D.^

~R.  All  right,  I'll  watch  him.

I  am  not  going  to  let  you  get  hurt.

tell  me  about  your  work  I  shall  be  so  glad  when  you  get
settled  down  with  father.

E.  Yes,  I  expect  to  study  law  next  fall.
Good.

What  did  you  want  to  ask  me  about  something  I  said  that
you  did  not  U.  D.

R.  No,  I  don't  know  what  you  mean.

I  thought  I  heard  you  tell  mother  you  did  not  know  what
I  meant  about  something  I  said  to  her  .  .

R.  I  don't  remember  now,  Bennie.

(Hand  turns  to  Mrs.  J.)

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie,  I  don't  know  to  what  you  refer.

I  think  it  was  golf  sticks,  in  your  room,  but  I  did  intend
to  misplace  them.

R.  H.  (to  Mrs.  J.)  He  probably  means  about  whether  Noble  was  aware
of  his  presence  by  any  disturbance  of  objects.

R.  I  did  not  see  the  sticks  move,  but  I  thought  I  heard  you
one  night  and  spoke  to  you  about  t\vo  weeks  ago.

I  heard  you  say  I  hear  hut  I  also  thought  you  said  I  don't
U.D.  did  you  .  .

iSee  p.  GOO.


LXI.] Report  on  the  Janet  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  607


R.  No,  I  asked  if  you  were  there.

I  remember  that  but  I  heard  or  got  your  thought  so  I
U.  D.  you  were  uncertain  about  something  I  said  but  if
you  don't  remember  it  I  will  not  bother  about  it  now  &
I  will  see  you  again  before  long.

E.  All  right,  Bennie.

[Bennie  said  in  the  sittings  in  February  that  he  would
try  to  let  me  know  of  his  presence  by  moving  some
hockejr  sticks  in  my  room,  see  p.  582.  One  night
during  the  latter  part  of  May,  my  two  room-mates  had
gone  out,  and  I  had  gone  to  bed.  Just  as  I  was  almost
asleep,  I  awoke  suddenly  thinking  something  had  hit  the
side  bar  of  my  bed  near  my  head.  I  said  "Bennie,  is
that  you  'I  " — R.  B.  J.]  [Note  that  Bennie  says,  "  I  saw
two  other  fellows  with  him  just  after  they  left  I  tried
to  speak  with  him,"  see  p.  601. — H.  deG.  V.]

I  wish  I  could  tell  you  how  happy  I  am  over  here  Roble
I  want  you  to  be  sure  that  I  am  your  brother,  &  while
I  come  to  you  there  I  want  you  to  know  &  U.  D.  that
I  am  looking  after  you.  I  saw  you  in  a  boat,  the  other
day. &  I  was  near  enough  to  touch  you.

H.  Yes,  Bennie,  about  two  weeks  ago.  (Assent.)
Just  about  the  time  I  was  in  your  room.

R.  Yes,  Bennie.

[I  was  on  the  water  a  great  part  of  the  time  either  row-
ing, sailing,  or  canoeing.  The  reason  I  said  "  two  weeks
ago "  was  because  on  that  day  we  had  taken  a  long  sail
down  to  Newport. — II.  B.  J.]

say  Roble  what  was  the  matter  with  your  ibot.

R.  I  cut  my  toe  in  swimming.

I  thought  so. I  heard  you  sing  out  but  I  saw  it  bleed.

R.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  cut  it  badly.

AVas  that  your  handkerchief  you  put  on  to  it.


608  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  '  [part

R.  No,  I  borrowed  one  from  another  boy.

I  thought  so,  I  saw  the  influence  but  it  didnt  look  just
like  yours, do  look  out.

R.  All  right,  Bennie,  I'll  be  careful.

You  see  I  am  watching  you. of  course  you  don't  mind.

R.  No,  I  like  to  have  you  watch  me,  Bennie.

[I  cut  my  toe  in  swimming  April  5th  and  was  on  crutches
some  time.  1  borrowed  a  handkerchief  to  tie  up  my
toe.— E.  B.  J.]

I  hear  every  word  you  say  R but  Helen  got  her  words

so  mixed  I  could  not  U.  D.  very  well.

Mrs.  .J.  She  is  not  used  to  talking  to  you  and  did  not  understand
how.

Oh  I  see  well  she  is  all  right  only  I  wanted  you  to  know

I  could  not  hear  her  very  well.
Now  everything  looks  lost  in  your  room  E  &  I  am  going

to  watch  out  closely  &  when  I  get  back  here. I  shall

tell  you  much  I  have  seen  you  do.

R.  Yes,  Bennie.

[College  was  over  and  we  had  packed  up  part  of  our  things^

before  going  home. — E.  B.  J.]
What  would  you  like  me  to  do  most.

(Hand  touches  cap,  and  then  takes  up  harmonica  a  few
seconds.)

tell  me  about  D has  he  got  through  yet.

R.  Yes,  Bennie,  he  finishes  this  week,
first  rate  isn't  it.

[Charlie  D  ,  a  great  friend  of  Bennie,  graduating  from

college  that  week. — E.  B.  J.]
Did  you  remember  about  my  photographs.^

R.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  gave  one  to  his  mother  and  she  said  she
Avould  give  it  to  him,  but  I  don't  know  that  she  did.

^  See  p,  578,


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  60^
Yes. I  think  she  did. thank  you  R.

What  good  times  we  used  to  have  at  the  farm  R. I  live
all  over  those  old  days  again  &  again.

R.  Yes,  Bennie,  we  had  lots  of  fun there,  and  I  wish  you
were  there  with  me  now.

I  am  in  a  way  R.  &  I  am  happier  because  I  can  be  there-
to see  all  you  do.
Do  you  remember  anything  about  climbing  trees  R  .  .

R.  You  mean  cherry  trees  ?

Yes.

R,  I  remember  very  well.

isn't  it  about  time  to  get  them  now.
R.  They  are  just  about  ripe  now,  Bennie.

[We  used  to  climb  two  old  cherry  trees  and  had  hammocks

slung  from  the  branches. — R.  B.  J.]
I  tried  my  best  to  see  this  so  I  could  remind  you  of  our

climbing  for  them.
(Hand  turns  to  R.  then  to  Mrs.  J.)

Mes.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

Do  you  know  about  it  .  .

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  I  remember  that  you  used  to  climb  the  trees  at  the
farm.

Oh  yes  dear  of  course. I  wanted  you  to  remind  me  of
something  so  I  would  not  get  weak. While  speaking.

R.  H.  (to  Mrs.  J.)  Remind  him  of  something  at  the  farm.

Mrs.  J.  Do  you  .  .  have  you  seen  your  father  at  the  farm,  lately?

Yes  I  think  so  do  you  mean  within  a  few  days.
Mrs.  J.  Within  a  week.

Yes. but  I  saw  him  at  my  grave  first.


610 •  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

Mes.  J.  Yes,  he  was  there  before  he  went  to  the  farm. Do  you
remember  the  pony  at  the  farm  1

Oh  yes  I  spoke  about  him. don't  you  remember.
Mrs.  J.  Yes,  I  remember.

I  want  to  know  what  dad  is  doing  with  the  spring.
Mes.  J.  I  don't  know,  Bennie.

(Hand  turns  to  R.)

R.  I  don't  know  7ioiv,  unless  he  is  having  it  cleared.

that  must  be  it  ask  him  I  saw  him  talking  to  a  man
about  it. the  very  day  I  was  here  before.

Mes.  J.  Yesterday  ? He  may  have  been  at  the  farm  yesterday.

it  was  when  I  came  here  before  &  spoke  with  you  &,  Helen.

Mes.  J.  That  may  be. He is troubled  about  the  new well  and
pump.

that  is  what  I  see  surely.  &  I  am  sorry  to  have  him
worried  about  it  because  he  ought  not  to  be  &  he  said
to  the  man  I  can't  see  why  it  could  not  be  fixed
differently.

[When  at  the  farm  3  days  before  this  sitting  I  had  an
animated  discussion  with  the  man  who  tends  the  hot-air
pump. It  was  working  badly. — N.  B.  J.]

Mes.  J.  I  will  ask  him  about  this  when  I  see  him.

all  right  mother. I  only  want  you  to  know  I  see.

he  made  them  take  away  some  boards  near  the  barn.  &

put  them  in  the  inside. What's  he  going  to  do  with

them  .  .

Mes.  J.  I  do  not  know  now  but  I  will  ask  him  later.

[Lately  I  ordered  an  old  shed  near  the  farm  barn  to  be
taken  down.  That  has  been  done,  but  I  do  not  think
the  boards  were  placed  in  the  barn. — N.  B.  J.]

You  tell  him  to  rest.  &  drive  &  take  care  of  his.  health,
he  is  tired.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  611

Mrs.  J.  Yes, Bennie, I intend to have him  do very  little  this
summer. We  will  be  very  quiet  while  at  the  farm.

do  you  think  he  has  a  pain  in  his  back.

Mks.  J.  Yes,  he  complains  of  it.

I  want  very  much  to  have  him  take  a  long  rest  &  get  over
it.  Do  tell  him  for  me  I  love  my  father  dearly  &  I
want  him  loell  .  .

Mes.  J.  Bennie,  your  father  wants  to  know  if  you  ever  see  Cousin
May  and  Aunt  Susan,  My  Cousin  May.

Oh  yes  I  do  often  didn't  I  tell  you  about  them  when  I
first  talked  with  you  mother  dear.

Mrs.  J.  Yes. You  said  that  Cousin  May  met  you  when  you  first
passed  over  to  the  other  side.i

So  she  did.  &  we  have  very  happy  times  together.  &  do
you  remember  Marion.

Mes.  J.  Miriam,  you  mean,  I  think?  (Assent.)
Yes  Clarke.

Mes.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. Have  you  a  message  from  her  to  her  mother?

Yes  she  wanted  me  to  tell  Aunt  Alice  how  well  &,  happy
she  is  &  how  glad  she  is  when  she  hears  her  speak  of
her.

Mes.  J.  Yes?

she  was  with  you  a  short  time  ago  mother  I  saw  her.
Roble  you  remember  Miriam  don't  you  1

R.  No,  Bennie.

You  remember  hearing  me  speak  of  her.

R.  Yes,  but  you  know  I  never  saw  her.

let  me  think.  No  I  don't  know  as  you  did  but  I  knew
&  she  is  a  fine  girl. &  very  fond  of  her  father  &  mother.

iSee  p.  385.


612


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


R,  Yes,  she  ought  to  be  a  fine  girl.

Slie  is  &  we  have  such  good  times  together.

She  wants  to  know  you  &  Helen  very  much.

Susan  is  all  right  too  &  sends  her  love  to  you  now  .  .

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. Aunt  Susan,  you  mean  1

Yes. (Hand  moves  from  side  to  side  rapidly  several  times

as  though  disturbed.  Pause.)
I  had  to  go  out  a  moment. (Hand  touches  harmonica.)
E.oble  do  you  remember, about  that  fellow  in  our  show

that  to  whom  I  referred.  ^

R.  Yes,  I  think  I  know  the  one.

All  right  I  got  a  little  confused  about  them,
do  you  remember  the  Swallow  nests  .  .

R.  At  the  farm  1

Yes. in  barn.

R.  Yes,  and  the  bats.

Oh  yes  I  tried  to  remember  that  name  but  it  would  not

come  back  to  my  memory.
[In  the  farm  barns  there  are  swallows'  nests  and  many  bats.

— R.  B.  J.]

R.  Do  you  remember  how  they  hang  on  the  beam  1

Oh  certainly  I  do  I  can  see  them  perfectly  just  as  the)'
looked  then.  What  a  good  time  we  had  there  I  hope
dad  will  always  keep  that  old  place.

R.  Yes,  he  will,  Bennie.

that  carriage  with  its  new  paint  bothered  me  a  little.
R.  The  runabout? 2

Yes.

Mrs.  J.  (sotto  voce) I  wonder  if  that's  .  .


iSee  p.  587.


2  See  p.  591.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  613

.  I  tried  to  look  it  over  but  it  looked  differently  somehow.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  yon  mean  the  carriage,  I  tliiuk, which  has  been
painted  a  different  colour.

What  did  you  say  Roble. What  about  .  .
R.  I  thought  you  meant  your  old  runabout.

Oh  that  was  painted  before  I  think, but  this  is  still  newer.
Mrs.  J.  I  don't  remember  .  .
R.  (to  Mrs.  J.)  Last  summer.
Mrs.  J.  The  runabout  was  painted  last  summer.

last  summer  1

help  me  Mr  Hodgson.

(Hand  touches  E,.  H.'s  lightly  as  he  puts  it  forward.)
I  mean  listen.

What  did  you  want  to  know  about  Frank  B .  .

Mrs.  J.  Nothing  special,  Bennie,  only  I  always  cared  a  great  deal
for  Frank  B  . Do  you  see  him  ever  1

Oh  yes  I  do  often  I  told  you  about  my  friend  Frank
my  Cousin  Frank  &  uncle  Frank, don't  j'ou  remember.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  remember.

We  meet  often & we  are  splendid  friends. &  they  all
want  to  send  love  to  you  &  to  dad will  you  tell  him.

Mrs.  J.  Yes, Bennie, I  will  give  him  any  message  you  wish  to
send.

tell  we  all  think  a  great  deal  of  him  &  want  to  help  him

in  every  possible  way.
Roble  tell  me  about  your  Gym.
&  are  you  going  to  give  it  up  1

R.  No,  Bennie, I  expect  to  have  some  fan  in  the  Gymnasium
next  year.

[I  was  in  the  gymnasium  a  great  deal  while  at  college. —
E.  B.  J.]

Capital, but  you  are  doing  finely, did  you  know  it.


614  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

R.  I  have  had  lots  of  fun  there,  Bennie,  playing  games.

tell  me  about  that  new  lift, of  yours.

R.  H.  "that  new  lift"^

Yes  it  seems  with  a  weight.

R.  Do  you  mean  nearer  the  river  1

Yes  near  the  water.

R.  I  remember  pulling  on  a  weight-machine  last  week,  when
we  were  canoeing.

that  is  what  I  saw  but  to  U.  D.  it  I  could  not.
R.  Yes,  we  tried  to  see  who  could  pull  the  heaviest  weight.

Isn't  it  .something  new  with  you'?
R.  Yes,  Bennie,  that  was  the  first  time  I  had  tried  it.

I  stood  behind  you  And  I  could  not  help  laughing  to  see
you  trying  to  lift  it.  .

R.  Yes,  Bennie. Did  you  see  any  one  that  was  with  me  1
Yes  I  saw  three  other  fellows.

R.  Yes,  there  were  several  others.

but  I  saw  three  in  particular,
one  quite  large.

R.  Yes,  there  were  three  of  us  lifting.

I  did  not  notice  in  particular  only  three.

[While  canoeing  up  the  river,  we  landed,  and  two  girls,
another  boy  and  I  tried  a  slot  machine  where  one  sees
how  much  he  can  lift.  One  of  the  girls  was  extremely
tall  for  a  girl,  being  6  feet  tall. — R.  B.  J.]

(Hand  feels  harmonica.)

What  to  say  something  mother,  ask  dad  if  he  didn't  put
some  flowers  at  my  grave  ?


LXi.]  Report  on  the  Jimot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  615^
Mes.  J.  Yes,  I  will  ask  him  in  a  few  days.

grandma  Junot  sends  very  much  love  to  him.
Mrs.  J.  I  will  tell  him,  Bennie. What  can  I  do  for  him '?

make  him  rest.

Mes.  J.  Yes,  I  think  it  would  be  a  good  ^l&n  for  Koble  and  him.
to  go  away  together.

that  is  so  it  would  be  fine.  I  want  him  to  stop  worrying
about  things  at  the  farm  &  in  his  business.  &  leave
it  all  .  .  before  he  breaks  down  altogether.

Mes.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  but  I  have  not  been  able  to  have  him  stop.

Well  I  know  dad  would  do  anything  for  me  &  I  want  you
to  tell  him  I  want  him  to  take  a  rest  now  right  off.

Mes.  J.  Yes,  I  will  tell  him  and  you  must  try  to  influence  him  to-
do  so.

I  will  surely  &  you  will  hear  him  say  he  v:ill.

Mes.  J.  That  will  be  good.

tell  me  about  your  horse  Roble  don't  you  think  he  is  a
high  headed  fellow  for  you  to  ride.

R.  He  is  a  very  fast  single-footer,  Bennie.

Yes  but  I  mean  nervous.
R.  Yes,  he  is  a  bit  nervous.

do  look  out  for  him  won't  you  I
R.  Yes,  Bennie. I  can  make  him  behave.

fine.

Why  don't  you  &  dad  take  a  trip  over  the  water  for  a
little  while?

R.  I  would  like  to,  but  he  is  very  busy  now.

I  know  it  but  I  mean  a  little  later.


616  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

Mrs.  J.  I  wish  that  he  would  and  will  tiy  to  have  him.

It  would  do  him  so  much  good  mother.

Do  you  know  what  troubled  him  so  about  the  R.  R.

Mes.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. But  I  think  he  was  over  anxious.

[I  had  some  months  ago  a  period  of  r/reat  anxiety  about
some  railroad  business.  I  was  thinking  of  it  constantly
for  weeks,  and  it  is  not  yet  settled  to  my  entire
satisfaction.- — N.  B.  J.]

I  know  he  was.  &  it  will  come  out  all  right  Uncle  Frank
says  so.

Mrs.  J.  I  will  tell  your  father  and  I  hope  that  he  will  not  worry
about  it  longer.

I  feel  sure  if  he  can  believe  me  &  feel  that  we  do  know
he  will  stop  worrying  about  that.

Mrs.  J.  This  talk  with  you  will  do  him  lots  of  good,  I  know.

Well  it  helps  me  very  much  &  it  helps  me  keep  in  touch
with  you  all  at  home  God  bless  &  keep  you  one  &  all.
I  am  going  out  a  moment  to  get  a  fresh  .  .  ■
.  .  fresh  breath.

(Hand  turns  to  Spirit. Then takes  up  harmonica,  bends

under  at  wrist,  still  holding  it,  lays  it  down  again.)
I  did  not  finish  about  Helens  friend.^

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie,  I  was  going  to  ask  about  her.

I  wondered  if  she  U.  D.  the  girl  I  meant  I  thought  she
called  her  Edith  it  was  something  like  it.

Mrs.  J.  I  do  not  know  any  friend  of  Helen's  named  Edith.  Helen
thought  you  might  have  meant  Elsa,  but  we  all  like
Elsa  very  much.

She  is  all  right  too  but  she  is  not  the  one  I  mean,  the
girl  I  mean  is  not  fond  of  Helen  .  .

Mrs.  J.  Tell  me  how  she  looks.

She  is  tall  &  has  very  dark  hair  &  she  has  dark  eyes  too  .  .
1  See  p.  604.


LXI.]
Mes.  J.


Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  xvith  Mrs.  Piper.  617
Does  she  live  near  us '?


Yes  I  think  she  does  but  she  is  jealous  of  Helen  &  I  am
sorry  she  is  so  I  want  Helen  not  to  feel  troubled
about  her.

ask  Helen  if  she  can  remember  seeing  lier  at  a  party  not
long  befcire  she  left  school.

Mrs.  J.  I  will  ask  Helen. Can  you  not  tell  me  her  name  ?
It  begins  with  E. it  may  be  Edna  .  .

Mrs.  J.  I  do  not  know  any  girl  of  that  name.
She  plays, on  Violin  I  think.

Mrs.  J.  Is  she  in  school  with  Helen  ?

I  think  she  is. I  have  seen  her  near  her  very  often.

Mrs.  J.  I  will  try  to  recall  her,  but  I  cannot  now.

I  feel  a  little  troubled  about  Helens  beina;  with  her.  that
is  all  &  if  you  can  place  her  it  will  help  very  much.

Mrs.  J.  I  will  watch  over  Helen  and  will  try  to  place  this  girl.
I  do  see  it  mother  dear.

[This  girl  is  not  satisfactorily  recognized. — N.  B.  J.]
speak  to  me  R ask  me  anything  you  wish.

R.  Bennie,  do  you  ever  see  me  rowing  or  canoeing^

Oh  yes  indeed  I  do.  didn't  I  tell  you  I  would  watch
over  you  &  see  that  nothing  happened  to  you  when
rowing.

R.  Yes,  I  remember.

I  think  you  have  great  fun.  &  I  am  glad  you  do  it  makes
me  as  happy  as  it  does  you.

R.  That  is  good.

Isn't  that  the  same  River  I  used  to  2:0  on  .  .

2  11


618  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

R.  No,  Bennie,  you  never  went  on  this  river. "  . '  '

What  it  is  not  near  the  farm, is  it.
R.  No,  Bennie,  it  is  at  college.

Oh  yes  I  U.  D.

[I  had  been  rowing  in  the  summer  time  on  the  river  near
the  farm,  on  which  Bennie  had  been. — R.  B.  J.]

but  what  place  was  it  where  I  saw  you  skating  it  looked
as  if  they  made  it  on  purpose.  .  .

R.  I  think  that  is  home,  where  you  and  I  used  to  skate.

Just  think  a  moment  &  see  if  you  &  some  other  fellows
didnt  skate  some  where  else, once  or  twice.

R.  Oh,  yes,  we  skate  at  college.

that  is  what  I  mean.

R.  We  skate  near  the  river  on  a  pond,  and  I  have  skated  in
New  York  where  they  freeze  the  ice  artificially.

That  is  what  I  mean  but  I  could  not  express  it  as  I
wished.

R.  Yes,  we  played  games  then  in  the  rink.

Yes  that  is  right  &  where  I  saw  yon.  but  I  could  not
locate  it.

[St.  Nicholas  Skating  Eink  in  New  York  City  where  the
intercollegiate  hockey  league  plays  its  games. — R.  B.  J.]

52nd  Sittinc4.

.My  13,  1904.  Present:  B.  H.

(Bennie  communicating.)

I  want  to  send  one  word  to  my  people.
Benny.

I  want  you  to  assure  them  of  my  love  my  watchfulness
&  &  care,  for  them.  I  saw  Helen  driving  out  the  day
before  Sunday  with  another  friend  girl  ...  a  girl.^


There  is  no  comment  on  this  statement.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  loith  Mrs.  Pilfer.  619


53rd  Sitting.
October  31,  1904.  Present:  R.  H.

(Rector  communicating.)

We  have  fir.st  a  message  from  Benny, which  we  give  now.

Dear  Mr.  Hodgson.  I  am  glad  to  greet  you.  Please
tell  my  dear  ones  in  the  earthly  world  that  I  am
still  with  &  watching  over  them.  When  I  can  con-
veniently do  so  I  shall  tell  about  some  of  their  doings
since  we  last  met,  do  you  hear  me  ?

R.  H.  Yes,  Bennie,  quite  clearly.  I  have  a  letter  received  this
morning  from  your  father.

When  is  morning  do  you  mean  day  this  day  ?
R.  H.  Yes.

Oh  I  am  so  glad,  please  tell  me  all  he  says  to  me  &
God  bless  you.

R.  H.  He  says  "Bennie,  we  have  often  spoken  of  you  during
the  summer  and  have  looked  forward  eagerly  to  hear
from  you  again.  I  have  just  been  looking  about  your
room  and  thinking  of  you.  Were  you  with  us  any
at  the  farm  this  summer  1 "

Yes  I  should  say  I  was.  I  have  been  wondering  if  you
were  at  all  conscious  of  my  presence,  if  so  please  tell
me.  besides  answer  all  my  questions  on  those  which  I
gave  when  1  last  spoke  to  Mr  Hodgson.

R.  H.  Yes  1  He  goes  on  "  And  what  did  you  see  and  hear
there  —  "

Oh  I  have  many  recollections  which  I  shall  narrate
eventually.

R.  H.  "  Roble  is  home  with  us  now  and  '  Schless '  "

Eoble  &  what  ?
Spell  it  to  me  .  .


620  . Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

R.  H.  S  c  h  1  e  ss.  .  ■

Oh  you  mean  his  friend.

[Correct. Was  a  friend  of  Bennie  also.  — N.  B.  J.]

R.  H.  He says  "  Schless  was  in  to  see  us  a  few  evenings  ago.
He  made  us  think  of  you."

evenings  1
R.  H.  Yes.


good  enough  I  have  it.

give  him  my  warmest  greetings & say  I  will  look  him
up  &  tell  you  some  of  his  movements  in  his  room.


R.  H.  Yes.  (reads)  "  Don't  foi'get  us.  We  love  j'ou  the  same  as
ever  and  long  to  hear  from  you.  Send  us  a  message
when  ever  you  can.  Daddy."

I  am  delighted,  thank  you.  Now  cannot  you  help  me.
by  corroborating,  all  that  I  have  previously  mentioned
that  was  clear  ? it  will  enable  me  to  avoid  repetition.

R.  H.  I  can  look  up  your  last  statements,  but  I  cannot  do  this
at  the  moment,  Bennie.

Can  you  do  so  next  time?
R.  H.  I  think  so.

I  will  ask  +. (Hand  turns  to  Spirit.)
It  will  be  well  +  .

Daddie  is  it  all  new  paint.  I  think  the  house  looks  queer
ljut  I  like  it  very  very  much. The  farm  house  I  mean.

R.  H.  Yes  1

[Have  lately  been  painting  the  large  barns  and  outhouses
at  the  farm  white — but  not  the  dwelling  house. — N. B.J.]
I  also  saw  the  new  stall.

R.  H.  What  kind  of  stall  1


horse  stall. I  thoutrht  it  was  for  Iloble's  horse, ask  liim.


Lxr.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Piper.  621
R.  H.  I  will.


[Have  lately  had  a  set  of  new  stalls  built  into  the  cow
house,  but  not  in  the  horse  stable. — N.  B.  J.]

I  saw  Helen  &  a  j'oung  lady  both  in  a  swing  reading  logic
&.  .

&  laughing,  venj.  loudly  over  something  they  were  reading.
Ask  her.

R.  H.  Yes.

It  occurred  several  times,
R.  H.  Yes  1

Which  attracted  my  attention.
R.  H.  Yes  ?

[Helen  is  away  at  school.  Don't  understand  about  this
unless  it  refers  to  a  swinging  seat  jit  the  farm  where
Helen  sat  often  during  the  summer. — N.  B.  J,]

Ask  Roble  what  he  was  trying  to  do  with  that  plat  form
down  at  the  shore. ^

I  saw  him  dive  .  from  it.  &  then  come  up  and  push  it
&  hammer  it  .  .  Push.  I  think  he  put  new  .  .  what
did  we  call  them  ?

R.  H.  AVas  it  a  float  ?

Yes  but  new  .  .  walks.

R.  H.  Springboard  1

boards  on  it.  or  he  was  telling  another  man  how  to  do  it.
U.  D.  what  I  mean.

R.  H.  Springboard?
Yes.

(Hand  imitates  diving  motion.)

R.  H.  How  to  dive. (Assent. Hand  repeats  diving  motion.)

^  See  p.  G25.


622


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


Oh  what  a  i^ood  time,  they  all  seemed  to  be  having.  I
am  glad  Helen  is  back  at  school.  it  is  better  for  her.
give  them  all  my  deepest  love  &  assure  them  that  I  am
watching  over  them  one  and  all. thank  you.  B

54th  Sitting.

November  2,  190-i.  Present:  R.  H.

(Bennie  communicating.)

Tell  mother  I  like  that  white  lace  affair  she  wears  so  often

near  her  neck  tfe  shoulders.  It  attracts  me  as  did  Helens
coat.

R.  H.  Yes  1 From  Bennie.

Yes.  ife  tell  her  those  yellow  flowers  attack  me  attract  me  also,
they  were  in  the  dining  room.

[Extract  from  Mrs.  J.'s  letter,  Nov.  4,  1904.

"  I  have  no  lace  scarf  or  fichu,  but  I  have  worn  white  a  great
deal  this  summer,  and  1  have  a  gown  with  white  lace  about  the
neck  and  sleeves,  which  the  other  members  of  the  family  like  very
much.  This  gown  I  wore  often  last  spring  and  am  again  wearing
it  this  autumn.

I  used  yellow  flowers  constantly  in  the  dining  room  this  summer.
I  was  particularly  fond  of  Eschscholtzias,  of  which  flower  there  was
an  abundance  in  the  garden.  I  used  it  with  Golden  Glow  in  the
dining  room  all  summer  long.  Both  of  these  flowers,  as  you  know,
are  yellow."]

55th  Sitting.

November  15,  1904.  Present:  R.  H.

(Waking  Stage.)

Bennie. Yes  please  tell  Mr.  Hodgson  (stumbling  over  the

name  Hodgson.)
We  are  happy  [  ?  ]

Tell  dad  I  will  see  to  everything  at  the  office  later.  (Not
absolutely  sure  of  every  word  :  R.  H.  repeated  the  words,
and  some  of  them  were  said  two  or  three  times  by
Mrs.  Piper.)

That's  what  I  say.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  tvith  Mrs.  Piper.  623


56th  Sitting.

November  16,  1904.  Present:  R.H.

(Bennie  communicating.)

Can't  you  tell  me  about  that  pump,
at  the  farm  1

R.  H.  I  don't  know  anything  of  the  pump.^ The  .  .

I  told  Eoble. don't  you  recall  ?
R.  H.  I  do  not  at  this  moment.

Well  go  on  I  am  trying  to  help  you.

R.  H.  I  think  that  practically  all  you  told  Eoble  and  Helen  when
they  met  you  was  right.  There  was  a  girl  you  referred
to  whose  influence  you  said  was  not  good,  and  I  think
they  were  uncertain  about  this.  What  you  said  at  the
beginning  this  season  is  partly  right,  but  the  enquiry
lias  not  been  pushed  enough  yet.  The  painting  at  the
farm  concerns  the  eow  stall.

Oh  yes  I  am  glad  to  U.  D.  because  I  saw  the  stall  as  I  told
you  but  had  an  idea  it  was  the  horse  stall.'-'

R.H.  Yes.

I  may  have  been  a  little  disturbed  in  giving  it  while  fresh
in  my  memory.

R.H.  Then  .  .

are  you  tired  ?
R.  H.  No,  I  don't  think  so.

Well  lets  clear  these  all  up.

R.  H.  Yes.  Eoble  was  in  the  water  a  good  deal,  but  he  doesn't
quite  know  what  you  meant  by  your  description  about
the  boards  and  so  on.

^Seep.  610.  -Seep.  620.


624  Helen  cle  G.  Verrall.  [part

I  saw  him  arranging  a  board  a  plank  for  jumping  i  ask
him  to  recall  this.

R.  H.  Yes?

Surely  I  know.

It  may  have  been  for  another  purpose  than  connected  with
his  swimming  but  I  saw  him  for  a  moment,  arranging
one.

R.  H.  Helen,  I  think,  was  not  directly  asked  about  the  other  girl
and  the  swinging.  Your  father  thought  it  might  refer
to  some  swing  or  hammock  at  the  farm.

It  was  at  the  farm  I  thought  I  told  you  this.

R.  H.  Perhaps  you  did,  Bennie. I  sent  it  as  you  gave  it.
thank  you.

*  *  *

R.  H.  Bennie,  what  was  the  mes.5age  you  tried  to  give  through
the  returning  spirit  of  the  light  last  time  1

Oh. I  said  help  me  dad  &  I  will  help  you  at  the  office."

■X-  *  *

Helen  must  be  going  to  a  party.  I  think  I  see  a  very
pretty  .  .

looks  like  Pink  gown, pink  &  something  white  with  it.
U.  D.

R.  H.  Yes. A  new  gown,  you  think?

Yes  I  never  noticed  it  before, very  pretty.

[Extract  from  N.  B.  J.'s  letter,  Jan.  5,  1905.
"  We  talked  with  Helen  when  she  was  home  on  her  Christmas
vacation. She read the record  about her  dressing  for  a  party,
etc. She could not recall the occurrence with any  clearness."]

Give  them  all  my  love  and  tell  Eoble  to  be  as  happy  as
he  can.


'(See  p.  621.


=  8ee  p.  62-2.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  tuitJt.  Mrs.  Pvper.  625

[Extract  from  K.  B.  J.'s  letter,  Nov.  23,  1904.

"In  the  notes  of  Nov.  16,  Bennie  says  'tell  Roble  to  be  as
happy  as  he  can.'  This  may  have  some  connection  with  a  family
joke  to  the  eifect  that  I  said,  when  I  started  to  work  this  fall,
that  I  never  expected  to  have  a  good  time  again.  This  has  grown
to  be  quite  a  phra«e  in  our  family."]


57th  Sitting.

January  9,  1905.  Present:  li.  II.

(Bennie  communicating.)

(R.  H.  put  Bennie's  articles  in  front  of  sheets.)
tell  Dad  not  to  hurry  so  when  eating.
(Hand  listens  to  E.  H.)

R.  H.  First,  Eoble  finally  thought  that  what  you  said  about  his
diving  and  the  water  and  so  on  was  about  his  diving
from  a  raft  at  Nantucket,  and  it  was  a  hard  raft  to
climb  upon,  although  there  was  no  spring  board.  You
must  have  had  a  glimpse  of  him  scrambling  up  on  to
the  raft.^

I  did  I  think  Ijecause  I  saw  him  greatly  Ijothered  about  it
&  I  saw  him  pulling  away  at  it  &  it  resembled  a
board. I  thought.

5Sth  Sitting.

'February  27,  1905. Present:  Mr.  and  Mrs.  J.  and  11.  H.
(Bennie  communicating.)
I  often  look  into  the  office  &  at  home  I  live  constantly.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  feel  very  conscious  of  your  presence  often.

I  see  nearly  everything  j'ou  do.  I  saw  you  the  last  day
when  you  went  to  the  cemetery  I  saw  you  talking  with
Helen  about  her  music,

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  she  has  not  done  anything about  her  music
lately.

iSee  p.  621.


626  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

I  know  it  but  c;ive  her  time  &  when  she  sets  through
school  I  shall  help  her  with  it.

Mks.  J.  I  wish  she  had  more  talent  for  music.

don't  worry  about  it. let  it  come  as  it  will. &  she  will

be  helped  greatly. (3h  I  am  so  glad  to  see  you.  please.

tell  Aunt  Alice. I  I'.ave  a  message  for  her  from  cousin

Frank, before  I  go.
do  you  hear  me  when  I  talk  with  you  when  you  seem  to

pray  mother.

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie,  tell  me  how  I  can,  hear  you.

I  think  if  you  listen  30U  can  hear  me  say  good  night.  I
never  forget  to  visit  you  then.  dad  did  you  have  a
cold  was  that  it  ?

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  had  a  very  bail  cold.

I  tried  to  help  you  all  through  it.  I  know  so  well  when
anything  is  the  matter  with  any  of  you.  I  know  better
if  possible  than  you  do  U.  D.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  help  us  all  you  can.

Oh  yes.  I  shall  do  that.  cV;  I  am  not  going  so  far  from
you  that  I  shall  not  be  ready  when  you  come  remember.
I  shall  be  ready  to  meet  each  of  you.

jST.  B.  J.  That's  what  we  want,  more  than  anything  else,  Bennie.

I  heard  you  talking  about  my  going  a  long  way  i'rom  you.
not  so  dad  I  am  growing  all  the  time  in  knowledge  of
this  new  life  but  not  that  I  shall  leave  you.  don't
forget  that.

[At  one  time  we  talked  of  the  possibility  of  changes  in  the
other  life  and  that  Bennie  m  ight  have  to  pass  on  and
away  from  remembrance  of  us. — N.  B.  J.]

did  you  U.  D.  that  I  heard  you  talking  about  my  going
so  far  away  .  .


Mrs.  J.  No,  but,  Bennie,  in  your  thought  to  care  for  us,  you  must
not  do  anything  to  prevent  your  own  progress.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  tvifli  Mrs.  Piper.  627


No  how  could  I  dear  mother,  there  are  kws  connected
with  this  life  &  its  conditions  which  enable  me  to
progress  constantly  yet.  while  progressing  I  am  better
able  to  if  possible  to  help  you. than  otherwise.

Mks.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. Tell  me  about  Helen.

Helen  is  all  right  if  you  will  only  think  so,  she  will  go
through  school  &  .  .  (Hand  moves  back  and  makes  a  big
line  on  table  behind  sheet,  curving  back  to  block-book.
This  was  perhaps  in  connection  with  some  remark  by
a  communicator  to  which  the  next  sentence  is  apparently
Rector's  reply. — R.  H.)

No  not  at  all.  E.

.  .  take  up  her  music  later.

I  saw  her  not  feeling  well  a  little  while  ago  but  she  is
very  careless.

Mks.  J.  She  is  not  well  at  all.

She  will  be. I  am  telling  you  dear.
/  uill  take  care  of  Helen  surely.

Mks.  J.  Thank  you,  Bennie. Sometimes  I  feel  troubled  as  to  the
best  thing  to  do  for  her.

look  out  for  her  dress  she  is  so  careless  mama  dear.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  that  is  true.

*  *  *

N.  B.  .J.  Bennie,  do  you  ever  see  Hugh  ?

Of  course  I  do. I  told  you  about  him  dad  .  .

N.  B.  .J.  Bennie,  tell  Hugh  that  dad  never  ceases  to  be  sorry  that
he  didn't  take  care  of  Hugh  better.

he  will  be  glad  to  hear  from  you  oh  so  glad  because  he
often  goes  with  me  to  the  office  &  stable  &  everywhere
I  go.  &  dad  he  is  very  fond  of  you.  he  said  I  don't
think  your  father  quite  U.  D.  me.


628


Helen  de  G.  VerralL


[PAUT


N.  B.  J.


That's  right,  Bennie,  I  did  not  understand  Hugh.


You  won't  worry  about  it  will  you  1

Do  you  remember  the  day  I  brought  him  here  .  .


N.  B.  J.


Oh  yes,  Bennie,  he  talked  himself.


Yes  he  often  refers  to  it. &  is  so  glad  he  saw  you  in  that
way. he  wants  to  know  if  you  U.  D.  about  Eounder.


N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  we  did. Do  you  sometimes  see  Rounder  now?


Oh  yes  often. Please  tell me dad what the place  was


N.  B.  J.  Yes,  we  got  him  through  Welsh.

Yes  didn't  I  tell  it  you?
Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  we  followed  your  directions  and  got  Eounder


Now  I  shall  talk  with  Hugh  &  he  will  so  glad  to  hear
from  you.  he  said  you  Avere  stern  at  times  but  he
U.  D.  it  all  now.  I  am  going  out  a  moment  .  .  (Hand
drops  pencil,  slight  disturbance,  feels  cap  about  inside,
holds  it  up,  replaces  it  in  front  of  sheets.)

I  did  not  wish  to  get  confused  so  got  refreshed.

Mks.  J.  Bennie,  a  very  dear  friend  of  ours  has  gone  over  to  your
life  lately. Can  you  tell  us  anything  about  it?

I  don't  know  as  I  can  at  the  moment  dear  but  I  will  fiml
out  &  tell  you  if  I  can  did  I  know  him  in  the  body  1

Mrs.  J.  Y''es,  Bennie. Perhaps  you  can  tell  me  about  him  the  next
time  I  come.

I  will  if  I  knew  him  I  can  find  him.  I  do  not  see  every
body  whom  I  knew  when  they  come  dear  because  I
meet  so  many  but  I  can  easily  find  any  one  by  looking
for  him.

When  I  stop  speaking.

dad  did  you  want  anything?


back.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  629
N.  B.  J.  Onlj'  to  know  that  you  are  happy,  and  progressing,
happy.

Oh  I  wish  you  knew.

]\I other  will  you  tell  me  who  all  those  people  were  at  the
house  the  other  day  or  what  they  were  there  for  ?

Mes.  J.  I  think  y^ou  mean  some  friends  of  Roble's  who  came  to
rehearse  a  play.

I  thoudit  I  heard  so  much  talking-  it  confused  me  somewhat.
[Eoble  lately  had  a  number  of  young  friends  at  our  home

rehearsing for private theatricals. They were  very

merry.^ — N.  B.  J.]
Do  you  see  how  perfectly  well  Eoble  is  1

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  and  very  happy  and  contented.

Yes  I  knew  it. isn't  he  a  good  l)oy  dad?

N.  B.  J.  Indeed  he  is,  a  great  pleasure  and  comfort.

he  loves  you  all  dearly  &  is  I  think  very  unselfish  for
which  I  am  so  thankful  I  have  prayed  for  him  so  much.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  he  sent  his  love  to  you,  and  said  that  he  regretted
that  he  could  not  come  with  us.

Oh  give  him  all  the  love  possible  &  tell  liim  I  am  always
interested  in  everything  he  does  I  think  his  work  with
dad  is  just  the  best  thing  in  your  world  for  him.

N.  B.  J.  Yes, Bennie, I'm  teaching him every  moment, and  he
learns  quickly.

I.  I  praj'  for  all  those  people  and  I  hope  some  day  your
world  will  grow  better.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Betmie. Have  you  any  message  from  my  mother  and
father  ? (Hand  points  to  Spirit.)

Grandma  is  so  interested  in  my  talks  with  you  that  when  I
finish  here  she  gets  close  to  me  &  asks  me  all  sorts  of
questions.  &  I  have  to  tell  her  everything  about  you
all  as  I  hear  it  from  you. She  says  the  only  thing  she


G30  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

cannot  forget  is  the  conditions  of  her  earthly life  &
how  often  she  misunderstood  her  children. She  sends
her  love  to  you  every  time  I  come  &  if  you  could  see
her  as  she  looks  now  you  would  be  delighted  I  know.
Dad  do  you  think  everything  is  all  right  at  the  farm.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  Roble  tends  to  the  farm  now.

did  you  U.  D.  about  that  i)ump.^

N.  B.  J.  No,  Bennie,  we're  going  to  have  a  veiv  pump  now.

Well  I  knew-  it  long  gone. &  I  told (Hand  turns  and

points  to  li.  H.)  you  about  it.
here  comes  cousin  Frank, he  was  sorry  his  mother  was  not

well.

R.  H.  Bennie,  I  have  some  articles  of  Frank's. Shall  I  produce
them  now  1

Better  avoid  confusion  friend  &  present  them  at  the  beginning
of  our  next  meeting  t^i  11.

R.  H.  Very  good.

N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  tell  cousin  Frank  that  his  mother  has  gone  away
from  home  for  a  change,  and  that  1  hope  that  she  will
be  better.

he  has  talked  constantly  about  his  mother  &  does  not  like
to  see  her  feeling  so  poorly,  he  has  asked  again  ct  again
to  see  her  influences  can't  you  bring  them  here  dad  or
give  them  to  .  . (Hand  points  to  R.  H.)

R.  H.  I  shall  see  about  this,  Bennie.

She  is  lonely  &  worries  a  great  deal, which  he  does  not

like  to  see  neither  does  Uncle  Frank  or  grandma,
tell  her  we  all  love  her  &  we  are  not  annihilated

Mrs.  J.  I  do  not  believe  she  thinks  you  are  annihilated.  Has  she
not  faith  in  another  life  ?

Oh  yes  she  has.  much  but  she  gets  very  lonely  &  sad  at
times  1  myself  see  it  too.

iSee  p.  610.


Lxi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  631

Mks.  J.  She  is  happy  in  Brandon's  wife.

I  am  glad  of  that  &  it  will  please  Uncle  Frank  very  much
to  U.D.

Dad  don't  work  too  hard  I  see  how  anxious  you  are  at
times  take  care  of  your  health  &,  I  will  take  care  of
Helen.

N.B.J.  Good  boy,  Good  boy.

Helen  is  not  very  strong  &  she  is  very  apt  to  overtax  her
strength  besides  she  does  not  wear  warm  clothing  I  see
it.

*  ■*  *

Mks.  J.  Bennie,  tell  me  something  else  that  you  have  seen  me  do,—
something  going  on  in  the  house  about  Eoble  or  myself
or  any  of  us.

Mother  I  saw  about  ten  Sabbaths  ago  you  &  dad  driving  to
my  grave  do  you  remember  it  1

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  it  was  about  Christmas  time.

I  saw  you  oh  so  clearly  &  I  saw  what  seemed  to  be
wreaths

I  saw  you  telling  a  woman  about  some  curtains  &  she
took  all  the  things  out  of  the  room.  What  did  you  do
with  it  dad. It  looks  so  light  now.

K  B.  J.  I  don't  understand,  Bennie.
listen.

don't  you  remember,  after  you  came  from  the  farm  you
had  somethincf  done  to  Robles  room  1

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  had  his  rooms  put  in  order.  You  remember
your  room  in  our  home  ?

Yes  I  do  very  well, (emphatically  written.)


Mrs.  J.


They  had  not  been  used  much  since  you  left  us,  but  last
fall  Eoble  came  .  .  went  back  to  them,  and  I  had  them
all  freshened  up  and  put  in  order.


632


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


I  conkl  not  tell  exactly  what  you  did  do  but  just  after

you  came  froui  the  farm  I  was  attracted  by  Robles  being

there  &  I  saw  great  confusion  .  .
I  saw  they  looked  so  light  &  cheerful  after  all  the  things

were  removed  &  changed  about  after  which  I  saw  Eoble

in  them.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  took  out  some  of  the  old  things  and  had
the  rooms  repapered  the  .  .  .  ..'

that  is  what  I  was  trying  to  recall  .  .
Re  papered

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  the  study  was  repapered  and  your  room  cleaned
and  put  in  order.

You  wished  me  to  tell  you  something  I  saw  at  home  so  I
remember  this  &  all  seemed  so  bright  &  light  there  to  me.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  it  looks  very  pretty.

I  see  my  desk  just  the  same,  but  I  cannot  find  that
script,!  where  is  it.

Mrs.  J.  What  do  you  mean  by  script '?

(N.  B.  .J.  puts  what  looks  like  a  fragment  of  an  old  dollar
bill  to  the  hand,  which  touches  it.)

N.  B.  J.  Is  this  it  1

Y^es.  it  is  the  one  I  had  so  long  ago  &  I  missed  it  from
my  room.

Mrs.  J.  You  told  your  father  at  one  of  these  meetings  to  get  it
and  carry  it  with  him.

so  I  did  I  remember  well  .  .

I  never  forget  anything  as  you  will  U.  D.  if  you  follow  me
but  at  times  I  look  for  my  different  things  &  if  I  do
not  see  them  where  I  used  to  see  them  while  I  am  speaking
I  ask.

Do  you  remember  a  polished  stone  1  used  to  have  on  my
desk  ?

iSee  p.  414.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  633

Mes.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  think  that it is  in  your  room now,  on
the  mantel-shelf.

On  what?

Mes.  J.  On  the  mantel — in  your  bedroom — over  the  fireplace.  Do
you  not  understand  1

I  cannot  remember, the  name,
say  it  once  more.

Mes.  J.  Mantel.

is  it  a  shelf  dear  ?
Mes.  J.  Yes. Over  .  .

Oh  yes  I  recall. I  will  look  &  see.

did  Roble  tell  you  about  a  dream  he  had  about  me  recently.

Mes.  J.  No,  Bennie. Can  you  tell  me  the  dream  1

he  saw  me  in  my  shirt  sleeves  with  my  trouser  legs  turned
up.

ask  him  if  he  does  not  remember  it.

Mes.  J.  I  shall,  Bennie.

[Roble  says  he  cannot  remember  anything  about  the  dream.
— N.  B.  J.]

do  you  remember, a  nest  he  &  I  got  at  the  farm  &  we
took  it  home  on  a  stick  .  .

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  perfectly.

Can  I  find  it  there  1

Mes.  J.  No,  Bennie,  we  threw  it  away  before  you  left  us.

did  you I  am  thinking, of  many  little  things  just  as  tests

to  assure  you  I  am  Benny,
they  are  calling  me.

R.  H.  Yes.

to  come  away.

tell  me  what  I  can  do  for  you.

2S


634


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


Mrs.  J.  Tell  me  about  the  friend  who  came  over  recently  to  your
side.

Yes  &  what  else.  .
Mes.  J.  About  Frank,  and  about  yourself. ...  ,  ■

I  will  not  forget.


(Sheet  turned.  Hand  follows  it  as  though  for  article,
perhaps  supposing  I  had  removed  article.  I  conjecture
that  hand  may  want  Frank  C.'s  articles. R.  H.)

R.  H.  Frank's?  .

(Hand  moves  forward  and  feels  Bennie's  articles.)


...  .  Please  help  me  to  U.  D.  HOW  to  talk  like  other  friends
of  mine I  am  Frank  if  you  U.  D.  me  .  .

(R.  H.  gestures  to  Mrs.  J.  to  put  F.'s  articles  near  block-
book. She  does.)

help  me  Benny.  I  wish  mother  would  hear  me  does  she
remember, about  Bobbie  [Robbie  ?J  .  ?  &  me  1

(R.  H.  hesitates  a  moment  over  deciphering  of  Bobbie.)

N.B.J.  "Bobbie."

(F.'s  necktie  and  book  are  near  hand.  Hand  touches  them
and  feels  tie  a  little,  as  if  with  earnest  interest.)

Oh  I  am  so  glad  so  glad  to  come  here  will  you  help  me
to  talk?

E.  H.  Yes,  take  your  time. (R.  H.  gestures  to  Sitters  to  talk.)

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Frank,  we'll  help  you. But  send  word  to  your  mother.
She  wants  to  hear  from  you. Tell  about  yourself.

(Hand  vibrates  somewhat,  turning  for  some  seconds  to  Spirit

then  to  R.  H.  and  Mrs.  J.  and  back.)
Oh  yes  I  U.  D. will  you  tell  mama  how  I  know  about

her. Is  it  uncle  N .  .


59th  Sittinc4.


Febrnari/  28,  1905.


Mr.  and  Mrs.  J.  and  B.  H.


(Frank  C.  communicating.)


I


LXi.] Report  on  tJte  Junot  Sittings  luith  Mrs.  Piper.  635

N.B.J.  Yes,  Frank,  this  is  Uncle  N — : — . I  want  a  message  to
your  mother  from  you.

I  want  you  to  ask  her  if  she  remembers.  Georgie  &
Bobbie,  he  came  to  see  me  just  before  I  left  my  body
&  tell  her  I.  want  her  to  recall,  the.  last  .  .  .  Water.
Water  .  .  tell  her  I  U.  D.

Where  are  my  things  now.

[Water  is  probably  an  automatism,  due  to  Frank's  feeling
as  if  he  was  losing  consciousness,  and  so  calling  for
water  as  he  might  if  feeling  faint  when  incarnate. — R.  H.]

Come  with  me  &  I  will  explain  again  to  you.  G  [1]
Pelham.

[These  names  are  not  recognized. — A.  J.  C.^]
■  Good  morning  dad.

N.  B.  -J.  Yes,  Bennie,  good  morning,  dearie.

did  you  see  anything  of  Frank  he  will  U.  D.  later  &  will

help  us  all  greatly  don't  get  impatient.
Mother  dear  why  didn't  I  think  of  paper  can  you  tell  me."
Was  it  Charlie  you  wanted  to  know  about  ?
Was  he  in  m\'  play  .  .

(Hand  moves  F.'s  necktie  forward,  and  puts  it  by  B.'s
articles.)

let  him  stay  with  me. (F.'s  tie  wnth  B.'s  articles.)
.  .  Was  it  Charlie. .  .  know  about.

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie,  it  was  not  Charlie. But  if  you  have  anything
to  tell  about  him,  tell  it  to  us.  '  '

I  don't  believe  you  U.  D.  me  very  well,
listen.

I  went  &  told  Hugh  what  you  said  about  him  &  he  said
if  God  U.  D.  all  you  must  U.  D.  also  that  all  is  well
with  him.  don't  worry  about  anything  he  had  his  faults
&  many  of  them.  .  .

Mes.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  but  we  did  not  know  that  he  was  sick,  else
we  would  have  taken  care  of  him.

^  Mrs.  Clarke,  Frank's  mother.
. -See  p.  632  on  the  repapering  of  the  room. — H.  de  G.  V. _ ,  .


636


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


he  U.  D.  that  fully,  don't  I  beg  of  you  think  more  about
it.  you  didn't  U.  D.  We  must  all  turn  to  Helen  now
&  help  her  get  well.  •  ■•

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  I  am  doing  all  that  I  can,  •

I  think  I  can  do  much  for  her.  shall  I  tell  you  about  the
farm  ?

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  go  on.

You  U.  D.  what  I  see  &  think  it  over  so  you  can  U.  D.
Do  you  remember  that  tree  they  cut  down  tell  me  was  it
dead  .  .

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  a  number  of  trees  died  last  summer  and  I  had  them
cut  down  and  burned.

I  missed  them  one  day  &  first  I  knew  I  U.  D.  they  were

cut.  down.
Was  it  the  cows  pen  which  was  painted.^

N.  B.  J.  It  was  the  big  barn,  Bennie.

Oh  yes.  Well  you  U.  I).  I  see  what  goes  on  with  you  &
most  of  all  I  want  you  to  know  about  it.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Eennie,  we  like  for  you  to  see  and  tell  us.

did  you  U.  D.  about  that  plank  1
Mrs.  J.  What  do  you  .  .  to  what  do  you  refer,  Bennie  1

Eoble  jumped  off  from  it  &  I  feared  he  would  get  injured.

Mrs.  J.  I  think  you  mean  the  platform  at  the  seashore  .  .  the  raft
at  the  seashore  1

Raft  yes  that  the  name  of  it.

tell  me  who  the  fellow  was  in  liobles  room  last  night.
Mrs.  J.  I  shall  ask  him  later  and  send  you  word,
such  fun  I  never  heard.

'See  p.  623  where  R.  H.  says,  ''The  painting  at  the  farm  concerns  the
cowstalL" This  statement  is  incorrect;  see  N.  B.  J.'s  note  on  p.  &21.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  637

Mes.  J.  What  were  they  doing?

he  was  playing, on  a  banjo.  .  ,  . .  ,

Mrs.  J.  I  shall  ask  him  when  I  see  hira.

he  &  another  fellow  were  there  together, playing  &  one
sang  something.

Mrs.  J.  Go  on,  Bennie.

like.  Dellia.

X.  B.  J.  and  Mrs.  J.  "Delia."

I  could  not  catch  it.
(Hand  turns  to  E.  H.)

R.  H.  Delia?

I  cannot  tell  you  I  got  it  so  mixed  up  in  my  thoughts,
say  it  again.

R.  H.  Delia  ?  .  .  Dellia  1

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  perhaps  you  mean  Burdelia. Budelia? It  is  a  song
that  the  boys  sing.

Yes  I  think  so. say  it  again  it  sounded  so  queer  to  me.
N.  B.  .J.  It's  Obedelia.
Mrs.  J.  Obedelia?  Bedelia?

Yes.

Mrs.  J.  You  got  it  very  nearly  right.

I  heard  O I  heard  Steel ing I  heard  Delia  .  .
■ I  heard  Roble  laughing  merrily.

Mrs.  J.  Go  on,  Bennie.

I  wondered  if  he  knew  I  was  there,
he  and  .  .

do  j'ou  know  Bert  .  .
Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie  .  .


63'S  . ' ' H den  de  G.  V errall.  ' '  [pakt

N.  B.  J.  {to Mrs.  J.  soito  voce.) Yes,  you  do. ' ■  •  •  .  .

Mrs.  J.  .  .  but  go  on,  this  is  very  interesting.
Mrs.  .J.  (to  N.  B.  J.)  Who  is  Bert^

N.  B.  J.  (to  Mrs.  J.)  Bert  B :

I  think  they  have  some  joke  on  him.

R.  H.  Kindly  wait.

I  have  so  much  to  tell  you  .  .

do  let  me  tell  you  .  .

(Hand  moves  a  little  to\yards  E.  H.)

R.  H.  Kindly  wait.

(Hand  feels  articles.  N.  B.  J.  takes  tie  away.  Hand  seeks
it  again.  He  replaces  it.  Hand  feels  the  articles  while
E.  H.  completes  the  record.)

R.  H.  Eeady.

leave  Frank  with  me.
E.  H.  Yes. (i.e.  leave  F.'s  article  with  B.'s.)

I  heard  Eoble  say  Walter  &  something  about  joke  &  Burt.
Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  I  was  mistaken. I  do  know  Bert.

[Extract  from  letter  of  R.B.J.  March  5,  1905.
"  Referring  to  the  sitting  of  February  28th,  on  pages  six  and  seven
of  the  typewritten  notes,  Benny  speaks  of  a  boy  playing  on  a  banjo
last  night.  The  night  before  this  sitting  I  was  with  a  party  of
young  people  and  we  played  the  piano  and  sang,  but  did  not
sing  Bedelia.  Then  he  says  'Steeling.'  The  words  of  the  song
are  '0,  Bedelia,  I've  made  up  my  mind  to  steal  you.'  Bert  was
my  room-mate  at  college,  and  he  was  the  first  one  I  heard  sing
Bedelia.  We  very  often  sang  it  together,  and  when  I  was  East  in
November,  I  saw  Bert  and  I  remember  a  lot  of  us  singing  Bedelia.
Then  speaking  of  Bert,  he  says  '  I  think  they  have  some  joke  on
him.'  Now,  Bert  was  always  getting  into  trouble,  and  the  joke
was  always  on  him,  so  much  so,  that  we  always  called  him  Bertie


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  639

the  Goat.  Below  that  he  saj's  'I  heard  Roble  say  Walter  and
something  about  joke  and  Bert.'  Now,  our  phrase  always  was
'joke  on  Bert,'  and  we  used  it  very  often."]

[The  reference  to  Walter  is  not  understood. — N.  B.  J.]
All  right  mother  we  U.  D.  each  other  very  well, how  is
KLON  .  .

my  pony  1  . :  , ^  '  .  ;

N.  B.  J.  Klondike  turned  bad,  and  we  sold  him  to  the  butcher.

I  feared, for  him. &  Helen.  :  .  . ,r ■  ■

Did  you  say  sold  him  ?

jST.  B.  J.  Yes,  he  came  near  hurting  Helen.

Do  you  think  I  could  see  &  permit  that.?

Mrs.  J.  Did  you  tell  us  to  get  rid  of  him  1

I  \varned  dad.  &  when  he  said  sold  I  was  very  glad,  you
do  not  U.  D.  how  you  often  do  the  very  things  I  tell
you  .  .

(Hand  jjoints  to  Spirit.)

I  want  to  helj)  find  our  friend who  has  just  come  over

&  I  have  asked  George  to  help  me  in  finding  him.^
I'll  bring  him  here  to  you  if  he  does  not  come  today.
(Hand  moves  a  little  towards  E.  H.)

Mrs.  J.  Thank  you,  Bennie.

What's  the  word  Dellia. (Hand  turns  to  E,  H.)

K.  H.  Obedelia.

all  right.

tell  me  about  the  horse  Eoble  had  .  .

IST.  B.  .J.  He's  at  the  farm  still,  Bennie.

Yes,  but  he  is  bad  too.

B.  J.  Yes, Bennie, I'W  have  him  sold, and  get  Eoble  another
horse.

iSee  p.  628.


640  :  • v  .  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  '■ VrO'  [part

do  .  .  -'■  '

I  tell  you  father  dear  you  don't  U.  D.  everything. I  see.

(Slight  disturbance  in  hand. Pencil  dropped. Hand  points

to  Spirit. Fresh  pencil  given,)
Sallie.

Where  is  May  .  .  -  !■  --^

Mes.  J.  Whom  do  you  mean,  Bennie  ?

May  .  .  .  ; '  ;

Mrs.  J.  Cousin  May  is  on  your  side.

I  am  May  .  .

N.  B.  J.  (to  Mrs.  J.)  Tell  her  to  go  on.
Mrs.  J.  Talk  to  me,  May.

I  found  you  at  last  &  you  will  hear  more  about  me  .  .
Mrs.  J.  Tell  me  anything  you  have  on  your  mind.

do  you  U  D  me  now  .  .
Mrs.  J.  No,  May,  did  you  write  Sallie?

I  did  .  .
N.  B.  J.  Who  is  Sally  ?

do  you  remember  Sarah  .  .
Mrs.  J.  Yes.

I  called  her  Sallie.  here.
N.  B.  J.  (to  Mrs.  J.)  Tell  her  to  send  a  message  to  us.

I  wanted  to  know  about  her  &  send  my  love  .  .

Mrs.  J.  Send  a  message  to  her.

ask  her  if  she  remembers  anything  about  my  ear  .  .
W^as  it  Rheumatism  she  had  .  .


LXI.]  Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  tvith  Mrs.  Piper.  641
Mrs.  J.  No,  I  think  not.

Back  .  . '  t
Mrs.  J.  She  had  a  serious  fever,  and  has  lately  had  the  grippe.

Grippe  1
Mrs.  J.  Yes.

Back  .  .

I  want  her  to  know  where  I  am  .  .  tell  her  not  to  take
any  more  of  those  powders  I  do  not  like  them  for  her.
She  will  U.  D.

Mrs.  J.  Tell  me  more  definitely  who  you  mean  by  Sarah.

She  is  .  Sister  .  .  your  .  .  aunt.
I'll  tell  you. I  am  her  .  .

Mrs.  J.  Tell  me  what  relation  you  are  to  her.

Are  you  A  .  .  I  forget. I  can't  think,  possibly.

(Slight  disturbance  in  hand.  Pencil  dropped.  Pause.  Evi-
dently "May"  was  drifting  off  into  unconsciousness  just
as  "Frank"  did  previously.)

[The  person  now  in  life  to  whom  May,  Bennie's  cousin,
was  most  attached  is  her  Aunt  Sarah — Bennie's  grand-
mother. We  have  never  known  her  to  be  called  "  Sally  "
by  any  of  her  family. — N.  B.  J.]

I  want  Marion  to  tell  her  mother  not  to  worry  so  about
that  house I  saw  her  with  you  not  long  ago.

All  is  well  with  me.

Mrs.  J.  Who  is  this  talking  1
Frank.

I  am  learning  how  to  speak.

(Bennie  communicating.)

Well  Dad  I  am  back  I  feel  that  you  are  going  to  be
better  now  than  ever  before  help  me  talk  to  me.

N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  who  was  May,  that  was  speaking  just  a  little  while
ago,  before  you  came  back  ?

She  was  here  before long  ago  don't  you  remember  her.


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  ' . '.  ;.='..  [part

I  think  she  was  cousin  May,  who  met  you  when  you  went
over  to  your  side  1

yes  I  told  you  all  this  long  ago.

&  she  wanted  me  to  let  her  speak  &  send  a  message  .  .
Did  she  do  so  mother  dear  .  .  .  .

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  I  was  very  glad  to  hear  from  hei'.  . .  .

You  must  talk  to  me  now.  .  .

I  want  to  know  if  that  was.

Pine, at  the  cemetery  or  evergreen  we  used  to  call  it.

Mes.  J.  Yes,  the  grave  is  covered  with  evergreen  boughs.

I  saw  it  so  clearly  I  wondered  if  it  was  pine,
dad  do  you  remember  the  kind  of  gum  Roble  Hen  [for
Helen  1]  &  I  got  in  the  woods  at  the  farm.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  remember  that.

did  we  call  it  pine  or  s  .  .  S  P  E  U  C  E.
N.  B.  J.  I  don't  remember  that.

ask  Roble  1

N.  B.  J.  All  right,  we  will.

tell  me  mother  what  those  little  red  berries  were  Helen
got  last  summer  on  those  green  vines  1

Mrs.  J.  I  think  they  were  from  a  honeysuckle  bush.

I  did  not  see  so  many  photographs  taken  as  usual  why  1

Mrs.  J.  No, Bennie, neither lioble nor Helen took many  last
summer. I  don't  know  why  it  was.

tell  them  I  am  watching  all  they  do  so  I  can  come  &  tell
you  for  what  this  man  calls  tests.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  we  are  glad  to  have  you  do  so. But  I  feel  sure  that
it  is  you.

Yes  I  know  I  am  Benny  &  I  am  all  right  but  I  like  to  tell
you  what  goes  on  with  you  all  so  far  as  I  can  I'ecall  .  .


642
Mrs.  J.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Jiivot  Sittivgs  with  Mrs.  Piper.  643
Mes.  J.  Yes,  it  makes  these  sittings  very  precious  and  valuable.  .
Dad  aren't  you  tired  of  your  work  1

Did  you  say  you  were  going  over  the  water  with  Roble  .  .
N.  B.  J.  No,  I  did  not,  Bennie. I  would  rather  go  to  the  farm.

farm. I  too  dad  any  day  .  .
Mrs.  J.  But  he  did  say  that  he  would  like  to  go  to  Japan.

Oh  yes  I  heard  him  talking  about  it  I  know  .  .  But  I
don't  want  him  to  I  have  reasons.

Mes.  J.  Very  well,  he  will  not  go.

I  want  you  to  U.  D.  about  my  condition  here  can  you  1
(Hand  turns  to  K.  H.)

R.  H.  Yes. (Taking  it  to  be  an  enquiry  as  to  whether  there  was
time.)

You  see  I  have  my  home,  my  work  &  all  grandma
Junot  [Juny]  often  says  nothing  can  compare  with  it.
Don't  you  think  William  was  good  about  the  Pony  ?

(E.  H.  in  reading  over  reads  "grandma  Juny")

I  didn't  say  Juni  .  .

R.  H.  Junot,  Junot.

my  name  isn't  J uny.  ,  .

R.  H.  Bennie,  that's  all  right. It  was  just  the  machine  slip.
Oh  yes.

dad  talk  to  me.

N.  B.  .J.  Bennie,  do  you  see  Roble  working  in  the  office  with  me  1

Yes  indeed  I  do.  &  it  makes  me  feel  very  happy.  I
longed  to  see  him  with  you.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie.

he  is  a  good  brother  I  tell  you  dad  &  I  couldn't  find  a
better  one  but  he  must  have  some  fun  you  U.  D.


G44  Helen  de  G.  Verrall. ' '  ' ''^  [part

N.B.J.  Yes,  surely,  he  shall  have  that.  .'  '

dad  what  was  the  matter  with  his  teeth.  *
N.  B.  .J.  I  don't  remember.

Just  after  he  got  home  from  college.

Mrs.  J.  He  had  some  trouble  with  his  teeth,  but  the  dentist  made
it  all  right.

I  was  sorry  to  see  that  but  glad  to  hear  he  is  over  it.
dad  I  don't  like  law  very  well  wouldn't  you  like  me  to
be  a  doctor  or  something  worth  Avhile  so  I  could  help
people  1

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  think  that  would  be  better.
I  do  too.

N.  B.  .J.  Bennie,  are  you  studying  law  now?
Yes  no.

I  am  studying  one  kind  of  law  but  not  as  I  used.

I  am  studying  the  laws  of  the  mortal  &  spiritual  life  which

interests  me  greatly. I  love  to  help  you  in  U.  D.  where

I  really  am  etc  etc  etc.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  do  all  the  people  in  your  life  help  some  one  on  our
side?

invariably,  except  the  children  here  &  we  have  to  help
them  ourselves.

Mrs.  J.  Tell  me  how  you  look  now. Have  you  grown  older,  or  do
you  look  as  you  did  1

Older  no  dear  not  in  looks,  I  look  about  the  same.  Y"ou
will  not  have  any  trouble  recognizing  me  when  3'ou
come.

Mrs.  J.  No,  only  I  have  often  wondered  if  people  change  in  your
life.

that  depends  mother  dear  on  the  conditions  under  which
they  passed  over  &  the  condition  of  their  lives  while
in  the  body.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Jiinot  Sittings  ivith  Mrs.  Piper.  645

Mes.  J.  Do  you  grow  old  as  we  do  ?  ,  .  , ,  , ..  ,

No  not  in  spirit  mother.

R.  H.  Bennie,  I  think  your  mother  wants  to  know  whether  there
is  growth,  for  example,  from  children  up,  and  whether
old  people  remain  very  old,  and  so  on.

I  U.  D.  no  .  .  old  people  grow  younger  in  a  sense  while
children  grow  to  the  years  of  maturity  as  you  would
express  it.

Mes.  J.  I  feel  sui'e  there  is  growth,  but  I  wanted  to  ask  about  the
ajypearance  of  people.

have  I  answered? (Hand  turns  to  R.  H.)

R.  H.  She  means  what  they  look  like  in  their  figure  and  face
appearance.

Why  I  don't  know  how  to  answer  this  question  so  you  can
U.  D.  it  I  can  only  say  we  look  as  we  did  when  in  the
body  with  the  exception  of  looking  old.

I  do  not  grow  wrinkles  lose  my  hair  etc.

Mes.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I  understand.

I  retain  my  looks  so  you  would  know  me. perfectly  well.
I  wonder  if  I  will  ever, speak  with  you  again  here.

Mes.  J.  I  hope  so,  Bennie.

Will  I  Mr  Hodgson  think?

R.  H.  You  doubtless  will,  Bennie,  if  the  light  continues  to  burn.

It  is  growing  dim  now  .  .

60th  Sitting.

Mai/  8,  1905.  Present:  R.  H.

(Bennie  communicating.)

Good  morning  Mr  Hodgson  will  you  give  my  love  to  all
at  my  home  and  ask  about  the  evening  I  heard  that
song.  Benny.


646 •  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.

K.  H.  You  mean  since  1


[PAUT


No.

(R.  H.  pauses  two  or  three  seconds,  trj'ing  to  recall.)
Cant  you  speak  slowly  ?  . '  '

R.  H.  The  boy  or  young  fellow  with  Eoble  did  sing  that  song
about  Bedelia,  and  so  on. I  forget  just  how  it  goes.

he  didi
R.  H.  Yes.

Well  I  heard  him  &  I  heard  him  say  something  about
stealing  her  .  .

R.  H.  Yes,  I  think  that's  tight.

Well  it  was  so  queer  to  me  I  laughed  &  laughed  to  hear
him  say  it  it  sounded  so  unlike  our  music  over  here.

R.  H.  Yes,  I  suppose  it  did.
how  is  Helen?

R.  H.  I  was  just  going  to  ask  you. I  don't  know.
She  is  much  better.

R.  H.  Good.

and  will  get  on  all  right. I  feel  sure, any  word  from  dad  ?

R.  H.  No. It  seems,  however,  that  Frank  Clarke  doesn't  succeed
very  well  yet  as  a  communicator.

I  know  it.

I  do  my  best  to  help  him.  I  wish  Aunt  Clarke  would
come  here  some  day  when  no  one  knows  it.  and  wake
him  up. so  he  can  remember  about  his  earthly  life.

Cant  you  help  us  arrange  it  1

R.  H.  I  shall  be  glad.

&  do  so  before  the  light  goes  out  will  you  1
tell  dad.

It  will  be  such  a  help  to  us  all. .  ...


LXI.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  rvith  Mrs.  Piper.  647


61ST  Sitting.

June  12,  1905.  Present:  R  H.

Benny  saj-s.  Helen  is  better  and  will  greatlj-  improve  as
time  goes  on.  my  dearest  love  to  all  at  home  God
bless  them.  B

E.  H.  All  right,  Bennie.

[Extract  from  letter  of  X.  B.  J.'s,  June  IS,  190-5.  "It  is
true  that  Helen  appears  considerably  improved  in  health."]

62nd  Sitting.
June  29,  1905.  Present:  R.  H.

(Bennie  communicating.)
One  word  for  Helen.

tell  dad  please  that  I  saw  the  flowers  on  mj'  grave  some

time  ago  j'et  it  seemed  recent!}-, if  you can U.  D.

this  seeming  contradiction. And  thank  them  for  their

thoughtfulness  of  me  in  this  way.i
Say  to  Helen  I  shall  be  witli  and  watch  over  her  during

the  long  silence, my  love.  Bennj'.

63  rd  Sitting.

November  20,  1905. Present:  Mr.  and  Mrs.  J.  and  B.  H.

(Bennie  communicating.)

.  .  Good  morning  mother  I  am  so  glad  to  see  j'ou  again  in
this  waj'  and  come  so  near  to  you.  do  not  feel  disturbed
when  you  and  dad  go  to  that  grave  if  I  do  [_not  omitted?]
refer  to  it  because  the  light  is  not  always  convenient  for
me Hallo  dad  ?

X.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  I'm  here.

I  see  you.

^  There  is  no  comment  on  this  statement. — H.  de  G.  V. •  ■


648


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


Mrs.  J.  Good  morning,  Bennie,  dear.

Oh  I  am  so  glad  so  glad  to  see  you.

I  was  with  you  all  and  saw  mucli  that  you  did. Do  you
not  U.  D.  how  much  better  Helen  is  1

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  she  is  much  better,  but  not  well  yet.

No  but  she  will  be  don't  worry, about  her. keep  her  from

over  doing  and  she  will  be  all  right,
give  her  a  great  deal  of  love  for  me  and  tell  her  I  will

watch  over  [her]  always. She  is  a  good  girl
I  love  you  all  so  much  and  when  you  speak  of  me  I  U.  D.

so  well.

Mother  was  it  a  cold  you  had  1
Mrs.  J.  I  may  have  had,  Bennie,  but  I  have  been  very  well.
I  know.

but  do  not  hurry. 1  have  much  to  say  to  you.
Dad  is  better  too  and  I'm  so  glad.
(Hand  reaches  towards  N.  B.  J.)

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie. I'm  much  better.

Amen  .  .

My  prayers  help  you I  know  they  do.
I  got  Kector  to  help  me  pray  for  Helen.
I feel troubled about Aunt Alice, but U.  D. it in  a
way.

Can't  you  help  me"?

Mrs.  J.  What  .  .  how  can  I  help  you,  Bennie?

help  me  to  U.  D.  what  troubles  Aunt  Alice  so  much.

Mrs.  J.  I  do  not  know,  Bennie. Last  summer  she  seemed  very
happy,  I  thought.

no  it  is  not  her  mind  but  her  body.
Is  it  rheumatism  1


Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  partly.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  vnth  Mrs.  Piper,  649

I  think  I  can  help  her  too. I'll  keep  on  trying.

Grandpa  Junot  saj's. it's  no  use. worrying  all  things  are

right  with  God.
I  saw  one  of  the  horses  go  and  glad  I  am.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  we  had  a  bad  horse,  and  your  father  sold  him.
Glad  I  am. glad  .  .

tell  me  is  Roble  U.  D.  law  any  better  .  .
Mrs.  J.  Yes. Tell  me  what  you  know  about  Roble.

I  am  much  amused  re  .  .  in  regard  to  him.
I  am  not  sure  he  will  be  altofrether  interested  in  law.
he  has  other  things  on  his  mind  .  .
I  feel  all  he  feels  and  am  with  him  a  great  deal,
ask  him  what  happened  to  his  hat  last  summer did  he  tell
you  1 1

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie,  I  don't  remember.
N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  do  you  know  where  Eoble  now  is  1
I  saw  him  going  on  a  boat.

.  .  sounds  like  Boat.  •  '

(Mrs.  J.  shakes  her  head  negativelJ^)
he  lost  his  hat,  anyway.

Mrs.  J.  No,  I  do  not  think  he  was  on  a  boat.

Yes  mother  you  are  mistaken he  was  and  his  hat  fell  into

the  water  ask  him.
Dad  I'll  answer  you  in  a  moment  .  .

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  Roble  is  not  with  us  now. I  wish  that  you  could
tell  us  about  him  later.

I  will  tell  you  all.

but  please  follow  me do  you  remember  early  after  the
light  went  out  he  went  sailing.

Mrs.  J.  No,  Bennie,  he  may  have. I  will  ask  him  and  let  you  know^

^This  is  perhaps  a  vague  reminiscence  of  the  incident  of  painting  the  hat.
See  p.  567.— H.  de  G.  V.

2t


650


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


Can't  3'ou  tell  him  for  me  1

I  saw  him. but  I  saw  him  with  a  lady  and  was  much

amused  over  it  all.
tell  him  about  the  boat  and  he  will  remember,
speak  to  me. (Hand  feels  articles.)

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  tell  me  about  yourself.

I  want  to  tell  you  all  that  is  on  my  mind.
Frank  is  Avith  me  now,  and  for  the  moment  I  was  confused.
Do  j'ou  remember  a  young  friend  of  mine  named  Williams
dad?

K  B.  J.  No,  I  do  not.

Mrs.  J.  Not  this  moment,  Bennie,  tell  me  something  about  him.

he  came  over  here  after  I  saw  you.
I  knew  him  at  College.

Mrs.  J.  No,  I  cannot  jilace  him. Tell  me  what  you  have  on  your
mind  about  him.

he  wants  to  find  his  mother  and  asked  me  to  help  him.
Arthur  Williams  is  his  name, and  he  used  to  room  with

Nichols. .  .  N  i  c  h  ol  s.
Ask  Roble  about  Nichols.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  I  will  try  to  recall  this  boy.

I  want  to  say  more  but  will  tell  you  later.
[Not  understood. — N.  B.  J  ]

Dad  did  you  say  you  would  give  Eoble  the  farm.
N.  B.  J.  Yes,  I  did.

good I  am  glad  of  it then  I  can  see  him  there.

I  U.  D. all. better  than  I  can  tell  you.
■ (Hand  seeks  about  as  for  article. Mrs.  J.  moves  the  A.  L.
bust  nearer;  which  the  hand  previously  had  moved  from
front  of  sheets  to  under  wrist,  and  was  now  apparently
seeking  on  block-book.)

I  want  you  to  hear  me  out.

I  saw  you  talking  to  the. Judge  we  used  to  call  him.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Jiinot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  651

R.  H.  "  Judge"  1 .  .  Judd. .  .  sounds  like  Judd.

[Cf.  the  confusion  between  "Judge"  and  "Judd"  on  p.  547.

-H.  de  G.  v.]
wake  up  dad  dear.

N.  B.  J.  Where  was  it  ?  '  .  .

Don't  you  remember  Judd?  •  ■

N".  B.  J.  No,  but  I  remember  the  Judge.

say  it  again.

N.  B.  J.  The  Judge.

Oh  [?]  yes  that's  it.
All  right.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  what  about  the  Judge'?
I  heard  dad  talkina;  with  him.

You  don't  U.  D.  very  well. or  I  am  in  too  much  ot  a

hurry  to  get  my  thoughts  to  you.
find  Williams  mother  and  we  will  all  be  happy,
did  you  say  Helen  could  not  go  back  to  school  .  .

Mks.  J.  She  was  not  strong  enough,  we  thought,  so  we  kept  her  at
home,  and  she  is  trying  to  get  entirely  well.

that  is  fine.

She  is  not  lazy. I  dislike  that  word  applied  to  her.
She  grew  too  fast  and  used  up  all  the  strength  she  had  in
growing.

Mrs.  J.  Yes  ? Her  nervous  energy  was  stronger  than  her  physical
endurance.

Vitality  .  . the  Dr  says  keep  her  out  doors  a  good  deal.
Mrs.  J.  Yes. I  wish  that  I  had  understood  her  condition  long  ago.

Didn't  I  keep  telling  you  dear  that  she  was  not  well  and  if
she  did  not  practise  she  was  not  to  blame  1


652  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  you  did,  Bennie. And  I  thought  that  I  was  doing  my
best  for  her.

So  you  did  and  when  they  said  she  was  lazy  I  did  not  like
it  because  I  could  see  how  she  felt  and  I  wanted  to  help
her  .  .  I  U.  D.  her  very  well  and  shall  help  her  until
she  is  well  .  . I  shall  take  care  of  her  so  do  not  worry.

Mrs.  J.  I  .  .  it  is  very  hard  to  know  the  right  thing  to  do,  Bennie.

I  know  and  feel  the  importance  of  looking  after  her  and
they  told  me  here  to  tell  you  all  about  her.  I'll  speak
to  Dr.

[Medical  advice  follows.]

I  shall  return  again  soon  when  I  have  much  to  tell  you

about  lioble.
it  all  comes  back  to  me  now.

N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  find  Eoble  and  tell  us  where  he  is  now  and  what
he's  doing.

Surely  I  will  when  I  return  I'll  tell  you. all  .  .

R.  H.  Finish  please.

I  wanted  to  tell  you  about  Rounder  but  I'll  wait  I  want
Helen  taken  care  of  most  of  all. Good  bye  .  .


64th  Sitting.

November  21,  1905. Present:  Mr.  and  BIrs.  J.  and  R.  H.

(Bennie  communicating.)

I  hope  I  shall  make  all  clear  to  you  to-day.
I  had  so  much  to  say  I  could  not  say  all.
I  found  Roble,  after  I  saw  you  .  .

He  seems  to  be  very  busy. I  saw  him  looking  through

some  books, after  I  saw  you.
he has  now  taken  up  a  new life which will  help  him

greatly.

I  saw  his  .  .  what  shall  I  call  it  room.
Does  he  need  more  help  or  study,  I  wonder.


Lxi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  653


What  I  see  is  clear  &  he. got  his. own. Ideas  about  his

business.
I  think  he  is  .  .
Started  for  himself,
how  can  I  tell  j'ou?

N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  what  kind  of  a  room  was  it  that  you  saw  Roble  in  ?

looked  large  with  a  .  .  (hand  waves  round  in  front.)
case  or  desk  in  it. with  some  large  books

N.  B.  J.  ''beds."

on  it. had  a  kind  of  map. behind  him  on  the  side  of  the

room, had  lines  all  drawn  across  it  i.e.  the  map.
looked  like  a  chart  of  some  kind.
Can  you  see  it "?
(Hand  turns  to  R.  H.)

R.  H.  I  know  nothing  of  it.

I  saw  a  chair, and  he  was  sitting  on  it.
the  other  thing  looked  like  a  bed.^

N.  B.  J.  Go  on,  Bennie,  tell  us  all  about  it.

I  saw  a  little  stand  or  table, beside  it.
It  looks  like  many  places  I  see  often.

looked  like  a  large  building  as  I  went  in.  and  looked  at
him  for  a  few  moments.  I  wondered  if  he  fits  [feels  ?]
all.  well.

he  had  his  hand  on  his  head.

Oh  I  saw  him  dad  surely.

there  is  no  mistake  about  it.

N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  could  you  tell  whether  he  was  at  home  or  in  a
foreign  land  ?

way  off  verj^  far  away  it  took  me  ever  since  I  saw  you  .  .
to  find  locate  him  and  return  here  to  tell  you  about
him.

^  The  communicator  apparently  accepts  N.  B.  J. 's  misreading  of  the  word
"  books  ^'  as  "  beds." -H.  de  G.  V.


654


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


I  heard  a  man  say  to  him  this  is  the  beginning  of  your
education.

but  before  I  saw  you  here  tlie  day  before  this  I  saw  him
on  a  boat  and  the  wind  blew  his  hat  off.  that  was
long  before  I  came  to  tell  you. of  it  here.

he  does  not  remain  all  the  time  in  this  big  room  but  he
was  in  it  when  I  found  him.  he  goes  on  what  we
used  to  call  cars, and  carriages.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  can  you  see  any  one  with  him?

I  saw  a  gentleman  with  him  and  he  said,  let  us  plan  for  it.
Do  you  U.  D.  about  his  hat  and  the  boat  ?

Mrs.  J.  Not  yet,  Bennie. But  this  may  have  happened.

It  certainly  did  and  after  he  gets  back  he  will  tell  you  all
about  it.

N.  B.  J.  Bennie, can you tell  what language they speak  where
Eoble  is  ?

language.

Mes.  J.  Yes.

Sounds  like  German.

but  I  cannot  exactly  tell  you.

[Eoble  was  at  his  mining  property  in  lower  Mexico  at  this
time.  Spanish  is  the  language  spoken  by  all  the  em-
ployes there. — N.  B.  J.]

I  am  not  sure  about  it  dad  but  if  you  will  let  me  follow
him  for  a  little  while  I  can  tell  this  gentleman  the  next
time  I  see  him.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  please  do  that. And  tell  us  now  if  you  can,
what  business  he  is  interested  in.

I  will  tell  you  all  I  can I  saw  the  lines, all  drawn  out

on  this  chart  .  .
Do  you  know  what  I  saw  at  all?

Mbs.  J.  Yes,  I  think  I  understand  what  you  mean.


Are  you  Mr  Hodgson


LXI.] Report  on  the  Jwnot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Pijper.  655
R.  H.  Yes,  Bennie,  never  mind  me.

don't get  out  of  sorts  with  me  if  I  cannot  see  straight

when  I  am  speaking,
my  thoughts  travel  very  much  faster  than  I  can  speak  them

for  E.

I  think  Roble  will  please  you  greatly  dad  because  he  is  as
good  boy  as  ever  lived  and  will  succeed. U.  D.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  dearie,  we understand. But you must watch  over
him  and  help  him.

I  certainly  do  try  always.

he  has  some  light  Roble  has  and  I  often  guide  him  when

he  gets  a  little  uncertain,
ask  him  if  he  doesn't  realize  that  I  am  with  him  %
I  said  it  looked  like  summer  all  the  time.
I  U.  D.  better  than  I  can  sa}'. Did  he  tell  you  that  I  was

with  him  at  the  office, one  day  before  he  went  away.

Mrs.  J.  No. But  he  often  dreams  about  you,  and  feels  that  you
are  with  him.

Did  he  tell  you  about  our  running'?
what  are  the  dark  lines  dad.
they  look  like  rail  roads,
all  over  the  chart  in  his  room.

N.  B.  J.  I  cannot  tell,  Bennie,  I  have  not  been  there.

I  U.  D.  every  word  you  say  dad  you  speak  so  clearly.  I

wish  I  could  speak  to  you  that  way.
We  used  to  say  abroad  when  I  was  in  the  body.
All  is  well.

Dad  what  did  you  say  about  that  lot  at  the  cemetery  do

you  not  like  it  .  .
What  did  the  man  do  1

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  the  lot  is  all  right  now.

AVhat  did  you  do  to  iti
Mrs.  J.  It  was  not  kept  in  good  order.

Is  that  what  you  told  him  %


656  .  . Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  and  it  looks  very  well  now.  ...
I  heard  you  and  I  U.  D.  you  were  troubled  about  it.

N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  have  you  seen  the  Major  since  he  came  to  your
world  ?

I  tried  to  tell  you  about  him  but  Rector  would  say  Judge.
I  tried  to  tell  him  last  time.^

(N.  B.  J.  gestures  to  Mrs.  J.  and  makes  a  sound  not  caught
by  E.H.)

Mrs.  J.  (to  N.  B.  J.)  Yes,  I  thought  of  it  afterwards.

Indeed  I  have  seen  him  many  many  times,
he often refers  to  you and  when he  can  he  will  speak
with  you.

I  shall  help  him  give  you  what  we  call  tests  later.

N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  if  you  can,  give  us  the  Major's  other  name  so  we
will  be  certain.

he  constantly  repeated  it  as  Judge  but  I  could  not  help

it  some  how.
I  U.  D.  and  know  him  perfectly  well.

When  I  return  here  I  will  tell  you  a  great  deal  about  him.
the  only  thing  I  do  not  like  is  you  do  not  reply  quickly
enough  dad.

N.  B.  J.  Bennie,  give  the  Major's  other  name  so  we'll  feel  certain.
Major  .  .

I  got  it  right  R.
W.  .  .
•.. Oh  .  .
JUDD.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  if  you  cannot  give  it  now,  give  it  to  Dr.  Hodgson
at  another  time.

I  am  a  little  confused.
What  do  you  say  ?
Oh  I  got  it.  Alright.

i.See  p.  651.


l.xi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  tvith  Mrs.  Pirj^er.  657


I  say  [?]  when  I  go  out  and  return  I  will  bring  it.

(Hand seizes cap  and spur and holds  them  for  several

seconds.)
Welch  ...

N.  B.  J.  Go  on,  that's  right.  Give  the  rest  of  it.  (N.  B.  J.  had
misinterpreted  the  name  as  JVilbur.)

(Hand  seizes  articles  as  before.)
Major  Welch,
got  it?

R.  H.  Major  Welch.

N.  B.  J.  No,  that's  Wilbur  .  .  plainly.  (Pointing  to  the  first  Welch
which  I  at  first  thought  might  be  JVeJd,  and  copied  it
as  such.)

Wil  .  .

W  i  1  CO  r.  .
I  cannot  do  more.

Mrs.  J.  Do  not  try  now,  Bennie.  Perhaps  you  will  have  an
opportunity  to  give  it  to  Dr.  Hodgson  later.

Yes  and  glad  I  will  be.

N.  B.  J.  (to  R.  H.)  That  wasn't  Weld.  That  was  plainly  Wilbur
in  the  first  place,  Doctor.

Rounder  is  all  right.
Why  don't  you  speak  1
I  Avant  you  to  listen,
listen  to  me.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  do  you  want  me  to  .speak,  or  Dr.  Hodgson  ?

I  want  you  to  speak  to  me  mother.
I  love  you  dearly.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  tell  me  about  yourself.

What  can  I  tell  you  I  am  so  well  and  so  happy  and  with
Miriam  and  Frank  all  the  time  they  are  well  and
happy  also  We  are  helping  each  other  I  am  teaching
school  now  and  I  like  it  very  much.


658  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  [part

Mrs.  J.  Do  you  see  cousin  May  ? Mij  cousin  1

Oh  yes  I  do  I  think  mother  you  forget  I  told  you  this
before  dear  long  ago.

Mes.  .T.  Yes,  she  met  you.

Yes  and  she  was  a  great  help  to  me.
dad  do  you  remember  W  E  L  C  h.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  we  got  Rounder  back  through  him.
I  told  you  about  him. did  I  not  ?

Mrs.  J.  Yes.

The  children  are  doing  well.  We  are  doing  all  we  can
to  help  them  I  often  walk  out  with  them  see  me  mother
do  you  ?

Of  course  you  do  not  U.  D.  fully, and  never  can  until

you  come  over.
Father  did  you  say  I  might go  so far  away  you  could

not  find  me  when  you  came.

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  we  were  talking  about  that,  and  I  was  afraid
you  might  have  to  go  far  away.

I  do  not  wish  you  to  think  this my  ties  are  too  strong

for that  and when you  are called to this  beautiful

world  I  shall  be  the  first  to  greet  and  help  you  don't
worry  about  that.

N.  B.  J.  Thank  you,  Bennie,  I  believe  you.

you  may  .  .
surely  I  will.

I  can  only  give  you  glimpses  of  what  it  really  is  but  I
am  glad  to  do  even  this.

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  are  you  with  me  constantly  1

Yes  mother  I  am  with  you  what  you  call  every  day  I  go
to  Eoble  I  pray  for  him  I  go  to  Helen  I  pray  for
her  I  find  dad  I  pray  for  him  and  then  I  go  all  over
it  again  and  nothing  gives  me  so  much  pleasure  .  .


LXi.]  Report  on  the  Jimot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  659
Mes.  J.  When  I  think  of  you,  does  it  bring  you  to  me  ?

Almost  invariably  and  is  a  great  help.

Don't  you  U.  D.  how  I  do  this  Hodgson  Mr.

R.  H.  Yes,  I  do,  I  think,  in  a  way.

(Mrs.  P.'s  breathing  rather  heavy.  K.  H.  changes  position
of  head.)

Every  thought  is  registered  upon  what  you  call  air  it  is
ether  really,  and  your  thought  waves  reach  me  just
as  mine  do  you  U.  D.

Mes.  J.  Yes, Bennie,  I  understand. But are  both  good  and  evil
thoughts  registered  1

Evil  thoughts  become  purified  by  the  ether  before  they
reach  us.

What  is  wrong  friend  your  body  seems  not  right.

[Any  connection  with  soreness  in  my  back  muscles'? — R.  H.]

R.  H.  I  attended  to  the  li^ht.

that  cannot  be  it.
N.  B.  J.  To  whom  was  that  addressed  ?

Are  you  alright  Mother?
Mes.  J.  No,  Bennie,  I  have  not  felt  cjuite  well  lately.

Are  you  alright  this  minute?

Mrs.  J.  Oh  yes,  oh  yes. But  I  have  been  troubled  about  Helen's
illness,  and  I  miss  lioble  very  much.

I  know  but  do  not  feel  troubled  about  either  I  assure  you
they  are  both  alright.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  I  feel  sure  that  they  are.
/  will  take  care  of  them  .  .

Mes.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  but  you  know  there  are  many  things  in  this
life  to  trouble  us.


660


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


Yes  but  trouble  comes  without  bringing  it  mother  dear  so
do  not  worry  for  my  sake  as  I  know  .  .

E.  H.  "without  beginning  it."

.  .  brincrino;  it.

All  is  well  and  will  be.

When  you  .  .  how  shall  I  express  it  mother  .  .
go  home  I  think.

give  Helen  a  good  thought  think  she  is  going  to  be  well
and  keep  this  in  your  mind  and  it  will  help  you  both
U.  D.  dear.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  but,  Bennie,  we  do  not  see  and  understand  as  you
do,  and  we  have  not  the  strength  of  mind  that  you
have.

I  U.  D.  what  you  mean  but  the  more  you  believe  in  the
thought  that  all  will  be  well  the  happier  you  will  be
don't  you  feel  it  so  dad?

N.  B.  J.  Yes,  I  have  no  doubt  but  that  you  are  right.

Now  I  said  help  me  to  keep  my  father  in  the  body  well
and  strong  he  needs  strength  for  his  work,  and  I  kept
saying  it  over  and  over  again  and  you  began  to  feel
better  .  .

Mrs.  J.  Bennie,  tell  me  more  about  yourself.  Do  you  ever  regret
that  you  left  this  world  so  early  ?

Eegret  1
Mrs.  J.  Yes.

Why  no  mother  I  have  nothing  to  regret  dear  I  am  very
happy  here  and  I  have  greater  privileges  than  you  can
possibly  have  I  can  see  you  all  just  as  often  as  I  wish
and  I  U.  D.  you  are  coming  to  me  some  day,

therefore  I  am  not  only  glad  I  came  but  I  am  supremely
happy  if  you  can  U.  D.  it.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  but  sometimes  I  feel  that  every  one  should
have  a  lono;  life  in  this  world  of  ours.


Report  on  the  Junot  Sitting.'^  ivith  Mrs.  Piper.  6G1

but  God  thinks  differently, and  this  is  the  way  of  all  all

must  come  sooner  or  later.
He  knows  better  than  any  of  us  either  on  our  side  or  on
yours.

I  get  dads  thoughts  some  times  when  he  is  surrounded  by
curious  etc  [I]  influences  giving  advice  and  help  and  I
say  .  .

Oh  how  much  better  off  I  am  and  how  I  wish  he  could

see  me  as  I  am.
Did  you  ever  find  those  letters  I  referred  to

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  Bennie,  don't  you  remember  I  told  you  about  them  ?
Oh  I  believe  I  do.

thank  you  do  you  remember,  when  I  was  ill  you  did  not
think  I  was  coming  over  did  you  ?

Mks.  J.  No,  Bennie.

I  did  not  get  injured  I  caught  cold  going  without  my  hat.
Mother  what  kind  of  a  flower  is  that  in  the  dinins;  room  ?

Mrs.  J.  I  have  been  away  from  home  for  some  time,  so  I  do  not
know.

It  is  large  and  green

Mrs.  J.  There  was  a  very  pretty  Boston  fern  in  the  room.

fern  1
Mrs.  J.  Fern.

long  green  leaves  on  it  1
Mrs.  J.  Yes,  that  is  it.

I  saw  it  and  I  saw  a  woman  putting  water  on  it  after  I
spoke  with  you  last  time,  when  I  was  hunting  for
Ptoble.

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  probably  you  did. Did  you  see  Helen?

Helen  was  up  in  the  .  .  1  i  .  .
Study.


LXI.]


662  Helen  de  G.  Verrall.  ■  [part

Mrs.  J.  Yes,  probably.

She  was  but  Robles  clothes  were  some  of  them  in  his  own
room  in  a  small  place,  but  I  found  him  way  across  the
water. I  have  so  longed  .  .

R.  H.  Five  minutes  more.

Yes  I'll  tell  Hodgson  Mr  a  .  .  about  the  Major  I  won't
forget  .  .

65th  Sitting.  ...
November  22,  1905.  Present:  11.  U.

(Bennie  communicating.)
Good  morning  Mr  H

E.  H.  Good  morning,  Bennie.

I  want  to  U.  D.  if  I  can  also  make  you  U.  D.  what  name
it  was  you  and  dad  were  discussing  about.

if  you  think  I  do  not  speak  clearly  now  I  want  to  make
myself  clear.

R.  H.  Quite  clear,  Bennie.

That  name  was  not  intended  for  W  a  Ich.
I  had  it  on  my  mind  however  with  reference  to  Eounder.
[Bennie  here  accepts  R.  H.'s  interpretation  of  the  name  given
on  p.  657.-H.deG.  v.]

R.  H.  Yes,  I  understand  exactly,  Bennie,  I  knew  that.

his  name  was  something  like  this  .  .
Wilb  .  .  .

R.  H.  W.i.l.b.

Wilb  [?  Wileb  ^]
Ee  .  .
Wilbre  .  .
(Thump  of  hand.)

Good  morning  H. (Arrival  of  G.  P.)
he  means  Jap.


LXi.] Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  xvith  Mrs.  Piper.  663
R.  H.  "Jap."
What  ?

R.  H.  "Jap." J.a.p.  "Jap."

["Jap"  appears  to  be  a  ' pormanteau '  word  produced  by
Rector's  confusion  between  "Judge"  and  "Major." —
H,  de  G.  v.]

how  absurd  is  that  what  you  got  1

R.  H.  Yes.  Jap.

Maj  .  .
Maj.

R.  H.  M.a.j. .  .  Major.

Yes.

Walb.

E  S.  force.

R.  H.  "Walb"^

It  is  not  a  it  is  i.
R.  H.  "  Wilbesforce  "  ?

Yes.

R.  H.  "  Wilberforce  "  ?

say  it  slowly. (G.  P.  to  Bennie  ?)
Yes  that  is  it.

R.  H.  "  Wilberforce."

got  it.  yes.
Wake  up.

I  U.  D.  that  Roble  is  not  here,  he  is  in  the  country  called.
No  I  cannot  give  it  now.

I'll  have  to  try  again, and  come  in  first.  Benny.

R.  H.  All right, Bennie. Take your time. Always glad  to
welcome  you.


664


Helen  de  G.  Verrall.


[part


No  further  allusions  to  Bennie  Junot  occurred  uj)  to  the  time
of  Dr.  Hodgson's  death.  Mr.  Junot  has  had  several  sittings  with
Mrs.  Piper  since  then.  But  as  these  sittings  were  held  after  a  long
interval  and  under  somewhat  different  circumstances,  and,  moreover,
contain  but  few  statements  purporting  to  be  evidential,  it  seemed
best  not  to  include  them  in  this  report.


LXI.]


Review.


665


SUPPLEMENT.


I.

SOME  RECENT  DEVELOPMENTS  IN  PSYCHOTHERAPY.

By  T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.

In  the  earlier  volumes  of  these  Proceedings  may  be  found
more  or  less  detailed  accounts  of  certain  researches  which  to  a
great  extent  originated  in  connection  with  inquiries  regarding
the  causation  and  cure  of  various  mental  and  bodily  disorders.
Mr.  Myers's  conception  of  the  Subliminal  Consciousness  was  in
no  small  measure  influenced  by  the  work  of  investigators  who
were  primarily  interested  in  psychopathology  and  psychothera-
peutics, and  these  subjects  were  often  referred  to  in  Mr.  Myers's
writings.  The  psychological  and  therapeutic  aspects  of  hypnotism
have  ever  been  closely  associated,  and  the  further  developments
of  a  subject  for  which  Mr.  Myers  and  Mr.  Gurney  did  so  much
should  be  of  interest  to  all  who  are  interested  in  psychical
research.  It  may  not  then  be  out  of  place  to  review  briefly
some  of  the  more  recent  work  which  has  been  done  in  this
department,  irrespective  of  any  immediate  bearing  which  it  may
apjDear  to  have  on  the  problems  with  which  as  a  Society  we  are
mainly  concerned.

The  occasion  for  such  a  review  is  afforded  by  the  publication
in  the  June- July  (1909)  number  of  the  Journal  of  Abnormal
Psychology  of  a  series  of  papers  which  were  read  at  a  symposium
on  Psychotherapy  arranged  by  the  American  Therapeutic  Society
for  their  annual  meeting  on  May  6th,  1909.

The  President  of  the  Society,  Dr.  Frederick  Henry  Gerrish,
took  as  the  subject  of  his  presidential  address  The  Therapeutic
Value  of  Hypnotic  Suggestion. He  said  he  did  not  wish  to  enter

2u


666


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


into  any  discussion  of  the  various  theories  which  have  been
advanced  to  account  for  hypnotic  phenomena.  His  desire  was
rather  ' '  to  set  forth  the  practical  usefulness  of  hypnotism  in  the
daily  routine  of  medical  work,  and  to  clear  away  many  miscon-
ceptions which  have  prevented  the  general  employment  of  this
agency."  In  doing  so  he  showed  the  same  enthusiasm  as  is
always  shown  by  those  who  have  had  much  experience  of  the
use  of  hypnotic  suggestion  in  general  practice.

We  are  constantly  told  that  hypnotism  is  only  of  value  in
dealing  with  functional  nervous  disorders,  and  we  might  suppose
that  its  most  enthusiastic  supporters  would  be  found  among  the
neurologists,  and  that  the  general  practitioner  would  find  it  of
comparatively  little  use  in  his  daily  work.  But  as  a  matter  of
fact  it  is  only  when  it  is  used  in  the  great  variety  of  bodily  and
mental  disorders  which  come  under  the  care  of  the  general
practitioner  that  the  extent  of*  its  field  of  usefulness  becomes
clearly  manifest.  It  is  then  also  that  its  limitations  become
accepted  in  the  same  spirit  as  are  the  limitations  of  other  thera-
peutic measures.  The  specialist,  on  the  other  hand,  whether  he
be  a  specialist  in  neurology  or  a  specialist  in  hypnotism,  is  very
apt  to  have  these  limitations  forced  too  prominently  on  his
attention,  and  it  is  not  uncommon  to  find  men  writing  dis-
paragingly of  hypnotism  who  in  their  earlier  studies  had  been
favourably  im^Dressed  by  its  therapeutic  value,  and  even  enthusi-
astic in  its  advocacy  as  a  mode  of  treatment.  Whatever  be  the
reason,  there  is  a  tendency  at  the  present  time  to  decry  the  use
of  hypnotism  and  to  extol  other  forms  of  psychic  treatment  which
have  arisen  in  conjunction  with  modern  studies  in  abnormal
psychology.  A  good  introduction  to  these  newer  forms  of  treat-
ment may  be  found  in  Dr.  Morton  Prince's  j^a-pei'  on  The
Psychological  Pri7icij)les  and  Field  of  Psychotherapy .

It  is  a  fundamental  law  of  the  structure  and  growth  of  the
mind  that  ideas,  feelings,  emotions,  movements,  sensations,
associated  in  experience,  tend  to  become  linked  together  into  a
system  or  group  in  such  fashion  that  the  stimulation  of  one
element  in  the  group  stimulates  the  activity  of  the  rest.  Such
a  system  or  group  Dr.  Prince  calls  a  complex.

A  complex  may  be  composed  almost  entirely  of  ideas  and
feelings  or  of  physiological  processes,  although  more  frequently
it  is  made  up  partly  of  psychical  and  partly  of  jihysiological
elements. In  every  pulse of  consciousness the  potentiality  of


LXI.]


Review.


667


complex  formation  exists,  but  it  is  only  under  certain  conditions
that  tlie  psycho-physical  disposition  of  the  moment  becomes  so
organised  that  anything  like  complete  reproduction  of  all  its
elements  can  afterwards  be  brought  about.  There  are  two  main
conditions  on  which  the  formation  of  complexes  depends.  In
the  formation  of  normal  complexes  the  most  important  factor  is
repetition:  it  is  on  this  that  the  efficacy  of  education  depends.
In  the  formation  of  abnormal  complexes  the  nature  of  the  emotion
or  feeling  tone  accompanying  the  experience  is  the  most  frequent
cause  of  the  organisation  of  its  elements  into  a  complex.

Since  past  experiences  may  be  revived  in  consciousness,  we
must  believe  that  somehow  and  somewhere  they  are  preserved,
and  Dr.  Prince  thinks  that  conscious  memory  of  any  past  experi-
ence would  be  impossible  unless  there  was  some  jDhysical  arrange-
ment for  preserving  it.  However  this  may  be,  we  have  good
grounds  for  believing  that  every  element  in  an  experience  is
correlated  with  some  alteration  in  the  nervous  system,  "and  we
must  infer  that  some  kind  of  residue  or  impi'essiou,  chemical  or
physical,  is  left  in  the  neurones,  in  consequence  of  which  they
have  a  disposition  to  reproduce,  when  again  stimulated,  the
original  experience,  whether  an  idea  or  physiological  reaction."

The  neuronic  residua  of  a  mental  complex  Dr.  Prince  terms
an  "unconscious  complex,"  and  it  is  on  the  organisation  of  the
unconscious  complexes  that  the  conservation  of  mental  and
physiological  complexes  depends.  The  factors  which  determine
the  conservation  of  complexes  are  in  the  main  the  same  as  those
which  lead  to  their  formation,  namely,  repetition  and  emotion  or
feeling  tone.  Both  repetition  and  the  intensity  of  emotional
tone  in  an  experience  seem  to  intensify  the  impression  made  upon
the  brain,  and  the  greater  the  impression  made  upon  the  brain
the  more  readily  is  the  unconscious  complex  aroused  to  function.
Of  course  the  doctrine  of  neurone  residua  as  the  substratum  of
memory  is  a  commonjDlace  of  physiological  psychology ;  the  point
insisted  on  here  is  that  the  elements  of  an  experience  which  from
any  cause  has  led  to  the  formation  of  a  complex  are  not  only
conserved  as  neurone  residua,  but  that  they  are  conserved  as  a
residuum  complex  whose  re-excitation  will  be  accompanied  by  a
reproduction  of  the  original  experience.

Without  the  organisation  and  conservation  of  comjDlexes  their
voluntary  recall  would  be  impossible,  but  the  fact  that  an  experi-
ence has  been  conserved  as  a  complex  is  no  guarantee  that  it  can


668


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


be  recalled  voluntarily ;  and  the  fact  that  an  experience  cannot
be  recalled  voluntarily  is  no  proof  that  it  has  not  been  conserved
as  a  complex.  An  experience  of  childhood  may  be  completely
forgotten  so  far  as  our  waking  recollection  is  concerned,  yet  it
may  be  recalled  in  detail  during  hypnosis  or  in  dream.  When  a
complex  which  is  well  organised  and  conserved  cannot  be  recalled
voluntarily  there  is  said  to  be  mental  dissociation,  and  the  correlated
neural  state  is  said  to  be  one  of  cerebral  dissociation.  Dr.  Prince
believes  that  dissociation  is  "a  general  principle  governing  the
normal  psycho-nervous  mechanism,  and  therefore  in  a  highly
marked  form  only  is  pathological.  .  .  .  Among  the  normal
phenomena  of  dissociation  are  to  be  reckoned  temporary  and
some  permanent  forms  of  forgetfulness,  the  limitation  of  the  field
of  consciousness  in  absentmindedness,  moods,  anger,  and  other
strong  emotional  states,  and  sleep.  Amongst  the  artificial  and
pathological  conditions  characterising  largely  or  chiefly  the  dis-
sociations are  hyjDnotic  and  hypnoidal  states ;  suggested  and
hysterical  amnesia,  paralyses,  contractures,  anaesthesia,  etc. ;
somnambulism,  trance,  psycholeptic  attacks,  etc."

When  an  unconscious  complex  is  stimulated  the  correlated
mental  complex  arises  in  consciousness  as  a  memory  of  which  we
are  aware ;  but  when  a  complex  which  is  dissociated  from  the
great  mass  of  complexes  which  form  the  waking  personality  is
stimulated  "ideas  are  awakened,  but  we  are  not  aware  of  them.
These  are  what  are  called  subconscious,  or  better,  co-conscious
ideas,  which  means  ideas  dissociated  from,  split  off  from  the  main
consciousness."

Well  organised  complexes  have  a  tendency  to  function  more
or  less  automatically  and  thus  to  determine  the  direction  of  our
thought  and  its  content.  This  is  well  illustrated  by  those  patho-
logical fixed  ideas  which  rush  into  consciousness  unbidden  and
undesired.  The  automatic  functioning  of  complexes  is  most
marked  when  they  are  dissociated  and  thus  freed  from  the
inhibitory  control  of  the  personal  consciousness.  The  threshold
of  stimulation  of  dissociated  complexes  is  lowered,  their  activity
is  easily  aroused,  and  they  are  capable  of  extremely  independent
functioning.  The  type  of  this  form  of  automatism  is  the  sub-
conscious fixed  ideas  of  hysteria.

The  relation  of  emotion  to  the  formation,  functioning,  con-
servation and  dissociation  of  complexes  is  very  important  and  in
many  respects  obscure. As  already  said,  the  intensity  of  emotion


LXI.]


Review.


669


accompanying  an  experience  seems  more  than  anything  else  to
determine  the  formation  and  conservation  of  the  mental  complex.
But  if  the  emotion  be  of  a  painful  or  distressing  character,  in
addition  to  its  effect  in  stamping  the  experience  indelibly  on  the
mind,  it  may  also  have  a  disintegrating  effect  on  consciousness
as  a  whole.  The  complex  formed  by  the  experience  may  become
dissociated  from  the  personal  consciousness  so  that  its  voluntary
recall  may  be  impossible.  On  the  other  hand,  exalting  emotions
have  an  integrating  effect,  and  are  accompanied  by  an  invigoration
of  the  whole  organism.

One  of  the  most  interesting  and  most  important  features  in
the  relation  between  an  ideational  complex  and  the  emotions
which  accompany  its  revival  in  consciousness  is  the  fact  that  when
a  dissociated  complex  is  roused  to  function  co-consciously,  the
personal  or  primary  consciousness  may  be  strongly  affected  by
the  emotion  although  unaware  of  the  ideational  content  of  the
co-conscious  thought.

Personality,  character,  thoughts,  hopes  and  aspirations,  even
bodily  well-being,  depend  on  the  nature  of  the  mental  and
physiological  complexes  which  have  been  formed  in  the  course  of
experience.  And  it  does  not  matter  in  what  state  a  complex
has  been  formed,  whether  in  waking  life,  sleep,  trance,  or  in
hypnosis.  So  long  as  it  is  conserved  it  becomes  part  of  our
personality,  and  may  at  any  time  affect  our  life  for  good  or  evil
according  to  its  nature.  Intellectual  and  ethical  growth  and
much  of  our  bodily  well-being  are  the  result  of  the  formation,
by  the  slow  process  of  education,  of  complexes  whose  essential
elements  are  conserved  by  means  of  repetition.  And  in  the
treatment  of  mental,  moral  and  physical  disorders  which  are  due
to  the  functioning  of  unhealthy  complexes,  there  is  no  way  of
cure  but  by  the  formation  of  new  complexes  of  a  different
character.  The  old  morbid  complexes  must  be  broken  up  and
new  ones  substituted  for  them,  and  whatever  method  may  be
emjDloyed  to  effect  this,  the  process  is  essentially  an  educative
one.

In  the  treatment  of  the  simpler  psycho-neuroses  of  the  neuras-
thenic type  where  the  disturbance  can  be  traced  to  the  formation
of  morbid  associations,  to  unhealthy  ideas,  self-examination,
worry,  erroneous  beliefs  in  and  apprehension  of  disease  with  the
depressive  emotional  tones  that  go  with  such  states,  the  main
principle  to  be  made  use  of  is  the  substitution  of  healthy  com-


670


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M  D.


[part


plexes  in  place  of  the  unhealthy  ones.  "The  point  of  view,  the
attitude  of  mind,  the  beliefs,  the  habits  of  thought,  must  be
modified  by  the  introduction  of  new  points  of  view,  of  data
jDreviously  unknown  to  the  patient  and  drawn  from  the  wider
experience  of  the  physician  ;  by  instruction  in  the  meaning  of
symptoms  and  in  their  organisation  and  causes ;  by  the  suggestion
of  expectations  that  justly  may  be  fulfilled ;  of  ambitions  that
ought  rightfully  to  be  entertained ;  of  duties  to  be  assumed  but
too  long  neglected ;  of  confidence  and  hope,  and  above  all,  by
the  suggestion  of  the  emotion  and  joy  that  go  with  success  and
a  roseate  vista  of  a  new  life."

The  relative  advantages  of  education  in  hypnosis  and  in  the
waking  state  is  a  much  discussed  question.  From  Dr.  Prince's
point  of  view  it  matters  little  in  what  state  therapeutic  systems
of  ideas  are  formed,  whether  in  hypnosis  or  in  the  waking  state.
In  obstinate  cases  he  thinks  hypnosis  has  the  advantage  that
suggestibility  being  increased  and  antagonistic  ideas  being  dis-
sociated or  inhibited,  the  new  ideas  are  more  readily  accejoted
and  firmly  organised.

When  dissociation  exists  the  disturbing  subconscious  ideas  need
either  to  be  so  modified  that  they  cease  to  function  or  they  must
be  reintegrated  with  the  personal  consciousness  and  thereby
realised  in  all  their  meaning,  rearranged  and  modified.  There
are  various  ways  of  doing  this.  "  So-called  psycho-analysis,
suggestion  in  the  waking  state  and  abstraction,  in  so-called
hypnoidal  states  and  hypnosis,  mental  and  physical  hygiene,  all
have  proved  to  be  eflBcient  in  bringing  about  a  reintegration  of
dissociated  functions.  But  all  these  methods  are  only  different
forms  of  education."

So  also  in  dealing  with  the  more  profound  psycho-neuroses,
those  of  the  severer  hysterias,  reassociation  of  the  dissociated
functions  is  the  essential  principle.  Sometimes  reintegration  can
be  formed  in  a  special  state  of  hypnosis ;  sometimes  by  suggestion
in  hypnosis  or  in  the  waking  state,  sometimes  by  recalling  the
dissociated  ideas  into  the  full  light  of  the  waking  consciousness.
Some  writers  think  that  when  hysterical  manifestations  are  due
to  the  functioning  of  dissociated  subconscious  ideas  it  is  always
necessary  to  recall  those  ideas  to  the  j^ersonal  waking  conscious-
ness;  but  Dr.  Prince  says  "It  is  enough  to  break  up  the
subconscious  complex  or  to  suggest  antagonistic  ideas,  or  to
resynthesise  the  ideas  in  the  manner  already  described,  into  a


LXI.]


Review.


671


healthy  complex  which  gives  a  true  appreciation  of  the  facts
which  they  represent.  This  can  be  done  in  hypnosis.  After
waking,  though  amnesia  for  the  previous  subconscious  ideas  may
persist,  the  symptoms  disappear,  for  those  harmful  subconscious
ideas  which  caused  the  trouble  have  ceased  to  exist."

It  may  be  seen  from  this  short  summary  of  Dr.  Prince's  paper
that  he  restricts  the  field  of  psychotherapy  to  those  disorders
which  depend  on  the  functioning  of  abnormal  complexes ;  that
the  psycho-neuroses  so  produced  may  be  roughly  divided  into  two
great  groups  according  to  whether  the  abnormal  comjDlexes  are
or  are  not  dissociated  from  the  waking  personality ;  that  the
treatment  of  the  psycho-neuroses  is  always  in  essence  an  educative
process,  whereby  the  old  abnormal  complexes  are  broken  up  or
destroyed  and  new  healthy  complexes  formed  in  their  stead ;  and
finally,  that  various  methods  may  be  employed  for  the  purpose
of  rendering  the  re-education  of  the  patient  easier  and  the  result
more  permanent.

Accepting  the  view  that  treatment  consists  in  the  formation
of  healthy  complexes  we  may  classify  the  methods  adopted  by
reference  to  the  mental  state  in  which  the  educative  process  is
attempted.  This  may  be  the  waking  state,  or  hypnosis,  or  any
intermediate  state  which  may  be  found  between  the  waking  state
and  hypnosis.  Another  classification  may  be  made  in  reference
to  the  method  employed  in  presenting  the  ideas  whose  acceptance
is  necessary  for  the  formation  of  healthy  complexes.  We  may
use  simple  explanation  and  persuasion,  suggestion,  or  psycho-
analysis. In  practice,  however,  an  artificial  classification,  resulting
from  the  use  of  particular  methods  by  individual  therapeutists
is  adopted,  and  it  is  to  a  consideration  of  the  more  important  of
these  methods,  as  illustrated  by  the  writers  in  the  Journal  under
review,  that  we  must  now  direct  our  attention.

Dr.  E.  W.  Taylor  discusses  Simple  Explanation  and  Re-educa-
tion as  a  Therapeutic  Method,  and  this  method  is  also  advocated
by  Dr.  G.  A.  Waterman  in  a  paper  on  The  Treatment  of  Fatigue
States.  The  treatment  of  fatigue  states  by  this  method  was
introduced  by  Dejerine  as  an  auxiliary  to  the  plan  of  trusting
to  isolation,  rest,  over-feeding  and  electricity,  advocated  by  Weir
Mitchell.  Its  wider  application  to  the  psycho-neuroses  as  a  whole
and  to  other  disorders  we  owe  to  Professor  Dubois  of  Berne.  In
Dubois'  book,  The  Psychic  Treatment  of  Nervous  Disorders,  we
Jaave  an  interesting  and  able  contribution  to  psycho-therapeutics,


672


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.B.


[part


marred  however  by  extreme  prejudice  in  regard  to  the  employ-
ment of  hypnotism  and  uncritical  denunciation  of  suggestion  as
a  curative  measure.  His  work  is  the  product  of  a  mind  trained
in  the  traditions  of  a  past  generation  and  almost  unaffected  by
the  trend  of  modern  psychological  and  philosophical  speculation.
He  mourns  over  the  suggestibility  of  mankind,  and  would  rather
not  cure  sick  peoj^le  at  all  than  do  so  by  utilising  the  very  weak-
ness which  has  led  to  their  sickness.  He  shows  a  pathetic  respect
for  human  reason,  and  follows  the  rationalist  philosophers  in
ascribing  to  it  a  supremacy  in  matters  of  belief  and  conduct  which
is  denied  by  the  majority  of  modern  thinkers.  He  confesses  that
giving  to  the  patient  the  conviction  of  cure  is  the  most  important
feature  of  his  method,  and  he  admits  that  there  is  faith  in  all
conviction,  but  faith  without  reason  he  will  have  none  of.  He
therefore  apjDeals  to  the  reason  of  his  patients,  and  when  he  finds
that  they  get  cured  he  supposes  that  the  cure  is  due  solely  to  the
rational  acceptance  of  his  explanations.  Knowing  as  much  as  he
does  about  suggestion  and  its  possibilities,  it  is  astonishing  how
Professor  Dubois  can  commit  such  an  obvious  fallacy.

Apart,  however,  from  his  rejection  of  suggestion  deliberately
used  as  a  therapeutic  agent,  and  his  denial  in  reference  to  his
own  method  of  the  part  played  by  the  suggestive  influences  which
he  admits  to  be  inherent  in  almost  every  other  form  of  treatment,
the  procedure  which  he  recommends  is  based  upon  sound  prin-
ciples and  is  an  important  feature  in  almost  every  form  of
psychotherapy.  The  essential  points  in  Dubois'  system  are  well
summarised  by  Dr.  Taylor  in  the  paper  previously  referred  to.
They  are  as  follows :

"First.  After  eliminating  or  properly  estimating  physical
causes  the  mental  attitude  of  the  patient  toward  his  ailment
should  be  carefully  determined ;  in  other  words,  a  diagnosis  should
be  made.

"Second.  This  is  best  accomplished  by  allowing  him  to  tell
his  com^Dlete  story  rather  than  by  a  primary  process  of  interroga-
tion on  the  part  of  the  physician.

"Third.  Having  determined  the  false  point  of  view  almost
invariably  revealed  which  has  led  up  to  the  neurosis,  the  attempt
is  made  to  explain  why  such  a  series  of  events  as  that  disclosed
would  be  likely  to  lead  to  this  result.

"Fourth.  Having  impressed  the  patient  with  the  correctness
of  the  physician's  point  of  view, the  process  of  readjustment


LXI.]


Revieiv.


673


begins,  or,  to  use  the  more  popular  but  possibly  too  comprehensive
term,  his  re-education.

"Fifth.  This  is  accomplished  by  pointing  out  in  a  painstaking
way  the  correct  way  to  mental  health  through  a  realization  on
the  part  of  the  patient  of  his  previous  misconceptions  and  through
an  accompanying  effort  toward  the  establishment  of  more  rational
mental  adjustment."

Dr.  Taylor  follows  Dubois  in  thinking  that  the  value  of  this
method  lies  in  its  appeal  to  the  reason,  and  that  some  special
virtue  must  inhere  in  such  a  "  commonsense  basis  of  procedure,
free  from  all  subtlety  or  demand  for  highly  specialized  training."
He  considers  the  analysis  of  the  mental  state  to  be  the  essential
feature  of  the  method,  and  thinks  that  "this  certainly  recjuires
no  special  personal  attributes  on  the  part  of  the  physician,  and
is  surely  available  for  practitioners  of  no  special  education  in  this
field."  It  would  seem  as  if  Dr.  Taylor  had  not  fully  appreciated
the  difficulties  encountered  by  those  who  without  special  education
in  this  field  try  to  analyse  abnormal  mental  states,  and  it  must
surely  be  a  misconception  of  the  nature  of  other  psychotherapeutic
methods  which  leads  him  to  suppose  that  they  necessitate  the
possession  of  special  attributes  on  the  part  of  the  physician.
Taking  the  phrase  "personal  attributes"  in  its  most  general  sense,
we  shall  probably  find  that  no  method  of  psychic  treatment  is  so
dependent  for  success  on  the  personal  attributes  of  the  physician
as  the  method  of  Rational  Therapeutics  advocated  by  Dubois.
The  truth  of  this  is  evidently  felt  by  Dr.  Waterman,  who  says :
"Whether  this  method  can  be  generally  adopted  by  practitioners
is  a  great  question.  The  remarkable  personality  of  Dubois,  and
his  firm  conviction  as  to  the  ethical  and  therapeutic  value  of  his
method,  render  it  peculiarly  efficient.  It  is  difficult  to  conceive
of  a  patient  not  being  strongly  moved  by  his  remarks,  which  are
presented  by  him  so  forcibly,  and  clinched  by  his  frequent  repeti-
tion of  his  favourite  phrase,  '  C'est  la  verite  !  ' "

Whatever  doubts  may  be  entertained  as  to  the  necessity  for
special  training  in  the  employment  of  the  mode  of  treatment  just
referred  to,  there  can  be  no  doubt  on  this  point  in  regard  to  the
method  of  psycho-analysis  elaborated  by  Professor  Freud  of
Vienna,  of  which  an  excellent  account  is  given  by  Dr.  Ernest
Jones  of  the  University  of  Toronto  in  his  contribution  to  the
symposium.  Psycho-analysis  in  Psychotherapy.

The  psycho-analytic  form  of  psychotherapy  is  specially  applicable


674


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


to  those  psycho-neuroses  in  which  a  mental  complex  has  become
dissociated  from  the  personal  consciousness,  and  it  is  carried  out
by  simultaneously  laying  bare  and  remedying  the  pathological
mechanism  at  the  basis  of  the  malady.  Hysteria  may  be  taken
as  the  type  of  these  psycho-neuroses,  and  in  order  to  understand
what  is  meant  by  psycho-analysis  it  is  necessary  to  have  some
knowledge  of  Freud's  views  on  the  nature  and  causation  of
hysteria.

It  is  acknowledged  by  the  majority  of  modern  observers  that
the  occurrence  of  hysterical  symjotoms  is  associated  with  a  splitting
of  consciousness  and  the  subconscious  functioning  of  dissociated
mental  states.  Myers  regarded  stratification  of  consciousness  as
part  of  the  normal  structure  of  the  mind,  and  he  ascribed
hysterical  manifestations  to  a  dream-like  action  of  the  subliminal
consciousness  at  the  hypnotic  level,  whereby  powers  or  faculties
that  ought  to  be  retained  in  the  supraliminal  become  submerged
and  lost  to  the  waking  self.  According  to  Janet  hysterical
symptoms  are  the  result  of  a  splitting  of  consciousness,  and  all
subconscious  manifestations  are  due  to  pathological  dissociation.
In  people  who  are  lacking  in  cajjacity  for  psychic  synthesis,  in
whom  there  is  narrowing  of  the  field  of  consciousness,  some  of  the
ideas  that  enter  into  the  formation  of  personality  tend  to  become
dissociated  from  the  waking  consciousness  and  to  take  on  indepen-
dent functioning  on  their  own  account.  Inability  to  keep  a  hold
on  the  whole  of  the  conscious  field  is  the  cause  of  the  splitting  of
consciousness,  and  the  stigmata  of  hysteria  are  the  consequences.

Freud's  views  regarding  the  origin  of  the  mental  dissociation
manifested  in  hysteria  are  quite  different  from  those  of  Myers  or
Janet,  and  in  some  respects  are  totally  opposed  to  them.  Far
from  thinking  it  due  to  a  dream-like  action  of  the  subliminal
at  the  hypnotic  level,  or  a  merely  accidental  result  of  misere
psycholoffique,  Freud  believes  that  the  splitting  of  consciousness
met  with  in  hysteria  is  caused  by  a  deliberate  act  of  will  on  the
part  of  the  j^atient.  He  does  not,  of  course,  mean  to  imply  that
the  jDatient  intends  to  produce  a  splitting  of  consciousness.  The
patient's  intention  is  different,  but  in  trying  to  attain  its  aim  it
jjrovokes  a  splitting  of  consciousness.

Psychic  health  may  exist  so  long  as  there  is  no  hopeless  incom-
patibility between  the  ideas  which  enter  into  consciousness.  But
it  may  happen  that  an  experience  or  an  idea  or  a  feeling  may
arise  which  is  so  incompatible  with  all  the  ideas  and  feelings  that


lxl]


Reviexo.


675


enter  into  the  formation  of  the  personality,  that  a  jjsychical  pain
ensues  which  is  felt  to  be  unbearable.  If  this  unbearable  idea  is
fairly  faced,  and  if  it  can  by  any  means  be  adjusted  within  the
personal  consciousness,  no  harm  will  follow ;  but  if  such  adjust-
ment cannot  be  effected,  if  the  personal  consciousness  will  have
nothing  to  do  with  the  idea  that  has  arisen,  the  unbearable  idea
is  repressed  by  an  act  of  will.  The  personal  consciousness  tries
to  forget  it  and  to  treat  it  as  if  it  had  never  occurred.  This  can
only  be  done  by  taking  away  from  it  the  emotional  excitement
which  adheres  to  it,  thereby  changing  the  strong  idea  into  a  weak
one  which  will  have  little  claim  on  the  associative  processes.  But
the  sum  of  the  excitement  thus  fi'eed  must  be  utilised  in  some
other  direction,  and  in  j^eople  who  develop  hysterical  symptoms
there  seems  to  be  some  psycho-physical  adaptation  which  enables
the  emotional  excitement  to  be  transformed  into  bodily  innerva-
tion. In  hysteria  the  unbearable  idea  is  rendered  psychically
harmless  because  the  sum  of  excitement  is  transformed  into
physical  manifestations.  This  transformation,  for  which  Freud
proposes  the  term  conversion,  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  defence
reaction  of  the  Ego  against  unbearable  ideas.

If  there  does  not  happen  to  be  any  adaptation  for  conversion
to  take  place,  and  still  for  the  purpose  of  defence  a  separation
of  the  unbearable  i-dea  from  its  painful  feeling-tone  is  necessary,
the  emotional  excitement  must  then  remain  in  the  psychic  sphere.
But  it  separates  from  the  unbearable  idea  and  attaches  itself  to
some  other  idea  not  in  itself  unbearable,  and  in  this  way  gives
rise  to  obsessions  or  phobias.

From  his  later  work  Freud  has  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the
repressed  idea  is  always  of  the  nature  of  a  wish,  and  that  the
hysterical  symptom  is  a  symbolic  expression  of  its  realisation.
A  wish  whose  realisation  would  be  incompatible  with  the  whole
personality  of  the  patient  is  realised  symbolically  as  a  tremor  or
a  paralysis,  and  the  hysterical  symptom  serves  as  a  sort  of  uncon-
scious gratification  to  the  patient.  When  an  unbearable  idea  is
successfully  repressed  a  splitting  of  consciousness  takes  place,  the
repressed  complex  takes  on  an  automatic  activity,  and  its  function-
ing is  manifested  in  the  symptoms  of  the  psycho-neurosis.

The  aim  of  psycho-analysis  is  to  discover  the  repressed  complex
which  underlies  the  hysterical  symptom,  to  reveal  it  in  all  its
relations  and  to  bring  it  back  into  the  waking  consciousness  of  the
patient. When  the  defence  reaction  of  the  Ego  has  been  sue-


676


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


cessful,  when  conversion  has  taken  place,  the  repressed  wish  and
the  circumstances  under  which  it  came  to  be  entertained  may  be
completely  forgotten  by  the  patient,  and  the  distorted  form  in
which  the  activity  of  the  repressed  complex  becomes  manifest
forms  the  chief  difficulty  in  discovering  the  real  nature  of  the
wish  which  is  thus  symbolised.  Perhaps  the  most  striking  feature
of  the  psycho-analytic  method  is  the  extraordinary  ingenuity  that
has  been  displayed  by  Freud  and  his  disciples  in  elaborating  a
technique  which  is  effective  in  unravelling  the  tangled  skein  of
psycho-neural  processes  involved  in  the  production  of  psycho-
neurotic symptoms.

The  procedure  most  generally  employed  for  the  purpose  of
resuscitating  forgotten  memories  related  to  the  repressed  complex
is  to  ask  the  patient  to  concentrate  his  mind  on  a  given  idea,
generally  one  in  relation  to  a  symptom,  and  to  relate  in  the  order
of  their  appearance  all  the  thoughts  that  come  to  his  mind.  If
he  does  this  quite  honestly  and  without  reservation,  important
clues  as  to  the  nature  of  the  disturbing  complex  are  very  soon
discovered.  In  most  of  the  recent  work  in  psycho-analysis  very
effective  use  has  been  made  of  a  method  elaborated  by  Jung  of
Zurich.  Sei'ies  of  test- words  are  called  out  to  the  patient,  who
has  to  respond  as  quickly  as  possible  by  the  first  word  or  thought
which  arises  in  his  mind  in  association  with  each  test- word.  Much
may  be  learned  from  the  nature  of  the  responses  so  given,  but  by
noting  certain  peculiarities  in  regard  to  these  responses  we  are
able  to  find  with  great  certainty  the  elements  of  certain  mental
complexes  which  possess  for  the  patient  a  high  emotional  value
generally  of  a  disagreeable  nature.  The  first  thing  that  may  be
noticed  in  regard  to  these  responses  is  that  the  reaction-time  for
certain  test- words  is  lengthened.  In  illustration  of  the  delayed
reaction-time,  when  the  test-word  is  associated  with  an  emotional
complex,  the  instance  taken  from  Jung,  shown  in  the  table  on  the
following  page,  may  be  given.

Another  peculiarity  which  this  table  shows  is  that  on  asking  the
subject  to  repeat  one  by  one  the  answers  to  the  test-words  the
reproductions  are  incorrect  in  all  the  instances  in  which  the
original  reaction-time  was  prolonged.  In  this  case  it  was  evident
that  some  strong  feeling-tone  was  associated  with  the  words
water,  ship,  lake,  swim,  and  the  patient,  when  cautiously  ques-
tioned, confessed  that  a  short  time  previously  she  had  seriously
thought  of  committing  suicide  by  drowning.


LXI.]


Revieiu.


677


stimulus  word.

Reaction.

Reaction-time
(seconds).

Reproduction.

Head

Hair

1.4

Green

Meadow

1.6

Water

Deep

5

Swim

Stab

Knife

1.6

Long

Table

1.2

...

Ship

Wreck

3.4

Steamer

Question

Answer

1.6

Vv  001

Knit

1  o
l.D

Insolent

Gentle

1.4

Lake

Water

4

Blue

III

Well

1.8

■  Ink

Black

1.2

Swim

Know

3.8

Water

For  the  discovery  of  emotional  complexes  another  test  of  great
delicacy  has  been  elaborated  by  the  Zurich  investigators.  It  is
found  that  if  a  galvanic  current  of  low  tension  is  passed  through
the  human  body,  the  amount  of  current  passing,  as  shown  by  a
galvanometer  placed  in  the  circuit,  is  increased  when  sensory
stimuli  of  a  certain  strength  are  applied  to  the  subject.  But
the  diminished  resistance  of  the  body  thus  shown  varies  not  so
much  with  the  strength  of  the  stimulus  as  with  the  intensity  of
the  resulting  feeling-tone.  Thus  when  the  stimulus  is  a  test-
word  in  the  word-association  reaction  experiment,  very  striking
deflections  of  the  galvanometer  are  observed  when  the  association
arouses  an  emotional  complex.

Prince  and  Petersen  have  shown  that  rises  in  the  galvano-
metric  curves  can  be  obtained  in  cases  of  double  personality
where  the  emotional  complex  stimulated  by  the  test-word  is
definitely  co-conscious.  Coriat  has  worked  out  the  jDulse  reactions
to  test-words  in  states  of  induced  distraction,  and  he  has  found
that  lengthened  reaction  times  and  high  galvauometric  curves
are  accompanied  by  acceleration  of  the  pulse  rate.

There  are  other  peculiarities  which  may  be  observed  in  these
association  experiments  which  need  not  be  referred  to  here.
SuflSce  it  to  say  that  by  the  methods  just  outlined,  combined
with  an  analysis  of  the  patient's  dreams  by  means  of  the  special
technique  introduced  by  Freud,  it  is  possible  to  trace  the  origin
of  a  symptom  to  its  underlying  complex,  and  the  advocates  of
psycho-analysis  as  a  therapeutic  method  maintain  that  by  bringing
submerged  complexes  to  light  and  by  enabling  the  patient  to


678


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.R


[part


understand  and  appreciate  their  significance  in  relation  to  his
malady,  "he  is  able  to  free  his  personality  from  the  constraining
force  of  these  complexes,  and,  by  taking  ujj  an  independent
attitude  towards  them,  to  gain  a  degree  of  self-control  over  his
aberrant  thoughts  and  wishes  that  was  previously  impossible."
The  repressed  complex,  after  being  dissected  and  analysed  in
all  its  relations,  becomes  assimilated  by  the  personal  consciousness
and  the  patient  is  thereby  cured  of  his  disorder.

In  every  attempt  at  scientific  treatment  of  disease  an  accurate
diagnosis  is  the  most  essential  preliminary.  This  is  as  true  of
psychotherapy  as  of  treatment  by  physical  or  chemical  measures.
And  just  as  in  ordinary  medical  treatment  accurate  diagnosis
has  been  one  of  the  latest  phases  in  the  history  of  the  art,  so
in  psychotherapy  the  empirical  methods  of  earlier  workers  are
being  modified  by  the  more  accurate  methods  of  investigation
which  are  being  evolved  at  the  present  time.  The  psycho-analytic
procedures  elaborated  by  the  Vienna  and  Zurich  schools  are  the
most  delicate  instruments  of  psychical  diagnosis  which  we  at
present  possess,  and  their  value  in  this  connection  cannot  fail
to  be  recognised ;  but  when  it  is  maintained  that  these  pro-
cedures are  in  themselves  curative  as  well  as  diagnostic,  there
are  good  grounds  for  disputing  the  validity  of  the  claim.  To
trace  the  psychogenesis  of  a  symptom  is  not  in  itself  to  modify
the  complex  which  causes  it,  and  if  the  psycho-analysis  cannot
be  successfully  jDcrformed  without  at  the  same  time  so  modifying
the  complex  that  the  symptom  disappears,  the  influences  which
lead  to  such  modification — whether  rational  explanation,  per-
suasion, or  suggestion — must  be  given  their  share  of  credit  in
regard  to  the  therapeutic  result.

So  far  we  have  been  dealing  with  methods  of  treatment  which
are  generally  applicable  to  patients  in  the  ordinary  waking  state.
But  these  methods  may  also  be  used  in  conjunction  with  the
artificial  induction  of  more  or  less  profound  alterations  of  con-
sciousness. Moreover,  it  is  maintained  by  some  observers  that
not  only  is  the  analysis  of  the  mental  state  rendered  easier  by
the  presence  of  these  alterations  of  consciousness,  but  also  that
the  necessary  therapeutic  measures  are  thereby  more  easily  and
more  effectively  applied.  In  the  practice  of  hypnotic  suggestion
it  has  been  observed  that  patients  are  sometimes  amenable  to
curative  suggestions  when  no  objective  signs  of  hypnosis  can  be
discovered. And  although  response  to  suggestion  in  these  cases


LXI.]


Review.


679


is  generally  obtained  only  after  some  preliminary  hypnotic  process
has  been  employed,  or  when  the  suggestions  are  given  in  par-
ticular ways  or  under  peculiar  circumstances,  it  is  not  uncommon
to  have  the  results  recorded  as  being  due  to  suggestion  in  the
waking  state.  The  assumptions  made  are  that  since  no  signs  of
hypnosis  can  be  detected,  or  since  no  formal  hypnotic  procedure
has  been  attempted,  the  patient  is  not  hypnotised ;  and  that  if
he  is  not  hypnotised  he  must  necessarily  be  in  the  ordinary
waking  state.  All  these  assumptions  may  be  false.  Using  the
term  hypnosis  in  the  elastic  sense  in  which  it  has  been  used  in
modern  writings,  we  may  say  legitimately  enough  that  there
may  be  a  first  stage  or  degree  of  hypnosis,  the  existence  of  which
is  only  shown  by  response  to  certain  therapeutic  suggestions ;
further,  a  true  hypnosis  may  be  induced  without  any  deliberate
or  formal  attempt  to  hj^pnotise  ;  and  finally,  we  have  no  reason
to  suppose  that  no  intermediate  state  of  consciousness  may  occur
between  the  normal  waking  state  and  definite  hypnosis.  The
existence  of  such  an  intermediate  state  characterised  by
increased  suggestibility  has  been  suspected  by  some  observers,
but  until  comparatively  recently  little  evidence  has  been  forth-
coming in  support  of  their  opinion.  During  the  last  thirteen
years,  however,  Dr.  Boris  Sidis  of  Brookline  has  brought  forward
a  considerable  amount  of  evidence  pointing  to  the  existence  of
such  a  state,  and  has  furnished  some  definite  data  in  regard  to
its  peculiar  characteristics.  A  summary  of  his  researches  and
his  most  important  conclusions  are  given  by  Dr.  Sidis  in  his
contribution  to  the  Symposium  entitled  The  Psychotherapeutic
Value  of  the  Hypnoidal  State.

In  his  earlier  studies  on  the  Psychology  of  Suggestion,  Sidis
found  that  any  arrangement  tending  to  produce  monotony  and
limitation  of  voluntary  activity  brings  about  a  state  of  suggesti-
bility termed  by  him  suhwaking  or  hypnoidal,  a  state  in  which
mental  life  can  be  affected  with  ease.  "The  subwaking  or
hypnoidal  state  is  essentially  an  intermediate  state  belonging  to
the  borderland  of  mental  life.  On  the  one  hand  the  hypnoidal
state  closely  touches  on  the  waking  state,  on  the  other  it  merges
into  hypnosis  and  sleep.  A  close  study  of  the  subwaking  state
shows  that  it  differs  from  the  hypnotic  state  proper,  and  that  it
cannot  be  identified  with  light  hyj^nosis."

In  the  course  of  a  valuable  experimental  study  of  sleep  in
the  lower  animals  and  in  man  Sidis  found  that  the  hypnoidal


C80


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


state  becomes  a  more  prominent  feature  in  connection  with  bodily
rest  and  recuperation  the  farther  we  descend  in  the  scale  of
animal  life.  Indeed  he  concludes  that  the  hypnoidal  state  is  the
primitive  rest  state  out  of  which  both  sleeji  and  hypnosis  have
been  evolved.

The  hypnoidal  state  is  on  the  borderland  of  waking,  sleep,
and  hypnosis.  It  is  a  phase  of  consciousness  which  must  be  passed
through  in  every  transition  from  one  of  these  states  to  another.
In  passing  from  the  waking  state  into  ordinary  sleep,  or  from
sleep  to  waking ;  from  waking  to  hypnosis,  or  from  hypnosis  to
waking ;  from  hypnosis  to  sleep,  or  from  sleep  to  hypnosis,  we
pass  through  a  hypnoidal  state  of  longer  or  shorter  duration.
The  state  is  very  unstable,  and  varies  greatly  as  regards  its
depth.  Sometimes  it  passes  into  sleep,  sometimes  into  a  true
hypnosis.  In  its  deeper  stages  the  j^fitient  hovers  between  sleep
and  hypnosis.

The  spontaneous  occiirrence  of  the  hypnoidal  state  in  man  is,
as  a  rule,  merely  a  transitory  stage  in  the  alternation  of  waking
and  sleep,  but  its  artificial  induction  may  be  very  easily  accom-
plished. There  is  nothing  rigid  about  the  method  of  doing  so;
it  admits  of  many  modifications.  "The  jarincipal  object  consists
in  bringing  about  the  conditions  of  monotony  and  limitation  of
voluntary  movements  requisite  for  normal  and  abnormal  suggesti-
bility. The  patient  is  put  in  a  relaxed,  recumbent  position;  he
is  asked  to  put  himself  in  as  comfortable  a  position  as  possible,
close  his  eyes,  and  attend  to  some  monotonous  stimulus  such  as
the  regular  beats  of  a  metronome  or  the  buzzing  of  an  induc-
torium.  .  .  .  When  respiration  and  jDulse  become  reduced,
sensory-motor  reaction  diminished,  sensory  hypoesthesia  becoming
occasionally  hyperesthesia,  with  occasional  disturbances  of  pulse
and  resjoiration,  with  sudden  apparently  unaccountable  starts,
with  tendencies  of  retention  of  position  of  limbs,  and  now  and
then  with  a  slight  tendency  to  resist  actively  any  change  of
position  of  limbs  or  of  body  without  the  actual  presence  of
catalepsy,  the  whole  feeling  tone  becoming  one  of  acquiescence
and  indifference,  while  memory  with  amnesic  gaps  begins  to  find
the  lost  links,  and  even  to  become  hypermnesic — when  we  observe
all  those  symptoms  we  know  we  have  before  us  the  subconscious
hypnoidal  state."

In  the  hypnoidal  state  there  is  a  surging  up  of  subconscious
memories, and  this  peculiarity  makes  it  a  valuable  instrument


lxl]


Review.


681


in  tracing  the  origin  of  the  symptoms  of  psychopathic  maladies.
But  Sidis  does  not  claim  for  it  in  this  respect  any  therapeutic
value.  He  thinks  that  the  information  gained  by  the  patient  in
this  way  as  to  the  origin  of  his  troubles  is  valuable  "only  in
so  far  as  by  a  systematic  course  of  direct  and  indirect  suggestion,
by  mediate  associative  and  immediate  associative  suggestion,  by
substitution,  disintegration,  and  synthesis,  both  in  the  waking
and  hypnoidal  states,  we  help  to  transform  the  associative  course
and  emotional  tone  of  the  patient's  mental  life."

The  practical  value  of  the  hypnoidal  state  lies  chiefly  in  its
therapeutic  possibilities.  Being  a  state  in  which  the  patient  is
amenable  to  suggestion,  many  of  the  advantages  of  the  hypnotic
state  may  be  obtained  withotit  the  necessity  of  inducing  hypnosis.
But  apart  from  its  affording  an  easily  induced  state  characterised
by  suggestibility,  Sidis  claims  for  it  therajDeutic  virtues  of  a
unique  kind.  He  maintains  that  the  main  therapeutic  value  of
the  hypnoidal  state  consists  in  the  liberation  of  reserve  energy
potential  in  the  nervous  system,  and  the  synthesis  of  dissociated
complexes  which  is  thereby  brought  about.

The  principle  of  reserve  energy  is  based  upon  a  broad  generali-
sation of  facts,  namely,  that  far  less  energy  is  utilised  by  the
individual  than  is  actually  at  his  disposal.  In  the  struggle  for
existence  the  importance  of  a  reserve  of  energy  which  can  be
drawn  upon  in  emergencies  is  very  great,  and  the  accumulation
of  such  a  store  of  energy  is  a  feature  of  the  evolutionary  process
in  all  highly  specialised  organisms.  The  most  important  factor
conducing  to  a  reserve  of  potential  energy  is  the  increase  of
inhibitions  that  accompanies  the  growth  in  complexity  which
characterises  the  evolution  of  the  nervous  system.  Unrestrained
reaction  to  the  multitude  of  stimuli  to  which  highly  differentiated
organisms  are  exposed  would  be  extremely  wasteful,  and  successful
adaptation  to  a  complex  environment  is  invariably  found  to  be
accompanied  by  an  increase  of  nervous  inhibitions.  The  thres-
holds of  stimulation  of  a  complex  system  rise  in  proportion  to
its  complexity,  and  with  the  rise  of  thresholds  energy,  which
would  otherwise  have  been  imnecessarily  expended,  becomes  locked
ujD  in  the  nervous  system  for  future  use.

A  high  degree  of  inhibition  is  a  characteristic  of  all  civilised
races,  but  occasionally  in  the  life  of  the  individual  the  inhibitory
tendency  becomes  too  intense,  and  by  interfering  with  normal
and  necessary  reactions  has  a  disastrous  effect  on  the  personality.


682


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


A  whole  system  or  complex  may  thus  be  rendered  inactive  and
cut  off  from  the  personal  life,  and  the  dissociated  complex  and
its  stored  energy  are  rendered  useless  in  the  adjustment  of  the
individual  to  his  environment.  By  removing  the  inhibitions
access  is  gained  to  the  dormant  energy  of  the  inhibited  systems,
and  the  energy  so  released  helps  towards  their  reintegration  and
synthesis.  Now  Sidis  claims  that  the  hypnoidal  state  "helps  us
to  reach  the  inaccessible  regions  of  dormant  energy,  it  helps  to
break  down  inhibitions,  liberate  reserve  energies,  and  repair  the
breaches  of  mental  activity.  The  painful  systems  become  dis-
sociated, disintegrated,  and  again  transformed,  reformed,  and
reintegrated  into  new  systems  full  of  energy,  and  joy,  and  life."

In  the  course  of  his  experience  Dr.  Sidis  seems  to  have  modified
his  opinions  in  some  ways  regarding  the  nature  and  importance
of  the  hypnoidal  state.  In  his  earlier  writings  little  stress  was
laid  on  the  employment  of  hyjDnoidisation  as  a  means  of  unlocking
the  reserve  energy  of  the  nervous  system.  It  was  rather  as  a
jarocedure  that  induced  a  state  in  which  suggestion  was  effective
and  in  which  forgotten  memories  could  be  recovered  that  it  was
recommended.  And  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  these  respects
it  is  a  very  valuable  measure  in  the  diagnosis  and  treatment  of
the  psycho-neuroses.  In  my  own  experience  I  have  found  it
inferior  to  hypnosis  in  both  of  these  resjDects,  but  of  very  definite
value  when  for  any  reason  hypnosis  cannot  be  induced.  In  regard
also  to  the  liberation  of  reserve  energy  the  hypnotic  state  should
be  more  useful  than  the  hyiDUoidal.  For  in  the  hypnoidal  state
there  is  merely  a  fluctuation  and  redistribution  of  thresholds,
whilst  in  hypnosis  there  is  a  general  lowering  of  thresholds  and
a  consequent  removal  of  inhibitions  that  tend  to  block  the  free
circulation  of  the  energy  of  dissociated  systems.  Indeed  the
principle  of  dormant  reserve  energy  and  its  liberation  in  the
course  of  successful  treatment  must  be  applicable  to  almost  every
psychotherapeutic  method  ;  for  in  whatever  way  the  reintegration
of  inhibited  systems  may  be  brought  about,  the  energy  so  liberated
must  go  to  swell  the  total  amount  of  energy  available  and  assist
in  the  re-establishment  of  normal  associations.

Although  I  can  endorse  from  my  own  experience  the  usefulness
of  the  method  of  hypnoidisation  advocated  by  Sidis,  and  although
I  think  it  is  well  to  distinguish  by  a  special  name  the  inter-
mediary state  which  is  to  be  observed  between  waking  and
hypnosis,  it  seems  to  me  doubtful  whether  the  hypnoidal  state


lxl]


Review.


683


can  be  regarded  as  a  state  of  consciousness  clearly  marked  off
from  light  hypnosis.  Sidis  admits  that  it  is  a  very  unstable
condition,  sometimes  differing  hardly  at  all  from  the  waking
state,  sometimes  deepening  into  definite  hypnosis  :  and  it  seems
probable  that  its  therapeutic  value  may  be  due  to  the  hypnotic
element,  which  is  almost  invariably  present  in  greater  or  less
degree.  In  discussing  this  matter  we  are  of  course  hampered  by
the  absence  of  any  recognised  definition  of  hypnosis  and  of  any
distinguishing  feature  which  will  enable  us  in  every  case  to
differentiate  the  hyjjnotic  state  from  other  states  of  conscious-
ness. In  the  deeper  degrees  of  hypnosis  the  peculiarities  of  the
state  are  clearly  marked  off  from  the  phenomena  observable  in
waking  life,  but  as  we  approach  the  lighter  stages  it  becomes
more  and  more  difficult  to  say  in  what  hypnosis  really  consists.
In  Bernheim's  hands  hypnosis  disappears  altogether,  and  nothing
is  left  but  suggestibility,  or,  at  most,  increased  suggestibility ;
normal  suggestibility  becomes  increased  suggestibility  by  means
of  suggestion.  But  although  it  is  commonly  held  that  some  people
are  responsive  to  direct  suggestion  in  the  waking  state,  there
are  good  grounds  for  holding  that  such  resjDonsiveness  is  always
preceded  by  some  change  in  consciousness  of  the  nature  of  what
in  its  more  marked  stages  we  know  as  hypnosis.  This  applies
whether  the  preliminary  change  in  consciousness  occurs  spon-
taneously or  is  artificially  produced ;  and  in  either  case  the
observable  departure  from  normal  waking  may  be  so  slight  that
we  are  tempted  to  think  that  we  have  to  do  with  effective
suggestion  in  the  waking  state.  On  the  other  hand,  the  change
from  ordinary  waking  may  be  apparent  while  none  of  the
recognised  peculiarities  of  definite  hypnosis  are  to  be  found,  so
that  we  may  be  led  to  believe  that  we  are  dealing  with  a  phase
of  consciousness  which  is  neither  the  waking  state  nor  hypnosis.
The  hypnoidal  state  described  by  Sidis  seems  to  include  all  the
stages  which  lie  between  the  waking  state  and  definite  hypnosis,
and  in  view  of  the  difficulty  of  saying  where  waking  ends  and
hypnosis  begins  it  is  convenient  and  desirable  to  have  some  term
which  will  cover  this  ill-defined  territory.

As  I  have  already  said,  some  men  who  formerly  used  hypnotism
in  the  practice  of  treatment  by  suggestion  now  maintain  that
the  "sleep"  is  unnecessary,  and  they  teach  that  suggestion
without  hypnosis  is  equally  efficacious.  The  most  distinguished
exponent  of  this  view  in  this  country  is  Dr.  Milne  Bramwell,


684-


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


who  after  many  years  of  remarkable  success  as  a  hypnotist  has
practically  given  up  attempting  to  hypnotise  his  patients.  Yet
he  tells  us  his  results  have  in  no  way  suffered,  and  he  naturally
regards  the  induction  of  hypnosis  as  simply  a  waste  of  time.
In  view  of  the  admittedly  greater  susceptibility  to  suggestion
which  characterises  hypnosis  as  compared  with  that  of  the  waking
state,  and  in  view  of  the  doubts  expressed  by  many  observers
as  to  the  possibility  of  getting  response  to  direct  suggestion  in
normal  life  without  some  prior  change  in  consciousness,  it  is
interesting  to  examine  Dr.  Bramwell's  method  of  giving  the
suggestions  which  prove  so  efficacious.

Dr.  Bramwell  asks  the  patient  to  sit  in  a  comfortable  arm
chair,  close  his  eyes,  and  concentrate  his  attention  on  some
restful  mental  picture.  While  the  patient  rests  thus  Dr.  Bramwell
quietly  and  monotonously  makes  suggestions  which  the  patient
is  not  supposed  to  attend  to.  The  hypothesis  on  which  the
method  is  based  is  that  we  have  a  secondary  consciousness  which
possesses  powers  over  the  organism  greater  than  those  of  the
ordinary  one,  and  that  if  the  primary  consciousness  is  absorbed
in  some  restful  train  of  thought  the  suggestions  more  easily
reach  the  secondary  one  and  call  its  powers  into  play.  It  is  the
repetition  of  the  impression  made  in  this  particular  way  which
gives  it  its  j^ower.  Dr.  Bramwell  tells  the  patient  beforehand
that  he  does  not  wish  him  to  go  to  sleep,  but  that  if  he  can  get
into  the  drowsy  condition  which  precedes  normal  sleep  the
curative  suggestions  are  likely  to  be  responded  to  more  quickly.
In  describing  the  condition  brought  about  by  these  methods.  Dr.
Bramwell  says  the  patient  "  often  passes  into  a  drowsy,  day-dreamy
state.  Sometimes  the  condition  becomes  one  of  slight  natural
sleep  ;  the  patient  ceases  to  hear  my  voice,  and  loses  conscious-
ness for  a  moment  or  two,  then  drifts  back  to  consciousness
again." ^

Before  giving  systematised  suggestions  to  his  patients  in  this
way,  Dr.  Bramwell  always  studies  their  m^ental  condition  in
reference  to  their  symptoms.  When  these  are  all  of  nervous
origin  he  carefully  explains,  step  by  step,  how  they  have  arisen
and  have  been  maintained  by  morbid  self-suggestion,  and  that
the  remedy  lies  in  re-education  and  the  development  of  will
power  and  self-control.  But  while  this  appeal  to  the  patient's
intelligence  is  often  helpful,  it  is  not  the  most  important  part

'Bramwell,  Hypnotism  and  Treatment  hy  Suggestion  (1909),  p.  168.


LXI.]


Review.


685


of  the  treatment.  The  essential  thing  is  the  systematised  sugges-
tions under  the  conditions  described.

In  the  method  of  Dr.  Bramwell  we  find  all  the  conditions
which  Sidis  desiderates  for  the  production  of  the  hypnoidal  state.
There  is  monotony  and  restriction  of  voluntary  movement.  The
monotonous  repetition  of  suggestions  v/ill  have  an  effect  similar
to  that  produced  by  the  beats  of  a  metronome  or  the  buzzing
of  an  inductorium,  and  increased  suggestibility  will  be  brought
about,  not  altogether  by  the  content  of  the  suggested  ideas,  but
partly  by  the  manner  in  which  they  are  presented.  In  the  state
of  consciousness  produced  by  this  method  of  giving  suggestions,
we  see  the  same  instability  and  variableness  which  Sidis  tells
us  characterises  the  hypnoidal  state,  and  it  would  seem  as  if
Dr.  Bramwell  really  treats  his  patients  by  hypnoidisation,  com-
bined with  suggestion  given  in  a  joarticular  way.  Monotonous
reiteration  of  the  curative  suggestions  is  a  characteristic  feature
of  the  method,  and  the  efficacy  of  this  may  be  correlated  with
what  we  know  of  the  importance  of  repetition  in  the  formation
and  conservation  of  new  mental  complexes.

It  will  probably  be  found  that  all  successful  therapeutic
suggestion  without  hypnosis,  where  direct  verbal  suggestion  has
been  employed,  is  to  be  explained  by  the  production  of  the
hypnoidal  state ;  for  we  have  no  evidence  at  present  that  direct
verbal  suggestion  in  the  normal  waking  state  can  produce  the
mental  and  physiological  changes  which  are  implied  in  the  cure
of  mental  and  physiological  disorders.  Indirect  suggestion  is
another  matter,  and  its  elusiveness  is  one  of  our  main  difficulties
in  estimating  the  value  of  any  form  of  treatment  whatsoever :
but  we  are  probably  right  in  supporting  the  view  put  forward
by  Sidis  in  his  study  of  the  Psychology  of  Suggestion,  that  in
the  waking  state  suggestion  is  least  effective  when  most  direct,
and  most  effective  when  least  direct.

The  different  methods  of  psychotherapy  which  I  have  described
are  all  developments  which  have  arisen  out  of  the  study  of
hypnotic  suggestion,  and  it  is  as  a  rule  the  expressed  purpose
of  their  originators  to  offer  them  as  substitutes  for  and  improve-
ments on  the  older  method.  But  although  their  superiority  may
be  admitted  under  certain  circumstances  or  in  the  treatment  of
particular  morbid  states,  it  is  doubtful  if  any  of  them  by  itself,
or  all  of  them  combined,  will  ever  take  the  place  of  suggestion
during hypnosis as a widely applicable therapeutic  measure.


686


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


Yet  each  is  of  value  in  its  own  way.  Simple  explanation  and
re-education  is  and  always  has  been  an  important  feature  in
every  form  of  psychotherapy.  Psycho-analysis  jDi-oves  of  un-
doubted value  in  dealing  with  certain  psychopathic  conditions.
Hypnoidisation  provides  an  easy  method  of  inducing  a  state  of
consciousness  which  facilitates  psycho-analysis  and  increases
suggestibility.  The  value  of  hypnotic  suggestion  is  well  estab-
lished and  needs  no  defence,  and  unless  it  can  be  shown  that
other  methods  are  as  effective,  as  easily  applied,  and  as  widely
applicable,  we  cannot  afford  to  dispense  with  it  as  a  therapeutic
measure.  Why  there  should  be  any  desire  to  dispense  with  it
before  some  better  way  is  found  is  hard  to  understand.  Prejudice
should  have  no  place  among  the  influences  which  determine  our
estimate  of  the  value  of  any  form  of  treatment,  but  it  cannot
be  denied  that  in  the  writings  of  some  therapeutists  we  find
evidence  of  a  mental  attitude  towards  hypnotism  which  is  un-
worthy of  scientific  men.


LXI.]


Review.


687


II.

REVIEW.


Mesmerism  and  Christian  Science:  a  short  history  of  mental
healing.  By  Frank  Podmore.  (Methuen  &  Co.,  London,  1909.
Pp.  306. Price,  10s.  6d.  net.)

In  setting  out  to  write  a  short  history  of  mental  healing,  Mr.
Podmore  may  well  have  been  embarrassed  by  the  amount  of
material  at  his  disposal,  and  he  must  have  had  difficulty  in
deciding  where  to  begin  and  where  to  end.  For  the  beginnings
of  mental  healing  must  be  looked  for  in  the  opening  chapters
of  man's  history,  its  persistence  through  the  ages  may  be  dis-
covered in  the  records  of  all  peojjles,  its  development  in  our  own
time  has  taken  place  along  widely  diverging  paths,  and  in  no
direction  can  it  be  said  that  the  end  has  yet  come.  Instead  of
beginning  with  Mesmerism,  which  was  really  the  first  attempt
at  rationalising  the  mystical  practices  of  former  generations,  he
might  have  traced  these  practices  to  their  roots  in  the  super-
stitions of  barbarism  or  in  the  magical  rites  of  early  civilisations.
Instead  of  ending  with  Christian  Science,  which  seems  the  final
abandonment  of  reason  in  the  interpretation  of  the  results
obtained  by  mental  healing,  he  might  have  traced  the  vicissitudes
of  hypnotism  since  the  days  of  Braid  and  brought  his  story  to  a
close  with  an  account  of  the  psychotherapeutic  methods  of  the
present  day.  We  are  told  in  the  preface  that  "the  aim  of  the
present  work  is  briefly  to  describe  the  various  phases  of  the
movement  initiated  by  Mesmer,  and  to  trace  the  successive
attempts  made  by  those  who  came  after  him  to  get  below  the
surface  to  the  underlying  reality."

It  cannot  be  Mr.  Podmore's  intention  to  imply  that  after  a
hundred  years  of  striving  to  get  below  the  surface  to  the  under-


688


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


lying  reality  the  att-empt  must  be  abandoned,  or  that  all  the
phases  of  the  movement  initiated  by  Mesmer  culminate  in  the
doctrines  and  practice  of  Mrs.  Eddy.  Yet  there  is  no  break  in
the  story  from  Mesmerism  to  Christian  Science  just  as  there  is
no  real  discontinuity  between  Mesmerism  and  the  psychic  treat-
ment of  orthodox  physicians  at  the  present  time.  With  the  rise
of  Mesmerism  two  lines  of  thought  which  had  existed  for  hundreds
of  years,  at  first  inextricably  mingled,  then  side  by  side,  came
once  more  for  a  time  into  contact  with  each  other.  At  the
close  of  the  Mesmeric  period  these  lines  again  diverged,  there
was  a  parting  of  the  ways,  and  it  is  along  only  one  of  these
ways  that  Mr.  Podmore  leads  us.

For  a  long  time  after  the  Renaissance  the  practice  of  the  art
of  healing  displayed  a  curious  blend  of  occultism  and  empiricism.
Natural  remedies  were  eagerly  sought  after  and  employed  with
effect  in  the  treatment  of  disease,  yet  the  virtues  of  medicaments
were  almost  universally  believed  to  depend  on  the  due  performance
of  magical  rites.  The  desire  for  natural  explanations  was  frus-
trated by  the  uncertainty  of  the  results,  and  such  definite
therapeutic  effects  as  were  obtained  seemed  to  receive  their  most
reasonable  interpretation  in  the  doctrines  of  Hermetic  Science.
With  the  dawn  of  the  scientific  era  an  ever  widening  gulf
developed  between  occultism  and  physical  jDhilosophy,  and  towards
the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century  a  mystical  explanation  of
any  natural  phenomenon  was  as  little  likely  to  obtain  credence
as  it  would  be  at  the  present  day.  Yet  about  this  time  certain
teachings  of  the  mystical  writers  of  an  earlier  period  were  forced
upon  the  attention  of  the  scientific  world  by  the  work  of  Mesmer.
And  although  Mesmer  failed  to  convince  his  scientific  contem-
poraries of  the  truth  of  his  doctrines,  or  even  of  the  genuineness
of  the  phenomena  on  which  he  based  his  claim  to  be  heard,  he
was  without  doubt  the  means  of  bringing  under  the  scrutiny  of
science  certain  facts  of  nature  which  in  the  Age  of  Reason  were
only  too  likely  to  be  neglected  and  forgotten.  Mr.  Podmore
says  that  ' '  Mesmer's  first  claim  to  our  remembrance  lies  in
this — that  he  wrested  the  privilege  of  healing  from  the  Churches,
and  gave  it  to  mankind  as  a  general  possession."  But  if  Christian
Science  were  to  be  regarded  as  the  sole  outcome  of  the  movement
initiated  by  Mesmer,  it  would  seem  as  if  his  work  had  been  in
vain.  Rather  should  we  say  that  Mesmer's  first  claim  to  our
remembrance  lies  in  this — that  he  compelled  scientific  men  to


Revieiv.


689


investigate  a  class  of  natural  phenomena  whose  very  existence
they  vk^oulcl  fain  have  denied.

Mr.  Podmore  dismisses  in  a  few  pages  the  scientific  work  that
has  been  done  in  connection  with  this  subject  since  the  close  of
the  Mesmeric  period.  It  is  no  part  of  his  plan  to  record  the
history  of  Hypnotism  which  is,  he  says,  "only  the  youngest  and
at  present  by  no  means  the  most  prominent  of  the  progeny  of
Mesmer."  His  purpose  rather  is  to  trace  the  pedigree  of
Christian  Science  and  allied  schools  of  thought  from  their  roots
in  "that  universal  system  of  knowledge  whose  boast  it  was  to
unite  two  well  known  sciences — Astronomy  and  Medicine."  And
in  doing  so  he  has  given  us  a  most  fascinating  work.  The
fullness  of  knowledge  which  he  shows  in  regard  to  every  stage
in  the  development  of  his  story  marks  him  out  as  peculiarly
fitted  for  the  task,  while  the  impartiality  of  judgment  and  the
critical  acumen  which  he  brings  to  bear  on  all  the  subjects  dealt
with  are  in  striking  contrast  with  the  mental  attitude  of  most
writers  who  have  dealt  with  these  matters  in  the  past.

The  first  half  of  the  book  is  devoted  to  the  history  of  Animal
Magnetism,  and  it  is  doubtful  if  there  exists  in  any  language
so  complete  and  yet  so  succinct  an  account  of  that  extraordinary
movement.  The  book  opens  with  a  short  description  of  Mesmer 's
early  life  and  studies,  followed  by  a  rapid  survey  of  the  main
incidents  which  attended  his  first  appearance  in  Pai'is  in  1778.
His  methods  are  described,  and  a  record  of  some  of  the  cases
of  cure  by  Animal  Magnetism  is  given.  Before  proceeding  to
treat  of  Mesmer's  later  life  and  the  recejotion  which  he  met  with
at  the  hands  of  the  medical  faculty  and  scientific  authorities
generally,  Mr.  Podmore  shows  how  Mesmer  derived  his  methods
and  his  doctrines  from  the  faith  healers  and  the  mystical
philosophers  of  a  former  generation.

Many  features  of  Mesmer's  practice  at  the  beginning  of  his
career  may  be  found  in  the  methods  employed  by  Valentine
Greatrakes  and  Gassner,  and  the  philosophical  doctrines  sum-
marised in  the  famous  twenty-seven  jDropositions  are  implicitly
contained  in  the  writings  of  Paracelsus,  Van  Helmont,  Fludd,
and  Maxwell.  "To  Van  Helmont  the  Magnetic  system  is  still
pi'imarily  a  spiritual  affair,  a  link  between  the  heavens  and  the
earth.  Man  can  only  obtain  a  complete  mastery  over  the  powers
which  sleep  in  his  own  nature  by  assimilating  his  will  to  the
Divine  Will. In  the  writings  of  Maxwell and  Fludd  greater


690


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


stress  is  laid  upon  the  material  operations  of  the  fluid ;  the
theory  tends  to  become  less  mystical  and  more  scientific.  .  .  .
But  in  Mesmer's  exposition  this  sjoiritual  aspect  of  the  doctrine
has  entirely  disappeared.  For  him  the  Magnetic  system  is  purely
a  question  of  matter  and  motion."

Such  at  all  events  was  the  claim  put  forward  by  Mesmer  in
the  paper  which  he  presented  to  the  Academy  of  Sciences  in
1778.  It  was  as  a  physicist  rather  than  as  a  physician  that  he
asked  to  be  recognised.  It  was  not  so  much  a  new  method  of
treating  disease,  but  a  new  physical  force  which  he  claimed  to
have  discovered.  But  apart  from  cases  of  alleged  cure  of  disease,
the  only  evidence  he  could  bring  forward  in  supjDort  of  his
contention  was  the  subjective  sensations  of  those  operated  upon.
"When  Leroy  and  his  colleagues  undertook  to  explain  all  these
sensations  as  due  simply  to  imagination,  Mesmer  was  confounded.
He  forgot  his  resolve  not  to  leave  his  great  discovery  to  the
uncertain  arbitrament  of  the  consulting  room,  his  reluctance  to
embroil  himself  with  the  medical  faculty,  and  he  decided  against
his  better  judgment  to  offer  the  proofs  demanded  of  him."

Then  followed  the  long  series  of  abortive  attempts  to  have
Mesmer's  claims  investigated  by  the  learned  Societies  of  Paris,
culminating  finally  in  the  appointment  by  the  Government  of
two  commissions,  one  chosen  from  the  Faculty  of  Medicine  and
the  Academy  of  Sciences,  and  one  from  the  Royal  Society  of
Medicine.  The  reports  of  both  commissions  were  unfavourable
to  the  claims  of  the  Animal  Magnetists.  The  commissioners
appointed  by  the  Faculty  of  Medicine  contented  themselves  with
showing  that  there  was  no  proof  of  the  existence  of  Mesmer's
postulated  fluid,  and  since  the  fluid  did  not  exist  they  thought
there  was  no  need  to  inquire  into  its  utility.  This  Report,
drawn  up  with  great  skill  by  Bailly,  was  signed  on  the  eleventh
of  August,  and  as  Mr.  Podmore  says  in  his  preface,  this  date
"should  be  observed  as  a  day  of  humiliation  by  every  learned
Society  in  the  civilised  world,  for  on  that  date  in  1784  a  Com-
mission, consisting  of  the  most  distinguished  representatives  of
Science  in  the  most  enlightened  cajDital  in  Europe,  pronounced
the  rejection  of  a  pregnant  scientific  discovery — a  discovery
possibly  rivalling  in  permanent  significance  all  the  contributions
to  the  physical  Sciences  made  by  the  two  most  famous  members
of  the  Commission — Lavoisier  and  Benjamin  Franklin."

The  Report  of  the  Royal  Society  Commission  was  to  the  same


LXI.]


Review.


691


effect,  although  one  of  its  members,  Jussieu,  issued  a  separate
Report  on  his  own  account,  in  which  he  showed  himself  to  be
a  better  obsei-ver  than  his  colleagues.  But  Jussieu's  Report  had
as  little  effect  on  his  scientific  contemporaries  as  the  Report  of
Bailly's  Commission  had  on  the  wider  public  who  were  interested
in  Animal  Magnetism,  and  the  movement  continued  to  sjjread
up  to  the  time  of  the  Revolution.

The  most  important  names  connected  with  this  period  are
those  of  Puysegur,  Petetin,  and  Deleuze,  and  Mr.  Podmore
gives  an  adequate  account  of  the  work  of  these  three  men.  The
discovery  of  Somnambulism  by  Puysegur  marks  an  important
stage  in  the  history  of  the  subject,  and  in  his  belief  in  the
influence  of  the  will  in  directing  and  controlling  the  magnetic
fluid  we  may  recognise  the  growing  tendency  towards  the  inclusion
of  the  human  element  in  the  interpretation  of  Mesmeric  phe-
nomena and  so  towards  what  we  regard  as  the  true  explanation.

With  the  outbreak  of  the  Revolution  the  progress  of  Animal
Magnetism  almost  stopped,  but  after  the  Restoration  it  reap-
peared and  flourished  more  vigorously  than  ever.  So  widespread
did  its  practice  become  that  in  1825  it  was  again  brought  before
the  Academy  of  Medicine,  and  a  Committee  of  investigation
was  appointed  in  February  of  the  following  year.  The  Report
of  this  Commission,  prepared  by  Husson  and  delivered  in  1831,
was  as  indiscriminately  favourable  to  the  claims  of  the  Animal
Magnetists  as  Bailly's  Report  had  been  unfavourable.  But
although  the  Commissioners  were  men  of  scientific  standing,
their  favourable  judgment  had  but  little  influence  on  the  medical
profession,  and  did  nothing  to  alter  its  resolute  determination
to  have  nothing  to  do  with  Animal  Magnetism.  The  attitude
of  the  official  medical  world  may  be  judged  from  the  sjDlenetic
work  of  Burdin  and  Dubois.  In  their  Histoire  Academique  du
Magnetisme  Animcd,  published  ten  years  after  the  issue  of
Husson's  Report,  these  authors  poured  out  their  contempt  on
everything  and  everybody  connected  with  the  subject.  So  blinded
by  prejudice  were  they  that  they  could  see  nothing  of  truth  or
of  value  in  any  part  of  the  story  from  Mesmer  to  Teste.

The  final  abandonment  of  Animal  Magnetism  by  the  medical
faculty  in  France  came  about  through  the  repeated  discovery
of  fraud  in  connection  with  the  Magnetists'  attempts  to  demon-
strate the  reality  of  clairvoyance  by  their  magnetised  subjects.
As  so  often  happens  in  research  on  matters  of  this  kind,  the


692  T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.  [part

discovery  of  fraud  was  held  to  justify  the  investigators  in  dis-
jjensing  with  further  inquiry  into  related  jjhenoniena  in  which
fraud  had  not  been  discovered.

It  was  in  the  period  following  the  Restoration  that  Alexander
Bertrand  lectured  and  wrote  on  Animal  Magnetism,  and  although
his  work  had  but  little  effect  on  his  contemporaries,  it  may
now  be  recognised  that  he  alone  of  all  the  medical  men  of  that
time  succeeded  in  distinguishing  in  some  measure  between  the
false  and  the  true  in  Animal  Magnetism.  It  is  surprising  how
modern  much  of  Bertrand's  writing  appears,  and  it  was  perhaps
inevitable  that  the  importance  of  his  views  should  have  been
missed  by  his  contemporaries  and  by  later  writers.  His  work
has  hardly  yet  had  justice  done  to  it,  and  it  is  gratifying  to
find  that  Mr.  Podmore  has  clone  something  to  restore  to  its
proper  place  in  the  history  of  the  subject  the  name  of  one  of
the  most  careful  observers  in  the  annals  of  Animal  Magnetism.

There  was  in  Paris  about  this  time  another  Magnetist,  to
whose  merit  Mr.  Podmore  hardly,  perhaps,  does  justice.  The
Abbe  Faria  was  one  of  the  most  successful  operators  of  his  day,
and  his  doctrine  of  Suggestion  as  the  cause  of  the  Mesmeric
state  and  its  associated  phenomena  is  more  modern  even  than
that  of  Bertrand.  The  name  of  Faria  is  of  particular  interest
to  us  in  this  country,  for  it  was  he  who  taught  Richard  Chenevix
to  magnetise,  and  it  was  Chenevix  who  introduced  Elliotson  to
the  study  of  Mesmerism.  If  Elliotson  had  only  paid  some  regard
to  the  teachings  of  Faria,  the  story  of  Mesmerism  in  England
might  have  been  very  different,  and  we  might  have  been  spared
the  most  deplorable  chapter  in  the  annals  of  British  Medicine.

Mr.  Podmore  brings  his  history  of  Animal  Magnetism  to  a
close  with  an  admirable  chapter,  in  which  he  recounts  the  main
incidents  of  the  struggle  with  official  medical  science  in  this
country.  As  he  well  says,  "The  intolerance  of  the  medical
profession  from  1839  onwards  to  Mesmerism,  and  especially  its
obstinate  rejection  of  the  cumulative  evidence  of  the  relief  from
pain  occasionally  afforded  by  its  means  in  surgical  operations,
is  one  of  the  most  noteworthy  episodes  in  the  history  of  medical
science."  But  recognition  of  the  reality  of  some  of  the  facts
of  Mesmerism  and  some  insight  into  their  probable  explanation
must  surely  have  followed  the  work  of  Braid  had  it  not  been
for  the  discovery  of  chloroform  and  the  rise  of  modern
Spiritualism. To  the  few  unprejudiced  medical  men  who  were


LXI.]


Review.


693


inclined  to  look  with  favour  on  the  practice  of  Mesmerism,  the
hope  that  it  might  become  of  use  in  surgical  work  was  the  main
incentive  to  its  study,  and  the  introduction  of  an  anaesthetic,
which  was  found  to  act  with  certainty  in  all  cases,  seemed  to
deprive  the  less  reliable  method  of  the  Mesmerists  of  all  utility.
The  effect  of  the  rise  of  Spiritualism  on  the  progress  of  Animal
Magnetism  is  well  told  by  Mr.  Podmore.  "When  table-turning
and  spirit-rapping  were  introduced  into  this  country  from
America,  the  Mesmerists  soon  identified  the  mysterious  force
which  caused  the  jDhenomena  with  the  mesmeric  or  neuro-vital
fluid.  A  little  later,  when  the  trance  and  its  manifestations
were  exploited  in  the  interests  of  the  new  gospel  of  Spiritualism,
many  of  the  English  Mesmerists,  v/ho  had  been  j^^'eparecl  by
the  utterances  of  their  own  clairvoyants  for  some  such  develop-
ment, proclaimed  themselves  adherents  of  the  new  faith.  Elliotson
himself  before  his  death  became  a  convert  to  Spiritualism.  The
Mesmerists  generally  found  the  marvels  of  the  magnetic  fluid
insignificant  in  face  of  the  new  revelation.  Mesmeric  operators
became  spiritual  healers,  and  their  subjects  trance  mediums ;  the
spiritualist  platforms  were  thronged  with  magnetic  clairvoyants
who  had  developed  into  '  inspirational '  speakers.  The  two
movements  naturally  became  identified  in  the  minds  of  the
public,  and  shared  in  a  common  condemnation.  No  physician
who  valued  his  professional  reputation  could  afford  to  meddle
with  the  subject,  and  the  study  of  the  induced  trance  and  its
attendant  phenomena  was  relegated  to  oblivion,  in  these  islands
at  any  rate,  for  more  than  a  generation."

But  the  cessation  of  scientific  interest  in  Mesmerism  did  not
stop  the  development  of  the  movement,  and  the  outcome  of  this
development  is  not  to  be  measured  by  the  amount  of  scientific
work  that  has  been  done  in  this  connection  since  the  days  of
Braid,  or  by  the  conclusions  that  have  been  arrived  at  in  the
course  of  the  rise  of  modern  psychotherapy  as  practised  by  more
or  less  orthodox  physicians.  As  Mr.  Podmore  says,  "The
deliberate  negligence  of  the  scientific  world  left  the  whole  field
to  be  cultivated  by  the  visionary  and  the  charlatan.  The
abundant  crop  of  false  beliefs  and  extravagant  systems  which
flourish  at  the  jDreseut  time  is  the  direct  result  of  the  apathy
or  obstinate  incredulity  shown  by  the  physicians  of  two  generations
ago."

All  the  mysticisms  and  pseudo-sciences  of  the  present  day  no


694


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[PAKT


doubt  owe  something  to  Mesmer,  but  there  are,  as  Mr.  Podmore
shows,  three  distinct  schools  of  thought,  each  claiming  a  scientific
foundation,  whose  descent  may  be  traced  directly  back  to  the
system  of  knowledge  on  which  Mesmer's  work  was  based.  "The
three  faiths  in  question  are  the  fluidic  theory,  which  finds  its
headquarters,  appropriately  enough,  in  modern  Paris  ;  the  religion
of  Modern  Spiritualism ;  and  the  movement  of  Mental  Healing,
of  which  the  sect  known  as  Christian  Scientists  are  the  most
prominent  repi'esentatives."  It  is  to  tracing  the  connection
between  Mesmerism  and  these  modern  phases  of  thought  that
the  second  half  of  Mr.  Podmore's  book  is  devoted.

Believers  in  Animal  Magnetism  had,  in  the  face  of  all  adverse
criticism,  persistently  clung  to  a  belief  in  the  existence  of  some
form  of  fluid  emanation  which  passed  from  the  operator  to  the
subject  in  the  process  of  magnetising,  although  they  were  often
hard  pressed  to  explain  how  the  fluid  operated  in  producing  the
so-called  higher  phenomena  of  Mesmerism.  A  welcome  support
to  £heir  belief  was  found  in  the  experimental  researches  of
Reiclienbacli,  and  although  counter  experiments  were  made  by
Braid  which  jjointed  the  way  to  the  true  explanation,  Reichen-
bach's  work  exercised  considerable  influence  in  this  country.  But
still  the  higher  phenomena  called  for  some  further  explanation,
and  the  growing  wonders  of  clairvoyance  recorded  on  all  sides
at  this  time  gradually  convinced  the  most  orthodox  of  the
fiuidists  that  in  clairvoyance  there  was  something  which  tran-
scended all  their  physical  interj^retations  and  compelled  them  to
revert  to  the  mystical  explanations  of  earlier  times.  Even
Deleuze  thought  that  the  phenomena  of  somnambulism  proved
clearly  the  spiritual  nature  of  the  soul,  and  that  the  soul,  "though
it  generally  makes  use  of  the  sense  organs,  can  in  certain  states
receive  ideas  and  sensations  without  the  mediation  of  these
organs."  As  Mr.  Podmore  says,  "If  a  man,  gifted  with  such
sobriety  of  judgment  as  Deleuze,  could  write  in  that  strain,  it
is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  less  cautious  students  should  see
in  the  magnetic  trance  an  open  door  into  the  spiritual  world."

During  the  next  few  years  their  expectations  seemed  to  be
abundantly  realised.  Under  the  influence  of  the  teachings  of
Swedenborg  revelations  of  a  spiritual  world  had  formed  a  not
infrequent  feature  of  magnetic  or  spontaneous  trance,  especially
in  Germany,  from  the  beginning  of  the  Mesmeric  movement ;
and  at  the  time  when  Husson's  Commission  was  investigating


LXI.]


Review.


695


the  claims  of  the  magnetists,  Justinus  Kerner  was  recording  the
sayings  and  doings  of  the  Seeress  of  Prevorst.  At  a  later  date
revelations  of  a  similar  kind  were  given  through  Adele  Maginot,
one  of  Cahagnet's  somnambules,  and  other  less  notorious  clair-
voyants, and  the  avidity  with  which  such  outpourings  were
accepted  as  authentic  revelations  from  another  world  is  an
indication  of  the  prevalence  of  the  ideas  and  beliefs  that  made
possible  the  rise  of  Modern  SjDiritualism.

The  insistence  by  the  Mesmerists  on  the  reality  of  clairvoyance
was  always  the  chief  stumbling  block  in  the  way  of  general
recognition  of  the  truth  tliat  was  in  Mesmerism,  and  the  clair-
voyant records  of  this  period  still  give  rise  to  our  main  difficulty
when  we  endeavour  to  interpret  the  results  which  were  claimed
to  have  been  obtained.  Mr.  Podmore  devotes  a  chapter  to  the
more  important  of  these  records  which  is  a  model  of  scientific
caution.  In  summing  up  his  discussion,  he  says  "the  so-called
clairvoyance  at  close  quarters,  when  not  due  to  fraud,  would
seem  to  indicate  extreme  acuteness  of  vision,  the  result  sometimes
of  training,  sometimes  apjDarently  of  hyperaesthesia  in  the  trance.
But  the  manifestations  of  community  of  sensation  and  of  clair-
voyance at  a  distance,  so  far  as  they  appear  to  be  genuine,
furnish  some  support  to  the  hyjDothesis  of  thought  transference."
But  he  admits  that  there  are  a  few  cases  "which  compel  us  at
least  to  enlarge  the  meaning  of  thought  transference."

The  final  stage  in  the  history  of  the  movement  initiated  by
Mesmer  is  reached  with  the  "  Coming  of  the  Prophets."  This
is  the  title  which  Mr.  Podmore  gives  to  the  chapter  in  which  he
describes  the  development  of  mental  healing  in  America  after
1848.  Prior  to  this  date  magnetic  clairvoyants  and  spirit
mediums  laid  claim  to  no  special  sanctity,  they  arrogated  to
themselves  no  spiritual  authority.  "But  in  the  land  of
democracy  we  are  confronted  with  a  singular  development  un-
known to  the  older  monarchies.  The  transatlantic  seers  constantly
tend  to  be  independent ;  they  assume  the  authority  of  the
prophet ;  they  grasp  at  a  spiritual  autocracy — an  autocracy  by
no  means  confined  to  the  spiritual  concerns  of  those  subject  to  it."
This  tendency  was  prominently  shown  in  the  careers  of  Andrew
Jackson  Davis  and  Thomas  Lake  Harris,  but  the  supreme
example  of  it  is  to  be  found  in  the  person  of  Mrs.  Eddy,  the
founder  of  Christian  Science.

Although Davis at  the beginning of his career essayed  to


696


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


diagnose  and  treat  disease  when  in  trance,  both  he  and  Harris
are  chiefly  noteworthy,  in  connection  with  mental  healing,  for
the  systems  of  philosophy  which  were  founded  on  the  contents
of  their  automatic  writings.  For  in  their  scheme  of  things  the
unreality  of  disease  and  its  conquest  by  spiritual  regeneration
are  first  clearly  insisted  on,  and  this  revelation  of  divine  truth
becomes  later  the  foundation  stone  of  the  doctrines  of  Christian
Science.  But  of  more  immediate  importance  in  the  development
of  Mrs.  Eddy's  opinions  regarding  the  nature  and  treatment  of
disease  was  the  teaching  of  Phineas  Parkhurst  Quimby.  After
starting  his  healing  career  as  a  professional  mesmerist  Quimby
came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  cures  which  he  effected  must  really
have  been  due  to  faith  and  expectation  on  the  part  of  the
patients.  He  became  convinced  that  all  disease  is  a  delusion,
an  error  of  the  mind,  and,  discarding  Mesmerism,  he  set  himself
to  cure  diseased  bodies  by  ministering  to  sick  souls.  In  doing  so
he  appealed  exclusively  to  the  understanding  of  his  patients,  and
it  is  interesting  to  observe  that  this  mode  of  psychic  treatment
has  been  rediscovered  within  recent  years  by  orthodox  physicians
who  believe  that  all  that  has  hitherto  been  achieved  by  sugges-
tion may  be  as  certainly  and  more  reasonably  attained  by
persuasion.  The  descrijotion  of  Quimby 's  procedure,  quoted  by
Mr.  Podmore  from  Mrs.  Julius  Dresser,  might  have  been  writt-en
yesterday  by  a  patient  of  Dubois  or  of  Dejerine  :  "...  instead
of  telling  me  that  I  was  not  sick,  he  sat  beside  me  and  explained
to  me  all  that  my  sickness  was,  how  I  got  into  the  condition,  and
the  way  I  could  have  been  taken  out  of  it  by  the  right  under-
standing. ...  I  felt  the  spirit  and  life  that  came  with  his
words,  and  I  found  myself  gaining  steadily."

But  although  Quimby  may  be  regarded  as  the  founder  of  the
modern  movement  of  Mental  Healing  and  the  original  source  of
all  that  is  most  characteristic  in  the  doctrine  and  practice  of  the
Christian  Scientists,  he  is  not  the  only  link  between  the  past  and
the  present.  The  various  phases  of  the  New  Thought  movement
have  also  had  some  influence  in  shaping  the  form  which  the
development  of  Quimby 's  teaching  was  ultimately  to  take.  While
Quimby  in  his  reliance  on  appeal  to  the  reason  in  the  treatment
of  disease  showed  himself  to  be  a  modern  of  the  moderns,  the
mind-curers  generally  tended  to  revert  to  the  old  view  of  the
Animal  Magnetists  in  believing  in  some  specific  action  of  the
operator  on  the  subject. A  patient  may,  they  say,  be  healed


LXI.]


Review.


697


without  his  consent  and  even  without  his  knowledge,  so  that
"absent"  treatment  is  as  efficacious  as  treatment  when  healer
and  patient  sit  and  converse  in  the  same  room.  But  in  a  wicked
world  such  a  power  may  be  used  in  injurious  ways,  and  we  have
in  Mrs.  Eddy's  denunciations  of  Malicious  Animal  Magnetism  an
indication  of  the  terror  that  may  be  inspired  by  such  a  reversion
to  belief  in  the  bewitchments  of  ancient  Magic.

Notwithstanding  all  the  vagaries  and  strange  philosophies  of
the  Mind  Healers  and  Christian  Scientists,  notwithstanding  the
remoteness  of  their  mental  outlook  from  that  of  ordinary  men
and  women,  there  is  one  matter  connected  with  their  teaching
which  must  interest  every  one.  Do  they  really  cure  disease?
Mr.  Podmore  says,  as  does  every  unbiassed  person  who  has  taken
the  trouble  to  investigate  the  facts,  that  they  unquestiona"bly  do.
There  are  no  good  grounds  for  doubting  the  testimony  of
thousands  of  honest  people  who  describe  the  relief  from  suffering
and  the  mental  and  bodily  vigour  which  have  come  to  them  with
their  acceptance  of  Christian  Science  as  the  true  gospel.  But
when  we  are  asked  for  the  explanation  of  these  extraordinary
stories  our  only  answer  is  "suggestion."  That  is  as  far  as  science
authorises  us  to  go,  and  there  for  the  present  the  matter  must
rest.  But  in  reading  Mr.  Podmore's  story  from  Mesmer  to  Mrs.
Eddy,  we  cannot  help  speculating  on  the  evolutionary  significance
of  the  movement  and  the  bearing  which  the  growth  of  this  phase
of  thought  may  have  on  man's  life  and  destiny  in  the  future.
Nor  can  we  help  feeling  that  behind  all  the  extravagances  of
Animal  Magnetism,  behind  all  the  futilities  of  Christian  Science,
there  lies  some  profound  truth  which  we  have  not  as  yet  even
dimly  comprehended.

T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


FORMER  PRESIDENTS  OF  THE  SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL

RESEARCH.

Professor  Henry  Sidgwick, ------  1882-1884.

Professor  Balfour  Stewart,  F.R.S., 1885-1887.

Professor  Henry  Sidgwick, ------  1888-1892.

The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,  - - -  1893.

Professor  William  James,  Harvard,  U.S.A., - - -  1894-1895.

Sir  William  Crookes,  F.R.S., ------  1896-1899.

Frederic  W.  H.  Myers, -------  1900.

Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.,  -------  1901-1903.

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S., -  - - -  1904.

Professor  Charles  Richet,- ------  1905.

The  Right  Hon.  Gerald  W.  Balfour, - - . -  1906-1907.

Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick, -------  1908-1909.

OFFICERS  AND  COUNCIL  FOE  1910.
PRESIDENT.
H.  Arthur  Smith.
VICE-PRESIDENTS.


Rt.  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S.
Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.
Sir  William  Crookes,  O.M.,  F.R.S.
George  B.  Dorr.


Professor  J.  H.  Hyslop,  Ph.D.
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.,  D.Sc.
Loud  Rayleigh,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  D.Sc.
The  Rt.  Rev.  The  Bishop  of  Ripon.


COUNCIL.


Professor  Gilbert  Murray,  LL.  D.

J.  G.  PiDDlNGTON.

St.  George  Lane  Fox  Pitt.
Lord  Rayleigh,  O.M.,  F.R.S.
F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.
Sydney  C.  Scott.
A.  F.  Shand.

Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  Litt.D.
Lieut.-Col.  G.  L.  Le  M.  Taylor.
Sir  Joseph  J.  Thomson,  F.R.S.
Charles  Lloyd  Tuckey,  M.D.
Mrs.  a.  W.  Verrall.
v.  j.  woolley.


W.  W.  Baggally.
The  Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.
Ernest  N.  Bennett.
J.  Milne  Bramwell,  M.B.
The  Earl  of  Crawford  and  Bal^

CARRES,  K.T.,  F.R.S.
G.  Lowes  Dickinson.
The  Hon.  Everard  Feilding.
The  Rev.  A.  T.  Fryer.
Sir  Lawrence  J.  Jones,  Bart.
Si  I!,  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.
W.  M'Dougall,  M.Sc,  M.B.
T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.

HON.  TREASURER.
H.  Arthur  Smith,  7  Queen's  Marsioiis,  Brook  Green,  London,  W.
HON.  SECRETARIES.
Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.
The  Hon.  Everard  Feilding,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.
RESEARCH  OFFICER  AND  EDITOR.
Miss  Alice  Johnson,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.
SECRETARY  AND  SUB- EDITOR.
Mi>s  I.  Newton,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.
ASSISTANT  RESEARCH  OFFICER.
Miss  H.  de  G.  Verrall.
HON.  SECRETARY  FOR  RUSSIA.
Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo,  5  Panteleiuionovskaia,  St.  Petersburo-,

AGENT  FOR  AMERICA.
The  W.  B.  Clarke  Co.,  26-28  Tremont  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.


MEMBERS  AND  ASSOCIATES.


November,  1910.
President — H.  Arthur  Smith.

Vice-Presidents.
The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,  4  Carlton  Gardens,
London,  S.W.

The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour,  Fishers  Hill,  Woking,  Surrey.
Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  6  De  Vesci  Terrace,  Kingstown,
Co.  Dublin.

Sir  William  Crookes,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  7  Kensington  Park  Gardens,
London,  W.

George  B.  Dorr,  18  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Professor  J.  H.  Hyslop,  519  West  149th  Street,  New  York  City.
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.,  The  University,  Birmingham.
Lord  Rayleigh,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  D. Sc. ,  Terling  Place,  Witham,  Essex.
The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  Ripon,  The  Palace,  Ripon.

Honorary  Members.

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  6  De  Vesci  Terrace,  Kingstown,
Co.  Dublin.

Sir  William  Crookes,  O.M.,  F.R.S. ,  7  Kensington  Park  Gardens,
London,  W.

Sir  Joseph  J.  Thomson,  F.R.S.,  Holmleigh,  West  Road,  Cambridge.
Alfred  Russel  Wallace,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  Broadstone,  Wimhorne,  Dorset.

Corresponding  Members.

Professor  A.  Alexander,  Caixa  906,  Rio  Janeiro.
Professor  H.  Beaunis,  Villa  Printemps,  Le  Cannet  (Alpes  Mari-
times),  France.

Professor  H.  Bergson,  Villa  Montmorency,  18  Avenue  des  Tilleuls,
Paris.


[part  lxi.]


Members  and  Associates.


701


Professor  Bernheim,  Hopital  Civil,  Nancy,  France.
Professor  H.  P.  Bowditch,  M.D.,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Boston,
Mass.,  U.S.A.

President  Nicholas  M.  Butler,  Columbia  University,  New  York,
U.S.A.

Dr.  Dariex,  6  Rue  du  Bellay,  Paris.

Dr.  Max  Dessoir,  31  Goltz  Strasse,  Berlin,  W.

Professor  Th.  Flournoy,  The  University,  Geneva.

President  Stanley  Hall,  Clark  University,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Professor  Pien-e  Janet,  54  Rue  de  Varenne,  "VII^,  Paris.

Dr. Wm.  Romaine  Newbold, Ph.D., Univ. of  Pennsylvania,

Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Professor  E.  C.  Pickering,  The  Observatory,  Cambridge,  Mass.,

U.S.A.

Professor  Th.  Ribot,  Office  of  the  Revue  Philosophique,  Paris.

Professor  Charles  Richet,  15  Rue  de  I'Universite,  Paris.

Dr.  Freiherr  von  Schrenck-Notzing,  2  Max  Joseph  Strasse,  Munich.

Honorary  Associates.
Alrutz,  Dr.  Sydney,  Upsala,  Sweden.

Bayfield,  Rev.  M.  A.,  The  Rectory,  Hertingfordbury,  Hertford.
Edmunds,  Miss  L.,  Wood  River  Junction,  R.I.,  U.S.A.
Eeden,  Frederik  van,  M.D.,  Walden,  Bussum,  Holland.
Falcomer,  Professor  M.  T.,  Regio  Instituto  Tecnico  e  Nautico,
Venice.

Fryer,  Rev.  A.  T.,  St.  James'  Vicarage,  Walthamstow,  London,  N.E.
Grubb,  Edward,  3  George  Street,  Croydon,  Surrey.
Ochorowicz,  Dr.  J.,  Wista,  Silesia.

Reed,  Miss  E.  M.,  2  Gledhow  Gardens,  S.  Kensington,  London,  W.
Robertson,  Miss  N.,  Lewes  Villa,  Uckfield,  Sussex.
Sage,  M.,  33  Rue  de  Coulmiers,  XIV^  Arrt.,  Paris.

Members  and  Associates.
An  asterisk  is  prefixed  to  the  names  of  Members.
Abbott,  E.  J.  W.

Abernethy,  Mrs.,  10  St.  Colme  Street,  Edinburgh.
Acland-Hood,  Rev.  R.,  Rodsall,  Shackleford,  nr.  Godalming,  Surrey.
Adamowska,  Madame  S.,  163  Walnut  Street,  Brookline,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Adams,  Mrs.,  4  Brookside,  Cambridge.


702


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Adamson,  Rev.  H.,  P.O.  Box  241,  Christchurch,  New  Zealand.
Adderley,  Hon.  and  Rev.  James,  Saltley,  Birmingham.
Addison,  Miss  Ina,  c/o  Mrs.  H.  J.  Wilson,  12  Cheyne  Court,
London,  S.W.

Adkin,  Mrs.  G.  E.,  HTorfield  Rectory,  Bristol,  Gloucestei'shire.
Agelasto,  Michael  A.,  Box  485,  Norfolk,  Va.,  U.S.A.
Alabaster,  Edward  P.,  Kil worth  Hotel,  Kildare  Street,  Dublin.
Albree,  John,  Swampscott,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Alexander,  Professor  S.,  Victoria  University,  Manchester.
Allen,  B.  M.,  14  Gainsborough  Gardens,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.
Allen,  George  B.,  Free  Chase,  Warningiid,  Sussex.
Allen,  Professor  H.  J.,  The  Presidency  College,  Madras,  India.
Allen,  Mrs.  M.  S.,  Bowry  House,  Wraysbury,  Staines.
Allen,  William,  M.B.,  4  Newton  Terrace,  Charing  Cross,  Glasgow.
Alston,  Mrs.  Rowland,  Turvey  Abbey,  Turvey,  Beds.
Ames,  Miss  Evelyn,  355  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Anderson,  Mrs.,  Brackenboro',  Bramhall,  Cheshire.

Anderson,  F.,  Medical  Director  U.S.  Naval  Examining  Board,  Navy

Yard,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
Andersson,  A.  A.,  Daily  News  Building,  McKeesport,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
*Antrobus,  Miss  Lily,  69  Cadogan  Square,  London,  S.W.
Armitstead,  G.  H.,  Queen  Anne  Mansions,  87  Wimpole  Street,
London,  W.

Armstrong,  Miss  C.  M.,  31  Hereford  Square,  London,  S.W.
Armstrong,  Charles  W.,  Caixa  196,  S.  Paulo,  Brazil.
Arnold,  Major  Ernest  C,  Junior  United  Service  Club,  London,  S.W.
Arnott,  T.  Davidson,  Port  of  Spain,  Trinidad,  B.W.I.
*Ashley,  Mrs.  Wilfred,  32  Bruton  Street,  London,  W.
Askew,  Claude, 2h  Portman  Mansions,  Gloucester  Place,  London,  W.
Askew,  Mrs.  Claude,  2h  Portman  Mansions,  Gloucester  Place,
London,  W.

Aspinwall,  Rev.  C.  F.,  Tregenna,  Decoy  Road,  Newton  Abbot,  Devon.

Assheton-Smith,  Mrs.,  Vaynol,  Bangor,  N.  Wales.
*Astley,  H.  D.,  Benham-Valence,  Newbury,  Berks.

Astley,  Miss,  Cowrie  Haven,  Poundstock,  nr.  Bude,  N.  Cornwall.
*Astor,  William  Waldorf,  Cliveden,  near  Maidenhead.

Atkinson,  Mrs.,  224  Hereford  Street,  Christchurch,  New  Zealand.

Atwater,  Horace  G.,  Norfolk,  St.  Lawrence  Co.,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
*Auden,  Harold  A.,  13  Broughton  Drive,  Grassendale,  Liverpool.
*Austen,  Harold  W.  C. ,  M.D.,  2  Freeland  Road,  Ealing,  London,  W.


LXI.]


Members  and  Associates.


703


Bacon,  Mrs.  Sewell,  59  Shrewsbury  Rd.,  Oxton,  Cheshire.
Badland,  Rev.  C.  D.,  Short  Heath,  Kidderminster.
*Baggally,  Wortley  W.,  23  Lower  Phillimore  Place,  Kensington,
London,  W.

Baggally,  Mrs.  W.  W.,  23  Lower  Phillimore  Place,  Kensington,
London,  W.
*Bailey,  Cyril,  Balliol  College,  Oxford.

Bailey,  Hon.  Mabel,  Hay  Castle,  Hay,  by  Hereford.
*Bailie,  Mrs.,  54  Sloane  Street,  London,  S.W.

Baker,  Alfred  L.,  Lake  Forest,  Illinois,  U.S.A.

Baker,  Mrs.  Charles,  161  Westbourne  Grove,  London,  W.

Baker,  Miss  Mabel,  St.  John's  Schools,  Eton,  Windsor.
*Balfour,  Miss,  4  Carlton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
*Balfour,  Right  Hon.  A.  J.,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,  4  Carlton  Gardens,
London,  S.W.

*Balfour,  Right  Hon.  G.  W.,  Fishers  Hill,  Woking,  Surrey.

Ball,  Mrs.  Sidney,  St.  John's  House,  St.  Giles',  Oxford.

Ballard,  Rev.  Frank,  D.D.,  Langbar,  Harrogate.
*Bancroft,  Miss  M.,  Haddonfield  Training  School,  Haddonfield,
N.J.,  U.S.A.

Barclay,  Rev.  Charles  W.,  The  Vicarage,  Hertford  Heath,  tiertford.
*Barclay,  Edwyn,  12  York  House,  Kensington,  London,  W.
*Barker,  Mrs.  C.  F.,  3942  Ellis  Avenue,  Chicago,  HI.,  U.S.A.

Barkley,  Dr.  M.,  Box  162,  Carlyle,  111.,  U.S.A.

Barkworth,  Mrs.,  Nash  Court,  Marnhull,  Dorset.

Barlow,  Miss  Jane,  D.Litt.,  The  Cottage,  Raheny,  Co.  Dublin.
*Barlow,  Rev.  J.  W.,  The  Cottage,  Raheny,  Co.  Dublin.
*Barnes,  C.  T.,  P.O.  Box  1199,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  U.S.A.

Barnes, Rev. Walter  W., 92 Warwick Gardens,  Kensington,
London,  W.

Barrett,  Harrison  D.

Barrows,  Miss,  Malvern,  Jamaica,  B.W.I.

Barrows,  C.  M.,  1121  Nelson  Ave.,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
*Barry,  Major  S.  L.,D.S.O.,  Pitsford  Hall,  Northampton.

Baruch,  Edgar,  Rooms  805-6  Wright  &  Callender  Building,  Los
Angeles,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
*Batclielor,  E.,  I.C.S.,  Bilaspur,  Central  Provinces,  India.

Bath,  Hubert,  7d  Grove  End  Road,  St.  John's  Wood,  London,  N.W.
*Battersea,  The  Lady,  Aston  Clinton,  Tring,  Herts.
*Bayley,  Weston  D.,  M.D.,  344  East  Main  Street,  Haddonfield,
N.J.,  U.S.A.


704.


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Baynes,  W.  E.  C,  Turf  Club,  Cairo,  Egypt.

Bean,  Rev.  Edwin,  The  School  House,  Brentwood,  Essex.
*Beattie,  Ivor  Hamilton,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.
*Bedford,  Adeline  Duchess  of,  Chenies,  Rickmansworth.

Beeching,  Miss  Nelly,  The  Priory,  Tonbridge.
*Begbie,  Hai'old,  Carbis  Bay,  S.O.,  Cornwall.
*Behrens,  Captain  Clive,  Swinton  Grange,  Malton,  Yorks.

Behrens,  Noel  Edward,  79  Albert  Hall  Mansions,  London,  S.W.

Belaribi,  Mrs.

Belhaven,  The  Master  of,  41  Lennox  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
*Bell,  Miss  A.  E.,  5  Gray's  Inn  Square,  London,  W.C.

Bell,  Miss  Alison  H.,  1 1  St.  Luke's  Road,  Westbourne  Park,  London,  W.

Bennett,  Ernest  N.,  Hertford  College,  Oxford.

Benson,  Miss  A.  M.,  M.D.,  Cama  Hospital,  Bombay,  India.
*Benson,  Mrs.,  Tremans,  Horsted  Keynes,  Sussex.

Benson,  Arthur  C,  C.V.O.,  The  Old  Lodge,  Magdalene  College,
Cambridge.

Bentham,  Mrs.,  30  Lexham  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.
*Berens,  Rev.  Randolph,  14  Princes  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
*Berens,  Mrs.  Richard,  Marlings  Hall,  Chislehurst.

Bergen,  Axel  von.  Abbey  Road,  Darlington,  Durham.
*Bergheim,  John  S.,  Belsize  Court,  Belsize  Park,  London,  N.W.

Berry,  Mrs.  Arthur,  Meadowside,  Grantchester  Meadows,  Cam-
bridge.

*Berry,  Mrs.  F.  M.  Dickinson,  M.D.,  21  Wimpole  Street,  London,  W.
Best,  Mrs.

Best,  Robert,  146  Hamstead  Road,  Llandsworth,  Birmingham.

Bethell,  Mrs.,  57  The  Common,  Woolwich,  London,  S.E.

Bevan,  Mrs.  Robert,  131  Gloucester  Road,  London,  S.W.

Bevan,  Hon.  Mrs.  R.  Yorke,  9  Rutland  Gate,  London,  S.W.

Bevan,  Rev.  W.  O.,  Richmond  Hill,  Galle,  Ceylon.
*Beveridge,  Erskine,  LL.D.,  St.  Leonard's  Hill,  Dunfermline,  N.B.

Beverley,  Mrs.,  Nascot  Lodge,  Watford,  Herts.

Bickersteth,  Miss  E.  F.,  West  Lodge,  Ripon.

Bicknell,  Clarence,  Villa  Rosa,  Bordighera,  Italy.

Bidder,  George  P.,  Cavendish  Corner,  Hills  Road,  Cambridge.
*Bigg,  Miss  Louisa,  2  York  Terrace,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.
*Binney,  Rev.  Maximilian  F.  B.,  The  Vicarage,  Richmond,  Surrey.

Birley,  Miss  Florence  H.,  Goldsmiths'  College,  New  Cross,  London,
S.E.

Bishop,  Edward  Thomas,  Edmonton,  Alberta,  Canada.


Lxi.]  Members  and  Associates.  705

Blackburn,  E.  M.,  Little  Thakeham,  Pulborough,  Sussex.

Blackburne,  F.  E.  I.,  Hazel  Hall,  Gomshall,  Surrey.

Blacklock,  Miss  C,  Chapel  House,  Ditchling,  Sussex.

Blackman,  J.  F.,  R.N.,  47  Grafton  Road,  Acton,  London,  W.

Blackwood,  Miss,  26  George  Street,  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.

Blane,  Missi Edith  H.,  Winkfield  Cottage,  Haywards  Heath,  Sussex.

Blatliwayt,  W.,  Eagle  House,  Batheaston,  Bath.
*Bligh,  Stanley  M.,  28  Grosvenor  Road,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.

Blodgett,  Mrs.  C,  1958  2nd  Street,  San  Diego,  Calif.,  U.S.A.

Bloemfontein,  The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of.  Bishop's  Lodge,
Bloemfontein,  O.R.C.,  S.  Africa.

Bloxsome,  C.  H.,  The  Croft  House,  Fairford,  Gloucestershire.

Bodley,  Mrs.,  41  Gloucester  Place,  Portman  Square,  London,  W.

Bois,  H.  G.,  c/o  Messrs.  J.  M.  Robertson  &  Co.,  Colombo,  Ceylon.

Bonazza,  Carlo.
*Bond,  Frederick  Bligh,  16  Brook  Street,  Bath.

Booth,  H.  L.,  Market  Place,  Thirsk,  Yorks.

Both-Hendriksen,  Miss  Louise,  150  Lefferts  Place,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.,
U.S.A.

Bouwens,  B.  G.,  Eastmoor  House,  Harpenden,  Herts.
Bowden- Smith,  Mrs.,  rue  Maze,  St.  Martin's,  Guernsey.
Bowden-Smith,  Mrs.,  Careys,  Brockenhurst,  Hants.
*Bowditch,  C.  P.,  28  State  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Bowen,  Miss  Anna  C,  210  E.  Main  Street,  Batavia,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Bower,  James  Garton,  Junr.,  Earlham  House,  Norwich.
Bowley,  Miss  S.  M.,  29  Croftdown  Road,  Highgate  Road,  London,
N.W.

Box,  Alfred  Marshall,  c/'o  The  Lancashire  and  Yorkshire  Bank,
Huddersfield.

Boys,  Major  R.  H.  H.,  D.S.O.,  c/o  Messrs.  Cox  &  Co.,  16  Charing

Cross,  London,  S.W.
Bozzano,  E.,  Salita  Emanuele  Cavallo,  N.  92,  Genoa.
Brabrook,  Sir  Edward  W.,  C.B., 178  Bedford  Hill,  Balham,

London,  S.W.
*Bradley,  Miss  A.  A.,  Hingham,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Bradley,  Arthur  C,  Newport,  New  Hampshire,  U.S.A.
Bradley, Professor A. C, 9 Edwardes Square,  Kensington,

London,  W.
Bradley,  F.  H.,  Merton  College,  Oxford.

Bramly,  Mrs.  Jennings,  Castel  di  Poggio,  Fiesole,  Italy.  ^
Pramston,  Miss  M.,  Kingshot,  St.  Cross,  Winchester.


706


Memhtrs  and  Associates.


[part


*Bramwell,  J.  Milne,  M.B.,  33  Wimpole  Street,  London,  W.

Brandretli,  Henry  S.,  Haddon  House,  Weybridge.
*Brandt,  Rudolph  E.,  4  Fenchurch  Avenue,  London,  E.G.

Brayshaw,  John  L.,  Settle,  Yorkshire.

Brazier-Creagh,  Mrs.,  Sesame  Club,  29  Dover  Street,  London,  W.
Brendon,  William  T.,  Whistley,  Yelverton,  S.  Devon.
Brewster,  Bertram,  Rose  Lodge,  Coombe  Lane,  Kingston  Hill,
Surrey.

Briantchaninoff,  Alexandre  N.,  11  Grand  Monetnaia,  St.  Peters-
burg, Russia.

Bristowe,  The  Hon.  Mr.  Justice,  Supreme  Court,  Pretoria,  South
Africa.

Bromberg,  Frederick  G.,  Mobile,  Alabama,  U.S.A.
Brooke,  Colonel  C.  K.,  Army  and  Navy  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,
S.W.

Brooke, Miss Emma F., 6 Pembroke Square,  Kensington,
London,  W.

Brooke,  E.  G.  de  C,  Brushford,  Dulverton,  Devonshire.
*Brooke,  Lady,  Colebrooke,  Brookeborough,Co.  Fermanagh,  Ireland.
*Brookes-Smith,  Mrs.,  The  Lodge,  Hurst  Green,  Sussex.

Brooks,  George  L.,  903  West  Copper  Ave.,  Albuquerque,  N.M.,
U.S.A.

*Brown,  B.  G.,  46  Regent's  Park  Road,  London,  N.W.
Brown,  Dr.  Gustavus  R.,  900  14th  Street,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
Brown,  Miss  May,  62  Carlisle  Mansions,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.
Brown,  Mrs.  Robert,  Tankerville,  Boscombe,  Hants.
Brown,  William,  St.  Paul's  School,  West  Kensington,  London,  W.
Browne,  Edward  G.,  M.B.,  Pembroke  College,  Cambridge.
Browne, J. Stark, The Red House, Mount  Avenue,  Ealing,

London,  W.
Browning,  Oscar,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Brownrigg,  Lady,  55  Zaimsku  Cho,  Azabu,  Tokio,  Japan.
Bruce,  James,  Craik,  Sask.,  Canada.

Brush,  W.  Franklin,  16  E.  37th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Bryce,  Miss  Kathleen,  15  Campden  Hill  Square,  London,  W.
*Bubb,  Henry,  J. P.,  Ullenwood,  near  Cheltenham.

Bullard,  Dr.  W.  N.,  89  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Buller,  Professor  A.  H.  Reginald,  University  of  Manitoba,  Winni-
peg, Canada.

Buller,  Mrs.  C.  F.,  46  Clarendon  Road,  Bedford.
*Bulley,  Mrs.  Arthur,  Ness,  Neston,  Cheshire.


LXI.]


Members  and  Associates.


707


Bullock,  A.  H.,  24  Goldsmiths'  Avenue,  Acton,  London,  W.
*Bullougli,  Edward,  6  Huntingdon  Road,  Cambridge.
*Bullough,  Mrs.  Edward,  6  Huntingdon  Road,  Cambridge.

Burghard,  Mrs.,  86  Harley  Street,  London,  W.

Burnliam,  Mrs.,  Barnfield,  Limpsfield,  Surrey.

Bury,  Henry,  Mayfield  House,  Farnham,  Surrey.

Bury,  Mrs.  Henry,  Mayfield  House,  Farnham,  Surrey.
*Bushell,  Rev.  W.  D.,  Harrow-on-the-Hill,  Middlesex.

Butcher,  W.  Deane,  M.R.C.S.,  Holyrood,  Cleveland  Road,  Ealing,
London,  W.

*Butler,  Mrs.,  20  Park  Side,  Albert  Gate,  London,  S.W.

Butler,  Mrs.  Charles,  Syon  House,  East  Budleigh,  Devon.
*Butt,  Lady,  9  Albert  Hall  Mansions,  Kensington  Gore,  London,
S.W.

*Butt,  Rev.  Walter,  Oakwood,  Chepstow,  Monmouthshire.
Buttemer,  Robert  Wm.,  St.  Mary's,  Godalming,  Surrey.
Butterworth,  Miss  A.  M.,  The  Bungalow,  West  Ivirby,  Cheshire.
Cade,  F.  J.,  Mosborough,  The  Park,  Cheltenham.
Cadell,  Mrs.  Lewis,  Brae  Lodge,  Murrayfield,  Edinburgh.
Cadenas,  Delgado  F.,  Caracas,  Venezuela,  S.  America.
Calderon,  George  Leslie,  Heatliland  Lodge,  Hampstead  Heath,
London,  N.W.

*Campbell,  Lady Archibald, Coombe  Hill  Farm,  Kingston-on-
Thames,  Surrey.
Campbell,  Mrs.  Burnley,  Ormidale,  Colintraive,  Argyllshire.
Campbell,  Colin  E.,  34  Lower  Belgrave  Street,  London,  S.W.
Campbell,  Mrs.,  Arduaine,  Lochgilphead,  N.B.
Campbell,  Cajjtain  N.  D.  H.,  7th  Dragoon  Guards,  Trimulgherry,
Deccan,  India.

Campbell,  Rev.  R.  J.,  King's  Weigh  House  Parsonage,  Thomas

Street,  Grosvenor  Square,  London,  W.
Campbell-Lang,  Miss,  c/o  Professor  Brunton,  LL.B.,  48  West

Regent  Street,  Glasgow.
Campion,  Rev.  C.  T.,  Aberford  Vicarage,  Leeds.
Candler,  H.  A.  W.,  37  Commercial  Road,  London,  E.
Cantacuzene,  Princess  Helene,  Edintzy,  Bessarabia,  Russia.
Capper,  Thomas,  17  Hale  Grove,  Edgware,  Middlesex.
Capron,  Mrs.  Cynthia  J.,  340  S.  Galena  Avenue,  Freeport,  111.,

U.S.A.

Carey,  Mrs.  A.  A.,  50  Fayerweather  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.,
U.S.A.


708


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Carlisle,  Mrs.  A.  M.,  12  Hyde  Park  Place,  London,  W.
Carnahan,  Charles  Tingley,  951  Logan  Avenue,  Denver,  Colo.,
U.S.A.

*Carnarvon,  The  Earl  of,  13  Berkeley  Square,  London,  W.
Carnsew,  Miss  Rosamund,  Bungalow,  Sutton,  Pulborough,  Sussex.
Carpenter,  Mrs.,  Withleigh,  Shoot-up-PIill,  Brondesbury,  London,
N.W.

Carpenter,  Miss  A.  C,  10  Arlington  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Carr,  Lucien,  163  Brattle  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Carrington,  Hereward,  130  West  34th  Street,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

*Carter,  Mrs.,  Springhaven,  Cross  Oak  Road,  Berkhampstead,  Herts.
Case,  Miss  A.  J.,  26  Denning  Road,  Ilampstead,  London,  N.W.
Casey,  Hon.  J.  J.,  C.M.G.,  K.C.,  Ibrickane,  Acland  Street,  St.

Kilda,  Melbourne,  Australia.
Cassatt,  Miss  Mary,  10  Rue  de  Marignan,  Paris.
Cathels,  Rev.  David,  The  Manse,  Hawick,  Scotland.
Cather,  Miss  A.  S.,  York  House,  3  Bedford  Place,  Russell  Square,
London,  W.C.

Cautley,  Mrs.  R.  Iv.,  Heaton  Moor  House,  Heaton  Moor  Rd.,  near
Stockport.

*Cave,  Charles,  J. P.,  Ditcham  Park,  Petersfield,  Hants.

Cawley,  T.  A.,  Lea  Dale,  New  Bedford  Road,  Luton,  Beds.

Cayley,  H.  S.,  Box  128,  Vancouver,  B.C.,  Canada.

Cecil,  Lady  Francis,  Alford  House,  Alford,  Somerset.
*Centeno,  Mrs.  A.,  25  Hyde  Park  Gate,  London,  S.W.
^Chambers,  John,  Mokopeka,  Hastings,  Hawkes  Bay,  New  Zealand.

Chance,  Clinton  F.,  Lawnside,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.

Charlton,  Miss  Frances  M.,  23  Kensington  Square,  London,  W.

Chase,  G.  N.,  1725  De  La  Vina  Str.,  Santa  Barbara,  Cal.,  U.S.A.

Chattock,  Professor  Arthur  P.,  24  Royal  York  Crescent,  Clifton,
Bristol.

Cheney,  Dr.  Frederick  E.,  126  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,
Mass.,  U.S.A.

Chevne,  C.  A.,  c/o  Arthur  Lomax,  Esq.,  Heilbron,  O.R.C.,  S.  Africa.
Childe-Pemberton, Miss  A. H., 12  Portman  Street,  Portman

Square,  London,  W.
Childers,  Miss  F.  I.,  Cranbourne  Grange,  Wonston,  Micheldever,

Hants.

€hilders,  Miss  S.  R.,  14  Embankment  Gardens,  Chelsea,  London,
S.W.


Lxi.]  Members  and  Associates.  709

Chitty,  Hubert,  M.B.,  F.R.C.S.,  etc.,  Royal  Infirmary,  Bristol.
Chubb, Mrs. C. A., Oldfield, Parkside  Avenue,  Wimbledon

Common,  London,  S.W.
Clapham,  Rev.  H.  Horace,  Trinity  Rectory,  312  North  K.  Street,

Tacoma,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
Clapham,  J.  H.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Clapp,  Mrs.  Emma  A.,  5310  Lexington  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.,
U.S.A.

Clapp,  James,  28  Avenue  Villas,  Cricklewood,  London,  N.W.

Clarke,  Ronald  Stanley,  Trobridge  House,  Crediton,  Devon.

Clark-Kennedy,  Rev.  A.  E.,  Ewhurst  Rectory,  Guildford,  Surrey.
*Clavering,  Miss,  New  County  Club,  21  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.
*Clawson,  G.  W.,  9th  and  Baltimore  Streets,  Kansas  City,  Mo.,
U.S.A.

Clissold,  Edward  M.,  Ravensworth,  Cheltenham.
Clive,  Hon.  Henrietta  Windsor,  Oakly  Park,  Bromfield,  Salop.
Closson,  Miss  Olivia  T.,  1359  Columbia  Road,  Washington,  D.C.,
U.S.A.

Coates,  C.  J.,  The  Thornton  Woollen  Mill  Co.,  St.  Petersburg.

Cockle,  Rev.  Francis  T.,  The  Rectory,  Swinford,  Co.  Mayo,  Ireland.

Coe,  Miss  M.  A.,  96  Chestnut  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Coggin,  Rev.  F.  E.,  White  Lodge,  Meads,  Eastbourne.

Coghill,  Colonel  Kendal,  C.B.,  Castle  Townshend,  nr.  Skibbereen,
Co.  Cork,  Ireland.
*Coit,  Stanton,  Ph.D.,  30  Hyde  Park  Gate,  London,  S.W.
*Cole,  Arthur,  West  Dene,  Pendennis  Road,  Streatham,  London,  S.W.

Coleridge,  Miss  Christabel  R.,  Cheyne,  Torquay.
*Collins,  Mrs.  Churton.

Collison,  Harry,  1  Temple  Gardens,  London,  E.C.

Colquhoun,  Daniel,  M.D.,  High  Street,  Dunedin,  New  Zealand.

Colthurst,  George  O.,  The  Castle,  Blarney,  Co.  Cork,  Irelaiid.

Compton,  Lady  Alwyne,  7  Balfour  Place,  London,  W.

Connell,  J.  Harvey,  110  Front  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Connor,  Rev.  David,  The  Knowe  Manse,  Bewcastle,  East  Cumber-
land. '
*Constable,  F.  C,  Wick  Court,  near  Bristol.

Conway,  Lady,  Allington  Castle,  Maidstone,  Kent.
*Cooke,  Mrs.,  Hadley  House,  North  Finchley,  London,  N.

Cooke,  Miss  Mabel,  Dana  Hall  School,  Wellesley,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Cooper,  Rev.  Canon  A.  W.  F.,  Killanne  Rectory,  Enniscorthy,
Ireland.


710


1

Members  and  Associates.


[part


Cooper,  Rev.  F.  W.,  Prestwich  Rectory,  Manchester.
Cooper,  Mrs.  M.  A.,  Woodville,  London  Road,  Gloucester.
Cooper,  Rear-Admiral  P.  H.,  Morristown,  N.J.,  U.S.A.
*Cooper,  Sir  W.  E.,  C.I.E.,  Hume  Towers,  Bournemouth.
Copland,  Howard,  Villa  Copland,  Interlaken,  Switzerland.
Corry,  Miss  Lucy,  Rosenheim,  Cx'oydon,  Surrey.
Cort  van  der  Linden,  P.  W.  A.,  Councillor  of  State,  Groenhove,
The  Hague.

Cotesworth,  Miss  Lilias  E.,  45  Westminster  Mansions,  Great  Smith

Street,  London,  S.W.
Cotterell,  Miss  Alice,  1g  Montagu  Mansions,  Portman  Square,

London,  W.

Coupland,  W.  C,  D.Sc.,  33  Peml)roke  Crescent,  Hove,  Brighton.
Courtauld,  George,  Junr.,  The  Waver,  Wethersfield,  Essex.
Courtauld,  R.  M.,  M.B.,  Borough  Sanatorium,  Brighton.
*Cowan,  W.  H.,  The  Crow's  Nest,  Fairwarp,  Uckfield,  Sussex.
Cowell,  Miss  Marion  A.,  2  Westbourne  Square,  London,  W.
Cox,  Mrs.  Rowland,  310  West  7th  Street,  Plainfield,  N.J.,  U.S.A.
Coxe,  Mr. Justice  Henry  R.  H.,  c/o  Messrs.  Grindlay  &  Co.,

54  Parliament  Street,  London,  S.W.
Coxeter,  Harold,  34  Holland  Park  Rd.,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Cozens,  J.  C,  Brigus,  Conception  Bay,  Newfoundland.
Craige,  Wm.  C,  409  Chestnut  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Crane,  Rev.  W.  M.,  Ph.D.,  Richmond,  Berkshire  County,  Mass.,

U.S.A.

*Crawford  and  Balcarres,  The  Earl  of,  K.T.,  F.R.S.,  2  Cavendish

Square,  London,  W.
Crawford,  W.  C,  1  Lockharton  Gardens,  Colinton  Road,  Edinburgh.
Critchley,  W.  A.  Paget,  15  Parkside,  Albert  Gate,  London,  S.W.
Crook,  A.  H.,  Queen's  College,  Hong  Kong.
*Crookes,  Lady,  7  Kensington  Park  Gardens,  London,  W.
*Crooks,  Miss  Marianne,  Achintorlie,  Norwood,  South  Australia.
Crouch,  H.  N.,  AdditionalJudicial  Commissioner  of  Sind,  Karachi,
Sind,  India.

Cunard,  Cyril  G.,  95  Eaton  Square,  London,  S.W.
Currie,  Mrs.,  Warders,  10  Crescent  Road,  Wimbledon,  London,
S.W.

*Curtois,  Miss  Margaret  A.,  10  Barton  Street,  Westminster,  Lon-
don, S.W.

Curwen,  Mrs.,  Horncop,  Heversham,  Milnthorpe,  Westmorland.
Dakin,  W.  R.,  M.D.,  F.R.C.P.,  8  Grosvenor  Street,  London,  W.


LXi.]  Members  and  Associates.  711

Dakyns,  Henry  Graham,  Higher  Coombe,  Haslemere,  Surrey.
Dale,  Alan,  110  St.  Nicholas  Avenue,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
*Dale,  J.  Gilbert,  31  Warwick  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Dallas, Miss  H.  A.,  Innisfail,  North  End  Road,  Hampstead,
London,  N.W.

*Dalton,  J.  H.  C,  M.D.,  The  Plot,  Adams  Road,  Cambridge.
Damant,  Mrs.  H.  C,  Lammas,  Cowes,  Isle  of  Wight.
Daniell,  Mrs.  Averell.

Danzas,  Mile.  Julie,  26  Moika,  St.  Petersburg,
Darbyshire,  Rev.  H.  S.,  St.  Margaret's  Vicarage,  Methley,  Leeds.
D'Arcy,  Rev.  G.  J.  A.,  The  Vicarage,  Worksop,  Notts.
Darton,  Hugh,  Beninghoe,  Hertford.
*Davidson,  J.  Mackenzie,  M.B.,  CM.,  76  Portland  Place,  London,  W.
Davies,  Benjamin,  Welford,  Chase  Green  Avenue,  Enfield,  Middle-
sex.

Davies,  Mrs.  G.  R.,  c/o  Miss  E.  M.  Reynolds,  44  Egerton  Crescent,

London,  S.W.
Davies,  Mrs.,  The  Goodwyns,  East  Coshani,  Hants.
*Davis,  Charles,  29  Gloucester  Place,  Portman  Square,  London,  W.
Davis,  Mrs.,  46  Sussex  Gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Davis,  Thomas  Henry,  Trelinda,  St.  Merryn,  Padstow.
Davison,  Miss  Annie,  Albemarle  Club,  37  Dover  Street,  London,  W.
Dawes,  Miss  E.  A.  S.,  Heathlands,  Weybridge,  Surrey.
Dawson,  Lt. -Colonel  Henry  P.,  Hartlington,  Burnsall,  Skipton.
Dawson,  Miles  M.

Day,  Rev.  Dr.  E.  IT.,  Pickwell  Rectory,  Oakham,  Rutland.
Day,  Miss  Mabel  K.,  Gershom,  Reigate,  Surrey.
*Dayton,  Mrs.  Elizabeth,  Box  258,  South  Kaukauna,  Wisconsin,
U.S.A.

Dearmer,  Rev.  Percy,  St.  Mary's  Vicarage,  Primrose  Hill,  London,
N.W.

Delanne,  Gabriel,  40  Boulevard  Exelmans,  Paris.
Delap,  Alfred  D.,  Rosslare  Harbour,  Kilrane,  Wexford.
De  Lissa,  Mrs.  F.,  22  Down  Street,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.
Demming,  Benj.  W.,  1518  State  Street,  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Denovan,  Wm.,  Ventura  Avenue,  Ventura,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
Densham,  William,  c/o  M.  W.  T.  Co.,  Ltd.,  9  Hall  Street,  Chelms-
ford, Essex.

Derby,  Dr.  Hasket,  352  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Despard,  Mrs.,  2  Currie  Street,  Nine  Elms,  London,  S.W.
Devitt,  Mrs.  J.  A.,  Oskaloosa,  Iowa,  U.S.A.


712


Members  and  Associates.


[PAilT


*Dewar,  Rev.  Peter,  The  Manse,  North  Bute,  Rothesay,  Scotland.
Dickie,  H.  Elford,  British  Vice-Consulate,  Kertch,  Crimea,  Russia.
Dickinson,  Miss,  Trebrea  Lodge,  Tintagel,  Cornwall.
Dickinson,  Miss  A.  J.,  3a  Clareville  Grove,  London,  S.W.,  and

Poultry  Court,  Painswick,  Gloucestershire.
Dickinson,  G.  Lowes,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Dicksee,  Frank,  A.R.A.,  Greville  House,  3  Greville  Place,  St.

John's  Wood,  London,  N.W.
Dill,  J.  F.  Gordon,  M.B.,  6  Brunswick  Place,  Brighton.
*Dixon,  Edward  T.,  Racketts,  Hythe.
Dixon,  Hugh  N.,  17  St.  Matthew's  Parade,  Northampton.
Dixon,  Professor  W.  Macneile,  LL.B.,  Litt.D.,  2  South  Park

Terrace,  Hillhead,  Glasgow,  W.
Doan,  Professor  F.  C,  911  Grove  Street,  Meadville,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Doane,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  Stockbridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Dobbie,  A.  W.,  Gawler  Place,  Adelaide,  South  Australia.
*Dodge,  Miss  Mary  H.,  Warwick  House,  St.  James's,  London,  S.W.
Doherty,  J.  J.,  LL.D.,  29  Grosvenor  Place,  Rathmines,  Co.  Dublin.
Donne,  Mrs.,  c/o  Messrs.  Holt  &  Co.,  3  Whitehall  Place,  London,

S.W.

Dorr,  George  B.,  18  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Dougall,  Miss  Lily,  East  Undercliff,  Exmouth.
Douglas,  Mrs.,  51  Palace  Gardens  Terrace,  Campden  Hill,  Lon-
don, W.

Douglas,  Mrs.  Charles,  Auchlochan,  Lesmahagow,  Lanarkshire.
Douglas,  Rev.  Dr.  G.  W.,  Tuxedo  Park,  Orange  County,  New
York,  U.S.A.

*Douglas-Pennant,  Hon.  Violet,  19  Queen  Street,  Mayfair,  Lon-
don, W.

Doveton,  F.  B.,  Karsfield,  Torquay.

Dowson,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  Felixstowe,  The  Park,  Nottingham.
*Doyle,  Sir  A.  Conan,  M.D.,  Windlesham,  Crowborough,  Sussex.
Doyle,  Theodore,  M.D.,  1001  East  15th  Street,  Kansas  City,  Mo.,
U.S.A.

Drake,  Mrs.  A.  J.,  24  Bennington  Street,  Newton,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Drew,  Professor  Eric.

Drew,  Ringrose  C,  8  Grove  Park,  Rathmines,  Co.  Dublin,  Ireland.

Drewry,  Mrs. George, c/o S. Hicks, J. P., Rostherne,  Upper
Colwyn  Bay,  N.  Wales.
*Dreyer,  R.  H.,  San  Diego,  Cal.,  U.S.A.

Duff,  Miss  H.  A.,  27  Chester  Street,  London,  S.W.


LXI.]


Members  and  Associates.


713


Duggin,  Mrs.  Chas.,  25  East  38tli  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Dulley,  Rev.  B.,  St.  Peter's  Clergy  House,  London  Docks,  E.
*Duncan,  Harold  M.,  Fairlawn,  Weybridge,  Surrey.
*Duncan,  Mrs.,  Earlston,  Epsom  Road,  Guildford,  Surrey.

Dunham,  Miss  Helen,  c/o  Messrs.  Baring  Bros.  &  Co.,  London,  E.C.

Dutton,  Miss  A.,  Somerdon,  Sidmouth,  Devon.

Dyce,  Capt.  Cecil,  69  Linden  Gardens,  Bayswater,  London,  W.

Dyson,  Rev.  W.  H.,  Edgerton,  1a  Weld  Road,  Birkdale,  Southport.

Edelsten,  Colonel  John  A.,  Heathercliffe,  Frodsham,  Cheshire.
*Edge,  Selwyn  Francis,  14  New  Burlington  Street,  Regent  Street,
London,  W.

Edie,  H.  S.  Ker,  c/o  Messrs.  Thos.  Cook  &  Son,  Ludgate  Circus,
London,  E.C.

*Elder,  Frederick,  21  Cleveland  Gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Eldred, Fleet-Paymaster E. H., R.N., H.M.S.  "Bulwark,"
Channel  Fleet.

Elliot,  Miss  A.  I.  M.,  Women's  University  Settlement,  44  Nelson

Square,  Blackfriars  Road,  London,  S.E.
Elliot,  Gilbert  C,  10  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.
Elliot,  Mrs.  Gilbert,  Kasr  el  Nuzha,  Cairo,  Egypt.
Elliott,  E.  T.,  Hawarden,  Iowa,  U.S.A.
Elliott,  Captain  W.  R.,  Sherbrooke,  Quebec.
Ellis,  Herbert,  120  Regent  Road,  Leicester.

Emmerson,  Robert,  M.D.,  Calle  Victoria  714,  Chihuahua,  Cliih.,
Mexico.

Emmet,  Rev.  C.  W.,  West  Hendred  Vicarage,  Steventon,  Berks.

Engall,  John  S.,  62  Goldsmith  Avenue,  Acton,  London,  W.

Eno,  H.  L.,  8  East  61st  Street,  New  York,  U.S.A.
*Eno,  J.  C,  Wood  Hall,  Dulwich,  London,  S.E.

Entee,  Pi'ofessor  B.  A.,  Samaldas  College,  Bhavnagar,  India.

Evans,  Frank  Gwynne,  The  Tower  House,  Woodchester,  Stroud.

Evans,  W.  A.,  The  Brackley,  Stoneygate  Avenue,  Leicester.
*Fabbri,  Alessandro,  11  East  62nd  Str.,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Fabbri,  Ernesto  G.,  11  East  62nd  Str.,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Farquharson,  L.  H.,  Trainmaster's  OlBce,  Panama  Railway  Co.,
Cristobal,  Canal  Zone,  Republic  of  Panama.

Farrer,  The  Dowager  Lady,  Idlerocks,  Stone,  Staffordshire.

Farrington,  Ernest  A.,  M.D.,  Haddonfield,  N.J.,  U.S.A.

Faulkner,  W.  B.,  52  South  Molton  Street,  London,  W.

Feilding,  Hon.  Everard,  5  John  Street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.

Ffoulkes,  Mrs.,  4  Nevern  Square,  Earl's  Court,  London,  S.W.


714


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Field,  Allan  B.,  P.O.  Box  274,  East  Liberty  Station,  Pittsburg,
Pa.,  U.S.A.

Fillmer,  Horatio  R.,  52  Ship  Street,  Brighton,  Sussex.

Finch,  H.  Wynne,  The  Manor  House,  Stokesley,  R..S.O.,  Yorks.

Fliigel,  J.  C,  Cravenhurst,  Reigate,  Surrey.

Foote,  Geo.  W.,  34  Bull  Street,  Newport,  R.I.,  U.S.A.

Ford,  Miss  Emily  S.,  44  Glebe  Place,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.

Forman, Colonel R. H., A. M.S., P.M.O. Bombay  Brigade,

Brigade  Staff  Office,  Fort,  Bombay.
Forrest-er,  Mrs.,  Tullibody  House,  Cambus,  by  Stirling,  N.B.
Fortescue, Miss Frances, 79 Gloucester  Terrace, Hyde  Park,

London,  W.

*Foster,  Rev.  J.  Edgar,  Lindsey  Vicarage,  Ipswich.
Fotheringham,  W.  B.,  24  Teville  Road,  Worthing.
Fournier  d'Albe,  E.  E.

Francis,  Arthur,  P.  O.  Kelowna,  British  Columbia.
*Francis,  Mrs.  Francis,  Palace  House,  Beaulieu,  Hants.
Franklin,  Hon.  Mrs.  E.  L.,  50  Porchester  Terrace,  London,  W.
Freas,  W.  R.,  7114  Greenway  Avenue,  Paschal,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

Freeman,  Miss  Adelaide  C,  Belgrave  Mansions,  Grosvenor
Gardens,  London,  S.W.

*Frith,  Mrs.,  Swynnerton  Rectory,  Stone,  Staffordshire.

*Frost,  Miss  Annie,  Carnelloe  Cottage,  Zennor,  nr.  St.  Ives,  Corn-
wall.

Fry,  Miss  Agnes,  Failand  House,  Failand,  near  Bristol.
*Fry,  Lewis  George,  Stonycroft,  Limpslield,  Surrey.

Fry,  T.  Hallett,  3  (N.)  King's  Bench  Walk,  Temple,  London,  E.C.

Funk,  Dr.  I.  K.,  195  Washington  Park,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Gaff,  T.  T.,  1520  20th  Street,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.

Gantz,  Mrs.,  The  Rectory,  Norton-in-Hales,  Market  Drayton.

Gardiner,  Professor  H.  N.,  23  Crafts  Avenue,  Northampton,
Mass.,  U.S.A.

Gardner,  Harold  E.,  4  Harrington  Street,  Liverpool.
*Gaskell,  Mrs.  J.  B.,  Roseleigh,  Woolton,  Liverpool.
*Gayer,  Gustav  A.,  Ph.D.,  131  West  63rd  Street,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

Gearn,  Dr.  George  C,  2545  Front  Street,  San  Diego,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
Gehring,  J.  G.,  M.D.,  Bethel,  Maine,  U.S.A.
*Geikie,  Sir  Archibald,  D.C.L.,  F.R.S.,  Shepherd's  Down,  Hasle-
mere,  Surrey.


LXI.]


Members  and  Associates.


715


*George,  Mrs.,  Cottage-on-the-Links,  Hindhead,  Haslemere,  Surrey.
George,  Walter  C,  Wayside,  St.  James  Avenue,  Beckenliam,
Kent.

Gibson,  Miss  Winifred,  108  Alexandra  Road,  St.  John's  Wood,
London,  N.W.

Giddings,  Miss  H.  M.,  810-11  New  England  Building,  Cleveland,

Ohio,  U.S.A.
Gidney,  A.  R.,  Aylsham,  Norfolk.
Gillard,  Mrs.,  Heinerweg  3,  Wiesbaden,  Germany.
Gittermann,  Rudolph  C,  Odessa,  Russia.
*Goldschmidt,  Mrs.  Beni  de,  16  Wilton  Street,  Grosvenor  iPlace,

London,  S.W.

Goldstein,  Dr.  phil.  J.,  Rossdorferstrasse  81,  Darmstadt,  Germany.
Gooch,  G.  P.,  South  Villa,  Campden  Hill  Road,  London,  W.
Goodall,  Charles  Henry,  Lucknow  Avenue,  Nottingham.
Goodhart,  Rev.  Charles  A.,  Lambourne  Rectory,  Romford,  Essex.
Goore,  Albert,  Rose  Mount,  Meadvale,  Redhill,  Surrey.
Gover,  J.  M.,  LL.D.,  5  New  Square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C.
Gower,  John  H.,  Mus.  Doc.  (Oxon.),  19  Steele  Block,  Denver,

Colo.,  U.S.A.
Graham,  Mrs.  Perceval  Gore,  Ghezireh,  Cairo,  Egypt.
Graham,  J.  W.,  Dalton  Hall,  Victoria  Park,  Manchester.
*Grant-Suttie,  H.  F.,  R.F.A.,  R.A.  Mess,  Bordon  Camp,  Hants.
Graveson,  Miss  C,  Goldsmiths'  College,  New  Cross,  London,  S.E.
Gray,  Rev.  Arthur  Romeyn,  Univ.  of  the  South,  Sewanee,  Tenn.,

U.S.A.

Gray,  Mrs.  John  C,  176  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  tJ.S.A.
Green,  Mrs.  Alan  B.,  Hogarth  House,  Bushey  Heath,  Herts.
Greene,  Mrs.  Bertram,  2  Louisburg  Square,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Greene,  J.  G.,  34  Stiles  Street,  Elizabeth,  New  Jersey,  U.S.A.
Green-Thompson,  Mrs.,  Bridekirk,  Cockermouth,  Cumberland.
Greet,  Mrs.,  Caens  Wood,  Weybridge,  Surrey.
Greg,  Miss  Mary  S.,  19  Kensington  Gate,  London,  W.
Grenfell,  Mrs.,  Sea  Front  Hotel,  152  Marine  Parade,  Brighton.
Grew,  Mrs.  Joseph  Clark,  Matthaiskirchstrasse  6,  Berlin,  Germany.
Gribble,  Miss  F.  M.,  32  Chester  Terrace,  Regent's  Park,  London,
N.W.

Griffith,  Miss  Mary  F.,  41  Leinster  Square,  Bayswater,  London,  W.

Griffith,  Rev.  R.  G.,  Riversley,  Bakewell,  Derbyshire.

*Grignon,  Miss  A.  E.,  24  Melrose  Avenue,  Ciicklewood,  London,  N.W.

*Grimshaw,  Mrs.,  109  Cromwell  Road,  London,  S.W.

•2z


716


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Gripper,  Mrs.  Harold,  11  Eliot  Vale,  Blackheath,  Kent.
Grosvenor,  Hon.  Mrs.  R.  C,  Morrisburne  House,  Woking,  Surrey.
Grottendieck,  W.  G.,  2de  Adelheid  Straat  153,  The  Hague.
*Grubbe,  Hubert  H.,  Soutliwold,  Suffolk.

*Gwyn,  W.  J.,  8  Netherhall  Gardens,  South  Hampstead,  London,
N.W.

Hackett,  James  T.,  95  King  William  Street,  Adelaide,  Australia.
*Haggard,  Miss  S.  E.,  5  Selwyn  Avenue,  Richmond,  Surrey.
*Haig,  Mrs.  G.  Ogilvy,  65  Brook  Street,  Grosvenor  Square,  Lon-
don, W.

Halkett,  Miss  Katherine  E.,  24  Holland  Street,  Campden  Hill,
London,  W.

*Hall,  Mrs.  Basil,  31  Cadogan  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
*Hall,  J.  P.,  Gorse  Bank,  Wernetli,  Oldham.

Hall,  Wilfr-ed,  9  Priors  Terrace,  Tynemouth,  Northumberland.

Hallett,  Henry  Hiram,  Bridge  House,  Taunton.

Halls,  Robert,  34  Royal  Avenue,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
*Hamar-Nemespaun,  La  Baronne  de,  Hohe  Warte  50,  Vienna  XIX,
Austria.

*Hambro,  Mrs.  Eric,  70  Princes  Gate,  London,  S.W.
Hamilton,  Col.  G.  Rowan,  Killyleagh  Castle,  Co.  Down,  Ireland.
Hamilton,  James,  Heversham  School,  Milnthorpe,  Westmorland.
Hamilton,  J.  J.,  80  Woodland  Rise,  Muswell  Hill,  London,  N.
Hamilton,  W.  Bernard,  The  Dale  House,  Hassocks,  Sussex.
Hamilton-Hoare,  Miss  Sybil  H.,  96  Ebui^y  Street,  Chester  Square,
London,  S.W.

Hammond,  Miss  Winifred  B.,  386 Catlin Avenue,  Portland,

Oregon,  U.S.A.
Handcock,  Dr.  Charles  L.,  J. P.,  Ashburton,  New  Zealand.
Hankow,  The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of,  Hankow,  China.
Hannay,  Mrs.  Hugh  B.,  Wren's  Nest,  Wellington  Road,  Broms-

grove,  Worcester.
Hansard,  Mrs.,  12  Cowley  Street,  Dean's  Yard,  Westminster,

London,  S.W.

Hanson,  H.  P.,  Box  39,  R.F.D.  Route  No.  5,  Harlan,  Iowa,  U.S.A.
Hanson,  Mrs.,  7  Canning  Place,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Hardeman,  Miss  Frances  E.,  Westfield,  Sefton  Park,  Liverpool.
Hardie,  Miss  Mabel,  M.B.,  Candello,  577  Finchley  Road,  London,  N.W.
Harding,  Miss  A.  K.,  c/o  Nevett  &  Co.,  21  Park  Road,  Crouch

End,  London,  N.
Hare,  Cyril  Lockhart,  Abbotsholme,  Dunstable,  Bedfordshire.


LXI.]


Members  and  Associates.


717


Hargreaves,  Miss,  115  Clarence  Gate  Gardens,  Regent's  Park,
London,  N.W.

Harris,  Alan  Campbell,  Staufenberg  Str.  28,  Annaberg,  Baden-
Baden,  Germany.
Harris,  Capt.  C.  S.,  90  Woodstock  Road,  Oxford.
*Harris,  Mrs.  H.  Percy,  98  Gloucester  Terrace,  London,  W.
*Harris,  Hon.  J.,  East  India  United  Service  Club,  16  St.  James's
Square,  London,  S.W.
Harrison,  Rev.  Arthur  S.,  28  Eastgate,  Stafford.
Hari'ison,  H.  Leeds,  M.B.,  104  Marine  Pax'ade,  Worthing.
Harrison,  Miss  Jane  E.,  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.
*Hart, Colonel  H.  H.,  R.E.,  c/o  Messrs.  King,  King  &  Co.,
Bombay,  India.

Hart,  Lieut. -General  Sir  Reginald  Clare,  V.C.,  K.C.B.,  K.C.V.O.,
United  Service  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,  S.W.
*Hartness,  James,  Springfield,  Vermont,  U.S.A.

Hartshorn,  Miss  Cornelia,  c/o  Messrs.  Brown,  Shipley,  123  Pall
Mall,  London,  S.W.

Hartshorne,  Charles  H.,  35  South  Willow  Street,  Montclair,  N.J.,
U.S.A.

Harvey,  Mrs.  P.  E.,  85  Isabella  Street,  Toronto,  Ontario.
Haslam,  Mrs.  F.  W.,  Sainte  Barbe,  Christchurch,  Canterbury,
New  Zealand.

Haslehurst,  E.  W.,  72  Burnt  Ash  Hill,  Lee,  London,  S.E.
Hastie,  Miss,  c/o  Messrs.  Street,  30  Cornhill,  London,  E.C.
Hastings,  Rev.  J.  H.,  The  Manor  House,  Halton,  Lancaster.
Hauxhurst,  Mrs.  W.,  c/o  W.  Hauxhurst,  The  Calumet  Club,  267

Fifth  Avenue,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Hawarden,  The  Viscountess,  18  Chelsea  Court,  London,  S.W.
Hawkins,  E.  F.,  Villa  des  Troenes,  Livry  (S.  et  O.),  France.
Hawkins,  H.  P.,  M.D.,  F.R.C.P.,  56  Portland  Place,  London,  W.
Hayes,  Rev.  Joseph  W.,  West  Thurrock  Vicarage,  Grays,  Essex.
Haynes,  Henry  W.,  239  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Head,  Miss  Alice  L.,  26  Leinster  Square,  London,  W.
*Heard,  G.  H.,  2  Fairfax  Road,  Bedford  Park,  London,  W.
Heaton,  Guy,  51  West  Cliff  Road,  Bournemouth.
Heath,  George  H.,  277  Brockley  Road,  London,  S.E.
Heath,  Mrs.,  North  Breach  Manor,  Ewhurst,  Guildford.
Henderson,  J.  J.,  Cairnmuir  Cottage,  Murthly,  Perthshire,  N.B.
Henderson, Miss  Lilian, The Sesame Club, 29 Dover  Street,
London,  W.


718


Mevibers  and  Associates.


[part


Henly,  Mrs.  Albert  W.,  Gwydyr  House,  Bromley,  Kent.
Henrici,  Jacob,  6126  Penn.  Avenue,  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Henry,  Miss  Eva,  1  Ai-gyll  Villas,  Cheltenham.
Herbert- Smith,  Miss  Evelyn  E.,  Raymead,  Park  Road,  Watford,
Herts.

Herschel,  Colonel  John,  Royal  Engineers,  Slough,  Bucks.
Hessel,  Miss  K.  A., 14  Waterlow  Court, Hampstead  Garden

Suburb,  London,  N.W.
Heuss,  Otto,  13  Stanley  Crescent,  London,  W.
Heysinger,  Dr.  Isaac  W.,  1521  Poplar  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,

U.S.A.

*Hichens,  Rev.  Thomas  S.,  Guilsborough  Vicarage,  Northampton.
Hielle,  Robert,  xix/1  Karl-Ludwig  Str.  62,  Vienna.
Higbee,  Colonel  George  H.,  Burlington,  Iowa,  U.S.A.
Hildyard,  F.  W.,  77a  Lexham  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Hill,  J.  Arthur,  Wensley  Bank,  Thornton,  Bradford.
Hill,  Mrs.  John  Howard,  272  State  Street,  Portland,  Maine,
U.S.A.

*Hillard,  Miss  Mary  E,.,  Westover  School,  Middlebury,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
Hinkle,  Beatrice  M.,  M.D.,  110  Madison  Ave.,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

Hinton,  Mrs.  Howard,  Tyson,  Bearsden,  Glasgow,  N.B.
Hoare,  F.  PI.,  67  Fitzjohn's  Avenue,  London,  N.W.
Hoare,  Mrs.  Henry,  20  Montagu  Street,  Portman  Square,  London,  W.
Hocken,  Thos.  M.,  M.R.C.S.,  Moray  Place,  Dunedin,  New  Zealand.
Hockliffe,  Mrs.  Ernest,  Springdale,  Uppingham.
Hodding,  Miss,  2  The  Avenue,  Bedford  Park,  London,  W.
Hodgkin,  Robert  Howard,  Queen's  College,  Oxford.
Hoernle,  Professor  R.  F.  Alfred,  South  African  College,  Cape  Town.
*Hogg,  Sir  Frederick  Russell,  Oriental  Club,  Hanover  Square,
London,  W.

*Hogg,  Henry  R.,  2  Vicai'age  Gate,  Kensington,  London,  W.

Holland,  Miss,  Niddry  Lodge,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.

Hollander,  Bernard,  M.D.,  L.R.C.P.,  57  Wimpole  Street,  London,  W.

Hollins,  Mrs.,  24  Sussex  Place,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.

HoUins,  Mrs.  A.  E.,  3  Maid's  Causeway,  Cambridge.
*Hollond,  John  R.,  c/o  Miss  E.  M.  Every,  18  Montagu  Street,
Portman  Square,  London,  W.

Holme,  Strachan,  Bridgewater  Offices,  Walkden,  Manchester.

Holms,  Mrs.  Douglas,  16  South  Street,  Thurloe  Square,  London,
S.W.


LXI.]


Member's  and  Associates.


719


*Holt,  Henry,  34  West  33rd  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Holt-White,  Mrs.,  Duchy  Hotel,  Prince  Town,  Dartmoor,  Devon.

Homan,  C.  H.,  24  Oscarsgade,  Christiania,  Norway.
*Home,  Mrs.  Robert,  b/78  Portsdown  Road,  Maida  Vale,  Lon-
don, W.

Hoppin,  J.  C,  1527  18th  Street,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
Hormusji,  B.,  Solikoti  Buildings,  Bombay,  India.
Horn,  W.  J.,  Woldingham,  Surrey.
Horridge,  Miss  J.  G.,  43  Alexandra  Road,  Southport.
Horton,  W.  Claude,  81  Church  Road,  Hove,  Sussex.
*Hoskins,  Edmond  J.,  M.D.,  Hammam  Chambers, 76  Jermyn

Street,  London,  S.W.
Hotchkin,  Mrs.,  The  Dower  House,  Woodhall  Spa,  Lincolnshire.
*Hough,  Joseph  Fairhurst,  Lowood  Cottage,  Moor  Park,  Great

Crosby,  Liverpool.
Houston,  James,  1  Hereford  Mansions,  Hereford  Road,  Bayswater,

London,  W.

Howson,  Richard,  M.I.C.E.,  5  Southfield  Terrace,  Middlesbrough,
Yorkshire .

Hubbell,  Geo.  Allen,  Ph.D.,  Cumberland  Gap,  Tennessee,  Lincoln

Memorial  University,  U.S.A.
Hubbell,  G.  G.,  S.W.  Cor.  Floral  and  Hudson  Avenues,  Norwood,

Ohio,  U.S.A.

*Hudleston,  R.  W.,  68  Parliament  Hill,  London,  N.W.

Hudson,  Morris,  Aldersey  Croft,  Guildford.

Hughes,  Major  H.  M.,  c/'o  Aston  House  Hotel,  Seoul,  Korea.
*Hull,  Mrs.  C.  G.,  112  Academy  Street,  Poughkeepsie,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Hume-Rothery,  J.  H.,  The  Pines,  Tivoli,  Cheltenham.

Humphrey,  Miss  Ola,  57  Davies  Street,  Berkeley  Square,  London,  W.

Hunt,  Guy  W.,  Southport,  Queensland,  Australia.
*Hunt,  Mrs.  Warwick,  12  Lansdowne  Road,  Holland  Park,  London,.
W.

Huntingford,  Miss,  Exeter  Lodge,  Bournemouth.
Hutchinson,  F.  W.  H.,  Grove  Lawns,  St.  Albans,  Hei-ts.
*Hyslop,  Professor  J.  H.,  519  West  149th  Street,  New  York  City,,
U.S.A.

Infield,  H.  J.,  130  North  Street,  Brighton.
Ingalls,  Mrs.  Joseph  A.,  Swampscott,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Ingham,  Charles  B.,  Moira  House,  Eastbourne.
Ingham,  Percy  B.,  Great  Missenden,  Bucks.
Innes,  Miss  H.  K.,  Raemoir,  Banchory,  Scotland.


720


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Ireland,  Gordon,  32  Nassau  Sfcr.,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
•'Izod,  C.  H.,  7  Malwood  Road,  Balham  Hill,  Loudon,  S.W.
Jacks,  L.  P.,  28  Holywell,  Oxford.
Jackson,  Mrs.

Jackson,  Mrs.,  44  Park  Street,  Calcutta,  India.
Jaguaribe,  Dr.  Domingos,  Rua  d.  Viridiana  30,  Sao  Paulo,  Brazil.
*Jameson,  David,  New  Castle,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

*Janson,  E.  W.,  11  Eaton  Mansions,  Eaton  Square,  London,  S.W.
Jaye,  William  R.,  Springwood  Lodge,  Oakfield  Road,  Clapton,
London,  N.E.

*Jeakes,  Rev.  Prebendary,  4  Cornwall  Terrace,  Regent's  Park,
London,  N.W.

Jenkinson,  W.  E.,  8  Albert  Promenade,  Savile  Park,  Halifax.
Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.
Johnson,  Chiarles  R.,  340  Main  Street,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Johnston,  Miss  M.  ¥.,  The  Writers'  Club,  Hastings  House,  Norfolk
Street,  Strand,  London,  W.C.  ,
Jones,  Miss  Constance,  Girton  College,  Cambridge.
*Jones,  Sir  Lawrence  J.,  Bart.,  Cardfields,  Hatfield  Peverel,  Essex.
Jones,  Lady,  Cardfields,  Hatfield  Peverel,  Essex.
Jones,  Miss  Lilian  I.,  120  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.
Josling,  Lieut. -Colonel  C.  L.,  Junior  United  Service  Club,  London,
S.W.

""Judah,  Noble  B.,  2701  Prairie  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
Judd,  Mrs.  Sylvestre  Dwight,  164  Summer  Street,  Maiden,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Kaleta,  Georg,  Griesgasse  27/11,  Salzburg,  Austria.

Kallen,  Horace  Meyer,  28  Lynde  Str.,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Kaufman,  Mrs.  Irene  M.,  Hamilton  Apartments,  3312  Hamilton

Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Keene,  The  Most  Rev.  J.  B.,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Meath,  Navan,

Co.  Meath.

Keep,  A.  P.  Perceval,  The  Hut,  Holmwood,  Dorking.
"-Kellogg,  Spencer,  Junr.,  Buffalo,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
■"Kelso,  Captain,  R.N.,  Horkesley  Park,  Colchester,  Essex.

Kenway,  Mrs.,  Mendip  View,  Winscombe,  Somerset.
*Kerr,  George,  M.B.,  6  St.  Colme  Street,  Edinburgh.

Kerr-Clark,  Lady,  Moore  Abbey,  Monasterevan,  Ireland.

Kilroe,  E.  G.,  Jubbulpore,  Central  Provinces,  India.

Kingsmill, Miss Agnes, 26 George Street, Hanover  Square,
London,  W.


Members  and  Associates.


721


Kirkwood,  J.  H.  M.,  M.P.,  62  Sloane  Street,  London,  S.W.
*Kittel,  T.  B.,  Vane  House,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.
*Klincko\vstroem,  Count  Carl,  Elisabethstrasse  40,  Munich,  Bavaria.

Kniglit,  Charles  N.,  36  Kensington  Park  Road,  London,  W.

KnoUer,  Richard,  1  Riemerstrasse  8,  Vienna.

Kothen,  Baron  Axel  von,  27  Mikealsgat-en,  Helsingfors,  Finland.

Krebs,  Rev.  Stanley  L.,  Swarthmore,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

Kress,  Miss  Anne,  Lock  Haven,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

Kwang,  Sim  Boon,  73  Scott's  Road,  Singapore,  S.S.

Labouchere,  Rev.  J.  A.,  Sculthorpe  Rectoiy,  Fakenham,  Norfolk.

Lach-Szyrma,  Rev.  W.  S.,  Barkingside  Vicarage,  Ilford,  Essex.
*Lacon,  Mrs.  Sidney,  Ormesby  Hall,  Great  Yarmouth,  Norfolk.
*Laflin,  Mrs.  Louis  E.,  Ellslloyd,  Lake  Forest,  HI.,  U.S.A.

Lafone,  A.  W.,  Springfield,  Oatlands  Park,  Walton-on-Thames.

Laing,  R.  M.,  Boys'  High  School,  Christchurch,  New  Zealand.

Lamb,  Charles  George,  77  Glisson  Road,  Cambridge.

Lambert,  Miss  Ada  R.,  c/o  Miss  Lambert,  Ivy  Cottage,  Newick,
Sussex.

Lambert,  Mrs.  Helen  C,  Lambert  Pharmacal  Co.,  2101  Locust

Street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  U.S.A.
Lambert,  Jordan  W.,  Lambert  Pharmacal  Co.,  2101  Locust  Street,

St.  Louis,  Mo.,  U.S.A.
Landman,  S.,  9  Gower  Street,  London,  W.C.

Lane,  Miss  E.  Abbott,  131  East  21st  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.  A.
Lane-Poole, Professor Stanley, Litt.D., Dunganstown  Castle,

Wicklow,  Ireland.
*Lang,  Andrew,  1  Marloes  Road,  London,  W.,  and  AUeyne  House,

St.  Andrews,  Scotland.
Larken,  E.  P.,  Les  Garennes,  Wimereux,  Pas  de  Calais,  France.
Latham,  Miss  Edith,  3  Avenue  Bugeaud,  Paris.
Latshaw,  Allen,  3414  Sansom  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Lauritzen,  Severin,  Holte,  Denmark.

Layman,  Alfred,  M.D.,  1630  North  18th  Street,  Philadelphia,

Pa.,  U.S.A.
Leaf,  Arthur  H.,  Woodcroft,  Oxted,  Surrey.
Leaf,  Miss  Ellen,  6  Airlie  Gardens,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.
Leaf,  Miss  E.  M.,  4  Barton  Street,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.
Leaf,  Mrs.,  The  Green,  Marlborough,  Wilts.
*Leaf,  Walter,  Litt.D.,  6  SussexPlace,  Regent's  Park,  London, N.W.
Leaf,  Mrs.  Walter,  6  Sussex  Place,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.
Ledyard,  Mrs.  R.  F.  H.,  Cazenovia,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.


22


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Lee,  Rev.  A.  H.  E.,  156  Albany  Street,  London,  N.W.
Lee,  Blewett,  1  Park  Row,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
Lee,  Mrs.  Henry  Thomas,  414  West  Adams  Street,  Los  Angeles,
Cal.,  U.S.A.

Lee,  L.  G.  H.,  Kingswood,  Rannds,  North  Wellingborough.  :
Leedham,  Isaac  S.,  1  The  Cloisters,  Temple,  London,  E.G.

•Lees,  Robert  James,  Craigmore,  Ilfracombe.

•Legg,  W.  A.,  P.O.  Box  1621,  Cape  Town,  South  Africa.
Leggatt,  Edward  O.  Every,  I.C.S.,  Saharanpur,  U.P.,  India.

''Leigh,  Mrs.  Gerard.

*Leigh,  Lord,  Stoneleigh  Abbey,  Kenilworth,  Warwickshire.
Leigh,  W.  Austen,  Hartfield,  Roehampton,  London,  S.W.
Leith,  J.  S.,  Nevada,  Ohio,  U.S.A.

Lenon,  J.  W.,  Kianiara  Estate,  Nairobi,  British  East  Africa.
Leon, Mrs. Philip, 4m;  Montagu  Mansions, Portman  Square,
London,  W.

Leonard,  Thomas,  628  N.  22nd  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
*Leslie-Melville,  Mrs.  A.  B.,  51  Hans  Road,  London,  S.W.

Lewin,  Rev.  C.  H.,  St.  Barnabas  Vicarage,  North  Rockhampton,
Queensland,  Australia.

Lewis,  David  J.,  Walsh  Building,  Cumberland,  Md.,  U.S.A.

Lewis,  Francis  B.,  Box  5,  Maraisburg,  Transvaal,  South  Africa.

Librarian,  Public  Library  of  Adelaide,  Australia.

Librarian,  Adelbert  College  of  Western  Reserve  University,  Cleve-
land, Ohio,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Birmingham  Public  Libraries,  Reference  Department,
Ratcliff  Place,  Birmingham.

Librarian,  Bowdoin  College  Library,  Brunswick,  Maine,  U.S.A.

Librai'ian,  Public  Library,  etc..  Church  Street,  Brighton.

Librarian,  Cambridge  Public  Library,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  City  Library  Association,  Springfield,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Public  Library,  Colorado  Springs,  Colo.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Library  of  Congress,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.

Librarian  (Hon.)  of  the  Constitutional  Club,  Northumberland
Avenue,  London,  W.C.

Librarian,  Enoch  Pratt  Free  Library  of  Baltimore  City,  Baltimore,
Md.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Grosvenor  Public  Library,  c/o  Messrs.  Stevens  &  Brown,

4  Trafalgar  Square,  London,  W.C.
Librarian,  Guildhall  Library,  London,  E.C.
Librarian,  Hackley  Public  Library,  Muskegon,  Mich.,  U.S.A.


LXI.]


Members  and  Associates.


723


Libi-ariau,  Harvard  College  Library,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Leeds  Library,  Commercial  Street,  Leeds.
Librarian,  Library  Association,  Portland,  Oregon,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Meadville  Theological  School,  Meadville,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Mercantile  Library,  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Minneapolis  Athenaeum,  Minneapolis,  Minn.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Newberry  Library,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Literary  and  Philosophical  Society,  Newcastle-upon-Tyne.
Librai'ian,  Public  Librarj^,  New  Bridge  Street,  Newcastle-upon-Tyne.
Librarian,  New  Hampshire  State  Library,  Concord,  N.PI.,  U.S.A.
Librarian, Public  Library  of  New  South  Wales, c/o  Messrs.

Truslove  &  Planson,  153  Oxford  Street,  London,  W.
Librarian,  New  York  Public  Library,  c/o  Messrs.  Stevens  &  Brown,

4  Trafalgar  Square,  London,  W.C.
Librarian,  Ohio  State  Library,  Columbus,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Pennsylvania  State  Library,  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Peoria  Public  Library,  Peoria,  111.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Somerville  Public  Library,  Somerville,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Theological  Seminary,  Rochester,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Theosophical  Society,  106  New  Bond  Street,  London,  W.
Librarian,  The  University,  Aberdeen.

Librarian,  University  of  Minnesota,  Minneapolis,  Minn.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Bibliotheque  Victor  Cousin,  L'Universite  de  Paris.
Librarian,  University  of  Pennsylvania,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  University  of  Sydney,  New  South  Wales,  Australia.
Librarian,  Vancouver  Medical  Association  Library,  633  Hastings

Street,  Vancouver,  B.C.,  Canada.
Librarian,  Victoria  Public  Library,  Melbourne,  Australia.
Librarian,  Wellesley  College,  Wellesley,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Dr.  Williams's  Library,  Gordon  Square,  London,  W.C.
Librarian,  Fi'ee  Public  Library,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Yale  University  Library,  New  Haven,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
*Lindsell,  Mrs.  J.  B.,  19  Weymouth  Street,  Portland  Place,  London,  W.
Livingstone,  Rev.  W.  O.,  355  Greenwood  Avenue,  Kankakee,  111.,

U.S.A.'

*Llewellin,  Mrs.  W.,  Upton  House,  nr.  Poole,  Dorset.

Lloyd,  Brig. -General  Francis.

Lloyd,  Judge  Frank  T.,  Camden,  N.J.,  U.S.A.

Lloyd,  Rev.  John,  1542  Main  Street,  Marinette,  Wisconsin,  U.S.A.
*Lockhart,  Lady,  187  Queen's  Gate,  London,  S.W.
*Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  F.R.S.,  Mariemont,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.


724


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Lodge,  Robert,  Compton  Wood,  28  Carlisle  Road,  Eastbourne.

Loewenstein,  Amtsrichter  Dr.,  43a  Maria-Louisen  Str.,  Hamburg.

Lomax,  Arthur,  Heilbron,  O.R.C.,  S.  Africa.

Lombardi,  C,  2331  Leconte  Avenue,  Berkeley,  Cal.,  U.S.A.

Long,  George  E.,  Box  D.,  Jersey  City,  N.J.,  U.S.A.

Lonsada,  Duchesse  de,  4  Lancaster  Street,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Ludwig,  Professor  Dr.  Hofrat  Alfred,  c/o  Herren  J.  G.  Calve'sche,

Kleiner  Ring  12,  Pi'ag,  Bohemia.
Luke,  James,  Box  No.  183,  G.P.O.,  Calcutta.
Lumsden,  Miss  K.  M.,  17  Richmondhill  Place,  Aberdeen.
Lyall,  Sir  Charles  James,  82  Cornwall  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
*Lyall,  Edward,  Barton,  R.S.O.,  Darlington.
Lyell,  D.,  United  Empire  Club,  117  Piccadilly,  London,  W.
Lyon,  Miss  C.  C,  117  Keuilworth  Court,  Putney,  London,  S.W.
Lyttelton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Alfred,  16  Great  College  Street,  Westminster,

London,  S.W.

Macdonald,  Prof.  Duncan  Black,  Hartford  Theological  Seminary,

Hartford,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
Macdonald,  Lieut. -Colonel  F.,  Resident  in  Nepal,  India.
Macdonald,  Hon.  Mrs.  Godfrey,  Portree  House,  Portree,  Isle  of

Skye,  N.B.

Macdonald,  Miss  Isabelle  M.,  M.B.,  47  Seymour  Street,  Portman

Square,  London,  W.
Macdonald,  Mrs.,  Chalfont  St.  Peter,  Bucks.
Macfarlane,  Mrs.,  74  Finnart  Street,  Greenock,  N.B.
MacGregor,  Arthur  C,  8  Longford  Terrace,  Monkstown,  Co.  Dublin.
Mackintosh,  R.  D.,  M.B.,  The  Bungalow,  Mortlake,  Surrey.
Macklin,  Miss  Helen  E.,  141  Inverness  Terrace,  London,  W.
Macnaughtan,  Miss,  61  Cadogan  Square,  London,  S.W.
Madocks,  Major  H.  J.,  1a  Ovington  Square,  London,  S.W.
Mainwaring,  Mrs.

Mallet,  Miss  A.  V.,  Anlaby  House,  25  Highbury  New  Park,

London,  N.
Mallet,  Louis.

Mander,  Charles  A.,  The  Mount,  Wolverhampton,  Staffs.
*Mander,  Geoffrey  Le  Mesurier,  Wightwick  Manor,  Wolverhampton.

Mangin,  Marcel,  102  Rue  Erlanger,  Paris.

Mann,  Rev.  Frederic,  Temple  Ewell  Vicarage,  Dover.

Mansell,  Andrew  Evans,  Mount  Vernon,  Melton  Mowbray,  Tasmania.
*Mansfield,  Mrs.  Richard,  c/o  Morgan,  Harjes  &  Co.,  31  Boulevard
Haussmann,  Paris.


LXI.]


Members  and  Associates.


725


Mantell,  Lieut. -Colonel  A.  M.,  Villa  Trollops,  Piazza  dell'  Indi-

pendenza,  Florence,  Italy.
Mantell,  Miss  Bertha,  6  Shalston  Villas,  Ewell  Road,  Surbiton  Hill,

Surrey.
Marks,  Mrs.  Claude.

Marsh,  Edward  H.,  3  Gray's  Inn  Place,  London,  W.C.
Marshall,  Mrs.  F.,  36  Drayton  Court,  London,  S.W.
Marshall,  William  Cecil,  Tweenways,  Hindhead,  Haslemere.
Marston,  Charles,  J. P.,  Afcot,  Compton,  nr.  Wolverhampton.
*Marston,  Commander  G.  M.,  R.N.,  Park  Lodge,  Albert  Gate,
Knightsbridge,  London,  S.W.
Marten,  Miss  A.  R.,  78  Vanbrugh  Park,  Blackheath,  London,  S.E.
Martin,  Miss  Florence  R.,  65  Cornwall  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Martin,  Mrs.  J.  Biddulph,  Norton  Park,  Bredon's  Norton,  near
Tewkesbury .

Martin,  Thomas  Beecham,  Wanstead  College,  South  Woodford,

London,  N.E.
Martineau,  Alfred  Edward,  Delhi,  Punjab,  India.
Maskell,  Miss  E.  M.,  21  Thornsett  Road,  Anerley,  London,  S.E.
Mason,  J.  T.,  L572  Race  Str.,  Denver,  Colo.,  U.S.A.
Mason,  Miss  M.  H.,  5  Vincent  Square  Mansions,  Westminster,

London,  S.W.

Massey,  Hon.  Mary,  80  Royal  Hospital  Road,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
*Mathews,  Mrs.,  15  Stanley  Gardens,  London,  W.
Mattiesen,  Emil,  Ph.D.,  Witzleben  Str.  3,  Charlottenburg,  Berlin,
Germany.

Mavrogordato,  John  N.,  52  Queen's  Gate  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Maxim,  Sir  Hiram  S.,  Ryecotes,  Dulwich  Common,  London,  S.E.
Maxwell,  Dr.  Joseph,  6  Rue  Villaret-de-Joyeuse,  Paris.
*Maxwell,  Sir  John  Stirling,  Bart.,  48  Belgrave  Square,  London,  S.W.
Mayor,  R.  G.,  11  Campden  Hill  Square,  Kensington,  London,  W.
M'Adam,  D.  J.,  Jr.,  Ph.D.,  Leonard  Hall,  S.  Bethlehem,  Penna.,
U.S.A.

M'Alpine,  Robert,  Balclutha,  Greenock,  N.B.

M'Clellan,  Mrs.  Clara  D.,  Briarcliff  Manor,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
M'Clure, Henry, M.D., 30 Portland Court, Portland  Place,
London,  W.

M'Connel,  H.  W.,  M.B.,  Matlaske  Hall,  Norwich.
M'Cormick,  Alfred,  Sunny  View,  The  Mall,  Lahore,  India.
M'Dorxgall,  Dugald  W.,  c/o  R.  J.  Turnbull  &  Co.,  4  Lloyds
Avenue,  London,  E.C.


726  Members  and  Associates.  [part

-'"M'Dougall,  Isaac  S.,  The  Orchard,  ofE  Arthog  Road,  Hale,  Cheshire.
M'Dougall,  William,  M.Sc,  M.B.,  Woodsend,  Foxcombe  Hill,  nr.
Oxford .

M'Keever,  Buell,  3900  Lake  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
M'Kellar,  Miss  J.  L.,  c/o  National  Bank  of  Australasia,  123

Bishopsgate  Street  Within,  London,  E.C.
M'Lean,  Mrs.,  186  St.  James's  Court,  Buckingham  Gate,  London,

S.W.

Meek,  Maximilian  de,  Russian  Consulate,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.
Meebold,  Alfred,  Ileidenheim,  Wurtemberg,  Germany.
Megson,  Albert,  Fern  Villa,  Headlands,  Ossett,  Yorks.
Mehrji,  Munchershaw  Hormusji,  M.D.,  340  Grant  Road,  Bombay.
Mellone,  Rev.  Sydney  Herbert,  D.Sc,  10  Hartington  Gardens,
Edinburgh.

Metcalfe,  Mrs.  G.  R.,  The  Aberdeen,  St.  Paul,  Minnesota,  U.S.A.

Meyer,  Rev.  F.  B.,  Regent's  Park  Chapel,  Park  Squ  are,  London,  N.W.
*Micklethwait,  Richard  K.

Milburn,  Rev.  R.  Gordon,  Bishop's  College,  Calcutta,  India.
*Miles,  Miss,  59  Egerton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
*Millard,  Mrs.  Almira  B.,  2505  Farnam  Str.,  Omaha,  Neb.,  U.S.A.

Millard,  Charles  Killick,  M.D.,  D.Sc,  Gilroes,  Leicester.

Milne,  A.  M.  Lees,  Ribbesford  ITouse,  Bewdley,  Worcestershire.

Mitchell,  Sidney  J.,  c/o  D.  Mitchell  &  Co.,  Box  77,  G.P.O.,  Newcastle,
N.S.VV.,  Australia.
*Mitchell,  T.  W.,  M.D.,  Hoath  Cottage,  Hadlow,  nr.  Tonbridge.

Moggridge,  Miss  Edith,  Stanfield  House,  High  Street,  Hampstead,
London,  N.W.
*Money-Coutts,  Francis  Burdett.

Monteagle, The  Lord, K.P., Moimt  Trenchard, Foynes,  Co.
Limerick.

Moore,  Major  H.  G.  A.,  Army  and  Navy  Club,  London,  S.W.
*Moore,  Admiral  W.  Usborne,  8  Western  Parade,  Southsea.
Morison,  Mrs.  Miller,  4  Randolph  Cliff,  Edinburgh,  and  Morison

House,  Hetland,  Ruthwell,  N.B.
Morries,  J.  M.,  Gogar  House,  Stirling,  N.B.

Morrish,  Harold  G.,  Leonard  House,  Grange  Rd.,  Sutton,  Surrey.
Moses,  E.  J.,  c/o  Messrs.  E.  D.  Sassoon  &  Co.,  Calcutta.
*Moss-Cockle,  Mrs.,  26  Hertford  Street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.
Moultrie,  Miss  A.  J.  C,  11  Burstock  Road,  Putney,  London,  S.W.
Mower,  Mrs.  George,  Winona,  Lovelace  Road,  Surbiton,  Surrey.
Muirhead,  Professor  J.  H.,  1  York  Road,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.


LXI.]


Mevihers  and  Associates.


727


Miiller,  Fraulein  A.,  78  Vanbrugh  Park,  Blackheatli,  London,  S.E.
Munro,  Hugh  F.,  1740  Germantown  Avenue,  Philadelpliia,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

*Murray,  Donald,  ]\Iildmay  Park  Works,  Mildmay  Avenue,  London,  X.
*Murray,  Professor  Gilbert,  LL.D.,  131  Banbury  Road,  Oxford.
Murray,  T.  Douglas,  Iver  Place,  Iver,  Bucks.

Murtou,  Miss  Josephine,  c/o  C.  Holmes,  Court  Street,  Faversham,
Kent.

Myers,  Professor  Charles  S.,  M.D.,  Galewood  Tower,  Great  Shel-
ford,  Cambs.

*Myers,  Mrs.  F.  W.  H.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
*Myers,  L.  H.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.

Myers,  W.  Wykeham,  M.B.,  H.B.M.'s  Consular  Agency,  Pagoda
Anchorage,  China.

Nash,  Joseph,  The  \Yhite  House,  Somerleyton,  Lowestoft.

Neate,  P.  J.

Neeld,  A.  D.,  10  Bradford  Avenue,  Crafton,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Neild,  Miss  Maria,  83  Victoria  Street,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.
Neustadter,  Louis  W.,  3501  Jackson  Street,  San  Francisco,  Cal.,
U.S.A.

*Newcastle,  The  Duke  of.  Clumber,  Worksop,  Notts.

Newill,  George  E.,  Guadalupe  Mine,  Inde,  Durango,  Mexico.
*Newmann,  Oscar  P.,  84  Newman  Street,  London,  W.

Newton,  Miss  I.,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.

Newton,  Rev.  R.  Heber,  D.D.,  East  Hampton,  Suffolk  County,
N.Y.,  U.S.A.

*Nicoll,  Mrs.  De  Lancey,  23  East  39th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Nicolson,  Right  Hon.  Sir  Arthur,  Bart.,  G.C.B.,  etc.,  Foreign

Office,  Downing  Street,  London,  S.W.
*Nisbet,  E.  T.,  13  Beverley  Ten-ace,  Cullercoats,  Northumberland.
*Niven,  Mrs.  Graham,  The  Golden  Farm,  Cirencester,  Gloucestei'-

shire.

*Noble,  Mrs.  Saxton,  69  Eaton  Place,  London,  S.W.

Noel,  Miss  Frances,  40  Beaufort  Mansions,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
*Noel-Cox.,  H.  L.,  M.B.,  Elcove,  Elms  Avenue,  Eastbourne.
*Norris,  Professor  Richard,  M.D.,  F.R.S.E., The  Laboratory,
Yardley  Fields,  Yardley,  Birmingham.
Northcote,  Rev.  H.,  Chimere,  Parame,  Ille  et  Vilaine,  France.
*Nugent,  Mrs.  Arthur,  5  Temple  Gardens,  Brighton.
Nunn,  T.  Percy,  D.Sc,  London  Day  Training  College,  Southamp-
ton Row,  London,  W.C.


728


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Nutter,  Miss  H.  G.,  Beechcroft,  The  Avenue,  Cambridge.
Gates,  R.  Crosbie,  Moyallen,  Ness  Holt,  nr.  Nestou,  Clieshire.
*Odell,  L.  E.,  2055  Rodriguez  Pena,  Buenos  Ayres,  Argentine
Republic.

Odell,  S.  W.,  202  Boston  Building,  Pasadena,  Cal.,  U.S.A.

Ogden,  Mrs.,  Heatli  Brow,  tiampstead  Heath,  London,  N.W.

Ogden,  William  Edward,  Gravenhurst,  Ontario,  Canada.

Ogilvie,  Mrs.  Robert,  c/o  R.  G.  Ross,  10  Hill  Street,  Edinburgh.

Ogle,  Nathaniel,  67th  Punjabis,  Multan,  Punjab,  India.

Oldham,  G.  P.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Rostrevor,  Langton  Green,
Tunbridge  Wells.

O'Leary,  Miss  Katherine  W.

Oliver,  Mrs.,  26  Brunswick  Terrace,  Brighton.
*01ivier.  Sir  Sydney,  K.C.M.G.,  King's  House,  Jamaica,  B.W.I.

Oman,  Professor  Charles  W.  C,  Frewin  Hall,  Oxford.

Onslow,  Lady,  Chevin  Bank,  Duffield,  Derbyshire.

O'Reilly,  Miss  B.,  10  King  Street,  Covent  Garden,  London,  W.C.

Osborne,  Miss  H.,  2  Northcote  Mansions,  Pleath  Street,  Hamp-
stead,  London,  N.W.
*Owen,  A.  S.,  Keble  College,  Oxford.

Pack  Beresford,  Denis  R.,  Fenagh  House,  Bagenalstown,  Co.  Carlow.

Pagan,  Miss  C,  Marston  Lodge,  Harrow.

Paget,  Sir  Arthur,  9  King's  Bench  Walk,  Temple,  London,  E.C.
Paley,  Mrs.,  Ampton  Hall,  Bury  St.  Edmunds.
Parke,  Roderick  J.,  179  Cottingham  Street,  Toronto,  Canada.
Parker,  Edward  W.,  168  Brookline  Avenue,  Brookline,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Parker,  Sir  Gilbert,  D.C.L.,  M.P.,  20  Carlton  House  Terrace,
London,  S.W.
*Parkin,  John,  Blaithwaite,  Carlisle.

Parkin,  Mrs.,  The  Mount,  Sheffield.
*Parsons,  J.  Denham,  58  St. Oswald's  Road,  West  Brompton,
London,  S.W.
Parsons,  N.  M.,  New  College,  Oxford.

Pask,  A.  F.,  50  Bensham  Manor  Road,  Thornton  Heath,  Surrey.
*Passingham,  Mrs.,  Berrow  House,  nr.  Ledbury,  Hereford.
Patel,  F.  J.,  L.R.C.P.,  3  Church  Gate  Street,  Bombay.
Paterson,  Miss  Mary  N.,  3  Devonshire  Terrace,  Ventnor,  Isle  of
Wight.

Paul,  J.  Rodman,  505  Chestnut  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Payne,  Ernest,  10  Wellington  Court,  Knightsbridge,  London,  S.W.


LXI.]


Members  and  Associates.


729


Peacock,  W.  H.,  M.B.,  Abok,  via  Torcados,  Southern  Nigeria.

Pease,  Mrs.  J.  R.,  Hesslewood,  Hessle,  Yorks.

Peckliam,  Miss  Ella,  246  Gano  Street,  Pi'ovidence,  R.I.,  U.S.A.

Peckham,  Orville,  First  National  Bank,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.

Pedley,  Charles  Herbert,  Dee  Lodge,  Chester.

Penha,  Alfred  de  la,  Long  Wall  House,  Oxford.

Penha,  Paul  de  la.

Pennington,  Mrs.  Henry,  Silverthorne,  King's  Ride,  Camberley,
Surrey.

Penny,  W.  R.,  Office  of  the  Chief  Railway  Storekeeper,  Cape

Town,  South  Africa.
Percival,  Mrs.,  1  Chesham  Street,  Belgrave  Square,  London,  S.W.
*Perdicaris,  Ion,  Shandon,  Tunbridge  Wells.
*Perez,  Dr.  Jorge,  Puerto  de  Orotava,  Teneriffe,  Canary  Isles.

Perkins,  Miss  S.  R.,  c/o  Dr.  Perkins,  8  Mansfield  Street,  London,  W.
*Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo,  The  Count,  5  Panteleimonovskaia,  St.
Petersburg.

Perry, Sir  E. Cooper, M.D., Superintendent's  House,  Guy's

Hospital,  London,  S.E.
Perry,  Thos.  S.,  c/o  Perier  &  Cie,  59  I'ue  de  Province,  Paris.
Peters,  Mrs.  F.  A.,  362  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass. ,  U.S. A.
Philipse,  Miss  Margaret  Gouverneur,  142  West  71st  Street,  New
York  City,  U.S.A.
*Philliinore,  Mrs.,  Battler's  Green,  Letchmore  Heath,  Herts.

Phillips,  John,  Haverford  College,  Haverford,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
*Pickering,  J.  F.,  Camden  Ridge,  Chislehurst,  Kent.
Pickering,  J.  W.,  D.Sc,  Sylvadene,  Cumberland  Road,  Bromley,
Kent.

*Piddington,  J.  G.,  Holy  Well,  Hook  Heath,  Woking,  Surrey.
*Piercy,  Major  B.  H.,  March wiel  Hall,  Wrexham.

Pigou,  Professor  Arthur  Cecil,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
*Pilcher,  Giles  T.,  Treryn,  Frith  Hill,  Godalming,  Surrey.

Pilkington,  Guy  Brabazon,  3  De  Vesci  Terrace,  Kingstown,  Co.
Dublin.

Pinchot,  Mrs.  Amos,  1021  Park  Avenue,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Pinchot,  Gifford,  1615  R.I.  Avenue,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
Piper, John  E., LL.B., 10 Herondale Avenue,  Wandsworth

Common,  London,  S.W.
Pithapuram,  The  Rajah  of,  Pithapuram,  Godavari  Dist.,  Madras

Presidency,  India.
*Pitt,  St.  George  Lane  Fox,  48  Glebe  Place,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.


730


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*Platt,  Mrs.  Hartford.

Plowdeii,  Mrs.,  Strachur  Park,  Loch  Fyne  Side,  Argyllshire.

Plumer-Willson,  Mrs.  W.,  20  Laurence  Road,  Hove,  Brighton.

Pogson  Smith,  Mrs.  E.,  Bourkes,  Blackball  Rd.,  Oxford.

Ponsonby,  Hon.  Mrs.  C.  B.,  14  West  Halkin  Street,  London,  S.W.

Pontifex,  Dudley,  73  Alleyn  Park,  West  Dulwich,  London,  S.E.

Pope,  George  H.,  60  Banbury  Road,  Oxford.
*Pope,  Miss  Tbeodate,  Hillstead,  Farmington,  Conn.,  U.S.A.

Popoff,  General  James,  Sosnitza,  Gov.  Chernigow,  Russia.

Porter,  Miss  Agatha,  M.D.,  18  Kensington  Park  Road,  Notting
Hill,  London,  W.

Portsmouth,  The  Countess  of,  Hurstbourne  Park,  Whitchurch.

Post,  Mrs.  Wm.,  St.  Lucie,  Fla.,  and  Buckhannon,  W.  Va.,  U.S.A.
*Potter,  John  Wilson,  219  Ashley  Gardens,  London,  S.W.

Powell,  C.  Berkeley,  J. P.,  283  Metcalfe  Street,  Ottawa,  Canada.

Powles,  Lewis  Charles,  The  Highlands,  Rye,  Sussex.

Price,  Miss  Elizabeth,  The  Elms,  Newport  Pagnel,  Bucks.

Pumplirey,  Mrs.,  Minster  Acres,  Riding  Mill,  Northumberland.

Purdie,  Mrs.,  27  Palace  Court,  London,  W.

Putnam,  Miss  Irene,  Bennington,  Vt.,  U.S.A.

Pym,  Mrs.  Guy,  35  Cranley  Gardens,  South  Kensington,  London,
S.W.

Pym,  Leslie  Ruthven,  Alnwick,  Northumberland.
Quackenbos,  John  D.,  M.D.,  331  West  28th  Street,  New  York
City,  U.S.A.

*Quinby,  Rev.  John  W.,  East  Bridgewater,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Quincy,  Josiah  P.,  82  Charles  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Radcliffe-Whitehead,  Ralph,  Woodstock,  Ulster  Co.,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Rae,  James,  Villa  Laurel,  San  Jacopo,  Livorno,  Italy.

Raggett,  Mrs.,  70  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.

Raikes,  E.  B.,  Malabar  Hill,  Bombay,  India.

Raikes,  Mrs.,  Beomonds,  Chertsey,  Surrey.
*Raines,  Lady,  46  Sussex  Gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Raj,  Des,  Pasrur,  Dist.  Sialkot,  Punjab,  India.

Ramsden,  Miss,  Bulstrode,  Gerrard's  Cross,  Bucks.  =■

Ransom,  Francis,  Chilterns,  Hitchin,  Herts.

Ransom,  Frank  H.,  137  Main  Street,  Buffalo,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Ransom,  H.  B.,  28  Belsize  Park  Gardens,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W

Ransom,  Mrs.,  22  Dartmouth  Row,  Blackheath,  London,  S.E.

Raper,  R.  W.,  Trinity  College,  Oxford.
*Rashdall,  Rev.  Hastings,  New  College,  Oxford.


XXI.]


Members  and  Associates.


731


*Rashleigb,  John  C.  S.,  M.D.,  Throwleigh,  Okehampton.
Reade, Herbert  V., 32  Palace  Gardens  Terrace,  Kensington,
London,  W.

*Reckett,  Miss  Juliet  E.,  20  Dulwich  Wood  Park,  Upper  Norwood,
London,  S.E.

*Reeves,  Mrs.,  6  Sterling  Street,  Knightsbridge,  London,  S.W.
*Rendall,  Rev.  Dr.  G.  H.,  Charterhouse,  Godalming,  Surrey.
Rice,  Mrs.  David  Hall,  2  Wellington  Terrace,  Brookline,  Mass.-
U.S.A.

Richardson,  Frederick  W.,  County  Analyst's  Office,  Hustlergate,
Bradford.

■*Ridley,  Henry  N.,  F.R.S.,  Singapore,  S.S.
'*Ridley,  Miss,  Stagshaw,  Daleham  Gardens,  London,  N.W.
Ridley,  The  Viscountess, 10  Carlton  House  Terrace,  London,
S.W.

Ritchie,  Thomas,  J. P.,  Overstrand  Lodge,  Cromer,  Norfolk.
Ritchie,  Mrs.,  33  Cadogan  Place,  London,  S.W.
Ritter,  7  Park  Place,  St.  James's,  London,  S.W.
Riviere,  Mrs.  Evelyn,  10  Nottingham  Terrace,  York  Gate,  London,
N.W.

*Robbins,  Miss  A.  M.,  29  Newbury  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Robbins,  G.  M'L.,  Titusville,  Fla.,  U.S.A.

Robeck,  Miss  Geraldine  de,  St.  David's  House,  Naas,  Ireland.
■*Roberts,  Lady,  Bryngwenallt,  Abergele,  N.  Whales.
*Roberts,  R.  Nevill,  29  Finchley  Road,  London,  N.W.

Roberts,  Rev.  W.  W.,  76  Kensington  Gardens  Square,  London,  W.

Roberts,  W.  M.,  Bar  Harbor,  Maine,  U.S.A.

Robertson,  Mrs.  J.  G.,  90  Regent's  Park  Road,  London,  N.W.

Robinson, Mrs. C.  B., 1513  Fourth  Avenue,  Louisville,  Ky.,
U.S.A.

Robinson,  George  R.,  31  James  Street,  Liverpool.
Robinson,  Nelson  L.,  381  Central  Park  West,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

Rodakiewicz,  Dr.  Eila,  Bernbrunngasse  17,  Hietzing,  Vienna,  Austria.
Roe,  Miss  Jessie  T.,  55  Nightingale  Vale,  Woolwich,  London,  S.E.
Rogers,  Edmund  J.  A.,  M.D.,  CM.,  222  West  Colfax  Avenue,

Denver,  Colo.,  U.S.A.
*Rogers,  George  F.,  M.D.,  4  King's  Parade,  Cambridge.
Rogers, T. Percival, Henleaze Park,  Westbury-on-Trym,

Gloucestershire .

Rohde,  Miss,  68  Hereford  Road,  Westbourne  Grove,  London,  W.

3  a


732


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Rolleston,  Mrs.,  Glasshouse,  Shinrone,  King's  Co.,  Ireland.

Rolleston, T. W., Ardeevin, Christchurch Road,  Hampstead^
London,  N.W.

Rose,  Mrs.  Guy,  Giverny,  par  Vernon,  Eure,  France.

Rosenberger,  James,  Sellersville,  Bucks  Co.,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
^Rothschild,  Mrs.  Leopold  de,  5  Hamilton  Place,  London,  W.

Roy,  Gunga  N.,  Deputy  Magistrate,  Barisal,  East  Bengal,  India.
*Rucker,  Sir  A.  W.,  F.R.S.,  19  Gledhow  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
*Rumsey,  Charles  Almaric,  33  Hawke  Road,  Upper  Norwood,,
London,  S.E.

Rundle,  Miss  M.  G.,  Varese,  Burghley  Road,  Wimbledon,  London,
S.W.

Russell,  George  M.,  Caixa  304,  Manaos,  Brazil.
Russell,  Rev.  T.  H.,  St.  Martin's  Vicarage,  Gospel  Oak,  London,.
N.W.

Ryan,  Mrs.,  The New  York  Sun, 1 Arundel  Street,  Strand,
London,  W.C.

Ryves,  Miss  Evangeline,  Clovelly,  Banstead  Road,  Ewell,  Surrey.
Sadgrove,  W.  Arthur,  Clonarel,  Foxley  Lane,  Purley,  Surrey.
St.  Davids,  The  Lady,  3  Richmond  Terrace,  Whitehall,  London,
S.W.

St.  Hill,  Mrs.,  Thimble,  Littlewick  Green,  Berks.

Sampson,  Colonel  Dudley,  Buxshalls,  Lindfield,  Hayward's  Heath.

Sanderson,  W.  R.
*Sandford,  Miss  Alice,  33  Hertford  Street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.

Sanger,  Mrs.  F.  W.,  The  Sevillia,  117  West  58th  Street,  New
York  City,  U.S.A.

Saunders,  Miss  E.  R.,  Newnliam  College,  Cambridge.

Saunders,  W.  E.,  Riovista,  Torresdale,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
*Savage,  Rev.  M.  J.,  D.D.,  1867  Crawford  Road,  Cleveland,  Ohio,
U.S.A.

Savill,  Dr.  Agnes,  66  Harley  Street,  London,  W.
*Scatcherd,  Miss  F.  R.,  Ringmore  House,  Quarry  Road,  Hastings.
*Schiller,  F.  C.  S.,  D.Sc,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.

Schmidt,  Julius,  582  Woolwich  Road,  Charlton,  London,  S.E.

Schoeller,  W.  R.,  Ph.D.,  Plankow,  Qiina.

Schofield,  Mrs.,  1  Phillimore  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Schreiner,  Miss  Julia,  56  Eaton  Square,  London,  S.W.
Schuster,  Miss,  Cottenham  House,  Wimbledon,  London,  S.W.
Scott,  Rev.  D.  D.,  The  Manse,  Onehunga,  Auckland,  New  Zealand.
*Scott,  Capt.  G.  B.,  27th  Punjabis,  Alipore,  Calcutta,  India.


LXI.]


Members  and  Associates.


733


*Scott,  Sydney  C,  92  Westbourne  Terrace,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Scott,  W.  Sibbald,  M.B.,  Hampton-in-Arden,  Warwickshire.
*Scott-Gatty,  Sir  Alfred  S.,  C.V.O.,  F.S.A.,  Garter  King-at-Arms,

Wendover  Lodge,  Welwyn,  Herts.
Scott-Moncrieff,  W.  G.,  J. P.,  Edgemoor,  Lanark,  Scotland.
Scripps,  Thomas  Cecil,  13  Woronzow  Road,  London,  N.W.
Searle,  Rev.  George  M.,  St.  Paul's  Church,  415  West  59th  Street,

New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Sedgwick,  Mrs.  H.  D.,  Junr.,  9  Avenue  des  Bourdonnais,  Paris.
Senathi  Raja,  E.  S.  W.,  LL.B.,  The  Grange,  Trivandrum,  India.
Seymour,  Admiral  of  the  Fleet  Sir  E.  H.,  O.M.,  G.C.B.,  G.C.V.O.,

Queen  Anne's  Mansions,  St.  James's  Park,  London,  S.W.
Shackleford,  Hon.  Thomas  M.,  Tallahassee,  Florida,  U.S.A.
Shaddick,  W.  Harris,  Lyndhui^st,  99  Montague  Road,  Leytonstone,

London,  N.E.
Shadwell,  Miss  Blanche,  Trewollack,  Bodwin.

Shakespear,  Mrs.,  12  Brunswick  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Shand,  Alexander  F.,  1  Edwardes  Place,  Kensington,  London,  W.
*Sharpe,  J.  W.,  Woodroffe,  Portarlington  Road,  Bournemouth.
*Shaw,  Rev.  Sir  Charles  I.  Monson,  Bart.,  The  Vicarage,  Margate.
Shaw,  Mrs.  W.  N.,  10  Moreton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Sheets,  J.  C.  (c/o  Cincinnati  Sanatorium,  College  Hill),  Station

K.,  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
Sheldon,  A.  F.,  209  State  Street,  Rm.  1002,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
*Shewan,  R.  G.,  c/o  Shewan,  Tomes  &  Co.,  Hong  Kong,  China.
*Shirley,  Ralph,  164  Aldersgate  Street,  London,  E.C.
*Shove,  Miss  E.,  M.B.,  30  York  Street  Chambers,  Bryanston
Square,  London,  W.
Shuttleworth,  Miss  C.  J.,  10  Cottesmore  Gardens,  Kensington,
London,  W.

*Sidgwick,  Arthur,  LL.D.,  64  Woodstock  Road,  Oxford.

Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Edward,  25  Collingham  Road,  London,  S.W.
*Sidgwick,  Mrs.  H.,  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.

Sidgwick,  Miss  Rose,  64  Woodstock  Road,  Oxford.

Siegel,  Louis,  3  Ploszlgasse,  Vienna  IV.,  Austria.

Siegel,  Mrs.  Henry,  26  E.  82nd  Street,  New  York  City,  and
Mamaroneck,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Silver,  Mrs.,  24  Victoria  Square,  London,  S.W.

Singh,  Amar,  Hoshiarpur,  Punjab,  India.

Sivudu,  R.  Venkata,  The  College,  Guntur,  Madras  Presidency,
India.


734


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Skeffington,  J.  B.,  LL.D.,  21  Crumlin  Road,  Belfast.

Skipwith,  Mrs.,  1  Culford  Gardens,  Sloane  Square,  London,  S.W.

Skipwith,  Mrs.,  13  Montagu  Square,  London,  W.

Sloane,  G.  G.,  Hylham  House,  Snowdon  R.oad,  Bournemouth  West.

Sloggett, Surgeon-General  A. T., C.M.G., C.B.,  P.M.O.  6th

Division,  Poona,  India.
Small,  Mrs.  William.

Smith,  Adolphe,  12  Crookham  Road,  Fulham,  London,  S.W.
Smith,  Miss  Beatrice  E.,  Lea,  Grange-over-Sands,  Lancashire.
*Smith,  Rev.  Ernest  F.,  153  Banbury  Road,  Oxford.
Smith,  G.  Albert,  Laboratory  Lodge,  Roman  Crescent,  Southwick,
Brighton.

Smith,  George  M.,  Custom  House,  Lowestoft.
*Smith,  Henry  Arthur,  7  Queen's  Mansions,  Brook  Green,  London,
W.

Smith, Sir H. Babington, C.B., National  Bank of  Turkey,
Constantinople.

*Smith,  Rev.  Richard,  The  Manse,  Melrose  Gardens,  West  Ken-
sington Park,  London,  W.

Smith,  Rev.  Sidney  M.,  Hebden  Bridge  Vicarage,  Yorkshire.
■*Smitli,  Mrs.  W.  Easton,  132  Grove  Street,  VVateibury,  Conn.,  U.S.A.

Smith,  Wm.  Hawley,  2039  Knoxville  Avenue,  Peona,  111.,  U.S.A.

Smith,  William  P.,  Crestline,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
*Smithson,  Mrs.,  42  Tilehouse  Street,  Hitchin,  Herts.

Snape,  Mrs.,  St.  Bees,  Beachy  Head  Road,  Eastbourne.
*Snow,  Chester  A.,  523  Ninth  Street,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.

Sparrow,  G.  W.  S.,  Albrighton  Hall,  near  Shrewsbury.

Spear,  John  A.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P., c/o Mrs.  Hoffmeister,
Clifton  House,  Cowes,  I.  of  W.
*Speer,  Charlton  T.,  Glenhurst,  The  Common,  Sutton,  Surrey.

Spencer,  Miss  C.  H.,  26  George  Street,  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.

Spens,  William,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
*Sproston,  S.,  Junr.,  Elm  House,  Nantwich,  Cheshire.
*Sproston, W. Manning, Ardingly College, Hayward's  Heath,
Sussex.

Stanton,  Rev.  Horace  C,  Ph.D.,  D.D.,  Clifton  Springs,  N.Y..  U.S.A.
Stapleton,  Mrs.,  46  Montagu  Square,  London,  W.
*Stapley,  Sir  Richard,  33  Bloomsbury  Square,  London,  W.C.
Statkowski,  Miss  Tamara,  Bagni  di  Castro  Caro,  Stabilimento

Conti,  Forli,  Italy.
Stawell,  Miss  F.  M.,  44  Westbourne  Park  Villas,  London,  W.


Members  and  Associates.


735


*Steel,  Mrs.,  Talgarth  Hall,  Machynlleth,  Montgomeryshire.
Stephens,  Mrs.,  41  Harrington  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Stephenson,  Guy,  41  Egerton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Stevenson,  Mrs.,  Wingrove,  Moorend  Park  Road,  Cheltenham.
Stewart, Miss  Agnes, Artillery  Mansions, 75 Victoria  Street,

London,  S.W.
Stewart,  Mrs.  C.  A.,  Larghan,  Coupar  Angus,  N.B.
Stewart,  Major  D.  B.,  Pi,.F.A.  Mess,  Roberts  Heights,  Pretoria,
S.  Africa.

Stewart,  Miss  G.,  29  Dover  Street,  London,  W.
Stewart,  Herbert  L.,  Ill  University  Street,  Belfast.
Stewart,  J.,  P.O.  Dept.,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
Stewart,  Miss  Marian  A.,  6  Lexham  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Stiles,  Mrs.  T.  L.,  411  North  D.  Street,  Tacoma,  Washington,

D.C.,  U.S.A.
Stocker,  Miss  M.  I.,  Dunorlan,  Harrogate.
Stoehr,  Miss,  Downend,  Hindhead,  Surrey.

Stokes,  Dr.  Henry  N.,  1443  Q.  Street,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.,
U.S.A.

*Stokes,  J.  N.  P.,  118  East  22nd  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Stout,  Professor  George  F.,  Craigard,  St.  Andrews,  N.B.
Strachan,  W.  M.,  Strood  Park,  Horsham,  Sussex.
Strachey,  Charles,  Colonial  Office,  Downing  Street,  London,  S.W.
Strachey,  J.  B.,  67  Belsize  Park  Gardens,  Hampstead,  London,
N.W.

*Strachey,  John  St.  Loe,  Spectator  Office,  1  Wellington  Street,,

Strand,  London,  W.C.
Strain,  Miss  E.  H.,  Cassillis  Hoiise,  Maybole,  Ayrshire.
Stratton,  F.  J.  M.,  Gonville  and  Caius  College,  Cambridge.
Strauss,  E.  A.,  49  Grosvenor  Square,  London,  W.
Strong,  Rev.  Charles,  D.D.,  67  Avoca  Street,  S.Y.,  Melbourne,

Australia.

*Strutt,  Hon.  Richard,  Rayleigh  House,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
*Stuart,  A.  I.,  24  Marlborough  Rd.,  Southport.

Stuart,  Mrs.,  Gloucester  House,  Lansdown,  Cheltenham.

Stuart-Prince,  Major  C,  c/o  Messrs.  Grindlay,  Groom  &  Co.,
Bombay,  India.

*Sturcly,  Edward  T.,  6  St.  John's  Wood  Park,  London,  N.W.
Sturge,  Miss  M.  Carta,  Cranbourne  Grange,  Wonston,  Micheldever,
Hants.

*Suffern,  Ernest  S.,  165  Broadway,  New  York,  U.S.A.


736


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Sulman,  H.  L.,  31  The  Avenue,  Brondesbury  Park,  London,  N.W.
Sutton,  Lady,  49  Lexham  Gardens,  London,  W.
Swainson,  Miss  F.  J.,  Stonecross,  Kendal.

Swainson,  Miss  M.,  7e  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Mansions,  London,  W.
*Swayne,  Mrs.  Noah  Haynes,  Junr.,  153  Mill  Creek  Rd.,  Ardmore,
Pa.,  U.S.A.

Sweetland,  Mrs.  Gilford,  Fair  Oak  Vicarage,  Eastleigh,  Hants.

Szentirmay  de  Darvasto,  B.  M.  J.  de.  Consulate  for  Austria-
Hungary,  Rustschuk,  Bulgaria.

Tait,  Mrs.  W.  J.,  LismuUen,  Arthur  Road,  Wimbledon  Park,
Surrey.

Tanner,  Ernest,  Hotel  Curzon,  Brighton.
*Taylor,  Miss  E.  Waring,  7e  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Mansions,

London,  W  .
■^Taylor,  H.  Dennis,  Stancliffe,  The  Mount,  York.
*Taylor,  Lieut-Colonel  G.  L.  Le  M.,  6  College  Lawn,  Cheltenham.

Temple,  Reginald  W.
*Tennant,  Lady,  Wilsford  Manor,  Salisbury.

Theophilus,  Mrs.,  165  Westbourne  Grove,  Bayswater,  London,  W.

Thomas,  Rev.  C.  D.,  South  Hill  Lodge,  Bromley,  Kent.

Thomas,  Miss  Edith  J.,  Mynydd  Ednydd,  Criccieth,  N.  Wales.

Thomas,  Ernest  Seymour,  Turf  Club,  Cairo,  Egypt.

Thomas,  Dr.  George  P.,  2113  North  7th  Street,  PhiladeliDhia,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

*Thomas,  J.  W.,  Overdale,  Shortlands,  Kent.

Thompson,  Edwin,  1  Croxteth  Grove,  Liverpool.

Thompson,  Matthew  William,  Knoll,  Frant,  Tunbridge  Wells.

Thompson,  Mrs.  Rosalie,  8  John  Street,  Adelphi,  London,  W.C.
^Thomson,  Edward  J.,  Western  Club,  Glasgow.

Thorburn,  Rev.  T.  J.,  LL.D.,  The  Bungalow,  St.  Helen's  Down,
Hastings.

Thornhill,  Miss  H.,  The  Studios,  42  Linden  Gardens,  London,  W.
Thornley,  Rev.  Alfred,  Hughenden,  Coppice  Road,  Nottingham.
Thornley,  Miss  F.  J.,  36  Downleaze,  Stoke  Bishop,  Bi-istol.
Thornton,  W.  M.,  D.Sc,  Durham  College  of  Science,  Newcastle-
on-Tyne.

'Thurn  and  Taxis,  H.I.H.  The  Princess  Alexander  of,  Lautschin,

Nimburg,  Bohemia,  Austria.
Tibb,  Mrs.,  Rede  Hall,  nr.  Burstow,  by  Horley,  Surrey.
Tootal,  Mrs.  A.  J.,  The  Ladies'  Empire  Club,  69  Grosvenor  Street,

London,  W.


LXI.]


Members  and  Associates.


737


Torr,  Miss  D.  R.,  St.  Andrew's  House,  Mortimer  Street,  London,
W.

Townesend,  Mrs.,  Trevine,  Boley  Hill,  Rochester,  Kent.

Trafford,  Mrs.  Galfrid  de,  Queensberry  House,  Richmond.

Trimnell,  Miss  H.  L.,  36  Regent's  Square,  Bloomsbury,  London,  W.C.
^Trotter,  Mrs.,  The  Hill,  Batheaston,  Bath.

Truell,  Robert  Holt  Stuart,  West  Mount,  Dover  College,  Dover.

Tschistiakoff,  P.  A.,  Arbat  (maison  Tolstoy),  Moscow.

Tucker,  James  W.,  Cooperstown,  N.Y.,  U.S.A..
*Tuckey,  C.  Lloyd,  M.D.,  88  Park  Street,  Grosvenor  Square,
London,  W.

Tudor,  Owen  S.,  Friday's  Hill,  Haslemere,  Surrey.
*Turner,  A.  Hilgrove,  H.M.  Attorney-General  for  Jersey,  Gouray
Lodge,  Jersey.

Turner,  Herbert  B.,  c/o  Brown,  Shipley  &  Co.,  123  Pall  Mall,
London,  S.W.

Turner,  Sidney,  20  Minster  Road,  Cricklewood,  London,  N.W.
■*Turpin,  Miss  S.  I.  G.,  Youngrove,  Midleton,  Co.  Cork,  Ireland.
-*Tweedale,  Mrs.,  Balquholly,  Turriff,  N.B.

Tyler,  Professor  C.  M.,  The  Oaks,  Ithaca,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
''^Tyrone,  The  O'Neill  de,  Toi're  de  S.  Sebastiao-Cascaes,  Lisbon,
Portugal.

Tyrrell,  G.  N.,  The  Lodge,  Alderminster,  Stratford-on-Avon.
Unwin,  Mrs.,  Homestead,  Bushey  Heath,  Herts.
Van  Deren,  H.  S.,  Nashville,  Tenn.,  U.S.A.
Van  Meter,  Solomon  L.,  Hutchison,  Kentucky,  U.S.A.
*Van  Norden,  Rev.  Charles,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  East  Auburn,  Placer
Co.,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
Van  Renterghem,  A.  W.,  M.D.,  1  Van  Breestraat,  Amsterdam,
Holland.

Venables,  Rev.  Herbert  A.,  Palazzo  Sonnino,  30  Via  del  Prato,
Florence,  Italy.
"^Verney-Cave,  Hon.  Mrs.,  Stanford  on  Avon,  Rugby.
"*Verrall,  Mrs.  A.  W.,  5  Selwyn  Gardens,  Cambridge.

Verrall,  Miss  H.  de  G.,  5  Selwyn  Gardens,  Cambridge.

Verrall,  Miss  M.  E.,  26  Gloucester  Place,  Brighton.

Vesme,  Cesar  Baudi  de,  39  rue  Guersant,  Paris.

Villamarina,  Her  Excellency  the  Marchesa  di,  Palazza  Reale,

Quirinale,  Rome.
Vincent,  W.  James,  M.B.,  Wadsley  Asylum,  Sheffield.
Walker,  Miss  Madeline  J.,  107  Queen's  Gate,  London,  S.W.


738


Members  and  Associates.


[part-


*Walker-Munro,  L.,  R.N.,  Rliinefield,  Brockenhurst,  Hants.

Walker-Munro,  Mrs.,  Rliinefield,  Brockenhurst,  Hants.
*Wallace,  Abraham,  M.D.,  39  Harley  Street,  London,  W.  '

Walsh,  Correa  M.,  Belleport,  Long  Island,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Walton,  J.  P.,  Hill  House,  Halesworth,  Suffolk.

Wanderley,  F.  M.,  Corumba,  Matto  Grosso,  Brazil.
*Ward,  The  Count,  G.C.V.O.,  Fulwell  Park,  Twickenham,  Surrey. -

Ward,  Hon.  Kathleen,  Castle  Ward,  Downpatrick.
*Warndorfer,  A.,  Elisabetstrasse  23,  Baden,  nr.  Vienna.

Warner,  Miss  E.,  42  Albany  Villas,  Hove,  Sussex.
*Warren,  R.  N.,  45  Bloomsbury  Square,  London,  W.C.

Warrender,  Miss  Margaret,  50  Wilton  Crescent,  London,  S.W.

W^assell,  H.  A.,  Addenbrook  Villa,  Old  Swinford,  Stourbridge,,
Worcester.

Wastell,  Mrs.,  The  Rowans,  Crowborough,  Sussex.
Waterlow,  Sydney,  Hillyfields,  Rye,  Sussex.
Watson,  Mrs.  Milne,  39  Eccleston  Square,  London,  S.  W.
Watson,  Professor  Wm.,  107  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,,
U.S.A.

Weaver,  Miss  F.  J.,  Howard  Cottage,  Peiin,  Bucks.

Weaver,  Miss  Sarah,  15  Blagden  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Webber,  Mrs.  Felix,  The  Croft,  Shillingstone,  Dorset.
*Weinberg,  Harry  J.,  North  Road,  The  Park,  Nottingham.

Welch,  Thomas  G.,  The  Oaks,  Blakebrook,  Kidderminster.
*Wells,  E.  P.,  The  Limes,  94  Larkhall  Rise,  Clapham,  London,  S.W.
*Westcott,  W.  Wynn,  M.B.,  J. P.,  396  Camden  Road,  London,  N.

Western,  F.  J.,  c/o  The  Librarian,  Forman  Christian  College,.
Lahore,  India.
*Westlake,  Ernest,  Fordingbridge,  Salisbury.

Westropp,  A.  S.  A.,  East  India  United  Service  Club,  16  St..
James's  Square,  London,  S.W.

Wheatley,  G.,  16  Royal  Parade,  Cheltenham.

Wheeler,  C.  Bickersteth,  7  St.  Stephen's  Crescent,  Bayswater,.
London,  W.

*Whetham,  W.  C.  D.,  F.R.S.,  Upwater  Lodge,  Cambridge.

Whipple,  L.  E.,  10  East  66th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Whitaker,  Joseph  J.  S.,  Villa  Malfitaho,  Palermo,  Sicily.

White,  Dr.  Gordon,  610A  Church  St.,  Nashville,  Tenn.,  U.S.A.
*Whitehead,  Miss  Mercia  D.,  St.  Mary's,  Trumpington,  Cambridge..

Whitehead,  Rev.  John,  Lexington  and  Beaver  Streets,  Waltham^,
Mass.,  U.S.A.


LXI.]


Members  and  Associates.


739^


Whiting, J. Markby, Ashford House, Wimbledon  Common,
London,  S.W.

Whitmore,  Mrs.,  28  Milner  St.,  Cadogan  Square,  Loudon,  S.W.
Whiton,  Rev.  J.  M.,  Ph.D.,  287  Fourth  Avenue,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

*Whittemore,  Mrs.  Julia  S.,  Naugatuck,  Conu.,  U.S.A.

Wigan,  Rev.  Herbert,  Dunsden  Vicarage,  Reading.

Wigan,  W.  L.,  Clare  Cottage,  East  Mailing,  Maidstone,  Kent.
*Wigg,  E.  Neale,  29  Ludgate  Hill,  London,  E.C.

Wight,  Edward,  M.R.C.S.,  9  Regency  Square,  Brighton.

Wilkins,  Mrs.,  8  Rostrevor  Terrace,  Rathgar,  nr.  Dublin.
*Wilkins,  C.  F.,  c/o  Messrs.  King  &  Co.,  9  Pall  Mall,  London,  S.W..-

Wilkinson,  Miss  M.  S.,  M.A.,  The  Lodge  School,  The  Park,  Hull.

Willett,  Mrs.,  St.  Andrew's  Lodge,  Seaford,  Sussex.

Williams,  A.  C.  Redshawe,  52  King  William  Street.  London,  E.G.
*Williams,  Mrs.  Glynne,  7  Berkeley  House,  Hay  Hill,  London,  W.

Williams,  J.  E.,  Plumb  Opera  House,  Streator,  111.,  U.S.A.

Williams,  Mrs.  S.  R.,  12  Lorne  Rd.,  Oxton,  Cheshire.

Williamson,  Mrs.,  The  Croft,  Didsbury,  Manchester.

Willis,  Mrs.,  c/o  Mrs.  Barbar,  New  Street,  Killarney,  Co.  Kerry,
Ireland.

Willis,  Grant  B.,  434  North  M'Kinley  Avenue,  Canton,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
*Willock,  Mrs.  C.  J.,  16  Warwick  Square,  London,  S.W.
Wilson,  Rev.  Alexander,  The  Manse,  Ythanwells,  Insch,  Aberdeen-
shire.

Wilson,  Mrs.  Arthur,  150  Whitehall  Court,  London,  S.W.

Wilson,  Charles  J.,  17  Pembroke  Park,  Dublin,  Ireland.

Wilson,  Mrs.  C.  Stuart,  c/o  Major  C.  S.  Wilson,  R.E.,  Kasr  el

Nil,  Cairo,  Egypt.
Wilson,  Miss  E.  M.,  Holland  Lodge,  Addison  Rd.,  Kensington,

London,  W.

Wilson,  Mrs.  H.  J.,  12  Cheyne  Court,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
Wilson,  Herbert  W.,  Cornholme,  Garston,  Liverpool.
Wilson,  Miss  M.  A.,  Holland  Lodge,  Addison  Road,  Kensington,.
London,  W.

Wingate,  D.  C,  Cornborough,  Abbotsham,  North  Devon.
*Wingfield,  H.  E.,  M.D.,  44  Welbeck  Street,  London,  W.
Winslow,  L.  Forbes,  M.B.,  LL.D.,  57  Devonshire  Street,  Portland

Place,  London,  W.
Winslow,  Mrs. Forbes,  57  Devonshire  Street,  Portland  Place,,

London,  W.


740


Members  and  Associates.


[part  lxi.]


Witherby,  Arthur  George,  Newtown  Grange,  Newbury,  Berks.
Wohlgemuth,  Adolf,  44  Church  Crescent,  Muswell  Hill,  London,  N.
*Wolf,  Francisco  Eugene  de.  Villa Miramar,  Bristol,  R.I. ,  U.S.A.
Wood,  John  B.,  346  Jurnpa  Avenue,  Riverside,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
Wood,  Lionel,  20  Edward's  Road,  Whitley  Bay,  Northumbei-land.
'''■Wood,  R.  H.,  c/o  Messrs.  Smith,  Wood  &  Co.,  3  and  4  Lime  Street
Square,  London,  E.G.
Wooderson,  George  T.,  20  Peckham  Road,  Camberwell,  London,
S.E.

Woodhull,  Miss  Zula  M.,  Norton  Park,  Bredon's  Norton,  near
Tewkesbury,  Worcestershire.
*Woods,  Miss  Alice,  3  North  Mansions,  Burton  Road,  Kilburn,
London,  N.W.

*Woods,  Mrs.,  The  Master's  House,  Temjjle,  London,  E.G.
Woodward, Miss Mabel, 16 Harborne Road,  Edgbaston,
Birmingham.

*Wooldridge,  H.  B.,  The  Gresham  Club,  London,  E.G.
Woollett,  Lieut. -Colonel  W.  Charles,  4  The  Ridges,  Farnboro',
Hants.

Woolley, V. J., 48  Lissenden  Mansions, Lissenden  Gardens,
London,  N.W.
*Worsfold,  Mrs.  Basil,  Romden  Place,  Smarden,  Kent.

Wrchovszky,  Wilhelm,  Kronprinz  Rudolf  Str.  12,  Vienna.
-x-Wright,  Maiirice  B.,  M.D.,  33  Wimpole  Street,  London,  W.

Wyke,  Mrs.  Wilberforce,  Arundel  House,  Beaumont,  Jersey,  G.I.

Wyllys,  Miss  R.,  18  Louisburg  Square,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Wyndham,  ITon.  Percy,  44  Belgrave  Square,  London,  W.

Wyndham  Quin,  The  Lady  Emily,  12  William  Street,  Lowndes
Square,  London,  S.W.

Yandell,  Miss  Maud,  c/o  Miss  Alice  Bodine,  Bridgeton,  New
Jersey,  U.S.A.
*Yorke,  Hon.  Alexander,  10  Granville  Place,  London,  W.

Yaroschenko,  Madame,  La  Cava,  Bordighera,  Italy.

Young,  G.  P.,  Burnside  Cottage,  Colston,  Bishopbriggs,  Glasgow.

Young,  J.  F.,  72  Lansdowne  Road,  Notting  Hill,  London,  W.
*Young,  Sir  William  L.,  Bart.,  35  Lower  Seymour  Street,  Portman
Square,  London,  W.

Younghusband,  Sir  Francis,  The  Residency,  Kashmir,  India.

Yssel  de  Schepper,  Mr.  Justice,  Dierquarddaan  49a,  Rotterdam.

Zagury,  Leon,  12  Emanuel  Avenue,  Acton,  London,  W.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

INDEX  TO  VOL.  XXIV.

(PARTS  LX.— LXI.)
I9IO.
A.

Abnormal  States,  Time  reactions  in - - - - - 676,  677

See  also  Hj'pnotism,  Psychotherapy,  and  Suggestion.
Aht  Vogler. See  Broivnvng,  Hope  and  Star.

Achilles  (Horace  Ode  Question)  reference  to  -  -  -  -  155,  156
Adam,  J.,  Republic  of  Plato,  edited  by,  reference  to  -  -  231  (footnote)
Addleshaw,  Percy,  on  the  Roden  Noel  Cross-Correspondence  -  -  5
Aeneid  (Book  I.)  Incidents. 35-37,  53,  59-77,  80,  89,  92,  93,  134  (footnote),

144,  145,  171-8

„  ,,  ,, Authorities  consulted - - 62  (footnote)

„  „ Summary  of  chief  points - - - -  77

See also articles by J.  G.  Piddington, Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick,
and  Mrs.  Verrall.

Agamemnon  Incident  - ------  36,37,47-52,81,147

Ajax  and  Ulysses  Incident  -------- 35,  52-54

American  Society  for  Psychical  Eesearch,  Journal  of,  Review  of

Miss  Johnson's  First  Report  on  "Mrs.  Holland's"  Script  -  -  6-10
American  Therapeutic  Society,  Symposium  on  Psycliotherapy  before

the - - - - --------  665

Anagrams,  identified  (Drone  =  Roden) ------  5

,, Early  Script  experiments  with,  by  F.  W.  H.  Myeis -  17
Anchises  (The  Sibyl  Incident) ------ -  125,147-50

Androsace. See  Broivnhig,  Mope  and  Star.


742


Index  to  Vol.  XXIV.


[parts


Angel. See  Spirit  and  Angel.

Animal  Magnetism. See  Hypncitism,  Mesmerism,  and  Suggestion.
Apples,  The  Golden,  of  the  Hesperides,  Cross-Correspondence

26-29,  35-37,  191-93
Aristophanes'  Apology. See  Browning  R,  and  Euripides.
Arma  Virumque  Cano. See  Aeneid  Incident  (Bk.  I.)

Arnold,  Sir  Edward,  Death  and  Afterwards,  reference  to 343-344,  350
Arnold,  Matthew,  Sivitzerland,  Script  references  to - - .  221
Arrow,  Cross-Correspondence,  Analysis  of - _ . . -  13-16
„  „  references  to -  13-16,  94,  97,  183  (footnote)

Articles  brought  to  sittings  to  assist  Identification 357-362,  376,  381,
392,  400,  412,  413,  423,  464,  484,  524,  542,  564,  579,  634
Atlas  (Apples  Cross-Correspondence)- - - -  26-29,35-37,191-93
Automatic  Writing. See  the  Scripts  of  Mrs.  Frith,  "  Mrs.  Holland,"


the  Mae  Script,  the  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Home,  Mrs.
Piper,  antl  the  Scripts  of  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall.
Automatisms  85,  635

„  Concordant, Supplementary Notes on a  Series  of,

by  J.  G.  Piddhigton- - - -  11-30
„  „ Minor  references  to 11-30,  150-152,  192,  201

(footnote),  105-7,  220-222,  258,  269,  286-88,  301
avTu'i  ovpavo^  aKviimv  Incident,  reference  to  -  -  -  -  -  19,  20
Ave  Roma  Immor talis,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to  -  -  8,  9
Azure  and  Horizon,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to - - -  220'


B.

B.  and  the  Walnut  Tree,  Script  ("Mrs.  Holland"),  references  to  -  210'
Bailly,  Report  on  the  French  Commissions  on  Animal  Magnetism  690-691
Barrett,  Professor  W.  F.,  Dowsing,  researches  in - - - -  333-4

,,  ,,  ,, Reichenbach  Phenomena,  reference  to  ex-

periments in - - - 333  (footnote)
Baughan,  Rosa,  Control  (The  Mac  Script) -----  265

Bell,  Ellen,  Control  (The  Mac  Script) ----- 265,  310

Benson,  R.  H.,  The  Necromancers,  reference  to- - - - -  345

Bertrand,  Alexander,  Researches  in  Animal  Magnetism,  reference  to  692'
Blue  Flower,  Cross-Correspondence ------ 215,  260'

Braid,  James,  Hypnotic  Researches  of,  reference  to - - - 687,  692
Bramwell,  Dr.  Mihie,  Hypnotism  and  Treatment  by  Suggestion,

Experiments  in - - - - - - - - -  683-685'

Browning,  E.  B.,  Script  references  to.  Consolation, . . - .  221
„  „  „  A  Brawa  of  Exile - - -  222

Browning,  R.,  Aristophanes'  Apology  and  Euripides,  Cross-Correspondence

25-30,  125,  127,  128,  192,  220
„  Hope  and  Star,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to

11-13,  18,  134  (footnote),  161


LX.-LXr.]


Index  to  Vul.  XXIV.


743


Browning,  E.,  Script  references  to  Cavalier  Songs

„ „ The  Englishman  in  Itahj

„ „ Lost  Leader - -  -

„ „ Rabbi  ben  Ezra

-  223

„ ,,  Sordello

-  219

„ „ Toccata  of  Galuppi

-  241

Bulfinch,  T.,  Age  of  Fable  (Lethe  Incident),  references  to

103,  104,  117  (footnote),  118  (footnote),  119,  131,

141,  142,  328

c.

■Cahagnet,  Researches  in  Clairvoyance,  reference  to  -  -  -  -  695
Carson,  Reynold,  Control  (Mac  Script)  .  -  -  -  266,  310,  311
Cave  of  Sleep  (Lethe  Incident)

35,  87-104,  112-113,  119,  122,  132,  133,  135,  188,  191
Ceyx,  Story  of  (Lethe  Incident) 35,  36,  83,  94-95,  99-100,  102-104,  106,  116,

120,  122,  131,  133,  142-3,  185  (footnote),  327-28
„  Literary  Sources  from  which  obtainalDle  102-104,  116,  120,  122


„  Snmmary  of  the  Story  given  by  Ovid  - - - 99,  100

Chaucer  (Lethe  Incident),  reference  to ----- -  103

■Christian  Science  (and  Mesmerism),  Podmore,  Frank,  on - - -  687
Mitchell,  T.  W.,  on  - - - - - - -  687

Clairvoyance,  Early  Experiments  in - - - - 691,  693,  694,  695

■Clarke  Family,  references  to. See  Junot  Sittings.


„  Frank  (Cousin  Frank) 452,  453,  459,  462,  465,  467,  474-75,

487,  584-85,  600,  603,  630,  634-5,  646,  657
Miriam - -  409,456,496,548,556,560,561,611,657
Classical  and  Literary  Allusions  in  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance,

Mrs.  A.  W.  Yerrall  on - - -  39-85
„  „  Three  Incidents  from  the  Sittings,

J.  G.  Piddington  on - -  86-169

Claviger  Epithet. See  St.  Peter.

Clough,  A.  H.,  Poems  of.  Script  reference  to

286,  287  (footnote),  288,  290  (footnote),  317
Comus  Incident,  the ------ 37,  45,  46,  81,  197-200

Conington,  Professor,  Notes  on  Virgil,  reference  to  -  -  64,  75  (footnote)
Controls. See  the  Hodgson,  Myers,  and  Sidgwick  Controls,  the

Junot  Sittings,  and  the  Mac  Script.
■  Coriat,  Dr.,  Experiments  in  Reaction-times . - - . .  677
Cousin  Frank. See  Clarke,  Frank.

Cranberries  Incident  (Junot  Sittings) - - 424,  426,  435,  470,  471
Cross-Correspondence,  Experiments  in - 2,  11,  31-200,  201,  264,  319,  327
„  Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  on - - - -  2,  201,  319

„  Piddington,  J.  G.,  on . . .  31,  86,  327

„  Sidgwick,  Mrs.  H.,  on - - - - 31,  170

Verrall,  Mrs.  A.  W.,  on - - - -  31,39,264


744  y


Index  to  Vol.  XXIV.


[parts-


CifO'ds-Correspondence,  Indications  of  the  Presence  of  a  Third  IntelHgence,

32-34,80,  91  (footnote),  92  (footnote),  98-104,  111-113,
115-133,  149,  155-156,  222,  256-58,  261-63,  319-32&
„  Identity  of  the  Intelligence,  question  of 32-34,  80,

91  (footnote),  123-133,  155-156,  256-258,  261-263
„  Knowledge  of  the  Subject-Matter  on  the  part

of  the  Auto7natists  or  Sitters,  Question  of 19,  23,
24,  29,  30,  42,  43,  98-104,  114  (footnote),  121-135,.
138-144,  158,  165,  233,  234,  237,  240,  275-76,  280

(footnote),  284,  286,  319-326
„  Phrases  indicating 21,  22,  183  (footnote),  189  (foot-

note), 203-4,  207-8,  211,  213,  223,  224  (footnote),  225,,

239,  242,  245,  257,  267-68
See  also  the  Scripts  of  Mrs.  Frith,  "Mrs.  Holland,"  and  Mrs.  and
Miss  Verrall,  The  Mac  Scri))t,  and  the  Trance  Phenomena  of
Mrs.  Home  and  Mrs.  Piper.
Crossing  the  Bar,  Ci'oss-Correspondeuce,  reference  to  - - -  17,  82

Cup,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to ----- -  220

Cyclops,  Centaurs,  etc.,  allusions  to ----- - 37,  54,  55

D.

Daemon  of  Socrates,  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on - - - - - -  17

Daffodils,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to - - - - -  137

Dandy. See  Don.

Dante,  references,  in  earlier  scripts - - 23,  24,  124,  134  (footnote),  137
„  „ in  the  Sevens  Cross-Correspondence

226-34,  236-7,  245,  255,  256,  290-91
D'Arc,  Jeanne. See  Arroiv,  Cross-Correspondence.

Davis,  Andrew  Jackson,  reference  to  - - - - - - -  695

de  Lys. See  Arroio,  Cross- Correspondence.

De  Morgan,  Prof.  W.,  Preface  to  From  Matter  to  Spirit,  reference  to  339-341
Dejerine,  Method  of  Treating  Fatigue  States - - - - -  671

,,  ,,  ,,  „ reference  to - - -  696

Dekker,  T.,  Patient  Grissell,  Script  reference  to  - - - - -  324

Deleuze,  Researches  in  Animal  Magnetism,  reference  to - - 691,  694
Diana,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to  - - - - - -  220

Don  (Dandy),  references  to  (Junot  Sittings)  392,  418,  419,  420,  431,  432,  435
Dorr,  G.  B.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  (Series  of  1908),  22,  26,  31-200,  327,  328-
„ Discussion  of,  by  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick,  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall,

and  J.  G.  Piddington  -31-200

Notes  and  Comments  referring  to 26-30,  42,  43,  86,  88,  91,  92,

98-104,  111-114,  142,  152,  158,  162
„ Letters  read  at  Sittings  ------ 86,  136

„ Sitter's  Knowledge  of  Subject-Matter,  Question  of

42,  43  (footnotes),  102-4,  114  (footnote),  141-2,  158


LX.-LXI.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXIV.


745


Dramatic  Characteristics  of  Trance  Personalities. See  the  Hodgson,

Myers,  and  Sidgwick  Controls  and  the  Junot  Sittings.
Dresser,  Mrs.  Julius,  and  the  Christian  Science  Movement- - -  696
Dryden's  Translation  of  the  Aeneid,  references  to - - 73,  74,  76,  77
Dubois,  Professor,  on  The  Psychic  Treatment  of  Nervous  Disorders

671-73,  691,  696

Dwarf. See  Giant  and  Divarf.


E.

Echo  and  Narcissus  (Lethe  Incident)  - - - -  36,  81,  104-6,  115-120

Eddy,  Mrs.,  and  the  Christian  Science  Movement - - -  695-697
Education  and  Suggestion  --------  670-686

„  „ Will,  reinforcement  of  the,  by - 678,  684,  685

^tfio^ow,  references  to  - - - - - - - - -  -3,17

Elliotson,  Dr.,  Researches  iu  Mesmerism,  reference  to - - -  692


Essays,  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  Script  reminiscences  of

19,  87,  128,  155,  188  (footnote)

Eumenides, See  Greek  Procession.

Euripides,  Cross-Correspondence,  further  details  25-30,  125,  127-8,  192,  220
Eurydice. See  Orpheus  and  Eurydice.


Evans,  Mr.,  Control  (Mac  Script)  -  -  -  -  265,  270,  309,  310
^a:^7e  a/if^  J/oo?'?,  Cross-Correspondence - - -  19,35-7,186-189,194

„  See  also  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  on.

Experimenters,  A  New  Group  of,  by  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall  (The  Mac

Script)- ----------  264-318

F.

Faith  Healing  - . . - . 672,  673

See  also  Christian  Science,  and  Suggestion.
Fall  on  the  Ice  Incident  (Junot  Sittings) ----- 442,  480

Faria,  Abbe,  Doctrine  of  Suggestion  introduced  by - - - .  (392
Fludd,  reference  to  writings  of  ------- -  689

"  Forbes,  Mrs.,"  Script  references  to -------  210

Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry,  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  Script  reminis-
cences of - - - -  21,87,129,131-133,167,168,177,178,204

Francis  and  Ignatius,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to  -  -  -  220
Franz-Joseph  and  September  21,  Ci'oss-Correspondence  -  -  204,  208
French  Commissions  on  Animal  Magnetism,  reference  to  -  -  -690-91
Freud,  Professor,  Methods  of  Psycho-analysis,  -  -  -  .  673-678
Frith,  Mrs.,  Script  of.  The  Sevens  Cross-Correspondence

234,  239,  252,  254,  255,  256


746


Index  to  Vol.  XXIV.


[parts


G.

Galatea. See  Pygmalion  and  Galatea.
Gardiner,  Prof.  H.  Norman —

Review  of  the  First  Report  on  "Mrs.  Holland's"  Script -  6

,, Some  C'imments  on,  by  Miss  Alice  Johnson  - -  6-10

Gassner,  Cures  of,  reference  to  -  689

■Gayley,  The  Classic  Mi/ths  in  English  Literature  (Lethe  Incident),

references  to  103,  118,  119,  142,  328

Giant  and  Dwa.rf\  Cross -Correspondence,  reference  to  - - - -  137

Goethe,  Faust,  Script  references  to ------ -  4

Goodhart,  Rev.  C.  A.,  Corrigenda  by  - - - - - - -  11

Grreatrakes,  Valentine,  Cures  of,  reference  to - - - - -  689

Greek  Procession  and  Funeral,  Cross-Correspondence  - - - -  213

Gerrish,  Dr.  F.  H.,  T'he  Therapeutic  Value  of  Ilj/pnotic  Suggestion,  hy  665,  666

Gurney,  Edmund,  Hypnotic  Researches  of,  reference  to - - -  665

H.

Halcyon  Days,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to - - 1 25  (footnote)
Hallam,  Arthur,  Script  refeiences  to ------  82

Hammond,  Miss  W.  B.,  Identification  of  references  in  Mrs.  Piper's

and  Mrs.  Verrali's  Scripts  ------- 19-20,  30

Harold,  an  item  in  a  Cross-Correspondence -----  19

Harp,  Cross-correspondence - - - - - - 1 1*,  37,  188,  189

Harris,  T.  Lake,  reference  to ------- -  695

Hawthorne,  N.,  Wonder  Books  (Lethe  Incident),  reference  to  -  -  103
Heracles. See  St.  Peter,  Cross-Correspondence.

Hercules  Furens,  Cross-Correspondence ----- 25-29,  192

Hill,  J.  A.,  a  question  about  "Mrs.  Holland's"  Script - - - 2,  3
,,  Note  on  the  Arrow  Cross-Correspondence - 15  (footnote)

Hodgson,  Dr.  R. — The  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper,  edited  by  Miss

H.  de  G.  Verrall, -------  351-664

„  „  Notes  on,  by - -  355,  416,  425,  426,  500,  590,  635

Hodgson-Control  (Mrs.  Frith's  Script) -----  235-236

„  ("Mrs.  Holland's"  Script) -----  8

„  Piper-Hodgson 32,  38,  39,  47,  50,  53,  61,  78,  86,  91,  94,

99,  137,  138,  157,  158,  170-177,  183  (footnote),  185,  186,

187,  197,  198,  219,  227

„  (Miss  H.  de  G.  Verrali's  Script) - -  186-187,  197-U)8

„  (Mrs.  Verrali's  Script) ------  22

„  Dramatic  character  of - - - - - 8,  22,  80

„  Letter  to,  by  J.  G.  Piddington - - -  136-138

"Holland,  Mrs.,"  The  Automatic  Script  of

„  Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  Sup].)lementary  Notes  on  the

First  Report -------  2

„  ,, Second  Report  ------  201


LX.-LXI.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXIV.


1^1


"  Holland,  Mrs.,"  Knowledge  of  Literary  and  Classical  Allusions  in

her  Script ----- 23,  24,  25,  127,  240

„  Cross-Correspondences

„  (with  Mrs.  Piper) 21,  22,  25-30,  122-127,  136-38,  179,
183  (footnote),  194-96,  200,  222-258,  269
■ „ . „  (with  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall) 6-10,  22-30,  122-127,
136-38,  179-181,  194-96,  201-263,  269,  299,  319-326
„  „  Ee-echoes  of,  in  the  Mac  Sci'ipt - - 269,  299

„  „  Sequel  to  the  Sesame  and  Lilies  Incident 319,  326

.,  „  The  Sevens  Cross-Correspondence 222-245,  252-258

„  Extent  of  Personal  Acquaintance  with  Members  of

the  Society  --------  6-10

„  Gardiner,  Professor,  on ----- -  6-10

„  Quotations  Identified  - - - - - - -4,  5

Veridical  Incidents -----  210,216,217

Home,  Mrs.  R.,  The  Sevens  Cross-Correspondence,  contribution  to

241-43,  252,  254-255

Homer,  Script  references  to ----- 64  (footnote),  154-5

Honeysuckle  (Junot  Sittings),  reference  to  - - - - 491,  503,  504

Hood,  T.,  FLUth,  Script  references  to ----- - 283,  312

Hope. See  Browning,  Hope  and  Star.

Horace  Ode  Question,  Prelude  and  Sequel  to,  J.  G.  Piddington  on

35-37,  150-169

„  Summary  and  Eeview  of  - - - - - 160-62

Horizon. See  Azure  and  Horizon.

Howe,  M.  A.  de  Wolfe,  Commemorative  Notice  of  Dr.  R.  Hodgson,

reference  to  -----------  79

Hugo,  Victor,  Poem  of,  Cross-Correspondence - 181  (footnote),  297,  312
Human  Personalitij,  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  Script  reminiscences  of -  17
Hyacinthus  (Lethe  Incident) - - 36-37,  83,  106-107,  110-120,  130-132
Hypnotic  Suggestion,  the  Therapeutic  Value  of.  Dr.  F.  H.  Gerrish  on -  665
Hypnotism,  phenomena  of,

„  Amnesia  -------- - 668,  671

„  Hypnoidal  State,  the ----- -  679-686.

„  Memory,  conditions  of - - - - -668,  669,  680-682

„  Suggestion -------  670-672,  678-686.

„  „ Character  in  the  light  of 669,  670,  678,  682,  684,  685

„  ,, and  Education ----- 670,  671

„  Therapeutic  aspects  of ----- -  665-686

See  also  Psychotherapy.
Hysteria  and  allied  abnormal  states  treated  by  Psychotherapy  -  665-686


I.

I  wandered  lonely  as  a  Cloud,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to -  137
Icarus  (The  Sibyl  Incident) ------ -125,  147-150

3b


748


Index  to  Vol.  XXIV.


[parts


Identity,  Expei-iments  in  reviving  the  Literary  Memories  of  Trance

Pei'sonalities  (G.  B.  Dorr  series) - . _ . .  31-200
„ Canons  of  Legal  Evidence  as  applied  to  the  Question  of  338-347
,, Literary  Personation  --------16

"  Imperator,"  Trance-Personality  of  Mrs.  Piper  (chief  references  to)

379,  390,  391,  399,  408,  411,  439
In  Memoriam,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to - - - -  19-20

Iris  (Lethe  Incident)  - 35,  86-95,  100,  184,  195

Irving,  Hugh  (Junot  Sittings)

The  John  Welsh  Incident 353,  354,  491-93,  499,  500,  515-518,  523,
530,  531,  545,  568,  569,  571,  627,  628,  635,  658,  662


J.

James,  Professor,  Report  on  the  Hodgson-Control  through  Mrs.

Piper,  reference  to-------- -  342

Janet,  Prof.,  on  Hysteria ---------  674

Janiculum,  Cross-Correspondence - - - - 23,  203,  204-207,  260

Janus,  discussion  of  script  references  to - - - 22,  23,  124,  205-207

See  also  St.  Peter.

Janus  and  Saturn  (Lethe  Incident)  -  -  -  -  -36,89,104-5,116
Johnson,  Miss  Alice —

First  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script,  Supplementary  Notes  2
„  Evidential  Matter,  proportion  of  -  -  -  -  2,  3
„  Minor  references  to  -  -  -  -  183  (footnote),  258
„  Reply  to  Professor  H.  N.  Gardiner  -  -  -  -  6-10
Second  Report  on  Mrs.  Holland's  Script  -  -  -  201-263
„  Chance  Coincidence,  Question  of  -  -  -  -  203-4
Cross-Correspondences 204,  207,  208,  211,  213,215,220,

222,  319

,, The  Sevens  Cross-Correspondence  - -  222-258
„  „ ,, Bearing  of  the  Case  on  - - - -  254

„ „ Chronological  Table - - - -  252

„ „ Earlier  references  -----  246

„ „ Mr.  Piddington's  "  Posthumous"  Letter  -  243
„ „ Telepathy,  indications  of - 254-58,  261-63
„ „ Tliird  Intelligence,  indications  of  256-58,  261-63
„ Discussion  of  some  Criticisms  of  the  Theory  of  Cross-
Correspondence -------  258

„ Precautions  taken ------ 201,  202

„ Sequel  to  the  Sesame  and  Lilies  Incident  - - -  319

Veridical  Cases  - 210,  216,  217

tTones,  Dr.  Ernest,  on  Psycho-analysis  in  Psychotherapy  -  -  673-679
Journal  of  Abtiormal  Psychology,  Sym-posinm  on 'Pay_chothersipy  -  -  665
Joy. See  Troy  and  Joy.

Jung,  Dr.,  Experiments  in  Reaction-times  -----  676-677


LX.-LXI.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXIV.


749


Junot,  Bennie,  Coutrol  (Mrs.  Piper) ------  351-664

Junot  Sittings,  Report  on  the—with  Mrs.  Piper,  by  Miss  H.  de  G.

Verrall -----------  351

Introduction -------  351

Detailed  Record ------  355

,,  Helen  Junot,  references  to,  possibly  veridical - -  416

„  N.B. „ Notes  on  the  Sittings  - - -  356-654

„  Eoble ,, references  to,  pussibly  veridical - 442,  480

Jussieu,  Report  on  Animal  Magnetism,  reference  to - - - -  691


K.

Keats,  Script  references  to
„ Ode  on  a  Urecian  Urn
„ Ode  on  Alelanchoh/ - - -  -
,, Ode  to  a  Nightingale . -  -
Kerner,  Justinus,  reference  to  -
Kingsley,  C,  Heroes  (Lethe  Incident)  -
Kipling,  R.,  The  Burial,  Script  references  to


-  214

-  191

-  279

-  695
103,  139,  141

-  208


L.

Lang,  Andrew,  Script  reference  ("Mrs.  Holland")  to  poem  by  - -  5
,,  On  a  Latin  passage  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  Scri|jt - -  6

Latin  Message,  Mr.  Piddington's,  reference  to - - 18,  262  (footnote)
Laurel Wreath,  Cross-Correspondence,  references  to 138,  183  (footnote),

286-88,  292  (footnote),  317,  323-24
Legal  Rules  of  Evidence  applied  to  the  Question  of  Identity,  H.

Arthur  Smith  on  ---------  336-347

Lethe  Incident,  the,  J.  C4.  Piddington  on - - -  19,  35-37,  86-144,  327

„  . Postscript  to--  327

References  to  19,  35-37,  54,  86-144,  184,  191,  291,  327
Lethean  Poppies,  chief  reference  to  -  -  -  -  -  101,  109,  133-35
Light  in  the  West,  Cross-Correspondeuce,  reference  to 137,  220,  234,  259,

260,  269,  290,  299,  301,  304,  306
„ News  from  the  Occident,  Re-echo  of  269,  299-301,  304-306

Lilies. See  Sesame  and  Lilies.

Lincoln,  Abraham,  Cast  of. See  Articles  brought  to  assist  Communications.
Literary  and  Classical  Allusions  in  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance,  Mrs.  A.  W.

Verrall  on  - - - - - - -  39-85

„  ,, Three Incidents from the Sittings, J.  G.

Piddington  on -----  -86-169

„  Memories of  Trance-Personalities. Experiments  in

reviving  the. See  the  Dorr  Sittings  with  Mrs.
Piper  (1908) ------  -31-200

3b  2


750


Index  to  Vol.  XXIV.


[parts


Literary  and  Classical  Allusions. Personation  and  the  Myers  Control,

J.  G.  Piddingon  on - . . . 16-19,  33,  3  23,  128
See  also  Cross-Correspondence.
Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  Comment  on  the  Olympus  Incident - - -  327
„  The  Poison  Bottle  Case  ------  216

,,  Script  references  to ------  210

Longfellow,  The  Old  Clock  on  the  .Stairs,  Script  reference  to 223,  245,  257

M.

Mac  Script,  The—

„ A  New  Group  of  Experimenters,  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall  on -  264
„ History  of  the  Script  ------ 264-270,  292

Early  Controls ------- 26-66,  309-311

,, Sesame  and  Lilies,  Cross-Correspondence  (with  Mrs.  and

Miss  Verrall  and  "  Mrs.  Holland  ") - 270-318,  319
,,  ,, Appendix --------  306

„  „ Automatists'  knowledge  of  Ruskin  - 275  (footnote),  276

,,  ,, Chronological  Table _ - - - - 317^  318

„  „ Sequel  to --------  319

,,  ,, Summary  and  Conclusion -----  304

„ Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  A  Sequel  to  the  Sesame  and  Lilies

Incident ---------  319

Maginot,  Adcle,  Alleged  Clairvoyance  of,  reference  to - - -  695
Maitland,  Professor  F.  W.,  Script  allusions  (veridical)  to  Illness  and

Death  of ------ - 210,  214  (footnote),  217

"  Major"  and  "Judge"  (Junot  Sittings),  Confusion  between

352,  397,  443,  444,  470,  547,  651,  657,  663
Marmontel  Incident,  reference  to------ -  344

Massey,  Gerald,  (?)  Script  reference  to  Poem  by - - - -  217

Maud,  Tennyson's,  references  to . - -  124,  127,  290,  300,  301,  303
Maxwell,  reference  to  Writings  of ------ -  689

M'Clellan,  G.  and  F.  (Junot  Sittings),  references  to -  565,  572,  575,  586,  591
Meetings,  General,  of  the  Society -------  1^  329

Members  and  Associates,  Honorary,  Corresponding  and  Ordinary,  Listof  700
Mesmerism  and  Christian  Science,  by  Frank  Podmore,  Review  of -  687

Milton,  Co7nus  Incident - 37,  45,  46,  81,  197-200

,, Script  references  to  Lycidas ------ 322,  323

Paradise  Lost ------  322

Mitchell,  T.  W.,  M.D.,  Review  of  Mesmerism  and  Christian  Science,  by

Frank  Podmore  687

Some  Recent  Developments  in  Psychotherapy  by  665
Morpheus. See  Lethe  Incident.

Mount-Temple,  Lady,  Script  references  to  ----- -  3

Music,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to  ------  18

Music  Lesson  Incident  (Junot  Sittings) ------  416

Myers,  A.  T.,  Control  ("  Mrs.  Hollaml  ") - - 214  (footnote),  217,  218


LX.-LXI.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXIV.


751


Myers,  Ernest,  Translation  of  the  Agamemnon  of  Aeschylus,  reference  to  46
Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  Presidential  Address  (1900),  reference  to - -  330
„  Script  References  and  Reminiscences  of  the  Writings

of  (chief)  3,  4,  16-19,  21,  87,  91  (footnote),  129-131,  133
(footnote),  151,  152,  155,  167,  168,  177, 178,  188  (footnote),

204,  226

,,  On  the  Subliminal  Consciousness  and  Hysteria -  674

Myers  Control,  The,  Communications  through  "Mrs.  Holland  "

3,  4,  17-30,  201-263,  319-26
„  „  „ Mrs.  Home  - - -  242

„  „  „ Mac  Script - 268,  307,  308

„  „ Mrs.  Piper  17,21,26-30,31-200

„  „  „ Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall  4,  17-19,

25,  121-127,  201-263,  276-318
,,  Comparison  of,  through  different  Automatists

16-19,  32,  33,  123-127,  262,  263
„  Dramatic  Character  of  the  Impersonation

16-19,  32,  33,  80,  123-133,  149,  155,  156,  160-62,  262-264

N.

Narcissus. See  Echo  and  Narcissus.

Neptujie  and  Trident  Cross-Correspondence  35,  36, 153,  155,  177-182,  193,345
New  Group  of  Experimenters,  A  (The  Mac  Script),  Mrs.  A.  W.


Verrall  on ---------- -  264

New  Thought  Movement. See  Christian  Science.

News  from,  the  Occident ......  269,299-301,304-306

See  also  Light  in  the  West.
Newman,  Cardinal,  Apologia,  reference  to  - - - - - -  345


Noel,  Miss,  on  the  Script  references  to  Mr.  Eoden  Noel  -  -  -  5,  6
Noel,  Roden,  Cross-Correspondence,  further  details  of 5,  25  (footnote),  210,

322-3

„  Script  description  of - - - - - - 5,  6,  210

„  Dying,  by,  Script  reference  to _ . - -  217-218

O.

Odyssey. See  Aeneid  Incident.

Officers  and  Council  for  1910  - - -  698

Oliphant,  Lawrence,  Control  ("  Mrs.  Holland  ")  -  -  -  -  -4,5
Olympus  Incident  -  -  -  96,  98,  120  (footnote),  146,  184,  327,  328
One-Hoi'se-Dawn  Experiment,  reference  to  -  -  -  258-259,  302
Orion  (Horace  Ode  Question),  references  to  -  -  -  .  157-160
Orpheus  and  Eurydice  (Lethe  Incident)

19,  36,  82-33,  94-95,  104-106,  115-120,  1.30,  132,  133,  135,  187  (footnote),  189
Osterville  (Junot  Sittings),  refei'ences  to

397,  431,  432,  450,  470,  485,  486,  552,  580


752


Index  to  Vol.  XXIV.


[parts


Ovid's  Metamorphoses  (Lethe  Incident),  Connexion  between,  and  Script

references --------  .  86-133,  328

P.

Palm  Branches,  Cross-Correspondence  - - - - .  -36,195,196

Paracelsus,  reference  to -------- -  689

Parnell  Letters,  reference  to ------- -  339

Parthenon  Incident - - - - - - - -  35,  36,  56-58,  83

Pelham,  George,  Control  (Mrs.  Piper),  chief  references  to

11,  356  (footnote),  368  (footnote),  402,  415,  436,  484,  543,  544,  561-62,

590,  596

Pei-sonal  Identity,  Legal  Canons  of  Evidence  aj^plied  to  the  Proof  of  336,  347
See  also  the  Hodgson,  Myers  and  Sidgwick  Controls,  the  Junot
Sittings  and  Cross-Correspondence.
Petetin,  Researches  in  Animal  Magnetism,  reference  to - - -  691
Pharaoh's  Daughter,  Cross-Correspondence  - - -35-36,  89,  189-193,  345
Phrases  indicating  Cross-Correspondence. iSee  Cross-Correspondence.
Piano-playing  Incident  (Junot  Sitting) ------  41(5

Piddington,  J.  G. —

Further  Experiments  with  Mrs.  Piper  in  1908  (G.  B.  Dorr
Series),  Introduction  by,  and  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  and
Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall -------  31

„ Three  incidents  from  the  Sittings,  by  - - -  -86-169

„  „  Lethe  Incident - - - - 19,  86-144

„  ,,  ,,  Postscript  to - -  327

„  „  The  Sibyl  89,  91  (footnote),  93,  96,  98,  144-150

„  ,,  The  Horace  Ode  Question

91,  92  (footnote),  150-169
,, Identity  of  the  Intelligence,  Question  of

123-133,  148-149,  150-156,  162,  168-169
Series  of  Concordant  Automatisms,  references  to

11-30,  150-152,  192,  201  (footnote),  205-7,  220-222,  258,

269,  286-288,  290,  301
,, Supplementary  Notes  on -----  11-30

Sevens  Cros-s-Correspondence,  "Posthumous"  letter  of  243-247,  252,

254

Pigott,  and  the  Parnell  Letters,  reference  to  339

Pigou,  Professor,  on  Cross-Correspondences - - - -  258-262
,,  on  the  Survival  of  Bodily  Death - - - -  344

Piper,  Mrs.,  Cross-Correspondences  (with  ''Mrs.  Holland")

21,  22,  25-30,  122-127,  136-38,  179,  183  (footnote),

194-196,  200,  222-258,  269

„  „ (The  Mac  Script) 269-299

„  „ (with  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall) -  13-19,26-30,121-127

„  „ The  Sevens  Cross-Correspondence

222-225,  239,  245,  252,  254


LX.-LXI.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXIV.


753


Piper,  Mrs.,  Cross-Correspondences,  Sidgwick,  Mi's.,  on - -  170-200
„ Report  on  Further  Experiments  with,  in  1908,  by  Mrs.

Sidgwick,  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall  and  J.  G.  Piddington  -31-200
„ Report  on  the  Junot  Sittings  with,  by  Miss  H.  de  G.

Verrall -  ......  351-664

See  also  Trance  Phenomena  of.

Plato,  Myth  of  Er,  in  relation  to  Dante  231

Plotinns,  references  to - -  3,  4,  17,  19,  20

Podmore,  Frank,  Mesmerism  and  Christian  Science  by,  Review  by

Dr.  T.  W.  Mitchell,  687

„  on  Cross-Correspondences .... 258,  262

„  on  the  Piper-  and  Verrall-Myers • - - 262,  263

Poe,  Edgar  Allen,  Script  references  to ..... 59,  79

Poison  Bottle,  The,  Incident - - -  216

Pollard,  A.  W.,  Odes  from  the  Greek  Dramatists,  reference  to -  43,  50

Pomona,  reference  to  --------- -  96

Presidential  Address  (1910)  by  H.  Arthur  Smith - - - -  330

Prevorst,  the  Seeress  of,  reference  to  - - - - - - -  695

Prince,  Dr.  Morton,  on  the  Psijcholoijical  Principles  and  Field  of

Psi/chotherapy ....  666-671

„  „  „ Galvanic  Experiments  in  connection  with  677

Prudens,  Trance-Personality  of  Mrs.  Piper  - ....  415,467

Psychotherapy,  Dr.  T.  W.  Mitchell  on  Some  Recent  Developments  in  665
,,  Symposium  of ------ -  665-686

Puysegur,  Count,  Researches  in  Animal  Magnetism,  reference  to  -  691
Pygmalion  and  Galatea  (Lethe  Incident) 36,  37,  83,  91  (footnote),  106-109,

115-120,  130,  131,  135,  136

Q.

QuiMBT,  Pliineas  Parkhurst,  and  the  Christian  Science  Movement  -  696
Quotations  in  Mrs.  Holland's  Script  recently  identiiied - - - 4,  5

R.

Reactios-time  Experiments  as  a  method  of  Psycho-analysis - -  677
Rector,  Trance-Personality  of  Mrs.  Piper 32,  38,  69,  84,  85,  145  (footnote),
159,  356,  364,  373,  374,  377,  379, -380,  392,  395,  398,  399,  402,  406,
411,  432,  437,  440,  442,  454,  476,  478,  484,  508,  529-30,  534,  549,  555,


558,  619,  627

Reichenbach  Phenomena,  reference  to  .....  333^  334
Renewal  of  Youth,  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  Script  reminiscences  of

21,  128,  152,  161,  167

Review ............  687

Rounder  (the  dog)  (Junot  Sittings). See  John  Welsh  Incident.
Rossetti,  Dante  G.,  Script  references  to — Blessed  Damozel  - - -  324
„  „  „  King's  Tragedy  - - -  315


754


Index  to  Vol.  XXIV.


[parts


Euiskin,  John,  Sesame  and  Lilies,  Cross-Correspondence - 269,  270-318
„  „  „  Summary  of  the  Book - - 272,  273

S.

S.,  Miss,  an  Interpretation  of  the  Browning,  Hope  and  Star  Cross-
Correspondence - 11-13

Satiu  D. See  Janus  and  Saturn.

Savonarola  Cross-Correspondence .... - 204,  211,  260
Sesame  and  Lilies  Cross-Correspondence  (Mac  Script) - 269,  270-294
„  ,,  Sequel  to,  by  Miss  Alice  Johnson  319

Sevens,  Cross-Correspondence - - - - - 37,  194,  195,  222-258
,,  „  Chronological  Summary  of - - -  252

„  „  Mr.  Piddiiigton's  "  Posthumous"  Letter

243-245,  252,  254

,,  „  *See  also  Miss  Alice  Johnson  on.

Shameful  Hill,  The,  Script  reference  identified -----  5

Shelley,  Script  reference  to 37,  43,  44

Sibyl,  The,  Mr.  Lang  on  Script  reference  (Mrs.  Verrall's)  to - -  6
Sibyl  Licident,  The - - -  35,  36,  89,  91  (footnote),  93,  96,  98,  144-150
Sidis,  Dr.  Boris,  on  the  PsjjchotherapeiUic  Value  of  the  Hypnoidal  State  679-686
Sidgwick,  Mrs.  H.,  and  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall,  and  J.  G.  Piddington,

Some  Further  Experiments  with  Mrs.  Piper
in  1908  - ------  -31-200

,,  ,, Abbreviations  and  Terms,  Explanation  of  - -  38

,,  „ Cross-Correspondences  with  other  Automatists  170-200

,,  „  Number  of  Successes  and  Faikires - 193,  194

,,  ,, Introduction -------  31-34

,,  „ List  of  Sittings  and  Subject-Matter - - -  35-37

See  also  Cro.ss-Correspondences.
Sidgwick  Control  (Mac  Script),  The - - - 265-270,  292-97,  299-311
Six  Tyrannus  Incident - - - - - - 30,  134  (footnote)

Sleej],  Cave  of. See  Lethe  Incident.

Smith,  H.  Arthur,  Presidential  Address  for  1910 - - - -  330

„  Growtii  and  Work  of  the  Society  - - 330-36,  347-350

„  Legal  Evidence  as  applied  to  the  Question  of

Identity ------  336-347

Society  for  Psychical  Research,  Growth  and  Work  of  - -  330-336,  347-350
Spenser,  Edmund  (Lethe  Incident),  reference  to  - - - - -  103

Spirit  and  Angel,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to  - 220,  227  (footnote)
St.  Paul,  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  Script  reminiscences  of - - 17,  226
„ Cross-Correspondence,  Corrigenda - - - - -  11

St.  Peter,  Item  in  Cross-Correspondence,  references  to  22-23, 124,  203-207,  220
Star. See  Browning,  Hope  and  Star.

Stephen,  Sir  J.  FitzJames,  Digest  of  the  Imw  of  Evidence,  reference  to  339
Stewart,  J.  A.,  The  Myths  of  Plato,  reference  to  - - - 231  (footnote)


LX.-LXI.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXIV.


755


Suggestion,  Educative  670-686

See  also  Hypnotism
Swinburne,  A.  C,  Triumph  of  Time,  Script  reference  to - - -  217

T.

Tavern  Club  Motto,  Piper-Hodgson  reference  to  78,  79  (footnotes),  222,  256

See  also  the  Sevens  Cross-Correspondence.
Taylor,  Bayard,  Translation  of  Faust,  reference  to - - - -  4

Taylor,  Dr.  E.  W.,  Simple  Explanation  and  Re-education  as  a  Thera-
peutic Method  671-673
Taylor,  Colonel  G.  le  M.,  Report  of  the  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.

Home,  reference  to ------- - 239,  242

Telepathy,  H.  Arthur  Smith  on  the  Scope  of - - - -  335-337

See  also  Cross-Correspondence.
Tennyson,  Alfred,  Script  references  to

„  Ancient  Sage  ------- 235,  237

„  Maud -----  124,  127,  290,  300,  301,  303

„  Morte  d' Arthur ----- 320  (footnote)

„  The  Princess --------  208

„  Vastness  ------- 155,  156,  162

Tennyson,  Frederick,  Daphne  and  Other  Poems  (Lethe  Incident),

reference  to- - - - - - - - - -  -103

Thanatos,  Cross-Correspondence,  Supplementary  Notes  on  - -  30,  220-222
Tiance-Personalities,  Identity  of. See  Cross-Correspondence,  and  the

Hodgson,  Junot,  Myers  and  Sidgwick  Controls.
Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Home ------ 239,  242

„  „ of  Mrs.  Piper  11-30,31-200,222-258,261-63,351-664

„  Automatist's  Knowledge  of  Subject-Matter

31-34,  85,  102-4,  138-141
„  „  Reviving  the  Literary  Memories  of  Trance-

Personalities - - . -  -31-200
„  „  Stages  of  Consciousness  32,  38,  41  (footnote),  43,

81-84

See  cdso  J.  G.  Piddington,  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  and  Mrs.  A.  W.
Verrall  on,  and  the  Phenomena  of  Ci-oss-Correspondence.
Trident. See  Neptune  and  Trident.

J/'O)/ aHO?  i/oj/,  Cross-Correspondence,  -----  35,182-185,194

U.

Ulysses. See  Ajax  and  Ulysses.

V

Van  Helmont,  reference  to  qqq
Vanity  of  Vanities,  Cross-Correspondence  - - - 294,  307-309,  312


756


Index  to  Vol.  XXIV.


[parts


Verrall,  Dr.  A.  W.,  Script  reference  to  ("Mrs.  Holland")  -  -  -  3
Verrall,  Mi.ss  H.  de  G.,  Cross-Correspondences  with  "Mrs.  Holland  "  201-204,

207,  208,  21],  228-234,  249,  252-258
„ (The  Mac  Script) - - -  268-318
„ with  Mrs.  Piper  - -  11-13,  17,  19,  177-196
,,  ,, Knowledge  of  Snbject-Matter  of  the

Script - 233,  234,  280  (footnote),  284
,,  „ The  Sesame  and  Lilies  Incident  268-318,

321,  325

,,  ,, The  Sevens  Cross-Correspondence  228-234,

249,  252-258

Eeport  of  the  Junot  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper,  by  351-664
,, Introduction ------  351

Detailed  Record  of  Sittings - -  355-664
„  „ Incidents  possibly  veridical - 416,  442,  480

„  ,, Mistakes  and  Confusions 352-55,  368  (footnote),

377-78,  390,  394,  395,  397,  398-400,  404,  409,
413,  414,  422-25,  432,  435,  442-44,  454,  457,  463,
470-75,  515-518,  539,  555,  556,  560,  572,  590,
591,  600,  611,  651,  657,  662,  663
Verrall,  Mi's.  A.  W.,  A  Latin  Passage  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  Script,

A.  Lang  on -------  6

,,  Cross-Correspondences  (Tlie  Mac  Script) -  264-318

(with  Mrs.  Piper)  -  -  13-19,  26-30,  121-127
(with  "Mrs.  Holland")  3-10,16-19,22-26,

201-263,  319-326

„  „ (with  Miss  Verrall)  17,19,186-89,190-93,196,

201-263,  268-318
„  „ Knowledge of Snbject-Matter  of  the

Script 121-123,  127,  128  (footnote),  233-234,

280  (footnote),  284
„ Sesame  and  Lilies - - -  268-318,319-326
Sevens ------  222-258

„  Further  Experiments  with  Mrs.  Piper  in  1908

Introduction  by  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  and  J.

G.  Piddington ------  31-38

„  „ Classical  Allusions  in  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance -  39-85

,,  ,, Detailed  Discussion  of  Cases - - - -  43-78

,, Facts  Suggestive  of  a  Third  Intelligence

40,  44-46,  50-52,  56-78

„  „ Mistakes  and  Confusions 41-46,  51-59,  62-64,  68-70,

74  (footnote),  77

„  „ Telepathy,  Question  of - 42,  43  (footnotes),  75,  77

„  A  New  Group  of  Exjjerinienters,  by  (Tlie  Mac

Script) --------  264


LX.-LXI.]  Index  to  Vol.  XXIV.  7o7

Villou. See  A)yovj,  Cross-Correspondence.
Virgil. See  Aeneid  Incident.

W.

W.,  Walter,  Confirmation  of  the  John  Welsh  Incident - - -  517
Walnut  Tree,  B.  and  the ---------  210

Waterman,  Dr.  G.  A.,  on  The  Treatment  of  Fatigue  States  -  -  671,  673
Watts,  G.  F.,  Stanzas  on  the  Collected  ^Yorl■s  of,  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers

21,  130,  132-33  (footnote)
„  Pictures  by,  references  to - 130,  132,  136,  187  (footnote)

Weir  Mitchell  Treatment,  reference  to - - - - - -  671


Welsh,  John,  Incident  (Junot  Series) 353,  354,  491-93,  499,  500,  515-518,

523,  530,  531,  545,  568,  569,  571,  628,  658,  662

Winged  Horse. See  Cyclops,  Centaurs,  etc.

Wordsworth,  W.,  Script  references  to

„  „ Daffodils, - - - - - - -  137

„  ,, Inside  of  King's  College  Chapel  - - 320,  321

„  ,, /  Wa7ide7'ed  Lonely  as  a  Cloud  - - -  137

„  ,, Laodamia  - - - - - - -  184

„  „ Lucy  307

„  „ Prelude -------  22

„  „ IFe  are  Seven 223-225, 228, 245, 252, 254, 256, 257

Y.


Yellow,  Cross-Correspondence
