Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. II (1884)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1884 London: Trubner and Co. edition (Parts V-VII) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingssoci01britgoog). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS


OF THE


SOCIETY FOR PSYCHICAL RESEARCH.


VOLUME II.


(CONTAINING PARTS V-VII.)


1884.


London :
TRUBNER AND CO., LUDGATE HILL.

1884. 'K


London :

Printed bt thr National Press Aoenot, Limited.

18, Whitefriars Street, E.C.


CONTENTS.

PAGE

Fourth Report of the Coiomittee on Thought-Tranaferenoe ... 1

Third Beport of the Committee on Mesmerism ...... 12

Appendix to the same 20

An account of some Experiments in Thought-Transf erence. By Malcolm
Guthrie, J.P 24

Second Beport of the Literary Committee 43

Appendix to the same 53

Note on the Existence of a "Magnetic Sense." By Professor W. F. 56

Barrett 56

The Stages of Hypnotism. By Edmund Gurnby 61

Beport of Wells Sunk at Locking, Somerset, to Test the Alleged Power

of the Divining Rod. By W. J. Sollas, M.A., D.So. .... 73

The Divining Rod. By Edward R. Pease 79

Appendices (I., IL) to the Divining Rod 90,95

Annual Business Meeting 108

Third Report of the Literary Committee. — A Theory of Apparations.

Parti 109

Second Beport of the Committee on Haunted Houses .... 137

President's Address at the Eighth General Meeting 152

Fourth Beport of the Literary Committee.— A Theory of Apparitions.

Part IL 157

Professor Balfour Stewart's Address at the Ninth General Meeting . . 187

An Account of Some Experiments in Thought-Transference. By Oliver

J. Lodge, D.Sc 189

An Account of Some Experiments in Mesmerism. By Edmund Gurnet 201

Diagrams niustrative of Thought-Transference 207

On a Telepathic Explanation of Some So-called Spiritualistic Phenomena.

By F. W. H. Myers. Part 1 217

Abstract of the President's Address at the Eleventh General Meeting . 238

M. Biohet's Becent Besearches in Thought-Transference .... 239

Note on the sams by Professor O. J Lodge and Mr. Alfred Lodge . .257

Thef Problems of Hypnotism. By Edmund Gurnet 265

Library Catalogue 293

Rules of the Library 316

List of Members and Associates, December, 1884 317

Constitution and Bules 333


Errata.

In page 10, lines 14, 15, for " experiments performed under this
last condition — a condition .which precludes any unconscious guidance
from the * agent ' " — read " experiments performed under conditions
which preclude the possibility of unconscious guidance from the
* agent.' " And add the following note to the word " contact," in the
eighth line from the bottom of the same page : —

It should be borne in mind that indications may be unconsciously given
otherwise than through contact. Gf, Proceedings, Part I. , pp. 18, 19, &c.

In page 55, line 15, omit the figure 1 before 657,000. And in line
25 of the same page, for l,657,000ths >• 10, read 657,000 x lo .

In page 250, line 20, for the words, "the probability that in the
whole series there will be one such success is ^^, or J," read " the most
probable result is that there will not be a single success in the whole
serie§."

In the same page, line 25, for the words, ** the chance of a single
success in the series is three times greater than before ; that is, it is 1,"
read " the probable number of successes in the whole series is L"


Note to Page 226.

It should be stated here that besides the anagrams given in the
text, Mr. A. obtained also other anagrams ; as wfvs yoitet (Testify !
vow !) ; ieh iov oafwle (1 go, vow belief !) ; and in reply to the question
"How shall I believe?" neb 16 vbliy ev S6e earf ee (Believe by fear
even, 1866). How unlikely it is that all this was due to mere accident
may be seen by anyone who will take letters, (the vowels and con-
sonants roughly proportioned to the frequency of their actual use,) and
try to make up a series of handfuls completely into words possessing
any grammatical coherence or intelligible meaning. Now in Mr. A.'s
case all the professed anagrams (when legible) were found to be real
anagrams, (with one error of i for e) ; some of the sentences were real
answers to the questions ; and not even the absurdest sentences were
wholly meaningless.


SOCIETY FOR PSYCHICAL RESEARCH.


PROCEEDINGS OF THE GENERAL MEETING ON

Thv/nday, November 22, 1883.

The fifth General Meeting of the Society was held at 11, Ohandos
Street, Oavendish Square, on Thursday, November 22, 1883.

Professor Henry Sidgwick, President, in the Chair.


I.
FOURTH REPORT

OP THE

COMMITTEE ON THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE.

[The Beport has been somewhat enlarged since it was read.]

Corrmittee: — Edmund Gurney,* M.A. ; F. W. H. Myers,* M.A. ;
and Professor W. F. Barrett,* Hon. Sec.


Since the last report was presented to the Society, the Committee

on Thought-transference have been steadily pursuing their inquiries,

uid have not only obtained a considerable amount of additional

evidence confirmatory of their previous work, but also evidence of a

ne^i^d important character. Moreover, we are happy to find that the

inquSy is beginning to bepursued by independent groups of investigators

^Qghout the country; some of these have communicated with us and

nave courteously permitted us to examine their mode of experiment,

^ gladly availed themselves of the precautions upon which experience

^ taught us to insist. To Mr. Malcolm Guthrie, J.P., of Liverpool, we

owe our warm thanks for his most capable and courteous co-operation,

*ttd we are glad to say that he has lately joined our Committee. Since

^0 extensive and careful series of experiments published in Part lY. of

ov Proceedings, Mr. Guthrie has enlarged his range of experiments

and obtained remarkable success in the transference of visual impressions

*~-diagrainsand the like — of tastes, and of pains. The only sort of distinct

sensation of which the transference yet remains to be obtained, is that of

srneUj — ^there being, of course, special difficulties in so arranging the

experiment that a "subject " shall have no opportunity of detecting

*TbE COUNCni HOLI>S ITSELF OKNBBALLT BBSPONSIBLE FOR THtt B.IE^OBJEa QT^i:i^ ^Q^^YCISS^.

At thb hxa2> of eaoh Export tsk names of those M.embi&iis ov Couiilyv?!^^ ^^rB.Q ks.'^

SPECIALLY RB8P0N8IBLB FOR ITS OOHPOSITION ARE MARKl&D -WITH. ASTERlSlia,


2 Report of the Committee on Thought-Transference. [Nov. 22,

by direct means any strongly odorous substance which the " agent ** is
smelling close by. In many of Mr. Guthrie's later experiments the
sole "agent" has been himself, or one or other of the gentlemen
. engaged with him in the investigation.

We trust that Mr. Guthrie's example will stimulate others among
our members to conduct experiments of the same kind. Not all
investigators, indeed, may have similar advantages of wide command
of " subjects *' for experiment ; but anyone among us may very possibly
find in his own family circle some one " subject '* of value ; and it is,
of course, in the family circle that it is easiest to secure that continuBl
and patient repetition of experiments whfch seems essential to any
marked success.

1. Transference of Tastes.

The experiments which we shall first detail have reference to the
tramsference of tastes. This particular form of transferred . sensation
had been often experimented upon, by ourselves and by others,
with " subjects '* in the hypnotic state ; but, so far as we know,
Mr. Guthrie was the first person to procure the phenomenon when
agent and percipient were both of them in a normal condition. There
was no chance of collusion, conscious or unconscious ; for the taste to
be discerned was known to no one except the actual experimenters ;
and the sensations experienced were verbally described by the
"subjects" (not written down), so that all danger of involuntary
muscular guidance was eliminated.

The following series of experiments were made in Liverpool
during the first week in September, 1883: —

A selection of about twenty strongly-tasting substances was made.
These substances were enclosed in small bottles and small parcels, pre-
cisely similar to one another, and kept carefully out of the range of
vision of the " subjects,*' who were, moreover, blindfolded, so that no
grimaces made by the tasters could be seen. The " subjects," in fact,
had no means whatever of knowing, through the sense of sight, what was
the substance tasted.

SmM had to be guarded against with still greater care. When the
substance was odoriferous the packet or bottle was opened outside the
room, or at such a distance, and so cautiously as to prevent any sensible
smell from escaping. The experiments, moreover, were conducted in the
close vicinity of a very large kitchen, from whence a strong odour of
beefsteak and onions proceeded during almost all the time occupied. The
tasters took pains to keep their heads high above the "subjects," and to
avoid breathing with open mouth. One substance (coffee) tried was
found to give off a slight smell, in spite of all precautions, and an
experiment made with this has been omitted.


•


• •


• 1 • m •

• •• • •

• • •
• •• • •


1883.] Report of the Committee on Thought- Transference. 3

The tasters were Mr. Guthrie (M.G.), Mr. Gumey (KG.), and Mr.
Myers (M.). The percipients were two young ladies employed in Mr.
Guthrie's establishment, whom we will call R. and E. The tasters
lightly placed a hand on one of the shoulders or hands of the
percipients. During the first experiments (September 3rd and 4th)
there were one or two other persons in the room, who, however,
were equally ignorant as to the substance tasted. During the
experiments silence was preserved. During the last 15 experi-
ments (September 5th) only M. G., E. G., and M., with the two
percipients, were present. On this evening Miss E. was, unfortunately,
suffering from sore throat, which seemed to blunt her susceptibility.
On this occasion none of the substances were allowed even to enter the
room where the percipients wera They were kept in a dark lobby out-
side, and taken by the investigators at random, so that often one
investigator did not even know what the other took. Still less could
any spy have discerned what was chosen, had such spy been there, which
he certainly was not,

A very small portion of each substance used was found to be enough.
The difficulty lies in keeping the mean between the Tnassive impression
of a large quantity of a salt, spice, bitter, or acid, which confounds the
specific differences under each general head, and the fading impression
which is apt to give merely a residual pungency, from which the charac-
teristic flavour has escaped. It is necessary to allow some minutes to
elapse between each experiment, as the imaginary taste seems to be
fully as persistent as the real one.

September 3, 1883.

KXFT. TASTEK. PERCIPIENT. ST7BSTAN0E.' ANSWERS GIVEN.

1 ... M E Vinegar "A sharp and nastj taste.'*

2 ... M E Mustard "Mustard."

3 ... M It Do "Ammonia."

4 ... M E Sugar "I still taste the hot taste of

the mustard."

September 4,

5 ... E. G-. &:M.... E Worcestershire sauce... " Worcestershire sauce."

6 ... M. a R Do "Vinegar."

7 ... E. G-. &M.... E Port wine " Between eau de Cologne and

beer."

8 ... M. G- R Do "Raspberry vinegar."

9 ... E. G-. &M.... E Bitter aloes " Horrible and bitter."

10 ... M. a R Alum "Atasteof ink— of iron— of

vinegar. I feel it on my *
lips — ^it is as if I had been
eating alum."

11 ... M. Q E Alum (E. perceived that M. Ot, was

not tasting bitter aloes, as
E. Ot, and M. supposed,

but &OTXieit\i\Ti^ ^^<^T^'D^.

account ol y5i&^et«ia\«an»
ot \ihe "bV^tot \»s\»^.>i


4 Beport of the Committee on Thought- Transference. [Nov. 22,

September 4 (continued).

EXFT. TASTEB. PERCIPIENT. SUBSTANOB ANSWERS OIYXN.

12 ... E. 6. &M.... E Nntmegr " Peppermint— no— what you

• pat in puddings — ^nut-

meg."

13 ... M.G R Do "Nutmeg."*

14 ... E. 6. &M.... E Sugar Nothing perceived.

15 ... M. 6 B Do Nothing perceived.

(Sugar should be tried at an
earlier stage in the series,
as, after the aloes, we
could scarcely taste it
ourselves.)

16 ... E. G. &M.... E Cayenne pepper "Mustard,"

17 ... M. G R Do. "Cayenne pepper."

(After the cayenne we were
unable to taste anything
further that evening.)

September 5.

18 ... E. G. &M.... E Carbonate of soda Nothing perceived.

19 ... M. G B Carraway seeds "It feels like meal — ^like a

seed loaf — oarraway

IJ\A>UD.

(The substance of the seeds
seem to beperceived before
their taste,}

20 ... E. G. &;M.... E Cloves "Cloves."

21 ... E. G. &;M.... E Citric acid Nothing felt.

22 ... M. G R Do "Salt"

23 ... E. G. &M.... E Liquorice "Cloves."

24 ... M. G B Cloves "Cinnamon."

25 ... E. G. &M.... E Acid jujube "Pear drop."

26 ... M. G B Do "Something hard, which is

giving way — acid jujube."

27 ... E. G. &M.... E Candied ginger " Somethuig sweet and hot."

28 ... M.G E Do " Almond toffy."

(M. G. took tlus ginger in the
dark, and was some time
before he realised that it
was ginger.)

29 ... E. G. & M.... E Home-made Noyau ... "Salt."

30 ... M.G E Do "Port wine."

(This was by far the most
strongly smelling of the
substancestried ; the scent
of kernels behig hard
to conceal. Yet it was
named by E. as salt.)

31 ... E. G. &M.... E Bitter aloes "Bitter."

32 ... M. G B Do Nothing felt.


*


In some cases two experiments were carried on simultaneously with the
same substance ; and when this was done, the first percipient was of course not
told whether her answer was right or wrong. But it will perhaps be maintained
that, when her answer was right, her agent unconsciously gave her an intimation
of the fact by the pressure of his hand ; and that she then 'coughed or made some
audible signal to her companion, who followed suit. Whatever the theory may
be worth, it will, we think, be seen that the success of the second x)ercipient with
the nutmeg was the only occasion, throughout the series, to which it can be
applied.


1883.] Report of the Committee on Thought^Tramference. 5

We should have preferred in these experiments to use only
substances which were wholly inodorous. But in order to get any
description of tastes from the percipients it was necessary that the
tastes should be either very decided or very familiar. It woiild be
desirable, before entering on a series of experiments of this kind, to
educate the palates of the recipients by accustoming them to a variety
of chemical substances, and also by training them to distinguish, with
shut eyes, between the more ordinary flavours. It is well known how
much taste is helped by sight and determined by expectation ; and when
it is considered that the recipients in these cases were judging blindfold
of the mere shadow of a savour, it will perhaps be thought that even
some of their mistakes are not much wider of the mark than they might
have been had a trace of the substance been actually placed upon their
tongues.

The interest and novelty of the foregoing experiments consist in the
fact^ already mentioned, that the " subjects " were apparently in their
normal waking state. It has long been on record that such transference
of impressions may take place between a mesmeriser or hypnotist and
a sensitive '* subject ; " and some instances will be given in the subjoined
report of the Mesmeric Committee. But here no preliminary mesmeric
passes nor fixation of the eyes had been resorted to ; nor indeed have
the ^'subjects " ever been mesmerised.

2. Transference of Pains,

The same subjects. Miss R. and Miss E., who proved sensitive to
the transference of tastes, were also found sensitive to the transference
of pains whilst in their normal waking state. Mr. Guthrie has made
a number of experiments in this direction, the record of which he
hopes to present to the Society shortly. Here, too, the results are
paralleled by those of hypnotic experiments, of which some have
been already recorded {Proceedings^ Part III., p. 225-6) and others will
be described in the ensuing Report.

3. Casual Experiments,

We have received from correspondents in different parts of the
country, records of more or less successful trials made amongst
members of their own families. As a rule, however, these experiments
have been too few and too fitful to be of much value ; at the same time
they are of interest as affording information that the faculty of Thought-
transference is probably tolerably widely diffused. Here, for example,
is the result of a casual trial by one of our members, the Hon. Mrs.
Fox Powys, as *^ percipient," with her husband as " agent."

* I send the results of a, trial my husband and 1 "had sXowa, '^o xaaS^
seemed like magic ! We had tried, I think, three timea \>elox€» >J5caai ^'^^


6 Report of the Committee on Thought- Transference. [Nov. 22,


indifferent success, I vras the guesser, and he held my left hand with his
right, and merely thought of a number. I sat with my eyes closed. The
rapidity with which the thing was done astonished us ; the number seemed
to flash instantaneously into my brain. In fact, so simultaneous was it that
I' began to think that I, perhaps, had impressed the number upon
Colonel Powys' brain first. However, when we reversed the operation, and
my husband guessed, he was not at all successful Here are our experiments ;
the complete series, including failures as well as successes, is given.
'^ First we tried single figures, and only one ' guess ' was allowed.


NUHBEB THOUGHT 07.


2

4
6
5
9
3
8


» . •


1. .


BSSULT.

I perceived nothing.
I answered 2.
7.
I perceived nothing.
I answered 5.


9.
3.

8.


" Here out of 8 trials 5 were right. We now tried numbers of two
figures, and where a second * guess ' was given it is noted.


NUMBER THOUQHT OF.
58

36 ...

27
69
100
42
55
22
38
30
22


BESULT.
24

36
72

28
100

42

55

79

38

42
120


On a second guess, 27

82


i>


»


j»


»»


97

78
20


'' Here 5 were right the first time, and 1 the second time,* out of 11
trials. We tried again the next evening, but out of 20 only got 5 right on
the first trial, and 2 right on a second triaL The secret of success the
previous evening I believe to lie in the fact that I felt almost absolute con-
fidence in my power to guess correctly, and to this height of confidence I
have never since been able to attain."

The coincidences here recorded seem clearly beyond the power of
pure chance to account for.

Another correspondent, writing from Brunswick Place, Leeds, sent
to us an account of some successful experiments of his own which
however, seemed probably due to mere muscular interpretation. We
explained this to him, pointing out the precautions necessary to
guard against the error. In reply he writes to us as follows :

"I have made a number of experiments since writing to you last -
perhaps the best of these was my finding a pin secreted in a purse which was

* It will be noted that this sixth case was ail "but «b ^ueo^^ oTi.\Sxfe jiv%t ttial— -
the digita beinar ooneMj given, but inverted.


1883.] Report of the Committee on Thought- Trans/efeme. 7

in my sister's pocket. I also found the number of a bank note correctly,
and correctly discovered 10 figures out of 12. But these experiments were
made when contact was permitted, or by my running the * agent's ' hand

. over a series of figures from to 9. When I tried yesterday to toll the

^ figures vjithout contact, I failed completely.

" I then blindfolded my sister, aged 13, and placed a piece of pencil
and paper before her. Then I drew, with a piece of chalk on a school
slate, a simple diagram (a circle with a cross inside), without her hearing
the scratching of the chalk. To my surprise she drew the enclosed,''^ in about
a minute, there being no contact between us, and I giving no indication
whatever, merely thinking and staring at the slate. I then made other ex-
periments in a similar way, and enclose you the results."

•

These, and a few other diagrams subsequently received, made
in all 10 trials, with diagrams of various random and irregular shapes.
Of the 10 trials six were as good reproductions of the original as could
have been drawn had- the child seen the original drawing and attempted
to draw it blindfolded. The remaining four bore less, but still some,
resemblance to the original. The hon. secretary of the Oommittee has
visited this correspondent in Leeds, and seen the way in which the
experiments were made. As far as could be judged from such a visit
no information could have reached the percipient through the ordinary
channels of sense. The " agent " is a highly intelligent young man,
and quite alive to the precautions necessary to be taken to avoid obvious
errors of experiment.

The following is an extract from a letter written to one of us by
Mr. K. Gibson, of Limerick. He has since supplied us with additional
details, and tells us that the " subject " (who has a large apothecary's
business), and several of the agents, had previously been quite
incredulous as to the phenomenon.

March 20th, 1884.

On last Tuesday week we were trying some experiments, at a friend's
house, and a Mr. Day who was there told the number thought of in five
different cases, by five different people — told them one after the other
without a bungle or any hesitation whatever. After these five consecutive
trials he got a violent headache, and on trying again could not tell any more.
He was successful by picturing to himself (with his eyes shut) a black-board,
and the number seemed at once to stand out on it in white.

The headache is an interesting, but (we are happy to say) not a
frequent feature of these experiments. The imagining of the black-
board is a device worth noting.

♦ Some of the drawings made in this series will be engraved lox ^\ift nex^V. twsx^^^
of the Froceedings,


8 Report oftlie Committee on Thought* Transference. [Nov* 22,

The following account was received, some weeks ago, from Miss
Crabbe (Gordon College, Chatham Street, Liverpool), a lady known to
two members of the Committee : —

One evening, at a rectory where I have been staying, we were trying pin-
finding, when I said I had seen much more wonderful things than that done,
and told them of what is done in your Society, such as placing figures and
other objects behind people, &c.

They were very sceptical about it, said it could iiot be done without
trickery, collusion, &c., that it was nonsense, &c., &c., and we had quite a
lively argument about it, for I stuck to my point, and vowed it could be, and
was done. At last the rector said he would try it, for that if anyone was able
to do it he would. He acted as agent, and his daughter as percipient. The
latter was blindfolded and placed in the usual position ; the background was a
large piece of white cardboard, and on that I pinned a pink oblong card, and,

to my astonishment, in about a minute or two's time Miss described it ;

for I must confess I expected a failure on account of the scepticism of all
parties.

Of course this success slightly changed their opinion, and they tried again.
The next object I placed up was a round fan or hand-screen, which was most
accurately described ; the order we proceeded in was 1st, colour, 2nd,
shape, and 3rd, object. Object after object was tried, and every time was a
success. They declared it was wonderful Night after night we tried it, and

the whole time I was there Miss never once made the slightest error,

and often named the object after the lapse of a second or so, with no second
guess.

We tried everything we could think of, including spoons, door-keys,

oranges. In describing the latter Miss said : '' It is something with a

reddish tinge, not quite round but a little fiat at the top and bottom. Oh,
I see ; it is an orange."

After the objects, we tried taste-transference. The effect was marvellous.

Salt, sugar, nutmeg, &c., &c., were tasted by Mr. and transferred to

his daughter.

Next we tried the number-reading, which was also a grand success ; in

this case we sometimes reversed the agent and percipient, Mr. acting

as the latter (and not as the former, as on the previous occasions), and either

Miss or I as the agent. Whichever plan we took proved successful, and

we tried very many times. The percipient wrote the numbers down while
the agent was in contact with either the left hand or the forehead.''^

After the number- writing, we tried objects again, wifJwut contact. This

was also done without an error, Mr. acting as agent and making a few

downward passes while fixing his mind on the object to be described.

Next we tried reading sentences written on the background, t.e., I wrote
iu large hand on a card " Don't kill dogs " ; then, " Thou shalt not kill,"

both of which were read by Miss , with the exception of one word, where I

stopped her on account of an interruption. Then Mr. acted as percipient

* This is not satisfactory, for the reason given at the bottom of p. 10.


1883.] Report of the Committee on Thought- Transference. 9

and Miss as agent, and I Ynx)te up, "Be quick." Mr. said, " B-e—

be, q-u-i-e-t — quiet." " No," we said, " not quite right" " No," he said,
**the last two letters are c-k, not e-t ; it is 'Be quick.' " Miss how-
ever, never even made that much of a failure.

Of all the experiments I have seen performed, I never saw any to equal
these, which were all so quickly and accurately made. I can tell you I felt
elated at having turned '* sceptics " into such clever performers.

In a second letter Miss Crabbe adds : —

When I proposed trying taste-transference, I said to Mr. : " It must

be something that has no smell," whereupon he replied, "Well, write down
the name of anything you wish me to taste on a piece of paper." I did so,
writing the word ** Ginger." He then put the paper in his mouthy and I

suppose imaguaed he tasted the ginger, for in a minute or two Miss

said what it was. The reason I did not mention this before is that I am not

sure whether Miss actually tasted the ginger, or whether the vjord was

impressed on her mind, and she felt bound to say it. This was the first ex-
periment in taste-transference ; afterwards I always gave the substance to

lir. to taste himself first, and then his daughter evidently did really

perceive the taste.

In the sentence-reading I wrote up Jirsty "Don't kill dc^," but some
one entered the room before this was read at all, and an interruption ensued,
whereupon I said, "Nevermind that one now, don't tell us anything about
it, and I will write another." I then wrote, " Thou shalt not kilL" This

was read correctly, and immediately afterwards Miss said, " I may as well

tell you what I thought the first sentence was. Was it^Don't kill ? " and
then she made some remark about the last word being a short one or some-
thing of the kind, but I really don't remember what the remark was.

4. Unconscious Muscular Action,

The subject of " Thought-reading " is just now in a rather singular
position ; for it is obtaining immense vogue throughout the country by
dint of public exhibitions which, however clever and interesting, have
no claim to be considered " Thought-reading " at all. These exhibitions
usually produce a perfect deluge of letters in the local journals, in whicb
the " willing-game " and its results are discussed from every possible
standpoint and in every possible key, by believers, disbelievers, and
doubters. In the more scientific contributions to this correspondence,
expression is usually given to three distinct views, each of which deserves
serious attention.

Some contributors are certain to give an adequate explanation of
the process of " muscle-reading" — an explanation which easily covers the
successes of the public performers, as well as 99 out of 100 cases of
ffucoess in the " willing-game."

^«e is prettj sure to put forward \Jaft \i^'^^>i!GL<^^


10 Report of the Committee on Thought-Transference. [Nov. 22,

strongly suggested by the 100th case of the "willing-game" — ^where
what is done is of so subtle or complicated a kind as to raise doubts
whether unconscious muscular pressure, or rather release of pressure
in a certain direction^ is adequate to account for it ; and one is tempted
to look deeper for the springs of action, and to conceive the governance
of one organism by another through some sort of nervous induction.

And finally, some prudent correspondent will point out that — as
long as the form of experiment adopted is the performance of some
O/Ction — the problem can never be solved as long as contact of any sort
is allowed between the "wilier " and the " willed'* ; and will perhaps
do us the honour to refer to some of our own experiments, in which
success in far more delicate operations than pin-finding and number-
writing has been attained without contact.

It is clearly only to experiments performed under this last condition
— a condition which precludes any unconscious guidance from the "agent"
— that the word " Thought-reading " can be safely applied. That name,
of course, in no way implies the absence of a physical basis for the
phenomena ; the theory of brain-waves (which would be only an instance
of "nervous induction") has been suggested to supply such a basis.
But of such a physical basis we know nothing ; of the psychical facts
we know a great deal, all of them being, in various forms, transferences
of impression or idea from mind to mind otherwise than by the recognised
sensory channels. The difference between these cases and the public
exhibitions of muscular and tactile sensibility is, of course, fundamental ;
and it is unfortunate that the word " Thought-reading " should have
become associated with the latter. Even for the genuine cases
" Thought-transference " is a much better expression — the other term
having i^pparently conveyed to some persons the notion that, if once the
reality of the phenomena were established, we should all be able to
" read " each other's secrets.

We must emphatically repeat, then, what we laid down in our first
report, — that wherever contact is permitted, success in the per-
formance of a desired action must be attributed to indications given
by the " wilier " — that his unconscious and involuntary variations
in pressure are unconsciously and involuntarily, or consciously and
voluntarily, interpreted by the percipient.* We have thought it
desirable to make a series of experiments to ascertain what can be
done in this way ; and the results have been most striking, but not
unexpected. The note on " Muscle-reading " by one of our members,

♦ The same objection'naturally applies to all cases where the subject writes
down something which is in the agent's mind— the action^ due to unconscioas
guidance, being then the movements of the pencil or chalk. The objection does
not apply to oases where the '^ subject *' gives his notion of the *' transferred
impression" — ^word, number, taste, or whatever it may be — hy word of mouth.


1883.] Report of the Committee on TJwught-Tramferetice. 11

published in Part IV. of our Proceedings, shows the result of some
such trials. The same gentleman has since given a lecture on the
subject in the Ulster Hall, Belfast, where he performed the following
muscular feat, as described by a local newspaper. "A £5 note was
handed to Mr. W. Gray, who fixed the number of it in his mind, the
lecturer being blindfolded. The blackboard was brought into requisition,
having five sections or colours marked upon it. Mr. Sugden, whose
right hand, holding a piece of chalk, was in contact with Mr. Gray's
left, then made the figures 5, 5, 3, 4, with great deliberation, and these
were acknowledged as the correct number of the bank-note." Further
experiments have been made by the hon. secretary of the Committee
with another " subject." Numbers thought of have been written with
perfect accuracy by the " subject," when the tips of the agent's fingers
were allowed to rest on the hand that held the pencil, provided that the
agent himself followed the movements of the pencil with his eya
When the " agent's " eyes were averted, and there was no more chance
of unconscious guidance, faOure was at once the result. Diagrams have
been accurately reproduced in like manner, while failure has inevitably
followed the closing or blindfolding of the agent's eyes. With a lady
as agent, two drawings were even reproduced with a considerable
degree of accuracy when her fingers lightly touched the " subject's "
left hand, he holding the pencil in his right.

We may conclude with a practical suggestion. Public perform-
ances, such as those which are exciting so much interest throughout the
country, have this advantage— that they invariably set people to work
in private houses ; and it would clearly be a great thing if this result
could be made useful as well as amusing. We would venture, then, to
suggest to those who feel .drawn to the pursuit that, instead of repeating
the old " willing-game," and merely re-proving what has been proved a
hundred times before, they should devote themselves to experiments
without contact^ or else adopt some form of experiment where the
" subject " has only to name an object or sensation — and so aid in the
establishment of facts completely new to science. Oards, numbers,
names, diagrams, all supply good forms of experiment ; and wo may
remind our friends that convenient blank schedules for recording
experiments may be had gratis by anyone willing to forward the
work of the S.P.R., on application to the Assistant-Secretary,


L2 Beport of the Committee on Mesmerism: [Nov. 22,


II.
THIRD REPORT

OF THE

COMMITTEE ON MESMERISM.

[The Report has been somewhat enlarged since it was read.]

Committee .•— W. F. Barrett,* M.R.I. A. ; Edmund Gurnet,* M.A.;
Richard Hodgson, B.A. ; A. T. Myers, M.D. ; Fredebic W. H.
Myers, M.A. ; Henry N, Ridley, M.A., F.L.S.; W. H.
Stone, M.A., M.B. ; George Wyld, M.D. ; and O. Lockhart
Robertson, M.D. and Frank Podmore, M.A., Hon. Secretaries.

In previous Reports, attention has been frequently called to the
affinity between transference of impressions obtained when tiie
*• subject " is in a normal state, and those results which have been held
to indicate a special sympathy or ^^ rapport " between a hypnotist or
mesmerist and a sensitive ** subject*' The latter class of sympathetic
transferences has been far longer observed than the former : we may
say, indeed, that the recognition of the special case preceded by about
a century the recognition of the more general faculty. This was
natural enougL Observations in this particular department of hypnotic
or mesmeric effects reaped the benefit of all the other striking pheno-
mena which hypnotism or mesmerism had to show. The ** community
of sensation'' was only one more wonder in a veritable wonder^
land* Here, too, it often presented itself in a high degree of perfec-
tion, and (between suitable persons) with a high degree of certainty —
in higher perfection and with higher certainty than we can often
hope to realise in experiments where the " subject " is in a normal
waking state. The narrowing down (so to speak) of the exercise of
the faculty to a single channel — the fact that the rapport is coniined to
a single pair of minds — seems to concentrate and enhance the force
of the influence. And in these cases, therefore, results were soon
manifest the possibility of which, outside mesmerism, was scarcely dreamt
of, and which have only lately been seriously looked for and distinctly
oUained in cases where no specific rapport had been established.

1'horo remains, however, one sort of transference where the
relation of the hypnotic to the normal state is harder to establish than
might at first sight appear, and presents a certain peculiarity. It is
sometimes loosely called the transference of volition ; but is, more
accurately, an influence which takes effect on the nwtor-eystem of the
'^ Mu hject, " either by originating ox ^^^^ " « m<cA«st YmL^Ts^aM^ This sort
of transference seems to be spc dl >aafe ^^^qXsv^^V.'* Sa. \s^ ^


1883.] Report of the Committee on Mesmerism. . 13

normal state. For we must be careful to avoid interpreting in this way
those cases in the " willing-game" where a person, without contact with
the " wilier," does some action which the latter intends him to do ; for
in such cases it is, as a rule, merely the idea of the action that is con-
veyed to him ; and he acts on the idea merely because he knows he is
to do something. He is only acting in accordance with the spirit of
the game if he does that of which the idea comes across him ; but he
does not feel any special compulsion to do it. Nor can the allegations
of certain persons that, e.g,,, they can make strangers in church or in
a theatre turn their heads by <* willing " that they should do so, be
accepted as establishing even a primd facie case ; till success and failure
in such experiments are accurately noted, chance must always be the
readiest explanation of the results. We may provisionally say, then,
that persons in a normal state seem to be little if at all liable to have
their will dominated, or their actions dominated against their will, by
the silent determination of another. There are, however, cases where
persons who appeared to be in a perfectly normal state, and had not
been subjected to. any process of fixation or passes, have beeQ impelled
to do things by a power which they felt themselves unable to resist ;
always, however, through the will of some person who had been proved
to possess strong mesmeric power. And outside the sphere of mesmeric
influence, we have in our possession a few very striking cases of
wndesigTved results, where a powerful and emotional desire has influenced
the movements of an absent person in a way which it is almost impos-
sible to parallel by a process of deliberate experiment. On the whole,
then, the evidence seems to tend to the conclusion that these telepathic
aflections of the will, or of the motor-system, involve prof ounder
changes in the person influenced than the mere transference of passive
sensations ; and that, as a rule, they demand in the '' wilier '' either
distinct emotion or some amount of that specific faculty which we have
called "mesmeric."

1. Transference of Motor or Inhibitory Impulses.

To proceed now to the experimental work of this Committee : — It
will be remembered that in our last report we recounted a series of
experiments, in which a hypnotised " subject " had been made to answer,
or not to answer, the question " Do you hear ? " according to the un-
expressed intention of the operator. A further series was carried out
last November in his own house, at Dublin, by Professor Barrett ; who,
for convenience, will now speak in the first person.

The hypnotist was Mr. G. A. Smith. The "subject" was an
entire stran^r to Mr. Smith, a youth named "FeanAsj, \tt ^"Wov
natiung whatever was said aa. to the nature oi tlie exg^TYXCksa^* ^iSwwsJ^


14 Report of the CommiiUe on Mesmerism. [Nov. 22,

to be tried, until he was thrown into the hjpnotic state in my study.
He waa then in a light sleep-waking condition — ^his eyes were closed
and the pupils upturned — apparently sound asleep; bat he readily
answered in response to any questions addressed to him by Mr. Smith
or by mysell

I first told him to open the fingers of his closed hand, mr not to
open them, just as he felt disposed, in response to the question
addressed to him. That question, which I always asked in a anifonn
tone of voice, was in each case, "Now, will you open your hand % " and
at the same moment I pointed to the word " Yes " or " No,"
written on a card, which was held in sight of Mr. Smith, bat
entirely out of the range of vision of the '' subject," even had his eyes
been open, which they were not. Without the slightest change of
expression or other observable muscular movement, and quite out of
contact with the " subject," Mr. Smith then silently willed the subject
to open or not to open his hand, in accordance with the *' ITes " or
"No." Twenty successive experiments were made in this way; 17
of these were quite successful, and three were foilures. But these three
faUures were possibly due to inadvertence on Mr, Smith's part, as
he subsequently stated that on those occasions he had not been prompt
enough to direct his will in the. right direction before the question was
asked.

The experiment was now varied as follows: — ^The word "Yes"
was written on one, and the word " No " on the other, of two precisely
similar pieces of card. One or other of these cards was handed to
Mr. Smith at my arbitrary pleasure, care, of course, being taken
that the " subject " had no opportunity of seeing the card, even had
he been awake. When " Yes " was handed Mr. Smith was silently to
will the " subject " to answer aloud in response to the question asked by
me, " Do you hear me ? " When " No " was handed Mr. Smith was
to will that no response should be made in reply to the same question.
The object of this series of experiments was to note the efiTect of in-
creasing the distance between the wilier and the willed, — ^the agent and
the percipient In the first instance Mr. Smith was placed three feet
from the " subject," who remained throughout apparently asleep in an
arm-chair in one comer of my study.

At three feet apart, 25 trials were successively made, and
in everj/ case the "subject" responded or did not respond in exact
accordance with the silent will of Mr. Smith, as directed by me.

At feet apart six similar trials were made without a single
failure.

At 12 teet apart six more trisds were made without a single

At 1 7 feet apart Hix moTQ tmlSA ^^r^!^ visA^yif^^


1883.] Report of the Committee on Mesmerism. 15

In this last case Mr. Smith had to be placed outside the study
door, which was then closed with the exception of a narrow chink
just wide enough to admit of passing a card in or out, whilst I remained
in the study observiDg the *' subject.'' To avoid any possible indication
from the tone in which I asked the questioD, in all cases except the first
dozen experiments, I shuffled the cards face downwards, and then
handed the unknown "Yes" or "No" to Mr. Smith, who looked
at the card and willed accordingly. I noted down the result, and then,
and not till then, looked at the card.

A final experiment was made when Mr. Smith was taken across
the hall and placed in the dining-room, at a distance of about 30 feet
from the " subject," two doors, both quite closed, intervening. Under
these conditions,three trials were made with success,the "Yes" response
being, however, very faint and hardly audible to me, who returned to
the study to ask the usual question after handing the card to the
distant operator. At this point, the "subject" fell into a deep
sleep, and made no further replies to the questions addressed to
him.

Omitting these final experiments, the total number of successive
trials at different distances was 43. If the result had been due to
accident, there would have been an even chance of failures and of
successes, — whereas in fact tliere was not a single failure in tlis entire
series,

I subsequently made a series of a dozen successive trials in an
absolutely dark room, conveying my intention to Mr. Smith by
silently squeezing his hand, once for " No," twice for " Yes." Every
trial was successful When Mr. Smith was placed outside the darkened
room, I handed him the card through a small aperture, which could be
closed. Eight trials gave six results quite right, one wrong, and one
doubtful. Afterwards 20 trials, made when Mr. Smith was recalled,
and the room lighted, were all entirely successful. There was, I need
hardly say, no contact between operator and "subject" in any of
these experiments.

The difference in the power of the will of the hypnotist and that of
any other person was strikingly manifest, and the proof of the existence
of a peculiar " rapport " between operator and subject was simply over-
whelming. I several times exerted my will in opposition to that of
Mr. Smith — ^that is to say, willed that the " subject " should or
should not respond, when Mr. Smith willed the opposite, both of us
being equally distant from the " subject." In every case his will
triumphed. As in the case of Mr. Beard, recorded in our last report,
the " subject," on being aroused, stated that he had heard the question
each time, but that when he gave no answer he felt unaccountably unable
to control his muscles so as to frame the word.


1 6 Report of the Committee on Mesmerism. [Nov. 22,

It was noticeable that neither in the normal nor in the hypnotic
state was this subject able to tell any word or number or describe any
diagram thought of or viewed by the operator. Only his ability to act
in a particular way could be controlled, and he was not susceptible to
even the most rudimentary form of thought-transference proper.

The following shorter series with another operator, Mr. Xershaw
of Southport, and with Mrs.Firth, a nurse, as **subject," though the pre-
cautions were less elaborate than in the case just recorded, was to an
eye-witness almost equally satisfactory. For the trial was quite sud-
denly suggested to Mr. Kershaw by the experimenter, Mr. Gumey
(who will, for the remainder of the report, speak in the first person).
Kot only was it planned out of Mrs. Firth's hearing, but Mr. Kershaw
himself had some difficulty in understanding what was wanted. A
variety of small circumstances combined to show that the form of
experiment was entirely new both to operator and "subject."

The trial took place at Southport, on September 7th, 1883. Mr&
Firth, who had been previously thrown into a light stage of trance,
was placed in a chair in the middle of a bare room. Mr. Kershaw and
I stood about three yards behind her ; and sight of us, or of any part of
us, on her part was out of the question. The window was in the wall
in front of her, but altogether on one side; and there were no
reflecting surfaces in the room. I drew up the subjoined list of
yeses and noesy and held it for Mr. Kershaw to see. He made
a quiet connecting motion of the hand (not touching me, and
being many feet from Mrs. Firth), when there was to be an
answer, and an equally quiet transverse or separating pass when
there was to be none. I attribute no virtue to the passes, except so
far as they were a means of vivifying Mr. Kershaw's silent intention
to himself. The passes were almost absolutely noiseless, and the ex-
tremely faint sound which they made was, from the very nature of the
gentle motion, the same in every case. Complete silence was preserved
but for my question, "Do you hear 1" repeated time after time in a
perfectly neutral tone ; and there did not appear to be the very faintest
chance of signalling, even had there been an opportunity for arranging
a scheme.

1. Yes Right (i.e., Mrs. Firth responded).

2. No Right (i. e. , Mrs. Firth did not respond).

3. Yes Right.

4. Yes Right.

5. No Right.

6. Yes Right.

7. No At first no answer, which was right : then I gave

a very loud stamp, which provoked a " Yes "

8. No Right.

9. Yea Right.


1883.]. Report of the Committee on Mesmerism. 17

The next short series took place at my lodgings at Brighton, on
September 10th, 1883. The operator was Mr. Smith, the " subject " a
very intelligent young cabinet-maker, named Conway. Mr. Smith and
I stood behind him, without any contact with him. I held the list, and
pointed to the desired answer each time. The silence was absolute. I
repeated the question, " What is your name 1 '' in a perfectly neutral
and monotonous manner.

1 Yes Eight (i.e., the "subject," said "Conway").

2 Yes Right.

3 No Thia time the answer "Conway" was given ; but when the

next question was asked, the " subject " seemed unable to
answer for some seconds, as though Mr. Smith's intention
had taken effect a little too late.


4 Yes Eight.

5 No Eight.

6 No Eight.


7 Yes Eight

8 No Eight

9 Yes Eight


10 Yes Right

11 No Right

12 Yes Eight


2. Transference of Pains and Tastes.

The following short series of experiments in transference of pains
and tastes was carried out the same evening with the same operator
and '* subject." Ooiiway sat with his eyes closed, in a tolerably deep
trance. Mr. Smith and I stood behind him, without contact, and Mr.
Smith preserved absolute silence. I from time to time asked Conway
whether he felt anything, but of course gave no guiding hint or indica-
tion of whether he was right or wrong.

I pinched Mr. Smith's right upper arm. Conway at once showed
signs of pain, rubbed his right hand, then passed his left hand up to
his right shoulder, aud finally localised the exact spot.

I silently changed to Mr. Smith's left arm. In a very few seconds
Conway's right hand flew to 'the corresponding place on his own left
arm and he rubbed it, uttering strong complaints.

I nipped the lobe of Mr. Smith's right ear. Conway first rubbed
the right side of his neck close to his ear ; he then complained of his
right leg, and used threats. I then gave a severe nip to his own right
ear, and he made no sign of any sort. He then rubbed close to the
left ear, and finally localised the spot on that ear exactly corresponding
to the place touched on Mr. Smith's right ear.

I now pinched the right side of Mr. Smith's right thigh. Conway,
without receiving any hint that he was expected to feel anything, im-
mediately began to rub the corresponding part of his left leg.

Mr. Smith now put a succession of substances into his mouth,
according to my indications, still keeping behind Conway, and pre-
serving total silence. I kept Conway's attention aWve \>^ %.^\ii% \»ssv
irom time to time what the taste was like, but gave not ^% iajcoXfe^Jc*


18 Report of the Committee on Mesmerism. [Nov. 22,

guidance,except in the single ease of cloves, when — to see if Oonway would
take a hint — I asked if it tasted like spice and he said it did not.

Mustard. — * * Something bitter. '* * * It*s rather warm. "
Cloves, — **Some sort of fruit" *' Mixed with spirits of wine." "Not
like spice. " " Tastes warm. "

BitUr Aloes.^'' Not nice." "Bitter and hot." " Sort of harshness."
** Not sweet." (I had suggested that it was sweet.) " Not nice." " Frightful
stuff. " '^ Hurt your throat when you swallow it." *' Bitterness and saltness
about it."

Sugar,—'' It's getting better." " Sweetish taste." " Sweet." "Some-
thing approaching sugar."

Powdered Alum, — "Fills your mouth with water." " Precious hot."
"Some stuff from a chemist's shop, that they put in medicine." "Leaves
a brackish taste." '* Makes your mouth water." "Something after the
style of alum."

Cayenne Fepper, — Conway showed strong signs of distress. **0h! you
call it good, do you ? " " Oh ! give us something to rinse that down. " " Draws
your mouth all manner of shapes." " Bitter and acid, frightful." " You've
got some Cayenne down my throat, I know." Renewed signs of pain and
entreaties for water.

The " subject '' was now waked. He immediately said, " What^s
this I've got in my mouth ? " " Something precious hot." ** Something
much hotter than ginger." " Pepper and ginger."

In the next series, which took place on September 20tli, 1883, at
Heckmondwike, in Yorkshire, Mr. and Mrs. Sidgwick were also
present. Mr. Kershaw was the operator. The " subject,^' who bad
come to the place by the merest accident, was Mrs. King, the wife of
a neighbouring clergyman. Mrs. King was in a light hypnotic trance,
with closed eyes ; and was questioned, as to what she tasted, by Mrs.
Sidgwick, without the very slightest guidance — Mrs. Sidgwick not
knowing herself what the substances were. Mr. Kershaw put the
substances into his mouth, according to my directions, in another room.
He then stood three or four yards behind Mrs. King, keeping absolutely
stilL

Cayenne Pepper.—'' Dry." " Choking feeling." " Not so choking."
" Sandy and dry ; thirsty feeling." (I took Mr. Kershaw out to renew the
dose.) "Thirsty, parched feeling." "Just the same"— though Mrs.
Sidgwick, who thought it had been changed, had made a remark which would
have naturally led her to believe that such was the case. Mrs. Sidgwick
said, " Is it cool, hot, sour, acid, dry, or bitter 1 " "Hot, dry."

Mn. King was woke, and said that she had a burning feeling in her
tbroBiy and it w»« ^ luev. Sbb tooV Bionxi!^ ^VBAer^ and was then

'^^jjfnotiMei


1883.] Report of the Committee on MesmetHsm. , 19

Bitter Aloes. — " Something sour." "As if I'd been eating acid drops."
Mrs. Sidgwick said " Not disagreeable," in a tone of agreement. " No."
She was given some water — " Mouth's nasty."

Sugar. — " Slightly sweet, I think." ** Mixture ; rather hot, but sweet."
" Just the same ; rather sweet taste."

Alum. — "Something like sour-bitter." "More sour than bitter."
" Don't know the taste." " Not particularly nice nor particularly disagree-
able." "Gives a watery feeling." "Tongue feels watery." "Watery
feeling, as if I had been tasting something sour." She was woke, and was
given a little of the stuff ; she said that was just the taste she felt in her
mouth.

Cloves, — " Like nutmeg." " Spicy taste ; nutmeg, or cinnamon, or some
other spice."

Ginger.--*' Saltpetre sort of taste." " Gone." " Salty taste slightly."

In both these series every experiment has been given, and there
has been no selection of results. The results would not be convincing,
if taken alone ; especiaUy since Mrs. King failed completely in similar
trials on two subsequent occasions. But no one who had witnessed
more conclusive experiments could doubt that the genuine phenomenon
was exhibited here, though the faculty was imperfectly developed.

Two other trials made about the same time with two other
" subjects,'* one with Mr. Smith and the other with Mr. Kershaw as
operator, gave results about as satisfactory as the above. In both
cases, as in the two series just recorded, Cayenne pepper was described
as strongly burning.

In the middle of this latter series with Mr. Kershaw, I suddenly
pinched the upper part of his left arm. The "subject," who was sitting in
a trance about eight feet off, with her back to us, did not know what
sort of experiment I was going to try, and was only asked by me
** What do you feel 1" She instantly started up, as if in great excite-
ment, rubbed the exactly corresponding place on her own person, and
complained of violent pain. Being woke, she said her arm was
dreadfully painful, as if some one had nipped her. A few more
experiments on tastes followed, and then I nipped Mr. Kershaw's left
little finger, and asked the " subject " if she felt anything beside the
taste. She began at once to complain of pain in her left side and
arm, all down to the finger ends.


c ^1


20 Appendix to the Eepart on Mesmerism. [Nov, 22,


APPENDIX.

It may be convenient to our readers if we quote or refer to a few cases of
transference of tastes and pains to hypnotised '^ subjects,*' recorded by
previous observers.

Mr. Esdaile, who was for many years Presidency Surgeon in Calcutta,
gives the following case of transference of taste between himself and a
patient he had mesmerised. The subject was a young Hindoo, Baboo
Mohun Mittre, who had been operated upon painlessly whilst in the
mesmeric trance.

One day that the Baboo came to the hospital to pay his respects, after
getting well, I took him into a side room, and mesmerising him till he oonld not
open his eyes, I went out and desired my assistant surgeon to procure me Bomesalt»
a slice of lime, a piece of gentian, and some brandy, and to give them to me in
any order he pleased, when I opened my mouth. We returned, and blindfolding
Lallee Mohun, I took hold of both his hands : and, opening my mouth, had a
slice of half -rotten lime put into it by my assistant. Having chewed it, I asked,
" Do you taste anything 7 '* *^ Yes, I taste a nasty old lime : " and he made wry
faces in correspondence. He was equally correct with all the other substances,
calling the gentian by its native name, cheretta ; and when I tasted the brandy,
he said it was Shrab (the general name for wine and spirits). Being asked what
kind, he said, " What I used to drink — ^brandy." For I am happy to say he is cured
of his drunken habits (formerly drinkiug two bottles of brandy a day) as well as
of his disease. {Practical Mesmerism ^ by J. Esdaile, M.D., p. 125.)

Kev. 0. H. Townshend, in his Facts in Mesmerism^ gives several
examples. (See especially pp. 68, 72, 76, 122, 150, 151, 184.) The following
experiments were made on a servant of his own, in whom he had produced
the trance-condition.

Wine, water, and coffee were handed to me successively, in such a way as tQ
prevent the patient from perceiving, by any usual means, what the liquors were.
He, however, correctly named them in order. The order was then changed, and
the results of the experiments were the same. Flowers were given me to smell.
I was holding the patient by one hand at the time, but turning altogether away
from him to a table, over which I bent, so as to interpose myself between him
and anything that might be handed to me. He, however, when I smelt of the
flowers, imitated the action, and on my asking him what he perceived, replied,
without hesitation, ** Flowers." Upon this, one of the party silently changed the
flowers for a bottle of eau de Cologne^ when he observed, *^ That is not the same
smell ; it is eau de Cologne" With i^e manner of conducting this experiment and
its results, all who were present declared themselves perfectly satisfied.

** Three of my sleep-wakers," Mr. Townshend says in another place
*^ could in no way distinguish substances when placed in their own mouths'
nor discriminate between a piece of apple and a piece of cheese ; but the
moment that I was eating, they, seeming to eat also, could tell me what I
had in my mouth."

The next case is also one of Mr. Townshend's.

Did any one strike or hurt me in any part of the body when Anna M, was
in sleep-waking, she immediately carried her hand to a corresponding part of her


1883.] Appendix to the Report on Mesmerism. 21

own person. Then she would rub her own shoulder when mine was smarting
with a blow, manifesting that the actual nerves of that part were, pro tempora,
restored to their functions. Once an incredulous person came near me unawares,
and trod upon my foot, which was quite hidden under a chair. The sleep- waker
instantly darted down her hand and rubbed her own foot with an expression of
pain. Again, if my hair was pulled from behind, Anna directly raised her hand
to the back of her head. A pin thrust into my hand elicited an equal demonstra-
tion of sympathy.

Stimulated by Mr. Townsheud's experiments, the Rev. A. Gilmour, of
Greenock, made some experiments on one of his servants. He described
the results in a letter to Professor Gregory (quoted in Animal Magnetism^
p. 211), in which the following passage occurs : —

I could throw her into the mesmeric sleep in 40 seconds. She is able to tell
what I taste, such as soda, salt, sugar, milk, water, &c., though not in the same
room with me. When my foot is pricked, or my hair pulled, or any part of my
person pinched, she feels it, and describes it unerringly.

Professor Gregory himself says (Animal Magnetism^ p. 23) : —

I have seen and tested the fact of community of sensation in so many cases
that I regard it as firmly established. No one who has had opportunities of
observing this beautiful phenomenon can long hesitate as to its entire truth — such
is the expression of genuine sensation in the face and gesture, besides the distinct
statements made by the sleeper.

The following account is given by Dr. Elliotson in the Zoist, Vol. V.,
pp. 242-245.

I requested my butler to enclose, in five different packets of blotting-paper,
salt, sugar, cinnamon, ginger, and pepper. These were wrapped in one common
cover when given to me, and I handed them over to Mr. Scarlet, the eldest son of
Lord Abinger, who gave me one packet after another, any that he chose, as each
was done with by me. The Archbishop of Dubliu and several clergyman and
other friends were present.

Wh^i I put each into my mouth, I was ignorant of its contents, and learnt its
nature as the paper became moistened and gave way. The first was salt, and I stood
with it in my mouth at Mrs. Snewing's side and rather behind her, saying nothing.
Before a minute had elapsed she moved her lips, made a face, and said, *^ Oh, that's
nasty enough." ** What do you mean 7 " "Why youVe put salt into my mouth,
you needn't have done that." I removed the packet of salt, and took another,
which proved to be cinnamon. Presently she said, " Well that is odd ; I never
heard of such a thing ; to put such things together into one's month 1" *' Why
what do you mean ? " " Why now you've given me something nice and warm,
very pleasant, but you've mixed salt with it." The impression of the salt thus
still remained. " What is it 7 " *' I don't know the name of it, but it's very
nice ; it's what we put into puddings ; brown, and in sticks." She puzzled a
long while and then on my asking if it was cinnamon, " Yes, that's it," she re-
plied, *' How odd that I shouldn't recollect the name." I then removed it, and
took into my mouth another packet, which proved to be sugar, and I observed
that Mr. Scarlet very properly peeped into it before he gave \\i ^ m^. MXat ^
nStaake or tvro Bhe begtm, **0h, that's very sweet; I like tl[\fiA>*, \V^ «»'vx.\sai>ti«^ "V

^y9dit from my month sJid took another packet, wbich pto-veOi \.o\i^ ^\x^6.^x.


22 Appendix to the Report on Mesmerism. [Nov. 22,

After a minute or two she exclaimed, *' Well, this is the f onnieBt thing I ever
heard of, to mix salt, and cinnamon, and sugar, and now to give me something
else hot." "What is it?" "I don't know; but this is very hot too. It sets
all my mouth on fire." In fact, I felt my mouth burning hot. After
some difficulty, for she was puzzled between these conflicting im-
pressions, she said it must be ginger, and went on complaining of the heat of
the mouth. I took a glass of cold water, and she instantly said, smiling, " That
isn't hot, that's nice and cool, it makes my mouth quite comfortable." " What jLs
it?" ** Why it's water ; what else can it be?" The last packet was now put
into my mouth, and proved to be pepper. She cried out, " Why you're putting
hot things again into my mouth. It gets down my throat, and up my nose ; it's
burning me„" and she soon declared it was pepper. I could scarcely endure it,
and took a draught of water. She was instantly relieved, and said, " How cool and
nice that is." She could not have seen what was doing had her eyes been open.

A gentleman now came beside me and pricked one of my fingers with a
pin. She took no notice of it at first, but, after a few minutes, slowly began to
rub the fingers of her corresponding hand, and at last rubbed one only, that
corresponding with my finger which had been pricked, and complained that
someone had pricked it. The back of one of my hands was now pricked.
She made no remark, but remained in quiet sleep. The pricking
was at length repeated at the same spot, and pretty sharply,
in silence. Still she made no remark. We gave it up, and my other
hand was pricked in silence. After a little time, she began to rub her hand,
corresponding with that of mine which was the first pricked^ and complained of
its having been pricked at the very same spot as mine. Gradually she ceased to
complain, and was still again. After the lapse of another minute or two, all the
party observing silence, she complained that the other hand, corresponding with
that of mine last pricked, was pricked, and wondered that any person should do
so. This is a most remarkable circumstance ; perfectly corresponding to the
phenomena of sympathetic movements in the Okeys, which often came out so
long after the movement of the operator had been made. Indeed after he,
in despair of any effect, had made another motion for them to imitate,
and when he was expecting the latter, the first would take place. It shows
how easily persons igfnorant of the subject and unqualified to make experi-
mejits may come to false conclusions, and set themselves up as the discoverers
of failures and imposition. In my patients the movement given for sympathy
and not productive of apparent effect has often come out again in a
subsequent sleep-waking^ the impression remaining unconsciously in the brain.
The heat and taste of the pepper still remained in Mrs. Snewing's mouth, and
she went on good-naturedly, as always, complaining of it. While she was com-
plaining, I suddenly awoke her, and asked what she tasted and whether her
mouth was hot. She looked surprised, and said she "tasted nothing " and her
" mouth was not hot ; " and she smiled at the questions.

A few weeks afterwards, I repeated these experiments with all the same
precautions, in the presence of Mr. H. S. Thompson and Mr. Chandler, who are
very accurate observers, Mrs. Thompson, and a few other friends. I stood quite
beMnd her large high-backed leather chair. Mr. Chandler gave me the packets
at his own pleasure, and, on tasting each, I wrote on a slip of paper what I
tasted, and held up the slip at a distance behind her, that all might judge of her
accuracy and my truth. These were the same articles as in the former experi-
ments ; but, as they were on both occasions taken at random, the order, of course,
turned out to be different. In addition, Mr. Chandler gave me a piece of dried
orange-peel from his pocket ; and I tasted water and wine. She named each


1883.] Appendix to the Report on Mesmerism. 23

article with perfect accuracy, and readily ; remarkiiig that it was very strange
she once conld not recollect the name of cinnamon. Indeed, on the first
oooacdon, she described the taste and the external character and nses of the
varions articles with perfect accuracy, bat hesitated in giving the names of
the cinnamon and ginger and pepper ; a fact showing that the sleepiness
extended a little more oyer the mental powers than one might imagine. In a note
sent me lately by Mr. Thompson are the following remarks : —

The patient's lips moved, and in a very short time after you had detected its
nature, she appeared to taste it as well as yourself ; and when it was anjrthing disagree-
able bulged you would not put the nasty stuff into her mouth in this way. She told,
without the slightest mistake, everything you tasted: salt, sugar, cinnamon, pepper,
ginger, orange-peel, wine, water, and some others. Not a word was spoken by any
of the party to each other, and the only question that was asked the patient was,
what she had in her mouth that she complained of. After the spices, when you
drank water, she seemed to enjoy it much, saying it cooled her mouth ; but at
other times, as you drank it very freely, she requested that you would not give
her any more water, for that so much water was disagreeable to her. There were
present, Mr. Chandler, Lord Adare, Baron Osten, a friend of his, whose name I
do not know, myself, and my wife. We were all perfectly satisfied with the entire
success of the experiments.

I then smelt eau de Cologne,withoat any noise. She presently said,«"How nice ;
what a nice thing you've given me to smell." But she could not tell what it was ;
when I mentioned its name she recognised it. I did the same with water. She
made no remark. I asked her if she smelt anything. She replied, *'No, I don't
smell anything ; what should I smell? "

I put fioiaff to my nostrils : she almost immediately complained of snuff behig
given to her.


24 Etperimenis in ThaughUTrans/erence. [Nov. 22,


III.

AN ACCOUNT OF SOME EXPERIMENTS IN THOUGHT-
TRANSFERENCE,

Conducted by Malcolm Guthbiz, J. P., and James BiBCHALLy Hon. Sec. of
the Literary and Philosophical Society of liyerpooL

By Malcolm Guthrie.

After Mr. Irving Bishop's visit to Liverpool in the spring of this
year, it became a favourite amusement to imitate his skill in pin-
finding ; and some persons also made experiments in reading numbers
thought of by others, they themselves meanwhile being blindfolded.
Out of experiments made in tins casual way arose the systematic study
which it is my business to recount in the present paper. A party of
young ladies amusing themselves after business hours found that certain
of their number, when blindfolded, were able to name very correctly
figures selected from an almanack suspended on the wall of the room,
when their companions, having hold of their hands, fixed their attention
upon some particular day of the month. There, so far as the young
ladies were concerned, the matter ended. They had their few evening!^
amusement, and other occupations and interests supervened.

It so happened that about this time I read an article by Mr, F.

Corder in the February number of CasseWi Magaziney which was

written with such an air of truthfulness, and spoke of Thou^t-

transference as a matter of such very ordinary experience, that for the

first time I began to think that there must be some foundation in &ct

for the belief so confidently expressed. Up to that time I had been

thoroughly sceptical, nor had I read any literature on the subject. I

thereupon determined to try the experiments, as described in Mr.

Corder's paper, upon my son, a nervous and susceptible &ir-haired boy

of ten years of age. Much to my astonishment^ and his own, he

named quickly and without difficulty objects which I placed behind

him when blindfolded under the usual conditions. He, however, would

not perform more than two or three experiments at a time, saying that

it made him " feel queer." Moreover, after the first experiments, when I

asked others to witness the curious phenomenon, he seemed disposed to

ensure success by taking a sly peep at the object, which indeed made

me suspicious of the whole thing. Under these circumstances of the

boy's reluctance and the difficultly of impoiing strini^ent conditions, I

abandoned him as an unsoitaUa or itady, more particularly as

other satisfactory means all H ome under my notice. I,


1883.] JExperiments in Thought-Transference. 25

however, at a subsequent period, tested my son's powers under proper
scientific conditions with the assistance of Mr. Birchall ; and we were
both satisfied as to his possession of the faculty, although we did not
consider him a useful subject for study.

It was after the discovery of my son's powers of receiving impressions
that I heard of the casual experiments before referred to ; and having
tested the accuracy of the reports which I had received, I mentioned
the matter to the Oouncil of the Literary and Philosophical Society of
Liverpool, asking for assistance for the purpose of a scientific study
of the phenomena. Mr. James Birchall, the Hon. Secretary, to whom
the subject was quite new, having, I suppose, some confidence in my
good judgment, agreed to give me the advantage of his assistance, and
we thereupon held our first meeting. From the very beginning it was
arranged between us that Mr. Birchall should make a full and complete
record of every experiment, and I have to tender him my grateful
thanks for the exactitude and care with which this record has been
kept. He has performed his office as a man free from any prepos-
sessions, and simply as a matter of official duty. His suggestions have
all been in the direction of stringency of conditions, and I may state
that he very shortly became convinced of the bona Jides of the experi-
ments, and interested in the scientific prosecution of the study. I very
much regret that he is not able to be present at this meeting as
we had arranged, in order personally to present the valuable and
interesting register of the experiments which he has prepared. I hope,
however, that he will be able to attend some future meeting with a
report upon experiments which we are continuing week by week.

And now as to the party of young ladies to whom I referred, as
having discovered the possession of the power of Thought-transference.
Tou must know that I am a partner in one of the large drapery estab-
lishments in the city of Liverpool, and that the young ladies are con-
nected with one of the show-rooms of that establishment. A relative
of mine (entered in Mr. Birchall's report as Miss C), also in the business,
had been present at the careless, offhand experiments made in imita-
tion of Irving Bishop, and, recognising their genuine character, informed
me of the circumstance, being aware of the experiments I had made with
my son.

One of the most important considerations connected with my
study has been that I have been made cognisant, through this relative,
of the very beginnings of the affair. I have, as it were, been behind
the scenes from the first, and through my representative have been
infoimed of almost every experiment which has been made outside
our weekly meetings, — although after the first month the young ladies
agreed coily to practise at these meetings, as I (rightly
or irMxit^) thought it desirable on consideTatioii<& ol ^^si2^


26 Experiments in Thought' Transference. [Nov. 22,

to limit their work in this direction. Thus I have had
the advantage of studying a series of experiments ah avo,
I had not to enter upon an examination of the achievements of people
who had been working together for years ; but have been acquainted
with the origin and whole development of the manifestations and have
witnessed the genuine surprise which the operators and the subjects have
alike exhibited at their increasing successes, and at the results of our
excursions into novel lines of experiment. The affair has not been the
discovery of the possession of special powers, first made and then
worked up by the parties themselves for gain or glory. The ex-
perimenters in this case were disposed to pass the matter over alto-
gether as one of no moment, and only put themselves at my disposal in
regard to experiments in order to oblige me. The experiments have all
been devised and conducted by myself and Mr. Birchall, without any
previous intimation of their nature, and could not possibly have been
foreseen. In fact they have been to the young ladies a succession of
surprises. Ko set of experiments of a similar nature has ever been
more completely known from its origin, or more completely under the
control of the scientific observer.

As to the young ladies concerned, I have known them all for many
years, and am able to speak in the highest terms of their probity and
intelligence. I know also that they have a high regard for me, and
would not willingly lead me into any error.

The two *' subjects," Miss B. and Miss E., are about 20 years of
age, engaged at business all day from 9 a.m. to 6 p.m., in the same
show-room, and they discovered their aptitude with their companions in
the same room as operators or " agents." They do not meet elsewhere,
as all the assistants live with their friends, and do not board on the

establishment. The lady, Miss R d, who is supposed to have the

principal influence in conveying impressions, is the head of the room,
and occupies a position of great trust and responsibility.

The experiments were commenced with simple shapes, such as
diamonds, circles, triangles, &c., cut out of brightly-coloured ribbons,
and exhibited upon a black background ; also with cards, and letters
of the alphabet printed in a bold type. Afterwards objects were
introduced, and short words were formed of the letters. The first
series of experiments were of a visual kind, and were very
successful. They were conducted in the presence of Mr. Birchall,
myself, several lady companions of the subjects, and usually one or two
members of the Literary and Philosophical Society. In the earlier
experiments the " subject " was in contact (that is to say clasped

or touched hands) with Miss It d or some other lady friend. I

need not say that the '^ subject " was always effectually blindfolded, and
that the object was placed in such a position that it could not be seen


1883,] Experiments in Thought- Transference, 27

by her, even if she were not so incapacitated for observation. These
conditions apply to all the experiments, and, to save iteration, I state
them once for all.

After a short time experiments of this description were performed
without any contact whatever. This was a suggestion of my relative,
and under her superintendence the first set of experiments with Miss
R., under these new conditions, was completely successful, and will
be found recorded in Mr. Birchall's report.* At the next meeting after
this discovery, the experiments were tried without contact, and were
ahnost uniformly successful. The party sat in a semi-circle before
Miss B. or Miss E., the object being placed behind her, and the attention
of all being concentrated upon it, the object was very speedily described
and sometimes named. It is noteworthy that the idea or name of
the object did not come first to the percipient, but the appearance
seemed to dawn gradually upon the mind, and sometimes it only
presented itself in its general features, so that very often it could only
be described and not named. First the colour impression was received,
^en the general shape, and afterwards any special characteristic, and
finally, the name. This was the usual order of the process. As an
illustration, take the case of a blue feather. The "subject" said, "It is
pale 1 It looks like a leaf ; but it can't be a leaf — looks like a feather
curled. Is it a feather ? " Again a key was described as " A little tiny
thing with a ring at one end and a little fiag at the other, like a toy
flag." Urged to name it, she said, " It is very like a key."

The foregoing is a summary of our work during the first few weeks.
All our regular meetings were successful, but in our desire to exhibit
our discovery to our fellow members, we had some extra meetings,
which proved total failures, much to our chagrin and much to the
disappointment of our subjects. It would appear that any mental
disturbance on the part of the operators or on the part of the "subjects,"
due to anxiety to succeed, or to the novelty of the entourage of persons
or things, very much interferes with the success of experiments. I
may here remark that the result of our experience is that success or
fiulure depends as much (if Dot more) upon the condition of the agent
as upon that of the percipient. It has happened that after a complete
&ilure before strangers, the agent and percipient have been almost
immediately able to obtain a successful transference of a number of im-
pressions — the previous failure having been probably due to the mind of
the agent occupying itself with the presence of the visitor, instead of

"* The first series of experiments was summarised and reported by Mr.
Birchall at a meeting of the Literary and Philosophical Society of Liverpool,
and the experiments referred to are included in his report. This report is a
record of every experiment* made — ^with only two exceptions, when the subjects
were hurriedly called upon to exhibit their powers to callers.


28 Experiments in ThoughUTramference. [Nov* 22,

being directed exclusively upon the object to be described. As regards
the condition of the agent, I may say that although I have been
very successful myself in giving impressions to each of the *' subjects *'
without the presence of any other person, still, under precisely similar
conditions, when I have not felt equal to the required effort of
concentration, I have been unable to repeat the success. We have
also found that wandering attention on the part of the agents is
misleading; and it would, I think, be fair to explain in this
way one or two failures of the following type — that although a
certain article was placed for observation, a picture hanging on
the wall a little above it was described. On account of the
disturbance of the agent's mind as well as that of the
"subject,'' it is judged that experiments in a drawing-room,
before a large miscellaneous company, are not likely to be
successful.

At the conclusion of the first series of experiments some new
departures were made.

First we tried the experiment of producing an article in the absence
of the subject from the room and after concealing it re-admitting her,
and, after blindfolding and isolating her, asking her to describe the object
we had been looking at. This experiment was tried both before and
after the summer interregnum and was successful. Thus a lady's
purse, in form of a satchel, with a bright metaUic frame and steel-bar
handle above, was thus described : " Is it something not quite square )
Something bright in the middle. Is it a purse ? There's something very
bright at the top. Has it ^ything else over it ? Don't know what this
is — ^whether it belongs to the purse. I've lost it — ^is it a bag ? " On
another occasion a key was correctly named, and Mr. Johnson's gold
watch-chain, hanging in a curve from his watch-pocket to a button-hole
of his waistcoat, elicited the answer : " Is it a chain, a watch-chain,
hanging from a pocket like this % " the patient then describing in the air
a curve similar to that formed by the chain we had been looking at but
which was now concealed. Then she added, " There is a little pendant
at the end of it,"

Proceeding a step further we agreed, in the absence of the subject
from the room, to imagine some object, and, under similar conditions, to
ask her to describe it. This experiment was also successfully performed,
on several occasions, by both subjects. A gold cross, pine-apple, and
other objects imagined in this way have been correctly named.

We tried also the perception of motion^ and found that the
movements of objects exhibited could be discerned. The idea was
suggested by an experiment tried with a card which, in order that all
present should see, I moved about and was informed by the percipient,
Miss B., that it was a card, but she could not tell which one because it


1888.] Experimenta in ThoughUTramfe^^ence. 29

seemed to be moTing about. On a subsequent occasion, in order to test
this perception of motion, I bought a toy monkey, which worked up and
down on a stick by means of a string drawing the arms and legs together.
The answer was : '' I see red and yellow, and it is darker at one end
than the other. It is like a flag moving about — it is moving. . . .
Now it is opening and shutting like a pair of scissors."

We have also tried experiments in the transference of real or
imaginary pamsy which Miss B. is able to receive from Mr. Birchall.
This branch of our studies has not as yet been carried very far,
for want of time, although I think it more likely to throw li^t upon
the nature of the mode of transmission than any other branch of
the inquiry. In particular, it would be desirable to ascertain by obser-
vation or even experiment, if the part affected in the subject shows
signs of physical change, such as contraction, tension, rush of blood,
redness, or any other physical change similar to that produced upon the
person of the agent in causing the pain.

At the conclusion of our Spring Session, we tried (without contact)
the transference of names, short quotations, &c., all the company
thinking of the word, or words. In this we met with but little success,
but on one occasion, the proverb, " Time flies," having been thought of
by the company, elicited the answer, " Is it two words ? — is it * Time
flies'?"

On this occasion, seeing that the subject was so apt, I proposed to
the company that we should think of a historical scene, and two experi-
ments were made, which are published in Mr. BirchaU's report. They
were imperfect, viewed critically, each of them having been done at the
second instead of at the first attempt ; but if the fact of Thought-
transference is accepted as proved on other grounds, they are sugges-
tive of further experiments in the same direction.

We discontinued our experiments at the end of May, on account of
press of business and arrangements for holidays j and I am told by the
^'subjeqts" that no experiments whatever were made until we resumed
our meetings, towards the end of August, in preparation for a visit by
Mr. Myers and Mr. Gumey. As I expected, after the interregnum we met
with very little success, and I wrote to those gentlemen not to expect
much under the circumstances. And, indeed, the " subjects" were able
to do very little, and our visitors would have gone away disappointed,
had not our inquiries taken the direction of experiments in transference
of tastes. As to these you have just heard the report prepared by Mr.
Myers, and he and his coadjutor appeared fully satisfied as to the
genuineness of the transference of impressions.

I may add the results of a few casual experiments, made in the
course of the last week in London, which illustrate the ^oxtli^l


30 JSxpenfnents in Thought^ Transference. [Nov. 22,

transference of somewhat more complex visual impressions than most
of those above described.

One evening I called Miss E. and a friend of mine, Mr. Lee, out of
the room, and requested them to assist me in imagining the large stained
glass rose-window in the transept of Westminster Abbey, opposite to
which Miss E., Miss R., and I had been sitting at the service the same
afternoon. I then asked Miss R. to say what object we were thinking
of. After a while she said, " I cannot tell what you are looking at^
but I seem to be sitting in Westminster Abbey, where we were this
afternoon," After another interval she said, " I seem to be looking at a
window," and again, " I think it is the window in the chancel with the
figures.'' When afterwards told which window it was, she said that she
did not see any window distinctly, and certainly not the rose-window
thought of.

I next proposed another object, and decided upon something
which had struck our att-ention in a lamp shop in Kew Bond-street, a
lighted lamp with a stuffed monkey clinging to it — the lamp at the
same time revolving, and the monkey moving a cocoa-nut, which was
suspended from its foot. This experiment took a very long time, and
was only partially successful. First Miss R. said she thought of a cat,
or it might be a dog. After a while she said it was something long,
dark, and hanging — describing the size and shape pretty well with her
hands. Then she said that she saw something hanging straight down,
and moving up and down. After the removal of the blindfolding, she
looked at the gas chandelier, and said, " Was it not that ? " and then
immediately, "Ko, it was not that — ^it was a lamp and it was
lighted." Asked if the cat she saw had anything to do with the lamp,
she said " No."

The following completely successful results in the simpler forms of
Thought-transference were also obtained on the same occasion as the
jabove.

I proposed to Miss R. to tell a name thought of by myself, Mr.
Lee, and Miss E., without contact and blindfolded. The name " Polly "
was written on a card and passed round in strict silence. In a few
minutes Miss R. said, " I can only think of Polly."

The name '' Isabella " was then selected by me, and passed round
silently. After a longer interval Miss R. said, " I don't know what it
can be. Somehow I can only think of my own name." Asked what
was her name, she said " IsabeL"

Mr. Lee proposed thinking of a number, and as only single numbers
had previously been thought of it occurred to me to take a double one
— 34 — which I wrote down and passed round. Miss R. shortly said,
"Are there two figures?" I said "Yes." "One is 4 and the other
3." She did not know whether it was 34 or 43.


1883.] ExperimenU in Thought' Transference. 31

Our endeavours recently have been towards the ascertainment of
individual powers on the part of the agents in regard to each of the
two '* subjects." The test selected has been the production by the
Uindfolded "subjects" of copies of drawings placed behind them.
An improved method has been to place the drawing on a stand,
with a wooden back between the agent and the " subject," and
^ibe agent placing himi^lf on the opposite side of a small table,
i either joins hands with the *' subject," or, by preference, does not touch
kter at all, and gazes at the drawing until the " subject " says she has
[ in impression thereof. The drawing is then taken down and concealed,
V tlie blindfolding is removed, and the " subject " being already provided
I with drawing materials, proceeds to delineate the impression she has
■ leceived. In most of these cases, no one besides the agent and the "sub-
ject " has been present in the room, and the result is held to establish
the relative power of each agent in giving off an impression of this
kind. In this way it has been found that all the agents have been
Successful in giving information individually to each of the subjects,
^though the range of experiments is not yet complete, because some
dew operators we have introduced have not yet had time to develop
Or settle down properly to their work. However, it has been found that
both Miss R. and Miss E. have been able to receive impressions of

drawings singly from myself, Mr. Birchall, Miss R d, Mr. Steel,

IPreeident of the Literary and Philosophical Society of Liverpool, and
imperfectly from two or three other gentlemen. Since my arrival in
ILondon, a very successful producer of impressions has been discovered
in the person of one of your members, Mr. F. S. Hughes. Mr. Gumey
iRras also successful at one of our meetings.

Under these circumstances about 90 drawings have been produced
in Liverpool, and 60 in London. It is difficult to classify them. A
great number of them are decided successes ; another large number give
part of the drawing; others exhibit the general idea, and others again
manifest a kind of composition of form. Others, such as the drawings
of flowers, have been described and named, but have been too difficult
to draw. A good many are perfect failures. The drawings generally run
in lots. A number of successful copies will be produced very quickly,
and again a number of failures, indicating, I think, faultiness on the
part of the agent, or growing fatigue on the part of the " subject."

The originals of the Liverpool experiments and the corresponding
copies have all been mounted, and I shall be pleased to show them at
the close of this meeting. Every experiment, whether successful or a
&dlure, is there in the order of trial, with the conditions, name of
"subject" and agent, and any remarks made by the "subject " specified
at the bottom. Some of the copies exhibit the curious phenomenon of
inversion. These drawings must speak for themselvea, Tl;i<^ ^x^XLC^'^iX.


82 Experiments in Thoughi- Transference, [Nov. 22,

facts to be borne in mind regarding them are that they have been
executed through the instrumentality, as agents, of persons of unques-
tioned probity, and that the responsibility for them is spread over a
considerable group of such persons ; while the conditions to be observed
were so simple — for they amounted really to nothing more than taking
care that the original should not be seen by the " subject '' — ^that it is
extremely difficult to suppose them to have been eluded. The results
may thus be considered a solid addition to the evidence for the trans-
ference of impressions from one mind to another otherwise than by
the ordinary channels of sense.

The originals of the following diagrams were for the moat part
drawn in another room from that in which the '^ subject " was placed.
The few executed in the same room were drawn while the '* subject "
was blindfolded, at a distance from her, and in such a way that the
process would have been wholly invisible to her or anyone else, even
had an attempt been made to observe it. During the process of
transference, the *' agent " looked steadily and in perfect silence at the
original drawing, which was placed upon an intervening wooden stand ;
the "subject'' sitting opposite to him, and behind thestand, blindfolded
and quite still. The " agent " ceased looking at the drawing, and the
blindfolding was removed, only when the " subject " professed herself
ready to make the reproduction, which happened usually in times
varying from half-a-minute to two or three minutes. Her position
rendered it absolutely impossible that she should glimpse at the
original. She could not have done so, in fact, without rising from her
st>at and advancing her head several feet ; and as she was almost in the
same lino of siglit as the drawing, and so almost in the centre of the
" agont's ** Hold of observation, the slightest approach to such a move-
ment must have been instantly detected. The reproductions were made
in perfect silence, and without the " agent " even following the actual
proot^ss with his eyes, though he was of course able to keep the
" subjoot '* under the closest observation.

lu the case of all the diagrams, except those numbered 7 and 8, the
"agtmt" and the "subject** were the only two persons in the room
during tho experiment. In the case of numbers 7 and 8, the "agent''
and " subject " wert^ sitting quite apart in a comer of the room, while
Mr« Outhrie and Miss E. were talking in another part of it. Numbers
l-(} art) specially iutert>sting as being the complete and consecutive
Herie» of a single sitting.


'J?-


i3.]


Experiments in T/iought- Transference.


33


No I. Original Drawinq.


No. I. Reproduction^


^^BPB^^^


Mr. Oathrie and Miss E. No contact.


No. 2. Original DRAWiNa


No. 2. Reproduction.


Mr. Guthrie and Miss E. No contact.


34


Experiments in I%ougkt^ Transference, [Nov. 22


No. 3. Original DRAwma


No. 3. REPROOUOnON.


Mr. Guthrie and Miss E. No
contact.


T40. 4. Original DRAwtNa


No 4 Reproduotion.


Mr. Guthrie and Miss E.
No contact.


i3.]


Experiments in Thought-Transference.


35


No. 5. Original Drawing.


No 5. Reproduction.


Mr. Guthrie and Miss E.
No contact.


No. 6. Original Drawing.


Mr. Guthrie and iliss E. No contact.


No. 6. Reproduction.


I R almost directly said, "Are you thinking of the bottom of the sea, with shfiOa
fishes ;" and then, " Is it a snail or a flsh? *'— theii dievf a& «\)on«.


36


EMpmmadB m ThmjU-Ti


[NoY.2^


7.


dnwiL


NaT.


.1


Ea^ammenU in Thought' Trat^ferenee.


37


No. 8. Original DRAwma


No 8. Reproduction.


&Ir. Oarney and Miss R. So contact


Na 9. Original DRAwiNa


MiiHL'


Mr. Birchall and Miss B, No contact.


No. 9. Reproduction.


said she seemed to see a lot of rings, as if they were moving, and she could not get them

steadily before her eyea.


»


j[Sot'. 21


l^W^ ffV^'yWfllV 9IW .^NVP JE^ .^^


Mo. %\. OmoiMAi. Dra^


#/ ^///'^AM// m\\ MiM N Nu tnniUt^K


.]


Exp^'imenfH in TIumght^Transferenee.


39


No. 12. Original DRAwiNa


Mr. Steel and Miss B. No contact


No. 12. Reproouction«


40


Sitperitnents in ThoughUTramference. [Nov. 22,


No. 13. Original DRAwiNa


No. 13. Reproduction.


Mr. Steel and Miss E. Contact before the
reproduction was made.


No. 14. Original DRAWiNa


No. 14. Reproduction.


Mr. Hughes and Miss E. Contact before the
reproduction was made.


Miss E. said, "A box or chair badly
shaped"— then drew as above.


Mvperimenia in Thought-Tran^erenee,


41


No. 15. ORIGINAL DRAWINa


Mr. Hughes and Mias E. Xo contact.


No. 15. Reproduction.


Mill E. said, ** It is like a mask at a pantomime,'* and immediately drew as above.


42 Experiment in TfimigM-Tranaferenee. [Not. 22, 1£


Na 16. Orioihal DnAwiNa


Ifr. Hughea tnil Miu E. Ni


No. IS. RIPHOOUOTION.


Jan. 18, 1884.] Report of the Literary Committee. 43


PROCEEDINGS OF THE GENERAL MEETING ON

Friday^ January 18, 1884.

The sixth General Meeting of the Society was held at 11, Chandos
Street, Cavendish Square, on Friday, January 18, 1884.

Professor Hexry Sidgwick, President, in the Chair.


IV.
SECOND REPORT OF THE LITERARY COMMITTEE.

Committee : — W. F. Barrett, F.R.S.E. ; Chas. C. Massey ; Rev. W.
Stainton Moses, M.A.; F. Podmore, M.A.; and Edmund Gurney,
M.A., and F. W. H. Myers,* M.A., lion. Sees,


About a year has now elapsed since the first Report of the Literary
Oommittee was presented to the Society. During that period the
Oommittee has met on nearly 60 days, and its individual members have
done much work for it between the meetings. The time seems now to
have arrived when we may fitly give some account of the position in
which our work at present stands.

First, as to the Society's Library. Many books of value have been
presented to the Society, and a lady, who wishes to remain anonymous,
bas contributed £50 as the beginning of a Library Fund. A Library
Sub-Committee has been appointed, and a catalogue of our collection,
Bunountingat present to more than 300 volumes, has been published in
Part IV. of our Proceedings.

It has been necessary so far to spend very little of the Society's own
Eonds on books, and the books thus purchased have been almost all of
them of a strictly scientific character. Among the books presented to
as there is more variety ; but on the whole, our collection contains a
large proportion of rare and valuable works, which form a good invest-
ment, as for the most part they are already rising in price, and the
^wing interest in our subjects is likely to induce a further increment
in their value. It will be seen that we are particularly strong in the
)lder works on Mesmerism and Hypnotism, which contain many
mportant observations, and are now very rare.

Our library, as we conceive it, is primarily intended for serious


44 Report of the Literary Committee. [Jan. 18|

•

students of psychical topics. We wish to bring it to a point such that
no one who is investigating these subjects with any thoroughness may
be able to neglect the advantages which it offers. But we desire also to
make it conveniently available for the less scientific reader, and we aw
gradually purchasing duplicates of such books as we find to be most
often inquired for.

We shall be happy to receive suggestions as to books (especially
foreign books and articles) which might advisably be purchased ; and
still more glad to receive gifts of such books or donations to the Library
Fund.

To pass on to the more specific work of the Committee ; the collectioii
and examination of evidence.

A series of meetings of the Literary Committee, occupying the
greater part of eight days, was held at the President's house, at
Cambridge, August 20th-27th, 1883. The evidence bearing on Phantasms
of the Living, — some 400 narratives which had been already printed on
slips, — was then considered ; and a resolution was passed, (and subse-
quently approved by the Council,) entrusting to Messrs. Gumey, Myers,
and Podmore the composition and publication of a book to be entitled
" Phantasms of the Living," to be published with the sanction of the
Council, and as one of the publications of the Society.

The proposed scheme includes the apparitions at or about the
moment of death, which are one of the most widely attested forms of
such phenomena. The persons whose phantoms are discerned at this
last hour may still rank among living men. But, even thus, oar
projected work is intended, as will be seen, to deal with a small
part only of the field which we hope in time to traverse. That field is
a dark territory, and full of pitfalls, and the safest way of moving across
it is not to leap, but to crawl. We wish to make each foot of ground
secure as we proceed, and never to lose our line of communication with
familiar and established things.

Now our Society claims to have proved the reality of Thought-
transference, — of the transmission of thoughts, feelings, and images
from one mind to another by no recognised channel of sense. AxiA
here we find a starting-point from whence we can begin to consider
all impressions which seem to be flashed from one human being to
another, — plt/intasnis, as we call them, in order to include under a term
more general than phantoms impressions which may be not visual only,
but auditory, tactile, or purely mental in character.

While we deal thus with living human beings, we feel that we have
behind us a solid and increasing mass of experimental analogies, of whieh
we shall make the fullest use, and which will supply us, as we venture to
hope, with at any rate something nearer to a true philosophy of
apparitions than it has till now been possible to frame.


188i.] Report of tlie Literary Cotnmittee. 46

Such is the task on which we are engaged ; and of which we hope
in the course of a few months to present to the Society some consider-
able instalment. As for the book itself, we shall aim at its publication
in the course of this year ; but the material grows on our hands, fresh
problems present themselves, and fresh inquiries are undertaken, till
the work which we once hoped to compress within one duodecimo volume
seems now likely to extend itself over two volumes octavo.

In the meantime, the greater part of the narratives which form
the substratum of the forthcoming book, are offered in printed slips to
the inspection of Members and Associates in the Society's rooms.
Those only are excepted which have been communicated under
conditions which would make it a breach of confidence thus to submit
them to view.

The cost of these slips, which will amount altogether to some
hundreds of pounds, is defrayed by a member of the Society, who]wishes
to remain anonymous. Their convenience is manifest. They enable each
member of the Oommittee to study each narrative, and to record his
comment or criticism in the readiest way. It must, of course, be under
stood that the fact of printing or exhibiting these slips does not imply that
any conclusion has been arrived at by the Committee as to the precise
value of any one of them. They are at present lying open to discussion,
and we should be very glad to receive any comments, additional
particulars, parallel cases, &c., which any members of our Society who
study them may be disposed to write on the slips, or to send us. Most
of Uie slips aJready printed refer to phantasms of the living, but
we are also collecting and printing similar narratives relating to
phantasms of the dead, premonitions, and other subjects, for future
consideration.

The labour involved in preparing these slips is very great. We
calculate that over 10,000 letters have been written during 1883 in the
course of the collection and verification of evidence. This may seem
an extravagant number, and we trust that in future years the task will
in some respects become an easier one. For the difficulty depends in
great measure on the novelty of the inquiry, and consists in explaining
to correspondents what is wanted, and in inducing them to hunt up
dates, obtain corroborative signatures, &c., which in many cases they
<»n easily do when once they have been led to perceive the all-importance
of accuracy and precision in narratives of this kind. Much time and
trouble have been expended on persuading correspondents to allow the
publication of their names. We ourselves have, of course, the names
of all our correspondents ; but we naturally think it right to place the
names before the public whenever we are permitted to do sa Some
cases, of course, there are where we should not think of requesting
such permission ; cases where some painful or intimate ciccumatsjxc^


46 Report of the Literary Committee, [Jau. 18,

connected with the narrative makes anonymity plainly desirable. Bat it
is not in these cases that our difficulties lie, but often in cases where
the story is one which our correspondent would be willing enough to
tell at any dinner-table. For the fact is, that persons unaccustomed to
seeing themselves in print suffer still in many cases from a kind of
unreasoning timidity which makes them dread unknown consequences
if they allow the public eye to rest on their own name printed in a
book, or on the name of their grandfather, or their mother-in-law, or
the husband of a former cook. Our correspondents' letters, their very
prejudices, are sacred in our eyes, or we could give some amusing
instances of this coy reluctance in cases where no human being could
derive any annoyance if the whole story were in the newspapers at
once.

Much good has been done in this direction by the publication in
the Fortnightly Review of our first Report, containing a number of signed
narratives of apparitions. !Not one of these narratives has been
shaken, and not one of the writers has complained of any ridicule,
notoriety, or other inconvenience as following on the publication of his
name and address in this widely circulated periodical. But a wide change
in this respect can only be induced by gentle and gradual persuasion; —
we must not associate Psychical Research in the public mind with
brusque interrogation or rash intrusion into the sacred places (A
memory.

Again, a large part of this correspondence is of a nature which
cannot make much show in any book or report. It has consisted in
the practice of the somewhat difficult art of courteous and unobtrusive
cross-examination ; — in endeavours to elucidate points where it seems to
us that there is a risk that our correspondents^memorymay have been dim
or incorrect. We desire, of course, not only that all our narratives shall
be the hond-fide depositions of trustworthy persons — (of that we think we
can make sure) — but also that there shall be as few as possible of those
little slips and inaccuracies into which the most trustworthy person
sometimes falls, and which if subsequently discovered are represented
(sometimes very unfairly) as vitiating the whole account.

And if to any of our correspondents we have seemed needlessly
pertinacious, irritatingly pedantic in our constant requests to them to
look out contemporary documents, to procure original signatures, to get
the corroboration of a second person, which often seems so needless to
a narrator, conscious that he is telling the exact truth ; — in short, to
attend to minutiae on which we sometimes dwell so much that we may
perhaps seem to have overlooked the main point of the narrative
altogether ; — if we have seemed to inflict on our most useful informants
in this way trouble which might have been spared, we would ask their
pardon, and we would assure them that the result of this minute verifir


1884.] Report of the Literary Committee, 47

cation is by no means, as a rule, to throw doubt upon the narratives
sent us, but much of tener to strengthen them in unexpected ways, and
especially to exhibit those undesigned coincidences with other accounts
oE the same kind, which help to show that we have got hold of a plexus
of coherent phenomena, and not a mere bundle of isolated and indi-
vidual fantasies.

It is, however, an unfortunate peculiarity of the human i:ace that
they are very unwilling to answer many letters of inquiry on the
same subject ; and as we have no means except persuasion of getting
any answers from anyone at all, it may be supposed that to bring any
given narrative up to the required pitch of accuracy and completeness,
may sometimes be a very tedious matter. But the very slowness
and tediousness of the inquiry is in itself a safeguard, and correspon-
dents who see how attentively we ponder over every expression which
they use, feel themselves thus invited to a careful precision of state-
ment which in many cases is really remarkable. A critic of the rough-
and-ready school, indeed, will sometimes say to us, "Get your witnesses
together, put them on ockth^ and then I will believe them," but until
he offers to arm us with the powers of the law, "to swear witnesses
and call for documents," we shall permit ourselves to smile .at his
somewhat crude conception of the way in which his fellow creatures
would be likely to behave when approached as he proposes to approach
them.

But alUiough we do not present ourselves to our correspondents
with a Testament ready for them to kiss, and an oath to administer, we
do think it important to secure personal interviews with them (at con-
•siderable cost of time and trouble to ourselves, and sometimes, we fear,
to them), whenever we can arrange such an interview without its
being felt as an intrusion. It has been suggested by one or two critics
ihat this personal acquaintance is valueless in those cases where it has
merely been acquired for the purpose of the inquiry. We may reply
that a juryman's acquaintance with a witness is generally acquired in
the process of the inquiry to which that witness's evidence relates ;
but that nevertheless he would be but an indifferent judge who should
-consider it unimportant whether the jury saw the witnesses or not. The
fact, of course, is, that in judging of men and women an interview of an
hour or two, though it is not so good as a lifelong intimacy, is incom-
parably better than nothing. It increases the sense of responsibility
and gives the opportunity for much individual detail, which may have
been thought too trivial for a formal correspondence.

On the whole, the trouble which we have taken in calling on our
correspondents has resulted in great satisfaction to our own minds.
We have found them decidedly not lacking in common-sense and , ac-
curacy of mind \ by no means ignorant of the possibility of mere morbMl


48 B^art of the Literary Committee. [Jan. 18,

hallucinations ; — and, in short, distinguished from the mass of mankind
not at all by being more imaginative or more hysterical, but rather by
taking somewhat more of interest than other people in the scientific
acceptance of phenomena which they happen to have themselves
observed.

We are not to be understood as disparaging persons whose nervous
organisations are abnormally sensitive, or as expressing distrust of ex-
periences which differ widely from those of ordinary mankind. We
believe that from some exceptional, even from some morbid organisations,
psychical science has much to learn. Some such abnormal natures we
are very glad to have encountered ; and for certain experiments it is
much to be desired that we should find more " sensitives " of every
kind. But we are merely stating a simple matter of fact when we say
that the correspondents who have seen the apparitions which we have
so far collected, have, for the most part, been persons of a perfectly healthy
and normal type. We make it a rule (for instance) to ask each of them
whether they have ever experienced anything in the nature of a hallu-
cination besides the special case which they recount, and in hardly
any instances have they ever seen or heard anything else of the kind
at all

But this brings us to a point at which we shall have to ask of all
our Members to render us all the assistance that they can. For it is
not enough, we think, for us to ask our correspondents who tell us of
dreams that " come true," and apparitions that coincided with deaths,
how many dreams of the same sort they have had which have not
" come true," and how many apparitions they have seen which have
coincided with nothing at all. This is necessary, but this is not enough
What we should likej — it is of course impossible, — would be to get a
regular cenaua of death-dreams and hallucinations, so as first of all to
know how many people in England had ever had hauntingly-vivid
dreams of the deaths of relations, and how many people in Sngland
had ever seen a human figure in the room when nobody was there.
Then, next, we should like to know how many of these hauntingly-
vivid dreams had " come true," and how many of these so-called hallu-
cinations had been truthrtelling impressions, that is, had coincided with
the death or other sudden shock of the person whose image was seen.
For, when speaking precisely, we must give the name of AaWi^cina^tona
to all such images seen where no one is standing in bodily presence :—
though we may distinguish those hallucinations into the deceptive \r
morbid hallucinations which are merely a symptom of diseased eyes or
bram, and the trutlvtelling, or, as we may call them, veHdical halluci-
nations which do, m fact, coincide with some crisis in the Uf e of the
person whose image is seen, and which, therefore, as we contend,
though they are m one sense hallucinations, yet have some reaUty be^


1884.] Report of the Liiei^aty Committee. 49

hind them — ^some origin exterior to the eyes and brain of the person
who sees them.*

Well, if we knew how many hallucinations of both kinds were seen by
sane persons in England in a year, and how many of those hallucinations
were truth4eUvng^ then we should be able to calculate in a very definite
way whether chance alone would explain all the coincidences, — ^whether,
in fact, it was by mere accident that hallucinations ever told the truth.
We cannot, of course, make such a census complete, or such a calcula-
tion definite. But, if only enough people will help us, we ought to bo
able to get at facts enough practicidly to put the matter beyond
controversy. Provisionally, we think ourselves justified in proceeding
on the assumption that hallucinations of the kind with which we are
mainly concerned — that is, solitary hallucinations occurring only once
in a lifetime, and not attributable to any known morbid condition of the
percipient's organism — are very rare phenomena: that they do not
occur, let us say, to one person in a hundred. This assumption is con-
firmed by the best estimate of conmion experience that we were able
to make without formal statistical investigation : and it is at least im-
plied in all that has been published on the subject of hallucination by
medical writers. Still it is an assumption which may always be disputed,
so long as it does not rest on a basis of carefully collected facts. Let us
consider how to ask for the statistics required in as precise a manner
as possible. First, as regards dreams. Certain dreams are sent to us
which have turned out true, and it is argued that the dream, which
coincided with the event, was in some way catbsed by the event. Well,
let OS consider what is the kind of dream which has a primd Jade look
of being something more than mere ordinary nonsense or nightmare ?

If I dream that a friend is dead, about whom I am in no way anxious
at the time, and if that dream is unusually vivid, and so haunting that
it continues to distress me not only while I lie in bed but for an hour
or more after I have got up ; and if it afterwards turns out that my
friend did die that night, then there is some primd facie reason for me
to say: *'I felt that this was no ordinary dream ; and now it is proved'
that it was no ordinary dream, for it has come true." If, however, it
can be shown that most other people habitually have dreams just as.
vivid and haunting as this of mine, which nevertheless do not come true
at all, then I shall probably have to admit that my dream came true by
mere chance, and was no proof of any subtle sympathy between my^
dying friend and myself.

The question about dreams, then, which we want asked of as many
people as possible is this : " Can you recall that you have ever, in th&
course of the last 10 years, had a dream of the death of some person

* On this subject see the interesting ** Thoughts on Apparitions," bj the
Bishop of Carlisle, in the Chntemporary Review for January, 1884.


50 Jteport of the Litei*ary Committee. [Jan, 18,

known to you (about whom you were not specially anxious at the time),
which you marked as an exceptionally vivid one, and of which the dis-
tressing impression lasted for as long as an hour after you rose in the
morning?" And similarly as regards hallucinations. In order to find out
how common mere morbid hallucinatipns are we have asked the question:
'' Have you ever, when in good health, and completely awake, had a
vivid impression of seeing, or being touched by, a human being, or of
hearing a voice or sound which suggested a human presence, when no
one was there 1 "

The reception which these questions have met with illustrates
the dangers of what may be called over-scrupulosity in controversy.
Of course, we should have been pleased to get as many Noes as possible
in reply to these questions ; for if (as we are inclined to think is the
case) only a very small percentage of people ever do have vivid death-
dreams or morbid hallucinations of any kind, then, of course, our cases
of coincidence of dream or . apparition with a friend's death are all the
more valuable. But we were so anxious not to give any indication that
we welcomed the answer Noj that we worded our questions in such a
way that (as it turns out) most people thought that the only answer
we cared about was Yes, Our critics ridiculed us for eagerly collectiiig
every kind of dream or hallucination that we could lay our hands
on, and swallowing them all whole. And our friends did ' not
take the trouble to tell us th9,t they had had no hallucinations.
They gave as an excuse for not answering our questions that
they could only have answered No, which was the very
answer that would have been most welcome, and they only wrote to us
when they Jwd some morbid hallucination to tell us of. We are
thus in danger of getting results which are of no value as statistics,
because the ordinary mass of mankind — who have not had
hallucinations or death-dreams — ^think that we do not care for
their answers. We must say more plainly, then, that we care
for all answers, — and for Noes fully as much as for Teses, — and
we must earnestly ask each of our Members to take the trouble to
collect 25 or 50 or 100 answers for us. Let them simply send in the
number of Noes or Yeses on a postcard, as the circular instructs them ;
and then if there are any cases in any way interesting amongst the
number, let them send also on a separate piece of paper an account of
such cases, as full as they are willing to make it.

This is a kind of help which we can hardly ask from casual acquaint-
ances — for it does, no doubt, involve some little trouble — but we think
that we are justified in urging the members of our own body to take this
amount of trouble for the ends which we all have in view. It is an
eminently good opportunity for the Society to justify its own existence;
for the results, the importance of which we trust we have made dear,


1884.] Report of tJie Literary Committee^ 51

can only be obtained by the active co-operation of a large body of
people, and, but fpr some such association as ours, might remain for
ever unsought and unknown. If all our members, or even a quarter
of #Lem, would help as actively as some have already done, we should
have good hope of getting our questions answered, as we desire, by
50,000 persons.

And, in truth, the need of a census of this kind (we must repeat) is
conspicuous from a scientific point of view. The medical authors who
have written on hallucinations are necessarily extremely vague as to
their freqriency, and for the most part content themselves with repeat-
ing a certain group>of striking cases, without much attempt to determine
whether these are truly typical in character. No real attempt at col-
lecting statistics has been made, and for our purpose statistics of hallu-
cination are of the highest importance ; and the best chance of obtaining
these is to make an effort so decided as to attract for the moment at
least the attention of large masses of people, and to induce them to
answer the easily-answered questions which are here proposed. We
hope that something of the collector's spirit may be aroused in many
minds for the service of the inquiry. The collection of perfectly futile
objects for the mere collection's sake, which amused our grandfathers
and grandmothers, has sunk now into the diversion of children. But the
instinct remains in their elders, and still prompts to many a. collection
of butterflies or flowers, useless except as teaching accurate discrimina-
tion to the collector. We would ask that some of this energy may be
transferred to a field where there is still a harvest more ample than
the labourers can gather in; namely, the collection of definite psychologi-
cal facts.

We want, then, the questions in the circular answered as widely as
possible. And we want also, as much as ever, well-attested narratives
of all kinds bearing on matters within our Society's scope. We find
sometimes that someone who could give us a well-attested account of
some death-wraith or similar phenomenon, refrains from doing so because,
as he says, '' You must have quite enough of such accounts at this stage
of the inquiry to establish the fact in question," But in reality we
can never have too many of such narratives. And we can never have
enatighf so long as a well-attested fact of this kind is still spoken of as
'* contradictory to experience " ; moreover, what we want to do is not to
establish facts merely, but to explain them ; and in order to make even
the first approach to explanation in a subject so strange and obscure
we want the widest possible range of narratives to collate and compare.
Each narrative, besides its evidential interest as strengthening the
credibility of similar narratives, has its tlieoretical interest in enabling
us to trace with greater clearness the. links of connection which corre-
late one such account with another; the significant features which


62 Report of the Literary Committee. [Jan. 18,

must be the basis of a tme classification. To illustrate our meaning
by a single point : Every detail as to the clothing in whioh any
apparition is seen is of value, as indicating whether the phantasmal
picture may be more probably referred to the percipient's mind, or to
the agent's, or to some further source. We do not say that definite
laws can be laid down on such a point ; but we do say that this is the
way in which the laws of such apparitions are to be sought for, — by the
collation of every scrap of evidence which bears on some perfectly
definite problem, which must necessarily have a solution expressible in
terms of our existing knowledge, if only that solution can be reached.

This is merely one instance of the numberless questions whidi need
the collection and collation of great masses of evidence before any
really permanent or scientific treatment of them is possible.

And those who aid us may feel that they are lending a hand to no
slight or trivial undertaking. The very violence of the attacks which
a certain school of thinkers have made on our work may be fairly taken
as unconscious evidence of the importance and novelty of the results
towards which our researches point. The school to which we refer is
that which insists, in tones louder sometimes andmore combative than the
passionless air of Science is willing to echo or convey, that all inquiries
into man's psychical nature, all inquiries which regard him as possibly
more than a portion of organised matter, are no longer open, but closed,
and closed against his aspirations for ever. For ourselves, we are far
indeed from retaliating either the contempt or the animosity which this
able group of thinkers often express for us. Many of us have thought
at one time as they think now ; and have learnt to honour the courage
which can face the worst, and which scorns to feed with vain hopes the
creatures of a day. If we disagree with this school — as we do funda-
mentally — it is not that we dispute their ability or their patience in
dealing with the facts on which they have concentrated their attention.
It is simply that we have taken pains to collect and master an immense
mass of evidence, which they have not yet included within the scope of
their inquiries.

They cannot complain of us for dogmatising, for we do not
dogmatise. They cannot complain of us for invoking sentiment in aid
of argument ; for we have refrained, with a persistency which has per-
plexed and disappointed some of our supporters, from anything which
could possibly be construed into an ad captandum appeal to the friends
of religion. All that can be complained of is that we are ready tQ take
facts as they come. But facts are facts, whatever view of the Universe
they make for. It is no blame to the materialist if the Universe is a
soulless interaction of atoms, and life a paltry misery, closed in the grave.
But neither is it any blame to us if the Universe is the field of spiritual
energies^ and ii ^'high capacious powers" do in truth **lie folded up in man."


1884.] Appendix to Report of tlie Litermy Committee. 63


APPENDIX.

We give here one of our cases where the percipient is one who has never
experienced any other hallucination of the senses, and whei*e the coincidence
of time is very close. It is from the Bev. Robert Bee, 1a, Colin Street,
Wigan (curate of St. George's, Wigan) :—

On December 18th, 1873, 1 left my house in Lincolnshire to visit my wife's
parents, then and now residing in Lord Street, Southport. Both my parents
were, to all appearance, in good health when I started. The next day after my
arrival was spent in leisurely observation of the manifold attractions of this
fashionable seaside resort. I spent the evening in company with my wife in the
bay-windowed drawing-room upstairs, which fronts the main street of the town.
I proposed a game at chess, and we got out the board and began to play. Perhaps
half-an-hour had been thus occupied by us, during which I had made several
foolish mistakes. A deep melancholy was oppressing me. At length I remarked :
'* It is no use my trying to play ; I cannot for the life think about what I am
doing. Shall we shut it up and resume our talk 7 I feel literally wretchedi"

^* Just as you like," said my wife, and the board was at once put aside.

This was about half -past 7 o'clock ; and after a few minutes' desultory con-
versation, my wife suddenly remarked : ** I feel very dull to-night. I think
I will go downstairs to mamTna for a few minutes."

Soon after my wife's departure, I rose from my chair, and walked in the
direction of the drawing-room door. Here I paused for a moment, and then
passed out to the landing of the stairs.

It was then exactly 10 minutes to 8 o'clock. I stood for a moment upon
the landing, and a lady, dressed as if she were going on a business errand, came
out, apparently, from an adjoining bedroom, and passed close by me. I did not
distinctly see her features, nor do I remember what it was that I said to her.

The form passed down the narrow, winding stairs, and at the same instant my
wife came up again, so that she must have passed close to the stranger — in fact,
to all appearance, brushed against her.

I exclaimed, almost immediately, ** Who is the lady, PoUy, that you passed
just now, coming up 7 "

Never can I forget, or account for my wife's answer. "I passed nobody,'*
she said.

«< Nonsense," I replied. ^* You met a lacly just now, dressed for a walk! She
came out of the little bedroom. I spoke to her. She most be a visitor staying
with your mother. She has gone out, no doubt, at the front door."

*' It is impossible," said my wife. " There is not any company in the house.
They all left nearly a week ago. There is no one, in fact, at all indoors but our-
selves and mamma."

** Strange," I said ; *^ I am certain that I saw and spoke to a lady, just before
you came upstairs, and I saw her distinctly pass you, so that it seems incredible
that you did not perceive her."

Hy wife positively asserted that the thing was impossible. We went down-
stairs together, and I related the story to my wife's mother, who was busy with
her household duties. She confirmed her daughter's previous statement ; there
was no one in the house but ourselves.

The next morning, early, a telegram reached me from Lincolnshire ; it was
from my elder sister, and announced the afflicting intelligence that ** our dear
mother had passed suddenly away the night before ; and that we (i.&., niyself and
wife) were to return home to Ghiinsborough by the next train.'


54 Appendix io Export of the Literary CwnmUtet. [Jan. 18,

I oonld Bcaroely realise tlie &ct f or a mOTaent, andl fotbcar to attempt wiy
descripdon of mjsnbeeqnent feeli&ga. I have the c oniiol ati mi of knowing that
my mother was prepared for her end, a satlrfMtiai to lis aU in oor bereaTemait
The doctor said it was heart disease, whieh in a few minntes had cansedhcr

death. .

After giring some details of his arriTal at home, and of the IdndnesB of friendg,

Mr. Bee cootinaes : —

When all was orer. and Christmas Day had arriTed, I Tentored to ask my

brother the exact moment of oor mothers death.

- Well, &ther was ont." he said, '^at the school-room, and I did not see her
aUTe. Jnliawasjost intimetoseehertoeatheherhtft. It was, as nearly as I

can recollect, 10 mimmU* to 8 orJork,"

I looked to my wife for a moment, and then said : *^ Then I saw her m
Soathporc, and can now aooonnt, nnaoooantably, for my unproesinnK "

Before the said 19th of December I wasntteriy cardeas of thoe things ; I
had giren little or no attention to sptritoal appa ritions or im|uesrimin. I was
utterly carelfss of these things.

In answer to inquiries Mr. Bee adds : —

My mother died in her dress and boots : she was taken ill in the Btceet» and
had to be taken to anoghbonr^shoose in Gainsboroogh a few paces tma herown
honse. The figure resembled my mother exactly as to siae, dress, and appeannoe

bat it did not recall her to my mind at the time. The light was no* ao dim tint
if my mother had actoaUy paaBcd me in flesh and hlood, I aboiold not hate
recognised her.

In answer to the qnestion whether this is the only case of haTtiiflinatiion tint
he has experienced. Mr. Bee answeis ^TesL*'

He farther adds : —

The gas light orer the head of the stairway shone within a frosted globe
and was probably not tamed on /mlly.

The fsct is. that there was ample light to see the figure in, bat jnst as the fMse
noght haxe been tamed to me. or was tamed to me, I could not, or did not,
clearly discern it. Many, many times, my regret and disappointment when I
recall this fsct hare been deeply felt.

Mrs. Bee writes to as as follows : —

If anything I can say to you will be of any use. I will willingly give my
tesdmonT to aU my husband has said. I iememb« perfectly 10 years ago my
Tisit to my mother'a;. and my husband s unaccountable rest UaBne sB on the
particular eTming mentioned, also Mr. Bee asking me. after I had been down*
8turs.if I had met a lady on the stairs^ I said -Xck I do not think there ia any
<me in the house but us.** Mr. Bee then said. ^ Well, a lady has passed me just
now <m the landing : she came out of the small bedroom and went downstairs ;
sl^ was dreeecd in a black bonnet and shawV* I said. -* Nonsense, yon most be
mistaken.** He said. - 1 am certain I am not. and I can assure you I feel very
^**"- I then went to ask mamnm if there was anyone in the house, and she
said no. only our^lres : stUl Mr. Bee insisted someone had passed him on the
landing, although we tried to reason him out of it.

In the morning, while we were in bed, we receired a tel^ram stating that
Mrs. Bee had died suddenly the night before. I said at once, *- Robert, that was
your molh» TOO saw last night." He said it me^ When we got to Gainsborough
we asked what time she died : we were told about 10 minutes to 8, which
was the exact time: also thai she was taken sadd«ily Ul in the street rwearing
at the tune a black bonnet and shawl) and died in 10 minocea.— Mabt Asx Bee.


1884.] Appendix to Report of the Literary Committee, 65

Now when the apparition is, like Mr. Bee's, a quite unique experience in
the percipient's life, and where its coincidence with a death is as close as this,
the improbability of a mere chance coincidence is so enormous that it is hard
to express it with anything like accuracy in actual figures.

We will, however, roughly show the lines on which such a problem would
need to be worked.

Let us say that the percipient has had only 30 years of intelligent life,
and that during those 30 years he has slept for nine hours a day. He has
then had 15 x 30 x 365=164,250 hours of waking intelligent life. Now, in
this space of time he has had oiie apparition, which resembled his mother,
and was within a few minutes of her death. Now if we say only that it was
within the quarter of an hour in which death occurred^ there are
164,250 hour8=:657,000 quarter-hours of life in which that apparition might
have come ; so that the chance of its coming in the right quarter-hour was
iZjkjnsTS (keeping to round numbers). But this is on the supposition
that the only apparition which could possibly appear to him would be his
mother's, or at least one which resembled his mother in general aspect as
nearly as the phantom which he actually saw.

Now visual hallucinations known to be morbid are by no means limited
to the human shape ; they are grotesquely varied in ways too numerous to
mention. But, for the sake of argument, we are willing to assume (it is a
monstrous assumption) that one-tenth of all phantoms accidentally caused are
likely to resemble a lady in a black bonnet and shawl. The chance, then, that
an apparition 9f the right class (the old lady class) would show itself in the
right quarter-hour (the quarter-hour of actual decease) will be l,657,000th3 x
10 \ or the chances against this happening to any given person will be over
6^ millions to one. That is to say, in order to explain satisfactorily Mr.
Bee's experience on the supposition of accidental coincidence, it ought to be
shown that there are something like 6i million adult Englishmen now living
who have had one single visual hallucination of a very distinct sort in the
course of their lives.

Even if Mr. Bee's case stood alone, this result would be somewhat sur-
prising. Of course it does iwt stand alone ; and if we take from our store,
say only nine more cases of equally close coincidence attending an appa-
rition seen by an English adult now living, and not otherwise subject to
hallucinations, — say, for instance, the cases on slips 55, 92, 229, 352, 382,
602, 627) 628, 685, — we increase the improbability tenfold, and require that
65,000,000 English adults now living should have had a single distinct visual
hallucination, to make it probable that in these ten cases the coincidence
would have accidentally occurred as it did.


66 Note on the Existence of a " Magnetic Senae.^^ [Jan. 18,


V.
NOTE ON THE EXISTENCE OF A "MAGNETIC SENSK"

By Professor W. F. Barrett.


The experience of those who have worked with large magnets and
of men of science generally, is entirely opposed to the notion that
magnetism can be felt or can exert any good or ill effect on the human
body or other organism. Nevertheless, the statements of Beichenbach,
Gregory, Ashburner, and others seem to indicate that upon certain
sensitive " subjects " a magnet can produce a distinct and powerful
influence. The investigation of this question properly belongs to the
" Beichenbach " Committee, and has been referred to in their first
report ; the object of the present note is merely to detail a few inde-
pendent experiments which I have recently made, whilst Mr. G. A
Smith was in Dublin.

When a powerful electro-magnet was employed, Mr. Smith stated
that he distinctly felt an unpleasant sensation when he approached the
magnetic poles. The effect seemed to be most powerful when his temple
was nearly touching one pole ; except on one day, when suffering from
facial neuralgia, and then he appeared much more sensitive in the
face than in the forehead. The peculiar and unpleasant sensation
produced by the magnet he describes as slowly rising to a maximum
in 15 or 20 seconds after the current has been sent round the coils of
the electro-magnet. In like manner the effect seemed to die down
slowly after the contact was broken. Unknown to Mr. Smith, the
circuit was closed and opened several times, and the magnetism corre-
spondingly evolved or dissipated, the result being that there was a fairly
accurate correspondence between the physical and the psychical effect
The faint molecular crepitation which accompanies the magnetisation
of iron, and can be heard when the ear is very near the magnet^
is, however, very apt to mislead the imagination. To avoid this,
Mr. Smith was placed at a distance where this faint sound could not
be heard, and he was then requested to walk up to the electro-
magnet, and, judging only from his sensations, to state if the current
were "on" or "off." The experiment was made 12 times succes-
sively, and he was correct in 10 out of the 12 trials. Assuming the
fact of Thought-transference, the imagination might, it is true, have
been misled ; but as I did not find Mr. Smith able at other times to
respond to my unexpressed will, it is hardly probable that my know-
ledge as to when the current was on or off would suffice to explain his


1884.] Note <wi ihe Existence of a ^^ Magnetic Sense.^^ 57

success. Of course it would be possible for a trickster, using a concealed
compass-needle^ to be able to impose on a careless experimenter ; but
care was taken, and I have not the least reason to doubt the bona
fides of Mr. Smith. Obviously the foregoing observation, which I
have thought it better to put on record, is of little value unless corrobo-
rated by a far more extensive series of experiments, conducted with the
most stringent precautions to avoid the creation of illusory effects.


Appendix, added March 12th.

Sir William Thomson has published in Nature for March 6th, 18849
the report of an address on the '* Six Gateways of Knowledge,"
delivered by him in Birmingham. In this address Sir William remarks,
" If there is not a distinct magnetic sense, I say it is a very great
wonder that there is not,'* and he then refers to an experiment made to
test this point in the following words : —

' ' This experiment was carried out in a most powerful manner by Lord
Lindsay (now Lord Crawford), assisted by Mr. Cromwell F. Varley. Both of
those eminent men desired to investigate the phenomena of mesmerism,
which had been called animal magnetism ; and they very earnestly set to
work to make a real physical experiment. They asked themselves. Is it con-
ceivable that, if a piece of copper can scarcely move through the air between
the poles of an electro-magnet, a human being or other living creature placed
there would experience no effect 1 Lord Lindsay got an enormous electro-
magnet made, so large that the head of any person wishing to try the experi-
ment could get well between t]^e poles, in a region of excessively powerful
magnetic force. What was the result of the experiment 1 If I were to say
nothing I 1 should do it scant justice. The result was marvellous, and the
marvel is that nothing was perceived. Your head, in a space through which
a piece of copper falls as if through mud, perceives nothing. I say this is
a very great wonder ; but 1 do not admit, I do not feel, that the investiga-
tion of the subject is completed. I cannot think that the quality of matter
in space which produces such a prodigious effect upon a piece of metal
can be absolutely without any — it is certainly not without any — effect what-
ever on the matter of a living body ; and that it can be absolutely without
any perceptible effect whatever on the matter of a living body placed there
fleems to me not proved even yet, although nothing has been found. It is so
marvellous that there should be no effect at all, that I do believe and feel
that the experiment is worth repeating ; and that it is worth examining,
whether or not an exceedingly powerful magnetic force has any perceptible
effect upon a living vegetable or animal body. I spoke then of a seventh
sense. I think it just possible that there may be a magnetic sense. I think
a posnble that an exceedingly powerful magnetic effect may produce a sensa-
ticmihat we cannot compare with heat or force or any other sensation."*

* ITpaiii ildl point a medical authority, Dr.W. H. Stone, published the following
vaBMUEfcs ftmir jwn ago :— *' It appears that a similar question was loiig ago asked
of Ancla^y whan he was engaged on hi^ diamagnetic discoveries by means of the


68 Note on the Existence of a ^^ Magnetic Senae.^^ [Jan. 18,

For some time prior to Sir William's lecture experiments have been
in progress in my laboratory, the object of which is to ascertain if any
special and perceptible effect is produced upon any living organism
by a powerful magnetic field. Large helices have been made to encircle
the head and limbs, and through them a strong electric current can be
sent ; so far nothing has been felt in my own case from the intense field
of magnetic force thus generated. I have also had the opportunity of
trying the effect of the enormously powerful magnetism generated in one
of the larger sized " Brush " dynamo-electric machines. The machine
was dismantled, its revolving armature being removed, and the massive
pole pieces attached to the field magnets of the machine adjusted so
that they clasped the head on either side. A current of great strength,
generated by a large Siemens dynamo, was then sent through the magnets,
but neither in my own case, nor in several others who tried was any-
thing felt that could be attributed to a ** magnetic sense." ^ The
circles indicate the poles of the pair of magnets and the crosses the
successive positions in which the head was placed.

© X ®

X X X
X ©


large magnet belonging to the Boyal Institaticm. He stAted that he had nefer
been able to trace the slightest physiological effect, whether senaorial, moh^ or
hypnotic, on himself when nsing the strongest magnetic fielda j***"* attainaUfi:
It is tme that the disoovery of dynamo-magnetic machines baa placed at our
disposal currents of vastly greater electro-motiTe force and qnantitj than wen
thai available. With these the subject should, if at all, be patiently inveatigated.
One or two rather trivial facts, such as the inability of many perBona of nervouB
temperament, of whom the writer is one, to sleep soundly in the noxth and aoath
position, and the singular vitality of magnetic treatment from very ear^ times
down to the present, are hardly strong enough to countervail the n^^ative evidenoe
here adduced. Still the subject, not being in direct oontraventiom of any known
scientific facts, deserves further investigation in a fair and dispaaBionate spirit
It seems primii/aei^ improbable that so important a factor in cosmogony ahonld
be otiose and inefficacious in its highest development — ^homan life." Barai
BcschoibQcK as is well known, made numerous experiments on the effect of the
position of the bed on persons of sensitive temperament. He found thatiiLvaiiahly
the most pleasant position and the most refreshing sleep was obtained when the
hod was to the north and the f eei to the south. These results wexe obtained
with per»cins he terms •• sick sensitives," but a much larger number of oazefall]^
ooiiduct«d obwfratioas on the$^ and others are needful befofie any ooneliiaions of
the least wei; hi ota safely be drawn, as it is moat important, but most diflkmlt^
t^ exeJovJe the e*ect of the imacinauon.


1884*] Note on the Existence of a ^^ Magnetic Sensed 59

Bat whilst the results were negative in this case, and doubtless
would generally be found so, yet Charcot has shown that in certain
cases of hysterical patients a transference of sensation from one side
of the body to the other is produced by magnetism. An apparent
confirmation of these results was obtained by Dr. Stone in the case
of a patient of his at St. Thomas' Hospital. The case is recorded
in the Reports of St Thomas' Hospital, VoL X., 1880, and the follow-
ing is the part relating to the specific effect of magnetism : —

July 1st. — Dr. Stone, thinking it probable that repeated examination by
this time might have put the patient on her guard, and roused an inclination
to simulate, described minutely the effects obtained by M. Charcot "with
magnets in her presence, intimating his expectation that the anaesthesia
would be transferred. This was the first hint she had received, as all clinical
observations had hitherto been made out of the ward, and the students had
been enjoined strict sUence in her presence. A magnet of eight large steel
plates was placed in the bed beside the sensitive leg, and there left It was,
however, non-magnetisedf and really only an inert piece of steeL On the follow-
ing morning she answered clearly and with great simplicity ' *that it had done
nothing at all ; she did not know it was there." It was then taken away on
some pretext, strongly magnetised by means of a powerful electro-magnet,
and returned to the ward apparently unchanged on the 3rd.

7th. — On its being similarly applied, after magnetisation, the anaesthesia
disappeared from the affected leg, but no alteration occurred in the other.

The chief points of interest of the case are, first, that the age, character,
and simplicity of the patient precluded any suspicion of imposture ; secondly,
that singular precautions were from the first adopted to preclude the possi-
bility of unconscious deception from the effect of ''expectant attention;'*
thirdly, the marked and unequivocal effect of magnetism.

This case offers the most trustworthy evidence which has hitherto come
under my personal observation of the influence of the magnetic field on
ordinary sensation. It is materially strengthened, moreover, by an interest-
ing communication by Dr. Julius Dreschfield, in the British Medical Jotumal
of August 14th, in which he shows the efficacy of the same great physical
power in non-hysterical cases. Another valuable contribution to the
physiology of the subject is contained in the Journal of Anatomy and
Fhytiology for January, 1879, from the pen of Professor M'Kendrick, in
which he demonstrates the fact that ''a portion of nerve stretched between
the poles of an electro-magnet, so as to touch each, will not excite contrac-
tions in a muscle when touched by a copper wire during the passage of the
current through the wire of the electro-magnet.''

It is to be regretted that neither of these last writers affords any quanti-
tative due to the intensity of the magnetic field employed. Judging from
the proved phenomena of diamagnetism and those of the action on light, the
field should be of considerable strength, but whether it acts most when
diffused or when concentrated requires further investigation. The unilate-
rality of nervous functional conditions certainly points to the hypothesis
already named of equilibrium more or less stable between the two halves


60 Note on the ExUtence qf a *^ Magnetic Seme" [J

of the nervous tyitem, like that of a duplexed caUe. This is also o
in a physical point of view by the slow oscillations of transfeiTed sei
which dosely resemble those of a metronome pendulum, in which t
mass is large and the unequilibrated moving force proportionately «
far less magnetic movement would also be competent to disturl
system than one in more stable surroundings.

For farther experiments I have constructed a large electro-magnc
with a helix of iron instead of copper wire. It developes a singnlariy
and regular series of curves even with a battery of moderate inte
propose also to excite it by means of a fine gramme machine w
recently come into my possession. Whether the results ultimate
X)08itive or negative, it is clear that a sufficient primd fade case is i
for further investigation.^

Although the magnet did appear to exert ''a mail
unequivocal effect" on Dr. Stone's hystero-epileptic patieat^ ;
obvious that a larger number of experiments, conducted with s
precautions, are necessary before any general inducticni can i
drawn.


* Dr. Stone informs me that the trials he made with this magnet
eelf and other healthy individuals yielded no evidence of any seni
peculiar to magnetism. It is chiefly with this electio-magnet, th
Stone's Idndness, that the experiments of the Reichenbach Committee
made.


.] Tlw Stages of Sypnotimi. 61


VI

THE STAGES OF HYPNOTISM.
By Edmund Gurney.


One of the first things which strikes the student of what is often
y called the " hypnotic " or " mesmeric " state is this — that even
■simplest manifestations of hypnotism are wont to present not one
but two^ distinguished from one another by very marked character-
But the distinction, as usually drawn, has been of a very rough
As a rule, it has been noticed that good " subjects " first get into
in which many of them show great acuteness of sensibility, and
wlkich all of them can be made to do or imagine very odd things ; and
from this they gradually merge into a state of profound sleep or
en coma. Such were the stages as originally observed by Braid, and
ihsequent investigation has done little to define them further. I am
ing to point out what appear to me grave deficiencies in this distinc-
n of states, and to attempt to draw a much more precise one. But,
ore doing so, it is necessary to refer to another mode of distinction,
bich, if not cleared out of the way, might greatly confuse us. In
^Siscnssions on hypnotism we continually find three types of condition
^recognised — the cataleptic^ the letJiargic^ and the somnambulic : the
^Mktaleptic being the condition where the limbs will remain in any
jNMdtion in which they may be placed, without effort on the " subject's '*
part ; the lethargic being the condition where the muscles are relaxed,
but abnormally liable to contractions and spasms under gentle stimula-
tion ; the somnambulic being the condition in which the '' subject "
exhibits the singular eccentricities of conduct associated with public
entertainments. But though these are all real and important conditions,
they do not the least represent distinct states of the individual, or distinct
stages of hypnotism. For the peculiarities of muscular condition may
quite well co-exist with that peculiar mental state which is described as
somnambulic. The cataleptic state, moreover, does not belong to normal
hypnotism at all, but is a decidedly exceptional phenomenon, and can
only be considered otherwise by confusing it with the mere ordinary
rigidity of the limbs ; and again the effects of muscular irritability may
be locally produced, by hypnotic processes, in various parts of the body,
while the ** subject " remains in his normal waking state. On the whole,
then, this mixing up of physical and mental and of constant and
occasional characteristics, in a list which professes to sum up the funda-
mental fonns of hypnotism, seems extremely misleading ; and in what


62 ne Stages of HypnoiUm. [Jan. 18,

follows I shall speak onlj of cases wliere the mind of the "sabject" is
to some extent afiected, and shall base m j distinctions primarilj on the
constant features which that mental affection di^iays.

If, then, the " subject ^ — ^the conscioas individnal and not merely a
part of his body — has saccnmbed to the hypnotic inflaence, if he has
passed oat of his normal waking state and croased the threshold of
trance, then, before he reaches the profound sleep in which his mental
condition is a mere blank, there lie before him two and only two
mari^edly distinct states or stages, each of which however may present
within itself a Tery large amount of Tariety. We may conveniently
designate them as the alert state oit stage and the deep state or stage.
These states are, I believe, produced or producible in the case of eveiy
** subject " who is sufficiently susoeptiUe to hypnotism to be able finally
to be put to sleep by it : but the question will veiy naturally occur how,
if that is so, there can ever have been a doubt about it. H<»w isitthat
the charMter, and even the very e3dstence, of the two states has esci^
general recognition 7 The answer is broadly this, — that^ in the fint
place, each state admits of many degrees^ and the characteristics of
either of them may be only very dightly or only very tnuudently
presented : and in the second place, unless spoaal means aio adopted, it
is very easy to mistake the akrt state for normal waking and the deep
state for sleep. This will become clearer vrfwn die states tfaemselves
have been further described.

To begin, then, with the alert state. This is die state in whidi a
'^subject ~ is when, after the usual preliminary period of gazing fixedly
at some object held near the eye, or of having passes made over the
uppier part of his peiaon, and after the usual invofamtaiy doame o£ his
eyes, the strain on his eyelids is released by a few t ouche s and wordS)
and he is restored to what may look quite like his natural waking con-
ditka. Sometimes, it is true, the dURerence is ieij marked, and he wiU
sit with a vacant air, irresponsiTe to every votce except that of the
ofKrator. and ckariy not in possession of his ordinary facnltiea. He
may be made to pei^Mnn imitative actions and to obey commands in a
mei'hanical way : but his eonscaousncsB may be at a very low ebb^ or (ai
some have held> may hav« la^iGied ahogether. But even these cases will
exhibit two charscteiisties of the alert ssan^e which are also characteiis-
txs of Eormal waking : — the *^ subject s ^ eyes will be open and capaUe
of seeing : and he will yalmost invariably]' prove sensitive to pain if he
!>? pinched or pricked. Very dieti^ however, the resemblance to normal
wakefulness is tar ck^sier than this: for the ^suli^eet'^ will be found to
cocLverse with perf^rt coo^prvhenskm. memory, and even kumoor. 'Where
then does the essential distinction of his state lie \

TWttudn point whii^ can W olMinrred atthe moment isifaat^thoB|^
jwffectly capable «>f sustainuig a conversatiaa. he does laoi ari§umU


1884.] Tlie Stages of Hypnotism, 63

remarks. If not spoken to he will sit quiet, and, if simply asked what
he is thinking about, he will almost always answer " Nothing." Perhaps
it may be said that even this condition of passive vacancy is after all
not so very different from that in which a large number of our fellow-
creatures spend a large portion of their waking hours. If this be
allowed, then we shall have to seek the essential difference of the
hypnotic condition, not in any feature which it immediately presents,
but wholly in two possibilities attaching to it, either of which demands
appropriate treatment to become a reality. In the first place, if the
** subject " be left completely to himself, he will rapidly sink into the
deeper state, and thence into hypnotic sleep, in either of which he will
prove insensitive to any moderate amount of torture. Clearly the con-
dition which leads rapidly and naturally on to further conditions of
this sort is not a Tiormal one : it can never be said of a person in a
wrmal state, however sleepy he may be, that in two or three minutes
ke will be in a condition when pins may be run into him, or the severest
pinches applied, without awaking him or evoking any signs of distress.
The passage into these deeper conditions, it should be observed, is often
so rapid that the fact of their being reached through the alert stage may
be wholly unnoticed. The hypnotising process may carry a sensitive
'•' subject " in a minute or less from a condition of normal waking into
hypnotic sleep ; and in such a case the " alert " period has been repre-
sented only by the few seconds before his eyes closed. If he had been
taken in hand during those few seconds, and had been talked to or kept
employed, this passage into the deeper state would have been prevented;
but if he is allolwed to follow the natural course without interference,
he will simply be seen to go to sleep, and he must be awakened by the
operator before any phenomena can be exhibited. This liahility to
lapse^ then, is one distinguishing characteristic of the alert state.

It is characterised, in the second place, by the possibility of obtain-
ing, while it lasts, certain special phenomena of an active sort. The
*' subject " can be made to do, and to continue doing, any action which
the operator commands, although he may be perfectly conscious of
making a fool of himself, and may strongly desire to resist the command.
He can also be put under the influence of delusions — can have his senses
deceived, so iAi&t he mistakes salt for sugar, ammonia for eau de Cologne;
or can even be made to believe that he is in some distant place, or that
his identity is changed.'^ These are the common platform-phenomena ;

* It should be remarked that even here the necessity remains of stimulating
the ** subject " from time to time, to keep him going. When he is under a delu-
sion, he will sometimes give long connected accounts, in great part often fictitious,
as if he were following the course of a dream ; but tnongh very slight questions
and comments will be enough to make him proceed, he will not do so if left to
sustain a complete monologue.


64 Tlw Stages of Hypnotkuu [Jan. 18,

and as the very object of hypnotising a " subject " at all is usually to
procure some of them, and the possibility of procuring them is thus
practically certain to be tested, it might seem that the recognition of
the abnormality of his state was in this case, at any rate, assured. But
though this may be so during the course of the manifestations, it is not
unfrequently otherwise at their close ; and a " subject " who has been
allowed, perhaps, to lapse into sleep, while others are being operated on,
is often roused and even sent away, without its being observed that he
has been roused not into a state of normal wakefulness, but only into
the alert stage of hypnotism. To all appearance he is quite himself;
and, the performance being over, it does not occur to anyone to try
whether he is still at the mercy of commands and delusions ; while the
general stir and commotion prevent him from lapsing again into sleep.
So he goes off home, acting and answering in a quite natural manner,
till the effect wears gradually off; or, as more often happens, he con-
tinues to feel drowsy and headachy, goes to bed, and wakes up in his
usual condition next morning.

Passing now to the dee]^ stage, we find that this in turn is liable to
be confounded with a contiguous condition, namely, the genuine hypnotic
sleep into which it tends to merge. It resembles that condition in the
fact that the eyelids are closed ; that, if one of them be forcibly raised,
the eyeball is found to be rolled upwards; in the general insensibility
to pain and to ordinary modes of stimulation. And there exists here
precisely the same ohance as we noted in the former case, that the
particular stage will escape detection. If the " subject " be left to him-
self, he will have no opportunity to manifest its characteristics, but,
passing rapidly through the period during which these might be evoked,
will soon lose consciousness and individuality in profound slumber.
With some "subjects," moreover, the invasion of mental torpor is so
rapid that it might be hard to fix and retain them in the genuine deep
stage, even if the proper means were adopted. But many others, if
taken in time, after their eyes are closed and they have become
insensible to pain, but before sleep has intervened, will prove quite
capable of rational conversation ; they are mentally awake, even when
their bodies are almost past movement, and when even a simple com-
mand is obeyed in the most languid and imperfect manner. The state
is, however, harder to sustain at an even level than the alert one, owing
to a stronger and more continuous tendency to lapse into a deeper
condition. In the alert state the " subject " can usually be kept gomg
for an indefinite time : in the deep state he usually shows an increasiiig
dislike to being questioned or meddled with.

Enough, perhaps, has been said to show how the two stages of
hypnotism may be distinguished trom normal wakiog on the one hand
and from blank slumber on the other. But the marks which have been


1884.] TJie Stages of Hypnotism. 65

so far given as distinguishing the two stages from one anotJier are by
no means equally constant and precise. The closure of the eyes, the
insensibility to pain, the disinclination, amounting sometimes almost to
inability, to move, are all in a general way characteristic of the deep
stage ; and to them may be added a diminution of the irritability of the
conjunctiva and of the susceptibility of the pupil to light, with irre-
sponsiveness to any voice but that of the operator.* But of these
characteristics the only one which is invariable is the bodily torpidity.
Closure of the eyes is nearly invariable ; but I myself have seen two
well-marked instances where the eyes remained wide open throughout
the period which, as judged by all other indications, was certainly the
deep stage. The irritability of the eye is sometimes only slightly
affected. Insensibility to pain, though usual, is liable to still more
frequent exceptions, as also is the irresponsiveness to the address of
persons other than the operator. Nor are these normal features of the
deep stage, even when present, entirely distinctive ; as more than one
of them are often also present in the alert. The irritability of
the eye may suffer marked diminution at the very beginning of
the hypnotising process, f Again, not only is insensibility of a
local sort in the alert stage one of the commonest phenomena of
public exhibitions, when an arm or a leg is stiffened, and submitted to
the audience to stick pins into or otherwise maltreat ; but even general
insensibility may supervene while the " subject " is still open-eyed and
capable of actively responding to suggestions and commands. This is
especially the case if his attention is strongly directed in some particular
channel ; for instance, a •* subject " who normally is sensitive in the
alert stage, if while in the deep stage he be ordered to do some particular
thing when he wakes, and be then roused into the alert stage, will often
prove insensitive till the thing is done. Similarly I have known a
" subject," who was quite seh^ifive before, become insensitive after, the
communication of some strong 'impression. Being told that his sweet-
heart was drowned, he expressed the resolution not to survive her ; and,
while in this heroic mood, he bore the severest and most continuous

* How little even the most elementary distiactions between the two states-
have been realised by high authorities, a couple of specimens from Heidenhain
may show. " The pupil of a hypnotised i>erson contracts energetically when light
falls upon the eye." It is impossible that this sweeping assertion could have
been made, had Heidenhain examined eyes in any but the alert state. '' Hypnotised
persoiiB never fall down." This statement, it is true, he qualifies in a note hy
saying that he has seen one person fall down. The fact, of course, is that in an
eaormous majority of cases (I myself have never seen an exception) the *' subject,"
if standing, falls downs a very few seconds after closing his eyes and lapsing into
the deep state.

f See (in addition to the observations of Braid, Tamburini, and Seppelli), th&
Case recorded by Ifr, Stanley Hall in Mind, XXX., p« 177.


66 The Stages of HypnotUm. [Jan. 18,

pinching without a sign of sensation. In such cases the nervous energy
is all, so to speak, concentrated into a single channel, in the per£ormanoe
of the task or the contemplation of the catastrophe^ and there is none
left to feel with — just as it has happened to soldiers in the excitement
of battle to be temporarily unconscious of wounds. Insensibility to
pain may also be present in the alert state, if the ^' subject " is put
under the influence of such a delusion as would naturally involve it^
e,g,^ if he is made to believe he is a statue ; and I have known insensi-
bility, which originated in this way, continue for some little time after
the delusion was withdrawn, and another substituted — ^the phenomenon
being the more remarkable in that the " subject," who had been receiv-
ing the most savage nipping with total indifference, actually shed tears
at the memory of a Jictitious nipping, which he was told had been
administered to him on the previous day. Closure of the eyes, again,
may be present in a state which in respect of every other symptom is
the alert one : indeed, unless the spasm which brings down the eyelid
during hypnotisation be relieved by some distinct local process, the eye
might naturally remain closed as much during the alert stage as during
the deep. Nor can we even account the bodily activity which may be
evoked during the alert stage, in contrast with the torpidity of the deqp
Olio, as a really sharp or essential distinction. The activity, it will be
remembered, always has to be evoked ah extra^ and often much against
the " subject's " inclination. If left to himself, he will sit as passive in
the former state as in the latter, and the one will insensibly merge into
the other. The difTerence here, then, might seem to be one rather of
<legroe than of kind ; and the two states to be merely the less and the
more advanced stages on the path to complete torpor. I may add that
the advance of mental decline, where it can be marked, seems to be of
the same graduated kind. Thus a '* subject " who, first in the alert and
thou in the deep state, is assured that he is going to be hanged next
morning, will succumb to the idea with about equal readiness in both
vtisos ; and the only observable difference will be that in the deep state
ho dot's not sooni equally to realise its gravity. A *' subject," for
instanot\ witli whom I tried this particular experiment and who was
ri'udortHi dt'cidoly gra\-o when in the alert state, was chiefly occupied,
in tho iUh'P stat«\ with the half-jocular invention of dodges to avoid pain.
Ihit, wh<*n^ the wholo montal condition is so abnormal it is hard to
tv^rtl »uoh i^li^ht ditVorvnces in the power of judgement as important
iu* diHtAuotiv^\ or to n^gard them as other than steps in a single process
of luoutitl unhinging.

*Wt^ \\\w*X\\\k\ tluMi pnw^ts it»^>lf : Is there any distinction of Idnd
W%^<^\\ tW two »tat«« any singlo t«t by which we can make sure in
whioK \^t thi^m \\\^ *' subjwt "" is — any sort of phenomena, capable of
nuivtMHt i>')v|^HUioti\viv» which will draw a clear line between them, and


1884.] The Stages of Hyimotism, 67

not merely represent a gradual and continuous decline of hypnotic
waking into hypnotic sleep 1 I believe that there is such a distinction ;
and that the phenomena needed to establish it are to be found in the
domain of memory. And as memory will afford the means not only for
distinguishing the one stage of hypnotism from the other, but also
further for distinguishing the " hypnotic state " as a whole from the
normal one, I may attempt to make my rapid sketch embrace all its
various conditions, so far as I have been able to observe them.

First, then, as to the " subject's " memory, when completely
awakened from the alert state, of what has taken place during that
state. The degree of it varies with the number of times that he has
been under the hypnotic influence.

(1) A " subject " who is quite fresh to hypnotism has frequently
some remembrance, on waking, of all that he has gone through. Of such
actions as are usually exhibited on platforms — ^imitative movements,
sneezing, laughing, jumping and the like — his remembrance is distinct ;
and he perfectly recalls not only the actions but the feelings of passive
acquiescence, or of surprise, or of repugnance, with which he performed
them. A not uncommon description is that he felt as if he had two
selves, one of which was looking on at the involuntary performances of
the other, without thinking it worth while to interfere. He also
perfectly remembers such simple mental operations as the effort to recall
his name. Of performances which have involved more complex mental
ideas, and where his mind has been at the mercy of some concrete form
of delusion, his remembrance is dimmer. But still he will give some
•acooont of parts played by him in imaginary scenes, or even when under
the impression that he was some one or something other than himself.
It is probable that the delusive impression in such cases has not been
quite completa For instance, a " subject" who, when awakened to his
normal state, remembered the fact of having been put to flight by a white
ghost^ described himself as having in a sort of way known that it was
only a handkerchief which the operator was flourishing, and yet as
anable to resist the ghostly terror.

(2) After a very short course of hypnotisation, these illusory changes
of scene or of identity, and even the simple mental operation of trying
to recall some familiar fact, are found to have left no trace on waking ;
but the " subject " can still perfectly recollect the imitative and other
actions ^hich he has performed inproprid persond, and the sort of feel-
ings which accompanied them. It will be observed how curiously fatal
this fact is to Professor Heidenhain's theory that the actions of imita-
tion, and of what he calls automatic " obedience," which a hypnotised
person performs, are purely reflex and unconscious. For it is just of
these actions that the clearest remembrance is retained ; and in fact, if
the " subject " has been made to perform a few ol Wi^toL ^i\AT\^^\xv^


68 TIhe Stages of Hypnotism. [Jan. 18

thrown into a light trance-condition, and is then brought back to the
normal state, there has been absolutely no breach whatever in the
continuous stream of his consciousness. He has passed through a strange
experience, and that is all.

The memory of the events of the alert hypnotic state finds its
precise parallel in certain cases of natural somnambulism — a condition
in which all actions are of course performed in proprid persond^ and
without any externally-induced illusion. Somnambulism is, as a rule,
a decidely deeper state than the lighter stage of hypnotism ; and
memory, on waking, of what has occurred in it is exceptional. I have,
however, lately met with well-marked cases of it in two of my own
acquaintance, who gave descriptions of their somnambulic experiences
very similar to those given by hypnotic "subjects." Though exceptional
such cases are probably not absolutely rare ; and it is the more cunous
that Despine, Heidenhain, and others should have so hastily and
sweepingly assumed that the function of true psychic memory is sua*
pended in hypnotism.

(3) In my experience no true memory has ever been exhibited, on
complete waking, of things which have been done or suffered in the deep
state. Nor am I aware of any published record of such an event.* The
performance, at the appointed time, of commands impressed on the
" subject " when in the deep state hours or even days before, is not a
case in point. For though he feels impelled to do what he has been
told to do, he has no recollection of the fact of having been so told,
and is at a loss to comprehend his own impulse. This is merely an
instance of the well-known phenomenon of cerebral (or as it has been
called " organic '') memory ; but is interesting as taking place when the
person is otherwise in a completely normal state.

So much, then, for the conditions of the memory on complete
waking ; next as to its conditions in the hypnotic states themselves.

(1) Facts of the "subject's" general knowledge, his address, busi-
ness, recent emplojnnents, and so on, are remembered even in the deep
state, if that state is sufficiently marked and prolonged for some
amount of conversation to be sustained in it.

(2) With a favourable " subject," something that has happened
during one of the hypnotic states will often recur to the memory on
the next occasion when that state is produced, though in the interval of
normality— amounting, it may be, to several days and nights— which has
intervened between the two occasions, it has been completely forgotten.
(The thing,however,must not be an action performed in 2yroprid persond,
for this— as we have seen above— would not be forgotten during the

*Dr. Wyld, however, assures me that he has occasionally witnessed the
phenomenon.


1884.] The Stages of Hypnotism. 69

"normal state ; nor connected with a delusive impression, for this — as
we shall see below — would not he remembered on the recurrence of the
abnormal state.) This recurrence may be made a test of the extreme
rapidity with which a " subject " will, in exceptional cases, pass from
the alert hypnotic to the normal state — his attention being first arrested
by a suitable incident, a few passes of the waking and '^ clearing" sort
obliterating all knowledge of it, and then a few more of the opposite sort
bringing it back again to his mind, all within the space of a minute.

But the chief interest of this induced phenomenon of alternating
memory lies in its resemblance to what occurs in spontaneous conditions.
Even ordinary drewming occasionally presents this feature in an embryonic
form — a dream-scene or dream-incident being often more apt to recur in
dream than in waking moments. Not that the mere recurrence could
be taken necessarily to imply memory ; but experiences are recorded
in which the scene or incident, though one not associated with the
waking life, is distinctly recognised as familiar when it recurs, which of
course does imply a sort of memory. Natural somnartibulism may seem
to present more distinct resemblances; and certainly, if one judged from
expressions used by the somnambulist, particular ideas which have made
no part of the waking life are apt to recrudesce in the sleep-waking
state. As a rule, however, it would be hard to represent this phe-
nomenon as involving more than a mere re-awakening into activity of
certain nervous tracts, which naturally manifest the fact of their ac-
tivity by the same external results as on previous occasions. Even in
the rarer cases, which more strongly suggest the recurrence of the past
events as such, the presence of true psychic memory is more doubtful
than in hypnotism, or at any rate is harder to substantiate ; for the
very tests which might substantiate it naturally tend to wake the som-
nambulist, and so to put an end to the condition. Perhaps, therefore,
the clearest interest of the hypnotic alternations of memory is rather as
illu£ftratingthe spontaneous alternations in cases of c?ot^6^ consciousness^^*
where a single individual lives in turn two (or more) separate existences.
There, as here, the transition may be almost instcmtaneous ; and there,
as here, while the memory of the normal state is continuous (its events
being remembered even in the abnormal condition, just as we have seen
that the events of ordinary life are remembered in either of the hypnotic
states), the memory of the past events of any abnormal state lapses and
recurs with the disappearance and reappearance of that state.

(3) If the phenomena mentioned under the last head are somewhat
uncertain, it is otherwise when the condition intervening between two
hypnotic states of the same kind is not normal wakefulness, but an
hypnotic state of the otJier kind — i.e., when a deep state intervenes
between two alert, or an alert between two deep states. I have then
found that (with certain well-marked exceptions to be m.ent\onftd Vl«c^


70 Th^ Stages of Hypnotism. [Jan. 18,

after) the ideas impressed in the one sort of state are invariablj
forgotten in the other, and are as invariably again remembered when
the former state recurs. Thus the " subject," when in the alert state, is
told something — some anecdote or piece of ordinary information — ^which
we will call A. He is then thrown, or allowed to &11, into the deep
state with closed eyes, and is asked, " What were you told just now f
He is quite unaware what is meant, nor will the broadest hints recall the
missing idea. He is now told something else, which we will call B ; and
is then re-awakened into the alert state. Being asked the same ques-
tion as before, he at once repeats not B but A, and it is impossible to
evoke in him any memory of B. Thrown again into the deep state, he in
a similar way recalls B, and A has once more vanished. Finally he is com-
pletely awakened, informed that two things have been told within the last
five minutes, and offered £10 to say what either of them was — ^witii a
result entirely satisfactory to the experimenter. Occasionally I have
succeeded in hitting a transitional moment at which both things were
remembered ; but it was a sort of knife-edge, and the slightest manipula-
tion or pause tending to deepen the condition brought about the
customary separation and oblivion of the thing told in the alert state.

The phenomena seem singularly constant. I have obtained them
with a large number of " subjects,'' and with three operators in three
different parts of England, two of whom certainly had no idea what
result I was expecting. They represent, of course, that clear distinction
of the two hypnotic stages — as something more than mere continuoos
degrees of a single trance-condition — ^to which I have been leading up ;
and the great rapidity of the transition, together with the sharpness of
the results, seems to make them as satisfactory indications of that
distinction as could well be imagined.

(4) To the rule thus established, there are certain definite exceptions.
If the idea impressed in the alert state is a delusion^ involving either
a change of scene or a change of identity, it is not remembered in the
usual way. A '^ subject " who has been made to believe himself else^
where than in the room where he actually is, or to assume the part of
another person or of an animal, and Who while under this delusion has
been carried into the deep state, on returning from that state proves
almost always to be the natural self of the alert state, and refuses to
believe that any idea of any sort has been impressed upon him. In the
few cases within my experience where this has not happened, and where
the delusory part was resumed when the alert state returned, it was
noticeable that the bare idea seemed to revive first — very likely as the
memory of the remark which had preceded and produced the illusion —
and that then the illusion followed in the wake of the idea. Thus a
boy who had been enacting the part of a fish on the floor, and who had
been then thrown into the deep state and placed in a chair, waa


1884.] The Stages of Hypnotism. 71

brought back to the alert state by gentle upward passes. He sat for
some seconds staring at the floor in a puzzled way, and then flung him-
self down and recommenced the flsh-like movements. Waking to the
alert state by any sudden means always ensured forgetfulness, carrying
the " subject " at once over that low degree of the alert stage where
recurrence of the delusion was possible. It may be added that though
delusive ideas are thus forgotten, yet if the same delusion be again
suggested in a general way, the details of the former one will be
remembered. Thus a youth who had been impressed with the idea
that he was a schoolboy attending Brighton College, and that his name
was " Gerald Hamilton," completely forgot this change of identity
when he returned to the alert state in which he had undergone it ; bub
on being then again told that he was attending Brighton College, and
asked his name, he gave it as Gerald Hamilton.

(5) The next case is stranger still, though quite as definite. If in
the alert state any physical effect is produced by suggestion — c.^., if
the " subject ** is made unable to flex his arm by being told that he
cannot do so — a further very marked effect is produced on his mental
powers and memory, although there is no special sign that his mind is
preoccupied with attending to his bodily symptoms. A boy's arm was
thus extended ; he became unable to talk rationally ; and being set to
read aloud, he did so in a stupid and mechanical way; and could not
recollect what he had read. He was now passed into the deep state,
during which his arm dropped ; and on being recalled from this state,
was asked what he had been doing just before he went to sleep. He
replied that he was holding his arm out ; but both forgot and utterly
denied the fact of the reading. Similarly the operations of opening a
piano and picking out a tune on it, carried out by a " subject " while
under an impression that he could not unclench one of his flsts, were
clean forgotten after an interval of the deep state.

(6) Any sort of argument or bothering has a singular effect in
causing the " subject's " mind to drift into a deeper dream-like state.
Thus, at the close of the experiment just mentioned, the " subject " was
pressed for some time as to how his arm, which he remembered to have
been stiff and extended, had dropped. While he was in a state of
puzzle and worry, a sudden clap and call brought him instantly to a
point at which the whole circumstance as to his arm was completely
forgotten ; but being allowed to lapse quietly, he again recalled it. There
are thus sub-divisions of recollective power within the alert stage itself.

(7) We now come to an apparent exception of another sort. If the
thing impressed on the " subject's " mind in the deep state is a com-
mandf which he is to execute " on waking," he will execute it as soon
as he returns to the alert state; or, if allowed to work off h^'s
trance in natural sleep, he will usually perform tba ^^^ wn.


72 The Stages of Hypnotism. [Jan. 18,

normal waking ; but if the act has been performed in the
alert state, he will have no recollection of it when brought
to his normal state.* Such obedience is, however, no true
exception to the rule that psychic memory of ideas does not extend
from one state to another, any more than in the case above noticed
where a " subject " obeys a command fixed for some distant hour : he
feels an impulse but does not remember its source. A singular point in
connection with this obedience is that it seems apt to fail in cases
where a vivid and interesting idea is suggested at the same time as the
command. Thus several " subjects " who were told in the deep state
that a fire had broken out at home, and that they must go and help to
put it out, on being recalled to the alert state sat without moving, and
denied any impulse to do anything. The idea probably produced a
strong mental picture, which, in disappearing with the change of state
according to the rule above given, involved the further disappearance
of the sense of obligation.

(8) Obedience also fails in the following case. If a command has
been imposed in the deep state, and the *' subject " is woko into the
alert, but then, before he has time to perform it, is put under a
delusion — this will su^end the performance of the act. Thus, a youth
who had been told that he was to put on his hat and begin reading the
newspaper, and had then been roused, was on the point of carrying out
the command, when he was suddenly told he was a chicken. He
instantly went down on the floor and began to cluck. He was then
allowed to lapse into the deep state, and again brought out of it : he
now at once performed the order. In this particular instance the order
was not rejtienibered in the second deep state, though carried out on
emergence from it ; the delusion had altogether obliterated it, as far
as psychic memory was concerned. But this feature seems unsym-
metrical, and was found not to be constant — the delusion as a rule having
no effect beyond the particular sort of state in which it is induced.

Huch in briefest outline is a sketch of the conditions of memory
connected with hypnotism, so far as my own observation has gone.
Brief as it is, it may perhaps suggest matter of reflection as to theories
which assume hypnotism to be a state of mere unconscious automatism,
on the ground that no true memory ever exists of what happens in it.

[All the experiments here mentioned were carried out as part of the
work of the Mesmeric Committee of the S.P.R.]

* After what has been said above, it will be readily understood that x>erf orm-
ance in the alert state of commands g^ven in the deep, and remembrance of
impresBums from one alert state to another with a deep state between, are liable
to be JW"^"* •• performance or remembrance an waking — i^,, on complete
^9id tel i^te— owing to the ease with which the alert state may

^ inormaL


1884.] Jteport on Wells Sunk at Locking, 73


VII.

REPORT ON WELLS SUNK AT LOOKING, SOMERSET, TO
TEST THE ALLEGED POWER OF THE DIVINING ROD.

By W. J. SoLLAS, M. A, D.Sc, Fellow of St John's College, Cambridge,
Professor of Geology in the University of Dublin.


In response to an invitation I made one of a party of investigators,
who on the 14th of May, 1883, proceeded to the little village of
Locking, to conduct an inquiry into the alleged phenomena of
" dowsing," "rhabdomancy," or divining for water. Our party consisted
of Dr. Burder, the esteemed President of the Bristol Naturalist's
Society, a lady who was believed to possess the power of divining,
Mr. Pope, Mr. Pease, and others. I accompanied them as a pro-
fessional geologist to determine the geological conditions under which
the experiments were to be made.

At Locking we were introduced to the " dowser," Mr. Thomas
Young, an aged and experienced man, who for 50 years had been
engaged in finding underground water, and with admitted success. He
showed us the whole modus operandi of his art ; and we were told to
particularly notice that, at the critical moment, the dowsing rod turned
of itself, without any pressure being exerted by the fingers of the
dowser ; on this point, however, it was the general opinion that the
dowser was mistaken. Dr. Burder and myself are positive that every
time the rod turned we plainly discovered a corresponding movement
in the fingers of the dowser. Not only Mr. Young, but Mr. Lawrence,
a dowser of great local reputation, lay great stress on the fact, as they
assert, that the movements of the rod are not governed by the move-
ments of the fingers, and also that it turns independently of their
volition, in fact, even in spite of their willing to the contrary. As to
their volition of course I am unable to speak, but I am confident from
what I observed, that the sole immediate cause for the turning of the
rod is to be found in the muscular contraction of the hand of the
operator.

We found Mr. Young very frank and communicative ; one of his
statements was to the efiect that when the dowser walks backwards
over the water he is in search of the rod turns downwards, while on
walking forwards, it always turns upwards ! A psychical fact so extra-
ordinary that it seems worth while to put it on record. Mr. Young
showed a close acquaintance with the ways and habits of underground


74 Hepart on Wells Sunk at Locking, [Jan. 18,

water. He told us that in the district about Locking it always flowed
from east to west ; moreover he actually showed us the natural spring
from which the underground water issued which he had previously sunk
upon at a point nearer its source, to obtain a supply for an adjacent
farmhouse. With so much real knowledge the use of the " rod " seemed
superfluous, so I ventured to inquire whether he would r^ard it as
morally wrong to make use of his evidently practical knowledge to
assist him in the discovery of springs. He replied, certainly not,
but that " he would be nowhere without his rod."

We were now to put the dowser's skill to a practical test. A
field on the alluvial plain, which extends from Locking to Hie
Bristol Channel, was selected for the experiment, and on this the
'' dowser " was to indicate two spots, one beneath which water should
be found, and another where it should not. Through these spots shafts
were then to be sunk, and the prediction verified or not. Li order to
simplify the conditions of the experiment, Mr. Pease requested the
dowser to operate blindfolded, but to this he absolutely refused to
consent. This was very unfortunate, as the trial became one rather of
the skill of the dowser than of the truth of dowsing : and I noticed
during the trial that the dowser made very good use of his eyes. Look-
ing about, he walked direct to one side of the field, without using
his rod ; — not wandering as one might have expected, rod in hand,
hither and thither, in blind search for an indication. Arrived at the
place he had chosen he used the rod over a line of march some 20 or
30 paces long, and as he did so the rod plunged vertically upwards at
a spot where he then asserted water would be found. He repeated the
traverse further down the field, in the same manner and with the same
result. This he did again and again, and so produced the impression
that a stream of water was flowing towards the sea beneath our feet)
and along a line indicated by the successive points which he indicated
by the rod. We therefore asked him to dowse along the length of the
stream instead of finding points over it by traverses, and this he very
willingly did, walking in an undulating manner over what he gave us to
understand was the course of the stream. Finally, we requested him
to make a fresh traverse and to indicate the spots where digging was to
be commenced. He did so, and at our suggestion selected a place
about 20 paces to the north of a ditch or "rhyne" which flows
through the flat, as that where water would be found, and another 15ft
north of this, where he stated it would not

We determined the position of these places in a way that left no
possibility of changing them, and made arrangements for pits to be
sunk by the dowser and his assistants. The supervision of the work as
it proceeded was deputed to me.

Before proceeding further with an account of the experiment we


1884.] Report on Wells Stmh at Locking. 75

may consider the nature of the case we are about to try. It is the
prediction of a practical man, skilled by experience, opposed to that
drawn from the generalisations of science.

The dowser predicts that in one of the pits now to be sunk we
shall find water, let us call that the + well ; in the other we shall not,
we will call that the — well As a geologist I predict that we shall
find water in both or neither. The dowser does not give reasons for
his prediction ; for mine they are the following.

The field we have selected for the experiments is part, of the great
alluvial flat which borders the eastern side of the Severn and Bristol
Channel. Sinkings have frequently been made in various places
through this flat, and I can therefore state beforehand that sand will
certainly be met with in both wells, and will certainly furnish some
water to both. Gravel may possibly be reached, and if in one, probably
in both wells, and then both will yield water freely.

I now proceed to give an account of the observations made on. the
wells, as I visited them from time to time during their sinking.

May 22nd. Verified the positions of the wells. The + well had
been sunk 10ft., and contained 6ft. of water ; the — well had been
sunk 5ft. and contained 1ft of water.

June 1st. The + well was now 16ft. deep, and contained a good deal
of water, eight or nine feet ; water was still trickling in from the sides.
As work had been suspended in this well, water had had time to
accumulate. The — well was 20ft. deep, and contained 4Jft. of
water. Water was trickling into it, but not so fast as into the other.
The well-sinkers said that this 4jf t. was merely surface water. A bed
of peat 14ft. from the surface had been struck in both wells.

June 15th. Visited the wells, but found that the work of sinking
was suspended. The + well indeed had been abandonded owing to the
caving in of the sides. The — well had been timbered down to 20ft.;
it was 22ft. deep, and water was slowly dripping into it

June 18th. Keceived a letter from Mr. Hellier, the bailifl' of the
estate, stating that the real depth of the + well was 17ft. 6in., and
the depth of water in it 9ft The — well 20ft with 4ft 6in. of
water (these numbers are for Friday, June 15th).

June 24th. Commissioned my friend and pupil, Mr. F. P. Evans,
to visit Locking. He reported that the water stood in both wells at
precisely the same height, viz., 5ft. 4in. below the level of the field.
So that the + well contained 12ft 2in. of water ; the — well 14ft.
Sin. of water.

The reports from the 16th June to the 24th require some comment.
On Thursday, the 14th, the men were sinking, consequently on that
day the — well was dry ; on the 15th, Friday, work having ceased for
24 hoars, it contained 4ft. 6in. of water ; on Saturday, the 24th (and


76 Report on Welk Sunk at Locking. [Jan. 18>

may bo several days earlier), it contained 14ft. Sin. Thus the well
which should not have furnished any water could not by any perversion
of language be called " dry.''

June 28th. Mr. Hellier writes, saying that the men have sunk
through the clay and found black sand, in which they have sunk 8ft
On making a subsequent visit I found that this black sand was a
lino arenaceous clay.

July 9th. Paid an unexpected visit to Locking ; I was expected
the previous Saturday ; work had been suspended, but one of
the sinkers, (George Gale, was still there. He told me that they had
l>een sinking on Saturday, the 7th, and had '* kept the water down, for
me to see everything ! " On the 8th, Sunday, water, so he said, had
accumulated to the extent of about 4ft. ; on Monday afternoon,
when I took measurements myself, there were 12ft. of water in
it So that 12ft. had accumulated in 48 hours. I made a thorough
examination of the shaft, descending as far as the water, and examining
the nature of the sides. The deposits passed through were as
follows : —

Blue Silt 14ft

Peat ... ... ... ... ... 1ft., or 1ft. Gin.

Blue Silt, beci>ming sandy lower down... 8ft

Red Clay ... ... ... ... ... 5ft. or 6ft

1 Trias

The sinker told me they had sunk to 29ft, in which case the
red clay would have been penetrated to the depth of 6ft. If this
tvd day is Trias, then Trias must be beneath both wells, and the bottom
rock being the same in each, the dowaer must have calculated on the
l^reaence of gravel in the + well, and its absence in the — well, if he
made his prediction on scientific grcnmds.

Water was stroaming from the sandy sides of the — well just as I
had aeon it issuing from the sides ol the + widl on Jane 1st

August Mr. Metcalfe visited the wells for me and found the water
standing at the same level in each.

This record of observations seems to me to completely
wnfy the pnnlietion made on the scientific side that the
l>ehaviour of the t^i^x) pits with K^ard to furnishing water would
in all prolvibility W the same for each. The dowser attributed the
watM^inth«( — well to an outflow from the +, but this is of course
an^xeuM" mad^ after the trial had been completed, under conditions
%a wlMili^ had himself assented : and an exonaewhidi Is without any

ImI baata. For if the rod: between the — and + weUs is so

■• ^bal waitw <4ua stroam throu^ it from one to tiie ol^ the

m iapBat <lda)tlKsn tii^ t^xk between tiietM^and neoessarily


1884.]


Jtepart on Welh Sunk at Locking.


77


surrounding the two, will be water-bearmg, and would furnish water to
both, and thus would have supplied the — well if the + one had not
existed.

The tenant who farms the estate said he had seen the water flowing
from the + to — well ! The dowser and his assistants confined them-
selves to asserting that it went into the — well from the side nearest
the + well, as indeed, from my own independent examination, I can
confijrm it did ; at the same time it trickled in from the other sides,
that farthest off included, quite as freely.

To me, therefore, it appears that the case of the dowser has
conspicuously failed, and I attribute it to the fact that the dowser's
experience has throughout been gained and employed in ihe finding
of wdUer, not in seeking for dry places. As to his ability to discover
underground water, these experiments simply confirm general testimony
which is unanimously in favour of his powers. That these powers are
totally independent of the use of the rod is, I think, proved by the
following considerations. For the sake of argument, let us assume that
the dowser is physically affected by the presence of water beneath his
feet. The action between him and the water will take place in a
straight line, drawn from him to it. On the analogy afforded by
physical forces, the force of the action will vary directly as the mass of
the acting bodies and inversely as the square of the distance. Let a
be the + spot marked by the dowser, and b the — spot, distant
from each other 15ft. Let c be the position of a stream of water,
20ft. vertically below a


a


Join Cf b.

Then the action at a will be


m


a C"


and at o


m
576.


400, """ *•" " 6 c- ~
So that if the action at a be represented by 1, at 6 it will be 1 — ^^,
or about |.

Now, if a force of 1 causes the rod violently to assume the upright


78 Report on Wells Sunk at Locking. [Jan. 18^

position, surely one of |- should have some appreciable effect, whereas
the rod shows no sign of agitation, remaining quite unconcerned, tUl a
is reached.

Again, we have stated the case here far too favourably for the
dowser, for the underground water is not all concentrated at c / it is
diffused throughout the alluvium, the underlying deposits are all moist^
and the diffused water will act upon the dowser as well as that concen-
trated in one place. The action at a, therefore, is : —

1 -f influence of the diffused water = X, and at b : f +
influence of the diffused water = Y, and the difference between
X and Y is much less than 1.

Moreover, on many occasions, the undeiground spring exists at a
much greater depth than 20ft., and yet affects the dowser when he
stands vertically over it. Its influence in these cases must be often
less than the | in our experiment, yet it makes itaelt decidedly felt

The dowser is naturally possessed of much mother wit^ and he has
a large experience of the behaviour of underground water ; but his
wonderful rod has no more magical power than the gold-headed cane of
the medical practitioner of the last century.


Note by Edward R. Pease.

Whilst agreeing on other grounds with most of the condusiong
which Professor SoUas sets forth in his very able report, I cannot feel
his complete confidence in the conclusive nature of this particular experi-
ment. In September I went again to Locking, and had both the wells
emptied of water. The + well I found now to be a mere hole some 10ft
deep, whilst the — well was a carefully-timbered shaft 24ft in depth. I
made minute observations of the rate at which both wells filled with
water, but during the course of them the sides of the -f well caved
in and filled it to the depth of 2ft This abnost destroyed the value
of the measurements, and I was not able to repeat them. But in so far
as they have any value, they seem to show that the -f well filled more
rapidly than the — well, although its depth was so much less. The
tenant of the farm told me that the water in the + well was of better
quality than thatin the — well


.1884.] Report on Wells Sunk at Locking. 79


VIII.

THE DIVINING ROD.*
By Edward R. Pease.


The Art of Divining has long been considered by men of science
and by the general public as one of the Black Arts, which alone has
survived in remote villages and amongst uneducated mining popula-
tions. Unlike the others, it is considered a harmless superstition that
preys only upon men's pockets, and does not imperil their liberty or
their lives. Therefore the strong arm of the law has neglected to ex-
tirpate it, and we are able to examine the only living example of a class
of superstitions that flourished many centuries ago.

This is the commonly-held view of the matter. But a little investi-
gation discloses the fact that belief in the power of the divining rod is
by no means confined to remote villages and to ignorant persons. The
evidence of its value is strong, and it comes from unexpected quarters.

The Divining or " Dowsing " Rod is a V shaped twig, commonly of
hazel, from 1 to 3ft. in length, and from a quarter to half an inch in
diameter. It is firmly grasped by the two ends, one in each hand, and
the " dowser '* walks carefully over the ground to be tried, holding the
rod before him. When he comes upon a spring of water the rod moves
as if of its own accord.

In England the rod is used for seeking for water chiefly in the
south-western counties. It is employed also in the United States, and
on the Riviera. In Oornwall and California it is used to discover
veins of metallic ore, and in Pennsylvania to find mineral oil.

A rod is the most natural symbol of authority, and hence at all
times and places, those who lay claim to occult powers are found to use
some sort of magic wand.

But the divining rod which we are now considering, is a forked rody
and the fork is its essential feature. We must, therefore, disregard all

♦ List op Works Consulted.

** Jacob's Bod." Thomas Welton, London. 1870. (?)

'' GariooB Myths of the Middle Ages." Baring Gould. 1872.

*< Myths and Mythmakers." Professor Fiske. Boston, 1873.

♦♦ Proceedings Bristol Naturalists' Society." Paper by Messrs. Tawney and Pass,

1874.
" The Divining Rod." Charles Latimer, Cleveland, U.S. 1876.
** Psychological Review." Paper by Mrs. de Morgan. September, 1879.
^* Oomhill Magazine." Jannarj, 1883.
•* Nature." Paper by B. B. Tylor, May 17th, 1883.
*' The Divining Rod.^* By Rossiter W. Raymond, Ph.D. Read at Boston Meeting

of the American Institnte of Mining Engineers, February, 1883.


80 The Divining Hod. [Jan. 18,

evidence of the use of n simple rod, whether by ancient peoples or by
savages, and confine our attention to the comparatively modern custom
of using a forked divining rod. A work on the art and science of
water-finding, published in Orleans in 1569, contains no allusion to it,
although in some places it must have been known at that date.
Melancthon, who died in 1560, is one of the earliest writers on the
divining rod, and he explains its power by the then common theory of
affinities. Agricola, the great German mineralogist of the first half of
the 16th century, also wrote on it at considerable length, and was by
no mean| a believer in its efficacy.

From this time till the end of the 17th century, the rod was
commonly employed for many purposes throughout the West of
Europe, and the writings of philosophers and enthusiasts are numer-
ous and bulky. Mr. Raymond, of New York, in his pamphlet, to
which I shall refer more particularly hereafter, enumerates some 46
works, by nearly as many different writers, all published in the century
and a-half preceding the year 1701.

During this period, especially towards the end of it, the foremost
philosophers of the age, princes and noblemen, and Ohurch dignitaries,
debated, and experimented, and quarrelled over the existence or non-
existence of this mysterious power, over the various explanations
propounded to account for it, over the honesty or trickeries of celebrated
diviners.

The Baron and Baroness Beausoleil were amongst the earliest
devotees to its cause. The Baron was " undoubtedly, one of the fore-
most mine-engineers of his time." He was made comptroller-general
of the mines of France, Hungary, the Papal States, and other countries^
and he travelled all over Europe studying the subject, whilst the
Baroness published books on the use of the rod. They obtained wealth
as well as fame, but were accused of sorcery by their enemies, were
imprisoned by Richelieu, and died in poverty about the year 1645.

Amongst other writers of the period Mr. Raymond mentions
Robert Boyle, who in 1666 brought the subject before the Royal
Society.

In 1692 comes the celebrated case of the murderers tracked
and discovered by Jacques Aymar. The story is so well known that it
is not necessary to dwell upon it here. It may be found in the
Cornhill Magazhie for January, 1883, and is fully discussed by Mr.
Raymond in his pamphlet. Aymar attained great fame by his success,
but he conspicuously failed when tested by Prince Cond^, and was
obliged to retire into private life.

In 1701 the use of the divining rod was condemned by the Inquisi-*
tion, and for some time we hear but little about it. In 1780 a Dr.
Thouvenel experimented with a diviner of Dauphiny, named Bleton,


1884.] The Divining Rod. 81

-and published a memoir in its favour, which created much sensation.
Bleton was tested by other scientific men, but without success. The
experiment of blindfolding him was repeatedly tried, and the indications
of his rod were, under this condition, proved to be fallacious. Penet,
who lived at the beginning of this century, was another celebrated
diviner, who professed to discover coal and hidden metals. A commis-
sion of savans tested him for three days at Padua, but failed to obtain
good evidence of his alleged powers, and afterwards he was detected
whilst examining at night the enclosure where an experiment was to be
made.

It would seem, therefore, that the claims of diviners were carefully
investigated by competent men of science at intervals during the 17th
and 18th centuries, and that they uniformly failed to elicit satisfactory
results. The domain oE science was then mapped out far more imper-
fectly than it is at present, and therefore alleged facts of an
extraordinary nature were examined with an absence of prejudice
which it is impossible now to obtain. We must therefore in my
opinion, attach considerable weight to the neigative results of these
investigations.

During the last few years the art of divining has attracted fresh
attention, and a number of articles and letters about it have appeared in
various newspapers and periodicals.

A member of the Society for Psychical Research, Mr. E.
Yaughan Jenkins, of Oheltenham, has made a most valuable collection
of contemporary evidence, which is an unique and most important con-
tribution to the literature of the subject, and which, with great
generosity, he has placed at the disposal of the Society.

He has communicated with various professional diviners, and has

obtained reports of their operations from andowners, architects,

builders, and other persons, who are entitled to speak sfri\h authority.

Concerning one of the best known of the professional diviners, John

Mullins, of OoUeme, Wilts, he has obtained twenty-two records of the

saccessf ul location of wells, nearly all from persons of standing, chiefly

owners of property in Gloucestershire and Lincolnshire. Twelve records

refer to Mr. W. S, Lawrence, of Bristol, of whom T shall have occasion

to speak later on ; seven cases are recorded in which Stokes, a carpenter

of Newbury, Berkshire, was the diviner; and seven others refer to Pavey

of Cheddar, and one or two other persons. All these, it must be

recollected, have been written and sent to Mr. Jenkins within the last

18 months, all are from persons actually cognizant of the facts, and

generally present at the divining operation, and many of them are very

careful and detailed statements of what took place. It must be

remembered too that these were all collected by one gentleman, in the

^K>ar8e of a few months, and are probably but samples of a vast mass of


82 The Divining Bod. [Jan, 18,

testimony which a more prolonged and wider search would reveal.
Several of them also refer to more than one case of successful dowsing.

In an appendix to this paper a complete list of these cases is given,
and a few of them are printed in full.

Notwithstanding the general consensus of scientific opinion against
dowsing up to this time, there seems to be a prima facie case for the
necessity of further examination of the subject from the evidence
collected by Mr. Vaughan Jenkins,

This evidence tends to show.

1. That the power of certain persons to find water when experts
fail is widely believed in to this day, and is utilised by practical men to
whom the finding of water is a business matter. This will be seen by
a glance at the cases given in the Appendix. Many of these persons
doubt the dowser's power to begin with, but are convinced of it by his
success.

2. That this power does not depend on superior knowledge of the
locality. See, especially, case 5, where Captain Smith says that
"Mullins had not been in our neighbourhood before " ; case 2, where
Mr. Finch Hatton says, " We established on good authority that MuUins
had no previous acquaintance with Haverholme " ; case 4, where an
old well was to be re-opened "but no one on the estate knew
where it was, not having been opened for a number of years.
But Stokes, with his divining rod, discovered the well (although a
perfect stranger to the place), and it proved to be where he predicted,
under the paving in the centre of the pathway." See also cases 1, 26,
29, 31, and 46.

3. That the power does not depend on geological or quasi-geological
knowledge or instinct. See especially case 13, where Sir W. E. Welby-
Oregory says, " To save time I took him (MuUins) to a spot from which
he could see the contour of the hills (about a mile distant) from which
most of our water comes^ showed him what springs we knew oi^ and
told him to choose for himself the best part to try for more. He un-
hesitatingly selected the upper part of a certain hill (which was after-
wards pronounced by an eminent civil engineer to be unquestionably
the most likely spot within sight to contain water), and thither we
went. He tried the whole hillside over without finding a drop." Also
in the same case 13, " The civil engineer before referred to assured me
that from his knowledge of the geological formation of the country, he
•could say confidently that there was no chance of finding a water supply
under my new house at a depth of less than 120 or 130 feet ; and his
opinion was confirmed by another geological authority who was then in
the neighbourhood." MuUins had previously, on the site of the new
house, "indicated two lines, about 30 yards apart, along which he said
water was flowing. This was all he could find there," Ultimately Sir


1884.] Tlie Divining Rod, 83

W. E. Welby-Gregoiy "determined to disregard the geologist and have
^ well sunk on one of these lines," where water was found in due course.
4. That the power is not only shown in finding spots where watei
is, which might be explained by supposing that there was water every-
where in that region at that depth — ^but spots where it is not. See
again case 13 where, as previously mentioned, a well was sunk to a
depth of 25ft. on one of Mullins' lines. Subsequently a shaft for a
lift was sunk " between the two lines .... some 12 yards or
15 yards from either, and to a depth considerably greater (10ft. or
12ft.) than the well. As no water came into this, though the forma-
tion was precisely similar, and the well has not been affected by it, I
am satisfied," Sir W. E. Welby-Gregory continues, " that, had I not
employed Mullins, I might have sunk wells in any number to no pur-
pose." See also case 31 where a well is sunk so that its side is
below the point indicated and water comes in from that side. And case
41 where Mr. Adey says, " Stokes . . . • told my foreman that
it was of no use going on with that well .... and told them

where the spring was, and tliat it was near the surface I

told him not to pay attention to such rubbish, and to continue sinking

the well At the depth of 40ft. there was not the slightest

appearance of coming to water. My men then threw out a hole
where Stokes indicated, about 30ft. or 35ft. from the well, and at a
depth of only 5ft. from the surface came upon a spring."

5. That dowsers believe themselves to possess some sort of occult
power, although they can offer no explanation of it. It would appear,
moreover, that they rarely make mistakes in locating wells. But some
allowance must be made for the fact that most of our evidence has
reached us from correspondents obtained through the diviners them-
selves. See, however, cases Nos. 3, 5, 7, 38, 39, 40, and 41.

We have next to consider the experiments recently made with
diviners by myself and other members of the Society.

Mr. W. S. Lawrence, of Elton House, Bishopston, Bristol, a retired
stone merchant, was known by my father for many years as a Poor
Law Guardian, and on December 26th, 1882, he came over to try some
experiments with me in my father's grounds. He is an elderly man, of
much intelligence, and is widely known for his power of dowsing, which
he still occasionally practises. He uses a piece of watch-spring, about
a foot long, in preference to the hazel-rod.

He first walked about the garden and fields and located numerous
springs. We then blindfolded him and took him over the same ground,
but the springs were so plentiful that it was not easy to ascertain
whether he found them again. Once or twice, however, we clearly ob-
served that the rod did not move with the dowser blindfold in spots-
where, just previously, he had located springs.


84 Tlie Divining Bed. [Jan. 18,

W#$ next tested him with metal, hidden under plates. Mr. Law-
rmim had not tried this for some years, and was doubtful of success.
Bat at the first attempt, he found, amongst seven plates, the two under
which metal objects were placed. On this occasion some of the
nutn<9rous spectators knew which were the right plates. In a second
attempt, when none of those present knew which were the right plates,
he succeeded in finding one object, but was at fault in regard to the
ottier. In a third attempt he wholly failed.

A lady present was thought to possess some power, and a metal
object was hidden for her under one amongst eight plates. The rod
moved over two plates, and both being taken up, metal objects were
found under both of them, the second having been added by one of those
present, unknown to the dowser and all others. This circumstance ap-
yNwnMl to bo very remarkable, but as the lady in question has totally
faih)(I in her later experiments, this success must be regarded as
uooicltMital, or possibly it may bo explained by Thought-transference.

l^ho rtwult of these experiments as a whole was, therefore, by no
tiinnnM oonulusive, as the existence of the supposed springs was not tested
by sinking wells, either on this occasion or after the experiments about
to be n^oonled.

In Man^h, 1883, I received from Mr. Jenkins an introduction to
Mm. n., of Clifton, a lady who is known to be an amateur dowser.

Mr. I^odiuon^ and I called upon her, and we then learned that
Ht^vi^ral yt^ars ago slio found out that she possessed the power of divining
ft>r \vatoi\ in oinmeotion with the well-known case of discovery of water
by Mr, t^awn^uct^, at Lawrence Weston. She also uses a steel watch-
apriuft.

*n\o following roport was drawn up by us at the time : — At our
r«H)UtMit Mrs. R triod to discover money hidden under plates, by meansof
\\w $Xt<\ spring* 2?(ho stat^'d that she had not attempted this before, and
that aht" '« ^U^i n<^ M^r* m U^^ In the first trial coins under two
)\Ut«^« wut of tU-^ wov^ oonKs^tly diaeovened. In this case all present
but Mix K kui>w which wiM^ the right plates^ In two subsequent
att^'mpt« in another room, wh«n no one present knew the right plates,
who (WUo^l (Nart^Ml^v in oiu> cAse and completely in the other.

\\> diN^w tx^ iVto lUnk. and in the first place tried over the same
jilt^vunx) yA jit>ii\vl (vi^th^ that Mr« Lawivnc^ had tried in experiments
|W\ UMi?4>k^ vx\\NVNh\i Mrs. R lvvrati!>a a s{Nnn$ on a ^»t which Lawrence
INa^ws) xwvr. w\d »K'v^^nd x-imis funh^ en Mis. R. passed over a spot
%h^^v Mr. U thx^Hj^t ho ^\c^^^twi a v«t sskw: spring. Adozen yuds
(Wxih^MT ^M\ Mvx R ivH^xvi a $prii^ iri aKxit the same position as a
>NM\t\»^^atu>^\ %Nf tho Wt «^4^\^^i $xvt3ti; w« kKSMd by Mr. L. We
^^K^ M>>». R %M' tW *tA\5>j;: *^tMr ^^A.'^x^ ^T Mr. L and passed by hwr,
«im) «>«i Vmt ^(^uv^\ «W xV«;£;nd^A Mr. L. $ <&k^xvsT« ikosiS^ locating the


1884.] Hie Divining Bod. 85

spring a yard or two away. We then blindfolded Mrs. B. and led her
over the same ground, when the results were decidedly different, the
steel watch-spring moving in several cases where previously it had been
still, and vice versd. But, owing to the limited space and peculiar
varieties of level, the result was not satisfactory in either way.

We then asked Mrs. B. to test carefully a long level gravel walk,
and we marked several springs which she detected upon it. She went
over the ground a second time, and did "not very certainly confirm
previous discoveries. We then blindfolded her, and led her over the
same ground. The watch-spring now moved in four or five spots, only
one of which approximately coincided with a previously marked spring.
Mrs. B. stated that the springs were very slight, the rod movements
vague and unsatisfactory.

We next tried over a place where we told Mrs. B. that an under-
ground current of water existed. This she asserted to flow about a yard
from the spot where botli the appearance of the land and other circum-
stances led us to believe the drain actually was. She maintained her
opinion after several trials with closed eyes. She traced the drain
(which carries the purest spring water) for 100 yards, but the con-
formation of the ground left little choice of directions.

Wethen tried coins under plates. We selected a spot in the drawing-
room clear of springs, and placed four plates on a wooden table, which we
moved round whilst Mrs. B. sat in a chair. One of the party only hid
the metal (a large heap of silver, and a brass ^Ib. letter weight), and then
left the room. The conditions were therefore carefully arranged. Mrs.
B. selected two out of four plates, because the watch-spring moved
freely over them, whilst it remained still over the others. These plates
over which the rod moved were the two covering nothing. The
other two covered the metals.

Mrs. B. then dowsed over the house, and detected correctly a very
strong spring in a passage, which we told her led over a well. We
went into the cellar, and here, over the same spring, close to the pump,
the rod did not move the first time she passed over it. She
detected springs in several places where Lawrence had not, and vice
versd.

This concluded our experiments with Mrs. B.

The next experiment was on a larger scale.

About this time Mr. Pope, of Olifton, had a well successfully
located for him at a farm near Locking, in Somerset, by a dowser
named Thomas Young. He sent us a report of the case and of some
experiments made with the rod, and offered us permission to dig a trial
well at the same place. Some members of the Society generously
provided funds, and in May a party of us went down, including
Professor W. J. SoUas, then of Bristol, now Professor ol G^oVq^^ ^V


Hfl Tlta hkining Rod. [Jan. 18,

Urn l/nivifrMity o( Dablin* He lias presented ns with the report which

J tiMtiit now proci;ed to the second part of the inqouy, by examin-
Iti^' tiir^rn particularly the methods and claims of diviners. My object is
ioMMnitrUIn on what points the theory and practice of the majority of
illvltinrM In agnK)d,aTidwhctherany physical orpsychical cause or causes can
bn NU^^oMtftd which might furnish an explanation of the phenomenon.

Am prnviously stated, the orthodox rod is a hazel twig shaped like a V>
litut from 1 to 'ift. in length. But many other materials are used; apiece
wi Mttidt watch-spring is employed in Somersetshire ; and in other places
Awhaln-bono instrument with a terminal chamber full of mercury,or full
o( A iiiyitorious unknown compound ; or ordinary foiked rods made of
niiy Rort of wood, green or dry, of iron or brass wire, or, as one i
Authority »ays, ** of any other supple and solid matters." Occasionally
tht) Hft^nuluo dowsing-rod seems to be unforked, and we hear of cases
in wlittih no rod at all is used When a piece of watch-spring is used,
tt is l\t^ld lK>nt into a Ik>w, which acts in the same manner as a forked
twig. Tht^ rtxl is grasped by both hands, in various ways, which how-
^vi^r ha\^ this in common, that the dowser holds it in a position of
f^xt ivn\o t<^n«ton, and at the same time of unstable equOibiinm. Oonse-
^ui^ntly a Ntvry slight variation in the pressure prodnoes fomUe and
f^v^u vii>l«^ut umtiou, apparently quite unconnected with any action of
tl\^ dow«ivr. Th« dowser, thus holding his rod, walks slowly across the
ItnHiud t\> Im!^ tri^, and when he comes over the spring of water, or vein
^ x^i!\^s lh<^ tod Iw^ns to movtew How it moves semis to depend upon
<Ih^ KHH^tty and llw' pi«otice of the dowsn; Somedmes it is held
)M^ril!HM\t^ly« and j^rks violently up^ as if repelled by the water spring;
»iMiM^\fM tW watiMT appMUPt to attract the rod, and it moves down-
x^^r^ ; »\NMH^jin^^ it mov>M in a complete ctrde, i^praadiiiig and then

1V^ts\>(i^M«<4tWi^ai^a<|tBM«lMniam«^ It has be^

W^^^Mh \^ i^iM^nd ^as in WtML tasbs> : ^riwr water, as o^Msed to

«^v^> >i(^hMrx>i^^i<f^K^)i«M'i>iiViftck<^cs^: w:ai«r^ptii^ [even beneath the
w^A*; . v^>!iv^i^ >K^^^r^ *( 4i$9^ir^idhMl iram all od^r water. Any
\MV4^K w^iP^))v v^(y«^ v«r ^vsai^WMb. aaii f«v^ swtab as o^Msed to

V«M V^in>nIm4^<^ << <>«iat<Ni : IfVotKOttii^ : smnAcRffs^ tlwTei^ and other
Wam^ v^^(n^N)(^>» ^ a>^^ >>i^ 1^%, ||^ ^nM^tlM^ s»dMr «f '^ JsMbh% Bod," it
VHi^>i^ ^^V'\y>^^ "^^fM^^r^ Vi^id^ii ^)i;h^ aiSmn m^ock «Be ia often mudi

V^yv^fsf^^^l)^^ %^hM I^Mi^
Wt>Kv^^ tV V**i«i ^l!W^ wii A^ Tti, SiiA % M«Mi Med not.


1884.] The Bwining Rod. 87

lirect interacfcion between rods (which may be composed of wood,
netal, or whalebone), and hidden things, which may be water, metals,
netallic compounds, mineral oils, dbc.

Moreover, this alleged occult force in some places attracts the rod
bo the object sought, whilst in other localities it would seem to have a
repulsive effect, and again, in other cases, it produces a rotatory
movement. This variation occurs even in the same locality, and with
me diviner. It seems obviously highly improbable that any specific
force can exert such varied movements.

The next theory to be examined is that the rod is moved by the
DJiviner's muscles, and is merely an index of the effect of some subtle
force which emanates from the water or metal, and acts on the diviner
liimsel£

It is a moot point whether the diviner feels a: sensations when
the rod is working. Most witnesses assert that the^ ^ave none what-
ever, whilst Mullins, and one or two others, state that they experience
a thrill, or vague sensation, when they come upon the water.

iDiviners always tell us that they are certain they are not moving
the rod, and even that they attempt to restrain its action. No doubt,
Uiey are perfectly honest^ But anyone who has had the smallest
experience in psychical research is aware that such statements have no
value whatever. We know by experience what care and study are
required to discover whether our own hands are conspiring to deceive
our intellects. We are not, therefore, surprised to find that honest
dowsers are easily deceived by the unconscious actions of their own
muscles.

It is commonly asserted that the rod cannot be made to turn,
except in the hands of a diviner. This is simply a mistake. Anybody
can work a divining rod, and can produce all the usual motions by
means of muscular contractions, so slight as to be scarcely apparent to
a careless observer.

Moreover, how can believers in the occult rod-moving force explain
(he curious experiment previously recorded, in which the steel spring
moved strongly when held over two plates covering nothing, and was
motionless over two others covering masses of metal ] In this case it
seems clear that the rod movements must have been caused by the
mconscious volition of the diviner ; and in this case above all others, the
lionesty of the diviner is beyond dispute.

The theory that a peculiar physical constitution is an important
factor in the diviner's art receives much support from the fact that only
i few persons are able successfully to use the rod. Mr. Baring Gould,
lowever^ tells us that on one occasion he saw watching the diviner a


88 The Divining Bod* [Jan. 18,

9

crowd of villagers who each in turn tried the rod over the hidden spring;
no one of them could restrain its movements, and they were somewhat
surprised that Mr. Gould, when his turn came, succeeded in keeping it
motionless. This would seem to be an exceptional case, and we shall now
proceed to examine the phenomenon in its simplest form. We find that
spring water and metals are alleged to have a certain obscure effect <m
certain exceptional persons, and that this physical disturbance of their
tissues causes slight muscular contractions, resulting in movements of a
rod held in their hands.

As regai'ds pure metals the evidence is entirely experimental
Somebody hides a heap of coins, and the dowser proceeds to discover
them as a proof of his power.

Unconscious indications given by the spectators would afford a
simple explanation of this class of phenomenon ; and in cases where these
indications are excluded, the diviner may be assisted by the newly
discovered faculty of Thought-transference. In harmony with this
suggestion, we found in our own experiments that when those present
knew the chosen plate, the diviner was often successful, whilst, when
no one present knew it, the diviner generally failed. Messrs. Pass
and Tawney tried experiments of this sort in Somersetshire, an
account of which they read to the Bristol Naturalists' Society in
1874. In five trials, in each case amongst seven or eight objects,
the diviner was successful three times in all. Messrs. Pass and
Tawney attempt to explain away this decidedly remarkable result ;
but their success in so doing seems to me by no means so remarkable.

In a similar manner we may explain how it is that Mr. Stokes,
of Newbury, can detect between two buckets of water, which o£ them
is surface and which spring water, although older diviners assert that
when the rod moves they " do not know if it is a spring or stagnant
water." ("Jacob's Rod," p. 24.)

Next turning to metallic ores, I have been unable to obtain evidence
beyond the general statement that the rod is commonly used in Cornwall
for mining purposes. Mr. Haymond, in his paper, gives many instances
of its complete failure in America, and of money lost by mining com-
panies through their belief in its efficacy.

Finally we come to the use of the rod for the discovery of water
springs. The evidence for this, as shown in the accompanying abstract,
is exceedingly abundant and strong. There are plenty of diviners of
good repute now living who without doubt use the rod, and find water.
Eut the value of this evidence wholly depends on the abundance of
water springs below the surface of the earth. If water is commonly to
be found wherever one digs, but little of the evidence before us is of
much value. This question can only be answered decisively by sinking
a number of experimental wells such as those at Locking. This, how-


1884.] The Divining Rod. 89

ever, is a very costly operation, and I fear the experiment is not very
likely to be made.

Mr. Eaymond's summary of the evidence is as follows : After
stating that the application of the rod to the discovery of metals, coal,
buried treasure, oil, <&c., is shown to be chimerical, he proceeds in a
passage of which the following is the substance : —

'* The case is somewhat different with the discovery of springs and
(since ore-deposits always have been and often still are the channels of
springs) of ore-deposits.

Here we have much stronger and more abundant evidence in favour
of the rod, and here, in my judgment, there is a residuum of scientific
value after making all necessary deductions for exaggeration, self-
deception, and fraud. There is undoubtedly a practical science of
discovering metal-deposits and springs. Everybody know^ ^hat Indians
in our desert West can find water where most white men Cv onot, and
the experienced frontierman has learned the art from the savages. The
superficial signs of water springs are often subtle, and in settled dis<
tricts they are little studied by the inhabitants. It is not necessary
th^kt a farmer who will want to locate a well once in his lifetime
should know the signs of water as a ranchman must know them.
Henoe men who are keen observers get impressions amounting to a
local science of the "lay" of the rocks, the difference in surface
vegetation, <bc., <&c. The unconscious judgment of such an expert
may decide upon a given spot, as he walks over it.

This brings me to the final inquiry whether there may not be, apart
from unconscious skill or judgment, a purely physical effect produced
by a subterranean spring upon a person walking over it. The effects
of moisture and temperature upon the nerves, are very striking, and
here, I think, is a matter which writers on the Divining Rod have gene-
rally overlooked."

With this suggested explanation of the possible residuum of fact,
Mr. Haymond closes his most valuable paper, and a summary of the
evidence here presented would seem to point to a similar conclusion.

If we looked only at the history of Divining, we should dismiss it
at once as a superstition. And, again, if we confine our attention to
test experiments, we find nothing that merits serious discussion.

But the evidence for the success of dowsing as a practical art is
very strong, and there seems to be an unexplained residuum when all
possible deductions are made for accident, for local knowledge, and for
inaccurate observations.

Mr. Raymond's hypothesis of the effects of moisture and tempera-
taxe is not a very satisfactory one, but no better has yet been suggested.


90


The Divining Bod.


[Jan. 18,


APPENDIX I.

ABSTRACT OF EVIDENCE
Collected hy Mr, E, Vauglian JenkifM, of CheltenJiam,


HO.


o


8


Diviner — Jolin MuUins, of Colleme, Wilts.


NAME AND ADDRESS OF
C0RR£S1>0NDENT.


H. D. Shrines, Clayerton
Manor, Bath


W. J. Brown, Hazleburj
Hoose, Box


Col. Wilson, Sleaf ord


J, H. Vessey, Welton
Manor, Louth

Capt. H. Smith, J.P.,
Folkingham

R. H. C. Nevile, Wellin-
gore Hall, Granthaih


A. Taylor, Hay Hill
Dairy, Bath


G. W. Johnson, Steward
to Lord Lindsay, Stam-
ford


Geo. Hancock, Corsham,
Wilts


LOCALITY.


DATE.


Somerset


Somerset


Lincolnshire


Lincolnshire
Lincolnshire
Lincolnshire


Somerset


Lincolnshire


Wilts


1852 and
since


1872


1876


17 years
ago up
till now


1883, d:o.


ABSTRACT OF CASE.


Mullins, a stranger in the
place, located several
wells suocessfnlly, and
pointed out a spot where
a spring was known to be;
details of other cases.
Archdeacon Earle was a
witness.

Details of two good oases ;
only well near, 180ft.deep;
found a disused well which
was covered over; found
sovereigns hidden under
stones.

Employed M." a good deal;'*
sunk six or seven wells by
his advice, all successfully.
Wellsfoundin dryoount^
where large sums had been
spent in boring for water
without success.

Well located correctly, and
depth fairly given.

Givenin full in Appendix IL


Water found near trial well
l(tft. deep. Spring at
a higher level and only
5ft. down ; other striking
details.

Has known him 17 years^
and has employed him.
often, with most satisfao-
tory results.

Details of several cases of
success; says that local
knowledge is needed to
judge depth of spring. An.
emphatic testimony.

Given in full in Appendix IL


1884.]


The Divining Rod.


91


HO.


NAMB AND ADDRESS OF
COBBESPONDBNT.


lOOAllTY.


DATE.


ABSTRACT OP CASE.


10


Geo. Cooling and Sons,
Seed Warehouse, Bath


Somerset


Given in f ullin AppendixIL


11


E. Issott, Ardwiok
Brewery


Manchester


Abundant water at depth
predicted. Ground near
had not been tried for
water.


12


Hon. E. A. Felham,
Grantham


Lincolnshire


1877


Strong spring found at
depth predicted.


13


Sir W.E.Welby-Gregory,
Bart., M.P., Grantham


Lincolnshire


1877


Given in full in Appendix II.


14


F. T. Mott, F.R.G.S.,
Birstal Hill, Leicester


Leicester


1882


Given in full in Appendix II.


15


J. Thomi)son,Steward to
the Duke of Beaufort,
Badminton


Glo'ster


1877


Water scarce. Strong spring
found deeper than pre-
dicted. Mr. T. was then
not a believer in the Divin-
ing Bod.


16


G. Au8t,Agent to Taylor
Trustees, Bath


1878


Well;found at about pre-
dicted depth, " where it is
difficult to obtain good
water."


17


p. Penchin,The Brewery
Box


Wiltshire


Two cases described.


18


J. Copley, Melton Mow-
bray


Lincolnshire


Found a small spring at


7ft.in a locality where wa-
ter is scarce;had previously
snuk 75ft. in vain.


19


J. B. West, Bath


Somerset


1877


Found spring for a brewery


20


J. H. Vesey, Malvern


1883


Spring foundat right depth
(letter addressed to Mullins)


21


The Hon. M. E. G. Finch
Hatton, M.P., Sleaford


Lincolnshire


Given in full in Appendix IL


22


Benj. Perry, Bristol


Glo'ster


1873


Springs found in two cases
by watch-spring bending
down. Detailed account.


92


The Divining Rod.


[Jan. 18,


Diviner-^, S. Lawrenoe, of Bristol.


NO.


23


24


25


NAME AND ADDRESS OF
COBRESPOMDEMT.


Samuel Lang, 3, Bath
Parade, Bristol


J. Parsons, Accountant,
Bristol


J. G. Davey, M.D., and
Ass. S.P.B.


LOOALITT.


Glo'stershire


Glo^stershire


Somerset


26 W. H. Cowlin, Building
Superintendent, Eagle
Land Co.


27


28


29


30


31


32
33


34


Bristol Port and Channel
Dock Company


T. Stone, Bristol


Mrs. Hare, Newton
Abbot


R. Harvey, Ashton Gate
Brewery


Stephens and Bastow,
Bristol ;S.Martell, their
Foreman; H. J. Shaw,
Architect, London

Col. Blount, Dorchester

J. H. Lockley, Lewins
MeadeBrewery,Bri8tol


H. Crisp, Architect ; R.
Butterworth ; Law-
rence ; Mereweather ;
Mrs.Bengough, &c.,&c.


Somerset*
shire


Glo^stershire


Glo'stershire


Devon


Somerset


Sussex


Dorset
Somerset


Glo'stershire


DATE.


1882


1865


1883


1873


1879


ABSTRACT OF CASE.


Well dug in vain at cost of
£100 ; spring located
20ft. away; tapped by
** culvert.'* Details given.
A remarkable case.

Water found for Great
Western Electric Light
Company^

Old well at Northwood
Asylum insufficient ; new
spring found and culvert
djriven to it. Careful and
detailed account.

Detailed account of dis-
covery contrary to local
expectation. Clear and
good.

Letter from Dockmaster and
Hydraulic Foreman; ac-
curate details ; water dis-
covered at 70ft.

Well dug with moderate
suooess.

Spring found, where local
men considered sinking
hopeless ; Lawrenoe a
stranger. Good case.

Spring found for the Com-
pany. (Mereweather also
present as dowser.)

Given in f ullin AppendixIL


A few
years ago


Strong spring found*

Valuable spring found for
the Company ; also a wdl
pointed out which was
known only to writer.

Given infullinAppendixU.


1884]


The Divining Rod.


93


Diviner — ^W, Stokes, of Newbury, Berks.


NO.

35
36
37

38

39


40


41


NAXB AND ADDRESS OF
CORBXSPONDENT.


Canon Portal, Newbnry

Capt. Ward, Newbury

H. Taylor, Oare Hermi-
tage, Newbury

W. Chatters, Sanderf ord •
Priory, Newbury

W. Cburoh, Builder,
Newbnry


Charles Adey, Marl-
borough

W, G, Adey, Newbury


ABSTRACT OF CASE.


Strong spring found.

Spring found.

Detailed account of experi-
ments.

Eight or nine times and no-
failure.

Never known failure. Gives
case of discovery 2ft.
from vain boring, 3oft.
deep. Has seen Stokes dis-
tinguish between a bucket
of spring water and one of
stagnant water.

Successful find. Diviner not
in his own locality.

Given in full in Appendix II.


2>it;/7t^r^Charle3 Cross, coachman, of Hallatrow, near Bristol.


HO.


NAME AND ADDRESS OF
CORRESPONDENT.


LOOALITir.


DATE.


ABSTRACT OF CASE.


42

43
44


T. Killen, Farrington
Gumey

M. J. Williams, Paulton

G. Thresher, Frome


Somerset

Somerset
Somerset


Spring found at 30ft.

Spring found at 37ft.
Spring found.


HO.


BiviTier — ^Thos. Pavey, of Cheddar, Somerset.


NAME AND ADDRESS OF
CORRESPONDENT.


45 T. K. Taplin, F. J. Nal-
der, Westbury-sub-
Mendip


46


Alfred Smith, Pershore


LOCALITY.


Somerset


Worcester-
shire


DATE.


1883


ABSTRACT OF CASE.


Disputed case, in newspaper
correspondence. Mr. Nal-
der had a well found by
three independent dowsers
and considers it clear and
valuable. A former owner
pooh-poohs the matter.

A good case; Pavey went,
on Mr. Yaughan Jenkins'
recommendation, to a new
district; water found in
an unlikely place.


94


Tlie Divining Rod.


[Jan. 18,


Diviner — Oeoige Lookyer.


KO.


KAMB AND ADDRESS OF
CORRESPONDENT.


LOCALITY.


DATE.


ABSTRACT OF CASE.


47


E. V. Jenkins, Chelten-
ham


Monmouth-
shire


1852


GiTen in f nllin AppendixII,


Diviner not knonm.


NO.


48


NAME AND ADDRESS OF
CORRESPONDENT.


Angus and Co., Con-
tnictors, Australia


ABSTRACT OF CASE.


Given in fullin AppendizIL


.1884.] The Divining Rod. 95


APPENDIX 11.

SELECTED CASES
From Mr, E, Vaughan Jenkins* Collection,


No. 5.

From Captain Henry Smith, Horbling, Folkingham, Lincolnshire.

December 26/ A, 1882.

It will perhaps be the best answer to your letter respecting John Mullins

(the water-finder as he is called here) if I tell you as well as I can what took

place when he was at my place. My object in sending for him was to obtain

his advice as to the best place to bore for water on some of my land, and

when he came he said he must get a twig. I told him I did not believe in

his conjuring tricks, I only wanted his advice, and he then said he was no

conjurer, but was not the slightest use without his tools, so I stood by whilst

he cut a couple of white thorn twigs. My nephew went with me, and we

each carried a thistle spud. In crossing the first field I said '' I have water

here, so need not trouble you,'' but Mullins said he might as well carry the

twig in his fingers, and whilst we were talking about the stock in the field

he stopped suddenly and said we were crossing water. This I knew was the

Case, although there was then no appearance of any. The next field was the

One I especially sent for him for, as I had dug a pond and bored about 40ft. ,

but found no water. I took him to the side of the field abqve the pond, and

after casting about for some time he said decidedly there was no water there,

and proposed trying the other side, where he said there was plenty. We

marked the place, and I have since bored there and found an abundant

supply of water. I then took him across two other fields, and in each he

found what he called a weak spring not worth boring for. We were at that

time walking a little distance from him on each side, and marked the ground

where he said he was over water, I believe unknown to him. On our return

I said, '^ Now Mullins, I shall blindfold you and see if you can find those

places again.*' He agreed to hold his head back and keep his eyes firmly

closed, and as far as we could see he did so, and in each field stopped at

exactly the same places we had marked, and the marks on the turf were so

slight and from 50 to 100 feet from him on each side that I do not believe

he could have seen them if he had opened his eyes.

We then came home to my lawn, and I showed him a beautiful spring,
and also informed him what quarter we supposed the water came from
(north) ; he tried all over the north side, and said most positively there was
no water there, and then proceeded to the south side, and seemed almost con-
vulsed. He said it was the strongest spring he had ever felt. I and my
nephew took hold of the twig on each side below his fingers, and
still it twisted up. I have bored there and found abundance
of water. I may say here that Mullins had not been in our neighbourhood
before, and distinctly asserted the water bearing strata lay very different from
that we had always before supposed. Wo are on clay between the fen and
limestone, and the land rises steadily from us until we reach the highest


96 The Dmning Rod. [Jan. 18,

point on the Great Northern Railway (Great Ponton), and my theory was
that the rainfall there percolated the limestone and under the clay strala
which )B continued from thence to us. This Mullins quite denied, and oar
borings have proved the correctness of his statement so far as this, that there
is abundance of water in the direction pointed out by him, but there may also
be water where he says there is none ; this has not been tested.

I did not look upon Mullins as a charlatan, but suspected he did a good
deal by guess, and must confess to being unable to prove this.

That he could find the same indications of water blindfold quite puzzled
me and my nephew, too, who is a thoroughly practical man.

That the twig was acted upon when Mullins had no control over its move-
ments, we were also both satisfied. Mullins was very confident both in his
assertion there was water or otherwise, and certainly did not adopt the asual
r^e of a charlatan of falling in with the views of those who paid him.

I have recommended him to some first-class business men, and all tell me
they are satisfied he is no impostor. I may add that, as a magistrate, I have
frequently been told that I ought not to countenance such a man, but I
generally take my own line, and try to arrive at some conclusion. In this
matter I can only say I do not understand it at all, but give you the facts as
near as I can, and shall be glad to hear of any further steps taken to explain
this mystery.


No. 0.

From Gxa Hancock, ** Fair View," Corsham, Wilts.

Jawiaty^ndy 1883.

Our testing of John Mullins* water finding powers has been of a negative
laUier than of a positive character. We have lately sunk a number of shafts
with a view to mining operations, and our desire has beoi to select spots
wh^i« there was no water to hinder us in our sinkings.

Mr. Mullins has gone over tbe ground with me and pointed out such spots.
He has always been careful to explain ^^ that we may, in a wet time, be
troubled with surface water, but that we should find no springs." In every
«a*» he has bet^n right. But in a shaft which we are now sinking we have
\viue to a fissure aK>ut 40 ft ft\>m the surface, and through this fissure
iWiv \\>iues s^^ much water that I have to-day been obUged to arrange a
|Hiva(>iu$ a)^\\iuratus in v>iv)er that the men may be able to proceed with the
wvvrk^

TKe^ToutKl iu the u^^hKHirhood of this shaft Mr. MuUins reported to
b« fuU s>f s|>rii>^ and siukiu^ vHir shaft below the level of the aprmgsand
bw^aki^x^s: into the &»»ur« may ha>'* div^rt^ the water fKnai its natural course.
Iu that casw thorc ms^ uv^ ha>v Wen. witen Mr, MaCina went over the
^fNMktHlx aiv w^^t^r >fchctv now it i* vv«su5j$ iato our shaft

MulUiVft ^Hxc?^^ f<\ttt)» Au v^Nbxx'tt— ^uKi a roughly conect one— as to the
\U^^K nv? tKc xksAtct W*\^w t^^' »uti^^ bet h« fci^ no ^aim to accuracy on
tKvk^ssiut lUv «\\«^tV^t a >fcv*k *^w>^ )M«ur the sweace exeits the same
4vti^\w vNit t\^^^v \x^\Nu ti^^? twii^ «» a *trv^i^ *?«»^ 6* *kM


L884.] The Divining Bod. 97

I have observed that after he has been walking about for some hours he
fets physically exhausted, and, if I mistake not, somewhat irritable. He has
old me that when he passes over a strong spring and the twig turns quickly,
. thrill runs through his entire system, and that if he follows the water
inding for several days consecutively, he is unable to sleep at night.

From what I ha^e seen and heard of Mullins, I believe him to be a per-
ectly honest and reliable man. It is certain that he finds hidden springs and
treams of water by the means above described, but he himself is ignorant of
he natural law — and I make no doubt it is a natural law — by virtue of whose
>peration there is an affinity between him and the stick, and between the stick
md running water, when the stick is in his hands.


No. 10.

Prom Geo. Cooling and Son, The Seed Warehouse, Broad Street, Bath.

Janiiary Qth, 1883.

We had very strong proof of the efficacy of the divining rod through
Mullins, of Coleme. We had gone to very considerable expense in excavat-
ing to secure a supply of water for our greenhouses at the nursery, and were
about giving up the matter in despair when we were recommended to send
fop Mullins, which we did, although with a great deal of incredulity. He,
however, pointed out a spot where he said at a distance of 10 or 12 feet w©
should get a good spring, and within that depth we found water, and have
had a constant supply running through all our houses since.


No. 13.

From Sir W. E. Welby-Gregory, Bart., M.P., Denton Manor, Grantham.

January 2Sth, 1883.

In the spring of 1877 I was preparing to build a large country house on
I new site, which I had selected on account, among other reasons, of its-
iryness. This site was on a large pla^teau of red loamy soil, resting on a
)ed of solid rock* several feet thick, in which there was no indication of
rater ; and it was a problem where the water supply was to come from, as.
here was none apparent which could be brought to the house without great
ixpense. While puzzling over this I heard that John Mullins, of Coleme^
lad been employed to find water at various places in the neighbourhood with
^ery remarkable success ; that he had been tested in almost every conceivable
iray, and that not only country gentlemen and farmers, but plumbers in the
leighbouting towns had frequently called in his aid, purely as a matter of

* The rock I believe is marlstone, and the thickness of the upper bed has been
ince ascertained to be between seven and eight feet.


98 The Divining Rod. [Jan. 18,

business, and I was at last induced to send for him. When he came, I
asked him whether he required a twig of any particular wood, and he replied
that almost any wood would do, except lance-wood and box-wood, which
were too stiff. He then cut for himself from the nearest conyeuient tree,
which I think was a sycamore, a forked twig in the shape of a Y of a foot or
18 inches long. I set him to work for a few minutes at first on my lawn,
sending him over parts where I knew there was a current of water at a
depth of a few feet, though none was visible or audible on the surface. He
slowly quartered his ground like a pointer, bending forward and holding
the twig about the level of his knees, point downwards, and tightly
grasped an inch or two from the extremities of the prongs of the fork, with,
if I recollect rightly, the thumb and fourth and little fingers of each hand
below, and the fore and middle fingers above the twig. Whenever he crossed
the water, of which I have spoken (a drain), the twig turned upwards in his
hands, though he apparently resisted its doing so to the utmost ; and the
same thing happened at other parts of the lawn, where, though we did not
know of any runlet, it was very likely that one existed. I then took him to
the kitchen garden, where we had always been much in want of water ; and
presently the twig stopped him at a spot apparently as dry as the rest, and with
nothing distinctive about it. I asked him what amount he supposed there
was, whether running or stagnant, and at what depth. He answered that
he was certain there was water, and that it was running, for no amount of
stagnant water had the smallest efifect upon him ; but that he could only
guess at the amount and the depth from the force with which the twig turned
up. From his experience he should say that it was a stream not thicker than
a walking stick, and at a depth of from 20 to 30 feet He traversed the rest
of the kitchen garden without finding any more, and I next took him to the
site of the new house. Here he soon indicated two lines, about 30 yards
apart, along which he said water was flowing in somewhat greater volume
than the rill he had found in the kitchen garden, and at a depth, he thought,
of from 30 to 40 feet. This was all he could find there, and as this seemed
hardly likely to be sufficient for my requirements, I felt that it must he
looked for at a greater distance. To save time, I took him to a spot from
which he could see the contour of the hills (about a mile distant from the
house) from which most of our water comes, showed him what spring
we knew of, and told him to choose for himself the best part
to try for more. He unhesitatingly selected the upper part of a
certain hill (which was afterwards pronounced by an eminent civil engineer
to bo unquestionably the most likely spot within sight to contain water)^
and thither we went. He tried the whole of that hillside over, without
finding a drop, and we afterwards took another hillside with no better suc-
cess. It was now late, and MuUins was evidently becoming exhausted. I
felt that I had seen enough to convince me that he was no impostor, and
that whatever discoveries he made were due to some force over which he
had no control, not to any power he had acquired by experience or observa-
tion of making good guesses at where water was likely to be ; but I was not
satisfied that he had found anything for me which promised to be of any
pn * : 10 1 dismissed him to tea in the housekeeper's room. After

he servants whose curiosity was excited got him to exhibit his


1884.] The Divining Rod. 99

art to them, and tried whether they themselves had any power with the twig.
My gardener, Joseph Towers, found that it worked in his hands nearly as
strongly as in those of Mullins himself. I took no further action then in the
matter ; but described what I had seen to the civil engineer before referred
to, who, though by no means altogether pooh-poohing it, assured me that
from his knowledge of the geological formation of the country, he could say
confidently there was no chance of finding a water supply under my new
house at a depth of less than 120 or 130 feet ; and his opinion was confirmed
by another geological authority who was then in the neighbourhood. So I
virtually gave up all hope of deriving any benefit from Mullins' assertions.
Some weeks later, however, my gardener came to me and said that he was
in great want of water in the kitchen garden; that he had tried repeatedly with
the twig over the place where Mullins indicated a rivulet ; that it invariably
turned up at the spot, and that he was quite convinced there was water
there. If I would allow him, he could sink a well with the garden labourers,
so as not to involve any additional expense. I consented to this ; the well
was sunk to a depth of nearly 20ft. , when water poured into it freely, and
it has supplied a long range of hothouses ever since.

I had previously decided upon bringing down the main supply of water
to the new house in pipes, by gravitation, from a considerable distance ; but
as this was a heavy work, necessarily taking much time, the question of a
supply during building had become urgent, and on the strength of what had
occurred in the kitchen garden, I set Towers to traverse the new site, where
the lines of water indicated by Mullins had been marked by pegs 60 yards or
70 yards apart, and just visible above the grass. These lines Towers and his
twig emphatically confirmed, and I proceeded to test him. I had the
projecting extremities of the prongs of the twig held tight by pincers, so
that there could be no voluntary action on Towers' part when crossing the
marked lines. Despite of this, the point of the twig twisted itself upwards,
till the bark was wrinkled and almost split, while the strain and pressure
upon the muscles of the man's hands were most apparent. I then blind-
folded him, and turned him loose. The result was precisely the same.
Whenever he crossed Mullins' lines, up went the twig. The presumption
now appeared to be so strong in favour of the twig that I determined to
disr^iard the geologists, and have a well sunk on one of the lines. This
was done ; at the depth of about 28ft. the water rushed in, and rose till it
stood about 8ft deep, at which it now remains, having, in the meantime,
folly supplied all the requirements during building the house, which were
probably not less than 1,000 gallons a day for three years or more, and
since that having acted as an ample reserve to the house for all purposes
whenever the distant supply for any reason has had to be shut off. I may
add that I have since had occasion to sink a shaft for a lift between the two
lines indicated by Mullins, some 12 yards or 15 yards from either, and to a
depth considerably greater (lOft or 12ft.) than the well. As no water
came into this, though the formation was precisely similar, and the well has
not been affected by it, I am satisfied that, had I not employed Mullins, I
might have sunk wells in any number to no purpose under my house, unless
I bad happened to hit upon the rills indicated by him with such perfect
precision.


100 The Dmning Bod, [Jan, 18,

No. 14.

From F. T. Mott, F. KG. S., Birstal Hill, Leicester,
Written for the British Association Meeting at Southampton, 1882.

I happen to be the owner of two acres of land on the slope of a hill in
Charnwood Forest, Leicestershire, 600ft. above sea level. The hill consists
of some ancient metamorphic slate, of which the geological horizon has not
been definitely determined. On this land there is no spring water. Springs
exist in several directions at distances of from half-a-mile to a mile, but on
the other hand several wells have been sunk at similar distances in other
directions but no water found. In one case the boring was carried to about
100ft., in a rich valley, but the search for water was unsuccessful. About a
month ago I heard accidentally, but from what appeared to be a disinterested
source, that a man was living near Chippenham, in Wiltshire, who had a
peculiar method of discovering springs. As a good water supply would double
the value of my land, I made some inquiries and received from a brewer at
Manchester, and from a large agriculturist at Grantham, such strong
testimony as to the ability of the person referred to that I thought it worth
while to send for him and to let him try his skill. He came accordingly, a
fine, sturdy, intelligent artisan, with no scientific knowledge, but a frank,
manly address, and not the slightest appearance of a charlatan. He said,
** If there is a spring on your land I think I can find it, but my method is a
mystery to myself ; I am always in doubt whether it will be successful, but
hitherto it has never failed, and I have performed the operation hundreds
of times." I took liim to the land, and on the way he stopped at a hawthorn
hedge and cut out a branch. This he trimmed up until he had got
two twigs about the thickness of a cedar pencil, united at one end so as
to take the form of the letter V yf^th. something like a right
angle at the base, and each of the arms rather more than a foot long. On
reaching the ground he took one of the arms in each hand, holding his ex-
temporised implement before him with the angle downwards, and he walked
across the field in a direction at right angles to the slope of the land. When
he came to a certain spot I saw the angle of the stick turn upwards suddenly
and forcibly. He stopped at this point and desired me to drive in a stake.
Then he went about 20 yards further down the field and crossed it again in
the same manner. This time, however, I accompanied him step by step,
holding his hands firmly grasped in mine and watching carefully for any
movement of his muscles. Again the angle of the stick leaped up, twist-
ing round within the grasp of his fingers, and another stake was driven in.
A third time he crossed the field, still lower down, while I held the two arms
which projected beyond his closed hands, nipping them with my full strength
and watching his hands at the same time. Yet again the stick turned up as
before, twisting round within my fingers as well as his, and a third stake
was put down. This process was gone through several times more, with like
results, and we then found that the stakes stood in a diagonal line across the
middle of the field. " Now," said he, " if you sink a well anywhere on that
line you will find water, and judging from the force with which the stick
moved, and my previous experiences, I should say that you will have to sink
at least 30ft., and possibly as much as 40ft, or 45ft." As the line thus marked


1884.] The Divining Rod. 101

out waB not conveniently situated I desired him to try the upper part of the
land, which he did, but without result. Another short diagonal line was,
however, found at the bottom corner.

Not placing much reliance upon what looked like a sort of necromancy, I
yet resolved that it should be tested, and just before I left home for South-
ampton I sent a gang of well-sinkers to the spot. Yesterday morning I re-
ceived the following telegram: '^Well, 28ft., sandy bottom, water 2ft.
deep." I may say that to the depth of 20ft. the soil was dry, and I had re-
ceived notice two days previously that on reaching 21ft. it became moist for
the first time.

These are the facts, what is the interpretation of them ? It may be said
that the finding of water was purely accidental, and that a well sunk in any
part of the field would have been equally successful. But there is no proof
of this, and the experience of other persons at Manchester and Grantham,
and the extraordinary behaviour of the stick have still to be accounted for.

Of course, my own unsupported testimony as to the behaviour of the
stick will not, and ought not to be taken as absolute proof of my statement.
There were in fact three other witnesses, but I cannot produce them, at
Southampton. Can any physical cause be suggested which could in any way
be supposed to produce such behaviour in a forked stick 1 It had much the
appearance of the deflection of the index in a galvanometer. If this man had
a particularly sensitive constitution, and if an underground water-stream
running for centuries in one direction could set up some kind of electric
current, might he not actually become a galvanometer giving visible indica-
tions of that current 1

Note. — The well was sunk to the depth of 31ft. and contained always
6ft. of good water.


No. 21.

From the Hon. M. E. G. Finch Hatton, M.P., 23, Ennismore Gardens, S. W.

Februaiy 2dth, 1884.

Hearing that J, MuUins possessed the power of finding springs of water,
by means of a forked twig held between his hands, I desired him to come
over to Haverholme Priory, near Sleaford, where I live.

This is what happened. First he cut a forked twig from a living tree, and
held it between his hands, the centre point downwards and the two ends
protruding between the fingers of each hand.

He then stooped forward and walked over the ground to be tried. Sud-
denly he would stop and the central point would revolve in a half circle until
it pointed the reverse way. This he stated to be owing to the presence of a
subterranean spring, and further that by the strength of the movement he
could gauge the approximate depth.

My brother, Hon. Harold Finch Hatton, and I each took hold of one of
the endfly protruding as stated above, and held them fast while the phe-
nomenon took place, to make sure that it was not caused by a movement,
voluntary or otherwise, of the man's own hand or fingers. The tendency to


102 Tlie Divining Rod. [Jan. 18j

twist itself, on the twig's part, was so great that, on our holding firmly on to
the ends, the twig split and finally broke ofL

The same thing occurred when standing on a bridge over a running stream.

Stagnant water, he states, has no effect on the twig.

Though now convinced ourselves of the man's good faith, and of the
automatic — or rather independent — ^action of the twig, we resolved to test
Mullins in various ways, of which the following is an account.

First, — We established it on good authority that Mullins had no previous
acquaintance with Haverholme.

1. I took him on to the grass in front of the house, across which the water-
supply pipe passed. There was no indication of its presence on the surface,
nor <Ud I previously mention its existence to Mullins; on crossing it, the twig
moved in the manner described, and he could trace the water to right and
left by its means, along the path actually taken by the pipe.

2. On our way to the kitchen garden Mullins discovered a spring on the.
open lawn, whose existence was unknown to me, it had been closed in so long,
but was subsequently attested by an old labourer on the place who remem-
bered it as a well, and had seen it bricked in many years before.

3. On reaching the kitchen garden I knew that a lead pipe, leading
water to a tap outside the wall, crossed the gravel path at a certain spot. On
crossing it the twig made no sign. I was astonished at first, till I
remembered what Mullins had said about stagnant water, and that the tap
was not running,

I sent to have it turned on, re-conducted Mullins over the ground, when
the twig immediately indicated the spot.

When Mullins had passed on, I carefully marked the exact spot indicated
by the twig. When he had left the garden, I said, " Now, Mullins, may we
blindfold you and let you try V* He said, ** Oh yes, if you don't lead me
into a pond or anything of that sort. " We promised.

Several sceptical persons were present who took care the blindfolding was
thoroughly done.

I then re-conducted him, blindfold, to the marked spot by a different
route, leaving the tap running, with the result that the stick indicated with
mathematic exactness the same spot. At first he slightly overran it a foot or
so, and then felt round, as it were, and seemed to be led back into the exact
centre of influence by the twig.

All present considered the trial entirely conclusive of two things.

First, of the man's perfect good faith.

Secondly, that the effect produced on the twig emanated from an agency
outside of himself, and appeared due to the presence of running water.

My brother, Mr. Harold Finch Hat ton, is present as I write, and confirms
what I say.

It is true that one of the Misses Wordsworth tried the twig, and was
surprised to find that an influence of a similar nature, though not so strong,
was imparted to it.

I merely give facts, without attempting to explain them.

No doubt it will be long before they aire generally admitted — ^probably
not until scientific (?) men cease to gratify their vanity by den3dng the
existence of everything they cannot explain or account for fully.


1884.] The Dwining Rod. 103

It appears to mo to be due to some occult fonn of magnetism, requiring a
high conductive power in the operator. MuUins says that he feels something
akin to an electric shock each time, and that his arms ache all night after
many experiments.


No. 31.

From Stephens and Barstow, Bristol Steam Joinery Works.

2Uh March, 1883.

In the year 1870 we were building a house at Horsham, in Sussex, for Mr.
J. Ronton, of Guildford.

There were one or two wells on the property, but little or no water could
be obtained from either (in fact water was very scarce indeed in the neigh-
bourhood generally), and it was thought desirable to sink another well.

As wo had known Mr. Lawrence for many years, and knew that he
professed to be able to discover water, we communicated with and arranged
with him to go to Horsham, hoping that if he should point out a place
where we might sink, that the well would bo a greater success than those
already there.

Mr. Lawrence proceeded to the place, but we cannot, from personal
observation, give you an account of what took place, as no member of the
firm was able to accompany him (we may here state that neither of us have
ever seen him use the ** rod"), but we enclose you a letter from the man who
was foreman upon the works at the time of Mr. Lawrence's visit (he is still in
our employ, and we wrote to him upon receiving your letter), in which he
fully describes how Mr. L. proceeded.
You will see by Mr. Martell's letter that he was in every way successful.


From S. Mabtell, Foreman.

March 2Qth, 1883.

He selected one, a hazel twig, and walked about with it. On coming to

a certain place he said, *^ Here is the spring of water," and the twig was

violently jumping up and down, and he marked the place which was to be

the centre of the well. He then tried the steel spring with the same result.

On commencing to dig the well I was obliged to move a little on one side, as

one of the new drains was in the way, and the centre of the well, as marked

by him, became the side. On sinking down about 40ft. the spring burst out

as latge as a hammer handle in the very spot that he marked for the centre.


From Henry Shaw, Architect, 52, New Broad Street, E.G., and 39,

Clapton Square, £.

March 2Sthy 1883.

With regard to the '* Divining Rod," in 1878 I erected a house at Kudg-
wick for J. T. Ronton, Esq. ; the site was on high ground, and the subsoil
of stiff clay. Daring the progress of the works the contractor proceeded to


104 The Divining Rod. [Jan. 18,

form a well close to the new building, and had bored a very considerable depth
vrithoiU coming to water, Messrs. Stephens and Bastow, of Bristol, were the
contractors, and they advised that Mr. Lawrence should be employed to
detect a spriiig. I had heard of him before, and was greatly interested as to
his mode of procedure. He was shown where we had already bored. [Then
follows a description of the process.] He said we should find water, the pon-
tion behig only some few yards from the original boring. We proceeded to
sink at the place indicated by Mr. La¥rrence, and within some 14 yards from
the surface we came upon a good spring of water, and which has, I believe,
continued to supply the house from that time to this. JL may state that there
was an old well some 100 yards from the new building, but Mr. Lawrence
was not informed of this to my knowledge.


No. S4.

From MBa Bexgough, 5, Apdey Road, Clifton, BristoL

Marth 7th, 1883.
I discovered I could use the ** Divining Rod " in this way. A professional
water-finder in this neighbourhood called on me on some business, and
happened to say he was going that afternoon to find water at my cousin's
new house at Henbury. A large well had been dug to a considerable depth
without any sign of water, and as the house was nearly completed the matter
was veiT important. I asked how he was going to find water, and he took
f i»m his pocket a watch-sprii^, and, going on to the lawn, showed me how
he used it. I then tried it> and found it worked quite as much in my hands
as in his. After he left I determined to go over to my cousin's house and try
if I could find the water before he came over in the afternoon, so I bought
a watch>spring and drove over, and tried it (before many witnesses) dose to
the well. I found it was most agitated at a spot about two yards from the
wcll« and frv^m this spot I traced a Une across the garden to a field beyond,
by the agitation of the watch-spring. If y friends marked the place, and thea
we waited for the water-finder. He came and fixed exactly on my spot.


Fxv^m IL J. Cusp, Ardiitect, BriskO.

IfartA 2Uh, 1883.

Frior :c* sickiKs: tho wvl). we cvcsnhed a geolopst as to the probability
%>f findic^ wa:er. anc at what depth. He informed as that it w*b not likely
that w;ftti^T wv^ulvl W *ouua until w« had sunk throo^ the bed of the moun-
tain i:uxf!«:c«;f^ ex^tiu^: thezt'. and which w;» about loQft. deep, when we
should vv^xe on a ty\l vi ola^ az^i£:^ xn abondant sopplT of water. This
a^>ik\i t^^ t^e di*5riv-: whorv tiu* $to£ie ^x»»^ and therefore the well could
W sunk iu ai^* ^\ttt w Lt:ii the sar:^ c^sa:>K« oc ending water. We accordingly
aunk a iisa;: tv> a cej^ << I^^lVv th:^>^p:: th* rvvk, and th«a bored 10ft,
V«t f.>und t>>^ watier. Th» «^ ivria^ be %ccvHsnt<d f«- to some extent^ as
Vy CI K^rk w^ ci)it:;.v itt vVtxt;Kf with »oaae tvshs yor a^idW-lMicka as they aie


1884.] The Divining Rod. 105

sometimes termed) in the rock. We then called in Mr. Lawrence with his
rod ; he held it over the mouth of the well and it was motionless, and Mr.
Lawrence stated it was no use sinking any deeper there ; he then walked in
a spiral line round the well, and when at a distance of about 20ft., the rod
moved vigorously, but nowhere else near the well. With his advice we
drove a level heading from the shaft at a depth of about 100ft. from the
surface, towards the spot indicated by the rod, and after proceeding about
soft, the water suddenly flowed in at the end of the heading, and the men
had to leave the heading at once and get to the surface. Since this there has
been a good and regular supply of water.

[These accounts are confirmed by Mr. Butterworth, the owner of the
house, Mr. Lawrence and others. There is some slight discrepancy in the
measurements, which, however, does not materially affect the case.]


No. 41.

From W. G. Adey, Builder and Timber Merchant, West Mills, Newbury.

Api-il im, 1883.

William Stokes has been in my employ as a carpenter and wheelwright
from the year 1865, in which year I built some stables and chaise houses for
the Rev. M. J. Bidley, of East Woodhay, and Stokes was on the works as a
carpenter ; and, while it was in hand, Mr. Bidley wished the well that
supplied the house to be opened and cleared out^ but no one on the estate
knew where it was, not liaving been opened for a number of years ; but
Stokes, with his divining rod, discovered the well (although a perfect
stranger to the place), and it proved to be where he predicted, imder the
paving in the centre of the pathway.

Altogether Stokes has been employed by me in that capacity as '* water-
finder " or " prophet," as he is called, in, probably, 18 or 20 different places,
and I cannot say that he has failed on any one occasion, and I must confess
that no one made greater ridicule of his abilities in thi^t direction than I did,
but was quite converted and made a true believer by the following
circumstance.

In the year 1872, I was employed to build a mansion in this neighbour-
hood, and was naturally desirous to have the well as near to the scullery as
possible, and directed my men to sink the well accordingly at the N.W.
angle of the building ; but after they had sunk the well a few feet, Stokes
went up, unknowing to me, and told my foreman that it was of no use going
on with that well as we should not get water, and told them
where the spring was, viz., in the N.E. comer, and that it was
near the surface. My foreman asked me what he should do in
the matter, and I told him not to pay any attention to such
rubbish, and continue sinking the well. We did so, and at a depth of nearly
40ft. there was not the slightest appearance of coming to water. My men
then threw out a hole where Stokes indicated, about 30 or 35ft. from the
well, and at a depth of only 5ft, from the surface came upon a spring which
kept the bricklayers and plasterers supplied all through the job, and has
been used for the supply of the house to this day.


106 The Divining Rod. [Jan. 1^,

On another occasion I deviated very dighUyfrom the couth of ike spring oi
indicated by Stokee aivdhad to eink aiwihtr well whett he directed,

I could give you a list of several wells sunk under his direction, but I
believe you have written to, and had replies from, several of my employers.

One bucket filled with spring water and another with rain water, placed
side by side, and he will tell Tyou, when blindfolded, which is the spring
water and which rain water.

He is an abstainer, and a highly nervous, sensitive man, and I am now as
great a believer in his powers as I was formerly a disbeliever.

He is going in the country to-morrow to advise in the sinking of a wefl
on the hill for a new house I am commencing.


No. 47.
From E. Vaughak Jenkins.


October 7thy 1882.

About 30 years ago I purchased a plot of land on a hill slope two acres
in extent whereon to erect a residence of considerable value. It formed part
of an estate laid out for building purposes in a suburb to Newport, Mon-
mouthshire. Tlie absence of waterworks necessitated the holder of each plot
who intended building thereon to sink a well for his water supply- Havii^
chosen the site for my residence, the architect fixed up<m the most conveni-
ent spot for the first requisite — the well.

After the well-sinkers had reached a depth of 51ft. they decided, from
the nature of the strata, &c., that it would be perfectly useless to proceed
further with the sinking, as the search for water in that direction would
bo sure to end in failure.

A consultation of all the ** knowing ones " in the matter was therefore
hold, with the result that, owing to the peculiar dip of the land and for various
other reasons, " they did not consider there was the least possible chance of
water being obtained on the plot of land anywhere.'* In this dilemma the
foreman of the masons, a native of Devon or Cornwall — ^I forget which — ex-
claimed, ** Why don't you try the divining rod ? In the part of the country
I come from no one would think of sinking a well without the guidance of
the rod." Although quite incredulous, I replied that I should only be but too
glad to have it tried if he knew any one who could use it. Upon which he
said his littlo boy, 11 years old, possessed the power in a remarkable degree,
and that if water was to be obtained on the plot he would pledge his charac-
ter that his boy would find it. The lad, an honest, innocent, and nice-
looking littlo fellow, being sent for and informed what was required of him,
immediately repaired to a neighbouring hedge, and returned with a rod of
blackthoni or hazel— I think the former-about 2ft. Sin. in length and of
the thickness of telegraph wire. Then placing the ends of the rod between
the thumb and forefinger of each hand, bending it slightly and holding it
before him at a short distance from the ground, he started on his expedition,
I iviul others following him and watching every movement closely. After
going up luid down, crossing and re-crossing the ground several times, but
never on the sumo lines, the lad stopped, and, to o^ great surprise, we saw


1884.] The Divining Rod. 107

ihe rod exhibit signs of motion, the fingers and thumbs being perfectly mo-
tionless. The motion or trembling of the rod increasing it slowly began to
revolve, then at an accelerated pace, fairly twisting itself to such an extent
that the lad, although he tried his best to retain it, was obliged to let it go,
and it fled to some distance. The experiment being thus far successful,
coupled with the respectability of the parents, the lad's transparent
innocence, and the father*s positive assurance that the operation might
be immediately commenced with the certainty of success, the next day
WW the well-sinkers in full swing on the spot indicated, and on reaching
the depth of 48ft. they had the gratification of striking on a strong
spring of pure and beautiful water coming in so fast as to cause them to
make a hurried exit, and in a few hours the well contained a depth of 10ft.
of water, rising since occasionally to 15ft. , and so it now continues. The
father stated that when he was a boy he possessed the same power, but
entirely lost it at 16 years of age. I send you this incident for what it may
be worth. To myself personally its results were most important, as it
changed the position of my residence and secured me an exhaustless supply
of beautiful water. 1 was then, and I am now, fully convinced of the total
absence of any deceit or collusion and of the full integrity of the whole
tiansaction, no fee or reward being asked for or expected, and I therefore
cannot avoid entertaining the opinion that there must be *•' something in it,"
that something being dependent upon some peculiar magnetic or other con-
dition of the human agent employed, and it may yet form one of the grand
discoveries of this or some future asre.


J^o. 48.

From ToPHAM Angus and Co., Contractors.

December 2%tK 1882.

In the summer of 1874, we had instructions from the Somerset and

Dorset Railway Company to sink a well at Shepton Mallet Station. We sunk

to a depth of 103ft., and got no traces of water. Our chief agent sent over

from Bath a man who could find water with the "Divining Rod." On

arrival he went down the well, and after sundry manoeuvring with the rod,

he said **You will never come upon water here." He came up. After walking

round the well a few feet, he came upon water which he said was boiling

40ft below the surface. He recommended a small heading to be driven,

about 40ft. from where he was standing. And he said, ** I do not think the

miners will have time to finish timbering before the rush of water will be

upon them." Naturally the Cornwall miners, who had sunk the well, and

myself thought it all humbug, but we found his statement true, for in less

than 24 hours we had 63ft. of water, and we got a 10-horse power engine

brought on the ground, and we could not reduce the water more than two

feet in the 24 hours.


108 Annual Business Meeting. [Jan. 18, 1884.


ANNUAL BUSINESS MEETING.


The annual business meeting of the members of the Society was held at
11, Chandos Street, Cavendish Square, London, on the 18th of January.
The President, Ptofessor H. Sidgwick, was in the chair.

The balance-sheet for 1883 (whidi has been circulated among all the
Members of the Society) was placed before the meeting. It showed that
although the receipts from subscriptions had greatly increased since the
preceding year, they had, even with the amount received iiom the sale of the
Proceedings, fallen short of the expenditure by over £300. The President
said that this deficiency had been fully met by tiie donations which had been
given in aid of the Socie^s work. Looking at the fact of the rapid growth
of the Society, which had increased its numbers from 150 at the commence-
ment of last year to over 300 at the present time, and was still steadily
increasing, he thought that this discrepancy between the income proper of
the Society and its expenditure need not cause the Members any oonoem.
He thought that, at this early stage in the development of the Sodeiy, it
was far more important to make the work effective than to balance snbsc^-
tions and expenditure. Accordingly lie contemplated with perfect equanimity
the prospect that, altiiough there would be a further large uMsreaae in the
amount received from subscriptiona, the Society would again this year have
partiaUy to subatst upon '^ charity.*' Indeed, he had the pleasure of
announcing three or four additions to the Research Fund sino&the beginning
of the year.

The following alterations in the constitution and rules, which had been
agreed to by the Council during the past year, were submitted to the meeting
and adopted : —

That in Bole 3 the words— "Provided tlmt no PresidaBi shaU hold the office
f<a more than three years oonseciitively "—be imiittod.

That a new Rule, to f61Iow Rule 8, be adopted as foSknn :— '-The Goimcil
shall have power to elect as GorrespoDding Meo^isn, wlw shall be <m the nme
footing as HoDorary Members, persons aUe mod willing to forward the objeote
of the Society."

That the following clause be introduced as the second sentence in Rule 17 :-^
^-ThenanKsof persons for the first time prapoaed to be co-opted on the Ooanoil
shall be brought forward at one meetingof the OomMsH, and shall be sent round
to all Membersof Council pcevioas toita next meeting, when the voting shsll be
hy baUot, and a unanimous vote of those prasent shall be reqidsite to may
the election.**

That in Role 22 the third danse stand thm : — ^^In. all meetingB of the CoanoS
four shall be a quorum "—instead of aa at present " — ^ Iel aU meetinga of the
Covncil five shall be a quomm."

The following gentlemen had been nominated by the Ooimcil to fill the
vacancies caused by the resignation of two Membcn during the year, and by
the retirement of four others under Rule 18 : —

Edxuxd GrRNET I Frank Podmore | Hksst A. Smith

Edward R. Pease | K. Dawsox Rogers | Prof. Raun^ur Stbwabt

No notice having been given of any other nominationa, theae gentlemen
were declared elected.

On the motion of the Hon. Percy Wyndham, M.P., Mr. Moiell
Theobald, F.C.A., was elected, in accMdance with Bnle S8, aa auditor for
i8ii4, on bdialf of the Memben.


ATarcli 28, 1884.] A Theory of Apparitions. 109


PEOCEEDINGS OF THE GENERAL MEETING ON

March 28, 1884.

The seventh General Meeting of the Society was held at the Garden
Mansion, Queen Anne^s Mansions, S.W., on March 28, 1884.

Professor Henry Sidgwick, President, in the Chair.


I.

THIRD REPORT OF THE LITERARY COMMITTEE.

Committee: — W. F. Barrett, F.R.S.E. : Chas. C. Masset ; Rev. W.
Stainton Moses, M.A.; F. Podmore, M.A.; and Edmund Gurnet,*
M.A., and F. W. H. Myers,* M.A., Hon, Sees.


A THEORY OF APPARITIONS.

Part I.

This is a question which, after five thousand years, is still undecided ; a
question, whether in theology or philosophy, one of the most important that can
come before the human understanding.— Db. Johnson.

By a curious combination of circumstances the question of "v^hich Dr.
Johnson speaks — ^namely, what Apparitions really are — ^which has in a
kind of fashion smouldered on since the days of the cave-men, or at
]east'of Job and Homer, is now entering on an acute phase. It is
coming at the same time to seem more important^ and to seem more
solvhle. In this respect it resembles many other time-honoured
questions, which men have been for many generations content to debate
backwards and forwards without result, partly from a pre-scientific
indifference to accurate tests, and partly from despair as to the
possibility of applying them. The attitude of our generation towards
such questions is very different. There is an inclination now to get to
the bottom of subjects, or at any rate definitely to recognise them as
bottomless. If any subject has actuality enough to retain any place at
all in general conversation, it is felt that somebody or other may be
expected to make it his business to analyse and expound it. The

* The Couhoil holds itself oeneballt responsiblb for the Sepobts of its Committees.
At thh HSAn of each Bepobt the names of those Members of Committee who abb

SPKIALLT BlSPOSBIBIil FOB ITS OOUPOSIHON ABB MABKED WITH ASTEBISKS.


110 A Theory of Apparitions, [Marcli 28,

change fairly indicates the extent to which the modem scientific spirit
has permeated the world of intelligence. Working unseen among
multitudes who belong to no learned bodies and have no scientific
pretensions, it helps to bear along on its imperceptible current the craft
of the discoverer, which used to have to be ever wrestling with the
opposing tides of ignorance and bigotry. The set of this current
gradually broadens. At first it speeds the barks only of the older and
more established sciences ; but little by little the explorer finds himself
supported into more devious channels, through which hitherto the
impetus of popular curiosity had never swept. Within the last genera-
tion, for instance, anthropology, from being rejected year after year by
the British Association as a vain cobweb spun from travellers' tales, has
taken its place as one of the most constant and popular elements in
their proceedings. And later still, the ingenious speculations of Mr. F.
Galton in the delicate domain of " eugenics," and in the idiosyncrasies of
mental imagery — received at first with something as near derision as
the eminence of their author permitted — are now recognised as a
necessary development of the method into which Darwin has cast the
thought of the age.

It is natural that the tone and the claims of science should
change with this gradual popularisation of the scientific instinct.
She can now demand, without fear, jx) subject, as it were, to her
police regulations the Broad Sanctuary which was once governed by
tradition and sentiment alone. Everything which claims to be known
is expected to show its credentials ; and views about the seen and
unseen worlds are alike conceived as amenable to objective tests. This
process has been applied, as we all know, to every element in ajicient
•creeds and institutions. It would be absurd to say that any kind of
general agreement has been in this way attained. But if we had to
•submit two resolutions, as a kind of compromise, to be voted on by the
readers of the innimierable tractates, " symposiums," &c., which have
<lealt with these high matters, we should select the following as prudent
generalities, likely to gain more assent and provoke less tfKFenuous
•opposition than any others which we could think of : —

1. The thesis that the universe is governed by unchanging laws, as
-opposed to arbitrary interferences, has gained in probability.

2. The crudely materialistic account of things, which refuses to
•allow us even to seek the key of any of the phenomena of life and mind
•outside the admitted scope of physiological and psychological laws,
has failed to commend itself as a complete or ultimate solution of the
•problems without and within us.

Now if we wish to see what real guidance lies in these two some-

ivhat vague resolutions, taken together, our practical coroUajry, as it

ivould seem, must be something oi tihis Idnd \ — -^Sioa^ i«Va&fik %Aoei;itl!iig as


1884.] A TJicory of Apparitions. Ill

perfectly valid every law which recognised science can establish, we
may fairly suppose that further laws, of a different kind it may be, but
perhaps none the less susceptible of rigorous investigation, are actually
in operation in the domain of human life ; and certainly no reason
exists for contentedly ignoring any hint of such laws which experience
may offer.

We select, then, a test-instance. We propose to deal with a class
of phenomena at once ancient, widespread, ajid notorious — the standing
jest and the standing mystery of age after age. Apparitions^ of
course, in one form or another, are an element in nearly every religion
known among men; and the discussion of their reality has been a
perpetual feature in religious controversy. But the apparitions which
have been most associated with religious ideas have been those of the
dead; and we shall do our best to avoid controversial ground, and also
keep our subject within manageable limits, by altogether excluding this
class. Let us take only the alleged apparitions of living persons, the
commonest of which are death-wraiths, or apparitions of persons near
the moment of death. How does opinion stand at present with regard
to death-wraiths ?

We think we may say that the subject holds a position absolutely
unique. The main question, it must be remembered, is simply as to
the reality of certain contemporary events. Differences of taste, of
temperament, of skill in historical interpretation, of religious or philo-
sophical proclivities, have nothing to do with it. Yet on this bare
question as to whether or not a particular sort of phenomenon, alleged
to be observed a good many times every year, is a reality or
a figment, intelligent opinion is found to be utterly, it might almost seem
hopelessly, divided. In what other department of real and pretended
knowledge can we find a parallel to such facts as the following?
Within the spiace of haK a year two papers appear in two of the leading
monthly Reviews. In the first, a rising physician, acting as spokesman
to a party of vigorous and enthusiastic scientific workers, dismisses the
phenomenon in question as a baseless absurdity. In the second, one of
the ablest bishops on the bench, whose scientific aptitudes were at any
rate sufiicient to obtain for him the highest mathematical honours at
Cambridge, represents the same phenomena as attested in a way
which makes doubt of them almost impossible to a fair mind. This
instance is a typical one ; and without hazarding a guess as to the
relative strength of the two parties, we feel assured that, if every
casual assembly of educated Englishmen could be polled, each view
would abQOst invariably claim a certain number of adherents. One
may not infrequently find the very antipodes of opinion located at
the two ends of a friendly dinner-table, and two groups, till then
harmonious, each pursuing the theme under a fire of contemptuous


112 A Theory of ApparifionM. [March 28,

jg^anoes from the other. In a piofiessedlj scientific age, this division
oC belief on a point of contemporarr testinHmj is sordy an anomalj
amounting ahnost io a scandal ; and the nKRe so that the alleged
events, thou^ not io be commanded at will, are not^ like the sea-
serpent, remote and inaccessiUe ; nor, Hke him, are they described
liy any particniar class of the commnnfty professionally addicted to
y^u-ns or to marvels. They occur, if they occur at all, in our very
midst; and are testified to by no single class, but by individuals drawn
from every class, and by representatives of every profession and pursuit.

A question of fact which is thus in suspense clearly cannot long
escape the widening current that sets towards minute and exhaustive
inquiry. For though there has been but little attempt at accurate
treatment^ it certainly cannot be said that the general interest in the
subject has in any way flagged. With all their difference of view, the
two parties at any rate agree in their inability to leave Apparitions alone.
There is, no doubt, a growing distaste for the fictitious tales of '' the
supernatural '' which have had in their day a considerable vogue ; and it
is still safe and easy to treat any thing which can possibly be called "ft
ghost-story " as on a par with such figments as these. But^ for all that,
such records as bear marks of genuineness are, as a rule, received with
a much more thorough-going curiosity, and refuted (it may be) with a
much more thorough-going zeal, than seems to have been the case in
times generally accounted far more credulous and far more intolerant.
If, therefore, little serious hope has been felt of ascertaining the truth
by subjecting the alleged phenomena to a really scientific analysis, it
mu«t be owing to an indistinct idea that the necessary evidence exists
in fragments too sporadic and uncertain to form the basis of any accurate
inductions.

It is against this idea that our first stand is made. We deem it
pnjinaturo to despair of the success of an enterprise which has never
once }>oen fairly attempted. We spoke just now of the invigorating
efloct of the infusion of the scientific spirit into popular thought : we
iiiUKt now even more strongly insist on another aspect of the democratic
UmiUmcy of modem science. The public are for the first time being
iwuUi pfJi/rtici2)ator8 in scientific work : for the first time they appear as
i\ui HourciiH of tho evidence, as the actual material (so to speak) of the
ex|i()riiiU)iitH, which the novel nature of recent inquiries demands.
Jloro, again, wo have tho example of Mr. Galton to point to.* The

* Mr. Qalton has felt himself at liberty to offer pecuniary rewards for
information of tho sort that he desires. We have held oursdves absolutely
tirciuludcd from taking this course. We do not, indeed, feel that there is any
xnar of intentional fictions being palmed off on us ; as our system of cross*
oxnminailon (which our informants may sometimes, we fear, have thought
piNlAntio) liai by thlH time set us quite at rest on that point. But it is plidnly
noMMory that our witnesses should not be induced, by any means that caa be
MfoUM, to OMt thoir ovidenoo in a striking or attractive form.


1884.] A Theary of Apparitions. 113

fact is, as he has pointed out, that the very spread of the scientific
spirit has immensely increased the number of men and women who are
able to give straightforward and accurate aaswers to questions bearing
on their personal experience. And as science graduaUy extends her
empire over the subtler problems of life, the importance of this new
departure may be expected to be more and more felt. Many a problem
which a E>eid or a Hamilton settled down to in a mood of conscientious
self-examination, and in the philosophic cave of his study, may hereafter
be solved in the market-place, by the Method of Averages and by
tables of statistics.

But to consider more precisely the present state of the argument as
regards the genuineness of Apparitions.

For them there is a considerable mass of evidence (which, as we say,
has never been carefully collected or measured), and a good deal of
popular belief — ^mainly held, however, by people who believe also that
they are more or less miraculousy more or less special interferences with
the ordinary laws of events..

Against them there is a large mass both of scientific and of
unscientific opinion. The unscientific opposition need not detain us
long. It embodies itself in such assertions as that no one ever heard
a ghost-story first-hand ; or that seers of apparitions almost always end
by believing in the Claimant, the Israelitish origin of the English, and
the flatness of the earth ; or that no one who was not of a nervous or
hysterical temperament was ever troubled with such experiences ; and
it rests probably on tacit reasonings of this kind, " / am a strong-
minded and superior person, and / never saw anything of the kind ; " or
on a comfortable and diffused sense of the progress of the age, and a
piquant recollection of Sir Matthew Hale's belief in witches. Supple-
mentary arguments can readily be improvised to suit the occasion. If
a believer in apparitions is a Catholic, it is said that of course he is one
who will swallow anything ; if he is a Freethinker, it is said that he is
setting up grotesque images to replace his lost gods. These people give
us no anxiety. Their assertions are mere phrases ; and one phrase is as
good as another. We entertain no doubt whatever that those who are
now asserting that the world has become too instructed for this sort of
thing, and that nobody ever heard a ghost-story first-hand, will — after
the evidence has been brought under their notice — be equally loud in
asserting that of course they always knew that any amount of people
could be found to vouch for personal experiences of this sort, and that
they are only too painfully aware what a thin crust of science overlies
the chaos of primitive superstitions.

But the scientific opposition has, of course, a more logical basis. It
supports itself on two arguments ; one of which is an explanation of
some at least of the alleged phenomena ; the other presumption agaiust


114 A Tlieory of Apparitions. [March 28,

the antecedent possibility of the phenomena, except so far as that
explanation will cover them.

(1) The explanation is that apparitions are merely cases of morbid
hallucination ; and that the time-coincidences involved (as when the figure
of a friend is seen at the precise moment of his death) are due to chance
alone.

(2) The presumption is that however hard it may be to explain
away the coincidence as due to chance, nevertheless that is the only line
to take ; and we must not suppose that the apparition has really any-
thing to do with the dying person, since this would involve an
interference with the order of Nature.

Now the exjdanation here suggested really resolves itself into a
pure question of facts and figures. No one doubts that there are
numerous hallucinations which do not correspond with any objective
fact whatever outside the organism of the percipient — ^which merely
reflect and externalise some morbid condition of his brain. And few
would care to deny that some such hallucinations or apparitions may have
been observed in close coincidence with deaths, <fec., and may thus have
given rise to the belief in wraiths. It is obvious that until the evidence
as to wraiths has been collected, sifted, tested in every way with
thorough care, and until also some conclusion is arrived at as to the
frequency of mere morbid hallubinations, it is impossible to say on
grounds of fact whether the coincidences of death and wraith are
due to chance or not. If it be at once asserted that of course all death-
wraiths are mere chance-coincidences, this positive • and wholeisale
assertion must be based on the presumption which we shall discuss
presently, not on the ground of recorded fact which we are discuss-
ing now.

Here, then, we have come clearly in view of the two lines along
which facts must be collected for the purpose of our introduction. We
must collect information not only of death-wraiths, but also of morbid
hallucinations — of purely subjective visions — having no claim to be
anythiag else. Up to this time no one has adopted the method of
systematic collection of facts along both these lines of inquiry, which
alone can be expected to bring the controversy to a final close. It is
not too much to affirm that the student of the subject may read every
word that has ever been published on both sides of the argument,
without encountering a sign — we do not say of the necessary statistics,
but of even an idea that statistics can be wanted. Confident assertion
is a far handier weapon. Thus, to quote a typical instance from a
leading daily paper, "The number of well-attested coincidences" between
the apparition of a person and his death " does not exceed, as Mr. Lang
has suggested, the limits that the laws of chance allow." The idea that
a point of this kind can be settled off-hand by anybody's suggestion — an


1884.] A TJieory of Apparitions. 115

idea which Mr. Lang himself would be the first to repudiate — clearly
belongs to the pre-scientific era. It is much as if some one should take
a stroll through Hyde Park, observe the children he met, and then
"suggest" the proportion of males to females in the population of
England. Again, on the other side of the controversy, it is no doubt a
more grateful task to relate or to priut an interesting narrative than to
ascertain, for instance, from twenty of one's acquaintance the dull fact
that they have never experienced a distiuct visual hallucination. Just
in the same way a scientific lecturer will win more regard at the
moment by a sensational experiment with pretty colours and loud
explosions than by laborious quantitative work in his laboratory. But
we must persistently impress on the friends of " psychical research " that
the laborious quantitative work has to be done ; and it is some satisfac-
tion to think that the facts themselves may stand as material for others
to deal with, even if the conclusions that we ourselves draw from them
are incorrect.

But while we much prefer facts to the most intelligent " suggestions,"
we must point out that we have no wish wholly to discard the
common-sense view of intelligent men, merely because it is not based on
careful numerical estimates. On the contrary, we ourselves are in a
position to appeal to that view with confidence, in respect of one, at any
rate, of the two lines of inquiry which we have indicated. The question
whether or not a very large proportion of the population have had experi-
ence of morbid or purely subjective hallucinations is one, we submit, where
we might fairly have taken our stand on the ordinary observation of
educated persons, and have thrown on our opponents the ornia of proving
it wrong. On this point a broad common-sense view does exist ; and
according to it^ " spectral illusions " — distiuct hallucinations of the sense
of vision — are very far from the everyday occurrences which they would
have to be if we are to suppose that, whenever they coincide in time
with the death of the person seen, they do so by accident. Nay, if we
take even one of our critics, and bring him fairly face to face with the
question, " If you all at once saw in your room a brother whom you had
believed to be a hundred miles away; if he disappeared without the
door opening ; and if an hour later you received a telegram announcing
his sudden death — ^how should you explain the occurrence ? " he does not
as a rule reply, " His day and hour for dying happened also to be my
day and hour for a spectral illusion, which is natural enough, consider-
ing how common the latter experience is ; " he usually says, " The
supposition is absurd ; there are no really authentic cases of that sort."
Under the immediate pressure of the supposed facts, he instinctively
feels that the argument of chance-coincidence would not seem efiective.

But to return to our census — it would perhaps have been too much
to expect our opponents to aid t^ in a task which it was rather for


116 A Theory of Apparitions. [Marcli 28,

0i/im to have undertaken. But we were scarcely prepared for the
ffjcejition which our proposal for a numerical estimate encountered. It
was introduced in a circular letter, every word of which might have
^ieen penned by a zealous sceptic, anxious above all things to prove that?
in cases where a distinct apparition or vision of a distant person has
Ijeen simultaneous with the person's death, the coincidence has been an
accidental one. If apparitions are extremely common things, then — ^it
was pointed out — it might naturally happen, according to the law of
chances, that one of them here and there would fall on the same day or
night as the real event which it suggested. Not a syllable was used
implying that the authors of the letter had themselves any opinion as to
whether apparitions to which no real event corresponds a/re or are not
common things ; it was simply argued that it is necessary to have some
idea how common they are, before deciding whether apparitions to
wliich real events do correspond are or are not to be fairly accounted
for })y chance. And since sensory hallucinations, whatever their
fre([ucncy, are at any rate phenomena as universally admitted as
inoasles or colour-blindness, it did not occur to us that the following
f[UCKtion could possibly be misunderstood : — Have you ever, when in
;<()0<1 licalth and completely awake, had a vivid impression of seeing oi
bcniig touched by a human being, or of hearing a voice or sound which
Hugg(>Nt(Ml a human presence, when no one was there ? Yes or no ? ,

Cloarly, the lyiore yeses are received to this question — i.e. the
commoner tlio purely subjective hallucinations prove to be — the stronger
iH th(^ argument for cluince as an adequate explanation of the instances
of ooinoidonco ; the more noes — the rarer the purely subjective
hull uoi nations provo to be — the stronger the argument that the death
wlnoh coinrifffs with the apparition is in some way the caitse of the
ii|>]>ariti(>n. Wo should have expected, if any injustice was to be. done
\iH, <lu\t it would have taken the form of attributing to us an inordinate
donin* for noe.^. To our amazement we found that we were supposed to
bo (\inung oxcluRivoly at yeses — and not only at yeses, but at yeses
v\\\\\.\\{\{h\ into orthodox "ghost-stories" — to be anxious in fact that
v\ovy ono \\\ and out of Bodlam who had ever imagined something that
WON not i\\K^\\\ or mist.akou one object for another, should tell us l^is
f>\|u»rionoo, with a viow that wo might immediately interpret it as due
U) tlu> intorvoutiou of a lH'>gi\v. A more singular instance of the power
of r*,»7»f>f»f«m<\v> of tho |y>\vor of gj\thering from words any meaning that
t ho orit io <^\u\os pi>HUs}>ost\l to find there, can hardly be conceived. A
httHiM(i«>nl «)\UM«t.ion on a |vrftx»t.ly well recognised point in the natural
llUl«wy %\t Xh<^ w^nw^ N\^4R troatoil, in scientific and unscientific quarters
V M (^ iw^^uifc'^to of faith in ** supomatural " agencies ; and we found
m «rtl<>iwnly ivbukf\i for ignoring the morbid and subjective
ittClt W^MVy hAlUunnAtiiMis — that is to say, for igiioring the fact


1884.] A Theory of Apparitions. 117

which we had set forth as the very basis of our appeal, and from which
its whole and sole point was derived.

So . much for the statistical aspect of the controversy.* We have
next to consider the presumption against Apparitions as being
interferences with Nature, exceptions to ordinary law-abiding phenomena,
and so a priori impossible. Now let us try to fix the meaning of this
expression. Arago's dictum pronounces " impossible " to be a mean-
ingless word, outside the region of pure mathematics ; but for present
purposes we are content to take it in a much looser sense, and to count
as impossible anything which can fairly be called too improbable to be
worth inquiring into. Let us try a definition then, and say " An
alleged phenomenon is impossible if it runs counter to a sujQ&cient
previous mass of experience ; or if (without definitely contradicting any
established generalisations) it postulates a force whose existence, did it
exist, must long ago have been inevitably observed." This perhaps
is as fair a working definition as can be got ; it is at any rate
one that all may agree to. But definitions are inanimate finger-
posts, not living guides. And as soon as a really difficult case
meets us, it is seen that the whole question has still been left un-
avoidably open in the words sufficient and inevitably, whose meaning it
must be left in each case to common sense and the dicta of experts to
determine. And even if we suppose a decision come to, it wUl be
difficult to regard it as final, so long as common sense insists^ — and it
certainly ynll insist — that all experience shall be counted for what it is
worth. How long will our definition bind us to go on dismissing, as
"running counter to experience," what is widely and strongly testified to
as experienced? Facts which have ended by settling down quite
comfortably with other facts, have before now had the door of science
slammed in their face; and phenomena which are now the very
starting-points of research were once distorted or ignored as intractable
and intrusive. Plenty of good solid substances have in their day been
jeered at as bitterly as if they were the airiest of spectres. Pre- Adamite
fossils, which flew in the face of established chronology, were inter-
preted as marks elaborately imprinted in the rocks by some uncertain
Power, with obscure reference to man's ultimate belief or disbelief in
the book of Genesis. Aerolites were scouted as a kind of fetish in
excelsis — a transcendental bsetyl — "the image which fell down from
Jupiter." " There are no stones in the sky," said Lavoisier, " therefore
none can fall upon the earth." Again, forces now used in a wholesale

* The collection of the statistics themselves must be the work of many
months ; and we earnestly appeal for help in it. To obtain an adequate nnmber
of answers, a very large nnmber of collectors is needed. Any person willing to
aid in the work should communicate with the Hon. See. of the S.P.R.»
14, Bean's Yard, S.W.


118 A Theory of Apparitions. [Marcli 28,

commercial mamier, and which existed as widely in the days of
Archimedes and in the days of Bacon as in our own, remained ahnost
latent, because the right conditions were not applied to draw them forth
or measure them. When we consider the place which electricity now
holds in the world, and yet how trivial were the forms under which
men for ages had been wont to recognise it, and how little they thought
of lightning in connection with it, we must surely be cautious of our
assertions as to wlien men ov^ht to have observed a force, and what
particular phenomena they ought to have referred to it.

This last illustration is specially apposite. For, as it happens, our
present theory comprises elements which are connected in somewhat
the same way as the electrical phenomena of the firmament and of the
cat^s coat. Under our term Telepathy* we connect very small
experimental, and very striking spontaneous phenomena. Apparitions
may stand for the lightning; while the ancient observations on the
attraction of amber for straw may be paralleled by the modest
experiments in Thought-transference, to which the Society for Psychical
Research has been for some time inviting attention. Apparitions, on
the one hand, have been observed in every age, but observed with mere
terror and bewilderment. And on the other hand, candid friends have
expressed surprise at our taking a serious interest in getting a rude
diagram from one person's mind into another, or proving that ginger
may be hot in the mouth by the effect of unconscious sympathy alone.
Yet we hope to be able to show that these trivial cases of community of
sensation are the germinal indications of a far-reaching force, whose
higher manifestations may outshine these as the lightning outshines the
sparks on Puss's back. We hope to show that the lowest telepathic
manifestations may be used to explain and corroborate the highest.
The experimental work from which, mainly at any rate, the lower
manifestations have been drawn, is as yet indeed only in its infancy.
But the infancy is a vigorous one ; and the results which, when the
subject was broached in our Proceedings two years ago, rested on
the assumption of the sanity and probity of a few observers, have now
been varied and repeated so as to divide the responsibility for their
genuineness over a group of persons too large, at any rate, to be
summarily discredited.

In thus insisting on Telepathy as a whole — as a conception of far-
reaching application — ^we are but following out a hypothesis which to
some of the highest intellects of the past appeared not only a rational,

* We began by restricting this word to cases where the distance thiongh which
transference of impressions took place far exceeded the scope of the recognised
senses. But there is great convenience in extending the term to aU oases of

impressiona conveyed without any aSection of tho percipient's zeoogniaed senseB

wliatever may he Ms actual distance trom\>\iQ ^%eu\i.


.1884."] A TJieory of Apparitmis. 119

but a probable one. The idea is no mere popular instinct. It comes
across our path in works of established fame, from Bacon's stately
proposals for "experiments in consort touching the emission of
immaterial Virtues from the Minds and Spirits of man, either by
Affections, or by Imaginations, or by other impressions," to Goethe's,
genial view that this power in the case of lovers " is particularly strong,
and acts even at a distance." Nor in referring to such names as Bacon,
Cuvier, Goethe, in support of a broad theory of supersensuous influence,
are we in any way bolstering up by antiquated authority a position
which modem discovery has undermined. We most strenuously insist
that whatever of rationality and probability that position ever possessed
it possesses still. There is nothing in the advance of science since the^
days of Goethe, or even of Bacon, which could possibly make tele-
pathy seem impossible to them now, if it seemed possible to them tlien.
Physiology and psychology have, of course, advanced ; the limits of the
known senses have been more exactly tested ; the invariable co-existence
of a physical with every psychical event has been more irresistibly
suggested. But the question of sympathy at a distance is left all the
time exactly where it was before. Analogy might lead us to suppose
that such sympathy, if it exists, has its physical basis, like so many
other phenomena of action between distant points. But such sympathy
if it exists, being ex hypotliesi independent of the known organs of
sense, is also independent of our enlarged scientific knowledge of them.
We have here, in fact, a specially good illustration of the difference
between the negative dogmatism and the positive discoveries of modem
science, and of the dangers involved in treatiag the two with equal
respect. It is not the assertion of the possibility but the assertion of
the impossibility, that the necessary evidence to a widely surmised fact
may one day be forthcoming, which is hasty and hazardous ; and such
attempts at finality lack wisdom in proportion as the prospect excluded
• is vast, and the instinct which prompts its exclusion a mere moment (so
far) in the history of thought. If the instinct of the vulgar and the
intuition of sages should turn out to have been right, and the fact of
communication apart from the recognised sensory channels should once
be established, then the scope of the laws (possibly even of the physical
laws) which concern our deepest being would turn out to have been
quite arbitrarily limited ; and the half-century which has surpassed all
others in the number of scientific paths which it has opened, would be
the very one which had shut out a legitimate curiosity from the most
inviting path of all. For in this direction may lie our clearest proofs
that we are not mere isolated drops in an aimless storm of atoms, but
interacting centres of force, and " every one members one of another. "^
And so far from the scientific study of man being a region whose
boundaries are pretty well mapped out, and which only requires to be


120 A Theory of Apparitions. [March 28,

filled in with further detail by physiologists and psychologists, we
•should then perceive that we are standing only on the threshold of a
vast terra incognita^ which must be humbly explored before we can
•even guess at its true extent, or appreciate its relation to the more
familiar realms of knowledge.

We present the ordinary forms of Thought-transference, then, as a
ifirst step in this exploring process. And the experimental work, which
we thus place in the forefront of our argument, at any rate supplies a
new and direct answer to the objection that the implied force — ^if it
exists — ought to have manifested itself sooner. For in fact it did
manifest itself as soon as it was really looked for. Before exact expe-
riments were made, the faculty which we now call Thought-transference
was vaguely observed and obscurely asserted; as soon as exact
experiments were made, it was definitely observed and explicitly
disserted. The mode of experiment may reassure those who look on
the faculty as something dangerous or uncanny ; we are still quite as
far as ever from any likelihood of reading each other's secrets. The
results have to be tried for either by a very distinct and irksome
process of concentration on the part of the person whose " thought " is
to be " read ; '' or through the establishment by particular means of
some sort of hypnotic condition in the " reader." It was when the
discovery was made that the somnambulic state could be artificially
induced, that experimental community of sensation may be said to have
first presented itself. We could fill pages with recorded experiments of
physicians and others in the early days of mesmerism in France, where
almost precisely the same phenomena as ours were obtained with
•" subjects" in the so-called "magnetic state." And wherever this induced
somnambulism has been largely practised, such phenomena have con-
tinued to appear. The novelty of recent years — that with which our
Society is specially identified — ^is the systematic repetition of the same
experiments with non-hypnotised subjects. And the experiments, when
thus tried, have presented the same res'ilts which mesmerists had
.already obtained in a somewhat different form. No previous experi-
ments were contradicted by these results, since no experiments had ever
been performed from which the non-existence of the telepathic force
could be concluded ; all that happened was that what had always been
suspected to exist, as soon as exact trial was made was found to exist.

We proceed now to illustrate the way in which all sorts and grades
•of " telepathy " do in fact hang together. And with this view we
may conveniently defer our actual evidence for Apparitions until we
have given some simpler and less startling instances — ^instances which
may form a transition between one end of the scale and the other —
of the distant and spontaneous action of the self-same force which


1884.] A Theory of Apparitions. 121

has been evoked within the four walls of a room by deliberate-
experiment.

Now experiment has given indications of communication of very^
various kinds, which follow in a somewhat indeterminate way the well-
known fourfold division of mental faculties into the emotions, the will^
the senses, and the intellect. And we shall find that the spontaneous
cases may be similarly grouped. We do not mean to assert that this
division corresponds with the various ways in which telepathic impres-
sions really reach the percipient. The telepathic impact, as we are
disposed to conjecture, falls usually upon the svh-conscixms region of the
mind. It emerges into consciousness by whatever channel happens in
each case to be the easiest ; but we cannot say what it is which deter-
mines whether the impression shall be felt emotionally as a diffused
gladness or gloom ; or fall on the motor nerves as an impulse to some
special act ; or be interpreted by the sensory centres as a ^'isible figure,
or a sound, touch, taste, or smell ; or, finally, shall be conceived as a
phrase or idea. But adopting the fourfold division for convenience'
sake and beginning with the emotional class, as the least clearly defined,
we may observe that the very vagueness of the emotions renders them
a field ill adapted either for precise experiments or precise records.
Strong emotion cannot be summoned up at will by an experimenter
even in his own mind ; while, if it exists, it probably betrays itself in
ways beyond his control. And, even when these purely emotional
impressions occur on a large scale, and spontaneously, they are still so
far defective for purposes of evidence inasmuch as they depend on the
percipient's account of his own necessarily indefinite sensations. In
the domain of experiment we can, however, refer to the occasional
cases where a secret grief or anxiety on a mesmeriser's part is reflected
in the demeanour of his " subject." And to illustrate the spontaneous
effect, we will select a few accounts from witnesses not likely to be
accused of sentimental exaggeration.

We begin with two closely allied narratives from gentlemen of
acknowledged scientific position. And we may remark in passing that
men of science — ^who are not, of course, a large class — contribute, we
think, quite their proportional quota to our collection of evidence
throughout. The following case was sent to Professor Sidgwick by the
Rev. J. M. Wilson, head-master of Clifton College, a senior wrangler
and well-known mathematician* : —

* Most of the informants quoted in this and the subsequent Keport are
privately known to us. But since it happens that many of them bear well-
known names, we have thought it better to omit in all cases the statement of onr
acquaintanceship, rather tlum to insert it in cases where our personal attestation
of confidence would have looked highly superfluous. The narratives here given
are, of course, mere samples from a very large collection, which we hope soon
to lay before the public in its entirety.


122 A Theory of Apparitions. [ifarcli 28,

Clifton College,

January 5tJi, 1884.

The facts were these, as clearly as I can remember.

I was at Cambridge at the end of my second term, in full health, boating,
football-playing and the like, and by no means subject to hallucinations or
morbid fancies. One evening I felt extremely ill, trembling, with no
apparent cause whatever ; nor did it seem to me at the time, to be a physical
illness, a chill of any kind. I was frightened. 1 was totally unable to
overcome it. I remember a sort of struggle with myself, resolving that I
xuould go on with my mathematics, but it was in vain : I became convinced
tliat I was dying.

I went down to the rooms of a friend, who was on the same staircase,
and 1 remember that he exclaimed at me before I spoke. He put away his
books, pulled out a whisky bottle and a backgammon board, but I could not
face it. We sat over the lire for a bit, and then he fetched some one else to
have a look at me. I was in a strange discomfort, but with no symptoms I
can recall, except mental discomfort, and the conviction that I should die
tliat night.

Towards 11, after some three hours of this, I got better, and went
upstairs and got to bed, and after a time to sleep, and next morning was
quite well.

In the afternoon came a letter to say that my twin brother* had died the
evening before in Lincolnsliire. I am quite clear of the fact that I never
once thought of him, nor was his presence with me even dimly imagined.
'He had been long ill of consumption ; but I had not heard of him for some
days, and there was nothing to make me think that his death was near. It
took me altogether by surprise.

James M. Wilson.

Our next case is also from a scientific witness, who can hardly have
been tempted to exaggerate, since the experience which he thus records
greatly impairs the force of the main thesis of his book, which is
directed against the transmission of obscure influences (mesmeric and
the like) from one person to another.

[Translation of pp. 71-73 of " Der sogenannte Lebens-Magnetismus oder
Hypnotismus " by Dr, E. L. Fischer, of Wilrzburg (1883).]

When I was a student at the University, I experienced, on waking one
morning, a quite extraordinary feeling of sadness. I was not in the slightest
degree unwell, and was aware of no reason for distress, and my state of
depression consequently made a great impression on me — the more so that I
normally enjoy the best spirits. I asked myself what could be the meaning
of it, and whether some serious illness must not be impending. I made
every effort to banish this deep melancholy, and especially to assume a gay
demeanour in the presence of my friends ; but all my efforts were unavailing.

* One or two of the cases quoted by Mr. Galton, of consentaneous action cr
thought on the part of twins, seem to us to be probably referable to telepathic
impressions.


1881.] A Theory of Apparitions, 123

Before lecture two of them asked me what was the matter ; they said I must
have something heavy on my heart. During the whole forenoon I remained
in this state of dismal wretchedness. All at once a telegram arrived from
home, informing me that my grandmother was taken very ill, and that she
was earnestly longing for me. There I had the solution of the riddle.
Nevertheless from that hour my melancholy gradually decreased, and in
spite of the telegram it completely disappeared in the course of the after-
noon. In the evening I received a second message, to the effect that the
danger was over. In this way the second phenomenon, the rapid decrease
of my wretchedness — a circumstance which in itself was surprising, inaslnuch
as the melancholy should naturally rather have increased after the receipt of
the first news — ^received its explanation. For the afternoon was just the
time when the change in the patient's condition for the better took place ;
and the danger to her "life once over, her yearning for my presence had
decreased ; while simultaneously my own anxiety was dispelled.

9

We have space for but one more instance, which is, at any rate,
suflBLciently terse and business-like : —

20, Rankeillor Street, Edinburgh.

December 27th, 1883.
In January, 1871, I was living in the West Indies. On the 7th of that
month I got up with a strange feeling that there was something happening
at my old home in Scotland. At 7 a.m. I mentioned to my sister-in-law my
strange dread, and said that even at that hour what I dreaded was taking
place.

By the next mail I got word that at 11 a.m. on the 7th of January my
«ister died. The island I lived in was St. Kilts, and the death took place in
Edinburgh. Please note the hours and allow for difference in time, and you
will notice at least a remarkable coincidence. I may add I never knew of
lier illness.

A. C N.

In answer to inquiries Mr. C ^n adds : —

I never at any other times had a feeling in any way resembling the
particular time I wrote about. At the time I wrote about I was in perfect
liealth, and in every way in comfortable circumstances.

If further proof be needed that we have not to go to weak or
liysterical sources for evidence of these vaguer and more emotional sorts
of telepathic impression, we may add that our collection includes under
this head accounts from two informants who, in very different ways,
liave obtained the highest reputation as acute and accurate observers —
Mr. Henry James and Mr. J. N. Maskelyne.

We come next to that branch of telepathy which manifests itself
as an influence exercised on the percipient's vdll ; or on the motor
centres where will is transformed into action. And here the connec-
tion between the exj^eritnental cases (both in the noiraaX ^jsi<^ ydl \W


124 A Tlicory of Apparitions. [Marcli 28,

"•ypnotic states) and the spontaneous cases becomes at once very
marked.

Having space for only a single experimental case, we choose one
which is of interest as showing a "subject" midway between the
normal and the mesmerised condition. It is interesting, too, as the
first publication, on first-hand authority, of an after-dinner incident'
which made much sensation in Yorkshire society when it occurred,
and which even twenty years afterwards was still alluded to with
bated breath as a manifest proof of the alliance of mesmerists with
the devil. Tlie modem inquirer will rather regret that this diabolical
assistance was so frequently perverted to mere works of charity and
mercy ; for Mr. H. S. Thompson (formerly of Fairfield, now of Moor-
lands, near York) has devoted his almost unique mesmeric power mainly
to the cure and comfort of his tenantry and poorer neighbours, and
has only incidentally made, and rarely recorded, those experiments on
" the silent power of the will " which few men, we fear, in a generation
are able to repeat.

Moorlands, York.

November^ 1883.

Dear Sir, — I will give you a sketch of some of the experiments I have
tried, and which lead me to the conclusion that the will is sufficient to
influence some people either far or near.

In 1837, I first became acquainted with mesmerism through Baron
Dupotet. The first experiment I tried was upon a Mrs. Thornton, who was
staying with some friends of mine, Itfr. and Mrs. Charles Harland, of
Sutton. She told me that no one had ever succeeded in mesmerising her,
though she soon submitted to being mesmerised by me. She went to sleep
at once, and was very strongly influenced by my will. One night when I
was dining with Mr. Harland, after the ladies had left the room, some
gentleman proposed that I should will her to come back again, which I did.
She came directly, and after this I could not go to the house without her
going to sleep, even if she did not know that I was there.

I have met with many cases of thought-reading, but none so distinct as in
a little girl named Crowther. She had had brain fever which had caused a
protrusion of the eyes. Of this ill effect I soon relieved her, and found that
she was naturally a thought-reader. I practised on her a good deal, and at
length there was no need for me to utter what I wished to say, as she always
knew my thoughts. I was showing some experiments to a Dr. Simpson, and
he asked me to will her to go and pick a piece of white heather out of a
large vase full of flowers there was in the room, and bring it to me. She did
this as quickly as if I had spoken to her. All these experiments were per-
formed when tlie girl was awake, and not in a mesmeric sleep.

Believe me, dear Sir, yours truly,

Henby Stafford Thompson.

The fotDiyi ''m. itcon ^<^ ^a^ m ^^ic^ai^ ^te^ ^^^^ss^ became


1884.] A Theory of Apparitions. 125

operative at a distance without any expectation of such a result on
the part of the person who exercised it.

[Extract from a Letter to Professor Sidgwlck.l

Cathedral Yard, Winchester.

January 31si, 1884.

Snt, — As a constant reader of the Times, I have noticed the "Proceed-
ings " of the Psychical Society, and as your Society has invited communica-
tions, I respectfully beg to offer you a short statement of my experience on a
subject which I do not understand. Let me premise that I am not a scholar,
as I left school when 12 years of age in 1827, and T therefore hope you will
forgive all sins against composition and grammar. I am a working foreman
of masons at Winchester Cathedral, and have been for the last nine years a
resident in this city. I am a native of Edinburgh.

It is now more than 30 years ago that I was living in London, very near
where the Great Western Railway now stands, but which was not then
built. I was working in the Regent*s Park for Messrs. Mowlem, Burt, and
Freeman, who at that time had the Government contract for three years for
the masons* work of the capital, and who yet carry on a mighty business at
Millbank, Westminster. I think it was Gloucester Gate, if I mistake not.
At all events it was that gate of Regent's Park to the eastward of the
Zoological Gardens, at the north-east comer of the Park. The distance
from my home was too great for me to get home to meals, so I carried my
food with me, and therefore had no call to leave the work all day. On a
certain day, however, I suddenly felt an intense desire to go home, but as I
had no business there I tried to suppress it, — ^but it was not possible to do so.
Every minute the desire to go home increased. It was 10 in the morning,
and I could not think of anything to call me away from the work at such a
tune. I got fidgety and uneasy, and felt as if I must go, even at the risk of
being ridiculed by my wife, as I could give no reason why I should leave my
work and lose 6d. an hour for nonsense. However, I could not stay, and I
set off for home under an impulse which I could not resist.

When I reached my own door and knocked, the door was opened by my
wife's sister, a married woman, who lived a few streets off. She looked
surprised and said, " Why, Skirving, how did you know ? " " Know what ? "
I said. " Why, about Mary Ann." I said, " I don't know anything about
Mary Ann " (my wife). "Then what brought you home at present ? " I
said, "I can hardly tell you. I seemed to want to come home. But
what is wrong ? " I asked. She told me that my wife had been run over by a
cab, and been most seriously injured about an hour ago, and she had called
for me ever since, but was now in fits, and had several in succession. I
went upstairs, and though very ill she recognised me, and stretched forth
her arms and took me round the neck and pulled my head down into her
bosom. The fits passed away directly, and my presence seemed to tranquillise
her, so that she got into sleep, and did well. Her sister told me that she
had uttered the most piteous cries for me to come to her, although there was
not the least likelihood of my coming. This short narrative has only one
merit ; it is strictly true.


126 A Theory of Apparitions. [March 28.

Dr. Fischer, whom we quoted, descrihes how he was himself once
driven forth from the midst of a jubilee-dinner, by the urgent desire
(as it turned out) of a person whose need of his attendance was at
the time quite unknown to him ; and we have reason to believe that
the experience is by no means unique in medical practice. We

received the following very similar case from Mrs. C , 11, Upper

Hamilton TeiTace, N.W. : —

December Vlth, 1883.
On the 2nd of December, 1877, I was at church. My children wished to
remain to a christening. I said, '' I cannot, somebody seems calling me ;
something is the matter." I returned home to find nothing ; but next
morning two telegrams summoned me to the deathbed of my husband, from
whom I had had a cheerful letter on the Saturday, and who left me in
excellent spirits on the Thursday before. All Sunday he was dying, and my
friends could not telegraph, and there was no train. I only arrived in time
to see him die. As soon as I read your letter, my sons both said they re-
membered the circumstance quite well, and signed the enclosed. George
was 10 years old, John 12 years.

Ellen C .

We remember, perfectly, our mother leaving the church, saying she felt
she was wanted, some one was calling her. The next day our father died,
the 3rd of December, 1877.

George C .

John A. C .


Here we have instances of an impression powerful enough to pro-

•duce a distinct and unusual course of action — ^for Mrs. C assures us

that under ordinary circumstances she would certainly have remained
where she was — ^yet so obscurely seated in the mind that its own
source remains unrealised and unknown. Somewhat similar is the
process of rising by candlelight in pursuance of an overnight resolution
to catch an early train, while, though sufficiently awake to dress
quickly and carefully, one does not yet realise why one is in such a
hurry to be up and out. A still closer parallel is offered by a
hypnotised " subject," who has been made in the sleep-waking state to
promise to go on some absurd errand when he wakes. He fulfils his
mission in just this mood of blank obedience to an inward impulse
whose origin he cannot trace, and which affects him, we may suppose,
like the migratory instinct that carries the lemming into the deep sea
We none of us grasp our whole identity ; the bark of our conscious
being may float on currents which neutralise each other in unguessed
■confusion, till one of them bears us for a moment with it, and
«hows how much stronger than our rowing is the set of that hidden
sea.


1884.] A Theory of Apparitions, 127

Our next class, a wide and important one, includes transferences of
actual sensation — sensory telepathy as distinguished from transference
of emotion, motor impulses, or abstract idea,s. And here we naturally
find the line between sensation and ideation very hard to draw. This
is not the place to discuss the derivation of ideas from sensations ; but
among our published experiments may be seen some curious instances
of a sensation transferred, but modified in the transference by some
erroneous belief on the part either of agent or percipient as to the
precise nature of the sensation felt or transferred. Perhaps the trans
mission of localised pains is as purely sensory an instance of telepathy
as can be well selected. We have occasionally obtained this phenome-
non in the normal state ; but it is in the hypnotic state that, thougli
still rare, it is most markedly induced. Take a mesmerised " subject ''
who is sufficiently en rapport with his mesmeriser ; talk to him on some
question which engrosses his attention; and, in the middle of your
talk, suddenly pinch (for instance) the mesmeriser's right ear behind
the subject's back. The sleep-waker will continue to listen and reply,
but his hand will fly to his own right ear, which he will rub with
manifest discomfort. Now here is a transferred impression which is as
purely sensory as we can well obtain, which prompts to an action nearly
or quite reflex, and is scarcely present in any conscious manner to the
sleep-waker's beclouded intellect.

Now, according to our theory of a close parallelism between the
induced telepathy of our experiments and the spontaneous telepathy
which nature offers on a much larger scale to our examination,
we might fairly expect to find some cases where a localised
pain has been transferred from one person to another at a distance,
imaccompanied by any definite idea of the cause or source of the
pain thus felt. To give force to an account of this kind, it is
plainly important that the pain should be sudden, distinctly localised,
and not easily referable to some mere ordinary cause. If Brown were
to tell us that he got into such rapport with Smith at a friendly
Greenwich dinner that, when Smith's head ached the next morning,
Brown's ached also out of sympathy, we should hand over both head-
aches alike to a branch of science better established than our own. But
when Louis Blanc feels a shock through one of his arms, as if it had
been pierced through with a rapier, at the moment that Charles Blanc's
arm is pierced in a duel, * we feel that any ordinary sort of common
cause for the two events is excluded. The incident which we shall now
quote (occurring to Mr. Arthur Severn, the distinguished landscape-
painter, and his wife, and the account of which has been obtained for
us through the kindness of Professor Ruskin) presents tho requisite

See »» Memoirs of 0. M. YouDg " (1871), pp. 341, 342.


128 A Theory of Apparitions. [March 28,

characteristics of suddenness, localisation, and unusualness of the pain
in a very high degree.

BRAin:wooD, Coniston,

October ^ih, 1883.

I woke up with a start, feeling I had had a hard blow on my mouth, and
a distinct sense that I had been cut, and was bleeding under my upper lip,
and seized my pocket handkerchief, and held it (in a little pushed lump) to
the part, as I sat up in bed, and after a few seconds, when I removed it, I
was astonished not to see any blood, and only then realised it was impossible
anything could have struck me there, as I lay fast asleep in bed, and so I
thought it was only a dream ! — ^but I looked at my watdi, and saw it was 7,
and finding Arthur (my husband) was not in the room, I concluded
(rightly) that he must have gone out on the lake for an early sail, as it was
so fine.

I then fell asleep. At breakfast (half -past 9), Arthur came in rather
late, and I noticed he rather purposely sat farther away from me than usual,
and every now and then put his pocket handkerchief furtively up to his lip,
in the very way I had done. I said, " Arthur, why are you doing that?'*
and added a little anxiously, ** I know youVe hurt yourself ; but Til tell you
why afterwards." He said, " Well when I was sailing, a sudden squall came,
throwing the tiller suddenly round, and it struck me a bad blow in the
mouth, under the upper lip, and it has been bleeding a good deal and won't
stop." 1 then said, " Have you any idea what o'clock it was when it hap-
pened ? " and he answered, " It must have been about 7."

I then told what had happened to me, much to his surprise, and all who
were with us at breakfast.

It happened here about three years ago at ^rantwood.

Joan B. Severn.

Bbantwood, Coniston,

November Ibth, 1883.
Early one summer morning, I got up, intending to go and sail on the
lake. Whether my wife heard me going out of the room I don't know ; she
probably did, and in a half -dreamy state knew where I was going.

I was left becalmed for half-an-hour or so, when, on looking up to the
head of the lake, I saw a dark blue line on the water. At first I couldn't
make it out, but soon saw that it must be small waves caused by a strong
wind coming. I got my boat as ready as I could, in the short time, to receive
this gust, but somehow or other she was taken aback, and seemed to spin
round when the wind struck her, and in getting out of the way of the boom
I got my head in the way of the tiller, which also swung roimd and gave me
a nasty blow in the mouth, cutting my lip rather badly, and having become
loose in the rudder it came out and went over-board. With my mouth bleed-
ing, the mainsheet more or less round my neck, and the tiller gone, and the
boat in confusion, I could not help smiling to think how suddenly I had been
hunihled almost to a wreck, just when I thought I was going to be so clever I
However, I soon managed to get m^ \iiiler, «sid, mth plenty of wind, tacked
back to Brantwoody and, making my \>oaX. «a^^%m'Ow^^^^»:^t»\ffi^"^^^^


1884.] A Theory of Apparitions. 129

the house, anxious of course to hide as much as possible what had happened
to my mouth, and, getting another handkerchief, walked into the breakfast-
room, and managed to say something about having been out early. In an
instant my wife said, " You don*t mean to say you have hurt your mouth ? "
or words to that effect. I then explained what had happened, and was sur-
prised to see some extra interest on her face, and still more surprised when
she told me she had started out of her sleep thinking she had received a
blow in the mouth ; and that it was a few minutes past 7 o'clock, and won-
dered if my accident had happened at the same time ; but as I had no watch
with me I couldn't tell, though, on comparing notes, it certainly looked as if
it had been about the same time.

Arthur Severn.

It is fortunate that in this case the incident was bizarre enough to
stamp itself at once on the memory. For one main dijficulty in col-
lecting cases of this sort is that, even if they do occur, they are not
likely to be observed or remembered. Their theoretical importance is
(very naturally) not discerned ; they are thought trivial and purposeless
— ^merely incredible, without either pathos or dignity. In reality, no
narratives are more significant, or cast a more searching ray on the
obscure pervasive co-sentiency of man and man.

We will next give a sample of an auditory impression. And here
we could easily give cases in precise parallelism with our recorded
experiments — cases, that is, where the actual words used by a person
dying or in strong distress are represented to the consciousness of a
friend at a distance. But the following, a somewhat more complex
instance, is perhaps of still greater interest. We received it from
the Rev. Andrew Jukes, Upper Eglinton Road, Woolwich.

On Monday, the 31st of July, 1854, I was at Worksop, stasdng in the
house of Mr. Heming, the then agent there to the Duke of Newcastle. Just
as I woke that morning — some would say I was dreaming — I heard the voice
of an old schoolfellow (0. C), who had been dead at least a year or two,
saying, " Your ifioiher Mark and Harriet are both gone." These words were
echoing in my ears as I woke. I seemed to hear them. My brother then was
in America ; and both were well when I had last heard of them, but the words
respecting him and his wife were so vividly impressed upon my mind that
before I left my bedroom I wrote them down, then and there, on a scrap of
an old newspaper, having no other paper in the bedroom. Could they have
been the end of a dream, haunting me in the moment of waking ? They
seemed to me like a voice from the unseen. That same day I returned to
Hull, and mentioned the circumstance to my wife, and entered the incident,
which had made a deep impression on me, in my diary, which I still have.
On the 18th of August (it was before the Atlantic telegraph), I received a line
from my brother's wife, Harriet, dated the 1st of August, saying that Mark
had just breathed his last, of cholera ; after preaching on Sunday, he had
been taken ill with cholera on Monday, and had died on Tuesday t».otoxv^\
that she herself was ill, and that in the event oi hex detv.t\\. ^^ V^^'e^^'Owea


s:


130 A Theory of Apparitions. [Marcli 28,

children should be brought to England. She died the second day after her
husband, on the 3rd of August. I immediately started for America, and
brought the children home. The voice I seemed to hear, and which at first
I thought must have been a kind of dream, had such an effect on me, that,
though the bell rang for breakfast, I did not go down for some time. And
all that day, and for days after, I could not shake it off. I had the strongest
impression, and indeed conviction, that my brother was gone. But you
should notice that at the moment when I seemed to hear this voice my brother
was not dead. He died early next morning, on the 1st of August, and hia

S«rif e nearly two days later, namely, on the 3rd of August. I do not profess
to explain it — I simply state the facts. I ought perhaps to add that we had
no knowledge of the cholera being in the neighbourhood of my brother'^
parish. My impression was that both he and his wife must, if the voice was

'true, have been taken away by some railway or steamboat accident.

Here we may conjecture that the first shock of alarm in the
mind of Mrs. Mark Jukes — at the idea of cholera in her house-
hold — ^flashed itself upon the mind of Mr. Andrew Jukes at the
impressible moment of waking, but clad itself in his brain, for some
untraceable reason, with a dreamlike reminiscence of the old schoolboy
friend.

We are excluding from this Report all cases where the impression
received suggests a presence wholly external to the percipient's organ-
ism, and thus seems to differ not only in degree but in Idvid from the
more ordinary forms of experiment. In the case of sound, however, it
is admittedly difficult to draw the line between what is inner and what
is outer sense ; and we have therefore included Mr. Jukes' narrative.
If we were to pass from the ear to the eye, we should be able to cite
instances of incipient visualisation of a very similar kind ; but the
subject of visual phantasms will be more conveniently treated as a
whole in our next Report.

From these cases of transferred sensory impression the transition to
transference of more abstract conceptions is gradual and imperceptible.
Ideas are derived from sensations, and intimately interfused with
surviving elements of sense; and in the spontaneous, as in the
experimental cases, the percipient who receives an idea from another
mind can hardly tell in what shape or investiture it sprang up in his
own — clothed upon by mental picture, or mental word, or in the state
described by one great Irish orator when he said of another, " He brings
a brood of lusty thoughts into the world, without a rag to cover them."
Let us quote first a case (originally cited by Mr. Knowles, in a letter to
the Spectator of January 30th, 1869) which closely resembles some of
our published experiments : —

Mr. Robert Browning tells me that when he was in Florence some yeara
since, an Italian nobleman (a Count Giunasi, of Ravenna), visiting at Florence,


1884.] A Theory of Apparitions. 131

was brought to his house without previous introduction, by an intimate friend.
The Count professed to have great mesmeric or clairvoyant faculties, and
declared, in reply to Mr. Browning's avowed scepticism, that he would under-
take to convince him, somehow or other, of his powers. He then asked Mr.
Browning whether he had anything about him then and there which he could
hand to him, and which was in any way a relic or memento. This, Mr.
Browning thought, was, perhaps, because he habitually wore no sort of trinket
or ornament, not even a watch-guard, and might therefore turn out to be a
safe challenge. But it so happened that, by a curious accident, he was then
wearing under his coat-sleeves some gold wrist-studs to his shirt, which he
had quite recently taken into wear, in the absence (by mistake of a sempstress)
of his ordinary wrist-buttons. He had never before worn them in Florence
or elsewhere, and had found them in some old drawer, where they had lain
forgotten for years. One of these studs he took out and handed to the Count,
who held it in his hand awhile, looking earnestly in Mr. Browning's face,
and then he said, as if much impressed, " C'^ qualche cosa che mi grida nell'
orecchio, * Uccisione, uccisione !* " (There is something here which cries out f
in my ear, "Murder, murder I ")

"And truly," says Mr. Browning, " those very studs were taken from the
dead body of a great-uncle of mine, who was violently killed on his estate in
St. Kitts, nearly 80 years ago. These, with a gold watch and other personal
objects of value, were produced in a court of justice, as proofs that robbery
had not been the purpose of the slaughter, which was effected by his own
slaves. They were then transmitted to my grandfather, who had his initials
engraved on them, and wore them all his life. They were taken out of the
nightgown in which he died and given to me, not my father. I may add that
I tried to get Count Giunasi to use his clairvoyance on this termination of
ownership, also ; and that he nearly hit upon something like the fact,
mentioning a bed in a room, but he failed in attempting to describe the room
— situation of the bed with respect to windows and door. The occurrence of
my great-uncle's murder was known only to myself, of all men in Florence, ;
as certainly was also my possession of the studs."


Mr. Browning, in a letter to us, dated the 21st of July, 1883,
affirms that the account is " correct in every particular " — adding, " My
own explanation of the matter has been that the shrewd Italian felt his
way by the involuntary help of my own eyes and face. The guess,
however attained to, was a good one." We think that in this conjec-
tural explanation the illustrious author of Sordello has done imperfect
justice to his own power of concealing his thoughts ; and we fancy that
his involuntary transparency of expression would not have enabled the
wily Italian to " feel his way " to murder. But of course such ca-ses are
more complete when agent and percipient are at a distance which
excludes involuntary hints.

Such instances are the following. The first is from a lady who
requests us not to publish her name. We learn from the friends with


132 A Theory of Apparitions. [Marcli 28,

whom she was staying that they " remember the circumstances perfectly
well."

On the 5th of November, 1855, when I was staying at a country house
with several friends, one wet November day we amused ourselves by reading
aloud, of which I did a large share, but was so overcome by the impression
that a very dear brother was drowning, that ice had broken, and that he was
drawn under it by the current, that I could not at all follow the purport of
the book, and when alone dressing for dinner, could only control my distress
by arguing that there could be no fear of ice accidents, as the weather was
exceptionally mild at that time. We afterwards learned my brother had been
in very actual peril, having jumped into a canal dock to rescue a companion,
who, being short-sighted, had fallen in in the dusk of the evening. My
brother was then an undergraduate at Cambridge, and I was in Wales. He
received a medal from the *' Humane Society," and a watch, &c., from the
members of his college, in recognition of the act. I have never had any
other similar impression of death or danger to any one.

The next case is from Mr. Robert Castle, estate-agent to many of
the Oxford colleges : —

Oxford, October 13^, 1883.

In the years 1851 and 1852, when I was from 15 to 17 years of age, I was
left in charge of a considerable extent of building and other estate work at
Didcot, Berks, at which some 50 or 60 men were employed ; and for so young
a person a good deal of responsibility was put upon me, as I was only visited
occasionally, about once a fortnight on an average, by one of the seniors
responsible for the work.

Occasionally this senior was my brother Joseph, about eight years older
than myself, and who had always taken, even for a brother, a very great
deal of interest in my welfare, and between whom and myself a very strong
sympathy existed.

I was very rarely apprised by letter of these visits, but almost invariably
before my brother came (sometimes the day before, at other times at some
previous hour on the same day) it would suddenly come into my mind as a
quite clear and certain thing, how I cannot say, that my brother was coming
to see me and would arrive about a certain hour, sometimes in the morning
and sometimes in the afternoon, and I cannot remember a single occasion, on
which I had received one of these vivid impressions, on which he did not
arrive as expected.

I had, without thinking particularly about it, got to act upon the faith of
these impressions as much as if I had received a letter, and the singularity of
the occurrence was not brought very forcibly to my own mind until one day
when the foreman asked me to give him instructions as to how a portion of
the work should be carried out, when I answered him quite naturally, "Oh,
leave it to-day, Joe will be here about 4 o'clock this afternoon, and I would
rather wait and ask his advice about it." The foreman, who had access to
my office, and usually knew what letters I received, said, "Perhaps it
would he as well, but I didn't know t\va.t. 'joxx \\ad received a letter from
Oxford,'^ I had to explain to kirn t\vat \ \va.^ xvsA. T^^^v?^^^\<i*^ufet^«&5^


1884.] A Theory of Apparitions. 133

that it was merely by an impression I knew my brother was coming, and
upon this I got a hearty laugh for my credulity.

As my brother turned up all right at the time named the foreman would
not be convinced that I had not been playing a trick upon him, and
that I had not received a letter and put it away, so that he might not

know of it.

The strangeness of the matter then induced me to arrange with the fore-
man always to let him know, as soon as I might have the opportunity, on the
occurrence of these impressions, so that he might check them as well as my-
self, and he, although he gave up all attempts to explain the singularity of
the thing, came afterwards to trust the certainty of their being right as much
as I did myself.

I told my brother of them, who was very much puzzled and could not
account for so strange an occurrence ; but on comparing my statements as to
the time when the impressions occurred to me, in a number of cases, he said
that, so far as he could check the time, it would seem to have been always at
or about the time when he first received his instructions, or knew of the
arrangement having been made for him to come.

As both the foreman and my brother have been dead for some years past,
I have no means of comparing their recollections of these matters with my

own.

Perhaps I should add that my brother was living at Oxford at the time,

10 miles or so from Didcot, and that although I was visited from time to

time by other gentlemen beside my brother, I cannot remember having had

these previous impressions in any case except his. Robert Castle.

The next case may also fairly be classed as the transference rather
of an idea than of an emotion. We received it from Mrs. Herbert
Davy, Burden Place, Newcastle-upon-Tyne.

December 20th, 1883.

A very old gentleman, living at Hurworth, a friend of my husband's, and
with whom I was but slightly acquainted, had been ill many months. My
sister-in-law, who resides also atH., often mentioned him in her letters,
saying he was better or worse as the case might be.

Late last autumn my husband and I were staying at the Tynedale Hydro-
pathic Establishment. One evening I suddenly laid down the book I was
reading, with this thought so strong upon me I could scarcely refrain from
putting it into words : '* I believe that Mr. 0. is at this moment dying." So
strangely was I imbued with this belief — there had been nothing whatever
said to lead to it — ^that I asked my husband to note the time particularly, and
to remember it for a reason I would rather not state just then. "It is
exactly 7 o'clock," he said, and that being our dinner hour, we went
downstairs to dine. The entire evening, however, I was haunted by the
same strange feeling, and looked for a letter from my sister-in-law next
morning. None came. But the following day there was one for her
brother. In it she said : " Poor old Mr. C. died last night at 7 o'clock.
It was past post time, so I could not let you know beioxe,"


134 A Theory of Apparitions. [March 28.

Decewfecr 27e^, 1883.
I have a perfect recollection of the night in question, the 20th of
October, 1882, when my wife asked me to teU her the time. I told her the
time, as she '^had a reason for knowing it," she said. She afterwards told
me that reason. Hebbebt Davy.

In all these cases the idea conveyed to the percipient, though it
doubtless involved a faint sensory image and had a certain amount of
emotional colouring, was at any rate abstract in so far as it was the
idea not of an object, but of a fact or eoeM, The following account
presents an interesting contrast in the total absence of an emotional
element ; while the idea transferred was of the most unpictorial kind.
Mr. Keulemans, a scientific draughtsman, of whose accuracy as a
witness we have had several examples, has experienced so many of these
coincidences that, even before our inquiries quickened his interest in
the matter, he had been accustomed to keep a record of his impressions
— which, as he informs us, were invariably justified by fa,ct.

In tlie summer of the year 1875, about 8 in the evening, I was return-
ing to my home in the Holloway-road, on a tramcar, when it flashed into my
mind that my assistant, Herr Schell, a Dutchman, who knew but Httle
English (who was coming to see me ihat evening), would ask me what the
English phrase ''to wit "meant in Dutch. So vivid was the impression
that I mentioned it to my wife on arriving at my house, and went so far as
to scribble it down on the edge of a newspaper which I was reading. Ten
minutes afterwards Schell arrived, and almost his first words were the
inquir}', *^ Wat is het HoUandsch voor *<o un* '? " (The words scribbled on
the newspaper were not in his sight, and he was a good many yards from it.)
I instantly showed him the paper, with the memorandum on it, saying,
^' You see I ^vas ready for you." He told me that he had resolved to a^ me
just before leaving his house in Kentish Town, as he was intending that
evening to do a translation of an English passage in which the words
occumni. He was in the habit of mAlHng such tianaLations in order to
impiove his knowledge of Enghsh. The time of his resolution coiTesponded
(i\s far as we could reckon) with that of my impression.

J. G. Keuubmans.

We have now, in rough adherence to the common division of man's
natuiv into emotions, will, sense, and intellect, indicated under each of
tht^> head$ some apparent anomalous and aberrant phenomena, which
w\> haw attempted to place in dose parallelism with actual experimerU,
and to oolli^ir5ivte prvn-isicoially under the general conception of telepathy,
the pnvi^e Uw of which has yet to be ascertained. Meanwhile, we
n\u;^t s^jxviaUy warn the reader against ccsicluding, from the word Jforce
which wv are oWigevl to use. that the law is necessarily a physical one,
or that thi$ di;^t;Mxt->a>\>rkiu^ f>rw cm in any way be coordinated with
the rev\^u^\i fvvrces of the material world. Xot only, as with other
<Wi\x*c»> j^'iuMueiva of lue «nA xbe^yo^t. \^ \3afe «>A6je(^«se side of the


1884.] A Theory of Apparitions. ISS*

problem the only one that we can yet attempt to analyse : we do not
even know where to look for the objective side. If there really is a
physical counterpart to the fact of transmission — over and above the
movements in the two brains which are the termini of the transmission
— ^that counterpart remains wholly unknown to us. The physical
analogies hitherto suggested for telepathic impulses are aids to imagi-
nation and nothing more. Mr. Elnowles* "brain-wave" was a metaphor
well chosen for its purpose, namely, to attract public attention to a
novel field of inquiry. But the transformation (by Dr. Maudsley) of
" brain-wave " into the more ambitious " mentiferous ether " only serves
to throw into stronger relief the real absence of provable likeness
between the psychical and the physical modes of communication. In
fact, the first nodus of the problem lies in the relation of telepathy
to space and to matter^ in the states in which matter is known to us.
Unless some such relation can be demonstrated we cannot reasonably
speak of a psychical telergy — an action of mind on mind at a distance
— as correlated with any energy which we have learnt to measure.
For even the force of gravitation diminishes with distance, and there is.
no force whose influence on a distant point is not liable to be inter-
cepted by various forms of matter ; while, on the other hand, it seems,
not improbable that the action ef mind on mind operates as esisily from
London to Melbourne as from this room to the next. It is true that in
our actual experiments we have found the physical nearness of agent
and percipient to be in the normal state always, and in the hypnotic
state usually, a necessary condition of success. But in our experi-
ments we seem to be dealing with weak and incipient stages of a
rapport which, when thoroughly established, and vivified by adequate
stimuli, may be transmitted without appreciable impairment or delay,
not only through walls, but over oceans, or through the centre of the
earth.

Understanding, then, that from physical conceptions we can hope at
present for nothing more than suggestive analogies^ we prefer to seek
those analogies on more sides than one ; not only in the conceptions of
radiance and undulation^ but in the conceptions of attraction and
affinity. The illustration which we should be most inclined to use, as
we note the extraordinary intensification of telepathic impulses at the
moment of dissolution, would be drawn from " nascent hydrogen " — from
some gas, let us say, which, set free by an electrical current from its
long union with some less volatile element, shows at its first moment
of deliverance an unusual eagerness to unite itself with any suitable
substance in its vicinity; but which, in default of such substance^
escapes away, recoverable by us no more from its diff^usion in the height
of heaven.

But the testing or verification of such speculatioiis «u"a AiJcL<5j&^ Ts>L>o&\.\i^


3 36 A Theory of Apparitions. [Marcli 28,

left for a later stage of this inquiry. The achievement which we claim
for our Society is not a theory of causes but a colligation of facts. We
claim that it has been shown that certain small experimental results
can be produced, and that certain impressive spontaneous phenomena,
generally discredited as anomalous, can be plausibly shown to belong to
the same class as these small results of experiment. To recur once
more to a previous metaphor, we may say that we have produced
frictional electricity on a small scale, and indicated the probable con-
nection of lightning with the sparks thus obtained. But we have not
yet tracked the birth of the thunderbolt, nor lit our highways with the
obedient flame.

Here we must break off". We are obviously as yet only on the
threshold of Apparitions as commonly understood — ^the visible phan-
toms, externalised in space, which, above all things, our title pledges us
to discuss. This further step, it may seem, must surely sever us from
the experimental support to which we have hitherto clung, and bring us
face to face with quite new problems. But though this is to some
-extent true, we shall not quit our old basis. We shall still hold fost to
our fundamental doctrine of Thought-transference ; we shall still seek
the origin of the phenomena not in " transcendental physics," but in
human psychology. The object of our next Report will be to show after
what fashion the minds of men, as already known to us, may be the
matrix of these airy crystallisations, the camera whence these phantas-
mal images are projected upon the waking world — ^what law is their
Sunamoner and their Disperser, the Hermes which " guides them harm-
lessly along the darksome way."


1884.] Report of the Committee m Saunted Houses. 137


11.
SECOND REPORT

OP T HK

COMMITTEE ON HAUNTED HOUSES, &c.

Committee : — Rev. W. D. Bushell, M.A. ; F. S. Hughes,* B. A. ;
A. P. Perceval Keep ; F. Podmore,* M.A. ; Hensleigh
Wedgwood, J.P. ; and Edward R. Pease,* Hon. Sec,


A year has elapsed since the last report of the Committee on
Haunted Houses was issued. During this time we have not been idle,
although we have no very startling theory to propound, or discovery to
announce. We have been occupied in the main in collecting and sifting
evidence, in printing those stories which seemed moderately complete,,
and in making some few personal examinations of houses reputed to be
haunted.

We are moreover convinced that at present we are not in a position
to attempt anything beyond the collection of evidence and the making
of experimental observations. Our subject is an obscure and difficult
one ; the stories which come before us present very various features, and
a considerable experience will be necessary before, with any confidence^,
we can judge of their evidential value. But, as a whole, the evidence
before us unquestionably points to the reality of this class of abnormal
phenomena. We are not investigating the origin of fables ; we are
examining facts ; and the quantity of evidence for them, which we are
now engaged in sifting, far surpasses our expectation.

Nevertheless, as noticed in our first report, we still find but few
opportunities for making experimental investigations of' Haunted
Houses. Often such houses belong to families who are not anxious to
attract attention, and perhaps ridicule, by allowing us to make serious
examinations. In other cases, where something abnormal is seen by a
tenant, we do not hear of it till he has left the house, which is either
occupied by another tenant or else can only be rented by us at consider-
able expense.

But beyond these there is another more serious obstacle to experi-
mental investigations. It is very seldom that phantoms appear or
disturbances occur with any frequency or regularity. On this point we
shall have something to say further on. Meanwhile it is sufficient to state
that when cases of repeated appearances are investigated, they usually


138 Report of the Committee on Haunted Homes. [March 28,

prove to be in this respect exaggerated. The original account is that the
figure was seen or the noise heard on one or two occasions in the course
of perhaps a dozen years. The report of such a story that first reaches
us often is that a figure is constantly seen, or a noise heard every night.
As therefore there is no satisfactory means of testing the reality of the
phenomenon, except upon the rare occasions of its occurrence, we are
losing hope that the experimental branch of our inquiries will furnish
us with much matter of value.

Nevertheless, we would beg any of our members and friends who
are so fortunate as to inliabit haunted houses, to afford us, if possible,
some opportunity for investigation. It may be that we are not likely
to obtain results, that is, to see or hear anything abnormal. But there
is some small chance of success, and for this chance we are willing to
incur much trouble and expense. If one of us could have some actual
experience of these phenomena, we should feel amply rewarded.

In these circumstances we are obliged to fall back on the testimony
of those fortunate persons who have seen phantasms or heard abnormal
noises. Now this evidence is not necessarily of small value, if a
phantasm is seen by several trustworthy witnesses, their account of the
matter is not vitiated because they do not happen to be members of
the Haunted House Committee.

We have made an analysis of the 65 stories which are printed as
being provisionally complete, but which, of course, form but a small
proportion of our collection. We have classified their evidential value
under four qualities, ABC and D. Of these 28 are A, or first-
class stories, for which the evidence is clear and strong, and the
witnesses for which we regard as worthy of credence. This does not, of
course, represent the true proportion of A stories amongst the total
number which reach us, since vague, unsatisfactory, and second-hand
stories are not usually worth printing. We now propose to give some
l)articulars of these 28 A stories, for the purpose of showing, not so much
what they are, as what they are not.

In the first place the whole of these stories are first-hand. In
every instance we have received the account from the actual witness
of the occurrence reported, and, in most cases, our informant is known
l^ersonally to some member of the Haunted House Committee, or of the
Literary Committee.

We are accused of obtaining our evidence principally from women.
This is, no doubt, true to some extent, and very good reasons could be
given why women should be our most frequent and accessible witnesses.
Nevertheless, for these 28 cases we have the evidence of 40 witnesses, of
whom 14 are men and 26 women.

The appearance of figures is recorded in 24 of these stories,
whilst 4 record noises only. This is, oi couxs*^, \s. Y^ci^o^vycLVJckfc^^-^^xrse of


1884.] Report of the Committee on Hamited Houses. 139

what obtains amongst our stories as a whole. Noises are more abundant
than visual appearances, but they are far less easily verified. If a
phantom is seen it can be clearly described, and must generally be
explained as an hallucination, or as a dream, or as something abnormal.
But noises may be all these, and, as well, may be rats, or wind, or wood
starting, or a dozen other things. Therefore, it is only now and then
that we obtain accounts of haunted houses where nothing has been
seen, which are sufficiently clear and detailed to be treated as first-class
evidence.

Omitting the four cases of noises only, and ^yb other cases which
are of an exceptional nature, we have left 19 stories, all as
regards evidence, of the A or first class. In these stories we shall now
point out the presence of certaia common features, and the absence of a
^ood many other features which might have been expected by anyone
fresh to the subject.

In the magazine ghost-stories, which appear in such numbers every
Ohristmas, the ghost is a fearsome being, dressed in a sweeping sheet
or shroud, carrying a lighted candle, and speaking dreadful words from
fleshless lips. It enters at the stroke of midnight, through the
sliding panel, just by the blood stain on the floor, which no effort
•ever could remove. Or it may be only a clanking of chains, a tread
as of armed men, heard whilst the candles burn blue, and the dogs howl.
These are the ghosts of fiction, and we do not deny that now and
then we receive, apparently on good authority, accounts of apparitions
which are stated to exhibit some features of a sensational type. Such
<5ases are, however, very rare, and must for the present be dismissed as
exceptional.

In examining the normal type of apparition, we find in the first
place that these appearances scarcely ever bear any relation to special
times. In none of the 19 cases we are considering is the appari-
tion seen at any known fixed time, either of the day or of the year.
There are, no doubt, stories that seem to be authentic of apparitions on
special days and at particular hours. One of the cases now published
records the occurrence of noises at a fixed time. But in general this
would seem to be an exceptional feature. It may indeed exist in soma
<5ases where it has not been observed, but on the other hand it is a
sensational detail which might easily be added in cases where it is
really absent.

This fact, if such it be, is important. We are usually told that
phantasms appear on the anniversary of some tragic occurrence, reputed
as their origin. But if subsequent observations show that the supposed
time-relation has no real existence, our task will be simplified when we
liave to ascertain the cause of these phenomena.

Another characteristic which these 19 ca&ea ^t^^^t^ \*^ ^"^^


140 Report of the Committee on Haunted Houses [March 28,

notice is the apparently casual and objectless nature of the appearances.
A figure is seen, and that is all. It does not act as if alive ; it does j
not speak or use its limbs. If it moves, it is usually described as
"gliding," that is, moving in an indefinite manner. It seems to resemble
a magic-lantern figure more closely than anything else we can suggest.
We may mention in this connection that the production of ghosts as ,
practical jokes, whether by magic lanterns or by any other means,
would seem to be very uncommon. Only one distinct case has come
under our notice.

Turning to the descriptions of the apparitions, we notice that m

12 cases the figure is taken to be a living person, whilst in 7
cases only it is recognised at once as a phantom. Again, m

13 cases it is seen distinctly, and described in detail ; in 6
casos only it is stated to be shadowy and indistinct. On these pomts,
thocofort*, the evidence is not decisive ; and for the present we can only
say that the figure, if seen distinctly, is found to appear in such clothes
as are now, or have recently been, worn by living persons.

Wo liud that in 7 out of the 19 cases a sudden death, often either
a nuuxlor or a suicide, appears to be connected with the cause of the
apiMirititni. In 7 other cases long residence in the locality, and
of ton a jHH^uliar attachment to some special house or room, seem to be
sin\ihu'ly connoctod with it ; whilst in the remaining 5 cases no ex-
pl»u\atiou of its origin is suggested to us.

As ivgiuxis frequency of appearance, the A stories are not a mt
tost, siiuv tho fact tliat we have good first-hand evidence for several
ivournM\oos of the same apparition is, of itself, generally a sufficient
t>\vsotx tor giving tho story a place in the first class. Yet in 8 out
of thoso 19 Oivsos, we have records only of a single appearance. And
ovon whon a tiguro is seen more than once, it is often only at intervals
dvu'it\^;j rt i\M\sidorable period. The instances where an apparition is
MyM\ o»\ sovon\l occasions during one year are very few indeed.

'r!\o v^n\oralis3\tions which we have now laid before you are pro-
t\^sst\Uy u\;uio from tho 19 cases under consideration, but in reaUty
w o h:u o dr^wn thorn fn>m our knowledge of the whole mass of evidence
iu owr ^vvvsoss^ion. Wo find that m large majority of the stories which
|>',\>\o t.> Iv ji\ uu\no> possie^ ceHain fetiituKS .; and, an the other hand,
Nxx^ t'iuxl th;u iu uxnoo;v?30s out ctf tea, whoji a stoiy differs widely from
tUot\|VxiT pvxxNji to Iv ir.v\>rTWts or uaattainable frcnn an authentic
^^M\\\N^ Wo ;x*\> not |\rt^}virt\i tv> aSttq tlttt all exceptional stories are
un\>\v-\\ of o\\\{ov,v\\ 1>;:t x^^ *ie inolined to believe that a larger
%\\r*vvt\xv,\ v>» v,„^T< rL^;. Ar,d a r:5.^?v ctiirv>fsil sndy of it, will, before long,
o\\,0,\;o v,N ".x ;,^x ,Xx>\>r, wxth $o.:uo vvrrsduty and precision the laws of
tho x\\-o,v^A v,^v xNtf thv\$^> iNS^Us>r,-er-*.

l^^ v\vAo'\;s^>»;\, Mkx^ ui^i^s^t ro^vti^: ;i»A: w^ ce&r ik> hvpothesis to account


1884.] Report of the Committee on Haunted Houses. 141

for the facts which we are discussing. We have avoided the convenient
word " ghost " because it might be understood as conveying the idea
that phantoms are due to the presence of departed spirits. To this
hypothesis we desire to give no countenance. Until our collection of
facts is larger, and our examination of them more complete, we abso-
lutely decline to theorise.

We have now to bring before you two narratives, the first of which
is a fair example of the normal type. It is a good case, because we
have accounts of the apparition on three . distinct occasions, and from
three separate persons. Moreover, the story is of recent date, and the
witnesses are all alive, and personally known to our President and to
Professor Barrett.

The evidence is as follows : —

In relating simply what I saw one July morning in the year 1873, I will
first describe the room in which I saw it. It is a bedroom with a window at
either end, a door and a fireplace at opposite sides ; the door is nearer the
front window, and the room is on the upper sjp»ey of a two-storied house, as

you know, some miles from the city of D . The house is an old one,

said to have been built before the Kebellion ; it has all the appearance of
dating as far back as that, at least, the walls being unusually thick, and the
roof high-pointed and uneven. A large old-fashioned garden lies in front,
and a yard opening upon the public road at the rear. The occupants at the
time I speak of were my brother Henry, myself, and a servant woman.
The latter slept in a room in the basement storey. A lobby divided my
brother's room from mine. On the night before the morning above-men-
tioned, I had locked my door, as fisual, and having undressed and put out
my light, I fell into a sound dreamless sleep. I awakened, I should think,
about 3 o'clock in the morning — of the hour I am not sure — with my face t6
the front window. One of my oddities consists in disliking cross lights, so
that I had got mto the habit of having the blind of the back window drawn
and the shutters closed at night, and of leaving the blind raised and the
shutters open towards the front, liking to see the trees and sky when I
awakened.

Opening my eyes now I saw right before me the figure of a woman,
stooping down and apparently looking at me. Her head and shoulders were
wrapped in a common grey woollen shawl. Her arms were folded, and they
were also wrapped, as if for warmth, in the shawl. I looked at her in my
horror, and dared not cry out lest I might move the awful thing to speech or
action. I lay and looked and felt as if I should lose my reason. Behind
her head I saw the window, and the growing dawn, the looking-glass upon
the toilette table, and the furniture in that part of the room. After what
may have been only seconds — of the duration of this vision I cannot judge —
she raised herself and went backwards towards the widow, stood at the
toilette table, and gradually vanished. I mean she grew by degrees trans-
parent, and that through the shawl and the grey dress she wore I saw the
white muslin of the tablecover again, and at last saw that only in the place
where she had stood. I have heard people speak of lying *' without moving,

M


142 Report of the Committee on Haunted Houses [March 28,

a muscle." For hours I lay as I had lain on first awaking, not daring
even to turn my eyes lest on the other side of the bed I should see her
again, and first had courage to stir when the servant came to call me.
Now there is one thing of which I could take my oath, and that is, that I
did not mention this circumstance either to my brother or our servant. I
was almost morally certain that if I had done so the latter, whom we valued,
would leave us, and that the former would turn me into ridicule. We had
been only about four months in that neighbourhood, and had few acquaint-
ances, and 1 am equally certain that I mentioned the occurrence to none of
them. At the distance of about a mile and a-half from us lived a family
with whom I had long been intimate, but to whom my brother had not then
been introduced. After passing a sleepless night with a perfect glare of
lamp-light about me, and not daring even to close my eyes, I started on the
second day to see my friends and consult with them. As we sat at luncheon
I told them about it, half dreading the ridicule of my host, but though he
smiled at first he went gravely into it, and proved in a sensible, matter-of-
fact way, entirely to his satisfaction, that the apparition was attributable to
the state of the drainage or that of my stomach. His wife and daughter
were sorry for my evident nervousness, and, I fancy, set down a good deal
of it to a very imaginative mind. However, I went home considerably
relieved, and struggled hard to obliterate my vivid remembrance with my
friend's arguments.

Exactly a fortnight afterwards, when sitting at breakfast, I noticed that
my brother seemed out of sorts, and did not eat. On asking if anything
were the matter, he replied : " No, but IVe had a horrid night-mare.
Indeed," he went on, " it was no night-mare. I saw it early this morning,
just as distinctly as I see you." '* What ? " I asked. ** A villainous looking
hag," he answered, "with her head and arms wrapped in a cloak, stooping

over me, and looking like this " He got up, folded his arms, and put

himself in the posture I remembered so well. " O, Henry," I said, " I saw
the same a fortnight ago." "And why did you not tell me before?" he
asked. " Because," I said, ** I was sure you would only laugh." " I should
be sorry," he said, ** if anyone laughed at me if I mentioned this ; it has
quite upset me." He then described how the figure moved towards the door
and disappeared. I asked him if she wore a cloak or a shawl, and he said it
might have been either — he was chiefly struck by her malevolent face and
her posture.

About four years afterwards, in the month of July, one evening about 7
o'clock, my second eldest sister and two little children were the only people
at home. The eldest child, a boy of about four or five years, asked for a
drink, and on leaving the dining-room to fetch it my sister desired the
children to remain there till her return, leaving the door open. Coming
back as quickly as possible, she met the boy pale and trembling on his way
to her, and asked why he had left the room. " Oh," he said " who is that
woman, who is that woman ? " "Where ? " she asked. " That old woman
that went upstairs," he answered. She tried to convince him that there
was no one else in the house, but he was so agitated and so eager to prove it
that ahe took his trembling hand in hers and brought him upstairs, from
one room to another, he searching ■bebind c>si\a\i\& ^sid under beds, still


1884.] Report of the Committee on Haunted Houses. 143

maintaining that a woman **did go upstairs.** My sister thought that the
mere fact of a woman going upstairs in a house where he was a stranger
would hardly account for the terror of the child. My brother had then
married and gone to live at a distance.

A gentleman with whom we became acquainted in the neighbourhood,
started when we first told him of what we had seen, and asked had we
never heard that a woman had been killed in that house many years
previously, and that it was said to be haunted. He is a sober-minded,
religious man, an Englishman of middle age, the most unimaginative man
I ever met, but he says he firmly believes we actually saw what he
described.


I


I have heard that the house was previously for years unlet owing to having
got the name of being haunted, and this was our only reason for keeping the
atory very much to ourselves. About three years since, I mentioned what
we had seen to the sub-agent, a respectable man, and he seemed annoyed
and asked if anyone had been telling us anything of the kind, to which we
replied in the negative. We had been awakened night after night by the
sound of heavy blows such as I have heard produced by breaking up peat
with a cleaver, and, day and night, heavy f ootsteaps going up and down
stairs. One night as I was going to bed — ^my youngest sister had been in about
10 minutes previously to say good night — I heard a loud knocking at the panel
of my door — someone knocking with thj^ knuckles — ^and I called out, *' Come
in ! As there was no answer I called out louder, " Come in ! " taking for
granted it was my sister come back for some reason. As she did not answer
and was not at my door when I opened it, I went across the lobby to her
room, saying, in rather a tone of annoyance, *' Why didn't you come in ?"
when I saw the room was dark, and getting a light saw she was sound
asleep.

Another night, while undressing at the far end of the room, I heard the
sound of a large bund^jof-keys-fiung violently on the toilette-table. At first
I was startled, but took my light over to examine it, thinking I might have
left keys or some heavy metal in such a position as to cause a fall like what
I had heard, but still could not get over the idea that they were flung
violently. There was nothing of the kind to be seen on or near the table.
Two or three small keys hung in one of the drawers of my chest of drawers,
and were not in motion. Frequently, in that ro(»ra, both in day-time and
at night, my dress has been pulled as if grasped by some hand.

On one occasion, as I was laid up with erysipelas in my foot, my youngest
sister had a bed moved into my room and slept there to take care of me.
When one night, as I lay wide awake, my foot being rather painful, there
was a loud sound beside my bed — as if some heavy body had fallen — indeed,
the whole room shook with the fall. My sister started up out of a sound
sleep, and cried out, "What is it? What is it?'* in a frightened voice.
*' What did you hear?" I asked. ** Something heavy falling there," she
said, and pointed to the spot at which I heard it — which was, in fact, the
very spot on which my visitant appeared to me. She got up and searched
the room, but found nothing to accoimt for it.

May 23rd, 1888. ^, ^. ^. ^.


144 Report of the Committee on Haunted Homes. [Maxell 28,

About three years ago, on the night of the 7th July, I was awakened
from a sound sleep by someone speaking close to me. I turned roimd saying,
*'Wliatisit, Emily?" thinking that a sister who slept in the room next
mine had come in. I saw plainly the figure of a woman who deliberately
and silently moved away towards the door, which remained shut as I had left
it. She disappeared, and not till then did the slightest doubt of my visitor
being supernatural enter my mind. Then I got really frightened, saying to
myself it must be the " Grey Lady," as we had for years called our ghost,
the story of which I had often turned into ridicule. A few minutes after-
wards I heard the hall clock strike two. I may mention that neither
shutters nor blind were closed. I thought it best to say nothing of what
had occurred to the only sister then at home, but the next evening when
talking to a gentleman who^was with us, she said suddenly to me, "Did you
hear any noise last night ? I thought it sounded as if in your room." I said,
" No — at what hour ? " ** Two o'clock." Soon she left the sitting-room, and
I told the friend with us, imder the promise of secrecy, what I had seen.

M. B.

Julybth, 1883.


So far as I recollect, it was about this time 10 or 11 years ago, I was
asleep in the house in question, and suddenly about 6 o'clock on a fine
summer's morning I was awakened by a feeling or presentiment of approach-
ing evil. I opened my eyes and distinctly saw the fonri <jf a darkly-clad
elderly female bending over me with folded arms, and glaring at me with eyes
of the most intense malevolence and malignity. I tried to scream, and
fltruggled to withdraw myself from her, when she slowly and silently receded
backwards and seemed to vanish through the bedroom door. I cannot say
whether the door was locked ; I generally keep it so at night, but it was
certainly closed tight.

August Ist, 1883. H. B. B., Solicitor.

The next narrative is a remarkably clear account of a haunted
house where noises were heard, but nothing was ever seen. It was
written by a well-known Church dignitary, from whose widow we have
received it. She was cognisant of all the facts related, and confirms the
accuracy of the account in every detail. The case is remarkable as
showing a periodicity in the noises, which is, as we have previously
stated, by no means a common feature.

About 18 years ago, having completed the probationary period of
two years from my ordination as deacon, I was in search of a curacy.
Amongst others which came under my notice was one in the south-west of
the county of S. The parish was extensive and the situation very retired.
It was a sole charge, and a commodious house was at the disposal . of the
curate. The curacy was accepted, and in due time my wife and I
proceeded to take possession of our new home. We reached it on the after-
noon of a dull February day.

The vicarage we were to occupy was a square spacious building, surrounded
by lawn and shrubberies, garden and orchard. The house was detached,
situated a short distance from the village, and separated by a road from two


1884.] Report of the Committee on Haunted Houses, 1 45

or three cottages which were the nearest dwellings. Our rooms were large
and sufficiently lofty, everything was in good repair, and we congratulated
ourselves on having secured a comfortable home.

It was, I remember, a Friday afternoon on which we arrived, and we
worked with a will, and had two or three rooms fit for occupancy by Saturday
evening.

Night fell, shutters were fastened, bolts shot and keys turned, and my
wife and I retired to bed on that Saturday, not reluctantly, for we had
worked for a couple of days as hard as porters in a warehouse.

We had not as yet engaged a servant, and had, therefore, availed our-
selves of the help of an honest country woman who lived hard by. When I
made all fast on the Saturday night, that honest country woman, my wife,
and myself were — to the best of my knowledge and belief — the only three
living beings within the four walls of the vicarage. Long before twelve we
were all in the land of dreams, and probably some way* beyond it, in that
realm of sleep to which no " extravagant and erring " dream ever finds its
way. Suddenly, however, there broke on our drowsy ears a sound which
murdered sleep. In a moment, almost before consciousness had come, I was
out of bed and on my feet, and even then it seemed as if that strange noise
was only just passing into the accustomed silence of deep night. My wife
was as abruptly and completely roused as myself, and together we listened
for some repetition of what had disturbed us, or for some further token to
guide us to the discovery of its cause. But nothing came. It was obviously
my business to make an investigation without delay, for the natural solution
of the mystery was that some one or more persons had made their way into
the house.

Accordingly I hurried on a few articles of dress and set out on an
exploring expedition. Before doing so, however, I looked at my watch, and
found that it was just 2.5 a.m. I wish to call particular attention to this
fact. I made a thorough search over the whole house. I examined the
fastenings of the doors, the shutters of the windows. All was safe, all was
quiet, everything was in its place. There was nothing left for me to do but
to retiun to my room, go to bed, and think no more of the disturbance.
This last was not so easy. Neither my wife nor I could persuade ourselves
that it was a mistake. The sound was so palpable, broke on our -sleep with
so peremptory a summons, pealed on our half -awakened senses with so pro-
longed a crash, that neither could its reality be doubted nor its impression
thrown oflf.

It struck me, then and afterwards, as being like the crash of iron bars
falling suddenly to the ground. Certainly there was a sharp metallic ring
about it. Moreover, it was prolonged, and, instead of coming from some
fixed point, it seemed to traverse the house like a succession of rattling
echoes, treading hard on one another's heels.

I speak of it not specially as it impressed me on the particular occasion
to which I am referring, but from my general estimate of its character ; for
I may as well say at once that my acquaintance with it was not limited to
the experiences of that one early Sunday morning. Of course — on my return
to my room — ^when we talked the matter over, it occurred to us to ascertain
whether the good woman from the village had also been roused by the din.


146 Report of the Committee on Haunted Housed. [March 28,

However, as she had not herself given any signs of alarm, we resolved to
wait to see whether she had any tale to tell in the morning.

Well ! the remaining hours of darkness passed away quietly enough,
and when morning came we found that the third member of our household
had been a sharer with ourselves in the mysterious visitation. She, like us,
had been rudely awakened, and had long lain awake in a state of consider-
able disquietude and alarm.

To her, however, the thing was not quite so strange and unlooked for as
to us. ** Oh dear," she said, *' I've heard tell of it afore, but never till last
night did I hear it, and don't want to again."

She had heard tell of it before. But there was not much more to be got
out of her, and she seemed unwilling to discuss the subject. '* It was a
conceit," she said, and that was all she choEe to say about it. On one point,
however, she was clear enough, and that was the necessity of going home
that evening to look after her house and children. She would give us her
services during the day, but she could not well be spared from home at nights.
To this ejQfect, therefore, an accommodation was made with her, and my wife
and I stood committed for the coming night to be the sole garrison of the
vicarage, whether it was to be assailed by tangible force or impalpable
sounds. The Sunday duties were duly discharged. I met my parishioners
in their church for the first time ; looked round with satisfaction on a large
and attentive, though not perhaps especially intelligent congregation,
and could not help wondering whether any of those stolid young farmers and
peasants, whose faces were turned so impassively towards the pulpit, had
been indulging in a grim practical joke at my expense.

In due time, my wife and I found ourselves alone in the vicarage : the

darkness of a winter night without, a snug wainscoted parlour, a bright fire,

and sundry creature comforts within. Thus we sat, till about 8 o'clock. It

then occurred to us to make an examination of the house, though we had

taken care — as soon as it became dark and our handmaid had left us — to make

everything, as far as possible, secure. We rose, then, and set off together,

and passing out of our sitting-room, found ourselves in the square entrance

hall, the door of which opened into the garden. Scarcely were we there

before we heard a noise which made us pause and listen. The sound came

/ from the long passage upstairs into which all the bedrooms opened, and was

\ simply the sound of human footsteps walking slowly but firmly along the

^ paseoge. There was no mistake about it. Bold, distinct, and strong, each

footfall reached our ears. At once, candle in hand, I dashed upstairs, three

steps at a time, and in a moment was on the landing and in full view of the

passage. But there was nothing to be seen. My wife, of course, followed

me, for she was becoming nervous. Together, therefore, we entered and

searched the bedrooms. But our search was fruitless. If anybody had been

there he had contrived by some way inexplicable to us to make his escape. A

more complete and anxious examination of the house was the necessary

consequence of this adventure, and we pretty well satisfied ourselves that,

whatever might have caused the sounds we had heard, we were not the

involuntary entertainers of any unbidden guest of flesh and blood. To make

assurance doubly sure, I unbarred the yard door and took a survey of the

outside premiaea. From this work, \io^'ev^T« \ ^^a» ic^^Jaax hastily recalled by


1884.] Report of the Committee on Haunted Houses. 147

my wife, who announced that the inexplicable footsteps were again in motion,
and though on my return they had ceased, yet once more that night they did
us the favour of letting us hear them before we went to bed. Now at this
point I am bound in honesty to say that when we returned to our parlour fire,
which had a very encouraging and comforting look about it, my wife and I,
in discussing the matter, did hint at the possibility of our having fallen in
with *' a haunted house." And it is only fair to add that we neither of us
were so settled in all unbelief of the supernatural, as without further con-
sideration to scout the notion as absurd. But assuredly we did not jimip at
once to any such conclusion, and were content with simply passing a resolu-
tion to the effect that the disturbances were somewhat extraordinary and
rather disagreeable than otherwise.

That night we experienced no further annoyance, and indeed for a week
or two there is nothing of any particular significance to record.

In the meantime we found ourselves fairly settled. One strong and
willing female servant did all that we needed to have done indoors, and a lad
of about 14 years of age was engaged to look after a couple of ponies and to
do the simdry odd jobs. This boy, it must be observed, did not sleep in the
house, so that unless we had a visitor, which did not often happen, the
number of the inmates was only three. Our female servant was a stranger
from a village at some distance, and had not, as far as we knew, any
acquaintances in the place.

For some little time, as I have intimated, we were not much disturbed. The
unexplained soimd of footsteps we occasionally heard, but we troubled our-
selves as little as possible about it, believing that whatever it might be it was
at all events very inoffensive and not likely to interfere much with our
comforts or prerogatives.

However, in due time we were favoured with a new development and
that, too, of a kind which was sufficiently distinct and obtrusive. There was,
it must be understood, a range of attics at the top of the house reaching
over the full extent of it. We found them empty and in good repair, and
we converted them into store-rooms for our boxes, packing cases, &c. They
were reached by a small staircase opening off the main passage upstairs ; and
having deposited in them everything that we wished to put out of the way
we secured the staircase door.

We had gone to bed one night as usual, and were about quietly to drop
asleep, when all at once there commenced a tumult overhead, which very
soon made us as wide-awake as we had ever been in our lives. The noise
was, confessedly, of the most vulgar, commonplace, and substantial kind. It
was— or rather I should say it seemed to be— the result of the tossing about
over the attic floors of all the boxes, cases, and bundles stored there. It
was loud, boisterous, and persistent. There was a bump, and a rattle, and
a roll, and a crash. Of course an investigation was an obvious necessity,
but an investigation discovered nothing. All was quiet. Everything was
apparently undisturbed and as much in order as it ever had been, or, in
such a place, could be expected to be. We were confessedly perplexed,
and moreover, — as far as that, as well as the other occurrences went, we
were condemned to the humiliation of remaining in a state of unrelieved
perplexiiy.


148 Report of the Committee on Haunted Homes. [Maxell 28,

But, besides, some supplementary entertainments were provided for our
benefit. From time to time a succession of distinctly audible knocks would
greet our ears. These knocks varied in their type. At one time they were
hurried, eager, impatient; at another, slow and hesitating. But, however,
in one style or another we were treated to them, I should say on the average,

four nights a week during our sojourn at C . These were, of all the

phenomena, the commonest. I am boimd, in justice to the imknown cause
of them, to say that we were seldom disappointed in our expectation of
hearing them. They were not very alarming, certainly, and after a little
familiarity had bred the requisite measure of contempt, they were not
particularly disturbing.

One feature about them, however, deserves to be noticed. Sometimes)
while lying awake, an involxmtary listener to their tattoo, I was provoked to
the use of a little sarcasm or what school-boys would call " chaff." I would,
for instance, address the hypothetical agent and bid it "be quiet, and not
disturb honest people in their beds," or I would challenge it, if it had any
request to make or any complaint to lay, " to come out and do it in a manly,
straightforward way." Somehow or other these remonstrances were not well
received. They always led to louder, more hurried, and if we may use such
a term, more passionate knocking. The reader may smile at the notion of
any connection between any wild words and the intensified rappings, and I
do not wish to assert that there must necessarily have been any connection.
I simply state the fact that coincidently with my challenge, the rappings
intensified. I do not theorise, I tell a roimd, unvarnished tale. Possibly it
was a coincidence and nothing more.

Did we — it may be asked — say anything to our neighbours about what
we were so frequently experiencing ? For a considerable time we did not.
We had determined to hold our tongues for several reasons. In the first
place if we talked about what had so much of the mysterious about it, we
might give rise to exaggerations, and excite alarms which would make it a
difficult matter to keep a servant or to get one. Moreover, we knew little of
the characters of the people amongst whom we had come, and we thought
that if it was the result of a trick we should, by saying nothing about it,
be more likely to discover it, or to tire out tihie performers by assumed
indifierence. Hence, though our servant, who was a stout-hearted country
wench, sometimes dropped hints of nocturnal disturbances, we always put
aside the subject and discouraged her attempt to talk about it. So far I
have strictly confined myself to what came under my own observation — ^to
what I heard with my own ears. And I think that the experience of my
wife and myself does not reach beyond the rappings, the confused noises in
the attics, the well defined pacing of footsteps about the house, and that
grand satanic crash. On these the changes were from time to time rung.

They began soon after our arrival, they were kept up with tolerable
activity during our stay, and for anything I know we left them behind us
when we departed. The great noise which greeted us on the first Sunday
morning, as it was the most startling of all the phenomena, so it was the
least frequent. Weeks sometimes passed without our hearing it at all. But
whenever we did hear it — if we took the trouble to ascertain — we always
found that it occurred at two o'clock ou a Suuda-vj mwrnug. \a.'Os\fe ^aovoaa of


1884.] Report of the Committee on Haunted Houses, 149

time, we had incontrovertible evidence that it might manifest itself to some
persons in the house, without my wife or myself being conscious of it.— -
Knowing how overwhelming the sound always appeared to me when I did
hear it, I cannot but consider this fact one of the most wonderful things in
the whole business. I will show, however, that it was so.

As the winter passed away, and our country became more attractive, we
had a few visitors ; amongst the earlier comers was a young lady, a very near
relative of my wife. We agreed to say nothing to her about our own
experiences, partly because we did not want her to be frightened by anticipa-
tion, and partly because we wished for a little independent, unprejudiced and
spontaneous testimony. We very soon got it ; our friend had not been many
nights with us, before she began to put questions as to why we had made
such a stir in the house after everybody, as she supposed, had retired to rest.
Our answers to these inquiries were, as might be expected, a little vague and
xmsatisfactory. Once or twice she asked whether there was to be a funeral,
for she had heard under her window what she concluded to be the sexton
digging a grave, and she expressed a little surprise that he should choose to '
ply his melancholy trade dmHuig the hours of darkness. She was, of course,
assured, as was indeed the case, that no funeral was about to take place, and,
moreover, that whatever she heard under her window, it was at all events
not the process of grave-digging, for the churchyard lay on the other side of
the house. This was conclusive enough, no doubt, against her theory, but
she did not the less persist in asserting that on several occasions she had
heard a noise beneath her window, and that that noise was, in her judgment,
the result of some form or other of spade-husbandry. I have no doubt of
the reality of the impression made on her mind, but I never myself heard
the sounds which she described.

I was not, however, particularly surprised, when, on another occasion,
she told us that someone had walked along the passage, and knocked at her
door, but that in answer to her call of "Who's there?" no reply had been
vouchsafed, and no attempt at entrance into her room had been made.

At length Sunday morning arrived, and we met at the breakfast table.

"Whatever was the matter last night?" was our kinswoman's earliest
greeting. " What a clatter somebody made ! I was so thoroughly awakened,
that I got up and should have come out of my room to see what had happened
had it not been that I was afraid of encountering your dogs ! However I was
so much disturbed that I could not easily compose myself again to rest, and
as I stood at my window, peering into the darkness, I heard the church dock
iftrike two,** Hereupon my wife and I exchanged very significant looks. Our
friend had heard that night — though we had not — what we had begun to call
"The Great Sabbath Alarum." We then told her something of our own
experience, and her impression of the sound harmonised with our own. I
shall only mention one more incident collateral to what we ourselves observed,
for it is on our personal experience that I rest the value and the interest of
my story.

We were absent from home for a week or two dmring the autumn, and on
our return our servant reported the following occurrences : —

One evening she had gone out into the village to do aoras V>\3a\xv^'ea» «cA
had left the aervant boy in sole charge of the houBe. "Bl^ n?^«» «k^^\a^^\s^ ^'^


150 Report of the Committee on Haunted Houses. [March 28,

kitchen fire, when he heard some one, — as it seemed — tramping about the
passages. He went to ascertain who it was, and what might be his business,
but finding no one, he returned to the kitchen and tried to fancy that he was
mistaken. Presently he again heard the apparent and palpable sound of
human feet, and again he ventured to explore the premises, though with
nerves a little more unsteady, and with glance more hurried and retrospective.
Again he made a bootless quest. But when from his quiet seat in the
chimney comer he heard for a third time the same mysterious echoes, it was
too much for boyish flesh and blood. He rushed out of the house, hurried
down the village, and never stopped till he told his breathless tale to the
gaping inmates of his father's cottage. I have already mentioned that for
some time I said nothing to any of my parishioners on the subject of these
nocturnal disturbances.

Ultimately, however, I introduced the subject in a conversation with a
very excellent Christian woman, a long and patient sufferer from a bodily
infirmity, which altogether confined her to her bed. She had seen better
days, was a Church woman of a good old type, full of a calm and sober religious
spirit. Her cottage was just opposite to the vicarage, and the window of the
little room in which she lay commanded a full view of it.

I told her what from time to time we had heard and asked her if any
reports of such matters had ever reached her ears. She at once said that
there had often been talk of such disturbances, and that some, at least, of
my predecessors in the curacy had been a good deal annoyed by them. More-
over she added, what I am sure she would not have said if she had not
thoroughly believed it — that she had herself at times seen fiUckering and I
intermittent light at the attic windows. Now it must be borne in mind
that, during my occupancy of the house, these attics were not used, that I
never myself entered them at night but on the occasions when I sought
to discover the cause of the noise heard there, that there was but one
possible entrance to the whole suite, and that we had made that secure, and
as far as we could judge, had the means of admission exclusively in our own
power.

My informant further told me of certain transactions which had taken
place in that house in the last century, and of which she had heard from her
elders, which, if they could be verified, and could be fairly connected with
the disturbances in the relation of cause and eflfect, would certainly assist in
enabling one to arrive at a theory as to the nature of the disturbances them-
selves.

But it is not my object to theorise, but simply to relate phenomena and
leave them to be judged on their merits. For the facts related, I again say
I can honestly vouch ; for their causes I am almost as much thrown on con-
jecture as my readers, for with all the pains I took I never could make any
discovery. The explanations which will probably suggest themselves to
many, did not fail to suggest themselves to us. There was first of all the
possibility of a practical joke. But supposing that with the care I took, and
the watch I kept any persons could have gained admission to the house, they
must have been the most patient and dreary jokers that ever gave their
unrequited and unappreciated services to the genius of mischief. To say
nothing of former years, only fancy any one troubling himself to keep up for


1884.] Report of the Committee on Haunted Houses. 151

12 months at all hours of the night (and occasionally in the day-time), a
succession of incoherent and inarticulate noises. Methinks a performer of
average ability would have tried the experiment once or twice in way of a
visible manifestation.

Then again there is the resource in such cases of rats. Well ! I have a great
respect for the capabilities of rats in the way of nocturnal clamour. If, however,
they really achieved all that came under my own observation, then I must
say that their abilities are wonderful. How, for instance, did they accomplish
— ^and how did they so exactly time — the Great Sunday Crash ? There is a
circumstance that deserves to be considered by any one who may care to.
suggest an explanation of what I have related. I have always been some-
thing of a dog-fancier, and I had at that time, two Skye terriers of pure
breed, excellent house-dogs, uncompromising foes to vermin, ready for any
fun, with no delicacy as to letting their sweet voices be heard, if they saw

good reason for speaking out. Once during our sojourn at C , they did

speak out to good purpose. The winter was a rough one, times were not
good, and there were several robberies of houses in the neighbourhood. An
attempt was made on the vicarage. My trusty dogs, however, gave prompt
alarm, I was roused by their fierce barking, reached a window in time to see
more than one dark figure on the lawn below, and was able to address such a
remonstrance to them as led to a retreat, expedited in some measure by the
discharge of a few shots from a pistol. I mention this incident simply to
contrast the behaviour of the dogs on that occasion with their conduct in the
presence of the mysterious noises. Against these they never once by bark
or otherwise made any demonstration. Perhaps they did not hear them. It
would seem otherwise, however, for when at such times, in making search
about the house, I came where they were, I always found them cowering in
a state of pitiable terror. Of this I am quite sure that they were more per^
turbed than any other members of the establishment. If not shut up below
they would make their way to our bedroom door and lie there, crouching and
whining, as long as we would allow them.

Our experience of the phenomena, which I have described, extended
pver a period of 12 months. At the end of that time I was appointed to a
benefice in another part of England, and consequently resigned my curacy.
We turned our backs on the vicarage, not sorry, it must be confessed, to h&
done with our nocturnal alarms, but disappointed at not having been able ta
discover the cause of them.

I have never visited the place since, and never had the opportimity of
learning whether the attentions paid by those secret and invisible agents ta
us have ever been renewed in favour of our successors.


^


152 Pnsidenfs Address. [May 28,


III.

PROCEEDINGS OF THE GENERAL MEETING ON

May 28, 1884.

The eighth General Meeting of the Society was held at the Garden
IMansion, Queen Anne's Mansions, S.W., on Wednesday, May 28, 1884.

Professor Henry Sidqwick, President, in the Chair.


The following address was delivered by the President : —

The last time that I addressed you at any length I endeavoured to
define the nature and grounds of our claim that we are investigating in
a scientific manner phenomena which in the recent progress of physical
science have been too long and too persistently neglected. Since then,
in consequence of an article which has appeared in the Nineteenth CerUwry
by two of my colleagues, and of a lecture which I was expressly asked
to deliver on this subject at the London Institution, some discussion of
our work from this point of view has been carried on in journals that
are for the most part hostile to our endeavour ; and it appears that I
might with advantage take up again the subject that I dealt with about
a year ago, and make one or two more remarks on our general scientific
position. In so doing I have no intention of occupying your time by
any comments on the misrepresentations of fact or the blunders in logic
which our opponents have committed : our aim, in my opinion, should
rather be to consider whether we can learn anything from our critics —
even from ignorant and prejudiced critics — ^which may assist us in the
novel and difficult work in which we are engaged. We may at any rate
see what appear to the careless glance of outsiders to be the weak points
of our position, and give them a careful reconsideration.

The first point that it is important to get clear is the exact relation
in which the conclusion that we have, to our own satisfaction, established,
stands to the generally accepted conclusions of physical science. Is it
true, as an opponent has asserted, that if Thought-transference, as
affirmed by our Committee, were admitted to be a fact, " physiology
would be overthrown " ? The statement might pass as a loose and hasty
way of characterising the extreme strangeness of our results ; but I
cannot conceive its being deliberately maintained by anyone actually
acquainted with physiological investigation. An instructed physiologist


1884.] Presidenfh Address. 15^

would know that supposing it generally accepted that ideas and feelings
can under certain special and rare conditions be conveyed from one mind
to another otherwise than by the recognised channels of sense, all ordinary
physiological research would go on exactly as before. No " working
hypothesis " of physiological method would have to be abandoned ; na
established positive conclusion of physiological inquiry — nothing that
has been ascertained as to the nature of the process by which visual,
auditory, tactile, or other sensations and ideas are ordinarily produced
in the mind — would have to be modified. What would have to be
given up would be merely the single negative conclusion that ideas and
sensations could not be transmitted from one mind to another except in
certain ways already known. It was very natural for physiologists to.
form this conclusion provisionally in default of evidence to the contrary;
but to abandon it in view of the presentation of such evidence would
be a mere enlargement, not in any sense an overthrow of existing
physiology.

I The question, then, is merely whether evidence enough has been
produced. And here I have always admitted, and indeed emphatically
maintained, that what we allege to be facts are so contrary to the
analogy of experience — at least so far as experience has been systematised
by science — ^that until a large number of mutually corroborative
testimonies are collected we cannot expect the scientific world to be
converted ; they will say, and reasonably or at least plausibly say, that
it is less improbable that the testimony to these facts should be false
than that the facts as testified to should be real. And I think that the
case is one in which no one can say exactly how much evidence is
wanted ; we have to balance conflicting improbabilities ; and the
improbabilities are of a kind that we have no scales to weigh exactly.
Indeed the improbability on one side necessarily appears greater or less
to different persons, according to what they know of the witnesses
personally. Hence though I am myself convinced of the trustworthiness
of our records of experiments, I do not complain that other persons who
do not know the witnesses are not yet convinced. And I have always
been anxious to urge on our members and f riiends — many of whom are
rather inclined to think that we have already collected facts enough to
convince a "fair mind" — that we cannot precisely define the requirements
of a fair mind in dealing with matters so unfamiliar ; and that we ought
to continue patiently piling up facts and varying the observers and
conditions, until we actually get the common sense of educated persons
clearly on our side.

At the same time, I am obliged to add that none of our critics
appear to me to appreciate the kind and degree of evidence that we have
already obtained. They often imply that the experiments in Thought-
transference are such as could be performed by " cheating mediums or


154 Presidenfs Address. [May 28,

mesmerists," by the simple means of a code of signals which the
investigating committee cannot find out ; quite ignoring such cases as
that given in Part I., pp. 22-3, where the cards guessed by one of the
Creerys were unknown to any one but the four strangers who went to
witness the experiment ; and where, therefore, as I have before said, the
investigators must either have been idiots, or one or other of them in
the trick. Similar remarks may be made about ;the experiments
reported in the last part of our Proceedings ; where four or five different
persons must either have been guilty of unveracity or collusion, or of
most abnormal stupidity, if the phenomena were not genuine.

Again, our opponents leave out of account that besides our own
experiments in Thought-transference between persons in a normal
condition, and the records of spontaneous telepathic phenomena,
•' apparitions, &c.," — of which we have collected a very large number
on first-hand evidence — we have the experiments in Thought-transference
in the mesmeric state, in which we have only obtained over again
results repeatedly affirmed by others. And here I think we may put
forward an irresistible claim that this mesmeric evidence of a generation
ago, which undoubtedly failed to satisfy orthdox medical opinion at the
time, should be carefully reconsidered ; the ground of our claim being
the now universally admitted fact that in the controversy which took
place from 1840 to 1850 between the mesmerists and the accredited
organs of medical opinion, the latter were imdoubtedly to a great
extent wrong; that they repudiated sweepingly an important part
•of the phenomena reported by the mesmerists, which no instructed
person now denies to be genuine. No instructed person now questions
the genuine reality of the hypnotic or sleep-waking state as a special
abnormal condition of the human organism, in which the hypnotised
person is, in a quite peculiar way, subject to delusions suggested to
him from without, and can in some cases be made as perfectly insensible
to pain as he can by inhaling chloroform or laughing gas. But at the
time I speak of the Lancet and other medical organs refused to admit
the genuineness of these phenomena, as decidedly as any of them now
refuses to admit the reality of community of sensation. When the
most painful surgical operations were successfully performed in the
hypnotic state, they said that the patients were bribed to sham
insensibility ; and that it was because they were hardened impostors
that they let their legs be cut off and large tumours cut out without
showing a sign even of discomfort. At length this unbelief, in all
but the most bigoted partisans, gave way before the triumphant success
of Mr. Esdaile's surgical operations under mesmerism in the Calcutta
Hospital : and hence, when subsequently a German professor (Heiden-
hain) reported that he had obtained results similar to Braid's, — which
had been previously neglected, — orthodox medical science willingly


1884.] Presidents Address, 155

allowed the hypnotic state to take a recognised place in physiological
works. The existence, indeed, of a peculiar rapport between the
mesmeiiser and his patient — such as the transference of sensation
manifests — has still the weight of medical authority against it ; but
this weight is surely diminished by the fact that it was so long and
obstinately thrown into the wrong scale as regards the hypnotic state
generally.

When confronted with this mass of testimonies, the argument of our
opponents sometimes takes a new turn. They say that our very
demand for quantity of evidence shows that we know the quality of
each item to be bad. But the quality of much of our evidence — when
considered apart from the strangeness of the matters to which it refers
— is not bad, but very good : it is such that one or two items of it
would be held to establish the occurrence, at any particular time and
place, of any phenomenon whose existence was generally accepted.
Since, however, on this subject the best single testimony only yields an
improbability of the testimony being false that is outweighed by the
improbability of the fact being true, the only way to make the scale
fall on the side of the testimony is to increase the quantity. If the
testimony were not good, this increase of quantity would be of little
value ; but if it is such that the supposition of its falsity requires us to
attribute abnormal motiveless deceit, or abnormal stupidity or
carelessness, to a person hitherto reputed honest and intelligent, then an
increase in the number of cases in which such a supposition is required
adds importantly to the improbability of the general hypothesis. It is
sometimes said by loose thinkers that the " moral factor " ought not to
come in at all. But the least reflection shows that the moral factor
must come in in all the reasonings of experimental science, except for
those who have personally repeated all the experiments on which their
•conclusions are based. Any one who accepts the report of the experi-
ments of another must rely not only on his intelligence but on his
honesty ; only ordinarily his honesty is so completely assumed that the
assumption is not noticed.

Here, however, some say that we ought to get evidence that can be
repeated at will ; that they will not entertain the idea of " rare, fitful
and delicate " phenomena which cannot be reproduced at will in the
presence of any number of sceptics. But I have never seen any serious
attempt to justify this refusal on general principles of scientific method.
The phenomenon of Thought-transference — assuming it to be genuine —
depends prvm/dfade on the establishment of a certain relation between
the nervous systems of the agent and percipient respectively ; and as
the conditions of this relation are specifically unknown, it is to be
expected that they should be sometimes absent, sometimes present, in
an inexplicable way; and, in particular, that this peculiar function


156 Prestdenfs Address. [May 28^

of the brain should be easily disturbed by mental anxiety or discomfort
of any kind.

Still we should be very glad to get evidence of this kind ; we ought
to relax no effort to obtain it. And one special source of interest for
us in the marvels related by the Indian Theosophists — ^with whose
doctrines, I may remark, we are in no way concerned — ^lies in the fact
that they are alleged to consist largely in the production at will of
" telepathic " phenomena ; similar in kind to those of which, as
occurring spontaneously, a large collection has been made by our
Literary Committee.

(A provisional Report on some of these Indian cases was then laid
before the meeting.)


1884J A Theory of Apparitions. 157


IT,
FOURTH REPORT OF THE LITERARY COMMITTEE.

Committee: — W. F. Barrett, F.RS.E. ; Chas. C. Massey; Rev. W.
Stainton Moses, M.A.; F. Podmore, M.A.; and Edmund Gurnet,*
M.A., and F. W. H. Myers,* M.A., Hon. Sees.


A THEORY OF APPARITIONS.
Part H.

Our last Report — it may be remembered — ^brought us only to the
threshold of the subject of Apparitions, as popularly understood. In
that introductory paper we approached our main theme by three
distinct steps. We first considered the general state of opinion with
respect to it, the ct priori arguments and assumptions which tend to
preclude inquiry into it, and the method which we hold that the
inquiry ought to pursue. We then explained that we intended to base
our own theory on an experimental basis, and to connect the striking
phenomena of death-wraiths with quite humble and unemotional forms
of Thought-transference — embracing the whole set of facts, large and
small, experimental and spontaneous, under the term " telepathy." And
finally we justified this interconnection of the phenomena, and showed
by examples that distinct effects — similar to those obtained in experi-
mental Thought-transference — ^have been spontaneously produced on the
emotions, ihe will, the senses, or the intellect of one person, by some
corresponding affection of another person at a distance.

But among effects produced on the senses, one particular class was
purposely deferred — that, namely, which concerns the sense of sight.
It is this deferred class of telepathic disturbances that we have now
to consider. Among these we find undoubtedly the furthest and most
eccentric of the phenomena which the telepathic theory can be made
to embrace ; and our account of them will require that the theory, as so
far stated, should be somewhat expanded. But for all that, they will
not drive us from our old basis. We are about to treat visible appari-
tions as " transferred impressions." Viewed in this light, it will be
found that even the most startling of them are not without experimental
analogy ; and that, moreover, we can lead up to these extreme cases by
quite gradual stepsy starting from a point where the experimental
analogies are perfectly obvious.

To begin with the commonest and simplest form of experiment— »


168 A Theory of Apparitions. [May 28^

that where the impression of a card or number is transferred, without
sensory communication, from one mind to another. Here the percipient
sees the object " in his mind's eye," not as external to himself at all.
Now we find an exact parallel to this lowest grade of visualisation in
cases where the impression originates, not in the fact that the agent is
concentrating his attention on a card or number, but in the fact that he
is dying. Such a case is the following, given to us by Mr. Robert
Rawlinson, of Lansdowne Court "West, Cheltenham.

I was dressing one morning in December 1881, when a certain conviction
came upon me that some one was in my dressing-room. On looking round
I saw no one ; but then, instantaneously, in my mind's eye (I suppose), every
feature of the face and form of my old friend William Stanley, of Ponsonby
Hall, Cumberland, arose. This, as you may imagine, made a great im-
pression on me, and I went at once into my wife's room and told her what
had occurred, at the same stating that I feared W. S. must be dead. The
subject was mentioned between us several times that day. Next morning 1
received a letter from George Stanley, then consul-general at Odessa, whom
I did not know to be in England, saying that his brother had died at a
quarter before 9 o'clock that morning. This was the very time the oc-
currence happened in my dressing-room. It is right to add that we had
heard some two months previously that W. S. was suffering from cancer, but
still we were in no immediate apprehension of his death.

Mrs. Rawlinson has kindly confirmed the fact of her husband's
coming into her room, and describing his experience, at about a quarter
to 9 on the morning in question. She adds that the name of W. S.
bad not been mentioned by anyone for weeks ; and that her husband " is
the last person to imagine anything, as he had always been particularly
unbelieving as to anything supernatural." *

In this case, the spontaneous picture-originating, as we hold, in
the condition of the dying friend — ^was not more definite and vivid than
that which the unexcited mind of the mere experimentalist has often been
able to transmit. A very important point of difference does, no doubt,
exist; for the spontaneous picture did not represent anything on
which the mind of the agent was at the moment concentrated ; we can-
not conceive him to have been gazing at his own face and form in a
mirror. This point, however, may be postponed till we have completed
our sketch of the graduated stages in the process of visualisation.

In the following examples, the vision was not of a single figure, but
of a scene, vividly flashed upon the sense, and for the moment engrossing
the attention, but still rather inward than outward, and not in any way
confounded with the objective world, or located in the actual place
where the percipient was at the sime.

* We cannot exclude this expression when quoting the words of our inf ormant8.
We ourselves, of course, regard all these occurrences as strictly luiturah


1884.] A Theory of Appantiona. 159

The first case is from Miss Henrietta Wilkinson, Enniscorthy,
Ireland.

I live in Ireland, my nephew in London. At the end of October or
beginning of November, 1881, when he was eight years old, he went one day
with his mother and sister to Kensington Gardens. While playing there ho
had a severe fall on his back ; his mother had to call a cab and take him
home, then send for the doctor. He was very ill for three or four days,
lying in a dark room and kept perfectly quiet. The accident happened on a
Saturday, I think. On the Sunday his mother wrote to tell me of it, whiclv^
letter I received on Tuesday. On the Monday night I was in bed, dropping
off to sleep, when I opened my eyes with a start, and saw quite distinctly a
London street, leading from Kensington Gardens to my nephew's home. All
the people, cabs, and horses were running very fast in one direction, towards
my sister's house. Amongst them were my sister and her twQ children, also
running. They stopped a cab, got in, and arrived at their own house. I
saw no more, but exclaimed, " Maurice is hurt !" why, I do not know, as my
nephew looked all right in the street. It all seemed to come from outside
myself. I thought it very strange, and told it to my family next morning,
before my sister's letter arrived. I am not perfectly sure of the day of the
week, but know it was the day after the accidentjmy sister wrote, and that
it was the night of the day after she wrote that I saw what I tell you.

I think it was my nephew's thoughts of me that gave me the vision, I
being the person he would think of, next to his father and mother.

Asked whether she had ever, on any other occasion, had a dream of
death or accident which had impressed her, she says : —

No, I remember none. It was quite unique. But why call it a dream,
when I was wide awake ? Had it been a dream I don't think it would have '
made the same impression on me.

The following corroboration is from Miss Wilkinson's sister. Castle
Hill, Enniscorthy.

January 8, 1884.
I distinctly remember my sister relating to us (myself and another sister)
her vision or dream before she got any letter. It made a great impression on
her, and she told us with surprise and a little alarm. She told us on Tues-
day morning, and the letter telling of the accident arrived soon after.

Martha Wilkinson.

The next account was sent to us by the Rev. A. Shaw Page, Vicar
of Selsley, Stonehouse, Gloucester, in the words of his sister. Miss
Millicent Anne Page. We have slightly shortened it.

I was staying with my mother's cousin, Mrs. Elizabeth Broughton, wife
of Mr. Edward Broughton, Edinburgh, and daughter of the late Colonel
Blanckley, in the year 1844, and she told me the following strange story : —

She woke one night and roused her husband, telling him that something
dreadful had happened in France. He begged her to go to sleep again and

N 2


160 A Theory of Apparitions. [May 28,

not to trouble him. She assured him she was not asleep when she saw what
she insisted on then telling him — ^what she saw, in fact. First a carriage
accident, which she did not actually see, but what she saw was the result, a
broken carriage, a crowd collected, a figure gently raised and carried into the
nearest house, and then a figure lying on a bed, which she then recognised
as the Duke of Orleans. Gradually friends collecting round the bed, among
them several members of the French Koyal family — ^the Queen, then the
King — all silently, tearfully watching the evidently dying Duke. One man
(she could see his back, but did not know who who he was) was a doctor. He
stood bending over the Duke, feeling his pulse, his watch in his other hand.
And then all passed away : she saw no more. As soon as it was daylight she
wrote down in her journal all she had seen. From that journal she read this
to me. It was before the days of electric telegraph, and two or more days
passed before the Times announced " The death of the Duke of Orleans."
Visiting Paris a short time afterwards, she saw and recognised the place of
the accident, and received the explanation of her impression. The doctor
who attended the dying Duke was an old friend of hers ; and as he watched
by the bed, his mind had been constantly occu^^d with her and her family.
Tlie reason of this was an extraordinary likenes^-a likeness which had often
led to amusing incidents — between several members of the Broughton family
and members of the French Royal family who were present in the room. " I
spoke of you and yours when I got home," said the doctor, "and thought of
you many times that evening. The likeness between yourselves and the
Royal family was, perhaps, never so strong as that day when they stood there
in their sorrow, all so natural ; father, mother, brothers, sisters, watching
the dying son and brother. Here was the link between us, you see."

We have placed these two " transferred impressions " together on ac-
count of their essential similarity, though the occasion was in one case
but the tumble of a little boy in the park, in the other the tragic death
of a " son of France." For in both cases, it will be observed, the scene
was not flashed from mind to mind at the Tnoment of its occurrence, but
considerably later, though at a time when the agent's thoughts were
deeply concentrated (as we know in one case and may presume in
the other) on a mental renewal of the agitating scene, coupled with a
thought of the very person to whose perception that scene was in feict
transferred. This deferment of the impression is certainly not a point
which any one would have invented in order to add to the marvel of a
story. To the ordinary reader it would seem a mere confusion and
weakening of the tale. But we need hardly say that to those who have
grasped the conception of telepathy this very point is of the utmost in-
terest and importance. It shows us onf» of the precise phenomena to
which our actual experiments point — the translation from agent to per-
cipient of a represented image with almost the distinctness of an actual
sensation — as where a diagram which the agent is merely recalling to
memory is transferred with pictorial vividness to the percipient's mind.
In the Xensington Gardens story t\i^ ^^rj inaccuracy of the scene, as


1884.] A Theory of Apparitions, 161

represented to the percipient's mind, suggests the manner in which it
has already been modified in the agent's memory. The confusion of
people, cabs, and horses, "running very fast in one direction," strongly
suggests the haK-delirious recrudescence of the agitated scene in the
mind of the little invalid.

We shall now give an example of a less unusual type, where there is
more distinctly a transference of actual sensation. It has a resem-
blajice to the experiments where the percipient is able to reproduce a
diagram at which the agent is actually gazing ; or, again, to our pre-
viously cited case, where Mrs. Severn felt the precise pain suffered by
her husband at a distance, from an accidental blow on the mouth. The
account was sent to us by the Bev. Canon Warburton, The Close,
Winchester.

Somewhere about the year 1848 I went up from Oxford to stay a day or

two with my brother, Acton Warburton, then a barrister living at 10, Fish

Street, Lincoln's Inn. When I got to his chambers I found a note on the

table apologising for his absence, and saying that he had gone to a dance

somewhere in the West End, and intended to be home soon after 1 o'clock.

Instead of going to bed, I dozed in an arm-chair, but started up wide awake

exactly at 1, ejaculating " By Jove, he's down 1" and seeing him coming

out of a drawing-room into a brightly illuminated landing, catching his foot

in the edge of the top stair, and falling headlong, just saving himself by his

elbows and hands. (The house was one which I had never seen,nor did I know

where it was.) Thinking very little of the matter I fell a-doze again for half

an hour, and was awakened by my brother suddenly coming in and saying,

*' Oh, there you are ! 1 have just had as narrow an escape of breaking my

neck as I ever had in my life. Coming out of the ball-room, I caught my

foot and tumbled full length down the stairs."

W. Warbubton.

In a second letter Canon Warburton adds : —

My brother was hurrying home from his dance, with some little self-
reproach in his mind for not having been at his chambers to receive his guest,
so the chances are that he was thinking of me. The whole scene was vividly
present to me at the moment, but I did not note particulars, any more than
one would in real life. The general impression was of a narrow landing
brilliantly illuminated, and I remember verifying the correctness of this by
questions at the time.

This is my sole experience of the kind.

Here the actual scene, intensely realised in the moment of imminent
peril, seems to have flashed itself from mind to mind with startling but
evanescent distinctness. We may remark that these sudden and vivid
impressions in a state between sleeping and waking (of which we have
many examples) do not fairly fall under the category of dreaTns. Their
analogue is rather to be found in the rare and curious illv^ions hypiia-
gogiqv^es of onconuiig sleep, or in the occasional proloiig^aXivOTL o\ ^x^^ass^-


162 A Theory of Apparitions. [ATay 28>

images into the first waking moments — ^the difference lying, of course,
in the fact that in our cases the scene observed is one which was actually
passing elsewhere at the moment.

In the next stage of visualisation the percipient sees a face or figure
projected or depicted, as it were, on some convenient surface — the image
being thus truly externalised, but in an unreal and unsubstantial fashion,
and in a bizarre relation to the real objects among which it appears.
In this respect it might be compared to the " after-image " of the sim,
or of some object that has been intently scrutinised through a micro-
scope, which we involuntarily import into our view of the surroimding
scene.

We will begin with an example taken from the " Memoirs of Geor-
giana, Lady Chatterton," by E. H. Bering (1878), pp. 100-102.

My mother had not been very well, but there was nothing alarming in
her stabe. I was suffering from a bad cold, and went early to bed one night,
after leaving her in the drawing-room in excellent spirits, and tolerably well
I slept unusually well, and when I awoke the moon was shining through the
old casement brightly into the room. The white curtains of my bed were
drawn to protect me from the draught that came through the large window,
and on this curtain, as if depicted there, I saw the figure of my mother — the
face deadly pale, with blood flowing on the bedclothes. For a moment I
lay horror-stricken, and unable to move or cry out, till, thi n king it might be
a dream or a delusion, I raised myself up in bed, and touched the curtain.
Still the appearance remained (although the curtain on which it was depicted
moved to and fro when I touched it) as if reflected by a magic lantern. In
great terrior I got up, and throwing on a cloak I rushed off through some
rooms and a long passage to my mother's room. To my surprise, I saw from
the further end of the passage that her dour was open and a strong light
coming from it across the passage. As she invariably locked her door when
she went to bed, my fears were increased by the sight, and I ran on more
quickly still, and entered her room. There she lay just as I had seen her on
the curtain, pale as death and the sheet covered with blood, and two doctors
standing by the bedside. She saw me at once and seemed delighted to see
me, though too weak to speak or hold out her hand. ** She has been very
ill," said the doctor, *'but she would not allow you to be called, lest your cold

should be made worse. But I trust all danger is over now The

sight of you has decidedly done her much good." So she had been in danger,
and would not disturb me ! Oh ! how thankful I felt to the vision or fancy,
or whatever it may have been.

It will be seen that the picture, though not producing the impression
of a solid and independent object, was still no mere illusion, no mere
momentary translation of the folds or pattern of the drapery into a
human face. It was accurate and persistent enough to resist a touch
which shook the curtain on which it was shown.

The next case carries us perhaps a step further still, as the image
appeared with somewhat more of apparent relief — though certainly not


1884.] A Theory of Apparitions. 163

yet as co-ordinate in any natural fashion with the other objects in the
percipient's field of vision. We received the account from Mr. Richard
Searle, Barrister, Home Lodge, Heme Hill, who tells us that it was his
sole experience of a hallucination.

One afternoon, a few years ago, I was sitting in my chambers in the
Temple, working at some papers. My desk is between the fireplace and one
of the windows, the window being two or three yards on the left side of my
chair, and looking out into the Temple. Suddenly I became aware that I was
looking at the bottom window-pane, which was about on a level with my
eys, and there I saw the figure of the head and face of my wife, in a re-
clining position, with the eyes closed and the face quite white and bloodless,
as if she were dead.

I pulled myself together, and got up and looked out of the window, where

1 saw nothing but the houses opposite, and I came to the conclusion that I
had been drowsy and had fallen asleep ; and after taking a few turns about
the room to rouse myself, I sat down again to my work and thought no more
of the matter.

I went home at my usual time that evening, and whilst my wife and I
were at dinner she told me that she had lunched with a friend who lived in
Gloucester Gardens, and that she had taken with her a little child, one of her
nieces, who was staying with us ; but during lunch, or just after it, the child
had a fall and slightly cut her face so that the blood came. After telling the
story, my wife added that she was so alarmed when she saw the blood on the
child's face that she had fainted. What I had seen in the window then
occurred to my mind, and I asked her what time it was when this happened.
She said, as far as she remembered, it must have been a few minutes after

2 o'clock. This was the time, as nearly as I could calculate, not having
looked at my watch, when I saw the figure in the window-pane.

I have only to add that this is the only occasion on which I have known
my wife to have had a fainting fit. She was in bad health at the time, and I
did not mention to her what I had seen until a few days afterwards, when
she had become stronger. I mentioned the occurrence to several of my
friends at the time. K. S,

November 2nd, 1883.

Mr. Paul Pierrard, at whose residence, 27, Gloucester Gardens, W.,
Mrs. Searle fainted, tells us that the cause of her doing so was the sight
of an accident which befel her little niece. He also describes hearing
from Mr. Searle, on the next day, that at the precise time of the faint-
ing " a peculiar feeling overcame him, and he distinctly saw — as it were
in a looking-glass — the very image of his wife leaning back in a swoon."

The last two narratives are specially noteworthy. When it first
became evident to us that a number of strange heterogeneous narratives
might be explained and connected by supposing them to represent the
various stages of extemalisation of a telepathic impact in the percipient's
mind, we were quite ignorant of the existence of such cases as those of
Lady Chatterton and Mr. Searle. Our chain of argument seemed fairly


164 A Theory of Apparitions. [May 28,

complete without them. We should have gone on from scenes flashed
before the mind to phantoms visualised " out in the room," with a sense
that there was no real interruption of continuity, although the step was
a long one to make on such uncertain ground. The moment, however,
that these externalised pictures are described, it becomes plain that'
they supply exactly the connecting link, the want of which was vagaely
felt. The picture on the window-pane or the bed-curtain comes pre-
cisely midway between the mental image and the apparently solid figure.
It represents (in our language) a telepathic impression wHch has been
externalised, but not yet completely objectified ; which presents itself as
something at which the percipient gazes, but which yet is not "taken for
real," or localised in three dimensions among the familiar objects around
him. And as compared with the two equally crude views between
which we steer — that phantoms are all morbid nonsense, or that they are
all "the spirits of the dead" — ^we think that our explanation is strongly
supported by such intermediate cases as these. Our aim is to trace the
connection between the most trivial phenomena of thought-transference,
or confused inklings of disaster, and the full-blown " apparition " of
popular belief. And, once on the track, we find group after group of
transitional experiences, illustrating the degrees by which a stimulus,
falling or fallen from afar upon some obscure sub-conscious region of the
percipient's mind, may seem to disengage itself from his subjectivity, and
to emerge into the waking world.

And now we come to the final class of cases, where the percipent sees
the phantasmal figure as an apparently solid object among the familiar
objects which surround him, and holding to those objects just such a
relation as a figure of flesh and blood might have held. We received
the following example from Mr. George Marchant, Linkfield Street,
Redhill, formerly a large farmer and miller, and now an admirable speci-
men of shrewd and vigorous old age.

About 2 o'clock on the morning of the 21st of October, 1881, while I was
perfectly wide awake, and looking at a lamp bxuiung on my washhand-stand,
a person, as I thought, came into the room by mistake, and stopped, looking
into the looking-glass on the table. It soon occurred to me it represented
E/obinson Kelsey, by his dress and wearing his hair long behind. When I
raised myself up in bed and called out, it instantly disappeared. The next
day I mentioned to some of my friends how strange it was. So thoroughly
convinced was I, that I searched the local papers that day (Saturday) and
the following Tuesday, believing his death would be in one of them. On the
following Wednesday a man, who formerly was my drover, came and told me
Kobinson Kelsey was dead. Anxious to know at what time he died, I wrote
to Mr. Wood, the family undertaker at Lingfield ; he learnt from the brother-
in-law* of the deceased that he died at 2 a.m. He was my first cousin, and

* This brother-in-law has kindly confirmed the accuracy of the above dat , bat
has now forgotten what was the hour of death, not having been actually presents


1884.] A Theory of Apparitions, 165

was apprenticed formerly to me as a miller ; afterwards he lived with me as
journeyman ; altogether, eight years. I never saw anything approaching
that before. I am 72 years old, and never feel nervous ; I am not afraid of
the dead or their spirits. I hand you a rough plan of the bedroom, &c.

To our inquiries as to whether Robinson Kelsey had been in his mind,
and on various other points, Mr. Marchant replies : —

I had not been thinking about him, neither had I spoken to him for *'
20 years. In the morning after seeing the apparition, I spoke about it
to a person in the house. In the evening I again spoke about it to two per-
sons, how strange it was. It was several days after our conversation about
what I had seen that I heard of his death. These people will confirm my
statement, for after I heard of the death I spoke of it to the same people,
that my relation died the same night as I saw the apparition. As the ap-
parition passed between my bed and the lamp I had a full view of it ; it was
unmistakable. When it stopped looking in the glass I spoke to it, then it
gently sank away downwards.

We have received the following confirmation of this incident —

We are positive of hearing Mr. Marchant one day say that he saw the
apparition of Robinson Kelsey during the previous night.

Ann Langeridgb,* Linkfield Street, Redhill.
Matilda Fuller, Station Road, Redhill.
WiLLLA3i Miles, Station Road, Redhill.

Mr. Marchant has never had any other " hallucination," and laughs
at the very idea of such things. In a personal interview he entered
further into detail, pointing out in situ the exact line that the figure
took, and how it momentarily hid the lamp in passing in front of the V
washhand-stand. He describes Kelsey's long and bushy back-hair as a
very distinct peculiarity ; and he thinks that the figure was visible for
nearly a minute.

Here, then, at last, we have the orthodox apparition. And we note
at once that the completeness of the extemalisation is not the only
point in which this phantasm differs from the preceding ones. It is
more durable, and it is apparently more independent. Reading the
account of it, one cannot resist the question, " Should I have seen it, had
I been there V And the question cannot but lead on to another. If the
apparition could have been seen by more than one person, what will be
the effect on our theory of the transference of an impression from mind
to mind ? Can we conceive of this rare telepathic sympathy as affecting
two minds at the same moment and in the same way ? or are we driven

* One of OS has visited Mrs. Langeridge, who is a sensible person, with very
little belief in '* ghosts." She at once volunteered the remark that Mr. Marchant
described his vision to her next morning.


166 A Theory of Apparitions. [May 28,

to assume some independent agency, operating quite outside the mind of
either percipient ?

Up to this point it will be observed, this fundamental problem has
not presented ibself. The phantasms with which we have thus far been
dealing have not been such as to force on us the question whether two
or more percipients would be likely to share them. But in the case of
the completer or more objective phantasms, we' have no longer any
assurance that they are perceptible to one person only, unless we have
actual evidence that other persons were present at the time and failed
to perceive them.

Now, as a matter of fact, each variety of these fully externalised
phantasms is liable (as we find from numerous instances) to be perceived
by anyone who happens to be present. This phenomenon of collective
percipience, of a sight seen or a sound heard* by several persons at once,
can be shown, we think, to be not inconsistent with the substantial
truth of our theory ; but the problem is a formidable one, and we can-
not here do more than indicate its existence.

Meantime, the very fact that we have been able to arrange the
phenomena in a graduated series must be admitted to be strongly sug-
gestive of a common origin for them all ; and we shall endeavour to
treat the solid-looking figure of Robinson Kelsey, no less than the
fieeting vision " in the mind's eye " of Mr. Rawlinson, as in some way
the product of the percipient's own mind, projected (so to speak) under
the stimulus of an impact from the mind of the dying friend. But this
explanation is something more than a natural conjecture : we have, as
we stated above, a certain amount of experimental support even for the
extreme cases where the apparition is externalised in the most com-
plete way. We should hardly have ventured to make so positive an
assertion on the ground of previously recorded cases ; as those cases are
few in number, and their correctness cannot now be tested in detail.
But we cannot doubt the genuineness of the case which we published in
the Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research (Vol. I. p. 120),
where a friend of our own, without having given the slightest hint of
his intention, concentrated his mind for some minutes on the idea of
appearing to two distant friends, in no way subjeqf to hallucinations ;
who volunteered the information, when next he visited them, that they
had distinctly seen him in their room at precisely that time.f Such a

* It would be cnmbroos to introduce at every turn the words necessary for
extending what is said about vision to impressions of hearing and t<mch. The
reader will have no difficulty in perceiving where the application to these farther
senses is possible, and is to be taken as understood.

t We cannot ignore the strength of the contemporary testimony for the
occorrenoe of similar events in the E^t -, b\it the remoteness of the lo(»Iity and
other di^oulties prevent us ixomheift d^w^VWii^ wi ^;Xveai»


1884.] A Theory of Apparitions. 167

result is specially instructive in connection with more than one of th&
spontaneous cases quoted above. We noted, in passing, how Mr. Raw-
linson's case differed from the more ordinary forms of experimental
Thought-transference, in that the agent was not directing his attention
to that which appeared to the percipient. The same remark applies to-
Mr. Searle's case ; and in Lady Chatterton's case, though a portion
of what she herself saw depicted — namely, the effusion of blood — was.
doubtless prominent at the moment in her mother's mind, the mother's
own face and aspect can hardly have had any conscious place there.
What, then, are we to conceive to have been in the agent's mind in these
instances ? It cannot be unreasonable to suppose (as Canon Warburton
supposes in the case of his brother) that part of its content, at any rate,
was a forcible idea of the percipient and of the agent's self in relation to
the percipient. Lady Chatterton's mother, it is clearly implied, was think-
ing of her daughter, and in the other two cases we should naturally ima-
gine a similar though more transient occupation of the agent's mind with
the absent husband or friend ; for it has often been noted that, in the-
sense of helplessness and collapse that immediately precedes fainting or-
death, the idea of distant scenes and persons is apt to recur in very
vivid flashes. And if this be granted, the parallelism with our friend's
experimental case becomes very marked. For the idea in his mind was
of himself — ^not his aspect particularly, but his personality — in relation to
the percipients ; while the impression in their minds was of his aspect.

Mr. Marchant's case (which is of a common type) does, however,
imdoubtedly carry us beyond this analogy. We cannot pronounce it
impossible that Kelsey's dying thoughts reverted strongly to his old
employer ; but, considering the length of time during which they had
held no intercourse, we should prefer to suppose that the pre-existent and
latent rapport between the two sufficed to effect the transference of the
image, without any conscious direction of the agent's attention. We can
hardly hope, however, that this hypothesis will look plausible, until the
rationale of the projection of the image has been more fully considered.
To this, then — the necessary supplement or expansion of our telepathic-
theory — we may at once proceed.

Let us first clearly realise the facts. Something is presented as
apparently an independent piece of matter in the material world ; but
no piece of matter is really there, and the appearance is a phantasifi.
How would such an experience be most naturally described ? Surely as.
a hallucination of the sense of sight — ^the creation of a mind which is in
some abnormal state. This is precisely what we hold it to be ; the
abnormal state bein^, however, not — as in the case of morbid
hallucinations — a mere pathological condition of the percipient, but a
peculiar form of disturbance produced by an unusvial cioiv^\\AcycL ycl %^\siR!


168 A Theory of Apparitions. [May 28,

distant person. In virtue of their having their real cause outside the
percipient, and so in a way conveying true information, we may describe
death-wraiths and the like as veridical hallucinations ; but as projections
of the percipient's own mind, by which his senses are deluded, we hold
them to be altogether on a par with morbid hallucinations. They are
thus, merely a species in a larger genus ; and our most hopeful course
will, therefore, be to trace the natural history of the genus — ^to decide
what a " hallucination of the senses " really involves. It is inevitable
that this endeavour should carry us for a brief space into the region of
physiology, but the accompanying diagram will enable the least in-
structed reader to master at a glance all the technical information
required. We accept the commonly accepted doctrine as to the locali-
sation of brain functions ; but the general tenor of our explanation
might, we think, hold good, even if that doctrine came to be modified.

Let A represent the retina of the eye which in itself has no more
power of seeing than a mirror has. Let B represent the group of cells
in the brain which constitutes the " visualising centre," and which is
excited into activity whenever sight takes place. And let represent
the cortical or external part of the hemispheres of the brain, part of
which is excited into activity whenever any of the higher psychical
faculties — intelligent perception, imagination, comparison, memory,
volition — are called into play. A is connected with B by the fibres of
the optic nerve, and B is connected with C by other nerve-fibres. !Now
any disturbance of the cells at B which reaches a certain intensity will
be accompanied by the sense of sight ; and, when this disturbance is
propagated onwards in the natural course from
B to C, this sense will become a complete per- ^^ — "q

ception — an object for the mind — ^which can be
reflected on, compared with other objects, and
remembered. But the central, indispensable
fact — the disturbance at B — may itself originate
in at least two quite distinct ways. On the one
hand it may originate in a nervous impulse sent
up along the fibres from A, owing to some
change which has taken place at A — whether it be a blow on the eye,
which makes us see sparks, or the stimulus of external rays of light,
which makes us see surrounding objects. Or, on the other hand, it may
originate in a nervous impulse sent down along the fibres from C, owing
to some change that has taken place at C ; and then we shall have a
hallucination — a sense of seeing, and of seeing, it may be, with great
vividness and completeness, though what is seen has no existence
external to the percipient's organism. This may happen either volun-
tarily or involuntarily. Painters have sometimes imagined a isLce or a
ficene with such force as actually to externalise it in space and see it


1884. J A Theory of Apparitions. 169

before their eyes. But far more often the hallucination is involuntary,
as in purely morbid cases, in dreams, and in the species of apparitions
with which we are dealing in this paper.

Now, so far, the matter seems plain enough. The particular cells at
B, whose activity is necessary for the sense of sight, may be stimulated
or exploded either by an impulse from without, started by light, in which
case we see objects that are really there ; or by an impulse from
within, started by some spontaneous cerebral change, in which case we
see objects that are not really there. But with regard to the latter
case there is just one point that needs carefx:! notice. We are supposing
that the impulse which results in a hallucination is started by some
change in the cells at C. ' Now what mental event does this physical
change at C imply 1 Clearly not the sight of the object, for that only
takes places in ass6ciation with the physical change in the cells at
B. The mental event associated with the change at C is not the
sight, but the idea, of the object, as it might present itself in imagin-
ation or memory. A certain low degree of visualisation is, no
doubt, involved in the very idea, and probably implies a slight downward
escape of current from C to B ; that is to say, the sluice-gates are never
entirely closed. But the idea only becomes completely visualised — only
becomes a precept, so as to suggest the real external presence of the
object — ^when the downward impulse is of a far stronger kind, and pro-
duces as large a change at B as an upward impulse from the retina
would do — the whole complex process being, however, for consciousness,
a single and instantaneous event. And this being so, we are at once
able to assign to the different parts of the process their respective
characters. The origin of the hallucination is no doubt in the imagina-
tion — that is, in physical terms, at C ; but it is not the imagination —
or C as the physical organ of the imagination — that is to blame for the
haUucination. There is nothing delusive in the mere idea or memory of
a visible object ; and in serving as a basis to such an idea or memory,
however vivid, the cells at C are merely performing their normal
functions. The blame attaches to the escape of a strong nervous current
in the dovmward direction from C to B, in the rending of the sluice-
gates (so to speak) at the point where the line drawn from B touches
the semicircle. This is the abnormal event. If it did not take place,
there would be no delusion, for there would be a mere idea or memory
of the object.^ When once it has taken place, delusion is inevitable ;
for instantaneously a strong stimulus is communicated to the cells at B,
and such a stimulus involves the sense of seeing the object. It may
well be only the sense, and not the judgment, that is deluded ; many
persons who have suffered from hallucinations have perfectly well known
that the figures seen by them were only phantasms. But for all that they
saw them : to the sense of sight the figures were completely real — so


170 A Theory of Apparitions. [May 28i

much so that the visual sensation was even referred to the external eye
^nd the figure could be made to appear double by squinting, or by pres-
sure on the side of one eyeball.

The physical details of the process which we have called the " rending
of the sluice-gates," and the " escape of current from to B," will per-
haps never be known. Certain general conditions that favour the
process are indeed recognised : hallucinations of the senses are common
events in sleep, in insanity, and in the delirium of fever; and they may be
produced by the immoderate use of various drugs, such as haschish and
opium. But even in these cases the broad fact is almost all that is known.
Of the actual physiological process we can say no more than that in
insanity it is part of the general cerebral derangement, and is due in the
other cases to some change in the constitution or distribution of the
blood. But there is one important class of sensory hallucinations of
which even thus much cannot be said — a class of which singularly Httle
notice has been taken by scientific writers — namely, the quite transient
and casual hallucinations of sane and healthy persons. Though rare,
in the sense that only a small percentage of the population have had
experience of them, these occurrences are absolutely numerous. Scores
of them take place in England in the course of a year. But what
determines their occurrence to this or that person, at this or that mo-
ment, we are often quite unable to say. Now in this state of ignorance
there certainly need be no difficulty in supposing that one means by
which the " escape of current " from to B may be determined is a
telepathic impulse. Supposing the evidence for the telepathic production
of hallucinations — e.g., for apparitions at the time of death — ^to be in
itself sufficient, physiology need make no difficulties about the process in
the percipient's brain, for in its general outline that process is just as
intelligible to us, and in its minute details just as obscure, as in any other
case of hallucination. Taking a broad view of the matter, we may even
say that the difficulties are less in the case of death-wraiths than in
cases where the hallucination is purely casual, and depends on no assign-
able conditions at all. For we at any rate succeed in connecting the
particular rare effect — ^the peculiar " escape of current," and the conse-
quent occurrence of a hallucination to a sane and healthy person — with
a particular rare cause — the peculiar condition of a distant friend.

This, happily, is all that need be said in the way of physical explan-
ation. For we have now got what we wanted — a ready way of
connecting apparitions with the simpler forms of Thought-transference,
even where (as in Mr. Marchant's case) the connection might at first
seem most difficult to establish. How, we asked above, could the idea
of Kelsey be impressed on Mr. Marchant's mind with such force as to
embody itself in a visible phantom, when Kelsey's mind was presumably
not occupied either with Mr. Marchant or with himself in relation to


1884.] A Theory of Apparitions, 171

him ? From a physiological point of view the difficulty vanishes, on the
supposition that the primary ejffect on Mr. Marchant took place not at
B but at C ; at the part of the brain which is the great storehouse of old
impressions ; in the part, moreover, where an appropriate physical basis
may be found not only for distinct and recognisable images, but for
subconscious ideas and memories, and for the most distant and intan-
gible associations. In the register of the brain it is seldom that a record,
once made, is so utterly obliterated that, under suitable conditions, it
may not be revived. And if once a relation be established between two
persons, and the records of it registered in their two brains, we see no
reason why the same harmony should not occasionally manifest itself
between those records — even though they be long sunk below the level
of conscious attention — as between the immediate impressions of the
moment ; and, this once granted, we have seen how the physiological
process may lead on to the projection of the visible phantom. In
psychical terms, we see no reason why subconscious ideas and memories
which are in no distinct way present to consciousness, such as Kelsey's
jsense of his old relationship to Mr. Marchant, should not evoke
similar blind movements in Mr. Marchant's mind, which, gathering
strength, might lead him to body forth the vision of his old acquaint-
ance.* On this view it would become quite intelligible that he should
see the figure even before he recognised it. And in a similar way we
should interpret some at least of those cases of death-wraith (of whicli
we have a good many specimens) where the figure seems to form by a
gradual process. We should say that there the idea, at first but dimly
conveyed and vaguely apprehended, was working itself into definiteness
{as so often occurs in processes of abstract thought), and that the char-
acter of the projection underwent a corresponding change.

But here we find ourselves fairly launched on a very wide and inter-
esting question — ^namely, how far the primary idea may be modified,
wrought on, or worked out, in the percipient^s own mind, before it be-
comes embodied as a visible phantom. Xhat mind is no mere collection

* It might seem out of the question to obtain any experimental support for a
transference of impression apart from conscioasness on the "agent's" part.
Yet support of a kind has actually presented itself. We requested our friend
above mentioned secretly to determine, before going to sleep at about 10.30 p.m.,
that his form should appear at midnight — that is, at a moment when he would
be actually asleep^to one of the pei^ons whom he had before succeeded in affect-
ing, and whom he had not even seen for some time. . On the 22nd of March he
did 80, determining not only to appear but to touch his friend's head. The result
is thus described by the latter :— " On Saturday night, 22nd of March, 1884, I had
a distinct impression that Mr. B. was in my room. I distinctly saw him, whilst
widely awake. He came towards me and touched my head." Since this Report
was written, we have received an account, from another "agent" and
**' percipient," of a similar successful experiment.


172 A Theory of Apparitions, [May 28,

of separate compartments, into which new ideas will fit and then rest in a
passive way ; but an organism of interacting parts, whereany changeorany
intruding element may set in motion whole trains of images and associations.
We know what small and dim suggestions will sometimes set large
tracts of mental machinery to work ; and we may therefore well credit
the vaguer or subconscious order of telepathic impressions with such a
power. Now if a visible phantasm results, in the manner above sug-
gested, what more natural than that these further images and associar
tions should be embodied in it ? We may compare the process to what
tukes place in the one form of hallucination with which we are all
familiar — in dreaming. A strong impression, whether received before
sleep (as from a recent sorrow or a piece of exciting work) or during
sleep (as from a knock at the door or an uncomfortable posture), will
mingle itself in dreams with all sorts of scenes and ideas that the
sleeping mind supplies. Now we would suggest that the mind, even in
a \oaJcimj state, may unconsciously react, as in a dream, on the crude
material presented to it, may invest the nucleus of a " transferred im-
pression '* with its own atmosphere and imagery ; nay,, even that the
appannit externality of the phantasm — the very fsuct in virtue of which
we call the impression a hallucinaiion — ^may itself be merely a radical
instance of such investiture. We should thus have a ready explana-
tion for many degrees of distinctness and individualisatdon, and many
diversities of character, in the sensory phantasm. Suppose the same
kind of rtwl event — say the peaceful death of an aged parent — to occur
in twenty o^vses, and in each of them to produce a real and unique sort
of disturl^ance in some absent person's mind ; then, if that disturbance
clothed itself in some sensortf form — or, in our language^ if it reached
the (x^iut of causing a haUucinatioH — such hallucination might take
t>r>»nty different forms. One percipient may hear his parent's voice;
another may imagine the touch of his hand upon his head ; a third may
see him in his wonted dress and aspect ; a fourth may see him in his
dying aspect : a fifth may see him in some transfigured aspect ; and
others may invest the disturbing idea with every sort of visible sym-
K^li:«au« derived from their minds' habitual furniture and their wonted
tnuus of thought.

Striking uarrativ^es of visible phantasms thus minted with a dream
^emeixt do in fact exi^t* In the case of sailors, for instance, the condi-
tivMxs of whose li\"e$ ar^ so diflenj^it from those of invalids on land, the
de«Ath-wniith often seems to ** suffer a sea-^^iange,'*' and to reflect in
fantastic wiUiue^ the perils of the deep. Such is a narrative (sent to
us by Engiiuvr Duul<^\ v>£ Bangkok:. Siauu) of an apparition seen
** when tht^ ^ship ^"^j^ ttuvler all plain sail <tf the |»tch of C^pe Horn,"
when the ^\junai\ who had ^^ started aloft to bi»kd the fore-top-gallant
fiuti^ his anus n>uud the topgallant shioods and hdd on without


188 J.] A Theory of Apparitions, 17


o


moving , , . till he was lowered on deck in the bight of a bowline."
For as he " kept looking to the windward at the squall, suddenly in the
midst of it he saw his sweetheart dressed in white flowing robes, who
came flying down toward him before the wind," and who, as it after-
wards proved, had died in England at that very time.

We cite this last narrative, not as itself evidentially strong, but on
account of its theoretical interest as illustrating (among others more
directly attested) the dream-like mode in which the telepathic impres-
sion may take shape from the scene around ; and " the wet sea-boy, in
an hour so rude," may transfer to ** cradle of the rude imperious surge"
the figure whose life is ebbing in the quiet bed at home. For we hold
it legitimate to use in this purely illustrative manner many narratives
on which we should hesitate to base our argument if they stood alone.
When we review the 600 cases which (exclusive of dreams) we have
already printed as maternal for our book on '' Phantasms of the
Living " alone — cases of which a large proportion come first-hand from
persons known to us — we can hardly doubt that sooner or later the
general fact of these distant impressions will be accepted by the majo-
lity of candid minds. Our evidence is eminently cumulative ; but until
its cumulation can be shown at full length, we must aim rather at
showing its coherence ; at indicating the way in which intermediate
instances and cross analogies interlock even the most apparently isolated
and grotesque of bond fide narratives of this kind.

Another group of cases in which the percipient's mind seems to
modify the impression received is that where the phantasmal imagery
is drawn from the appurtenances of death, or the accepted beliefs as to
resurrection. Of course symbolism of this kind, which is common to
the agent's mind as well as to the percipient's, affords no positive proof
as to whose mind it is from which the phantom derives its shape and
consistency. But the least marvellotis explanation — ^the nearest to
experimental analogy — will be that which assumes that it is the perci-
pient's own activity which invests the transferred impression with its
clothing of imagery. We have space for only two instances of this
class. The first was given to us by lieut. -Colonel Jones, 8, Sussex
Place, N.W., who confirmed the narrative to us verbally, and showed
us a letter written at the time in which his father alludes to the
apparition. Colonel Jones has never experienced any other hallucina-
tion whatever ; and it seems to us that this case alone would severely
try the theory which explains all such phantoms as this by mere chance-
ooincidence.

In 1845 I was stationed with my regiment at Moulmein, in Burmah. In
those days there was no direct mail, and we were dependent upon the arrival
of sailing vessels for our letters, which sometimes arrived in batches, and
occasionally were months without any news from home.

O


174 A Theory of Apparitions. [May 28,

On the evening of the 24th of March, 1845, I was, with others, dining
at a friend's house, and when sitting in the verandah after dinner, with the
other guests, in the middle of a conversation on some local afiairs, I all at
once distinctly saw before me the form of an open cofi^, with a favourite
sister of mine, then at home, lying in it apparently dead. I naturally
ceased talking, and every one looked at me with astonishment, and asked
what was the matter. I mentioned, in a laughing manner, what I had seen,
and it was looked upon as a joke. I walked home later with an officer very
much my senior (the late Major-General George Briggs, retired, Madras
Artillery, then Captain Briggs), who renewed the subject, and asked whether
I had received any news as to my sister's illness. I said no, and that my
last letters from home were dated some three months prior. He asked me
to make a note of the circumstance, as he had before heard of such occur-
rences. I did so, and showed him the entry I made opposite the day of the
month in an almanack. On the 17th of May following I received a letter
from home announcing my sister's death as having taken place on that veiy
day — viz., the 24th of March, 1845.

As to the coincidence of hour, Colonel Jones only learnt that the
death occurred in the morning of the 24th. His vision was seen after
an early dinner, so that, allowing for longitude, the correspondence of
time was certainly near, and may have been exact. There had been a
very close attachment between sister and brother.

The next case is from our friend, Miss Summerbell, 140, Kensing-
ton Park Road, "W., who has never had any other hallucination.

I have been, for many years, on terms of close intimacy with the family
of a Dutch nobleman, who reside in Holland. Early in July last I received
a letter from the eldest daughter of the house saying that her father was
seriously ill. From that time I received news of his condition every day.
On the 27th of July, 1882, 1 received a postcard saying that he was slightly
better. I was staying at the time at the Spa, Tunbridge Wells, and suffer-
ing much from neuralgia. On the night of the 27th I was lying, unable to
sleep from pain ; no doubt I dozed now and then, but I firmly believe that I
was awake when what I am about to relate occurred. It was beginning to
be light, and I distinctly saw every object in the room. I do not know
whether it is necessary to say that in Holland, when a person of distinction
dies, a prieur d'enterrement is employed. This man is dressed in black, with
dress coat, knee breeches, and cocked hat, with bands of crape hanging from
the corners. It is his office to go to all the houses where the deceased was
known and announce the death. On the morning of which I speak, I saw
the door of my room open and a prieur cPenterrement enter. He said
nothing, but stood with a long paper in his hand. I remember distinctly
wondering whether I had fallen asleep and was dreaming ; I looked round
and saw the furniture, and the window, with the dim light coming through
the closed blind. I looked at my watch, it was nearly 5 o'clock. I looked
towards the man, but he was gone. It was nearly six years since I had
lived for any time in Holland, and llaa.d. loT^otten the custom of announcing


1884.] A Theory of Appantions. 175

•deaths ; at least, I had not thought of it for years. But on that morning,
^t 3.20, my friend died.

I afterwards questioned my friend, Mme. Huydecoper, about what
happened at the time of her husband's death, and I find that the first thing
they did was to discuss how they should send the tidings to me. 1 told the
friend with whom I was staying at the time what I had seen ; she spoke of
it several times during the day, and reminded me of it when the news of the
death arrived.

Here the telepathic impression, instead of connecting itself with
some familiar image, such as a coflEin, seems to have evoked slumbering
memories which associated Dutch customs with Dutch friends in the
percipient's mind.*

Whatever be the view taken of each separate symbolical case of this
kind, it is to be hoped that the collection of a great number of them
may throw further light on the laws of association which govern these
rare events — on the path and barometry of these psychical storms.
There is, perhaps, scarcely any visual phantom of a dying person from
which some hint of scientific value might not be drawn, were the figure
carefully scrutinised in every detail. Unfortunately, this scrutiny is
much less easy in the case of veridical than in the case of morbid
hallucinations. Morbid hallucinations are much more often durable,
and much more often repeated. Moreover — and we commend this point

* An analogons incident was narrated more than once by the late Dr. Posey,
in a way which led his hearers to believe that the experience was his own. Our
friend, the Rev. G. B. Simeon, of Gainsborough, having undertaken to ask Dr.
Posey what troth there was in the romoor that he had seen an apparition in
High Street, Oxford, Dr. Posey replied that the report was probably f oonded on
the following fact : —

Two clergymen, A. and B., great friends, were at a distance from one another.
One afternoon, A., who was in his garden, saw the figore of B. approach, and
heard him say, " I have been in hell for half -an-hoor, becaose I loved the praise
of men more than the praise of God." It tomed oot that B. had actoally died
soddenly on that day, shortly before the appearance in the garden.

We were not satisfied with this evidence, as Dr. Posey did not actoally
affirm that A. was himself ; and we have lately discovered what we think most
be the original of the story, in an old copy of the Imperial JUagazine. As,
however, the main facts agree, and Dr. Posey vooched for their troth, we may
be allowed to refer to them for porposes of illostration. It is plain that, on oor
theory, the phantom's speech most be treated in the same way as the coffin and
the prieur d'enterrement. Miss Jones was not actoally lying in her coffin when
she appeared to her brother in that position ; nor, happily, is it necessary to
assume that B.'s words were a transcript of literal reality. Jost as in the one
case it was the imagery of death which forced itself into prominence, so, in the
other case, the conception of what follows death may have started into dream-
like vividness when the telepathic impact from the dying friend arrived, and
awoke, perhaps, a slombering jodgment on him in foro conscientice^ whicU
affection had long kept hidden in the unacknowledged. \»yQ^^o\mdL ol >i7fiL<:>(\x^(^«


176 A Theory of Apparitions. [May 28,

to those who regard veridical hallucinations as merely transient morbid
affections occurring by clmiice at the moment of death — ^morbid hallu
ciuations seem, in a majority of cases, to be unrecognised faces and
figures of strangers, and they thus excite curiosity rather than emotion.
In a large majority of our cases, on the other hand, the percipient has
recognised the phantom. It is thus to the countenance that they have
for the most part looked. The dress and surroundings are not minutely
obsei^v ed, or it seems a mere irreverence to dwell on them in the
presence of what is so sacred and beloved. Often, too, the phantom is
merely momentary, and the result is that in very many instances we
have only the vague description, " I saw my father as I was used to see
him," " It was my mother, as she lived." In such cases there is
nothing to guide us as to the origin of the phantasmal image. It is
sucli as the percipient might most readily have shaped for himself ; but
it is such, also, as the agent might most naturally have transmitted, if
such images are transmitted in their entirety and, so to speak, ready
made.

There is, however, one large and important class of death-wraiths
whose peculiarity it is that the dress is, as it were, an integral part of
them, fonning an element in the apparition so conspicuous and unex-
pected as to attract a full share of attention. We mean the cases
where the phantom appears in the dress, or with the aspect, which the
dying man actually wore at death, and of which the percipient was
not previously aware. Here it undoubtedly seems as though the
agent had transmitted a finished picture of himself — an ^wa^o, as Lucretius
would say, thrown off from his whole circumference — ^which needed no
reinforcement from the percipient's shaping imagination before it
stood complete and evident in the open day.

This reproduction of actual costume or actual aspect passes
through all stages of distinctness and unexpectedness. We begin
with the cases where the dying person is merely seen clad in
n']i ite, as it were the vague reflection of the night-dress in which he lies ;
and we go on to instances where the dress worn at death is altogether
strange and unusual, or where a violent end has inflicted recognisable
scars or mutilation; or where the image reiterates with phantasmal
urgency some task which the living mind regretfully leaves unaccom-
plished, as it sinks into the stupor of the dim death-day.

The first of these cases that we shall select is one which curiously
illustrates the changes effected by half a century of oral tradition in a
nari-ative of this kind. The occurrence in question, belonging to a
well-known noble family and to a tragic accident, has been often cit^ in
society when such topics are discussed, and we obtained a written ac-
count of it from a member of the family known to us — ^both he and we
being ignorant that a contemporary record of the matter had already


1884.] A Theory of Ajyparitions. 177

been printed in "The Journal of Thomas Raikes, Esq., from 1831 to
1847 " (London, 1856), Vol. I. p. 131. Weare thus, as it happens, able
to compare a traditional account 53 years old with an account written
down 15 months after the occurrence : —
We give first our friend's account : —

My grandfather Sir J. Y. was drowned by the upsetting of a boat in the
Solent, in or about the year 1830. On the day of his death Miss M. , a gresft
friend and connection of his, was at one of the Ancient Concerts in Hanover
Square Rooms. During the performance she fainted away, and when she
<3ame to declared that she had seen a corpse lying at her feet, and though the
face was turned away she knew the figure to be that of my grandfather.
Communication in those days was not, of course, as easy as now, and her fears
were not verified till some days after the event. Such is the family story,
which I heard often from my father, and had verified by my mother when last
I saw her.

Here, as will be seen, there is nothing to indicate either the co-
incidence of hour or the dress in which the phantom was seen. Let us
now turn to the contemporary account, which has the two advantages
of being half a century nearer to the facts and of coming from the side
of the actual percipient. Miss Majiningham, whose name we are now
allowed to print for the first time. In " A Portion of the Journal kept
byT. Raikes, Esq., from 1831 to 1847," Vol. I. p. 131, we read:—

«

Wednesday, 2Qih December, 1832. — Captain recounted a curious

anecdote that happened in his own family. He told it in the following

words : — It is now about 15 months ago that Miss M , a connection

of my family, went with a party of friends to a concert at the Argyll Rooms.
She appeared there to be suddenly seized with indisposition, and though she
persisted for some time to struggle against what seemed a violent nervous
affection, it became at last so oppressive, that they were obliged to send for
their carriage and conduct her home. She was for a long while unwilling to
say what was the cause of her indisposition ; but on being more earnestly
questioned, she at length confessed that she had, immediately on arriving at
the concern room, been terrified by a horrible vision which unceasingly pre-
sented itself to her sight. It seemed to her as though a naked corpse was
lying on the floor at her feet ; the features of the face were partly covered by
a cloth mantle, but enough was apparent to convince her that the body was

that of Sir J Y . Every effort was made by her friends at the time

to tranquillise her mind by representing the folly of allowing such delusions
to prey upon her spirits, and she thus retired to bed ; but on the following

day the family received the tidings of Sir J Y having been

drowned in Southampton River that very night by the oversetting of his boat,
and the body was afterwards found entangled in a hoat-cloak. Here is an
authentic case of second sight, and of very recent date.

On a critical comparison, it will be seen that the contemporary oi
eld account presents two small apparent discrepancies from the tra*


178 A Theoi^y of Apparitions, [May 28,

ditional or new account, and also (which is more surprising) contains
two further circumstances of the highest interest. The discrepancies are
these. The new account says that Misa M. did not receive the news for
some days ; the old account saysthat the ^amiVy received it the next day.
Now the journey from Southampton to London occupied only one day
in 1830, and probably the old account is correct. Mxbb Jf., however^
may not have been informed for another day or two; so the nitw
account may be correct also. The other discrepancy is in the name of
the building where the vision was seen — the " Argyll Rooms " accord-
ing to the old account, the " Hanover Square Booms " according to the
new. Now from Crickley's "Picture of London" (1831), p. 93, we learn
that " the Argyll Eooms, Regent Street, burnt down in the early part
of last year, have been again restored to their former splendour. They
are devoted to concerts, balls, and exhibitions, and are much frequented by
persons of rank and fashion." It also appears that the Hanover Square
Rooms were open for concerts at the same time, so that either
account might be correct. But as the title " Argyll Rooms " has long
ceased to suggest a high-class concert hall, it is likely enough that it

may have been unconsciously replaced in Lord and Lady 's minds

by the more apparently suitable appellation.

These trifling discrepancies in unimportant points are such as must
needs accrue in 50 years' tradition. But it is a much more remark-
able thing to find that in this case tradition, so far from exaggerating^
has miniwAsed the cardinal points of the story. It is in the old^
not in the new^ account that we hear that the accident took place
"that very night ^^ so that it is at any rate possible that
the coincidence of hour was exact. Moreover — and this is the
point with which we are here specially concerned — it is in the oU^
not in the new^ account that we hear of the cloth mantle wrapped about
the visionary form, the boat-cloak whose prototype was at that
time entangling beneath the dark estuary the limbs of the drowning
man. Note also in the old account the combination of dreamlike sym-
bolism with reflex of actual fact. The corpse was seen as if naked, no
part of the dress being visible except that one article whose significance
was destined to be afterwards understood too well.

The comparison of these two narratives may serve to illustrate a
generalisation which has gradually been suggested to us by many
similar collocations of older and newer versions. Tradition, we find,
when it deals in modem times with such accounts as these, tends
primarily to shorten and simplify them. Sometimes this simplification
may also involve exaggeration of the marvellous element. For instance^
a coincidence of death and death-wraith, which was really not traced
nearer than to the same day, will be sometimes repeated as if it had
been proved to be also at the same hour. Or a figure vaguely


1884.] A Theory of Apparitions, 179

resembling a dying person will be represented as precisely resembling
him. Often, again, this process of simplification is unimportant in its
effect on the narrative ; as when in the well-known Wynyard case, a man
who strikingly like Wynyard (and whose likeness is the only im-
portant point) is represented as having been Wynyard 's twin hrotlier.
But often, also (as in the case first given), this simplifying process tends
to lose the very points on which we are most concerned to dwell — the
undesigned indications which so often at once strengthen the evidence
of the narrative and double its theoretic interest. If the nari'atives with
which we are dealing were the offspring of chance and credulity, then
the further we get them from their original sources the better, it might
be thought, they would suit us. But if they are the offspring of law and
fact, we shall expect — and the case is so — that the nearer to absolute
accuracy, absolute contemporaneity, we can obtain them, the better
will they fit in with other facts, and range themselves beneath general
laws.

Our next case shall be a first-hand one, from a physician. Dr.
Rowland Bowstead, of Caistor, who tells us that he has never expe-
rienced any other hallucination.

In September, 1847, I was playing at a cricket match, and took the place
of long-field. A ball was driven in my direction which I ought to have caught
but missed it, and it rolled towards a low hedge ; I and another lad ran after it.
When I got near the hedge I saw the apparition of my brother-in-law, who
was much endeared to me, over the hedge, dressed in a shooting suit with a
gun on his arm ; he smiled and waved his hand at me. I called the attention
of the other boy to it ; but he did not see it, although he looked in the same
direction. When I looked again the figure had vanished. I, feeling very
sad at the time, went up to my uncle and told him of what I had seen ; he
took out his watch and noted the time, just 10 minutes to 1 o'clock. Two
days after I received a letter from my father informing me of the death of
my brother-in-law, which took place at 10 minutes to 1. His death was
singii^ar, for on that morning he said he was much better and thought he
should be able to shoot again. Taking up his gun, he turned round to my
father, asking him if he had sent for me, as he pai^icularly wished to see me.
My father replied the distance was too far and expense too great to send for
me, it being over 100 miles. At this he put himself into a passion, and said
he would see me in spite of them all, for he did not care for expense or
distance. Suddenly a blood-vessel on his lungs burst, and he died at once.
He was at the time dressed in a shooting suit and had his gun on his arm. I
knew he was ill, but a letter from my father previous to the time I saw him
told me he was improving and that he might get through the winter ; but his
disease was consumption, and he had bleeding from the lungs three months
before his death. Rowland Bowsxiad, M.D.

Here the dress is a very distinct one, not associated with invalids
or death-beds, and reproduced with apparent exactness. The agent's


180 A Theory of Apparitions, [May 28,

impression of his personality seems, in fact, to have carried with it the
details of his actual aspect as well as the symbolism of his imagined
farewell ; and nothing was left to the percipient^s imagination. It will
be observed that the coincidence of time is close to a minute, and was
noted on the spot. It would, we think, be difficult to express in figures
the enormous unlikelihood of a merely morbid hallucination, unique in
the percipient's experience, and involving by accident such coincidences
as these.

Our final instance shall be one which illustrates the possibility
of collective percipience. "We received it from Miss K. M. Weld , of
The Lodge, Lymington, one of the two original witnesses.*

Philip Weld was the youngest son of Mr. James Weld, of Archers
Lodge, near Southampton, and a nephew of the late Cardinal Weld.
(The chief seat of that ancient family is Lulworth Castle, in Dorsetshire.)

He was sent by his father, in 1842, to St. Edmund's College, near
Ware, in Hertfordshire, for his education. He was a well conducted,
amiable boy, and much beloved by his masters and fellow-students.

It happened that on April 16th, 1845, it was a playday (or whole holiday),
and some of the boys went out on a boating expedition upon the river Ware.

On the morning of that day, Philip had been to Holy Communion
at the early Mass (having just finished his retreat), and in the after-
noon, accompanied by one of the masters and some of his companions,
went to boat on the river, which was a sport he enjoyed much.

When one of the masters remarked that it was time to return to
the college, Philip begged to have one row more ; the master consented,
and they rowed to the accustomed turning point.

On arriving there, in turning the boat, Philip accidentally fell out
into a very deep part of the river, and, notwitiistanding every effort
that was made to save him, was drowned.

His corpse was brought back to the college, and the Very Rev. Dr.
Cox (the president) was immensely shocked and grieved ; he was very
fond of Philip, but what was most dreadful to him was to have to break
the sad news to the boy's parents. He scarcely knew what to do,
whether to write by post or to send a messenger.

At last he made up his mind to go himself to Mr. Weld, at South-
ampton. He set off the same afternoon, and, passing through London,
reached Southampton the next day, and drove from thence to Archers
Lodge, the residence of Mr. Weld ; but before entering the grounds he
saw Mr. Weld at a short distance from his gate, walking towards the town.

Dr. Cox immediately stopped the carriage, alighted, and was about
to address Mr. Weld, when he prevented him by saying : —

*'You need not say one word, for I know that Philip is dead.
Yesterday afternoon I was walking with my daughter, Katherine, and
we suddenly saw him. He was standing on the path, on the opposite
side of the turnpike road, between two persons, one of whom was a

* In the present issue, this case replaces^ one where further examination
showed an apparently fundamental exioi m on^ oi ^^ ^\«&.


i.


'18S4.] A Theory of Apparitions. 181

youth dressed in a black robe. My daughter was the first to perceive
them and exclaimed, * Oh, papa ! did you ever see anything so like
Philip as that is?* 'Like him,* I answered, *why it is him.' Strange
to say, my daughter thought nothing of the circumstance, beyond that
we had seen an extraordinary likeness of her brother. ' We walked on
towards these three figures. Philip was looking, with u smiling, happy
expression of countenance, at the young man in a black robe, who was
shorter than himself. Suddenly they all seemed to me to have vanished ;
I saw nothing but a countryman, whom I had before seen through the
three figures, which gave me the impression that they were spirits. I, how-
ever, said nothing to anyone, as I was fearful of alarming my wife. I
looked out anxiously for the post the following morning. To my delight,
no letter came. I forgot that letters from Ware came in the after-
noon, and my fears were quieted, and I thought no more of the extra-
ordinary circumstance until I saw you in the carriage outside my gate.
Then everything returned to my mind, and I could not feel a doubt
that you came to tell me of the death of my dear boy.*'

The reader may imagine how inexpressibly astonished Dr. Cox was
at these words. He asked Mr. Weld if he had ever before seen the
young man in the black robe at whom Philip was looking with such a
happy smile. Mr. Weld answered that he had never before seen him,
but that his coimtenance was so indelibly impressed on his mind that
he was certain he should have known him at once anywhere.

Dr. Cox then related to the afflicted father all the circumstances of
his son's death, which had taken place at the very hour in which he
appeared to his father and sister ; and they felt much consolation on
account of the placid smile Mr. Weld had remarked on the countenance
of his son, as it seemed to indicate that he had died in the grace of
God and was, consequently, happy.

Mr. Weld went to the funeral of his son, and as he left the church,
after the sad ceremony, looked round to see if any of the religious
at all resembled the young man he had seen with Philip, but he could
not trace the slightest likeness in any of them.

About four months after, he and his family paid a visit to his
brother, Mr. George Weld, at Seagram Hall, in Lancashire.

One day he walked with his daughter Katherine to the neighbouring
village of Chipping, and after attending a service at the church called
on the priest.

It was a little time before the rev. father was at leisure to come
to them, and they amused themselves meantime by examining the prints
hanging on the walls on the room. Suddenly, Mr. Weld stopped before
a picture which had no name, that you could see, written under it (as the
frame covered the bottom), and exclaimed, ** That is the person whom
I saw with Philip ; I do not know whose likeness this print is, but I
am certain that it was that person whom I saw with Philip."

The priest entered the room a few moments afterwards, and was im-
mediately questioned by Mr. Weld concerning the print.

He answered that it was a print of St. Staiii&i\a.u<& 'K.o^^^^ ^\A %«^^:^
posed to he a very good likeneaa of the young aaiat.


182 A Theory of Apparitions. [May 28,

Mr. Weill was much moved at hearing this, for St. Stanislaus was a
Jesuit, who died when quite young, and Mr. Weld's father having been
a great benefactor of that Order, his family were supposed to bo under
the particular protection of the Jesuit saints ; also, Philip had been led of
late, by various circumstances, to a particular devotion to St. Stanislaus.

Moreover, St. Stanislaus is supposed to be the especial advocate of
drowned men, as is mentioned in his life.

The rev. father instantly presented the picture to Mr. Weld, who,
of course, received it with the greatest veneration, and kept it until his death.

His wife valued it equally, and at her death it passed into the
possession of the daughter who saw the apparition at the same time he
did, and it is now in her possession.

In answer to an inquiry as to whether she had ever had other
hallucinations of the senses, Miss Weld replied that the above was
a totally unique experience.*

We have no explanation of the third phantasmal figure ; but the
apparition of the second figure seems to lend itself with special facility
to the telepathic hypothesis ; since we can conceive that the idea of his
favourite saint may have been actually present to the mind of the
drowning man.

Our theory of Apparitions has, we hope, been now made sufficiently
clear. It of course makes no claim to be exhaustive. Resting as
it does on an experimental basis, we think that it ought to be pressed
to the furthest possible point ; but we are far from dogmatically
asserting that all phantasmal indications of death are of identical
nature, and that becuse Thought-transference explains some of them,
it must needs explain all. Just as morbid phantasms may be
variously produced by fever, by insanity, by opium, so also veridical
phantasms may be ultimately traceable to more than one originating
cause. But whatever further departures may hereafter be needful,

* The following reference to the same incident, from a physician
residing at Florence, is useful as illustrating the slight inaccuracies which
may creep into a narrative, without the least affecting the essential point :—
**I was mentioning this" (i,e„ a similar case) "to Baron F., or rather we
were talking over the incidents connected with it, when he told me of a strange
occurence which happened at the school were he was, ne«u: Ware, in
England, a Catholic college, — ^president a Dr. Cox. There was a boy
there of the name of Weld, a very well-known Catholic family. This
boy was accidentally drowned. The father and mother w^ere at the time
at Southampton, and on the day in question were walking on the Qnay
near the shipping. They suddenly saw the said boy approaching, and
hurried to meet him, but immediately he appeared to fade away, so that
they could see the masts of the ships, and through what had seemed to be
his body. The next day, or the day following, Dr. Cox called on them,
when Mr. Weld said, " I know why you are here, it is to tell me that

my son is dead; I saw liim -jeaWia.^, ^tvA. knew then that he had

departed. "


1884.] A Theory of Appantiom, 183^

we trust that the generalisations already made will continue valid^
We trust that permanent acceptance will be accorded to the thesis,
that 8(yme of those hallucinations of one or more of the senses, which
correspond with objective events at a distance, and which we there-^
fore term veridical^ are caused by a telepathic impact conveyed from
the mind of an absent agent to the mind of the percipient, and
rendering itself cognisible by the percipient's senses in various stages
of externalisation, and with various admixtures of a dreamlike or
symbolical element. We claim that this thesis possesses the primcc
facie characteristic's of a true scientific generalisation. It is not
contradictory of any previously established law ; it hsis been vaguely
foreshadowed by many earlier observers; it is more or less directly
confirmed by two separate lines of actual experiment — those, namely,
which indicate the existence of a similar reception of impressions
in the normal and in the hypnotic state ; and it adapts itself to
facts recorded for centuries in all quarters of the globe, and forming
a convergence of testimony without any possible concert or pre-
arrangement. The theory wi^, we hope, be discussed, modified, and
extended by many persons capable of dealing with it in all its
bearings. Meantime, there is little to be learnt from the mere a
priori negation with which it is sometimes met, and which would,
without inquiry, explain all telepathic experiments by fraud, and all
veridical hallucinations by mere chance-coincidence. This position of
pure negation, indeed, becomes daily more difficult to maintain, as
experiments are multiplied and death-wraiths recur. The force of
€t priori denunciation such as this lies mainly in its first confident
expression, and in the amount of diffused prejudice which it can
begin by arraying on its side. Time fights for inductive reasoners ;.
and if (as we may fairly hope) an increasing body of informants
continue to supply us with the first-hand evidence on which our
induction depends, we may trust that each year will make our
position stronger, and our own views more clear.

But we must find space before we close for one or two of the refiec-
tions to which the narratives cited in these papers naturally give rise —
reflections which may jar, we fear, alternately on some religious
and on some scientific prepossessions, but which may not be unacceptable
to those who hold that these two modes of regarding the universe
do but point from different sides to a higher, a reconciling unity.

In the first place, then, with all respect to those who in every
age have held these death-wraiths as proof of a special Providence
— intimations of the pitying indulgence of a beneficent Power — we
must say that the evidence, as presented to us, does not seem to sup-
port the conclusion. Such indulgence would involve some distinct
reference to the percipient^s affections and eTao^AOXiS*. ^>\\» \s!l ^^^<


184 A Tlieory of Apparitions. [May 28,

Marchant's case, for instance, there was no question of affection ; and
the only emotions that his experience caused h™ were surprise and
<iuriosity. Can we suppose that his old employi was expressly
permitted to overstep the lot of man, merely to manifest himself on an
orrand so bootless, and as a phantom so undesired ? No, even in this
Jiyperphysical region, and in the very vanguard of our advance upon
the Unseen, we are forced to believe that Dieu rCagit pas par des
vohntes particulieres — ^we are forced to surmise the presence of a law
which, though obscure, is immutable ; which is a factor in the fabric of
things, and was not framed, nor is suspended, in the special interest of
any one of us.

But, at the same time — and now we fear that a certain section of
the scientific world may in their turn find our suggestions distasteful—
the theory of telepathy does undoubtedly afford an unexpected support
to a certain school of religious conceptions. For there are two very
<lifferent theological views (often obscured by vagueness of language) as
to the manner in which unseen powers exercise influence on the visible
world. Some dogmatists have insisted that such influence is, in the
strictest sense of the word, mirax^ulous ; that it involves a suspension of
the laws of nature, an interference with the established course of things;
and that, in fact, on such non>natural or miraculous " character its
sanctity and value depend. Now against this creed, Telepathy, like
any other correlation under law of facts previously supposed to be
xirbitrary exceptions to law, does but accumulate one more presumption.
Lut there have been other theologians, from Augustine to Archbishop
Trench, who have formulated the claim of theology in a wiser way.
Such men maintain that an influence is in truth exercised by the
invisible on the visible world ; but that it is exercised according to laws,
which, though unknown to us, do in fact regulate and determine the
action of higher intelligences, whose volition thus intervenes in
human affairs in a fashion as strictly conditioned as any volitions of
our own.

Now the evidence which we have been discussing certainly does not
supply any direct confirmation of this view either. We have foand no
need to postulate the existence of any intelligences except bu .nan minds,
and human minds, not in hell or heaven, but on earth as we know
them. But, nevertheless, if other intelligent beings besides those
visible to us do in fact exist — if man's own soul survives the tomb-
then, no doubt, our telepathic Experiments and our collected cases of
apparitions, interpreted as we interpret them, do suggest analogies of
influence, modes of operation, which (it is hardly too much to say)
would throw a quite novel light over the long controversy between
Science and Faith. It is only in some form of idealism that that con-
troversy can find a close. And we are far too sensible of the problem


1884.] A Theor?/ of Apparitions. 185

involved in the relation of our own will to the facts and forces of
nature to meet any idealistic hypothesis of the relation of other wills to
those facts and forces with a direct denial. We cannot call a hypothesis
nnphilosophical — however much unproved — if it introduces into the
great problem no difficulty which is not already there, and is compatible
— which the cruder theory of miracle is not — with the known facts of
the universe, viewed in that connected manner which alone can give
stability to thought.

But we shall do more than indicate this line of reflection. We
have no wish to take wing as chimcerce bombinantes in vacuo — full-blown
explainers of the universe — but rather to be accepted as hewers of
wood and drawers of water in a territory which inductive science has yet
to clear for her own. Nay, we have preferred to submit to the incon-
venience of an arbitrary restriction of our subject, rather than to risk
the dangers which might attend its further extension. Of apparitions
ajier death we say nothing here ; we choose rather to defer all discus-
sion of such evidence as is alleged for them (though we receive and
examine it) until we have learnt everything that it may be possible to
\ea.rn oi those pJiantasms of the living which do not tempt us among
agencies so obscure and unknown. It is true that even of these inci-
dents death is the central fact. It is in this profoundest shock which
human life encounters that these phantasms are normally en-
gendered ; and, where not in death itself, at least in one of those special
moments, whether of strong mental excitement or of bodily collapse,
which of all living experiences come nearest to the great crisis of disso-
lution. Following the track not only of logical sequence but of imagin-
ative interest, our evidence has carried us from the slightest to the
gravest of human things, from the curiosities of an afternoon to the
crises of a lifetime, from petty experiments and seemingly aimless
mysteries up to the experience which there is no refusing, and into the
heart of the supreme mystery which surrounds and overshadows us
whether we speculate about it or no. But in the light of advancing
knowledge that mystery may appear — ^if no less profound than ever — at
any rate less appalling. We have drawn on no creeds ; we have
appealed to no " supernatural agencies ; " but new facts cannot leave
old facts exactly where they found them ; and we have jat any rate
discovered in death the great and peculiar source of phenomena which
— ^however we interpret them — are essentially vital. With tliis reflection
we may pause on the threshold — vestibulum ante ipsum primisque in
/aucibu^ Orci — till our eyes, which still can look into daylight, have
grown accustomed to the darkening air. Not here, indeed, any more
than elsewhere, shall we find the " Elysian road " which will conduct
man undoubtingly to such beliefs as his heart most craves. Centauri
in foribus stabulant. There will, we doubt not, as discovery replaces


186 A Theory of Apiyaritions. [May 28, 1884.

imagination, be found much that will startle, something that will alarm
or repel. But in this age, if in any, it may surely be aflfirmed that
** Truth, after all, is the prime passion of mankind " ; and the audience,
the fellow-workers, to whom we look are those who in these deep matters
Are weary alike of unproved dogma and of uninquiring negation • who
have faith enough in the methods and in the future of science to feel
confident that the same humble, candid, persistent collection and colli-
gation of facts — without disdain of the smallest things or fear of the
hardest — ^which in one century has so changed our outlook on the
world, may be rewarded hereafter by the opening of horizons wider
45till, — by a more indisputable insight, a more assured penetration into
the " chief concerns of man."


June 30, 1884.] Professor Balfour Stewarfs Address. 187


V.
PROCEEDINGS OF THE GENERAL MEETING ON

June 30, 1884.

The ninth General Meeting of the Society was held at the Garden
Mansion, Queen Anne^s Mansion, S.W., on Monday, June 30, 1884.

Professor Balfour Stewart, F.R.S., Vice-President, in the Chair.


The following address was delivered by the Chairman : —

Residing as I do at Manchester, I cannot refrain from adverting to the
loss which our Society has suflfered in the death of Dr. Angus Smith.
It has never been my lot to meet with a man of greater simplicity and
purity of character, or of greater love for truth. Whilst we all deeply
mourn his loss, it is a source of satisfaction to think that the name of
one so eminent in- many ways should be found on the roll of our
Society. It is likewise cause for much satisfaction that men of science
of undisputed eminence have recently consented to join our ranks.
And I have been much gratified by the unanimous verdict of scientific
<jandour and honesty which a perusal of our memoirs has called forth
from men who are, nevertheless, not disposed to join us at present.

Being myself engaged in physical science I should like to make a
single remark on that part of our programme which refers to the pro-
duction of peculiar physical phenomena. I know that the investiga-
tions in this direction, upon which several members of this Society are
engaged, have not yet been developed sufficiently to be brought before
us for discussion ; but my remark is of a general nature, and can in no
way prejudice that which is now going on.

Those who have discussed the subject of what I will call Free-will,
may be divided into two classes or schools.

First, The Materialistic, embracing those who believe that all acts
of will, all desires and aspirations of the Ego, are the results of certain
material transformations in the brain, which transformations take place
according to ordinarily-understood physical laws.

Secondly, The Spiritualistic schools, or those who believe that some-
thing in the Ego is theoretically, as well as practically, above ordinary
matter, and is the cause rather than the effect of certain changes in the
brain.


1S8 Professor Balfour Steicarfa Address. [June 30,

It is rather of the Spiritualistic school, as above defined, that I would
now speak. 1 cannot, of course, tell how this school will view evidence
tending to prove a peculiar action of mind upon matter, but I think I
can tell how they ought to view it. Believing as they do that something in
the Ego is theoretically as well as practically above matter, they must
l)elieve that to a greater or less extent the usually-received physical
axioms are broken by it. That is to say, they have been driven, it may
be by ethical and metaphysical views, into an assertion with reference to
Physics which they nevertheless believe to be quite unsupported by
physical evidence. Surely then they ought above all others to welcome
obser\ations tending to show that there may possibly be an action of
mind over matter in other regions than that of the brain.

For my own part, while I do not dispute the truth of the positioii
held by the advocates of what I call Free-will, I yet acknowledge the
difficulty of its being held permanently as a single isolated exception,
incapable of verification. Exceptions are not dead units, but have a
family life of their own, with their own peculiar traditions and places
of resort ; and just as the naturalist, who has got hold of a imique
beetle, goes next day to the same hunting-ground in the hope that he
may obtain its fellow, so — I am prepared to maintain — should the investi-
gator who thinks he has discovered, no matter how, an undoubted
exception, explore the most likely places for its fellow, which, if there
be truth in his position, he is almost certain sooner or later to secure.


1884.] Experiments in Thought" Transference. 189


VI.

AN ACCOUNT OP SOME EXPEEIMENTS IN THOUGHT-

TRANSFERENCE.

By Oliver J. Lodge, D.Sc,
Professor of Physics in University College, Liverpool.


Members of the Society for Psychical Research are all perfectly
aware of the experiments in Thought-transference which have been origi-
nated and carried out by Mr. Malcolm Guthrie, in Liverpool.

Perhaps it may not be considered impertinent, since it bears on the
question of responsibility and genuineness, if I state that Mr. Guthrie holds
an important position in Liverpool, being a Justice of the Peace, and
an active member of the governing bodies of several public institutions,
among others of the new University College; that he is a severe student
of philosophy, and the author of several works bearing on the particular
doctrines of Mr. Herbert Spencer. I may also say that he is a relative
of Professor Frederick Guthrie, and that he has exhibited in this ex-
perimental research such care and systematic vigilance as might perhaps
have been expected on Mr. Francis Galton's principles, and such as
would, if properly directed, have placed him in a high rank of experi-
mental philosophers. I may also remind you of what he himself has
here said, viz., that he is a partner in the chief drapery establishment in
Liverpool, and that it is among the employes of that large business that
the two percipients hereafter referred to were accidentally discovered.

Let it be \mderstood that the experiments are Mr. Guthrie's, and
that my connection with them is simply this : — ^that after Mr. Guthrie
had laboriously carried out a long series of experiments and had pub-
lished many of his results, he set about endeavouring to convince
such students of science as he could lay his hands upon in Liverpool ;
and with this object he appealed to me, among others, to come and wit-
ness, and within limits modify, the experiments in such a way as would
satisfy me of their genuineness and perfect good faith.

Yielding to his entreaty I consented, and have been, I suppose, at
some dozen sittings ; at first simply looking on so as to grasp the pheno-
mena, but afterwards taking charge of the experiments — Mr. Guthrie
himself often not being present, though he was always within call in.
another room^ readj to give advice and aa^tasic^ ^rVvsa di^^ssvx^


190 Eocpemments in Thought-TransfereTice. [June 30,

In this way I had every opportunity of examining and varying the
minute conditions of the phenomena so as to satisfy myself of their
genuine and objective character, in the same way as one is accus-
tomed to satisfy oneself as to the truth and genuineness of any ordinary
physical fact.

I did not feel at liberty to modify the experiments very largely, in
other words to try essentially new ones, because that would have been
interfering with Mr. Guthrie's prerogative. I only regarded it as my
business to satisfy myself as to the genuineness and authenticity of the
phenomena already described by Mr. Guthrie. If I had merely
witnessed facts as a passive spectator I should most certainly not
publicly report upon them. So long as one is bound to accept
imposed conditions and merely witness what goes on, I have no
confidence in my own penetration, and am perfectly sure that a conjurer
could impose on me, possibly even to the extent of making me think
that he was not imposing on me ; but when one has the control of the
circumstances, can change them at will and arrange one's own experi-
ments, one gradually acquires a belief in the phenomena observed
quite comparable to that induced by the repetition of ordinary physical
experiments.

It is only on these grounds that I have been asked to report pro-
gress to-night, and it is only on these grounds that I have consented.

After this long preamble you may be disappointed to hear that I
have no striking or new phenomenon to report, but only a few more
experiments in the simplest and most elementary form of what is called
Thought-transference ; though certainly what I have to describe faUs
under the head of " Thought-transference" proper, and is not explicable
by the merely mechanical transfer of impressions, exhibited before large
audiences, signalised by sensational articles in the daily Press, and
more properly described as muscle-reading.

In using the term " Thought-transference," I would ask to be under
stood as doing so for convenience, because the observed facts can
conveniently be grouped under such a title; but I would not be
understood as implying that I hold any theory on the subject. It is a
most dangerous thing to attempt to convey a theory by a phrase, and,
probably, if I held any theory on the subject, I should be more guarded
in my language, and should require many words to set it forth.
As it is, the phrase describes correctly enough what appears to take
place, viz., that one person may, under favourable conditions, receive a
faint impression of a thing which is strongly present in the mind, or
thought, or sight, or sensorium of another person not in contact, and
may be able to describe or draw it more or less correctly. But
how the transfer takes place, or whether there is any transfer at
^H or what is the physical rea\ity Miii^etVyfli^ \?si<i -^xnoaa " mind,"


1884.] Experiments in Thought' Transference, 191

" consciousness," " impression," and the like ; and whether this thing
we call mind is located in the person, or in the space round him, or in
both, or neither ; whether indeed the term location, as applied to mind,
is utter nonsense and simply meaningless, — concerning all these things
I am absolutely blank, and have no hypothesis whatsoever. I may,
however, be permitt.ed to suggest a rough and crude analogy. That
the brain is the organ of consciousness is patent, but that consciousness
is located in the brain is what no psychologist ought to assert ; for just
as the energy of an electric charge, though apparently on the conductor,
is not on the conductor, but in all the space round it ; just as the
energy of an electric current, though apparently in the copper wire, is
certainly not all in the copper wire, and possibly not any of it ; so it
may be that the sensory consciousness of a person, though apparently
located in his brain, may be conceived of as also existing like a faint
echo in space, or in other brains, though these are ordinarily too busy
and pre-occupied to notice it.

The experiments which I have witnessed proceed in this sort
of way. One person is told to keep in a perfectly passive condition,
with a mind as vacant as possible ; and to assist this condition the
organs of sense are unexcited, the eyes being bandaged and silence
maintained. It might be as well to shut out even the ordinary street
hum by plugging the ears, but as a matter of fact this was not done.

A person thus kept passive is " the percipient." In the experiments
I witnessed the percipient was a young lady, one or other of two who
had been accidentally found to possess the necessary power. Whether it
is a common power or not I do not know. So far as I am aware very
few persons have been tried. I myself tried, but failed abjectly. It
was easy enough to picture things to oneself, but they did not appear
to be impressed on me from without, nor did any of them bear the least
resemblance to the object in the agent's mind. [For instance, I said a
pair of scissors instead of the five of diamonds, and things like that.]
Nevertheless, the person acting as percipient is in a perfectly ordinary
condition, and can in no sense be said to be in a hypnotic state, unless
this term be extended to include the emptiness of mind produced by
blindfolding and silence. To all appearance a person in a brown study
is far more hypnotised than the percipients I saw, who usually
unbandaged their own eyes and chatted between successive ex-
periments.

Another person sitting near the percipient, sometimes at first holding
her hands but usually and ordinarily without any contact at all but with
a distinct intervening distance, was told to think hard of a particular
object, either a name, or a scene, or a thing, or of an object or drawing
set up in a good light and in a convenient position for staring at. This
person is " the agent " and has, on the whole, t\ie \ia.T^'e&\. Mxcckfe cS. \^,


192 JExperimenis in Thought- Trat^ference. [June 30,

It is a most tiring and tiresome thing to stare at a letter, or a triangle,
or a donkey, or a teaspoon, and to think of nothing else for the space of
two or three minutes. /^Whether the term " thinking " can properly be
applied to such barbarous concentration of mind as this I am not sure ;
but I can answer for it that if difficulty is an important element in the
definition of " thinking," then it is difficult enough in all conscience.

Very frequently more than one agent is employed, and when two or
three people are in the room they are all told to think of the object
more or less strenuously ; the idea being that wandering thoughts in
the neighbourhood certainly cannot help, and may possibly hinder, the
clear transfer of impression. As regards the question whether when
several agents are thinking, only one is doing the work, or whether all
really produce some effect, I have made a special experiment, which
loads me to conclude that more than one agent can be active at the same
time. We conjecture that several agents are probably more powerful
tlian one, but that a confusedness of impression may sometimes be pro-
duced by different agents attending to different parts or aspects of the
object : tliis, however, is mere conjecture.

Most people seem able to act as agents, though some appear to do
l»ott<T tlian others. I can hardly say whether I am much good at it or
not. I have not often tried alone, and in the majority of cases when I
have tried I have failed ; on the other hand, I have once or twice ap-
|>arontly succeeded. We have many times succeeded with agents quite
disixinnected from the percipient in ordinary life and sometimes com
ploto strangers to them. Mr. Birchall, the headmaster of the Birkdale
Industrial School, frequently acted ; and the house physician at the Eye
luul Vaw Hospital, Dr. Shears, had a successful experiment, acting alone,
on his first and only visit. All suspicion of a pre-arranged code is thus
riMidortni impossible e%"en to outsiders who are unable to witness the
obvious fivirm^ss of all the experiments,

Tho objoot looked at by the agent is placed usually on a small black
o|V{\t|\u^ NViXxion soiven between the percipient and agents, but sometimes
it is put on a ljiurg<>r screen behind the percipient. The objects were
Kopt iu {U\ iii\jiHuiii^ room and were selected and brought in by me,
with \\\\ duo prxvauticttu after the percipient was blindfolded. I
nUouKI js\\\ hv^x^ninvr. that no n*lianc^ was placed on, or care taken in,
tho Iviudi^iu^vr^ It ^"^s merely done because the percipient preferred it
t\^ u\o\>^K shuttiix^ the c\>\s. After recent experiments on blindfolding
b\ u\ou\lv\^ wf the Society^ T vvrta:n.!y would not rely an any form of
lv^\\\U^\\^ ; the o^vfcoitv ot the Wvxvien screen cai which the object was
I^Uu^si \\<vs the thixvj: ivaHv dojvr,vievi oiu and it was noticed that no
i^\iv\\\^> N\r iuviistiuct rx^t'.iv^tor^ ^>mv prv^sent. Hie <mly sur^ce at all
*ux|N\\ \nnus \x5^s the \\vv$JK\i top of :hc $c2iatll tal4e on which ihe opaque
MUSN^\ v\\u^<^\ ;^tv\\ls l^: A$ tbsc screiM sloped backwards at a


1884.] Experiments in Thought-Transference. 193

slight angle, it was impossible for the object on it to be thus mirrored.
Moreover, sometimes I covered the table with paper, and very often it
was not used at all, but the object was placed on a screen or a settee
behind the percipient ; and one very striking success was obtained with
the object placed on a large drawing board, loosely swathed in a black
silk college gown, and with the percipient immediately behind the said
drawing board, and almost hidden by it. *•

As regards collusion and trickery, no one who has witnessed the
absolutely genuine and artless manner in which the impressions are
described, but has been perfectly convinced of the transparent
honesty of purpose of all concerned. This, however, is not
evidence to persons who have not been present, and to them I can only
say that to the best of my scientific belief no collusion or trickery
was possible under the varied circumstances of the experiments.

A very interesting question presents itself as to what is really trans-
mitted, whether it is the idea or name of the object or whether it is
the visual impression. To examine this I frequently drew things with-
out any name — ^perfectly irregular drawings. I am bound to say that
these irregular and unnameable productions have always been rather
difficult, though they have at times been imitated fairly well ; but it is
not at aU strange that a faint impression of an unknown object should be
harder to grasp and reproduce than a faint impression of a familiar one,
such as a letter, a common name, a teapot, or a pair of scissors. More-
over, in some very interesting cases the idea or name of the object was
certainly the thing transferred, and not the visual impression at all ;
this specially happened with one of the two percipients ; and, therefore,
probably in every case the fact of the object having a name would
assist any faint impression of its appearance which might be received.

As to a^spect, t.e., inversion or perversion, so far as my experience
goes it seems perfectly accidental whether the object will be drawn by
the percipient in its actual position or in the inverted or perverted posi-
tion. This is very curious if true, and would certainly not have been
expected by me. Horizontal objects are never described as vertical,
nor vice versd ; and slanting objects are usually drawn with the right
amount of slant.

In proceeding to the details of the actual experiments, it would take
far too long to recount the whole — failures as well as successes ; I shall
only describe a few from which a more or less obvious moral may be
drawn. '

The two percipients are Miss R. and Miss E. Miss R. is the more
prosaic, staid, and self-contained personage, and she it is who gets the
best quasi-visual impression, but she is a bad drawer, and does not
reproduce it very well.

Miss E. is, I should judge, of a more sensitive temperament, seldom


194 ExperimenU in Thought- Transference. [June 30,

\)eing able to preserve a strict silence for instance, and she it is who
more frequently jumps to the idea or name of the object without being
able so frequently to " see " it.

I was anxious to try both percipients at once so as to compare their
impressions, but I have not met with much success under these condi-
tions, and usually therefore have had to try one at a time — the other
licing frequently absent or in another room, though also frequently
present and acting as part or sole agent.

I once tried a double agent — ^that is, not two agents thinking of the
same thing, but two agents each thinking of a different thing. A mixed
and curiously double impression was thus produced and described by the
percipient, and both the objects were correctly drawn.


Description of some of the Experiments.

In order to describe the experiments briefly I will put in parentheses
everything said by me or by the agent, and in inverted commas all the
remarks of the percipient. The first seven experiments are all that
w(jr(i made on one evening with the particular percipient, and they
wore rapidly performed,

A. ExpeHmenU loUh Miss IL as Percipient
FivHt Agenif Mr, BirchaU^ holding hands. No one else pi-esefit except mysdf.

Ohjt^ct — a hlxts square of siUc, — (Now, it's going to be a colour ; ready.)
*' Im it |jcn>on ? " (No.) **It*s something between green and blue. . . .
1 •oiwM »ok . " ( What sliape ?) She drew a rhombus.

I N . U. — It is not intended to imply that this was a success by any means,
Mu\ it. iw t^> bo uudorstood that it was only to make a start on the first ex-
|H»riuu>nt tliat so much help was given as is involved in saying ** it's a colour."
NVhoii WxKsy ivn> simply told ** it's an object," or, what is much the same, when
nntluwjt iH wvid at all, the field for guessing is practically infinite. When no
rtMuivrk at. Ht<)vrtiu); is reoi>rded none was made, except such an one as "Now
wo a»v iHvmly/' by niyscdf.]

AVu f ohj^>* ,1 Avy OH a Wadt yftwud.— (It's an object.) In a few seconds
nho «aM» " lf« bri^UtH . , . It looks like a key." Told to draw it she
M»H>\v it j\ut iuvortiHl,

AV,»^ ^^hJ^^t lAiY* ^^Id finds IH moTtKco «Me,— " Is it yellow ? . . .
Wo\mMluutfK>^M. . . , S.Mnothing round. . . . A locket or a watch
|^*M!m|vii. 0^\>vu *oo mort> than one round!) "Yes, there seem to be
^u^^jv t Imu ouo. , . , Aro thoiv thi^ rounds ? . . . Three rings."
K\\\\M yls tluvy »^vm tx. W «ot in f ) *^S.>mething bright like beads."
I ^1. \^Vi ^^''^ ^"va.M^^u^uliiv^ ^>r Attonding to the question,] Told to un-
iMtu.t vvt.t W^>*.xK auvi amw..^hoarew the thr^ rounds in a row quite correctly,
M^m\ »K^xMuHi xvuua thixm^W^iOy Uie outline <rf the caae ; which seemed,


1884.] Encperimenta in ThoughUTransference.. 195

therefore, to have been apparent to her though she had not consciously
attended to it. It was an interesting and striking experiment.

Next object — a pair of scissors standing partly open with their points down.
— "Is it a bright object ? . . . Something long ways [indicating
verticality]. ... A pair of scissors standing up. ... A little bit
open." Time, about a minute altogether. She then drew her impression,
and it was correct in every particular. The object in this experiment was on
a settee behind her, but its position had to be pointed out to her when, after
the experiment, she wanted to see it.

Next object — a d/rawing of a right angle triangle on its side, — (It's a
drawing.) She drew an isosceles triangle on its side.

Next — a circle vdth a cord across it, — She drew two detached ovals, one
with a cutting line across it.

Next — a drawing of a Union Jack pattern, — ^As usual in drawing experi-


i@


ORIGINAL. BBFBODXJOnOV.

ments, Miss B. remained silent for perhaps a minute ; then she said, " Now
I am ready." I hid the object; she took off the handkerchief, and proceeded
to draw on paper placed ready in front of her. She this time drew all the
lines of the figure except the horizontal middle one. She was obviously
much tempted to draw this, and, indeed, began it two or three times faintly^
but ultimately said, '* No, I'm not sure," and stopped.

[N.B. — The actual drawings made in all the experiments are preserved
intact by Mr. Guthrie.]

[end or STETING.]

Mxperiments with Miss B, — contvmied,

T will now describe an experiment indicating that one agent may
be better than another.

Object— the Three of Hearts. — ^Miss E. and Mr. Birchall both present as
agents, but Mr. Birchall holding percipient's hands at first. "Is it a black
cross . . a white ground with a black cross on it ? " Mr. Birchall now let
Miss E. hold hands instead of himself, and Miss B. very soon said, " Is it a
card?" (Bight.) "Are there three spots on it ? . . . Don't know what
they are. ... I don't think I can get the colour. . . , They are
one above the other, but they seem three roimd spots. ... I think
they're red, but am not clear."

Next object — a playing card with a blue anchor painted on it slantwise in-
stead of pips. No contact at all this time, but another lady, Miss B d,

who had entered the room, assisted Mr. B. and Miss E. as agents. " Is it
an anchor ? . . a little on the slant." (Do you see any colour ?) " Colour
is black . . . It's a nicely drawn anchor." When asked to draw she
sketched part of it, but had evidently half forgotten it, and not knowing the
use of the cross arm, she could only indicate that there was something more


196 Eaiperiments in Thought' Traiw/erence. [June 30,

there but she couldn't remember what. Her drawing bad the right dant
exactly.

Another object — tun pair of eoaree liiyee crossing ; drawn m red ehalkf and
set up at some distance from agents. No contact. '' I only see lines cross-
ing.'' She saw no colour. She afterwards drew them quite correctly, but
very small.

Double object, — ^It was now that I arranged the double object between

Miss R d and Miss E., who happened to be sitting nearly facing one

another. [See NatwrCj June 12th, 1884.] The drawing was a square on one
side of the paper, a cross on the other. Miss R— d looked at the side with


n X


OBianrALs. BSFBODVcnoir.

the square on it. Miss E. looked at the side with the cross. Neither knew
what the other was looking at — ^nor did the percipient know that anything
unusual was being tried. Mr. Birchall was silently asked to take off his
attention, and he got up and looked out of window before the drawings were
brought in, and during the experiment. There was no contact. Very soon
Miss B. said, *' I see things moving about ... I seem to see two
things ... I see first one up there and then one down there . . .
I don't know which to draw. ... I can't see either distinctly." (Well
anyhow, draw what you have seen.) She took off the bandage and drew first
a square, and then said, " Then there was the other thing as well . . .
afterwards they seemed to go into one," and she drew a cross inside the
square from comer to comer, adding afterwards, ** I don't know what made
me put it inside."

The next is a case of a perfect stranger acting as agent by himself
at the first trial. Dr. Shears, house physician at the Eye and Ear Infir-
mary, came down to see the phenomena, and Miss B. having arrivedbefore
the others, Mr. Guthrie proposed his trying as agent alone. Dr. Shears,
therefore, held Miss R's hand while I set up in front of him a card :
nothing whatever being said as to the nature of the object.

Object — the five of dubs, at first on a white ground. " Is it something
bright ? " (No answer, but I changed the object to a black ground where it was
more conspicuous.) " A lot of black with a white square on it.' (Go on.)
" Is it a card V (Yes.) " Are there five spots on it ?" (Yes.) " Black ones."
(Right.) " I can't see the suit, but I think it's spades."

Another object at same sitting, but with several agents, no contact, a drawing
of this form —


r\


<^^^ BEPKODUCnON

"I can see something, but lam sure I can't draw it. . . . It's something
with pomto all lomid it . . . It's a star, . . . or like a triangle


1884.] Experiments in ThoughUTransferenee. 197

within a triangle." Asked to draw it, she expressed reluctance, said it was
too difficult, and drew part of a star figiure, evidently a crude reproduction
of the original but incomplete. She then began afresh by drawing a triangle,
but was unable to proceed.

I then showed her the object for a few seconds. She exclaimed, ''Oh
yes, that's what I saw. ... I understand it now." I said, *' Well now
draw it." She made a more complete attempt, but it was no more really like
the original than the first had been.

M


Z


s


Experiments at a Sittitig in ihe room of Dr, HerdmaUy Professor of Zoology at

Ufdversity CoUege,

Object — a drawing of the outline of a flag, — Miss R. as percipient in

Q


ORIGINAL. REPBODUCnON.

contact with Miss E. as agent. Very quickly Miss B». said, * ' It's a little flag,"
and when asked to draw, she drew it fairly well but perverted. I showed her
the flag (as usual after a success), and then took it away to the drawing place
to fetch something else. I made another drawing, but instead of bringing it
I brought the flag back again and set it up in the same place as before, but
inverted. There was no contact this time. Miss R d and Miss E. were
acting as agents.

Object — same flag inverted, — After some time. Miss R. said, *' No, I can't
see anything this time. I still see that flag. . . . The flag keeps bothering
me. . . . I shan't do it this time." Presently I said, *' Well, draw what
you saw anyway." She said, " I only saw the same flag, but perhaps it had
across on it." So she drew a flag in the same position as before, but added
a cross to it. Questioned as to aspect she said '' Yes, it was just the same as
before."


Object — an (ywxl gold locket hanging by a bit of string with a litUe price label
attached, — ^Placed like the former object on a large drawing board, swathed
in a college gown. The percipient, Miss R., close behind the said board and

almost hidden by it. Agents, Miss R d and Miss E. sitting in front ; no

contact; nothing said. *' I see something gold, . . . something hanging,
. . . like a gold locket." (What shape?) "It's oval," indicating with
her fingers correctly. (Very good so far, tell us something more) — meaning


198 Experiments in Thought' Transference. [June 30,

ticket at top. No more said. When shown the object she said, ''Oh yes,
it was just like that/' but she had seen nothing of the little paper ticket.

Next object — a watch and chain pirvned up to ihe board cu on a waid-
coat. — This experiment was a failure, and is only interesting because the
watch-ticking sounded abnormally loud, sujQBlcient to give any amount of
hint to a person on the look out for such sense indications. But it is very
evident to those witnessing the experiments that the percipient is in a quite dif-
ferent attitude of mind to that of a clever guesser, and ordinary sense indica-
tions seem wholly neglected. I scarcely expected, however, that the watch-
ticking could pass unnoticed, though indeed we shuffled our feet to drown it
somewhat, but so it was ; and all we got was ** something bright . . .
either steel or silver. . • • Is it anything like a pair of scissors ? " (Not a
bit.)

I have now done with the selection of experiments in which Mi'gg
H. acted as percipient ; and I will describe some of those made with
Miss E. As a rule, these seemed perhaps less satisfactory and complete
at the time, but there are several points of considerable interest notice-
able in connection with them.

B, — Experiments with Miss E, as Percipient.

Object — an oblong piece of red {cerise) sUk, Agent, Mr. B., in contact. —
"Red." (What sort of red ?) "A dark red." (What shape ?)" One patch."
(Well, what shade is it ?) "Not a pale red."

Next object^a yellow oblong. Agent as before. — " A dusky gold colour.
. . . A square of some yellow shade."

Object — the printed letter r. Told it was a letter ; agent as before. — *' I can
see R." (What sort of R ?) *' An ordinary capital R."

This illustrates feebly what often, though not always, happens with Miss
E. — ^that the idea of the object is grasped rather than its actual shape.

Another object — a small printed e. — "Is it E ? " (Yes.) But, again, she
couldn't tell what sort of E it was.

Object — a teapot cut out of silver paper, — ^Present — ^Dr. Herdman, Miss


ORIGINAL. BBPIlODX70nOH.

R d, and Miss R., Miss R. holding percipient's hands, but all thinking

of the object. Told nothing. She said, "Something light. ... No
colour. . . . Looks like a duck. . . . Like a silver duck. . . .
Something oval. . . . Head at one end and tail at the other." [This is
not uncommon in ducks.] The object, being rather large, was then moved
further back, so that it might be more easily grasped by the agents as a
whole, but percipient persisted that it was like a duck. On being told to
unbandage and draw, she drew a rude and perverted copy of the teapot, but
didn't know what it was unless it was a duck. Dr. Herdman then explained


1884.] ^Experiments in Thought-Transference. 19^

that he had been thinking all the time how like a duck the original teapot
was, and, in fact, had been thinking more of ducks than teapots.

Next object — a hand mirror brought in and set up in front of Miss R d,

— ^No contact at first. Told nothing. She said, **Is it a colour?" (No.)*
"No, I don't see anything.'' Object then shifted for Miss R. to look at
herself in it, holding percipient's hand. "No, I don't get this." Gave it
up. I then hid the mirror in my coat, and took it out of the room. Dr.
Herdman reports that while I was away Miss E. begged to know what the
object had been, but the agents refused, saying that I had evidently wished
to keep it secret. Half annoyed, Miss E. said, " Oh, well, it doesn't matter.
I believe it was a looking-glass."

Next object — a drawvng of a right^ngled triangle. No contact. — "Is it
like that?" drawing a triangle with her finger (no answer). "It's almost
like a triangle." She then drew an isosceles triangle.

Next object — a drawing of two parallel but curved lines. No contact. — " I
only see two lines," indicating two parallel lines. " Now they seem to close-
up.

Next object — a tetrahedron outline rudely dravnt> in projection — "Is it


A


another triangle V* (No answer, but I silently pass round to the agents a
scribbled message, "Think of a pyramid.") Miss E. then said, "I only
see a triangle." . . . then hastily, "Pyramids of Egypt. No, I shan't
do this." Asked to draw, she only drew a triangle.

Object—a rude outline of a donkey or other quadruped. — Still no contact
at first. "Can't get it, I am sure." I then asked the agents to leave the

room, and to come in and try one by one. First Miss R d, without

contact, and then with. Next Miss B., in contact, when Miss E. said
hopelessly, "An old woman in a poke bonnet." Finally I tried as agent
alone, and Miss E. said "It's like a donkey, but I can't see it, nor can
I draw it."

C. — Experiments with both Fei^dpients at once.

In addition to the experiments with single percipients, I tried a few
with both percipients sitting together — hoping to learn something hy
comparing their different perceptions of the same object.

But unfortunately the experiments were not very successful ; some-
times they each appeared to get different aspects or the parts of object,
but never very distinct or perfect impressions. The necessity of im-
posing silence on the percipients, as well as on the agents, was also
rather irksome, and renders the results less describable without the
actual drawings.

I still think that this variation might convey something interesting if
pursued under &,yourable circumstances. Whether greater agent-
power is necessary to affect two percipients as strongly as one ; or


200 Hxpmments in ThoughUTransference. [June 30, 1884,

whether the blankness of mind of one percipient re-acts on the other, 1
cannot say.

With regard to the feelings of the percipients when receiving an
impression, they seem to have some sort of consciousness of the action
of other minds on them ; and once or twice, when not so conscious,
have complained that there seemed to be ." no power " or anything
acting, and that they not only received no impression, but did not feel
as if they were going to.

I asked Miss E. what she felt when impressions were coming freely,
and she said she felt a sort of influence or thrilL They both say
that several objects appear to them sometimes, but that one among
them persistently recurs, and they have a feeling when they fix upon
one that it is the right one.

Sometimes they seem quite certain that they are right. Sometimes
they are very uncertain, but still right. Occasionally Miss E. has been
pretty confident and yet quite wrong.

One serious failure rather depresses them, and after a success others
often follow. It is because of these rather delicate psychological con-
ditions that one cannot press the variations of an experiment as far
as one would do if dealing with inert and more dependable matter.
Usually the presence of a stranger spoils the phenomena, though in
some cases a stranger has proved a good agent straight off.

The percipients complain of no fatigue as induced by the experi-
ments, and I have no reason to suppose that any harm is done them.
The agent, on the other hand, if very energetic, is liable to contract a
headache ; and Mr. Guthrie himself, who was a powerful and determined
agent for a long time, now feels it wiser to refrain from suiting, and
conducts the experiments with great moderation.

If experiments are only conducted for an hour or so a week no harm
<;an, I should judge, result, and it would be very interesting to know
what percentage of people have the perceptive faculty well developed.

The experiments are easy to try, but they should be tried soberly
and quietly, like any other experiment. A public platform is a most
unsuitable place ; and nothing tried before a mixed or jovial audience
can be of the slightest scientific value. Such demonstrations may be
efficient into putting money into the pockets of showmen, or in, n-n^iiRJiig
one's friends ; but all real evidence must be obtained in the quiet of
the laboratory or the study.


Experiments in Mesmei^km. 201


VIL
AN ACCOUNT OF SOME EXPERIMENTS IN MESMERISM.

By Edmund Gurney.


I. — Local Ancesthesia.

In the second report of the Committee on Mesmerism, an account
was given of some experiments in the production, by mesmerism, of local
rigidity and anaesthesia, under conditions which precluded the subject
from knowing which particular part of his body was subjected to the
mesmeric process. The object of these conditions was, of course, to
eliminate the factor of expectancy. If the "subject" knows what part
of his body is being operated on, that knowledge may alone be quite
enough to produce rigidity and anaesthesia in the part ; just as one
may see a sensitive " subject " go into violent spasms at the touch of a
coin, or on drinking water, which he believes to have been " magnetised,"
even though that belief is erroneous. But if the " subject " is ignorant
what particular part of his body has been selected for the purpose, and
if rigidity and anaesthesia in this part results from the making of passes
over it or from the mere proximity of the operator's hand, then the
phenomenon must be attributed to some direct and specific influence
passing from the mesmeriser to the "subject." It may be
remembered that the method adopted was to seat the " subject "
in front of a table, on which his ten fingers were extended ;
while his body was covered in front by a very thick paper screen,
extending far above his head, with holes in it for his arms to pass
through. In this manner it was easy to make it perfectly certain that
he could not see his hands. Different fingers, or combinations of fingers,
were then mesmerised in succession, by passes made without contact,
and so quietly as to prevent the "subject" from discovering, by means
of currents of air, which of his digits was being operated on. To
make assurance doubly sure, one of ourselves would make similar
movements over some other finger or fingers than those on which
the mesmeriser was at work. The experiments, as so far reported, were
made with two " subjects," and have since been repeated with a third ;
and in every one of the numerous trials the mesmerised finger, or fingers,
proved insensible to pain, so far as could be judged by the application
of very severe tests. In every case, also, when the " subject " was told
to double up his fist, the mesmerised member remaiiife^ s»\a$^ycl <5Vi.\» \sw


202 Experiments in Mesmerism.

lielpless rigidity, and so, for the first time, niade its owner aware of the
abnormal condition into which it had passed.

It will be observed that this second phenomenon — the rigidity — is, as
a test, even more completely satisfactory than the first, the insensibility
to pain. For as regards the insensibility, though nobody who witnessed
the experiments was able seriously to doubt its genuineness, the objec-
tion always remains that very extracffdinary feats in the endurance of
pain have been known to be performed without any assignable motive.
But with the rigidity a similar objection would have no weight ; for
though, of course, the rigidity itself might be easily simulated, the " sub-
ject " had — as I have explained — no means of knowing which was the
right finger or pair of fingers to simulate with ; and it is clearly out
of the question that a mere guess on this point should have been
unfailingly correct.

But though the test afforded by telling the "subject" to double up his
or her fist was thus evidentially the more complete, the test of insensi-
bility is capable of being made very convincing on its own account.
What is wanted is some mode of infliction which a person whose
finger was in a normal state would be quite unable to endure without
flinching, but which at the same time will leave no painful or unpleasant
traces behind, when the finger had been demesmerised and resumed its
normal condition. Fortunately such a mode of infliction is afforded
by electricity. The shock of an intermittent current can be made strong
enough to defy the most hardened powers of endurance, while producing
no prolonged ill effects such as would follow a stab or a bum. Accord-
ingly this test was adopted by Dr. Myers and myself on the 26th and
27th April last. The mesmeriser was Mr. G. A. Smith, and the subject
was the young baker, Fred Wells, with whom most of the previous
experiments had been made.

The same precautions as before were taken to prevent the " subject "
from seeing his fingers, and thus to preclude the operation of expectancy.
The result was entirely satisfactory. By gradually moving out the
regulating-tube of an induction-coil, we could mark the stage at which
the pain produced by the current began to pass our own powers of
endurance, and we could then immensely increase its strength.* Eleven
trials were made, the finger to be mesmerised being each time
selected by ourselves ; and in every case there was very marked loss of
sensibility in this finger. In ten of these trials the particular finger
proved insensible to the very strongest shock that could be obtained
from the apparatus; and in the eleventh to all but the veiy

* The apparatus consisted of an induction coil, 4in. long l^in« diameter,
with 10 yards primary wire (No. 18 Birmingham gauge), and 50 yards seoondary
wire (No. 35 gauge) ; a regulatot ; and t^o qm.tAiia'iT i^iat biohromate cells.


Experiments in Mesmerism, 203

strongest. But there was sometimes a curious additional result.
In five cases, when the mesmerised finger was being sub-
jected to the full current, "Wells said that he felt a weak
effect in another part of his hands. "When the middle finger of the
left hand, and when the forefinger of the same, was the mesmerised
member, this weak effect was felt in the thumb ; on the other three occa-
sions it was felt in the palm — once even in the palm of the other hand,
and once in the palm of both hands. "Wells described the shock, thus
localised at a Kttle distance from the mesmerised finger, as about as strong
as the very slight shocks which we administered to the unmesmerised
fingers just to make sure that they remained sensitive — showing that
the strong current was producing an effect immensely below the
normal. I may mention that I once by accident touched one of the
unmesmerised fingers with the terminal wire for the fraction of a second,
when the current was at its full strength ; and the violent wince and
exclamation which resulted were a pretty sure index of what was felt.

There was a further point of importance in the last four of these
trials. The effect was then produced without any passes at all, the
operator merely holding his hand downwards over the destined finger
of the " subject," from which the tips of his own fingers were about two
inches distant. "Wells's hands are tolerably pachydermatous ; and it is
extremely difficult to believe that, under these conditions, any physical
indication, such as a very slight difference of temperature, could have
made him aware which of his ten fingers was nearest to the operator's
hand.

"We then proceeded to test a hypothesis to which attention was drawn
in the second report of the Committee. "We there referred to the question
how far these finger-experiments bore out the idea that some special
effluence or some special form of local "nervous induction," passed
between the fingers of the operator and those of the " subject." If this
were the case, then apparently it ought not to be necessary that the opera-
tor should himself know over which of the subject's fingers he is making
passes, or holding his hand; the effect ought to be producible when he is
looking away, and his hand is guided to the appropriate position or
movements by a third person. If, on the other hand, this blind and
passive mode of operating prove unavailing, and the knowledge of the
operator as to which of the " subject's " fingers is to be affected, with a
distinct direction of attention to that finger, prove to be indispensable
■conditions of success, then the theory of a special effluence or special
local induction seems inapplicable, or at any rate insufficient. Now trial
showed that these conditions were indispensable ; the selected finger
remained perfectly sensitive and flexible when passes were made over it
by my guiding Mr. Smith's hand, while his eyes and attention were
turned in another direction.


204 Eccperimenta in Mesmerism.

The deductions from this fact are very interesting; for if the
operator's knowledge and attention are necessary for successful results,
then those results seem inevitably to fall under that capacious category of
Thought-transference, of which members of this Society hear so muck
It is true that the thought is not conveyed as a thought ; for no im-
pression as to which is the selected finger is conveyed to the subject's
intelligence. But among the evidence of telepathy which the Literary
Committee have collected, there are several instances where the
emotional or volitional condition of one person has produced actions in
another person which the latter has been quite unable to account for,
and has performed in obedience to a blind impulse. And it is to the
same class that the local effects which I have been describing seem to
be partly referable. For it certainly does not seem impossible to
suppose that if a marked effect may be telepathically produced by the
condition of one person on the motor system of another, without the
transference of any distinct idea, a like effect may also be produced on
the sensory system. It will probably be granted by those who at all
accept the principle of telepathy, that the operator's knowledge as to
which particular finger he is operating on is an idea which might be
communicated by Thought-transference ; it will be further granted by those
who realise the power of suggestion and expectation to produce physical
effects, that such an idea, if present to the " subject's J[ consciousness,
might lead to local paralysis of movement and sensation in the finger
thought of ; and, finally, the analogy of the cases of blind telepathic
impulse, to which I have just referred, makes it conceivable to us that
this very same train of events might take place with the omission of the
psychical element on the subject's part — with the omission, that is, of
his knowledge or conscious idea of the particular finger that was being
affected. If this were so, we should have established one more link of
connection between the spontcmeovs telepathic communications, between
persons at a distance, and the experimental communications, occurring
otherwise than through the recognised sensory channels, which may
be obtained within the four walls of a room.

At the same time, this supposition does not altogether meet
the case, so far as the recent experiments are concerned. For
while these experiments showed — as I have described — ^that the mere
proximity of the mesmeriser's hands was ineffective if his attention was
not directed to his work, they also showed that mere concentrated
attention on his part, without any manual process, was equally ineffec-
tive. When Mr. Smith attempted to produce the local effect by steadily
gazing at the selected finger, without approximating his hand to it at
all, the normal condition of the finger remained quite unchanged, and
it proved sensitive to the very weakest shock. It appeared, therefore,
that the local physical process, whatever it may be, though not producible


Experiments in Mesmeriam, 205

apart from thought and attention, was still in itself indispensable ;
and thus the suggested analogy between experimental and spontaneous
phenomena is here far from complete.

II. — Commimity of Sensation,

The following experiments in transference of pains and tastes were
also made by Dr. Myers and myself, on April 26th, the agent being
Mr. G. A. Smith, and the " subject " a very intelligent young cabinet-
maker, named Conway, who had been thrown into a Kght hypnotic
trance. For the first set Mr. Smith was in light contact with Con-
way, behind whom he stood. No hint was given to Conway as to
whether his answers were right or wrong : he was simply asked by Dr.
Myers or myself what he felt. Mr. Smith kept perfect silence
throughout.

1. Mr. Smith was pinched, by one of the experimenters, on the right
upper arm. Conway localised very nearly the corresponding place on
the left arm, and then the right spot on the right arm.

2. Mr. Smith's right foot^was pressed. Conway began to move his
right leg uneasily, and complained of pain from the foot upwards.

3. Mr. Smith's right little finger was pinched. Conway complained
of pain in the right shoulder.

4. The lower lobe of Mr. Smith's left ear was pinched. Conway
complained that the hair above his right ear was being pulled.

5. Mr. Smith's right upper eyelid was pinched. Conway complained
of pain in the forehead.

6. Mr. Smith's left popliteal space was pinched. Conway com-
plained of pain in the lower third of the left thigh.

7. Mr. Smith was pinched in the right lumbar region. Conway
complained of pain in the left hypochondrium and lumbar region.

In the next set of trials there was no contact whatever between Mr.
Smith and Conway. Nor was Conway (who was still in the hypnotic
state) informed before the experiments began of what nature they were
to be. Standing at some distance behind him, I suddenly and silently
gave Mr. Smith some salt, motioning to him to put it into his mouth.
He did so ; and Conway instantly and loudly exclaimed, " What's this
salt stuff?"

I now gave Mr. Smith in succession — Conway said —

Sugar "Sweeter; not so bad as before."

Citric Acid "Bitter; something worse— a little reminds

me of cayenne — sweety."

A Raspberry Drop " A sweetish taste — ^like sugar."

Salt **I told you I liked sweet things, not m^^—

such a mixture ! "

(^cua^ "Don't like it; hot— little bit of honey

mixed with it."

Q


206 Experiments in Mesmerism.

Salt "Something acid, osAtv — ^first one thing,

then another — like Brine."

Powdered Ginger "Hot; dries your month np. Don't like

it, — reminds me of mnstard."

Sugar " A little better — a sweetish taste."

Potodered Alum " Yon call that swe<^t, do yon? Brackish

and bitter this — enongh to skin your
mouth out ; bitter."

Cayenne Pepper "It*shot, and there is some sugar in it just

to soften it over a bit It is hot— ^ou
would feel hot, I can tell you."

Cloves " Not so very much better, but it's sweeter;

it's sugar, only something else with it"

Vinegar Conway had sunk into a deeper hypnotic

sleep, and made no remarlL

Throughout the series Mr. Smith preserved perfect silence; and the
only remarks made by Dr. Myers and myself were brief inquiries as to
what Conway tasted, with an occasional word calculated to mislead
him.

These are not picked results ; only one other series of experiments
has been made with Conway, and these are fully reported in Part V. of
the Proceedings. There are practical difficulties in the way of obtain-
ing either him or Wells for regular and frequent trials ; as both are in
positions of responsibility, and their time is very fully occupied.


Eocperiments in Thought'TraTisfereTice. 207


VIII.

DIAGRAMS
ILLUSTRATIVE OF THOUGHT-TRANSFERENCE


The following diagi*ams, illustrative of a special form of Thought-
transference, are part of a series referred to in Part V. of the Pro-
ceedings, p. 7, under the head of results obtained by independent
investigators. Professor Barrett has seen the " agent," Mr. J. W.
Smith, of Brunswick Place, Leeds, and his sister, the " percipient," and
has carefully explained to them the necessary precautions ; but their
description of the mode in which they had worked before this inter-
view convinced him that those previous trials had been conducted with
due care, and that the results were genuine. The experiments have been
made throughout without contact. The first four of the diagrams here
engraved were made before Professor Barrett's visit ; the last four have
been made since his visit.

It may be added that whenever the Committee on Thought-trans-
ference obtain evidence of a case of this kind, where the power seems
tolerably continuous, and the conditions, as reported, seem satisfactory,
they will do all in their power to obtain opportunities for personally
conducting the experiments. Meanwhile, they cannot too strongly
urge the importance of having trials made as widely as possible in
families and private circles. They are continually hearing of results
— obtained without contact or the possibility of sensory indications —
which show that the genuine faculty is by no means extraordinarily
rare ; but often the scientific value of the experiments is not realised,
and no written record has been kept. If only every indication of this
sort were carefully followed up, a body of evidence might be collected
which would greatly hasten the general acceptance of the facts.


Q 2


ExpervmerUa in Thought-Trwnaference.


OuaraAL DuwtHO.


Experiments in Thougkt-Tranafer&nce. 209


Obicinal Dkawino.


Rbpboditction.

O G
g)


SIO Experiments in Thought-Trcmaference.


u


Experhnenta in Thought-Tranaferffoce. 211


<^IOINAL DRAWINS.


212


Experi/mmts vn ThAmght-Tramsference.


Obioinal DRAwnro. .


RKPRODUCmON.


Ea^ri/ments in Thoiught'Transference,


213


Obioinal Dbawino.


Repboduotion.


214


Experiments in Thought-Trcmsference.


Obioinal Dbawinq.


RsPBODUOnON.


Experiments in ThoiughUTransference,


215


Original Dbawino.


Repboduotion.


216


Experiments in Thought-Tranaference.


The following table of results was filled up by Mr. J. W. Smith on
one of the forms supplied by the S.P.R.


Experiments ik Thought-transference.


Agent


or Agents.


Percipient.


J. W.


SMITH.


KATE SMITH.


Date.


Object selected.


First triaL


Second
triaL


March 11.


Figures.


Correct first time.


—


Figure 5.


Correct first time.


—


Black cross on
white ground.


Correct first time.


—


Colour blue.


Correct first time.


—


Cipher (0).


Correct first time.


Fair of scissors.


I did not say what (t.e., what
form of experiment — ^figure,
colour, or object) was to be
next, but car^ully and with-
out noise laid a pair of
scissors on a white ground,
and in about one minute
and a-half she exclaimed,
"Scissors!"


Group.


Total No.
of experiments.


No. right on first triaL


Nciiffhton
seconatriaL


3 figures.


6


(>


1 colour.


1 object.


1


1


1 pair of 8(
sors.


BIS-


Observations : Whilst sitting at dinner (March 11th, 1884), I was
thinking about a person who had died. Just then one of my sisters
(not the thought-reader) exclaimed : " I wonder if it will be a large
funeral." We had not spoken about that subject previously. After
that I thought to myself I would see if I could make her hum a tune.
I then (to myself, that is to say, without uttering any sound whatever)
hummed a tune, and to my surprise she also sang aloud the same song.
After that, I resolved that she should lift her fork up (she had finished
her dinner) ; she did so immediately. I do not know whether this was
an instance of Thought-transference or not, but if it were not so it seems
an astounding coincidence. (No contact.) — J. W. S.


Nov. 28, 1884.] General Meeting. 217


PROCEEDINGS OF THE GENERAL MEETING ON

Novertiber 28, 1884.

The tenth General Meeting of the Society was held at the Rooms
of the Society of British Artists, Suffolk Street, Pall Mall, on Friday,
November 28, 1884.

Professor W. F. Barrett, Vice-President, in the Chair.


The Chairman, in his opening address, described a recent visit to
Canada and the United States, in the course of which he had devoted
much time and trouble to spreading a knowledge of the Society's work.
He had met with many indications of a genuine interest in Psychical
Research, and he spoke hopefully of the prospect that allied societies;
might before long be formed at several important centres.


I.

ON A TELEPATHIC EXPLANATION OF SOME SO-CALLED

SPIRITUALISTIC PHENOMENA.

By F. W. H. Myers.


Part I.


It is an obvious fact, but it is nevertheless a fact which we must
repeat as often as possible, that in no way can psychical research be
better aided than by constant and varied experiments on Thought-
transference in every f erm. We have got, as we hold, a definite, fact to
start from, a fact of immense and unknown significance. If, as we
believe, we can truly say "mind acts on mind otherwise than
by the recognised organs of sense," this is probably a statement
far more pregnant with consequences than the statements, "rubbed
amber attracts straw," or, "the loadstoiie attracts iron." And it
must be our business to turn our new fact over in every direction,
to specxdate upon it in every way, or rather in every way which can
possibly suggest a new form of experiment. We must remember that
the experimental cases which we have already collected are probably
only what Bacon calls "ostensive instances]" "instances," as he
expressed it) "which show the nature under investigation naked, in an


218 On a Telepathic Explanation of some [Nov. 28,

exalted condition, or in the highest degree of power" ; — and which are, so
to speak, mere emergent summits from a great ocean, which lies
l^ey ond our present reach of observation, and perhaps even beneath the
level of our consciousness.

And our investigation,in the case ofa power so novel and obscure, must
take two different, though converging lines. We must, in the first place,
vary our actual deliberate experiments as widely as possible ; in turn
introducing and excluding as many separate conditions as seem likely to
have a bearing on the result. And we must, in the second place, scan
the whole range of psychical phenomena already alleged to occur (though
interpreted on some different principle) with telepathy in our minds as
a new vera catLsa, which will probably be found to be the real solution
of many problems hitherto in dispute.

And in this form oifshing interrogatory, or survey from a new stand-
point of a wide and miscellaneous field, we shall do best to begin
with a few definite groups of phenomena, and to disentangle them as
distinctly as may be from any dubious theory with which they may
have become involved, and to look at them in the light of telepathy so
as to give that theory the chance of explaining them.

In this process we shall probably, in some directions, press the
theory of telepathy farther than subsequent knowledge will justify.
But it is only by endeavouring to ascertain how many phenomena,
inexplicable by generally recognised laws of nature, may be explained
by this new vera causa that we shall learn at what point other, yet
unknown, causes (if any) begin to intervene.

We have already begun to make one survey from the telepathic
standpoint of previously-recorded phenomena — ^namely, our inquiry into
the nature of apparitions and other (auditory or tactile) phantasms of
living persons. We have seen reason to connect many of these with
telepathy ; and we are pressing that explanation as far as it will go,
though without prejudice to any other explanation which certain
apparitions may hereafter seem to require.

In the same way I now propose, in a series of two or three papers,
to consider how far thp already recorded phenomena of automatic
writing and the like may be explained by telepathy, but without
prejudice to any other yet unknown causes which may afterwards
show claim to acceptance.

I have selected automatic writing as the subject for inquiry in great
measure because of its direct bearing on one of the most interesting of
telepathic problems, — viz., the relation of consciousness to telepathy ; the
extent to which the hypothetical impact is consciously present, whether
as will, thought, emotion, or sensation in either mind. Throughout all
these investigations we must keep unconscious cerebration steadily in
view, and we shall, I think, find ourselves confronted with many of its


1884.] So-called Spiritualistic Phenomena. 219

results, and be induced continually to enlarge its field of action. We
shall, I venture to say, come to regard this term less and less as
expressing a subsidiarj/f more and more as expressing a mbstantive amd
primary operation of our intelligence ; and we Shall come, perhaps, to find
super-conscious, as necessary a term as sub-conscious, if we would indi-
cate the true relation to each other of the processes in which our being
consists.

And it is to my mind one of the chief interests in telepathy that it
seems sometimes to reveal our unconscious to our conscious selves ; that
it acts like the strong inwardly-directed ray of light which enables the
surgeon to see reflected in a mirror some obscure recess of his own
inward structure.

With these possibilities in our mind, let us first consider how the
question of consciousness stands in the cases of telepathy which we have
already collected. And, for the sake of simplicity, we will, in this first
paper, take i^<Q percipient^ s consciousness alone into account.

In our recorded experiments on telepathy with percipients in the
normal state the percipient has necessarily been conscious of the im-
pact, inasmuch as it has been by his description, or his voluntary repre-
sentation of the impact, (as by drawing a picture which he feels to be
telepathically presented to his mind's eye), that the success of the
experiment has been tested. No argument can be drawn from these
cases, however, as to the necessary emergence of the telepathic impact in
consciousness. For here consciousness was voluntarily concentrated on
the reception of that impact ; all competing impressions being, as far
as possible, excluded.

But in one class of our experiments a singular difference occurs.
Thought-transference is one of the characteristic phenomena of the
mesmeric trance or sleep-waking state, where, although there seems to
be a certain consciousness at the time, that consciousness, in most cases,
leaves no trace whatever in the subject's normal memory. And, more
than this, there seems reason to believe that in many cases of hysteria
and similar affections where the subject is said to be clairvoyante, the
phenomenon is in reality referable to thought-transference only. An
interesting case, recently published by Dr. Taguet, of Bordeaux, affords
a good instance of the confusion of thought at present prevalent on such
subjects. His hysterical patient manifested during her acces ah extra-
ordinary hypersesthesia of smell and hearing. Her eyes, meantime,
were shut, or at any rate the eyeballs were completely upturned. But,
nevertheless, she manifested what Dr. Taguet rather oddly describes as
** hypersesthesia of vision," under the following circumstances. Dr,
Taguet stood completely behind her, and fixed his eyes on certain words
in a book. A sheet of cardboard was held before her face, in such a
position that, had it been a mirror, the book would have been reflected


220 On a Telepathic Explanation of some [Nov. 28,

therein. The girl then, in her trance, took the cardboard for a mirror,
and spelt out the words which Dr. Taguet was reading, as though they
were reflected in the cardboard before her. Now Dr. Taguet does not
attempt to explain this, further than by calling it hypersesthesia of vision.
But he can hardly mean that she really saw the words reflected in the
cardboard. Perhaps the only other solution which suggested itself to
him was that she saw the words clairvoyantly, and this solution he did
not like to adopt. And there is in fact no reason, as the facts are
reported, for assuming clairvoyance. Thought-transference would
amply suffice to explain the phenomenon. If, then, we find telepathy
occurring in mesmeric trance and spontaneous trance, we may infer
that it is not inseparably linked with the ordinary stream of normal
consciousness. If it appears as an element of the consciousness or
quasi-consciousness of abnormal states, which themselves form mere
lacunce in the main life-memory, it may be surmised to exist beneath
the threshold of consciousness in normal states also.

It is, naturally, not very easy to get direct evidence of this.
Amongst our phantasms of the living we have, no doubt, many instances
where the supposed thought or impulse of the agent is represented very
vaguely and imperfectly in the percipient's mind, and prompts, for
instance, to some mistaken form of action. But this is not quite the
same thing. Something comes into the percipient's consciousness,
though it may be only an imperfect transcript of what the agent's mind
contained, or attempted to transmit.

In a few cases, however, the impact seems to affect the percipient
without exciting anything which can be called an idea. In these cases
it is merely felt as a motor impulse, determining to some action whose
purport is not consciously realised. We have elsewhere given the case
of Mr. Skirving, who was irresistibly impelled to leave his work and go
home — why, he knew not — at a moment when his wife was, in fact^
calling for him in the distress of a serious accident. But we may give
here one other illustrative case, — ^which no one, I think, who has
accepted the general fact of telepathy will be disposed to regard as a
mere coincidence ; a case where consciousness is still less invaded by
the telepathic impact, and where the motor impulse is described as
having been as nearly automatic as any movements so prolonged and
complex can easily be. The case comes from Mr. Morgan, of Nugent
Hill, recommended to us by Dr. Paul Chapman as a most accurate and

careful informant.

Nugent Hill, Bristol, July 11th, 1883.

Dear Sir, —

The matter to which Dr. Chapman refers is as follows : —

On Monday, February 14th, 1853, I was listening to a lecture by the late

Geo. Dawson, of Birmingham, in the Broadmead Rooms in Bristol. I

frequently spent my evenings at lectures, concerts, &c., and often took a


1884.] So-called Spintuallatic Phenomena. 221

Httle walk afterwards on my way home. I had lived nearly all my life (27
years) at home with my mother, whom I strongly resemble in face and in
many characteristics. We were much attached to each other.

I was thoroughly interested in the lecture, and had so little intention of
leaving before its conclusion, that I remember noticing a friend among the
audience and making up my mind for a walk with him on my way home.

The lecture must have been more than half through — I was not tired,
and had no reason to move — when I noticed, at the side of the platform
farthest from the back entrance to the hall, a door which I had never seen
before, flush with the panels, and it suddenly became the most natural thing
that I should walk half the length of the room, and away from the main
entrance, in order to see if this door would open. I turned the handle,
passed through, closed the door gently behind me, and found myself in the
dark among the wooden supports of the platform.

I clambered along towards a glimmer of light at the other end, passed
round a side passage, crossed the end of the hall to the main entrance without
any thought of the lecture, which was still going on, and walked home
quietly without excitement and *' impression " of any kind, and quite
unconscious, till long after, that I had done anything unusual.

On opening my door with a latch-key I smelt fire, and found my mother
in great alarm. She had also noticed the strong burning smell, had been
over the house with her servant, and was longing for my return.

On going upstairs I saw flames issuing from a back window of the next
house, immediately gave the alarm, removed my mother to a safe distance,
and then had two or three hours' struggle with the flames. The adjoining
house was destroyed, but mine only slightly damaged.

The point which has seemed to me most striking whenever I have recalled
this occurrence, is the entire absence of any presentiment or impression on
my mind. I should probably have shaken off anything of the kind had I
been aware of it, and refused obedience.

Neither was there on my mother's part any intentional exertion of her
will upon me, only a strong wish for my presence, which must have begun

about the time I left my seat. I do not know that there is anything to add. K
anything occurs to you as being worthy of further inquiry, I shall be happy
to say what I can about it.

Fredk. Morgan.

Mr. Morgan adds, in reply to our regular inquiry, that he has never had
any other presentiment or impression of the kind.

He also sends a plan of the lecture-room, which shows that he walked in
a dark passage round nearly three sides of the hall.

** But going home,^^ he adds, ** was not in my thoughts when I moved."

Well, then, let us consider whether there is any kind of minor
automatic motion which we can hope to evoke experimentally by tele-
pathic impact, without the invasion of the percipient's consciousness by
any definite idea ? The movements practised in the " willing game "
— finding of objects and the like — at once suggest themselves, and the
•writing of the numbers of bank-notes, <kc., as practised in certain public
performances. But, as we have so often remarked, any contact between


222 On a TeUpaihk Explanatioii of wme [Nov. 28,

«^i»it and percipient at once vitiates these as telepathic experiments;
and even if we get the finding of objects, kc.y without contact, it seems
difficult to exclude all risk of ffuessing^ where the possible modifications
€ji movement are, comparatively speaking, so few. We want to find
Nome class of movement which shall be readily capable of being per-
f onned atUoyaaticcUlt/, and at the same time shall admit of a very large
range of variations.

Proljably the first action of this kind which will suggest itself
to all of us is the act of writiiuf. Handwriting is, in many ways, a kind
of summary expression of a man's being. It is one of the best instances
of an aptitude at once acquired and hereditary ; of a manual dexterity
which olHiys limitations of idiosyncrasy as well as of will. John Smith
cannot paint like Raphael. That, we say, is because Raphael's command
of hand and oye is immensely greater than John Smith's. But it does
not follow that Raphael can write like John Smith. Very probably no
manual or luontal superiority will give him the power of appropriating
what is veritably idiosyncratic in the hurried scrawl with which John
Hinith signs his name, with scarcely a glance at the paper. Handwriting,
that is to say, is a deep-seated thing. It is likely to have secrets to
toll UH.

FirHt, lot us consider what is the ratuytiale of automatic writing
from tht> oiHliuary physiological point of view. It is simply an exten-
Hiou of tho tricks of unconscious action which, to some extent, are com-
unui to t^'ory one, and which in nervous and excitable persons often
attain an oxtraordiuary degree of complexity. It is, of course, well
known thut in n\oment<sof ^'i\'id emotion the 'surplus nervous energy es-
oajuvH in iuvoluntarv ohaimels, which often bear some traceable connec-
tiou with tho habitual modes of thought or action of the person con-
*H>rutHK To tako a typia\l case, an accomplished pianist, if stirred by
ik\M\\o suddotx omotion while seated at the piano, will sometimes play a
h»u^»* |H\!vSi\^x^ witiiout any consciousness of having done so ; and, more-
ovx^«\ tho ^vi.'isj^i^^ thus unwittingly selected will be one which is in vague
){txuoral hiunuouy with the new current of emotion. Xow the act of
♦«»ri>*^«,* ^v\\vj; v^uo \\f the cvMwmvvnest of the more complex acquired acts^
wo >h*^\l \\;Uu\"^^nY o\|>vt thiit many half-conscious or unconscious
tnck\ \\\U \v v\\uutvT^\\ with i:.

Aun^ ^h\N is VA^;v>r;vV,:s.y :h-* ct^i^v Persoris seated with pens or
|HMw/,\ \u ',ho;v h,^v,xU xvv,r,>,; A :*:> where discussion is going on will
ji>^U\^\v^Vv\ NN^w^w ', vNi^ s.V<^:c>, xv.\ the viitvr rtetc»re them ; while if that
|v^^^s^v w.'^v >\^\>;x^r,A >kx:hsvru>ir« a:x^ th-ey w>er^ jLsi^ed what words they
l\^^>\ w\*,t\;on \ih,^^v\v,x v,^„\x: .^ :h;r,: >a \v::ll S* ;i=jk r*e to reply. Students
\\C ^>*\, ,v.*,^ ^^w ,^s. v.',wh: V ; v,\fv't^xL ti&rtS^'^'^fcrlx liible to this trick ;
**i^i ^^X\>^ A\\ nvvsv vUwX >*\>!:vu .vcztj: ;t* wat^ so to ^KAk, from some
^ ^^"^;v»^iAv ^^ 'SiV'V. ^;;.^'^^:c.^'i>,'■i;:^y scci'Sbied oq the edge of


1884.] So'Calkd Spiritualistic Phenomena. 223

composition papers in the nervousness of examination. In this case it
is the strong concentration of the current of attention elsewhere which
allows the writing faculty to manifest itself automatically, — permits,
that is to say, the unconscious cerebral action to discharge itself along
the well-worn track which leads to the formation of written words.
And something of the same kind takes place also when the current of
attention, instead of being concentrated into a narrow channel, is choked in
the sand; or (to vary the metaphor) when an explosion of the more complex
brain elements (as in an epileptic fit) has left the less complex in
possession of the field, and the actions are not guided, or not wholly
guided, by conscious will. There are many varieties of this morbid
automatism. Thus a patient of this kind may write a word, say,
"horse," without any consciousness of writing at all (as in some slight
epileptiform seizures, where the act of writing is automatically continued);
or he may write " cow " when he wishes to write " horse " and not per-
ceive his error ; or he may write " cow " for " horse," although he per-
ceives his error as he is in the act of committing it. Now, in both
these classes of cases, in the graphic automatism of mental abstraction
and the graphic automatism of cerebral disea.se, the passages written are
usually very short ; in the first case because the abstraction is transitory,
in the second case because the writing impulse is feeble. The anxious
classical honour-man could not scribble down a whole ode of Pindar
without becoming aware of what he was doing. And in the mor-
bid cases there is nothing but a residual impetus, soon exhausted, or
a painful effort of the imperfect will. Let us consider, however,
whether there are any cases which indicate that the unconscious graphic
impulse may be prolonged and in a sense systematic. We find that
precisely such cases are afforded by somnambulists, who not unfre-
quently write long compositions withmuch manual rapidity and accuracy.
Sometimes these compositions are a kind of written dream, rambling
and incoherent ; sometimes they are on the level of waking thought ;
sometimes they seem to overpass it, as when the solution of a
baffling problem is written out during sleep.

"We see, then, that automatic writing is a phenomenon liable to be

originated in various ways in the human organism. And we shall not,

therefore, be surprised to find that certain human beings are very much

more liable to its occurrence than their neighbours. For we are

gradually learning, (what was, of course, antecedently probable), that

the gamut of natural capacity is just as far-reaching when we deal

with things trifling and useless, as when we deal with the most impor-

•^spicuous things. The differences in human faculty were

matters important to human welfare ; but they exist quite

the obscurest comers of our constitution. There is the

ier just as surely as the born rumier; there is the born


OOe^


224 On a Telepathic Erplanafion of 9ome [Xor. K,


visuali$er o/number$ — ^to take one of Mr. Glaltcm's
truly as the bom painter or sculptor. We can set no 6efixiise
befordiand to any <^ the veins <^ onexploied facuHr wiik^ crop 19
intervals from the safaterranean realms <^ our being.

It will, therefore, by no means surprise ns to lean fSiaz
certain persons who occasionally feel an impulse to write mnumuacaeaSlj
when they are merely sitting quiet with a pencil in their liTwk Has
is not really much more odd than that there should be persons wi» occa-
sionally feel an impulse to ima^ne a tune inwardly wixsi liienr aie
merely sitting quiet with nothing to do. The imagined tazne iistm.
externalises itself so to speak, in riiythmical movementB of tiie bead
and body, involving a good deal of muscular action, ol wfaidi vkt sak§eK%
is neariy or quite unccmscious. The case <^ automatic wrjfing, liow-
ever, differs in this way from the dumbly-imagined umeu — in lbs; the
written words, falling immediately under the writer's eye, veMid 10
his attention and to evoke a amteiofiM train of thought,
ticmof what is mming next, which stzxMigly tends tochedc tibe
flow. The little instrument called Ptattekette is mainly ssefal in pre-
cluding this kind of interruption. Itis,af courseySKaiph-apaMecfboazd
supported on three legs, one of whidi legs is a pcnoL so tbax if a hand
be placed flat on the board, and if that hand be then moved astkou^
tracing letters, the board will move according^, and the pencil will
mdidy trace out the lettns which the hand's movement figures. Of
course it is pniectly easy to write oOTuriaiut/y with a FSanchecse, and
to be aware of the letters which the pencil is sh^wng. But the point is
that •/ there is a tendency already <>-riQrag to auiom&aiie writings it is
much easier to write as[toinaticaIlv or uneonscioaslT with the Flancikette
than wiOioct it. A slight tremor of the hand will set tike Flarhdiette
running, and the sioawkd characters are generally quite too foo^ and
oi>nfuseii to cat«^ the operator's eye. andsag;ge5tcQnscsoas anticipatjons.

Now $appiKe I am wririi^g with a FSanchetteL Let us consider
^hAt themes »re k^Kally poesEK^ as to the source of what I write.
The wv>rds which I am writes^ eesv occaceivaUv be : —

1. C«McksisIy written £:l ibe ccdicdLry way, and <*hosiPT» by my
deuNe^ite will

-^ AutKXEA'ioaLy writteji. azti szrc^aed by my own unconscious
A. Autv^ntttscTftUy wrinec* tcri sirvtied by scene hi^ier unconscioiis
4. AutvjieaatkuIIy writt^fc. "cc- s;rrco«i by tiziepathic impact from
^ ^^ Au^.^«A5is»IIy written, szsi srrcoeiiby -^ spirits'^ or extrarhuman
XH>>if ;is tv> ky^vt^M^s^ : c£ vx <tr^. wie ai« all asieed. It is p^


^54.] So-called Spiritualistic Flienometia. 225

>C5t]y easy to write consciously with Planchette, and to look as if you
"^re writing unconsciously. The proof (to others than the actual
•Triter) that the writing is automatic can only lie in the production of
Qunes or facts unknown to the writer. But it is easy for competent
bservers, under certain circumstances, to satisfy themselves that what
hey write, although containing no facts new to them, has not passed
Inrough their consciousness. I am speaking at present, of course, of
ckses where one person alone is writing, either with or without
f^lanchette.

The first incipient stage of automatism is described in the following
dccount by Mr. H. Arthur Smith, author of " The Principles of Equity,'*
jid a member of the Council of the Society for Psychical Research.

In experimenting alone, since, I have not succeeded in getting any
notion out of the instrument cdiwide ; but I think I have observed that
vhen my hand rested on it, the wrist being grasped by the other hand, a
vord, on which I concentrated my attention, was written without any
conscious volitional effort. I am doubtful as to this, as it is a difficult thing
io be sure of the absence of volition, but such is my decided impression.

Next we have the experience of Mr. A. (a friend of the writer's),
who can often write words by mere attention without any voluntary
muscular action whatever. He fixes his mind on a word, and his hand
writes it with energy, — as though by an involuntary spasm or true
cacoetJies scribendi, — while he is studiously avoiding all intentional
impulse. This experience is interesting, as being precisely what
might have been anticipated, as an intermediate step between
writing which is wholly voluntary and writing which is wholly
automatic. It seems probable that there might be a point at
which consciousness extended to the idea related with the move-
ment, but not to the movement itself, at which there was still
<ittention, but not voluntary muscular action. We have next to find
;an example of writing wholly automatic, indicating if possible by
its very substance that it has not consciously passed through the
-writer's mind. It is naturally not very easy to fix on written matter
of which we can affirm both that it is such as the writer's unconscious
cerebration might have produced, and that it is such as his con-
^ious cerebration had no share in modifying. There are frequent
cases in which the writer affirms that he is not aware of the letters
-which he is writing until he is in the act of writing them ; or sometimes
until they are written. In such cases the nervous process which causes
the act of writing would seem to be unconscious ; although the mental
act required to produce the formation of a letter is so simple and rapid
that it is hard to be sure that there was not a semi-consciousness of it
almost immediately forgotten. Sometimes however, in the midst of


226 On a Telepathic Explanation of some [Nov. 28,

writing of this kind the result of the involuntary movement of the pen
is altogether puzzling to the writer, — is something which he has to make
out with difficulty as if it were the product of another brain ; — and in
such cases we have, I think, to suppose that a rather complex process
of unconscious cerebration has taken place. An excellent instance of
this kind has been sent to the Society by the above-mentioned Mr. A,
on whose accuracy we believe that we can thoroughly rely. We give
it in full because it is a good instance of the capricious half-nonsense
which believers in Spiritualism often unhesitatingly refer to the agency
of spirits, but which every intelligent Spiritualist would surely be glad
to be able to explain in some other way^

The indisputable evidence for complex unconscious cerebration which
this case seems to me to furnish lies in the fact that here the Planchette
writes not only unintelligible abbreviations but absolute anagrams of
sentences ; anagrams, indeed, of the crudest kind, consisting of mere
transpositions of letters, but still puzzles which the writer had to set
himself to decipher ah extra. The chances against drawing a group of
letters at random which will form several definite words and leave
no letters over, are, of course, very great indeed.

Clelia, or Unconscious Cebebbation.

The following experiment will be regarded by some as a beautiful proof
of unconscious cerebration ; by others as an indubitable proof of the existence
of spirits. Others, again, will, like myself, remain halting between the two
opinions, with a decided leaning to the scientifically more orthodox. I
wished to know if I were myself an automatic writer, or so-called writing
medium. The experiment was made Easter, 1883, upon one day, and after
an interval of a week, continued upon three consecutive days ; upon four
days in all. Upon the first day I became seriously interested ; on the second
puzzled ; on the third I seemed to be entering upon entirely novel experi-
ences, half awful and half romantic ; upon the fourth the sublime ended very
painfully in the ridiculous.

First Day.

Q. 1. Upon what conditions may I learn from the unseen ?
A. 1.


My hand immediately moved, though not to a very satisfying issue.
But, as my expectation of the answer had been that the condition
was a strict adherence to the absolute rule of right, holiness in short,
I took this answer to be at any rate consistent with my expectation,
and continued :

Q. 2. What is it that now moves my pen ?

A. 2. Religion.

Q. 3. What moves my pen to write that answer ?

-A. 3. Conscience.


1884.] So-called Spiritualistic Phenomena. 227

Q. 4. What is religion ?
A. 4. Worship,

Here arose a difficulty. Although I did not expect either of these three-
answers, yet when the first few letters had been written I expected
the remainder of the word. This might vitiate the rissult. Cons — ,
for instance, might have ended as consciousness, had I thought of
that word instead of thinking of conscience. As if to meet the
difficulty, just as if an intelligence wished to prove by the manner
of answering that the answer could be due to it alone, and in no-
way and in no part to mere expectancy, my next question received
a singular reply.

Q. 5. Worship of what ?
A. 5. wbwbwbwbwb


Q. 6. What is the meaning of wb ?

A. 6. Win, buy,

Q. 7. What?

A. 7. Know (ledge).

Here I knew the letters which were to follow, and the pen made a.
sudden jerk, as if it were useless to continue.

Q. 8. How?
A. 8.


Here I was referred to the first answer. Although startled by the fifth
and seventh answers, which at first sight seemed to show an
independent will and intelligence, yet, as I had learnt nothing new,
I concluded the whole to be due to unconscious cerebration and
expectancy. Having, then, put a few questions as to matters of
fact unknown to me, but easily discoverable, and the replies being
either illegible or wrong, I was confirmed as to the complete
naturalness of the phenomena.

Second Day.

Q. 1. What is man ? (i.e.. What is the nature of his being ?)
A. 1. Flise.

My pen was at first very violently agitated, which had not been the cas&
upon the first day. It was quite a minute before it wrote as above ►
Upon the analogy of it;6, I proceeded.

Q. 2. What does F stand for ?

A. 2. Fesi.

Q. 3. 1?

A. 3. le..

Q. 4. i?

A. 4. i V y.

Q. 5. s?

A. 5. sir.


228 On a Telepathic Explamtion of some [Nov. 28,

■Q. G. e? 1

A. G. e y e.

Fesi le ivy sir eye.
"Q. 7. Is this an anagram i
A. 7. Yes.

■Q. 8. How many words in the answer ?
A. 8. 4.

I tried for a few minutes to solve it without success. Not caring to
spend much time in trying to solve what might have no solution, I
gave it up.

Third Day.
<i. 1. (rep.) What is man ?
A. 1. Tefi Hasl Esble Lies.

This answer was written right off.

"Q* 2. Is this an anagram ?

A. 2. Yes.

Q. 3. Ht)w many words in the answer ?

A. 3. V(t.e., 6).

Q. 4. What is the first word \

A. 4. See.

<i, 5 What is the second w^ord ?

A. 5. Eeooee

<j. G. Soo I Must I interpret it myself ]

A. G. Try.

Presently I got out

** Life is the less able."

Next 1 tried the anagram given uiK>n the previous day, and at last obtained

** Every life is yes."
But my jHxn signified tliat it preferred the following order of words,

*' Every life yes is."

Some remarks ctmceniing the probable genesis of these oracular sentences
>viU bo made in the seipiel. I do not know whether any other interpretationB
oau Ih> given Xo Uio letters. But these fulfil the requirements as to the
iwunlnn* of wonls ; and tlie action of the pen, assisting in the process of
iutorpivtHtion, )xnutiug to tJio letters, accepting these and rejecting those
•ct^uibinat-ions, loft no doubt in my mind that I had hit the meaning.

U\it now I \N*aa !k> astoni»hotl at the apparently independent will and
intolKvl u\auifi>«tiHl in forming the alK>ve anagrams that, for the nonce, I
b^HNVuu* a iHMuploto iHMivort u> Spiritualism : and it was not without something
of a\vo» that I p\it :

^>. 7. NV!\o art thou ?

^i^ ^. Thxm avt a >vomai\ \

\4» \K Ua«t thou ov^r \\vod uivn the earth \
\\ No.


1884,] Sthcalkd Spiritualistic Phenomena. 229

Q. 10. Wilt thou ?

A. 10. Yes.

Q. 11. When?

A. 11. Six years.

Q. 12. Wherefore dost thou speak with me ?

A. 12. E if Clelia e 1,

It has been already said that when I experimented I had a certain
fever of speculative pessimism upon me. It was, therefore, with
increasing excitement that I perceived as an interpretation

"I Clelia feel."

But upon my asking whether this was right "Clelia" wrote^
again thus

**E if Clelia el."

20
Q. 13. Is 20 your age?

A. 13. 00. (She was eternal.)

Q. 14. Then 20 what ?

A. 14. Words.

I was obliged to reserve the reception of these till the morrow. I am
writing not a tale of Edgar Poe, but a scientific narration of fact. Therefore,
nothing shall be said of my feelings and ideas upon this occasion. It was
evident that I was in communication with a — ^beautiful ? — spirit of romantic
name, who in six years time was to be bom upon the earth. My snatches
of sleep that night were few and far between.


Fourth Day.

I began my questioning in the same exalted mood, but, to my surprise^
did not get the same answer.

Q. 1. Wherefore dost thou speak with me ?

A. 1. [Wavy line. Repetition and emphasis : Wherefore dost thou speak
with me .^]

However, I thought this **a solemn and piercing rejoinder," and
proceeded to consider my motives, and purify them from all earthly
and unspiritual alloy. Then —

Q. 2. Wherefore dost thou answer me ?

A. 2. [Wavy line. Wherefore dost thoxf; answer me f\

Q. 3. Do I answer myself ?

A. 3. Yes.

Q. 4. Is Clelia here ?

A. 4. No.

Q. 5. Who is it, then, now here ?

A. 5. Nobody.

Q. 6. Does Clelia exist ?

A. 6. No.


•230 On a Telepathic Explanation of some [Nov. 28,

'Q. 7. With whom did I speak yesterday ?

A. 7. No one.

Q. 8. AVhy didst thou lie ?

A. 8. [Wavy line. Why didst ih<yii lie ?]

Q. 9. Do souls exist in another world ?

A. 9. m b.

■Q. 10. What does m b mean ?

A. 10. May be.

Q. 11. What was that last answer of yesterday again ?

A. 11. Eif Clelia o el,

i.e., I feel no Clelia ;

or, the original may have been

"I Clelia flee."
And the 20 meant nOy negativing my interpretation.

My pen now became altogether wild, sometimes affirming and
sometimes denying the existence of Clelia, and finally performed as
follows : —


CC.C


I wrote ce, and u.c, and placed my pen in the middle between
them. It refused to'point to either, but upon my writing ** partly
each " above, my pen imderlined the words.

Possible Scientific Explanation.

The desire for an answer was sufficient in the first place to put brain and
muscles in motion.

A desire soon arose to avoid the effect of expectancy. To meet this desire
the brain unconsciously formed anagrams ; one of these anagrams, ** Life is
the less able," is a sentiment only too frequently met with in the spiritualistic
literature which I had been lately reading.

The other, ** Every life is yes," is similarly derived from Spinoza, whom
I had just been reading. He has much about all existence being affirmation
•of the Deity.

Thus both these expressions were imbedded in my brain by late reading,
and this fact supports the supposition of u.c. being the agent.

With regard to *' Clelia," I had written cl when the rest of the word
flashed upon me, and this may have vitiated the answer through expectancy ;
and all that followed about Clelia may have been a structure upon a fiJse
foundation ; which, therefore, my brain having unconsciously considered
during the night, proceeded upon the next day to demolish.


1884.] So-called Spiritualistic Phenomena. 231

Possible Spiritualistic Intbepretation.

That upon the first day it was perliaps u.c. acting for the most part

But on the second day, the great agitation of the hand, the complicated
intellectual process, the insistance (** See," ** Try ") would point to a spirit's
operating upon the cerebral particles.

That this spirit chose to call herself Clelia, and that having manifested
herself she fled, leaving me upon the fourth day to the unassisted operation
of u. cerebration.

Although as I have said, I incline strongly to the scientific explanation,
that inclination does not rifle to absolute belief. But I must confess I should
not expect myself to be able to hit upon the right explanation, and it is with
the hope that some psychologist may clearly explain it that I wish to call
attention to it. There is another reason, more singular, for my calling
attention to it, namely, that the automatic power has left me, and almost the
last anagram I received was

Wvfs yoitet — testify, vow.


Scientific Explanation op Why the Power has Ceased.

The ever present* desire not to write a letter which I expect beforehand,
acts as a neutraliser to all power of writing. Seeing myself about to form a
letter, say o, I fear that I have expected it, thereupon the pen at once stops,
or sometimes, between the opposing tendencies, describes a curve. This
fear was not thought of in the first experiment, and reasoning upon the
phenomena has since paralysed the power of producing them.


Spiritualistic Interpretation.
The spirit is weary of my unbelief, and I am weary of her coquetry.


Note 1. I simply took a pen into my hand. Since, I have tried with the
Planchette, but without any success.

Note 2. I liave never known any one named Clelia.

Note 3. I have not been in the habit of writing anagrams, though I have
done so in boyhood.

It will be observed that Mr. A., chough quite alive to the mode
of interpretation which we have here adopted, retains himself some
little doubt as to the intervention at one point of an external agency.
This seems mainly owing to the subjective sensation of an agitation or
inBistance^ which seemed to him too powerful to have existed in his own
mind entirely below the threshold of consciousness. Were such agitation
never more marked than in the present case, it need not, perhaps, inter-
pose much difficulty ; but we shall come to instances where it becomes
dominant and violent to a perplexing extent. At present we must
merely notice that the stream of automatism does not always run
smoothly on.

We now come to the case where several persons, with their hands


232 On a Telepathic Explanation of some [Not. 28,

united on the Planchette, obtain answers which are not conscionsljr
present to the minds of any one of them.

But here we must first ask ourselves : Is this in reality a new case t
Will it not be simpler to suppose that one agent alone is concerned^
and that the rest are merely passive ?

Undoubtedly this would be simpler ; and this would be what we
might have expected. But actual experiment seems to show that there
are cases where motion does not ensue when either A or B places his
hand on Planchette, but does ensue when both so place their hands.
If the motion which ensues is of a merely random kind — ^no defimte
words being written — ^we may refer it to a mere summation of two
ordinary unconscious muscular actions, either of which actions singly
was unable to move tne machine. But if definite words are written it
is hard to explain this by a mere summation either of physical or
psychical influences. Why should the same word arise in both minds ?
Why should both hands move automatically in the same direction 1 If
A's hand will not write a word when he alone touches the Planchette^
why should the superposition of B*s finger — equally powerless alone —
lead to the production of rapid sentences ?

It may still be suggested that B's finger may contribute just the
initial shove which A needs in order to set his own more complex
automatism going. But this supposition would hardly meet the cases
where Planchette will write for no one hut A^ and for A only just so
long as B toucJies it also ; stopping short in its vigorous career the
instant that B's finger is removed. Here the first shove has long since
been given; the writing has begun; yet B's withdrawal stops it,
although B can get no writing himself either alone or with 0, D, <fec.

In cases like this where a novel effect is produced by the juxtapo-
sition of two quantities whose simple summation is not antecedently
seen to be capable of producing the said effect, two hypotheses suggest
themselves. The summation of the two quantities may raise their
actual volume to a point necessary for the appearance of some new
force or quality, which may have been virtually or actually present in
each quantity severally, though in a degree beneath our limit of obser-
vation. Or, again, the juxtaposition may in itself involve alteration
as well as addition ; the two bodies may influence each other
and give rise to phenomena which neither of them could have origi-
nated alone.

The Spiritualist theory of Planchette-writing assumes the former of
these two hypotheses, — something in this way. There is an external
agency which desires that the word " Byron " should be written. It
acts by possessing itself of a certain internal force, which varies in each
individual. That force in A is insufficient to enable the " spirit " to
write the word through A's hand. The same is the case with B.


1884.] So'Called Spiritualistic Phenomena.' 233'

But when the two hands can be used to guide the same pencil, the
" spirit " uses the sum of both forces, and the pencil moves. More than
two persons may be necessary. O's force and D's force may have to be
added to A's and B's. On the other hand, E s force may be sufficient
by itself to enable the external agency to write the word, either by
means of Planchette, or by direction imposed upon the pen.

On the other hand, I shall, at present, prefer to conjecture
that there may have been some development of a new energy of a
telepathic character. In some unknown way, I would suggest, the two.
minds are acting on each other, and the writing is a resultant of their
unconscious mutual play. Neither theory is at present capable of direct
proof. They are merely of use to direct our observation to the important
points in the cases submitted to us. Here is another from Mr. H. A,
Smith, who has had the patience to analyse many of these communica-
tions, which, be it observed, are generally quite equally puerile what
ever be the operator's own level of intelligence.

Mr. Smith and his nephew placed their hands on the Planchette,
and a purely fantastic name was given as that of the communicating
agency.

Mr. Smith asked :

** Where did you live?" A. "Wem." This name was quite unknown to
any of us. I am sure it was to myself, and as sure of the word of the other*
as of that of any one I know.

Is it decided who is to be Archbishop of Canterbury ? A. Yes.

Who? A. ** Durham." As none of us remembered his name, we
asked.

What is his name ? A. ** Lightfoot." Of course, how far the main
statement is correct, I don't know. The curiosity at the time rested in the
fact that the name was given which none of us could recall, but was found
to be right.

Now, this is just one of the cases which a less wary observer might
have brought forward as evidence of spirit agency. An identity, it
would be said, manifested itself, and gave an address which none present
had ever heard. But I venture to say that there cannot be any real
proof that an educated person has never heard of Wem. A permanent
recorded fact, like the name of a town which is to be found (for instance)
in Bradshaw's Guide, may at any moment have been presented to Mr.
Smith's eye, and have found an unobtrusive lodgment in his brain.

The phenomena of dreams should teach us to be slow to draw nega-
tive conclusions as to what facts may not have thus imprinted them-
selves unconsciously on the sensorium. For we find, by the
accounts sent to us, that a class of dreams on which Aber-
crombie and others have laid stress, tends to recur pretty frequently
at the present day. The type is this : A man has mislaid an


234 On a Tekpathic Hxplanation of some [Nov. 28,

important letter. He looks in all likely places in vain ; then dreams
that it is in some special and very unlikely place ; and finds it there
when he wakes. Now here we must assume that he has put the letter
in the unlikely place in what we call ''a fit of absence " ; but that
the distraction of mind which has prevented the act from forming part
of his current of normal memory has not prevented it from recording
itself in his brain, and reappearing in sleep, when the correlated
elements (so to say) in his brain have been excited by his fruitless
search.

I hold, therefore, that the word " Wem " may have been already
lodged in the mind of one of the writers, and may have pre-
sented itself at this particular moment by what is called accident ; that
is to say, by virtue of some still more underground form of that same
sub-conscious action which often brings some well known but irrelevant
name or word suddenly into our consciousness, especially in moments of
inaction or drowsiness.

In the answers " Durham " and " lightfoot," we have the same kind
of attempt to meet expectation which we noticed in Mr. A's case. This
reminds us of cases where in a dream we ask a question with vivid
curiosity, and are astonished at the reply ; which nevertheless proceeds
from ourselves as undoubtedly as does the inquiry.

This preliminary discussion has, it may be hoped, left us with some
notion of the kind of opportunity which Planchette-writing affords for
telepathic action. We have, perhaps, formed the conception of an ob-
scure ocean of sub-conscious mental action ; — Chidden waves whose
shifting summits rise for a moment into our view and disappear. And we
shall not be surprised to find that any influences which may habitually
stream from one mind to another may manifest themselves here more
easily, though perhaps more confusedly, than in the upper air of our
full waking intelligence.

I will begin with a case where the intermingling of telepathy with
ordinary unconscious cerebration is doubtful, but not impossible.

From Mr. H. Arthur Smith, 2, New Square, Lincoln's Inn, W.C.

Present— H. A. Smith (A), R. A. H. Bickford-Smith (B), another
gentleman (C), and two ladies (D and E).

R. A. H. B.-S. having, on previous occasions, exhibited considerable
aptitude for automatic writing with a Planchette, it was designed to apply
this instrument as a means of testing the transference of thoughts. No exact
record having been made at the time of the whole of the results obtained, it
would be of little service now to record isolated instances of success.
iSometimes names thought of were correctly reproduced, sometimes not ; but
the proportion of successes to failures cannot now be accurately stated. The
following incident, however, very much struck us at the time, and seems
worthy of record.

Our method of procedure at the time was as follows : — C, sitting at one


1884.] Bo^edUed Spiritualistic Phenomena. 235

end of the room, wrote down a name of an author, showing it to no one in
the room ; B had his hands on the Planchette, no one else being in contact
with him or it. fixed his attention on the written name, and our design
was to see whether that name would be written through the mediiun of the
Planchette. The ladies were meanwhile sewing in silence, and taking no part
in the experiments. It happened that one of the ladies had at the tiiue«
owing to some painful family circumstances, the name of a gentleman (not
present) painfully impressed on her mind. The name was not a common one,
and though all present knew something of the circumstances, they had not
been mentioned during the evening, and no one had mentioned the name in
question, which we will call " Bolton." C then wrote ** Dickens " on his
paper, and was '* willing " B with all his might to write this, when, to the
surprise of everyone, Planchette rapidly wrote ** Bolton." This was not only
surprising to us, but painful ; and no comments were made at the time, the
subject being changed as rapidly as possible. It would appear from this that
the effect of O's volitional concentration was overmatched by the intensity of
the lady's thought, though not directed to the same object.

H. Abthur Smith.
April 2f7ih, 1883.

Now here I think that it is possible that the lady's mental action may
have contributed, as Mr. Smith supposes, to the very result which she
so little desired. Perhaps, however, the word written may have
emanated from the unconscious cerebration of the writer alone.

In our next case, assuming the accuracy of the account, we are
almost forced to adopt the telepathic hypothesis. The conditions are much
the same as in our own recorded experiments ; — the minds of the agents,
that is to say, are intently fixed on some word or picture, and the per-
cipients (who are represented by the unconscious writers with the
Planchette) reproduce a corresponding word or initial. The account is
from Mrs. Alfred Moberly, Tynwald, Hythe, Kent, and it is corrobo-
rated, with some additional examples, by two other ladies present at
the time.

May ^th, 1884.

The operators were placed out of sight of the rest of the company, who
selected — ^in silence — a photograph, one of an albumful, and fixed their
attention on it. We — the operators — were requested to keep our minds a
blank as far as possible and follow the first involuntary motion of the
Planchette. In three out of five cases it wrote the name or initial or some
word descriptive of the selected portrait. We also obtained the signatures
to letters selected in the same manner. We both knew perfectly well that
\oe were writing — ^not the spirits, as the rest of the company persist to this
day in believing — ^but had only the slightest idea what the words might
prove to be.

We have tried it since, and generally with some curious result. A
crucial test was offered by two gentlemen in the form of a question to
which we couldn't possibly guess the answer. "Where's Toosey?' The


236 On a Telepathic Explanation of some [Njv

•

answer came ** In Vauxhall Road." " Toosey," they explained, was a pet
terrier who had disappeared ; suspicion attaching to a plumber living in the
road mentioned, who had been working at the house and whose departure
coincided with Toosey's.

Of course, in the case of the inquiry after the lost dog, we may sup-
pose that the answer given came from the questioner's own mind. Mrs.
Moberly and her friends seem to have been quite aware of this ; and
were little likely to fall into the not uncommon error of asking
Planchette, for instance, what horse will win the Derby, and staking,
perhaps, some pecuniary consideration on the extremely illusory
reply.

I shall devote the next case — the last which I shall cite at present —
to the illustration of this special point, namely, the manner in which the
questioner's own anticipation is reflected in the reply, even when that
reply professes itself to come, or is supposed by the experimenters t
come, from some independent source; And since it is always satisfac-
tory if one can illustrate one's own view by a statement whose author
intended it to prove a view directly opposite^ I will take a case which
was sent to Professor Barrett by a convinced Spiritualist, as a proof of
the reality of intercourse with the departed. The names were stated
but as I am citing the narrative in a sense differing from that which its
writer meant it to bear, I will not now give them, and will only say
that all three persons concerned are of very good position.

March 22nd,

One evening, a few years ago, I had with me two young friends,

Mademoiselle de P., now Lady S., and Mademoiselle de P ^n, her cousin,

who is Grande Gouvemante to the daughters of the Crown Prince of
Germany, both complete unbelievers in Spiritualism. To amuse them,
however, as I sometimes write under occult influence, I asked Mademoiselle
de P. , to fix her thoughts on some one I did not know, to see whether my
hand would write something true concerning him or her. She did as I
requested, and soon my hand wrote, ** His life has been overshadowed by
the act of another." She looked astonished and said that the person she
was thinking of had had a brother to whom he was much attached, who had
committed suicide.

She then asked if she could be told where she had met him for the first
time. My hand wrote, *' It was at the foot of a marble staircase splendidly
illuminated by a July sun ; as you went up he gazed after you as one gazes on
the track of a dazzling meteor." This also was correct; she had met him, she
said, for the first time at the foot of the staircase of the Minist^re de la
Guerre, in Paris, and her cousin added that he had been much struck with
her. The only inaccuracies were that the staircase was not a marble but a
stone one, and that it was a September sun that shone.

When I write in this way the ideas do not come (conscuyasly at least) from,
my mind, and my hand seems to be gently moved by some external influence*.


1884.] So-called Spintualiatic Phenomena, 237

Now I confess that this description of the staircase, and the meteor,
and so forth, suggests to me as its source, not so much a male spirit
disembodied as a female spirit still in the flesh.

The romantic tone of the communication seems to reflect the mood
of the persons present ; and the slight inaccuracies are just such as we
have found to occur in the experimental transference of words, <kc., from
one mind to another.

But here I must, for the present, pause. We have reached a stage
at which the nature of the problem presented to us is somewhat
changing. Up to the present point we have been aiming mainly at two
things. The operation of unconscious cerebration in automatic writing
has been illustrated with some fulness ; and it has thus been shown that
some of the effects which Spiritualists ascribe to spirits are referable to
the unconscious action of the writer's own mind.

And we have seen unconscious cerebration begin to blend, as it were,
into telepathic influence, and have noted certain cases where, judging
by the analogy of our previous experiments. Thought-transference
suggests itself as the most probable explanation.

In a second paper I hope to give some more strongly-marked cases of
iielepathic influence, showing itself through automatic writing and other
unconscious muscular movements. It has been by tracking the writer's
own unconscious cerebration as far as it would carry us that we have
begun clearly to recognise a limit beyond which that explanation no
longer holds good. We have next to explore the full extent of the field
which telepathic communication covera, and to consider whether there
is still a residuum of phenomena which need the intervention of
intelligences other than the intelligences of living and breathing men.


238 General Meeting. [Deo. 30,


PROCEEDINGS OF THE GENERAL MEETING ON

December 30, 1884.

The eleventh General Meeting of the Society was held at the Rooms
of the Society of British Artists, Suffolk-street, Pall Mall, on Tuesday,
December 30, 1884.

Professor Henry Sidgwick, President, in the Chair.


II.

The President opened with the statement of a proposed change in
the relations between the Council of the Society and the investigating
Committees. The Council, he said, had come to the conclusion that it
was desirable that, for the future, the responsibility for both the facts
and the reasonings in papers communicated to " the Society, and pub-
lished in the Proceedings^ should rest entirely with their authors, and
that the Council, as a body, should refrain from expressing or implying
any opinion on the subjects thus brought forward. The reason for this
change was to be found in the position which the Society liad now
reached. On the one hand, by the work which had been accomplished
it had obtained the adhesion of a certain number of men of scientific
reputation, whose services on the Council would be of the highest value,
but who, though generally sympathising with the Society's aims and
methods, would be reluctant to pledge themselves to the conclusions of
any investigation in which they had not personally been concerned.
On the other hand, a necessity was now strongly felt of concentrating
effort on the most difficult and obscure part of the task originally
undertaken — namely, the phenomena of so-called Spiritualism. In this
region it could hardly be hoped to maintain, even in the Council itself,
the amount of agreement which had been arrived at in the investigation
of Thought-transference and Mesmerism.

Professor Barrett read a paper on certain narratives which had
been received from various correspondents, containing some remarkable
instances of success in the " willing-game," and also a few cases of
apparent Thought-transference without contact. In this paper, and in
the discussion that followed it, special attention was called to the con-
ditions which must be fulfilled in order to give the records of such experi-
ments an evidential value. A careful account of the experiments should
be written down at the time that they are made ; and this account should
in every case include the whole set of trials made at that time, failures


1884.] JResearches in Thought- Transference. 239

as well as successes. The importance of excluding contact, or any
other opportunities of unconscious indications, was again emphasised.

Mr. Edmund Gumey then gave a brief abstract of the following
paper : —

in.

M. RICHET'S RECENT RESEARCHES IN THOUGHT-
TRANSFERENCE.

The number of the Revue FhUosophique for December, 1884 (Felix
Alcan, editeur, 108, Boulevard St. Germain, Paris), contains an account^
by the well-known savant, M. Ch. Richet, of some most interesting and
original experiments in Thought-transference, conducted by himself and
a group of his friends. The title of his paper is '* La Suggestion Mentale
et le Calcul des Probabilites." By mental suggestion he means exactly
what we term Thought-transference — the communication of ideas from
one mind to another otherwise than through the recognised sensory
channels.

Beginning with some general remarks on the limitations of our
knowledge, M. Richet shows the unwisdom of attempting to set limits
to the possibilities of Nature on d priori grounds, and the importance of
keeping the mind open to evidence for novel facts. He further points
out that experiments in delicate psychical phenomena necessarily differ
from experiments on the matter and forces of the inorganic world, in
that the results can never be predicted with certainty. "When it has
once been discovered that iodide of sodium is decomposed by chlorine,
this result can for ever after be produced with absolute certainty under
certain simple conditions. But in the case of Thought-transference, the
conditions of success are inscrutable and unstable ; out of 20 trials,
the faculty, even if it exists, may only once take appreciable effect.

After this brief preface, M. Richet comes to the de^tails of his own
investigation. And here his originality does not immediately show
itself in the form of the experiments. They are divided into three
main groups ; and in the first of these the plan was one which has been
repeatedly adopted by our own Committee on Thought-ti'ansference. A
card being drawn at random out of a pack, the " agent " fixed his atten-
tion on it, and the " percipient " endeavoured to name it. The novelty
of M. Richet's method was this ; that though the success, as judged by
the results of any particular series of trials, seemed slight (showing
that he was not experimenting with what we should consider " good sub-
jects "), he made the trials on a sufficiently extended scale to bring out
the fact that the right guesses were on the whole, though not strikingly,
above the number that pure accident would account for, and that their
total was considerably above that number.


240 jReaearches in Thought- Transference. [Ded 30,

This observation involves a new and striking application of the
calculus of probabilities. M. Richet takes advantage of the fact that,
the larger the number of trials made under conditions where success is
purely accidental, the more nearly will the total number of successes
attained conform to the figure which the formula of probabilities
gives. For instance, if some one draws a card at random out of
a full pack, and before it has been looked at by any one present,
I make a guess at its suit, my chance of being right is of course
1 in 4. Similarly if the process is repeated 52 times, the " probable '^
number of successes, according to the strict calculus of probabilities,
is 13 ; in 520 trials the probable number of successes is 130. Now if we
consider only a short series of 52 guesses, I may be accidentally right
many more times than 13, or many less times. But if the series be pro-
longed — if 520 guesses be allowed instead of 52 — the actual number of
successes will vary from the probable number within much smaller
limits ; and if we suppose an infinite prolongation, the proportional
divergence between the actual and the probable number will become
infinitely small.* This being so, it is clear that if, in a very short series
of trials, we find a considerable difference between the actual number of
successes and the probable number, there is no reason for regarding this
difference as anything but purely accidental ; but if we find a similar
difference in a very long series, we are justified in surmising that some
condition beyond mere accident has been at work. If cards be drawn
in succession from a pack, and I guess the suit rightly in 3 out
of 4 trials, I shall be foolish to be surprised ; but if I guess the suit
rightly in 3,000 out of 4,000 trials, I shall be equally foolish not to be
surprised.

* M. Richet mentions one condition as calculated to interfere with the
rule of pure accident, in a series of guesses made in the way described. He
remarks, truly enough, that the guesser, it told, after each guess, whether he has
been right or wrong, may have an unreasonable instinct that the next card or
suit Avill be different from the last ; and he adds : " Mais cet instinct trompe plus
souvent qu'il ne sert, de sorte qu'en r^gle g^n^rale, on dit moins bien quand on
devine, que quand c'est le hasard qui parle pour nous. " But whatever goes on
in the guesser's mind — even if he laboriously follows some complex system, as
is so frequently done by gamblers, still, if the cards are drawn absolutely at
random, the Tightness or wrongness of the guess must remain a matter of pure
accident. For the rightness or wrongness of the guess involves a relation
between two things, of which the guesser can only control one. The drawer
supplies a card ; the guesser supplies a card's name ; correspondence between
the two events means a success. Now, ex hypothesis nothing but pure accident
governs the first event — the drawing of the card ; therefore, any guess that is
made has exactly the same chance of being right as any other, whatever be the
principle or no-principle on which the guesser acts. And if his mental processes
are irrelevant to his chance of success in each particular case, they are, of
course, equally so to the percentage of his successes in the aggregate.


1884.] 'Researches in T/ioitght- Transference. 241

'Now M. Erichet continued his trials until he had obtained a very
large total ; and the results were such as at any rate to suggest that
accident had not ruled undisturbed — ^that a guiding condition had been
introduced which affected in the right direction a certain small
percentage of the guesses made. That condition, if it existed, could
be nothing else than the fact that, prior to the guess being made, a
person in the neighbourhood of the guesser had concentrated his atten-
tion on the card drawn. Hence the results, so far as they go, make for
the reality of the faculty of "mental suggestion.'' The faculty, if
present, was clearly only slightly developed, whence the necessity of
experimenting on a very large scale before its genuine influence on
the numbers could be even surmised.

Out of 2,927 trials at guessing the suit of a card, drawn at random,
and steadily looked at by another person, the acttial number of suc-
cesses was 789 ; the probable number, had pure accident prevailed, was
732. The total was made up of 39 series of different lengths, in which
11 persons took part, M. Richet himself being in some cases the
guesser, and in others the person who looked at the card. He observed
that when a large number of trials were made at one sitting, the apti-
tude of both persons concerned seemed to be affected ; it became harder
for the " agent " to visualise, and the proportion of successes on the
guesser's part decreased. If we agree to reject from the above total all
the series in which over 100 trials were consecutively made, the num-
bers become more striking. Out of 1,833 trials, we then get 510 suc-
cesses, the probable number being only 458; that is to say, the
actual number exceeds the probable number by about ^q. Some
further experiments, where the particular card, and not merely the
suit, was to be guessed, gave a number of successes slightly, but only
slightly, above the probable number. Out of 782 trials the actual
number of successes was 17, while the probable number was 15 ; and
there was a similarly slight excess over the probable number when only
the colour of the card was to be guessed ; whence M. Richet surmises
that there may be a field of choice too wide, and a field of choice too
narrow, for the influence of " mental suggestion " to have effective
play.

Clearly, however, no definite conclusion could be based on such figures
as the above; they at most contain a hint for more extended trials, and
would be valueless if they stood alone. M. Richet himself is careful
to state this in the most explicit way ; we shall find, indeed, as we
proceed, that he sometimes carries caution of tone to a point which may
not be excessive, but which is certainly extreme. At the same time he
appears to me to press the calculus of probabilities to a point where it
ceases to be instructive, when he deduces from these results a provisional
estimate of the probability of " mental suggestion " as a fact in Nature


242 Researches in Though t^Trana/erenee. [Deo. 30

Taking the number of successes on the whole as about ^(f (apparently
misprinted tV) above the probable number, he concludes that ** mental
suggestion is, in a certain degree, probable, but with a degree of
probability of only about iV" Such a statement could only have a
practical meaning, if we could view the results in oblivion of all the
legitimate objections to which the hypothesis of so novel a faculty is
exposed. Nor, indeed, is any immediate estimate, of the sort that M.
Richet seems to intend, possible ; for when a result is due to either A
or B (i.e., here to either chance alone or some further cause) the
calculation of the probability that B has produced it cannot be made
without assuming some value (as small as we please) for the a priori
probability that B exists. It seems better, therefore, to regard a result
like M. Richet's simply as indicating the most probable measure of
the influence of the faculty (for these cases) if it exists, rather than
as measuring the probability of its existence.*

The persons who took part in the above experiments, as has been
said, were not specially distinguished by any natural or acquired aptitude
for " mental suggestion."! M. Richet regrets that he has not been able
to experiment in the same way with any really sensitive " subject ;" and
at this point he falls back on the reports of our own Committee on
Thought-transference. He dwells specially on the case reported in the
Proceedings, Part I., pp. 22, 23, where cards, drawn at random from a
pack, and seen only by the members of the investigating Committee,
were correctly named by the percipients in 9 out of 14 trials. But
while admitting that our results, if genuine, are more conclusive than
his own, he rightly prefers to take his stand on trials which he has per-
sonally supervised.

In his next batch of experiments, cards were replaced by photo-

* In n trials, with a probability p of success in each, the most probable
number of accidental successes is 7ip, which would give w — up failures. If, then,
tlie number of successes in excess of nj^ be represented by a, the fraction
which expresses the most probable measure of efficiency of an unknown cause,
supposed to exist, is — ^ (not ^ j which would represent M. Richet's -^ )•

t We are often asked by acquaintances what they can do to aid the progress
of psychical research. These experiments of M. Richet's suggest, at any rate,
one answer ; for they can be repeated, and a valuable contribution made
to the great aggregate, by any two persons who have a pack of cards and
a little perseverance. One person should draw a card at random from a pack,
and regard it steadily ; the other should try to guess it, and his success or
failure should be silently recorded. The pack should be shuffled after each
trial, and the number of trials made at any one time should be limited to 50.
The total number of trials contemplated (1,000, 5,000, 10,000, or whatever it
may be) should be specified beforehand ; and in order that the guesser's mind
may be in as blank and receptive a state as possible, he should not be allowed to
see the record of results until the whole series is completed.


1884.] Researches in Thought'Transfei^ence. 243

graphs of landscapes, pictures, statues, &c., all mounted in an absolutely
similar manner — the object of the change being to occupy the eye and
mind of the " agent " with something more vivid and interesting than a
mere playing-card. Different numbers of these photographs were used
on different occasions ; and as M. Richet gives the probability of a right
guess as ^, J^, &c., according to the number employed, it is to ba
inferred that the guesser was always accurately informed, before the
experiment began, what his field of choice was. Out of 218 trials of thia
class, in which the probable number of successes was 42, the actual
number was 67. This total consisted of 28 series ; and in only 6 of
these did the actual number of successes fall below the probable
number.*

We pass now to the second main division of M. Richet's work*
Here he boldly confronts the possibility that the impression made by
" mental suggestion " may act, not on the conscious but on the uncon-
scious part of the percipient's mind — " sur les facult^s inconscientes de
rintelligence." That this is what often happens in the case of spon-
taneous telepathic impulses has been more than once suggested in the^


* M. Richet has calculated the probability of the number of right guesses
actually given in each of these 28 series. In one particularly successful case, it
was as small as -^^j^ ; in another it was x^ ; ^^ another y^, and in others
some larger fraction. In strictness, what we want, for each case, is a fraction
expressing the probability, not of that one particular result y but of at least that
amount of success ; which fraction may then be compared with the fraction
of ideal probability, J. M. Richet proceeds to illustrate his results in the following
way. He supposes a row of urns containing balls, the number in each
corresponding to the denominator of one of the fractions. Thus there will
be one urn with 2,600 balls ; a second with 130 ; a third with 100 ; others
with various lower numbers ; and several with only one, which is to
express the wholly' unsuccessful series where not a single right guess was
given. Each of the urns contains one white ball ; and in those which contain
more than one ball, the rest are all black ; except in the sixth urn where three
are white and one black, to correspond with a series where the actual number
of right guesses fell below the probable number. M. Richet then asserts that
the probability of his results may be represented as the probability that a person
who draws a single ball at random out of each um will in every case draw a white
one. Now even if the number of balls in each bag were made to correspond
with the correction given above, this method of representing the totality of the
success seems clearly illegitimate. The error may be most easily seen if we
consider the case of the sixth urn. In that um there are several white balls ; but
still the chance of drawing a white ball from each of the first six urns must clearly
be less than that of drawing a white ball from each of the first five. That is to say,
the urn representing a series where the amount^of success was ic/o^<- the i)robable
amount that accident would give, is made to heighten the probability that
something beyond accident was at work. This illustration, however, is in
no way vital to M. Richet's argument.


244 Meaearches in Thought- Transference. [Deo. 30,

reports of our Literary Committee.* Experimental analogies are,
therefore, of extreme interest to us. Now, if we are to have experi-
mental evidence of an unconscious mental impression, received from
another mind, it must show itself in some bodily affection, either
sensory or motor. In our Proceedings, Part VI., pp. 203-4, a sensory
-case is given. The fingers of a " subject " having been concealed from
him by a paper screen, anaesthesia and rigidity were repeatedly
produced in one or another of them, by a process in which the con-
<5entrated attention of the " agent " on the particular finger proved to
be an indispensable element. A psychical account of this result seems
possible, if Thought-transference can work, so to speak, underground.
And as specimens of the motor affection, we have in our collection
several cases where a mental question on the part of some one
present has been answered in writing, with a, plancliette or a simple
pencil, without any consciousness of either the question or the
answer on the part of the person whose hand was auto-
matically acting.! It is to the motor form of experiment that
M. Richet's contributions belong. But he has developed it in a
<iuite novel way ; and here again, as in the case of the card-guessing,
he has brought the calculus of probabilities to bear effectively on vari-
ous sets of results, which, if looked at in separation, would have had
no significance. The " subjects " of the experiment, as has been said,
were persons possessing no special aptitude for " mental suggestion " ;
and this being so, it was clearly desirable that the bodily action required
should be of the very simplest sort. The formation of words by a
planchette-writer requires, of course, a very complex set of muscular
-co-ordinations : all that M. Richet sought to obtain was a single move-
ment or twitch. He accordingly applied the principle of the divining
rod, in the following ingenious way. The two ends of a wand-
which had a certain appreciable flexibility, were held by the would-be
" percipient " in his two hands. An article having been hidden by the
"agent" in one of a certain number of specified places (underneath the box
of one of a row of orange trees in a garden near Paris), the hiding place
was revealed to the percipient as he passed in front of it, by a move-

* Proceedings f Part II. , p. 140, where it is remarked how the effect of such
an impulse seems sometimes to remain latent for several hours, until a season
■of stillness and passivity allows it to emerge into consciousness. See also Part VI.,
pp. 121 and 171. For cases where the emotional or volitional condition of one
person seems to have produced unusual actions *in another person at a distance,
see Part VI., pp. 124-126.

t Some of these cases have been cited above by Mr. Myers, and others will
be given 'in the sequel to his paper. Mr. Myers and the present writer have
both witnessed the phenomenon, under conditions which left no possible
doubt of its genuineness.


1884.] Researches in Thought- Trans/et'ence. 245

ment of the wand due to an extremely slight muscular tremor which
"brought his two hands nearer together. In 25 trials, where the number
of successes, according to the calculus of probabilities, should have been
4, the actual number was 12. One of the diviners, apparently the most
sensitive of the group, obtained 4 successes in 4 trials, the probability
of each success being J ; M. Richet himself, as diviner, under similar
conditions, obtained 6 successes in 13 trials. He made some more trials
of the same sort, using the shelves of his bookcase as the hiding-places ;
and again, hiding the object on the person of some one present. Taking
the total results of these three sets, we find that out of 67 trials, where
the probable number of successes was 16, the actual number was 34»
The improbability of obtaining such a result by accident is enormous; and
though M. Richet is again careful to point out that an immensely larger
number of trials would be necessary before the influence of " mental
suggestion " could be held to be proved by such a method, the im-
portance of the method is incontestable.* It is, however, one which
needs very special precautions, owing to a danger to which M. Richet
is fully alive — the possibility of unconscious indications. Hints from
the expression or attitude of the " agent " may be prevented by blind-
folding the " percipient " and in other ways ; but if the two are in close
proximity, it is harder to exclude such signs as may be given by
involuntary movements, or by changes of breathing.

The form of the experiment was again varied by placing a number
of toy-pictures— ^ of medals, sabres, scales, animals, &c. — in a row on a
table ; the diviner then, passing along the row, had to discover from the
movement of his wand on which of these objects the agent had fixed
his thoughts. The actual success here was only slightly above what
accident might probably have given. But there were special points of
interest in several of the failures. The set of objects contained only two
pictures of medals ; when one of these was the selected object, the other
one was " divined." One trial was made with 78 cards, two of which
represented a man on horseback, and one of these two was the selected
object ; the diviner narrowed down his field of choice to these two, but

* It may be worth while to remark that either the selection of the particular
hiding-place ought to be settled each time by lot, or the percipient ought to be
prevented from knowing whether or not his divination has been correct. Other-
wise the chances of success may be really affected in the way which M. Richet
imagined in the case of the card-guessing. If we allow the mind of the agent ta
govern the selection, then a process in his mind may find its counterpart in the
mind of the percipient ; for instance, the agent may decide to be a little crafty,
and to hide the object twice running in the same place ; and the percipient's,
mind, following a similar track, may reckon that this amount of craft has been
exercised, or has not been exercised. Here then (as in the game of hiora) we
should have the operation of something which i3neitYi<eiTcv!^XL\»\^\\%'^<^^^
accident.


246 Itesearchea in Thought^Tranaference. • [Deo. 30,

Anally guessed the wrong one. In 6 other cases, out of a total of 31,
there was a similar close approach to correctness ; and in 3 more,
M. Richet, who was closely observing the process, believes that the
■error was due to the wrong interpretation of the movements of the
wand — the object guessed being next in the row to the right one. If
these facts were allowed for, the actual number of successes would be
10, while the probable number would be about 2. But M. Richet,
with his usual candour and caution, admits the danger of
Applying the calculus to results which have been rectified in this manner.
His reason for drawing attention to the close resemblance between the
object guessed and the right object is the intrinsic interest of the fact.
The explanation of this fact by the hypothesis of " mental suggestion "
involves, however, certain difficulties which must not be ignored.

M. Richet does not inform us whether the agent was watching the
diviner as he passed in front of the various objects. If he was, we
43hould find the readiest telepathic explanation of the successes in a move-
ment of his will^ whereby the diviner's organism was affected. But
then in that case the diviner's frequent selection of an object closely
resembling the right object loses all significance ; for the agent would
not be willing the selection of the resembling object any more than of
any other of the wrong objects. If, on the other hand, the agent was
Twt watching the process, then we might perhaps conceive a connection
between the idea of the object and the idea of movement to be firmly
established in the agent's mind, and to be a preparation for the
particular connection in the percipient's mind. We should, however,
have to extend our view of the operations of Thought-transference in a
decidedly novel manner. It is not merely that a composite idea, con-
sisting of an image and an impulse, is transferred to the percipient's
" unconscious intelligence " ; but the one element, the impulse, is to
reveal itself when — and only when — the other element, the image, finds
its fellow in a conscious percept, the actual picture of the object.

But the above, I imagine, is not the way in which M. Richet him-
self conceives the event ; for he says nothing about an impulse of will or
an idea of movement. I infer from his language that in such cases he
would consider the chance of success through " mental suggestion" to
be just the same, if the agent were unaware of the precise form of
experiment adopted, and exercised his will, not to produce a movement,
but merely in the sense that every agent in experimental Thought-
transference exercises it — that is, in a concentrated desire that the
idea of the object in his mind should reappear in the percipient's mind.
But then the percipient's sub-conscious or unconscious idea of a medal,
or a man on horseback, or whatever it may be, could apparently have
no more tendency to produce a movement than any other of the ideas,
conscious, sub-conscious, or unconscious, of which, at the time, his


1884.] Researches in Thought-Tramference. 247

mind is the theatre ; and it is hard to see what difference in this
respect could be made by the fact that the idea had been transferred
from the mind of the agent, instead of occurring spontaneously. But
even if we grant — and it is very possible that in time we shall have to
grant — that the mere fact of a telepathic impression may entail
peculiar physiological effects, why should the effect of the unconscious
idea manifest itself only at the moment when the percipient's mind
becomes consciously occupied with a smiilar idea — that is, when his
advance along the row brings him opposite to the actual picture of a
man on horseback ? To put the case briefly, if the idea of movement is
not in the agent's mind, one can only attach psychical significance to
the frequent selection of a wrong object which resembles the right one,
by making two suppositions : (1) that the telepathic fact, which produces
a physiological effect in the percipient apart from his consciousness, may
be pictorial, not volitional — statical, not dynamical — in character ; and
(2) that the effect is produced only after a sort of parley has taken place
between the conscious and unconscious parts of the percipient's mind.
That these suppositions are not mere speculative curiosities will be
plain when we proceed, as it is now time to do, to the last and most
important division of M. Richet's work.

In the final group of experiments the place of the flexible wand
was taken by a table : and M. Richet prefaces his account by a
succinct statement of the scientific view as to "table turning."
Rejecting altogether the three theories which attribute the phenomena
to wholesale fraud, to spirits, and to an unknown force, he regards the
gyrations and oscillations of stance-tables as due wholly to the
unconscious muscular contractions of the sitters. It thus occurred to
him to employ a table as an indicator of the movements that might be
produced, by " mental suggestion." The plan of the experiments was
admirably conceived. Three persons (C, D, and E) took their seats
in the semi-circle at a little table on which their hands rested. One
of these three was always a " medium " — that is to say, a person liable
to exhibit intelligent movements in which consciousness and will
took no part. Attached to the table was a simple electrical apparatus,
the effect of which was to ring a bell whenever the current was broken
by the tilting of the table. Behind the backs of the sitters at the table
was another table, on which was a large alphabet, completely screened
from the view of C, D, and E, even had they turned round and endea-
voured to see it. In front of this alphabet sat A, whose duty was to
follow the letters slowly and steadily with a pen, returning at once to
the beginning as soon as he arrived at the end. At A's side sat B,
with a note-book ; his duty was to write down the letter at which
A's pen happened to be pointing whenever the bell rang. Things being


248 Researches in Thought- Transference. [Deo. 30,

arranged thus, the three sitters at the first table engage in conversation,
sing, or tell stories ; but at intervals the table tilts, the bell rings, and
B writes down the letter which A's pen is opposite to at that moment.
Now, to the astonishment of all concerned, these letters, when
arranged in a series, turn out to produce rational words and phrases.
M. Richet has not given us any examples of these words and phrases
in his present paper ; but he promises a future one, in which the
omission will probably be made good. Meanwhile, how is such a
phenomonen to be regarded? To whom or to what is it due?
A and B are mere automata. C, D, and E are little more, being
unconscious of tilting the table, which appears to them to tilt
itself; but even if they tilted it consciously, and with a conscious
desire to dictate words, they could not possibly succeed. For they have
no means of ascertaining at what letter the pen is pointing at any
particular moment, and they might thus tilt for ever without producing
more than an endless series of incoherent letters, or at best meaning-
less syllables. It is surely hard to imagine a more convincing display
of the unconscious intelligence on which M. Richet insists.

This phrase is no doubt a somewhat equivocal one, and it is necessary
to know in every case exactly what is meant by it. It may be used in
a purely physical sense — to describe the unconscious cerebral processes
whereby actions are produced which as a rule are held to imply conscious
intelligence ; as, for instance, when complicated movements, once per-
formed with thought and effort, gradually become mechanical. But it may
be used also — as M. Richet seems to use it — ^to describe psychical processes
which are severed from the main conscious current of an individual's
life. Unconsciousness in any further sense it would be rash to assert ;
for intelligent psychic process without consciousness of some sort, if not a
contradiction in terms, is at any rate something as impossible to imagine
as a fourth dimension in space. The events in question are outside the
individual's consciousness, as the events in another person's consciousness
are ; but they differ from these last, in that there is no continuous
stream of conscious life to which they belong ; and no one, therefore,
can give an account of them as belonging to a self. They are essentially
fragmentary, unappropriated, and inarticulate ; and they can only be
inferred to exist from certain sensible effects to which they lead.

But it may be asked what right we have to make any such inference^
since, d, la rigueur, the effects, being sensible and physical, do not rer
quire us to suppose that they had any other than physical antecedents*
It is true that it is impossible to demonstrate that the physical ante-
cedents, which undoubtedly exist, have any psychical correlative : but
the dogmatic assertion that they have not loses much of its force froia
two considerations : (1) Analogy fails. The results in question are often
wholly dissimilar to the effects of practice, and the various other auto-


1884.].. Researches in Thought-Transference. 249

matic actions which may be fairly attributed to " unconscious cerebra'
tion " : they are new results, of a sort which has in all our experience
been preceded by intention and reflection. I advance this view with
some hesitation ; but we shall find considerable justification for it in
some of M. Richet's experiments. (2) The undoubted phenomena of
what has been called "double consciousness" have familiarised us with
the idea of a double psychical life connected with a single organism.
In those cases the two lives which know nothing of each other are
sioccessive ; but no new difficulty is introduced by conceiving fragments
of such mutually exclusive existences as simultaneous.*

However, it is not with the proof of " unconscious intelligence,"
but of " mental suggestion," that we are here more immediately con-
cerned. Subject to the above explanation, we may accept M. Richet's
view on the former question, and confine ourselves to the bearing of his
experiments on the latter. And in the case already described, we have
already a pretty plain indication that something of the nature of
" mental suggestion " was at work. For to whatever source we ascribe
the rational words and phrases which B.'s note-book records, it is im-
possible not to admit that the idea of the letters necessary for their for-
mation had an existence, though an unconscious one, in the mind or
brain of one or more of the three sitters at the tilting table. The letters
had at any rate the same existence for them as those written by the
plancliette-vrritQr have for him, when he produces a string of words and
sentences without knowing what they are. But the peculiarity of the
present case is that the letters could only obtain this existence in the
mind or brain of the " medium," (C, D, or E) through a " mental
suggestion " from A. No one but A (or possibly B) knew the moment
at which alone the next letter required could be caught and
fixed ; and the " medium's " involuntary seizure of that critical
moment to tilt the table cannot possibly be disconnected from this
knowledge in A's mind. In M. Richet's words; " The unconscious
person in the * medium' — whose conscious Ego is thinking of something
else — ^follows mentally, with rigorous precision, the movements of the
other who points to the successive letters."

* These suggestions of " unconscious intelligence " are drawn from facts
observed in connection with a single individual. But they may be reinforced
by a consideration drawn from the phenomena of telepathy. It has been more
than once pointed out in our Proceedings that, while a coherent account can he
given of telepathic phenomena on purely psychical ground, there are peculiar
difficulties in conceiving any complete physical account of them. Now this
remains just as true when the percipient is imconscious of the ''mental
suggestion" as when, he is conscious of it This being so, it seems specially
arbitrary and unnecessary to insist, on confining such phenomena to the physical
plane — ^the very place where the difficulties are thickest — and to deny their
psychical existence, in respect of which our ideas of them can at any rate be
made orderly and consistent.


260 Researches in ThoughUTramfererice. [Deo. 30,

But the experiment was carried to a much further point than this ;
and in its further development the calculus of probabilities is again
turned to most striking account. A sixth operator (whom we will
call F) is introduced, who stands apart both from the tilting table and
from the alphabet ; and his thought is now the source of the " mental
suggestions " which lead to the same connected series of events as
before — the tilting of the table, the ringing of the bell, the fixing of
successive letters, and the gradual formation of rational words in B^s
note-book.

For the sake of comparing the results with those which pure acci-
dent would give, M. Richet first considers some cases of the latter sort.
He writes the word NAPOLEON ; he then takes a box containing a
number of letters, and makes 8 draws ; the 8 letters, in the order of
drawing, turn out tobeUPMTDEYV. He then places this set
below the other, thus :—

NAPOLEON
UPMTDEYV

Assuming the number of letters in the alphabet to be 24, the pro-
bability of the correspondence of any letter in the lower line with the
letter immediately above it is, of course, ^ ; and the probability that
in the whole series there will be one such success is -^ or J. If we
reckon as a success any case where the letter in the lower line corre-
sponds not only with the letter above it, but with either of the neigh-
bours of that letter in the alphabet* {e.g., where L has above it either
K, L, or M), then the chance of a single success in the series is three
times greater than before ; that is, it is 1. In the actual result, it will
be seen, there is just 1 success, which happens to be a complete one —
the letter E in the sixth place. It will not be necessary to quote other
instances. Suffice it to say that the total result, of trials involving the
use of 64 letters, gives 3 exact correspondences, while the probable
number was 2.7 ; and 7 correspondences of the other type, while the
probable number was 8. Thus even in this short set of trials, where
accident had full scope, the experimental result very nearly coincides
with the strict theoretic number.

We are now in a position to appreciate the results obtained when

* This procedure of countiDg neighbouring letters seems to require some
justification. It might be justified by the difficulty, on the theory of mental
suggestion, of obtaining an exact coincidence of time between the tilting and the
pointing. But I think that M. Richet does justify it (p. 654) by references to
the other more striking experiences of which he has not here given us any
examples, where neighbouring letters also appeared, but where there seems to
have been no room for doubt, in the reader's mind, as to what the letter should
have been.


1884.] Besearchea in Thought^Tranaference. 251

the factor of "mental suggestion" was introduced. In the first experi-
ments made, M. Richet, standing apart both from the table and from the
alphabet, selected from Littre's dictionary a line of poetry which was
unknown to his friends, and asked the name of the author. The letters
obtained by the process above described were J F A R D ; and
there the tilting stopped. After M. Richet's friends had puzzled in
vain over this answer, he informed them that the author of the lines
was Racine ; and juxtaposition of the letters thus —

J F A R D
J E A N R

shows that the actual number of successes (of the type where neigh-
bouring letters are reckoned) was 3, the probable number being only f.
One would be glad to know whether M. Richet was actually concen-
trating his thought on the author's Christian name. Even if he was not,
it probably had a sub-conscious place in his mind, which might sufficiently
account for its appearance. At the same time, accident has of course a
wider scope when there is more than one result that would be allowed
as successful.

It is, of course, better — ^with the View of making sure that F's
mind, if any, is the operative one — not to ask a question of which the
answer might possibly at some time have been within the knowledge of
the sitters at the table ; and in the subsequent experiments the name
was silently fixed on by F. Two more specimens may suffice.

Name thought ofiDOREMOND

Letters produced : EPJYEIOD.

Here the probable number of successes (of the type whose neigh-
bouring letters are reckoned) was 1, and the actual number was 4.

Name thought of:0HEYALON.

Letters produced : H E Y A L:

Here the probable number of exact successes was |, and the actual
number was 6.

Taking the sum of 8 trials, we find that the probable number of
exact successes was a little over 2, and the actual number 14 ; and that
the probable number of successes of the other type was 7, and the
actual number 24. It was observed, moreover, that the correspondences
were much more numerous in the earlier letters of each set than in the
later ones. The first three letters of each set were as follows —

J F A— N E F— F Q— H E N— C H E— E P J— C H E— A L L
J E A— L E G— E S T— H I G— D I E— D O R— C H E~Z K O

Here, out of 24 trials, the probable number of exact successes
being 1, the actual number is 8 ; the probable number of successes of
the other type being 3, the actual number is 17. The figures become stOJ


252 Besearches in Thotcg/d- Transference. [Dec. 30,

more striking if we regard certain consecutive series in the results.
Thus the probability of the 3 consecutive correspondences in the first
experiment here quoted was sj^ ; and that of the 6 consecutive
correspondences in the last experiment quoted was about i6o.ooo.ooo-

And now follows a very interesting observation. In some cases, after
the result was obtained, subsequent trials were made with the same wordy
which of course the agent did not reveal in the meantime ; and the
amount of success was sometimes markedly increased on these subsequent
trials. Thus, when the name thought of was DOREMOND,
the letters produced on the first trial were EPJYE I OD.

„ „ second „ E P F E I.

„ „ third „ E P S E R.

„ „ fourth „ DOREMIOD.

Summing up these four trials, the probable number of exact successes
was just over 1, and the actual number was 9 ; the probable number of
successes of the other type was just over 3, and the actual number was
18, The probability of the 5 consecutive successes in the last trial was
O'^ovLt 8.000.000 - The complete accuracy of this last fraction may, however,
be called in question ; since M. Richet, who was the agent, tells us that
he had imagined the name as spelt thus — d'Ormont. Even so, how-
ever, the amount of success is very large ; and the admission introduces
a new point of interest. It recalls to mind the numerous cases where
automatic writers, or table-tilters, have obtained responses with mistakes
or peculiarities of spelling, sometimes persistently repeated, to which
their conscious selves were in no way prone. And if the analogy be a
just one, then in M. Richet's experiments one might discover a hint of an
" unconscious person " in the agent, as well as in the percipient.

The experiment was repeated 4 times in another form. A line
of poetry was secretly and silently written down by the agent, with the
omission of a single letter. He then asked what the omitted letter was ;
it was correctly produced in every one of the four trials. The probability
of such a result was less than ai^iyl^T^xr •

A result of a different kind was the following, which is specially
noteworthy as due to the agency of an idea that was itself on the
verge of the unconscious. M. Richet chose a quotation at random
from Littre's dictionary, and asked for the name of the author, which
was Legouv^. The letters produced were JOSEPHCHD,
which looked like a complete failure. But the quotation in the
dictionary was adjacent to another from the works of Joseph Chenier ;
and M. Richet's eye, in running over the page, had certainly encoun-
tered the latter name, which had probably retained a certain low place
in his consciousness. Another very interesting case of a result unin-
tended by the agent, though due to something in his mind, was this. The


1884.] Researches in TIiought'Transference. 253

name thought of was Victor : the letters produced on three trials were

D A L E N
DAMES
BANDS
seemingly complete failures. But it appeared that while the agent had
been concentrating his thoughts on "Victor," the name of a friend,
Danet, had spontaneously recurred to his memory. We should, of
course, be greatly extending the chances of accidental success, if we
reckoned collocations of letters as successful on the ground of their
resemblance to any one of the names or words which may have
momentarily found their .way into the agent's mind while the experi-
ment was in progress. Here, however, the name seems to have
suggested itself with considerable persistence, and the resemblance is
very close. And if the result may fairly be attributed to " mental
suggestion," then, of the two names which had a certain lodgment in the
agent's mind, the one intended to be effective was ineffective, and vice
versd.

These latter results have very great theoretic importance. It is to
be remembered that we found a certain difficulty in conceiving the tele-
pathic production of movements by what is at most an idea, and not a
volition, on the agent's part. But it is now difficult to resist the
evidence that this is what actually has taken place ; and even that the
very idea may be below the threshold of conscious attention. Nor is it
only in these exceptional cases that this startling hypothesis has to be
faced. For we must remember that in a sense A is throughout more
immediately the agent than F ; it is what A's mind contributes, not
what F's mind contributes, that produces the tilts at the right
moments. But this is of course through no toill of A's ; he is ignorant
of the required word, and has absolutely no opportunity of bringing his
volition into play. His " agency " is of a wholly passive sort ; and his
mind, as it follows the course of his pen, is a mere conduit-pipe, whereby
knowledge of a certain kind obtains access to the " unconscious
intelligence " of the " medium." If, then, the knowledge manifests
itself as impulse, can we avoid the conclusion that in this particular
mode of access — ^in " mental suggestion " as such — a certain impulsive
quality is involved ?

It may perhaps be objected that F might produce the movements, in
a similar way to that proposed above ct propos of the cases where an
object resembling the right one was divined. It was there suggested
that in the agent's mind the idea of the object had been combined with
the idea of the movement, and that this complex idea was what was
transferred and what ultimately took effect. This explanation, if
sound, might possibly be extended to the far more complicated cases
.where — as in the word-experiments — there are as many objects as there


254 Researches in Thought-Transference. [Dea 30,

are letters ; and where, further, the actual perception of the resembling
object, when the percipient comes opposite to it in a row, is replaced
by an unconscious image of it received from a third mind. But it is
surely hard to include under the notion cases where a word is produced
which, though latent in Fs mind, has no resemblance to the word
whose production he is willing. The transference of the idea of the
latent word, even to the exclusion of the right word, can be quite con-
ceived ; but can we suppose that, sub-consciously or unconsciously, an
idea of movement was combined with the idea of its letters in the agent's
mind, at the very moment when that on which his attention was fixed,
and with which ex hypotheai the conscious idea of movement was con-
nected, was a quite different set of letters ? Can we suppose that the
idea of movement overflowed into the unconscious region of his mind,
and there on its own account formed an alliance with alien elements,
the effect of which on the percipient would prevent the effect intended?
It must be remembered that where a word which is not the one
intended gets transferred from P to the " medium," there is no know-
ledge, conscious or unconscious, on F's parr, as to what that word will
be. A number of words are latent in his mind ; one of these finds an
echo in another mind. But how should the idea of movement find out
which particular one, out of all the words, is destined thus to find an
echo, so as to associate itself with Us letters and no others? And if we
suppose the association to be between the unconscious idea of move-
ment and the unconscious idea of letters in generaly this is no less
dissimilar and opposed to anything that the conscious part of F's mind
has conceived. For it is not in letters as such, but in the exclusive
constituents of a particular word, that he is interested ; if indeed he
is interested in anything beyond the word as a whole. The difficulty
here seems yet further to justify the suggestion — ^with which I
imagine that M. Richet would agree — that the physiological impulse
does not depend on any idea of moveinenty or any special direction of
the agent's will to tliat result. This might be tested, if F were a
person ignorant of the form of the experiment, and out of sight of
the table.

But of course the relation between F and the " medium " does play a
necessary part in the result ; the impulse to tilt when a particular letter
is reached only takes effect when it falls (so to speak) on ground pre-
pared by " mental suggestion " from F — on a mind in which the word
imagined by him has obtained an unconscious lodgment. And whereas
we spoke above of " a parley between the conscious and unconscious
parts of the percipient's mind," we shall now have to conceive the un-
conscious part, if not as dual, as at any rate the scene of confluence of
two separate streams of influence, which proceed to combine there in an
intelligent way — one proceeding from F's mind, which produces


1884.] Researches in Thought- Transference. 255

unconscious knowledge of the word, and the other proceeding from A's
mind, which produces an unconscious image of the successive letters.
Such a conception seems to support what I said above, as to results of
the supposed " unconscious intelligence " which go beyond the received
results of mere unconscious cerebration. Unconscious cerebration is
amply competent to produce such seemingly intelligent actions as
ordinary writing ; but what is now done more resembles the formation
of a word by picking letters from a heap, or type-writing by a person
who is unused to his instrument. The process is not one in which every
item is connected by long-standing association with the one before and
after it ; every item is independent, and implies the recognition, at an
uncertain moment, of a particular relation — ^that between the next
letter required for the word and the same letter in its place in a quite
distinct series. There is, no doubt, an alternative to the hypothesis
just suggested ; we might suppose that F's thought affects, not the
"medium," but A, or conversely, that A's thought affects, not the
** medium," but F ; that A obtains unconscious knowledge of the word,
or that F obtains unconscious knowledge of the letter, and so is enabled
to communicate an impulse to the " medium " at the right moment.
But we should then have to suppose a secret understanding between
two parts of A's or F's mind, the part which takes account of the
letters of the alphabet, and the part which takes account of the letters
of the word — the former being conscious and the latter unconscious, or
vice verady according as A or F is the party affected,*

One hesitates to launch oneself on such conceptions ; but the only
alternative would be to question the facts from an evidential point of
view. So regarded, they are of an extremely simple kind ; and if their
genuineness be granted, we are reft once and for all from our old
psychological moorings. The whole question of the psychical constitu-
tion of man is opened to its furthest depths; and our central conception
— ^telepathy — ^the interest of which, even in its simpler phases, seemed
almost unsurpassable, takes on an interest of a wholly unlooked-for kind.
For it now appears as an all-important method or instrument for testing
the mind in its hidden parts, and for measuring its unconscious
operations.

M. Richet holds out hopes that on a future occasion he may return
to this aspect of the subject, and treat the problems on a more extended
scale. We ask for nothing better. Meanwhile, I cannot withhold an
opinion that he decidedly underrates the general effect of what he has

* There is yet one other conceivable view of the process which, in spite of
its desperate improbability, should not be left out of account —namely, that the
** medium " perceives the movements of the pointer by unconscious clairvoyance.
It would be worth while to try whether A is indispensable, and whether similar
results could be obtained when the pointer is moved by mechanism.


256 Researches in Thought' Transference. [D©c. 30,

so far accomplished. He concludes his account by a synopsis of his
numerical results, as measured in three ways ; — ^by the actvxil nutnher of
successes in the several series ; by various instances of several consecu-
tive successes ; and by the probability of the amount of success in the
more striking cases, which is represented by very small fractions.*"
Summing up from these data, though purposely keeping below the mark,
he suggests that "the probability in favour of the reality of mental sug-
gestion may be represented by § " ; that is to say, if he were compelled to
decide one way or the other, under pain of death if he were wrong, he
would allow chance to decide for him in this way — that he would put
two white balls and one black ball into a bag, and then draw at random ;
if he drew a white ball, he would declare for the reality of " mental
suggestion"; if he drew the black one, he would declare against
it. One cannot but think that if it came to the pinch,
he would make his reckoning differently. Exception was
taken above to interpreting a result which indicates the most probable
efficiency of mental suggestion, if it exists, as the measure of the
probability of its existencef ; and with an increased number of trials,
the illegitimacy of such a proceeding becomes still more manifest.
Whatever be the number of trials, the efficiency of the new cause, as
calculated from a certain ratio of the actual to the probable number of
successes, will be the same ; but if this ratio remains undiminished with
a continually increasing number of trials, the probability of the existence
of the new cause continually increases. Otherwise, results might go on
for ever deviating in the same direction from the probable results of
accident, and yet without producing even approximate certainty that
anything beyond accident was at work. Suppose that a pair of dice are
thrown a billion times in succession ; and that the total result shows
that half the total number of throws have been sixes. We should, of
course, conclude that the dice were unevenly weighted; but on M.
Richet's mode of reckoning, such a conclusion would only amount to a
considerable probability, on which no sane man would willingly stake
anything he cared about. In so extreme a case, to estimate the
probability as falling appreciably short of certainty, would argue, not an
excess of caution, but ignorance of a fundamental principle. M^
Richet's estimate of the probability of " mental suggestion " is not, of

* These fractions are not absolutely correct, for the reason pointed out on
p. 243. But the correct fractions would also be very small. The improbability
of the I'lnis of success is also overstated. Allowance should be made for the
fact that they mostly occurred as part of n longer series ; cf/,, the improbability
of obtaining 5 successes running is less in a series of 10 than in a series of 5.

t This is practically what M. Richet has done in the present case. For
he gives the fraction | as approximately expressing the excess of the actual
number of successes over the probable number, divided by the total number of
the trials.


1884.] Researches in ThoughUTransferoice. 257

course, open to such a charge as that ; but still he certainly seems to
have shown caution of statement in the wrong place. Granted the
genuineness of the results — granted, that is, the bona fides of all con-
cerned and the perfection of the conditions — the probability that
" mental suggestion " was at work, or in other words, the improbability
that the results were purely accidental, is, when we consider the
multitude of trials, something enormous. If it falls appreciably short
of certainty — as to which opinions might differ — it still cannot possibly
be represented by such a proportion as 2 to 1. So much may be stated
boldly. The place for caution is rather in estimating the chances of a
flaw in the conditions ; and though speaking on this point with con-
siderable confidence, M. Richet puts in more than once a judicious note
of warning. He insists that the experiments must be repeated ; and the
importance of this cannot be too stronsjly urged. Even if the experi-
menter's assurance as to the perfection of his conditions be complete, it
is in the nature of things impossible that strangers, who only read and
have not seen, should be infected with it. It is on this side, then, that
the case for "mental suggestion" needs fortifying ; and the fortification
(as has been frequently pointed out in these Proceedings,) can only con-
sist in spreading the responsibility — in multiplying the number of
persons, reputed honest and intelligent, who must be either knaves or
idiots if the alleged transference of thought took place through any
hitherto recognised channels.

It is needless to remark in conclusion that, such being the means.
by which an overwhelming proof may in time be attained, M. Richet's
investigations form a most important step towards its attainment. His
paper can hardly fail to be a permanent landmark in the slowly
widening domain of psychical discovery.


NOTE.

On the very eve of our going to press, I have received the following
communication from Professor Lodge and Mr. Alfred Lodge : —

Liverpool, January 8th, 1885.

Dear Gurney, — In cogitating over your remarks anent the
valuable suggestion of M. Richet, that feeble thought-reading powers or
slight mental reverberation may be possibly detected in most persons by
applying the laws of probability to a great number of guesses made by
them/ at a limited series of objects, while under the influence (real or
aginary) of another mind strongly cognisant of these objects in random


258 Besearcltes in ThoughUTramference, [Dea 30,

succession; we have emancipated ourselves from the fallacy under
which M. Richet appears to labour, and which you have already
detected, and think that a statement of our present position may be not
uninteresting.

The evidence in favour of an unknown law, which can be legiti-
mately deduced from a definite departure from probability in a large
number of cases, is an important matter in connection with such
^experiments, and it is by no means obvious what such evidence really is.

Thus M. Richet finds, as the result of a number of series of guesses,
that the number of successes actually attained was in a large majority
of cases above the theoretically probable number ; and he sums up, as
the cumulative evidence of the whole number, an extraordinarily great
probability in favour of law, in an illegitimate manner. The inference
to be drawn from a number of series of varying success will seldom be
greater than that to be drawn from the most remarkable of those
series j* but, indeed, no single unsupported series of a few trials can
afford any legitimate inference at all.

The whole validity of the method depends on a great number of
trials being made, and before any short series can be used as an argu-
ment it must be confirmed again and again by repetition. But the
division of the whole number of trials into series of so many guesses
each is unnecessary and deceptive.! All the series, or at any rate all

* This may no doubt be true, if ** varying succesp " be taken to include results
where the number of right guesses is below as well as above the theoretically
probable number. But suppose that a die has been thrown 600 times, in 100
batches of 6, and that in each of these batches the ace has appeared either 2 or 3
times, except in the first batch, where it appeared 4 times. The presumption
that the die is unevenly weighted is of course stronger at the end of the 600
throws than it was at the end of the first 6. And this is a sort of illustration
which M. Richet might perhaps consider fairly justified by his results.

t Supposing the odds against each individual success to be constant
throughout (which was not the case in M. Richet's sets of trials), the division
into series is, of course, irrelevant to the calculation of the a priori probability
that chance will produce a certain total of successes. But when we look at
certain results obtained, with a view to discovering the probability that some-
thing beyond chance has acted, the mode of distribution may sometimes have a
real importance. For, supposing a vera causa to exist, by which the actual
number of right guesses is made to exceed the probable number, there is no
41 priori ground for assuming that it would act certainly or tmiformly. Suppose
that 1,000 guesses at the suit of a card are made on M. Richet's plan, in batches
of 200 each, on five successive days ; and suppose that all the 200 guesses are
right on the first day, and that 50 more right guesses are dispersed over the
other days, — the total number of right guesses, 250, will then not exceed the


1884.] 'Researches in Thought- Tnmsference. 259

'those where the probability of success at each individual guess was the
same, constitute one large series, which is only available for legitimate
inference if it consist of a sufficient number of trials.

This expression " sufficient number " is, however, only susceptible of
subjective and psychological definition ; rigidly, an infinite number
would be necessary for perfect inference, but practically a large number
serves.

The result at which we have arrived may thus be stated for practical
purposes.

Let a series of m guesses be made at a set of n things, and let r of

ff

these guesses come right. The inference to be drawn is, that the proba-
bility in favour of law or bias, as opposed to pure chance, is.


/ 2m—r—k+l \
\(nr-l){k+r+l))


r — h


vn \ "1

where k stands for the integer just smaller than — ^. Thus, to take

n

an example : let the objects of guess be the nine digits, and let 100
guesses be made, of which 20 turn out right. The value of the above
letters is w=9, m=100, r=20, k=ll ; and the probability of bias, or
action of Thought-transference instead of mere guessing, is about |g.
The outlying possibility of pure chance being only ^q. This is still a
long way from certainty, and more trials must be made.

The investigation is as follows : —

At every trial let there be n possible guesses, of which h are to be
considered right and the rest wrong ; what is the chance of guessing
right r times in m triials ?

The answer is the (r+1) ^ term of the expansion ( H j '

namely : —


\r I m — r * \ n J ', \n)


But it is usually unnecessary to consider b as anything but unity,

probable number ; but would it be unreasonable to surmise that on the first day
something beyond chance had been at work ? From this point of view it is clear
that there may be cases where the division into series— a division which accords
with actual facts, and is no arbitrary manipulation of figures — cannot be
acooimted wholly deceptive.


n


260 Beaearchea in ThougliUTranaference. [Deo. 30,

for only one of the possible guesses is generally correct. We can there-
fore re-write the formula conveniently thus

I r I m — r (n — Vf
where it will be observed that r occurs only in the denominator.

The chance of guessing wrong every time is / h— 1 \

The chance of guessing right every time is


n


The event which is most probable, or that for which the probability
is a maximum, depends upon how many trials are made — that is upon
7ti : n.

If fewer than n — 1 trials are made, the most probable event is
that all the guesses will be wrong.

In a set of n — 1 trials it is an even chance whether all be wrong or
one right.

If more than n — 1 but fewer than 2iz — 1 trials are made, it is
most likely that one of the guesses will be right.

If more than 2n — 1 but fewer than Zn — 1 guesses are made, two
of them will be most probably correct.

And in general if ~ ^^ lies between two consecutive integers, h
and ^-f 1, the most probable event is to succeed h times in the wi
guesses. The chance of this event actually happening is

/n— 1\^


fc I m — fc (^i — 1)

■ ■ ■ ■ »

The chance^of an actually observed event, viz., r successes, is


Lm /n— 1\^


= JL say.


I r ! m — V (n — 1) ^

Now, in estimating what is the legitimate inference that can be
drawn from an enormous number of trials in favour of the action of
some unknown law, as opposed to mere chance, we must compare these


1884.] Researches in Thought-Transference. 261

two probabilities ; that is, we must find the relative probability of the
observed event as compared with that of the event most likely to
happen on the hypothesis of pure chance. For if mere chance rules,
the most probable event is bound to happen in an enormous number of
trials, whereas if there be a bias some other event will happen, whose

relative probability is — • The probability in favour of mere chance

is therefore — , and the probability of a disturbing cause is 1 — - ;
or the betting odds in favour of some bias or interference with chance

q—p

are — — - •
P

The value of — is

I h \m—k . (n—1)^ (^yi_^+l) (^_r.+2) (m—k)

-IZ IZ^i: , whujh reduces to — r.

|r |m-r . O^lf (fc -r 1) (fc + 2)....r . (n-l)'-t

When m is very large, it is a long business to find the numerical
value of this expression, and an approximation may be conveniently
used instead. The following is deduced on the principle of using the
arithmetic mean of a series of numbers instead of the geometric mean,
and for all practical purposes it is sufficiently close to the true value :

2m— r — k -f- 1 \r—k


p / 2m— r — k -f- 1 \

7 - \(n—l) (r-irk-h 1)/


This is easily calculated, and it represents the outstanding pro-
bability in favour of pure chance very nearly.

We will recapitulate the meaning of the symbols.

m means the total number of guesses made, all under proper
conditions ;

n means the number of objects, or specified things, to be guessed at;

k means the most likely number of successes or right guesses on thei

hypothesis of mere chance (it is the integral part of ) ;

r means the number of successes or right guesses actually made.

It may be well to illustrate by a simple example. Let the things to
be guessed be the four suits of cards, and let 32 guesses be made, 13 of
them being right, the rest wrong. What probability of bias can be
deduced from such a set as this ?

The most likely number of successes in this case is 8 ^since 5!?yi
is V), and so we have to put in the above formula k = S,


262 Besearches in ThaughU Transference. [Dec 30,

r = 13, w = 4, w = 32 ; with the result that the probability of mere
chance is rigidly ^? 9 or from the approximate formula t^ ) or
say I roughly. The probability of some law is therefore |, and the odds in
favour of it are 7 to 1.

It is umiecessary to know the separate value of p and q ; they can be
calculated from formulae given above ; but the arithmetic is in most
cases rather long.

Another mode of writing the approximate formula is perhaps just
worth recording. Let k n trials be made, and let 8 be the excess of the
actual number of successes over the probable number, that is, let 8=
r — k; then the probability of bias is »

2k- «-l *


\2k + «-fl /


Calling the ratio of 8 : k, tj and taking k large^ this becomes

8


\ 2+t J •


which shows that if — ,- tends to diminish as the number of trials k

k

increased, the result of an infinite number of trials would be completely

in favour of mere chance ; whereas, if -jp— remains constant, or shows

a tendency to increase with the number of trials made, the fact is
strongly indicative of law. — We are, yours sincerely,

Oliver J. Lodge*
Alfred Lodge.


The problem of discovering from the results of a number of series of
trials, "VTirying in length and kind as M. Richet's did, what is the
probability that some cause beyond chance has acted, should surely
admit of a theoretic solution based on this simple proposition : —

An event occurs which must be due to ^ or A
The (t priori probability of the existence of -4 is P ; and the dt priori
probability that, if A exists, such a result wiU follow is p.


1884.] Researches in ThmghUTransference. 263

The h priori probability of the existence of ^ is Q ; and the h priori
probability that, if B exists, such a result will follow is q.

Then, on any occasion when the event has happened, the d posteriori

probability that it was due to ^ is ^^^

and the ci posteriori probability that it was due to i? is p^^. •

The following is an attempt at such a solution : —

The result of any particular scries represents a certain degree of
success ; and the attainment of at least that degree of success must be
due either to chance alone, or to chance plus some other cause, which
we will call 6, the amount of whose efficiency is unknown.

The probability of obtaining at least that degree of success is

(1) if chance alone acts, (say) q^

(2) if chance +0 acts ^,

because in our ignorance of the efficiency of 0, we must suppose it as.
likely to bring the degree of success up to that point as not to do so.

Now we cannot proceed further without assigning some value, as-
small as we please, to the it priori probability that acts. Let this,
probability = x : then the d priori probability that chance alone
acts =1— a;.

Taking now the result of a particular series, the ct posteHori-

probability that at least that degree of success has been obtained by

chance alone is g (l—y) , or 2q (1— a;)

q(l-x)+lx . 2q(l-x)-\-x '

and the it posteriori probability that at least that degree of success has.

been obtained by chance -f^ is \x> , or » ,

q (l~x)4-i» 2q (l-«)+x

which is greater than a; if ^ is less than \.

This latter fraction must be taken as a first approximation to the
probability that 6 has acted. The expression may now be used instead
of Xj to deduce in a similar way the probability that 6 has acted in a
second series ; and the new expression so obtained may in its turn be
used in application to a third series ; and so on. The successive
expressions will have a constantly increasing value as truly representa-
tive of the probability that has acted, in that they will depend on
continually widening experimental results.


264 Eesearclm in TIwughUTranafei^ence. [Dec. 30,

Now if ^1, ^-2, ^3, ike, represent the successive probabilities that B has
acted, obtained from a series of experiments in which q (as above
defined) is represented by q^, q.^, q^, &c., successively, then

X

X a a;+2gi (1— x) __ x

^1- x-h2gi(l-x) ' ^'^ X /. X \ x+4q, q, (1-/)

x+2(/,(l-x)"^^H^^ x+2q,{l-x))

X

A in the same way = , o^ ^ ^ n_-.^\ *^^ generally


^n = E •

X + 2^l(?2 «n(l— »)

The final value of B^ is independent of the order in which the results
of the experiments are used.

It will be seen that, if the representative of g in any series is J

-exactly, the probability for the action of B will be unaffected by that

.series; and that if the representative of g is ^ throughout, the

>(t posteriori probability for the action of B will be the same as .the

ct priori probability — i.e., will be = a; throughout. The illustration of

-the urns (p. 243), on the other hand, would give an immense ct posteriori

probability for the action of B, even where the representative of q was J

jbhroughout ; in other words, it would give an immense improbability

for the exclusive action of chance, even where the result of every series

.represented no more than the degree of success which the exclusive

action of chance was as likely as not to attain. To represent these

conditions, each urn would have to contain one white ball and one black

one, and the illustration would require all the white balls to be drawn ;

that is to say, a total amount of success wliich corresponded with ideal

probability would be illustrated by a total amount which was the

furthest possible departure from ideal probability. The probability of

"drawing all the white balls, -— » expresses the probability of obtaining,

in the sets of trials, not the total amount of success supposed, but that

-one particular distribution of it.

KG.


1884.] The Problems of Hypnotum. 265


lY.

THE PROBLEMS OF HYPNOTISM.*
By Edmund Gurnet.

Of all physical analogies, the one which most constantly suggests itself
outside the limits of the physical universe is that of the pendulum.
Alike in our sensory experience where excitement leads on to &.tigue
and satiety begets aversion, and in the wider domains of religion and
politics where movements and opinions so constantly tend to one extreme
by a mere impetus of repulsion from the other, the rhythmic law of
action and reaction is ever at work. But sensation and sentiment by
no means exhaust the region to which these further applications of the
law extend : we find it operating where it would least be sought, and
invading the passionless paths of science herself. The characteristic
instinct of the scientific spirit is, of course, to simplify and unify ; as
science advances, theories of a multitude of separate agents, whether
personal deities or abstract faculties, gradually give way to the recog-
nition of large general laws. But if in the main this tendency towards
unity and simplification brings nothing but good, it is inevitable that
an end in itself so eminently conducive to intellectual peace and satis-
Miction should also act as a temptation — that in yielding to the generalising
instinct the mind should sometimes be swayed too fast and too far, and
so be landed in premature hypotheses. And thus it is that, even as the
old pre-scientific speculation sought a transcendental unity of things in
such principles as water or fire, so even advanced science may occa-
sionally do injustice to the immense variety of Nature, and, in the
determination to formulate a law for some special department of facts,
may seek and observe too exclusively the fa<;ts which can be made to
square with the law. It would be hard to find a better instance of such
over-simplification than is afibrded by the modem science of Hypnotism.
For so short a span of existence, few sciences can have been so prolific
in theories, presented often concurrently, and with little attempt at
mutual refutation ; and the time has perhaps come when the experimen-
tal knowledge of the subject which is so rapidly advancing may be use-
fully supplemented by a brief critical review of its theoretic vicissi-
tudes. If such a review reveals how divergent have been the
various paths which speculation has taken, and how one after another

*In the endeavour to give some sort of completeness to the following sketch,
it has been found necessary^here and there, to resurvey ground which has already
been to some extent traveised in the Reports of the Conunittee on Mesmerism.


266 The Problems of Hypnotism.

of them seems to leave this or that set of facts on one side, it may at {
least aid in defining the problems that actually remain.

The facts of hypnotism, it is needless to say, first became prominent
in connection with theories which science has with one voice rejected,
finding nothing tlierein but absurd personal pretensions, and an ignoraat
jargon about forces and fluids. The facts themselves,however, were too
indisputable and extraordinary to be neglected ; and the first and most
comprehensive theory of them, advanced in opposition to those of
** mesmeric " influence and ** odic " emanations, was that of suggestion
and imagination. The singular mental phenomena which followed
** mesmeric " manipulations were ascribed to a temporary suspension of
the " subject's " independent powers of will and judgment, whereby both
his beliefs and his conduct were left at the mercy of external sugges-
tions. This was the theory crudely set forth exactly a century ago by
the Commission of the French Academy of Sciences which was appointed
to examine Mesmer's claims. Though presumably regarded by them as
an explanation, it clearly contains no explanatory power whatever ; it
is simply a description (and, as we shall see later, a very imperfect one)
of the particular mental condition which the " subject's " actions
suggest. The crucial question remains : If the doctrine of a specific
influence from the operator be rejected as outside the domain of natural
law, what are the natural laws to which this peculiar mental condition
can be referred ?

This question remained for a long time without an answer ; but
two answers were at last given by countrymen of our own — one which,
as far as it went, was of a clear and definite character, by Braid ; the
other, of a hazy and unexplanatory character, by Dr. Carpenter. This
description may at first sight seem unjust to the latter, inasmuch as he
professes general agreement with Braid, and does not seem aware
of having adopted a different basis. It will not be hard, however, to
justify what has been said.

Dr. Carpenter's explanation ("Mental Physiology," c.xiv.) rests purely
on mental ground : his argument is concerned with states which (though,
of course, like other mental states, they have their physical correlate
in the nervous system) he treats throughout in their purely mental
aspect. There could be no objection to this treatment, were it success-
ful as far as it goes — the conditions of success obviously being that the
phenomena of the mental state for which we seek explanation should be
brought into relation with phenomena of other and more familiar mental
states; for scientific explanation consists in bringing out identities
between new and old knowledge. Dr. Carpenter's failure to realise this
condition seems to me to be complete. The region where he seeks the
needed identities is the well-recognised one of reverie and abstraction;
And his endeavour is to embrace the phenomena of these famib'ar states


TJie Prohlems of Hypnotism. 267

with those of hypnotism in the common category of " automatic mental
action." As an instance of the automatism of reverie, he describes the
Joose play of fancy to which the poet may resign himself under the in-
fluence of some pleasing aspect of Nature. To illustrate the automatism
of abstraction, he describes the " absence of mind " which has charac-
terised many clear and profound thinkers, — showing itself in their
eccentric conduct in the streets, or in random answers to persons who
have addressed them when their whole attention was absorbed in follow-
ing some complicated train of logical thought. The reader will observe,
even before we begin to test the resemblance of these " explanatory "
phenomena to the unexplained facts of hypnotism, how confused and
confusing the idea of automatism has already become. It is more than
doubtful, to begin with, whether "automatism" correctly describes the
poet's condition at all. As long as the idea of will is absent,
** automatic " is an excellent word to describe actions, the conditions
of which are inside and not outside the subject of them : such, for
instance, is its appropriate meaning in physiology. But the mind is
not a cell or a tissue ; and, in the present connection, to call the mind's
actions automatic, simply because it is taking its own path unsolicited
fr&m moment to moment by new sensory impressions, seems very mis-
leading. " Automatism," if it is to serve Dr. Carpenter's purpose and
to embrace hypnotic facts, must mean something quite distinct from
spontaneous and unsolicited origination of ideas ; it must mean nothing
less than temporary paralysis of the directive power of the will ; and
there is nothing to warrant the assumption of this paralysis in the fact
that the mind's action for the moment is unimpeded and effortless.

But even if we waive this objection and extend the meaning of
** automatism " to cover what is properly expressed by spontaneity, the
automatism in the described condition of the poet and that displayed by
the absent-minded mathematician are surely so far from identity that
they present an absolute contrast. The spontaneity or " automatism "
of the poetic day-dreamer, in the sense of a free and aimless play of
mind, belongs to the essence of his activity ; so far as it is a correct
description at all, it is a description covering the whole ground of what
his mind is doing. The mathematician's mental activity, on the other
hand, is just exactly not free and aimless, and just exactly not auto-
matic. It is the most conscious and strenuously-directed effort, con^
centrated on successive points in an argument which it may require all
the strength of his will to stick to and grapple with ; and any
automatism that he may display is a mere accident of this state, showing
itself if external demands happen to solicit an attention which is already
irresistibly set in one particular channel. The condition described as
" automatic '' in the case of the poet is charged with consciousness,
which may be of the most vital and delightful kind ; it i«, in fact, itself


268 The Problems of Sypnotism.

the stream of consciousness in a particular aspect — £.0., winding hither
and thither in a roving and easy way. The automatism of the maiihe-
matician who does or says odd things while Folring a problem, is
essentially remote from the stream of his consciousness ; that is engrossed
with other things, and his automatic sayings and doings are distincUj
reflex actions, the result of suggestions which may never reach even
the threshold of conscious perception.

Having thus observed the total dissimilarity, or rather opposition,
of the two mental states whose fundamental characteristics Dr.
Carpenter treats as identical, we shall not be much surprised to
find that the hypnotic state, which he goes on to identify with them
— in order by that means to obtain an expression for the less
known in terms of the better known — is essentially distinct from
either. Tlie looseness of thought which has already made " automatism "
cover two quite distinct things very easily extends it to a third equally
distinct thing, which, being thus referred to a class, is so far — and all by
the magic of a word — explained ! The automatism of the hypnotised
*' subject," in his response to external suggestions, is often automatism
in a true sense ; in that respect differing toto coslo from those spontaneous
or internally-originated impulses of fancy to which, in moments of
random reverie, the poet's mind may give the rein. But it differs no less
distinctly from the automatic or reflex words or actions with which "we
saw the absorbed mathematician responding to external impulses. For
of those responses, as we observed, the essence was that they were un-
attended to, the stream of consciousness being rapt away in another
direction ; while in the hypnotic case, consciousness and attention,* so
far from being abstracted from the things which are being done in
response to the external suggestion, are directed with even abnormal
concentration upon those very things. We might without incorrectness
describe the higher hypnotic phenomena as rejlex action, in respect of
the certainty with which particular movements follow on particular
•bimuli; but they are, and their peculiarity consists in their being,
conscious reflex action. The central problem of hypnotism lies in the
combiiiation of those two adjectives ; and in the following pages each of
them will have to be emphasised in turn. The hypnotised " subject" who
carries out complicated orders is a conscious, and often even a reckonings
and planning, automaton. Reflex response (if we wish to retain the
phrase) is here raised from the merely physical to the mental plane;
the external suggestion evokes a particular idea in as certain and as
isolated a way as an appropriate electrical stimulus evokes the isolated
action of one particular muscle. This isolation of a single object in the

* Consciousness and attention, that is, so far as they are present. The vei)'
varying degrees, and in many cases the indisputably high degree, in which they
may be resent wUl be discussed a little later.


Tlie Probkma of HypnotUm. 269

mind naturally implies abeyance of the normal controlling and relating
power. In the normal state, successive vivid points of consciousness are
surrounded by a swarm of subordinate perceptions and ideas, by refer-
ence to which it is that conduct is instinctively or subconsciously kept
rational, even though the attention may be strongly focussed on its
immediate aim or object. In the hypnotic state the contact is broken
between the predominant idea and this attendant swarm ; and conduct
thus ceases to have reference to anything except the predominant idea.
And the difference between that isolation of the dominating idea which
is the cause of automatic answers and actions in the case of the absorbed
mathematician, and the isolation of the dominating idea in the hypnotic
automaton — though to a superficial observer the states seem similar
just because each produces irrational actions — clearly goes to the very
root of the phenomenon, regarded as mental. The mathematician has no
fraction of attention to spare for external solicitations ; his mind is in a
state peculiarly impregnable to them : the mind of the hypnotic
** subject " is absolutely at their mercy. The one mind is working with
unusual force and individuality in its self-elected channel, and what its
owner says or does in response to external influence is as little attended
to by him as the influence itself. The other mind is working with
marked absence of individuality in a channel elected by others, and
what its owner says or does in response to external influence is that on
which his attention is concentrated to the complete exclusion of every
other thought.

The attempted explanation of the phenomena on mental ground, by
bringing the mental condition within the recognised domain of abstrac-
tion or automatism, thus falls to pieces. Braid's explanation was a very
different one. He fearlessly took physical ground, and attributed the
hypnotic effects to an exceptional and profound nervous change produced
by a particular muscular strain. His experiments and conclusions,
which were the foundations of the actual science of hypnotism, are too
well known to need recapitulation. They dealt, it is true, chiefly with
the lower phenomena — the obvious. bodily effects, and Braid's grasp of
the subject on the psychical side was certainly very imperfect ; still his
claims to have traced to their true source effects which had hitherto
been ascribed to imagination and imitation are sufficiently explicit to
pass as a suggestion, at any rate, of a physiological basis for the higher
phenomena with which we are here chiefly concerned. Since his time,
the principal gain to our knowledge has been the proof that it is not
necessary that the eye should be the organ employed, or even that
the strain should be of a muscular sort at all. With sensitive
*< subjects," the ticking of a watch held at the ear, and light
monotonous passes acting on the nerves of touch, have been
found, as effective as the fixed gaze. But this, it will be


270 The Problems of Hypnotisni.

observed, is a mere extension of Braid's doctrine ; for
physiological condition of preparatory nervous adjustment to &
regularly-recurring stimulus is resXij fiocation in as true a sense as where
the employment of muscular apparatus more immediately suggests the
word. Concentration of attention is, no doubt, the natural mental
concomitant of the physical fixation; it may even be that for the
artificial production of the state in man it is a real condition, in the
sense that physical fixation alone would not be effective if the attention
were kept actively employed on external topics. But Braid never for a
moment suggested that the peculiar muscular or nervous strain could in
the first instance be dispensed with, or was anything less than the full
and sufficient cause of the subsequent phenomena. He is throughout
consistent and urgent in his view that the basis of hypnotism i&
a complete alteration or rebalancing of the nervous system,
artificially producible by special means of an obviously physical sort.

Here, then, we seem to have at any rate the beginning of a satisfactoiy
account of many of the facts popularly attributed to "mesmeric*'
influence. Braid clearly saw — what Dr. Carpenter has failed to see
— that the hjrpnotic state is a unique one and is due to a quite special ,
cause. If the fact is experimentally established that a particular sort
of physical process is perpetually followed by an exceptional mental
state having no apparent relation to it, the hypothesis of an exceptional
nervous change — as a middle term, and as the proximate condition of
the mental state — is one which, in the present stage of our knowledge
as to the connection between mind and nerve-tissue, we not only may
but must make. And so far as the mental change is profound and the
mental state unique, to that extent, we are justified in saying, is the
nervous change profound and the nervous state unique. Even to
enunciate this doctrine may appear somewhat out of date, now that
science is attempting to define, what Braid left uncertain, the exact
nature of the nervous events — whether, for instance, they consist in
" cortical inhibition " or in " local erethism." But there is a special
reason for constantly insisting on the more general position. For Dr.
Carpenter's is by no means the only attempt that has been made to
frame an explanation of hypnotic phenomena out of psychical factors ;
and such factors have proved themselves peculiarly liable to illegitimate
use. Above all, they have tended to confuse the important distinction
between the production of the state and the state itself-— a distinction
which Braid's conception enables us to keep clear.

The psychic factor mainly relied on has of course been that of
attention. And there are doubtless cases where such reliance might
seem justified— cases where the physical means which are successful in
producing hypnotism seem much less exceptional and violent than thosfr


^it .?HbSp«iii? rr ^tnnurimL. £^1


: roziaeacnssL scssuzizn. 'i«»*iim*s r^iicr^T mrcr r^mssm^^zjAXS^

^ hk-r-t 311 r-ftKiTL re "ill* Tcnanranr 'J*- jot?


-I. "Ill* T^TT cco:sT# cc "sib* i^'^'v-f jcin cc


L JtvkA XXX^ it »

rna hzj Troe pc«^inf-- cc 2dbi.iJlI ccowsiTrRiSa:!. -A:i>i

Ltclissn or " sjtw-^irfckizsi;.^ '•"iici ia
le^^ect oi tbe ^uscBrpniaE:. d tike zLizxi fzi ccie cirfmStx: pcvsiKLt ti»e c^c«s«*s9
aoaJocT to tlioBe oi hrpas^csn^ da:«Azid =$9 preTic^cs o:QciKiT:nuScQ
ol attentaoBi at all R=t evd if ^ve «cci£zt^ ccirste^ret^ to <«£«&
vheiB mneattaan t# sctoaZlr psesexit d^m^ the- xw^inrzSoQ. of i2k^
wJtmtB, "vhftC STOCsd is tbere for descrirfizif it its t}>e rffvur of tibat
state, in tiie abpf^**' cf u^J extzmoems canpdrscal prM?f of a t^K^deocT
in the antecedexxx to prodTzoe xhe cK^cseiqcem ? Tbe ^iff&rflu e:S&cts
of a ane-aded stnin of mind or body am? pt«ty w\eCI knomn ;
and ** toDic cnunp of tlie attention ~ \ to adopt Proiess^x' Stauiley
HaU's i^umse) may be a very satis&ctoiy desicnpixm of tbe coie^d^
abswptioii in m pardmlar directi<Hi which characterises maiiy is^^t^
stages cy£ the hypnodc trance. Bat what tendency should tbe cxminp
of an attention whidi is directed to a button held in the hand have to
prodnce, or to facilitate, a fresh cramp or series of cramps when the
attentian is diTerted to quite fresh objects ? The cramp of a limb
vidch b*« been kept too long in one pc^tion does not issue in a tendencv
to move it rapidly into new positions ; yet it is just such an anomaly as

♦ This of coarse docs not apply to the production m the state in »en$^tive
"subjecte " who have been hypnotised on preTions occasions, and who fail into
the trance by attention, not to a button, but to their own menwtie* ^^^ past
uensationflL The power of representing and revivifying past states is one whK^
manifesto itself in many direction*, and has no special relation to the hyi^K^tic


272 The Problems of Hypnotism.

this that the hypnotic process and its sequel perpetually present. Pro-
fessor Stanley Hall's excellent remarks — h propos of the idea of atten-
tion — on the danger of using terms in a manner which necessitates
** radically reconstructing the notion of them familiar to common con-
sciousness/' would surely be equally in place here ^ propos of cramp.
Even the case which he himself describes — ^where powerful excitement,
both physical and psychical, was produced by the effort to change the
current of the " subject's " ideas, and where it was necessary to wake
and re-hypnotise him before impressions of a new genus could be given
— presented a feature which seems an odd result of previous rigid at-
tention to a button, namely, " great mobility of attention *' within
the single genus of ideas suggested. But this necessity for waking and
re-hypnotising is so far from being constant that in my experience it is
unexampled. I have again and again found the complete change to a
new genus of ideas to be absolutely effortless and instantaneous — found,
that is, that the attention, which had been as usual fixed during the
process of hypnotisation, became quite abnormally mobile afterwards.
Thus — to give one example out of many — a youth well-known to me,
with whom I have made many experiments, was told by the operator,
before the proceedings began, that when hypnotised he was to recognise
and converse with me. He was then hypnotised by fixation in the
usual way ; after which he talked to me for a minute quite naturally.
Then, with a single sentence, he was taken from my room to a church-
yard, and was set to work at trimming a grave, where the grass had
grown too long. He put great energy and humour into his task, and he
now regarded me as a stranger who wanted to interfere with him and rob
him of his job. Another word from the operator, and he was in a boat
in a storm, running up an antimacassar for a sail, and lashing his com-
panion to the mast for safety, his comments throughout being extremely
vivid and amusing. Another word, and he was engrossed in watching
a conjurer spinning plates in the Brighton Aquarium ; he indulged in
very free criticism, and, while greatly admiring, opined that the plates
were loaded and the table made to slope inwards. I now got the
operator to introduce me to him, and to place my hand in his, and by
this means I obtained sufficient hold on him to make him half believe
that he was in church ; but he was puzzled by the continuation of the
plate-spinning, and at last he compromised his beliefs by saying that,
though he would consent to sit in church, he must insist on watching
the conjurer. A word from the operator obliterated the latter im-
pression, and brought him wholly to church, where he pointed out
various objects and, without the slightest suggestion, began mimicking
the manner of a local preacher. I now again addressed him, and he
again disowned acquaintance with me, though curiously he regarded
me as the same stranger who had interfered with him before. Another


The Problems of Hypnotism. 273

word, and he was at home helping his mother with accounts, and did a
sum which I gave him on paper correctly and with rapidity.* Here
then the order of mental events, in the whole experiment, was unusual
rigidity followed by unusual mobility. But how can we pretend that
we cbccount for the latter by recognising the former ? So long as we
keep to physical ground, it will be observed, no such difficulty
occurs. If Braid had been asked how it is that fixation of
particular muscles op nerves reacts on the higher nervous centres in
so remarkable a manner, he might have fairly replied that physiology
abounds in puzzles no less special and insoluble. JBut if I am told that
a particular mental attitude — ^that of fixed or one-sided attention — is
the catuae of certain mental phenomena which are new to me, I am
surely justified in demanding that the order of events shall present
some perceptible coherence — shall at least not run directly counter to
what my general experience would have led me to expect. Such an
objection might be pedantic — as against writers who of course have no
thought of differing from Braid, or of denying the physical correlative
of the attentive attitude — were it not that in their advocacy of atten-
tion they have curiously disregarded the facts , such as those just re-
corded, where this want of coherence is evident. The oracular sim-
plicity of Burger's formula, that the cause of hypnotic phenomena is
essentially psychic, would hardly retain its impressiveness in face of
hypnotic phenomena which in psychic character are at the precisely
opposite pole from their antecedent.

But this objection has yet another side. Suppose we were told that
the final result of cramping a limb or a psychic faculty was paralysisy
where should we expect to find the paralysis ? Surely in tliat limb, or
in that faculty. And in the case of the lower hypnotic phenomena

* It may be asked what guarantee can be had, in such cases as the above,
that the ** subject " is not acting a part in a condition of normal wakefulness.
The test of pain cannot well be immediately applied, as in the alert- stage of
hypnotism there is rarely a marked diminution of sensibility. But the sensi-
bihty test can nevertheless foe effectively brought to bear ; for, if left alone at
the close of such manifestations as the above, the ''subject " will fall, usually
with great rapidity, into the deeper stage of trance, in which any amount of
such minor torments as pin-sticking and pinching may be applied without
arousing him, or his conjunctiva may be touched without evoking more than a
feeble reflex response. This is a state nn to which it cannot be maintained that
robust youths are wont to pass at will out of a condition of normal wakefulness.
Another test, which I have repeatedly applied, is to inform the ''subject," on
his complete wakirg, that he nas apparentl^^ been dreaming of taking part in
various scenes, and to o£fer him £20 if he wHl say what the scenes were. It will
still, perhaps, be objected that though truly in a hypnotic condition and unable
subsequently to recollect what has passed, the "subject " may still at the time
be only pretending to be a party to the scenes suggested. This supposition
deserves careful attention, and there are cases to which it certainly seems
applicable. (See the very interesting remarks in M. Richet's L* Homme et
rintdligeneej p. 166.) But even if universally true, it would still leave the fskct
of the mobility of the attention just where it was.


274 The Problems of Hypnotknu

what happens to the faculty of attention may doubtless be regarded in
this light. Thus if a favourable " subject " be allowed to stare at a
button undisturbed, he will soon pass beyond the " alert stage," when
his imagination and his body might be brought into activity by sugges-
tions, and will simply become torpid and indifferent, though still often
capable for some time of rational conversation ; the cramped condition
of his attention has not resulted in continued and absorbing attention
to the button, but in gradual paralysis of the whole perceptive func
tion. We have just observed how different is the case with the atten-
tion, if the " subject " be taken in hand and suitably treated for the
higher phenomena before this deep state has supervened ; but the
further point to be now noted about such phenomena is this — ^that
while in them the attention is so little paralysed that it is even found
to be abnormally mobile after a period of fixation on the button, other
functions — those namely of choice, and will, and reaction in the way of
attraction and repulsion — are paralysed. The effect on these reactions
admits (as we shall see) of various degrees, but there can be no doubt as
to its reality. In psychical terms, then, cramp of the perceptive has led
to paralysis of the appetitive faculty — a fact which it would surely need
a very enthusiastic psychicist to regard as self-explanatory.

It may be worth while here to note what I think has been a main
reason (though a very illogical one) for the tendency to regard previous
fixity of attention as in itself a sufficient ground for the unhinged
automatic mental condition of hypnotised " subjects." It is that
certain physical phenomena, which may at first sight seem more start-
ling (but are in reality far less unique) than the mental condition in
question, liave undoubtedly been known to follow or to accompany the
state of fixed or expectant attention — that attention, however, being
then always directed to the part of the body in which the phenomena
were actually to appear ; as in the familiar case where the steady con-
templation of a particular finger leads to a sense of tingling in it. But
even in this direction, where the mere attitude of attention and expect-
ancy does actually aeem of distinct efficiency, cases occur where the
physical change cannot possibly be ascribed to that attitude, inasmuch
as not even the vaguest realisation of the bodily part to be affected was
in the patient's mind. Such a case. is that of a woman who had been
hypnotised by Braid for relief of violent pain in the arm and shoulder,
and who found, much to his and her own surprise, that an opacity
which had been left by rheumatic fever over more than half the cornea
of her left eye was gradually clearing. This case has been most unac-
countably quoted by Dr. Carpenter as an instance of the curative effects
of mere attention. The result seems clearly attributable to that re-
balancing or re-direction of nervous energy which Braid regards as
characteristic of the hypnotic state — to those nervous events which are


The Problems of Hypnotism. 275

no mere correlate of an act of attention, but the result (as he explains)
of a quite special physical cause.

But the objections to the attention-theory are not by any means ex-
hausted by the difficulty of connecting the process with the results of
hypnotisation ; on the contrary, they become even more substantial if
we confine ourselves to the latter. And they deserve note the more-
just because the theory here will actually cover so much ground —
because so many of the hypnotic phenomena may be truly described as.
belonging to the " pathology of the attention," and admit of interesting
treatment (c.^., in G. H. Schneider's treatise, Die psyclwlogische Ursache
der hypnotischen Ersclieinungen) in connection with other branches of
that wider subject. But in the first place, even in the alert stage-
of hypnotism, where mono-ideism with its accompanying loss.
of balance and control is often most conspicuous, it must-
always be borne in mind that this is not the essential
peculiarity of the state. The fundamental fact according to-
our formula is not that the psychic activities are abnormal, but that
they are reflex ; it is not the mere subjection of the mind to a single
idea or set of ideas, but the certain production and alteration of that
condition nh extra. In the second place, results are often loosely set
down to the " dominance of an idea," where, if we inquire what the-
particular idea is, we fail to find it. A hypnotised boy is told that he
may have a £5 note if he can pick it up. To suit the theory, the
dominant idea must be that of the impossibility of the act ; but even if
we allow this idea a momentary dominance, in what sense can it be
held to continue dominant during a struggle in which every word and
gesture express the strongest determination and incredulity 1 It may,
perhaps, be suggested that the words and gestures express no more than
an ineffectual effort to resist a nevertheless dominant idea ; but to this,
suggestion we may often oppose the " subject's " subsequent description
of his experience. And lastly, there remains the large class of cases,
which do not belong to what I have called the " alert stage " of hypno-^
tism at all ; and where the attention-theory can only be applied by the
desperate assumption that unusual deadness of sensibility in one direc-
tion necessarily involves unusual concentration in another. If a jet of
gas is seen burning specially brightly, it is doubtless reasonable to.
connect this condition with the fact that the other jets in the chandelier
are turned off ;* but if no light at all can be perceived, the natural

* Apropos of this metaphor, which is often, of course, an entirely just one,
the following instances may be worth recording. A hypnotised ** suoject" who-
strongly resented being even slightly ninched was impressed with the idea that
a person to whom he was attached haa died. He showed considerable emotion,
and was now completely indifferent to the most savage pinching. Again,
several '* subjects "who were sensitive to pain in the alert state, were thrown
into tiie deep state, and impressed with a command which was to be executed
when they emerged a^^ain into the alert state : when the emergence came, they
showed entire inaensitiveness until the conunand was duly performed.


276 The Problem of EypnotUm.

hypothesis surely is, not that some jet is burning brilliantly somewknB
out of sight, but that all the jets are turned off. The energy of atteor
tion is not a fixed quantity, bound to be always in operation in one
direction or another ; nor does the human mind, any more truly than
nature, abhor a vacuum. Even in the " alert stage," when the
*^ subject " can be made by an occasional word to enact scene alter
scene with astonishing truth and vigour, the indications, if he be left
alone, are of blankness, not of concentration. He knows where he is,
and will answer if spoken to ; but otherwise he sits inert and listless, if
asked what he is thinking about will usually answer " nothing," and
soon passes into the deeper stage with closed eyes, in which, though,
still able for a brief period to respond to questions, he is insensible to
any ordinary tactile stimuli. It would surely be irrational to refer that
insensibility to the strong concentration in some unknown direction of
an attention which, even in the previous alert state with open eyes,
there was no ground for supposing to be active. I do not urge the cases
of obvious reflex action (on which Professor Stanley Hall has made
fiome good remarks in the paper already referred to), since on a theory
like that of Herr Schneider — in which the lower centres, so far as they
distinguish stimuli, are credited with an embryonic consciousness — ^the
question might there be a mere question of words. The cases which I
have in view are those where the results observed cannot, by any
4stretch of the meaning of attention, be reasonably connected either with
the " positive field " — t.e., with unusual absorption of the attention in
the line of the result, whether as immediately producing it or as
inhibiting its opposite* — or with the " negative field," where insensi-

* I gather from some expressions of Professor Stanley Hall on the subject
of ''active inhibition," that he holds that the condition of the attention in this
positive field may be further subdivided — that the acttud direction of concentra-
tion may be not only towards the production, but towards the inhibition of a
particular mental phenomenon. This direct action of inhibition is hard to
picture. The activity of active inhibition appears to me always to lie in a
determined setting of the mind in some tiew direction : I mitigate a pain not by
attending either to the pain or to an imagined absence of the pain, but by
^clenching my teeth and thinking of something else, i.e., by opening quite new
chan^nels of nervous energy. So when Professor Stanley Hall inquires whether
when a hand is made insensitive to pain, it is *' due to abnormally intense
inhibition of sensation or motion by consciousness, or is better conceived as an
entire detachment and vagrancy of attention from consciousness, of which it is
•conceived only as a concentration," I find a difficulty in admitting the possi-
bility of the first alternative, as also, I must confess, in catching the meaning of
the second. In the proposed case, at any rate, I should not myself see the
necessity of having recourse to either. If the hand is rendered insensible in the
ordinary way by faint sensory stimuli, it is surely a case where the theory of
■direct physical inhibition of the lower sensory centre is exactly in place. The
very different case where the manipulations employed do not produce any
-sensory stimuli at all , as where no contact is used and the arm is thickly
enveloped in clothes, is one on which I shall have a word to say later.


The Problems of Hypnotism, 277

bility and irrational conduct are the result of an unusual draining-off of
attention from the ordinary sensory or ideational tracts into some other
line. They are cases where, if we wish still to hypostatise attention,
we must just say that it is paralysed or has fallen asleep. But, such a
mode of expression is not to be commended. For the sleep and
paralysis may invade some faculties and not others, e.g., colour-blindness.
may supervene while the hearing remains perfect ; and even in the
deeper state of trance, ideas, and especially commands, naay be
impressed on the " subject's " mind. What do we gain, then, by
employing a general term to describe such special effects ? When once
the chandelier-metaphor is abandoned — when once it is recognised that
in a multitude of cases the quantity of attention turned on in one
direction is in no way connected with a withdrawal from any other —
the idea of a common psychic factor seems out of place and misleading.
The " subject's " ear wakes while his eye sleeps ; so in ordinary paralysia
the right side may feel while the left does not ; and it does not then
occur to us to talk about the patient's attention being asleep on the left
side and concentrated on the right.

And now we must make a sudden transition, from the theories
which have unduly magnified psychic functions in hypnotism, to those
which have unduly ignored them, and have substituted the shibboleths
of physical reflex action and automatic cerebration for that of attention.
If we trace the natural logical route of the subject, we shall see that a
time was almost bound to arrive when a purely physical account of the
whole range of phenomena would be attempted. Up to the time of Braid's
death, no serious question seems to have been raised as to the relation of
cofisciotcsness to the hypnotic manifestations. No doubt, at any rate,
was expressed as to the presence of consciousness in those higher
phenomena which belong to the lighter stage of the trance, and which
form by far the most interesting part of the whole subject. Braid
himself speaks of "the extraordinary power of concentration of
thought," " the rapt contemplation," " the glowing scenes and images '^
presented to " the fervid imaginations " of his patients. But the
very fact of tracing the observed phenomenon, as he did, to a
peculiar physical condition must lead on to the question how far the
psychical factors of consciousness and volition are really involved in
them at all, and how far the suggested idea has any true existence in
the " subject's " mind. Granting that his attention has to be directed
in the first instance to the monotonous process by which the state is
produced, we have seen that the power of attention might naturally be
expected to be paralysed by that very process, so as not to survive when
the state is once reached; and if the "alert stage" is not caught
and used, this is what actually happens, the gradual dulling of the


278 The Problems of Hypmtiam.

•faculties passing on into comatic unconsciousness.* But there is
nothing primd facie unreasonable in supposing attention to have passed
away before this deep stage is reached — in supposing that it does not
isurvive that profound nervous change which, following Braid, we infer
to have supervened as soon as the alert stage is reached. The state of
the " subject " is so obviously peculiar that there would seem to be
no strong cl priori obligation on us to interpret what would ordinarily
he accounted signs of consciousness in the usual way. Dr. Carpenter's
wavering utterances already indicate some suspicion on this point ; and
the gradual progress in our knowledge of physical reflex action, and of
its special connection with the hypnotic state, has naturally given the
question a new shape and significance. Hypnotism being, beyond
doubt, the field on which such reflex action reaches its furthest limit,
where is that limit to be drawn ? The consideration of this point will
further establish the distinction between the lower and the higher
hypnotic phenomena, and will thus further define the fundamental
peculiarity of the latter.

If we begin at the bottom of the series of phenomena, we certainly
find no reason to suppose that they are accompanied by any distinct
consciousness or concentration of attention. If we fibad it hard to credit
the frog with attention during the process of hypnotisation, it is still
harder when the process is complete ; and the insensibility and
immobility of the human " subject," if left to himself in the " deep
stage," seem to indicate a mental condition not very different from the
frog's. Higher in the scale, actual experiments in reflex action suggest
a decided lowering of the psychical functions. The heightening of the
reflex responsiveness of the miiscles, which is often the first symptom
of hypnotic influence, does not, it is true, serve as a sign of diminished
mental activity, especially as the phenomenon itself — the twitching
limbs and the inability to control them — is peculiarly calculated to
45timulate the " subject's " attention. But Professor Stanley Hall's recent
■experiments avoid this difficulty, and give us just the indication that is
needed. For, in establishing the diminution, during the alert stage
of hypnotism, of the time necessary for voluntarily reacting
on a stimulus, they suggest that the reaction has become to
jsome extent reflex ; t and since this implies that the brain-
action associated with conscious attention to the work of reacting is

* A fuller account of the different stages of hypnotism will be found in
A former paper, Proceedings, Part V., p. 61, &c.

f It is worth observing that this extension of reflex action in one direction
may perfectly well co-exist with what might appear a contrary result in another.
For instance, Professor Stanley Hall's " subject " (I presume while in the same
hypnotic stage as he was in during the reaction-experiments) could gaze at a sunny
window for 13 minutes without winking. But the ability to do this doubtlefis


Tlie Problems of Hypnotism, 279

diminished, we may fairly suppose that the amount of conscious
attention is itself diminished. And this leads us on to the more
general supposition, that actions which would normally involve very
distinct consciousness may be performed by the hypnotic " subject "
either with a lesser degree of it or entirely without it. There is thus
considerable justification for Heidenhain's explanation of the singular
exhibitions known as hypnotic mimicry. According to him, the
movements or words of the operator, acting on the eyes or ears of the
** subject," stimulate as usual the lower sensory centres ; but in the
hypnotic state, the functions of the higher cortical portion of the brain
{to which nervous discharges are supposed normally to pass from the
lower sensory centres) are inhibited^ and consequently no effect is
produced in the way of consciousness. At the same time, the
disturbance in the lower sensory centres, though thus unaccompanied
by consciousness, is sufficient to pass on the nervous discharge to the
most nearly associated m^tor centres, which will naturally be those
whose activity will produce the same words or movements ; since clearly
no association can well be closer or more constant than that between
the sight and sound of a movement or word and the act of producing
that movement or word. And since the same inhibition of the cortical
functions, which precludes consciousness of the impression, precludes
also the normal exercise of the power to direct and control movements,*
the mimicry takes place mechanically and unfailingly, i.e., as genuine
reflex action. Heidenhain further extends this explanation to the
phenomena of what he calls " automatism at command." He attributes
the machine-like obedience of the " subject " to a similar inhibition of
cortical function, and to the consequent opening of an unimpeded
channel of discharge from the lower ideational to the motor centres —
-i.e., from the place of the nervous discharges which, if allowed to
pass on in the normal way, would result in the mental picture of
an action, to the place of the nervous discharges immediately associated
with the performance of that action.

But while it is important to note the facts to which this hypothesis

arose not from an inhibition of the normal reflex movement, but from a direct
deadening of sensibility in a particular organ. So extreme a deadening in the
"alert stage " of hypnotism is rare, though out of several hundred " subjects "
I have found two whose eyes remain open even in the deep stage. Such
exceptions are valuable as showing the variety that may exist even in the
simplest facts of hypnotism.

* Heidenhain has introduced an iquivoqut into the terminology of the
^subject by calling the hypnotic action on the cortical functions inhibitiony
without pointing out explicitly that the iwrmal action of those functions
in respect of motion is to a large extent inhibitory, and that the complete
description of the method by which the automatic reflex responses are brought
is thuB inhibition of the inhibitory function^


280 Tlie Problems of Eypnotkm.

will apply, and in which ideation and volition apparently play no
part, it is of still greater importance to avoid mistaking this limited
portion of the field for the whole. It is no doubt convenient for the
theory to conceive the inhibition of directive and volitional power as
accompanied by inhibition of consciousness ; but the positive grounds
on which the sweeping assertion of the unconsciousness rests are so
flimsy that, but for the high authority of those who are opposed to me,
I should almost have thought it waste of time to discuss them.

The most thorough-going statement of the doctrine in question
appears, I regret to say, in a book which for general acuteness and
comprehensiveness of treatment is superior to any other on the subject
with which I am acquainted — the ittude Scientifique sur le Somnamr
buliame of Dr. Despine, which in 1879 obtained for its author a medal
from the Medico-Psychological Society of Paris. The acuteness, it is
true, is not unfailing. When a man concludes that the highest psychic
manifestations may take place without consciousness, from the fact that
the complicated vital functions of the animal and vegetable creation,
while seeming to demand a capacity at least equal to that of an
intelligent man, nevertheless take place unconsciously, and that the
highest human intellect could not construct a butterfly's wing, we may
defer our answer till a stomach or a tree begin to reason, or a butterfly's
wing to decide knotty points. Popular arguments, moreover, are
sometimes caught at in a manner fatal to consistency. Thus an appeal
is made to the well-known ability of somnambulists to keep their
balance in dangerous places and at giddy heights ; which may reason-
ably be connected with unconsciousness of danger, and so far might
pass muster as an argument for the temporary abolition of all psychic
function. But on Despine's own principles, how should the somnambulist
be any the safer for his unconsciousness? If cerebration, even in its
most subtle and complicated forms, can go on just as usual without any
psychic correlative, why are we to except the particular cerebration
that would normally be accompanied by fear, giddiness, and loss
of balance ? What is to prevent that in the given conditions
from functioning in the normal way, and so producing a
fall ? So far from affording a proof of true automatism,
this is emphatically a case where the theory of attention — of a mind
exclusively occupied with the next step and not occupying itself with
ideas of falling — seems of most assistance. Dr. Despine's next argu-
ment, however, has more force. He finds an indication that even the
most complicated psychic phenomena of hypnotism may be purely
automatic in the fact that in certain abnormal states the personality
seems doubled ; as when a person recovering from typhoid fever spoke
and sang, while seeming to himself to be listening to another's per-
formance, and without any idea what the next sound to be produced


The Prohkma of Hypnotwn. 281

would be. Similarly religious ecstatics and " trance-mediums " have
delivered impromptu discourses without conscious cerebration, and have
been the devout and admiring auditors of eloquence whose sense they
grasped only after it had issued from their own lips. In these cases
Dr. Despine attempts to make the one part of the person — the watch-
ing and attentive part — the witness of the automatism of the other
part ; and since, viewed in this light, the presence of the witness
is not necessary to the production of the result, an argument is
obtained for the general possibility of similar manifestations without
any participation of consciousness. This artifice of making two
people, A and B, out of one, in order (in the absence of evidence) to
obtain a sort of presumption that A's presence is not a condition of £'s
actions, is not very convincing ; at the same time there need be no
great difficulty in admitting the particular possibility claimed. Few
will dispute that the talking and singing might appear as purely auto>
matic phenomena ; and even the impromptu discourse, with its far
more complicated series of actions, may be conceived as producible
either in the absence or with a minimum of consciousness — its contents
being presumably a string of familiar ideas, closely connected by associa-
tion, and clothed in a hackneyed phraseology. Despine's error is in
sweepingly applying the same argument to hypnotism, without remark-
ing how radically different are many of the phenomena there presented.
The psychologist who claims for his study the dignity of a science is
surely bound to follow the physicist's example, and to take some trouble
to vary the conditions of his observations ; and in this question of the
presence of consciousness, the very simplest experiments suggest the
3ort of variation that is necessary. A *' subject " is asked a question
to which the obvious reply is " yes," and answers " yes " : he is asked
another to which the obvious reply is " no," and answers " no."
" Clearly automatic reflex action," say Despine and Heidenhain, with a
great show of reason. But now let us take a case where,
though the answer is equally simple, the question itself does not suggest
one answer rather than another. For instance, let some one, standing
behind the " subject," give a very light clap of the hands at intervals,
and let the " subject " immediately before each clap and also at other
times between the claps, be asked the question " Do you hear this ? ''
He will be found to answer " yes" when a clap follows, "no " when
no clap follows. Now here even to suppose the answer '* yes " to be
automatically given involves some strain of the reflex theory ; for
granting that the physical attention might be fixed by the question —
i.e., that the nervous events corresponding to expectation of a faint
£ound might be thus produced — these events would in themselves have
no tendency to produce the word "yes " in response to the clap. In
the normal state, that answer would involve a sense that a

Y


282 The Problems of Eypnotism.

doubtful point had to be decided by the person himself, and the result
truly communicated — a mental operation of some complexity and great
delicacy ; and if the same result be produced without any psychic con*
currence, the physical events must at any rate differ considerably from
anything involved in the trance-medium's self-propagating stream of
irresponsible verbiage. But when the answer given is ** no," the indi*
cation of a true psychical event — viz,, the consciousness of not hearing
— corresponding to it seems almost irresistible ; for here the answers,
besides involving just the same delicate operations as the former one,
would have to be reflexly jogged out not by the stimulation of sound,
but by the non-stimulation of silence. Similar and far more comph*
cated instances could be easily multiplied ad infinitum.

But Despine's principal argument, and Heidenhain's only one,
depends on the " subject's " subsequent defect of memory as to what has
passed during his trance. It does not seem to have occurred to either
of them that the requirement, as a test for present consciousness, that
its content shall be afterwards remembered, requires itself any justifi«
cation. Yet if the reality of that test be granted, the question
whether a man was conscious when he read an article in the Times will
depend on whether or not he receives a blow on the head when he has
finished it. In his development of the argument, however, Despine
shows considerable controversial ingenuity ; and it must be admitted that
those who have maintained the presence of consciousness in hypnotism
and somnambulism have not always been happy in their way of ac-
counting for the subsequent forgetfulness. This has been attributed
by Dugald Stewart to the "subject's" defect of attention to the
events that are passing ; by M. Maury to a. mental paralysis brought
about by an exhausting concentration of attention on those events, —
theories so weak and baseless that we certainly need not grudge Despine
the satisfaction of setting them off one against the other. So again, he
has no difficulty in disposing of M. A. Lemoine's explanation that
memory cannot survive the shock of the sudden change from the som-
nambulic to the natural state. A single instance, however, will show
that his own counter-positions are very little stronger. He adduces the
extreme violence of the things which have been done or suffered in tho
trance-condition, and argues that since these things, though so impres-
sive in their nature, are not remembered, they must have been done or
suffered unconsciously. The reply is obvious that equally violent things
are done and suffered in dreams (which Despine again and again dis-
tinguishes from the trance-condition by the presence to them of con-
sciousness and the ego), and are forgotten within a minute of waking.
Equally obvious is it to notice that Despine's argument quietly begs the
whole question ; for he is assuming for the abnormal state the same
relation of consciousness to meixiorj ^ja exv&\& Ssx. VXjkft isLormal state^


The Problems of Hypnotism. 283

foi^tting that that identity of relation is precisely what he has to
prove.

But there is a more radical objection to all these arguments for the
unconsciousness of the " subject " from the fact that subsequent memory
is absent — ^the fact, namely, that it is frequently present. The primd
Jade indications of this subsequent memory, found in correct descrip-
tions by the " subject " of what he has been doing, are too obvious to
be long overlooked ; and Heidenhain, when he observed them, brought
them into harmony with his general theory by supposing that, when the
abnormal inhibition of cortical function is removed, the excitation
renudning in the lower centres transmits a stimulus to the liberated
sensorial ganglion cells — ^to be psychically represented as memory of the
original exciting cause, which, when it actually operated, had no place in
consciousness. He holds, however, that some distinct hint or impulse is
necessary to bring up this residuary excitation to the requisite strength^
And for many of the simpler phenomena this seems a satisfactory
hypothesis. Further, the outward indications of remembering, in a
new hypnotic state, what occurred in a former one, and the apparent
taking^up of an old track of ideas, or even of a connected discourse^
at the point where it had been abandoned, have been brought by
Despine within the scope of purely automatic brain-action — the renewal
of the hypnosis bringing with it the former special excitatory condi-
tions. But other phenomena seem quite beyond the legitimate scope of
such a theory. If the " subject " is brought into the " alert state,"
made to go thorough the ordinary platform buffooneries, and then
re-awakened, there is often not a.ny breach of consciousness at all ; and
he gives a description, which there is not the slightest ground for call
ing in question, of his state of mind in performing the actions — as, e.g.,
that he felt disinclined to do them but could not help it, or that he was
aware of their absurdity but could see no reason for not doing them.
Again, on re-hypnotisation the events of the previous hypnotic state
are sometimes spoken of with fulness, in answer to perfectly neutral
questions ; nor do they merely recur in unrelated sequence, as by. the
release of particular springs, but are compared and estimated. There
is here no mere rejoining of a temporarily-broken associative chain : the
phrases used are to all appearances the normal results of a discursive
and critical review of past experiences ; and the onus prohandi rests
with those who deny that what gives every sign of being genuine
memory is genuine memory. When once this hypnotic memory is duly
recognised, the study of its varieties will be found of great interest ;
and in the -paper above referred to I endeavoured to make this study
the basis of a clear separation between two states — the "alert " and the
" deep " — ^that have commonly been distinguished merely as steps in a
«ixigle prqcessi continuous changes on the path to hypnotic sleep.


.. A


284 The Problems of HypnotUm.

The results there given have an important bearing on the central
question as to the respective relations of consciousness and of reflex
action to the hypnotic state, or rather states. Under appropriate con-
ditions, we saw reason to recognise true subsequent memory, and there-
fore present consciousness, even in the lighter stages of what I called
the " deep " state ; and when we passed upwards to the lower pheno-
mena of the " alert " state — c.^., mimicry, and mechanical obedience—
we could often appeal further to the absolute unbrokenness of the cxxor
scious stream. Where memory is absent, and where there is a distinct
breach in the train of consciousness, arguments may still be drawn
from experiments such as the one on hearing above recounted, where a
point is left to the " subject's " decision, and the truth of this decision
is independently ascertained. Again, the end being suggested, the " sub-
ject " will take his ovm means to accomplish it. He will use his reasoning;
powers — as in the case of Dr. Hack Tuke's "subject," who was
asked if he could not walk forwards, and who " remembers arguing ont
in his mind, wearily, that it followed from this he was walking
backwards." He will even form original theories as to what is told
him. For instance, a young man who had been impressed with the
idea that he was going to be hanged, was then told that his sweetheart
had been blovm off the pier and drovmed, and that the announcement
of the event was in the evening paper. He at once surmised that she
had purposely thrown herself ofi^ through grief at his approaching &te.
He was now told that the second edition of the paper showed it was a
mistake, and he suggested two explanations ; the first that the name
Newington had been wrongly printed for Newton ; the second (in which
he testified his belief by seizing a paper and pointing to what he
imagiuixl to be the actual passage), that the words in the second edition
ran ^Uilmost blown off the pier, and almoH drowned." Again the
hypnotised person, like the somnambulist, will sometimes go through
<^mplox calculations, and bring out a correct result with greater ease
and certainty than in his normal state ; while the vividness and inven-
ti\>»u>ss of his imagination, as under the stimulation of questions he
pursues aloud the course of his waking-dream, are a source of ever
frt^sli astonisluiieut.

lm>st^ la t tor facts alone cannot, of course, be made conclusive against
a tlummgh ijoius: automatic theory ; but they at any rate suggest strong
pn^lvaluHUt\5, which ouiit to be met by something better than bare
»w»ortioas. First we have Heidenhain's crude attribution to reflex
mimicry of kuI the phenomena which others have attributed to the
domiuiu\KV ot ai\ idi^ —his statement, e,g., that a " subject " will never
t>at a raw jxuato on the sug^jestion that it is a pcM-, unless the operator
umk^Ns movements of mastication in his sight. This view produces a

^M«* A £ew morv experiments are made^ and these produce a


.The Problems of Hypnotisnu 285

practical recantation with an admission of the sufficiency of suggested
ideas to produce the appropriate bodily movements. Then comes Despine
and maintains that even the " ideas " have only a physical existence.
We de not dispute the admissibility of his conception in simple cases,
but ask in vain why we are to extend it over the whole hypnotic field,
and apply it to elaborate actions which have been accompanied by
consciousness in the whole of our experience, and present every imagi-
nable sign that the attention is completely engrossed by them ? Are we
to forego all discrimination, just because it saves trouble to have a
simple and thorough-going theory ? The situation may be put thus.
One set of facts (notably the unbroken persistence of consciousness and
memory in the passage into and back from the lightest stages of the
trance) show that a hypnotic condition is not ipso facto an unconscious
one. Another set of facts show that, in hypnotism, the line which
separates mechanical and reflex from conscious and volitional actions
is considerably shifted, and actions which would normally be above the
threshold of consciousness sink below it. But what of that, if a mul-
titude of actions, performed in that lighter stage of the trance to which
the most interesting phenomena of hypnotism belong, do according to
any natural interpretation imply a state distinctly above the threshold ?
We readily grant that we cannot draw the new line with certainty,
even for a particular case ; but all analogy is against supposing it shifted
to the utmost limit at the very outset.

I cannot, then, for a moment believe that the automatic theory, in
the extreme form which asserts unconsciousness for all hypnotic and
somnambulic actions, will hold its ground. But in proportion as the
theory becomes less sweeping, it gets into difficulties of detail. Heiden-
hain, as we have seen, has found himself obliged to recognise the
psychic element in the higher hypnotic manifestations : but he seems
oddly unaware of the effect of this admission on his exposition of the
physical processes involved. The point of that exposition, it will be
remembered, was the opening of a direct channel from impressional to
motor nerve-centres, through inhibition of cortical function; and now
we find a vast number of cases where consciousness, though conditioned
by cortical activity, is not inhibited. It is of course easy to reply that
here it is only the functions specially associated with spontaneous control
and choice of movements that suffer inhibition. But that goes not a
whit further as an explanation than Braid's general assertion of a
profound nervous change ; it is merely a necessary inference from the
palpable fact that spontaneous control and choice have ceased. It is
just this cessation — which, translated into physical terms, we should
naturally call " inhibition " — that constitutes the novel feature of the
case ; and nothing that we have otherwise known about inhibition (as
Mr. Romanes, in his preface to the translation of Heidenhain's Animal


286 .The Problems of HijpnotUm.

Magnetism, has rightly admitted) could have led ns to e^net of
conceive the results attributed to it. Heidenhain's explanaium^ in fKt,
like that of the French Commission, is no more than a rttiaiemtnt ol
the problem. As long as the whole of cortical function can be supposed
to be eliminated, his theory has a certain symmetry and explanatoiy
power. It gives a plausible account, involving neither conscioasDesB
nor volition, of the power of the simple sound ** go," to produce an
inmiediate corresponding movement of the " subject " — ^the merit of the
explanation being the easily conceivable picture of the nervous events
which it supposes, and which are quite on a par with the recognised
facts of reflex action. But when, e.g.^ a long series of orders is thought-
fully and painfully carried out, long after they were given — a phe-
nomenon not uncommon in " mesmeric " exhibitions — it seems impossible
to adapt the old (or any other) neat and symmetrical hypothesis of the
nervous processes to the new phenomena ; and the word ** reflex " can
be applied to the latter, if at all, only in the peculiar and carefully
guarded sense which confines it to their psychical aspect. It seems
hardly possible that Heidenhain should have missed seeing this, had he
waited to formulate his theories until he had witnessed some of the
higher phenomena in their more striking forms. As soon as the ele-
ments of consciousness and volition are clearly recognised as active in
such phenomena, it surely must equally be recognised that the fonda-
mental peculiarity of the condition is simply the absorption of those
elements into the one suggested channel of attention or expectancy, and
is thus quite removed from the lower plane of physical " reflex."

So far, then, our formula of conscious or psychic reflex action, as
expressing the true peculiarity of the higher hypnotic manifestations,
has been defended against two sorts of over simplification ; that which
ignores the part played by the mind in the phenomena ; and that which,
accepting the part played by the mind, fails to see that its differentiating
feature is the liability to respond to suggestions with the same
mechanical i*eadiness as a stimulated muscle displays when the normal
inhibitory influence is withdrawn. It is only stating the condition thus
indicated in other words, to say that the heart of the problem lies not
in cotiscioKsness but in icilL And here another important distinction
presents itself. The hypnotic automatism must not be conceived as
necessarily implying any abrogation whatever of the will, taken as the
setise of desire or impulse. That element admits of all degrees. It may
be absent altogether, and the " subject '* may perform his acts, con-
sciously indeed, but with complete indifference — in which case nothing
is commoner than for him to believe and to assert afterwards that he
could have avoided doing tliose things if he had chosen; but
It may also be present in full force, and may even be


The Problems of Hypnotism. 287

directly opposed to the course of action pursued. What
is abrogated is not the sense of desire or the power of willing, but the
isense of self-determination and the power of choosing. Even here
questions of degree come in. In the very lightest stage — as exemplified
by the boy who strove to pick up the bank-note — it cannot be said that
choice, any more than desire, is abrogated ; while even in a deeper
stage, a " subject " will sometimes experience such a sense of repugnance
as seems to involve some residual power of avoidance ; and occasionally
he will retain complete pbwer of choice in some isolated particular.* At
the same time, this suspension of choice must be accepted as the most
marked and central characteristic of the higher form of the hypnotic
trance. And for those who regard the intuition of free-will as a
subjective illusion, it is a point worth notice that decided abnormalities
of conduct should present themselves precisely when, and in
proportion as, the sense of having a free-will and being a
choosing ego disappears. The variations are at any rate concomitant ;
and if nothing else varies, such concomitance would, outside meta-
physics, be held to imply some sort of casual connection. It may
perhaps be objected that it would be incorrect to say that nothing else
varies — that the essential variation is simply a change in the particular
Tiwtive that assumes prominence; e,g,, that when a command is given
to put the hand between the bars of the fire, and the determinant
motive to a normal mind would be the dread of being burnt, the deter-
minant motive to a hypnotised mind is the desire to obey the controller,
IBut this is not at all in accordance with the evidence of many hypnotic
"** subjects " who have been able to recall and give an account of their
state of mind. They are often conscious of the falseness of what is
told them, and of the folly and harmfulness of the things they are
T)idden to do ;t they are even sensible of a strong objection to doing
them, and not sensible of any positive motive impelling them to act ;
but it simply does not occur to them that they have a choice in
the matter. J Even if we abandon free-will and stick to psychology,

* I was recently experimenting with a youth who had formerly been a
telegraph-boy, and who had taken a strong dislike to the metier. When hypno-
tised, he was at the mercy of any suggestion or command, except one ; nothing
would induce him to carry a telegram. In its strength of resistance to the
Jhypnotic mono-ideism, this repugnance really itself reached the mono-ideistic
intensity ; for the refusal was unaffected by considerations that would certainly
have reversed it in the youth's normal state, — e.g., when he was told that the
matter was one of life and death, and that he should have diJ20 for the job.

t See a case reported by Dr. Hack Tuke, in the Journal of Mental Science^
for April, 1883, p. 70.

J The detemiinist may, no doubt, make a more general objection : he may
sB,y that the consciousness of free choice, however interpreted, is a normal ante-
cedent of human voluntary action ; and that t'lerefore he would have expected


2SS Tke ProMoM ^ HffaMm.

Midi iMfiUf, Hh tL«i^ Mffm d*M/Mlj avkrard for die MMylMmiral tiieory
^4 th^ dt^^frmiitaLtiotA <if cfmduct, at eretrfwint, bj a BMidTe that repfe^
iMftit* tiy? i^mmUsKt }m]Mtice of foreseen pkunres or inunniities from pain.
Afid w«; art; tfatu led io the completing step in our deatiiptimi of the
big^Mfr b jprjrAic irtate. That state maj be regarded as the most eomplete
ifx^tnplificati'yri of Prof «r«or Bain's fraitfol formnbi^ — lAe CnMiniey of an
vUn Uj arX xU^Jj (nit, I cannot regard Frofessor Bain's oiwn instances
(MtrnJUd aiid Mwal Hcienc€^ p. 91) as the best examples of tlie law ; they
Wiinii i/} m*s rather to exconplify the common impulse to produce a
ffiark^J fiiftict, to ** make a scene " ot some sort, even at one's own cost
At th^^ Karne time, I think that his formula represents a reality, the
scojifsof which even in ordinary life has hardly been sufficiently recog-
iiiji^;d« It wntniH to me the only possible ground for certain brief phases
of MulkinfsHH or i><5rversity — the shade of meaning maj be best conveyed
by th<9 Mlang ^< cufUM^dness " — where a person finds himself persisting in
Ml attitude or a line of conduct which causes him acute discomfort at
i\w iiuuif with a promise of nothing but discomfort as the consequence.
Hut in thf} inuM of hypnotism, at any rate, the idea is a most helpfnl
otu\ For it enables us to bring under rule the cases that seemed most
«xc;i»[itionaI — where, c.y., a "subject" is told that he cannot do a
particular thing, and struggles ineffectually to do it. We saw how
ubNunl it was to represent his mind as throughout possessed by the idea
of ih« iinpoHHiliility, or his will as paralysed. But there is no great
difllmlty in Hupi)OHing that the idea of impossibility obtains a
inonidnt^iry l(Klgin<uit, and then tends to work itself o\xt physically^ even
aft4«r i\u\ opposite idoa — the idea that the action is possible and aliaU^Xf
ac'coniplinhiMl -has dislodged it from consciousness. We might fairly
(unnparo tlM> automatic continuance of the brain-movements which are
♦»vc)I<imI by Mm nioniontary stimulus of the first idea, to the long-con-
tinuod and far Nprt^ading muscular contractions which in a sensitive
*• Ktilijori " will follow on a briof sensory stimulation : both are signs of
MitM'lmnu'toriMtio hypnotic irritability. This view seems strongly con-
IIiiiumI l»y tlio faot that, if the l)oy*s muscles be examined, they will be
found in tlio HUto whioli corresponds to the first idea — that of
liiilHmnibility and not to tho sooond. I have myself tested this many
lilnioN. A hoy's ann luMng Hoxod, he is offered a sovereign to extend
It, llt^ Ntnij^^dt^s till ho is nnl in the face ; but all the while his triceps

lU mUouoo to W no«M>unv\niiHl hy 8omo other abnonnality. I must, however,
t«Ko h»rtN,Mo»hmht whothor, if takon unawares, he would have evolved this
«»s|»«virttiou »hothoi ho NNouKl Imve refiranied the (to him) purely illusive sense


'The ProUems of Hypnotism. 28&

is remaining quite flaccid, or, if some rigidity appears in it, the effect is at
once counteracted by an equal rigidity in the biceps. The idea of
the impossibility of extension, i.e., the idea of continued flexion, is^
thus " acting itself out," even when wholly rejected from the mind.

It is perhaps well that my space is nearly exhausted ; for it might
be held unfitting, in a paper on Hypnotism, to do more than hint
at results, however simple and precise, which break away from every
form of hypnotic hypothesis. Community of sensation between.
" subject " and operator ; the distinction by tha " subject " of the
operator's faintest whisper, either amid deafening uproar, or among a
number of other faint whispers of similar sound ; local anaesthesia
produced in the absence of expectancy by a process which is itself
unf elt ; inhibition of speech or memory without a word or sign of any
sort ; — a writer who owns to having participated in experiments which
establish these facts grievously imperils his chance of being listened to
on the sober ground of hypnotism. At the same time the naivete and
suddenness with which the clamorous facts of hypnotism itself were-
welcomed within the portals of science, as soon as a savant of
established reputation took the trouble to learn (very imperfectly) the-
A B C of them, and to proclaim that they actually were realities, that
his own brother had been experimented on, and that it was not all
cheating, as he had all his life supposed — may perhaps suggest a quiet
surmise as to the scientific future of other events which, with all
their absurdity and inadmissibility thick upon them, still go through
the hollow form of taking place with surprising accuracy. But
leaving these matters aside, no sketch of the " problems of hypnotism '^
could be in the least complete without mentioning certain
objections which present themselves in the direct path of orthodox
hypnotic experiment, and which concern the very processes on which,
the hypnotic explanations are made to rest.

At the very outset, there is the difficulty of the vast differences of
degree that exist in the power to produce the results — a difficulty whick
has never been fairly faced, much less surmounted. It has been
asserted, and in a sense it may be true, that any one can hypnotise any
one : any one, that is, may be competent to make passes in the gentle
and monotonous manner which acts on the organism of sensitive
" subjects," and with immense perseverance may produce some amount of
the hypnotic effect. But let a score of likely " subjects " be taken who
have never before been hypnotised, and let a dozen persons who have
been instructed in the right method of making the passes be set in turn
to operate on them, and let this dozen include one recognised and suc-
cessful "mesmerist." If the experiment be often repeated, always with
fresh " subjects," it may be pretty confidently asserted that in the long


290 The Problems of Hypnotkm^

run the successes of the " mesmerist " will outnumber those of all his
rivals put together, and moreover will as a rule be far more marked in
character and far more rapidly effected. And this is the more noticeable
in that, supposing the usual process to be adopted, the condition which
on the hypnotic hypothesis would appear to be the most important — ^the
staring fixedly at an object in the hand — would be common to all the
-attempts, and little if any of the required monotonous stimulation would
be derived from the actual passes — the operator's hands not being in
contact with the " subject " till perhaps the very final stage of closing
the eyelids. But if the truth of the above assertion be denied — and
fully to carry out the experiment with a new set of " subjects " daily
would involve great practical difficulties — the result of repeated
attempts with the same " subject " will afford a still stronger argument.
A recognised " mesmerist," after a very few successful trials on favour-
able " subjects," can send them into the trance in a very short time,
sometimes even with a single pass ; but except in response to him they
will show no particular susceptibility; and no attempt of others,
extending only over the few seconds that suffice the successful operator,
will produce any effect whatever. To account for facts like these, as
Heidenhain has done, by differences in the moisture or temperature of
the operating hands, seems little better than childish — as if a somewhat
warm and moist hand (even were it indispensable, which it is not) were
a sort of lu8U8 "fiaturce. Somewhat more plausible is the suggestion
that the facts really exemplify the doniinance of an idea — ^that the
** subjects " believe that their mesmerist has special power, and as a
-consequence of that belief succumb to him. But it really seems absurd
to suppose that this faith in a single individual's power is unfailingly
complete and absorbing in every member of a set of careless boys who
are new to the whole business, and whose obedience to the simple
directions which they receive, and passive acceptance of what happens
to them, certainly do not suggest any nice criticism of the nature and
limits of their operator's faculties. There is no difficulty in impress
ing such " subjects " with the idea that some other person present, who
may be of a more dominant and imposing aspect than their recognised
controller, is also a powerful " mesmerist " ; but this preparatory idea
will not be found to invest that person with any of the controller's
powers.

The hypothesis of suggestion and expectancy is still more obviously
inappropriate where the end in view is not the production, but the
ermination, of the trance-condition. It would be very strained to-
imagine that the mind of the " subject " is in every case dominated, or
even that he was dominated at the time when the condition was being
produced, by the idea that only the producer of it has the power to put
a stop to it. Yet he will often remain completely uninfluenced by the


The Problems of Hypnotism, 291

efforts of others to awake him, and that, tod, even when only a light
phase of the trance has been induced. The upward passes, or the slap
of the hands and sudden call, which are at once effective when used by
the right operator, may be repeated in vain by others. This fact has
occasionally led to very awkwaid results ; as, for instance, in London
some years ago, when one mesmerised " subject " was set to mesmerise
some one else, and then, after he had succeeded in producing a state
of profound coma, passed himself into a condition in which it was
impossible to impress him with the necessity of undoing his own work.

This disagreeable incident suggests another well-known class of
phenomena of which no explanation on any purely hypnotic hypothesis
seems possible — the so-called " cross-mesmerism " or agitated bewilder-
ment which is apt to result when a mesmerised person is subjected to
new treatment from a second operator, before the effects of the
former treatment have disappeared. The phenomena are of too alarming
and distressing a kind to admit of deliberate experiment, but when once
seen, are not easily mistaken; and a slight but sufficient indication of their
nature is sometimes afforded in a momentary way by the violence which the
** subject," who is perfectly docile in the hands of his mesmerist, will
display when accidentally touched or interfered with by a bystander.
If this be explained away as an instance of the "dominance of an idea,"
we ask, of what idea 1 Is it the idea of the operator, with which the
** subject's " mind is so wholly engrossed as to react with violence on any
attempt to divert it ? But if he is in the alert stage, his mind is so little
riveted on his operator that it is abnormally ready to be borne off by
any and every suggestion ; and if he is in the deep stage, it is an
unwarrantable assumption that his mind is engrossed with anything at
all. Nor can the view that suggestion is the cause of the phenomenon —
though a natural enough one to start with and applicable to some cases
— survive a prolonged and patient study of the facts. Instances will
be found where it is practically certain that no idea, tending to make
the " subject " dread interference from all persons save one, had been
even remotely suggested to him ; and where, if any such idea were
really dominant in his mind, it could only itself be an instance of the
specific rapport which hypnotism fails to account for.

Such considerations as these, though they lie across the threshold of
the subject, are apt from their very generality to be disregarded ; but it
is easy enough to find in single definite phenomena — and these not
among the outlying marvels above referred to, but among the experi-
ments which are the stronghold of the hypnotic theories — a starting-
point for similar objections. A boy is placed in a chair and is not
hypnotised ; but his arm is rendered stift and insensible after a minute
of downward stroking. " Reflex irritability," say some of our friends ;
** the monotonous sensory stimulation has produced the well-known


292 The Problems of Hypnotum.

tonic spasm." A thoroughly sound explanation ; but let us try the
effect of downward passes made without contact or any possibility of
sensory stimulation. The same result ensues ; the usual tests of torture
and bribes may be applied, with complete impunity, to the " subject's "
arm in the former case, and to the experimenter's pocket in the latter;
"Expectant attention," say other of our friends; "an interesting
example of the power of mind over body ; the boy believes in the
operator's power, and his mental energy, being absorbed into the single
channel of the expected effect, brings that effect to pass." Very
probably ; but on experimental principles it is surely just worth while,
before promulgating this very probable theory, to test it by a single
variation of conditions. Let the experiment be repeated, then, with
this difference — that the boy is made to read aloud a paragraph from a
newspaper as long as the process continues, having been previously
warned that he must carefully attend to what he is reading, as he will
be examined in it afterwards. After this warning it is not surprising
that he should stand the examination successfully ; but a little surpris-
ing, on the proposed theory, that the stiffness and insensibility should
again have supervened.* When such an experiment has succeeded
with " subject " after " subject," and when their expressions of astonish-
ment have suggested that in many cases the idea of the result was not
even latently present in their minds, it is natural to devise measures for
preventing the possibility even of the latent idea ; as, e,g.y by extend-
ing the " subject's " ten fingers on a table in front of him, with a thick
screen between them and his eyes, selecting a couple of them (the
combination being of course varied each time), and then subjecting the
selected pair to the same process as the arm. But I am approaching
the region of marvels and the theory of specific influence which I have
here forsworn. To relieve one's mind by observing how fairly the
mesmeric hypothesis embraces and explains the facts which so violently
break away from the hypnotic one, is perhaps not more unscientific
than to neglect and ignore those intractable facts ; but to those who
do not share it, such relief will naturally seem to resemble the escape
from subordinate perplexities which the devout Catholic makes by
swallowing one huge assumption at the outset.


AV ith regard to the question how far the idea of his arm was present to the
** subject" of this experiment, it Avas instructive to compare his vivacioua
reading and subsequent remembrance in this case with his mechanical reading
and subsequent oblivion when (as described in Proceedings, Part V., p. 71) he
had been thrown into the hypnotic state, and then had the idea of his arm
prommently brought before his mind. In that case the idea remained truly
dommant, and left no room for attention to the reading.


Library Catalogt^e. 293


V.
LIBEAEY CATALOGUE.

1884.
[R] indicates Ihat ihe hook is for reference mdy.


ENGLISH.

Abbot (Ezra) A Catalogue of Works relating to the Nature, Origin,

and Destiny of the Soul New York, 1871

Abercrgmbie (John, M.D.) Inquiries concerning the Intellectual

Powers, and the Investigation of Truth London, 1841

il] Account of a Strange and Dreadful Apparition at Sea ,,, London. 1627

Alexander (P.P. , M.A.) Spiritualism. A Narrative with a Discussion

Edinburgh, 1871

Angelic Revelations, concerning the Origin, Ultimation, and Destiny

of the Human Spirit, 4 vol Lmulofi, 1875-83

I] Apparition of Spirits (A Relation of) (No place of jpuhlicatUyn,), 1780

Arnold (Edwin, M.A., F.R.G.S.) The Light of Asia Londmi, 1879

AsHBURNER (John, M.D.) Philosophy of Animal Magnetism and

Spiritualism London, 1867

(Anoiher copy,)

Ashman (Joseph) Psychopathy ,.,., London, N.D,

Astounding Facts from the Spirit World Souihampton, Mass. 1854

Aubrey (John, F.R.S.) Miscellanies London, 1784

Bailey (Philip James) Festus : A Toem, lOih edit London, 1877

Ballou (Adin) The Modern Spirit Manifestations Liverpool, 1853

Barkas (Thomas P.) Outlines of Investigations into Modem

Spiritualism London, 1862

Barth (George) The Mesmerist's Manual, 2nd edit London, 1851

cl] Baxter, Of the Immortality of Man's Soul, and the Nature of it...

London, 1682

Baxter (Richard) The Certainty of the World of Spirits, to which is
added, The Wonders of the Invisible World, by Cotton Mather,
D.D., F.R.S « London, 1834

Baxter (Robert) Supernatural Manifestations in Mr. Irving's Con-
gregation London, 1833

Beard (George M., M.A., M.D.) The Psychology of the Salem

Witchcraft Excitement of 1692 New York, 1882

Trance and Muscle-Reading , New York, 1882

R] Beaumont (John) A Treatise of Spirits, Apparitions, Witchcrafts, &c.

London, 1705

Beecher (Charles) Spiritual Manifestations Boston, U,8,A., 1875


294 Library Catalogue.

Belden (L. W., M.D.) An Account of Jane C. Rider, the Springfield |l

Somnambulist. Lecture to Springfield Lyceum |]

Spriiigfieldy Mass.^ U.S.A., 1834

A different editiwi LoncUyiiy 1834

Bekry (Catherine) Experiences in Spiritualism Londoiif 1876

Beyond the Sunrise. Observations by two Travellers New YorkyN.D.

BiBLiOTHECA DiABOLiCA. In Two Parts ; Pro and Con. ...New York, 1874

Blackwell (Anna) Probable Effect of Spiritualism on Society. Prize

Essay London, 1876

(Another copy.)

Blair (Mrs.) Dreams and Dreaming. With an Introductory Essay by

the Kev. Samuel Blair ^ Lm\d&n,N.B^

(Another copy.)

(Another copy.)

Blayatsky (H. P.) Isis Unveiled, 2 vol New York, 1877

(Another copy.)

(Another copy.)

BoiSMONT (A. Brierre De, M.D.) A History of Dreams, Visions,
Apparitions, Ecstasy, Magnetism and Somnambulism. 1st
American; from the 2nd Paris edition Philadelphia, 1855

On Hallucinations. From the French, by Robert T. Hulme, F.L.S.

London, 1859

(Another copy.)

BoNAiRA (Emmanuel, M.D.) Contributions to Christology ...Londo^i, 1869

Boole (Mary) The Message of Psychic Science to Mothers and

Nurses ., Lmidon, 1883

BoNWiCK (James, F.R.G.S.) Egyptian Belief and Modem

Thought London, 1878

Braid (James, M.B.C.S., &c.) Neurypnology ; or, the Rationale of

Nervous Sleep London, 1843

(Another copy.)

Observations on Trance ; or. Human Hybernation ...London, 1850

Bray (Charles) On Force and its Mental Correlates London, 1866

The Science of Man London, 1868

A Manual of Anthropology ; or. Science of Man London, 1871

The Science of Man, A Manual of Anthropology. 2nd

edit London, N.D.

Brevior (Thomas) The Two Worlds, the Natural and the

Spiritual London, N.D^

Britten (Emma Hardinge) Nineteenth Century Miracles London, 1884

(Another copy.)

[ R] Brothers (Richard) Wonderful Prophecies London, 1795

[R] Bromhall(T.) ("T.B.") A Treatise of* Specters London, 1668

[B] BuRTHOOGE (Richard, M.D.) An Essay upon Reason and the Nature

of Spirits London, 1694

(Aiwiher copy.)


Lihranj Catalogue, 295

TTLER (Rev. Alban) Lives of the Saints, 12 vol Derby, N,I).

"arLBR (Samuel) The Fair Haven Lmid&n, 187S

SH (Rev. George, M.A.) Reasons for Embracing the Doctrines and
Disclosures of Emanuel Swedenborg Lwidmi, N. D.

• • (de St. Dominique, Countess) Animal Magnetism... i/(>9u£o9i, 1874

X). (with a preface by A. B.) From Matter to Spirit ; LwicUyiiy 1863

— (Aiioiher copy.)

-iKAGNET (L. A.) The Celestial Telegraph ; or, Secrets of the Life to
Come, revealed through Magnetism New York, 1851

■ — The Sanctuary of Spiritualism. From the French, by M. Flinders
Pearson London, N.D,

-XTHNESS (Countess of) Serious Letters to Serious Friends... iotic^i, 1877

^XDER (Alexander) The Coming Era Londwi, 1879

cXMET (Augustine) The Phantom World ; or, The Philosophy of
Spirits, Apparitions, &c., with an Introduction and Notes by the
Rev. H. Christmas, M.A., 2 vol Lmuimi, 185(T

JUFBELL (Duncan) The History of the Life and Adventures of D.C.,
a Gentleman, who though Deaf and Dumb, writes down any
■ Stranger's Name at first sight (by D. Defoe) Lmidon, 1720

— (Anoiher copy.) .

.PERN (Thomas) The Curative Powers of Mesmerism proved in One
Hundred and Fifty Cases Lmidmi^ 1851

lrpenter (William B., M.D., F.R.S., &c.) Mesmerism, Spiritualism,
<&c.. Historically and Scientifically considered Lo^idan, 1877

— Principles of Mental Physiology, Qth edit Lo^idon, 1881

lTHOLic Progress. February and March, 1883 Lmidwi, 1883

[ABLBY (T. ) News from the Invisible World Wakefield, N, D,

[RiSTMAS (Rev. Henry, M.A., F.R.S., F.S.A.) The Cradle of the
Twin Giants, Science and History, 2 vol Lwvio^i, 1849

lAiRVOYANCY, Mind Reading, Psychomancy and Soul-charming :
How to become a good Clairvoyant \ Manchester, N.D..

ABKE (Edward H., M.D.) Visions : A Study of False Sight
(Pseudopia) Bostmi, U.S.A., 1878

JBRGYMAN (A) On Spiritualism. With a Dedication by Mrs.
Makdougall Gregory Landwi, 1879'

issoLD (Augustus) The Consummation of the Age ; being a Prophecy
now fulfilled and interpreted in the Writings of Emanuel Sweden-
borg Londmi, 1879

,owBS (Rev. John, M.A.) Illustrations of the Holy Word... London, 1875

►IXYER (Robert H., M.D.) Psychography Philadelphia, 1843

— Exalted States of the Nervous System Lmido^x, 1873.

— (Another copy.)

•ixjUHOUN (J. C.) Isis Revelata. An Inquiry into Animal Magnetism,
2 vol Edinburgh, N.D^

— Report (1831) on Animal Magnetism of the French Academy of
Sciences. From the French •• . . .Edinbu^rgh, 1833:

— (Another copy.) •


296 Library Catalogue.

CoLTON (Rev. C., M.A.) The Sampford Ghost (And other Pamphlets)

Tivert(/n, N.D,

Confessions op a Medium Londwi, 1882

Cooke (C.) CurioBities of Occult Literature (With interleaved MS.

Notes) London^N.D,

CouES (Professor Elliott) Biogen : A Speculation on the On^n and .
Nature of Life Bodmi, U,S.A,, 1884

•Cousin (Victor) Elements of Psychology. From the French, by the

Rev. C. S. Henry, D.D New York, 1838

Cox (Edward W.) A Monograph on Sleep and Dreams L&iidmi, 1878

Cox (Edward W.) The Mechanism of Man: An answer to the
Question — ^What Am I ?

Vol. L The Mechanism Lrnvdmi, 1876

Vol. IL The Mechanism in Action London^ 1879

(Another copy of Vol. I. o^dy.)

Ceookes (William, F.R.S.) Researches in the Phenomena of Spiritu-
alism •. Lo^idoiiy 1874

Ceosland (Newton) Apparitions: An Essay LancUyiiy 1873

Ceosland (Mrs. Newton) Light in the Valley Lo^idon, 1857

Ceo WE (Catherine) The Night Side of Nature, 2 vol London, 1848

Another edition, 2 vol. in one Lond&n, 1852

Spiritualism and the Age we Live in London, 1869

Ceowell (Eugene, M.D.) The Identity of Primitive Christianity and

Modem Spiritualism, 2 vol Netv York, 1875

The Spirit World, its Lihabitants, Nature and Philosophy

Boston, 1879

IR] Cey feom the Dbseet (A) ; or. Testimonies of Miraculous Things lately

come to pass in the Cevennes (Translation), 2nd edit Lo7idon, 1707

Danskin (Washington A.) How and Why I became a Spiritualist

Baltimore, 1869

Davis (Andrew Jackson) Works, 25 vol. Baltimore, Boston, aiul

New York, 1869-77

Death Deeds. An Extraordinary Incident Connected with Barbadoes

London, 1860

[R] Death Watch (The) Dialogues upon Spirits. By a Country Clergy-
man Londi^i, 1796

[R] Dee (Dr. John) On Spirits. With a Preface by M. Casaubon, D.D.

London, 1659

Deleuze (J. P. F.) Practical Instructions in Animal Magnetism.

From the French, by Thomas C. Hartshorn New York, 1879

Delitzsch (Franz, D.D.) A System of Biblical Psychology. From the
German, by the Rev. R. E. Willis, Ph. D. , 2nd Etiglish edit.

Edinburgh, 1879

[R] De Loiee (Peter) A Treatise of Specters or Strange Sights. From the

French London, 1605

Demonologia. An,, Expose of Ancient and Modem Superstitions.

By J. S. F London, 1831


Library Catalogue^ 297

Db Morgan (Sophia Elizabeth) Memoir of Augustus De Morgan

Lmvdmi, 1882

Dendy (Walter Cooper) The Philosophy of Mystery Lmidmi, 1841

Dennis (Prebendary J.) Subversion of Materialism, by Credible

Attestation of Supernatural Occurrences Lwidmi, 1826

Dennys (Edward N.) life Lectures LmicUyti, 1871

Denton (William) Our Planet ; its Past and Future... jBos^on, U.S.A., 1873

What was He ? or, Jesus in the Light of the Nineteenth

Century Wellesley, near Boston, U.S.A., 1877

De Quincby (Thomas) Confessions of an English Opium Eater

Edinburgh, 1862

Dialectical Society, Report of the Committee on Spiritualism

Lmidmi, 1873

B] Divine Visions op John Engelbrecht (The). From the German, by

Francis Okely , Northampton, 1780

DoDS (John Bovee) The Philosophy of Mesmerism and Electrical

Psychology London, 1876

Earle (John Charles, B.A.) The Spiritual Body Lwidon, 1876

Earle (Lisette) Between the Lights London, 1&79

Edmonds (Judge) An Appeal to the Public on Spiritualism New York 1858

Letters and Tracts on Spiritualism London,N.D^

t] Elliotson (John, M.D., F.R.S.) Surgical Operations in the Mesmeric

State Lmidan, 1843

Elliott (Charles Wyllys) Mysteries or Glimpses of the Supernatural

New York, 1852

Ennbmoser (Joseph) The History of Magic. From the German, by
William Howitt. With an Appendix by Mary Howitt. 2 vol.

London, 1854

EsDAiLE (James, M. D. ) Mesmerism in India Londmi, 1846

Natural and Mesmeric Clairvoyance Lwidon, 1852

(Anoiher copy.)

Esoteric Philosophy (Hints on) 2nd edit. CkdcuUa, 1882

Essay on Capacity and Genius : — ^Also an Inquiry into the Nature

of Ghosts London, N.D^

Evans (Rev. W. F.) The Mental Cure Lmidmx,N.D.

Evening (The) AND THE Morning. A Narrative, bth edit.,,, London, 1883

R] Farmer (Hugh) An Essay on the Demoniacs of the New Testament

Lwhdon, 1785

Farmer (John S.) A New Basis of Belief in Immortality London, 1881

Ferriar (John, M.D.) An Essay towards a Theory of Apparitions

London, 1813

Flammarion (Camille) Stories of Infinity. From the French, by S.

R. Crocker Boston, U.S.A., 1873

Frazer (Rev. John) A Brief Discourse Concerning the Second Sight,

commonly so csdled Edinburgh, 1820


298 Library Catalogme^

OAVKiJi (Fnmcis, F.R.S.) Inqniries into Hmnan Faculty lAmdon, 18S$

Gilbert (William) Legion ; or, The Kodem Demoniac London^ 1882

G1LE8 (Rev. Chauncey) The Spiritual Worid and oar Children tiiere

Londaiiy 1883

The Incarnation, Atonement and Mediation of tiie Lord Jesus

Christ LotuUm, 1883

[R] Glanvil ^Joseph) Saducismus Triamphatus ; or. Evidence Concerning

Witcnes and Apparitions, ^d edit Lmvdon^ 1689

(Also CMitinxunijdy paged with the above).
A Continuation of the Collection, by HeniyMore, D.D. London^ 1688
A Whip for the Droll, &c., in a Letter to Dr. Henry More, D.D. 1688
An Account of What Happened in the Kingdom of Sweden,

by A. Homech, D.D 1688

[R] The Wi edit, of the above toith additions Xoiuion, 1726

Godwin (William) Lives of the Necromancers Xotidon, 1834

[R] GHKATBiiK (Valentine) Account of Strange Cures ; written by himself

in a Letter to Rooert Boyle (Aiid omer pamphlets, ) Ixyndon, 1666

(i KEEN (G. F. ) Probable Effect of Spiritualism on Society ; Prize Essay,

London^ 1876

Grimeh (J. Stanley) Mesmerism and Magic Eloquence Londofh, 1850

Hafbi) Prince op Persia London, 1876

(AiMther copy,)

|RJ Halk ^Lord Chief Justice) Matter of Fact Concerning Witches and

Witchcraft. Parti London, 1693

Hall(S. C, F.S.A.) The Use of Spiritualism Glasgow, 1876

Hall (Sponcor T.) The Phreno-Magnet and Mirror of Nature Xo^m^oh, 1843

(,inothfr copy,)

1 1 AUK (Robert, M.D.) Experimental Investigation of the Spirit

Manifestations New York, 1855

Hammond (William A., M.D.) Spiritualism and Nervous Derangement

London, 1876

Hahdinok (Kmma) Extemporaneous Addresses London, 1865

Hahhih (UiH>rgo) Treatise on Man, 2 vol London, 1876

Hahuih (Thomas L.) A Lyric of the Golden Age GUusgow, 1870

Hahh»mon(W. H.) Spirit People Loiidon, 1875

Spirit* Wforo our Eyes London, 1879

Ha\ NTKb Howsk at HiNTON. A Hampshire Ghost Story. [In a

Volumo of tho itontlomaii's MagarineJ Landmi, 1872

HwxKKH ^Uow U. 8,) Fix>ti>rints of former Men in Far Cornwall

Lo7idon, 1870

Hv\ni\ O'^^^^^w**^ A Wonderful Ghost Story London, 1882

IUa1i>\)< y)M\uvi^> Th* KxtnK^rdinary Affliction and Gracious Belief of
'^ l^llU^ \V>>k\ »up}x^9ed to be the Effects of Spiritual Agency

_^ PltrmwOh, 1822


Library Catalogue. 299

Heaven Opened ; or, Messages for the Bereaved from Our Little

Ones in Glory. Through the Mediumship of F. J. T. ,. Li/ivdcyii^N.D.

Heidenhain (Professor Rudolf, M.D. ) Animal Magnetism. From the
German, by J. C. Wooldridge, B. Sc. With a preface by J. G.
Romanes, M.A., F.R.S Londoiiy 1880

Hebschell (J. W. F.) Discourse on the Study of Natural Philosophy

LoncUyHy 1850

Hewlett (Edgar) Personal Recollections of the Little Tew Ghost

Loiidmi, 1854

HiBBEKT (Samuel, M.D., F.R.S.E.) Sketches of the Philosophy of

Apparitions. 2iid edit Edinburgh, 1825

Hints for the Evibencb op Spieitualism, 2nd edit Lmxdmi, 1875

y History op Apparitions ; or, a View of the Invisible World L<ynd<yiv, 1752

f] History op Apparitions; or, the Secrets of the Invisible World Lwidon, 1770

Note, — ^This appears to be an anonymously published and greatly abridged
edition of Anorew Moreton's book.

11 History op Witches, Ghosts, and Highland Seers (The).,. Berwick, N,D,

History op the Inquisition London,N.D^

HoBfE (D. D.) Incidents in my Life London, 1864

HowiTT (William) The History of the Supernatural, 2 vol. ...Lrnvdwi, 1863

(Another copy,)

Hudson (Captain) An Attempt to Explain Mesmerism, Biology, and

Clairvoyance Vhm-ley, 1852

Human Nature. A Monthly Record of Zoistic Science and Intelli-
gence, vol. 1 to 7 Lo^ido^i, 1867, 1873

Hunt (Miss Chandos Leigh) Instructions in Organic Magnetism Lwido^i, N.D,

J] Hutchinson (Francis, D.D.) An Historical Essay Concerning Witch-
craft Londo^i, 1718

Hyde (Rev. John) Emanuel Swedenborg. An Outline Laiidwi, 1883

^] Impartial Account op the Prophets Lmidwi, 1707

Inoleby (Dr.) Introduction to Metaphysics

Ingram (John H.) The Haunted Homes, and Family Traditions of

Great Britain Lo^idon, 1884

(Atwiher copy.)

Second Series London, 1884

H] Jacob's Rod. From the French, by Thomas Welton Linidaii, N.D»

Jackson (J. W.) Mesmerism in Connection with Popular Superstitions

London, 1858

Ecstatics of Genius Ixyndon, 1859

James (Captain) Mesmerism, with Hints for Beginners Lmidon, 1879

(AiwQier copy.)

Jennings (Hargreave) Curious Things of the Outside World, 2 vol.,

London, 1861

Live Lights or Dead Lights Londo^i, 1873

z 2


300 Libranj Catalogue^

Journal op Science (The) The Vols, for 1875, 1879, and 1880 iwwimi

JuNO-STiLLiNfi (Dr. J. H.) Theory of Pneumatology, From the Ger-
man, by SamuelJackson Lmidwi, 1834

(Another copy.)

Kabdec (Allan) The Modmm's Book. From the French, by Anna

Blackwell Jxyiulon, 187a

ICerner (Justinus) The Seeress of Prevorst. From the German, by

Mrs. Crowe Lo^idoiiy 1845

KiDD(Almira) The Laws of Being Boston, U.S.A., 1878

The Logic of Facts Boston, U.S.A., 187^

King (Maria M.) The Principles of Nature, given inspirationally

Boston, U.S.A., 1871

Lach-Szyrma (Rev. W. S., M.A.) Aleriel ; or, A Voyage to Other

Worlds. A Tale London, 1883

Lanoe (Frederick Albert) History of Materialism. From the German,

by Ernest Chester Thomas (vol. 1 only) London, 1879

Lee (Edwin Lee, M.D.) Animal Magnetism London, 186G

(Another copy.)

Lee (Rev. Frederick George, D.C.L.) The Other World ; or, Glimpses

of the Supernatural, 2 vol London, 1875

More Glimpses of the World Unseen London, 1878

Light. Vols. L, XL, IIL, and IV Londo7i, 1881-1884

Lilly (William) History of his Life and Times from the year 1602 to

168L Written by Himself London, 1822

Linton (E. Lynn) Witch Stories London, 1861

M.A. (Oxon) Psychography London, 1878

Spirit Identity London, 187^

(Another copy.)

Higher Aspects of Spiritualism London, 1880

Psychography, 2nd edit London, 1882

Reminiscences of Epes Sargent L(yndon,N.D.

Spirit Teachings London, 1883

Macdonald (George) The Portent : A Story of the Inner Vision of the

Highlanders London, 1864

Mack (James) Healing by Laying on of Hands London, 1870

Mackay (Charles LL.D.) Memoirs of Extraordinary Popular

Delusions, 2 vol '...LoiUwi, 1852

Mackenzie (Alexander) The Prophecies of the Brahan Seer, with an
Appendix on the Superstition of the Highlanders, by the Rev.
Alexander Macgregor,M. A ! I... L Inverness, 1878

Macnish (Robert) The Philosophy of Sleep, 1st American edit. New York, 1834

'' »' n 3rd edit Glasgow, 1836


Library Catalogue. 301

Madden (R. R., F.R.C.S., M.R.I.A.), Phantasmata ; or, Illusions and
Fanaticisms of Protean Forms Productive of Great Evils, 2 vol.
y LoiuJUyn, 1857

Mahan (Rev. Asa, D.D.) Modem Mysteries Explained and Exposed

Boston, U.S.A., 1855

The Phenomena of Spiritualism Scientifically Explained and

Exposed London, 1875

Maitland (Edward) England and Islam ; or, The Counsel of Caiaphas

Londmi, 1877

The Soul, and how it found me London, 1877

Maitland (Rev. S. R., D.D., F.R.S. and F.S.A.) Superstition and

Science. An Essay London, 1855

False Worship. An Essay Lmidon, 1856

Magic, Pretended Miracles and Remarkable Natural Phenomena

London, N.D.

Mather (Increase) Remarkable Providences Illustrative of the Earlier

Days of American Colonisation Lo^ido^i, 1856

The Wonders of the Invisible World London^ 1862

Mattison (Rev. H., M.A.) Spirit Rapping Unveiled New York, 1853

Maudsley (Henry, M.D.) The Pathology of Mind Londmi, 1879

■ Body and Will Lo)idon, 1883

[ Mayo (Herbert, M.D.) On the Truths contained in Popular Supersti-

' tions. With an account of Mesmerism, 2nd edit Ed inbnrgh, 1851

■ [R] Memoibs op Thomas Harrington. With a short Account of the Lights

I which appeared in his House, 1836-7 Cork, 1840

Mesmerism : Its History, Phenomena, and Practice. With Reports of

Cases developed in Scotland Edinburgh, 1843

Reports of Annual Meetings of the London Mesmeric Infirmary

London, 1854-1866
Pamphlets and Extracts


»> 7> 5>


r


[R] Miraculous Prophecies, Predictions, and Strange Visions ,..Lmidmi, 1794

[R] Mitchell (J.), (and Jn. Dickie) The Philosophy of Witchcraft

Paisley, 1839

MoNNiN (The Abb^ Alfred) Life of the Curd d'Ars. From the French

London, N.D.

[R] Moor (Major Edward, F.R.S.) Bealings Bells JVoodhridge, 1841

[R] More (H., D.D.) An Explanation of the Grand Mystery of Godliness,

and other Works, bound in one vol London, 1660

[R] MoRETON (Andrew) The Secrets of the Invisible World disclosed, or

an Universal History of Apparitions. Ath edit Londmi, 1740

Morse (J. J.) Leaves from my Life Londmi, 1877


[R] Narrative op Astonishing Transactions at Stockwell, in Surrey,

in 1772 Lmidmi, 1772

Newman (John B., M.D.) Fascination ; or, the Philosophy of Charming


302 Library Catalogue.

Nichols (Thomas L., M.D.) An Autobiography of the Brothers Daven-
port Loiuiwi, 1864

2iid Edituyii Liythdan^ 1865

Supramundane Facts in the Life of Jesse B. Fergusson L<ytid<yii, 1865

Noble (Rev. Samuel) An Appeal on Behalf of Swedenborg and his

Writings Loiuihii, 1881

Noel (Hon. Roden) The House of Ravensburg LoiicUyii, 1877

NoYES (John Humphrey) History of American Socialisms FhUaM/phia, 1870

Oken (Lorenz, M.D.) Elements of Physio-Philosophy. From the
German, by Alfred Tulk, M.R.C.S. (Printed for the Ray Society)

Lrnvdmi^ 1847

Olcott (Henry S.) People from the Other World

Hartford, Cminecty U.S. A,, 1875

Olcott (Colonel Henry S.) Lectures on Theosophy and Archaic

Religions Madras, 1883

Ollieb (Charles) Fallacy of Ghosts, Dreams, and Omens. With Stories of

Witchcraft, Lif e-in-Death, &c. , Monomania London, 1848

Owen (Robert Dale) Footfalls on the Boundary of Another World

London, 1861
(Another copy,)

The Debatable Land between this World and the Next... London, 1871

Threading my Way : Twenty-seven Years of Autobiography

Landonj 1874

Paine (Albert W.) The New Philosophy Ba'ngor, Me., U.S.A., 1884

£R] Pamphlets, Vol. I. —

Alderson (John, M.B.) An Essay on Apparitions London, 1823

Ashbumer (John, M.D.) Facts in Clairvoyance London, 1848

Colley (Rev. Thomas, M.A.) Later Phases of Materialisation... X(m<2<m, 1877

Collyer (Robert H., M.D.) Pyschography Philadelphia, 1843

Collyer (R.H.,M.D.) AutomaticWriting. The Slade Per8ecution.i<//t<?o», 1876
Grookes (W.,F.R.S.) Psychic Force and Modem Spiritualism.i<m<^£^«, 1872

Howitt (A. W., F.G.S.) On Some Australian Beliefs London, 1883

Isham (Sir Ghas., Bart.) The Barby Apparition Korthumjition, 1867

King (George) Experiments with Dr. Slade. (Privately printed.) 1876

' Lane (Gharles) The Law and Method of Spirit-Culture Boston, 1843

M.A. (Oxon.) TheSladeCase Londo7i, 1877

Ruskin (John, LL.D.) Fors Clavigera. Letter 63rd London, 1876

Wilson (John, M.D.) Trials of Animal Magnetism Londoti, 183^

[R] Pamphlets, Vol. II. —

Edmonds (Judge) Spiritual Tracts JVew York, 1858

Guppy (Samuel) Imitations of Spiritual Phenomena London, 1873

Hall (Spencer T.) Mesmeric Experiences Limdon, 1845

M. A. (Oxon.) Spiritualism at the Church Gongress London , 1881

Iota, Maskelyne and Cooke : An Expos4 London, 1873

Stone (G. W.) Electro-Biology Liverpool, 1850

Wallace (A. R.) The Scientific Aspect of the Supernatural London, 186(>

^erffi (G. G., Ph. D.) Drtsma and aiioata London, 1875


Library Catalogue. 303

Pamphlets, Vol. III. —

Babkas (T.P.) Original Eesearches in Psychology London, 1876

Cox (Serjeant) Matter and Spirit London, 1876

Has Man a Soul London, 1877

Gbaig (James) History of a Case of Spectral Illusions, Containing also
Account of Cases of Spectral Illusions by R. Paterson, M.D.

Edinburgh, N.D.

Elliotson (John, M.D., F.R.S.) Cases of Surgical Operations in the

Mesmeric State London, 1843

Hopps (John Page) A Scientific Basis of Belief in a Future Life

London, K.D,

Lbighton (Andrew) " Wonder" in Relation to Spiritualism London, N,D.

Lewis (Comewall) and the Rev. S. Maitland on Mesmerism London, 1851

SwEDENBOBG (Emanuel) The Intercourse between the Soul and Body

London, 1867

Wabneb (Rey. Richard)Remarks on Literary Recollections of London, 1831

Pamphlets, Vol. IV. —

Cabpentbb (Dr., F.R.S.), Epidemic Delusions Mancliester, 1871

Coleman (Benjamin) The RiseandProgress of Spiritualism in England

London, 1871

Edmonds (Hon. J. W.) What is Death? - New York, 1863

GiLLiNGHAM (James) Eight Days with the Spiritualist London, 1872

Hopps (John Page) Six Months of Spirit Communion London, 1867

M.A. (Oxon.) Spiritualism at the Church Congress London, 1861

Zebpfi (G. G., Ph.D., &c.) Dreams and Ghosts London, 1875

Pamphlets, Vol. V. —

Cbookes (Wm., F.R.S.) Researches in the Phenomena of Spiritualism

London, 1874

^Psychic Force and Modem Spiritualism London, 1871

^Notes of an Inquiry into the Phenomena called

Spiritual London, 1874

Expebimbntal iNVESTiaATiONS. From The Spiritualist ...London, 1871
Cox (E. W., S. L.,&c.), Spiritualism answered by Science ...London, 1871

2nd edit., London, 1872

Testimony : Its Posture in the Scientific World. By Robert

Chambers 1859

Blackwell (Anna) Spiritualism and Spiritism K.D.

Spibitualism. Narrative of Facts Observed (for Private Circulation)

Glasgow, 1864

Habbis (George, F.S.A.) Supernatural Phenomena London, 1874

The PBESSwr«w« Spibitualism. By Investigator London, N.B.

Pamphlets, Vol. VI. (12 Articles on Mythology and Demonology).

1. Review of Horst's Zauber-Bibliothek...The Foreign Quarterly

Review 1830

2. Review of Salvertels Des Sciences Occultes... 1830

3. Review of Creuzer's Symbolik und Mythologie 1829

4. Review of two works on Judaism 1833

5. Review of two works on Grecian Mythology and Religion 1831

6. Serpent Worship, or Ophiolatry The St. James's Magazine, 1862

7. Tree and Serpent Worship The Comhill Magazine,

8. A Glance at the Theology of Homer Titan, 1858


304 Library Catalogue,

9. Review of three works on Druidism The Edinbtirgh Review, 1863

10. Review of Home's Incidents in my Life, and Howitt's History of

the Supernatural The Quarterly Review, 1863

11. Sacred Trees and Flowers 1863

12. Review of Mackay's Memoirs of Popular Delusions... The Edin-

burgh Review 1844

[R] Pamphlets, Vol. VII. (Theosophical.)

MoxA Singh : A Sketch, by D. M. S Calcutta, 1884

Olcott (Henry S.) A Buddhist Catechism Colombo and London, 1882

Report of Eighth Anniversary of Theosophical Society Madras, 1884

Translation (A) From the Sanskrit.By S. Ramaswamier...il/fl«?rfl«, 1884

[R] Pandemonium ; or, the Devil's Cloyster. (Title page defective)

Past Feelings Renovated London, 1828

PiNAMONTi (F., S.J.) Hell Opened to Christians. From the Italian

Derby, N.D.

Perfect Way (The) ;or, the Finding of Christ Londoii, 1882

(AnoiJier copy.)

Pinkerton (James N., M.D.) Sleep and its Phenomena Lmidaii, 1839

Plotinus (The Five Books of) From the Greek. By Thomas Taylor

Lo^idon, 1794

Prophecies (German Popular) An Article in Blackwood's Ediiiburgh

Mcujazine for May 1850

Psychic Notes (Nos. 1 to 10) Calcutta, 1882

Ramsay (E.B., M.A., LL.D., F.R.S.E., Dean of Edinburgh)

Reminiscences of Scottish Life and Character Edinburgh, 1868

Randolph (Pascal Beverly) After Death. The Disembodiment of

Man Boston, U.S.A., 1873

Reade (Winwood) The Martyrdom of Man, 4:th edit Lmidon, 1877

Realities of the Future Life Loivdou, 1880

Reichenbach (Baron Charles von) Researches on Magnetism,
Electricity, &c., in their Relations to Vital Force. From the
German, with Preface and Notes, by John Ashbumer, M.D.

Loudou, 1850

(Another copy.)

Reichenbach (Baron Charles von) Researches on Magnetism, Elec-
tricity, &c. , in their Relations to Vital Force. From the German,
by Wm. Gregory, M.D. , F.R.S.L London, 1850

Ren wick (Thomas, M.D.) A Narrative of the Case of Miss Margaret

McAvoy London, 1817

Revisits from the World of Spirits London,N.D,

Rifts in the Veil. A Collection. Edited by W. H. Harrison

Londcyn, 1878

Romanes (G.J., F.R.S.) Mental Evolution in Animals Lmidon, 1883

(Another copy.)

Rutter(J.O.N., F.R.A.S.) Human Electricity Lmidon, 1854

(AnotJier copy.)


Library Catalogue. 305

Saint-Martin (Louis Claude de) Mystical Philosophy and Spiritual
Manifestations : Correspondence. From the French, by Edward
B. Penny L(yiid<yn>, 1863

Man : His True Nature and Ministry. From the French, by

Edward B. Penny Loiidmi, 1864

Sandby (Rev. George, jun., M.A.) Mesmerism and its Opponents

Lmidoitf 1844

Sargent (Epes) Planchette ; or, The Despair of Science,

Boston, U.S. A,, 1869

The Proof Palpable of Immortality Boston, U.S.A., 1876

The Scientific Basis of Spiritualism Boston, U.S.A., 1881

Savile (Rev. Bourchier Wray, M.A.) Apparitions : A Narrative of

Facts LoncUyti, 1874

ScQRESBY (Rev. W., D.D., F.R.S.) Zoistic Magnetism London, 1849

Seafield (Frank, M.A.) The Literature and Curiosity of Dreams,

2 vol London, 1865

Service op Suffering (A) or, Lessons from the Biography of Mrs.

Croad. Compiled by J. G. Westlake, 2nd edit London, N.D.

Shortland (Edward, M.A.) Traditions and Superstitions of the New

Zealanders Lwidon, 1856

Sinclair (George) Satan's Invisible World Discovered Edinburgh, 1808

Sinnett(A. p.) The Occult World Lwidon, 1881

(A. P.) "Eaoteric 'Buddhism, 4:th edit Londo^i, 1885

(Another copy.)

Skey (F.C, F.R.S.) Hysteria : Six Lectures at St. Bartholomew's

Hospital London, 1866

Smedley (Rev. Edward, M.A.) (and others) The Occult Sciences

London, 1855

Smith (J. E., M.A.) Legends and Miracles) Lmidon, 1SS7

(Another copy.)

Smith (James, Rev.) The Coming Man, 2 vol Londmi, 1873

Spicer (Henry) Sights and Sounds : a History of the American Spirit

Manifestations Loiidon, 1853

Spicer (Henry) Facts and Fantasies London, 1853

Strange Things Among Us London, 1863

Spilling (James) Things New and Old London, 1883

Spiritual Magazine (The), 14 vol London, 1860-1873

Spiritual Magazine (The) Vols, for 1874 and 1875 London

Spiritual Notes London, 1878-80

Spiritualist (They By D. A. G London, 1857

Spottiswoode Miscellany (The), 2 vol Edinburgh, 1884-5

Squirrell (Elizabeth) Autobiography of. By One of her Watchers

Lo^idon, 1853

Stewart (Prof essor Balfour, F.R.S., and P. G. Tait) The Unseen

Universe Lmidon, 1875

Stock (St. George) Attempts at Truth Lmidon, 1882


806 Library Catalogue.

Sully (James) IlluBions : A Psychological Study, 2nd edit.,,. London, 1882

SwAMY (Sir M. Coom^ra) Sutta Nipata ; or, Dialogues and Discourses

of the Gotama Buddha. From the Pali » London, 1^4:

SwAMY (Muter CormAra) The Dath^vansa ; or, The History of the

Tooth-relic of Gotama Buddha. From the Pali London, 1874

SwBDENBORO (Emanuel) —

Arcana Coelestia, 12 vol London, 1863-1881

„ „ (Index to) London, 1880

The New Jerusalem and its Heavenly Doctrine London, 1868

Heaven and Hell .„,London, 1875

The Earths in the Universe London, 1875

The Last Judgment London, 1875

Gonjugial Love London, 1876

The Four Primary Doctrines of the New Church London, 1876

Divine Providence London, 1879

The Apocalypse Revealed London, 1882

Divine Love and Wisdom London, 188S

The True Christian Religion London, 1883

The White Horse London, 1871

Brief Exposition of the Doctrine of the New Church London, 1878

The Future Life London, 1883

The Heavenly Doctrine and Charity London, 1883

SwEDENBOEo (Emanuel) Heaven and Hell London, 1863

Swift (Edmund, junr.) Manual of New Church Doctrines, drd edit,

London, 1882

Symonds (John Addington, M.D.) Sleep and Dreams : Two Lectures

delivered at Bristol London, 1851

Taylor (Joseph) Apparitions : A Collection of Stories founded on

Fact Londot^, 1815

Teste (Alphonse, M.D.) A Practical Manual of Animal Magnetism.

From the French, byD. Spillan, M.D., M.A Londoih, 1843

(Another copy.)

[R] Thbophilus Insulanus. A Treatise on the Second Sight. Ikiinbii^^h, 1763

Theory of Dreams (The) (2 vol. in one) Londmi, 1808

Theosophical Miscellanies, Nos. 1 and 2 Ckdcntta, 1883

Theosophist (The) Vol. XL, IIL, IV. and V Madras, 18804884

(Vol I is heimj reprinted and mill shortly he placed in the Library.)
Theosophy (Hints on Esoteric) (Nos. 1 and 2) Issued under the

Authority of the Theosophical Society Calcutta, 1882^

Thomson (George) The Discovery of a New World of Being... Xohc^oh, 1871
Tiele (C. P.) Outlines of the History of Religion. From the Dutch,

by J. Estlm Carpenter, M.A * Lo.^n, 1877

Topham (W and W. Squire Ward) Case of Amputation of Thigh

dunng Mesmeric State /. f! x J,^ 1842

Town^shend (Rev. C. H., M.A.) Facts in Mesmerism Lo^uion, 1840

London, 1844


I


Library Catalogue. 307

TowKSHEND (Rev. C. H., M.A.) Mesmerism Proved True ...Xwufwi, 1854

Sleep-Walking and Hypnotism Landmiy 1884

Tkbgobtha (John) News from the Invisible World BursUm^ 1814

J] Trite and Exact Relation (A) of Witches arraigned and executed
in Essex, who were condemned the 29th July, 1645 (Reprint from
the ori^nal edition of 1645) LaiuJUyii, ISST

J] True and Perfect Account op an Apparition (A) LiyncUyiij 1672:

TuKE (Daniel Hack, M.D.) The Influence of the Mind upon the Body,

2 vol LoiidaHj 1884

U.S.E. (Emanuel Swedenborg) The Spiritual Columbus, P/wwie^ic edit.

London, 1878>

UPHAM(Rev. Charles W.) Lectures on Witchcraft. Comprising a

History of the Delusion in Salem, 1692 Bostwi, U.S.A., 1831

W (G., M.D.) Theosophy, and the Higher Life Ixyndon, 1880

Wallace (Alfred Russel) On Miracles and Modem Spiritualism, 2iui

edit Lmidon, 1881

Watson (Rev. Samuel) The Clock Struck One New York, 1872"

The Clock Struck Three Chicago, 1874

Watts (Anna Mary Howitt) Pioneers of the Spiritual Reformation,

Justinus Kemer. William Howitt Lmidmi, 188^

Wblby (Horace) Signs before Death, and Authenticated Apparitions

London, 1825

Mysteries of Life, Death, and Futurity Londo^i, 1861

Werner (H.) Guardian Spirits. From the German, by A. E. Ford,

New York, 184T

White (William) Other-World Order Londo^v, 187&

White (William, M.D.) Medical Electricity New Ycw-fc, 1878

Wienholt (Dr. Arnold) Somnambulism. From the German, by J. C.

Colquhoun EdinhirgK 1845-

Wilde (W. R.) Irish Popular Superstitions Ihiblin, ND^

Wilkin (Mrs.) Your Cousin's Ghost Loiido^i, 1871

Wilkinson (W.M.) Spirit Drawings. A Personal Narrative London, 1858-

(Another copy. )

,, ,, ,, ,, ,, ,, 2iid edit. London, 1864

Wilkinson (James John Garth, M.R.C.S.) The Human Body, and

its Connection with Man Li/ndon, 1851

Wilson (John) (Physician to the Middlesex Hospital) Trials of

Animal Magnetism London, 1839*

Witches of Renfrewshire (A History of the) ... New edit. Paisley, 1877

World op Wonders (A) With Anecdotes and Opinions concerning

Popular Superstitions Londo^i, 1853^

Year-Book of the Scientific and Learned Societies of Great

Britain and Ireland. First Annual Issue London, 1884

Young (Charles Mayne) A Memoir of Xwvdjwv.^ ^S§VV


308 Library Catalogue,

Yff^iA I'Mii/M^^KHV (^The> With an Intrndaction by CoL H. S. Olcott.

VAttAsdhy Tukiriui Tiitii Bombay, 1882

XfSKrri (ProfeMkT O. G,, Plu Dr.) Spiritualism^and Animal Magnetigm

Zoiidath, 1871

Vauht (Hie) A Journal (A Cerebral Thysiology and MesmeriBm, 13

vol. London, 1844-1856

■ — CA lUfther ci/fnj, )

XoLf/!VfSK (*Johann Carl Friedrich) Transcendental Physics. From the i

Ocrman, by C. C. Massey London, 1882 '

Zhciiokkk (Heinrich) Aut4^»biography of London, 1845 |


FRENCH.

Annalkm I)U Maunetihme Animal, 8 vol. (bound in four) Faru,

1814-1816

lUiLLAiuiKK (M. J.) De rinfluence des Hallucinations FarU, 1846

(Anoifier copy.)
Drkoannk (M.) Considerations sur le Magn^tisme Animal .,,La Haye, 1784
.Dkrniikim (Dr.) Do la Suggestion dans I'Etat Hypnotique Faris, 1884

Trait(5 du Somnambulisme Faris, 1823

Hkhtu AN!) (Alexandre) Du Magndtisme Animal en France Paris, 1826

Hkutuand (IVof. Alexis.) L'Aperception des Corps Humain par la

(NuiHoienoe ', I*aris, 1884

Ilini.ioTiiKgrK nu Maunetisme Animal, 8 vol. (bound in four) Faris

1817-1819

HoiHMoNT (.\. Briorro Do, M.D.) Des Hallucinations, 2^id edit, Faris, 1852

lUuoKN ((\ ot DuIhus Freil.) Histoire Acaddmique du Magn^tisme

Animal Fai-is, 1841

r\u\tiNKr(U. A.> Mi^nuHiame, 2 vol Paris, 1848-9

ru\n^K\. vi\> Khhju do rayoholi>gie Physiologique Paris, 1844

i'M\wri^)NoN^J,U\v&ioU^io,MedecineetMetaphysiqueduMagndtisme

Parts, 1848

^^^n^ Ok I^ v\.\ ^J.> Diotionuain> Infernal Paris, 1844

TxxMt V v^VvtoxuA U-i Vorito aux Moilecuis et aux Gens du Monde,

Paris, 1841

\H^^\xv Vmkxnwvkhk M' Maonetisme Hoiain. Par M. TAbb^

' ^^^ Paris, 1846

\H xUm VKW vl.^^Ou\ \o^uor^ Dos TaiWcs Tournantes, 2 vol. ...Paris 1854
Ok Uk\xknn« vM.N I\» IVhKijw oi des Prxv-edes du Magn^tisme

■A \KmiHi in .m>^\ Faris^ 1819


Lih*ary Catalogue^ 309

Delsuze (J. -P. F.) Defense du Magn^tisme Animal Faris, ISIO*

Histoire Critique du Magndtisme Animal, 2 vol. (bound in one),

2iid edit Paris, 1819

Memoire sur la Faculty de Provision Faris, 1836^

De Mirville (J. E.) Pneumatologie.

Vol. I. Des Esprits et de leurs Manifestations Fluidiques Farts, 1854
,, II., III., IV., V. Des Esprits et de leurs Manifestations

Diverses Faris, 1863-4

Question Des Esprits ; Appendice Compldmentaire et Defense

du Premier Memoire Faris, 1863

De Puysbgub Mdmoires pour servir k I'Histoire et k TEtablissement

du Magn^tisme Animal, Srd edit , 4 vol Faris, 1811-1820

Des Mousseaux (Chevalier Gougenot) La Magie au Dix-Neuvi^me

Si^cle Faris, 1860

DuFRESNOY (M. I'Abbe Lenglet) Recueil de Dissertations ; Anciennes
et Nouvelles, sur les Apparitions, les Visions et les Songes, 2 vol.

Faris, 1752-

DuPAU (J. Amedee) Lettres sur le Magnetisme Animal Faris, 1826-

Du PoTET (Le Baron de Sennevoy) Le Magnetisme oppose k la Medecine

Fa^^, 1840

Du PoTET (Le Baron) Manuel de L'Etudiant Magnetiseur Faris, 1851

ExPOSiS DES Cures Operes en France par le Magnetisme Animal, 2 vol.

Faris, 1826

FoissAC (M.P., M.D.) Rapport et Discussions de I'Academie Roy ale de

Medicine sur le Magnetisme Animale Faris, 1833^

Garcin (M. le Docteur) Le Magndtisme Explique par Lui-mSme Fai-is, 1855

Gauthier (Aubin) Histoire du Somnambulisme, 2 vol Faris, 1842*

Gauthier (L. p. Auguste Recherches Historiques sur TExcercise de

la Medicine Faris, 1844

Gentil (J. A.) Magnetisme et Somnambulisme ; Guide des Incrddules

Faris, 1852^

Manual Elementaire de 1' Aspirant Magnetiseur Faris, 1853^

GuLDENSTUBBE (Baron L. de) La Realite des Esprits Faris, 1857

Kardec (Allan) Le Livre des Esprits, 2iid edit Faris, 1860

Lapontaine (Ch. ) L'Art de Magndtiser , 3rd edit Faris, 1860

Lasserre (Henri) Les Episodes Miraculeux de Lourdes Faris, 1883-

Lemoine (Albert) Du Sommeil Faris, 1855

Lenormanb (Mile. M.A.) Les Oracles Sibyllins Faris, 1817

Leuret (Fran9ois) Fragmens Psychologiques sur La Folie Faris, 1834

Levi (Eliphas) Histoire de la Magie Faris, 1860

Dogme et Rituel de la Haute Magie, 2 vol Faris, 1861

La Clef des Grands Myst^res ,.,,,, Taxx&^'SSi^ci^


310 Library Catalogue.

Levi (Elipliai) La Science de» Bsprite ^«»^, 1^

Leymarie (Madame P. G.) Proc^i de« Spirites J*ar«, 1875

LjE<iE^>iH (Julci) De la Suggestion Hypnotique dans ses Bapporteavec

lo Droit Civile et le Droit Crimmel -i"**^ 1»4

LuYM (Dr. J.) Le Cerveau, 3rd edit -Pan*, 1878

Maw^hal (Le P. V.) L'Esprit Consolateur, ou nos Destinies ...Paris, 1878

Makicoukt (R. Comte de) Souvenirs d'un Magndtiseur Faris, 1884

Matkjnon (R. p.) La Question du Sumaturel Paris, 1863

Mauhy(L. F. Alfred) La Magie et F Astrologie Paris, 1860

Le Sommen et les Rfives -Pa«^» 1^8

Mkmoireh pour sorvir h, I'Histoire et k TEtablissement du Magnetisme
Animiil, 2 vol, (bound in one) 2ml edit Paris, 1809

Mehmkr M<5moires et Apliorismes de Paris^ 1846

MimiKA (C. F.) Du Ddlire des Sensations. 2iid edit Paris, 1851

MoRiN (S. A.) Du Magndtisme et des Sciences Occultes Paris, 1860

Pailloux (R. p. Xavier) Le Magn6tisme, le Spiritisme, et la Possession

Paris, 1863

Pktktin(D. M.) Klectricitd Animale Paris, 1808

PMiurH(A. J. P,) Electro-Dynamisme Vital Paris, 1855

PiuKAiRK (J., M.D.) Puissance de TElectricitd Animale Paris, 1839

Pi'KL(T.) Do la Catalei>8ie Paris, 1856

- - - (A »H4htr ctipkf. )

lUvvK Madnisti^^vk, Vol. I Paris, 1844

Ukw'i: Smkitk : Journal d Etudes Psvchcdogiques. Public sous la

Dirvv'tiondoM. Allan Kardec. 10 vol Paris, 1858-1867

Kjkvvk Smritvaustk, 4 v^>l Paris, 1858-1861

UJkv Hrr ^OharW) L Homme et llntelligence ^ Paris, 1884

Kiv\KRik ^J . J . A« > Tnute Th<k>rique et Pratique da Magnetisme Animal

PariSy 1841

VU>-^v4v^ie et Hygiene du Magnetiseor Part*, 1841

KvmiiKK (Augu*te> Ex(K^tiv>a Physiologiqae des Phenomenes du

Mi^ueclwuv Amm;ia ec vlu Soumimbulisme Paris, 1817

S.vivhiiic»fi^Ku;j^be^ IV* Science* CVcultes. 2 voL J'aris. 1829

^vuviiiu yU. V\> Kaj>^vrT; OoiilideDLtiel *ur le Magnetisme Animal,

-'-^ "^^^^ J'aris, 1839

^hiKK^^V^. touuisle> Avt»^ica:iouvijtS«-^miiambuIiame M PariSy 1855

Si vb»vvvvk5^t vlooiA- Kodii^ Kecaervae* sur Ie» Hallucinations ...FtiriSy 1849

TvKN»ivH.^ IV llu'^'^Ix^^tKv. :>vuL, ^rii^dU:. ^ J'aris, 1883

iViviii V Vli^lK^iw^, M. l\ ^ U >ti^ttetisme Axximal E^IiqTa^ ^«mw, 1845


i


Library Catalogue. 311

Teste (Alphonse, M.D.) Manuel Pratique de Magn^tisme Animal,

2iid edit Paris, 1845

TissANDEEB (J. B.) Des Sciences Occultes Paris, 1866

Yung (Dr. Emile) Le Sommeil Normal et le Sommeil Pathologique,

Paris, 1883


GERMAN.

AoBiPPA (Heinrich Cornelius) Magische Werke, ins Deutsche

iibersetzt, 5 vol Stuttgart, 1855-6

Abchiv fub den Thiebischen Magnbtismus, 6 vol Leipzig 1817-1820

BisCHOF (Jacob) Der Geisterseher. Eine Arabeske dramatisch

gedichtet, 2nd edit Fiirth in Franken, 1806

BxTBDACH (Karl Friedrich) Blicke ins Leben, 2 vol. (bound in one)

Leipzig, 1842

Blicke ins Leben, Vols. I., II., and III Leipzig, 1842

Vol. IV. (Posthumous) Leipzig, 1848

Daumeb (Prof. G. W.) Das Reich des Wundersamen und

Geheimnissvollen Regetishif^rg, 1872

Du Pbbl (t)T, Carl) Die Philosophie der Mystik Leipzig, 1885

3] EcKHABTSHAUSEN (Hofrath von) Sammlung Visionen, Erscheinungen,

&c Munich, 1792

Ennemoseb (Dr. Joseph) Untersuchungen iiber den Ursprung der

Menschlichen Seele, 2f id edit Tiihingen, 1851

Et] Ebasmus (Franciscus) Der Hollische Proteus Nuremberg, 1725

EscHENMAYEB (Prof. C. A. V.) Versuch die Scheinbare Magie des
Thierischen Magnetismus aus Physiologischen und Psychischen
Gesetzenzu erklaren Stuttgart, 1816

Geschichten Besessener neuerer Zeit Stuttgart, 1834

^Mysterien des innem Lebens Tiihingen, 1830


FiscHEB (Prof. Fr. ) Der Somnambulismus, 3 vol Bash, 1839

Gedanken VON Gespenstern, 2nd edit HaXU, 1745

Geistebn und Geistebsehebn (Von) Leipzig, 1780

Gebbeb (U.) Das Nachtgebiet der Natur in Verhaltniss zur Wissen-
schaft, zur Aufklarung, und zum Christenthum, 2iyi edit,

Augsburg, 1844

Gbavbll, iiber die Fortdauer unserer Gefiihle nach dem Tode, Leipzig, 1821
Guldenstubbe (Baron Ludwig von) Positive Pneumatologie, 2nd edit,,

Berne, N,D^
(Aiwther copy,)


312 Library Catalogue.

Hellenbach (L. B.) Die Magie der Zahlen Vieiiiui, 1882

Hexxixos (Justus Christian) Von den Traumen und Nachtwand-

leni Weimar, 1784

Hensler (Dr. P. J.) Der Menschen Magnetismus in seiner Wirkun-

gon auf Gosundheit und Leben Wwrzburg, 1837

HoRNUNO (D. ) Neueste Spiritualistische Mittheilungen Berlin, 1862

HoR«T (Georg Conrad) Von der alten und neuen Magie, Ursprung,

Idee, Umfang, und Geschichte Mainz 1820

Douteroskopie, 2 vol Fraiikfurt-am-Main, 1830

(AnoUier copy.)

Zauber-Bibliothek. 6 Parts Mahiz, 1821-6


Juno (Johann Heinrich) Genannt Stilling. Scenen aus dem Geister-

reiche, 7th edit Stuttgart, 1881

Kerner ( Justinus) Geschichte zweyer Somnambiilen Karlsruhe, 1824

Die Seherin von Prevorst, 2 vol. (bound in one) 2'ivd edit,

StiittgaH, 1832

Geschichten Besessener Neuorer Zeit Stuttgart, 1834

Blatter aus Prevorst, 12 vol. (bound in three) Karlsrtihe and

StiittgaH, 1831-9

Kieser (Dr. D. G.) System des Tellurismus oder Thierischen
Magnetismus, 2 vol Leipzig, 1826

Kluge (Carl A. G.) Versuch einer Darstellung des Animalischen

Magnetismus als Heilmittel, 2?id edit Berlin, 1815

Knoll (Friedrich) Wunderscheinungen ins Licht gesetzt Langensalza, 1785

Krausz (Friedrich) Nothschrei eines Magnetisch - Vergifteten

StiittgaH, 1852

,, Nothgedrungene Fortsetzung Meines Nothschrei

StuttgaH, 1867

Meier (Dr.) Geschichte der hellsehenden Auguste Miiller ...StiittgaH, 1818

Meyer (Johann Friedrich von) Blatter fiir hohere Wahrheit, 11 vol.

(bound in six) Frankfort and Berlin, 1818-1832

Mittheilungen aus dem magnetischen Schlafleben der Somnambule
Auguste K. in Dresden. [The preface is signed by Johann Karl
Bahr and Rudolph Kohlschiitter as editors.] Dresden, 1843

Munter (Dr. C. E.) Merkwiirdige Visionen und Erscheinungen nach

dem Tode Hannover, 1865

Museum des Wundervollen : oder Magazin des Ausserordentlichen
in der Natur, der Kunst, und im Menschenleben, 12 vol.

Leipzig, 1804-12

[R] Nicolai (Friedrich) Beispiel einer Erscheinung mehrerer Phantasmen

Berlin, 1799

IsoRK (F.) Die Existenz der Geister und ihre Einwirkung auf die

Sinnonwelt Weimar, 1841


Library Catalogue, 313

R] Pamphlets, German, Vol. I. —

Ennemoser (Dr. Joseph) Untersuchaiig'en iiber den Ursprung' und

das Wesender Menschlichen Seele Stuttgart^ 1851

Leubuscher (Bud.) Ueber die Entstehung' der Sinnestauschung'

Bevlhi, 1852

Siebeck (Prof. H.) Das Traumleben der Seele Berlin, 1877

Schubert (Dr. G. H. von) Ueber Ahnen und Wissen Munich, \M7

Wundt (Prof. W.) Der Spiritismus Leii^ig, 1879

R] Pamphlets, German, Vol. II.

Baader (Franz) Eine Geisterscheinung JlUnxter, 1833

Clemens (Dr. A.) Das Femgefiihl Franhfurt-am-Main, 1857

Hoffmann (Dr. H.) Die Physiologie der Sinnes-Hallucinationen

Fran Jifu rt-am-Jlain , 1851

Leben (das) und der Tod Leij^zig, 1850

Scherer (Friedrich) Das Walten von Wahrheit und Wahn

(Im Selbstverlage den Verfassers) X.D,

Wegners (G«org Wilhelm) Abhandlung von Gespenstem Berlin, 1747

Wellmer (Meta) Geistergeschichten Xordhauften, 1875

R] Pamphlets, Gemufti, Vol. III.

Blicke in die Traumund Geisterwelt ,,„Leij)zig, 1854

E (H. von) Geschichten von Lebendig begrabenen Personen

Franhfort, 1798
Horst (Georg Conrad) Theurgie Mainz, 1820

Meier (Dr.) Geschichte der Magnetisch hellsehenden Auguste Miiller

in Karlsruhe Stiittgart, 1818

Oeooeb (Wilhelm) Mein Uebertritt zur Neuen Kirche Tiihlnfjen, 1835

Passavant (Dr. Johann Carl) Untersuchungen iiber den Lebens-

magnetismus und das Hellsehen, 2iid edit, ,.,Frankfurt-ani-Main, 1837

Peety (Prof. Dr. Maximilian) Die Realitat magischer Krafte und
Wirkungen des Menschen gegen die Widersacher vertheidigt

Leipzig, 1863

(Aiwiher copy.)

Blicke in das verborgene Leben des Menschengeistes Leipzig, 186^

(Another copy.)

Die Mystischen Erscheinungen der Menschlichen Natur, 2nd edit.

Leipzig, 1872
(Aiwfher copy.)

Der jetzige Spiritualismus Leipzig, 1877

R] PoLiTZ (Dr. 0. H. H.) Konnen hohere Wesen auf den Menschen

wirken und sich mit ihm verbinden ? Leipzig, 1794

Preyer (Professor W.) Die Entdeckung der Hypnotismus Berlin, 1881

Reich der Geister (Das) der Wunder des Priestertrugs und der

Zaiiberei. Erster und Zweiter Theil Leipzig, 1834

Reich der Geister (Das.) 4Uiedit Stiittgart, 1867

Riegbb (Dr. Conrad) Der Hynotismus Jena, 1884

2 a


314 Library Catalogue.

BcHEiBLE (J.) Die Sympathetiflch Magnetische Heilkunde... Stiittgarty 1851

Schopenhauer (A. )Parerga und Paraliiwmena, 4:{h edit 2 vol. Leipzig, 1878

Schubert (Dr. Gotthilf Heinrich) Ansichten von der Nachtseite

der Naturwissenschaft, ^ct^ c</i« JDresdm, 1818

Die Geschichte der Seele StuUgaH, 1833

„ ^dedit StaUgaH, 19S^

Die Symbolik des Traumea, ^d edit Leipzig, 1840

[R] Untersuchung der damonischen Leute HaUe, 1762

[R] Semler (Johann Salomo) Sammlungen von Brief en und Aufsatzen

iiber die Gassnerischen und Schropferischen Geisterbeschworungen

Magdelmrg, 1776

Spitta (Dr. Heinrich) Die Schlaf- und Traumzustande der Mensch-

lichen Seele Tiihiiigefn, 1878

Die Schlaf- und Traumzustande der Menschlichen Seele, 2'iid edit.

Tubingm, 1883

Splittoerber (Franz) Tod, Fortleben und Auferstehung Hcdle, 187^

Stahmann (Friedrich) Seherblicke in die Geisterwelt, Ne^ihaldeiisleben, 183^

Stiedenroth (Ernst) Psychologie zur Erklarung der Seelenerschei-

nungen Berlin, 1824

Stilling (Professor W.) Das Geheimnissvolle Jenseits, Qih edit.

StiiUgaH, 1864

Sz Y (Franz, Graf von) Ein Wort iiber Animalischen Magnetismus

Leipzig, 1840

[R] Tknzbl (Andreas) Medicina Diastatica, Herausgegeben von P. C.

Leipzig, 175^

W (Dr. .1. K.) Meiner Gattin wirklicke Erscheinung nach ihrem

Todo Chemnitz, 1805

NoTK. — Dr. Wotzel is the writer of this book. See his other work.

Waubnbr (Sam. Chr.) Die Gespenster, 2 vol Berlin, 1799

- — Nouo Gespenster Berlin, 1801

Wkknru (Heinrich) Der Schutzgeister oder merkwiirdige Blicke zweier

Sehorinnen in die Geisterwelt Stiittgart, 1839

WiRNRR (Dr. M.) Selma die judische Seherin Berlin, 183*

N\ unii (»l. l\) TlKH>rie des Somnambulismus oder des Thierischen

Mivgm>tiamu8 Leipzig, 183&

WiUTH (Mority.) lV>feasor Zollner's Experimente mit den Amerikani-
Hohen MihUiuu Herru Shuie und seine Hypothese intelligenter
YuuMimonsiionalor Weseu Leipzig, 1882

NVoTfRi. O^r. Johaun Karl) Niilioro Erklarung und Aufschliisse iiber
m»u\e Svhnft : Moinor Gattin wirkliche Erscheinung nach
Uuvm T.hIo Leipzig, 1805

/KuxMUiarr n k 1\\vhischk Akrzte. Herausgegeben von Friedrich

^''^'*^'*^^' Nv^ii, L V Leipzig, 1818-1822

/oM N^u vK.^ /ur Autklaruug dor Deutschen Volkes iiber Inhalt und

VwtKHlv dor W ij^^cusohaftlicheu Abh;mdlungen Leipzig, 1880

1U|/hv'u...^.K U.^ i^ei^tor und Gei§tor«eher Kiistrin, 1789


Library Catalogue. 315

OTHER LANGUAGES.

[R] OoMPSin>iUM Malefecabum Mediolaniy 1626

Obookes (William) Indagini Sperimentali intomo alio Spiritualismo

(dall' inglese) Locariio, 1877

Del Pilastro (Mario) I Fenomeni Spiritici lAvonio, 1883

[R] De-Thakdingius (Du Georgius) Dissertatio 1724

Fabixjs (Everardus) Specimen de Somniis Amsterdamy 1836

[R] HiSTOiRE DBS DiABLES DB LouDUN AmsUrdUimy 1716

[B] Maoica Seu mirabilium Historiarum de Spectris et Apparitionibus

Spirituum Islehios, 1597

[ [R] (Another copy.)

[R] Pamphlets, Latin, for Vol. I.

Wedelius (Emestns Henricus) Dissertatio Medica de Spectris. . ,Je7iaj 1 693

[R] PoBTA (lo Baptista) Magise Naturalis Antwerp, 1560

[R] PiSELLUS (Michael) De Operatione dsemonum Dialogus ^Greek and

Latin) Paris, 1615

[R] Semleb (Salomonis Joannis) Commentatio de Dsemoniacis quorum in

N. T. fitmentio Halae, 1797

[R] Thybjei Pbtbi Opera Col&nioe Agrippinm, 160O

[R] Tbithemios (Joannes) Steganographia Frankfort, 1606

[R] WiEBi (Joannis) Opera Omnia Amstelodami, 1660


CURRENT PERIODICALS.

Dbeam Invesugatob (The) Peoria, III., U.S.A., 1l9^ —

Facts Bost<yii, U.S.A., 1882 —

JouBNAL (Religio-Philosophical) Chicago, U.S.A., 1884, —

Light , LonoUni, 1881 —

Science Cambridge, Mass., U.S.A., 1884 —

Theosophist (The) Madras^ 1879 —


R]^yx7E Philosophiqub (Ed. Th. Ribot) Paris, 1884 —

R^UE SpiBiTB(Ed. Allan Kardec) Paris, 1883 —


PSTcmscHE Studien (JSd. Alexander Aksakow") ,..JJe^•]^^i^^^S^


316 Library Catalogue'.


THE LIBEAEY.


The Society's Library of books and periodicals is open to Members
and Associates alike, for consultation at the Society's Rooms.
Members have the additional privilege of taking out books, except those
marked [R], which are for reference only, according to the following
Rules : —

1. Members may obtain books either by writing to the Assistant-

Secretary, or by taking them from the shelves, in which latter
case they must leave a written acknowledgment on the form
provided for the purpose, entering also any books which they
may at the same time return. Members must pay for the
carriage of books sent to them or returned by them.

2. No Member may have more than two volumes out at once, or

retain any volume more than three weeks, without special
permission from the Assistant-Secretary. In the case of
Members of Committees engaged on work for the Society in
which Uie books are needed, this Rule will be relaxed.

S. Associates temporarily in London, or who may otherwise wish
to borrow books from the Library during a short period, can
do so on the following terms : —

For One Month ... 5s. ' For Three Months ... 10s.

Should jH^rsous who are neither Members nor Associates of the
SiX*it*tY div&iro to make use of the Library, special facilities will be
X»>^i4tt\U in oases where ther^ seems to be sufficient reason for doing so.

Furthor Kules will l^e added if occasion arises, but it is hoped that
MomWrs will i\M>jvr!ite in taking caurv of the books, and returning
iWm priMw^^tlv tW the us*^ of otliers. Many of the books are rare, and
wniUl Iv hi^ni to rx-pUw if Kxs^t.

A ?^\ViQ^'«tiou Kvk is kept in the Sooierr s Rooms, where names of
K\\ks t>\vxuuuuvu\t tVr purvhase may b^ entered by Members and
\ssvvi;itx\< ; er suJQ^-^tiv>r,s rjyiy Se^ s^?r:t in writing to the Assistant-
S.viv^>^rv. Auv suvh r^xvr^uii -d*:ioii5 will c^ cai^fullT considered by
the U*>^^r\ V\\iuxu:::<>e.

\ U^v^^ xv-v^^v.-ivix vi tl-s- -vi<-ir^ :o:ks bjkT^ been acquired bvgift
t ,.e KvXn v;;rv\ii.^xx >. ;:\ ^v^ S.v-cv > r^-is. h*ve been, for the most
^vv,^, .^ A o^>-^N-:x :^^-,ot',urv v:u«.-c^r

w """^^ ^—^ -^KXiT^^^^Y .s: exrir^^si:^ their thanks to


List of Members and Associates. 317


VI.

LIST OF MEMBERS AND ASSOCIATES.

{December^ 1884.)


PRESIDENT.
Professor Henry Sidgwick, Trinity College, Cambridge.

VICE-PRESIDENTS.
Arthur J. Balfour, Esq., M.P., 4, Cariton-gardens, S. W.

Professor W. F. Barrett, F.R.S.E., Royal College of Science,
Dublin.

The Right Rev. the Bishop of Carlisle, Rose Castle, Cariisle.

John R Hollond, Esq., M.P., 57, Lancaster-gate, London, W.

Richard H. Hutton, Esq., M.A., Englefield Green, Staines.

Rev. W. Stainton Moses, M.A., 21, Birchington-road, London, N.W.

Hon. Roden Noel, M.A, 57, Anerley Park, London, S.E.

Lord Rayleigh, F.R.S., Terling Place, Witham, Essex.

Professor Balfour Stewart, M.A., F.R.S., The Owens College,
Manchester.

W. H. Stone, Esq., M.A, M.B., 14, Dean's-yard, Westminster, S.W.

Hensleigh Wedgwood, Esq., 31, Queen Anne-street, London, W.

HONORARY MEMBERS.

Professor J. C. Adams, LL.D., F.R.S., The Observatory, Cambridge.

William Crookes, F.R.S., 7, Kensington Park-gardens, London, W.

Professor Ruskin, LL.D., D.C.L., Brantwood, Coniston, Lancashire.

Lord Tennyson, Farringford, Freshwater, Isle of Wight.

Alfred Russel Wallace, F.R.G.S., Nutwood Cottage, Frith Hill,
Godalming.

G. F. Watts, R.A., Little Holland House, London, W.

CORRESPONDING MEMBERS.

Professor H. P. Bowditch, M.D., Harvard Medical School, Boston,
U.S.A.

Theodore Bruhns, Simferopol, Russia.

Nicholas Murray Butler, Columbia College, New York, U.S.A.

The Chevalier Sebastiano Fenzi, Florence.

Professor G. S. Fullerton, Pennsylvania University, Philadelphia,
U.S.A.

Professor Stanley Hall, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
U.S.A.


318 List of Members and Associates.

Profbmor W. James, Harvard University, Cambridge, U.S.A.
Professor E. 0. Pickering, The Observatory, Cambridge, U.S.A.
Bet. R. WniTTiNOHAM, Pikesville, Maryland, U.S.A,

MEMBERS.

Abdy- Williams, E. M., 8, Caledonian-place, Clifton, Bristol

Aroles, Miss Edith M., Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford.

Arundale, Miss Francesca, 77, Elgin-crescent, Notting Hill, London, W.

Baillie, Edmund J., F.L.S., Woodbine, Eaton-road, Chester.

Halpour, Arthur J., M.P., 4, Carlton-gardens, London, S.W.

Balfour, G. W., M.A., Florence.

Balfour, Miss, 4, Carlton-gardens, London, S.W.

Balliston, W. H. T., 5, Sutherland Avenue, Maida Hill, London, W.

Barber, Mrs. J. W., Femdene, Abbeydale, near SheflSield.

Barrett, Professor W. F., F.RS.E., &c., 6, De Vesci-terrace, Kings-
town, Co. Dublin.

Barrett, Mrs., 30, Courtfield-gardens, South Kensington, London, S.W.

Barrington, Hon. Eric, 62, Cadogan-place, London, S.W.

lU YNES, Robert Edward, M.A., Christ Church, Oxford.

Beatty, Octavius, Exeter College, Oxford.

Benham, Robert Fitzroy, MR.C.S., Abercom House, Baron's Court,
London, S.W.

Bennett, Edward T., 27, Church-road, Richmond, near London.

Bkvkridok, Erskine, St. Leonard's Hill, Dunfermline.

Bidder, Ci. P., Q.C., Ravensbury Park, Mitcham, Surrey.

Bidder, Mrs. G., Ravensbury Park, Mitcham, Surrey.

BiDDELL, Sidney, 32, The Grove, Boltons, London, S.W.

iU^AguiKRE, Mrs. Charles de, 1, Hyde Park Mansions, London, W.

BoDMKR, »). J., 44, Al»erdeen Park Road, London, N".

I^RKTT, (iKOH()K, Tho Collos^o, Wostou-super-Mare.

l^iUDsoN, Joseph RiiHnvAV, Belle Isle, Windermere.

nuowNiNi}. OvSrAH, M.A., King's College, Cambridga

l^uvrK, .1. P., .I.P., By stock, near Exmouth, Devon.

Hvsuuw Uknry North (irant. Trinity College, Cambridge.

Hvshki.Im Hkv. W. IX, M.A, Harrow-on-the-Hill, near London.

Bivri.KK» Ukv. Canon, M.A., Worcester.

Uvri.Ki^ Kdwaud, l\ llathorloy-road, Kew Gardens, S.W.

1\V\THNKSS, ThK i\HNTKSS OF, DUCHKSSE DE PoMAR, 51, Rue de

i\vi.\^KU\ .\\.K\A\i*KK\ I, Uon^ford-squar^, South Kensington, London,

iV\«i^KMKi\ Ma.u^k Gko, W. Wallace, 2S, Ashley-place, Victoria-
*t»\H^t^ UmuUxu. S,W,

i^AniUK, U\^«Kiu\ ^.\ CSiutorburyroM, Oxford.


Lid of Members and Associates, 319

Close, Charles Arthur, M.A., B.C.L., 30, St. James'-square, London^
S.W.

Close, Rev. Maxwell H., M.A., University Club, Dublin.

Coffin, Walter H., F.L.S., 94, Cornwall-gardens, London, S.W.

Colchester, W. P., Ellershouse, Nova Scotia.

Corbet, Rev. R. W., M.A., Stoke Rectory, Hodnet, Shropshire.

Crawshay, Robert, 16, Berkeley-square, London, W.

CuFFE, Hon. O. Frederick Seymour, 2, Ted worth-square, Chelsea,

S.W.
Dakyns, Henry Graham, M.A., 3, Upper Belgrave-road, Clifton,

Bristol.
Dawe, N, Fabyan, Old Grove House, Hampstead Heath, London, N.W.
Delmar, F., 17, St. Petersburgh-place, Bayswater, London, W.
DoDGSON, Rev. Charles Lutvvidge, M.A., Christ Church, Oxford.
Downing, Charles, 3, HoUybush Hill, Hampstead, London, N.W.
Drayson, Major-General, R.A., Royal Albert Yacht Club, Southsea.
Elder, Alexander Lang, Campden House, Kensington, London, W.
Elvey, Miss Mary M., Finborough-road,West Brompton, London, S.W.
Eno, J. C, Wood Hall, Dulwich, London, S.E.

Finch, Gerard Brown, M. A., 2 4, Old-square, Lincoln's Inn, London, W.C.
Florence, Ernest B., 14, Emperor's-gate, South Kensington, London, S.W.
Flower, Mrs. Cyril, Aston Clinton, Tring.
Ford, Mrs. Lawson, Adel Grange, Leeds.
Fountain, Alfred, Highfield, Hillingdon, Uxbridge, Middlesex.
Fox, St. George Lane, Garden Mansions, Queen Anne's-gate, London,

S.W.
Fry, Lewis George, Goldney House, Clifton, Bristol.
Gardner, Herbert, 46, Dover-street, Piccadilly, London, W.
Garrett, Miss Agnes, 2, Gower-street, London, W.C.
Gary, Baron Raymond de, 17, Rue d'AnjouSt. Honore, Paris.
Gatty, Alfred Scott, 71, Warwick-road, London, S.W,
Gerhard, Mrs., 12, Platzhoff Strasse, Elberfeld.
Gell, Philip Lyttelton, M.A., 2, Tanfield-court, Temple, London,E.C.
Glinka, Mademoiselle de, 1, Rue Lincoln, Champs Elys^es, Paris.
Gordon, Robert, M. Inst. C.E., 4, Elgin-crescent, Notting Hill,

London, W.
Graham, Alexander, 9, Gray's Inn-square, London, W.C.
Grant, Thomas, Shirley House, Maidstone.

Griffin, Francis Charles, 1, Kensington Palace-gardens, London, W.
Grubbe, Hubert H., 29, Holland-park, London, W.
GuRNEY, Edmund, M.A., 26, Montpelier-square, London, S.W.
GuRNEY, Rev. Alfred, M.A., St. Barnabas Parsonage, Pimlico, London,

S.W.
Gurney, Mrs. Russell, 3, Orme-square, London, W.


320 List of Members and Associates,

Guthrie, Malcolm, J.P., 2, Parkfield-road, Liverpool.

Hamilton, Major Gawin Rowan, The Castle, Killyleagh, Co. Down.

Hamilton, Miss, Lansdowne, Farquhar-road, Upper Norwood, London,

S.E.
Hargreaves, T. Sidney, 218, Golbome-road, North Kensington, London, W.
Hartley, Lieut.-Col. J., LL.D., D.L,, The Old Downs, Hartley, near

Fawkham, vid Dartford.
Haughton, Rev. G. D., 13, Cecil-street, Strand, London, W.C.
Henniker-Major, The Hon. Mary, 6, Grafton-street, London, W.
Hennings, Mrs. Mary, Sunninghill, 78, Thicket-road, Anerley, S.E.
Herringham, Mrs,, 22, Bedford-square, London, W.C.
Hodgson, Richard, B.A., St. John's College, Cambridge.
Hogg, Miss A. M. M., Berry Head House, Brixham.
Hogg, H., M.A., New University Club, St. James', London, S.W.
Hogg, Jonathan, Stratford, Rathgar, Co. Dublin.
Holland, Sydney G., 21, Queen-street, Mayfair, London, W.
HoLLOND, John R., M.P., 57, Lancaster-gate, London, "W.
Holt, H. Sherwin, Ogbeare HaJl, Holsworthy, Devon.
Hood, H. J., M.A., 115, St. George's-road, London, S.W. "

HoPKiNSON, Professor Alfred, M.A., B.C.L., The Owens College,

Manchester.
HoRSFALL, Charles Edward, Grassendale Priory, Liverpool.
Houghton, Lord, D.C.L., F.R.S., &c., Frystone Hall, Pontefract,

Yorkshire.
Hughes, Frank Septimus, 11, Staples Inn, London, E.C.
Hughes, Captain Henry Morgan, F.R.G.S., Brooklyn, Wilbury-rood,

Hove, Sussex.
Jameson, F., 6, Westbourne Park-villas, London, W.
Jameson, Miss, Glencormac, Bray, Ireland.

Jebb, J. Gladwyn, 11, Chester-place, Hyde Park-square, London, W.
Jeune, Mrs., 37, Wimpole-street, London, W.
Joyce, Samuel, Junr., European Telegraph Works, Pownall-road,.

Dalston, London, E.
Kay, H. a., 371, Westgate-road, Newcastle-on-Tyne.
Keigiitley, Bertram, B.A., 20, Stanley-gardens, London, W.
Kelso, Commander, R.N., 96, Hyde Park-square, London, W.
KiMBER, Mrs., 3, Roland-gardens, South Kensington, London, S.W.
KiRWAN, J. J., Reform Club, London, W.
Lafone, Alfred William, Hatton, Bedfont, Middlesex.
Lafone, Harold, B.A., Hanworth Park, Feltham, Middlesex.
Lamplugh, Rev. David, M.A., Yalding Vicarage, Maidstone.
Latham, Mrs. P. W., 17, Trumpington-street, Cambridge.
Laurie, Reginald Northall, 4, Queen Anne's-gate, Westminster, S.W,
Leaf, Walter, M.A., Old CYiarvge,"Loi[i^o\i^'¥i.Q.


List of Members and Associates, 321

Leighton, Sir Baldwyn, Bart., M.P., 49, Upper Brook-street, Gros-

venor-square, London, W.
Leonard, Arthur G., M.A., 44, Highbury-hill, London, N.
Leycester, Mrs., 6, Cheyne-walk, Chelsea, London, S.W.
Leyson, Miss Kate, Penscynnor, Neath, South Wales.
LoNGSTAFP, George Blundell, M.A., M.B. (Oxon.), Southfield Grange,

Woodhill-road, Wandsworth, S.W.
Lonsdale, Gladys, Countess of, 12, Bruton-street, London, W.
MacAlister, John Y. W., Leeds Library, Leeds.
MacColl, Rev. Canon Malcolm, M.A., 1, New Burlington-street,

London, W.
Manders, el, F.R.O.S., Agincourt House, Yorktown, Farnborough

Station, Hants.
Marshall, Mrs. Edgar, 3, Rupert-road, Bedford Park, Chiswick.
Marshall, John William, M.A., The Holt, Godalming.
Massey, Charles C, 1, Albert Mansions, Victoria-street, London, S.W.
Miles, Frank, Tite-street, Chelsea, London, S.W.
Montefiore, F., 4, Great Stanhope-street, London, W.
Money-Coutts, Francis Burdett, Ancote, Weybridge.
Morell, J. D., LL.D., Clevelands, Fitzjohn's-a venue, London, N.W.
Moses, Rev. W. Stainton, M.A., 21, Birchington-road, London, KW*
Mount-Temple, The Lady, Broadlands, Romsey, Hants.
Murray- Aynsley, Mrs., Great Brampton, near Hereford.
Myers, Frederic W. H., M.A., Leckhampton House, Cambridge.
Myers, A. T., M.D., 24, Clarges-s treat, Piccadilly, London, W.
Nevill, E. a., 13, Bryanston-street, Portman-square, London, W.
Newnham, Rev. P. H., Maker Vicarage, Devonport.
Pagan, Miss C, Marston Lodge, Harrov^-on-the-Hill, near London.
Page, A. C, M.D., Truro, Nova Scotia.
Paice, Wm., M.A., 28, Caversham-road, London, N.W.
Parker, Hon. Mrs., 60, Elm Park-gardens, London, S.W.
Paschkoff, a., Trinity College, Cambridge.
Paynter, William, Bute Chambers, Cardiff

Pease, Edward R., 17, Osnaburgh-street, Regent's Park, London, N.W,
Percival, Francis W., M.A., F.S. A., 36, Bryanston-street, London, W»
PiLCHER, Giles Theodore, 37, Cromwell Houses, South Kensington,

London, S.W.
PoDMORE, Frank, M.A., 14, Dean's-yard, Westminster, S.W.
Porter, Miss, 16, Russell-square, London, W.C.
PowYS, Hon. Mrs. Fox, 11, George-street, Hanover-square, London, W^
Pratt, Thomas, Camden House, Lower Merton, Surrey.
Prim, Jose, 188, Gresham House, Old Broad-street, London, E.C.
Prower, Nelson, M.A., 12, Cambridge-terrace, Hyde Park, W.
PuRDON, John E., M.B., Surgeon-Major, Valley Head, Alabama, CT.S. A.


I


•


. — ._. . *. ^


* ■ ■ -


LUtZZT


■r.^.f;


*-■


'-'-Ti'. j_=c- c: ^


^uo.-


* J •*■ !.


l£- .a*


_i- « . -- -1:1 = -_-iiT!=~ - i-:i. .


•^••t


^:-».i^#"


r- n


.• •••


r"^ _— •■■ iii^ T^lfci —


*^4>i.--.t:


I


i^


«f -^ ^ r"^


■ _j» y i


''^. : : .


r j_


?->-i:


*^c^::.


i.


—'"T _"


■ 1 illl


» k


---''-s-'iT**. !!:._:-- .12:; A^cma


«^r. :


J.1. -■_


.-LT.- --^ -.-^ f JL i? . ZU-iluC


*^.^

'»^*-:i^


« ^'


^.^r^s^Tj-


List of Members and Associates. 323

■acoPFORD, Francis James, Junior Army and Navy Club, St James's

street, London, S.W,
^niRGEON, Wentworth, 10, Park-road, Regent's Park, London, N.W.
'TVURGis, Julian, M.A., 2, Gloucester-pJace, Portman-square, W.
r^jBTEES, William Edward, Tainfield, near Taunton.
f'^WAN, Joseph Wilson, Lauriston, Bromley, Kent.
^YLOR, Rev. Charles J., M.A., Toppesfield Rectory, Halstead, Essex.
^^YLOR, Major G. L. Le M., Royal Military College, Farnborough

Station, Hants.

I?KBB, Mrs., 7, Albert-road, Gloucester-gate, Regent's Park, London, N.W.

^EETGEN, William, Lea View, Mount Pleasant-lane, Upper Clapton, N.

Cheobald, Morell, 62, Granville-park, Blackheath, S.K

&0MPS0N, Joseph John, M.A., Trinity College, Cambridge.

Chornton, Rev. R., D.D., St. John's Vicarage, NottingHill, London, W.

Chorpe, Mrs. Mart, Lenton House, Lenton, Nottingham.

K?iDMAN, Paul Frederick, Chislehurst, Kent.

•oD, Alexander, St. Mary's Mount, Peebles, N.B.

Kopham, Lieut. -Col. Sir William, Noirmont, Weybridge, Surrey.

Kravers, John Amory, St. Ives House, Ringwood, Hants.

'Vane, Francis P. F., Isthmian Club, 12, Graf ton-street, London, W.

Vicars, George Rayleigh, B.A., Woodville House, Rugby.

I^Tarrender, Miss, Bruntisfield House, Edinburgh.

^ATTS, Alaric Alfred, 19, Cheyne-walk, Chelsea, S.W.

!Webb, Godfrey, 36, Hans-place, London, S.W.

Webb, Matthew W., 45, Stemdale-road, West Kensington Park,
London, W.

Wedgwood, Hensleigh, M.A, 31, Queen Anne-street, London, W.

Weldon, Walter, F.R.S., F.R.S.E., Rede Hall, Burstow, near Crawley.

Welldon, Rev. J. E. C, MA., Dulwich College, London, S.E.

Wemyss, Mrs. M. Erskine, The Clock House, Chelsea Embankment,

London, S.W.
Whishaw, Bernhard, B.A.,Toynbee Hall, Commercial-road, London, E.
White> Harold Holden, 96, Queen's-gate, London, S.W.
Whitear, Rev. W., B. A., Ardgour Villa, Crouch Hill, Finsbury Park,

London, N.
Wild, Charles, Jesus College, Cambridge.
Willmott, Miss R., Warley Place, Great Warley, Essex.
Wilson, Charles M., Rose Villa, North Strand, Limerick.
Woodhouse, G. H., Heath Bank, Bolton.
W'ilson, David H, M.A., Rosemont, Hyeres, France.
iVyld, George, M.D., 41, Courtfield-road, South Kensington, S.W.
fcVYNDHAM, Hon. Percy, M.P., 44, Belgrave-square, London, S.W.
Harrow, Thomas A, Cleveland House School, Weymouth.
JToRKE, Hon. Alexander, 32a, Orchard-street, London, W,


324 List of Member H and Associates.

HONORARY ASSOCIATES.

Beard, Sidney H., 23, Kildare-gardens, Bayswater, London, W.

BiRCiiALL, James, Kirkdale, Liverpool.

Brietzcke, Mrs. Helen Kate, 21, Applegarth-road, West Kensing-
ton, London, W.

Carmichael, Rev. F., LLD., Ranelagh, Dublin.

Creery, Rev. A. M., B.A,, Victoria-terrace, Murray-street, Higher
Broughton, Manchester.

Curtis, Miss Mary, Laughame, St. Clears, South Wales.

DouoALL, J. R., 294, Drummond-street, Montreal, Canada.

Fryer, Rev. A. T., 20, Holford-square, London, W.C.

Grubb, Edward, 8, Holly-terrace, York.

Hancock, Miss, Exmouth, Devon.

James, Captain, 68, Hereford-road, Bayswater, London, W.

Jenkins, E. Vaugiian, The Oak Grove, Parkstone, near Poole, Dorset.

Keulemans, J. G., 34, Matilda-street, Bamsbury, London, N.

Macdonald, Rev. J. A., 19, Hey wood-street, Cheetham, Manchester.

Moore, Hon. Mrs. Montgomery, The Royal Barracks, Dublin.

Morgan, Owen, Pontypridd, South Wales.

XisBET, R T., 135, Northumberland-st3!^eet, Newcastle-on-Tyne.

Saxby, Mrs., Mount Elton, Clevedon.

Scudamors, Mrs., The Grove, Pluckley, Ashford, Kent.

SuGDEN, Rev. E. H., B.A., RSc., Prospect House, Great Horton,
Bradford, Yorkshire.

WooDiiULU Major Alfred, M.D., David's Island, Pelham, New-
York, U.S.A.

ASSOCIATES.

Abercrombie, Cavendish, D., Scottish Club, 39, Dover-street,

London, W.
Adams, Mrs., The Observatory, Cambridge.
Allkn, Miss >[ary Gray, 1, Florence-terrace, Londonderry.
Amy, Miss Anmk R, Civ>ss Bow, Trinitv, Jersev.

Anderson, James Arbcthnot, 46, Warwick-gardens, Kensington,
London, \V.

lUiKiK, RoBKKT, M.D„ ^\ Mrlville-street, Edinbui^

Uailky, Waltkk, 1;\ Albeniarle-crescent, Scarborough.

Ualu W. \\\ R., M.A.. Trinity Colle^^, Cambridge.

lVvKKKK\ M:>s AnvK K., A.rric^:. :. H^l, Wolverhampton.
lUvKsv^x, Mks, S. Hiirvoy rA^.i, Oiurilndire,

UKvnK\, 1 .v;tvnv\tO.>i^:nvl G£:s e G., 74, Redcliffe-square,
Un5-,xVv.x. :vW.

^UL^>^^^. Mks, llio IVa.v, Lain-n-h, Lxidx:. S.W.


List of Members and Associates, 325

Beresford, Edward A., 21, Hereford-square, London, S.W.

BiCKNELL, Rev. Clarence, M.A., Villa Rosa, Bordighera, Italy.

Bidder, George P., Trinity College, Cambridge.

BiRRELL, Miss, 37, Addison-gardens North, London, W.

Bonus, Arthur R., Clifton College, Clifton, Bristol.

BosTOCK, Miss E. A., Penmaen Gower, Swansea.

Bramston, Miss M., Waterloo, Truro.

Britten, James, F.L,S., 17, West-square, Southwark, S.E.

Brock- Arnold, Rev. George M., M.A., Hertford College, Oxford.

Brown, Mrs., Moorsden, Tarbolton, Ayrshire, N.B.

Browne, Edward G., B. A., 24, Bernard-street, Russell-square, London*

W.C.
Bryce, Miss, 35, Bryanston-square, London, W.
Buck, E. C, Civil Service, Simla, India.
Burt, Percival J., 16, Leadenhall-street, London, E.C.
Burton, Mrs., Longner Hall, Shrewsbury.
Busk, Miss Edith, Ford's Grove, Winchmore Hill, N.
Caldecott, Rev. Alfred, M.A, St. John's College, Cambridge.
Campbell, James A., Barbreck, vid Loch-Gilp-Head, Argyll, N.B.
Cannon, Mrs., Hill Cot, Sharpies, Bolton.
Carleton, Hon. Mrs. Pigott, Greyhill, Winchfield.
Caulfeild, Miss Sophia F. A., 1, Hyde Park Mansions, London, W.
Cazalet, Mrs., Grenehurst, Dorking.

Chandler, Rev. H. C. D., M.A., Waterbeach Vicarage, Cambridge.
Clay, A. Keatinge, Anglesea, Killiney, Co. Dublin.
Clemens, S. L., Hartford, Conn., U.S.A.

Cobden-Sanderson, T. L, 3, Paper-buildings, Temple, London, E.C.
Cock, Rev. Thomas A, 18, Rodney-street, London, N.
Collins, Sir Robert H., K.C.B., Bay ton Lodge, Claremont, Esher,
CoLTHURST, Lady, 47, Hill-street, Berkeley-square, London, W.
CoLTON, C. Gardner, 32, Southampton-buildings, London, W.C.
CooKSON, Mrs. Montague, 29, Rutland-gate, London, S.W.
CooMBE, Charles Frederick, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., General Infirmary,

Sheffield.
Corbet, Miss Mary E., Bayshill Lawn, Cheltenham.
OouES, Professor Elliott, Smithsonian Institution, Washington,

U.S. A.
Cox, John, M.A, Cavendish College, Cambridge.
Crawford, W. C, 1, Lockharton-gardens, Slateford, Midlothian, N.B.
Craufurd, of Auchenames, Mrs., 109, St. George's-square, London, S.W.
Crossley, Mrs. Herbert, Ferney Green, Windermere.
Cumin, Mrs., 16, Chester-square, London, S.W.
Cunningham, George, D.M.D. (Harvard, U.S.A.), Downing College^

Cambridge.


326 List . of Members and Associates.

Cunningham, Rev. W., M.A., 2, St Paurs-road, Cambridge.

Darley, Mrs., Quambi, Woollohra, New South Wales.

Davey, James George, M.D., 4, Redland Park-villas, Bristol

Davey, S. John, Alfriston, Hayne-road, Beckenham, London, S.E.

Davies, William, Bellfield, Kingsbridge, Devon.

Davis, Thomas Henry, The Western and Brazilian Telegraph Company,

Caixa, 453, Rio Janeiro, Brazil.
Debenham, Ernest Ridley, Trinity College, Cambridge.
Dewar, James, M.D., Drylaw House, Davidson's Mains, Midlothian,

N.B.
DovETON, F. B., 10, Grange-gardens, Eastbourne.
Eaden, Mrs., Little Shelford, Cambridge.
Edelsten, John A., Quemfield, Latchford, Warrington.
Everest, Miss, 62, Queensborough-terrace, Hyde Park, London, W.
FitzGerald, Desmond G., M.S.T.E., 6, Akerman-road, Brixton, S.W.
Fletcher, Rev. W. Roby, M.A., Vice-Chancellor of the University of

Adelaide, Australia.
Fleming, A., Broxboume, Herts.
Ford, Miss Emily S., 27, Albany-street, London, N.W.
Fowler, James Kingston, M.B., 35, Clarges-street, Piccadilly*

London, W.
Gibson, Thomas, Castle Park, Lancaster.
Gibson, Mrs. Sumner, Shrublands, Tunbridge Wells.
Gladstone, Miss Catherine Annie, Shedfield Cottage, Botley, Hants,
Gonemys, Le Oomte Dr. Nicolo, Corfu, Ionian Islands.
Goodman, Roger N., B.A., B.Sc, St. John's College, Cambridge.
Gow, James, M.A., 35, Fitzroy-square, London, W.
Graham, J.W., Avenham View, Preston.

Greenfield, Miss M. T. C, 66, Crystal Palace Park, Sydenham, S.E. '
Gregg, Mrs., Temple Grafton Court, Alcester.
Griffith, Robert W., M.A., li!he Old House, Llandaff.
Grignon, Rev. William S., M.A., The Grove, Pluckley, Kent.
Gudgeon, James, Stowmarket.
GuNTON, Rev. F., Magdalene College, Cambridge.

Hackett, James F., B. A., 71, King William-street, Adelaide, Australia.
Haddon, Professor Alfred C, M.A., Royal College of Science,

Stephen's Green, Dublin.
Hadland, Miss, Milton Mount College, Gravesend.
Hansford, Charles, 3, Alexandra-terrace, Dorchester.
Harpur, Rev. George, B.A., Clifton Vicarage, Newark.
Hart, S. Lavington, M. A., St. John's College, Cambridge.
Havers, Miss, 76, Westbourne Park road, Bayswater, London, W.
Ha>veis, Rev. R. H., ]SLA., Amber House, St. John's Wood, London,

N.W.


List^ of Members and Associates. 327

Hayes, Josepu Walton, 1, George's-street, Enniscorthy.

Hennings, Rev. James, Duncombe House, Kingsbridge, Devon.

Henty, Walter, 89, Onslow-gardens, London, S.W.

Herbert, Hon. Auberon, M.A., Burley, Ringwood, Hants.

Hill, Arthur G., M.A, F.S.A., 47, Belsize-avenue, London, N.W.

HiME, Robert D., New Olub, 1, Boulevard Malesherbes, Paris.

Hodgkin, John Eliot, Childwall, Richmond, Surrey.

Hogg, Robert W., B A, St. John's College^ Cambridge.

HooKE, Richard, Kersall Dale, Higher Broughton, Manchester.

Horner, Andrew L., B.A., Limavady, Co. Londonderry.

Howe, Edward R. J. Gambier, 7, New-square, Lincoln's Inn, London^
W.C.

HowoRTH, Henry H., Derby House, Eccles, near Manchester.

Hubbe-Schleiden, Dr. T. U., 9, Alfred Strasse, Hamburg.

lONiDES, CoNSTANTiNE A., 23, Second Avenue, West Brighton.

Jackson, William Hatchett, M.A., F.L.S., Penwartha, Weston-
super-Mare.

James, Mrs., 10, Pelham-place, South Kensington, London, S.W.

Jeappreson, Rev. H. H., M.A, 17, Kilbum Park-road, London, N.W.

Jebb, Miss C, Girton College, Cambridge.

Jebb, Major J. de Witt, Junior United Service Club, London, W.

Jebb, Mrs., The University, Glasgow.

Jeffreys, Mrs., Glandyfi Castle, Glandovey, R.S.O.

Jennings, Mrs., Driffield, Yorkshire.

Johnson, G. I., 24, Cross-street, Manchester.

Johnson, Miss Lucy, Llandaff House, Cambridge.

Johnson, William Ernest, B.A., Llandaff House, Cambridge.

Jones, Miss Constance, Girton College, Cambridge.

Jordan, Mrs. Lutley, 22, Lexham-gardens, Kensington, London, W.

Kane, J. G. Auriol, Sloperton Lodge, Kingstown, Co. Dublin.

Keene, Rev. James B., M.A., The Rectory, Navan, Co. Meath.

Keep, A. P. Perceval, 122, Blackheath-hill, London, S.E.

Kenny, Courtney S., LL.M., Downing College, Cambridge.

Ker, Dr., Hadley House, Cheltenham.

Kersey, H. A, 4, Eslington-terrace, Newcastle-on-Tyne.

Lach-Szyrma, Rev. W. S., M.A., F.R.H.S., The Vicarage, Newlya
St. Peter, Penzance.

Lambert, Rev. Brooke, M.A., B.C.L., The Vicarage, Greenwich.

Lane-Poole, Stanley, M.R.AS., Savile Club, London, W.

Larken, Rev. E. P., Gatton Tower, Reigate.

Laycock, Rev. James A., 2, Eton-terrace, Harrogate.

Lee, William Arthur, 39, The Walk, Tredegarville, Cardiff.

Leigh, W. Austen, M. A., 2, Norfolk-crescent, Hyde Park, London, V»

Leith, Miss Alicia Amy, 8, Dorset-square, London, N.W,


328 Lid of Members and Associates,

LiMOND, Miss Catherine, 15, Eaton-terrace, London, S.W.
Lloyd, Francis, Grenadier Guards, 43, Butland-gate, London, S.W.
Lodge, Professor O. J., D.Sc, University College, LiverpooL
LoMAX, Benjamin, C.E., Free Library and Museum, Brighton.
Lyttblton, Hon. Mrs. Arthur, Selwyn College, Cambridge.
Macalister, Professor, M.D., F.R.S., Strathmore House, 5, Harvey-
road, Cambridge.
Mackenzie, John, 1, Greig-street, Inverness, N.B.
Mackenzie, Miss Minna, 1, Ennismore-gardens, London, S.W.
Maitland, Edward, Oxford and Cambridge Club, London, S.W.
Marino, La Duchessa di, 46, Lowndes-street, London, S.W.
Marshall, Arthur, Weetwood Hail, Leeds.
Marson, Gervase, Birk Crag, Great Clowes-street, Higher Broughton,

Manchester.
Martin, Mrs. Elizabeth G., 42, Rue Gambetta, Honfleur (Calvados),

France.
Martin, W. R., Pine Craig, South Queensferry, Scotland.
Mathews, George B., B.A., 1, Menai View-terrace, Upper Bangor,

North Wales.
Metcalfe, Captain Henry, Wateruliet Arsenal, West Troy, New

York, U.S.A.
Middleton, Miss Alice Edith, 3, Porchester-gate, London, W,
MiLEY, M., B.A., Trinity College, Cambridge.
Millar, Alexander, Airdrie House, 19, Orlando-road, Clapham,

London, S.E.
Miller, Robert, 6, Chester-street, Edinburgh.
MiLNES, George Hutchinson, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., Addenbrooke's

Hospital, Cambridge.
Moore, Lieut.-Col. Montgomery, The Royal Barracks, Dublin.
Morris, Miss E., 13, Park-street, Park-lane, London, W.
MoRTLOCK, Rev. E., M.A., Snail well Rectory, Newmarket.
Mott, Frederick T., F.R.G.S., Birstal-hill, Leicester.
MouLE, John, Codicote, Welwyn, Herts.
MuLLAN, Rev. David, B.A., Kingstown, Co. Dublin.
Murray, R. Milne, M.A., M.B., M.R.C.P., (Edin.), 10, Hope-street,

Edinburgh.
Musk, Miss Agnes, Market-place, Mildenhall, Suffolk.
Myers, Mrs., Brandon House, Cheltenham.
Myers, Mrs. F. W. H., Leckhampton House, Cambridge.
Mylne, Mrs., 22, Gloucester-place, Hyde Park, London, W.
Neate, Percy John, F.G.S., M.M.E., Med way Iron Works, Rochester.
Neville, Francis Henry, M.A., Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge.
Newton, Richard Heber, Garden City, New York, U.S.A.
Nichols, Miss Irene, Lady Margaret Hall, Oxford.


LUt of Members and Associates. x 829

Nicholson, Sir Charles, Bart., D.O.L., LL.D., M.D., The Grange,
Totteridge, Herts.

Noel, Hon. Roden, 57, Anerley Park, London, S.E.

Norway, Arthur H., Secretary's Office, General Post Office, London,

E.O.
Parker, Kenyan C. S., 13, Old-square, Lincoln's Inn, London, W.C.
Passingham, Mrs., Milton, Cambridge.
Patterson, Mrs. Jane, 23, Brompton-square, London, S.W.
Peard, Miss Frances Mary, Spamon, Torquay.
Perry, Edwin C, B.A., King's College, Cambridge.
PoDMORE, Austin, 14, Dean's-yard, Westminster, S.W.
Pollock, Dighton Nicolas, King's College, Cambridge.
Pope, George H., M.A., B.C.L., 14, The Avenue, Clifton, Bristol.
Postgate, Professor J. P., M.A., Trinity College, Cambridge.
Powell, George Thompson, Rotherwood, Sydenham Hill, S.E.
Praed, Mrs. Campbell, 16, Talbot-square, Hyde Park, London, W.
BrANDOLPH, Edmund, 34, Upper Brook-street, Park-lane, London, W.
Rawson, Henry G., 68, Cornwall-gardens, London, S.W.
Ridley, Miss, 19, Belsize Par London, N.W.
Robin, Percy A, B.A., The Leys, Cambridge.

Robins, Mrs. Elizabeth, 8, Marlborough-road, St. John's Wood,
London, N.W.

RoLLESTON, Thomas W., Glasshouse, Shinrone, Ireland.

Roxburgh, Robert, M.B., F.R.C.S.E., 1, Victoria-buildings, Weston-
super-Mare.

Sampson, Colonel Dudley, Buxshalls, Lindfield, Hay ward's Heath,
Sussex.

Sampson, Mrs. Dudley, Buxshalls, Lindfield, Haywards Heath, Sussex.
Sandars, Miss, Lower Soughton, Northop, Flintshire.
Sawyer, Miss Eliza A., 25, Lansdowne-crescent, Cheltenham.
Schiller, F. C. S., Balliol College, Oxford.
Scholepield, Rev. C. C, M.A., Eton College, Windsor.
Sellin, Professor C. W., 59, Borgfelde, Mittelweg, Hamburg.
Shadwell, Miss Blanche, 21, Nottingham-place, London, W.
Sharps, Mrs. Reginald, 11, Victoria-road, Kensington, London, W:
Shilton, Alfred John, 40, Paradise-street, Birmingham.
Shoobridge, Leonard K. H., Albury House, Ware, Herts.
SiDEBOTHAM, E. J., Caius College, Cambridge
SiDGWiCK, Mrs. Edward, 29, Gloucester-square, London, W.
Skene, Miss F. M. F., 13, New Inn, Hall-street, Oxford.
Smith, Andrew, Lanark, N.B.

Smith, Francis Nicholas, J. P., B.A., 12, Wilton-crescent, Belgrave-
square, S.W.

Smith, Mrs. Martin, 11, Wilton-crescent, Belgrave-square, London,
S.W


330 Lini of Members and Aisociaies.

Shitb, Rev. Cajtost IL Tratebs, RD., Vicarage, Clyde-road, Dablin.
SsrrB, Miss, 4653, C^rmantown-avenae, Philadelphia, U.S.A.
SxrrH, Mm. J. Gea5T, 25, Leinster-gardens, Hyde Park, London, W.
SoiXAfl, PftOFuaoB W. J., M.A, F.B.S.K, F.G.S., Trinity Coll^ie^

Dablin.
Spexces, Mias Georoiasa M., 25, York-street, Portman-sqnare^

XiOiuiiOn, W.
Starlet, Mim Sara, 156, Poi-tsdown Road, Maida Yale, London,

W.
Stephen, O. Leslie, 4, Oollingfaam-place, Cromwell-road, London, SW«
Stetenboit, Arthur J., Trinity College, Cambridge.
Stewart, Dayid^ Woodside, Wemyis Bay, N.B.
Stillmast, W. J., Office of Evening Post, New York, U.S.A.
Stoste, Mias Edfth L, Shnte Hay, Walditch, Bridport
Stout, Georoe R, B.A., St John's College, Cambridge.
Stmostdo, Johh ADDncGTOX, M.A., Davos-Platz, Switzerland.
Tauntost, Mrs. R. H., Brook Yale, Witton, near Birmingham.
Tatlor, I. O. Howard, Pine Banks Tower, Thorpe, Norwich.
Tatlor, Miss Marian, Ayton House, Great Ayton, Yorkshire.
Templetost, J. Murray, 1, Park-circus, Glasgow.
TE3niA2rT, Mrs., 2, Richmond-terrace, Whitehall, London, S. W.
TEVNAirr, Miss Dorothy, 2, Richmond-terrace, Whitehall, London,

aw.

TEmcAirr, Miss Laura, 35, Grosvenor-sqaare, London, W.

Thrupp, Mrs. Leonard, 67, Kensington Gardens-square, London, W.

Thurstan, Frederick W., M.A., Kingsley College, Westward Ho,

Devon.
Trench, Ret. F.Chenevix, M.A.,St John Baptist, Taebrook, LiverpooL
Tucker, Miss Mildred A. R., 4, Oxford and Cambridge Mansions,

London, N.W.
Turner, John P., Beauliea, Farqahar-road« Edgbaston, Birmingham.
Vbnman, Hezbkiah, 20, Pimlico-road, London, S.W.
ViALLS, Mrs., Teddington House, Teddington, S.W.
Vincent, Maria Lady, 8, Ebury-street, London, S.W.
Vivian, H., Trinity College, Cambridge.

Walker, Miss M., 17, Gloucester-street, Warwick-square, S.W.
Walsham, Maa, 27, Weymouth-street, Portland-place, London, W.
Walwyn, Mrs., 9, Sion-hill, Clifton, Bristol
Wassell, Henry A, Addenbrook Villa, Love-lane, Stourbridge
Wherry, G. E., F.R.C.S., Corpus-buildings, Cambridge.
White, William, Morden House, 55, Highbury Hill, London, N.
White, Mrs. Henry, 22, Orosvenor-place, London, S.W.
WiLLETT, Mrs., Bedalesy Lindfield, near Haywards Heath, Sussex.
Williams, Thomas, B.A^ LLBl, 71, BoareriMtreet, Chester.


List of Member B and Asaociaies, 331

WiLLSON, Rev. T. B., M.A., 11, Canterbury-villas, Thornton Heath,
Croydon.

"WiNGPiELD, MR8.i The Redings, Totteridge, Herts.
WiNCKLEY, Mrs., Flambards, Harrow-on-the-Hill, near London.
Withers, John James, Kling's College, Cambridge.
Wood, Rev. Canon, M.A., Newent Rectory, Gloucestershire.
WooDHOUSE, Otway K, A.I.C.E., 20, Upper Phillimore-gardons,

Kensington, London, W.
Woods, Miss Alice, 8, Bath-road, Bedford Park, Ohiswick,
Woods, Arthur, A.I.O.E., Mickleham, Surrey.
Workman, Walter Percy, B.A., Trinity College, Cambridge,
WoRSLEY, Mrs., Bromley College, Kent.

Wright, Arthur J., M.A., Kensington Palace Mansions, London, W,
Wright, Thomas Herbert, Assistant Engineer, Public Works

Department, N.W.P., India, or care of H. S. King and Co.,

65, Comhill, London, E.C.

N.6.— Members and Associates are requested to send information of any change
of address to the Assistant-Secretary, 14. Dean*s-yard, Westminster, S.W.


COUNCIL FOE 1884.


Prof. W. F. Barrett.
G. P. Bidder, Q.C.
Alexander C alder.
Walter H. Coffin.
Edmund Gurney.
BicHARD Hodgson.
Charles C. Massey.
Rev. W. Stainton Moses.
Frederic W. H. Myers.
Edward Br. Pease.


Francis W. Percival.

Frank Podmorb.

C. LocKHART Robertson, M.D.

E. Dawson Rogers.

Henry A. Smith.

J. Herbert Stack.

Prof. Balfour Stewart, F.R.S.

W. H. Stone, M.B.

Hensleigh Wedgwood.

G. Wyld, M.D.


HON. TREASURER.
Alexander Caldbr, 1, Hereford Square, South Kensington, S.W.

HON. SECRETARY.
Edmund Gurnby, 26, Montpelier Square, London, S.W.


2 B 2.


Cfomtitiltlon and Rules, 335


VJI.

CONSTITUTION AND RULES.

1884.


Title.
1, — The name of the Society is — The Society for Psychical Research.

Objects.

2. — The objects for which this Society is established are : —

(a) To unite students and inquirers in an organised body, with
the view of promoting the investigation of certain obscure
phenomena, including those commonly known as Psychical,
Mesmeric, or Spiritualistic ; and of giving publicity to the
results of such research.

{h) To print, sell, or otherwise distribute publications on

Psychical and kindred subjects; to afford information to

inquirers into these subjects by correspondence and

otherwise ; to collect and arrange facts respecting them ;

to open Libraries, E.eading-rooms, and other suitable

Premises and Offices ; and generally to do all such other

things as may be conducive to the attainment of the above
objects.

Note. — To prevent misconception, it is Iiere expressly stated tliat
Membership of the Society does not imply the acceptance of
any particular eocplanatuni of the plienomena investigated^
nor any belief as to the operation, in the physical worlds of
forces other tJian those recognised by Physical Science,

Government.

3. — ^The Society shall be governed by a Council consisting of
twenty-four Members. The Council shall elect from amongst the
Members of the Society a President, who shall be President of the
Society, and an ex-officio Member of the Council and of all Committees
and who shall retire from office yearly at the first Meeting of the


334 ConBtitutian and Rules,

Council after the Annual General Meeting of the Members of the
Society. He shall, however, be eligible for re-election, and shall be
deemed as retaining his offices until he shall have been re-elected or lus
successor appointed. The Council shall also from time to time elect
Vice-Presidents, who shall be ex-offido Honorary Members of the
Society, and shall have the privilege of being present at any of the
Meetings of the Council.

Constitution.
4. — The Society shall consist of —

(a) Members, who shall contribute not less than two guineas
annually, or a single payment of twenty guineas, and who
shall be eligible to any of the offices of the Society ; and
shall be entitled to vote in the election of the Governing
Council and at all meetings of the Society; to use its
Keading-rooms and Libranes ; to borrow books from its
Libraries ; and to the free receipt of any journal, transactions,
or periodical publication which may be issued by the Council.

(/;) Associates, who shall contribute not less than one guinea
annually, or a single payment of ten guineas, and who shall
l)e entitled to attend all Meetings of the Society, except such
as are convened for business purposes only, and to the free
receipt of the ordinary published Proceedings of the Society ;
and shall have free access to its Reading-rooms and Libraries.

i\ronil)ors and Associates shall be entitled to purchase all the
publications of the Society at half their published price.

5. — All Members and Associates of the Society shall be elected by
iho Council. Every candidate for admission shall be required to give
Huoh n^fortnioos as shall be approved by the Council, unless he shall
havo botni pix-ipc-^sed in writing by two or more Members or Associates,
who» on his In^half, and by his authority, shall assent to the Constitution
and Uulos of tho Society, and consent to abide and be governed by
thiMu, one of whom shall have certified in writing, from personal
knowUnlgi^ of him, that he is a tit person for admission. Every such
<»t^rti!ieate having Ihhmi read and approved at a Meeting of the Coimcil,
the eleetion sUiall l>o proceeded with. The election to be by ballot, and
i>ne blaoir to exclude. The Council shall cause the result to

iH« lUiM « candidate, who, if elected, shall be furnished


Constitution and Rules. 335

with a certificate of election and a copy of the " Constitution and
Rules."

6. — The subscription shall become due immediately on election, and
afterwards in advance on the first day of January in each year. In
the case of any Member or Associate being elected on or after the 1st
October, his subscription shall be accepted as for the following year.
• Any Member or Associate who is more than three months in arrear
and who fails to pay after two applications in writing, shall be liablp
to be struck off the list.

7. — If any Member or Associate desire to resign, he shall give
written notice thereof to the Secretary. He shall, however, be liable
for all subscriptions which shall then remain unpaid.

Honorary Members and Honorary Associates.

8. — The Council may invite any person who

(i) is either distinguished for knowledge or experience in Psychical
Research or otherwise eminent, to become an Honorary
Member of the Society ; or any person who

(ii) has rendered services to the Society,

to become an Honorary Associate, such person to be eligible
for re-election anni:ally.

Honorary Members and Associates shall have the privileges without
the obligations attaching to Associates.

Corresponding Members.

9. — The Council shall have power to elect as Corresponding
Members, who shall be on the same footing as Honorary Members,
persons able and willing to forward the objects of the Society. Thej
shall be eligible for re-election annually.

General Meetings.

10. — The Anniversary or Annual General Meeting of the Members
of the Society shall be held in the month of January, on a day to be
fixed by the Council, and of which not less than twenty-one days' notice
shall be given. The business of such Anniversary Meeting shall be to
receive the Annual Report of the Council, and Statement of Assets and
Liabilities, to elect New Members of Council, and to discuss questions
on the Rules and management. A Member shall not moot any question


336 CoMtituUon and Ruka,

on the Rules or management of the Society unless he shall have given
at least fourteen dajs* notice thereof to the Secretary, but amendments
to any motion may be brought forward without notice, provided they
relate to the same subject. The Secretary shall give seven days' notice
to every Member of all questions of which such notice shall have been
given to him.

1 1. — Special General Meetings of the Members of the Society may
be convened by the Council, or by the President, or by the Secretary on
the requisition of ten Members, and notice of such Meetings, stating the
ol^ects, shall be given at least seven days previously, and no other
business shall be entered upon at such Meetings than that stated in the
notice.

12. — All General Meetings of the Members of the Society shall be
convened by circular to the Members.

Proceedings ix General Meeting.

IS. — The quorum necessary to constitute a General Meeting shall
be ten.

1 4. — ^The President of the Society shall preside ex-officio / in his
alienee anv one of the Vice-Presidents who may at the siame time be a
Member of the Society ; or should no such Vice-President be present
a Member of CounciL In their absence the Meeting shall nominate
its Chairman.

15. If within one hour from the time appointed for the Meeting a

quorum is not present the Meeting shall stand adjourned for one week.
At the adjourned Meeting the number present for the time being ahall
constitute the le^ number.

1^:. — All questions shall, at a General Meeting, be determined by a
nxA vHtv of the Members present, except in the election of Members of
Cvxir.vil *t the Annual General Meeting, for which election voting
T«{^rs shall Iv accepted. The Chairman shall have a second or casting
\-ote a: aII General Meetings of the Societ}'.

17. Voting: j»pers for the election of Members of Council shall be

s^tit to all Members of the Society with the notice of the Meeting, and
shall W ^^^r<*sited with the Secretary of the Society, at least twenty-
foar hvx:rs prior to the Meeting. They shall be duly signed by the
MemWr vcung^ and W '^udosftd in envelopes securely fastened and


Constitution and Rules, 337

marked on the outside " voting paper," and enclosed in a letter sent to
the Secretary and signed by the Member voting, and they shall not be
opened till so directed by the Chairman at the Meeting.

Election and Business op Council.

18. — The Council shall consist of eighteen members, elected
annually at a General Meeting, and of other members co-opted from
time to time by the Council, provided that the whole number shall not
exceed twenty-four. The nam^s of persons for the first time proposed
to be co-opted on the Council shall be brought forward at one Meeting-
of the Council, and shall be sent round to all members of Council
previous to its next Meeting, when the voting shall be by ballot, and a
unanimous vote of those present shall be requisite to carry the election.
The members co-opted from time to time by the Council shall cease ta
hold office at the Annual Meeting at which new members are elected,
but may be co-opted afresh at the First Meeting of the Council after
such Annual Meeting.

19. — Of the eighteen elected Members of the Council of the Society
so appointed, six or whatever number may be required to reduce the
number of elected Members to twelve shall go out of office at the time
appointed for election of Council in the year 1883 ; one other third, at
the time appointed for such election in the year 1884, and the remainder
at the time appointed for such election in the year 1885, and the^
vacancies so made shall be filled by fresh elections. All Members of
Council from time to time elected at the annual elections ishall go out
of office at the time appointed for the annual election in the third
following year. The Secretary shall every year, at least twenty-one,
days before the ensuing Annual General Meeting, send to all the Members
of the Society a list of the retiring Members of Council, and a statement
whether all, and if not, which of them are candidates for re-election. In
all cases the retiring Members shall be deemed as remaining in office
until they shall have been re-elected or their successors appointed.

20. — Any Member of the Society who shall have paid up all
subscriptions due from him, including that for the current year,
shall be eligible for election or re-election, as a Member of Council,
provided he shall have been nominated in writing by a Member of the
Society, duly qualified, and such nomination shall have been forwarded
to the Secretary fourteen days before the time of holding the Annual

2 c


338 Coiihtitution and Rules,

General Meeting. A list of the persons so nominated shall be forwarded
to all the Members of the Society, at least ten days prior to the
meeting. In case more persons, duly qualified, shall be nominated for
•election at any Annual General Meeting than are required to fill up the
'I'acant places of those retiring by rotation, then such persons shall be
preferred and declared elected as shall obtain the highest number of
vote^

21. — The Council shall at their first Meeting after every Annual
General Meeting, elect a President as provided for in Erule 3. At the
same Meeting they shall also elect a Treasurer and Auditor, and such
other officers as they may deem expedient, who shall retire from office
.annually, at the same time and under the same conditions as provided
for in the case of the President by Rule 3. They shall from time to time
elect Vice-Presidents, Members of the Society, and Honorary Members,
as provided for by Rules 3, 5, and 9. They shall have power to appoint a
salaried Secretary, and such other paid officers, assistants, and servants
as they may deem necessary, and to determine their duties. All the
appointments made by the Council, the Council may at their pleasure
revoke.

22. — ^The Council shall elect persons duly qualified to fill up any
vacancies which may, from time to time, occur in their own body ; and
any such persons so elected shall go out of office at the time when the
term of office of the persons in whose places they were respectively ap-
pointed would have expired.

23. — The Council shall meet monthly, unless otherwise determined.
An attendance lK>ok shall be kept, and signed by each Member of the
Council at the time of entering the Council-room. In all Meetings of
the Council four shall be a quorum ; all questions shall be decided by
vote, and a decision of the majority shall, except where otherwise
providi*d bv these Rules, be the decision of the Meeting ; the Chairman
to have, in addition to his own, a casting vote. The Chair shall be
iX'oupied bv the President : or in his absence by a Vice-President who
is a subscribing Member of the Society, or should no such Vice-President
Ih* present^ by a Member of Council chosen by the Meeting.

24. — ^The Council shall haTe power to appoint for special purposes
Committees coi^pr anbeni of the Society or other suitable

pejTons. Etm; 1 nport its proceedings to the Council


Constitution and Rules. 339

through the Chairman or Secretary of such Committee, one of whom
must be a Member of Council, and no report shall be published without
the sanction of the Council.

25. — The Council shall have power, by a majority of three-fourths
of the Members present, in a Special Meeting of their own body duly
convened for the purpose, and of which, and of the objects thereof, not
less than seven days' notice shall have been given to each Member of
the Council, to add to, suspend, or alter any of the rules, regulations,
and bye-laws of the Society ; such alteration to be in force only until
the next ensuing Anniversary Meeting, unless it be then confirmed
by the vote of a majority of the Members of the Society there
present.

26. — The Council shall have power to employ the funds of the
Society, including any funds obtained by donation, bequest, or
otherwise, in any manner consistent with the objects thereof, and they
may invest any surplus funds in such securities and in such manner
as they may deem proper ; and they may sell, employ, or re-invest the
said funds.

27. — The Council may establish Branches, and Local or Provincial
Societies, in any part of Great Britain or elsewhere, under such regula-
tions, and subject to such limitations as they may deem fit.

28. — The Council shall have power from time to time to co-operate

with, or accept the alliance of, other Societies, having similar objects in

view.

Auditors.

29. — There shall be two Auditors — one chosen by the Members

of the Society, and one chosen by the Members of the Council. These

shall audit the accounts of the Society, and report thereon to the

Oouncil. The auditors shall be empowered to examine into the par-

"ticulars of all expenditure of the funds of the Society, where they

shall see occasion; and may report their opinion upon the whole or

any part of it, whether it has been expended in accordance with the

•constitution of the Society.

Finance.

30. — The Council shall cause true accounts to be kept of all sums of
money received and paid, and shall submit the accounts of the Society,
with a statement of the assets and liabilities, to the Annual General
Meeting.


340 Constitution and Buka.

Pbopebtt akd Funds.

31. — ^Every paper accepted bj the Society for reading or publication
shall become the absolute property of the Society^ unless the author's
rights be specially reserved.

32. — ^The property of the Society shall be invested in Trustees
chosen by the Council. The Trustees shall be eligible to any other
office in the Society.

Notices.

33. — The posting of a notice to the registered address of a Member
or Associate shall be deemed service of a notice. Members or
Associates residing abroad shall name a place of address in the United
Eingdom. In default of such address, the posting of a notice in a
conspicuous place at the Offices of the Society shall be deemed to be a
notice.

34. — A notice forwarded by post to the Secretary of a Branch or
Allied Society shall be deemed a notice to the Members of the Society
of which he is Secretary.

Interpretation of Rules.

35. — In the Interpretation of these Bales words importing the
singular number only, include the plural, and words importing the
masculine gender only, include the feminine.


National Preis Agency, Limited, 13, >Miitefriar8 Street, E.C


PEOOEEDINGS OF THE


SOCIETY FOR PSYCHICAL RESEARCH.


INDEX TO VOL. II.


A.

A., Mb., Case contributed by 226

Apparitionfl, A Theory of 109, 157

Automatic- Writing, A Telepathic Explanation of 217

„ Instances of 225-237


B.

B., Mb. H. C. 8., Case contributed by 141

Barrett, Prof. W. F,, Note on the existence of a " Magnetic Sense " 56

„ See also Reports of Mesmeric, Eeichenhach and Thought'

trmiKference Committees

Bee, Bey. B., Case contributed by ... 53

Bengough, Mrs., " Divining " Experiments with 84,85,104

Birchall, J., Experiments in Thought-transference by 24,194

Bowstead, Boland, Case contributed by 179

Braid's Theory of Hypnotism 269,274,277

Brighton Experiments in Mesmerism 17, 18, 201

Browning, Bobert, Case contributed by 130


C.

C, Mbs., Case contributed by 126

C, Mr. A. G n, Case contributed by .. ... 123

Carpenter, Dr., Theory of Hypnotism 266


u


Index to Vol. II,


Castle, B., Case contributed by

ChattertoD, Lady Georglana, Case recorded by ...
Committees of the Society, Reports of ...

Constitution and Rules of the Society

Conway, Mesmeric Experiments with

Council of the Society

Crabbe, Miss, Case contributed by


... • • .


132
162


See under subject headings
.. ... ... ••• ""•'

17, 205

108, 331, 337

Q

aa aaa ••« ••• ^


• t • • • •


■ • • • • »


D.

Davt, Mrs., Case contributed by

Despine, Dr., Theory of Hypnotism
Diagrams, Illustrative of Thought-transference

Divining Rod, Phenomena of the

Experimental Evidence —

Dowsing for Water

Metals and other Substances Traced

Murderers alleged to have been Tracked
Table of Results ... ... ... ...

Various Substances used instead of the Hazel Rod
Practical uses made of...
Reports upon

By E. Vaughan Jenkins ...

ByE.E. Pease

By Prof . W. J. Sollas
Small percentage of "Diviners"

Writers, various, upon

Dublin Experiments in Mesmerism, &c. ...
Dunlop, Engineer, Case contributed by ...


• • • • • •


• • • • • •


• • • • • •


• • • • • •


280, 285

33, 207

73, 79

73-77, 82-107

84, 88

80

■ • • • • t/V/

• •• Ou

82, 90-107

... 90

... 78

... 73

... 87

... 79
13, 56

... 172


E.


Elliotson, De., Cases recorded by
Esdaile, Dr., Cases recorded by ...


21

20


F.

Fearnley, Mesmeric Experiments with
Frith, Mrs., Mesmeric Experiments with
Fischer, Dr. E. L., Cases recorded by ..


... 13
... 16
... 122


G.

^^OSTS

Gibson, R,, Case contributed by


See Hatmted H&usex


Index to Vol. IL iii

Gilmour, Rev. A., Case recorded by 21

Gregory, Prof ., Cases recorded by 21

Gumey, Edmund-
Hypnotism, The Problems of 265

„ The Stages of ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 61

Mesmerism, Account of some Experiments in 201

M. Richet*s Recent Researches in Thought-transference, Review of 239
See also Reports of the Literary^ Mesineric, and Tkoiight-trang/erenoe

Committees

Guthrie, Malcolm, Experiments in Thought-transference by, 1, 24, 189, 190, 200


H.

Hall, Peof. Stanley, on Hypnotic Phenomena 65,271,276,278

Haunted Houses, &c.. Report of Committee on 137

... 141
... 140
... 148
143, 145


Appearances in ^

„ Causes which seem to induce the Phenomena in


»


j>


Periodic Disturbances in

Physical Phenomena observed in

Tragic Incidents or Crimes apparently connected with


the Phenomena of

Heckmondwike Experiments in Mesmerism

Heidenhain's Theory of Hypnotism

Hughes, F, S See Report of the Committee on Haunted Houses

Hypnotism See Mesmerism


140, 143

... 18

65, 279, 281


J.

Jenkins, E. Vaughan, Evidence on the Divining-Rod. collected by ...81, 90

Jones, Lieut. Col., Case contributed by 173

Jukes, Rev. A., Case contributed by 129


K.

Kebshaw, J., Mesmeric Experiments made by 16, 18

Keulemans, J. G,, Case contributed by ... ... ... .. ... ... 134

King, Mrs*., Mesmeric Experiments with 18


L.

La WEENCE, W. S., "Divining " Experiments mth ,,.'^V^^^^J^

LIbrarjr, Catalogue of.., ,. ., .. ... "... .» »» *** *^^


iv Index to Vol. 11.

Library, Increase of ^^

„ Rules of ... ... ... ... .•• ••• •• ••• ••• •'^'^

Lindsay, Lord, Experiment to test the Existence of a " Magnetic" Sense, by 67

Literary Committee, Reports of 43,109,157

Liverpool Experiments in Thought-transference 2,24,189

Looking, Experiments at ^^

Lockyer, G., " Divining " Experiments with 94,106

Lodge, Prof. Oliver J., Experiments in Thought-transference 189

„ and Mr. Alfred Lodge, Note on M. Richet's Article

on Thought-transference, by 257


M »


M. •

Magnetic Sense, Note on the Existence of a ^6

See also Reichenhach Phenomena f

Marchand, Geo., Case contributed by 16^

Meetings of the Society 1,108,187,217,238^

Members and Associates of the Society, List of 317*^

Mesmerism, Report of Committee on 12

„ „ Appendix to... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 20

Experimental Evidence— 1

Choice, Loss of Power of 287

Community of Sensation 17,205,206 ^

„ of Pain 17,19,205


„ of Smell ... ... ... ... ... ... 20, 23

of Taste .• ... 17, 205


>•


;


Concentration of Operator *s Thoughts necessary to ensure

Success 203, 243

Hallucinations 70, 272

Hypnotic Theory, Insufficiency of 289 (

Hypnotism, Problems of 265

„ Stages of ... ... 61 ^

Memory, Conditions of , during the Trance 67,273

283, 287, 292

Forgetfulness, total or partial, of what has occurred in the

xrance... ... ... .,, ... ... ... ... v)7, zio

Reasoning Powers, Exercise of 273,284

Rigidity and Anaesthesia 17, 71, 201, 273, 275, 291

Thought-transference 124, 203, 219, 243

Transferenceof Motor or Inhibitory Impulses 14,124

Thought-transference affecting the Sensory System of the Per-
cipient 203, 243

Moberly, Mrs. Alfred, Case contributed by 235

Morgan, F., Case contributed by 220

Mnllins, J., "Divining " Experiments made 81, 90, 95, 97 ,


Index to Vol II. v

.'^ Muscle-Reading, Experiments in 10

Myers, F. W. H., On a Telepathic Explanation of some so-called

Spiritualistic Phenomena 217

See also Reports of the Literary and Thought-transference

Committees


0.

Officers and Council of the Society, List of, for 1884 317, 331


P.

Page, Rev. A. Shaw, Case contributed by 159

Pease, E. R., On the Divining Rod 78

See also Reports of the Committee on Haunted, Houses

Podmore, Frank... /Sfee Reports of the Committees on Mesmerism and Haunted Bouses

Powys, Hon. Mrs. Fox, Case contributed by 5

Presidential Addresses 152, 238

Pusey, Dr., Case recorded by 175


K

Rabdomancy, or the Phenomena of Divining Rod 73, 79

Raikes, T., Case recorded by 177

Rawlinson, R., Case contributed by 158

" Reichenbach " Phenomena 56

„ Evidence in favour of the Existence of a " Magnetic Sense " 59

„ Sensations in the Magnetic Field 56,59

„ „ Absence of —in the case of Normal Individuals 57, 60

Richet, M. C, Recent Researches in Thought-transference by 239

„ „ Note on— by Prof. O. J. Lodge & Mr. Alfred Lodge 257


S.

Searle, R., Case contributed by 163

Severn, Arthur and Mrs., Case contributed by 128

Sidgwick, Prof. H., Presidential Addresses 152, 238

Skirving, Alex., Case contributed by 12 6

Smith, Gr. A., Mesmeric Experiments 13, 202

„ „ Reichenbach Experiments 56

Smith, H. A., Cases contributed by "^aSi^^iai^

Smith f W, J.f Experiments in Thougbt-txansiexeiifi^ ^^'ffSV


■\.0o

^^.Bu^vt^^^^e* •- ... - ... ^'^ ... - ,^

^dltv^^'^'t.^ftio*''^'' ... - ... - ... - 316

3\1


« ..snirS •••


itVOtt*


^^^tV^^x^'f - - - - - - - 't

t^***'' -ijvot**** ... - ... - ... -a^l, 33^' ^^1

o^^Z^^^Z^v.^^^^;^ ••• ... - ... ^^^^


^^ t ■Re?"** " f *.« W^^"^ ... .antfte»° \.M- \.


.-^^-,;Vo.^tr^vo.^ ::. ••;,,. i.^> ^^^' ^^'' .!.


•••


Index to Vol IL vii

Experimental Evidence —

Objects ; ... 8, 24, 26, 124, 194, 195, 197, 216, 243

Jl CwXLLo ••• ••• ••• #•• #•• ••• ••■ ••• ••• O* mt V

Pictures 7, 31, 42, 195, 199, 208

Playing Cards 195,239

Reproductions (plates of ) made by Sensitives 33,207

Scenes and Places, Transferred Impressions of 30

X«lDUW0 ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• 0| Oa ^t/

Words and Sentences 8, 9, 26, 29, 250

Physiological Effect on Sensitives 7,24,200

„ on the Agent 200

Richet, M. Ch., Researches in Thought-transference by 239, 257
Spontaneous ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 130, 216

„ Connection between — and Experimental ... 203,243

Table of Results 216

Thought of Agent affecting Sensor J System of Percipient ... 244
vnshend, Rev. C. H., Cases recorded by 20

V.

RLEY, C. F,, Experiments by, to Test the Existence of a " Magnetic Sense " 57

W.

RBUETON, Canon, Case contributed by 161

Id, Miss, Case contributed by 180

Us, Fred, Mesmeric Experiments with 202

Lkinson, Miss, Case contributed by 159

Lson, Rev. J. M., Case contributed by 121

Y.
