Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. XXIII (1909-1910)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1909 Glasgow: Robert MacLehose and Co. edition (Parts LVIII-LIX) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc23soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research


VOLUME  XXIII

(CONTAINING  PARTS  LVIII-LIX)
1909


The  responsibility  for  both  the  facts  and  the  reasonings  in  papers
published  in  the  Proceedings  rests  entirely  with  their  authors


PRINTED  FOR  THE  SOCIETY  BY

ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  &  COMPANY  LIMITED

UNIVERSITY  PRESS,  GLASGOW
1909

Agents  for  the  sale  of  publications  :

LONDON  :  FRANCIS  EDWARDS,  83  High  Street,  Marylebone,  W.
GLASGOW  :  JAMES  MACLEHOSE  &  SONS,  61  St.  Vincent  Street
AMERICA:  THE  W.  B.  CLARKE  CO.,  26-28  Tremont  Street,  Boston,  Mass.


All  rights  reserved


3  5  3 > 0  ■


CONTENTS.

PAET  LVIII.
June,  1909.


General  Meeting, - -- -- -- -- -  l

I. Report  on  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson-Control. By  Professor
William  James.

Part  L, -  -  2

Part  II., ----------  30

II. Note  on  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson -Control  in  England  in  1906-7.

By  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  and  J.  G.  Piddington,  - - -  122

III.  Report  on  some  Trance  Communications  received  chiefly  through

Mrs.  Piper. By  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.

Table  of  Contents, -  -  127

Introduction, - -  128

Chapter I. Explanatory  and  Historical,  -  -  130

„ II. The  Gurney  Control, -  140

„ III. The  Isaac  Thompson  Case, -  -  162

IV. The  Myers  Control, - -  198

,,  V.  Messages  obtained  through  Miss  Rawson,  -  219
„ VI. Messages from the Myers and  Hodgson

Controls  of  Mrs.  Piper,  Autumn,  1906,  -  226
„ VII. The  Myers  and  Hodgson  Controls  of  Mrs.

Piper,  Spring,  1907, - -  248

„  VIII. The  Joseph  Marble  Series, -  255

„ IX. Supplementary  Remarks, -  -  280

IV.  Psychical  Research  and  Survival  after  Bodily  Death. By  Pro-

fessor A.  C.  Pigou,  --------  286

PART  LIX.
November,  1909.

General  Meeting, ----------  305

Introductory Note to the "  Report  on Sittings  with  Eusapia

Palladiuo," ---------  306

106330


iv  Contents

t t c < ft 1  1


e c  c  t e  ( ct''< t v  c  1  c e  »■ •  c  rAuai

Report  on  a  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino. By  the  Hon.

Everarp  Ffilding.  W.  W.  Bagg almt,  *aR<?l<  .Hereward

Carrington.  : tcc  "c 5 J :  :

Table  of  Contents, -  . -  309

I.  Introduction.

Preliminary,  ------  310

Historical, - - - - - - - - -  311

Object  of  the  Present  Investigation, - - - -  318

The  Investigating  Committee -  -  319

II.  General  Account  of  the  Sittings.

The  Seance  Room,  ......  321

Conduct  of  the  Seances, ------  323

The  Control,- 325

The  Phenomena,  -  ------  328

Conclusions,  --  ----- -  340

III.  Detailed  Report.

Measurements, -  ------  345

Seance  I., - -- -- -- --  346

„ II, --------  358

„ III,  -  375

„ IV,  ---------  399

„ V, ---------  418

„ VI,  -  440

„ VII,- -------  463

„ VIII, --------  484

„ IX, 505

The  Bell  Incident,  - - -  525

Seance  X, - -- -- -- --  527

. „ XL,  --------  536

IV.  Individual  Conclusions  of  the  Investigators.

Final  Note  by  Here  ward  Carrington, - -  555

W.  W.  Baggally, -  556

„  the  Hon.  Everard  Feilding,  - - -  566

Supplement.

M.  Courtier's  Report on  the Experiments  with  Eusapia
Palladino  at  the  Paris  Institut  General  Psychologique.

Ey  Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo,  570

Index  to  Vol.  XXIII, ------  590


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research.


PART  LVIII.
June,  1909.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  GENERAL  MEETING.

The  133rd  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  in  the
Hall  at  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.,  on  Thursday,
January  28th,  1909,  at  5  p.m.;  the  President,  Mrs.  Henry
Sidgwick,  in  the  chair.

Professor  William  James's  "  Preliminary  Report  on  Mrs.
Piper's  Hodgson-Control,"  forming  Part  I.  of  the  paper  printed
below,  was  read  by  Mr.  J.  G.  Piddington.


A


2


Professor  William  James.


[part


I.

EEPOET  ON  MRS.  PIPER'S  HODGSON-CONTROL.

PART  I.1

By  Professor  William  James.

Richard  Hodgson  died  suddenly  upon  December  20th,  1905.
On  December  28th  a  message  purporting  to  come  from  him
was  delivered  in  a  trance  of  Mrs.  Piper's,  and  she  has  hardly
held  a  sitting  since  then  without  some  manifestation  of  what
professed  to  be  Hodgson's  spirit  taking  place.  Hodgson  had
often  during  his  lifetime  laughingly  said  that  if  he  ever
passed  over  and  Mrs.  Piper  was  still  officiating  here  below,
he  would  control  her  better  than  she  had  ever  yet  been
controlled  in  her  trances,  because  he  was  so  thoroughly
familiar  with  the  difficulties  and  conditions  on  this  side.
Indeed  he  was ;  so  that  this  would  seem  prima  facie  a
particularly  happy  conjunction  of  spirit  with  medium  by  which
to  test  the  question  of  spirit  return.

I  have  collated  69  of  the  American  sittings  (the  latest  being
that  of  January  1st,  1908)  in  which  the  professed  R.  H.  has
appeared  (his  communications  forming  possibly  a  sixth  of  the
total  bulk  of  the  records),  and  a  few  remarks  as  to  my  own
relation  to  the  phenomenon  would  seem  a  good  introduction
to  what  follows.  I  have  no  space  for  twice-told  tales,  so  I  will
assume  that  my  readers  are  acquainted,  to  some  degree  at
any  rate,  with previously  printed accounts of Mrs.  Piper's

1  This  report  was  prepared  to  be  read  at  the  General  Meeting  of  the  Society,
on  January  28th,  1909.  To  make  a  single  document  by  distributing  its  material
through  the  larger  report  would  cost  much  labor,  so  the  two  parts  are  printed
separately,  but  readers  will  understand  that  they  should  be  read  in  conjunction.


LVlil.] Report  on  Mrs.  Piper  s  Hodgson-Control.


3


mediumship.1  I  had  myself  had  no  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper
and  had  hardly  seen  her  for  some  nine  years,  but  for  most
of  that  time  I  had  been  kept  informed  of  what  was  going
on  by  reading  the  typed  records,  furnished  me  by  my  friend
Hodgson,  of  all  the  trances  of  which  report  was  taken,  and
for  which  the  sitters  had  not  asked  secrecy  to  be  observed.
The  "  Control "  most  frequently  in  evidence  in  these  years
has  been  the  personage  calling  himself  "  Hector."  Dr.  Hodgson
was  disposed  to  admit  the  claim  to  reality  of  Eector  and  of
the  whole  Imperator-Band  of  which  he  is  a  member,  while
I  have  rather  favoured  the  idea  of  their  all  being  dream-
creations  of  Mrs.  Piper,  probably  having  no  existence  except
when  she  is  in  trance,  but  consolidated  by  repetition  into
personalities  consistent  enough  to  play  their  several  roles.
Such  at  least  is  the  dramatic  impression  which  my  acquaint-
ance with  the  sittings  has  left  on  my  mind.  I  can  see  no
contradiction  between  Eector's  being  on  the  one  hand  an
improvised  creature  of  this  sort,  and  his  being  on  the  other
hand  the  extraordinarily  impressive  personality  which  he
unquestionably  is.  He  has  marvellous  discernment  of  the
inner  states  of  the  sitters  whom  he  addresses,  and  speaks
straight  to  their  troubles  as  if  he  knew  them  all  in  advance.
He  addresses  you  as  if  he  were  the  most  devoted  of  your
friends.  He  appears  like  an  aged  and,  when  he  speaks
instead  of  writing,  like  a  somewhat  hollow-voiced  clergyman,  a
little  weary  of  his  experience  of  the  world,  endlessly  patient
and  sympathetic,  and  desiring  to  put  all  his  tenderness  and
wisdom  at  your  service  while  you  are  there.  Critical  and
fastidious  sitters  have  recognized  his  wisdom,  and  confess
their  debt  to  him  as  a  moral  adviser.  With  all  due  respect
to  Mrs.  Piper,  I  feel  very  sure  that  her  own  waking  capacity
for  being  a  spiritual  adviser,  if  it  were  compared  with  Eector's,
would  fall  greatly  behind.

As  I  conceive  the  matter,  it  is  on  this  mass  of  secondary
and  automatic  personality  of  which  of  late  years  Eector  has
been  the  centre,  and  which  forms  the  steady  background  of

1  Chief  among  these  are  Hodgson's  reports  in  Vols.  VIII.  and  XIII.  of  the
S.P.R.  Proceedings,  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  discussion  in  Vol.  XV.,  Hyslop's  long
account  in  Vol.  XVI.,  and  his  briefer  one  in  his  book  Science  and  a  Future
Life.


Professor  William  James.


[part


Mrs.  Piper's  trances,  that  the  supernormal  knowledge  which
she  unquestionably  displays  is  flashed.  Flashed,  grafted,
inserted — use  what  word  you  will— the  trance-automatism  is
at  any  rate  the  intermediating  condition,  the  supernormal
knowledge  comes  as  if  from  beyond,  and  the  automatism  uses
its  own  forms  in  delivering  it  to  the  sitter.  The  most  habitual
form  is  to  say  that  it  comes  from  the  spirit  of  a  departed
friend.  The  earliest  messages  from  "  Hodgson "  have  been
communicated  by  "  Hector,"  but  he  soon  spoke  in  his  own
name,  and  the  only  question  which  I  shall  consider  in  this
paper  is  this :  Are  there  any  unmistakable  indications  in  the
messages  in  question  that  something  that  we  may  call  the
"  spirit "  of  Hodgson  was  probably  really  there  ?  We  need
not  refine  yet  upon  what  the  word  "  spirit "  means  and  on
what  spirits  are  and  can  do.  We  can  leave  the  meaning  of
the  word  provisionally  very  indeterminate, — the  vague  popular
notion  of  what  a  spirit  is  is  enough  to  begin  with.

Sources  other  than  R.  H.'s  surviving  spirit  for  the  veridical
communications  from  the  Hodgson-control  may  be  enumerated
as  follows  :

(1)  Lucky  chance-hits.

(2)  Common  gossip.

(3)  Indications  unwarily  furnished  by  the  sitters.

(4)  Information  received  from  E.  H.,  during  his  lifetime,
by  the  waking  Mrs.  P.  and  stored  up,  either  supraliminally  or
subliminally,  in  her  memory.

(5)  Information  received  from  the  living  E.  H.,  or  others,
at  sittings,  and  kept  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance-memory,  but  out
of  reach  of  her  waking  consciousness.

(6)  "  Telepathy,"  i.e.  the  tapping  of  the  sitter's  mind,  or
that  of  some  distant  living  person,  in  an  inexplicable  way.

(7)  Access  to  some  cosmic  reservoir,  where  the  memory  of
all  mundane  facts  is  stored  and  grouped  around  personal  centres
of  association.

Let  us  call  the  first  five  of  these  explanations  "  natural,"  and
the  last  two  "  supernatural "  or  "  mystical."  It  is  obvious  that
no  mystical  explanation  ought  to  be  invoked  so  long  as  any
natural  one  remains  at  all  plausible.  Only  after  the  first  five
explanations  have  been  made  to  appear  improbable,  is  it  time


lviil] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  5

for  the  telepathy-theory  and  the  cosmic-reservoir  theory  to  be
compared  with  the  theory  of  B.  H.'s  surviving  spirit.

The  total  amount  of  truthful  information  communicated  by
the  E.  H.  control  to  the  various  sitters  is  copious.  He  reminds
them,  for  the  most  part,  of  events — usually  unimportant  ones —
which  they  and  the  living  E.  H.  had  experienced  together.
Taking  any  one  of  these  events  singly,  it  is  never  possible  in
principle  to  exclude  explanations  number  1  and  4.  About
number  3,  a  complete  record  of  the  sitting  ought  generally
to  decide.  Number  2  is  often  excluded  either  by  the  trivial
or  by  the  intimate  nature  of  the  case.  Number  5  would  be
easily  settled  if  the  records  of  the  sittings  of  the  living  Hodgson
with  Mrs.  Piper  were  complete  and  accessible.  They  are
supposed,  for  the  past  ten  or  twelve  years  at  least,  to  exist  in
complete  form.  But  parts  of  them  are  in  Hodgson's  private
cipher,  and  they  are  now  so  voluminous  that  it  would  be  rash
to  say  of  any  recent  message  from  Hodgson,  so  long  as  the
matter  of  it  might  conceivably  have  been  talked  of  at  any
previous  trance  of  Mrs.  Piper's,  that  no  record  of  such  talk
exists. It  might  exist  without  having  yet  been  found.

Add,  to  these  several  chances  that  any  communication  of
fact  by  the  Hodgson-control  may  have  had  a  natural  source,
the  further  consideration  that  Mrs.  Piper  had  known  H.  well
for  many  years,  and  one  sees  that  her  subliminal  powers  of
personation  would  have  had  an  unusually  large  amount  of
material  to  draw  upon  in  case  they  wished  to  get  up  a  make-
believe  spirit  of  Hodgson.  So  far,  then,  from  his  particular
case  being  an  unusually  good  one  by  which  to  test  the  claim
that  Mrs.  Piper  is  possessed  during  her  trances  by  the  spirits
of  our  departed  friends,  it  would  seem  to  be  a  particularly  poor
one  for  that  purpose.  I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it
is  an  exceptionally  poor  one.  Hodgson's  familiarity  when  in
the  flesh  with  the  difficulties  at  this  end  of  the  line  has  not
made  him  show  any  more  expertness  as  a  spirit  than  other
communicators  have  shown ;  and  for  his  successes  there  are
far  more  naturalistic  explanations  available  than  is  the  case
with  the  other  spirits  who  have  professed  to  control  Mrs.  Piper.

So  much  for  generalities,  and  so  much  for  my  own  personal
equation,  for  which  my  various  hearers  will  make  their  sundry
kinds  of  allowance. But  before  taking  up  the  messages  in


6


Professor  William  James.


[part


detail,  a  word  more  about  the  fourth  of  the  naturalistic  explana-
tions which  I  have  instanced  (conversations,  that  is,  between
Mrs.  Piper  and  Hodgson  when  alive)  is  in  order.  Abstractly,  it
seems  very  plausible  to  suppose  that  E.  H.  (who  systematically
imposed  on  himself  the  law  of  never  mentioning  the  content
of  any  trance  in  her  waking  presence)  might  have  methodically
adopted  a  plan  of  entertaining  her  on  his  visits  by  reciting  all
the  little  happenings  of  his  days,  and  that  it  is  this  chronicle
of  small  beer,  stored  in  her  memory,  that  now  comes  out  for
service  in  simulating  his  spirit-identity.

In  the  concrete,  however,  this  is  not  a  highly  probable
hypothesis.  Every  one  who  knew  Hodgson  agrees  that  he  was
little  criven  to  anecdotical  small  change,  unless  the  incident
were  comic  or  otherwise  of  an  impressive  order,  and  that  his
souvenirs  of  fact  were  usually  of  a  broad  and  synthetic  type.
He  had  had  a  "  splendid  time "  at  such  a  place,  with  a
"  glorious "  landscape,  swim,  or  hill-climb,  but  no  further
detail.  Gifted  with  great  powers  of  reserve  by  nature,  he
was  professionally  schooled  to  secretiveness ;  and  a  decidedly
incommunicative  habit  in  the  way  of  personal  gossip  had  become
a  second  nature  with  him, — especially  towards  Mrs.  Piper.  For
many  years  past  he  had  seen  her  three  times  weekly  (except
during  the  months  of  her  summer  vacation)  and  had  had  to
transcribe  the  record  afterwards.  The  work  was  time-consuming,
and  he  found  it  excessively  fatiguing.  He  had  economized
energy  upon  it  by  adopting  for  many  years  past  a  purely  busi-
ness tone  with  the  medium,  entering,  starting  the  trance,  and
leaving  when  it  was  over,  with  as  few  unnecessary  words  as
possible.  Great  brusqueric  was  among  the  excellent  P.  H.'s
potentialities,  and  for  a  while  the  amount  of  it  displayed  towards
Mrs.  P.  led  to  a  state  of  feeling  on  her  part  which  a  New  York
Herald  reporter  once  took  advantage  of  to  exploit  publicly.
R.  H.  was  remonstrated  with,  and  was  more  considerate
afterwards.  It  may  well  be  that  Mrs.  Piper  had  heard  one
little  incident  or  another,  among  those  to  be  discussed  in  the
following  report,  from  his  living  lips,  but  that  any  large  mass  of
these  incidents  are  to  be  traced  to  this  origin,  I  find  incredible.

The  spirit-Hodgson's  first  manifestion  was,  as  I  have  said,
eight  days  after  his  death. There  was  something  dramatically


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Piper  s  Hodgson-Control.


7


so  like  him  in  the  utterances  of  those  earliest  days,  gradually
gathering  "strength"  as  they  did,  that  those  who  had  cognizance
of  them  were  much  impressed.  I  will  begin  by  a  short  account
of  these  earliest  appearances,  of  which  the  first  was  at  Miss
Theodate  Pope's  sitting  on  Dec.  28th,  1905.  At  this  sitting
Rector  had  been  writing,  when  the  hand  dropped  the  pencil  and
worked  convulsively  several  seconds  in  a  very  excited  manner.

Miss  P.  What  is  the  matter  ?

[The  hand,  shaking  with  apparently  great  excitement,  wrote

the  letter  H,  .  .  .  bearing  down  so  hard  on  the  papei

that  the  point  of  the  pencil  was  broken.  It  then  wrote
"  Hodgson."]

Miss  P.  God  bless  you  !

[The  hand  writes  "I  am" — followed  by  rapid  scrawls,  as
if  regulator  of  machine  were  out  of  order.]

Miss  P.  Is  this  my  friend1?

[Hand  assents  by  knocking  five  times  on  paper-pad.]

(Rector.)  Peace,  friends,  he  is  here,  it  was  he,  but  he  could
not  remain,  he  was  so  choked.  He  is  doing  all  in  his
power  to  return  ....  Better  wait  for  a  few  moments
until  he  breathes  freer  again.

Miss  P.  I  will.

(R.)  Presently  he  will  be  able  to  conduct  all  here.

Miss  P.  That  is  good  news.

(R.)  Listen.  Everything  is  for  the  best.  He  holds  in  his
hand  a  ring.  ...  He  is  showing  it  to  you.  Cannot  you
see  it,  friend  1

Miss  P.  I  cannot  see  it. Have  him  tell  me  about  it.

(R.)  Do  you  understand  what  it  means?
Miss  P.  I  know  he  had  a  very  attractive  ring.

(R.)  Margaret.

"All"  was  then  written,  with  a  "B"  after  it,  and  Miss  P.  asked
"what  is  that?"  "A,"  "B"  and  "L"  followed,  but  no  explanation.
[The  explanation  will  be  given  later.]


8


Professor  William  James.


[part


The  above  is  the  whole  of  the  direct  matter  from  Hodgson
at  this,  the  first  of  the  sittings  at  which  he  has  appeared.
(For  the  sequel  to  this  ring-episode,  see  pp.  13-18.)

At  Miss  Pope's  next  sitting  (five  days  later),  after  some  talk
about  him  from  Rector,  E.  H.  appeared  for  the  second  time,
and  in  the  character,  familiar  to  him,  of  being  a  well-spring
of  poetical  lore.  Mrs.  Piper's  hand  cramped  most  awkwardly,
first  dropped  and  then  broke  the  pencil.  A  new  one  being-
given,  the  hand  wrote  as  follows  :

RICHARD  HODGSON  I  AM  WELL  HAPPY  GLAD  I  CAME  GOD  BLESS  POPE
Miss  Pope.  Many  thanks. [Then  the  hand  wrote  : — ]

It  lies  not  in  her  form  or  face

Tho  these  are  passing  fair,
Nor  in  the  woman's  tone  of  grace,

Nor  in  her  falling  hair  ;
It  lies  not  in  those  wondrous  eyes

that  swiftly  light  and  shine,
Tho  all  the  stars  of  all  the  skies

Than  these  are  less  divine.

I  am  only  practicing.
Miss  P.  Who  wrote  it  ?

(Rector.)  Richard  only.
Miss  P.  When  ?

Now.

Miss  P.  Doesn't  it  exist  on  paper  in  our  world  ?
No.

Miss  P.  Did  you  really  make  that  up  1
Yes.

Miss  P.  Well,  you  are  clever.

If  you  ever  find  this  in  your  world,  never  believe  in  this
world  !

Miss  P.  I  shall  look  for  it,  you  may  be  sure.

Good  ! Think  I'm  asleep  ] Not  much  ! My  head. I  must-
leave  you  now.

(Rector.)  It  is  impossible  for  us  to  hold  him — that  is  all.


lviil] Report  on  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson-Control.  9

Miss  P.  Rector,  did  he  dictate  that  poem  to  you?  ...  Do  you
think  he  made  it  upl

(Rector.)  I  do  positively  know  he  did  .  .  .  Farewell  !

At  the  second  sitting  after  this  (Jan.  8th,  1906),  Miss  Pope
again  being  the  sitter,  E.  H.  appeared  again,  writing  as  follows  :

I  am  Hodgson  ...  I  heard  your  call — I  know  you — you
are  Miss  Pope.  Piper  instrument.  I  am  happy  exceed-
ingly difficult  to  come  very.  I  understand  why  Myers
came  seldom.  I  must  leave.  I  cannot  stay.  I  cannot
remain  to-day.  .  .  .

(A  tobacco-pouch  that  had  belonged  to  Hodgson  was  presently
given  to  the  Medium  as  an  "influence,"  when  the  writing
went  on : — )

I  am  in  the  witness-box,  do  you  remember  ? — Do  you  remem-
ber my  promise  to  shake  you  up  1

Miss  P.  I  once  asked  Geo.  P[elham]  to  "shake  me  up."

No,  I  do  not  mean  that.

Miss  P.  What  do  you  mean  ?

I  said  that  if  I  got  over  here  first  I  would  soon  learn  how  to
communicate. — I  would  not  make  a  botch  of  it.

Miss  P.  I  remember — indeed  you  did.

I  am  certainly  P.  H.  I  am  sure.  I  have  joined  dear  old
G.  Pelham,  who  did  so  much  for  me — more  than  all  the
rest  put  together.

[After  a  few  words  in  Pector's  name,  a  brush  that  had
belonged  to  Hodgson  was  put  into  the  medium's  hand.]

Pemember  my  theory  about  objects'?
Miss  P.  What  was  it 1

They  carried  their  own  light. I  was  right.
Miss  P.  Yes,  I  remember  very  well.

I  see  it  now,  I  was  right.

Did  you  receive  my  lines  to  Miss  D.  [Referring  apparently
to  the  verses  at  the  previous  sitting.]


10  Professor  William  James.  [part

Miss  P.  Good,  that  is  most  interesting.

Amen  ! Miss  D [This  name,  correctly  given,  is  that

of  the.  cousin  of  R.  H.,  mentioned  as  "Q"  in  previous
reports,  a  name  well  known  to  the  trance-consciousness.
— W.  J.]

Miss  P.  Miss  D  ?

Yes. Ah,  ah,  ah,  (which  written  words  indicate  laughter).
Miss  P.  What  does  that  mean? — (referring  to  the  "ah,  ah").

I  am  amused  at  you. Yet  1 found  them  ?

Miss  P.  No,  I  haven't.

It  will  take  the  remainder  of  your  earthly  life,  and  then
you'll  fail.

Miss  P.  You  are  just  the  same  as  ever.

Not  quite  as  full  of  energy  as  I  wish,  but  give  me  time.
[Rector  then  comes  in,  and  the  sitting  closes.]

On  Jan.  16  th  and  Jan.  17  th,  R.  H.  spoke  again  to  Miss
Pope,  but  without  anything  evidential  in  matter — or  in  manner
either,  unless  the  following  be  counted  as  dramatically  like : —

I  shall  never  assume  control  here.  Imperator  shall  lead  me.
In  his  care  I  am  safe.  I  was  met  by  him.  There  will
be  no  moaning  at  the  bar  when  I  pass  out  to  sea —
remember  it  I

[Miss  Pope  assents.]

On  Feb.  5th,  R.  H.  asks  again  : —
Got  any  news  of  my  poem  1

Miss  P.  No,  I  give  that  up.

I  thought  you  would  come  to  it.  I  made  that  up  in  a  moment
and  composed  to  Miss  D  .

[After  some  more  non-evidential  talk,  R.  H.  mentions  his
living  friend,  Miss  Bancroft,  and  says  : — ]


lviil] Report  on  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson-Control.  11


Give  my  love  to  her  and  tell  her  I  hope  to  speak  with  her
soon.

It  seems  as  if  the  wondrous  land

Within  her  vision  lay  :
I  dimly  sense  the  mystic  strand

Behind  the  glorious  gray.

To  Margaret  Bancroft.  Give  her  this.  She  has  light.
[Correct.— W.  J.]

Miss  P.  Yes. Is  this  your  own  ?

I  just  made  it  for  her.  .  .  .  Tell  her  I  shall  never  forget
those  hills,  the  water,  our  talks,  and  the  delightful  visit  I
had  with  her. [Correct. — W.  J.]

Miss  P.  I  think  she  is  coming  soon  to  speak  with  you  here.

Good.  I  hope  so.  Will  you  tell  her,  give  her  my  message,
ask  her  if  she  knows  anything  about  my  watch  being
stopped. Do  you  1 I  must  go  out  and  get  a  little  breath.

[Miss  B.  writes: — "I  think  the  watch  means  my  watch.
We  had  a  number  of  jokes  about  the  frequent  stopping
of  my  watch."']

On  Jan.  23rd,  1906,  Mrs.  Wm.  James,  and  W.  James,  Jr.,
had  a  sitting  at  which  K.  H.  used  the  medium's  voice  and  save
a  very  lifedike  impression  of  his  presence.  The  record  runs
as  follows  : 1

Why,  there's  Billy  !  Is  that  Mrs.  James  and  Billy  ?  God
bless  you  !  Well,  well,  well,  this  is  good  !  [Laughs.]  I
am  in  the  witness-box.  [Laughs.]  I  have  found  my  wa}',
I  am  here,  have  patience  with  me.  All  is  well  with  me.
Don't  miss  me.  Where's  William'?  Give  him  my  love
and  tell  him  I  shall  certainly  live  to  prove  all  I  know.
Do  you  hear  me  ?  see  me  1  I  am  not  strong,  but  have
patience  with  me.  I  will  tell  you  all.  I  think  I  can
reach  you.

1  In  this  and  in  some  of  my  future  citations  from  the  records,  I  have  condensed
the  material  by  leaving  out  repetitions  and  digressions,  so  that  what  appears  is
often  straighter  and  more  coherent  than  what  was  originally  given.  I  have,
however,  scrupulously  endeavoured  to  omit  nothing  that  could  possibly  have
determined  what  was  said  or  its  veridieality. — W.J.


Professor  William  Jo,mes.


[part


Something  on  my  mind.  I  want  Lodge  to  know  everything
I  have  seen  Myers. I  must  rest.

[After  an  interval  he  comes  in  again  : — ]

Billy,  where  is  Billy  1  What  are  you  writing,  Billy  ?  Are
you  having  any  sports?  Would  you  like  to  take  a  swim?
[B.  H.'s  chief  association  with  W.  J.,  Jr.,  had  been  when
fishing  or  swimming  in  Chocorua  Lake.]  Well,  come  on  !
Get  a  good  deal  of  exercise,  but  don't  overdo  it !  Perhaps
I  swam  too  much.  [He  undoubtedly  had  done  so.] — I
learned  my  lesson,  but  I'm  just  where  I  wanted  to  be.

Do  you  remember  [Q]  ?  [Q]  helped  me.  Then  I  saw  Mother,
Bebecca,  and  Father.  I  want  very  much  to  converse  with
Annie.  [His  sister.]  She  perfectly  understood  my  efforts
and  was  everything  to  me.  I  want  her  to  know  that  I
am  living,  and  I  am  going  on  to  show  what  I  know  to
the  end  of  all  time.  Is  Ellen  well? — that's  my  sister.
I  want  G.  D.  [his  brother-in-law]  to  have  my  watch.
[The  Hodgson-family  names  used  here  are  correct,  but  were
known  to  the  trance-consciousness. — W.  J.]

Do  you  play  ball? — tennis?  Men  will  theorize — let  them
do  so !  I  have  found  out  the  truth.  I  said  that  if  I
could  get  over  there  I  would  not  make  a  botch  of  it.
If  ever  B.  H.  lived  in  the  body,  he  is  talking  now.  .  .  .
William  [James]  is  too  dogmatic.  ...  I  want  George
[Dorr]  to  extricate  all  those  papers  and  set  those  marked
"private"  aside.  This  has  been  on  my  mind.  George
is  to  be  trusted  absolutely  with  all  sincerity  and  faith.
There  are  some  private  records  which  I  should  not  wish
to  have  handled.  Let  George  [Dorr]  and  Piddington  go
through  them  and  return  them  to  the  sitters.  The  cipher  !
I  made  that  cipher,  and  no  one  living  can  read  it.
[Correct.]  I  shall  explain  it  later.  Let  Harry  [James]
and  George  keep  them  till  then.  [They  had  been
appointed  administrators  of  his  estate,  a  fact  probably
known  to  Mrs.  Piper.]  This  is  the  best  I  have  been
able  to  do  yet.  I  spoke  with  Miss  Pope,  but  this  is  the
best.  Remember,  every  communication  must  have  the
human  element.  I  understand  better  now  why  I  had  so
little  from  Myers. [To  W.  J.,  Jr.] What  discourages


LVIIL] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  13


you  about  your  art  ?  [W.  J.,  Jr.,  was  studying  painting.]
Oh  what  good  times  we  had,  fishing !  Believe,  Billy,
wherever  you  go,  whatever  you  do,  there  is  a  God.

So  much  for  Hodgson's  first  appearances,  which  were  char-
acteristic enough  in  manner,  however  incomplete.

Within  the  space  to  which  this  preliminary  report  is
limited  one  can  hardly  quote  the  records  verbatim,  for  they
are  anything  but  concise.  My  best  plan  will  be  to  cull
a  few  of  the  best  veridical  communications,  and  discuss
them  simply,  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  alternatives  of
explanation.

I  begin  with  what  I  shall  call

The  Bing  Incident.

On  Hodgson's  50th  birthday,  a  lady  whom  I  will  call  Mrs.
Lyman,  an  old  friend  of  his,  much  interested  in  the  Biper  work,
had  given  him  a  rather  massive  ring  to  wear.  The  source  of
this  ring  H.  had  kept  to  himself,  and  after  his  death  Mrs.
L.  asked  the  administrator  of  his  estate  to  return  it  to  her.
The  ring  could  not  be  found.

At  the  sitting  of  Dec.  28th  (B.  H.'s  first  appearance  as  a
spirit),  it  will  be  remembered  that  the  control  Sector  had
said  to  Miss  Bope,  the  sitter,  "  He  holds  in  his  hand  a  ring —
do  you  understand  what  it  means  ?  "

Miss  P.  I  know  he  had  a  very  attractive  ring.

Rector (writing)  Margaret,  a  11  B,  L.

On  Jan.  16th,  Miss  Bope  being  again  the  sitter,  the  B.  H.-
control  suddenly  wrote  :

Give  ring  to  Margaret  back  to  Margaret. [Mrs.  Lyman's
name  is  not  Margaret.]

Miss  P.  Who  is  Margaret  1

I  was  with  her  in  summer.

Miss  P.  All  right,  but  the  ring  has  not  been  found  yet. Can  you
find  out  where  it  is  ?


The  undertaker  got  it.


14


Professor  William  James.


[part


Miss  P.


Oh,  all  right.

I  know. Help  me.


Miss  P.  I  shall  look  it  up.

It  was  with  me.
Miss  P.  Yes,  I  heard  so.

It  was,  it  was.
Miss  P.  I  will  attend  to  it.

Thank  you.

On  January  24th,  Mrs.  Lyman  herself  had  her  first  sitting.
As  soon  as  Hodgson  appeared  he  wrote  :

The  ring.  You  gave  it  me  on  my  fiftieth  birthday.  When
they  asked  I  didn't  want  to  say  you  gave  it  me,  I  didn't
want  to  say  that.  .  .  .  Two  palm-leaves  joining  each
other — Greek.  [Here  followed  an  illegible  word.  The
palms  truly  described  the  ring,  which  Mrs.  Piper  probably
had  seen ;  but  it  bore  no  Greek  inscription,  nor  was  the
symbol  on  it  a  Greek  cross.] You  gave  it  me—

Mrs.  L.  Yes,  Dick,  where  is  it  now  1

They  have  got  it.  They  took  it  off  my  finger  after  I  was
gone.

Mrs.  L.  No,  they  didn't  find  it  on  your  finger.

Pocket,  it  was  in  my  pocket,  I'll  find  it  you  shall  have  it.

On  January  29th,  Mrs.  L.  had  another  sitting.  The  Hodgson-
control  wrote :

I  have  been  trying  to  make  clear  about  that  ring.  It  is
on  my  mind  all  the  time.  I  thought  if  I  could  get
Margaret  B.  to  get  it  for  me,  I  would  get  it  to  you
through  her,  then  no  one  would  understand.  I  could
not  tell  Miss  Pope  about  you.

Mrs.  L.  Did  you  think  Margaret  B.  gave  it  to  you  ?


Oh  dear  no  ! not  at  all.


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson-Control.  15

Mrs.  L.  Then  why  .did;  you  speak  pf  ii3f:1t

I  could  trust  her  absolutely,  and  no  one  could  understand.
She  would  never  betray  it.  You  gave  it  to  me  on  my
50th  birthday.  Palms  and  R.  H.  [Then  a  possible
attempt  to  draw  a  symbol  engraved  on  the  ring.]  No
one  living  knows  this  but  myself  and  yourself.

Mrs.'L.  That  is  true,  but  what  was  the  motto  in  the  ring1?

All  will  be  clear  to  me  in  time.  Do  not  ask  me  test
questions  now.  ...  I  wish  the  ring  now  to  go  back
to  yourself.  I  thought  Margaret  would  understand  and  be
glad  to  do  it  for  me.  I  could  not  tell  Miss  Pope  about
you.

On  March  5th  E.  H.  again  inquires  of  Mrs.  Lyman  about
the  ring.  She  then  asks  him :  "  Did  you  have  it  on  that
last  day  when  you  went  to  the  boat-elub  ? "  [B,  H.  died
while  playing  a  game  of  hand-ball  at  the  boat-club.]

I  certainly  had  it  on  that  day.

Mrs.  L.  You  told  Miss  P.  the  undertaker  got  it,

Thought  he  did  and  I  am  sure  a  man  took  it  from  my
finger.

[After  a  few  more  words  R..  H.  continues  :]

I  had  that  ring  on  my  finger  when  I  started  for  the  club,
I  recall  putting  in  my  pocket,  I  did  so  because  it  hurt
my  finger  when  playing  ball.  I  am  not  dreaming,  I  am
clear.  When  I  get  here  first  I  am  a  little  stuffy,  but
I  am  as  clear  now  as  I  ever  was,  I  put  it  in  my  waist-
coat pocket.

Mrs.  L.  Why  do  you  think  a  man  stole  it  1

I  saw  it  on  a  finger.  ...  I  put  in  my  pocket,  and  the  one
who  took  care  of  my  clothes  is  responsible  for  it.  .  .  .
What  did  they  do  with  my  waistcoat?

On  May  16th,  on  being  told  that  the  ring  is  not  yet
found,  the  Pi.  H.  control  writes  :

I  saw  it  taken  by  a  man  from  my  locker. He  was  in  charge
at  the  time  and  he  has  my  ring.  ...  I  shall  be  able  to


< . < < c c t <  • c  r  c c e  i <  ■  ■ ,  <

,  t , r i t  < ■ <  c  c J , !  ,  ' ' ,  '

<<(<-<<-<,,  c  f.c'  i  i

r.  t,  c < r  c  r c  t  f 'r  c r  ct^o !  'J

t c c rc i c t i c  (  i f  ° < C  .« ' <  c '  <

16  Professor  William  James.  [part

disi^oviu  bis  name  so  you  may  be  able  to  find  it.  I  see
where  he  goes  and  the  house  where  he  lives,  plainly.  .  ,  .
Five  story  brick  house  not  far  from  the  club  and  he  is
on  the  third  story  from  the  street,  near  the  corner  of
the  street,  the  room  is  in  the  rear  of  the  building  and
I  see  his  face  clearly  [a  description  of  the  man  follows].
I  see  the  ring  on  his  finger  clearly.  The  waistcoat  was
in  his  room  when  I  entered  the  light  a  few  moments
ago.  I  am  as  sure  of  this  as  I  am  that  you  are  Mrs.
Lyman.

In  point  of  fact  the  ring  was  found  a  couple  of  months
later  in  the  pocket  of  Hodgson's  waistcoat,  which  had  been
too  carelessly  explored  for  it,  and  which  had  lain  during  all
the  interval  in  a  room  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Dorr,  with  whom
the  Hodgson-control  had  all  the  time  been  having  frequent
communications.

The  whole  incident  lends  itself  easily  to  a  naturalistic
interpretation.  Mrs.  Piper  or  her  trance-consciousness  may
possibly  have  suspected  the  source  of  the  ring.  Mrs.  Lyman's
manner  may  have  confirmed  the  suspicion.  The  manner  in
which  the  first  misleading  reference  to  "  Margaret "  was  after-
wards explained  away  may  well  have  been  the  cunning  of  a
"  control "  trying  plausibly  to  cover  his  tracks  and  justify  his
professed  identity.  The  description  of  the  house  and  of  the
man  to  whom  he  ascribes  its  present  possession  sounds  like
vague  groping,  characteristic  also  of  control- cunning.  The
description  was  but  little  like  that  of  Mr.  Dorr,  whose  house,
moreover,  is  neither  very  near  a  corner  nor  very  near  a  club.

On  the  other  hand,  if  the  hypothesis  be  seriously  enter-
tained that  Hodgson's  spirit  was  there  in  a  confused  state,
using  the  permanent  Piper  automatic  machinery  to  communicate
through,  the  whole  record  is  not  only  plausible  but  natural.
It  presents  just  that  mixture  of  truth  and  groping  which  we
ought  to  expect.  Hodgson  has  the  ring  "  on  his  mind "  just
as  Mrs.  Lyman  has.  Like  her,  he  wishes  its  source  not  to
be  bruited  abroad.  He  describes  it  accurately  enough,  truly
tells  of  his  taking  it  to  the  fatal  boat-club,  and  of  putting
into  his  waistcoat-pocket  there,  of  the  waistcoat  being  taken
from  the  locker,  and  vaguely,  but  not  cpuite  erroneously,
indicates  its  present  position.


i


Lvin.j


Report  on  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson-Control.


17


Mrs.  Lyman's  own  impression  of  the  incident  is  as  follows :

"No  living  person  beside  myself  knew  who  had  given  him  the
ring,  and  I  am  quite  sure  that  the  living  R.  H.  would  have  been
as  desirous  as  I  to  keep  all  mention  of  me  out  of  the  trance-
record.  Had  he  had  entire  control  he  would  never  have  mentioned
the  ring  until  I  had  come  to  a  sitting,  but  in  his  half-dreamy  state
something  slipped  out  to  Miss  Pope,  the  sitter,  aided  telepathically
perhaps  by  her  knowledge  that  he  had  lately  worn  an  unusual-looking
ring  which  she  knew  was  missing  after  his  death.  I  am  sure  that
Miss  Pope  thought  the  ring  would  be  a  good  "  test,"  so  that
although  she  was  not  the  first  to  speak  of  it,  it  must  certainly
have  been  in  her  mind.  It  is  characteristic  of  R.  H.  that  even
in  his  half-conscious  state  he  is  able  to  keep  his  own  counsel  so
well.  The  word  Margaret  and  the  letters  B  and  L  which  followed
the  mention  of  the  ring  at  the  very  first  sitting  seem  to  refer  to  Miss
Margaret  Bancroft  and  myself.  He  knew  that  Miss  Bancroft  had
"light,"  and  he  seems  to  feel  that  if  he  can  only  reach  her  she  will
understand  what  he  wants.  He  was  well  aware  of  my  own  morbid
dislike  of  having  my  affairs  mentioned  at  the  trance  outside  of  my
own  sittings.  You  know  that  curious  trait  of  suspicion  in  Hodgson's
absolutely  honest  nature — trained  in  him  professionally.  When
Miss  Pope  tells  him  the  ring  cannot  be  found,  he  at  once  thinks :
"there  was  my  body,  and  my  clothes,  etc.,  I  believe  the  undertaker
took  it."  Then  I  myself,  Mrs.  Lyman,  come  and  again  tell  him
the  ring  can't  be  found.  His  earthly  memories  presently  become
clear  and  he  tells  me  exactly  what  he  did  with  it  before  his  death.
But  his  suspicious  side  has  been  aroused — you  know  how  anything
once  registered  on  the  trance-machinery  seems  to  make  an  impression
and  tends  to  recur — and  again  he  thinks  that  some  one  took  it.
Nothing  could  be  more  characteristic  of  H.  than  his  indignant
remark  about  the  man  who  had  charge  of  his  clothes  being
responsible.  It  all  seems  to  me  the  kind  of  unpractical  thing  that
a  man  would  do  in  a  dream.  There  are  strong  characteristics  of
R.  H.  in  it,  but  it  is  R.  H.  dreaming  and  troubled.  I  am  glad
I  haven't  to  make  myself  intelligible  to  a  stranger  to  the  persons
involved  ;  but  knowing  them  as  I  do,  I  feel  my  own  way  straight
through  the  maze,  and  the  explanation  is  clear."

This  incident  of  the  ring  seems  to  me  a  typical  example
of  the  ambiguity  of  possible  interpretation  that  so  constantly
haunts us in the Piper-phenomenon. If  you are  willing

B


18


Professor  William  James.


[part


beforehand  to  allow  that  a  half-awakened  spirit  may  come
and  mix  its  imperfect  memories  with  the  habits  of  the
trance-automatism,  and  you  apperceive  the  message  sympatheti-
cally, what  you  get  is  entirely  congenial  with  your  hypothesis.
But  if  you  insist  that  nothing  but  knock-down  evidence  for
the  spirits  shall  be  counted,  then,  since  what  comes  is  also
compatible  with  natural  causes,  your  hardness  of  heart  remains
unbroken,  and  you  continue  to  explain  things  by  automatic
personation  and  accidental  coincidence,  with  perhaps  a  dash
of  thought-transference  thrown  in.  People  will  interpret  this
ring-episode  harmoniously  witb  their  prepossessions.  Taken
by  itself  its  evidential  value  is  weak ;  but  experience  shows,  I
think,  that  a  large  number  of  incidents,  hardly  stronger  than
this  one,  will  almost  always  produce  a  cumulative  effect  on
the  mind  of  a  sitter  whose  affairs  they  implicate,  and  dispose
him  to  the  spiritistic  view.  It  grows  first  possible,  then
plausible,  then  natural,  and  finally  probable  in  a  high  degree.

The  next  incident  I  will  cite  is  one  which  at  a  certain
moment  gave  me  a  little  thrill,  as  if  I  might  be  really  talking
with  my  old  friend.  (I  have  to  make  the  personal  confession
that  this  reality-coefficient,  as  Professor  Baldwin  calls  it,  has
generally  been  absent  from  my  mind  when  dealing  with  the
Piper-controls  or  reading  reports  of  their  communications.)  I
will  call  the  episode  "  the  nigger-talk  case."

The  Nigger-Talk  Case.

On  February  27th,  1906,  at  a  sitting  with  Professor  Hyslop,
the  following  dialogue  took  place  :

R.  H. I  wonder  if  you  recall  what  I  said  I  would  do  if  I  should
return  first  1

Hyslop.  I  do  not  remember  exactly.

Remember  that  I  told  Myers  that  we  would  talk  nigger-talk
— Myers — talk  nigger-talk  1

Hyslop.  No,  you  must  have  told  that  to  some  one  else.

Ah  yes,  James. I  remember  it  was  James,  yes,  Will  James.
He  will  understand.

Mr.  Hyslop  immediately  wrote  to  me — I  being  in  California
— enclosing the record and  soliciting  corrohoration. I  had


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson-Control.


19


to  reply  that  the  words  awakened  absolutely  no  echo  in  ray
memory.  Three  months  later  I  returned  to  Cambridge,  and
began  to  study  records  of  sittings  held  during  my  absence.
I  met  this  incident  again,  and  again  it  failed  to  stir  my
memory.  But  the  very  next  day,  in  a  conversation  with
Messrs.  Dorr  and  Piddington,  while  I  was  recalling  certain
discussions  that  I  had  formerly  had  with  Hodgson  about  the
amenability  to  suggestion  of  the  Piper-controls,  it  suddenly
flashed  across  me  that  these  were  probably  what  the  words  to
Hyslop  had  meant.  I  had  namely  said  to  Hodgson,  more  than
once,  that  a  little  tactful  steering  on  his  part  would  probably
change  the  sacerdotal  verbiage  of  the  Imperator-group  so  com-
pletely that  he  would  soon  find  them  "  talking  like  nigger-
minstrels."  For  a  moment  I  felt  sure  that  this  expression  of
mine,  buried  so  deep  in  my  own  mind  that  it  required  a  peculiar
chain  of  associations  to  revive  it,  was  what  was  dimly  working
in  the  memory  of  a  surviving  Hodgson,  and  trying  to  extricate
itself.  It  was  so  incredible  that  E.  H.  would  ever  have  repeated
such  a  remark  to  either  the  waking  Mrs.  Piper  or  to  her
controls,  that  it  seemed  a  good  test  of  his  survival.  I  regret
to  say,  however,  that  the  subsequent  developments  of  the
incident  have  deprived  it  in  my  eyes  of  all  test-value.  Not
only  did  the  Hodgson-control,  when  questioned  by  me  subse-
quently, fail  to  recall  anything  like  that  discussion  of  the
control's  suggestibility  which  was  the  setting  in  which  my
memory  had  put  the  phrase,  but  Mr.  Piddington  has  found  in
the  Piper-records  evidence  that  Hodgson  had  used  the  words
"  nigger-talk "  in  speaking  to  the  Myers-control,  so  that  this
expression  must  be  considered  as  part  of  the  stock  of  Mrs.
Piper's  trance-vocabulary.1  Such  an  incident  shows  how  wary
one  must  be  in  one's  interpretations.  A  really  expert  critic
of  the  Piper-trances  ought  to  be  familiar  with  the  entire
mass  of  material  previous  to  any  utterance  under  consideration.
Hodgson  was  extraordinarily  expert  in  this  sense,  and  one  of
the  weirdest  feelings  I  have  had,  in  dealing  with  the  business
lately,  has  been  to  find  the  wish  so  frequently  surging  up  in

1{'Feb.  4th,  1902.  Dr.  Hodgson  (spontaneously  to  Myers-control)  Do  you
remember  about  your  laughing  with  me  once  and  your  saying  that  doubtless
you  would  some  time  be  coming  back  and  talking  nigger-talk  ">.  "  A  reference
to  the  same  incident  is  also  made  in  the  sitting  of  Feb.  13th,  1901.


20


Professor  William  James.


[part


me  that  he  were  alive  beside  me  to  give  critical  counsel  as
to  how  best  to  treat  certain  of  the  communications  of  his  own
professed  spirit.

The  Huldah-Episode.

During  the  voice-sitting  of  May  2nd,  1905,  Mr.  Piddington
being  present,  the  R.  H.  control  said :

Pid,  I  want  very  much  to  give  you  my  private  letters  con-
cerning a  Miss — a  Miss — in  Chicago  [pseudonym].  I  do
not  wish  any  one  to  read  them.

J.  G.  P.  How  shall  I  know  ?

Look  at  my  letters  stamped  from  Chicago.  I  wouldn't  have
them  get  out  for  the  world.

The  name  "  Densmore  "  [pseudonym]  was  then  written.  Mr.
Piddington  asked  whether  the  letters  would  be  signed  by  the
surname  or  the  Christian  name.  The  name  "  Huldah  "  was  then
given  as  that  by  which  the  letters  would  be  signed.

On  May  14th  Piddington  reported  to  the  R.  H.  control  that
no  such  letters  could  be  found,  and  asked  for  further  informa-
tion— "  Can  you  tell  me  at  what  time  this  lady  wrote  letters
to  you  ? Was  it  lately  ?  "

No,  several  years  previously.  I  should  be  much  distressed
if  they  fell  into  other  hands.  No  one  living  except  the
lady  and  myself  knows  of  the  correspondence.

J.  G.  P.  If  I  cannot  find  those  letters,  should  you  feel  any  objection
to  my  writing  to  the  lady  to  ask  if  there  has  been  such
a  correspondence  1

Yes,  I  would  rather  you  would  do  so.

Later  (May  29th)  Piddington  reports  unsuccessful  search
again,  and  Mr.  Dorr,  who  also  is  present,  asks  whether
"  Huldah "  is  one  of  a  family  of  Densmores  known  to  him.
"  Is  she  a  sister  of  Mary,  Jenny,  and  Ella  [pseudonyms]  ? "

Ella  is  the  one. Huldah  we  used  to  call  her.

[This  was  emphatically  spoken.  Then  followed  a  statement
(not  caught  in  Mr.  Dorr's  notes)  that  the  lady's  full  name  was
Ella  Huldah  Densmore.]


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson-Control.  21


No  one  living  could  have  known  it.  I  hope  I  have  destroyed
them — I  may  have  done  so  and  forgotten  it.  There  was
a  time  when  I  greatly  cared  for  her,  and  I  did  not  wish
it  known  in  the  ears  of  others.  I  think  she  can  corro-
borate this. I  am  getting  hazy. I  must  leave.

On  June 5th,  Mrs.  William  James and  Mr.  Dorr  being

present,  D.  asked : "  Can  you  tell  us  anything  more  about

Huldah  Densmore  ? You  said  the  other  day  that  she  was  the

same  person  as  Ella  ? Were  you  clear  in  saying  that  ? "

Did  I  say  that  1  That  was  a  mistake.  She  is  a  sister.  Is
one  of  the  three  sisters,  but  not  Ella.  [She  was  Ella.]
I  know  what  I  am  talking  about.  I  saw  Huldah  in
Chicago.  I  was  very  fond  of  her.  I  proposed  marriage
to  her,  but  she  refused  me.

The  statement  about  proposing  marriage  was  not  divulged
to  me  by  my  wife,  until  I  had  already  heard  from  the  lady
called  Ella  Densmore  in  this  narrative,  who  was  then  in  a
foreign  country,  and  to  whom  I  had  written  to  ascertain  whether
she  and  Hodgson  had  ever  corresponded,  or  whether  she  or
any  one  in  her  family  was  christened  Huldah.  Both  Mr.  Dorr
and  I  knew  her,  but  I  was  ignorant  that  she  and  Hodgson
were  acquainted.  Great  was  my  surprise  when  she  wrote  as
follows  :

Regarding  the  utterances  of  Mrs.  Piper,  I  have  no  difficulty  in
telling  you  the  circumstances  on  which  she  may  have  founded  her
communications.  Years  ago  Mr.  H.  asked  me  to  marry  him,  and
some  letters  were  exchanged  between  us  which  he  may  have  kept.
I  do  not  remember  how  I  signed  the  letters  to  him.  I  have
sometimes  used  my  middle  name,  Hannah,  instead  of  Ella.  [She
knew  of  no  "  Huldah "  in  her  family.]

In  spite  of  the  confusion  that  pervades  Hodgson's  veracious
utterances  here,  it  seems  improbable  that  they  should  merely
have  been  lucky  flukes.  Two  naturalistic  explanations  offer
themselves  immediately.

(1)  He  might  have  made  Mrs.  Piper  his  confidant  at  the
time ;  but  no  one  who  knows  Hodgson  will  regard  this
explanation  for  a  moment  as  credible.


22


Professor  William  James.


[part


(2)  Nothing  spreads  as  fast  as  rumors  of  this  sort;  so
that  if  there  had  been  a  gossipy  rumor,  it  might  very  well
have  spread  to  Mrs.  Piper's  ears,  although  it  had  skipped  over
Mr.  Dorr's  and  mine.  I  accordingly  inquired  of  a  dozen  of
E.  H.'s  most  intimate  friends,  saying :  "  Suppose  I  were  to
tell  you  that  Hodgson  had  been  in  love  not  long  ago,  and
had  offered  himself  to  a  certain  lady — would  any  particular
person's  name  arise  in  your  mind  in  consequence  of  such  a
suggestion  ? "  Not  a  single  one  of  these  friends  thought  of
the  name  of  Miss  Densmore,  although  three  of  them  suggested
other  names  very  wide  of  the  mark.  Evidently  no  gossip
had  got  into  circulation,  and  E.  H.  had  covered  his  tracks
well.  He  was  indeed  the  most  singular  mixture  of  expansive-
ness  and  reticence  I  have  ever  known ;  and  the  reticence  had
been  increased  professionally,  as  I  may  say,  through  his  long
training  in  having  to  guard  the  private  affairs  of  sitters,  and
to  watch  himself  with  Mrs.  Piper.  I  was  Hodgson's  earliest
American  friend,  and  until  his  death  always  imagined  myself
to  enjoy  an  almost  perfect  intimacy  with  him.  Since  his
death  I  have  nevertheless  found  that  whole  departments  of
his  life  were  unknown  to  me.  In  this  "  Huldah "  matter
in  particular,  not  only  was  I  unaware  that  lie  and  she  were
acquainted,  but  if  any  one  had  described  him  to  me  as  being
in  love  with  her,  I  should  have  scouted  the  story  as  inherently
improbable,  from  the  character  of  the  two  parties.

Nevertheless  the  story  was  true,  barring  the  false  name
Huldah  and  a  certain  vacillation  about  the  real  Christian  name.
The  sister  of  the  so-called  "  Huldah "  has  told  me,  moreover,
that  besides  herself,  she  thought  that  no  living  person  knew
from  her  sister's  lips  of  E.  H.'s  state  of  mind.  As  Hodgson
himself  had  apparently  told  no  one,  the  incident  seemed  an
excellent  one  to  count  in  favor  of  spirit-return,  unless,  indeed,
it  should  turn  out  that  while  it  was  happening,  he  had  been
led  to  consult  the  Piper- controls  about  it  himself,  and  to  use
"  Huldah's "  name  as  a  test  of  their  telepathic  or  clairvoyant
powers.  But  that  even  then  he  could  have  given  them  the
real  name  seems  unlikely,  in  view  of  his  habitual  methods.
The  records  taken  to  England  have  not  yet  been  looked  over
from  this  point  of  view,  and  no  one  knows  just  what  they
may  contain,  but  fortunately  one  of  the  sittings  with  Mrs.


lviii] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  23

Piper  after  Hodgson's  decease  throws  decisive  light  upon  the
matter.  Hodgson  did  consult  the  Imperator  group  at  the
time  of  his  disappointment,  and  the  reasonable  conclusion  is
that  the  revelation  which  so  surprised  Mr.  Dorr  and  myself
was  thus  a  product  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance-memory  of  previous
conversations  with  the  living  Hodgson.

The  sitting  to  which  I  allude  was  held  on  January  27th,
1906,  by  Prof.  Newbold.  In  the  course  of  it  the  Hodgson-
control  suddenly  says  :

Let  me  ask  if  you  remember  anything  about  a  lady  in
[Chicago]  to  whom  I  referred.

W.  R,  N.  Oh  Dick,  I  begin  to  remember.  About  eight  or  nine
years  ago,  was  it,  Dick  ]

Yes.

[Note  by  W.  JR.  N. — Such  a  lady  was  frequently  mentioned
at  sittings  in  1895,  and  H.  was  told  he  would  marry
her.  I  was  present  when  these  statements  were  made,
if  my  memory  serves  me.]

W.  R.  N.  Tell  me  more,  so  I  won't  tell  you !
And  my  position  regarding  her.

W.  R.  N.  I  wasn't  sure  it  was  in  [Chicago].

Do  you  remember  ....  Densmore  1

W.  R.  N.  Was  it  Jessie  Densmore  1

Yes,  Good.

[Mr.  Dorr,  who  was  present,  here  interjects  :]

"Do  you  mean  the  name  was  Jessie  Densmore,  Hodgson?"

No,  no,  no,  no.  [Jessie  was  the  first  name  of  K.  H.'s
Australian  cousin,  "Q". — W.  J.]

W.  R.  N.  Dick,  you  told  me  years  ago  about  a  lady  you  were
interested  in,  but  1  have  forgotten  her  name  and  where
she  lived.

She  lived  in  [Chicago].

W.  R.  N.  Dick,  it  comes  back  to  me  as  a  cloud.

She  was  a  Miss  Densmore  j  I  loved  her  dearly.


24  Professor  William  James.  [part

W.  R.  N.  You  used  to  tell  me  about  her  years  ago.

Yes,  and  she  afterwards  married.  Yes,  I  told  you,  and
you  are  the  only  man  I  ever  told.  [Correct,  apparently,
save  for  the  possibility  of  his  having  told  Myers.  See
below.]

W.  R.  N.  I'm  not  sure  you  told  me  her  name.
Yes,  I  did.

W.  R.  N.  The  name  is  the  least  likely  thing  for  me  to  remember
 What  is  the  married  name  of  Miss  Densmore  ?

Heaven  knows  !  It  has  gone  from  me  and  I  shall  soon  go
myself.

So  much  for  Dr.  Newbold's  evidence.  He  has  sent  me  a
letter  written  to  him  by  Hodgson  in  1895,  from  which  it
would  appear  that  the  Piper  controls  had  prophesied  that  both
he  and  Newbold  would  ere  long  be  made  matrimonially  happy,
but  that  whereas  the  prophecy  was  being  verified  in  N.'s  case,
it  had  been  falsified  in  his  own,  he  having  that  day  received
formal  announcement  of  the  marriage  of  Miss  Densmore  to
another.  The  only  other  material  which  1  shall  quote  is
the  following  dialog,  at  a  sitting  of  nay  own,  October  24th,
1906. Inquiring  about  "  Huldah,"  I  ask:

W.  J. Did  you  make  any  one  your  confidant'?

No,  though  I  may  possibly  have  given  a  hint  of  it  to
Newbold.

W.  J. Did  you  tell  anybody  on  the  other  side  of  the  water  ?

I  may  possibly  have  hinted  it  to  Lodge.

W.  J. Her  sister  tells  me  she  thinks  you  may  have  told  Myers
when  he  Avas  alive.

I  think  not  :  I  may  have  hinted  it  to  Myers.

W.  J. She  denies  any  knowledge  of  the  name  Huldah.

I  used  that  name  instead  of  the  right  christian  name  [he
here  gives  the  latter  correctly]  to  avoid  compromising
—  it  was  a  very  delicate  matter,  and  caused  me  great
disappointment. Have  you  communicated  it  to  her  ?


LVIII.]


Report  on  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson-Control.


25


W.  J. Yes,  and  she  corroborates

[R.  H.  displays  no  further  curiosity, — a  living  person  would
probably  have  asked  whether  the  lady  had  said  nothing
about  him,  etc.]

Do  you  remember  a  lady-doctor  in  New  York?  a  member
of  our  Society  1

W.  J. No,  but  what  about  her?

Her  husband's  name  was  Blair,  ...  I  think.

W.  J. Do  you  mean  Mrs.  Dr.  Blair  Thaw?

Oh  yes.  Ask  Mrs.  Thaw  if  I  did  not  at  a  dinner  party
mention  something  about  the  lady. I  may  have  done  so.

[Mrs.  Thaw  writes  in  comment  upon  this: — "Fifteen  years
ago,  when  R.  H.  was  visiting  us  after  his  operation  for
appendicitis  he  told  me  that  he  had  just  proposed  to  a
young  lady  and  been  refused.  He  gave  no  name/' — Mrs.
Thaw  is  the  only  living  person  beside  Newbold  to  whom
I  can  certainly  find  that  he  ever  spoke  of  this  episode,
and  the  clue  to  Mrs.  Thaw  comes  from  the  control  !
W.  J.]

W.  J. Do  you  remember  the  name  of  Huldah's  present  husband  1

[To  which  R.  H.  replies  by  giving  his  country  and  title
correctly,  but  fails  to  give  his  name.]

The  entire  incident  shows  the  importance  of  completeness
in  the  records.  Without  Professor  Newbold's  sitting  we
should  have  no  present  assurance  that  the  trance-memory
might  have  furnished  the  facts  which  seemed  at  the  first
blush  to  suggest  so  strongly  the  return  of  a  "  spirit "  in  a
state  of  confused  memory.  Compatible  with  the  return  of  such
a  spirit  the  facts  indeed  are.  The  possibility  of  the  more
naturalistic  explanation  doesn't  make  the  supernatural  one
impossible ;  and  if  spirit-return  were  already  made  probable
by  other  evidence,  this  might  well  be  taken  as  a  case  of  it
too.  But  what  I  am  sifting  these  records  for  is  independent
evidence  of  such  return ;  and  so  long  as  the  record  in  this
instance  lends  itself  so  plausibly  to  a  naturalistic  explanation,
I  think  we  must  refuse  to  interpret  it  in  the  spiritistic  way.


26


Professor  William  James.


[part


A  couple  of  smaller  veridical  incidents  which  have  seemed
to  the  sitters  to  make  rather  strongly  for  spirit-return  are
connected  with  E.  H.'s  financial  history. I  shall  call  them, —

The  Pecuniary  Messages.

The  American  Branch  had  never  fully  paid  its  expenses ;
and  although  the  Secretary's  salary  had  always  been  very
small,  Hodgson  had,  after  the  first  years,  been  reluctant  to
have  any  part  of  it  charged  to  the  mother-country.  The
result  had  occasionally  been  pecuniary  embarrassment  on  his
part.  During  his  last  visit  to  England,  shortly  after  Myers's
death,  this  embarrassment  had  been  extreme ;  but  an  American
friend,  divining  it  in  the  nick  of  time,  rescued  him  by  an
impulsive  and  wholly  unexpected  remittance.  To  this  remit-
tance he  replied  by  a  letter  which  contained  some  banter
and,  among  other  things,  cited  the  story  of  a  starving  couple
who  were  overheard  by  an  atheist  who  was  passing  the  house,
to  pray  aloud  to  God  for  food.  The  atheist  climbed  the  roof
and  dropped  some  bread  down  the  chimney,  and  heard  them
thank  God  for  the  miracle.  He  then  went  to  the  door  and
revealed  himself  as  its  author.  The  old  woman  replied  to
him:  "Well,  the  Lord  sent  it,  even  if  the  devil  brought  it."

At  this  friend's  sitting  of  Jan.  30th,  E,  H.  suddenly
says :

Do  3'ou  remember  a  story  I  told  you  and  how  you  laughed,
about  the  man  and  woman  praying.

Sitter: Oh,  and  the  devil  was  in  it. Of  course  I  do.

Yes,  the  devil,  they  told  him  it  was  the  Lord  who  sent
it  if  the  devil  brought  it.  .  .  .  About  the  food  that
was  given  to  them.  ...  I  want  you  to  know  who  is
speaking.

The  sitter  feels  quite  certain  that  no  one  but  himself  knew
of  the  correspondence,  and  regards  the  incident  as  a  good
test  of  E.  H.'s  continued  presence.  Others  will  either  favor
this  interpretation  of  it,  or  explain  it  by  reading  of  the
sitter's  mind,  or  treat  it  as  a  chance  coincidence,  according
to  their  several  prepossessions.  I  myself  feel  morally  certain
that  the  waking  Mrs.  Piper  was  ignorant  of  the  incident  and


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  27


of  the  correspondence.  Hodgson  was  as  likely  to  have
informed  me,  as  any  one,  of  the  affair.  He  had  given  me
at  the  time  a  vivid  account  of  the  trouble  he  had  been  in,
but  no  hint  of  the  quarter  from  which  relief  had  come.

Of  the  other  pecuniary  message  no  written  record  exists,
but  the  sitter  has  acquainted  me  with  the  incident,  which
ran  as  follows  :

To  assure  Hodgson  a  salary,  Mr.  Dorr  had  acquainted  a
certain  wealthy  friend  (who  believed  in  the  cause  and  in
the  value  of  the  Secretary's  work)  with  the  situation  of  the
Branch,  and  with  E.  H.'s  reasons  for  not  wishing  to  be
indebted  to  the  parent  Society.  This  friend  had  agreed  to
pay  into  the  Branch-treasury  the  amount  of  deficit  in  the
yearly  salary-account,  provided  the  operation  should  remain
anonymous,  and  Hodgson  should  ask  no  questions.  Hodgson
agreed  to  this.  But  upon  the  first  sitting  which  this  friend
had  after  his  death,  the  "  spirit "  of  E.  H.  immediately
referred  to  the  matter  and  thanked  the  sitter  warmly  for
the  support  given.  The  donor  is  of  opinion,  as  I  am  also,
that  Hodgson  may  have  suspected  the  source  of  the  aid  while
receiving  it,  and  that  his  "  spirit "  may  therefore  naturally
have  thanked  the  right  person.  That  Mrs.  Piper's  waking
consciousness  should  have  been  acquainted  with  any  part  of
the  transaction  is  incredible.  The  donor's  name  had  been
kept  from  me,  who  was  Vice-President  of  the  Society,  and
had  yearly  to  know  the  accounts.  I  had  known  that  the
deficit  in  Hodgson's  pay  was  made  up  by  anonymous  American
believers  in  his  work,  but  had  supposed  that  there  were
several  of  them.  I  cannot  well  understand  how  Mrs.  Piper
should  have  got  wind  of  any  part  of  the  financial  situation,
although  her  controls  may  have  got  wind  of  it  in  trance  from
those  who  were  in  the  secret.

Few  persons  will  ascribe  the  affair  to  chance-coincidence,  but
with  both  thought-transference  and  trance-memory  as  possible
explanations,  the  incident  cannot  be  deemed  to  furnish  proof
of  Hodgson's  personal  survival.

In  a  later  report  I  shall  quote  sittings  at  greater  length
and  discuss  briefly  some  of  the  control's  peculiarities.  The


2S


Professor  William  James.


[part


conclusions  I  shall  then  draw  will  probably  not  be  different
from  those  which  I  now  draw  as  follows :

(1)  The  case  is  an  exceptionally  bad  one  for  testing  spirit-
return,  owing  to  the  unusual  scope  it  gives  to  naturalistic
explanations.

(2)  The  phenomena  it  presents  furnish  no  knock-down
proof  of  the  return  of  Hodgson's  spirit.

(3)  They  are  well  compatible,  however,  with  such  return,
provided  we  assume  that  the  Piper-organism  not  only  transmits
with  great  difficulty  the  influences  it  receives  from  beyond
the  curtain,  but  mixes  its  own  automatic  tendencies  most
disturbingly  therewith.  Hodgson  himself  used  to  compare  the
conditions  of  spirit-communication  to  those  of  two  distant  persons
on  this  earth  who  should  carry  on  their  social  intercourse  by
employing  each  of  them  a  dead-drunk  messenger.

(4)  Although  this  Hodgson-case,  taken  by  itself,  yields  thus
only  a  negative,  or  at  the  best  a  baffling  conclusion,  we  have
no  scientific  right  to  take  it  by  itself,  as  I  have  done.  It
belongs  with  the  whole  residual  mass  of  Piper-phenomena,
and  they  belong  with  the  whole  mass  of  cognate  phenomena
elsewhere  found.  False  personation  is  a  ubiquitous  feature  in
this  total  mass.  It  certainly  exists  in  the  Piper-case ;  and
the  great  question  there  is  as  to  its  limits.  If,  when  lavish
allowance  has  been  made  for  this  strange  tendency  in  our
subliminal  life,  there  should  still  appear  a  balance  of  probability
(which  in  this  case  can  only  mean  a  balance  of  simplicity)
in  the  view  that  certain  parts  of  the  Piper-communications
really  emanate  from  personal  centres  of  memory  and  will,
connected  with  lives  that  have  passed  away ;  if,  I  say,  this
balance  of  probability  should  appear  decisively  anywhere
in  the  mass,  then  the  rest  of  the  mass  will  have  to  be
interpreted  as  at  least  possibly  similarly  caused.  I  admire
greatly  Hodgson's  own  discussion  of  the  Piper-case  in  Volume
XIII.  of  our  Proceedings,  especially  in  sections  5  and  6,
where,  taking  the  whole  mass  of  communication  into  careful
account,  he  decides  for  this  spiritist  interpretation.  I  know
of  no  more  masterly  handling  anywhere  of  so  unwieldy  a
mass  of  material ;  and  in  the  light  of  his  general  conclusions
there,  I  am  quite  ready  to  admit  that  my  own  denials  in
this  present  paper  may  be  the  result  of  the  narrowness  of


lviil] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  29

my  material,  and  that  possibly  R.  H.'s  spirit  has  been
speaking  all  the  time,  only  my  ears  have  been  deaf.  It  is
true  that  I  still  believe  the  "  Imperator-band "  to  be  fictitious
entities,  while  Hodgson  ended  by  accepting  them  as  real ;  but
as  to  the  general  probability  of  there  being  real  communicators
somewhere  in  the  mass  I  cannot  be  deaf  to  Hodgson's  able
discussion,  or  fail  to  feel  the  authority  which  his  enormous
experience  gave  to  his  opinion  in  this  particular  field.

(5)  I  therefore  repeat  that  if  ever  our  growing  familiarity
with  these  phenomena  should  tend  more  and  more  to
corroborate  the  hypothesis  that  "  spirits "  play  some  part  in
their  production,  I  shall  be  quite  ready  to  undeafen  my  ears,
and  to  revoke  the  negative  conclusions  of  this  limited  report.
The  facts  are  evidently  complicated  in  the  extreme,  and  we
have  as  yet  hardly  scratched  the  surface  of  them.  But
methodical  exploration  has  at  last  seriously  begun,  and  these
earlier  observations  of  ours  will  surely  be  interpreted  one
day  in  the  light  of  future  discoveries  which  it  may  well
take  a  century  to  make.  I  consequently  disbelieve  in  being
too  "  rigorous "  with  our  criticism  of  anything  now  in  hand,
or  in  our  squeezing  so  evidently  vague  a  material  too  hard
in  our  technical  forceps,  at  the  present  stage.  What  we
need  is  more  and  more  observations.  Quantity  will  probably
have  to  supplement  quality  in  the  material.  When  we  have
the  facts  in  sufficient  number,  we  may  be  sure  that  they  will
cast  plenty  of  explanatory  backward  light.  We  can  therefore
well  afford  to  play  a  waiting  game.


30


Professor  William  James.


[part


PAET  II.1

"  Believe  me,  I  am  not  rubbish." — The  Hodgson-Control.

Richard  Hodgson  had  always  seemed  and  felt  so  robust  that
the  possibility  of  his  death  had  been  thought  of  by  no  one,
and  no  provision  against  it  had  been  made.  He  had  worked
the  American  Branch  of  our  Society  practically  alone,  for  many
years,  and  although  Prof.  Hyslop  and  I  were  vice-presidents,
we  had  no  minute  acquaintance  with  details  at  the  office,
where  Miss  Lucy  Edmunds,  the  assistant  secretary,  was  now
left  in  charge  alone.

What  was  to  be  done  about  the  Branch  ?  what  was  to  be
done  with  its  mass  of  records  ?  what  with  Hodgson's  private
property  ? — these  were  so  many  problems  requiring  immediate
solution.  Last,  not  least,  there  was  the  problem  of  Mrs.  Piper's
future.

The  question  of  E.  H.'s  property  was  easily  answered  by
the  legal  appointment  of  Messrs.  Dorr  and  H.  James,  Jr.,  to  be
administrators  of  his  personal  estate,  he  having  left  no  will.
The  great  mass  of  Members  and  Associates  of  the  Branch
being  inert  and  indifferent,  the  handling  of  the  other  questions
fell  to  a  small  group  of  more  acutely  interested  persons,  of
whom  Dr.  Hyslop  and  I  were  the  only  ones  with  official
authority.

Absent  in  California  for  about  five  months,  I  found  on  my
return  that  certain  differences  of  opinions  had  been  developing
at  home.

Prof.  Hyslop,  who  had  expended  so  much  labor  already  on
the  Piper  material,  wished,  if  possible,  to  secure  the  records  for
the  new  American  Society  which  he  was  founding.  Others,
whose  sittings  had  been  of  a  peculiarly  intimate  nature,
claimed  that  the  records  of  those  sittings  were  their  private

1  Part  I.  of  this  report  was  written  to  be  read  at  the  S.P.R.  meeting  in
London,  January  28th,  1909.  I  must  assume  in  what  follows  that  my  readers
are  already  acquainted  with  the  contents  of  Part  I.


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson-Control.  31


property.  In  some  quarters  an  objection  was  felt  to  such  a
mass  of  American  material  going  to  England.  One  person
protested  rather  vehemently  against  the  prominent  part  played
by  a  certain  other  person  in  the  deliberations.  There  being
no  one  officially  empowered  to  succeed  Hodgson  in  taking
charge  of  Mrs.  Piper's  sittings,  differences  of  opinion  regarding
her  future  relations  to  the  S.P.K.  had  arisen.

There  was,  in  short,  a  state  of  strain  which  I  have  to
mention  here,  for  the  trance-utterances  of  that  period  refer  to
it,  and  its  peculiarities  must  be  taken  account  of  in  estimating
their  significance.

In  the  end,  however,  since  we  all  had  fair  minds  and
good-will,  and  were  united  in  our  common  love  for  Hodgson,
everything  got  settled  harmoniously.  Mr.  Piddington  was  sent
for  to  represent  the  English  Society;  it  was  decided  to  extinguish
the  American  Branch,  and  to  carry  the  Piper-reports  to  England,
practically  complete,  while  Hyslop's  Society  should  take  pos-
session of  the  other  records ;  workable  arrangements  were  found
for  Mrs.  Piper ;  the  situation,  in  short,  smoothed  itself  out,
leaving  nothing  but  a  new  system  of  friendships  among  persons
who  before  Hodgson's  death  had  for  the  most  part  been
unacquainted  with  one  another.

The  records  of  the  Piper  trance  show  that  during  all  this
period  the  "  controls "  had  cognizance  of  the  main  factors  of
perplexity.  There  were,  however,  so  many  sources  of  leakage
at  this  epoch  that  no  part  of  this  cognizance  can  be  counted
as  evidence  of  supernormal  knowledge.  Whether  in  or  out
of  trance,  the  Medium  may  well  have  come  into  possession
of  what  was  essential  in  the  facts,  and  the  gaps  could  be
filled  by  her  imagination,  either  waking  or  somnambulistic.
The  result,  however,  was  that  those  who  held  sittings  at  this
time  had  a  lively  feeling  that  the  control-personality  they
talked  with,  whether  Eector  or  Hodgson,  was  an  intelligence
which  understood  the  whole  situation.  It  talked  appropriately
with  Dorr  about  certain  records  not  being  made  public ;  with
Henry  James,  Jr.,  about  the  disposition  of  K.  H.'s  books  and
other  property;  with  Piddington  and  Dorr  about  Hyslop's  desires
and  how  best  to  meet  them  ;  with  Hyslop  about  his  responsi-
bilities and  about  mediums  in  whom  he  and  Hodgson  had
recently  been  interested : with  Dorr,  James,  Piddington,  and


32


Professor  William  James.


[part


Mrs.  Lyman  about  whom  to  induce  to  manage  the  sittings ;
with  more  than  one  of  us  about  a  certain  person  who  was
unduly  interfering,  etc.,  etc. ;  the  total  outcome  being  that
each  sitter  felt  that  his  or  her  problems  were  discriminatingly
perceived  by  the  mind  that  animated  the  sleeping  medium's
organism.

More  than  this — most  of  us  felt  during  the  sittings  that
we  were  in  some  way,  more  or  less  remote,  conversing  with
a  real  Eector  or  a  real  Hodgson.  And  this  leads  me  to  make
a  general  remark  about  the  difference  between  reading  the
record  of  a  Piper-sitting  and  playing  an  active  part  in  the
conversation  recorded.

One  who  takes  part  in  a  good  sitting  has  usually  a  far
livelier  sense,  both  of  the  reality  and  of  the  importance  of
the  communication,  than  one  who  merely  reads  the  record.
Active  relations  with  a  thing  are  required  to  bring  the  reality
of  it  home  to  us,  and  in  a  trance-talk  the  sitter  actively
co-operates.  When  you  find  your  questions  answered  and  your
allusions  understood ;  when  allusions  are  made  that  you  think
you  understand,  and  your  thoughts  are  met  by  anticipation,
denial,  or  corroboration  ;  when  you  have  approved,  applauded,  or
exchanged  banter,  or  thankfully  listened  to  advice  that  you
believe  in ;  it  is  difficult  not  to  take  away  an  impression
of  having  encountered  something  sincere  in  the  way  of  a
social  phenomenon.  The  whole  talk  gets  warmed  with  your
own  warmth,  and  takes  on  the  reality  of  your  own  part  in
it ;  its  confusions  and  defects  you  charge  to  the  imperfect
conditions,  while  you  credit  the  successes  to  the  genuineness  of
the  communicating  spirit.  Most  of  us  also,  when  sitters,  react
more,  prick  our  ears  more,  to  the  successful  parts  of  the
communication.  These  consequently  loom  more  in  our  memory,
and  give  the  key  to  our  dramatic  interpretation  of  the
phenomenon.  But  a  sitting  that  thus  seemed  important  at
the  time  may  greatly  shrink  in  value  on  a  cold  re-reading ;
and  if  read  by  a  non-participant,  it  may  seem  thin  and
almost  insignificant.1

1  A  striking  example  of  this  was  furnished  me  lately  by  a  manuscript  which
a  friend  sent  me.  She  had  been  one  of  Mrs.  Piper's  most  assiduous  clients.
Her  conversations  with  a  certain  spirit-control  had  been  copious,  fluent  and
veridical,  and  to  herself  so  comforting  and  elevating,  that  she  had  epitomized


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Piper  s  Hodgson-Control.  33


Somewhat  similar  fluctuations  are  noticed  in  the  reality-
feeling  which  the  records  may  awaken  at  different  times  in
one  and  the  same  reader.  When  I  first  undertook  to  collate
this  series  of  sittings  and  make  the  present  report,  I  supposed
that  my  verdict  would  be  determined  by  pure  logic.  Certain
minute  incidents,  I  thought,  ought  to  make  for  spirit-return
or  against  it  in  a  "  crucial "  way.  But  watching  my  mind
work  as  it  goes  over  the  data,  convinces  me  that  exact
logic  plays  only  a  preparatory  part  in  shaping  our  conclusions
here  ;  and  that  the  decisive  vote,  if  there  be  one,  has  to  be
cast  by  what  I  may  call  one's  general  sense  of  dramatic
probability,  which  sense  ebbs  and  flows  from  one  hypothesis
to  another — it  does  so  in  the  present  writer  at  least — in  a
rather  illogical  manner.  If  one  sticks  to  the  detail,  one  may
draw  an  anti-spiritist  conclusion  ;  if  one  thinks  more  of  what
the  whole  mass  may  signify,  one  may  well  incline  to  spiritist
interpretations.

This  was  the  shape  in  which  I  myself  left  the  matter  in
my  recent  preliminary  report.  I  said  that  spirit-return  was
not  proved  by  the  Hodgson-control  material,  taken  by  itself,
but  that  this  adverse  conclusion  might  possibly  be  reversed
if  the  limited  material  were  read  in  the  li<dit  of  the  total
mass  of  cognate  phenomena.  To  say  this  is  to  say  that  the
proof  still  baffles  one.  It  still  baffles  me,  I  have  to  confess ;
but  whether  my  subjective  insufficiency  or  the  objective  in-
sufficiency (as  yet)  of  our  evidence  be  most  to  blame  for
this,  must  be  decided  by  others.

The  common-sense  rule  of  presumption  in  scientific  logic  is
never  to  assume  an  unknown  agent  where  there  is  a  known
one,  and  never  to  choose  a  rarer  cause  for  a  phenomenon  when
a  commoner  one  will  account  for  it. The  usual  is  always  more

them  in  this  manuscript  which,  she  thought,  ought  to  be  published.  Strictly
evidential  matter  was  ruled  out  from  it  as  too  minute  or  private,  and  what
remained  was  ethical  and  human  matter  only.  Never  having  known  the
communicator,  and  reading  passively  and  critically,  I  felt  bound  to  dissuade
from  publication.  I  could  not  believe  that  readers  would  find  in  the  com-
munications a  twentieth  part  of  the  importance  which  their  receiver  had  found
in  them.  The  vital  heat  was  absent,  and  what  remained  was  ashes.  I  may
well  have  been  wrong  in  this  opinion,  but  the  incident  brought  vividly  home
to  my  own  mind  the  contrast  between  the  inside  view  of  the  sitter,  and  the
outside  one  of  the  mere  critic.

C


34


Professor  William  James.


[part


probable,  and  exceptional  principles  should  be  invoked  only  when
the  use  of  ordinary  ones  is  impossible.  Fraud  is  a  form  of
human  agency  both  known  and  common,  though  much  less
common  than  cynics  suppose ;  "  personation  "  is  unquestionably
common  in  the  whole  realm  of  our  subconscious  operations ;
"  telepathy "  seems  fairly  established  as  a  fact,  though  its
frequency  is  still  questionable ;  accidental  coincidences  occur,
however  rarely ;  but  "  spirits "  of  any  grade,  although  they  are
indeed  matters  of  tradition,  seem  to  have  shown  themselves  (so
far  as  concrete  evidence  for  them  goes)  nowhere  except  in  the
specific  phenomena  under  investigation.  Our  rule  of  presump-
tion should  lead  us  then  to  deny  spirits  and  to  explain  the
Piper-phenomena  by  a  mixture  of  fraud,  subconscious  persona-
tion, lucky  accident,  and  telepathy,  whenever  such  an  explanation
remains  possible.  Taking  these  Hodgson-records  in  detail,  and
subjecting  their  incidents  to  a  piecemeal  criticism,  such  an
explanation  does  seem  practically  possible  everywhere ;  so,  as
long  as  we  confine  ourselves  to  the  mere  logic  of  presumption,
the  conclusion  against  the  spirits  holds  good.

But  the  logic  of  presumption,  safe  in  the  majority  of  cases,
is  bound  to  leave  us  in  the  lurch  whenever  a  real  exception
confronts  us ;  and  there  is  always  a  bare  possibility  that  any
case  before  us  may  be  such  an  exception.  In  the  case  at
present  before  us  the  exceptional  possibility  is  that  of  "  spirits  "
really  having  a  finger  in  the  pie.  The  records  are  fully  com-
patible with  this  explanation,  however  explicable  they  may  be
without  it.  Spirits  may  co-operate  with  all  the  other  factors,
they  may  indeed  find  that  harnessing  the  other  factors  in  their
service  is  the  only  way  open  to  them  for  communicating  their
wishes.  The  lower  factors  may,  in  fact,  be  to  a  spirit's  wishes
what  the  physical  laws  of  a  machine  are  to  its  maker's  and
user's  aims.  A  spectator,  confining  his  attention  to  a  machine's
parts  and  their  workings,  and  finding  everything  there  explicable
by  mechanical  push  and  pull,  may  be  tempted  to  deny  the
presence  of  any  higher  actuation.  Yet  the  particular  pushes
and  pulls  which  the  form  of  that  machine  embodies,  would  not
be  there  at  all  without  a  higher  meaning  -which  the  machine
expresses,  and  which  it  works  out  as  a  human  purpose.  To
understand  the  parts  of  the  machine  fully,  we  must  find  the
human  purpose  which  uses  all  this  push  and  pull  as  its  means


t-viii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.


35


of  realization.  Just  so  the  personation,  fishing,  guessing,  using
lucky  hits,  etc.,  in  Mrs.  Piper,  may  be,  as  it  were,  the
mechanical  means  by  which  "  spirits "  succeed  in  making  her
living  organism  express  their  thought,  however  imperfectly.

As  soon,  therefore,  as  we  drop  our  routine  rule  of  presumption,
and  ask  straight  for  truth  and  nothing  but  truth,  we  find  that
the  whole  question  is  as  to  whether  the  exceptional  case  con-
fronts us.  This  is  a  question  of  probabilities  and  improbabilities.
Now  in  every  human  being  who  in  cases  like  this  makes  a
decision  instead  of  suspending  judgment,  the  sense  of  probability
depends  on  the  forms  of  dramatic  imagination  of  which  his  mind
is  capable.  The  explanation  has  in  any  event  to  be  dramatic.
Fraud,  personation,  telepathy,  spirits,  elementals,  are  all  of  them
dramatic  hypotheses.  If  your  imagination  is  incapable  of  con-
ceiving the  spirit-hypothesis  at  all,  you  will  just  proclaim  it
"  impossible  "  (as  my  colleague  Miinsterberg  does,  Psychology  and
Life,  p.  130),  and  thus  confess  yourself  incompetent  to  discuss
the  alternative  seriously.

I  myself  can  perfectly  well  imagine  spirit-agency,  and  I  find
my  mind  vacillating  about  it  curiously.  When  I  take  the
phenomena  piecemeal,  the  notion  that  Mrs.  Piper's  subliminal
self  should  keep  her  sitters  apart  as  expertly  as  it  does,  remem-
bering its  past  dealings  with  each  of  them  so  well,  not  mixing
their  communications  more,  and  all  the  while  humbugging  them
so  profusely,  is  quite  compatible  with  what  we  know  of  the
dream-life  of  hypnotized  subjects.  Their  consciousness,  narrowed
to  one  suggested  kind  of  operation,  shows  remarkable  skill  in
that  operation.  If  we  suppose  Mrs.  Piper's  dream-life  once  for
all  to  have  had  the  notion  suggested  to  it  that  it  must  personate
spirits  to  sitters,  the  fair  degree  of  virtuosity  it  shows  need  not,
I  think,  surprise  us.  Nor  need  the  exceptional  memory  shown
surprise  us,  for  memory  seems  extraordinarily  strong  in  the
subconscious  life.  But  I  find  that  when  I  ascend  from  the
details  to  the  whole  meaning  of  the  phenomenon,  and  especially
when  I  connect  the  Piper-case  with  all  the  other  cases  I  know
of  automatic  writing  and  mediumship,  and  with  the  whole  record
of  spirit-possession  in  human  history,  the  notion  that  such  an
immense  current  of  experience,  complex  in  so  many  ways,  should
spell  out  absolutely  nothing  but  the  words  "  intentional  humbug  "
appears  very  unlikely. The  notion  that  so many  men  and


Professor  William  James.


[part


women,  in  all  other  respects  honest  enough,  should  have  this
preposterous  monkeying  self  annexed  to  their  personality  seems
to  me  so  weird  that  the  spirit-theory  immediately  takes  on  a
more  probable  appearance.  The  spirits,  if  spirits  there  be,
must  indeed  work  under  incredible  complications  and  falsifica-
tions, but  at  least  if  they  are  present,  some  honesty  is  left  in
a  whole  department  of  the  universe  which  otherwise  is  run  by
pure  deception.  The  more  I  realize  the  quantitative  massive-
ness  of  the  phenomenon  and  its  complexity,  the  more  incredible
it  seems  to  me  that  in  a  world  all  of  whose  vaster  features
we  are  in  the  habit  of  considering  to  be  sincere  at  least,
however  brutal,  this  feature  should  be  wholly  constituted  of
insincerity.

If  I  yield  to  a  feeling  of  the  dramatic  improbability  of  this,
I  find  myself  interpreting  the  details  of  the  sittings  differently.
I  am  able,  while  still  holding  to  all  the  lower  principles  of
interpretation,  to  imagine  the  process  as  more  complex,  and  to
share  the  feeling  with  which  Hodgson  came  at  last  to  regard
it  after  his  many  years  of  familiarity,  the  feeling  which  Prof.
Hyslop  shares,  and  which  most  of  those  who  have  good  sittings
are  promptly  inspired  with.  I  can  imagine  the  spirit  of  E.  H.
talking  to  me  through  inconceivable  barriers  of  obstruction,  and
forcing  recalcitrant  or  only  partly  consilient  processes  in  the
Medium  to  express  his  thoughts,  however  dimly.

This  is  as  candid  an  account  of  my  own  personal  equation
as  I  can  give.  I  exhibited  it  in  my  treatment  of  special
incidents  in  the  preliminary  report,  and  the  reader  will  make
allowance  for  it  in  what  is  to  follow.  In  the  end  he  must
draw  his  conclusions  for  himself;  I  can  only  arrange  the
material.

The  best  way  perhaps  to  do  this  will  be  to  begin  with
certain  general  characteristics,  Hodgson's  mannerisms,  for
example.

Hodgson  was  distinguished  during  life  by  great  animal  spirits.
He  was  fond  of  argument,  chaff,  and  repartee,  a  good  deal  of
a  gesticulator,  and  a  great  laugher.  He  had,  moreover,  an
excessive  appetite  for  poetry.  I  call  it  excessive,  for  it  was
anything  but  fastidious,- — he  seemed  to  need  sonorous  rhyme  and
metre  for  his  daily  food,  even  if  the  quality  and  sentiment  were


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  37

commonplace.  All  these  traits  were  manifested  from  the  outset
in  his  appearances  as  a  "  control " — some  examples  are  given
in  my  preliminary  report.  Chaff  and  slang  from  a  spirit  have
an  undignified  sound  for  the  reader,  but  to  the  interlocutors
of  the  E.  H.-control  they  seem  invariably  to  have  been  elements
of  verisimilitude.  Thus  T.  P.  writes,  a  propos  of  a  bantering
passage  in  the  record  of  Jan.  16,  1906:  "T.  P.  and  R  H.
were  such  good  chums  that  he  was  saucy  to  her,  and  teasing
her  most  of  the  time.  E.  H.'s  tone  towards  T.  P.  in  all  his
communications  is  absolutely  characteristic,  and  as  he  was  in
life."  Similarly,  Dr.  Bayiey  appends  this  note  to  a  number  of
ultra- vivacious  remarks  from  E.  H. :  "  Such  expressions  and
phrases  were  quaintly  characteristic  of  E.  H.  in  the  body,  and
as  they  appear,  often  rapidly  and  spontaneously,  they  give  the
almost  irresistible  impression  that  it  is  really  the  Hodgson
personality,  presiding  with  its  own  characteristics.  To  fully
appreciate  this,  of  course,  one  would  have  had  to  have  known
him  as  intimately  as  I  did." 1

For  these  rollicking  observations  the  control  chose  his  sitters
well  in  accordance  with  his  habits  during  life.  This,  however,
did  not  exclude  very  serious  talk  with  the  same  persons — quite
the  reverse  sometimes,  as  when  one  sitter  of  this  class  notes  :
"  Then  came  words  of  kindness  which  were  too  intimate  and
personal  to  be  recorded,  but  which  left  me  so  deeply  moved
that  shortly  afterwards,  at  the  sitting's  close,  I  fainted  dead
away — it  had  seemed  as  though  he  had  in  all  reality  been
there  and  speaking  to  me."

The  extracts  given  in  the  earlier  report  or  to  be  given  soon
will  show  what  I  mean  by  Hodgson's  rollicking  manner.  The
later  communications  show  more  of  it  than  the  earlier  ones ;
and  it  quickly  manifested  the  tendency,  characteristic  in  the
medium's  utterances,  to  become  stereotj'ped.  Whatever  they
may  have  been  at  the  outset,  they  soon  fall  into  what  may
be  called  the  trance-memory's  "  stock,"  and  are  then  repeated
automatically.  Hodgson  quickly  acquired  a  uniform  mode  of
announcing  himself:  "Well,  well,  well!  I  am  Hodgson.
Delighted  to  see  you.  How  is  everything  ?  First  rate  ?  I'm
in  the  witness-box  at  last,"  etc.,  with  almost  no  variety.  This
habitual  use  of  stock-remarks  by  Mrs.  Piper  may  tempt  one

1  Sitting  of  April  3rd,  1906.


38


Professor  William  James.


[part


to  be  unjust  to  the  total  significance  of  her  mediumship.  If
the  supernormal  element  in  it,  whatever  it  is,  be  essentially
discontinuous  and  flash-like,  an  utterance  that  to-day  belongs
to  the  regular  trance-stock  may  have  got  into  that  stock  at  a
former  moment  of  supernormal  receptivity.  Supernormal
receptivity  of  some  kind  is  certainly  involved  in  the  total
phenomenon,  but  I  believe  that  information  that  originally  came
thus  quickly  ceases  to  be  supernormal.  The  control  G.  P.,
at  the  outset  of  his  appearance,  gave  supernormal  information
copiously,  but  within  a  few  years  he  has  degenerated  into  a
shadow  of  his  former  self,  dashing  in  and  quickly  out  again,
with  an  almost  fixed  form  of  greeting.  Whatever  he  may
have  been  at  first,  he  seems  to  me  at  last  to  have  "  passed
on,"  after  leaving  that  amount  of  impression  on  the  trance-
organism's  habits.

I  will  now  cull  from  the  records  a  number  of  extracts
relative  to  particular  sitters,  which  show  the  control's  familiarity
with  their  affairs,  calling  the  first  of  these  extracts

The  Oldfarm  Series.

Oldfarm  is  the  name  of  Mr.  George  B.  Dorr's  place  at  Bar
Harbor,  Maine,  where  B.  H.  had  often  been  a  summer  guest.
Mrs.  Piper  at  the  time  of  these  sittings  had  never  been  at
Bar  Harbor;  and  although  she  had  had  many  interviews,  as  well
with  Mr.  Dorr  as  with  Mr.  Dorr's  mother  before  the  latter's
death,  it  is  unlikely  that  many  of  the  small  veridical  details
in  what  follows  had  been  communicated  to  her  at  those
interviews.  At  Mr.  Dorr's  sitting  of  June  5th,  1906,  he
asks  the  B.  H.-control  for  his  reminiscences  of  Oldfarm  :  "  Do
you  remember  your  visits  to  us  there  ? "

Certainly  I  do.  One  night  we  stayed  out  too  long  and
your mother got very nervous, do you remember  1

Minna was there  We stayed out much  too

long.  I  felt  it  was  a  great  breach  of  etiquette  but  we
couldn't  help  it !  I  fear  as  guests  we  were  bad  [laughs],

[R.  H.'s  sitting  out  with  "Minna"  and  others  "much  too
long "  and  "  their  being  bad  as  guests "  is  excellent.
In  old  days  they  used  often  to  sit  up  hopelessly  late
into  the  night,  when  the  nights  were  pleasant,  out  on


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Piper  s  Hodgson-Control.  39


the  piazza,  talking  in  the  dark;  and  my  mother's  half-
real  and  half-humorous  exasperation  over  it,  expressed  in
her  own  vivid  way,  and  R.  H.'s  boyish  delight  in  doing
it  and  at  the  scoldings  they  all  used  to  get  for  it  next
day,  would  naturally  be  one  of  the  first  things  he  would
recall,  associated  as  those  evenings  were  with  people
whom  he  cared  for.— D.]

And  do  you  remember  the  discussion  I  had  with  Jack,
when  he  got  impatient  1 You  were  much  amused  !

[His  recollection  of  his  discussion  with  Jack,  who  used,  to-
gether with  M.,  to  be  at  our  house  with  him  a  great
deal  in  the  old  days,  is  characteristic.  I  do  not  myself
remember  the  special  occasion  to  which  he  refers,  but
the  incident,  including  my  own  amusement  at  the  heat
they  used  to  get  into  in  their  talk,  falls  in  most  naturally
with  all  my  own  recollections  of  that  time. — D.]

And  I  remember  your  mother's  calling  me  out  one  Sunday
morning  to  see  the  servants  go  to  church  on  a  buckboard.

[I  cannot  now  recall  my  mother  taking  R.  H.  out  to  see
the  servants  off  on  any  special  day,  but  he  was  with  us
many  Sundays,  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  memory
of  this  is  absolutely  accurate,  nor  is  it  anything  of  which
Mrs.  Piper  might  know, — it  is  not  the  sort  of  thing  that
any  one  would  have  spoken  to  her  of,  or  mentioned  at
the  trance.  The  buckboard  is  quite  correct.  It  was  a
big  buckboard  that  carried  six  people  and  was  the  only
wagon  which  we  had  big  enough  to  take  all  the  people
up,  but  its  use  is  not  sufficiently  universal  at  Bar  Harbor
to  injure  the  evidential  value  of  his  recollection  of  it.
Again,  the  people  used  to  go  off  from  the  kitchen,
which  is  at  an  end  of  the  house  and  cannot  be  seen
from  the  living  rooms  or  piazzas,  so  that  his  statement
that  my  mother  called  him  out  to  see  them  off,  while  a
small  point,  seems  to  me  of  value;  and  the  event  itself,
with  the  arrangements  that  had  to  be  made  to  make  it
possible,  was  quite  enough  of  a  circumstance  in  our
family  life  to  make  recollection  of  it  natural. — D.]

I  can  see  the  open  fireplace  in  the  living  room.


40


Professor  William  James.


[part


[The  room  is  one  in  which  the  fireplace,  hroad  and  arching,
is  the  central  feature  and  would  be  first  thought  of  in
thinking  of  the  room. — D.]

6.  B.  D.  Do  you  remember  where  you  used  to  sleep  ?

Out  in  the  little  house  just  out  across  the  yard,  where  we
used  to  go  and  smoke.

[His  recollection  also  of  the  little  house  is  good.  The  only
mistake  in  reference  to  it  is  in  speaking  of  it  as  "  across
the  yard,"  it  being  in  fact  across  the  lawn  and  garden,
upon  a  hillside  opposite  the  house.  We  always  kept
some  rooms  in  it  for  our  guests,  over-flowing  into  it
when  the  house  was  full,  and  R.  H.  liked  it  better  than
the  house  itself  in  the  greater  freedom  that  it  gave  him.
We  used  to  close  the  house  itself  early  in  the  evening,
and  R.  H.  was  very  apt  then  to  go  up  to  the  cottage
with  some  other  man  or  men  and  sit  up  and  smoke
and  talk, — often  until  quite  late. — D.]

I  remember  the  bathing  and  the  boats  and  a  walk  through
the  woods.

[The  bathing  was  one  of  the  incidents  at  Oldfarm  which
R.  H.  would  have  best  remembered.  We  used  to  take
long  walks  over  the  mountains  and  go  down  for  a
plunge  when  we  returned  from  them.  There  were  often
three  or  four  men  or  more  going  in  together  when  the
house  was  full,  and  it  was  something  in  which  R.  H.
delighted  especially,  so  that  his  recollection  of  this
would  be  apt  to  be  one  of  his  most  vivid  ones. — D.]

G.  B.  D.  Do  you  remember  whether  you  used  to  bathe  off  the  beach,
or  off  the  rocks  1

We  used  to  bathe  off  the  rocks ;  I'm  sure  of  that. /  can

see  the  whole  place.

[I  asked  the  question  as  to  whether  we  went  in  off'  the
rocks  or  the  beach  so  as  to  see  if  he  really  had  a  clear
remembrance  of  it,  and  I  asked  it  in  such  a  way  that
my  companion  at  the  sitting  thought  R.  H.'s  answer
"  off  the  rocks "  was  probably  wrong.  My  bath-house
was  not  on  the  beach,  but  on  a  point  running  far  out


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson-Control.  41


into  the  sea,  very  bold  and  rocky,  and  we  used  to
spring  off  the  rocks  into  deep  water,  climbing  out  by
a  perpendicular  ladder  fastened  to  the  ledge. — D.]

I  can  see  the  little  piazza  that  opened  out  from  your
mother's  room  and  the  whole  beautiful  outlook  from  it,
over  the  water.

[That  that  piazza  and  its  view  should  be  one  of  E.  H.'s
strongest  recollections  of  the  place  seems  to  me  most
natural,  while  at  the  same  time  the  piazza  itself,  which
is  not  a  conspicuous  object  in  the  house  from  without,
and  which  was  only  familiar  to  my  mother's  more
intimate  friends,  is  not  a  thing  which  would  occur
naturally  to  any  one  not  familiar  with  our  life  down
there.— D.]

Mr.  Dorr  then  asks  B.  H.  if  he  remembers  a  walk  he
once  took  with  a  young  friend  from  New  York,  where  B.  H.
outwalked  the  other  man  and  was  very  triumphant  about  it
afterward,  and  whether  he  could  recall  the  man's  name.  He
also  asks  him  if  he  remembers  the  name  of  the  man  who
lived  in  the  farm  house,  where  E.  H.  used  generally  to  sleep
when  staying  at  Oldf'arm.  Both  of  these  names  would  have
been  quite  familiar  to  E.  H.  in  life.  E.  H.  cannot  give  them
and  makes  no  attempt  to  do  so.

R.  H.  Names  are  the  hardest  things  to  remember ;  it's  extra-
ordinary but  it's  true.  The  scenes  of  my  whole  life
are  laid  open  to  me  but  names  go  from  one's  memory
like  a  dream.  I  remember  walking  through  the  woods
there  and  sitting  down  and  lighting  my  pipe  and  coming
back  late  to  lunch.

On  June  20th,  1906,  at  a  sitting  of  Miss  Bancroft's,  at
which  Mr.  Dorr  was  present,  the  E.  H.  control  suddenly
writes  :

Do  you  remember  anything  about  Celery-root'?  about
C  e  1 1  e  root  1

Miss  B.  (to  G.  B.  D.) — Do  you  remember  anything  about  it  ?
G.  B.  D.  No.


42


Professor  William  James.


[part


Or  was  it  at  your  place,  George.  [Difficult}'  in  reading
this  sentence.  When  read  successfully,  G.  B.  D.  says
"yes".]

Your  mother  used  to  have  it,  and  I  was  surprised  to  see
it  there  as  I  thought  it  the  best  of  it.  As  I  thought
it  the  best  part  of  it.  The  best  part  of  it.  No  one
would  ever  think  of  this  thing  I  know.

Miss  B.  You  mean  you  think  you  got  this  at  Mr.  Dorr's  1

Think  !  I  know.  I  think  so,  yes.  I  think  George's  mother
used  to  have  it  and  I  never  got  it  anywhere  but  there.

G.  B.  D.  at  first  cannot  recall  what  is  meant,  then  remembers
and  says  "  Good  "  . He  appends  the  following  note :

[We  used  to  have  a  bunch  or  two  of  raw  celery,  when  we
grew  our  own,  placed  on  the  table  as  a  hors  d'ceuvre,  and
served  whole,  with  the  upper  portion  of  the  root  left  on
it  in  the  French  fashion.  This  part  of  the  root  is  very
good  eating,  but  it  is  not  usually  served  in  America ;
and  though  I  have  no  clear  remembrance  now  of  special
talk  about  this  with  Pi.  H.,  I  remember  quite  well  his
talking  at  our  table  late  one  fall  about  these  autumn
vegetables  and  think  that  what  is  spoken  of  is  this. — D.]

On  July  2nd,  1906,  Mr.  Dorr  had  a  spoken  sitting  alone,
taking  the  short-hand  record  himself,  and  asked  again  for
Oldfarm  recollections  :

G.  B.  D.  Can  you  give  me  any  names  connected  with  Bar  Harbor,
or  of  the  mountains  there  which  you  used  to  climb,  or
of  the  people  to  whose  houses  you  used  to  go  with  me,  or
any  others  that  you  can  recall  1

No,  I  can't  recall  any  names  now  ...  I  will  think  it  over
and  try.

G.  B.  D.  Can  you  recall  four  sisters  whom  we  used  to  walk  with,  and
be  much  with,  a  number  of  years  ago  ?

I  remember  Minna  and  Gemma.  [Names  known  to  the
medium  in  former  trances,  but  pertinent  as  a  reply.]

G.B.D.  I  will  give  you  the  name  of  the  sisters,  and  see  if  that
recalls  anything  to  you. It  was  the  Minturns.


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  43

Oh  ! the  Minturns  ! [repeated  eagerly  and  emphatically].

There  was  Gertrude  and  Robert,  a  brother  named  Robert —
and  Mary.  They  lived  in  New  York.  I  remember  them
well. [Correct,  save  that  Mary  should  have  been  May.]

G.  B.  D.  There  was  another  sister,  who  used  to  walk  oftenest  with
us — can  you  recall  her  name  ?

[R.  H.  makes  one  or  two  ineffectual  attempts,  giving  wrong
names.]

G.  B.  D.  Now,  Hodgson,  can't  you  tell  me  something  about  the  lady
you  were  interested  in,  whose  letters  you  asked  Pidding-
ton  to  find'?

This  was  Hulclah  Densmore.

G.  B.  D.  But  there  is  no  Huldah  in  the  family,  that  I  know,  nor  can
we  learn  of  any.  We  have  asked  her  sister,  and  she
has  never  heard  the  name  of  Huldah.

Wait  a  moment.  Let  me  think.  It  is  most  difficult  to  get
earthly  memories.  They  go  from  one,  but  I  find  that
they  come  back  to  me  as  I  think  of  things. She  married

a [name  of  nationality  given  correctly]. If  you  will

write  to  her,  you  will  find  I  am  right. Write  to  her  !

G.  B.  D.  Did  you  want  to  marry  her  1

Yes,  I  did.  And  I  remember  what  a  disappointment  it  was
to  me.

G.  B.  D.  Was  she  out  of  sympathy  with  your  work  1

She  wanted  me  to  give  it  up — it  was  a  subject  she  did  not
care  to  have  to  do  with.  [Correct  as  to  the  lady's
animus. — W.  J.]

G.  B.  D.  Was  it  at  our  house  you  met  her'?

I  met  her  there,  at  Bar  Harbor.  Your  mother  ought  to
remember  it  well.  She  introduced  us  to  each  other.
[Correct. — I).]

G.  B.  D.  But  my  mother  is  on  your  side.

Oh  yes,  I  had  forgotten.  It  has  troubled  me  over  here,
thinking  I  might  have  left  her  letters  among  my  papers.
So  I  spoke  to  Piddington  about  it.


44


Professor  William  James.


[part


G.  B.  D.  I  think  you  must  have  destroyed  them. We  didn't  find
any.

I  think  I  must  have  destroyed  them — I  hope  I  did.

[This  "  Huldah "  episode  is  treated  in  a  separate  section  of
Part  I.  of  this  report,  see  above,  pp.  20-"26. — W.  J.]

I  recall  the  pansies  your  mother  used  to  place  over  the  table.
I  remember  that  well — delightful  to  see  them  !  I  can
see  them  now.

[My  mother  used  to  have  pansies  spread  loosely  over  the
table-cloth,  when  she  had  people  to  dine  or  sup  with  us
at  Bar  Harbor,  where  we  had  a  large  bed  of  them  planted
near  the  house  so  that  we  could  get  them  freely  for  this
purpose.  The  custom  is  not  common  enough  to  let  H.'s
statement  pass  for  a  happy  guess,  nor  do  I  think  it  likely
he  would  have  spoken  of  it  to  Mrs.  Piper,  either  awake
or  in  trance.  It  came  out  quite  suddenly  also,  and  with
a  positiveness  which  made  me  feel  that  it  was  a  true
recollection,  something  seen  at  the  moment  in  a  mental
picture. — D.]

Or.  B.  D.,  endeavoring  to  extract  Bar  Harbor  names  from
Pt.  H.,  again  tries  to  get  that  of  the  man  who  occupied  the
farmhouse  at  which  R.  H.  used  generally  to  sleep  when  at
Oldfarm.  He  was  not  able  to  give  that,  but  gave  the  name
of  the  gardener,  Miller.  "  It  is  possible,"  Mr.  Dorr  writes,
"  that  Mrs.  Piper  may  have  heard  of  Miller's  name  as  that  of
the  manager  of  my  plant-nurseries  at  Bar  Harbor.  I  remember
I  once  meant  to  send  her  some  plants  from  the  nurseries  for
her  garden,  and  think  it  probable  they  went.  It  is  also
possible  that  the  name  may  have  come  up  at  the  trance  in
my  own  past  sittings."

I  remember  a  beautiful  road,  a  bicycle-road  you  made,  going
through  the  woods.

[A  dozen  years  ago  I  made  a  bicycle-road  on  my  own  back-
land,  which  ran  through  the  woods  beneath  a  mountain
over  which  we  often  used  to  walk.  It  was  a  pleasant
and  familiar  feature  in  our  summer  life  there,  and  it
would  naturally  be  one  of  the  pictures  that  would  come


lviii.J Report  on  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson-Control.


45


back  to  K.  H.  in  thinking  of  the  place, — like  the  view
from  my  mother's  balcony  of  which  he  spoke  at  the  former
sitting.  But  it  is  not  a  thing  of  which  either'  he  or  I
would  have  spoken  to  Mrs.  Piper,  whether  in  trance  or
awake. — D.]

G.  B.  D.  then  tries  again  to  get  the  name  of  the  man  who
occupied  the  farmhouse,  describing  him  to  E.  H.  without
mentioning  his  name.

Oh  yes,  I  remember  him  well — I  remember  going  off  with
him  once  fishing — going  down  the  shore  in  a  boat.  .  .  .
I  remember  one  evening,  and  it  impressed  me  so  vividly
because  your  mother  did  not  like  it,  and  I  felt  we  had
done  wrong  and  hurt  her — M.  and  I  were  smoking  to-
gether and  we  talked  too  late,  and  she  felt  it  was  time
to  retire —

[This  would  be  remarkably  good  if  the  incident  should
prove  not  to  have  come  up  already  in  R.  H.'s  own
sittings  after  M.  died.  She  used  to  smoke  cigarettes
occasionally,  and  was  the  only  person  of  the  feminine
sex  whom  I  now  recall  as  having  done  so  at  our  house.
Unless  in  possibly  referring  to  this  incident  to  her
'spirit'  at  trances,  after  M.  died,  Hodgson  would  have
been  most  unlikely  to  speak  of  it  to  others, — certainly
not  to  Mrs.  Piper,  either  in  trance  or  awake. — D.]

G.  B.  D.  Do  you  remember  where  you  went  with  John  Rich  when
you  went  fishing  with  him — Oh  I  forgot !  I  did  not
mean  to  give  you  his  name  !

John  Rich,  John,  that  is  his  name  !  But  I  am  sorry  you
gave  it  to  me  too — it  might  have  come  to  me.  We
got  a  boat  and  went  over  to  an  island.  Coming  back
we  had  some  difficulty  in  getting  our  fish  in.  We  had
poor  luck  in  catching  them,  and  then  we  lost  them.
Ask  him,  he  will  remember  it,  I  think.

[R.  H.'s  recollection  of  going  off  with  Rich  seems  to  be
good,  as  I  think  it  over.  That  he  should  go  off  with
Rich  only  and  neither  alone  nor  with  me  or  other  guests,
is  exactly  what  happened, — and  yet  not  what  might
have  been  expected  to  happen.  His  going  to  an  island
is  descriptive  also. — D.]


46


Professor  William  James.


[part


Do  you  remember  what  you  used  to  put  over  your  back
that  had  a  cup  in  it  1  And  there  was  a  little  brook
where  we  used  to  stop  and  drink.  And  then  I  used
to  stop  and  light  my  pipe — the  whole  scene  is  as  vivid
to  me  ! If  I  could  only  express  it  to  you  !

[I  used  to  carry  a  little  canvas  bag  slung  over  my  shoulder
and  a  cup  in  it,  when  we  went  on  long  tramps.  This
may  be  what  R.  H.  refers  to,  though  I  think  that  he
was  rather  apt  to  carry  a  folding  leather  cup  of  his
own  in  his  pocket.  The  whole  recollection  is  rather
vague  in  my  memory,  going  back  a  number  of  years.
The  picture  is  a  good  one  of  just  what  used  to  happen
when  we  were  off  on  our  tramps  together,  though  of
course  what  he  describes  would  be  always  apt  to  happen
on  walks  through  woods  and  over  mountains.  The
picture  of  the  little  brook  we  used  to  stop  and  drink
at  is  good — I  can  see  it  now. — D.]


After  some  talk  about  the  Tavern  Club,  about  Australia,  and
about  the  state  of  things  in  the  other  world — some  of  which
will  be  noticed  later,  R.  H.  goes  on  as  follows :

Do  you  remember  one  summer  there  was  a  gentleman  at
your  house  who  had  a  violin.  I  had  some  interesting
talks  with  him  about  these  things,  and  I  liked  to  hear
him  play  his  violin.  A  little  gentleman — I  remember
him  very  well.

[This  describes  a  man  named  von  G.,  who  was  an  excellent
violinist  and  who  also  talked  interestingly  on  psychical
research  matters,  in  which  he  professed  to  have  some
faculty.  As  R.  H.  himself  was  also  fond  of  the  violin,
it  seems  natural  that  some  memory  of  von  G.  should
stand  out  now.  That  Mrs.  Piper  should  have  any  know-
ledge of  this  gentleman  seems  most  improbable. — -D.]

My  earthly  memories  come  only  in  fragments.  I  remember
quite  well  this  little  gentleman  and  how  interested  I
was  in  talking  with  him  about  psychics,  and  in  his
instrument  as  well.  I  remember  a  man  Royce  visiting
you.


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson-Control.


47


[Prof.  Koyce  says  that  he  has  been  at  Oldfarm  along  with
Hodgson,  but  adds  that  that  might  be  a  natural
association  in  Mrs.  Piper's  mind,  since  he  thinks  that
the  only  time  he  ever  saw  her  was  at  the  Dorrs'  in
Boston.— W.  J.]

This  is,  I  think,  the  whole  of  the  matter  relative  to
Oldfarm  which  the  R  H.-Control  has  given.  The  number  of
items  mentioned  is  not  great,  and  some  inability  to  answer
questions  appears.  But  there  are  almost  no  mistakes  of  fact,
and  it  is  hardly  possible  that  all  the  veridical  points  should
have  been  known  to  Mrs.  Piper  normally.  Some  of  them
indeed  were  likely  a  priori ;  others  may  have  been  chance-
hits  ;  but  for  the  mass,  it  seems  to  me  that  either  reading
of  Mr.  Dorr's  mind,  or  spirit-return,  is  the  least  improbable
explanation.

The  fewness  of  the  items  may  seem  strange  to  some  critics.
But  if  we  assume  a  spirit  to  be  actually  there,  trying  to
reach  us,  and  if  at  the  same  time  we  imagine  that  his
situation  with  regard  to  the  transaction  is  similar  to  our  own,
the  surprise  vanishes.  I  have  been  struck  over  and  over
again,  both  when  at  sittings  myself  and  when  reading  the
records,  at  the  paralyzing  effect  on  one's  ready  wit  and
conversational  flow,  which  the  strangeness  of  the  conditions
brings  with  it.  Constraint  and  numbness  take  the  place  of
genial  expansiveness.  We  "  don't  know  what  to  say,"  and
it  may  also  be  so  "  on  the  other  side."  Few  persons,  I
fancy,  if  suddenly  challenged  to  prove  their  identity  through
the  telephone,  would  quickly  produce  a  large  number  of  facts
appropriate  to  the  purpose.  They  would  be  more  perplexed,
and  waste  more  time  than  they  imagine.

I  next  pass  to  what  I  will  call

The  Owl's  Head  Series.

Owl's  Head  was  the  name  of  the  summer  place  of  Miss
Bancroft,  overlooking  Rockland  Harbor,  in  Maine,  where  Mrs.
Piper  had  never  been.  E.  H.  had  very  greatly  enjoyed  visits
which  he  had  made  there  on  two  successive  summers.  Miss
Bancroft  had  been  a  sitter  of  Mrs.  Piper's  and  was  a  convert
to spiritism, with some degree of  "  psychic  "  susceptibility


48  Professor  William  James.  [part

herself.  At  her  first  sitting  after  Hodgson's  death,  Feb.  19th,
1906,  Mr.  Dorr  also  being  present,  the  following  dialog  took
place  : 1

I  am  Hodgson!  Speak!  Well,  well,  well,  I  am  delighted
to  see  you. How  are  you  1

Miss  B.  I  am  all  right. How  are  you?

First  rate.
Miss  B.  I  can  scarcely  speak  to  you.

But  you  must  speak  to  me.

Miss  B.  Will  you  give  me  some  definite  message1?

Surely  I  will.  I  have  called  and  called  to  you.  Do  you
remember  what  I  said  to  you  about  coming  here  if  I
got  a  chancel

Miss  B.  Yes,  I  do.

I  wish  you  to  pay  attention  to  me.  [The  sitter  and  Mr.
Dorr  were  together  trying  to  decipher  the  script.]  Do
you  remember  how  I  used  to  talk  about  this  subject,
evenings  1  You  know  what  you  said  about  my  writing —
I  think  I  am  getting  on  first-rate.

[Everything  accurate  so  far  !  Miss  B.  can  herself  write  auto-
matically, and  since  R.  H.'s  departure,  has  thought  that
he  might  have  been  influencing  her  subconsciousness  in
that  and  other  ways.  The  words  "  I  have  called,"  etc.,
she  interprets  in  this  sense.  Rector,  however,  already
knew  of  her  automatic  writing. — W.  J.]

Do  you  remember  what  a  good  time  we  had  at  Head?  I
am  so  glad  I  went.  .  .  .  Do  you  remember  a  little  talk
we  had  about  the  lights  and  satellites  1  Do  you  re-
member how  interested  you  were  ?  Do  you  remember
what  I  used  to  say  about  returning  if  I  got  over  here
first?

1  Here,  as  in  all  the  rest  of  the  records  reprinted,  I  omit  repetitions  and
remarks  not  connected  with  the  recollections.  Nothing  is  omitted,  however,
which  in  my  eyes  might  affect  the  interpretation  of  what  is  printed. — W.  J.


LVIII.]


Report  on  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson-Control.


4!)


Miss  B.  Yes,  I  remember  all  that.

[Accurate  again.  The  "Head"  must  mean  Owl's  Head,
where  during  two  successive  summers  Hodgson  had
visited  the  sitter,  and  been  supremely  happy.  The
"  lights "  refer  to  the  lights  of  Rockland,  across  the  bay,
of  which  he  greatly  admired  the  effect,  and  at  night  on
the  piazza  he  had  often  spoken  about  the  planets  and
stars,  and  the  question  of  their  habitation. — M.  B.]

Well,  here  I  am,  now  fire  away,  now  fire.

Miss  B.  Can  you  tell  me  the  names  of  some  who  were  with  you
there  last  summer1?

Remember  Miss  Wilkinson1?

Miss  B.  No.

You  ask  me  about  whom  ?  Not  understand.  How  are  the
children  ?  [The  house  had  been  full  of  school  children,
of  whom  R.  H.  was  fond.— M.  B.]

Miss  B.  They  are  well.

Good !  Do  you  remember  the  day  I  walked  across  to  the
Mountain  1

Miss  B.  No,  I  don't  remember.

Ask  Putnam  if  he  and  I — My  watch  stopped.

[For  this  reference  to  a  watch  stopping,  compare  pp.  11  and
116  of  this  report.  I  suspect  some  confused  memory  of
a  real  incident  to  be  at  the  bottom  of  it. — W.  J.]

Miss  B.  Can  you  not  recall  something  you  did  at  the  Head  ?

That  is  just  what  I  am  trying  to  do.  Don't  you  remember
how  I  had  to  laugh  at  you,  laugh  on  that  boat,  about
that  boat?

This  last  word,  being  wrongly  deciphered  as  "  hat,"  Miss  B.
asks  : —

Miss  B.  Whose  hat  blew  off?

My  hat,  do  you  not  remember  the  day  it  blew  off?  Yes,
you  are  not  following  me  very  clearly.

D


50  Professor  William  James.  [part

Miss  B.  I  am  trying  to  recall  about  that  hat.

Do  you  remember  fishing  1  Yes.
Miss  B.  Yes,  I  remember  fishing.

Capital ! Remember  about  my  hat  1  went  into  the  water.

Miss  B.  Yes,  I  think  I  do.

I  should  say  you  did.  Oh  my  !  but  I  am  not  so  stupid  as
some  I  know.  I  have  not  forgotten  anything.  Get  my
Poem  ?

Miss  B.  Yes,  and  I  want  to  thank  you  for  it.

Don't  bother  about  that.  I  want  you  to  know  I  am  really
here  and  recognize  you,  and  the  first-rate  time  I  had

at  Owl's Thank  you  very  much. How  is  Bayley  1

Certainly  first-rate  time  I  had  at  Owl's.  Thank  you
very  much.  Owl's.  Remember  the  jokes  I  told  you1?
Jsp.  Thank  you.  Remember  what  I  said  about  dressing
them  [or  "  him  ?  "]  1 Remember  1 Oh  I  do  well.  .  .  .

Miss  B.  How  am  /  getting  along  1

Capital !  You  are  doing  well,  all  you  need  is  experience.
I  would  like  to  take  a  swim  !  I  would  like  to  take  a
swim.  Plunge.

[Much  incoherence  hereabouts.  The  names  Bayley  and
Jessup  (Jsp)  are  correct.  Hodgson  used  to  bathe  with
them  off*  the  rocks,  and  Miss  B.  recalls  jokes  between
them  about  dressing  there.  H.  and  they  went  deep-sea
fishing  almost  daily.  One  day  Dr.  B.  and  R.  H.  went
fishing  in  a  gasolene  launch,  and  on  their  return  had
much  riotous  laughter  about  some  happenings  in  the
boat.  Miss  B.  can  remember  nothing  definite  about  a
hat,  but  is  inclined  to  interpret  the  allusion  as  referring
to  this  incident.  The  "poem"  she  conceives  to  be  the
verses  "  It  seems  as  if  the  wondrous  land,"  etc.,  written
at  Miss  Pope's  sitting  of  Feb.  5th.  See  Part  I.  of  this
report,  p.  11. — W.  J.]


On  the  following  day  Miss  B.  had  a  second  sitting,  and  R.  H.
asked  "  How  is  Nellie  ? " [Nellie  is  a  member  of  Miss  B.'s


lviil] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.


51


household,  presumably  unknown  to  Mrs.  Piper,  about  whom
E.  H.  always  used  during  his  lifetime  to  inquire.]

On  the  night  of  Hodgson's  death,  Miss  B.,  whom  I  described
above  as  having  "  psychic "  aptitudes,  had  received  a  strong
impression  of  his  presence. She  now  asks :

Miss  B.  Yesterday  you  said  you  had  "called  and  called"  me.  When
did  you  ever  call  me  1

Just  after  I  passed  out  I  returned  to  you  and  saw  you
resting  .  .  .  and  came  and  called  to  you  telling  you  I
was  leaving.  .  .  .

Miss  B.  Did  I  not  answer  1

Yes,  after  a  while.

Miss  B.  What  did  I  do  1

You  arose  and  seemed  nervous.  I  felt  I  was  disturbing  you.
I  then  left.

Miss  B.  Do  you  not  recall  another  time  when  I  was  sure  you  were
there  and  I  did  something  ?  .  .  .  What  did  I  do  at  one
o'clock,  Christmas  morning  1

I  saw  you,  I  heard  you  speak  to  me  once,  yes.  I  heard  you
speak  to  some  one,  and  it  looked  like  a  lady.  You  took
something  in  your  hand,  and  I  saw  you  and  heard  you
talking.

Miss  B.  Yes,  that  is  true.

I  heard  you  say  something  about  some  one  being  ill,  lying
in  the  room. [Nellie  was  ill  in  my  room. — M.  B.]

Miss  B.  Yes,  that  is  true. I  also  said  something  else.

You  said  it  was  myself.

Miss  B.  Yes,  I  said  that. Anything  else  1

I  remember  seeing  the  light,  and  heard  you  talking  to  a
lady. [Correct.— M.  B.]

Miss  B.  The  lady  did  something  after  I  talked  to  her.

You  refer  to  the  message,  she  sat  down  and  wrote  a
message  for  me. [I  do  not  understand  what  is  meant


52


Professor  William  James.


[part


by  this,  unless  it  be  a  confused  reference  to  Miss  Pope's
reception  of  a  message  to  me  in  the  sitting  of  Feb.  5th.
— M.  B.] [See  Part  I.,  p.  11.— W.  J.]1

There  was  nothing  more  of  interest  from  Hodgson  at  this
sitting.  Dr.  Bayley,  to  whom  reference  was  made  in  con-
nexion with  Owl's  Head,  at  Miss  Bancroft's  first  sitting,  had
two  sittings  in  April,  in  which  the  hearty  and  jocose  mannerisms
of  B.  H.  were  vividly  reproduced  ;  but  there  was  a  good  deal
of  confusion,  owing  to  Dr.  Bayley's  lack  of  familiarity  with
the  handwriting ;  and  the  evidential  material,  so  far  as  the
Hodgson-control  (whom  we  are  alone  concerned  with)  went,
was  comparatively  small. One  passage  was  thus :

R.  H. Get  that  book  I  sent  you  ?

Djr.  B. I  received  the  book  right,  after  your  death.

[Hodgson  had  addressed  some  books  and  some  cards  to  be
sent  to  friends  as  Christmas  presents.  They  were  mailed
after  his  death  on  December  20th.  It  should  be  added
that  Miss  Bancroft  had  at  her  sitting  of  Feb.  informed
Bector  that  such  a  book  had  come  to  her,  and  Bector
associated  her  and  Doctor  Bayley  as  friends.]

Have  you  seen  Billy  ? [My  friend  Prof.  Newbold. — B.]
Dr.  B. No,  have  you  any  word  for  him  ?

1 A  propos  to  Miss  Bancroft's  "  psychic "  susceptibility,  at  a  sitting  on
October  17th,  1906,  which  Mrs.  M.  had  with  Mrs.  Piper,  the  following  words
were  exchanged  :

Mrs.  M.  Any  other  messages,  Dick?

R.  H. Not  for  him  [the  person  last  spoken  of],  but  tell  Margaret  it  was  I  who
produced  that  light  she  saw  the  other  night.

The  sitter  immediately  wrote  to  Miss  Margaret  Bancroft,  with  whom  she
had  recently  become  acquainted,  to  ask  (not  telling  her  of  the  message)
whether  she  had  had  any  special  experiences  of  late.  Miss  B.  answered :
"I  had  a  very  curious  experience  on  the  morning  of  the  14th.  At  four  o'clock
I  was  awakened  from  a  sound  sleep,  and  could  feel  distinctly  the  presence  of
three  people  in  the  room.  I  sat  up  and  was  so  attentive  that  I  hardly  breathed.
About  nine  feet  from  the  floor  there  appeared  at  intervals  curious  lights,  much
like  searchdights,  but  softer,  and  there  seemed  to  be  a  distinct  outline  of  a
figure.  .  .  .  This  lasted  probably  from  fifteen  to  twenty  minutes  .  .  .  when  I
went  into  a  sound  sleep."


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson-Control.  53

Ask  him  if  he  remembers  the  day  we  went  to  the  seashore
and  we  sat  on  the  beach,  and  I  told  him  how  I  hoped
to  come  over  here  any  time,  only  I  wanted  to  finish
my  work.  And  ask  him  if  he  remembers  what  I  told
him  about  my  getting  married.

Dr.  B. I don't know anything about it. That's a good  test.
[Proves  to  have  been  correct. — W.  J.]

Also  ask  him  if  he  remembers  what  I  said  about  the
children  of  my  old  friend  Pilly.

[W.  R.  N.  remembers  R.  H.  telling  him  of  a  certain
"Pilly,"  but  forgets  about  the  children.]

No  one  living  could  know  this  but  Billy.  .  .  .

I  ask  if  you  recall  the  fishing  process.

Dk.  B. Why,  Dick,  it  will  be  very  sad  fishing  without  you.

[R.  H.  and  I  had  done  much  deep-sea  fishing  together,  but
my  supposition  that  this  was  meant  may  have  deflected
him  from  some  explanation  of  the  "  fishing "  process  of
the  controls  at  the  sittings. — B.]

I  wonder  if  you  remember  Miss  Nellie.
Dr.  B.  Perfectly.

Give  her  my  kindest  regards.  .  .  .  Got  your  feet  wet !

Dr.  B. Tell  me  more  about  that,  Dick.

Do  you  remember  how  I  put  my  pipe  in  the  water  ?  Do  you
remember  my  putting  my  coat  on  the  seat,  and  my  pipe
got  into  the  water] Remember  ducking]

Dr.  B. Ducking  ]

I  said  plunge.
Dr.  B. Plunge  ]

Yes  ! Let's  take  a  plunge.
Dr.  B. Yes  indeed  !


ALL.


54


Professor  William  James.


[part


Be.  B. Who  was  along  with  us,  Dick  1

Jess — .  .  .  I  got  it  in  my  head. [Dr.  Jessup  is  correct. — B.]

Do  you  remember  the  Head  1  Oh  I  think  it  was  the  best
summer  I  ever  had.  Best,  best,  best.  .  .  .  Do  you
remember  laugh  about  Mitchell  1  Laugh  ?  [This  might
refer  to  a  very  distinct  incident  involving  a  friend  named
MacDaniel. — B.]  Idiosyncracies  .  .  .  [What  immediately
followed  was  illegible.]

On  the  next  clay,  April  4th,  Dr.  B.  says  to  Hodgson  :

De.  B. Give  me  your  password  if  you  can  to-day.

Password  1  I  had  no  less  than  forty.  One  was  shoeing.
Yes,  yes,  do  you  remember  ?

Dr.  B.  Of  course  I  don't  remember  about  your  passwords ;  but  you
wrote  Mrs.  Bayley  a  charade  of  your  own  making,  and  if
you  can  give  the  answer  to  that  it  will  be  a  splendid
test.

Shoo  fly,  shoo  fly  1  [It  runs  in  my  head  that  these  words
were  answers  to  charades  propounded  last  summer,  but
I  can  get  no  confirmation  and  may  be  mistaken. — B.]

Dr.  B.  I  have  the  letter  with  the  charade  here.  (Puts  it  into  the
medium's  hand.)

Doctor,  this  is  peacemaker,  peacemaker.  I  gave  this  word  in
my  letter. Shoo  fly.

[Miss  Bancroft  writes:  "I  have  a  dim  recollection  about
'  peacemaker  '. I  feel  very  sure  about  '  shoo  fly  '."]

Dr.  B.  I  will  look  it  up.  [There  were  two  charades  in  the  letter
handed  to  the  medium,  but  the  words  given  answer  neither
of  them. — B.]

Do  you  remember  anything  about  that  awful  cigar  and  my
joke  about  it?  [Mrs.  Bayley  remembers  a  cigar  so  huge
that  neither  R.  H.  nor  I  would  smoke  it.  He  finally
broke  it  up  and  smoked  it  in  his  pipe.  This  may  have
been  the  joke  referred  to. — B.]


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  55

Doc,  [This  was  not  E.  H.'s  usual  way  of  addressing  me. — B.]
that  is  peacemaker  !  And  to  Mrs.  B.  I  felt  I  said  shoo
fly.  If  you  knew  the  difficulties  I  am  having,  you  would
smile  out  loud.  .  .  .  Can  you  play  ball  1

Dr.  B.  Well,  H.,  neither  of  us  were  very  active  ball-players  in  the
country.

Listen,  do  you  remember  our  late  hours  1

Dr.  B.  Indeed  I  do.  [R.  H.  and  I  used  to  sit  out  on  the  porch
smoking  to  untimely  hours. — B.]

Got  your  sleep  made  up  yet  1

Dr.  B. Not  quite.

Next  followed  some  rather  unintelligible  as  well  as  illegible
references  to  skinning  fish  and  baling  a  boat. Then  :

Do  you  remember  how  we  tried  to  make  many  words  out
of  one  ?  [Compare  Piddington's  Report,  Proceedings,  Vol.
XXII,  p.  65.— W.  J  ]

Dr.  B.  Yes.

And  the  fun  we  had  ?

Dr.  B.  Yes.  [R.  H.  had  enjoyed  doing  this  with  some  of  the  ladies
at  Owl's  Head.— B.]

Do  you  remember  reading  in  the  evening  ?

Dr.  B. Well  enough.

Remember  the  joke  I  told  you  about  Blats  [Blavatsky]  .  .  .
and  her  tricks  1  [Correct,  but  matter  of  common  know-
ledge.—W.  J.]

Dr.  B.  Now,  Dick,  do  you  remember  some  of  the  words  of  the  song
which  we  all  sang  so  much,  and  which  you  brought  there
last  summer  ?

Song  % awful ! song  1

Dr.  B. It  begins  "  Come,  I  will  sing  you."

Oh  yes ! — gone  out  of  my  head  like  a  shot !


56

Dr.  B.


Yes,  Dick.


Professor  William  James.


[part


Listen,  let  me  tell  you  something.  Do  you  remember  a  little
song  I  sang  to  the  children  which  went  like  this  :  "  Little
Popsey  Wopsey  .  .  .  Chickey  Biddy  Chum  .  .  .  all  .  .  .
I  am  tired.

Dr.  B.  Dick,  that  was  splendid,  I  remember  it  well.  [Known
also  to  Mrs.  Piper. — W.  J.]

Do  you  remember  my  palming  tricks  1

Dr.  B. Yes. [Known  also  to  Mrs.  Piper. — W.  J.]

And  how  you  all  seemed  to  enjoy  them  1  .  .  .  I  am  getting
clearer  since  I  have  met  you  here.  It  helps  in  recalling
many  things  I  had  almost  forgotten.  Listen,  do  you
remember  my  recitation  of  a  Hindoo  ?

Dr.  B. No,  I  don't  remember  that.

Which  reads  like  this:  "I  think  till  I'm  weary  of  thinking —

Dr.  B. Yes,  I  know  that  well. [Known  also  to  Mrs.  Piper. — W.  J.]

Do  you  remember  my  letter  to  Will,  in  which  I  told  him
of  the  delight  of  the  place  ?  [Possibly  a  misreading  for
"  depth  of  the  piece  "].

Dr.  B. Who  is  Will  ?

Will  James. Or  perhaps  I  didn't  read  it  to  you  after  all.

Dr.  B.  No,  I  didn't  hear  that  letter.  [I  recall  no  letter  either
about  the  "place,"  or  about  the  "piece,"  but  my  memory
is  so  bad  that  that  proves  nothing.  I  have  heard  the
"  piece,"  however,  and  heard  it  from  Hodgson. — W.  J.]

.  .  .  Ask  Margaret  Bancroft  if  she  remembers  telling  me
about  you  and  Mrs.  Bayley  giving  her  a  watch.  I  am
glad  I  found  her  after  I  came  over.  I  think  she  is  perfectly
sincere  and  a  light.  [Miss  Bancroft  writes :  "  I  felt
badly  about  accepting  the  watch,  and  consulted  Mr.
Hodgson  about  it.  He  said  a  number  of  things  about
my  sensitiveness,  and  after  that  I  felt  all  right  about  the
watch.  I  don't  think  I  told  anybody  of  this  interview
with  Dr.  Hodgson. As  regards  my  '  sincerity,'  the  last


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  57


talk  I  had  with  him  was  on  that  very  subject.  ...  He
said  he  would  certainly  convince  Dr.  Bayley  of  my
sincerity."  The  reader  knows  already  that  Miss  Bancroft
is  a  "light."]

On  June  20th,  1906,  Miss  Bancroft  had  her  third  sitting.
Some  days  previous  to  this,  Mrs.  M.,  an  old  friend  of  Hodgson,
had  taken  to  her  sitting  a  cross  which  remained  among  his
effects,  and  asked  the  B.  H.  control  for  directions  concerning
its  disposition.  The  control  had  ordered  it  to  be  sent  to
Miss  Bancroft ;  and  when  he  appeared  to  Miss  Bancroft  at
the  sitting  a  few  days  later  almost  his  first  word  was :

Get  my  cross  1
Miss  B.  Yes,  thank  you  very  much.  .  .  .

A  Mascot  I  send  to  you.
Miss  B.  Yes,  I  know  you  sent  it  to  me.

I  shall  be  with  you  when  you  are  in  the  cottage.

Miss  B.  Do  you  know  that  I  have  bought  the  place  1

Of  course  I  do.  I  understand  pretty  well  what  you  are
about.  [Miss  B.  had  been  enabled  to  buy  the  land  at
Owl's  Head  since  her  sittings  in  the  previous  February.]

.  .  .  There  is  more  help  coming  to  you  to  enlarge  the  house.
.  .  .  You  remember  you  thought  it  necessary  to  have
more  room.

Miss  B.  Yes,  I  remember  very  well.

Did  you  see  me  in  your  dream  with  my  trousers  rolled  up
at  the  bottom  ?

Miss  B.  I  am  not  sure  that  I  did.

I  spoke  to  you  and  you  replied.
Miss  B.  I  have  seen  you  several  times  in  dreams.

Remember  my  knock  1
Miss  B.  When  did  you  knock  ']


You  were  sleeping.


58  Professor  William  James.  [part

Miss  B.  I  remember  twice  when  I  thought  some  one  knocked  my
arm.

But  I  woke  you,  I  certainly  did.  [Correct.]
Miss  B.  Can't  you  do  me  a  favor  by  knocking  now  ?  .  .  .

Not  while  I  keep  on  speaking.  You  wish  me  to  knock
your  arm  now,  eh  ? I  cannot  do  so  and  keep  on  speaking.

Do  you  remember  the  evening  I  told  you  about  my  sister
Ellen's  boy?

Miss  B.  I  do  not  recall  it.

Yes,  Ellen's  boy  and  his  passing  over.

Do  you  remember — Enid?  What  I  told  you  about  her1?
And  her  poems  ? A  scholarship  and  her  poems  ?

Miss  B.  I  remember  all  that.  [He  had  told  me  a  great  deal  about
this  niece  Enid. — M.B.  Mrs.  Piper  denies  knowledge
of  her  existence. — W.  J.]

Listen. I  am  in  the  witness  box ! I  am  trying  to  help

you  to  recognize  me.  .  .  .
Do  you  remember  anything  about  celery  root?  .  .  .  [See

above,  p.  41.]

Margaret  do  you  remember  the  walk  through  the  woods  ?

Miss  B.  Yes,  I  remember  it.

Do  you  remember  "  Let  us  sing  of — sing  you
Let  us  sing  of  a "

Miss  B. Yes,  I  understand.

No  you  do  not. No  song.

Miss  B.  Yes  I  do. Try  and  give  it  to  me.

I  am  but  you  do  not  understand.  You  do  not  understand
at  all. Let  us  sing  the  old  song.

Miss  B.  You  mean  the  song  "Come  let  us  sing"?

Yes.

Miss  B.  Tell  me  what  it  is.

I  am  telling  you.  '  Come  let  us  sing  the — what  would  you
sing — sing — sing


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.


59


[He  taught  us  a  song  last  summer  "Come  I  will  sing  you"
and  the  response  was  "What  will  you  sing  me?"  "I
will  sing  you  one  oh,"  etc.  My  idea  is  that  he  wanted
to  have  me  give  him  the  next  line  and  probably  he
would  have  been  able  to  give  me  the  text  and  perhaps
the  whole  song  or  part  of  it,  but  I  did  not  understand
what  he  wanted  to  do. — M.  B.]

Miss  Bancroft  had  two  more  sittings,  on  Dec.  2nd  and  3rd,
1907.  On  Dec.  2nd  Hodgson  seemed  to  be  cognizant  of
certain  changes  in  the  Owl's  Head  place,  that  there  was  a
new  wall-paper  of  yellow  colour,  a  new  bath-house,  a  new
pier  and  platform,  etc.,  none  of  which  facts  Mrs.  Piper  was  in
a  way  to  have  known.

He  also  showed  veridical  knowledge  of  a  very  private
affair  between  two  other  people,  that  had  come  under  Miss
Bancroft's  observation.  There  was,  however,  some  confusion  in
this  sitting,  and  E.  H.  was  not  "  strong."  The  results  were
better  on  Dec.  3rd,  but  the  evidential  parts  do  not  lend
themselves  well  to  quotation,  with  one  exception,  as  follows :

Miss  B.  Don't  you remember something that happened that  you
helped  us  in  1

I  remember  that  one  evening  ■

Miss  B.  What  happened  that  evening  1

We  got  a  little  fire  and  I  helped.  Yes.
Miss  B.  Yes,  that  is  true.

Put  it  out  the  fire  ■ I  remember  it  well.

Miss  B. What  did  you  tell  us  to  get  before  the  fire  occurred  1

Before  the  fire  ?

Miss  B.  You  told  us  to  get  something  for  the  house.

I  said  you  ought  to  get  a in case  of  fire pail,

yes.

[Here  the  hand  drew  three  long  horizontal  lines,  which
might  have  meant  shelves,  and  beneath  them  the  outline
of  a  vessel  with  a  cover.]


60


Professor  William  James.


[part


Miss  B.  What  are  they  for  ?

Water  pails water  pails yes,  fire  buckets fire

Yes,  I  did.

[He  told  us  in  Maine,  when  we  were  experimenting  with
Mrs.  Austin  by  automatic  writing,  to  get  fire  buckets
and  put  them  up  on  the  shelves,  which  we  did  long
before  the  fire  occurred.  He  warned  us  of  this  fire  many
times,  but  no  one  seemed  to  pay  much  attention  to  it
but  myself.— M.  B.]

Miss  B.  What  did  you  tell  us  to  put  on  them  1

Go  on  you  will  find  that  I  am  not  asleep.

Miss  B.  I  never  thought  you  were  asleep.

So  much  for  the  Owl's  Head  record,  which,  as  the  reader
sees,  follows  a  not  incoherent  thread  of  associated  facts.

Few  of  the  items  were  false,  but  on  the  other  hand  it
must  be  remembered  that  a  mind  familiar  with  Hodgson's

O

tastes  and  habits  might  have  deduced  some  of  them  (swimming
and  fishing,  for  example)  a  priori  by  combining  the  two  abstract
ideas  "  Hodgson  "  and  "  seaside."  Leakages  impossible  now  to
follow  might  also  account  for  the  medium's  knowledge  of  such
items  as  the  names  Nellie,  Jessup,  etc.,  for  her  connecting
Dr.  Bayley  with  "  Billy,"  etc.  For  the  "  fire-buckets,"  "  watch,"
"  sincerity,"  and  other  items,  it  would  seem  necessary  to  invoke
either  lucky  chance  or  telepathy,  unless  one  be  willing  to
admit  spirit-return.  I  should  say  that  I  have  condensed  the
record  considerably,  leaving  out  some  matter  irrelevant  to  Owl's
Head  memories,  some  repetitions  and  all  the  talk  that  grew  out
of  slowness  in  deciphering  the  script.

Dr.  Bayley  himself  wrote  me  after  his  sittings  :  "  They  are
pretty  good,  and  have  about  convinced  me  (as  evidence  added
to  previous  experience)  that  my  much  loved  friend  is  still
about.  I  had  had  either  four  or  six  sittings,  some  of  them
in  conjunction  with  Miss  Bancroft,  before  R.  H.'s  death.  I
do  not  think  that  Mrs.  Piper  normally  knew  me  by  name,
or  knew  that  I  was  from  Philadelphia  or  that  I  knew
ISTewbold. I  realize  that  the  average  reader  of  these  records


lviil] Report  on  Mrs.  Piper  s  Hodgson-Control.


61


loses  much  in  the  way  of  little  tricks  of  expression  and  per-
sonality, subtleties  impossible  to  give  an  account  of  in  language.
As  I  look  over  the  sittings  and  realize  my  own  blunders  in
them,  I  cannot  always  decide  who  was  the  more  stupid,  the
communicator,  or  myself."


The  message  given  to  Dr.  Bayley  for  "  Billy "  (i.e.  Prof.
Wm.  B.  Newbold)  makes  it  natural  to  cite  next  the  experience
of  this  other  intimate  friend  of  B.  H.  Brof.  Newbold  had  two
written  sittings,  on  June  27th  and  July  3rd,  1906,  respec-
tively, Mr.  Dorr  being  present  both  times.  On  June  27th,
after  a  few  words  with  Bector,  Hodgson  appears,  and  the
dialog  continues  as  follows :

R.  H. Well,  well,  of  all  things  ! Are  you  really  here ! I  am


W.  R.  N.  Hallo,  Dick  !

Hello,  Billy,  God  bless  you.
W.  R.  N.  And  you,  too,  though  you  do  not  need  to  have  me  say  it.

I  wonder  if  you  remember  the  last  talk  we  had  together —
W.  R.  N.  I  do  remember  it,  Dick.


I  can  recall  very  [well  all  I  said  to  you  that  glorious  day
when  we  were  watching  the  waves.  [Our  last  talk  was
on  a  splendid  afternoon  of  July,  1905,  at  Nantasket
Beech. — N.]


I  told  you  of  many,  many  predictions  which  had  been
made  for  me.  I  told  you  I  hoped  to  realize  them  but
I  would  not  consent  to  give  up  my  work.


Professor  Newbold's  Sittings.


Hodgson.


W.  R.  N.


Yes,  Dick,  I  remember  it  well.


W.  R.  N.


First  rate,  Dick,  you  told  me  just  that.

I  would  give  up  almost  anything  else  but  my  work


my


W.  R.  N.


work  and  my  pipe.

Dick,  that  sounds  like  you.
Don't  you  remember  1


62  Professor  William  James.  [part

W.  R.  N.  Do  you  remember  something  /  told  you  on  the  boat  going

to  Nantasket  ?

Yes  of  course.  Long  ago  you  wrote  me  of  your  happiness
and  I  wrote  back  and  asked  you  if  you  were  trying
to  make  me  discontented.

W.  E.  N.  I  don't  remember,  but  I  have  your  letters  and  will  look
it  up.

[This  allusion  to  my  "  happiness "  is  very  characteristic.
He  often  spoke  to  me  of  it. — N.]

Look  over  your  letters  and  you  will  find  my  memory
better  than  yours.

W.  R.  N.  Like  as  not ! Like  as  not !

I  have  hoped  to  boss  things  on  this  side.  [R.  H.  had  often
told  me  of  his  belief  that  if  he  could  "pass  over"  and
communicate,  many  of  the  difficulties  of  the  spiritualistic
theory  would  disappear.  I  can  mentally  see  him  now
shaking  his  pipe  at  me  threateningly  and  saying  :  "  If
I  get  over  before  you,  Billy,  I'll  make  things  hot
for  you." — 1ST.]

W.  R.  N.  Yes,  Dick,  so  you  did.

Therefore  if  I seem bossy  pardon  me Bossy

Pardon.

W.  R.  N.  Go  ahead,  Dick,  be  as  bossy  as  you  will. I  have  nothing
to  say  to  you  until  you  get  through.

Good.  That's  what  I  wish.  I  remember  telling  you  how
you  must  not  write  more  about  your  happiness.

W.  R.  N.  Did  you  tell  me  this  on  the  trip  or  in  the  letter  1

In  the  letter.

W.  R.  N.  First-rate ! I  have  piles  of  letters. I  will  go  through  them.

If  you  do  you  will  find  it  all.  [I  cannot  find  it  in  the
letters. — N.]  Oh,  I  am  so  delighted  to  see  you  of  all
persons.

W.  R.  N.  Well,  you  were  a  dear  friend  of  mine.
I  had  the  greatest  affection  for  you.


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  63

W.  R.  N.  Do  you  remember  what  a  friend  you  were  to  me,  years  ago  1

Yes,  I  do,  and  how  I  helped  you  through  some  difficulties'

W.  R.  N.  I  should  say  you  did,  Dick  !

But  I  do  not  care  to  remind  you  of  anything  I  did  !

only  as  a  test  •  only  as  a  test.

W.  R.  N.  Yes,  that's  right,  we  wish  a  test.

I  remember  how  delighted  I  was  with  your  experiences.

W.  R.  N.  You  were  !

You  told  me  much  about  them  which  I  recall  most  clearly—
recall.

W.  R.  N.  Right !  [What  follows  refers  to  the  trip  to  Nantasket  and
was  probably  preceded  by  some  reference  to  it  on  my
part  which  the  record  omits. — N.]

You  and  I  had  smoked  [Correct.]  until  I  got  a  dip

W.  R.  N.  Right !

  and  we  walked  along  the  shore

W.  R.  N.  Right,  Dick  !

and  waited  until  the  boat  returned. [We  had to  wait
perhaps  twenty  or  thirty  minutes. — -N.]

W.  R.  N.  Dick,  what  did  we  do  while  waiting  1

We  took  a  dip  and  went  to  hear  some  music.

W.  R.  N.  No,  we  did  not ;  you  took  a  dip.

I  say  /  took  a  dip  and  you  sat  and  watched  me.

W.  R.  N.  After  that  what  did  we  do  ?

We  went  and  got  some let  me  think  !

W.  R.  N.  I  can't  read  that,  Dick.

A  drink ■  drink. I  asked  you  to  have  cigar.  Cigar

  and  something  else.

W.  R.  N.  That  is  true  about  the  cigar. Go  on.

At  the  moment  I  do  not  think  what  it  was.


64  Professor  William  James.  [part

W.  R.  N.  All  right,  it  is  not  worth  the  trouble.

Do  you  remember  anything  about  sausages  I  cooked  ?
W.  R.  N.  Indeed  I  do  ! Many  a  one  you  cooked  for  breakfast.

Yes,  and  how  you  laughed  about  them.
W.  R.  N.  I  said  they  were  the  best  I  ever  tasted,  Dick.

Yes,  I  remember.

[A  passage  is  omitted  here  in  which  veridical  reference  is
made  to  a  private  subject  of  which  we  had  talked. — N.]

I  do  not  catch  all  you  say,  Billy, too  bad.  Speak

slowly,  old  chap,  and  I  shall  understand.  I  asked
you  about  your  [word  undecipherable]  and  you  said
you  thought  you  were  not  half  worthy  of  all  you  had
received.

W.  R.  N.  Well,  I  thought  it ;  I  don't  remember  saying  it  to  you.

You  did  say  it  once  in  my  room.

W.  R.N.  I  can  believe  it,  Dick;  I  have  thought  it  a  thousand  times.

[A  remark  was  next  ascribed  to  me  which  exactly  expressed
what  I  had  thought,  though  I  am  forced  to  omit  it. — N.]

I  gave  you  a  long  explanation  of  the  whole  modus  operandi
and  you  were  a  very  good  listener.  Do  you  remember
the  day  1

W.  R.  N.  I  do  not  remember  the  details.  I  remember  in  a  general
way  talking  about  it.  [I  recalled  the  details  clearly  as
soon  as  I  had  thought  it  over.  The  "  long  explanation  "
was  made  in  H.'s  room  in  June,  1904. — N.]

All  right.  Good,  listen.  And  you  and  I  met  in  New  York
and  I  advised  you  what  to  do  1

W.  R.  N.  Was  it  in  New  York  or  Boston  ? In  Boston,  wasn't  it  ?

You  and  I  went  to  the  theatre.

W.  R.  N.  Certainly  we  did.

And  then  to  my  club.


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson-Control.  65

W.  R.  N.  Right,  yes,  that  is  right,  Dick.

And  to  my  rooms  where  I  cooked  sausages  and  made  tea.

W.  R.  N.  Yes,  you  gave  me  the  first  good  tea  I  ever  tasted  !

[Statements  are  here  omitted  relating  to  a  person  deceased.
True  on  the  whole,  but  not  evidentially  significant. — N.]

Do  you  remember  that  clergyman  ■

W.  R.  N.  Try  the  last  word  again.

Who  was  a  medium  in  Philadelphia1?

W.  R.  N.  I do, I think I do . A  clergyman  who  was  an

Episcopalian.

Yes. Went  into  trance.  Yes.

W.  R.  N.  Yes,  I  know  what  you  are  thinking  of,  but  he  was  not  a
clergyman.

[Word name  perhaps  written  several  times  but

undecipherable.  Some  years  later  I  had  met  a  clergy-
man who  was  mediumistic,  but  did  not  go  into  trance.
Hodgson  knew  of  his  case,  but  had  never  met  him.
The  two  cases  seem  to  be  confused. — N.]

And  his  wife  was  afraid  of  him.
W.  R.  N.  No,  I  don't  remember  that,  Dick.

You  have  them  mixed  up  in  your  mind.
W.  R.  N.  Very  likely.

I  saw  a  young  man  who  went  into  trance.
VV.  R.  N.  That's  right,  yes.

And  do  you  remember  my  opinion  of  him  ?

W.  R.  N.  Yes,  Dick,  I  remember  your  opinion of  him. Tell  me
what  it  was  !

I  thought  he  was  hysterical  and  induced  his  trances  through
hysteria.  I  remember  telling  you  about  [name  given,
but  omitted  here],  and  by  the  way,  Billy,  do  you  recall
his  ideas  on  this  subject?


66  Professor  William  James.  [part

W.  R.  N.  Yes,  I  do. His  ideas  1

Yes,  all  about  it. The  devil?

W.  E.  N.  He  thought  it  was  the  devil?

Yes. The  devil  has  nothing  to  do  with  it. I  laughed  when
you  told  me  about  it.


W.  R.  N.  Now,  Dick,  have  you  any  more  to  say


1


Do  you  remember  the  story  I  told  you  about  the  girl  who
said  her  prayers?

W.  R.  N.  No,  I  do  not  remember. Perhaps  I  might  if  you  told  me.

Yes.  And  when  she  got  through  she  said  she  was  sure
she  thought  the  devil  was  prompting  her  prayer.  [I
remember  no  such  anecdote. — N.]

W.  R.  N.  No,  Dick ;  but  I  want  you  to  tell  me,  if  you  possibly  can,
something  I  told  you  on  the  boat  going  down  to
Nantasket,  just  before  we  got  there.

About  your  home-life  ?

W.  R.  N.  No,  it  was  about  my  work,  Dick.

Oh  yes,  I  recall  you  said  you  would  like  to  give  it  up.

W.  R.  N.  No,  Dick,  I  did  not  say  that.  [I  had  just  resigned
my  eight  years  of  Deanship  and  was  very  glad  of  the
relief.  If  E.  H.'s  remark  referred  to  that  fact,  it  was
apposite. — N.]

Not  for  anything  !  [Seemingly  meant  to  suit  my  answer.
_K]

Do  you  remember  our  talk  about  hypnotism  ?

W.  R.  N.  Yes,  we  talked  about  hypnotism.

And  hypnotising  students.  You  said  your  mind  was  on
your  work  and  how  much  you  liked  it.

W.  R.  N.  Yes,  I  said  that.  There  was  a  lot  more  I  said,  but  never
mind  it. Let  it  go.

I  will  give  it  all  eventually — eventually.  Yes.  I  am  in
the  witness-box.


Lvrn.] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  67

W.  R.  N.  Poor  Dick  !

Poor  Dick !  Not  much !  Poor  Dick !  Not  much !  Fire
away  ! I  recall  your  psychological  teaching  very  clearly

[R.  H.  next  goes  "out"  to  rest,  but  returns  after  a  brief
interval  of  Rector.]

Hello,  Billy!  All  right?  All  right  now?  You  told  me
you  were  working  on  some  interesting  work  which  you
enjoyed  better  than  anything  you  had  done  in  years.
You  said  you  would  not  give  it  up  for  anything  !

W.  R.  N.  Right,  Dick.  Now  before  we  got  on  the  boat,  to  go  out
to  Nantasket,  what  did  we  do  1

I  believe  we  went  to  the  hotel  and  got  some  bite  [word
not  clear]  to  eat.

W.  R.  N.  No  ! No  !

Drink  [word  not  clear]  No !  Do  let  me  think  what  I
gave  you. I  asked  if  you  would  get  weighed.

W.  R.  N.  I  believe  you  did.  I  am  not  sure  now.  Don't  bother
about  it  any  more. It  is  not  worth  the  trouble.

I  did  ! You  said  I and  joked  about  your  weight.

Don't  you  recall  1

W.  R.  N.  I  don't  remember,  but  I  often  have  joked  about  my
weight  and  I  dare  say  I  did  with  you  then.

I remember  drinking Yes,  and  I  said  I  did  not

take  beer.  Yes,  you  asked  me,  I  remember  well.  I  re-
member the water  well. You  smoked  cigar, and  I

also pipe  ■ [I  smoked  a  cigarette,  but  not  a

cigar. — N.]

W.  R.  N.  No,  let  us  drop  the  trip  to  Nantasket,  Dick.  I  think  you
have  told  me  all  you  remember  about  the  trip  to
Nantasket  that  you  can.

I  have  it  surely  right  as  it  was  the  last  time  I  saw  you  !
I  remember  it  as  it  was  the  last  time  I  saw  you.


G8


Professor  William  James.


[part


W.  R.  N.  That's  right,  Dick,  it  was  the  very  last  time  I  saw  you.


Do  you  remember  the  stand  near  the  boat  where  we  went


W.R.N.  Where  we  went  to  get  a  what,  Dick? Write  that  once
more ! [Word  undecipherable.]


W.  R.  N.  No,  it's  long  since  I  have  had  experience  in  the  writing.


I  understand.  Therefore  I  am  doing  my  best  to  make  it
clear.

[The  communicator  now  professes  to  report  a  conversation
which  I  had  with  a  definitely  named  person  who  died
some  years  ago — N.]

He  told  me  he  did  not  approve  or  believe  in  your  having

  anything  to  do  with this  subject. [True. — N.]

He  thought  it  was  the  devil  and  you  had  better  keep
out  of  it.


He  said  he  would  try  to  reach  you  if  such  were  possible.

[I  saw  the  person  here  referred  to  not  long  before  his
death.  He  made  no  reference  of  any  kind  to  the  future
life.  Such  a  promise  as  is  here  ascribed  to  him  is  quite
incongruous  with  all  I  ever  knew  of  him — I  do  not
believe  the  thought  would  have  occurred  to  him. — N.]

He  did  tell  me  so  and  before  he  left  his  body  he  felt  a
little  different.  But  he  wants  to  see  you  very  much
  very  much  indeed  and  tell  you  how  he  under-
stands your  life  now.


W.  R.  N.  Can  you  tell  me  from  him  what  he  said  before  he  passed
out  of  the  body  ?

Yes. He  said  you  said  "Come  to  me  if  you  are  alive."

W.  R.  N.  No,  Dick,  you've  got  that  wrong  !

Wait  a  minute. Listen,  Billy. You  said  "I  wish  you  to
be  with  me."


in  and  got  a  "Life"  —
illegibility  followed. — N.]


[I  don't  recall  this. — Some


You  do  not  get  it  very  clearly,  Billy.


W.  R.  N.  Bight.


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  69

W".  R.  N.  No, Dick, that's  wrong ; you  had  better  try  to  get  it
another  time  when  the  light  is  clearer.

Listen,  Billy,  you  said  when  you  get  to  the the  other

side  you  will  know know. [Incorrect. — N.]

W.R.N.  Did  I  say  that  to  him,  Dick?


He  told  me  you  said  so.  He  said  so,  and  he  thought  he
was  not  going  to  live  here.  I  have  talked  with  him
about  it  often  and  he  thought  he  would  not  live.


[W.  R.  N.  now  repeats  that  so  long  as  the  "light"  is  not
clear  K.  H.  bad  better  not  stay.]

Yes.  Yes,  I  will  return  when  the  light  is  clear  and  tell
you  clearly.

W.  R.  N.  Now,  Dick,  many  of  my  relatives  have  passed  to  your  side
and  if  you  see  them  you  can  give  me  their  names.

Good.  I  will  find  all  I  can  and  report  to  you.  I  will
report  to  you.

W.  R.  N.  Names  are  good  tests.

Exactly,  I  remember.  Look  up  those  letters.  I  am  going
now.  I  am  holding  on  to  a  figment !  Goodbye  !  God
bless  you  ! R.  H.

The  Hodgson  part  of  the  sitting  of  July  3rd  was  as
follows :

(R.  H.) I  am  Hodgson.
W.  R.  N.  Hallo,  Dick  !

I  am  glad  to  meet  you,  Billy,  old  chap  !  How  are  you  ?
First-rate  1

W.  R.  N.  Yes  I  am,  Dick  !

Capital.  Good.  So  am  I.  I  come  to  assure  you  of  my
continued  existence.  Do  you  remember  what  I  said
to  you  the  last  time  I  left  you  after  our  experiment
with  that  young  man  ?  I  said  hysteria  was  the  cause
of  his  trances.


70  Professor  William  James.  [part

W.  R,  N.  Exactly,  yes.

He  could  not  kadoodle  me.
W.  R.  N.  That  is  a  new  word  to  me.

I  made  that  up — ask  Judah.

[Mr.  Judah  writes  of  his  sitting  of  March  27th  or  28th  :
"I  tried  to  get  K.  H.  to  repeat  a  word  which  he
had  used  in  one  of  our  long  conversations.  It  was
'  kadoodle ' — I  think  he  must  have  coined  it  for  the
occasion.  He  could  not  or  at  least  did  not  give
it." — As  this  attempt  was  during  a  trance,  the  reference
to  Mr.  Judah  in  Newbold's  sitting  has  no  evidential
bearing. — W.  J.]

Tell  me  about  your  wife — is  she  well  ?
W.  R.  N.  Yes,  better  than  for  these  many  years.

Capital! Glad  to  hear  it. Remember  me  to  her.

W.  R.  N.  All  right,  Dick,  I  will.

Give  me  something  of  my  own.  ...  I  shall  be  clearer
in  a  minute.  Billy,  do  you  remember  how  depressed
you  were  at  one  time,  and  how  I  used  to  advise  you'?

W.  R.  N.  Indeed  I  do.

And  did  it  not  result  in  good  1

W.  R.  N.  Indeed  it  did,  Dick. You  did  advise  me  just  as  you  say,
and  it  did  result  in  good.

I  have  memories,  many  memories — let  me  remind  you  of
a  few  of  them  as  I  recall  them  now.

W.  R.  N.  All  right,  Dick. Go  ahead.

Do you remember the man with whom you and  I

experimented  in  Philadelphia?
Do  you  remember  the  name he  gave  me  as  being  my

sister's  1

W.  R.  N.  No,  Dick,  I  don't  remember,  but  go  on  and  give  me  all
you  can  about  him.


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  71

Do  you  remember  when  I  asked  him  about  hypnotism,  he
said  he  was  not  a  good  subject,  and  you  and  I  had
a  good  laugh  over  it  after  he  left.

W.  R.  N.  I  don't  remember  that  either,  Dick.  Do  you  remember
who  was  with  us  when  we  experimented  with  him  ?

You,  myself, — yes,  and  Dr.  Hyslop.  [Hyslop  was  not
there. — W.  R.  N.]  Do  you  remember  a  young  student
in  whom  you  and  I  were  intensely  interested.  We
hypnotized  him  several  times,  but  with  little  result.
[Possibly  refers  to  a  medical  student  whom  I  hypnotized
in  1899  with  ver}'  interesting  results.  I  wrote  to  H.
and  arranged  experiments  (apparent  clairvoyance).  But
H.  never  saw  him. — N.]

W.  R.  N.  Bless  my  soul !  I  think  it  must  be  ****  I  will  get
your  letters. I  may  find  something  about  it  in  them.

You  certainly  will. Have  you  looked  up  my  last  reference  1
W.  R.  N.  I  can't ;  I'm  in  Boston  and  my  letters  are  in  Philadelphia.

Oh,  of  course,  I  understand. Help  me  if  I  seem  stupid.

W.  R.  N.  No,  you  are  not  stupid,  I  am.

I  wish  to  remind  you  of  things  of  which  you  are  not
thinking,  so  far  as  possible.

W.  R.  N.  Yes,  that's  good.

Do  you  remember  the  case  of  a  clergyman —  ?

W.  R.  N.  Yes,  certainly.  I  remember  a  clergyman  who  lived  in
Philadelphia  and  thought  he  had  supernormal  experiences,
and  I  told  you  about  them.

"Why  didn't  you  say  so  before  ?  Yes.  I  just  told  you
about  the  case  of  hysteria — and  you  were  interested  in
telepathy.  [The  young  clergyman  had  professed  to
have  telepathic  powers — he  cheated. — -N.]

W.  R.  N.  Is  this  the  case  you  were  talking  about  at  the  last
sitting  ?

Of  course  he  was.  You  asked  me  what  experiments  we
tried  with  him.


72  Professor  William  James.  [part

W.  R.  N.  That  is  right.

I  said  telepathic  experiments,  and  some  were  pretty  poor.

W.  R.  N.  Right.

Do  you  remember,  Billy  .  .  .  ?  [A  veridical  reference  here
which  W.  R.  N.  prefers  to  omit.]

W.  R.  N.  Yes,  Dick.

I  am  delighted  to  recall  your  telling  me  you  were  happy
and  contented  and  how  pleased  you  were  with  your
classes — .

W.  R.  N.  Right,  Dick.

And  how  readily  your  work  was  being  accepted.  You  were
so  happy  about  it  all. It  gave  me  great  delight.

W.  R.  N.  Thank  you.

You  certainly  did.  You  also  told  me  of  your  advancement
in  a  material  way.

W.  R,  N.  Yes,  I  told  you  that,  that  is  right.

Which  pleased  me  greatly.

W.  R.  N.  Yes,  Dick,  it  did  !

You  were  my  counterpart — counterpart  in  expressions  of
delight.  You  and  I  were  very  pleased  and  I  told
you  I  would  not  give  up  my  work  even  for  a  wife.

[I  don't  recall  this  remark,  but  it  sounds  characteristic. — ^N].

W.  R.  N.  Yes,  Dick,  you  are  very  clear  and  easy  to  understand.

I  am  glad  to  hear  it.  I  am  trying  my  level  best  to
give  you  facts.

W.  R/N.  Very  good.

I  said  my  pipe and my  work  would  not  be  given  up
even  for  a  wife. Oh  how  you  have  helped  me,  Billy.
Yes,  in  clearing  my  mind  wonderfully.

[I  omit  here  a  few  sentences  from  R.  H.  in  which  he
credits  me  with  a  remark  I  have  often  made  to  him,
seldom  to  others. — Important  veridically. — N.]


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  73

W.  R.  N.  Dick,  I  have  told  you  that  twenty  times.

You  have  certainly,  but  Billy,  I  used  to  say  it  was  the
most  important  thing  in  the  world  I  believed.

[Refers  next  to  psychical  research  and  in  particular  to  the
Piper  case.]

You  said  you  could  not  understand  why  so  many  mistakes
were  made,  and  I  talked  you  blind,  trying  to  explain
my  ideas  of  it.

W.  R.  N.  Dick,  this  sounds  like  your  own  self.  Just  the  way  you
used  to  talk  to  me.

Well  if  I  am  not  Hodgson,  he  never  lived.

W.  R.  N.  But  you  are  so  clear.

Of  course  I  am,  I  am  drawing  on  all  the  forces  possible

for  strength  to  tell  you  these  things.
You laughed about the ungrammatical expressions  and

said,  why  in  the  world  do  they  use  bad  grammar'!

W.  R,  N.  Yes,  Dick,  I  said  that.

I  went  into  a  long  explanation  and  attributed  it  to  the
registering  of  the  machine.  You  were  rather  amused
but  were  inclined  to  leave  it  to  my  better  under-
standing.

W.  R.  N.  You  mean,  I  think,  that  you  understood  the  subject  better
than  I  and  I  took  your  explanation  1  You  mean  that
therefore  I  was  inclined  to  accept  your  explanation]

I  think  I  do.  I  find  now  difficulties  such  as  a  blind  man
would  experience  in  trying  to  find  his  hat.  And  I  am
not  wholly  conscious  of  my  own  utterances  because
they  come  out  automatically,  impressed  upon  the
machine.

W.  R,  N.  Perfectly  clear.

Yes,  I  am  standing  beside  you.

W.  R.  N.  Can  you  see  me,  Dick  ?

Y^es,  but  I  feel  your  presence  better.  I  impress  my
thoughts on the machine which registers them  at


74


Professor  William  James.


[part


random,  and  which  are  at  times  doubtless  difficult  to
understand.  I  understand  so  much  better  the  modus
operandi  than  I  did  when  I  was  in  your  world.  Do
you  remember  you  said  you  could  faintly  understand — ■
faintly  understand  the  desire  on  the  part  of  a  friend
after  coming  to  this  side  to  communicate  with  his
friend  on  the  earthly  side.  But  why  he  would  choose
such  methods  were  the  most  perplexing  things  to  you.

W.  R.  N.  No,  Dick,  you  are  thinking  of  some  one  else. I  never  told
you  that.

Yes  you  did  in  the  case  of  the  man  I  am  talking  of,  who
pretended  to  give  manifestations,  and  you  were  right
in  your  judgment.

W.  R.  N.  Yes  !  I  think  I  did  say  it  in  that  case.1

While  in  other  cases  you  were  open  and  clear  to  my
explanations — and  agreed  with  me,  especially  regarding
G.  P.

W.  R.  N.  Right !  First-rate  ! That  is  all  very  characteristic.

You  were  a  good  listener  always,  Bill}',  always.  [R.  H.'s
talks  and  mine  had  been  rather  one-sided ! — N.]
Do  you  remember  a  trip  we  had  into  the  moun-
tains years  ago  1  I  am  trying  to  recall.  We  took  a
bit  of  clothing  and  spent  several  days  together.

W.  R.  N.  No,  Dick,  I  never  did  that  with  you,  you  are  thinking  of
somebody  else.

1  When  the  "choice  of  such  methods"  was  first  mentioned,  I  supposed  it
referred  to  the  notion  that  mediums  ought  to  be  persons  of  distinguished
character  or  abilities.  I  therefore  disavowed  it,  for  I  have  never  seen  any
reason  for  the  assumption.  When  it  was  referred  to  the  "men  who  pretended
to  give  manifestations,"  I  doubtfully  acknowledged  it,  supposing  it  referred
to  the  so-called  "physical  phenomena,"  especially  those  of  Stainton  Moses.
The  objections  upon  which  I  used  to  lay  most  stress  in  my  talks  with  H.
were  (1)  the  astonishing  ignorance  often  displayed  with  reference  to  subjects
which  the  supposed  communicators  must  have  been  acquainted  with  ;  (2)  the
whole  Imperator  group,  its  historical  and  philosophical  teachings,  its  supposed
identity  with  the  similar  group  in  the  Stainton  Moses  case  and  its  connection
with  the  seed-pearls,  perfumes  and  other  physical  phenomena  which  Moses
professed  to  produce.  To  these  objections  H.  could  never  give  an  answer ;
they  are  not  here  mentioned. — N.


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  75

Wait  a  moment. Let  me  ask  you  if  you  and  I  did  not
pass  a  few  days  together  one  summer.

W.  R.  N.  No,  Dick,  only  in  Boston.

Sure? All  right,  let  me  narrate  what  is  in  my  mind.

W.  R.  N.  Right !  Go  on.

I  remember  we  were  together  one  summer  and  we  went  to

the  woods  or  and  lay  under  some  trees  and  had  a

smoke  and  discussed  several  problems.  Where  was  it,
Billy?

W.  R.  N.  Not  with  me,  I  think,  Dick,  unless  it  was  somewhere  in
Boston.

I  think  it  may  have  been  in  Boston.
W.  R.  N.  Go  on  to  something  else,  Dick. I  don't  remember  that.

I  remember  when  you  were  with  me  I  got  very  much
interested  in some letters  you wrote  me  after  your

return  home  your  saying  some  things  puzzled  you

very  much.  [A  first-rate  veridical  statement  from
R.  H.  has  had  to  be  omitted  here.  The  matter  re-
ferred to  had,  however,  been  mentioned  at  sittings  in
1895. — N.]

W.  R.  N.  By  jingo !  that  is  true,  Dick. It  was  ten  years  ago.

Do  you  remember  a  woman  named  Wright  ? [Name  not
clearly  written.]

W.  R.  N.  No,  not  at  this  moment.

Did  I  not  tell  you  about  her  the  day  we  were  at  the
shore  1

MV.  R.  N.  Ah,  Dick,  I  think  you  did,  but  I  do  not  remember  it
well  enough  to  make  it  a  good  test.

Do  you  remember  my  remark  about  the  way  in  which
the  name  was  spelled  1

W.  R.  N.  No,  I  don't  remember  it,  Dick.

Also  about  her  giving  me  some  very  interesting  things  ?


76


Professor  William  James.


[part


W.  R.  N.  No,  Dick,  I  do  not  remember  it.  Do  you  remember
telling  me  that  day  that  when  you  got  on  the  other
side  you  would  make  it  hot  for  me  ?

I  do  indeed  remember  it  well.  I  said  I  would  shake  you
up — shake  you  up.

W.  R.  N.  That  is  just  the  word  you  used  Dick.  [I  am  not  now
sure  the  word  was  "shake  you  up,"  but  it  was  some
such  colloquial  expression. — N.]

Yes,  I  did.  Oh — I  said,  won't  I  shake  you  up  when  I
get  over  there  if  I  go  before  you  do !  And  here  I
am,  but  I  find  my  memory  no  worse  than  yours  in
spite  of  the  fact  that  I  have  passed  through  the  transi-
tion stage — state.  You  would  be  a  pretty  poor
philosopher  if  you  were  to  forget  your  subject  as  you
seem  to  forget  some  of  those  little  memories  which  I
recall,  Billy.  Let  me  ask  if  you  remember  anything
about  a  lady  in  [Chicago]  to  whom  I  referred.

W.  R.  N.  Oh  Dick,  I  begin  to  remember.  About  eight  or  nine
years  ago  was  it,  Dick  1  [Here  follows  the  "  Huldah  "-
material  already  quoted  in  my  Part  I.  of  this  report.
See  pp.  20-26.— W.  J.]

Do  you  remember  some  trouble  I  had  with  Mrs.  F.  .  .  1

W.  R.  N.  I  have  some  remembrance. [I  recall  this,  but  no  details.

-N]

I  told  you  about  her. Yes,  Mrs.  ■ Mrs.  ! I  told  you

about  her,  and  you  thought  I  did  right  at  the  time.

W.  R.  N.  Dick,  did  you  get  any  names  of  those  relatives  of  mine
on  your  side  ?

Oh  yes,  names  on  my  side.  Yes,  I  found  lots  of  your
uncles  and  aunts. Your  wife's  also. Do  not  make

me  any  worse  than  I  am.  Do  you  remember  my

explanation  about  Proctor  1

W.  R.  N.  No.

Don't  you  remember  my  old  friend?
W.  R.  N.  No.


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  77


The  astronomer?  ....  Do  you  remember  my  little  talk
about  the  satellites  1

W.  R.  N.  Yes,  I  do.

And  about  the  inhabitants  of  Mars  ?

W.  R.  N.  I  do  indeed,  I  remember  very  well. [This  was  in  1895.
-N.]

Do  you  remember  my  own  talk  independent  of  sittings,
and  my  talks  on  the  subject  of  canals  ?  [R.  H.'s
own  interest  in  these  things  was  known  to  the  trance-
controls,  by  conversations  he  had  held  with  them  at
earlier  sittings. — W.  J.]

W.  R.  N.  Yes,  indeed,  I  remember.

This  is  what  I  am  reminding  you  of.  I  heard  you  and
William — William  discussing  me,  and  I  stood  not  one
inch  behind  you.

W.  R.  N.  William  who  1

James.

W.  R.  N.  What  did  William  James  say  ? [I  recall  this  talk  with
W.  J.  last  week.— K]

He  said  he  was  baffled  but  he  felt  it  was  I  talking — at
one  moment — then  at  another  he  did  not  know  what
to  think.

[Perfectly  true  of  my  conversation  with  N.  after  his  sitting
with  Mrs.  P.  a  week  previous. — W.  J.]

W.  R.  N.  Did  you  hear  anything  else?

Yes,  he  said  I  was  very  secretive  and  careful.
W.  R.  N.  Did  you  hear  him  say  that  1

He  did. He  said  I  was, I  am  afraid  I  am.

W.  R.  N.  I  don't  remember  his  saying  so. [I  remember  it. — W.  J.]

I  tell  you  Billy  he  said  so.


78


Professor  William  James.


[part


W.  R.  X.  Did  he  say  anything  else  1

He  paid  me  a  great  compliment,  [I  recall  this. — N.]  I

fear  I  did  not  deserve  it. However,  I  am  here  to  prove

or  disprove  through  life.  Amen.
Eemember  my  explanations  of  luminous  ether  ? [A  favorite

subject of discussion with him, possibly known  to

Mrs.  Piper.— XL]
Good  bye. God  bless  you  and  your  good  wife.  Remember

me  to  her. Adieu. — E.  H.

Some  persons  seem  to  make  much  better  "  sitters "  than
others,  and  Prof.  Xfewbold  is  evidently  one  of  the  best.  The
two  sittings  of  his  from  which  I  have  quoted  are  more
flowing  and  contain  less  waste  matter,  perhaps,  than  any  others.
If  the  E.  H.  who  appeared  therein  be  only  a  figment  of  Mrs.
Piper's  play-acting  subconscious  self  (compare  E.  H.'s  words
"I  am  holding  on  to  a  figment"  on  page  69  above),  we  must
credit  that  self  with  a  real  genius  for  accumulating  the
appropriate  in  the  way  of  items,  and  not  getting  out  of  the
right  personal  key.  Not  many  items  were  certainly  wrong  in
these  sittings,  and  the  great  majority  were  certainly  right.
If  two  of  the  omitted  communications  could  have  been
printed,  they  would  have  greatly  increased  the  veridical  effect.
Professor  Newbold  gives  me  his  own  resultant  impression
in  the  following  words :  "  The  evidence  for  H.'s  identity,  as
for  that  of  other  communicators,  seems  to  me  very  strong
indeed.  It  is  not  absolutely  conclusive ;  but  the  only  alterna-
tive theory,  the  telepathic,  seems  to  me  to  explain  the  facts
not  as  well  as  the  spiritistic.  I  find  it,  however,  absolutely
impossible  to  accept  the  necessary  corollaries  of  the  spiritistic
theory,  especially  those  connected  with  the  Imperator  group,
and  am  therefore  compelled  to  suspend  judgment."1

After  Dr.  Newbold's,  it  would  seem  natural  to  cite  Dr.
Hyslop's  sittings,  which  were  six  in  number  during  the  period
which  this  report  covers.  But  he  has  himself  given  an  account
of  them,  with  inferences,2  so  I  refrain. It  may  suffice  to  say

1  Compare  Newbold's  previous  account  of  his  experience  of  the  Piper-
phenomena,  in  the  S.P.R.  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIV.,  pp.  6-49.

2 In  the  Journal  of  the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  519  West
149th  Street,  New  York,  Vol.  I.,  No?.  II.,  III.,  and  IV.


lviil] Report  on  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson-Control.  79


that  Hyslop  had  already  been  converted,  largely  by  previous
experiences  with  Mrs.  Piper,  to  the  spiritist  theory  1  of  such
phenomena,  and  that  he  held  it  in  a  form  similar  to  that
to  which  Hodgson  had  been  led,  supposing  namely  that  at  the
time  of  communicating,  the  communicating  spirits  are  themselves
in  a  dreamy  or  somnambulic  state,  and  not  in  full  possession
of  their  faculties.2

Dr.  Hyslop's  sittings  in  the  present  series,  although  they
seem  to  me  to  contain  no  coercive  evidence  for  a  surviving
Hodgson,  as  contrasted  with  the  field  of  alternatives — I  doubt
if  Hyslop  would  make  any  such  claim  for  them — yet  lend
themselves  easily  to  the  notion  that  Hodgson,  in  a  somewhat
amnesic  and  confused  state,  was  there.  They  pursued  a  train
of  ideas  most  natural  for  such  as  Hodgson  to  have  followed,
and  they  confirmed  Dr.  Hyslop  in  the  theory  which  he  had
already  reached  as  the  line  of  least  resistance  in  these
matters : — Hodgson  was  probably  communicating  as  best  he
might  under  the  available  conditions.  He  led  the  conversation
back  to  his  and  Hyslop's  earlier  experiences,  recalled  the
differences  of  opinion  they  had  had  over  the  proofs  of  Hyslop's
report  on  Mrs.  Piper  in  1901  ;  alluded  to  a  meeting  which
they  were  to  have  had  in  New  York  if  Hodgson  had  not
"  passed  over,"  and  to  what  Hyslop  wished  to  discuss  there ;
reminded  Hyslop  of  some  experiments  on  mediums  which  they
had  made  together  in  earlier  days,  and  of  messages  purporting
to  be  from  II.  H.  which  Hyslop  was  receiving  through  another
medium  at  present ;  discussed  other  mediumistic  persons,  and
especially  the  aptitudes  of  a  certain  young  "  light "  in  whom
Hyslop  was  interested;  sent  a  veridical  message  to  Dr.  ISTewbold ;
recalled  a  certain  "  cheese "  of  which  he  and  Hyslop  had
partaken  on  a  unicpae  occasion  together ;  gave  advice  regarding
Hyslop's  practical  perplexities  in  the  crisis  of  S.P.E.  affairs ;
expressed  his  sympathy  in  the  most  appropriate  fashion ;  etc.,
etc. — most  of  this  in  an  exceedingly  scanty  way,  to  be  sure,
but with such naturalness of tone, and following  such

1  See  his  Report  on  Mrs.  Piper  in  Vol.  XVI.  of  the  S.P.E.  Proceedings.

2  Compare  with  this  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  well-argued  theory  that  they  are  not
trying  to  communicate  at  all,  but  that  the  medium  in  trances  is  able  tele-
pathically  to  tap  their  minds  in  spots,  just  as  she  taps  the  minds  of  the
sitters. (Proceedings  S.P.P.,  Vol.  XV.,  pp.  16-38.)


80


Professor  William  James.


[part


characteristic  lines  of  association  with  the  sitter,  that  the
latter's  view  was,  as  I  said,  only  confirmed.

A  reader  of  the  records,  not  having  Dr.  Hyslop's  Mental
Apperceptionsmasse  to  interpret  them  by,  might  fail  to  find
them  convincing.  My  own  feelings  towards  these  sittings  is
what  it  is  towards  all  the  others.  The  interpretation  of  them
will  depend  on  that  of  the  whole  larger  mass  of  material  with
which  they  belong.

W.  J.'s  Sitting.

The  evidence  is  so  much  the  same  sort  of  thing  throughout,
and  makes  such  insipid  reading,  that  I  hesitate  to  print  more
of  it  in  full.  But  I  know  that  many  critics  insist  on  having
the  largest  possible  amount  of  verbatim  material  on  which  to
base  their  conclusions,  so  I  select  as  a  specimen  of  the  R.  H.
control's  utterances  when  he  was  less  "  strong,"  one  of  two
voice-sittings  which  I  had  with  him  myself  (May  21st,  1906).
The  reader,  I  fear,  will  find  it  long  and  tedious,  but  he  can
skip.

(R.  H.  enters,  saying  :)

Well,  well,  well,  well ! Well,  well,  well,  that  is here

I  am. Good  morning,  good  morning,  Alice.

Mrs.  W.  J.  Good  morning,  Mr.  Hodgson.

I  am  right  here. Well,  well,  well ! I  am  delighted !

Hurrah! R.  H. ! Give  us  your  hand!

Hurrah,  William  ! God  bless  you. How  are  you  1

First  rate.

Well,  I  am  delighted  to  see  you. Well,  have  you  solved
those  problems  yet  ?

Which  problems  do  you  refer  to  1

Did  you  get  my  messages  1

I  got  some  messages  about  your  going  to  convert  me.

Did  you  hear  about  that  argument  that  I had  ?  You
asked  me  what  I  had  been  doing  all  those  years,  and


W.  J.


W.  .1.


w.  J.


w.  J.


xviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  81

what  it  amounted  to?  [R.  H.  had  already  sent  me,
through  other  sitters,  messages  about  my  little  faith. —
W.  J.J

W.  J.  Yes.

Well,  it  has  amounted  to  this, — that  I  have  learned  by
experience  that  there  is  more  truth  than  error  in  what
I  have  been  studying.

W.  J. Good !

I  am  so  delighted  to  see  you  to-day  that  words  fail  me.

W.  J. Well,  Hodgson,  take  your  time  and  don't  be  nervous.

No.  Well,  I  think  I  could  ask  the  same  of  you  !  Well,
now,  tell  me, — I  am  very  much  interested  in  what  is
going  on  in  the  society,  and  Myers  and  I  are  also
interested  in  the  society  over  here.  You  understand  that
we  have  to  have  a  medium  on  this  side  while  you  have
a  medium  on  your  side,  and  through  the  two  we  com-
municate with  you.

W.  J. And  your  medium  is  who  ?

We  have  a  medium  on  this  side.  It  is  a  lady.  I  don't  think
.she  is  known  to  you.

W.  J. Y~ou  don't  mean  Rector  1

No,  not  at  all. It  is  do  you  remember  a  medium  whom

we  called  Prudens?

W.  J.  Yes.

Prudens  is  a  great  help.  Through  Prudens  we  accomplish
a  great  deal.  Speak  to  me,  William.  Ask  me  anything.
What  I  want  to  know  first  of  all  is  about  the  society.
I  am  sorry  that  it  could  not  go  on.

W.  J. There  was  nobody  to  take  your  place.

If  it  can't  go  on  then  it  must  be

W.  J.  Be  dissolved.  That  is  what  we  have  concluded.  There  is
nobody  competent  to  take  your  place.  Hyslop  is  going
to, — well,  perhaps  you  can  find  out  for  yourself  what  he
is  going  to  do.

F


82


Professor  William  James.


[part


I  know  what  he  is  going  to  do,  and  we  are  all  trying  to  help
Hyslop,  and  trying  to  make  him  more  conservative,  and
keener  in  understanding  the  necessity  of  being  secretive.

W.  J.  You  must  help  all  you  can.  He  is  splendid  on  the  interpreting
side,  discussing  the  sittings,  and  so  forth.

I  know  he  is,  but  what  a  time  I  had  with  him  in  writing
that  big  report.  It  was  awful,  perfectly  awful.  I  shall
never  forget  it.  [Hodgson  had  tried  to  get  Hyslop's
report  in  S.P.R.  Proceedings,  Vol.  XVI,  made  shorter,  a
fact  possibly  known  to  the  medium. — W.  J.]

There  is  one  thing  that  troubles  me.  Harry  [James]  asked
me  about  a  letter  which  he  had  received  [at  a  previous
sitting,  from  a  certain  C.  B.,  asking  whether  E.  H.  had
tried  to  appear  to  her  since  his  death].  I  have  not  got
that  cleared  up  in  my  mind  yet.  It  was  regarding  some
one  to  whom  I  have  returned  since  I  passed  over.

(A  letter  from  a  certain  H  1  asking  a  similar  question,

was  here  offered  as  an  "influence;"  and  held  on  the
medium's  forehead.)

I  did  not  return  to  C.  B. Did  you  get  her  message?

W.  J. I  have  not  got  her  message. Harry  may  have  it.

I  also  gave  a  message  to  Mrs.  C. Did  you  gettthat?

W.  J.  Either  George  Dorr  or  Harry  must  have  got  that.  You
see  I  have  not  seen  everything  yet,  having  been  in
California.

Oh,  yes,  I  forgot.  William,  can't  you  see,  don't  you  under-
stand, and  don't  you  remember  how  I  used  to  walk  up
and  down  before  that  open  fireplace  trying  to  convince
you  of  my  experiments'?

W.  J. Certainly,  certainly.

And  you  would  stand  with  your  hands  in  your  trousers
pockets.  You  got  very  impatient  with  me  sometimes,
and  you  would  wonder  if  I  was  correct.  I  think  you
are  very  skeptical.


lviil] Report  on  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson-Control.  83


W.  J.  Since  you  have  been  returning  I  am  much  more  near  to
feeling  as  you  felt  than  ever  before.

G-ood  ! Well,  that  is  capital.
W.  J. Your  "personality"  is  beginning  to  make  me  feel  as  you  felt.

If  you  can  give  up  to  it,  William,  and  feel  the  influence  of
it  and  the  reality  of  it,  it  will  take  away  the  sting  of
death.

W.  J.  But,  R.  H.,  listen  a  moment.  We  are  trying  to  get  evidential
material  as  to  your  identity,  and  anything  that  you  can
recollect  in  the  way  of  facts  is  more  important  than
anything  else.  For  instance,  do  you  recollect  a  Churchill
case,  Mr.  Churchill,  who  came  on  from  New  York  or
from  the  West  with  some  materials,  and  you  and  I  had
some  discussions  ?  I  have  just  had  that  worked  up  in
the  laboratory. Can  you  remember  anything  of  that  ?

Oh,  yes.  I  had  Osier  in  my  mind  also  and  I  was  preparing
some  answers  for  that.  [Piddington  on  May  2nd  had
told  the  controls  that  some  MS.  notes  of  a  reply  to  Osier
had  been  found  among  Hodgson's  papers. — W.  J.]  I
think  perhaps  you  have  heard  about  that,  have  you  ?

W.  J. Yes,  I  have  heard  about  that.

Well,  Sanger,  or  Zangler  ?  the  clergyman,  do  you  remember
him?

W.  J. No,  I  don't  remember. [Impossible  to  identify. — W.  J.]

Don't  you  remember  a  young  man  whom  I  was  going  to
see  1  I  think  I  told  you  about  it,  William, — quite  sure
I  did, — who  was  a  clergyman,  and  who  was  afraid  of
his  condition,  going  into  the  trances.  Don't  you  remember
that  at  all  ? Ask  Alice. Perhaps  she  remembers.

Mrs.  J.  No,  I  don't  remember  that  account  of  the  clergyman.  I
think  perhaps  Hyslop  may  remember  it.  I  remember
something  about  dream-cases  and  what  we  called  death-
bed experiences.  [Possibly  the  case  mentioned  to
Newbold,  see  above,  p.  71.]


84  Professor  William  James.  [part

W.  J. Yes,  this  clergyman  had  had  some  of  those,  had  hel

He  had  had  some  experiences  in  dreams.  And  then  there
was  a  case  in  Washington  that  I  was  anxious  to  look  up.
Do  you  remember  my  speaking  anything  about  that'?

W.  J. No,  I  am  not  so  sure  of  that. Do  you  remember  a ■

Gower  case  1

Oh  yes,  you  recall  that  to  my  mind.  And  do  you  remember
the  description  of  the  man  whose  finger, — there  was
something  peculiar  about  his  finger  1

W.  J. Yes,  I  do  remember  that. I  remember  that  incident.

[I  seemed  to,  at  the  moment,  but  the  memory  has  failed  to
become  distinct. — W.  J.l

Well,  have  you  found  anything  more  about  that?

W.  J.  No,  I  have  not.  If  you  could  recall  what  kind  of  a  case
the  Gower  case  was,  it  would  be  interesting.  [For  this
case,  concerning  which  R.  H.  had  been  in  correspondence,
see  Miss  Johnson's  report  in  S.P.R.  Proceedings,  Vol.
XXL,  p.  94.]

Wasn't  that  a  case  of  hysteria  ?

W.  J.  No,  not  hysteria.  He  corresponded  with  you  and  wanted
you  to  come  and  see  the  phenomena. Do  you  remember  1

I  do  remember  a  physical-manifestation  case,  and  I  remember
an  aural  case, — the  voices  came.  And  I  think  the  Gower
case  was  physical  manifestation,  if  I  remember.  [No
voices. — W.  J.]

W.  J.  That  is  correct.  Can  you  remember  what  the  physical  mani-
festations were  1

Well,  I  hope  I  will  not  get  these  mixed  up  in  my  mind,
because  I  have  several  that  are  passing  through  my
thoughts.  There  was  one  where  they  had  the  table
manifestations,  and  they  had  also  some  experiments  in
knocking  about  the  room  after  retiring.  Do  you  remem-
ber those  1  [The  table  had  moved  without  contact,  but
I  fail  to  remember  any  "knocking." — W.  J.]

Mrs.  J.  Yes.


rin.] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  85

I  think  I  had  those  correct  in  my  mind,  and  then  I  think —
do  you  remember  the  case  where  the  hands  appeared,  as
though  they  were  in  phosphorescent  light  1

■  J. I  don't  remember  that  case.

I  have  those  two  now  just  on  my  mind  at  the  moment.  I
think  they  will  come  to  you  clearly  presently.  Now  tell
me  a  little  bit  more  about  the  Society.  That  will  help
me  keep  my  thoughts  clear.  I  think,  William— are  you
standing  ?

J. Yes,  I  am  standing.

Well,  can't  you  sit?
J.  Yes.

Well,  sit. Let's  have  a  nice  talk.

J.  The  society  is  going  to  disband.  Hyslop  and  Piddington
and  George  Dorr  and  I  have  agreed  to  that,  and  we  have
written  a  circular,  which  we  have  signed,  to  the  members,
and  I  don't  think  there  will  be  any  objection.  The
American  work  will  have  to  go  on  apart  from  the  English,
work  in  some  way.

W  ell,  then  about  Hyslop's  society. I  think  he  will  succeed
in  that. I  feel  very  much  encouraged  in  regard  to  that.

J. I  certainly  hope  he  will  succeed.

I  want  to  ask  you  if  you  have  met  at  all  Miss  Gaule  1

J.  Maggie  Gaule?  I  have  not  met  her.  [A  medium  known
to  E.  H.  during  life,  probably  also  known  by  name  to
Mrs.  P.— W.  J.]

I  am  very  much  disappointed  in  some  respects.  I  have  tried
to  reach  her.  [In  1908,  Hyslop  got  messages  from  R.  H.
through  Miss  Gaule.— W.  J.]  I  have  reached  another
light  and  I  did  succeed  in  getting  a  communication
through.

J. What  was  your  communication  ?

I  did  not  believe  in  her  when  I  was  in  the  body. I  thought
she  was  insincere,  but  I  believe  her  now  and  know  that


86


Professor  William  James.


[part


she  has  genuine  light,  and  I  gave  a  message  recently  to
a  Mrs.  M.  in  the  body.  I  referred  to  my  books  and  my
papers  and  several  other  things.  Her  name  is  Soule.
[R.  H.  acted  as  Mrs.  Soule's  control,  and  something  like
incipient  cross-correspondences  were  obtained. — W.  J.]

W.  J. Soule  ?

A.  M.R.  [the  stenographer]  I  know  her.

And  now,  as  I  go  through  my  rooms  [which  were  still  full
of  R.  H.'s  effects]  I  have  talked  over  the  matters  there
very  well.  Now  let  me  see — tell  me  more  about  the
Gower  case. Are  you  going  to  look  that  up  1

W.  J. I  stopped  at on  my  way  from  California,  and  I  saw

all  the  witnesses,  and  I  think  it  is  a  good  case.

I  am  inclined  to  think  he  is  honest  and  I  will  investigate
and  if  possible  I  will  give  some  manifestations  there  that
you  will  know  that  it  comes  from  me.  I  will  do  every-
thing I  can  because  I  am  so  anxious,  and  if  I  cannot
prove — wait  a  moment — will  you  spell  this  after  me  ?
[Very  dramatic  change — as  if  some  sudden  influence  had
come  upon  him.]

W.  J.  Yes.

It  is  Z  e  i  v  o  r  n  [spelt  out].

[W.  J.  pronounces  each  letter  after  it  is  spoken  by  R.  H.]

Now  put  those  letters,  repeat  those  backwards,  and  I  have
left  that  word  written  and  I  think  you  will  find  it  among
my  papers.  It  is  original  and  nobody  saw  it,  nobody
would  understand  it. [Not  found  there. — W.  J.]

W.  J. That  is  a  password  ?

Yes.

W.  J. Now,  Hodgson,  do  you  remember  any  sealed  test  that  you
left  with  Myers  or  me  or  anybody  1


I  left  one  with  Lodge.


lviii.]  Report  on  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson-Control.  87
W.  J. Did  you  leave  one  with  me  1

Yes,  I  left  one  with  you.  [I  myself  supposed  so,  but  have
found  none. — W.  J.]

W.  J.  Can  you  recall  anything  about  that  1  It  is  very  hard  to
remember  those  things.

It  is  sealed,  if  I  remember  rightly.  Now  wait  a  moment.
That  is  one  you  will  find  in  the  office — in  my  rooms,
rather — and  I  think  I  left  it  in  a  book.

W.  J. This  one  that  you  just  spelt  out  ?

Yes.

W.  J. Did  you  make  that  word  up  %

I  spelt  the  word,  made  the  word  up  and  spelt  it  out
because  I  knew  no  one  living  could  guess  at  it  or  hit  it.

W.  J. It  does  not  mean  anything  in  particular  1

Nothing  at  all.

W.  J. J ust  a  password  1

Yes.  And  the  one  I  gave  to  you,  I  shall  have  to  think
that  over,  William.

W.  J.  Think  that  over,  Hodgson.  Think  it  over  carefully.  Take
your  time  and  see  if  you  can  get  it,  because  it  is  very
important.

I  shall  do  so,  and  I  want  to  do  it  in  a  way  to  exclude  if
possible  the  theory  of  clairvoyance.  Now  I  want  to  ask
you  a  question,  may  I,  while  it  is  on  my  mind  1  Have
you  ever  asked  Harry  if  he  asked  Dr.  Bayley  about  that
charade  1 [Reference  to  a  former  sitting  with  H.  J.,  Jr.]

W.  J.  Yes,  there  is  an  answer  from  Dr.  Bayley,  about  a  charade
containing  the  word  "  peacemaker."  [Dr.  Bayley  recalls
no  such  charade. — W.  J.]

Yes.

W.  J. And  that  is  all  right.
The  answer  1


88  Professor  William  James.  [part

W.  J.  Yes.  [I  print  the  record  as  it  stands — it  seems  incoherent,
on  my  part. — W.  J.]

Well,  about  the  cheese  1 Please  answer  me.

W.  J. The cheese is all right. That is a very [The

"cheese"  recalled  to  me  another  charade. — W.  J.J

No,  no, — I  want  to  know  if  he  gave  it  to  Bayley.

W.  J.  Yes,  that  was  sent  to  Bayley  by  Harry,  I  think,  but  whether
you  gave  it  to  Bayley  originally,  I  am  not  sure.  [R.  EL
did  so  give  it,  Dr.  Bayley  informs  me,  but  Mrs.  Piper
says  she  also  had  heard  this  charade  from  R.  H. — W.  J.];

Well,  I  wish  you  would  find  that  out.  You  see  these  things
are  all  going  through  my  mind,  as  though  there  was  a
panorama  of  things  going  through  my  vision.

W.  J. Hodgson,  what  are  you  doing,  apart  from  Mrs.  Piper  ?

Why,  I  am  working  with  the  society,  William,  trying  to-
reach  other  lights,  trying  to  communicate,  trying  to  get-
into  touch  with  you  all.

W.  J. Why  can't  you  tell  me  more  about  the  other  life?

That  is  a  part  of  my  work.  I  intend  to  give  you  a  better
idea  of  this  life  than  has  ever  been  given.

W.  J. I  hope  so.

It  is  not  a  vague  fantasy  but  a  reality.
Mrs.  J.  Hodgson,  do  you  live  as  we  do,  as  men  do  1

What  does  she  say  ?
W.  J. Do  you  live  as  men  do  ?
Mrs.  J.  Do  you  wear  clothing  and  live  in  houses'?

Oh  yes,  houses,  but  not  clothing.  No,  that  is  absurd.
[Query:  the  clothing?  or  the  statement  made  about  it?
— W.  J.] Just  wait  a  moment. I  am  going  to  get  out.

W.  J, You  will  come  back  again  ?
Yes


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson-Control.


Eectoe.  He  has  got  to  go  out  and  get  his  breath.

(When  R.  H.  comes  back  he  recommences  talking  about  his
passwords :)

Philanthropist — That  is  one  of  the  words,  but — wait  a
moment — that  is  Lodge's.  Now  I  remember  that  very
well.  The  other  one  which  I  have  spelled — you  wait  a
moment — there  is  something  troubling  me  regarding  the
— do  you  remember  another  case  1  I  want  to  recall  it
to  your  mind.  Do  you  remember  a  case  about  a  young
girl,  a  young  woman  that  I  told  you  about?

W.  J.  Yes.

I  have  seen  her  since  I  came  over.  Yes,  I  think  Hyslop
brought  her  here  to  me.

W.  J.  Yes.

Well,  that  is  the  nearest  approach  to  a  case  of  hysteria  of
anything  I  know.  Do  you  remember  my  telling  you
about  it,  William1?

W.  J. Well,  I  do  remember  a  case. I  don't  fully  identify  it.
It  was  about  a  year  before  I  passed  out.

W.  J. I  do  remember  a  young  woman. Have  you  been  influencing
her?

No,  I  tried  to  reach  her  two  or  three  times,  one  or  two
messages,  but  they  did  not  come  from  me.

W.  J. I  don't  know  whether  it  is  the  same  case. The  one  I  meant
had  been  in  an  asylum.

That  is  the  one.  I  tried  to  get  the  message  through  but  I
found  it  was  a  failure.  [Evidently  not  the  person  I  was
thinking  of.— W.  J.]

[The  letter  from  H  1  (see  above,  p.  82)  was  here  again

put  into  Mrs.  Piper's  hand.]

I  tell  you  one  person,  William,  who  has  light,  and  that  is  B.


90


Professor  William  James.


[part


VV.  J. Have  you  been  able  to  get  near  Mrs.  B.  1

Yes,  I  gave  her  a  communication  since  I  passed  out.  You
ask  her  if  she  received  anything  like  this  :  "  I  have  seen
the  Doctor  and  I  put  my  hands  palms  to  your  face  facing
you."  You  ask  her  if  she  got  anything  of  that  kind.
[Mrs.  B.  informs  me  that  she  has  had  no  direct  impres-
sion from  Hodgson  since  his  death,  but  numerous  messages
from  him  through  mediums  on  the  Pacific  Coast. — W.  J.]

W.  J. How  did  you  get  this  message  to  her  1

Appeared  to  her  and  thought  she  saw  me.  She  put  her
hand  up. She  had  just  retired.

W.  J. What  time  of  day  was  it  %

Just  retired.

W.  J. Gone  to  bed  ? Do  you  remember,  Hodgson,  any  one  by  the
name  of  H  tl

A  medium  ?

W.  J. No,  not  a  medium,  a  friend.

You  mean  lived  in  Providence  1  [The  letter  was  from  a
Mr.  H  1  in  England.— W.  J.]

W.  J. No,  I  don't  think  he  lived  in  Providence.

Oh  yes,  I  remember  Mr.  H  1  who  used  to  live  in  Pro-
vidence and  from  whom  I  received  a  great  many  letters.
[Unknown,  as  yet,  to  W.  J.]

W.  J. Have  you  tried  to  have  any  communication  with  him?

No,  I  don't  think  I  have.  1  think  I  shall  try,  though.  I
have  had  some  communications,  you  know,  here.  I  have
met  several  people.  But  independently  I  have  gone  to
very  few.

[The  conversation  then  goes  on  about  the  lost  ring  (compare
Part  I.  of  this  report,  pp.  13-18),  and  about  the  "  cheese  "-
charade.  Then  I,  thinking  of  a  certain  pitfall  which  the
children  and  I  had  dug  for  Hodgson,  asked :]


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  91


W.  J.  Do  you  recall  any  incidents  about  your  playing  with  the
children  up  in  the  Adirondack^  at  the  Putnam  camp  1

Do  you  remember, — what  is  that  name,  Elizabeth  Putnam  1
She  came  in  and  I  was  sitting  in  a  chair  before  the  fire,
leading,  and  she  came  in  and  put  her  hands,  crept  up
behind  me,  put  her  hands  over  my  eyes,  and  said  "who
is  it  ? " And  do  you  remember  what  my  answer  was  1

W.  J. Let  me  see  if  you  remember  it  as  I  do.

I  said,  "Well,  it  feels  like  Elizabeth  Putnam,  but  it  sounds
like  ■'

W.  J.  I  know  who  you  mean.  [R.  H.  quite  startled  me  here
because  what  he  said  reminded  me  of  an  incident  which
I  well  remembered.  One  day  at  breakfast  little  Martha
Putnam  (as  I  recall  the  fact)  had  climbed  on  Hodgson's
back,  sitting  on  his  shoulders,  and  clasped  her  hands
over  his  eyes,  saying  "Who  am  I?"  To  which  R.  H.,
laughing,  had  responded:  "It  sounds  like  Martha,  but
it  feels  like  Henry  Bowditch" — the  said  H.  B.  weighing
nearly  200  lbs.  I  find  that  no  one  but  myself,  of  those
who  probably  were  present,  remembers  this  incident. —
W.  J.]

Do  you  realize  how  difficult  that  is  1

W.  J.  It  is,  evidently ;  yet  you  were  just  on  the  point  of  saying  it.
Is  it  a  man  or  a  woman  ?

A  man.

W.  J. Have  you  any  message  for  that  man  now  1

Dr. — not  Putnam — Dr.  Bowditch  !
W.  J. That  is  it,  Bowditch.

"Sounds  like  Dr.  Bowditch."

W.  J.  It  was  not  Elizabeth  Putnam,  but  it  was  Charlie  Putnam's
daughter.


Charlie  Putnam,  yes. Now  do  you  remember  that  1


92  Professor  William  James.  [part

W.  J. But  what  is  the  name  of  Charles  Putnam's  daughter?

Of  whom  ?  Annie  1  Oh,  she  is  the  youngest.  She  is  the
young  lady.  And  there  was  a  Mary — Mamie.  [False
name?. — W.  J.]

W.  J. But  you  must  remember  Charles  Putnam's  daughter's  name  !

I  have  got  it  now  in  my  mind.  I  could  not  think  of  it  at
first.  Well  it  has  gone  from  me  at  the  moment.  Never
mind. That  is  less  important  than  the  thing  itself.

W.  J.  Do  you  remember  another  thing?  We  played  a  rather
peculiar  game.  Possibly  you  may  recall  it.  Had  great
fun.

I  remember  playing  leap-frog  with  the  boys.  Do  you
remember  that  1

W.  J. Yes,  that  was  frequent.

Yes,  that  is  a  very — and  then  do  you  remember  how  I
played  bear.

W.  J.  Yes,  bear  is  first-rate.  I  was  not  there,  but  I  heard  them
talking  about  your  playing  bear.  I  remember  one
morning  you  and  I  had  a  very

Well,  what  you  remember  I  might  not  remember  at  all.

W.  J.  Of  course  not.  You  played  so  often  with  them  that  you
may  have  forgotten.

Besides  all  that,  I  am  trying  to  avoid  things  that  are  in
your  mind  if  possible,  to  remind  you  of  other  incidents.
Well,  let  me  see — -what  were  we  playing — we  were
playing — you  remember  at  all  playing  marbles  with  the
children  1

W.  J.  No.

That  is  another  game  I  played  with  them.  [False.]  Oht
such  fun,  such  days  as  those  were.  You  say  you  and
I  were  playing  with  them  particularly  1

W.  J. Yes,  perhaps  that  will  come  to  you.

That  may  come  to  me  at  some  other  time.  But  all  those
things you ask me  about  the  children, — well,  that  is


xviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  93

the  first  thing  I  can  remember.  That  is  all  right  so
far  as  it  goes.  Now  let  me  see  what  other  thing  I
can  tell  you  that  no  one  living  knows  but  myself.
Do  you  remember  a  place  where  we  used  to  go,  where
I  used  to  go  and  smoke?  I  used  to  go  with  Billy
[my  son.. — W.  J.]  a  great  deal,  and  it  was  high  up.

W.  J.  Doubtful.

Yes,  do  you  remember  that  at  all  1  By  the  way,  how  is
Billy  ?

W.  J. Billy  is  first-rate.

He  has  gone  away,  hasn't  he  1 [Correct,  but  not  evidential.]
W.  J.  Yes.

I  think  he  is  now  on  the  right  track  and  hope  he  will
keep  so.  Give  my  deepest  love  to  him  and  tell  him
how  much  I  think  of  him  and  also  the  rest.

W.  J.  Yes.

[Some  non-evidential  matter  here  is  omitted.]

Excuse  me,  it  seems  to  me  you  are  peculiarly  dull  concerning
my  affairs  at  my  rooms.  I  suppose  Harry  knows  more
about  them  than  you  do.

W.  J.  Do  you  think  it  would  help  you  to  have  the  "  light "
taken  to  your  room  there  in  your  old  surroundings  ?
Do  you  think  you  could  get  more  influences  and  feel
nearer  ?

Perhaps  I  could.  I  left  everything  so  suddenly,  I  had  so
little  time  to  make  my  plans  and  my  arrangements.  I
suppose  you  understand  that1?

"W.  J.  Yes,  indeed.  Would  it  be  advisable  to  take  the  "light"  to
your  rooms  1

Well,  I  should  rather  come  here  and  mention  my  individual
things  from  time  to  time  and  then  take  her  there
later,  .  .  .  because  there  are  many  things  which  I  wish


94


Professor  William  James.


[part


to  locate  and  point  out  and  dispose  of  from  time  to
time  and  things  I  would  like  to  mention.  I  wish  you
would  repeat  to  me  those  letters,  to  see  if  you  have


got  them  correct.

W.  J. Zei  vorn.

That  is  right.  It  is  written  in  cipher,  the  one  word,  and
written  by  itself,  on  a  large  sheet  of  paper,  carefully
folded  and  placed  in  one  of  my  books,  and  it  is  in
a  book  of  poems  I  think,  and  I  think  it  was  Longfellow's,
and  the  book  has  a  scroll  up  and  down  the  back,  and
the  binding  is  green  in  color,  and  I  don't  think  any
one  living  knows  that  but  myself. [Not  found. — W.  J.]

W.  J. Yes,  are  there  any  particular  things  that  you  would  like
to  have  sent  to  Australia?

I  have  talked  that  over  pretty  carefully  with  Piddington
and  I  think  those  arrangements  are  already  made.

W.  J. Yes,  that  is  right.

I  wanted  to  recall, — Alice,  perhaps  you  can  help  me  to
recall, — what  was  that  balcony  where  we  used  to  go
and  smoke  ?

Mrs.  J.  Why,  yes,  it  was  up-stairs,  the  upper  story  of  the  piazza.

[If  Chocorua  were  meant,  Mrs.  Piper  had  seen  this
"balcony."— W.  J.]

That  is  all  right.  That  is  perfectly  clear.  She  always  did
have  a  clear  head.  .  .  .  Now  I  want, — William,  I  want
one  thing.  I  want  you  to  get  hold  of  the  spiritual
side  of  this  thing  and  not  only  the  physical  side.  I
want  you  to  feel  intuitively  and  instinctively  the  spiritual
truth,  and  when  you  do  that  }'ou  will  be  happy,  and
you  will  find  that  I  was  not  idling  and  was  not  spending
my  time  on  nonsense ;  and  as  I  thought  over  all,  as
it  came  to  me  after  I  entered  this  life,  I  thought
"What  folly! If  I  could  only  get  hold  of  him!"

W.  J. I wish  that what  you  say  could  grow more  continuous.

That  would  convince  me.  You  are  very  much  like  your
old  self,  but  you  are  curiously  fragmentary.


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  95


Yes,  but  you  must  not  expect  too  much  from  me,  that  I
could  talk  over  the  lines  and  talk  as  coherently  as  in
the  body.  You  must  not  expect  too  much,  but  take
things  little  by  little  as  they  come  and  make  the  best
of  it,  and  then  you  must  put  the  pieces  together  and
make  a  whole  out  of  it.  Before  I  lose  my  breath,  is
there  any  other  question  you  want  to  ask  me  ?  What
do  you  think  of  that  bust,  William  1  I  don't  quite
approve  of  it.  I  think  it  is  all  nonsense.  [On  March
12th  Mr.  Dorr  had1  told  the  11.  H.  control  that  Mr.
Biela  Pratt  had  begun  to  model  a  bust  of  him  for  the
Tavern  Club.]

W.  J.  I  do  not  know  anything  about  it.  I  have  not  seen  it.  But
it  is  a  natural  thins;  "for  the  Tavern  Club  to  want  of
you,  they  were  so  fond  of  you,  all  of  them.

I  want  to  know,  William,  what  is  that  you  are  writing
about  me  1

W.  J. I  am  not  writing  anything  about  you  at  present.

Aren't  you  going  to?
W.  J. Perhaps  so.

Can  I  help  you  out  any?

W.  J.  Yes,  I  want  you  to  help  me  out  very  much.  I  am  going
to  write  about  these  communications  of  yours.  I  want
to  study  them  out  very  carefully,  evei'ything  that  you
say  to  any  sitter.

Well,  that  is  splendid.  You  could  not  have  said  anything
to  please  me  more  than  that.

W.  J. I  am  glad  you  approve  of  my  taking  it  in  hand.

Yes,  I  do. Of  all  persons  you  are  the  one.

W.  J. I'll  try  to  glorify  you  as  much  as  I  can  !

Oh,  I  don't  care  about  that.  I  would  like  to  have  the
truth  known,  and  I  would  like  to  have  you  work  up
these  statements  as  proof  that  I  am  not  annihilated.


9b'


Professor  William  James.


[part


W.  J.  Precisely  so.  Well,  R.  H.,  you  think  over  that  "nigger
minstrel"  talk.  [Compare  Part  I.,  p.  18.]  If  you  get
the  whole  conversation  in  which  that  nigger-minstrel
talk  was  mentioned  by  me,  it  would  be  very  good  proof
that  it  is  you  talking  to  me.  [He  failed  to  get  it. —
W.  J.]

Well,  I  shall  do  it.  I  want  you  to  understand  one  thing,
that  in  the  act  of  communicating  it  is  like  trying  to
give  a  conversation  over  the  telephone,  that  the  things
that  you  want  to  say  the  most  slip  from  you,  but  when
you  have  ceased  to  talk  they  all  come  back  to  you.  You
can  understand  that.

W.  J. I  understand  that  they  come  back.

But  I  shall  give  that  out  to  some  one  here,  you  may  be
sure,  and  I  hope  to  see  you — this  is  only  the  beginning,
and  I  shall  be  clearer  from  time  to  time,  but  the
excitement  of  seeing  you  and  all  has  been  very  beautiful
to  me.

W.  J.  If  you  can  manage  to  get  a  little  more  hold  of  the  conditions
on  the  other  side,  it  will  be  very  good.

Yes,  that  I  shall  do.  You  must  remember  I  have  not  been
over  here  an  endless  number  of  days  1  but  I  wish  they
would  all  try  as  hard  as  I  have  tried  to  give  proof  of
their  identity  so  soon  after  coming  over.

W.  J.  I  wish  you  would  more  and  more  get  Rector  to  let  you
take  his  place.  You  do  all  the  talking  and  let  Rector
have  a  rest.  And  it  would  be  much  better,  I  think,  for
you  to  take  control  of  the  light,  and  for  me  particularly.

Yes,  that  is  a  very  good  suggestion,  very  good.

W.  J.  Because  I  want  to  write  this  up,  and  the  time  taken  by
Rector  is  so  much  lost  from  you.

But  he  repeats  for  me  very  cleverly,  and  he  understands
the  management  of  the  light.  I  want  to  speak  with
Alice  a  moment,  and  their  I  shall  have  to  leave  you,  I
suppose.


LVIII.]


Report  on  Mrs.  Piper  s  Hodgson-Control.


97


Mrs.  J. Mr.  Hodgson.  I  am  so  glad  to  know  that  you  can  come
at  all.

Well,  you  were  always  a  great  help  to  me,  you  always
did  see  me,  but  poor  William  was  blind.  But  we  shall
wholly  straighten  him  out  and  put  him  on  the  right
track.  ...  I  am  sorry  to  be  off  so  soon,  but  I  know
there  are  difficulties  in  remaining  too  long.  They  often
told  me  too  frequent  communication  was  not  good  for
any  one.  I  understand  what  that  means  now  better  than
ever.  I  am  going  to  look  up  one  or  two  cases  and  put
you  on  the  track  of  them,  William,  when  I  can  com-
municate here, — at  the  same  time  repeat  the  messages
elsewhere.

W.  J. That  is  first-rate.

I  think  that  is  one  of  the  best  things  I  can  do.  Now  I
am  going  to  skedaddle.  Good  bye,  William.  God  bless
you. Give  my  love  to  the  boys.

As  I  review  this  somewhat  diluted  sitting,  the  only  evidential
point  in  it  seems  to  me  to  be  the  anecdote  about  the  Putnam
child  (see  above  p.  91).  The  incident  was  very  distinct  in
my  own  memory,  but  seems  to  survive  in  no  one  else's.  I
was  hoping  for  another  answer  altogether,  about  a  certain
"  pitfall,"  namely,  and  this  one  was  a  surprise.  Either  tapping
my  subconscious  memory,  or  a  surviving  B.  H.,  would  be  possible
explanations  of  it,  unless  it  were  more  reasonable  to  assume
that  some  one  had  told  the  anecdote  to  Mrs.  Piper  at  the
time,  and  that  her  memory  was  now  reproducing  it.  Obviously
the  reader's  solution  will  depend  on  his  sense  of  "  dramatic
probability,"  and  that  will  differ  with  the  line  of  his  previous
experiences.  For  myself,  considering  the  possibilities  of  leakage,
impossible  to  trace,  in  the  whole  case,  I  cannot  be  positively
sure  that  Mrs.  Piper's  knowledge  of  this  anecdote  was  super-
normal at  all.  The  rest  of  the  sitting,  although  quite,  compatible
with  the  spiritual  explanation,  seems  to  me  to  have  but  little
evidential  force.

The  same  is  true  of  the  second  sitting  which  I  had  a
fortnight  later.  Much  of  it  went  over  the  same  matters,  with
no  better  results. I  vainly  tried  to  make  Hodgson  remember

G


98


Professor  William  James.


[part


a  certain  article  he  had  written  for  Mind  in  1885,  and  to
give  the  name  of  Thomas  Brown,  whom  he  had  praised  there.
Neither  could  he  remember  anything  about  the  American
Society  for  Psychical  Research,  as  he  found  it  on  arriving  in
this  country.  He  rightly  mentioned  his  brown  dress-suit  and
his  broad-toed  boots  when  questioned  about  his  costume  at
that  time,  but  these  facts  were  known  to  Mrs.  Piper.  He
named  a  "  Grenier "  whom  my  son  should  have  met  at  Paris,
but  whom  we  could  not  identify.  He  insisted  much  on  my
having  said  of  a  certain  lady  "  God  bless  the  roof  that  covers
her."  I  trust  I  may  have  said  this  of  many  ladies,  but
E.  H.  could  lead  me  to  no  identification.

The  only  queer  thing  that  happened  at  this  sitting  was
the  following  incident.  A  lady  had  sent  me  a  pair  of  gloves
as  an  "  influence "  to  elicit,  if  possible,  a  message  from  her
husband,  who  had  recently  committed  suicide.  I  put  the  gloves
into  Mrs.  Piper's  hand,  naturally  without  a  word  of  information
about  the  case,  when  "  Hodgson,"  who  had  been  speaking,
said,  with  a  rather  startling  change  of  his  voice  into  a  serious
and  confidential  tone,  that  he  had  just  seen  the  father  (known
to  us  both  in  life)  of  a  young  man  who  a  few  years  before
had  made  away  with  himself.  "  I  never  knew  it  till  I  came
over  here.  I  think  they  kept  it  very  quiet,  but  it  is  true,
and  it  hastened  the  father's  coming."  The  apparent  suggestion
of  a  suicide,  even  though  it  were  another  one,  by  the  gloves,
and  the  instantaneous  change  of  tone  in  the  communicator,
forcibly  suggested  to  me  the  notion  that  the  gloves  were
shedding  an  influence  of  the  kind  called  "  psychometric."  The
facts  given  by  E.  H.  about  the  suicide  were  veridical ;  but,
with  the  possibilities  of  leakage  in  the  case,  they  cannot
count  in  any  way  as  evidential.

After  middling  or  poor  sittings  like  these  of  my  own,  it
seems  hardly  worth  while  to  quote  a  bad  one,  to  show  the
full  range  of  the  phenomenon.  Were  I  to  do  so,  an  appropriate
one  for  the  purpose  would  be  that  of  Miss  Anne  Putnam.
There  is  no  doubt  that  certain  persons  are  good  "  sitters "
naturally,  while  others  seem  to  impede  the  telepathic  flow.
On  certain  days,  also,  communication  may  be  less  free.
Hodgson  had  sent  repeated  messages  to  the  Putnams  to  come


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson-Control.  99


and  talk  with  him,  and  he  had  been  so  extremely  intimate  a
member  of  their  family  group,  that  the  best  results  might
have  been  expected.  Miss  Putnam's  sitting,  but  for  one  item
(see  below,  p.  114),  was  nevertheless  extremely  poor;  and  Dr.
James  Putnam's  was  hardly  to  be  called  good,  although  he  was
introduced  to  Mrs.  Piper  by  name.  The  sitter's  difficulty  in
reading  the  written  record  may  perhaps  account  for  R.  H.'s
lack  of  fluency  in  this  latter  case.  There  was  one  apparently
supernormal  item  which  unfortunately  I  must  omit.

I  will  end  my  specimens  by  some  extracts  from  two  sittings
of  Miss  M.  Bergman  [pseudonym].  Miss  Bergman  had  been
in  previous  years  an  excellent  sitter,  and  was  known  by  name
to  Mrs.  Piper.  She  dwelt  in  another  state,  and  her  social
connections  were  not  in  Massachusetts.  At  her  first  visit,
December  31st,  1907,  the  communications  were  in  writing  and
she  had  much  difficulty  in  deciphering  them.  At  the  second
sitting,  January  1st,  1908,  the  voice  was  used  and  things  ran
much  more  smoothly.

At  the  first  sitting  E.  H.  quickly  appeared,  spoke  of  having
seen  two  brothers  of  the  sitter  in  the  spirit-world  (names
known  to  trance-personalities,  and  non-evidential),  made  a
wrong  statement  about  Christmas  at  the  cemetery,  and  then,
being  asked  to  recall  his  meetings  with  Miss  Bergman  on
earth,  said :

I  will.  Do  you  remember  one  evening  when  I  came  to
the  hotel  where  you  were  staying  aud  I  sat  and  told
you  of  my  experiences  till  it  got  very  late  and  I  asked
you  if  you  would  not  [illegible]  I  told  you  so  very
many  jokes,  you  and  Miss  Pope  were  convulsed  with
laughter  over  it.  [Correct,  Hotel  Bellevue,  Boston,
March  1905.— M.  B.]

After  a  while,  Hodgson  reappears,  saying :

Do  you  remember  my  telling  you  about  my  German  friends  1
Miss  B.  No.

Perhaps  Miss  Pope  remembers.

[I  found  later  that  Miss  Pope  well  remembered  Dr.  Hodg-
son's telling  about  his  "German  friends"  and  that  it  was


100  Professor  William  James.  [part

that  which  "  convulsed  us  with  laughter "  the  evening-
he  had  stayed  so  late  when  calling  at  our  hotel.  At
this  point  I  had  become  so  discouraged  by  the  great
difficulty  of  reading  the  writing  and  the  confusion  in
making  things  clear  that  I  felt  very  indifferent  and
inert  in  mind. — M.  B.]

Bosh.

Miss  B.  What  do  you  mean  by  that  1

You  understand  well.
Miss  B.  Bosh  ?

Yes,  I  say  bosh. BOSH  BOSH
Miss  B.  What  do  you  mean  by  that  ?

Oh  I  say  it  is  all  bosh.
Miss  B.  What  is  bosh  1

Why  the  way  you  understand. It  is  simply  awful.
Miss  B.  That  sounds  like  you,  Dr.  Hodgson.

I  could  shake  you.
Miss  B.  How  can  I  do  better  ?

Put  all  your  wits  to  it,  you  have  plenty  of  them.
Miss  B.  I  will  do  my  best. Go  on.

Do. Do  you  remember  I  used  to  chaff  you.
Miss  B.  Indeed  I  do.

Well  I  am  still  chaffing  you  a  bit  just  for  recognition.
Miss  B.  It  helps.

Amen. Now  you  are  waking  up  a  bit.
Miss  B.  I  am.

Capital.  So  am  I.  Don't  you  remember  I  told  you  I
would  show  you  how  to  manage  if  I  ever  came  over
before  you  did.


LVIII.]


Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  101


Miss  B.  Indeed  I  do. [Sitter  had  often  heard  Dr. Hodgson  say
this.] 1

Well  now  I  am  trying  to  show  you.  I  used  to  scold  you
right  and  left  and  I  shall  have  to  keep  it  up,  I  think,
unless  you  do  better.

Miss  B.  I  deserve  it.

If  you  do  not  who  does  1

Miss  B.  You  are  your  old  self.

Oh  I  am  the  [two  words  not  deciphered]  I  was.  You'll
find  it  out  before  I  finish.

Miss  B.  Have  you  a  message  for  Theo  [Miss  Theodate  Pope]  1

Yes  indeed  give  her  my  love  and  tell  her  I  am  not  going
to  forsake  her.  I  do  not  think  she  has  been  keeping
straight  to  the  mark.

Miss  B.  What  do  you  mean  by  that'!

I  think  she  has  been  getting  a  little  mixed  up  in  her
thoughts  and  ideas  of  us  over  here.  I  am  the  same
old  sixpence  and  I  wish  she  were  the  same.  I  want
to  see  her  very  much.

["  Theo "  had  had  no  sitting  for  a  long  time,  her  interest
being  lessened  by  the  circumstance  that  records  of
several  sittings  had  not  been  kept  systematically,  as
before  Dr.  Hodgson's  death.  At  this  point  the  hand
wrote  comments  relating  to  circumstances  which  had
arisen  in  Theo's  life  since  Dr.  Hodgson's  death.  These
comments  were  singularly  appropriate. — M.  B.]

At  the  second  sitting,  when  11.  H.  appeared,  the  voice  began
speaking  very  rapidly  and  heartily.

Well,  well,  well,  this  is  Miss  Bergman ;  hullo !  I  felt  as
though  I  could  shake  you  yesterday.

1The'  bracketed comments  in  the third  person  are  Ly Miss  Bergman
herself.


102


Professor  William  James.


[part


Miss  B.  Well,  I  was  pretty  stupid. I  think  we  can  do  better  to-day.

Please  repeat  some  of  the  messages  you  wrote  and  left
sealed  to  be  opened  after  your  death.

One  message  I  gave  to  Will.  If  I  remember  correctly  it
was  "  there  is  no  death."

Miss  B.  Who  is  Will  1

Will  James.

Miss  B.  Are  you  sure  you  are  now  giving  this  quotation  correctly
as  you  wrote  it?

Of  course  I  am.  [There  followed  an  outburst  spoken  so
rapidly  that  the  sitter  could  not  get  it  down,  declaring
that  the  speaker  had  not  lost  his  memory  any  more
than  had  the  sitter,  etc.]

Miss  B.  Did  you  leave  other  messages  ?

Yes,  another.  "Out  of  life" — how  did  I  quote  it — "Out  of
life,  into  life  eternal."  ...  I  know  positively  what  I
wrote.  I  have  promised  Piddington  to  repeat  through
Mrs.  Verrall  all  the  messages  that  I  give  through  this
light.  Every  message  given  at  this  light  must  be  repeated
through  Mrs.  Verrall  before  any  one  opens  any  of  my
sealed  messages.  Mrs.  Verrall  is  the  clearest  light  except
this  which  I  have  found.  Moreover  she  has  a  beautiful
character  and  is  perfectly  honest.  That  is  saying  a  great
deal.  [The  reader  will  notice  that  Mis.  Piper  had  been
in  England  and  returned,  at  the  date  of  the  sittings  with
Miss  Bergman. — W.  J.]  Do  you  remember  my  description
of  luminiferous  ether,  and  of  my  conception  of  what  this
life  was  like  1  I  have  found  it  was  not  an  erroneous
imagination.

[The  above  words  were  spoken  with  great  animation  and
interest.  The  sitter,  although  remembering  Dr.  Hodgson's
description  of  "luminiferous  ether,"  felt  that  she  was  not
qualified  to  enter  into  a  conversation  of  this  character  and
began  to  say  something  else. The  voice  interrupted  her :]

It  is  never  the  way  to  get  the  best  results  by  peppering
with  questions.  Intelligences  come  with  minds  filled  and
questions  often  put  everything  out  of  their  thought.  I


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  103


am  now  going  to  give  you  a  test.  Mention  it  to  no  one,
not  even  to  Theo.  Write  down,  seal  and  give  to  Alice
or  to  William.

[Directions  here  followed  regarding  such  a  test.  After  these
directions  the  voice  spontaneously  took  up  another
subject.]

Your  school  was — [correct  name  given],  was  it  not  1  [Already
known  to  controls,  but  probably  not  to  Mrs.  Piper  when
awake.]  You  are  changing,  your  brother  tells  me,  and  he
is  very  pleased.  He  thinks  you  are  going  to  broaden  out
and  do  a  better  work.  He  is  very  glad.  Do  not  under-
take too  much. Make  use  of  assistance  in  the  work.

Miss  B.  Where  were  your  lodgings  in  Boston  1

Well,  now,  that  has  brought  back  to  my  mind  Boston—.
Certainly — there  were  some  doctors  in  my  building —
George  Street — no — not  George — Charles  Street — I — I
believe.  Now  let  me  see,  Charles  Street.  Up  three
flights,  I  think  I  was  on  the  top.  [Correct,  but  known
to  Mrs.  Piper.— W.  J.]

Miss  B.  Do  you  know  when  I  was  at  your  lodgings  ?

You  were  there  1 Didn't  we  have  tea  together  ?  [False.]
Miss  B.  No.

Did  you  come  and  read  papers  ?
Miss  B.  No.

Did  you  go  there  after  I  passed  out1?

Miss  B.  Yes. I  went  to  get  some  articles  belonging  to  you,  and
did  them  up  in  rubber  cloth.

Capital,  that  is  good.  Lodge  and  Piddington  consider  it  good
when  I  can't  remember  what  did  not  happen  !  What  was
the  name  of  that  girl  who  used  to  work  in  my  office  1

Miss  B.  I  do  not  remember.

Edmund — Edwards— I  am  thinking  of  her  going  to  my  rooms
to  read  papers.  [Her  name  was  Edmunds,  known  to  the
medium. — W.  J.]


104


Professor  William  James.


[part


Now  I  want  to  ask  you  if  you  remember  Australia,  remember
my  riding  horseback  1  Remember  my  telling  you  of
riding  through  the  park  in  the  early  morning  with  the
dew  on  the  grass  and  how  beautiful  it  was.

Miss  B.  Yes,  yes,  I  remember  that  very  well. That  is  fine.

I  am  Richard  Hodgson.  /  am  he.  I  am  telling  you  what
I  remember.  I  told  you,  too,  about  my  preaching.  I
believed  I  was  in  the  wrong  and  I  stopped.  It  hurt
some  of  my  people  to  have  me.

Miss  B.  Tell  me  about  your  riding.

I  remember  telling  you  about  my  dismounting  and  sitting
and  drinking  in  the  beauty  of  the  morning.

Miss  B.  Tell  me  any  experiences  that  befell  you  while  riding.

Oh,  I  told  you  about  the  experience  with  the  fiery  horse.
You  remember  he  dismounted  me.  It  was  the  first
experience  I  had  in  seeing  stars.  I  lost  consciousness.
I  experienced  passing  into  this  life.  I  remember  my
being  unconscious  and  recovering  consciousness.  I  re-
member telling  you  this  at  the  hotel.

[Sitter's  mind  was  filled  here  with  recollections  of  how  Dr..
Hodgson  had  once  told  her  all  this  when  talking  with
her  at  the  Parker  House  in  Boston,  in  1 904.  He  had
related  just  this  experience  and  had  said  that  when  he
recovered  consciousness  after  being  unconscious  for  some
time,  it  seemed  to  him  he  had  been  in  a  spiritual  universe.
He  also  told  her  at  that  time  of  his  having  given  testimony
in  Methodist  meeting  as  a  lad  in  his  teens,  and  after-
wards giving  it  up  because  he  became  skeptical  in  matters
of  faith.  This,  he  said,  had  troubled  some  of  his  kinsfolk.
— M.  B.]

Miss  B.  What  did  you  use  to  order  for  luncheon  when  you  lunched
with  us  at  the  hotel  1

Oh,  I  have  forgotten  all  about  eating — m — m — I  was  very
fond  of  protose.

[The  sitter  did  not  have  "  protose  "  in  mind,  but  remembers
Dr.  Hodgson  sometimes  askiug  the  waiter  for  one  of  the


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson-Control.  105


prepared  breakfast  foods,  but  does  not  recall  its  name.
— M.  B.]

When  I  found  the  light  it  looked  like  a  tremendous  window,
open  window.  The  canopy — do  you  remember  how  they
used  to  talk  about  the  canopy  1  It  is  an  ethereal  veil.
If  your  spiritual  eyes  were  open  you  could  see  through
this  veil  and  see  me  here  talking  to  you  perfectly.

[The  sitter  did  not  care  to  talk  about  this,  although  she
remembered  perfectly  Dr.  Hodgson's  telling  her  "how
they  talked  about  the  canopy,"  so  she  asked  a  question
referring  to  the  intimate  personal  affairs  of  one  of  her
friends.  The  replies  showed  a  strange  knowledge  of  the
circumstances  known  only  to  the  sitter  and  her  friend,
and  were  entirely  a  propos.  The  voice  then  went  on
speaking,  and  burst  out  with  what  follows,  in  a  tone  of
mingled  indignation  and  amusement:]

Will  thinks  I  ought  to  walk  into  the  room  bodily  and  shake
hands  with  him.  I  heard  him  say  "  Hodgson  isn't  so
much  of  a  power  on  the  other  side."  What  does  he
think  a  man  in  the  ethereal  body  is  going  to  do  with  a
man  in  the  physical  body  1  [Seems  to  show  some  super-
normal knowledge  of  the  state  of  my  mind. — W.  J.]

Miss  B.  To  whom  did  you  speak  first  from  that  world?

Theodate,  yes,  Theodate,  she  was  the  one  to  whom  I  first
spoke.  [Correct.]

[The  sitter  now  asked  to  talk  with  another  spirit,  and  reply
was  made  that  R.  H.  would  continue  talking  until  he
came.  E.  H.  did  this  by  again  referring  to  the  accident
in  the  park.  He  spoke  of  being  seated  when  he  first
told  us  of  the  incident,  and  of  getting  up  and  walking
around  the  room  as  he  talked.  He  said  it  chanced  that
this  incident  had  been  told  to  few  people,  and  again
dwelt  upon  having  seen  stars  after  falling,  having  been
unconscious,  having  had  visions  while  unconscious,  as  if
the  spirit  had  left  the  body  and  passed  into  another
world.  All  of  this  corresponded  exactly  with  fact.  Dr.
Hodgson  had  commenced  the  story  seated,  and  had  risen
and  walked  about  as  he  talked. — M.  B.]


106


Professor  William  James.


[part


The  accurate  knowledge  thus  displayed  of  E.  H.'s  conversa-
tions at  the  hotels  in  Boston  where  the  ladies  stayed,  seems
to  me  one  of  the  most  evidential  items  in  the  whole  series.
It  is  improbable  that  such  unimportant  conversations  should
have  been  reported  by  the  living  E.  H.  to  Mrs.  Piper,  either
awake  or  when  in  trance  with  other  sitters ;  and  to  my  mind
the  only  plausible  explanation  is  supernormal.  Either  it  spells
'  spirit-return,'  or  telepathic  reading  of  the  sitter's  mind  by
the  medium  in  trance.

I  now  pass  to  E.  H.'s

Australian  Eecollections.

E.  H.  has  sent  many  messages,  both  of  affection  and  for  test
purposes,  to  his  sister  Annie  in  Australia.  Mrs.  M.,  Mr.
Piddington,  my  wife,  myself,  Mr.  Dorr,  Miss  Pope,  Miss  Hillard,
all  received  such  messages,  which  were  duly  transmitted  to
the  sister,  on  whose  replies  what  follows  is  based.  Some  of
these  messages  were  too  general  to  serve  as  good  tests  {e.g.  "  Do
you  remember  my  reading  Fenimore  Cooper  ? ") ;  some  had
been  spoken  of  at  previous  trances  (e.g.  "  Cousin  Fred  Hyde,"
"  Q,"  "  fly-the-garter,"  etc.  Compare  report  of  Hodgson's  own
sittings  in  S.P.E.  Proceedings.  Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  60-67);  some
awoke  no  corresponding  memory  in  Miss  Hodgson.  There
are  too  many  of  them  to  quote  in  full,  so  I  will  go  rapidly
over  the  more  significant  ones,  taking  them  in  their  time-order.

Melbourne ;  Latrobe  Street ;  bush  in  yetrcl  with  red  berries.
[Correct,  as  to  town,  street,  and  bush,  berries  not  recalled  by
Miss  H.  Had  E.  H.  ever  mentioned  Latrobe  Street  and  bush
to  Mrs.  Piper  ? — of  course  she  knew  of  Melbourne.]

Charley  Roberts  (or  Eobertson)  at  the  University.  [Not
recalled. There  was  a  Eoberts  at  E.  H.'s  school.]

Little  shed  where  boys  used  to  play.  [Correct.]

Sister  Rebecca. [Known  in  previous  trances.]

Plums  in  back-ya.rd. [False  ?]

R.  H.,  ten  years  old,  sat  with  knees  crossed  at  church,  and  his
mother  made  him  sit  straight. Sat  on  his  hat  to  keep  other  boys
from  getting  it. A  man  named  Hurley  made  him  stop.  [Pro-
bably untrue.]

Sister  Annie  caught  him  reading  in  bed,  and  put  out  the  light.
[Not  remembered.]

Riding  horseback.  [Correct.]


lviil] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  107


Holidays  spent  at  the  Hydes '.  [Correct.]
Kendall. [Name  not  remembered.]

Great  plates  of  peas  reused  in  our  garden.  [Not  particularly
recalled.]

Played  Jly-the-gartcr  with  Tom  [his  brother],  Jack  Munroe,  and
Roberts.  [No  reply  from  Miss  Hodgson  about  Jack  Munroe — •
the  rest  true.]

Feither's  mines  einel  losses.  [Correct.]

Description  of  paterncd  house.  [Wrong.]

Sister  used  to  teach  him.  [False.]

Father  nervous  over  children's  noise.  Motlier  used  to  say  "Let
them  enjoy  themselves." [Not  remembered.]

Sister  helped  him  to  escape  punishments.  [Possibly,  when  very
young.]

Read  Fenimore  Cooper. [Possibly  true.]

Sunday-school  poem  abotit  stars.  [R.  H.  wrote  juvenile  poems
— one  about  "  stars  "  not  remembered.]

The  account  to  Miss  Bergman  of  E.  H.  being  thrown  from
his  horse  we  have  already  seen  (above,  p.  104).  Miss  Annie
Hodgson  writes  of  the  whole  collection  of  messages  sent  to
her :  "  To  my  mind  there  is  nothing  striking  in  any  of  the
statements."  She  propounded  in  turn  three  test-questions  of
her  own  to  which  no  answer  was  forthcoming ;  and  E.  H.,
questioned  by  a  sitter,  couldn't  remember  the  name  of  his
schoolmaster  in  Melbourne.  In  interpreting  responsibly  these
Australian  messages,  tapping  the  mind  of  the  sitters  and  normal
acquaintance  with  the  facts  on  Mrs.  Piper's  part 1  must  probably

]I  wrote  to  Mrs.  Piper  for  the  names  of  H.'s  Australian  relatives.  Here  is
her  answer,  which  I  take  to  be  sincere :

"Boston,  Jan.  11,  1909.  Dear  Mr.  James, — In  replying  to  your  letter  of
this  morning  I  will  say  I  am  very  sorry  I  cannot  help  you  in  finding  Dr.
Hodgson's  relatives  in  Australia,  as  I  do  not  know  any  of  them  or  anything
about  them,  except  that  he  had  one  sister  whose  Christian  name  was  Annie,
and  this  was  unknown  to  me  until  some  time  after  Dr.  Hodgson's  death.
Mrs.  [Lyman]  might  be  able  to  tell  you,  as  it  was  she  who  told  me.  She  had
some  photographs  of  Dr.  H.  which  I  admired,  and  she  said  she  would  give  me
one  later,  but  those  she  had  she  was  going  to  send  to  his  sister  Annie  in
Australia.  I  was  struck  by  the  familiarity  with  which  she  used  the  name
and  concluded  that  she  must  have  known  her.  Dr.  Hodgson  never  talked  with
me  about  his  relatives  or  anybody  else's  ;  on  the  contrary  he  most  carefully
avoided  all  such  subjects  when  talking  with  me.  I  haven't  the  slightest  idea
who  'Q.'  was,  I  have  never  heard  the  name  so  far  as  I  am  aware.

"I  am  sure  my  daughters  do  not  know  any  more  than  I  do  about  Dr.  Hodgson's
family. — I  am  very  sincerely  yours,  L.  E.  Piper."


108


Professor  William  James.


[part


be  excluded  as  explanations.  If  a  naturalistic  interpretation
were  insisted  on,  fictitious  construction  of  incidents  probable  in
any  boyhood,  and  accidental  coincidence  of  a  certain  number
of  these  with  fact,  would  have  to  be  chiefly  relied  upon.
Against  fictitious  construction  is  the  fact  that  almost  none  of
the  names  that  had  figured  in  Hodgson's  own  sittings  in  1887
and  1888  (S.P.E.  Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  60-67)  were  used
for  reproduction.  "  Enid,"  "  Ellen,"  "  Eric,"  were  added  rightly  ;
and  the  three  names  of  "  Q."  (Hodgson  had  apparently  given
only  the  first  one  to  Phinuit — see  loc.  cit.,  p.  60)  slipped  out
in  full,  as  it  were  inadvertently,  on  May  29th,  1906,  Hodgson
insisting  at  the  same  time  that  her  identity  must  never  be
revealed  to  the  outside  world.  The  possibility  that  Hodgson
had  given  "  Q.'s "  entire  name  to  later  controls  than  Phinuit
cannot,  however,  be  eliminated.

On  the  whole  this  series  baffles  me  as  much  as  the  rest.
It  may  be  spirit-return  !  it  may  be  something  else  !  Leaks  of
various  sorts  are  so  probable  that  no  sharp  conclusion  can  be
drawn.

I  think  that  by  this  time  the  reader  has  enough  documentary
material  to  gain  an  adequate  impression  of  the  case.  Additional
citations  of  sittings  would  introduce  no  new  factors  of  solution.
The  entire  lot  of  reports,  read  verbatim,  would,  it  is  true,  give
a  greater  relative  impression  of  hesitation,  repetition,  and  boggling
generally ;  and  the  "  rigorously  scientific  "  mind  would  of  course
rejoice  to  find  its  own  explanatory  category,  "  Bosh,"  greatly
confirmed  thereby.  But  the  more  serious  critic  of  the  records
will  hold  his  judgment  in  suspense  ;  or,  if  he  inclines  to  the
spiritistic  solution,  it  will  be  because  an  acquaintance  with  the
phenomenon  on  a  much  larger  scale  has  altered  the  balance
of  presumptions  in  his  mind,  and  because  spirit-return  has
come  to  seem  no  impermissible  thing  to  his  sense  of  the
natural  dramatic  probabilities.

Before  indulging  in  some  final  reflections  of  my  own  on
Nature's  possibilities,  I  will  cite  a  few  additional  evidential
points.  I  will  print  them  in  no  order,  numbering  them  as
they  occur.

(1)  Eirst  of  all,  several  instances  of  knowledge  that  was
veridical  and  seemed  unquestionably  supernormal. These  were


lviil] Report  on  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson-Control.  109


confidential  remarks,  some  of  which  naturally  won't  bear  quota-
tion. One  of  them,  plausible  after  the  fact,  could  hardly  have
been  thought  of  by  any  one  before  it.  Another  would,  I  think,
hardly  have  been  constructed  by  Mrs.  Piper.  A  third  was  to
the  effect  that  E.  H.  thought  now  differently  about  a  certain
lady — she  was  less  "  selfish  "  than  he  had  called  her  in  a
certain  private  conversation  of  which  he  reminded  the  sitter.

(2)  Again,  there  was  intense  solicitude  shown  about  keeping
the  records  of  a  certain  former  sitter  from  publicity.  It
sounded  very  natural  and  Hodgsonian,  but  the  trance-Mrs.
Piper  might  also  have  deemed  it  necessary.

(3)  The  following  incident  belongs  to  my  wife's  and  Miss
Putnam's  sitting  of  June  12th,  1906  :— Mrs.  J.  said:  "Do
you  remember  what  happened  in  our  library  one  night  when
you  were  arguing  with  Margie  [Mrs.  J.'s  sister]  ?  " — "  I  had
hardly  said  '  remember ',"  she  notes,  "  in  asking  this  question,
when  the  medium's  arm  was  stretched  out  and  the  fist  shaken
threateningly,"  then  these  words  came :

R.  H.  Yes,  I  did  this  in  her  face.  I  couldn't  help  it.  She  was  so
impossible  to  move.  It  was  wrong  of  me,  but  I  couldn't
help  it.

[I  myself  well  remember  this  fist-shaking  incident,  and  how
we  others  laughed  over  it  after  Hodgson  had  taken  his  leave.
What  had  made  him  so  angry  was  my  sister-in-law's  defence
of  some  slate-writing  she  had  seen  in  California. — W.  J.] 1

1  Prima  facie,  the  following  incident  also  sounds  evidential:
R.  H. Ask  Margie  if  she  remembers  chaffing me about sitting  up  late  to
entertain  people.

This  happened,  as  I  well  remember,  at  Chocorua,  but  at  this  distance  of
time  it  is  impossible  to  be  sure  whether  it  was  not  on  the  occasion  when
Hodgson  and  Mrs.  Piper  were  there  as  visitors  together.  The  evidence  is
therefore  "leaky."

Another  case  of  leaky  evidence  is  the  following,  which  prima  facie  seems
striking  enough  :

In  Hodgson's  rooms  a  quantity  of  MS.  was  found,  in  a  cipher  probably
invented  by  himself.  In  the  sitting  of  Jan.  23rd,  this  cipher  was  spontaneously
mentioned  by  the  control  :

R.  H.  Is  this  the  Piper-case  ?  the  Piper  phenomenon  ?  .  .  .  There  are  some
private  records  which  I  should  not  wish  to  have  handled.  Let
George  and  Piddington  go  through  them  and  return  them.  The


110


Professor  William  James.


[part


(4)  At  a  written  sitting  at  which  I  was  present  (July  29th,
1907)  the  following  came:

You  seem  to  think  I  have  lost  my  equilibrium.  Nothing  of
the  sort.

W.  J. You've  lost  your  handwriting,  gone  from  bad  to  worse.

I  never  had  any  to  lose.

Mrs.  M.  It  was  a  perfectly  beautiful  handwriting  [ironical].

Ahem  !  Ahem  !  William,  do  you  remember  my  writing
you  a  long  letter  once  when  you  were  ill  ?  You  had
to  get  Margaret  [my  daughter — W.  J.]  to  help  you  read
it  and  you  wrote  me  it  was  detestable  writing  and  you
hoped  I  would  try  and  write  plainer  to  a  friend  who-
was  ill,  next  time.  How  I  laughed  over  that,  but  I  was
really  sorry  to  make  you  wade  through  it.  Ask  Mar-
garet if  she  remembers  it.  [Perfectly — it  was  in  London.
— M.  M.  J.]

(5)  Another  item  which  seems  to  mean  either  telepathy  or
survival  of  E.  H.,  came  out  at  a  sitting  of  Miss  Pope's  on
Feb.  7th,  1906.

I  am  not  going  to  make  a  botch  of  anything  if  I  can  help
it.  Not  I.  Do  you  remember  my  telling  you  what  I
would  do  if  I  got  over  here  first.

Miss  P.  You  said  several  things  about  it.

I  said  if  I  couldn't  do  better  than  some  of  them  I  was
mistaken.  I  said  some  of  them  were  awful.  Eemember  ?
And  if  I  based  my  opinion  on  what  they  tried  to  give
I  should  expect  to  be  said  to  be  in  the  trick.  Remember?

Miss  P.  Of  course  I  remember.

cipher — let  Harry  and  George  take  care  of  them.  That  was  my
cipher  and  no  one  living  can  read  it.  I  shall  explain  it  later.
[He  never  has  explained  it,  though  it  was  spoken  of  later  several
times.]

I  think  it  probable  here  that  a  question  about  the  cipher  from  the  sitter,
preceding  the  control's  reference  to  it,  has  been  accidentally  omitted  from
the  record.  If  so,  there  is  nothing  remarkable  in  the  incident.  The  record
was  not  stenographic,  and  neither  my  wife  nor  the  son  who  took  the  notes,
is  now  confident  that  the  cjuestion  was  not  asked.


lviii.] Re-port  on  Mrs.  Piper  s  Hodgson-Control.  1 1 1

Do  you  remember  a  story  I  told  you  about  my  old
friend  Sidgwick  1  Don't  you  remember  how  I  imitated
him  1

Miss  P.  Yes,  what  word  did  you  say  about  Sidgwick  % [I  had  not
deciphered  the  word  "imitated." — T.  P.]

If  I  believed  in  it  they  would  say  I  was  in  the  trick.

[Still  not  understanding,  T.  P.  said  :]

Miss  P.  What  about  Sidgwick?

I  imitated  him.
Miss  P.  What  did  you  do  1

I  said  s-s-s-should-be  i-n  th-e  t-r-i-c-k.
Miss  P.  I  remember  perfectly,  that's  fine.

No  one  living  could  know  this  but  yourself  and  Mary  Bergman.

[It  was  most  interesting  to  see  the  hand  write  these  words
to  imitate  stuttering,  and  then  for  the  first  time  it
flashed  over  me  what  he  had  some  time  ago  told  Mary
and  me  about  Sidgwick,  imitating  at  the  same  time
Sidgwick's  stammer :  "  H-Hodgson,  if  you  b-b-believe  in
it,  you'll  b-be  said  to  be  in  the  t-trick."  I  cannot
quote  the  exact  words,  but  this  is  very  nearly  right.

Sidgwick  referred  to  Hodgson's  belief  that  he  was  actually
communicating,  through  Mrs.  Piper,  with  spirits.  He
meant  that  people  not  only  would  not  believe  what
Hodgson  gave  as  evidence,  but  would  think  he  was  in
collusion  with  Mrs.  Piper. — T.  P.]

(6)  At  a  sitting  of  Miss  Pope's  and  mine,  Oct.  24th,  1906,
E.  H.  said  of  Miss  P. — "  She  goes  on  and  puts  on  bays  and
piazzas,  changes  her  piazzas,  her  house,  makes  it  all  over
again."  As  this  was  literally  true,  and  as  no  one  in  Boston
could  well  have  known  about  it,  it  seemed  like  mind-reading.
[E.  H.'s  saying  is  possibly  explained,  however,  by  a  previous
sitting  (April  16  th)  of  Miss  Pope's,  in  which  another  of
Mrs.  Piper's  controls  had  already  of  his  own  accord  made
the  same  veridical  remark,  so  that  the  fact  had  got,  however
inexplicably,  into  the  trance-consciousness,  and  could  be  used
by  the  controls  indiscriminately.]


112  Professor  William  James.


[part


(7)  On  Jan.  30,  1906,  Mrs.  M.  had  a  sitting.  Mrs.  M.
said :

Do  you  remember  our  last  talk  together,  at  N.,  and  how,
in  coming  home  we  talked  about  the  work  1

(R.  H.)  Yes,  yes.

Mks.  M.  And  I  said  if  we  had  a  hundred  thousand  dollars —

Buying  Billy  ! !
Mrs.  M.  Yes,  Dick,  that  was  it — "  buying  Billy."

Buying  only  Billy  1
Mrs.  M.  Oh  no — I  wanted  Schiller  too. How  well  you  remember !

Mrs.  M.,  before  E.  H.'s  death,  had  had  dreams  of  extending
the  American  Branch's  operations  by  getting  an  endowment,
and  possibly  inducing  Prof.  Newbold  (Billy)  and  Dr.  Schiller  to
co-operate  in  work.  She  naturally  regards  this  veridical  recall,
by  the  control,  of  a  private  conversation  she  had  had  with
Hodgson  as  very  evidential  of  his  survival.

(8)  To  the  same  sitter,  on  a  later  occasion  (March  5th,
1906),  the  control  showed  veridical  knowledge  of  R.  H.'s  pipes,
of  which  two  had  been  presents  from  herself.  She  asks  him
at  this  sitting  about  the  disposal  of  some  of  his  effects.  He
mentions  books  and  photographs  in  a  general  way,  then  says :

I  want  Tom  [his  brother]  to  have  my  pipes, all  except
any  that  nry  friends  wish.

Mrs.  M.  Do  you  remember  any  special  ones  1

Yes,  I — the  one  you — [The  hand  points  to  me,  etc.- —
Mrs.  M.]
Mrs.  M.  ^Vhich  1

Meerschaum. [I  gave  R.  H.  a  meerschaum  pipe  some  years
ago.— M.]

Mrs.  M.  You  do  remember  ! Give it  to  any  one  you  would  best
like  to.

....  I  want  Billy  James  to  have  it. Will  you  give  it  to
him  % Do  you  remember,  etc.  1


lviil] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  113


Mrs.  M.  Do  you  remember  any  other  special  pipe  ?

You  mean  with  a  long  stem? Certainly. What  about  it?

Mrs.  M.  Can  you  recall  anything  special  about  it  1

What?  You  mean  the  one  you  gave  me  long  ago,  some
time  ago,  not  the  recent  one  ?

Mrs.  M.  The  last  one  I  gave  you.

Last  season,  last  season,  yes.

Mrs.  M.  A  year  or  two  ago,  I  think  it  was.

I  recall  it  well.  You  gave  me  what  I  call  a  briar  pipe.  [A
number  of  years  ago  I  gave  R.  H.  a  briar-root  pipe,
with  rather  a  long  stem,  bound  round  the  bowl  with
silver,  but  this  was  not  the  one  of  which  I  was
thinking. — M.]

Mrs.  M.  The  one  I  mean  was  an  odd-looking  pipe.

I  know  it  well,  a  big  large  bowl.

Mrs.  M.  Wasn't  that  the  meerschaum?

Yes,  Billy  is  to  have  it.  The  face  one  I  want  Tom  to  have.
I  want  my  brother  Tom  to  have — face  on  it.  The  whole
thing  was  a  face. I  mean  the  pipe  bowl.

[I  had  seen  such  a  pipe,  the  whole  thing  a  face,  at  the
Charles  Street  rooms  a  short  time  before.  I  never
remember  seeing  Mr.  Hodgson  use  it.  The  pipe  of
which  I  was  thinking  was  a  carved  Swiss  pipe  which
he  evidently  does  not  remember. — M.]

(9)  Among  my  own  friends  in  the  Harvard  faculty  who
had  "  passed  over "  the  most  intimate  was  F.  J.  Child.
Hodgson  during  life  had  never  met  Professor  Child.  It  looks
to  me  like  a  supernormal  reading  of  my  own  mental  states  (for  I
had  often  said  that  the  best  argument  I  knew  for  an  immortal
life  was  the  existence  of  a  man  who  deserved  one  as  well
as  Child  did)  that  a  message,  to  me  about  him  should  have
been  spontaneously  produced  by  the  E.  H.  control.  I  had
assuredly  never  mentioned  C.  to  Mrs.  Piper,  had  never  before

H


114


Professor  William  James.


[part


had  a  message  from  his  spirit,  and  if  I  had  expressed  my
feelings  about  him  to  the  living  E.  H.,  that  would  make  the
matter  only  more  evidential.

The  message  through  E.  H.  came  to  Miss  Bobbins,  June
6th,  1906.

There  is  a  man  named  Child  passed  out  suddenly,  wants  to
send  his  love  to  William  and  his  wife  in  the  body.

Miss  R.  Child's  wife  ?

Yes,  in  the  body.  He  says  ...  I  hope  L.  will  understand
what  I  mean.  I  [i.e.  E.  H.]  don't  know  who  L.  is.
[L.  is  the  initial  of  the  Christian  name  of  Professor
Child's  widow.— W.  J.]

(10)  Miss  Putnam  had  been  consulted  about  the  disposition
of  certain  matters  left  undone  by  Hodgson  at  the  date  of  his
death.  At  her  sitting,  much  later,  these  words  came  out.  I
copy  the  record  as  it  stands :

R.  H.  Did  you  get  my  Christmas  present  1  [A  calendar  addressed
by  him  to  me  before  his  death. — A.  C.  P.]  I  heard
you  in  the  body  say  you  didn't  want  them  sent.  [Mr.
Hodgson  had  left  some  Christmas  cards  addressed,  but
unenclosed.  I  had  expressed  unwillingness  to  mail  them
unenveloped. — A.  C.  P.]

(11)  Mrs.  M.,  on  March  30th,  placed  a  volume  in  manu-
script in  the  medium's  hands. E.  H.  immediately  wrote :

Well,  well. Isn't  that  the  book  I  lent  you  1
Mrs.  M.  Yes. You  loaned  it  to  me  at  C  .

I  remember,  but  you  have  it  still !

Mrs.  M.  I  returned  it  to  you.

Yes,  but  isn't  it  the  one  I  loaned  you  1  And  the  poems  I
used  to  love  so  well,  I  recall.  [The  book  contained
poems  copied  or  composed  by  Hodgson,  and  after  having
been  returned  to  him  ere  he  died,  had  been  taken  from
among  his  effects  and  brought  to  the  sitting  by  Mrs.  M.]


lviil] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  115


These  eleven  incidents  sound  more  like  deliberate  truth-
telling,  whoever  the  truth-teller  be,  than  like  lucky  flukes.  On
the  whole  they  make  on  me  the  impression  of  being  super-
normal. I  confess  that  I  should  at  this  moment  much  like
to  know  (although  I  have  no  means  of  knowing)  just  how
all  the  documents  I  am  exhibiting  in  this  report  will  strike
readers  who  are  either  novices  in  the  field,  or  who  consider
the  subject  in  general  to  be  pure  "  rot "  or  "  bosh."  It  seems
to  me  not  impossible  that  a  bosh-philosopher  here  or  there  may
get  a  dramatic  impression  of  there  being  something  genuine
behind  it  all.  Most  of  those  who  remain  faithful  to  the  "  bosh  "-
interpretation  would,  however,  find  plenty  of  comfort  if  they  had
the  entire  mass  of  records  given  them  to  read.  Not  that  I
have  left  things  out  (I  certainly  have  tried  not  to!)  that
would,  if  printed,  discredit  the  detail  of  what  I  cite,  but  I  have
left  out,  by  not  citing  the  whole  mass  of  records,  so  much
mere  mannerism,  so  much  repetition,  hesitation,  irrelevance,
unintelligibility,  so  much  obvious  groping  and  fishing  and
plausible  covering  up  of  false  tracks,  so  much  false  pretension
to  power,  and  real  obedience  to  suggestion,  that  the  stream  of
veridicality  that  runs  throughout  the  whole  gets  lost  as  it
were  in  a  marsh  of  feebleness,  and  the  total  dramatic  effect
on  the  mind  may  be  little  more  than  the  word  "  humbug."
The  really  significant  items  disappear  in  the  total  bulk.
"  Passwords,"  for  example,  and  sealed  messages  are  given  in
abundance,  but  can't  be  found.  (I  omit  these  here,  as  some
of  them  may  prove  veridical  later.)  Preposterous  Latin  sen-
tences are  written,  e.g.  "  Rebus  merica  este  fecrum  " — or  what
reads  like  that  (April  4th,  1906).  Poetry  gushes  out,  but  how
can  one  be  sure  that  Mrs.  Piper  never  knew  it  ?  The  weak
talk  of  the  Imperator-band  about  time  is  reproduced,  as  where
E.  H.  pretends  that  he  no  longer  knows  what  "  seven  minutes  "
mean  (May  14th,  1906).  Names  asked  for  can't  be  given,
etc.,  etc.1  All  this  mass  of  diluting  material,  which  can't  be
reproduced  in  abridgment,  has  its  inevitable  dramatic  effect ;

1  For  instance,  on  July  2nd,  the  sitter  asks  R.  H.  to  name  some  of  his
cronies  at  the  Tavern  Club.  Hodgson  gives  six  names,  only  five  of  which
belonged  to  the  Tavern  Club,  and  those  Ave  were  known  to  the  controls
already.  None  of  them,  I  believe,  were  those  asked  for,  namely,  "names  of
the  men  he  used  to  play  pool  with  or  go  swimming  with  at  Nantasket."  Yet,
as  the  sitter  (Mr.  Dorr)  writes,  "He  failed  to  realize  his  failure."


116


Professor  William  James.


[part


and  if  one  tends  to  hate  the  whole  phenomenon  anyhow  (as  I
confess  that  I  myself  sometimes  do)  one's  judicial  verdict
inclines  accordingly.

Nevertheless,  I  have  to  confess  also  that  the  more  familiar  I
have  become  with  the  records,  the  less  relative  significance  for
my  mind  has  all  this  diluting  material  tended  to  assume.  The
active  cause  of  the  communications  is  on  any  hypothesis  a  will
of  some  kind,  be  it  the  will  of  E.  H.'s  spirit,  of  lower  super-
natural intelligences,  or  of  Mrs.  Piper's  subliminal ;  and  although
some  of  the  rubbish  may  be  deliberately  willed  (certain  hesita-
tions, misspellings,  etc.,  in  the  hope  that  the  sitter  may  give
a  clue,  or  certain  repetitions,  in  order  to  gain  time)  yet  the
major  part  of  it  is  suggestive  of  something  quite  different — as
if  a  will  were  there,  but  a  will  to  say  something  which  the
machinery  fails  to  bring  through.  Dramatically,  most  of  this
"  bosh "  is  more  suggestive  to  me  of  dreaminess  and  mind-
wandering  than  it  is  of  humbug.  Why  should  a  "will  to  deceive  "
prefer  to  give  incorrect  names  so  often,  if  it  can  give  the  true
ones  to  which  the  incorrect  ones  so  frequently  approximate  as
to  suggest  that  they  are  meant  ?  True  names  impress  the  sitter
vastly  more.  Why  should  it  so  multiply  false  "  passwords  "
("  Zeivorn,"  for  example,  above,  p.  86)  and  stick  to  them?
It  looks  to  me  more  like  aiming  at  something  definite,  and
failing  of  the  goal.  Sometimes  the  control  gives  a  message
to  a  distant  person  quite  suddenly,  as  if  for  some  reason  a
resistance  momentarily  gave  way  and  let  pass  a  definite  desire
to  give  such  a  message.  Thus  on  October  1 7th,  "Give  my
love  to  Carl  Putnam,"  a  name  which  neither  Mrs.  Piper  nor
the  sitter  knew,  and  which  popped  in  quite  irrelevantly  to
what  preceded  or  followed.  A  definite  will  is  also  suggested
when  P.  H.  sends  a  message  to  James  Putnam  about  his
"  watch  stopping."  He  sends  it  through  several  sitters  and
sticks  to  it  in  the  face  of  final  denial,  as  if  the  phrase  covered,
however  erroneously,  some  distinct  "  intention  to  recall,"  which
ought  not  to  be  renounced.

That  a  "  will  to  personate "  is  a  factor  in  the  Piper-pheno-
menon, I  fully  believe,  and  I  believe  with  unshakeable  firmness
that  this  will  is  able  to  draw  on  supernormal  sources  of  infor-
mation. It  can  "  tap,"  possibly  the  sitter's  memories,  possibly
those  of  distant  human  beings,  possibly  some  cosmic  reservoir  in


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  117


which  the  memories  of  earth  are  stored,  whether  in  the  shape
of  "  spirits "  or  not.  If  this  were  the  only  will  concerned
in  the  performance,  the  phenomenon  would  be  humbug  pure
and  simple,  and  the  minds  tapped  telepathieally  in  it  would
play  an  entirely  passive  role — that  is,  the  telepathic  data  would
be  fished  out  by  the  personating  will,  not  forced  upon  it  by
desires  to  communicate,  acting  externally  to  itself.

But  it  is  possible  to  complicate  the  hypothesis.  Extraneous
"  wills  to  communicate  "  may  contribute  to  the  results  as  well
as  a  "  will  to  personate,"  and  the  two  kinds  of  will  may
be  distinct  in  entity,  though  capable  of  helping  each  other
out.  The  will  to  communicate,  in  our  present  instance,  would
be,  on  the  pirinia  facie  view  of  it,  the  will  of  Hodgson's  sur-
viving spirit  ;  and  a  natural  way  of  representing  the  process
would  be  to  suppose  the  spirit  to  have  found  that  by  pressing,
so  to  speak,  against  "  the  light,"  it  can  make  fragmentary
gleams  and  flashes  of  what  it  wishes  to  say  mix  with  the
rubbish  of  the  trance-talk  on  this  side.  The  two  wills  might
thus  strike  up  a  sort  of  partnership  and  reinforce  each  other.
It  might  even  be  that  the  "  will  to  personate "  would  be
comparatively  inert  unless  it  were  aroused  to  activity  by  the
other  will.  We  might  imagine  the  relation  to  be  analogous
to  that  of  two  physical  bodies,  from  neither  of  which,  when
alone,  mechanical,  thermal,  or  electrical  activity  can  proceed,
but  if  the  other  body  be  present,  and  show  a  difference  of
"  potential,"  action  starts  \ip  and  goes  on  apace.

Conceptions  such  as  these  seem  to  connect  in  schematic
form  the  various  elements  in  the  case.  Its  essential  factors
are  clone  justice  to ;  and,  by  changing  the  relative  amounts
in  which  the  rubbish-making  and  the  truth-telling  wills  con-
tribute to  the  resultant,  we  can  draw  up  a  table  in  which
every  type  of  manifestation,  from  silly  planchet-writing  up
to  Eector's  best  utterances,  finds  its  proper  place.  Personally,
I  must  say  that,  although  I  have  to  confess  that  no  crucial
proof  of  the  presence  of  the  "  will  to  communicate "  seems  to
me  yielded  by  the  Hodgson-control  taken  alone,  and  in  the
sittings  to  which  I  have  had  access,  yet  the  total  effect  in
the  way  of  dramatic  probability  of  the  whole  mass  of  similar
phenomena  on  my  mind,  is  to  make  me  believe  that  a
"  will  to  communicate "  is  in  some  shape  there. I  cannot


118


Professor  William  James.


[part


demonstrate  it,  but  practically  I  am  inclined  to  "  go  in "  for
it,  to  bet  on  it  and  take  the  risks.

The  question  then  presents  itself :  In  what  shape  is  it
most  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  will  thus  postulated  is
actually  there  ?  And  here  again  there  are  various  pneuma-
tological  possibilities,  which  must  be  considered  first  in  abstract
form.  Thus  the  will  to  communicate  may  come  either  from
permanent  entities,  or  from  an  entity  that  arises  for  the
occasion.  R.  H.'s  spirit  would  be  a  permanent  entity ;  and
inferior  parasitic  spirits  ('  daimons,'  elementals,  or  whatever  their
traditional  names  might  be)  would  be  permanent  entities.  An
improvised  entity  might  be  a  limited  process  of  consciousness
arising  in  the  cosmic  reservoir  of  earth's  memories,  when
certain  conditions  favoring  systematized  activity  in  particular
tracts  thereof  were  fulfilled.  The  conditions  in  that  case  might
be  conceived  after  the  analogy  of  what  happens  when  two
poles  of  different  potential  are  created  in  a  mass  of  matter,
and  cause  a  current  of  electricity,  or  what  not,  to  pass
through  an  intervening  tract  of  space  until  then  the  seat
of  rest.

To  consider  the  case  of  permanent  entities  first,  there  is  no
a  priori  reason  why  human  spirits  and  other  spiritual  beings
might  not  either  co-operate  at  the  same  time  in  the  same
phenomenon,  or  alternately  produce  different  manifestations.
Prima  facie,  and  as  a  matter  of  "  dramatic "  probability,  other
intelligences  than  our  own  appear  on  an  enormous  scale  in  the
historic  mass  of  material  which  Myers  first  brought  together
under  the  title  of  Automatisms.  The  refusal  of  modern
"  enlightenment "  to  treat  "  possession "  as  a  hypothesis  to  be
spoken  of  as  even  possible,  in  spite  of  the  massive  human
tradition  based  on  concrete  experience  in  its  favor,  has  always
seemed  to  me  a  curious  example  of  the  power  of  fashion  in
things  scientific.  That  the  demon-theory  (not  necessarily  a
devil-theory)  will  have  its  innings  again  is  to  my  mind
absolutely  certain.  One  has  to  be  "  scientific "  indeed,  to  be
blind  and  ignorant  enough  to  suspect  no  such  possibility.
But  if  the  liability  to  have  one's  somnambulistic  or  automatic
processes  participated  in  and  interfered  with  by  spiritual
entities  of  a  different  order  ever  turn  out  to  be  a  pro-
bable fact,  then  not  only what I have  called  the  will  to


lviii.] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  119


communicate,  but  also  the  will  to  personate  may  fall  outside
of  the  medium's  own  dream-life.  The  humbugging  may  not
be  chargeable  to  her  all  alone,  centres  of  consciousness  lower
than  hers  may  take  part  in  it,  just  as  higher  ones  may
occasion  some  of  the  more  inexplicable  items  of  the  veridical
current  in  the  stream.

The  plot  of  possibilities  thus  thickens ;  and  it  thickens  still
more  when  we  ask  how  a  will  which  is  dormant  or  relatively
dormant  during  the  intervals  may  become  consciously  reani-
mated as  a  spirit-personality  by  the  occurrence  of  the  medium's
trance.  A  certain  theory  of  Fechner's  helps  my  own  imagina-
tion here,  so  I  will  state  it  briefly  for  my  reader's  benefit.

Fechner  in  his  Zend-Avesta 1  and  elsewhere  assumes  that
mental  and  physical  life  run  parallel,  all  memory-processes
being,  according  to  him,  co-ordinated  with  material  processes.
If  an  act  of  yours  is  to  be  consciously  remembered  hereafter,
it  must  leave  traces  on  the  material  universe  such  that  when
the  traced  parts  of  the  said  universe  systematically  enter  into
activity  together  the  act  is  consciously  recalled.  During  your
life  the  traces  are  mainly  in  your  brain ;  but  after  your  death,
since  your  brain  is  gone,  they  exist  in  the  shape  of  all  the
records  of  your  actions  which  the  outer  world  stores  up  as
the  effects,  immediate  or  remote,  thereof,  the  cosmos  being  in
some  degree,  however  slight,  made  structurally  different  by
every  act  of  ours  that  takes  place  in  it.2  Now,  just  as  the
air  of  the  same  room  can  be  simultaneously  used  by  many
different  voices  for  communicating  with  different  pairs  of  ears,
or  as  the  ether  of  space  can  carry  many  simultaneous  messages

1  Zend-Avesta,  2nd edition, 1901,  §§  XXI.  and  following. Compare  also

El  wood  Worcester  : The  Living Word,  New  York,  Moffett,  Yard  &  Co.,

1908,  Part  II.  :  and  Wm.  James,  A  Pluralistic  Universe,  Longmans,  Green  &
Co.,  1909. Lecture  iv.

2 "  It  is  Handel's  work,  not  the  body  with  which  he  did  the  work,  that
pulls  us  half  over  London.  There  is  not  an  action  of  a  muscle  in  a  horse's
leg  upon  a  winter's  night  as  it  drags  a  carriage  to  the  Albert  Hall  but  what
is  in  connection  with,  and  part  outcome  of,  the  force  generated  when  Handel
sat  in  his  room  at  Gopsall  and  wrote  the  Messiah.  .  .  .  This  is  the  true
Handel  who  is  more  a  living  power  among  us  one  hundred  and  twenty-two
years  after  his  death  than  during  the  time  he  was  amongst  us  in  the  body."
Samuel  Butler,  in  the  New  Quarterly,  I.  303,  March,  1908.


120


Professor  William  James.


[part


to  and  from  mutually  attuned  Marconi-stations,  so  the  great
continuum  of  material  nature  can  have  certain  tracts  within
it  thrown  into  emphasized  activity  whenever  activity  hegins
in  any  part  or  parts  of  a  tract  in  which  the  potentiality  of
such  systematic  activity  inheres.  The  bodies  (including  of
course  the  brains)  of  Hodgson's  friends  who  come  as  sitters,
are  naturally  parts  of  the  material  universe  which  carry  some
of  the  traces  of  his  ancient  acts.  They  function  as  receiving
stations,  and  Hodgson  (at  one  time  of  his  life  at  any  rate)  was  in-
clined to  suspect  that  the  sitter  himself  acts  "  psychometrically,"
or  by  his  body  being  what,  in  the  trance-jargon,  is  called  an
"  influence,"  in  attracting  the  right  spirits  and  eliciting  the
right  communications  from  the  other  side.  If,  now,  the  rest
of  the  system  of  physical  traces  left  behind  by  Hodgson's
acts  were  by  some  sort  of  mutual  induction  throughout  its
extent,  thrown  into  gear  and  made  to  vibrate  all  at  once,  by
the  presence  of  such  human  bodies  to  the  medium,  we  should
have  a  Hodgson-system  active  in  the  cosmos  again,  and  the
"  conscious  aspect "  of  this  vibrating  system  might  be  Hodgson's
spirit  redivivus,  and  recollecting  and  willing  in  a  certain
momentary  way.  There  seems  fair  evidence  of  the  reality  of
psychometry ;  so  that  this  scheme  covers  the  main  phenomena
in  a  vague  general  way.  In  particular,  it  would  account  for
the  "  confusion  "  and  "  weakness "  that  are  such  prevalent
features :  the  system  of  physical  traces  corresponding  to  the
given  spirit  would  then  be  only  imperfectly  aroused.  It  tallies
vaguely  with  the  analogy  of  energy  finding  its  way  from  higher
to  lower  levels.  The  sitter,  with  his  desire  to  receive,  forms,  so
to  speak,  a  drainage-opening  or  sink ;  the  medium,  with  her
desire  to  personate,  yields  the  nearest  lying  material  to  be
drained  off1;  while  the  spirit  desiring  to  communicate  is  shown
the  way  by  the  current  set  up,  and  swells  the  latter  by  its
own  contributions.

It  is  enough  to  indicate  these  various  possibilities,  which  a
serious  student  of  this  part  of  nature  has  to  weigh  together,
and  between  which  his  decision  must  fall.  His  vote  will
always  be  cast  (if  ever  it  be  cast)  by  the  sense  of  the
dramatic  probabilities  of  nature  which  the  sum  total  of  his
experience has begotten in him. /  myself  feel as if  an


lviil] Report  on  Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control.  121


external  will  to  communicate  ivere  probably  there,  that  is,  I
find  myself  doubting,  in  consequence  of  my  whole  acquaintance
with  that  sphere  of  phenomena,  that  Mrs.  Piper's  dream-life,
even  equipped  with  "  telepathic "  powers,  accounts  for  all  the
results  found.  But  if  asked  whether  the  will  to  communicate
be  Hodgson's,  or  be  some  mere  spirit-counterfeit  of  Hodgson,
I  remain  uncertain  and  await  more  facts,  facts  which  may  not
point  clearly  to  a  conclusion  for  fifty  or  a  hundred  years.

My  report  has  been  too  rambling  in  form,  and  has  suffered
in  cordiality  of  tone  from  having  to  confine  itself  to  the
face-value  of  the  Hodgson-material  taken  alone.  The  con-
tent of  that  material  is  no  more  veridical  than  is  a  lot  of
earlier  Piper-material,  especially  in  the  clays  of  the  old  Phinuit
control.1  And  it  is,  as  I  began  by  saying,  vastly  more  leaky
and  susceptible  of  naturalistic  explanation  than  is  any  body  of
Piper-material  recorded  before.  Had  I  been  reviewing  the
entire  Piper-phenomenon,  instead  of  this  small  section  of  it,
my  tone  would  probably  give  much  less  umbrage  to  some  of
its  spiritistic  friends  who  are  also  valued  friends  of  mine.

1  See,  in  proof  of  this  assertion,  Hodgson's  and  Hy slop's  previous  reports.


122


Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part


II.

NOTE  ON  MRS.  FIEEE'S  HODGSON-CONTROL  IN
ENGLAND  IN  1906-7.

By  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  and  J.  G.  Piddington.

We  think  it  may  be  useful  to  complete  the  account  of  the
Hodgson-Piper  control  (HodgsonP)  up  to  January,  1908,  by
giving  here  a  brief  risumi,  of  our  experience  of  it  during  Mrs.
Piper's  visit  to  England,  which  interrupted  in  1906-7  the
sittings  dealt  with  above  by  Professor  James.

The  Hodgson  control  appeared  frequently  at  Mrs.  Piper's
English  sittings,  but  was  seldom  the  most  prominent  control.
In  explanation  of  this  he  stated  that  he  was  engaged  in  helping
Myers  and  others  to  communicate,  and  thought  it  better  to
keep  himself  in  the  background.1  On  the  one  hand  his  style
and  expressions  in  communicating  resembled  those  described
by  Professor  James,  and  were  dramatically  suitable  to  Hodgson.
Moreover,  he  referred  appropriately  and  characteristically,  though
rather  generally,  to  private  matters  with  which  Hodgson  and
the  sitter  (Miss  Alice  Johnson  on  one  occasion  and  Mrs.  Sidg-
wick on  another)  had  been  concerned.  (These  references,  however,
though  impressive,  cannot  be  regarded  as  quite  satisfactory
from  an  evidential  point  of  view,  because  the  knowledge  of
facts  unknown  to  Mrs.  Piper  which  they  primd  facie  seem  to
involve,  might  have  been  derived  from  facts  which  Hodgson,
when  alive,  had  mentioned  to  the  trance-personalities.)  On  the
other  hand,  the  attempts  made  by  HodgsonP  to  recall  trivial
incidents  were  not  convincing,  and  were,  in  fact,  often  wrong.
To  Mrs.  Sidgwick  it  seemed  that  such  attempts  in  relation  to

1  Thus  on  February  6,  1907,  Hodgson^  wrote:  "You  must  pardon  me  if  I
do  not  appear  here  often  personally,  as  I  feel  I  can  be  of  better  service  by  helping
others  for  a  time  at  least."


lviii.] Mrs.  Pipers  Hodgson-Control  in  England.  123

her  were  either  guesses  or,  if  referring  to  real  events  at  all,
reminiscences  appropriate  not  to  her  but  to  some  other  friend.

The  communications  so  far  spoken  of  are  those  which  came
spontaneously  and  unsought  in  the  course  of  sittings  with
persons  known  to  be  present  both  by  Mrs.  Piper's  normal  self
and  by  the  trance  personalities.  But  a  systematic  attempt  was
made  to  obtain  evidence  which  should  be  free  from  the  sources
of  leakage  and  possibilities  of  naturalistic  explanation,  which,
as  Professor  James  points  out,  were  largely  though  inevitably
present  in  the  body  of  evidence  with  which  he  had  to  deal.
We  introduced  anonymously,  and  after  the  trance  had  begun,
intimate  English  friends  of  Hodgson's  hitherto  unconnected
with  the  active  work  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,
and  who  had  never  met  Mrs.  Piper  either  in  her  normal  or
her  trance  state ;  about  whom,  moreover,  it  was  unlikely  that
Hodgson  in  this  life  would  have  spoken  in  any  detail,  if  indeed
at  all,  either  to  Mrs.  Piper  or  the  trance  personalities.  Unfor-
tunately the  results  were  almost  purely  negative.  Three  such
intimate  friends  had  among  them  seven  sittings,  and  all  went
away  disappointed.  Even  after  clues  had  been  given  by  the
sitters,  nothing  that  could  be  regarded  as  adequate  evidence  of
recognition  was  said,  and  there  was  a  great  deal  of  what  looked
like  guessing  and  fishing,  and  much  said  that  was  inappropriate.1
A  fourth  friend  of  Hodgson's  had  five  sittings  under  what
might  be  supposed  to  be  very  favourable  circumstances — in
the  very  rooms  in  which  Hodgson  had  dined  with  him  the
last  time  that  they  had  met  in  England.  Nevertheless  there
was  no  good  evidence  that  there  were  any  associations  for
HodgsonP  either  with  the  friend  or  with  the  room.  This  is
all  the  more  remarkable  because  these  sittings  afforded  very
interesting  evidence  of  supernormally  acquired  knowledge.
What  happened  was  that  another  friend  of  the  sitter's,  long
deceased,  professed  to  communicate,  gave  his  name  correctly,
and  correctly  said  that  he  had  promised  to  communicate  if  he
should  die  first.  Other  correct  statements,  though  also  some
incorrect  ones,  were  made.'2 All  this  time  HodgsonP  professed

1  Compare,  however,  in  this  connexion  Section  XIII.  of  Mr.  Piddington's
paper  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.  pp.  179-192,  where  portions  of  some  of
these  sittings  are  dealt  with.

-It  is  hoped  that  it  may  be  possible  some  day  to  publish  details.


124


Mrs.  Sidgivick  and  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part


to  be  helping  the  communicator,  but  did  not  himself  claim  any
connexion  with  the  sitter  till,  after  the  five  sittings  were  over,
a  hint  was  given  to  him. The  following  extracts  show  this : —


Extract  from  record  of  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  held  on
February  19,  1907.

(Present,  Mr.  Piddington  alone.)
(Hodgson  communicating.)

J.  G.  P.  .  .  .  When  you  are  helping  spirits  to  talk  through  this
light,  can  you  recognise  the  mortals  with  whom  they  are
communicating  1

No,  not  at  the  time  when  I  am  helping  them,  but  if  I
came  alone  I  could  recognise  them,  I  think,  perfectly.

J.  G.  P.  Yes.


I  had  an  idea  that  I  got  a  glimpse  of  a  friend  recently,
but  found  another  friend  who  recognised  him  also,  and
therefore  I  left.

J.  G.  P.  What  was  the  name  of  the  other  friend  1

Hudson  [the  name  of  the  above-mentioned  long-deceased
friend  of  the  previous  sitter].


J.  G.  P.  Hodgson,
Hello.

J.  G.  P.  The  mortal  friend  to  whom  Hudson  spoke  was  also-
(Hand  interrupts.)

also  a  friend  of  mine  1 Yes,  I  understand  perfectly.

J.  G.  P.  Well,  tell  me  who  he  was.

I  will,  after  I  talk  with  Hudson.


Oh,  Pid.,  I  am  not  idle,  not  for  one  moment. I  hope]  he
was  not  disappointed,  as  I  explained  to  you  longTago


lviii.] Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson-Control  in  England.  125


that  anything  I  personally  might  say  would  not  convince
half  so  quickly  as  what  others  might  say  to  whom  I
gave  help.

J.  G.  P.  It  would,  of  course,  have  been  very  good  if  you  had
recognised  the  friend  ;  but  it  will  still  be  very  good  if,
when  you  go  out,  you  could  talk  it  over  with  Hudson
and  then  say  things  to  prove  you  know  who  the
friend  is.

Exarth/. I  understand,  and  I  will  certainly  do  so,  but  I
have  told  you  already  that  I  know  him.

At  later  sittings  there  were  what  we  took  to  be  attempts
at  this  sitter's  name,  though  not  explicitly  referred  to  him,  and
reminiscences  that  may  have  applied  to  him  were  connected  by
Hodgsoiip  with  another  sitter  ;  but  there  was  nothing  that  can
be  claimed  as  proof  that  Hodgsoiip  really  remembered  anything
about  him.

This  failure  on  the  part  of  Hodgsoiip  to  recognise  Hodgson's
friends  is  the  more  remarkable  because  HodgsonP  had  been
told  first  by  Mr.  Piddington  at  Boston  and  later  by  Sir  Oliver
Lodge  at  Edgbaston  that  friends  of  Hodgson's  (not  specified,  of
course)  would  come  to  the  sittings,  so  that  it  was  natural  to
suppose  that  HodgsonP  would  be  on  the  look-out  for  them.

A  fifth  person  who  had  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  in
England  was  "  Mrs.  Eorbes,"  known  to  readers  of  the  Pro-
ceedings as  an  automatist  who  has  had  veridical  communications,
and  some  cross-correspondences  with  Mrs.  Verrall.  Mrs.  Forbes
had  not  previously  seen  Mrs.  Piper,  but  she  knew  Hodgson,
who  on  one  of  his  later  visits  to  England  had  stayed  at  her
house  to  discuss  psychical  matters.  Like  the  other  sitters,  she
was  introduced  anonymously  and  after  the  trance  had  begun,
but  her  name  was  inadvertently  mentioned  to  the  trance
personalities  before  the  end  of  the  series  of  four  sittings.
The  sittings  were  not  on  the  whole  satisfactory,  though  the
real  name  of  Mrs.  Forbes's  son  "  Talbot "  (see  Proceedings,
Vol.  XX.,  p.  220)  was  gradually  arrived  at  by  Kector  before  her
name  had  been  revealed.  HodgsonP  communicated  in  the  course
of  the  first  sitting  and  after  a  sufficient  interchange  of  remarks


12G


Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part


to  suggest  that  the  sitter  had  been  acquainted  with  Hodgson,
tried  to  remind  her  of  the  story  about  the  old  man  and  woman
praying  for  bread  told  by  Professor  James  above  (p.  26).
This  the  sitter  failed  to  remember,  but  she  remembers  having
had  discussions  with  Hodgson  about  prayer.  There  was  not,
however,  enough  verifiable  specific  detail  to  make  it  certain
that  the  conversation  referred  to  by  HodgsonP  was  really  a
conversation  with  Mrs.  Forbes.

From  what  we  have  said  it  is  clear  that  our  attempt,  by
introducing  Hodgson's  friends,  to  obtain  evidence  of  continuity
of  memory  between  HodgsonP  and  Hodgson  must  be  regarded
as  a  failure.  The  same,  it  may  be  remarked,  is  true  of  the
similar  experiments  we  made  in  connection  with  Henry  Sidgwick.1
His  communications  in  the  trance  were  much  rarer  than
Hodgson's,  but  they  did  not  occur  at  all  when  friends  were
introduced  whom  it  was  hoped  he  would  recognise.  What
the  inference  to  be  drawn  from  these  negative  results  should
be — whether  the  failure  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  absence  of
continuous  memory  or  to  the  absence  of  conditions  essential
to  its  manifestation — it  is  not  possible  in  our  present  state
of  ignorance  about  the  whole  subject  to  decide.

1  Since  1901  a  control  calling  itself  Henry  Sidgwick  has  put  in  occasional
appearances  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance.  The  personation  has  been,  however,  of
the  feeblest  description  ;  a  fact  all  the  more  strange  because  Mrs.  Piper  was
personally  acquainted  with  Dr.  Sidgwick.


lviii.] Report  on  some  Trance  Communications.


127


III.

EEPOET ON SOME TBANCE  COMMUNICATIONS
EECEIVED  CHIEFLY  THROUGH  MBS.  PI  PEE.

By  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.

PAGE

Introduction. Anticipatory  Eeply  to  Critics  -  128

Chapter  I. Explanatory  and  Historical  -  -  130

The  present  manner  of  a  Piper  sitting.

General  remarks  on  Piper  Controls -  137

Chapter  II. The  Gurney  Control -  -  140

Some  sittings  'm  1889  and  1890.

Various  unverifiable  communications -  -  145

Chapter  III. The  Isaac  Thompson  Case -  -  162

Communications  in  1905 - -  -  164

Ditto in  1906 - - -  -  171

Sittings  with  Isaac  Thompson's  family  - - -  -  174

Messages  received  at  Edgbaston  - - - - -  -  189

Remarks  on  Eelics - - - - - - -  -  196

Chapter  IV. The  Myers  Control - - - -  -  198

Messages  received  through  Mrs.  Thompson.

Eecord  of  sittings  in  1901 - - - - - -  -  201

General  remarks  addressed  to  religious  objectors - -  215

Specific  comments - - - - - - -  -  217

Chapter  V. Messages  obtained  through  Miss  Rawson  -  219

Chapter  VI. Messages  from  the  Myers  and  Hodgson

Controls  of  Mrs.  Piper,  Autumn  1906  - -  -  226

Chapter  VII. The  Myers  and  Hodgson  Controls  of  Mrs.

Piper,  Spring  1907  - - - - - -  .  2iS


128  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part

PAGE

Chapter  VIII. The  Joseph  Marble  Series -  -  255

Mrs.  Grove's  sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson  in  1900  -  257

Mrs.  Grove's  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  in  1906  - -  265

Experiment  on  recognition  of  photograph -  275

Comment ... .......  278

Chapter  IX. Supplementary  Eemarks -  - -  280

Phinuit.

Concluding  observations  281


INTRODUCTION.

My  object  in  drawing  up  the  following  Report  is  to  give  a  general
idea  of  the  dramatic  aspect  of  the  Piper  phenomena,  and  of  the
utterances  of  some  of  the  ostensible  controls.  For  this  purpose
therefore  I  do  not  limit  myself  to  the  consideration  of  evidential
matter,  but  regard  the  non-evidential  and  the  trivial  as  sometimes
equally  instructive.  I  do  not  propose  to  argue  as  to  the  nature
of  these  same  controls,  although  that  constitutes  the  main  problem
before  us.  The  time  hardly  appears  ripe  for  useful  discussion  of
that  kind,  and  I  feel  myself  in  agreement  with  Professor  William
James  when  he  says  (see  above,  p.  29) : —

"The  facts  are  evidently  complicated  in  the  extreme,  and  we

have  as  yet  hardly  scratched  the  surface  of  them

I  consequently  disbelieve  in  being  too  'rigorous'  with  our  criticism
of  anything  now  in  hand,  or  in  our  squeezing  so  evidently
vague  a  material  too  hard  in  our  technical  forceps,  at  the
present  stage.  What  we  need  is  more  and  more  observations.
Quantity  may  have  to  supplement  quality  in  the  material.
When  we  have  the  facts  in  sufficient  number,  we  may  be  sure
that  they  will  cast  plenty  of  explanatory  backward  light.  We
can  therefore  well  afford  to  play  a  waiting  game."

There  is  one  kind  of  criticism  which  had  better  be  met  and  if
possible  countered  from  the  first.  The  method  of  a  Piper  sitting
is  a  conversation — usually  written  on  one  side,  spoken  on  the
other, — and  in  a  conversation  it  is  natural  and  necessary,  if  the
colloquy  is  to  be  maintained,  to  deal  with  the  utterances  at  their
face  value,  and  accept  the  speaker  or  writer  for  what  he  purports
to  be  at  the  time.  The  only  alternative  is  to  refuse  to  continue
the  conversation. When  therefore  a  critic  objects  to  "  Hail  Myers,


(Lvm.] On  Trance  Communications,  Introduction.  129


.glad  to  see  you,"  as  a  response  to  the  greeting  "Well  well  Lodge
I  am  Myers,"  or  when  he  ridicules  such  phrases  as  "Glad  to  see
you  at  last,"  and  "I  expect  so,"  as  responses  to  the  boisterous
salutation  "Hello  Lodge,  I  am  Hodgson,"  "I  am  very  much  alive,"
he  shows  himself  deficient  in  imagination.  In  the  same  predicament
the  most  carping  critic  would  himself  instinctively  respond  some-
what in  the  same  vein ;  unless  he  declined  to  respond  at  all  and
threw  the  whole  thing  up.  But  we  could  have  managed  that  still
more  simply  by  not  inviting  Mrs.  Piper  over  !

In  answering  a  telephone  call,  the  object  of  an  ordinary  communi-
cator is  to  ascertain  who  his  correspondent  pretends  to  be.  A
conversation  would  soon  languish  if  friendly  advances  were  met  by
accusations  of  fraudulent  impersonation.  Caution  should  of  course
be  constantly  exercised  not  to  give  gratuitous  information,  and  every
piece  of  information  given  should  be  carefully  recorded,  but  the
•contention  that  a  hostile  or  squeamish  attitude  should  be  taken  by
every  unprejudiced  investigator  is  quite  absurd;  it  would  only  be
appropriate  to  one  who  so  despises  and  sneers  at  the  whole  subject
as  to  refuse  an  opportunity  of  learning  anything  about  it.  Doubt-
less there  are  many  such  people  in  existence,  and  with  them  I  have
no  quarrel ;  but  they  are  not  asked  to  read  or  review  these  and
other  such  reports.

One  other  preliminary  remark  may  be  made.  Communications  are
now  conducted  by  writing,  and  the  script  is  not  at  all  easy  to  read.
There  are  only  a  few  cases  where  there  is  any  ultimate  doubt  as
to  the  correctness  of  the  reading,  when  it  has  been  deciphered,  but
it  cannot  always  be  deciphered  on  the  spot.  This  difficulty  has
perhaps  hardly  been  sufficiently  emphasised  in  the  other  papers  on
~the  subject — for  instance,  in  Mr.  Piddington's.  In  many  cases  the
temporary  misunderstandings  recorded  must  seem  stupid  to  a  reader
who  has  printed  sentences  before  him  :  but  I  can  assure  him  that
if  he  saw  the  script  he  would  in  some  cases  be  surprised  at  the
amount  of  intelligence  shown  by  readers.  The  long  experience  of
Dr.  Hodgson  and  Mr.  Piddington  enables  them  to  decipher  the
script  with  fair  promptitude,  though  Rector  is  rather  liable  to  discount
this  advantage  by  writing  more  quickly,  and  therefore  still  more
illegibly,  when  dealing  with  a  skilled  reader.  So  the  contemporary
reading  is  always  a  strain,  and  mistakes  will  occur  wdiich  interrupt
anything  like  easy  conversation — such  a  conversation  as  you  might
expect  to  carry  on  with  a  perfectly  dumb  person  who  is  not  deaf.


I


130


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


CHAPTER  I.

Explanatory  and  Historical.

My  first  acquaintance  with  Mrs.  Piper  dates  from  19  Nov.  1889,.
and  my  first  experience  of  a  sitting  with  her  was  at  Cambridge  on
Nov.  30  of  the  same  year.

Between  Dec.  18  and  Dec.  27,  1889,  she  stayed  in  my  house  at
Liverpool  ;  and  again  between  Jan.  30  and  Feb.  5,  1890;  on  which
latter  date  she  returned  to  America.

At  that  time  she  was  accustomed  to  give  sittings  as  often  as
twice  a  day.

A  full  account  of  my  experiences  on  these  occasions  is  recorded
in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  for  December
1890,  Part  XVII,  Vol.  6,  pp.  413-557.  This  is  preceded  by  an
introduction,  pages  436-442,  written  by  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  and  is
followed  by  a  report  on  further  sittings  by  Dr.  Walter  Leaf,  together
with  short  supplementary  statements  by  Prof,  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick,
Prof.  Richet,  and  Prof.  Wm,  James.

I  saw  Mrs.  Piper  again  on  9  Nov.  1906  at  Liverpool,  where  she
had  just  arrived  from  America,  and  was  staying  in  the  house  of
Mrs.  Isaac  Thompson  of  Liverpool,  whose  acquaintance  she  had  made
on  her  previous  visit  to  this  country.  Another  series  of  sittings
then  began,  but  at  a  rate  of  only  two  or  three  per  week  instead
of  two  a  day,  and  of  the  general  character  of  these  I  now  propose
to  give  an  account.

It  has  been  described  by  Mr.  Piddington  in  his  recent  paper,
but  an  independent  description  may  supplement  his  in  a  few
particulars.  In  so  far  as  there  is  repetition,  it  will  presumably  be
repetition  of  salient  points,  and  as  such  is  not  altogether  to  be
deprecated.  It  is  not  easy  to  make  a  reader  as  familiar  with  the
whole  procedure  as  an  experimenter  becomes  who  has  undertaken
the  labour  of  supervising  a  number  of  sittings.

Since  our  first  English  experience  with  Mrs.  Piper  a  great  mass
of  material  had  been  accumulated  in  America,  under  the  manage-
ment of  Dr.  Hodgson,  and  the  manner  of  the  sittings  had  somewhat
changed.  In  the  old  days  communication  had  always  been  made  with
the  voice,  and  any  writing  done  was  only  brief  and  occasional.  Now


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  I.


131


communications  are  almost  entirely  in  writing,  and  only  under
exceptional  circumstances  is  the  voice  employed.

There  was  an  intermediate  stage,  reported  by  Dr.  Hodgson  in
Vol.  13,  pp.  358  and  398,  during  which  both  hand  and  voice  were
separately  employed  at  the  same  time, — a  sort  of  duplex  telegraphy
— so  that  two  sets  of  independent  messages  could  be  going  on
simultaneously,  and  two  different  sitters  accommodated,  one  talking
to  the  voice  and  the  other  to  the  hand.  Once  or  twice  even  the
left  hand  seems  to  have  been  independently  employed  as  well.
This  condition  was  one  of  great  interest,  but  it  must  have  been  a
strain  and  it  did  not  very  long  continue.  Gradually  the  G.P.  control
monopolised  the  right  hand,  and  Phinuit  was  gradually  ousted  from
the  voice.

In  the  old  days  Mrs.  Piper  sat  upright  in  her  chair,  with  head
somewhat  bowed  and  eyes  closed,  and  with  both  hands  available
for  holding  objects  or  a  hand  of  the  sitter.  Now  her  head  reclined
throughout  on  a  cushion,  with  her  face  turned  away.  The  right
hand  alone  was  active,  being  engaged  nearly  all  the  time  in
writing,  with  intervals  of  what  looked  like  listening.  The  dramatic
activity  of  the  hand  was  very  remarkable  :  it  was  full  of  intelligence,
and  could  be  described  as  more  like  an  intelligent  person  than  a
hand.  It  sometimes  turned  itself  to  the  sitter,  when  it  wanted  to  be
spoken  to  by  him  ;  but  for  the  most  part,  when  not  writing,  it
turned  itself  away  from  the  sitter,  as  if  receiving  communications
from  outside,  which  it  then  proceeded  to  write  down ;  going  back
to  space — i.e.  directing  itself  to  a  part  of  the  room  where  nobody
was — for  further  information  and  supplementary  intelligence,  as
necessity  arose.

The  manner  of  preparation  was  as  follows.  A  quiet  room  was
selected  in  which  interruption  need  not  be  feared ;  a  fire  was  pro-
vided for  warmth,  and  the  windows  were  open  for  ventilation.  A
comfortable  chair  was  placed  near  a  table,  on  which  was  a  pile  of
from  four  to  six  cushions  or  pillows,  on  which  the  medium  sitting
in  the  chair  and  leaning  forward  could  securely  rest  the  side  of
her  head  when  sleep  came  on, — not  burying  her  face  in  the  cushions,
but  turning  it  to  the  left  side  so  as  to  be  able  to  breathe  during
the  trance.  If  it  ever  happened  that  the  pillows  incommoded  the
breathing,  they  had  to  be  adjusted  and  pressed  down  by  the  experi-
menter in  charge,  so  that  air  obtained  free  access  to  the  mouth
and  nose.  On  the  right  hand  side  of  the  pillows,  either  on  the
same  or  on  a  small  subsidiary  table,  the writing  materials  were


132


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[PART


arranged,  namely  a  large  pad  or  block-book  (10"  x  8")  of  100  blank
sheets  all  numbered  in  order,  and  four  or  five  pencils  of  soft  lead,
2  b  or  3  b,  properly  cut  and  ready.

It  was  the  duty  of  the  experimenter  in  charge  to  record  all  that
the  sitter  said.  This  could  generally  be  done  sideways  on  the  same
sheet  without  interfering  with  the  medium's  hand.  He  also  had
to  arrange  the  pad  so  that  the  hand  could  conveniently  write  upon
it ;  and  to  tear  off  the  sheets  as  they  were  done  with.  No  attempt
was  made  to  economise  paper ;  the  automatic  writing  was  large
and  scrawling,  and  did  not  often  begin  at  the  top  of  the  page.
Sometimes  a  good  deal  of  writing  was  obtained  on  a  single  page,
sometimes  only  a  few  lines,  and  occasionally  only  a  few  words.
The  tearing  off  of  the  old  sheet  was  quickly  done;  and  the  hand
waited  the  moment  necessary  :  though  sometimes,  when  in  the
midst  of  an  energetic  message,  it  indicated  momentary  impatience  at
the  interruption.

Mrs.  Piper  and  her  daughters  often  had  breakfast  with  the  family,
though  occasionally  she  breakfasted  in  her  room.  On  ordinary  days
she  went  shopping  or  sight-seeing,  or  was  otherwise  ordinarily  occu-
pied ;  but  on  sitting  days  she  went  back  after  breakfast  to  her
own  room  to  be  cpiiet.  At  the  time  fixed  for  the  sitting,  say
10  or  10.30  a.m.,  Mrs.  Piper  came  into  the  arranged  room  and  seated
herself  in  the  chair  in  front  of  the  pillows ;  then  the  experimenter
in  charge  sat  down  on  a  chair  near  the  table,  leaving  a  vacant  chair
between  him  and  the  medium,  for  the  Sitter ;  who  at  my  sittings
was  sometimes  present  from  the  first,  but  at  those  held  in  London,
was  introduced  only  after  the  trance  had  come  on.  Mrs.  Piper  sat
with  her  hands  on  the  pillows  in  front  of  her;  about  five  minutes
of  desultory  conversation  followed,  then  heavy  breathing  began,  and
the  head  of  the  medium  presently  dropped  on  to  her  hands  on
the  pillows  and  turned  itself  with  its  face  to  the  left.

Then  almost  at  once  the  right  hand  disengaged  itself  and  fell  on
the  table  near  the  writing  materials.  After  about  30  seconds  of
complete  quiescence,  this  hand  alone  '  woke  up '  as  it  were ;  it
slowly  rose,  made  the  sign  of  the  cross  in  the  air,  and  indicated  that
it  was  ready  to  write.

The  experimenter  then  gave  the  hand  a  pencil,  placing  it  between
fore  and  middle  fingers ;  it  was  at  once  grasped,  and  writing  began.
First  a  cross  was  drawn,  and  then  the  word  "Hail"  was  written,
followed  usually  by  "  We  return  to  earth  this  day  with  joy  and
peace " ; or  "  We  greet  you  friend  of  earth  once  again,  we  bring


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  I.  133


peace  and  love";  or  some  such  semi-religious  phrase,  signed  "R,"
which  stands  for  '  Rector '  the  ostensible  amanuensis.

In  the  old  days  the  control  had  styled  itself  'Phinuit';  now  Phinuit
never  appears,  and  the  control  calls  itself  Rector.

I  am  aware  that  all  this  is  familiar  to  a  great  number  of  members
of  the  Society ;  but  new  members  join,  and  if  I  were  to  begin  to
allow  for  previous  information  I  should  be  very  uncertain  where  to
stop  allowing.  I  should  probably  omit  the  whole  of  this  introductory
portion.

In  the  old  days  the  tone  was  not  so  dignified  and  serious  as  it
is  now :  it  could  in  fact  then  be  described  as  rather  humorous
and  slangy ;  but  there  was  a  serious  under-current  constantly  present
even  then ;  the  welcomes  and  farewells  were  quaint  and  kindly —
even  affectionate  at  times — and  nothing  was  ever  said  of  a  character
that  could  give  offence.  I  judge  that  stupid  familiarity  or  frivolity
on  the  part  of  a  sitter — for  which,  however,  there  was  no  excuse —
would  have  been  at  once  rebuked  and  checked.

In  the  old  days  the  going  into  trance  seemed  rather  a  painful
process,  or  at  least  a  process  involving  muscular  effort ;  there  was
some  amount  of  contortion  of  the  face,  and  sometimes  a  slight
tearing  of  the  hair;  and  the  same  actions  accompanied  the  return
of  consciousness.  Now  the  trance  seems  nothing  more  than  an
exceptionally  heavy  sleep,  entered  into  without  effort — a  sleep  with
the  superficial  appearance  of  that  induced  by  chloroform ;  and  the
return  to  consciousness,  though  slow  and  for  a  time  accompanied
by  confusion,  is  easy  and  natural.

A  sitting  used  to  last  only  about  an  hour ;  and  on  the  rare
occasions  when  there  is  a  voice  sitting  now,  an  hour  is  the  limit ;
but  a  writing  sitting  seems  less  of  a  strain,  and  was  often  allowed
to  last  as  much  as  two  hours,  though  not  more.

In  the  old  days,  when  sittings  were  more  frequent,  there  were
degrees  of  intensity  about  them.  Occasionally,  though  rarely,  they
declined  to  come  on  at  all ;  and  sometimes,  even  when  they  did,
the  loss  of  consciousness  seemed  less  than  complete.  Under  present
conditions  the  trance  was  undoubtedly  profound,  and  the  suspension
of  normal  consciousness  unmistakably  complete.  Once,  but  only
once  in  my  recent  experience,  the  trance  refused  to  come  on,  and
the  attempt  at  a  sitting  had  to  be  abandoned  till  next  day.

Usually  after  purposely  placing  herself  under  the  familiar  condi-
tions to  which  she  is  accustomed,  Mrs.  Piper  is  able  to  let  herself
go  off,  without  trouble  or  delay.


134


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


Great  care  was  taken  of  the  body  of  the  medium,  both  now  and
previously,  by  the  operating  intelligence.  She  was  spoken  of  usually
as  "the  light,"  sometimes  as  "the  machine,"  though  the  word
"  machine "  commonly  signified  only  the  pencil.

If  anything  went  wrong  with  the  breathing,  or  if  there  was
insufficient  air  in  the  room,  or  if  the  cushions  slipped  so  as  to
make  the  attitude  uncomfortable,  the  hand  wrote  "  something  wrong
with  the  machine,"  or  "  attend  to  the  light,  "  or  something  of  that
sort  ;  and  the  experimenter  amended  the  arrangements  before  the
writing  went  on.  The  whole  thing  was  as  sensible  and  easy  as
possible,  as  soon  as  the  circumstances  and  conditions  were  under-
stood. Each  experimenter,  of  course,  handed  down  all  the  informa-
tion and  Hodgsonian  tradition  of  this  kind  to  the  next,  so  that  all
the  conditions  to  which  Mrs.  Piper  was  accustomed  could  be  supplied
beforehand,  and  so  that  no  injury  would  happen  to  her  bodily
health.

The  following  illustrates  the  care  taken  of  the  physical  conditions
and  the  way  they  are  spoken  of.  It  is  an  extract  from  a  sitting
held  by  Mr.  Dorr  at  Boston  in  1906.

(Rector  interrupting  a  "  Hodgson "  communication)
Friend,  you  will  have  to  change  the  conditions  a  moment.

[At  the  beginning  of  the  sitting  only  one  of  the  two  windows
in  the  room  was  open  a  very  little  way.  A  few  moments
previous  to  this  time  H.  J.  Jr.  noticing  that  the  room
was  a  little  close  had  opened  the  other  window,  and
G.  B.  D.  had  nearly  closed  it  again.]

G.  B.  D.  What  is  wrong  with  the  conditions  1 Do  you  want  more
air  or  less  1

Well,  there  will  have  to  be  a  change  in  the  surroundings,
there  will  have  to  be  more  strength,  what  is  it,  air,
yes,  air.  And  a  good  deal  more  just  now.  Hodgson
takes  a  good  deal  of  strength  when  he  comes,  but  he  is
all  right,  he  understands  the  methods  of  operation  very
well.  (The  window  was  now  opened  wide.)  That  is
better.  Now  the  light  begins  to  get  clear.  All  right,
friend.

As  the  time  drew  near  to  the  two-hour  limit,  which  has  been  set
as  a  period  beyond  which  it  is  undesirable  to  persist,  and  some-


1,viii.] On,  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  I.  135


times  at  the  end  of  about  an  hour  and  a  half,  or  an  hour  and  three
quarters,  from  the  commencement,  the  experimenter  in  charge  gave
a  hint  that  the  sitting  must  terminate  soon ;  or  else  the  controls
indicate  the  same  thing,  and  they  then  begin  to  clear  up  and  take
farewell.  A  sitting  usually  concludes  as  it  began,  with  the  writing
of  a  serious  sentence  invoking  the  blessing  of  the  Most  High  upon
the  sitter  and  the  group.

The  coming  out  of  the  trance  was  gradual,  and  semi-consciousness
lasted  for  several  minutes,  during  which  muttered  sentences  were
ottered,  and  the  eyes,  if  open  at  all,  only  glared  in  sleep-walking
fashion,  until  almost  suddenly  they  took  on  a  natural  appearance,  and
Mrs.  Piper  became  herself.  Even  then,  however,  for  half  an  hour
or  so  after  the  trance  had  disappeared,  the  medium  continued
slightly  dazed  and  only  partly  herself.  During  this  time  her  eldest
daughter  usually  took  charge  of  her.  But  the  trance  itself  was  so
familiar  to  them  all  that  the  daughters  were  not  the  least  anxious,
and  in  another  room  went  on  with  their  letters  or  needle-work
■unconcerned.  After  a  sitting,  one  of  them  was  usually  called  and
•took  her  mother  for  a  stroll  in  the  garden.  Then  everybody  had
lunch  together  and  talked  of  ordinary  topics,  nothing  being  said
about  the  sitting,  and  no  ill  result  of  an)'  kind  being  experienced.
It  seemed  a  normal  function  in  her  case.  The  experimenter  mean-
while had  collected  the  papers  and  arranged  them  in  order,  and  had
removed  the  pencils  and  other  appliances.  Subsequently  it  was  his
business  to  write  out  legibly  all  the  material  accumulated  during  the
two  hours  of  sitting,  to  annotate  it  sufficiently,  and  send  it  to  a
typewriter.

The  actual  record  is  of  course  preserved  for  exact  reference
whenever  necessary.  A  record  was  also  made  of  the  remarks  of
Mrs.  Piper  during  the  period  of  awaking  from  trance.  These  were
more  or  less  mumbled  and  difficult  to  hear,  but  they  were  often  a
continuation  of  what  had  been  obtained  during  trance,  and  generally
contained  useful  passages ;  though  part  of  them  nearly  always  con-
sisted of  expressions  of  admiration  for  the  state  or  experience  she
was  leaving,  and  of  repulsion — almost  disgust — at  the  commonplace
terrestrial  surroundings  in  which  she  found  herself.  Even  a  bright
day  was  described  as  dingy  or  dark,  and  the  sitter  was  stared  at
in  an  unrecognizing  way,  and  described  as  a  dull  and  ugly  person,
or  sometimes  as  a  negro.  Presently,  however,  the  eyes  became
intelligent,  and  she  recognised  some  one — usually  Lady  Lodge  first —
and then with a smile welcomed her by name, and  speedily


136


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


came  to.  Some  examples  of  these  waking  utterances  will  be  found,
on  pages  169,  185-7,  232,  276,  277.

Coming  to  ordinary  social  details :  it  is  not  an  impertinence,  but
is  justified  by  the  special  circumstances  of  the  case,  to  state  that  the
family  is  an  admirable  one,  and  that  we  regard  them  as  genuine
friends.

At  the  time  of  Mrs.  Piper's  first  visit  her  daughters  were  children..
Now  they  are  grown  up,  and  are  very  useful  to  their  mother.  Nothing
in  any  way  abnormal  or  unusual  is  to  be  noticed  about  them,  and  their
mother  expresses  it  as  her  sincerest  wish  that  they  will  not  develop  her
power.  For  though  she  must  realise  the  value  of  her  services  to
science,  she  cannot  but  feel  that  it  to  some  extent  isolates  her  and
marks  her  out  as  peculiar  among  her  neighbours  in  New  England,
and  that  the  time  spent  in  the  trance  state  must  have  made  a  distinct
inroad  on  her  available  life-time.  This  however  must  to  some  extent
be  the  case  with  any  occupation,  and  it  is  as  the  duty  specially  allotted
to  her  that  she  has  learnt  to  regard  her  long  service,  now  extending
over  a  quarter  of  a  century.  She  became  acquainted  with  Professor
William  James — who  from  our  point  of  view  may  be  said  to  have
discovered  her— in  1885,  but  by  that  time  her  powers  were  already
fully  developed  and  well  known  to  a  group  of  admirers.  They  appear
to  have  been  noticed  in  1884,- — see  Proc.  S.P.R.  Vol.  8,  p.  46.

In  May,  1887,  Dr.  Richard  Hodgson,  who  was  over  in  the  States
as  Agent  or  American  Secretary  of  the  S.P.R.,  was  introduced  by
Prof.  William  James,  and  had  his  first  set  of  sittings  with  her.  On
the  strength  of  these  experiences  he  proceeded  energetically  to  investi-
gate and  subject  her  to  tests,  in  case  he  might  be  able  to  discover
some  fraudulent  procedure.  There  was  none  however  to  detect,
and  gradually  lie  became  one  of  the  most  convinced  and  enthusiastic
of  her  supervisors.  He  held  and  superintended  an  immense  number
of  sittings — the  first  series  of  which  are  reported  on  by  him  in
Volume  8  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.  (the  details  beginning  on
page  59) ;  and  this  report  constitutes  the  second  large  batch  of
material  on  the  subject  published  by  the  Society.

There  is  a  large  amount  of  unpublished  material  accumulated
in  America,  which  remains  still  to  be  edited  some  day :  but  some
portions  have  already  appeared  in  the  Society's  Proceedings  from,
time  to  time.

Vol.  13  contains  a  further  report  by  Dr.  Hodgson  of  occurrences
in  the  year  1892-4,  and  herein  is  recorded  the  first  appearance  of
automatic  writing  through  Mi  s.  Piper — Phinuit  being  still  in  customary


lyiil] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  I.  137


possession,  but  beginning  to  be  displaced  by  the  other  controls.  On
page  295  is  a  history  of  the  George  Pelham  control,  and  on  page  408
is  related  the  first  appearance  of  Stainton  Moses,  which  before  long
led  to  the  development  of  some  controls  like  his,  though  with  some
dissimilarities. Phinu.it  gave  place  to  them  altogether  in  1897.

Vol.  14  contains  a  record,  by  Prof.  W.  R.  Newbold,  of  a  con-
siderable collection  of  sittings  held  by  him  in  conjunction  with  Dr.
Hodgson  in  1894-6.

Vol.  16  consists  entirely  of  a  Report  by  Professor  Hyslop  on  his
series  of  sittings  in  1898-9.

Mr.  Podmore  discusses  Piper  sittings  in  Vol.  14,  p.  50,  and  Mrs.
Sidgwick  discusses  them  in  Vol.  15,  p.  16.

Finally,  Mrs.  Verrall's  own  automatic  script,  which  only  began  after
Mr.  Myers's  death,  is  analysed  by  herself  in  a  paper  which  constitutes
the  whole  of  Vol.  20.  Part  LV.  of  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.  (Vol.  21)
contains  Miss  Johnson's  report  on  the  script  of  Mrs.  Holland,  and
Vol.  22  consists  of  Mr.  Piddington's  report  on  Mrs.  Piper.

General  Remarks  on  Piper  Controls.

Last  time,  viz.  in  1890,  I  gave  a  full  chronological  series  of  all  the
sittings,  and  it  would  be  easy  to  continue  that  process  on  this
occasion  also.  But  it  would  be  rather  tedious,  and  seems  likely  to
serve  no  useful  purpose.  It  is  a  more  laborious  plan,  but  probably
more  serviceable,  to  dissect  out  the  parts  relating  to  certain  main
episodes,  or  received  from  certain  chief  communicators,  so  as  to  collect
and  arrange  together  all  the  messages  which  purport  to  come  from  a
single  control,  free  from  the  interleaved  communications  from  others.
In  this  way  the  reader  will  be  able  to  get  a  better  grasp  of  the
personality,  or  of  the  impersonation,  as  the  case  may  be,  than  if  his
utterances  were  scattered  about  through  the  sittings  as  in  the  old
record.

It  is  even  desirable,  I  think,  to  extract  from  those  old  records  a
few  of  the  utterances  which  purported  to  come  then  from  the  same
communicators ;  and  likewise  to  record  a  few  of  the  messages  given
by  these  communicators  through  other  mediums,  so  far  as  they
have  come  directly  to  myself  and  are  concerned  with  the  same
general  sort  of  topics.

On  the  cross-correspondence  messages  I  shall  touch  only  very  lightly,
though  I  recognise  their  great  importance ;  because  this  part  of  the
subject  requires  the  collation  of  the  contemporary  records  of  several
sitters,  and  the  labour  of  doing  this  has  been  left  to  Mr.  Piddington,


138


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


One  curious  circumstance  I  feel  constrained  to  mention — though  it
will  seem  absurd — and  that  is  that  the  controls  seem  to  do  best  in
their  own  country.  For  instance,  long  ago,  before  any  of  us  on  this
side  of  the  Atlantic  had  seen  Mrs.  Piper,  a  control  calling  itself
Gurney  sent  messages  through  that  medium  while  she  was  still  in
America ;  which  messages,  when  recorded  on  this  side,  were  thought
feeble  and  unworthy,  so  that  the  control  was  spoken  of  both  by
Prof.  W,  James  and  by  those  in  England  as  "  the  pseudo-Gurney."
When,  however,  Mrs.  Piper  came  over  here  the  "Gurney"  messages
became  better,  and  could  be  described  as  quite  fairly  lifelike.  Con-
versely, the  Hodgson  control,  which  seemed  rather  brilliant  and
active  over  there,  when  it  appeared  on  this  side  did  not  sustain
that  character  to  the  full  extent.  It  was  robust  and  lively,  and  in
manner  like  Hodgson,  but  it  was  not  so  successful  in  furnishing
tests  or  in  recognising  old  friends.  Again,  the  Myers  control,  which
had  seemed  rather  weak  over  there,  on  this  side  gained  strength
and  vivacity,  and  gave  some  admirable  tests.

The  fact  of  the  difference  here  suggested  may  be  doubted,  and  I
do  not  dogmatise  about  it,  but  that  is  my  impression  ;  and  I  see  that
something  similar  has  already  struck  Mr.  Piddington,  and  is  remarked
upon  by  him  at  the  beginning  of  his  Introduction.  I  have  no
explanation  to  offer,  beyond  the  obvious  suggestion  that  familiar
and  friendly  surroundings — greater  intimacy  of  friends  and  relations
in  the  proximate  neighbourhood — all  make  for  strength  and  reality
and  give  assistance  to  the  impersonation.  This  indeed  is  a  conceiv-
able possibility  on  any  hypothesis,  whether  the  control  is  merely  a
personation  by  Mrs.  Piper's  subliminal  consciousness,  or  is  a  telepathic
influence  from  living  persons  acting  upon  it,  or  whether  it  is  really
some  surviving  influence  of  the  departed  intelligence  who  is  the
ostensible  communicator.

In  speaking  of  messages  received  from  a  certain  control,  it  is  not
to  be  understood  in  general  that  that  control  is  actually  manipulating
the  organism ;  it  may  be  always,  and  certainly  is  in  general,  merely
dictating  through  an  amanuensis  as  it  were, — the  actual  writer  or
speaker  being  either  'Rector'  or  'Phinuit,'  who  again  may  or  may
not  be  a  phase  of  Mrs.  Piper's  personality.

In  the  old  days,  undoubtedly,  the  appearance  was  sometimes  as
if  the  actual  control  was  changed — after  the  fashion  of  a  multiple
personality ;  whereas  now  I  think  it  is  nearly  always  Rector  that
writes,  recording  the  messages  given  to  him  as  nearly  as  he  can,
and  usually  reporting  in  the  first  person,  as  Phinuit  often  did.  I


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  I.  139


do  not  attempt  to  discriminate  between  what  is  given  in  this  way
and  what  is  given  directly,  because  it  is  practically  impossible  to  do
so  with  any  certainty;  since  what  appears  to  be  direct  control  is  liable
to  shade  off  into  obvious  reporting.  That  is  to  say,  if  a  special
agency  gets  control  and  writes  for  a  few  minutes,  it  does  not  seem
able  to  sustain  the  position  long,  but  soon  abandons  it  to  the  more
accomplished  and  experienced  personality,  Rector.  In  the  recent
series  there  appeared  very  little  evidence  of  direct  control  other
than  Rector.

We  shall  speak  however  of  the  'Gurney  control,'  'the  Hodgson
•control',  etc.,  without  implying  that  these  agents — even  assuming
their  existence  and  activity — are  ever  really  in  physical  possession
of  the  organism ;  and,  even  when  they  are  controlling  as  directly  as
possible,  they  may  perhaps  always  be  operating  telepathically  on  it
rather  than  telergically — operating,  that  is  to  say,  through  some
stratum  of  the  mind,  rather  than  directly  on  any  part  of  the
physical  organism.  It  is  rather  soon  as  yet  to  make  definite
assertions  regarding  the  actual  method  of  control :  there  are  too
many  unknown  quantities  about  the  whole  phenomenon ;  at  the
same  time  Dr.  Hodgson  has  thought  it  worth  while  to  report
the  general  aspect  of  the  phenomenon  as  it  is  said  to  appear  to  the
"communicators"  themselves;  he  does  this  on  page  400  of  Vol.  13
{a  portion  is  quoted  below  on  page  147).  And  in  the  next  few
pages  he  goes  on  to  indicate  his  own  independent  view  of  what  is
occurring,  giving  a  detailed  description  which  my  own  smaller  ex-
perience, as  far  as  it  goes,  tends  in  a  general  way  to  confirm.  Readers
interested  in  these  particulars  may  here  conveniently  refer  to  further
remarks  on  the  subject  in  Chapter  II.,  pp.  161,  147.
One  other  point  deserves  to  be  here  mentioned : —
In  the  days  of  Phinuit  considerable  facility  was  shown  in  dealing
with  strangers.  Persons  introduced  anonymously  had  their  relations
•enumerated,  and  their  family  affairs  referred  to,  in  a  remarkably
quick  and  clever  way  :  so  much  so  that  they  sometimes  thought  that
their  special  case  must  have  been  "got  up"  beforehand.  The  facility
for  dealing  with  strangers  in  this  way  is  now  much  less  marked.
The  introduction  of  a  stranger  now  makes  things  slow  and  laborious,
and  is  on  the  whole  discouraged ;  for  although  the  old  characteristics
continue  to  some  extent,  the  tests  now  given  are  mainly  of  a  different
kind.  The  early  procedure  was  useful  at  the  beginning,  and  it
•continued  useful  for  a  good  many  years  till  a  case  for  investigation
was  firmly  established ;  but  it  must  have  seemed  tedious  to  prolong


140


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


that  method  further,  so  the  group  of  controls  associated  with  Rector
assured  Dr  Hodgson  that  they  would  take  the  trance  in  hand  and
develop  it  on  better  and  higher  lines.

As  to  how  far  the  change  is  an  improvement,  there  has  been  at
times  some  difference  of  opinion  ;  but  in  view  of  the  remarkable
tests  recently  given  under  what,  though  of  several  years'  standing,
may  be  called,  the  new  regime — tests  which  have  been  dissected
out  by  Mr.  Piddington — there  can  be  but  little  doubt  about  the
improvement  now,  however  imperfectly  or  doubtfully  it  may  manifest
itself  in  my  small  portion  of  the  whole  report.  I  shall  begin,  how-
ever, not  with  messages  received  under  the  new  conditions,  but  with
some  received  under  the  old.


CHAPTER  II.

The  Gurney  Control.

Some  of  the  messages  purporting  to  come  directly  or  indirectly
from  the  late  Edmund  Gurney  were  received  by  me  in  1889,  and
are  partially  reported  in  the  Proceedings,  Vol.  6,  already  referred
to  ;  but  part  was  ignored  as  unverifiable,  and  another  part  suppressed
as  too  private ;  moreover,  even  the  part  published  is  disguised  under
the  pseudonym  of  "  Mr.  E."  This  anonymity  seems  no  longer
necessary ;  and  I  shall  no  longer  trouble  myself  as  to  whether
the  communication  refers  to  verifiable  subjects  or  not,  but  shall
give  what  was  said  as  completely  as  possible — that  is  to  say  as-
far  as  it  could  be  taken  down  by  a  moderately  expert  note-taker
with  an  excellent  memory — in  order  to  convey  some  idea  of  the
conversation.

On  the  whole,  it  was  rather  a  lifelike  impersonation,  and  now
that  we  have  determined  to  make  the  working  hypothesis  that
deceased  members  of  the  S.P.R.  may  conceivably  have  something
to  do  with  the  messages,  I  propose  to  republish  the  old  Gurney
communications,  so  as  to  make  a  more  complete  set.

It  should  be  remembered,  however,  that  the  communications  in
the  earlier  sittings  were  by  word  of  mouth,  which,  although  the
easier  and  livelier  and  more  interesting  method,  is  not  so  con-
ducive to  exact  record  as  the  writing  plan.

The  report  aims  at  being  a  correct  representation,  but  cannot  be
regarded  as  verbally  precise,  since  it  necessarily  suffers  from  defect


lviil] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  II.  141


frequentl}',  and  there  is  no  guarantee  against  occasional  mishearing.
But  the  chief  fault  is  omission  of  connecting  words  and  such  like,
resulting  in  a  jerkiness  of  style  not  necessarily  characteristic.

With  regard  to  the  influence  of  the  medium  herself  upon  the
messages,  there  is  in  all  cases  bound  to  be  a  certain  amount  of
sophistication  attributable  to  this  cause,  and  some  hesitation  and  con-
fusion, owing  to  the  cropping  up  from  time  to  time,  or  perhaps  the
constant  superposition,  of  idiosyncracies  of  the  medium  herself.  In
other  words,  the  impersonation,  however  good,  cannot  be  perfect;
and  this  we  say  with  the  more  confidence  now  that  we  have  the
same  control  purporting  to  communicate  through  different  mediums.
The  manner,  and  even  partly  the  matter,  is  coloured  by  the  medium  ;
so  that,  for  instance,  we  have  to  speak  of  the  Piper-Myers,  the
Verrall-Myers,  and  the  Holland-Myers,  as  to  some  extent  different
people,  though  also  to  a  great  extent  similar.

For  instance,  one  and  the  same  sentiment  or  fact  can  be  expressed
through  Mrs.  Verrall  by  classical  language  and  allusions,  through
Mrs.  Holland  with  some  poetic  composition  and  literary  style,  and
through  Mrs.  Piper  in  simple  English.

If  a  child  were  the  medium,  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect
some  childish  turns  of  phrase ;  whereas  the  brain  of  a  scholar  natur-
ally furnishes  an  instrument  of  greater  power  and  scope.

The  communications  which  immediately  follow  are  all  from  the
Piper  Gurney,  or,  as  Mr.  Piddington  denotes  it,  from  GurneyP.

A  few  episodes  are  said  by  the  control  to  be  private,  he  did  not
want  them  told  to  others  or  published,  and  accordingly  these  are
perforce  omitted.  They  were  of  an  identifying  nature,  and  conveyed
information  as  to  facts  previously  unknown  to  me ;  I  was  per-
mitted to  mention  them  to  Mr.  Myers,  and  they  turned  out  to  be
true.  I  am  informed  however  that  they  had  already  come  out  in
the  presence  of  sitters  aware  of  the  facts ;  so  that  they  had  not
the  evidential  importance  that  might  attach  to  them  if  they  had  been
mentioned  a  first  time  while  only  one  who  was  ignorant  of  them  was
present.  Of  some  I  have  no  record,  and  these  I  have  practically  for-
gotten. But  I  remember  this, — that  I  learnt  in  this  way  more  about
the  life  and  thoughts  of  Edmund  Gurney  than  I  had  known  in  his
lifetime.  My  acquaintance  with  him  was  not  intimate,  and  its  history
can  be  briefly  given.  It  began  in  the  early  seventies,  when  in  order  to
proceed  with  his  study  of  Sound,  he  came  as  a  senior  student  and
sat  on  the  benches  of  University  College,  London,  to  listen  to  my
regular college  lectures on Mechanics and Physics, in  classes


142


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


with  which  I  was  entrusted  at  that  time  by  Professor  Carey
Foster.  He  was  good  enough  to  strike  up  a  friendship  with  his
youthful  instructor,  and  I  occasionally  lunched  with  him,  and  once
or  twice  saw  him  in  his  rooms  at  Clarges  Street.

The  talk  gradually  turned  upon  psychical  matters,  concerning
which  I  was — as  were  most  young  physicists  in  those  days —
entirely  sceptical  and  completely  ignorant.  Though  he  did  not
let  it  consume  the  whole  of  his  time,  I  recollect  that  Mr.  Gurney
was  even  then  at  work  on  systematic  preparation  for  the  book,
Phantasms  of  the  Living,  and  that  his  room  was  strewn  with  papers
and  printed  slips.  Before  long  he  introduced  me  to  his  friend,
F.  W.  H.  Myers,  who,  like  Mr.  Gurney,  was  patience  itself  in  trying
to  inspire  my  superficial  and  dogmatic  materialism  with  an  element
of  larger  sense.

A  few  years  after  all  this  the  S.P.R.  was  founded,  but  I  was  not
one  of  the  original  members.  I  joined,  I  suppose,  after  the  Liverpool
thought-transference  experiments  in  1883  and  1884.  I  had  migrated
to  Liverpool  in  1881,  and  remained  there  till  1900.  Professor  Barrett
I  had  of  course  known  all  along  as  a  physicist,  and  in  the  eighties
we  had  some  conversations  on  thought-transference  in  connexion  with
the  Liverpool  experiments,  in  some  of  which  I  took  part,  and  on
which  I  reported  in  the  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  2.

Until  1884  I  was  unconvinced  of  the  possibility  of  telepathy;
and  not  till  the  end  of  1889  did  the  evidence  for  survival  of
personality  beyond  bodily  death  make  any  serious  impression  upon
me,  though  I  recognised  the  force  of  some  of  the  arguments
employed.  The  subject  did  not  trouble  me  however.  I  knew  that
the  facts  must  be  in  one  direction  or  another,  and  there  I  was
content  to  leave  them  ;  under  the  belief  that  real  knowledge  was
impossible.  So  if  anyone  represents  that  I  was  keenly  anxious  to
believe  and  be  assured  on  this  subject,  at  this  or  any  other  time,,
they  are  unintentionally  representing  a  falsehood.1

I  did  not  get  to  know  Myers  really  well  till  about  this  date,  and
it  was  later  still  before  I  gained  any  genuine  acquaintance  with
Henry  Sidgwick.  Before  his  death,  Myers  had  become  perhaps  my
most  intimate  friend;  but  Edmund  Gurney  died  in  1888,  at  a  time
when  I  was  entirely  absorbed  in  orthodox  physical  experiments  and
theory,  in  connexion  with  electric  waves.

1  See,  for  instance,  some  anonymous  gossip  quoted  by  Mr.  Edward  Clodd  in,
his  book  called  Pioneers  of  Evolution,  page  66.


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  II.  143>


Old  Piper  Sittings.

Sitting  on  evening  of  21  Dec,  1889,  with  Mrs.  Piper.
0.  J.  L.  alone.

The  first  mention  of  Gurney  in  my  sittings  occurred  on  Saturday
evening,  Dec.  21,  1889,  at  a  sitting  which  I  had  alone,  taking  notes
as  best  I  could ;  for  at  that  time  it  was  the  custom  for  the  medium
to  hold  one  of  the  sitter's  hands.  It  is  only  very  partially  reported
on  page  493,  Vol.  6.

After  the  messages  already  reported,  ending,  "It  is  the  one  who*
doesn't  paint  who  is  married,"  Phinuit  went  on  : —

You  have  got  a  mighty  good  life  before  you.  You  are
going  to  be  very  rich.  I  wish  I  had  your  life.  It  is
through  your  work.  There  will  be  a  change  of  work
in  two  years,  and  you  will  go  out  of  present  sur-
roundings.

[This  is  quoted  as  an  example  of  the  style  of  some  of
Phinuit's  humorous  attempts  at  fortune-telling  predic-
tions, to  which  every  now  and  then  he  shamelessly
resorts  when  gravelled  for  lack  of  matter  (Cf.  top  of
p.  497  of  Vol.  6,  also  p.  525  and  elsewhere).]

(A  photograph  of  my  late  Demonstrator  Mr.  Clark  was
here  handed  in.)

0.  J.  L.  Can  you  tell  who  this  is  1

Well  I  will  try.  Edmund  will  help  me.  A  vessel  burst
in  his  stomach,  and  he  passed  out  very  suddenly.  He
was  away,  not  at  home.  A  clever  fellow  and  a  great
help. He  fell.  .  Edmund  sends  his  love  to  you.

(A  letter  from  Edmund  Gurney  was  handed  in.)

0.  J.  L.  Can  you  read  this  1

Oh,  I  don't  know. I  can't  read  it  word  for  word. I  can

tell  you  what  it  is  about.
It  has  got  Edmund's  influence  on  it.

So  had  that  picture.  Had  you  kept  it  with  Edmund's
letter?


144


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


O.  J.  L.  Well  it  had  been  in  the  same  pocket.

You  must  not  do  that.  You  mix  things  up  if  you  do  that.
No,  I  can't  read  this  letter.  It  is  something  about
some  books,  and  asking  you  about  something.  There  is
an  illness  described  in  it  and  a  person  in  trouble.  It
is  about  an  experiment  or  for  a  meeting,  and  about
some  experiments. No,  I  give  it  up.

[Here  the  personality  seemed  to  change  and  to  represent
Edmund  Gurney,  He  spoke  so  naturally  that  for  a
time  I  forgot  to  take  notes,  but  nothing  evidential
was  said. The  notes  go  on  thus:—

They  are  henceforward  very  imperfect,  i.e.  fragmentary.]

I  am  here,  I  etherially  exist. I  wrote  to  you  about  some

books  for  the  Society.
I  have  seen  a  little  woman  that's  a  medium,  a  true  medium.

I  have  written  to  Myers  using  her  hand. I  did  do  it,

I,  Edmund  Gurney,  I.

O.  J.  L.  Is  this  a  medium  here  now  ?

Yes,  she's  a  medium.  Very  few  you  will  get  like  Dr.
Phinuit.  He  is  not  all  one  would  wish,  but  he  is
all  right.

You  are  Lodge.  I  know  you.  Lodge  we  shall  beat  them
yet.  There  is  no  death,  only  a  shadow  and  then
Light.  Experiment  and  observation  are  indispensable.
We  have  to  use  some  method  like  this  to  communicate.

My  extant  notes  here  come  to  an  abrupt  end,  the  lower  half
of  the  paper  being  cut  off,  presumably  because  something  concern-
ing Gurney's  private  affairs  was  said  which  I  was  asked  not  to
remember.

At  any  rate  I  do  not  remember  what  it  was.  One  of  the  ad-
vantages of  a  lone  sitting  like  this  is  that  the  controls  seem  to
feel  freer,  and  more  willing  to  enter  upon  more  private,  and
therefore  more  really  evidential,  subjects,  than  when  a  reporter  is
present.  Before  closing  we  discussed  Phinuit's  powers  a  little,  and
I  told  the  Gurney  control  that  I  had  arranged  a  special  clair-
voyant experiment  which  I  wanted  to  try  with  the  Phinuit  control.
That  is  to  say  I  wanted  to  see  if  he  could  read  some  letters
which,  in  that  grouping,  were  not  and  never  had  been  in  anybody's


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  II.  145


mind, — namely  some  cardboard  letters  pinched  by  me  at  random
from  a  child's  alphabet  box  and  forthwith  sealed  up.  I  doubted
if  it  was  of  much  use,  but  wanted  to  try  in  order  to  test  for  clair-
voj^ance  as  against  telepathy. The  voice  said  : —

By  all  means  try. All  these  experiments  must  be  tried.

0.  J.  L.  Well,  tell  him  it's  very  important.

Yes. Here  he  is  coming  back. (Change  of  control.)

Now  then,  what  is  it  you  want  of  me '?

0.  J.  L.  I  want  you,  doctor,  to  tell  me  what's  in  this  box,  please.
No  one  knows.

Give  me  a  pencil  (putting  the  box  on  top of  medium's
head).

A  pencil  was  handed  to  him  and  he  wrote  on  cardboard,
slowly,

LK  Q  U  C  N

and  then  dropped  the  pencil.
I  am  getting  too  weak.

Try  me  earlier  on  another  time. I  am  going  now.

This  was  the  end  of  the  sitting,  and  Mrs.  Piper  speedily  came  to.

I  may  as  well  repeat  that  this  clairvoyance  experiment,  as  reported
in  Note  B  on  p.  494  of  Vol.  6,  entirely  failed.  The  letters  were
not  read.  It  is  true  that  this  matter  has  nothing  whatever  to  do
with  the  Gurney  episode,  but  I  think  it  better  to  exhibit  con-
tinuity between  the  portion  previously  reported  and  the  portion
which  I  now  report  more  fully.  So  I  give  a  little  bit  at  the
beginning  and  a  little  bit  at  the  end,  each  time.

I  have  no  particular  comment  to  make  upon  this  sitting ;  the
published  parts  of  which  are  not  remarkable.

Specimens  of  unverijiable  communications.

People  constantly  ask  why  the  communicators  do  not  deal  with
subjects  that  are  important,  or  which  give  us  new  information.  I
see  no  reason  to  suppose  that  we  are  here  in  contact  with  a  trust-
worthy source  of  general  information,  or  that  the  controls  know  more
about  things  than  we  do.  When  an  opportunity  is  occasionally  given
for  miscellaneous  conversation,  the  following  is  the  kind  of  thin"

K


146


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


obtained — at  least  in  the  case  of  this  medium  at  that  time ;  and  it
is  not  encouraging,  nor  does  it  make  us  greedy  for  more.  It  must
be  remembered  that  it  was  obtained  twenty  years  ago,  and  that  it
is  rather  exceptional  ;  so  if  any  critic  selects  this  rubbishy  portion
as  a  fair  specimen  of  what  comes  through  under  ordinary  circum-
stances, he  will  be  criticising  unfairly.

The  sensory  nervous  system is the foundation  of  all

etherial substance  recall  mundane

experience.  the  sensory  nervous  system  is  a  medium
through  which  the  etherial  intellect  like  mine  must
operate.  But  you  must  be  good.  Immorality,  im-
purity, never  approaches  the  spirit  world.  There  are
two  spheres,  and  the  good  are  separated  from  the  bad.

Is  it  not  overcrowded  1

No,  it  is  a  spacious  place.  The  body  is  only  a  covering
for  the  etherial  to  grow  in.  It  is  difficult  to  know
things  when  in  it.

Is  evolution  true  ?

Yes,  God  is  in  Nature,  all  Nature  is  God.  We  are  a
reflexion  of  God.  Don't  give  up  a  good  thing.  The
world  will  know,  and  our  Society  will  know,  that  there
is  no  death.  I  didn't  know.  I  would  have  given
anything  to  have  had  you  come  and  speak  to  me,  if
you  had  passed  away  first,  as  I  am  speaking  to  you
now.

Is  it  good  to  be  where  you  are  1

Yes,  it  is  good, — the  only  good  thing.
Life  in  material  world  is  beautiful.
Marriage  is  beautiful,  but  this  is  far  better.

Is  there  no  marriage  ?

No,  no,  Swedenborg  was  all  wrong.
Jesus  Christ  was  right ;  he  knew.
He  was  a  reflexion  of  God.

More  than  any  one  else  1

Yes,  more  than  any  one  else. And  why  1

Because  he  was  purer  and  better  in  every  way  .....


lviil] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  II.  147


All  this  does  not  amount  to  much,  and  it  would  be  quite  easy
to  suppress  this  portion ;  but,  as  it  was  at  that  time  a  part  of  the
phenomenon,  it  is  thought  fairer  to  quote  a  specimen  of  what  could
be  got  when  rein  was  given,  as  in  this  instance,  to  anything  that
came.  Usually  unverifiable  utterances  of  this  kind  were  not
encouraged.

Here  also  I  might  insert  the  summary  made  by  Dr.  Hodgson  in
1897  of  what  the  communicators  themselves  say  as  to  what  appears
to  them  to  be  occurring  on  the  physical  side  while  they  are  com-
municating. Their  statements,  he  says,  may  be  put  in  brief  general
terms  as  follow  (I  quote  from  Vol.  13,  p.  400).

"We  all  have  bodies  composed  of  '  luminiferous  ether'  enclosed
in  our  flesh  and  blood  bodies.  The  relation  of  Mrs.  Piper's  etherial
body  to  the  etherial  world,  in  which  the  'communicators'  claim  to
dwell,  is  such  that  a  special  store  of  peculiar  energy  is  accumulated
in  connection  with  her  organism,  and  this  appears  to  them  as  '  a
light.'  Mrs.  Piper's  etherial  body  is  removed  by  them,  and  her
ordinary  body  appears  as  a  shell  filled  with  this  'light.'  Several
'  communicators '  may  be  in  contact  with  this  light  at  the  same
time.

"  There  are  two  chief  '  masses '  of  it  in  her  case,  one  in  connection
with  the  head,  the  other  in  connection  with  the  right  arm  and
hand.  Latterly,  that  in  connection  with  the  hand  has  been  'brighter'
than  that  in  connection  with  the  head.  If  the  'communicator'  gets
into  contact  with  the  'light' and  thinks  his  thoughts,  they  tend  to
be  reproduced  by  movements  in  Mrs.  Piper's  organism.  Very  few
can  produce  vocal  effects,  even  when  in  contact  with  the  '  light '  of
the  head,  but  practically  all  can  produce  writing  movements  when
in  contact  with  the  'light'  of  the  hand.  Upon  the  amount  and
brightness  of  this  '  light,'  aeteris  paribus,  the  communications  depend.
When  Mrs.  Piper  is  in  ill-health,  the  '  light '  is  feebler,  and  the
communications  tend  to  be  less  coherent.

"  It  also  gets  used  up  during  a  sitting,  and  when  it  gets  dim
there  is  a  tendency  to  incoherence  even  in  otherwise  clear  com-
municators. In  all  cases,  coming  into  contact  with  this  '  light '  tends
to  produce  bewilderment,  and  if  the  contact  is  continued  too  long,
or  the  '  light '  becomes  very  dim,  the  consciousness  of  the  communicator
tends  to  lapse  completely."

Needless  to  say  that  in  thus  making  a  jirtcis  of  a  number  of
statements,  Dr.  Hodgson  is  not  to  be  supposed  as  in  any  degree
vouching  for  their  accuracy,  nor  even  for  their  reasonable  sense —


148


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


he  goes  on,  in  fact,  to  give  his  own  independent  view  of  the  matter
— but  such  statements  are  interesting  and  deserve  study  as  part
of  the  phenomenon.  They  must  certainly  represent  a  subjective  or
dream-like  imjjression  of  some  true  and  ultimately  intelligible  kind.

As  a  further  example  of  non-evidential  statement  I  quote  a  state-
ment made  about  the  difficulty  of  recalling  old  memories,  which  I
find  among  some  reports  made  to  me  by  Mr.  Dorr  of  remarks  made
to  a  lady  during  a  sitting  in  America  in  1906  (cf.  pp.  202-5).

(The  Hodgson  control  communicating  by  the  voice.)

Sitter.  I  want  you  to  tell  me  something  that  you  do  on  your  side.

You  saw  Mr.  Dorr  yesterday.  Now  what  have  you  done
since  you  saw  him  1

Oh,  Myers  and  I,  we  have  formed  a  society  over  here.  I
suppose  you  know  that  ?

Sitter.  Yes.

And  we  are  investigating  the  conditions  that  constitute  a
medium,  and  I  have  been  studying  that  very  carefully
since  I  was  here  yesterday,  and  that  is  the  work  in
which  I  am  engaged  now.  I  am  also  looking  up  mediums
on  the  earthly  side  and  trying  to  find  those  through
whom  it  would  be  safe  to  speak. Is  that  clear  1

Sitter.  Perfectly.

(Rector  communicating.)  Oh,  I  hear  his  voice  just  as  plain
as  I  ever  heard  anything.  It  is  very  clear.  Some  things,
when  dissolution  takes  place,  go  so  completely  out  of
one's  mind  that  it  takes  time  to  recall  those  incidents.
The  impressions  and  thoughts  in  the  mortal  mind  are
removed  when  the  spirit  is  released,  temporarily.  It  takes
time  to  recall  those  memories. Is  that  clear  1

Incidentally,  and  as  a  continuation  of  non-evidential  matter,  I
will  also  quote  a  little  bit  of  Phinuitesque  assertion  about  Christmas
day  which  was  previously  omitted  from  the  report  on  page  516,
Vol.  6.  I  insert  it  now  because  it  is  not  now  my  object  to  deal
with  verifiable  incidents  alone,  which  by  this  time  are  numerous,
but  to  give  an  idea  of  the  manner  and  method  of  the  whole
business — especially  as  it  was  in  the  old  days.


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  II.  149


The  sitting  opens  with  a  curious  episode,  characteristic  of  the
relation  between  the  controls  and  the  medium.  They  sometimes
speak  of  'seeing  a  woman  going  away'  as  they  come  in.  A  new
control  often  does  not  know  who  she  is,  or  what  she  has  to  do  with
the  business.  For  instance,  on  page  453,  Vol.  6,  a  '  Mr.  Wilson '  is
supposed  to  be  controlling,  and  to  him  I  am  explaining  the
desirability  of  eliminating  the  hypothesis  of  telepathy  from  the
sitter  "  whose  mind  might  be  influencing  that  of  the  medium " ;
when  he  replies  : —

I  see  your  idea,  but  what  do  you  mean  by  the  '  medium '  1
That  woman  I  saw  just  now1?

0.  J.  L.  Yes.

Phinuit  of  course  knows  her  well.  Sometimes  the  control
speaks  of  having  tried  to  grasp  the  'spirit  of  the  light'  and
give  it  a  message  as  it  was  returning  to  its  body.  (See  p.  96  of
J.  G.  P.'s  Report,  Vol.  22.)  Whether  the  same  kind  of  thing
happens  sometimes  in  pathological  cases  of  multiple  personality  I  am
not  sure.

Evening  of  25th  Dec,  1889. Control  at  first  Phinuit.
Present — 0.  J.  L.  anil  Professor  Alfred  Lodge.

Captain,  do  you  know  that  as  I  came  I  met  the  medium
going  out,  and  she's  crying. Why  is  she  crying  ?

["  Captain  "  was  the  humorous  nickname  employed  by  Phinuit
to  designate  0.  J.  L.]

0.  J.  L.  Well  the  fact  is  she's  separated  from  her  children  for  a  few
days,  and  to-day  being  Christmas  day  she  is  feeling
rather  low  about  it.

Christmas  day  ! Do  you  think  we  don't  know  that  1

O.  J.  L.  Oh  do  you  1

Certainly,  it's  the  day  Christ  was  born  isn't  it, and  he
always  appears  to  us  on  that  day.

0.  J.  L.  Do  you  not  often  see  him  ?

No,  he's  much  higher. I  have  only  seen  him  two  or  three
times. He's  very  high  up.


150


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


I  have  got  your  mother's  influence  very  strong :  she's  been
talking  to  Edmund  Gurney — a  nice  fellow  he  is — she's
very  fond  of  you ;  he'll  tell  her  all  about  you.  She  has
got  on  a  good  way  since  she  passed  out.  Do  you  know
what  we  mean  by  Christ's  appearing  1

0.  J.  L.  No.

We  have  to  express  it  in  your  language.  He  comes  to-day
with  a  basket  of  flowers,  forget-me-nots,  and  gives  them
to  the  little  children.  They  are  awfully  pleased  when
they  see  him  coming.  (Cf.  a  somewhat  similar  statement
on  p.  545,  Vol.  6.)
How  are  you  Alfred  1 I've  your  mother's  influence  strong.

[And  so  on  as  already  reported,  p.  516,  ending,]
Convince  yourself,  and  let  others  do  the  same. We  are  all

liable  to  make  mistakes,  but  you  can  see  for  yourself.
Here's  a  gentleman  wants  to  speak  to  you.
(Phinuit  now  seemed  to  leave,  and  another  control,  speaking
in  a  more  educated  voice,  took  his  place ;  the  change
taking  place  with a  little  uncertainty  and  difficulty
as  to  how to  manage it, and a  seeming  colloquy
between  the  departing  and  entering  controls, — Phinuit
giving  sotto  voce  instructions. After  the change  was
over,  the  voice  said)
Lodge,  how  are  you  ? I  tell  you  Edmund  Gurney  is  living,
not  dead. Edmund  Gurney  that's  me : you  know  me
don't  you  ?

0.  J.  L.  Yes  Gurney,  delighted  to  see  you  again.

Don't  give  it  up  Lodge.  Cling  to  it,  it's  the  best  thing
you  have.  It's  coarse  in  the  beginning  but  it  can  be
ground  down  fine.  You'll  know  best  and  correct  (?)  It
can  only  come  through  a  trance.  You  have  to  put  her
in  a  trance.  You've  got  to  do  it  that  way  to  make
yourself  known.

0.  J.  L.  Is  it  bad  for  the  medium  1

It's  the  only  way  Lodge  ;  in  one  sense  it's  bad,  but  in  another
it's  good.  It  is  her  work.  If  I  take  possession  of  the
medium's  body,  and  she  goes  out,  then  I  can  use  her
organism  to  tell  the  world  important  truths. There  is


lviil] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  II.  151


an  infinite  power  above  us.  Lodge  believe  it  fully,
infinite  over  all,  most  marvellous.

One  can  tell  a  medium  she's  like  a  ball  of  light.  You  look
as  dark  and  material  as  possible,  but  we  find  two  or
three  lights  shining.  It's  like  a  series  of  rooms  with
candles  at  one  end.  Must  use  analogy  to  express  it.
When  you  need  a  light  you  use  it,  when  you  have
finished  you  put  it  out.  They  are  like  transparent
windows  to  see  through.

Lodge,  it's  a  puzzle.  It's  a  puzzle  to  us  here  in  a  way
though  we  understand  it  better  than  you.  I  work  at
it  hard.  I  do.  I'd  give  anything  I  possess  to  find  out.
I  don't  care  for  material  things  now,  our  interest  is
much  greater.  I  am  studying  hard  how  to  communi-
cate ;  it's  not  easy.  But  it's  only  a  matter  of  a  short
time  before  I  shall  be  able  to  tell  the  world  all  sorts
of  things  through  one  medium  or  another. — Who's  that  1

0.  J.  L.  It's  my  brother. He's  taking  notes.

Make  experiments,  observe,  record,  Lodge. Observation  and

experiment  are  indispensable.
I  have  seen  your  father,  but  am  not  very  well  acquainted

with  him.

I  suppose  people  thought  I  was  well,  but  I  wasn't.  No,  far
from  it.  Lodge  if  I  could  take  the  same  body  and  be
the  same  as  before  I  wouldn't  take  it.  I  would  far
rather  be  as  I  am  than  as  I  was.

What  was  that  letter  you  shewed  the  Doctor  1  [i.e.  Phinuit]

0.  J.  L.  Oh,  one  you  wrote  to  me  about  taking  the  chair  for  you  at
Liverpool.

I  have  met  an  aunt  of  yours ;  was  introduced.  A  delightful
character.  Not  had  the  advantages  many  have,  but
thoroughly  good  and  sensible.

0.  J.  L.  How  is  it  they  see  their  things  1

I  don't  know,  there  is  something  about  articles  worn  by
spirits  which  retains  their  personality  (?)  and  a  spirit
controlling  a  medium  is  sensitive  to  such.  In  nine  cases
out  of  ten  they  will  recognise  their  things ;  it  doesn't
come  from  your  mind.


152


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


0.  J.  L.  Then  it's  not  ordinary  thought  transference.

No,  it's  not  that.  Investigate.  You  can  verify  with  patience.
From  time  to  time  you  will  hear  from  me  and  I  will
advise  you.

I  met  a  lady  in  America — a  Mrs.  Dorr.  [A  lady  well
known  to  Mrs.  Piper,  but  I  did  not  happen  to  know
the  name  then. 0.  J.  L.~\

0.  J.  L.  Daw  ?

No,  Dorr,  D(o,r,r,  a  very  nice  lady;  very  intellectual  spiritual
and  good.  I  had  a  long  talk  with  her,  and  through  her
I  found  the  medium.  She  is  a  medium.  These  people
are  links  between  the  material  and  spirit  worlds.  Their
spiritual  body  is  stronger  than  their  material  body.
The  light  is  given  to  them  and  to  us.  Using  her
organism  may  be  bad  for  her  in  one  sense,  but  not
in  another.  She  will  never  allow  herself  to  be  dis-
honest. Sometimes  she  is  not  well.  If  the  physical
is  ill  and  depressed  you  cannot  come  easily.

Where's  Myers1?  Give  him  my  love.  I  want  to  help  him.
Lodge,  when  I  passed  out  at  first  I  didn't  know  who
I  was,  nor  where  I  was.  I  hunted  about  for  my  friends
and  for  my  body.  Soon  however  my  sister  welcomed
me.  Three  of  them,  all  drowned.  If  I  see  Myers  I
will  talk  to  him.  No  spirit  in  the  spirit  world  is  more
anxious  to  let  friends  know  than  I  was.

[Some  private  matter  here.] Don't  mention  this.

Tell  Myers  if  you  like.

Myers  is  my  confidential  friend.

There  is  nothing  I  wouldn't  have  him  know.

Kate  is  my  wife  my  sister  is  Ellen,  [abbreviated]

Lodge  keep  up  your  courage ;  there  is  a  quantity  to  hope  for
yet.  Hold  it  up  for  a  time.  Don't  be  in  a  hurry.  Get
facts ;  no  matter  what  they  call  you,  go  on  investigating.
Test  to  fullest.  Assure  yourself,  then  publish.  It  will
be  all  right  in  the  end — no  question  about  it.  It's
true.

0.  J.  L.  You  have  seen  my  Uncle  Jerry,  haven't  you  1

Yes.  I  met  him  a  little  while  ago — a  very  clever  man — had
an  interesting  talk  with  him.


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  II.  153

0.  J.  L.  What  sort  of  person  is  this  Dr.  Phinuit?

[It  is  noteworthy  that  all  the  Controls  treat  Phinuit  as  a
genuine  person  of  whom  they  have  to  speak  circumspectly
when  he  is  likely  to  be  able  to  overhear  what  they  are
saying  or  read  what  they  are  writing.  Compare,  for
instance,  statements  about  him  made  by  6.  P.  in  the
Hodgson  Eeport;  footnote  to  page  369,  Vol.  13.]

In  the  present  instance  the  Gurney  Control  replied  to  my  question
thus : —

Dr.  Phinuit  is  a  peculiar  type  of  man ;  he  goes  about  con-
tinually and  is  thrown  in  with  everybody.  He  is  eccentric
and  quaint  but  good  hearted.  I  wouldn't  do  the  things  he
does  for  anything.  He  lowers  himself  sometimes ;  it's  a  great
pity.  He  has  very  curious  ideas  about  things  and  people,
he  receives  a  great  deal  about  people  from  themselves  (?).
And  he  gets  expressions  and  phrases  that  one  doesn't  care
for,  vulgar  phrases  he  picks  up  by  meeting  uncanny
people  through  the  medium.  These  things  tickle  him
and  he  goes  about  repeating  them.  He  said  to  me  the
other  day  '  Mr.  Gurney  what  you  think  a  gentleman  said
to  me  the  other  day  :  he  said  "  put  that  in  your  pipe  and
smoke  it  Dr."'  He  picks  up  this  sort  of  thing  and  it
tickles  him.  He  has  to  iuterview  a  great  number  of
people  and  has  no  easy  berth  of  it.  A  high  type  of
man  couldn't  do  the  work  he  does.  But  he  is  a  good-
hearted  old  fellow.  Good-bye  Lodge.  Here's  the  Doctor
coming.

0.  J.  L.  Good-bye  Gurney. Glad  to  have  had  a  chat  with  you.

(The  Control  here  changes  back  again.)

This  [ring]  belongs  to  your  Aunt.
Your  Uncle  Jerry  tells  me  to  ask  .  .  .

By  the  way,  do  you  know  Mr.  Gurney 's  been  here ;  did  you
hear  him  1

0.  J.  L.  Yes,  I've  had  a  long  talk  with  him.

wants  you  to  ask  Uncle  Bob  about  his  cane.

[And  so  on  as  already  reported  on  page  517,  Vol.  6.]

The  Gurney  control  appeared  only  once  more  in  that  year  1889,
on  the  evening  of  Dec.  26,  and  speedily  disappeared, — as  we  were,  so


154


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


to  speak,  engaged.  It  seems  to  have  been  the  third  sitting  held  on
the  same  day,  and  the  last  before  Mrs.  Piper  went  on  to  London.
This  crowding  of  three  sittings  into  one  day  now  seems  extraordinary,
and  cannot  have  been  wise.  However,  they  were  by  no  means  bad
ones — in  fact  they  were  distinctly  good.

The  following  is  the  report :  it  has  already  been  given  on  p.  524,
Vol.  6.

Evening  of  26th  Dec,  1889.  Present— 0.  J.  L.,  M.  L.,  and
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thompson.

(Dr.  Phinuit  speaking  and  reporting  in  the  first  person.)

I  could  almost  come  back  and  die  over  again  to  see  you.
You  tell  Mary  that  her  sister  Isabel  still  lives  •  tell  her
she  has  done  nobly  ;  tell  her  William  and  I  are  together.
That  lazy  gardener !

(Then  the  voice  and  manner  changed  to  that  of  the  Gurney
control.)

Don't  give  up  a  good  thing,  Lodge.  .  .  . Who  is  here  ?

0.  J.  L.  This  is  my  wife.

How  do  you  do,  Mrs.  Lodge  (shaking  hands).
I  remember  having  tea  with  you  once.

[It  was  true  that  Mr.  Gurney  had  done  so.]

0.  J.  L.  (Introducing)  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Thompson.

Yes,  I  remember  you,  I  think. [They  had  once  met.]
Good-bye,  Lodge ;  don't  divulge  my  secrets.

0.  J.  L.  No,  all  right ;  good-bye.

(Then  Dr.  Phinuit  appeared  again  and  said  to  Mr.  T.)

Ted  is  asking  about  George.

Don't  forget  to  tell  him  I  asked  about  him,  and  send  my  love.

[And  so  on  as  reported  on  page  524,  Vol.  6.]

The  point  of  this  short  episode  is  the  sudden  and  natural  stoppage  of
the  conversation  directly  the  control  realises  that  strangers  are
present.  That  and  the  introductions  that  followed  were  all  just  as
if  the  Gurney  control  were  a  person  really  present.


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  II.  155


Mrs.  Piper  returned  to  Liverpool,  from  London,  at  the  end  of
January,  1890,  and  we  held  sittings  again  until  it  was  time  for  her
to  depart  to  America.

The  Gurney  control  appeared  again  on  Feb.  3rd,  and  the  following
is  the  report.

At  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper,  on  Monday  Evening,  3  February,
1890.  Present — 0.  J.  L.  and  E.  C.  L.,  afterivards  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Tlwmpson.

This  sitting  began  with  conversation  with  Phinuit  and  messages
to  Miss  E.  C.  Lodge,  who  was  present,  and  a  final  communication
also  from  "Mr.  Wilson",  as  reported  on  page  552,  Vol.  6.  (It
may  be  interesting  now  to  record  that  this  "  Mr.  Wilson,"  junior,
there  spoken  of  as  travelling,  was  my  friend  the  Rev.  John  Watson
— afterwards  known  as  Ian  Maclaren — at  that  time  on  a  tour  in
Egypt.) Then  Phinuit  suddenly  said,  "  Here's  Mr.  Gurney."

(Thereupon  the  control  appeared  to  change,  the  impression
somehow  conveyed  being  very  much  as  if  Phinuit  were
leaving  and  another  coming  in  his  place.  The  voice  also
became  different  and  more  educated  than  before.  No
longer  was  I  called  '  Captain  ',  nor  were  people's  relations
and  personal  affairs  any  more  regarded  as  objects  of
interest.)

Here's  Mr.  Gurney — (change  of  control).

Lodge  don't  loose  hold  of  a  good  thing.  I  could  have  done
much  for  the  Society  if  I  had  lived,  but  I  can  do  still
more  now.  It  is  wonderfully  difficult  to  communicate.
All  the  time  I've  been  here  I  have  only  found  two
mediums  beside  this  one.  More  people  might  be  mediums,
but  many  won't  when  they  can.

0.  J.  L.  What  constitutes  a  medium  ?

Not  too  much  spirituality  and  not  too  much  animalism,  not
the  highest  people  and  not  the  lowest.  Sympathetic  and
not  too  self-conscious,  able  to  let  their  minds  be  given  up
to  another — that  sort  of  person — easily  influenced.  Many
could,  but  their  pride  and  a  sense  of  self  comes  in  and
spoils  it.


156  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part

0.  J.  L.  Gurney,  what  about  those  table-tilting  and  physical  things  1
Is  there  anything  in  them  ?

Mostly  fraud.  The  rest  electricity.  A  person's  nerves  are
doing  they  don't  know  what.  They  are  often  not
conscious  when  they  move  things.

0.  J.  L.  It's  like  automatic  writing  then  1

Something.  Often  the  tilts  and  noises  are  made  by  them
when  under  the  control  of  some  other  spirit,  and  then  the
message  may  be  genuine.  Trance  things  and  automatic
writing  are  good.  Often  good.  Other  things  sometimes,
but  mostly  fraud.

0.  J.  L.  Can  things  be  moved  without  contact  ?

No. All  bosh.

0.  J.  L.  Then  that  Eglinton  writing,  with  bits  of  pencil  untouched  1

Trickery  Lodge.  Not  worth  a  thought.  Most  of  this  I  have
gone  into,  and  it's  as  false  as  that  elf,  that  fiend  I  might
say.  She  bewitched  me  once.  What's  her  name,  that
woman  who  smoked  1

0.  J.  L.  Blavatsky  1

That's  her  name.

0.  J.  L.  And  what  about  those  Indian  tricks  ? Mango  and  basket
tricks  1

I  do  not  know  about  the  mango,  don't  remember  it ;  but  you
mean  that  cutting  up  a  child  and  flinging  its  legs  and
arms  about.

O.  J.  L.  Yes,  that's  one  of  them.

It's  a  veil  Lodge,  an  etherial  veil  between  the  thing  and  the
spectators.  They  can't  see  what  really  happens.  It's  a
delusion,  it's  done  through  ether.  It's  not  true  spiritualism,
it's  a  gap  in  ether  p]  But  true  spiritualism  has  been  real
ever  since  the  first  life  that  had  any  humanity  in  it.

What  are  you,  Lodge  ?


0.  J.  L.  I  don't  know.


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  II.  lo7

You've  not  made  it  out.  You  are  a  reflexion  of  Christ,  and
Christ's  a  reflexion  of  God.  We  praise  and  bless  him
without  tiring.  Lodge,  I  wouldn't  be  back  for  anything.
I  was  not  happy,  and  I  was  not  well.  Not  at  all
well.

Lodge,  I  told  Myers  what  I  told  you. It's  secret.

0.  J.  L.  Yes  I  know,  I  am  forgetting  it.

That's  right.  Myers  is  the  soul  of  honour,  a  real  friend,  a
true  man. I  told  it  you  as  a  test. Forget  it.

0.  J.  L.  Eight,  I  have  promised  you  before.

Yes,  I  know. Who  is  this?

0.  J.  L.  It's  my  sister,  a  young  girl.

Oh  ;  pleased  to  make  your  acquaintance.
I  didn't  meet  you  I  think.

E.  C.  L.  No,  I  never  saw  you.

Glad  to  see  you  now.  I  wrote  a  little  book  once,  "The
Power  of  Sound." Did  you  ever  read  it  1

E.  C.  L.  No.

You  might  by  chance  be  interested  in  it.

Lodge  I  will  shew  you  some  verses  I  have  written  up  here

some  day.
Phinuit  will  be  coming  back  soon.

He's  a  good  old  man.  He  has  a  hard  place.  I  wouldn't
do  the  work  he  does  for  anything.  Seeing  all  manner
of  people  and  hunting  up  their  friends,  and  often  he  has
hard  work  to  persuade  them  that  they  are  really
wanted.

0.  J.  L.  Is  he  reliable  \

Not  perfectly,  he  is  not  a  bit  infallible.  He  mixes  things
terribly  sometimes.

He  does  his  best;  he's  a  good  old  man  but  he  does  get
confused,  and  when  he  can't  hear  distinctly  he  fills  it
up  himself.  He  does  invent  things  occasionally,  he  cer-
tainly does. Sometimes  he  has  very  hard  work.


158  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part

0.  J.  L.  Are  his  medical  prescriptions  any  good  1

Oh,  he's  a  shrewd  doctor. He  knows  his  business  thoroughly.

He  can see into  people,  and is  very  keen on  their

complaints.
Yes,  he  is  good  in  that  way,  very  good.

0.  J.  L.  Can  he  see  ahead  at  all  1 Can  any  one  1

I  can't. I  haven't  gone  into  that.

I  think  Phinuit  can  a  iittle  sometimes.  He  can  do  wonder-
ful things ;  he  has  studied  these  things  a  good  deal ;
he  can  do  many  things  that  I  can't  do.  He  can  look
up  people's  friends  and  say  what  they  are  doing  some-
times in  an  extraordinary  way.  But  he  is  far  from
being  infallible.

0.  J.  L.  The  Thompsons  are  waiting  in  next  room. Shall  I  call  them
in  1

The  Thompsons?  Oh,  I  know,  I  met  them  at  your  house
once  at  dinner  I  think.  No,  I  don't  specially  want  to
see  them.

Well  Lodge  I  must  be  going.  Good-bye.  Stick  to  a  good
thing  and  don't  give  it  up.  Go  on  with  the  investi-
gation. I  will  help  you.  This  will  be  the  thing  of  the
future,  and  will  increase  people's  happiness.  More
mediums  will  arise,  and  communication  will  be  easier.
Good-bye.

(Here  the  medium  seemed  to  sleep  -a  few  moments,  and
then  woke  up  again  in  the  Phinuit  manner,  putting  out
hand  and  feeling  sitter's  head.)

Eh,  what.  Oh,  yes.  All  right.  [This  was  internal  colloquy.]
Look  here,  Mr.  Gurney  has  been  here  ;  he  told  me  to  express

his regret that he had not said good-bye to  Miss

Lodge.

E.  C.  L.  Oh  it  doesn't  matter  a  bit.

I'm  to  tell  him  that,  am  I. Very  well.

(Mr.  and  Mrs.  T.  had  come  in.)
Here's  Dr.  Thompson  [etc.  as  reported  in  Vol.  6,  page  553].


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  II.  159

Again  it  was  the  dramatic  character  of  the  speaking  that  was
impressive — rather  than  the  things  said.  The  conversation  was
carried  on  in  an  exceedingly  easy  and  natural  manner.  I  attach  no
importance  to  what  is  said  concerning  physical  phenomena  :  it  does
not  pretend  to  represent  more  than  an  individual  opinion,  whoever
the  individual  may  be  ;  but  it  seemed  to  me  interesting  to  ask  this
sort  of  question,  to  see  what  would  be  said.

The  casual  reference  of  unknown  phenomena,  part  to  fraud  the
rest  to  "Electricity,"  though  quite  common  with  uneducated  people,
was  especially  unworthy  of  Edmund  Gurney,  and  not  in  the  least
the  sort  of  thing  he  would  have  said  to  me  when  alive.  In
Phantasms  of  the  Living  he  writes  humorously  of  the  excellent
people  who  are  ready  to  jump  lightly  from  the  hypothesis  of
"fraud"  to  that  of  "electricity",  and  suggests  that  they  are  equally
innocent  of  either  form  of  energy  !  But  the  little  friendly  speeches
to  my  sister  were  quite  appropriate  to  Mr.  Gurney,  and  so  especi-
ally was  the  readiness  to  depart  the  instant  he  heard  that  the
Thompsons  were  waiting  to  come  in.

"  The  Thompsons  1  Oh,  I  know.  I  met  them  at  your
house  once  at  dinner  I  think.  No,  I  don't  specially
want  to  see  them.  Well,  Lodge,  I  must  be  going.
Good-bye."

Not  that  he  had  any  objection  to  them  ;  but,  besides  the  dislike
of  keeping  anyone  waiting,  he  had  the  natural  unwillingness  of  the
man  of  sensitive  temperament  to  be  thrown  with  strangers  needlessly.

It  will  have  been  observed  that  several  times  in  the  record  I  have
emphasised  the  change  of  control.  I  have  done  so  all  the  more  ex-
plicitly because  now  it  seems  a  comparatively  extinct,  or  at  any  rate  a
less  pronounced,  feature.  The  whole  business  of  'control'  seemed  more
difficult  then,  and  it  is  possible  that  a  personality  really  changes  now
without  our  noticing  the  change  so  much.  Then,  however,  the  change
of  control  was  a  distinct  operation,  sometimes  appearing  to  be  really
a  difficult  one,  that  could  not  be  managed  in  a  hurry  ;  and  once  I
remember  it  occupied  a  minute  or  two,  with  a  muttered  internal
colloquy  going  on,  as  if  there  were  a  tangle  or  a  hitch  somewhere.

The  naturalness  of  the  change  in  manner  and  memory  was  very
pronounced.  Even  a  reader  can  perceive  that;  but  a  reader  may
think  that  this  is  due  to  the  perfection  of  conscious  acting,  while  a
sitter  of  any  experience  will  hardly  think  that.  The  fluctuation  of
memory  is  certainly  not  artificial,  it  is  a  genuine  change  of  personality


IGO


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


— whatever  that  may  be.  People  may  legitimately  hold  that  the
change  is  some  kind  of  subliminal  modification — that  depends  on
the  view  they  take  as  to  the  meaning  and  nature  of  control  in
general — but  it  is  unmistakably  analogous  to  multiple  personality,
whether  that  be  ever  due  to  control  by  actual  possession  or  not.

Undoubtedly  actual  control  or  telergic  possession  used  to  be  claimed
for  some  of  the  more  experienced  communicators.  For  instance,  at
a  sitting  on  the  morning  of  February  3rd,  1890  (as  reported  on
p.  550,  Vol.  6),  I  asked  for  a  certain  person  to  come  and  control
instead  of  only  sending  messages,  and  was  told  that  it  was  too
difficult.  I  pleaded  1;  Mr.  G-urney  does."  To  which  Phinuit  replied,
"You  are  greedy.  Yes,  Mr.  Gurney  does,  but  Mr.  Gurney  is  a
scientific  man,  who  has  gone  into  these  things.  He  comes  and
turns  me  out  sometimes.  It  would  be  a  very  narrow  place  into
which  Mr.  Gurney  couldn't  get."

The  appearance  of  direct  control  is  even  now  preserved,  and  at
voice  sittings  held  in  1906,  after  Hodgson's  death,  must  have  seemed
rather  realistic.  Moreover,  the  Hodgson  control  often  says  that  the
conditions  are  stuffy  and  confusing,  and  that  he  must  go  away  to
get  air  sometimes, — the  extracts  on  pp.  134  and  236  suggest  that  he
and  Rector  were  interchanging  places  ; — and  yet,  when  questioned,
"  Hodgson  "  disclaims  the  exertion  of  immediate  control.

The  following,  for  instance,  is  an  extract  from  a  sitting  with  Mr.
Dorr,  who  is  speaking  to  the  Hodgson  control.

G.  B.  D.  I  wanted  to  ask  whether  you  ever  controlled  the  organism
of  the  light  yourself,  or  whether  it  is  wholly  done  by
Rector.

It  is  wholly  done  by  Rector  and  it  will  continue  to  be.  I
shall  take  no  part  in  that.

G.  B.  D.  Then  it  is  he  who  is  speaking  1

It  is  Rector  who  is  speaking  and  he  speaks  for  me.  I  have
no  desire  to  take  Rector's  place.  I  trust  him  implicitly
and  absolutely.

G.  B.  D.  And  he  constantly  reports  for  every  one  ?

Every  one.  There  is  no  question  about  that.  In  the  first
place  he  is  more  competent  to  do  it,  he  understands  the
conditions  better  than  any  individual  spirit;  he  is  fully


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  II.  161


capable  and  is  under  the  constant  direction  of  Imperator.
When  I  finished  with  the  conditions  in  the  earthly  life
I  finished  with  ray  control  over  the  light.

So  it  would  appear  that  the  changes  of  control  claim  to  be  now
usually  dramatic  rather  than  real.

But,  as  said  before,  these  dramatic  changes  of  personality  are  much
less  marked  and  less  frequent  features  in  the  sittings  of  to-day.
They  still  appear  to  occur  occasionally,  but  they  are  not  so  striking
and  vivid  as  they  used  to  be.

It  was  on  the  strength  of  the  experience  gained  by  a  number  of
such  transitions  of  personality  that  I  wrote  in  1890  my  introduction
as  printed  on  p.  453,  Vol.  6,  from  which  I  will  now  quote  a  small
portion  : —

"  On  reading  the  record  it  will  be  apparent  that  while  '  Phinuit '
frequently  speaks  in  his  own  person,  relating  things  which  he
himself  discovers  by  what  I  suppose  we  must  call  ostensible
clairvoyance,  sometimes  he  represents  himself  as  in  communication
—  not  always  quite  easy  and  distinct  communication,  especially
at  first,  but  in  communication — with  one's  relatives  and  friends
who  have  departed  this  life.  The  messages  and  communi-
cations from  these  persons  are  usually  given  through  Phinuit
as  a  reporter.  And  he  reports  sometimes  in  the  third  person,
sometimes  in  the  first.  Occasionally,  but  very  seldom,  Phinuit
seems  to  give  up  his  place  altogether  to  the  other  personality,
friend  or  relative,  who  then  communicates  with  something  of
his  old  manner  and  individuality ;  becoming  often  impressive  and
realistic.  This  last  I  say  is  rare,  but  with  one  or  two  person-
ages it  occurs,  subject  to  reservations  to  be  mentioned  directly ;
and  when  it  does,  Phinuit  does  not  appear  to  know  what  has
been  said.  It  is  quite  as  if  he  in  his  turn  evacuated  the  body,
just  as  Mrs.  Piper  had  done,  while  a  third  personality  uses  it
for  a  time.  The  voice  and  mode  of  address  are  once  more
changed,  and  more  or  less  recall  the  voice  and  manner  of  the
person  represented  as  communicating.

"  The  communications  thus  obtained,  though  they  show  traces
of  the  individuality  of  the  person  represented  as  speaking,  are
frequently  vulgarised ;  and  the  speeches  are  more  commonplace,
and  so  to  say  cheaper,  than  what  one  would  suppose  likely
from  the  person  himself.  It  can,  of  course,  be  suggested  that
the  necessity  of  working  through  the  brain  of  a  person  not

L


162


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part


exceptionally  educated  may  easily  be  supposed  capable  of
dulling  the  edge  of  refinement,  and  of  rendering  messages
on  abstruse  subjects  impossible."

End  of  the  Owrney  set.

CHAPTER  III.

THE  ISAAC  THOMPSON  CASE.

The  next  case  I  shall  take  will  be  that  of  the  late  Isaac  C.
Thompson,  F.L.S.,  for  a  long  time  my  neighbour  and  friend  in
Liverpool.  His  family  made  the  acquaintance  of  Mrs.  Piper  during
her  stay  with  me  there,  and  had  several  sittings.  They  are  specially
referred  to  on  pages  455  and  523  of  Vol.  6,  and  all  the  sittings
then  held  with  them  are  fully  reported  (pp.  508,  523,  544,  553).
We  owe  them  thanks  for  allowing  the  report  to  be  printed  without
reserve  or  anonymity.  It  is  always  more  interesting  when  this
can  be  done ;  and  in  practice  it  has  been  found  that  people  of
a  low  order,  who  from  mischief  or  malice  might  possibly  cause
trouble  and  annoyance,  are  not  sufficiently  interested  in  our  Pro-
ceedings to  take  any  notice  of  them.

Excessive  reticence,  therefore,  seems  to  be  unnecessary  ;  and  it  was
on  that  basis  that  I  drew  up  the  whole  of  my  1889-90  report.

It  must  be  understood  that  the  wife  of  the  above  Isaac  Thompson
has  no  connexion  whatever  with  the  (to  S.P.R.  members)  better  known
Mrs.  Thompson,  formerly  of  Hampstead,  whom  I  shall  have  to
mention  in  some  portions — especially  in  chapter  IV. — of  my  report.

As  an  introduction  to  this  set,  I  will  first  quote  what  I  said  for
the  same  purpose  in  1890  as  printed  on  p.  455,  Vol.  6.

"One  of  the  best  sitters  was  my  next-door  neighbour,  Isaac
C.  Thompson,  F.L.S.,  to  whose  name  indeed,  before  he  had
been  in  any  way  introduced,  Phinuit  sent  a  message  purporting
to  come  from  his  father.  Three  generations  of  his  and  of  his
wife's  family  living  and  dead  (small  and  compact  Quaker  families)
were,  in  the  course  of  two  or  three  sittings,  conspicuously  men-
tioned, with  identifying  detail ;  the  main  informant  representing
himself  as  his  deceased  brother,  a  young  Edinburgh  doctor,  whose
loss  had  been  mourned  some  20  years  ago.  The  familiarity  and
touchingness  of  the  messages  communicated  in  this  particular
instance  were  very  remarkable,  and  can  by  no  means  be  repro-


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  III.  163


duced  in  any  printed  report  of  the  sitting.  (Nos.  45,  50,  80,
81,  83,  Vol.  6.)  Their  case  is  one  in  which  very  few  mistakes
were  made,  the  details  standing  out  vividly  correct,  so  that  in
fact  they  found  it  impossible  not  to  believe  that  their  relatives
were  actually  speaking  to  them.  This  may  sound  absurd,  but
it  correctly  represents  the  impression  produced  by  a  favourable
series  of  sittings,  and  it  is  for  that  reason  that  1  mention  it
now.  Simple  events  occurring  elsewhere  during  the  sitting  were
also  detected  by  Dr.  Phinuit  in  their  case,  better  than  in  any
other  I  know  of."

To  this  I  have  only  to  add  that  in  1906,  when  the  recent  series
of  sittings  was  held,  one  of  the  three  daughters,  who  in  1889  were
children,  was  married,  and  the  son  engaged  ;  that  the  grandmother,
alive  in  1889,  was  now  dead ;  and  I  regret  to  say  that  Isaac
Thompson  himself  had  suddenly  died  of  an  apoplectic  seizure  in  his
own  house  on  the  6th  November,  1903.

The  interest  of  the  family  at  the  present  time  therefore  lay  in
receiving  communications  if  possible  from  him  :  and  it  is  the  episodes
connected  with  that  very  natural  desire,  and  with  the  corresponding
appearance  of  an  Isaac  Thompson  control,  that  I  now  proceed  to
deal.

The  first  attempt  at  reaching  this  control  through  Mrs.  Piper
occurred  during  a  business  visit  of  the  son,  Edwin  Thompson,  to
America;  when  Dr.  Hodgson  introduced  him  as  a  stranger — not  by
name — to  Mrs.  Piper  in  trance  at  her  house  near  Boston.

The  effort  was,  I  consider,  unsuccessful ;  partly  in  all  probability
owing  to  the  inexperience  of  the  sitter.  The  position  is  a  very  diffi-
cult one.  He  had  had  no  previous  experience  of  the  sittings ;  because
in  1889,  when  Mrs.  Piper  was  in  Liverpool,  he  was  only  8  years
old.  Besides,  the  character  of  the  sittings  had  changed,  and  the
writing  of  Rector  is  not  at  all  easy  for  a  novice  to  read.

Suffice  it  therefore  to  say  that  Edwin  Thompson  was  introduced
anonymously  by  Dr.  Hodgson  after  the  trance  had  begun  on  Monday,
11  December,  1905,  at  Boston.  Messages  purported  to  come  from
his  father,  who  seemed  to  wonder  how  his  son  had  "  managed  to
find  him." It  was  however  a  bad  sitting  and  evidentially  blank.

Undoubtedly  there  ought  to  have  been  another  sitting  without
delay,  to  clear  up  this  unsatisfactory  interview,  which  clearly  estab-
lished nothing  whatever ;  though  I  believe  that  Mr.  E.  Thompson
is  on  the  whole  more  satisfied  with  it  than  these  remarks  of  mine
would  suggest ; but  unfortunately  he  had to return  to  England


164


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


immediately,  and  at  the  next  sitting  he  was  not  present.  From
some  points  of  view — however  unfortunate  it  undoubtedly  was — this
absence  of  any  connecting  link  at  ensuing  sittings  held  by  E.
Hodgson  or  others  in  America  may  be  held  to  strengthen  the
evidence,  provided  anything  further  was  obtained — as  it  was ;  since
now  the  facts  could  hardly  be  supposed  to  be  obtained  from  the
Sitter ;  American  strangers  naturally  knowing  nothing  about
the  family,  and  Dr.  Hodgson  being  a  complete  stranger  to
them  all,  except  E.  T.,  whose  slight  acquaintance  he  had  only  just
made.

The  Sitter  on  12  Dec.  1905,  was  a  Miss  M.,  who  the  same  evening
sent  a  Special  Delivery  letter  to  Dr.  Hodgson  conveying  a  message
entrusted  to  her  by  the  control  George  Pelham, She  wrote: —

"'There  was  a  message  for  you,'  George  saith.  'Tell  Hodgson
that  name  the  gentleman  in  the  spirit  tried  to  get  was
Agnes.'  They  said  you  would  know,  and  it  was  the
day  before."

This  evidently  refers  to  a  name  '  Anna '  attempted  near  the  end
of  the  omitted  sitting.  The  name  Agnes  is  quite  appropriate — being
the  name  of  a  daughter — and  would  have  been  jumped  at  by  Edwin
Thompson  if  it  had  occurred  while  he  was  present  as  sitter.  It  is
noteworthy  that  Agnes  was  a  name  that  Phinuit  in  the  old  days
had  always  boggled  over,  pretending  he  could  not  pronounce  it ;
his  best  attempt  being  something  like  Annese  or  Anyese,  see  Vol.  6,
p.  478 ;  but  when  taken  unawares  he  could  pronounce  it  well  enough,
though  he  quickly  changed  it  to  Adnes  before  repeating  it.  See
p.  509.

On  the  next  day,  13  Dec,  1905,  Dr.  Hodgson  had  a  sitting;  when
Eector,  after  script  relating  to  other  matters  had  been  obtained,  wrote
as  reported  below  : —

Sitting  with  Mrs.  Pijjcr  in  America,  13  Dec,  1905.  Present —
Dr.  R.  Hodgson  cdonc.

Didst  thou  receive  the  message  from  George  1

R.  H.  Yes  last  night,  thank  }OU.

Have  you  the  influences  of  the  young  man's  father '/


R.  H.  (No.)


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  III  165

It  seems  almost  an  injustice  to  us  Dot  to  have  met  him
once  more,  as  it  would  be  a  great  help  to  the  communi-
cator himself  and  all  on  our  side.

R.  H.  I  have  explained  all  to  him,  and  he  will  send  me  some
articles  of  his  father  after  he  returns  to  England.  He
had  no  more  time  here,  and  is  already  on  his  way  back.
He  had  no  opportunity,  before  leaving  home,  to  know
what  he  ought  to  do.

We  U.D.  and  since  the  spirit  is  now  waiting  with  our  good
and  faithful  co  worker  George  we  shall  after  preliminary
matters  are  cleared  up  listen  to  what  he  hath  to  say.

R.  H.  I  shall  be  glad.

That  young  man  hath  some  significant  light  himself

(Scrawls  were  now  made,  ending  "help  me.")

R.  H.  Kindly  tell  me  anything  you  wish.

I  hold  this  bottle  in  my  hand  for  identification.  .  .  Bottle
.  .  in  my  hand.

R.  H.  Yes?

I  had  much  to  do  with  them  when  in  your  world.
R.  H.  Who  are  you  ?

I  used  to  be  address  [sic]  Dr. I  got.

[He  had  medical  ambitions,  and  was  partner  in  Thompson
&  Capper. — 0.  J.  L.]

(G.  P.  communicating).  He  is  trying  very  hard.  let  him  dream
it  out  H  and  he  will  be  all  right.

If  he  says  anything  clearly,  congratulate  him  help  him  by
words  of  encouragement  only,  remember  he  has  nothing
or  no  one  except  yourself  to  attract  him  here.

R.  H.  Yes. Is  he  the  young  man's  father?

he  is  surely. Agnes  is  his  daughter.
R.  H.  Yes  ?

So  he  tells  me.


166  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part

R.  H.  Shall  I  talk  to  him?

Just  encourage  him  a  little  by  telling  him  who  you  are
etc. what  your  object  is  etc. It  will  help  him  greatly.

R.  H.  I  will  explain  in  answer  to  your  enquiry  who  I  am, — that  I
am  an  old  friend  of  Professor  Lodge.

Lodge.

R.  H.  Yes.

What  my  old  neighbour  in  Liv.  .

(Excitement  iu  hand  which  cramps  and  twists  about.)

calm  friend (Between  sp.)

Li  .  .

(Excitement  stops  the  writing  again.)

Drugs  .  .
Do  not  go.
Wait  for  me.
Liver  stool.

R.  H.  Liverpool,  you  mean.

I  say  so.

I  say  so I  say  so I  say  so I  say  so  [sic]  .  .
R.  H.  Yes  I  understand.
I  say  so.

Liverstool  [Livestool  ?]
R.  H.  Liver-pool.

Pool. R  [R  =  Rector.]

I  live I  live I  had  three  daughters  one  son  [true]

(scrawls  over  sheet)  .  .

I  want  to  help  them  all  all  all.  God  help  me  to  help  them
to  understand  that  I  am  alive.

R.  H.  Yes?

I  am  confused  [confussed]  No  doubt  but  I  will  be  better  soon
it  is  so  hard  to  understand.  You  look  so  heavy,  a  black
cloud  comes  over  you  and  I  can  scarcely  see  you.  Do  you
know  me  1


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  III.  167

R.  H.  I  do  not  know  you  personally,  but  I  now  know  your  son  who
came  with  me.  Did  you  not  see  the  lady  in  England  with
Professor  Lodge  through  whom  you  are  now  communi-
cating 1 I  mean  the  light?

Oh  I  cannot  tell  you  yet wait  until  I  find  my  way  about.
R.  H. Don't  .  .

Tell  me  all  about  yourself  first I  want  to  get  acquainted  with
you.

R.  H.  Yes  I  will. Kindly  listen.

I'll  do  my  best,  because  I  want  to  reach  my  family,  very
very  much.

R.  H.  I  am  interested  in  psychical  work  and  sent  Mrs.  Piper  many
years  ago  to  England, — don't  you  remember  seeing  Mrs.
Piper?

Piper  1

R.  H.  Yes,  and  the  .  .

(Perturbation  in  hand.)

Oh  yes  I  remember  Piper. Was  Mrs.  Piper  a  Medium,  an
American  lady  ?

R.  H.  Yes.

Oh  yes Oh  yes  I  do I  do,  but  Pll  find  her  out  and  come
to  you  if  it  is  a  possible  thing. What  is  your  name  1

R.  H.  My  name  is  Hodgson,  Richard  Hodgson.

Can't  you  spell  it  for  me  1

R.  H.  Hodgson.

Oh  he  is  telling  me thank  you  greatly.
Let  me  think.

I  am  so  anxious  to  U.D.  all  about  this  then  I  can  talk  with
you.

R.  H.  Well,  now,  Mr  .  .

Where  are  wef I  left  my  body  some  time  ago.  Where
are  you  1


168  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part

R.  H.  This  is  America  where  I  am  now.

America  1
R.  H.  Yes.

Well  well  that  is  very  interesting  to  me.
You  are  in  the  hody  1

R.  H.  Yes  I  am.

Well,  happy  1
R.  H.  Yes,  both,  thank  you.

Splendid I  begin  to  U.D.
R.  H.  Well  now  I  will  tell  you  more  about  myself  and  Lodge.

My  wife  is  better  thank  you  I  am  watching  over  them,
but  my  business  will  be  better  in  time.  I  am  trying  to
take  care  of  it  for  the  children.

R.  H.  Yes. Mr  .  .  did  you  [say]  that  there  were  three  daughters
and  one  son  in  the  body  1
Yes  .  .

My  wife  wore  glasses  .  .  spectacles  we  called  them  I  think.

R.  H.  You  mentioned  her  eye  trouble.

Oh  may  be  so,  it  was  on  my  mind.
Who  is  the  lady  with  my  boy  1

R.  H.  I  don't  know  anything  about  her.

No  .  .

Well  I  U.D. I  had  a  business  called  .  .
sounds  like  drugs.

I  am  helping  all  I  can  [this  was  evidently  Rector.]

(Hand  to  Sp.  1.)

he  must  rest  +  .  . [meaning  Imperator.]

R.  H.  I  shall  be  so  pleased  for  you  to  come  again  and  send  any
messages  you  wish  to  your  family.

he  will  return  in  a  moment  friend  but  I  command  him  to  go
for  a  moment. +  R.

(Thump  of  hand.)


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  III.  169
Mrs.  .  kindly

Your  friend  George  is  the  very  best  helper  we  have.

R.  H.  I  am  very  grateful  to  him.

Did  his  spirit  seem  any  clearer  1  R.

R.  H.  Yes  I  should  judge  that  he  will  probably  be  a  very  clear
communicator  shortly.

talk  with  him  in  general  when  he  comes  whether  he  gives
you  a  chance  or  not.  .  .  chance  or  not  .  .  he  is  very
earnest  but  he  does  not  U.D.  yet  our  methods.

R.  H.  No.

I  say  I  shall  return  and  help  you.
was  very  very  glad  I  came.

R.  H.  Thank  you  very  much.

I  could  not  U.D.  while  you  were  here  but  I  could  see  him
after  you  left.  T

R.  H.  I  understand.

Waking  Stage.

(During  the  waking  stage  Mrs.  Piper  said)

.  .  Thompson  [sic]  .  .  with  you  all.

[This  was  the  first  time  the  name  had  been  mentioned.]

Before  I  let  you  go  .  .  you  must  take  this  over  to  Mr.

Hodgson.
Tell  him  .  .

R.  H.  "Tell  him"?

Tell  Mrs.  Thompson  I'm  very  glad  to  be  here. It  is  better

so. I  am  grateful  for  all  God  has  done  to  help  me.
.  .  the  truth  will  find  its  way.
Farewell, fare  thee  well  .  .  peace  .  .  .

(Pause.)

There  was  two  gentlemen  resembling  each  other.  One  was
George,  the  other  was  another  man  looked  something
like  him.


170


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


This  is  a  great  improvement  on  what  had  been  obtained  at
the  sitting  before,  and  indicates  considerable  anxiety  on  the  part
of  the  Isaac  Thompson  control  to  manifest  himself,  since  this  time
he  had  to  overcome  the  difficulty  of  talking  to  a  complete  stranger;
and  save  for  the  mention  of  my  name  as  a  common  friend  of  Hodgson
and  himself,  it  is  doubtful  if  anything  could  have  been  got.  The
excitement  which  the  hand  displays,  as  here  at  the  mention  of
Lodge  and  Liverpool,  is  characteristic.  On  such  occasions  it  twists
and  squirms  about  and  frequently  breaks  the  point  of  the  pencil  by
pressure  against  the  paper.  It  is  as  if  the  nerves  conveyed  too  strong
a  stimulus  to  the  muscles,  so  that  until  the  excitement  abates  no
writing  can  go  on.

The  bottles  and  drugs  mentioned  are  symbolic  of  his  profession.
(See  p.  525,  Vol.  6,  and  cf.  a  similar  case  near  foot  of  page  554,
Vol.  6.) The  things  said  are  all  true  and  appropriate.

One  of  the  most  curious  episodes  is  the  way  in  which  Mrs.  Piper's
name  is  introduced.  R.  Hodgson  says,  in  order  to  introduce
himself,

R.  H.  I  am  interested  in  psychical  work  and  sent  Mrs.  Piper
many  years  ago  to  England, — don't  you  remember  seeing
Mrs.  Piper?

Piper  1

R.  H.  Yes,  and  the  .  .

(Perturbation  in  hand.)

Oh  yes  I  remember  Piper. Was  Mrs.  Piper  a  Medium  an
American  lady  ?

R.  H.  Yes.

Oh  yes oh  yes  I  do I  do,  but  I'll  find  her  and  come  to  you
if  it  is  a  possible  thing. What  is  your  name  1

R.  H.  My  name  is  Hodgson,  Richard  Hodgson.

Can't  you  spell  it  for  me  1
R.  H.  Hodgson.

Oh  he  is  telling  me thank  you  greatly."

The  perturbation  in  hand  thus  begins  again  when  the  name  Piper
is  remembered,  and  then  the  Thompson  control  speaks  of  her  as  a


Lvni.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  III.


171


medium  he  had  known,  and  says  he  will  try  to  find  her  now  in
order  to  communicate.

When  it  is  remembered  that  the  whole  thing  is  being  obtained
through  Mrs.  Piper's  body,  the  curiosity  of  the  position  is  obvious.

The  sentence  "  oh  he  is  telling  me,  thank  you  greatly  "  signifies  that
whereas  the  Thompson  control  had  been  trying  to  understand  with
difficulty  what  Dr.  Hodgson  was  saying,  he  was  now  being  told  on
on  his  own  side  by  G.  P.,  whom  he  thanks — all  this  by-play  being,
now  as  often,  automatically  recorded  by  the  writing  hand.

The  way  in  which  he  receives  the  information  that  Hodgson
is  in  America, — where  in  1884  Isaac  Thompson  had  been  with  me
alone  for  nine  weeks, — is  also  very  natural ;  and  his  enquiry  as  to
whether  Hodgson  is  a  living  person  or  not  is  curious.

It  is  quite  true  that  Mrs.  Thompson  wore  spectacles,  though  of
course  this  was  within  Mrs.  Piper's  own  knowledge.  In  the  previous
set  (p.  524,  Vol.  6)  a  sister  of  Mr.  Thompson's  was  represented  as
unfamiliar  with  them  and  wanting  them  taken  off.  This  also  was
a  correct  apprehension  of  fact  at  the  date  referred  to.

"  The  lady  with  my  boy  "  may  well  refer  to  his  son's  engagement :
though  that  was  not  in  Mrs.  Piper's  normal  knowledge,  and  pre-
sumably not  in  Dr.  Hodgson's  either.  But  of  course  this  sort  of
thing  can  be  guessed;  and  E.  T.  had  clearly  hinted  it. (Cf.  p.  176).

In  fact  although  there  is  nothing  very  much  obtained,  and  little
that  can  be  called  really  evidential,  because  of  Mrs.  Piper's  previous
normal  knowledge, — provided  any  clue  to  the  particular  family  had
been  conveyed  during  Edwin  Thompson's  sitting,  in  the  course  of
which  I  observe  that  he  had  mentioned  the  name  "  Theodora "  and
also  spoken  of  "the  business,"— there  is  nothing  that  is  inapplicable
or  foreign  to  the  person  represented,  or  in  the  least  untrue,  as  soon
as  communication  really  began  ;  and  there  is  much  in  the  dramatic
details  that  I  find  distinctly  interesting.

Sittings  in  1906.

It  may  be  that  when  the  American  records  of  this  period  are
hunted  through,  a  few  other  brief  manifestations  of  the  Isaac  Thompson
control  may  be  found  in  them,  For  a  record  has  been  sent  me  by
Mr.  Piddington  of  an  incident  which  was  unexpectedly  interpolated
in  a  sitting  of  his  during  a  visit  to  America  in  the  spring  of  1906.

It  should  be  premised  that  Mr.  Piddington  was  ignorant  of  and
not  interested  in  the  Thompson  family.

The  following  is  the  relevant  extract :—


172


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


Portion  of  a  Sitting  held  by  J.  G.  P.  with  Mrs.  Piper  in  Boston

on  23  May,  1906.

Yes,  we  have  much  to  say  to  you  and  we  have  a  message
to  give  you  from  a  spirit  whom  we  call  Thompson.
He  wishes  to  send  his  love  to  his  wife  and  children
and  says  he  is  anxious  to  meet  Teddy  again.

J.  G.  P.  To  meet  Teddy  1

That  is  what  he  said.
J.  G.  P.  Yes,  I  think  I  understand. Could  he  give  any  fact?

He  says  he  is  delighted  with  the  change  which  has  come
to  him  and  believes  it  will  be  a  great  help  to  him.

J.  G.  P.  By  the  "  change  that  has  come  to  him "  does  he  mean  to
Eddy,  or  Freddy,  his  son  1

Ted. Ted,  Ted.

J.  G.  P.  Yes,  I  will  give  that  message  to  Ted.

Tell  him  not  to  feel  anxious  about  the  business  as  I  am
helping  him  constantly.

(Hand  seemed  to  listen  and  then  wrote)

I  was  sorry  about  Theo's  headaches  but  I  know  [she]  will
be  better  now.

(J.  G.  P.  read  "Ted's"  instead  of  "Theo's.")

Not  Ted's. Listen. Theodore's. Theo's.  (read)

Yes,  correct. Oh  my,  I  hardly  realized  I  could  speak  so  well.

J.  G.  P.  Was  that  the  spirit  Thompson  who  said  that  1

It  was  I  myself.  I  have  been  waiting  this  opportunity  a
very  long  time.

J.  G.  P.  Now  can  you  tell  me  some  incident  in  your  past  life  that
might  be  a  proof  of  identity?  And  1  will  send  it  to
your  family.

Yes,  gladly.  I  was  writing  some  letters  to  an  uncle  hoping
I  might  be  able  to  help  him  just  before  I  came  over  here.

Ted  will  U.D.  this.  [It  does  not  seem  to  be  specially
appropriate.]

J.  G.  P.  Yes  ?

I  am  very  anxious  to  keep  in  touch  with  all  my  family.
More  later.


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  III.  173


It  will  be  observed  how  natural  it  is  for  a  sitter  or  for  the  ex-
perimenter in  charge  to  challenge  a  control  to  furnish  some  evidence
of  his  identity,  or  to  demand  from  him  a  sudden  answer  to  a  specific
question.

It  is  quite  natural  and  I  suppose  inevitable  :  but  that  it  also  is
to  some  extent  unreasonable  must  be  admitted.  Trivial  domestic
incidents  are  not  constantly  in  one's  thoughts,  and  only  when  in  a
reminiscent  and  holiday  mood,  or  under  the  stimulus  of  friendly
chat,  does  any  vivid  recollection  of  such  incidents  normally  occur.

It  is  a  common  experience  that  characteristic  touches,  specific
phrases,  and  sparkling  sayings,  are  most  likely  to  come  out  in  the
give  and  take  of  lively  conversation.  Silent  and  solitary  brooding,
though  it  may  generate  valuable  and  even  brilliant  ideas  in  a  few
cases,  does  not  as  a  rule  lead  to  anything  specially  personal  or
identifying — rather  the  contrary, — such  ideas  seem  to  spring  up
impersonally,  or  to  be  supplied  from  outside,  so  to  speak.

It  is  proverbially  difficult  to  control  thoughts  to  order,  and  a  com-
municator suddenly  asked  to  remember  an  identifying  circumstance,  or
to  send  an  appropriate  message,  may  feel  rather  as  a  person  feels
when  set  in  front  of  a  phonograph  and  told  to  "say  something
brilliant  for  posterity."  Under  these  conditions  any  one  with  the
gift  might  compose  some  half-doggerel  verse  perhaps,  or  might
remember  some  poetry  more  or  less  accurately, — and  indeed  that
is  what  it  appears  the  controls  sometimes  actually  do — but  usually
there  would  be  hesitation,  requests  for  delay,  and  fishing  for  sugges-
tions,— something  like  what  we  find  in  the  records.  The  controls
cannot,  unfortunately,  be  assisted  by  the  give  and  take  of  friendly
and  stimulating  conversation ;  for,  under  the  conditions  of  a  sitting,
the  intercourse  on  our  side  is  nearly  all  "  take "  and  very  little
"give."  It  is  admittedly  dangerous  for  a  sitter  to  talk  freely,  because
the  conditions  then  become  "loose,"  and  more  may  be  inadvertently
given  away  than  was  intended,  so  that  thereafter  nothing  obtained,
however  otherwise  good,  can  be  considered  evidential.  But  then —
it  must  also  be  admitted — no  conversation  can  be  in  the  full  sense
stimulating  or  satisfactory  if  its  animation  is  hampered  by  a  constant
desire  to  keep  back  as  much  as  possible,  lurking  in  the  background.

In  order  to  be  human  a  conversation  should  be  whole-hearted
and  free  from  arrihes  pensdes  on  both  sides :  but  under  evidential
conditions  that  seems  quite  impossible.  It  is  one  of  the  many
disadvantages  under  which  the  investigation  of  the  subject  inevitably
labours.


174


Sir  Oliver  Lodge,


[part


Sittings  in  England.

We  now  skip  to  Nov.  1906,  when  Mrs.  Piper  was  brought  over
by  the  S.P.R.  to  England ;  and  on  landing  in  Liverpool  was  met
by  Edwin  Thompson  on  behalf  of  Mrs.  Isaac  Thompson,  and  was
taken  with  her  daughters  to  their  home  for  a  few  days.  On  the
evening  of  Nov.  9th  I  went  over  to  Liverpool  from  Birmingham  for
the  Saturday  and  Sunday,  and  we  had  a  couple  of  sittings,  in  which
again  it  is  the  dramatic  character  of  the  recognition  that  can  alone
be  treated  as  of  any  interest.

In  America  it  was  a  question,  and  a  minor  test,  whether  the  family
could  be  identified.  Here  in  Liverpool  of  course  no  test  of  that
kind  was  possible.  The  getting  into  communication  at  a  strange
house  in  America  was  evidently  difficult  and  tiresome,  as  the  first
[omitted]  sitting,  held  on  11  Dec.  1905,  shows:  but  here  in  Isaac
Thompson's  own  home,  so  to  speak,  and  with  his  own  family,
recognition  is  easy  enough, — though  even  there,  after  the  interval,
not  quite  sudden.  The  change  of  locality  seems  a  barely  recognised
incident,  he  continues  at  first  to  talk  to  his  son  much  as  he  had
tried  to  do  before;  but  the  excitement,  when  at  a  certain  stage  in  the
sitting  the  widow  let  her  presence  be  known  and  her  voice  heard,
was  very  great  and  remarkable.

Here  is  the  record,  or  so  much  of  it  as  need  be  printed.

I  think  it  desirable  to  report  in  full  the  initial  stages  of  this
first  English  sitting  of  the  new  series,  although  some  of  it  may  be
considered  dull  and  dispiriting ;  because  it  illustrates  the  difficulty
that  apparently  exists,  even  under  these  exceptionally  favourable
circumstances,  at  getting  into  what  purports  to  be  clear  communica-
tion with  a  deceased  member  of  a  family, — the  difficulty  being  not
wholly  on  one  side.  And  the  ultimate  vivid  recognition,  when  the
recognition  stage  is  reached,  is  likewise  instructive  :  indeed  to  persons
present  it  is  more  than  instructive, — it  is,  in  its  accessory  way,
what  may  be  called  'convincing', — perhaps  for  the  moment  more
convincing  than  it  ought  to  be.


Lvm.]


On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  III


175


First  Recent  Piper  Sitting,  Liverpool,  1906.

Held  at  19  Waverky  Road,  Liverpool,  on  Saturday,  10th
November,  1906,  beginning  at  10.50  a.m.,  ending  about
12.50  p.m.

Present — Mrs.  Isaac  (Susan)  Thompson,  Edwin  Thompson,  and  sister,
with  0.  J.  L.  recording.
-+-  Hail. (Hand  raised. Cross  in  air.)

0.  J.  L.  Hail,  Imperator  !

We  return  to  earth  once  more  this  day  with  peace  and
love +  E

O.  J.  L,  I  thank  you  for  coming  now,  because  I  am  so  busy.

We  understand,  but  we  must  follow  after  Sabbaths  as  we
understand  time  better.

O.  J.  L.  But  will  you  sit  to-morrow,  this  Sabbath  ?

[That  is  the  way  these  controls  reckon  time.  By  '  Sabbath  '
they  mean  Sunday.  0.  J.  L.  See  also  p.  27  of  Mr.
Piddington's  report  (Vol.  22)  for  other  days  of  the
week.]

We  will. +  R. A  spirit  is  present  whom  we  have  seen
before,  he  is  imploring  us  to  let  him  speak.

O.  J.  L.  Yes,  we  wish  to  speak  to  him.

We  understand  you  very  well,  friend,  and  you  are  under-
standing me  also.

[Then  came  the  change  of  control,  either  real  or  sim-
ulated, and  O.  J.  L.  gives  place  to  E.  T.  as  sitter.]

(Excitement  in  hand,  many  scrawls.)

I  am  so  very  glad  to  return  again.
I  have  longed  to  speak  once  more.

E.  T. Have  you  ever  communicated  with  me  before  through  this
medium  1

Are  you  by  any  possibility  my  son  1


176  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part

E.  T.  Yes,  have  you  spoken  to  me  before  ?

Oh  yes,  do  you  not  remember  how  difficult  it  was  for  me
to  reach  you  under  those  new  and  strange  conditions  ?
I  am  so  delighted  to  see  you  again.  I  cannot  think
fast  enough.  God  bless  you  my  boy.  I  have  been
helping  you  and  Theodo.

E.  T. Was  it  long  ago  you  saw  me  1

I  do  not  understand.
E.  T. Can  you  give  your  name1?

What  name?  E.

E.  T. I  do  not  know  who  it  is  yet.

Neither  do  I.  R.
Tlieoder.  The

E.  T.  Oh,  you  mean  Theodora.

All  the  time  I  am  helping  her.

E.  T.  Do  you  remember  speaking  to  me  before  ?

God  bless  you.  Not  long  ago,  but  it  was  not  here.  Do  you
not  remember  you  asked  me  what  I  thought  of  your
new  life?

E.  T. Yes,  I  remember.

I  am  your  father,  I  am,  and  I  sent  several  messages  to  you
through  a  friend  who  came  with  you,  and  who  is  now
on  our  side.  [This  of  course  refers  to  Dr.  Hodgson.]
Do  you  understand,  my  son  ?

E.  T. What  is  that  last?

My  son.  I  wish  you  to  understand  and  to  tell  Theodora  I
am  watching  over  her.

E.  T.  Tell  mother?

No,  tell  Theodora  I  am  watching  over  her.
I  want  mother  to  know  it  also.
How  is  it  you  do  not  speak  ?

E.  T.  Can  you  give  any  message  that  I  can  tell  mother?

[Note,  interpolated  by  the  recorder. The  interesting  feature  in  this


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  III.  177


part  of  the  record  is  the  conscientious  anxiety  of  the  sitter  not
to  give  any  clue  or  assistance  to  the  control.  This  attitude — the
result  of  instruction  from  Dr.  Hodgson  on  the  other  side  the
Atlantic — was  specially  appropriate  at  the  Boston  sitting  to  which
E.  T.  was  introduced  as  an  anonymous  stranger,  though  it  is  less
useful  and  may  indeed  seem  hampering  here  in  his  own  house  at
Liverpool,  with  Mrs.  Piper  staying  with  the  family  and  knowing  them
all  well.  It  illustrates,  however,  what  is  always  very  marked,  how
naturally  a  sitter  ignores  the  normal  knowledge  of  Mrs.  Piper  and
treats  it  as  non-existent.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  controls  likewise
treat  it  as  non-existent,  and  that  her  normal  knowledge  has  in  reality
very  little  if  any  influence  on  the  information  that  is  obtained  during
her  trance.  The  trance  personalities  appear  to  be  ignorant  of,  or  to  be
groping  after,  a  number  of  things  that  Mrs.  Piper  knows  quite  well,
and,  on  the  other  hand,  to  attain  knowledge  of  which  she  is  and
remains  entirely  ignorant  until  she  reads  these  records ; — which  it  is
to  be  presumed  she  does  when  they  are  printed  and  published,
not  before.  (See  further  remarks  on  this  subject  below,  page  181.)
Now,  however,  the  sitting  enters  on  a  more  natural  phase]  : —

Tell  her  I  am  sorry  I  did  not  understand  about  coming  here.
Had  I,  I  should  have  arranged  things  differently  for  her.
Take  good  care  of  her  will  you1?

E.  T. She  is  here,  would  yon  like  to  speak  with  her?

Oh  yes,  oh  yes,  oh  yes. Why  did  you  not  tell  me  before  ?

Mes.  T.  Do  you  see  me  ?

I  hear  her  speak.

(Excitement. Breaks  pencil.)

Isa

Mrs.  T.  Do  you  see  me  1

I  do,  I  do,  I  do,  I  do.
Isaac.

Mes.  T.  Can  you  call  me  by  my  name  1
SSSA.

Let  me  free  my  mind  and  tell  you  how  I  feel.
I  am  not  dead  now,  but  I  am  speaking  with  you.
Isauc. I  am  he. Do  you  remember
Issa.  Issa.
Susa.  Susa.

M


178  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part

Mrs.  T.  Can  you  help  me  about  Theodora  1

Yes  I  can  now,  but  I  did  not  before.

Dear,  are  you  tired  ? Are  you  tired  and  discouraged  at
times  ?

Mrs.  T.  Yes,  Isaac,  since  you  went.

Better  I  came. Think  it  so.
Can't  you  see  me  ?

Mrs.  T.  No,  I  cannot.

Susar Susan Susu  Susin

(Excitement,  scrawls.)

Mrs.  T.  Shall  Theodora  come  in  ? Would  you  like  to  see  her  ?

Yes,  more  than  you  think.

Mrs.  T.  Here  is  Theodora.

She  is  going  to  get  well  and  get  stronger  and  better  than

ever  before  in  all  her  life.
She  has  light,  she  has  light,  but  do  not  use  it. It  isn't

good  for  her.

Mrs.  T.  You  mean  she  could  write  automatically,  but  is  not  to  try  !

Correct. Do  not  let  her  do  so,  I  beg  of  you.

Father. Papa. I  wish  you  to  get  all  good  out  of  that

life  :  that  let  me  desire  for  you.  [1]
Dear  Theo,  you  have  a  claim  to  health — it  is  your  right.

T.  T. Can  you  tell  me  anything  I  should  do  to  get  strong?

Yes,  I'll  ask  the  Doctor,  I'll  call  the  Doctor.

(Change  of  control.)

Come  here.

(Then  the  control  calling  itself  "Doctor"  entered  into  long
medical  details  and  precepts.)

Then  the  Isaac  Thompson  control  returned  and  talked  of  business
matters  with  his  son,  and  was  much  interested  to  hear  about  the
result  of  a  lawsuit,  begun  before  he  died,  and  other  matters  concerning
which  Edwin  Thompson  gave  information. The  reception  of  the


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  III.  179

information  was  perfectly  appropriate  and  natural.  It  concluded
thus  : —

Good  for  you. [?] I  shall  be  happier  to  understand.

I  tried  to  tell  that  man  who  helped  me  reach  you  in  America,
and  who  is  now  with  me.  Did  he  tell  you  *?  I  told
him  before  he  came  over  that  I  was  troubled  about
something  and  hoped  it  would  be  all  right.  [Meaning
presumably  the  lawsuit  which  was  bearing  on  his  mind.]

E.  T.  Are  you  happy  now  ?

Yes,  I  am,  very,  because  I  understand  and  see  you  all,  and
I  am  so  near  you. I  spoke  of  you  all  to  him.

E.  T. Who  is  that  1

His  name  is  Hodgson.
E.  T.  Oh  yes,  Dr.  Hodgson. I  understand.

And  he  is  helping  me  now.

(Interpolation  by  recorder.)

I  find  all  these  episodes  instructive,  and  the  portion  about  the
lawsuit  was  as  good  as  it  could  be ;  but  it  would  be  tedious  to
strangers.  The  anxiety  to  be  told  about  it— a  matter  which  had
weighed  on  his  mind  and  caused  him  a  good  deal  of  worry  just  at
the  end  of  his  life — seemed  quite  genuine.

E.  T. Have  you  any  messages  for  mother  ?

Ask  her  if  she  understands  what  I  meant  by  Agnes.

E.  T. Have  you  any  message  for  Agnes  1

Yes,  I  love  you  all  so  much,  so  very  much.
I  wish  you  to  know  it  well.  Agnes.

E.  T.  Would  you  like  to  speak  to  Agnes  1
I  should,  I  should,  I  should.

[Agnes  is  the  married  daughter,  living  in  another  town. — 0.  J.  L.]
E.  T. Shall  she  come  to-morrow  or  next  day  t
I  do  not  understand. Ask  Eector.


180  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  [part

Mks.  T.  Would  you  like  her  to  come  to  see  you  ?

Oh  yes,  much. Do  you  remember,  clear  Susan,

(There  appeared  now  to  be  some  confusion.)

What  are  you  talking  about  1  Something  is  troubling  me
very  much  just  now.  Something.  You  are  all  talking
at  once,  and  I  do  not  understand  you.

0.  J.  L.  Shall  we  all  go  out  of  the  room  except  one  1

No,  stop  talking. What  is  that  fellow  doing'?

(An  organ-grinder  was  playing  outside  in  the  street,  and
the  sound  coming  in  through  the  open  window  evidently
introduced  confusion.  This  must  have  been  what  was
spoken  of  as  "  all  talking  at  once.")

What  are  you  doing? Stop  it,  stop  it.  Rector.
0.  J.  L.  We  have  sent  out  to  stop  it.

What  is  he  talking  about  1
0.  J.  L.  It  was  a  man  outside,  we  have  sent  out  to  stop  the  noise.

Oh,  I  understand.

(The  noise  ceased.)

Your  father  is  not  quite  satisfied  with  the  way  in  which  I
spelt  that  name,  but  I  cannot  understand  it  very  well.  R.

[This  probably  referred  to  some  name  mentioned  in  connexion
with  the  business. — 0.  J.  L.]

E.  T. Has  my  father  gone  away  now  ?

He  is  here,  but  he  is  getting  weak.

Good-bye  for  the  present,  I  will  speak  again.  Good-bye
children,  I  will  speak  again.  Darling  S.  Are  you  getting
on  well  without  me?  I  am  looking  after  you,  and  when
you  think  of  me  I  am  nearest  you.  You  are  a  part  of
me  always.  I  am  a  part  of  you  always,  a  part  of  you
always. Nearest  you  dear.

(End.)

There  was  nothing  of  special  interest  in  the  waking  stage  this  time.


lviil] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  III.  181


Comment.

Comment  on  this  sitting  is  not  specially  necessary  :  it  was  a  sound
and  satisfactory  sitting  with  a  quite  realistic  impersonation  of  the
deceased,  as  soon  as  communication  was  once  established.  The
incidental  episode  of  the  disturbance  caused  by  the  organ-grinder
outside  is  interesting.  The  sitting  was  in  a  room  high  up,  on  the
second  floor,  with  the  window  open.  The  noise  from  the  outer  world
perturbed  the  control,  as  if  it  were  a  sort  of  general  conversation
that  was  going  on.  We,  the  sitters,  were  not  specially  annoyed ;  but
the  fidget  of  the  hand  increased  until  it  rebelled,  and  called  for
cessation  of  whatever  it  was  that  caused  the  disturbance, — as  recorded.

I  am  told  that  Mrs.  Piper,  in  trance,  was  similarly  disturbed  by
passing  vans,  and  by  the  noise  of  coal  being  put  on  the  fire,  at
sittings  in  London.

In  continuation  of  what  I  have  said  above  (page  177)  about  the
normal  knowledge  of  Mrs.  Piper  having  little  or  no  influence  on
the  knowledge  shown  by  the  controls,  the  instance  of  the  surprise
and  eagerness  shown  by  the  Isaac  Thompson  control  when  told
that  Mrs.  Isaac  Thompson  was  present  is  a  case  in  point.  For  of
course  Mrs.  Piper  had  known  perfectly  well  the  people  likely  to  be
present  at  the  sitting,  and  had  seen  them  assemble ;  it  was  no
news  to  her.  But  indeed  everything  tends  to  show  that  during
thorough  trance  the  normal  consciousness  is  in  abeyance.  And,
although  it  is  true  that  we  cannot  claim  anything  as  evidential
when  it  comes  out  in  the  trance  if  it  had  ever  been  known  to  Mrs.
Piper,  I  myself  am  unable  to  trace  much,  if  any,  connexion  between
the  trance  knowledge  and  her  normal  knowledge.  For  instance,  a
sitter  introduced  by  name  is  no  more  likely  to  have  his  name
mentioned  during  a  sitting  than  one  who  is  introduced  as  an  anony-
mous stranger.  I  make  a  general  statement  of  this  kind  believing
that  careful  analysis  will  bear  it  out,  and  as  a  challenge  to  anyone
who  will  bestow  time  and  labour  upon  the  work  of  analysing  the
records  from  this  point  of  view.  It  seems  to  me  a  desirable  piece
of  work  for  someone  to  undertake.

Of  course  a  sceptic  may  say  that  this  kind  of  kenosis  is  due  to
mere  cunning ;  but  the  time  for  suspicion  of  that  kind  is  over  with
most  of  us  investigators.  It  is  a  genuine  piece  of  psychological
information  that  we  now  desire,  not  anything  analogous  to  detective
work.  Detective  work  is  necessary  in  its  proper  time  and  place,
but  there  are  cases  which  have  run  that  gauntlet,  and  require
more  advanced  treatment. The  Piper  case  is  one  of  them.


182


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


When  I  speak  of  "Mrs.  Piper's  normal  knowledge,"  I  mean  of
course  knowledge  acquired  in  her  ordinary  state.  Knowledge  acquired
while  in  the  trance  state  is  of  course  reproducible  when  in  that
state,  but  it  appears  not  to  be  accessible  iu  her  ordinary  state ;  and
vice  versa. I  do  not  call  that  "normal  knowledge."

To  illustrate  that  the  controls  themselves  feel  that  their  only
access  to  the  normal  Mrs.  Piper  is  through  the  agency  of  her
daughter,  with  whom  they  can  communicate  during  trance,  I  extract
a  small  fragment  from  a  quantity  of  serious  conversation  which  took
place  between  them  and  Dr.  Hodgson's  executors  soon  after  his  death.

Mr.  Dorr,  I  think,  was  conducting  the  sitting  and  speaking  the
remarks  printed  in  parentheses.

"(We  are  anxious  that  the  light  in  the  future  should  not
be  adrift  and  astray,  and  anxious  that  past  relations
should  not  be  wholly  interrupted  by  any  change  of
environment  or  other.)

Well,  no  one  could  be  more  anxious  about  these  things  or
more  concerned  than  we  ourselves  are,  and  it  hath  dis-
turbed us  not  a  little  to  see  the  conditions  on  the  earthly
side.  We  are  not  quite  pleased  with  them  because  the
light  cannot  know  itself,  it  cannot  understand  itself.  It
is  shut  off  from  communication  with  us  on  our  side  and
it  must  remain  in  ignorance  of  the  methods  which  we
pursue  in  our  endeavors  to  reach  the  mortals  on  the
earthly  side.

(But  through  the  daughter,  Alta,  I  have  felt  that  you  might
in  a  sense  reach  her.)

Yes,  that  is  the  only  way."

I  do  not  adduce  this  as  evidence,  but  as  illustrative  of  how  the
phenomenon  represents  itself  j  for  when  it  does  so  consistently  it  is
reasonable  to  suppose  that  something  true  is  indicated.

Sitting  No.  2  of  the  Thompsons  in  Liverpool,  on  Sunday,  11  Nov.

0.  J.  L.  again  present.

After  a  brief  interlude  with  the  Myers  control  talking  to  0.  J.  L.
(see  further  on),  the  Isaac  Thompson  control  appeared  and  continued


lviil] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  III.  183

to  the  end.  There  was  plenty  of  family  talk  of  a  reasonably
satisfactory  kind. The  following  may  suffice  : —

[In  reply  to  some  question.]

I  do,  I  do,  and  remember  my  brother  who  was  lame.
Joe.

E.  T.  Did  you  say  Joe  1
Yes.

E.  T. Is  he  with  you  now  ?
No,  no.

E.  T. Is  Joe  my  uncle  1 It  is  Ted  speaking. Do  you  mean  Ted's
uncle  1

I  do,  Yes.  Tell  him  I  send  my  love  to  him,  also  greetings
from  this  life  [?]  Tell  him  I  thank  him  for  all  his  kind-
ness to  you  all,  and  I  will  do  all  I  can  to  help  him  in
return.

Do  you  understand  1  Why  do  you  not  repeat  after  him  ?
Rector.

E.  T. We  were  trying  to  read  it.

I  will  now  read  it  over,  (does  so).
Is  that  right  ?

Yes,  all  is  well.
E.  T. Do  you  wish  him  thanked  ']

Yes,  I  thank,  I  thank.
Have  you  got  it  ?

E.  T. Can  you  explain  further  who  Joe  is  ?

Yes  I  can. Where  is  mother? She  will  understand.
Mrs.  T.  Do  you  mean  Joe  Coventry  1
Yes.

Mrs.  T.  Is  he  helping  now  ?
No,  not  now.

Mrs.  T.  Did  he  help  us  before  1
I  thought  so.


184  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part

E.  T.  Yes  it  is  quite  true  that  he  did  when  you  went  away  and  we
were  in  trouble. He  did  help  us  a  good  deal.

Good.  I  like  you  to  understand,  and  I  like  it  very  much.
It  helps  me  much  to  recall,  recall,  recall,  things  for
you.

I  want  you  to  know  I  live.

I  want  you  to  know  I  live. (Repeated  because  misread.)
0.  J.  L.  Can  you  send  something  to  prove  your  identity  1

Hello  Lodge. Well  if  I  ever  saw  anything  so  strange.
0.  J.  L.  Hullo  Thompson. Glad  to  see  you  again.

Good.  Do  you  remember  a  talk,  in  fact  many,  we  had  about
this  ?

0.  J.  L  Cannot  read  that.

A  talk,  in  fact  many.

0.  J.  L.  Yes,  I  do  indeed.

I  used  to  wonder  how  much  I  could  believe,  and  now  I  am
to  prove  it  for  your  world.

0.  J.  L.  Yes,  that  is  what  we  want.

Hello.

0.  J.  L.  We  want  you  to  prove  your  identity.

Good. I  am  getting  clearer  every  minute.
I  see  you  all  better  than  ever  before.
May  I  speak  to  my  wife  alone  ]

(All  go  out  but  Mrs.  T.)

Mrs.  T.  Do  you  see  me  Isaac  ?

Yes  I  do  see  you  dear,  and  I  love  you  dearly.  I  see  it
clearly.  I  know  you  are,  dear,  and  when  you  think  of
me  I  know  it.  I  see.  [Etc.  No  questions  being  kept,
this  part  is  unintelligible.  Two  sheets  are  removed  by
0.  J.  L.  from  the  script,  numbered  40  and  41.]

The  omitted  part  of  the  record  is  appropriate  but  not  strictly
evidential,  as  the  remarks  of  the  Sitter  are  not  preserved,  and  some


lviil] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  III.


185


of  it  is  private  ■  but  I  may  say  that  she  was  called  by  the  right
abbreviation  of  her  Christian  name  which  he  always  used.  It  is
worth  noting  that  in  a  previous  set  the  '  Uncle  Edwin '  called  her
by  another  abbreviation — which  was  the  appropriate  one  also  in  his
case. See  pp.  523,  4,  Vol.  6.

Subsequently  there  was  much  talk  with  his  daughters,  and  more
business  talk  with  the  son,  whom  he  called  Ted  as  usual,  but  whom
he  did  not  call  by  a  childish  nickname  which  was  asked  for  and
not  given.

Waking  Stage.

While  coming  out  of  trance  Mrs.  Piper  spoke,  or  rather  muttered
at  intervals,  as  usual ;  and  her  words  were  taken  down,  or  such  of
them  as  could  be  heard  (cf.  p.  135).  It  is  worth  while  to  quote  one
record  of  these  ejaculations — say  this  one,  since  it  was  a  fairly
typical  case  of  an  unimportant  and  unevidential  but  characteristic
coming  to.

Notes  intruded  in  square  brackets  are  added  merely  in  order
to  place  the  reader  in  the  same  sort  of  position  as  regards  under-
standing the  significance  of  these  sub-conscious  utterances  as  a
recorder  finds  himself  in  after  an  experience  of  many  sittings.

I  am  aware  that  such  explanations  may  irritate  a  certain  group  of
people  who  have  been  all  their  lives  familiar  with  trance  speeches
of  one  kind  or  another ;  but  in  the  first  place  I  must  beg  them  to
observe  that  when  I  explain  things  to  members  and  associates  I  am
not  assuming  ignorance  on  the  part  of  specialists.  It  would  be
impossible  to  write  in  an  explanatory  fashion  on  any  branch  of
even  the  most  orthodox  science  if  thereby  one  ran  the  risk  of
offending  specialists.  In  ordinary  subjects  it  is  safe  silently  to
assume  that  experienced  people  will  understand  that  their  know-
ledge is  taken  for  granted.  Again,  trances  are  by  no  means  identical.
Each  has  distinctive  features.  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  has  itself  under-
gone modification  in  the  course  of  the  nineteen  years  since  I  first
knew  her ;  and  it  may  be  useful  to  quote  the  kind  of  phrases
employed  by  her  during  recovery — if  only  as  a  psychological  study.
They  are  seldom  or  never  identical,  but  they  have  a  strong  family
likeness. Here  then  they  are  on  this  occasion  : —

"  I  saw  you  before. It  is  fearful. [This  means  that  she

dislikes  changing  from  her  trance  state  and  coming  back

to  ordinary  surroundings.]


186


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


They  are  going  away.  It's  awful.  Too  bad.  Snap.  [This
refers  to  a  sensation  which  she  calls  a  snap  in  the
head,  which  nearly  always  precedes  a  return  to  con-
sciousness. Sometimes  it  heralds  almost  a  sudden  return  ;
and  she  is  always  more  conscious  after  a  snap  than  she
was  before ;  but  often  it  takes  two  snaps  to  bring  her
completely  to.  AVhat  the  snap  is  I  do  not  know,  but  I
expect  it  is  something  physiological.  It  is  not  audible
to  others,  though  Mrs.  Piper  half  seems  to  expect  it  to
be  so.]

What  are  all  the  people  doing  ?

[Probably  some  of  the  sitters  were  moving  about  and
leaving  the  room,  under  the  mistaken  impression  that
the  snap  meant  that  interest  was  over.]

I  saw  a  man  in  the  light,  which  looked  like  Mr.  Thompson.
Kept  waving  his  hand.  The  man  with  the  cross  was
helping  him  out.

["The  man  with  the  cross"  is  intended  to  signify  Imperator.]

The  moon  was  shining  [or  it  may  have  been  the  '  sun.'  It
only  signifies  that  her  recent  surroundings  have  been
bright  and  luminous.]

Has  an  old  lady  with  him.

[This  no  doubt  means  Isaac  Thompson's  mother.  See  Vol.  6,
pages  523-544.]

She  is  helping  him  read  something.  I  could  see  his  face
perfectly.

Noise,  [probably  something  going  on  outside.]  They  were
talking  to  me.  I  came  in  on  a  cord,  a  silver  cord.
They  were  trying  to  tell  me  something  about  the
children  in  the  body. Lovely  place.

Buzzing  in  my  head. Another  snap.

Miss  Thompson.  I  thought  you  were  small.  Looking
through  opera  glasses  at  wrong  end.  You  grew  larger.
Did  you  hear  my  head  snap  ? It  breaks.

I  forgot  where  we  were  sitting.

Why  Mrs  Thompson,  I  didn't  know  you  were  there.  My
cold."


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  III.  187

[Mrs.  Piper  was  troubled  with  a  cold  at  this  time.  Her
intelligence  was  now  normal.]

In  further  illustration  of  the  waking  stage,  showing  how  similar
it  was  in  1906  to  what  it  is  now,  and  as  a  further  description  of
the  curious  "  snap "  sensation,  I  subjoin  an  extract  from  the
termination  of  a  sitting  with  Henry  James,  Junior,  and  Mr.  Dorr
in  America  in  1906.

I  thought  you  were  a  stranger.
Well,  did  you  hear  my  head  snap  ?

H.J.Je.  No.

Didn't  hear  it  1  It  is  a  funny  sound.  Don't  you  hear  it  at
all  1  Sounds  like  wheels  clicking  together  and  then  snaps.
There  it  is  again.

G.  B.  D.  Now  you  are  really  back.

Third  Sitting  of  the  Thompson  Family  with  Mrs.  Piper  at
Liverpool  on  12  November,  1906.

With  regard  to  sitting  No.  3,  held  on  12  Nov. — at  which  I  was
not  present,  though  all  the  Thompson  family  were,  including  the
married  daughter  Agnes — there  is  not  much  in  the  record  to  interest
an  outsider.  The  Hodgson  control  put  in  a  short  appearance,  but
the  Thompson  control  appeared  to  be  present  nearly  all  the  time,  and
said  many  appropriate  things,  though  in  my  judgment  the  record
does  not  show  that  it  was  a  specially  good  sitting.

It  may  be  sufficient  to  copy  here  Edwin  Thompson's  letter  to  me
the  next  day.

Letter  from  Edwin  Thompson  about  Sitting  No.  3.

To  us  the  sitting  was  most  satisfactory  :  the  most  convincing  part
being  the  last  few  answers.  Mother  asked  if  he  recognised  the
room,  and  you  will  see  the  answer  is  correct  (the  hand  looked  round
for  some  time) :  and  then  when  we  said  Good-bye,  he  said  he  never
did  like  Good-bye;  which  is  perfectly  true,  although  at  the  time,
when  we  said  it,  we  did  not  think  of  it.

Are  the  original  writings  kept  ?  If  not  I  should  be  very  much
obliged  if  I  might  have  the  originals  of  this  sitting.

I  cannot  remember  the  stick  to  which  Father  refers.


18S  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part

Dr.  Hodgson  [i.e.  the  Hodgson  control. — 0.  J.  L.]  seemed  most
emphatic  in  [his  part  of]  the  writing.  With  regard  to  "Dinner  at
Club  "  [to  which  he  refers]  he  had  been  most  pressing  for  me  to  dine
with  him  there,  when  I  was  in  America,  and  had  also  written  and
asked  me  to  du  so.  It  never  came  off,  however,  as  I  was  so  pressed
for  time.

I  will  send  a  full  report  of  the  sitting  by  to-night's  post.
Yours  sincerely,

(Signed) Edwin  Thompson.

The  following  are  the  passages  in  the  script  referred  to  in  this
letter  [Isaac  Thompson  supposed  to  be  communicating]  :

Do  you  remember  a  stick  I  gave  you  one  Christmas  1

Agnes.  No  I  do  not,  what  kind  of  a  stick  1

I  got  it  in  the  Canary  Islands.

Agnes.  I  don't  remember  the  stick,  but  I  remember  your  going  to  the
Canary  Islands.

That's  what  he  said.  R.

All  right  I  am  glad  you  remember  that.

[And  then  later  in  the  sitting]

Mrs.  T.  Can  you  remember  this  room  ?

Give  me  time  and  I'll  see.  (Hand  waves  about  and  seems
to  look  round  everywhere.)  Can  it  be  the  nursery,  Sue
dear  ?

Mrs.  T.  Yes  it's the old  nursery,  where we  have  been  so  often
together.

I  am  so  glad  to  know  and  see  you  all  here.
E.  T. Imperator,  Rector,  it  is  time  for  us  to  close.
+  We  are  about  to  cease.

All  tue  Family.  Good-bye  Good-bye.

Do  not  say  it  more  [or  now],  I  am  with  you  although  I
speak  not. I  never  did  like  Good-bye.


lviij.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  III.  189


Mrs.  T.  May  we  say  au  revoir.
Yes  au  revoir.

God  bless  you  and  keep  you  in  his  holy  keeping.

+  R.

We  cease  now  and  may  the  blessing  of  God  rest  on  you  all.
+  Farewell  R.

Sittings  at  Edgbaston.

Mrs.  Piper  thereupon  came  from  Liverpool  to  my  house  at
Edgbaston  ;  where  the  first  sittings  were  occupied  by  other  matters
— fragmentary  talks  with  the  Myers  and  Hodgson  controls,  arrange-
ments about  future  sittings,  and  plans  for  the  London  visit.  For  it
was  as  necessary  to  secure  the  good-will  and  consent  of  the  responsible
controls  as  it  was  to  conciliate  Mrs.  Piper  herself,  in  making  future
arrangements ;  they  would  not  see  everybody,  nor  could  it  be  assumed
that  they  would  consent  to  appear  unless  the}'  approved  the  conditions
of  time  and  place.  (Parenthetically  I  may  here  remark  that  on  one
occasion  I  had  a  total  failure ;  the  trance  would  not  come  on.  See
page  238.)  But  they  frankly  discuss  the  proposed  arrangements  and
are  as  amenable  to  suggestions  as  real  people  are.  They  were
evidently  desirous  that  the  conditions  should  be  good,  and  that  no
undue  tax  should  be  put  upon  the  medium.  Of  course  their  atti-
tude in  this  respect  may  be  taken  as  a  natural  self-preservative
attitude  of  the  subconcious  part  of  Mrs.  Piper's  intelligence.

Other  friends  also  appeared,  and  more  than  one  important  stranger
was  introduced  during  this  short  series.

Not  till  the  fifth  Edgbaston  sitting  (the  8th  of  this  English  series)
did  the  Isaac  Thompson  control  again  put  in  an  appearance.  I  do
not  assert  that  he  actually  controlled — probably  not — but  he  sent
messages  through  Rector.

The  ostensible  reason  for  his  coming  was  because  Mrs.  Isaac
Thompson  had  just  sent  me  through  the  post  an  object  connected
with  a  living  brother  of  his,  concerning  whose  health  anxiety  was
felt.  I  opened  the  packet  and  handed  what  turned  out  to  be  a
necktie  to  Mrs.  Piper's  hand,  after  she  was  entranced,  giving  her  no
clue  whatever.  Before  long  it  was  said  to  belong  to  "  the  family
with  Agnes  Teddy  .  .  .  " ;  and  when  I  admitted  that  it  had  to  do
with  the  family  of  Isaac  Thompson,  I  was  told  (what  I  knew)  that
it  belonged  to  one  of  his  living  brothers,  whose  name  was  correctly
given.


190


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


Medical  statements  were  made,  concerning  facts  not  in  my  know-
ledge, which  were  said  to  be  correct  when  reported  ;  and  advice  was
tendered,  especially  concerning  the  visits  of  some  specified  local
doctor.  This  apparent  obtaining  of  information  from  an  object  is
very  remarkable,  though  common  enough.  I  have  remarked  on  it
elsewhere.  It  seems  to  strengthen  the  case  for  general  telepathic
activity  as  opposed  to  personal  identity.

Then  '  Isaac  Thompson '  spoke  to  me  of  a  few  incidents  during
travels  which  we  had  taken  together;  but  those  which  he  best
recollected  for  the  most  part  I  did  not,  or  only  partially,  and  vice  versa ;
so  that  there  is  nothing  much  worth  recording.  Among  other  things,
he  tried  to  remind  me  of  a  knife — a  paper  knife — which  he  had
given  me.  I  could  not  remember  it ;  but  it  has  since  turned  up —
a  carved  red-wood  paper  knife  which  I  did  not  use,  and  so  had
forgotten.  He  had  brought  it,  I  think,  from  the  Canary  Islands — a
visit  to  which  had  been  mentioned  by  the  control  in  an  evidential
manner.  Other  things  which  I  had  forgotten  may  be  true  ;  but,  save
in  exceptional  cases,  these  reminiscences  do  not  seem  of  much  value.

Appropriate — though,  under  the  circumstances  of  previous  normal
knowledge,  non-evidential — messages  were  sent  to  his  family,  and
to  his  brother;  which  were  duly  delivered.

Mrs.  Isaac  Thompson  wrote  to  me,  after  receiving  a  record  of  the
statements  made  in  connexion  with  the  necktie  which  she  had  sent
me,  saying  that  the  brother  (who  had  never  seen  Mrs.  Piper)  ad-
mitted the  general  correctness  of  the  medical  diagnosis,  that  he  was
much  interested  in  the  message  sent  to  him,  and  that  he  was  going
to  the  Doctor  recommended.  Also  that  a  "picnic,"  referred  to  as
among  the  reminiscences  of  the  Isaac  Thompson  control,  suggested
to  her  one  at  Coniston  ;  though  I  had  failed  to  remember  it.

In  a  still  later  Edgbaston  sitting,  in  May  1907,  after  Mrs.  Piper's
return  from  London,  Isaac  Thompson  again  sent  messages  to  the
family,  with  further  reminiscences  of  events  in  which  I  was  concerned ;
but  nothing  of  special  importance.

Last  English  sitting  with  the  Thompson  family  at  Liverpool.

Finally — to  finish  up  the  Isaac  Thompson  series — when  at  length
Mrs.  Piper  went  back  to  Liverpool,  on  her  way  to  America  (after
a  holiday  in  Scotland,  which  she  had  spent  in  the  neighbourhood
of  the  Thompson  family  who  were  also  in  Scotland  and  with  whom
she  and  her  daughters  were  on  very  friendly  terms)  they  had  a


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  III.  191


farewell  sitting,  at  which  I  was  not  present,  from  which  a  few  extracts
must  be  made.

It  must  be  stated  that  a  brother  of  Mrs.  Thompson,  named  Charles,
had  died  in  the  interval,  namely  on  May  22nd ;  this  final  sitting
being  held  on  July  3rd,  all  in  the  year  1907.

The  following  is  a  sufficient  extract  from  the  record.

Sitting  called  No.  17.  The  Thompson  family  with  Mrs.  Piper,
at  Liverpool,  on  3  July,  1907.  Annotated  chiefly  by  Edwin
Thompson.

[After  Eector's  introductory  remarks.]

E.  T. Have you  anything  you  wish  to  communicate  to  anyone
present  1

Yes  we  have  much. We  bring  a  spirit  who  says  he's  your
father.

E.  T. Is  he  present  now  1
He  is.

Good  morning  my  boy,  I  am  glad  to  see  you  again ;  did
you  and  mother  receive  my  message  ?  you  and  mother.

E.  T. Yes,  we  did.

I  want  to  tell  you  that  I  have  a  new  friend  here  whom  I  was

very  glad  to  meet.  Chas.
He  says  Chas. Chas  Chare  Charl

E.  T. We  do  understand,  but  can  you  spell  that  word  correctly  ?

I'll  ask  your  father.  R

[Thereby  indicating  that  Rector  is  really  conveying  the
messages. — 0.  J.  L.]

Yes. Chares  Chares
Charles

[Charles  E.  Stevens,  brother  of  Mrs.  T.  died  on  22  May,  1907.]
sends  love  to  M.

[Probably  Mary  his  sister.]


192  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part

E.  T.  Is  that  M  ?
Yes.

I  didn't  realise  I  was  coming  over.

[He  died  suddenly  from  apoplexy.]

Oh  dear I  am  so  glad  to  understand  it  now.
Isaac  has  been  so  kind,  so  very  kind  to  me.
I  can't  tell  you  how  kind.

(Then  he  expresses  anxiety  about  his  other  surviving  sister,
Mary,  and  begs  that  she  may  be  looked  after.  Then
he  says  he  has  something  on  his  mind.)

I  want  you  to  look  up  a  picture  I  ordered  before  I  left,  and
it  never  came.

E.  T. Can  you  tell  us  from  whom  you  ordered  it?

That  would  be  difficult  to  get  through  to  thee,  but  I  ordered
it  from  a  friend  of  mine,  who  used  to  take  my  orders,
and  get  them  for  me.

Tell  Mary  she  dreamed  I  was  there  and  I  was.

That  picture  must  be  looked  up.

E.  T. Can  you  tell  us  whether  it  was  a  water-colour  or  an  oil  ]

Water,  yes.

Mrs.  T.  Yes,  Charlie,  the  picture  did  come  after  you  left,  and  Mary
sent  the  bill  of  it  to  Mr.  Alsop  to  pay.

[E.  T.  did  not  know  anything  about  this.]

Oh  I  am  so  glad  to  understand.

Mrs.  T.  That  is  good,  and  all  done  with. Is  there  any  other  message
thou  would  like  to  give  about  anything?

(Then  again  he  refers  to  his  sister.)

Take  good  care  of  her  and  do  not  let  her  go  off  alone.

Mrs.  T.  We  will  do  our  best.

She  will  come  over  to  me  some  time  but  before  she  comes  I
want  you  all  to  look  after  her.


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  III.  193

Mrs.  T.  But  you  have  no  reason  to  think  that  she  will  join  you
shortly  1

I  have  reason  for  asking  you  to  take  good  care  of  her.

Ted,  is  this  you  1

E.  T. Yes  it  is,  Uncle  Charlie.

I  am  glad  to  see  you.

(Then  he  gives  his  nephew  business  advice  and  again  refers
to  family  matters,  mentioning  names  quite  familiarly
and  correctly,  though  some  of  them  were  also  men-
tioned by  the  sitters,  in  a  fairly  natural  conversational
way  on  both  sides, — though  of  course  all  rather  of  the
anxious  and  telephonic  order  necessitated  by  the  diffi-
culties incidental  to  the  situation.

Then  'Charles'  disappeared,  and  his  brother-in-law,
'Isaac  Thompson,'  once  more  sent  messages  and  advice
about  business — showing  rather  detailed  knowledge  on
some  points.  Then  he  addressed  Mrs.  Thompson
again  : — )

Oh  dear  Sue,  did  you  understand  my  message  1
Mrs.  T.  Do  you  mean  the  message  that  came  through  Sir  Oliver  1
Yes  I  do.

Mrs.  T.  Yes  I  did  get  it. Did  you  see  Charlie  when  he  went  over  ?

Oh  yes,  I  was  by  his  side  and  helped  him  to  find  his  way.
Mrs.  T.  We  were  so  sorry  to  part  with  him.

Yes  I  was  so  glad  to  see  him  ...  he  is  always  near  you  all.

Mrs.  T.  And  Isaac,  we  want  to  send  our  love  to  thee  and  Charlie.
Theodora  is  here  and  Agnes  is  downstairs.

Theodora  dear  are  you  better. (Theodora  had  just  come  into
the  room.)

I  say  you. R. Because  I  understand  it  better. Rector.  He
says  Thee,  but  I  say  you. I  understand  it  better.

Mrs.  T.  We  understand.

(Then  after  long  medical  advice  from  "Doctor  "  to  Theodora
Agnes  comes  in  and  says)

N


194  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part

A.  Here  is  Agnes. Is  my  father  there  ?

Well  dear  I  have  been  waiting  to  speak  with  you.
A.  What  is  that?

I  have  been  waiting  to  speak  with  you.

A.  Can  you  call  me  by  the  name  you  used  to  call  me  ?

Yes  .  .  .  Yiyi  [But  this  name  had  been  given  away  by  her
in  a  previous  sitting. — 0.  J.  L.]

A.  Yes,  that  is  what  I  wanted.

Do  you  remember  how  I  used  to  explain  about  your  work  ?

Tell  me  dear  you  are  happier  now  ?
A.  Yes,  I  am.

Do  you  understand  when  I  come  to  you  when  seem  bothered  1

A. Yes,  I  do. What  is  the  little  light  I  often  see  ?

(Hand  excited.) Agnes  dear  do  you  understand  that  light?
I,  it  is  I  who  bring  that  light  to  you.

A. When  there  is  another  light  beside  the  big  one  what  does  that
mean  1

It  is  your  brother  here  [meaning  a  deceased  infant  brother].
Never  feel  that  I  forget  you  for  a  minute. I  never  do.

There  is  a  young  girl  here  who  sends  love  to  Helen.

A. Is  it  Nita?

Yes  (emphatically)  yes  she  says.

A. Has  she  any  message  for  Helen  ?

Yes,  she  says  tell  her  not  to  think  I  am  far  away.  I  am
trying  to  help  and  cheer  her,  but  she  seems  not  to  know
me  and  goes  on  weeping.  I  do  not  wish  her  to  do  so
more.  Ask  her  to  get  my  little  brown  purse  and
keep  it.


lviii.]  On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  III.  195
A. Have  you  any  message  about  little  Donald?

Yes  I  wish  so  much  to  make  her  understand  how  I  am  trying

to  reach  them  all.
Yi  Yi  are  you  there  dear?

Listen. A  young  girl  is  trying  to  send  her  love  to  her
Mother.

A. Her  Mother?

Mother  and  Donald  and  all  .  .  .  too.
Will  you  tell  her  ?

A. Yes,  I  will  tell  her. Has  my  father  any  message  for  me  or
my  husband  ?

Ask  her  if  she  remembers  a  very  pretty  handkerchief  he  gave
me  one  Christmas.

A. Yes,  Helen  has  it  now.

Helen,  oh  I  want  her  to  have  it.
Give  my  dearest  love  .  .  . Yes  indeed  all.
Tell  them  I  am  better  off,  and  very  happy,  if  they  will  only
be  so  too.

A. Who  does  Nita  want  to  look  after  Donald  ?

Bertram — very  very  much and  Mother  also.  Good-bye.


I  could  say  much  more  to  you,  but  I  can't  now  Dear.
Yes  dearest,  you  feel  troubled  don't  you  ? Well  I  do  not
wish  you  to.

Mrs.  T.  I  can't  help  it  Isaac.

But  don't,  if  you  only  won't  I  know  dear  Sue  everything  is
all  right.

(E.  T.  indicates  that  time  is  up.)

Yes  but  let  me  say  one  word  more ;  may  I  not  ?

E.  T. Yes,  but  we  have  only  one  more  minute.

Sue  dear,  feel  that  all  is  going  to  be  right,  and  it  will  be,
and  we  shall  meet  again.


196


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


Mrs.  T.  Yes,  that  is  what  I  am  looking  forward  to.(

I  too,  when  it  is  right. I  shall  be  so  glad. That  is  what

light  is  for.  Good-bye.
Ted  my  boy  I  am  not  overlooking  you  at  all,  my  love  and

all  my  help  for  you ;  father.
+  we  cease  now,  and  may  the  blessings  of  God  rest  on  you.

+  Farewell  (E).

That  is  the  last  of  the  Isaac  Thompson  series  of  messages.  They
are  reported  because  of  their  simple  domestic  character  and  the
appropriate  knowledge  and  anxiety  they  show ;  though  few  of  them
can  be  regarded  as  technically  evidential.

Remarks  on  Belies.

In  this  last  sitting  the  unexpected,  though  rather  hoped  for,
appearance  of  the  uncle  (brother  of  Mrs.  Isaac  Thompson)  recently
deceased,  is  rather  striking ;  and  his  messages  are  all  quite  appro-
priate. (Of  course  Mrs.  Piper  had  heard  of  the  death,  since  she  was
in  friendly  relation  with  the  Thompson  family.)  It  need  not  be
supposed  that  he  was  actually  in  control :  presumably  it  was
Rector  who  was  reporting  in  the  first  person  all  the  time.

It  will  by  some  people — who  might  otherwise  be  in  favour  of  some
form  of  spiritistic  hypothesis — be  thought  absurd  that  reference
should  be  made  under  such  circumstances  to  trifles  like  ordered  but
undelivered  pictures,  and  to  trivialities  like  the  possession  of  a  hand-
kerchief or  other  relic.  The  usual  excuse  is  that  these  things  are
mentioned  for  purposes  of  identification ;  but  though  there  may  be
some  truth  in  that  view,  there  is,  in  my  judgment,  more  reason  than
that  for  such  incidents,  and  they  are  not  contradictory  of  the  notion
of  survival.  The  fate  of  objects  once  regarded  with  affection,
or  even  interest,  and  possessing  any  kind  of  personal  association,
does  not  seem  to  have  suddenly  become  a  matter  of  indifference.
Scattered  through  all  the  sittings  are  innumerable  instances  of  this
sort  of  curious  memory  of  and  interest  in  trifles ;  so  that  it  would
be  merely  tedious  to  refer  to  pages  where  they  occur.  Every  experi-
enced sitter  knows  that  such  references  are  the  commonest  of  all.
What  is  the  explanation  1  I  am  not  prepared  with  a  full  explana-
tion ;  but,  granted  the  most  completely  spiritistic  hypothesis,  it
would  appear  that  the  state  after  death  is  not  a  sudden  plunge
into  a  stately,  dignified,  and  specially  religious  atmosphere.  The
environment,  like  the  character,  appears  to  be  much  more  like  what


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  III.  197


it  is  here  than  some  folk  imagine.  This  may  be  due  to  the  effort
and  process  incidental  to  the  condition  of  semi-return,  under  which
alone  communication  is  possible  :  it  appears  to  involve  something  less
than  full  consciousness.  But  it  goes  rather  further  than  this,  since
a  few  of  the  controls,  when  recently  deceased  (a  pious  old  lady  in
particular  is  in  my  mind),  have  said  that  the  surroundings  were  more
"secular"  than  they  expected;  they  have  indeed  expressed  themselves
as  if  a  little  disappointed,  though  they  nearly  always  say  that  the
surroundings  are  better  than  they  are  here.  Anyhow,  there  appears
to  be  no  violent  or  sudden  change  of  nature  ;  and  so  any  one  who
has  cared  for  trinkets  may  perhaps  after  a  fashion  care  for  them
still.

But  there  must  be  more  than  that  even.  Objects  appear  to  serve
as  attractive  influences,  or  nuclei,  from  which  information  may  be
clairvoyantly  gained.  It  appears  as  if  we  left  traces  of  ourselves,  not
only  on  our  bodies,  but  on  many  other  things  with  which  we  have
been  subordinately  associated,  and  that  these  traces  can  thereafter
be  detected  by  a  sufficiently  sensitive  person.  This  opens  a  large
subject  which  I  have  touched  upon  once  or  twice  already  in  other
papers — never  with  any  feeling  of  certainty  or  security — and  which
requires  careful  handling  lest  its  misunderstanding  pave  the  way  for
mere  superstition.

But  to  return  to  common  sense,  and  without  assuming  anything
of  this  kind,  even  hypothetically,  how  do  we  know  that  we  are  right
in  speaking  of  some  things  as  trifles  and  other  things  as  important  1
What  is  our  scale  or  standard  of  value  1

No  one  expects  people  to  be  wholly  indifferent  as  to  the  posthumous
disposal  of  their  property,  provided  it  amounts  to  several  thousand
pounds.  They  make  careful  wills,  and  would,  if  they  knew,  be
perhaps  displeased  if  the  provisions  were  not  adhered  to,  or  if
their  final  will  was  lost.

Very  well,  on  what  scale  shall  we  estimate  property,  and  how
shall  we  measure  its  value  ?

It  is  conceivable  that,  seen  from  another  side,  little  personal
relics  may  awaken  memories  more  poignant  than  those  associated  with
barely  recollected  stocks  and  shares.

That  at  any  rate  is  the  kind  of  idea  which  naturally  suggests  itself
in  connexion  with  the  subject.  Our  terrestrial  estimate  of  the
comparative  importance  of  things  is  not  likely  to  be  cosmically
sufficient  or  perennially  true.

However  that  may  be,  it  is  clear  that  the  various  Piper  controls


198


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


do  not  estimate  the  importance  of  property  by  any  standard  dependent
on  pounds  sterling.  As  a  variant  on  old  lockets,  old  letters,  and
other  rubbish,  in  which  Phinuit  seemed  to  take  some  interest,  I  once
gave  him  a  five-pound  note.  It  was  amusing  to  see  how  at  first  he
tried  to  read  it — in  his  usual  way  by  applying  it  to  the  top  of  the
medium's  head ; — and  then  on  realising  the  sort  of  thing  it  was,  how
he  crumpled  it  up  and  flung  it  into  a  corner  with  a  grunt,  holding
out  his  hand  for  something  of  interest.  Needless  to  say,  I  did  not
share  in  this  estimate  of  value,  and,  after  the  sitting,  was  careful  to
rescue  the  despised  piece  of  paper  from  its  perilous  position.
End  of  comment  upon  the  Isaac  Thompson  Series.


CHAPTER  IV.
MESSAGES  RECEIVED  THROUGH  MRS.  THOMPSON.

The  'Myers'  Controls.

Now  let  us  enter  upon  the  episodes  where  F.  W.  H.  Myers  was
supposed  to  be  controlling,  or  at  least  communicating,  while  I  was
present.  I  shall  begin,  however,  with  communications  received  not
through  Mrs.  Piper,  but  through  other  mediums.  Most  of  the  Piper-
Myers  messages  were  obtained,  and  must  be  dealt  with,  by  Mr.
Piddington ;  because  they  often  involve  cross-correspondences,  which
belong  to  his  department  of  the  work.  Moreover,  in  the  recent  series
of  sittings  I  had  but  few  conversations  with  the  Myers  control  as
modified  or  represented  by  Mrs.  Piper — what  we  call  the  "  Piper-
Myers  "  or  Myersp.  I  fear  I  did  not  give  him  many  chances,  and  one
day  was  rather  rebuked  by  Rector  for  not  affording  the  MyersP  control
more  opportunity  for  utterance.  This  was  because  I  usually  had  some-
thing else  ready  that  I  wanted  to  try.  So  neither  from  MyersP  nor
from  HodgsonP  did  I  get  very  much  in  these  recent  sittings.

And  of  course  in  the  old  days,  1889-90,  both  had  been  in  full
vigour  of  life.

But  it  so  happens  that  long  before  Mrs.  Piper  arrived,  and  very
soon  after  Mr.  Myers's  death,  I  had  had  a  couple  of  unexpected
and  exceptional  sittings  with  the  well-known  Mrs.  Thompson,  at
that  time  still  living  at  Hampstead.  She  had  suspended  sitting
altogether;  but  she  kindly  allowed  myself  and  my  wife  to  sit  twice
with  her, — she  said  she  felt  impelled  to  do  so, — on  two  occasions
when  she  happened  to  be  visiting  friends  in  or  near  Birmingham.


lviil] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  IV.


199


Accordingly  the  first,  and  certainly  the  most  striking,  of  the  com-
munications that  I  have  to  report  are  not  from  the  Piper-Myers,  but
from  the  Thompson-Myers  or  Myersx.

There  was  a  certain  amount  that  was  dramatic  in  these  sittings
and  a  little  substantial  information  concerning  unknown  facts  which
I  subsequently  verified,  together  with  a  few  which  are  not  yet
verified  and  therefore  perhaps  erroneous.

Sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson.

Sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson  are  first  reported  on  by  several
members  of  the  Society  in  Vol.  17;  where  there  is  first  an
introduction  by  myself,  with  a  posthumously  published  paper  by
Myers  (giving  a  history  of  this  case  on  p.  69) ;  then  papers  by  Dr.
van  Eeden,  Mr.  Piddington,  Dr.  Hodgson,  Miss  Johnson,  and  a  long
.and  important  discussion  with  details  by  Mrs.  Verrall.

A  fairly  full  account  of  Mrs.  Thompson's  sittings  and  controls  is
given  by  Mr.  Piddington  in  Vol.  18,  Proc.  S.P.R.  His  remarks  on
the  trance  are  on  pp.  106-7;  also  on  pages  147  and  157.  Those
who  have  read  his  report  will  know  that  her  chief  control  repre-
sents itself  as  her  deceased  daughter  Nelly,  and  that  it  talks  in
semi-baby  language,  and  with  the  kind  of  intelligence  appropriate
to  a  clever  child.  Instances  of  '  Nelly's '  occasional  modes  of  speech
are  quoted  on  page  158,  and  again  on  p.  162,  with  further  instructive
details  on  and  about  p.  209  and  p.  221,  Vol.  18.

Other  controls  are  described  on  pp.  126-135.  Some  inter-relation
between  '  Nelly '  and  Miss  Eawson  are  referred  to  about  p.  207,  and
a  Gurney  control  on  p.  301.

Mrs.  Thompson  was  so  well  acquainted  with  Mr.  Myers  and  his
family  that  no  evidential  importance  can  be  attached  to  remarks  and
messages  concerning  that  family,  obtained  through  her  mediumship,
however  natural  they  may  be.  These  are  therefore  all  omitted.
Reference  to  trivial  facts  and  domestic  affairs  are  good  as  evidence
only  in  the  case  of  unknown  strangers :  in  other  cases  they  are
only  of  use  as  contributing  to  the  dramatic  character  and  personal
expression  of  the  whole.  From  this  point  of  view  I  regret  some
omissions,  which  nevertheless  have  been  considered  necessary.

A  further  statement  can  be  made.  It  may  be  recollected  that
Dr.  Hodgson  experienced  only  poor  sittings  during  his  few  oppor-
tunities of  meeting  Mrs.  Thompson,  that  he  accordingly  formed  an
unfavourable  estimate  of  her  powers,  and  published  his  views  in


200  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,


[part


Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  17,  p.  138. But,  speaking  for  myself,  I  form
my  own opinions on the subject,  and do not agree  with  his
criticisms  ;  though  doubtless  the  reader  may  be  influenced  thereby.
I  now  return  to  the  description.

Mrs.  Thompson's  trance  is  an  easy  trance,  not  so  complete  or
striking  as  Mrs.  Piper's,  but  it  is  a  state  of  suspension,  or  partial
suspension,  of  ordinary  consciousness,  and  is  accompanied  by  a  change
of  voice  and  manner.

In  the  sitting  which  follows,  '  Myers '  was  represented  as  controlling
and  speaking  for  part  of  the  time,  but  the  sittings  began  with  the
"  Nelly "  control,  and  when  the  Myers  control  is  not  manifestly
intended  to  be  speaking,  the  words  may  be  taken  as  emanating
either  from  Nelly  or  from  one  or  other  of  Mrs.  Thompson's  ordinary
controls — it  does  not  matter  which,  since  I  am  not  studying  Mrs.
Thompson's  phenomena,  but  am  giving  what  appear  to  be  messages
from  or  about  Myers,  who  died  on  17  January,  1901.

The  first  sitting  was  on  Thursday,  19  Feb.  1901,  that  is  to  say
just  about  a  month  after  his  decease.  Present,  only  myself  and  wife
with  Mrs.  Thompson.  At  6  o'clock  the  control  Nelly  began  talking
about  Myers,  about  whose  death  she  had  been  for  some  time
incredulous.  Indeed  she  had  declared  that  she  could  not  find  him
anywhere  and  did  not  believe  that  he  had  come  over.  See  J.  G.  P.'s
paper,  Vol.  18,  p.  240,  also  238.  But  now  she  was  just  beginning
to  admit  the  fact.

Tuesday,  19  February,  1901.  Sitting  with  Mrs.  Thompson  at
225  Hagley  Road,  Birmingham. Notes  by  0.  J.  L.  and  M.  L..

6.0  p.m.  I  was  allowed  to  go  on  his  birthday  to  see  him.  They
will  have  plenty  of  work  to  do,  for  he  has  promised
to  send  messages  to  74  people.
All  the  people  said  he  was  dead,  but  I  did  not  believe
it ;  and  though  I  saw  him,  I  thought  he  only  came
over  for  his  birthday  like  in  a  vision.  But  I  see  him
now.  It  is  the  truth,  it  is  the  truth  (excitedly).  Let
us  see  if  he  can  talk  sense.  He  was  talking  on  the
platform  with  you.  It  was  at  a  station  by  a  race-course.
[I  had  met  him  at  Liverpool ;  seen  him  off  from  the
landing  stage  to  America.  But  this  is  unimportant.]
He  will  come  when  he  is  more  wakened  up — before
9  o'clock. You  be  ready  at  25  minutes  to  9. He  will


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  IV.  201


be  awake  by  then. He  would  rather  think  and  realise
for  a  little  space  by  himself.
He  is  sensible,  for  a  spirit.

Before  you  came,  mother  was  praying.  She  said  "Come
and  tell  the  truth  for  truth's  sake."

(At  6.30  Mrs.  Thompson  came  to.)

Then  we  had  dinner,  and  at  8.30  the  Control  Nelly  appeared
again,  saying

What  is  the  matter  with  the  little  girl's  throat  1  her  ear
seems  to  have  made  her  throat  ache.  One  of  yours — a
twinkle  one.

[This  is  of  course  a  mere  friendly  interlude.  One  of  my
twin  daughters  was  often  troubled  with  ear-ache  about
this  time.]

(Here  there  was  an  incipient  attempt  at  a  Myers  control,
and  an  incident  at  a  Club  was  referred  to.  Then
another  control  said)

Do  you  know  he  feels  like  the  note-taker,  not  like  the  spirit
that  has  to  speak. I  think  he  will  speak  presently.

(A  short  interval  of  apparent  discomfort,  and  then  '  Myers  '
purported  to  communicate)

Lodge,  it  is  not  as  easy  as  I  thought  in  my  impatience.
Gurney  says  I  am  getting  on  first  rate.  But  I  am
short  of  breath.

Oh,  Lodge,  it  is  like  looking  at  a  misty  picture.  I  can
distinctly  feel  I  ought  to  be  taking  a  note  of  it.  I  do
not  feel  as  if  I  were  speaking,  but  it  is  best  to  record
it  all.

Tell  them  I  am  more  stupid  than  some  of  those  I  had  to
deal  with.  Oh,  Lodge,  what  is  it  when  I  see  you  ?
Was  it  the  Albemarle  Club  we  went  to  when  I  talked
about oh,  it  leaves  off.

Sidgwick  knows  I  am  with  him. He  said  that  he  saw  me

in  the  morning  of Oh,  dear,  it  always  leaves  off

in  the  interesting  places.

I  can  hear  myself  using  Rosa  Thompson's  voice.


202


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


I  want  to  convince  Sidgwick.  He  says  "  Myers,  now  we
are  together,  you  convince  me  that  I  am  sending  my
messages,  and  that  she  is  not  getting  them  from  us  some
way."  He  still  wants  me  to  show  him.  He  says  he  saw
me  in  the  morning  of  the  day  he  went  to  Trevelyan.
He  met  Trevelyan,  and  he  saw  me  first.  I  am  trying
to  show  him  the  way.  It  is  funny  to  feel  myself  talking
when  it  is  not  myself  talking.  It  is  no*-  my  whole  self
talking.  When  I  am  awake  I  know  where  I  am.  Do
you  remember  the  day  I  was  with  you  here  %  When
I  went  home  that  day  I  was  ill.  I  had  such  a  bad
night.  It  is  in  my  diary.  It  was  in  May,  I  think.  I
Avas  very  ill.  [This  about  Trevelyan  seems  to  refer  to
an  incident  dealt  with  by  Mr.  Piddington.  See  Proc.
Vol.  18,  pp.  239,  241.]

[The  description  of  the  feeling  of  the  control  while  engaged
in  communication  agrees  closely  with  that  of  Dr.
Hodgson  based  upon  his  experience  of  Mrs.  Piper.
See  for  instance  Vol.  13,  pages  366,  380,  404,  405.
And  the  forgetfultiess  immediately  following  may  be
compared  with  Rector's  statement,  p.  148  above.]

0.  J.  L.  Do  you  want  to  say  anything  about  the  Society  1
What  Society?

O.  J.  L.  You  remember  the  S.P.R.

Do  not  think  that  I  have  forgotten.  But  I  have.  I  have
forgotten  just  now.  Let  me  think.  You  know,  Lodge,
when  you  have  wanted  a  thing  thirty  or  forty  years,
and  at  last  got  it,  you  do  not  think  of  much  else  beside.
Let  me  think,  and  bit  by  bit  give  it  you.  I  used  to  get
better  evidence  when  I  let  them  say  what  they  wanted
to  say.

They  tell  me  it  was  my  best  love  that  Society.  They  will
help  me.

What  did  Battersea  say  about  itl
O.  J.  L.  I  do  not  know.

I  am  going  to  talk  to  you  clearly  and  very  distinctly  in
April. I  do  not  know  my  Mother's  name  now


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  IV.  203


What  James  gave  me  to  make  me  sleep  did  not  do  me  any
good.

There  is  plenty  of  good  matter  in  those  papers  that  I  left,
....  if  it  is  gone  through.  You  remember  the  dis-
cussion there  was  over  Hyslop's  paper  and  its  length  ?
If  it  is  put  in  too  much  detail,  there  is  too  much  of
it;  and  yet  if  you  put  it  fully  it  is  there  for  those
who  want  it  full ;  and  you  can  pick  out  the  points
too

I  was  confused  when  I  came  here.  I  groped  my  way  as  if
through  passages,  before  I  knew  I  was  dead.  I  thought
I  had  lost  my  way  in  a  strange  town,  and  I  groped
my  way  along  the  passage.  And  even  when  I  saw
people  that  I  knew  were  dead,  I  thought  they  were
only  visions.

I  have  not  seen  Tennyson  yet  by  the  way.

I  am  going  to  be  bold  and  prophesy  already.  I  am  going
to  see  you  in  April.  I  am  going  to  know  who  I  am
by  then.

0.  J.  L.  And  will  you  then  read  what  you  wrote  in  the  envelope  1
What  envelope  1 — I  shall  be  told.

Ernest  does  not  mind  now.  What  do  they  mix  me  up  with
him  for?  (Jocularly.)  Do  they  think  I  want  to  shine
in  his  glory  ?

[This  was  evidently  a  reference  to  the  "  Times "  obituary
notice,  which  I  had  written,  but  to  which  some  one  in
the  "  Times "  office  appended  a  supplementary  state-
ment that  F.  W.  H.  M.  had  been  a  joint  translator  of
Homer  together  with  Walter  Leaf  and  Andrew  Lang ;
whereas  it  is  public  and  general  knowledge  that  this
was  only  true  of  his  brother  Ernest.]

I  wanted  you  to  do  for  me  what  I  did  for  Sidgwick.  [i.e.
write  a  notice  in  the  Society's  Proceedings.]

0.  J.  L.  I  am  going  to  ;  and  so  are  Eichet  and  James.

Ah,  Richet :  Yes,  Eichet  knows  me ;  and  James  will  do  it
well.


204


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[PART?


I  never  finished  those  letters  I  was  writing — letters  to  be
published.

[Probably  meaning  the  book  "  Human  Personality."]

[Then  the  control  seemed  to  change,  and  it  went  on]  : —

He  says  he  must  stay  and  try  and  help.  He  says,  Bless  him
when  he  has  so  much  to  do.  He  says  "  Brothers  I  have
none  excepting  Lodge."  He  wants  Lodge  to  be  President
if  he  dare  spare  the  work  ;  but  he  says  "  Do  not  rope
yourself,  but  keep  the  group,  keep  the  group  together.
It  will  soon  take  care  of  itself."

0.  J.  L.  We  are  trying  to  get  Rayleigh.

That  will  be  splendid,  but  that  is  too  good  to  hope  for.  I
think  it  will  be  you.  Thank  you  for  being  helpful  to
him.  You  have  helped  him.  Man's  sympathy  is  more
helpful  than  anything  else,  and  with  sympathy  every-
thing slips  into  place.  Among  the  things  which  are  not
evidential  you  get  things  which  are.  They  must  take
it  all.  Those  that  seek  only  the  evidential  things  will
not  get  them.

There  are  so  many  he  would  like  to  help. He  promised,  and

he  will  have  to.
When  he  comes  in  April  he  will  remember  a  great  deal  more.

He  will  remember  what  he  wrote  for  you  in  the  envelope.

(Trance  ends  about  10.30  p.m.)

The  impersonation  at  this  sitting  was  really  a  remarkably  vivid
and  lifelike  one.  It  occurred  only  a  month  after  the  death  of
F.  W.  H.  Myers,  and  the  state  of  confusion  in  which  the  Myers
control  found  itself  seemed  very  natural.  Indeed,  it  would  be
difficult  for  me  to  invent  an  experience  or  a  communication  more
reasonable  and  natural  under  the  supposed  circumstances  than  what
we  actually  got.  The  necessity  for  still  "convincing  Sidgvvick "
struck  us  as  amusingly  characteristic ;  so  did  several  other  little
traits,  such  as  that  Myers  "  felt  as  if  he  ought  to  be  taking  notes  " —
a  point  on  which  F.  W.  H.  M.  was  always  specially  insistent.  And
as  to  his  temporary  forgetfulness  of  the  existence  of  the  S.P.R.,.
though  it  will  probably  be  pounced  upon  as  an  absurdity  by  scoffers,,
and  though  it  was  of  course  quite  unexpected,  yet  even  that  struck.


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  IV.


us  at  the  time  as  humanly  natural  and  interesting.  And  indeed  so
it  does  now.  (Compare  Rector's  statement  on  p.  148.)  With  the
portions  omitted  and  everything  taken  into  account,  this  sitting  seems
to  me  about  the  best  of  the  Myers  sittings  in  which  I  have  been
immediately  concerned.  "Without  being  strictly  evidential,  it  was  in
fact  as  convincing  as  anything  that  could  be  imagined  of  that  kind.

This  was  in  February,  1901.  A  further  communication  was  pro-
mised for  April,  but  no  opportunity  for  another  sitting  came  until
May  8th,  and  then  it  came  quite  unexpectedly  and  without  being
arranged  for.  In  fact  at  that  time  it  was  unlikely  that  any  sitting
would  occur,  since  we  had  all  been  definitely  told  that  they  were
suspended,  or  rather  that  they  were  intended  henceforth  to  cease.

Second  Thompson  Sitting  at  Edgbaston.

On  May  8th,  1901,  Mrs.  Thompson  happened  to  come  to  Birmingham
again  to  see  her  connexions  there  ;  and  she  incidentally  visited  us
at  our  temporary  house  in  the  Hagley  Road.

I  made  the  following  contemporary  notes,  and  it  seems  to  me
worth  while  to  reproduce  them  as  a  representation  of  the  circum-
stances of  the  case  at  this  time.


From  0.  J.  L's  Note-booh,  9  May,  1901.

After  dinner  Mrs.  Thompson  spontaneously  asked  Mrs.  Lodge  to
take  her  up  into  my  study,  saying  as  she  went  upstairs  that  she
felt  only  half  conscious,  and  as  if  she  were  going  off.

Upstairs  we  three  alone  sat  and  talked  for  some  time.

At  last  "  Nelly "  appeared  and  notes  began :  Mrs.  Lodge  taking
them  as  well  as  myself.  Mrs.  Lodge  spoke  no  word  during  the
trance  from  first  to  last.

The  sitting  was  dim  and  unsatisfactory  and  in  most  respects
apparently  at  the  time  a  failure.  It  lasted  about  an  hour  and  a
half,  one  continuous  trance,  and  at  the  end  Mrs.  Thompson  was
much  agitated  j  not  exhausted,  but  weepy ;  saying  how  much  she
disliked  the  idea  of  coming  back  to  consciousness  and  leaving  the
conditions  in  which  she  had  just  been.  She  said  she  had  no  re-
collection of  what  had  been  said ;  and  this  appeared  to  be  the  case.
She  also  told  me,  before  the  sitting  began,  that  of  late  she  had
been  quite  unconscious  of  any  communications,  that  is  to  say,  she
could  not  remember  their  contents,  but  that  she  was under  the


206


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


impression  that  during  the  last  month  or  so  she  had  had  three  or
four  trances  when  no  one  was  there,  at  different  times,  and  that
once  she  found  herself  waking  on  the  floor  with  a  feeling  of  great
satisfaction  and  contentment.

She  further  said  that  the  sudden  cutting  off  of  all  attempts  at
communication  had  been  a  great  blow  to  her  and  seemed  to  upset
her  physically  to  some  extent.  Also  that  she  had  been  promised
something  for  her  birthday,  April  22nd, — evidently  connecting  it
with  me.  'Nelly'  had  indeed  promised  me  a  sitting  in  April,
[as  recorded  in  last  sitting]  though  not  for  any  particular  date.
But  it  seems  she  had  expected  it  on  the  22nd.  However  I  had
no  sitting  in  April — nothing  till  this  May  8th.

The  difficulties  of  clear  utterance  at  times  rendered  it  necessary
for  me  to  help  the  ideas  out,  or  anticipate  them  as  far  as  I  could.
My  notes  aim  at  recording  the  sense  of  what  was  intended,  and  can
only  be  of  interest  to  those  who  understand.

Additional  Note  written  on  11  May,  1901.

The  above  was  dictated  before  copying  the  notes,  and  gives  my
contemporary  impression  of  the  sitting ;  but  on  reading  over  the
notes  I  find  them  better  than  I  expected ;  and  now  think  that
though  at  the  time  it  seemed  a  bad  sitting  to  everybody  concerned,
it  is  not  really  bad ;  though  the  utterances  were  so  feeble  and
confused  that  to  a  novice  it  would  have  been  nearly  all  gibberish.
A  little  gibberish  remains  undeciphered  in  places ;  but  is  recorded
in  case  any  meaning  can  be  attached  to  it.  I  do  not  think  it  is
gibberish  really, — only  as  heard  and  taken  down.  It  probably  had
sense  if  it  could  have  been  heard  and  understood,  though  most
likely  not  at  all  important  sense.

Second Sitting with Mrs. Thompson at 225 Hagley  Road,
Birmingham,  8  May,  1901,  from  9.0  till  10.30  p.m.

Present — O.  J.  L.  and  M.  L.,  both  taking  notes.

(Nelly  speaking.)

Professor  Lodge,  what  is  that  umbrella  they  have  put  up
and  made  it  all  dark  ? I  wish  they  would  take  it  away.

(Further  indications  followed  that  she  had  tried  to  com-
municate but  found  it  dark.)


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  IV.  207


[This  evidently  refers  to  the  suspension  of  sittings ;  Mrs.
Thompson,  for  some  private  reason,  having  declined  to
sit  for  the  last  few  months,  and  only  doing  it  now
as  a  special  favour,  and  because  she  felt  internally  urged
to  do  so.]

I  have  not  seen  Mr.  Myers,  not  once ;  I  have  not  seen  him
since  they  put  that  umbrella  up.

Nelly  then  appealed  to  me  to  try  and  believe  her  and  receive
her  statements  sympathetically  and  not  with  an  undercurrent  of
suspicion,  explaining  that  such  undercurrent  befogged  her,  and  that
she  could  give  me  better  things  if  I  was  sympathetic.  I  asked  her
not  to  regard  me  as  in  any  way  hostile,  and  she  said  "No,  I  do
not  feel  like  that  to  any  of  the  Marshall  family."  This  remark  was
not  amplified,  nor  did  it  seem  understood  by  Nelly  herself.

It  is  perhaps  worth  noting  incidentally  that  my  grandmother  and
my  wife's  father  were  both  Marshalls,  though  no  relation  whatever
to  each  other,  nor  to  Frederic  Myers's  relations  of  that  name.

Nelly  then  sent  a  few  messages  to  Mr.  Piddington,  and  incidentally
remarked  that  she  felt  as  if  in  a  pound  in  the  middle  of  a  field,
and  as  if  she  could  not  see  clearly  the  people  on  the  other  side  of
the  enclosure,  and  that  communication  was  very  difficult  and  not
clear  to-day.

Then  followed  some  convulsive  movements  and  a  sort  of  internal
colloquy  of  which  only  fragments  were  audible.  They  appeared
however  to  indicate  a  confused  conversation  between  Nelly  and  Mr.
Myers,  Nelly  asking  him  to  come  in,  and  Mr.  Myers  saying  that
he  had  been  told  not, — that  he  had  understood  the  communications
were  suspended  for  a  time.

But  this  was  only  an  impression  gathered  from  the  confused
mutterings.  A  further  impression  was  that  Mr.  Myers  mistrusted
the  presence  of  a  third  person  and  was  being  reassured  by  Nelly
that  it  was  only  Mrs.  Lodge.

It's  only  Mrs.  Lodge  whom  you  love.

No  I  don't  love  her.

It's  only  Lodge's  wife,  who  will  help.

More  than  I  anticipated  much  more.

With  other  barely  intelligible  fragments  of  internal  colloquy.


208


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


Ultimately  the  conversation  with  me  began  again  but  in  a  very-
halting  and  indistinct  fashion,  no  marked  personality  at  all,  some-
what as  if  Nelly  were  half  giving  messages  and  half  personating
Mr.  Myers,  and  doing  both  badly  and  with  difficulty.

The  following  however  are  my  notes  of  what  was  said  :—

Mr.  Myers  is  worrying  about  something  connected  with  Mr.

Sidgwick,  something  that  was  not  understood  or  that

was  not  put  down. He  [H.  S.]  had  some  Jews  in  College

and  he  could  not  do  it  on  a  Saturday.
Tell  Feilding  that  he  is  doing  something  that  is  waste  of

time. The  Times  said  something  about  it  and  said  it

was  valuable.

[But  I  understood  the  communicator  to  mean  that  it  was
not.  I  do  not  know  what  Avork  is  being  referred
to.]

The  first  shock  to  my  dearest  hopes.

So  stupid  not  to  tell  them  what  I  wished.

The  time  was  gradually  passing.

You  know  Sidgwick  and  I  had  many  disappointments  like
this  [when  communications  would  not  come  clear?]

I  thought  I  should  do  better,  but  I  cannot, [cf.  p.  227.]

We  had  many,  a  year,  a  hundred,  at  Newcastle.  Bitter
disappointments.

But  when  I  can  give  pound  [muddle]

Given  a  grain  and  found  as  much  as  would  have  been,  for
Sidgwick,  in  that  hundred.

Mrs.  Sidgwick  was  cold  on  a  brick  floor.

A  hundred  results  nil.

It  is  true  Lodge  it  is  true.

I  tried  on  the  Sunday  with. —

I  saw  the  receptacle,  but  not  this  one.  It  was  Hodgson  and
Smith  and  I.  We  were  all  in  my  room  together,  and  I
told  him.

I  told  him  I  would  find  no  difficulty,  if  he  were  in  difficulty,  in

putting  things  straight ;
But  it  is.

[Meaning  that  it  was  much  harder  than  he  thought.]

I  thought  I  knew  better  than  be  such  a  miserable  failure.
I  thought  I  would  come  and  read  it.


lviil] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  IV.


209


[Apparently  or  possibly  meaning  the  sealed  letter.]

I  had  gone  away. I  thought  I  was  not  to  communicate  now.

It  is  not  the  time  now.
I  wished  you  would  all  write  to  me. I  was  so  far  away.  I

pined  to  hear  from  you  all.
My  philosophy  did  not  help  me  much.

I  feel  just  as  lonely. Lodge,  it  is  just  as  they  say,  you

grope  in  fog  and  darkness.
I  do  not  know,  when  I  come  to  talk  to  you,  about  the  other

side.

But  I  must  do  as  I  promised.

I  feel  I  am  selfish  still.

I  wanted  it  for  my  own  satisfaction.

Further  indications  that  the  conditions  under  which  he  was  were
not  altogether  to  his  liking,  not  at  least  when  trying  to  communicate ;
and  also  further  statements  that  he  could  not  very  clearly  realise  the
conditions  on  that  side  when  he  was  trying  to  communicate,  and
that  now  he  was  wishful  to  pass  on  and  up  and  not  stay  to  redeem
his  promises.

Is  the  typhoid  better  1

What  are  you  doing  in  this  place  1

[Apparently  meaning  strange  and  unfamiliar  surroundings,
the  temporary  house  in  Birmingham  which  I  had  taken,
and  which  he  had  never  seen.]

I  had  plenty  of  this  kind  of  unsatisfactory  experience  [meaning

bad  sittings.]
James  went  with  me.

I  seemed  to  be  taken  from  all  my  pain  and  suffering  into
light.

I  hardly  like  to  tell  you  what  I  wanted  to  do,  it  seems  so
selfish  now,  but  I  wanted  to  go  and  talk  to  Tennyson,
whom  I  idolised.  But  I  was  told  that  I  must  suffer  for
my  promises,  and  then  I  could  have  what  I  wanted.

I  wish  I  had  not  been  taken  so  far :  it  makes  it  difficult
to  communicate.

Then — referring,  as  I  thought  at  the  time,  to  Mrs.  Thompson's
tranee  which  she  had  told  me  of,  when  she  woke  up  and  found

0


210


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


herself  on  the  floor,  but  perhaps  more  probably  referring  to  one  of
the  incidents  mentioned  by  Mr.  Piddington  in  Proc,  Vol.  18,
pp.  147,  148 — the  Medium  went  on,

I  did  not  throw  her  on  the  floor.
It  was  Talbot— Talbot  Forbes.

It  was  not  I. I  wanted  her  to  know  I  was  there,  but  Talbot

only  wanted  her  to  tell  his  Mother.
Why  does  she  [meaning  apparently  the  Medium]  pray  to  me

and  beg  me  to  come,  when  she  knows  I  want  to  be

cleansed  from  earth  first  1 I  do  not  want  her  to  fetch

me  back  at  all  times.
They  keep  on  calling  me. I am wanted everywhere.  I

hear  them  calling,  and  I  cannot  tell  who  it  is  at  first.
They  tell  me  I  am  wanted. But  I  want to  concentrate

in  a  few  places,  or  in  one  place,  and  not  to  be  split  up.
Do  appeal  to  them  not  to  break  me  up  so,  and  leave  me

not  clear  in  one  spot.
1  am  only  one  now,  and  the  noise  of  you  all  calling  makes

me  feel  I  cannot. Someone  is  calling  me  now.
What  did  Miss  Edmunds  want  with  me  ? On  Friday  she

called.

[A  letter  from  America  referring  to  this,  May  3rd,  arrived
later.]

Tell  Kichet  I  shall  meet  him  in  Rome.  I  shall  speak  to
him  in  Rome  on  the  third  day  of  the  Congress.

I  heard  them  describing  how  I  died,  and  I  could  not  stop
them.

[Referring  apparently  to  some  unpublished  Piper  sittings
in  America.]

I  could  not  say  it,  but  they  were  translating  like  a  schoolboy
does  his  first  lines  of  Virgil — so  terribly  confused  and
inaccurate.  But  somehow  I  could  not  help  it.  It  was
not  me  communicating,  yet  I  saw  it  going  on.  They
had  something  from  me  on  the  15th.

I  tried  to  communicate  on  a  15th.

[These  things  are  referred  to  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  report.  Proc,
Vol.  20,  pp.  207-9. See  also  Notes  below.]


lviii.J On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  IV.  211

I  tried  by  writing.
Moses — Stainton  Moses.

They  mixed  the  deaths  up — his  death  and  my  death.  It
applies  to  him  and  not  to  me.

[Apparently referring to some unpublished and to  me
unknown  account  of  the  death-bed.]

How  easy  to  promise  and  how  difficult  to  fulfil.

Make  one  appeal  to  them  to  let  me  be  at  rest  for  two
or  three  weeks  after  they  get  the  note.  After  Hodgson
hears  that  I  have  tried,  however  badly,  ask  him  not
to  call  me,  and  tell  him  that  if  he  does,  they  will  not
let  me  hear  him.  I  have  gone  back  from  where  I  was
that  night.  I  could  hear  what  she  (the  Medium)  was
saying,  and  keep  a  check  on  it,  but  now  I  cannot  hear
what  is  being  said  :  I  can  only  think  the  things,  and
false  things  may  creep  in  without  my  knowing  it.

Have  you  ten  days  work  in  a  week?  I  cannot  protect
you  from  the  calls  upon  you  as  they  may  protect  me.

Do  you  not  think,  Mrs.  Lodge,  he  has  ten  days  work
a  week  1

(Then  the  Nelly  Control  reappears.)

Professor  Lodge,  do  you  know  I  have  seen  such  a  funny
thing.  I  have  seen  Mr.  Myers  talking  as  if  to  a  stick
right  through  Mother's  body ;  and  while  he  was  talk-
ing to  it  some  one  came  up  and  touched  it,  and  it  all
got  confused,  and  he  could  not  think  why  it  went
funny.

He  seems  to  have  to  talk  through  this  stick,  and  yet  it
keeps  on  being  interfered  with  by  other  people.

I  wish  Mother  was  not  so  wicked ;  because  when  Mr.  Myers
wants  to  go  to  sleep  and  be  quiet,  Mother  will  not
let  him.  She  will  call  him.  You  must  tell  her  not
to.  Tell  her  it  is  wicked  to  call  him.  When  he  wants
to  go  to  sleep  and  be  quiet  she  keeps  him  back.  She
must  not  do  it.

[I  promised  to  give  her  the  message ;  which  I  did  after
the  trance,  and  she  then  admitted  that  she  thought  of
him  frequently  and  urgently,  but  that  she  would  try  to
refrain.]


212


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


(Nelly  went  on,)

Do  you  know  last  Monday  when  I  went  to  Dr.  Van  Eeden's
house ;  he  called  for  me  and  we  went.  Mr.  Myers  came
and  told  me  he  was  calling.  We  both  went,  yes,  on
Monday.  He  has  got  an  impression  that  Mr.  Myers
helped  him  to  call  me.  Mr.  Myers  said  "Let  us  go
and  see  '  old  Whiskers '  in  his  little  bed  and  laugh  at
him."  He  is  much  more  lively  when  he  is  talking  to
me,  and  much  more  wakened  up  than  when  he  is  talk-
ing down  that  stick. [Cf.  Proc.  S.P.E.  Vol.  18,  p.  201.]

But  he  does  seem  worried,  he  gets  no  rest.  Some  one  has
called  him  in  a  glass  bottle — yes,  a  crystal.

Oh  yes,  and  he  said  it  was  not  he  that  wrote  when  Miss
Kawson  wrote  and  said  he  told  her.  But  it  was  not
he  that  was  writing.  You  know  when ;  Miss  Rawson
wrote  two  very  full  sheets  in  the  middle  of  a  Gurney
letter.  [Perhaps  referring  to  the  incident  recorded  on
p.  224.]  He  said  it  was  not  he,  but  neither  was  it  fraud.
He  does  not  want  you  to  stop  the  phenomenon.  He
wants  to  study  it.  You  are  not  to  say  that  it  was
wrong  and  get  it  stopped.  He  likes  to  watch  the
somnambulistic  thing  at  work.  It  is  not  he  that  is
doing  it,  and  yet  he  is  looking  on.

He  does  not  see  how  it  is  worked,  but  he  finds  this  more
interesting  than  the  genuine  communications.

He  did  not  rattle  the  curtains  either.  Eva — now  do  not
think  I  am  talking  about  Mrs.  Myers,  but  Mrs.  Eva ;
they  had  a  shaking  of  the  curtain,  and  thought  it  was
he.  It  was  not  he,  but  it  was  not  cheating,  and  he
does  not  want  you  to  make  them  think  that  they  are
cheats  He  does  not  know  how  it  is  worked,  but  he
is  studying,  and  he  thinks  it  will  help  a  great  deal
if  he  can  understand  how  the  cheating  things  that  are
not  cheats  are  done.  It  is  not  cheating,  and  yet  it  is
not  him  doine;  it.  .  .  .  There  was  no  stick  that  went
through  any  one's  body  there.

He  says  that  others  tell  him  it  was  just  the  same  with
them.  Sometimes  when  he  thought  they  were  com-
municating they  were  not,  and  yet  they  knew  about  it.

"  He  says  he  is  finding  out  how  honest  non-phenomena  are
to  be  accounted  for.


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  IV.


213


Apparently  dishonest  phenomena  are  phenomena  of  extreme
[interest  ?]  apart  from  the  spirit  which  purports  to  be
communicating."

[This  last  part  was  slowly  recited  by  Nellie,  like  a  lesson
not  understood  by  her.]

I  can't  help  what  he  says.
I  must  go  now.

(End  of  sitting  10.30  p.m.)

Notes  on  this  Sitting.

Some  of  the  remarks  reported  above  seem  to  indicate  a  connexion
with  statements  made  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  automatic  writing  of  the  same
period,  about  which  Mrs.  Thompson  knew  nothing.  Thus  there
appears  a  certain  similarity  between  the  remark  "  Mr.  Myers  is
worrying  about  something  connected  with  Mrs.  S."  and  the  attempts —
misunderstood  at  the  time — in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  between  April  19
and  May  8,  as  related  in  Proceedings  Vol.  20,  pp.  195-198,  to
describe  where  Mrs.  Sidgwick  was  to  look  for  something  of  the
nature  of  a  book.  Again  "  I  tried  on  the  Sunday  with — I  saw
the  receptacle  but  not  this  one "  may  perhaps  be  connected  with
the  sudden  impulse  on  Sunday,  March  17th  {Proceedings,  Vol.  20,
p.  221),  which  induced  Mrs.  Verrall  to  write  automatically  and
which  produced  the  first  reference  to  Mrs.  Forbes  in  what  eventually
became  a  long  series  of  cross-correspondences  between  those  two
automatists.

Finally,  there  seems  a  close  correspondence  between  the  above
remarks  as  to  difficulties  produced  by  simultaneous  efforts  at  com-
munication and  similar  observations  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  the
same  day  and  approximately  the  same  hour  (Proceedings,  Vol.  20,
pp.  207-209).  Thus  in  Mrs.  Thompson's  sitting  the  Myers  control
speaks  of  "  the  noise  of  you  all  calling  makes  me  feel  I  cannot.
Someone  is  calling  me  now";  he  also  says  "false  things  may  creep
in";  and  the  Nelly  control  describes  how,  just  before,  "someone  came
up  and  touched"  the  stick  through  which  communication  was  being
made,  "and  it  all  got  confused."  While  Mrs.  Verrall's  automatic
script  of  Monday,  May  8th,  10-10.30  p.m.,  concludes  as  from  the
Myers  control  with  the  words:  "falsehood  is  never  far  away,  What

do  you  want  with  me. I  cannot No  power,  doing

something  else  to-night.  Note  hour."  The  initial  '  H '  with  which
the  message  is  there  signed  was  a  substitution  for  the  real  initial,


214


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


because  that  purported  to  represent  F.W.H.M.;  and  in  those  early-
days  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  writing  it  was  thought  safer  to  treat  this  as
mere  impersonation.

The  correspondence  can  be  shown  by  a  statement  in  parallel
columns,  as  follows  :

May  8,  1901.

Mrs.  Thompson  Mrs.  Verrall

Birmingham  Cambridge
9-10.30  p.m.  10-10.30  p.m.


1.  "I  cannot."  1.  "  Non  possum  (I  cannot)."

"No  power."

2.  "  Some  one  is  calling  me  now." 2.  "  Doing  something  else  to-night."

3.  "Let  me  be  at  rest."  3.  "Desine  (leave  off)."

4.  "False  things  may  creep  in." 4.  "Falsehood  is  never  far  away."

The  utterances  of  Mrs.  Thompson  were  not  known  to  Mrs.  Verrall
when  she  wrote  the  script  reported  in  her  paper,  Proc,  Vol.  20 ;  but
the  correspondence  is  mentioned  there  on  pages  207  et  seq.


Further  Notes  on  the  Thompson  Myers  Sittings.

The  rather  strikingly  worded  complaints  and  requests  recorded
above  (p.  210),  as  received  through  Mrs.  Thompson,

"  They  keep  on  calling  me. I  am  wanted  everywhere  ....

Do  appeal  to  them  not  to  break  me  up  so  ...  .
How  easy  to  promise  and  how  difficult  to  fulfil. Make  one

appeal  to  them  to  let  me  be  at  rest  for  two  or  three

weeks."

also  correspond  with  something  to  the  same  effect  independently
received  through  Miss  Rawson  three  months  earlier ;  and  constitute
what  may  be  fairly  considered  another  cross-correspondence.  This
message,  received  on  Feb.  7th,  1901,  purported  to  come  from
Edmund  Gurney,  who  was  represented  as  speaking  through  Miss
Rawson  as  follows,  (see  for  fuller  report  below,  pp.  223-5).

"  I  have  come  to  warn  you  for  my  friend  to  implore  you
not  to  let  them  call  him.  He  gets  no  rest  day  or  night.
At  every  sitting  '  Call  Myers  ! Bring  Myers ' ;  there's


lviil] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  IV.  215


not  a  place  in  England  where  they  don't  ask  for  him ;
it  disturbs  him,  it  takes  away  his  rest.  For  God's  sake
don't  call  him.  It  is  all  right  for  him  to  come  of  his
own  accord.  .  .  .  What  Ave  want  for  him  now  is  to
rise,  and  to  forget  the  earthly  things.
He  can't  help  any  more.  His  life  was  given  to  it,  and  that
must  be  the  help.  He  was  allowed  just  to  say  that  he
continued.  That  was  his  great  desire,  but  it  will  help
nobody  that  he  should  be  called  back,  and  made  to  hover
near  the  earth.  In  fact  it  will  only  make  him  earth-
bound.

I  am  tempted  to  quote  here,  from  page  213  of  Proc,  Vol.  21,  a
different  though  not  altogether  dissimilar  extract  from  the  script
of  Mrs.  Holland  in  India  which  was  written  on  January  5th  and
•6th,  1904,  by  the  MyersH  control:

"  Oh  if  I  could  only  get  to  them — could  only  leave  you  the
proof  positive  that I  remember — recall — know — continue

  I  have  thought  of  a  simile  which  may  help  you

to  realise  the  '  bound  to  earth  condition '  which  persists
with  me. It  is  a  matter  very  largely  of  voluntary  choice
— I  am,  as  it  were,  actuated  by  the  missionary  spirit ;
and  the  great  longing  to  speak  to  the  souls  in  prison —
still  in  the  prison  of  the  flesh — leads  me  to  '  absent  me
from  felicity  awhile.'  "
This  clearly  expresses  the  idea  of  service  to  which  I  refer  later,
-and  it  is  a  reverberation  and  later  expansion  of  the  thought  expressed
in  the  extracts  already  quoted,  which  had  not  been  published  and
were  not  known  to  Mrs.  Holland. But  the  long  post-dating  of  this
last  communication  destroys  any  claim  to  consideration  as  a  cross-
correspondence. Besides it  was  only  an  explanation  of  why  the
messages  still  willingly  continued  ;  whereas  the  other  two — so  soon
after  the  death — are  full  of  earnestness  and  anxiety.

General  Remarks,  addressed  to  religious  objectors.

Good  and  earnest  though  moderately  intelligent  religious  people
sometimes  seek  to  pour  scorn  upon  the  reality  of  any  of  these
apparent  communications — not  for  any  scientific  reason,  but  for
reasons  born  of  prejudice.  They  think  that  it  is  not  a  worthy
occupation  for  "just  men  made  perfect"  "who  have  entered  into
felicity  " to be remembering trivial and minute details,  under


216  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


circumstances  of  exceptional  difficulty,  for  the  purpose  of  proving
to  those  left  behind  the  fact  of  survival  and  the  continuance  of
personal  identity.  It  is  taken  for  granted  that  saints  ought  to  be
otherwise  occupied  in  their  new  and  lofty  and  favoured  conditions.

What  may  or  may  not  be  possible  to  saints,  it  is  hardly  for  me
or  other  gropers  among  mere  terrestrial  facts  to  surmise:  nor  am  I
anxious  to  imagine  that  all  our  communicators  belong  to  the  cate-
gory of  '  perfected  and  glorified  saints,' — it  seems  to  me,  I  confess,
singularly  unlikely ;  nor  is  it  necessary  to  suppose  that  such  exercises
as  we  report — even  if  they  are  fully  and  entirely  what  they  pretend
to  be — constitute  any  large  proportion  of  the  activity  of  the  people
who  are  professedly  concerned  in  their  production — people  who  are
confessedly  far  from  perfection  and  who  have  still  much  to  learn.
And  as  regard  dignity  and  appropriateness,  does  it  not  sometimes
happen  that  an  Archbishop  or  a  Savant  is  found  willing  to  play  a
frivolous  childish  game,  and  otherwise  to  disport  himself,  in  spite
of  his  being  on  the  brink  of  eternity  in  a  world  of  sorrow  and
sin  1

But  seriously,  is  it  not  legitimate  to  ask  these  good  people
whether,  if  an  opportunity  of  service  to  brethren  arises,  an  effort
to  seize  it  may  not  be  made  even  by  a  saint  ?  Whether  this  notion
of  perennial  service  is  not  in  accordance  with  their  own  doctrines
and  beliefs  1  and  whether  they  are  not  impressed  by  that  clause
in  the  creed  of  most  Christians  which  roundly  asserts  that  their
Master  descended  into  Hades  1  for  purposes  which  in  another
place  are  suggested.  Whereby  they  may  learn  that,  even  after
such  a  Life  and  Death  as  that,  Felicity  was  not  entered  into
save  after  an  era  of  further  personal  service  of  an  efficient  kind.
Those  who  interpret  the  parables  in  such  a  way  as  to  imagine
that  dignified  idleness  is  the  occupation  of  eternity — that  there
will  be  nothing  to  do  hereafter  but  idly  to  enjoy  the  beatific  con-
templation and  other  rewards  appropriate  to  a  well-spent  life  or  to
well-held  creeds, — free  from  remorse  of  every  kind,  and  without  any
call  for  future  work  and  self-sacrifice, — such  people  will  probably
some  day  find  themselves  mistaken,  and  will  realise  that  as  yet
they  have  formed  a  very  inadequate  conception  of  what  is  meant
by  that  pregnant  phrase  "  the  Joy  of  the  Lord."

Remarks  concerning  the  nature  of  the  record.

For  the  purpose  of  making  the  record,  which  was  written  out
very  soon  after  the  sitting,  notes  were  taken  continuously  both  by


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  IV.  217


my  wife  and  by  myself.  The  record  is  built  out  of  both  these,
eked  out  by  memory,  and  is  substantially  true,  though  I  \>y  no
means  guarantee  verbal  accuracy  everywhere.

When  anything  depends  on  verbal  accuracy,  as  it  does  in  some
cases  of  cross-correspondence,  the  writing  sittings  are  far  better
than  oral  ones,  and  the  original  script  must  always  be  referred  to
for  doubtful  or  specially  interesting  points.

My  record  aims  at  giving  a  true  representation,  and  at  conveying
to  the  reader,  as  far  as  possible,  an  impression  of  the  circumstances,
the  substance,  and  the  manner  of  the  communications, — an  impression
which  shall  be  fairly  correct  even  though  not  lifelike  and  vivid.

I  have  not  the  slightest  interest  in  attempting  to  coerce  belief
of  any  kind.  The  facts  will  make  different  kinds  of  appeal  to
different  people,  and  to  some  they  will  not  appeal  at  all.  These
will  regard  the  whole  business  with  contempt  and  pity.  They  are
within  their  rights  in  doing  so  if  they  have  conscientiously  read
this  and  the  other  records.  As  a  rule  however  that  is  where  they
are  apt  to  fail ;  and  when  a  person's  knowledge  of  a  subject  is
minute,  we  may  be  pardoned  for  holding  his  opinion  concerning  it
in  light  esteem.

Those  who  think  that  there  is  anything  sensational  or  specially
emotional  in  this  sort  of  conversation  are  mistaken.  The  conversa-
tion is  conducted  on  the  same  lines  as  a  telephonic  conver-
sation :  it  is  liable  to  the  same  sort  of  annoying  interruptions,  and
likewise  to  the  same  occasional  surprising  gleams  of  vividness, —
a  happy  turn  of  phrase,  for  instance,  a  tone  of  the  voice,  and  other
unmistakable  and  unexpected  revelation  of  identity — forged  or  real —
such  as  may  be  conveyed  by  an  appropriate  nickname  or  by  some
trivial  reminiscence.  When  this  happens,  and  when  relatives  are
present,  their  emotions  are  certainly  perturbed.

These  remarks  are  general,  and  are  applicable  to  this  whole  group
reported  on  by  me :  they  are  not  limited  in  their  application  to
any  one  particular  series.

Specific  Comments  by  0.  J.  L.

To  me  the  most  interesting  of  the  whole  are  the  concluding
observations,  part  of  which  were  carefully  and  laboriously  reported
by  the  "Nelly"  control, — the  words  sounding  odd  in  a  childish
voice.

Whatever  their  origin,  they  do,  in  my  judgment,  represent  the  truth
about  a  good  many  of  these  phenomena — that  is  to  say,  that  they


218


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


are  not  precisely  what  their  surface-aspect  implies,  yet  neither  are
they  fraud.  They  are  attempts  at  doing  something  rather  beyond
the  power  of  the  operators, — who  arrive  approximately  at  their
aim  without  achieving  what  they  want  exactly.  They  are  trying  to
get  something  definite  through,  let  us  say,  and  something  like  it  comes.
Occasionally  they  hardly  know  how  it  comes,  it  is  a  puzzle  to  them
as  to  us,  and  often  they  don't  know  what  it  is  that  we  have  got ;  but
sometimes  they  too  seem  to  be  spectators,  aware  of  the  result,  and
to  be  worried  by  the  misconception  and  misunderstanding  which  they
see  will  arise,  but  which  they  are  powerless  to  prevent, — except,  as
here,  by  trying  to  instruct  us  and  awaken  our  intelligences  into  a
condition  in  which  we  too  can  understand  and  grapple  with  the
unavoidable  difficulties  of  the  situation.

"I  can  only  think  the  things":  seems  to  me  likely  to  be  an
accurate  description  of  the  method.  It  is  a  telepathic  method,  and
the  reproduction  by  voice  or  pen  is  a  supplementary  and  only
barely  controllable  process.  And,  as  reported  above,  the  process  of
communication  is  instructively  described  as  from  that  side  thus : — ■

"  I  could  not  say  it,  but  they  were  translating  like  a  school-
boy does  his  first  lines  of  Virgil — so  terribly  confused
and  inaccurate.  But  somehow  I  could  not  help  it.  It
was  not  me  communicating,  yet  I  saw  it  going  on.  .  .  .
I  can  only  think  the  things,  and  false  things  may  creep
in  without  my  knowing  it."
"  He  said  it  was  not  he,  but  neither  was  it  fraud.  He  does  not
want  you  to  stop  the  phenomenon,  he  wants  to  study  it.
You  are  not  to  say  it  was  wrong  and  get  it  stopped.  He
likes  to  watch  the  somnambulistic  thing  at  work.  It  is  not
he  that  is  doing  it,  and  yet  he  is  looking  on.  He  does
not  see  how  it  is  worked,  but  he  finds  this  more  interesting
than  the  genuine  communications.  He  did  not  rattle  the
curtains  either  .  .  .  but  it  was  not  cheating,  and  he  does
not  want  you  to  make  them  think  that  they  are  cheats.
He  does  not  know  how  it  is  worked,  but  he  is  studying
and  he  thinks  it  will  help  a  great  deal  if  he  can  understand
how  the  cheating  things  that  are  not  cheats  are  done.

[And  then  came  the  laborious  sentences]

He  says  he  is  finding  out  how  honest  non-phenomena  are  to
be  accounted  for. Apparently  dishonest  phenomena  are


lviit.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  IV.


219


phenomena  of  extreme  [interest]  apart  from  the  spirit
which  purports  to  be  communicating.

It  was  characteristic  also  of  Myers  to  feel  as  if  he  were  the  note-
taker,  not  the  communicator,  and  that  he  ought  to  be  putting  it  all
down  (p.  201).  Another  amusing  episode  was  the  persistence  of
Prof.  Sidgwick's  incredulity  (p.  202),  so  that  he  was  represented
as  asking  to  be  convinced  that  he  was  himself  communicating,  and
that  the  medium  was  not  "  getting  it  out  of  him  somehow."

The  coincidence  in  time  between  the  termination  of  this  sitting
at  Birmingham  and  some  writing  obtained  by  Mrs.  Verrall  at
Cambridge,  as  exhibited  in  the  analytical  statement  above,  on
page  214,  is  very  remarkable  and  worth  careful  notice — especially
when  the  unexpected  character  of  the  Thompson  sitting  is  taken
into  account. It  really  makes  an  effective  cross-correspondence.

These  observations  terminate  this  account  of  communications
received  through  the  mediumship  of  Mrs.  Thompson.

An  immense  mass  has  been  obtained  through  her  in  the  past
(see  Reports  in  Vols.  17  and  18),  but  so  far  as  I  know  these  are
the  last  two  sittings  or  among  the  last  sittings  which  she  has  given.
We  owe  her  thanks  for  the  time  and  opportunity  which  she  has  freely
accorded  to  members  of  the  Society  for  scientific  purposes.

I  now  pass  to  messages  received  through  a  lady  known  to  leading
members  of  the  Society,  but  who  desires  to  remain  anonymous.

CHAPTER  V.

Messages  Obtained  Through  Miss  Rawson.

It  is  perhaps  doubtful  whether  the  following  series  of  messages,
with  the  reception  of  which  I  was  in  no  way  concerned,  ought  to
be  included  in  this  paper  or  reported  at  all.  Doubtless  a  great
number  of  communications  ostensibly  purporting  to  come  from  Mr.
Myers  have  been  received  through  many  mediums,  and  some  of
them  I  have  seen.  For  the  most  part  I  regard  these  as  valueless,
— as  not  even  plausibly  lifelike  representations  of  the  person  sup-
posed to  be  communicating.  But  on  the  spiritistic  hypothesis  it
must  be  admitted  as  likely  that  Miss  Rawson — a  lady  well  known
to  Mr.  Myers,  whose  hand  sometimes  writes  while  she  remains
conscious — would  be  one  of  the  channels  of  communication  employed
by  a  posthumous  Myers-like  activity ;  and  accordingly  when  com-


220


Sir  Oliver  Lodge,


[part


munications  coming  through  this  channel  are  specially  sent  to  me,
I  do  not  feel  at  liberty  to  suppress  them.  They  do  not  in  fact
fall  into  the  category  of  things  which  we  may  safely  ignore  :  they
must  be  regarded  as  part  of  the  psychological  evidence ;  and  in  so
far  as  they  differ  in  tone  with  what  is  received  through  the  two
entranced  mediums  with  whom  I  have  been  myself  chiefly  concerned,
we  can,  as  before,  discriminate  and  attribute  them  to  what  we  may
call  a  MyersR.

Until  there  is  evidence  to  the  contrary  we  are  bound  to  assume
that  writings  done  by  people  who  are  not  in  any  kind  of  trance
can  hardly  fail  to  be  greatly  influenced  by  their  own  normal  con-
sciousness, as  well  as  largely  controlled  by  their  normal  sub-conscious-
ness. It  may  be  instructive  therefore  to  interpose  among  the  trance
communications  a  specimen  of  this  other  kind  of  perfectly  honest
and  sincere  record.

The  following  is  an  extract  which  I  have  been  kindly  allowed  to
make  from  one  of  the  note-book  records  kept  of  Miss  Rawson's  trance
speech  and  script.  I  received  and  had  it  copied  out  of  the  book
in  March,  1901.

For  a  brief  account  of  the  lady  called  Miss  Rawson,  see  Mr.
Piddington's  paper  in  Vol.  18,  p.  294.

Extracts  from  Note-book  of  Miss  Rawson's  trance  utterances,  as
recorded  by  the  Experimenter  in  charge  (who  is  anonymous  but
known  to  me).

The  extracts  which  follow  are  entirely  of  the  unevidential  order ;
but  since  the  book  is  an  honest  record  of  what  purported  to  be  a
series  of  communications,  I  think  it  wise  to  publish  some,  since  it
forms  part  of  my  scheme  to  illustrate  the  general  character  of  the
communications,  in  so  far  as  it  can  be  done  in  moderate  compass.
The  hypothesis  that  all  this  matter  is  a  product  of  the  subliminal
activity  of  the  medium  is  a  feasible  one ;  no  one  hypothesis  fits  all  the
facts.  But,  of  course,  if  Miss  Rawson  had  never  given  evidential
matter  on  other  occasions,  and  in  respect  of  other  persons  and  events,
her  script  and  utterances  would  be  totally  disregarded.

Dec.  22,  1900. Message  from  H.  S.,  with  F.  W.  H.  M.  himself
present,  (unimportant).

Jan.  11,  1901. Message  from  H.  S. Tell  Myers  to  tell  my
wife  not  to  put  in  the  whole  of  the  last  chapters  of  the


lviil] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  V.


221


book  she  is  finishing.  She  will  know  the  passages  she
feels  doubtful  about. Tell  him  it  is  really  I  who  am  here.

This  was  spoken  with  hesitation  and  stuttering  just  as  in  life  j
'  last '  was  a  difficult  word  and  repeated  twice.  The  last  sentence
was  very  difficult,  as  the  power  seemed  to  be  going.  [Myers  was
alive  then  ;  he  died  on  Jan.  17.]

Jan.  23,  1901.  H.  S.  I  have  not  seen  my  dear  friend  Myers
yet,  but  I  am  more  thankful  that  I  can  say  that  he  has
come  here.  The  circle  above  has  been  waiting  for  him,
and  will  with  great  joy  welcome  him.

[17  January,  1901,  was  the  date  of  his  death.]

(What  is  the  work  of  the  circle  above  1)

It  is  to  attest  his  work,  to  make  a  school  above  to  corre-
spond with  the  school  on  earth.  His  wonderful  power
of  organisation  will  not  be  lost  here.

The  world  is  not  so  ready  as  he  thought.

We  shall  work  together  again.

Jan.  26,  1901.  F.  Myers,  (very  faint  voice.)  I  am  at  rest;
my  body  is  laid  where  I  wished,  and  my  soul  is  free.
I  told  you  if  possible  I  should  return.  Little  did  we
think  when,  not  a  month  ago,  I  stood  beside  you,  telling
you  that  all  my  happiness  was  on  the  other  side,  that
I  should  again  stand  beside  you,  having  obtained  that
happiness.  I  thank  you  a  thousand  times  for  making
[this]  meeting  .  .  .  possible,  for  it  confirmed  what  I  had
been  told,  which  I  was  never  quite  certain  of,  how  far
my  desire  controlled  the  spirit  speaking.  But  when  I
was  assured  .  .  .  then  calm  and  content  came  to  me,
never  to  leave  me  again.

And  through  the  last  great  struggle  those  blessed  words
....  were  ever  present  with  me,  and  made  my  physical
suffering  a  thing  to  be  borne  to  obtain  the  greatest
desire  of  my  heart.

Thank  God,  it  was  and  is  true.

Later  I  can  do  more. I  am  supremely  happy.

Jan.  30,  1901.  F.  TV.  H.  Myers.  I  have  come  back  as  I
told  you  I  should  on  that  last  day  at  the  Grand  Hotel.


222


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


I  shall  return  through  Mrs.  Thompson.  My  great  wish
was  to  come  back  and  tell  you  that  I  am  still  living,
and  things  are  to  a  great  extent  as  I  had  pictured  them.

I  know  now  that  it  will  be  impossible  for  me  to  inhabit
[this  medium]  to  give  many  messages  but  it  will  be  my
privilege  to  come  now  and  then  to  your  circle  to  give
you  the  higher  evidence  that  it  will  be  impossible  always
to  secure  through  the  other  mediums  that  I  work  with.

I  prepared  my  place  and  I  must  go  to  it.  I  prepared  Mrs.
Thompson,  and  she  will  carry  on  the  work,  but  it  will
not  be  for  long  that  I  shall  come  back.

I  understand  now  the  full  meaning  of  what  I  had  only  half
realised  in  the  subliminal  consciousness.  I  can  separate
the  two  now,  and  know  how  far  conscious  thought  and
unconscious  thought  are  dependent  one  on  the  other,
and  I  can  fully  apprehend  their  indivisibility.  That's
where  I  made  my  mistake.  I  believed  them  to  be  separate,
but  now  find  they  are  merely  two  sides  of  the  same  thing
— the  unconscious  self  is  the  sleeping  conscious  self,  and
the  conscious  self  is  the  reflection  of  the  spiritual  man,
and  that  light,  reason,  and  discernment  come  from  one
and  the  same  source.

I  want  to  thank  you  for  what  you  did  for  me.

I  was  unable  to,  then,  but  my  wife  will  give  you  my  messages,
they  were  left  with  her. I  shall  return  again.

Feb  3,  1901. (5  p.m.) F.  IF.  II.  M.  letter.

As  soon  as  Miss  Tiawson  was  entranced  she  got  up  from  the  sofa,
crossed  the  room  to  the  writing  table,  hunted  for  a  sheet  of  writing
paper  and  pen  and  ink,  and  then  wrote  a  letter ;  put  it  in  an
envelope  and  addressed  it.

The  room  was  not  quite  dark  and  I  stood  by  her  and  watched
her  throughout.  When  she  sat  down  again,  I  took  the  letter  and
found  to  my  surprise  it  was  addressed  to  me  at  [a  certain  address].
The  letter  runs  as  follows  : —

"My  dear  ...  I  spoke  to  you  at  our  last  meeting  of  my
intense  wish  to  [be]  on  the  other  side

My  wish  is  accomplished. I  am  now  at  peace.

I  am  sending  you  a  message  later  through  Mrs.  Thompson
and  you  will  then  understand  all  I  said  to  you.

F.  W.  H.  Myers."


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  V.  223

The  control  said  later  that  F.  M.  could  not  speak  because  he  was
not  inside  the  medium  ;  he  pushed  her  along.

Feb.  7.  1901.

While  waiting  for  a  friend  to  come  in  to  begin  the  sitting,  Miss
Kawson  suggested  that  we  should  sit  in  the  dark  and  she  would
perhaps  see  something.  The  lamp  was  turned  down  and  she  at
once  saw  a  bright  mist  in  corner  of  room,  out  of  which  gradually
emerged  the  face  of  a  tall  man  with  moustache,  blue  tie,  black  coat :
he  advanced  towards  her  waving  his  hand  and  evidently  most  anxious
to  communicate.  She  repeated  the  alphabet  and  he  waved  his  hand
at  the  right  letter. She  spelt  out  Edmund  Gurney.

The  friend  then  came  in  and  the  sitting  began.

E.  G.  at  once  controlled  the  medium.

"  I  have  come  to  warn  you  for  my  friend  to  implore  you
not  to  let  them  call  him.  He  gets  no  rest  day  or  night.
At  every  sitting  'Call  Myers!  Bring  Myers,'  there's  not
a  place  in  England  where  they  don't  ask  for  him  ;  it  disturbs
him,  it  takes  away  his  rest.  For  God's  sake  don't  call
him.  It  is  all  right  for  him  to  come  of  his  own  accord.
You  might  send  a  letter  to  Light  to  say  that  when  a  great
person  passes  you  mustn't  call  for  him.

Don't  mention  Myers'  name,  our  people  wouldn't  like  it.  .  .  .

His  heart  is  tender  and  when  he  hears  them  call,  he  tries
to  come.  If  they  leave  him  to  rest,  in  time  he'll  come
back  again  more  strong,  but  if  they  call  and  call  it  will  take
away  the  power  and  help  and  everything  else.  .  .  .

Feb.  9.  1901.

F.  W.  H.  M. "Really,  really  this  is  delightful.

.  .  .  ,  I  never  thought  to  meet  you  here.  It  was  all  true —
we  had  not  deceived  ourselves.  Thank  you  for  giving  me
the  power  to  come.  We  wrote  and  sat  so  often  together
in  the  old  days  ;  sometimes  the  results  were  good,  sometimes
not  at  all. You  are  strong,  very  strong. Thank  you  so

much. I  could  not  thank  you  at  the  same  time.

has  iny  message  for  you. I  believe  in  the  touch  now.

Your  testimony,  .  .  .  ,  was  most  valuable — you've  done  a
great  deal  for  the  cause — I  gave  my  life  for  it.  It  must  be
carried  on.  I  talked  about  it  the  last  two  days.  I
do  hope  my  wishes  will  be  carried  out,  though  it's  not
easy.  .  .  .


224


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


They  don't  know  how  one  consciousness  can  merge  into
another  .  .  .  our  lives  are  only  given  us  to  learn  how  to
help  humanity,  but  it  will  take  us  thousands  of  years  to
learn  it .  .  .  we  must  ignore  the  conscious  self  sometimes,  and
let  the  unconscious  self  have  a  chance  .  .  I  implore  you
not  to  lose  the  least  scrap  of  evidence.  It  is  only  by
putting  down  all  the  scraps  you  make  a  mosaic.

Feb.  10.  1901.

F.  W.  H.  M. (by  raps)

'Your  friend  is  here.'  Then  the  medium  saw  F.  M.  in  Mr.
[White's]  body. She  went  into  a  trance  and  spoke.

He's  there.  He's  in  Mr.  [White.]  He  is  lying  on  a  brown
bed,  and  he  has  got  violets,  and  his  eyes  are  shut,  and
beside  him  is  standing  another  Mr.  Myers,  and  the  other

one has picked up some of the  violets,

 — That's  the  curious  experience — He  is  tied

to  it  yet,  and  has  to  hold  the  cord  of  light  in  his  hand —
he  can't  leave  go.  He  is  in  you  Mr.  [White]  still,  but
he  is  in  bed,  and  standing  beside  the  bed.  He  dictated
three  letters  the  day  before  he  died — important  letters,
and  left  a  paper  for  Richet.  (  .  .  )  You'll  hear  through
another  source  in  10  days'  time  a  curious  circumstance
of  his  illness  and  death.  You'll  hear  it  at  a  place  you'll
go  to  after  a  little  from  here.  [The  gentleman  here  called
Mr.  White  is  generally  recognised  as  possessor  of  some
occult  powers.]

Feb.  16.  1901.

During  the  sitting  Miss  Eawson  suddenly  got  up  and  went  across
the  room  to  the  writing  table,  and  wrote  a  note  in  pencil  pur-
porting to  come  from  F.  M. We  could  not  read  it.


Mar.  17.  1901.  London.
Edmund  Gurney.

It  will  be  no  advantage  to  my  friend  to  be  kept  down  for

communication  with  the  groups  he  prepared.
What  we  want  for  him  now  is  to  rise,  and  to  forget  the
earthly  things. He  can't  help  any  more. His  life  was
given  to  it,  and  that  must  be  the  help. He  was  allowed
just  to  say  that  he  continued. That  was  his  great  desire,


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  V.


225


but  it  will  help  nobody  that  he  should  be  called  back,
and  made  to  hover  near  the  earth.  In  fact  it  will  only
make  him  earthbound.  So  tell  all  those  who  tried  to
persuade  him  to  come,  ...  to  receive  the  messages  that
will  be  sent  now  and  again,  but  never  permanently.

Another  control.

The  mistake  Myers  made  was,  he  thought  the  finite  could
control  the  infinite ;  so  he  gathered  groups  and  did  his
best  to  train  them  into  working  order,  to  carry  out  his
design.  This  was  not  a  good  thing  to  do — mapping  out
work  to  do  under  different  conditions  which  he  did
not  understand.  He  made  promises,  but  did  not  know
if  he  could  fulfil  them  or  not ;  and  now  he  knows
these  different  groups  will  have  to  go  on  as  they
began,  not  with  communications  direct  from  the  other
side,  but  communications  attracted  to  a  centre  and
given  out  in  a  revised  form.

If  you  pass  over  with  a  fixed  idea  of  which  you  have  sown
the  seed,  and  which  you  have  nourished  up  until  it  is  a
tree,  you  must  wait  till  the  tree  withers  and  dies,  you
can't  sweep  away  the  idea  in  a  second.

I  have  seen  Myers,  he  is  perfectly  happy ;  he  finds  many  of
his  theories  difficult  to  work.

I  believe  Mrs.  T.  to  be  quite  honest  and  straightforward.

March  19.

"  Myers  is  here,  but  will  not  be  able  to  speak  himself.

I  shall  speak  for  him. He  is  not  so  near,  and  not  so  real

as  he  was. This  means  that  he  is  soon  leaving  the  earth

plane  and  going  to  rise  higher.
He  is  being  personated  right  and  left.

He  is  being  used  as  a  peg  to  hang  innumerable  hats  and
coats  on.  He  came  to  thank  you  and  to  say  that  as
you  prayed  for  others  at  a  sitting  when  he  was  present,
so  he  hopes  you  will  pray  for  him  now.  "

In  concluding  this  chapter  I  must  once  more  call  attention  to  the
caution  and  explanation  with  which  it  opened.  These  scripts  repre-
sent a  genuine  phenomenon,  and  are  therefore  of  interest  to  students

of  psychical  matters,  although  it  is  quite  possible  that  a  hostile  critic

P


226


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


may  here  find  part  of  the  pabulum  necessary  for  making  every  effort
of  the  kind  appear  ridiculous.  Whether  this  portion,  or  the  subsequent
commonplace  dialogue  carried  on  through  Mrs.  Piper,  or  such  of  the
unverifiable  communications  as  were  reported,  in  Chap.  II.,  will  appear
the  more  humorous  when  regarded  from  the  scoffer's  point  of  view,
I  am  unable  to  judge. Nor  need  the  question  deeply  concern  us.


CHAPTER  VI.

Messages  of  the  Myers  and  Hodgson  controls  received
by  0.  J.  L.  through  Mrs.  Piper.

Autumn  Series.

Coming  now  to  communications  obtained  through  Mrs.  Piper,  the
"  Myers "  messages  were,  as  I  said  before,  not  specially  useful  or
impressive  :  partly  perhaps  because  I  did  not  give  this  control  much
chance.  They  were  far  less  interesting  than  those  reported  in
Chap.  IV.

The  dramatic  aspect  of  the  "  Myers "  communications,  being  not
specially  striking,  I  shall  no  longer  trouble  to  quote  what  imme-
diately preceded  or  followed  them,  but  shall  give  as  a  rule  only
the  substance  of  the  message ;  together  with  such  facts  of  date
and  circumstance  as  shall  enable  easy  reference  to  the  original  MS.
whenever  necessary.

I  had  at  first  thought  of  collecting  the  MyersP  and  the  HodgsonP
scripts  separately,  but  inasmuch  as  they  deal  with  a  similar  class
of  subject,  as  a  rule,  there  seems  no  particular  gain  in  separating
them ;  and  perhaps  there  may  be  some  convenience  in  retaining
them  in  the  actual  order  in  which  they  occurred — omitting  only  the
irrelevant  parts  and  such  as  were  concerned  altogether  with  other
controls.  If  a  Gurney  or  Sidgwick  control  had  appeared  in  this
set,  it  would  likewise  be  included.

To  save  the  reader  trouble — that  is  to  say  what  seems  to  me
unnecessary  trouble — I  introduce  punctuation  and  other  trivial  clari-
fication into  the  script.  It  must  be  understood  that  it  is  not  by
any  means  always  easy  to  read.  Occasionally  it  is  necessary  to
illustrate  the  superposition  of  words  and  other  accidental  defects,
but  this  is  not  so  necessary  in  my  report  as  it  was  in  Mr.
Piddington's.


lviil] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  VI.  227

Proceeding  now  to  the  record,  we  may  as  well  quote  the  initial
particulars  of  the  first  sitting  of  the  Edgbaston  series,  which  followed
the  few  Liverpool  sittings,  reported  on  pp.  175-189;  but  all  that  can
be  published  is  confessedly  very  poor,  and  is  preliminary  only.

FOURTH  ENGLISH  SITTING  WITH  MRS.  PIPER.

(First  at  Edgbaston.)

Held  at  Mariemont,  Edgbaston,  on  15  Nov.,  1906,  11.0  a.m.,

ending  1  p.m.

Present — 0.  J.  L.  and  M.  L.

(Hand  raised. Cross  in  air.)

+  Hail.

0.  -T.  L.  Hail,  Imperator  and  Rector.

We  are  glad  to  return  once  more  to  earth  this  day.  -f-  11.
We  desire  that  you  should  understand  and  know  the  truth.

0.  J.  L.  All  right. (Then  began  a  "Myers"  message.)

Well  well  Lodge. I  am  Myers.
O.  J.  L.  Hail  Myers,  glad  to  see  you.

I  have  not  forgotten  you  in  the  least.

0.  J.  L.  Nor  I  you. (Some  private  matters  were  here  referred  to.)

Do  you  remember  a  talk  I  had  with  you  in  which  I
promised  to  do  better  than  others  1  [Cf.  a  similar  remark
made  through  Mrs.  Thompson  on  page  208.]

0.  J.  L.  Yes,  you  always  thought  you  would  do  better.

In  case  I  came  first.
O.  J.  L.  Yes.

I  wish  you  to  remind  me  of  something.

0.  J.  L.  What  we  are anxious to  get  is  correspondence  messages
between  this  medium  and  others.

Good. I  U.D.


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part
Well,  will  you  now  give  one  to  some  one  1
Very  well ;  give  me  a  message.

Suppose  you  say  'Julius  Caesar.' Can  you  send  that?

Yes,  I  believe  I  can,  but  let  me  repeat  the  message  that  I
may  be  quite  certain  of  it.

Good.

Spell  it. (O.  J.  L.  spells  it.)
Julius C  e  s  e  a  r
O.  J.  L.  Yes,  very  near,  not  quite  right.

Spell  it. (0.  J.  L.  spelt  Csesar  again.)
Coesar.

0.  J.  L.  Yes,  it  is  really  JE  diphthong,  not  OE.

I  said  0,  it  is  intended  for  0.
O.  J.  L.  Very  well  then,  I  quite  understand.

I  will  give  it  her  within  five  minutes,
0.  J.  L.  That  would  be  excellent.

He  has  gone.

I  need  not  point  out  how  absurd  all  this  need  for  spelling,  and
other  signs  of  apparently  rudimentary  ignorance,  would  seem,  if  we
were  to  assume  that  we  were  in  effective  touch  with  the  intelligence
of  F.  W.  H.  Myers;  even  though  intercourse  be,  as  it  is  repre-
sented as  being,  conducted  through  the  intermediate  agency  of  an
amanuensis, — namely  the  control  calling  itself  Eector,  who  purports
to  be  ignorant  of  everything  but  simple  English.  Our  business  is
to  record  the  facts,  and  to  make  deductions  from  them  afterwards.
These  trivial  signs  may  be  an  indication  of  something  which  will
help  towards  a  theory  of  the  phenomenon  some  day.  Meanwhile  it
must  be  regarded  as  curious  on  any  hypothesis  that  there  should
have  been  hesitation  at  taking  a  couple  of  words  so  simple  as  these,
since  it  cannot  be  urged  in  this  case  that  such  words  are  foreign  to
the  brain  of  the  medium.  All  that  we  can  say,  I  think,  is  that
they  are  treated  as  a  '  code  '  message,  which  must  be  received  and
conveyed  with  scrupulous  precision,  in  order  to  be  efficient. As  to


228
0.  J.  L.

0.  J.  L.


Lviir.] On  Trance  Commtmications,  Charpter  VI.  229


the  ce  instead  of  the  a?,  it  would  have  been  characteristic  and  satis-
factory if  the  misspelling  had  reappeared  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script.
For  if  it  had  so  appeared  it  would  have  been  a  good  case  of
the  simplest  kind  of  cross-correspondence.  But  as  a  matter  of  fact
this  particular  message  did  not  succeed  in  getting  through  at  all.

Returning  to  the  record,  I  omit  a  long  interlude  and  talk  between
some  other  controls  and  M.  L.  on  various  subjects,  chiefly  medical,
and  take  it  up  again  at  a  later  stage  of  the  sitting.

Myers.

0.  J.  L.  Yes,  well  J

Here  I  am  I  have  given  j'our  message  to  Mrs.  Verrall  and
she  will  record  it  in  black  and  white  within  a  few  hours.

[It  is  noticeable  here  that  the  controls  discriminate  between
the  delivery  of  a  message  and  the  actual  record  of  it.
The  interval  mentioned  here  is  "  a  few  hours."  In
our  actual  experience  there  is  sometimes  an  interval
of  a  few  days  or  even  weeks  between  the  claim  and
the  performance.]

0.  J.  L.  I  hope  she  will  not  forget  it.

No,  I  will  see  to  that.  Good-bye.

0.  J.  L.  Good-bye  for  the  present.

(Another  short  interlude. Then  scrawls  of  a  curiously
energetic  nature,  ending)

I  am  Hodgson.

0.  J.  L.  Glad  to  see  you  at  last.

Hello  Lodge.  I  am  not  dead,  as  some  might  suppose :  I
am  very  much  alive.

0.  J.  L.  Good,  I  expect  so.

I  wish  to  correct  a  statement  I  made  some  time  ago  to
Piddington.

0.  J.  L.  Whatever  you  say  I  will  send  to  him.

I  did  not  send  you  a  posthumous  letter,  but  I  gave  one  to
William  James,  which  I  will  re-read  to  you  before  we
get  through.


230  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part

[Hodgsorip  had  told  J.  G.  P.,  at  a  sitting  held  at  Boston,
U.S.A.,  in  the  spring  of  1906,  that  he  had  deposited
a  'posthumous  letter'  with  0.  J.  L.  None  of  these
asserted  posthumous  letters  seem  to  have  been  found.]

0.  J.  L.  That  is  right;  that  will  be  first  rate.
Speak  to  me.

0.  J.  L.  Are  you  interested  in  the  cross-correspondence  1 Could  you
send  something  to  other  communicators?

I  am,  very,  and  think  it  the  very  best  thing.
0.  J.  L.  Could  you  send  one  now  to  one  of  the  mediums  1

I  will  go  to  Mrs.  Holland.
0.  J.  L.  What  will  you  send  1

St.  Paul.
0.  J.  L,  That  is  a  good  idea.

St.  Paul. I  will  give  it  to  her  at  once.

0.  J.  L.  Right, [J.  G.  P.  has  referred  to  this  in  Vol.  22,  p.  31.]

Stick  to  the  truth,  and  it  will  stick  to  you.
Is  this  your  wife  1

0.  J.  L.  Yes,  it  is.

Glad  to  see  you.

M.  L. But  I  never  saw  you  in  the  flesh.

[They  were  not  acquainted.]

I  wish  of  all  things  to  do  the  very  best  thing  to  prove  my
identity.

[A  few  private  matters  are  here  omitted.]

Oh  yes,  well  get  Mrs.  S.  to  verify  it.

O.  J.  L.  You  mean  Mrs.  Sidgwick?

Yes,  and  it  will  be  good. Better  use  judgement.
Give  my  love  to  Piddington  and  tell  him  I  shall  try  cross
messages.


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  VI.  231

0.  J.  L.  And  also  we  shall  introduce  some  of  your  friends  to  you,
and  see  if  you  recognise  them.

Good. I  wish  Feilding  to  meet  me.

0.  J.  L.  Yes,  but  he  is  not  in  England  just  now.

Yes,  I  will  see  him  later  on.

0.  J.  L.  They  wish  your  medium  to  sit  in  the  rooms  of  the
Society.

Why?

0.  J.  L.  Well,  because  of  the  difficulty  of  lodgings,  and  because  the
sittings  will  be  more  under  control.

All  right;  it  may  be  good. If  not,  I  will  tell  them.
You  understand  me  wonderfully  well.

0.  J.  L.  Well  I  have  been  practising  reading  this  writing,  in  readiness.

Capital.

0.  J.  L.  I  have  to  arrange  the  days  to  suit  us  both.  I  am  very
busy.  To-morrow  and  Sabbath  [see  page  175]  will  suit
me  best. Can  we  have  '  voice  '  to-morrow  ?

Voice,  yes  certainly. Good ;  all  right.

I  hope  Piddington  will  get  into  the  spiritual  truth  of  this
thing.  If  he  does,  all  will  be  very  good.  It  is  very
important  not  to  crowd  in  too  many.

O.  J,  L.  He  will  introduce  people  only  after  the  trance  has  begun.

Very  good,  I  U.D. ;  there  can  be  no  objection  to  that.
0.  J.  L.  And  only  one  at  a  time.

Yes,  better  probably  for  most  who  meet  me.

0.  J.  L.  We  want  you  to  recognise  your  friends,  and  to  take  cross
messages.

Yes,  very  good ;  we  are  willing  to  do  anything  we  can.

0.  J.  L.  Do  you  remember  what  you  were  going  to  say  to  Mrs.
Holland  ?

St.  Paul.


232  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part

0.  J.  L.  Yes,  quite  right.

I  will  go  at  once.

I  am  Rector. Hodgson  has  gone  away.
Do  you  U.D.  ?

0.  J.  L.  Yes,  he  has  gone  to  take  a  message.

Mrs.  Verrall  has  got  one  name  already.

0.  J.  L.  Yes,  that  was  from  Myers. Hodgson  has  gone  to  another.

[But  the  intention,  perhaps,  was  that  she  had  got  either
'  Julius '  or  '  Caesar.']

Yes. Mrs.  Thompson  is  a  nonentity  with  Hodgson.

(Then  came  a  change  of  control  and  some  talk  with  M.  L.,
her  father  being  represented  as  communicating  much
as  he  did  eighteen  years  ago  (Vol.  6) ;  and  finally,
suddenly  interjected,  after  a  scrawl,)

St.  Paul. Got  it. (Then  Rector  goes  on.)

Will  leave  now,  and  may  the  blessing  of  God  rest  on  you.

+  Farewell  R.

0.  J.  L.  Voice  sitting  next  time.

We  U.D.

(Cross  in  air.)

Waking  Stage.
Good-bye. I  wonder  where  they  have  gone.

(Looking  at  M.  L.) In  the  body. Oh  Lady  Lodge. I  was

up  in  another  place.
I  saw  a  nice  looking  gentleman. He  had  a  book  in  his

hand. Talking  with  me. I  did  not  want  to  come  here

to  see  you.

I  did  not  know  you  at  all. I  forgot  where  we  were.

The  house  looks  so  strange. When  I  woke  up  this  morning

I  did  not  know  where  I  was.
They  take  care  of  me  on  the  other  side. It  is  so  nice  to

waken  up  and  see  you  and  know  you.

(End  of  trance.)


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  VI.


233


The  next  was  a  voice  sitting — that  is  a  talking,  not  a  writing,
sitting — as  promised.  It  is  the  only  one  of  the  kind  we  had  during
the  whole  of  this  English  series :  and  it  was  less  unlike  those  of
the  old  Phinuit  days  than  I  had  expected.  In  fact  there  was
distinct  recurrence  of  what  in  the  old  days  used  to  be  called  "  fishing,"
when  Phinuit  was  groping  in  tentative  fashion  for  a  name  and  hoping
for  help  from  the  sitter. More  fishing  is  reported  on  pp.  266-7.

But  in  truth  I  have  long  wanted  to  exonerate  Phinuit  from  most
of  the  blame  in  this  matter.  The  1  fishing '  procedure  had  to  be
admitted,  and  indeed  emphasised,  like  all  other  weak  spots ;  and
Phinuit  had  not  been  trained  to  eschew  normal  help  and  to  take
precautions  against  it,  as  Mrs.  Thompson's  '  Nelly '  control  had  been
trained ;  but  I  always  felt  that  his  haziness  and  tentative  approach
to  things  probably  represented  a  genuine  difficulty,  and  was  part  of
the  phenomenon  which  needed  study ;  so  I  am  interested  in  reading
in  Dr.  Hodgson's  Report,  page  382,  Vol.  13,  the  following  judicial
pronouncement :

"  It  was  out  of  the  automatic  dreameries  of  persons  in  some
such  conditions  as  those  which  I  have  illustrated  above,  that
Phinuit  in  my  present  view  so  often  had  to  fish  his  facts,
and  I  think  that  assent  to  correct  statements  and  other  clues
from  the  sitters,  besides  helping  the  '  communicator,'  were  prob-
ably of  great  service  to  Phinuit,  enabling  him  to  '  cast  his  line '
for  those  mental  automatisms  that  specially  concerned  the  sitter.
Much  light  seems  to  me  to  have  been  thrown  upon  Phinuit's
mistakes  and  obscurities  and  general  method  of  trying  to  get
at  facts,  in  what  were  on  the  whole  bad  sittings,  by  comparison
of  the  results  obtained  from  the  various  communicators  writing
directly  or  using  Gr.  P.  as  amanuensis ;  and  I  feel  pretty  sure
that  much  of  Phinuit's  '  fishing '  was  due  to  the  confusions  of
the  more  or  less  comatose  communicators,  whose  minds  had  let
loose,  so  to  speak,  a  crowd  of  earthly  memories."

For  the  voice  sitting  all  preparatory  arrangements,  with  the
cushions  etc.  (p.  131),  were  made  as  usual,  and  when  trance  super-
vened, the  head  sank  upon  them  ;  but  instead  of  the  right  hand
slipping  off  and  ultimately  holding  a  pencil,  both  hands  remained  all
the  time  on  the  cushion,  while  the  head  raised  itself  and  emitted
speech  in  a  rather  deep  voice.  The  manner  was  solemn,  without  any
of  the  ejaculations  and  humorous  slang  of  Phinuit;  and  although  up
to  this  time  I  had  thought  that  a  voice  sitting  would  be  easier


234


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


and  better  (as  it  is  certainly  more  interesting  and  less  strain  to
a  sitter)  I  perceived  that  really  it  possessed  but  little  advantage
over  a  writing  sitting — now  that  the  lively  Phinuit  control,  who
was  specially  competent  in  this  kind  of  manifestation,  had  disappeared;
while  for  evidential  purposes,  and  permanent  record,  the  writing
method  is  indisputably  better.

As  this  was  the  only  voice  sitting,  however,  I  think  I  had
better  report  sufficient  to  give  some  idea  of  the  manner  of  it.

FIFTH  SITTING.

(Voice.)

Held  at  Mariemont,  Edgbaston,  on  16  November,  1906,

11.0-12.0  a.m.

Present — 0.  J.  L.  and  M.  L.,  with  Mrs.  Grove.

I  come  to  take  up  the  voice  as  I  promised  thee.

I  bring  to  thee  this  day  a  message  from  Imperator  that

that  for  which  thou  dost  ask  can  be  granted  [meaning

about  London  arrangement].

[It  is  rather  curious  that  Rector  speaking  for  himself  should
employ  the  second  person  singular  for  his  pronoun,
whereas  when  giving  messages  from  a  member  of  a
Quaker  family  he  explains  that  he  translates  from
"thou"  to  "you"  because  he  "understands  it  better.'
See  p.  193.— O.J.L.]

I  see  all  well.  I  shall  conform  to  those  requests  if  they
involve  no  injury  to  physical  conditions  of  Medium,
without  injury  to  the  brain.  We  understand  the  con-
ditions and  must  be  obeyed.

(Others  spoke  here,  but  I  only  report  the  short  'Myers'
portions.)

Here  is  Myers.  I  must  express  myself  to  Lodge  with
deepest  affection.  I  have  not  succeeded  in  getting  it
through  to  Mis.  Verrall,  but  I  will  persist.  [This  may
be  regarded  as  a  warning  of  the  failure  otherwise  referred
to  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  same  date.  See  J.  G.  P.'s
paper,  Vol.  22,  p.  306.]

(Messages  from  others  here  intervened.)


LVIII.]


On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  VI.


235


"  St.  Paul  "  has  been  given.  Ask  Piddington  if  he  remembers
anything  about  a  church  at  Mrs.  Holland's.  Ask  him  if
he  gave  a  message  to  be  recorded  here  about  a  church —
if  he  said  "  church  "  to  Mrs.  Holland.  [See  Proc.  S.P.R.,
Vol.  22,  p.  46.]

(Messages  from  others  again  intervened.)

It  would  be  wise  to  give  Prudens  a  message  to  take  to
another  lady.  Give  it  to  me  to  give  to  Prudens,  who
will  take  it  to  Mrs.  Forbes.

O.  J.  L.  I  understand. Well,  suppose  you  suggest  "  Botanic  Gardens."

Botanic  Gardens. Very  well,  Prudens  will  take  this.

That  was  all  that  came  through  of  that  hind,  on  this  occasion.
The  ladies  whose  names  here  and  elsewhere  in  the  Proceedings  are
printed  as  Mrs.  Holland  and  Mrs.  Forbes  were  really  spoken  of  by
their  right  names.

It  will  be  of  interest  to  those  familiar  with  the  script  of  Stainton
Moses  to  see  the  names  of  his  old  Controls  cropping  up.  Not
only  Imperator  and  Rector,  but  'Prudens'  also,  who  appears  to  act
as  an  accomplished  messenger.  I  conjecture,  however,  that  whatever
relationship  may  exist  between  these  personages  and  the  correspond-
ing ones  of  Stainton  Moses  there  is  little  or  no  identity.  For
instance,  a  '  Doctor '  is  represented  as  communicating  or  controlling,
but  he  appears  neither  to  have  nor  to  claim  any  connexion  with
the  non-medical  'Doctor'  of  Stainton  Moses;  sometimes  at  any  rate
this  Piper  one  is  called  '  Dr.  Oliver,'  and  is  probably  intended  to
represent  a  deceased  medical  man  of  Boston.  It  is  rather  a  puzzle
to  me  why  Mrs.  Piper's  personalities  should  have  assumed  the
same  set  of  names.  In  general  characters  they  are  similar ;  but  I
see  no  very  close  resemblance  in  detail.  And  hitherto  the  Piper
'Imperator'  has  not  given  to  us  the  same  old  earth-name  as  did
the  original  '  Imperator '  to  Stainton  Moses.  So  that  it  would
appear  as  if  they  did  not  very  seriously  pretend  to  be  identical.

That  gives  a  meagre  idea  of  a  voice  sitting  at  the  present  day ;
and  some  of  what  is  temporarily  omitted  may  appear  later  in  another
connexion.  In  no  case  was  there  any  marked  change  of  control,
such  as  occurred  with  Phinuit  sometimes. It  appeared  to  consist


236


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


of  first-person-reporting  on  the  part  of  Rector,  who  spoke  after  the
fashion  of  a  dignified  and  gentle  old  man.

There  has  been  no  recent  experience  so  far  as  I  am  aware  of  any
apparent  control  except  Rector  during  a  voice  sitting.  Whether  or
not  other  controls  speak  now,  they  certainly  appear  to  have  done  so
as  late  as  1906,  and  when  they  did  it  was  evidently  impressive:  so
much  so  that,  as  Professor  James  records,  a  lady  sitter  was  cpiite
overcome  on  one  occasion  by  the  apparent  identity  of  the  Hodgson
control  with  R.  H.  and  fainted.  No  such  excitement  would  be
justified  by  anything  that  has  come  within  my  experience,  but  even
now  it  seems  to  me  that  personality  can  loom  out  more  obviously  in
a  voice  sitting,  and  when  clear  can  more  thoroughly  satisfy  a  sur-
viving friend  who  is  present.  The  record  may  be  less  exact,  but
the  impression  made  at  the  time  is  more  vivid  ;  at  least  when  the
sitting  is  a  personal  one  with  only  an  intimate  friend  present.

It  may  be  noted  that  in  America  with  the  advent  of  the  Stainton
Moses  control  the  atmosphere  of  a  sitting  sometimes  became  rather
markedly  "religious."  This  can  be  illustrated  by  the  following  close
of  an  American  voice  sitting  in  1906,  reported  to  me  by  Mr.  Dorr;
which  also  indicates  that  a  change  of  control  occurred,  in  spite  of
the  statement  on  page  160  :

("Hodgson"  terminating  his  communication.)
Well,  I  will  be  off. Goodbye  for  the  present.

(Rector  resumes.)  All  right.  That  is  first  rate.  Took  him
a  long  time  to  turn  round  and  get  out.  He  dislikes  to
go  more  than  anybody  I  ever  saw.  The  last  moment
he  kept  talking  to  me  and  talking  to  me.  He  could  not
give  it  up.

Prayek.

Father,  in  Thy  kindness  guide  Thy  children  of  earth,  bestow
Thy  blessings  on  them,  teach  them  with  Thy  presence
and  Thy  power  to  receive  suffering,  pain,  illness  and
sorrow,  teach  them  to  know  that  Thy  presence  is  always
with  them.  May  Thy  grace  and  everlasting  love  be  and
abide  with  them  now  and  evermore.

Farewell.  We  depart,  friends,  and  may  the  blessings  of
God  be  bestowed  on  you.  Farewell.

It  is  only  occasionally  that  the  atmosphere  of  a  sitting  is  serious
and  solemn — usually  it  is  of  an  even  tenour,  and  sometimes  it  is


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  VI.  237

hearty  and  jovial.  The  following  is  a  characteristic  "Hodgson"
greeting  extracted  from  a  sitting  with  Mr.  Dorr  and  Henry  James,
Jr.,  at  Boston  in  1906:

Ha!  Well,  I  did  not  expect  to  see  you  so  soon.  Good
morning,  Harry  !

I  am  delighted  to  see  you.

H.  J.  Jr.  Is  that  you,  Mr.  Hodgson  1

Yes,  it  is  a  great  delight  to  me  to  see  your  face  once  more.
How  is  everything  with  you,  first  rate  ?

H.  J.  Jr.  Very  well.

(An  "influence" — a  glove  formerly  belonging  to  Hodgson —
was  now  given  to  Mrs.  P.  A  brief  remark,  of  greeting
apparently,  was  lost  by  the  stenographer  while  this  was
going  on.)

Why,  I  feel  as  though  I  was  one  among  you. Hello,  George  !

G.  B.  D. Hello  !

You  people  don't  appreciate  my  spirit  of  fun  !  But  I  am
Hodgson,  and  I  shall  be  Hodgson  to  the  end  of  all  eternity,
and  you  cannot  change  me  no  matter  what  you  do.

H.  J.  Jr.  I  think  we  appreciate  it,  Mr.  Hodgson.

Well,  I  hope  you  do — if  you  don't,  you  have  lost  something,
because  I  am  what  I  am,  and  I  shall  never  be  anything
else,  and  of  all  the  joyous  moments  of  my  whole  existence,
the  most  joyful  is  when  I  meet  you  all.

G.  B.  D. That  is  first  rate.

This  sort  of  thing  is  of  course  not  in  the  least  evidential,  and  yet
if  I  were  asked  to  invent  some  scheme  of  salutation  more  natural  and
characteristic  of  Hodgson's  personality  I  should  not  be  able  to  improve
upon  it.

Eeturning  now  from  this  interpolation  to  the  record  of  our  both
less  solemn  and  less  jovial  English  experience, — although  another
voice  sitting  was  promised  for  next  time,  it  did  not  turn  out  so,
for  at  the  next  trial  nothing  happened  at  all,  and  the  attempt  had
to  be  abandoned.

The  record  of  the  beginning  of  the  next  sitting  shall  be  printed,
in  order  to  exhibit  the  manner  of  it.


238


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


[Preliminary  Note — A  sitting  was  attempted  on  Sunday,  Nov.  18th,  at
Edgbaston,  a  voice-sitting  being  expected,  but  it  was  a  failure  :
the  trance  would  not  come  on.  Mrs.  Piper  thought  it  was
because  she  had  taken  coffee  with  breakfast.]

SIXTH  SITTING.

Held  at  Mariemont,  Edgbaston,  on  November  19th,  1906.

Present — -Mrs.  Grove  with  Lady  Lodge  all  the  time,  and  0.  J.  L.  as
recorder  part  of  the  time.

(Hand  raised. Cross  in  air.)

-f  Hail.

0.  J.  L.  Hail,  Imperator  and  Rector.

No  light  until  now  friend. We  could  not  return  before.

0.  J.  L.  No,  we  failed  to  get  at  you.

[Nothing  of  what  followed  belongs  to  this  part  of  the  report,
but  to  the  Sandford  and  Marble  portion,  Chap.  VIII.]

At  the  seventh  sitting  I  introduced  a  stranger,  J.  H.  M.,  after
the  trance  had  come  on.  The  Report  of  this  will  appear  separately,
if  at  all.  I  only  quote  here  the  fragments  of  "  Myers  "  or  pseudo-
"  Myers."

SEVENTH  SITTING.

Held  at  Mariemont,  Edgbaston,  on  21  November,  1906,
beginning  1 1  a.m.

Present— O.  J.  L.  at  first,  then  J.  H.  M.

[After  preliminaries.]

I  am  Myers  speaking  now.

0.  J.  L.  Oh  Myers,  may  I  ask  you  a  question  1

Certainly. I  shall  be  glad  if  you  will.

0.  J.  L.  Does  the  word

Not  too  fast.


lviil] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  VI.  239

0.  J.  L.  Does  the  word  Mantovano  convey  anything  to  you  1

Yes,  you  mean  a  word  I  gave  to  Mrs.  V.

0.  J.  L.  Well  I  do  not  think  so.

My  own. Much  in  little. Yes  I  used  this  before  in  my
own  writing.

[Multum  in  parvo  was  an  attempted  Piper-Verrall  C.-C.  of
date  1901  ;  but  it  had  never  been  published,  and  Mrs.
Verrall  had  forgotten  all  about  it.  The  records  have
been  looked  up,  however,  and  are  now  printed  as
Appendix  2  to  this  sitting.  It  looks  as  if  Rector
recollected  this  because  of  what  seemed  like  a
reminiscence  in  sound. — 0.  J.  L.~\

0.  J.  L.  Most  likely.

I  did.

O.  J.  L.  Well  it  was  used  by  someone  whom  you  greatly  admired.

Yes,  I  understand  this  also.  also.

Let  me  think  this  out  and  refer  to  it  later.

0.  J.  L.  Right. Mantovano  is  the  word :  do  you  get  it  ?

Yes. I  will  certainly  explain.
0.  J.  L.  Good,  you  have  the  word  clearly  ?

I  believe  I  have. Explain  once  more.

(O.  J.  L.  repeats  word.)

Yes  I  have  it,  R.,  and  he  will  understand  shortly.

0.  J.  L.  There  is  a  friend  outside ;  shall  I  ask  him  in  1

I  shall  be  glad  to  see  him.  presently.

Do  you  remember  a  friend  of  mine  named  Browning  1

0.  J.  L.  Yes,  I  do.

Will  you  ask  him  if  he  remembers  a  statement  he  made  to
me  about  a  dream  he  had  concins;  concerning  a  fall.

0.  J.  L.  Concerning  a  fall1?

fall  yes.


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part

Well  ?

I  believe  it  was  Browning. I  thought  it  very  good.

0.  J.  L.  I  will  ask  him.

[Mr.  Oscar  Browning's  letter  in  reply  is  appended.  He  had
had  a  sitting  or  two  with  Mrs.  Piper  at  Cambridge
during  her  visit  there  in  1889.]

Can  I  do  anything  for  you  1  R.

0.  J.  L.  When  you  are  ready  for  the  friend  I  will  bring  him  in.

Oh  yes,  bring  him  in  if  you  wish.
I  do  not  wish  more  than  one.

0.  J.  L.  No,  only  one ;  may  he  come  now  1

Yes.

(J.  H.  M.  now  comes  in  and  sits  down.)


APPENDIX  1  TO  NO.  7.

Letter  from  Mr.  Oscar  Broioning  with  reference  to
Sitting  No.  7. {Sheet  125.)

King's  College,  Cambridge,
November  22nd,  1906.
My  Dear  Lodge,

I  do  not  remember  anything  of  the  kind
being  talked  about  between  Myers  and  myself,  although  it  is
possible  that  it  may  be  so,  as  I  have  sometimes  dreamt  of  falling
or  even  flying.  About  four  years  ago  Hodgson  wrote  to  me  that
Myers  had  been  asking  after  me  and  wanted  to  know  what  I  was
doing.  Hodgson  said  that  he  must  mention  something  known  to
both  of  us  and  he  talked  about  a  battle  in  the  centre  of  Africa,
of  which  I  have  no  recollection  whatever.  It  is  rather  curious  if
Myers  has  mentioned  me  because,  although  the  connection  between
him,  Sidgwick,  and  myself  was  very  close  indeed,  it  is  scarcely  at
all  known  to  the  external  world,  at  least  I  never  see  any  allusions
to  it.


240
0.  J.  L.


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  VI.  241

I  am  having  a  meeting  of  the  Cambridge  Psychical  Society  in
my  rooms  this  evening,  the  first  after  six  years.

Believe  me,

Ever  yours,

(Signed)  OSCAR  BROWNING.


APPENDIX  2  TO  SITTING  NO.  7.

MULTUM  IN  PARVO.

Clearly  there  is  nothing  of  importance  here,  but  the  curious
reminiscence  of  multum  in  parvo  aroused  apparently  by  the  word
Mantovano  demands  an  explanation  of  the  hitherto  unpublished
cross-correspondence  in  which  these  words  occurred.

On  the  13th  February,  1901,  Mrs.  Piper,  at  Boston,  in  the
presence  of  Dr.  R.  Hodgson,  wrote  thus  (Rector  communicating) :

At  last. At  last  we  meet.

B.  H.  Articles?

(Hand  assents.)

E.  H.  Whose]
S.

(Articles  of  H.  S.  presented.)

A  wondrous  change. A  life  ideal
I  have  found  at  last — go  slow —

I  have  found.  It  is  worth  the  struggle — keep  on  do  not
get  weary — the  imperfections  are  in  the  material  not
here. Multum  in  parvo.

E,  H. Multum  in?

Sounds  like  parvo.  It  is  not  so  easy  to  reach  you  as  one
might  think.  Nora.

E.  H. Yes,  I  understand. You  mean  Mrs.  Sidgwick.

I  do.  But  you  shall  know  me  as  I  am.  It  is  better  so.
Good  morning. H.  Sidgwick.


242


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


On  the  22nd  April,  1901,  at  9.45  p.m.  in  Dr.  Verrall's  study  at
Cambridge,  Mrs.  Verrall  wrote  thus  :

Verax  quod  dixi  hesterno  die.

Tu  autem  non  comprensa  deformasti  illud.  Cur  non  credis  1
Omnia  plana  credenti.

(Here  I  went  to  the  drawing-room,  as  A.W.V.,  who
was  in  the  study,  moved  and  disturbed  me.)

multum  in  parvo  capax  omnum  [sic]  sermo  deest  anarith-
metos  4'ctti  ravra.  .  .  .

which  being  translated  is  :

What  I  said  yesterday  is  true.  But  you,  not  being  understood,
spoilt  its  shape.  Why  do  you  not  believe1?  All  is  plain
to  the  believer.

Much  in  little — capable  of  all  [i.e.  holding  all]  words  fail —
unnumbered. This  is  it.  .  .  .

On  this  matter  the  following  comments  are  made  by  Mrs.  Verrall :

(1.)  Gomp-ensa  is  perhaps  intended  to  mean  "having  understood,"
not  "being  understood."  The  Latin  past  participle  passive  seems
to  be  occasionally  used  in  my  early  script  after  the  fashion  of  a
Greek  middle  participle,  i.e.  with  an  active  sense.

(2.)  The  script  of  April  22  goes  on  to  refer  to  (a)  the  "gate  of
Cancer,"  (b)  a  lost  paper,  (c)  the  importance  of  "  superposition "  as
a  help  to  interpretation  [Notes  on  these  points  will  be  found  in
Proc.  Vols.  XX.  pp.  39,  195-8,  289;  XXI.  377  et  foil],  and  is  signed
with  three  forms  of  the  Greek  sigma  (s).

(3.)  The  first  automatic  writing  obtained  by  Mrs.  Verrall  was  on
March  5,  1901 ;  previous  attempts,  between  Jan.  23  and  Feb.  13,
and  again  on  March  3,  having  produced  only  disconnected  words
and  some  Greek  letters.  Thus  a  clear  cross-correspondence  between
Mrs.  Piper's  trance  and  Mrs.  Verrall's  writing  was  obtained  within
7  weeks  of  the  inception  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  automatic  script.


lviii.] On  Trance  Commitnications,  Chapter  VI.  243


EIGHTH  SITTING.

At  the  Eighth  Sitting  on  23  Nov.  1906  (present :  O.  J.  L.  alone),
"Isaac  Thompson"  wrote  a  good  deal,  but  the  following  came  from
HodgsonP.

I  am  Hodgson,  but  I  cannot  take  Rector's  place  to-day.
However  I  will make  a  poor attempt  to  speak  through
him.

0.  J.  L.  Very  glad  to  see  you.

Here's  ditto. Do  I  understand  that  Mrs.  Piper  is  in  England  1

0.  J.  L.  Yes,  she  is,  and  is  staying  in  my  house.

Capital. If  I  were  in  the  body  it  would  not  be  so.
However  I  am  glad  it  is  so.

0.\T.  L.  She  is  here,  well  and  happy,  with  Alta  and  Minerva.

Good,  first  rate. I  am  glad.

Will  you  take  a  message  to  Billie  Newbold  for  me,  safe  ?

0.  J.  L.  Yes,  I  will  send  it  through  William  James.

He  asked  me  about  the  name  of  a  poem ;  it  was  in  Hindustan,
and  meant  love.

0.  J.  L.  Meant  what  3 Is  that  "  love  1 "

Correct.  Do  you  remember  a  place  in  England  where  Gurney
and  I  went  to  see  a  medium,  and  a  long  walk  we  had
soon  after  midnight?

0.  J.  L.  A  long  what  ?

Walked  home.
0.  J.  L.  Oh,  a  long  walk  after  midnight.

I  cannot  recall  her  name,  but  I  told  you  about  it.

0.  J.  L.  Do  you  mean  Gurney  1

Yes,  I  do,  and  I  have  never  mentioned  it  to  anyone  except
possibly  Pid.


244


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part


Very  well. [J.  G.  P.  does  not  recall  this.]
Do  you  remember  it  1
I  do  not.

Do  you  wish  me  to  take  a  message  for  you  1
Ask  slowly ;  remember  we  cannot  hear  as  well  as  you  can.
I  am  so  glad  to  be  on  this  side.

0.  J.  L.  Well,  Hodgson,  I  do  want  to  ask  you  something.  You  know
when  I  am  talking  to  you  I  am  talking  to  the  hand ;  but
I  want  to  know  whether  it  is  through  the  hand  you
hear.  Suppose  I  stopped  up  your  medium's  ears  with
cotton  wool,  would  it  make  any  difference  1  Would  the
message  still  come  ?

I  think  it  would,  try  it.

0.  J.  L.  Very  well,  I  will  another  time.

First  rate,  I  permit  it ;  first  rate.

But  after  all  I  did  not  try  the  experiment ;  for  it  is  exceedingly
difficult  to  secure  complete  deafness  by  plugging  the  ears — even  with
putty.  Moreover  the  necessary  manipulation  of  the  medium's  head
during  trance  seemed  rather  repellent.  It  is  an  experiment  worth
trying,  however,  if  we  could  be  sure  of  a  clear  result.  If  I  could
have  been  sure  of  a  crucial  test  I  would  have  had  it  done ;  but
hyperaesthesia  would  have  to  be  allowed  for  in  the  positive  direc-
tion— possibly  also  inhibitory  suggestion  in  the  negative, — and  on
the  whole  I  felt  that  no  definite  deduction  could  be  made,  whatever
the  result.  Nevertheless  the  experiment  ought  to  be  made  by  some
competent  person.

After  this  came  some  private  matter  which  is  omitted,  and  there
was  more  talk  about  London  arrangements  and  choice  of  room
suitable  for  the  sittings  there  ;  but  nothing  of  permanent  interest.

The  ninth  and  eleventh  sittings  were  entirely  occupied  with  the
second  and  third  visits  of  Prof.  J.  H.  Muirhead.

At  the  tenth  a  lady  was  introduced.

At  the  twelfth  Mrs.  Grove  sat  with  Lady  Lodge  but  without  me.
Nothing  from  the  S.P.R.  group  came  at  any  of  these.


0.  J.  L.


0.  J.  L.


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  VI.  245


THIRTEENTH  SITTING.

Edgbaston,  December  3,  1906,  at  11.10  a.m.
Present — O.  J.  L.  only.

(After  preliminaries  and  a  considerable  amount  of  communication
about  J.  H.  M.)

Any  further  tests  that  I  can  give  1

0.  J.  L.  I  should  like  to  speak  to  either  Myers  or  Hodgson.

Yes,  all  right,  I  will  call  them.  +
Prudens  will  be  here  in  a  moment.

(Scrawl. )

Hello,  Hello,  Lodge. How  are  you  on  that  side  1
0.  J.  L.  Hullo,  Hodgson,  I  want  to  ask  you  something.

Fire  away  at  me,  I  am  in  the  witness  box.
0.  J.  L.  Well,  you  told  me  to  give  a  message  to  "  Billie  Nevvbold."

Right.

0.  J.  L.  About  the  title  of  a  Hindustan  poem,  but  you  did  not  tell
me  anything  in  Hindustani.  That  is,  I  expect,  what  he
wanted.

No,  I  beg  your  pardon ;  he  asked  me  to  translate  into
English  the  name  of  a  poem  I  wrote,  now  in  his  possession.

0.  J.  L.  And  you  said  it  meant  'love.'

Yes,  I  do  say  so,  and  that  is  correct.

0.  J.  L.  Very  well ;  and  is  that  all  I  am  to  say  to  him  ?

Yes,  about  that.  But  you  will  please  tell  him  that  he  is
not  to  feel  disturbed  about  that  Medium's  message :  it
is  all  rot.  He  will  understand  about  it;  i.e.,  his  going
to  the  bottom  with  his  wife  ;  i.e.,  going  to  the  bottom
of  the  sea.  U.D.


246


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


0.  J.  L.  Yes,  I  supposed  so.

Lodge,  do  you  remember  a  medium  I  went  to  see  long
ago  with  Gurney,  and  we  walked  home  late  at  night,
and  the  laugh  we  had  about  it  1  I  told  you  about  it,
and  you  ought  to  remember  it.

0.  J.fL.  I  am  afraid  I  do  not.

[This  probably  refers  to  an  incident  he  tried  to  recall  to
my  recollection  at  a  previous  sitting.  I  begin  to  have
some  recollection  of  walking  through  the  semi-under-
ground passage  at  Berkeley  Square  with  Gurney  and
Hodgson,  but  whether  it  is  a  case  of  true  or  false
memory  I  am  not  sure.  The  medium  may  have  been
Eglinton,  to  whom  I  went  many  times  fruitlessly  with
Gurney ;  but  I  had  not  recollected  any  connexion  of
Hodgson  with  that  particular  series  of  attempts.  On
referring  to  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  Vol.  2,  p.  290,  where
these  experiments  are  recorded,  however,  I  see  that  it
may  quite  well  have  been  possible.  See  also  page  491
of  the  same  volume.]

I  left  a  posthumous  letter  with  W.  J.
In  it  I  said  ....

[This  is  kept  back  for  the  present,  for  evidential  reasons.]

I  will  refer  to  it  again.

0.  J.  L. Yes,  we  will  not  be  in  a  hurry.

Did  you  ask  Piddington  about  the  church  ?

He  said  something  to  me  through  Mrs.  Holland  about  church.

O.  J.  L. Very  well,  that  is  a  C.-C.  message.

Yes,  have  you  heard  about  the  others  yet1?

0.  J.  L. No,  but  they  will  all  be  recorded,  and  collated  in  due  time.

0.  J.L. Very  well,  it  is  getting  time  to  stop  now.

Myers  has  had  very  little  opportunity  or  encouragement  to
prove  his  identity.


LVIII.]


On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  VI.


247


O.  J.  L. Yes,  that  is  fairly  true  so  far.

And  now  if  the  opportunity  can  be  given  him,  no  one  on
our  side  is  more  desirous  of  proving  his  identity  than
Myers.  U.D.

O.  J.  L. Yes,  I  quite  understand.

He  understands,  and  wishes  very  much  to  communicate  with
a  few  of  his  real  friends.  R.  It  should  be  given  him  in
any  case,  as  he  is  intelligent,  clear,  and  understands  the
necessity  of  so  doing.

O.  J.  L. I  think  that  this  will  be  the  last  time  in  these  surroundings
for  the  present.

Yes,  we  doubt  if  we  can  return — again  here,  but  hope  for  an

opportunity  somewhere  while  the  light  burns.
Now,  friend,  we  are  about  to  depart.

We  cannot  remain  here ;  our  utterances  are  fragmentary  but
they  are  earnest  and  sincere.  This  must  be  the  case
however  until  the  veil  is  lifted,  with  all  made  clear  to
you.  Your  mind  cannot  help  us.  If  you  think  of  a  thing
seriously  it  cannot  convey  anything  to  us.  We  go,  and
may  God  be  with  and  watch  over  you  always.

+  Farewell  E.

j[The  waking  stage  is  reported  in  another  connexion. See  p.  276.]

This  was  the  last  of  that  particular  set  of  Edgbaston  sittings,
and  soon  afterwards  Mrs.  Piper  went  to  London.

After  her  return  in  May,  three  more  sittings  were  held,  from
the  records  of  which  I  again  extract  the  writings  of  the  S.P.R.
group ;  and  since  the  beginning  after  a  break  is  usually  rather
interesting,  I  report  the  introductory  portion  also  in  this  case.


248  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part


CHAPTER  VII.

Messages  Received  from  the  Myers  and  Hodgson  Controls
through  Mrs.  Piper. Spring  Series.

First  Sittingr  of  the  Second  Series  at  Mariemont,  Eclgbaston,

called  No.  14,
Sunday,  19  May,  1907,  beginning  10.50  a.m.

Present — O.  J.  L.,  M.  L.,  and  Mrs.  Grove.

("Hand  raised. Cross  in  air.]

+  Hail.

Once  more  we  return  to  earth  to  greet  you.
Peace  and  joy  we  bring. +  R.

0.  J.  L. Welcome,  Imperator  and  Rector.

[Excitement  in  hand.]

We  are  very  glad  to  see  you.
I  just  discovered  who  you  were.  R.
We  bring  some  friends  who  are  anxious
to  speak  with  the  lady. Is  she  present.

0.  J.  L. Yes,  she  is.

Mes.  G.  Yes,  I  am  here.

Mr.  Myers  speaks  first

My  good  friend  I  am  delighted  to  see  you

once  more  and  assure  you  that  I  live.

Oh  what  joy  and  delight  when  we  meet  again.

I  know  all  is  well  with  you,  therefore

I  will  tell  you  I  have  sent  and

succeeded  [?]  in  making  Mrs.  V.  understand.

O.  J.  L. What  is  that  word?

And  —  succeeded

O.  J.  L.  Good.


Expectancy,  tranquility,  and  cloud.


lviil]  On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  VII.  249
0.  J.  L. That  word  is  cloud  1


Yes.

0.  J.  L. Lonely  as  a  cloud.
Yes,  quite.

Give  her  my  love  and  tell  her  this
being  my  first  opportunity  to
acknowledge  the  fact  that  the  word

(O.  J.  L.  reads  'she  would'.)

the  word  did  appear.

0.  J.  L.  Right,

I  am  working  on  Church  and  hope  to
get  it  through  soon

(0.  J.  L.  read  'writing'.)

working  on  the  word.
She  gave  it  me  to  reproduce  there.
Would  you  like  to  say  anything  now  ]
If  not,  others  would  like  to  speak.

0.  J.  L. Thank  you,  Myers,  I  only  want  to  say  that  I  think  what
you  did  about  Browning  Hope  and  a  Star,  was  very  fine.

I  am  glad  to  have  succeeded  in  making

it  clear  to  Rector,  but  I  did  have  a

time  of  it  in  making  him  understand  my  meaning.

I  will  step  aside  for  a  few  minutes

and  will  see  you  before  the  light  goes  out.

0.  J.  L. Thank  you. Very  good.

Remember  life  is  everlasting.  Myers.

[Signature  not  unlike  his.  But  for  the  most  part  the  style
of  all  this  communication  is  more  appropriate  to
"Rector"  than  to  "Myers."]

(Then  much  communication  for  Mrs.  G. ;  and  at  the  end
the  following  from  the  Hodgson  control :)

Hong  Kong  Nut  will  come  out  later.


250


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


O.  J.  L.  What  is  that  after  Hong  Kong?

Nut. Hong  Kong  nut  will  come  out  later  through  Mrs.  V

and  I  think  will  be  fine.  Nut.

That  is  one  of  my  test  words.

I  am  glad  to  see  you,  and  sorry  to  say  goodbye.

O.  J.  L.  Yes,  it  is  about  time  to  stop.

Adio. K.  H.

[Writing  changes,  becomes  more  like  Myers's  and  the  style
also.]

Good-bye  for  the  present,  old  fellow.
I  am  happier  than  you  can  ever  know.
My  love  always.

(Then  Rector  concludes.)

We  cease  now,  and  may  the  blessings  of
God  rest  on  you  both.
+  Farewell  R.

[Scrawl.]
[Time— 12-50.]

On  this  I  have  only  to  say  that  Hong  Kong  Nut  was  the
subject  of  a  C.-C.  experiment,  selected  by  HodgsonP,  which,  however,
like  many  others,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  did  not  succeed.
They  are  possibly  of  the  same  class  as  those  dream  inspirations
which  when  analysed  turn  out  to  be  rubbish,  though  they  impress
the  sleeper  at  the  time  with  a  sense  of  great  importance.

SITTING  No.  15.

At  the  fifteenth  sitting  on  27  May,  1907,  the  following  was
received  : —

I  have  been  trying  to get another  message  through  Mrs.
Verrall.  Myers.

0.  J.  L. That  will  be  very  good.

Wait  for  it.

Lodge,  do  you  realise the  joy  I  experience  meeting  you
to-day  1


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  VII.  251

0.  J.  L. Yes,  Myers,  I  think  so. Delighted  to  see  you.
I  wish  you  could  speak  to  me.

Tell  Piddington  I  understand  his  desires  and  will  do  all
in  my  power  to  continue  to  reach  him.

0.  J.  L.  Good.

I  did  give  Dwarf. (Not  read  at  first.)  Dwarf.
O.  J.  L. Oh,  "dwarf."

Yes,  P.  will  understand.

O.  J.  L. Piddington  will  understand. [See  Proe.,  Vol.  22,  p.  87.]

Do  you  understand  Plotinus  ? (Not  read  at  first.)
Do  you  understand  Plotinus  1

O.J.L. "Plotinus'"? [Evidently  I  had  not  been  told  about  Mrs.
Verrall's  Greek  message  then.]

Yes.

0.  J.  L. I  know  something  about  Plotinus,  yes.

This  is  my  answer  to  the  Greek  message.
O.J.L. Do  you  wish  to  translate  to  me  Piddington's  Latin  message?

Yes,  you  have  long  since  been  trying  to  assimilate  ideas.

0.  J.  L. Cannot  read  all  that.

[I  thought  at  the  time  that  this  was  a  sentence  addressed
to  me, ;  whereas  I  now  realise  that  it  was  the  begin-
ning of  a  translation. — 0.  J.  Z.]

You  have  long  since  been  trying  to  assimilate  ideas,  but  1
wish  you  to  give  through  Mrs.  Verrall  a  proof  sucli
proof  of  the  survival  of  bodily  death,  in  such  a  way
as  to  make  such  a  prove  conclusively  conclusively  the
survival  of  Bodily  death.

O.  J.  L. Would  you  tell  me  the  Latin  again  ?

Yes;  assimilate  ideas,  one  with  another,  one  with  another.

But  what  I  ask  is  for  you  to  give  that  proof  of  the  survival
of  bodily  death,  and  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  it  con-
clusive. He  [not  read]  He  He  wished  me  to  give  a
message  through  Mrs.  Verrall  and  this  light  concerning
the  same  subject.


252  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part

0.  J.  L. Yes.  I  know,  cross-correspondence.

Yes,  and  this  was  his  message  to  me  in  Latin.

0.  J.  L. Very  well,  thank  you.

You  will  find  it  is  correct  in  the  main.
He  suggested  Browning  to  me.

0.  J.  L.  Yes.

In  the  passage  Prefissias.

0.  J.  L. Perficias  1

Yes. Yes. Appreciate  (so  read.)
Apparirat  Appariat.

0.  J.  L. Oh,  I  see,  Appariat ; very  well.

illud  etc. (0.  J.  L.  reads.)

Yes  ;  from  the  last  sentence  I  got  instead  of  a  fourth  sound
came  a  star.  Sound.

0.  J.  L. Yes,  I  know.

[The  date  on  which  I  read  the  poem  "AbtVogler"  to  the
Piper  family,  as  reported  in  Vol,  22,  p.  416,  was
May  29, — i.e.  two  days  after  this.]

It  was  the  last  sentence  in  Latin  which  suggested  it  to  my
mind.

Jam  dudam  commitis. ('Jam 'was  read  at  first  'I  am.')

Jam  didam  commitis  (so  read).

0.  J.  L. Is  it  not  dedam  1

Dudam.  Jam  dudam.  (Plainly  written.  0.  J.  L.  reads
dudam.)  Yes.  This  is  only  a  few  of  the  words  to
his  message  (corrected)  of  his  message.  I  have  it  now
completed. Anything  more  1

0.  J.  L. Is  Myers  still  there  1

I  am  answering  your  question  friend.

O.  J.  L. I  was  not  sure  it  was  you ;  I  thought  it  was  Eector.

The  evidential  part  of  this  sitting  is  the  reference  to  some  of  the
cross-correspondences,  which,  although  largely  a  repetition  of  what
had  been  said  in  London,  were  now  expressed  perhaps,  in  places,


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  VII.


253


more  clearly  and  distinctly  than  at  first.  At  any  rate  they  are  reported
for  whatever  they  turn  out  to  be  worth.  I  had  no  previous  know-
ledge of  any  of  the  words  of  the  Latin  message  (see  Vol.  22,
page  313).


SITTING  No.  16.

Now  I  come  to  the  last  sitting  of  the  series,  No.  16,  on  2  June,
1 907,  from  which  I  will  quote  the  appropriate  portion.

Myers  will  open  first  this  day.

He  says  when  messages  come  from  him  he  understands  that
the  language  is  not  always  as  he  would  speak  it,  but  it
gathers  so  much  on  the  way  when  it  is  being  transmitted
it  sometimes  loses  its  natural  tone. Understand  ?

0.  J.  L. Yes,  I  gathered  that.

However  if  he  can  succeed  at  all  in  making  his  thought
appear  clear  he  will  be  extremely  [?]  grateful  and  pleased.
I  speak  these  words  for  him  as  he  helped  me  to  do  so.  R.
(Writing  gets  smaller.)

Good  morning,  my  friend,  I  am  delighted  to  see  you  again.
You  must  not  be  disappointed  if  I  do  not  succeed  in
replying  to  [a  sentence  I  had  given  him]  at  once,  but  I  am
working  over  it,  as  I  understand  it  and  will  answer  as
soon  as  I  can  get  it  clearly.

0.  J.  L. Yes,  very  well.

I  have  succeeded  in  getting  another  word  through  Mrs.  V.
It  is  Montin. [Doubtless  meant  for  mountain.]

O.  J.  L. Montin  ?

Yes ;  one  of  my  test  words. I  also  note  Lake  Lake.
O.J.L.  Lake?

Yes. Laburnum  and  Rose  leaf.

All  this  has  much  meaning,  as  you  will  understand  later.
0.  J.  L.  Very  well,  I  shall  keep  a  careful  record  of  all  this.
I  travelled,  not  footsore  or  heavy  laden.

(0.  J.  L.  reads  it.)


254  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part

Yes,  look  for  this  also,
to  find  light. (Read  by  O.  J.  L.)

Yes ;  these  I  propose  to  work  on  until  they  appear  through
Mrs.  V.

0.  J.  L.  Yes,  you  will  send  them  through  Mrs.  Verrall.

Yes. Have  you  understood  her  recent  notes  1
0.  J.  L.  Those  I  have  heard  of  seem  very  good.

I  wish  you  would  follow  me  now  for  a  moment.

0.  J.  L.  Quite  right.

Remember  when  Piddington  gave  me  his  message,  the  special
point  in  it  was  for  me  to  give  definite  proof  through
both  lights. [At  first  read  '  other '  instead  of  '  both '.]

The  first  thought  I  had  was  to  repeat  a  few  words  or  lines
of  Browning's  poem,  but  in  order  to  make  it  still  more
de  finite

(Written  as  two  words,  and  then  some  talk  between  the
controls  :  appearing  thus  :)

All  right,  I  will. I  am  sorry.  Rector.

Yes  definite  I  registered  a  star  and  the  lines  which  I  quoted
to  you  before.

0.  J.  L.  Is  that  word '  before  '  ?

He  says  I  speak  too  fast  for  him. R. I  will  wait.

which  I  quoted  to  you  before

were  the  most  appropriate  I  could  find.

I  believe  you  will  understand  this  to  be  conclusive,  that  I

fully understand and have  fairly well translated  his

message.
Any  inquiry  1

0.  J.  L.  No,  I  do  not  think  of  anything  now.

I  am  working  over  several  other  things.
Have  you  understood  about  wandering,  etc.

(0.  J.  L.  thought  of  'wandering  lonely'  as  a  cloud,  but
thought  it  safer  to  say  "no,"  which  he  did.)


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  VII.  255
Lonely  etc.

I  think  part  of  it  has  appeared. Will  you  reply1?

0.  J.  L.  I  understand  about  autos  ouranos  etc. It  is  considered  about
the  best  thing  you  have  done.

Really  ?  I  thought  of  Tennyson  directly  she  gave  me  her
words.

Socratese  [sic]  and  the  original  aspect.

Do  you  realise  how  difficult  it  is  to  receive  your  words  and
translate  them  clearly  to  Rector,  who  understands  nothing
of  what  I  am  trying  to  tell  him  ?

Wait,  friend,  and  do  not  lose  your  patience.

(Then  messages  came  from  other  controls,  and  soon  after-
wards the  series  terminated.)

[For  the  meaning  of  all  this,  reference  must  be  made  to  Mr.
Piddington's  analysis  near  the  end  of  Proc,  Vol.  22].

End  of  present  report  on  the  Myers  and  other  S.P.R.  controls.

CHAPTER  VIII.
OTHER  MESSAGES  RECEIVED  THROUGH  MRS.  PIPER.

The  Joseph  Marble  Series.

A  CURIOUS,  and  withal  distinctly  evidential,  series  of  communications
was  obtained,  partly  in  my  presence  and  partly  without  me,  by  a  lady
known  to  me  and  to  a  few  other  members  of  the  S.P.R.,  whom
I  will  call  Mrs.  Rupert  Grove.  There  are  several  reasons  for  con-
cealing identity  :  one  is  that  people  still  alive  would  resent  publication,
and  another  is  that  it  would  tend  to  spoil  some  possible  future
evidence  which  at  present  remains  in  the  form  of  prediction  as  yet
unfulfilled.

Mrs.  Grove  herself  is  an  intelligent  lady  of  middle  age,  open  minded
as  to  the  genuineness  of  psychical  phenomena  of  all  kinds,  but  in  her
own  judgment  tending  towards  scepticism,  which  it  requires  frequently
renewed  experience  to  counteract. Such  renewal  of  experience,  from


256


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


time  to  time,  she  has  had  through  her  husband,  who  has  been  more  or
less  familiar  with  such  things  for  years.  But  his  attitude  to  them  is
unimportant,  since  he  does  not  enter  into  this  series  except  by  incidental
mention.  He  knew  Mr.  Marble  slightly,  since  he  also  had  lived  for
some  years  in  the  same  neighbourhood ;  but  he  had  at  that  time  no
knowledge  of  the  great  and  affectionate  intimacy  between  Mr.  Marble
and  his  future  wife.  He  is  still  living,  and  I  think  I  am  right  in
assuming  that  he  knows  about  it  now  and  has  learnt  not  to  resent
it.  Nevertheless  the  possibility  that  he  might  dislike  it  is  another
reason  for  anonymity.  And,  after  all,  names  in  this  case  are  of  no
importance,  since  none  of  the  people  primarily  concerned  is  of  any
public  notoriety  or  importance.

I  shall  begin  with  a  statement  written  down  by  Mrs.  Grove  on  the
14th  June,  1907,  and  kept  by  me  till  the  present  time.

Statement  by  Mrs.  Grove,  made  14th  June,  1907,
with  reference  to  earlier  incidents.

Mr.  Joseph  Marble  and  his  sister,  Mrs.  Kate  Sandford,  were  neigh-
bours of  each  other  and  also  neighbours  and  old  friends  of  my  mother,
near  Ashton ;  and  he  had  a  small  '  works '  not  far  from  Stalybridge.
Both  were  well-read,  clear-headed,  somewhat  sceptical  people.  They
knew  me  better  than  any  one  else,  and  were  interested  in  everything
that  concerned  me.  In  fact  there  was  a  strong  and  very  deep  affection
between  us,  unknown  to  any  one  else.  Some  years  after  my  marriage,
when  I  had  gained  a  little  experience  of  psychical  matters  through
a  few  visits  to  a  medium  in  1896,  I  often  spoke  to  them  separately,
but  especially  to  him,  on  the  subject,  trying  to  make  him  realize
and  see  things  as  I  was  beginning  with  a  good  deal  of  hesitation
to  see  them ;  but  without  success.  He  listened  as  he  would  have
listened  to  anything  I  told  him,  but  more  with  amusement  than
acceptance.

Mrs.  Sandford  was  equally  incredulous,  and  said,  rather  distinctly,
that  she  did  not  like  such  things.  So  I  never  really  expected  to  get
communications  purporting  to  come  from  them.

Nevertheless,  in  two  sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson,  during  the
Spring  of  1900,  about  three  years  after  Mr.  Marble's  death,  I  did
try  for  something  of  the  kind,  by  taking  with  me  an  object  that  had
belonged  to  him.  And  communications  seemed  to  come  from  Mr.
Marble  almost  the  whole  time :  giving  many  facts  that  could  not
be  known  by  anyone  else. His  sister  (a  widow)  was  then  alive.


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  VIII.


257


The  communications  included  a  short  piece  of  writing,  in  which
among  other  things  he  wrote — very  naturally — "I  never  thought  I
should  attempt  in  so  rubbishy  a  manner  to  demonstrate  the  truth  of
your  own  strange  belief,  but  I  live,  I  live,  etc." (See  p.  263.)

The  communications  just  received  through  Mrs.  Piper  from  him  and
his  sister  are  in  many  ways  quite  appropriate  to  their  individuality.
Mrs.  Sandford  went  by  the  name  of  Aunt  Kitty  among  her  nieces
(his  daughters, — the  ablest  of  whom  is  named  Peggy),  with  whom  I
was  on  affectionate  terms.

The  family  still  retains  the  old  incredulity  and  strong  repugnance  to
anything  spiritistic,  but  the  two  deceased  members  of  it  seem  most
anxious  to  make  up  for  their  scepticism  by  giving  a  carefully  considered
kind  of  proof,  which  if  it  comes  off  (but  this  seems  at  present  past
belief)  will  be  to  me  most  wonderful  and  satisfying.

Alick  F.  Grove.

Here  follow  the  original  notes  of  two  voice-sittings  with  Mrs.
Thompson  at  Hampstead ;  together  with  a  contemporary  letter  from
Mr.  Myers,  to  whom  they  were  sent  to  see  if  he  wanted  to  include
them  with  his  own  extensive  series.

The  only  part  kept  back  is  a  portion  of  the  writing  done  by
the  entranced  Mrs.  Thompson  during  one  of  the  sittings.

Mrs.  Grove's  first  Sitting  with  Mrs.  Thompson,  in  1900.

(Notes  by  the  sitter  are  in  square  brackets.)

(Control  "Nelly"  speaking.)  There's  Mr.  Myers.  Yes  I'm
very  happy  to  get  things  for  other  people.

(I  gave  the  medium  a  Scotch  plaid  tie  to  hold  which  had
belonged  to  my  deceased  friend  Mr.  Marble.)

What  makes  me  say  Stalybridge  1

Mrs.  G.  Good.

I  dont  know  where  it  is,  a  horribly  smoky  place,  as  bad  as
Dudley  Port.  A  stout  good  tempered  influence  with  this,
easy  comfortable  jolly.  A  sort  of  Scotch  name  associated
with  it. I  dont  mean  because  of  the  pattern.

(Touching  locket  I  was  wearing  that  my  father  gave  my
mother.)

R


258


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


You  know  the  old  gentleman  belonging  to  that  locket.
He  knows  all  about  the  Baltic  Sea. [He  was  a  sailor.]

(I  gave  a  letter  written  by  the  same  deceased  friend.)

It  is  written  by  the  man  that  wore  the  tie.  [True.]
seems  a  separation  between  tie  and  letter
not  the  same  influence.  [1]

This  gentleman  has  whiskers  at  the  side,  no  beard.  [True.]

Have  you  really  got  2  or  3  fathers  1

because  it  seems  as  if  you  had,  besides  Mr.  Grove.

He  keeps  saying  15,  not  the  one  with  the  whiskers.

The  one  with  the  whiskers  wears  a  felt  hat — he  doesnt  like  a
top  hat — Mrs.  Cartwright1  is  helping  him,  he  cant  talk  very
well — she  is  helping  to  smooth  it  out.  He  was  one  that
didnt  like  other  people  knowing  his  affairs.  [He  was  very
reserved.]

He  wants  you  to  send  your  love  to  him — to  help  him.

He  says  he  hasn't  been  dead  as  long  as  the  old  Gentleman  that

gave  the  locket. [Certainly,  since  this  latter  has  been  dead

many  years.]

Who  is  the  Lady  crying  because  he  is  dead. Is  it  your  sister  ?
She  says  it  is  her  Joe. [This  is  what  his  wife  always  called
him.]

There  is  a  great  mistake  about  this  man  dying,  he  is  like  in
the  prime  of  life.  [He  was  over  60,  but  a  strong  looking
man.]

It  is  not  an  outside  death,  its  inside.  His  stomach  is  all
doubled  up. [It  was  in  fact  appendicitis.]

He  ought  to  have  gone  on  breathing  and  breathing  a  lot  more
and  got  better.  [He  was  thought  to  have  pneumonia,
so  I  presume  that  breathing  was  difficult.]  Its  as  if
he  wants  to  cough;  cant  breathe  very  well. — Joseph
Limestone.

[The  real  name  is  Marble  :  but  unfortunately  the  letter  came
partly  open  while  in  Mrs.  Thompson's  hands,  and  his
name  may  have  been  seen.  Also  it  said  in  the  letter  that
he  found  it  difficult  to  believe.  She  did  not  appear  to
be  reading  it  at  all.  A.F.G.]

'For  "Mrs.  Cartwright,"  see  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  18,  p.  126.


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  VIII.


259


You  know,  Alice,  it  seems  as  if  he  says  he  always  doubted
about  people  coming  to  talk  when  they  were  dead,  but  he
knows  now  it  is  true.

He  seems  as  though  he  was  a  mixed  up  sort  of  relation,  a  kind
of  brother  in  law. [No  relation.]

He  says  he  promised  he  would  tell  you  if  it  was  true.  He
wants  to  come  because  you  and  Eupert  didn't  think  it
was  the  truth,  and  he  wants  carefully  to  demonstrate  it
to  you.

(Another  short  digression  about  my  brooch.)

Mr.  Limestone  says  the  boys  used  to  come  over  where  he
lived,  to  stay.  [Yes,  some  cousins.  He  did  not  care  for
them.]

Mrs.  Grove  darling  do  you  know  that  gentleman  is  getting
quite  happy. He  says  he  had  Pneumonia.

[He  was  treated  for  Pneumonia,  but  it  turned  out  to  be
Appendicitis.]

He  says  your  little  girls  used  to  hang  on  each  side  of  him.

[This  is  quite  possible.]
Have  you  got  the  ring  he  gave  you  1

I  can't  understand  the  relationship,  because  there  is  such  a
bond  of  love  between  you  as  doesn't  exist  between
ordinary  people.

Beloved  Alice,  that's  what  he  says —he  wants  you  to  comfort
someone  that's  left  crying  for  him — he  wants  you  to
tell  them  that  it  was  a  sort  of  shock — he  didn't  seem
to  be  ill  long. [His  illness  did  not  last  3  days.]

In  spite  of  all  he  loves  he  doesnt  want  to  come  back.

He's  waiting  for  Alice.

He  says  there  is  no  separation  of  love  in  Heaven.
Does  he  mind  1

but  you  did  so  straightforwardly  tell  him  [i.e.  Mr.  Grove].
My  poor  little  woman,  how  sorry  I  was  for  you
He  says  he  told  you  not  to  wear  a  bonnet,  he  always  liked
to  see  you  in  a  hat.  [True.]


260


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


You  will  let  him  kiss  you  now,  you  used  to  screw  yourself
up  from  him.  He  said  he  ought  to  have  been  more  patient.
He  can  see  the  truth  of  your  heart  now — it  hurt  his
feelings — He  often  wanted  to  make  you  presents,  and
you  wouldn't  have  them.  He  said  sometimes  you  were
your  own  self  and  other  times  you  weren't.

But  he  says  neither  of  you  wronged  any  one  else.

What  a  masculine  voice  he  has,  a  voice  he  would  be  known
by  anywhere — not  ordinary.  [True.]

He  says,  when  he  sees  you,  he  would  rather  some  one  else
were  here  and  he  was  in  some  one  else's  place.

He  says  you  were  nicest  to  him  in  the  train — it  was  the
only  time  you  were  yourself — He  says  he  gave  you  a
lot  of  trouble,  he  caused  you  a  lot,  but  it's  all  smooth
and  straight  now. He  didn't  know  at  the  time.

He  says  what  troubles  him  most  is  for  your  sake — you  had
so  much  to  bear — It  seems  selfishness  that  he  should
have  caused  you  so  much  trouble.

He  seemed  to  be  doing  something  he  ought  not.

It  seems  as  though  he  doesn't  like  to  tell  me.  Perhaps  he
can  write  it.  [All  this  is  entirely  intelligible  and  correct.
The  hand  of  the  medium  now  writes  matter  fairly  appro-
priate, with  his  real  surname,  Marble,  written  in  full  and
correctly.]

Who  is  that  with  his  teeth  so  even  and  square,  bright  and
regular,  and  his  ear  such  a  nice  ear?  [Had  nice  teeth,
and  had  a  good  ear  lying  flat  to  the  head.]

He  says  you  have  his  photograph  but  have  put  it  away.

[True.]

Why  did  I  take  it  so  hard  1  The  knowledge  of  all  we  were
to  each  other  ought  to  keep  me  till  we  meet  and  are
united.

Mks.  G.  Then  what  about  my  Rupert?

Oh  !  there  are  no  jealousies  and  no  relationships,  but  souls
united. He  is  sure  Rupert  won't  be  cross  at  souls  united.

He  seems  to  say  "  Alice  love  me  just  this  once,"  and  seems
to  be  trembling  and  trembling.

It  seems  to  commence  by  your  going  in  the  train.

(Mrs.  G.  asks  for  the  name  of  a  special  place.) [Not  obtained.]


Lvnr.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  VIII.  261


He  says  tell  him  anything  but  that.

Oh  God — but  he  does  not  believe  in  God  does  he  1  [In
a  Piper  Sitting,  six  years  later,  he  is  represented  as
saying,  through  Rector,  "I  do  believe  in  God  now."

What  is  that  in  his  throat"? — -You  see  how  large  it  is  there,
[he  had  a  large  'Adam's  apple']  and  a  turn  down  collar.
They  don't  know  anything  of  this  at  his  house  and  he
doesn't  want  them  to.

What  made  him  die  so  quickly  1  looks  as  if  something  was
doubled  up  inside  his  stomach.  Do  you  know  what  a
passionate  love  on  one  side  and  a  sisterly  love  on  the
other — that's  what  it  is.  He  hasn't  any  patience  with
Platonic  affection.

Second  Sitting  of  Mrs.  Grove  with  Mrs.  Thompson
on  the  following  day.

[After  preliminaries.]

Where  is  his  brother  1

(Mrs.  G.  asks  '  Nelly '  to  find  out  if  he  remembers  the  School
of  Art.)

Have  you  been  painting  a  picture,  Mrs.  Grove  1  because  he
sees  you  with  a  pinafore  on  painting — he  used  to  watch
you  painting.

[True,  and  also  true  that  I  had  been recently  painting
a  picture.]

Mrs.  G.  Can  you  tell  me  what  the  picture  was  ? [Really  a  portrait
of  him  from  a  photograph.]

(Long  silence) — You  seem  to  be  copying  off  another.
There  are  a  lot  of  suicides  connected  with  this  gentleman.

[His  brother  committed  suicide  b}^  shooting  himself,  and
he  knew  that  I  knew  this  fact.]

Well,  there  is  a  poison  that  doubles  up  the  inside,  but  he
is  afraid  of  distressing  you ;  but  it  is  written  up.

[If  this  implies  that  Mr.  Marble  also  committed  suicide,
it  is  untrue.]


262


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


All  the  Elliotts  know  him.  He  only  loved  one  Elliott;
[Elliott  was  my  former  name]  but  you  mustn't  be  jealous —
he  once  loved  an  Alice  Elliott — You're  not  cross  are
you  1 — He  didn't  marry  her.

(In  answer  to  questions  if  he  remembered  where  he  went
with  her.)

He  went  away  to  some  pictures  by  rivers  with  Alice  Elliott.

You  won't  be  cross  will  you,  but  you  know  his  heart  seems
to  go  out  to  her  more  than  to  anyone  else.  [Nelly  never
seemed  to  know  my  former  name,  or  to  suspect  that
this  really  referred  to  me.]

What's  an  Agnostic  I Tell  her  I  am  an  Agnostic.  [True.]

He  says  what  the  devil  shall  I  do  when  I  can't  think —
He  says  in  one  more  year  he'll  come  and  tell  you.  He
says  he  is  not  in  the  same  house  '  Nelly '  is  in.  When
he  is  there,  which  he  hopes  to  be  soon,  he  can  talk  to
her  without  getting  in  a  muddle.

[This  is  probably  intended  to  signify  that  he  is  not  yet
at  the  same  stage  of  progression  as  the  reporting
control.]

(The  medium  now  took  a  pencil  and  began  to  write.  The
writing  consisted  of  unintelligible  questions  at  first.
Then)

"  Why  remind  me  of  this  however,  I  am  happy  and  have
been  for  you  you  all  and  am  now  happy.

I  cannot  think  you  are  my  Alice  or  you  would  not  say
you  forget  it,  how  am  I  to  believe  you  are  my  Alice  I
cannot  see  you  any  more  than  you  can  see  me.  There
are  the  sketches  I  gave  you.  They  are  in  my  house  or
yours."

[I  do  not  remember  having  received  any  sketches  from
Mr.  Marble.]

(Writing  continued.)  "My  clear  Alice  tis  not  that  I  am
unwilling,  but  I  am  now  though  not  then  convinced  that
we  are  both  best  to  leave  our  loves.  This  life  has
brought  me  the  joy  and  happiness  I  so  often  sought  but
sought  in  vain.  I  was  so  deuced  selfish  in  my  love
but  now  I  see  it  is  better  left  alone — and  try  my  dear


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  VIII.  263


Alice  to  forget  me  as  you  used  to  pretend  so  well  to  do.
Why  did  you  treat  me  so  coldly.  You  little  thought
how  grieved  it  made  me — I  have  suffered  for  the  wrong
I  would  have  done  to  others  but  now  it  is  best  for  me
not  to  communicate  in  this  or  any  other  way.  I  love
you  still  but  only  by  giving  you  this  proof  in  our  case
is  best  left  alone — for  one  year.  Remember  in  one  year
I  will  give  you  all  the  proof,  nay  more,  but  dearest
dont  ask  me  now.  I  never  thought  I  should  attempt
in  so  rubbishy  a  manner  to  demonstrate  the  truth  of
your  own  strange  belief.

but  I  live  I  live,  and  that  is  sufficient  for  now,  and  more,
much  more,  than  anything  I  ever  thought  of.

I  will  not  try  to  say  more,  surely  one  year  will  not  grieve
you  to  wait,  etc."

[It  becomes  illegible  and  I  cannot  read  it  quite  to  the
end.  The  whole  of  the  above  is  extremely  appropriate.]
(Then  follow  several  irrelevant  things  written,  and  then
'Nelly'  said:)

Who  is  that  dear  old  lady  called  Annie? — wears  a  Honiton
lace  cap, — used  to  wear  a  little  black  silk  apron  with
lace  round  it.  She  sees  you  have  been  communicating
with  some  one  and  thinks  you  had  better  not  give  her
love  to  Rupert.  She  is  very  high,  nearly  as  high  as  the
bright  Lady.

[I  do  not  know  for  whom  this  is  intended — it  might  be  a
particular  Aunt,  but  her  name  was  not  Annie  or  Anne.]

She  asks  you  not  to  communicate

She  thinks  we  shall  have  to  educate  him  a  bit  first  as  he  is
rather  anti-everything.  [This  phrase  is  distinctly  charac-
teristic of  Mr.  Marble.]


NOTES  BY  0.  J.  L.

All  this  J.  M.  business  is  extraordinarily  good.  It  is  really  more
lifedike  than  the  subsequent  quieter  Piper  impersonation,  some  six
or  seven  years  later.  At  that  time,  however,  the  attempt  to
give  evidence,  here  foreshadowed,  is  really  made  :  and  the  Control
shows  some  knowledge  of  what  was  said  here,  e.g.  by  writing  that


264


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


"lie  does  believe  in  God  now."  (Cf.  p.  261  just  above.)  If  it  be  true
that  any  J.  M.  material  comes,  or  has  come,  through  Mrs.  Verrall,
or  other  strangers,  it  will  be  excellent.  At  present  telepathy  from
the  sitter  is  the  least  strained  hypothesis  that  will  account  for
it. No  more  normal  explanation  than  that  will  serve.

The  substitution  on  one  occasion  of  '  Mr.  Limestone '  for  Mr.
Marble  is  characteristic  of  the  '  Nelly '  control,  and  recalls  the
substitution  of  'Happyfield'  for  Merrifield,  as  reported  in  Vol.  17,
p.  208.  These  small  things  are  of  interest  as  tending  to  throw  light
on  the  mechanism  of  the  process ;  at  least  in  this  instance.  But
just  as  people  differ  in  power  of  visualising  and  other  methods  of
reminiscence,  so  each  case  of  automatism  should  be  studied  as  likely
to  possess  individual  features.

These  materials  were  sent  to  Mr.  Myers  in  the  year  1900,  who
replied  as  follows  : —

Cambridge,
May  30/0  [1900].

My  dear  Lodge,

With  many  thanks  for  enclosed,  I  think  it  need  not
be  typewritten  in  my  series.  A  sentence  from  Mrs.  Grove's  letter —
as  to  general  impression — will  suffice,  and  I  think  we  will  now
wait  and  see  what  the  '  spirits '  suggest  of  themselves  after  a  year.
Mrs.  T.  had  another  somewhat  disturbing  impression  of  this  'spirit,'
which,  as  she  thought,  roused  her  from  the  trance  at  my  last  sitting
with  van  Eeden. — He  said  something  about  returning  in  a  year,
in  a  tone  which  rather  roused  her  opposition.  We  had  better  just
wait  and  let  matters  develop  themselves — no  need  to  say  anything
about  the  matter  as  yet.

F.  W.  H.  M.

After  this  the  same  Control  sent  occasional  messages  through  other
mediums,  to  whom  Mrs.  Grove  occasionally  went  anonymously,  hoping
to  get  some  more  evidence.  These  communications  are  hardly  worth
reporting;  but  as  no  clue  of  any  kind  was  given,  they  seemed  beyond
chance,  since  they  clearly  had  reference  to  the  same  personality
and  incidents.  But  of  course  they  were — like  most  of  this  series —
well  within  the  scope  of  telepathy.  The  few  incidents  outside  the
scope  of  telepathy  remain  for  the  future  to  verify.  These  were
obtained  through  Mrs.  Piper — from  whose  script on this  subject


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  VIII.  265


I  now  extract  portions ;  but  for  evidential  reasons  it  is  necessary  to
withhold  the  not  yet  verified  portions  for  subsequent  publication.
They  are  all  carefully  kept.  In  the  interim,  between  1900  and  1906,
Mrs.  Kate  Sandford,  sister  of  Mr.  Joseph  Marble,  had  died  in  her
own  house.

The  main  difference  between  the  communications  received  through
Mrs.  Thompson,  as  reported  above,  and  the  communications  which
follow,  obtained  through  Mrs.  Piper,  lies  in  the  fact  that  one  was
conversational  and  therefore  easy,  whereas  the  other  was  hampered
by  the  difficulty  of  deciphering  a  more  or  less  illegible  script.  Even
when  a  skilled  reader  is  present  it  is  not  easy,  but  to  a  sitter  who
is  comparatively  a  novice  at  the  work  the  difficulty  is  extreme.
For  part  of  Mrs.  Grove's  time  I  was  present  and  assisted  with  the
reading,  but  the  presence  of  an  outside  person  is  naturally  perturbing,
and  hence  the  opportunity  for  referring  to  intimate  matters  was  not
so  complete  as  during  the  previous  voice  sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson
alone.  Another  difference  seems  to  be  due  to  the  fact  that  at  the
later  date  communication  begins  not  directly  with  Mr.  Marble
himself  but  with  his  now  deceased  sister ;  and  the  presence  of  this
additional  communicator  exerted  another  restraining  influence — not
only  on  the  other  side,  so  to  speak,  but  even  1  thought  on  Mrs.
Grove.

Anxiety  to  communicate  in  an  evidential  manner  if  possible,  and
genuine  affection,  were  manifested  now  as  strongly  as  before ;  but
the  tone  was  somewhat  more  sedate,  and  more  what  may  be  called
'religious.'  Probably  most  of  this  is  due  to  the  intervention  of
Rector,  but  it  is  represented  as  indicating  some  progress  in  the
communicator  himself.

In  Mis.  Grove's  opinion,  the  communicator  seemed  the  same  person
in  the  main,  and  not  more  different  in  detail  than  the  different  cir-
cumstances might  reasonably  be  held  to  justify.

Let  it  be  remembered  then  that  the  remaining  communications
are  obtained,  not  as  heretofore  through  Mrs.  Thompson  by  the  voice,
but  through  Mrs.  Piper  by  writing.


Sitting  of  Mrs.  Grove  vritli  Mrs.  Piper  in  November,  1906.

The  first  appearance  of  anything  in  connexion  with  Mr.  Joseph
Marble  or  his  sister  Mrs.  Kate  Sandford — frequently  known  as  Aunt
Kitty  though  she  was  no  relation — occurred  in  the  midst  of  other


260


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


matter,  when  Mrs.  Grove  was  present  and  had  handed  in  a  brown
tie  belonging  to  the  late  Mr.  Marble,  thus : —

Who  is  Kate  ?  Sends  her  dearest  love.  All  is  well,  and
hopes  it  is  with  j'ou.  Wants  you  to  remember  her  as
she  was  glad  she  came  over.

(Feeling  shawl  worn  by  sitter.)

She  made  it. She  gave  it  to  you.

Mrs.  G.  Yes,  she  did. [It  was  the  last  thing  that  Mrs.  Sandford
had  made ;  she  had  given  it  to  Mrs.  G.,  who  happened
now  accidentally  to  have  it  on.]
Wants  you  to  keep  it  always.

There  is  the  same  influence  about  these  two,  (tie  and
shawl)  they  are  connected,  and  yet  they  are  not.  I  will
get  it  clear.  She  does  love  you  so.  She  thinks  as  much
of  you  as  of  anyone  now  in  the  body.  Do  you  remember
her  father?

Mrs.  G.  No.

He  came  a  long  time  ago.

Lawrence,  no  Lorenz ;  no,  I  cannot  get  it.  A  lady  whom
she  knew  who  nursed  her  in  the  body.  [A  lady  com-
panion used  to  live  with  Mrs.  Sandford  in  her  last
years ;  but  the  name  was  not  at  all  like  Lawrence.]
She  was  with  her  when  she  passed  out.  This  is  a
companion.  These  two  influences,  ihis  is  the  sister,  and
this  is  the  brother.

Mrs.  G.  Right.

She  (feeling  shawl)  was  not  far  from  your  mother's  sur-
roundings.

Mrs.  G.  True. [They  all  lived  near  together.]

Kate's  is  an  excellent  influence. This  object  (brown  tie)  is

not  quite  what  I  like.
The  influence  of  the  body  is  not  quite  so  clear. A  dimmer

light.

Thy  presence  attracts  both.

This  (brown  tie)  influence  is  a  little  puzzling.

I  think  I  might  get  this  another  time  clearer.


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  VIII.  267


I  will  speak  to  him  myself.
Give  me  these  when  I  return.

I  often  get  best  results  by  speaking  to  someone  on  our
side  and  then  speaking  directly  I  return.

Mrs.  G.  All  right ;  Kate  will  help  you.

The  next  sitting  was  held  specially  for  Mrs.  Grove,  and  the  subject
was  developed  during  most  of  the  time.  It  would,  however,  be  tedious
to  quote  it  all,  for  some  of  the  incidents  mentioned  could  not  be
recalled  by  the  sitter,  and  others  were  given  only  vaguely.  I  take
the  beginning,  and  then  a  bit  out  of  the  middle  :  the  beginning  of
Mr.  Marble's  appearance,  as  a  communicator  through  Mrs.  Piper,
being  perforce  included.  It  is  very  hazy  and  confused  at  first,  but,
as  soon  as  it  is  properly  established,  this  impersonation  will  be
recognised  as  fairly  consistent  with  the  hitherto  unpublished  repre-
sentation through  Mrs.  Thompson  recorded  above,  and  obtained  six
and  a  half  years  previously.  The  opening  words  of  the  following
record  purport  to  be  from  Mrs.  Sandford : —

I  am  well  and  happy  in  this  life,  so  is  my  brother  Martin
who  greets  you  with  great  love.  [This  name  Martin
seems  to  be  merely  a  muddle  of  Rector's.]

Kate  and  Martin  [  1  ]  are  both  here  to  greet  you.  He  asks
me  to  remind  you  of  a  ring  which  you  had  a  long
time  ago.

Mrs.  G.  I  am  glad  to  meet  Kate  again,  but  I  do  not  know  Martin.

Speak  to  me.
Mrs.  G.  I  have  the  ring  on  my  finger  now.

I  wish  I  could  speak  to  you  as  I  feel.  I  think  of  the  days
that  are  gone  and  the  joy  I  had  in  life.

Have  you  seen  mother  since  I  came  over  or  do  you  under-
stand anything  about  her  'I  Jane.

Mrs.  G.  No  I  don't  understand.

She  came  to  this  life  many  years  ago.

Mrs.  G.  I  don't  know  anything  about  her.

All  right.  Speak.  Don't  let  me  get  confused— that  sign.
No  one  could  recall  better  than  myself  that  ring  (not
read)  but  myself  would  remember  that  ring.


268  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part

Mrs.  G.  No. [A  ring  given  by  Mr.  Marble  to  Mrs.  G.,  long  ago,  was
on  her  finger,  as  said  above.]

I  am  really  near  you  now,  and  so  glad  to  have  found  my
way  here.  [This  purports  to  be  Mr.  Marble  communi-
cating.]

Mks.  G.  Can  you  quote  to  me  a  line  of  Eossetti's  that  you  said  to
me — a  sort  of  farewell  poem  1

I  am  not  sure  about  that,  but  I  will  try  my  very  best  to
refresh  my  memory  with  it,  and  repeat  it  if  possible
here. Do  you  remember  Halstead  Hall  ?

Mrs.  G.  No  :  no  I  do  not.

Hall  Hall  Hall.

0.  J.  L.  (Thinking  to  help  matters  on)  Hell  Hall  ?

No  No  No  friend,  Halstead  Hall  where  I  used  to  ...  .

[illegible]  in  part  of  the  writing.
Did  those  lines  go  like  this,

"All  day  for  day  drift  far  apart'"?

Mrs.  G.  No,  those  are  not  the  lines.

Not  quite  right  friend.
Our  lives  apart.

Mrs.  G.  No.

I  do  not  recall  the  exact  poem,  but  don't  trouble  about  it :
it  will  all  be  clear  in  time,  and  I  will  give  it  you.  I
certainly  will.  [It  was  never  given.  Mrs.  G.  herself
quoted  it  later.] Do  you  remember  anything  about  Hall  ?

Mrs.  G.  A  hall  we  used  to  pass  in  walking,  where  the  Jeffersons
lived?

(Excitement  in  hand)  Not  far  from  that  hall.
Mrs.  G.  Do  you  mean  Casford  Hall?

Yes  I  do. I  told  Eector  again  and  again.

Halsford  Hall.  M.

There  is  something  on  his  mind.  E.

which  he  is  anxious  to  recall  with  the  lady  present.

Dance.


lviil] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  VIII.  269

Mrs.  G.  Yes  yes.

Together  at  Ball,  at  Hall. Not  so?

Mrs.  G.  No,  not  there  [but  if  he  meant  another  hall  it  would  be
right].

No,  but  we  stopped  at  Hall  on  our  way  and  sat.

Mrs.  G.  I  don't  recollect.

Think  a  moment  friend,  he  is  surely  right.
Think  a  moment.

Mrs.  G.  I  cannot  remember  it.

(And  so  on  with  other  ineffective  reminiscences  for  about  five
or  ten  minutes  more,  then)

Do  you  remember  Singing  1  [or  possibly  a  portmanteau  attempt
at  Sunday  morning.]

Mrs.  G.  Singing  1 Yes,  very  badly.

I  remember  well. Sunday  ming  [clearly  meant  for  either

evening  or  morning].
Repeat. Not  singing. I  was  going  to  progress  and  go  on  in

this  life. He  thinks  she  does  not  hear  him.  R.

[Note  by  Mrs.  G.  I  did  not  understand  the  writing  at  the
time.  It  says  "  Sunday  morning,"  a  time  when  we  always
saw  each  other.  It  must  have  seemed  cruel  not  to
understand.  I  thought  he  referred  to  "singing,"  so  he
goes  to  that  at  last.]

Mrs.  G.  I  want  you  to  say  something  that  I  may  know  it  is  you.

Oh  yes.  Yes,  you  used  to  sing  occasionally  sing  when
I  came  to  your  house.  You  sang  evening  evening  the
last  time  I  heard  you.

0.  J.  L.  (Again  putting  in  his  oar)  Very  likely.

Yes  you  did.

I  think,  friend,  you  had  better  leave  the  lady  to  speak.
0.  J.  L.  Shall  I  go  away  1
I  think  so,  friend.


270  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part

0.  J.  L.  May  I  bring  a  friend  two  days  hence  %

You  may  bring  him.
O.  J.  L.  Farewell  then,  Rector.

God  be  with  you.

(Mrs.  G-.  was  now  left  alone  with  Lady  Lodge,  and  almost
at  once  the  conditions  improved.  Lady  L.  kept  a  record
of  what  was  said,  as  0.  J.  L.  had  done,  and  tried  to
assist  in  reading  the  script.)

Yes  I  am  Martin  Wright. [This  name,  if  correctly  deciphered,

appears  meaningless.]
Joe  (illegible  :  might  be  Johnson).

Mrs.  G.  Yes,  that  is  right  [meaning  that  the  Christian  name  was
given  correctly].

No,  I  do  not  know.

Read  me. M. Yes  I  am  Marb

Now  do  you  understand  1

Mrs.  G.  Yes,  right,  what  next  1

le. Yes,  I  am  he. I  am  Marbl I  am  so  glad  and  so  very

happy  to  see  you  again.
I  never  shall  cease  to  love  you,  never,  never,  shall  cease  to

love  NEVER.

I  am  now  nearer  you  than  ever  before,  and  yet  progressing
all  the  time.

Mrs.  G.  I  must  progress  too.

Yes,  you  must ;  but  you  are  growing  better  every  year ;

yes,  every  year.
Dear  Kate,  she  loves  you  too,  and  she  longs  to  help  you

in  that  life. Ask  her  to  do  so.

Mrs.  G.  How  shall  I  get  her  to  do  this  ? Do  you  mean  pray  1

Yes,  and  she  will  always  hear  you. So  shall  I.

I  see  and  know  when  you  think  of  me.

Do  you  remember  you  said  you  could  not  in  that  life?

You  do  understand  now  so  much  better.


LVlll.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  VIII.  271


Mes.  G.  Yes,  I  do,  but  I  did  not  understand  then.

It  hurt  me  then,  but  I  understand  it  all  now.
I  never  loved  more.

I  see  the  ring  I  gave  you. I  do  so  well.

I  was  attracted  to  it,  and  how  could  I  help  coming  back

to  you  1
I  could  not  help  coming.
I  did  not  wish  to  help  it.

I  longed  to  return,  to  return. Do  you  understand  1

Mes.  G.  Yes,  I  do.

I  tried,  Alice,  to  love  many  times —  a  good  many  times,

but  could  not,  but  I  could  not.
[This  is  intelligible  also,  but  the  explanation  would  be  long.]

At  a  much  later  sitting  Mrs.  Grove  again  sat,  and  again  had  the
shawl  with  her.  Messages  came  from  Kate  Sandford,  the  sister  of
Joseph  Marble.

Mes.  G.  Is  Kate  here  ?

Yes  I  am  here  dear.  Joe  feels  so  bad  to  think  that  he
could  not  understand  what  you  said  better.  He  says
he  does  understand  you  about  the  last  dance  at  his
house,  and  going  home  with  you.

I  understand  also  all  that.

I  never  knew  when  I  was  in  the  body.  .  .  .  [This  is  true.

She  did  not  know  of  the  terms  of  affection  we  were  on.

Nor  indeed  did  anyone.]
I  am Kate, Joe's  sister. I  see  my  object  very  clearly

[namely  the  shawl  she  made]  and  it  helps  me  so.

Mes.  G.  Can  you  tell  me  whom  you  have  met  in  your  world  1

[This  question  was  intended  to  extract  a  reference  to  her
husband,  who  long  pre-deceased  her ;  but,  instead,  a
curious  introduction  of  a  deceased  friend,  well  known
to  both,  occurs. — 0.  J.  L.']

Do  you  remember  a  friend  of  mine  named  Weston  1

Mes.  G.  No  I  do  not.


Do  you  remember  Bet  Best  Westn,  Alice  ?


272


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part


Mrs.  G.  Yes  quite  well ;  lots  of  them,  the  Wests.

Do  you  ? I  have  seen  her  and  her  father,  also  Best.

Mrs.  G.  Is  it  a  gentleman  or  a  lady  ?

Don't  you  remember  him  ?  A  gentleman.  He  asked  me
the  other  day  if  I  had  really  spoken  to  you.  I  told  him
I  had  tried  to  do  so ;  and  he  said,  ask  her  if  she  re-
members me  at  all.

Mrs.  G.  Yes,  well. Can  he  give  his  Christian  name  1

He  will.  Jim.

Mrs.  G.  I  remember  you  well.

Jim  West.  [This  was  exactly  the  name  he  always  went  by  :
he  died  young. He  was  a  very  intimate  friend.]

Mrs.  G.  I  am  glad  to  speak  to  you.

I  do  not  forget  you  if  you  forget  me.

Mrs.  G.  Do  you remember a dance and  supper, and what  you
promised  to  give  me  1

It  was  I  who  remembered  you  first ;  do  not  hurry  me.  I
will  recall  anything  you  wish  if  you  give  me  time.  I
am  so  glad  to  see  you,  etc.
[Then  came  reminiscences  of  a  fan  with  crests  stuck  on  it,
and  of  a  journey ;  but  nothing  sufficiently  clear  and
precise — at  least  to  strangers — to  be  worth  quoting  as
evidence. The  unexpected  but  quite  distinct  appearance
of  the  personality  at  all  was  the  curious  thing. — 0.  J.  L.]

Extracts  from  further  sittings  of  Mrs.  Grove  with  Mrs.  Piper.

After  this  Mrs.  Grove  had  a  sitting  without  my  presence,  and  the
following  is  a  small  part  of  the  record.  She  kept  a  copy  of  all  her
own  remarks,  and  I  have  read  it. — 0.  J.  L.

We  are  surrounded  by  your  friends.

They  long  to  reach  you  friend  of  Earth,  and  unburden  their
minds.

The  first  to  greet  you  is  Kitty,  Kitty.

[This  is  Mrs.  Kate  Sandford,  commonly  called  "Aunt  Kitty,"
sister  of  Mr.  Joseph  Marble.]


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  VIII.


273


Mrs.  G.  Ah,  at  last  the  right  name. Why  did  you  call  yourself  Kate
before  ?

Because  I  did  it  for  Rector's  understanding.

I  am  with  you  dear  Alice. I  see  and  understand  all  your

enquiry,  so  does  Joe.  .  .  .
Alice  he  loves  you  dearly,  etc.

(Then  he  was  represented  as  saying,)

Have  you  any  idea  of  my  joy  at  meeting  you  1
I  feel  it  must  mean  much  to  me  as  life  goes  on.
With  you  in  the  body  this  privilege  of  speaking  to  you  is
everything  to  me.  It  helps  me  to  free  my  mind.  And
my  sister  has  been  so  patient  and  kind  to  me.  She  has
helped  me  to  find  you  dear,  as  she  came  to  this  life  after
I  did.  [Correct.]

Pray  for  me  always,  etc.

(Then  some  messages  for  identification,  such  as)

He  used  to  go  down  to  those  buildings,  his  works,  and  mix
the  materials  [to  some  extent  specified]  for  the  workmen.
He  supervised  it  himself  and  used  to  judge  of  their  work
after  they  were  completed. [This  was  all  correct.]

(Then  a  communication  about  one  of  the  late  workmen,  not
yet  verified.)  [A  great  number  of  details  were  given,
but  there  appears  no  means  of  verifying  them  at
present,  though  an  attempt  has  been  made. — 0.  J.  X.]

Mrs.  G.  I  am  going  home  soon  and  will  enquire.
Good I  am  glad. Bridge.  Bridge.

He  is  spelling  it  out  to  me.  Sounds  like  Stale  Stale  Bridge
Stale.

Mrs.  G.  Yes  that's  right.

Works  at  Bridge  Staly.

Now  dear  I  am  not  sure  that  I  can  give  you  further  proofs
of  identity,  because  I  am  Marble,  and  I  am  serious  and
in  earnest.  I  love  you  dearly.  I  always  did,  and  my
life  would  be  a  barren  waste,  he  says  a  barren  waste,
without  your  prayers  and  love.

s


274


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


Mrs.  G.  A  barren  waste  ? I  thought  you  were  happy.

Oh  yes,  I  am  absolutely  happy.
I  understand  so  much  better  now.

Mrs.  G.  What  should  I  pray  for  ?

For  a  re-union  of  our  souls,  for  my  peace,  and  for  me  to  be
able  to  reach  you  in  this  meagre  and  simple  way.

Mrs.  G.  Do  you  wish  to  come  ?

It  has  helped  me  more  than  you  can  ever  realise ;  and  if  I
do  not  speak  again  it  will  not  injure  me,  as  I  have
practically  freed  my  mind,  as  I  have  practically  freed  my
mind. It  has  been  such  a  help  to  me  and  to  Kitty  also.

Mrs.  G.  Dear  'Aunt  Kitty.'

That  sounds  so  natural  to  me.
I  love  to  hear  it.

Do  you  love  me,  and  do  you  understand  how  blind  I  was  ?
Forgive  me.

Mrs.  G.  You  mean  your  incredulity ;  but  you  cannot  make  people
believe.

Yes,  but  I  was  so  stupid,  I  would  not  believe  dear.
Now  I  understand  I  am  sorry  I  did  not.

Mrs.  G.  Does  it  make  any  difference  1

Only  I  feel  I  hurt  you  dear.

Mrs.  G.  Not  much.

But  I  did  not  have  the  opportunity,  did  I  really  dear  1

Mrs.  G.  No.

It  is  time  to  close  now.  E.

The  few  opportunities  afforded  by  later  sittings  were  utilised  for
reiterated  communications,  intended  to  be  evidential,  regarding  the
present  state  of  an  old  workman  whom  the  Marble  control  wanted
found  and  helped  through  the  agency  of  his  daughter  Peggy,  whom
he  correctly  named.  But  hitherto  it  has  been  impossible  to  ascertain
the  facts  or  to  get  any  co-operation  from  this  source.


lviil] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  VIII.


275


If  verified  in  the  future,  this  part  may  be  extremely  good,  but  at
present  it  would  be  absurd  to  quote  it.  So — though  carefully  re-
corded and  filed — it  is  left  unreported.  The  mingled  restraint  and
utterance  of  the  Marble  control,  throughout,  were  exceedingly  natural,
and  practically  overcame  the  incredulity  of  the  sitter — at  any  rate
for  the  time.

Experiment  on  the  recognition  of  a  Photograph  of  one  of  the  Controls.

The  waking  stages  of  the  last  sitting  of  the  first  Edgbaston  series
in  December,  1906,  and  of  the  first  of  the  second  series  in
May,  1907, — with  an  interval  between  them  of  five  months, —
are  worth  recording  because  of  an  experiment  I  made  in  connexion
with  the  likeness  of  a  person  supposed  to  have  been  communicating
during  the  trance  (in  this  case  Mr.  Marble) :  the  point  being  to  see
whether  there  would  be  any  recognition  of  a  photograph  by  the
automatist  before  her  state  had  become  entirely  normal, — that  is
during  the  sort  of  period  in  which  it  is  customarily  possible  dimly
to  remember  dreams.  This  stage  is  referred  to  by  Dr.  Hodgson  on
page  401  of  Vol.  13 — where  he  calls  it  Mrs.  Piper's  subliminal  stage,
a,nd  says  that  it  is  a  condition  in  which  she  frequently  has  visions
of  the  distant  or  departing  "  communicators."

On  the  first  occasion  I  waited  rather  a  long  time  before  trying
the  experiment, — something  more  than  an  hour,  and  the  recognition
was  uncertain;  but  faint  as  it  was,  it  seemed  to  be  a  residual  effect
of  the  trance ;  since  it  was  not  permanent,  and  by  next  day  had
entirely  disappeared.

On  the  second  occasion  I  tried  directly  after  the  waking-stage
was  complete ;  and  then  the  recognition  was  immediate  and  certain.
But  in  a  few  minutes  it  had  become  vague  and  dim,  and  before
the  end  of  the  day  it  had  again  completely  ceased.

The  following  is  the  complete  contemporary  record  of  Mrs.  Piper's
somnambulic  utterances  during  the  first  of  these  two  waking  stages.
The  ejaculations  happen  to  be  foreign  to  the  present  case,  since
they  refer  to  the  concerns  of  a  stranger  who  had  recently  had  a
sitting  but  who  was  now  absent.  Incidentally  I  may  mention  that  the
description  now  given  of  this  sitter's  deceased  mother,  who  had  been
represented  as  communicating  during  the  sitting,  is  correct  and
evidential.

Mr.  Marble  had  also  been  represented  as  communicating  during  a
portion  of  the  same  sitting,  and  that  is  why  I  tried  the  experiment


276


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


which  in  the  sequel  is  described ;  though  I  tried  it  under  better

conditions  after  the  waking  stage  of  the  next  ensuing  sitting,  as
subsequently  reported.

Waking  Stage  of  No.  13.

Myers,  Myers. I  made  it  what  it  is. I  did  it. I  made  it.
Light. William. Franklin. Mildred. My  son.
Mr.  Myers  is  in  the  light  there.
A  lot  of  people  trying  to  get  through.
He  made  it  all  it  was.
(Looking  at  0.  J.  L.) A  man  in  the  body.
A  line. A  line  goes  from  me  to  them.
What  Myers  said  was, — I  made  it  what  it  was.
I  have  more  for  you. Hewitt,  Ewart,  Hewitt. One,  two,
three.

Who  is  Mary,  and  Mary's  son  ?  William.  Franklin.  Franklin.
Franklin.  Alexis.  [These  names,  though  not  all  correct,
have  a  meaning  in  connexion  with  another  sitter ;  and
the  following  is  a  true  description  of  his  deceased  mother.]

She  is  so  beautiful.  Hair  parted  in  the  middle,  puffed  out
a  little  over  ears.

Nose  is  not  very  long  but  straight.

Shuts  her  mouth  like  this,  tight.

Short  and  full  in  cheeks.

Blue  eyes  with  a  little  grey  in  them,  and  she  had  a  little
mark  on  cheek  (touching  right  cheek  not  far  from  mouth.)
She  was  laughing  away. — ■

Isn't  that  funny  1 I  knew  you  were  there,  but  I  could  not

speak  to  you. You  looked  so  small.
You  grew  so  much  larger. Hear  that !  it's  gone.
I  have  got  used  to  the  room  now.
I  saw  a  circle,  kept  going  round  and  round.
Very  light. But  it  has  gone. I  do  not  like  to  come  back

here.

When  the  light  shines  in  I  see  all  sorts  of  things  in  the
room.

Sequel  to  No.  13.
Sitting  lasted  from  11.10  to  1.10.

After  lunch  I  took  eleven  photographs  of  men,  and  asked  Mrs.
Piper  if  she  had  ever  seen  any  of  them. She  looked  over  them,


lviil] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  VIII.


277


hesitating  on  the  one  representing  Mr.  Joseph  Marble  for  some
time,  and  then  picked  that  out  and  said  she  had  seen  that  man
somewhere,  but  she  could  not  remember  where.  Nothing  was  said
by  me  during  the  process,  of  course.

Next  day,  in  the  evening,  I  tested  Mrs.  Piper  again  with  another
set  of  photographs  of  men,  partly  the  same  and  partly  different,
but  containing  among  others  the  critical  one.  This  time,  however,
it  was  looked  at  without  comment  and  without  interest,  and  no
remembrance  of  the  appearance  seemed  to  persist.  She  remembered
the  fact  of  having  recognised  one  before ;  but  when  asked  to  do  it
again,  she  picked  out,  after  much  hesitation,  a  different  one  as  a
possibility,  and  said  that  she  thought  it  had  been  found  in  America
that  the  memory  evaporated  in  time,  and  that  it  was  strongest
within  an  hour  of  the  sitting.  The  test  made  the  day  before  had
been  made  about  an  hour  and  a  half  after  the  sitting.

And  this  is  the  record  of  the  second  of  the  two  waking-stages,  five
months  later :  the  '  Joe '  here  referred  to  is  Mr.  Marble,  who  had
been  represented  as  communicating  during  the  sitting  : —

I  Faking  Stage  of  No.  14.

All  right. I  will. Do  not  like  it.

It  must  be  a  house. Blacker  one.

Black  one. I  do  not  like  it. Do  not  want  you.

I  want  the  other  place. You  look  funny.

I  wonder. Mrs.  Heath  says  he  wants  letter  to  Edith.

Likely  to  be  better. All  the  time  from  now  on.

Mr.  Myers  would  help  Joe  get  matters  clear.

Help  Joe  make  it  completely  clear. I  do  not  know  what  I

had to do with it. Something help persuade  Mr.

Ridge  way  (?)  to  grasp  the  idea  of  it.
You  are  ugly  to  say  the  least. I  never.
I  would  not  look  like  you. I  do  not  like  it  at  all.
If  you  looked  like  Mr.  Myers  you  would  not  look  so  black.
Fine  looking  man,  his  name  is  Joe.

Mr.  Hodgson  keeps  pushing  him  in  the  front  row.  Foreground.
What  is  the  difference  between  [some  name  not  heard]  and

you. Are  you  alive.
(Yes.) There  are  others  more  alive  than  you  are  up  there.
Head  snap. I  was  all  the  time  trying  to  find  out  who  you

were,  and  could  not  place  you  at  all.


278


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


You  looked  so  small. Then  a  veil  came  down.

Flowers  and  things  I  saw. A  gentleman  tried  to  tell  me

something,  and  then  I  forgot  it.
Another  snap. I  see  you  plainly.

I  was  so  numb.  I  am  not  numb  now.  My  hands  were  so
heavy.

You  do  not  tease  me. Mr.  Piddington  used  to  tease  me.
He  was  a  large  man  and  then  all  of  a  sudden  he  went  out.
He  was  a  nice  looking  man.

(A  number  of  men's  photographs  were  now  placed  in  a
row  before  her :  she  immediately  pounced  on  one
without  the  slightest  hesitation.)

That  is  the  man  I  saw.  I  saw  him.  That  is  the  man  I
saw.  I  saw  him  up  there :  such  a  nice  face.  I  could
see  him.  I  could  see  Mr.  Hodgson  pushing  him  up  to
the  front.

[The  selection  was  correct;  the  photograph  was  one  of  the
person  she  calls  Joe,  i.e.  of  the  late  Mr.  Joseph  Marble.]

Sequel  to  No.  14  an  hour  or  so  later.

A  sitting,  was  it  not? Perhaps  my  going  to  London  was  a

good  thing  for  me.
When  Mrs.  Sidgwick  said  she  was  glad,  I  was  very  much

astonished,  because  she  does  not  say  anything  at  all.

Mr.  Piddington  told  me  he  was  a  medium  too.

(I  now  again  put  the  photographs  in  front  of  her.  She
looked  at  them  as  if  for  the  first  time,  and  said)

I  do  not  know  the  photographs.

(She  then  hesitated  long  over  the  right  one,  saying  she  had
'seen  him  somewhere,'  but  finished  up  by  saying)

No,  I  do  not  know.

Comment.

The  result  of  this  experiment,  with  other  experiences  relating  to
the  description  of  the  personal  appearance  of  a  person  spoken  of
in  the  trance,  has  satisfied  me  that — whatever  may  be  the  cause —
a  visual  likeness  of  the  people  supposed  to  be  communicating  in
the  trance  is  sometimes  really  impressed at the time upon  the


lviil] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  VIII.  279

subconscious  mind  of  Mrs.  Piper.  A  veridical  dream  impression
seems  to  be  caused  in  these  cases;  but  like  other  dream  impressions
it  fades.  The  visual  impression  is  merely  an  extension  of  the
impression  of  character  and  of  speech,  which  is  also  impressed  upon
the  same  stratum  of  her  subconsciousness,  and  is  of  a  similarly
evanescent  character.

During  trance  undoubtedly  her  subconsciousness  is  thus,  at  least
occasionally,  in  touch  with  a  simulacrum  or  hallucinatory  representa-
tion of  a  deceased  person, — whatever  be  the  cause — a  telepathic
impression  received  from  the  sitter  perhaps,  or  as  appears  more
likely,  from  the  surviving  influence  of  the  deceased  person.

That  much  is  certain;  and  to  deny  that,  is  merely  to  refuse  to
be  informed  by  facts  of  experience.  But  of  what  nature  this
evanescent  but  for  a  time  vivid  impression  of  appearance  and  character
and  personality  really  is,  is  a  more  difficult  question,  on  which  at
present  I  do  not  feel  competent  to  express  an  opinion.  For  what
it  is  worth,  however,  my  instinct  leads  me  to  judge  that  it  is  not
solely  due  to  a  telepathic  impulse  from  the  sitter — in  spite  of  the
fact  that  the  sympathy  and  understanding  of  the  sitter  is  a  great
help,  and  indeed  a  determining  cause  why  one  set  of  impressions  is
produced  and  not  a  totally  different  set.  Undoubtedly  the  existence
of  real  interest  and  affection  on  the  part  of  a  person  present  is  the
awakening  cause  of  any  particular  veridical  impression.  It  is  that
which  determines  the  selection  out  of  the  infinite  multitude  of  other
impressions  which  otherwise  might  equally  well  be  produced.  But
although  sympathy  of  this  kind  is  the  selective  and  determining
cause,  I  do  not  feel  that  it  is  the  creative  or  constructive  cause.
It  appears  to  me  that  there  is  an  agency  or  energy  lying  ready,
which  is  capable  of  arousing  in  the  subconsciousness  of  an  entranced
person,  or  of  persons  endowed  with  automatic  faculty,  a  vast  multi-
tude of  impressions — good  bad  and  indifferent;  and  that  out  of  this
multitude  of  possible  impressions  some  are  selected  with  more  or
less  discrimination  as  appropriate  to  a  particular  case, — the  presence
of  a  sitter  being  the  detent  or  trigger  which  liberates  or  guides  the
energy  in  one  direction  and  not  in  another.


End  of  the  present  report  on  the  Joseph  Marble  series.


280  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  [part

CHAPTER  IX.
SUPPLEMENTARY  REMARKS.

Phinuit.

It  was  of  some  interest  to  me  to  see  what  the  Controls  of  recent
times  had  to  say  about  the  ancient  Control  calling  itself  Phinuit ;
and  accordingly  I  asked  questions  in  Sitting  No.  11,  of  which  the
record  stands  as  follows  : —

0.  J.  L.  May  I  ask  a  question  ?  Does  '  Phinuit '  mean  anything  to
you  1

You  mean  Dr.  Phinuit.  Oh  yes,  we  see  him  occasionally,
friend ;  he  is  in  another  sphere  of  this  life,  no  longer
earth-bound,  and  he  is  very  well  and  very  happy.

0.  J.  L.  He  was  a  friend  of  mine.  [By  this  I  meant  that  during  the
old  Piper  sittings  I  was  on  friendly  and  even  affectionate
terms  with  this  curious  and  not  universally  appreciated
impersonator.]

Could  you  by  any  possibility  be  the  friend  on  earth  whom
he  called  '  Captain '  ?

0.  J.  L.  Yes  indeed,  that  is  me.

(Excitement  in  hand.)

Would  you  like  to  see  and  speak  with  him  1

0.  J.  L. I  should  if  it  did  him  no  harm.

Oh  no  harm  in  the  least ;  he  is  beyond  harm,  friend ;  he
has  so  progressed.  He  will  no  doubt  be  glad  to  return.
We  will  speak  with  him  and  report  his  doings.  This
also.

0.  J.  L.  Will  you  give  him  my  love  1

I  will  give  him  your  love  certainly  with  great  pleasure.
He  is  a  much  better  spirit  than  he  was  thought  to  have
been.  He  fell  in  with  the  wrong  element  to  begin  with.
U.D.  Wrong  i.e.  on  the  earthly  side.  I  will  see  him
and  report  at  our  next  meeting.  R.


lviii  ] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  IX.  281

And  at  the  next  sitting  at  which  I  was  present  the  following
came  : —

We  found  Phinuit,  and  gave  him  your  message.  He  sends
his  love  in  return  and  says  if  you  would  like  to  speak
with  him,  really,  he  would  endeavour  to  return  to  you

through  the  light  at  our  next  meeting ;  and  he  says

he  remembers  you  and  your  companion — with  deepest
affection  and  appreciation  of  his  anxious  efforts  to  tell
of  our  world  and  its  inhabitants — —  —

0.  J.  L.  Well,  I  do  not  know  that  it  would  be  good  for  the  machine
to  ask  him  to  return  ;  moreover  I  am  not  sure  that  we
shall  have  another  sitting  here.

You  must  speak  to  +  about  his  returning  next  time  through
the  voice,  which  he  would  be  glad  to  do  himself.  U.D.
R.

0.  J.  L.  Please  thank  him,  but  I  do  not  know  that  there  is  any
object  in  getting  him  to  speak.

Oh  yes.  Well  friend,  we  were  about  to  say  that  he,  Dr.
Phinuit  is  not  in  the  least  anxious  to  return  to  earth
again,  as  he  had  quite  enough  while  he  was  there.

0.  J.  L.  Very  well  then,  please  remember  me  to  him  kindly.

Yes,  we  certainly  will  do  so.

I  don't  know  whether  it  was  wise  thus  to  discourage  a  temporary
return  of  Phinuit.  The  fact  is,  I  felt  it  to  be  rather  too  much  of  a
responsibility  to  interfere  with  the  conditions  of  control ;  especially  as
the  entry  of  Phinuit,  in  past  times,  had  been  usually  accompanied
with  contortions  and  some  slight  apparent  discomfort.  Tiie  oncoming
of  the  trance  is  now-a-days  so  placid  that  I  thought  it  best  to  leave
well  alone ;  but  I  confess  that  it  would  have  been  interesting  to  see
whether  the  Phinuit  personality  would  have  reappeared,  with  all  its
original  peculiarities  unchanged.

Concluding  Observations.

I  have  not  reported  all  the  sittings  at  which  I  was  present — it
would  be  tedious  to  do  so.  Those  held  with  Prof.  Muirhead  are
omitted  because  they  were  not  specially  good,  and  it  is  a  tax  upon
the  reader  to  introduce  him  unnecessarily  to  a  further  set  of  relatives.


282


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


The  controls  did  not  treat  him  from  the  Professorial  point  of  view,
but  from  the  domestic,  just  as  they  used  to  in  the  Phinuit  days.
I  need  hardly  point  out  how  much  more  easy  it  would  be  to  "get
up "  Professorial  details  than  obscure  family  incidents.  Those  how-
ever are  what  are  still  attended  to  :  so  every  series  of  sittings  with
a  stranger  involves  trouble  analogous  to  that  which  must  be  taken
when  beginning  to  read  a  new  novel ;  and  unless  the  novel  is  fairly
good,  the  trouble  is  not  worth  while.

The  sittings  omitted  do  not  appear  to  me  to  throw  any  additional
light  upon  the  procedure ;  and  the  question  arises — what  is  the
outcome  of  it  all,  so  far  as  my  own  impression  of  the  above  series
of  facts  is  concerned.

On  the  whole,  they  tend  to  render  certain  the  existence  of  some
outside  intelligence  or  control,  distinct  from  the  consciousness,  and
as  far  as  I  can  judge  from  the  subconsciousness  also,  of  Mrs.  Piper
or  other  medium.  And  they  tend  to  render  probable  the  working-
hypothesis,  on  which  I  choose  to  proceed,  that  that  version  of  the
nature  of  the  intelligences  which  they  themselves  present  and  favour
is  something  like  the  truth.  In  other  words  I  feel  that  we  are  in
secondary  or  tertiary  touch — at  least  occasionally — with  some  stratum
of  the  surviving  personality  of  the  individuals  who  are  represented
as  sending  messages.

I  call  the  touch  secondary,  because  it  is  always  through  the  medium
and  not  direct;  and  I  call  it  generally  tertiary,  because  it  represents
itself  as  nearly  always  operating  through  an  agency  or  medium  on
that  side  also — an  agency  which  calls  itself  'Rector'  or  'Phinuit.'
That  these  latter  impersonations  are  really  themselves  individuals  I
do  not  venture  either  to  assert  or  deny  ;  but  it  is  difficult  or  impossible
to  bring  them  to  book,  and  an  examination  of  their  nature  may  be
deferred  :  it  is  the  impersonation  of  verifiable  or  terrestrially  known
individuals  to  which  it  behoves  us  in  the  first  instance  to  pay
attention.

Very  well  then,  I  feel  bound  to  say  that  in  the  old  days  when
conversing  with  the  Gurney  control  through  Mrs.  Piper,  as  reported
in  Chapter  II.,  I  felt  very  much  as  if  I  were  conversing  under  diffi-
culties with  Edmund  Gurney.  And  he  appeared  to  be  in  real  '  control '
for  the  time — so  that  lapses  and  uncertainties  and  occasional  con-
fusions, in  his  case,  were  rather  rare.

But  when  the  Myers  and  Hodgson  controls  now  send  messages
through  Mrs.  Piper,  as  above  reported,  I  have  very  little  feeling  of
that  kind. They  seemed  in  my  case  rather  shadowy,  and  so  to


lviil] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  IX.  283


speak  uninteresting,  communicators.  It  is  true  I  did  not  give  them
much  chance  or  encouragement,  and  under  better  treatment  they
flourished  and  blossomed  as  reported  by  Mr.  Piddington  ;  but  if  my
opinion  had  to  depend  on  my  own  Piper  sittings  alone,  I  should  not
be  strongly  impressed  by  these  personalities.

When  '  Isaac  Thompson '  was  the  communicator,  however,  I  was
favourably  impressed  on  the  whole,  and  consider  that  this  part  of
the  record  strengthens  rather  than  weakens  the  case  not  only  for
survival  but  for  intelligent  and  affectionate  intercourse.  In  particular
I  think  that  the  sitting  reported  by  Dr.  Hodgson  from  America,
when  '  Isaac  Thompson '  appeared  on  the  scene  after  his  son  had  left
for  England,  was  sjaecially  good  and  dramatic  (pp.  166,  7).

The  "Myers"  utterances  which  have  impressed  me  most  were  those
obtained  at  two  sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson  (then  of  Hampstead)
soon  after  his  decease, — as  reported  above  in  somewhat  abbreviated
form,  in  Chapter  IV.,  which  is  perhaps  one  of  the  most  notable
portions  of  this  whole  document.  It  is  of  course  to  be  admitted
that  few  things — perhaps  nothing — obtained  through  a  medium  so
well  acquainted  with  Mr.  Myers  as  Mrs.  Thompson  was  can  be
regarded  as  strictly  evidential ;  but,  in  spite  of  that,  the  dramatic
verisimilitude  was  very  marked — especially  in  some  of  the  omitted
fragments.

There  remains  the  Mrs.  Grove  case,  at  some  of  which  I  was  present.
This  series,  for  several  reasons,  must  be  regarded  as  the  most  strictly
evidential  of  all ;  and  a  decided  unity  of  character  and  of  message
is  preserved,  no  matter  through  what  medium  the  communication
comes.  But  the  hypothesis  of  telepathy  from  the  sitter,  if  stretched
sufficiently,  will  cover  all  the  reported  portions  :  and  in  such  a  case
this  notion  constitutes  a  difficulty  which  can  hardly  be  avoided.
At  the  same  time  I  must  say  that  I  find  this  hypothesis  not  very
probable, — it  does  not  at  all  satisfy  my  mind  as  an  explanation.  On
the  whole  the  surviving  and  communicating  intelligence  hypothesis
commends  itself  to  me  as  the  most  likely.

Readers  who  happen  to  know  that  I  myself  am  convinced  of  the
fact  of  the  survival  of  human  personality  beyond  bodily  death  may
be  surprised  at  this  critical  attitude,  since  they  may  think  such  an
attitude  inconsistent  with  that  belief.  But  the  main  question  before
us  is  whether  the  additional  evidence  now  adduced  strengthens  the
previous  verdict  in  favour  of  the  possibility  of  conscious  communi-
cation. It  is  not  easy  to  strengthen  it,  because  it  was  already-
strong.


284


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


[part


A  careful  analysis  and  examination  of  the  facts  both  for  and  against
the  genuine  activity  of  deceased  communicators  has  been  made  by
Dr.  Hodgson,  and  will  be  found  in  his  Report  in  Proc.  Vol.  13,
pages  357-412.  He  is  led  distinctly  to  countenance,  and  indeed  to
champion,  a  cautious  and  discriminating  form  of  spiritistic  theory, —
not  as  a  working  hypothesis  only,  but  as  truly  representing  part  of
the  facts.  His  experience  was  so  large,  and  his  critical  faculty  so
awake,  that  such  a  conclusion  of  his  is  entitled  to  the  gravest  con-
sideration. If  I  had  to  pronounce  a  prematurely  decided  opinion,
my  own  view  would  agree  with  his.

The  old  series  of  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  convinced  me  of  survival,
for  reasons  which  I  should  find  it  hard  to  formulate  in  any  strict
fashion,  but  that  was  their  distinct  effect.  They  also  made  me
suspect — or  more  than  suspect — that  surviving  intelligences  were  in
some  cases  consciously  communicating, — 3res  in  some  few  cases  con-
sciously ;  though  more  usually  the  messages  came  in  all  probability
from  an  unconscious  stratum,  being  received  by  the  medium  in  an
inspirational  manner  analogous  to  psychometry.

This  Report's  usefulness,  if  it  has  any,  must  chiefly  lie  in  the
additional  information  to  be  gleaned  from  it  regarding  the  process
and  the  difficulties  of  conscious  inter-communion  between  our  own
minds  and  whatever  stratum  of  consciousness  is  operating  on  them
from  the  other  side.  The  hypothesis  of  surviving  intelligence  and
personality, — not  only  surviving  but  anxious  and  able  with  difficulty
to  communicate, — is  the  simplest  and  most  straightforward,  and  the
only  one  that  fits  all  the  facts.  But  the  process  of  communication
is  sophisticated  by  many  influences,  so  that  it  is  very  difficult,
perhaps  at  present  impossible,  to  disentangle  and  exhibit  clearly  the
part  that  each  plays.

One  thing  that  conspicuously  suggests  itself  is  that  we  are  here
made  aware,  through  these  trivial  but  illuminating  facts,  of  a  process
which  by  religious  people  has  always  been  recognised  and  insisted
on,  namely  the  direct  interaction  of  incarnate  with  discarnate  mind, —
that  is  to  say,  an  intercourse  between  mind  and  mind  in  more
than  one  grade  of  existence,  by  means  apart  from,  and  independent
of,  the  temporary  mechanism  of  the  body.

The  facts  indeed  open  the  way  to  a  perception  of  the  influence  of
spirit  generally,  as  a  guiding  force  in  human  and  terrestrial  affairs, —
active  not  under  the  exceptional  circumstances  of  trance  alone,  but
always  and  constantly  and  normally, — so  uniformly  active  in  fact
that  by  ordinary  people  its  agency  is  undetected  and  unperceived.


lviii.] On  Trance  Communications,  Chapter  IX.


285


Most  people  are  far  too  busy  to  attend :  they  are  too  thoroughly
occupied  with  what  for  the  time  are  certainly  extremely  important
affairs.  A  race  of  inspired  people  would  be  hopelessly  unpractical,
though  Society  is  usually  grateful  for  the  existence  and  utterance  of
a  few  individuals  of  this  type.

The  fact  that  these  communications  are  obtained  through  sub-
conscious agency  is  sometimes  held  to  militate  against  their  importance
as  a  subject  of  study.  But  have  not  men  of  genius  sometimes  testi-
fied that  brilliant  ideas  do  surge  up  into  their  consciousness  from
some  submerged  stratum,  at  a  time  when  they  are  incompletely
awake  to  the  things  of  this  world1?  And  ordinary  people  are  aware
that  a  brown  study  favours  the  conscious  reception  of  something
presumably  akin  to  inspiration,  by  relegating  ordinary  experience  to
the  background,  and  thereby  enabling  new  and  unfamiliar  ideas  to
enter  or  germinate  in  the  mind.

A  trance,  or  any  state  of  complete  unconsciousness,  renders  the
normal  though  obscure  activity  of  an  unfamiliar  psychical  region
still  more  manifest.  Not  indeed  to  the  patient, — who  is  unaware  of
the  whole  phenomenon,  or  remembers  it  only  after  the  indistinct  and
temporary  fashion  of  a  dream, — but  to  an  observer  or  experimenter,
who  is  allowed  to  enlarge  his  experience  and  to  receive  impressions
by  deputy ;  thereby  attaining,  at  second  hand,  some  of  the  privileges
of  intuition  or  clairvoyance,  or  even  of  genius,  while  he  himself
remains  in  an  ordinary  and  businesslike  condition.  His  experience
in  fact  may  be  regarded  as  an  undeserved,  and  therefore  only
moderately  valuable,  kind  of  vicarious  inspiration.


286


Professor  A.  C.  Pigou,


[part


IV.

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH  AND SURVIVAL  AFTER
BODILY  DEATH.

By  Professor  A.  C.  Pigou.

1.  The  question  whether  men  and  women  survive  bodily
death  contains  three  ambiguities.  There  is  ambiguity  in  the
term  survive ;  ambiguity  in  the  term  man  or  woman ;  and
ambiguity  in  the  use  of  the  plural  "  men  and  women."

The  ambiguity  connected  with  "  survive "  is  philosophical.
If  any  one  asks  whether  cats  survive  immersion  in  water,  it
does  not  occur  to  us  to  bring  to  bear  on  that  problem  a
metaphysical  discussion  concerning  the  reality  of  time ;  we
assume,  in  fact,  that  time  is  real,  and  we  mean  by  "  surviving
immersion "  being  alive  after  immersion.  When,  however,  our
question  relates  to  men  and  women  and  bodily  death  the
idealist  philosopher  enters  the  arena  and  claims  that  time,
with  all  that  therein  is,  is  a  purely  subjective  condition  of
human  perception ;  that  in  reality  there  is  no  after  and  no
before ;  that  survival  and  death  alike  are  appearance ;  that
men  and  women,  as  spirit,  neither  survive  nor  die,  but  in
some  sense  eternally  are.  This  doctrine  I  do  not  propose  to
discuss  here.  To  any  one  who  accepts  it  the  question  of
survival  in  the  ordinary  sense  must  seem  trivial,  if  not  mean-
ingless. For  my  own  part,  I  provisionally  hold  the  opinion
that  time  is  real,  and  I  address  this  paper  only  to  persons
who  share  that  view.

The  second  ambiguity  in  our  question  concerns  the  term
man  or  woman.  In  ordinary  life  this  term  carries  with  it  an
idea  of  physical  bodies.  From  the  present  standpoint  it  is
obvious  that  that  idea  must  be  eliminated.  The  thing  about
which  debate  should  turn  is,  I  suppose,  what  we  somewhat
vaguely  term  the  conscious  mind. But  what,  for  our  purpose,


lviil]  Psychical  Research  and  Survival.  287

is  this  entity  ?  When  we  ask  whether  a  seed  survives  burning,
the  answer  may  be  different  according  as  seed  is  understood
to  mean,  on  the  one  hand,  a  mere  quantity  of  matter  or,  on  the
other  hand,  matter  in  a  special  form  with  special  properties.
We  are  in  the  same  difficulty  with  regard  to  "  conscious  mind."
The  idea  of  absorption  of  the  individual  consciousness  into  a
larger  Whole,  and  its  survival  somehow  in  the  Whole,  is  no
less  familiar  than  that  of  personal  survival.  This  complication
is  the  more  serious,  at  least  for  me,  on  account  of  my  complete
inability  to  grasp  or  understand  the  notion  of  absorption  of
one  conscious  mind  into  another,  I  do  not,  however,  wish  to
debate  this  complication.  Perhaps  for  the  present  purpose  we
may  so  far  compromise  as  to  say  that  conscious  mind  survives
if,  after  the  death  of  a  person,  there  is  added  to  the  Whole,
whether  absorbed  in  it  or  not,  a  conscious  mind  that  has  some
sort  of  continuity  in  memory  and  quality  with  the  person  who
has  died.  I  am  quite  aware  that  this  is  exceedingly  unsatis-
factory and  vague,  but  the  difficulty  seems  to  be  inherent  in
the  subject.

The  remaining  ambiguity,  that  involved  in  the  use  of  the
plural,  "  men  and  women,"  is  obvious.  "  Men  and  women  "  may
mean  either  "  all  men  and  women  "  or  "  any  men  and  women."
It  seems  to  me  plain  that  psychical  research  can  never  give
a  direct  answer  to  the  question  whether  all  men  and  women
survive  death.  A  proof  that  some  survive  would  give  but
slight  warrant  for  the  wider  thesis.  In  what  follows,  there-
fore, I  shall  understand  by  "  men  and  women  "  "  any  men  and
women." Do  any  men  and  women  survive  bodily  death  ?

§  2.  The  question  thus  framed  and  limited  is  believed  by
some  persons  to  be  answered  affirmatively  by  an  appeal  to
revelation  or  to  the  beneficence  of  God.  In  like  manner  it  is
believed  by  other  persons  to  be  answered  negatively  by  legiti-
mate inference  from  the  science  of  physiology.  I  am  not
myself  able  to  accept  either  of  these  lines  of  argument.  The
question  of  survival  seems  to  me  to  be  on  a  par  with  the
question  whether  some  entity  that  we  are  able  to  conceive
exists  in  fact  in  the  real  world.  The  answer  to  this  cannot
be  found  by  a  priori  but  only  by  a  posteriori  study :  it  is  a
matter  of  evidence  and  probabilities  of  the  sort  commonly
investigated  by  science.


288


Professor  A.  G.  Pigou.


[part


§  3.  In  recent  publications  of  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research  there  is  material  that,  in  the  opinion  of  several  com-
petent persons,  makes  it  probable  that  Frederic  Myers,  Henry
Sidgwick,  and  others  have,  in  some  sense,  survived  bodily
death.  This  material  it  is  the  business  of  my  paper  to
examine.  Before,  however,  that  task  is  attempted,  it  is
necessary  to  see,  so  far  as  we  can,  how  the  problem  stands
apart  from  this  new  evidence.  Let  us  suppose — what  is
approximately  the  case — that,  apart  from  these  data,  there
is  no  direct  evidence  whatever  for  the  survival  of  any
dead  man  or  woman.  Should  we,  in  that  case,  say  that
it  is  an  even  chance  whether  people  survive  or  not,  or
that  survival  is  exceedingly  improbable,  or  that  there  is  no
determinate  probability  about  the  matter — no  alleviation  what-
ever to  our  ignorance  ?  I  have  no  confident  opinion  on  this
difficult  point.  The  interdependence  of  mind  and  brain  in
life  as  we  know  it  does  not,  of  course,  logically  imply  that
the  two  perish  together,  but  it  does,  as  it  seems  to  me,  make
that  event  in  some  small  measure  probable.  On  the  strength
of  this— the  one  relevant  fact  in  our  deep  ignorance, — I  am
inclined  to  say  that  initially,  and  apart  from  the  new  evidence,
survival  is  somewhat  improbable.  The  hypotheses  of  survival
and  of  non-survival  do  not  start  exactly  on  a  level :  the  scales
are  inclined  in  favour  of  the  latter.

§  4.  The  evidence  that  psychical  research  has  to  offer  is
of  two  sorts :  first,  the  provision  of  information  unknown  to
any  living  person,  but  known  to  some  person  who  is  dead ;
secondly,  the  performance  of  some  act  not  easily  explained  as
the  result  of  the  agency  of  living  persons,  and  claiming  to  be
due  to  a  dead  person.  Of  these  two  sorts  of  evidence  the
former  is  at  present  practically  non-existent.  The  tests  pre-
pared by  means  of  sealed  envelopes  have  not  been  successful :
there  is  nothing  substantial  enough  to  afford  the  basis  for  an
argument.  With  the  second  sort  of  evidence,  however,  the
case  is  different.  It  again  may  conveniently  be  separated
under  two  heads :  first,  the  impression  of  individuality  con-
veyed, to  those  who  knew  Myers  and  the  other  alleged  controls
when  alive,  by  the  general  form  and  content  of  the  automatic
speech  and  script  claiming  to  come  from  them ;  secondly,  the
cross-correspondences  recently  discovered  between  the  script  of


LVIII.]


Psychical  Research  and  Survival.


289


various  automatists.  The  former  sort  of  evidence  I  shall  not
consider  here.  What  I  have  to  say  refers  exclusively  to  the
latter.

'  §  5.  The  three  volumes  of  the  Society's  Proceedings  which
deal  with  the  automatic  writing  produced  by  Mrs.  Holland,
Mrs.  Verrall,  and  Mrs.  Piper  under  the  alleged  influence  of
various  discarnate  intelligences  make  a  case  for  survival  that
is  prima  facie  sufficiently  strong  to  warrant  careful  study.  The
phenomena  observed  consist  mainly  of  cross-correspondences
between  the  contents  of  the  scripts  of  two  or  more  automatists
— cross-correspondences  announced  in  the  script  themselves  and
claiming  to  be  the  deliberate  work  of  Myers,  "  Talbot  Forbes,"
or  some  other  "  control."  The  cross-correspondences  that  have
been  discovered  may  be  divided,  according  to  Mr.  Gerald
Balfour's  nomenclature,  into  two  groups,  simple  correspondences
and  complementary  correspondences.1  An  ideal  simple  corre-
spondence would  occur  if  an  idea  given  through  one  automatist
were  transferred  directly  to  another :  an  ideal  complementary
correspondence  if  ideas  unmeaning  individually,  but  significant
in  combination,  were  given  through  several  automatists.  In
the  concrete,  o'f  course,  it  may  not  always  be  easy  to  decide
with  which  of  these  two  groups  any  assigned  correspondence
should  be  classed.  In  the  opinion,  however,  of  Miss  Johnson
and  other  investigators  there  is  a  fair  number  of  cases  that  are
not  marginal,  but  can  be  labelled  definitely  as  belonging  to
the  one  or  the  other  kind.

§  6.  The  question  whether  the  facts  that  have  been  obtained
make  it  probable  that  Myers  and  the  others  really  survive
breaks  up  naturally  into  three  parts  :  first,  we  have  to
decide  how  probable  it  is  that  there  is  any  common  cause
operating  on  the  different  scripts  and  responsible  for  their
correspondences  ;  secondly,  if  there  is  such  a  cause,  how  prob-
able it  is  that  this  cause  is  some  discarnate  mind ;  thirdly,
if  the  cause  is  some  discarnate  mind,  how  probable  it  is  that
it  is  the  mind  of  that  deceased  person  with  whom  it  claims
to  be  identical. These  questions  I  shall  discuss  in  order.

§  7.  First :  suppose  that  there  are  two  novels  written  by
two  different  people.  Three  things  are  possible :  the  plot
and  the  language  of  each  may  have  been  fashioned  by  causes

1  The  Hibbert  Journal,  Jan.  1909,  p.  247.
T


290


Professor  A.  C.  Pigou.


[part


entirely  independent  of  one  another :  they  may  have  been
fashioned  by  some  independent  and  some  common  causes ;  or
they  may  have  been  fashioned  entirely  by  common  causes.
Let  us  imagine  that  the  two  novels  are  identical  throughout
word  for  word.  We  should  then  reason  in  this  way :  if
they  have  been  fashioned  by  independent  causes,  this  result
is  extremely  improbable.  Hence,  unless  the  existence  of  a
common  cause  is  also  extraordinarily  improbable  a  priori,
such  a  cause  has  almost  certainly  been  at  work.  The  proba-
bility of  this  conclusion  is  not,  except  in  a  special  case,
measured  by  the  improbability  of  the  correspondence  arising
under  a  regime  of  independent  causes ;  for  its  magnitude  is
affected  by  the  a  priori  probability  of  the  existence  of  a
common  cause.  Still,  in  such  a  case  as  I  have  supposed,
everybody  would  judge,  and  that  rightly,  that  there  was
almost  certainly  a  common  cause  in  operation.  The  problem
is,  however,  more  complicated  in  the  concrete.  Let  us  imagine
that  the  novels  are  not  identical,  but  have  some  measure  of
resemblance.  We  know  that  there  are  some  common  causes
affecting  contemporary  novelists  in  the  same  country : — they
speak  the  same  language ;  they  live  in  the  same  atmosphere  ;
they  move  among  the  same  events ; — and  we  wish  to  know
whether  the  resemblance  is  sufficient  to  make  it  probable  that
any  further  common  cause  has  been  at  work.  To  such  a
problem  no  precise  answer  can  be  given  in  general  terms ;
we  have  to  balance  up  in  our  minds  the  degree  of  observed
resemblance,  the  importance  of  the  known  common  causes,
and  the  a  priori  probability  of  the  existence  of  an  unknown
common  cause,  and  having  clone  this,  to  judge  as  best  we
may.  This  is  the  class  of  problem  presented  by  the  corre-
sponding scripts  of  Mrs.  Verrall,  Mrs.  Piper,  and  Mrs.  Holland:
— is  the  measure  of  correspondence  sufficient  to  make  probable
the  operation  of  some  common  cause  over  and  above  that
provided  by  similarity  of  environment  and  interests  ?  This  is
a  cpuestion  which  everybody  must  answer  for  himself  after  a
study  of  the  scripts.  Personally,  I  agree  with  the  judgment
formed  by  practically  all  those  who  have  investigated  the
matter,  that  the  presence  of  some  special  common  cause  is
probable  in  a  fairly  high  degree — the  sort  of  degree  in  which
I  should  judge  it  to  be  probable  that  there  was  a  common


LYIII.]


Psychical  Research  and  Survival.


291


source  to  which  both  St.  Luke  and  St.  Matthew  had  access
in  writing  their  gospels.

|  8.  If  so  much  be  granted,  we  have  next  to  ask  how
probable  it  is  that  this  assumed  common  cause  is  the  influ-
ence of  a  discarnate  mind.  I  shall  simplify  the  problem  by
excluding  at  once  the  hypothesis  of  conscious  fraud  or  collusion
between  the  various  automatists  concerned.  This  hypothesis  is
not,  of  course,  impossible,  but  it  is  (as  I  think)  iu  view  of
all  the  circumstances,  so  improbable  as  not  to  deserve  serious
consideration.  We  are,  therefore,  left  with  the  alternative
hypotheses  of  the  influence  through  some  supernormal  channel
of  an  incarnate  mind  or  of  the  influence  of  a  discarnate  mind.
It  is  not  permitted,  be  it  observed,  at  this  point  to  turn  round
and  declare  that  both  these  hypotheses  are  grotesque  and  im-
possible. Anybody  who  takes  that  view  must  have  parted
company  with  me  earlier.  If  collusion  and  fraud  are  ruled
out,  to  concede  that  some  common  cause  is  probable  is  prac-
tically equivalent  to  conceding  that  one  of  these  causes  is
probable.  What  we  have  to  do,  therefore,  is  simply  to  consider
the  relative  probability  of  supernormal  incarnate  and  of  dis-
carnate agency.

§  9.  At  this  point  we  are  confronted  directly  with  a  logical
difficulty  that  has  long  been  haunting  the  discussion.  When
we  have  to  judge  whether  it  is  more  probable  that  our  gyp
or  our  bedmaker's  son  is  responsible  for  the  abstraction  of
cigarettes,  we  in  general  start  fair.  We  know  that  they  are
both  agencies  who  might  have  performed  the  deed.  But  imagine
this  case.  Suppose  it  to  be  certain  that  the  cigarettes  were
taken  either  by  the  gyp  or  by  the  son  of  our  bedmaker,  but
that  it  is  a  priori  somewhat  improbable  that  our  bedmaker  has
a  son.  Suppose,  furthermore,  that  our  cigarettes  are  so  care-
fully concealed  and  our  gyp  is  of  such  mean  intelligence  that
it  is  a  priori  very  improbable  he  could  discover  them.  In
such  a  case  as  that,  how  are  we  to  determine  the  relative
final  probability  that  our  bedmaker  has  a  son  who  took  the
cigarettes  or  that  our  gyp  took  them  ?  That  problem — it  has
its  parallel  in  the  speculations  of  physical  science — is  closely
analogous  to  the  one  with  which  we  are  now  dealing.  The
subliminal  self  corresponds  to  the  gyp :  a  discarnate  intelli-
gence, Myers  or  another,  to  the  hypothetical  bedmaker's  son.


292


Professor  A.  C.  Pigou.


[part


The  argument  in  favour  of  the  discarnate  intelligence  endeavours
to  show  that  the  subliminal  consciousness  is  not  sufficiently
competent  to  bring  about  the  effect  that  has  in  fact  occurred.
In  such  a  discussion  it  seems  almost  impossible  to  lay  down
any  canons  of  judgment.  The  gyp,  since  we  know  him  to
exist,  has  some  initial  advantage  ;  the  bedmaker's  son  may  not
exist  at  all,  and,  if  he  does  exist,  may,  for  all  we  know,  be
even  less  intelligent  than  the  gyp,  and  less  competent  than  he
to  discover  where  the  cigarettes  are  concealed.  On  the  other
hand,  a  bedmaker's  son,  particularly  a  bedmaker's  discarnate
son,  may  possess  powers  of  discovery  and  abstraction  undreamt
of  in  a  gyp's  philosophy.  The  only  conclusion  to  which  I  can
come  is  that,  if  the  problem  is  presented  in  the  general  form
in  which  I  have  stated  it,  no  solution  can  be  found.

§  10.  The  actual  problem  which  the  new  facts  published  by
the  Psychical  Research  Society  present  does  not,  however,
seem  to  me  so  difficult  as  this.  If  the  abstraction  of  cigarettes
from  places  similar  to  that  in  which  I  had  concealed  mine
could  be  shown  to  be  an  act  of  the  same  class  as  many  acts
which  my  gyp  was  known  to  perform,  I  should  conclude  at
once  that  he  was  the  probable  culprit,  and  should  certainly
not,  on  the  evidence,  suspend  judgment  between  him  and  a
hypothetical  and  a  priori  somewhat  improbable  bedmaker's
son.  In  like  manner,  if  the  subliminal  consciousness  can  be
shown  to  be  responsible  for  the  same  class  of  phenomena  as
these  recent  correspondences,  it  is,  and  should  be  judged,  the
probable  cause  of  them  also.  This  conclusion  would  be  in
conformity  with  the  recognised  methods  of  science,  and  is,  I
think,  logically  correct.  The  new  arguments  for  survival
depend  largely  upon  the  thesis  that  the  correspondences  which
have  recently  occurred  are  not  paralleled  by  any  known
operations  of  the  subliminal  self.  If  the  thesis  is  incorrect,
the  argument  dissolves. I  propose  to  contest  the  thesis.

8  11.  Simple  correspondences  between  the  impressions  of  two
automatists  are  well  known  to  occur  under  conditions  which
make  it  probable  that  the  agent  is  the  subliminal  conscious-
ness of  one  of  the  persons  concerned.  If  proof  of  this  is
recpuired,  I  may  cite  the  experiments  recently  conducted  at  a
distance,  sometimes  of  20,  and  sometimes  of  400  miles  between
Miss  Eamsden and Miss Miles. The  experiments  were  not


LVIII.]


Psychical  Research  and  Survival.


293


concerned  with  automatic  writing,  but  consisted  in  attempts
on  the  part  of  Miss  Miles  to  transfer  impressions  of  objects
to  Miss  Eamsden,  Miss  Miles  arranging  to  concentrate  atten-
tion on  some  object,  and  Miss  Eamsden  to  sit  for  impressions
at  times  previously  arranged.  Had  it  merely  happened  that
this  experiment  partially  succeeded  in  its  direct  object,  that
circumstance  would  not  perhaps  have  much  bearing  on  our
present  discussion.  Curiously  enough,  however,  as  Miss  Eams-
den has  observed,  "  those  (impressions)  which  are  the  most
surprisingly  correct  are  some  which  were  not  intentionally
transferred  at  all."1  Miss  Eamsden's  impression  would  refer  to
something  that  had  happened  to  Miss  Miles  in  the  course  of
the  day,  and  not  to  the  object  of  which  she  sought  to  transfer
a  picture  at  the  time  of  the  sitting.  This  circumstance  seems
to  me  to  show  that  the  subliminal  self  of  one  person  is
sometimes  capable  of  influencing  the  perceptions  of  another
apart  from  conscious  will.  Hence,  the  subliminal  self  of,  say,
Mrs.  Verrall,  could  probably  bring  about  a  simple  correspond-
ence between  her  automatic  script  and  that  of  some  other
scribe.  In  explaining  the  simple  correspondences  that  have
occurred  by  the  hypothesis  that  this  is  what  has  in  fact
happened,  we  should  not  need  to  assign  to  the  subliminal  self
any  powers  beyond  those  which  we  already  have  strong  reason
to  believe  that  it  sometimes  possesses.  If,  therefore,  we  had
to  do  only  with  simple  correspondences,  the  proper  conclusion,
as  I  have  already  indicated,  would  be  that  the  subliminal  self
of  one  of  the  automatists  was  probably  responsible.  The  fact
that  the  correspondences  are  claimed  in  the  scripts  themselves
to  be  the  work  of  discarnate  intelligences  is,  in  view  of  the
frequency  with  which  the  subliminal  consciousness  is  known  to
impersonate  real  or  imaginary  people,  quite  inadequate  to  rebut
this  conclusion.

§  12.  It  is  by  no  means  my  intention  to  suggest  that
those  who  have  been  responsible  for  the  recent  investigations
have  ignored  this  consideration.  On  the  contrary,  they  have
fully  realized  its  importance,  and,  because  they  have  realized
this,  have  laid  very  little  stress  upon  cases  of  simple  cor-
respondence. The  weakness  of  such  cases  as  evidence  of  the
action  of  a  discarnate  mind is explicitly  admitted  by  Miss

,  1  Proceedings,  Yol.  XXL,  pp.  92-3.


294


Professor  A.  C.  Pigou.


[part


Johnson  in  her  report  on  The  automatic  writing  of  Mrs.  Holland.
"  If,"  she  writes,  "  we  simply  find  the  same  idea  expressed —
even  though  in  different  forms — by  both  [of  two  automatists]
it  may  most  easily  be  explained  by  telepathy  between  them";1 —
or,  as  I  should  prefer  to  put  it,  by  the  agency  of  the  sub-
liminal self  of  one  or  both  of  them.  The  cases  which,  in  the
view  of  Miss  Johnson,  Mr.  Piddington,  and  others,  do  possess
evidential  value  are  cases,  not  of  simple,  but  of  complemen-
tary correspondences.  "  The  characteristic  of  these  cases,"  Miss
Johnson  writes,  "  or  at  least  of  some  of  them,  is  that  we  do
not  get  in  the  writing  of  one  automatist  anything  like  a
mechanical  verbatim  reproduction  of  phrases  in  the  other ;  we
do  not  even  get  the  same  idea  expressed  in  different  ways.  .  .  .
What  we  get  is  a  fragmentary  utterance  in  one  script,  which
seems  to  have  no  particular  point  or  meaning,  and  another
fragmentary  utterance  in  the  other,  of  an  ecjually  pointless
character ;  but  when  we  put  the  two  together,  we  see  that
they  supplement  one  another,  and  that  there  is  apparently  one
coherent  idea  underlying  both,  but  only  partially  expressed  in
each."  "2  The  question  whether  the  production  of  those  cor-
respondences of  this  class  which  have  hitherto  been  recorded
is  outside  the  powers  that  we  know  in  other  ways  sometimes
to  belong  to  the  subliminal  self  cannot  be  answered  so  easily
as  the  analogous  question  concerning  simple  correspondences.
Nevertheless,  it  can  (as  I  think)  be  answered  quite  decidedly —
in  the  negative.

§  13.  In  the  discussion  of  this  problem  there  is  some
danger  of  confusion  between  the  two  questions,  (1)  whether
the  complementariness  in  complementary  correspondences  is
intentional,  and  (2)  to  what  agent  the  correspondences  are
probably  due.  The  logical  connection  between  these  questions
seems  to  me  to  be  as  follows.  If  it  can  be  shown  that  the
complementariness  in  any  particular  complementary  correspon-
dence is  probably  the  result  not  of  intention  but  of  accident,
the  correspondence  in  question  must  be  regarded,  when  we
come  to  investigate  the  probable  agent,  as  equivalent  to  a
simple  correspondence.  The  manufacture  of  simple  correspon-
dences does  not,  however,  as  has  already  been  argued,  lie
outside  the  known powers  of  the subliminal  consciousness.

1  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXL,  p.  375.  -Ibid.,  p.  375.


LVIII.]


Psychical  Research  and  Survival.


295


Therefore,  to  show  that  intention  is  probably  absent  in  any
set  of  complementary  correspondences  is  equivalent  to  showing
that  the  manufacture  of  these  correspondences  does  not  lie
outside  the  said  known  powers.  This  sort  of  reasoning  affords,
I  think,  a  convenient  method  of  eliminating  from  the  dis-
cussion a  number  of  complementary  correspondences  in  which
the  element  of  complementariness  is  small.  It  is  a  characteristic
of  thought-transference  that  the  percipient  often  fails  to  get
the  word  which  the  agent  is  endeavouring  to  transfer  by  a
direct  process.  Something  like  the  idea  embodied  in  the  word
may  come  first,  or  something  like  the  sound  embodied  in  it,
or  something  connected  somehow  with  either  the  idea  or  the
sound.  In  Miss  Kamsden-s  and  Miss  Miles's  experiments
there  are  two  cases  of  this  sort.  On  one  occasion,  when
Miss  Miles  attempted  to  transfer  Sphinx,  Miss  Ramsdeu
obtained,  among  other  things,  Luxor  in  Egypt : 1  on  another
occasion  when  Bishop  was  the  object  of  the  experiment,
Miss  Eamsdeu  concluded  in  sequence  "  latme,  Bishop  Latimer,
Archbishop." 2  The  same  characteristic  is  observable  in
numerous  cases  recorded  in  Mr.  Piddington's  study  of  Mrs.
Piper,  where  the  controls  undertake  to  transfer  a  particular
word  from  Mrs.  Piper  to  Mrs.  Verrall.  The  word  is  not
given  directly,  but  there  is  an  evident  groping  towards  it,
•attempts  to  get  at  it  now  along  the  route  of  sound,  now
along  that  of  sense.  In  view  of  this  quality  in
thought-transference  we  are  entitled  to  claim  that,  if  the
subliminal  self  of,  say,  Mrs.  Verrall,  were  trying  to  impress
any  given  idea  upon  the  automatic  script  both  of  Mrs.
Verrall  herself  and  of  some  other  automatist,  the  correspon-
dences actually  achieved  would  often  not  be  exact.  The  two
scripts  would,  indeed,  be  orientated  about  the  same  idea ;
but  they  would  be  very  far  from  identical.  If  we  compare
the  word  aimed  at  to  the  bull  of  a  target,  it  is  in  a  high
degree  probable  that  attempts  to  hit  the  bull  would  result
in  shots  scattered  widely  round  it.  In  other  words,  mildly
complementary  correspondences  are  likely  to  result  from
attempts  at  simple  correspondences.  The  complementariness  is
probably  not  intentional,  and  its  presence  has  no  significance.
§14. I do  not  myself  feel,  however,  when  we  come  to

Proceedings,  Vol.  XXI.,  p.  62.  2  Ibid.,  p.  75.


296


Professor  A.  G.  Pigou.


[part


more  complicated  cases,  that  this  roundabout  method  of
approach  is  the  best.  The  question  of  intention  is  a
secondary  one.  A  more  satisfactory  method,  as  it  seems  to
me,  is  to  leave  it  aside  altogether  and  to  ask  quite  directly :
"  Do  the  complementary  correspondences,  the  authorship  of
which  is  now  under  investigation,  differ  in  any  marked
degree  from  other  complementary  correspondences  that  we
have  grounds  for  attributing  to  subliminal  agency  ? "  This  is
all  that  we  need :  for,  if  the  answer  is  in  the  negative,  we
know,  without  delving  behind  the  facts  for  explaining  intentions,,
that  the  phenomena  we  are  studying  fall  within  the  capacity
of  subliminal  agents,  and,  therefore,  on  the  principles  here
adopted,  are  probably  due  to  them.

In  order  to  a  perfect  application  of  this  test,  two  con-
ditions would  be  necessary,  one  of  which,  from  the  nature  of  the
case,  cannot  be  attained,  while  the  other  has  not,  as  a  matter
of  fact,  been  attained  hitherto.  The  first  condition  is  that  we
should  know  for  certain  that  no  discarnate  intelligence  had
a  hand  in  those  complementary  correspondences  which  we
attribute  to  subliminal  agency  and  use  as  a  standard  of  com-
parison for  the  others.  Now,  it  is  evident  that  we  can  never
know  this  for  certain.  In  the  case,  to  which  I  shall  allude
presently,  in  which  Dr.  Verrall  endeavoured  to  impress  three-
Greek  words  upon  Mrs.  Verrall's  script,  it  is  jwssiMe  that  the
discarnate  intelligence  of  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  took  part  in  the
experiment,  and  that,  but  for  his  co-operation,  the  complement-
ariness  that  occurred  between  the  different  scripts  would  not
have  come  about.  This  is,  no  doubt,  possible.  I  do  not,
however,  attach  much  importance  to  such  suggestions.  We
know  that  Dr.  Verrall's  subliminal  consciousness  and  Mrs..
Verrall's  subliminal  consciousness  were  agents ;  we  have  no
evidential  ground  for  believing  that  Dr.  Myers  was  an  agent
at  all,  or  that,  if  an  agent,  he  was  likely  to  be  responsible
for  the  complementary  element  in  the  scripts.  I  hold,  there-
fore, that,  on  the  evidence,  the  complementariness  that  emerged
should  be  assigned,  with  a  high  measure  of  probability,  to  the
action  of  the  incarnate  subliminal  intelligences  which  we  know
to  have  been  at  work,  and  that  the  bare  possibility  of  co-
operation "  from  the  other  side  "  is  not  of  material  significance.

The  second  condition  required  to  make  our  test  perfect  is


lviil]  Psychical  Research  and  Survival.  297


that  the  coroplementariness  which  we  have  grounds  for  attri-
buting to  subliminal  action  should  occur  between  the  scripts
of  different  automatists.  If  we  had  cases  in  which  someone
attempted  to  impress  the  same  idea  upon  several  different
writers,  the  records  of  such  cases  would  constitute  an  excellent
standard  with  which  to  compare  those  complementary  corre-
spondences that  claim  to  flow  from  a  discarnate  mind.  Un-
fortunately, however,  though  experiments  of  this  kind  no  doubt
will  be,  they  have  not  yet  been,  made.  The  best  case  that
is  available  for  our  purpose  is  one  in  which  the  complement-
ariness  which  occurs  is  between  different  scripts  of  the  same-
automatist.  I  grant  that  the  use  of  this  case  leaves  room  for
the  reply  that  the  essential  peculiarity  of  the  Holland-Piper-
Verrall  cross-correspondences  is  just  the  fact  that  it  is  between
the  scripts  of  different  automatists  that  complementariness  occurs.
Such  a  reply,  however,  seems  unsound.  If  the  subliminal  con-
sciousness can  produce  complementariness  between  the  different
scripts  of  one  automatist,  that  seems  to  me  to  give  strong
ground  for  holding  that  it  can  produce  at  least  an  equal
measure  of  complementariness  between  the  scripts  of  different
automatists.  Indeed,  if  the  complementariness  arises  in  any
measure  out  of  a  succession  of  attempts,  that  fall  short  of
success  in  different  ways,  to  bring  some  single  idea  to  the
surface,  we  should  expect  a  'priori  somewhat  greater  diversity
and  more  recondite  complementariness  when  the  attempts  are
made  through  several  persons  of  different  characteristics  and
environment  than  when  they  are  made  through  one  person
only.  Hence,  though  experiments  with  several  automatists  of
the  kind  suggested  above  are  much  to  be  desired,  it  would
seem  that,  meanwhile,  the  use,  as  a  standard  of  comparison,,
of  Dr.  Verrall's  experiment  with  one  automatist  is  thoroughly
well  warranted.  In  short,  the  absence  of  the  two  conditions
that  I  showed  to  be  required  in  order  to  make  our  test  perfect
does  not  prevent  that  test  from  being  very  good.
,  §15.  This  then  is  the  test  proposed.  In  Mrs.  Verrall's  paper
upon  her  own  automatic  writing,  published  in  October,  1906,
there  is  an  account  of  an  attempt  made  by  Dr.  Verrall  to
transfer  telepathically  to  her  automatic  script  the  three  Greek
words  fxovoirwkov  k  aw,  "  to  the  one-horse  dawn,"  a  phrase
connected  with  an  incident  of  his  undergraduate  clays  about,


298


'  Professor  A.  0.  Pigou.


[part


thirty  years  before.1  The  result  of  this  experiment  is  traced
by  Mrs.  Verrall  in  her  script  for  six  months  following.  We
thus  have  a  series  of  attempts — or,  at  least,  it  is  extremely
probable  that  we  have — by  the  subliminal  self  of  one  or  both  of
the  persons  concerned  to  reproduce  a  single  definite  idea  in
the  script  of  one  automatist.  The  test  which  I  propose  to
apply  to  Mr.  Piddington's  and  Miss  Johnson's  records  is  to
see  whether  the  degree  of  complementariness  in  the  corre-
spondences found  in  them  is  in  any  decided  way  more  striking
than  that  which  appears  in  the  different  efforts  of  Mrs.
Verrall's  script  to  produce  Dr.  Verrall's  words.  If  there  is
no  decided  difference  it  seems  to  me  that  the  Holland- Piper  -
Verrall  cross-correspondences  are  also  probably  the  result  of
subliminal  activities.  I  will  first  set  out  two  cases  of  cross-
correspondences  from  Miss  Johnson's  and  Mr.  Piddington's
records,  and  will  then  make  an  analysis,  on  the  same  plan  as
theirs,  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  attempts  at  Dr.  Verrall's  Greek  words.

The  first  case  I  shall  take  is  that  called  in  the  records  Ave
Roma  Immortalis.  The  reason  I  take  it  is  that  Miss  Johnson
writes  in  regard  to  it  " '  Ave  Eoma  Immortalis '  is  the  clearest
case  of  what  I  regard  as  a  typical  cross-correspondence." 2
The  case  is  quite  simple.  There  is  a  picture  in  the  Stanza
d'Eliodoro  in  the  Vatican  which  Miss  Johnson  describes  as
follows :  "  The  picture  is  the  well-known  one  in  the  Stanza
d'Eliodoro  in  the  Vatican.  The  Pope  sits  on  a  white  palfrey,
a  cross-bearer  riding  on  his  left  and  cardinals  on  his  right.
Attila  on  a  black  horse  is  in  the  middle  of  the  picture,  with
a  standard-bearer  in  the  background  on  his  right  and  a  group
of  mounted  Huns  beyond.  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul  are
descending  from  the  sky,  both  bearing  swords,  and  St.  Peter  also
holding  a  large  key  or  keys  in  his  left  hand.  In  the  back-
ground is  seen  the  city  of  Home,  with  the  Coliseum  and
aqueducts."  3

The  following  passages  occur  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script :
March  2  :  "  Primus  inter  pares  ipse  non  nominis  immemor.

Cum  eo  frater  etsi  non  sanguine  animo  consanouineus."

(First  among  his  peers,  himself  not  unmindful  of  his  name ;

with  him  a  brother  related  in  feeling,  though  not  in  blood.)

1  Proceedings,  Vol.  XX.,  p.  156.  -Proceedings,  Vol.  XXI.,  p.  387.

3  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXI.,  p.  299.


LVIII.]


Psychical  Research  and  Survival.


299


March  4 :  "  Pagan  and  Pope  and  Reformer  all  enemies  as
you  think."

In  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  March  7  there  occurs :
"  Ave  Eoma  immortalis. How  could  I  make  it  any  clearer
without  giving  her  the  clue  ?  "  1

There  are  other  details,  but  the  above  quotations  give  the
essence  of  the  process.  This  is  well  described  by  Miss  Johnson
in  her  comment.  "  A  number  of  details  of  the  picture,  cmite
unintelligible  to  herself,  were  given  by  Mrs.  Verrall,  while  a
single  other  important  detail,  clinching  the  whole  matter,  was
given  by  Mrs.  Holland,  accompanied  by  a  remark  implying
that  Mrs.  Verrall  had  been  purposely  kept  in  the  dark." 2

I  shall  now  set  out  a  case  from  Mr.  Piddington's  records.
The  one  I  select  is  that  dealing  with  Abt  Vogler.  I  choose
it  because,  since  it  has  been  summarised  by  Mrs.  Verrall,  I
can  use  her  words  and  need  not  make  a  summary  of  my
own. She  writes :

In  the  case  of  "Abt  Vogler"  we  have  a  cross-correspondence  of
the  complex  type  desired.  The  dates  here  are  important.  On
January  2nd  the  delivery  of  the  "Latin  Message"  was  complete.
On  January  16th  Mr.  Piddington  spoke  to  the  Piper  controls  of  the
importance  of  cross-correspondences,  and  suggested  the  drawing  of  a
triangle  within  a  circle  to  show  that  a  script  formed  part  of  a  cross-
correspondence.  On  January  23rd  and  28th  my  script  contained
allusions  to  Hope,  Star  and  Browning's  Abt  Vogler,  and  on  February
3rd  and  17th  Miss  Verrall's  script  alluded  to  star  and  Browning.
On  February  11th,  before  the  completion  of  Miss  Verrall's  allusion,
but  after  its  beginning,  the  Piper  controls  announced  as  a  cross-
correspondence  "Browning,  Hope  and  Star,"  and  on  March  6th  and
thenceforward  persistently  they  claimed  that  this  particular  cross-
correspondence  was  "  an  answer  to  the  Latin  Message " ;  in  other-
words,  a  cross-correspondence  of  the  complex  type.

Is  this  claim  justified  1  Is  something  discoverable  by  putting  the
statements  together  that  is  not  discoverable  from  any  single  one
of  them  1 I think this  is  so. Mrs.  Piper describes  the  cross-

1  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXI.,  pp.  295-8.  Primus  inter  pares  is  appropriate  to  the
Pope.  If  we  take  the  Pope  as  St.  Peter,  the  brother  in  feeling  might  well  be
St.  Paul.  Pagan  and  Pope  is  appropriate  to  Attila  and  the  Pope  (cf.  Pro-
ceedings, Vol.  XXI.,  p.  300.)

2  Op.  cit.,  p.  387.


300


Professor  A.  C.  Pigou.


[part


correspondence  as  "  Browning  Hope  and  Star."  Hope  appears  in  my
script  as  a  mis-quotation  in  a  line  of  Alt  Vogler,  but  does  not  appear
in  the  poem  at  all.  Browning  and  Star  appear  in  both  my  script
and  my  daughter's.  The  emphasis  in  my  script  among  Browning's
poems  is  plainly  on  AM  Vogler,  but  there  is  no  indication  in  my
script  as  to  which,  if  either,  of  the  lines  in  that  poem  which  refer
to  a  star  underlies  the  general  thought. The  lines  are  :

Stanza  IV.

"  Not  a  point  nor  peak  but  found  and  fixed  its  wandering  star."
Stanza  VII.

"That  out  of  three  sounds  he  frame  not  a  fourth  sound  but  a  star."

But,  given  that  one  of  these  two  lines  is  to  be  indicated,  Miss
Verrall's  script  settles  the  point  beyond  dispute.  The  star  is  "  the
sign  "  ;  there  is  "  heavenly  harmony,"  "  the  diapason,"  "  the  mystic
three,"  "  above  it  all  is  the  star."  Thus,  while  my  script
determines  the  poem,  my  daughter's  script  determines  the  line.
But  her  script  alone  does  not  determine  the  poem.  It  is  only
by  combining  her  script  with  mine,  and  by  interpreting  them
on  the  lines  suggested  by  the  three  words  of  the  Piper  controls,
that  we  see  the  point  of  this  complex  cross-correspondence,  and  find
that  the  whole  is  something  more  than  the  sum  of  the  parts.1

§  1 6.  I  shall  now  analyse  Mrs.  Verrall's  different  attempts
at  Dr.  Verrall's  Greek  words  on  a  plan  similar  to  the  preceding.
My  point  is  to  show  that  between  these  different  attempts
there  is  exactly  the  same  kind  of  complementariness  as  between
the  different  correspondences  in  the  Piper  case ;  that  the
isolated  passages  make  no  sense  separately,  but  have  meaning
when  properly  combined.  The  words  aimed  at,  it  will  be
remembered,  are  /j.ov6-jtw\ov  e$  aw,  meaning  either  "  to  the  one-
horse  car  of  dawn "  or,  as  Dr.  Verrall  thinks  may  be  the
case,  "  to  the  solitary  dawn."  They  are  contained  in  a  passage
from  Euripides  set  for  the  Classical  Tripos  in  1873  when  Dr.
Verrall  was  a  candidate.  In  April,  1901,  Dr.  Verrall  wrote
them  down  with  a  view  to  seeing  whether  they  would  appear
in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script.  I  now  give  the  chief  relevant  passages.
Mrs.  Verrall  wrote  as  follows :

July  4  : Yellow  is  the  colour  of  the  dawn.

1  Journal  S.P.R.,  January,  1909,  pp.  29-30.


LVIII.]


Psychical  Research  and  Survival.


301


Sept.  2  :  Two  syllables  es  to  (following  what  seems  like  an  attempt

at  es  on  Aug.  9).
Sept.  11  : fj.ovos  /zera  Oeov  ovSe  a\Xov  Tti'os.

(alone  with  God,  and  none  other).
Sept.  18  : «s  t--os  (one  horse).

Now,  if  we  suppose  these  four  passages  to  have  occurred  in
the  writings  of  separate  automatists,  we  have  all  the  conditions
of  a  typical  cross-correspondence.  Separately  they  have  no
meaning,  but  properly  fitted  together,  they  combine  into  the
full  meaning  of  Dr.  Verrali's  words.  This,  however,  is  not  all.
On  August  20,  Mrs.  Verrall  wrote:  "The  long  room  with
the  many  windows  is  near  this  hot  room,  he  was  outside."  On
Sept.  20:  "There  were  others  there,  but  he  knew  more  than
the  rest."  Here  we  have  a  further  elaboration.  Dr.  Verrali's
Greek  words  formed  the  subject  of  a  conversation  between  him,
Dr.  A.  T.  Myers,  and  others  on  the  steps  of  the  Senate  House
after  the  examination.  The  two  sentences  in  combination  give
the  idea,  wholly  veiled  in  either  of  them  singly,  of  a  group
on  the  steps  of  the  Senate  House,  of  whom  Dr.  Verrall  "  knew
more  than  the  rest."  When  they  are  combined,  further,  with
the  words  already  quoted  we  have  this  group  identified  with
the  party  that  discussed  there  the  problem  of  the  "  one-horse
dawn."  I  have  kept  for  the  last  one  passage  of  that  recondite
allusive  type  to  which  Mr.  Piddington,  in  discussing  his  cross-
correspondences,  attributes  especial  importance.  On  Sept.  9,
Mrs.  Verrall  wrote  :  "  Find  the  herb  moly,  that  will  help — it
is  a  clue."  The  bearing  of  this  passage  has  most  fortunately
been  discovered  by  the  care  and  ingenuity  of  Mrs.  Verrall.
I  cpiote  her  words:  "In  the  spring  of  1905,  when  I  was
writing  this  paper,  and  had  ascertained  that  the  passage  of
the  Orestes  was  set  in  the  last  paper  of  the  Classical  Tripos
of  1873,  it  occurred  to  me  to  look  at  the  other  papers  set  in
that  year,  and  I  found  that  the  subject  for  Latin  Hexameters
in  the  Tripos  of  1873  was  the  passage  from  Coimis  ending

"And  yet  more  med'cinal  is  it  than  that  moly
Which  Hermes  once  to  wise  Ulysses  gave."1

Could  anything  be  more  typical  than  this  of  the  general
manner of the cases recorded in Mr. Piddington's paper  ?

1  Proceedings,  Vol.  XX.,  p.  163  and  pp.  3S7-90.


302


Professor  A.  G.  Pigou.


[part


How  effective  it  would  have  been  if  the  allusion  had  been
discovered  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  after,  say,  Mrs.  Piper's
had  given  the  sentence  about  the  room  with  many  windows
and  Mrs.  Verrall's  /j-ovottooXov  h  aw  !  All  the  characteristics
of  the  best  cross-correspondences  seem  to  me  to  be  produced
in  this  experiment.  Since,  therefore,  there  are  strong  grounds
for  believing  that  the  agent  here  was  the  subliminal  conscious-
ness of  Mr.  or  of  Mrs.  Verrall,  or  of  both  together,  there  are
also  strong  grounds  for  believing  that  the  manufacture  of
cross-correspondences  of  the  required  type  falls  within  the
compass  of  incarnate  mind.  In  view  of  this  fact  I  conclude
that  the  occurrence  of  these  correspondences  in  other  cases
does  not  make  probable  the  operation  of  any  discarnate  mind.

§17.  This  conclusion,  of  course,  deprives  of  the  greater
part  of  its  interest  the  third  question  which  I  distinguished
at  the  beginning ;  if  the  cause  of  the  correspondences  is  some
discarnate  mind,  how  probable  is  it  that  it  is  the  mind  of
that  deceased  person  with  whom  it  claims  to  be  identical.
My  answer  to  this  question  would  be  that  the  general  practice
of  living  men  and  women  makes  probable  the  proposition  that
a  person  announcing  himself  as  Mr.  A.  really  is  that  person.
Since  we  have  no  ground  for  believing  that  discarnate  intelli-
gences are  more  likely  than  incarnate  to  adopt  aliases,  I,
therefore,  conclude  that,  if  the  personality  acting  through
Mrs.  Piper  and  purporting  to  be  Frederic  Myers  is  a  dis-
carnate intelligence  at  all,  he  probably  is  Frederic  Myers.  As
I  have  said,  however,  the  evidence  seems  to  me  to  make  it
probable  that  this  personality  is  not  a  discarnate  intelligence,
but  is  a  product  of  the  subliminal  activity  of  some  living
person.

8 1 8.  This  conclusion,  it  should  be  remembered,  refers
exclusively  to  the  evidence  of  the  cross-correspondences  that
have  so  far  been  recorded.  The  evidence  that  consists  in
what  Mr.  Dickinson  calls  the  vraisemblance  of  the  impersona-
tions of  Mrs.  Piper's  various  controls  has  not  been  considered.
Its  value  cannot,  I  think,  easily  be  estimated  except  by  intimate
friends  of  the  alleged  controls  who  are  prepared  both  to  under-
take a  large  number  of  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper,  and  also  to
study  known  cases  of  fictitious  impersonations  by  secondary  per-
sonalities. What  the  result  of  that  kind  of  investigation  will


LVIII.]


Psychical  Research  and  Survival.


303


be  I  do  not  venture  to  forecast.  It  may  be  that  the  manu-
facture of  vraisemblanccs  of  the  type  that  has  been  obtained
will  not  be  found  to  fall  within  those  powers  that  we  have
evidence  for  assigning  to  the  subliminal  self.  It  may  be,
again,  that  new  cross-correspondences  will  be  recorded  in  the
future  that  do  not  fall  within  those  powers.  If  either  of
these  things  happens,  we  shall  be  confronted  with  a  problem
in  the  logic  of  probability  the  solution  of  which  is  not  likely
to  be  easily  found.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research.

PART  LIX.
November,  1909.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  GENERAL  MEETING.

The  134th  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  in  the
Queen's  (Small)  Hall,  Langharn  Place,  London,  W.,  on  Friday,
June  18th,  1909,  at  3.30  p.m.;  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  in  the
chair.

The  Hon.  Everard  Feilding  read  a  paper  on  "  Some  Sittings
with  Eusapia  Palladino,"  the  full  report  of  which  sittings  is
printed  below.


u


306


Introductory  Note  to  the


[part


INTRODUCTORY  NOTE  TO  THE  "  REPORT  ON  SITTINGS
WITH  EUSAPIA  PALLADINO."

The  following  paper  contains  an  account  by  Mr.  Eeilding,
Mr.  Baggally  and  Mr.  Herewarcl  Carrington 1  of  the  results
of  their  investigations  at  Naples  of  the  well-known  medium
Eusapia  Palladino.  It  seems  necessary  to  introduce  it  with
some  explanation  of  the  reasons  which  have  induced  the  Council
of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  to  depart  in  this  instance
from  its  usual  practice  of  not  concerning  itself  with  mediums
who  have  been  detected  in  trickery  of  a  seemingly  deliberate
character,  and  have  led  it  to  send  the  three  above-named
gentlemen — all  experienced  investigators  well  acquainted  with
tricks  practised  at  seances — to  Naples  to  hold  sittings  with
Eusapia.  This  explanation  is  the  more  needed  as  it  is  by  no
means  the  intention  of  the  Council  to  change  its  general  practice.

The  reasons  against  employing  fraudulent  mediums  are  very
obvious.  It  encourages  a  mischievous  trade,  the  existence  of
which  stands  in  the  way  of  scientific  investigation.  If  it  is
true,  as  alleged,  that  in  the  presence  of  specially  endowed
persons  movements  of  objects  and  other  physical  phenomena
are  produced  by  forces  unknown  to  science,  it  is  of  course
possible  and  even  probable  that  these  forces  may  sometimes
be  manifested  in  the  case  of  persons  who  are  ready  to  simulate
them  when  it  suits  their  convenience  to  do  so.  Proved  trickery
does  not  exclude  the  possibility  of  genuine  phenomena  even
in  connexion  with  the  trickster.  But  it  reduces  the  value
of  evidence  obtained  through  such  a  medium,  since  even  if
a  competent  investigator  convinces  himself  that  he  has  not
been  deceived  by  any  conjurer's  arts,  it  is  difficult  for  him  to
produce  the  same  conviction  in  others. Moreover,  the  prevalence

1  Author  of  The  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism,  a  book  giving  a  useful
account  of  trick  methods.


Lix.] "  Report  on  Sittings  ivith  Eusapia  Palladino."  307


of  proved  trickery  tends  to  discredit  the  whole  subject  and  to
deter  honest  persons  who  think  they  may  have  these  special
powers  from  lending  themselves  to  investigation.  And  further,
it  tends  to  foster  a  belief,  likely  to  fulfil  itself  through
suggestion,  that  conditions  which  are  favourable  to  fraud  are
those  favourable  to  phenomena.

It  is  therefore  of  the  utmost  importance,  in  the  interests
of  Psychical  Eesearch,  that  fraudulent  mediumship  should  be
strongly  discouraged  by  making  it  clear  that  trickery  leads
to  loss  of  employment.  So  long  as  the  fees  of  investigators
and  of  convinced  spiritualists  flow  with  unabated  abundance
into  the  pockets  of  mediums  who  have  been  detected  in
deliberate  trickery,  this  trickery  will  also  remain  unabated.

It  is  for  these  reasons  that  those  guiding  the  affairs  of  the
Society  for  Psychical  Eesearch  have  as  a  rule  abstained  from
employing  mediums  known  to  have  resorted  to  deliberate
trickery,  and  they  believe  that  in  this  they  have  the  approval
of  most  of  the  members  of  the  Society.

In  the  case  of  Eusapia  Palladino,  however,  another  considera-
tion comes  in,  and  has  led  the  Council  to  decide  that  it  would
be  advisable  that  some  persons  specially  practised  in  the
investigation  of  mediumistic  physical  phenomena,  and  who  had
themselves  detected  trickery  in  other  cases,  should  carry  out
an  investigation  with  her  on  behalf  of  the  Society.  When
in  1894  and  1895  certain  members  of  the  Society  had  sittings
with  her  privately,  first  at  the  ile  Eoubaud  and  at  Carqueiranne
by  invitation  of  Professor  Eichet,  and  afterwards  at  Cambridge,
Eusapia  had  already  been  detected  in  what  might  legitimately
be  called  fraud,  though  there  was  room  for  supposing  that  it
might  be  occasional  only.  The  Cambridge  sittings  proved,  in
the  opinion  of  the  sitters,  that  the  deceptive  methods  adopted
by  her  indicated  skill  and  practice  on  her  part,  and  at  these
sittings  she  also  showed  unwillingness  to  experiment  under
conditions  dispensing  with  the  need  of  continuous  observation.
Accordingly  the  investigation  was  dropped.  On  the  other  hand,
however,  those  engaged  in  Psychical  Eesearch  abroad  have
continued  their  investigations,  and  Eusapia  has  been  observed
by  probably  a  larger  number  of  scientific  men  than  any  other
medium,  and  can  produce  a  larger  number  of  witnesses  whose
opinion  would  carry  weight  in  other  subjects,  who  have  been


308  Introductory  Note.  [part

convinced  that  unknown  forces  do  in  certain  cases  operate
in  her  presence.  Some  of  the  recorded  phenomena,  moreover,
cannot  be  explained  by  her  detected  methods  of  trickery.  In
particular  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  has  always  strongly  adhered  to
his  view  that  this  is  true  of  some  of  the  phenomena  observed
by  him  at  the  ile  Eoubaud,  and  that,  further,  these  were  not
the  result  of  any  trick.  (The  record  of  his  investigations
was  printed  at  the  time  in  the  Journal  S.P.E.,  Vol.  VI.,
pp.  306-336,  and  346-347.)  In  these  circumstances  the
Council  came  to  the  conclusion  that  as  we  do  not  maintain  an
obstinate  attitude  of  incredulity,  we  should  again  make  an
attempt  to  collect  material  with  a  view  to  forming  an  independent
judgment  on  the  phenomena  Eusapia  presents.  The  results
will  be  found  in  the  following  account  of  the  seances  recently
held  at  Naples.

Signed  on  behalf  of  the  Council,

Eleanor  Mildred  Sidgwick

(President).


lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Introduction.  309


REPORT  ON  A  SERIES  OF  SITTINGS  WITH  EUSAPIA

PALLADINO.

By  the  Hon.  Eveeaed  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and
Heeewaed  Cabeington.

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.

PAGE

I.  Introduction

Preliminary  --  ----310

Historical -  -  311

Object  of  the  Present  Investigation - - - - -  318

The  Investigating  Committee  - -  -  319

II.  General  Account  of  the  Sittings

The  Seance  Eoom  -  -  321

Conduct  of  the  Seances  -  -  323

The  Control  -  -  325

The  Phenomena -  -  -  328

Conclusions  -  -  ...  34Q,

III.  Detailed  Report

Measurements -  - -  -  315

Seance  I. -  346

„ II. -  - -  -  358

„ III.  -  -  - 375

„ IV.  -  ...  ....  399

„ V - 418

„ VI.  - - - - - - - - - -  410

„ VII. -  -  463

„ VIII.  .....  - -  484

„ IX.  - - -  - -  ...  505

The  Bell  Incident  - - -  525

Seance  X. ----- -  - - -  527

„ XI.  -  ....  ...  536


310 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part

PAGE

IV.  Individual  Conclusions  of  the  Investigators

Final  Note  by  Hereward  Carrington -  -  555

W.  W.  Baggally -  -  -  556

„  the  Hon.  Everard  Feilding -  566


I.

INTRODUCTION.
Preliminary.

Of  all  the  problems  with  which  psychical  research  is  con-
fronted there  is  none  upon  which  opinion  still  remains  more
hopelessly  divided, — not  only  among  students  of  the  reports  of
other  people,  but  among  actual  experimenters  themselves, — than  on
that  of  the  reality  or  otherwise  of  what  are  now  known  as  the
"physical  phenomena  of  spiritualism."  In  all  times,  and  from  all
countries,  phenomena  of  this  class  are  recorded,  from  the  days
of  Aaron's  rod  to  those  of  the  Rochester  rappings,  when  this
era  of  modern  systematised  spiritualism  was  inaugurated  ;
since  which  the  world  has  been  flooded  with  claimants  to
every  kind  of  unorthodox  power  over  physical  nature,  which
they  are  willing  to  display  to  all  comers  in  return  for  a  very
moderate  consideration.  It  may  seem  a  remarkable  thing  that
with  all  the  wealth  of  opportunity  for  investigation  that
appears  ready  at  hand  no  final  answer  to  the  question  of
what  these  pretensions  amount  to  should  yet  have  been
reached.

It  is  understating  the  case  to  say  that  the  vast  majority
of  these  modern  wizards  and  witches  are  the  merest  charla-
tans— sometimes,  indeed,  using  mechanical  and  scientific  apparatus
of  extreme  ingenuity,1  but  as  a  rule  relying  merely  upon  the
simplest  devices,  with  an  insolent  confidence  in  the  avid
simplicity  of  their  dupes.  Yet  every  now  and  then  a  person-
ality arises  whose  claims  to  something  beyond  such  manifest

1 A  good  notion  of  the  dimensions  to  which  this  conspiracy  of  fraud  has
attained  in  America  can  be  obtained  from  David  P.  Abbott's  Behind  the  Scenes
with  the  Mediums  (London  :  Kegan  Paul)  and  H.  Carrington's  Physical  Pheno-
mena of  Spiritualism  (London  :  Werner  Laurie).


Lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Introduction.  311

imposture  it  has  seemed  impossible  to  dismiss  thus  curtly.
Of  such  it  would  be  possible  to  compile  a  fairly  formidable
list,  but  for  present  purposes  it  is  sufficient  to  mention  but
two,  D.  D.  Home  and  Eusapia  Palladino,  concerning  whom  a
mass  of  material  exists  from  authorities  of  competence  and
integrity,  of  such  a  kind  as  to  place  their  case  in  a  wholly
different  category.  It  may  almost  be  said  that  by  the
evidence  for  the  possession  of  supernormal  faculty  by  these
two  persons,  the  whole  controversy  regarding  the  existence  of
some  hitherto  unascertained  and  unrecognised  force  affecting
matter  and  apparently  operating,  whether  directly  or  indirectly,
through  the  organism  of  particular  individuals,  must  be  decided.
If  ultimately  the  evidence  for  its  display  by  these  "  mediums  "
be  judged  invalid,  there  remains  little  to  be  said  for  the  less
well-attested  claims  of  any  others.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the
existence  of  a  telekinetic  force  in  them  can  be  proved  beyond
reasonable  doubt,  a  great  impulse  towards  credibility  is  given
to  a  number  of  historical  phenomena  which  have  hitherto
failed  to  achieve  it,  less  on  account  of  the  weight  of  evidence
by  which  they  were  supported  than  of  the  inherent  improba-
bility of  their  occurrence.  D.  D.  Home  has  passed  away,  a
lasting  marvel  to  those  who  witnessed  the  events  of  his
career,  and  a  still  unsolved  mystery  to  those  who  are  familiar
with  them  through  the  records  only.  Eusapia  Palladino  is,
however,  still  active,  and,  owing  to  an  increasing  interest  among
men  of  science  on  the  Continent  in  the  strange  phenomena
alleged  to  take  place  in  her  presence,  may  be  said  to  have
reached  the  zenith  of  her  fame.

Historical.

Without  attempting  a  complete  history  of  this  remarkable
woman,  it  may  be  useful  to  give  a  short  outline  of  the  events
which  have  made  her  so  interesting  a  figure  in  the  discussion
of  this  obscure  question.

Eusapia  was  the  daughter  of  a  peasant,  and  was  born  in
1854  in  the  province  of  Bari.  Her  education  was  of  the
poorest,  and  even  now  she  is  unable  to  read,  or  to  write  more
than  her  own  name.  According  to  her  own  account,  her
father  having  been  killed  by  brigands,  she  was,  after  certain


312 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


vicissitudes,  taken  in  a  menial  position  into  a  family  given
to  spiritualistic  practices.  Being  called  one  day  to  make  up  the
circle  at  a  seance,  certain  new  and  surprising  manifestations
took  place,  and  she  was  pronounced  to  he  herself  a  "  medium."
She  states  that  for  many  years  she  was  merely  frightened  by
these  occurrences  and  sought  to  evade  the  importunity  of
people  who  constantly  tried  to  induce  her  to  attend  seances.
She  eventually  made  the  acquaintance  of  Cavaliere  Ercole
Chiaja  of  Naples,  who,  partly  overcoming  her  prejudices,  per-
suaded her  to  develop  her  "  power."  It  was  through  this
gentleman  that  Eusapia  owed  her  first  introduction  to  the
scientific  world,  by  the  publication  in  1888  of  an  open  letter
to  Professor  Lombroso  stating  that  the  writer  had  become
convinced  that  certain  phenomena  took  place  in  her  presence
contrary  to  all  natural  physical  law,  and  inviting  Lombroso  to
investigate  the  case  for  himself.  Lombroso  did  so  three  years  later,
with  the  result  that  he  was  convinced  of  the  non -fraudulent
character  of  the  phenomena.  Professor  Tamburini,  however,
who  was  associated  with  him  in  the  experiments,  did  not
consider  that  the  evidence  was  sufficient  to  give  conclusive
proof  of  the  production  or  transmission  of  force  in  modes
other  than  those  known  to  science,  though  he  apparently
admitted  that  it  pointed  strongly  in  that  direction,  and  was
prepared  to  grant  the  possibility,  or  even  the  probability,  of
Lombroso's  view  that  cerebral  movements  might  be  transmitted
by  means  of  the  ether  to  surrounding  objects,  and  act  upon
them  as  force,  without  the  intervention  of  muscular  action
(Lombroso,  Annales  des  Sciences  Psychiques,  1891,  p.  326,  and
1892,  p.  143;  Tamburini,  Spiritismo  e  telepatia,  reviewed  in
Proceedings  S.P.E.,  Vol.  IX.,  p.  224;.

Lombroso's  confession  of  faith  had  the  effect  of  inducing
another  group  of  scientific  men  to  undertake  fresh  experi-
ments, and  17  sittings  were  held  in  1892  in  Milan  by  a
committee  consisting  of  Professor  Schiaparelli,  Director  of  the
Astronomical  Observatory  of  Milan  ;  Professor  Eichet,  Professor
of  Physiology  in  Paris ;  Carl  du  Prel,  D.Ph.  of  Munich ;  Angelo
Brofferio,  Professor  of  Philosophy  ;  three  physicists,  Professor
Gerosa  and  Drs.  Ermacora  and  Finzi,  and  M.  Aksakoff,  the
well-known  spiritualist  (see  Annates  des  Sciences  Psychiques,  1893,
pp.  39-64). The  phenomena  were  of  the  kind  that  have  since


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Introduction.


313


been  so  frequently  described  in  connection  with  Eusapia ;  in
full  light,  levitations  of  the  table,  movements  of  objects,  and
the  alteration  by  as  much  as  21  lbs.  of  the  medium's  weight
in  a  balance ;  and  in  darkness  or  semi-darkness,  the  appear-
ance and  contact  of  hands,  etc.  The  Committee,  with  some
reserve  as  to  the  frequently  unsatisfactory  nature  of  the  holding
of  Eusapia's  hands,  came  to  the  conclusion  that  none  of  the
phenomena  which  were  obtained  in  good  light  could  have
been  produced  by  trickery,  and  that  this  was  equally  true  of
many  of  the  others.

Eeferring  to  the  appearance  of  a  hand,  they  say,  "  It  is  im-
possible to  count  the  number  of  times  that  that  hand  appeared
and  was  touched  by  one  of  us  ;  suffice  it  to  say  that  doubt
was  no  longer  possible  ;  it  was,  indeed,  a  living  human  hand
which  we  saw  and  touched,  while  at  the  same  time  the  bust
and  arms  of  the  medium  remained  visible  and  her  hands  were
held  by  those  on  either  side  of  her."

Professor  Eichet  did  not  sign  the  report,  but  preferred  to
issue  a  more  cautious  one  of  his  own  (Annalcs  des  Sciences
PsycMqioes,  1893,  pp.  1-31).  He  points  out  various  unsatis-
factory features  of  the  control  of  the  medium's  hands,  as  well
as  the  inconclusive  nature  of  the  experiments  in  the  reduction
of  her  weight.  In  regard  to  the  hands  that  were  seen  and  felt,
he  thinks  that  the  only  normal  explanation  of  them  (the  hypothesis
of  an  accomplice  being  apparently  out  of  the  question)  was  that
Eusapia  got  one  of  her  hands  free,  and  he  discusses  in  detail
the  way  in  which  this  might  have  been  done  by  substitution.
He  gives,  however,  cases  where  substitution  seems  impossible,
and  says  that  they  never  detected  it.  M.  Eichet  states  his
own  conclusion  as  follows  :  "  Absurd  and  unsatisfactory  though
they  were,  it  seems  to  me  very  difficult  to  attribute  the
phenomena  produced  to  deception,  conscious  or  unconscious,  or
to  a  series  of  deceptions.  Nevertheless,  conclusive  and  indis-
putable proof  that  there  was  no  fraud  on  Eusapia's  part,  or
illusion  on  our  part,  is  wanting.  We  must  therefore  renew  our
efforts  to  obtain  such  proof." 1

A  series  of  40  sittings  were  held  in  Warsaw  by  Dr.  Ochorowicz
in 1893-1894,  the  reports  of  which  were  published  in  the

1 A  full  discussion  by  Mr.  Podmore  of  these  Milan  experiments  will  be  found
in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  IX.,  p.  218.


314 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part

Polish  newspapers  and  are  summarised  by  de  Krauz  in  the
Revue  de  V Hypnotismc,  July-December,  1894.  There  were
considerable  differences  of  opinion  as  to  the  results  among  those
who  took  part  in  the  sittings.  Out  of  twenty-three  experi-
menters, ten,  including  Ochorowicz  himself,  were  convinced  of
the  supernormal  character  of  the  phenomena ;  seven,  while
expressing  certain  doubts  as  to  the  honesty  of  the  medium  and
the  method  of  experimentation,  thought  they  could  not  all  be
due  to  an  ordinary  mechanical  agency.  Two,  on  the  other
hand,  were  inclined,  with  certain  reservations,  to  deny  the
supernormal  character  of  the  manifestations,  and  three  attributed
them  all  to  fraud.  One  declined  to  express  any  opinion
at  all,  being  dissatisfied  with  the  method  of  experimentation.
While  certain  observations  of  Dr.  Eeichmann,  one  of  the  three
who  denied  the  genuineness  of  any  of  the  phenomena,  irre-
sistibly point  to  fraud  on  certain  occasions ;  on  certain  others
the  correctness  of  his  observation  is  strongly  disputed  by  Dr.
Ochorowicz.  It  appears  that  Dr.  Eeichmann  detected,  among
other  more  occasional  tricks,  the  substitution  of  hands  or  feet
which  afterwards  played  so  prominent  a  part  in  the  Cambridge
experiments,  as  will  be  noticed  later.

In  1894  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  and  Mr.  Myers,  on  Professor
Eichet's  invitation,  took  part  in  four  sittings  at  the  ile  Eoubaud
in  the  Mediterranean  ;  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  being  given  control  of
the  seance  room.  A  few  weeks  later,  Professor  and  Mrs.
Sidgwick,  also  as  Professor  Eichet's  guests,  assisted  at  eight
sittings,  at  six  of  which  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  was  again  present.
A  full  report  by  him  of  the  first  series  is  printed  in  the
Journal  S.P.E.,  Vol.  VI.  (pp.  306-336  and  346-7).  Sir
Oliver  Lodge  and  Mr.  Myers  were  convinced  by  these  sittings
of  the  supernormal  character  of  some  of  the  phenomena ;
and  Professor  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  who  did  not  witness  the
phenomena  that  most  impressed  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  expressed  the
opinion  that  if  the  medium's  hands  were,  as  they  appeared
to  be,  adequately  controlled,  there  seemed  no  way  of  accounting
for  the  phenomena  except  by  supernormal  means.  At  these
sittings,  some  of  which  were  held  in  darkness  too  great  to
admit  of  the  hands  being  seen,  no  fraud  was  actually
discovered.

In the  Journal  S.P.E. for  March-April, 1895,  Vol.  VII.


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Introduction.


315


(pp.  36-55),  there  appeared  an  analysis  and  criticism  of  Sir
Oliver  Lodge's  report  by  Dr.  Hodgson,  who  complained  that  a
number  of  important  points,  chiefly  relative  to  the  conditions  of
control  and,  in  particular,  to  the  way  the  hands  and  feet  of
Eusapia  were  held,  were  omitted  from  the  report,  leaving  the
door  open  for  various  suppositions  as  to  the  way  in  which
the  phenomena  might  have  been  produced  by  normal  means.
As  a  result  of  this  criticism  it  was  felt  that  further  experiment
was  necessary,  and  in  the  summer  of  1S95  Eusapia  came  to
Cambridge,  where  she  gave  a  series  of  twenty-one  sittings.

Very  early  in  the  sittings  suspicious  circumstances  were
observed,  especially  in  regard  to  the  limitations  imposed  by
Eusapia  on  the 'holding  of  her  hands  and  feet,  and  the  coin-
cidence of  the  phenomena  with  the  moment  of  least  satisfactory
holding.  What  was  still  more  suspicious  was  the  precautions
apparently  adopted  by  Eusapia  to  avoid  any  detection  of  fraud.
She  would  not  allow  the  sitters  to  feel  about  in  the  darkness
with  their  hands,  and  any  "  grabbing"  of  the  supposed  material-
ised hand  that  performed  the  touches  or  movements  of  objects
was  strictly  forbidden.  After  vainly  attempting  through  the
greater  part  of  the  sittings  to  obtain  genuine  phenomena  under
unimpeachable  conditions,  the  investigators  were  obliged  to
turn  their  attention  to  ascertaining  exactly  what  methods  of
fraud  were  used.  Dr.  Hodgson  had  been  invited  over  from
America  to  attend  these  sittings,  and  his  observations,  with
those  of  other  sitters,  ended  in  convincing  all  those  who  had
any  prolonged  experience  of  the  sittings  that  the  substitution
of  hands  and  feet  described  by  Prof.  Eichet  as  possible,  and
already  detected  by  Dr.  Eeichmann,  constantly  occurred  and
could  be  observed  if  attention  was  directed  to  it.  At  the  end
of  the  series,  the  investigators  responsible  for  conducting  it
unanimously  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  systematic  fraud,  of
a  kind  that  must  have  required  long  practice,  had  been  used
in  many  cases  and  was  to  be  inferred  in  others,  and  that  there
was  no  adecpuate  reason  for  concluding  in  favour  of  any  super-
normal agency  having  been  at  work  during  the  course  of  the
sittings. (See  Journal  S.P.E.,  Vol.  VII.,  pp.  131-5,  and  14S-159.)

None  of  the  present  writers  had  the  advantage  of  being-
present  at  these  Cambridge  sittings,  which  appear  to  have
differed  markedly  in  certain  respects  from  those  which  form  the


316 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Cdrrington.  [part


subject  of  the  present  report.  The  chief  points  of  difference
lie  in  the  condition  of  light  and  in  the  degree  of  control  of
her  hands  permitted  by  Eusapia.  For  the  most  part  the  seances
appear  to  have  taken  place  either  in  complete  darkness  or  in
light  so  poor  as  not  to  ensure  the  visibility  of  the  medium's  hands,
while  she  seems  never  to  have  allowed  her  hands  to  be  properly
held.  This,  as  will  be  seen  later,  also  occurred  at  some  of  the
Naples  sittings,  and  our  experience  was  that  the  sense  of
touch  was  so  little  to  be  trusted  on  the  occasions  when  Eusapia
refused  to  allow  the  complete  control  of  her  hands,  that  observation
depending  on  it  alone  is  quite  useless.  Had  our  own  sittings
been  conducted  throughout  in  these  conditions  it  is  quite
certain  that  we  should  have  felt  ourselves  unable  to  come  to
the  conclusions  at  which  in  fact  we  arrived.

The  net  result  of  the  Cambridge  experiments  was  not  to
show  any  hitherto  unsuspected  method  of  trickery,  but  to
show  that  certain  already  discovered  methods,  substitution  of
hands  or  feet  in  the  dark,  were  far  more  frequently  resorted,
to  than  the  Continental  observers  had  up  to  then  ascertained.

The  Cambridge  series  is,  we  believe,  the  only  published
negative  series  in  the  experience  of  Eusapia,  though  we  have
knowledge  of  at  least  one  other  series  of  14  or  15  sittings
in  which  the  fraudulent  devices  already  mentioned  played  an
extremely  prominent  role.  It  should,  however,  be  added  that
in  these  sittings,  as  in  a  certain  proportion  of  those  at  Cam-
bridge, opportunities  for  cheating  were,  for  experimental  purposes,
deliberately  given,  of  which  the  medium  took  suitable  advantage.

It  would  be  wearisome  to  attempt  to  review  all  the  series
of  experiments  undergone  by  Eusapia  since  the  issue  of  the
Cambridge  report.  The  bibliography  of  the  reports  and  dis-
cussions on  her  rnediumship  which  have  appeared  between
1895  and  1907  cover  29  pages  in  Prof.  Morselli's  recent
book.  She  had  been  dropped  by  this  Society  as  a  fraudulent
medium,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  there  appeared  to  be  a
few  phenomena,  even  in  the  Cambridge  sittings,  for  which  the
ascertained  fraud  could  not  account,  to  say  nothing  of  the
previous  observations  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  at  the  ile  Roubaud,
and  by  numbers  of  other  qualified  experimenters.  Continental
observers  were  by  no  means  satisfied  that  the  Cambridge
report  could  cover  the  whole  ground  of  Eusapia's case,  and


lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Introduction.


317


they  renewed  their  investigations  with  increased  energy.  As  a
result,  the  opinion  of  practically  all  the  scientific  men  and
others  (apart  from  the  Cambridge  investigators)  who  have  given
any  attention  by  personal  experiment  to  the  subject,  is  that,
after  making  every  allowance  for  such  fraud  as  she  may  occa-
sionally permit  herself  to  indulge  in,  Eusapia  is  nevertheless
possessed  of  faculties  of  some  supernormal  kind.  The  most
important  contributions  to  the  study  of  the  case  are  perhaps
M.  Camille  Flainmarion's  Les  forces  naturelles  inconnues,  in  which,
as  part  of  a  general  discussion  of  alleged  supernormal  pheno-
mena, an  elaborate  description  of  Eusapia's  case  is  contained  ;
the  large  work,  in  two  volumes,  Psicologia  c  Spiritismo,  by
Enrico  Morselli,  Professor  of  Pathology  in  the  University  of
Genoa  (reviewed  in  Proceedings  S.P.E.,  Vol.  XXL,  pp.  516-25);  the
report  by  M.  Courtier,  issued  by  the  Institut  Gtniral  Psychologique
of  Paris  as  the  result  of  experiments  extending  over  three
years,  and  attended,  among  others,  by  Professor  and  Madame
Curie,  M.  d'Arsonval,  M.  Henri  Bergson,  M.  Ballet,  M.  Char-
pentier,  M.  Eichet,  M.  Branly,  and  M.  de  Yourievitch  ;  and  the
report  by  Professor  Bottazzi,  Professor  of  Physiology  in  the
University  of  Naples,  of  a  series  of  sittings  held  in  1907  by
himself  and  Professors  Galeotti,  de  Amicis,  Scarpa,  Pansini,
and  Cardarelli,  of  which  a  risumS  will  be  found  in  the  Annalcs
cles  Sciences  Psychiques,  August-November,  1907.

Professor  Morselli  announces  his  belief  in  the  possession  by
Eusapia  of  some  supernormal  power  without  any  reserve  what-
ever. In  an  article  in  the  Annates  des  Sciences  Psychiques,
April,  1907,  after  stating  that  for  many  years  his  state  of  mind
regarding  the  existence  of  these  phenomena  was  to  believe  that
those  who  asserted  that  they  were  genuine  were  either  deluded
by  gross  fraud  or  were  the  victims  of  hallucination  or  of
illusions  of  judgment,  he  says  that  he  has  now  changed  his
belief:  "  I  write  with  full  consciousness  of  bein«  in  the  risfht  .  .  .
that  the  phenomena  of  physical  mediumship  attributed  to
Eusapia  are  in  the  great  majority  of  cases  real,  authentic,
genuine  ;  that  in  the  now  innumerable  series  of  her  '  spiritistic '
manifestations  there  may  be  an  admixture  of  some  spurious
phenomena,  sometimes  also  naive  and  puerile  attempts  at  decep-
tion on  her  part,  and  illusions  or  errors  of  appreciation  on  the
part  of  the  sitters  ;  but  on  the  whole  the  phenomena  produced


318 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


by  Eusapia  have  for  a  calm  scientist,  an  impartial  observer,  a
competent  student  of  psychology,  an  objective  existence  and  a
positive  consistency  equal  to  those  attained  by  categories  of
facts  judged  by  ordinary  reasoning,  and  verified  and  accepted
in  accordance  with  the  rules  of  the  experimental  method."

The  report  of  the  Institut  Gine'ral  Psychologique  is  more
cautious,  and  no  positive  conclusions  are  attempted.  They
mention  the  practice  of  certain  frauds,  saying  that  it  is  difficult
to  indicate  exactly  the  extent  of  them,  and  point  out  that  of
course  such  frauds,  adequately  proved,  tend  to  throw  suspicion
upon  everything.  They  state  that  the  objectivity,  at  all  events,
of  the  phenomena  has  been  proved  by  self-registering  instru-
ments ;  that  movements  and  liftings  of  objects  appear  to  take
place  by  simple  contact  with  the  hands  or  the  dress  of  the
medium,  and  also  without  contact;  that  although  muscular
contractions  on  the  part  of  the  medium  take  place  at  the  time
of  such  movements,  no  direct  mechanical  action  upon  the  object
so  moved  was  observed ;  that  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  medium
luminous  phenomena  were  observed  of  which  the  character  was
undetermined :  that  forms  of  human  appearance  were  seen  and
sensations  of  contact  felt,  in  the  production  of  some  of  which,
however,  fraud  was  ascertained,  and  that  apparently  the  medium
can  from  a  distance  discharge  an  electroscope  and  produce  in
objects  molecular  vibrations  (raps  and  other  sounds).1

The  report  of  Prof.  Bottazzi  "  Dans  Us  regions  inexplorSes  de
la  biologic  hitmaine "  in  the  Annalcs  referred  to  above  is  of  an
absolutely  positive  character.  It  is  lively  reading,  and,  granting
that  the  phenomena  are  genuine,  is  of  much  interest  as  a  descrip-
tion of  Eusapia's  seances,  and  of  the  results  attending  the  use
of  various  scientific  apparatus.  But  as  the  dull  details  of  the
actual  control  existing  are  not  insisted  on,  it  is  of  little  help
as  a  solution  of  the  problem  whether  the  phenomena  in  them-
selves were  or  were  not  fraudulent.

Object  of  the  Present  Investigation.

In  the  face  of  all  these  reports  from  scientific  men  of
high  standing  and  accustomed  to  experimental  research,  which,

i  A  full  discussion  of  this  report  will  be  found  in  Count  Solovovo's  review
below.


lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Introduction.


319


whether  wholly  favourable  or  not,  at  all  events  suggested
that  the  case  of  Eusapia  could  not  be  lightly  dismissed  with
the  explanation  that  all  the  phenomena  occurring  in  her  presence
were  due  to  common  fraud,  it  seemed  desirable  that  this
Society,  one  of  whose  objects  is  to  investigate  physical  phenomena,
should  not  maintain  its  attitude  of  aloofness  on  the  mere  ground
that  Eusapia  was,  on  certain  occasions,  detected  in  trickery,
and  the  Council  accordingly,  after  some  consideration,  deter-
mined to  reopen  the  case.  A  statement  of  their  attitude  in  the
matter  is  contained  in  the  Note  which  prefaces  the  present
Eeport.

Count  Solovovo,  in  his  review  printed  below,  criticises  the  Paris
report  on  the  ground  that  while  it  proves  the  objectivity  of  the
phenomena,  sufficient  regard  was  not  paid  to  proving  their
authenticity.  The  phenomena  themselves  are  elaborately  described,
but  not  the  exact  conditions  under  which  they  occurred.  With
certain  exceptions,  the  same  criticism  may,  indeed,  be  made  of
most  of  the  reports  which  have  hitherto  appeared.  The  experi-
menters have  been  more  solicitous  of  stating  their  conclusions
than  of  assisting  readers  to  form  conclusions  for  themselves.
We  decided,  therefore,  to  furnish  as  complete  a  record  as
possible  of  the  conduct  of  our  seances,  and  while  it  is  true  that  a
report  consisting  mainly,  as  does  the  present,  of  mere  details  of
hand-holding,  foot-holding,  and  conditions  of  light,  is  intolerably
wearisome  and  unreadable,  a  report  of  this  kind  is  necessary  for
those  who  are  prepared  to  take  the  trouble  of  following  at  least
a  part  of  it  with  attention,  if  anything  more  than  the  mere  ipse
dixit  of  an  observer  as  to  the  adequacy  of  the  control  is  to  be
provided.

The  Investigating  Committee.

As  regards  the  personnel  of  the  Committee  appointed  by
the  Council  to  undertake  the  investigation,  it  was  felt  that  as  the
object  of  it  was  merely  to  attempt  to  determine  whether  the
phenomena  were  due  to  trickery  or  not,  the  assistance  of
persons  well  versed  in  the  available  methods  of  trickery  should
be  invoked.

Mr.  Carrington  has  been  for  some  time  the  investigator  for
the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  and  is  the  author


320 E.  Feilcling,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


of  a  book,  The  Physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism  (London :
Werner  Laurie),  in  which  is  a  detailed  exposure  of  the  tricks
employed  by  fraudulent  mediums,  of  which  he  has  made  a
special  study.  For  many  years  Mr.  Garrington  has  been  an
amateur  conjurer,  and  is  able  to  reproduce  almost  any  of  the
slate  writing  and  other  "tests"  offered  by  the  average  "medium."
In  the  course  of  his  work  for  the  American  Society  he  has
investigated  many  cases  .  of  poltergeists,  physical  phenomena,
etc.,  etc.,  and  in  all  the  ten  years  of  such  work  had  never
seen  anything  that  he  was  unable  to  account  for  by  trickery,
which  in  many  cases  he  could  improve  upon.

Mr.  Baggally  has  similarly  been  for  many  years  an  investi-
gator of  the  phenomena  of  spiritualism  and  has  been
specially  interested  in  the  physical  phenomena.  He,  also,  is
an  amateur  conjurer  of  much  experience.  Notwithstanding  the
fact  that  he  had  investigated  nearly  all  the  mediums  who
have  appeared  upon  the  spiritualist  horizon  since  the  days  of
D.  D.  Home,  he,  like  Mr.  Garrington,  had  never  yet  met  with
what  appeared  to  him  a  genuine  example  of  any  agency
other  than  that  of  more  or  less  easily  discoverable  trickery,  and
before  the  experiments  with  Eusapia,  had  come  to  an  entirely
negative  conclusion  as  to  the  probability  of  any  genuine  physical
phenomena.

Mr.  Leilding,  though  not  himself  a  conjurer,  had  had  a
reasonably  extensive  experience  in  the  investigation  of  physical
phenomena  and  the  advantage  of  a  fairly  complete  education
at  the  hands  of  fraudulent  mediums.  While  preserving  an
open  mind  as  to  the  possibility  of  the  existence  of  some
hitherto  unascertained  force  in  nature  whereby  the  manifesta-
tions testified  to  by  so  many  observers  of  high  standing  were
produced,  the  discovery  of  repeated  fraud  had  produced  in  him
an  attitude  of  complete  scepticism  as  regards  the  probability
of  his  ever  finding  any  examples  of  the  exercise  of  such  a
force.


Fig.  I.


Facing  p.  321.


lix.] Sittings  with  Eusapia:  General  Account.  321


II.

GENEEAL  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  SITTINGS.

The  Stance  Boom.

On  receipt  of  the  Council's  commission  to  hold  further
experiments  with  Eusapia,  a  wire  was  sent  asking  if  she
would  consent  to  a  series  of  seances,  and  an  affirmative  reply
being  received,  two  of  us,  E.  and  C.,1  went  to  Naples.  We
chose  adjoining  rooms  on  the  fifth  floor  of  the  Hotel  Victoria,
one  of  the  principal  hotels  in  Naples,  and  decided  to  hold  the
seances  in  E.'s  room,  of  which  a  plan  is  given  facing  p.  346.
F.  and  C.  then  visited  Eusapia  and  made  arrangements  with
her  for  a  series  of  five  seances,  to  be  extended  to  ten  if  re-
quired. Enquiries  were  next  made  for  an  English  shorthand
writer,  who  was  eventually,  on  the  suggestion  of  Messrs.  Thos.
Cook  &  Son,  discovered  in  the  person  of  Mr.  Albert  Meeson,  a
gentleman  in  the  employ  of  the  American  Express  Co.,  and  hither-
to unknown  to  Eusapia.2

A  group  of  electric  lights  of  variable  illuminating  power
was  arranged  and  hung  from  the  ceiling  at  a  distance  of
6  feet  from  the  position  of  the  medium's  head.

As  paraphernalia  for  the  proposed  seances,  Eusapia  desired
us  to  procure  a  pair  of  black  curtains  and  a  small  deal  table.
Alternatively,  she  offered  to  provide  them  herself.  We  accepted
her  offer  expressly  with  a  view  to  seeing  if  she  would  provide
anything  in  the  nature  of  a  trick  apparatus.  The  curtains,
which  were  her  own,  proved  to  be  of  very  thin  black  cashmere
and  concealed  no  mystery ;  while  the  table  which  she  procured
for  us,  and  of  which  a  photograph  is  given  opposite,  was  on
careful  examination  found  to  be  an  absolutely  plain  structure,

1From  this  point  onwards  the  investigators,  Messrs.  Feilding,  Carrington,  and
Baggally  (who  later  joined  the  first  two),  are  designated  by  their  initials.

2  We  wish  to  take  this  occasion  of  expressing  our  acknowledgments  to  Mr.
Meeson  for  his  invaluable  assistance  in  what  proved  a  most  laborious  under-
taking.

X


322 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


without  rim,  2  ft.  lOf  ins.  (87  cm.)  long  by  1  ft.  7|  ins.
(48  cm.)  broad,  and  weighing  10  A  lbs.  (4"75  kilog.).  The
curtains  were,  at  Eusapia's  request,  stretched  across  a  corner  of
the  seance  room  on  a  wire  fastened  to  nails  in  the  walls,  so  as
to  enclose  a  small  triangular  space,  the  depth  from  the  angle
of  the  walls  to  the  middle  of  the  curtains  beino-  2  ft.  8  ins.
(80  cm.),  and  the  space  so  enclosed  will  be  referred  to  through-
out this  report  as  the  '  cabinet.'

Eusapia  also  requested  us  to  procure  various  small  objects
to  be  placed  inside  the  cabinet.  We  purchased  accordingly
a  couple  of  tambourines,  a  guitar,  a  toy  trumpet,  a  flageolet,
a  toy  piano,  and  a  tea  bell.  These  objects  were  disposed  about
the  cabinet,  some  on  a  small  round  table  which  we  generally
placed  inside  it,  and  some  on  the  floor,  leaning  against  the
walls  or  against  the  small  table  (see  Eig.  II.).

The  scene,  in  fact,  was  set  according  to  Eusapia's  usual
habit ;  and  if  a  criticism  be  made  (a  criticism  the  justice  of
which  we  are  ourselves  prepared  partly  to  concede)  that  we
did  not  in  this  setting  or  in  the  subsequent  conduct  of  the
experiments  seek  to  introduce  a  variation  from  her  accustomed
procedure,  our  reply  must  be  that  our  time  in  Naples  was
limited,  and  that  after  due  consideration  we  preferred  to  adopt
conditions  to  which  the  medium  was  used  and  in  which  there-
fore it  was  probable  that  effects  would  be  produced,  rather
than  impose  others  which  might  possibly  impede  the  produc-
tion of  what  we  had  gone  to  study.  We  conceived  our
function  to  be,  not  the  scientific  examination  of  the  nature
of  the  force  involved  in  the  production  of  possibly  supernormal
manifestations,  but,  by  means  of  the  technical  experience  in
'  spiritualistic '  conjuring  possessed  by  two  out  of  our  number,
to  attempt  to  determine  the  preliminary  question  of  whether
the  manifestations  themselves  were  or  were  not  merely  at-
tributable to  legerdemain.

Rightly  or  wrongly,  we  believed,  and  still  believe,  that  the
simplest  plan  would  be  to  allow  matters  to  take  their  accus-
tomed course,  while  adopting  every  precaution  that  occurred
to  us  as  necessary  to  the  end  we  had  in  view.  We  felt  that
if,  in  a  reasonable  number  of  experiments,  persons  specially
versed  in  conjuring  tricks  and  already  forewarned  concerning,
and  familiar  with,  the  particular  tricks  to  be  expected,  were


Fig.  II.


lix.] Sittings  with  Eusapia :  General  Account.  323


unable  to  discover  them,  it  would  not  be  presumptuous  to
claim  as  a  probable  consequence  that  some  other  agency  must
be  involved.

Conduct  of  the  Seances.

Before  the  arrival  of  Eusapia,  the  room  was  examined,  un-
necessary furniture  removed,  the  cabinet  was  prepared,  the
various  objects  put  in  position,  and  the  curtains  drawn  together.
One  of  us  then  went  down  to  receive  her.  She  came
attended  by  her  husband,  who  then  left,  and  she  came  up
to  our  rooms  alone.  The  door  was  then  locked,  and  she
immediately  took  her  place  at  the  narrow  end  of  the  seance
table,  with  her  back  to  the  curtains  of  the  cabinet,  the  back
of  her  chair  being  a  foot  or  a  foot  and  a  half  distant  from
them.  One  of  us  sat  on  each  side  of  her,  holding  or  held  by
her  hand,  with  his  foot  under  or  on  her  foot,  his  leg  generally
pressing  against  the  whole  length  of  hers,  often  with  his  free
hand  across  her  knees,  and  very  frequently  with  his  two  feet
encircling  her  foot.

The  degree  of  control  permitted  by  her  varied  very  much,
and  appeared  to  depend  upon  her  mood.  If  she  was  in  a  good
temper  she  would  generally  allow  us  to  control  her  as  we
pleased,  that  is,  to  hold  the  whole  of  her  hand,  to  tie  her
hands  and  her  feet,  or  to  encircle  her  feet  with  ours.  If,
as  happened  on  two  or  three  occasions,  she  was  in  a
bad  temper,  she  made  difficulties  about  everything,  com-
plained of  our  suspicious  attitude,  allowed  the  poorest  light,
and  was  generally  intractable.  We  never  found,  hoivever,  that
the  adequacy  of  the  control  influenced  unfavourably  the  pro-
duction of  the  phenomena.  On  the  contrary,  it  was  on  the
nights  when  she  was  in  the  best  humour,  and  consequently
when  our  precautions  were  most  complete  and  the  light  the
strongest,  that  the  phenomena  were  the  most  numerous.  On
the  other  hand,  when  she  seemed  in  bad  health,  or  was  in  a
bad  humour  or  indisposed  for  the  seance,  she  appeared  to  try
to  evade  our  control :  she  would  not  allow  us  to  grasp  her
hands  fully,  but  merely  rested  them  on  ours  ;  she  asked  for
the  light  to  be  reduced,  and  her  movements  were  furtive  and
hard  to  follow.  The  phenomena  on  these  occasions  were  rarer
and  of  small  account,  and  ive  did  not  find  that  the  reduction


324 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


of  light,  and  the  consequent  increased  facility  for  fraud  had
any  effect  in  stimulating  them.

Her  own  condition  varied  greatly.  She  exhibited  three
stages  of  consciousness.  During  the  continuance  of  the  brighter
light  in  which  the  stance  generally  opened  she  remained  per-
fectly normal,  and  it  was  in  this  state  as  a  rule  that  the
levitations 1  of  the  seance  table,  which  will  be  later  described,
took  place.  She  would  then  gradually  sink  into  a  condition
of  half-trance,  preluded  as  a  rule  by  numerous  yawns  and
amazing  hiccoughs.  In  this  state  she  still  speaks  and  answers
questions,  though  her  manner  is  quieter  than  in  her  normal
state,  her  speech  oppressed  and  plaintive,  and  her  eyes
clouded.  She  professes  to  have  no  recollection  of  events  that
take  place  in  this  state.  It  is  difficult  to  distinguish  the
exact  moment  of  the  beginning  of  this  amnesic  condition,  but
when  questioned  she  stated  that  as  a  rule  she  remembers
nothing  after  the  light  is  reduced  for  the  first  time.

Of  her  third  state,  that  of  deep  trance,  we  did  not  have
many  examples.  It  was,  however,  generally  coincident  with
the  more  complex  phenomena.  Ex  hypothesi,  while  in  this
state  she  is  under  the  complete  influence  of  her  '  control,' 2
'  John  King.'  She  speaks  sometimes  in  a  deep  voice,  refers  to
herself  in  the  third  person  as  'my  daughter'  or  'the  medium,'
and  addresses  the  sitters  as  '  thou.'  She  laughs  occasionally
in  a  raucous,  almost  diabolic  manner,  and  her  expression  is  at
times  fierce  and  forbidding.  But  as  a  rule  she  is  apparently
overwhelmed  by  sleep,  throws  herself  often  into  the  arms  of
her  neighbours,  remains  entirely  passive,  and  surrenders  herself

1  See  footnote,  p.  347.  We  use  the  word  '  levitation '  merely  because  it  ha?,
so  to  speak,  become  consecrated  by  practice  in  this  sense.  The  word  'lifting'
would  be  more  correct.  The  Paris  experiments,  referred  to  above,  show  con-
clusively that  the  lifting  of  the  table  does  not  involve  any  modification  of
the  laws  of  gravity,  but  that  it  is  produced  by  some  force  having  its  point
d'appui  in  the  medium,  whose  weight  as  registered  in  a  scale  increases  by  the
weight  of  the  table  at  the  moment  of  lifting.  This  is  of  course  consistent  with,
though  not  necessarily  demonstrative  of,  a  fraudulent  lifting  by  her  hands  or
feet.  The  conclusion  that  the  lifting  is  not  produced  by  normal  means  can  only
be  arrived  at  by  observing  that  in  fact  no  mechanical  contact  exists.

2The  word  'control'  is  used  in  two  senses,  as  meaning  (1)  the  precautions
prevailing  at  the  moment  as  to  the  holding  of  the  medium's  hands  and  feet ;
(2)  when  printed  in  inverted  commas,  the  entity,  or  whatever  it  may  be,  calling
itself  generally  'John  King,'  which  purports  to  'possess'  her.


lix.] Sittings  with  Eusapia:  General  Account.  325


completely  to  their  control.  We  did  not  attempt  to  make
any  physiological  study  ,  of  her  condition  in  these  varying
stages,  this  having  already  been  the  subject  of  elaborate  obser-
vation by  many  previous  experimenters.

Of  the  two  trance  conditions  it  is  that  of  half-trance  which
is  the  more  complex,  as  it  appears  to  exhibit  the  characteristics
of  a  form  of  divided  consciousness,  namely,  her  own  trance
consciousness  and  that  of  the  soi-disant  '  control,'  which  co-
operate, though  by  no  means  with  complete  agreement,  in
directing  the  proceedings.  The  former  communicates  through
her  own  speech,  the  latter  by  means  of  an  established  code
through  tilts  of  the  table.  Thus,  two  tilts  signify  '  no ' ;
three,  'yes';  four,  'talk';  five,  'less  light';  seven,  'the  seance
is  ended.'  In  the  early  stages  of  trance  the  directions  for
diminution  ot  the  light  are  usually  given  through  tilts  or  levi-
tations  (sometimes  apparently  without  contact)  of  the  table.
Eusapia  herself  frequently  opposes  these  directions,  but  as  a
rule  the  table  continues,  by  repeated  series  of  five  tilts,  often
of  great  violence,  to  demand  a  reduction  of  light  to  which
she  ultimately  gives  way.  In  the  later  stages  of  trance,  when
Eusapia  is  entirely  under  1  control,'  the  directions  for  less  light
are  given  by  her  verbally,  as  is  always  the  case  for  an  in-
crease of  light,  for  which  there  is  apparently  no  accepted
code  of  tilts.

The  Control.

There  appears  to  be  no  feature  of  Eusapia's  seances  upon
which  observers  differ  more  than  upon  the  question  of  the
difficulty  or  otherwise  of  properly  controlling  the  move-
ments of  her  feet  and  hands.  By  comparing  accounts  it  is
evident  that  this  must  vary  to  a  marked  extent,  not  only  as
between  individual  stances,  but  as  between  series  of  experi-
ments. We  can,  of  course,  only  speak  of  our  own  experience.
We  can  readily  understand  that  if  experimenters  have  had
the  misfortune  of  assisting  only  at  what  may  be  called  her
'  bad  nights,'  they  would  rise  with  a  sense  of  profound  dis-
satisfaction. Of  such  we  had  several  examples,  notably  the
third  seance  of  our  series.  Eusapia  was  in  a  nervous,  anxious
mood,  perpetually  interrupting  to  ask  if  the  control  was  satis-
factory, and perpetually  rendering  it  as difficult  as  possible


326 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


for  us  to  make  it  so.  The  conditions  were  precisely  those
which  seem  to  have  chiefly  prevailed  at  the  Cambridge
sittings.  Her  hands  played  about  on  the  top  of  those  of
her  controllers  in  a  furtive  and  elusive  manner,  and  the
light  during  a  considerable  portion  of  the  seance  was  ex-
tremely dim.  It  was,  however,  not  so  dim  as  to  prevent  C.
from  twice  observing  the  substitution  of  hands  which  has
occupied  so  large  a  space  in  the  general  discussion  of  Eusapia's
mediumship.  There  was  room  to  suppose  that  this  trick  was
again  resorted  to  in  complete  darkness  in  the  fourth  stance;  and
it  was  certainly  performed  once  in  the  eleventh,  when  however
the  light  was  amply  sufficient  to  foredoom  it  to  failure,  if  her
intention  in  performing  it  was  fraudulent.  (See  note,  Seance
XL,  10.30-10.34  p.m.)

Whether  fraudulent  or  not,  the  skill  with  which  the  sub-
stitution was  performed  was  remarkable.  The  tactile  sensation
of  continuity  of  contact  was  unbroken.  On  neither  occasion
in  Seance  III.,  when  the  substitution  was  performed,  was  F.
aware  of  it,  though  it  was  immediately  seen  by  C,  on  whose
side  the  hand  was  released ;  while  in  Seance  XL,  though
visible  to  F.  from  the  other  side  of  the  table,  the  release  was
not  felt  either  by  him  or  by  Mrs.  H.,  who  was  controlling  on  the
side  on  which  it  happened.  It  is  therefore  possible,  if  not
probable,  that  substitution  may  have  taken  place  on  other
occasions  when  the  darkness  was  sufficient  to  prevent  its  being-
detected  visually,  that  is,  chiefly  during  Seances  III.,  IV.  and  X.

We  consider,  however,  that  the  conclusions  to  which  we
have  come  regarding  the  character  of  Eusapia's  phenomena
are  in  no  way  affected  by  this  admission.  These  conclusions
were  formed  as  a  result  of  seances  in  which,  on  account  of
the  degree  of  light  and  of  the  adequacy  of  control,  substitution
of  hands  was  not  possible  and, — unless  our  coincident  sensations
of  both  sight  and  touch  were  constantly  hallucinatory, — cer-
tainly did  not  take  place,  and  of  such  seances  the  bulk  of  our
series  of  experiments  was  composed.

Our  own  experience,  therefore,  is  that,  whereas  in  certain
conditions  absolutely  no  reliance  can  be  placed  on  the  control
of  Eusapia  and  the  phenomena  obtained, — even  when  there  is
no  direct  evidence  to  show  that  they  are  fraudulent, — are
wholly  inconclusive  and  unsatisfactory:  in  other  conditions  the


Lix.] Sittings  with  Eusapia :  General  Account.  327

control  of  her  is  not  a  matter  of  difficulty,  nor  can  the
phenomena  observed  therein  be  explained  by  any  such  method
as  substitution  or  release  of  hands  or  feet.

Of  substitution  of  feet  we  discovered  no  instances.  It  is
true  that  the  method  of  controlling  her  feet  preferred  by
Eusapia,  namely  the  placing  of  her  feet  on  those  of  her  con-
trollers, is  in  itself  unsatisfactory.  This  method  was,  however,
by  no  means  invariable.  Sometimes,  though  rarely,  she  allowed
the  controllers'  feet  to  be  placed  on  hers ;  sometimes  she
allowed  both  their  feet  wholly  to  encircle  hers ;  sometimes  she
encircled  the  leg  of  one  of  the  controllers  tightly  between  her
own  or  rested  both  her  legs  across  his  knees ;  and  sometimes
her  feet  were  held  beneath  the  table.  Nearly  always  the
controllers'  knees  pressed  closely  against  the  outside  of  her
knees,  so  that  her  leg  was  felt  and  imprisoned  from  the  knee
to  the  foot,  and  very  frequently  (and  whenever  he  wished)
a  controller's  free  hand  was  laid  across  her  knees.

We  notice  in  other  reports  references  to  Eusapia's  insistence
on  the  '  chain '  being  strictly  maintained,  that  is,  that  all  the
sitters  should  join  hands  in  a  circle.  During  our  seances,
except  during  Seances  IV.,  VIII.,  X.  and  XL,  when  our  num-
bers were  increased  by  the  addition  of  persons  whom  we  had
invited,  this  was  rarely  done,  and,  except  on  a  very  few  occa-
sions, was  not  asked  for.  She  never  objected  to  our  moving
our  free  hands  about  as  we  wished,  placing  them  on  her
knees,  head  or  shoulders,  or  feeling  about  behind  her,  or
passing  them  up  and  clown  the  whole  length  of  her  arms  and
legs.

On  certain  occasions,  as  will  be  seen  by  reference  to  the
Remarks  on  the  various  seances,  she  permitted  us,  and  on
others,  invited  us,  to  tie  her  hands  to  our  own  and  to  one
another,  and  her  feet  to  her  chair  or  to  ours.  But  as  already
stated,  the  occurrence  of  the  phenomena  appeared  to  depend
entirely  upon  her  own  condition,  to  the  '  psychic  trim '  in  which
she  happened  to  be,  and  not  at  all  upon  the  severity  or  laxity
of  the  control  or  the  degree  of  light  permitted  at  the  time,
or  upon  the  closeness  of  our  attention.

Our  observations  on  the  above  head  are  positive  and  are
unaffected  by  those  of  other  observers  derived  from  less  satis-
factory conditions. It  appears  unquestionable  that,  given  the


328 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part

opportunity,  Eusapia  will  seek  to  produce  her  manifestations
normally,  that  is,  by  a  substitution  and  momentary  release  of
her  hands,  and  that  if  unchecked,  she  will  continue  to  do  this
for  long  periods  together.  It  is  also  unquestionable  that  her
skill  in  effecting  this  substitution  is  so  great  that  in  poor
conditions  of  light  it  is  practically  impossible  to  rely  upon
mere  tactile  sensation  to  determine  whether  she  has  or  has
not  resorted  to  it.  Had  our  experiences  been  limited  to  our
third,  fourth  and  tenth  seances  we  should  undoubtedly,  even
though  unable  to  demonstrate  the  fraudulent  character  of  the
phenomena  or  to  explain  the  mode  of  their  production,  have
remained  wholly  unconvinced  that  we  were  not  the  victims
of  some  clever  trick.  We  did  not,  however,  willingly  permit
any  imposture,  and  on  the  occasions  when,  in  poor  conditions
of  control,  we  detected  a  substitution,  we  notified  her  that  we
had  done  so.  A  general  discussion  of  Eusapia's  fraud  and  of
the  impossibility  of  considering  it  applicable  to  the  phenomena
on  which  we  rely  for  our  own  conclusions  will  be  found  in  C.'s
and  F.'s  notes  to  Seance  III.  and  F.'s  supplementary  note  to
the  same  seance  ;  F.'s  note  to  Seance  V.;  all  the  notes  to
Seance  VI.;  B.'s  note  to  Seance  VII.;  F.'s  note  to  Seance
X.;  and  B.'s  final  note.

The  Phenomena.

These  took  place  apparently  according  to  a  certain  pro-
gramme. At  the  earlier  seances,  phenomena  of  a  simple  kind
only  were  produced.  As  the  series  progressed,  new  phenomena
were  added  at  almost  every  stance,  some  of  the  former  mani-
festations being  eliminated,  so  that  the  proceedings  appeared
to  shift,  as  it  were,  along  a  kind  of  scale.  The  following
brief  analysis  of  the  seances  will  show  this  gradual  develop-
ment, no  regard,  however,  being  paid  to  the  quality  of  evidence
regarding  each  class  of  phenomenon.

SSancc  I.

Movements  and levitations  of  the  seance table,  with

and  without  apparent  contact.
Raps  on  the  table.
Movements  of  the  curtain.


lix.] Sittings  with  Eusapia:  General  Account.


329


Stance  II.

Many  levitations  of,  and  raps  on  the  seance  table  and
movements  of  the  curtain  as  before.

Touches,  apparently  by  invisible  or  unseen  finger  tips.

Movements  of  objects  inside  the  cabinet.

Loud  noises  and  raps  inside  the  cabinet.

Upsetting  of  table  inside  cabinet  and  transportation  of
it  over  medium's  shoulder  on  to  seance  table.

Plucking  of  guitar  string  inside  cabinet.

One  appearance  of  a  head  from  cabinet.

Stance  III.

Very  few  levitations.

Many  movements  of  curtains.

Touches,  noises  in  cabinet,  and  movements  of  objects
in  cabinet.

Movements  and  levitation  of  small  table  outside  cabinet.
Pulling  of  sleeve  as  if  by  fingers.

Stance  IV.

At  first  very  few  levitations,  more  later.
Other  phenomena  as  in  Seance  III.
Appearance  of  a  white  object  (?  a  hand).
Movement  of  a  tambourine  outside  cabinet.

Stance  V.

Only one complete levitation but many  prolonged

partial  levitations.
Movements  of  curtain  as  before,  and  of  small  table

and  objects  inside  and  outside  cabinet.
Appearance  of  hand  and  head  from  cabinet.
Production  of  a  tangible  hand  felt  through  curtain.

o  o

Production  of  cold  breeze  from  medium's  brow.

Stance  VI.

No  levitations.

Bulging  of  medium's  dress.

Violent  movements  of  the  curtain.

Several  appearauces  of  objects  like  heads,  and  of  grey
and  white  objects,  from  cabinet ;  also  of  a  hand.
Grasps  by  complete  hand  through  curtain.


330 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part

Loud  bangs  on  seance  table.
C4entle  twanging  of  guitar.
Cold  breeze  as  before.

Stance  V II.

No  levitations,  and  but  few  movements  of  table.
Prolonged  bulging  of  dress.

Appearance  of hand  and  arm  from  cabinet,  and  of

other  undefined  objects.
Movements  of  objects  outside  cabinet,  and  loud  bangs

as  before.

Appearance  of  hand  bringing  bell  from  cabinet.

Appearance  of  lights.

Grasp  by  a  visible  hand  outside  cabinet.

Stance  VIII.

Some  levitations  and  movements  of  table,  and  violent

movements  of  curtain.
Series  of  transportation  of  objects  from  inside  cabinet.
Many  touches ;  and  appearances  of  objects  like  heads

and  hands.
Untying  of  knots.

Stance  IX.

Exuberant  resumption  of  levitations  of  table.

Long  continued  movements  of  objects  outside  cabinet.

Touches,  and  grasps  by  complete  hand  through  curtain.

{Before  Stance  X.  Ringing  of  bell  in  seance  room  before
arrival  of  medium. (See  note  '  Bell  incident.')]

Stance  X.

Almost  blank ;  a  few  touches,  grasps,  levitations  and
bangs  on  table.

Stance  XI.

General  resume"  of  almost  all  preceding  phenomena,
levitations,  bulging  of  dress,  a  light,  movements
of  curtain,  grasps  of  hand,  appearances  of  head
and  other  undefined  objects,  and  movements  of
objects,  outside  cabinet.

Sensation  of  an  arm  inside  cabinet.


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  General  Account.


331


Slow  climbing  of  a  stool  up  the  curtain.
Touch  inside  cabinet.
Long  continued  touches  through  curtain.
Loud  raps  and  scrapings  on  internal  door  at  consider-
able distance  from  medium.

Although  it  appears  that  the  conditions  under  which  our
seances  were  held  compared  favourably  as  regards  light  and
the  general  control  permitted  with  many  of  those  of  former
observers,  the  phenomena  themselves  were  of  the  ordinary
type.  Not  only  did  they  present  nothing  exceptional,  but
many  of  the  more  remarkable  phenomena  described  by  Sir
Oliver  Lodge,  by  Prof.  Morselli,  and  by  M.  Courtier  in  his
report  of  the  sittings  held  by  the  Institut  Ge'ne'ral  Psychologique
of  Paris,  and  others,  did  not  occur.

We  proceed  to  a  description  of  the  various  classes  of  phe-
nomena, with  references  to  the  shorthand  notes  of  each  seance
for  examples  which  appear  to  us  especially  worthy  of  attention.
Further  descriptions  of  the  more  interesting  cases  will  generally
be  found  in  the  preliminary  Eemarks  to  the  respective  seances
or  in  the  notes  at  the  end.

(1)  Movements  and  levitations  of  the  stance  table.

A  series  of  these  movements  generally  occurred  at  the  be-
ginning and  end  of  each  seance,  while  occasional  levitations
occurred  during  its  course.  They  were  among  the  most  frequent
phenomena,  and  were  produced  in  the  strongest  prevailing  light,
viz.  a  light  in  which  we  were  able  to  read  small  print.  As  a
rule  the  table  began  to  rock  in  a  manner  explainable  by  the
ordinary  pressure  of  Eusapia's  hands.  It  then  tilted  in  a
manner  not  so  explainable,  that  is,  in  a  direction  away  from  the
medium  while  her  hands  were  resting  lightly  on  the  top,  and
finally  it  would  leave  the  ground  entirely  and  rise  to  a  height  of
from  six  inches  to  two  feet  rapidly,  remain  there  an  appreciable
time  and  then  come  down.  Sometimes  there  would  be  slight
contact  of  the  medium's  hands  on  the  top,  but  very  frequently
no  apparent  contact  whatever,  her  hands  being  held  by  us  at
a  distance  of  a  foot  or  two  from  the  table,  either  in  her  lap
or  above  the  table. No  precautions that  we  took  hindered


332 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


these  movements  in  the  slightest.  Eusapia  had  no  hooks,
either  at  her  wrists  or  under  the  front  of  her  bodice,  and  we
could  never  discern  the  slightest  movement  of  her  knees  or
feet.  We  very  often  had  our  free  hands  on  her  knees,  while
her  feet  were  controlled  either  by  our  feet  or  by  one  of  us
under  the  table,  and  were  generally  away  from  the  table  legs,
an  absolutely  clear  space  being  sometimes  discernible  between
her  and  any  part  of  the  table.  The  total  levitations  in  our
series  lasted  as  a  maximum  two  or  three  seconds,  though  other
observers  have  reported  levitations  lasting  a  much  longer  space
of  time.

Partial 1  levitations,  on  the  other  hand,  when  the  table  re-
mained tilted  at  an  angle  on  two  legs,  generally  away  from
or  sideways  to  the  medium,  were  often  of  very  much  longer
duration,  half  a  minute  or  even  a  minute.  Sometimes  there
would  be  slight  contact,  though  of  a  kind  insufficient  to  produce
the  effect  normally,  but  often  there  was  no  ascertainable  contact
whatever,  either  with  feet  or  hands.  We  would  sometimes  press
the  table  down  and  it  would  rise  again,  as  if  suspended  on
elastics.

Sometimes  there  would be  contact  of  her  dress  with  the
table  leg,  but  we  never  were  able  to  perceive  that  this  form
of  contact  had any mechanical importance. During  certain
seances,  notably  the  first,  second  and  ninth,  the  levitations  fol-
lowed one  another  with  extreme  rapidity  so  that  our  dictation
of  the  circumstances  of  one  to  the  shorthand  writer  was  often
interrupted  by  the  occurrence  of  another  and  another. See  e.g.
Seance  I.  11.4,  11.43  and  11.44.
II.  10.54  to  11.11.
III.  10.52,  11.6  (table  in  stocks).
VIII.  10.18.

IX.  10.14  to  10.17,  10.23  2  and  F.'s  note,  11.50 2
and  B.'s  Final  note.

(2)  Movements  of  curtains.

The  most  frequent  of  the  phenomena,  as  well  as  that  most
susceptible  of  satisfactory  control,  was  movements  of  the  cur-

1  See  footnote,  p.  347.

2  Phenomena  to  which  special  attention  is  directed  are  given  in  italics  or
block  type.


lix.] Sittings  with  Eusapia :  General  Account.  333

tains  hanging  behind  the  medium.  For  these  she  generally,
though  not  always,  demanded  a  reduction  of  the  light,  but  it
still  remained  sufficient  to  enable  every  movement  of  the
medium  to  be  clearly  seen,  even  from  the  further  end  of  the
table.  She  would  generally  hold  out  one  of  her  hands  towards
the  curtain,  always  held  by  or  holding  one  of  ours  at  a  dis-
tance of  about  8  or  12  inches  from  it,  and  the  curtain  would
balloon  out  towards  it  in  a  bulge.  Sometimes  the  same  effect
would  be  produced  if  one  of  us  held  our  own  hands  towards
the  curtain  at  her  request.  The  bulge  was  a  round  one,  as
if  the  curtains  were  pushed  out  from  behind.  If  we  made  a
sudden  grab  at  the  bulge,  no  resistance  was  encountered,  and
the  bulge  subsided  as  though  one  had  pricked  the  surface  of
a  balloon.  There  was  no  attachment  to  her  hand,  as  we
constantly  verified  by  passing  our  hands  between  her  and  the
curtain.  Nor  would  any  attachment  produce  the  same  effect,
as  the  curtain  was  so  thin  that  the  point  of  attachment  of
any  string  would  at  once  have  been  seen.  Besides  these  bulges
in  response  to  her  or  our  gestures,  there  were  spontaneous
movements  of  the  curtain,  often  very  violent,  and  frequently
the  whole  curtain  would  be  flung  out  with  so  much  force
that  the  bottom  of  it  came  right  over  to  the  further  end  of
the  table.  This  occurred  notwithstanding  that  Eusapia  herself
was  perfectly  visible  and  motionless,  both  hands  held  and
separately  visible  upon  the  table,  her  feet  away  from  the  cur-
tain, in  front  of  her,  and  under  the  table.  See  e.g.
Seance  I.  12.5,  12.11.
II.  11.17,  11.30.

III.  10.6.
V.  10.37  etc.,  10,57.

VI.  12.55,  2.0,  C.'s  note  and  B.'s  Final  note  referring

to  it.
VII.  Passim.
VIII.  11.0  etc.,  11.15,  11.53  etc.
X.  11.6  etc.

XL  10.11  to  10.18  and  F.'s  note.

(3)  Balgings  of  the  mediums  dress.

This  is  usually  a  frequent  phenomenon  at  Eusapia's  seances,
though  in  our  own  series  we  did  not have  many  examples.


334 E.  F eliding,  W.  W.  Bag  gaily,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


A  description  of  it  will  be  found  in  B.'s  note  to  Seance  VII.,
which  was  the  only  seance  at  which  we  had  an  opportunity
of  careful  observation  of  it,  though  it  occurred  casually  at
several  other  seances.

See  Seance  VII.  9.47  etc.

(4)  Raps.

Of  this,  the  simplest  of  all  Eusapia's  phenomena,  there  were
many  examples,  but  we  did  not  succeed  in  getting  it  under
what  could  be  considered  good  evidential  conditions  until  the
eighth  and  last  seances.  Either  the  raps  were  produced  while
the  medium's  hands  were  resting  on  the  table,  or  the  exact
position  of  her  feet  at  the  moment  of  their  production  was
not  determined,  or  the  place  where  they  sounded  was  uncertain.
At  the  end  of  Seance  XL,  when  the  light  had  been  turned  up
and  the  seance  was  thought  to  be  ended,  there  occurred,  in
response  to  gestures  by  the  medium,  a  series  of  raps  on  an
internal  door  at  a  distance  of  6  inches  to  3  feet  from  her,
which  appeared  to  fulfil  all  the  necessary  conditions.  See

Seance  VIII.  11.19.

XI.  1.15,  and  B.'s  Final  note.

(5)  Bangs  on  the  sdance  table.

These  bangs  may  be  considered  separately  from  the  raps,
the  quality  and  quantity  of  the  sound  being  absolutely  different.
Whereas  the  raps  (except  those  which  occurred  in  Stances
VIII.  and  XI.)  were  seldom  louder  than  if  made  by  a  gentle
rap  with  a  knuckle  on  the  table,  and  were  unaccompanied  by
any  apparent  movement  on  the  part  of  the  medium,  the  bangs
sounded  like  a  heavy  crash  with  a  wooden  mallet,  and  were
always  accompanied  by  a  sudden  movement  either  of  the
medium's  head  or  leg,  though  without  any  apparent  contact
with  the  table. See  e.g.

Seance  VI.  12.25.
VII.  11.1.
X.  11.11.

(6)  Noises  inside  the  cabinet.

These  were  of  constant  occurrence,  and  took  various  forms  r
sometimes  a  violent  shaking  of the small table  inside  the


lix.] Sittings  with  Eusapia:  General  Account.


335


cabinet  causing  all  the  objects  upon  it  to  clatter  over ;  some-
times bangs  upon  some  unascertained  place  within  the  cabinet;
sometimes  noisy  rhythmical  movements  of  one  or  other  of  the
objects  within,  acting  synchronously  with  a  series  of  rhythmical
gestures  or  pinches  of  the  hand  of  one  of  the  controllers  out-
side. See  e.g.

Seance  It  11.34  to  11.37.

III.  11.45,  11.50.

IV.  12.18  etc.

V.  10.52,  11.0  to  11.4.
VI.  11.50.
VIII.  11.43,  11.52,  12.17  etc,

(7)  Plucking  of  the  guitar.

Although  this  should  be  included  under  the  previous  head-
ing it  deserves  special  mention  on  account  of  its  remarkable
character.  It  may  be  numbered  among  the  phenomena  which
impressed  us  most.  See

Stance  II.  about  12.3,  and  C.'s  and  F.'s  notes.
VI.  C.'s  note.

(8)  Transportations  of  the  small  table  from  the  cabinet  on  to  the

stance  table,  and  movements  and  levitations  of  it  outside
the  curtain.

After  the  levitations  of  the  seance  table  and  the  movements
of  the  curtain  it  often  happened  that  the  next  manifestation
of  '  force '  consisted  of  violent  shakings  of  the  small  table
inside  the  cabinet  on  which  were  placed  various  small  objects
as  before  stated.  It  was  sometimes  shaken  with  such  vigour
that  the  objects  all  fell  off.  On  three  or  four  occasions  it
then  appeared  over  the  medium's  shoulder,  as  though  lifted
by  some  one  within  the  cabinet,  and  landed  upon  the  seance
table  horizontally,  that  is,  with  its  top  resting  on  our  table
and  its  legs  pointing  into  the  cabinet.  It  would  then  some-
times appear  to  hang  in  that  position,  for  half  a  minute  or  a
minute  (possibly,  though  not  apparently,  supported  by  Eusapia's
arm,  or  ours  as  we  held  her  hand  on  the  seance  table),  and
try  to  climb  on  to  the  seance  table. This  it  never  succeeded


336 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part

fully  in  doing  and  it  eventually  would  fall  back  as  if  tired.
See  e.g.

Seance  II.  1142.

IV.  11.9,  11.13,  11.16  (conditions  poor).

v.  11.ee,  11.51.

After  the  small  table  bad  in  the  above  manner  got  outside
the  curtain,  it  would  frequently  move  about,  sometimes  ap-
proaching the  medium,  and  sometimes  receding  from  her,  or
be  levitated  when  standing  at  a  certain  distance  from  her  and
without  any  apparent  contact.  See  e.g.
Seance  II.  11.55  and  12.1.

III.  11.50  etc.,  but  see  C.'s  note  at  end  of  short-
hand report.

V.  11.8,  11.22  to  11,36.

(9)  Transportations  of  other  objects  from  the  cabinet.

After  the  fifth  stance,  in  order  to  prevent  the  objects  placed
on  the  small  table  from  being  disturbed,  we  either  did  not
put  the  table  inside  the  cabinet  at  all  or  tied  it  firmly
down  to  staples.  In  the  latter  case,  it  was  twice  violently
shaken,  lifted  and  let  go  with  a  bang,  by  some  force  which,
considering  the  tightness  of  the  fastening,  must  have  been
very  considerable.  The  attention  which  apparently  had  hitherto
been  directed  chiefly  to  the  table  was  now  diverted  to  the
objects  on  it,  and  these  were  in  turn  transported  by  some
unascertainable  agency  on  to  the  seance  table.  See  e.g.
Seance  VII.  11.20.

VIII.  11.55,  11.59,  12.22  (see  C.'s  and  F.'s  notes),
12.46,  12.50.
IX.  12.47.
XI.  12.15.
See  also  (15)  below.

(10)  Touches as  by  invisible or  unseen  finger  tips  outside  the

curtain.

These  touches  took  place  on  our  arms,  shoulders,  heads,  etc.
Although  the  light  might  be  sufficient  to  see  the  medium's
head  and  hands  clearly,  and  we  might  be  looking  in  the
direction  from  which  the  touch  came,  whatever  it  was  that
produced  the  touches  remained  unseen. See  e.g.


ltx.] Sittings  with  Eusapia:  General  Account.


337


Seance  II.  11.44,  11.49,  12.0.

III.  11.41,  11.45.

VI.  11.41,  11.44.

VII.  11.17.

VIII.  11.38,  12.9.

IX.  10.47  to  10.57,  1.3,  1.5.

X.  12.11  to  12.20  (see  B.'s  note).

XT.  11.0,  11.21,  11.28.

(11)  Touches  and  grasps  by  a  hand  through  the  curtain.

This  was  the  next  development  of  this  class  of  phenomenon.
The  object  which  touched  us  was  now  apparently  a  material
hand  with  living  fingers,  even  the  nails  of  which  were  on
some  occasions  clearly  felt.  These  touches  occurred  at  times
when  we  were  absolutely  certain  that  Eusapia's  hands  were
held  on  the  table  in  front  of  her. See  e.g.

Seance  V.  11.38  and  C.'s  note.

VI.  11.58,  1:2.11  to  12.17,  12.26,  and  C.'s  and  B.'s

notes.
VIII.  12.50,  12.56.
IX.  12.38,  1247  to  1.0.
XI.  11.2  to  11.9,  11.30.
On  one  occasion  only  was  there  a  touch  by  a  hand  inside
the  curtain. See  Seance  XL  12.56  and  B.'s  Final  note.

(12)  Abearance  of  hands  outside  the  curtain.

The  next  development  was  that  these  hands  became  visible
outside  the  curtain.  They  generally,  though  not  always,  appeared
between  the  parting  of  the  curtains  over  Eusapia's  head.  They
were  of  different  appearances,  dead  paper  white,  or  of  a
natural  colour.  Sometimes  they  shot  out  rapidly  and  were
imperfectly  seen,  sometimes  they  came  with  a  slow  deliberate
motion,  and  sometimes  carried  objects  with  them.  On  one
occasion  a  grasp  was  felt  by  a  hand  seen  at  the  same  time.
See  e.g.

Seance  V.  11.10.
VI.  12.23.

VII.  11.20  and  F.'s  note,  12.9  (F.'s  control  not  given),

and  B.'s  note.
VIII.  1.5  and  F.'s  note.

Y


338 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  II.  Garrington.  [part


(13)  Appearance  of  heads  and  objects  more  or  less  like  heads.

These  '  heads  '  were  of  several  different  kinds.  At  one  time
they  would  appear  like  shadowy  objects  which  shot  out  with
extreme  rapidity  and  silence  from  the  side  of  the  curtain,
looking,  from  the  position  from  which  they  were  seen,  like
two-dimensional  faces  in  profile,  made  of  cobweb.  At  another,
the  appearance  was  as  though  the  curtain  had  itself  been
formed  into  the  likeness  of  a  head  with  very  pronounced
features  by  being  drawn  tightly  over  a  large  hand  with  its
fingers  crooked  to  imitate  a  face.  On  other  occasions  they
appeared  like  a  square  head  at  the  end  of  a  long  stalk-like
body,  which  shot  out  over  the  medium's  head,  turned  sharply,
approaching  within  a  few  inches  of  the  sitter's  face,  and
then  shot  back.  Sometimes  they  looked  like  the  medium's  own
arm,  pivoted  on  her  shoulder,  and  wrapped  up  in  something
black,  producing  the  effect  of  folds  (or,  as  we  described  them
hurriedly  at  the  time,  '  warts ').  The  movement  of  these  latter
'  heads '  was  slow,  and  on  the  occasions  when  they  appeared,
they  emerged  from  the  side  of  the  curtain,  came  right  across
the  table  (bringing  the  curtain  also,  as  would  be  the  case  if
they  had  really  been  the  medium's  arm),  bowed  two  or  three
times  with  deliberation,  and  then  retired.  Their  appearance
was  obviously  suspicious,  but  the  control  existing  at  the  time
seemed  adequate  to  exclude  the  possibility  of  her  having  freed
her  arm  for  their  production. See  e.g.

Seance  II.  About  11.52  (no  control).
V.  11.18.

VI.  11.38,  12.30,  12.40.
VII.  12.5 \  and  F.'s  note,  12.9  and  B.'s  note.
XI.  11.33,  11.34.

(14)  Appearance  of  other  indefinable  objects.

In  addition  to  these  so-called  heads  there  were  other  objects,
black,  white  or  grey,  which  appeared  from  the  cabinet  above
the  medium's  head  or  at  the  side  of  the  curtains.  They  were
of  different  shapes,  sometimes  square,  sometimes  round,  in  the
latter  case  looking  like  a  white  handkerchief  rolled  up,  or  a
handful  of  white  muslin.  Here  again  the  actual  appearance
was  obviously  suspicious. See  e.g.


MX.] Sittings  with  Eusapia:  General  Account.  339


Seance  VI.  11.41,  11.58,  12.6,  12.17,  12.20,  12.23.

VII.  10.57  (?  hand  and  arm),  10.58,  11.7,  11.30,

11.32;  11.36  (control  not  given)  and  many
other  cases  where,  however,  the  control  was
not  reported.

(15)  Transportation  of  objects  from  inside  the  curtain  by  a  visible

hand.

There  were  only  two  instances  of  this,  and  they  have  already
been  included  under  (12).

Seance  VII.  11.20  and  F!s  note.

VIII.  1.5.

(16)  Movements  of  objects  outside  the  curtain.

Besides  the  levitation  of  the  small  table  which  took  place
after  it  had  emerged  from  the  cabinet,  there  were  movements
of  other  objects,  chiefly  of  a  small  stool  which  stood  about
3  feet  to  the  left  of  the  medium,  having  either  stood  there
from  the  beginning  of  the  seance,  or  placed  there  in  the  middle
of  it  for  the  express  purpose  of  seeing  whether  she  could  move
it.  It  either  jumped  about  where  it  stood,  or  approached  the
medium  or  receded  from  her  in  response  to  gestures  made  with
her  hand  at  a  distance  from  it  of  several  feet.  In  Seance  XI.
it  was  also  seen  to  climb  very  slowly  up  the  curtain  from  the
floor  to  the  level  of  her  head,  at  a  distance  of  about  3  feet
from  her  body.  There  were  also  movements  of  a  tambourine
on  the  floor  at  a  distance  of  2  or  3  feet  from  the  medium.
Examination  for  an  attachment  of  some  kind  was  made  in  the
intervals  between  movements  of  this  kind,  but  none  was  found.
See  e.g.

Seance  IV.  12.23  (control  imperfectly  noted).

IX.  10.30,  10.33,  10.37,  10.40,  1145,  11.58,  1.5.
XL  10.19,  10.23,  12:26.

(17)  Lights.

Of  these  we  had  but  few  examples,  but  these  few  must  be
ranked  among  the  more  interesting  phenomena.  They  were
of  three  kinds,  a  steady  blue-green  light  such  as  one  might
imagine  to  proceed  from  a  self-luminous  aquamarine,  a  yellow


340 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


light,  and  a  small  sparkling  light  like  the  spark  between  the
poles  of  a  battery  and  emitting  a  similar  sound.  See
Seance  VII.  11.36,  11.37,  11.45,  11.46  and  F.'s  note.
XL  10.55,  11.1.

(18)  Sensation  of  cold  breeze  issuing  from  a  scar  on  medium's  brow.

Perhaps  of  all  the  phenomena,  this,  by  reason  of"  its  very
simplicity,  appears  one  of  the  most  preposterous.  It  has  con-
stantly been  observed  by  other  experimenters.  See

Seance  V.  After  12.12.

VI.  After  termination  of  seance,  see  C.'s  note.

(19)  Untying  of  knots.

Apparently  sudden  and  mysterious  untyings  of  knots  have
also  been  reported  by  other  experimenters.  We  had  only  one
instance  of  this.  Unlike  most  of  the  other  phenomena,  it
occurred  casually  and  unexpectedly,  after  the  manner  of  a  con-
juring trick. We  record  its  occurrence  without  further  comment.

See  Seance  VIII.  1.5  and  F.'s  note.

Conclusions.

The  evidence  for  the  foregoing  phenomena  varies  considerably
both  in  quantity  and  quality,  and  we  are  of  opinion  that  any
attempt  at  an  analysis  dividing  them  into  classes  for  which
the  evidence  may  be  regarded  as  sufficient  or  insufficient  would
be  of  purely  academic  interest  and  of  no  real  value.

It  was  only  through  constant  repetition  of  the  same  phe-
nomenon, in  a  good  light  and  at  moments  when  its  occurrence
was  expected,  and  after  finding  that  none  of  the  precautions
which  we  took  had  any  influence  in  impeding  it,  that  we
gradually  reached  the  conviction  that  some  force  was  in  play
which  was  beyond  the  reach  of  ordinary  control,  and  beyond
the  skill  of  the  most  skilful  conjuror.  But  though  we  have
come  to  that  general  conclusion,  we  find  it  exceedingly  difficult
to  say  to  which  particular  phenomena,  or  even  to  which
particular  kind  of  phenomena,  we  have  sufficiently  strict  evidence
to  apply  it.

So  while  each  of  us  could  indicate,  and  in  our  various  notes
has  indicated,  cases  of  special  evidential  value  to  himself,  we


lix.] Sittings  with  Eusapia :  General  Account.  341


hesitate  to  select  either  any  particular  individual  phenomenon
as  providing  absolute  proof  of  some  supernormal  agency,  or
any  individual  class  of  phenomena  as  exhibiting  more  certainly
its  action.

We  think  there  is  no  conceivable  form  of  evidence  which,
if  relating  to  one  phenomenon  only,  would  have  convinced  us,
even  as  eye-witnesses,  of  its  supernormal  character.  The  mind
confronted  with  an  obviously  absurd  isolated  fact  merely  rebels,
as  with  us  was  (and  remains)  the  case  in,  for  example,  the
isolated  instance  of  untying  of  knots  reported  in  Seance  VIII.
Every  possible  and  impossible  form  of  doubt  suggests  itself
under  such  circumstances.  And  to  persons  who  were  not  eye-
witnesses, the  evidence  regarding  any  special  phenomenon  will
inevitably  appear  still  less  conclusive.

Thus  our  conclusions  are  based  on  the  resultant  impressions
derived  from  the  whole  series,  since  we  are  unable  to  say  to
what  special  phenomena  these  conclusions  extend,  and  we  limit
ourselves  here  to  a  statement  of  opinion,  amounting  in  our
own  minds  to  certainty,  that  to  explain  Eusapia's  manifesta-
tions some  agency  of  a  kind  wholly  different  from  mere  physical
dexterity  on  her  part  must  be  invoked.

The  conditions  in  which  the  seances  were  held  render
absolutely  inadmissible  the  supposition  that  there  was  any
accomplice.  There  remains  therefore,  in  our  opinion,  only  one
possible  alternative  to  the  hypothesis  of  some  supernormal
physical  force,  namely,  the  hypothesis  that  in  some  way  we
were  collectively  hallucinated.

The  hallucination  theory  has  been  repeatedly  suggested  and
has  lately  been  urged  with  much  ingenuity  by  Miss  Johnson1
as  the  probable  interpretation  of  this  class  of  phenomena,  and
especially  of  the  phenomena  occurring  in  the  case  of  D.  D.  Home,
which  it  would  seem  impossible  to  explain  normally  on  any  other
hypothesis.

It  appears  to  us  that  this  hypothesis  must  involve  the
possession  by  Eusapia  of  some  supernormal  psychical  force,
acting  upon  our  perceptions — without  systematic  suggestion,
without  preparation,  irregular  in  its  procedure,  but  invariably
producing  the  same  results — in  such  a  way  as  constantly  to

1  See  her  paper  on  "The  Education  of  the  Sitter,"  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.
Vol.  XXL,  pp.  483-511.


342 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


inhibit  our  power  of  deriving  any  accurate  information  through
our  ordinary  channels  of  sense,  visual  or  tactile.

The  theory  of  hallucination  in  this  case  must  apply  to  one  or
both  of  the  following  incidents :  namely,  the  fact  of  the
phenomenon  itself,  or  the  character  of  the  control  existing  at
the  moment  of  its  production  ;  that  is,  either  we  imagined  that
the  phenomenon  took  place  when  in  fact  it  did  not,  i.e.  the
phenomenon  was  subjective,  not  objective ;  or  we  imagined  that
we  both  saw  and  felt  Eusapia's  hands  in  a  particular  place
when  in  fact  they  were  elsewhere ;  in  other  words,  we  were
constantly  '  glamoured.'

We  think  ourselves  justified  in  discarding  the  first  of  these
alternatives  at  once,  without  further  discussion.  The  mere  fact
that,  when  such  a  phenomenon  as  the  transportation  of  an
object  occurred,  it  was  afterwards  found  in  the  place  to  which
it  had  appeared  to  be  moved  is  alone  sufficient  to  show  its
inapplicability.  Further,  the  flash-light  photographs  of  M.  de
Fontenay  and  others,  and  the  records  of  the  self-registering
instruments  used  by  the  Institut  Gindral  Psychologique  or  by
Prof.  Bottazzi,  supply  absolute  proof  of  the  objectivity  of  the
phenomena,1  although,  of  course,  affording  no  evidence  of  their
supernormal  character.

There  remains,  then,  the  theory  that  we  were  hallucinated
as  to  our  control.

It  is  clearly  insufficient  to  suppose  that  we  were  merely
deceived,  an  explanation  which,  in  unfavourable  conditions  of
hand-holding  and  of  light,  would  be  more  than  plausible.  The
deception,  in  the  conditions  which  prevailed  at  the  bulk  of
our  seances,  must  amount  to  a  complete  hallucination.

1  One  hears  much  of  hallucination  as  a  possible  explanation  of  physical
phenomena  ;  but  I  can  say  that,  after  attending  many  stances,  I  have  never
seen  a  single  trace  of  hallucination  in  any  single  instance.  In  some  cases,
I  have  seen  illusions  propagated,  but  never  a  full-blown  hallucination.  In
many  cases,  hallucination  has  been  urged  as  a  possible  explanation  for  facts
which  I  knew  and  saw  to  be  perfectly  fraudulent.  Fraud  is  always  a  far
simpler  and  more  rational  hypothesis  than  hallucination ;  and  I  may  say  in
this  connection  that  I  have  never  met  a  conjuror  who  believes  in  hallucination
as  an  explanation  of  any  conjuring  or  mediumistic  trick,  though  his  whole
performance  depends  upon  a  series  of  illusions.  I  think  that,  on  account
of  my  long  experience  as  an  amateur  conjuror  and  investigator  of  fraudulent
mediumistic  devices,  my  testimony  should  have  some  weight  in  this  connec-
tion.—H.  C.


Lix.] Sittings  with  Eusapia :  General  Account.


343


This  is  undoubtedly  the  theory  which  will  be  held  by  the
most  serious  of  our  critics,  and  it  is  the  oidy  one  we  think  it
worth  while  attempting  to  meet.  To  do  so  adequately  is  by  its
very  nature  impossible,  just  as  it  would  be  impossible  for  a
person,  by  mere  assertion,  to  meet  a  charge  that  he  was  not
telling  the  truth. We  can  but  attempt  to  show  its  improbability

It  would  involve  the  assumption  not  only  that  each  of  us
was  subject  to  fully  externalised  hallucinations  both  of  touch
and  of  vision,  but  that  we  were  concurrently  and  concordantly
hallucinated.  When,  for  example,  at  1.0  a.m.  in  Seance  XL,  B.
reports  that  he  is  holding  both  the  medium's  thumbs  in  different
hands,  and  F.  from  the  further  end  of  the  opposite  side  of  the
table  shortly  afterwards  spontaneously  reports  a  change  of  B.'s
control  and  says  that  he  now  sees  B.  holding  both  her  thumbs
in  his  right  hand,  it  would  have  to  be  supposed,  first,  that  B.
was  hallucinated  when  he  reported  that  he  held  both  her
thumbs  in  separate  hands,  and  secondly,  that  F.  was  hallucinated
when  he  reported  the  change  of  the  thumbs  to  B.'s  right  hand,
and  that  both  remained  collectively  hallucinated  during  the  con-
tinued touches  on  B.'s  left  hand  by  a  hand  within  the  curtain.

The  hypothesis  would  imply,  further,  not  only  that  we  our-
selves were  subject  to  such  hallucinations,  but  that  the  majority
of  all  the  other  experimenters  with  Eusapia  were  similarly  subject
to  them.  Also,  that  such  hallucinations  could  be  induced  with-
out words  on  Eusapia's  part,  on  persons  who,  while  they  had
frequently  assisted  at  performances  at  which  professedly  super-
normal occurrences  were  to  take  place,  had  never  yet  been
hallucinated  into  a  belief  in  them.

We  should  again  have  to  suppose  that  this  state  of  '  be-
slatnourment '  could  co-exist  with  a  decree  of  attention  which

o  o

was  constantly  being  stimulated  by  the  necessity  of  having  to
report  momentary  observations  to  the  shorthand  writer ;  that
it  was  strong  enough  to  prevail  against  an  attitude,  at  all
events  in  the  earlier  seances,  of  hostility,  and  in  all  of
them,  of  suspicion  ;  that  while  it  was  sufficiently  effective  to
prevent  us  from  observing  the  modus  operandi  of  tricks  per-
formed in  a  reasonable  light,  requiring  the  greatest  boldness  of
execution,  and  often  continuing  for  a  considerable  space  of
time,  it  was  not  effective  enough  to  preclude  us  from  perfectly
well  noticing  the  machinery  of  substitution  when  no  tricks


344 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


were  performed  whatever  (Seances  III.  10.28;  XI.  10.30),  or
from  contemporaneously  speculating  upon  its  performance  in
conditions  of  darkness,  when  illusions  of  sensation  might,  as
we  were  well  aware,  easily  take  place.  (Seances  IV.  12.9  ;
X.  12.11).

Finally,  we  must  suppose  that  this  abnormal  condition  of
consciousness  had  supervened  without  any  of  the  victims  to  it
either  being  aware  of  any  change  in  himself,  or  noticing  it
in  the  others.  While  familiar  through  experiment  with  the
possibilities  of  hypnotic  and  other  suggestion,  whereby  halluci-
nations even  in  the  waking  state  may  occasionally  be  produced,
we  believe  that  long  continued  and  collective  hallucinations  of
this  kind,  without  either  previous  hypnosis  or  verbal  suggestion,
but  purely  spontaneous,  are  wholly  outside  those  possibilities.

The  question  therefore  seems  reduced  to  a  choice  between
two  improbabilities.  Either  we  were  constantly  thrown  into  a
state  of  hallucination  by  means  of  a  mysterious  suggestive
influence  exercised  by  Eusapia,  for  the  existence  of  which,
either  in  her  or  in  anybody  else,  there  is  otherwise,  in  our
view,  no  evidence  whatever ;  or,  on  the  other  hand,  the
ordinarily  recognised  laws  of  dynamics  have  to  be  enlarged  by
the  assumption  that  there  does  actually  exist  some  hitherto
unascertained  force  liberated  in  her  presence  and  for  the  exist-
ence of  which,  both  in  her  and  certain  other  persons,  the  body
of  evidence  is,  we  think,  not  inconsiderable.

With  great  intellectual  reluctance,  though  without  much
personal  doubt  as  to  its  justice,  we  adopt  the  latter  alternative.
Making,  then,  a  reservation  for  the  possibility  of  some  form  of
hallucinatory  influence  of  such  a  kind  as  fundamentally  to  in-
validate the  trustworthiness  of  all  evidence  and  for  the  existence
of  which  we  believe  there  is  neither  warrant  nor  parallel,  we
are  of  opinion  that  we  have  witnessed  in  the  presence  of
Eusapia  Palladino  the  action  of  some  telekinetic  force,  the
nature  and  origin  of  which  we  cannot  attempt  to  specify,
through  which,  without  the  introduction  of  either  accomplices,
apparatus,  or  mere  manual  dexterity,  she  is  able  to  produce
movements  of,  and  percussive  and  other  sounds  in,  objects  at  a
distance  from  her  and  unconnected  with  her  in  any  apparent
physical  manner,  and  also  to  produce  matter,  or  the  appearance
of  matter,  without  any  determinable  source  of  supply.


Fig.  III.


Facing  p.  345.


Sittings  ivith  Euswpia:  Detailed  Report.


345


III.

DETAILED  BEPORT.

Measurements.

Room} Width,  11  ft.  (3'35  m.).
„ Length,  16  ft.  5  ins.  (5  m.).

Height,  12  ft.  4  ins.  (3-7  5  m.).

Cabinet. 8  ft.  2  A  ins.  (2 -5  m.)  high.

3  ft.  (90  cm.)  deep,  side  to  medium's  left.
„ 3  ft.  3  A  ins.  (1  m.)  deep,  side  to  medium's  right.
„ 2  ft.  7  ins.  (80  cm.)  from  centre  of  curtains  to  corner.

E.  R.'s  Chair. Seat,  1  ft.  6A  ins.  (40  cm.)  high.

Width,  inside  legs,  1  ft.  1A  ins.  (34  cm.).

outside  legs,  1  ft.  4  ins.  (40  cm.).
Depth  of  seat,  1  ft.  3  ins.  (38  cm.).
Height  of  hack  from  floor,  2  ft.  10  A  ins.  (86  cm.).

Sdance  Table.

Height,  2  ft,  8  ins.  (80  cm.).

Width,  1  ft.  7 i  ins.  (48  cm.).

Between  legs,  small  end,  1  ft.  4  A  ins.  (41  cm.).

Outside „  „  1  ft.  7  ins.  (48  cm.).

Length,  2  ft.  lOf  ins.  (87  cm.).

Eim  (flange),  3  A  ins.  (9  cm.).

Thickness  of  wood,  f  in.  (1  cm.).

Depth  of  small  rim,  side,  1  in-  (-5  cm.).

„  „ ends, in.  ('8  cm.).

Weight,  10  Lbs.  8  oz.  (475  kilog.).


Weight  of  small  round  table,  7  lbs.  8  oz.  (3 '4  kilog.)
Weight  of  clay  with  board,  3  lbs.  12  oz.  (1"7  kilog.)
Weight  of  clay  without  board,  3  lbs.  3  oz.  (1*45  kilog.)

1The  door  close  to  the  cabinet  (see  plan  of  room,  Fig.  III.)  was  permanently
locked  and  secured  with  tape.  There  was  no  connection  between  any  of  the
windows,  which  were  locked  and  shuttered.  The  seance  room  was  on  the  fifth
floor  of  the  hotel.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  seance  room  was  sheltered  on
either  side  by  B.'s  and  C.'s  rooms,  which  prevented  any  access  from  the  hotel.
The  floor  was  of  tiles  covered  by  heavy  carpet.


346


E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


Note.— In  the  case  of  each  sitting,  the  Eeport  gives  (1)  Eemarks
on  the  sitting,  being  a  summary  of  what  took  place  ;  (2)  the
verbatim  contemporary  shorthand  report;  (3)  subsequent  notes
by  the  individual  sitters,  Feilding,  Carrington,  or  Baggally.
These  notes  were  for  the  most  part  written  within  a  day
or  two  of  the  seance  and  are  dated.  They  were  written
independently  and  supply  a  progressive  record  of  the  state  of
mind  of  the  individual  sitters  and  of  the  effect  produced  on
them  by  the  seances,  as  well  as  a  more  detailed  description
of  specific  occurrences.

In  the  shorthand  reports,  the  descriptions  of  phenomena  are
printed  in  large  type,  and  the  descriptions  of  the  control
prevailing  during  each  particular  phenomenon  in  small  type,
while  alterations  in  the  general  conditions,  or  casual  occurrences,
or  remarks  not  specifically  concerning  the  preceding  phe-
nomenon, are  indicated  by  italics.  In  no  case  has  the  exact
shorthand  report  been  added  to  or  altered,  otherwise  than
grammatically,  except  as  follows :  when,  on  transcribing  the
shorthand  notes,  it  was  found  that  the  interpretation  of  a
passage  describing  either  a  phenomenon  or  the  accompanying
control  was  not  clear,  the  passage  has  been  omitted,  with  the
result  that  the  case  is  then  understated,  and  the  phenomenon
in  question  is  described  under  the  general  heading  of  "  non-
evidential."  The  transcribing  of  the  shorthand  report  was
usually  done  the  following  day,  and  in  the  presence  of  the
sitters.  Any  additions  made  by  them  either  then  or  at  a
later  date  are  enclosed  in  square  brackets,  initialled  and  dated.
The  description  of  each  phenomenon  is  given  in  the  exact
words  dictated  by  one  of  the  sitters,  usually,  though  not
invariably,  by  the  one  to  the  medium's  left.  Any  dissent
from,  or  amplification  of,  the  description  by  any  other  sitter
is  also  given.  The  condition  of  the  light  is  given  in  black
type  in  the  margin.

Remarks  on  Seance  I.

November  21s/1,  1908.

The  phenomena  at  this  seance  were  of  three  kinds  only,
movements  of  the  table,  raps  on  the  table,  and  bulging  move-
ments of  the curtain,  behind  the  medium,  as  though  blown


Sittings  toith  Euscqna :  Seance  I.


347


out  from  within  at  a  spot  about  on  a  level  with  her  head.
These  movements  or  raps  went  on  almost  without  intermission
throughout,  rendering  proper  description  of  them,  as  well  as
of  the  control,  almost  impossible.  Various  degrees  of  light
prevailed,  but  these  differences  did  not  appear  to  have  much
effect  upon  the  movements,  which  were  about  as  frequent  and
strong  in  the  good  light  as  in  the  feeble.  The  seance  began
at  10.35  p.m.  Five  minutes  afterwards  the  table  began  to
tilt,  sometimes  in  a  way  that  could  be  explained  by  the
ordinary  pressure  of  the  medium's  hands,  but  often  in  a
manner  not  thus  explainable,  either  because  her  hands  were  off
the  table  altogether,  or  because  they  were  only  touching  it  on  the
top  in  such  a  way  as  to  be  unable,  normally,  to  produce  the  move-
ment. A  very  large  number  of  partial  and  complete  levitations  1
took  place  under  these  conditions.  As  the  light  was  ample
during  many  of  these,  it  was  easy  to  see  that  no  hook  or
other  form  of  attachment  was  used,  nor,  notwithstanding  close
watch,  could  we  ever  detect  the  slightest  trace  of  her
using  either  her  knees  or  her  feet.  At  the  beginning  of
the  seance,  the  stenographer  was  in  the  adjoining  room  and,
what  with  our  difficulty  in  keeping  pace  with  the  phenomena,
and  his  difficulty  in  hearing  what  we  said,  the  shorthand
notes  of  this  portion  proved  so  inadequate  that  they  are  not
given  in  detail,  only  a  few  extracts  being  made.  Even  after
the  stenographer  entered  the  seance  room  and  took  his  place
at  another  table,  our  inexperience  as  to  the  best  and  shortest
way  of  describing  our  control,  and  his  in  recording  it,  resulted
in  the  notes  being  very  incomplete.  From  this  point,  however,
they  are  given  more  or  less  in  detail  for  what  they  are
worth.  Owing  to  all  the  details  of  control  not  having
been  stated,  a  reader  who  can  judge  of  the  conditions  only

1  Throughout  the  reports,  the  terms  "complete"  and  "partial  levitation"
constantly  recur.  By  "complete  levitation,"  we  mean  the  lifting  of  the  table
off  all  four  legs  simultaneously.  A  levitation  of  this  kind  was  seldom
less  than  6  in.  off  the  ground,  and  frequently  a  foot  or  more.  By  "partial
levitation "  we  mean  the  raising  of  the  table  on  to  two,  and  sometimes  on
to  only  one,  leg.  In  complete  levitations  the  table  generally  went  up  horizon-
tally, sometimes  momentarily,  but  occasionally  for  several  seconds.  A  partial
levitation  would  often  turn  into  a  complete  levitation — the  table,  after  having
been  poised  on  one  or  two  legs  for  a  certain  time  at  an  angle,  ultimately
leaving  the  ground  altogether  and  going  up  into  the  air,  usually  at  the  same
angle.


348


E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


from  the  actual  records  will  naturally  not  be  so  impressed
with  the  difficulty  of  supposing  that  these  levitations  were
produced  by  hands  or  feet  or  some  mechanical  device  as  we
were,  both  at  the  time  and  since.  Special  attention  may  be
directed  to  the  levitations  occurring  at  11.26,  11.43,  and  11.44,
which  occurred  in  good  light,  sufficient  to  enable  us  to  read
from  where  we  were  seated.  The  levitation  occurring  under
the  time  11.58,  though  in  poor  light,  is  of  interest.

Throughout  the  seance,  Eusapia's  hands  were  held  by
us,  and  her  feet  were  controlled,  sometimes  by  our  feet
on  the  top  of  hers,  or  hers  on  ours.  It  is  evident  that
foot  control  of  this  kind  is  unsatisfactory  in  the  case  of  long-
continued  observation  of  sparse  phenomena.  During  this
sitting,  however,  the  levitations  often  followed  one  another
with  such  rapidity  that  dictation  of  them  was  almost  impos-
sible, and  notwithstanding  that  every  kind  of  foot  control  was
tried,  such  as  encircling  her  feet  separately  between  our  feet
and  encircling  the  legs  of  the  table  with  our  legs,  nothing
seemed  to  impede  them.

Of  raps  there  were  many  examples.  The  medium  generally
held  one  of  our  hands  in  hers  and  made  a  gesture  with  it
towards  the  table,  and  a  rap,  apparently  on  the  top  of  the
table,  followed  shortly  after.  The  quality  of  these  raps  varied,
but  as  one  of  her  hands  was  generally  on  the  table,  and  her
feet  were  not  in  view,  they  could  not  be  regarded  as  evidential.

The  bulging  of  the  curtain  behind  the  medium,  though
occurring  at  this  seance  in  fairly  poor  light  coming  through
the  slightly  open  door  from  the  next  room,  were  very  remark-
able. The  medium  sat  well  in  front  of  the  curtain  :  her  feet
and  hands  were  absolutely  controlled.  She  would  approach
one  of  her  hands,  held  by  one  of  ours,  to  within  about  a
foot  of  it,  and  the  curtain  would  bulge  out,  sometimes  gently,
but  sometimes  with  considerable  force.  The  bulge  was  a
round  one,  as  though  blown  from  within,  and  not  in  the  least
appearing  as  if  any  string  or  attachment  were  made  to  the
outside.  The  coming  out  of  the  curtain  happened  generally
as  she  approached  her  hand  towards  it,  not  as  she  withdrew
it,  as  would  be  the  case  if  there  was  an  invisible  attachment.
During  and  between  some  of  these  movements  C.  passed  his
arm between  Eusapia  and the curtain,  and  along  the  floor,


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  I.


349


and  found  no  attachment,  and  indeed,  as  the  curtain  was
extremely  thin,  its  movement,  if  any  attachment  had  existed,
would  have  been  obviously  due  to  such,  and  of  a  wholly  dif-
ferent character  from  what  actually  occurred.

Shorthand  Report  of  Seanck  I.

November  list,  1908.

Present — F.,  C,  and  If.,  shorthand  writer.

[Dictated]  C.  on  right  of  medium  and  F.  on  left.1  M.,  the  steno-
grapher, in  the  next  room  with  the  door  open,  cdearly  seeing  the
table.  Incandescent  electric  16-candle  power  lamp  hanging  two  metres
from  medium's  position  at  table,  covered  by  three  thicknesses  of  thin
brown  tissue  paper.  The  light  is  sufficient  when  sitting  at  the
side  of  the  seance  table  to  read  small  print  in  a  Baedeker  and
in  Graglia's  Pocket  Italian  Dictionary,  holding  them  at  the  ordinary
distance  from  the  face.  Everything  in  the  room  is  clearly  visible ;
pattern  of  carpet  and  furniture  covers,  texture  of  skin  of  hands,  etc.


Light  I.  =  Electric  light  as  described  above.

Light  II.  =  Square  photographic  lamp,  with  red  linen  sides,  standing  on
stenographer's  table.  Also  light  coming  from  the  next  room,  which
was  lit  by  an  ordinary  electric  light,  the  door  being  ajar  about  6
inches.

[No  detailed  contemporary  note  was  made  of  the  visibility  of
objects  in  this  light  except  as  appears  casually  in  the  shorthand
notes.]

1  Throughout  the  reports  F.  =  Feilding,  C.  =  Carrington,  B.  =  Baggally,  and
M.  =  Meeson,  the  stenographer.  Where  special  sitters  were  invited  to  attend
individual  seances,  this  is  stated  in  the  introductory  note  and  the  initials  of
their  names  are  given  in  the  shorthand  Report.


350


E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.


[part


Light  I.

[The  seance  began  at  10.35  p.m.  Five  minutes  afterwards,  the
table  began  to  tilt,  sometimes  in  a  way  that  could  be  explained
by  the  ordinary  pressure  of  the  medium's  hand,  but  often  in  a
manner  apparently  not  thus  explainable.  These  tilts  took  place
frequently  away  from  the  medium,  while  her  hands  were  off  the
table  and  perfectly  visible.  They  followed  one  another  very
rapidly,  but,  owing  to  our  inexperience,  we  found  it  extremely
difficult,  in  our  first  seance,  to  describe  them  and  the  accom-
panying control  of  the  hands  and  feet  properly.  This  difficulty
was  increased  by  the  distance  of  the  stenographer  from  ourselves.
The  result  was  that  the  shorthand  notes  proved  so  inadequate
that  they  are  not  given  in  detail  during  the  first  part  of  the
seance. Nov.  22/08.]

11.4  p.m.  The  table  tilts  towards  C,  then  a  complete  levitation
followed,  both  medium's  hands  being  on  the  table,  and  both
clearly  visible.

C.  Both feet  being on our feet, my  left hand  being  across
both  her  knees.

F.  I  looked  under  the  table  and  clearly  saw  that  her  knees
and  the  table  legs  were  not  touching.

11.6  p.m. F.  I  have  taken  off  my  right  shoe.

11.7  p.m.  The  table  tilts  and  stands  up  on  one  leg  away  from
medium.  The  medium  stands  up  away  from  table,  and  the  table
stood  up  on  its  two  legs  away  from  her.  The  medium  removed
both  her  hands  from  the  table.

C.  Both  of  mine  were  also  off  the  table.
F.  My  left  hand  only  just  touching  table.

C.  The  table  then  appeared  to  give  a  little  jump  and  raised
itself  about  an  inch  from  the  ground,  and  then  fell  back.

F.  I  did  not  notice  that  it  was  actually  off  the  ground  at  any
time.

C.  To  me  it  appeared  quite  plain.
11.9  p.m. Three  raps  are  heard.

F.  The medium's hands were not touching the table.  The
raps  appeared  to  sound  on  the  top  of  the  table.
C. I  don't  know  where  her  heel  was.


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  I.


351


[Light  L]

11.10  p.m.  The  table  stood  up  on  the  two  legs  nearest  to
medium.

C.  It  appeared  to  me  as  though  she  pressed  heavily  on  it.

11.11  p.m. Further  non-evidential  tilts.1

11.15  p.m.  M.  enters  stance  room  and  sits  at  another  table
facing  medium,  at  a  distance  of  about  8  or  9  feet  from  her.
F.  and  C.  change  places.  Electric  light  in  room  put  out,  light  in
adjoining  room  still  burning,  the  door  ajar  about  six  inches.


M

Light  II.

Nothing  happens  from  this  time  till  11.22  p.m.,  when  medium-
says  that  she  feels  tired  and  asks  for  the  light  to  be  turned  up
again,  which  is  accordingly  done.

Light  I.

11.23  p.m. Further  non-evidential  tilts.

1  Under  the  heading  "non-evidential"  are  comprised  tilts  which  could  be
produced  by  the  normal  pressure  of  the  medium's  hands,  e.g.  towards  or  to
either  side  of  her,  as  well  as  such  other  tilts  as  are  referred  to  in  the  head-
note  preceding  the  Remarks  to  this  seance,  of  which,  while  at  the  time  they
appeared  to  be  evidential,  the  description  as  given  in  the  shorthand  report
seemed,  on  transcription,  uncertain.


352  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part
[Light  I.]

11.26  p.m. Complete  levitation  of  the  table.

F.  Nobody  had  a  hand  on  the  table.  My  left  hand  was  on
medium's  right  hand,  and  was  completely  raised  in  the  air.  Her
right  foot  was  on  mine,  and  was  away  from  the  table.

C.  I  could  see  both  her  hands  right  off  the  table.  My  hand  was
on  both  her  knees.

F.  The  table  tilts  on  legs  furthest  from  medium  and  makes
rocking  movements,  there  being  no  contact  either  with  her,  or  C.
or  myself.

11.34-  P-m- F.  Medium  asJcs  us  to  put  our  hands  on  her  legs.

My  left  foot  without  shoe  is  on  her  right. I  can  tell  which  foot

it  is  and  that  her  leg  is  not  touching  the  table.

C. Her  left  foot  is  on  my  right.

F. J  can  sec  right  down  the  right  leg  of  the  table.

11.38  p.m. Medium  makes  gestures  and  raps  follow.

11.39  p.m. More  non-evidential  tilts.

11.43  p.m. The  table  rocks  violently.

F.  I  am  certain  that  her  right  leg  was  not  touching  the  table.
C.  My  right  hand  being  across  both  her  knees.

Complete  levitation  of  the  table.

F.  I  am  certain  that  her  right  leg  is  not  touching  the  table;
my  right  leg  was  curled  round  the  table  leg.  I  can  see  right
down  the  right  leg  of  the  table.  The  medium  removed  her
hands  and  mine  from  the  table,  which  rose  right  up  into  the
air  about  two  seconds  after  the  hands  had  left.  My  right  hand  had
been  pulled  up  by  her  about  two  feet  above  the  table  before  it
started. [My  left  hand  was  on  her  right  knee. F.,  Nov.  22/08.]

C.  Her  left  foot  was  on  my  right  foot.  My  right  hand  was
held  by  the  medium  beneath  the  table  in  her  lap  about  one  foot
from  the  table.

M.  notes:  "I  could  see  table  in  the  air  with  nobody  touching  it."
C.  Medium's  left  foot  was  continuously  on  my  right.


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  I.


353


[Light  L]

11.44  p.m. Complete  levitation  of  the  table.

F.  My  hand  was  on  the  table.  Medium's  right  hand  on  top
of  mine  and  not  touching  the  table.

C.  Medium's  left  foot  did  not  leave  my  right.  My  right  hand
was  across  both  her  knees.  I  am  sure  that  at  that  time  medium's
leg  did  not  come  into  contact  with  the  leg  of  the  table.

F.  There  was  no  possibility  of  her  touching  the  leg  of  the
table. The  table  was  lifted  completely  into  the  air  off  all  four  feet.

C.  The  medium's  left  hand  grasped  my  right  hand  firmly  and
was  over  mine,  mine  being  between  hers  and  the  table.

F.  My  left  foot  was  pressing  strongly  on  hers.

11. If 6  p.m.  Medium  asks  for  less  light.  Light  turned  out,  and
photographic  lamp  re-lit  on  M.'s  table.  [A  candle  lamp  with  red
linen  sides.  Some  light  also  came  in  from  the  next  room  of  which
the  door  was  slightly  ajar. F.,  Jan.  25/09.]

Light  II.

11.49  p.m.  Medium  asks  for  thorough  control,  as  she  is  going
to  try  and  make  raps  in  the  middle  of  the  table.  She  says  "  If
you  feel  movements  of  my  knee,  don't  mind,  as  it  helps."

11.51  p.m. But  nothing  happens.
Further  tilts.

11.56  p.m.  F.  Medium  holds  my  right  hand  towards  the  left
curtain  with  hers  and  makes  two  slow  movements  which  are
reciprocated  by  movements  of  the  curtain.

F.  My  right  leg  was  curled  round  the  table  leg,  between  it  and
her  right  leg  which  touches  the  outside  of  my  leg,  my  foot  against
her  heel.

C. Medium  takes  my  right  hand  and  lifts  it  right  off  the  table.

F.  Medium  grasps  my  left  hand  in  hers,  and  lifts  it  towards  the
curtain  about  two  feet  above  the  table,  and  the  curtain  bulges
out  about  two  feet.

11.57  p.m.  C.  My  right  hand  is  across  both  knees  of  medium
and  I  can  see  it  clearly.

z


354 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


[Light  II.]

11.58  'p.m. F.  She  squeezes  my  left  hand  hard.

F.  Table  tilts  to  the  right.  Complete  levitation  of  the  table.
The  table  goes  right  up  into  the  air.  I  was  able  to  stoop  and
put  my  left  [?  right]  hand  under  the  right  table  leg  which  I
saw  the  whole  length  of.  Complete  levitation  off  all  four  legs,
the  medium's  hands  being  right  away  from  table.

C.  My  right  hand  was  across  both  her  knees.  Her  leg  was
away  from  the  table,  which,  however,  was  touched  by  her  skirt,
but  not  in  such  a  way  as  to  be  able  to  effect  the  results.  While
the  table  was  up  she  grasped  my  right  hand  with  her  left  and  put
it  on  the  table,  and  I  pressed  and  she  pressed  on  the  top  of  mine
very  hard,  downwards.  [The  table  resisted  our  pressure  for  several
seconds,  before  falling  back. C,  Dec.  8/08.]

12.1  a.m.  Table  has  resumed  its  position,  and  starts  tipping  to
medium's  right. She  says  "  Pay  attention."

C. This  leg  of  the  tabic  is  at  least  six  inches  from  her  shirt.

12.2  a.m. Two  or  three  gestures  with  left  hand  produce  raps.

C.  I  can  feel  the  vibration  of  the  table  after  the  gestures  under
my  left  hand,  which  is  on  the  table.

F.  My  hand  is  on  the  table  and  medium's  hand  on  it.  The
raps  do  not  appear  to  come  from  the  medium's  hand  but  are  like
a  distant  thump  as  if  an  echo.

12.3  a.m. More  tilts  of  the  table.

12.5  a.m.  C.  Medium,  holding  my  right  hand  and  raising  it  in
the  air,  makes  movements  towards  the  curtain  which,  after  three
movements,  bulges  out  and  brushes  against  me.

F.  My  left  knee  is  pressing  against  hers.  She  is  holding  my
right  hand  in  hers.  Her  knees  and  hands  are  perfectly  visible.  I
can  see  the  curtain  come  out.

C.  Table  also  moves.

Medium  calls  our  attention  to  her  skirt  bulging  out  on  her  left
side.

[I  touched  this  bulging  part,  but  felt  no  solid  substance  under-
neath her  skirt,  which  immediately  receded  and  did  not  again
bulge  out. C,  Nov.  22/08.]


LIX.]


Sittings  ivith  Eusapia :  Seance  I.


355


[Light  II.]

1*2.8  a.m. We  can  clearly  see  outline  of  medium.

G. My  right  knee  pressing  against  her  left. My  right  hand  in  her

left  about  IS  inches  from  the  curtain.

F. Her  right  foot  is  on  my  left.

12.9  a.m. Medium  asks  us  to  get  nearer  the  curtain.
C.  The  curtain  blows  clearly  out.

F. The  curtain  again  blows  out  about  two  feet.

12.10  a.m. Medium  calls  attention  to  a  light  on  the  floor.
C. Can  I  touch  it  ?

Medium  says,  "  Later."

Medium  makes  three  movements  towards  curtain,  which  blows  out.

F.  The  light  remains  good,  the  whole  of  the  medium  being
visible.

12.11  a.m.  Medium  raises  C.'s  hand  towards  curtain  and  says
"  Vieni,  vieni.'' The  curtain  blows  out  towards  C.

C.  I  touched  the  curtain  with  my  right  hand  while  it  was
blowing  out  and  found  no  material  resistance.  [Between  the
bulgings  I  felt  along  the  carpet  and  between  the  medium  and
curtain  to  see  that  there  was  no  attachment. C,  Nov.  22/08.]

F.  Medium  takes  both  our  hands  in  both  of  hers  and  holds
them  towards  the  curtain  which  blows  out  at  least  2h  feet,  and
stops  out  a  considerable  time.

12.14  a-m- Medium  now  asks  to  rest.

12.15  a.m.  As  C.  was  bending  down  to  ascertain  the  cause  of
the  previously  described  light  [which  turned  out  to  be  a  reflection
from  the  next  room  on  a  patent  leather  shoe.  Nov.  22/08],
the  curtains  bulged  out  and  brushed  against  his  head.

C.  I  was  holding  medium's  left  hand  in  my  left. The  medium
was  leaning  forward  over  the  table.
F.  Her  right  hand  was  over  mine.


356


E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


[Light  II.]

12.16  a.m. Table  rocks  violently,  there  being  no  contact  at  all.

12.18  to  12.23  a.m. Various  tilts  of  a  non-evidential  character.

12.2-4  a.m.  Table  tilts  from  medium  on  one  leg,  followed  by
complete  levitation.

C.  Both  medium's  hands  are  off  the  table.  No  contact  at
any  point  except  the  left  leg  of  the  table,  which  was  slightly
touching  her  skirt,  but  not  sufficiently  to  have  any  effect.

F.  The  whole  of  the  table  went  right  up  into  the  air.  All
hands  were  off  the  table.  Her  right  leg  is  still  immovable  against
mine.  I  still  keep  my  right  leg  between  her  right  leg  and  the  leg
of  the  table.

C.  She  was  pressing  down  on  my  right  hand.  I  was  pressing
down  on  the  table  very  hard.  Her  left  hand  was  holding  my  right
on  the  table.  I  feel  sure  that  there  was  no  contact  between  her
leg  and  the  leg  of  the  table.  [At  first  sight  this  would  seem  a
contradiction,  since  I  stated  (1)  that  both  the  medium's  hands  were
off  the  table,  and  (2)  that  our  hands  were  on  the  table,  pressing
strongly.  There  is  no  contradiction,  however.  As  the  table  was
being  levitated,  the  medium  lifted  my  hand  off  the  table,  with  hers  ;
but,  while  the  table  was  still  in  the  air,  she  placed  my  hand  on  the
table,  asked  me  to  press,  and  pressed  herself.  Our  united  force  must
have  exerted  a  considerable  pressure,  but  the  table  continued  to
stay  in  the  air  for  one  or  two  seconds  after  we  had  pressed  in  this
manner. C,  Dec.  7/08.]

12.25  a.m. Complete  levitation  of  the  table  again.

C.  No  contact  on  this  side.  My  right  leg  is  curled  between
the  medium's  leg  and  the  leg  of  the  table.

F.  It  is  not  possible  for  her  right  leg  to  touch  the  leg  of  the
table.

C.  My  right  leg  is  between  her  leg  and  the  leg  of  the  table.
Both  knees  are  clearly  visible.

12.2 6 \  a.m.  F.  Medium  grasps  my  right  hand.  She  makes
gestures  with  her  right  hand  about  six  inches  above  the  table.
She  continues  pulling  my  right  hand  and  makes  gestures  of
pushing  at  the  table,  and  the  table  moves.  There  was  no
possibility  of  contact  in  any  way.


lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Stance  I.  357

[Light  II.]

12.27  a.m. Complete  levitation  of  the  table.

F.  She  pulled  my  right  hand  about  two  feet  above  the  table,
and  the  table  followed  it.

C.  My  knee  was  between  her  leg  and  the  leg  of  the.  table,
my  hand  across  both  her  knees.

F.  My  right  leg  was  between  her  leg  and  the  leg  of  the  table.

12.30  a.m.  Seven  raps  tell  us  to  end  the  stance  and  the  lights
are  turned  up.

Note  by  E.  Feilding.

It  must  not  be  thought  that  we  are  not  painfully  conscious  of
the  shortcomings  of  the  report  of  this  first  seance.  On  re-reading
the  notes  after  a  lapse  of  a  few  days,  it  is  mortifying  to  find  in
how  many  cases  the  control,  especially  of  the  feet,  is  not  stated.
Having  frequently  criticized  the  reports  of  others,  we  set  out  with
the  intention  of  supplying  a  record  which  would  be  proof  against
the  attacks  of  absent  critics ;  and  we  have  failed  egregiously.  The
seance  was,  in  fact,  far  more  remarkable  than  the  report  suggests.
The  light,  which,  while  the  electric  light  in  the  seance  room  was
lit,  was  sufficient  to  enable  us  to  see  everything  with  almost  as
much  clearness  as  in  an  ordinary  well-shaded  sitting-room,  was  at
all  times  sufficient  to  show  the  medium's  face  and  hands  with
perfect  distinctness.  Notwithstanding  the  frequent  lapses  in  our
description  of  the  control,  we  were,  in  fact,  at  no  time  conscious  of
the  slightest  suspicion  of  its  adequacy.  The  movements  of  the
table  or  curtain  were  almost  continuous.  It  was  not  as  if  Eusapia
waited  for  a  favourable  moment  of  inattention  on  our  part  to  produce
a  phenomenon,  but  the  phenomena  happened,  and  went  on  happen-
ing, in  spite  of  our  best  efforts  to  prevent  them.  It  is  unthinkable
to  us  that  for  two  hours  two  reasonably  intelligent  and  active  men,
both  fairly  well  posted  in  the  tricks  of  mediums,  closely  clinging
with  arms  and  legs  about  this  elderly  lady,  could  be  baffled  by
mere  methods  of  substitution  of  feet  or  hands,  for  which  they  were
constantly  on  the  look-out.  The  shorthand  report  has  given  us
so  much  trouble  that  though  it  was  written  out  as  well  as  possible
in  long-hand  the  day  after  the  seance,  we  have  delayed  till  to-day
typing  it  in  its  final  form.  It  is  therefore  in  the  light  of  the  fraud
practised  in  the  third  seance  that  we  are  able  still  to  look  back


358 E.  Feilcling,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part

with  astonishment  on  the  first,  and  record  our  unchanged  impression
of  its  remarkable  character.

E.  F. Nov.  29th,  1908.

Note  by  H.  Carrington.

There  is  little  I  can  add  to  F.'s  note,  with  which  I  wholly  concur.
The  weak  point  of  the  seance,  of  course  (to  outsiders,  not  to  our-
selves), is  the  frequent  lapse  of  recorded  control  of  one  hand  or
one  foot.  This  was  due  partly  to  our  inexperience  of  this  particular
kind  of  dictation  and  to  the  rapidity  with  which,  on  occasion,  the
phenomena  succeeded  one  another.  We  would  dictate  an  account
of  a  phenomenon  and,  say,  the  control  on  one  side,  when  another
phenomenon  occurred  and  prevented  the  opposite  sitter  from  giving
his  control.  When  several  phenomena  thus  occurred  in  rapid  succes-
sion the  control  was  almost  invariably  the  same  for  all,  so  that,  by
reading  the  record,  and  piecing  together  the  various  controls  of
hands  and  feet  as  stated,  a  correct  idea  may  be  gained  of  the
degree  of  its  efficacy.  I  need  only  add  that  the  control  in  this  first
seance  struck  me  throughout  as  almost  perfect,  while  the  light,
during  the  greater  part  of  the  time,  was  so  good  that  we  could
clearly  see  both  the  medium's  hands,  and  we  should  almost  have
been  content  not  to  hold  them  at  all,  so  clear  was  her  every
movement.

H.  C. Dec.  7th,  1908.

Remarks  on  Seance  II.

November  23rd,  1908.

In  the  second  seance  the  programme  of  phenomena  was
somewhat  enlarged.  Besides  a  very  large  number  of  levita-
tions  of  the  table  and  raps  upon  it,  there  were  touches  by
invisible  or  unseen  finger  tips,  or  what  felt  like  such,  on  both
F.  and  C,  while  there  were  also,  as  before,  many  movements  of
the  curtain.  There  were,  further,  movements  of  the  objects
behind  the  curtain ;  noises  and  raps  behind  the  curtain ;  the
plucking  of  the  string  of  the  guitar  on  the  floor  in  the
corner  of  the  cabinet ;  the  upsetting  of  the  small  table  in  the
cabinet,  and  the  transportation  of  it  over  the  medium's  shoulder
half  on  to  the  stance  table;  and  the  appearance  to  C.  of  the


lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  II.  359

silhouette  of  a  kind  of  head  which  shot  out  to  a  distance
of  about  two  feet  from  the  curtains.

As  a  result  of  practice  with  the  shorthand  writer  during
the  day,  the  descriptions  of  the  control,  though  still  in  many
important  cases  inadequate,  were  not  only  much  better  given,
but  better  recorded,  so  that  the  shorthand  report  gives  a
fairly  accurate  summary  of  the  proceedings.  The  same  dif-
ficulty of  keeping  pace  with  the  phenomena  was,  however,
experienced  as  at  the  first  seance,  for  occasionally  they
followed  each  other  so  rapidly  that  the  description  of
one  was  interrupted  by  the  happening  of  another  and
then  another.  Perhaps  the  most  remarkable  thing  about  this
seance  was  the  number  and  interest  of  the  phenomena  which
occurred  in  the  bright  No.  1  light,  a  sixteen  candle  power
lamp  shaded  with  three  thicknesses  of  tissue  paper,  and  which
was  strong  enough  not  only  to  enable  us  to  see  every  object
all  over  the  room,  but  even  to  read,  at  our  places  at  the
table,  small  print.  The  sitting  began  in  this  light,  and  the
table  almost  immediately  started  tilting  with  contact,  and
raps  were  produced  in  it  while  the  medium  knelt  in  her
chair,  with  her  feet  away  from  the  table,  and  only  touching
the  table  with  one  hand.  We  were  not  afterwards  able  to
imitate  these  raps,  but,  owing  to  the  contact  of  the  medium's
liand  with  the  table,  felt  unable  to  come  to  any  conclusion
as  to  their  origin.

Aware  of  the  objections  to  the  character  of  the  foot
control  at  the  previous  seance,  we  asked  the  medium
if  she  would  allow  her  feet  to  be  tied.  She  made  no  ob-
jection, and  they  were  accordingly  secured  round  the  ankles
to  the  legs  and  rung  of  her  chair,  leaving  her  a  play  of
about  four  inches.  There  then  followed  a  series  of  tilts  of
a  remarkable  character,  sometimes  without  contact  of  the
medium's  hands,  and  no  apparent  contact  of  her  feet;  some-
times with  a  hand  resting  on  the  table,  but  in  such  a  way
as  could  not  account  normally  for  the  particular  movement.
Her  body  was  always  motionless  during  these  tilts,  a  clear
space  of  generally  about  6  inches  being  visible  between  her
chest  and  the  table.  Under  the  conditions  of  light  in  which
these  tilts  and  the  subsequent  complete  levitations  occurred,
any  hook  or  attachment to  her body would have  become


360 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


immediately  visible.  Nor  was  there,  so  far  as  we  were  able
to  see,  any  action  of  her  knees  or  feet.  It  is  true  that  the
fastening  of  her  ankles  was  not  close  enough  to  prevent  her
from  getting  her  feet  under  the  legs,  and  raising  the  table
at  one  corner  or  another  by  ankle  movement,  and  so  pro-
ducing a  very  easily  detectable  "  partial  levitation."  We
were,  however,  of  course,  specially  and  constantly  on  the
watch  for  action  of  this  kind.  The  hands  of  one  or  other
of  us  were  frequently  over  both  her  knees,  and  during  a  great
part  of  the  stance  F.'s  leg  was  completely  between  hers  and
the  leg  of  the  table.

Occasionally,  when  the  table  was  tilted  or  entirely  levi-
tated, it  resisted  considerable  pressure  downwards  by  C. —
see  shorthand  notes  at  10.45  p.m.  and  10.58  p.m.  Sometimes
the  table  would  start  upwards  while  the  medium's  hands,
holding  or  held  in  ours,  were  on  the  table ;  but  sometimes
she  would  pull  our  hands  high  above  the  table,  or  one  above
and  the  other  below  on  her  lap,  and  then  the  table  would
rise  a  second  or  so  later — see  shorthand  notes  at  11.0,  11.1
and  11.13  p.m.  Total  levitations  alternated  with  partial  ones-
— see  shorthand  notes  at  10.58,  11.0  and  11.5  (three  in
rapid  succession)  and  11.11  p.m.  (two).

It  was  not  till  after  successive  diminutions  of  light  had
been  made  that  movements  of  the  curtain  occurred.  These
reached  a  climax  in  the  whole  of  one  of  the  curtains  blowing
right  over  the  full  length  of  the  table  (11.30  p.m.),  after
which  noises  took  place  in  the  cabinet  under  what  appeared
to  be  perfect  conditions  of  control.

At  11.42  the  small  table  in  the  cabinet  was  lifted  up  and
came  over  Eusapia's  left  shoulder,  with  the  curtain  enveloping
it,  on  to  the  seance  table  and  remained  hanging  there,  its
top  on  the  seance  table  and  its  legs  downwards  at  an  angle
of  about  45°,  over  Eusapia's  and  C.'s  joined  hands.  C.  felt
it  pushing  against  his  hand  as  though  it  were  trying  to  climb
further  up  on  to  the  seance  table,  and  eventually  it  fell  back
on  to  the  ground,  where  it  lay  horizontally,  its  legs  pointing
outwards.  At  a  later  period  of  the  seance  (11.55  p.m.)  in  a
poor  light,  though  sufficient  for  both  C.  and  F.  to  see  it  from
their  places,  it  began  to  retire  back  into  the  cabinet  towards
the  corner,  away  from  Eusapia,  in  a  series  of  little  jumps,  a


LIX.]


Sittings  tvith  Eusapia:  Seance  II.


361


movement  which  it  continued  to  make  after  Eusapia  had
directed  the  electric  light  to  be  turned  up  again.

At  11.44  p.m.  there  commenced  a  short  series  of  touches
on  both  sitters  given  in  different  places  in  immediate  response
to  requests,  the  medium's  head  being  visible,  her  hands  visible
and  held,  and  her  feet  tied.  Whatever  it  was  that  produced
the  touches  remained,  however,  unseen.

The  appearance,  at  about  11.52  p.m.,  of  a  square  head  on
a  long  neck  which  shot  apparently  from  the  curtain  between
Eusapia  and  C,  cannot,  perhaps,  be  considered  in  itself  as
evidential,  as  F.  had  ceased  to  control  the  medium's  right
hand  while  engaged  in  releasing  the  fastening  of  her  right
foot.  It  was,  however,  the  first  of  many  subsequent  similar
appearances  which  occurred  while  the  control  was  adequate,
and  is  of  interest  on  that  account.

After  more  noises  in  the  cabinet  synchronising  with  muscular
tensions  of  the  medium's  hand  (11.55  to  12.0  p.m.)  Eusapia
asked  for  more  light,  and  the  electric  light  of  the  seance
room  was  turned  up  as  at  the  beginning  of  the  sitting.

Then  followed  a  series  of  manifestations  which  must  be
regarded  as  amongst  the  most  remarkable  that  occurred  through-
out the  seances,  on  account  of  the  excellence  of  the  light  and
the  absolute  ease  with  which  every  movement  of  the  medium
could  be  followed.  Eusapia  sat  about  a  foot  away  from  the
curtain,  which  was  withdrawn  in  such  a  way  that  on  different
sides  of  it  C.  and  F.  could  see  right  into  the  cabinet.  The
shorthand  notes  and  F.  and  C.'s  notes  thereto  should  be
referred  to.

Shorthand  Report  of  Seance  II.

November  23rd,  1908.

The  condition  of  stance  room  icas  the  same  as  at  the  last  stance.
Present,  F.  and  C. ;  and  M.,  shorthand  writer,  seated  at  another
table  in  stance  room.

The  stance  began  at  10.1'2  p.m.

Light  at  commencement :  Incandescent  electric  light  in  the  centre
of  room,  shaded  as  before.  Bright  light  in  the  next  room  and
the  door  open.  Light  enough  to  read  small  print  at  our  places
at  the  table.


362


E.  F eliding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.


[part


/


M


Light  I.

Various  non-evidential  tilts  take  place.

10.20  p.m.  F.  asks  medium  if  she  will  try  and  get  a  rap  whilst
standing  aiuay  from  the  table.  She  assents  and  kneels  on  her  chair,
her  feet  aiuay  from  the  table.

10.21  p.m.  Two  movements  of  her  left  hand  above  the  table
at  a  distance  of  about  6  inches  result  in  two  raps  in  the  wood
of  the  table  following  about  one  second  after  the  movements.

F.  Her  right  hand  is  apparently  motionless  on  the  table.

10.23  p.m.  F.  Medium  tapped  three  times  on  the  table  and  then
put  the  tips  of  her  fingers  touching  the  table  between  mine  [my
hand  being  flat  on  the  table  with  fingers  outstretched,  F.,  Feb.
6/09]  whereupon  about  five  seconds  afterwards  three  creaks
imitating  the  rhythm  of  the  taps  followed,  but  entirely  different
in  the  cpiality  of  the  sound.

[Subsequently  we  ascertained  that  these  creaks  could  be  obtained
by  considerable  muscular  pressure.  At  the  same  time  we  must  admit
that  no  such  pressure  was  apparently  exercised  by  the  medium.
F.  and  C,  Nov.  24/08.]

F.  The  creaks  were  evidently  made  under  my  hand.

10.28  to  10.36  p.m.  Time  occupied  in  tying  up  medium's  legs.
At  her  request,  each  ankle  was  tied  to  the  nearest  leg  of  her  chair
by  means  of  a  rope  p>asscd  once  round  her  ankle  and  tied,  then


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  II.


363


[Light  I.]

attached  to  the  leg  and  rung  of  her  chair,  leaving  her  a  play  of
about  four  inches.

10.37  p.m.  The  table  raised  itself  on  the  two  legs  furthest
from  her.

F.  Her  right  hand  was  on  my  left  hand  and  my  little  finger
was  over  the  edge  of  the  table  so  that  she  could  not  have  lifted
the  table  with  her  wrist.

C.  Her  left  hand  was  over  my  right,  mine  being  between  hers
and  the  table.  [No  effort  was  perceived  by  either  of  us.  F.  and
C,  Nov.  24/08.]

10.38  p.m.  The  table  is  going  up  in  the  air  at  the  present
moment. The  table  again  raised  itself  away  from  her.

F.  Her  hands  are  absolutely  on  the  top  of  our  hands,  and  not
touching  the  top  of  the  table  at  all.

F. Now  it  has  done  the  same  thing  again.

F.  My  left  hand  is  on  her  knees,  which  are  motionless.  My
left  foot  is  touching  her  right  foot  and  is  between  it  and  the  leg
of  the  table.

C.  Her  left  foot  is  on  my  right  foot,  and  my  right  knee  pressing
against  her  left  knee.

10.44  p.m.  The  table  again  raised  itself  on  two  legs  away
from  her,  her  hands  barely  touching  it  and  the  fingers  being
on  our  hands.

F.  My  left  hand  still  on  her  knees,  my  foot  as  before.

10.45  p.m.  F.  With  only  her  left  hand  resting  flat  on  the
top  of  the  table,  the  table  tilts  to  the  right.  C.  is  trying  to
press  it  down.

C. I  was  strongly  pressing  downward  with  my  right  hand.

F.  Her  right  hand  was  on  my  shoulder  at  the  time.
[Foot  control  not  mentioned,  but  remembered  by  us  to  be  as
before. F.  and  C,  Nov.  24/08.]

10.47  p.m.  Medium  makes  three  raps  with  her  fingers  on  the
top  of  the  table,  and  three  faint  raps  follow,  apparently  in  the
wood  of  the  table,  about  two  seconds  afterwards.


364  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part
[Light  I.]

10.48  p.m.  Medium  squeezed  both  our  hands  tightly,  our
hands  being  between  hers  and  the  table,  and  the  table  raised
itself  from  her.

F.  My  left  hand  was  on  her  knees,  my  left  foot  between  her
foot  and  the  table  leg.

10.49  p.m.  The  table  has  again  raised  itself  away  from  her,
her  hands  being  flat  on  the  top  of  it,  partly  resting  on  our
bands.

10.54  P-m-  F.  I  have  changed  the  control  from  my  left  foot
to  my  right,  My  right  foot  is  now  between  hers  and  the  leg  of
the  table,

10.58  p.m.  The  table  tilts  on  the  two  right  less

C.  The  medium's  left  hand  is  held  in  mine  over  the  table,  her
left  foot  being  pressed  on  my  right,  and  my  right  knee  being  in
contact  with  her  left  knee.

F.  Her  right  hand  was  on  my  shoulder.

F. The  table  was  then  completely  levitated,  and both C.  and
she  afterwards  pressed  on C.'s  side  of  the  table,  which  went
up  in  spite  of  their  pressure.
C. I  pressed  strongly.

11.0  p.m. Complete  levitation  of  the  table.

C.  The  medium's  left  hand  pulled  up  my  right  about  four
inches  above  the  table,  her  left  foot  pressing  against  my  right  foot,
my  right  knee  pressing  against  her  left  knee.

F.  The  medium's  right  hand  was  partly  on  mine,  the  wrist  just
touching  the  top  of  the  table,  my  left  hand  across  both  her  knees,
my  right  foot  touching  her  right  foot  and  being  between  it  and
the  table  leg.  My  lace  was  within  six  inches  of  the  edge  of  the
table.

11.1  p.m.  The  table  tilts  on  the  two  legs  furthest  from
medium,  both  her  hands  being  clearly  visible  and  about  a
foot  away  from  the  table,  and  her  fists  being  clenched  in  a
line  with  her  waist.

C.  The  control  of  the  feet  being  the  same  as  before,  except  that
my  right  hand  was  then  also  grasping  her  thigh.


lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  II.  365

[Light  L]

F.  My  left  hand  was  across  both  her  knees.

[The  medium  sat  well  back  in  her  chair  and  her  body  was  at
least  nine  inches  from  the  table.  We  clearly  remember  the  con-
ditions of  this  striking  phenomenon. F.  and  C,  Nov.  24/08].

11.5  p.m. Complete  levitation  of  the  table.

F.  The  table  lifted  about  six  inches,  only  C.'s  left  hand  and  my
right  were  on  the  table,  clasped  across  the  middle  of  it.

Another  complete  levitation  of  the  table.

F.  Nobody's  hands  are  on  the  table,  it  goes  up  all  by  itself.

Another  complete  levitation  of  the  table.

C.  All  hands  being  off  the  table.  Her  right  hand  was  free  but
perfectly  visible,  and  about  six  inches  off  the  table.

11.10  -p.m.  F.  asks  medium  to  attempt  levitation  whilst  standing
up ;  she  agrees,  but  presently  says  that  she  cannot  stand  any  longer.
She  reseats  herself.

11.11  p.m. Complete  levitation  of  the  table.

C.  Both  hands  of  the  medium  were  about  eight  inches  above  the
table.  I  can  clearly  feel  her  left  foot  across  my  right ;  the  leg  of
the  table  was  not  in  contact  with  her  skirt.

Another  complete  levitation  of  the  table.

F.  My  left  hand  was  underneath  the  bottom  of  the  right  leg  of
the  table.  There  was  no  contact  between  her  and  the  leg  of  the
table. Her  right  hand  was  off  the  table  altogether.

C.  There  were  nine  inches  between  her  body  and  the  table.

11.13  p.m. Partial  levitation  of  the  table.

F.  She  removed  her  hands  entirely  from  the  table  about  two  feet,
and  the  table  went  up  on  the  two  legs  furthest  from  her,  about
one  foot.

Immediately  afterwards  she  repeated  the  same,  taking  our  hands
in  her  lap,  whereupon  the  table  again  lifted  up  and  wriggled
about  without  anybody  touching  it.

F.  My  hand  was  on  her  right  hand  all  the  time.
C.  My  right  hand  was  on  her  left  hand.


366  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part

[Light  L]

F.  I  could  see  right  clown  the  leg  of  the  table.
[We  could  clearly  distinguish  her  two  hands. F.  and  C,  Nov.
24/08.]

Light  II.

11.17  p.m.  Electric  light  in  room  turned  out,  electric  light  in
next  room  burning,  the  door  partly  open ;  cdso  photographic  lamp
for  M.

[  We  could  clearly  see  across  the  room  and  distinguish  every  feature
of  the  medium  and  her  two  hands.  F.  and  C,  Nov.  24-/ 08.]
M.  notes:  "  The  medium's  head  is  clearly  visible  to  me,  at  a  distance
of  about  9  feet."

11.17  p.m. The  left  curtain  has  blown  out.

C.  The  medium's  left  hand  was  on  my  right,  her  left  foot  on
my  right  foot. The  phenomenon  took  place  on  her  left  side.

F.  The  medium  was  holding  my  left  hand  on  her  lap,  and  it  is
visible  to  me. Her  head  is  visible.

The  curtain  again  blows  out.

C.  With  her  left  hand  the  medium  held  my  right  towards  the
curtain  which  blew  out  towards  it.

This  has  happened  again.

F.  My  control  is  the  same  as  before,  my  hand  in  her  lap  with
hers,  and  her  right  foot  on  mine.

11.19  p.m. Partial  levitation  of  the  table.

C.  The  medium  grasped  my  right  hand  in  her  left  hand  and
raised  it  above  the  table  and  the  table  then  tilted  on  the  two
legs  furthest  from  her. Her  left  foot  was  on  mine.

F.  Her  right  hand  was  off  the  table,  my  left  hand  was  on  her
knee.  My  right  leg  was  curled  right  round  the  leg  of  the  table,  and
was  between  her  leg  and  the  table.

[In  three  or  four  of  the  above  levitations,  it  will  be  noticed  that
no  description  was  given  by  me  of  my  foot  control.  In  these  cases
I  was  not  satisfied  with  the  control,  feeling  the  pressure  of  a  heel
rather  than  a  whole  foot  across  my  instep,  which  was  invariably  the
case  when  I  stated  "I  feel  the  medium's  foot  on  mine." At  such


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  II.


367


[Light  II.]

times  I  felt  the  whole  of  the  medium's  foot,  and  there  was  no
possibility  of  substituting  one  foot  for  two.  At  the  same  time  we
must  record  the  fact  that  subsequent  experiment  showed  us  that  it
was  impossible  for  us  to  levitate  the  table  with  the  one  free  foot  unless
contact  with  the  hands  was  also  allowed.  Besides  which  it  must  be
recorded  that  our  hands  were  on  her  knees,  and  the  light  good.
C,  Nov.  24/08.]  [Further,  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  medium's
feet  were  tied  to  the  legs  of  her  chair,  with  only  four  inches  play,  so
that  substitution  of  feet  was  impossible. F.,  Feb.  8/09.]

Light  III.

11.23  p.m.  Light  further  lessened  by  closing  the  door  more,  only
red  photographic  lamp  and  feeble  light  coming  through  crack  in
door  remaining.

C.  I  can  clearly  see  the  medium's  eyebrows,  her  lips,  the  difference
in  the  white  and  brown  of  her  hair.

M.  notes :  "  The  three  heads  just  visible  to  me"  his  distance  from
the  medium  being  then  about  twelve  feet.

C.  The  table  rises  three  times  on  the  two  legs  furthest  from  me.
F.  With  violence.

C.  Her  left  foot  is  on  my  right,  her  left  hand  on  my  right  hand
which  rests  on  her  left  knee.

F.  She  was  holding  my  left  hand  in  her  right  hand,  and  I  could
feel  her  thumb  and  knew  it  was  her  right  hand.

[Though  not  stated,  she  held  my  hand  in  her  lap  ;  both  hands
were  clearly  visible. F.,  Nov.  25/08.]

11.26  to  11.31  p.m.  Various  tilting  phenomena  of  interest  took
place  which  the  medium  asked  us  not  to  take  the  trouble  to
record  owing  to  the  poorness  of  the  light.

Light  IV.

11.30  p.m.  Still  less  light,  the  door  into  the  next  room  being
further  closed.

M.  notes :  "  I  cannot  see  the  heads."
I. "  John,  are  you  there  ?  "
Three  raps  follow  on  the  table.


368  E.  Feilcling,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part

[Light  IV.]

C. The  left  curtain  has  blown  right  out  on  to  the  table.

C.  My  right  hand  was  under  the  table  firmly  holding  the
medium's  left  hand.

F.  I  have  hold  of  her  right  hand  continuously  in  her  lap.

ll.oJf.  p.m.  F.  The  medium  kicks  with  her  right  foot  violently
on  mine.

C.  She  kicks  me  with  her  left  foot  cdso.  Her  left  hand  raises  my
right  hand  towards  the  curtain.

Objects  in  the  cabinet  rattle  on  the  table  inside  the  curtain.

11.35  p.m.  F.  Medium  asks  me  to  put  my  left  arm  on  her
shoulder. Her  right  arm  is  round,  my  neck.

11.36  p.m.  C.  With  her  left  hand  medium  is  holding  my  right
hand  on  the  table.

11.37  p.m.  The  objects  in  the  cabinet  have  fallen  over  on  the
table  inside  it.

C.  She  grasped  my  right  hand  firmly  in  her  left  hand  at  the
time  this  was  going  on,  and  pressed  on  my  right  foot  with  her  left.

F.  I  was  holding  her  right  hand  on  the  table  with  my  left,  and
the  tips  of  both  her  feet  under  the  table  with  my  right  hand.

C.  My  left  hand  was  holding  her  head  and  I  was  holding  her
left  hand  in  m}'  right.

11.42  p.m.  The  small  table  in  the  cabinet  has  been  lifted  up
on  to  the  seance  table,  behind  the  curtain,  several  objects  remain-
ing upon  the  top.

F.  I  could  see  that  her  head  was  motionless.

C.  My  right  hand  was  held  in  her  left  hand  on  the  seance
table. Her  left  foot  was  on  my  right.

F.  Her  right  hand  was  in  my  left  hand.  I  was  holding  both  her
toes  in  my  right  hand.

C.  The  small  table  from  the  cabinet  is  pushing  against  me  with
considerable  force,  the  objects  being  still  on  it.
[The  table  was  pushed  out  on  to  the  seance  table  at  an  angle
of  about  45  degrees,  still  covered  by  the  left-hand  curtain,  which
thus  prevented  the  objects  from  falling  off. The  four  feet  of  the


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  II.


369


[Light  IV.]

table  were  about  two  feet  from  the  ground,  and  the  table  remained
in  this  position  for  at  least  one  minute,  pressing  strongly  against
my  hand  which  had  been  raised  from  the  table  still  holding  the
medium's,  and  apparently  making  efforts  to  climb  on  to  the  seance
table.  C,  Nov.  24/08.]  [After  which  it  fell  back  to  the  ground.
F.,  Feb.  6/09.]

C.  My  right  arm  is  under  the  curtain,  my  hand  being  held  by
the  medium's  left  hand.  The  curtain  has  remained  on  the  seance
table,  covering  our  two  arms,  with  several  small  objects  inside,  these
having  fallen  off  the  top  of  the  small  table.

ll.Ii.Jt,  p.m. C.  Medium  grasped  my  right  hand  and  passed  it
through  the  opening  of  the  curtain.
F. Both  her  feet  are  on  mine.

F. "  John,  will  you  touch  me  ?  "

F.  I  was  immediately  touched  on  my  left  forearm  in  reply  to
my  request.

F.  I  am  holding  her  right  hand  continuously.

C.  Her  left  hand  held  mine  on  the  top  of  the  table.

F.  I  could  see  her  face.

C.  So  could  I.

F. asks  "  John "  to  touch  G,

C. I  am  touched  through  the  curtain  on  my  right  arm.

C.  Her  hand  is  holding  mine  on  the  top  of  the  table.  I  could
see  her  face.

F.  I  could  see  her  right  hand  in  mine  and  her  face.

11.4-9  p.m. F.  asks  "John"  'whether  he  can  touch  C.  on  the  head.
The  medium  asks  F.  to  rest  his  head  against  hers.
F. Our  two  heads  are  touching.

C.  I  am  touched  on  the  head  as  if  by  a  hand  through  the
curtain.

C.  While  this  was  going  on  the  medium  held  my  hand  in  hers
and  I  could  feel  her  forearm  with  my  arm  pressed  against  it.  The
distance  between  her  hand  and  the  touch  was  about  two  feet.

F.  Her  head  was  resting  against  mine.  Her  right  hand  was  in
mine.

2  a


370  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


[Light  IV.]

C. The  curtain  blows  right  out  over  the  table.

Medium  asks  that  her  feet  should  be  untied  as  they  are  hurting
her. Up  to  this  point,  they  have  remained  tied  by  the  rope.
[Finding  it  impossible  to  untie  the  knots,  I  cut  the  rope  from  the
right  leg. F.,  Nov.  25/08.]

[The  releasing  of  the  feet  was  interrupted  by  the  sudden  appearance
of  the  phenomenon  next  mentioned,  and  the  left  foot  remained  tied
till  the  end  of  the  stance. F.,  Feb.  8/09.]

C.  I  can  see  a  square  object  coming  right  out  in  front  of  my
face  for  about  a  second  and  disappear  immediately.
[The  object  seen  by  me  was  quite  black  and  about  five  inches
square,  and  appeared  to  be  the  silhouette  of  a  man's  head,  small
in  size  and  very  square  in  shape  and  having  a  long  neck.  This
occurred  when  F.  was  kneeling  down  cutting  the  rope  on  her  right
side,  and  had  consequently  let  go  of  her  right  hand.  C,  Nov.
25/08].  [I  looked  up  immediately  C.  spoke,  and  her  right  arm
was  resting  on  the  table  and  against  my  shoulder.  F.,  Nov.
25/08.]  [The  head  appeared  to  be  about  six  inches  from  my
face,  and  was  between  my  head  and  the  medium's. C,  Dec.  1/08.]

C.  The  left  hand  was  held  by  me,  the  right  hand  was  not  con-
trolled.

11.55  p.m.  C.  The  small  table  is  walking  into  the  cabinet
[i.e.  away  from  the  medium. F.,  July  11/09].

F.  I  have  her  right  leg  securely.

C.  The  medium  is  holding  my  right  hand  in  her  left  hand  on  the

table,  and  I  can  clearly  see  her  face.

F.  Her  right  hand  is  in  mine  and  visible,  on  the  table.

F.  My  right  leg  is  in  contact  with  her  right  knee.

C.  Her  left  foot  is  on  my  right  foot,  my  right  knee  pressing
against  her  left  knee.

11.56  p.m.  F.  The  medium,  whilst  holding  my  left  hand  makes
three  gestures,  and  noises  in  the  cabinet  follow  each  gesture.

C.  She  [is  holding  my  right  hand  in  her  left  hand.

F.  Now  she  presses  my  hand  three  times  and  three  noises  are
heard  simultaneously  in  the  cabinet,  on  the  tambourine.


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  II.


371


[Light  IV.]

12.00  p.m. C. I  hear  movements  in  the  cabinet.

C. I  am  touched  as  if  by  a  hand  through  the  curtain.

C.  My  right  hand  holds  her  left  hand  firmly  on  the  table.
F.  Her  right  hand  is  in  mine  all  the  time,  her  face  close  to
mine  and  visible.

[The  touch  was  on  my  right  side. C,  Nov.  25/08.]

12.1  a.m. Medium  asks  for  more  light;  electric  light  turned  up.
Light  I.

F. She  makes  three  movements  with  her  right  hand.

C.  The  small  table  moves  away  from  her  in  the  cabinet,  whilst
I  am  looking  at  it.  I  can  clearly  see  the  whole  table,  which
moves  about  a  foot.

[The  table  was  lying  on  its  side  on  the  floor,  the  curtain  being
accidentally  drawn  to  one  side  sufficiently  for  us  both  to  see
into  the  cabinet, F.  and  C,  Nov.  25/08.]

M.  notes :  "  I  see  this  also."

[While  I  was  looking  at  the  small  table  in  the  cabinet  (the
curtains  having  been  accidentally  parted,  allowing  me  to  see  the
whole  table)  it  made  a  series  of  little  jumps  in  a  direction  away
from  the  medium,  and  back  into  the  cabinet.  I  could  see  that
there  was  no  contact  between  the  medium's  foot  and  the  table,
while  a  thread,  if  pulled,  would  have  had  the  effect  of  pulling
the  table  in  the  opposite  direction,  i.e.  towards  the  medium.
About  six  or  seven  little  jumps  of  this  kind  were  made,  bringing
the  small  table  again  right  into  the  cabinet.  The  light  was
particularly  good,  at  this  time,  and  I  could  clearly  see  the  whole
of  the  table  as  it  was  moving. C,  Dec.  7/08.]

F.  I  can  see  between  her  and  the  place  where  the  table  was,
over  her  knee  [between  the  two  curtains].

F. I  was  looking  into  the  cabinet  over  her  knee. She  pinched
my  hand  and  the  table  in  the  cabinet  wriggled  about.
C.  I  also  can  see  the  table  moving  about  in  the  cabinet.

A  note  is  struck  on  the  string  of  the  guitar.


372  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part
[Light  I.]

[Eusapia  had  tapped  three  times  on  the  palm  of  my  hand  with
her  right  hand,  the  first  two  taps  were  followed  by  raps  in  the
cabinet,  and  the  third  by  the  plucking  of  the  guitar  string.
Thereupon  she  laughed  diabolically.  F.,  Nov.  25/08.]
[The  guitar  was  a  metre  behind  the  back  of  the  medium's  chair,
and  the  small  table  was  between  medium  and  guitar, — the  guitar
standing  upside  down  in  the  corner,  on  the  floor.  F.  and  C,
Nov.  25/08.]

[In  re-reading  this  description  we  notice  that  the  foot-control  is
omitted.  Owing  to  the  excellence  of  the  light,  however,  we  could
clearly  see  that  her  feet  were  not  employed.  There  was  a  clear
space  of  about  a  foot  between  the  back  of  her  chair  and  the  curtain,
and  her  knees  and  feet  were  towards  the  seance  table.  F.  and  C,
Dec.  6/08.]

C.  The  small  table  moves  forward  a  foot  while  we  are  looking
at  it.

C.  Both  her  hands  are  clearly  visible,  the  light  good,  the  feet  held
as  before.

[At  this  'point  the  medium  discovered  that  the  cabinet  curtain  was
accidentally  drawn  to  one  side  allovnng  me  to  see  into  the  cabinet.
She  thereupon  reached  up  and  replaced  the  curtain  in  its  proper
position. C,  Nov.  25/08.]

F.  The  medium  says  that  she  wants  to  touch  the  small  table  in
the  cabinet.

She  raises  it  from  the  floor  and  puts  it  upside  down  and  closes
the  curtains.

C. Her  feet  are  about  two  feet  in  front  oj  the  curtains.

[Her  chair  was  now  turned  slightly  to  the  left. F.,  Dec.  1/08.]

12.5  a.m.  Medium  makes  six  gestures  and  large  movements  of
the  left  curtain  take  place.

F.  Her  light  hand  was  on  my  shoulder,  the  left  hand  holding
C.'s  wrist.

15. 12  a.m.  F.  asks  "John"  to  touch  him,  "John"  replies  by  tilts
of  the  stance  table.

12.13  a.m. Medium  says  that  she  is  tired.


lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusajpia:  Seance  II.  378

[Light  I.]

F.  tells  "  John "  that  the  medium  is  tired  and  asks  him  whether
the  stance  shall  end.  The  medium  says,  "  say  '  Yes '  John,"  but
"John"  tilts  "No,  No."

C.  Medium  holds  my  right  hand  in  her  left  hand,  and  makes
three  taps  on  my  right  hand  with  her  right  hand ;  three  taps
are  heard  in  the  cabinet  apparently  on  the  wood  of  the  small
table  corresponding  with  these  taps.

F.  Absolute  control  of  feet.

12.15  a.m.  F.  She  takes  up  curtain  and  elraws  it  to  C.'s  right
hand,  holding  C.'s  right  hand  in  her  left  hand  on  the  table.  Her
right  hand  supports  her  head. She  lets  curtain  fall  back.

F.  The  curtains  part  in  the  middle  and  I  can  see  right  into
the  cabinet.

[They  were  drawn  gently  aparc,  just  as  though  some  invisible
person  within  were  looking  out. F.,  Dec.  1/08.]

12.18  a.m. Four  complete  levitations  of  the  table.

Both  her  hands  being  clearly  visible  and  six  inches  above  the
table.

F.  My  right  leg  is  curled  right  round  between  her  leg  and  the
leg  of  the  table.

C.  Her  left  foot  being  on  my  right,  pressing  very  strongly.

Medium  again  says  that  she  is  tired,  and  "  John,"  on  F.  asking
him  if  the  siance  may  now  end,  tilts  three  times,  meaning  "  Yes."

Note  by  H.  Carrington.

So  many  remarkable  phenomena  took  place  at  this  seance,  in
good  light  and  under  what  appeared  to  us  excellent  conditions  of
control,  that  little  need  be  said,  save  to  record  the  fact  that  we
both  felt,  at  its  conclusion,  that  at  least  some  of  the  phenomena
were  undoubted.  The  plucking  of  the  guitar  string  alone,  under
the  conditions  prevailing,  appeared  to  us  practically  convincing.  It
must  be  remembered  that,  at  this  time,  the  light  was  excellent,
allowing  us  clearly  to  see  the  whole  body  of  the  medium,  and  to
read  small  print.  Her  head  and  her  two  hands  were  plainly  visible  ;
her  feet  controlled;  in  addition  to  which  there  was  a  space  of  about


.374  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


a  foot  between  her  body  and  the  cabinet  curtains.  Further,  the
small  table  was  lying  on  the  floor  in  the  cabinet,  forming  a  sort
of  "  fence  "  between  Eusapia  and  the  guitar.  The  guitar  was  upside
down,  in  the  corner,  and  at  least  four  feet  from  the  medium.  Yet,
under  these  conditions,  a  string  was  clearly  and  forcibly  plucked
on  the  guitar.  We  were  absolutely  positive  at  the  time,  and  remain
so  still,  that  Eusapia  could  not  have  reached  the  guitar  by  any
normal  means.  H.  C,  Dec.  7th,  1908.

Note  by  E.  Feilding.

In  preparing  the  report  for  press  I  perceive  that  I  wrote  no
contemporary  note  to  this  seance.  I  think  I  shirked  it.  My  mind
was  not  prepared  to  accept  the  phenomena  which  occurred,
and  yet  I  was  unable  to  suggest  any  loophole  for  fraud  in  the
production  of  any  of  them.  Re-reading  the  shorthand  report  after
this  lapse  of  time,  and  studying  it  critically,  I  can  appreciate  what
an  absolutely  different  impression  it  must  make  on  the  mind  of  any
one  not  present,  who  is  naturally  justified  in  doubting  whether,
when  some  obvious  precaution  is  not  mentioned  in  the  report,  it
may  not  perhaps  have  been  neglected.

This  seance,  although  the  phenomena  were  less  complicated  than
those  at  later  seances,  ranks  in  my  memory  as  among  the  most  remark-
able of  the  whole  series.  We  were  still  fresh  at  the  game,  still  alertly
suspicious  of  every  movement  of  Eusapia;  somewhat  annoyed,  to
speak  frankly,  at  our  failure  to  detect  any  fraud  at  the  first  seance,
and  determined  to  get  even  with  her.  We  tied  her  feet,  and  then
presently  forgot  that  we  had  tied  them,  and  to  judge  by  C.'s  somewhat,
elaborate  note  at  11.19,  did  not  even  remember  it  the  next  day.  This
attitude  of  suspicion  must  be  read,  therefore,  into  the  report,  which
of  itself,  as  a  complete  record  of  events,  is  very  imperfect.

As  it  is  inevitable  that  critics  will  talk  of  excited  and  emotional
witnesses,  I  should  like  to  state  that  throughout  the  whole  series  of
seances  it  was  only  on  two  occasions  that  I  experienced  the  slightest
emotional  thrill.  The  cause  of  the  second  of  these  occasions  was  the
phenomenon  occurring  at  12.11  a.m.  in  the  sixth  seance;  while  the
cause  of  the  first  was  the  plucking  of  the  guitar  string  during  the
seance  under  consideration.  The  matter  itself  was  simple  enough,
yet  it  was  precisely  one  of  the  things  which  one  knew  could  not
happen,  but  which  did.  E.  F.,  Feb.  9th,  1909.


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  III.


:J7o


Remarks  on  Seance  III.

November  26th,  1908.

For  this  seance  we  had  prepared  an  apparatus,  referred  to  in
the  report  as  the  "  stocks,"  with  a  view  to  preventing  the
fraudulent  use  of  the  medium's  feet  in  levitating  the  table.  A
reproduction  of  a  photograph  of  this  apparatus  is  given
opposite.  It  consisted  of  two  wooden  tubes,  shaped  like
inverted  cones,  into  which  were  inserted  the  legs  of  the  table
at  the  end  at  which  the  medium  sat.  The  tubes  were  joined,
at  the  bottom,  by  a  board  which  rested  flat  on  the  floor,  and  at
the  top,  by  another  board  so  placed  as  to  go  over  the  medium's
knees  when  she  sat  at  the  table.  The  lower  board  extended  on
each  side  so  as  to  enable  one  leg  of  the.  chair  of  the  sitter  on
either  side  of  the  medium  to  be  placed  upon  it.  The  conical
shape  of  the  tubes  permitted  the  table  to  tilt  fairly  freely.
It  is  evident  that  as  the  medium  could  not  get  her  feet
under  the  legs  of  the  table,  nor  her  knees  either  against  the
legs  or,  owing  to  the  upper  board,  against  the  top  of  the
table,  it  was  impossible  for  her  to  levitate  it  fraudulently  with
her  feet  or  knees,  except  in  one  way,  viz.  by  sitting  very  low
in  her  chair,  thrusting  her  legs  far  under  the  knee-board  of
the  stocks,  and  kicking  upwards  in  the  middle  of  the  table.
This  would  involve  a  form  of  acrobatic  contortion  which  would
not  only  have  been  very  obvious,  but  was  of  a  kind  to  which
the  robust  physique  of  the  medium  certainly  did  not  appear  to
lend  itself.  While,  however,  effectively  eliminating  leg  action,  the
stocks,  we  found,  facilitated  that  of  the  hands,  since  a  direct
pull  at  the  front  of  the  table  caused  its  legs  to  slide  along
the  sloping  sides  of  the  conical  tubes  and  produced  a  bad
imitation  of  a  total  levitation.

A  change  was  made  in  the  lighting  arrangements  by  the
fitting  up  of  a  group  of  four  electric  lamps  hanging  in  the  same
position  as  the  original  lamp.  By  means  of  a  commutator
standing  on  the  shorthand  writer's  table,  the  light  could  be
successively  reduced  from  the  ordinary  light  of  the  room
down  to  a  rather  faint  glow.

The  programme  of  phenomena  at  this  seance  consisted  of
levitations  of  the  seance  table ;  movements  of  the  curtains ;
touchings  and  pullings  of  the  sitters  as  if  by  an  unseen  hand


376 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


coming  from  behind  the  curtain  ;  movements  of  objects  inside  the
cabinet,  including  the  upsetting  of  the  small  table  within  it,  and
levitations  of  the  small  table  while  standing  outside  the  curtain.

Owing  to  the  poor  light  that  prevailed  during  a  great  part
of  the  seance  the  conditions  were  not  nearly  so  satisfactory  as
those  of  the  first  two  seances.  Further,  during  the  darkness,  the
medium  twice  effected  the  substitution  of  hands  detected  at
the  Cambridge  sittings  and  elsewhere.  A  discussion  of  this
apparently  fraudulent  action  will  be  found  in  the  notes
following  the  shorthand  report.

Levitations  of  the  table  were  far  fewer  than  at  the  previous
seances,  the  table  remaining  motionless  for  long  periods
together.  Whether  or  not  this  was  due,  as  at  the  time  wo
supposed  it  was,  to  the  use  of  the  stocks,  it  is  impossible  to
say.  It  may,  however,  be  remarked  that  at  several  of  the
later  stances,  though  no  stocks  were  used,  there  were  scarcely
any  movements  whatever  of  the  table,  the  phenomena  appear-
ing merely  to  have  progressed  to  another  part  of  the  programme.

At  this  seance  the  most  frequent  phenomena  were  movements
of  the  curtain,  which  began  after  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour,
in  the  faintest  of  the  four  lamps,  which,  however,  was  still
bright  enough  to  enable  us  to  see  the  grain  in  the  wood  of
the  table.  These  movements  followed  one  another  rapidly  from
10.3  till  10.13,  when  the  light  was  turned  out,  leaving  only  the
photographic  lamp  on  the  stenographer's  table.  After  a  few
more  movements  of  the  curtain  the  light  was  further  reduced,
at  10.24,  by  shading  the  photographic  lamp  on  to  the  steno-
grapher's book,  leaving  the  faintest  possible  illumination,  just
enough  to  distinguish  the  whereabouts  of  the  medium's  face.

Just  after  10.27  she  made  the  substitution  of  hands
already  referred  to.  This  was  immediately  detected  and
protested  against.  After  touches  on  F.'s  side  and  hand,  the
medium  gave  warning  that  something  was  going  to  happen,
and  asked  for  careful  control.  The  table  was  then  completely
levitated  (10.52)  under  what  appeared  to  be  unimpeachable
conditions.  Owing,  however,  to  the  state  of  suspicion  into
which  we  had  been  thrown  by  the  fraud  referred  to  above,
and  to  the  poor  light,  we  were  not  at  the  time  impressed.
The  upsetting  of  the  small  table  within  the  cabinet,  at
10.55, must be regarded as non-evidential owing to  the


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  III.


377


shorthand  report  omitting  to  state  whether  the  control  had
been  relaxed  during  the  moment  of  rest  immediately  preceding  it.

At  10.56  C.  was  pulled  on  the  sleeve  at  a  time  when
both  hands  are  accounted  for  separately,  while  the  light  was
sufficient  for  the  head  to  be  clearly  distinguishable.  At  11.2
the  medium  asked  for  No.  4  light  to  be  turned  up  again,
and  shortly  afterwards  asked  for  her  feet  to  be  held  under
the  table  by  F.,  M.  taking  his  place  meanwhile.  Two  complete
levitations  of  the  table  immediately  followed.  At  the  time
we  attributed  her  wish  for  a  change  merely  to  a  hope  that
she  would  find  M.  a  less  experienced  controller.

At  11.30  the  medium,  apparently  realizing  our  dissatisfaction,
asked  for  her  hands  to  be  tied  to  those  of  the  sitters  on  either
side  of  her.  Further  movements  of  the  curtain  and,  after  the
light  had  been  further  increased  to  the  No.  3  lamp,  touches  on
the  sitters  continued  unchecked,  and  at  11.45  there  occurred  an
outburst  of  phenomena  of  various  kinds  at  once,  accompanied
by  the  typical  muscular  contractions  which  we  began  to  notice
that  the  medium  usually  exhibited  either  shortly  before  or
at  the  moment  of  production  of  her  strongest  manifestations.
These  contractions  consist  of  strong  pressure  of  her  hands  on
those  of  the  sitters,  or  of  spasmodic  movements  of  her  feet
and  legs,  accompanied  by  those  of  the  sitters  under  the  table
in  front  of  her.  The  effect  is  as  though  muscular  pressure
produced  a  discharge  of  some  kind  of  energy  which  took  effect
on  objects  at  a  distance  from  her.  We  have  never  been
able  to  trace  any  normal  physical  connection  between  these
movements  and  the  phenomena  which  are  precipitated  by  them.

At  11.50  the  small  table  from  the  cabinet  emerged  and
attempted  to  climb  first  on  to  C.'s  chair  and  then  on  to
the  seance  table ;  but  the  control  is  inadequately  stated  in  the
report,  though  a  note  made  by  the  shorthand  writer  shows
that  the  conditions  of  light  were  sufficient  for  him  to  see  the
position  of  the  medium's  hands  as  well  as  her  feet  under  the
table.  A  series  of  movements  of  the  small  table  followed,
including  several  levitations,  but  the  control  of  the  medium's
left  foot  was  felt  by  C.  at  the  time  to  be  unsatisfactory.  His
note,  as  well  as  F.'s,  on  this  subject  should  be  referred  to.

It  seems  possible,  in  the  light  of  subsequent  experience,  that
the  unsatisfactory  impression  made  upon  us  by  this  seance  was


378


E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggcdly,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


clue  chiefly  to  the  attitude  of  extreme  hostility  into  which
we  had  been  thrown  by  what  we  believed  to  be  the  fraudulent
conduct  of  the  medium  in  the  early  part  of  the  seance,  and
to  the  fact  that  the  light  was  so  much  less  good  than  at  the
previous  seances.

No  deliberate  conscious  fraud  was  proved,  and  the  utmost
that  can  be  said  is  that,  taken  by  itself,  the  seance  must  be
regarded  as  inconclusive.


A  group  of  four  clear  glass  electric  lights  has  been  arranged  in  the
same  position  as  the  single  burner  in  the  previous  stances,  and  by
means  of  a  commutator,  the,  light  can  be  varied  through  lamps  of
110,  150,  3:?0  and  SJ/,0  volts,  the  current  being  110  volts.  These
lights  will  be  referred  to  throughout  the  stance  as  Nos.  1,2,3  and  4-

Also,  a  new  j^otogrcqjhic  lamp  with  cylindrical  red  glass  shade  has
been  'provided,  throwing  a  more  brilliant  light  in  cdl  directions.

The  seance  tabic  is  placed  in  the  "Stocks"  apparatus  {see  photo-
graph, p.  375).


9.49  p.m. Stance  commenced. F.  on  left  of  medium,  C.  on  right.


Shorthand  Report  of  Seance  III.


November  mh,  1908.


Present — F.,  C,  and  M.,  shorthand  writer.


Light  I.


M


lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  III.  379

[Light  I.]

M.,  the  shorthand  writer,  sits  at  another  table,  being  himself  about
three  feet  distant  from  the  end  of  the  stance  table  furthest  from  the
medium.

F.  and  C.'s  chair-legs  arc  placed  on  the  lower  board  of  stocks.

9.5-4  p.m.  Medium  taps  three  times  on  the  table,  three  raps  in
the  wood  of  the  table  follow,  her  hands  being  apparently  quite
motionless  on  the  table.

9.55  p.m.  Medium  taps  three  times  on  the  table  and  three  raps
reply.

[We did not  care to interrupt  the  proceedings in order  to
control  the  raps. F.  and  C,  Nov.  25/08.]

Light  II.

9.56  p.m.  Light  No.  2,  and  light  from  next  room  through  crack
of  door  ajar  about  three  inches.

Light  III.

9.57  p.m. Light  No.  3,  also  'photographic  lamp; door  shut.

F.  I  have  asked  medium  to  try  and  make  me  feel  some  raps  on
my  hand,  and  she  replies  that  there  is  too  much  light.

Light  now  lowered  to  lamp  No.  If.,  photographic  lamp  shaded
so  as  to  throw  light  only  on  to  M.'s  book.

Light  IV.

C. The light is still  sufficiently  good to  enable us to see  the

whole  of  the  medium's  body  clearly.

F.  And  the  grain  in  the  wood  of  the  table.

M.  notes :  "  1  can  see  the  three  figures  perfectly,  except  black  of
clothes."

C.  The  medium  removes  our  two  hands  from  the  table  and  places
them  on  the  board  running  above  her  knees,  her  hands  being
betu'ecn  this  board  and  the  table.

10.00  p.m. F. Her  left  foot  is  on  my  right  foot.
C. Her  right  foot  is  on  my  left  foot.


380  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  BaggoMy,  and  H.  Oarrington.  [part
[Light  IV.]

10.2  p.m. F. My  right  hand  is  now  over  Iters.

C. Mine  is under hers. Medium asks  whether  control  is  good.

10.3  p.m.  F.  The  medium  is  holding  my  right  hand  out  towards
the  curtain.

C. With  her  right  hand  she  grasps  mine  under  the  table.

F.  She  made  a  gesture  towards  the  curtain  and  nothing  happened  ;
she  then  made  another  and  the  curtain  jumped  out.

10.6  p.m.  F.  She  holds  my  right  hand  again  towards  the
curtain,  and  after  two  or  three  movements  apparently  of  some-
thing inside  the  curtain,  the  curtain  comes  out  towards  my
hand.

[It  looked  as  though  a  hand  were  moving  about  inside  the
curtain,  which  eventually  pushed  it  out. F.,  Nov.  27/08.]

F.  She  holds  my  hand  again  towards  the  curtain,  and  after  a
moment  the  curtain  comes  out  about  six  to  eight  inches.

[Whenever  the  medium  holds  our  hands  towards  the  curtains,  it
is  always  about  in  a  line  with  her  head,  and  the  spot  on  which
the  curtain  bulges  out  is  just  opposite.  Usually  about  a  foot
intervenes  between  her  hand  and  the  curtain. F.,  Nov.  27/08.]

10.7  p.m. Medium  asks  for  careful  control.

10.9  p.m.  F.  She  holds  both  our  hands  up  in  the  air  in
both  of  hers  and  makes  a  big  gesture  and — nothing  happens.
She  makes  a  second  gesture  and  the  curtain  moves  on  my
side.

10.10  p.m. F. The  curtain  blows  out  again.

C.  The  curtain  blew  out  about  two  feet. She  is  holding  my
left  hand  on  the  table  with  her  right,  which  is  clearly  visible.
F.  She  has  mine  upon  hers  all  the  time.

C.  The  table  tilts  up  away  from  her,  with  her  right  hand
only  on  it.

F.  I  am  holding  her  left  hand.

C.  The  curtain  blows  out  a  foot,  my  left  hand  held  out  by
her  towards  it  while  she  makes  a  pulling  movement.


lix.]  Sittings  tvith  Eusapia:  Seance  III.  381


[Light  IV.]

F. She  asks  me  to'  make  gestures  by  myself.

C.  The  mediums  hands  are  clearly  visible,  although  not  touching
ours.

F.  She  asked  me  to  make  a  motion  towards  the  curtain  with
my  hand  free.  I  did  so,  and  the  curtain  moved.  She  then  took
hold  of  my  wrist  and  the  curtain  came  out  and  touched  me.

10.11  p.m. F.  asks  '"John"  to  touch  him.
F.  The  curtain  is  coming  ri™ht  out.

F. "  John,  touch  me."

C.  The  table  tilts  up  to  the  left,  her  right  hand  being  about
two  inches  above  the  table.

10.12  p.m. F.  The  curtain  then  came  out  about  three  feet.
C. Quite  slowly.

F.  Her  feet  are  motionless  and  her  chair  is  quite  visible,  and
I  can  see  the  whole  of  it.

[During  the  above  curtain  phenomena  the  control  of  the  feet  is
not  given,  but  as  the  light  was  sufficient  for  us  to  see  the  whole
of  the  medium,  right  down  to  the  floor,  it  seemed  unnecessary  to
state  that  the  movements  of  the  curtain  were  not  produced  by  her
feet.  Moreover,  the  curtain  invariably  bulged  out  as  though  pushed
from  inside  at  about  four  feet  from  the  floor,  and  did  not  present
the  appearance  that  it  would  have  done  if  it  had  been  pulled  by
a  string  from  outside. F.  and  C,  Nov.  27/08.]

Light  V.

10.13  p.m.  Electric  light  turned  right  out.  Only  'photographic
lamp  on  M.'s  table,  being  left,  not  shaded.

F.  I  can  see  her  face,  hands,  eyebrows,  and  the  different  colours
of  her  hair  [which  has  white  streaks  in  it].

M.  notes :  "  /  can  just  see  the  three  heads  and  the  two  hands
nearest  me."

C. She  holds  my  left  hand  tender  the  table.


382  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part

[Light  V.]

10.15  p.m.  F.  She  holds  my  hand  towards  the  curtain,  and
the  curtain  comes  right  out  and  is  touching  my  hand  now,  I
cannot  feel  anything  resisting  inside.

10.18  'p.m. C.  At  this  moment  the  medium  is  holding  both  our
hands  on  the  board  vith  her  two  hands,  and  she  showed  us  by
raising  our  hands  that  toe  were  held  by  two  different  hands.
F. Which  we  can  also  sec  anyhow.

F.  She  holds  her  hand  and  mine  to  my  side  and  makes  three
gestures,  raps  follow  somewhere.  She  holds  my  hand  again
towards  the  curtain  and  the  curtain  again  blows  out.

F.  "  Touch  me  John "  severed  times.

F.  She  takes  the  curtain  in  her  hand  and  holds  it  right  out.

C.  And  then  lets  go.

F.  Holding  my  left  hand  all  the  time.

C.  Her  right  hand  is  now  holding  my  left  hand,  on  the  table.

10.22  p.m.  M.  notes  :  "  She  asks  whether  feet  are  still  well  controlled.

F.  and  C.  reply,  '  yes!  "

F. I  can  feci  the  heel  of  her  left  foot.

C. I  can  feel  the  toe  of  her  right.

[The  obvious  implication  from  this  description,  the  insufficiency
of  which  was  realized  at  the  time,  is  that  the  same  foot  was  holding
both  of  ours.  Owing  to  the  fact  that  our  feet  were  on  opposite
sides  of  the  table,  however,  we  feel  tolerably  sure  that  such  was  not
the  case. F.  and  C,  Nov.  27/08.]

Light  VI.

10.24-  P-m-  Fight  still  further  reduced  by  shading  photographic
lamp  so  as  to  throw  light  only  on  to  M.'s  booh.

C.  d  can  still  clearly  see  the  medium's  head.

F.  I  can  only  see  the  white  of  her  face.

M.  notes : "I  can  sec  nothing  at edl except  just  the  white  edge

of  the  table  nearest  me,  distant  about  three  feet  from  me."


ltx.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  III.  383

[Light  VI.]

10.27  p.m.  F.  She  is  showing  which  hand  is  now  held  by  me
and,  which  by  C.

F.  Medium  makes  three  gestures  with  the  right  hand  and  nothing
happened,

C.  The  curtain  blows  out  ou  the  table.

F.  For  the  hrst  time  the  right  hand  curtain  blows  out  on
the  table.

N.B. — C.  My  left  hand  was  not  property  held,  and  I  am  perfectly
certain  that  there  was  a  substitution  of  hands.

F.  explains  to  medium  that  control  teas  not  good.

[This  is  the  first  time  in  any  of  the  seances  where  even  an
attempt  at  substitution  was  made.  During  the  first  two  seances
the  light  was  always  sufficient  to  enable  us  to  see  both  hands
clearly.  This  time  I  saw  the  medium  push  her  right  arm  into
the  cabinet,  grasp  the  curtain  and  pull  it  out  over  the  table.  The
difference  between  this  and  the  other  curtain  phenomena  was  very
clear  to  me  on  whose  side  it  occurred. C,  Nov.  27/08.]

10.32  p.m. F.  Something  has  touched  me  on  my  right  side.

C.  The  medium  held  my  left  hand  in  her  right,  above  the  table,
and  made  three  movements  in  the  direction  of  the  curtain.
F.  She  held  my  right  continuously  in  hers.

10.33  p.m.  We  have  now  verified  by  touching  the  feet  with  our
hands  that  the  feet  touching  ours  are  separate.

10.35  p.m.  The  medium  asks  whether,  if  the  table  were  to  levitate
now,  we  should  consider  the  control  good.

10.37  p.m. F. She  again  asks  us  to  control  her  feet  carefully.
F. Her  left  foot  is  quite  clearly  on  mine.

C.  The  medium  is  holding  my  left  hand  in  her  right  hand
on  the  table,  under  the  curtain  of  the  cabinet  which  has  remained
out  over  it.

10.4-0 p.m. C. asks F. if  the leg of  his chair is still  on
bottom  board  of  stocks.
F. "  Yes."


384  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part

[Light  VI.]

F. asks  "  John "  several  times  to  touch  him.

10.45  p.m.  F.  My  hand  was  touched  about  two  feet  away  from
the  cabinet.

(J.  My  left  hand  was  held  by  her  right  about  an  inch  above
the  table.

10.53  'p.m.  Medium  says,  "Look  out,  I  feel  that  something  is  going
to  happen."

C. She  pi^csses  on  my  foot.

Complete  levitation  of  the  table,  about  18  inches.

F.  And  I  can  see  something. I  saw  something  black,  apparently

just  touching  the  edge  of  the  table.

[A  filmy  black  thing  seemed  to  me  to  shoot  out  (horizontally
from  the  medium,  F.,  May  2/09),  and  touch  the  edge  of  the  table
near  C. It  was  a  very  fugitive  glimpse. F.,  Nov.  27/08.]

C.  My  left  hand  was  held  by  her  right  hand  on  her  right  knee.
F.  My  right  hand  was  held  by  her  left  on  her  left  knee,  the
fingers  being  around  it. No  question  of  substitution.
M.  asks  "Were  the  stocks  held?" Reply:  "yes."
F.  Her  left  foot  was  pressing  heavily  on  mine,  both  heel  and  toe.
C.  Ditto  here  for  right  foot.

10.53  p.m. Medium  asks  to  hewc  a  rest.

10.55  p.m.  The  table  in  the  cabinet  falls  over  with  a
loud  noise.

C.  Her  right  hand  was  held  in  my  left  hand  under  the  table
on  the  board,  and  she  was  pressing  strongly  against  my  left  leg
with  her  right.

F.  Her  left  hand  was  holding  my  right  in  her  lap,  and  I  am
absolutely  certain  of  the  whole  of  her  left  foot.

10.56  p.m.  C.  I  am  pulled  by  a  hand  through  the  curtain.  Her
right  hand  holds  my  left  hand  on  the  board.  [The  sleeve  of
my  coat  was  pulled,  near  the  elbow. C,  Nov.  27/08.]


LIX.]


Sittings  ivith  Eusapia:  Seance  III.


385


[Light  VI.]


F.  She  kicks  my  right  foot  about  with  her  left  foot.  She  holds
my  right  hand  in  her  left  hand  in  her  lap,  and  calls  my  attention
to  a  black  shadow  .near  C,  which  I  do  not  sec.

C.  I  am  again  pulled  by  a  hand.

F.  She  asked  me  again  if  I  saw  nothing,  but  although  I  could
see  the  red  lit  door  between  C.  and  the  curtain,  looking  in  front
of  her,  I  could  not  see  anything.  [A  visible  object  touching  C.
from  the  cabinet  would  have  crossed  this  red  lit  door  (the  shining
wood  of  which  reflected  the  red  light  of  the  lamp)  and  ought  to
have  been  perceived  b}^  me. F.,  Feb.  10/09.]

10.59  p.m. Medium,  "See!  I  do  this"  (making  gestures).

C.  I  can  hear  noises  in  the  cabinet  as  though  something  were
softly  moving  about.

[it  sounded  to  me  as  though  a  kitten  or  a  small  dog  were
moving  about  inside  it. C,  Nov.  27/08.]

C.  Medium  is  holding  my  left  hand  continuously  with  her  right.
I  have  my  thumb  under  her  ringers,  holding  it  on  the  board.
F.  She  is  holding  my  right  hand. Control  is  perfect.


11.3  p.m.  Light  No.  If..  F.  and  G.  change  places.  F.  is  now
to  right  of  medium,  G.  to  left.


Light  IV.


Medium's  chair  is  about  a  foot  from  the  curtain.

11. If.  p.m. Medium  asks  F.  to  remove  his  right  hand.

■2b


386


E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington,  [part


[Light  IV.]

11.6  p.m.  Medium  asks  M.  to  take  place  of  F.,  asking  F.  to  hold,
her  feet  under  the  table,  which  is  done.


Complete  levitation  of  table  about  eight  inches.

The  following  notes  are  therefore  made  by  M.  from  memory
immediately  on  resuming  his  position  :

F.  holding  feet  under  table.

M.  Left  hand  held  by  medium's  right  flat  on  her  lap  (right  thigh).
C.  I  am  holding  her  left  hand  in  my  right  on  left  thigh,  my
hand  entirely  encircling  hers.

11.20  p.m. Medium  asks  for  a  few  moments'  repose.

About  half  a  minute  after  this,  2nd  levitation  of  the  table  about
eight  inches ; disposition  as  before.

M.  remarks  "  It  seems  strange  that  this  levitation  sltould  take
place  just  after  medium  had  asked  to  rest,  and  consequently
our  attention  had  been  relaxed,  which  mine  certainly  was."

M.  resumes  position  at  stenographer s  table.  F.  resumes  his
position  on  right  side  of  medium.


E  P.


11.36  p.m.  F.  says  to  "John"  that  lie  has  already  made  three
levitations,  and  that  he  might  try  something  else.


lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  III.  387

[Light  IV.]

11.30  p.m. Medium  asks  us  to  tie  her  hands.

While  M.  is  searching  for  cord,  the  curtains  blow  right  out.

11.34  t°  11-36  p.m.  Hands  are  being  tied.  [Her  hands  were  tied
to  F.  and  C.'s  left  and  right  hands  respectively,  leaving  a  play
of  about  1  foot  between  her  hands  and  ours. ¥.,  Feb.  11/09.]

11.36  p.m.  F.  Medium  holds  both  our  hands  towards  the
curtain.  Her  left  hand  held  C.'s.  Her  right  hand  free  except
for  the  cord.

11.37  p.m. Electric  light  accidentally  turned  full  on.
Light  I.

M.  notices  curtain  bulging  right  out  to  table.

C.  and  F.  were  looking  towards  light.

Light  turned  down  again  to  No.  4,  M.'s  lamp  being  shaded
on  to  his  book.

Light  IV.

C. I  am  touched  on  my  right  side.

C.  My  right  hand  is  holding  medium's  left  hand  on  the  table.
My  right  foot  is  pressed  by  her  left  foot  under  the  table.

F.  Her  right  hand  made  two  gestures  with  mine  about  two  feet
away  from  the  cabinet,  her  right  foot  held  on  mine.

C.  I  could  see  medium's  right  hand  making  these  gestures  up
and  down  above  the  table.

11.41  p.m.. Light  changed  to  No.  3.

Light  III.

C. I  am  touched  on  my  right  side.

C.  I  am  holding  medium's  left  hand  firmly  on  the  table  with
my  right  hand.

F.  I  can  see  between  C.  and  the  curtain,  but  could  not  see
anything  touching  him.


388  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Oarrington.  [part
[Light  III.]

C.  I  can  see  both  hands  all  the  time  and  the  outline  of  her
body.

F.  I  could  see  her  face  both  times  during  the  touches.  Her
foot  is  absolutely  tight  on  mine.

11.45  p.m.  The  tambourine  in  the  cabinet  rattles  after  three
distinct  movements.

C.  While  that  was  going  on,  I  was  holding  medium's  left  hand
over  the  table  with  my  right.

Medium  says,  "  Oh,  la,  la,  la ! "  several  times,  and  then  suddenly
the  table  in  the  cabinet  falls  over  and  the  things  on  it  fall  to
the  floor  with  a  crash. Tambourine  strikes  several  times.

F.  She  was  holding  my  right  hand  all  the  time.

C. I  am  touched  on  my  right  arm.

C.  Medium  holds  my  right  hand  in  her  left  all  the  time ;  her
left  foot  pressing  on  my  right  foot.

C. Touched  again  on  my  right  arm.

0. She  presses  four  times  strongly  with  her  finger  on  my  hand.
F. Her  right  foot  on  mine  cdl  the  time  and  kicking  about,  her  right
hand  pressing  on  mine.

C. The  medium  presses  her  left  foot  on  my  right.

Loud  noises  in  cabinet  as  though  objects  were  moving  about
within.

F.  She  is  kicking  about  under  the  table  with  her  right  foot.

[The  above  series  of  phenomena  took  place  so  rapidly,  like  a
kind  of  feu  de  joie,  that  it  was  difficult  to  describe  the  control
throughout.  The  final  description  of  the  foot  control,  when  one
foot  was  stationary  while  the  other  moved  about  seems  to  make  it
clear  that  the  two  separate  feet  were  held. F.  &  C,  Nov.  28/08.]

11.46  p.m. Complete  levitation  of  the  table.

F.  Her  right  hand  was  free,  but  still  bound  to  mine  and  visible
above  and  off  the  table.

11.50  p.m.  She  makes  gestures  towards  the  cabinet,  which  are
followed  by  movements  of  the  instruments  inside  cabinet.


Lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  III.  389

[Light  III.]

Medium  tells  F. to  make  gestures  with his  free  hand,  which

he  does,  and  noises  inside  the  cabinet  follow  them  irregularly.

C.  The  small  table  is  coming  out  from  under  the  curtain  on
my  right,  legs  first.

C. One  leg  of  the  small  table  has  climbed  up  on  my  chair.

[Here  again  the  phenomena  followed  so  quickly  that  a  descrip-
tion of  the  control  was  impossible.  We  can  only  say  that  it
seemed  adequate  at  the  time. F.  &  C,  Nov.  28/08.]

Light  IV.

M. I  can  see  everything  very  clearly.
F.  So  can  I.
C.  So  can  I.

Noises  again  follow  gestures  made  by  F.

The  small  table  attempts  to  climb  on  to  the  seance  table,  and
falls  back.

M.  notes:  "I  can  see  all  the  hands  over  and  away  from  the
table,  and  her  feet."

Things  in  cabinet  move  about  violently  and  with  great  com-
motion.

F.  Feet  are  all  right.

11.51  p.m.  C.  In  good  light  I  can  see  the  small  table  moving
towards  me,  the  result  of  my  making  movements  towards  it
with  my  right  hand.

C.  The  medium's  left  hand  is  holding  my  right  hand  and  clearly
visible. She  is  pressing  on  my  right  foot  with  her  left  foot.

F.  Her  right  foot  is  firmly  fixed  on  mine.  I  have  just  verified
with  my  hand  that  her  two  feet  are  apart.

Medium  asked  C.  to  lift  tip  the  smcdl  table  and  put  it  v/prighi,
which  he  does.  The  smcdl  table  now  stands  completely  out  of  the
cabinet  [to  the  left  of  the  medium. F.,  Feb.  11/09].


390  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part

[Light  IV.]

11.53  p.m. Complete  levitation  of  small  table.

C.  My  right  hand  being  on  the  surface,  her  left  being  upon
mine,  her  foot  was  pressing  strongly  on  mine.  The  table  is  raised
about  a  foot  in  the  air.

F.  Her  right  foot  is  pressing  on  mine.

11.57  p.m.  C.  She  puts  her  left  hand  on  my  right,  which  rests
flat  on  the  top  of  the  small  table,  and  the  table  again  rises  a
foot  in  the  air.

C.  Her  foot  is  still  strongly  pressing  on  my  right.
F.  Her  right  foot  is  still pressing  on  mine. Her  right  hand
is  visible  close  to  me,  in  mine.

G.  I  now  ascertain  that  there  is  no  string  or  connection  between
the  medium  and  the  small  table.

11.59  p.m.  C.  The  distance  between  the  small  table  and  the  d'uss
of  medium  appears  to  me  to  be  about  a  foot.

12.00  p.m.  Medium  makes  various  gestures  to  and  fro  over  the
small  table,  and  the  table  follows  them  backwards  and  forwards
three  or  four  inches.

C.  Her  left  hand  now  rests  on  the  small  table  on  mine.
Medium  lifts  my  hand  and  makes  pulling  movement  in  the  air
about  six  inches  above  it.  The  table  follows.  The  medium's
foot  still  strongly  pressing  on  mine.  The  table  moves  several
inches  on  the  floor,  and  a  complete  levitation  to  the  height  of
one  foot  in  the  air  follows.

C.  My  right  hand  was  resting  on  its  surface,  the  medium's  hand
on  my  hand.

1*2.1  a.m. C.  Her  foot  strongly  pressing  on  mine.
F.  Her  right  foot  strongly  pressing  on  mine  right  over  this  end
of  the  table,  and  her  right  hand  on  mine.

[Notwithstanding  that  the  notes  appear  to  show  adequacy  of  foot
control,  I  had  an  impression,  throughout  all  these  levitations  and
other  movements  of  the  small  table,  that  my  control  of  the  left
foot  was  not  satisfactory.  The  genuineness  of  the  above  series
depends  entirely  on  the  adequacy  of  the  control  of  the  left  foot.
On  all  previous  occasions  when  the  control  is  stated  to  be  good,


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusa/pia :  Seance  III.


391


[Light  IV.]

the  whole  of  the  medium's  foot  was  felt.  During  these  phenomena,
however,  only  the  toes  of  the  foot  were  felt,  and  not  the  whole
foot  as  before. C,  Nov.  28/08.]

Here  M.  had  to  leave.  It  was  explained  to  the  medium  that  the
control  of  the  foregoing  phenomena  had  not  been  considered  satis-
factory. She  thereupon  said  that  she  would  like  to  repeat  them.
See  C.'s  note  below.

Note  by  H.  Carrington.

A  complete  description  of  our  third  seance  is  extremely  difficult.
Not  only  were  the  phenomena  of  a  somewhat  different  order,  but  the
whole  conduct  of  the  seance  was  altered.  Further,  our  subjective
sensations — the  whole  atmosphere  of  the  seance — were  entirely  different
from  those  which  we  experienced  on  the  two  previous  occasions.  On
looking  back  on  this  seance,  I  cannot  help  feeling  that  some,  at  least,
of  the  phenomena  were  genuine, — notably  the  blowing  of  the  curtains.
But  on  the  other  hand,  I  must  record  the  fact  that  the  seance  reads  far
better  than  it  appeared  to  me  at  the  time.  Throughout  the  whole  of
the  latter  part  of  the  seance,  we  were  certainly  dissatisfied  with  the
phenomena  and  the  control,  though  the  notes  would  not  seem  to
indicate  this,  I,  especially,  was  dissatisfied  with  my  foot  control,
and  there  seemed  to  me  to  be  a  long  continued  effort  on  the  part
of  the  medium  to  substitute  one  foot  for  the  other.  Also,  on  two
occasions,  there  were  perfectly  clear  substitutions  of  hands,  followed
in  one  case  by  a  fraudulently  produced  phenomenon  which  was
obvious  to  me,  on  whose  side  it  took  place.  The  difference  between
the  apparently  genuine  and  the  spurious  phenomena  struck  me  very
forcibly  at  the  time,  and  I  felt  that  it  would  be  quite  impossible  to
confound  the  two.

The  seance  was,  on  the  whole,  a  bad  and  disappointing  one.
In  the  first  place,  the  medium  insisted  on  almost  total  darkness
during  the  greater  part  of  the  seance,  whereas  she  had  permitted
very  good  light  on  both  the  previous  occasions.  In  the  next  place,
she  held  our  hands  under  the  table  instead  of  upon  its  surface,  as
during  the  former  seances.  The  position  of  the  hands  was  often
the  most  favourable  for  substitution.  Moreover,  the  whole  bearing
and  manner  of  the  medium  were  different.  Instead  of  her  usual
languid  condition,  she  remained,  during  the  time  of  the  suspected


392  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  mid  H.  Garrington.  [part


phenomena,  quite  bright  and  energetic,  with  no  tendency,  apparently,
to  go  into  trance,  and  was  not  in  the  least  fatigued  at  the  termina-
tion of  the  seance,  as  she  had  been  on  the  two  previous  occasions.
My  own  impression  is  that  she  was  endeavouring  to  see  how  far  she
could  carry  fraud  without  detection, — to  "test"  us,  in  fact, — and  to»
ascertain  whether  it  would  be  necessary  to  produce  genuine  phenomena
in  the  future.  That,  of  course,  is  a  mere  supposition.  But  it  is
interesting  to  note  in  this  connection  that  Prof.  Morselli  also  dis-
covered fraud  during  his  third  sitting.

Throughout  the  seance,  the  control  of  the  left  foot  was  not  perfect.
Towards  the  end  three  complete  levitations  of  the  small  table  took
place,  my  hand  resting  fiat  upon  the  surface  of  the  table,  and  the
medium's  hand  just  touching  it.  The  small  table  stood  to  the  left
of  the  medium  and  only  about  a  foot  away  from  her.  It  was,
however,  too  dark  to  see  whether  her  foot  touched  it  or  not.1  I
pressed  down  firmly  with  my  right  hand,  but  the  table  went  up  in
spite  of  this.  The  upward  pressure  must  have  been  considerable.
When  pressing  downwards,  I  noticed  that  the  upward  pressure
came  from  the  leg  of  the  table  nearest  the  medium,  and  not  from
its  centre.

At  the  same  time  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  how  she  could  have
reached  so  far  with  her  left  foot  unperceived,  and  it  is  especially
difficult  to  conceive  this  in  the  third  levitation,  when  both  our  hands
were  completely  removed  from  the  table.  It  then  appeared  to  rise
up  all  by  itself,  and  with  no  visible  contact.  We  subsequently
ascertained  by  experiment,  that  it  was  impossible  (for  us)  to  levitate
the  small  table  in  this  manner  by  one  foot  alone  and  without  the
assistance  of  the  hands.  During  the  above  manifestations  and
immediately  before  them,  the  medium  kept  asking  me  if  my  foot
control  was  good.  I  invariably  replied  that  it  was ;  and  it  was  very
good,  at  those  moments.  But  during  the  actual  levitation  of  the  table,
the  control  became  very  poor,  and  I  could  only  feel  the  pressure  of
the  toe  of  her  foot.  At  this  point  the  regular  seance  ended,  and
M.,  the  stenographer,  left.

We  explained  to  the  medium  that  the  control  of  the  left  foot
had  not  been  good,  whereupon  she  immediately  insisted  on  re-
peating the  experiment.  She  made  me  put  my  right  foot  across
the  toes  of  both  her  feet,  and  her  left  hand  was  held  in  my  right,
her  right  hand  was  held  by  F.,  and  her  head  was  clearly  visible.
The  medium  kept  raising  each  foot  in  turn  under  mine,  saying,

1  On  account  of  the  shadow  thrown  by  the  seance  table. — F.,  Feb.  11/09.


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  III.


393


"  One,  two  ;  one,  two,"  as  she  raised  them.  Yet  despite  all  this,  I
did  not  feel  that  the  control  was  perfect.  She  would  count  and
raise  her  feet  several  times,  and  then,  suddenly,  I  would  feel  only
one  foot,  the  right,  and  the  left  foot  would  be  missing.  I  replied
to  her  question  by  saying  that  the  control  was  not  good,  whereupon
I  immediately  felt  both  her  feet  under  mine  again.  This  happened
several  times.  It  seems  only  fair  to  add,  however,  that  muscular
movements  almost  invariably  take  place  during  the  production  of
large  phenomena,  and  these,  when  occurring  in  good  light,  have
evidently  no  direct  physical  bearing  upon  their  production.  It  is
perhaps  unfair  to  assume  that  they  are  necessarily  evidence  of  fraud
merely  because  they  happen  in  the  dark.

No  movements  of  any  evidential  value  took  place,  and  after  about
ten  minutes  of  futile  attempts  the  seance  was  abandoned  and  the  light
turned  up.  The  net  result  of  the  seance  is  to  leave  on  my  mind
the  impression  that  very  skilful  trickery  had  been  employed  at  various
times,  but  that  fraud  alone  could  not  account  for  all  the  observed
facts,  while  it  seems  absolutely  inadequate  to  account  for  the  pheno-
mena in  the  former  seances,  which  appear  to  me  as  remarkable  as
ever.  H.  C.

[The  above  note  is  undated,  but  was  written  within  a  day  or  two
of  the  seance.]

Note  by  E.  Feilding.

On  reading  through,  last  night,  the  translation  of  the  shorthand
notes  of  the  third  seance,  we  were  both  surprised  to  find  what  an
entirely  different  impression  we  had  retained  of  what  had  taken  place
from  that  which  we  derived  from  the  notes.  All  the  more  remarkable
manifestations  had  receded  in  our  memory,  driven  back  by  the
certainty  that  the  medium  had  been  detected  in  fraud  ;  and  if,  before
reading  the  notes,  we  had  been  asked  to  give  an  account  of  the
seance,  we  should  certaiidy  have  said  that  it  had  been  almost  barren
of  results.  This  seance  is  largely  of  the  same  character  as  those
of  the  Cambridge  series.  The  light  was,  during  a  great  part  of  it,
very  poor ;  the  control  of  the  feet  was  difficult ;  and  her  hands
were  often  invisible,  and  in  a  position  where  substitution  would  be
possible.

Further,  the  medium  frequently  resisted  our  attempts  to  hold
her  hands  properly  ;  and  whereas,  in  the  former  stances,  they  had
been  almost  constantly  in  view,  or  firmly  grasped  in  ours,  during


394 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


much  of  the  third  seance  they  were  for  ever  moving  about  furtively
in  and  over  our  hands,  apparently  seeking  any  opportunity  that
might  be  presented  to  get  free.  The  shorthand  notes  do  not  show
this,  for  while  these  manoeuvres  were  going  on  nothing  happened,
as  will  be  seen  from  the  long  periods  which  elapsed  without  the  pro-
duction of  any  phenomena, — notwithstanding  the  occasional  outbursts
resembling  a  feu  de  joie  at  a  firework  display.  On  two  occasions  she
succeeded  in  freeing  her  right  hand.  Only  one  of  these  appears  in
the  notes,  for  though  the  release  of  the  hand  was  each  time  perceived
at  once  by  C,  on  whose  side  it  took  place,  he  preferred  to  watch
events  silently  ;  as  on  the  first  occasion  it  occurred  no  phenomenon
followed  it.

The  introduction  of  the  stocks  apparatus  had  also  a  marked
effect  on  the  behaviour  of  the  table.  This,  during  the  first  two
seances,  had  been  in  almost  constant  movement,  and  levitations,  whole
or  partial,  had  followed  one  another  closely.  During  the  third  seance,
on  the  other  hand,  it  remained  motionless  for  long  periods  together,
and  the  impression  upon  our  minds  was  that  the  use  of  the  apparatus
had  floored  the  medium.  The  notes,  however,  show  that  several
complete  levitations  did,  in  point  of  fact,  take  place,  which  cannot  be
accounted  for  by  any  substitution  of  hands.  Substitution  of  feet,
even  if  it  took  place,  could  not  have  assisted  the  production  of  a
levitation  of  the  seance  table  guarded  as  it  was  by  the  stocks;  besides
which,  two  levitations  took  place  while  I  held  her  feet  and  could  see
her  knees  under  the  table.  The  only  other  conceivable  method  by
which  the  table,  under  the  conditions,  could  have  been  lifted,  would
be  by  a  hook  under  the  skirting  board  that  runs  round  the  top  of
the  table.  A  pull  diagonally  upwards  with  a  hook  so  placed  would
have  the  effect  of  steadying  the  front  legs  of  the  table  against  the
stocks,  and  would  raise  all  its  four  legs  from  the  ground.  The
obvious  suggestion  that  Eusapia  uses  a  hook  can,  however,  only  be
made  by  some  one  who  has  not  assisted  at  her  better  stances,  and
is  of  a  cast  with  most  of  the  other  suggestions  made  by  absent  critics
of  her  more  remarkable  phenomena.  She  certainly  used  no  hook  in
the  two  previous  seances.  The  conditions  of  light  at  the  third  were
so  bad  that  I  cannot  affirm,  with  certainty,  that  she  did  not  use
one  then,  and  I  prefer  to  come  to  no  conclusion  as  regards  these
levitations.

There  remain  the  touches  on  my  hand  and  side,  and  the  pulls  on
C.'s  sleeves;  also  the  movements  of  the  curtain,  the  noises  within
the  cabinet,  and  the  levitations  of  the  small  table. The  fraud  and


Lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Stance  III.  395

the  constant  apparent  attempt  at  fraud  which  had  been  noticed  had
so  affected  our  minds  that  we  had  completely  forgotten  a  great  por-
tion of  these  until  we  read  the  notes.  It  appears  from  the  notes,
however,  that  only  the  levitation  of  the  small  table  can  be  accounted
for  by  any  manoeuvres  of  substitution,  whether  of  hands  or  feet.
If  we  assume,  therefore,  for  the  present,  that  genuine  phenomena
exist,  the  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  the  third  seance  appears  to  be
that  to  which  many  other  observers  have  previously  come  :  namely,
that  on  certain  occasions  Eusapia  seeks  to  produce  simple  phenomena
by  the  easiest  method, — fraudulent  substitution, — and  when  prevented
from  doing  so,  succeeds  in  producing  far  more  difficult  ones  by
some  means  unascertainable.

E.  F.,  Nov.  28th,  1908.

Supplementary  Note  by  E.  Feilding.

On  re-reading  the  foregoing  notes  while  preparing  the  report
for  press,  I  wish  to  state,  in  fairness  to  Eusapia,  that  in  the  light
of  subsequent  seances,  I,  personally,  am  now  disposed  to  give  an
entirely  different  interpretation  to  the  incidents  of  this  one.  It  is
nevertheless  a  satisfaction  to  me  that  these  notes  exist  as  a  record
of  our  critical,  indeed  hostile  state  of  mind.  The  first  two  seances
had  in  fact  left  no  enduring  mark  upon  us.  They  had  astonished
us,  puzzled  us,  vexed  us.  They  had  shown  us  that  the  problem
presented  by  Eusapia's  phenomena  was  not  the  simple  matter
which,  before  we  witnessed  them,  we  had,  in  the  invincible  conceit
of  every  new  critic  of  such  things,  supposed  it.  Conviction  is,
after  all,  an  emotional  and  not  an  intellectual  process;  and  the
impression  left  by  the  first  two  seances  was  purely  intellectual.
The  ordinary  effect  of  the  sudden  confrontation  of  a  fairly  balanced
mind  with  a  merely  bizarre  fact  is  a  reaction  :  the  mind  rejects
it,  refuses  to  consider  it.  And  the  more  bizarre  the  fact,  the
stronger  the  reaction.  If  the  possessor  of  such  a  mind  were,  for
example,  in  the  course  of  a  walk  down  Piccadilly,  to  see  a
policeman  levitated  across  a  motor  omnibus,  no  permanent  impression
as  to  the  mutability  of  the  laws  of  gravitation  affecting  policemen
would  remain  with  him.  The  emotional  certainty  produced  by  his
long  continued  previous  experience  that  policemen  do  not  do
such  things  would  be  stronger  than  any  degree  of  intellectual
certainty  that  this  particular  policeman  did,  and  would  presently
efface  it. And so it was with ourselves. Tables, we knew,  or


396


E,  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


thought  we  knew,  do  not  go  into  the  air  by  themselves,  curtains
do  not  bulge  out  without  some  mechanical  agency ;  and  although
we  saw  them  do  so,  we  still  refused  to  believe  that  they  did.
We  preferred  to  believe  that  we  had  been  deceived  in  some  way
unknown,  that  we  had  been  hallucinated,  or  had  wrongly  observed.
We  doubted  our  senses  rather  than  our  experience ;  were  guided,
in  fact,  by  our  emotions  rather  than  our  observation.  Hence,  at
this  seance  we  hailed  with  a  kind  of  relief  the  fact  that  Eusapia
had  been  caught  substituting  one  hand  for  the  other,  and  we
regarded  all  the  incidents  that  followed  through  the  atmosphere
of  suspicion  which  this  discovery  had  fortified.  The  result  was
that  not  only  did  we  colour  up  certain  possibly  quite  innocent
actions  into  almost  clear  evidence  of  fraud,  but  certain  other
interesting  and  indeed  inexplicable  phenomena,  such  as  the  outburst
at  11.45,  occurring  in  light  III.  which  ensured  the  absolute
visibility  of  her  head,  while  her  hands  were  bound  and  her  feet
separately  accounted  for,  passed  out  of  our  memory  completely.

Let  me  now  consider  the  fraudulent  action  which  produced  on  us
such  marked  psychological  consequences  and  see  what  it  really
amounted  to.  She  approached  her  hands  to  one  another,  used
part  of  her  left  hand  held  imperfectly  by  me  to  cover  part  of
C.'s  hand,  raised  her  right  hand  from  his  and  lifted  it  aver  her
head  to  touch  the  curtain.  C.  not  only  heard  the  action  by  the
cracking  of  her  dress,  but  saw  it.  If  the  action  was  fraudulent  in
intent  it  was  remarkably  ill-done.  She  then  replaced  her  hand  ;
and  presently  again  removed  it,  took  hold  of  the  curtain  to  her
right,  and  pulled  it,  very  obviously  to  C.  (though  not  to  me,  as  I
was  on  the  other  side  of  her)  over  the  table.  We  at  once  told  her
that  she  must  not  do  this  kind  of  thing  and  during  the  rest  of
the  seances  she  apparently  did  not  again  attempt  it,  except  on  two
occasions,  once  in  the  11th  seance,  when,  after  making  a  similar
substitution,  she  removed  her  left  hand,  in  a  light  good  enough
to  enable  me  (sitting  on  this  occasion  to  her  right)  as  well  as
the  lady  controlling  on  her  left,  at  once  to  see  it,  waved  it
slowly  in  the  air  towards  the  curtain,  and  returned  it;  and  once
possibly  in  the  4th,  in  complete  darkness,  when  I  am  not  certain
that  in  fact  she  did  do  it,  and  when,  in  any  case,  no  phenomenon
accompanied  it.

We  subsequently  observed  that  it  was  a  habit  of  hers  occasionally
to  wish  either  to  touch  the  curtain,  or  to  put  it  over  the  seance  table.
With  the  exception  of  the  cases  above  mentioned  she  invariably  either


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  III.


397


asked  permission  to  do  so,  or  called  our  attention  to  the  fact  that  she
did  do  so,  a  fact,  for  the  rest,  which  was  anyhow  quite  sufficiently
obvious.  I  cannot  explain  why  she  wished  to  do  these  things,  any
more  than  I  can  explain  many  other  items  in  her  procedure,  such
as  why  she  should  wish  to  have  a  table,  or  why  she  should  require
a  curtain  at  all.  I  find,  in  talking  with  friends,  that  when  I
mention  the  curtain,  they  inevitably  say,  "  Ah,  a  curtain  !  Why
a  curtain'?  What  a  suspicious  fact!"  I  agree  that  it  may  be
suspicious,  but  it  is  not  necessarily  so.  It  is  suspicious  when
used  by  a  materializing  medium  who  goes  behind  it,  and,  when  a
"spirit"  comes  out,  refuses  to  allow  spectators  to  ascertain  whether
he  is  himself  still  there.  But  in  Eusapia's  case,  where  she  sits
outside  it,  I  cannot  see  that,  given  certain  obvious  precautions,
it  is  necessarily  suspicious.  She  says  it  helps  to  "concentrate
the  force."  Perhaps  it  does.  I  do  not  know  what  the  "force"
is,  nor  what  it  requires  to  "concentrate"  it.  Nor  does  an}'  one
else.  To  a  person  ignorant  of  photography  it  is  possible  that
the  use  by  the  photographer  of  a  black  cloth  over  his  head
would  be  suspicious.  In  dealing  with  an  unknown  force  one  can
only  judge  empirically  of  the  utility  of  certain  conditions.  That
the  curtain  does  have  some  bearing  on  the  phenomena  is  clear,
as  nearly  all  of  them  seem  to  radiate  from  behind  it.  Eusapia
appears  to  be  en  rapport  with  something  within.  And  she  constantly
seems  to  experience  the  necessity  of  establishing  this  rapport  by
momentary  contact  with  the  curtain  or  by  enveloping  the  table
or  part  of  herself  in  its  folds.  We  never  perceived,  however,
that  the  phenomena  which  followed  this  action  had  any  normal
relation  to  it  whatever.  I  have  come,  therefore,  to  feel  it  possible
that,  so  far  as  our  own  series  of  experiments  is  concerned,  the  cases
of  hand-substitution  practised  were  innocent  in  intent,  though
fraudulent  in  appearance ;  that  she  wished  to  do  what,  after
obtaining  our  previous  consent,  she  otherwise  frequently  did, — touch
the  curtain  or  pull  it  over  the  table, — and  did  it,  half  automa-
tically and  without  consulting  us,  though  without  any  intention  of
producing  a  spurious  phenomenon.  It  is  necessary  to  say  that  never
once,  in  the  course  of  hundreds  of  phenomena,  did  we  detect  a  single
case  of  undoubted  fraud,  and  it  is  my  personal  belief  at  present  that
though  there  were  many  phenomena  which  must  be  classed  as  non-
evidential,  there  were  in  fact  none  which  we  should  be  justified  in
thinking  to  be  probably  spurious.  I  do  not  know  how  far  C,  who
is  now  in  America,  or  B.,  will  endorse  this  opinion. But  I  think


398  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Cwrington.  [part


it  probable  that  C.  will  now  admit  that  in  his  above  note  to
this  stance,  in  which  he  contemplates  the  possibility  of  Eusapia
having  produced  the  levitations  of  the  small  table  with  the  foot
which  he  was  intently  attempting  to  control,  he  did  himself
injustice  as  an  observer ;  as  he  must  also  admit  that  in  writing
that  the  'greater  part  of  the  s6ance  took  place  in  almost  total
darkness,'  when  as  a  matter  of  fact  the  darkness  only  endured
for  38  minutes  (10.24  to  11.2)  out  of  a  period  of  more  than
two  hours,  he  did  so  under  the  influence  of  the  psychological
impression  produced  by  Eusapia's  behaviour  rather  than  in  accordance
with  the  exact  facts.

E.  F.,  Feb.  12th,  1909.

Supplementary  Note  by  H.  Carrington.

A  few  additional  words  are  necessary  from  me  in  reply  to  F.'s
note.

One  of  the  most  essential  things  to  learn  in  connection  with
Eusapia's  sittings  is  that  there  is  on  the  medium's  part  a  constant
semi-automatic  attempt  to  produce  phenomena,  which,  if  checked  and
controlled,  will  result  merely  in  a  synchronous  movement  of  the
hands  or  feet ;  but  which,  if  allowed  full  play,  will  result  in  an
automatic  movement,  which  might  well  be  mistaken  for  conscious
fraud.  That  was  the  interpretation  we  put  upon  all  such  actions
of  hers  in  our  early  stances, — perhaps  naturally  enough.  Looking
back  on  the  seances  in  the  light  of  what  I  can  only  think  a  fuller
knowledge  of  the  medium  and  her  phenomena,  I  must  say  that  I
am  disposed  to  construe  these  acts  of  hers  in  very  much  the  same
way  as  F. ;  and  that  I  now  consider  my  earlier  hyper  critical  attitude
unwarranted.  Having  heen  convinced  by  later  seances  that  genuine
phenomena  do  unquestionably  take  place,  I  think  it  probable  that
many  of  the  earlier  phenomena,  put  down  by  us  as  "  non-evidential,"
were  in  point  of  fact  genuine.  Still,  of  course,  for  purposes  of  con-
version, the  phenomena  must  be  regarded  as  valueless,  and  cannot
be  taken  into  account  when  discussing  the  seances.

Briefly,  then,  I  wish  to  say  that  I  am  now  disposed  to  retract
and  repent  my  earlier  critical,  indeed  hostile  attitude;  and  think
that  we  should  all  have  obtained  better  and  more  conclusive  pheno-
mena had  we  been  less  severe  with  the  medium,  and  known  better
how  to  conduct  her  seances.  When  one  is  convinced  of  the  reality
of  the  phenomena,  the  fascinating  study  of  their  causes,  nature  and


Lix.]  Sittings  with  Easapia:  Seance  IV.  399

conditions  becomes  possible.  That  is  the  point  from  which  I  should
now  stud}'  the  facts,  were  I  again  to  observe  them.  But  at  the
period  under  review,  we  were  still  uncertain  whether  such  facts
occurred  at  all,  or  whether  they  were  one  and  all  produced  by  fraud.

H.  C,  May  23,  1909.

Eemarks  on  Seance  IV.
November  29th,  1908.

Although  the  stocks  apparatus  in  use  at  the  last  seance
had  rendered  impossible  any  action  of  the  medium's  feet  or
knees  in  levitating  the  table,  it  did  not  exclude  action  of  the
hands,  assuming  that  she  could  succeed  in  freeing  them,  or  the  use
of  a  hook  attached  to  her  body  and  bearing  under  the  skirting
board  round  the  top  of  the  table.  In  fact,  the  apparatus  had
the  effect  of  actually  facilitating  a  total  levitation,  if  either  of
these  suppositions  be  granted.  In  order,  therefore,  still  further
to  obviate  the  necessity  of  continuous  control,  and  to  meet
possible  objections  that  it  had  not  been  efficient,  we  pasted
newspaper  round  the  front  and  part  of  the  sides  of  the  table,1
reaching  from  the  top  to  the  knee  board  forming  the  top  of
the  stocks,  and  also  fastened  Eusapia's  feet  to  and  between  the
stocks,  leaving  a  play  of  about  3  to  4  inches  laterally.  In
these  conditions  it  was  impossible  to  lift  the  table  except  by
the  use  of  both  hands,  one  on  each  side  of  the  top  ;  in  other
words,  except  in  the  way  in  which  a  table  might  ordinarily
be  lifted,  or  by  thrusting  one  hand  below  the  line  of  paper
inside  the  tube  of  the  stocks  and  seizing  the  leg,  an  easily
detected  manoeuvre.

There  were  present,  besides  C.  and  F.,  Professors  Bottazzi  and
Galeotti  of  the  Naples  University,  Signor  De  Santi,  a  friend
of  Eusapia's,  and  Signori  Morelli  and  Falanga,  two  friends  of
his  invited  in  accordance  with  the  circumstances  described  in  F.'s
note  below.  At  the  beginning,  C.  controlled  on  the  medium's
left ;  F.  on  her  right.  Eusapia  showed  much  dislike  to  the
precautions  taken  and  especially  to  the  paper.  She  also  seemed
in  bad  health,  and  in  the  early  part  of  the  seance  coughed
constantly.  The  table  movements  for  a  long  time  were  feeble
and non-evidential, except one tilt at  9.39  p.m.  which  was

1  See  photograph,  p.  375.


400  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  If.  Carrington.  [part


without  contact  and  in  good  light.  The  light  was  constantly,
either  in  obedience  to  raps  asking  for  less  light  or  at  the
medium's  request,  lowered  down  and  up  again,  during  the  first
25  minutes,  and  was  eventually,  at  9.54,  reduced  to  nothing-
except  the  shaded  photographic  lamp  on  the  stenographer's
table,  i.e.  practically  complete  darkness.  Shortly  afterwards  she
asked  F.  to  change  with  Prof.  Bottazzi.  Then  followed  a
complete  levitation.  It  is  unfortunate  that  owing  to  the  general
conversation  which  constantly  went  on  at  this  seance,  the  notes
fail  to  report  the  position  of  the  medium's  right  hand,  though
Prof.  Bottazzi  always  expressed  himself  satisfied  with  his  control.
The  prevailing  darkness  renders  the  evidence  for  this  and  a
subsequent  repetition  of  the  same  phenomenon  unsatisfactory.
Having  performed  two  levitations,  Eusapia  showed  her  annoyance
at  the  paper  by  tearing  it,  and  the  table  was  reversed.  She
then  made  C.  and  Prof.  Galeotti  change  places.

Except  as  taken  in  conjunction  with  others  held  under  better
conditions,  the  first  part  of  this  seance,  by  reason  of  the  dark-
ness and  the  insufficient  reporting  of  the  control,  must  be  dis-
regarded for  evidential  purposes,  though  an  exception  may  fairly
be  made  for  certain  individual  phenomena,  e.g.  the  appearance
of  something  white  in  better  light  at  10.55  p.m.  and  11.2:
the  transportation  of  the  small  table  from  the  cabinet  over  the
medium's  shoulder  partly  on  to  the  seance  table  at  11.9  p.m.
The  action  of  head  and  hands  is  clearly  eliminated  by  the
control  described:  the  left  foot  alone  remains  as  a  possible  normal
agency,  the  feet  having  by  this  time  been  released.  Owing  to
the  balance  and  weight  of  the  table,  it  seems  to  us,  after  practice,
an  impossible  feat  to  perform  in  this  way,  even  supposing  that
Prof.  Galeotti  could  fail  to  notice  the  removal  of  the  left  foot
from  his  right,  and  the  strong  effort  necessary  to  put  her  foot
behind  her  chair  between  the  curtains  and  raise  the  table  so
high  witli  it.  The  improbability  of  this  is  also  greatly  increased
by  the  fact  that  the  small  table  was  lifted  in  this  way  three
times  in  seven  minutes.

At  11.35  Prof.  Bottazzi  and  also  Eusapia's  friend  and  the
two  gentlemen  who  accompanied  him  left.  F.  resumed  control
of  the  medium's  right,  Prof.  Galeotti  remaining  on  her  left.
Then  followed  some  very  prolonged  and  remarkable  partial
levitations  of  the  table,  of  which,  however,  on  account  of  the


ltx.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  IV.  401

poor  light  and  the  possibility  of  at  least  some  of  them  being
merely  effects  of  balance  (though,  at  the  time,  this  certainly
appeared  not  to  be  the  case),  we  prefer  not  to  offer  any
opinion.  A  very  remarkable  complete  levitation  under  appar-
ently perfect  conditions  of  control,  while  C.  was  under  the
table  holding  the  medium's  feet,  her  hands  being  well  accounted
for,  and  all  standing  up,  occurred  at  12.5  a.m.

At  12.9  an  apparent  attempt  to  make  a  substitution  of  hands
is  reported.  F.  was,  however,  by  no  means  sure  of  this,  and
nothing  followed.  Shortly  afterwards,  but  under  conditions  of
apparently  complete  control,  Prof.  Galeotti  experienced  a  series
of  touches.  The  head  control  is,  it  is  true,  not  mentioned,  but
we  are  convinced  that  these  touches  were  not  and  could  not
have  been  thus  produced,  the  position  of  the  medium's  head
being,  even  in  this  faint  light,  clearly  visible.  At  12.16  a
partial  levitation  of  a  remarkable  kind  took  place,  and  at  12.18
a  series  of  movements  in  the  cabinet  followed  by  an  attempt
of  the  tambourine  to  jump  from  the  floor  to  the  medium's
right  on  to  F.'s  lap,  which  appeared  quite  unaccountable  by
normal  means.  After  a  further  series  of  movements  of  objects
in  the  cabinet,  the  seance  ended  about  12.35  a.m.

Shorthand  Report  of  Seance  IV.
November  29th,  1908.

Present : Eusapia. C. to  left  of  medium. F. to  right.
To  right  of  E.,  Prof.  Bottazzi,  and  Signor  De  Santi  sitting  away
from  table. Signor  Ecdanga  at  end  opposite  medium.
To  left  of  C,  Prof.  Gcdeotti  and  Signor  Morelli. M. at  short-
hand table  as  before. Lights  as  at  Stance  III.  except  as  noted  in
shorthand  report.

Small  table  placed  behind  curtain  with  various  objects  on  it :
guitar,  tambourine,  flageolet,  toy  piano,  etc.

The  legs  of  the  medium  are  fastened  very  securely  by  a  rope
between  the  stocks,  with  no  play  except  two  or  three  inches  laterally
between  the  stocks.  A  newspaper  has  been  fastened  around  the
table  over  the  top,  down  as  far  as  the  upper  board  of  the  stocks,
so  as  to  render  absolutely  impossible  the  use,  either  of  a  hand
or  a  hook  or  wire,  for  the  levitations  of  the  table.

2c


402 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


9.30  p.m. Stance  begins.


Small


Curtain.


E.  P.


F.

Prof.  B.
De  S.  •


C.  \%


Prof.  G
Mor.


Fal.


9.31  ip.m. Light  II. Then  light  I.,  plus  crack  in  door.
Light  I.

9.34-  P-m-  Medium  is  apparently  not  in  good  health,  and  is  certainly
in  a  bad  temper. She  suffers  from  violent  jwi'oxysms  of  coughing.

Various  raps  of  an  interesting  but  non-evidential  character',  owing
to  the  fact  that  her  hands  were  on  the  table.

9.37  p.m.  Note  by  M.  "  I  cannot  see  feet."  [Prevented  by  the  others
who  sat  between  him  and  the  end  of  the  table. F.,  Nov.  30/08.]

9.38  p.m. More  raps  of  a  non-evidential  character.

9.39  p.m. F.  The  table  tilts  towards  me.

C.  No  one's  hands  were  on  the  table  at  the  time.

9.40  p.m. F.  More  non-evidential  movements.

9.41  p.m. F.  Various  tilts,  but  all  these  are  non-evidential.
942  p.m. Light  III.

Light  III.

9.44  p.m. More  movements,  still  non-evidential.

9.44-  P-m-  Light  II.  with  crack  in  door  and  photographic  lamp
unshaded.


LIX.]


Sittings  tvith  Eusapia:  Seance  IV.


403


Light  II.


9.4-4-2  P-m-  Light  III.  with  crack  in  door  and  photographic  lamp
■unshaded.


9.45  p.m. More  slight  movements,  still  non-evidential.

Note  by  M.  "  I  can  just  see  the  mediums  head,  and  can  see  the
table  and  all  the  other  heads  plainly."

9.4-6  p.m. Paps  ask  for  less  light. Medium  will  not  allow  it.
9.4-7  p.m. All  sitters  move  back  from  table.

F.  Medium  asks  if  she  may  touch  the  curtain,  which  she  does
with  her  left  hand,  C.'s  right  being  in  hers.


9.51  p.m. C.  More  slight  movements  of  non-evidential  character.

9.53  p.m.  No  electric  light,  crack  in  door  shut.  Photographic  lamp
shaded.


9.54-2  P-m-  Medium  asks  F.  and  Prof.  Bottazzi  to  change  places,
which  they  do. C.  retains  control  of  left  side.


Light  III.


9.4 8  p.m. Light  IV.


Light  IV.


Light  IV.


De  S.  •


Mor.


Fal.


9.55  p.m.
1/09].


No  light  except  photo,  lamp  [heavily  shaded. F.  Mar.


404  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


Light  VI.

9.58  p.m. Note  by  M.  "  /  can  see  nothing!'

0.  I  hold  medium's  left  hand  securely  on  the  table  in  my  right
hand.

Prof.  B. I  have  my  left  hand  on  medium's  knees.

Partial  levitation  of  the  table  [lasting  for  some  time.  F.  Mar.
1/09].

F.  There  is  no  contact  with  any  one  along  this  end  of  the  table.

C.  I  move  her  hand  to  and  fro  across  the  table,  showing  that
her  left  wrist  is  not  pressed  upon  the  table.

F.  I  have  felt  all  along  the  edge  of  the  table  and  there  is  no
contact  with  any  of  the  sitters.  The  right  furthest  leg  of  the  table
is  now  also  off  the  ground.

Complete  levitation  of  the  table.

[Having  been  removed  from  the  place  of  controller  of  medium,
I  occupied  myself  with  guarding  the  end  of  the  table  furthest
from  medium.  The  levitation,  which  began  with  only  a  tilt  off
two  legs,  then  off  three,  and  finally  became  a  levitation  of  all  four
legs,  lasted  long  enough  for  me  to  be  able  to  pass  my  hand  several
times  around  the  furthest  end  of  the  table  and  down  the  legs  and
verify  that  there  was  no  contact  with  any  of  the  sitters.  Of  this
I  am  certain. F.,  Nov.  30/08.]

[Owing  to  general  confusion,  the  shorthand  report  fails  to  indicate
the  position  of  medium's  right  hand. F.  and  O,  Nov.  31/08.]

10.6  p.m. F.  Complete  levitation  of  the  table.
C.  Of  a  non-evidential  character.

10.7  p.m. Various  tilts,  still  of  a  non-evidential  character.

Medium  teetrs  the  paper  pasted  round  table.
She  asks  for  more  light.
10.5  p.m. Light  No.  IV.

Light  IV.

10.10  p.m.  Medium  says,  '  This  paper  is  antipathetic  to  me,"
and  the  table  is  accordingly  turned  round  so  that  the  ends  are
reversed.


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Stance  IV.


405


[Light  IV.]


Light  No.  IV.  shaded  by  two  thicknesses  of  thin  brown  tissue


10.12  p.m. Medium  asks  G.  to  change  places  with  Prof.  Galeotti.


F.  In  the  -present  condition  of  light  I  can  see  both  the  hands
and  the  face  of  the  medium  clearly.

G.  So  can  I.

10.16  p.m.  Medium  asks  if  she  can  touch  curtain  again,  which
she  does,  holding  Prof.  G.'s  hands.

10.17  p.m. She  makes  gestures  and  raps  follow.

10.18  p.m.  Raps  ask  for  less  light.  No  electric  light,  only
photographic  lamp.


Note  by  M.  "  /  can  hardly  see  anything  at  all.  I  can  just  see
the  edge  of  the  table  nearest  me."

G.  The  medium's  left  hand  is  held  on  her  knees.

[Being  no  longer  in  control  of  the  medium,  we  had  to  ascertain  it
from  controllers,  and  dictate  as  best  we  could,  through  the  general
confusion,  to  the  stenographer.  As  two  or  three  of  the  sitters  talked
incessantly,  it  was  extremely  difficult  to  get  these  notes  correctly
reported.  Further,  the  controllers  but  rarely  stated  what  the  control
was,  and  we  almost  invariably  had  to  question  them  to  ascertain
the  particulars. F.  and  C,  Nov.  30/08.]


paper.


Light  IV.


Fal.


Light  V.


406  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part

[Light  V.]

10.25  'p.m.  Prof.  G.  I  have  the  medium's  left  hand  in  my
right  hand.

Prof.  B.  The  medium  says  that  the  curtain  is  moving.
F.  But  it  is  too  dark  for  any  one  to  see.

Prof.  B. My  left  hand  is  on  legs  of  medium  and  my  right
hand  on  right  hand  of  medium  all  the  time.

The  curtain  has  blown  out  over  the  table.

Prof.  G. I  have  the  curtain  on  my  rigid  hand  in  which  I  hold
her  hand,  she  makes  movements  with  her  fingers.
F.  Her  head  is  invisible  to  me.

Prof.  B. I  have  my  head  touching  the  head  of  the  medium.

Prof.  G. I  was  touched  through  the  curtain  on  my  right  arm.

10.27  -p.m.  Medium  says  that  she  wants  to  release  her  feet,  which
have  become  numb.  Medium's  feet  are  therefore  released,  having
been  found  still  firmly  secured,  by  F.  and  G.

F.  The  medium  makes  movements  in  the  direction  of  the  curtain
with  her  right  hand,  and  nothing  happens.

G.  (to  Profs.  B.  and  G.)  How  far  apart  are  your  hands'?
Prof.  G.  I  do  not  know.

G.  Medium's  left  hand  is  held  on  the  table  by  Prof.  G.
F.  ascertains  that  right  hand  is  also  properly  held.
Prof.  G.  Tlds  hand  is  all  right.

10.32  p.m.  F.  The  medium  makes  gestures  with  Prof.  B.'s  hand
up  in  the  air.

Prof.  B.  I  have  the  right  hand  of  the  medium  in  my  left  hand,
up  in  the  air.

Prof.  G.  I  hold  the  hand  of  the  medium  in  my  hand  in  the
middle  of  the  table.

Things  tumble  about  on  small  table  in  cabinet.
Prof.  G.  The  medium  has  her  foot  on  my  foot.


Lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  IV.  407

[Light  V.]

Prof.  G.  Something  touched  my  arm.  Something  has  moved
under  my  chair. Something  has  again  moved  under  my  chair.

Prof.  G.  She  holds  my  fingers  well.

10.37  p.m.  F.  Note  that  the  position  of  heads  is  unknown.  [A  Iso
position  of  right  foot  not  stated. F.,  Mar.  10/09.]

Mote  by  M.  "  Medium  gasps  and  moans."

Prof.  B.  I  have  been  touched  on  my  left  shoulder.

C.  to  Prof.  B.  Can  you  see  her  head  1
Prof.  B.  No.

10.39  p.m. Complete  levitation  of  the  table.

Prof.  B.  The  table  is  coming  up,  right  hand  held  as  before.

Note  by  M.  "Medium  taps  violently  with  her  feet."

Light  [?  IV.]

[It  is  evident  from  M.'s  and  G.'s  remarks  just  below  that  the
light  was  here  raised,  but  in  the  general  confusion  the  fact
failed  to  be  noted. F.,  Mar.  1/09.]

Another  complete  levitation  of  the  table.

Prof.  B.  Medium's  right  hand  was  on  my  shoulder.
Prof.  G.  Medium's  left  hand  was  on  the  table.
Note by M.  The table rose  up  about two feet  away  from
medium.

10.41  p.m.  Note  by  M.  "Medium  turns  towards  the  curtain  and
says  "  Andiamo,"  ("  come  along ")  and  I  could  see  the  curtains
part  in  the  middle."

F.  The  medium  places  the  curtain  over  her  left  arm.

O.  Both  hands  are  noiv  visible :  also  her  head  and  face  are
clearly  visible.

10.50  p.m.  Light  turned  up.  [We  again  failed  to  note  the
degree  of  light. F.,  Mar.  1/09.]


408 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part

Light  [?  III.]

10.51  p.m. Medium  asks  for  a  rest.

10.55  p.m. Prof.  B.  She  is  still  holding  my  hand.
Prof.  G.  A  white  thing  came  out.

F.  A  white  thing  shot  out  from  the  cabinet  on  the  window  side
of  the  curtain  [i.e.  behind  Prof.  G.]  bringing  the  white  window
curtain  out  with  it,  and  then  shot  back  again  very  rapidly.
[I  saw  this  hand. G,  Nov.  30/08.] [Query,  a  hand?  F.?
Mar.  1/09.]

[The  light  was  good  enough  to  enable  me  to  see  this  clearly
from  the  other  side  of  the  table,  i.e.  about  4-  or  5  feet  from
the  window  curtain. F.,  Mar.  1/09.]

Prof.  G.  My  right  hand  was  held  by  medium's  left  on  the  board.
Prof.  B.  I  am  holding  her  right  hand  close  to  my  corner  of  the
table.

11  p.m. The  medium  asks  if  she  may  touch  the  small  table.

11.2  p.m.  Prof.  G.  I  saw  a  white  thing  come  from  the  curtain7
near  the  floor.

At  G's  request  G  verifies  that  medium  is  now  holding  G.'s  hand
on  the  board  under  the  curtain  [which  was  over  her  left  arm].
Prof.  B.  I  am  holding  medium's  right  hand  on  the  table.

11.3  p.m.  F.  The  medium  releases  her  right  hand  and  raps
with  it  on  the  sm,all  table  inside  the  cabinet.

11 A  p.m.  F.  She  makes  gestures  with  her  right  hand,  and
the  small  table  moves  a  little.

Prof.  G.  My  hand  was  held  by  her  left  hand  all  that  time,  on
the  board.

11.9  p.m.  F.  The  little  table  jumps  strongly  out  from  between
the  curtains  right  on  to  the  left  corner  of  the  seance  table,  and
remains  there.

Prof.  G.  She  is  holding  my  right  hand  very  tight.
F.  Was  her  arm^motionless  1
Prof.  G.  Yes.

F.  Her  head  was  quite  visible  to  me. Her  right  arm  was  on
Prof.  B.'s  shoulder.


ijx.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  IV.  40f>

[Light  ?IIL]

F.  All  the  time  while  we  are  talking  the  small  table  has  been
hanging  on  the  left-hand  corner  of  the  seance  table.  In  reply
to  my  question  as  to  what  is  supporting  it  Prof.  G.  says
"  Nothing."

11.11  p.m. About  two  minutes  afterwards  it  falls  bach.
F.  She  pushed  it  and  it  fell  down  to  the  floor.

11.13  p.m.  Note  by  M.  "  I  set  the  small  table  upright,  meantime
feeling  all  around  it,  and  found  no  attachment  of  any  hind,
and  replaced  it  about  six  inches  away  from  medium!'

F.  The  small  table  has  again  jumped  on  to  the  left-hand  corner
of  the  seance  table.

Prof.  G.  She  is  holding  my  hand  very  tightly.

F.  to  Prof.  G.  Is  your  arm  supporting  the  table  now  %

Prof.  G.  No  ;  just  touching  it.

F.  Her  right  hand  is  visible  on  the  table ;  her  head  is  visible.

F.  Noiv  the  table  has  fallen  down  again  after  being  up  for
about  a  minute.

11.14  p.m. F.  The  small  table  is  again  coming  up.

F.  The  medium's  right  hand  is  holding  Prof.  B.'s  hand  visibly  above
the  seance  table.

11.16  p.m.  F.  The  small  table  has  again  jumped  on  to  the
seance  table.

11.20  p.m.  F.  to  Prof.  G.  "Are  your  hands  still  on  the  board?"
[The  knee-board  of  the  stocks  was  hidden  from  me  by  the  table.
F,  Mar.  10/09.]

G.  "Yes."

F.  Her  face  was  quite  visible  all  the  time.
Prof.  B.  I  was  holding  her  right  hand.

[On  being  questioned  further  to-day  about  this  series  of  pheno-
mena, Prof.  G.  insisted  that  his  arm  did  not  support  the  small
table  whilst  it  was  apparently  hanging  on  the  corner  of  the
seance  table,  and  that  while  so  hanging  it  appeared  to  be  con-
stantly trying  to  push  itself  further  up. F.  and  G,  Nov.  30/08.]

[In  spite  of  the  fact  that  Prof.  G.  says  that  the  small  table
was  not  resting  on  his  shoulder,  I  found,  during  the  second  levitation,


410  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


[Light  ?IIL]

after  ascertaining  that  the  legs  and  feet  of  the  table  were  free
from  support,  that  the  top  of  the  table  was  clearly  supported  by
the  seance  table  and  the  shoulders  of  the  medium  and  Prof.
G.,  as,  on  passing  my  hand  between  Prof.  G.'s  shoulder  and  the
top  of  the  table,  I  found  that  there  was  considerable  pressure
exerted  by  the  table  upon  Prof.  G.,  and  when  this  apparent
support  was  removed  the  table  fell  to  the  floor. C,  Nov.  30/08.]

11.35  p.m.  F.  resumes  his  position,  and  Prof.  G.  retains  control
of  left.  G.  to  G.'s  left.  Stocks  are  removed  from  the  table  and
all  the  other  sitters  leave  except  Prof.  G.


c.


F.  Her  right  hand  is  holding  my  left  hand.
Prof.  G.  Her  left  foot  is  on  my  rigid  foot-
No  electric  light,  and  only  night  light  in  photographic  lamp.

Light  V.

C.  Tilts  of  table  resumed,  interesting  but  non-evidential.

F.  Various  interesting  tilts,  which,  owing  to  the  bad  light,  must
be  considered  as  non-evidential.

Long  rest,  during  the  whole  of  which  the  medium  was,  how-
ever, under  our  constant  supervision.

11.55  p.m.  F.  The  medium  has  drawn  the  curtain  to  the  right
and  dropped  it  partly  across  her  chair.

11.57  p.m.  Medium  and  all  sitters  stand  up  and  the  table  tilts
on  the  two  legs  furthest  from  her  and  remains  in  that  position
for  a  considerable  time,  during  which

F.  My  left  hand  is  outstretched  and  between  the  medium  and
the  table,  the  top  of  which  was  only  just  touched  with  the  tips  of


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  IV.


411


[Light  V.]

her  fingers.  I  am  passing  my  right  hand  around  the  rim  of  the
table.  I  have  put  my  hand  completely  under  the  leg  of  the  table,
and  I  am  pressing  down  against  the  table  with  the  medium's  hand
in  mine.  It  twirls  about  on  one  leg,  I  am  pressing  with  considerable
force.  [And  it  resisted  my  pressure  for  some  considerable  time.
F.,  Nov.  30/08.]

\G.  now  went  under  the  table  to  hold  mediums  feet.  F.,  Mar.
10/09.]


C.  under  table.


12  p.m. Complete  levitation  of  the  table.

The  table  falls  back  and  again  raises  itself  up  in  the  air  on
one  leg.

F.  Medium's  hands  just  touching  the  top,  and  she  is  standing  up,
and  I  can  see  them.

C.  I  now  grasp  both  her  two  feet  in  my  two  hands  whilst  under
the  table.  [I  was  constantly  moving  my  head  to  and  fro  along  the
rim  of  the  table  so  that,  had  the  medium  introduced  a  hand  or  other
means  of  attachment  underneath  the  table,  I  must  have  felt  it  with
my  head  during  one  of  these  movements. C,  Dec.  1  /08.]

F.  Her  hands  are  fiat  on  the  top  of  the  table.  Only  the  fingers
are  touching  now,  and  sometimes  she  takes  off  one  hand  and
sometimes  the  other  so  that  only  one  finger  touches  it  at  a  time.
Now  both  hands  are  right  off  the  table  and  the  table  falls
back.  I  pressed  against  it,  and  it  resisted  for  about  two  seconds.
[My  impression  is  that  this  partial  levitation  on  one  leg  lasted
for  about  a  minute,  and  that  it  was  not  merely  balanced  on  one
leg. F.,  Dec.  1/08.]


C.  I  am  holding  her  two  feet  in  my  hands.


412  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


[Light  V.]

12.5  a.m. Complete  levitation  of  the  table.

C.  I  hold  both  her  ankles  with  my  two  hands.
F.  I  was  holding  her  right  hand  in  the  middle  of  the  table.
Prof.  G.  I  was  holding  her  left  hand  on  the  rim  of  the  table.
F.  Prof.  G.'s  left  hand  was  on  my  right  hand  [across  the  table].

12.7  a.m.  Note  by  M.  "Large  movements  of  the  table,  I  can
just  see  the  table  up  in  the  air."

[After  this,  I  believe  I  noticed  an  attempt  at  substitution  of
hands,  from  which,  however,  nothing  followed.  F.,  Dec.  1/08.]  [I
mentioned  this  at  the  time  but  it  was  not  noted. F.,  Mar.  1/09.]

F.  She  has  now  put  both  her  legs  astride  around  my  left  leg.

C.  The  table  tilts  on  the  two  legs  furthest  from  her.

I

F.  My  hand  is  with  hers  against  the  corner  of  the  table,  her
hand  being  over  my  hand.  The  table  stands  up  on  the  two  legs
farthest  from  the  medium,  and  the  table  legs  do  not  touch  her.
My  arm  is  between  her  and  the  table.  [She  stood  at  arm's  length
from  the  table. F.,  Dec.  1/08.]

Prof.  G.  I  was  touched  on  the  back  of  my  hand,  and  on  my
arm.

F.  I  am  holding  medium's  right  hand  on  mine  just  on  a  line
with  medium's  waist  about  three  feet  away  from  Prof.  G.
Prof.  G.  I  was  holding  one  finger  of  medium.

Prof.  G.  I  was  touched  on  the  back  of  my  hand,  and  a  second
touch  on  my  arm  near  the  shoulder.

F.  I  am  absolutely  certain  of  the  foot-control.
12.13  a.m. F.  The  table  is  up  on  its  two  legs  all  this  time.

F.  (to  Prof.  G.)  Is  your  hand  resisting  on  the  table  1
Prof.  G.  Yes.

F.  I  am  pressing  down  against  the  table.  The  table  falls.  [It
is  quite  possible  that  this  long  partial  levitation  which  lasted  some
3  or  4  minutes  may  have  been,  and  doubtless  in  part  was,  a  kind
of  "Annie  Abbott"  effect  of  balance. F.,  Dec.  1/08.]

F.  She  was  riding  cock-horse  on  my  left  leg  all  the  time  with
her  two  feet  on  each  side  of  my  foot.


LIX.]


Sittings  ivith  Eusapia:  Seance  IV.


413


[Light  V.]

Prof.  G-. I  have  been  touched  on  my  back.

F.  I  am  holding  her  right  hand  in  the  whole  of  mine.
Prof.  G.  She  was  holding  my  left  hand.

12.16  a.m. C.  resumes  control  of  left  side  of  medium.


C.  I  am  now  holding  medium's  left  hand  securely  in  my  right.

C.  The  table  is  going  up  on  its  two  legs  furthest  from  me.

C.  I  am  holding  medium's  hand  over  the  table.

F.  I  am  standing  entirely  between  the  medium  and  the  table.

C.  My  right  leg  is  between  the  medium  and  the  table.

F.  The  medium  still  cock-horses  on  my  leg.

G.  noiv  goes  beneath  the  table  and  grasps  the  medium's  ankles
in  his  two  hands.

Prof.  G.  resumes  control  of  the  left  side.


G.  I  am  securely  holding  the  medium's  two  ankles  in  my  hands.

F.  Now  her  right  hand  has  just  touched  the  table,  my  arm  is
between  her  and  the  table.

Prof.  G. Her  left  hand  is  off  the  table  entirely.

12.17  a.m. Medium  says  she  is  tired.


414 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


[Light  V.]


[Meantime  the  table  has  fallen  bach,  but  it  is  not  reported  in
the  notes,  Dec.  1/08.]  [Apparently  a  levitation  of  some  kind
had  occurred  but  was  not  noted. F.,  Mar.  1/09.]

12.18  a.m. Medium  now  sits  down.


G.  She  puts  her  left  foot  on  my  right.  [Meantime  C.  had
resumed  his  position. Dec.  1/08.]

F.  And  I  have  her  right  foot  on  mine  outside  the  table  leg.
Movements  of  objects  in  cabinet.

C.  I  was  firmly  holding  medium's  left  hand  on  the  table.

F.  She  holds  my  finger  towards  the  curtain.

G.  I  am  now  holding  mediums  left  hand  on  her  left  thigh.

0.  Movements  in  cabinet.

C.  The  medium  had  her  left  foot  on  my  right  foot  and
kicked  it  about,  asking  me  to  let  my  foot  accompany  it.

Movements  in  cabinet.

C.  She  had  her  left  foot  on  my  right  motionless.

Movements  in  cabinet  again.

F.  She  is  still  holding  my  right  hand  miles  away  from  C.
C.  Her  left  hand  is  on  her  thigh.

F.  Her  foot  is  well  to  the  right  outside  the  leg  of  the  table.
12.22  a.m. Movements  in  cabinet.

C.  I  am  holding  medium's  left  hand  on  the  table,  with  mine,
firmly. Left  foot  on  mine  motionless.

F.  Medium's  right  hand  on  my  left,  and  I  can  feel  the  thumb
all  the  time. Her  right  foot  was  kicking  about  with  mine.


lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusa'pia :  Seance  IV.  41 5*

[Light  V.]

Small  table  in  cabinet  falls  over.

F.  As  she  kicks  with  her  right  foot  on  mine.

12.23  a.m.  F.  The  tambourine  has  jumped  on  to  my  left  knee
[and  fell  down  again. F.,  Dec.  1/08].

C.  Medium  held  my  right  hand  firmly  and  raised it  towards
the  cabinet.

F. Her  foot  was  still  on  mine.

[The  tambourine  had  been  lying  on  the  floor. F.,  Dec.  1/08.]

Medium  says  she  is  tired.

0. I  am  touched  on  the  right  arm.

C.  I  am  holding  medium's  left  hand  on  the  table  by  the  thumb
and  wrist. I  was  touched  on  the  hip. Her  left  foot  was  on  mine.
F.  I  could  see  her  face.

F.  Medium  now  takes  both  my  hands.

F.  The  small  table  has  come  up  near  my  lap.

12.85  a.m.  G.  Medium  holds  all  our  hands  in  both  Iter  hands.  Her
left  foot  is  on  'my  right.  Her  left  arm  rests  on  my  right  arm.
With  my  right  hand  I  am  also  holding  mediums  left  hand.
F.  I  am  sure  of  her  right  foot.

12.27  a.m. G.  Her  left  foot  is  now  on  my  rigid,  firmly.
F.  And  her  right  foot  is  on  my  left  foot.

12.28  a.m. Movements  in  cabinet.

0.  With  her  left  hand  medium  holds  my  right  about a  foot
from  the  table.

12.30  a.m.  Medium  says  she  wants  to  rest;  an  intermission  of
about  two  minutes.

12.32  a.m. Things  in  cabinet  move  about.
F.  The  small  table  falls  over  to  my  left.


416  E.  Feilcling,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


[Light  V.]

[There  is  evidently  a  lapse  in  the  notes,  as  it  is  not  stated  how  the
small  table  had  got  upright  again.  I  think  I  must  have  inched  it
up  when  it  approached  me. F.,  Mar.  1/09.]

F.  Her  right  foot  is  absolutely  certainly  on  my  left  foot.  I  am
holding  her  right  hand  motionless  on  the  table.

C.  Her  left  foot  was  thoroughly  on  my  right  foot.  Her  left
hand  was  held  by  my  right  about  two  feet  above  the  table,  and
she  made  a  gesture  with  it  in  the  direction  of  the  small  table,
which  was  on  her  right  side.

[I  think  that  the  small  table  must  have  been  within  reach  of
her  elbow,  but  I  felt  absolutely  no  motion  of  her  arm.  F.,
Dec.  1/08.]

Note  by  H.  Carrington.

The  general  impression  left  on  my  mind  by  this  seance  was  one
of  uncertainty  and  general  irritation,  due  more,  however,  to  the  fact
that  we  were  not  ourselves  controlling  during  the  actual  production
of  the  phenomena  than  to  the  character  of  the  phenomena  themselves.
Had  we  been  controlling,  we  should  certainly  have  considered  the
seance  a  remarkable  one ;  but,  absurd  as  it  may  appear,  we  did  not
feel  the  same  degree  of  confidence  in  the  results  as  if  we  had  been
controlling  the  hands  and  feet  ourselves.  Doubtless  this  was  partly
due  to  the  extremely  poor  light  upon  which  Eusapia  insisted  ;  partly
to  the  difficulty  of  extracting  descriptions  of  the  control  from  her
holders ;  partly  to  the  constant  talking  of  one  or  more  of  the  other
sitters,  who  sat  at  the  far  end  of  the  circle.  It  is  perhaps  excus-
able that  under  these  conditions,  we  should  not  feel  the  same  degree
of  confidence  in  the  results  as  we  might  otherwise  have  done.

Some  of  the  phenomena  that  took  place  at  this  seance,  especially
towards  the  end,  were  certainly  remarkable.  It  is  of  great  interest
to  note  that  all  the  best  phenomena  were  obtained  after  Eusapia's
friends  had  left,  and  when  only  Prof.  Graleotti  and  F.  and  myself
remained.  When  F.  and  I  were  controlling  the  right  and  left  sides,
respectively,  the  very  best  phenomena  of  all  took  place.  It  is
hardly  necessary  to  point  out  that  such  a  state  of  things  is  precisely
what  we  should  not  expect,  had  the  medium  resorted  to  fraud,  or
had  her  friends  been  in  collusion  with  her.  Under  the  very  best
conditions  of  control  the  veiy  best  phenomena  of  all  occurred.  This
would seem  to  confirm  most  strongly  the  conclusion  to  which  I


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  IV.


417


have  been  driven  by  a  study  of  Eusapia,  viz.  :  that  so  long  as
suspicion  of  the  medium's  honesty  is  not  openly  manifested,  the
closer  the  contact  and  the  more  perfect  the  control,  the  better  will
be  the  results.  H.  C,  Dec.  7th,  1908.

Note  by  E.  Feilding.

If  Eusapia's  psychology  is  a  puzzle  to  us,  we  find  that  our  own
is  scarcely  less  so.  The  mythopoeic  tendency  of  the  mind  appears
to  act  with  us  inversely.  Instead  of  the  marvellous  becoming
exaggerated  in  our  memory,  we  discover  that  the  slightest  unfavour-
able elements  tend  to  obliterate  the  recollection  of  it  altogether.
For  this  reason,  except  for  the  evidence  of  the  notes,  the  fourth
seance  has  left  in  our  minds  no  enduring  impression  of  any
phenomena  of  interest  whatever.  The  reason  for  this  is  as  follows  :
Eusapia  had  told  me  that  if  we  really  wished  to  see  higher
manifestations  of  materializations,  etc.,  we  should  have  to  provide
ourselves  with  a  larger  circle,  and  should  include  in  it  someone
who  was  accustomed  to  her  methods,  who  could  direct  the  seance  and
could  supply  the  necessary  sympathetic  "current."  She  mentioned,
as  one  possessing  a  "  current "  beyond  reproach,  a  friend  of  hers,  a
chemist,  who  would,  if  asked,  bring  two  of  his  friends,  in  conjunction
with  whom  surprising  results  had  been  obtained.  Her  argument
was  this :  If  full  materializations  took  place,  while  we  should
sacrifice  proper  scientific  control  of  the  minor  phenomena,  we  should
be  favoured  with  evidence  of  such  a  kind  as  would  obviate  the
necessity  of  detailed  control  altogether.

We  accordingly  visited  the  chemist  to  make  a  preliminary  inspection.
He  proved  to  be  a  person  of  cultivated  intelligence,  and  appeared  pos-
sessed of  a  thoroughly  reasonable  temper.  He  said  that  while  he  thought
it  would  be  better  that  we  should  first  come  to  some  conclusion  as  to
the  possession  by  Eusapia  of  some  supernormal  gifts  by  experiments  of
our  own,  and  alone,  he  would  be  quite  willing,  if  we  wished  him  to  do
so,  to  come  himself  and  to  bring  his  friends,  and  see  if  he  could  assist
in  the  production  of  the  "  higher  phenomena."  Under  the  glamour
of  his  account  of  these,  we  decided  to  set  aside  scientific  caution
and  accept  his  offer,  and  we  further  invited  Professors  Bottazzi  and
Galeotti,  Professors  of  Physiology  and  Pathology  respectively  at  the
Naples  University,  who  had  conducted,  with  the  utmost  scientific
elaboration,  a  number  of  sittings  with  Eusapia,  and  were  much
interested  in  her  case.  We  thus  had  an  addition  of  five  to  our
usual  number.

2d


418  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [pakt


After  a  short  time  Eusapia  requested  the  Professors  to  undertake
the  control  in  our  places.  Owing  to  their  unfamiliarity  with  our
method  of  dictating,  and  to  a  natural  hesitancy  in  doing  so  in
a  foreign  language,  but  owing  chiefly  to  the  loquacity  of  the
chemist's  two  friends,  who  talked  loudly  throughout  the  sitting,
and  to  the  fact  that  the  light  was  lowered  gradually  to  the  merest
glimmer,  the  shorthand  writer  was  presently  reduced  to  a  state  of
despair,  ourselves  to  one  of  exasperation.  The  table  had  been
placed  in  the  stocks,  Eusapia's  feet  tied  elaborately,  paper  had  been
so  adjusted  at  her  end  that  a  fraudulent  levitation  seemed  impossible.
In  the  course  of  the  seance  Eusapia  complained  that  the  paper
worried  her,  and  the  table  was  accordingly  turned  round.  Of  course,
we  regarded  this  as  suspicious  :  we  again  believed  we  had  cornered
her.  The  discord  of  the  proceedings  was  complete,  and  at  their
termination  we  were  fully  under  the  impression  that  practically
nothing  had  occurred,  until  after  the  departure  of  all  except  Prof.
Galeotti,  when  many  remarkable  levitations  followed  one  another
rapidly.  On  reading  the  notes  we  were  greatly  surprised  to  find
that  two  full  levitations  of  the  table  had  taken  place  before  it  was
turned  round.  For  strict  evidential  purposes,  these  levitations,  owing
to  the  presence  of  Eusapia's  friends,  should  perhaps  not  be  relied
upon.  I  have  every  reason,  however,  both  ocular  and  experimental
and  otherwise,  for  believing  that  these  gentlemen  were  in  no  way
concerned  with  the  production  of  these  phenomena.  It  is  also
noteworthy  that,  with  the  exception  of  these  two  levitations  and
those  of  the  small  table,  all  the  more  interesting  phenomena  took
place  after  their  departure.

Nevertheless,  not  only  for  strictly  evidential  purposes,  but  also
so  far  as  the  progress  of  our  own  convictions,  in  whatever  direction,
is  concerned,  I  fear  that  we  must  write  down  this  seance  as  wasted.

E.  F.,  Dec.  4th,  1908.

Remarks  on  Seance  V.

December  2nd,  1908.

This  was  the  first  seance  attended  by  Baggally,  who  had
come  out  from  England  in  consequence  of  a  telegram  inviting
him  to  do  so.  At  the  request  of  the  shorthand  writer,  Meeson,
the  attendance  of  Mr.  Gibson,  a  friend  of  his,  resident  in
Naples,  hitherto  unknown  to  the  medium,  was  also  invited.


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  V.


419


In  order  to  provide  a  more  gradual  diminution  of  light,  and
to  lessen  the  chances  of  having  to  sit  in  almost  complete  dark-
ness, as  had  occurred  at  the  3rd  and  4th  seances,  a  new  lighting
arrangement  was  adopted.  The  original  No.  I.  light,  (i.e.  the
ordinary  light  in  the  room,  which  during  seances  I.  and  II.
had  been  shaded  with  3  thicknesses  of  tissue  paper,  and
at  the  3rd  and  4th  was  not  used  at  all),  was  discarded,
and  in  its  place  the  former  jSTo.  II.  light,  shaded  with  one
thickness  of  tissue  paper,  was  substituted.  The  light  was  some-
what less  than  the  former  No.  I.  thrice  shaded,  but  it  was
still  possible  to  read  the  Baedeker  and  Italian  dictionary  at
our  places  at  the  table,  though  with  some  difficulty,  while  from
the  furthest  end  of  the  room,  distant  about  13  ft.,  the  face  of  a
person  and  its  varying  expression,  closing  or  opening  of  eyes,
etc.,  was  distinguishable.  The  No.  II.  light  was  the  former
No.  III.  (see  Seance  III.,  p.  378).  Nos.  III.  and  IV.  were  two
ruby  glass  bulbs  of  110  and  140  volts  respectively.  The
medium  objected  to  the  red  glare  of  the  former,  and  it  was  not
used  at  this  seance,  while  light  No.  IV.  which  prevailed  during
a  great  part  of  the  seance,  gave  a  light  sufficiently  strong  for
C,  seated  about  4  feet  from  the  medium,  to  see  her  features
distinctly.

No  apparatus  to  guard  the  table  was  used,  nor  was  the
medium  tied  in  any  way,  yet  there  was  only  one  total  levita-
tion  of  the  seance  table,  and  that  a  non-evidential  one,  towards
the  end  of  the  seance.  The  phenomena  were  of  a  different
class,  and  showed  a  progression.

From  9.50,  6  minutes  after  the  seance  began,  till  10.37,
there  was  a  series  of  partial  levitations  of  the  table  of  a  very
remarkable  character,  often  very  prolonged,  the  table  rising  on
one  or  two  legs,  frecpiently  without  any  contact  on  the  part
of  the  medium,  and  remaining  tilted  at  an  angle,  sometimes
resisting  downward  pressure  of  considerable  force,  against  which
it  rose  in  an  elastic  kind  of  manner.  See  the  shorthand  report,
especially  at  10.32,  when  C.  was  holding  the  medium's  feet
at  her  request  (she  having  apparently  become  annoyed  at  his
obviously  suspicious  attitude)  under  the  table.

From  10.37  to  10.44  a  series  of  movements  of  the  right
curtain  occurred:  hitherto,  except  on  the  occasion  at  Seance  III.
when  the  medium  herself  pulled the  right  curtain  over  the


420 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


table  after  making  substitution  of  hands,  it  had  always  been
the  left  curtain  which  moved.

From  10.5 'J  onwards  there  were  a  series  of  movements  of
the  small  table  and  of  other  objects  behind  the  curtain,  cul-
minating at  11.8  by  the  small  table  striking  B.  on  the
shoulder  and  upsetting  completely,  the  medium  being  rigorously
held,  visible  and  motionless.

At  11.10  an  entirely  fresh  phenomenon  occurred,  viz.  the
appearance  over  the  medium's  head,  from  between  the  two
curtains,  of  a  hand,  dead  white  in  colour.  It  came  somewhat
slowly  out,  palm  downwards,  then  clenched  its  fingers  and
withdrew  again  between  the  curtains,  the  medium's  own  hands
being  held  separately  and  distinctly  by  B.  and  F.

At  11.18  a  black  head  with  large  features  shot  rapidly  out,
apparently  from  the  further  side  of  the  right  curtain.

At  11.22  the  small  table  in  the  cabinet  again  began  to
move,  and  presently  came  over  the  medium's  right  arm  and
landed  on  the  seance  table,  both  the  medium's  hands  and  legs
being  under  control  and  her  head  visible.

At  11.28,  the  small  table  having  been  replaced  on  the  floor
by  C.  outside  the  curtain  to  the  left  of  B.,  it  made  a  series
of  movements  fully  described  in  the  shorthand  report,  which
should  be  referred  to.

At  11.38  another  new  phenomenon  occurred,  viz.  the  pro-
duction of  something  solid  and  tangible  within  the  curtain,
like  a  hand,  which,  while  C.  held  his  own  hand  against  the
curtain  two  feet  above  the  medium's  head,  pressed  against  it
from  within,  at  intervals  through  a  space  of  about  10  minutes.
The  medium,  while  this  was  going  on,  was  lying,  apparently
in  a  state  of  deep  trance,  in  F.'s  arms,  and  her  hands  were
held  separately  by  F.  and  B.

At  11.51  the  small  table,  which  had  receded  again  behind
the  curtain  near  B.,  to  the  right  of  the  medium,  was  suddenly
levitated  over  her  head  and  came  down  on  the  seance  table
to  her  left,  between  her  and  F.,  her  hands  being  held,  her
legs  and  feet  separately  controlled,  and  her  head  visible  and
motionless.

At  12.03  a  further  series  of  partial  levitations  of  the  seance
table,  including  one  total  levitation  under  not  very  good
evidential  conditions,  occurred,  and  the  seance  terminated  at


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  V.


421


12.12.  At  its  close,  the  medium  appeared  extremely  exhausted,
and  remained  for  some  time  in  a  semi-trance-like  state.  During
this,  she  called  attention  to  a  breeze,  which  apparently  issued
from  a  scar  under  her  hair  on  the  left  side  of  her  brow.  Of
this  singular  incident  a  fuller  description  will  be  found  in  the
shorthand  report  and  in  the  notes.

Shorthand  Report  of  Seance  V.
December  2nd,  1908.

Arrangement  of  objects  in  the  cabinet:  Small  table,  standing.
Little  stool  to  left  and  behind  medium  in  cabinet.  Tambourine
on  floor  and  to  left  of  medium.  Plate  of  wetted  clay  on  floor
and  to  left  of  medium,  both  inside  the  cabinet.  Bell  hung  up
on  wall  by  a  string  at  a  distance  of  6'  2"  from  floor  inside
cabinet  in  the  middle  slightly  to  the  left.  Another  tambourine
hung  up  on  wall  about  6"  6"  from  ground  inside  cabinet  (right
side)  with  the  guitar  hung  on  the  left  side  of  cabinet  at  a
distance  of  6"  0"  from  the  ground.

Light  1,  being  the  former  Light  2  [i.e.  150  volt,  white],  shaded
with  one  thickness  of  thin  tissue  paper.  Light  2,  being  tlie
former  Light  3  [i.e.  220  volt,  white}.  Light  3,  a  new  110  volt
ruby  glass  lamp.  Medium  does  not  like  this  light  [ivhich  gave
a  brilliant  red  glare].  Light  4,  a  new  150  volt  ruby  glass
lamp.

A  red  electric  lamp,  closely  shaded  so  that  no  light  falls  on
the  medium  and  hardly  any  into  the  room,  has  been  obtained
for  the  stenographer  in  place  of  the  photographic  lamp.

At  a  distance  of  13  feet,  using  Light  1,  F.  can  distinguish  the
kind  of  expression  on  the  face  of  a  person  sitting  in  the  mediums
place.  There  is  less  light  titan  at  the  first  seance,  but  we  can
still  read  the  Baedeker  and  the  dictionary.

Present:  F.,  C,  B.,  and  Gibson.  M.,  stenographer,  opposite
medium,  at  separate  table.

The  use  of  the  stocks  has  been  discarded.  Use  of  newspaper  on
big  table  discarded.  Chairs  are  all  straw-seated.  [Hitherto
only  the  medium  had  had  a  straiv  chair.  She  said  it  ivas
desirable  that  no  stuff  chairs  should  be  used.]


422  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part

Positions.

9.44-  rp-m-  Seance  began,  Light  1.  Medium's  feet  are  not  bound.
She  did  not  look  into  the  cabinet  on  entering  room.

Small  /\
Curtain.


B.


M

Light  I.

9.50  p.m.  F.  Movements  of  table  begin.  Eaps  on  the  top  of
the  table.

9.52  p.m.  Medium  made  three  gestures  over  table  and  three
raps  followed.

F.  Her  left  foot  is  on  my  right,  and  not  touching  the  leg  of
the  table.

C.  Right  foot  on  my  left,  and  not  touching  the  table.

[Medium's  right  hand  was  under  mine  under  the  table.  I  felt
slight  movements  of  her  right  hand,  possibly  sufficient  to  account  for
these  raps. C,  Dec.  3/08.]

9.53  p.m. Table  tilts  towards  C.

C.  The  table  tilts  on  the  two  left  legs.  I  press  down  firmly  on
the  table,  which  refuses  to  go  down  for  some  time.

F.  Her  left  hand  was  on  the  left  corner  of  the  table,  free ;
my  right  hand  was  on  her  two  knees.  Her  left  foot  on  my  right
foot.

10.5  p.m. Four  raps  meaning  "Talk."
10.13  p.m. Light  2  and  ill's  light.


LIX.]


Sittings  'with  Eusapia :  Seance  V.


423


Light  II.

10.13  p.m. Table  tilts  towards  F.

F.  I  am  pressing  clown  on  the  table  and  it  resists  in  an  elastic
kind  of  way, — and  about  three  seconds  afterwards  the  table  fell
back.

F.  I  have  her  left  foot  quite  clearly.  My  right  hand  was
underneath  the  left  leg  of  the  table.  There  was  contact  with  the
skirt,  but  I  could  put  my  right  hand  up  and  down  between  the  leg
of  the  table  and  the  skirt.

[I  was  watching  the  medium  closely  while  F.  was  passing  his  hand
in  between  her  leg  and  the  leg  of  the  table,  and  noticed  that  she
seemed  to  suffer  each  time  F.  passed  his  hand  between  her  leg  and
the  leg  of  the  table,  and  drew  in  her  breath  cpiickly  as  though  it
gave  her  pain. C,  Dec.  3/08.]

Partial  levitation  on  the  two  legs  away  from  medium.

F.  Both  hands  were  off  the  table  at  the  time  the  table  went  up
and  were  clenched  at  a  distance  of  about  3  or  4  inches  from  the
table,  slightly  below  it.  The  table  remained  up  and  then  fell  back.
My  right  hand  was  on  both  her  knees.  I  was  perfectly  certain  of
her  left  foot.

C.  I  have  my  left  foot  on  her  right  clearly.  My  left  knee
pressing  against  her  right.

The  table  again  tilted  on  the  two  legs  furthest  from  her.

The  same  thing  is  again  repeated  rather  more  strongly.

F.  I  again  pass  my  hand  down  the  left  leg  of  the  table,  and  the
whole  of  the  medium's  foot  is  absolutely  on  mine.

The  table  is  up  again  on  one  foot  furthest  from  medium.

C.  I  have  passed  my  hand  completely  between  her  and  the  table
leg.

F.  So  have  I.

F.  The  table  is  still  up  and  I  am  passing  my  hand  between  her
and  the  table  right  down  the  left  leg.

C.  Her  left  hand  was  off  the  table  and  her  right  one  just
touching  the  top  of  the  table,  near  the  right  corner,  clenched.

[During  all  this  a  perfectly  clear  space  was  visible  between  her
body  and  the  edge  of  the  table. F.  and  C,  Dec.  3/08.]


424


E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.


[part


[Light  II]


1016  p.m.  F.  The  table  remained  up  after  her  left  hand  was
taken  right  off  the  table  and  her  right  hand  was  clenched  and
just  slightly  touching  it  in  the  right-hand  top  corner.

10.1S  p.m. At  request  of  medium  C.  and  B.  change  places.


10.20  p.m.  F.  The  table  is  up  on  its  two  legs  furthest  from
medium.

10.21  'p.m.  F.  Medium  makes  a  gesture,  but  nothing  happens.

10.22  p.m.  F. Two  more  gestures  followed  by  very  faint  raps.

10. Ho  p.m.  F.  She  asks  one  to  put  my  hands  in  the  middle  of
the  table  while  she  makes  gestures  on  my  right  shoulder.  She
makes  various  gestures  and  grips  on  my  right  shoulder.  Nothing
happens  and  she  says  "  Non  lo  fa." ("  He  wont  do  it")

10.24  p.m. The  table  is  now  going  up.

F.  Her  left  hand  is  on  my  shoulder,  her  right  hand  off  the
table,  about  two  inches  above  it,  and  clenched.  Her  left  foot  is
certainly  on  mine  and  I  feel  it  with  my  left  hand,  and  my  right  is
on  both  knees.

B.  My  left  hand  is  on  her  right  knee  and  her  right  foot  on  my
left  foot. I  felt  it  with  my  right  hand.

[This  tilt  took  place  on  the  two  legs  furthest  from  the  medium.
F.,  C.  and  B.,  Dec.  3/08.]

10.25  p.m.  F.  She  asks  me  to  let  her  put  her  left  leg  across
my  two  shins.

The  table  shortly  afterwards  went  up  on  the  two  legs  furthest
from  her.  She  removed  both  her  hands.  It  remained  up  a
considerable  time.


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  V.


425


[Light  II.]

1 0.2 5 ^  p.m. The  same  thing  has  happened  again.


F.  Her  leg  is  well  across  my  shins.

B.  My  control  the  same  as  before,  her  right  foot  on  my  left  foot.

10.26  p.m. The  table  is  going  up  again.

F.  Both  medium's  hands  are  off  the  table.  As  I  am  speaking
I  am  looking  under  them,  between  them  and  the  table.  Her  left
foot  was  absolutely  motionless  against  mine.  My  right  hand  on
her  left  knee.

B.  My  control  the  same  as  before,  I  could  see  under  both  hands.

C.  I  saw  a  clear  space  under  both  wrists.

10.27  p.m.  The  table  went  up  again  in  the  air  on  the  two  legs
furthest  from  her.

F.  I  put  my  left  hand  between  her  wrist  and  the  table.  Her
left  hand  did  not  touch  the  table.  Her  left  foot  is  firmly  on  my
right.  My  other  hand  was  on  her  knee.  The  right  hand  was  also
off  the  table  while  the  table  was  going  up.

B.  And  during  this  levitation,  my  left  hand  was  on  her  right
knee  and  her  right  foot  was  on  my  left  foot.  I  could  feel  it
clearly.

10.32  p.m.  At  request  of  medium,  C.  goes  under  table  and  holds
her  feet  in  his  hands.


The  table  goes  right  up  in  the  air  on  the  legs  furthest  from  her.

F.  Her  hand  was  touching  the  top  of  the  table.

C.  I  have  both  the  medium's  ankles  in  my  two  hands  and  can  see
there  is  about  three  inches  between  her  skirt  and  the  table  leg  on
either  side.

C.  I  am  now  holding  her  toes  instead  of  her  ankles.


426


E.  F eliding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


[Light  II.]


B.  My  control  is  the  same  as  before.

C.  I  can  see  controllers  on  both  sides  holding  her  knees  with  their
hands.

F.  Her  wrists  were  just  touching  the  top  edge  of  the  table,  but
apparently  without  any  force.

C.  I  can  feel  the  live  foot  through  the  shoes  and  know  that  I
am  not  merely  holding  the  shoes  in  my  hands.

Medium  asks  C.  to  come  out  again,  which  lie  does,  medium  saying,
"  I  only  asked  him  to  do  that  so  that  he  might  see  that  I  did  not
lift  the  table  with  my  foot."


10.33  p.m. The  table  is  up  in  the  air  on  the  two  furthest  legs.

F.  Her  foot  is  undoubtedly  on  mine,  and  her  two  hands  were
off  the  table,  about  five  inches  below  the  rim.

B.  Her  right  foot  was  also  on  my  left  foot  and  my  left  hand  was
on  her  ri"ht  knee  at  the  same  time.

10.36  p.m.  Medium  makes  two  gestures,  the  first  of  which  was
followed  by  a  thump  in  the  table  and  the  second  not.

10.37  p.m.  She  holds  her  left  hand  up  towards  the  curtain  over
her  head.

B. The  right  curtain  bulges  out  and  touches  me  on  my  shoulder.

B.  Her  right  foot  was  on  my  left  foot  and  my  left  hand  was
on  her  right  hand.

F.  Her  left  foot  is  firmly  on  mine.  Her  left  hand  is  visible  on
the  corner  of  the  table  in  front  of  me.  My  right  hand  is  on  her
left  shoulder.

C.  Both  her  hands  are  motionless  and  clearly  visible  to  me.


lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  V.  427

[Light  II.]

The  rierht  curtain  goes  out  again.

o  o  o

F.  At  this  time  my  right  hand  is  held  in  her  left.  Her  left
foot  still  pressing  tightly  on  my  right,  and  I  am  certain  that  it  is
her  left  foot.

B.  I  am  holding  her  right  hand  with  my  left  hand  on  her  knee
and  her  right  foot  is  on  my  left  foot.

10.40  p.m. The  right  curtain  blows  out  about  two  feet.

10.41  p.m.  B.  I  felt  a  strong  breeze  coming  through  the  curtain
from  the  cabinet  at  the  moment  the  curtain  was  blowing  out.

10.42  p.m.  F.  My  control  was  the  same  as  before,  absolutely.
[This  breeze  was  probably  produced  by  the  movements  of  the  curtain.
B.,  Dec.  3/08].

10.44  p.m. Another  big  bulge  of  the  curtain.

F.  Her  left  hand  was  on  the  table  at  the  time  and  quite  visible.
B.  Her  right  foot  is  on  my  left. [Her  right  hand  was  on  my
left. B.,  Dec.  3/08.]

10.44\  P-m-  Medium  asks  F.  to  touch  the  table  in  the  cabinet,
which  he  does  with  his  right  hand.

10.4-5  'p.m. F.  Her  hand  is  holding  mine  on  her  knee.
The  table  tilts  four  times  rapidly  towards  the  medium.

B.  She  was  holding  my  left  hand  on  her  knee,  and  her  right
foot  was  on  my  left  foot.  During  the  movements  I  did  not  perceive
her  move  her  hand  at  all.

F.  Control  the  same  as  before  on  my  side.  My  hand  was  in
her  lap,  hers  holding  mine. I  am  sure  that  it  was  her  left  hand.

B.  I  am  sure  that  it  was  her  right  hand  as  I  was  holding  it  by
the  thumb.

IO.47  p.m. Light  No.  4.
Light  IV.

G.  In  this  light  I  can  see  her  face  at  a  distance  of  four  feet
clearly. I  can  distinguish  the  eyes,  ears  and  nose.

10.50  p.m. F.  She  has  put  her  left  leg  on  my  two  knees  now.


428  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part
[Light  IV.]

B.  I  feel  the  whole  length  of  her  right  leg  with  my  leg.  Her  foot
is  on  my  foot. Her  right  hand  is  on  my  left  hand.

10.52  p.m.  F.  She  asks  me  to  put  my  right  hand  on  her  shoulder
and  takes  my  left  hand  in  her  left  hand  on  her  lap.

Movements  of  small  table  in  the  cabinet.

C.  Her  left  foot,  which  is  also  across  my  right  knee,  presses
■  stronErlv.

10.53  p.m. B.  Her  right  foot  is  on  my  left  foot  and  I  was  holding
her  right  hand  in  my  left  hand  on  my  knee.
F.  Her  left  leg  was  still  on  my  two  knees.
C.  Her  head  clearly  visible.

F.  Her  left  hand  was  in  mine,  my  right  arm  around  her  left
shoulder.

10.54  p.m.  F.  She  has  now  taken  her  leg  down  off  my  knees
and  put  her  left  foot  on  my  right  foot.

10.55  p.m.  F.  She  leans  forward  over  the  table.  She  is  enclosing
my  right  foot  right  under  her  chair  with  her  two  feet  and  her
legs  press  tightly  on  each  side  of  my  leg.

10.57  p.m. B.  The  curtain  is  blown  over  my  head.

B.  She  is  holding  my  left  hand  with  her  right  hand  on  the  table.
She  did  not  move  her  hand  while  the  curtain  was  blown  over  my
head.

F.  Her  two  legs  were  still  tightly  round  my  right  leg  and  she
was  leaning  far  forward  over  the  table  with  her  head.  My  left
hand  under  hers,  which  held  it  [on  my  side  of  her  head.  F.,
Pec.  3/08.]

C.  I  am  also  holding  her  left  hand  with  my  right.  [My  right
hand  was  encircling  both  F.'s  and  the  Medium's,  and  I  could  feel
them  both. C,  Dec.  3/08.]

10.58  p.m. B.  The  curtain  is  still  over  my  hand.

10.59  p.m.  Medium  now  returns  her  right  foot  to  B.'s  left  foot
and  her  right  hand,  is  now  in  B.'s  left  hand  on  the  table.

11.0  p.m.  F.  She  holds  my  right  hand  with  her  left  hand
back  towards  the  cabinet,  pinches  it  several  times  and  there
are  movements  as  of  the  tambourine  inside.


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  V.


429


[Light  IV.]

F.  Her  left  foot  is  pressing  strongly  all  the  time  and  I  know  it
is  her  left  foot.

B.  Her  right  hand  was  on  the  table  in  mine  and  her  right  foot
continually  pressing  my  left  foot.

B.  She  is  moving  her  right  leg,  with  my  left  leg  continuously
in  contact  with  it.

A  few  slight  movements  take  place  in  the  cabinet.

F.  Her  left  foot  was  under  the  table  kicking  about  forwards  and
backwards  with  mine  and  her  left  hand  is  on  the  table.  Head
fully  visible  to  me.

11.4  p.m.  F.  She  played  the  flute  on  my  little  finger,  the
thumb  on  one  side  and  all  four  fingers  on  the  other,  and  in
rhythm  with  it  some  object  moved  in  the  cabinet.

B.  Exactly  the  same  control  with  me  as  before,  only  I  felt  a
rhythmic  movement  of  her  leg,  synchronising  with  the  movements
in  the  cabinet.

11.5  p.m.  B.  She  is  lifting  her  foot,  but  mine  accompanies  it
at  the  same  time.

F.  The  back  of  her  chair  is  almost  touching  the  small  table,  I
could  hardly  get  my  hand  between  the  two.  [In  order  to
ascertain  that  there  ivas  no  attachment  between  the  medium  and
the  objects  in  the  cabinet,  I  had  passed  my  right  hand,  between
her  and  them,  from  her  head  downwards,  behind  the  back  of
her  chair  to  the  ground.  The  medium  had  receded  much  further
into  the  cabinet  than  in  the  previous  seances. F.,  Dec.  3/08.]

11.8  p.m.  B.  The  little  table  struck  me  under  my  shoulder
and  fell  over  completely  on  the  right  of  the  medium.

B.  At  the  same  moment  she  was  holding  my  left  hand  with  her
right,  and  her  right  foot  was  resting  on  my  left  foot.  I  felt  the
whole  length  of  her  leg  against  my  leg.

F.  Her  left  hand  is  in  my  left,  on  the  corner  of  the  table.  My
right  hand  across  both  knees.  Her  left  leg  motionless.  Her  left  foot
on  my  right  foot,  and  I  know  it  is  the  whole  of  it.  Her  head
close  to  me  and  motionless,  and  clearly  visible.

B.  Her  head  is  visible  to  me  as  well.


430


E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


[Light  IV  ]

11.10  p.m. F. I can  see  a  white  hand  come  right  out  from

the  cabinet  over  her  head.

C. I  could  see  the  white  hand.

[A  very  white  hand  came  out  between  the  curtains  about  two
inches  above  her  hair,  palm  downwards.  It  moved  rather  slowly,
then  clenched  its  fingers  and  withdrew  again  into  the  cabinet.  F.,
Dec.  3/08.]  [C.  I  agree  with  the  above  description.  Dec.  3/08.]
[B.  and  CI.  did  not  see  the  hand  owing  to  the  position  of  the
right  curtain,  which  was  still  over  B.'s  arm.  Dec.  3/08.]
[It  was  a  right  hand. F.,  July  20/09.]

F.  I  am  holding  her  left  hand  visibly  on  the  corner  of  the  table
in  my  left. The  control  of  her  left  leg  being  the  same  as  before.

B.  I  am  holding  her  right  hand  with  my  left  hand  and  her  right
foot  is  on  my  left  foot,  and  I  am  feeling  the  whole  length  of  her  leg.

11.13  p.m. F.  Her  left  hand  is  on  her  lap  with  my  right.

11.14-  P-ni. F.  I  have  gut  both  hands  of  the  medium.

11.16  p.m.  F.  She  pinches  my  right  hand  ivith  her  left  hand
on  her  lap.

11.18  p.m. F. I  see  an  extremely  black  thing  come  right  out.

B.  My  right  hand  control  was  perfect.

F.  Her  left  hand  was  in  mine  on  the  table.

F.  It  came  out  about  three  feet  from  the  medium's  head.  The
medium's  head  was  resthm  on  mine.  She  told  me  to  look  in  a
particular  direction  first  of  all,  and  said  that  I  should  see  a  head.
The  black  thing  was  the  profile  of  a  head,  and  it  came  out  to
within  about  two  inches  of  B.'s  face.

[The  thing  I  saw  appeared  like  a  grotesque  face  with  a  Jewish
nose,  i.e.  not  the  least  like  the  ,  head  which  C.  saw  during  the
second  seance.  It  gave  me  the  impression  of  a  flat  thing,  rather
than  of  a  solid  head.  It  shot  rapidly  out,  apparently  between
the  right-hand  curtain  and  the  door,  went  within  two  inches  of

B.  's  hair  and  then  withdrew. F.,  Dec.  3/08.]

C.  I  saw  the  head  just  disappearing  into  the  cabinet.

B.  I  could  not  see  the  head  because  it  appeared  from  behind
the  curtain  on  the  right  [and  consequently  behind  B.'s  line  of
sight. F.,  Mar.  1/09].


Lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  V.  431

[Light  IV.]

11.22  p.m. B.  The  small  table  is  moving.

F.  She  squeezed  my  right  hand  at  the  time  with  her  left  hand,
on  her  lap. Her  left  foot  quite  clearly  on  my  right.
B.  Same  control  of  foot  as  before.

B. The  small  table  rises  and  touches  my  elbow.

B.  I  am  perfectly  certain  that  her  right  hand  is  on  my  left  hand
on  the  table,  and  I  can  feel  the  whole  length  of  her  leg.

B. The  small  table  is  again  moving ; same  control.

F.  My  right  hand  was  on  her  two  knees,  and  her  left  hand  in  mine
and  visible,  and  close  to  me;  legs  both  firmly  between  B.'s  and  mine,
and  I  have  felt  their  position  with  my  hand.

11.25  p.m. The  small  table  is  rising  again.

11.26  p.m.  The  small  table  is  levitated  right  on  to  the  seance
table,  through  the  curtains,  between  B.  and  medium.  It  rose
to  a  height  of  2h  feet  from  the  floor,  and  is  now  resting  on  the
seance  table.

[The  small  table  which  had  been  in  the  cabinet  was  levitated
from  behind  the  right  curtain,  between  it  and  the  door,  and  came
over  the  medium's  right  arm  and  my  left  arm,  the  legs  resting
on  my  arm  and  the  medium's.  It  seemed  to  make  successive
efforts  to  get  well  on  to  the  seance  table. B.,  Dec.  3/08.]

B.  My  control  is  perfect ;  the  same  as  before.

F.  Her  left  hand  is  right  over  this  side  of  the  table  and  visible.
Her  head  close  to  me  and  visible.  My  right  hand  on  both  her  knees
as  before.

11.28  p.m.  G.  stands  up  ami  leans  across  the  stance  table  and
takes  the  small  table  and  puts  it  bach  on  the  floor.


icith  hand  on  small  table.


432  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part
[Light  IV.]

C.  Oh  !  As  I  put  it  clown  it  was  jerked  up  forcibly  about
G  inches,  levitated  and  pushed  against  my  hands.

F.  Her  left  foot  was  on  my  right,  my  right  hand  on  hers.

B.  I  was  not  touching  her  leg  at  that  time.  [I  was  not  feeling
her  knee  at  the  time,  but  her  right  foot  was  on  my  left  and  motionless.
B.,  Dec.  3/08.]

C.  [still  leaning  across  the  seance  table]. It  is  levitated  twice  again.

B.  Her  right  leg  against  my  left  leg.  Her  right  foot  on  my  left
foot,  her  right  hand  on  my  left  hand.

C.  The  small  table  is  again  levitated  about  18  inches  off  the  floor,
my  hand  resting  on  its  surface.

B.  Her  right  hand  is  resting  on  my  left  hand  on  the  table.  Her
right  foot  is  kicking  backwards  and  forwards,  but  I  follow  it  all  the
time.

F.  Her  left  hand  is  well  in  mine  on  the  table,  my  right  hand
on  her  knees. Head  close  to  me.

11.30  p.m.  C.  The  table  is  moved  up  again  as  though  pushed.
[I  was  leaning  over  the  seance  table  with  my  right  hand  resting
flat  on  the  surface  of  the  small  table.  The  upward  pressure
exerted  by  the  small  table  was  of  a  peculiar  character,  as  though
the  table  were  suspended  on  elastics,  which  pushed  upwards
forcibly. C,  Dec.  3/08.]

C.  The  curtain  is  blown  ritrht  out  against  me  as  I  am  leaning
over  the  table.

F.  Her  left  leg  absolutely  controlled  as  before.  Her  left  hand  in
mine  on  her  lap.

B.  Her  right  hand  in  mine  on  the  table.  She  moves  her  right
foot  with  mine,  and  I  follow  the  movements  of  it.

C.  During  this  time  I  am  leaning  across  the  seance  table,  my
right  hand  being  on  the  small  table.  The  curtain  covers  my  right
hand  and  the  arm,  as  far  as  the  elbow.

11.32  p.m. 0.  The  small  table  moves  slightly  under  my  right  hand.

11.34  p.m. C. Three  raps  on  the  small  table.

C.  The  small  table  has  moved  about  three  inches  along  the  floor.


lix.J  Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  V.  433

[Light  IV.]

C. The  small  table  tilts  on  two  of  its  legs.

F.  Her  left  foot  is  continuously  on  my  right  foot,  and  when  the
bumps  came  on  the  small  table  she  pinched  my  left  hand  at  the
same  time.

B.  Her  right  hand  continues  in  my  left  hand  on  the  table.  Her
right  foot  on  my  left  foot,  and  I  keep  following  the  movements  of
her  foot.

F.  I  have  my  right  hand  still  on  both  her  knees,  which  are
motionless.

11.36  p.m. C. The  small  table  tilts  violently  to  the  right.

F.  She  is  leaning  back  in  my  arms.  My  right  hand  on  her  two
knees  and  her  left  hand  on  the  corner  of  the  table  just  in  front  of
me.

B.  Her  right  hand  on  my  left  hand  on  the  table.  She  swings  her
right  foot  backwards  and  forwards  continuously  and  I  follow  it  with
my  left  foot.

11.37  p.m. F.  I  have  hold  of  her,  left  hand  again.

11.38  p.m.  Medium  asks  C  to  hold  his  hand,  out  towards  the
curtain.

C.  I  hold  it  up  about  two  feet  above  her  head.

C.  I  feel  a  hand  under  the  curtain  but  it  does  not  touch  my
hand ;  it  pushes  out  the  curtain  slightly  to  the  left  of  the  spot
where  my  hand  is.  I  could  feel  a  hard  substance  pushing  the
curtain.

F.  Her  head  is  lying  on  my  shoulder,  her  left  hand  continues  in
mine.

C.  Now  I  feel  a  hand  pushing  against  my  right  hand.

F.  Her  left  foot  on  my  right. My  left  hand  on  her  knees.

C.  Again  a  hand  pushes  my  right  hand ;  again  a  hand  pushes
strongly. I  felt  resistance  as  I  pressed  the  curtain  gently.

B.  Her  right  hand  in  my  left  hand  on  the  table  and  her  right  foot
against  my  left  foot  which  she  continues  to  swing  backwards  and
forwards  and  I  continue  following  it  with  my  foot.

F.  Her  two  hands  are  at  least  two  feet  apart.

2e


434  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part
[Light  IV.]

11.44  p.m. C. I  am  touched  on  my  left  fore-arm  strongly.

[F.  During  all  this  time  the  medium  was  lying  in  a  trance  on
my  right  shoulder. Dec.  3/08.]

F.  Her  left  hand  continuously  in  mine.

C.  The  hand  pushes  strongly  against  the  curtain,  just  under  my
hand.

B.  She  presses  her  right  hand  very  strongly  on  my  left  and
swings  her  right  foot  and  I  keep  my  left  foot  against  it  all  the  time
during  the  movements.

F.  Her  left  hand  continuously  in  mine,  her  head  close  to  me  and
visible.

11.46  p.m.  C.  The  curtain  is  strongly  pushed  just  under  my
hand.

F.  Control  exactly  the  same  as  before.
B.  The  same  with  me.

11.48  p.m. B. I  am  touched  on  the  left  knee.

11.51  p.m.  The  small  table  is  levitated  up  from  the  cabinet
and  between  F.  and  the  medium,  over  her  head.
[The  small  table  must  have  come  from  the  further  side  of  the
cabinet,  where  G  had  replaced  it.  It  came  out  right  over  her
head  and  landed  with  its  top  between  her  head  and  mine,  with
its  legs  pointing  horizontally  into  the  cabinet. F.,  Dee.  3/08.]

F.  I  was  holding  her  left  hand  motionless  on  the  corner  of  the
table,  her  head  was  visible  and  motionless,  and  the  table  came  out
directly  over  it.  Her  left  foot  absolutely  controlled,  one  of  mine
being  between  it  and  B's.  Her  left  leg  pressing  against  mine.  Her
left  hand  is  right  over  at  this  corner.

B.  Her  right  hand  in  my  left  hand  resting  on  the  table.  Her
right  foot  on  my  left  foot  and  I  feel  her  knee  against  my  knee.
The  control  is  perfect.

11.53  p.m.  F.  The  table  is  now  supported  between  her  shoulders
and  mine.

11.54-  p-m.  F.  I  am  putting  the  small  table  bach  again  into  the
cabinet.


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  V.


435


[Light  IV.]

11.56  p.m. The  small  table  moved  in  the  cabinet.

F.  Her  foot  was  on  mine  ;  hand  visibly  in  mine.
B.  Her  right  hand  in  my  left  hand,  also  visible,  and  her  right
foot  on  mine.

11.57  p.m.  C.  The  medium  rests  her  head  on  F.,  his  arm  being
around  her  neck.

12.3  a.m. Various  movements  of  the  large  table,  non-evidential.

12.4  a.m. Partial  levitation  of  the  large  table.

F.  Her  left  hand  was  holding  mine  on  this  side  of  the  table,  just
touching  it.  It  cannot  have  been  her  left  hand  which  caused  the
movements.  Her  left  foot  motionless  on  mine  and  I  know  it  is  her
left  foot.

B.  Her  right  hand  is  in  my  left  hand  on  her  right  knee.  Her
right  foot  is  resting  on  my  left  foot  and  it  remained  motionless
during  the  movements  of  the  table.

T2  6.  a.m. The  medium  stands  up.

F.  The  table  tilts  on  its  two  legs  furthest  from  medium.

F.  My  left  hand  is  under  the  left  table  leg.  I  also  passed  my
hand  down  the  leg. Her  left  hand  is  motionless  in  my  right.

C.  Her  right  hand  on  the  top  of  the  table.  I  am  passing  my
finger  along  the  edge  of  the  table,  her  fingers  and  her  wrists  are
well  above  the  edge.

B.  I  am  holding  her  right  hand.

F.  Both  hands  are  now  above  the  table.  I  was  between  her  and
the  table.  I  pulled  the  table  towards  me  and  it  resisted  considerably
before  it  fell  down — this  after  her  hands  had  left.

The  table  comes  up  very  strongly  on  two  legs.

F.  Of  course,  the  table  is  balanced  now.  [I  meant  that  the
table  remained  balanced  in  a  normal  way  on  the  two  legs  furthest
from  medium. F.,  Mar.  1/09.]

Complete  levitation  of  the  table.

F.  Her  left  hand  was  jus.t  touching  the  rim  of  the  table  when  it
went  up. Her  left  foot  was  absolutely  controlled.

B.  Her  right  hand  in  the  same  position  as  her  left,  just  on  the
rim  of  the  table,  and  I  had  my  left  foot  against  her  right  foot.


436  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H-.  Carrington.  [part
[Light  IV.]

[The  table  had  tilted  over  a  long  way  and  appeared  to  be  balancing
on  the  two  furthest  legs.  It  then  made  a  sudden  jump  of  several
inches  with  all  four  legs  off  the  ground.  Experiment  shows  that  if
her  knees  were  against  both  legs,  a  strong  pull  with  both  hands  on
the  rim  could  produce  this  effect. F.,  Dec.  3/08.]

12.12  a.m. The  medium  says  that  she  docs  not  feel  very  well.

[The  medium  sat  down  and  presently  raised  my  hand  to  her  fore-
head. F,  Ap.  13/09.]

F.  I  feel  a  wind.

[/  asked  the  others  to  feel  cdso. F.,  Ap.  13/09.]

C. I feel  a  distinct  cold  breeze  issuing  from  her  forehead.  I

now  feel  it  distinctly.

B. I  can  feel  it.

G.  Yes.  Yes.

[/  now  covered  her  nose  and  mouth  with  my  hand,  to  prevent
the  'possibility  of  her  blowing  with  her  mouth. F.,  Ap.  13/09.]

12.14  a.m. C. I  feel  it  clearly  here  on  the  left  side.

F.  At  that  time  I  had  my  hand  right  over  her  nose  and  mouth,
my  little  finger  being  on  the  ridge  of  her  nose  and  the  palm  over
the  tip  of  it.

12.15  a.m.  C.  I  feel  the  breeze  very  strongly.  F.,  do  you
feel  it?

F.  Yes.

B. I  felt  it  very  strongly  indeed.

F.  I  have  my  hand  right  over  her  nose  and  mouth.

[Other  observers  have  recorded  this  cold  wind  which  appears  to  issue
from  a  scar  under  her  hair,  over  her  forehead. F.,  Dec.  3/08.]

[The  stance  now  terminated.  The  medium  appeared  extremely  ex-
hausted. She  asked  if  we  would  like  to  search  her.  We  said  it
was  not  necessary. F.,  Ap.  13/09.]

Note  by  E.  Feilding.

Throughout  the  whole  of  our  previous  seances,  Eusapia  had  been
constantly  in  a  state  of  nervous  anxiety  to  know,  at  every  moment,
whether  we  held  her  properly. "E  buono  il  controllo  ? E  buono  il


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  V.


437


controllo?"  ("Is  your  control  good?")  was  repeated  often  many  times
a  minute,  especially  during  the  third  seance.  In  vain  we  urged  her  to
leave  that  to  us,  and  to  go  quietly  off  into  her  trance,  and  let  come
what  might.  At  the  third  seance,  when  we  actually  caught  her  playing
her  old  trick  of  substituting  one  hand  for  two,  we  immediately  told
her  of  it.  She  discussed  the  matter  with  seeming  frankness.  She
told  me  of  an  occasion  when  Colonel  de  Rochas  had  caught  her  in  a
similar  manner,  and  said  that  she  was  unaware  that  she  had  done
it.  In  view  of  the  Cambridge  sittings,  it  seems  probable  that  this
is  something  less  than  the  truth.  Nevertheless,  from  conversations
with  her,  her  husband  and  her  friend  Signor  de  Santi,  who  at  once
admitted  that  he  had  often  noticed  this  trick,  as  well  as  from  the
reports  of  former  observers,  we  gathered  the  impression  that  it  is,
at  all  events,  a  hypothetical  possibility  that  her  frauds,  skilfully  as
they  are  performed,  are  resorted  to  in  a  spirit  of  mischief  while  in
her  waking  state,  and  perhaps  half  unconsciously  while  in  her  semi-
trance  state,  and  that  no  very  severe  moral  blame,  in  a  woman  of
her  temperament,  is  necessarily  attachable  to  them.  We  therefore
promised  her,  if  ever  we  actually  caught  her  tricking,  at  once  to
tell  her.

On  Nov.  30th  the  Report  of  the  Paris  Institut  Glniral  Psycho-
logique  on  their  experiments  with  Eusapia  reached  me.  She  had
asked  me  about  this  and  expressed  interest  to  know  whether  it  was
favourable  or  the  reverse.  I  accordingly  went  to  see  her  and  told
her  frankly  that  while,  on  the  whole,  the  conclusions  must  evidently
be  read  as  implying  a  belief  in  the  possession  by  her  of  some
abnormal  faculty  affecting  matter,  the  report  nevertheless  stated
that,  on  a  few  occasions,  she  had  been  caught  resorting  to  fraud.

She  was  in  no  way  disturbed  and  merely  said,  when  I  offered  to
show  her  the  Report,  that  she  did  not  want  to  hear  the  details,  as
charges  of  this  kind  might  produce  a  suggestive  effect  which  would
be  harmful  to  her  and  tend  to  make  her  repeat  the  offence.

The  result  of  our  conversation,  however,  was  satisfactory.  She  did
not,  as  in  the  third  seance,  constantly  keep  asking  if  the  control
was  good,  but  appeared  never  to  trouble  about  it  at  all,  resigned
herself  quietly  to  our  keeping  and  for  the  first  time  went  off  into
what  appeared  to  be  a  deep  trance  state.  Nor  did  she,  as  in  the
third  seance,  constantly  attempt  to  evade  control.  She  allowed
her  hands  to  be  firmly  held :  her  feet  were  generally  motionless,
and  the  light  was  always  sufficient  to  see  the  exact  whereabouts  of
her  face,  as  well  as  of  her  hands,  even  from  the  further  side  of  the


438


E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


table.  Whatever  be  the  means  by  which  the  white  hand  and  the
black  face  seen  by  C.  and  me,  and  the  hand  felt  by  C.  within
the  curtain,  were  produced,  I  am  absolutely  certain  that  the  use  of
her  head  or  of  the  hand  or  foot  on  my  side  was  not  in  question.
B.  is  equally  certain  so  far  as  the  hand  or  foot  of  his  side  are
concerned.

There  remains  the  hypothesis  of  an  apparatus  concealed  about
her,  and  actuated  in  some  manner  inconceivable  to  me.  We
shall  be  told  we  ought  to  have  searched  her.  We  ought.  She
herself  suggested,  after  the  seance,  that  we  should.  Whether  it  was
the  fact  that  she  herself  proposed  it  that  disarmed  us,  or  a  not
unnatural  disinclination  to  submit  her,  while  just  recovering,  with
every  symptom  of  exhaustion,  from  a  state  of  deep  trance,  to  what
we  understand  from  other  reports  has  invariably  proved  a  vain
quest,  I  cannot  say.  It  is  clear  that  another  time,  we  must,  in  the
interests  of  accuracy  of  evidence,  harden  our  hearts.

E.  F.,  December  4th,  1908.

Note  by  H.  Carrington.

Having  yielded  my  control  to  B.  early  in  the  evening,  I  am
not  in  so  good  a  position  to  speak  of  that  as  he  :  but  there  can  be
no  doubt  that  it  was  exceptionally  good  throughout  the  seance.
I  can,  however,  speak  with  certainty  of  the  levitations  of  the  small
table  and  of  the  touches  through  the  curtain  towards  the  end  of
the  sitting.  With  F.  and  B.  closely  guarding  her  hands  and  feet,
her  head  being  visible,  and  with  a  clear  space  between  the  table
and  her  body,  the  small  table  was  completely  levitated  several  times
under  my  hand,  in  a  way  quite  inexplicable  by  me,  and  in  a  peculiar
manner  impossible  to  duplicate  by  fraudulent  means,  so  far  as  I  can
judge.  The  touches,  also,  were  certainly  effected  by  a  material  and
responsive  agent,  which  pushed  strongly  against  the  curtains,  just
under  my  hand,  and,  later,  against  my  hand,  through  the  curtains.
My  hand  was  held  up  at  a  distance  of  quite  2h  feet  above  the
medium's  head,  and  both  B.  and  F.  were  positive  of  their  separate
controls,  which  they  several  times  verified,  during  the  actual  pro-
duction of  these  touches.  There  was  also  a  clear  space  between
her  body  and  the  curtain.  The  phenomena  appeared  to  me  very
remarkable  at  the  time,  occurring,  as  they  did,  under  what  I  must
consider  exceptionally  fine  conditions,  as  regards  hand  and  foot
control.  H.  C,  December  7th,  1908.


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  V.


439


Note  by  W.  W.  Baggally.

No  perfect  levitation  of  the  table  (that  is,  the  rising  of  the  four
legs  of  the  table  from  the  floor  at  the  same  time)  took  place  at
this  seance,  and  most  of  the  levitations  that  occurred  could  not  be
considered  evidential,  since  one  or  both  hands  of  the  medium  were
in  contact  with  the  table  when  it  was  rising.

There  were,  however,  two  cases  which  offered,  to  my  mind,  good
evidence  of  a  supernormal  force  being  at  work ;  viz.,  those  which
occurred  at  10.13  and  10.24  (vide  Report)  when  Eusapia  had  not  her
hands  in  contact  with  the  table,  and  her  feet  were  under  control  of  F.
and  C.  in  one  case,  and  of  F.  and  myself  in  the  other.  It  is  doubtful
whether  the  levitation  that  took  place  at  12.6  (when  the  legs  of
the  table  close  to  Eusapia  were  off  the  floor  and  the  side  of  the
table  further  away  from  her  rose  up  in  the  air),  was  produced  super-
normally,  since,  although  she  was  standing  up  at  the  time,  and  both
her  feet  were  controlled,  I  found,  subsequently  that  while  holding  the
rim  of  the  table  in  the  same  manner  that  the  medium  did,  I  could,  by
placing  my  bent  knees  against  the  table  legs,  or  pressing  the  sides
of  my  knees  against  the  interior  sides  of  the  table  legs,  cause  the
furthest  side  of  the  table  to  rise  when  pulling  the  table  with  my
hands  towards  me.  I  cannot  assert  that  Eusapia  resorted  to  this
method. My  impression  is  that  she  did  not,

I  feel  positive  that  the  medium's  right  hand  and  right  foot
were  not  used  in  the  production  of  any  of  the  phenomena  which
took  place  in  the  cabinet.  I  continuously  kept  control  of  her
right  foot  and  right  hand  and  also  kept  my  knee  against  her
knee,  with  the  exception  of  the  experiment  at  10.57  when  F.  had
control  of  both  her  legs.  On  two  or  three  occasions  when  I  felt
that  her  knee  was  not  touching  mine,  I  broke  the  "  chain,"  that
is,  I  released  my  right  hand  from  Mr.  Gibson's  hand  and  then
passed  my  right  hand  under  the  table  and  felt  with  it  Eusapia's
right  leg,  from  the  knee  downwards,  to  assure  myself  that  no
substitution  of  feet  had  taken  place,  and  that  it  was  the  foot  of
her  right  leg  that  was  resting  on  my  left  foot.

No  substitution  of  hands  took  place  at  this  seance.  I  frequently
verified  that  it  was  the  medium's  right  hand  that  I  held  in,  or  that
was  resting  on,  my  left  hand,  by  feeling  her  thumb  and  the  palm
of  her  hand.  Moreover,  the  light  was  sufficiently  good  for  me  to
see  her  right  hand  when  it  rested  on  the  table. It  is  also  to  be


440 E.  Feilcling,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


observed  that  her  hands  were  too  far  apart  from  each  other  to
allow  of  substitution.

This  was  the  first  seance  of  the  series  that  I  attended.  I  formed
no  opinion  as  to  the  character  of  the  phenomena,  but  was  much
impressed  by  the  results  obtained  under  the  strict  conditions  that
were  imposed.  W.  W.  B.,  Dec.  3rd,  1908.

Remarks  on  Seance  VI.
December  ith,  1008.

This  seance,  by  reason  of  the  number  of  phenomena  and
the  rapidity  with  which  they  followed  one  another,  the
remarkable  character  of  many  of  them,  and  the  complete  con-
trol permitted  by  Eusapia,  proved  one  of  the  most  interesting
of  the  whole  series.  For  an  hour  practically  nothing  occurred.
The  medium  appeared  vexed  and  suggested  an  alteration  of
the  light,  which  was  accordingly  changed  to  No.  3,  the  bright
ruby  lamp  shaded  with  tissue  paper  and  a  white  silk  hand-
kerchief hanging  over  it,  a  light  sufficient  to  enable  F.,  sitting
at  the  further  end  of  the  table  from  the  medium,  to  see  her
head  and  hands.  Still  nothing  occurred  for  a  further  half
hour,  till  at  11.35  B.  was  touched  on  the  shoulder,  and  the
curtain  blew  out  over  the  table.

At  11.38  there  appeared  one  of  those  strange  objects  seen
from  time  to  time  at  Eusapia's  seances,  to  which,  for  want  of  a
better  name,  the  word  "  head  "  is  applied,  though  they  are  only
very  distantly  suggestive  of  human  heads.  They  are  of  different
sizes  and  shapes,  sometimes  shooting  out  of  the  curtain  and
back  with  great  swiftness,  sometimes  with  a  certain  deliberate-
ness,  but  always  with  absolute  silence,  like  shadows.  They  are
impossible  to  describe  verbally.  After  the  seance  C.  attempted
to  draw  his  impression  of  this  one,  with  approximately  the
following  result  :


lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  VI.


441


It  shot  straight  out  from  between  the  curtains,  turned
a  sudden  right  angle,  approached  close  to  C.'s  face,  and  then
retired.  This  object  was  black ;  the  next  appearance,  a
few  minutes  later,  at  11.41,  coincident  with  a  touch  on
C.'s  head,  was  white.  In  both  these  cases  the  medium's
two  hands  were  separately  held  and  under  complete  control.
Further  touches  followed,  and  at  11.50  the  curtain  flew  out
with  such  violence  that  it  reached  the  further  end  of  the
table.

It  seems  unnecessary  to  go  through  the  details  of  the
phenomena,  which  are  adequately  described  in  the  shorthand
report,  but  attention  may  be  called  to  some  of  the  more
remarkable.  Although  touches  had  frequently  been  felt  at
previous  seances,  this  was  the  first  seance  at  which  the
sensation  of  the  grasp  of  a  complete  hand  was  experienced.
This  occurred  to  all  three  sitters,  to  both  C.  and  B.  between
11.58  and  12.5,  and  to  F.  just  before  and  after  12.11,
when  he  was  holdino-  his  hand  2  J-  feet  above  the  medium's
head  (her  hands  being  held  one  on  the  table  and  one  in  her
lap)  and  was  seized  by  apparently  living  fingers,  of  which
he  felt  the  nails,  through  the  curtain.  At  about  12.18  B.
was  seized  by  a  hand  which  came  from  behind  the  curtain,
and  pulled  him  by  the  sleeve  so  violently  that  it  almost
upset  him  off"  his  chair  into  the  cabinet,  both  the  medium's
hands  being  separately  and  distinctly  held  by  C.  and  B.
Various  other  appearances  of  objects,  sometimes  white,  some-
times grey,  took  place,  occasionally  coincident  with  touches
on  the  sitters.

At  12.26  F.  went  to  stand  beside  the  medium  and  held
his  hand  high  over  her  head,  with  a  view  to  ascertaining
how  far  from  her  the  touches  could  be  obtained.  The
attempts  made  to  produce  the  touches  were  instructive.
The  medium  first  appeared  to  wish  to  establish  a  rap-port
between  her  and  F.'s  hand,  and  releasing  her  hand  from  B.'s,
put  it  within  the  curtain  and  took  hold  of  F.'s  through  it.
She  then  replaced  her  hand  on  B.'s  on  her  lap.  After  a
kind  of  head  visible  to  C.  and  F.  (the  notes  do  not  state
whether  B.  also  saw  it)  had  shot  out  and  retired,  a  series
of  attempts  were  made  by  something  within  the  curtain  to
take  hold  of  F.'s  uplifted  hand. Something  solid  pushed  out


442  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garringtou.  [part


over  and  over  again  aqainst  the  inside  of  the  curtain  against

CO  o

the  lower  side  of  F.'s  hand,  or  against  his  wrists,  but
apparently  could  not  reach  quite  high  enough  to  grasp  the
hand  itself.  Meanwhile,  Eusapia  appeared  to  strain  upwards
outside  the  curtain,  raising  her  two  hands,  still  held  by  C.  and
B.,  as  though  a  sympathetic  physical  effort  were  required  in
order  to  direct  the  "  force,"  and  explaining  at  the  moment  that
that  was  in  fact  the  case.  The  effort,  it  is  true,  failed,  and  no
actual  grasp  was  given,  but  the  conditions  under  which  the
touches  occurred  and  the  opportunity  for  careful  observation
during  the  long  continued  attempts  to  reach  F.'s  hand,  the
adequate  control  which  existed  in  consequence  of  the  visibility
of  Eusapia's  head  and  hands  and  the  proximity  of  F.  to  the
curtain,  make  the  incident  one  of  high  interest.

Immediately  afterwards,  a  further  appearance  of  a  black
head,  apparently  similar  to  the  one  seen  during  the  earlier
portion  of  the  seance,  occurred,  followed  by  a  light  inside  the
curtain,  the  first  luminous  phenomenon  that  had  been  per-
ceived by  us.  This,  from  its  position,  was  visible  only  to  C.
The  white  Light  II.  was  then,  at  Eusapia's  request,  turned
up,  and  a  further  short  series  of  curtain  movements  and  of
touches  took  place.  The  "  cork  experiment "  mentioned  at
12.55  refers  to  a  small  apparatus  devised  by  B.,  consisting  of
a  cork  suspended  perpendicularly  on  an  elastic  stretched
horizontally  between  two  nails  fastened  on  a  board.  The
lower  surface  of  the  cork  was  covered  with  indigo,  and  the
object  of  the  experiment  was  to  see  if  without  contact
Eusapia  could  succeed  in  depressing  the  cork  so  as  to  leave
a  mark  of  the  indigo  on  the  board.  She  tried,  holding
her  hands  above  the  cork  for  2  or  3  minutes,  but  failed  to
produce  any  effect,  and,  it  being  very  late,  she  abandoned  the
attempt.

The  seance  then  broke  up  and  the  original  Light  I.  was
turned  up.  The  phenomena,  however,  as  described  in  C.'s
note,  continued.  The  table  continued  to  tilt  about  as  though
the  "force"  were  not  yet  expended  and  it  occurred  to  F.  to
ask  for  a  repetition  of  the  phenomenon  which  had  taken  place
at  the  2nd  seance  when  the  guitar  had  been  plucked.  We
were  all  standing  round  the  curtain,  B.  and  M.  talking  and
not  paying  attention  ;  F.  and  C,  however,  listening  to  see  if


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  VI.


443


effect  would  be  given  to  F.'s  request.  They  both  simultane-
ously heard  a  light  twanging  of  the  guitar  which  stood  as  in
the  2nd  seance  on  the  floor  in  the  ancrle  of  the  walls,  distant

O  }

about  a  metre  from  the  curtains.

A  description  is  given  in  C.'s  note  of  a  further  experiment
with  the  "  breeze "  which,  after  the  fifth  seance,  appeared  to
issue  from  the  scar  on  Eusapia's  brow.  It  may  be  added
that,  witli  a  view  to  determining  the  objective  character  of
this  breeze,  we  had  meanwhile  bought  a  small  paper  flag
similar  to  those  used  for  Christmas  tree  decoration.

Shorthand  Eeport  of  Stance  VI.
December  4th,  1908.

Present :  F.,  C,  and  B.,  and  If.,  shorthand-ivriter,  cd  separate  table
as  before.

No  small  table  was  put  inside  the  cabinet.

The  various  toys  were,  placed,  on  the  floor  inside  the  curtain  along
the  walls,  with  the  guitar  standing  upright  in  the  angle.

Lights  as  before,  except  that  No.  3  was  shaded  with  one  thickness
of  brown  tissue  paper  and  silk  handkerchief,  to  diminish  the
unpleasant  red  glare.

10.3  p.m. Seance  began.


M


414 E.  Feilding,  IF.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


Light  I.

10.3  to  10.16  p.m.  nothing  happens.

F.  Note  that  when  medium  came  into  the  room  she  went  straight
to  her  chair,  then  got  up  to  get  her  handkerchief,  and  then  returned
to  her  scat.  She  has  not  touched  the  curtains  and  does  not  know
what  is  behind  them,

10.20  p.m.  The  table  tilts  towards  B.

10.23  p.m.  C. The  medium's  skirt  bulges  out  very  slowly.

10.4-6  p.m.  Four  tilts  ash  us  to  talk.

10.49  p.m.  Light  No.  2  with  M.'s  Light.

Light  II.

11.5  p.m. F.  The  table  tilted  towards  her  strongly.

C.  Her  left  leg  is  over  my  right  knee  and  she  made  pressing-
movements  with  her  foot  as  the  table  went  up.  Her  left  hand  is
pressing  against  mine  in  my  lap.

B.  Her  right  hand  is  resting  on  my  left  hand  resting  on  her  lap.
Her  right  foot  is  on  my  left  foot,  and  I  am  feeling  the  whole  of
her  leg  with  my  leg. Our  knees  are  touching.

F.  There  is  no  movement  of  her  body  as  far  as  I  can  see.

[The  toe  of  her  foot,  so  far  as  I  can  judge,  was  about  three
inches  below  the  surface  of  the  table,  and  as  she  moved  her  foot
slowly  as  the  table  went  up,  I  cannot  guarantee  that  she  did  not
press  against  it  with  her  toe,  though  my  impression  is  that  she  did
not, C,  Dec  5/08.]

[Medium  being  vexed  at  the  long  delay  in  the  commencement  of  the
phenomena  suggested  tliat  ice  might  try  another  light;  on  our  asking
her  which,  she  said  she  did  not  know. Fee.  5 /OS.]

11.7  p.m.  Light  3  shaded  with  brown  tissue  paper  and  handker-
chief and  M.'s  electric  light,  shaded.

Light  III.  shaded.

11.8  p.m.  Medium  asks  F.  to  sit  at  the  end  of  the  table  so  as
to  make  a  better  circle.


Lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  VI.

[Light  III.  shaded.]


445


F


F.  Note  that  I  can  see  the  medium's  face  from  ■where  I  am.  1
can  see  the  'position  of  all  three  heads  quite  plainly.

B.  She  asks  me  to  put  my  hand  against  the  curtain.
11.21  p.m. F. The  table  tilts  away  from  her.

C.  Her  left  foot  is  on  my  right,  kicking  slowly  about ;  left  hand
in  my  right  on  her  lap.

B.  My  hand  is  on  her  right  hand  on  her  lap.  Her  right  leg-
moving  backwards  and  forwards,  with  my  left  leg  accompanying  it.
My  leg  was  away  from  the  table.

11.35  p.m. B. Oh! I  was  touched  on  my  shoulder.

[Immediately  after  the  touch  the  right  curtain  blew  out  and
remained  over  B.'s  arm. Dec.  5/08.]

C.  She  was  holding  my  right  hand  with  her  left  visibly  on  the
table,  her  left  foot  pressing  against  my  right.

B.  My  left  hand  was  on  the  right  hand  of  the  medium  on  the
table,  under  the  curtain,  which  had  fallen  across  our  hands.  Her
right  foot  was  on  my  left  foot,  my  knee  touching  her  knee,  and  I
can  feel  the  whole  length  of  her  leg.

11  38  p.m. C.  Medium  asks  me  to  look  in  a  particular  direction.

C.  I  see  a  black  object  coming  to  within  three  inches  of  my  face.
I  cannot  describe  it.  It  went  up  instantaneously.  It  looked  like
a  cauliflower.

[The  object  coming  from  the  cabinet  was  intensely  black  and
seemed  to  be  about  3  inches  broad  by  12  inches  long.  It
shot  straight  out  from  the  cabinet  and  then  turned  to  the  left
and  approached  my  face,  as  though  a  head  had  turned  to  look
at  me, The  outline  of  this  head  was  certainly  not  human,  either


446 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggcdly,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part

[Light  III.  shaded.]

as  regards  size  or  characteristics.  It  appeared  to  be  covered  all
over  with  small  lumps  or  knobs,  and  the  nearest  description  I
can  give  to  this  head  is  that  it  resembled  the  top  of  a  large
'cello.  It  moved  slowly  and  stayed  out  about  3  or  4  seconds.
C,  Dec.  5/08.]

C.  Her  left  hand  was  on  my  left  hand  visibly  on  the  table.  My
right  hand  being  on  her  back.  Her  head  resting  against  my  head.
Her  left  foot  resting  against  my  right.

B.  Her  right  hand  on  the  table  in  my  left,  still  under  the  curtain,
and  her  right  foot  on  my  left  foot  and  our  knees  together ;  she  kept
moving  her  leg,  but  I  kept  in  contact  with  it.

C. The  curtain  is  thrown  over  my  shoulder.

C.  Control  the  same  as  before.

F.  to  C.  Could  the  medium  have  moved  her  head  away  from
you  1

C.  No,  my  head  and  hers  were  touching  and  my  right  hand  was
holding  her  left  visibly  The  foot  control  exactly  the  same  as
before.

B.  Mine  exactly  the  same,  as  also  the  motions  of  her  leg.

F.  Note  that  the  medium  let  go  of  B.'s  hand  for  a  moment,  after
saying  that  she  'teas  going  to  do  so.

C. She  now  leans  her  head  against  mine.

11.41  p.m. C.  I  am  touched  by  a  hand  on  the  head.

F.  I  saw  a  white  thing  come  out  from  the  curtains  over  the
medium's  head  towards  C.'s  head.

C.  While  this  was  going  on,  the  medium's  head  was  resting  against
mine,  my  right  arm  being  around  her  shoulder,  her  left  hand  being
visibly  on  mine  on  the  table  and  her  left  foot  pressing  on  my  right.

B.  My  control  exactly  the  same  as  before,  her  right  hand  resting
on  my  left  hand  on  the  table,  under  the  curtain,  and  her  right  foot
resting  on  my  left  foot,  and  her  right  knee  pressing  against  my  left
knee.

[I  could  tell  it  was  her  right  hand  by  the  feeling  of  the  relative
position  of  her  hand  to  her  fingers  and  feeling  the  thumb  and  the
palm  of  her  hand  ;  and  that  it  was  her  real  hand  by  the  warmth
and  by  the  responses  to  my  squeezes. B.,  Dec.  5/08.]


Lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  VI.  447

[Light  III.  shaded.]

11.44  P-m- Medium  says,  it  is-  coining  there  !

{Medium  said  to C,  "  Look, he will come there"  indicating  a

particular  spot  to  the  left  of  B. Dec.  5 /OS.]

\_No  phenomenon,  occurred  which  seems  to  justify  this  remark  till
the  appearance  of  a  head  at  about  1:2.50. F.,  Mar.  10/09.]

C. I  am  touched  on  the  head  through  the  curtain,  twice.

C.  The  medium's  head  resting  against  my  head ;  her  left  hand
visibly  on  the  table  in  my  left  hand,  her  left  knee  pressing  against
my  right  knee.

B.  Her  right  hand  is  resting  on  my  left  hand  on  the  table,  and
her  right  foot  is  resting  on  my  left  foot  and  I  still  continue  pressing
my  knee  against  her  knee.

F.  I  saw  something  white  just  over  the  medium's  head.  A  sort
of  flash  of  white. The  medium's  head  was  motionless.

II.4.8  p.m. 0.  The  medium  moves  the  hand  held  in  B.'s  hand  and
makes  him  feel  with  his  hand  that  we  are  holding  different  ones.
B. And  tells  me  that  that  is  what  site  is  doing.

11.50.  p.m. 0. I  hear  something  moving  in  the  cabinet.

B.  The  curtain  is  thrown  over  my  side.

F. It  has  come  as  far  as  my  end  of  the  table.

C.  Her  left  hand  held  my  right  firmly  on  her  knee.  Her  left
foot  resting  on  my  foot.  I  was  also  stroking  her  forehead  with  my
left  hand.

B.  Her  right  hand  on  my  left  hand  on  her  right  knee,  her  right
foot  on  my  left  foot,  and  I  could  feel  the  whole  length  of  her  leg
against  mine,  our  knees  touching.

B.  and  C.  both  say  that  they  can  feel  her  thumbs.

11.58  p.m. Medium  asks  B.  if  he  can  sit  nearer  to  her.

C.  I  saw  a  slight  bulge  out  of  the  curtain  on  the  right  side.

F.  I  saw  a  white  thing  come  slowly  up,  which  I  thought  was
the  medium's  hand  lifting  B.'s,  and  going  slowly  up  about  two
inches  above  the  level  of  B.'s  head  and  then  down  again,  slowly,
and  made  no  doubt  that  it  was  B.  raising  his  hand  with  the
medium's.


448 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carriwgton.  [part

[Light  III.  shaded.]

F.  to  B. Was  it  your  hand  holding  the  medium's  ?

B.  No.

F. I  made  no  doubt  that  it  wets  your  two  hands.

B.  Medium's  right  hand  was  still  on  my  left  hand  on  her  knee
and  her  right  foot  was  continuously  on  my  left  foot,  and  our  knees
are  touching.

C.  And  her  left  hand  is  held  by  my  right.

C.  I  am  hit  right  on  the  head  by  a  hand  right  through  the
curtain.

[I  felt  the  four  fingers  and  the  thumb  this  time.  The  hand  was
open  and  a  minute  after  the  fingers  were  closed  and  I  was  again
hit  on  the  head. C,  Dec,  5/08.]

C.  Control  exactly  the  same.  The  medium's  head  against  mine,
and  she  kicked  with  her  foot  under  the  table  in  front  of  her.

B.  My  control  exactly  the  same  as  before.

Note  by  M.  "  Medium  says  that  she  is  getting  cold.  I  have  looked
at  thermometer  and  it  stood  at  6:2°  Fahr.,  the  same  as  be/ore."

F.  I  asked  "John"  to  give  me  something  from  the  cabinet,  and
the  medium  replied,  "  /  will  look  for  it  with  my  foot"  and  moved
her  left  foot  about.

B.  A  hand  comes  out  from  behind  the  curtain  and  presses  me
tightly  on  my  shoulder.  I  feel  the  thumb  and  the  four  fingers
which  are  now  pressing  downwards  with  very  considerable  force.

C.  I  was  holding  her  left  hand  by  the  thumb  on  her  left  thigh.
Her  left  foot  being  on  my  right.  Her  head  pressing  against  my
head.

B.  Her  right  hand  is  resting  on  my  left  hand.  I  can  feel  both
her  knees  with  my  right  hand  which  I  had  passed  under  the  table.
Her  right  foot  is  on  my  left  foot  and  our  knees  are  touching.

1 2.4  a.m. C. I  saw  the  curtain  bulge  out.

B.  She  let  go  of  my  hand  asking  if  she  could  feci  inside  the
cabinet,  and  after  a  few  seconds  she  passed  her  hand  back  again
to  my  left  hand.


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  VI.


449


[Light  III.  shaded.]

12.5  a.m.  C.  The  medium  holds  my  right  leg  in  between  her  tvjo
legs  and  is  kicking  to  and  fro  saying  that  she  wants  to  bring
something  out  of  the  cabinet  with  her  foot,  but  her  foot  remains
under  the  table  all  the  time.

B.  She  has  removed  her  foot  from  mine.

12.6  a.m.  F.  I  again  saw  a  white  thine;  coming  over  her  head.
I  could  not  say  what  it  was.

C.  I  also  saw  the  white  thing.

[The  '  white  thing '  looked  like  a  creamy  white  object  coming  out,
about  six  inches  square. C,  Dec.  6/08.]

C.  My  control  exactly  the  same  as  before.

C.  The  curtain  blows  right  out  twice  as  though  pushed  by  some
substance. I  could  see  the  round  swelling  of  the  curtain.

C.  Her  hand  was  pressing  firmly  against  my  hand  and  I  am
holding  it  by  the  thumb. Both  legs  around  my  right  leg.

B.  Her  right  hand  is  on  my  left  hand  on  her  right  knee.

F.  I  have  asked  the  medium  whether  I  could  feel  the  hand  also.
She  replied,  "  yes."

[She  asked  me  to  stand  at  the  side  of  the  table  and  hold  my  hand
to  the  curtain  over  her  head. F.,  Mar.  11/09.]

F.  stands  to  the  left  of  C.  and  leans  over  with  his  left  hand  out-
stretched about  2h  feet  above  and  to  the  left  of  the  mediums  head.
Immediately  after —

F.  I  am  touched  by  something  coming  straight  on  to  the  points
of  my  fingers.

12.11  a.m. F. I  am  touched  again; I  am  taken  hold  of  by
fingers,  and  I  can  feel  the  nails  quite  plainly.
[My  fore-finger  was  pressed  hard  by  three  separate  fingers  above
it  and  by  a  thumb  below,  through  the  curtain. I  felt  the  nails
quite  distinctly  as  they  pressed  into  my  finger. F.,  Dec.  6/08.]

C.  Her  head,  pressing  against  my  head.  I  am  absolutely  holding
her  left  hand  on  the  table,  both  her  legs  are  around  my  right  leg
under  the  chair.

B.  I  am  absolutely  certain  that  her  right  hand  is  on  my  left
hand  on  her  right  knee.


450 E.  Fe tiding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  GarHngton,  [part


[Light  III.  shaded.]

F.  I  am  touched  again.  Grasped  this  time  as  though  by  the
lower  part  of  the  thumb  and  ringers.  [The  grasp  was  round
the  palm  of  my  hand. F.;  Mar.  11/09.]

B.  I  am  touched  gently  on  my  hand  and  at  the  same  moment
I  am  touched  by  a  hand  on  my  shoulder.

B.  Also  the  curtain  came  out  as  though  struck  violently  by  a
hand  from  within.

[The  touches,  in  this  case,  on  F.'s  hand,  which  was  high  up,  and
on  the  shoulder  of  B.,  who  was  sitting  on  the  other  side  of  the
table,  at  least  three  feet  from  F.'s  hand,  appeared  to  be  absolutely
simultaneous,  and  immediately  afterwards  the  curtain  was  thrust
violently  out  as  though  it  was  struck  hard  several  times  by  a
hand  within. F.  and  B.,  Dec.  6/08.]

B.  Same  control.

C.  Same  control.

[In  acknowledgment  of  this  outburst  of  phenomena  I  said  "  Thank
you!  John,"  and  a  hand  replied  by  coming  out  from  behind  the
curtain  and  patting  me  on  the  shoulder  in  a  friendly  kind  of
way. B.,  Dec.  6/08.]

C.  She  squeezed  my  left  hand  while  this  was  going  on

B. She  has  now  placed  the  curtain  between  my  hand  and  hers,
F.  to  B. Are  you  certain  it  is  Iter  hand  ?

B.  Yes,  because  I  can  feel  part  of  the  bare  hand  011  the  table,  and
I  am  squeezing  her  thumb.

12.17  a.m.  F.  I  have  ashed  Joint  if  there  was  enough  force  for
him  to  show  himself. Immediately  afterwards —

C.  I  saw  a  white  thing  over  her  head  clearly.

[So  did  I ;  it  was  just  as  though  something  showed  itself  obligingly
in  reply  to  my  request. F.,  Dec.  5/08.]

[The  medium  squeezed  my  hand,  and  immediately  afterwards
F.  and  I  saw  the  white  thing. C,  Dec.  5/08.]

B.  I  saw  the  white  thing  over  her  head  and  immediately  after
that  a  hand  came  out  from  behind  the  curtain  and  forcibly  pulled
me  towards  the  cabinet,  quite  tightly  on  my  sleeve.


lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  VI.  451

[Light  III.  shaded.]

[The  pull  was  so  violent  that  it  almost  pulled  me  off  my  chair.
B.,  Dee.  5/08.]

12.19  a. in.  C.  At  that  time  I  had  hold  of  her  left  hand  in  my
right  on  my  corner  of  the  table,  and  I  could  feel  her  arm  up  as
far  as  the  elbow. Both  her  legs  were  around  my  leg.

B.  Her  right  hand  was  resting  on  my  left  hand  on  the  table  and
I  was  holding  her  thumb.  The  curtain  had  been  taken  away  from
between  our  hands.

12.20  a.m.  C.  The  medium  has  taken  her  two  legs  from  around
my  right  leg  and  noiu  has  her  left  foot  on  my  right  foot.

B.  And,  she  places  her  rigid  foot  on  my  left  foot  and  I  am  feeling
her  knee  with  my  knee.

C.  The  medium  rests  her  head  on  my  right  shoulder  and  is  pressing
against  it.  I  have  my  arm  around  her  neck.  I  have  her  left
hand  in  my  left  hand  on  the  table.

C. I  saw  the  curtain  blow  out  in  front  of  me.

B.  Medium's  right  hand  is  in  my  left.

F.  I  saw  something  white  appear  on  the  furthest  side  of  the
cabinet  from  the  medium,  up  by  the  door.  The  white  thing  I
saw  was  about  half  way  up  the  curtain  and  about  3i  feet  away
from  medium.

B.  My  control  the  same  as  before.

C. I  am  touched  on  the  head  by  a  hand.

C.  At  this  moment  the  medium's  head  is  pressing  against  my
head.  Her  left  hand  in  my  left  on  the  table,  and  with  my  right
hand  I  am  holding  the  whole  of  her  left  arm.  Her  left  foot  on
my  right  foot.

B.  Medium's  right  hand  resting  on  my  left  on  the  table.  Bight
foot  on  my  left  foot,  and  she  moves  it  backwards  and  forwards  and
I  follow  with  my  foot.

C.  Her  left  foot  was  motionless.

12.23  a.m. C. I  am  touched  plainly  by  a  hand  on  the  head.

C.  My  control  the  same  as  before.
F.  I  also  saw  it. It  was  a  grey  thing.


452


E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


[Light  III.  shaded.]

[I  saw  a  greyish  thing  shoot  out  from  the  cabinet  over  the
medium's  head  towards  C.  and  then  go  back  again. F.,  Dec.  5/08.]

B.  The  medium's  right  hand  was  rubbing  the  back  of  my  left
hand  continuously  while  that  took  place,  our  hands  being  on  the
surface  of  the  table,  her  right  foot  being  on  my  left  foot.

12.2Jf.  a-m-  Medium  said-  that  she  wanted  to  let  go  of  B.'s  hand;
she  did  so  and  immediately  afterwards  put  it  back.

12.25  a.m.  C.  She  kicked  up  with  her  left  foot  quickly  about
two  inches,  her  left  foot  resting  across  my  left  foot,  and  a  loud
knock  sounded.

She  did  this  a  second  time.

C.  I  had  my  hand  across  the  under  part  of  the  table  and  know
that  her  leg  did  not  come  up.

[After  the  first  rap,  which  sounded  like  a  kick  with  the  boot  on
the  under  side  of  the  table,  I  stooped  down  and  stretched  my  left
hand  across  under  the  table  so  that,  had  she  kicked  with  her  foot
she  must  have  kicked  my  arm,  and  although  the  second  rap  resulted,
nothing  touched  my  arm. C,  Dec.  5/08.]

B.  "  John  "  has  given  me  a  second  squeeze  on  my  left  arm.

12.26  a.m.  F.  asks  medium  if  he  mag  go  close  up  to  the  curtains.
Medium  sags  "  Yes,"  and  F.  therefore  goes  between  B.  and  the
cabinet.


F.  I  am  holding  mg  hand  just  inside  the  cabinet,  on  the  extreme
right  of  the  medium.

F.  I  feel  a  cold  breeze  inside  the  cabinet  around  my  hand.  I
cannot  yet  touch  anything.


lis.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  VI.  453

[Light  III.  shaded.]

C.  I  am  touched.  Oh  !  niy  hair  is  pulled  by  a  complete  hand
through  the  curtains.

C.  Medium's  head  resting  against  mine.  Medium's  left  hand
[control  stated,  but  omitted  in  stenographic  notes.  C.  Dec.  5/08].
The  whole  of  her  left  arm  controlled  by  my  right  arm,  and  her  left
foot  on  my  right  foot.

B.  The  medium's  right  hand  is  on  my  left  band  on  the  table.
I  am  sure  it  is  her  right  hand  as  I  can  feel  her  thumb.  Her  right
foot  is  on  my  left  foot  and  I  can  feel  the  side  of  her  leg  against
my  leg.

F.  When  C.  was  touched  I  saw  the  curtain  come  right  out  over
the  medium's  head.

1*2,30  a.m.  F.  She  saw  me  holding  my  hand  up  against  the
cabinet  waiting  to  be  touched.  She  therefore  let  go  of  B.'s  hand,
saying  that  she  was  going  to  do  so,  put  her  hand  inside  the  curtain
and  took  hold  of  mine  through  the  curtain,  saying  "  This  is  my
hand,"  and  she  then  resumed  holel  of  B.'s  hand.

C.  I  saw  a  head  come  out  from  the  curtains  slowly  and  within
six  inches  of  my  head,  and  it  stayed  out  about  two  seconds,  and
then  went  back.

C.  The  medium's  head  resting  against  my  head,  left  hand  in  my
right  in  her  lap,  left  foot  on  my  right  foot.

B.  Her  right  hand  on  my  left  hand  on  her  right  lap ;  her  right
foot  on  my  left  foot.

C.  I  saw  a  distinct  head  come  out  to  within  a  foot  from  me
and  then  disappear  suddenly.

F.  I  saw  it  also.  I  saw  it  come  out  about  two  feet.  I  only
just  caught  sight  of  it  and  could  not  describe  it.

[It  is  not  clear  whether  this  refers  to  a  repetition  of  the  pheno-
menon or  whether  it  is  a  repetition  of  the  description  only.
F,  Mar.  11/09.]

C.  Same  control  as  before.

B.  Her  right  hand  on  the  palm  of  my  left  hand  on  her  knee.
Her  right  foot  on  my  left  foot.


454 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part

[Light  III.  shaded  ]

12.38  a.m.  F.  Something  pushes  out  here  against  my  hand,
just  on  the  side  of  my  hand,  from  inside  the  curtain.

C.  Same  control  as  before.

B.  My  control  is  the  same.

12.40  a.m.  F.  The  curtain  pushed  out  here  against  my  hand
for  the  second  time.

[I  wanted  to  see  at  how  great  a  height  I  could  be  touched.  I
held  my  hand  more  than  two  feet  above  her  head.  I  asked  her
if  it  was  too  high.  She  said  "  No."  Various  attempts  were  made
to  reach  my  hand  by  something  within  the  cabinet,  but  it
apparently  could  not  get  so  high  and  struck  me  only  on  the
wrist. F.,  Dec.  5/08.]

[While  this  was  going  on  the  medium  redsed  B.'s  and  my  hands
about  IS  ineh.es  off  the  table  saying  that  this  helped.  C,
Dec.  5 1  OS.]

F.  Now  there  is  something  playing  around  about  my  hand.  I
am  holding  my  hand  above  the  head  of  the  medium  against  the
curtain.

F. Another  strong  push  below  my  hand.

C.  1  saw  something  white  just  inside  that  curtain  [right],  under-
neath.

C.  A  head  comes  right  out  between  my  head  and  B.'s.

[The  object  appeared  to  me  to  be  a  small  black  head  at  the  end
of  a  long  neck,  on  a  narrow,  knotty  body,  and  it  appeared  not
to  issue  horizontally  from  the  curtain  but  to  come  rather  from
the  right  shoulder  of  the  medium.  When  it  retired  it  moved  as
if  the  lower  part  of  it  were  pivoted  on  to  the  shoulder  of  the
medium.  I  had  an  extremely  good  view  of  it,  and  during  the
production  of  the  phenomenon  I  was  certain  that  the  medium  was
holding  my  left  hand. B.,  Dec.  5/08.]

C.  Control  the  same  as  before,  except  that  medium's  head  is
removed  from  my  head  to  a  distance  of  eight  inches,  visibly.  Her
left  leg  is  now  across  my  right  knee.


Lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  VI.  455

[Light  III.  shaded.]

B.  Her  right  hand  is  on  my  left  hand  on  the  edge  of  the  table.
Her  right  foot  resting  on  my  left  foot.

[1  think  I  had  resumed  my  place  at  the  other  end  of  the  table
when  this  phenomenon  occurred,  though  the  fact  is  omitted  in  the
report. F.,  Mar.  11/09.]

C.  The  curtain  has  moved  and  I  saw  a  kind  of  white  light
about  an  inch  across  and  about  six  feet  from  the  floor,  inside
the  curtain.

Medium  asks  for  more  light. Light  No.  3  turned  on,


Light  II.

F.  The  curtain  is  pulled  up  as  though  by  somebody  inside.  It
is  pulled  inwards  first  and  is  then  pushed  outwards.

C.  I  can  see  the  medium's  head  about  six  inches  from  me.  Her
left  hand  in  my  right. Her  left  leg  across  my  knee.

B.  I  can  see  the  medium  quite  clearly.  I  hold  her  right  hand
in  my  left  hand.  I  cannot  see  it  because  it  is  under  the  curtain.
I  feel  her  right  foot  on  my  left  foot,  which  I  verify  by  feeling  with
my  right  foot. I  feel  with  both  feet,  in  fact.

C.  The  curtain  blows  out  strongly.

B. And  "  John "  struck  my  back  twice.

C.  My  control  as  before.

B.  So  is  mine,  and  I  am  squeezing  her  hand.

12.55  a.m.  F.  asks  medium  if  "John"  will  try  the  cork  experi-
ment. Medium  says  "  We  will  try."

[The  cork  apparatus  was  brought  and  placed  on  the  table,  and  the
medium  tried  for  two  or  three  minutes  to  depress  the  cork  without
contact,  but  unsuccessfully. F.,  Ap.  13/09.]

B.  The  curtain  was  blown  right  over  my  left  shoulder.

B.  The  medium's  hands  were  free,  but  joined  in  front  of  her
and  visible  to  all  of  us. Her  right  foot  resting  wholly  on  mine.

F.  I  asked  medium  whether  I  could  look  into  the  cabinet  and  she
said  certainly.

C.  I  see  a  slight  bulge  of  the  curtain.


456


E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


Light  I.

B.  She  now  parts  the  curtain  altogether  and  gives  it  to  me  to
enable  us  all  to  look  into  the  cabinet.

[The  se'ancc  was  now  thought  to  be  ended.  Further  phenomena,
however,  still  occurred. See  C.'s  note  below. F.,  Ap.  13/09.]

Note  by  H.  Garrington.

The  sixth  seance  has  left  on  my  mind  an  indelible  impression  of
the  reality  of  at  least  some  of  the  phenomena  occurring  in  the  presence
of  Eusapia.  This  relates  more  particularly  to  the  touches  of  human
hands,  which  are,  in  one  sense,  the  most  extraordinary  and  the
most  incredible  of  any  of  the  phenomena  produced  through  Eusapia's
mediumship.  That  human  hands — having  all  the  peculiarities  of
hands,  even  to  the  presence  of  finger  nails,  should  become  visible
and  tangible  during  a  seance — these  hands  not  being  Eusapia's  nor
any  of  the  sitters' — this  is  so  utterly  at  variance  with  common  sense
that  one  finds  it  next  to  impossible  to  believe  it.  And  yet  these
hands  are  real,  and  by  no  possible  means  could  they  have  been
Eusapia's.  During  almost  the  whole  time  when  the  touches  were
taking  place  she  was  resting  her  head  against  mine,  my  right
hand  being  around  her  shoulders,  her  body  resting  against  my
body.  Her  left  hand,  passive,  was  lying  in  my  left  hand,  firmly
grasped  by  me,  while  I  frequently  pressed  the  whole  of  her  left
arm  against  my  body,  lifted  the  hand  to  the  light  to  make  sure
that  it  was  really  her  hand,  and  traced  its  connection  with  her
body.  The  hand  was  certainly  hers,  and  could  not  possibly  have
been  any  dummy  left  in  my  care.  I  frequently  verified  that
fact.  This  left  hand  rested  the  greater  part  of  the  time  on
Eusapia's  left  knee,  and  was  at  least  two  feet  away  from  her
right  hand,  which  B.  was  firmly  holding  tqwn  the  table.  At  no
time  did  she  attempt  even  to  approximate  the  hands,  far  less
to  effect  any  substitution. That  was  out  of  the  question.

Both  B.  and  I  are  absolutely  certain  that  we  continuously  held
one  hand  of  the  medium  (which  we  constantly  verified  was
hers),  and  during  the  actual  moment  of  the  touch,  we  frequently
disregarded  the  phenomenon  and  turned  our  whole  attention  to
the  control  of  the  hands.  Her  feet  were  meanwhile  held  securely
by  ours  under  the  table.  But  there  is  no  doubt  whatever
that-  the  touches  were  made  by  a  hand  and  not  by  a  foot,  nor  by  a


LIX,]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  VI.


457


non-living  thing.  I  frequently  felt  the  separate  fingers  and  the
thumb  during  the  touch,  and  F.  on  one  occasion  distinctly  felt  the
finger  nails,  which  pressed  into  the  upper  side  of  his  outstretched
finger.  Whatever  may  be  the  nature  and  origin  of  these  hands,  I
am  absolutely  positive  that  they  are  not  produced  by  Eusapia's
own  hands  and  equally  certain  that  they  were  not  produced  by
her  head,  her  feet  or  any  part  of  her  bod}-.  The  theory  of  dummy
hands,  manipulated  somehow  by  the  medium  during  the  trance
state,  is  the  only  possible  normal  hypothesis,  but  I  consider  that  also
quite  excluded  for  the  following  reasons  :

(1)  A  careful  search  of  the  medium,  after  the  seance,  failed  to
reveal  the  presence  of  any  such  hands.

(2)  The  sensation  of  the  touch  was  distinctly  human,  and  quite
unlike  the  sensation  that  would  result  from  a  touch  by  a  dummy  hand.

(3)  Some  part  of  the  medium's  body  must  be  free  in  order  to
work  such  an  apparatus.  No  part  of  her  body,  however,  was  free,
and  no  suspicious  movements  of  the  kind  necessary  to  manipulate
such  an  instrument  were  ever  perceived  by  us.

(4)  It  is  almost  impossible  to  conceive  the  elaborate  apparatus
that  would  be  necessary  to  produce  all  the  effects  observed  by  us.

Several  important  phenomena  took  place  at  the  conclusion  of  the
sixth  seance,  after  the  stenographic  record  ends.  The  reason  for  this
ij  that  the  stenographer  ceased  taking  notes  when  the  light  was
turned  up,  owing  to  the  lateness  of  the  hour  (it  was  getting  on
for  2.0  a.m.),  but  phenomena  continued  to  take  place  in  the  light,
even  when  we  considered  the  seance  closed.  The  right  hand  curtain
blew  out  strongly  towards  B.,  who  thereupon  stated  that  he  felt  a
hand,  playing  with  his  left  side,  under  his  arm,  as  though  finger
tips  were  gently  stroking  him.  At  this  time,  both  the  medium's
feet  were  controlled,  and  her  head  and  her  two  hands  were  clearly
visible,  in  good  light,  above  the  table.  She  was  just  coming  out
of  the  trance  state,  and  still  somewhat  bewildered.

The  table  then  tilted  several  times,  our  hands  resting  upon  it.
Thereupon  F.  asked  "  John  "  to  try  and  pick  one  of  the  strings  of
the  small  guitar,  still  standing  in  the  corner  of  the  cabinet.  We  all
stood  up,  including  the  medium,  who  was  about  six  inches  in  front
of  the  cabinet  curtains,  her  skirt  not  touching  them,  her  two  feet
were  controlled  by  those  on  either  side  of  her,  and  her  two  hands
held.  The  light  was  very  bright  and  good — good  enough  for
us  to  read  small  print.  We  stood  thus  for  about  a  minute,  while
B.  and  M.  exchanged  remarks  upon  some  subject  bearing  on  the


458 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


seance.  At  that  moment,  F.  and  I,  who  were  listening  closely,
clearly  perceived  a  slight  twanging  sound  of  the  strings  of  the
guitar,  as  though  fingers  were  playing  with  them  lightly,  but  were
unable  to  pull  one  of  them  with  sufficient  force  to  make  it  resound.
The  attempt  to  play  these  strings  was,  however,  quite  clear  and
audible  to  F.  and  myself,  who  heard  it  at  the  same  instant.

After  the  medium  had  resumed  her  seat,  we  felt  her  head  with
our  hands,  to  see  if  the  famous  "cold  breeze"  was  again  issuing  from
her  forehead.  We  all  clearly  perceived  it  with  our  hands,  placed  at
a  distance  of  about  3  inches  from  the  medium's  head.  F.  held
his  hand  over  her  mouth  and  nose  and  we  all  held  our  own
noses  and  mouths  and  refrained  from  breathing,  but  the  breeze
was  still  distinctly  perceptible.  B.  then  held  a  small  paper  flag
to  the  medium's  forehead — her  nose  and  mouth,  as  well  as  our
own,  still  being  well  covered.  The  flag  blew  right  out  several
times,  and  then  out  so  forcibly  that  it  turned  completely  over  and
wrapped  itself  once  round  the  flag-staff  to  which  it  was  attached.
The  objective  nature  of  this  breeze  seems  thus  established,  though
a  thermometer,  held  to  her  head,  failed  to  record  any  lowering  of
temperature.

At  the  conclusion  of  the  sixth  seance,  we  asked  the  medium  if
we  might  search  her.  She  at  once  consented,  and  proceeded  to
take  off  her  bodice  and  skirt,  and  hand  them  to  us  for  examination.
There  was  certainly  no  slit  or  other  contrivance  in  the  skirt  or  in
the  bodice,  and  we  also  examined  her  petticoats  and  other  under
garments,  and  felt  over  her  body  with  our  hands,  through  the  few
remaining  clothes.  So  far  as  we  could  discover,  nothing  was  concealed
about  her  person  or  her  clothes.

I  have  already  remarked  that  unless  the  medium  could  succeed
in  releasing  one  hand,  such  devices  would  be  quite  useless  to
her.  I  am  quite  positive,  however,  that,  not  only  were  no  such
devices  concealed  about  her,  but  that  her  hands  were  not  free
one  instant  during  the  actual  production  of  any  phenomenon,
unless  it  is  so  especially  stated  in  the  Iveport  :  and  in  these  cases
the  hands  were  invariably  visible  to  us.  It  would  have  been  an
excellent  occasion  for  the  medium,  had  she  been  dishonest,  to  have
concealed  such  objects  about  her  person,  since  our  refusal  to  search
her  at  the  previous  seance  (owing  to  her  extreme  fatigue)  might
have  suggested  to  her  that  we  should  not  want  to  search  in  future,
and  so  she  would  most  certainly  have  concealed  apparatus  about
her  at  this  particular  seance,  if  at  all. jj  q j-)ec  7^  1908


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  VI.


459


Note  by  W.  W.  Baggally.

During  the  production  of  the  phenomena  which  occurred  at  this
seance,  the  light  in  the  room  was  at  times  lowered  and  raised,  but
was  always  sufficient  to  allow  of  the  sitters'  faces  being  seen,  and
their  hands  also  when  resting  on  the  table.

Precautions  against  the  substitution  of  hands  or  feet  were  taken
by  C.  and  myself.  C.  had  control  of  her  left  hand  and  foot  and  I
had  control  of  her  right  hand  and  foot.  I  assured  myself  that  no
substitution  of  hands  took  place  during  the  whole  sitting  by  con-
tinually feeling  the  thumb  and  palm  of  the  medium's  hand  that  I
had  under  control,  and  by  this  means  I  was  certain  that  it  was  her
right  hand  that  was  held  in,  or  rested  on,  my  left  hand.  I  also
assured  myself  that  no  substitution  of  feet  took  place  by  feeling  the
whole  of  her  right  leg  against  my  left  leg,  and  by  touching  her
knee  with  mine,  and  also  feeling  her  right  foot  on  my  left  foot.
As  an  additional  precaution,  I  sometimes  felt  her  two  knees  with
my  right  hand  which  I  placed  under  the  table,  and  her  two  feet
with  my  right  foot.

No  movement  of  objects  in  the  cabinet  took  place.  The
phenomena  consisted  principally  of  the  appearance  of  a  hand,  the
touching,  grasping  and  pulling  by  it  of  the  sitters,  the  appearance
of  a  head,  and  of  objects  of  an  indefinable  nature  of  different
colours,  white,  grey  and  black.  I  am  of  opinion  that  under
the  conditions  of  strict  control  (and  of  light)  described  above,  it
was  not  possible  for  Eusapia  to  produce  these  phenomena  with
one  of  her  hands,  as  any  suspicious  movement  of  it  would  have
been  felt  or  seen.  Neither  could  she  have  produced  them  with  one
of  her  feet,  even  assuming  that  by  substitution  she  had  got  one  of
them  free.  She  continued  quietly  seated  in  a  natural  position  in
her  chair  and  it  would  have  been  a  physical  impossibility  for  her
to  raise  one  of  her  feet  to  the  height  above  her  head  at  which
some  of  the  touches  were  felt.  It  would  be  absurd  to  imagine  that
she  had  been  able  to  transform  the  form  of  one  of  her  feet
into  that  of  a  hand.  F.  clearly  felt  the  fingers  and  nails  of  this
hand.  C.  felt  the  form  and  movements  of  the  fingers,  and  I  also
distinctly  felt  the  grasp  of  the  thumb  and  four  fingers.  The  pheno-
mena followed  each  other  rapidly.  If  they  had  been  carried  out
by  means  of  one  of  the  medium's  hands  or  feet,  they  would  have
necessitated  a  series  of  releases  and  replacements  of  her  hand  or
foot  which  would  have  been  detected  at  once.


4G0


E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


The  pivoting  on  Eusapia's  shoulder  of  the  lower  part  of  the
body  belonging  to  the  black  head  which  appeared  after  12.40  was
certainly  suspicious.  It  would  suggest  that  one  of  her  arms,  covered
with  some  material  like  black  cloth,  was  being  used  by  her  for  the
production  of  the  manifestation,  but  as  both  C.  and  myself  were
quite  sure  that  we  had  her  left  and  right  hands  under  perfect
control  at  the  moment  that  the  figure  appeared,  it  is  difficult  to
understand  how  she  could  have  had  one  of  her  arms  free.  The
figure  appeared  and  disappeared  quite  noiselessly.

I  noticed  that  the  force  or  whatever  it  may  be  that  produces
the  phenomena,  is  capable  of  acting  only  within  a  limited  area
round  Eusapia's  body.  This  fact  of  course  suggests  the  suspicion
that  the  limitation  is  determined  by  the  distance  from  her  body
that  she  can  reach  to  with  her  arms  and  legs  after  she  has  effected
a  substitution  of  hands  or  feet.  The  instance  when  F.  placed  his
hand  on  the  curtain  above  Eusapia's  head  (while  she  was  under
complete  control  of  both  hands  and  feet)  in  order  to  see  how  far
from  her  his  hand  could  be  touched  by  the  hand  within  the  cabinet,
specifically  proved,  however,  that  the  limitation  did  not  depend  on
the  length  of  her  arms  or  legs.

The  phenomena  were  not  produced  by  any  method  of  conjuring
known  to  me.  I  have  made  a  study  of  this  art  from  my  boyhood.
Just  before  the  occurrence  of  a  manifestation  Eusapia  often  observed
that  it  was  about  to  take  place,  and  she  frequently  described  the
nature  of  the  anticipated  phenomenon,  and  asked  the  sitters  to  be
sure  that  they  had,  at  the  same  time,  proper  control  of  her  hands
and  feet.  This  procedure  on  her  part  is  contrary  to  one  of  the
fundamental  rules  of  the  conjuring  art,  which  enjoins  that  the  atten-
tion of  the  audience  should  not  be  directed  to  (nor  their  vigilance
increased  at)  the  actual  moment  that  the  necessary  steps  for  the
production  of  a  trick  are  being  carried  out.  The  result  on  my
mind  of  the  two  seances  of  Dec.  2nd  and  Dec.  4th  is  that  I  find
myself  being  driven  to  adopt,  as  a  provisional  explanation  of  the
phenomena,  either  that  they  are  brought  about  by  some  mechanism
which  is  hidden  about  the  person  of  Eusapia,  which  she  is  able  to
make  use  of  in  some  unaccountable  manner,  while  her  hands  and
feet  are  under  control,  or  that  they  are  produced  by  some  super-
normal means.

At  the  conclusion  of  the  seance,  we  requested  Eusapia  Palladino
to  allow  us  to  search  her.  She  readily  consented,  divested  herself
of  all  her  outer  clothing  and,  while  she  stood  on  a  chair,  allowed


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  VI.


461


us  to  feel  over  her  body  and  to  examine  the  clothing  that  she  had
taken  off.  No  mechanism  (threads,  hooks,  wires)  or  anything  of  a
suspicious  nature,  was  found  upon  her.

The  supernormal  explanation  appears  therefore  to  be  the  only
one  that  will  meet  the  case,  but  I  hesitate  to  accept  it  until  I
have  had  further  experiments  with  this  remarkable  medium.

W.  W.  B.,  Dec.  6th,  1908.

Note  by  E.  Feilding.

It  is  singular  that  the  impression  made  upon  our  minds  by  any
particular  seance  seems  to  vary  inversely  with  the  effectiveness  of
the  shorthand  notes.  Certain  it  is  that  the  report  of  the  sixth
seance,  which  we  went  through  last  night,  while  doubtless  accurately
recording  what  took  place,  gives  a  most  inadequate  account  of  the
emotional  effect  of  it  all.  We  were  all  three  completely  bowled  over.
Eusapia  had  arrived  very  late  owing  to  the  non-arrival  of  her  cab.
When  she  did  come  she  was  in  a  very  talkative  mood,  and  button-
holed me  at  every  landing  of  the  five  flights  of  stairs  to  our  rooms
to  give  a  fresh  instalment  in  Neapolitan  dialect  (I  do  not  understand
Neapolitan  dialect)  of  a  burglary  which  she  had  once  endured.
Our  journey  upstairs  occupied  about  25  minutes ;  but  it  was  not
enough  for  the  dimensions  of  her  story,  which  continued  long  after
we  sat  down  at  the  table.  Every  device  failed  to  distract  her,  and
it  was  very  late  before  the  first  symptoms  of  the  oncoming  mediumistic
condition,  stertorous  yawns  and  amazing  hiccoughs,  gladdened  our
eyes  and  ears.  Silence  at  last  prevailed :  but  nothing  happened.
We  waited  patiently.  The  table  occasionally  tilted  feebly;  sparse
raps,  or  rather  bangs,  were  heard  on  the  table ; — nothing  else.  "  The
phenomena  lag  much,"  said  Eusapia.  We  were  almost  disposed  to
abandon  the  attempt  for  the  night,  when  suddenly  things  began.

I  shall  not,  in  this  note,  go  through  the  seance  in  detail,  but  wish
to  record  the  fact  that  it  has  certainly  had  a  very  profound  effect
on  our  mental  attitude.  My  own  frame  of  mind,  when  starting  on
this  investigation,  was  that,  in  view  of  the  concurrent  opinion  of
practically  all  the  eminent  men  of  science  who  have  investigated
Eusapia's  phenomena,  it  was  inconceivable  that  they  could,  in  turn,
have  been  deceived  by  the  few  petty  tricks  that  have,  from  time
to  time,  been  detected,  and  that  it  Avas  therefore  probable  that  the
phenomena  were  real.  At  the  same  time  I  could  not  believe  in
them. All  my  own  experiments  in  physical  mediumship  had  resulted


462 E.  Fcilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and,  H.  Garrington.  [part


in  the  discovery  of  the  most  childish  frauds.  Failure  had  followed  upon
failure.  While,  therefore,  I  tended  to  accept  the  general  hypothesis
that  the  facts  of  so-called  spiritualistic  physical  manifestations  must,
on  the  evidence,  be  regarded  as  probably  existent,  my  mental  habit
had  become  so  profoundly  sceptical,  when  it  came  to  considering
any  given  alleged  instance  of  them,  that  I  had  ceased  to  have  any
expectation  of  finding  it  able  to  bear  examination.  The  first  seance
with  Eusapia,  accordingly,  provoked  chiefly  a  feeling  of  surprise ;
the  second,  of  irritation — irritation  at  finding  oneself  confronted  with
a  foolish  but  apparently  insoluble  problem.  The  third  seance,  at
which  a  trumpery  trick  was  detected,  came  as  a  sort  of  relief.  At
the  fourth,  where  the  control  of  the  medium  was  withdrawn  from
ourselves,  my  baffled  intelligence  sought  to  evade  the  responsibility
of  meeting  facts  by  harbouring  grotesque  doubts  as  to  the  com-
petency of  the  eminent  professors,  who  took  our  places,  to  observe
things  properly  ;  while  at  the  fifth,  where  this  course  was  no  longer
possible,  as  I  was  constantly  controlling  the  medium  myself,  the
mental  gymnastics  involved  in  seriously  facing  the  necessity  of  con-
cluding in  favour  of  what  was  manifestly  absurd,  produced  a  kind
of  intellectual  fatisrue.

After  the  sixth,  for  the  first  time,  I  find  that  my  mind,
from  which  the  stream  of  events  had  hitherto  run  off  like  rain
from  a  macintosh,  is  at  last  beginning  to  be  capable  of  absorbing
them.  For  the  first  time  I  have  the  absolute  conviction  that  our
observation  is  not  mistaken.  I  realise,  as  an  appreciable  fact  in
life,  that  from  an  empty  cabinet  I  have  seen  hands  and  heads  come
forth,  that  from  behind  the  curtain  of  that  empty  cabinet  I  have
been  seized  by  living  fingers,  the  existence  and  position  of  the  very
nails  of  which  could  be  felt.  I  have  seen  this  extraordinary
woman  sitting  visible  outside  the  curtain,  held  hand  and  foot  by
my  colleagues,  immobile,  except  for  the  occasional  straining  of  a
limb,  while  some  entity  within  the  curtain  has  over  and  over  again
pressed  my  hand  in  a  position  clearly  beyond  her  reach.  I  refuse
to  entertain  the  possibility  of  a  doubt  that  we  were  the  victims  of
a  hallucination.  I  appreciate  exactly  the  fact  that  ninety-nine
people  out  of  a  hundred  will  refuse  to  entertain  the  possibility  of  a
doubt  that  it  could  be  anything  else.  And,  remembering  my  own
belief  of  a  very  short  time  ago,  I  shall  not  be  able  to  complain,
though  I  shall  unquestionably  be  annoyed,  when  I  find  that  to  be
the  case.  I  shall  be  told  that  this  sudden  declaration  of  conviction
is  absurdly  hasty,  highly  unphilosophical  and  unworthy  of  a  student


LIX.]


Sittings  ivith  Eusapia :  Seance  VI.


463


of  psychical  science.  Perhaps  it  is ;  but  the  precise  moment  at
which  conviction  is  reached  differs  in  individuals  not,  I  think,  according
to  the  cogency  of  the  facts  presented  to  them,  but  according  to
their  willingness  to  abandon  a  position  which  they  feel  to  have
become  untenable.  Now,  I  have  no  prejudices  whatever  in  favour
of  a  set  of  ideas  to  which  my  own  previous  experiences,  limited
enough,  happen  to  have  led  me,  and  am  prepared  to  abandon
them  at  once  as  soon  as  fresh  experiences  come  along  to  lead  to  a
different  conclusion.

Since  writing  the  above  I  have  read  the  notes  of  C.  and  B.  The
former  has  apparently  submitted  with  the  same  completeness  as
myself  to  the  evidence  of  facts.  B.,  who  is  evidently  passing  through
the  same  stages  as  I  did  in  my  earlier  seances,  toys  with  the  sug-
gestion of  an  apparatus,  by  way  of  easing  his  mind.  It  would  be
an  interesting  problem  to  set  before  a  manufacturer  of  conjuring
machines  to  devise  an  apparatus  capable  of  producing  alternatively
a  black  flat  profile  face,  a  square  face  on  a  long  neck,  and  a  'cello
like  face  on  a  warty  nobbly  body  two  feet  long;  also,  a  white  hand
with  moveable  fingers,  a  yellowish  hand,  and  a  hand  invisible
altogether, — all  these  for  use  outside  the  curtain.  Further,  for  use
within,  a  hand  with  practicable  living  thumb  and  fingers  having
nails,  capable  of  reaching  high  above  the  medium's  head,  of  patting,
pinching  and  pulling  hair,  and  of  so  vigorously  grasping  B.  by  the
coat  as  almost  to  upset  him  into  the  cabinet.  Our  manufacturer
must  so  construct  the  apparatus  that  it  can  be  actuated  unseen  by
a  somewhat  stout  and  elderly  lady  clad  in  a  tight  plain  gown,  who
sits  outside  the  curtain  held  visibly  by  hand  and  foot,  in  such  a
way  as  to  escape  the  observation  of  two  practical  conjurors  clinging
about  her  and  on  the  look-out  for  its  operation.  It  must  further
be  of  such  dimensions  as  to  be  concealed  about  the  lady  while
parading  herself  for  inspection  upon  a  chair,  clad  in  her  stays  and
a  short  flannel  petticoat,  R  p>>  Dec 6th>  19QS_

Remarks  ox  Seance  VII.

December  7th,  1908.

This  seance  proved  remarkable  in  several  respects ;  in  the
first  place,  for  a  long-continued  exhibition  of  the  curious
"  dress-swelling  "  phenomenon  which  has  been  so  often  described
by  other  observers,  but which,  though  we had on  several


464 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


occasions  witnessed  it,  we  had  hitherto  not  had  any  good
opportunity  of  adequately  examining.  This  phenomenon,  which
occurred  in  the  No.  1  light  (light  sufficient  to  read  small
print  by),  continued  for  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  and  is
described  in  detail  in  the  shorthand  report  and  B.'s  note.

In  the  second  place,  it  was  the  first  seance,  indeed  the  only
one,  at  which  a  hand  came  out  from  within  the  curtain  and
was  both  felt  and  clearly  seen.  This  occurred  at  12.9  a.m.,
when  B.  was  grasped  on  the  shoulder  by  a  hand  visible  to
himself  and  C.  (see  B.'s  note).  Further,  at  11.20  p.m.  a  hand
came  out  over  the  medium's  head,  visible  to  F.,  C.  and  M.
from  the  stenographer's  table,  ringing  a  large  tea-bell  which
had  been  placed  on  the  table  inside  the  curtain.  It  attached
it  with  extraordinary  rapidity  to  the  medium's  hair,  leaving  it
there,  and  disappeared,  to  return  about  a  quarter  of  a  minute
afterwards,  detach  it,  ring  it  over  the  medium's  head  and  throw
it  on  to  the  seance  table.  Both  the  medium's  hands  were
separately  and  adequately  controlled  at  the  time.

Again,  this  was  the  only  seance  at  which  brilliant  lights
were  visible  to  all  present.  See  shorthand  report  at  11.36  p.m.
It  will  be  noticed  that  whereas  three  of  the  lights  seen  were
of  one  kind,  viz.  a  steady  though  very  bright  blue-green  light
of  a  certain  size,  the  fourth  was  wholly  different,  viz.  an
intermittent  sparkling  light  accompanied  by  a  cracking  sound,
like  the  spark  between  the  poles  of  an  electric  battery.

Finally,  the  seance  was  remarkable  for  the  exceedingly  suspicious
character  of  certain  of  the  phenomena  taken  by  themselves  and
judging  by  their  appearance  only,  though  not  by  the  control  which
existed  at  the  moment  of  their  production.  Among  these  must
be  included  the  white  object  like  a  ball  of  white  muslin  which
appeared  at  11.32  p.m.;  and  the  persona  who  professed  to  kiss
B.  through  the  curtain  at  12  o'clock  and  onwards,  and  shortly
afterwards  appeared  twice,  looking  like  an  arm  wrapped  up  in
something  black,  and  moving  just  as  the  medium's  arm  would
if  free,  pivoted  on  her  shoulder.  A  discussion  of  these  pheno-
mena will  be  found  in  B.'s  note.

Many  other  phenomena  of  great  interest  occurred,  e.g.  the
"  white  thing "  with  apparently  a  white  arm  attached  to  it,  at
10.57  p.m.;  the  loud  bang  and  three  subsequent  thumps  of  a
different  quality  of  sound  which  were  made  on  the  table  at


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  VII.


465


11.1  p.m.  in  response  to  four  vigorous  nods  of  the  medium's
head  ;  and  the  stroking  by  fingers  of  F.'s  hand  while  behind
the  medium's  head,  at  11.17  p.m.,  both  her  hands  being
separately  held  in  front  of  her.

Shorthand  Report  of  Seance  VII.

December  1th,  1908.

Present — F.,  C,  B.,  and  31,  shorthand  writer.

The  smcdl  table  has  been  tied  to  steeples  in  the  cabinet  to  prevent
"  John "  from  pulling  it  out  and  upsetting  things.  In  the  middle
of  it  is  a  board  carrying  a  lump  of  wet  clay.  To  the  medium's
left  of  the  clay  is  a  trumpet,  and  to  the  right  a  flageolet.  Behind
the  flageolet  is  a  tea  bell  and  at  the  bach  is  a  toy  piano  on  the
top  of  which  lies  a  guitar.  Hanging  to  the  medium's  right  against
the  wall  is  a  photographic  plate  enclosed  in  red  and  black  paper ;
above,  a  smcdl  tambourine.  In  the  middle  hangs  another  bell  and
to  the  left  hangs  a  broken  guitar.  On  the  floor,  in  front  of  the
table,  and  to  the  left,  is  a  smcdl  stool  with  a  tambourine  upon  it.
The  small  bell  hangs  1\  meters  from  the  floor,  the  smcdl  tambourine


B


the  same,  and  the  broken  guitar  1  m.  30  c.  The  lights  are :  No.  1
=  150  volts,  1 0  candles,  unshaded. No.  20  volts,  10  candles,

unshaded.  No.  3  =  110  volts,  10  candles,  ruby,  shaded  toith  one
thickness  of  thin  tissue  cream  coloured  paper,  and  one  thickness  of  a

2g


466 E.  Feildimg,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


white  silk  handkerchief  hung  over  it  so  that  the  whole  handkerchief
is  illumined  with  a  red  glow.  No.  If,  =  110  volts,  5  candles,  ruby,
unshaded.  If  anything,  Light  No.  ^  is  found  to  give  a  stronger
light  than  No.  3,  so  shaded.

9.30  p.m. Stance  begins.

Light  No.  I.

9.42  p.m. Tilts  begin.

9.47  p.m.  F.  Medium  calls  my  attention  to  the  swelling  of  her
dress  on  the  left  side.

[Her  dress  was  swelling  out  about  half  way  up,  going  in  and  out
like  a  half-filled  balloon. F.,  Dec.  8/08.]

I  watched  it  and  she  said  "  Catch  at  it  quickly  with  your  hand."
1  said  "  No,  I  would,  rather  wait  until  it  becomes  stronger."  She
then  said,  "  Very  well ;  sit  between  it  and  the  lamp,  so  as  to  leave
it  in  the  shade."

C.  At  the  time  of  this  blowing  out,  she  showed  us  that  we  were
holding  different  feet,  and  I  put  my  hand  down  and  felt  her  two
feet,  showing  that  she  was  not  doing  this  with  her  feet.

[The  manifestations  became  slightly  stronger  and  cdl  came  near  to
watch.  She  asked  us  laughingly  to  examine  for  her  "  mctcchina."
F.,  Dec.  8/08.]

B.  She  lifts  her  dress  and  her  petticoats  to  show  us  that  there
is  nothing  underneath.

F.  There  is  absolutely  nothing  under  her  dress.
[Remembering  an  experiment  of  Prof.  Curie's  which  I  had  seen
in  Paris,  when  a  small  stool  was  placed  about  a  foot  from
Fusapia's  dress,  which  thereupon  swelled  out,  touched  the  leg  of  the
stool  and  immediately  caused  it  to  run  rapidly  in  towards  her,  I
asked  her  to  try  and  repeat  it.  She  said,  "  We  can  always  try
it,  but  it  does  not  defend  upon  me!'  J  took  the  small  stool  from
the  cabinet,  ascertained  that  it  had,  no  attachment,  and  placed  it  on
the  ground,  to  her  left.  She  pulled  the  curtain  of  the  cabinet  partly
over  it. F,  Pec.  8/08.]

F.  She  asked  me  to  make  contact  between  the  curtain  and  her
dress.  I  have  felt  severed  times  between  her  and  the  stool  right
cdong  the  floor,  especiedly  after  the  last  time  she  touched  the  curtain,


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  VI I.


467


[Light  L]


and  since  I  have  passed  my  hand,  behuecn  her  and  the  stool  she
has  not  touched  the  curtain  in  any  way.  There  is  therefore,  at  the
present  moment,  no  possibility  of  any  attachment  between  her  leg
and  the  leg  of  the  stool.  Her  foot  is  quite  unquestioncdjly  on  the
whole  of  mine,  I  can  feci  it,  I  can  see  it,  and  everything  else.
Her  right  foot  is  on  my  left  foot  and  she  keeps  moving  it  about.

C.  As  we  are  talking,  the  corner  of  her  dress  keeps  moving  out
and  making;  towards  the  curtain  and  then  moves  back  a«ain.

9.58  p.m. F. Big  bulge  of  dress.
M.  notes :  I  went  round  and  saw  it.

F.  Another  bis;  bulge.
B. I  saw  it  also.

[  We  remained  a  considerable  time  xvaiting  for  this  experiment  to
come  off,  she  holding  my  hand  towards  the  stool,  but  iiothing  hap-
pened except  the  bulging  of  her  dress.  The  stool  did,  not  move.  F.,
Dec.  8 /OS.]

10.0  p.m.  "  John"  tilts  five  times  for  less  light.  Medium  is
annoyed  and  says  "  No."

10.5  p.m.  The  tilts  continued  to  ask  for  less  light  and  eventually
she  yielded.

Light  No.  II.

10.6  p.m.  Medium  says  that  (J.,  being  unwell,  gives  a  weak  "current"
and  asks  him  to  change  places  luith  B.


c.


10.11  p.m.  Various  tilts  of  an  interesting  but  non-evidential
character.


468


E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.


[part


[Light  II.]


10.15  p.m. Various  tilts  and  raps  of  non-evidential  character.

10.15  'p.m. The  stance  tabic  is  turned  broadways  at  our  request.


10.20  p.m.  The  table  tilts  on  the  two  legs  towards  B.  Non-
evidential.

10.26  p.m.  Movements  of  the  curtain.

10. 30  p.m.  The  little  stool  is  knocked  over.

F.  Her  left  foot  was  immovable  on  my  left  foot,  and  her  left
hand  was  on  the  table  with  mine,  visible.

B.  Her  right  hand  was  on  the  table  on  my  corner  and  visible,
my  left  hand  on  her  two  knees,  and  her  right  foot  on  the  toes  of
my  left  foot.

F.  The  little  stool  which  I  had  put  under  the  curtain  has  gone
somewhere.

[Since  I  had  felt  that  there  was  no  attachment  bchucen  her  and
this  stool,  there  had  been  no  relaxation  of  control,  except  during  the
moment  that  the  seance  tabic  was  being  turned  round,  and  I  am
certain that  slue  had  no opportunity of  meddng  any  attachment.


F.  She  squeezes  my  hand  and  the  curtain  comes  out  and  covers
my  chair.

F.  Her  hand  was  about  2 \  feet  from  the  curtain  and  her  foot
on  mine,  as  before.

B.  Same  control  as  before.  Her  back  is  at  least  a  foot  from
the  curtains.


c.


F.,  Dec.  8/08.]


ltx.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  VII.  469

[Light  II.]

F.  Immediately  after,  she  held  my  hand  out  away  from  her
towards  the  small  stool,  which  is  somewhere  (under  the  curtains),
I  do  not  know  where,  and  it  jumped.

10.33  p.m.  F.  I  cannot  sec  the,  little  stool  because  it  is  under  the
curtains.

F.  Both  her  hands  are  free  but  quite  visible. Her  left  foot  is
on  mine.

B.  I  also  see  both  her  hands,  free,  and  both  her  knees,  which
are  under  the  table,  and  her  right  foot  is  on  my  left  foot.

10.34  p.m. Medium  asks  for  less  light. Light  No.  3.
Light  III.

F.  In  this  light  I  can  sec  across  the  room,  I  can  see  the  bar  at
the  head  of  my  bedstead  (about  lip.  feet  away),  and  I  can  see  B.'s
face  opposite  me  quite  plainly.  I  can  sec  all  the  separate  fingers
of  the  medium  at  a  distance  of  two  feet  from  my  face.

G.  I  can  see  medium's  face.

B.  I  can  recognise  F.  opposite  me.  I  cam  also  sec  the  crack  in  the
table.

10.46  p.m. Some  object  in  the  cabinet  moves.

The  seance  table  gives  three  violent  tilts  towards  medium.

B.  Perfect  control  of  the  medium  on  both  sides.
[These  tilts  were  without  contact,  but  we  had  grown  tired  of
giving  elaborate  control  of  minor  phenomena. F.,  Dec.  8/08.]

10.53  p.m. F.  The  curtain  comes  out  towards  me  again.

B.  The  control  is  the  same  as  before.
F.  Yes.

10.5 If.  p.m.  Medium  ashed  if  she  could  touch  the  curtain  for  a
moment,  but  she  did  not  attach  anything  to  it.

10.56  p.m.  Four  tilts  of  the  table  without  contact,  meaning
"  Talk."

[F.  proceeded  to  deliver  an  address  on  bimetallism,  while  we  tocrc
all  paying  close  attention  to  the  curtain,  as  this  is  genercdly  a  sign
of  something  about  to  happen. Dec.  8/08.]


470  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part

[Light  III.]

10.57  p.m. B. A  white  thing  comes  out.

0.  I  saw  that  white  thing  come  out  of  the  curtain,  apparently
round  the  right-hand  curtain,  over  the  table.

F.  Her  left  hand  is  motionless  on  her  lap,  in  mine,  and  I  can
feel  the  thumb,  and  her  left  toe  and  heel  are  planted  firmly  on  my
right  foot.

B.  Her  right  hand,  which  I  am  absolutely  certain  is  her  right
hand,  as  I  feel  the  fingers,  rests  on  my  left  hand,  both  resting  in
her  right  lap. Her  right  foot  on  my  left  foot.

B.  Not  only  did  I  see  the  white  thing,  but  also  what  appeared
to  be  a  white  arm  attached  to  it.  Note  the  medium  is  dressed
in  black.

10.58.  p.m.  F.  Something  white  appeared  above  the  medium's
shoulder  about  two  feet  away.

F.  I  hold  the  left  hand  absolutely,  feeling  the  thumb.
B.  Her  right  hand  on  my  left  hand,  both  on  my  knee.  Her
right  foot  on  my  left  foot.

10.59  p.m.  F.  Medium  says,  "I  am  going  to  look,  for  something"
and  pinches  my  rigid  hand  in  her  left,  stretched  straight  behind
towards  the  cabinet.

The  small  stool  continues  to  move  under  her  hand.

F.  My  right  hand  being  below  her  hand.  Her  foot  on  mine,  and
I  have  verified  the  foot  control.

B.  Her  right  hand  has  just  left  my  left  hand  for  a  moment.
Both  hands  are  now  on  her  right  knee,  and  her  right  foot  con-
tinues completely  on  my  left  foot.

[When  Eusapia  removes  her  hand  in  this  way,  she  always  mentions
it  beforehand. F.,  Dec.  8/OS.]

11.1  p.m. Four  nods  of  her  head  are  followed  by  four  thumps
on  the  table. She  did  not  touch  the  table  with  her  head.
[The  first  of  these  thumps  was  like  a  blow  struck  by  a  mallet.
F.,  Dec.  8/08.]

F.  Her  hands  were  on  her  lap,  my  right  hand  being  on  her  left
knee  and  her  left  foot  on  mine.

B.  Control  exactly  the  same  as  before.


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Ensapia:  Seance  VII.


471


[Light  III.]

11.2  p.m.  She  says  that  she  will  try  to  levitate  the  tahle
whereupon  a  partial  levitation  takes  place.

F.  Her  left  hand  being  in  ray  right  on  her  lap  and  not  touching
the  table  at  all. Left  foot  firmly  on  mine.

B.  During  the  levitation  I  held  her  right  hand  in  my  left  hand
resting  in  her  lap. Her  right  foot  on  my  left  foot.

11.7  p.m.  F.  I  asked  if  "John"  would  show  himself  outside  the
curtain,  whereupon  the  table  tilts  four  times,  as  far  as  I  can
see  without  any  contact,  meaning  "  talk."

[Nonsense  talked  as  before,  close  attention  being  paid. F.,  Dec.  8/08.]

F.  Something  has  shot  out  about  H-  feet  towards  B.'s  head.  It
seemed  to  me  an  almost  misty  black  thing  this  time.  I  could
not  see  it  thoroughly  as  it  was  not  against  the  illuminated  back-
ground of  the  door.

F.  I  have  got  hold  of  her  left  hand  in  my  right  on  her  lap.

11.10  p.m.  Medium  says  that  she  did  not  like  the  sSance  table  that
way  and  it  is  again  turned  round  to  its  usual  position.  Medium
puts  the  right  hand  curtain  over  the  table.


c.


11.11  p.m. F.  She  has  asked  me  to  put  my  right  hand  on  her  back.

11.12  p.m.  F.  She  says  that  she  is  going  to  find  something  with
her  foot.  She  is  kicking  about  with  her  foot  [i.e.  under  the  table
in  front  of  her. F,  Dec.  8/08.]

11.13  p.m.  F.  The  small  table  in  the  cabinet  was  shaken  and
something  fell  from  it,  while  she  was  kicking  with  her  left  foot
with  mine  under  the  seance  table.


472


E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


Light  III]

[It  was  then  explained,  to  "  John "  that  he  need  not  trouble  about

trying  to  bring  out  the  small  table,  as  it  was  fastened,  and  he  was

asked  to  confine  Ids  attention  to  the  objects  on  it. F.,  Dec.  8/08.]

B.  She  had  her  right  hand  on  my  left  hand  always  resting  on
her  knee,  and  she  moved  her  leg  two  or  three  times.  I  followed
the  movements  with  my  leg.

11.17  p.m.  F.  I  am  touched  on  the  back  of  the  fingers.  My
hand  is  on  the  back  of  her  neck  and  gentle  finders  came  and
touched  my  hand  with  their  tips.

F.  Her  left  hand  is  visibly  in  mine  on  the  table.  Her  left  foot
tightly  on  mine.

B.  She  has  her  right  hand  in  my  left  hand  resting  on  the  table,
under  the  curtain. Her  right  foot  is  still  on  my  left  foot.

[Here  the  obvious  suggestion  to  a  critic  is  that  I  must  have
been  holding  a  dummy  hand  under  the  curtain  ;  but  I  continuously
verified  that  it  was  a  natural  hand,  and  a  right  hand,  by  feeling
the  fingers  and  thumb  and  feeling  their  movements. B.,  Dec.  8/08.]

11.20  p.m.  C.  A  bell  from  the  cabinet  is  lifted  from  the  small
table  in  the  cabinet,  through  the  curtains,  and  put  upon  the
medium's  head  and  remains  there.

F.  I  heard  the  bell,  which  had  been  on  the  table  in  the  cabinet,
begin  to  ring,  and  then  it  suddenly  appeared  outside  the  curtain
and  came  over  the  medium's  head,  and  it  hung  there  and  went
on  ringing.  She  told  me  it  was  tied  to  her  head.  I  felt  with
my  fingers  and  felt  something  like  muslin  tying  it  to  her  hair.
As  I  was  looking  at  it,  I  suddenly  saw  a  white  thing  which  I
thought  was  the  medium's  right  hand,  come  to  untie  the  bell,
ring  it  hard  and  throw  it  on  to  the  seance  table.  This  was
within  one  foot  of  my  nose.  I  could  see  the  medium's  face
perfectly.

[See  my  expanded  note  below. F.,  Dec.  8/08.]

B.  1  saw  the  bell  come  out  and  lie  on  the  medium's  head,  and
also  saw  it  thrown  from  her  head  on  to  the  table.

C.  I  saw  the  hand  coming  to  untie  the  bell  and  heard  the  bell
ringing  above  her  head,  also  saw  the  hand  throw  it  out  on  the
table.


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  VII.


473


[Light  III.]

[I  also  saw  this  hand  distinctly  lift,  ring  and  throw  the  bell,  but
thought  that  it  was  F.  or  medium's  hand. M.,  Dec.  8/08.]
[B. I  did  not  see  the  hand. Dec.  8/08.]

F.  Her  left  hand  was  visibly  in  my  right  all  the  time  on  the
table.

B.  During  the  whole  of  this  phenomenon  her  right  hand  was
resting  on  my  left  hand  on  the  table  and  her  right  foot  on  my
left  foot.

F.  I  had  got  the  whole  of  her  left  hand  on  the  table  visibly  in
my  right  on  my  corner  of  the  table,  so  that  it  is  perfectly  clear
that  there  cannot  be  any  question  of  substitution.

11.26  p.m. F.  A  white  thing  again  came  out  over  her  head.

11.30  p.m.  C.  I  saw  a  white  object, — square — distinctly  come
out  from  behind  the  right-hand  curtain  at  a  distance  of  about
three  inches  over  the  medium's  head.

B.  I  also  saw  this  white  object,  but  1  think  only  a  side  view
of  it. I  could  see  irregularities  on  its  surface.

F.  It  was  on  the  other  side  of  the  curtain  from  me  so  that  I
did  not  see  it.  The  medium's  head  was  resting  against  my  head,
and  her  left  hand  is  on  the  corner  of  the  table  in  mine.  Foot
absolutely  on  mine.

B.  My  control  of  foot  and  hand  is  exactly  the  same  as  before.

11.32  p.m.  C.  A  white  object  came  out  from  behind  the  curtain.
This  time  it  issued  about  18  inches  in  front  of  the  curtain  and
stayed  out  about  one  second  and  then  disappeared.
B.  I  also  distinctly  saw  the  object,  as  it  was  quite  close  to  me.
F.  I  saw  it  this  time  because  it  came  round  with  a  swing.  As
far  as  I  could  see  it  looked  to  me  like  a  bunch  of  white  muslin,
and  it  seemed  to  bring  the  curtain  with  it  as  it  moved  towards
me.

[I  only  got  a  very  fleeting  glimpse  of  this  object,  but  I  confess
that  it  had  a  most  suspicious  appearance.  It  was  just  as  though
the  medium  had  put  a  ball  of  white  muslin  out  from  the  further
side  of  the  right  curtain  with  her  right  hand,  brought  it  towards


474  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part
[Light  III.]

me,  making  the  curtain  move  with  it,  as  would  have  been  the
case  if  it  had  really  been  her  arm. F.,  Dec.  8/08.]

F.  My  control  on  this  side  was  quite  complete.
B.  My  control  also  quite  complete. I  confirm  with  my  hand
that  her  foot  is  really  on  mine.

11.36  p.m.  F.  The  medium  puts  her  head  behind  the  curtain
and  makes  a  sudden  dive,  to  the  right.

[At  the  same  time  I  thought  I  saw  a  white  object  appear  outside
the  curtain  to  the  extreme  right,  much  further  than  she  could
have  reached  with  her  head.  The  movement  was  similar  to  the
movement  she  makes  with  her  other  limbs  when  she  wishes  to
stimulate  the  production  of  the  phenomena. F.,  Dec.  8/08.]

F.  A light Hashed out about a  foot  behind  and above  the

medium's  head. It  was  of  a  brilliant  bluish-green  colour.

[It  was  a  steady  light  and  lasted  about  two  seconds. F.,  Dec.

8/08.]

M.  I  saw  it  also,  it  seemed  to  me  to  be  about  the  size  of  a  six-
penny piece,  like  the  eye  of  a  cat  in  the  dark,  so  strong  that  it
made  me  wink.

0.  and  B.  did  not  see  this  light.

11.37  p.m.  F.  Now  another  light  has  come  out,  this  time  on
the  medium's  lap.

F.  Her  left  hand  is  on  the  table  in  mine.

[/  asked  if  the  lights  might  be  shown  to  the  others,  who  had  not  yet
seen  them  owing  to  the.  position  of  the  curtain. F.,  Fee.  8/08.]

11.42  p.m.  Five  tilts  of  the  seance  table,  apparently  without
•contact,  ask  for  less  light.

F.  My  hand  on  her  lap  with  hers.

B.  My  hand  on  hers,  control  of  feet  also  the  same.

11.4-5  p.m.  Light  No.  4-  Sec  head  note;  this  light  is  if  anything
stronger  than  Light  III.


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  VII.


475


Light  IV.

B. Both  C.  and  I  saw  a  brilliant  light  inside  the  cabinet  about
2  J  feet  from  medium,  inside  the  right-hand  curtain.
[The  light  was  of  a  bluish-green  colour,  quite  bright,  and  about
three  feet  from  the  ground  behind  the  extreme  edge  of  the  right
curtain. B.,  Dec.  8/08.]

B.  Her  right  hand  was  on  my  left  hand,  but  she  had  lifted  her
foot  and  placed  it  on  the  bar  of  her  chair.  I  have  verified  this
fact  with  my  hand.

F.  Her  hand  in  mine  on  this  side  of  the  table,  and  her  left  foot
was  on  mine.

11.46  p.m.  F.  There  it  is  again  over  her  head.  She  kicked
with  her  leg.  It  is  a  different  kind  of  light  this  time,  because  it
seemed  to  crack.  It  was  not  a  bright  steady  light  as  before,  but  a
small  sparkling  light,  and  appeared  about  four  to  five  inches  above
her  head.

M.  I  also  saw  this  light  and  agree  with  F.'s  description.

B.  Sniffs  behind  the  curtain,  and  says,  "  There  are  no  indications  of
the  smell  of  phosphorus."

[I  smelt  no  phosphorus  either. F.,  Dec.  8/08.]

11.5 Jf.  p.m. Table  tilts  four  limes,  meaning  "talk."

B. Something  has  touched  my  jacket  from  behind  the  curtain.

[Medium  having  ashed  particularly  that  the  se'ancc  should  close
before  twelve  was  told  it  vxis  novj  time  to  stop.  She  refused  to  do
so,  however,  and  said  that  "  Some  one "  was  coming  for  B.  She
said  that  he  would  kiss  him. Dec.  8/08.]

B.  Something  pressed  through  the  curtains  against  my  face  and
made  a  sound.

F.  All  this  time  her  left  hand  is  in  mine  on  her  lap.  I  know  it
is  the  left  hand. Her  head  is  always  resting  on  mine.

B.  My  control  as  before  except  that  she  has  now  taken  her
right  foot  from  her  chair  and  is  now  pressing  my  left  foot  with  it.

11.58  p.m. B.  Something  has  touched  me  twice.

Medium  says  that  a  mem  is  coming  out  towards  B.


476


E.  Feileliwg,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.


[part


[Light  IV.]


[Here  medium  was  told  of  the  clay  winch  had  been  placed  inside  the
cabinet,  and  an  imprint  of  fingers  was  asked  for. She  felt  F.'s


the  best  of  my  belief,  had  any  opportunity  of  seeing  it. F.,  June


12  p.m.  B.  Something  pushes  the  curtain  towards  me  from  behind
the  curtain,  close  to  me,  and  it  makes  a  sound  similar  to  that
produced  by  the  clicking  of  the  nails.

B.  The  medium  heal  previously  said  that  this  person  teas  going  to
give  me  a  kiss.

12.1  a.m.  B.  The  thing  has  again  pressed  against  the  curtain
and  made  the  same  sound  as  before.

B.  The  control  the  same  as  before  of  both  hands  and  feet.  Her
right  hand  on  the  table  during  these  last  phenomena.  Her  right
foot  is  on  my  left  foot.

F.  Control  the  same.

[This  "  something,"  although  not  stated  in  the  notes,  touched  my
face  twice  while  making  the  clicking  sound. B.,  Dec.  8/08.]

12.2  a.m.  F.  While  the  medium  was  resting  her  head  on  my
shoulder,  violent  movements  of  the  curtain  took  place  from  inside
the  cabinet.

12.J/,  a.m.  F.  She  has  now  put  my  hand  across  her  two  knees  so
as  to  show  that  it  was  not  her  foot  that  did  it.

12.5  a.m.  F.  asks  for  the  thing  that  kissed  B.  to  show  itself  out-
side the  cabinet ; medium  says  it  will.

12.5 \  a.m. F. I  saw  a  thing  exactly  like  the  head  of  a  nine-
pin  or  a  small  wooden  head. It  stayed  out  about  3  seconds.
[See  my  extended  note  below. F.,  Dec.  8/08.']
B. I  saw  this  object  come  out  too.

[It  came  from  the  furthest  side  of  the  right  curtain,  past  B.'s
head,  rather  slowly,  towards  F.,  above  the  level  of  our  heads,
and  then  went  back. B.  and  F.,  Dec.  8/08.]


25/09.]


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  VII.


477


[Light  IV.]

F.  It  is  certainly  not  the  medium's  left  hand,  which  is  motionless
on  this  corner  of  the  table.

B.  And  it  is  certainly  not  the  right  hand,  because  I  had  control
of  it  all  the  time. My  foot  control  is  the  same.

12.9  a.m. B. I  saw  a  hand  distinctly  come  out  of  the  [extreme
right  of  the]  curtain ;  it  grasped  my  left  shoulder  and  I  felt  its
thumb  and  four  fingers. My  control  is  the  same  as  before.
[See  my  expanded  note  below. B.,  Dec.  8/08.]
C. I  saw  the  white  hand  which  seemed  to  me  to  remain  out
about  3  seconds.

F.  That  was  the  first  time  that  a  visible  hand  has  caught  hold  vf
anyone  outside  the  curtain.

F.  I  was  complaining  to  the  medium  that  the  head  which  came
out  was  not  large  enough  to  be  a  man's  head.  She  said  that
she  had  not  seen  it.  While  we  were  talking  it  came  out  again.
This  time  it  appeared  to  me  to  be  larger  and  it  waggled  about
for  quite  a  time  between  B.  and  me.

F.  I  had  her  left  hand  absolutely  in  my  left  hand  and  her  left
foot  on  my  right  foot  and  my  right  hand  across  both  knees.
B.  My  control  is  the  same  as  before.

12.19  a.m.  F.  asks  medium  to  get  "  John"  to  play  the  toy  piano.
She  says,  "We  will  try."  Medium  says  to  B.,  "Flay  the  'piano
with  your  fingers  [on  the  table]."  B.  imitates  the  playing  of  a
piano,  but  nothing  happens  and  medium  says,  "  Non  lo  fa  "  ("  He
wont  do  it ").

12.25  a.m. Movements  of  the  table.

F.  I  have  my  right  leg  between  her  leg  and  the  table  and  it  is
curled  round  the  table  leg.  Her  left  arm  was  motionless  across  my
shoulder,  my  right  hand  is  on  her  two  knees  and  her  left  foot  on
my  foot.

B.  She  holds  my  left  hand  with  her  right  hand.  She  squeezes
my  hand  while  this  levitation  takes  place.  My  hand  was  also  on
her  knee,  in  her  hand. Her  right  foot  on  my  left  foot.


478  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggcdly,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part
[Light  IV.]

12.27  a.m. A  similar  movement  has  again  happened.

F.  Her  left  hand  was  off  the  table.  My  right  hand  was  this  time
pinched  by  her  right  hand  on  her  lap.

B.  My  control  the  same  as  before,  except  that  she  is  squeezing
both  our  hands.

[Her  right  hand  held  both  B.'s  and  mine,  her  left  hand  was
visible  to  me,  but  free,  some  distance  above  my  corner  of  the  table.
F.,  Dec.  8/08.]

12.30  a.m. Medium  stands  up,  as  also  F.  and  B.

Lights  Nos.  3,  '2,  and  1  successively,  and  stance  is  terminated.

Note  by  E.  Feilding.

It  is  difficult  to  say  precisely  why,  but  last  night's  seance  marks
a  certain  set-back  in  the  process  of  my  mental  absorption  of  these
phenomena.  It  is  not  that  we  have  the  impression  that  our
observation  left  any  loop-hole  for  fraud  on  the  part  of  Eusapia,  for  I
have  never  been  more  absolutely  certain  of  the  efficiency  of  our
control.  More  than  this,  owing  to  the  disposition  of  the  silk
handkerchief  which  hung  about  and  below  the  red  lamp,  producing
a  larger  radiant  surface,  the  light  was  somewhat  better  than  at  the
preceding  seance;  while  the  manifestations  themselves  appeared  with  an
unhurried  deliberacy  which  admitted  of  far  more  detailed  observation.
The  set-back  is  probably  due  to  the  preposterous  character  of  the  mani-
festations themselves.  For  example,  Eusapia  had  announced  that  some-
body was  going  to  kiss  B.  through  the  curtain.  Presently,  the  curtain
did  approach  his  face,  making  a  clicking  sound,  a  thoroughly  bad
imitation  of  a  kiss,  such  as  would  be  made  by  clicking  the  thumb
nail  against  that  of  the  middle  finger.  This  happened  two  or  three
times,  and  I  asked  if  it  were  "John."  "No,"  said  Eusapia,  "it  is
un'  altra  persona."  I  then  tried,  with  sweet  words,  to  lure  this
"  altra  persona"  to  show  his  face  outside  the  curtain.  "He  will
do  so,"  said  Eusapia,  and  he  did.  From  the  extreme  right  of  the
curtain  there  appeared  a  thing  like  a  knobbed  nine-pin,  or  like  an
arm  with  a  closed  fist,  wrapped  up  in  something  black.  It  came
slowly  towards  me  (who  was  sitting  on  Eusapia's  left)  as  though
pivoted  on  her  right  shoulder,  made  a  kind  of  grotesque  reverence,
about  a  foot  above  the  level  of  my  head  and  retired  with  deliberation,


LIX.]


Sittings  uith  Eusapia:  Seance  VII.


479


having  been  visible  at  least  three  seconds.  I  asked  Eusapia  who  it
was.  She  said  she  did  not  know  the  name,  but  that  it  was  a  man,
clean  shaved.  I  complained  that  it  didn't  look  in  the  least  like  a
man,  that  its  head  was  too  small.  As  an  acquaintance  it  would
be,  in  fact,  preposterous,  a  face  fit  only  for  a  cocoanut  shy.  It
immediately  reappeared,  this  time  larger,  but  still  an  outrage  on
any  kind  of  humanity.  I  am  absolutely  certain  of  the  control  of  the
hand  held  by  me.  B.  is  equally  certain  of  the  medium's  right  hand,
which,  if  the  head  were  any  arm  of  hers,  could  alone  have  been
in  play.  What  then  was  this  ridiculous  "altra  persona?"  B.  has
a  provisional  theory. For  myself  I  can  suggest  none.

The  incident  of  the  bell  was  remarkable.  By  measurement
made  subsequently,  the  bell  was  situated  behind  and  slightly
to  the  right  of  the  medium,  about  2  feet  from  her  right  shoulder.
It  announced  itself  by  ringing  for  a  moment  in  the  cabinet ;  it
then  came  out,  appeared  over  the  medium's  head,  ringing  as
it  came,  and  remained  dangling  over  her  left  ear  within  one
foot  of  my  face.  "It's  tied  on,"  she  said.  I  felt  with  my
left  hand,  and  found  that  something,  which,  in  the  dim  light
seemed  like  a  strand  of  muslin,  but  which  I  afterwards  ascer-
tained was  probably  a  loose  piece  of  velvet  ribbon  she  wore  in  her
hair,  was  passed  through  the  handle  of  the  bell  and  attached  it  to
her  hair.  I  watched  the  bell  for  a  moment  or  two,  and  was  just
about  to  untie  and  detach  it,  when  I  saw  a  naturahlooking  hand
appear  quietly  from  behind  her  neck,  undo  the  bell,  ring  it  over
her  head  and  throw  it  on  the  table  in  front  of  her.  While  the
hand  was  detaching  the  bell,  I  made  no  doubt  but  that  the  medium
had  found  it  uncomfortable,  and  had  freed  her  right  hand  to  take
it  away.  When,  however,  it  was  rung  and  thrown  upon  the  table,
it  struck  me  as  a  curious  action  for  the  medium  to  do  herself,
and  I  asked  B.  whether  he  still  held  her  right  hand.  He  said
he  had  done  so  all  the  time.  That  he  was  mistakenly  holding  her
left  hand  was  impossible,  as  this  was  on  my  corner  of  the  table,  in  my
right  and  perfectly  visible.  It  must  be  noted  that  the  light  was
sufficiently  good  for  the  stenographer,  seated  at  the  further  side  of
a  separate  table,  and  distant  from  the  medium  about  six  feet  (by
subsequent  measurement),  to  see  the  hand  while  the  bell  was  being
detached.

Of  the  lights  sufficient  description  has  been  made  in  the  report.
The  first  one,  visible  to  me  and  to  the  stenographer,  about  a  foot
or  eighteen  inches  above  Eusapia's  head,  and  within  the  curtains,


480  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


as  I  immediately  ascertained  with  my  left  hand,  had  the  appearance
of  a  brilliant  self-luminous  aquamarine ;  of  the  second,  on  her  lap,
I  only  caught  a  glimpse ;  the  fourth,  visible  to  the  stenographer
and  myself,  was  of  a  wholly  different  character  from  the  first,  and
resembled  the  sparks  given  off  between  the  poles  of  a  battery.  That
the  manufacture  of  these  luminosities  is  subject  to  volition  seems
shown  by  the  readiness  with  whicli  a  light  appeared,  at  request,  in  a
different  place,  so  as  to  be  visible  to  the  other  members  of  the
circle.

It  will  be  gathered  from  the  notes  that,  notwithstanding  the
careful  description  of  the  control,  and  our  precautions  in  ascertaining
that  we  each  held  separate  hands,  and  real  hands,  were  unremitting —
several  of  the  phenomena  wore  a  most  suspicious  appearance.  I
refer  especially  to  the  Aunt  Sally  kind  of  head,  to  the  imitation
kiss  bestowed  upon  B.,  and  to  the  white  muslin  ball  and  the  movement
of  the  curtain  accompanying  its  movement  (though  the  glance  I
had  of  this  was  so  fleeting  that  I  cannot  be  quite  sure  of  my
observation).  Eusapia  took  a  long  time  coming  to  herself  when
the  light  was  turned  up,  though  she  had  never,  during  this  seance,
appeared  to  be  in  as  deep  a  trance  as  during  the  previous  one.  As
we  walked  downstairs  she  said  that  she  did  not  feel  nearly  so  tired,
but  that  her  mind  was  very  confused  and  she  feared  that  the
seance  had  not  been  a  good  one.  Notwithstanding  the  fact  that
the  programme  of  phenomena  had  been  added  to  by  the  appearance
of  hands  outside  the  curtains  which  did  things,  and  of  so-called
heads  which  offered  themselves  for  more  detailed  observation,  it
cannot  be  said  that  the  impression  left  by  this  seance  was  nearly
so  strong  as  that  we  received  from  the  6th,  though  we  are  as  far
away  as  ever  from  finding  the  slightest  ground  for  imputing  fraud
to  Eusapia.  The  singular  lights,  of  two  different  kinds,  and  appearing
under  conditions  which  seem  to  preclude  their  having  been  produced
by  trickery,  were,  however,  of  very  great  interest.

E.  F.,  Dec.  8th,  1908.

Note  by  W.  W.  Baggally.

The  results  obtained  at  this  seance  tend  to  strengthen  my  growing
conviction  of  the  supernormal  nature  of  some  of  the  phenomena
produced  by  Eusapia.  Others,  however,  occurred  under  circumstances
which,  although  they  in  no  way  diminish  our  increasing  assurance  of
the  occasional  exhibition  of  a  supernormal  force,  suggested  an  element


LIX.]


Sittings  loith  Eusapia:  Seance  VII.


481


of  fraud,  since  they  were  not  what  Eusapia  asserted  them  to  be.
Thus  at  12.5J-  she  said  that  the  object  that  presented  itself  from
out  of  the  curtain  was  a  head ;  whereas  in  appearance  it  more
resembled  an  arm  with  a  closed  fist,  covered  by  some  black  material.
Again,  at  12  she  remarked  that  the  sounds  like  the  clicking  together
of  a  thumb  and  finger  heard  by  me  when  my  cheek  was  touched
from  behind  the  curtain,  were  kisses.  The  reason  why  we  did  not
conclude  that  these  particular  phenomena  were  fraudulent  was  that
we  were  quite  sure  that  the  control  of  the  hands  and  feet  of
Eusapia  was  perfect  at  the  time.  I  will  return  to  these  special
manifestations  later  on.

As  regards  the  nature  of  my  own  personal  control,  it  will  not  be
necessary  to  describe  it  in  detail,  as  I  have  already  done  so  in  my
notes  of  the  seances  of  the  2nd  and  4th  December.  I  will  only  say
that  I  took  the  same  precautions  to  assure  myself  that  it  was  really
Eusapia's  right  hand  and  right  foot  that  I  had  under  my  charge,
and  that  I  did  not  relax  my  vigilance  for  a  moment,  but  concen-
trated my  attention,  at  the  critical  moment  when  each  phenomena
occurred,  more  on  the  control  than  on  the  manifestation.

It  should  be  noted  that  equally  remarkable  results  were  obtained

when  F.  and  C.  controlled  as  when  F.  and  I,  or  C.  and  I  did  so.

I  attach  great  importance  to  the  phenomenon  that  occurred  at  the

very  beginning  of  the  seance,  viz.  the  "  gonfiamento "  or  swelling

out  of  Eusapia's  dress  which  took  place  before  and  after  F.  had

placed  the  little  stool  on  the  floor  on  the  left  side  of  the  medium

in  order  to  try  and  repeat  the  experiment  which  he  had  witnessed

with  the  late M.  Curie  and  his  colleagues  of  the  Institut  Gdndral

Psi/chologique  in  Paris. If  the  stringent  conditions  under  which  these

movements  of  Eusapia's  dress  took  place  are  considered,  it  will  be

seen  that  this  phenomenon,  although  not  of  a  startling  character,

was  of  great  evidential  value. She  had  hardly  sat  down  when  she

called  our  attention  to  the  movement  of  her  dress. The  light  had

not  been lowered  : it  was  the  strongest  that we  used  at  these

seances — not  shaded. By  it  I  could  read  small  print  and  see  every

object  in  the  room  clearly. The  medium's  hands  rested  quietly  on

the  table  in  full  view  of  us  all,  and  her  feet  were  under  the  strictest

control  of  F.  and  C. We  all  watched  the  peculiar  movement.  The

force  under  the  dress  made  an  evidently  intelligent  effort  to  reach

the  stool. The  bulge  in  the  garment  was  not  a  pointed  one,  but

more  like  what  a  breeze  of  wind  would  produce. The  dress  did  not,

however,  swell  out  en  masse ;  it  only  did  so  at  a  certain  part,  as  if  a

2  a


482


E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Bag  gaily,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


small  balloon  under  the  garment  were  pushing  it  towards  the  stool.
F.  felt  right  down  the  dress  at  the  time  of  the  bulging  and  did
not  feel  any  hard  object  under  it.  Eusapia  laughingly  asked  us  to
find  "  la  macchina,"  and  thereupon  lifted  her  dress  and  petticoats.  No
apparatus,  such  as  a  rod,  which  the  late  Dr.  Hodgson  suggested  could
have  been  employed  by  her,  or  an  india  rubber  tube,  through  which
a  gust  of  wind  could  have  been  blown,  or  anything  else,  was  found.
After  Eusapia  had  lowered  her  dress,  the  movement  recommenced.
After  the  swelling  occurred  the  lower  edge  of  the  dress  touching
the  floor  slid  towards  the  stool  in  a  peculiar  manner.  This  lower
edge  repeatedly  advanced  and  retired  slowly ;  at  each  successive
advance  gradually  diminishing  the  distance  between  it  and  the  stool.
I  compared  this  sliding  motion  in  my  mind,  at  the  time,  to  the
movement  of  a  protuberance  from  the  body  of  a  unicellular  organism.
F.  felt  with  his  hand  several  times  between  the  dress  and  the  stool
and  found  no  attachment.  Thus,  the  conditions  of  this  phenomenon
were  :

(1)  It  was  carried  out  in  good  light.

(2)  It  was  seen  by  all  members  of  the  Committee  at  the  same

time.  •

(3)  No  hard  object  was  felt  causing  the  bulge.

(4)  No  attachment  was  found  between  the  dress  and  the  stool.

(5)  No  mechanism  was  discovered  under  the  dress.

(6)  The  hands  of  Eusapia  were  in  full  view  resting  on  the

table.

(7)  The  feet  were  under  absolute  control.

The  thumps  on  the  table,  which  took  place  at  11.1  p.m.,
following  the  nods  of  Eusapia's  head,  were  very  remarkable.  Her
hands,  at  the  time,  were  on  her  right  lap,  under  control,  and  her
feet  under  control  also.  I  fail  to  see  how,  under  the  prevailing
conditions,  she  could  possibly  have  produced  a  very  loud  sound,  as
of  a  blow  struck  with  a  mallet,  and  the  thuds  which  followed.

The  light  that  I  saw  at  11.45  p.m.  was  a  bright  one  of  a
bluish-green  colour,  and  of  an  intensity  greater  than  that  produced
by  the  head  of  a  match  when  rubbed  between  the  fingers,  or  by
phosphorised  oil.  It  was  a  steady  light.  Neither  F.  nor  myself
perceived  any  indications  of  the  smell  of  phosphorus.

I  had  felt  the  touch  and  grasp  of  a  hand  at  the  previous  seances.
For  the  first  time,  at  this  one,  I  clearly  saw  a  hand.  It  appeared
from  behind  the  right-hand  curtain  at  about  1\  feet  from  the  floor,


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  VII.


483


advanced  towards  my  right  shoulder  and  gave  it  a  strong  grip,
after  which  it  disappeared  behind  the  curtain.  The  hand  appeared
to  be  a  man's  hand  of  a  natural  colour,  larger  than  Eusapia's,  which
I  subsequently  examined.  I  cannot,  however,  be  sure  of  the  size
of  the  hand,  as  it  is  difficult  to  judge  of  the  size  of  objects  in  a
weak  light.

I  will  now  return  to  the  suspicious  phenomena.  First,  before
the  black  object  appeared,  viz.,  at  12.5|  a.m.,  the  medium  had
said  that  a  head  was  about  to  appear.  When  the  object  came
out  of  the  cabinet,  it  looked  more  like  an  arm  covered  with
black  material,  (possibly  part  of  the  cabinet  curtain  wound  round
it),  than  a  head.  This  gave  rise,  in  my  mind,  to  the  suspicion
that  it  might  have  been  the  arm  of  the  medium  covered  in  this
manner,  but  I  explain  below  the  difficulties  of  this  supposition.
F.  made  the  remark  that  the  apparition  was  not  large  enough  to
be  a  head,  whereupon  it  came  out  again,  but  was  now  of  an
enlarged  size. Both  F.  and  myself  noticed  the  increase  in  its  bulk.

Again,  when  Eusapia  had  said  that  some  one  was  coming  for
me  who  would  kiss  me,  I  certainly,  immediately  after  she  had
made  this  remark,  felt  some  hard  object  pressing  through  the  curtain
against  my  cheek,  but  it  did  not  feel  like  a  face.  It  felt  like  a
closed  hand,  and  the  sound  that  was  emitted  by  it  did  not  resemble
that  of  a  kiss,  but  was  more  like  the  clicking  of  the  nails  of  a
thumb  and  of  a  finger.  The  difference  in  the  sound  was  noticed
by  F.,  C,  and  myself.  Doubtless  the  above  phenomena  have  an
element  of  a  suspicious  nature  attached  to  them,  but  in  trying
to  explain  them  by  normal  means  I  have  to  ask  myself  how,
under  the  kind  of  control  described  in  the  Report,  when  exchange
of  hands  could  not  take  place  owing  to  the  medium's  hands
being  kept  too  far  apart,  and  when  the  successive  phenomena
would  require  a  series  of  releases  and  replacements  of  her  hands
which  could  not  fail  to  be  detected,  it  was  possible  for  Eusapia
to  produce  fraudulently  the  appearance  of  a  black  arm  first  of
one  size  and  then  of  another,  and  also,  at  the  same  seance,
the  appearance  of  a  white  arm,  while  she  is  dressed  in  a  tight
fitting  black  dress  with  tightly  fastened  sleeves  down  to  her  wrists.
I  also  ask  myself  how  it  was  possible  for  her,  under  the  strict
control  above  indicated,  to  introduce  her  hand,  undetected,  behind
the  curtain  and  produce  the  imitation  of  a  sound  of  a  kiss  with
her  fingers.  I  cannot,  in  fact,  see  any  way  of  accounting  for
these  incidents  by  normal  means. ^ g jjec 9^  1908


484 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part

Remarks  on  Seance  VIII.
December  10th,  1908.

To  this  seance  four  friends  of  F.'s  were  invited.  These  were  :
Mr.  Ryan,  a  gentleman  with  a  medical  training  whom  F.  judged  and
who  proved  to  be  a  particularly  painstaking  and  shrewd  observer,
Lord  Sudeley  and  two  American  ladies,  Signora  X.  and  Miss  Y.,
daughters  of  an  eminent  literary  man.  These  ladies  were  asked
to  examine  the  medium  prior  to  the  seance  in  a  more  com-
plete way  than  had  previously  been  attempted.  On  her
arrival  upstairs  Eusapia  was  invited  by  them  to  submit  to
an  examination  in  their  room,  to  which  she  was  first  taken.
Their  detailed  report  of  this  examination  will  be  found
appended  to  the  shorthand  report.  On  its  conclusion,  nothing
of  a  suspicious  character  having  been  found,  Eusapia  was
immediately  brought  into  the  seance  room.  The  small  table
within  the  cabinet  was  tied  down  as  during  the  previous
seance,  and  the  disposition  of  the  objects  within  the  cabinet
was  the  same.  The  medium's  feet  were  tied  to  the  rungs
of  the  controllers'  chairs,  but  in  such  a  way  only  as  to
prevent  her  reaching  with  them  behind  her  own  chair.

The  seance  began  at  9.25,  and  after  about  20  minutes
various  minor  phenomena,  movements  and  levitations  of  the
seance  table,  began.  More  than  an  hour,  however,  elapsed
before  the  manifestations  became  at  all  powerful,  but  once
they  did  start,  they  followed  one  another  with  extreme  rapidity,
making  adequate  description  and  note-taking  extremely  difficult.
At  first  they  were  of  the  usual  character,  movements  of  the
table,  sometimes  without  any  apparent  contact  by  the  medium,
movements  of  the  curtain,  often  of  great  violence,  touches  on  |
the  controllers  to  either  side,  and  loud  noises  within  the
curtain.

Just  after  11.55  the  first  of  a  series  of  transportations  of
objects  which  had  been  placed  on  the  small  table  behind  the
curtain  took  place.  R.  was  controlling  to  the  medium's  left,
and  F.  to  her  right.  A  violent  movement  of  the  left  curtain
on  R.'s  side  occurred,  ending  in  its  being  thrown  over  to
the  further  end  of  the  seance  table,  and  the  trumpet  came  out
on  to  R.'s  shoulder  and  slid  down  his  right  arm  ;  the  medium's


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  VIII.


485


two  hands  being  separately  held  at  a  distance  from  one
another,  while  the  light  (No.  Ill,)  was  sufficient  to  enable
her  head  to  be  continuously  visible.  A  few  minutes  after-
wards, the  toy  piano  followed  the  trumpet,  striking  E.  gently
on  the  head  and  falling  violently  to  the  ground ;  and  again
at  a  later  period,  about  12.23,  the  board  carrying  a  lump
of  wet  clay  which  had  originally  been  placed  on  the  small
table  in  the  cabinet,  directly  behind  the  medium,  emerged
from  the  extreme  left  of  the  curtain,  behind  R.'s  right  shoulder,
landed  upon  his  shoulder,  slid  slowly  down  his  right  arm  to
the  table  on  which  the  medium  was  holding  his  right  hand,
crossed  the  table,  a  distance  of  about  10  to  12  inches,  and
stopped  on  the  top  of  F.'s  right  hand,  under  which  was  the
right  hand  of  the  medium.  '  Of  the  three  transportations  this
was  the  most  interesting,  owing  to  the  size  of  the  object
lifted  (the  board  was  about  12  ins.  x  8  ins.,  and  the  lump
of  clay  standing  on  it  about  the  size  of  an  ordinary  Genoa
cake  while  the  total  weight  was  1  k.  700  gr.  =  3-6  lbs.),  and
the  deliberacy  of  its  movement,  as  well  as  to  the  fact  that
its  progress  was  followed  by  at  least  one  observer,  C,  from
the  moment  that  it  first  appeared  outside  the  curtain.  C,
who  was  standing  behind  F.'s  chair  to  the  medium's  right,
first  saw  the  clay  at  the  side  of  the  curtain  near  the  window,
and  reports  (see  his  note  attached  to  the  shorthand  report)
that  he  saw  a  white  opaque  object  about  6  ins.  x  3  ins.
apparently  carrying  it.  The  degree  of  light  can  be  judged  by
the  distance  (6  to  8  ft.)  from  which  he  was  able  to  see  the
clay  at  its  first  appearance,  a  degree  of  light  which  makes  it
inconceivable  that  it  could  have  been  carried  by  either  of  the
medium's  hands,  which  were  resting,  perfectly  visible,  on  the
table.

At  12.46  a.m.  the  flageolet  came  out,  unseen  however,  rapped
three  times  on  F.'s  head,  and  fell  on  his  shoulder,  at  a  time
when  F.  was  holding  the  medium's  right  hand  close  to  his
face,  and  R.  reported  that  he  had  thorough  control  of  her  left ;
and  very  shortly  afterwards  the  bell  began  ringing  inside  the
curtain  and  was  deposited  on  the  top  of  the  medium's  head
from  between  the  parting  of  the  curtains,  F.  seeing  it  arrive
there.  The  only  distinctly  new  phenomenon  that  happened  at
this  seance  was  one  which  took  place  at  about  1.7  a.m.  It


486 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


has  already  been  stated  that  the  medium's  feet  had  been  tied
by  cords  attached  to  the  rungs  of  the  controllers'  chairs.  Just
after  1.5  a.m.  (though  not  noted  at  the  time)  the  medium,
evidently  foreseeing  the  phenomenon  (whether  fraudulently
accomplished  or  not),  asked  F.  to  verify  the  fastenings  of  her
left  foot.  He  stooped  under  the  table  and  verified  the  fastenings
of  both  feet  and  then  resumed  his  place,  with  his  hand  on
Eusapia's  head,  supporting  it,  as  she  said  she  was  tired,  and
seemed  to  be  falling  into  a  deeper  state  of  trance.  About
2  minutes  afterwards,  a  hand  appeared  between  the  parting  of
the  curtains  over  the  medium's  head  and  dropped  upon  it,
close  to  F.'s  hand,  a  coil  of  rope.  This  proved  to  be  the
end  of  the  cord  which  B.  had  originally  fastened  with  four
tightly  drawn  reef-knots  round  the  medium's  left  ankle,  and
which  F.  thought  he  had  verified  just  previously.  See  the
shorthand  report  and  F.'s  note  attached.

In  addition  to  these  transportations  of  objects,  many  other
interesting  phenomena  took  place  in  the  course  of  the  seance.
See  especially  the  appearance  of  a  large  white  object  at
12.14  a.m.,  seen  from  opposite  by  F.  and  C,  and  sideways
by  E.,  thus  probably  accounting  for  the  varying  descriptions
given  of  it  by  the  different  observers.  Further,  many  touches
and  grasps  of  hands,  some  of  them  (e.g.  those  on  C.  occurring
at  about  12.47  a.m.  and  1  a.m.)  at  a  distance  of  about  3  feet
from  the  curtain,  and  about  the  same  from  the  medium  in
conditions  of  light  and  control  which  made  it  inconceivable
that  she  could  have  produced  them  fraudulently.

Shorthand  Report  of  Seance  VIII.

December  10///,  1908.

Present:  F.,  B.,  C,  Ryan,  Lord  Sudeley,  Signora  X.,  Miss  Y.,
and  M.,  stenographer.

Lights  as  in  Stance  VII.

Mediums  legs  tied  to  the  legs  of  the  controllers'  chairs,  leaving
feet  play. [The  measurement  is  omitted  in  the  shorthand  report.
The  medium's  feet  were  not  tied  closely  to  the  chairs,  but  so  as
to  prevent  her  reaching  with  them  behind  her  own  chair.  F.,
May  18/09.]


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  VIII.


487


[Lights  as  in  Seance  VII. Small  table  in  cabinet  tied  clown,  and
disposition  of  objects  upon  it  as  before. F.,  May,  19/09.]
9.c2o  p.m. Seance  begem.


Light  No.  I.  M

9.42  p.m. Non-evidential  tilts  begin.

9.49  p.m. Eaps  in  table  follow  gestures  by  medium,  non-evidential.

Medium  asks  F.  to  rap  on  table.  He  does  so,  and  a  very  poor
imitation  of  the  rhythms  follow,  non-evidential,  owing  to  her
right  hand  being  on  the  table.

10.6  p.m. Medium  asks  for  less  light. Light  II.


10.15  p.m.  F.  The  table  tilts  towards  medium,  and  then  a
complete  levitation  of  it.

F.  Her  hands  on  the  table,  holding  and  above  C.'s  and  my
hands. Her  left  foot  on  mine.

C.  Her  right  foot  was  just  touching  my  left  foot.  My  left  knee
pressing  against  her  right  knee.

10.18  p.m.  Two  complete  levitations  of  the  table  closely  follow-
ing one  upon  the  other.

F.  She  had  asked  all  except  the  controllers  to  take  their  hands
off  the  table,  and  they  had  accordingly  sat  back.  My  right  hand
across  both  her  knees.  Her  left  foot  undoubtedly  on  mine.  Both
her  hands  on  the  table  and  visible.


Lord  s


Light  II.


488


E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


[Light  II.]

C.  Her  right  foot  pressing  against  my  left  foot.  My  left  knee
pressing  against  her  right  knee.  I  passed  my  hand  between  her
body  and  the  table  several  times  [showing  that  there  was  no  hook
or  attachment. C,  Dec.  11/08.]

10.21  p.m. Further  non-evidential  movements.
10.24  p.m. F.  The  table  was  merely  balancing.

F.  The  medium  raised  both  C.'s  and  my  hands  off  the  table,  and
then  the  table  rocked  to  and  fro  [on  the  two  legs  to  medium's
right. F.,  Dec.  11/08]  four  or  five  times.

F.  Her  hands  are  not  touching  the  table.  Her  foot  is  on  my
foot,  and  there  is  a  clear  space  all  the  way  down  this  table  leg.

C.  F.  and  I  both  had  our  hands  on  the  medium's  knees  while
the  rocking  was  going  on.

10.81  p.m. F. The  medium  looks  as  if  she  is  getting  sleepy.

F.  After  two  or  three  minutes  of  complete  silence,  she  held  my
hand down towards  the  bottom  of  the  curtain,  and  something
black  flashed  out  near  me. [This  was  very  dimly  seen ;  I  do
not  know  what  it  was. F.,  Dec.  11/08.]
B. I  saw  that.

F.  Her  foot  on  my  toe.

10.34-  P-m-  F.  She  asks  me  to  hold  my  hand  out  towards  the  curtain,
and  she  vmnts  the  chain  made.  She  asks  whether  she  can  touch
the  curtain;  does  so,  and,  then  puts  her  hand  back  to  the  table.
I  can  see  my  hand,  and  am  moving  it  between  her  and  the  curtain
[shotoing  that  when  she  touched  the  curtain  she  made  no  attach-
ment. F.  Dec.  11/08].  She  holds  her  hand  towards  the  curtain
in  front  of  me.

10.36  p.m.  F.  Still  noticing  happens,  and  the  medium  turns  back
to  the  table.

10.38  p.m. F. She  holds  my  hand  and  squeezes  it  several  times.

10.4-0  p.m.  Medium  asks  whether  she  can  touch  the  curtain  to  the
right  of  her ;  she  does  so,  and  puts  her  hand  back  into  C.'s.

10.4-3  p.m.  F.  C.  and  I  close  the  curtains,  vjhich  had  become
rather  widely  separated  [the  back  of  her  chair  having  receded  into


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  VIII.


489


[Light  II.]


the  cabinet.  F.  Dec.  11/08].  Almost  immediately  afterwards  she
pulled  the  left  curtain  out  again.

10.44  p.m.  F.  She  holds  out  her  left  hand  again  towards  the
curtain,  and  I  think  I  can  see  the  curtain  move  [very  slightly.
F.,  Dec.  11/08].

10.46  p.m.  F.  She  held  my  hand  out  towards  the  curtain,  and
the  curtain  came  out.

lO.lf.7  p.m.  Medium  says  that  she  cannot  make  out  why  the  pheno-
mena delay  so.

10.50  p.m.  F.  Medium  says  suddenly  "Fa  lo  venire"  ("make  it
come  out  ")  [and  I  held  my  hand  towards  the  curtain.  F.,
Dec.  11/08],  and  immediately  the  curtain  comes  out  almost  as
far  as  my  elbow,  quite  two  feet.

F.  Her  left  hand  being  motionless  on  mine  on  the  table.  Her
left  foot  on  mine  under  the  table.

10.53  p.m. R.  and  C.  change  places,  at  mediums  request.


10.5 If.  p.m. F.  and  R.  verify  tying  of  the  feet.
11.0  p.m. F. Movements  of  the  curtain.

F.  My  hand being held by hers about six inches from  it.
Hands  being  absolutely  visible.

11.0  p.m.  Medium  says  to  F.  "  Prendilo "  ("take  it"),  pointing
to  window  curtain.  F.  touches  it,  and  a  movement  at  the  extreme
left  of  the  curtain  near  the  window,  about  three  feet  from  ground,
follows.

F.  Her  left  hand  on  the  table.


Lord  s


490  E.  Feikling,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part
[Light  II.]

11.1  p.m.  F.  Another  very  small  movement  at  the  extreme
side  of  the  curtain  towards  the  window.

F.  Her  hand  holding  mine  above  the  table.

R.  I  had  her  right  hand  in  my  right  hand. My  left  hand  being
on  her  left  thi<rh.

11.3  p.m.  Tabic  tilts  five  times  for  less  light.  Medium  will  not
allow  it.

11 A  p.m.  Five  more  tilts  of  the  table,  without  contact,  on
one  leg,  persist  in  asking  for  less  light.

Medium  still  refuses.

F. Five  more  tilts,  whereupon  light  changed  to  3.
Light  III.

11.5  p.m. F. Big  movements  of  the  curtain  on  my  side.

F.  Her  left  hand  in  mine  on  the  corner  of  the  table. Left  foot
on  mine.

B. I  saw  the  movement  of  the  curtain.

R.  Medium's  right  foot  pressing  against  mine. Her  hand  grasp-
ing mine  firmly  on  her  lap. My  left  hand  resting  on  her  thigh.

11.6  p.m. F. Another  movement  of  the  curtain.

F.  Her  hand  and  mine  beins;  as  before  on  the  corner  of  the
table.

R.  Medium  grips  my  hand  this  side.

11.8  p.m.  F.  Something  touched  me  then,  not  in  the  place
where  she  had  touched  me,  but  just  above  my  right  hip,  near  the
back  of  my  chair.

[Medium,  had  leant  over  and  touched  me  on  the  side.  Immediately
after  she  had  removed  her  hand,  something  else  touched  me.  F.,
Dec.  11 /OS.]

11.10  p.m.  F.  Medium  has  been  holding  my  hand  towards  the
curtain  and  squeezing  it  several  times ;  sometimes  there  are
movements  of  the  curtain  [following  this.  F.,  Dec.  11/08],  but
generally  not.

[Medium  yawned ;  I  rcmccrked  that  that  was  a  good  sign,  and  all
leaned  forward  attentively. F.,  Dec.  11  /OS.]


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Stance  VIII.


491


[Light  III.]

11.15  p.m.  F.  The  right  curtain  is  suddenly  and  violently
thrown  right  over  as  far  as  the  other  end  of  the  table.

F.  My  right  hand  is  in  her  lap  in  her  left  hand.

E.  Her  right  hand  completely  in  my  left; I  hold  her  thumb
and  all  her  fingers. Her  right  foot  was  pressing  firmly  on  my  left.

F.  Her  right  hand  M'as  visible  to  me  all  the  time.

11.18  p.m.  F.  She  asks  me  to  put  my  right  hand  on  her  bach.
Her  left  hand  is  held  by  my  left  hanel.

11.19  p.m.  F.  She  wants  to  make  knocks,  and  she  holds  my
left  hand  right  across  her  body  towards  R  She  pinches  my
fingers,  and  synchronous  knocks  are  heard  on  the  door  behind  1!.

E.  Her  right  hand  completely  in  my  left; I  hold  her  thumb
and  all  her  fingers. Her  right  foot  pressing  firmly  on  my  left.

11.21  p.m.  F.  Medium  says  I  shall  shortly  be  touched  on  the
bach  of  my  hand.  My  hand  is  well  on  her  back.  I  have  got  her
left  foot  on  mine.

B. She  has  her  right  foot  firmly  on  mine.
[Nothing  happened. F.,  Dec.  11  /OS.]

11.36  p.m.  Medium  ctsks  F.  and  B.  to  change  places,  which  is  done.
[It  is  not  noted,  but  I  distinctly  remember  that  I  retained  hold  of
both  the  medium's  hands  while  B.  moved,  over  and  took  my  place,
and  that  he  controlled  them  until  1  had  taken  his. F.,  May  19/09.]


11.32  p.m.  F.  She  kicks  three  times  with  her  right  leg  on
mine,  and  the  table  tilts  three  times  away  from  her.

F.  My  left  hand  being  on  her  knee  and  her  right  hand  holding  it
at  the  time. I  am  sure  it  was  wholly  upon  my  hand.


Lord  s


492  E.  Feilcling,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part

[Light  III.]

R.  At  the  same  time  her  left  foot  was  firmly  pressed  on  my
right  foot.  My  right  hand  on  her  left  thigh.  My  left  hand  holding
her  left  hand  also  on  her  lap. I  am  sure  it  is  the  whole  of  her  hand.

11.38  p.m.  F.  I  am  touched  close  under  my  left  shoulder  while
I  am  stroking  the  medium's  forehead  with  my  right  hand.  I  was
touched  very  gently.

F.  Her  right  hand  holding  my  left  hand  on  her  lap.  Her  right
foot  was  firmly  on  my  left  foot.

R.  The  same  with  the  left  foot  on  my  right  foot.  I  am  holding
the  whole  of  her  left  hand  on  her  left  thigh.

11.42  p.m.  F.  The  table  tilts  up  and  down  for  about  20
seconds  on  the  two  legs  furthest  from  her.

F.  During  that  time  she  was  playing  about  with  her  fingers  on
my  right  hand  on  her  lap.  Her  right  foot  was  firmly  planted  on
my  left  foot,  and  her  knees  were  immovable.

R.  My  right  hand  was  firmly  grasped  by  her  left  hand ;  my
hand  between  hers  and  the  table,  I  can  feel  the  table  rising  away
from  me.  [She  kept  lifting  my  hand  up  in  movement  with  the
table,  so  that  I  could  just  feel  but  not  press  it.  R.,  Dec.  11/08.]
At  the  same  time  her  left  foot  pressing  on  my  right  foot.

11.J/.3  p.m.  General  conversation  about  a  supposed  light  which
proves  to  be  a  reflection.

F.  There  have  been  three  different  series  of  three  shakes  of  some-
thing in  the  cabinet.

F.  Her  right  hand  has  been  on  mine  on  the  table  near  my
corner  all  the  time.  Her  right  foot  is  still  fixed  totally  on  mine,
heel  and  toe.

R.  My  right  hand  was  holding  hers  on  the  corner  of  the  table,
firmly  grasping  mine.

R.  A  moment  ago  I  was  touched  under  the  ribs.

R.  Foot  control  well  marked.

R. I  am  touched  again,  strongly.

F.  And  she  makes  gestures  with  her  right  hand  well  over  the
table  at  the  same  time  as  R.  feels  the  touches,  her  right  foot
being  absolutely  fixed  on  mine.


lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  VIII.  493

[Light  III.]

11.52  p.m. Table  tilts  four  times,  meaning  talk.

F.  Noises  in  the  cabinet  which  sometimes  synchronise  with  thumps
on  my  hand,  which  is  lying  on  her  lap,  with  her  right  hand.
[She  made  a  long  series  of  rhythmical  thumps  on  my  hand  in
her  lap,  which  were  answered  by  knocks  in  the  cabinet,  as  if
made  by  an  electrical  connection,  which  occasionally  failed  to
act. F.,  Dec.  11/08.]

F. As  I  am  looking  at  the  curtain  I  see  something  push  it  out.
The  curtain  keeps  on  moving  for  a  long  time,  violently,  near  the
window  [i.e.  behind  R F.,  Dec.  11/08].

F.  Her  right  hand  is  continuously  in  mine,  her  head  is  perfectly
visible  and  motionless.

R.  Her  left  hand  in  mine  lying  pressed  on  the  table;  she  is
gripping  my  wrist. The  foot  control  well  marked.

F. The  curtain  has  again  moved  between  me  and  the  window.

F.  Control  as  before.
R.  Same  here.

11.55  p.m.  F.  The  curtain  moved  two  or  three  times  strongly,
then  suddenly  came  out  right  over  the  table  as  far  as  the  further
end,  as  though  thrown  out.

R.  The  trumpet  came  out  and  crept  along  from  my  ear  to  my
hand,  and  is  now  resting  on  my  right  arm.

F.  All  this  time  her  right  hand  is  in  mine  on  the  edge  of  the
table  near  me,  just  under  the  curtain.

R.  Her  left  hand  is  grasping  my  right  and  is  against  my  chair ;
foot  control  firmly  marked.

B.  I  have  my  right  hand  on  R.'s  chair  and  I  can  feel  the
vibration  of  several  raps.

F,  While  these  raps  were  being  made  she  made  gestures  towards
R.  with  her  right  hand  held  in  mine.  Her  head  was  quite  visible
all  the  time.

R.  The  trumpet  has  fallen  to  the  ground.

C.  A  square  white  patch  appears  just  above  the  medium's  head.

F.  Her  right  hand  continuously  in  mine  on  the  table.
R.  Her  left  hand  stroking  the  back  of  my  hand.


494  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington,  [part
[Light  ill.]

11.59  p.m.  F.  She  holds  my  right  hand  right  across  the  further
end  (?  side)  of  the  table  and  makes  a  number  of  rhythmical
slaps  against  it  with  her  fingers,  and  some  noise  in  the  cabinet
synchronises  exactly  with  these  slaps.

R.  Her  left  hand  in  my  right  hand  lying  flat  on  the  top  of  the
table.

R  Something  has  butted  my  head  and  fallen  violently  to  the
ground.  [This  afterwards  proved  to  be  the  toy  piano.  K.,  Dec.
11/08.]

R.  She  was  grasping  my  hand. Her  left  foot  on  my  right  foot.

F.  Her  right  hand  was  held  in  mine  on  her  lap.  My  left  foot
is  behind  the  heel  of  her  right  foot  so  that  there  is  no  possibility
of  her  bending  it  back.

12.3  a.m.  F.  Mediums  head  has  again  gone  right  into  the
cabinet. Noiv  it  re-appears.

12.6  a.m. F.  My  foot  is  rigid  underneath  her  right  heel.

Eaps  in  the  cabinet  synchronise  with  taps  made  by  medium's
right  hand  on  Signora  X.'s  left  hand.

R.  Her  left  foot  firmly  planted  on  my  right,  heel  and  toe.

K,  She  is  gripping  my  hand  firmly  and  moving  it  about  over
the  table  to  her  side,

F.  Her  right  hand  on  her  right  knee  with  mine.  Head  con-
tinuously  visible.

12.9  a.m. R. I  am  touched  on  my  right  shoulder.

R.  Her  left  hand  pressing  my  right  hand  on  her  side,  and  foot
as  before.

F.  During  the  touches  and  during  three  violent  movements  of  the
table  on  the  legs  furthest  from  her  [which  happened  just  as  I  began
this  sentence,  F.,  Dec.  11/08]  her  right  hand  was  immovable  in  mine
on  her  lap,  and  my  left  foot  is  still  under  her  right  heel.  She  was
kicking  about  with  her  foot,  my  foot  following  it.  My  right  foot
in  front  of  her  toe.

R.  Same  control  as  before.


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  VIII.


495


[Light  III.]

[Some  time  previous  to  this,  not  noted  at  the  time,  C.  had  taken
up  a  position  standing  behind  and  slightly  to  the  left  of  my
chair. F.,  May  19/09.]


Signora  X


Miss  Y


Lord  S


12.14.  a.m. F.  Medium  asks  me  to  put  my  left  hand  behind  her  back.

E.  A  white  object  came  out  up  by  my  right  eye.

F.  I  saw  it  very  well  from  where  I  am.

B.  I  saw  it.

C.  I  also.

F. It  looked  to  me  like  a  boiled  white  cabbage.

E,  It  seemed  to  me  like  an  ace  of  diamonds  and  about  3  inches

from  my  right  eye.

C.  Movements  of  the  curtain  follow  convulsive  kicks  of  the
medium. [I  was  standing  behind  F. C,  Dec.  11/08.]

F.  Her  right  hand  was  continuously  on  the  corner  of  the  table,
her  head  visible,  and  my  left  hand  behind  her  back.

The  medium  was  asked  what  the  white  thing  was.  She  said  it
was  the  same  friend  of  B.'s  who  had  formerly  kissed  him
through  the  curtain.  She  was  told  that  his  head  was  "very
badly  developed,"  and  site  replied  that  it  would  be  better  later.

12.17  a.m.  C.  Something  tried  to  lift  up  the  small  table,  but
finding,  apparently,  that  it  was  tied,  let  it  go  with  a  bang.

F.  Her  right  hand  on  the  table  in  mine.  My  left  foot  still  behind
her  heel.

E.  My  right  hand  lying  on  the  table  and  her  left  hand  pressed
on  it.  Her  left  foot  planted  on  mine,  her  leg  pressed  against  mine,
and  my  right  foot  behind  her  left  heel.


496


E.  Fetlding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


[Light  III.]

12.22  a.m.  B.  A  white  thing  appeared  between  the  curtains
over  her  head.

R. I  saw  nothing.
F. I  saw  it.

F.  Her  right  hand  holding  mine  on  the  edge  of  the  table.  I  am
sure  it  is  the  whole  of  it,  I  am  feeling  her  thumb.

R.  Something  lifts  the  clay  and  puts  it  on  to  the  table.
F.  The  medium  blew  three  or  four  times  while  it  happened.  The
clay  came  gently  out  from  the  side  of  the  curtain  near  the
window,  between  the  medium  and  R.,  over  her  left  shoulder,  on
to  the  table  and  on  to  the  top  of  her  right  hand  and  mine.
R.  The  block  of  clay  passed  my  eye,  coming  from  over  my
shoulder,  and  slid  down  my  right  arm  and  passed  over  to  the
opposite  side  of  the  table.

R.  My  right  hand  was  lying  perfectly  flat  on  the  middle  of  the
table,  and  her  left  hand  was  stroking  my  wrist;  her  left  foot  between
my  two  feet.

F.  Her  right  hand  was  continuously  in  mine.  My  left  hand  on
her  head. [See  C.'s  and  F.'s  notes  regarding  this  phenomenon.]

12.40  a.m.  R.  A  strong  breeze  of  air  is  blowing  into  my  face
from  the  curtain. It  has  now  stopped.

R.  Her  foot  is  on  the  top  of  mine.

12.41  a.m.  F.  While  R.  felt  the  cold  breeze,  she  had  just  lifted
my  hand  on  the  top  of  her  head.

12.J/.3  a.m.  Medium  asks  B.  to  get  up  on  to  the  siance  table  and  to
hold  his  hand  high  up  towards  the  curtain,  which  he  docs,  at  least
three  feet  above  the  medium's  head.

B. Oh,  it  has  touched  me  this  side.

B. I  again  felt  it.

[These  sensations  were  merely  the  result  of  the  convulsive  move-
ments of  the  medium's  hand  which  was  holding  F.'s  against  the
curtain  while  she  pulled  it ;  they  were  quite  different  from  the
sensation  of  touching  hands,  which  I  have  often  experienced  on
previous  occasions. B.,  Dec.  11/08.]

R. The  curtain  has  blown  out  over  my  right  shoulder.


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  VIII.


497


[Light  III.]

B.  Kneeling  on  the  top  of  the  table,  I  have  placed  my  hand
about  a  yard  over  her  head  and  I  feel  a  push  from  behind  the
curtains. I  do  not  feel  a  solid  substance,  it  is  more  like  wind.

R.  Her  left  hand  resting  on  mine  in  the  middle  of  the  table.
F.  The  medium's  right  hand  in  mine  close  to  my  face. Her  head
resting  against  mine.

B.  I  am  touched,  I  am  touched.  Oh,  can  I  catch  hold  of  that
hand  ?

R.  She  is  squeezing  my  hand.
B. I  feel  the  curtain  push  out.

B.  I  do  not  know  what  it  is  that  keeps  pushing  the  curtain,
underneath,  hut  I  cannot  catch  hold  of  it.

[B.  I  realized  at  the  moment  that  this  sensation  of  pushing
could  be  produced  by  pulling  the  curtain.  I  brought  my  right
hand  down  the  edge  of  the  curtain  and  found  that  it  was  being
held  by  the  medium  while  she  was  holding  F.'s  hand,  and  that
she  was  pulling  it. B.,  Dec.  11/08.]

[The  medium  was  holding  the  curtain  tight  with  my  hand  in
hers.  Although  it  is  probable  that  the  sensations  felt  by  B.
were  clue  to  pulls  given  by  her  to  the  curtain,  she  appeared  to
give  these  quite  openly,  and  without  concealment  from  me.  The
movements  somewhat  resembled  those  she  makes  when  she
apparently  produces  phenomena  at  a  distance  and  may  perhaps,
in  this  case,  be  interpreted  as  movements  made  unsuccessfully
in  the  attempt  to  make  a  solid  substance  touch  B.'s  hand.
Thus,  though  these  movements  were  unquestionably  suspicious,
they  are  not  necessarily  indicative  of  an  attempt  at  fraud.  F.,
Dec.  11/08.]

B.  gets  down  from  table.

12.46  a.m.  F.  The  flageolet  has  rapped  three  times  on  my  head,
and  has  fallen  on  my  shoulder.

F.  In  the  meantime  I  was  holding  her  right  hand  up  against  her
face  and  mine  [holding  the  curtain. F.,  Dec.  11/08].
R.  Thorough  control  established.

12.47  a.m.  R.  Somebody  nudged  me  in  the  ribs  on  the
right  side.

2i


498  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part

[Light  III.]

C. A  solid  substance  pushes  against  my  hand.

C. I  am  touched  on  the  left  arm.

F.  Her  right  hand  is  two  feet  above  the  table  in  my  left  hand.

[C.  was  standing  behind  me  about  three  feet  from  the  part  of
the  curtain  nearest  to  him. F.,  Dec.  11  /OS.]

E.  Noises  in  the  cabinet.

12.50  a.m.  F.  She  taps  with  her  right  hand  on  mine,  and  the
tambourine  shakes  synchronously  inside  the  cabinet.

F.  Her  head  close  to  me  and  visible.

F.  The  same  thing  happens  again.

R.  She  grips  my  hand,  both  resting  upon  the  table,  her  foot
pressing  mine  firmly.

C.  The  bell  rings  and  has  been  brought  on  the  top  of  the
medium's  head  from  the  cabinet  and  remains  there.

F.  I  was  holding  her  right  hand  on  the  top  of  the  table. I  saw
the  bell  arrive  on  her  head.

F.  1  hold  the  bell  up  against  the  curtain  and  ask  "  John "  to
take  it  from  me.

F.  I  was  holding  my  hand  about  a  foot  from  her  head  and
towards  the  curtain  with  my  fingers  holding  it  so  that  they
projected  beyond  the  bell  towards  the  curtain.  Three  or  four
fingers  took  hold  of  the  bell  and  shook  it  in  my  hand.  I  felt
their  pressure  on  my  fingers.

[This  is  not  a  strictly  accurate  description.  The  fingers  took
hold  of  my  fingers,  I  felt  them  distinctly  as  living  fingers  through
the  curtain.  They  held  my  fingers  tight  and  shook  my  hand,
and  with  it,  the  bell. F.,  Dec.  11/08.]

12.52  a.m.  [/  asked  that  the  bell  be  taken  altogether  from  me.
F,  Dec.  11 1  OS.]

F. Medium  says  put  the  bell  near  the  curtain.

F. The  curtain is blowing  right  out  towards  the  bell,  and  the

small  table  in  the  cabinet  moves.

12.55  a.m. Violent  shakes  in  the  cabinet.


LIX.]


Sittings  tvith  Eusapia :  Seance  VIII.


409


[Light  III.]

12.56  a.m. F.  I  am  still  holding  up  the  hell  for  "John"  to  take  it.

C. The  curtain  is  blowing  out  towards  me.

C. Something  brushed  against  my  face.

C. Something  hit  me  through  the  right-hand  curtain.

C. I  am  pushed  through  the  curtain.

C. I  am  touched  by  a  hand  on  my  hand  and  I  feel  the  texture
of  the  flesh  touching  me  about  two  feet  from  the  curtain.
B. It  must  be  over  a  yard  from  the  curtain  [and  about  as  far
from  the  medium. F.,  July  18/09].

F.  I  am  touched  on  the  left  cheek  softly  by  a  hand  through  the
curtain.

F.  The  medium's  right  hand  was  resting  quite  quietly  on  my
left,  and  I  know  it  is  the  whole  hand.

R.  She  was  grasping  firmly  the  forefinger  of  my  left  hand  with
the  whole  of  her  left  hand,  fingers  and  thumb,  my  right  hand  firmly
pressed  on  her  knee. Her  left  foot  grinding  on  my  right  foot.

[From  the  bell  incident  to  this  point  the  phenomena  were  happening
in  all  directions  closely  upon  one  another,  and  producing  considerable
commotion  in  so  large  a  circle.  I  am  absolutely  certain  that  the
control  stated  finally  by  me  of  the  medium's  right  hand  was  that
which  prevailed  at  the  time  that  the  bell  appeared  on  the  medium's
head,  and  continuously  throughout. F.,  Dec.  11/08.]

[The  control  mentioned  at  the  conclusion  by  me  was  a  continuous
one  of  both  hand  and  foot. E.,  Dec.  11/08.]

1.5  a.m. C.  Two  raps  are  heard  in  the  cabinet.

Medium  sags  she  is  tired.

F.  A  white  hand  has  appeared  over  her  head.  Oh,  it  has  brought
a  cord.

[A  small  coil  of  cord  was  on  top  of  the  medium's  head,  the  end
of  it  descending  to  her  left.  I  handed  it  to  R.  and  asked  him  to
trace  it  down. F.,  Dec.  13/08.]

F.  It  is  fastened  to  something. Oh,  somebody  is  pulling  it.


500 E.  F eliding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


[Light  III.]

[R.  traced  it  down  and  found  it  attached  to  the  rung  of  his
chair. F.,  Dec.  IS/OS.]

F.  Twt,  minutes  before  this  had  happened  she  had  asked  me  to
feel  the  cord  of  her  left  leg  to  see  whether  it  was  fastened.  I  put
my  finger  through  the  loop  of  her  left  leg  and  found  that  the  cord
was  still  round  it.  I  did  the  same  thing  to  the  right  leg.  Shortly
after  that  I  put  my  right  hand  on  the  medium's  head,  and  she  said
that  she  was  going  to  rest.  I  continuously  kept  my  left  hand  on
her  right.  There  then  appeared  a  white  hand  through  the  curtain
which  dropped  something  on  the  top  of  her  head.  It  proves  to  be
the  cord  which  had  previously  been  fastened  to  the  left  leg.

[/  had  tied  the  medium's  left  leg,  at  the  narrowest  part  of  the
ankle,  with  tins  cord.  I  made  four  reef  knots.  The  other  end
of  the  cord,  I  had  attached  to  the  leg  and  rung  of  the  controller  s
chair  in  the  same  manner,  with  four  reef  knots,  .pulled  tightly.
B.,  Dec.  12/08.]

[It  did  not  occur  to  me  when  the  medium  asked  one  to  verify
the  fastening  of  her  feet,  tivo  minutes  before  this  incident,  to  do
more  than  ascertain  that  the  ropes  were  still  fast  round  her
ankles,  which  tvas  the  case,  nor  did  it  occur  to  me  when  the  coil
dropped  on  her  head  that  it  could  possibly  be  the  same  cord.
When  traced  by  R.  to  the  left  leg  of  Ids  chair,  her  leg  was
found  free.  The  rope  was  of  such  a  kind  as  to  be  difficult  to
untie.  Similar  knots  on  the  other  foot  took  B.  about  two  minutes
to  untie,  using  both,  hands.  Even  supposing  that  the  medium
had  freed  her  hand  from  R.,  unperceived  and  unremembered
by  him,  it  is  to  me  inconceivable  that  she  could  have  stooped
down  and  untied  the  knots  with  her  left  hand  between  the  time
that  I  verified  the  fastenings  and  the  appearance  of  the  rope  on
her  head,  unnoticed  by  R.  and  me,  the  light  beivg  amply  sufficient
to  follow  any  action  of  the  kind.  ¥.,  Dec.  12/08.]
[The  rope  used  throughout  for  tying  the  medium  was  one  I  had
brought  with  me  specially  for  that  purpose.  It  was  very  soft
and  pliable,  and  a  most  difficult  rope  to  untie,  as  the  knots,  when
tied,  sank  deeply  into  the  cord. C,  June  30/09.]

1.8  a.m.  C.  I  am  touched  by  a  hand  through  the  curtain  at  a
distance  of  about  3  feet  from  the  medium's  chair.


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  VIII.


501


[Light  III.]

R.  Her left foot  planted on mine. Both my hands  were
touching  her  left  hand.

F.  As  she  nearly  seems  to  fall  off  her  chair,  I  am  holding
medium  in  my  arms,  my  [?  her]  right  hand  in  her  Icq).
[Medium  appeared  here  to  go  deeply  into  trance  and  seemed
about  to  fall. F.,  Bee.  12 /OS.]

1.11  a.m. Partial  levitation  of  the  table.

1.13  a.m.  [The  medium  again  somewhat  came  to.  We  luishecl  to  see  if
she  could  obtain  raps  under  strictly  evidential  conditions  on  an  object
well  in  sight,  and  on  which  the  quality  of  the  raps  made  would  be
recognisable.  She  ivas  therefore  asked  to  try  and  produce  raps  without
contact  on  a  tambourine  which  we  placed  on  the  table  in  front  of
her. F,  Dec.  12/08.]

F.  The  tambourine  is  placed  on  the  table  and  she  is  ashed  to  produce
raps  in  it.  She  places  C.'s  and  my  hands  on  the  tambourine  and
hers  on  both  of  them.

R. Her  left  hand  holds  my  right,  hand  on  the  table.

[She  made  several  attempts  to  get  raps  on  the  tambourine  by  making

gestures  over  it,  but  failed,  and  abandoned  the  attempt. F.,  Bee.

12j08.]

1.25  a.m.  Further  non-evidential  movements  of  the  table  terminate  the
stance.

Note  on  Seance  VIII.  by  W.  W.  Baggally.

At  this  seance  I  did  not  sit  at  the  table  by  the  side  of  Eusapia ;
I  cannot  therefore  speak  with  the  same  assurance  respecting  the
strictness  of  the  control  as  in  my  notes  to  the  previous  seance.
The  conditions  were  different,  owing  to  the  introduction  of  other
sitters  than  the  members  of  the  S.P.R.  Committee.  After  F.  and
C.  had  sat  for  some  time  controlling  the  medium,  she  complained
that  C.'s  current  was  feeble  owing  to  temporary  ill  health,  whereupon
R.  took  his  place.

I  judged  from  the  conversation  that  I  had  with  R.  that  he  was
a  careful  observer  not  easily  deceived.  His  taking  a  part  in  the
seance  had  this  advantage,  that  it  served  to  confirm  the  opinion  of
each  of  the  members  of  the  Committee  that  the  phenomena  that
took  place  in  the  cabinet  were  not  produced  by  the  hands  or  feet  of
Eusapia.


502 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


Signora  X.  and  Miss  Y.  undressed  the  medium  before  the  seance
began  and  found  no  mechanism  concealed  about  her  person,  so  that
the  seance  was  carried  out  under  good  test  conditions.  I  detected
one  suspicious  circumstance,  viz.,  the  pulling  of  the  curtains  by
Eusapia  when  I  was  kneeling  on  the  table  and  feeling  for  the  touch
of  a  hand  at  the  time  I  placed  my  hand  against  the  curtain  high
above  Eusapia's  head.  This  is  mentioned  in  the  report,  but  I  agree
with  F.  that  the  pulling  on  the  part  of  the  medium  may  have  been
due  to  her  anxiety  that  a  hand  should  touch  mine.  At  the  time,
she  kept  calling,  in  an  appealing  manner,  apparently  to  some  entity
within  the  cabinet,  "  La  mano,  la  mano."  We  have  observed  that
motions  of  the  medium's  body  are  often  followed  by  phenomena  at
a  distance.  Thus  she  would  extend  her  hand  or  foot,  while  held  by
the  controller,  towards  the  cabinet,  without  touching  the  curtains,
exclaiming  at  the  time  "  Voglio  toccare  colla  mano,"  or  "  Voglio
toccare  col  piede "  ("I  want  to  touch  with  my  hand,"  or  "my
foot"),  and  immediately  some  object  in  the  cabinet  would  move.
A  notable  instance  of  this  occurred  during  the  7th  seance,  when
Eusapia  nodded  her  head,  saying  at  the  time,  "  Coipo  colla  testa "
("I  am  going  to  hit  it  with  my  head"),  and,  without  her  bringing
her  head  in  contact  with  the  table,  a  very  loud  blow,  as  if  struck
with  a  hammer,  was  heard,  followed  by  three  thuds  synchronizing
with  the  nods  of  her  head,  her  hands  and  feet  being  under  control
at  the  time.  W.  W.  B.,  Dec.  11th,  1908.

Note  on  Seance  VIII.  by  H.  Garrington.

Although  there  were  a  large  number  of  persons  present  at  this
seance  no  confusion  existed,  as  before  under  similar  conditions,  and
silence  and  good  control  were  maintained  throughout.  I  gave  up
my  control  early  in  the  evening  to  R.,  who  retained  it  during  the
rest  of  the  evening.  An  exceedingly  long  wait  before  anything  took
place  ushered  in  some  of  the  most  remarkable  phenomena  we  had
as  yet  seen.  I  refer  to  the  carrying  of  the  board  of  clay  on  to
the  seance  table,  the  carrying  out  of  the  toy  piano,  the  trumpet,  the
flageolet,  etc.,  the  details  of  all  which  phenomena  are  fully  described
in  the  report.  Not  being  in  control  on  this  occasion,  I  speak
merely  as  an  onlooker;  but  the  latter  part  of  the  seance— after
the  phenomena  began — appeared  to  me  about  as  remarkable  as  any-
thing one  could  well  wish  for  or  conceive.

I  was  in  an  exceptionally  good  position,  standing  behind  F.,  for
seeing  the  transportation  of  the  clay  from  the  cabinet  to  the  seance


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusoupia:  Seance  VIII.


503


table,  shortly  after  12.22  a.m.,  and,  as  I  happened  to  be  closely
watching  the  curtain  at  the  time,  I  saw  the  movements  of  the  board
and  clay  very  clearly.  The  clay  appeared  first  at  the  opening  on  the
extreme  left,  next  to  the  white  window  curtains,  and  at  a  distance
of  at  least  three  feet  from  the  medium's  chair.  It  must  have  been
moved  to  that  point,  (2)  from  its  former  position  on  the  small  table
in  the  cabinet,  (1).  [It  was  transported  from  (2)  to  the  right
shoulder  of  R.  H.  C,  June  30/09]  and  then  slid  gently  down
on  to  the  table,  until  it  rested  at  the  point  (3).  I  saw  a  white,
opaque  substance,  about  two  inches  broad  and  six  inches  long,
apparently  carrying  this  clay,  which  came  across  the  medium's
left  arm,  her  left  hand  being  on  R.'s  right.  The  movement  of  the
clay  was  peculiar.  It  travelled  slowly  as  though  carried  through  the
air,  and  was  most  certainly  not  thrown.  It  would  have  been  an  utter
impossibility  for  the  medium  (even  supposing  that  she  had  her  left
hand  free)  to  have  placed  the  clay  in  the  position  in  which  I  first  saw
it,  (2),  and  then  to  have  moved  it  on  to  the  seance  table.  Had
she  done  so,  the  left-hand  curtain,  behind  which  her  left  arm  must
have  been  thrust,  would  have  been  crumpled  together  and  carried
forward  some  considerable  distance  over  her  arm.  Such,  however,
was  not  the  case.  I  clearly  saw  that  the  left  hand  curtain  did  not
move,  and  I  am  consequently  quite  sure  that  her  left  arm  and  hand
did  not  and  could  not  have  transported  the  clay  from  the  left  opening
of  the  cabinet  curtain  to  the  seance  table.


Note  by  E.  Feildtng  on  the  Transportation  of  the  Clay.

I  find  I  wrote  no  contemporary  note  to  this  seance.  My  recollec-
tion is,  however,  perfectly  clear  as  to  the  transportation  of  the  clay.
Eusapia's  two  hands  were  both  visible,  her  left  on  R.'s  right  near
the  middle  of  the  table,  her  right  hand  under  my  right  about  a


H.  C,  Dec.  15th,  1908.


Lord  S


504 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


foot  distant  from  her  left.  I  did  not  see  the  board  on  which  was
the  clay  till  it  arrived  on  E.'s  right  shoulder,  nor  did  I  notice  the
white  opaque  substance  referred  to  by  C.  I  saw  the  board  and  clay,
however,  slide  slowly  down  E.'s  right  arm,  alight  on  the  table  b}'
his  hand,  move  across  the  table  and  come  on  to  the  top  of  my  own
right  hand  near  my  side  of  the  table.  I  am  absolutely  certain  that
neither  of  Eusapia's  hands  carried  them.

E.  F.,  April  14th,  1909.

Supplementary  Note  by  E.  Feilding.

I  remember  rising  from  this  seance  in  a  spirit  of  acute  indignation.
Our  minds  had  become  gradually  attuned  to  the  ordinary  run  of
phenomena  in  which  the  seance  had  been  specially  rich,  and  to  the  idea
of  the  non-fraudulent  character  of  some,  at  all  events,  of  which  we  had
become  convinced.  But  it  seemed  little  short  of  offensive  on  the
part  of  Eusapia's  "spirits"  or  "fiuidic  force,"  or  whatever  the  agency
might  be  which  produced  them,  to  intrude  into  a  series  of  respectable
phenomena  one  of  such  indubitably  Davenportish  associations  as
the  untying  of  the  cord.  I  feel  sensitive  to  the  reproach  which
will  certainly  be  levelled  at  us  :  "  If  you  can  be  so  easily  deluded
by  the  repetition  of  such  a  fly-blown  trick,  your  observation  in  other
matters  cannot  be  worth  much."  The  only  plausible  suggestion  that
I  can  offer  is  that  when  Eusapia  asked  me  to  verify  the  tying  of
her  left  foot,  she  had  already  contrived  to  release  it,  and  crossed  her
feet  under  the  table,  making  me  believe  I  was  verifying  the  fastening
of  her  left  foot,  when  in  reality  I  was  verifying  that  of  her  right.
Yet  the  four  reef-knots  had  been  made  by  B.,  an  expert  knot-tier,  in
a  soft  cord  specially  brought  by  C.  for  the  purpose.  The  knots  had
been  verified  at  10.54  when  R.  and  C.  changed  places,  and  at  the
only  other  time  when  control  might  be  considered  relaxed,  i.e.  when
E.  changed  places  with  me,  I  remember  distinctly  holding  both
Eusapia's  hands  till  E.  assumed  control  of  them.  Further,  the  light
was  at  all  times  sufficient  to  detect  any  manoeuvrings  on  the  part
of  Eusapia  to  untie  the  knots,  even  supposing  an  unreniembered
lapse  in  our  physical  control  of  her.  There  were  no  knots  in  the
coil  which  appeared  on  her  head,  but  upon  the  manner  of  their
disappearance  I  find  it  only  possible  to  reserve  judgment.

E.  F.,  May  19th,  1909.


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  VIII.


505


Report  of Examination  of Medium by  Signora  X.  and
Miss  Y.  prior  to  Seance  VIII.

Madame  Palladino  first  took  off  a  black  serge  bodice  and  skirt  of
the  same  material  and  colour.  She  then  slipped  over  her  head  a
white  knitted  cotton  stay-cover.  She  also  drew  off  her  neck  a
white  linen  scarf  a  little  over  a  foot  in  length  and  about  four
inches  wide.  Next  came  a  long  dark  blue  petticoat  with  white
embroidery  round  the  bottom.  After  that  she  took  off  a  short  white
flannel  one,  and  a  pair  of  pink  and  brown  stays.f|She  then  removed
a  long  shift  of  coarse  white  linen  and  stood  in  what  one  might
call  a  pair  of  grey,  woolly,  divided  combinations,  that  is  to  say,
body  and  drawers,  a  pair  of  white  stockings,  black  elastic  garters
under  her  knees,  and  a  pair  of  brownish  coloured  boots,  with  heels,
which  were  only  buttoned  by  the  top  button.

Every  one  of  these  things  was  thoroughly  examined,  including
the  linings  of  bodice  and  skirt,  and  nothing  was  found  anywhere.

Her  hair,  too,  was  simply  drawn  up,  tied  by  a  narrow  bit  of
black  tape,  and  done  into  a  bun.

Dec.  10/08.

Remarks  on  Seance  IX.
December  13th,  1908.

In  some  ways  this  seance  was  the  most  remarkable  of  the
whole  series,  not  indeed  on  account  of  the  variety  of  the
phenomena,  which  was  small,  but  of  their  boisterous  exuberance.
The  light  was  altogether  unshaded  at  the  start,  yet  levitations
of  the  table  began  immediately  and  followed  one  another
with  extreme  rapidity,  no  less  than  six  complete  levitations
taking  place  within  five  minutes  (10.13  to  10.17  p.m.).
The  conditions  under  which  these  levitations  took  place  were
so  exceptionally  good  as  to  light  and  control  that  it  seemed
unnecessary  to  go  on  repeating  them.  Eusapia  was,  however,
asked  to  produce  one  more  while  F.  held  her  feet  under  the
table.  She  consented,  and  placed  her  hands  on  her  lap,  held
by  B.  and  C,  and  sat  motionless  while  F.  gathered  her
skirts  about  her  feet  and  encircled  them  with  his  hands.
The  light,  it  is  true,  was  reduced  to  the  No.  3  ruby  light,
but  this  was  sufficiently  bright  for  us  to  see  an  absolutely


06 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


clear  space  between  her  and  the  table,  which,  as  soon  as  she
was  told  that  we  were  ready,  was  again  levitated  off  all  four
legs. See  the  shorthand  report  at  10.23  p.m.

Shortly  after  this  commenced  a  series  of  movements  of  the
little  stool  which  had  been  placed  outside  the  curtain  to  the
right  rear  of  B.  and  to  Eusapia's  left,  distant  from  her  about
3  feet.  In  response  to  gestures  made  towards  it  with  her
left  hand  holding  B.'s,  the  stool  advanced  towards  her  several
times,  and  was  also  levitated  while  B.'s  hand  was  resting  on
its  surface,  her  hand  being  on  top  of  his.  See  report  from
10.30  p.m.  to  10.40  p.m.  A  series  of  touches  on  both  C.
and  B.  followed  at  10.47  p.m.,  but  the  description  of  the
control  in  the  report  is  not  very  adequate.

It  is  difficult  to  say  whether  this  seance,  which  began  so
auspiciously,  would  have  added  to  the  general  programme
of  phenomena.  A  development  of  some  kind  had  taken
place  at  every  stance  up  to  now,  and  owing  to  the  extreme
vigour  displayed  by  the  "  force "  at  this  one,  and  the  extreme
good  humour  of  the  medium,  it  seems  probable  that  some
further  and  more  startling  manifestations  might  have  followed,
had  it  not  been  for  the  unfortunate  '  misunderstanding '  that
took  place  at  11.6  p.m.  and  to  which  further  reference  is  made
in  C.'s  and  F.'s  notes.  The  discussion  which  arose  in  consequence
lasted  nearly  three-quarters  of  an  hour.

At  the  resumption  of  the  seance  at  11.45  p.m.  further  move-
ments of  the  stool  of  a  particularly  interesting  character  took
place  in  the  No.  2  light.  The  medium  made  gestures  with  her
hand  at  a  distance  from  it  of  about  three  feet,  sometimes  with  one
hand  and  sometimes  with  the  other,  and  gestures  of  attraction
made  the  stool  approach,  while  gestures  of  repulsion  made
it  recede  from  her.  See  B.'s  note.  During  this  series  of
movements,  the  stenographer  left  his  place  and  examined  the
stool,  putting  his  arms  right  round  it  and  feeling  along  the
floor,  several  times,  and  found  no  attachment.

At  12.0  began  a  series  of  the  usual  curtain  movements,  and
at  12.23  a.m.  of  touches  on  C.  by  something  from  within  the
curtain.  The.  complete  control  at  12.25  a.m.  when  C,  who
was  stroking  the  medium's  forehead,  was  touched  on  the
wrist  above  her  head,  while  he  held  one  of  her  hands  on
the table and B. held the other on her  lap makes  this


LIX.]


Sittings  vnth  Eusapia:  Seance  IX.


507


particular  touch  noteworthy.  The  same  may  be  said  of  the
grasp  of  a  complete  hand  through  the  curtain,  experienced  by
C.  at  12.38  a.m.,  while  both  the  medium's  hands  were  visibly
on  the  table.

At  12.43  a.m.  began  a  series  of  movements  of  the
tambourine  within  the  cabinet.  Shortly  afterwards  the  tam-
bourine came  out  of  the  cabinet  along  the  floor  and  remained
there  quietly  for  a  time  while  C.  was  pulled  about  and
touched  in  various  places  a  very  large  number  of  times.
Attention  may  be  directed  to  a  touch  occurring  at  12.51,
when  a  whole  hand  was  felt  by  C.  at  a  time  when  he  was
holding  both  the  medium's  hands.  At  1.5  a.m.  the  tambourine
began  to  perform  a  kind  of  tune.  F.,  who  was  standing  close
to  it,  felt  around  it  and  found  no  attachment,  and  shortly
afterwards  it  appeared  to  try  and  jump  on  to  C.'s  lap,  both
the  medium's  legs  encircling  C.'s  left  leg,  while  her  hands
were  under  thorough  control,  and  also  tied  in  such  a  way
as  to  put  the  tambourine  out  of  her  reach.  After  various
futile  attempts  on  the  part  of  the  medium  to  procure  an
impress  of  a  hand  on  the  sculptor's  clay  within  the  cabinet,
the  stance  closed  at  1.30  a.m.

Shorthand  Report  of  Seance  IX.

December  IBth,  1908.

Present: F.,  C,  B.,  and  M.,  shorthand  writer,  at  separate  table.

Lights  same  as  in  seance  7  except  that  light  3 — ruby  lamp,  10
candles,  110  volts — was  only  shaded  with  cream  tissue  paper
and  no  silk  handkerchief.

Small  bell  and  broken  guitar  hung  up  in  same  positions
as  in  seance  8.  Photographic  Plate  as  in  8.  Small  table  tied
down  in  the  same  position.  Guitar  leaning  up  against  front
of  table  in  centre.  To  right  of  medium,  leaning  up  against  cord
fastening  table,  large  tambourine.  At  back  of  table,  on  top,
toy  piano.  To  left  side  of  medium  on  top  of  table,  tea  bell.  To
right  side  of  medium,  on  top  of  table,  flageolet  and  trumpet.
In  the  centre,  in  the  front  of  top  of  table,  clay.
Medium's  feet  tied  to  rungs  of  chairs  of  controllers  on  each  side
of  her,  length  of  rope  on  left  being  20  ins.,  on  right  21\  ins.


508 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part

Hands  tied  to  one  another — distance  apart  $2  ins.,  also  left
hand  tied  to  B.'s  right,  distance  being  16\  ins.,  medium's  right
hand  tied  to  G.'s  left,  distance  18  ins.

10. IS  p.m. Seance  begins.


Light  I.


M

Tilts  begin  almost  immediately.

F. Table  tilts  on  the  legs  away  from  her.

10.13  p.m. Complete  levitation  of  the  table.

C.  Her  right  hand  resting  on  the  table  touching  mine,  my  wrist
being  between  hers  and  the  edge  of  the  table.  Her  right  foot  in
contact  with  my  right  foot.  I  saw  a  clear  space  of  about  eight  inches
between  her  dress  and  the  leg  of  the  table.

B.  Complete  levitation  of  the  table  for  a  second  time  [during
dictation  of  B.'s  control. Dec.  14/08].

B.  My  right  hand  on  both  her  knees.  Her  left  foot  touching
my  right  foot.

10.14  p.m. Complete  levitation  for  a  third  time.
B. Another  complete  levitation.

F.  Both  medium's  hands  completely  on  the  top  of  the  table
touching  C.'s  and  B.'s.

C.  I  can  see  a  clear  space  of  about  8  inches  between  her  dress
and  the  table  leg  all  the  way  down.


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  IX.


509


[Light  I.]


B.  My  right  hand  on  her  two  knees.  My  right  foot  against  her
left  foot,  and  I  can  see  between  her  left  leg  and  the  table  leg.

10.16  p.m. Another  complete  levitation.

F.  Her  right  hand  off  the  table  altogether,  left  hand  on  B.'s,  pull-
ing it  upward  and  the  table  appeared  to  stick  to  it.

10.17  p.m. Another  complete  levitation  of  the  table.

F.  First  of  all  a  partial  levitation,  which  lasted  about  ten  seconds,
then  a  complete  levitation,  off  all  four  legs.

F.  Her  right  hand  touching  the  table,  left  hand  on  B.'s. — She
raised  her  right  hand  from  the  table  and  the  table  slid  sideways  in
the  air  under  B.'s  hand.

B.  My  right  hand  across  both  her  knees.  My  right  knee  against
her  left  knee  and  my  right  foot  against  her  left  foot,  and  I  see  a
clear  space  between  her  leg  and  the  table  leg.

C.  Her  right  hand  clenched  (at  first)  on  the  table  within  three
inches  of  my  eyes.  My  left  hand  across  both  her  knees.  Her  right
foot  on  my  left  foot.  I  can  clearly  see  a  space  of  at  least  six  inches
between  her  dress  and  the  table  leg,  all  the  way  down.

[The  light  was  sufficient  to  read  small  print  by  with  comfort,  at
the  further  end  of  the  room,  the  hands  were  always  plainly
visible  and  always  situated  so  that  it  was  clear  that  the  table
was  not  lifted  by  them.  The  extreme  rapidity  of  flie  levitations
made  complete  description  almost  impossible,  and  it  was  decided
to  confine  the  description  of  the  control  to  the  feet,  the  control
of  the  hands  being  obvious  to  cdl  and  description  rendered
unnecessary.  Medium  was  then  told  that  enough  levitations
had  been  produced  but  was  ashed,  before  proceeding  to  further
phenomena,  to  produce  one  more,  with  her  feet  actually  held
under  the  table.  I  thereupon  went  under  the  table. F.,  Dec.  14/08.]


510  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part

[Light  I.]

10.20  p.m. F.  I  have  got  my  hands  on  both  feet.
C. The  table  tilts  away  from  her.

C.  My  left  hand  is  on  both  her  knees.  Both  her  hands  are  flat
on  the  table  in  full  view  of  us,  her  wrists  not  over  the  edge.

Five  tilts  of  table  ask  for  less  light.
Light  II.

F.  I  have  now  got  my  hands  on  the  floor  against  the  table  legs,
and  inside  them. Her  two  feet  are  between  my  hands.
Five  more  tilts  of  the  table  ask  for  still  less  light.

Light  III.

10.23  p.m. Complete  levitation  of  the  table.

Note  by  M.:  Immediately  before  levitation  took  place  medium
asked  F.  if  he  had  got  her  feet  all  right.

F.  I  had  my  hands  on  the  floor  between  her  legs  and  the  table
legs.  Her  feet  and  the  whole  of  her  dress  were  in  between  my
hands.

C.  My  left  hand  on  her  right  knee,  her  right  hand  being  on  the
top  of  my  left  hand  and  did  not  leave  it.

B.  My  right  hand  was  on  her  left  knee,  her  left  hand  on  the
top  of  my  right  hand.  My  foot  was  away  from  her  foot  but  F.  had
complete  control  of  her  feet.1

[/  now  came  out  from  under  the  table  and  meditim  was  asked
to  stop  levitating. F.,  Dec.  12/OS.]


F.


1  See  F.'s  note  at  end.


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  IX.


511


[Light  III.]

10.27  p.m. B. A  movement  of  some  object  in  the  cabinet.

B.  She  moves  her  left  hand  within  mine  towards  the  cabinet  but
at  a  distance  of  about  three  feet  from  it.  Her  left  foot  on  my  right
foot.

C.  Her  right  foot  pressing  against  my  left  foot,  her  right  knee
in  contact  with  my  left  knee.  Her  right  hand  holding  my  left  hand
on  her  right  thigh.

F.  Note  that  in  this  light  I,  from  the  opposite  end  of  the  table
to  the  medium,  can  see  her  face,  and,  of  course,  her  hands.

10.30  p.m.  B.  The  little  stool  which  was  placed  outside  the
cabinet  at  a  distance  of  three  feet  from  the  medium  approached
towards  the  medium  while  she  held  my  right  hand  with  her  left
hand,  and  continued  to  do  so.

B.  Her  left  knee  is  against  my  right  knee.  Her  left  foot  against
my  right  foot  [and  between  her  leg  and  the  table  leg.  B.,  Dec.  14/08].
She  is  holding  my  hand  towards  the  stool  but  at  a  distance  from  it.
I  can  see  her  hand  which  is  holding  mine  quite  clearly.

C.  Her  right  hand  is  visibly  on  the  table  in  my  left.  Her  right
knee  pressing  against  my  left  knee  ;  her  right  foot  pressing  against
my  left  foot.

10.33  p.m.  B.  She  places  my  right  hand  on  the  surface  of  the
little  stool  with  her  left  hand  on  the  top  of  my  right,  and  the
stool  rises  up  into  the  air  against  my  hand,  with  pressure  under-
neath, while  her  left  foot  is  resting  on  my  right  foot.

C.  Her  right  hand  is  visible  on  the  table  holding  my  left.  I  can
feel  her  right  knee  against  my  left.  Her  right  foot  is  in  contact
with  mine.

B. It  went  up  again.

10.34  p.m.  F.  Four  complete  levitations  of  the  table  to  a
height  of  about  six  inches,  very  rapidly,  presumably  meaning
"  talk."  I  can  see  from  here  that  her  hands  were  not  on  the
table.

B.  My  right  hand  is  resting  on  the  medium's  left  knee  with  her
left  hand  upon  it,  and  her  left  foot  distinctly  held  on  my  right  foot.

C.  The  fingers  of  the  medium's  right  hand  are  now  on  the  back
of  my  hand  resting  on  her  right  knee  which  is  distant  from  her  left


512  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part
[Light  III  ]

knee  only  about  two  inches.  My  left  knee  in  contact  with  her  right
knee.  Her  right  foot  pressing  against  my  left  foot.  [I  was  dis-
satisfied at  the  time  with  the  sensation  of  the  hand  control.  C,
Dec.  14/08.]

10.37  p.m.  C.  The  little  stool  moves  out  again  towards  the
medium.

C. Again  it  moves  violently.
F. I  can  see  it  (standing  up).

B.  She  makes  a  jerky  motion  in  the  air  above  the  table  (towards
the  stool)  with  her  hand  while  holding  my  right  hand.  My  right
knee  pressing  against  her  left  knee,  and  my  right  foot  under  her
left  foot.

C.  Her  right  hand  resting  entirely  on  my  left  hand  on  her  right
knee. The  control  of  feet  as  before.

10.40  p.m.  B.  The  medium  places  my  right  hand  on  the  surface
of  the  stool,  lifts  her  hand  away  from  mine,  and  the  stool  rises
in  the  air  about  six  inches.

B.  At  this  time  I  distinctly  felt  her  left  leg  against  my  right
leg. I  could  see  her  left  hand  while  this  was  taking  place.

C.  Control  exactly  the  same  as  before.

B.  She  touches  the  curtain  with  her  left  hand  held  in  mine.

10.41  p.m. C. The  curtain  blows  out.

10.42.  p.m.  C.  The  curtain  blows  out  about  two  feet.  The
medium  says  that  I  shall  get  a  touch  if  I  hold  my  hand  up
to  the  curtain.  I  did  so  and  I  feel  the  curtain  pulled  down-
wards (viz.  as  B.  did  when  on  table  during  Seance  VIII. ).

W.JpJf.  'p.m.  F.  I  can  see  the  mediums  left  hand  on  B.'s.  I  can
see  G.'s  hand  held  out  against  the  curtain.  I  can  see  Iter  right
hand  on  the  table.

F.  I  can  see  from  where  I  am  a  strong  movement  of  the  small
stool.

F.  Her  head  is  perfectly  visible  to  me.

B.  I  can  feel  her  left  foot  against  my  right  foot,  and  her  left
knee  against  my  right  knee,  which  she  has  not  moved  at  all  while
the  phenomenon  was  taking  place  (viz.  the  movements  of  the  stool).


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  IX.


513


[Light  III.]

10.47  p.m. C. I  am  touched  on  the  left  wrist.

C.  I  was  leaning  across  the  medium's  body,  my  left  arm  being
in  contact  with  her  chest,  my  left  knee  and  foot  in  contact  with  hers.

C. I  am  touched  by  a  hand  through  the  curtain.

C.  Control  of  feet  as  before. Her  right  hand  on  my  left  knee.
B.  Her  left  hand  resting  on  my  right  hand  on  the  table.  Same
control  of  feet.

10.48  p.m. B. I  am  touched  on  my  right  knee.

B.  Same  control  of  feet  and  hands  as  before ;  her  left  hand  was
on  the  table.

C.  Same  control  here.

10.57  p.m. Four  tilts  of  table,  meaning  "  talk."
B. I  feel  three  touches  on  my  right  knee.

B.  At  that  moment  I  felt  her  left  hand  on  my  right  hand  and
her  left  leg  against  my  right  leg.  I  did  not  feel  the  slightest  motion
of  her  hand  which  is  about  six  inches  from  the  point  of  touch.

C.  Same  control  as  before.  The  whole  of  her  right  hand  on  my
left  [?on  C.'s  left  knee  "as  before." F.,  May  22/09].

F.  Her  face  is  visible  to  me  and  motionless.

B.  This  is  the  first  time  we  have  had  touches  in  front  of  the
medium.

11.0  p.m.  F.  Two  tilts  of  the  table  on  the  legs  nearest  to
her,  very  strong.

C.  Her  right  foot  clearly  on  my  left  foot.  I  am  holding  her
right  hand  in  my  left  hand,  her  left  hand  resting  over  my  right
hand.

B.  Synchronizing  with  these  tilts,  she  presses  her  left  foot  slightly.
Owing  to  the  position  of  her  left  leg  against  my  right  leg  she  was
not  able  to  touch  the  table  leg  with  it.  I  am  holding  her  left  hand
with  my  right  hand  firmly  on  her  left  knee  [?on  top  of  C.'s  right
hand. F,  May  22/09].

11.6  p.m.  G.  shoivs  that  he  is  dissatisfied  with  the  foot  control,
and  seeks  to  verify  whether  medium's  feet  are  separate,  with  his
hand. [Dictated  later] — Medium  pointed  out  that  as  her  feet


514


E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


[Light  III.]

were  tied  she  did  not  think  it  mattered  where  they  were,  under
the  table.  She  is  very  angry  and  woke  thoroughly  up  from  a
condition  of  semi-tramee  into  which  she  had  fallen.  A  long
discussion  followed.  The  medium,  thoroughly  upset,  says  "Better
phenomena  are  spoilt  for  the  evening,"  asks  for  light  to  be  turned
up  and  for  the  control  of  her  feet  to  be  verified.

Light  I.

11.40  p.m. M. Examines the  tying  of  the  medium's  feet  and
finds  that  it  is  absolutely  in^ossiblc  for  her  to  do  anything  herself.
The  fastenings  found  as  at  the  beginning  of  the  stance.

Il.lf5  p.m. Seance  resigned,  medium  still  very  irritated.
Light  II.

B.  The  stool  by  the  side  of  the  medium,  in  very  good  light,  has
moved.  This  movement  was  preceded  by  one  of  her  left  hand
at  a  distance  from  the  stool  of  about  2h  feet.

B.  I  was  holding  her  left  knee  against  my  right  knee,  and  her
left  foot  against  my  right  foot.

C.  Her  right  foot  on  my  left  foot,  my  right  hand  on  her  right
knee. Her  right  hand  covering  my  left  hand.

B.  She  moves  her  left  hand  as  though  pushing  something  away
from  her  at  a  height  of  about  a  yard  from  the  stool.  The  stool
thereupon  retires  from  her.

B.  Control  same  as  before.

C.  Mine  also  the  same.

[I  now  got  up  and  examined  the  little  stool,  feeling  right  round
it,  and  saw  that  there  was  nothing  connecting  it  to  the  medium's
dress.  As  I  was  about  to  resume  my  place  I  saw  the  little  stool
again  moving,  and  stooped  down  to  watch  it.  It  moved  in  little
jerks  about  a  foot  sideways.  When  it  had  finished,  I  again  put
my  hands  right  round  it  and  found  no  attachment.  While  I  was
doing  this  the  stool  seemed  to  brush  up  against  my  coat  sleeves
as  though  drawn  by  a  magnet.  I  was  again  about  to  sit  down
when  the  stool  began  moving  for  a  third  time,  and  I  examined
it  again.  There  was  absolutely  no  possibility  of  there  being  any
attachment. M.,  Dec.  15/08.]


lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  IX.  515

[Light  II.]

F. Standing  up  I  saw  the  stool  moving.
M. It  moved  about  12  inches.

B.  and  C.  Controls  same  as  before.
11.50  p.m. Complete  levitation  of  the  table.

C.  Both  her  hands  were  on  the  top  of  the  table,  my  left  hand
resting  on  her  right  knee.  Her  right  foot  on  my  left  foot  firmly.
I  can  see  a  clear  space  between  her  dress  and  the  leg  of  the  table
all  the  way  down.

B.  My  right  hand  on  her  left  knee.  My  right  foot  feeling  her
left  foot. There  is  a  space  between  her  left  leg  and  the  table  leg.

11.58  p.m.  F.  Standing  up  at  this  end  of  the  table,  I  saw  her
make  gestures  with  her  right  hand  at  a  distance  of  about  3|  feet
from  the  small  stool,  her  left  hand  being  motionless  in  B.'s  on  his
corner  of  the  table,  and  the  stool  advanced  in  little  jerks  towards  B.

C.  The  curtain  is  pushed  right  out  on  this  side  about  three  feet.

B.  I  am  feeling  her  left  foot  on  my  right  foot.

C.  Control  the  same  as  before,  the  whole  of  medium's  hands
being  visible.

C.  The  curtain  is  again  pushed  out  about  two  feet.

C.  Her  right  hand  on  my  left  on  the  table ;  right  foot  on  my
left  foot  firmly.

B.  Control  same  as  before,  hand  and  foot.

12.1  a.m. Partial  levitation  of  the  table.

Another  partial  levitation  of  the  table,  almost  complete.

12.2  a.m. The  curtain  blew  out.

C.  I  am  holding  my  hand  out  towards  the  curtain.

12.3  a.m. Five  violent  tilts  of  the  table  ask  for  less  light.

Light  III.

F.  Note  that  her  face  and  eyes  are  visible  to  me  over  at  the
opposite  end  of  the  table.

12 A  a.m. C. The  right  curtain  has  again  blown  out.
12.6  a.m. M.  notes:  The  curtain  made  a  large bulging  move-
ment of  about  2h  feet  while  I  was  standing  up.


516  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrvngton.  [part
[Light  III.]

[During  these  last  two  or  three  minutes  I  had  left  my  place  and
gone  round  to  the  curtain,  and  approached  my  hand  towards  it
to  try  whether  I  could  get  a  touch. M.,  Dec.  15/08.]

12.22  a.m. Loud  noises  in  the  cabinet.

12, £3  a.m. Medium  asks  G.  if  he  had  been  touched.

C. I  was  touched  through  the  curtain  as  if  by  a  hand.

C.  Her  right  hand  holding  my  left.

B.  Her  left  hand  holding  my  right  hand  on  her  left  knee.

F.  Her  head  is  visible  to  me;  I  saw  the  curtain  come  out  towards
the  place  where  C.  was  touched.

12.25  a.m.  C.  I  was  touched  again  as  if  by  a  hand  through
the  curtain  on  the  wrist  of  my  right  hand  as  I  was  stroking
the  medium's  forehead  with  it.

C.  Again  I  am  touched  in  the  same  place.

C.  Meanwhile  I  have  her  right  hand,  of  which  I  feel  the  thumb
and  four  fingers,  on  the  table.

B.  I  am  holding  her  left  hand  on  her  left  knee.

12.26  a.m. Complete  levitation  of  the  table.
12.38  a.m. Two  raps.

C.  I  am  grasped  through  the  curtain  by  a  complete  hand.

C.  At  that  time  her  right  foot  was  strongly  against  mine ;  the
fingers  of  her  right  hand  pressing  on  the  back  of  my  left  hand  on
the  table,  almost  in  the  centre  of  it.

B.  Her  left  hand  holding  my  right  hand  on  the  table.  I  could
see  both  her  hands  at  the  time.  Her  left  foot  kicking  against  my
right  foot.

12.43  a.m.  Medium  squeezes  on  C.'s  hand  and  movements  in
the  cabinet  follow  (thumps  on  the  tambourine).

B.  I  was  holding  her  left  hand  with  my  right  hand  on  her  knee.

C.  Mine,  holding  medium's,  is  on  the  table.

B.  She  gives  three  squeezes  of  her  left  hand  in  my  right  hand,
and  synchronizing  with  these  three  squeezes,  we  hear  three  thumps
on  the  tambourine.


Lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  IX.  517

[Light  III.]

12.46  a.m.  C.  Corresponding  with  squeezes  of  the  medium's
hand,  the  tambourine  was  thumped.

B.  My  right  hand  was  holding  medium's  left  hand,  and  my  right
foot  was  on  her  left  foot.  My  right  knee  pressing  against  her  left
knee.

C.  I  am  holding  her  right  hand  by  the  thumb  on  the  table.
Her  right  foot  on  my  left  completely.

12.47  a.m. F.  I  ash  "  Carlo  " 1  to  give  me  the  tambourine.

{Medium  said  he  would  do  so  and  I  moved  round  behind  C.
F.,  Dec.  14/OS.]


B.  She  holds  my  right  hand  over  the  table  in  front  of  her  and
makes  gestures  with  it  in  the  air,  and  the  tambourine  slid  along
the  ground.

C.  I  am  touched  again.

C.  The  same  thing  has  happened  again.

C.  I  was  touched  three  times  with  fingers  on  my  left  hand.  The
tambourine  then  jumped  up  about  10  or  12  times  inside  the
curtain,  apparently  trying  to  get  to  the  edge  of  the  curtain,  and
was  then  pushed  outside  the  cabinet  [near  where  I  was  standing.
F.,  June  6/09].

C.  I  am  grasped  very  firmly  by  a  hand  through  the  curtain  on
the  left  arm.

C.  I  felt  the  medium's  right  hand  on  my  left  on  the  table,  at
the  same  moment  that  the  tambourine  was  kicking  about  inside  the
cabinet.

B.  I  am  holding  her  left  hand  on  the  table.  I  can  see  it  quite
clearly.

114  Carlo"  is  another  "spirit"  whom  Eusapia  occasionally  states  to  be  present.


518 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


[Light  III.]

12.51  a.m. Medium  says  she  wishes  to  touch  C,  which  she  does.

C.  I  was  grasped  just  above  the  left  elbow  by  four  fingers  and
a  thumb,  which  pressed  very  bard  indeed.

C.  I  am  touched  on  the  left  side  by  a  hand.

C.  I  was  holding  both  medium's  hands  in  both  of  mine  and  she
was  squeezing  tightly,  one  being  clearly  visible  and  one  on  the  table
under  the  curtain.  Absolute  control  of  right  foot  and  leg ;  her  right
foot  pressing  strongly  on  my  left  foot  in  contact  with  my  right.

B.  I  was  holding  the  wrist  of  her  left  hand  with  my  right  hand
on  the  table  in  full  view  of  us  all, — perfectly  visible.  My  right  knee
against  her  left  knee. My  right  foot  under  her  left  foot.

1.0  a.m.  C.  I  am  touched  on  the  face  by  a  hand  through  the
curtain  as  the  medium  kicks  to  and  fro.

0. I  am  again  touched  on  the  face  by  a  hand.

C.  Medium  having  both  her  legs  round  my  left  leg,  her  right
hand  holding  my  left  on  the  table  in  the  middle  under  the  curtain.

B.  Her  left  hand,  which  I  see  clearly,  holding  my  right  hand  on
the  table.

F.  Note  heads  are  visible  to  me.

F.  I  am  standing  up  between  C.  and  the  curtain  holding  my  right
hand  on  C.'s  shoulder.

1.3  a.m. C. I  was  touched  on  the  left  shoulder  strongly.

C.  Medium  had  both  her  legs  round  mine,  her  right  hand  holding
my  left  under  the  curtain  in  the  middle  of  the  table.

B.  I  am  holding  her  left  hand  with  my  right  hand  on  the  table.

1.5  a.m.  The  tambourine  jumps  up  about  twelve  times,  as  if
trying  to  play  a  tune.

B.  .She  squeezes  my  hand  synchronously  in  tune  with  it.

F.  I  have  put  my  hand  between  the  tambourine  and  the
medium's  knee.

[I  knelt  down  on  the  ground  and  felt  right  round  the  tambourine
which  was  lying  near  the  edge  of  the  curtain,  behind  and  to  the
left  of  C.'s  chair. There  was  no  attachment. F.,  Dec.  1^/08.]


lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  IX.  519

[Light  III.]

C. I  am  touched  on  the  left  arm  above  the  elbow.

C.  Control  exactly  the  same  as  before.

B.  My  control  the  same  as  before.

1.6  a.m.  C.  The  tambourine  jumps  and  jerks  as  though  it  tried
to  get  on  to  my  lap.

C.  Control  the  same  as  before.

B.  My  control  absolutely  the  same  as  before.

1.13  a.m.  All  stand  up.  F.  asks  "John"  if  he  can  make  an
impression  on  the  clay. Three  tilts  of  the  table  respond  "  Yes."

1.17  a.m.  The  medium  is  told  that  it  is  very  late,  and  that  if
she  is  unable  to  do  anything  else  she  had  better  stop,  but  she
replies  "The  phenomena  are  not  finished  yet."

1.24  a.m. Something;  falls  over  behind  the  medium.

C.  ascertains  that  it  is  the  medium's  chair.  Medium  says  "  Do
not  take  any  notice  of  that  as  I  might  leave  done  it  with  my
feet."

1.30  a.m. Something  moved  in  cabinet.

Medium  says  "Please  note  that  I  did  not  move  at  all  then."
[Owing  to  the  lateness  of  the  hour,  the  medium  is  severed  times
asked  whether  she  will  not  finish.  For  some  time  she  declines.
She  is  asked  whether  she  can  get  an  impression  on  the  clay.  First
of  all  she  replied  "  They  said  '  Yes,' "  but  after  long  continued
efforts,  she  said  she  felt  tired  and  could  do  no  more.  F.,  Dec.  14-/08.]

Note  on  Seance  IX.  by  E.  Feilding.

This  seance  began  under  the  most  favourable  circumstances.
Eusapia  was  in  the  best  of  humours,  and  submitted  to  having  her
hands  and  feet  tied  with  perfectly  good  grace.  They  were  tied  by
B.  and  myself.  The  tying  of  the  hands,  however,  is  not  of  any
special  importance  for  those  who  are  present  at  the  seances,  and  whose
attention  has  constantly  to  be  on  the  alert  from  the  necessity  of
describing  the  control  at  every  moment  to  the  stenographer.  At
scarcely  any  time  has  the  light  been  so  poor  as  not  to  enable  the
controllers  to  see,  as  well  as  feel,  the  hands  they  were  holding.  And


520 E.  Feilcling,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


it  is  especially  to  be  remarked  that  it  has  been  just  those  seances
where  the  light  has  been  the  poorest  that  the  phenomena  have  been
the  least  remarkable  and  frequent.  The  tenth  seance,  which  has
taken  place  before  I  have  finished  this  note,  has  been  the  worst
of  the  whole  series.  Compared,  indeed,  with  the  performance  of
other  mediums,  the  manifestations  which  occurred  were  remarkable
enough ;  but  compared  with  its  predecessors,  the  tenth  seance  was
almost  blank,  though  darkness,  more  or  less  complete,  prevailed
almost  throughout.  The  same  thing  may  be  said  of  a  great  part
of  the  third  and  fourth  seances.  The  implication  appears  to  be
that  when  the  force,  whatever  it  is,  which  produces  Eusapia's  pheno-
mena, is  strong,  nothing  will  interfere  with  it,  and  phenomena,  at
all  events  of  a  certain  class,  hurry  one  upon  another  even  in  the
brightest  light.  When,  however,  the  force  is  weak,  she  seeks  to
improve  the  conditions  for  its  development  by  reducing  the  light;
but  even  then,  though  a  few  sparse  manifestations  will  occur,  the
results,  with  some  exceptions,  are  generally  feeble  and  of  small
interest,  and  certainly  far  from  convincing.

We  tied  Eusapia,  then,  more  for  the  sake  of  being  able  to  say
that  we  had  done  so,  than  for  our  own  satisfaction.  The  tying  of
her  hands  would  not  have  been  close  enough  to  prevent  her  from
fraudulently  producing  the  many  touches  which  C.  experienced  at  the
latter  part  of  the  seance,  but  she  could  not  have  touched  either  the  tam-
bourine or  the  stool,  which  were  the  only  objects  moved  at  this  seance,
at  any  time.  The  tying  of  her  right  foot  was  close  enough  to  prevent
her  from  reaching  within  about  a  foot  from  the  tambourine  in  its
original  position  within  the  cabinet,  though  she  might  possibly  have
done  so  after  it  came  out  and  jumped  about  on  the  floor.  Had  she
not  been  otherwise  controlled,  with  her  knees  under  the  table,  while
the  small  stool  was  moving  about  on  the  floor,  it  is  possible  she
might  have  reached  it  at  some  part  of  its  progress.  It  is  difficult,
when  a  seance  is  over,  exactly  to  fix  the  positions  of  chairs  and  other
movable  objects.  But  as  a  matter  of  fact,  she  did  not  use  her  feet.
The  tambourine  and  the  stool  stood  free  of  her,  a  clearly  visible  space
being  between  her  and  them  while  they  moved.

The  proceedings  started  in  the  light  of  an  unshaded  10  candle
power  150  volt  lamp.  The  current  being  110  volts,  the  lamp  of
course  is  less  brilliant  than  if  it  had  been  a  110  volt  one,  but  it  was
good  enough  for  me  to  be  able,  while  standing  at  the  entrance  door,
ten  feet  from  under  the  light  and  holding  my  book  edgeways,  not
directly  towards  it,  to  read  small  print  without  the  least  discomfort.


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  IX.


521


It  was  thus  the  best  light  that  we  had  yet  had  at  any  seance.
Levitations  began  immediately.  The  table  bounded  about  as  if  it
was  on  springs.  In  some  respects  these  levitations  were  less  aston-
ishing than  those  we  had  at  seances  1  and  2,  as  there  was  usually
some  slight  contact  with  the  medium's  hands,  though  not  of  such
a  kind  as  could  produce  the  levitations  by  normal  means.  They
ended  by  boring  us,  and  we  asked  for  them  to  stop,  except  for  one
final  levitation  which  we  wished  her  to  produce  while  her  feet,  which,
however,  had  been  hitherto  quite  visible  under  the  table  to  the
stenographer  and  myself  (I  sat  opposite  Eusapia),  were  actually
being  held.  I  went  accordingly  under  the  table,  gathered  Eusapia's
skirts  together  and  enclosed  them  and  her  feet  within  my  hands
and  between  the  table  legs.  It  appears  that  the  application  of  a
special  test  produces  a  psychological  effect  on  Eusapia,  and  even
though  she  still  produces  the  phenomenon,  its  performance  seems
made  more  difficult ;  she  asked  for  the  light  to  be  reduced  twice,  i.e.
to  the  ruby  light,  and  seemed  to  collect  herself  for  an  effort.  I
requested  the  others  to  remove  their  legs  so  that  I  could  get  a  clear
view,  as  well  as  hold,  of  Eusapia's,  which  even  in  the  reduced  light
were  still  perfectly  visible  to  me.  B.  and  C.  placed  their  hands  on
her  knees  and  she  placed  her  hands  on  their  hands.  She  asked  if
our  control  was  quite  satisfactory,  and  up  went  the  table.  We  felt
that  there  was  no  more  to  be  said,  and  I  resumed  my  place  opposite
her.

With  regard  to  the  storm  which  arose  later  on,  I  may  make
a  few  remarks.  When  Eusapia  is  in  the  deeper  stage  of  trance
which  usually  accompanies  the  production  of  the  more  advanced
phenomena  our  experience  is  that  she  always  allows  her  hands
to  be  fully  enclosed  in  those  of  her  neighbours.  When,  how-
ever, she  is  only  in  a  state  of  half-trance,  she  frequently  seeks
to  keep  her  hands  on  the  top  of  theirs,  and  moves  them  restlessly
about.  When  her  two  hands  are  near  together,  it  is  obvious
that  a  substitution  of  hands  becomes  easy,  but  when  they  are  far
apart, — and,  as  a  rule,  she  keeps  them  at  a  considerable  distance
from  one  another, — no  substitution  is  possible.  I  have  complained  to
her  more  than  once  that  she  ought  to  allow  her  hands  to  be  fully
enclosed.  She  said  that  during  a  seance  she  became  very  hyper-
aesthetic  and  nervous,  and  that  the  touch  of  certain  people's  hands,
especially  if  these  are  at  all  moist  or  hot,  is  so  acutely  unpleasant
to  her  that  she  cannot  endure  her  hands  being  held  inside  them.
She  said  that  this  sensation  had  no  connection  with  her  liking  for


522


E.  Feildivg,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


people  otherwise,  and  that  there  were  certain  persons  to  whom  she
was  greatly  attached  in  her  normal  condition  who  were  profoundly
antipathetic  to  her  as  neighbours  during  a  seance,  and  vice  versd.
As  regards  her  feet,  especially  her  left  foot,  she  said  she  was  still
more  sensitive.  Her  left  foot,  she  told  me,  had  once  been  run  over
by  the  wheel  of  a  cab,  and  she  cannot  stand  pressure  on  the  instep,
while  both  her  feet  have  a  tendency  to  go  to  sleep,  so  that  she  gets
a  sensation  of  pins  and  needles  in  them,  and  has  to  press  violently
every  now  and  then  with  them  so  as  to  restore  sensation.  This
certainly  accords  with  our  experiences,  and  we  have  all  of  us
arisen  from  seances  with  mangled  feet,  the  result  of  the  vigorous
application  of  her  exceedingly  sharp  heels.  It  is,  in  any  case,  not
unnatural  that  during  a  long  seance  she  should  be  restless  with
both  hands  and  feet,  and  although  her  knees  are  almost  always
pressing  against  ours,  and  well  under  the  table,  which  is  very
narrow,  thus  making  it  impossible  for  any  ordinary  person,  as  we
have  found  by  trial,  to  get  the  foot  outside  the  table  leg  in  such  a
way  as  to  perform  tricks  without  the  movement  immediately  being
perceived,  we  have  always  been  extremely  suspicious  of  a  substitution
of  feet  being  performed.  Nevertheless,  though  the  actual  sensation
on  our  feet  was  frequently  that  of  only  part  of  one  of  hers,  heel
or  toe,  leading  us  to  verify,  with  the  free  hand,  the  fact  that  we
were  really  controlling  the  foot  which  we  ought,  none  of  us  has
ever  once,  excepting  at  this  seance,  detected  the  slightest  attempt
at  foot  substitution.

During  this  seance,  however,  C.  did  notice  a  change,  and  forgetting
that,  owing  to  the  fastening,  she  had  only  a  certain  range  of  action,
he  stooped  down  to  feel,  and  found  that  Eusapia  had  crossed  her
feet.  He  told  me  in  English  that  the  foot  control  was  not  good.
Eusapia,  who  detests  English,  and  is  always  annoyed  when  she  does
not  know  what  is  being  said,  yet  has  a  flair  for  the  meaning  of
things  so  remarkable  as  to  amount  almost  to  the  dignit}'  of  tele-
pathic perception,  was  furious.  She  worked  herself  up  into  a
passion  and  covered  us  with  rich  Neapolitan  reproaches  for  our
suspicion  and  inexperience  of  her  phenomena.  The  storm  raged
for  about  an  hour,  and  when  at  length  calm  was,  to  a  certain  extent,
restored,  and  we  all  expressed  unfeigned  astonishment  at  the  activity
of  the  stool,  which  performed  a  pas  seul  outside  the  cabinet,  she  said
sarcastically  :  "  You  have  spoiled  all  the  better  phenomena,  and  now
you  are  amazed  at  a  straw  (paglia)  like  that."

E.  P.,  Dec.  17th,  1908.


lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  IX.  523

Note  on  Seance  IX.  by  H.  Carrington.

This  seance  started  most  propitiously,  and  it  was  possibly  owing
to  what  was  perhaps  a  blunder  on  my  part  that  we  did  not  get
many  more  startling  phenomena  than  we  did.  The  medium  arrived
in  very  high  spirits,  and  consented  to  have  her  hands  as  well  as
her  feet  tied  with  rope,  which  she  had  refused  at  the  previous
sitting.  B. — who  is  an  expert  at  knots  and  tying  generally — under-
took to  tie  the  medium's  feet  and  hands,  which  he  did.  I  then
controlled  the  right  side  of  the  medium,  B.  the  left.

The  table  began  to  move  almost  at  once,  as  at  our  first  seances.
Several  complete  levitations  followed  one  another  in  good  light,  and
under  excellent  conditions  of  control.  The  little  stool  was  then
moved  and  levitated,  and  moved  again  under  absolute  test  condi-
tions, as  the  record  will  show.  Several  important  and  evidential
touches  through  the  curtain  followed  this,  also  other  phenomena.

It  was  shortly  after  this  that  I  began  to  feel  dissatisfied  with
my  foot  control,  and  later  with  the  hand  control  also.  I  forgot,
for  the  time  being,  the  limitations  put  upon  the  medium's  move-
ments by  the  tying  of  the  hands  and  feet,  and  felt  I  should  have
the  same  amount  of  control  as  formerly  for  two  reasons:  (1)  touches
on  my  side  would  be  non-evidential  if  the  hand  control  were  not
good;  and  movements  of  objects  on  her  right  side,  on  the  floor,
would  also  be  non-evidential,  for  the  same  reason.  (2)  We  had
agreed  to  tell  the  medium  at  once  as  soon  as  any  laxness  of  the
control  became  apparent.  Further,  the  light  had  now  been  lowered
very  considerably,  and  the  right-hand  curtain  was  covering  part  of
her  body.  I  accordingly  manifested  some  signs  of  unrest,  as  soon
as  the  control  became  markedly  poor,  and  finally  sought  to  verify,
with  my  hands,  the  exact  position  of  her  feet.  It  was  at  this  that
she  became  angry,  and  a  long  intermission  resulted,  in  which  she
explained  that,  owing  to  the  tying,  she  did  not  consider  that  such
strict  conditions  of  control  were  necessary,  and  she  wished  to  be
more  free  to  move  about,  etc.  We  consented  to  this  at  once,
with  the  result  that,  although  the  control  of  hands  and  feet  through-
out the  rest  of  the  seance  was  not  so  good  as  formerly,  still  I
could  usually  follow  her  movements  quite  clearly,  and  am  assured
that  some  of  the  phenomena  at  least  could  not  have  been  produced
by  her,  even  had  she  effected  a  substitution  of  one  hand  and  one
foot,  as  I  think  the  account  will  show.

H.  C,  Dec.  15th,  1908.


24  E.  Feildivg,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


Note  on  Seance  IX.  by  W.  W.  Baggally.

The  numerous  complete  levitations  of  the  table  at  this  seance
afforded  further  evidence  of  the  existence  of  a  telekinetic  force
exercised  by  Eusapia.  The  light  was  sufficiently  good  to  enable  us
to  see  her  hands  and  legs  at  the  moment  that  some  of  the  levita-
tions took  place,  and  no  suspicious  movement  on  her  part  was
detected.  Her  feet  were  also  under  control,  and  could  not  have
been  inserted  under  the  table  legs,  and  the  hand  of  one  of  the
controllers  was  on  both  her  knees.  The  complete  levitations,  the
swelling  out  of  the  medium's  dress  already  referred  to,  and  the  bulging
of  the  curtains  of  the  cabinet,  afforded  me  the  strongest  evidence
so  far  obtained  by  us  for  the  existence  of  this  force,  owing  to  the
excellent  test  conditions  under  which  I  observed  them.

During  the  production  of  these  phenomena,  and  when  the  objects
were  outside  the  cabinet,  the  movement  could  be  watched  from  the
moment  of  its  initiation.  If  this  movement  were  due  to  a  super-
normal force,  as  the  test  conditions  under  which  it  Avas  produced
suggest,  it  is  not  impossible  that  this  same  force  is  also  at  work
when  objects  are  brought  out  of  the  cabinet, — although  their  initial
motion  is  not  then  perceptible, — if  the  test  conditions  in  this  latter
case  are  equally  severe.  This  supposed  force  appears  to  be  able
to  attract  matter,  as  when  the  medium  held  her  hands  above
the  table  (her  feet  being  under  control),  the  table  was  completely
levitated  with  all  four  feet  from  the  ground.  It  appears  also  able
to  repel  it,  as  when  she  placed  her  hands  below  the  table,  though
not  touching  it  (her  feet  being  under  control),  the  table  rose  in  the
same  manner.

The  movements  of  the  little  stool  which  was  placed  on  the  ground
outside  the  cabinet,  on  her  left,  at  a  distance  of  three  feet  from
her  left  hand  and  two  and  a-half  feet  from  her  left  foot,  illustrated
the  double  action  of  this  force.  When  she  made  a  motion  of
her  hand  high  above  the  stool,  as  if  pushing  it  away  from  her,
it  retired ;  and  when  she  made  the  motion,  also  high  above  the
stool,  as  if  drawing  it  towards  her,  it  advanced  in  her  direction.

At  the  time  these  motions  were  taking  place  I  was  sure  I  had  a
good  control  of  her  left  leg.  My  right  foot  was  not  only  against
her  left,  but  the  whole  length  of  my  right  leg  was  between  hers
and  the  stool.  The  light  was  sufficient  to  enable  us  to  see  the
little  stool  as  it  moved  in  different  dhections.

W.  W.  B.,  Dec.  14th,  1908.


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  IX.


525


Apparently  Spontaneous  Ringing  of  a  Bell  in  the  Seance
Cabinet,  Dec.  15th,  1908.

It  is  difficult  to  know  whether  to  include  the  following
peculiar  occurrence  in  this  report  or  not.  Whereas  in  the
case  of  phenomena  taking  place  in  Eusapia's  presence  the
problem,  reduced  to  its  simplest  form  is  "  conjuring  or
spooks  ? "  in  the  case  about  to  be  described  the  problem
appears  to  be  "  spooks,  or  a  practical  joke  ?  "  It  is  impossible
to  say  which  of  the  alternatives  appears  the  more  blankly
improbable.  E.  E.

Bell  Incident.
8.45  by  C.'s  watch.  15th  December,  1908.

At  a  certain  moment  when  B.»  was  working  up  our  clay
at  the  small  table  in  the  centre  of  the  room,  C.  being  in
the  next  room,  with  the  door  open,  the  small  bell  hanging
from  the  string  in  the  cabinet  rang  violently.  It  struck
against  the  wood  of  the  doorway — a  good  21  feet  from  the
bell.  The  ringing  continued  for  several  seconds,  with  violence,
and  then  stopped.  B.  was  at  least  nine  feet  from  the  bell,
at  the  time  of  ringing,  and  C.  could  see  he  did  not  approach
it.  Nobody  else  was  in  the  room  at  the  time.  As  soon
as  the  bell  ceased  ringing,  we  called  in  Mr.  Ryan  from  the
next  room,  who  opened  the  curtains  and  saw  (as  did  we  all)
that  the  bell  was  still  swinging  on  its  suspending  string.
The  cabinet  was  empty  save  for  a  chair,  standing  inside  it.
We  all  three  heard  and  saw  this  remarkable  bell  phenomenon.

(Signed) W.  W.  Baggally.

Hereward  Carrington.

I  was  adding  my  final  note  to  my  previous  evidence  when
I  heard  the  bell  in  the  next  room  ring.  I  attached  no
importance  to  this  (thinking  that  B.  and  C.  were  testing  the
apparatus).  Mr.  Baggally  just  then  rushed  in,  made  me  come
round  and  open  the  curtain.  I  then  saw  that  the  bell  was
still  swinging  on  its  string.  Mr.  Baggally's  hands  were
covered  with  clay,  which  he  was  puddling.

James  Ryan,  Dec.  15th,  1908.

[Written  immediately  after  the  curtain  had  been  opened.]


526


E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


Note  by  W.  W.  Baggally.

I  was  standing  alone  at  8.45  p.m.,  on  the  evening  of  the  15th
December,  by  the  side  of  a  table  in  the  seance  room  preparing
some  clay  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining,  if  possible,  impressions  of
"John's"  fingers  or  hand  at  the  sitting  which  Eusapia  was  to
give  us  on  that  evening,  when  suddenly  a  bell  in  the  cabinet  gave
a  bang  against  some  woodwork,  and  rang  loudly.  I  was  standing
at  the  time  2f  metres  from  the  closed  curtains  of  the  cabinet.
I  looked  at  C,  who  was  just  within  the  open  doorway  of  his  room,
and  said  to  him  "Do  you  hear  that?"  He  exclaimed  "By
Jove."  I  then  rushed  into  my  room  where  Mr.  Ryan  was  seated
writing  some  notes,  and  I  told  him  what  had  occurred.  He  came
with  me  into  the  seance  room,  opened  the  curtains,  and  we  all
saw  the  bell  swinging  violently  with  the  string  that  it  was
suspended  by.  I  had  anticipated  that  this  string  had  broken  and
that  the  bell  had  fallen  to  the  ground;  my  surprise  was  great  to
see  the  bell  still  hanging  and  swinging  violently.  I  asked  C.
to  make  a  note  of  the  occurrence  at  once,  and  also  Mr.  Ryan.

After  the  swinging  of  the  bell  had  ceased  it  occurred  to  me
that  possibly  some  one  had  hung  or  balanced  it  on  the  horizontal
cord  to  which  the  string  (by  which  the  bell  hung)  was  attached,
and  that  if  this  were  so,  a  jerk  might  cause  the  bell  to  fall  and
ring.  I  found  by  experiment  that  I  could  not  balance  the  bell  on
the  cord,  but  that  I  could  balance  it  on  a  nail  in  the  cabinet  or
hang  it  on  the  cord  by  a  small  ornamental  knob  that  was  on  the
side  of  the  handle.  When  so  balanced  or  hung,  the  bell  required
a  jerk  to  cause  it  to  fall.  No  one  was  near  the  cabinet  to  give
this  jerk.  The  incident  has  no  evidential  value,  but  is  very
perplexing.  It  is  strange  that  it  should  have  occurred  during  the
course  of  the  seances.  w w  Rj  Dec 15tb>  1908


Note  by  E.  Feilding.

As  to  this  bell  incident,  I  can  express  no  opinion,  not  having
been  present.  I  came  in  amid  the  general  consternation.  It  is
infinitely  painful  to  me,  as  Hon.  Sec.  of  that  most  staid  body,
the  S.P.R.,  to  record  the  state  of  emotion  in  which  I  found  my
colleagues.

As  to  who  was  responsible  for  it,  we  shall  never  know.  If  it
was  "John,"  playing  poltergeist,  he  reveals  a  sense,  of  humour  on


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  IX.


527


which  he  deserves  sincere  congratulation ;  if  a  more  fleshly  jester,
the  chambermaid  and  the  boots  must  divide  my  homage.  The
only  way  that  I  can  imagine  the  bell  ringing  as  it  did  (it  was
still  swinging  as  I  came  in)  was  by  its  having  fallen  from  a  position
of  unstable  suspense,  from  which  it  was  dislodged  by  some
concussion.  It  may  have  occurred  to  the  chambermaid  or  the
boots  to  balance  it  on  a  certain  nail  in  the  hopes  that  it  might
tumble  dramatically  later  on.  Long  practice  has  failed  to  disclose
any  other  method.  The  chambermaid  and  the  boots,  delicately
questioned,  deny  blankly.  The  chambermaid,  indeed,  is  terrified
at  our  cabinet  and  could  barely  be  persuaded  to  play  "Eusapia"
in  some  imitation  photographs'  of  phenomena  we  took  yesterday.
The  boots  is  too  stolid  for  such  imaginative  leaps.  "John"  himself
is  unquestionable.  Taking  it  all  round  it  is  the  most  perplexing,
indeed,  annoying  dilemma  of  this  most  perplexing  month.

An  additional  plausibility  would  perhaps  be  lent  to  a  super-
normal explanation  if  this  occurrence  be  taken  in  conjunction  with
an  incident  which  took  place  after,  I  think,  the  fifth  seance,
hitherto  not  mentioned.  I  had  gone  to  bed  and  to  sleep.  I  was
presently  awakened  by  C.  who  came  in  saying  that  from  his  bed  in
the  next  room  he  heard  rappings  in  my  room  through  the  open
door.  They  still  continued,  and  I  rose  and  went  with  C.  to  the
cabinet,  whence  they  came.  They  were  slow,  deliberate  raps
apparently  on  the  wood-work  near  the  window.  They  went  on
for  about  -J  minute  while  we  stood  there.  Unfortunately  the
light  was  then  turned  up  and  the  curtain  withdrawn  and  they
immediately  stopped.

Eusapia,  when  told  of  this,  declared  it  must  have  been  her
"fluid"  which  sometimes  stayed  behind.  Perhaps; — or  a  beetle.
I  do  not  know.  R  ^  Dec ^  190g_


Remarks  on  Seance  X.
December  loth,  1908.

In  this,  which  was  to  be  last  seance  of  the  series,  we  had
arranged  for  a  photographer  to  come  and  take  a  photograph  of
a  table  levitation,  Eusapia  having  readily  consented  when  this
was  proposed  to  her.  As  among  the  many  photographs  of  levi-
tations  that  have  already  been  published,  there  are  hardly  any
that  show  adequately  the  control  of  the  medium's  feet,  we  asked


528


E.  F eliding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


her  to  use  the  stocks  apparatus,  which  would  render  any  kind  of
foot  control  unnecessary.  We  also  invited  Prof.  Galeotti  and
Mr.  Ryan  to  attend  the  seance.  The  night  was  wet  and  stormy.
Eusapia  arrived  late  and  in  a  bad  humour.  She  said  that  she
had  been  ill  all  day,  and  had  intended  to  send  word  to  say
she  could  not  come,  and  that  it  was  only  because  she  had
heard  from  F.  in  the  afternoon  that  Prof.  Galeotti  was  coming
that  she  changed  her  mind.

The  photographers  were  placed  in  the  next  room  with  the
door  closed,  Eusapia  saying  that  when  she  felt  that  a  levitation
was  going  to  happen  she  would  give  notice  so  that  they  might
open  the  door  and  get  ready.  The  seance  began  at  9.40.  It
had  been  suggested  that  until  the  "  force "  worked  up  she
should  operate  with  the  table  free  of  the  apparatus,  but  she
presently  said  that  it  would  only  cause  disturbance  if  a  change
were  made  after  the  manifestations  had  begun,  and  asked
that  the  stocks  should  be  put  into  use  at  once.  Peyond  a
few  unimportant  tilts  nothing  whatever  occurred  for  an  hour.
The  light  was  altered  several  times  without  result.  Eventually,
at  10.34,  the  stocks  were  removed,  and  F.  and  P.  lay  on
the  floor  to  control  the  medium's  feet.  Still  no  result,  and,
at  10.45  p.m.,  the  light  was  altogether  put  out.  Shortly
afterwards,  a  complete  levitation  took  place  to  which,  owing
to  the  darkness,  no  attention  was  paid.  Some  violent  curtain
movements  and  touches,  in  what  appear  to  be  complete  con-
ditions of  control,  except  as  regards  the  medium's  head,  then
followed.  At  11.42  the  faint  red  light  was  again  lit,  and
another  complete  levitation  occurred  under  what  seemed  good
conditions,  but  the  light  was  again  shortly  afterwards  extin-
guished. From  12.11  ami.  till  the  seance  ended  at  12.28
a.m.  P.  continued  to  experience  a  series  of  touches  on  the
back  (as  to  which  see  his  and  F.'s  notes).  They  were  note-
worthy owing  to  the  fact  that  both  the  medium's  hands  were
held  during  part  of  their  continuance  by  both  the  controllers.

This  seance  proved,  on  account  of  the  bad  conditions  of
light  and  the  sparseness  of  the  phenomena,  the  least  interesting
of  the  series.  Two  alternative  explanations  offer  themselves.
1st.  That  the  medium  feared  the  test  of  photography,  and
therefore  limited  her  activity ;  2nd.  that  owing  to  her  fatigue
and  ill-health,  and  possibly  to  the  bad  weather,  the  "  force "


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  X.  529


was  weak.  She  seemed  greatly  annoyed  at  the  failure  of  the
stance,  and  afterwards  offered  us  another  one,  gratis,  to  make
up.  She  frequently  asked  for  the  light  to  be  raised,  but  tilts
of  the  table  invariably  insisted  on  its  being  lowered  again.
Her  demeanour  was  at  least  consistent  with  her  sincerity.  It
will  be  seen  that  no  new  kind  of  phenomenon  was  added  to
the  general  programme,  with  one  possible  exception,  an  imprint
in  the  clay,  of  which  no  mention  is  made  in  the  Shorthand
Eeport.  This  was  found  on  the  clay  being  examined  on  one
of  the  occasions  in  the  early  part  of  the  seance  when  the  light
was  turned  up.  Five  finger  marks  had  been  made  at  random,
i.e.  not  in  the  shape  of  a  hand.  A  real  finger  mark,  in  the
same  surface,  shows  the  papillae  markings ;  but  these  did  not.
Eusapia's  own  fingers  on  examination  showed  no  trace  of  clay.
The  imprints  were  produced  under  entirely  non-evidential
conditions,  unexpectedly,  and  at  a  time  when  attention  was
concentrated  on  securing  a  photograph  of  a  levitation,  and  no
particular  care  was  being  exercised  against  the  medium's  gaining
access  to  the  cabinet.  Except,  however,  that  it  is  strange  that
this  particular  phenomenon,  often  unsuccessfully  attempted
before,  should  have  been  produced  on  an  evening  when  the
"  force "  was  otherwise  so  weak,  and  that  it  was  produced
just  at  the  period  of  the  seance  when  fraud  could  easily  have
been  employed,  no  safe  conclusion  can  be  drawn.

Shorthand  Report  of  Seance  X.

December  16th,  1908.

Present,  F.,  C,  B.,  Ryan,  Professor  Galeotti,  and  M..  shorthand
writer.  Nothing  in  tJie  cabinet  excepting  a  chair,  tied  down,
on  the  seat  of  which  lies  a  cake  of  clay.

[Lights  not  recorded,  bxit  were  as  in  stance  IX. F.,  June  £4-1 09.]
9.40  p.m. Seance  begins.

Light  I.

9.4.6  p.m. Stocks  are  put  to  table.
9.54  2xm- Table  begins  tilting.

9.58  p.m.

2l


530  E.  Feilcling,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part

Light  II.


9.59  p.m.

Light  III.

10.0  p.m.


Light  IV.

10.S  p.m. Various  tilts.

10.7  p.m.  Prof.  G.  "  John,  hurry  up,  as  photographers  are
waiting!'

10.13  p.m.
No  Light.

10.27  p.m.  For  convenience  of  photographers  medium  says
that  she  will  make  a  certain  sign  when  she  feels  a  levitation
is  coming.

10.34  p.m.

Light  IV.

10.35  p.m. Stocks  removed.


Chair  with
F.  holding  clay  on  it.
right  foot.  —

A

'Prof.  G,


R.  holding
left  foot.


10.45  p.m. Door  of  photographer's  room  closed.

No  Light.

Complete  levitatioa  of  the  table.

10.58  p.m.

Light  IV.

11.5  p.m.


Lix.]  Sitt  ings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  X.  531


No  Light.

11.6  p.m.  F.  The  curtain  is  pulled  away  from  under  my  foot,
which  was  on  it.

F.  I  had  hold  of  the  medium's  two  feet,  and  my  left  foot  was
lying  on  the  top  of  the  curtain,  which  was  flicked  away  strongly
from  underneath  my  foot.

B.  Her  left  hand  on  my  right  hand  on  the  left  side  of  the  table.

G.  She  is  holding  my  hand. I  can  feel  her  thumb.

11.10  p.m. F.  The  curtain  blows  out.

F.  I  was  holding  both  feet,  and  she  kicked  up  with  her  right
foot.

11.11  p.m. C.  A  blow  like  a  mallet  on  the  table.
F.  The  curtain  is  violently  blown  about.

G.  I  have  the  whole  of  her  right  hand  in  my  left  hand,  feeling
fingers.

B.  Her  left  hand  on  the  palm  of  my  right  hand  resting  on  the
surface  of  this  end  of  the  table.

F.  At  the  time  of  the  blow  she  kicked  up  with  her  right  foot,
that  is  to  say,  her  knee.  Her  foot  certainly  did  not  touch  the
table.  [She  lifted  her  right  knee  about  four  inches,  and  brought  the
foot,  which  I  was  holding,  down  with  a  stamp.  The  blow  resounded
as  the  foot  came  down,  not  as  it  went  up. F.,  Dec.  16/08.]

B.  My  hand  is  under  her  left  foot,  between  her  left  foot  and
the  table  leg.

11.13  p.m.  B.  There  is  a  hand  that  has  caught  hold  of  my
knee  and  squeezes  it.

B.  Her  left  hand  on  my  right  hand.  I  feel  distinctly  that  it  is
her  left  hand. I  hold  it  by  the  thumb.

G.  She  has  her  right  hand  on  the  back  of  my  hand  in  the
middle  of  the  table.

11.15  p.m.
Light  IV.

F. The  curtain  conies  right  out  over  my  head.

F.  There  was,  at  the  same  time,  a  convulsive  movement  of  her
right  foot  [which  I  was  holding. F.,  Dec.  16/08].


532  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part

[Light  IV.]

G. I  felt  a  hand  press  me.

G.  She  holds  my  hand  on  her  knee  by  her  two  fingers.
B.  She  is  holding  the  whole  of  my  right  hand  with  her  left
hand  on  her  left  knee.

11.24  V-m- F-  Her  left  foot  is  kicking  about

Complete  levitation  of  the  table.

F.  I  had  both  feet.

11.27  p.m. The  curtain  blows  out.

G.  My  left  hand  is  resting  on  her  right  knee.  I  can  feel  the
whole  of  her  hand.

B.  Her  left  hand  on  my  right  hand  on  her  left  knee.  I  am
certain  it  is  her  left  hand  because  I  can  feel  her  thumb.

F.  I  have  both  feet.

11.30  p.m. The  right  curtain  blows  out.

G.  Same  control  as  before.
B.  Same  control  as  before.

F.  Same  control  as  before.

11.31  p.m. The  curtain  was  blown  over  G.'s  head.

G.  My  hand  is  on  the  table,  and  she  holds  it.

B.  Her  left  hand  was  holding  my  right  hand  on  her  left  knee.

B.  Something  touched  me.  She  held  my  right  hand  in  her  left
hand  towards  the  curtain,  and  I  felt  a  touch.

G.  My  hand  is  on  the  table,  and  she  holds  it.

G. I  am  touched  on  the  shoulder.

G.  My  hand  is  on  the  surface  of  the  table,  and  I  can  feel  the
whole  of  her  hand  on  my  hand,  her  thumb  under  and  her  fingers
over  it.

B.  I  am  holding  her  left  hand  in  my  left  hand  on  the  table,
my  right  hand  on  the  back  of  her  neck.

11.42  p.m. Complete  levitation  of  the  table.

G.  Control  same  as  before.
B.  Control  same  as  before.
F.  I  have  both  feet.


LIX0  Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  X.  533

[Light  IV.]

12.0  p.m.  F.  gets  tip  from  beneath  the  table,  R.  also  abandons
his  position.


Prof.  G.


12.11  a.m.  c.
No  Light.

B. Something  is  playing  about  with  my  back.

Long  discussion  between  F.  and  B.  about  a  supposed  substitution
of  hands.  [  When  B.  reported  the  touch  on  his  back,  I  noticed
that  the  medium's  right  hand  ivas  only  partly  on  my  left.  I
felt  down  quickly  with  my  right  hand  and  found  that  her
fingers  were  resting  on  one  of  B.'s  hands.  I  said  in  Italian,
"The  control  is  not  good."  The  medium  at  once  agreed  that
it  was  not  good,  her  hands  being  too  close  together.  But  she
showed  me  the  position  of  her  left  hand,  which  was  under  B.'s
right.  B.  stated  that  it  had  been  there  all  the  time.  After
this  B.  and  I  together  controlled  both  of  the  medium's  hands,
I  leaning  over  to  B.'s  side  of  table.  The  touches,  however,  on
B.'s  back  still  continued  as  before. F.,  Dec.  16/08.]

12.13  a.m. B. There  is  something  touching  my  back.

B.  She  had  her  left  hand  on  my  right  hand  on  the  table  on
the  left  side  of  the  table,  and  her  left  foot  was  resting  on  my  right
foot,  and  our  knees  are  touching.

F.  Her  right  hand  is  squeezing  mine  very  hard  on  her  right  lap.
Her  right  foot  is  squeezing  very  hard  on  my  foot,  and  I  have  just
verified  that  it  is  her  right  foot.

B. Something  is  playing  with  my  back  again.

F.  At  that  time  she  squeezed  my  right  hand  under  the  table.
B.  Same  conditions  and  control  as  before.
F.  Same  control  as  before.


534  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part

[No  Light.]

B. Something  is  playing  about  with  my  back  again.

F.  That  is  extremely  good.  There  is  absolutely  no  possibility
of  hand  substitution.

12.20  a.m. B.  This  thing  keeps  playing  on  my  back.

B.  Her  left  foot  is  pressing  on  my  foot.  [While  I  was  feeling
these  touches  on  my  back,  I  repeatedly  placed  my  left  hand  on
the  medium's  left  hand,  which  was  on  my  right  hand,  and  verified
that  it  was  really  her  left  hand  by  passing  my  left  hand  all  up
her  arm  to  the  shoulder,  and  I  also  verified  that  it  was  her  left
foot  that  was  resting  on  my  right  foot  by  passing  my  left  hand
down  from  her  knee  to  the  foot  which  was  resting  on  mine.
B.,  Dec.  16/08.]

12.22  a.m.  F. Rather  good  partial  levitation.

12.23  a.m.  B. Something  is  knocking  on  the  back  of  my  chair.
B.  and  F.  Control  perfect,  the  same  as  before.

12.24  a.m.  B. Something  is  playing  with  my  chair.

F.  I  have  my  left  hand  on  her  left  wrist,  and  her  right  hand
is  on  the  top  of  my  right  hand,  so  that  I  can  feel  both  her  hands.
I  still  hold  her  left  hand.

B.  And  I  verify  by  feeling  right  up  to  her  shoulder.

F.  My  left  foot  behind  her  right  heel,  and  her  right  leg  touched
by  my  left.

B.  She  says  she  wants  to  touch  my  chair,  which  she  does.
B. Something  touched  me.

12.27  a.m.  B.  Something  is  playing  with  my  hand.  Again  it
does  so,  now  under  my  arm.

12.28  a.m. Stance  terminated.

Note  on  Seance  X.  by  E.  Feilding.

I  think  that  the  incident  reported  at  12.11  a.m.  may  be  somewhat
instructive,  and  that  it  may  throw  some  light  on  the  vexed  question
of  the  frequency  of  Eusapia's  fraudulent  substitution  of  hands.  In
view  of  the  Cambridge  report,  and  the  reports  of  other  observers,


Lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  X.  535

it  is  clearly  impossible  to  deny  that  she  resorts,  at  times,  to  this
trick.

My  own  experience  on  this  occasion,  however,  leads  me  to  think
it  is  not  impossible  that  it  is  often,  in  the  darkness,  thought  she
had  resorted  to  it  when,  in  fact,  she  has  not,  and  that  her  hands
have,  through  weariness  or  carelessness,  got  into  what  may  be  called
the  "  substitution  position,"  without  its  being  taken  practical  advan-
tage of.  I  noticed  that  I  only  had  half  her  hand,  and  immediately
felt  for  the  other  half,  and  found  it  on  B.'s  left  hand.  I  at  once
jumped  to  the  conclusion  that  she  must  have  produced  the  touches
on  B.'s  back  with  her  other  hand.  In  accordance  with  my  promise
I  told  her  my  control  was  not  good.  She  agreed ;  but  lifted
my  hand  to  feel  her  other  hand,  which  I  found  was  under  B's
right.  Even  then,  had  not  the  touches  continued  at  intervals  for
about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  on  B's  back,  I  should  still  have  felt
dissatisfied,  but  our  attention  being  called  to  the  close  position  of
the  hands,  we  took  especial  pains  to  control  them,  and  the  touches
continued  without  the  least  interruption.

E.  F.,  Dec.  19th,  1908.

Note  on  Seance  X.  by  W.  W.  Baggally.

There  was  a  good  deal  of  confusion  at  this  seance  owing  to  the
repeated  opening  and  shutting  of  the  door  between  the  seance  room
and  C.'s  room,  where  the  photographic  camera  had  been  placed  with
which  it  was  intended  that  a  photograph  of  the  seance  table  should
be  taken  at  the  moment  of  its  complete  levitation.  The  accidental
flash,  at  one  time,  of  the  magnesium  powder  was  also  a  cause  of
disturbance.

Notwithstanding  these  disquieting  incidents  (which  had  a  dis-
turbing effect  on  the  mind  of  Eusapia),  good  phenomena  took  place
towards  the  end  of  the  seance.

The  repeated  touches  on  my  back  between  12.11  and  12.23  were
to  me  of  great  evidential  value,  notwithstanding  the  prevailing
darkness  at  the  time,  as  I  not  only  assured  myself  that  I  had
control  of  the  medium's  left  hand  and  left  foot,  by  feeling  them
with  my  right  hand  and  my  right  foot,  but  also  by  repeatedly,
while  I  was  being  touched,  passing  my  left  hand  all  up  her  left
arm  to  her  shoulder,  thus  verifying  that  it  was  really  her  left  hand
that  rested  on  my  right,  and  by  also  continually  passing  my  left
hand  down  her  left  knee  to  the  foot  which  rested  on  mine,  thus
verifying  that  it  was  her  left  foot  that  rested  on  my  right.


536  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


The  touches  could  not,  by  any  possibility,  have  been  produced
by  her  head,  as  when  I  passed  my  left  hand  up  her  left  arm,  I
verified  the  position  of  her  head.

The  touches  were  not  produced  by  the  hand  or  foot  that  I  had
under  control,  nor  by  her  head.  The  medium's  right  hand  and
right  foot  were  under  perfect  control  of  F.,  therefore  the  touches  on
my  back  appeared  to  me  evidential.

W.  W.  B.,  Dec.  16th,  1908.

Remarks  on  Seance  XI.

December  19th,  1908.

This  was  the  extra  seance  which  Eusapia  had  offered,  to
make  up  for  the  failure  of  the  tenth.  C.  had  been  obliged
to  leave  Naples.  F.  and  B.  decided  to  make  another  attempt
to  get  the  '  higher  phenomena '  of  materialisation,  and  to
discard  the  recording  of  the  details  of  control  of  the  less  im-
portant manifestations.  They  also  invited  Signor  Zingaropoli,
a  gentleman  of  high  official  position  in  the  avvocatura  of  the
municipality,  very  well  known  to  Eusapia  and  thoroughly
familiar  with  her  phenomena ;  and  also  Mrs.  and  Miss  Hutton,
two  English  ladies,  friends  of  his,  and  who  had  attended  a
few  of  Eusapia's  seances.  Although,  it  is  true,  the  '  higher
phenomena '  did  not  appear,  the  stance  proved  an  extremely
fruitful  one,  and  the  shorthand  report,  not  very  complete  in
itself,  but  amplified  by  subsequent  notes,  should  be  carefully
read.  It  will  be  sufficient  if  attention  is  here  called  to  the
more  remarkable  occurrences.

(1)  The  very  remarkable  curtain  movement  at  10.11  p.m.

which  occurred  in  the  bright  No.  1  light,  shortly
after  F.  had  carefully  examined  the  curtain,  gathered
it  together  and  placed  it  away  from  the  medium.

(2)  The  movements  of  the  stool  at  10.19  p.m.,  outside  the

cabinet,  within  a  minute  or  two  after  it  had  been
placed  on  the  floor  at  a  distance  of  two  or  three  feet
from  the  medium,  with  the  express  purpose  of  seeing
whether  she  could  cause  it  to  move.  Note  that  the
movements  were  occasionally  sideways,  that  the  short-
hand writer,  who  had  placed  the  stool,  was  standing
close  to  it  while the  movements  were  taking  place,


Lix.J  Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Stance  XI.  537

and  on  several  occasions  felt  around  the  stool  to  show
that  there  was  no  attachment.

(3)  The  appearance  of  an object  like  a  head  with  large

features,  or  a  hand  with  the  finders  crooked  so  as  to
simulate  a  head,  wrapped  up  in  the  curtain,  at  10.54
p.m.  and  at  11.33  and  11.34  p.m.

(4)  The  repeated  graspings  of  B.,  kneeling  on  the  table  from

11.02  p.m.  to  11.09  p.m.,  by  a  hand  through  the  curtain,

(5)  The  white  thing  which  appeared  3  ft.  to  the  medium's

left,  i.e.  from  the  corner  near  the  window,  at  11.16  p.m.

(6)  The  touches  that  occurred  simultaneously  on  both  the

controllers'  laps  at  11.45  p.m.,  when  both  the  medium's
hands  were  visibly  on  the  table.

(7)  The  levitation  of  the  clay  at  12.15  a.m.,  from  the  floor

behind  the  medium's  chair,  inside  the  curtain,  and  its
appearance  between  Mrs.  H.  and  the  medium  at  a
height  of  about  3 \  ft.  from  the  ground,  wrapped  up
in  the  curtain,  held  there  as  if  by  some  one  behind
the  curtain  until  taken  by  Mrs.  H.  and  F.

(8)  The levitation,  at 12.26  a.m.,  of  the  stool,  which,  on

account  of  its  extreme  slowness,  was  perhaps  the  most
remarkable  of  all  the  transportations  of  objects  which
we  had  yet  witnessed.  The  inception  of  this  movement
was  seen  by  the  shorthand  writer,  who  was  standing
close  to  the  stool  as  it  began  its  upward  climb.

(9)  The  long  series  of  touches,  lasting  almost  continuously

through  a  period  of  half  an  hour  (12.34  a.m.  to  1.6
a.m.),  experienced  by  B.  as  of  a  hand  playing  about
on  his  left  hand  or  wrist  as  he  held  it  against  the
curtain.  It  will  be  noticed  that  during  part  of  this
time  B.  held  both  the  medium's  thumbs  in  front  of  her
on  the  table,  at  one  time  in  both  of  his  hands  which
he  kept  far  apart  and  at  another  time  in  his  right
hand,  the  medium's  thumbs  and  hands  being  visible.

(10)  Finally,  the  series  of  raps  produced  on  the  door  leading
into  B.'s  room,  at  the  side  of  the  cabinet,  at  the  close  of
the  seance,  which  must  be  regarded  as  the  only  really
evidential  raps  obtained  throughout  the  whole  series.
The  No.  1  light  was  on,  and  the  room  additionally  flooded
with  light  through  the  open  door  of  the  next  room.


538  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part

Shorthand  Eepokt  of  Seance  XI.
December  IQth,  1908.

Present:  F.,  B.,  Mrs.  and  Miss  Hutton,  Signor  Zingaropoli,  and
M.,  shorthand  writer.

In  cabinet :  Photographic  plate  hanging  to  wall  as  before.

The  board  of  clay  is  on  the  ground  in  the  centre  of  the  cabinet.
The  small  guitar  is  upside  down  in  the  corner  of  the  cabinet
behind  the  clay.

[Lights  not  recorded,  but  were  as  in  seances  IX.  and  X.  F.,
June  34/09.]

Guitar.

Board  with
clay.


Miss  H.


light  I.

10.5  p.m. Tilts,  non-evidential,  begin.

F.  Partial  levitation  of  the  table  is  coming  on.

F.  The  table  has  been  up  in  the  air  on  the  two  legs  furthest
from  her  for  the  last  half  minute.  I  am  holding  her  hand  on
the  top  of  it. It  is  wriggling  about.

10.8  p.m. Tilts  become  very  violent.

Complete  levitation  of  the  table.

10.11  p.m. Curtain  blows  out.

10.11  p.m.  F.  I  am  putting  my  hand  down  between  her  dress
and  the  curtain,  and  now  I  have  made  a  perfectly  clear  space
between  her  foot  and  the  curtain.


lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  XL  539


[Light  I.]

10.16  p.m. F. I  saw  her  dress  bulging  out  to  the  right.

F.  Her  foot  is  certainly  on  mine.

F.  It  is  coming  out  again.  It  is  coming  out  a  different  way
this  time.

10.18  p.m. Tilts  ask  for  less  light.
Light  II.  but  immediately  afterwards
Light  I.  again.

The  little  stool  is  at  her  request  placed  outside  the  curtain  to
the  left  of  the  medium,  about  a  yard  distant  from  her  left
foot.

F.  I  saw  the  curtain  move  then  on  to  the  medium.  I  could  see
a  perfectly  clear  space  between  the  chair  of  the  medium  and  the
curtain.  Again  while  I  am  looking  at  an  absolutely  clear  space
the  curtain  rushes  out  and  completely  engulfs  the  right  side  of
the  medium.

[This  was  the  first  time  I  have  seen  the  curtain  blow  out  under  such
absolutely  evidential  conditions.  I  was  sitting  beside  it ;  I  had  at
10.11  pulled  it  right  away  from  the  medium  so  that  a  clear  space  of
a  foot  was  between  it  and  her,  visible  right  down  to  the  carpet,
the  bottom  of  the  curtain  being  gathered  together  in  a  bunch
away  from  her  foot.  I  then  asked  that  the  curtain  might  again
be  made  to  blow  out.  I  watched  it  closely.  The  medium  several
times  held  her  hand  out  towards  it,  but  it  did  not  move.  Her
dress  then  made  two  bulging  movements  out  towards  it  from
below  her  chair,  on  the  right,  but  did  not  reach  it.  At  10.18  p.m.
the  table  tilted  five  times  for  less  light.  I  protested  and  asked
that  the  curtain  might  be  moved  in  the  original  bright  light,
and  the  light  was  immediately  turned  up  again.  I  watched  the
curtain  continuously  throughout,  and  suddenly  the  whole  of  the
left  edge  of  the  right  curtain,  i.e.  the  edge  nearest  to  her  right
shoulder,  rushed  out  and  completely  enveloped  her  right  side.
F,  Dec.  20/08.]


10.19  p.m. Five  tilts  for  less  light.


540  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part

Light  II.

M. I  see  the  little  stool  move.

Mrs.  H.  I  am  squeezing  the  medium's  left  hand  in  my  right.

M.  The  stool  again  moved while  I was  trying to close  the
window  doors  which  had  become  unlatched.
10.23  p.m. Mrs.  H.  Three  knocks  on  my  chair.

Mrs.  H.  Control  same  as  before.

Mrs.  H.  The  little  stool  is  moving  again.
M.  While  I  was  looking  at  it.

[At  medium's  request  I  had  fetched  the  stool  from  another  part
of  the  room  and  placed  it  as  stated  above.  I  then  returned  to
my  place  shortly  after,  at  10.19.  I  saw  the  stool  move.  I
walked  over  towards  it,  re-examined  it  by  putting  my  hands  right
round  it,  and  ascertained  that  there  was  no  attachment,  and  it
again  immediately  moved  sideways,  i.e.  not  towards  the  medium.
There  was  a  clear  space  between  the  stool  and  the  medium.
M.,  Dec.  20/08.]

10. 25  p.m. Five  tilts  ask  for  less  light.
Light  III.

F.  In  this  light  I  can  see  the  separate  fingers  of  the  medium.

10.37  p.m.  F.  Note  that  I  verified  the  clay  after  the  medium  had
entered  the  room  and  taken  her  seat.

10.28  p.m. Mrs.  H. The  curtain  is  moving  towards  me.

F. More  movements — 2  or  3  times,  very  large.

10.30  p.m. Mrs.  H.  The  curtain  still  moves.

M.  notes:  The  medium  says  she  wishes  to  touch  something,  which
she  does,  then  replacing  her  hand.

F.  I  can  see  the  medium's  left  hand  on  the  table;  her  right
hand  is  on  her  lap  in  mine.  Her  left  foot  on  Mrs.  Hutton's
foot,  and  her  right  foot  on  mine.

F.  Substitution  of  hands!

Mrs.  H.  I  thought  that  I  still  had  hold  of  the  medium's  left
hand.


Lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Stance  XL.


541


[Light  III.]

[The  medium  was  now  holding  Mrs.  H.'s  and  my  hands  on  her  lap
close  together.  I  was  looking  over  the  mediums  lap,  the  hands
being  obscured  by  the  table,  and  I  saw  a  hand  moving  about
toivards  the  curtain.  I  ashed  Mrs.  H.  if  she  held  the  mediums
left.  She  said  "  No,  she  has  made  a  substitution."  Her  right
hand  was  only  partly  on  mine,  and  she  must  have  given  Mrs.  H.
the  impression  that  she  continued  to  hold  the  left  by  touching
her  with  the  fingers  of  her  right  hand.  The  movement  of  the
hand  I  saw  was  quite  deliberate  and  visible.  Nothing  followed.
F.,  Dec.  20 '/OS, ,]

[It  seems  difficult  to  suppose  that  her  intent  was  fraudulent,  as
she  must  have  known  that  in  the  light  which  prevailed  a  trick
woidd  have  been  detected. F.,  May  23/09.]

[I  felt  the  thumb  nail  of  the  mediums  rigid  hand  and  imme-
diately suspected  she  had  substituted  the  right  for  the  left  hand,
thus  leaving  the  left  free.  My  suspicion  tvas  confirmed  when  I
felt  the  left  return  to  its  original  position,  clasping  my  right.
C.  H,  Dec.  22/08.]

10.34  p.m. Mrs.  H. Three  knocks  on  my  chair.

10.35  p.m. Mrs.  H.  Three  taps  on  my  chair  again.
10.43  p.m. Mrs.  H.  A  hand  is  pressing  my  right  thigh.

F.  I  can  see  the  medium's  left  hand  on  the  table. Her  right
hand  in  my  left.

Mrs.  H.  Four  raps  on  my  chair.

10.4-7  p.m.  Light  J/..

Light  IV.

F.  Medium  has  her  rigid  leg  right  across  my  knees.  Her  right
hand  is  on  her  right  lap.

10.50  p.m.  F.  Something  white  appeared  over  the  medium's
head.

F.  Her  right  hand  is  over  on  my  corner  of  the  table  in  mine.
H.  Her  left  hand  is  on  my  right  hand  on  the  table.


542


E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


[Light  IV.]

10.54  p.m. Mrs.  H. A  black  thing  came  out.

F.  The  left  curtain  came  right  over  the  table,  obscuring  Mrs.  H.
[This  appeared  like  an  elongated  hand  with  very  long  fingers,
which  were  bent.  The  curtain  was  tightly  stretched  over  the
object,  which  waved  three  times.  It  appeared  at  a  considerable
height  above  the  medium's  head.  I  had  firm  control.  C.  H.,
Dec.  22/08.]

F.  Medium's  right  band  was  in  mine  on  the  table.

Mrs.  H.  Her  left  hand  in  mine  on  my  corner  of  the  table.

10.55  p.m. F.  A  light  appeared  over  the  medium's  head.
[This  light  was  different  from  either  of  the  two  lights  we  had  pre-
viously seen. It  was  more  of  a  yellow  colour,  not  blue-green,
and  it  did  not  sparkle. F.,  Dec.  20/08.]

F.  Her  right  hand  immovable  in  mine.

Mrs.  H.  Medium's  left  hand  in  mine  on  this  corner  of  the  table.
Mrs.  H.  Five  knocks  on  my  chair.

1 0.5*7  p.m. Mrs.  H. Something  has  just  touched  my  right  side.

10.58  'p.m.  Light  4  is  now  shaded  by  two  thicknesses  of  a  silk
handkerchief.

Light  IV.  shaded.

F.  I  can  see  the  face  and  hands  and  position  of  the  medium,
but  I  can  no  longer  see  the  individual  fingers.

11  p.m.  F.  Something  touched  me  on  the  right  hand,  under
the  table.

F.  Medium's  right  hand  is  visible  on  the  table.
Mrs.  H.  She  holds  my  right  hand  in  her  left  on  the  table,  the
two  hands  are  separate.

11.1  p.m.  Mrs.  H.  There  is  a  light  on  the  white  window  curtain.
[A  golden  yellow  light  remained  for  two  or  three  seconds  on  the
white  curtain  to  the  right  of  me,  then  shifted  its  position  a  few
inches  to  the  right  and  disappeared. C.  H.,  Dec.  22/08.]


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Stance  XI.


543


[Light  IV.  shaded.]

11. 2  p.m. B.  I  get  up  on  to  the  table  at  medium's  request.


Guitar


Miss  H.


B.  Oh,  an  arm  comes  and  touches  my  elbow  through  the
curtain.  A  distinct  arm  on  my  arm.  It  is  much  too  high  for
the  medium  to  reach.

F.  Medium's  hand  is  right  in  mine  on  my  corner  of  the  table.

B.  I  am  touched  again.  It  is  pulling  my  hand.  I  can  feel  the
fingers. It  is  coming  again.

Mrs.  H.  She  is  holding  my  hand  in  hers  on  this  corner  of  the
table.

B.  My  hand  is  at  least  three  feet  or  more  above  the  head  of
the  medium.

F.  At  the  time  of  the  last  phenomenon  I  measured  the  distance
between  Mrs.  H.'s  fingers  and  mine;  it  is  about  9  to  12  inches.

B.  A  hand  caught  hold  of  my  four  fingers.  I  distinctly  felt
the  fingers  of  the  hand  and  the  thumb,  which  gave  me  a  close
squeeze.

F.  Medium's  two  hands  were  in  the  extreme  corners  of  the  table,
the  left  held  in  Mrs.  H.'s  hand  and  the  right  in  the  extreme  right
of  the  corner  in  mine.

[About  this  time,  while  B.  was  on  the  table,  an  incident  occurred
which  was  not  caught  by  the  stenographer.  The  medium's  head
had  retired  into  the  shadow  between  the  curtains.  Suddenly  I
perceived  her  head  about  a  foot  higher  up,  looking  out  of  the
curtain  as  though  trying  to  appear  as  a  '  spirit '  head  to  B.  I
noticed  no  movement  of  her  body,  and  the  effect  was  exactly


544  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.

[Light  IV.  shaded.]


[part


that  described  in  Alice  in  Wonderland  of  a  neck  becoming  sud-
denly elongated.  This  must  have  been  an  illusion  ;  I  cannot
account  for  it.  The  medium  must  have  known  her  head  was
visible  to  me.1 F.,  Dec.  20/08.]

11.5  p.m. Mrs.  H.  A  hand  is  pressing  my  hip  on  my  right  side.

F.  My  left  hand  is  on  her  left,  which  is  holding  Mrs.  H.'s  arm,
and  her  right  is  on  the  top  of  my  right  hand.

11.8  p.m. B. Something  has  moved  inside  the  cabinet.

11.9  p.m.  B.  That  hand  came  out  and  nearly  pulled  me  off
the  table. It  came  out  as  I  was  getting  down.

F.  I  had  her  right  hand  on  the  right  corner  of  the  table.
Mrs.  H.  I  had  the  whole  of  the  medium's  left  hand  pressing  on
mine  on  the  table.

[B.  returned  to  his  seat. F.,  June  34-/09.]


Oxtitar


Board  with
clay.


Miss  H.


11.11  p.m. Mrs.  H. A  hand  is  pressing  my  right  shoulder.

F.  I  have  her  right  hand  visibly  on  the  table  in  my  right  hand.
I  had  my  left  hand  over  both  knees. Her  head  was  visible.
Mrs.  H.  And  I  held  her  left  hand  on  the  table.

11.14  p.m. Mrs.  H. The  curtain  is  being  drawn.


1  Mrs.  H.  writes,  Dec.  24/08,  "You  may  be  interested  to  know  that  I  have
seen  the  elongation  of  the  neck  which  you  describe  as  a  scene  from  Alice  in
Wonder/and  on  other  occasions,  although  not  at  this  last  stance.  I  was  speaking
with  Prof.  Lutzenberger,  a  well-known  physician  and  psychist,  and  he  told  me
that  Eusapia  had  given  some  very  successful  manifestations  of  this  elongated  neck
and  of  her  apparent  power  to  grow  a  third  arm.  These  experiments  took  place
here  last  year.  ..."


LIX.]


Sittings  ivith  Eusapia :  Seance  XI.


545


[Light  IV.  shaded.]

11.16  p.m. Mrs.  H.  Something  white  appeared.

F.  From  here  I  can  see  the  white  thing  which  comes  out  about

three  feet  to  the  left  of  the  medium's  head. It  looks  to  me

from  here  very  much  like  a  very  large  handful  of  tow.

[This  white  thing  came  out  quite  deliberately ; it  was  irregular

in  shape. It  stayed  out  about  a  foot  beyond  the  curtain  for

2  or  3  seconds  and  then  retired. F.,  Dec.  20/08.]

[The  white  thing  which  came  out  from  the  curtain  quite  near

my  right  shoulder  was  of  uncertain  shape  and  looked  like  a

white  cloud  or  a  quantity  of  cotton  wool. C.  H.,  Dec.  22/08.]

F.  Her  right  hand  is  on  the  table  visible  to  me  in  the  whole  of
my  right.

Mrs.  H.  I  have  her  left  hand  here  on  my  corner  of  the  table.

F.  There  can  be  absolutely  no  question  of  substitution  now,  her
hands  are  far  too  far  apart  and  the  curtain  is  between  them.  I
have  my  left  hand  on  her  two  knees,  and  her  head  is  visible.

11.18  p.m. H. Something  has  touched  me.

F.  Medium's  right  hand  is  holding  mine  some  inches  off  the  table.
My  left  hand  always  on  her  two  knees.

Mrs.  H.  Her  left  hand  is  on  mine  and  her  head  is  always
visible.

11.21  p.m. F.  I  am  touched  gently  on  my  left  knee.

F.  My  left  hand  is  across  medium's  two  knees,  and  her  right
hand  is  visible  to  me  on  the  table.

Mrs.  H.  Her  left  hand  is  over  mine  on  the  table.

11.28  p.m. M.  Medium  asks  for  control  to  be  verified.

F.  My  left  hand  was  on  the  top  of  her  head  and  I  felt  some-
thing just  touch  the  top  of  my  fingers.

F.  Her  right  hand  visibly  in  mine  on  the  table.

Mrs.  H.  Her  left  hand  was  on  the  back  of  my  hand  on  the  table.

11.30  p.m.  F.  A  hand  pressed  me  through  the  curtain  on  my
left  hand,  which  was  behind  her  head.

F.  Her  right  hand  is  visibly  in  mine  on  the  table.
Mrs.  H.  Mine  is  on  the  table,  her  left  hand  on  the  back  of  it.

2  m


546  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


[Light  IV.  shaded.]

F.  There  can  be  no  question  of  a  substitution  of  hands  here
because  her  left  hand  is  the  other  side  of  the  curtain  which  is
over  the  table.

11.33  p.m.  F.  Medium  asks  me  to  lean  my  head  against  hers
and  look  in  a  particular  direction  [i.e.  towards  Mrs.  H.  F.,
Dec.  SO/08].

F.  There  comes  a  black  thing  right  between  me  and  the  light,
between  me  and  B.
Mrs.  H.  Here  it  comes.

Mrs.  H.  There  is  a  hand  pressing  me.

F.  Her  right  hand  was  close  to  my  face  on  the  right  side  of  the
table  holding  my  hand  entirely.

Mrs.  H.  My  right  hand  on  the  table  with  her  left  hand  holding  it.

Mrs.  H.  Again  something  has  touched  my  right  leg,  and  I  have
not  lost  control  of  her  hand.

Mrs.  H.  My  jacket  is  being  pulled  on  the  right  side.  I  have
not  lost  control.

11.34  p.m. Mrs.  H.  The  black  thing  again.

F.  This  time  it  was  a  head,  I  saw  the  features.  It  looked  to
me  like  a  head  wrapped  up  in  the  curtain.  It  remained  out  I
should  say  about  3  or  4  seconds.  It  went  as  far  as  between
me  and  the  light.  Her  right  hand  was  holding  mine  firmly,  right
round  the  thumb. Her  head  was  against  mine.

Mrs.  H.  Control  just  the  same  as  before.

[To  me  this  appeared  like  a  large  black  head  with  clearly  marked
features  more  than  life  size,  as  though  made  of  stiff  black  muslin.
It  was  attached  to  a  kind  of  a  body,  it  came  slowly  out  over
the  medium's  left  shoulder  past  Mrs.  H,  well  over  the  table
towards  the  light.  The  curtain  being  very  thin  and  transparent,
the  effect  I  saw  might  have  been  produced  by  a  head  inside  it,
the  curtain  being  drawn  closely  over  the  features,  which  were
distinct,  and  revealed  themselves  owing  to  the  light  being  on  the
other  side  of  them,  or  the  same  effect  might  have  been  produced
by  a  head  made  out  of  stiffened  black  muslin  or  gimp  without
any  curtain  outside  it. I  am  absolutely  certain  of  the  control


Lis.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  XI.  547


[Light  IV.  shaded.]

of  the  right  hand,  which  was  close  to  my  own  face.  F.,
Dec.  20/08.]

[The  black  object  was  decidedly  covered  with  the  curtain  (not
black  muslin).  It  [the  curtain]  came  out  on  my  side  close  to
me  and  it  was  tightly  stretched  over  the  object  in  which  I
distinguished  the  same  elongated  hand  seen  at  10.54  p.m.  The
fingers  seemed  to  imitate  a  profile  like  an  ombre  chinoise,  the
middle  finger  crooked  like  a  Eoman  nose,  the  folded  thumb  form-
ing a  chin.  This  is  a  manifestation  which  has  never  failed  to
appear  at  any  of  Eusapia's  seances  at  which  I  have  been  present.
...  I  am  perfectly  certain  of  the  control  of  the  left  hand.
C.  H.,  Dec.  22-24/08.]

11.38  p.m. Medium  asks  F.  to  pinch  her.
F.  Now  I  am  pinching  her.

Mrs.  H. I  am  pinched  on  my  right  arm.

F.  I  am  pinching  again.

Mrs.  H. Both  at  the  same  time  now.

F.  I  pinched  the  medium  and  Mrs.  H.  felt  a  pinch  simul-
taneously, but  not  always,  that  is  to  say,  sometimes  I  pinched
and  she  did  not  feel  the  pinch.

[The  medium  told  me  that  if  I  pinched  her  Mrs.  H.  would  feel
simultaneous  pinches.  I  did  so  first  on  her  left  shoulder  and
subsequently  on  her  right  arm,  the  first  two  or  three  pinches
Mrs.  H.  was  simultaneously  pinched,  but  the  last  two  or  three
she  felt  nothing. F,  Dec.  20/08.]

[I  also  felt  the  last  two  pinches,  but  not  simultaneously ;  about
a  second  after. 0.  H.,  Dec.  22/08.]

11.41  p.m. B.  and  F.  change  places.


548 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part

LLight  IV.  shaded.]

11.45  p.m.  Mrs.  H.  A  hand  is  pulling  my  dress.  The  hand  is
pulling  me  in  my  lap.

Mrs.  H.  Both  medium's  hands  are  on  the  table.

F.  (compressing  a  description  given  by  B.  and  Mrs.  H.  together)
A  hand  was  playing  about  on  both  B.'s  and  Mrs.  H.'s  laps,
simultaneously.

F. Each  of  them  was  holding  one  of  the  medium's  hands  on
opposite  corners  of  the  table. I  can  see  both  hands  from  here.

[I  reported  the  control  here  being  nearer  the  stenographer  and
both,  hands  being  visible  to  me. F.,  Dec.  SO/08.]

B.  I  can  see  the  medium's  hand  on  mine. My  left  knee  against
her  right  knee,  my  left  foot  against  her  right  foot.
Mrs.  H.  Her  left  heel  is  on  the  toe  of  my  foot.

F. Mrs.  H.'s  dress  was  twitched  that  time.

11.49  p.m.  B.  A  hand  touched  me.  It  caught  hold  of  my  arm.
This  hand  apparently  came  from  behind  the  medium.  It  was
not  the  medium's  right  hand.  I  am  absolutely  certain  of  this
because  I  can  see  the  medium's  right  hand,  clearly,  in  front  of
me. There !  it  is  done  again,  with  the  same  control.

F. We  xvill  not  describe  the  control  any  more.

[After  this  series  of  touches  tve  decided  not  to  interrupt  the  pro-
ceedings by  describing  the  control  but  to  await  developments
quietly. F.,  Dec.  20/08.]

11.49  p.m.  ?  B.  or  Mrs.  H.  A  hand  caught  hold  of  my  arm.
The  same  thing  has  happened  again.

11.51  p.m.  F.  Something  white  appeared  over  the  medium's
head.

11.56  p.m. B. Something  came  out  two  or  three  times.

B.  Something  is  keeping  time  with  the  tune  on  my  leg  [Z  was
singing].

B.  The  curtain  comes  out  and  covers  the  medium's  head  altogether.


LIX.]


Sittings  ivith  Eusapia :  Seance  XI.


549


[Light  IV.  shaded.]

12.3  a.m.  B.  Fingers  were  playing  on  my  hand  for  several
minutes.

[I  here  walked  over  to  the  curtain  to  try  and  get  a  touch.  M.,
Dec.  SO/08.]

12.10  a.m.  M.  notes:  While  I  was  trying  for  a  touch,  the
curtain  bulged  violently  several  times  but  I  cannot  say  whether
or  not  this  was  done  by  movements  of  the  medium's  shoulder  or
feet.

Mrs.  H.  Something  came  right  on  to  the  table  and  seized  me
violently  and  thumped  on  the  table.

12.11  a.m.  F.  Mrs.  H.'s  left  hand  was  seized  by  the  wrist  by
a  hand  and  dragged  across  the  table  to  touch  B.'s  face.

[My  left  arm  was  seized  suddenly  above  the  wrist  and  rapidly
dragged  across  the  table  and  my  hand  was  violently  shaken  in
B.'s  face,  as  if  to  strike  him.  I  had  complete  control  of  the  left
hand  of  medium. C.  H.:  Dec.  22/08.]

[I  was  looking  at  Mrs.  H.'s  left  hand  when  it  suddenly  made  a
movement  across  the  table  as  though  striking  out  at  B.'s  nose.
I  did  not  see  any  hand  holding  it. F.,  Dec.  20/08.]

B.  Oh!  Here's  the  hand  again. I  saw  it  that  time.

1°2.1S  a.m. B.  and  Z.  change  places.

Guitar.

■Board  with
clay.


F,


Miss  H.


12.15  a.m.  F.  The  clay  comes  right  out  over  the  table  in  front
of  Mrs.  H.  and  is  apparently  held  there,  within  the  curtain.

M.  I  touched  it  as  it  was  entering  Mrs.  H.  s  hands  but  felt


nothing  else.


550


E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


[Light  IV.  shaded.]

[The  clay  had  been  on  the  floor  of  the  cabinet  just  behind
medium's  chair  in  such  a  position  that  she  could  not  reach  it
with  her  hands  without  stooping  in  a  necessarily  obvious  manner.
It  came  quickly  out  wrapped  up  in  the  curtain  between  Mrs.  H.
and  the  medium.  I  then  took  it  in  my  hands  and  unwrapped
it.  There  were  no  finger  marks  on  it.  The  clay  had  come
alone,  without  the  board  on  which  it  stood. F.,  Dec.  20/08.]

12.17  a.m.  Bell  (which  we  had  placed  on  stance  table  at
beginning)  falls  off  (non  evidential).

12.26  a.m.  M.  The  little  stool,  which  was  to  the  left  of  the
medium,  on  the  ground,  while  I  was  looking  at  it,  approached
the  curtain,  gradually  climbed  up  it,  very  slowly,  to  about  1J
feet  above  Mrs.  H.'s  right  shoulder  then  approached  the  table,
drawing  curtain  with  it,  and  remained  there  in  front  of  Mrs.  H.

[As  the  control  was  no  longer  to  be  given  in  full  I  had  stood
up  to  try  to  see  some  of  the  phenomena  and  was  standing  behind
and  to  the  right  of  Mrs.  H.  I  was  looking  down  at  the  little  stool
which  was  on  the  floor  about  a  foot  from  the  curtain  and  about
2h  feet  from  the  medium's  leg  and  wondering  whether  any  thing-
would  happen.  Suddenly,  as  I  was  looking,  I  saw  it  approach
the  curtain,  and  the  curtain  go  out  towards  it.  It  then  climbed
very  very  slowly  indeed  up  the  curtain,  horizontally,  one  corner
only  pointing  to  and  touching  the  curtain  on  the  outside.  It
gave  me  the  impression  of  being  drawn  up  as  if  by  a  kind  of
magnet  on  the  other  side  of  the  curtain.  It  slid  past  the  curtain
which  remained  motionless.  I  felt  up  the  curtain  as  it  was
climbing  up,  on  both  sides  of  the  stool,  but  not  between  the
stool  and  the  curtain,  as  I  was  afraid  of  interfering  with  the
movements.  There  was  nothing  tangible  behind  it.  When  it  had
climbed  up  to  a  distance  of  about  1J  feet  above  Mrs.  H.'s
shoulder  it  seemed  to  turn  and,  drawing  the  curtain  with  it,
went  over  Mrs.  H.'s  shoulder  on  to  the  seance  table.  At  the
moment  it  was  turning  I  was  curious  to  verify  the  position  of
the  medium's  left  hand.  I  began  by  Mrs.  H.'s  shoulder,  felt  all
down  her  arm,  discovered  she  was  holding  the  medium's  left
hand,  which  I  felt  right  up  to  the  medium's  shoulder.  On
bringing  my  hand  down  again  to  the  medium's  hand,  she  made  a


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Seance  XI.


551


[Light  IV.  shaded.]

violent  movement  as  if  to  push  it  away  and  said  "  Somebody  is
breaking  the  current"  ("fili").  M.,  Dec.  20/08.]
[I  first  saw  the  stool  when  it  was  about  the  height  of  Mrs.  H.'s
shoulder.  It  moved  very  slowly  towards  me  and  came  on  to  the
table  over  Eusapia's  left  hand  which  Mrs.  H.  said  she  held
firmly  all  the  time. F.,  Dec.  20/08.]

[M.  who  was  standing  behind  Mrs.  H.'s  chair  had  suddenly  said
"  Oh,  look  at  the  stool."  I  turned  round  and  saw  the  stool  very
slowly  climbing  up  the  curtain  at  its  extreme  edge  near  the
window  curtain,  by  one  corner,  and,  as  M.  says,  as  though  drawn
up  by  a  magnet  from  within  the  curtain.  I  saw  M.  feel  on  both
sides  of  the  corner  by  which  it  was  being  drawn  up,  and  he
reported  that  he  felt  nothing.  The  stool  appeared  to  slide  along  the
stuff  of  the  curtain.  I  also  saw  M.  quickly  slip  his  hand  down
Mrs.  H.'s  right  arm  and  up  Eusapia's  left  arm  to  her  shoulder  to
make  absolutely  sure  that  her  hand  was  firmly  held  on  the  table.
When  the  stool  reached  a  point  above  the  level  of  Mrs.  H.'s
head,  it  slowly  turned  as  though  pivoted  on  the  corner,  came
towards  Eusapia  and  descended  on  to  the  seance  table  between
her  and  Mrs.  H. F.,  May  23/09.]

[The  stool,  which  I  had  myself  replaced  in  its  original  position
rather  more  than  a  yard  from  medium  at  her  request,  suddenly
struck  me  gently  on  the  right  side  of  the  forehead.  It  then
passed  before  me  and  I  saw  it  quite  clear  of  the  curtain  as  it
remained  two  or  three  seconds  poised  in  front  of  me  before
settling  partly  on  my  right  arm,  but  not  supported  by  my  arm.
It  just  touched  the  sleeve  of  my  jacket. C.  H,  Dec.  22/08.]

12.32  a.m.  Mrs.  H.  Something  white  appeared  between  the
black  and  white  curtains.

[The  same  cloud-like  object  as  at  11.14  p.m.,  but  somewhat
smaller. C.  H,  Dec.  22/08.]

[A  question  was  asked  as  to  whether  a  spirit  ivas  present  con-
nected with  any  one  in  the  circle.  Tilts  of  the  table  in  reply
to  questions  requiring  answers  of  only  "  Yes"  or  "No"  indicated
that  B.'s  father  was  present.  B.,  therefore,  resumed  control  of
medium  to  be  near  the  curtain,  and  asked  for  a  touch  from


552 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


[Light  IV.  shaded.]

his  father  s  left  hand,  which,  owing  to  an  accident,  would  disclose
a  mark  of  identity. F.,  Dec.  SO/OS.]

[The  touch  was  not  given,  and  tilts  in  reply  to  qtiestions  asked
by  F.  about  B.'s  father  gave  wrong  answers. B.,  Oct.  19109.]
B.  and  Z.  again  change  places.


12.34  a.m. B. Something  is  playing  with  my  knees  now.

12.43  a.m. B. Something  is  playing  with  my  sleeve.

12.43  a.m.  B.  holds  his  left  hand  towards  the  curtain  to  try
and  get  a  touch  from  his  alleged  father's  hand.

B.  My  right  hand  on  medium's  right  hand.

Mrs.  H.  I  am  absolutely  certain  I  have  hold  of  her  left  hand.

F.  Note  that  B.'s  sleeve  is  continuously  being  pulled  while  he
is  holding  his  hand  down  towards  the  curtain.

B.  The  curtain  is  jerked  three  times,  as  much  as  to  say  that  I
shall  be  touched  by  my  father's  hand.

12.45  a.m.  B. The  right  curtain  blew  right  out  again.

12. 4-6  a.m.  B.  I  have  taken  my  hand  away  from  the  curtain.

12.50  a.m.  B. The  curtain  blew  out  and  went  back  again.

12.50  a.m.  Violent  movements  of  the  curtain.

12.51  a.m.  B.  My  left  hand  is  squeezed  several  times  in  response
to  my  questions  asking  my  alleged  "  Father "  to  come  and  grasp
me  by  the  left  hand.

B.  Now  I  am  grasped  by  the  arm.

B.  I  can  see  both  the  medium's  hands  on  the  table.


Miss  H.


Lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Seance  XI.  553

[Light  IV.  shaded.]

12.52  a.m. B. I  am  touched  on  the  wrist  of  my  left  hand.

B.  I  am  holding  medium's  right  hand  by  the  wrist.
12.54  a.m. B. I  am  continuously  being  touched.

B.  I  can  always  see  medium's  hands.

12.56  a.m. The  curtain  has  violently  blown  over  the  table.

B.  Something  keeps  touching  me,  several  times,  whilst  I  am
holding  my  left  hand  clown  inside  the  cabinet  asking  "  Father "
to  give  me  a  grasp  of  his  left  hand  so  that  I  might  recognise  him.

B.  I  have  got  the  right  hand  of  the  medium.
Mrs.  H.  I  have  the  left  hand  of  the  medium.

1  a.m.  B.  This  hand  has  again  come  out,  and  is  playing
with  me  now.  [B.  asked  Mrs.  H.  to  let  him  hold  both  the
medium's  hands. F.,  May  23/09.]

B.  I  have  got  both  her  hands  now.

B. Yes. It  has  touched  me  again.

B.  It  is  an  absolute  proof  to  me  that  this  hand  is  not  the
hand  of  the  medium.

B.  I  have  got  both  her  thumbs,  I  am  holding  her  right  hand
in  my  left  hand,  my  right  hand  is  on  the  left  side  of  the  table
holding  her  left.

B. This  hand  is  still  playing  about  me.

B.  now  takes  hold  of  both  thumbs  of  medium  in  his  right  hand.

F.  B.'s  left  hand  is  lying  on  the  corner  of  the  table,  and  a
hand  from  inside  the  curtain  plays  with  it.  Meanwhile  B.  is  now
holding  the  two  thumbs  of  the  medium  in  his  right  hand,  visibly
to  me.

1.3  a.m. B. Oh,  it  is  touching  me  again.

B.  I  have  verified  the  foot  control.

1.6  a.m. B.  The  hand  is  again  playing  about  with  me.

1.15  a.m.  Medium  says  she  is  tired.  Lights  are  gradually
turned  up,  and  F.  goes  into  G.'s  room  with  Miss  H.,  but  medium
still  keeps  her  place,  as  also  do  B.,  Mrs.  H.  and  M.


554


E.  Feildvng,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


Light  I.

After  a  time,

B.  Medium  makes  three  gestures  towards  the  door  behind  me,
and  three  noises  are  heard  on  it.

M.  notes  this  is  in  light  1;  C.'s  room  door  open  with  full
electric  light  on.

Mrs.  H. I  heard  them.

B.  Several  times  medium  made  gestures,  and  each  time  raps
are  heard  on  the  door.  These  gestures  and  raps  were  made  a
considerable  number  of  times,  finishing  by  four  large  gestures
and  four  loud  raps.  Medium  then  held  my  right  hand  in  her
left,  and  scratched  the  back  of  my  right  hand  with  the  nails  of
her  right  hand,  and  a  loud  rasping  sound  was  heard  on  the
door  behind  me.

[B.  called  me  in  from  the  other  room,  and  I  asked  Eusapia  to
repeat  the  raps.  It  seemed,  however,  as  though  the  force  were
expended.  She  made  three  or  four  gestures,  and  no  raps  followed.
Then  she  made  a  final  gesture,  and  a  loud  rap  followed.  It
appeared  to  me  distinctly  to  come  from  the  door  beside,  which
I  was  standing,  her  feet  at  least  three  feet  from  the  door,  while
her  hand,  as  she  made  the  gesture,  did  not  approach  within  six
inches  of  it.  There  was  a  clear  space  between  the  whole  of
the  medium  and  the  door. F.,  Dec.  20/08.]

[Mrs.  H.  writes,  Dec.  24/08:  "I  want  to  draw  your  attention
to  a  curious  incident.  When,  after  the  seance,  and  after  success-
fully producing  the  raps  on  the  door,  Eusapia  failed  to  produce
them  again,  she  seized  my  right  hand  in  her  left  and  squeezed
my  hand  with  great  force.  At  the  same  time,  she  took  the
curtain  in  her  right  hand  and  squeezed  it  tightly,  as  if  she
were  pressing  a  wet  sponge.  She  .retained  both  my  hand  and
the  curtain  (the  latter  between  her  thumb  and  forefinger,  extending
the  other  fingers),  and  then  made  the  usual  gestures  towards
the  door,  and  produced  the  raps,  though  feebly.  On  again  attempt-
ing to  do  so— without  either  my  hand  or  the  curtain — she  failed.
It  seemed  almost  as  if  the  curtain  were  impregnated  with  some
fluid,  and  my  own  sensation  is  that  of  my  strength  being  drawn
out  of  me,  leaving  a  feeling  of  great  exhaustion."]


MX.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia  :  Conclusions.


555


IV.

INDIVIDUAL  CONCLUSIONS  OF  THE  INVESTIGATORS.
Final  Note  by  Hereward  Carrington.

As  a  result  of  the  ten  sittings  held  by  us  at  Naples,  November  21st-
December  15th,  1908, — being  the  ten  seances  attended  by  me, — I
have  to  record  my  absolute  conviction  of  the  reality  of  at  least
some  of  the  phenomena ;  and  the  conviction,  amounting  in  my
own  mind  to  complete  certainty,  that  the  results  witnessed  by
us  were  not  due  to  fraud  or  trickery  on  the  part  of  Eusapia.  It
would  be  impossible  to  impart  this  feeling  of  certainty  to  others,
since  that  could  only  be  obtained  by  a  series  of  personal  sittings ;
and  the  critic  must  depend  for  his  conviction  upon  our  record  of
the  seances, — as  we  have  had  hitherto  to  depend  upon  the  records  of
others.  This  is  a  very  different  thing  from  attending  the  seances
oneself.  Just  as  one  can  only  gain  a  correct  idea  of  a  fraudulent
spiritualistic  seance  by  attending  it  in  person,  so,  I  think,  can  one
only  reach  a  defnrite  conclusion  in  favour  of  the  phenomena  by
attending  genuine  seances.  The  curious  fact  recorded  by  Mr.
Feilding  that  the  incidents  seemed  to  roll  off  our  minds  and
that  we  lapsed  back  into  scepticism  on  each  occasion  until  we  had
held  four  or  five  seances,  was  noticed  by  all  of  us ;  and  it  is  only
when  one  is  controlling  the  medium  oneself,  and  when  one  has
absolute  confidence  in  the  controllers  on  the  other  side,  that  one
reaches  that  state  of  complete  conviction  which  it  would  be  impos-
sible to  reach  in  any  other  manner.

One  or  two  of  the  phenomena  occurred  under  what  I  was
forced  to  regard  as  ideal  conditions  of  control.  The  touches  during
the  latter  part  of  Seance  VI.  were  among  these,  when  I  was
holding  the  medium's  left  hand  in  her  lap,  and  controlling  practically
the  whole  of  her  body,  while  Mr.  Baggally  was  controlling  the
right  hand  on  the  table,  and  these  were  the  cases  that  con-
vinced me  finally  and  conclusively  that  genuine  phenomena  occurred,
though  I  could  see  no  definite  reason  for  refusing  credence  to  many
of  the  phenomena  of  the  previous  seances.  Still,  there  is  a  differ-
ence between  intellectual  and  emotional  conviction,  and,  whereas


556 E.  Feilcling,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part

the  first  of  these  states  had  been  reached  by  the  end  of  the  second
seance,  the  second  did  not  result  until  the  sixth  seance,  as  I  have
said.  Never  were  the  two  degrees  more  clearly  marked  than  on  this
occasion  in  my  own  mind ;  and  it  is  probable  that  the  second
of  the  two  stages  will  only  be  reached  by  the  majority  when
psychical  science  assumes  a  more  definitely  experimental  form.
Thus,  on  several  occasions,  I  verified  my  own  control  and  found
it  perfect ;  I  also  verified  the  control  of  my  colleague.  I  then
stretched  my  disengaged  hand  out  towards  the  curtain,  saying,
"  Now,  if  I  am  touched  under  these  conditions,  I  shall  consider
the  phenomenon  definitely  and  finally  proved."  On  several  such
occasions,  I  did  receive  touches  apparently  of  hands,  and  I  was
consequently  forced  to  the  conclusion  that  these  phenomena  were
absolutely  genuine,  and  not  the  results  of  fraud  on  the  part  of
Eusapia.

H.  C,  June  1909.


Final  Note  by  W.  W.  Baggally.

On  reading  through  the  shorthand  notes  I  find  that  470  phenomena
are  recorded  as  having  taken  |place  during  the  course  of  the  eleven
seances.

Of  these  phenomena
305  took  place  when  members  of  the  S.P.R.  Committee
controlled ;

144  took  place  when  a  non-member  and  a  member  of  the
S.P.R.  Committee  controlled ;
21  took  place  when  two  non-members  controlled;

470.

I  have  classed  as  phenomena  in  connection  with  the  seance  table,
the  complete  levitations  only,  excluding  the  raps  on  it  and  its  tilts  and
rockings,  as,  although  some  of  these  occurred  under  extremely  good
evidential  conditions,  the  majority  were  non-evidential.  At  some  of
the  seances  the  phenomena  succeeded  each  other  so  rapidly  that  it
was  not  possible  to  record  them  all,  and  consequently  their  number
is  largely  understated.

The  470  phenomena  divide  themselves  into  the  following  classes :


LIX.]


Sittings  ivith  Eusapia :  Conclusions.


557


Classification  of  Phenomena.


Complete  levitations  of  seance  table,
Bulgings  and  movements  of  curtains,

1  Occasions  on  which  bulges  of  med-

ium's dress  occurred,  -
Movements  of  objects  within  the

cabinet,  -
Movements  of  objects  (other  than

seance  table)  outside  the  cabinet,
Objects  brought  out  of  the  cabinet,  -
Plucking  of  the  guitar  string,  -

2  Occasions  on  which  sounds  were

heard  in  the  cabinet  (including
sounds  on  tambourine,  guitar,
etc.),  ------

2  Occasions  on  which  sounds  were
heard  outside  the  cabinet,  such
as  knocks  and  scrapings  on  door,
raps  on  backs  of  chairs,  etc.,

Loud  sounds  on  seance  table,  syn-
chronising with  movements  of
medium's  head  or  foot,

Touches  by  some  object  (hand  ?)
through  curtain,

Touches  by  some  object  (hand  ?)
outside  the  cabinet,  -

Occasions  on  which  touches  by  some
object  (hand?)  were  felt  inside
the  cabinet, -  -

Grasps  and  touches  by  a  tangible  hand
through  curtain,

Grasps  and  touches  by  a  tangible  hand
(not  visible)  outside  the  cabinet,

Hands  seen  which  issued  from  and
retired  into  the  cabinet,

Objects  seen  of  an  indefinable  nature
which  issued  from  and  retired
into  the  cabinet,  - - -  -

Objects  seen  of  an  indefinable  nature
in  the  cabinet, - - -  •

Objects  seen  resembling  heads  which
issued  from  and  retired  into  the
cabinet,  -

Lights  seen  in  the  cabinet,  on  the
curtain,  and  on  medium's  lap,  -

Untying  of  knots, - -  -

Occasions  on  which  currents  of  air
issued  from  medium's  head,


Control  by
2  Members
of  S.P.R.
Committee.

Control  by
1  Member
of  S.P.R.
Committee
and  1  Non-
member.

Control  by

2  Non-
members.

Totals.

34

8

3

45

59

32

2

93

4

2

a
<>

28

4

2

34

41

o
.1

7
t

■^l

o±

5

8

1

14

1

1

14

7

Ol
_  1

6

8

14

7

7

20

a
0

o

28

O  1

1
1

44

—

1

1

19

7

26

13

22

35

3

2

—

5

16

9

3

28

1

—

—

1

5

1


6

5

2

7

1

1

2

2

305

144

21

470

1  These  do  not  give  the  actual  number  ol  bulges  out  tne  occasions  uu  nmu,
they  occurred. Several  bulges  in  succession  are  put  down  as  one  phenomenon.

2  The  actual  number  of  sounds  is  not  given  but  the  occasions  on  which  they
were  heard.  A  series  of  thumps  on  the  tambourine  struck  in  succession  are
put  down  as  one  phenomenon,  etc.


558  E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


For  the  strict  purposes  of  the  S.P.R.  investigation,  perhaps  only
the  phenomena  which  occurred  when  the  members  of  the  Committee
alone  controlled  should  be  taken  into  account.  At  the  time  that
these  took  place  (except  on  the  occasion  when  a  current  of
air  issued  from  Eusapia's  head)  the  medium  sat  outside  the  cabinet
with  her  back  to  the  curtains,  and  a  member  of  the  S.P.R.  Com-
mittee sat  on  each  side  of  her  controlling  her  hands  and  feet.
These  305  phenomena  may  be  explained  by  one  of  four  hypotheses  :

(1)  That  they  were  all  fraudulent.

(2)  That  they  were  all  genuine.

(3)  That  some  were  genuine  and  the  others  fraudulent.

(4)  That  some  were  genuine  and  the  others  not  proved  to  be

either  genuine  or  fraudulent.

I  proceed  to  consider  these  hypotheses  in  their  order:  (1)  If  all
the  phenomena  were  fraudulent  they  must  have  been  produced
either  by  the  liberation  of  one  of  Eusapia's  hands  or  feet,
after  she  had  carried  out  a  substitution ;  or,  when  she  was  not  able
to  resort  to  this  method,  owing  to  her  hands  or  feet  being  too  far
apart,  by  the  removal  of  one  of  her  hands  or  feet  from  the  hand  or
foot  of  the  controller  (he,  after  such  a  removal,  continuing  under
the  impression  that  he  still  felt  her  hand  or  foot  in  contact  with
his  own),  or  by  the  use  of  her  head  or  other  part  of  her  body,
or  some  mechanism  concealed  about  her  person,  or  by  the  help  of
an  accomplice.

Now  it  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  (excluding  the  three  occasions
on  which  substitutions  of  hands  took  place,  which  were  followed  by  no
phenomena.1  Eusapia  was  not  detected  resorting  to  any  fraudulent
methods  during  the  production  of  any  of  the  305  phenomena.2

I  cannot  accept  the  theory  that  the  members  of  the  Committee
were  suffering  from  a  collective  hallucination.  The  fact  that  they
were  able  to  verify  that  the  objects  which  they  saw  brought  out
of  the  cabinet  remained  outside  at  the  termination  of  the  sit-
tings is  sufficient  to  disprove  it.  Taking  into  consideration  the
manner  of  the  control,  that  no  mechanism  was  found  on  the
medium's  person,  that  no  accomplice  was  present,  and  also  that

II  do  not  include  among  the  470  phenomena  the  occasion  when  Eusapia
made  a  substitution  of  hands  and  then  brought  the  curtain  forward  and  placed
it  on  the  table  (see  p.  383),  because,  in  the  view  of  F.  and  C,  this  incident
did  not  purport  to  be  supernormal.

-  The  non-detection  of  fraud  also  applies  to  all  the  other  phenomena  of  the
eleven  seances  which  are  not  included  in  the  above  305.


LIX.]


Sittings  %vith  Eusapia :  Conclusions.


559


the  three  S.P.R.  investigators  were  men  who  had  been  accustomed
for  years  to  the  investigation  of  so-called  physical  phenomena  of
every  variety,  and  who  had  detected  fraud  after  fraud,  I  find  it
impossible  to  believe  that  Eusapia  could  have  been  able  to  practise
trickery  constantly  during  the  many  hours  that  the  seances  lasted
and  remain  undetected.

(2)  As  regards  the  second  hypothesis,  "that  all  the  phenomena
were  genuine,"  I  cannot  positively  assert  that  this  is  correct.

The  chances  of  occasional  mal-observation  on  the  part  of  the
investigators  should  not  be  excluded.  Eusapia  was  detected  practis-
ing the  trick  of  substitution  on  three  occasions ;  it  is  therefore
possible  that  she  may  have  been  able  unobserved  to  liberate  one
of  her  hands  or  feet  on  other  occasions,  and  by  this  means
to  produce  fraudulently  some  of  the  phenomena ;  but  neither  my
colleagues  nor  I  had  proof  that  she  resorted  to  fraud  in  the  pro-
duction of  any  one  of  the  phenomena.

(3)  Regarding  the  third  hypothesis,  "  that  some  of  the  phenomena
were  genuine  and  the  others  fraudulent,"  the  second  part  of  this
is  negatived  by  the  remark  just  made  ;  it  only  then  remains  to
consider  the  first  part  "that  some  of  the  phenomena  were  genuine."

On  this  point  I  feel  that  I  can  speak  with  assurance,  though
I  am  aware  of  the  difficulty  of  imparting  to  a  critic,  by  a  mere
description,  the  same  conviction  of  the  supernormal  character  of  the
particular  phenomena  in  question  as  I  gained  from  personal  obser-
vation. One  cannot  easily  accept  as  genuine  phenomena  which
appear  to  contravene  the  known  laws  of  Nature,  and  before  doing
so,  one  must  be  assured  that  by  no  possibility  could  they  have
been  produced  by  normal  means.  A  knowledge  of  the  conjuring
art  is  obviously  of  great  use  in  enabling  an  investigator  to  judge
whether  a  medium  is  practising  fraud  or  not,  and  two  members  of
the  S.P.R.  Committee  possessed  this  knowledge.  I  have  already
mentioned  the  only  normal  methods  which  under  the  circumstances
Eusapia,  in  my  opinion,  could  have  used  for  the  fraudulent  pro-
duction of  the  phenomena,  viz.,  the  unobserved  liberation  and  use
of  one  of  her  hands  or  feet,  the  unobserved  use  of  her  head  or
other  part  of  her  body,  or  of  some  mechanism  concealed  about  her
person.  The  help  of  a  confederate  need  not  be  considered,  as  the
seances  took  place  in  our  own  room  with  locked  doors.1

1  It  has  been  suggested  to  me  that  possibly  M.,  the  stenographer,  assisted
the  medium  as  a  confederate.  To  this  suggestion  I  would  reply  that  M.  is  a
gentleman  whose  services  F.  engaged  without  previously  informing  Eusapia  that


560 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


If  certain  phenomena  take  place  when  both  hands  of  the
medium  are  distinctly  seen,  above,  or  quietly  resting  on,  the  seance
table,  or  both  hands  are  clearly  seen  when  being  held  by  the  con-
trollers, and  at  the  same  time  her  body  is  in  view  down  to  her
feet,  while  the  controllers  are  assured,  by  tactile  examination  or  by
their  sense  of  sight,  that  no  mechanism  is  being  brought  into  play,
and  when  it  is  certain  that  there  is  no  accomplice ;  if  certain
phenomena,  I  say,  take  place  under  the  above  conditions,  which
seem  to  exclude  all  conceivable  normal  means  of  producing  the  pheno-
mena, there  is  then  a  strong  presumption  that  they  are  produced
supernormally,  and  it  was  the  phenomena  which  occurred  under
these  strictly  test  conditions  that  first  convinced  me  of  this.  I  will
now  give  a  few  examples  of  such  phenomena.

I  have  already  (in  my  note  to  Seance  VII.)  recounted  in
detail  the  remarkable  movement  of  Eusapia's  dress.  This  took
place  at  the  beginning  of  the  seventh  seance,  in  the  strongest
light  (unshaded)  that  we  used  from  the  time  that  I  joined  in  the
investigation,  when  the  medium's  hands  were  resting  on  the  seance
table  in  full  view  of  all  the  members  of  the  S.P.R.  Committee,
when  her  whole  body  was  seen  (I  stood  quite  close  to  Eusapia
intently  watching  her),  and  when  her  two  feet  were  securely  held
by  F.  and  C,  there  being  no  possibility  of  a  substitution  of  feet
nor  the  use  of  any  mechanism  nor  attachment,  as  the  medium
showed  us,  at  the  time,  that  her  two  feet  were  separately  held  and
that  no  mechanism  was  concealed  under  her  dress.  F.  felt  with  his
hand  several  times,  and  found  no  attachment.

Another  phenomenon  which  greatly  impressed  me  was  the  bulging
of  the  curtain  after  the  conclusion  of  the  sixth  seance  at  about  2  a.m.1

a  stenographer  would  be  present  at  the  seances,  and  that  he  had  never  met  the
medium  before.  During  the  whole  time  that  the  seances  at  which  I  was
present,  lasted,  M.'s  face  was  lit  by  the  lamp  which  he  used  for  the  purpose  of
taking  the  notes.  His  face  was  clearly  visible  to  the  controllers,  and  therefore
his  position  in  the  seance  room  was  never  lost  sight  of.  The  table  at  which
he  sat  was  several  feet  away  from  the  end  of  the  seance  table  farthest  away
from  the  medium.  He  never  moved  from  his  table  except  when  he  was  asked
to  come  near  Eusapia  the  better  to  witness  a  few  of  the  phenomena.

As  regards  the  possibility  of  a  confederate  gaining  access  into  the  cabinet
by  a  trap  door,  I  may  say  that  I  examined  the  interior  of  the  cabinet  and
found  that  the  floor  was  made  of  tiles  closely  cemented  together.  The  walls
were  at  right  angles  to  each  other ;  one  consisting  of  thick  masonry  gave  on
to  the  street,  the  other  of  thin  masonry,  brick  or  plaster,  separated  the  stance
room  from  my  bedroom.  There  was  no  trap  door.
1  See  C.'s  note  to  Stance  VI.


lix.]  Sittings  with  Eusapia:  Conclusions.  561

The  light  had  been  raised  to  No.  1  light.  Eusapia  released  both
her  hands  from  control  and  placed  them  on  the  table.  They  were
perfectly  visible  to  all  of  us.  Both  her  feet  were  under  control.  I
noticed  that  the  curtain,  which  was  on  the  medium's  right,  but  not
in  contact  Math  any  part  of  her  body,  made  a  slight  movement.  I
immediately  realised  that  if  the  curtain  bulged  out  at  that  time
there  could  be  no  possibility  of  her  being  able  to  produce
the  movement  by  normal  means  without  detection,  as  owing  to
the  good  light  and  to  my  position,  I  could  distinctly  see  at  the
same  moment  her  head,  her  two  hands,  her  body  down  to  her
feet,  and  the  curtain  which  was  close  to  me  and  not  touching  her.

A  very  short  time  after  this  thought  crossed  my  mind,  and  while
I  was  intently  watching  Eusapia,  who  did  not  move,  the  curtain
bulged  strongly  out,  as  if  pressed  from  within  the  cabinet  by  a
balloon.  The  bulge  was  about  a  foot  and  a  half  from  the  medium's
head  and  on  a  level  with  it.  Eusapia  was  examined  shortly  after-
wards, at  this  seance,  and  no  mechanism  was  found  concealed  about
her  body.

There  was  a  curious  parallelism  between  the  bulges  of  Eusapia's
dress  and  those  of  the  curtains.  Those  that  I  saw  were  all  globular
in  form  and  they  did  not  show  themselves  close  to  the  ground.1

The  remarkable  nature  of  these  bulges  should  be  kept  in  mind.
When  they  were  felt  by  the  hand  of  a  sitter  they  offered  no  resist-
ance, but  gave  the  impression  of  being  caused  by  a  current  of  air
blown  from  behind  the  curtain.  They  were  never  pointed  or  irregular
in  form,  as  would  have  been  the  case  had  they  been  brought  about
by  a  thread  attached  to  the  curtain  or  by  a  hand  or  foot  pushing
the  curtain  forward.  The  bulges  of  the  curtains  were  sometimes  on
a  level  with  Eusapia's  head  and  sometimes  higher  or  loAver.  Her
head  was,  as  I  have  said,  visible  when  the  bulges  took  place.

A  notable  phenomenon  of  a  different  character  was  one  that  was
witnessed  at  1.15  a.m.  after  the  termination  of  Seance  XL  when  Mrs.  H.
had  ceased  to  control.  This  lady  retained  her  seat  on  the  left  of  the
medium  and  I  retained  mine  on  her  right.  The  other  persons  who  had
been  present  at  the  seance  (with  the  exception  of  the  stenographer,  who
remained  seated  at  his  table)  had  retired  into  C.'s  room.  They  had
left  the  door  wide  open  so  that  the  seance  room  was  now  not  only
lit  by  Light  1  (the  strongest  light  used  at  the  seances),  but  also  by

1  As  regards  the  movement  of  Eusapia's  dress,  to  which  I  have  referred,  the
bulges  occurred  before  the  lower  edge  of  her  dress  began  to  creep  along  the
floor  in  the  manner  described  in  my  note  to  Stance  VII.

2N


562 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


the  light  from  the  adjoining  room  which  was  full  on.  Eusapia  con-
tinued in  a  state  of  semi-trance,  her  elbows  on  the  table,  her
hands  raised.  She  tightly  closed  the  fist  of  the  left  hand,  as  if  by
nervous  tension,  and  made  three  motions  with  it  towards  the  closed
door  which  was  behind  my  back  (I  was  seated  between  the  medium
and  the  door  and  had  a  full  view  of  her  hands  and  the  right  side
of  her  body  from  her  head  to  her  feet),  whereupon  three  loud  raps
were  heard  on  the  door.  After  this  she  made  several  gestures  with
her  hand,  and  each  time  raps  were  heard  on  the  door,  finishing  with
four  large  gestures  followed  by  four  loud  raps.  These  raps  were
heard  by  Mrs.  H.  and  myself.  They  distinctly  came  from  the  door
behind  me  and  not  from  where  Eusapia  sat  in  front  of  me.  The
medium  then  held  my  right  hand  in  her  right  and  scratched  the
back  of  my  right  hand  with  the  finger  nails  of  her  left  and,  syn-
chronously, a  rasping  sound  was  heard  on  the  door.  The  distance
between  the  medium's  hand  and  the  door  when  she  made  the  gestures
and  scratched  my  hand  was  about  3h  feet,  and  the  distance  between
her  feet  and  the  door  about  3  feet.  I  was  much  impressed  by
these  phenomena  as  they  were  taking  place,  and,  without  leaving
my  seat,  called  F.  from  the  other  room.  His  note,  in  the  steno-
graphic report,  is  as  follows  :

"B.  called  me  in  from  the  other  room.  I  asked  medium  to
repeat  raps.  It  seemed  as  though  the  force  were  expended.  She
made  three  or  four  gestures  and  no  raps  followed.  Then  she  made
a  final  gesture  and  a  loud  rap  followed.  It  appeared  to  me  dis-
tinctly to  come  from  the  door  beside  which  I  was  standing.  Her
feet  were  at  least  three  feet  from  the  door,  and  her  hand,  as  she
made  the  gesture,  did  not  approach  within  six  inches  of  it.  There
was  a  clear  space  between  the  whole  of  the  medium  and  the  door."

When  F.  came  into  the  seance  room  Eusapia  did  not  succeed  in
obtaining  a  rap  until  she  brought  her  hand  within  a  distance  of
six  inches  from  the  door,  whereas  when  I  first  heard  the  raps  her
hand  was  about  3|  feet  from  it.  F.  placed  himself  between  the
medium  and  the  door  in  a  similar  position  to  my  own,  and  was  thus
able  to  confirm  the  fact,  which  I  have  stated,  that  Eusapia's  hands
could  be  clearly  seen,  in  the  excellent  light,  that  the  whole  of  her
right  side  was  in  view  down  to  her  feet,  and  that  the  loud  rap  that
he  heard,  like  those  that  I  heard,  came  distinctly  from  the  door
and  not  from  where  the  medium  sat.

The  apparently  supernormal  agency  was  not  only  able  to  produce
percussive  and other  sounds at a distance  from  Eusapia's  body


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Conclusions.


563


and  to  move  comparatively  light  objects,  such  as  her  dress  or  the
curtains  of  the  cabinet,  but  could  also  affect  heavy  objects,  as  was
shown  by  many  of  the  complete  levitations  of  the  seance  table
which  occurred  when  one  of  my  colleagues  of  the  S.P.R.  Committee
and  I  controlled.

I  would  refer  the  reader  to  the  complete  levitations  which  took
place  during  Seance  IX.  at  10.14,  10.16,  and  10.17  p.m.  The
strongest  Light,  No.  1,  was  then  on  ;  the  medium's  hands  were
plainly  visible  in  such  a  position  that  she  could  not  make  use  of
them  for  raising  the  table,  and  at  the  same  time  a  space  was  seen
by  C.  and  myself  between  the  table  legs  and  the  dress  of  the
medium  on  either  side  of  her.  As  an  additional  precaution  I  had
my  right  hand  across  her  two  knees,  which  remained  motionless
during  the  levitations.  All  the  above  phenomena  occurred  under
these  stringent  test  conditions.  I  am  therefore  convinced  that
Eusapia  did  not  (for  their  production)  make  use  of  her  hands,  or
her  feet,  or  any  part  of  her  body  ;  neither  did  she  resort  to  any
mechanical  means,  nor  was  she  assisted  by  a  confederate,  and  I  am
compelled  to  ascribe  these  phenomena  to  some  supernormal  cause.

So  far  I  have  only  treated  of  phenomena  which  were  due  to
the  action  of  some  force  of  a  telekinetic  nature.  My  mind  did
not,  a  priori,  reject  the  possibility  of  its  existence  owing  to  the
fact  of  its  neAvness  to  me,  but  that  this  force  should  be  able  to
manifest  itself  as  tangible  matter  and  assume  an  organic  form  like
a  hand,  capable  of  grasping,  was  a  phenomenon  of  such  a  complex
nature  that  I  was  not  able  to  give  it  acceptance  with  equal  ease.
The  phenomena,  however,  that  I  am  about  to  describe,  although
lacking  in  one  of  the  specific  test  conditions  (inasmuch  as  the
lower  part  of  the  medium's  body  was  not  in  view  at  the  time  of
their  occurrence),  offered  me  strong  evidence  that  this  force  did
materialise  itself,  to  use  a  spiritualistic  term,  and  did  assume  the
form  of  a  hand.

During  the  time  that  I  controlled  Eusapia,  at  the  seances,  I  was
certain  that  the  hand  that  I  had  in  contact  with  mine  was  her
right  hand  (or  her  left  hand  as  the  case  might  be),  as  I  continually
assured  myself  of  the  fact  by  feeling  the  relative  position  of  her
thumb  and  palm,  and  also  that  it  was  a  living  hand  by  the
responses  that  it  gave  to  my  pressure.  The  controller  who  sat  on
the  other  side  of  the  medium  was  equally  certain  that  the  hand
that  he  had  in  contact  with  his  own  was  her  other  hand,  for  the
same  reasons. I had, therefore, the  assurance  that  it  was  not


564 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


cne  of  Eusapia's  hands  which  issued  from  the  cabinet  and  occasion-
ally grasped  me.  This  assurance  was  greatly  increased  at  the
eleventh  seance  at  12.51-12.54  a.m.,  as  at  the  moment  that  I  felt
the  squeezes  and  grasps  I  could  see  both  the  medium's  hands  on  the
seance  table ;  and  especially  so  at  1  a.m.,  when  I  alone  controlled,
and  not  only  saw  both  Eusapia's  hands,  but  held  them  separately
by  her  thumbs  in  both  my  hands,  which  I  kept  apart  on  the
seance  table;  and  subsequently  at  1.3  a.m.,  when  I  held  both  her
thumbs  in  my  right  hand,  the  foot  control  being  verified  by  me
at  the  time.  I  cannot  do  better  than  transcribe  part  of  the
stenographer's  notes  in  order  to  give  a  succinct  account  of  these
phenomena.

Seance  XL

,,  12.51  a.m.  B.  My  left  hand  is  squeezed  several  times.

,,  B.  Now  I  am  grasped  by  the  arm.

,,  I  can  see  both  medium's  hands  on  the  table.

,,  12.54  a.m.  B.  I  am  continuously  being  touched.

I  can  always  see  medium's  hands.

,, 1  a.m.  B.  This  hand  has  again  come  out,  and  is  playing
with  me  now.

,,  B.  I  have  got  both  her  hands  now.

,,  B.  Yes,  it  has  touched  me  again.

,,  It  is  an  absolute  proof  to  me  that  this  hand

is  not  the  hand  of  the  medium.  I  have  got
both  her  thumbs.  I  am  holding  her  right
hand  in  my  left  hand,  my  right  hand  is  on
the  left  side  of  the  table  holding  her  left.

,,  B.  This  hand  is  still  playing  about  with  me.

,,  F. B.'s  left  hand  is  lying  on  the  corner  of  the

table,  and  a  hand  from  inside  the  curtain  plays
with  it.  B.  is  now  holding  the  two  thumbs
of  the  medium  in  his  right  hand  visibly
to  me.

,, 1.3  a.m.  B.  Oh,  it  is  touching  me  again.
,,  B.  I  have  verified  the  foot  control.

It  will  be  noted  that  F.,  as  well  as  myself,  was  able  to  see  that  at
1.3  a.m.  I  was  holding  the  two  thumbs  of  Eusapia  in  my  right  hand.1

1 1  had  ceased  controlling,  with  my  left  hand,  in  order  that  the  alleged  spirit
hand  of  my  father  should  be  better  able  to  grasp  it.  Had  I  received  a  grasp
in  a  certain  manner  it  would  have  been  to  me  a  test  of  identity.  The  grasps
that  I  received  failed  to  give  the  required  test.


LIX.]


Sittings  with  Eusapia :  Conclusions.


565


It  is  inconceivable  that  Eusapia  should  have  been  able  to  squeeze
my  hand  and  grasp  my  arm  in  this  manner  with  one  of  her  feet,
even  if  she  had  one  free,  for  the  squeezes  and  grasps  were  clearly
those  of  a  hand.  Neither  could  she  have  lifted  her  foot  to  the
height  of  my  hand  and  arm  without  a  contortion  of  her  body,
which  would  have  been  immediately  seen,  whereas  she  sat  quietly  on
her  chair  in  a  natural  position.  I  am  therefore  convinced  that  it  was
neither  Eusapia's  hand  nor  her  foot  that  squeezed  and  grasped  me,  and
as  I  am  positive  that  it  was  not  the  hand  nor  foot  of  any  one  of  the
sitters,  I  am  driven  to  the  conclusion  (preposterous  though  it  appears
to  me)  that  the  supernormal  force,  which  had  given  me  conclusive
evidence  of  its  existence  through  the  phenomena  previously  described,
was  able  to  produce  the  effects  of  tangible  matter  and  assume  the
form  of  a  hand.1  It  is  not,  however,  the  above  phenomena  of
touches  and  grasps  that  I  would  bring  forward  as  crucial  evidence
for  the  existence  of  a  supernormal  force,  as  some  of  the  test  con-
ditions which  I  have  specified  were  lacking  in  these  cases.  I  would
rather  depend  on  the  phenomena  which  took  place  in  light  when
the  medium's  hands  were  distinctly  seen  simultaneously  with  her
whole  body  down  to  her  feet.

I  refer  here  only  to  phenomena  which  occurred  while  I  was  person-
ally controlling.  The  reader  will  find  in  the  Report  others  of  equal
evidential  value,  during  the  occurrence  of  which  the  same  crucial
test  conditions  prevailed,  when  F.  and  C.  controlled.

I  am  compelled  to  accept  as  true  the  first  part  of  the  third  hypo-
thesis, "that  some  of  the  phenomena  were  genuine"  (the  second
part  I  have  already  dealt  with) ;  it  follows  that  the  fourth  hypothesis,
"that  some  of  the  phenomena  were  genuine  and  the  others  not
proved  to  be  either  genuine  or  fraudulent,"  is  that  which  represents
my  attitude.

In  previous  investigations  with  other  so-called  physical  mediums,  I
had  formed  the  opinion  that,  as  I  had  detected  them  resorting  to  fraud

1  The  conditions  under  which  I  felt  grasps  and  touches  on  other  occasions  at
these  seances  than  those  referred  to  above  offered  me  also  strong  evidence  that
the  touches  and  grasps  were  independent  of  the  physical  organism  of  Eusapia.
The  numerous  touches  on  my  back  between  12.11  and  12.20  in  Seance  X.  occurred
under  what  were  to  me  excellent  test  conditions,  as  at  the  very  time  that  I
was  feeling  them  I  was  constantly  passing  my  left  hand  all  up  her  left  arm  to
her  shoulder  and  down  her  left  leg  to  her  foot,  thus  verifying  that  I  had
undoubted  control  of  her  left  hand  and  foot  with  my  right  hand  and  foot,  and
that  the  touches  were  not  produced  by  her  head.  F.  had  control  of  her  right
hand  and  foot. See  my  note  to  that  seance.


■


•566 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Garrington.  [part


in  the  majority  of  their  phenomena,  the  other  phenomena  in  which  I
did  not  detect  fraud  were  presumably  also  fraudulent.  As  regards
Eusapia's  phenomena  at  these  seances,  my  opinion  is  that,  as  some
of  the  phenomena  appear  to  me  to  be  undoubtedly  genuine,  others
in  which  I  did  not  detect  fraud  were  (considering  the  manner  and
strictness  of  the  control  and  the  amount  of  light  in  the  seance  room)
also  genuine.  I  do  not  maintain  this  of  all  the  phenomena,  as  the
chances  of  occasional  mal-observation  on  our  part,  at  such  rare  times
as  when  darkness  prevailed  or  when  the  controllers  were  changing
their  seats,  cannot  be  excluded.  At  the  same  time  I  must  repeat  that
Eusapia  was  not  detected  in  fraud  in  any  one  of  the  470  phenomena
that  took  place  at  the  eleven  seances.

My  general  opinion  of  these  phenomena  is  that  they  were  due
to  some  supernormal  force  resident  in  the  organism  of  Eusapia,
though  some  few  of  them  would  appear  to  point  to  the  action  of  an
independent  energy.

Whatever  explanation  is  advanced  can  only  be  a  theoretical
one.  It  is  not  theories  that  are  required  at  this  stage  of  the  investi-
gation of  this  medium,  (who  so  far  has  only  been  examined  by  one
English  and  a  few  foreign  eminent  men  of  science),  but  the  recognition
by  the  scientific  world  at  large  of  the  occurrence  of  supernormal
phenomena.  It  is  greatly  to  be  regretted,  in  view  of  the  reports  of
the  eminent  scientific  men  just  referred  to,  that  British  men  of
science  do  not  take  the  opportunity  of  an  investigation  into  Eusapia
Palladino's  mediumship, — an  opportunity  which,  if  not  taken  soon,
may,  in  nature's  course,  be  lost  for  ever.

W.  W.  B.,  6th  March,  1909.


Final  Note  by  E.  Feilding.

I  have  but  little  to  add  to  the  notes  of  my  colleagues  and
to  the  Report,  the  length  of  which  must  have  exhausted  the
attention  of  the  most  earnest  student  of  the  subject  with  which
it  deals.  I  propose  to  allow  myself  only  a  few  words  as  to
the  character  of  the  Report  itself.

In  preparing  it  for  press  I  have  speculated  much  as  to  what
measure  of  success  we  have  attained  towards  achieving  the
modest  object  we  have  had  in  view,  namely,  to  present  to
readers  who  have  never  assisted  at  seances  of  the  kind  described


Lix.]  Sittings  ivith  jEusapia :  Conclusions.


567


a  complete  record  of  the  conditions  which  prevailed,  and  an
accurate  account  of  the  occurrences,  so  that  they  might  them-
selves come  to  a  conclusion  as  to  whether  these  occurrences
were  due  to  conjuring,  or  to  a  display  of  telekinetic  force.
Our  intention  at  the  outset  was  not  to  obtrude  our  own  views,
but  to  let  the  facts  speak  for  themselves.

In  both  of  these  respects  our  intention  has  been  largely
modified  in  practice.  There  is  no  question  but  that  the  short-
hand reports  give  in  most  cases  an  inadequate  account  of
the  proceedings  by  constantly  understating  the  number  of  the
phenomena  and  insufficiently  recording  the  adequacy  of  the
control  which  prevailed,  with  the  result  that  a  critical  reader,
loth  to  accept  the  hypothesis  of  a  supernormal  agency  having
been  at  work,  will  find  the  proportion  of  phenomena  which
he  is  able  to  dismiss  as  inconclusive,  by  reason  of  the  omission
from  the  report  of  some  important  detail,  far  larger  than  we
ourselves,  from  our  contemporary  observation,  could  so  dismiss.

It  was  perhaps  because  we  so  often  found,  when  reading
the  reports  through  the  day  after  the  seance,  that  we  had
fallen  thus  far  short  of  our  ideal  in  the  way  of  reporting,  and
had,  in  a  sense,  done  the  phenomena  an  injustice,  that  we
were  forced  from  our  proposed  colourless  attitude  into  one  of
almost  proselytizing  affirmation.  The  result  is  that  the  Report
is  far  more  positive  in  its  conclusions  and  dominated  by  a  far
more  personal  note  than,  for  example,  the  admirably  balanced
report  recently  issued  by  the  Institut  Giniral  Psychologique
of  Paris,  a  report  which,  though  dealing  with  experiments
lasting  through  three  years  and  marked  by  more  remark-
able incidents  than  any  in  our  own  experience,  is  nevertheless
drawn  up  with  such  a  wealth  of  scientific  caution  and  reserve
as  almost  to  leave  a  reader  in  doubt  as  to  the  character  of  its
own  conclusions.

It  has  constantly,  and  in  my  opinion  most  absurdly,  been
said  that  no  one  is  so  easy  to  deceive  as  a  man  of  science.
I  think  it  would  be  nearer  the  mark  to  say  that  if  in  fact
there  be  such  a  thing  as  a  supernormal  physical  force,  no  one
is  so  easily  converted  to  a  belief  in  it  as  a  conjuror.  The
savant,  steeped  in  his  experience  of  the  normal  forces  of  nature,
is  constitutionally  averse  from  the  conception  of  an  apparently
bizarre  departure  from  them. Aware  of  his  own  lack  of  know-


568 E.  Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally,  and  H.  Carrington.  [part


ledge  of  the  possibilities  of  mere  legerdemain,  he  naturally  prefers
to  suspect  himself  of  having  been  the  sport  of  some  undiscovered
form  of  deception  rather  than  to  remodel  his  philosophy.  The
conjuror,  on  the  other  hand,  has  the  experience,  not  only  of  the
possibilities,  but  also  of  the  limitations  of  his  own  art,  and
having  no  particular  philosophy  beyond  that  of  an  ordinary
layman  regarding  the  forces  of  nature,  has  no  special  difficulty
in  remodelling  it,  if  necessary,  when  confronted  with  a  series
of  events  which  he  knows  his  art  is  incapable  of  explaining.

My  colleagues,  then,  having  come  to  the  deliberate  opinion
that  a  large  proportion  of  the  manifestations  of  which  we  were
the  witnesses  in  Naples  were  clearly  beyond  the  possibilities
of  any  conceivable  form  of  conjuring,  entertain  no  difficulty  in
saying  so  in  precise  terms,  and  so  far  as  my  own  position  as
a  layman  entitles  me  to  it,  I  associate  myself  entirely  with
their  conclusions  without  apology  for  our  seeming  lack  of  scien-
tific caution.

I  permit  myself  to  finish  with  a  quotation  from  a  paper
which  I  read  before  the  Society  when  introducing  to  it  the
subject  of  this  Eeport.

"  While  I  have  convinced  myself  of  the  reality  of  these
phenomena  and  of  the  existence  of  some  force  not  yet  generally
recognised  which  is  able  to  impress  itself  on  matter,  and  to
simulate  or  create  the  appearance  of  matter,  I  refrain  for  the
present  from  speculating  upon  its  nature.  Yet  it  is  just  in
this  speculation  that  the  whole  interest  of  the  subject  lies.
The  force,  if  we  are  driven,  as  I  am  confident  we  are,  to  pre-
suppose one  other  than  mere  conjuring,  must  either  reside  in
the  medium  herself  and  be  of  the  nature  of  an  extension  of
human  faculty  beyond  what  is  generally  recognised ;  or  must
be  a  force  having  its  origin  in  something  apparently  intelligent
and  external  to  her,  operating  either  directly  from  itself,  or
indirectly  through  or  in  conjunction  with  some  special  attribute
of  her  organism.  The  phenomena  then, — in  themselves  pre-
posterous, futile,  and  lacking  in  any  quality  of  the  smallest
ethical,  religious,  or  spiritual  value, — are  nevertheless  sympto-
matic of  something  which,  put  at  its  lowest  by  choosing  the
first  hypothesis,  must,  as  it  filters  gradually  into  our  common
knowledge,  most  profoundly  modify  the  whole  of  our  philosophy
of  human faculty ; but  which,  if that  hypothesis  is  found


LIX.]


Sittings  ivith  Eusapia :  Conclusions.


569


insufficient,  may  ultimately  be  judged  to  require  an  interpre-
tation involving  not  only  that  modification,  but  a  still  wider
one,  namely,  our  knowledge  of  the  relations  between  mankind
and  an  intelligent  sphere  external  to  it.  Although  one  may
approach  the  investigation  of  the  phenomena  themselves  in  a
light,  shall  I  say,  even  a  flippant  spirit, — (I  sometimes  think
that  in  this  way  alone  one  can  preserve  one's  mental  balance
in  dealing  with  this  kind  of  subject), — one  must  regard  them
as  the  playthings  of  the  agency  which  they  reveal,  and  the
more  perfect  revelation  of  that  agency,  whatever  it  may  be,
through  the  study  of  them,  is  surely  a  task  as  worthy  of  the
most  earnest  consideration  as  any  problem  with  which  modern
science  is  concerned.  If  our  report,  by  reason  of  its  form  and
detail,  is  found  to  do  something  towards  supplying  a  further
evidential  basis  for,  and  therefore  directing  the  attention  of
men  of  science  in  this  country  towards,  the  far  more  important
and  elaborate  published  investigations  of  many  of  our  more
eminent  predecessors,  and  of  inducing  them  to  take  a  part  in
the  research,  I  shall  feel  that  it  has  amply  served  its  purpose."


570


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


SUPPLEMENT.


M.  COURTIER'S  REPORT  ON  THE  EXPERIMENTS  WITH
EUSAPIA  PALLADINO  AT  THE  PARIS  "  INSTITUT
GENERAL  PSYCHOLOGIQUE  "  AND  SOME  COMMENTS
THEREON.1

By  Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.

This  long  expected,  very  interesting  and  copiously  illustrated  Report
embodies  the  results  of  forty-three  sittings  in  all:  thirteen  in  1905,
sixteen  in  1906  and  fourteen  in  1907-1908.  Prior  to  the  first  series
Messrs.  Courtier  ("  Chef  des  services  du  Secretariat  general "  of  the
Institute)  and  Yourievitch  (Secretary  General)  had  in  May,  1905,
attended  eight  seances  with  Eusapia  Palladino  in  Naples,  which
says  M.  Courtier,  "are  among  the  strongest  we  have  ever  had"
(p.  418).  Immediately  afterwards,  a  "General  plan  of  research"  was
drawn  up  by  the  two  investigators.  It  embraced  "  observation,
control  and  registering  of  the  phenomena,"  "physical  researches"  and
"  psycho-physiological  researches."  It  was  in  fact  a  very  exhaustive
programme,  and  the  investigators  have  honestly  endeavoured  to
carry  it  out  in  every  particular,  whether  with  uniform  success  is
another  question.

The  Parisian  seances  (held  partly  at  M.  Courtier's,  in  1905,
partly  in  the  library  of  the  Institute,  and  finally  in  M.  Yourievitch's
house)  were  attended  by  many  persons  of  scientific  eminence ;  some
names  will  be  given  below.  The  general  conditions  of  the  sittings
were  the  usual  "  Eusapian "  conditions,  which  are  too  well  known
(it  may  be  supposed)  to  readers  of  the  Proceedings  to  need  repetition
— a  special  feature  being,  however,  the  use  of  self-registering
instruments  of  various  descriptions,  these  instruments  being  placed
in  an  adjoining  room  and  communicated  with  by  means  of  electric
leads  and  air-tubes  passing  through  the  wall.

1  Bulletin  de  Vlnstitut  Giniral  Psychologique,  No.  5-6  (Novembre-Decembre,
1908).


LIX.]


Review.


571


At  all  the  sittings  held  in  Paris  a  stenographer  was  present  who
noted  down  every  word  said  by  the  sitters  and  by  the  medium.
Other  appliances  were  also  used  to  make  the  record  of  the  investi-
gation as  complete  as  possible.

In  the  course  of  the  experiments  different  systems  of  light  were
employed,  the  most  perfect  being  as  follows  :  a  group  of  six  electric
lamps  was  placed  in  a  wooden  reflector  closed  below ;  it  was  then
raised  to  about  thirty  centimetres  from  the  ceiling ;  the  room  was
therefore  lit  up  with  reflected  light,  whose  intensity  could  be
modified  at  will.  At  another  series  of  sittings  a  gas-burner  sur-
rounded with  movable  wooden  shutters  was  in  use,  and  at  another
still  an  oil-lamp,  placed  in  another  room.

After  these  preliminary  details  the  Report  proceeds  (Part  I.)  to
the  phenomena  themselves,  every  class  of  them  being  illustrated  with
excerpts  from  the  original  stenographic  records.

It  first  cites  instances  of  blows,  and  scratchings  on  or  in  the
table,  and  remarks  that  these  different  sounds  generally  occurred
in  imitation  of  corresponding  movements  made  by  Eusapia  and
sometimes  by  the  sitters.  Exact  localisation  of  sounds  is  admittedly
very  difficult;  but  it  must  be  remarked  that  in  some  cases  simul-
taneously with  the  noises  the  table  was  felt  to  vibrate  under  the
sitter's  hands  (pp.  434-436).

Then  come  movements  and  tiltings  of  the  table  ;  then  full
levitations  of  the  same.  This  last  category  is  the  most  important.
In  many  instances  the  conditions  under  which  the  levitations
occurred  seem  to  have  been  very  good,  and  one  need  not  wonder
that  this  particular  phenomenon  has  apparently  dealt  a  serious
blow  to  the  scepticism  of  such  a  savant  as  M.  dArsonval,  not  to
mention  M.  Courtier  himself,  and  others.  I  will  give  a  few  instances  :
"  (1905-IV-3.)  Eusapia  serre  ses  poings  et  les  tend  vers  la  table;
elle  remet  ses  mains  sur  la  table,  puis  les  leve.  La  table  se  souleve
des  quatre  pieds.  L'appareil  enregistreur  a  indique  le  soulevement
de  la  table.  M.  dArsonval  et  M.  Yourievitch  (qui  controlent  a
gauche  et  a  droite)  declarent  que  les  pieds  et  les  genoux  d'Eusapia
n'ont  pas  bouge  "  (p.  437).

"  (1905-X-4-5)  9  h.  58.  La  table  est  soulevee  des  quatre  pieds
a  environ  30  centimetres  du  sol  et  elle  reste  en  Pair  sept  secondes.
Eusapia  n'avait  qu'une  main  sur  la  table ;  la  bougie  placee  sous  la
table  permettait  le  controle  des  genoux  qui  n'ont  pas  bouge."

"  10  h.  La  table  est  soulevee  des  quatre  pieds  a  une  hauteur
d'environ  25  centimetres  et  reste  en  l'air  quatre  secondes,  M.  Curie


572


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


touchant  seul  la  table,  la  main  d'Eusapia  etant  sur  la  sienne.  Eusapia
a  geint  et  a  paru  faire  un  grand  effort.  Le  controle  etait  excellent
grace  a  la  bougie  placee  sous  la  table  "  (pp.  437-438).

"  (1906-IV-3).  La  table  se  leve  de  deux,  puis  des  quatre  pieds  ;
une  main  d'Eusapia  est  au-dessus  de  la  table  et  son  autre  main  sur
la  main  de  M.  Curie.  Les  pieds  d'Eusapia  sont  attaches  aux  pieds
de  la  chaise  sur  laquelle  elle  est  assise.  Controleurs  a  gauche  M.
Curie,  a  droite  M.  Fielding  [Feilding]  "  (p.  438).

Another  time  the  table  is  levitated  when  an  additional  weight  of
ten  kilogrammes  has  been  placed  upon  it.  Messrs.  Ballet  and
d'Arsonval  were  controlling  "  absolutely "  Eusapia's  feet  and  knees
(besides  the  hands).  The  table  was  also  once  levitated,  no  one
(apparently)  touching  it  and  one  of  the  sitters  holding  the  medium's
feet  under  it.  Levitations  were  also  obtained  when  two  of  the
table-legs  (those  nearest  the  medium)  were  protected  with  wooden
covers  ("  jambieres  ")  joined  by  a  cross-bar  above  the  medium's
knees  (pp.  438,  445).

These  levitations  were  registered  in  a  manner  which  left  no
doubt  whatever  as  to  their  objective  character.  Each  leg  separately
had  been  provided  with  a  contact  key  which  completed  an  electric
circuit  when  the  leg  ivas  off  the  ground.  Each  of  these  circuits
operated  a  Desprez  indicator  writing  on  a  revolving  drum.  If  then  any
leg  experienced  a  pressure  from  below — either  from  the  floor  or  from
the  medium's  foot — the  corresponding  index  would  not  work.  So
when  all  four  scribers  worked  together  it  was  certain  that  the  legs
were  really  off  the  ground  and  not  otherwise  supported  by  or  resting
on  anything  else.

The  investigators  also  tried  to  ascertain  what  became  of  the
natural  weight  of  the  table  during  these  "levitations."  It  was
finally  proved  that  in  each  and  every  case  everything  took  place
"  as  if  the  fulcrum  of  the  force  were  in  the  subject  himself" — and
therefore  in  perfect  accordance  with  orthodox  mechanics  (p.  441).
This,  says  the  Report,  is  one  of  the  most  important  results  arrived
at  during  the  sittings  (p.  441).

Apparent  decrease  in  Eusapia's  weight  was  also  observed  and
automatically  registered,  she  being  seated  upon  a  chair  placed  on  a
"  Marey  balance,"  and  under  control.  Alteration  of  weight  even  to
a  considerable  extent  was  also  proved  in  the  case  of  a  small  table
when  moved  and  raised  into  the  air  seemingly  without  contact.

A  small  table  with  a  movable  upper  surface  being  placed  upon  the
seance-table  and  Eusapia  having  brought  her  head  close  to  it,  the


LIX.]


Review.


573


surface  was  twice  lifted  up.  The  second  time  Madame  Curie  held
her  hand  between  the  small  table  and  the  medium's  head  (p.  447).

The  Report  next  mentions  briefly  movements  and  bulgings  of  the
curtain  and  of  the  medium's  dress  (the  latter  circumstance  greatly
impressed  M.  Curie) ;  then  various  cases  of  movements  of  objects  in
the  cabinet.  A  notable  instance  was  the  bringing  upon  the  seance-
table  of  a  basin  full  of  clay  weighing  seven  kilogrammes.  Some
objects  were  broken,  for  instance,  a  wooden  lath  and  an  India-
rubber  tube  (pp.  447-471).

The  peregrinations  of  another  small  wooden  table  ("gueridon")
(also  graphically  registered  through  a  specially  devised  apparatus)
deserve  more  attention  from  the  evidential  point  of  view.  Here
is  one  good  instance :

"  (1906-IV-10).  "Le  gueridon  place  a  la  gauche  d'Eusapia,  a
50  centimetres  environ  de  sa  chaise,  est  completement  souleve  alors
que  les  pieds  d'Eusapia  sont  attaches  aux  pieds  de  sa  chaise  par
des  lacets  et  que  ses  poignets  sont  attaches  aux  poignets  des
controleurs.  Arrive  dans  son  ascension  a  la  hauteur  des  epaules  de
M.  Curie  il  est  retourne  les  pieds  en  l'air,  puis  pose  plateau  contre
plateau  sur  la  table.  Le  mouvement  n'a  pas  ete  rapide,  mais  comme
attentivement  guide"  (pp.  472-473).

Apparent  alterations  of  weight  were  also  observed  with  this
"  gueridon."

With  such  "  phenomena "  as  "  touches "  and  the  appearance  of
hands  and  "  black  limbs,"  "  comme  des  silhouettes  d'ombres  chinoises "
(pp.  473-475,  478,  479)  the  Report  deals  very  briefly.  An  instance
is  given  of  a  touch  through  the  curtain  at  a  considerable  height
above  the  medium's  head  and  two  cases  of  apparently  simultaneous
touches.

The  Report  then  describes  various  luminous  phenomena  witnessed.
Bluish  and  phosphorescent  lights  were  observed  to  appear  on  Eusapia's
forehead  and  also  on  the  curtain.  When  Eusapia  was  lying  in  the
cabinet  upon  a  "chaise  longue"  to  which  she  had  been  tied  from
head  to  foot,  M.  Courtier,  who  sat  inside  the  cabinet,  observed  on
two  different  occasions  cloudy  lights,  "as  if  phosphorescent  or  white,"
wandering  over  the  medium's  body.  They  were  also  noticed  at  the
opening  of  the  curtain  by  the  other  sitters.

Sparks  and  luminous  points  above  the  medium's  head  are  also
recorded. The  most  interesting  episode  is  described  as  follows  :

"  (1907-X-10-12).  .  .  .  Eusapia  demande  qu'on  aille  chercher  la
machine  electrique  et  que  Ton  en  tire  trois  etincelles. M.  Courtier


574


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


va  dans  la  piece  voisine  prendre  la  machine  electrique  et  se  placant
en  face  d'Eusapia,  environ  a  2  metres,  en  tire  trois  etincelles.  On
voit  successivement  a  la  hauteur  de  la  tete  d'Eusapia  trois  petits
points  lumineux  imitant  les  etincelles  electriques  et  Ton  entend  en
meme  temps  le  petit  bruit  sec  de  l'etincelle  electrique.  A  la
seconde  experience  ces  points  lumineux  sont  beaucoup  plus  faibles,
et  le  bruit  se  produit  quelques  instants  apres  leur  apparition  au
lieu  d'etre  simultane"  (p.  477).

M.  Branly,  in  the  course  of  the  discussion  of  M.  Courtier's
report,  referred  to  this  incident  as  "  one  of  the  most  curious
experiments  I  have  seen "  (p.  558).

Part  II.  of  the  Report  is  devoted  to  a  very  short  biography
of  the  medium  and  to  various  psycho-physiological  and  purely
physiological  researches  to  which  she  was  subjected.  Here  are  the
two  points  most  worthy  of  attention :  though  some  incidents
during  the  sittings  seemed  to  point  to  another  conclusion  (p.  487),
special  experiments  made  on  her  (supposed)  sensibility  at  a
distance  gave  negative  results  (p.  482),  and  in  the  course  of  some
experiments  on  her  ctynamometric  strength  it  was  ascertained  that
its  fall  was  invariably  instantaneous,  thus  reminding  one  of  the  fall
of  the  table  after  a  "  levitation  "  (p.  483).

A  few  pages  devoted  to  "  Eusapia  en  seance "  (pp.  484-490)
are  particularly  interesting.  She  seems  to  be  in  a  genuine
"  secondary  state "  during  the  sittings.  The  level  of  her  hypnosis
appears,  however,  to  be  most  variable.  The  hyperesthesia  to  which
her  hands  are  subject  will  sometimes  persist  long  after  a  sitting.
She  seems  to  remember  the  incidents  of  a  seance  up  to  a  certain
point  only  and  then  amnesia  apparently  sets  in.

She  maintains  that  the  phenomena  are  produced  by  "  la  densita
della  volonta  di  medio "  and  sometimes  asks  the  sitters  to  concen-
trate their  will  on  a  certain  phenomenon.  The  movements  and
levitations  of  objects  are  accompanied  on  her  part  by  strong
muscular  contractions.  Eusapia's  own  ideation  seems  to  have  a
considerable  influence  on  the  things  which  happen  at  the  sittings.
A  friendly  attitude  of  the  sitters  is  apparently  a  very  important
condition  for  the  success  of  the  experiments.

The  Report  deals  next  with  the  "  investigation  of  the  physical
environment  in  the  subject's  proximity"  (pp.  505-514).

The  investigators  tried  to  ascertain  Eusapia's  possible  action  on
physical  instruments.  The  experiments  made  dealt  chiefly  with
mechanical  force,  heat,  electricity  and  magnetism.


LIX.]


Review.


575


Eusapia  having  been  placed  in  front  of  a  lever-balance  and  under
control,  the  index  marks  first  one  kilogramme-and-a-half,  then  three,
seven  and  ten.  Part  of  her  skirt  was  at  her  request  placed  on
the  edge  of  the  base  of  the  balance.

Different  experiments  were  made  on  the  movement  in  good  light
and  without  contact  of  various  small  weighing  balances.  The  experi-
ment succeeded  several  times  without  any  imposture — such  as  the
use  of  a  hair  or  thread — being  detected.  It  is,  however,  particularly
noteworthy  that  after  one  such  instrument  (a  balance  for  weighing
cocoons)  had  been  covered  with  lamp-black  (so  as  to  reveal  the  trace
of  any  contact)  the  medium  was  unable  to  affect  this  "  pese-cocon "
any  more. (On  this  point  see  also  further  on.)

A  glass  was  made  to  vibrate  in  full  light,  giving  oft'  "strong
sonorous  waves,"  then  fell  down  on  the  table  and  broke.

Observations  made  by  three  of  the  investigators  tended  to  show
that  the  medium  could  discharge  an  electroscope  without  contact.
In  other  circumstances,  however,  electroscopes  remained  unaffected.

Experiments  made  to  ascertain  whether  Eusapia's  muscular  efforts
were  accompanied  by  abnormal  thermal  or  magnetic  phenomena  led
to  negative  results,  and  chemical  examination  of  the  atmosphere  in
the  medium's  proximity  during  the  seances  revealed  nothing  abnormal.

I  pass  on  to  the  most  attractive  part  of  the  Report — that  entitled
"Critical  Considerations"  (pp.  514-546).

The  attitude  of  men  of  science  towards  the  problems  in  question
has  undergone,  says  M.  Courtier,  a  serious  change.  They  have  ceased
to  look  with  contempt  on  those  researches.  On  the  contrary,  they
regard  them  with  serious  and  keen  curiosity.  But  they  have  banished
from  them  the  supernatural  element  and  wish  to  investigate  with
rigorous  experimental  methods.  The  time  is  not  far  away  when  the
same  point  of  view  will  prevail  in  the  public  mind.

Before  everything  else — and  in  particular  before  the  building  up
of  new  hypotheses — it  is,  however,  necessary  to  examine  how  far
the  phenomena  themselves  may  be  considered  authentic  and  the
conditions  of  control  and  observation  adequate.

From  this  point  of  view  many  circumstances  are  unsatisfactory.
The  light  is  generally  poor,  and  is  usually  diminished  gradually
as  the  seance  is  in  progress, — which  gives  rise  to  new  and  various
sources  of  error.  Moreover,  the  greater  the  darkness, — the  more
the  medium  as  a  general  rule  complains  of  cutaneous  hyperesthesia
and  throws  difficulties  in  the  way  of  controlling.  On  this  point
the  Report  says  :


570


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


"  En  ce  qui  concerne  les  mains  d'Eusapia,  le  controle  n'est  pleine-
ment  satisfaisant  que  si  Ton  en  serre  le  pouce  et  si  la  main  ainsi
tenue  repose  sur  le  plateau  de  la  table  en  bonne  lumiere.  Mais
souvent  Eusapia  place  ses  mains  sur  ses  cuisses  et  le  controle
devient  deja  moins  satisfaisant,  puisque  ses  mains  cessent  d'etre
entitlement  visibles.  .  .  .  Lorsqu'on  ne  tient  plus  le  pouce  il  est
difficile  dans  une  obscurite  relative  de  savoir  nettement  si  Ton
touche  la  main  droite  ou  la  main  gauche.  Mais  que  dire  du  controle
quand  Eusapia  se  plaignant  d'hyperesthesie  cutanee  POSE  SA  main
sur  la  votre,  en  l'appuyant  plus  ou  moins  fortement  ?  .  .  .  Pis
encore  est  le  controle  lorsque  Eusapia  ne  fait  plus  que  toucher
legerement  la  main  du  controleur  qu'elle  tapote "  (p.  517).

Besides  the  hand  the  medium's  neighbour  has  to  look  after  her
knee  and  her  foot.  When  his  foot  is  upon  the  medium's  and  his
leg  against  hers  the  conditions  of  control  may  be  considered
sufficient.  But  it  often  happens  that  Eusapia  herself  insists  on  being
allowed  to  put  her  foot  upon  the  controller's  :

"  La  surveillance  est  alors  si  precaire  qu'un  observateur  demanda
un  jour  a  defaire  sa  bottine  pour  mieux  sentir  le  contact  du  pied
d'Eusapia"  (p.  518).

She  also  objects — as  a  general  rule  at  least — to  certain  "  tests "
being  applied  to  her,  which,  though  very  effective,  could  not  have
caused  her  any  inconvenience— and  this  on  pretences  which  are
obviously  inadequate.

Since  controlling  the  phenomena  is  one  thing  and  observing  another,
it  would  be  preferable  to  have  during  the  sittings  some  one  standing
close  to  Eusapia  without  either  holding  her  or  taking  part  in  the
"  chain  " — merely  for  purposes  of  observation.  To  this,  however,  she
decidedly  objects  in  most  cases.1

The  result  is  that  the  controllers  are  in  a  perpetual  state  of  division
of  attention.  Observation  is,  moreover,  the  more  difficult  as  the
"phenomena"  occur  now  in  one  place,  now  in  another,  generally
in  an  "instantaneous  and  fugitive  fashion."  If  a  phenomenon  has  long
been  expected  attention  becomes  worn  out  and  sometimes  slackens
in  spite  of  energetic  efforts.

In  addition  to  this  cause  of  distraction  the  sitters  generally  talk
during  the  seance,  and  are  often  expressly  invited  by  raps  to  start
a  general  conversation.  This  naturally  leads  to  their  attention
becoming  divided.

1  For  an  apparent  exception,  see  Annates  des  Sciences  PsycMques,  No.  10,
1907,  pp.  683,  687,  691,  692,  703.


XIX.]


Review.


577


Then  there  is  suggestibility  to  beware  of; — one  must  be  careful
not  to  affirm  more  than  what  was  really  perceived  (with  this  point
S.P.R.  members  are  of  course  particularly  familiar).  The  elements
of  emotion  and  excitement  may  also  come  into  play  now  and  then,
and  vitiate  observation  and  judgment  most  seriously.

"  Combien  on  est  loin  des  patientes  experimentations  de  laboratoire
■oil  les  conditions  des  phenomenes  sont  reglees  et  calculees  a  l'avance,
oil  Ton  n'observe  qu'un  seul  fait  a  la  fois,  dans  un  etat  d'attention
trancmille  et  silencieuse  ! "  (p.  520).

The  report  next  deals  with  Eusapia's  "supercheries"  (pp.  521-540).
These  are  unfortunately  very  numerous.  At  one  time,  having  failed
with  the  phe-cocon,  after  it  had  been  covered  with  lamp-black  (as
described  above)  she  moves  the  leaf  of  a  gum-tree  up  and  down
by  the  aid  of  a  hair.  Another  time  she  moves  the  scale  of  the
aforesaid  "  pese-cocon "  in  the  same  way.1

1 1  am  not  aware  when  hairs  and  threads  were  first  found  to  play  so
objectionable  a  part  in  E.  P. 's  performances,  but  similar  observations  appear
to  have  been  very  often  made.  So  often  indeed  that  some  six  years  ago  an
ingenious  hypothesis  was  started  according  to  which  these  supposed  hairs  or
threads  were  merely  harmless  "  fluidic  filaments"  (Revue  des  Etudes  Psychiques,
March,  1903,  pp.  86-97).  Quite  recently  such  a  hypothesis  has  been  sanctioned
by  no  less  an  authority  than  Dr.  Ochorowicz  himself.  In  Annates  des  Sciences
Psychiques  for  the  current  year  has  appeared  a  series  of  articles  by  him,  giving
an  account  of  some  experiments  with  a  young  Polish  lady  called  Stanislawa
Tomczyk.  Among  other  things  this  mediumistically  gifted  young  person  would
now  and  then  "levitate"  various  small  objects — which  "  levitations "  were  in
some  cases  photographed.  A  book-shaped  calendar  being  thus  privileged  (the
medium  holding  her  hands  to  the  right  and  left  of  it),  Dr.  Ochorowicz  noticed
at  a  certain  moment  "quite  distinctly"  "a  black  thread,  not  a  very  thick
•one,  going  from  one  of  the  medium's  hands  to  the  other;  its  right  end,  not
being  stretched  out,  was  hanging  down  under  the  medium's  right  hand  in
the  shape  of  an  irregular  spiral."  At  the  same  moment  the  medium  began  to
bring  her  hands  down  on  the  table,  the  calendar  fell  flat — and  no  thread  could
be  detected  (Annates,  March,  1909,  p.  68).  Subsequently  examination  of  a
photograph  showing  an  arrow  "levitated"  revealed  "on  the  forefinger  of  the
medium's  left  hand  a  small  line  not  corresponding  to  the  natural  fold  of  the
phalanx "  which  might  be  due  to  a  tightened  hair  or  thread  pressing  against
the  skin  ;  moreover,  two  of  the  fingers  were  suspiciously  joined  together  as  if
retaining  the  end  of  the  thread  (Annates,  April,  p.  100).  Dr.  Ochorowicz  thinks,
however,  that  the  thread  in  question  was  a  "materialised"  one  (ibid,  footnote),
and  he  sums  up  his  "general  impressions"  as  follows:

"It  is  possible  medianically  to  create  between  the  medium's  hands  a  kind
of  thread  presenting  during  a  few  minutes  a  certain  consistency  which
decreases  and  disappears  when  his  hands  have  been  moved  asunder.  This
thread  created  by  the  medium's  unconscious  imagination  seems  to  present  a

20


578


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


In  the  course  of  an  experiment  with  a  manoraetric  apparatus,
invented  by  M.  Courtier,  a  little  nail  (which  might  well  serve  its
purpose)  is  found  where  no  nail  should  have  been, — that  is,  drops
(apparently)  from  Eusapia's  left  hand.

Substitution  of  the  medium's  hands  was  once  very  clearly  noticed
at  a  sitting  outside  the  Institute  by  M.  Courtier.  It  would  seem
that  at  this  same  seance  the  medium  managed  to  liberate  herself
from  both  her  neighbours  for  a  moment  (p.  525).

In  the  course  of  the  seances  some  photographs  were  taken.  The
medium,  however,  objected  to  their  being  taken  unexpectedly,  on
the  ground  that  this  might  injure  her  :  and  this  injunction  was
departed  from  in  one  case  only  when  a  partial  levitation  of  the
table  occurred  in  full  darkness.  The  photograph  this  time  revealed
nothing  particular,  one  way  or  the  other.  Some  other  photographs
are,  however,  distinctly  unfavourable  to  the  medium's  claims.  They
were  taken  when  the  "  gueridon "  was  being  carried  out  of  the
cabinet :  they  show  it  in  an  exactly  similar  position  three  times  in
succession,  and  it  is  obvious  that  it  is  supported  by  the  medium's
head.  It  is  important  to  note  that  after  Eusapia  had  seen  the  most
significant  of  the  photographs  in  question,  this  small  table  was  never
again  moved  out  of  the  cabinet,  though  this  had  constantly  occurred
before.

A  little  strip  of  cloth  which  was  found  one  day  on  the  floor  of
the  seance-room,  was  ascertained  from  details  of  internal  construction
to  correspond  pretty  closely  (though,  it  is  true,  not  completely)  to
the  "  spirits'  veil,"  whose  presence  in  impressions  of  "  materialised
hands "  on  clay  and  putty  had  been  often  noticed  before.  "  Nous
l'enroulames  sur  nos  doigts.  Nous  tenions  un  secret  des  empreintes  "
(p.  538).

case  of  objective  material  ideoplasty  :  a  vivid  desire  to  lift  a  small  object
at  a  distance  brings  by  association  the  idea  of  a  thread  which  would  answer
the  purpose.  This  idea  realises  itself  in  a  monoideio  moment.  In  ordinary
life  the  siyht  of  a  thread,  that  is  certain  vibrations  of  the  ether,  raise  the
idea  of  a  thread ;  here  by  virtue  of  the  law  of  reversibility  the  contrary
happens  ;  the  idea  of  a  thread  leads  up  to  the  sight,  the  objective  ghost  of
a  thread,  that  is  to  certain  vibrations  of  the  ether.  ...  Is  it  a  thing
created  from  nothing?  Is  it  the  etheric  body  of  a  real  thread?  Is  it  idea
materialised — and  with  what  matter  ?  Ether  particles  ?  Atoms  of  the  medium's
body? Of  her  dress? It  is  a  mystery"  [Annates,  March  1909,  pp.  69-70).

It  is  sad  to  think  that  with  such  boundless  horizons  opening  before  their
eyes  most  people  will  doubtless  wickedly  prefer  the  most  prosaic  explanation
of  the  incident  !


LIX.]


Review.


579


I  pass  over  some  other  points  of  secondary  or  not  decisive
importance.

It  is  of  course  quite  possible  (says  the  Report)  that  Eusapia's
powers  are  now  on  the  wane.  M.  Courtier  himself  noticed  from
year  to  year  a  gradual  weakening  of  her  powers.  Professional
mediums  would  do  wisely  if  they  gave  up  their  trade  at  a  certain
age,  but  as  most. of  them  are  poor  and  are  not  used  to  any  other,
they  must  needs  persevere.

The  Report  then  goes  on  to  consider  whether  certain  occurrences
do  not  after  all  present  in  themselves  "  some  internal  proof  of
authenticity  or  fraud  "  (pp.  540-544).  A  table  weighing  7  kilogrammes
by  itself,  and  with  an  additional  weight  of  10  kilogrammes,  was  in
1905  twice  raised  off  the  ground  for  several  seconds.  At  another
sitting,  in  the  same  year,  it  was  levitated  again,  when  the  legs
nearest  the  medium  were  protected  with  wooden  sheaths.  Messrs.
Courtier  and  Yourievitch  tried  to  imitate  this  phenomenon  now
with  one  hand,  now  with  both,  now  with  the  hands  and  feet,
now  with  the  feet  and  knees  only.  Some  measure  of  success  was
obtained,  but  the  conditions  at  the  sittings  were  different,  the  steno-
graphic record  showing  that  when  the  levitation  occurred,  the
medium's  feet  and  knees  were  "  absolutely  under  control "  and
there  was  no  contact  with  the  legs  of  the  table;  apart  from  this,
the  latter  remained  in  the  air  a  good  many  seconds.  Moreover,  Messrs.
Courtier  and  Yourievitch  are  much  stronger  physically  than  Eusapia.
Then  certain  levitations  which  took  place  at  the  end  of  the  seances
and  with  everybody  standing  up,  have  also  to  be  accounted  for.  Some
reached  as  much  as  one  metre,  the  medium's  hands  and  feet  being
"  rigorously  "  controlled.

Some  of  the  movements  made  by  the  "gueridon"  also  deserve
attention.  Sometimes,  when  placed  at  the  medium's  left,  about  one
metre  from  her,  it  moved  either  towards  her  or  away,  in  accordance
with  Eusapia's  gestures.  In  the  former  case  we  cannot  perhaps
exclude  altogether  the  possible  action  of  a  thread  :  but  how  about
the  other  kind  of  movement  1  A  rod  could  not  have  been  used
without  detection.

At  the  sitting  of  April  6,  1906,  Eusapia  had — as  already  men-
tioned— allowed  her  feet  to  be  attached  to  the  legs  of  her  chair
with  strings.  Her  wrists  had  also  been  tied  to  those  of  Messrs.
Curie  and  Feilding.  Under  these  conditions  M.  Courtier,  who  was
seated  some  distance  behind  M.  Curie,  distinctly  saw  the  "  gueridon  "
rise  from  the  ground  and  could  detect  no  hand  touching  it.  The


580


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


little  table  then  went  up  as  high  as  M.  Curie's  shoulders,  was  turned
upside  down  and  then  gently  placed  in  this  position  upon  the  central
table.  None  of  the  four  investigators  (M.  Yourievitch  besides  those
mentioned)  under  whose  eyes  the  "  phenomenon  "  took  place  could
detect  any  suspicious  movement  on  the  medium's  part  (p.  543).

"  Des  faits  aussi  nets  donnent  matiere  a  reflechir,"  remarks  the
Report  a  propos  of  this  and  similar  incidents.

On  the  other  hand,  it  notes  the  suspicious  character  of  the
touches,  of  the  movements  of  various  objects  in  the  cabinet  and
of  the  appearances  of  hands.  It  thinks  that  the  sparks  may  have
been  due  to  "  peculiar  electrisation  of  Eusapia's  body  discharging
itself  in  the  proximity  of  the  other  bodies."

These  are  the  general  conclusions  arrived  at :

"(1)  Les  deplacements  (avancements  ou  reculs)  et  les  soulevements
(partiels  ou  complets)  de  certains  objets  pesants  (tables,  gueridons)
au  voisinage  d'Eusapia  pendant  les  seances  sont  prouves  par  des
enregistrements.

"  (2)  Certains  de  ces  mouvements  semblent  se  produire  au  simple
contact  des  mains  ou  des  vetements  du  sujet  et  meme  sans  contact.

"  Pendant  les  soulevements  complets  de  la  table  devant  laquelle
il  est  assis  ou  des  gueridons  places  a  proximite  de  son  corps,  le
sujet  contracte  la  plupart  du  temps  puissamment  ses  muscles.  Mais
on  n'a  pas  constate  une  action  directe  de  ses  efforts  sur  les  objets
ainsi  souleves,  semblable  a  celle  qu'exerceraient  en  pareil  cas  les
autres  homines,  c'est  a  dire  qu'on  n'a  pas  vu  le  sujet  faire  levier
sur  ces  objets.

"  (3)  Le  point  d'appui  de  la  force  qui  souleve  de  diverses  manieres
ces  objets  parait  resider  sur  le  sujet  lui-meme,  puisque  les  balances
sur  lesquelles  on  l'a  place  ont  marque  des  augmentations  ou  des
diminutions  de  pression  conformes  aux  lois  de  la  mecanique  pendant
les  soulevements.

"  (4)  II  semble  que  le  sujet  decharge  a  distance  les  electroscopes.

"  (5)  II  semble  qu'il  produit  a  distance  dans  les  objets  des
vibrations  moleculaires  (coups  frappes,  vibrations  sonores).

"  (6)  On  constate  dans  son  voisinage  au  cours  des  seances  des
phenomenes  lumineux  dont  les  causes  restent  a  determiner.  Certains
de  ces  phenomenes  ont  presente  l'apparence  d'etincelles  electriques.

"  (7)  Signalons  aussi  la  vision  de  formes  d'apparence  humaine  et
les  sensations  de  contact  eprouvees  par  les  assistants,  en  rappelant
que  la  fraude  a  ete  constatee  pour  quelques  manifestations  de  ce
genre.


lix.]  Review.  581

"  (8)  Eusapia  au  cours  de  certaines  seances  entre  dans  un  etat
second  a  niveau  variable.  Elle  accuse  de  l'hyperesthesie  cutanee
pendant  un  grande  partie  des  seances  et  plus  ou  moins  longtemps
apres.  Elle  accuse  une  amnesie  partielle  des  phenomenes  des
seances.

"  (9)  L'ideatiou  et  la  volonte  du  sujet  ont  une  action  sur  la  nature
et  la  marche  des  phenomenes.

"(10)  Les  assistants  sont  en  butte  a  des  supercheries  dont  il  est
difficile  de  limiter  exactement  l'etendue "  (pp.  544-545).

The  Report  winds  up  with  an  eloquent  appeal  to  other  possible
subjects  to  come  before  the  experimenters  and  submit  their  powers
to  investigation.  No  a  priori  conditions  will  be  imposed  upon  them.
"  We  shall  seek  to  discover  in  the  facts,  such  as  they  present  them-
selves to  us  during  the  experiments,  the  antecedents  necessary  for
their  production."

These  conclusions  were  discussed  by  the  "  Section  des  recherches
psychiques  et  psychologiques "  of  the  Institute  on  November  30th,
1908  ;  there  being  present  Messrs.  d' Arson val  (in  the  chair),  Branly,
Courtier,  Favre,  Comte  A.  de  Gramont,  Matisse,  Maxwell,  de  Varigny,
de  Watteville,  Vaugeois,  and  Yourievitch.  The  details  of  the  dis-
cussion (a  most  interesting  one)  are  given,  pp.  547-578.

So  far  as  one  can  judge,  some  of  the  investigators  (among  them
M.  d'Arsonval)  undoubtedly  incline  to  believe  in  the  genuineness
of  a  few  phenomena,  chiefly  the  table-levitations  and  the  movements
of  the  "  gueridon,"  whilst  remaining  sceptical  otherwise.

I  will  not  analyse  this  discussion  here,  one  point  excepted,  to
which  I  will  return  presently.


So  much  for  M.  Courtier's  report  on  a  most  scientific  series  of
experiments  carried  out  by  a  most  eminent  company.

To  many  it  will  probably  appear  that  it  might  have  been  more
affirmative.  And  it  is  certainly  a  matter  of  regret  that  after  forty-
three  seances  extending  over  three  years  and  some  25,000  francs
spent,  no  more  categorical  pronouncement  has  been  deemed  possible.
As  just  mentioned,  some  of  the  phenomena  have  favourably  impressed
some  of  the  experimenters ;  but  nothing  more.  As  stated  by  M.
d'Arsonval  himself  (p.  563) — "  nous  n'avons  pas  de  certitudes."

Surely  this  is  a  pity.  And  in  view  of  the  importance  of  the
effort  made,  more  might  have  been  expected.


582


Count  PerovsJcy-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


But  on  the  other  hand,  if  we  take  into  account  the  extraordinary
difficulties  inherent  to  such  an  investigation  ;  the  a  priori  improbability
of  some  of  the  phenomena ;  the  evasive  and  fugitive  character  of  all  of
them;  the  numerous  frauds  discovered;  the  unsatisfactory  character  of
the  conditions  at  the  sittings  for  adequate  investigation,  etc.,  etc.,
etc. — the  extreme  cautiousness  of  the  conclusions  of  the  Report
becomes  intelligible,  and  M.  Courtier's  remarks  on  the  subject
deserve  our  approval  (p.  546).

If  I  may  be  allowed  an  innocent  joke,  Eusapia's  "spirit-guide"
is  primarily  responsible  for  such  a  state  of  things.  Let  him  improve
his  methods  first, — and  then  we  shall  see.  It  may  not,  however,
follow  that  the  method  of  the  investigators  themselves  left  nothing
to  be  desired.

Conscious  as  I  am  of  my  extreme  audacity  when  it  comes  to
criticising  the  modus  procedendo  of  so  distinguished  a  body,  I  will  still
ask :  What  was  the  aim  of  the  experiments  1  Was  the  authenticity
or  the  objectivity  of  Eusapia's  phenomena  the  subject  of  the  inves-
tigation 1

If  the  objectivity,  then — at  first  sight  at  least — the  aim  was  bril-
liantly attained.  For  the  very  numerous  experiments  made  with
the  aid  of  various  scientific  apparatus  made  it  absolutely  certain
that  the  movements  and  "  levitations "  of  tables,  great  and  small,
and  some  other  things  were  most  undoubtedly  objective.

This  is  something.  But  it  is  not  all :  and  the  main  question
is,  I  submit,  not  whether  the  "  phenomena "  did  occur,  but  what
produced  them.

Here  the  question  assumes  a  different  aspect.  For  we  are  told
again  and  again  in  the  Report  that  all  this  scientific  registering
"left  the  question  of  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena  themselves
entirely  untouched "  (p.  445 ;  see  also  p.  553).  This  was  indeed
obvious  already ;  but  these  repeated  assertions  are  characteristic.
To  give  an  instance:  when  at  the  sitting  of  June  12th,  1905,  the
"gueridon"  was  repeatedly  moved  backwards  and  forwards,  these
movements  were  registered  by  an  ingenious  mechanism  and  corre-
sponding traces  obtained.  This  is  very  satisfactory,  of  course ;
but  the  Report  is  careful  to  point  out  that  "ces  traces  n'indiquent
pas,  bien  entendu,  de  quelle  maniere  ont  ete  effectues  les  mouve-
ments  successifs  du  meuble"  (p.  472).  I  confess  it  seems  to  me
that,  if  so,  the  experiment  loses  almost  all  its  value.  For  the
question  to  be  answered  was :  "  What  moved  the  '  gueridon '  1 "
The  answer  is: "It  really  did  move." Now  this  is  no  explanation


Review.


583


at  all.  And  this  sort  of  thing  occurs  again  and  again  and  to  my
mind  is  very  unsatisfactory.1

On  the  other  hand,  the  all-important  question  as  to  what  among
the  phenomena  observed  could  and  what  could  not  have  been  duplicated
by  conjuring  has  received  on  the  investigators'  part  comparatively
little  attention,  if  we  except  some  valuable  experiments  by  Messrs.
Courtier  and  Yourievitch  on  artificial  levitations  of  tables  (pp.  540-
542).  The  Report  says  (p.  539)  that  application  was  made  in  1907
to  two  professional  conjurers,  but  nothing  came  of  it,  one  being
absent  from  Paris  and  the  other  too  busy ;  and  it  does  not  seem
the  attempt  was  renewed.  I  should  have  thought  it  was  very
well  worth  renewing.

1  Other  experiments  conducted  with  Eusapia  by  scientific  men  seem  to  me
to  lie  open  to  the  same  objection  to  a  still  greater  extent.  Take,  for  instance,
the  experiments  of  Prof.  Bottazzi,  published  in  Annates  des  Sciences  Psychiques,
1907,  No.  8-11.  Here  also  we  have  most  ingenious  appliances  for  the  graphic
self- registering  of  the  phenomena,  both  ''direct"  and  "indirect"  (see  No.  8,
pp.  560-568  and  passim).  So  far,  so  good  ;  but  when  it  comes  to  ascertaining
the  precise  nature  of  the  phenomena — their  authenticity  or  otherwise — it  is
altogether  another  matter.  In  the  very  great  majority  of  cases  no  details  at
all  are  given  as  to  the  way  in  which  the  medium  was  controlled.  So-and-so
"was  in  contact"  with  her— this  is  an  expression  very  often  used;  but  as  to
how  this  "contact"  was  realised — whether  E.  P.  allowed  her  hands  to  be  held
■or  not,  etc. — on  these  all-important  points,  on  which,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the
whole  question  has  been  turning  for  many  years,  the  report  is  extraordinarily
reticent.  Such  an  attitude  on  the  part  of  a  man  of  science  is  not  easily
intelligible.  Cf.  also  No.  11,  p.  766,  text  and  footnote,  where  the  whole  problem
of  the  tricks  played  by  Eusapia's  hands  and  of  their  possible  bearing  on  the
nature  of  the  phenomena  is  dismissed  in  seven  lines  and  a  half,  it  being  asserted
that  "  unconscious  trickery  consists  simply  (!)  in  the  fact  that  as  the  mediumistic
phenomena  depend  immediately  on  the  psychical  and  physiological  organism  of
the  medium,  sometimes  it  is  the  natural  limb  which,  instead  of  the  mediumistic
limb,  endeavours  to  execute  the  movement,  to  produce  the  phenomenon.  And
it  seems  as  if  this  exchange  were  noticed  by  the  medium  herself,  for  she  often
says:  'I  have  touched  it  myself,  I  have  moved  it  myself — when  speaking  of
the  object  touched  or  moved."

Impartiality  compels  me,  however,  to  say  that  among  the  episodes  of  these
seances  there  is  one  (occurring  three  times  in  succession)  similar  to  those  to
which  I  have  repeatedly  called  attention  in  the  case  of  D.  1).  Home  (Proceed-
ings, Part  LV.,  page  401,  Part  LVL,  pp.  441,  445)  :  that  is— the  gradual  melting
away  of  the  "spirit  hand"  when  grasped  (No.  11.,  pp.  760-761).  As  to  whether
such  a  circumstance  tends  to  enhance  Eusapia's  reputation  or  to  detract  some-
thing from  Home's,  opinions  will  probably  differ.  There  are  also  other  incidents
which  seem  prima  facie  remarkable,  but  against  these  must  be  set  not  only
the  remarks  I  have  made  but  also  the  general  tone  of  this  report,  which  strikes
me  as  being  somewhat  too  lyrical.


584


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


In  the  course  of  the  discussion  of  the  Report's  conclusions  we
find  M.  Courtier  saying :

"  Nous  avons  cause  aujourd'hui  meme  avec  des  prestidigitateurs.
lis  nous  ont  dit  qu'ils  faisaient  soulever  des  tables  des  quatre  pieds
sans  contact  apparent.  Est-ce  avec  l'aide  de  comperes  ou  autrement  ?
lis  ne  nous  l'ont  pas  revele  "  (p.  567).

Surely  this  is  not  a  very  encouraging  postscript  to  all  the  detailed
accounts  of  what  was  thought  the  most  conclusive  of  Eusapia's
performances.  Could  not  and  ought  not  much  more  to  have  been
done  in  this  direction  1

Note  also  that  all  the  imposing  scientific  machinery  used  on  the
one  hand  did  not  prevent  the  learned  investigators  from  adhering
on  the  other  to  methods  of  control  which  they  admit  themselves
(pp.  517-518)  to  be  altogether  inadequate.  I  refer  chiefly  to  the
method  of  controlling  Eusapia's  hands.  All  the  history  of  the
experiments  conducted  with  her  since  1892  abundantly  shows  that
for  scientific  purposes  the  method  at  present  in  use  is  valueless.
With  a  medium  who,  like  the  late  Sambor,  allowed  his  hands  to
be  constantly  grasped  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  word,  the  conviction
of  two  separate  persons  that  they  were  holding  two  separate  hands
might  have  been  sufficient  for  establishing  the  genuineness  of  the
"  phenomena."  With  Eusapia  Palladino,  in  view  of  the  numberless
frauds  practised  and  of  the  very  unsatisfactory  way  in  which  her
hands  are  "held,"  we  want  something  else.  Otherwise  investigation
of  the  phenomena  becomes  a  mere  waste  of  time.

I  am  well  aware  that  (as  stated  in  the  Report)  Eusapia  will
object  to  certain  methods  of  control,  as  a  general  rule ;  and  yet
this  same  report  shows  that  at  times  she  will  give  in  (pp.  472,  518)
and  that  positive  results  may  yet  be  obtained.  Why,  I  ask,
were  not  such  exceptions  generalised  ?  Would  Eusapia's  reluctance
have  been  really  insuperable  1  Could  not  certain  inducements  have
been  used  which  she  would  not  have  withstood?

Should  mediums  in  the  future  always  refuse  to  submit  to  such
methods  of  control  as  allowing  both  hands  to  be  grasped  by  one  person ;.
or  luminous  strips  to  be  pinned  to  their  sleeves  so  as  to  make  them
visible  to  all ;  or  their  hands  to  be  divided  (on  the  table)  by  some
kind  of  partition  (so  that  one  could  not  do  duty  for  two) — not  to-
mention  possible  tying  or  electrical  "  tests,"  etc. — a  presumption
against  the  authenticity  of  the  "  manifestations  "  would  d  la  tongue  be
established  which  would  finally  outweigh  all  the  positive  evidence^
we  possess.


MX.]


585


Why,  I  ask,  was  not  a  decisive  step  made  in  this  direction  during
the  Paris  experiments  1

There  are  also  other  important  omissions :  for  instance,  it  does
not  appear  whether  the  medium  was  ever  searched,  whether  before
or  after  the  seance.  Surely  this  ought  to  have  been  done  in  most
cases  at  least.

Then  another  remark.  I  suppose  excerpts  from  the  original
stenographic  records  are  given  not  only  for  the  sake  of  "illus-
trating" such  or  such  a  "class"  of  phenomena,  but  also  in  order
to  enable  the  reader  to  appreciate  the  evidential  character  of  certain
occurrences.  If  so,  I  think  these  excerpts  strangely  incomplete —
at  least  in  some  instances.  Here  is  a  sample.  At  the  sitting  of
June  10th,  1907,  Eusapia  tries  to  lift  up  ("  supernormally ")  the
(movable)  surface  of  a  small  table  which  had  been  placed  on  the
seance-table. The  record  says:  (p.  417)

"  Elle  approche  sa  tete  de  la  petite  table  et  le  plateau  de  la
table  se  souleve.

"Mme.  Curie. — Elle  a  maintenant  un  souffle  tres  net  sur  la  tete.

"  Mme.  Curie  debout  a  cote  de  M.  Yourievitch,  met  sa  main  sur
le  front  d'Eusapia  qui  approche  sa  tete  de  la  petite  table.  Le
plateau  mobile  est  souleve,  la  main  de  Mme.  Curie  se  trouvant
entre  cette  table  et  la  tete  d'Eusapia.

"  (Controleurs  :  a  gauche  M.  Yourievitch,  a  droite,  M.  Debierne.)  n

This  episode  may  or  may  not  have  seemed  conclusive  to  the
eye-witnesses,  but  the  reader  is  left  in  the  dark  as  to  the  most
essential  details.  Nothing  is  said  either  about  the  amount  of  light,
or  the  position  of  Eusapia's  hands,  or  about  the  "  curtain  " — whether
it  was  partly  upon  the  table  (and  perhaps  covering  the  medium's
hands)  or  otherwise. Many  more  such  instances  could  be  adduced.

I  will  now  revert  to  the  discussion  of  M.  Courtier's  Report  by
the  "Section  des  recherches  psychiques  et  psychologiques,"  and  will
dwell  on  some  very  instructive  remarks  of  M.  Favre's  (pp.  572-574).

A  propos  of  some  suggestions  made  as  to  the  modus  procedendo  to
be  adopted  in  future  experiments  with  Eusapia,  M.  Favre  insisted  on
the  desirability  of  investigating  "  constantly  or  as  much  as  possible  "
in  full  light ;  and  formulated  four  hypotheses  as  to  the  reasons  why
light  should  (supposedly)  interfere  with  the  phenomena :

First  hypothesis. — Some  think  that  the  medium  objects  to  full
light  because  he  is  a  mere  fraud  and  because  the  light  will  reveal
his  tricks.  "  If  this  hypothesis  is  the  true,  the  only  true  one,  one
cannot  hope  to  succeed  in  operating  in  full  light."


586


Count  Perovslcy-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


Second  hypothesis. — -Others  think  that  light  does  really  hinder  the
production  of  the  phenomena  by  acting  more  or  less  directly  on
the  form  of  energy  at  work.  Those  who  hold  to  this  theory  are
needs  bound  to  experiment  in  attenuated  light.

Both  suppositions  are  discouraging ;  but  others  may  be  imagined
which,  if  true,  would  enable  us  to  modify  the  experiments  and
finally  to  achieve  success  with  the  condition  of  full  light  realised.

Third  hypothesis. — Light  interferes  neither  with  the  medium's  tricks,
nor  with  the  energy  producing  the  phenomena,  but  gives  incon-
venience to  the  medium,  "  who  during  the  experiment  is  in  a  state
of  ocular  hyperalgesia  or  hyperaesthesia,"  and  is  prevented  by
suffering  from  displaying  his  special  powers.

To  obviate  this  difficulty  some  kind  of  bandage  or  opaque  eye-
glasses should  be  used  and  all  the  details  of  the  protective
apparatus  should  be  made  the  subject  of  special  research.

Fourth  hypothesis. — Light  interferes  neither  with  the  cheating,  nor
with  the  phenomena,  nor  with  the  medium  from  a  physiological
stand-point.  The  reason  is  a  psychological  one.  The  medium  on
account  of  his  previous  training  is  convinced  that  he  CANNOT
operate  in  full  light.  And  such  a  suggestion  (whether  consciously
■or  unconsciously  made,  coming  from  without  or  from  the  subject
himself)  is  an  obstacle  to  his  placing  himself  in  the  conditions
necessary  for  the  experiment  to  succeed.

If  this  hypothesis  be  the  true  one,  sittings  might  be  conducted
in  the  light,  the  unfavourable  impression  having  been  previously
destroyed  by  a  counter-suggestion.  To  achieve  such  a  result  it
might  be  necessary  to  use  hypnotism.  In  the  case  of  Eusapia  it
would  not  be  difficult  to  find  a  man  in  whom  she  would  feel  con-
fidence and  who  would  have  a  sufficient  knowledge  of  hypnosis.

M.  Favre  added  that  he  was  inclined  to  believe  that  none  of  the
four  hypotheses  represented  the  whole  truth  and  that  the  failure
of  the  light  seances  was  due  to  all  the  four  factors  combined.  Still
he  hoped  that  after  the  two  last  ones  had  been  removed,  experi-
ments in  full  light  would  be  very  near  succeeding  "  normally  and
constantly."

The  use  of  hypnotism  to  remove  the  medium's  objection  to  sitting
in  the  light  seems  to  me  well  worth  trying,  though  I  am  by  no
means  hopeful  as  to  the  results.  In  any  case  M.  Favre's  idea  is
a  very  ingenious  one.

But  is  not  all  this  insistence  on  "light,"  however  natural,  some-
what exaggerated  1 In  the  first  place  darkness  may  after  all  be  a


Lix.]  Review.  587

necessary  condition  of  the  supposed  phenomena,  or  at  least  most
of  them.  There  is  nothing  d  priori  improbable  in  this.  If  so,
further  insistence  on  this  point  becomes  a  mere  waste  of  time.

Secondly,  light  at  a  sitting  does  not  by  any  means  afford  us  a  guarantee
that  the  phenomena  are  genuine.  With  Eusapia  herself  many  things
were  observed  to  occur  in  the  light  (as  stated  by  several  of  the
investigators  in  the  course  of  the  discussion);  more  than  this,  her
seances  are  seldom  if  ever  held  in  total  darkness ;  and  yet  the
controversy  as  to  the  authenticity  of  the  "manifestations"  or  other-
wise is  still  going  on  and  I  am  afraid  is  not  likely  to  cease  soon.  And
how  about  such  a  "phase"  of  the  "Physical  Phenomena  "as  "Indepen-
dent Slate-writing,"  which  invariably  takes  place  in  the  light,  with
what  results  the  psychical  researcher  well  knows  1  It  is  not  so
much  light  we  want,  as  a  radical  change  in  the  general  conditions.
I  want  to  hold  the  medium,  not  as  he  or  she  allows  me,  but  as  I
choose  to ;  I  want  him  or  her  to  be  searched  whenever  the  idea
enters  into  my  mind;  if  an  object  is  being  " supernormally  "  moved,
I  want  to  ascertain  exactly  how  it  is  moving;  if  levitated,  I
want  to  make  a  whole  circuit  round  it  with  my  hand,  nay,  a
series  of  circuits  to  make  sure  there  is  nothing  which  supports  it — ■
not  even  a  "ghost  of  a  thread,"  anywhere;  if  a  "materialised  form"
appears  I  want  to  press  it  tenderly  to  my  bosom  and  then  patiently
wait  until  it  gently  fades  away  in  that  position.  I  want  all  this  and
much  more ;  but  if  all  these  conditions  were  granted  to  me,  or
even  only  the  most  fundamental  of  them,  I  should  be  ready  not
to  insist  too  much  on  light.

It  should  also  be  remembered  that  when  insufficient,  "light"  is
for  evidential  purposes  as  bad  as — and  may  be  worse  than — total
darkness.  When  sitting  in  a  dark  room  I  am  able  to  give  the  whole
of  my  attention  to  controlling  through  two  senses  only, — touch  and
hearing.  And  there  is  about  a  "dark"  seance  a  certain  unpre-
tentiousness  which  makes  it  almost  sympathetic  !  Accounts  of  a
"  dark "  seance  are  not  calculated  to  create  a  very  favourable  im-
pression as  to  the  medium's  claims  ;  najr,  the  very  fact  of  his  or  her
giving  "dark"  seances  puts  people  on  their  guard.  With  the  "light"
sittings  as  they  are  now  given,  the  case  is  different.  The  room
being  soi-disant  lighted,  I  am  expected  first  to  see  what  happens
and  then  to  describe  what  I  have  seen  to  others.  In  the  first
stage  I — in  most  cases — merely  strain  my  eyes  and  do  damage  to
my  eye-sight,  broadly  speaking,  to  no  purpose ;  in  the  second  I
allow  my  imagination  full  play,  and  mislead  others,  if  I  have  only


588


Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo.


[part


been  in  the  slightest  degree  favourably  impressed ;  and  even  if  I
have  not  I  am  likely  to  help  in  creating  about  the  medium  a
favourable  reputation  as  a  "light-lover."

To  return  to  Eusapia :  a  "  light  seance "  of  hers  with  the  curtain
is,  I  think,  evidentially,  at  least,  equivalent  to  a  totally  dark  seance.
When  first  introduced  this  curtain  was  supposed  to  serve  a  reason-
able purpose ;  it  would  ensure  for  part  of  the  room  the  necessary
condition  of  darkness  whilst  allowing  the  medium  to  remain  in  full
view.  As  a  matter  of  fact  it  simply  complicates  matters,  hampers
investigation  and,  generally  speaking,  plays  a  part,  which — with  all
due  respect  to  the  medium — I  may  be  permitted  to  call  simply
disreputable  ! 1 A  serious  improvement  is  needed  here  also.

I  note  by  the  way  that  in  the  course  of  the  same  discussion
reference  was  more  than  once  made  to  another  medium — a  Pole
named  "Janek"  (or  rather  Jan  Guzik ;  Proceedings  S.P.E.,  Part
LIL,  p.  409),  M.  Yourievitch  recommending  him  to  the  Institute's
attention  and  remarking  that  his  absolute  "  placidity "  makes  him
very  suitable  for  investigation  (p.  577).

I  therefore  think  it  appropriate  for  me  to  state  that  I  believe
this  medium  to  be  a  fraud,  and  this  not  only  because  he  has  been
repeatedly  exposed  and  because  he  is  admitted  to  cheat  by  his
most  ardent  admirers,  but  also  from  personal  experience — not  very
exhaustive,  it  is  true,  but  careful  and  sufficient.  (See  pp.  231-237
of  my  "Appendix"  to  my  Eussian  translation  of  Mr.  Podmore's
Modern  Spiritualism.)  In  my  opinion  "  Janek  "■ — unless  he  thoroughly
amends — does  not  deserve  the  honour  of  a  scientific  investigation ;
and  his  case  is  instructive  chiefly  as  showing  what  kind  of  evidence
will  satisfy  the  average  Spiritualist.

1  It  has  in  particular  a  certain  way  of  being  thrown  over  the  table  and  cover-
ing the  medium's  hands  which  may  very  well  serve  a  certain  purpose,  only  it
will  not  be  the  purpose  of  scientific  research.  When  its  lower  end  is  thus
spread  over  E.  P.'s  hands  she  will  still  keep  on  moving  them,  at  times  showing
one  or  both,  at  times  concealing  them  again.  And  while  this  is  going  on,
"phenomena"  will  occur  now  and  then,  and  it  requires  a  certain  straining  of
attention  to  note  whether  both  hands  were  visible  simultaneously  with  such
and  such  "manifestations"  or  not.  At  times  a  hand  will  also  appear  between
the  two  halves  of  the  curtain  ;  and  as  the  result  of  all  this  hand-moving  the
sitters  may  very  easily  be  led  to  believe  that  they  saw  all  the  three  hands  at
once,  whilst  in  fact  they  did  not.  At  some  sittings  with  E.  P.  in  St.  Petersburg
in  the  spring  of  1898  I  specially  noticed  that  this  was  just  the  case  ;  and  yet
at  least  one  other  sitter  was  found  to  believe  and  assert  the  contrary,  until  I
positively  assured  him  that  he  was  mistaken.  In  the  present  instance,  therefore,
light  engenders  an  error  for  which  there  would  have  been  no  room  in  the  dark.


LIX.]


Review.


589


Were  I  now  asked  to  sum  up  in  one  word  the  impression  all  these
recent  Eusapian  investigations  have  left  on  me  I  would  answer :
"  DISCOURAGEMENT."

The  main  question  has  not  progressed.  Results  tangible  and  posi-
tive have,  it  is  true,  been  obtained ;  but  only  in  a  region  where
there  was  no  need  for  them.  And  even  here  I  doubt  whether
there  is  not  in  the  evidence  a  serious  logical  flaw.  The  objective
reality  of  the  occurrences  has  been  established  ;  but  is  it  not  open
to  those  who  will  cling  to  the  hallucination  theory  quand  meme  to
maintain  that  as  these  occurrences  may  after  all  have  been  fraudulent,
proof  of  the  objectivity  of  genuine  phenomena  is  still  lacking?  And
I  confess  I  do  not  well  see  how  such  an  argument  could  be  met !
So  that  even  in  this  direction  real  progress  is  more  doubtful  than
would  at  first  sight  appear.  As  for  the  authenticity — well,  we  are
certainly  no  more  advanced  than,  say,  after  the  lie  Eoubaud,  nay
even  after  the  Milan  experiments,  which  laid,  seventeen  years  ago,  the
foundation-stone  of  Eusapia's  reputation.  The  great  bulk  of  the
phenomena  has  not  by  any  means  been  proved  to  be  due  to  fraud
unmitigated — far  from  it !  aud  a  few  have  come  within  measurable
distance  of  the  required  standard.  But  not  one  of  them  has  after  all
been  clearly  shown  to  he  authentic.

Nor  do  I  see  good  reasons  for  feeling  very  sanguine  as  to  the
final  outcome  of  future  investigations.

P.S. — Since  writing  the  above  I  have  read  in  the  July  Journal
S.P.R.  the  abstract  from  the  report  by  Messrs.  Feilding,  Baggally,
and  Carrington  on  their  recent  investigation  at  Naples.  After  reading
it,  I  certainly  feel  in  a  more  optimistic  mood  on  the  subject.  The  fact
that  such  experts  in  the  domain  of  conjuring  should  have  been
converted  by  what  they  saw  to  a  belief  in  the  genuineness  of  E.P.'s
phenomena  is  eminently  significant  and  satisfactory.  I  also  heartily
welcome  their  methods  of  investigation,  and  think  the  absence  of
imposing  technical  appliances  more  than  compensated  for  by  some
of  the  results  obtained.  In  view  of  the  latter  circumstance  I  confess
I  should  be  happy  to  see  a  similar  course  of  action  uniformly  adopted
in  the  future,  even  by  scientific  stars  of  the  first  magnitude.


■

PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

INDEX  to  VOL.  XXIII.

(PARTS  LVIir.— LIX.)
I  909.
A.

Abbott,  David,  Behind  the  Scenes  with  Mediums,  Reference  to,  310  (footnote).
Abt  Vogler. See  Browning,  Hope  and  Star.

Aksakoff,  Alexander,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino  - -  312

American  Branch  of  the  Society,  Dissolution  of  -  -  30,  31

Amicis,  Professor  de,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino  -  317

Anagram,  R.  Hodgson's  (Eats,  Arts,  Star),  Reference  to  -  55
d'Arsonval,  Professor,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino  317,  571,  572,  581
Australian  Recollections  (Piper-Hodgson  Control), -  -  106-108

Automatic  Writing. <S'eeThe  Scripts  of  "Mrs.  Forbes,"  "Mrs.  Holland"

and  Mrs.  Verrall — and  the  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper

and  Mrs.  Thompson.
avTos  ovpavbs  o.kv/j.wv,  Incident,  Reference  to -  -  251,  252

Ave  Roma  Immortalis,  Cross-Correspondence,  Reference  to  - - 298,  299

B.

W.,  and  the  Hon.  E.  Eeilding  and  H.  Carrington,
Report  on  a  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eusapia

Palladino -  306,  309-569

Individual  Conclusions - -  -  556

Notes  to  Seances  439,  459,  480,  501,  524,  535,  556

„ on  the  Bell  Incident  -  - 525,  526

„ Classification  of  Phenomena - - -  557


Baggally,  W.

>!
3?
)1
)!


parts  lviii.-lix.] Index  to  Vol.  XXIII.


591


Balfour,  Gerald  W.,  on  Cross-Correspondences,  Reference  to  article  by  289
Ballet,  Professor,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino -  - -  317

Bancroft, Miss  Margaret, Piper-Hodgson  references  to  7,10,11,13-15,17,56,57
„  „  Impressions  connected  with  Dr.  Hodgson 51,  52

„  „  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper,  Owl's  Head  Series  47-61

Bayley,  Dr.,  Piper-Hodgson  references  to -  50,  60,  87,  8&

„ Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  -  -  37,  52

Bergman,  Miss  M.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper - -  -  99,107

Bergson,  Henri,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino  - -  317

Bottazzi,  Professor,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino,

317,  318,  342,  399,  400,  417,  583
Branly,  M.,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino -  - - 317,  574

BrofFerio,  Professor  Angelo,  Sittings  witli  Eusapia  Palladino  -  -  312
Browning,  Oscar,  on  a  Piper-Myers  Message  -----  240
Browning,  B.,  Hope  and  Star,  Cross-Correspondence,  Eef  erence  to  252, 299, 300
Butler,  Samuel,  Quotation  from  -----  - -  119

C.

Cardarelli,  Professor,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino,  -  -  317

Carlo,  Trance  Personality  of  Eusapia  Palladino  -  - -  517

Carrington,  Hereward,  and  the  Hon.  Everard  Feilding  and  W.  W.

Baggally,

„  ReportonSittingswithEusapiaPalladino  306,309-569

„  Notes  to  Seances 358,  373,  391,  398,  416,  438,  456

502,  523,  555

„  „ the  Bell  Incident -  - -  525

Cartwright,  Mrs.,  Trance  Personality  of  Mrs.  Thompson -  -  258

Celery-Root,  Piper-Hodgson  reference  to -  -  41,  42

Charades,  Piper-Hodgson  references  to -  54,  55,  87,  88

Charpentier,  M.,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino  - - -  317

Chiaja,  Cavaliere  Ercole,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino  -  -  -  312
Child,  Professor  F.  J.,  Piper-Hodgson  reference  to -  -  113,114

Cipher  Records,  Piper-Hodgson  reference  to - - - -12,  109,  110
Communicators. See  Gurney,  Hodgson,  Myers  and  Sidgwick  Controls,
and  the  Joseph  Marble  and  Isaac  Thompson  Cases.
Controls,  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson-Control - 1,  2,  30,  122,  127,  226,  248,  282
See  also  Gurney,  Myers,  Joseph  Marble,  Sidgwick  and  Isaac
Thompson  Controls.
Cooper,  Fenimore,  Piper-Hodgson  reference  to - - - - 106,  107
Courtier,  M.,  Report  of  the  Institut  G4n4ral  Psychologique,  on  Eusapia

Palladino  -----  317,318,331,437,481,567,570-581
Cross-Correspondences,  Experiments  in  -  86,  102,  137,  198,  208-210,213-215,

219,  239-242,  250-255,  288-303
„  Professor  A.  C.  Pigou  on, - - -  288-303

See  also  The  Automatic  Scripts  of  "  Mrs.  Forbes,"
"Mrs.  Holland"  and  Mrs.  Verrall.


592  Index  to  Vol.  XXIII.  [parts

Curie,  Professor  and  Madame,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino

317,  466,  481,  571,  572,  579,  585

D.

Dmon,  the  One-Horse. See  Verrall,  Dr.,  Telepathic  Experiments  of.
Densmore. See  Huldah-Episode.

Dorr,  J.  B.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  - - 20,  21,  23,  38-47,  48,  115,  134,

182,  187,  236,  237

„ Old  Farm  Series,  the, -------  38-47

du  Prel,  Carl,  D.Ph.,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino -  -  312

Dwarf,  Cross-Correspondence,  Beference  to  ...  251

E.

Elliott,  Miss  Alice. See  Grove,  Mrs.  Rupert.

Ermacora,  Dr.,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino  -  - -  312

F.

Falanga,  Signor,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino  -  399,  400,  417,  418
Favre,  M.,  On  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino  -  -  -  -  585,  586
Fechner,  Theory  of  Memory  Processes  applied  to  the  Phenomena  of

"Controls"  ----------  119,120

Feilding,  the  Hon.  Everard,  and  W.  W.  Baggally  and  H.  Carrington.

„ Eeport  on  a  Series  of  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino  309-563

,,  ,,  (General)

,,  „ Introduction -  - -  310-320

,,  „ Detailed  Eeport -  ...  345-554

„  „ Analysis  and  Tables  of  Phenomena 328-340,  556,  557

„  „ General  Account  of  the  Sittings -  321-340

,,  ,,  „ Conclusions- -----  340-344

,,  ., Individual  Conclusions  of  the  Investigators -  555-559

„  „ Notes  on  Seances  by  E.  Feilding 357,  374,  393,  395,  417,

436,  461,  478,  503,  504,  519,  534,  566
„ on  the  Bell  Incident - -  - 525,  526

„ Control,  the,  Question  of 323,  324,  325-333,  347,  348,  357-
361,  373,  375-377,  391-394,  396,  399-401,  416,  418-
419,  420,  436-442,  456-460,  478-484,  486,  501,  502,
504-507,  519-524  528,  534-537,  555,  556,  558,  566
„  ,,  ,, Senses  in  which  the  word  is  used 324  (foot-note)

„  „ Fraud,  discussion  of  the  possibility  of  -306-308,312-319,

324,  326-328,  340,  342  (foot-note),  357,  374,  376,
378,  383,  391,  393-399,  401,  412,  416,  437,  439-458,
460,  461,  464,  478,  480,  481,  483,  502,  505,  521,
522,  523,  533-535,  555,  556,  558-566,  568
„  ,, Hallucination,  Collective,  considered  as  an  explana-

tion of  the  phenomena  - - - 341-344,  462,  558
Petrovo-Solovovo,  Count  Perovsky ,  Note  on  the  Eeport  589
See  also  Levitations,  Luminous  Appearances  and  Materialisations.


LVIII.-LIX.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXIII.


593


Finzi,  Dr.,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino - -  - -  312

Fire-Buckets,  Piper-Hodgson  reference  to  59,  60

Flammarion,  Camille,  on  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino  - - -  317
Fontenay,  M.  de,  Photographs  of  Phenomena  obtained  with  Eusapia

Palladino - -  -  342

"  Forbes,  Mrs.,"  Automatic  Script  of,  Eeference  to -  -  289

„  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper -  -  125

"  Forbes,  Talbot,"  References  to  - -----  125,210,289

G.

Galeotti,  Professor,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino

317,  399,  401,  416,  417,  418,  528,  529
Gaule,  Miss  Maggie,  Messages  from  the  Hodgson-Control  through  -  85
Gerosa,  Professor,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino  -  312
Gibson,  Mr.,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino -  -  418

Gower,  Dr.  T.  H,  Piper-Hodgson  reference,  to  Experiments  of  - -  84-86
"  Grove,  Mrs.  Rupert,"  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper 234,  238,  244,  248,  255-279
,,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson  -  257-265

„  The  "Joseph  Marble"  Series  -  -  255-279

Gurney-Control,  the,  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  on,

Through  Mrs.  Piper-  -  138,  139,  140-162,  282

„  „ "  Miss  Rawson " - - -  223-225

„  Dramatic  Characteristics  of  the  Impersonation

138,  140,  159,  282

H.

Hallucination,  Collective,  considered  as an explanation  of  the

Physical  Phenomena  of  Eusapia  Palladino • - - 341-344,  558
Handel,  S.  Butler  on  the  Influence  of ------  119

Hodgson,  Dr.  R.,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino - - 314,  315,  482
„  Reports  on  the  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper,

References  to 19,  28,  29,  130,  131,  136,  139,  147,  148,

163-171,  233,  284

Hodgson-Control,  the  (Mrs.  Piper's).

James,  Professor  W.,  Report  on  (1905-08) - -  1,2,30
Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  on,

138,  139,  148,  160,  226,  229,  236,  248-250,  282,  283
Sidgwick,  Mrs.  H.,  and  Piddington,  J.  G.,  Note  on  the  Eng-
lish Series  of  1906-7  -  -  -  122
Dramatic  Characteristics  of  the  Impersonation 4-7,  11-13,  31,  32,
33,  36-38,  48,  49,  52,  60,  61,  69,  70,  73,  76,  78-80,  100,
101,  109,  111,  115-119,  122, 123,  138-236,  237,  282,  283
Hodgson,  Miss,  Information  as  to  the  Piper-Hodgson  Australian

Recollections - - - - - - - - -  106-108

"  Holland,  Mrs.,"  Automatic  Script  of  -  137,  230-232,  235,  289

„  Cross-Correspondences  with  Mrs.  Piper - -  230-235

Home,  D.  D.,  References  to  311,  320,  583  (footnote)  *

2  p


594


Index  to  Vol.  XXIII.


[parts


Hope,  Star  and  Browning,  Cross-Correspondence,  Reference  to 252,  299,  300


Huklah  Densroore  Episode,  the  (Piper-Hodgson) -  - 20,  43,  44

Hyde  Family,  Piper-Hodgson  references  to ... - 106,  107
Hyslop,  Professor  J.  H.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper - - - 18,  78,  137
Hutton,  Mrs.  (and  Miss),  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino  - - -  536
„ Note  by ---------  554

I.


"  I operator  "  (and  "  Imperator  "  Band),  Trance  Personality  of  Mrs.  Piper

3,  19,  29,  74,  78,  115,  137,  168,  175,  188,  227,  235,  248
Institut  General  Psychologique  (Paris),  Report  on  Eusapia  Palladino

317,  318,  437,  481,  567,  570-581

J.

James,  Henry,  Jr.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper -  187,  237

James,  Mrs.  Win.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper - -  11,  21,  80,  109

James,  William,  Jr.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  -  -  -  -  -  11
James,  Professor  W.,  A  Pluralistic  Universe,  by,  Reference  to  -  119

„  Report  on  Mrs.  Piper's  Hodgson-Control  - 1,  2,  30

,,  ,, Discussion  of  points  bearing  on  the

question  of  Identity 4-7,  13,  16-23
25-29,  31-38,  47,  60,  61,  78-80,  97,  98,
99,  106-109,  111,  112,  113,  11  5-121
,,  ,,  ,, General  Conclusions -  115-121

„  „ Australian  Recollections  - - 106,  107

„  „ Dramatic  character  of  the  Control 4-7,  11-

13,  31-33,  36-38,  48,  49,  52,  60,  61,  69,  70,
73,  76,  78-80,  100,  101,  109,  111,  115-119,

236, 237

,,  ,, Failure  of  attempts  to  obtain  Tests  44, 46,

83,  86,  87,90,91,92,  96,  97,  98,107,115,  116
„  „ Negative  Value  of the  Hodgson-

Control  as  a  Test  Case  5,28,29,33,34, 121
,,  „ Realisiic  Nature  of  impression  re-

ceived by  Sitters- - 31-33,  37,  236
,,  References  to  places,  incidents,  and

persons  known  to  the  Control

7,  10-26,  38-114

„  „ Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper- 80,  110,  111

Jan  Guzik,  Fraudulent  Mediumship  of -  ... -  588

Jessup,  Dr.,  Piper-Hodgf-on  reference  to - - - - - -  50,  54

Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  Report  on  the Automatic  Script  of  "Mrs.

Holland,"  References  to - - 137,  294,  298
„  „  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper -  - -  122

,,  „  The  Education  uf  the  Sitter,  by,  Reference  to

341  (footnote)

Judah,  Noble,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper ...  70


LVIIL-LIX.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXIII.


595


K.

Kendall,  Piper-Hodgson  reference  to ----- -  107

"King,  John,"  Trance  Personality  of  Eusapia  Palladino - 324  (footnote)

L.

Latin  Message,  Mr.  Piddington's,  Eeferences  to  - - - 251-253,  299
Leaf,  Dr.  Walter,  Report  on  the  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper,

Reference  to - -- -- -- -- -  130

Levitations,  Complete  Levitations  of  the  Table  in  the  presence  of

Eusapia  Palladino  329,  331,  332,  347,  352,  353,  356,  357,  364,  365,  384,
386,  388,  390,  392,  394,  395,  400,  401,  404,  407,  411,
412,  418,  420,  431,  432,  434,  435,  438,  439,  487,  508,
509-511,  515,  516,  521,  523,  524,  528,  530,  532,  557,

563,  571,  572,  579

Lodge,  Professor  Alfred,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Pij^er -  149
Lodge,  Miss  E.  C,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper -  ...  155

Lodge,  Lady,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  -  154,  227,  234,  238,  248,  270

„ Sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson - - - 200,  205-207
Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  Report  on  Eusapia  Palladino  (He  Roubaud  Series)

307,  308,  314,  315,  316,  331
„  Report  on  some  Trance  Communications  received

chiefly  through  Mrs.  Piper -  127-285
„  „ Anticipatory  Reply  to  Critics - -  128

,,  „ Explanatory  and  Historical -  130

„  ,, Recognition  of  a  Photograph,  Experiment

in -------  275

,,  „ Remarks  on  the  Piper  controls - -  137

„  „ Remarks  on  Relics  -----  196

,,  „ Supplementary  Remarks -  280

„  „  „  Phinuit - - - -  280

„  „  „  Concluding  observations -  281

„  „ The  Controls  :

„ The  Gurney  Control  (Mrs.  Piper)  140-162
„  „  „ ("Miss  Rawson")  219-226

„  „ The "Joseph Marble" Series  (Mrs.

Thompson  and  Mrs.  Piper) -  255-278
,, The  Myers  and  Hodgson  Controls

(Mrs.  Piper)  -  226-255
„ ("Miss  Rawson")  219-226
„  „  „  „ (Mrs.  Thompson)  198-219

„  „ The  Isaac  Thompson  Case  (Mrs.  Piper)  162-198

Lombroso,  Professor,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino - - -  312
Luminous  Appearances  seen  at  Seances  with  Eusapia  Palladino

330,  339,  340,  442,  455.  464,  474,  475,  479,  480,  482,  557,  573,  574
Lyman,  Mrs.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper - -  - - -  14,  15

,  Oil  the  Ring  Incident,  -------  17

2P2


596


Index  to  Vol.  XXIII.


[parts


M.

M.,  Miss,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper -------  164

M.,  Mrs.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  52,110,112-114

"  Marble,  Joseph,"  A  Series  of  Communications  from  - - -  255-279
„  Communications  through  Mrs.  Piper - -  264-279

„  „  „  Mrs.  Thompson -  255-264

,,  Dramatic  Characteristics  of  the  Impersonation

263,  264,  275,  283

,,  Experiment  on  recognition  of  a  Photograph  - -  275

Materialisations  seen  in  the  presence  of  Eusapia  Palladino 329,  330,  337,

338,  361,  420,  430-438,  440-442,  445-454,  456,
460,  462-464,  470,  472-474,  476-483,  485,  495,
499,  500,  537,  557,  573,  583
Meeson,  Albert,  Shorthand  reports  of  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino  321
,,  Position  of,  in  regard  to  the  Experiments,  - -  559-560

Meetings  of  the  Society,  General - - - - - - -  1,  305

Melbourne,  Latrobe  Street,  Piper-Hodgson  reference  to  -  -  -  106
Miles,  Miss  Clarissa,  Telepathic  Experiments  of,  reference  to

292,  293,  295

Morelli,  Signor,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino  399,  400,  417,  418

Morselli,  Professor  Enrico,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino, 316,  317,  331
Moses,  Stainton,  References  to  the  Experiences  of - - - -  74

The  "  Tmperator  Band" -  137,235,236
Muirhead,  Professor,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper -----  281

Multum  in  Parvo,  Cross-Correspondence,  Reference  to - 239,  241,  242
Munroe,  Jack,  Reference  to--  -----107

Myers,  Ernest,  Thompson-Myers  reference  to - -  -  203

Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  Letter  referring  to  the  "  Joseph  Marble  "  Series -  264
,,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino - - - -  314

Myers-Control,  the

Communications  through  "  Mrs.  Holland " - -  -  215

Mrs.  Piper-  -  19,138,226-255

„  „ "MissRawson" -  219-226

Mrs.  Thompson  -  198-219
„  „ Mrs.  Verrall  -213,214,234,288,289

Dramatic  Characteristics  of  the  Impersonation

138,  198,  199,  201-205,  218,  219,  226,  282,  283
Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  on - -  -  198-255

N.

Nelly-Control,  the(Mrs.  Thompson)  199  201,  205-208,  211-213,  217,  256-262
Newbold,  Professor  W.,  Report  on  the  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.

Piper,  Reference  to - -  -  137

„  „  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper - -  -  23,  61

Nigger-Talk  incident,  Piper-Hodgson  reference  to -  -  18,  96


LVIII.-LIX.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXIII.


597


O.

Objects  brought  to  Sittings  to  assist  Communications

9,  82,  89,  98,  114,  143,  189,  190,  237,  257,  266
„ Remarks  on  Relics,  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge - - - -  196
Ochorowicz,  Dr.,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino - - - 313,  314
„  „  Miss  S.  Tomczyk - - - 577,  578

Old  Farm  Series,  Piper-Hodgson  Communications  to  G.  B.  Dorr  -  38-47
Owl's  Head  Series,  Piper-Hodgson  Communications  to  Miss  M.  Bancroft  47-61

P.

P.,  T.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  -  ......  37

Palladino,  Eusapia,  Cambridge  Series  of  Experiments  with

307,  315,  316,  326,  334

,,  Historical  account  of -  - - -  311-318

„  Report  on  the  Naples  Experiments  of  1908,  by  the

Hon.  E. Feilding,  W.  W.  Baggally  and  H.
Carrington  309-569
,,  Report  of  the  Institut  General  Psi/c/tologique,  Review

of,  by  Count  Perovsky-Petrovo  Solovovo  570-589
„  Sidgwick,  Mrs.,  Note  on, -  - -  306-308

See  also  Levitations,  Luminous  Phenomena  and  Materialisations,
and  Feilding,  the  Hon.  Everard.
Pausies,  Piper-Hodgson  reference  to  -  ...  44

Pansini,  Professor,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino  -  317
Passwords,  given  as  Tests  (Piper-Hodgson  Control) 54,  70,  86,  87,  89,  94,

115,  116,  250

Pecuniary  Messages,  the  (Piper-Hodgson  Communications)  26
"Pelham,  George"  (G.  P.),  Control  (Mrs.  Piper),  Chief  references  to

9,  38,  137,  164,  165

,,  ,,  Dramatic  Characteristics  of  the  Impersonation  38

Petrovo-Solovovo,  Count  Perovsky.

„  Review  of  M.  Courtier's  Report  on  the  - -  570-89

,,  Paris  Experiments  with  Eusapia  Palladino

318  (footnote),  319,  570-589
„ Note  on  the  S.P.R.  Experiments  of  1908 -  589
"  Phinuit,"  Trance  Personality  of  Mrs.  Piper

133,  136-140,  143,  148,  149,  150-158,  160-164,  233,  234,  280,  281
Sir  Oliver  Lodge  on  -  161-163,  280,  281

Photographs,  Experiment  in  the  recognition  of,  by  a  Control  -  -  275
Physical  Phenomena. See  Feilding,  Hon.  E.,  Keport  on  Sittings  with

Eusapia  Palladino.
Miscellaneous, - -  311,320,577,578,583
See  also  Levitations,  Luminous  Appearances  and  Materialisations.
Piddington,  J.  G.,  Report  on  The  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper

122,  137,  172,  299,  300
„  and Sidgwick,  Mrs.  H,  Note  on  Mrs.  Piper's

Hodgson-Control  in  England,  1906-7 - -  122


,598


Index  to  Vol.  XXIII.


[parts


Pigou,  Professor  A.  C,  Psychical  Eesearch  and  Survival  after  Bodily

Death  286

,,  on  Cross-Correspondences, - - -  288-303

Piper,  Mrs.,  Trance  Phenomena  of.

Cross-Correspoudences  (with  Mrs.  Verrall  and  others)

86,  102,  137,  198,  239,  241,  242,  250-255,  288-303
„ Jaines,  Prof.  W.,  Report  on  the  Hodgson-Control - 1,2,  30
,, Letter  from, ---------  107

„ Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  Report  on  Some  Trance  Communica-
tions chiefly  through  ------  127-286

„ . Pigou,  Professor  A.  C,  on  288-303
„ Sidgwick,  Mrs.  H.,  and  J.  G.  Piddington,  Note  on  the

Piper-Hodgson  Control ------  122

Plotinus,  References  to, - -- -- -- --  251

Podmore,  F.,  On  Eusapia  Palladino,  Reference  to - - 31 3  (footnote)
,,  On  the  Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper - - -  137

Pope,  Miss  Theodate,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  -  -  7-10,  51,  52,  110,  111
Predictions. See  Unfulfilled  Communications.

"Prudens,"  Trance  Personality  of  Mrs.  Piper  -  81,235
Psychical  Research  and  Survival  after  Bodily  Death,  Professor  A.  C.

Pigou  on - -  -  -  - - -  286

Psychonietry,  in  connection  with  the  Phenomena  of  Controls  98,  120, 121,  196

See  also  Objects  brought  to  Sittings.
Putman,  Dr.  J.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper -  99
Putnam  Family,  Piper-Hodgson  references  to - - - 91,  92,  97,  116
Putnam,  Miss  Anne,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper -  -  98,99,10.9,114

Q.

"  Q,"  Piper-Hodgson  references  to - -  10,12,23,106,107,108

R.

Ramsden,  Miss  Hermione,  Telepathic  Experiments  of,  Reference  to

292,  293,  295

"Rawson,  Miss,"  Messages  through,

„  The  Gurney  and  Myers  Controls  of  -  -  212,  214,  219-26
„  ,, Cross-Correspondence  (with  Mrs.  Thompson)

214,  215,  223-25

"Rector,"  Trance  Personality  of  Mrs.  Piper 3,  7-10,  31,  32,  52,  67,  81,  89,
96,  125,  129,  133,  134,  138,  139,  160,  168,  175,  189,  191,  193,


196,  227,  232,  234,  235,  236,  238,  248,  267,  268,  270,  280,  281
Reichmann,  Dr.,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino  - - 314,  315

Review  -  570

Richet,  Professor  Ch.,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino

307,  312,  313,  314,  315,  317
Riding  Accident,  Piper-Hodgson  reference  to  104-106,  107

Ring  Incident,  Piper-Hodgson  references  to  - - - 7,  13,  90


lviii.-lix.] Index  to  Vol.  XXIII.  599

Eobbins,  Miss,  Sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper - -  - - - -  n4

Eoberts,  Charley,  Piper-Hodgson  reference  to -  106,  10/

Eochas,  Colonel  de,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino  -  43/

Eyan,  James,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino -  - 484,  528,  529

Note  on  the  Bell  Incident -  -  525


St.  Paul,  Cross-Correspondence,  Eeference  to -  - 230-232,  235

"Sandford,  Mrs.  Kate,"  Communications  from. See  The  "Joseph
Marble"  Series.

Santi,  Signor  de,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino 399,  400,  417,  418,  437
Scarpa,  Professor,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino -  - -  317

Schiaparelli,  Professor,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino - - - 31 2
Sealed  Envelopes,  Hodgson-Piper  references  to  Non-existent

86,  87,  115,  229,  230,  246
Sidgwick,  Mrs.  H,  Introductory  Note  to  the  Eeport  on  Sittings  with

Eusapia  Palladino ------  306

Sittings  with  Eusapia  ------  314

and  Piddington,  J.  G.,  Note  on  Mrs.  Piper's

Hodgson-Control  of  1906-07 -  - -  122

Sidgwick,  Professor  H,  Piper-Hodgson  references  to  past  incident

concerning - - - - - -  111

Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino  - - -  314
Sidgwick-Control  (Mrs.  Piper's),  Negative  Character  of -  -  126

("Miss  BawsonV')-  -  220,221

Soule,  Mrs.,  Messages  from  the  Hodgson-Control  through  -  86
Star. See  Hope,  Star  and  Browning.

Stevens,  Charles  E.  Communications  from  (Mrs.  Piper)  -  191-193,  196
Sudeley,  Lord,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino  -  -  484

Survival  after  Bodily  Death,  Psychical  Eesearch  and,  by  Professor

A.  C.  Pigou  -  ■  286

T.

Tambukini,  Professor,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino  -

Tavern  Club,  Piper-Hodgson  references  to  -  -  46,  115

Test  Questions,  Failure  of  attempts  to  obtain  answers  to

44,  46,  68,  69,  83,  86,  87,  90-92,  96,  98,  107,  115,  116,  122-126
144,  145,  172,  173,  228,  229,  234,  250,  260,  268,  288
Thaw,  Mrs.  Blair,  Note  on  the  Huldah-Episode  -  . -  25

Thompson,  Edwin,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper -  163,  175-196

Thompson,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Isaac  C.  —

Earlier  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  -  154,  155,  158

The  Isaac  Thompson  Case  (Mrs.  Piper)  -  -  162-198

Dramatic  Characteristics  of  the  Impersonation 170,  171,  181,  283


600


Index  to  Vol.  XXIII.


[parts


Thompson,  Mrs.,  Trance  Phenomena  of —

Cross-Correspondences  (with  "  Mrs.  Forbes ") - - -  213
„  „ ( „ Mrs.  Verrall) 208-210,  213,  214,  219

Hodgson,  Dr.  R.,  on -  199-200
Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  on ----- -  198-265

„  „ the  "Joseph  Marble"  Series  256-263

„  „ the  Myers-Control  198-219

Piddington,  J.  G.,  Eeport  on,  References  to  -  - 199,  200

Tomczyk,  Miss  Stanislawa,  Dr.  Ochorowicz's  Sittings  with  - - 577,  578
Trance  Phenomena  (of  Mrs.  Piper) - - - - - 2,  30,  127-285

,,  „  Conditions  of  Conscious,  and  Memory  during

131-136,  177,  181,  185-7,  233,  275-281
„  ,,  Historical  Survey  of  the  Phenomena  from

1889-  -  130-140

,,  ,,  See  also  the  Gurney,  Hodgson,  Myers,  and  Sidgwick

Controls  and  the  cases  of  Joseph  Marble  and
Isaac  Thompson.

„  „ (of  Mrs.  Thompson) -  198-219,  255-265

,,  ,,  Conditions  of  Consciousness  during - -  200

„  „  See  also  the  "Joseph  Marble"  case  and  the  Myers-

Control.

Trevelyan,  Sir  George,  Thompson-Myers  reference  to  - - - -  202

U.

Unfulfilled,  Communications  awaiting  fulfilment  -  255,  264,  265,  274
Unverifiable  Communications,  Specimens  of  - -  145

V.

Verrall,  Dr.,  Telepathic  Experiments  of  (the  One-Horse  Davm),

Reference  to  296,  297,  298,  300,  301

Verrall,  Mrs.,  References  to  the  Automatic  Script  of

102,  137,  239,  241,  242,  250-255,  288-303
Cross-Correspondences  (Mrs.  Piper) 239,  241,  242,  250-255,

289,  295,  299-300
("Mrs.  Holland") -  298-301

W.

Watch  Stopping,  Piper-Hodgson  references  to  - -  -  11,  49,  116

Watson,  Rev.  John  (Ian  Maclaren),  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper  - -  155

"  West "  Family,  "  Joseph  Marble  "  reference  to  -  -  271,  272
"  Wilson,  Mr." See  Watson,  Rev.  John.

Worcester,  Elwood,  The  Living  Word,  Reference  to - -  - -  119

X.

X.,  Signora,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino, -  484,  502
„ „ Report  on  the  examination  of  the  Medium -  505


lviii.-lix.]  Index  to  Vol.  XXIII.  601

Y.

Y.,  Miss,  Sitting  with  Eusapia  Palladino -  - 484,  502

„ Keport  on  the  examination  of  the  Medium - -  505
Yonrievitch,  S.,  Sittings  with  Eusapia  Palladino

317,  570,  579,  580,  585,  588

Z.

Zeivorn,  Attempted  Pass- word  -  - -  86,94,116

Zend-Avesta. See  Fechner.
