Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. III (1885)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1885 London: Trubner and Co. edition (Parts VIII-IX) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc03soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS


OF  THE


SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


VOLUAIE  III.

{CONTAINING  PARTS  VIII.  AND  IX.)


1885.


London  ;


TRUBNER  AND  CO.,  LUDGATE  HILL.


1885.


London  r

National  Press  Agency,  LiinTEr\
13.  Whitefriars  Street,  E,C,


cO

cO


r

A

j

0

C/!


CONTENTS.


Automatic  Writing.  Ity  Frederic  W.  II.  Myers  . . . .

Opening  i^ddres.s  at  the  Tliirteentli  General  Meeting.  lly  Profes.sor
B.-VLForR  Stewart,  F.R.S

Notes  on  the  Evidence,  collected  hy  the  Society,  for  Phantasms  of  the
Dead.  By  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick

Hallucinations.  By  Edmund  Gurney

The  Calculus  of  Probabilities  applied  to  Psychical  Research.  By  F.  Y.
Edgeworth

Annual  Business  Meeting

Report  on  Phenomena  connected  with  Theosophy

(1)  Statement  and  Conclusions  of  the  Committee  ....

(2)  Account  of  Personal  Investigations  in  India,  and  Discussion  of

the  Authorship  of  the  “ Root  Hoomi  ” Letters  (with
Appendices).  By  Richard  Hodgson

(.3)  Report  of  Mr.  F.  G.  Netherclift  on  the  Blavatsky- Coulomb
Correspondence  ..........

(4)  Note  on  Certain  Phenomena  not  dealt  with  in  Mr.  Hodgson’s
Account.  By  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick

(.5)  Details  of  the  Evidence  referred  to  on  Page  207

Contents  of  the  above  Report

Some  Higher  Aspects  of  Mesmerism.  By  Edjiund  Gurney  and
Frederic  W.  H Myers

Further  Report  on  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference  at  Liverpool.
By  Malcolm  Guthrie,  J.P

Local  Anpesthesia  induced  in  the  Normal  State  by  Mesmeric  Passes

Report  on  an  alleged  Physical  Phenomenon

Catalogue  of  the  Library  (Abridged.)

List  of  Members  and  Associates,  December,  1885

Constitution  and  Rules


34.087


PAGE

1

64

69

151

190

200

201

207

381

382

397

400

401

424

453

460

464

475

493


SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH


PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  GENERAL  MEETING  ON


ADDITIONS  AND  CORRECTIONS,

Page  91,  line  IS,  add: — In  anothei'  communication  he  adds,  “ l\ly
friend  had  been  dead  some  days  before  I lieard  the  voice.  I liad  no
previous  intimation  that  he  was  ill.  He  died  of  dropsy,  and  rather
suddenly  ; for  the  day,  or  second  day,  before  Ins  death  he  was  engaged
in  writing,”

Page  100,  line  20,  add : — This  occurrence  took  place  in  1847.

Page  101,  line  8,  fur  “ seem  ” read.  “ seems.”

Page  l-'iO,  line  17,  for  “ Mr,  W,”  read  “Mr.  Z.”

Page  156,  line  17,  and  page  16.5,  line  32,  for  “ Delbdmf  ” reail
“ Fechner.”

Page  159,  line  8,  omit  “as  Brewster  first  observed,”


certain  so-cailed  bpintualistic  Fiienomena  ” in  l^roceedinr/s  VII.  But  as  that
title  was  cumbrous,  I have  now  called  these  papers  hy  the  name  of  the  phenome-
non with  which  they  mainly  deal.

t To  the  anagrams  cited  in  the  “Clelia”  case  in  my  previous  paper,  two
others  should  he  added,  which  IMr.  A.  obtained  at  about  the  same  time.  These
■were  icb  iov  ogf  uie  (I  go,  vow  belief),  and  nch  16  vhliij  ev  86  e carf  ee  (Believe
hj' fear  even  ! 1866).  This  last  was  an  nnsircr  to  the  question,  “ How  shall  I
believe  ? ” and  seems  quite  to  negative  the  hypothesis  that  the  anagrams  were
mere  chance  combinations  of  letters,  which  happened  to  be  susceptible  of
arrangement  in  sentences.  It  should  be  mentioned,  however,  that  there  was
an  i too  much  in  one  of  the  anagrams  previously  cited.

B


* •


SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH


PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  GENERAL  MEETING  ON
January  30,  1885.

The  twelfth  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the  Rooms
of  the  Society  of  British  Artists,  Suffolk-street,  Pall  Mall,  on  Friday,
January  30.

Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,  President,  in  the  Chair.

The  first  half  of  a paper  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  on  “ The  Evidence,
collected  by  the  Society,  for  Phantasms  of  the  Dead,”  was  read.  The
paper,  in  its  complete  form,  is  printed  further  on.


I.

AUTOMATIC  WRITING.— II.*

By  F.  W.  H.  Myers.

Part  II.

In  a previous  paper  I discussed  certain  forms  of  automatic  writing-
which  seem  referable  to  the  operation  of  unconscious  cerebral  action.
I endeavoured  to  show  that  in  cases  where  the  message  written  fails  to
convey  any  facts  which  demonstrably  are  not  known  to  the  writer,  and
never  have  been  known  to  him,  there  is  no  need  to  assume  that  any
intelligence  but  his  own  has  been  concerned  in  the  message.  I
maintained  that  this  was  the  case  even  where  the  message  took  the  form
of  an  anagram,  which  the  writer  had  some  trouble  in  deciphering. -(-

* Tills  paper  is  a continuation  of  my  paper  “On  a Telepatliic  Explanation  of
certain  so-called  Spiritualistic  Phenomena  ” iii  Froceedings  VII.  But  as  that
title  was  cumbrous,  I have  now  called  these  papers  by  the  name  of  the  phenome-
non with  which  they  mainly  deal.

t To  the  anagrams  cited  in  the  “Clelia”  case  in  my  previous  paper,  two
others  should  be  added,  which  Mr.  A.  obtained  at  about  the  same  time.  These
were  ich  iov  ogf  uie  (I  go,  vow  belief),  and  nch  16  vhliy  cv  86  e ear/  ee  (Believe
by  fear  even  ! 1866).  This  last  was  an  «ii«rcr  to  the  question,  “ How  shall  I
believe  ? ” and  seems  quite  to  negative  the  hypothesis  that  the  anagrams  were
mere  chance  combinations  of  letters,  which  happened  to  be  susceptible  of
arrangement  in  sentences.  It  should  be  mentioned,  however,  that  there  was.
an  i too  much  in  one  of  the  anagrams  previously  cited.

B


o


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  30,


The  mentation*  involved  in  such  a case  must  of  course  be  of  a very
unusual  kind,  and  I shall  return  to  its  discussion  later  in  this  paper.
For  the  present  it  is  enough  to  point  out  that  there  is  really  no  line
■which  can  be  consistently  laid  down  beforehand  as  demarcating  self-
inspired  from  extraneously-inspired  messages,  except  the  presence  in
such  messages  of  definite  pieces  of  information,  such  as  in  a court  of
justice  it  would  be  considered  possible  to  prove  that  the  waiter  or
.speaker  could  never  have  possessed.

But  I went  on  to  point  out  that  there  are,  in  fact,  some  trustworthy
cases  where  the  automatic  message  does  include  facts  unknown  to  the
writer.  I cited  a few  of  these,  and  showed  that  our  hypothesis  of
Thought-transference, — of  communication  from  one  living  mind  to
another, — would  explain  the  cases  given,  although  in  one  at  least  of
those  cases  the  persons  concerned  had  felt  convinced  that  the  .spirit  of  a
dead  man  had  intervened.  I shall  proceed  now  to  give  some  more
cases  of  this  kind,  and  shall  lead  up  to  a palmary  instance  (the
Rev.  P.  H.  Newnham’s)  Ijy  some  briefer  cases,  so  arranged  as  to
illustrate  some  important  points.

A.  In  the  first  case  there  is  an  apparent  element  of  ’pro’pliecy  ; and
I quote  it  in  order  to  show  how  fallacious  this  appearance  is,  and  how
easily  an  ordinary  mental  anticipation  of  the  future,  if  it  in  any  way
becomes  exteryialised,  may  look  like  a revelation.  Miss  Summerbell’s
name  is  by  this  time  familiar  to  our  readers.

Planchette. — Miss  Summekbell’s  Case.

I have  used  Planchette  a great  deal,  but  the  result  lias  generally  been
nonsense  ; but  I remembered  two  occasions  when  it  correctly  interpreted  the
thought  of  someone  in  the  room,  whose  h.ands  wmre  not  upon  it.  About  a
year  ago,  we  were  amusing  ourselves  by  asking  it  what  Christmas  presents
we  should  have.  My  hands  were  upon  Planchette,  and  1 believe  Miss  Lay’s,
but  in  any  case  it  is  quite  certain  that  neither  of  the  jiersons  who  were
touching  it  could  possibly  know  the  answer  to  the  question  I asked.  I said,
“ What  w'ill  Miss  T.  have  at  Christmas  ? ” Miss  T.  was  in  the  room,  but  not
near  the  table.  Planchette  immediately  wrote  down  a rather  large  sum  of
money.  I asked,  “Who  is  to  give  it?”  It  wrote  “ B.  and  one  other.”
Some  weeks  afterwards  I met  Miss  T.,  who  asked  me  if  I remembered  what
Planchette  had  written.  I remembered  it  perfectly.  She  said,  “ I have
received  more  than  that  sum,  but  I knew  about.it  at  the  time,  though  not  the
exact  sum,  and  I believe  that  must  have  been  thought-reading,  for  1 am
certain  that  nobody  in  the  room  knew  of  it,  but  myself.”  The  money  was
given  by  a relarive  whose  surname  begins  with  B.,  and  another  person.

* This  word  is  due, I bcliei'e,  to  Dr.  Metcalfe- Johnson,  and  has  been  adopted
by  Dr.  linghlings-Jackson.  It  is  more  convenientthan  “ mental  action”  both  as
•being  one  word  instead  of  two,  and  as  avoiding  the  term  “action”,  which  sounds
inappropriate  in  some  cases,  where  a relative  is  the  fact  to  he  brought

■out.  Moreover,  “ mentation  ” seems  an  obvious  correlative  to  “ cerebration.”


1885.]


Automatic  Writing.


3


On  another  occasion,  we  asked  a friend  to  dictate  a (question,  the  answer
to  which  we  did  not  know.  She  said,  “Who  is  coming  to  breakfast  to-
morrow ?”  Miss  Lay  and  I placed  our  hands  upon  Planchette  and  asked  the
<piestion.  It  wrote  “ Lucas.”  Our  friend  said  that  was  the  name  of  the
gentleman  who  was  coming  to  breakfast.  Neither  Miss  Lay  nor  I had  ever
heard  of  him  before.  Our  friend  said,  “Ask  his  Christian  name.”  We
asked;  it  wrote  “William.”  “ Is  that  right?”  w'e  asked  our  friend.  “I
don’t  know,”  she  answered  ; “ I never  heard  his  Christian  name.”  Then
somebody  else, who  was  'iiot  touching  Planchette,  remembered  that  there  was
a song  by  him  somewhere  among  the  music.  We  looked,  and  at  length
found  the  song  by  “ 'William  Lucas” — of  whom  we  had  never  heard  before,
nor  have  we  heard  of  him  since.

L.  D.  SuMMEEBELL.

I can  thoroughly  endorse  these  statements,  and  could  multiply  instances
equally  curious. — J.  M.  Lay.

From  the  point  of  view  at  which  we  Iiave  now  arrived,  it  will  surely
seem  probable  that  the  prophecy  of  the  Christmas  gift  was  a mere
reflection  of  Miss  T.’s  anticipation — transferred  telepathically  to  the
writer’s  unconscious  mind.  With  regard  to  predictions,  as  witli  regard
to  statements  of  existing  fact,  we  must  surely  assume  that  any  anticipa-
tion -which  could  have  existed  in  the  mind  either  of  the  write i-  or  of  any
other  person  present  did  in  fact  come  from  that  mind,  in  pi'eference  to
supposing  a disembodied  intelligence  to  account  for  it.  Yet  I have  seen
one  or  two  promising  e.xperiments  spoilt  by  the  foolish  superstition
that  what  “ Planchette  says”  about  the  future  is  necessarily  true.
Sentimental  or  sporting  cpiestions  are  asked  ; the  secret  appiehensions
of  the  questioner  externalise  themselves  before  his  (or  her)  astonished
eyes,  and  the  pencil  is  thrown  aside  in  disgust  or  indignation.  Or
sometimes  people  solemnly  inquire  “ whether  it  is  wicked  to  hold  com-
munion with  Planchette  ? ” Their  own  brain  inspiies,  and  their  own
fingers  write,  some  alarming  monitory  reply,  and  they  then  seriously
inform  one  that  “ Planchette  itself,”  (or  “ Planchette  herself”  as  some
people  plu’ase  it),  has  pronounced  the  inquiry  impious.  One  smiles  at
finding  Philip  sober  thus  appealing  to  Philip  drunk, — the  waking  man
guiding  his  judgment  by  the  capricious  utterance  of  his  own  unconscious
brain.  But  the  true  lesson  of  such  an  incident  is  the  rashness  of
ignoring  or  contemning  phenomena  just  because  they  look  as  if  they
made  for  some  foolish  faith,  the  unwisdom  of  leaving  strange  facts  to
become  the  nucleus  of  a superstition  instead  of  the  groundwork  of  a
science.

As  regards  the  Christian  name  “ William,”  which  Planchette  gave
in  Miss  Summerbell’s  narrative,  we  may  perhaps  assume  that  (as  in  the
case  of  the  word  Wem  in  a previous  narrative)  the  name  printed  on
the  song  although  no  one  consciously  remembered  it,  had  been  vaguely

B 2


Automatic  Writing.


4


[ Jan.  30,


noticed  l)y  Mr.  Lucas’  friend  at  some  previous  time,  and  now  reappeared
from  tlie  stores  of  unconscious  memory.

B.  In  tlie  next  case  which  I shall  give,  Mr.  Allhright,  of  Mariemont,
Birmingham,  a chemical  manufacturer  (whose  letter  to  me  I abbreviate),
asked  a young  lady,  of  whose  complete  ignorance  of  the  facts  of  hi.s
Imsiness  he  feels  quite  sure,  for  the  name  of  a waste  product  occurring
on  a large  scale  in  his  manufactory.  He  meant  the  answer  to  be
“gypsum,”  but  “chloride  of  calcium”  was  written,  and  this  was  also
true  ; although,  had  he  thought  of  this  substance,  he  would  have  thought
of  it  by  its  trade  name  of  “ muriate  of  lime.”  Again,  he  asked  what
was  his  lirm’s  port  of  importation.  He  meant  the  answer  to  be
“ Gloucester,”  but  “ Wales”  was  written  ; and  this  again  was  true  at  the
time,  as  he  was  just  then  importing  through  Cardiff.  These  answers
startled  him  so  disagreeably  that  he  refused  to  make  further  exj^eri-
ments.  But  I cite  the  case  here  for  the  express  purpose  of  pointing
out  that  no  insuperable  difBculty  is  presented  fjy  the  fact  that  the
answers,  while  substantially  known  to  the  inquirer,  were  not  those  on
which  his  mind  was  consciously  fixed.  The  whole  tendency  of  our
argument  has  been  to  show  that  ideas  latent  in  the  mind  may  react
telepathically  in  preference  to  ideas  which  the  conscious  attention  is
keeping  uppermost.  Our  consciou-sness  gives  us  very  little  clue  to  the
real  massing  and  proportion  of  the  mental  pictures  within  us.  Some-
what similarly  (a  cynic  might  say),  our  own  vivid  perception  of  our
admirable  qualities  gives  us  little  clue  to  the  aggregate  impression
which  our  character  makes  on  our  friends.  But  a closer  parallel  is  to
be  found  in  the  phenomena  of  muscle-reading, — another  avenue  into
the  unconscious  mind.  The  Pi.ev.  C.  H.  Sugden,  the  successful  amateur
whose  Note  on  Muscle-reading  is  to  be  found  in  Proceedings  IV.,
says  (p.  ‘29)

“ I noticed  very  often  tliat  when  an  article  had  been  hidden  in  one
place  and  then  transferred  to  another,  my  patient  almost  invariably  took
me  first  to  the  first  place,  and  then  after  a short  search  suddenly  went  off

to  the  right  jilace Once  in  writing  a banknote  I could  get

nothing  but  two’s ; they  were  declared  to  be  wrong, — ‘ but,’  said  the  patient,
‘there  were  two’s  on  another  part  of  the  note  which  I particularly  noticed.’
This  is  of  interest  as  bearing  on  the  well-known  fact  that  in  so-called
spiritualistic  revelations  the  things  told  are  things  which  the  questioner  has
possibly  even  forgotten,  but  which  have  once  been  in  his  mind.”

We  have  yet  much  to  learn  as  to  what  has  been  called  the  phosphore-
scence— or,  by  an  exacter  analogy,  the  fluorescence — of  the  brain; — the
way  in  which  excitations  continue  to  thrill  through  us  long  after  they  have
sunk  below  the  tlireshold  of  consciousness,  and  the  swell  of  the  old
wave  intersects  or  embraces  the  more  conspicuous  agitation  of  the  new.
Or  we  may  vary  the  metaphor,  and  say  that  our  clearest  mental


1885.]


Automatic  Writing.


5


outlook  is  but  a superposition  of  dissolving  views,  in  which  no  scene,
however  vivid,  is  devoid  of  some  element  of  its  predecessor.

C.  In  my  next  case  an  answer  is  given  which  is  in  fact  true,
although  the  questioner  believed  it  at  the  time  to  be  false.

From  Me.  W.  Riddell,  Dunster,  Somerset.

Jnhj,  1884.

The  way  I became  acquainted  with  “Planchette”  was  as  follows  : — A
friend  of  ray  wife’s  is  staying  with  us,  and  one  day  she  was  talking  about
“ Planchette,”  and  saying  that  she  had  one  at  her  home,  in  London,  and  had
seen  some  remarkable  answers  given  by  it  when  a certain  young  lady  had
her  liands  on  it.  Both  my  wife  and  I laughed  at  the  idea,  saying  nothing
would  make  us  believe  in  it.  Miss  B.  (my  wife’s  friend),  to  prove  herself
right,  sent  for  her  “ Planchette.”  In  the  course  of  a day  or  two  it  arrived,  and
having  put  it  together  Miss  B.  and  I tried  it,  but  without  any  result  beyond
a few  lines  up  and  down  the  paper.  Then  my  wife  put  her  hands  on  it  with
Miss  B.,  and  in  a very  short  time  it  began  to  move,  and  on  being  asked
answered  questions  very  freely,  some  rightly  and  some  quite  wrongly.
Amongst  those  answered  rightly  were  the  following.  (I  may  here  observe  that
not  only  did  my  wife  and  myself  not  believe  in  it,  but  we  were  antagonistic  to
it  in  feeling.)  Our  first  question  was  asked  by  myself,  my  wife  and  Miss  B.
having  their  hands  on  it.  I said.  How  many  shillings  has  IMiss  B.  in  her
purse?  Ans. — “Four”;  right.  I then  asked  how  many  coins  I had  in
mine.  Ans. — “Five”;  right.  I thought  I had  many  more.  I then  took
a playing  card  from  a pack  in  a box,  looked  at  it,  put  it  face  down  on  a
table,  and  asked  for  its  colour.  Ans. — “Red  ” ; right.  Humber — “ Seven  ” ;
right.  Name — “ Hearts”  ; right.  This,  I must  confess,  seemed  to  me  very
wonderful,  as  neither  my  wife  nor  Miss  B.  could  possibly  have  known  any-
thing about  the  card.  I then  took  a visiting  card  from  the  bottom  of  the
basket,  and  having  looked  at  it,  placed  it  face  downwards  on  the  table,  and
asked  “Planchette”  for  the  name  on  it.  This  it  seemed  quite  unable  to
give,  but  after  along  time  it  wrote  “clergyman,”  which  was  a wonderful

answer,  as  the  card  was  that  of  a Rev. who  was  here  two  winters  ago,

helping  our  rector.  After  this  wm  did  not  get  anything  more  satisfactory.

Now,  here,  as  no  complete  list  of  the  answers  has  been  preserved,
we  cannot  feel  sure  that  the  answer  “five,”  as  to  the  number  of  coins
in  Mr.  Riddell’s  pocket  may  not  have  been  right  by  mere  accident.
But  my  point  is  that,  even  excluding  the  idea  of  mere  chance
coincidence,  there  is  still  nothing  in  the  answer  which  obliges  us  to  go
beyond  Mr.  Riddell’s  own  mind.  For  on  a trivial  point  of  fact  like
this,  it  is  possible  for  two  contradictory  beliefs  to  exist  in  the  mind
with  nearly  equal  intensity.  A man  looks,  perhaps,  carefully  into  his
purse  when  it  contains  much  small  change,  and  forms  a vivid  mental
picture  of  the  mass  of  coins.  He  then  pays  away  several  coins  without
specially  looking  into  his  purse  in  doing  so.  He  is  asked  shortly  after-
wards for  some  small  change,  and  the  mental  picture  of  the  coins  in  his


G


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  30,


purse  is  still  Auvid  enough  to  make  him  at  once  pull  out  his  purse  to
get  at  them,  although  even  simultaneously  and  in  the  act  of  doing  so
he  remembers  to  have  paid  them  away.  The  fact  that  they  are  actually
gone  seems  to  need  veritication  by  ocular  inspection  before  the  old
picture  of  them  can  be  wholly  displaced.  It  is  less  trouble  to  look
afresh  into  the  purse  than  to  convince  oneself  by  redection  that  there
really  is  no  sih^er  left  there.  TriA^ial  as  such  considerations  are,  they
may  be  useful  in  reminding  us  that  our  mental  action  is  a much  less
homogeneous  thing  than  we  are  wont  to  imagine  it ; and  that  any
picture  thereof,  reflected  to  us  from  other  minds,  Avill  probably  surprise
us  by  its  jumbled  confusion.

Observe  that  the  seven  of  hearts  is  told  correctly  at  once ; while  in
the  case  of  the  visiting  card  there  is  an  approximation  only,  as  if  the
idea  had  been  only  partially  caught.

We  possess  a few  more  of  these  minor  cases  of  the  transmission  of
thought  as  manifested  in  automatic  writing.  And  we  are  anxious  to
receive  further  instances  of  the  kind,  believing  it  to  be  probable  that
the  teleiiathic  influence  may  show  itself  thus  tx’ansitorily,  though
genuinely,  in  the  experience  of  many  persons.  But  if  our  theory  is  to
be  established,  Ave  shall  need  something  beyond  these  fleeting  instances;
Ave  shall  need  a series  of  experiments  of  a more  solid  and  prolonged
order.  Such  a series  has  been  communicated  to  us  by  the  Rev.
P.  H.  NeAvnliam,  Vicar  of  Maker,  DevonjAort.  This  gentleman  has  for
many  years  paid  careful  attention  to  psychical  phenomena,  and  especially
has  been  conscious  of  a frequent  inA’oluntary  transmission  of  thought
from  himself  to  Mrs.  NeAvnham.  A striking  instance  of  this,  Avhich
occurred  some  .30  years  ago,  before  their  marriage,  may  be  given  here.


From  Rev.  P.  H.  Neavnhaai,  Member  S.P.R.

In  March,  1854,  I Avas  up  at  Oxford,  keeping  my  last  term,  in  lodgings.
I was  subject  to  violent  neuralgic  headaches,  Avhich  always  culminated  in
sleej).  One  evening,  about  8 p.m.,  I had  an  unusually  A'iolent  one  ; AAdien
it  became  unendurable,  about  9 p.m.,  I Avent  into  my  bedroom,  and  flung
myself,  Avitliout  umlressing,  on  the  bed,  and  soon  fell  asleep.

I then  had  a singularly  clear  and  vivid  dream,  all  the  incidents  of  which
are  still  as  clear  to  my  memory  as  ever.  I dreamed  that  I Avas  stojxping  with
the  family  of  the  lady  aaIio  subsecjuently  became  my  Avife.  All  the  younger  ones
had  gone  to  bed,  and  I stopixed  chatting  to  the  father  and  mother,  standing
u])  by  the  fireplace.  Presently  I bade  them  good-night,  took  my  candle,
and  Avent  off  to  bed.  On  arriA’ing  in  the  hall,  1 perceived  that  my  fiancee
had  been  detained  doAA-nstairs,  and  Avas  only  then  near  the  top  of  the  stair-
case. 1 rushed  upstairs,  oA’ertook  her  on  the  top  step,  and  passed  my  tAvo
arms  I’ound  her  AA'aist,  under  her  arms,  from  behind.  Although  I AA-as
carrying  my  candle  in  my  left  hand,  Avhen  1 started  to  run  upstairs,  this  did
not,  in  my  dream,  interfere  AA’ith  this  gesture.


1885.]  Automatic  Writing.  7

On  this  I woke,  and  a clock  in  the  house  struck  10  almost  immediately
afterwards.

So  strong  was  the  impression  of  the  dream  that  I wrote  a detailed
account  of  it  next  morning  to  my  fiancee.

Crossinij  my  letter,  not  in  answer  to  it,  I received  a letter  from  the  lady
in  question;  “Were  you  thinking  about  me,  very  specially,  last  night,
just  about  10  o’clock  ? For,  as  I was  going  upstairs  to  bed,  I distinctly
heard  your  footstej^s  on  the  stairs,  and  felt  you  put  your  arms  around  my
waist.”

The  letters  in  question  are  now  destroyed,  but  we  verified  the  statement
made  therein  some  years  later,  when  we  read  over  our  (dd  letters,  previous
to  their  destruction,  and  we  found  that  our  personal  recollections  had  not
varied  in  the  least  degree  therefrom.  The  above  narrative  may,  thereforOj
be  accepted  as  absolutely  accurate.

P.  H.  Newnham.


From  Mrs.  Newnham.

I remember  distinctly  the  circumstance  which  my  husband  has  described
as  corresponding  with  his  dream,  I was  on  my  way  up  to  bed,  as  usual,
about  10  o’clock,  and  on  reaching  the  first  landing  I heard  distinctly  the
footsteps  of  the  gentleman  [to  whom  I was  engaged,  quickly  mounting  the
stairs  after  me,  and  then  I as  plainly  felt  him  put  his  arms  around  my  waist.
So  strong  an  impression  did  this  make  upon  me  that  I wrote  the  very  next
morning  to  the  gentleman,  asking  if  he  had  been  particularly  thinking  of  me
at  10  o’clock  the  night  before,  and  to  my  astonishment  I received  (at  the
same  time  that  my  letter  would  reach  him)  a letter  from  him  describing  his
dream  in  almost  the  same  words  that  I had  used  in  describing  my  im25ression
of  his  jjresence.

dth  June,  1884.  M.  Newnham.

Mr.  Newnham  has  made  many  subsequent  attempts  to  transmit
thought  voluntarily  to  his  wife,  but  succeeded  only  in  the  year  1871,
during  a peidod  of  about  eight  months.

During  that  period  he  made  notes  from  day  to  day  in  a private
diary,  which  diary  he  has  been  good  enough  to  place  in  my  liands.
There  are  40  pages  of  MS.  notes,  containing  .38-5  automatically-written
replies  to  questions.  Mr.  Newnham  made  the  experiments  purely  for
his  own  satisfaction,  and  without  any  idea  of  submitting  them  to  public
inspection,  and  consequently  tlie  questions  include  many  references  to
his  domestic  affairs  at  the  time,  to  family  jokes,  and  otlier  matters
which,  while  illustrating  the  intimate  and  spontaneous  character  of  the
diary,  are  not  suited  for  publication.  Mr.  Newnham,  however,  has
kindly  made  long  extracts,  which  I shall  print  below.  I have  carefully
compared  the  extracts  with  the  original  diary,  and  consider  that  thev
give  a quite  fair  impression  of  it;  although  the  diary  contains  several
further  points  of  interest,  to  illustrate  which  I shall  (with  Mr.
Newnham’s  permission)  myself  make  a few  additional  extracts.  I have


[Jan.  30,


8 Automatic  Writing.

received  a letter  from  Mrs.  aSTewnliam,  independently  corroborating  her
husband’s  account.*

It  must  be  distinctly  understood  that  Mrs.  Newnham  did  not  see  or
hear  the  questions  which  Mr.  iNewnham  wrote  down.  The  fact,  there-
fore, that  her  answers  bore  any  relation  to  the  questions  shows  that  the
sense  of  the  questions  was  telepathically  conveyed  to  her.  This  is  the
leading  and  important  fact.  The  sicbstance  of  the  replies  written  is
also  interesting,  and  Mr.  Newnham  has  some  good  comments  thereon.
But  even  had  the  replies  contained  no  facts  which  Mrs.  Newnham
could  not  have  known,  this  would  not  detract  from  the  main  value  of
the  evidence,  which  consists  in  the  fact  that  Mrs.  Newnham’s  hand
wrote  replies  clearly  and  repeatedly  answeiing  questions  which  Mrs.
Newnham  neither  heard  nor  saw.


Extracts  from  Mr.  Newnham’s  Diara".

It  was  in  January,  1871,  that  I Avas  first  led  to  think  of  making  an
attempt  to  investigate  the  alleged  jjhenomena  of  Planchette-writing.
Having  procured  an  instrument,  I consulted  carefully  Avith  my  Avife,  as
to  forming  a code  of  conditions  Avhich  aa'C  Avould  agree  to  bind  ourselves
rigidly  to  observe,  in  case  she  Avas  found  capable  of  Avriting.

I copy  from  my  note-book  tlie  folloAving  preliminary  statement  and  con-
ditions agreed  upon,  AA'hich  Avere  put  doAvn  in  AA'riting  before  any  experiment
had  been  made  : —

“Being  desirous  of  investigating  accurately  the  phenomena  of  Blanchette,
myself  and  my  Avife  have  agreed  to  carry  out  a series  of  systematic  experi-

* Mr.  NeAAmliam  has  procured  for  me  tAvo  autograpli  letters  from  eye-
Avitnesses  of  some  of  the  experiments  avIio  do  not,  hoAA-eA  er,  Avish  tlieir  names  to  he
published,  on  account  of  prejudices  still  existing  in  certain  quarters  against  the
experiments  as  involving  questionable  agency.  One  Avriter  says  : “You  Avrote
the  question  on  a sliji  of  paper  and  put  it  under  one  of  the  ornaments  of  the
chimney-piece — no  one  seeing  Avliat  you  had  AAuitten.  Mrs.  Newnliam  sat  apart
at  a small  table.  I recollect  you  kept  a bo(jk  of  the  questions  asked  and
ansAvers  given, asyou  thought  some  neAv  poAver  might  be  discovered, and  you  read
me  from  it  some  of  the  results.  I remember  particularly  questions  and  ansAver.s
relating  to  the  selection  of  a curate  for  B.  My  Avife  and  her  sister  saAv  experi-
ments conducted  in  this  manner.  Mrs.  NeAvnham  and  you  Av^ere  sitting  at
different  tables.”  Another  eye-Avitness  Avrites  ; “I  and  my  sister  Avere  staying

at  , and  Avere  present  at  many  of  the  Idanchette  experiments  of  Mr.  and

Mrs.  NeAvnham.  Mr.  and  IMrs.  NeAvnliam  sat  at  different  tables  some  distance
apart  and  in  such  a position  that  it  AA’as  quite  impossible  Mrs.  NeAvnham  could
•see  Avhat  question  Avas  Avritten  doAvn.  The  subject  of  the  questions  Avas  never
mentioned  even  in  a Avhisper.  Mr.  Newnham  Avrote  them  doAvn  in  pencil  and
sometimes  passed  them  to  me  and  my  sister  to  see,  but  not  often.  Mrs.
NeAvnham  immediately  ansAvered  the  questions.  Though  not  ahvays  correct,
they  (the  ansAvers)  ahvays  referred  to  the  questions.  Mr.  NeAvnham  copied  out
the  pencil  questions  and  ansAvers  verbatim  each  d.ay  into  a diary.”


1885.]


Automatic  Writing.


9


ments,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  conditions  under  wliicli  the  instrument  is
able  to  work.  To  this  end  the  following  rules  are  strictly  observed  : —

1.  The  question  to  be  asked  is  written  down  before  the  Planchette  is

set  in  motion.  This  question,  as  a rule,  is  never  known  to  the
operator.

2.  Whenever  an  evasive,  or  other  answer  is  returned,  necessitating

one  or  more  new  questions  to  be  put,  before  a clear  answer  can  be
obtained,  the  operator  is  nut  to  be  made  aware  of  amj  of  these
questions,  or  even  of  the  general  subject  to  which  they  allude,
until  the  final  answer  has  been  obtained.

3.  In  all  cases  where  the  operator  has  asked  the  question,  or  is  aware

of  its  terms,  or  general  tenor,  the  question  will  be  distinguished
by  prefixing  an  asterisk,  and  leaving  a sjiace  between  it  and  the
marginal  line.  [None  of  these  questions,  except  No.  313,  are
quoted  here.]

4.  Where  no  operator  is  mentioned,  my  wife  is  always  meant.

5.  Where  no  questioner  is  mentioned,  myself  is  always  meant.”

Although  not  provided  for  in  writing,  (as  our  mutual  bona  Jides  was,  of
course,  taken  for  granted),  I may  add  that  my  wife  always  sat  at  a small
low  table,  in  a low  chair,  leaning  backwards.  I sat  about  eight  feet  distant,
at  a rather  high  table,  and  with  my  back  towards  her  while  writing  down
the  questions.  It  was  absolutely  impossible  that  any  gesture,  or  play  of
features,  on  my  part,  could  have  been  visible  or  Intel  igible  to  her.  As  a
rule,  she  kept  her  eyes  shut  ; but  never  became  in  the  slightest  degree
hypnotic,  or  even  naturally  drowsy.

Under  these  conditions  we  carried  on  experiments  for  about  eight  months,
and  I have  309  questions  and  answers  recorded  in  my  note-book,  spread
over  this  time.*  But  the  experiments  were  found  very  exhaustive  of  nerve-
power,  and  as  my  wife’s  health  was  delicate,  and  the  fact  of  thought-
transmission  had  been  abundantly  proved,  we  thought  it  best  to  abandon
the  pursuit.

I now  proceed  to  give  a sample  of  some  of  these  questions  and  answers.
The  numbers  prefixed  are  those  in  my  note-book.

I may  mention  that  the  Planchette  began  to  move  instantly,  with  my
wife.  The  answer  was  often  half  w'ritten before  I had  completed  the  question.

On  first  finding  that  it  w'ould  write  easily,  I asked  three  simple  questions
w’hich  w'ere  known  to  the  operator ; then  three  others,  unknowm  to  her,
relating  to  my  own  private  concerns.  All  six  having  been  instantly  answered
in  a manner  to  show'  complete  intelligence,  I proceeded  to  ask,

7.  Write  dowm  the  low'est  temperature  here  this  w'inter.

A.  8.

Now,  this  reply  at  once  arrested  my  interest.  The  actual  low’est
temperature  had  been  7.6°  so  that  8 w'as  the  nearest  whole  degree  ; but  my

* The  remainder  of  the  385  questions  and  answers  in  this  book  belong  to  a
diflerent  series,  where  the  question  was  known  to  the  operator.


10


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  30y


wife  said  at  once  that,  if  she  had  been  asked  the  question,  she  would  have
written  7,  and  not  8 ; as  she  had  forgotten  the  decimal,  but  remembered  my
having  said  that  the  temperature  had  been  down  to  7 svmeihing.

I simpily  quote  this,  as  a good  instance,  at  the  very  outset,  of  perfect
transmission  of  tliought,  coupled  with  a perfectly  indeiiendent  reply  ; the
answer  being  correct,  in  itself,  but  different  from  the  impression  on  the
conscions  intelligence  of  both  parties.

Naturally  our  first  desire  was  to  see  if  we  could  obtain  any  information
concerning  the  nature  of  the  intelligence  whicli  was  oirerating  through  the
Planchette,  and  of  the  metliod  by  which  it  produced  the  written  results.  We
repeated  questions  on  this  subject  again  and  again  ; and  I will  copy  down
the  principal  (questions  and  answers  in  the  connection.

Januccrg  2Wi.

13.  Is  it  the  operator’s  brain,  or  some  external  force,  tliat  moves  the

Plancliette  ? Answer  “ brain  ” or  “force.”

A.  Will.

14.  Is  it  the  will  of  a living  jierson,  or  of  an  immaterial  spirit,  distinct  from

that  person  ? Answer  “ person  ” or  “ spirit.”

A.  Wife.

15.  fJive  first  the  wife’s  Christian  name  ; then,  my  favourite  name  for  her.

(This  was  accurately  done.)

27.  What  is  your  own  name  ?

A.  Only  you.

28.  We  are  not  (juite  sure  of  the  meaning  of  the  answer.  Exjilain.

A.  Wife.

Failing  to  get  more  than  this,  at  the  outset,  we  returned  to  the  same
thought  after  question  114  ; when,  having  been  closely  pressed  on  another
subject,  we  received  the  curt  reply — “ Told  all  I know.”


Fehntarg  181//.

117.  Who  are  you  that  writes,  and  has  told  all  you  know  ?

A.  Wife.

118.  But  does  no  one  tell  wife  what  to  write  ? If  so,  who  ?

A.  Spirit.

Ilf).  Whose  spirit  ?

A.  Wife’s  l)rain.

120.  But  how  does  wife’s  brain  know  (certain)  secrets  ?

A.  Wife’s  sj/irit  unconsciously  guides.

121.  But  liow  does  wife’s  spirit  know  things  it  has  never  been  told  ?
A.  No  external  influence.

122.  But  by  what  ■/ftff’/'//.a?  influence  does  it  know  (these)  secrets?

A.  You  cannot  know.


March  15th.

132.  Who,  then,  makes  the  impressions  upon  her  ?
A.  Many  strange  things.


1885.]


Automatic  Writing.


11


133.  What  sort  of  strange  things  ?

A.  Things  beyond  your  knowledge.

134.  Do,  then,  things  beyond  our  knowledge  make  impressions  upon  wife  I
A.  Influences  which  no  man  understands  or  knows.

13G.  Are  these  influences  which  we  cannot  understand  external  to  wife  ?

A.  External — invisible.

137.  Does  a spirit,  or  do  spirits,  exercise  those  influences  1
A.  Xo,  never  (written  very  large  and  emphatically).

138.  Then  from  whom,  or  from  whence,  do  the  external  influences  come?

A.  Yes  ; you  will  never  know.

139.  What  do  you  mean  by  writing  “ yes  ” in  the  last  answer  ?

A.  That  I really  meant  never.

March  19f/(.

142.  By  what  means  are  (unknown)  secrets  conveyed  to  wife’s  brain  ?

A.  What  you  call  mesmeric  influence.

144.  What  do  you  mean  by  “ what  you  call  ” ? What  do  you  call  it  ?

A.  Electro-biology.

145.  By  whom,  or  by  what,  is  the  electro-biologic  force  set  in  motion  ?

A.  I told  you  you  could  not  know  more  than  you  did.

14G.  Can  wife  answer  a question  the  rej)ly  to  which  I do  not  know  ?

A.  Why  do  you  ti-y  to  make  me  say  what  I won’t  ?

147.  Simply  because  I desire  knowledge.  iVliy  will  not  you  tell  ?

A.  Wife  could  tell  if  someone  else,  with  a very  strong  will,  in  the  roomi
knew.

March  2Gf//.

179.  Can  you  foresee  the  future  ?

A.  No.

April  lOtli.

190.  Why  are  not  you  always  ....  influenced  by  what  I think  ?

A.  Wife  knows  sometimes  what  you  think.

191.  How  does  wife  know  it  1

A.  When  her  brain  is  excited  and  has  not  been  much  tried  before.

192.  But  by  what  means  are  my  thoughts  conveyed  to  her  brain  ?

A.  Electro-biology.

193.  What  is  electro-biologj’  ?

A.  No  one  knows.

194.  But  do  not  you  know  ?

A.  No.  Wife  does  not  know.

195.  What  makes  you  always  call  her  “ wife  ” ?

A.  You  always  think  of  wife.

19G.  But  I never  crtlZher  “wife.”  Why  do  you?

A.  I am  nothing  without  wife.

200.  That  is  no  answer.  iVhy  do  you  call  her  so  ?

A.  Because  she  is  all  a wife.


12


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  30,


My  object  in  quoting  this  large  number  of  questions  and  replies  has  not
been  merely  to  show  the  instantaneous  and  unfailing  transmission  of  thought
from  questioner  to  operator  ; but,  more  especially,  to  call  attention  to  a
remarkable  characteristic  of  the  answers  given.  These  answers,  consistent
and  invariable  in  their  tenor  from  first  to  last,  did,  not  correspond  with  the
opinions  or  expectations  of  either  myself  or  my  v;ifc.  Something  which  takes
the  appearance  of  a source  of  intelligence  distinct  from  the  conscious  intelli-
gence of  either  of  us,  was  clearly  perceptible  from  the  very  first.  Assuming,
at  the  outset,  that  if  her  source  of  percif)ience  could  grasp  my  questions,  it
would  be  equally  willing  to  reply  in  accordance  with  my  request,  in  the  fii'st
two  questions  I suggested  the  form  of  answer  ; but  of  this  not  the  slightest
notice  was  taken  ! Neither  myself  nor  my  wife  had  ever  taken  part  in  any
form  of  (so-called)  “ spiritual”  manifestations  before  this  time  ; nor  had  we
any  decided  opinion  as  to  the  agency  by  which  phenomena  of  this  kind  were
brought  about.  But  for  such  answers  as  those  numbered  14,  27,  137,  144,
192,  and  194,  we  were  both  of  us  totally  unprepared  ; and  I may  add  that,
so  far  as  we  were  prepossessed  by  any  opinions  whatever,  these  replies  w'erc
distinctly  optpiosed  to  such  ojjinions.  In  a word,  it  is  simply  impossible  that
these  replies  should  have  been  either  suggested  or  composed  by  the  conscious
intelligence  of  either  of  us.

One  isolated  but  very  interesting  exiieriment  deserves  to  be  recorded
here.

I had  a j'oung  man  reading  wdth  me  as  a private  pupil  at  this  time.  On
February  12th  he  returned  from  his  vacation  ; and,  on  being  told  of  our
experiments,  expressed  his  incredulity  very  strongly.  I offered  any  proof
that  he  liked  to  insist  upon,  only  stipulating  that  1 should  see  the  question
asked.  Accordingly,  Mrs.  Newnham  took  her  accustomed  chair  in  my
iStudy,  while  we  went  out  into  the  hall,  and  shut  the  door  behind  us.  He
then  wrote  down  on  a 2)iece  of  jiajjer  : —

87.  What  is  the  Christian  name  of  my  eldest  sister?

We  at  once  returned  to  the  study,  and  found  the  answer  already  waiting
for  us  : —

A.  Mina.

(This  name  v/as  the  family  abbreviation  of  Wilhelmina:  and  I should
•add  that  it  was  unknown  to  myself.)

I need  make  no  comments  iq^on  such  a case  as  this.

I must  now  go  on  to  si)eak  of  a series  of  other  ex25eriments,  of  a veiy
remarkable  kind.

We  soon  found  that  my  wife  was  perfectly  unable  to  follow  the  motions
■of  the  Blanchette.  Often  she  only  touched  it  with  a single  finger  ; but  even
with  all  her  fingers  resting  on  the  board  she  never  had  the  slightest  idea  of
what  words  were  being  traced  out.  This  is  im2)ortant  to  remember,  in  view
>of  the  fact  that  five  or  six  questions  were  often  asked  consecutively  without
her  being  told  of  the  subject  that  was  being  2mrsued.  (Rule  2.)

It  struck  me  that  it  would  be  a good  thing  to  take  advantage  of  this
2'<eculiarity  on  her  2)art,  to  ask  questions  U2ion  subjects  that  it  was  impossible
for  her  to  know  anything  about.  It  will  be  noticed  that  in  some  of  the


1885.]


Automatic  Writing.


13


questions  quoted  above  (142,  120,  122),  a word  is  inserted  between  brackets.
I must  now  explain  that  in  the  original  note-book,  the  words  between
brackets  are  always  replaced  by  the  word  “Masonic.”  I had  taken  a deej)
interest  in  Masonic  archfeology.  and  I now  questioned  Planchette  on  some
subjects  connected  therewith.


Fehnutrij  14f/i.

02.  What  is  the  English  of  the  Great  Word  of  the  R.A.  ?

After  an  interruption,  of  which  I shall  speak  hereafter,  one  great  word
of  the  Degree,  but  not  the  one  I meant,  was  written,  very  slowly  and
clearly.

07.  Is  the  word  truly  genuine,  or  is  it  a made-up  one  ?

A.  Tried  to  tell  ; can’t.

08.  By  whom  was  the  word  first  used  ?

A.  Too  hard  work  for  wife.

February  IStii.

112.  AVhat  is  the  translation  of  the  Great  Triple  Word  ?

A.  (The  first  syllable  of  the  word  in  question  was  written  correctly,
and  then  it  proceeded.)  The  end  unknown.  Three  languages.
Greece.  Egypt.  Syriac.

113.  What  part  of  the  word  is  Greek  ?

A.  Meaning  unknown.

114.  When  was  the  word  first  invented  ?

A.  Told  all  I know.

115.  Who  are  you  that  know  ?

(Answer  scrawled  and  illegible.)

IIG.  Please  repeat  same  answer  legibly  ?

Manifestation  triune  j^erson.

(Here  follow  questions  117 — 122,  as  above.)

March  loth.

125,  126.  What  are  the  three  languages  of  which  the  Great  R.A.  Word  is
composed  ?

A.  Answered  all  I could  before.

127.  T^ou  said  one  part  of  the  word  was  Greek.  Which  is  it  ?

A.  Greek,  I think.

128.  Which  syllable  do  you  think  is  Greek  ?

A.  The  last.

120.  What  is  the  English  translation  of  it  ?

A.  Can’t  explain  it.

130.  If  the  last  syllable  be  Greek,  which  is  Egyptian,  as  you  said  ?

A.  I cannot  tell  you  more  than  you  know.

131.  But  w'hy,  then,  do  you  say  that  that  syllable  is  Greek  which  I think

Egyptian  1

A.  Wife  can’t  ahvays  receive  impressions.

(Here  follow'  132 — 130,  as  above.)


14


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  30,


March  2Qth.

IGG,  Of  what  language  is  the  first  syllable  of  the  Great  Triple  R.  A.  Word  ?

A.  Don’t  know.

1G7.  Yes,  you  do.*  Wliat  are  the  three  languages  of  which  the  word  is
composed  ?

A.  Greek,  Egypt,  Syriac  first  syllable  (correctly  given),  rest  unknown.
1G8.  Write  the  syllable  which  is  Syriac.

A.  (First  syllable  correctly  written.)

169.  Write  the  syllable  which  is  Egyptian.

A.  Second.

170.  Can  you  not  write  the  syllable  itself  1
A.  Third  Greek.

174.  Write  down  the  word  itself.

A.  First  tliree  and  last  two  letters  were  written  correctly,  but  four
incorrect  letters,  parti  ijhorrovml  from  another  word  of  the  scane  degree,
came  in  the  middle.

17G.  Why  do  you  write  a word  of  which  I know  nothing  ?

A.  Wife  tried  hard  to  tell  the  word,  but  could  not  quite  catch  it.

177.  Catch  it  from  whom  1
A.  Not  quite  sure.

178.  Not  quite  sure  of  what  ?

A.  I know  nothing.  WTfe  doesn’t  quite  know.

In  the  above  series  of  answers  we  have,  it  seems  to  me,  a very  remai'kable
combination  of  knowledge  and  ignorance.  There  is  a j)erfect  appreciation
of  my  thoughts,  in  the  queries  ; but  a strange,  persistent,  almost  dogged,
incapability  of  seeing  my  thoughts,  in  the  replies.  Especially  in  the  answer
to  IIG,  and  in  some  other  answers  ('which  are  not  given),  there  is  a reference
to  an  opinion  which  was  published  by  Dr.  Oliver,  wdrose  works  I had  been
carefully  reading  about  four  months  before,  but  with  whose  theory,  in  this
case,  I most  strongly  disagreed.  So  tliat  liere  was  an  opinion  intimated
which  it  was  impossible  that  the  ojoerator  could  have  been  aware  of,  and
which  the  questioner  had  absolutely  rejected  as  untenable  !

How  can  we  account  for  such  a case  as  this  ? If  it  were  merely  the
questioner’s  brain  which  transmitted  the  thoughts,  or  which  (so  to  sjoeak)
could  be  read  like  an  oiien  book  by  some  clairvoyance  on  the  part  of  the
operator — wiry  should  not  the  expected  reply  impress  itself  upon  the
operator  as  rapidly  and  as  lucidly  as  did  the  questions  ?

Still  more  forcibly  are  such  perplexities  as  these  brought  before  us  by
the  following  experiment ; —

182.  Write  out  the  prayer  used  at  the  advancement  of  a hlark  Master
Mason.

A.  Almighty  Ruler  of  tlie  Universe  and  Architect  of  all  worlds,  we
beseech  Thee  to  accept  tliis,  our  brother,  whom  we  liave  this  day
received  into  our  most  honourable  Company  of  Mark  Master  Alasons.
Grant  him  to  be  a wortliy  member  of  our  brotherhood  ; and  may  he
be  in  his  own  person  a perfect  mirror  of  all  Masonic  virtues.  Grant
tliat  all  our  doings  may  lie  to  Tliy  honour  and  glory,  and  to  the
welfare  of  all  mankind.


15


1885.]


Automatic


Writing.


This  prayer  was  written  off  iitstantaiXeorisiyiaiitl  very- rapidly.  It  is  a very
remarkable  pi’oduction  indeed.  For  the  feenefir  of  those  iv ho  are  not  mem-
bers of  the  craft,  I may  say  that  no  prayer  in  the  slightest  degree  resembling
it  is  made  use  of  in  the  Ritual  of  any  Masonic  degree- ; and  yet  it  contains
more  than  one  strictly  accurate  technicality  connected  with -the  degree  of
Mark  Mason.  My  wife  has  never  seen  any  Masonic  prayers,  wdiether  in
“ Garble, ” or  any  other  real  or  spurious  Ritual  of  the  Masonic  Order.

Here,  then,  assuredly,  was  a formula  composed  by  some  intelligence
totally  distinct  from  the  conscious  intelligence  of  either  of  the  persons
engaged  in  the  experiment.

I iiroceeded  to  inquire  as  follows  : —


183.  I do  not  know  this  prayer.  Where  is  it  to  be  found  ?

A.  Old  American  Ritual.

184.  Wbiere  can  I get  one  ?

A.  Most  likely  none  in  England.

185.  Can  you  not  write  the  prayer  that  I make  use  of  in  my  own  Lodge  ?
A.  No,  I don't  know  it.


In  these  last  answers  we  see  a new  moral  element  introduced.  There  is
evasion,  or  subterfuge,  of  a more  or  less  ingenious  kind  ; and  totally  foreign
to  the  whole  character  and  natural  disposition  of  the  operator.  A similar
attempt  at  deliberate  invention,  rather  than  plead  guilty  t<j  total  ignorance,
is  contained  in  the  following  answers  : —


May  'itli  .

255.  In  what  Masonic  degree  Avas  the  Triple  Word  first  used  ?

A.  Wife  does  not  know.

25G.  Cannot  you  tell  her  ?

A.  How  can  Avife  know  what  no  one  else  does  ?

257.  Does  no  one,  then,  know  the  ansAver  to  this  ?

A.  No  one  knoAvs  noAv.

258.  What  do  you  mean  by  “ noAv  ” ? Did  anyone  once  knoAv  ?

A.  The  last  one  avIio  kncAv  died  at  least  20  years  ago.

259.  W^hat  Avas  his  name  ?

A.  In  Amei’ica  ; don’t  knoAv  name.

And  again.  May  21.sf.

280.  Can  you  AAuite  the  Trii)le  R.A.  Word  to-night  ?

A.  Abracadabra.

281.  Wb’ong  Avord.  Try  again.

A.  Wife  can’t  Avrite  secret  Avords.

282.  Then  Avhy  did  you  pnjfess  to  Avrite  it,  the  other  day  ?

A.  I only  Avrote  Avhat  Avife  kneAv.

283.  But  if  she  knoAvs  it  Avhy  do  you  not  Avrite  it  to-night  ?

A.  You  told  her.

284.  What  did  I tell  her  ?

A.  One  day  Avhen  your  influence  over  her  Avas  veiy  strong.

(N.B.  The  ansAver  to  284  is  a case  of  “arrested  ” rei>ly  ; i.e.,  it  is  a con-
tinuation of  the  reply  to  283,  Avithout  reference  to  question  284  at  all.)


[Jan.  30,


]6


Aiiidmatic  ’TF)’itikrr.'


285.  Then  why  oToekfeli’e'ji'Vti'^fttf  itpiow.?  I

A.  Wife  can’t  understand.”

28G.  Is  it  iny  question,  or  the  answer  to  it,  that  she  can’t  understand  ?
A.  Don’t  know.

287.  What  is  the  matter  with  you  to-night  ?

A.  You  are  tired  and  so  is  wife.


I have  spoken  of  the  introduction  of  an  apparently  “new  moral  clement”
into  some  of  the  foregoing  rejdies.  I am  inclined  to  emphasise  this  pohit.
The  existence  of  a recijn’ocal  intelligence  is  clear  enough  ; and  so  long  as  this
intelligence  only  varies  in  depth  or  rapidity  of  perception,  we  have  only  to
note  occasional  diflerences  of  degree  or  quantity,  so  to  speak.  But  the
question  becomes  gi’eatly  complicated  by  the  ajq^iearance  of  a low  tone  of
moral  feeling,  and  a total  indifference  to  truth  for  its  own  sake,  coiq^led  with
what  looks  like  a morbid  dread  of  seeming  to  be  ignorant  of  the  reply  to  the
question.  The  differences  now  become  matters  of  qimlUij  rather  than  of
qaantiftj.  I wish  to  invite  very  careful  consideration  of  this  phenomenon,  of
which  1 will  now  adduce  a few  more  instances.

It  was  during  the  time  of  the  Franco-German  war  ; and  two  young
Frenchmen,  former  pupils  of  mine,  had  been  called  out  for  service.  In
order  to  test  the  intelligence,  I asked  as  follows  : —


Januarq  2W]t.

29.  Where  is  A.  H.  now  ?

A.  Safe.

(Tliis  rejdy  was  afterwards  found  to  be  correct,  although  my  friend
was  wounded  subsecpiently.)

30.  And  L.  D.  1

A.  From  home.

31.  Is  he  in  the  war  ?

A.  No.

32.  Has  he  been  engaged  in  the  war  ?

A.  Yes.

33.  In  what  country  is  he  living  ?

A.  Prisoner.

The  curious  evasion  of  the  answer  here  is  all  the  more  to  be  noticed,  as
the  ultimate  reply  was  correct.

.Subsequently,  March  19th,  I asked  : —

15G.  Who  told  you  that  L.  D.  was  imisoner  ?

A.  He  will  only  get  a slight  punishment.

157.  Please  answer  my  last  question.

A.  They  liked  his  sermon  very  much.

Here  is  a deliberate  evasion  of  a question  which  there  was  no  wish  to
answer.  Being  pressed  the  subject  is  closed.

158.  How  did  you  find  out  that  L.  P.  was  a prisoner  ?

A.  Wife's  brain  getting  bewildered.


1885.J  Automatic  Writing.  17

Later  on  in  the  year  (in  October)  I asked — the  operator  being  aware  of  the_
question  : —

313.  Whence  did  wife’s  brain  gather  the  answers  to  29  and  30  ?

A.  Wife’s  brain  knew  it,  for  slie  knew  their  characters.

In  order  to  test  the  possibility  of  prescience  in  this  intelligence,  I had
frequently  pressed  it  rather  hard  as  to  the  probable  date  of  an  event  which  I
expected  to  hapjjen  to  myself,  sooner  or  later,  but  had  no  notion  of  how
long  it  would  Vje  first.  In  reply  to  questions  4,  5,  0,  the  date  of  Christmas,
1871,  had  been  fixed  for  this  event  to  happen.  In  152  I recurred  to  the
same  subject ; and  after  two  answers,  referring  back  to  previous  questions
on  other  matters,  I again  got  the  answer  “ Very  likely  Christmas.”  I re-
presented that  circumstances  rendered  this  simply  impossible,  and  the  reply
came  : —

152.  A.  Christmas  is  your  free  time.

And  on  my  urging  that  the  event  expected  never  took  place  at  Christmas,,
it  sinqily  said  : —

153.  A.  There  will  be  this  year.

On  May  7th,  I asked  : —

267.  What  will  ....  do  to-morrow  night  ?

A.  I don’t  know.

268.  Can  you  never  foresee  what  is  going  to  hajiiien  ?

A.  No,  I can’t.

269.  Then,  how  do  you  know  what  I am  going  to  do  next  Cliristmas  ?

A.  That  is  settled  now  : it  is  not  to  be  settled  in  the  future.

270.  Who  has  settled  it,  and  when  was  it  settled  ?

A.  Why  do  you  want  to  know  ?

271.  That  I may  verify  your  statment  when  the  time  comes.

A.  settled  it  about  three  months  ago.

272.  Who  proposed  it  ?

A.  M.  and  P.  (names  written  at  full  of  two  persons  who  were  the
most  probable  ones  to  have  been  concerned  in  the  matter.)

Now  the  whole  of  these  reidies  evince  an  attenqit  to  keep  uji  consistency,
and  every  one  of  them  was  pure  and  absolute  fiction,  and  the  readiness
with  wliich  every  query  was  met  was  fully  equalled  by  the  audacious  un-
scrupulousness of  the  inventive  art  which  persisted  in  defending  an  absolutely
impossible  position  to  which  the  first  answers  stood  committed,  some  months
before.

Of  ingenious  evasion  pure  and  sinqile  the  following  are  good  examples

18.  What  is  the  matter  with  old  J.  ? (an  aged  parishioner  of  mine,  who  was

ill  at  the  time.)

An  “arrested”  answer  was  given;  being  the  last  half  of  the  answer
to  17.

19.  Please  answer  mv  question  as  to  Mr.  J.  ?

A.  No.


c


18


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  30,


20.  Can  you  not,  or  will  you  not  ?

A.  Don  (the  pencil  then  slip2)ed  off  the  paper).

21.  Question  repeated.

A.  Don't  know.

22.  Will  he  get  better  ? Do  you  know  ?

A.  Yes.

23.  Is  it  “Yes”  to  the  first  question,  or  to  the  second?  Answer  one  or

two.

A.  Two.

24.  Is  it  wrong  in  me  to  ask  ?

A.  No.

25.  Then  will  Mr.  .J.  die  in  this  illness,  or  no  ?

A.  Soon.  (This  was  not  the  case  : he  lived  several  years.)

2G.  In  how  many  weeks  ? Answer  in  figures.

A.  I won’t  tell.

In  the  autumn  a friend  who  was  staying  with  me  had  made  a big  find  of
some  (ajqjarently)  “ chipjmd  flints,”  on  the  Dorsetshire  downs.  I was
doubtful  myself  of  their  true  character,  and  my  friend  pro2)Osed  to  ask
Planchette.  Accordingly  I in(2uired  : —

September  ord.

305.  What  are  the  flints  which  William  found  to-day  ?

A.  You  do  not  ex2Ject  me  to  know  things  so  far  back.

I have  referred  above  to  “arrested”  or  “retarded”  answers.  I use
these  terms  to  denote  two  modes  in  which  a curious  ilogged  2mrtinacity  was
manifested.  Sometimes  the  23encil  would  come  to  its  usual  dead  sto2),  and,
the  sense  being  a2)2)arently  complete,  a new  question  would  be  asked  ; but
Planchette  at  once  went  on  with  an  ex2)ansion  of  its  2>revious  re2dy.  This  is
the  “arrested”  answer.  The  “retarded”  answer  is  when  the  intelligence
at  work  seems  as  though  it  were  obliged  to  relieve  itself  of  some  2mevious
im2n’ession,  before  it  could  turn  its  attention  to  a new  line  of  thought.

The  following  are  interesting  cases  of  the  “ retarded”  answer  : —

Janua.i’ii  30f/(.

A friend  and  his  wife  were  2>resent  and  asked  to  2i'-'t  questions.  The
gentleman  was  not  merely  incredulous,  but  rather  un2)leasantly  so.  His
question  was  one  the  answer  to  which  I did  not  know,  namely  : —

40.  What  were  the  names  given  to  Sirs.  E.’s  baby  ?

The  answer  was  (2uite  unintelligible.

41.  The  answer  is  illegible.  Please  re2)eat  it.

A.  Ellen  Theresa.

This  ret^dy  is  very  curious.  It  was  quite  wrong,  neither  of  these  names
having  been  given  ; Imt  both  of  them  are  family  names  of  the  near  relations
of  the  querist’s  wife,  who  was  sitting  by.

42.  Please  give  the  names  of  I\Irs.  E.’s  baby.

A.  I can’t  tell.


1885.]


Automatic  Writing.


19


43.  Can  you  give  the  name  of  Mrs.  P.’s  last  baby  but  one  ?

A.  Too  many  people.

It  was  plain  that  some  disturbing  influence  was  at  work  ; and  the
experiment  was  abandoned.

Two  days  later — Februaiy  1st — we  commenced  again  ; —

47.  Give  the  names  of  Mrs.  P.’s  baby,  who  is  my  godson.

Although  myself  and  wife  were  alone  as  usual,  the  instrument  absolutely
refused  to  move.  After  waiting  a long  time,  I thought  it  best  to  break  into
a new  line,  and  asked  : —

48.  What  name  shall  we  give  to  our  new  dog  ?

The  reply  came  at  once .

A.  Yesterday  was  not  a fair  trial.

This  is  the  more  noticeable  as  it  was  not  “yesterday,”  but  the  day
before,  that  the  failure  had  taken  place,  which  was  evidently  weighing  on
Planchette's  intelligence.

I asked  : —

49.  Why  was  not  yesterday  a fair  trial  ?

A.  Dog.

(Here  is  an  endeavour  to  catch  up  the  idea  of  question  48. )

oO.  Why  was  not  yesterday  a fair  trial  ?

A.  Want  strength.

51.  Who  wants  strength  ?

A.  Yes.

52.  Who  is  it  that  wants  strength  ? You,  or  wife  I

A.  Wife.

A similar  case  occurred  again  on  Februaiy  14th.  A friend  and  his  sister
* were  present,  and  were  inclined  to  ridicule  the  whole  matter.  IMy  friend
asked,  “Of  whom  am  I thinking?”  Planchette  made  two  very jirobable,  but
mistaken,  guesses.  He  then  asked  to  be  told  the  population  of  his  parish,
and  the  answer  was  310  ; whereas  the  correct  figures  were  510  ; and,  as  my
wife  showed  signs  of  exhaustion,  the  questions  were  abandoned.

In  the  evening  1 recommenced  my  Masonic  test  questions  ; and  asked
(92)  “ What  is  the  English  of  the  Great  Word  of  the  R.A.  ?”  and  was  much
amused  when  the  reply  began  : “ Miss  B.”  (my  friend’s  sister)  and  there  was
arrested.  I proceeded.

93.  Please  explain  your  answer.

A.  Fidgets  wife.

The  completion  of  the  “ arrested”  answer  perfects  the  “ retarded  ” answer.
Planchette  was  evidently  still  full  of  the  last  strong  impression  of  the  after-
noon's failure,  and  was  obliged  to  offer  an  explanation  before  it  would
proceed  to  other  business.

An  excellent  case  of  totally  independent  answering,  coupled  with  a sense
of  humour,  was  manifested  on  the  following  occasion.

r


O


20


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  30,


April

We  had  all  been  a good  deal  worried  about  several  matters,  and  on
asking  the  first  (question  of  the  evening,  the  Planchette  refused  to  write
words,  but  after  some  lines  of  unintelligible  scribble,  drew  the  profile  of  a
hideous  face.  I went  on  : —

1101.  Answer  unintelligible.

A.  Can’t  see  the  question.  (Then  it  drew  a facsimile  of  the  previous
face.)

202.  Why  do  you  draw  that  face  at  the  end  ?

A.  A little  amusement.

203.  Is  the  face  a portrait  of  any  one  ?

A.  Wife  would  like  to  amuse  you.

204.  Is  the  face  intended  to  be  a jtortrait  ?

A.  Of  course.

20.0.  Of  whom,  then,  is  it  a portrait?

A.  When  people  are  sad  they  should  be  amused.

200.  Of  whom  is  the  face  a ])ortrait  ?

A.  You  know  (pnte  well.

207.  I don’t.  Please  answer.

A.  Possibly  I know  better.

208.  I daresay,  but  please  answer.

(Only  unintelligilile  floiu-Lshes  made.)

200.  Question  repeated.

A.  What  you  need.  (This,  I imagine,  is  the  arrested  conclusion  of  207.)

Later  on,  after  much  evasion  to  other  questions,  I said  : —

221.  Answer  my  question,  and  don’t  talk  rubbish.

A.  Don’t  be  cross.

A few  minutes  later,  in  reply  to  question  230,  Plancliette  drew  a wavy
line,  and  then  wrote  “pretty  little  man.”

231.  Please  explain,  and  don’t  chaff.

(It  drew  the  same  profile  as  in  reply  to  201.)

232.  Please  reply.

(It  drew  something  like  a wall  and  battlemented  tower.)

2.33.  Don't  be  ridiculous,  and  answer.

A.  D.’s  likeness  (my  wife’s  sister).

234.  Either  answer  my  question,  or  say  you  will  not.

A.  You  don’t  understand  fun.

23.0.  Yes,  I do  ; but  I don’t  want  fun  now.  Please  answer.

A.  It  is  much  better  to  be  silly  sometimes  than  wise  always.

23G.  I quite  agree  with  you.  Nevertheless,  answer  my  question.

A.  Too  much  work  and  no  play  makes  Jack  a dull  boy.

237.  Will  you  answer,  or  no  ?

A.  You  are  sleepy.

238.  Answer  my  question.

(Reply  too  faint  to  be  read.)

2.30.  Please  repeat,  distinctly.

A.  It  is  time  to  go  to  sleep — go  to  bed.


1885.]


Automatic  Writing.


21


May  10th.

Plancliette  again  gave  us  an  example  of  its  sense  of  the  humorous.

I had  been  obliged  at  short  notice  to  jn’ovide  a substitute  for  my  curate  at
a small  lonely  parish  in  the  Dorset  hills,  several  miles  away  from  my  own
house.  I had  to  engage  a clergj’inan  wlio  was  not  a favourable  sj)ecimen  of
his  profession,  as  I could  procure  no  one  else  in  time  to  get  the  Sunday  s
work  done.  He  was  much  amused  Avith  Plancliette,  and  desired  to  ask  : —

277 . Hoav  should  a bachelor  live  in  this  neighbourhood  ?

(The  answer  Avas  illegible.)

278.  Please  rejieat  ansAver.

A.  Three  months.

(Plancliette  evidently  did  not  catch  the  exact  (|uery.)

279.  I did  not  ask  how  long,  but  hoic  ?

A.  Eating  and  drinking  and  sleeping  and  smoking.

That  clergyman  never  consulted  Plancliette  again.

I Avill  conclude  Avith  a very  pretty  instance  of  a mistake  instantly  cor-
rected . It  Avas  on  the  same  eA'ening,  IMay  10th  ; I had  to  preach  on  the
folloAAung  Whit-Monday,  on  the  occasion  of  laying  a foundation  stone  Avith
Masonic  ceremonial,  so  I asked  : —

275.  Give  me  a text  for  Whit-iMonday’s  sermon  ?

A.  If  I go  not  aAvay,  the  Comforter  Avill  not  come  to  you.

The  selection  of  a subject  suitable  for  IMMs^iatide  is  plainly  the  first  idea
caught  by  the  intelligence  ; so  I proceeded  ; —

276.  That  Avill  not  do  for  my  subject.  I Avant  a text  for  tlie  Monday's

sermon.

A.  Let  brotherly  love  continue.

I have  had  a tAvofold  object  in  quoting  the  foregoing  large  number  of
questions  and  ansAA'ers,  Avhich,  in,  theniselces,  are  often  criA'ial  and  Avorthless.

I.  My  first  aim  has  been  to  prove  incontestably  the  possibility  of
absolutely  perfect  and  instantaneous  transmission  of  thought  from  one
brain  to  another,  although  the  recipient  brain  Avas  in  a normal  state,  and
entirely  axiart  from  any  so-called  “magnetic,”  mesmeric,  or  other  hyimotic
influences.  I am  not  aAvare  of  any  exactly  parallel  experiments  having  as
yet  been  carefully  registered  and  recorded.

II.  But  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  close  this  paper  Avithout  again  very
urgently  calling  attention  to  AA'hat  I liaA'e  termed  the  Ioav'  “mora/  ” character
of  the  re-acting  intelligence.

We  are  all  familiar  Avith  this  jhienomenon  in  the  average  experience  of
so-called  sjjiritxtal  coidrols,”  but  in  these  cases  the  ‘‘^controlled”  medium
is  more  or  less  hypnotic  and  unconscious.  And  I think  tliat  tlie  recurrence
of  the  same  phenomenon  in  the  case  of  a person  in  jjerfect  health,  and  in  tlie
enjoyment  of  full  consciousness,  is  AA’orthy  of  A^ery  serious  consideration.

‘‘‘‘  Hypotheses  nonjiiigo”  is  an  absolutely  necessary  rule  for  psychical
inquirers  at  the  present  time.  Our  Avork  is  to  amass  facts  for  some  master-
mind of  a future  generation  to  piece  together,  hlost  assuredly  I shall  offer
no  theory  to  explain  this  curious  appearance  of  Avhat  looks  like  the  presence
of  a “ third  centre  of  intelligence,”  distinct  from  the  conscious  intelligence


22


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  30,


and  character  of  either  of  the  two  parties  engaged  in  tlie  experiments.  Bub
I should  like  to  suggest  two  questions,  which  apjiear  to  me  to  he  well  worth
the  careful  consideration  of  biologists  and  psychologists.

1.  Is  this  “ third  intelligence  ” analogous  to  the  “dual  state,”  the  exis-
tence of  which,  in  a few  extreme  and  most  interesting  cases,  is  now  well
established?  Is  there  a latent  potentiality  of  a “ dual  state  ” existing  in
every  brain,  and  are  the  few  very  striking  phenomena  which  have  as  yet
been  noticed  and  published  only  the  exceptional  developments  of  a state
which  is  inherent  in  most,  or  even  in  all,  brains  ?

2.  Is  it  possible  that  this  “dual  state  ” arises  from  the  fact  that  we
habitually  use  only  one  of  the  cerebral  hemispheres  for  the  transaction  of  our
ordinary  brain-work  ; leaving  the  other,  so  to  speak,  untrained  and
undiscijdined  ? and  so,  if  the  untrained  side  of  the  brain  be  suddenly
stimulated  to  action,  its  behaviour  is  aj^t  to  resemble  that  of  a child,  whose
education  has  not  beeir  proj)erly  attended  to.  The  percipient  powers  of  such
a child  may  be  astonishingly  acute,  and  the  dejjth  of  its  intuitive  remarks
and  replies  will  often  astonish  everybody  that  associates  with  it.  Neither
will  it  be  habitually  deceptive,  or  otherwise  immoral  ; but  its  morality  is
simply  a matter  of  convenience.  It  cannot  bear  to  be  put  in  the  wrong,
and  will  never  acknowledge  itself  to  have  been  wrong.  It  will  lie  per-
sistently ; not  for  the  sake  of  deceiving,  but  in  order  to  prove  itself  to
have  been  in  the  right,  and  to  claim  the  position  of  a martyr,  if  punished.
We  are  all  familiar  with  such  characters  ; especially  in  young  girls  at  a
critical  jjeriod  of  life  ; w'hen  it  has  been  said  that  for  a year  or  two  many
girls  have  “ no  conscience  whatever.”  In  such  cases  no  doubt  physical
causes  are  sufficient  t(j  hold  the  moral  training  of  childhood  in  abeyance,  for
a time,  and  to  produce  the  appearance  of  a morality  far  below  what  the
.same  person  evinced  a few  years  before,  or  wdll  evince  a few  years  later.
May  not  the  “untrained  half”  of  the  organ  of  mind,  even  in  the  most
pure  and  truthful  characters,  be  ca2)able  of  manifesting  similar  tendencies,
and  of  producing,  at  all  events,  the  appearance  moral  deficiencies
which  are  tcjtally  fcjreign  t(.)  the  well-trained  and  disciplined  portion  of
the  brain  which  is  ordinarily  made  use  of  ?

P.  H.  New’nham.

Before  proceeding  to  further  comment,  I will  make  one  or  two
additional  citations  from  the  diary  befoi’e  me.

We  have  had  a case  where  a thermometrical  reading  was  given  wdtli
substantial  correctness,  but  not  as  either  ]\Ir.  or  Mrs.  N.  would  have
given  it.  Here  is  a case  wdiere  a barometrical  reading  is  given
tncorrectly,  ljut  as  either  Mr.  or  Mrs.  N.  might  have  guessed  it  to  be.

85.  Write  in  figures  the  lowest  barcjmetrical  reading  here  last  month.

A.  21  (last  figure  doubtful  ; then  stopped).

86.  Answer  incomplete.  Please  repeat.

A.  29.  35.  Tired.

“ The  addition  of  tired,  of  its  owur  accord,”  says  Mr.  Newnham,
“seems  to  plead  for  pardon,  if  wrong.”  That  is  to  say  that  to-ward.s
the  end  of  a sitting  the  answers  generally  become  vaguer,  and  fatigue
is  alleged  as  an  excuse.


1885.]


Automatic  Writing.


23


In  fact,  the  transmission  of  thought,  as  already  observed,  was  not
always  effective.  Sometimes  the  Planchette  persisted  in  expressing
some  idea  of  its  own  ; sometimes  it  only  gradually  came  to  the  know-
ledge of  the  subject  of  the  question.

48.  What  name  shall  we  give  to  our  new  dog  ?

A.  Yesterday  was  not  a fair  trial.

40.  Why  was  not  yesterday  a fair  trial  ?

A.  Dog.

And  again  : —

108 . What  do  I mean  by  chaffing  C . about  a lilac  tree  ?

A.  Temper  and  imagination.

100.  You  are  thinking  of  somebody  else.  Please  reply  to  my  question.

A.  Lilacs.

Mr.  Newnham,  in  his  notes,' is  careful  to  state  that  in  the  case  of
question  108  Mrs.  Newnham  “knew  that  there  was  some  chaff  in  the
question,  but  did  not  know  against  whom  the  chaff  was.”  The  vague
answer,  “ temper  and  imagination,”  was,  therefore,  just  such  as  her
conscious  mind  alone  might  have  produced.*  But  the  answer  to  109
shows  that  her  unconscious  mind  was  beginning  to  get  hold  of  the
question,  in  just  the  fragmentary  manner  in  which  “dog”  was  given
before.

It  will  have  been  observed  that  the  replies  throughout  show  very
little  originality  from  the  side  of  the  ivriters  brain.  They  are  for  the
most  part  reflections  of  the  questioner’s  thoughts,  helped  out  by  poor
jokes  and  evasions.  I will  conclude  these  quotations  with  one  answer
which  seems  to  show  an  independent  originative  effort  on  the  writer’s
side.

50.  What  name  shall  we  give  to  our  new  dog  ? Nipen.

“The  name  of  Nipen,”  adds  Mr.  Newnham,  ^Avom  Feats  on  the
Fiord,  shot  into  the  operator’s  brain  just  as  the  question  was  asked.”

Now  Mr.  Newnham  had  been  thinking  of  another  name,  and  the
choice  of  the  name  of  the  tricksy  Norwegian  sprite  came,  as  far  as  we
can  tell,  wholly  from  the  operator’s  mind.  Po.ssibly  some  unusual
vivacity  in  the  suggestion  carried  it  over  the  threshold, — from  the
writer’s  unconscious  into  her  conscious  mind, — as  she  was  in  the  act  of
writing  it  down.  It  will  be  remembered,  of  course,  that  she  had  no
conscious  knowledge  as  to  what  was  the  question  asked.

But  what,  it  may  fairly  be  asked  at  this  point,  do  I mean  by  “ the
unconscious  mind  ” ? Is  this  a mere  synonym  for  the  “ complex
unconscious  cerebration  ” of  whicli  I spoke  in  my  first  paper  1 or  am
I postulating  some  distinct  focus  of  psychical  action, — co-ordinate,  in
some  sense,  with  the  conscious  mind  ?

* “ I should  add,”  says  IMr.  Newnham,  in  a letter  to  me,  “ that  these  two
words  formed  part  of  habitual  family  ‘ chaff  ’ among  ourselves.  ”


24


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  30,


At  the  risk  of  tediousness,  I must  endeavour  to  answer  this  question
as  fully  as  possible.  For  in  no  subject  is  it  more  necessary  than  in
psychical  research  to  define  the  meaning  of  new  terms,  or  terms  used
in  a new  sense,  as  soon  as  they  are  introduced.  In  no  subject  is
there  a greater  danger  of  the  illicit  extension  of  established  scientific
phraseology.  A metaphor,  used  at  first  avowedly  as  a metaphor,  and
then  insensibly  sliding  into  an  assertion  of  fact,  may  give  a spurious
look  of  orthodoxy  to  what  is  really  no  more  than  an  unverified
hypothesis.  The  name,  for  instance,  of  “ animal  magnetism,”  suggested
at  first  by  some  real,  though  probably  superficial  analogies,  has  been  the
source  of  many  a page  of  wild  theory  and  prepossessed  observation.
It  is  better  to  give  the  new  thing  a new  name, — descidptive  like
“hypnotism,”  historical  like  “mesmerism,”  or  even  purely  arbitrary
like  “ odic  force,”  and  then  to  leave  its  reality  to  be  established  by
independent  observation  and  argument.

To  apply  this  principle  to  the  present  case.  In  the  discussion  on
“ Clelia,”  in  my  last  paper,  I certainly  pushed  the  phrase,  “ unconscious
cerebration,”  as  far  as  it  can,  with  any  fairness,  be  made  to  go.  The
accepted  writers  on  unconscious  cerebration  (of  whom  Dr.  Carpenter
may  be  taken  as  the  pidncijjal  English  representative)  ti’eat  this
unconscious  action  of  the  Ijraiii  as  a process  which,  though  distinct  from,
is  suhsidiarg  to,  consciousness,  as  a subaqueous  agitation  which  stii’s
the  conscious  surface,  not  as  a stream  which  meets  the  stream  of
consciousness,  still  less  as  an  earthquake-wave,  which  is  capable  of
efi'acing  and  overwhelming  it.  But  in  “ Clelia  ” we  saw  produced,  for  the
first  time,  pei’haps,  in  psycho-physical  discussions,  an  instance  of  a sane
and  waking  man  holding  a colloquy,  so  to  speak,  witli  liis  own  dream  ;
an  instance,  that  is  to  say,  where  the  unconscious  cerebral  action  was
not  subordinated  to  the  conscious, — did  not  depend  for  its  manifestation
on  the  direction  of  the  conscious  attention  elsewhere,  but  presented  itself
as  co-ordinate  with  the  conscious  action,  and  as  able  to  force  itself  upon
the  attention  of  the  waking  mind.  How  different  this  is  from  the  stock
examples  will  be  seen  at  a glance.  When  Gauss  answers  the  servant-
maid  who  announces  that  his  wife  is  dying,  with,  “ Tell  lier  to  wait  till
I come,”  it  is  because  the  absorption  of  his  conscious  attention — his
highest  centres* — in  a train  of  abstract  reasoning,  leaves  certain  lower

* I use  the  term  “ lughest  centres  ” as  the  hest-autliorised  expression  for
the  cerebral  correlative  of  conscious  (or  at  least  complex)  mentation.  See,  for
instance,  Hughlings-Jackson  (“  Croonian  Lectures,”  1884,  p.  4.)  “The triple
conclusion  come  to  is  that  the  highest  centres,  which  are  the  climax  of
nervous  evolution,  and  which  make  up  the  ‘ organ  of  mind  ’ (or  physical  basis  of
consciousness),  are  the  least  organised,  the  most  complex,  and  the  most
voluntary.”  Tlie  term  “unconscious  mentation”  is  used  deliberately;  but  I
must  defer  its  defence  till  a future  occasion,  and  the  reader  who  demurs  to
it  may  substitute  “ cerebration  ” without  injury  to  the  present  argument.


1885.1


Automatic  Writing.


25


centres  free  to  shape,  unchecked,  the  colbereyit,  but  not  altogether
appropriate,  reply.  Even  when  the  somnambulist  solves  in  sleep  the
problem  which  baffled  him  when  waking,  the  high  centres  wliicli  thus
act  automatically  are  enabled  to  do  so  only  because  the  habitual
conscious  mentation  is  temporarily  checked  by  profound  sleep.  If
Gauss  had  given  his  full  attention  to  what  the  maid-servant  said,  lie
wmuld  have  made  some  more  logical  answer.  And,  conversely,  if  the
somnambulist  had  woke  up  while  he  was  writing  out  the  problem,  he
would  have  been  at  a loss  as  to  the  next  steji.  In  either  case  the
manifestation,  whether  more  or  less  intelligent,  of  the  unconscious
mentation  depends  on  the  inhibition,  or  the  diversion,  of  the  conscious
mentation.  But  in  the  “ Clelia  ” case,  the  unconscious  mentation
flowed  on  inter  currently  with  the  conscious.  It  asserted  for  itself  a kind
of  co-ordinate  position,  and  employed  the  waking  hand  to  write  anagrams
which  the  waking  brain  found  a difficulty  in  solving.

It  must  be  confessed,  therefore,  that  in  advancing  this  case  I
am  already  overpassing  very  considerably  the  recognised  limits  of
unconscious  cerebration.  And,  moreover,  I do  not  even  advance  the
“ Clelia  ” case  as  in  my  view  an  altogether  exceptional  one.  I
conceive,  rather,  that  this  kind  of  active  duality  of  mentation — this
kind  of  colloquy  between  a conscious  and  an  unconscious  self — is  not  a
rare,  but  a fairly  common  phenomenon.  I believe  that  I have
personally  witnessed  it,  in  slightly  different  forms,  in  at  least  1 2 cases
during  the  past  1 2 years.  Most  of  the  cases,  however,  of  which  I speak,
are  not  suitable  for  quotation  here,  for  they  would  not  in  themselves
have  px’oved  the  active  duality  of  the  mind,  since  they  did  not  contain
— what  the  “ Clelia  ” case  did  contain — internal  proof  of  that  duality
inherent  in  the  very  nature  of  the  messages  written.  I ha\  e preferred,
therefore,  to  leave  it  to  my  readers  to  repeat  the  experiment  for  them-
selves, or  with  ti’usted  friends,  and  thus  to  acquire  that  sidgective
certainty  which  the  automatist  soon  feels,  that  his  conscious  mentation
is  not  supplying  the  written  answers  which  flow  from  his  pen.

I must,  however,  interrupt  my  argument  to  add  one  more  case,
precisely  parallel  with  “ Clelia,”  with  which  Professor  Sidgwick  has
furnished  me,  from  his  own  experience  with  an  intimate  friend.

The  experiences  which  I mentioned  to  you  as  similar  to  those  described
in  your  paper — so  far  as  the  mere  effects  of  unconscious  cerebration  are
concerned — occurred  about  20  years  ago.  An  intimate  friend  of  mine
who  had  interested  himself  somewhat  in  Siuritualism,  and  had  read  Kardec’s
book,  discovered  almost  by  accident  that  his  hand  could  write,  without  any
conscious  volition  on  his  part,  words  conveying  an  intelligible  meaning — in
fact,  what  puiqxorted  to  be  communications  of  departed  spirits.  He  asked
me  to  come  and  stay  with  him,  in  order  to  investigate  the  phenomenon  ; he
had  been  rather  struck  by  some  things  in  Kardec’s  book,  and  was  quite  dis-


26


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  30,


posed  to  entertain  the  hypothesis  that  the  writing  might  be  due  to  something
}uore  than  unconscious  cerebration,  if  it  should  turn  out  that  it  could  give
accurate  information  on  facts  unknown  to  him.  The  experiments,  however,
that  we  made  in  order  to  test  tliis  always  failed  to  show  anything  in  the
statements  written  down  that  might  not  have  been  due  to  tlie  working  of  his
own  brain  ; and  at  the  end  of  my  visit  we  were  both  agreed  that  there  was
no  ground  for  attributing  the  phenomenon  to  any  other  cause  but  unconscious
cerebration.  At  the  same  time  we  were  continually  surprised  by  evidences
of  the  extent  to  which  his  unconscious  self  was  able  to  puzzle  his  conscious
mind.  As  a rule,  he  knew  what  he  was  writing,  though  he  wrote  involun-
tarily ; but  from  time  to  time  he  used  to  form  words  or  conjunctions  of
letters  which  we  were  unable  to  make  out  at  first,  though  they  had  a mean-
ing which  we  ultimately  discovered.  Thus  one  evening,  just  as  we  were
about  to  break  up,  the  capital  letters  KIIAIRETE  were  written  ; their
meaning  will  not  be  obscure  to  you,  but  it  so  hajipened  that  it  did  not  at  first
occur  to  us  that  K H represented  the  Greek  so  that  we  had  no  idea  what  the
letters  meant,  and  tried  various  solutions  till  the  true  signification  (“Fare-
well”) suddenly  flashed  upon  my  mind.  On  another  occasion  I asked  a question
of  the  supposed  communicating  intelligence,  and  requested  that  the  answer
might  be  given  in  German,  a language  which  my  friend  was  unable  to  read
or  write,  though  he  had  learnt  to  speak  one  or  two  words  while  travelling  in
the  country.  His  hand  proceeded  to  write  what  was  apparently  one  long
word,  which  seemed  to  him  absolutely  without  meaning  ; but  when  I came
to  read  it  I could  see  that  it  was  composed  of  a number  of  German  words,
though  jmt  together  without  proper  grammatical  terminations  ; and  that
these  words  smigested — though  they  could  hardly  be  said  to  convey — what
would  have  been  a 2)roper  and  significant  answer  to  my  question.  The
words  were  all  common  words,  such  as  he  might  have  heard  in  conversation  ;
and  when  I had  sejtarated  them,  and  told  him  their  meaning,  he  seemed
faintly  to  recognise  some  of  them.

Sometimes,  again,  when  we  tried  to  get  correct  information  as  to  facts
unknown  to  either  of  us,  the  result  was  curious  as  showing  an  apparently
elaborate  attempt  on  the  part  of  my  friend’s  unconscious  self  to  deceive  his
conscious  self.  I remember  (e.y.)  that  one  night  we  got  written  down  what
jmrported  to  be  the  first  sentence  in  a leading  article  of  the  Times  that  had
just  been  written  and  would  appear  next  morning.  The  sentence  was  in
the  familiar  style  of  Printing  House  Square  ; but  I need  not  say  that  when
we  came  down  to  breakfast  next  morning  we  did  not  find  it  in  the  printed
columns.  My  friend  immediately  placed  his  hand  on  a piece  of  paper  ; and
there  came,  involuntarily  written  in  the  usual  way,  a long  rigmarole  of
explanation  to  the  effect  that  the  article  originally  written,  containing  the
sentence  that  we  had  got^  the  night  before,  had  been  cancelled  at  the  last
moment  by  the  editor  in  consequence  of  some  unexpected  political  exigency,
and  another  article  hastily  substituted.  And  similarly  in  other  cases  when
statements  involuntarily  written  were  ascertained  to  be  false,  explanations
were  written  exhibiting  the  kind  of  ingenuity  which  a fairly  inventive  hoaxer
might  show  when  driven  into  a corner.

If  I had  not  had  absolute  reliance  on  my  friend’s  bona  Jides,  1 might  have
supposed  that  he  was  mystifying  me  ; but  I could  not  doubt  that  his  curiosity


1S85.]


Automatic  Writing.


27


as  to  the  result  of  the  experiments  was  greater  than  mine,  and  that  he  had
no  conscious  desire  to  make  me  believe  that  the  phenomenon  was  an}-thing
more  than  the  result  of  unconscious  cerebration.

I am  sorry  that  the  notes  I took  at  the  time  have  been  destroyed  ; but  I
have  no  doubt  that  what  I have  just  written  is  accurately  remembered.

I have  said  that  the  vn-iter  usually  knew  what  he  was  writing.  This  was
not  the  case  in  his  first  trials,  when  the  writing  came  in  an  abrupt,  jerky,  and
irregular  way,  and  he  rarely  knew  what  he  had  written  till  he  looked  at  it.
But  after  the  first  few  trials,  the  flow  of  unconscious  action  became  even  and
steady,  like  that  of  ordinary  conscious  handwritmg  ; and  then  he  generally
■ — though  not  always — knew  just  before  each  word  was  written  what  it
would  be  ; so  that  when  the  statements  made  were  entirely  contrary  to  our
expectation — as  was  often  the  case — his  surprise  used  to  come  just  before  the
word  was  actuallj'  written.  jj  Sidgwick


I repeat,  then,  that  in  uiy  view  such  cases  as  this  are  not  excep-
tional, not  extreme  ; tliat  they  represent  a degree  of  dual  action  to
which  perhajas  one  person  in  a hundred  could  by  pei’sistent  effort  attain.

It  must  be  repeated,  then,  that  this  conclusion  is  already  far  enough
from  the  accredited  -siew  as  to  the  extent  of  the  brain’s  unconscious
operation.  A secondary  seif — if  I may  coin  the  phrase — is  thus
gradually  postulated, — a latent  capacity,  at  any  rate,  in  an  appreciable
fraction  of  mankind,  of  developing  or  manifesting  a second  focus  of
cerebral  energy  which  is  apparently  neither  fugitive  nor  incidental
merely — a delirium  or  a dream — but  may  possess,  for  a time  at  least,  a
kind  of  continuous  individuality,  a purposive  activity  of  its  own.*

But,  of  course,  a still  further  step  away  from  physiological  orthodoxy
is  made  when  Mr.  Aewnham’s  case  is  set  before  the  reader.  For  here
we  have,  in  fact,  two  innovations  together;  blended,  indeed,  at  first  sight
into  one,but  manifest  on  inspection  as  separate  marvels  which  assui'edly
complicate,  though  they  may  ultimately  help  to  explain  one  another.

For,  first,  in  Mr.  Xewnham’s  case,  we  have  the  telepathic  com-
munication of  one  mind  with  another,  the  transmission  of  thought  with-
out the  agency  of  the  senses,  on  which,  in  other  forms  of  experiment,
we  have  so  often  insisted,  but  which  has  not  yet  been  generally  accepted
by  the  scientific  world.  And,  secondly,  we  have  the  prolonged


* While  this  paper  is  passing  through  the  press  I have  received  Hellenbach’s
just  published  “ Geburt  und  Tod”  (Vienna,  1SS.5),  in  which  conclusions  much
resembling  these  are  advocateil,  with  some  singular,  even  verbal,  coincidences
with  an  article  on  “Automatic  Writing”  which  I published  in  the  Contemporary
Review  for  February  last,  and  which  Herr  Hellenbach  cannot  possibly  have
seen.  That  two  persons  should  independently  hit  on  so  bizarre  a metaphor  as
“ a blue  and  a yellow  consciou-sness,”  might  seem  an  impossible  chance  ; but
see  Contemporary  Review,  18S.5,  p.  234  ; “Geburt  und  Tod,”  p.  66.  Baron
du  Prel’s  “ Philosophie  der  Mystik  ” (Leipzig,  1885)  moves  on  somewhat  the
.same  line  of  argument,  which  has,  of  course,  been  advanced,  with  more  or  less
distinctness,  by  many  previous  writers.


28


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  30,


manifestation  of  a secondarg  or  inner  selj",  which  is,  as  it  would  seem,
no  mere  fragment  or  reflection  of  tlie  primary  self,  hut  an  entity  thus
far,  at  least,  independent  that  it  can  accpiire  knowledge  which  the
primary  self  has  no  means  of  reaching.  It  is  the  secondary  self,  that  is
to  say,  which  receives  or  recognises  the  telepathic  impact,  which  in  some
way  or  other  knows  wdiat  questions  Mr.  Xewnham  is  writing,  and  in
some  way  or  other  furnishes  an  intelligent  reply.

Now  this  second  marvel,  or  problem,  is  easily  seen  to  be  a problem
quite  separate  from  the  first.  It  is  quite  possible  to  imagine  telepathy
without  assuming  an  unconscious  self.  It  is  quite  possible,  for  instance,
to  conceive  of  a “ brain-wave,”  subtler,  indeed,  than  the  air-wave
which  carries  the  voice,  even  than  the  ether-wave  which  carries  the
glance — but  carrying  an  impression  which  is  caught  in  the  same  way  as
voice  or  glance  by  the  percipient’s  voluntary  attention  and  conscious
strain.  And  it  is  quite  possible,  on  the  other  hand,  to  imagine  an
unconscious  self  behind  the  self  that  we  know,  without  including
telepathy  among  the  attributes  of  that  unconscious  self  at  all.  From
the  metaphysical  point  of  view,  I need  hardly  say,  every  supposition
that  can  well  be  made  about  the  self  has  been  made  again  and  again
before  telepathy  was  heard  of.  And  if  there  be  more  of  novelty  in
this  psycho-physical  conception  of  a secondary  self  possessing  our
brains,  as  it  were,  in  a kind  of  sleeping  co-partnership,  and  utilising
our  members  when  it  pleases  him,  for  his  private  ends,  yet  this  concep-
tion, with  all  its  hizctrrerie,  by  no  means  involves  the  assumption  that
the  sleeping  partner  is  in  the  habit  of  receiving  telegrams  which  his
more  conspicuous  coadjutor  is  unable  to  open  or  interpret.

Yet  it  is  to  some  such  assumption  as  this  that  Mr.  Newnham’s  case,
if  steadily  looked  at,  is  seen  to  have  led  us.  And  it  was  to  some  such
complexity  of  problems  as  tliis  that  I looked  forward  when,  at  the
beginning  of  these  papers,  I spoke  of  the  attractiveness  of  automatic
writing  as  a subject  for  inquiry  as  largely  dei’ived  from  its  direct  bearing
on  the  relation  of  cojiscionsness  to  telepathy.

For  I am  not  without  hope  that  this  very  comjDlication  of  the
unknown  telepathic  impact  with  the  unknown  secondary  self,  may
admit  of  being  so  handled  as  to  throw  some  light  on  the  nature  of  the
problems  involved  in  both  the  one  and  the  other.

Our  object,  let  us  say,  is  to  possess  ourselves  of  a message,  couched  in
we  know  not  what  tongue  and  conveyed  by  we  know  not  what  agency.
We  learn  only  that  the  message  will  be  received  at  a certain  house
where  we  see  an  indecipherable  inscription  over  the  door.  We  know
then  that  this  house,  (which  in  our  parable  represents  the  unconscious
self),  whatever  else  it  may  Ije,  is  an  office  for  the  receifjt  of  messages.
And  our  next  duty  will  be  to  puzzle  out,  by  all  the  analogies  at  our  com-
mand, to  what  family  of  languages  the  insci'iption  ovei'  the  door  belongs.


1885.]


Automatic  Writing.


29


If  we  can  find  this  out  we  shall  get  some  notion  as  to  the  tongue  and
probable  mode  of  conveyance  of  the  message  which  we  seek.

If  then  w'e  fix  our  gaze  steadily  on  these  two  problems  together —
the  problem  of  telepathic  action  and  the  problem  of  the  unconscious
self — we  shall  recognise  in  the  first  place  that  there  is  nothing  in  the
reception  of  telepathic  influence,  as  we  know  it,  which  connects  such
reception  with  conscious  effort,  or  conscious  adjustment.  Even  in  our
cases  of  the  transference  of  numbers,  names,  ikc.,  where  the  percipient’s
whole  attention  is  given  to  the  experiment,  no  conscious  effort  on  his
part  is  effective  unless  it  Ite  the  effort  not  to  think,  not  to  guess,  to
leave  his  field  of  inward  vision  clear  for  the  flashing  upon  it  of  images
from  a camei’a  whose  illumination  he  can  invite  but  not  control.

A parallel  case  wdll  make  my  meaning  clearer.  If  we  wish  to
recollect  (say)  the  address  of  a friend  we  may  make  many  conscious
efforts  in  vain.  First,  we  appeal  directly  to  memory  by  an  act  of  con-
centration ; then  we  try  to  get  at  the  street  l^y  roundaltout  suggestions,
reflecting  whereahouts  it  was,  how  long  the  name  was,  itc.  Ultimately
we  feel  that  our  only  chance  is  to  let  our  brain  bring  up  the  name  of
itself.  We  walk  on  in  as  blank  a frame  of  mind  as  possible,  and
suddenly  the  recjuired  name  swims  up  from  below  the  threshold  of
consciousness,  and  automatic  cerebration  has  done  for  us  what  wdll  and
effort  could  not  do.

Whatever,  in  short,  the  precise  mechanism  of  telepathy  may  lie,  the
analogies  which  its  mode  of  operation  suggests  are  less  often  to  the
sudden  excitations  of  peripheral  stimuli,  sight,  hearing,  and  the  like,
than  to  the  vaguer  organic  impressions,  such  as  hunger,  which  gradually
become  perceptible  from  within.

And  this  is,  to  a great  extent,  true,  even  with  regard  to  another
large  class  of  telepathic  incidents  which  we  have  considered  at  length
elsewhere.  Our  readers  know  that  we  have  explained  as  telepatliic
impressions  many  “phantasms  of  the  living” — apparitions,  voices,  itc.,
purporting  to  represent  friends  undergoing  some  crisis  at  a distance,
which  would  ordinarily,  if  credited  at  all,  have  been  classed  as  real
objective  manifestations,  perceived  by  the  organs  of  sight  or  sound.  We
belieA'e  that  we  have  shown  ground  for  supposing  tliat  these  phantasms
are  by  no  means  always  such  sudden  or  external  things ; that  they  also
are  apt  to  begin  as  indefinite — even  systemic — affections,  specialising
themselves  into  emotion  or  sensation  after  a latency  more  or  less
prolonged  ; * rising,  perhaps,  into  the  percipient’s  consciousness  in

* We  have  observed  something  like  this  period  of  latency  even  in  tlie  direct
experiments  on  thought-transference  ; — the  percij)ient  sometimes  guessing  the
last  card  or  word  after  we  liad  proceeded  to  think  of  another, — of  course  without
indicating  the  previous  one.  Compare  the  deferred  imitations  of  the  operator’s
movements  sometimes  noticed  in  the  hypnotic  trance.


Automatic  Writing.


30


[Jan.  30,


moments  of  drowsiness,  or  waking  him  with  an  accumulated  energy
which  has  developed  itself  in  sleejr.

Tliese  considerations  will  perhaps  prepai’e  us  for  the  enunciation  of
three  propositions,  wliich  are  otfered — not,  assui'edly,  as  established
scientific  conclusions,  but  as  hypotlieses  more  or  less  novel  and  dis-
putable, yet  sufficiently  justified  by  observed  facts  to  afford  a convenient
basis  for  further  reasoning.

I.  Coincidently  with  our  normal  or  primary  self  there  is  within  us
a potential  secondary  self,  or  second  focus  of  cerebration  and  mentation,
wliich  is  not  a mere  metaphysical  abstraction,  but  manifests  itself  occa-
sionally by  certain  supernormal  pliysiological  or  psychical  activities.*

II.  Telepathy  is  among  the  supernormal  activities  in  which  we
have  reason  to  suspect  tlie  ojieration  of  tlie  unconscious  or  secondary  self.

III.  It  may  lie  exjiected  that  supernormal  vital  phenomena  will
manifest  themselves  as  far  as  possible  through  the  same  channels  as
abnormal  or  morbid  vital  phenomena.

To  illustrate  the  meaning  of  this  third  theorem,  I may  refer  to  a
i-emark  already  made  by  Mr.  Gurney  and  myself  in  dealing  with
“Phantasms  of  the  Living,”  or  veridical  hallucinations,  generated  (as  we
have  maintained),  not  by  a morbid  state  of  the  percipient’s  brain,  but
by  a telepathic  impact  from  an  agent  at  a di.stance.  We  have  oliserved
tliat  if  a hallucination — a subjective  image — is  to  be  excited  by  this
distant  energy,  it  will  probably  be  most  readily  excited  in  somewhat
the  same  manner  as  the  morbid  hallucination  which  follows  on  a
cerebral  injury.  We  have  urged  that  this  is  Ukelji  to  be  the  case —
we  have  shown  ground  for  supposing  that  it  is  the  case — Iioth  as
regards  the  mode  of  evolution  of  the  phantasm  in  the  percipient’s
brain,  and  the  mode  in  which  it  seems  to  present  itself  to  his  senses.

And  here  I should  wish  to  give  a much  wider  generality  to  this
principle,  and  to  argue  that  if  there  be  within  us  a secondary  self
aiming  at  manifestation  by  physiological  means,  it  seems  proliable  that
its  readiest  putib  of  extprnalisation — its  readiest  outlet  of  visible  action,
— may  often  lie  along  some  track  which  has  already  Iieen  shown  to  be  a
line  of  low  resistance  by  the  disintegrating  processes  of  disease.  Or,


* I liave  ventured  to  coin  the  word  “ supernormal  ” to  be  applied  to
phenomena  which  are  beyond  uiicd  nsually  happens — beyond,  that  is,  in  the
sen.se  of  suggesting  unknown  psychical  laws.  It  is  thus  formed  on  the
analogy  of  abnormal.  When  we  speak  of  an  abnormal  phenomenon  we  do  not
mean  one  which  contravenes  natural  laws,  hut  one  which  exliiliits  them  in  an
unusual  or  inexplicable  form.  Similarly  by  a supernormal  phenomenon  I
mean,  not  one  wliich  overrides  natural  laws,  for  1 believe  no  such  phenomenon
to  exist,  but  one  which  exhibits  the  action  of  laws  higher,  in  a psychical  aspect,
than  are  discerned  in  action  in  everyday  life.  By  higher  (either  in  a psychical
or  a physiological  sen.se)  1 mean  “ apparently  belonging  to  a more  advanced  stage
of  evolution.”


1885.]


Auiomatic  Wrifiinj.


31


varying  the  metaphor,  we  may  anticipate  tliat  the  partitioir  of  the
primary  and  the  secondary  self  will  lie  along  some  plane  of  cleavage
which  the  morbid  dissociations  of  our  psychical  synergies  have  already
shown  themselves  disposed  to  follow.  If  epilepsy,  madness.  Arc.,  tend
to  split  up  our  faculties  in  certain  ways,  automatism  is  likely  to  split
them  up  in  ways  somewhat  resembling  tliese.

This  argument  might  be  illustrated  by  various  physical  analogies.
Let  us  choose  as  a simple  one  a musical  instrument  of  limited  range.
The  consummate  musician  can  get  eflects  out  of  this  instrument  which
the  ordinary  player  cannot  rival.  But  he  does  this  at  the  risk  of
evoking  occasional  sounds  such  as  only  the  most  blundering  of  begin-
ners is  wont  to  produce.

Savages  take  epilepsy  for  inspiration.  They  are  thus  far  right,  that
epilepsy  is  (so  to  speak)  the  temporary  desti'uction  of  the  personality
in  consequence  of  its  own  instability,  whereas  inspiration  was  assumed
to  be  the  temporary  subjugation  of  the  personality  by  invasion  froni
without.  The  one  case,  (if  I may  use  the  metaphor,)  was  a spontaneous
combustion ; the  other  an  enkindlenient  Iiy  heaveidy  fire.  In  less
metaphorical  language,  explosion  and  exhaustion  of  the  highest  nervous
centres  must  have  somewhat  the  same  look,  whatever  may  have  been
the  nature  of  the  stimulus  which  overcame  their  stability.

But  in  what  way  then,  it  will  be  asked,  do  you  di.stinguish  the
supernormal  from  the  merely  abnormal  ? Why  assume  that  in  these
aberrant  states  there  is  anything  besides  hysteria,  besides  epilepsy,
besides  insanity  ?

The  answer  to  this  question  would  need  to  be  a long  one.  Perhaps
it  may  be  best  for  present  purposes  if  I ask  the  reader  to  anticipate  a
thesis  which  I shall  hope  to  develop  on  some  future  occasion,  and  to
regard  all  psychical,  as  well  as  all  physiological  activities  as  Jiecessarily
either  developmental  or  degenerative,  tending  to  evolution  or  to
dissolution.  And  further,  whilst  altogether  waiving  any  teleological
speculation,  I will  ask  him  hypothetically  to  suppose  that  an  evolu-
tionary nisics,  something  which  we  may  I'ej^resent  as  an  efibrt  towards
self-development,  self-adaptation,  self-renewal,  is  discernilde  especially
on  the  psychical  side  of  at  any  rate  the  higher  forms  of  life.  Our
question.  Supernormal  or  abnormal  ? — may  then  be  phra.sed.  Evolutive
or  dissolutive  1 And  in  .studying  each  psychical  phenomenon  in  turn  we
shall  have  to  inquire  whether  it  indicates  a mere  degeneration  of  powers
already  acquired,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  the  “promise  and  potency,”  if  not
the  actual  j^ossession,  of  powers  as  yet  unrecognised  or  unknown.

Thus,  for  instance.  Telepathy  is  surely  a step  in  evolution*  To

*To  avoid  misconcej)tion,  I may  point  out  that  this  view  in  no  way
negatives  the  possibility  tliat  telepathy  (or  its  correlative  telergy)  may  he  in  some
of  its  aspects  commoner,  or  more  powerful,  among  savages  than  among  ourselves.


32


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  30,


learn  the  thoughts  of  otlier  minds  without  the  mediation  of  the  special
senses  manifestly  indicates  the  possibility  of  a vast  extension  of  psychical
powers.  And  any  knowledge  which  Ave  can  amass  as  to  the  conditions
under  which  telepathic  action  takes  ph'.ce,  Avill  form  a valuable  starting
point  for  an  inquiry  as  to  the  evolutive  or  dissolutive  character  of
unfamiliar  psychical  states.*

Thus,  for  instance,  we  may  learn  from  our  knowledge  of  telepathy
that  the  superficial  aspect  of  certain  stages  of  psychical  evolution,  like
the  superficial  aspect  of  certain  stages  of  physiological  evolution,  may
resemble  mere  ininhition,  or  mere  perturbation.  The  hypnotised  subject
may  pass  thi'ough  a lethai-gic  stage  before  he  Avakes  into  a state  in
Avhich  he  has  gained  commnnity  of  sensnh’ow  Avith  the  operator;  some-
what as  the  silkAvorm  (to  use  the  oldest  and  the  most  suggestive  of  all
illustrations)  passes  through  the  apparent  torpor  of  the  cocoon-stage
before  eA'olA'ing  into  the  moth.  Again,  the  automatist’s  hand,  (as
we  haAm  seen,  for  instance,  in  Professor  SidgAvick’s  narratiA^e,)  is  apt
to  pass  through  a stage  of  inco-ordinated  movements,  Avhich  might
almost  1)6  taken  for  choreic,  before  it  acquires  the  poAver  of  ready
and  intelligent  Avriting.  Similarly  the  development,  for  instance,  of
a tooth  may  be  preceded  by  a stage  of  indefinite  aching,  Avhich  might
be  ascribed  to  the  formation  of  an  abscess,  did  not  tlie  new  tooth  ulti-
mately show  itself.  And  still  more  striking  cases  of  a perturbation
mhich  masks  evolution  might  be  draAvn  from  the  history  of  the  human
organism  as  it  dev-elops  into  its  OAvn  maturity,  or  prepares  for  the
appearance  of  the  fresh  huma]i  organism  Avhich  is  to  succeed  it.

Analogy,  therefore,  lioth  physiological  and  psychical,  Avarns  us  not
to  conclude  that  any  given  psychosis  is  merely  degenerative  until  Ave
have  examined  its  results  closely  enough  to  satisfy  ourselves  Avhether
they  tend  to  bring  about  any  enlargement  of  human  poAvers,  to  open

EA'olutionary  processes  are  not  necessarily  continuous.  The  acqirirement  by  our
lowly-organised  ancestors  of  the  sense  of  smell  (for  instance)  Avas  a step  in  evo-
lution. But  the  sense  of  smell  probably  reached  its  highest  energy  in  races
earlier  than  man  ; and  it  has  perceptil)ly  declined  even  in  the  short  space
Avldch  separates  ciAulised  man  from  existing  saA'ages.  Yet  if,  Avith  some  change
in  our  environment,  the  sense  of  smell  again  became  useful,  and  Ave  re-acquired
it,  this  Avould  be  none  the  less  an  evolutionary  process  because  the  evolution
had  been  interrupted.

* I do  not  Avish  to  assert  that  all  unfamiliar  psychical  states  are  necessarily
evolutive  or  dissolutive  in  any  assignable  manner.  I should  jjrefer  to  suppose
that  there  are  states  Avhich  may  better  be  styled  allotropic  ; — modifications  of
the  arrangements  of  nervous  elements  on  Avhich  our  conscious  identity  depends,
but  Avith  no  more  conspicuous  superioritif  of  the  one  state  over  the  other  than
(for  instance,)  charcoal  ])Ossesses  over  graphite  or  graphite  over  charcoal.  But
there  may  also  be  states  in  Avliich  tlie  (metapliorical)  carbon  becomes  diamond ;

with  so  much  at  least  of  advance  on  previous  states  as  is  involved  in  the

substitution  of  the  crystalline  for  the  amorphous  structure.


1885.]


Automatic  Writing.


33


any  new  inlet  to  the  reception  of  objective  truth.  If  such  there  prove
to  be,  then,  with  whatever  morbid  activities  the  psychosis  may  have
been  intei-twined,  it  contains  indications  of  an  evolutionary  nisus  as
well.

T must  not  pursue  this  subject  here.  But  I must  guard  myself  in
passing  against  the  possible  supposition  that  I am  in  some  way  justifying
morbid  states,  or  recommending  their  induction,  on  the  plea  that  they
may  contain  what  I term  evolutionary  elements,  and  may  be  the  avenue
to  new  knowledge.  The  fact  is  quite  the  contrary.  With  regard  to
our  right  of  inflicting  pain  either  on  our  fellow-creatures  or  on
animals  for  the  sake  of  obtaining  knowledge,  my  views  are,  perhaps,
narrower  than  the  dominant  school  of  physiologists  would  be  willing'
to  endorse.  And  if  the  injury  to  be  inflicted  be  imjchicnl  injury,  it
seems  to  me  obvious  that  our  standard  of  admissibility  should  be
stricter  still.

But  for  my  OAvn  part,  although  knowledge  fer  se  is  no  doubt  a
primary  aim,  I am  aiming  also,  with  no  less  directness  of  intention,  at
explicitly  sanative,  explicitly  ethical  ends.  I knoAv  enough  of  the
mischief  which  is  being  done  to  the  minds  of  men  and  Avomen,  in
America  especially,  by  the  unquestioning  reception  of  these  spurioirs
self-generated  revelations  through  pencil  and  planchette,  to  feel  that,
though  it  may  be  but  a small  element  in  the  mass  of  human  error,  it
is,  nevertheless,  Avorth  a considerable  effort  to  set  right.  And,  Avhile  I
sympathise  Avith  tlie  moral  purpose  of  various  physiologists  Avho  haA^e
attempted  this  task,  I feel  that  they  haA'e  gone  to  Avork  in  not  the  most
effective  manner.  In  such  a case  it  is  useless  to  scoff'  or  to  sermonise,
you  must  understand  and  explain.  If  a man  tells  you  that  the  spirit
of  Shelley  Avrites  through  him,  and  recommends  free-love,  it  is  of  no
use  to  ansAver  that  it  is  all  nonsense  and  A^ery  Avrong.  The  man  simply
thinks  that  you  knoAv  nothing  aljout  it,  and  sticks  to  his  Shelley  and
his  free-loA^e  more  triumphantly  than  eA-er.

To  prevent  graphic  automatism  from  being  a source  of  mental
danger,  it  is  necessary,  not  that  it  should  be  repressed  and  sneered  at,
but  that  it  should  be  openly  practised  and  understood.  When  thus
treated,  there  is,  so  far  as  I knoAv,  no  cause  for  graA'e  anxiety  of  any
kind  in  connection  Avith  any  of  that  group  of  phenomena  Avhich  Ave  are
noAv  discussing.*  Here  indeed,  as  in  all  psychical  inquiries,  there  is
need  for  prudence  and  caution ; and  it  Avill  have  been  observed  that  in

* Those  Avho  a,re  disposed  to  take  an  anxious  A'ieAv  as  to  experiments  on  the
ner\mus  system  should  read  Dr.  Bernheim’s  book,  “ De  la  Suggestion  dans
I’Etat  Hypnotique  et  dans  I’Etat  de  Yeille.”  (Paris,  1884.)  Practices  at  AA’hicli
the  hair  of  the  Faculty  Avould  have  stooil  on  end  a very  fcAV  years  ago,  are  noAV
matters  of  course  in  the  hospital  of  Xancy  ; Avhile,  nevertheless,  (like  the  monks
of  Rheims  after  a celebrated  anathema),  “nobody  seems  one  penny  the  Avorse.”

D


34


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  30,


]\Irs.  Newnham’s  case  thei'e  was  enough  of  fatigue  to  render  advisable
the  gradual  discontinuance  of  the  experiments.  Fatigue  like  this
Irequently  follows  on  automatic  writing.  It  seems  in  no  way  persistent
or  dangerous,  Imt  rather  resend  )les  the  fatigue  felt  after  writing  an
exercise  in  some  new  language,  or  making  some  other  eflbrt  to  which
the  l)rain  is  unaccustomed.

And  having  thus  returned  from  a more  general  argument  to  the
phenomenon  of  automatic  writing,  which  was  our  point  of  departure,  it
seems  fitting  here  to  inquire,  fi’om  the  new  point  of  view  which  we  have
meantime  reached,  what  are  the  analogies  l>etween  this  supernormal  j)heno-
menon  and  such  ahnormal  phenomena  already  oliserved  as  may  seem  most
closely  akin  to  it  1 This  inquiry  lies  in  the  main  track  of  our  argument ;
for  in  discussing  the  spiritual  or  telepatliic  or  merely  subjective  origin
of  automatic  messages,  it  is  important  to  know  all  that  we  can,  not  only
as  to  their  contents,  but  as  to  their  mode  of  communication.

On  the  present  occasion,  however,  I must,  for  the  sake  of  lirevity
and  clearness,  confine  myself  to  one  branch  only  of  the  widely-ramifying
analogies  which  gradually  suggest  themselves  to  the  student  of  graphic
automatism.  I will  take  the  analogy  which  may  or  may  not  Ije  the
most  direct,  but  which  at  any  rate  is  in  one  sense  the  most  conspicuous,
— the  analogy,  namely,  between  this  automatic  writing, — emanating,
as  has  been  maintained,  from  some  second,  hal.)itually  latent,  focus  of
cerebral  energy, — and  the  writing  performed  by  j^atients  who  have,  as
most  pathologists  tell  us,  only  the  partially  untrained  half  of  the  brain
to  rely  on, — those  centres  which  habitually  initiate  the  graphic  energy
having  been  destroyed  or  rendered  temporarily  useless  l)y  accident  or
disease.*  I allude,  of  course,  to  the  subjects  of  agrfiplv\j,\ — one  of  the
5nost  significant  results  of  those  delicate  processes  of  dissection  which
disease  performs  for  us  among  the  complex  capacities  of  the  brain.

Agraphy,  strictly  so  termed,  forms  one  of  four  afiections  of

* I must  guard  myself  from  being  supposed  to  assert  that  the  connection
between  sinistro-eerebral  lesions  and  asemic  troubles  in  right-handed  men  is  an
invariable  one.  Many  pathologists  hold  that  it  is  not  so  ; but  it  is  quite  enough
for  my  purpose  that  the  connection  should  be  recognised  as  yea c/vd/y  subsisting.
As  will  be  seen  later,  I expressly  hold  that  in  my  “supernormal  ” cases  there
will  be  mure  exceptions  to  all  such  rules  than  in  cases  of  ordinary  .aseinia.

f The  word  “agraphia,”  re-invented  by  Dr.  'William  Ogle  (in  his  admirable
monograph,  “ On  Aphasia  and  Agraphia,”  St.  George’s  Hospital  lleports,  1867,
Yol.  II.),  seems  to  have  existed  in  old  Greek,  (Stephani  Thesaurus),  though,  to
judge  from  the  analogy  of  ayparpa  ixtraWa,  aypafiov  ypa4>fi,  it  jwobably  meant  not
“inability  to  write,”  but  “defect  of  registration.”  The  point  is  vmrth
mentioning,  as  raising  the  question,  which  frequently  recurs  in  any  new  scientific
inquiry,  whether  words  may  l)e  adapted  from  the  Greek  in  a sense  other  than
that  which  they  can  be  shown  to  have  borne.  I am  decidedly  in  favour  of  such
adaptation,  v,  hich  I do  not  regard  as  .a  debasement  of  the  Greek  language,
but  rather  as  a prolongation  of  its  vitality  under  altered  conditions.

As  the  word  “agraphia  ” has  as  yet  been  comparatively  little  used,  I have


1885.]


Autcmcdic  Writing.


35


speech  (Storungen  cler  Sprache)  which  are  logically  distinguishable
d priori,  and  which  have  quite  recently  been  all  of  them  definitely
distinguished  and  (with  one  possible  exception)  found  to  exist  some-
times independently.*  These  four  affections  are  massed  together  under
the  title  aphasia,\  which  was  at  first  given  to  the  most  conspicuous  of
these  phenomena. — that  of  speechlessness — but  (from  sheer  lack  of  a
more  comprehensive  term)  has  been  stretched  to  include  them  all.  T.

In  order  to  make  full  use  of  any  given  word  we  have  to  perform
four  separate  operations.  We  have  to  recognise  it  when  we  hear  it

ventured  to  anglicise  its  termination.  I think  that  this  should  be  done  wherever
some  already  accredited  English  word  with  similar  termination  exists,  (as  in  this
case  telegraphy),  so  that  the  new  word  has  not  too  singular  an  appearance.
Thus,  had  not  aphasia  become  rooted  in  our  tongue,  I could  have  wished  to  say
aphasy,  on  the  analogy  of  euphrasy ; while,  on  the  other  hand,  I would  not
\'enture  to  anglicise  aphemiu  into  aphciny,  on  account  of  the  lack  of  similar
English  word-endings.  We  have,  indeed,  blasphemy  and  cuphemy,  hut  usage
has  sliortened  their  penultimate  syllables,  so  that  they  form  an  added  difficulty
in  the  way  of  introducing  aphemy, — whose  penultimate  we  could  scarcely  shorten
(so  to  speak)  in  cold  blood,  and  with  no  usage  to  help  us  over  the  false  quantity.

* It  will  not,  of  course,  he  expected  that  I should  attempt  to  indicate  the
precise  part  taken  by  each  observer  in  establishing  the  facts  to  which  I shall
have  occasion  briefly  to  refer.  One  main  source  of  recent  progress  in  the  know-
ledge of  aphasia  consists  of  Dr.  Charcot’s  lectures  of  1883.  These  lectures  have
not  as  yet  been  published  in  full,  except  in  an  Italian  translation  of  Dr.
Kummo’s,  (“  Ditferenti  Forme  d’Afasia,”  &c.,  ^Milano,  1884.)  But  they  have
inspired  many  articles  and  treatises,  among  which  I acknowledge  special  obli-
gations to  “Considerations  sur  rAgraphie,”  by  Dr.  A.  Pitres,  (Revue  cle
Meclecinc,  November!  0th,  1884);  and  to  a treatise,  “De  I’Aphasie  et  deses  Diverses
Formes,”  by  Dr.  Bernard,  (Paris,  1885).  This  last  work  is  at  present,  perhaps,
the  most  complete  treatise  on  the  subject,  (more  complete  on  some  points  even
than  Kussmaul’s),  and  I have  drawn  my  references  mainly  from  its  large
collection.  Berillon’s  “ Hypnotisme  Expm-imental — La  Dualite  Cerebrate”
(Paris,  1884)  belongs  to  the  same  school,  and  contains  much  pertinent  matter.
In  English  I have  already  referred  to  Dr.  William  Ogle's  paper.  INIany  articles
of  nrerit  have  been  published  since  that  early  rrronograph.  But  my  own  obliga-
tions are  mainly  due  to  Dr.  Hughlings-Jackson,  whose  scattered  papers  on  this
and  kindred  subjects,  especially  the  articles  on  “Affections  of  Sireech”  in
Vols.  I.,  II.,  III.  of  Brain,  and  the  Croonian  Lectures  (1884),  on  “The
Evolution  and  Dissolution  of  the  Nervous  System,”  are  indispensable  to  any
student  of  these  subjects.

t It  is  an  odd  thing  that  “the  Greek  Chrysaphis  ” (Bernard,  jr.  172)
should  have  fancied  that  he  was  inventing  the  common  Greek  word  arpaaia,  which
in  its  poetical  form  is  as  old  as  Homer,  where  Brji'  Si  i.i.iv  aupaair]  In-lar  AdB^  occurs
twice,  (II.  xvii.  695  ; Od.  iv.  704.)  Nor  can  I understand  Broca's  and  Bernard’s
view  that  the  word  had  a different  meaning  in  old  Greek.  The  temporary  speech-
lessness of  Antilochus  on  hearing  of  the  death  of  Patroclus,  of  Penelope  on
hearing  of  the  journey  of  Telemachus,  though,  of  course,  not  dependent  on
cerebral  disease,  seems  to  me  to  approach  the  modern  cases  as  closely  as  a poetical
can  be  expected  to  approach  a clinical  phenomenon.

X Hughlings-Jackson  and  Bernard  despair  of  establishing  any  other  word

D 2


[Jan.  30,


36  Automatic  Writing.

and  to  utter  it  ourselves  ; to  recognise  it  when  we  see  it  written,  and  to
write  it  ourselves.

Inability  to  do  the  first  of  these  things  is  called  word-deafness ;
inability  to  do  the  second,  for  which,  properly  speaking,  the  name
ai)hasia  should  have  been  resei’ved,  is  called  motor  aphasia,  or
aphemia.  *

Inability  to  perform  the  third  operation  is  called  word-blindness  ;
inability  to  perform  the  J’ourtJi,  agraphy.  These  various  inabilities  may
be,  and  generally  are,  found  in  conjunction  with  each  other,  in  a gi-eat
vaiuety  of  ways.  But  all  of  them  alike  appear  generally  to  depend  (in
I’ight-handed  persons)  on  certain  delinite  lesions  of  the  left  hemisphere
of  the  brain, — the  hemisphere  which  mainly  conti’ols  the  right  side
of  the  body.

With  these  possible  sources  of  analogy  in  our  minds,  let  us  now
consider  what  are  the  earliest  stages  of  our  own  special  phenomenon,
graphic  automatism.

In  my  first  paper  I adduced  as  “ the  first  incipient  stage  of  automa-
tism,” cases  where  words  were  written  “by  mere  attention,  without  any
voluntai’y  muscular  action  wliatever.”  These  cases  (to  wliich  at  some
future  time  we  shall  have  to  make  further  reference)  are  assui’edly
transitional  between  voluntary  and  automatic  writing.  But  they  are
not  what  Ave  Avant  iioav  ; they  are  transitional,  so  to  speak,  by  a different
transit;  they  sIioav  us  the  median  line  betAveen  voluntary  and  in-
A'oluntary  action,  Avhereas  Avhat  Ave  noAv  desire  is  to  trace  the  process  by
Avhich  the  involuntary  action,  Avhen  once  initiated  in  the  brain,
externalises  itself  into  increasing  definiteness.  To  discover  this  process
I Avould  recommend  my  reader  to  try  for  himself ; to  sit  quietly  many
times  for  10  or  20  minutes, Avith  a pencil  in  his  right  hand  and  attention
concentrated  on  a Avish  to  Avrite.  His  experience  is  likely  to  resemble,

than  aphasia  as  the  title  for  the  Avliole  group  of  affections  of  speech.
T’itres  refuses  even  yet  to  concede  to  the  Avonl  so  aA\  kAvard  an  extension  of
meaning.  Dr.  McLane  Ilainiltou  lias  proposed  ascmasia,  “defect  in  the  poAver
of  giving  signs.”  I shall  venture  to  suggest  ascmia  {Avith  the  adjective  aseniic,)
as  shorter  and  not  more  unauthorised.  A term  is  Avanted  Avhich  shall  include
all  kinds  of  defect  in  the  usage  of  signs — as  in  piano-playing,  draAving,  &c. ,
faculties  Avhich  may  or  may  not  be  affected  along  Avith  speech.  “ Sign-troubles”
Avould  have  an  uu-Englisli  sound  ; but  Ave  shall  need  to  use  greater  freedom  in
combining  okl  terms,  as  Avell  as  in  introducing  iicav  ones,  if  our  vocabulary  is  to
represent  the  exactness  and  the  range  of  modern  science.

* Strictly  speaking,  fqdtcjufrt  should  befi/iAc/ms/mM,  just  as  telegram  should  be
telegrapheme.  But  (though  thus  far  siding  Avith  Trousseau  against  Broca)  I do
not  think  it  important  to  pireserve  the  correct  terminations  any  more  than
the  original  meanings,  in  adapting  Avoids  from  the  Greek.  So  many  Greek
Avords  are  Avanted  that  practical  convenience  must  dictate  the  conditions  on  Avhicli
they  are  to  be  received.


1885.]


Automatic  Writing.


37


not  that  of  Mr.  A.,  a remarkably  sensitive  subject,  but  that  of  an
ordinary  insensitive  person,  myself  for  example.

By  extreme  persistency,  in  the  year  1875, 1 attained  for  a few  weeks
to  the  lowest  degree  of  graphic  automatism.  The  hrst  symptom  was  that
my  fist  would  thump  itself  violently  on  the  paper.  Spasms  were
entirely  new  to  my  experience,  but  this  seemed  like  a spasm  of  the  arm,
induced  by  expectant  attention.  Soon,  however,  it  was  plain  that  there
was  more  than  this.  There  was  an  unmistakable  attempt  to  go  through
the  act  of  writing.  I scrawled  rapidly  many  meaningless  interlacing
strokes,  which  sometimes  bore  a vague  I’esemblance  to  letters  of  the
alphabet,  but  never  shaped  themselves  into  a legible  word.  I never  got
beyond  this  point,  and  after  some  neglect  of  practice,  even  this  faculty
(if  such  it  can  be  called)  deserted  me.

Now,  trivial  though  this  piece  of  unconscious  cerebration  may  be,  it
is  not  altogether  easy  to  explain.  What  I expected  and  wished  was
not  to  scrawl,  but  to  write.  I persistently  imagined  my  hand  as  writing,
and  had  I actually  written  words,  though  without  knowing  what  I
wrote,  the  automatic  externalisation  of  my  inward  picture  Vi^ould  have
been  natural  enough,  as  when  the  sitters,  in  Faraday’s  experiment,
pushed  the  table  round  when  they  expected  it  to  move  round  of  itself.
But  what  I actually  did  was  something  quite  different  from  what  I
wished  or  expected  to  do.  It  was  as  if  Faraday’s  sitters,  instead  of
pushing  the  table  round,  had  taken  to  scratching  the  varnish  otf  with  their
fingers.  Moreover,  I was  of  course  fully  aware  of  wha.t  I was  doing,
and  I could  stop  doing  it  at  any  moment ; but  while  I continued  to  let
my  hand  go  I could  not  direct  or  modify  its  movements.  However  ex-
plained, the  experience  was  enough  to  persuade  me  that  other  friends
who  began  in  much  the  same  way,  but  gradually  attained  to  the  writing
of  actual  words,  deserved  at  any  rate  the  credit  of  being  thorough-going
automatists.  And  I will  select  as  an  example  of  this  next  stage  the  case
of  Mrs.  Brietzcke,  an  Honorary  Associate  of  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research,  who  Avas  quite  unfamiliar  Avith  this  subject,  but  tried  experi-
ments at  my  request.

“ I haAm  tried  tlie  Planchette,”  she  Avrites,  “ and  I get  writing,  certainly  not
done  by  my  hand  consciously  ; but  it  is  nonsense,  such  as  Mebew.  I tried  hold-
ing a pencil,  and  all  I got  Avas  mm  or  rererere  ; then  for  hours  together  I got
this  : Celen,  Celen.  Whether  the  first  letter  was  C or  L I could  never  make  out.
Then  I got  I Celen.  I w'as  disgusted,  and  took  a book  and  read  Avliile  I held
the  pencil.  Then  I got  Helen.  Now,  note  this  fact ; I never  make  H like
that  (like  I and  C juxtaposed)  ; I make  it  thus  : (like  a printed  H).  1 then

saw  that  the  thing  I read  as  I Celen  was  Helen,  my  name.  For  days  I had
only  Celen,  and  never  for  one  moment  expected  it  meant  Avhat  it  did.”

Mrs.  Brietzcke  has  since  lost  even  this  degree  of  poAver,  and  can
now  produce  nothing  more  than  a slight  scrawl  automatically.


3S


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  30,


And  now  let  us  quote  a passage  from  Dr.  Bernard  (p.  226),
describing,  witli  references  which  I need  not  give,  some  of  the  familiar
forms  of  agraphy.

“ Tel  malade,  la  plume  ou  le  crayon  en  main,  ne  tracera  que  des  traits
irrdguliers  entrelaces,  ou  meme  rien  absolument ; tel  autre,  qu’une  meme
lettre,  la  lettre  r,  j^ar  exemple,  ou  la  meme  syllabe.  Celui-la  ne  pourra
ecrire  que  sou  nom,  ou  le  meme  mot,  celui-ci  qu’un  meme  fragment  de
phrase  ou  la  meme  phrase.  Les  lettres  tracees  i^ar  I’un  ne  constitueront
qu’un  assemblage  indechiffrable  de  caracttjres  ou  de  syllabes  sans  significa-
tion. An  milieu  des  essais  d’ecriture,  au  milieu  des  lettres  bizarrement
assemblees,  a la  fin  des  mots,  traces  du  reste  correctement  par  un  autre,  la
meme  lettre,  la  meme  reunion  de  lettres  reapparaitront.  C’est  Ih  ce  que
Gairdner  a d’aboi’d  nommd  V intoxication  du  cerveau  parunc  lettre.”

How  close  is  the  correspondence  here  ! We  find  the  agraphic
patient  unable  to  write  at  all,  or  scrawling  meaningless  marks  on  the
paper,  or  writing  some  one  letter,  as  rrrr,  or  some  one  syllable,  over
and  over  again.  We  find  him  writing  senseless  words,  or  able  to  write
nothing  but  his  own  name,  or  interspersing  his  sentences  with  some
perpetually  recurring  letter  or  syllable  which  has,  so  to  speak,  intoxicated
his  l)rain.

And  all  these  stages  are  being  rejoeated  daily  in  the  graphic  automa-
tism of  scores  of  persons  who,  like  myself  when  I tried  the  experiment
in  1875,  have  never  so  much  as  heard  of  agraphy  in  their  lives.

And  these,  so  far  as  I know,  are  the  only  two  conditions  in  which
a waking,  sane,  and  sol)ei'  man,  with  a trained  and  healthy  hand,  per-
sistently scrawls  when  he  attempts  to  write.*  In  writer’s  cramp,  for
instance,  the  hand  itself  is  unhealthy ; its  local  centres  are  overworked,
and  the  attempt  to  write  is  followed  l)y  local  spasm.  But  the  imperfect
writing  in  graphic  automatism,  and  in  agraphy,  is  not  the  fault  of  the
hand,  but  of  the  orders  which  are  sent  down  to  it  from  the  l.)rain.  The
agTaphic  patient  can  sometimes  draw,  tliough  he  cannot  write,  f The
automatist  can  cease  his  scrawling  when  he  chooses,  and  write
voluntarily  in  his  usual  style.

In  short,  the  physician  who  should  simply  see  the  graphic  auto-
niatist,  in  las  early  stages,  at  work,  without  opportunity  of  learning  the
history  of  his  alfection,  would  be  bound,  according  to  recognised  rules  of
diagnosis,  to  class  him  as  an  agraphic  patient.

And  I believe  that  the  analogy  is  not  merely  accidental,  l)ut  that
the  inco-ordination  of  agraphy  and  the  inco-ordination  of  rudimentary
graphic  automatism, — inco-ordinations  so  limited  in  range,  but  so  unique

* I do  not  forget  the  confused  writing  of  post-epileptic  states,  “ eifilepti-
form  migraine,”  &c.,  which  I shall  hope  to  discuss  later,  but  which  are  transient,
not  persistent,  states.

t See  Dr.  Pitres’  Ohs.  III.,  Rev.  de  Medecine,  November  10th,  1884.


1885.]


Automatic  Writing.


39


and  striking  within  those  limits, — arise  from  the  same  cause ; from  tlie
employment  in  the  act  of  writing  of  untrained  centres  in  the  right
hemisphere  of  the  brain.  That  these  dextro-cerebral  centres  initiate
the  imperfect  writing  of  the  agraphic  patient  it  is  not  my  part  to  i^rove.
I may  be  content  to  refer  the  reader  to  Dr.  Hughlings- Jackson,  whose
authority  is  at  least  not  inferior  to  that  of  any  other  writer  on  these
processes  of  nervous  dissolution.  My  own  task  is  rather  to  show  that
the  arralogies  preserrted  by  graphic  airtonratisrrr  are  so  rrumerous  and
exact  that  the  sarrre  for-rrr  of  cerebral  actiorr  rrrust  ahrrost  rrecessarily  be
assumed  as  operative  irr  either  case.

And  here  I may  irrtroduce  a curious  arralogy  which  graphic
autorrratisrrr  j^ceserrts,  rrot  specially  to  agraphy,  but  to  other  cases  of
writirrg  almost  undoubtedly  irritiated  by  the  right  herrrisphere.

Arryorre  who  has  watched  rnrrch  autorrratic  writirrg  is  likely  to
have  rroticed  two  pherrorrrerra,  apparerrtly  cogrrate,  but  each  of  therrr
exceedirrgly  pei-plexirrg.

Sometirrres  the  word  or  “ rrressage  ” which  is  beirrg  writterr  will
sudderrly  becorrre  urrirrtelligible.  It  is,  j^erhaps,  abarrdorred  at  the  tirrre
as  mere  rrorrserrse  ; brrt  subseqrrerrt  scrrrtiny  shows  that  there  is  a rrrethod
irr  the  apparerrt  corrfusiorr.  The  word  is  simply  spelt  backwards,  thgiri
for  rright,  &c.*  Now  this  nray,  of  cortrse,  remirrd  the  reader  of
“ Clelia’s  ” arragrarrrs ; brrt  the  impression  actually  giverr  wherr  the
phenorrrerrorr  occurs  is  a rather  ditfererrt  orre.  Irr  tire  case  of  the
arragrarrrs  there  was  an  intention  to  'puzzle  ; the  cornrrrirrricatirrg  irrtelli-
gerrce  (which  was  still,  of  course,  irr  rrry  view,  a part  of  Mr.  A.’s
own  irrtelligcrrce)  was  obviously  actirrg  irr  a jrurposive  way.  But  when
the  reversed  words  are  giverr  there  seems  ofterr  to  be  rro  purpose  orr  the
part  of  the  courrrnruicatirrg  irrtelligerrce  (still  assurrred  to  be  arr  eirrairatiori
of  the  writer’s  owrr  brairr)  to  diverge  in  arry  way  frorir  ordirrary  script.

Can  we  frrrd  arry  parallel  to  this  pherrorrrerrorr  1 Is  arry  other  case
knowrr  where  words  are  written  or  spelt  backwards,  without  apparerrt
knowledge  that  anythirrg  urrusiral  is  beirrg  dorre  ?

I have  ascertained,  by  irrquiry  irr  elerrrentary  schools,  that  this  is
actually  sorrretirrres  the  case  with  left-handed  children,  wherr  they  first
begirr  to  write  arrd  spell.  They  will  transpose  the  letters  of  srrrall  words
in  a way  irr  which  right-lrarrded  childrerr  do  rrot.

Arrd  “Dr.  Wilbirr,  of  Syracuse,  N.Y.,  rrrerrtiorrs  the  casef  of  a left

* This  plrenontenotr  is  also  frequently  observed  wlien  nressages  are  spelt  oirt
by  the  tilting  of  tables  ; another  method  of  obtaining  answers,  drre,  in  most
cases,  as  we  nray  at  least  provisionally  assume,  to  rrnconscioirs  muscular
action  prompted  by  uirconscious  nrental  action.

t lira  communication  to  Dr.  Ireland,  Brain,  Vol.  IV.,  j).  .“IdG.  I quote  from
Dr.  Ireland’s  article,  “ Orr  Mirror-writing  and  its  Delation  to  Left-handedness
and  Cerebral  Disease.”


40


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  30,


handed  cliild  who,  when  Ijeginning  to  read,  asked  his  father  what
‘ efiw  ’ was.  Such  inversions  not  unfrequently  occur  in  teaching
imbecile  children  to  read.”

I would,  suggest,  therefore,  that  here  is  a mode  of  perception  to
Avhich  the  right  hemi.sphere  is  pi’one,  and  which  appears  in  three  cases  :
(1)  In  left-handed  children,  in  whom  the  right  hemisphere  is
undoubtedly  predominant;  (2)  in  certain  imbeciles  in  whom  the  right
hemisphere  may  very  possibly  Ije  predominant,  though  we  have  not  as
yet  details  of  the  autopsy  of  a l)ackward-writing  imbecile ; and  (3)  in
my  cases  of  gi’aphic  automatism,  in  which,  as  I am  trying  to  show  by
cumulative  observations,  the  right  hemisphere  is  taking  a leading
jjart.

But  this  is  not  all.  Besides  the  simple  backward-writing  already
described,  the  automatist  will  sometimes  produce  a form  of  script
reversed  in  a more  comjalex  manner,  i.e.,  so  written  that  in  order  to  read
it  one  has  to  look  through  the  paper  at  the  light,  or  to  hold  it  before  a
mirror.

And  this  kind  of  writing,  too,  occurs  sometimes  without  notice,  or
apparent  reason,  and  in  a way  which  entirely  baffles  the  writer.  In  one
case  which  I know,  a lady  made  rude  automatic  drawings  of  Egyptian
figures  (iutei’esting  from  another  point  of  view,  but  foreign  to  our
immediate  subject).  Among.st  these  figures  was  a cartouche,  with  what
looked  like  a hieroglyphic  inscribed.  The  lady  and  her  friends,  who
took  the  matter  seriously,  tried  hard  to  decipher  this  description  on
Egyptian  analogies.  They  entirely  failed  ; and  it  was  not  till  some
months  afterwards  that  an  acquaintance  to  whom  the  automatic  draw-
ing was  shown  held  it  up  to  the  window,  and  easily  read  the  inscrip-
tion, which  was  an  English  name  in  mirror-writing.

3 0 O

I cite  another  case,  sent  by  a gentleman  well-known  to  me,  in  which
the  first  automatic  writing  achieved  was  of  this  type.


One  of  my  sisters,  a clergyman’s  wife,  once  tried  to  persuade  me  that  all
so-called  autcunatio  writing  was  in  some  unconscious  way  really  the  act  of  the
“ medium  ” through  whose  hand  it  came,  and  to  prove  it,  said,  “ If  I were
to  hold  a pencil  to  the  end  of  time  my  hand  would  never  write  anything  unless
I willed  it  to  do  so.”  She  took  iiencil  and  paper  ; her  hand  soon  began  to
move,  in  spite  of  all  her  efforts  to  keep  it  still,  and  after  scrawling  a quantity
of  unmeaning  circles  and  zigzags,  produced  something  that  looked  like  writing,
but  which  neither  of  us  could  decipher.  She  laid  down  the  pencil  and  took
up  some  other  occupation.  Suddenly,  after  some  time  had  elapsed,  it  occurred
to  one  of  us,  I forget  which,  that  she  might  have  been  writing  backwards.
On  holding  the  paper  up  to  the  looking-glass  she  found  that  she  had  written,
quite  legibly,  “.Unkind.  My  name  is  Norman.”  Before  this  was  written  she
had  asked  the  supposed  sjiirit  for  its  name,  and  had  jeered  at  it  for  its


1885.]


Automatic  Writing.


41


apparent  inability  to  reply.  (We  neither  of  us  could  remember  having  ever
known  any  spirit,  in  or  out  of  the  flesh,  of  the  name  of  Xorman.)*'

Algerxox  Joy.

20,  Wilton  Place,  London.

February  4th,  1885.

Now  the  Spiritualist  wdll  say  that  the  spirits  resort  to  backward-
writing or  mirror- writing,  either  in  order  to  show  that  a mind  other
than  the  medium’s  is  at  work,  or  in  order  to  communicate  some  secret
which  some  of  the  persons  present  are  not  intended  to  kno^v.  But  (apart
from  the  other  objections  to  this  explanation)  the  way  in  which  mirror-
writing is  interspersed  among  ordinary  script  does  not  look  like  pre-
meditation. I have  seen  an  automatist  writing  page  after  page  in
ordinary  handwriting,  and  then  a page  in  mirror-writing,  at  the  same
raj^id  j^ace,  and  in  mere  continuation  of  some  general  topic — perhaps  of
the  sermonising  type,  which  these  communications  so  often  assume.

Let  us  consider  whether  mirror-wu’iting  has  been  observed  in  past
times,  or  may  now  be  observed,  among  the  manuscripts  of  ordinary  men.

Mirror-wu’iters,  it  would  appear,!  if  they  did  not  “live  before
Agamemnon,”  lived  not  very  long  after  him  ; for  the  first  seven  letters
of  that  chieftain’s  name  are  so  written  in  an  inscription  in  the  Louvre
(Hall  of  Phidias,  69).  The  last  two  letters  return  [Bova-TpocprjSov  from
right  to  left.  It  would,  however,  be  foreign  to  our  purport  to  dwell  on
the  varieties  of  writing  among  early  peoples  ; which  would  probably  be
found  to  indicate  a less  specialised  instinct  of  graphic  direction,  (centri-
fugal or  centripetal,  horizontal  or  vertical),  than  is  now  organised  in  our
civilised  brains.  But  in  the  well-known  case  of  Lionardo  da  Vinci’s
mirror-writing,  Erlenmeyer  (whom  Ireland  follows)  is  surely  in  error
in  ascribing  it  to  paralysis  of  the  right  hand  ; for  the  mirror-writing
accompanies  elaborate  drawings,  which  must  have  been  executed  before
this  affection  supervened.  It  is  possible  that  Lionardo  may  have  been
ambi-dexti’ous  and  have  written  his  with  his  left  hand,  for

purposes  of  concealment.

What,  then,  do  we  find  to  be  the  position  of  ordinary  right-handed
persons  with  respect  to  mirror-writing  ? Of  course,  anyone  can  learn  to
write  and  to  read  it,  but  is  it  ever  written  without  deliberate  effort,  or
accepted  by  the  eye  as  normal  w'riting  ?

IMost  people,!  fancy,  are,  like  myself,  unable  to  write  SpiegelSchrift,
either  with  right  or  left  hand.  If  I try  to  write  with  my  left  hand,  I
scrawl  roughly,  but  in  the  same  direction,  &c.,  as  usual.  There  are,

* I imagine  this  answer  to  have  been  an  imperfect  reproduction  of  the
once  familiar  cprotation,  “ ]ily  name  is  Xorval,”  wliich  was  sometimes  jocosely
used  by  persons  affecting  to  conceal  their  identitj'.  I take  it,  therefore,  as  a
sally  of  the  “secondary  self’s,” — about  on  the  usual  level  of  jdanchette’s
humour.

! Bernard.  “ De  I’Aphasie,”  p.  235.


42


Automatic  Writing.


[ Jan.  30,


however,  some  right-] lamlers,  (if  this  useful  abl)reviative  term  may  be
allowed),  who,  if  they  try  to  write  with  their  left  hands,  instinctively
25roduce  Spiegel-SclLrift,  thougli  if  they  look  at  what  they  are  wiiting
they  are  j^uzzled  and  cease  to  be  able  to  do  it.

Beyond  these,  again,  comes  a small  class  of  j-iersons,  (one  is  known
to  me,  and  one  is  mentioned  by  Dr.  Wilbur),  who  can  write  simul-
taneously with  botli  hands, — with  the  right  in  ordinaiy,  the  left  in
mirror-writing.  I am  inclined  to  class  these  j^ersons,  even  if  not  in  all
respects  ambi-dextrous, — as  anihi-cerehral,* — capable  of  using  both
hemis2:)heres  concurrently  in  ceidain  ways  which  are  impossible  to
ordinaiy  men.

But  without  insisting  on  this,  let  us  jiass  on  to  the  case  of  left-handers.
It  has  been  observed  by  Dr.  Ireland  (and  inquiries  of  my  own  confirm
tliis)  that  left-handed  children  when  learning  to  write  are  apt  to  Avrite
SpiegelSclirift,  without  j^erceiving  that  it  differs  from  tlie  copy  set  to
them.  And  Buchwald  has  a striking  case,  wliich  Dr.  Ireland  cites,  of  an
aj^hasic  jAatient  Avith  hemiplegia  of  tlie  right  side,  in  Avhom  the  tendency
to  mirror-Avi’iting,  CA'en  Avith  the  right  hand,  jaersisted  after  the  aphasia
had  disajA^Aeared.  To  this  may  be  added  a very  curious  case  of  Dr.
Bernard’s,  f Avhere  an  ataxic  ^Aatient,  Avith  right  hand  pai’tially  jAaialysed
Avrote  Spiegel-ScJi.rift  Avith  hei'  left  Avithout  jAerceiving  that  it  difiered
from  ordinary  Avriting.  She  Avondered  that  she  I'eceiA’ed  no  rejAlies  to
her  letters,  the  addresses  of  Avhich,  of  course,  no  one  could  read.

“ It  may  be  asked,”  says  Dr.  Ireland,  “ is  the  image  or  imiAression,  or
change  in  the  brain-tissue  frimi  Avhich  the  image  is  formed  in  the  mind  of  the
mirror-Avriter,  reversed  like  the  negative  of  a i)hotograiA]i  ; or  if  a double
image  be  formed  in  the  visual  centre,  one  in  the  right  liemisphere  of  tlie  brain

* I A^enture  to  suggest  the  following  terms  as  likely  to  lie  useful  in
discussions  as  to  the  resiiective  operation  of  the  right  and  left  hemispheres  of
the  brain.

Ambi-cerebral.  Originating  in,  or  operating  Avith,  both  hemisjiheres.

De.xtro-cerebral  ,,  ,,  ,,  the  right  hemisphere.

Sinistro-cerebral  ,,  ,,  ,,  ,,  left  ,,

Hemi-cerebral  ,,  ,,  ,,  ,,  one  hemisphere  only.

Two  objections  may  be  taken  to  these  terms  : —

(1)  umhi-cercbral  is  formed  as  though  “cerebrum”  meant  one  hemis-

phere only;  Avhereas  in  hcmi-ccrcbral,  &c.,  “cerebrum”  means  both  hemi-
.spheres.  To  this  I reply  that  such  slight  anomalies  in  compound  Avords  are  very
common,  and  less  confusing  here  than  the  introduction  of  a term  like  ambi-
Jicmisphcrical  Avould  be.

1 (‘2)  That  hotii-cercbral  is  a liarbarous  Avord,  being  half  Greek  and  half  Latin.
I reply  that  the  best  Avay  of  using  Greek  and  Latin  prefixes  is  the  Avay  in  Avhich
the  French  have  used  them  i n the  metric  system  ; Avhere,  for  instance,  'iiiilU
and  kilo  are  prefixed  to  the  tireek  oasic  Avord  wictre , Avith  clearly-defined  differing
significations.  Similarly  I take  hemi  to  mean  that  half  of  a thing  is  spoken  of,
as  hemisphere,  and  semi  to  mean  that  the  object  is  half  one  thing  and  half
another,  as  semi-fluid.

j “ De  FApliasie,”  p.  2.37.


1885.]


Automatic  Writing,


43


and  the  otlier  in  the  left,  do  the  images  lie  to  each  other  in  opposite
directions  ; c.r/.,  C on  the  right  side  and  0 on  the  left  side  t We

can  thus  conceive  that  the  image  on  the  left  side  of  the  brain  being  effiiced
through  disease,  the  inverse  image  would  remain  in  the  riglit  hemisphere,
which  would  render  the  patient  apt  to  trace  the  letters  from  right  to  left,
the  execution  of  which  would  be  rendered  all  the  more  natural  from  the
greater  facility  of  the  left  hand  to  work  in  a centrifugal  direction.  Moreover,
when  one  used  the  left  hand  to  write  there  would  probably  be  a tendency  to
copy  the  inverse  impression  or  image  on  the  right  side  of  tlie  brain.”

The  subject  needs  further  investigation,  but  in  the  meantime  it  is
noticeable  how  closely  this  hypothesis  accords  with  the  explanation
which  must  be  given  on  my  theory  to  the  mirror-writing  of  the
automatist.  I hold  that  in  graphic  automatism  the  action  of  the  right
hemisphere  is  predominant,  because  the  secondary  self  can  appropriate
its  energies  more  readily  than  those  of  the  left  hemisphere,  which  is
more  immediately  at  the  service  of  the  waking  mind.*  Nevertheless,  I
hold  that  it  uses  the  right  hand  habitually,  being  unable  to  overcome  the
incompetence  of  the  left.  But  in  its  right-handed  writing  I should
expect  traces  of  dextro-cerebral  influence  occasionally  to  occur ; and  this
I maintain  that  I have  shown  to  be  the  case,  first  in  the  reversed  ivords
and  secondly  in  the  mirror-writing,  which  graphic  automatism  so
frequently  shows,  f

And  I must  here  remind  the  reader  that  occasional  indications  are  all
that  we  canexi^ectto  find  in  tracing  the  “seat  of  election”  of  supernormal
cerebral  automatism.  The  lines  will  not  be  as  sharply  drawn  as
they  sometimes  are  in  cases  of  traumatic  injury,  or  of  congenital  de-
fect. For  besides  the  alternated  action  of  specialised  centres,  which  I
am  here  suggesting,  other  and  profounder  departures  from  normality
are  likely  to  be  involved,  and  their  results  may  be  such  as  to  leave  no
more  than  a mere  hint  discernible  of  such  a comparatively  minor
change  as  the  replacement  of  some  sinistro-cerebral  by  some  dextro-
cerebral  centre  of  sight  or  speech.

Such  a hint,  I may  add,  in  what  seems  an  appropriate  parenthesis,
I believe  that  we  have  got  in  experimental  thought-transference,  as
well  as  in  graphic  automatism.  The  reader  may  remember  that  in

In  speaking  thus  of  the  two  hemispheres,  I refer  only  to  their  functions  in
connection  with  the  various  stages  of  the  grajjhic  synergy.  I do  not  mean  to
assume  any  doctrine  with  regard  to  them  of  a more  general  character  than  my
argument  absolutely  recpiires.

f Following  the  hints  of  Gley,  d:c.  (see  Berillon,  p.  63),  as  to  the  influence
on  the  carotid  pulse  of  cerebral  activity,  it  would  be  desiralde  to  obtain  tracings
of  the  pulses  of  both  carotid  arteries  during  ordinary  and  during  automatic
writing.  And  the  “cerebral  thermometry”  of  Amidon,  Bert,  Ac. — if  better
established — might  be  used  to  record  a possible  ditl'erence  of  local  cephalic
temperature  during  ordinary  and  during  automatic  speech  or  writing.


4-1


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  30,


Proceedings,  Yol.  I.,  pp.  80-166,  &c.,  we  detailed  some  experiments  in
which  the  image  of  an  arrow,  and  other  figures,  were  telepathically
seen  by  Mr.  Smith  sometimes  in  an  inverted,  but  more  often  in  a
laterally-inverted  or  'perverted  position.  The  results  were  not  uniform,
and  we  were  at  the  time  unable  to  explain  them.*

Some  time  afterwards,  in  1884,  I asked  a young  lady,  whom  I will
call  Miss  K.,  of  highly  sensitive  temperament,  to  try  some  experiments  in
thought-transference  with  her  sister.  She  soon  told  me  that  the  experi-
ments had  succeeded,  but  with  this  strange  peculiarity,  that,  when  the
sister  fixed  her  eyes  on  some  word.  Miss  K.  saw  its  letters  appear  in
her  field  of  mental  vision  in  reverse  order.  Miss  K.  was,  unfortunately,
very  liable  to  headache,  which  these  experiments  quickly  induced,  and
I vfas  only  allowed  one  short  series  of  trials.  I placed  the  word  NET
Ijehind  her,  and  looked  fixedly  at  the  letters.  She  said  that  she  saw
successively  the  letters  T,  E,  N.  I next  chose  SEA,  and  she  saw
A,  E,  S.  I chose  a third  word,  but  she  saw  no  mental  image,  and
headache  stopped  the  experiments.

But  I would  suggest  that  we  have  here  a case  parallel  to  the  back-
ward writing  of  the  left-handed  child,  and  of  the  graphic  automatist ;
and  I trace  in  these  reversed  telepathic  images  a furtlier  indication  of
the  action,  through  the  right  hemisphere,  of  the  secondary  self.f

From  this  digression  I return  to  my  more  immediate  subject.
There  is  another  peculiarity  of  the  early  stages  of  automatic  writing
which  it  has  somewhat  embarrassed  Spiritualists  to  explain.
“Blanchette,”  automatists  often  testify,  “is  sadly  given  to  swear."
Especially  when  the  hand  is  exhausted  by  a long  and  somewhat  barren
eflbrt,  the  word  devil  will  sometimes  be  written  over  and  over  again
with  an  energy  which  shocks  the  unsuspecting  writer.  If,  however,  I
have  been  obliged,  on  the  one  hand,  to  request  the  Shakespeares  and
Byrons  of  “ spirit  messages  ” to  retire,  if  1 may  so  say,  into  the  recesses

See  also  Proceedings,  Part  V.,  p.  .37.  Some  experiments  in  the  telepathic
transference  of  double  numbers  seem,  perhaps,  to  point  the  same  way  : — as  when
38  is  guessed  as  S3,  ric.

f In  ]\Iiss  K.’s  experiments  with  her  sister  contact  was  not  found  needful.
In  my  own  bnef  trials  I did  hold  her  haml,  in  deference  to  a fancy  on  her  part
that  in  trials  with  a comparative  stranger  some  contact  Avouhi  be  necessary.  I
need  not  say  that  liad  she  undertaken  to  lorite  the  word  which  I saw,  contact
would  have  vitiated  the  experiment,  as  my  unconscious  muscular  indications
might  have  guided  lier  movements.  And  even  when  (as  in  this  case)  the  word  is
to  be  spoken,  contact  is  still  olijectionable,  as  the  agent  may  nnsconsciously  trace
the  required  letters  by  sliglit  motions  of  his  hand  on  the  percipient’s.  To  avoid
this  risk,  I grasped  Miss  K.’s  lingers  with  so  linn  and  rigid  a clasp  that  neither
could  any  unconscious  movement  of  mine  have  borne  any  appreciable  relation
to  the  general  force  of  compression  exercised,  nor  were  my  muscles  capable,
without  a relaxation  of  tension  which  I must  have  perceived,  of  the  delicate
movements  required  to  trace  a letter  on  another  hand.


1885.]


Automatic  Writing.


45


of  some  humbler  intelligence,  I am  glad,  on  the  other  hand,  to  be  able
to  suggest  a reassuring  analogy  to  those  whose  peace  of  mind  is  compro-
mised by  association  with  this  ill-omened  sign-manual.

For  I believe  that  in  most  cases,  at  any  rate — for  even  here  I will
not  attempt  to  close  all  loophole  to  a moi’e  realistic  interpretation — the
swearing  of  Planchette  is  just  the  same  thing  as  the  swearing  of  the
aphasic  patient.  The  aphasic  patient  who  has  only  one  or  two
utterances  left  him  has  mostly  an  oath  among  the  number.  * So  oddly
does  he  rap  it  out,  as  an  expression  inditierently  of  disgust  and
gratitude,  discomfort  and  satisfaction,  that  his  ward-neighbour  is  apt
to  refuse  to  keep  a record  of  his  expressions,  on  the  ground  that,  though
the  fellow  says  but  little,  what  he  does  say  is  such  as  no  one  ought  to  be
bound  to  listen  to.  The  physician,  however,  has  another  explanation  of
this  monotonous  crudity.  He  recognises  (it  is  to  Dr.  Hughlings- Jackson
that  the  explanation  is  due)  that  in  the  dissolution  of  speech  the  highest
speech — pi’opositional  utterances— hrst  disappear  : and  that  on  the  lower
level  of  evolution  which  remains,  no  speech  is  left  except  what  has
become  highly  automatic,  so  automatic  that  its  special  machinery  has
become  organised  in  the  right  hemisphere.  How  interjections  are  the
most  instinctive  parts  of  speech,  and  oaths  with  the  uneducated  are  the
most  emotional  of  interjections.  They  represent  the  point  where  speech
is  least  of  an  intellectual  effort,  and  most  of  an  organic  cry.  And
with  all  deference  to  the  refined  automatist,  it  must  be  said  that  with
him,  too,  the  gradual  enfeeblement  of  the  secondary  self’s  directive
control,  the  gradual  exhaustion  of  the  centres  available  for  the  message,
are  bringing  him  down  to  those  highly-organised  f dextro-cerebral
verbal  processes  which  represent  words,  which,  however  little  a man
may  use  them  himself,  are  unavoidably  familiar  to  him  as  the  habitual
expression  of  impatience  and  discontent.

I do  not  positively  assert  that  this  explanation  meets  all  the  cases.
There  are,  perhaps,  some  rare  instances  where  violent  expressions  with
which  the  writer  is  almost  demonstrably  unacquainted  run  from  his
automatic  pen.  We  may  compare  these  to  the  cases  of  delirium  where
the  patient  utters  expressions  which  would  have  been  supposed  to  be
entirely  unknown  to  him.

* M.  Beaudelaire,  for  instance,  the  poet  of  “ Les  Fleurs  du  Mai,”  was
compelled  by  the  sad  irony  of  disease  to  summarise  his  revolt  against  the  moral
order  of  the  universe  into  the  two  reiterated  syllables,  “ Cre  nom  ! ” Bernard,
p.  182,  on  the  authority  of  INI.  Alphonse  Daudet.

t See  Hughlings-Jackson,  in  Brain,  Vol.  11.,  p.  .331.  By  “highly-organised
verbal  processes  ” are  here  meant  the  processes  which  subserve,  7iot  new  and
elaborate  speech,  hut  old,  automatic  speech.  The  process  for  uttering  the
interjection  is  “lower  and  earlier  than  true  speech;”  it  is  “ready  made-up”
(in  Dr.  H. -J.’s  view)  in  the  right  hemisphere,  in  consecpience  of  frec^uent  past
reproduction.


46


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  30,


Wliile  we  are  speaking  of  the  “ recurring  speech  ” of  the  aphemic
patient  we  must  remember  that  these  interjections  are  by  no  means
confined  to  oaths  alone.  Any  kind  of  gibberish,  such  as  monomoinentif,
nazi  bouzi,  macassa,*  may  form  the  one  reiterated  utterance  which  can
still  issue  from  the  injured  brain.

Here  again  we  have  a parallel  to  Mrs.  Brietzcke’s  “ Celen,”  and  to
similai’  cases  known  to  me,  where  some  one  word  or  sentence  has  been
automatically  written  perhaps  hundreds  of  times  in  succession.  I have
observed,  moreover,  that  the  word  or  sentence  thus  repeated  is  often
one  which  has  been  more  or  less  appropriate  on  the  first  occasion  on
which  it  was  used,  and  has  got  rooted,  as  it  were,  in  the  unconscious
mind,  so  that  it  returns  again  and  again  when  wholly  meaningless.
This  is  paralleled  by  the  utterances  of  many  aphasics, — utterances  once
pi’opositional  but  now  senseless, — like  the  “ Come  on  to  me  ” of  a well-
known  case  of  Dr.  Hughlings-Jackson’s,  where  the  signalman  who
repeated  this  parrot-like  cry  had  probably  been  uttering  it  with
meaning  and  intention  at  the  moment  when  he  was  attacked.

Did  the  scope  of  this  paper  permit  me  to  dwell  at  length  on  vocal
a'utQmatism, — on  “ trance-utterances,”  “ speaking  with  tongues,”  and  the
like,  I could  greatly  develojr  these  suggested  analogies.  At  present  it
must  be  enough  merely  to  refer  to  automatic  speech,  and  to  point  out
that  we  have  here  two  paii’s  of  psycho-physical  conditions, — agraphy
and  aphemia  on  the  one  side,  automatic  writing  and  automatic  speech
on  the  other  side,  which  all  of  them  share  certain  marked  characteristics,
not  found  (or,  at  least,  not  found  so  definitely  or  so  generally)  in  any
other  states  of  the  human  organi,sm.

The  first  pair  of  abnormal  states — agraphy  and  aphemia — are
undoubtedly  closely  connected  together.  Their  common  characteristics
are  due  to  a common  cause,  and  that  cause  is  presumably  connected
with  the  replacement  of  some  of  the  activities  of  the  diseased  left
hemisphere  by  activities  of  the  partially-ti’ained,  or  automatically-
acting,  right  hemisphere.

The  second  j^air  of  states — supernormal , as  I term  them — are  also
found  frequently  in  conjunction,  and  are  presumably  closely  connected
together.  Their  common  characteristics  are  likely  to  be  due  to  a com-
mon cause ; and  it  seems,  therefore,  no  unreasonable  hypothesis  that
that  cause  may,  in  some  degree,  be  identical  with  the  cause  which
produces  similar  effects  in  asemic  trouljles  ; viz.,  some  predominance
of  the  activity  of  the  more  automatic  hemisphere.

I have  not  yet,  however,  exhausted  my  parallel.  I have  thus  far
been  dwelling  mainly  on  cases  where  the  synergy  of  graphic  automatism
is  doubly  imperfect, — cases,  that  is  to  say,  Avhere  there  was  neither  a

* Cited  by  Ifernard,  p.  182,  from  Trousseau  and  Durand-Fardel.


1885.1


Automatic  Writing,


47


distinct  internal  image  of  the  Avords  which  wei'e  to  be  written,  nor  a
facile  transmission  of  those  words  to  the  paper.  And  consequently
our  asemic  parallels  have  been  from  cases  where  the  synergy  of  speech
or  Avriting  was  similarly  imjAerfect  in  a double  manner,  that  is  to  say —
Avhen  there  Avas  agraphy,  and  Avord-blindness  along  Avith  agraphy,  or
aphemia,  and  Avord-deafness  along  Avith  apliemia.

But  I must  noAv  consider  cases  of  a more  advanced  kind — cases  on
the  automatic  side,  in  Avhich,  in  my  aubav,  evolution  has  proceeded
further ; Avhich  Avill,  therefore,  be  parallel  to  cases  on  the  asemic  side
Avhere  dissolution  has  not  proceeded  so  far.

And  tii’st,  let  us  consider  the  cases  Avhere  automatic  Avriting  is  j'ler-
formed  rapidly  and  easily,  but  Avithout  any  internal  knoAvledge  of  Avhat  is
being  Avritten,  or  is  about  to  be  Avritten.  These  cases  Avill  be  paralleled
on  the  asemic  side  by  cases  of  Avord-blindness,  Avithout  actual  agrajAhy.
The  ordinary  graphic  automatist  is  by  no  means  necessarily  A'ery  acute
in  reading  Avdiat  he  has  himself  Avritten.  I have  often  been  able  to
furnish  such  an  one  Avith  a “lectio  emendata  ” of  his  OAvn  composition.
But  it  is  curious  to  Avatch  the  process  by  Avhich  the  puzzled  automati.st
enlightens  himself  as  to  Avhat  he  means.  He  usually  appeals  verbally  ;
“ What  is  the  Avord  Avhich  I cannot  read  ? ” And  thereupon  his  hand  re-
traces the  word,  sloAvly  and  Avith  exaggerated  motions  for  each  letter.  Or
if  this  process  is  too  tedious,  he  makes  a guess,  and  says  : “ Is  the  Avord
so-and-so  1 ” If  it  is,  his  hand  or  pencil  gives  three  taps  on  the  table  ;
and  one  tap  if  it  is  not  the  right  Avord — this  being  the  conventional  code
Avhich  on  such  occasions  indicates  assent  or  dissent  by  a mere  muscular
movement.  I liaA'e  often  Avitnessed  this,  and  have  been  struck  l.)y  the
delicate  control  maintained  by  the  unconscious  agency  over  the  muscles
of  the  automatist,  Avhile  at  the  same  time  it  is  plainly  unable  to  affect
his  Avord-seemg  centres,  to  eA’oke  in  him  any  internal  picture  of  the  in-
tended Avord.

When  this  proce.ss  is  seen  going  on,  it  certainly  has  a strange  look
of  possession  y — the  sight  of  a man  ajApealing  to  his  hand  to  help  out  his
brain  is  a curious  reversal  of  ordinary  operations.

The  asemic  parallel  to  this  particular  condition  Avill  plainly  be  some
case  of  pure  word-hlindness  ; Avhere  the  patient  can  Avrite  from  dictation
or  Avrite  a letter  of  his  own  composition,  but  is  totally  unable  to  read
Avhat  is  Avritten.  The  reason  of  the  inability  is,  of  course,  different  in
the  tAvo  cases.  In  the  one  case  it  is  “A^erbal  cecity,”  a specific  inability
to  recognise  Avritten  or  printed  Avords  at  all,  OAving  to  a specific  lesion  of
the  left  hemisphere.  In  the  other  case  it  is  the  ordinary  difficulty
of  reading  bad  handAvriting ; — Avith  this  special  oddity,  that  the  manu-
script Avhich  the  automatist  cannot  read  has  just  that  moment  pro-
ceeded from  his  OAvn  pen.  The  analogy  lies  in  the  fact  that  in  these  tAvo
cases,  and  in  these  perhaps  alone,  Ave  liaA'e  the  graphic  synergy  function-


48


iutomatic  Writing.


[Jan.  30,


ing  with  ease,  but  in  complete  detachment  from  that  directive  imvard
visualisation  of  the  words  to  be  written,  which  habitually  guides  our
hand,  whether  we  actually  at  what  we  are  writing  or  not.  The  plane
of  cleavage  between  writing  and  reading  is  thus  the  same  in  the  ab-
normal and  in  the  supernormal  case,  though  the  forces  which  effected
that  cleavage  are  altogether'  diffei'ent.

On  a close  examination  of  receirt  cases  of  word-blindness,  another
point  comes  out  which  is  not  without  interest  for  us.  M.  de  Capdeville*
noted  the  curious  fact  that  word-blind  persons  are  sometimes  able  to
read  manuscript  but  not  print.  The  reason  of  this  was  first  guessed  by
M.  Charcot  from  observation  of  a Mr.  H.  P.’s  case.  I extract  a
passage  from  M.  Charcot’s  account,!  of  which  the  reader  will  perceive
the  significance.

“ II  e'crit  sans  hesitation  son  noni  et  son  adresse,  une  longue  phrase,  et
meme  une  longue  lettre,  sans  fautes  notables  d’orthographie,  sans  ^rasser  de
mots.  ‘ J’ecris,’  dit-il,  ‘ comme  si  j’avais  les  yeux  termes  ; je  ne  lis  pas  ce
que  j’eci'is.’  . . . II  vient  d’ecrire  le  nom  de  I’hospice  ; je  I’ecrisa  morr

toursur  une  autre  feuille  de  papier,  et  je  le  lui  donne  a lire  ; il  no  pent  pas
d’abord  ; il  s’efforce  de  le  faire,  ct  ])endant  qu’il  se  livre  a ce  travail  nous
remarcpions  qu’avec  le  bout  de  son  index  de  la  main  droite  il  retrace  une  h
une  les  lettres  qui  constituent  le  mot,  et  arrive  apres  beaucoup  de  peine  h
dire  : ‘La  Salpetriere.’  On  ecrit  ‘rue  d’  Aboukir,’  I’adresse  de  son  ami  ; il
trace  avec  le  doigt  dans  r espace  les  lettres  qui  ccmposent  le  mot,  et  aprfes
quelques  instants  dit : ‘C’est  la  rue  d’Aboukir,  I'adresse  de  monami.’

“ Ainsi  I’alexie  n’est  jias  absolue  pour  recriture.  La  lecture  est  seulement
extremement  difficile,  et  elle  n’est  possible  cpie  sous  le  controle  des  notions
fournies  j^ar  les  mouvements  executes  par  la  main  dans  I’acte  d’ecrire.
C’est  evideniment  lit  le  sens  musculaire  qui  est  en  jeu,  et  ce  sont  les  notions
qu’il  fournit  qui  permcttent  seules  au  malade  de  verifier  les  notions  vagues
qu’il  recueille  par  la  vision.”

It  will  be  observed  that  tliis  last  sentence  would  have  been  equally
applicable  had  M.  Charcot  been  desci’ibing  the  slow  demonstrative
word-tracing, or  the  conventionally  significant  pencil-tapjjing,  with  which,
as  I have  already  descriljed,  the  graphic  automatist  supj)lements  and
exj^ounds  his  own  indecipheralile  scrawl.

Between  the  two  states,  then,  asemic  and  automatic,  abnormal  and
supernormal,  we  have  once  more  detected  a resemblance  which,  however
caused,  is  hardly  shai-ed  by  any  third  p.sychical  condition.  In  order  to
find  another  case  of  a writer  assisting  his  percej^tions  of  what  he  has
wi'itten  by  movements  imitative  of  the  act  of  writing,  we  should  have
to  go  back  to  the  young  child’s  first  efforts,  when  the  instinct  of  writing

* In  file  Marseille  MMical,  1880,  cited  by  Ileinard.  See  also  .some  of
ISIdlle.  Nadine  Skworfzoffs  cases  (“De  la  Cecito  et  de  la  Surditc  des  i\Iots  dans
TAphasie,”  1881),  cited  by  Bernard  and  Pitres.

f Bernard,  op.  cit.  p.  84.


1885.]


Automatic  Writing.


49


-svas  not  as  yet  sufficiently  specialised  to  be  able  to  dispense  with  a
sympathetic  contortion  of  the  whole  body.  And  at  that  period,  may
we  say  ? the  child’s  h/t  hemisphere  was  very  much  in  the  condition  as
to  lack  of  training  for  the  graphic  synergy  in  which  his  right  hemisphere
permanently  remains.

There  is  yet  one  more  phase  of  asemic  troubles  on  which  I ought,
for  the  sake  of  symmetry,  to  touch.  It  is  the  case — a rare  one — where
there  is  inability  to  write,  but  ability  to  read — agraphy  without  word-
blindness.  But  the  parallel  to  this  on  the  automatic  side  will  plainly
be  a case  where  automatic  icriting  is,  at  any  rate,  not  the  prominent
feature.  For  if  the  secondaiy  self  has  command  enough  over  word-
picturing  centres  to  make  its  message  known  interiorly,  it  need  hardlj'
resort  to  the  pen.  And,  therefore,  although  no  branch  of  automatic
action  is  more  interesting  than  that  which  writes  its  Imrning  message  as
with  “ a hand  upon  the  wall,”  or  inscribes  it  inwardly  as  “ upon  the
tablets  of  the  heart,”  I must,  for  the  present,  pass  this  topic  by,  as
scarcely  germane  to  our  discussion.

And  finally  ; — since  we  have  been  tracing  upwards  the  various  stages
of  asemic  troul>le,from  complete  inco-ordination  to  co-ordination  defective
only  in  part,  and  have  been  endeavouring  to  trace  their  parallel  in
automatic  performance,  finally,  we  may  ask  ourselves  what  is  the
automatic  parallel  to  the  normal  writing  of  conscious  men  1

Are  there  cases  where  the  secondary  self  has  a control  over  the  graphic
synergy  as  undisputed  as  that  which  the  primary  self  ordinarily
possesses  1 Are  there  cases  where  mental  picture  and  manual  act  are
alike  dominated  by  the  same  supernormal  will  1

Such  cases  there  assuredly  are,  and  although  their  discussion  will
not  fall  within  our  jDresent  limits,  yet  it  may  be  ho})ed  that  the  mere
attempt  to  co-ordinate  them  with  other  forms  of  automatic  writing  may
not  be  without  instruction.  For  it  is  plain  that  this  last  class  must  in-
clude all  cases  where  writing  is  produced  in  a supernormal  state  in  which
tliere  is  no  intercurrence  of  consciousness  of  the  ordinary  kind.  Such
writing  may  be  produced  during  what  seems  normal  sleep,  by  somnam-
bulists, or  in  the  hypnotic  trance,  by  hynotic  sleep-wakers,  or  in  spon-
taneous trance,  to  which  condition,  indeed,  the  mere  act  of  graphic  auto-
matism seems  sometimes  to  lead  or  predispose.

I must  not  here  discuss  these  difficult  phenomena.  To  do  so  would
prolong  beyond  all  bounds  a paper  which  is  already  inconveniently
crowded  with  detail.  But  nevertheless  a discussion  of  automatic  writinsr

O

would  be  very  imperfect  which  did  not  mention  these,  its  highest
phases,  with  some  attempt  to  indicate  the  relation  in  which  the  lower
manifestations  stand  towards  this  ultimate  victory  of  the  secondary  self
(so  to  say)  along  the  whole  line.

And  I shall  here  endeavour  to  present  a synoptic  view  of  the  various

u


50


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  30,


automatic  conditions  which  I have  been  discussing,  with  the  aseniic
conditions  which,  in  my  view,  are  parallel  to  them,  arranged  for  ready
comparison.

Any  such  synopsis,  even  if  it  came  from  an  expositor  far  Ijetter
qualified  than  I,  must  of  irecessity  be  very  crude  and  imperfect.  My
own  attempt  is  rude  in  the  extreme ; it  is  not  intended  to  resist  attack,
but  to  give  such  preliminary  clearness  as  I can  to  conceptions  which
others  may  form  more  correctly  than  I.  Following  the  Baconian  hint,
when  absolute  truth  is  beyond  our  reach,  we  should  at  least  endeavour
that  our  more  fortunate  successors  may  need  rather  to  distinguish  it
from  our  error  than  to  disentangle  it  from  our  contusion.

I shall  not,  however,  speak  altogether  without  authority,  for  I shall
begin  by  reproducing  M.  Charcot’s  scheme  of  the  processes  of  speech
and  writing,  given  by  Dr.  Bernai’d,  but  not,  so  far  as  I know,  as  yet
jmblished  in  England.*

The  tetters  by  which  I designate  the  various  centres  are  selected  by
myself,  and  will  be  explained  later.

In  the  first  place,  Dr.  Charcot’s  diagram  may  be  briefly  explained
as  follows  ; —

First  as  regards  the  auditory  and  vocal  as2)ect  of  verbalisation.!

A bell  rino's  near  a child.

The  child’s  auditory  nerves  convey  the  sound  to  the  common  auditory
centre,  where  it  “ forms  a deposit,” — becomes  gradually  an  “ organised
image  ” by  repetition.

A man  calls  Bell  ! and  points  to  the  bell  which  has  rung.

The  child's  auditory  nerves  convey  this  sound  also  to  the  common
auditory  centre,  where  it  forms  an  oi'ganised  image  in  close  connection
with  the  preceding  one,  l)ut  in  the  v)ord-h earing  centre,  the  centre
specially  organised  for  the  intelligent  perception  of  articulate  speech.

* I must  not  omit  to  notice  Dr.  Broadbent’s  diagnam  {Brain,  Vol.  I. , pp.  493-1)
which,  though  less  suited  to  iny  present  ]iuri)ose,  may  remind  us  in  how  many
ways  cerebral  operations  of  this  complex  character  may  he  instructively
represented.  In  the  diagram  an<l  ex]>lanation  in  S.P.ll.  Proc.,  Vol.  II.,
pp.  168,  169,  C corresponds  to  what  is  here  called  the  ideational  centre,  11  to  the
visual  centres.  INI.  Dejerine’s  schemata  (“  Ktude  sur  I’Aphasie  dans  les  Lesions
de  rinsula  de  Iteil,”  Pcvxc  de  Medccinc,  March  10th,  18S.">)  practically  include
the  “ common  auditory  ” and  “ common  visual  ” centres  of  hi.  Charcot’s  figure
in  the  “ ideational  centre.”  ItJiiust  he  remembered  that  this  is  here  a mere
matter  of  diagrammatic  clearness,  and  that  no  definite  assertion  as  to  the  extent
or  nature  of  the  centres  classed  as  “ ideational  ” is  necessary  to  my  argument.

Professor  Lichtheim’s  schemata  (Br(tin,  January,  188.3)  would  necessitate  a
far  more  elaborate  system  of  notation  than  I have  here  employed.  Professor
Liehtheim’s  views,  though  apparently  rpiite  indepemlent  of  hi.  Charcot's,  do  not,
I think,  differ  therefrom  in  any  point  essential  to  my  argument.

t Verbalisation  is  a useful  word  of  Dr.  Hughlings-Jacksoii’s  to  sum  up  the
cerebral  processes  concerned  in  hearing  and  uttering,  reading  and  writing,  words.


1885.]


Automatic  Writing.


51


The  child’s  ideational  centres  register  these  images,  and  he  is  fully
aware  that  the  word  “ bell  ” corresponds  to  the  special  sound.

The  child  now  wishes  to  pronounce  the  word  “bell.”  His  word-


Dr.  Charcot’s  Diagram  of  Spoken  and  Written  Speech.
(Symbols  moditied  as  explained  below.)

From  Dr.  Ikrnard’s  “ De  V Apiiasie.”


hearing  centre  supplies  him  with  an  internal  image  of  the  sound
required.  He  transfers  this  to  his  icord-uttering  centre,  which,  after
some  practice,  articulates  the  soiuid  “ liell.”

E 2


52  Automatic  Writing.  [Jan.  30,

Similarly  with  regard  to  the  visual  and  graphic  aspect  of
vei'balisation

A bell  is  placed  before  the  child’s  eyes.

The  optic  nerve  transmits  the  bell’s  image  to  the  common  visual
centre,  where  it  “ forms  a deposit,” — effects  some  slight  permanent
change.

A man  shows  the  child  this  written  word  “ bell  ” and  points  to  a bell
(if  tlie  child  is  deaf),  or  says  “ bell,”  and  thus  appeals  to  the  already
organised  connection  between  the  obiect  “bell”  and  the  sound
“bell.”

The  optic  nerve  conveys  the  written  sign  to  the  word-seeing  centre,
in  close  connection  with  the  preceding  deposit.

The  ideational  centres  register  these  images,  in  connection  with  the
auditory  bell-images  already  registered.

The  child  now  wishes  to  write  the  word  “ bell.”  His  word-seeing
centre  supplies  him  with  an  inward  image  of  the  required  word,  and  his
word-writing  centre,  after  much  practice,  is  able  to  reproduce  the
written  word  “ bell.”

How  I do  not  supjjose  that  Dr.  Charcot  means  to  imply  tliat  this
diagram  is  at  all  a complete  representation  of  the  facts  of  the  case.  All
that  can  be  said  is  that  it  conveys  as  much  truth  (and  as  little  error)  as
so  simple  a diagram  of  so  complex  a process  can  convey.

I have  now  to  explain  the  symbols  whicli  I have  affixed  to  Dr.
Charcot’s  centres.  By  XX'  I mean  the  ideational  centres  (waiving  the
question  as  to  whether,  in  ultimate  analysis,  these  are  themselves  to  be
considered  as  sensori-motor)  of  the  left  and  right  hemisphere  conjointly  ;
activities  of  the  right  hemisphere  being  in  each  case  indicated  by  the
dash  abov'e  the  letter.

By  HH'  I mean  the  word-hearing  centres  of  the  two  hemispheres
conjointly.  Following  Hughlings-.Jackson  I assume  that  H'  is  a real
quantity — that  there  is  a certain  potential  educal)ility  of  the  dextro-
cerebral  word-centres,  although  the  sinistro-cerebral  word-centres
habitually  do  all,  or  almost  all,  the  work.

By  SS'  I mean  the  word-seeing  centres  of  the  two  hemispheres  con-
jointly. Here  again  S in  a right-handed  man  is  entirely  dominant,
and  the  existence  of  8'  rests  on  inference  mainly.

By  UU'  I mean  the  word-uttering  centres  of  the  two  hemispheres
conjointly.  Here  again  U'  must  l>e  conceived  as  habitually  taking
part  only  in  the  utterance  of  automatic  or  highly-organised  speech.
( H ughlings- J ackson. )

By  W \V' I mean  the  word-writing  centres  of  the  two  hemispheres
conjointly.  It  is  on  the  existence  and  specific  tendencies  of  W'  that
our  further  arguments  will  mainly  turn.

I shall  now  attempt  to  give  a conspectus  of  noi’mal  v'erbalisation,


1885.]


Automatic  Writing.


53


and  also  of  cerebrally-defective  verljalisation,  or  aseiuia,  in  the  shape
of  a series  of  formulse.  Tlie  several  quantities  in  each  formula  repre-
sent factors  in  a pliysiological  co-ordination,  elements  of  the  vocal  or
graphic  synei’gy.  I am  not  acquainted  with  any  other  attempt  at
formula  of  this  kind,*  and  I have  hesitated  by  what  sign  to  connect  these
collaborating  nervous  energies.  But  the  sign  of  additioyi  seems
perhaps  the  fittest  ; as  in  the  case  of  chemical  formulae,  where  -^  sign
denotes,  not  a mere  mechanical  juxtaposition,  but  a mechanical  juxta-
position leading  to  action  and  reaction  between  the  substances  thus
juxtaposed.

We  begin,  tlien,  with  the  series  of  formulae  for  the  speech  of  aright-
handed  man,  in  health  or  asemic  disease.


xx'+iiir+uu'...


xx'-fHir


XX'-f  HII'  + U'


f XX'-hH'-rUlT'
1 XX'  +UU'


Xormal  speech,  involving  ideational  centres  of
l)oth  hemispheres,  word-hearing  centre  of  left,
and  subordinately  of  right,  hemisphere,  and
word-uttering  centre  of  left,  and  subordinately
of  right,  hemisphei’e.

Imagined  or  inward  speech.  The  ideational
centres  conceive  tlie  speech,  (perhaps  as  an
articulatory  movement,)  and  the  word -hearing
centre  represents  it  inwardly,  but  no  attempt
at  utterance  is  made.  This  formula  will  also
represent  some  of  the  cases  under  the  next
heading.

Pure  aphemia.  The  patient  hears  and  under-
stands what  is  said  to  him,  and  can  imagine
the  desired  replies  ; but  he  cannot  utter  these
replies ; he  can  only  utter  words  whose
vocalisation  lias  become  automatic  ; — words
whose  corresponding  articulatory  movements
have  become  organised  in  the  right  hemi-
sphere,— words  which,  in  Dr.  Hughlings-
Jackson’s  phrase,  are  “kept  ready  made-up.”

Pure  word-deafness.  The  patient  can  still  speak
fluently,  but  cannot  understand  questions
asked,  or  his  own  talk  when  he  hears  it.  It
is  doubtful  liow  far  a dextro-cerebral  word-
hearing centre  is  active  here, — in  default  of


* While  this  is  passing  through  the  press,  my  attention  has  been  called  to
the  fact  that  Dr.  Hughlings-Jackson  has  himself  employed  somewhat  similar
formuhe,  (to  represent  muscular  movements,)  in  an  article  in  the  Medical  Press
and  Circular,  November  loth,  1882.  Dr.  Hughlings-.Jackson’s  contributions  are
scattered  through  so  many  periodicals  that  it  is,  unfortunately,  very  hard  to  be
.sure  that  one  has  seen  them  all.


[Jan.  30,


o4


( XX'+H'+U'
XX'+H'

(xx'  +U'


Automatic  Writing.

tlie  paralysed  or  disintegrated  sinistro-cerebral
word-hearing  centre.  If  no  word-hearing
centi'e  is  functioning,  the  speech  will  be
parallel  to  the  congenital  deaf-mute’s,  which
would  be  represented  by  the  same  foi'inula
XX'-hUU',  having  been  learnt  by  imitation
of  the  articulatory  movements  of  others,  with
no  inward  w'ord-hearing  faculty.

...  Aphemia  combined  wdth  w’ord-deafness.  The
patient  can  neither  understand  questions  nor
answer  intelligibly.  Fragments  of  word-hear-
ing and  word  - uttering  faculty  genei'ally
subsist,  probably  of  dextro-cerebral  origin.


Passing,  for  the  sake  of  added  clearness,  to  the  case  of  a left-hander,
we  may  represent  his  ideational  centres  by  X'X, — indicating  a
presumable  pre-eminence  of  the  rigid  hemisphere, — and  similarly  for
his  word-hearing  and  word-uttering  centres.  The  series  for  the  verbal
audition  and  vocalisation  of  the  left-hander  will,  therefore,  be  as  briefly
indicated  below.


X'X-fH'H-fU'U...

XX-fH'H

X'X+H'H+U  ...
fX'X  + H + U'U  ...
( X'X  +U'U

( X'X+H+U

X'X+H
' X'X  +u


Xormal  speech.
Inward  speech.
Pure  aphemia.

Pure  word- deafness.


Aphemia  combined  v,dth  word-deafness.


Xext  as  to  writing.  In  the  normal  writing  of  a right-handed  man
both  hemispheres  will  co-operate  in  forming  the  idea  of  writing —
(perhaps  as  a specialised  manual  movement,  reading  being  conceived  as
a specialised  ocular  adjustment) — in  the  internal  of  the

writing,  and  in  the  act  of  writing.  P^epeating,  then,  the  formula^
corresponding  to  those  already  obtained  for  sjwech,  we  have,  for  a right-
handed  man,  the  following  series.

XX'+SS'-fWAV'  ...  Xormal  writing.

XX'-t-SS'  Reading,  or  internal  imagination  of  writing.

This  formula  will  also  represent  some  of  the
cases  under  the  ne.xt  heading.

XX'-t-S>S'-t- A\"'  ...  Pure  agraphy.  Tlie  patient  can  read  ljut  can-

not write  intelligibly.


1885.]


Automatic  Writing.


55


j XX'  + S'  + 5VW'
I XX'  +WW'


jXX'  + S'  + AV'
■ XX' + 8'

‘ XX'  +W'


...  Pure  word-bliudness.  The  patient  can  write
fluently,  hut  cannot  read  what  he  or  others
have  written.  Here  a"ain  it  is  doubtful  how

O

far  a dextro-cerebral  woi’d-seeing  centre  is
active.  If  none  such  is  functioning,  the
writing  resembles  that  of  a congenitally-
blind  man,  which  might  be  represented  by
the  same  formula  XX'  + WW',  ha\'ing  been
acquired  by  means  of  tactile  impressions,
without  the  aid  of  an  inward  visual  repre-
sentation of  the  words  written.

...  Agraphy  combined  with  word-blindness.  The
patient  can  neither  read  nor  wiite  intelligibly.
8ometimes,  though  having  some  conception  of
w riting,  he  can  make  no  graphic  movement
wdiatever.  Sometimes  his  hand  scrawds
vaguely,  with  apparently  no  conception  of  any
definite  word  to  be  'written.


The  same  series,  with  transposition  of  the  signs  of  the  hemispheres,
will  serve  for  the  (normal  and  asemic)  visual  and  graphic  verltalisa-
tion  of  the  left-handed  man.

Thus  far  1 havm  mainly  been  endeavouring  to  explain  the  views  of
M.  Charcot,  modified  by  those  of  Dr.  Hughlings- Jackson  and  others.

I now  proceed  to  the  more  original  part  of  my  task.

I have  spoken  of  a secondary  self — a second  focus  of  mentation —
which  I assume  to  be  active  in  graphic  automatism.

I propose  to  call  this  second  focus  of  mentation  xx',  and  to  repeat
the  above  formuhe  with  this  symbol,*  instead  of  the  XX',  which  repre-
sents the  normal  co-operation  of  the  two  hemispheres  in  the  mentation
of  the  primary  self.

I shall  thus  in  some  measure  test  the  reality  of  this  second  focus.  If
this  is  a merely  exaggerated  and  misleading  title  which  I have  given  to
some  scattered  hysterical  phenomena,  I am  likely  to  find  it  impossil)le  to
assign  a rational  meaning  to  my  new  series  of  formula?.

If,  on  the  other  hand,  I can  show  that  each  one  of  my  series  of
formulfe  involving  xx'  is  explicable — on  the  same  principles  on  wdiich
the  formulce  involving  XX'  were  explained — as  representing  a well-


I mean  flie  symbol  xx'  to  imply  that  there  is  mentation  of  a supernormal
kind  presumably  acting  through  both  hemisplieres.  Hut  as  we  have  no  means
of  knowing  w’hether  the  seat  of  this  secondary  mentation  is  in  any  way
dependent  on  congenital  right-  or  left-handedness,  I do  not  transpose  the
factors  xx'  in  any  of  the  formulm.  If  preferred,  the  symbol  X"  might  be  used
for  the  secondary  self,  and  the  question  of  the  predominance  of  sinistro-  or
dextro-cerebral  ideational  centres  in  supernormal  mentation  altogether  avoided.


56


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  30,


defined  plienoinenou  of  automatic  or  partially  automatic  verbalisation
which  has  actually  l)een  observed,  I shall  have  some  primd  facie  case
for  assuming  that  xx'  represents  in  some  way  a real  psycho-physical  fact.

Or,  to  avoid  the  risk  of  over-statement,  let  me  repeat  this  in  some-
what different  language.

On  one  side  we  have  the  Avell-known  series  of  asemic  troubles,  more
or  less  deOnite  defects  of  the  verljalising  faculty,  which  stand  to  each
other  in  relations  referable  to  certain  more  or  less  definite  and  circum-
scribed cerebral  lesions.

On  the  other  side  we  have  the  vague  and  hitherto  unexplored
congeries  of  phenomena  included  under  the  term  of  automatic  writing.

Now  supjiose  that  automatic  writing  were  purely  what,  to  use  the
vaguest  word  which  can  claim  a place  in  scientific  nomenclature,  is
called  a hysterical  phenomenon.  Or,  disentangling  the  central  mean-
ing which  this  word  is  often  used  to  cover,  let  us  suppose  that  graphic
automatism  is  the  2)roduct  of  a kind  of  half-insane  cunning.  Surely  the
charactei'istic  of  its  different  forms  will  then  be  caprice.  No  scientific
(dassification  of  them  will  be  possible  ; the  moi’e  we  look  into  them  the
more  random  and  baffling  will  they  appear.  They  will  not  even  have
the  orderliness  which  is  discernible  among  asemic  troubles;  for  that
orderliness  depends  on  the  original  orderliness  of  the  cerebral  arrange-
ments on  which  the  disease  operates  (so  that  even  the  disorderliness  of
the  disease  is  referable  to  a certain  law),  whereas  if  graphic  automatism
be  dependent  on  the  caprices  of  a half-insane  cunning,  there  is  no
known  law  of  aberration  by  help  of  which  such  caprice  can  be  either
predicted  or  described.

I have  used  the  term  “ half-insane  cunning,”  because  that  seem.s
most  neai'ly  to  convey  the  view  intimated  rather  than  expressed  as  to
phenomena  of  this  kind  in  ordinary  physiological  treatises.  Sometliing-
of  half-conscious  deception,  something  of  moral  distortion,  seems  always
to  be  presupposed.  If  that  be  so,  the  argument  of  my  last  paragraph
seems  to  apply.  Hut  Ave  might,  of  course,  make  another  supposition,
and  say  that  graphic  automatism  is  a symptom  of  some  real  and  definite
cerebral  malady,  not,  indeed,  involving  organic  lesion,  but  shoAving  itself
in  a functional  disorder  Avhich  folloAvs  someAvhat  the  same  course  in
different  individuals.  Now  this  A’ieAv,  could  it  be  established,  Avould
not  be  necessarily  inconsistent  Avith  the  suggestions  of  this  paper.
“Perturbation  that  masks  evolution”  is  my  phrase  for  the  mode  of
manifestation  of  the  secondary  self.  That  in  some  graphic  automatism,  at
least,  there  actually  is  something  evolntionary,  I hold  that  my  telepathic
cases  (IMrs.  NeAvnham’s,  etc.)  suffice  to  show.  That  there  perturhation
also  I have  throughout  asserted  ; and  to  Avhat  degree  the  phenomena  of
that  i)erturbation  are  to  be  considered  as  in  themselves  evolutiAm  or
dissolutivp,  is  a question  as  hard  to  ansAver  here  as  in  certain  parallel


1885.]


Automatic  Writing.


57


cases,  already  alluded  to,  which  concern  the  development  or  the  repro-
duction of  the  physical  frame  of  man.  "When  we  come  to  consider
t’ocrt^ automatism  (the  phenomena  of  “ revivals,”  “possession,”  etc.),  such
questions  will  be  strongly  forced  on  our  attention.  But  in  graphic
automatism  (apart  from  the  hypothesis,  already  discussed,  of  hysterical
or  capricious  deception  or  self-deception),  there  is  very  little,  as  it  seems
to  me,  to  suargest  definite  cerebral  disorder.

On  the  contrary,  my  cases  of  graphic  automatism  have  (as  has  been
seen)  for  the  mo.st  part  been  developed  by  sane  and  healthy  persons  for
experimental  purposes, — are  not  accompanied  with  any  history  of  inter-
current brain-troubles, — and  resemljle  in  their  general  character  the
acquirement  of  an  accomplishment  rather  than  the  invasion  of  a disease.
I hold,  then,  that  I am  justified  in  provisionally  extending  to  these
cases  in  general  the  designation  of  “ supernormal,”  with  its  implication
of  an  evolutionary  element,  which  is,  no  doubt,  more  demonstrably
applicable  to  the  telepathic  cases  alone.

And  in  order  to  te.st  this  view,  I urge  that  if  automatic  writing  be
the  product,  not  of  an  undefined  dissolution  of  faculty,  but  of  an  obscure
evolutionary  nisus  ; — if  it  be  oi’iginated,  not  by  the  half-insane  cunning
of  the  self  familiar  to  us,  but  by  the  rudimentary  efforts  of  a secondary
self  to  emerge  into  objective  activity  ; — then  it  is  likely  that  there  will
be  some  order  discernible  among  the  manifestations  ; — some  “ seat  of
election  ” among  cerebral  faculties,  in  which  this  secondary  self
will  be  found  to  establish  itself  most  perceptibly, — some  “ path  of
least  resistance”  by  which  its  externalisation  will  be  most  commonly
effected.

And  what  I am  at  f)i’esent  maintaining  is  that  in  cases  where
automatic  writing  occurs  during  the  waking  consciousness  of  the
pi’imary  self,  then  the  right  hemisphere  is,  to  a certain  extent,  the
“seat  of  election  ” of  the  secondary  self,  and  the  word-seeing  and  word-
writing centres  of  that  hemisphere  form,  to  a certain  extent,  the
readiest  path  of  externalisation  for  its  inward  activity.

And  I urge  that  this  view  becomes  j'>ro  tanto  more  probable  if  I can
show  (as  I have  tried  to  show  by  the  concrete  examples  which  1 am
now  about  to  summarise  in  formulse)  that  the  observed  phenomena  of
graphic  automatism  do  in  fact  fall  naturally  into  an  arrangement  which
is  roughly  parallel  to  the  arrangement  into  which  asemic  troubles  fall,
when  arranged  according  to  the  seat  which  disease  has  elected,  and  the
path  of  externalisation  which  is  then  left  still  open  for  the  mutilated
primary  self.

First,  then,  let  us  give  the  formulae,  invohdng  xx', which  are  parallel
to  the  formulae  representing  (normal  and  asemic)  auditive  and  vocal
verbalisation  of  the  primary  self  of  a right-handed  man.


58


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  30,


xx'  + HH'  + UU'  ...


-x.x'  + HH'


x.k'  + HK'  + U'


( xx'  + H'  + UIT'
) xx'  +UU'


j'xx'  + H'  + ir  ...
xx'  + H'

Vxx'  +U'


Speech  of  somnambule,  entranced  hypnotic
subject,  etc.  Both  hemispheres  (so  far  as
active)  are  at  tlie  service  of  the  secondary
self.  All  the  observable  mentation  is  super-
normal.

Internal  audition  ; the  demon  of  Socrates,  and
“ messages  of  revelation”  in  general,  where
not  referable  to  disease  of  the  brain.

“ Speaking  with  tongues.”  Automatic  speech
when  there  is  an  inward  conception  of  the
message  to  be  given,  but  ditiiculty  in  its
delivery,  resulting  perhaps  in  mere  vague
reiterated  cries.  The  sinistro-cerel)ral  word-
uttering  centre  has  not  passed  under  the
control  of  the  secondary  self.

“ Trance-utterance  in  the  normal  .state.”  Woi’ds
are  poured  forth  fluently  by  a waking  and
conscious  person,  who,  howevei’,  has  no
internal  perce2:)tion  of  his  own  words,  to
which  he  listens  like  one  of  the  bystanders.
The  word-hcai'ing  centres  of  one  or  both
hemispheres  are  still  una^ijoropriated  by  the
secondary  self.

Rudimentai’y  automatic  speech.  Ison-proposi-
tional words,  or  mere  cries,  are  uttered,
sometimes  with,  and  sometimes  Avithout,
internal  knoAvledge  that  some  kind  of  speech
is  intended.  In  xx'-f  II'  Ave  have  the  lowest
form  of  vocal  automatism,  Avhere  no  sound  is
uttered,  but  there  is  mere  gasjui'g  and  sigh-
ing, Avith  an  indistinct  impulse  to  speak.


Finally,  Ave  must  give  the  series,  involving  x.x',  Avhich  is  parallel  to
that  Avhich  represents  the  (normal  and  asemic)  visual  and  grai)hic
verbalisation  of  the  primary  self.  The  folloAving  formuhe  will  represent
the  graphic  automatism  of  a right-handed  man.

xx'-b  SS'  -f  WW'  Writing  of  the  somnambule,  hypnotic  subject,

itc.  The  Avord-seeing  and  Avord-writing  centres,
so  far  as  actiA'e,  are  entirely  at  the  service  of
the  secondary  self.*  All  the  observable
mentation  is  sujAernornial.


■*  It  Avould  not  surprise  me  to  find  a right-handed  hy)>notic  sAiliject  becoming
slightly  more  left-handed  (or  amhi-dextrous)  in  the  sleep-Avaking  state.  I have
myself  a hypnotic  subject  Avho,  from  temporary  disablement  of  her  right  arm,


18So.]


Automatic  Writing.


59


XX'  + SS'


xx'  + SS'  + W'


f xx'  + S'  + WW'
■(  xx'  +WW'


^ xx'  + S'+W'
. xx'  + S'

' xx'  +W'


Inwardly-realised  message  in  writing,  wdiich
mav  Le  either  imagined  as  internal  (written
on  the  heart,  itc.),  or  externalised  as  a
hallucination  (seen  written  on  the  wall,  A;c.)
This  complex  phenomenon  (belonging  both  to
insanity  and  to  ecstacy)  does  not  fall  strictly
within  our  present  limits  and  cannot  now  be
fully  described.

Grapliic  automatism  with  inward  word-picture.
Case  where  words  are  llaslied  on  the  Ijrain
with  impulse  to  wulte,  or  in  tlie  act  of  writing
tliem  (as  in  case  sent  by  Professor  tSidgwick),
but  witli  more  or  less  difficulty  in  writing.
The  secondary  self, while  momentarily  p)ossess-
ing  itself  of  the  waking  man’s  sinistro-cerebral
word-seeing  centre,  does  not  altogether  subju-
gate his  corresponding  word-writing  centre.

Graphic  automatism  wuthout  inward  word-
picture.  Case  where  words  are  written  wuth
ease,  l:»ut  without  knowledge  of  what  is  being
written.  The  word-seeing  supervision  ( if
any ) which  guides  this  script  is  probably
exercised  by  the  dextro-cerebral  centres  ; for
the  sinistro-cerebral  remain  at  the  service  of
the  automatist’s  conscious  will ; and  he  reads
a book  voluntarily  while  he  writes  auto-
matically.

Piudimentary  graphic  automatism.  The  group
of  phenomena  with  wdiich  we  have  sjiecially
had  'to  deal.  The  sinistro-cereln-al  word-
seeing  and  w'ord-hearing  centres  continue
mainly  at  the  service  of  the  primary  self ; and


has  been  accustomed  to  write  with  her  left  hand  in  ordinary  rigid wurd  script,
— just  as  with  the  right  hand.  I!ut  when  I asked  her,  in  the  trance,  to  write
her  name  with  lier  left  hand  she  wrote  it  in  Spicgcl-Schrift,  and  thi.s  tendency
persisted  for  about  a minute  after  I woke  her.  But  the  phenomenon  may
have  been  due  to  suggestion  merely  ; for  filthough  no  hint  was  given  during
the  trance,  nor  had  that  special  experiment  ever  been  suggested  in  the  subject's
presence,  yet  I found  that  she  had  heard  mirror-writing  discus.sed  some
fortnight  before,  and  I believe  (as  Bernheim,  for  instance,  found  in  experiments
with  magnets,  [Rev.  Phil.,  IMarch,  1885)  that  the  hypnotised  subject’s  uncon-
scious mind  catches  up  and  works  out  hints  of  a very  slight  kind.  The  faint
persistence  of  the  idea  after  awakening  Avould,  of  course,  be  ijuite  in  accordance
■^vith  analogy.


60


Automatic  Writing.


[Jan.  30,


consequently  the  writing  produced  resembles
that  of  the  word -blind  and  agraphic  patient,
— or  sometimes  is  mirror-writing,  like  the
untrained  left-handed  cliild’s.

Thus  far  I have  dealt  only  with  tlie  automatist’s  secondary  self,
introducing  neither  telepathic  impact  from  anotlier  living  human  mind,
nor  spiritual  influence  from  a disembodied  intelligence.  Let  us  denote
telepathic  influence  by  Y,  spiritual  by  Z.  We  wdll  leave  Z alone  for
the  present,and  merely  indicate  our  formula  for  IMrs.Newnham’s  writing.
Where  another  human  mind  was  involved  this  will  be  : —

xxW  -f  S W W '

That  is  to  say,

Mrs.  X ewnham's  unconscious  self  wrote.

It  wrote  with  the  assistance  of  Mr.  Xewnham’s  mind.

It  employed  only  her  dextro-cerebral  word-seeing  centres.  She  did
not  know  what  was  being  written  till  she  consciously  read  it.  It
enqiloyed  prohnbljj  mainly  her  dextro-cerebral  word-writing  centres,  as
tlie  handwriting  was  unlike  her  own,  and  frequently  degenerated  into
a scrawl.

On  the  occasion  wdien  shey’orcAYar  the  word  “ Nipen  ” before  waiting
it,  the  sinistro- cerebral  wmrd-seeing  centre  was  for  the  moment
implicated,  and  tlie  formula  w'ould  be  ; —

XX  Y"  -hSS'-fW'

We  have  thus  come  back  once  more  to  Mr.  Newnham’s  case,  and
the  reader  wlio  rememliers  the  suffjiestion  witli  which  he  concludes  his
communication, — viz.,  that  tlie  low  moral  tone  of  some  of  the  automatic
messages  may  be  traceable  to  an  untrained  moral  sense  in  the  right
hemisphere — may  perhaps  suppose  that  I am  in  agreement  with  that
hypothesis.

This,  liowever,  is  hardly  the  case.  For  although  I hold  that  the  right
hemisphere  had  much  to  do  wdth  Mrs.  Xewmham’s  replies,  as  with  other
automatic  writing,  I nevertheless  cannot  And  any  well-recognised
doctrine  of  cerebral  localisation  which  authorises  us  to  draw'  any  con-
clusion as  to  the  way  in  which  a temporary  predominance  of  dextro-
cereliral  centres  might  art'ect  the  manifestation  of  moral  character ; —
that  is  to  say  of  the  highest,  or  nearly  the  highest,  co-ordinating  pro-
cesses of  the  mind.  And  1 should  of  course  be  unwilling  in  such  a
matter  to  go  a step  beyond  the  consensus  of  the  best  scientiflc  opinion.
So  far  as  the  questions  at  issue  are  purely  physiological  I can
aim  at  nothing  more  than  attentive  study  of  the  labours  of  others.
The  region  w'here,  for  sheer  lack  of  previous  w'ork  on  the  sub-


1885.]


Automatic  Writing.


61


ject,*  something  original  must  he  attempted,  comprises  only  the  appli-
cation of  accredited  physiological  conceptions  to  such  new  evidence  or
experiment  as  our  Society  has  been  able  to  adduce ; — or  such  old,  but
neglected  evidence  as  we  are  endeavouring  to  bring  within  the  field  of
scientific  vision.

But  although  we  may  not  see  ground  for  referring  this  slight
alteration  of  moral  temper  to  any  difference  in  the  relative  functions  of
the  two  hemispheres,  Ave  nevertheless  may  fairly  expect  to  find  some
elucidatoiy  parallel  to  it  among  other  supernormal  or  abnormal
phenomena.  This  inquiry,  however,  we  cannot  now  pursue,  and  I
suggest  it  merely  in  order  to  remind  the  reader  that  the  phenomena  of
asemia  are  by  no  means  the  only  ones  Avhich  may  instructively  be
compared  with  those  with  Avhich  we  have  to  deal.  Somnambulism,  double-
consciousness, epilepsy,  insanity  itself,  are  all  of  them  natural
gJsycJtoscopes  which,  rightly  handled,  may  give  an  insight — beyond  their
own  special  province — into  the  mechanism  of  our  most  inAvarxl  being.

For  the  present,  lioweA’er,  our  investigation  must  jrause  here.  The
promise  of  the  original  title  of  these  papers  has  been,  T think,  in  some
part  fulfilled.  An  explanation,  partly  dependent  on  telepathic  influence,
partly  on  unconscious  cerebration  alone,  (though  unconscious  cerebration
raised,  if  I may  so  say,  to  a higher  power  than  had  previously  been
suspected),  has  been  offered  for  certain  Avidespread  phenomena,  Avhich,
Avhile  ignored  or  neglected  by  the  main  body  of  men  of  science,  have
been,  for  the  most  part,  ascribed  l»y  those  Avho  haA'e  Avitnessed  them  to
the  operation  of  some  external  and  iiiA'ading  poAver.

* It  is  rather  surprising  to  find  how  little  serious  attention  has  liitherto  been
paid  to  these  automatic  phenomena.  The  authors  of  handbooks  to  tlie  “Path-
ology of  !Mind” — as  INIaudsley  or  Carpenter — .stop  their  discussions,  intentionally
andavowedly,  ujjon  thetliresholdof  our  present  subject.  The  more  recent  school
of  psycho-physicists  approach  our  topic  more  closely.  Their  Avork,  or  that
oi  pstjcho-ijhysical  philosophers,  such  as  !M.  Kibot,  (if  I may  so  term  him),  Avas  in-
deed anindispensablepre-requisite  to  fruitful  inquiry  on  ouiqiresent  lines.  Put  be-
fore M.  Itichet's  article  on  Mental  Suggestion  in  the  Revue,  Philosop/hique  of
November  last,  I am  not  aware  of  any  specific  discussion  of  the  plienomena  of
automatism,  considered  as  anything  more  than  a mere  aberration.  I have  found
onlyafewscattered  passages  where  automatism  issuggestedin  e.xplanation  of  the
speech  orAvriting  Avhich  Spiritualists  ascribe  to  possession.  Littre  in  the  “ Philo-
sophie  Positive,”  1878,  cited  Avith  adhesion  by  DagonetfAnn.  Med.  Psych. ,1881,
Vol.  VI.  p.20), explains  in  this  Avay  the  “prophetic” speech  of  the  “Convulsionnaires
deSaint  Medard.”  AndTaine  in  the  prefacetothelatereditionsof  his  treatise  “ De
ITntelligence,”  cites  an  ordinary  case  of  automatic  Avriting,  and  adds  : “ Cer-
tainement  on  constate  ici  un  dedoublement  du  moi  ; la  presence  sirnultanee  de
deu.x  series  d'idees  paralleles  et  independantes,  de  deux  centres  d’action,  ou  si
I'on  veut,  de  deu.x  personnes  morales  juxtaposees  dans  le  meme  cerveau.”  Put
he  does  not  follow  up  this  suggestion.  From  the  Spiritualistic  point  of  vieAv,
automatic  Avriting  has  been  carefully  and  candidly  discussed  by  “iM.A.  (Oxon.),”
in  “Spirit  Identity  ” and  other  Avorks.


G2


Aufomatic  Writing.


[Jan.  30,


If  the  view  taken  in  these  papers  bo  accepted,  a veiy  large  propor-
tion of  the  phenomena  to  which  Spiritualists  ai’e  wont  to  appeal  will
)je  no  longer  available  as  evidence  for  any  spiritual  influence  other  than
that  of  the  spirits  of  living  and  breathing  men.

The  phenomena,  however,  wliich  I have  described  by  no  means
exhaust  tliose  which  are  alleged  to  occur  in  the  course  of  graphic  auto-
matism. It  is  said  that  the  handwriting  of  dead  persons  is  sometimes
reproduced  ; that  sentences  are  written  in  languages  of  which  the
writer  knows  nothing  ; that  facts  unknown  to  anyone  present  are  con-
tained in  tlie  replies,  and  that  these  facts  are  sometimes  such  as  to
point  to  some  special  person,  departed  this  life,  as  their  only  conceiv-
able source.  If  these  tilings  be  so,  they  are  obviously  facts  of  the  very
highest  importance.  Isor  are  we  entitled  to  say  that  tliey  are  impos-
silile  <(  priori.  The  spiritualistic  hypothesis,  thougli  frequently
presented  in  an  unacceptable  shape,  is  capable,  I believe,  of  lieing  so
formulated  as  to  contradict  none  of  the  legitimate  assuinjitions  of
science.  And  furthermore,  I readily  admit  that  should  the  agency  of
departed  spirits  be  estaldished  as  a vera  causa,  then  the  explanations
here  suggested  will  need  revision  in  a new  light.

I!ut  in  order  to  estaldish  any  conclusion  so  startling  in  a vvay  to
satisfy  the  scientific  world,  there  must  assuredly  be  an  amount  of
evidence,  and  a way  of  dealing  with  that  evidence,  very  different  from
that  with  which  Spiritualists  for  the  most  part  appear  to  have  been
contented.

I am  fai'  from  wishing  to  re-echo  the  coniiiion  sneers  at  the  credulity
or  incapacity  of  Spiiltualists.  I am  not  raising  the  question  of  fraud
on  tlie  one  side,  or  of  imbecility  on  the  otlier  ; I am  assuming  tliat
something  supernormal  has  in  reality  happened,  and  that  the  question
is  one  of  ohsemUion  in  tlie  first  place,  and  of  iuterpretation  in  the
second.  Hut  supernormal  phenomena,  whatever  their  explanation  may
be,  have  no  tendency  to  occur  preferentially  in  the  presence  of  persons
specially  qualified  to  observe  them.  It  is  no  wonder,  therefore,  that
they  have  so  often  been  loosely  described  and  inadequately  attested,
while  those  who  have  witnessed  them,  deeply  impressed  Avith  what
they  saw,  and  rushing  to  some  hasty  conclusion,  have  been  unable
even  to  understand  the  essential  need  in  such  experiments  of  exactness,
repetition,  control.

Loose  assertion  has  been  met  with  contemptuous  neglect,  and  Ave
noAV  Avitness  the  spectacle  of  a small  band  of  “ lielievers  ” and  an  out-
side Avorld  Avliich  does  not  even  take  the  trouble  to  examine  the
grounds  of  that  lielief.  It  is  not  thus  that  truth  can  be  attained,
and  it  need  hardly  be  said  that  one  special  aim  of  the  Society  for
Psychical  Pv,esearch  is  to  establish  at  least  a modus  vivendi  between


1880.]


Automatic  Writing.


63


extremes  of  credence  and  non-credence  by  a dispassionate  elucidation
of  the  actual  phenomena  to  which  both  2)arties  appeal.

But  as  regards  the  special  point  with  which  we  are  now  concerned
— the  question  whether  automatic  writing  ev'er  shows  unmistakeable
indications  of  an  intelligence  other  than  that  of  some  living  man — I
must  make  an  earnest  appeal  to  Spiritualists  in  England  and  America
to  furnish  me'^  with  additional  cases  where  they  believe  such  intelligence
to  have  been  shown — cases  which  they  can  give  on  first-hand  testimony,
and  with  full  details.  The  printed  cases  of  the  kind  are  not  numerous,
and  many  of  them  are  now  remote  ; so  that  supplementary  evidence  is
urgently  required  before  the  subject  can  be  discu.ssed  on  a sufficiently
broad  basis.  An  appeal  which  I made  in  the  leading  Spiritualistic  news-
pajierhas  produced  veiy  meagre  results.  Those  who  believe  themselves
to  be  in  possession  of  timth  of  this  high  value  may  surely  be  invited  to
take  as  much  trouble  to  prove  it  as  the  chemist  is  willing  to  take  in
investigating  a new  compound,  or  the  physician  in  identifying  a new
disease.  As  a mere  matter  of  fact,  and  without  imputing  filame  to  any-
one, it  may  safely  be  said  that  no  such  persistent  and  organised  j^resenta-
tion  of  8piritualistic  evidence  has  yet  been  attempted  as  is  habitually
demanded  by  the  scientific  world  in  matters  of  far  less  difficulty  and
importance.  To  any  correspondents  who  may  be  disposed  thus  to  help
me  towards  a further  instalment  of  the  present  discussion,  I can  promise,
at  any  rate,  cordial  thanks  and  careful  attention.

F.  W.  H.  Myers.


* Cases  may  be  sent  to  me  at  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge,  or  to  the
Secretary,  14,  Dean’s  Yard,  London,  S.W


64


President's  Address.


[April  24,


PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  GENERAL  MEETING  ON
Fridiuj,  April  24,  1885.

Tlie  thirteenth  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the
Rooms  of  the  Society  of  British  Artists,  Sutiblk  Street,  Pall  Mall,  on
Friday,  April  24,  1885.

Pjiofessor  Balfour  Stewart,  F.R,.S.,  President,  in  the  Chair.


The  President  made  tlie  following  address  ; —

II.

You  will  permit  me  on  this  occasion  to  allude  to  the  great  loss
which  our  Society  has  sustained  in  the  resignation  by  Professor
Sidgwick  of  tlie  office  of  President.

I cannot  imagine  one  better  fitted  than  our  late  President  to  develop
into  vigorous  action  a struggling  body  such  as  ours,  and  we  must  all
feel  deeply  grateful  to  him  for  his  successful  accomplishment  of  this
oiiject.

He  has  procured  the  recognition  by  men  of  education  of  a society
whose  advent  was  at  first  somewhat  coldly  welcomed  by  the  fraternity
of  knowledge.

Under  these  circumstances  everything  depended  on  the  choice  of  guar-
dians for  the  infant  Society.Had  it  been  injudiciously  led  it  would  certainly
have  proved  a failure,  and  have  thus  strengthened  the  widespread  belief
that  no  good  result  is  to  be  obtained  by  discussing  subjects  of  a certain
class.  But  things  have  happily  turned  out  far  otherwise,  and  tlie  recogni-
tion which  our  Society  enjoys  to-day  is  greatly  due  to  its  guidance  by  a
President  and  officers  who,  through  a happy  mixture  of  boldness  and
prudence,  carried  energetically  into  action,  have  succeeded  in  bringing  it
into  its  present  position.  Professor  Sidgwick’s benefits  to  the  Society  were
not  mei'ely  those  of  a wise  and  energetic  guidance  of  its  affairs.  He  was
unsparing  in  every  sense  where  he  felt  that  the  interests  of  the  Society
required  support,  and  he  is  not  only  our  first  and  honoured  President
but  one  of  our  chief  benefactors.

Success  of  this  nature  cannot  be  equalled  or  even  approached.  But
it  is  not,  therefore,  with  a feeling  of  despair  that  I commence  this
evening  the  duties  of  the  office  with  which  I have  been  honoured,
knowing  that  gratitude  to  my  predecessor  should  prompt  me  to  give


1885.]


Presidents  Address.


65


him  what  relief  I can,  and  to  do  what  I can  for  the  benefit  of  a Society
wliich  has  strong  claims  upon  all  who  are  desirous  to  promote  know-
ledge.

It  may  not  be  out  of  place  to  bring  before  you  a few  statistics  of  our
progress.

A preliminary  conference  was  convened  by  Professor  Barrett  (whom
we  honour  as  our  founder)  on  the  5th  and  6th  of  January,  1882.  At
this  meeting  a Committee  of  sixteen  were  appointed,  to  which  a few
additions  were  afterwards  made.

The  Society  was  next  formally  constituted  in  accordance  with  the
report  of  the  Conference  Committee  at  an  adjourned  meeting  of  the
Conference  held  on  20th  February,  1882,  the  Committee  being  consti-
tuted as  the  Council  of  the  new  Society  under  the  presidency  of  Professor
Henry  Sidgwick.

At  the  first  meeting  of  the  Council,  held  on  the  3rd  March,  1882,  a
number  of  proposals  for  election  Avere  brought  forward,  and  at  its
second  meeting  on  the  17th  March,  20  Members  and  11  Associates  Avere
elected.

At  the  end  of  1882  the  total  number  of  the  Society  Avas  150  ; at
the  end  of  1883  it  Avas  288  ; at  the  end  of  188-1  it  Avas  520  ; Avhile  at
the  present  moment  the  total  number  is  586.

If  these  results  are  very  encouraging  as  regards  numbers  it  is  a
source  of  equal  gratification  to  think  that  men  of  the  highest  standing
in  all  departments  of  knoAvledge  have  consented  to  join  our  ranks  ; and
you  have  been  already  informed  by  Professor  Barrett  that  a kindred
Society  has  recently  been  started  in  America  under  very  faA'ourable  cir-
cumstances, embracing,  likeA\dse,  amongst  its  members  men  of  the
highest  attainments  and  standing.

In  reply  to  the  question,  Avhat  has  the  Society  done  1 I may  state
that  since  its  commencement  it  has  issued  seven  parts  of  Proceedings,
of  Avhich  a total  number  exceeding  12,000  has  been  distributed  to
Members  and  others,  placed  in  public  libraries,  sent  for  reA'icAV,  and  sold
through  the  ordinary  channels.  An  eighth  part  Avill  be  published  A’ery
shortly.

Early  in  1881  a was  commenced,  Avhich  has  been  continued

monthly  for  private  circulation  amongst  members.

In  the  autumn  of  last  year  a Beport  of  the  Committee  on  Theo-
sophical  Phenomena  Avas  issued  for  private  circulation  only.

A large  number  of  slips  has  also  been  printed  comprising  a
selection  of  the  evidence  collected  in  the  various  departments  of
inquiry.

All  these  schemes  could  not  have  been  carried  out  by  means  of  the
ordinary  income  of  the  Society,  and  their  successful  accomplishment  is
due  to  the  fact  that  Ave  haAn  Members  Avho  are  Avilling  not  only  to

F


66  President's  Address.  [April  24,

devote  their  time  and  energy,  hut  likewise  their  private  means,  to  the
advancement  of  our  interests.

The  cost  of  the  slips  of  printed  matter  and  of  the  Theosopliical
Report  was  borne  by  our  late  President.  The  printing  of  the  slips
is  now  suspended,  it  being  intended  to  publish  selections  from  the
evidence  in  the  Journed  of  our  Society.  Professor  Sidgwick  has  mean-
while agreed  to  be  editor  of  the  Journal,  nor  while  devoting  his  time  in
tliis  way  to  the  service  of  the  Society  has  he  discontinued  his  former
liberality,  Ijut  rather  transferred  it  into  this  new  channel.

The  library  of  the  Society  consists  of  more  than  800  volumes,
of  which  about  250  are  French  and  German  works.  A great  many  of
the  English  books  have  been  presented  through  the  kind  liberality  of
Members  and  friends.

I have  read  with  much  interest  in  the  pages  of  our  Journal  a
correspondence  between  our  Secretary,  Mr.  Gurney,  and  Professor
Newcomb,  the  distinguished  President  of  the  American  Psychical
Society.

It  would  aj^pear  from  this  correspondence  that  there  is  a perfect
agreement  as  to  the  great  importance  of  studying  experimentally  the
subject  of  thought-transference.

To  my  mind  the  evidence  already  adduced  is  such  as  to  render
highly  probable  the  occasional  presence  amongst  us  of  sometliing  which
we  may  call  thought-transference  or  more  generally  telepathy  ; but  it  is
surely  our  duty  as  a Society  to  continue  to  accumulate  evidence  until
the  existence  of  such  a power  cannot  be  controverted.  We  liave  not
been  remiss  in  this  respect,  and  it  will  Ije  found  from  the  pages  of  our
Proceedings  that  the  main  strength  of  our  Society  has  been  given  to
prove  the  existence  of  telepathy,  in  the  belief  that  such  a fact  well
established  will  not  only  possess  an  independent  value  of  its  own,  but
will  serve  as  an  admirable  basis  for  further  opei’ations.

But  our  Society  has  not  only  its  staff  of  observers  and  experimenters,
it  has  likewise  its  literary  staff,  whose  duty  it  is  to  collect  and
scrutinise  the  existing  evidence  on  the  various  subjects  embraced  in
Psychical  Research.  Now,  it  would  appear  to  me  to  be  the  one
iinpardonable  offence  if  this  Literaiy  Cojnmittee  were  to  decline  to
invite,  to  listen  to,  to  examine,  or  to  register  the  contemporaneous
evidence  on  any  branch  of  psychical  inquiry.

It  is  no  doubt  quite  conceivable  that  after  a quantity  of  evidence
on  some  subject  has  been  collected,  the  result  of  its  discussion  should
prove  that  there  is  nothing  in  it  worth  inquiring  into,  at  least  nothing
new.  But  a delinite  settlement,  even  of  a negative  character,  is  not
without  its  value,  and  this  can  only  be  obtained  as  the  result  of  an
exhaustive  discussion.  On  the  other  hand  it  is  conceivable  that  the
result  of  such  a discussion  may  be  the  establishment  of  new  facts


1885.]


Presklenfs  Address.


67


eminently  worthy  of  record,  and  the  next  generation  of  our  Society
would  greatly  Llame  the  present  if  we  declined  to  bring  together,
examine,  and  register  the  contemporaneous  evidence,  so  as  to  ht  it,  if  not
for  our  own  final  discussion,  at  least  for  that  of  those  who  shall  come
after  us.

But  perhaps  the  best  justification  of  the  labours  of  the  Literary
Committee  is  to  be  found  in  what  they  have  already  done.  As  regards
apparitions  at  the  moment  of  death,  I will  quote  the  following  state-
ment by  Mr.  Gurney  : “ AVe  have,”  he  tells  us,  “ collected  more  than

a hundred  first-hand  cases  of  apparitions  closely  coinciding  with  the
time  of  death  of  the  person  seen  ; and  it  is  only  in  a small  minority  of
such  cases  that  our  informants,  according  to  their  own  account,  have
had  any  other  hallucination  than  the  apparition  in  question.”  The
great  importance  of  this  statement  will  be  manifest  to  all.

It  has,  however,  been  objected  that  the  evidence  brought  forward
by  this  Committee  is  a mixture  of  the  strong  and  the  weak  ; and  some
have  even  hinted  that  the  efl’ective  streiigth  of  such  evidence  is  that  of
the  weakest  portions  of  it.  As  I know  from  experience  that  this
mixed  character  is  a stumbling  block  to  many,  I will  take  the  present
opportunity  of  repeating  what  cannot  be  too  widely  known — that  the
Literary  Committee  ai’e  themselves  very  well  aware  of  this  difference
between  the  various  items  of  evidence  which  they  have  brought
together.  Some  of  these  are  regarded  by  them  as  peculiarly  of  an
evidential  nature  adapted  to  force  conviction  into  the  minds  of  those  who
are  sceptical.  Other  items  again,  while  deficient  in  this  respect,  may  yet
be  of  importance  in  bringing  out  the  laws  which  regulate  these  strange
phenomena.  For  example,  the  question.  Do  apparitions  of  the  dying
actually  occur  1 is  to  be  replied  to  by  quoting  evidence  of  one  kind
while  the  question  as  to  the  exact  meaning  of  these  appearances,  and
their  possible  relation  to  telepathy,  is  to  be  replied  to  by  evidence  of
another  kind  less  important,  perhaps,  in  its  value  as  regai’ds  those  who
are  unconvinced.  Similar  rules  apply  to  all  branches  of  knowledge.

The  thanks  of  our  Society  are  due  to  Mr.  Myers  for  the  pains  he
has  taken  in  classifying  the  various  items,  and  it  is,  indeed,  abundantly
obvious  that  without  such  a preliminary  process  the  full  value  of  the
evidence  could  not  possibly  become  known.

I have  dwelt  at  some  length  on  this  subject  because  of  its  import-
ance, and  because  the  public  are,  perhaps,  apt  to  attach  too  exclusive  a
value  to  the  experimental  part  of  our  work.  I have  fully  recognised
the  claims  of  the  experimental  part ; we  need  in  it  far  wider  assistance
— especially  in  the  way  of  systematic  trials  of  thought-transference  in
private — than  we  have  yet  received.  But  none  the  less,  I think,  must
the  codification  of  the  current  evidence  be  looked  upon  as  a pressing
and  paramount  duty.

F 2


68


President's  Address.


[April  24,


We  may  l)e  told  in  the  kindest  manner  that  there  are  regions  which
it  is  utterly  liopeless  to  approach — groups  of  recurrent  phenomena  so
wrapped  about  with  the  garments  of  confusion  that  we  cannot  possibly
disentangle  them  so  as  to  find  whether  there  is  anything  new  in  them
or  not.

Our  reply  to  such  remarks  should  not  be  doubtful.  It  ought,  I
imagine,  to  consist  in  a prompt  refusal  to  believe  in  the  existence  of
any  such  region  or  of  any  such  phenomena.  Is  it  not  at  once  the
privilege  and  the  duty  of  the  human  intellect  to  gain,  as  time  goes  on,  a
clearer  and  still  clearer  insight  into  the  principles  which  underlie  all
terrestrial  occurrences  1 The  ultimate  explanation  of  certain  classes  of
these  may,  no  doubt,  be  different  from  what  we  imagined  on  our  setting
out.  This,  however,  is  not  the  question.

The  point  is,  rather,  whether  there  exist  around  us  groups  of  recur-
rent terrestrial  phenomena  which  it  is  utterly  hopeless  to  grapple  with.
Surely  there  is  only  one  proper  way  of  rei^lying  to  this  suggestion,  and
that  is  by  making  the  attempt.  Everything  is  possible  to  courage  and
prudence,  coupled  with  perseverance.  Such  qualities  will  enable  us  to
overcome  the  preliminary  Dragon  which  guards  the  entrance  to  these
interesting  regions,  and  our  united  efforts  will  ultimately  result  in
obtaining  for  us  the  golden  apples  of  truth.


1885.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


69


III.

NOTES  ON  THE  EVIDENCE,  COLLECTED  BY  THE  SOCIETY,
EOR  PHANTASMS  OF  THE  DEAD.

By  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick.


In  the  following  paper  I propose  to  consider  the  evidence  which  the
Society  has  hitherto  collected  for  Phantasms  of  the  Dead,  including
under  this  term  all  kinds  of  impressions  on  human  minds  which  there
seems  any  reason  to  refer  to  the  action,  in  some  way  or  other,  of  deceased
persons.*

Most  of  those  to  whom  this  paper  is  addressed  probably  belong  to
some  Christian  denomination,  and  to  them  the  continued  existence
of  the  soul  after  death  is,  of  course,  no  new  theory  invented  to
account  for  such  phenomena  as  we  are  discussing,  or  I’equiring  such
phenomena  to  support  it.  But  few  will  have  any  difficulty  in  agreeing
with  me  that  (1)  the  possibility  of  receiving  communications  from  the
dead,  here  and  now,  would  not  follow  as  a necessary  consequence  from
the  immortality  of  the  soul ; (2)  that  if  communication  of  what  I
may  call  an  objective  kind — distinguishable,  I mean,  from  our  own
thoughts  and  emotions — is  possible  to  all  those  of  the  departed
who  desire  it,  we  should  naturally  expect  it  to  occur  more  fre-
quently than  the  most  sanguine  can  suppose  that  it  actually  does ;
and  (3)  that  its  possibility,  while  not  in  contradiction  with  any
of  the  known  facts  of  physical  science,  is  certainly  not  siqaported,
or  in  any  way  suggested,  by  any  of  these  facts.  However  firmly,
therefore,  we  may  believe  in  the  continued  existence  of  dead
human  beings,  w'e  cannot  regard  the  supposition  of  their  action  on  the
minds  of  the  living  as  if  it  were  merely  the  reference  of  an  effect  to  a
vera  causa  knowm  to  be  adequate  to  produce  it.  We  must  treat  it  as
we  should  treat  the  hypothesis,  in  any  department  of  physical
investigation,  of  an  entirely  new  agent,  for  the  existence  of  which  we
have  no  evidence  outside  the  phenomenon  which  it  is  introduced  to
explain.  If  this  be  so,  it  will,  I think,  be  admitted  that  we  should  be
violating  an  established  rule  of  scientific  method  if  we  introduced  such

* This  evidence  does  not  of  course  include  appearances  at  the  moment  of
death,  or  a few  hours  afterwards,  since  these,  as  my  reader.s  will  remember,
have  been  classed  with  Phantasms  of  the  Living.


70  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.  [April  24,

a hypothesis  except  in  the  last  resort,  when  all  other  modes  of
explanation  seem  clearly  to  fail.

Exactly  at  what  point  of  improbability  this  failure  of  other
explanations  is  to  be  regarded  as  established,  cannot,  I think,  be
defined — at  any  rate,  I feel  quite  unable  to  define  it.  But  I may  per-
haps say  that,  in  my  opinion,  it  is  a point  which  can  hardly  be  reached
in  the  case  of  any  narrative  of  a single  event  considered  by  itself  ; if
we  had  only  a single  ghost-story  to  deal  Avith,  I can  hardly  conceiA^e  the
kind  or  amount  of  evidence  Avhich  Avould  lead  me  to  prefer  the
hypothesis  of  ghostly  agency  to  all  other  lAOSsible  explanations.  The
existence,  therefore,  of  phantasms  of  the  dead  can  only  be  established,  if
at  all,  by  the  accumulation  of  improbabilities  in  Avhich  Ave  become
iiiA’olA'ed  by  i-ejecting  a large  mass  of  apparently  strong  testimony  to
facts  Avhich,  as  recounted,  Avould  seem  to  admit  of  no  other  satisfactory
explanation  : and  in  testing  the  Amlue  of  this  testimony  Ave  are  bound,
I think,  to  strain  to  the  utmost  all  possible  suppositions  of  recognised
causes,  before  Ave  can  regard  the  iiarratiA^e  in  question  as  even  tending
to  proA'C  the  operation  of  this  novel  agency.

Of  course,  if  its  operation  should  ever  be  rationally  established,
by  the  cumulatiA^e  process  that  I have  described,  it  Avill  then  become
reasonable  to  reconsider  our  evidence  from  the  neAv  point  of  aucav  thus
reached  ; and  to  refer  to  this  cause,  Avhen  once  proved  to  exist,  many  of
the  phenomena  AA'hich,  in  the  first  instance,  it  Avas  right  to  put  aside
as  othei'Avise  explicable.  I liaA’e  made  these  preliminary  remarks,
lest  the  explanations  I shall  endeavour  to  apjrly  to  some  of  the  cases
before  us  .should  seem  unreasonably  fai’-f etched  to  such  of  my  readers
as  may  already  believe  in  phantasms  of  the  dead,  or  are  trembling  on
the  A'erge  of  belief.

The  Society  noAv  possesses,  as  the  residue  of  a much  larger  number,  a
collection  of  about  370  narratives, — that  seemed  to  deserA’e  some  con-
sideration— of  phenomena,  not  clearly  physical,  and  Avhich  believers  in
ghosts  Avould  be  apt  to  refer  to  the  agency  of  deceased  human  beings.
These  narratiA-es  are  printed  on  slips  for  consideration  and  criticism,
and  they  constitute,  probaljly,  a fairly  representativ'e  collection
of  the  kind  of  evidence  that  we  are  likely  to  obtain  on  the
subject.

I shall  not,  of  course,  attempt  here  to  go  through  each  case  in  detail
and  explain  my  reasons  for  the  vieAv  I have  formed  about  it,  but  shall
merely  giA'e  the  general  results  of  a careful  examination  of  them,  Avith
some  examples.  The  slips  themselves  are  at  14,  Dean’s  Yard,  open  to
the  inspection  of  any  member  of  the  Society  ; and  to  anyone  Avho  is
sufficiently  interested  in  the  question  to  Avish  to  examine  into  it  for
themselves,  I could  furnish,  if  desired,  a list  of  the  narratives  classified
according  to  my  vieAV  of  them,  for  comparison  Avith|their  OAvn  results.


1885.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


71


In  the  first  partof  thispaper  I shall  explain  and  illustrate  the  different
grounds  on  which  I think  that  the  greater  number  of  the  cases  in  the
Society’s  collection  should  be  set  aside  at  the  present  stage  of  our  inves-
tigation, as  having  no  important  evidential  force,  for  the  purpose  of
proving  the  existence  of  phantasms  of  the  dead.  In  the  second  part
I shall  examine  the  residue,  consisting  of  some  twenty-five*  narratives,
in  detail,  with  a view  of  ascertaining  what  psychical  theoi’ies,  if  any,
they  seem  to  poiirt  to.  This  residue,  though  comparatively  small  and
not  suggestive  of  any  satisfactory  \uew  as  to  the  conditions  of  com-
munication with  the  other  world,  noi’,  indeed,  by  any  means  conclusive
as  to  the  possibility  of  such  communication,  is  still,  in  my  opinion,
quite  sufficiently  important  to  deserve  serious  consideration,  and  to
justify  the  pains  that  have  been  taken  in  collecting  and  sifting  it.

The  possible  non-ghostly  explanations  of  what  pass  as  ghostly  pheno-
mena may  be  conveniently  classified  with  reference  to  the  various  sorts
of  error  by  which  the  evidence  to  such  phenomena  is  liable  to  be
affected,  I should  state  these  as  (1)  hoaxing,  (2)  exaggeration  or
inadequate  description,  (3)  illusion,  (I)  mistaken  identity,  (5)  hallucina-
tion.

I.  To  begin  with  hoaxing.  Probably  most  sceptical  persons,  who
have  not  examined  the  evidence  actually  collected,  would  suppose  that
this  is  likely  to  be  a very  fruitful  source  of  fallacious  narratives,  either
(1)  through  the  narrator  hoaxing  the  collector,  or  (2)  from  his  having
himself  been  made  the  victim  of  a practical  joke.  I think,  however,  that
any  one  who  has  read  the  evidence  will  at  once  discard  the  first  of  these
alternatives,  at  any  rate  so  far  as  the  great  mass  of  the  first-hand
narratives  is  concerned.!  In  most  of  these  cases  enough  is  known  of
the  narrators  to  make  it  highly  improbable  that  they  are  intentionally
deceiving  the  investigator ; and  even  were  this  not  so,  the  stories  are
mostly  so  tame  and  dull  in  comparison  with  the  thrilling  narratives
which  from  time  to  time  appear  in  the  magazines,  that  I can  hardly
imagine  a hoaxer  feeling  any  pride  in  having  got  them  accepted  as

* I purposely  give  the  number  vaguely  because  there  is  of  course  no  clear
and  unmistakable  line  between  stories  that  should  be  placed  in  the  first  class  and
those  that  belong  to  the  second.  Different  people  would  take  different  views  of
some  of  them,  and  I should  myself  probably  estimate  them  slightly  differently  at
different  times.  Moreover,  it  is  not  impossible  that  further  evidence  may  expose
f.atal  weaknesses  in  one  or  two  of  those  I have  selected,  and  on  the  other  hand
it  is  probable  that  some  of  those  which  I have  for  the  present  set  aside  as  in
various  ways  insufficiently  evidenced,  may  by  additional  evidence  be  raised  into
the  first-class.

fit  should  be  observed  thatthecollectioncontainsasmall  number  of  anonymous
stories,  printed,  as  I understand,  only  in  the  hope  of  obtaining  further  informa-
tion about  them  through  members  of  the  Society  who  may  see  them.  It  is  not
improbable  that  one  or  two  of  these  may  turn  out  to  be  pure  inventions.


72


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


genuine.  This  last  remark  applies  also,  generally  speaking,  to  the  sup-
position that  the  phenomena  described  are  the  result  of  practical  jokes
perpetrated  on  the  narrator.  I think,  however,  that  there  are  a few
which  can  plausibly  be  explained  as  the  result  of  trickery.  In  some  of
these,  the  ghost  only  does  what,  according  to  the  narrative,  would  be
clearly  within  the  scope  of  human  personation ; and  in  one,  though  the
apparition  can  hardly  have  been  a living  being  of  any  sort,  the  immo-
bility and  persistence  of  the  figure,  and  the  behaviour  of  one  of  the
actors  in  the  scene  seem  to  me  to  suggest  a practical  joke.  But  I do  not
think  that  the  number  of  cases  in  which  this  explanation  is  applicable
can  be  more  than  half-a-dozen — at  least  if  we  exclude  the  narratives  which
I am  disposed  to  set  aside  on  other  grounds.

II.  But  itis  obvious  that  without  the  slightest4ntention  to  deceive,
the  stories  may  contain  unintentional  exaggeration,  or  may  omit
important  details  which  would  give  us  a clue  to  some  non-psychical
explanation.  We  have  no  means  of  excluding  this  possibility  in  any
case,  and  we  can  only  form  a judgment  as  to  the  probability  of  its
having  been  realised  in  the  same  way  as  we  are  constantly  forming
judgments  inordinary  life.  We  know  roughly  in  common  life  what
sort  of  things  we  may  believe  on  the  testimony  of  any  ordinaril  y truth
ful  person,  and  what  sort  of  things  are  liable  to  be  forgotten,  imagined,
misinterpreted,  or  badly  observed  ; and  the  weight  that  we  attach  to
what  people  tell  us  is  in  accordance  Avith  this  knowledge.

We  have,  of  course,  to  do  the  same  thing  [with  “ ghost  stories,”
taking  care,  moreover,  to  allow  full  weight  or  the  witness’s  state  of
mind  at  the  time  and  other  attendant  circumstances.  This  is  a general
remark  applying  to  all  the  narratives,  but  some  rules  for  dealing  with
special  classes  of  cases  may,  I think,  be  laid  down  under  this  head.

All  stories  at  second-hand  (and  a fortiori  those  that  are  more  re-
mote) in  which  it  is  fundamentally  important  to  know  accurately
the  details,  should  be  regarded  as  of  low  value,  so  far  as  the  evidence
directly  supplied  by  them  is  concerned  •,  because  it  is  well  known  that
few  people  can  repeat  quite  accurately  in  detail  what  they  have  been
told,  and  because  there  is  a special  tendency  to  distortion  in  narratives
of  the  kind  we  are  dealing  with  (just  as  there  is  in  scandalous  stories),
owing  to  the  fact  that  certain  elements  of  the  story,  in  the  present  case
the  marvellous  ones,  are  usually  more  striking  to  the  imagination,  and
therefore  more  likely  to  remain  in  the  memory  than  the  qualifying
circumstances.  Besides,  no  description  can  reproduce  to  the  mind’s
eye  with  certainty  the  actual  scene — no  description  can  include  every
detail  : the  very  best  may  be  compared  to  a photograph — correct  as  far
as  it  goes,  but  incomplete.  And  thus  when  the  hearer  repeats  the  story
— unless  he  does  it  with  absolute  verbal  accuracy — he  is  liable  to
describe  a mental  'picture  of  the  scene  differing  from  the  original  in


1885.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


73


just  the  details  which  would  have  enabled  us  to  interpret  the  occurrence
correctly.  Hence,  in  my  opinion,  a second-hand  story,  even  when
reported  by  a good  witness,  can  rarely'  amount  for  us  to  more  than  this  :
that  in  B’s  opinion  A believed,  ^on  good  grounds,  that  he  had  seen  a
ghost.  This,  if  we  have  reason  to  respect  the  veracity  and  judgment
of  A and  B,  is  doubtless  an  important  fact,  but  it  is  less  important  than
it  would  be  if  we  could  ourselves  criticise  the  grounds  on  which  A’s
conclusion  was  based,  and  could  compare  his  experience  in  detail  with
that  of  others.

On  somewhat  similar  grounds  but  little  definite  weight  can  be
attached  to  stories  which  are  told  with  too  little  care  or  detail  to  enable
us  to  judge  what  reasons  there  were  at  the  time  for  supposing  the
phenomenon  described  to  be  a “psychical”  one.  And,  again,  the  value
of  a narrative  diminishes  steadily  as  the  interval  between  the  event  and
the  record  of  it  increases — not  only  because  the  details  fade  owing  to
defective  memory,  but  because  they  are  liable  to  be  confused  and  sup-
plemented by  subsequent  suggestions.  Hence  it  is  much  to  be  desired
that  anyone  who  has  what  he  regards  as  a “psychical”  experience
should  write  it  down  at  once  with  as  much  detail  as  possible.

I may  here  observe  that  there  are  certain  narratives  wdiere  the
nature  of  the  phenomenon  described  seems  to  preclude  the  possibility  of
obtaining  evidence  of  a “psychical”  cause.  For  instance,  we  have
several  accounts  of  horses  being  frightened  in  places  supposed  to  be
haunted,  where  their  riders  or  drivers  see  nothing.  Horses  are  nervous
animals,  and  it  is  difficult  to  exhaust  the  possible  causes  of  their  alarm.
Moreover,  they  are  good  readers  of  both  conscious  and  unconscious
muscular  indications — otherwise  what  is  called  a good  hand  in  a rider
would  not  be  so  important  as  it  is — and  thus  nervousness  of  the  horse’s
master,  perhaps  conscious  of  the  reputation  of  the  haunted  spot,  may
sometimes  be  imparted  to  the  horse.  Even  when  it  is  a human  being
who  has  a feeling  of  dread  or  horror,  or  of  something  being  wrong,  or  of
an  unseen  presence  (a  not  unfrequent  occurrence  apparently  in  so-called
haunted  houses),  it  is  very  difficult  to  obtain  sufficient  evidence  that
this  feeling  was  quite  peculiar.  One  might,  jierhcqjs,  be  sure  of  it  in
one’s  own  case  if  one  ever  expei’ienced  it,  but  one  could  not  expect  to
convince  other  people.

On  the  whole,  the  evidence  appears  to  me  to  be,  at  present,  too  weak,
or  otherwise  seriously  defective,  on  such  grounds  as  I have  been  dis-
cussing, in  about  one-third  of  the  printed  stories,  which  I,  therefore,  set
aside  for  the  present.  In  those  that  remain  we  have  to  consider
whether  any  known  physical  explanations  will  apply,  even,  as  I have
said,  with  some  straining.

III.  Illusion,  or  misinterpretation  of  what  is  perceived  by  the
senses  is  an  explanation,  which  is,  perhaps,  possible  in  a considerable


74


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


number  of  cases.  Most  of  us  have  experienced  illusions  in  some  degree
tliougli  usually  if  the  misinterpreted  phenomenon  is  of  more  than
momentary  duration,  we  almost  immediately  correct  our  impressions.
It  must,  however,  be  noted  that  short-sighted  people  have  to
interpret  much  smaller  indications,  and  are  consequently  more
liable  to  visual  ilkusions  than  persons  whose  sight  is  good.  This
makes  it  very  important  to  know  whether  our  Avitnesses  have  good  sight
or  not.  I Avould  venture  to  suggest  to  the  Committee  that  someAvhat
more  information  should,  if  possible,  be  obtained  on  this  point,
especially  as  short  sight  aud  other  defects  of  vision  are,  of  course,
extremely  common.  I am  told  by  a short-sighted  friend  that  illusions
Avill  sometimes  last  Avith  her  till  she  is  quite  close  to  the  misinterpi’eted
object,  and  that,  OAving  to  the  blurring  of  the  images,  she  is  liable  to  be
mistaken  both  as  to  the  size  and  shape  of  Avhat  she  sees — taking,  for
instance,  a man  on  the  road  in  front  of  her  for  a man  on  a pony,  or  for
tAvo  or  three  men  Avalking  close  together  abreast.  In  a bad  light  Ave
are  all  someAvhat  in  the  position  of  short-sighted  people,  obliged  to
infer  from  small  indications  A\diat  it  is  Ave  see,  and  moreover  some
persons  Avith  good  sight  in  ordinary  light  become  short-sighted  in  a bad
light.

Of  course,  in  most  cases,  Avhether  Ave  are  short-sighted  or  not,  the
true  interpretation  of  Avhat  Ave  see  is  ultimately  forced  upon  us,  but  it  is
easy  to  imagine  circumstances  in  Avhich  this  Avould  not  happen,  and  it  is
then  that  Avhat  is  really  an  ordinary  natural  j^lienomenon  is  liable  to
assume  the  appearance  of  inexplicable  mystery.

I do  not  think  that  our  collection  includes,  among  the  narratives  of
apparitions  seen  once  by  a single  2Aerson,  any  that  can  be  fairly  explained
as  ocular  illusions;  but  in  examining  the  rarer  cases  of  those  seen  by  tAvo
j^ersons  together,  or  successively  in  the  same  jilace,  I haA-e  found  some
in  Avhich  this  explanation  seems  admis.sible.  Tavo  j^ersons  seeing  some-
thing rather  indistinctly  from  the  same  point  of  vieAv  may  sometimes
help  each  other  to  inteiqAret  it  alike  ; and  a figure  frequently  indistinctly
seen  in  a particular  spot,  es^Aecially  if  in  a particular  light,  may  be  due
to  some  constantly  reciArring  effect  of  light  and  shade,  or  arrangement  of
trees  or  other  objects,  .sufficiently  like  Avhat  it  is  taken  for  to  deceive.
PerhajAS  about  IG  of  the  narratives  may,  Avith  some  straining,  be
explained  in  this  Avay.  One  or  two  specimens  may  be  given.  The
olio  wing  (G.  lO)-* **-  is  one

In  1845,  my  late  husband,  William  Man  Townsend,  and  self,  AA^ere
residing  in  a ijrettj’'  cottage  half-AA'ay  between  Thame  and  Aylesbury,  had

* Tlie  number  in  brackets  ajipended  to  each  story  quoted,  is  its  number

among  the  “G.”  slips,  and  the  number  attached  to  the  original  documents
concerning  it.


1885.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


75


gone  there  on  account  of  his  health,  had  been  there  two  years,  derived  great
benefit  ; liked  it  very  nmcli  ; had  serious  thoughts  of  buying  it.

We  had  gone  to  bed  at  our  usual  time,  say  10  ; soon  after  our  dog,  a
very  intelligent  but  untrained  field  spaniel,  began  to  bark  in  a sharp  short
way,  and  continued  to  do  so  till  3 ; it  vexed  my  husband  and  hejit  him
awake  and  gave  him  a bad  headache,  as  it  sounded  so  jilainly  in  our  room,
and  as  the  dog  obeyed  my  voice  quicker  than  his,  he  asked  me  if  I would  go
to  the  window  at  the  back  of  the  house  and  make  him  go  to  his  kennel.  I
had  done  so  before,  but  had  to  cross  a landing,  go  through  an  einj^ty  room
into  the  room  our  servant,  a woman  about  30  years  old, was  sleeping  in,  as  we
curly  had  one  window  that  looked  over  that  yard.  I may  say,  we  neither
of  us  had  any  fear  of  anything  and  did  not  believe  in  ghosts,  or  anything  of
that  sort,  and  I preferred  going  about  my  own  house  in  the  dark  to  taking  the
trouble  of  carrying  a candle  at  any  time,  as  I always  knew  where  to  find  what
I wanted.

I called  to  my  clear  old  dog,  tried  to  soothe  him,  he  answered  with  a whine,
but  I heard  his  chain  rattle  as  he  went  in,  did  as  I told  him,  and  we  heard  no
sound  of  him  again.

My  servant  slept,  did  not  know  I had  been  in  her  room.  I turned  to  go
back  to  my  own  room  and  in  passing  the  landing  window  just  outside  my  own
door  I lifted  the  blind,  always  liking  to  look  out  into  the  sky  ; it  was,  as  I
said,  between  3 and  4,  and  in  October,  and  we  had  been  having  heavy
clews  at  night,  and  it  seemed  a grey  c^uiet  sort  of  morning,  no  moon,  no  stars,
all  very  still,  yet  I could  see  distinctly.  We  had  a night-light  burning  and  my
husband  was  sitting  iqi  in  bed.  I had  stayed  at  the  back  window  looking  out
some  time  and  thought  what  a strange  light  it  was,  so  I held  the  blind  only  a
little  on  one  side  to  get  a better  look  at  the  front,  but  dropped  it  and  started,
made  an  exclamation,  and  my  husband  heard  me  and  asked  what  it  was  ; at
first  I did  not  answer,  did  not,  in  fact,  choose  to  believe  what  I saw  ; he
sjn’ang  to  the  window,  did  just  as  I had  done  ; w'e  asked  each  other,  what
can  it  be,  or  ratlier,  who  can  it  be.  Standing  looking  at  our  room  window
just  at  the  point  of  one  of  my  flower  beds  was  an  old  man  in  dressing  gown
and  nightcap  ; he  looked  about  GO.

“ Is  it  any  one  you  know  ?”  asked  my  husband.  I did  not.  Did  he,  I
asked,  or  had  he  ever  seen  anyone  at  all  like  it  ? No.  In  speaking  of  it
afterwards  to  each  other,  as  you  may  be  sure  we  often  did,  we  always  called  it
Scrooge,  from  Charles  Dickens’  Christmas  Carol,  so  no  one  knew  whom  we
meant.  My  husband  at  once  began  to  prepare  to  go  out  to  tlie  garden.  I wouldn’t
hear  of  it,  a terror  came  over  me  and  stiffness.  I had  only  my  nightdress  on,
no  slippers  ; he  saw  me  change  and  took  me  iq)  and  put  me  in  bed  and  re-
turned to  the  window.  I macle  him  promise  me  he  wouldn’t  leave  me,  which
he  never  quite  forgave  me.  He  told  me  after  a little  time  it  was  getting
shorter  and  then  that  it  had  disappeared  underground.  I seemed  to  lose  all
the  use  of  my  limbs  for  a time.

I was  so  anxious  to  get  into  the  garden  in  tlie  morning  to  see  if  the  grass
had  been  at  all  disturbed  and  the  dew  showed  any  foot  prints,  but  no,  not  a
blade  of  anything  had  been  interfered  with.  My  husband  said,  “ Now  you
must  not  speak  of  this  to  anyone,  if  your  maid  has  any  idea  of  it  she  will
leave  at  once,  and  we  shall  have  all  the  country  folk  hero.  IVe  will  make  all


76


Phantasms  of  the  Bead.


[April  24,


the  inquiries  we  can  as  to  who  has  lived  here,  what  sort  of  ]jersons  they
were.”  We  did  so,  .and  found  the  house  had  been  built  by  a fanner  who  had
retired  there  with  his  wife  ; they  had  no  children  ; tliey  had  been  dead
some  years,  and  there  had  been  several  tenants  ; no  one  used  to  stay  in  it
long  ; no  remark  was  ever  made  to  us  as  to  any  reason,  nor  did  we  make  any.
1 asked  one  of  our  friends  to  give  me  a description  of  the  owner  of  the  place
as  slie  had  known  him  well  ; it  was  exactly  like  our  visitor.

The  last  time  we  sjioke  of  it,  we  wei’e  just  as  unable  to  account  for  it
as  when  we  saw  it  ; had  we  not  botli  seen  it  at  the  same  time  we  .agreed  we
should  never  have  n.amed  it,  nor  have  expected  anyone  to  have  believed  us.

We  did  not  leave  for  some  time  after,but  never  saw  anything  else, nor  have
1 since,  but  I have  never  looked  out  into  the  night  with  the  same  pleasure,
and  it  always  crosses  my  mind.

July  9tJi,  1883.  M.  Townsend.

[Strange  noises  were  heard  on  two  occasions, which  could  not  be  accounted
for.  Once  Mrs.  Townsend  was  greatly  startled  by  a tremendous  crash,  which
Mr.  Townsend  did  irot  hear  at  all.]

Tliirty-eiglit  years  seem  to  have  ehapsed  after  this  experience  before
it  was  written  down,  and  in  that  time  the  definiteness  of  the  figure,
aird  the  exactness  of  correspondeirce  between  it  and  the  old  farmer  may
have,  perhaps,  grown  in  recollection.  Besides,  coirsidering  wdiat  an
iirsidequate  thing  a description  is,  exactness  of  correspondence  such  as
is  here  meant  can  never  come  to  very  much.  I suppose  iro  oire  feels
tliat  he  could  at  once  recognise  an  escaped  burglar  from  the  police
description  of  him.  All  he  would  know  would  be  that  certain  persons
were  excluded  by  the  description  while  certaiir  others  were  not.  But
to  go  back  to  our  ghost ; some  of  its  cliaracteristics,  namely,  its  being
rooted  to  the  spot  and  in  a fixed  attitude,  aird  its  disappearance  by  ap-
parently sinking  into  the  ground,  suggest  an  effect  of  light,  e.g.,  of  a
rising  or  setting  moon  shining  through  the  house  on  to  a shrub  or
plant.  If  Mr.  Townsend  had  but  gone  down  to  the  garden  as  he
wished,  he  would,  doubtless,  have  ascertained  definitely  whether  what
is  here  suggested,  or  any  other  physical  explanation,  was  or  was  not  possi-
ble ; and  had  the  occurrence  been  recent,  an  examination  of  the  house
and  garden  might  even  yet  have  been  worth  making.  But  as  the  story
stands,  it  can  hardly  be  thought  unreasonable  to  regard  the  above  ex-
planation as  more  probable  than  any  “ psychical  ” one.

I will  here  add  a narrative  (G.  117)  of  a kind  quite  unique  in  our
collection,  and  which  I am  inclined  to  think  may  be  explained  as  a
case  of  collective  illusion,  though,  if  so,  the  illusion  w'as  so  remarkable
on  account  of  its  persistence  and  repetition,  as  almost  to  suggest  a
borderland  between  illusion  and  hallucination.

It  has  been  received  directly  from  the  elder  of  the  two  ladies  who
witnessed  the  phenomenon ; the  younger  sister  has  read  it  through  and


77


1885.]  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.

appended  a Lrief  comment  to  the  account.  The  maid  cannot  now  he
traced.

“ I daresay  it  is  ten  or  twelve  years  since  this  happened.  One  night  in
November  my  sister  C.  and  myself,  witli  the  maid,  had  been  to  evening
service  in  our  village  church.  There  was  thick  fog  ; the  moon  was  full,  but
it  made  a sort  of  steam  in  the  fog,  instead  of  shining  brightly.

“ As  we  walked  we  met  a man  : he  was  whistling,  and  we  heard  his  wliistle
and  his  footstejis  long  before  we  saw  him  ; he  passed  us  on  C.’s  side,  whistling
still.  Shortly  after  he  had  gone,  I was  surprised  to  see  another  man  at  C.’s
side,  who  had  come  there  without  making  a sound  ; he  was  a much  shorter
man  than  the  first.  C.  apparently  did  not  see  him  ; I was  walking  beside
her,  and  I pulled  her  sleeve,  whispering  ‘ Let  that  man  pass.’  C.  was
walking  on  the  outside  of  the  three,  next  the  carriage  road.  As  I spoke,  the
man  disappeai-ed — it  seemed,  into  C.’s  dress  ; neither]  C.  nor  the  maid  had
seen  him,  and  he  had  made  no  sound.  In  another  moment  we  were  all
bewildered  at  the  sight  around  us  ; it  was  as  if  we  were  in  a crowded  street ;
innumerable  figures  were  round  us  ; men,  women,  children,  and  dogs,  all
were  moving  briskly  about,  some  singly,  others  in  groups,  all  without  a
sound  ; they  ajjpeared  mist-like.  There  was  a broad  strip  of  grass  on  our
right,  and  a narrow  strip  on  our  left  ; the  figures  were  hidden  directly  they
got  on  either  of  these  dark  strips,  or  when  they  passed  into  ourselves  ; but
as  we  walked  on  they  came  from  every  quarter.  Some  seemed  to  rise  out  of
the  grass  on  either  side  of  us  ; others  seemed  to  jjass  through  us,  and  come
out  on  the  other  side.  The  figures  all  seemed  short,  dwarf-like,  except  one,
of  whom  I write  after.  The  women  were  dressed  in  bygone  fashion,  high
bonnets,  big  cloaks  or  shawls,  and  large  flounces  on  their  dresses,  such  as  I
remember  my  mother  wearing  when  I was  a child.  We  three  were  never
mistaken  as  to  the  identity  of  the  different  shapes  ; if  one  saw  a man,  all
saw  a man  ; if  one  saw  a woman,  all  saw  the  woman  ; and  so  on.  Over-
head it  was  jterfectly  free  of  them  ; they  were  all  walking  on  the  ground,  as
we  ourselves  were.  We  saw  two  men  (at  different  intervals)  that  had  sparks
all  round  their  faces  ; they  appeared  to  grin.  As  we  saw  the  second  of
these,  looking  hideous,  close  to  us,  one  of  my  comjianions  said  ‘ I can’t  pass
that,’  and  I answered,  ‘ Look  at  the  sky,  you  don’t  see  them  then.’

“There  was  one  man  taller  than  all  the  rest  (ho  looked  rer;/ tall),  v.'ho
took  great  strides,  though  perfectly  noiseless  ; he  wore  a kind  of  cape  ; he
was  the  only  one  who  walked  beside  us,  and  he  was  on  the  carriage  road  ;
the  rest  all  went  on  in  an  aimless  kind  of  way,  losing  theniselves  in  the
grass,  and  so  on  ; but  this  one  never  changed  his  step  or  swerved.

“ As  we  walked  on,  and  he  kept  near  us,  we  cast  frightened  glances  at
him,  and  kept  bidding  each  other  in  a whisper  to  look  at  him,  though  he
never  turned  his  head  to  look  towards  us.  We  aj)proached  our  ov/ii  gate,
where  we  should  turn  in,  and  then  we  had  a long  drive  to  walk  up  before  we
should  reach  the  house.  I think  that  by  the  time  we  reached  our  gate  all  the
figures  had  disappeared  except  tliis  one  tall  man.  He  had  cpiite  a different
look  to  any  of  the  others,  looked  more  horrible  altogether.  His  way  of
walking  was  quite  different  to  the  rest,  and  he  was,  I should  think,  twice  as
tall  or  more  than  any  of  the  others.  He  looked  as  if  he  liad  a purpose  ; the
rest  seemed  quite  different.  As  we  had  to  cross  the  road  and  enter  our  gate.


78


FJ/aiitasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


I thought  I could  not  go  if  that  horrible  figure  went  too,  but  to  our  intense
relief,  he  passed  our  gate,  and  went  on  with  his  measured  stride  up  the  middle
of  tlie  road.  As  we  turned  into  our  gate,  he  was  the  only  form  in  sight. —
E.  F.,  Fehruarij  7th,  1882.”

Mrs.  F.’s  sister  adds  ; —

“ The  only  thing  I do  not  recollect  in  this  story  is  where  F.  says  the  men
had  a All  the  rest  is  true.  I cannot  say  I recollect  the  faces.  The

sparks  I did  see  ; the  faces  appeared  to  me,  as  did  the  figures,  mist-like. —
C.  M.  B.,  February  llth:’’

In  two  further  letters,  Mrs.  F.  writes  : —

(1)  [As  to  the  distance  actually  traversed  in  comjrany  with  the  “ spirits.”]
‘ ‘ After  talking  together  and  recalling  the  I'oad,  we  think  we  may  safely  say
we  were  among  them  for  200  yards,  or  thereabouts.”  [So  that  the  probable
duration  of  the  vision  would  be  from  two  to  three  minutes.]

(2)  “As  to  the  sj^arks  round  the  two  faces,  I certainly  think  they  were
on  the  faces  ; they  were  around  the  faces,  as  it  might  be,  on,  the  edge  of  the
faces  ; they  were  yellow  sparks  ; the  two  figures  who  had  the  sparks  appeared
to  me  thin  and  cadaverous,  for  the  faces  did  not  look  round,  but  seemed  to
fall  in  under  the  cheek  bones.  I wish  I could  draw,  for  I can  see  the
‘ things  ’ now  j ust  as  plainly  as  I saw  them  then,  and  1 could  i^oint  out  the
exact  spot  of  gi’ound  on  which  they  stood.  We  were  close  to  them.  As  to
the  number  of  .sparks  I cannot  speak  definitely  ; they  were  placed  at  regular
distances  round  the  face  ; there  might  he  about  ten  or  twelve  r(.)und  each
face,  so  I think.  They  appeared  yellow  and  bright,  and  they  made  a slight
steam  in  the  fog.  Their  light  was  not  nearly  so  beautiful  as  a star’s  light  ”
[this  last  a suggested  simile];  “it  might  he  more  like  a small  yellow
candle’s  flame.  There  was  nothing  beautiful  about  them.

(3)  “You  ask  whether  I have  any  theory  as  to  the  apiiarition.  I have

none  whatever,  and  should  be  extremely  interested  if  anybody  could  throw
light  upon  the  matter.  The  style  of  the  women’s  dress  seemed  to  take  me
back  as  far  as  I could  remember  (perhai)s  to  1857),  when  1 seemed  to
remember  my  mother  wearing  the  same  sort  of  fashion,  but,  as  you  know,
fashions  come  and  go,  and  repeat  themselves  a hundred  times.  I think  the
men  chiefly  wore  capes  or  long  cloaks  ; but,  you  must  remember,  they  all
looked  dark  and  mist-like.  ...  I should  be  myself  about  20  when  I
saw  this  appearance,  and  my  sister  16.  ...  One  might  imagine  it

to  be  a kind  of  mirage,  only  the  whole  appearance  was  so  unlike  what  one
would  have  seen  in  any  town  at  the  time  we  saw  it.  No  woman  iir
any  English  town  was  dressed  in  the  least  as  were  all  the  women  in  our
vision.

(4)  “We  were  all  very  much  frightened.  Tlie  maid  and  my  sister  were
crying  aloud  ; I was  not,  for  1 felt  I must  keep  my  wits  about  me  ; the  tears
were  rolling  down  my  clieeks  in  a kind  of  bewilderment,  yet  1 was  not  crying,
and  my  voice  was  strong  and  firm.  We  ke])t  i)ulling  each  other  from  one
and  another  side  of  the  road,  as  the  sjnrits  came  thicker  towards  us
from  different  sides,  for  it  was  an  uncomfortable  feeling  to  see  them  disappear
into  ourselves.

“ AVhen  we  burst  into  the  house  with  the  history  of  our  curious  apparition


1885.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


79


my  father  and  mother  came  out  with  us  again,  to  see  if  anything  was  to  be
seen,  but  the  road  was  quite  free  of  anything,  and  after  walking  about  for
half-an-hour  we  went  indoors  again.”

Illusion  is  certainly  not  a very  plausible  explanation  of  this
occurrence,  but  it  is  perhaps  possible  that  the  small  figures  were
irregularities  in  the  density  of  the  fog  interpreted  into  shapes  of  men
and  women,  the  witnesses  confirming  each  other  in  their  interpretation,
and  that  the  large  figure  was  a real  man  walking  noiselessly,  as  a man
does,  for  instance,  in  goloshes.  The  fact  that  the  small  figures  disappeared
directly  they  got  on  either  of  the  dark  strips  of  grass,  affords,  I think,
a strong  reason  for  regarding  them  as  illusions ; for  it  is  difficult  to  see
why  a hallucination,  veridical  or  otherwise,  should  be  affected  so  much
by  the  background,  while  on  the  other  hand,  an  illusion  caused,  as  I have
suggested,  by  irregularities  in  the  density  of  the  fog,  would  depend  on
the  background  almost  entirely.  If  the  phenomenon  was  really  a
“ psychical  ” one  it  is  peculiarly  unlucky  that  the  one  fact  of  this  kind,
I’ecorded  in  a collection  of  370  narratives,  should  have  occurred  in
a fog.

So  far  I have  dealt  only  with  visual  illusions,  but  auditory  illusions
are,  I think,  commoner.  W e interpret  sounds  from  smaller  indications
than  sights,  and  more  mistakes  are  possible  about  them.  If  we  see  a
figure,  we  cannot  be  mistaken  as  to  the  direction  in  which  we  see  it,
and  the  relation  to  other  objects,  called  in  optics  jaarallax,  constantly
enables  us  to  estimate  its  distance,  and  consequently  its  size.  Whereas
in  sounds  we  may  easily  be  wrong  about  direction,  and  as  to  distance,
and  consequently  absolute  loudness,  we  have,  I think,  no  guide  at  all,
unless  we  know  independently  what  the  source  of  sound  is.  Any  one
may  experimentally  verify  this,  if  he  will  carefully  observe  his  first
uncorrected  impressions  as  to  the  source  of  unexpected  sounds.  This
difficulty  in  the  exact  localisation  of  unknown  sources  of  sounds  is
a very  serious  obstacle  to  discovering  their  possible  physical  causes,  and
makes  it,  I think,  on  the  whole,  unwarrantable  to  assume  that
mysterious  sounds  not  showing  intelligence  are  physically  inexplicable,
merely  because  not  yet  physically  explained.

There  are,  however,  tlii’ee  considerations,  which,  in  a more  legiti-
mate way,  suggest  a “ psychical  ” origin  for  such  sounds,  and  though  I
do  not  think  that  as  at  present  exemplified  in  the  collection  before  us,
these  considerations  are  very  weighty,  it  would  l:)e  a mistake,  in  view  of
further  investigations,  to  put  them  altogether  out  of  court.  ( 1 ) Tire
sounds  sometimes  seem  to  show  signs  of  intelligent  agency,  or  of  corre-
spondence with  external  and  physically  independent  circumstances.  For
instance,  raps  seem  to  vary  in  answer  to  questions  asked,  or  the  sounds
are  for  the  first  time  heard  in  seeming  connection  with  a very  recent
death.  We  have  not,  I think,  at  present  any  very  strong  evidence  for


80


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


such  psychical  signs  as  these,  hut  if  the  origin  of  the  sounds  be  really
non-physical  it  is  in  this  way  that  there  is,  probably,  most  likelihood  of
proving  it.*  (2)  In  houses  where  there  seems  to  be  good  evidence  for
the  occurrence  of  visual  apparitions,  mysterious  sounds  also  occur,  and
if  it  can  be  shown  tliat  sounds  and  sights  have  in  these  cases  some
common  psychical  origin,  this  will,  of  course,  afford  a facie

ground  for  attributing  similar  sounds  to  a similar  origin  when  they
occur  by  themselves.  (3)  Many  of  the  sounds  in  question  appear  to
those  who  hear  them  to  resemble  sounds  usually  made  by  human
beings,  such  as  footsteps,  rustling  of  dresses,  moving  of  furniture  over-
head, the  crash  of  falling  china,  the  smack  of  a whip  on  door  or
furniture,  raps  and  blows  on  walls  and  doors,  cries,  groans,  sobs,  sighs,
whisperings  and  inarticulate  voices.  I think,  however,  that  little
importance  can  Ije  attached  to  this  consideration.  For  none  of  the
sounds  I have  enumerated  seem  to  me  at  all  unmistakable  in  character.
For  in.stance,  the  chief  characteristic  of  footsteps  is  their  periodicity.
Any  recurring  tap  having  about  the  same  period  might  easily  be
mistaken  for  them,  and  if  it  gradually  increased  or  diminished  in  loud-
ness it  would  suggest  a person  approaching  or  receding.!  And  again,
it  is  well  known  that  draughts  of  air  under  certain  circumstances  will
produce  the  illusion  of  wliispering.

It  is  clear  from  our  evidence  that,  in  many  cases,  considerable
trouble  has  been  taken  to  find  any  physical  cause  for  the  mysterious
noises  without  success — the  inliabitants  having  often  before  them  the
sceptic’s  favourite  explanation  of  rats  quite  as  clearly  as  we  have.  On
the  other  hand,  obvious  causes  are  no  doubt  sometimes  over-looked,  or
their  effect  under-estimated.  In  one  case,  for  instance,  (312)  we  learn
from  the  owner  of  a house  that  the  partition-wall  between  it  and
the  next  house,  is  probably  not  so  completely  impervious  to  sounds  as


* Careful  observations  on  this  point  sliouhl  be  made  by  those  residing  in
houses  where  mysterious  noises  occur.  It  is  satisfactory  to  know  that  this  is
being  done  by  General  Campbell,  tlie  narrator  of  No.  331,  and  we  may  hope  for
valuable  evidence  from  him.

! In  some  cases  there  seems  good  ground  for  flunking  that  sounds  of  tliis
nature  were  correctly  localised  though  unexplained.  The  following  is  an  extract
from  a recent  narration  of  experiences  which  occurred,  unfortunately,  .30
years  ago.  It  has  been  shown  to  me  by  the  Committee  in  manuscript,  and  has
not  yet  been  printed  among  the  slips  ; — “ Almost  every  night  I used  to  hear  these
footsteps,  and  used  sometimes  to  sit  on  the  stairs  holding  the  bannisters  on  each
side  with  my  hands.  Nothing  corporeal  could  have  passed  me;  but  the  foot-
steps distinctly  passed  me.  Two  stairs  in  the  bottom  flight  were  in  the  habit
of  creaking  when  trodden  upon  ; and  when  I heard  the  steps  coming  I used  to
count,  and  the  creak  came  always  regularly  on  these  two  stairs.  It  was  like  a
heavy  unshod  foot.”  In  this  case,  and  in  others,  the  footsteps  have  sometimes
been  followed  about  the  house.


81


3885.]  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.

our  informant,  who  had  occupied  the  former  house  for  some  years,
believed  it  to  be.

I do  not  give  any  specimen  of  these  narratives  of  houses  haunted
by  noises  only,  because  one  has  already  ajDpeared  in  the  Froceedings
of  the  Society.  (Part  VI.,  p.  114.)*

There  are,  I think,  about  30  of  the  stories  which  come  under  the
head  of  merely  unexplained  sounds,  and  about  the  same  number
where  there  is  good  evidence  for  unexplained  sounds,  and  also  evidence
for  other  phenomena,  but  where  the  latter  evidence  does  not  seem  to
me  important  for  our  present  purpose.  Here  I should  remark  that
evidence  for  the  ghostly  nature  of  other  phenomena,  e.g.,  apparitions,
is  not,  in  my  view,  materially  strengthened  by  the  fact  that  there  are
mysterious  noises  at  the  same  time  or  place,  because  the  existence  of
the  sounds,  and  the  consequent  idea  that  a house  is  haunted,  may,  for
aught  we  know,  produce  a state  of  mind  conducive  to  hallucinations.
It  is  noticeal)le  that  in  some  accounts  of  haunted  houses,  the  figure  seen
varies  with  the  seer,  being  seen  at  different  times  and  places  and,
perhaps,  only  once  by  each  person.  For  instance,  in  one  narrative
(1G8),  one  person  is  said  to  have  seen  a figure  in  white  on  the  stairs;
another  person,  when  in  bed,  a man  in  a shooting  jacket ; and  a third,  also
in  bed,  a womaii  and  a baby.  Does  not  this  suggest  a casual  combina-
tion of  dreams  and  either  illusions  or  the  merely  subjective
hallucinations  of  which  I shall  j^resently  speak,  to  which  importance
was  attached  because  the  house  had  already  acquired  a reputation  of
being  haunted?  I will  give  here,  as  an  illustration,  a case  (G.  324)  where
the  evidence  for  the  phenomena  described  seems  very  good,  though
they  occuri’ed  32  years  ago,  and  where  it  is,  perhaps,  possilile
that  real  but  unexplained  sounds,  resembling  human  footsteps,  in  some
way  caused  a j^urely  subjective  hallucination.

From  Mrs.  Watson  (written  by  her  daughter),  42,  Old  Elvet,  Durham,

Fehruarii  'lith,  1884.

I am  writing  at  my  mother’s  dictation,  her  recollection  of  the  circum-
stance which  occurred  at  Armitage  during  the  summer  of  1852.  She  was
alone  in  tlie  dining-room  ; her  sister  and  sister’s  husband  were  in  the  kitchen
about  2 o’clock  in  the  afternoon.

She  distinctly  heard  footsteps  loudly  running  upstairs,  and  the  door  at  the
top  of  the  stairs  “ banged.”  She  thought  it  was  her  brother-in-law,  but  he
immediately  afterwards  opened  the  dining-room  door,  and  asked  her  if  she
had  heard  the  sound.

He  and  his  wife  had  heard  exactly  the  same  while  in  the  kitchen,  and  the
latter  looking  up  the  stairs  had  seen  the  figure  of  a man  at  the  top  of  the

* I rank  this  narrative  in  this  class  because  the  evidence  in  it  for
intelligence  in  the  agency  producing  the  sounds  seems,  to  me,  too  slight  and
indefinite  for  any  stress  to  be  laid  on  it.


G


82


rhantasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


stairs,  wlio  turned  and  lunked  down  at  her,  and  then  disappeared,  the  door
banging  after  iiiin.  Slie  said  it  was  a figure  exactly  resembling  her  father.
Every  jjossible  search  was  immediately  made,  but  not  the  slightest  clue  ever
found  to  tlie  mystery.

Annie  M.  L.  Watson.

The  following  independent  account  is  from  the  Rev.  R.  L.  Loughborough,
Pirton  Vicarage,  Hitchin,  brother  of  Mrs.  Watson  and  of  the  sister  (Mrs.
Swann),  above  mentioned.

Pirton,

20th  Fehrnarj,  1884.

It  is  nearly  30  years  since  the  following  account  was  given  to  me,  in  the
house  where  it  occurred,  by  my  sister,  Mrs.  Swann,  who  tlien  resided  in  a de-
tached house  in  the  village  of  Armitage,  in  Staffordshire.  Tlie  house  is
surrounded  by  a garden  having  back  as  well  as  front  entrance  ; the  back
entrance  led  into  the  kitchen,  from  whence  a back  stair,  enclosed,  led  to  the
ujiper  rooms,  hlrs.  Swann  was  alone  in  the  kitchen  engaged  at  a table
standing  against  the  enclosure.  No  door  opened,  but  she  was  startled  by
hearing  the  sound  of  footste2i3  as  of  one  ascending  the  enclosed  stair.  She
immediately  ojjened  the  door  at  the  foot  of  the  stairs,  and  being  broad  day-
ight  saw  a figure  ascending,  wliicli  she  at  once  recognised  as  that  of  her
father,  who  had  been  dead  several  years.  She  recognised  the  figure  by  tlie
hand  jilaced  behind,  as  was  his  custom  when  alive  and  walking  ; and  she
recognised  the  face  when  he  turned  at  the  toj)  and  looked  back.  On  reach-
ing tlie  toji  of  the  stairs  the  figure  turned  round,  looked  at  her  for  a brief
sjiace,  tlien  seemed  to  jJ^-ss  along  the  jiassage.  Her  husband  and  sister  (now
Mrs.  Watson)  were  in  another  jiart  of  the  house,  the  dining-room  ; they
both  heard  the  sound  as  of  footstejis,  and,  as  by  an  impulse,  both  quickly
ascended  the  front  stairs,  looked  through  the  house,  but  saw  nothing.  I may
add  that  the  occurrence  took  jilace  just  before  Mrs.  Watson’s  marriage,  per-
hajis  two  months  or  so,  and  that  I heard  of  it  when  I went  to  Armitage  to
jierform  the  ceremony.  Mrs.  Swann  has  been  dead  some  years  ; but  when
she  related  the  aflliir  to  me,  was  fully  convinced  of  the  reality  of  the  vision.

R.  Lindsay  Loughborough.

The  next  account  is  frcin  a letter  from  Mr.  George  W.  Swann,  East
Roldoii,  Newcastle-on-Tyne,  to  Mr.  Loughborough.

February  20th,  1884.

A clearer  and  more  correct  descrijition*  could  not  be  given,  and  I have
really  nothing  to  add  but  that  I distinctly  heard  the  noise,  and  Anne  as  dis-
tinctly saw  what  she  believed  to  be  her  father,  running  up  the
nack  stairs.  It  took  Maria  and  myself  very  little  time  to  run
through  the  whole  of  the  house.  In  vain  we  looked  for  signs  of
any  one  being  in  ; and  it  was  impossible  for  anyone  to  have  got  out,  for
men  were  working  outside  close  by,  and  told  us  they  had  seen  and  heard
nothing,  hlaria’s  version  is  correct, — that  she  was  alone  in  the  dining-room,
and  that  I went  hastily  to  her,  and  ^ve  both  rushed  iq)  the  front  stairs,

* Mr.  Swann  refers  to  the  aliove  account  by  IMrs.  Watson,  which  had  been
sent  to  him  by  hlr.  Lcughborougli.


1885.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


83


expecting  to  meet  the  intruder  on  tlie  landing  leading  from  the  back  to  the
front.  It  was  after  that  Anne  told  us  wIkj  the  figure  was  like,  and  to  her
dying  day  she  was  convinced  that  it  was  her  fatlier.  At  this  distance  of  time
I am  cpiito  certain  of  hearing  a man’s  feet  going  up  the  uncarpded  back
stairs.

It  will  be  convenient  to  mention  here  that  tliei’e  are  a few  accounts
of  phenomena  otlier  than  sounds — e.g.,  lights  dancing  on  the  ceiling, —
which  undoubtedly  call  for  investigation,  as  the  sounds  do,  but  which,
like  the  sounds,  cannot,  I think,  at  preseirt  be  referred  to  “ psychical  ”
causes  on  any  better  ground  than  that  no  physical  cause  has  yet  been
found  for  them  ; while  their  fleeting  nature  and  rare  occurrence  make
the  search  for  possible  physical  causes  difficult.

IV. — The  next  explanation  which  I will  consider  is  mistaken  iden-
tity in  its  various  forms — including  under  this  head  all  the  cases
where  we  can  suppose  that  what  was  taken  for  a phantasm,  was  a
living  being  in  the  flesh,  or  otherwise  a real  earthly  specimen  of  that
which  it  resembled  ; and  also  cases  where  there  has  been  a mistake  as
to  the  fact  of  death,  as  when  a person  taken  for  a ghost  has  really  been
alive  all  along.  About  13  of  the  narratives  may,  perhaps,  be  explained
in  this  way,  though  generally,  it  must  be  admitted,  with  some  difficulty.

The  following  narrative  (G.  300)  received  from  Mr.  William  H.
Stone,  1,  Park  Avenue,  Slade  Lane,  Levenshulme,  Manchester,  is  one
of  them  : — ■

I think  it  was  in  1854  ; at  that  time  we  were  large  leather  factors,  and
hide  and  skin  brokers  in  Hojistown  ; when  I say  we,  my  employers  were  in
the  above  line  of  business,  and  I was  manager  of  the  latter  department,  and
in  which  we  used  a large  amount  of  stationery,  such  as  weekly  catalogues,
blackleads,  and  memorandum  books,  &c.,  for  our  buyers  and  our  own  men.
I was  going  along  from  our  office,  in  rather  a merry  mood,  to  order  from  a

stationer  in  P Street  a cpiantity  of  catalogues  wanted  for  next  Friday’s

sale,  for  we  sold  the  hides  and  skins  by  auction  every  Friday,  at  half-past
1 o’clock  to  the  minute,  or  nearly  so.  As  I said,  I was  going  along  P — ■ —
Street, — it  might  be  some  six  or  eight  days  before  the  great  St.  Leger  day.
I generally  had  a pound  or  two  on  the  “ Leger,”  and  it  was  my  intention,  as
soon  as  my  little  order  was  given  for  stationery,  to  see  a friend  about  the
horse  I had  backed.  Crossing  from  left  to  right  in  P — • — Street,  whom
should  I meet  (or  as  I thought  met)  but  an  old  customer,  as  he  had  been  for
some  years,  of  my  father’s  ; my  father  was  formerly  a brewer,  and  he  had
sui)2)lied  the  party  I thought  I met  with  ale,  as  I said,  for  some  years,  and  I
used  to  collect  the  accounts  from  him  along  with  others  in  the  same  line  :
he  was  a beerhouse-keeper,  or  as  they  were  then  called,  a jerry-shopkeeper.
I went  up  to  him,  called  him  by  his  right  name,  shook  him  by  the  left  hand,
for  he  had  no  right,  it  having  been  cut  off  when  he  was  a youth  ; he  had  a
substitute  for  a hand  in  the  shape  of  a hook,  and  he  w'as,  said  he,  very  active
with  this  hook  when  his  services  were  required  in  turning  anyone  out  of  his
house  that  was  in  any  way  refractory  ; he  was  what  you  might  call  a jolly,

G 2


84


Phantasnis  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


good,  even-tempered  sort  of  a man,  and  much  respected  by  his  customers,
most  of  whom  did  a little  betting  in  the  racing  line.  He  had  a very  red
countrified  sort  of  a face,  and  dressed  quite  in  a country  style,  with  felt  hat,
something  after  the  present  style  of  billy-cocks,  with  thick  blue  silk  hand-
kerchief and  round  white  dots  on  it,  his  coat,  a sort  of  chedle-swinger,  and  a
gold  watchguard  passing  round  his  neck  and  over  his  waistcoat  ; his  clothing
was  all  of  good  material  and  respectably  made.  The  moment  he  saw  me  his
face  shone  bright,  and  he  seemed  much  pleased  to  meet  me,  and  I may  say
I felt  a similar  ideasure  towards  him.  Mind,  this  occurred  in  perfect  day-
light, no  moonlight  or  darkness  so  essential  an  accompaniment  to  ghost
stories  ; many  peop)le  were  passing  and  repassing  at  the  time.  You  may  be
sure  I did  not  stand  in  the  middle  of  the  street  for  about  seven  minutes
talking  and  shaking  hands  with  myself  ; someone  would  have  had  a laugh  at
me  had  that  been  the  case.  I almost  at  once,  after  the  stereotyped  compli-
ments of  the  day,  launched  into  the  state  of  the  odds  respecting  the  St.
Leger,  and  into  the  merits  and  demerits  of  various  horses.  He  supplied
me  with  what  information  I required,  and  we  each  went  our  way.  He  was  a
man  considered  to  be  well  posted  up  in  such  matters,  had  cool  judgment  and
discrimination  ; in  fact,  he  was  one  of  those  that  would  not  be  led  away  by
what  are  called  tips.  I made  a memorandum  or  two,  shook  his  hand  again,
and  passed  on  about  my  business,  ordered  my  catalogues,  &c.

I came  back  sauntering  along  towards  the  office,  not  now  intending  to
see  the  party  I had  previously  intended  to  see.  As  I got  to  the  same  part

of  P Street,  on  my  way  back,  I suddenly  stood  still,  my  whole  body

shook,  and  for  the  moment  1 tried  to  reason  with  myself.  The  man  I had
been  speaking  to  was  dead  some  four  years  before  ! Could  it  be  possible  that
he  had  been  buried  alive  ? This  is  horribly  shocking  to  think  about,  but  such
things  have  taken  place.  Decomposition  being  the  only  certain  indication  of
death,  might  he  not  have  been  prematurely  buried  ? But,  if  so,  what  had  I
to  do  with  it  ? I had  nothing  to  do  with  his  death,  but  I am  now  sorry  I do
not  know  or  recollect  the  particulars  of  his  death  and  burial.  I certainly  saw
his  funeral.  [We  have  failed  to  obtain  the  certificate  of  death  or  burial.]

As  I stood  in  the  street  I tried  to  give  utterance  to  my  thoughts  and
feelings,  but  no,  I felt  a sort  of  dumbness,  and  fairly  gasped  for  breath.  I
felt  a cold  shiver  come  over  me,  although  the  day  was  warm  ; the  hair  of  my
head  seemed  as  if  it  would  force  my  hat  off;  my  very  blood  seemed  to  object
to  perform  its  duty.

The  question  might  be  asked  ; Was  I unwell  ? had  I been  indulging  too
freely  in  stimulants  ? In  both  cases  I answei’.  No  ! for  at  that  time  I was
particularly  moderate  in  the  use  of  stimulants,  or  tobacco,  and  was  enjoying
the  most  robust  health,  such  as  I never  enjoyed  before  or  since,  and.  had  a
constitution  like  a horse.  Was  I annoyed  in  my  mind  in  any  way  ? Not  in
the  least.  Was  it  really  a vision  of  the  departed  ? Let  the  reader  judge  for
himself.  I give  it  up.  Had  I been  deceived  in  having  met  the  man  ? No
such  thing.  Then  was  it  someone  very  like  him  ? Nothing  of  the  sort,  for
the  very  words  that  passed  between  us  could  come  from  no  other  lips  but
the  man  himself,  in  substantial  flesh  and  blood.  Was  it  an  optical
delusion  ? for  nothing  is  so  decejitive  as  optical  delusions.  Certainly  not ;
we  sometimes  believe  we  see  what  we  do  not  see,  but  in  this  case  it  was


1885.]


Phantasms  of  the  Bead.


85


nothing  of  the  sort,  nor  could  it  be  somebody  like  him,  it  was  him  !
As  I said  before,  he  had  but  one  hand,  and  his  right  hand  %oas  his  left  one,
in  a sense.  I liad  business  transactions  with  him  for  many  years.  He
had  entirely  slijciJed  out  of  my  memory  for  a length  of  time.  That
he  was  in  or  out  of  existence  it  never  occurred  to  me  for  one  moment
till  no^v  ; and  the  thought  never  presented  itself  throughout  the  interval
between  my  going  and  coming,  and  perhaps  never  would  have  done,

had  I not  gone  the  same  way  back,  by  way  of  P Street,  and  passed

the  identical  spot.  It  may  be  asked,  am  I,  or  was  I,  superstitious  ? I say,
Ho,  emphatically.

To  conclude,  and  as  I have  several  times  said  before,  and  as  I again  say,
I gave  a start,  and  said.  Bless  me  1 how  can  this  be  ? not  an  optical  delusion,
not  it.  What  then  Nothing  but  a slight  mystery,  and  I was  confident  I
could  easily  solve  it.  Never  was  I more  mistaken,  for  from  that  day  to  this
I still  remain  in  profound  ignorance  as  to  what  was  the  cause  or  meaning  of
what  I saw.

IMr.  F.  A.  Whaite,  writing  to  Mr.  Gurney  from  Whaite’s  Fine  Art
Galleiy,  Bridge  Street,  Manchester,  October  10th,  1883,  says  : —

“You  ask  Mr.  Stone  if  he  ever  mentioned  the  circumstance  mentioned  in
your  note  of  the  14th  inst.  ” (i.e.,  the  above  account.)  “ He  did  name  it  to
me  and  my  parents  the  same  day  ; and  I believe  it  was  the  truth,  for  he  was
so  excited  about  it  at  the  time.”

This  occurrence  may,  I think,  be  possibly  accounted  for  by
supposing  that  the  man  our  informant  talked  to  was  a living  man,  and
that  he  was  mistaken  as  to  which  of  his  father’s  customers  had  died
four  years  before.  This  explanation  may  seem  far-fetched,  but  any
other,  whether  “ psychical  ” or  not,  is  very  difficult.  It  clearly  cannot
have  been  an  illusion  or  a trick,  and  a hallucination  or  a ghost  beliaving
as  this  one  did — touched,  heard,  seen,  and  talked  to  for  several  minutes,
in  broad  daylight,  in  a public  street,  and  presumably  seen  by  all  the
passers-by — -would  be  unique  among  the  hallucinations  and  ghosts
of  our  collections.

V.  I now  come  to  the  discussion  of  a more  important  and  difficult
part  of  the  subject  than  any  which  has  yet  been  before  us— namely,
hallucination.  The  difficulty  which  at  once  meets  us  arises  from  the
fact  that  genuine  phantasms  of  the  dead  such  as  we  are  discus.sing
would  themselves  generally  take  the  form  of  hallucinations  of  the  senses
— that  is,  they  would  not  (at  least  in  my  opinion,  but  I shall  discuss
this  question  somewhat  more  fully  further  on)  form  part  of  the  external
physical  world  around  us.  It  is  true  that  ghosts  are  alleged  sometimes
to  produce  a physical  effect  on  the  external  world  ; but  this  suppo.sition
opens  up  a new  field  of  difficulty,  since  it  really  does  bring  us  into
2)7'inid  facie  collison  with  the  physical  sciences  ; and  on  the  whole  it  has
seemed  to  me  be,st  to  leave  the  small  group  of  stories,  in  which
physical,  as  distinct  from  psychical,  jdienomena  are  definitely  alleged


86


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


to  have  occurred,  to  be  treated  in  connection  with  the  records  of
Jiiiysical  phenomena,  reported  to  have  been  experimentally  obtained  at
spiritualistic  seances.

The  phenomena  with  which  the  mass  of  the  narratives  are  concerned
-if  we  omit  mere  feelings  and  impressions  to  which  I can  attach  little
weight — are  almost  all,  at  best,  indistinguishable  from  hallucinations.
The  question  then  is  how  are  we  to  distinguish  them  from  hallucinations
which  are  not  what  is  called  veridical.  There  is  nothing,  so  far  as  we  at
present  know,  either  in  the  ^dienomena  themselves,  or  in  the  condition
of  the  percipient,  by  which  they  may  be  distinguished.  For  cai'eful
inquiry  shows  that  solitary,  and  seemingly  non-veridical,  hallucinations
of  persons  whom  there  is  no  reason  to  think  otherwise  than  healthy  in
body  and  mind,  do  occur.  Clearly,  then,  we  should  not  be  justilied  in
assuming  a hallucination  to  be  veridical  without  some  si^ecial  external
reason  for  doing  so,  or,  in  other  words,  some  conlirmatory  coincidence.
When  the  phantasm  is  that  of  a living  person,  information  about  that
j^erson  may  affoi'd  us  the  required  reason.  But  in  the  case  of  phantasms
of  the  dead.,  we  are  cut  off  from  the  possibility  of  any  information  about
the  supposed  agent,  and  are  reduced  to  seek  for  some  other  kind  of
confirmation.  Several  kinds  of  confirmation  are  possible,  and  of  these
five  seem  to  me  to  be  more  or  less  exemplified  by  the  part  of  our  present
collection  to  which  I attach  most  importance.

Of  hallucinations  without  any  such  confirmation,  we  have,  I
think,  about  forty,  and  about  as  many  more  where  the  confirmatory
evidence  I'equired  does  not  seem  to  me  sti'ong  enough.

The  first  kind  of  confirmation  which  I will  consider  occurs  when
two  people  have  a hallucination  simultaneously.  It  certainly  seems
in  the  highest  degree  improbable  that  two  people  should  independently
have  similar  subjectively  caused  liallucinations  ; but  for  those  who,  like
myself,  are  disposed  to  regal’d  thought-transference  oy  telejndhy  as  estab-
lished, the  fact  that  two  persons  apparently  see  the  same  apparition  at
the  same  time,  does  not  prove  that  it  is  externally  caused  in  both  cases.
We  must  admit  the  possibility  that  A,  having  a hallucination,  may
by  thought-transference  convey  the  impression  to  B,  and  cause  B to
have  a hallucination  too  ; and  even  perhaps  that  xl  may  cause  a halluci-
nation to  B by  some  teleiiathically  conveyed  impression,  thougii  his  own
mental  disturbance  does  not  externalise  itself  in  the  same  way.  At
any  rate  Ave  know  as  yet  too  little  about  hallucinations  and  the
conditions  under  Avliich  they  occur,  to  say  that  this  cannot  be  so.  These
suppositions  may  seem  extraA’agant ; but  according  to  the  general
principle  Avith  Avhich  I started,  it  seems  to  me  that  I am  bound  to  press
the  hypothesis  of  telepathy  as  far  as  it  Avill  go,  no  less  than  the  other
liypotheses — exaggeration,  illusion,  mistaken  identity,  &c.  And  it  should
be  observed  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  supjAose  that  the  tAvo  hallucina-


1885.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


87


tions,  even  when  believed  to  be  similar,  are  so  in  eveiy  detail.  No  one
takes  in  every  detail  of  an  object  seen,  especially  wlien  seen  for  so  short
a time  as  these  hallucinations  usually  last,  and  A’s  description  may
easily  seem  to  recall  to  B’s  mind  points  which  he  did  not  actually  observe
himself,  though  he  did  not  observe  the  contrary.  The  positive  evidence
in  favour  of  this  hypothesis  is  not  as  yet  large  in  amount,  or  conclusive
in  quality.  But  there  are  cases  among  the  collected  narratives  of
phantasms  of  the  living,  which  seem  more  easily  explained  on  this  hypo-
thesis than  on  any  other,  and  which  therefore  support  it  as  far  as  they  go.
For  example  (L.  1.531)  alady  tells  us  that  her  brother  and  his  wife,  both
now  dead,  once  asked  her  whether  she  had  been  thiidving  of  them  in
any  special  way  on  a certain  night  some  months  previously.  It  ap-
peared that  they  had  both  seen  her  standing  at  the  foot  of  their  bed.
She  could  not  remember  anything  on  her  part  which  suggested  a cause
for  this  phenomenon.  Another  very  interesting  case  of  a similar  kind
Avas  printed  in  the  Proceedings,  Vol.  I.,  p.  115.  Then  again  there  is  a
curious  story  (L.  323)  in  which  the  mother  of  a dying  Avoman  appears
to  the  nurse  at  the  bedside.  There  is  no  eAudence  of  Avhat  our  Com-
mittee call  “ agency”  on  the  part  of  the  mother,  and  she  was  quite
unknoAvn  to  the  percipient.  It  seems  here  plausible  to  suppose  that
the  sick  person  Avas  in  some  Avay  the  agent  causing  the  hallucination,
though  Ave  do  not  knoAV  Avhat  AA’-as  her  own  experience  at  the  time.

If  this  hypothesis,  as  to  the  nature  of  collective  hallucinations,  be
regarded  as  tenable,  then  all  the  stories  Avhere  there  is  no  other  ground
for  assuming  an  external  cause  may  possibly  be  cases  of  thought-
transference  betAveen  living  persons,  and  cannot  be  regarded  as  affording
arguments  for  the  possibility  of  communication  Avith  the  dead  or  of
apparitions  directly  connected  AAuth  them.  There  are,  I think,  about
20  such  stories  in  the  collection.  The  folloAving  may  be  given  as  a
specimen  (G.  105,  printed  also  as  610),  the  impression  of  the  little
orphan’s  dream  being  supposed  transferred  to  the  Avarden.  The  story
Avas  originally  printed  in  July,  1883,  in  an  account  of  the  Orphanage
AA'liere  it  occurred,  entitled  “ The  Orphanage  and  Home,  Aberlour,
Craigellachie,”  etc.  (pp.  11,  15),  and  Ave  liaAm  since  obtained  coiilirmation
of  it  from  the  AYarden.

In  1875,  a man  died  leaA-ing  a AvudoAv  and  six  orphan  children.  The  three
eldest  Avere  admitted  into  the  Orphanage.  Tliree  years  aftei’Avards  the  AvidoAv
died,  and  friends  succeeded  in  getting  funds  to  send  the  rest  here,  the
youngest  being  about  four  years  of  age.  At  this  time  the  Orphanage  con-
tained nearly  30  inmates,  for  the  smaller  ones  of  Avhom  the  Warden  did  every-
thing that  Avas  required.  There  Avas  not  a spare  room  in  the  house,  and
visitors  to  the  Orphanage  had  to  be  lodged  in  the  parsonage.  About  six
months  after  the  arrival  of  the  younger  children  referred  to  above,  tAvo
visitors  unexpectedly  arrived  late  in  the  evening — too  late  to  get  a bed  aired


88


Phantasins  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


at  the  parsonage  ; it  was  therefore  arranged  that  they  sliould  have  the
Warden’s  room,  lie  agreeing  to  take  a bed  in  the  little  ones’  dormitory,
which  contained  10  beds,  nine  occupied.  No  other  change  except  this  was
made  in  tlie  usual  order  of  things.

In  the  morning,  at  breakfast,  the  Warden  made  the  following  state-
ment : — As  near  as  I can  tell  1 fell  asleep  about  11  o’clock,  and  slejjt  very
soundly  for  some  time.  I suddenly  woke  without  any  apparent  reason,  and
felt  an  impulse  to  turn  round,  my  face  being  towards  the  wmll,  from  the
children.  Before  turning,  I looked  up  and  saw  a soft  light  in  the  room.
The  gas  was  burning  low  in  the  hall,  and  the  dormitory  door  being  ojien,  I
thought  it  jirobable  that  the  light  came  from  that  source.  It  w'as  soon
evident,  however,  that  such  was  not  the  case.  I turned  round,  and  then  a
wonderful  vision  met  my  gaze.  Over  the  second  bed  from  mine,  and  on
the  same  side  of  the  room,  there  was  floating  a small  cloud  of  light,  forming
a halo  of  the  brightness  of  the  moon  on  an  ordinary  moonlight  night.

I sat  upright  in  bed,  looked  at  this  strange  appearance,  took  up  my  watch
and  found  the  hands  jiointing  to  five  minutes  to  1.  Everything  was  quiet,
and  all  the  children  sleeping  soundly.  In  the  bed,  over  which  the  light
seemed  to  float,  slept  the  youngest  of  the  six  children  mentioned  above.

I asked  myself,  “Am  I dreaming?”  No  I I wars  wide  awake.  I was
seized  with  a strong  impulse  to  rise  and  touch  the  substance,  or  whatever  it
might  be  (for  it  was  about  five  feet  high),  and  was  getting  up  when  something-
seemed  to  hold  me  back.  I am  certain  I heard  nothing,  yet  I felt  and  i)er-
fectly  understood  the  words — “No,  lie  down,  it  won’t  hurt  you.”  I at  once
did  wdiat  1 felt  I was  told  to  do.  I fell  asleep  shortly  afterwards  and  rose  at
half-past  5,  that  being  my  usual  time.

At  0 o’clock  I began  dressing  the  children,  beginning  at  the  bed
furthest  from  the  one  in  -ivliich  I sle2)t.  Presently  I came  to  the  bed  over
wdiich  I had  seen  the  light  hovering.  I took  the  little  boy  out,  iflaced  him  on
my  knee,  and  jmt  on  some  of  his  clothes.  The  child  had  been  talking  with
the  others,  suddenly  he  was  silent.  And  then,  looking  me  hard  in  the  face
with  an  extraordinary  expression,  he  said,  “ Oh,  Mr.  Jiqq:),  my  mother  came
to  me  last  night.  Did  you  see  her?”  For  a moment  I could  not  answer
the  child.  I then  thought  it  better  to  pass  it  oil’,  and  said,  “ Come,  we  must
make  haste,  or  we  shall  be  late  for  breakfast.”

The  child  never  afterwards  referred  to  the  matter,  we  are  told,  nor  has
it  since  ever  been  mentioned  to  him.  The  Warden  says  it  is  a mystery  to
him  ; he  simjily  states  the  fact  and  there  leaves  the  matter,  being  j^erfectly
satisfied  that  he  was  mistaken  in  no  one  j^articular.

Letter  from  Miss  Venning.

British  Museum,

4dh  November.

My  friend,  Mr.  Farrer,  Rector  of  Bigbury,  Kingsbridge,  vouches  for  the
truth  of  the  story.  A week  or  two  ago  he  visited  the  Or2)hanage  at  Aberlour,
and  saw  the  jMr.  .Juj)i)  mentioned,  whom  he  describes  as  a straightforward,
rather  matter-of-fact  Englishman,  and  who  told  him  the  story  almost  word
for  word  as  it  is  given  in  the  ijamjjhlet.


1S85.]


FJiantasms  of  the  Dead.


89


Letter  from  Mr,  Jupp  to  Mr.  Gurney.

The  Orphanage  and  Convalescent  Home,  Aberlour,  Craigellachic.

Novemhcr  13th,  1883.

De.vr  Sir, — I fear  anything  the  little  boy  might  now  say  would  be
unreliable,  or  1 would  at  once  question  him.  Although  the  matter  was
fully  discussed  at  the  time,  it  was  never  mentioned  in  the  hearing  of  the
child,  and  yet,  when  at  the  request  of  friends,  the  account  was  published  in
our  little  magazine,  and  the  child  read  it,  his  countenance  changed,  and
looking  up  he  said,  “Mr.  Jupp,  that  is  me.”  I said,  “Yes,  that  is  what  we
saw.”  He  said,  “ Yes,”  and  then  seemed  to  fall  into  deep  thought,  evidently
with  pleasant  remembrances,  for  he  smiled  so  sweetly  to  himself,  and  seemed
to  forget  I was  present.

I much  regret  now  that  I did  not  learn  something  from  the  child  at  the
time.

(Signed)  Cha.s.  Jurp.

The  following  narrative,  (G.  127)  received  from  Mrs.  Windridge,
is  perhaps  another  instance ; the  mother  here,  on  the  hypothesis
under  consideration,  causing  the  child’s  hallucination.

24,  Maitland  Park  Road,  Haverstock  Hill,  N.W.

OtJi.  November,  1882.

About  the  year  1869,  I was  much  interested  in  a poor  woman  who  was
dying  in  my  neighboinliood.  1 used  to  visit  her  frequently,  until  my  friends
prevented  me  from  going  any  more,  as  the  excitement  rendered  me  ill.
Eventually  when  she  died,  they  concealed  the  fact  from  me  for  some  days.

I was  taking  my  little  boy,  three  years  old,  up  to  bed  one  evening.  It
was  dusk  ; and  when  half-way  up  the  first  flight  of  stairs,  I distinctly  felt  a
pressure  and  a rustling  of  a dress  at  my  side  as  if  a woman  had  brushed  past
me.  There  was  no  one  there.  On  the  second  flight  the  pressure  was
repeated,  but  more  unmistakably.  The  occurrence  made  me  so  nervous
that,  having  jmt  the  boy  to  bed,  I decided  to  remain  with  him  until  my
husband  came  in.  I accordingly  lay  down  on  the  bed,  facing  him.

Suddenly  the  boy  started  up.  “ Oh,  mother,  there  is  a lady  standing
behind  you,”  at  the  same  moment  I felt  a pressure  which  I knew  to  be  that
of  my  friend.  I dared  not  look  round.

When  my  husband  returned,  I heard  from  Inm  for  the  first  time  that  my
friend  had  died  three  days  before.

In  the  above  two  cases  the  percipients  had  simultaneous,  but  not
similar  impressions.  The  following  (G.  lol)  is  an  interesting  specimen
of  impressions  l)oth  simultaneous  and  similar,  which  might  be  exjolained
in  the  same  way.  The  narrator,  who  wdll  not  allow  lier  name  to  be
published,  is  known  to  Mr.  Podmore.

Fehmar]!  Yith.,  1884.

Shortly  after  my  marriage,  about  the  year  1847,  I went  to  stay  at  my
father’s  house.  I had  at  that  time  two  sisters  at  home,  unmarried.  The
elder  of  the  two  was  nearly  two  years  younger  than  myself,  and  would  there-


90


Ffia  Ilf  asms  of  the  Bead.


[April  24,


fore  be  about  22  years  of  age  at  the  time  I speak  of.  The  other  sister  was
muoh  younger  tliaii  us  both,  and  at  this  time  Avas  about  14  years  old.  My
two  sisters  slept  together  in  a room  adjoining  mine.

(due  morning,  on  my  going  down  to  breakfast,  my  elder  sister  said  to  me,
“ Sarah,  such  a strange  thing  ha])pened  in  the  night.  I rvas  sleeping  outside”
(the  otlier  side  of  the  bed  was  against  the  wall),  “and  I was  awoke  by  a feeling
of  oi)2iression  at  my  chest,  as  though  there  Avas  a Aveight  there,  and  I could
not  breathe.  On  opening  my  eyes  I aauas  startled  to  see  a veiled  figure  bending
over  me.  While  I looked  I felt  Anna’s  arm  come  round  me.  After  Avdiat
seemed  to  me  a fcAv  minutes  the  form  disappeared.  Then  Anna  Avdiispered,

‘ Oh,  Lizzie,  I thought  it  Avas  going  to  take  you  aAva3^’  ”

This  Avas  my  sister’s  account.  I took  an  ojiportunity,  Avhen  my  younger
sister  and  I Avere  alone,  to  ask  her  Avhat  that  Avas  that  she  and  Lizzie  had  seen.

She  said  she  Avas  aAVoke  by  a feeling  of  ojiijression,  as  though  she
could  not  breathe,  and  on  opening  her  eyes,  in  the  dim  light  of  the  room
(the  blind  AA'as  doAvn,  but  there  Avas  a gas  lamp  in  front  of  the  house,  Avhich
gave  some  light  to  the  room),  she  saAv  a veiled  figure  bending  over  Lizzie,
and  she  put  her  arm  round  her,  as  she  thought  it  had  come  to  take  her  aAvay.

My  father  and  his  family  shortly  after  moved  into  another  house,  my
sisters  still  occu2)yir  g a room  together.  They  assured  me  that  once  in  this
other  house  they  Avere  visited  by  the  same  appearance,  but  this  time  it  Avas
over  Anna.  She  only  lived  a short  time  after,  dying  at  sixteen  and  a-half.

On  sending  this  account  to  my  sister,  in  case  I might,  through  lajAse  of
time,  have  altered  the  matter,  she  assures  me  that  it  is  substantially  correct,
and  adds  that  the  form  Avas  grey,  darker  and  thicker  in  the  middle  ; she
also  adds  that  the  feeling  of  horror  Avas  intense.*

Tlie  remaining  kinds  of  confirmation  with  Avhicli  Ave  liave  to  deal
are  those  Avhicli  Ave  have  (1)  When  the  phantasm  conveys  correct
information  previously  unknoAvn  to  the  percipient ; or  (2)  Avhen  there
seems  to  be  some  clearly  defined  object  aimed  at  in  the  manifestations  ;
(3)  Avlien  the  apparition  resembles  a deceased  person  unknoAvn  to  the
percipient  so  much  that  he  aftei’Avards  recognises  his  portrait,  or  Avhen
it  lias  some  Avell-marked  cliaracteri.stic  of  the  deceased  which  is
unknoAvn  to  the  percipient  ; (4)  Avhen  two  or  more  people  see,  inde-
pendently of  each  other  and  at  difierent  times,  apparitions  Avhich  seem
clearly  to  liaAm  been  very  much  alike.

Of  nari'atiA’es  with  the  first  of  these  kinds  of  confirmation  Ave  have
five  or  six,  but  none  of  them  very  recent.  Sometimes  simply  the
fact  of  the  death  is  learnt  from  the  phantasm,  as  in  the  folloAving  case,
where  the  hallucination  is  auditory  (O.  357).  It  Avas  received  by  the
Committee  from  the  Rev.  C.  C.  Wambey,  39,  Canal,  Salisbury.

During  my  residence  in  B.  C.,  as  curate  in  charge,  it  Avas  my  custom  to
Avalk  in  the  summer  evenings  over  the  neighbouring  doAvns.

* Tliis  sister  has  had  other  experiences  of  the  kind,  Avhich  the  Committee  hope
to  obtain  accounts  of, but  tliere  has  as  yet  been  no  opportunitj^  of  communicating
Avith  her  directl3^


1885.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


91


On  the  evening  of  Sunday,  August  20th,  1874,  I was  strolling  on  the
downs  skirting  hlarlcombe  Hill,  composing  a congratulatory  letter,  which  I
proijosed  to  write  and  post  to  my  very  dear  friend  W.,  so  that  he  might
have  it  on  his  birthday,  the  22nd,  when  1 heard  a voice  sajnng,  “What,
write  to  a dead  man  ; write  to  a dead  man  ! ” I turned  sharply  round,  fully
ex2>ecting  to  see  some  one  close  behind  me.  There  was  no  one.  Treating
the  matter  as  an  illusion,  I went  on  with  my  comjwsition.  A second  time  I
heard  the  same  voice,  saying,  more  loudly  than  before,  “What,  write  to  a
dead  man  ; write  to  a dead  man ! ” Again  I turned  round.  I was  alone,
at  least  bodily.  I now  fully  understood  the  meaning  of  that  voice  ; it  was
no  illusion.

Notwithstanding  this,  I sent  the  joroijosed  letter,  and  in  rei)ly  received
from  Mrs.  W.  the  sad,  but  to  me  not  unexx^ected,  intelligence,  that  her
husband  was  dead.

“ What,  write  to  a dead  man  ; write  to  a dead  man  ! ”

In  answer  to  imiuiries,  Mr.  Wambey  says  ; — I have  an  imjiression — but
only  an  imi>ression — that  I have  heard  other  voices,  no  visible  jierson  being
near.

In  the  following  case  (G.  306),  the  information  is  conveyed  by  an
apjoarition  of  the  deceased  jD^rson,  accomj^anied  by  symbols  of  death.
The  narrator  is  Mrs.  George  T.  Haly  122,  Coningham  Road,  Shej^herd’s
Bush,  W.

On  waking  in  broad  daylight,  I saw,  like  a shadowed  reflection,  a
very  long  coffin  stretching  quite  across  the  ceiling  of  my  room,  and  as
I lay  gazing  at  it,  and  wondering  at  its  length  and  whose  it  could
foreshadow,  my  eyes  fell  on  a shadowy  flgure  of  an  absent  ne^fliew,  with  his
back  towards  me,  searching,  as  it  wei’e,  in  my  book-shelf.  That  morning’s
post  brought  the  news  of  his  death  in  Australia.  He  vxis  Gfoot  3 or  o uiclies
in  height,  and  a book  had  been  my  last  jjresent  to  him  on  his  leaving
England,  taken  from  that  very  bookcase.

Mr.  Gurney  saw  Mrs.  Haly  in  November,  1884,  and  learnt  that
this,  and  an  appearance  of  lights,  are  the  only  hallucinations  of  sight
Mrs.  Haly  has  had,  and  that  she  clearly  recognised  her  iieirhew’s  figure.
The  event  occurred  in  the  winter  of  1872-3,  some  six  weeks  after  the
nephew’s  death.

The  case  of  the  apparition  of  Canon  Robinson  to  Mr.  Tandy,
an  account  of  which  was  printed  in  the  Journal  of  the  Society  for
January,  1885,  jt.  246,  is  somewhat  similar,  only  no  imitression  that
Canon  Robinson  was  dead  was  seemingly  conveyed  by  the  phantasm.
Both  in  this  story  and  in  the  one  last  quoted  a curious  point  will  be
noticed — namely,  that  the  ajrparition  occurs  j ust  before  the  news  of  the
death  is  received.  It  is  not  easy  to  imagine  any  reason  for  this — any  reason
why  the  sujrposed  agent  should  intentionally  or  unintentionally  impress
the  percipient  at  that  moment  rather  than  another,  or  why  the  perci-
pient should  be  at  that  moment  peculiarly  impressible.  And  yet,  if  the


92


Phaniasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


coincidence  be  due  to  chance  only,  it  is  curious  that  we  should  have  two
cases  of  it  among  so  few.  It  is,  perhaps,  possible  that  the  immediate
receipt  of  the  news  may  have  caused  the  apparition  to  assume  in
memory  a definiteness  which  it  had  not  in  reality,  though,  if  recognition
be  distinctly  recollected,  it  would  be  rather  a strange  trick  for  memory
to  play  ; and  Mr.  Tandy  tells  us  that  in  his  case  his  recognition  of
Canon  Robinson — an  intimate  friend — was  very  definite  indeed.

Another  case  of  an  apparition  of  a dead  person  whose  death  was
unknown  to  the  percipient  is  the  following  (G.  477),  which  has  not

yet  been  jjrinted.  The  writer  is  Colonel , a welbknown  Irish

gentleman,  but  we  are  not  allowed  to  publish  his  name.  He  writes
from  Arthur’s  on  March  1st,  1885  ; —

Some  10  years  since  Mrs. said  to  me,  “We  have  some  people

staying  here  all  next  week.  Do  you  know  any  person  I could  get  to  sing
with  the  girls  V'  I suggested  that  my  gunmaker,  Mr.  X.,  had  a daughter
with  a fine  voice,  who  was  training  as  a public  singer,  and  tliat  if  she,  Mrs.

, liked  I would  write  to  X.  and  ask  if  he  would  allow  her  to  come  down

and  spend  a week  with  us.  On  my  wife’s  aj^proval  I wrote,  and  Miss  X.

came  down  for  a week,  and  tlien  left.  As  far  as  I know,  Mrs. never  saw

her  again.  Shortly  after  I called  onX.,  thanked  him  for  allowing  his  daughter
to  come  to  us,  and  said  we  were  all  mucli  pleased  with  her.  X.  replied  : “I
fear  you  have  spoilt  her,  for  she  says  she  never  passed  so  happy  a week  in  her
life.”  Miss  X.  did  not  come  out  as  a singer,  but  shortly  after  married  Mr.
Z.,  and  none  of  us  ever  saw  her  again.

Six  or  seven  years  passed  away,  and  Mrs. , who  had  been  long  ill,

was  dying,  in  fact  she  did  die  the  following  day.  I was  sitting  at  the  foot  of
her  bed  talking  over  some  business  matters  that  she  was  anxious  to  arrange,
being  perfectly  composed  and  in  thorough  possession  of  her  senses  ; in  fact
she  was  right,  and  my  solicitor,  who  advised  that  the  step  slie  wanted  to  be
taken  was  mjt  necessary,  was  wrong.  She  changed  tlie  subject  and  said  :
“ Do  you  hear  those  voices  singing?”  I replied  that  I did  not;  and  she
said  : “I  have  heard  them  several  times  to-day,  and  I am  sure  they  are  tlie
angels  welcoming  me  to  Heaven  ; but,”  slie  added,  “ it  is  strange,  there  is
one  voice  amongst  them  I am  sure  I know,  and  cannot  remember  whose  voice
it  is.”  Suddenly  she  stopped  and  said,  pointing  straight  over  my  liead,
“ Why  there  she  is  in  the  coimer  of  the  room  ; it  is  Julia  X.  ; she  is  coming
on  ; she  is  loaning  over  you  ; she  has  her  hands  up  ; she  is  praying  ; do

look  ; she  is  going.”  1 turned  but  could  see  nothing.  Mrs. then  said,

“ She  is  gone.”  All  these  things  I imagined  to  be  the  phantasies  of  a dying
person.

Two  days  afterwards,  taking  up  the  Times  newspajrer,  I saw  recorded
the  death  of  Julia  Z.,  wife  of  Mr.  Z.  I was  so  astounded  that  in  a day  or

so  after  the  funeral  I went  up  to and  asked  Mr.  X.  if  Mrs.  Z.,  his

daughter,  was  dead.  He  said,  “ Yes,  poor  thing,  she  died  of  pueri^eral
fever.  On  the  day  she  died  she  began  singing  in  the  morning,  and  sang  and
sang  until  slie  died.”

Last  year  I saw  mentioned  tliat  some  person  or  persons  were  collecting


1885.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


93


remarkable  ghost  stories,  and  I wrote  to  Mr.  Z.,  telling  him  shortly  wliat  I
have  now  written  at  length.  Mr.  Z.’s  answer  was,  that  I had  described
so  accurately  the  scene  of  his  wife’s  death  that  he  should  like  to  see  me,
was  coming  uj:!  to  London  the  week  after,  and  would  call.  Unfortunately
I was  obliged  to  leave  London,  and  have  never  seen  INIr.  Z.

In  a subsequent  communication  Colonel adds  : —

Mrs.  Z.  died  on  2nd  February,  at  six  or  thereabout  in  the  morning,  ISTI.

Mrs. died  February  13th,  1874,  at  about  four  in  the  evening.

I saw  notice  of  j\Ira.  Z.’s  death  on  February  14th.

Mrs. never  was  subject  to  hallucinations  of  any  sort.

[For  corroboration  in  this  case,  see  the  Note  at  the  end  of  the  paper.]

In  this  case,  as  in  Mr.  Tandy’s,  no  definite  impression  of  the  supposed
agent’s  death  is  given,  so  that  the  coincidence  is  reduced  to  the  simple
seeing  of  a person  who  is  dead,  but  not  at  the  time  known  to  be  so.
And  it  is  here  further  weakened  by  the  fact  that  dying  persons  do
frequently  hear  music  and  see  visions,  and  tliat  the  idea  of  singing

might  naturally  have  called  up  Mrs.  Z.’s  image  to  Mrs. ’s  mind.

Still,  there  remains  a remarkable  coincidence,  and  the  narrative  has
moreover  great  interest  in  connection  with  these  visions  of  dying
persons,  whose  objective  origin  is  firmly  believed  in  by  many,  but  is
very  difficult  to  pi’ove.  Cases  like  this  one,  in  sufficient  numbers,
would,  of  course,  go  a long  way  towards  proving  it,  at  any  rate  if  it
could  be  shown  that  dying  persons  do  not,  under  similar  circumstances,
see  apparitions  of  persons  alive  and  well  at  the  time.

The  apparition  described  in  the  following  narrative  (C.  32),  abridged
from  Temple  Bar  for  December,  1882,  conveys  information  of  a different
kind.  The  writer  is  the  Rev.  Gerrard  Lewis,  of  St.  Paul’s  Vicarage,
Margate,  who,  in  a letter  to  Mr.  Podmore,  dated  December  30th,  1882,
says  : —

I have  nothing  to  add  to  my  “ true  ghost  story  ” in  Temple  Ba  r.  I should
not  like  the  young  man’s  name  to  be  published,  but  will  give  it  jmu  in  confi-
dence. As  to  dates,  he  died  on  Thursday,  September  19th,  1860.  I saw
his  appearance  on  Sunday,  September  22nd,  and  officiated  at  his  funeral  on
Wednesday,  September  25th.

My  wife’s  mother  had  in  her  service  a coachman  named  P. , with  one  son,
James  Heniy  P.,  who  had  been  brought  up  by  friends  at  a distance,  and  was
apprenticed  to  a trade  in  London.  His  father  had  only  twice  casually
mentioned  him  to  me,  and  he  had  almost  entirely  slipped  out  of  my  mind,
for,  with  a large  seaside  parish  on  my  hands,  of  which  I was  curate,  my  time
and  attention  were  fully  taken  up  with  matters  nearer  home.  I mention
this,  lest  in  the  course  of  the  following  story  my  readers  should  chance  to
think  that  a deep  impression,  previously  made  on  my  own  mind,  had  pre-
disposed me  to  see  what  I saw,  and  afterwards  to  regard  it  in  a supernatural
light.  I cannot,  therefore,  too  emphatically  repeat  that  I knew  next  to


riinntasms  of  the  Dead.


94


[April  24,


nothing  about  James  Henry  P.,  my  friend’s  son  ; tliat  I had  never  seen  him;
and  seldom,  if  ever,  thought  of  him  at  all.

It  was  a hot  and  bright  afternoon  in  summer,  and,  as  if  it  were  only  yester-
day, I remember  2')erfectly  tvell  walking  down  the  broad  bright  street  in  the
broad  bright  afternoon.  I had  to  jiass  the  house  of  P.  I remarked  indeed
that  all  his  window  blinds  were  drawn  carefully  down,  as  if  to  screen  his
furniture,  of  which  his  wife  was  inordinately  i)roud,  from  the  des2)oiling  blaze
of  the  afternoon  sun.  I smiled  inwardly  at  the  thought.  I then  left  the
road,  step2ied  on  to  the  side  2iavement,  and  looked  over  the  area  rails,  into
the  front  court  below.  A young  man,  dressed  in  dark  clothes,  and  without
a hat,  and  a2»2)arently  about  20  years  of  age,  was  standing  at  the  door  beneath
the  front  ste2)s.  On  the  instant,  from  his  likeness  to  my  friend  P.,  I seemed
to  recognise  his  son.  We  both  stood  and  looked  very  hard  at  each  other.
Suddenly,  however,  he  advanced  to  that  2iart  of  the  area  which  was  imme-
diacely  below  where  I was  standing,  fi.’^ed  on  me  a wide,  dilated,  winkless
sort  of  stare,  and  halted.  The  desire  to  S2)eak  was  evidently  legible  on  his
face,  though  nothing  audible  esca2)ed  from  his  li2)S.  But  his  eyes  s25oke  ;
every  feature  in  his  countenance  s2ioke,  S2K)ke,  as  it  were,  a silent  language,
in  which  re2:>roach  and  2«^hi  seemed  ec2ually  intermingled.  At  first  I was
startled;  then  I began  to  feel  angry.  “Why,”  1 said  to  myself,  “does  he
look  at  me  in  that  manner  ? ” At  last,  annoyance  2>re vailing  over  sur2U’ise,
I turned  away  with  the  half-muttered  thought  : “ He  certainly  knows  me  by
sight  as  a friend  of  his  father,  and  yet  has  not  the  civility  to  salute  me.  I
will  call  on  the  tirst  02)2iortunity  and  ask  his  reason  for  such  behaviour.”  I
then  2)ursued  my  way  and  thought  no  nuu-e  of  what  had  just  occui-red.

On  Wednesday  it  was  my  turn  to  otliciate  at  the  local  cemetery.  On
my  asking  Avho  was  to  be  buried,  I was  told  that  it  was  a young  man  from
my  (luarter  of  the  town,  who  had  died  of  consum2ition.  1 cannot  give  the
reason,  but  immediately  I felt  startled  and  ill  at  ease.  It  was  not  that  I
had  the  least  sus2iicion  that  anything  extraordinary  was  about  to  ha2)25en.  I
had  (2uite  forgotten  young  P.  The  feeling  which  I think  rvas  u2>25ermost  in
my  mind  was  annoyance  at  the  fact  that  any  one  should  have  died  of  such  a
slow  disease  in  my  2iarish,  Imt  without  my  knowledge.  I asked  without
delay  for  the  registrar’s  certificate.  My  eyes  fell  on  the  words,  “James
Henry  P..  aged  21  years.”  I could  scarcely  believe  my  owm  senses.

I lost  but  little  time  before  calling  on  P.  and  his  wife.  I found  the
latter  at  home,  and  what  she  had  to  say  only  made  me  more  uncomfortable
still.  James  Henry  P.  bore  such  a close  resemblance  to  his  father  that  all
who  saw  him  remarked  on  the  striking  likeness.  In  addition  to  this,  during
the  last  three  months  of  his  life,  which  he  S2)ent  under  his  father’s  roof,  he
had  often  w'ondered  that  I did  not  come  to  see  him.  His  longing  for  an
interview  with  me  had  been  most  intense  ; and  every  time  he  saw  me  23ass
the  house  without  going  in  he  had  both  felt  and  ex2n-essed  a keen  disa2i-
piiintment.  In  fact,  he  died  terribly  in  earnest,  wishing  in  vain  to  the  last
that  I would  come.  That  thought  pierced  me  through  and  through.  I had
not  gone  to  him  but  he  had  come  to  me.  And  yet  I would  have  gone,  if  I
had  but  known.  I blame  the  doctor  for  not  telling  me  ; I blame  the
2)arents  for  not  sending  for  me  ; and  with  that  awful  look  he  gave  me  in  my
remembrance,  I blame  myself,  though  I canirot  tell  why.


1885.]


Phantasms  of  the  Bead.


95


James  Henry  P.  liad  died  on  the  Thursday  before  the  Sunday  on  which  I
had  seen  him.  He  Irad  died,  too,  in  the  front  room,  on  a level  with  the
area,  into  which  its  window  opened.  He  had  also  lain  there  till  the  Wed-
nesday following,  awaiting  burial.  His  corpse  then  was  lying  in  that  very
room  on  that  very  Sunday,  and  at  the  very  moment,  too,  when  I had  seen
his  living  likeness,  as  it  were,  in  the  area  outside.  Nobody,  I found,  had
passed  through  the  area  that  day  ; the  door  there  had  been  h)cked  and
unused  all  the  Sundaj'.  The  veiy  milkman,  the  only  pjerson  who  called,  had
come  by  the  front  steps  to  the  house  ; and  P.  and  his  wife  were  the  only
inmates  at  the  time.

The  fact  pretty  definitely  communicated  in  this  case  by  the
apparition,  was  the  young  man’s  longing,  before  liis  death,  to  see  the
percipient.

5[r.  Podmore  has  recently  seen  Mr.  Lewis,  and  also  Mrs.  Lewis,  who
heard  of  the  experience  at  the  time,  and  confirms  all  that  Mr.  Lewis
says.  Mr.  Lewis  maintains  that  the  likeness  of  the  apparition  to  the
elder  P.  was  unmistakable,  but  there  seem  to  be  differences  of
opinion  as  to  the  degree  of  resemblance  between  the  young  man  and
his  father.  Mr.  Podmore  has  also  seen  the  outside  of  the  house,  and,
after  talking  it  all  over  he  does  not  think  it  likely  that  it  wms  a real
man  that  Mr.  Lewis  saw.  Another  explanation  had  occurred  to  me,
namely,  that  the  apparition  was  due,  not  to  the  agency  of  the
dead  man,  but  to  that  of  old  P.,  or  his  wife,  whose  thought  of
the  son  in  connection  with  Mr.  Lewis  would  be  intensified  by  seeing
him  pass.  Some  little  evidence,  apart  from  this  narrative,  suggesting
the  possibility  of  such  an  explanation  could  be  adduced,  and  as  the
blinds  of  the  house  are  Venetian,  a person  inside  might  have  seen
through  them  without  being  seen.  But  Mr.  Lewis  does  not  think  it  at
all  likely  that  the  P.’s  did  see  him,  as  Mrs.  P.  e.xj^ressed  some  surprise
when  he  told  her,  after  the  funeral,  that  he  had  passed  on  that  day.
Mr.  Lewis  has  had  no  other  visual  hallucination,  veridical  or  other-
wise.

In  the  case  I shall  next  consider,  the  information  is  given  in  a
dream,  and  as  has  been  often  said,  the  evidence  afforded  by  dreams  must
always  be  very  inferior  to  that  afforded  by  waking  experiences,  because
of  the  immense  frequency  of  dreams,  and  the  large  proportion  of  them
which  are  obviously  unveridical.  In  the  case  before  us,  however,  there
is  apparently  some  coincidence  between  the  dream  and  the  facts  in  two
unlikely  and  independent  points.  Mr.  I).,  the  narrator,  does  not  wish
his  name  to  be  published,  but  Mr.  Gurney  has  seen  him,  and  talked
over  the  subject  with  him.  He  narrates  as  follows  (G.  406)  : —

I am  the  owner  of  a very  old  mechanical  business  in  Glasgow,  with  for  20
years  past  a branch  in  London,  where  I have  resided  for  that  period,  and  in
both  of  which  places  my  professional  reimtation  is  of  the  highest  order.


96


rJiaiifasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


Some  35  years  ago  I took  into  my  employment  a tender,  delicate-looking
boy,  Robert  Mackenzie, who,  after  some  three  or  four  years’  service,  suddenly
left,  as  I found  out  afterwards,  through  the  selhsh  advice  of  older  hands,  who
practised  tliis  frightening  away  systematically  to  keej)  wages  from  being
lowered,  a common  device,  I believe, among  workmen  in  limited  trades.  Pass-
ing tlie  gate  of  the  great  workhouse  {ticatike  poorhouse)  in  the  Parliamentary
Road,  afew  years  afterwards, my  eye  was  caught  by  a youth  of  some  13  years  of
age  ravenously  devouring  a piece  of  dry  bread  on  the  public  street,  and  bearing
all  the  ai)pearance  of  being  in  a chronic  state  of  starvation.  Fancying  I
knew  liis  features,  I asked  if  his  name  were  not  Mackenzie.  He  at  once
became  much  excited,  addressed  me  by  name,  and  informed  me  that  he  had
no  employment  ; that  his  father  and  mother,  who  formerly  supported  him,
were  now  both  inmates  of  the  “poorhouse,”  to  which  he  himself  had  no  claim
for  admission,  being  yf)ung  and  without  any  bodily  disrpialihcation  for  work,
and  that  he  was  literally  homeless  and  starving.  The  matron,  he  informed
me,  gave  him  daily  a ])iece  of  dry  bread,  but  durst  not,  under  the  rules,  give
him  regular  maintenance.  In  an  agony  of  grief  he  deplored  liis  ever  leaving
me  under  evil  advice,  and  on  my  unexpectedly  oft'ering  to  take  him  back  he
burst  into  a transport  of  thanks,  such  as  I cannot  describe.  Suffice  it  to  say
that  he  resumed  his  work,  and  that,  under  the  circumstances,  I did  every-
thing in  my  power  to  facilitate  his  progress.  All  this  was  mere  matter  of
course  ; but  the  distinction  l)etween  it  and  the  common  relations  of  master
and  servant  was  this,  tliaton  every  occasion  of  my  entering  the  workshop  he
never,  so  far  as  possible,  took  off  his  eyes  from  following  my  movements.
Let  me  look  towards  him  at  any  moment,  there  was  the  pale,  sympathetic
face  with  tlie  lai’ge  and  wistful  eyes,  literally  yearning  towards  me  as  Smike’s
did  towards  Nicholas  Nickleby.  I seemed  to  be  “ the  polar  star  of  his
existence,”  and  this  intensity  of  gratitude  never  appeared  to  lessen  in
degree  tlirougli  lapse  of  time.  Beyond  this  he  never  | ventured  to  express
his  feelings.  His  manhood,  as  it  were,  his  individuality  and  self-assertion,
seemed  to  liave  been  crushed  out  of  him  by  privations.  I was  aj)parently
his  sole  thouglit  and  consideration,  saving  the  more  common  concerns  of
daily  life.

In  18G2  I settled  in  London,  and  have  never  been  in  Glasgow  since.
Robert  Mackenzie,  and  my  workmen  generally,  gradually  lost  their
individuality  in  my  recollection.  About  10  to  12  years  ago  my  employes
had  their  annual  soiree  and  l.)all.  This  was  always  held,  j^ear  after  year,  on
a Friday  evmning.  Mackenzie,  ever  shy  and  distant,  as  usual,  refused  to
mingle  in  the  festivities,  and  begged  of  my  foreman  to  be  permitted  to  serve
at  the  buffet.  All  went  off  well,  and  the  Saturday  was  held  (more  workmen)
as  a succeeding  day  of  festival.  All  this,  however,  I only  learned  after  what
I am  now  about  to  relate.  On  the  Tuesday  morning  following,  immediately
before  8 a.m.,  in  my  house  on  Campden  Hill,  I had  the  following  manifesta-
tion, I cannot  call  it  a dream  ; but  let  me  use  the  common  phraseology.  I
dreamt,  but  with  no  vagueness  as  in  common  dreams,  no  blurring  of  outline
or  rapid  passages  from  one  thing  disconnectedly  to  another,  that  I was  seated
at  a desk,  engaged  in  a business  conversation  with  an  unknown  gentleman,
who  stood  on  my  right  hand.  I’o wards  me,  in  front,  advanced  Robert
Mackenzie,  and,  feeling  annoyed,  I addressed  him  witli  some  asjierity,


1885.]


Phcnitasms  of  the  Dead.


97


asking  him  if  he  did  md  see  that  I was  engaged.  He  retired  a short  distance
with  exceeding  reluctance,  turned  again  to  approach  me,  as  if  most  desirous
for  an  immediate  colloquy,  wlien  I sjioke  to  him  still  more  sharply  as  to  his
want  of  manners.  On  this,  the  person  with  whom  I was  conversing  took
his  leave,  and  Mackenzie  once  more  came  forward.  “ What  is  all  this,
Robert?  ” I asked,  somewhat  angrily.  “ Did  you  not  see  I was  engaged  ? ”
“Yes,  sir,”  he  replied;  “but  I must  speak  with  you  at  once.”  “What
about  ? ” I said  ; “ what  is  it  that  can  be  so  important  ? ” “I  wish  to  tell
you,  sir,”  he  answered,  “ that  I am  accused  of  doing  a thing  I did  not  do,
and  tliat  I want  you  to  know  it,  and  to  tell  you  so,  and  that  you  are  to
forgive  me  for  what  I am  blamed  for,  because  I am  innocent.”  Then,  “ I
did  not  do  the  thing  they  say  1 did.”  I said,  ‘ ‘ What  ? ” getting  same  answer.
I then  naturally  asked,  “ But  how  can  I forgive  you  if  you  do  not  tell  me
what  you  are  accused  of  ? ” I can  never  forget  the  emphatic  manner  of  his
answer,  in  the  Scottish  dialect,  “ Ye’ll  sune  ken  ” (you’ll  soon  know).  This
question  and  the  answer  were  re2)eated  at  least  twice — I am  certain  the
answer  was  repeated  thrice,  in  the  most  fervid  tone.  On  that  I awoke,  and
was  in  that  state  of  surprise  and  bewilderment  which  such  a remarkable
dream,  qua  mere  dream,  might  induce,  and  was  wondering  what  it  all  meant,
when  my  wife  burst  into  my  bedroom,  mucli  excited,  and  holding  an  open
letter  in  her  hand,  exclaimed,  “ Oh,  James,  here's  a terrible  end  to  the
workmen's  ball,  Robert  Mackenzie  has  committed  suicide  ! ” With  now  a
full  conviction  of  the  meaning  of  the  vision,  I at  once  quietly  and  firmly  said,
“No,  he  has  not  committed  suicide.”  “ How  can  you  possibly  know  that  ? ”
“ Because  he  has  just  been  here  to  tell  me.”

I have  puiqjosely  not  mentioned  in  its  iDrojter  place,  so  as  not  to  break
the  narrative,  that  on  looking  at  Mackenzie  I was  struck  by  the  peculiar
api^earance  of  his  countenance.  It  was  of  an  indescribable  bluishq^ale
colour,  and  on  his  forehead  aiqjeared  sjjots  which  seemed  like  blots  of  sweat.
For  this  I could  not  account,  but  by  the  following  jJost  my  manager  informed
me  that  he  was  wrong  in  writing  me  of  suicide.  That,  on  Saturday  night,
Mackenzie,  on  going  home,  had  lifted  a small  black  bottle  containing  aqa.a.
forth  (which  he  used  for  staining  the  wood  of  birdcages,  made  for  amuse-
ment), believing  this  to  be  whisky,  and  pouring  out  a wineglassful,  had  drunk
it  off  at  a gul{),  dying  on  the  Sunday  in  great  agony.  Here,  then,  was  the
solution  of  his  being  innocent  of  what  he  was  accused  of — suicide,  seeing
that  he  had  inadvertently  drunk  aqua  forth,  a deadly  jioison.  Still  pondering
upon  the  peculiar  colour  of  his  countenance,  it  struck  me  to  consult  some
authorities  on  the  symi^toms  of  poisoning  by  aqua  forth,  and  in  Mr.  .J.  H.
Walsh’s  “Domestic  Medicine  and  Surgery,”  j).  172,  I found  these  words

under  symptoms  of  jjoisoning  by  suljdiuric  acid “ the  skin

covered  with  a cold  sweat  ; countenance  livid  and  expressive  of  dreadful

suffering.” “ Aqua  forth  produces  the  same  effect  as

sulphuric,  the  only  difference  being  that  the  external  stains,  if  any,  are  yellow
instead  of  brown.”  This  refers  to  indication  of  sulfdiuric  acid,  “generally
outside  of  the  mouth,  in  the  shape  of  brown  s2')ots.”  Having  no  desire  to
accommodate  my  facts  to  this  scientific  descrijition,  I give  the  quotations
freely,  only,  at  the  same  time,  stating  that  previously  to  reading  the  passage
in  Mr.  Walsh’s  book,  I had  not  the  slightest  knowledge  of  these  symjitoms.


11


98


riiavtasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


and  I consider  tliat  they  agree  fairly  and  sufficiently  with  what  I saw,  viz.,
a livid  face  covered  with  a remarkable  sweat,  and  having  sjoots  (particularly
on  the  forehead),  wliich,  in  my  dream,  I thought  great  blots  of  perspiration.
It  seems  not  a little  .striking  that  I had  no  iwevious  knowledge  of  these
symptoms,  and  yet  should  take  note  of  tliem.

1 have  little  remark  to  make  beyond  tliis,  that,  in  speaking  of  this  matter,
to  me  very  affecting  and  solemn,  I liave  Ijeen  quite  disgusted  by  sceptics
treating  it  as  a hallucination,  in  so  far  as  that  my  dream  must  have  been  on
the  Wednesday  morning,  being  that  after  the  receipt  of  my  manager  s letter
informing  me  of  the  supposed  suicide.  This  exjjlanation  is  too  absurd  to
require  a serious  answer.  My  manager  first  heard  of  the  death  on  the
Monday — wrote  me  on  that  day  as  above — and  on  the  Tuesday  wrote  again
explaining  the  true  facts.  The  dream  was  on  the  Tuesday  morning,  imme-
diately before  the  8 a.m.  i^ost  delivery,  hence  the  thrice  emphatic  “Ye’ll
sune  ken.”  I attribute  the  whole  to  Mackenzie’s  yearning  gratitude  for
being  rescued  from  a deplorable  state  of  starvation,  and  his  earnest  desire  to
stand  well  in  my  opinion.  1 have  coloured  nothing,  and  leave  my  readers
to  draw  their  own  conclusions.

D.

The  following  i.s  Mrs.  D.’s  corroboration  : —

In  regard  to  the  remarkable  dream  my  husband  had  wlien  Robert
Mackenzie’s  death  took  place  througli  inadvertently  drinking  some  aqua
fortis,  1 beg  to  inform  you  of  what  took  jjlace  as  far  as  I am  concerned.

On  the  Tuesday  morning  after  the  occurrence,  I was  downstairs  early,
and  at  8 o’clock  was  handed  a letter,  just  received  from  the  postman,  and
addressed  to  Mr.  D.  Seeing  it  was  from  our  manager  in  Glasgow,  I opened
it,  and  was  much  grieved  to  find  that  it  was  to  tell  us  that  Robert  Mackenzie
had  committed  suicide.  I ran  upstairs  to  Mr.  D.’s  bedroom  with  the  letter
in  my  hand,  and  in  much  excitement.  1 found  him  apparently  just  coming
out  of  sleep,  and  hastily  cried  out  to  him,  exactly  as  he  has  described  to
you.  I need  not  go  over  the  words,  which  have  often  been  rej^eated  amongst
us  since,  and  I can  confirm  his  narrative  regarding  them,  as  given  to  you,  in
every  particular.  The  whole  affair  gave  us  a great  shock,  and  put  an  end  to
the  workmen’s  balls  for  some  four  or  five  years.  Mr.  D.’s  dream  was  a
frequent  subject  of  conversation  at  the  time.  I knew  Mackenzie  well.  He
was  a pale,  large-eyed,  and  earnest-looking  jmung  man,  with  a great  regard
for  Mr.  D.,  through  circumstances.  Tlie  next  day’s  post  brought  us  the
actual  facts.

J.  D.

The  two  points  of  coincidence  hei’e  are  the  fact  that  iMackenzie  was
accused  of  something  wrongly,  and  a certain  degree  of  resemblance
between  his  appearance  in  the  dream  and  his  appearance  as,  accordiiig
to  Walsh’s  “Domestic  Medicine,”  it  should  have  been,  after  taking  the
poison  which  killed  him.  Tlie  coincidence  is  certainly  curious,  though
it  might,  of  course,  have  been  stronger.  It  would  be  very  interesting
to  know — though  at  this  distance  of  time  impossible,  I fear,  to  ascertain,
— whether  at  the  time  of  the  dream  it  was  known  to  any  living  man
that  Mackenzie  had  not  committed  suicide.


1885.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


99


These  cases  ai’e  all  I find  in  the  collection  with  this  particular  kind
of  confirmation  to  distinguish  them  from  subjective  hallucinations.  It
will  be  observed  that,  with  the  exception  of  the  narrative  concerning
the  nephew  who  died  in  Australia,  where  there  was  an  interval  of  some
six  weeks  between  the  death  and  the  apparition,  they  have  a common
characteristic,  namely,  that  the  communication  occurs  within  a few
clays  of  the  death,  but  it  would  be  absurd  to  try  to  infer  a general
rule  from  so  few  instances.

In  dealing,  however,  wdth  these  phantasms  manifesting  themselves
very  shortly  after  death,  it  should  be  noticed  that  in  the  collection  of
phantasms  of  the  living,  cases  have  been  included  in  which  the  mani-
festation occurs  a few  hours  after  deatli.  For  this  there  are  two
grounds,  namely,  that  the  exact  moment  of  the  cessation  of  life  is,  it
must  be  assumed,  to  some  extent  uncertain,  and  that  there  is  some
reason  to  think  that  a telepathic  impression  may  remain  latent  for  a
time  and  force  itself  into  consciousness  only  when  quiet,  or  solitude,  or
some  other  condition  favouralde  to  its  development  supervenes.  If,
liowever,  the  dead  can  communicate  with  us,  it  is  possible  that  these
supposed  delayed  communications  from  the  living  are  really  communica-
tions directly  from  the  dead.  I think  we  should  also  notice  that
appearances  of  those  who  have  recently  died,  to  friends  aware  of  their
death,  seem  to  be  not  uncommon,  and  frequently  these  appearances
have  afforded  great  consolation  to  the  survivors.  If  the  dead  can  com-
municate wuth  us,  these  appearances,  too,  may  be  real  messages  from
them,  though  we  have  no  means  of  distinguishing  them  from  subjective
hallucinations.

I have  named  among  the  kinds  of  confirmation  we  have  to  deal  witli,
that  afforded  by  apparent  intention  consistently  carried  out  by  the  spirit.
But  it  is  a rather  remarkable  fact  that  we  have  exceedingly  little
evidence  in  our  collection  clearly  tending  in  this  direction.  We  have
such  evidence  to  some  extent  in  the  dream  of  Mackenzie,  already
quoted,  where  the  spirit  may  naturally  have  desired  to  convince  Mr.  D.
that  he  had  not  committed  suicide.  The  only  other  case  we  have,  I
think,  is  our  single  instance  of  the  old-fashioned  ghost  wdro  threatens
to  haunt  her  husband  till  he  does  what  she  desires,  and  who
carries  the  threat  into  execution.  But  though  the  throat  was  not  made
to  the  husband  himself,  so  far  as  we  know,  it  is  yet  impossible  to  feel
sure  that  the  apparition  was  not  simply  a morbid  effect  of  his  state  of
grief  and  worry,  which  ceased  when  the  disputed  question  was  settled
and  the  worry  consequently  at  an  end.  The  narrative  (G.  425)  is  in  the
words  of  the  married  daughter  alluded  to.

A young  couple  were  engaged.  Her  father  withdrew  his  consent,  the
mother  on  her  death -bed  made  its  renewal  her  last  request.  The  father,
instead  of  getting  over  his  sorrow,  seemed  more  and  more  bowed  down  with.

H 2


100


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  21,


an  ever-increasing  sense  of  “horror.”  One  day  he  told  his  married
daugliter  and  her  husband  that  liis  wife  haunted  him  every  morning  at  4,
tlie  hour  when  she  died,  always  talking  of  the  young  couple.  They  asked
him  what  clothes  the  apparition  wore,  and  he  said,  “The  last  dress  I gave,
and  a cap  of  your  making.”  On  their  way  homo,  the  married  daughter
told  her  husband  that  it  was  when  in  that  dress  and  cap  that  her  mother  had
said  to  her,  “ If  I die  before  jmur  father  renews  his  consent,  I shall  haunt
him  till  he  does.”  )She  was  then  in  i)erfect  health.  This  was  never  told  to
the  father,  but  he  was  urged  to  renew  his  consent.  For  some  months  he
could  only  esca2)G  the  visitations  by  having  someone  awal:e  with  him  in  the
room.  From  the  day  he  consented  again  to  the  marriage  his  wife’s  visits
ceased.

Mr.  Sidgwick  has  had  an  interview  with  the  narrator  of  this  curious
occurrence,  wlio  tells  him  tliat  she  has  no  doubt  that  her  mother  had
made  a dying  I’equost  tliat  he  tvould  give  consent  to  the  marriage ;
but  feels  sure  from  the  way  he  siroke  of  the  matter  that  she  Iiad  not
said  anything  about  “ liaunting”  to  him  ; he  clearly  did  not  know  that
his  consent  would  ^^ut  a stop  to  it,  nor  did  he  apparently  ever  connect
its  cessation  with  her  sister’s  marriage,  which  followed  immediately  on
his  consent.

In  the  remaining  divisions  we  shall  only  havm  cases  of  haunted
houses,  or  what  the  Committee  have  called  “ fixed  local  ghosts,”  except
one  where  the  sujiposed  ghost  seems  to  have  followed  the  family.  In
discussing  these,  I shall  use  the  exjnression,  the  su2?posed  ffhost,  or  shortly,
the  (/host,  without  intending  either  to  affirm  or  to  deny  the  existence  of  a
continuous  entity  manifesting  itself  in  the  apparitions,  or  even  to  im2:>ly
that  there  is  necessarily  any  cause  foi'  them  external  to  the  percijrient,
or,  in  fact,  to  express  any  view  whatever  as  to  the  origin  of  the  alleged
phenomena.  I shall  use  it  merely  as  a convenient  name  foi’  the
unknown  cause  or  causes  of  a series  of  apjjaritions  or  other  phenomena
of  the  kind,  connected  by  similarity  or  locality,  or  otherwise;  or  for  the
phenomena  themselves.

I now  proceed  to  the  third  kind  of  confirmation  of  which  the  type
is  the  subsequent  recognition  by  the  percipient  of  the  i^ortrait  of  the  sujj-
posed  ghost.  We  have  two  cases  of  this  in  the  collection,  but  for  different
reasons,  which  I will  mention  in  their  place,  they  neither  of  them  appear
to  me  to  be  of  a conclusive  kind.

One  case  has  already  been  published  in  the  Proceedings  of  the
Society  (Vol.  L,  p.  lOG)  in  the  first  report  of  the  Committee  on
Flaunted  Houses.  Mr.  X.Z.  is  there  described  as  recognising  the  supposed
ghost  four  years  after  he  saw'  it,  in  a portrait  of  the  man  with  whom,
on  other  grounds,  he  had  connected  the  apparition.  These  grounds
were  that  the  man  in  question  was  said  to  wear  a costume  resembling
that  of  the  apparition,  and  to  havm  committed  murder  and  suicide  on
the  spot  where  he  appeared,  and  on  the  same  day  of  the  year.


1885.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


101


The  narrative  was  written  in  1882,  30  years  after  the  appearance,  but
against  this  must  be  set  the  fact  that  (as  I understand)  a third-hand
account  has  been  obtained  substantially  agreeing  with  it,  originating  in
the  account  given  by  Mr.  X.  Z.,  much  nearer  to  the  event,  and  which
forms,  therefore,  a to  some  extent  independent  check  on  the  accuracy
of  Mr.  X.  Z.’s  recollection.  A more  serious  weakness  in  the  evidence
lies,  I think,  in  the  interval  between  the  apparition  and  the  recogniton
of  the  portrait.  Four  years  seem  a long  time  to  keep  vividly  in  one’s
mind  a face  seen  only  once,  for  a few  moments,  at  a distance  of  35  feet,
though  no  doubt  under  exciting  circumstances  likely  to  impress  it  on  the
memory.  With  regard  to  the  otlier  evidence  connecting  the  supposed  ghost
and  the  suicide,  the  dressing-gown  and  the  site  of  the  death  were  tra-
ditional only  (the  death  occurred  more  than  50  years  before  the  appari-
tion) ; the  date  of  the  death  Mr.  X.Z.  ascertained,  he  tells  us,  from  the
parish  register.  But  in  estimating  the  evidence  afforded  by  the  observance
of  an  anniversary,  we  must  take  into  account  that  this  is,  1 think,  the
only  instance  of  such  observance  which  we  have  at  first-hand  in  all  our
collection — except  two,  which  on  other  grounds  I am  inclined  to  regard
as  possibly  explicable  by  personation.

In  the  next  case,  (C-.  28),  the  portrait  was  seen  on  the  day  after  the
apparition,  but  it  does  not  seem  to  have  been  recognised  without  a little
prompting.  The  percipient,  who  will  not  allow  either  her  name  or  the
address  of  the  house  to  be  published,  is  known  to  Mr.  C.  0.  Massey  and
Mr.  Podmore.  The  account  here  given  was  written  out  in  her  presence
after  a prolonged  and  careful  examination  of  her  evidence,  and  is
certified  by  her  to  be  correct.

About  tlie  year  1872  my  husband  and  I sjjent  one  night  m the  house  of
my  aunt,  in  one  of  the  suburbs  of  London.  The  liouse  being  a very  small
one,  my  cousin  gave  me  up  her  room,  and  my  husband  had  to  sleep  upstairs
with  the  son.  Before  she  left  me  my  cousin  insisted,  why,  I could  not  under-
stand, on  leaving  the  gas  alight — and  did,  in  fact,  leave  a faint  glimmer.  In
the  middle  of  the  night  I awoke  in  a cold  sweat,  and  saw,  in  the  dim  light,
a man  standing  close  to  my  bedside.  Thinking  it  was  my  husband  I called
him  by  name,  and  as  far  as  my  recollection  serves,  I put  out  my  hand,  lying
still  m bed,  to  turn  up  the  gas.  The  figure  had  disappeared  ; and  I j umped
out  of  bed,  found  the  door  locked,  and  searched  the  room  through  to  no
purpose.  I then  felt  a little  nervous,  but  thinking  that  I must  have  been
dreaming,  I got  into  bed  and  went  to  sleep  again.  Twice  more  that  night  1
was  woke  by  the  same  cause  ; I found  myself  each  time,  as  before,
shivering  and  in  a cold  sweat,  and  saw  the  same  figure  standing  by  me.  I
now  clearly  saw  the  features  and  general  ai^pearance.  It  was  apparently  a
tall,  well-built,  rather  good-looking  man,  in  a frock  coat,  and  with  a long
reddish  beard.  After  the  third  appearance  I left  the  gas  turned  fully  on,  and
then  got  to  sleep  without  further  disturbance.

In  the  mornmg  I spoke  at  breakfast  time  of  my  nocturnal  disturbance,


102  P/tanfasms  of  the  Dead.  [April  24,

and  iny  cousin  exclaimed/*  Now,  mamma,  yon  will  believe  my  story  : I told
you  the  room  was  haunted.”

Afterwards  1 went  into  the  dining-room,  into  which  I had  never
in’eviously  gone,  and  there  saw  a picture  of  a man  which  I appeared  to
recognise.  “Who  is  that,”  I said,  “one  of  your  neighbours?”  “ Someone
you  liave  seen,”  my  cousin  replied  ; and  it  then  flashed  across  me  that  it  was
the  face  of  my  vision.  It  was  tlie  jjortrait  of  the  late  owner  of  the  house —
my  aunt  had  taken  tlie  house  furnished — who  had  died  of  delirium  tremens,
a few  months  before,  in  the  bedroom  w'hich  I had  occu2)ied  : as  I then  learnt
for  the  first  time.

November  23rd,  1882.

The  imjoortance  of  this  case  is  greatly  increased  by  the  cousin’s
apparently  similar  experience,  whicli  liad  not  been  previously  communi-
cated to  our  informant ; but  unfortunately  tlie  cousin  declines  to  give
us  any  account  of  it.

Cases  having  tlie  fourth  kind  of  confirmation — that  which  obtains
when  two  or  more  people  see  indej^endently  of  each  other  and  at
different  times,  apparitions  -wliicli  seem  clearly  to  have  lieen  very
much  alike, — constitute  the  most  important  j^art  of  the  evidence
in  our  collection.  A very  fair  specimen  of  them  was  printed  in  full  in
the  Proceed.inys  of  the  Society,  Part  VI.,  p.  141.  A lady  sees  one
morning  leaning  over  her  in  bed,  in  a certain  attitude,  a muffled  figure
of  a wmnian,  wdiich  cannot,  according  to  her  account,  have  been  a real
woman  since  she  saw  it  gradually  becoming  transiiareiit  and  vanishing.
She  is  certain  that  she  spoke  to  no  one  in  the  house  about  it,  and  to  no
one  outside  who  could  have  communicated  wdth  her  brother  ; but  a fort-
night later  lie  tells  her  at  breakfast  that  he  has  seen  the  muffled  figure
of  a woman  leaning  over  him  in  bed  in  the  same  attitude.

The  following  narrative  is  an  account  of  a very  interesting  case  of
the  same  kind,  only  it  is  more  recent,  and  the  figure  that  appeared  was
more  definite.  The  diti'ereut  accounts  are  signed  by  the  percipients,  whom
Mr.  Gurney  has  seen  and  with  wdiom  he  has  thoroughly  discussed  the
evidence.  They  are  not  willing  that  their  names,  or  that  of  the  house
where  the  phenomena  occui-red,  should  be  pulilished,  but  they  have
communicated  it  privately  to  Mr.  Gurney,  Avho  hopes  to  obtain  in  time
more  information  about  its  preA'ious  history  and  the  experience  of  other
inhabitants.  The  first  account  is  from  Mrs.  W.

Fehrnnry  19//;,  1885.

In  .lune,  1881,  rve  ivent  to  live  in  a detached  A'illa  just  out  of  the  town  of

C . Our  household  consisted  of  my  husband  and  myself,  my  steii-daughter,

andtw'o  little  boys,  aged  9 and  G,  and  tw'o  female  servants.  The  house  was
between  10  and  20  years  old.  We  had  been  there  about  three  weeks,  wlien,about
11  o’clock  one  morning,  as  I was  idaying  the  iiiano  in  the  draw'ing-rooni,  I
had  the  following  experience  : — 1 was  suddenly  aw'are  cf  a figui’e  i)ee2)ing


1885.]


Thant myns  of  tlte  Dead.


103


round,  tlie  corner  of  the  folding-doors  to  my  left ; thinking  it  must  be  n
visitor,  I jumped  up  and  went  into  the  passage,  but  no  one  was  there,  and
the  hall  door,  which  was  half  glass,  was  shut.  I only  saw  the  upiier  half  of
the  figure,  which  was  that  of  a tall  man,  with  a very  pale  face  and  dark  hair
and  moustache.  The  impression  lasted  only  a second  or  two,  but  I saw  the


Sketch  Plan  of  the  Ground  Floor  of  the  House.


Dining-room

Kitchen

G |f

E D

^ A

Front

Back  1

D Drawing-room

Drawing-room

1

1

I

A Piano.  B First  position  of  figure.  C Second  position  of  figure.  D Garden
door.  E Baize  door.  F Front  door  and  porch.  G Front  gate.

face  so  distinctly  that  to  this  day  I should  recognise  it  if  I met  it  in  a crowd.
It  had  a sorrowful  expression.  It  was  impossible  for  anyone  to  come  into
the  house  without  being  seen  or  heard.  I was  startled,  but  not  the  least
frightened.  I had  heard  no  report  whatever  as  to  the  house  being  haunted  ;
and  am  certainly  not  given  to  superstitious  fancies.  I did  not  mention  my
experience  to  anyone  at  the  time,  and  formed  no  theory  about  it.  In  the
following  August,  one  evening  about  8.30,  I had  occasion  to  go  into  the
drawing-room  to  get  something  out  of  the  cupboard,  when,  on  turning-
round,  I saw  the  same  face  in  the  bay-window,  in  front  of  the  shutters,
which  were  closed.  I again  saw  only  the  upper  part  of  the  figure,  which
seemed  to  be  in  a somewhat  crouching  posture.  The  light  on  this  occasion
came  from  the  hall  and  the  dining-room,  and  did  not  shine  directly  on  the
window  ; but  I was  able  perfectly  to  distinguish  the  face  and  the  expression
of  the  eyes.  This  time  I icas  frightened,  and  mentioned  the  matter  to  my
husband  the  same  evening.  I then  also  told  him  of  my  first  experience.
( )n  each  of  these  occasions  I was  from  8 to  10  feet  distant  from  the
figure.

Later  in  the  same  month  I was  jdaying  cricket  in  the  garden  with  my
little  boys.  From  my  position  at  the  wickets  I could  see  right  into  the
house  through  an  oi>en  door,  down  a passage,  and  through  the  hall  as
far  as  the  front  door.  The  kitchen  door  opened  into  the  passage.  I dis-
tinctly saw  the  same  face  peeping  round  at  me  out  of  the  kitchen  door.
I again  only  saw  the  upper  half  of  the  figure.  I threw  down  the  bat  and
ran  in.  No  one  was  in  the  kitchen.  One  servant  was  out,  and  I found
that  the  other  was  up  in  her  bedroom.  I mentioned  this  incident  at  once  to
my  husband,  w-ho  also  examined  the  kitchen  without  any  result.


104


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


A little  later  in  the  year,  about  8 o’clock  one  evening,  I was  coming  down
stairs  alone,  when  I heard  a voice  from  the  direction,  apparently,  of  my  little
boys’  bedroom,  the  do(jr  of  which  was  oiien.  It  distinctly  said,  in  a deep
sorrowful  tone,  “ I can’t  find  it. ” I called  out  to  my  little  boys,  but  they
did  not  reply,  and  I have  not  the  slightest  doubt  that  they  were  asleep  ;
they  always  called  out  if  they  heard  me  upstairs.  My  step-daughter,  who
was  downstairs  in  the  dining-room  with  the  door  open,  also  heaixl  the  voice,
and  thinking  it  was  me  calling,  cried  out,  “What  are  you  looking  for?”
We  were  extremely  puzzled.  The  voice  could  not  by  any  possibility  have
belonged  to  any  member  of  the  household.  The  servants  were  in  the
kitchen,  and  my  husband  was  out.

A short  time  after  I was  again  coming  downstairs  after  dark  in  the  ev  ening
when  I felt  a sharp  slap  on  the  back.  It  startled  but  did  not  hurt  me.
There  was  no  one  near  me,  and  I ran  downstairs  and  told  my  husband  and
my  step-daughter.

I have  never  in  my  life,  on  any  other  occasion,  had  any  hallucination  of
sight,  hearing,  or  touch.

The  following  is  Miss  W.’s  account  ; —

Fehrvary  VMh,  1885.

In  July,  1881,  1 was  sitting  playing  the  piano  in  our  house  in  C — — , about
11.30  in  the  morning,  when  I saw  the  head  and  shoulders  of  a man  peeping
round  the  folding-doors,  in  just  the  same  way  as  they  had  appeared  to  my
mother, but  1 had  not  at  that  time  heard  <.if  her  experience.  I jumpedup,and  ad-
vanced, thinking  it  was  an  accpiaintance  frcnn  a few  yards  off.  This  impression,
however,  only  lasted  for  a second  ; the  face  disai)peared,  but  recalling  it,  1
perceived  at  once  that  it  was  certainly  not  that  of  the  gentleman  whom  I had
for  a second  thought  of.  The  resemblance  was  only  that  they  were  both
dark.  The  face  was  pale  and  melanclujly,  and  the  hair  very  dark.  I at  once
went  to  Mrs.  W.  in  the  dining-room,  and  asked  if  any  one  had  called.
8he  said,  “ No  ” ; and  1 then  told  her  what  I had  seen.  I then  for  the  first
time  heard  from  her  what  she  had  seen,  and  our  descriptions  completely
agreed.  We  had  even  both  noticed  that  the  hair  was  parted  in  the  middle,
and  that  a good  deal  of  shirt-front  showed.

A few  weeks  later,  about  11  p.m.,  Mrs.  W.  and  I were  playing  bezique
in  the  dining-room.  Mr.  W.  was  out,  and  the  servants  had  gone  to  bed.
The  door  of  the  room  was  open,  and  1 was  facing  it.  I suddenly  had  an
impression  that  someone  was  looking  at  me,  and  I looked  up.  There  was  the
same  face,  and  the  upper  half  of  the  figure,  peeping  round  into  the  room
from  the  hall.  I said,  “ There’s  the  man  again  1”  Mrs.  W.  rushed  to  the
door,  but  there  was  no  one  in  the  hall  or  passage  ; the  front  door  was  locked,
and  the  green  baize  dour  which  communicated  with  the  back  jiart  of  the
house  was  shut.  The  figiu’e  had  been  on  the  side  of  the  dining-room  door,
nearest  to  the  front  door,  and  could  not  have  got  to  the  green  baize  door
without  passing  well  in  our  sight.  We  were  a good  deal  frightened,  and  we
mentioned  the  occurrence  to  Mr.  W.  on  his  return.  He  went  all  over  the
house,  as  usual  before  going  tc'  bed,  and  all  windows  were  fastened,  and
everything  in  order.

A few  weeks  after  this,  about  11.30  a.m.,  I was  upstairs  jdaying  battle-


1885.]


rhantasms  of  the  Dead.


105


clore  and  sliuttlecock  with  my  eldest  brother  in  his  bedroom.  The  door  was
open.  Stei^ping  back  in  tlie  course)  of  the  game,  I got  out  on  to  the  landing  ;
I looked  sideways  over  my  shoulder,  in  order  to  strike  the  shuttlecock,  and
suddenly  saw  the  same  face  as  before,  and  my  brother  called  out  at  the  same
moment,  “There’s  a man  on  the  landing.”  I was  startled  myself,  but  to
reassure  the  child  I said  there  was  no  one — that  he  liad  made  a mistake —
and  sliut  the  door  and  went  on  with  the  game.  I told  my  fatlier  and  Mrs.
W.  of  this  as  soon  as  I saw  them.

Later  in  the  autumn,  I was  sitting  alone  in  the  dining-room  one  evening,
with  the  door  open.  Mrs.  W.  had  been  upstairs,  and  I heard  her  coming
down.  Suddenly  I heard  a deej)  melancholy  voice  say,  “ I can’t  hnd  it.”  I
called  out,  “What  are  you  looking  for?  ” At  the  same  time  the  voice  was
not  the  least  like  Mrs.  W.’s.  She  then  came  in  and  told  me  she  had  heard
exactly  the  same  thing.  Bly  father  was  out  at  the  time,  but  we  told  him  of
tlie  circumstance  on  liis  return.

In  September  of  1882,  I was  for  a week  in  the  house  with  only  the  two
children  and  the  servants.  It  was  about  7.30  on  Sunday  evening,  and  nearly
dark.  The  others  were  all  out  in  the  garden.  I was  standing  at  the
dining-room  window,  when  I cauglit  a glimpse  of  a tall  man’s  hgure  slipping
into  the  porch.  I must  have  seen  if  anybody  had  approached  the  porch  by
the  path  from  the  front  gate,  and  I should  certainly  liave  heard  the  latch  of
the  gate,  which  used  to  make  a considerable  noise,  and  I should  also  have
heard  footsteps  on  the  gravel-path.  Tlie  hgure  appeared  quite  suddenly  ;
it  had  on  a tall  hat.  I was  veiy  much  astonished,  but  ran  to  the  door,
thinking  it  might  possibly  be  my  father.  No  one  was  there  ; I went  to  the
gate,  and  looked  up  and  down  the  road.  No  one  was  in  sight,  and  there  was
no  possibility  that  anybody  could  have  got  so  suddenly  out  of  view.

I have  never  at  any  other  time  in  my  life  had  any  hallucination  what-
ever, either  of  sight  or  hearing.

I remember  Mrs.  W.  telling  me  of  her  exiierience  of  the  slap  as  soon  as
she  came  downstairs.

I ought  to  add  that  at  the  time  when  we  were  negotiating  about  the
house,  the  landlady  of  the  lodgings  where  my  father  and  I were  staying
told  me  that  all  the  villas  of  the  row  in  which  our  house  was  situated,  ten  in
number,  were  haunted.  I was  with  my  father  when  I heard  this.  hlrs.  AV.
was  not  with  us.  I am  certain  tliat  the  remark  made  no  impression  wliat-
ever  on  me,  and  that  it  did  not  even  recur  to  my  mind  till  I saw  what  I have
described.  1 did  not  even  mention  the  remark  to  hlrs.  W.

Mrs.  W.  adds  : —

I distinctly  remember  my  step-daughter  coming  to  me  immediately  after
lier  first  sight  of  the  figure,  and  telling  mo  about  it.  I then  told  her  for  the
first  time  of  my  own  experience  (I  had  then  only  had  one),  and  our  descrii)-
tions  completely  tallied.  I distinctly  remember  our  agreeing  about  the  part-
ing of  the  hair  in  the  middle,  and  about  the  amount  of  white  shirt-front.
We  could  neither  of  us  remember  wdiether  his  tie  was  white  or  black.  We
agreed  that  we  should  know  the  face  if  we  ever  met  it.  And  subsequently,
at  an  evening  party,  we  both  pitched  on  the  same  individual  as  more  like  our


Phantasma  of  the  Bead.


106


[April  24,


strange  visitor  than  any  one  else  we  knew.  The  resemblance,  however,  was
not  extremely  close.

I distinctly  remember,  also,  my  step-daughter  exclaiming,  ‘ ‘ There’s  that
man  again  ! ” when  we  were  playing  bezique.  I rushed  at  once  into  the  hall
and  found  the  door  closed  as  she  has  described.

I also  remember  her  telling  me  at  once  about  what  she  had  seen,  and
what  her  brother  had  exclaimed  when  they  were  playing  at  battledore
and  shuttlecock.

Slie  told  me  about  what  she  had  seen  in  the  porch  when  Mr.  W.  and  I
returned  from  town  on  the  next  (Monday)  morning.

The  following  is  Surgeon-Major  AV.’s  confirmation  : —

I was  told  of  these  various  occurrences  by  my  wife  and  daughter  at  the
times  which  they  have  specified.  I only  heard  from  my  wife  of  her  first
experience  after  she  had  told  me  of  her  second.  After  she  had  seen  the  figure
during  the  game  at  cricket,  I went  into  the  kitchen,  but  found  everything  as
usual.  On  my  return  home,  after  my  daughter’s  seeing  the  figure  peeping
round  the  dining-room  door,  I went  all  over  the  premises  as  my  custom  was,
and  found  windows  secured  and  every  thing  in  order.

My  wife  and  daughter  are  as  unlikely  as  any  one  I know  to  suffer  from
causeless  frights.  They  are  comj^letely  free  from  nervousness,  and  though
these  experiences  were  startling  and  bewildering  to  them,  they  did  not  in  the
least  worry  themselves  in  consequence.

It  seems  possible  that  the  voice  may  have  been  that  of  one  of  the  children
talking  in  sleep,  and  the  shi})  some  effect  of  imagination,  but  it  is  not  easy  to
account  for  the  ajjparitions  by  any  such  known  causes.

The  next  case  I will  give  (G.  464)  is  somewhat  less  striking,  but  it
has,  like  the  last,  the  advantage  of  being  recent.  Air.  Gurney  has  had
a long  interview  with  Aliss  Leigh  Hunt  and  Aliss  Laurence,  and  talked
over  the  fjhenoinena  with  them.


From  Miss  Kathleen  Leigh  Hunt,  81,  Camden  Road,  N.W.

June,  1884

Tw'o  years  ago  last  winter  I was  staying  with  my  cousin  at  a hcnise  in
Hyde  Park  Place,  wliich  we  were  taking  care  of  for  my  cousin’s  brother-in-
law  and  sister  during  their  absence  from  England.

One  morning  after  breakfast,  I think  it  was  about  10  o’clock,  I was  going
iq)stairs  when  I seemed  to  see,  about  twm  stairs  in  front  of  me,  a figure,
wdiich  I too’K  to  be  the  housemaid,  going  up  before  me.  !.  went  up  the
entire  flight  of  stairs,  under  this  inqjression,  to  the  first  floor,  when  suddenly
at  the  toj)  1 could  see  nobody.  This  puzzled  me,  as  1 could  not  account  for
any  one  being  able  to  disappear  so  quickly,  and  I went  into  the  room  that
was  the  nearest  to  the  stairs,  tliinking  that  in  some  w'ay  the  housemaid  must
have  gone  in  there  without  my  seeing  her.  The  room,  however,  was  emjh}^
and  so  was  the  drawing-room,  which  led  out  of  it  -with  folding  doors  that
were  kept  0])en.  1 then  went  into  the  only  other  room  on  that  floor,  but  no

one  was  there  either.  I felt  that  it  was  impossible  that  she  should  have  gone


1885.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


107

on  upstairs,  as  I should  have  seen  her  do  so.  I was  not  at  all  frightened,
although  I began  to  believe  that  it  could  not  have  been  the  housemaid  that
I had  seen  ; still  the  hour  of  the  day  was  not  one  to  suggest  ghostly  thoughts,
and  the  ligure  itself  had  nothing  supernatural  about  it,  being  simply  that  of
a servant  in  a light  cotton  dress  (a  white  ground,  with  a spriggy  pattein  all
over  it),  and  with  white  cap  on.  Of  course,  being  behind  it,  I had  not  seen
the  face.  The  whole  figure  had  the  general  api»carance  of  the  housemaid,
so  that  she  had  been  the  one  1 had  thought  of.  It  was  not  in  the  least  like
the  cook,  who  dressed  in  much  darker  cottons,  and  was  besides  a very  little
wmman,  while  the  figure  I saw'  W'as  of  medium  height.

I determined  not  to  tell  my  cousin  about  this,  as  I was  going  out  for  the
day,  and  I thought  she  might  get  nervous  in  thinking  about  it  alone,  and
afterw'ards  I forgot  about  it  till  seeing  it  a second  time  iinjiressed  it  upon  my
mind.

It  was  about  the  same  time  in  the  morning,  about  tw'o  or  three  w'eeks
afterwards,  as  far  as  I can  remember,  that  having,  as  I thought,  heard  a
single  knock  at  the  street  door,  and  wishing  to  sjieak  to  the  housemaid  as  she
returned  from  answering  it,  I stood  in  the  dining-room,  just  inside  the  half-
open door,  waiting  to  catch  her  as  she  passed  back  to  the  kitchen,  but
standing  a little  behind  the  door  so  that  I should  not  be  seen  if  anybody
should  come  into  the  house  wdien  she  answ'ered  the  dcor.  I saw'  a figure  pass
along  the  passage  towards  the  sti'eet  door,  which  I took  to  be  the  housemaid
again,  because  I w'as  expecting  her  to  go  by,  but,  ow'ing  to  my  jiosition,  I did
not  see  her  face,  but  only  a jjiece  of  her  cheek  and  the  side  view'  of  her
figure.  On  neither  occasion  did  I hear  any  sound  of  w'alking,  but  this  did
not  surprise  me,  although  the  figure  w'as  not  tw'o  yards  from  me,  because  the
housemaid  had  a very  quiet  walk  indeed,  cpiite  remarkably  so.  As  I heard
no  door  open  or  shut,  and  no  figure  returned  after  waiting  tw'o  or  three
minutes,  I jjut  out  my  head  and  looked  in  the  hall.  Nobody  w'as  there.  I
then  w'ent  across  to  the  only  room  on  that  fioor  besides  the  dining-room .
Nobody  was  there  either.  Both  the  little  room  and  the  dining-room  have
only  one  door  each  to  them,  so  there  w'as  no  possibility  of  her  having
left  the  room  any  way  but  the  w'ay  I went  in.  This  time  I felt
I must  inquire  into  the  puzzle,  and  I went  straight  to  the  kitchen,
where  I found  the  housemaid  sitting.  I asked  her  if  she  had  not  just  been
to  the  door.  She  answered,  “ No.”  “ Then,”  I said,  “ surely  you  went  to
the  door  just  now' ; you  must  forget,  there  was  a single  knock  at  the  door.”
But  she  said  she  had  heard  no  knock,  and  had  not  been  out  of  the  kitchen.
I then  told  my  cousin  about  my  tw'o  experiences,  and  she  surprised  me  by
telling  me  of  hers,  and  of  the  former  housemaid  having  told  her  that  she
often  saw  “ skirts  going  up  round  the  stairs.”  We  agreed  we  would  not  say
anything  of  this  to  her  sister  or  her  husband,  as  w'e  w'ere  afraid  w'e  shoukl
only  be  laughed  at  and  thought  to  be  nervous,  although  we  did  not  find  our
exj)eriences  made  us  feel  so,  nor  was  I nervous  w'hen  I had  them.  My  health
was  very  fairly  good  during  that  time,  better  than  usual  indeed  ; nor  ought
I t(j  omit  to  say  that  never  before  or  since  have  I ever  fancied  I have  seen
anything  of  a ghostly  kind,  nor  have  I ever  had  any  unaccountable  exj^eri-
ences  of  any  sort  except  that  twice  in  that  house.

Kathlken  Leigh  Hunt.


108


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Leigh  Hunt  says  ; —

Jvhj  nth,  1884.

Your  conjecture  was  right  regarding  the  servants  at  Hyde  Park  Place.
There  were  only  two  with  us  at  the  time,  and  I did  not  c[uestion  the  cook  on
the  matter  because  the  figure  I saw  bore  no  resemblance  to  her.  The  cook
was  much  smaller,  and  always  dressed  in  darker  cottons  ; she  was,  besides,
remarkably  heavy  footed.  I do  not  remember  hearing  any  noise  at  all  when
I saw'  the  figure,  but  this  did  not  surprise  me,  as  the  housemaid  was  very
quiet  in  all  her  movements.  I questioned  the  housemaid  once  after
the  second  time  of  seeing  the  figure,  which  was  like  her  in  general
aqipearance.

In  another  communication,  slie  adds  : —

During  my  visit,  I frequently  heard  noises  as  of  persons  walking  about
and  moving  articles  in  a dressing-room  adjoining  my  bedroom.  This  room
communicated  with  mine  by  a door  which  was  left  oi)en,  the  only  other  door  of
the  dressing-room  being  locked.  A friend.  Miss  E.  L.,  who  had  stayed  in
the  house  the  previous  winter,  told  me  that  she  had  had  the  same
experience.  I certainly  have  never  thought  I have  heard  such  sounds  any-
where else.

From  Miss  Laurence,  81,  Camden  Road,  N.W.

t)no  morning,  about  10. .30,  I was  on  my  w'ay  to  my  bedroom,  situated  on
the  top  floor  of  the  house.  The  flight  upstairs  leading  from  the  second  floor
to  the  top  floor  was  well  lighted  by  tw'o  w'indows  and  a large  skylight  over-
head. When  I reached  the  second-floor  landing  I saw  a cotton  .skirt,  of  a
light  lilac  shade,  and  indefinite  pattern,  disappearing  round  the  bend  of  the
stairs  leading  to  tlie  top  floor,  and,  believing  it  to  be  the  housemaid  we  then
had,  I called  out,  “Harriet,”  tw'o  or  three  times.  She  immediately  came
out  of  a bedroom  door  to  my  left  on  tlie  second  floor,  whereupon  I said  to
her,  “ Rut  you  w'ere  going  upstairs  just  now,  how  is  it  that  you  are  here  ? ”
Slie  answ'ered,  “No,  I was  in  this  bedroom,”  pointing  to  the  one  she  came
from,  “all  the  time.”  1 then  said,  “ I saw'  your  skirt  going  round  the  bend  ! ”
and  she  replied,  “ Oh  ! that’s  notiiing,  miss,  1 often  see  a skirt  go  round  that
corner.”

I saw'  the  .skirt  so  vividly  that  had  T not  known  the  p.arlour-maid  was  in
the  bedroom,  out  of  which  the  housemaid  liad  just  come  tome,  and  the  only
other  servant,  the  cook,  downstairs,  I should  have  concluded  it  to  belong
to  one  of  them.  It  was  as  real  looking  as  possible,  and  could  not  have  been
an  effect  of  light.  I saw  only  the  skirt,  and  it  was  about  four  yards  in
advance  of  me.

I had  never  before,  nor  have  I since,  been  subject  to  an  hallucination.

Jessie  L.^ubence.


In  answer  to  inquiries  Miss  Laurence  says  : —

Jmie  24//(,  1884.

I am  sorry  I cannot  be  more  p)recise  as  to  tlie  date.  The  house  was  taken
in  1877,  and  w'e  lived  there  till  the  autumn  of  1882.  It  was  some  time  between
these  years  of  course,  but  I really  cannot  say  vhat  year.  My  eflbrts  to  find
the  housemaid,  “Harriet,”  have  failed.


1885.]  Fhantasms  of  the  Lead.  109

From  Mr.  Paul  Bird,  of  39,  Strand,  Calcutta,  who  is  known  to  Mr.  Curney.

J'ul[i  17  til,  1884-.

I have  iniich  pleasure  stating,  briefly,  what  I saw,  or  thought  I saw,  at
iny  late  residence,  in  Hyde  Park  Place.  I came  home  as  usual  one  evening
about  7.30,  the  hall  lamp  being  lighted,  and  while  wiping  my  feet  on  the  mat,
saw  one  of  the  maid  servants  come  towards  me  a few  stejrs  and  then  pass  intc)
the  dining-room.  1 took  off  my  overcoat  and  then  w'ent  into  the  dining-
room to  tell  her  to  bring  dinner,  and  to  my  surprise  there  was  no  one  in  the
room.  There  was  no  other  possible  egress  from  the  room  tlian  the  door  she
went  in  at.  I then  went  upstairs  and  told  my  wife,  who  exclaimed  that  a
similar  figure  had  been  seen  by  Miss  Hunt  and  others.*  I never  saw  the
figure  again  though  I frequently  looked  for  it.  My  own  impression  at  the
time  was  that  it  was  an  optical  delusion,  that  there  ims  a servant  where  I saw
her,  but  that  instead  of  passing  into  the  dining-room,  as  I could  have  sworn,
she  really  passed  through  another  door  into  the  kitchen,  which  was  on  the
same  floor  as  tlie  dining-room,  and  was  entered  from  the  hall  by  a door
opjiosite  the  street  door.  I delayed  verifying  this  theory  till  too  late,  and  was
liesides  a little  afraid  of  unsettling  the  servants  if  I made  inquiry.

P.AUL  Bird.

j\Ii.ss  Leigh  Hunt  adds  ; — -

We  carefully  compared  notes  at  the  time,  and  the  descriptions  agreed.


It  seems  possible  here  that  the  second  appearance  to  Miss  Leigh
Hunt  may  have  been  an  illusion  resulting  from  expectation  produced
by  the  fancied  knock  at  the  door,  and  that  Avhat  IMr.  Bird  saw  may
liave  been  explicable  in  the  way  he  at  first  supposed.  But  tlie  combina-
tion of  appearances  of  a similar  kind  in  the  same  house,  and  inde-
pendently of  each  other,  to  two  people  Avho  never  had  similar  experiences
elsewhere,  is  certainly  curious.

The  next  case  (G.  107)  is  less  recent.  Personation  of  the  ghost  by
some  real  human  being  Avould  be  the  explanation  of  it  that  would
suggest  itself,  were  it  possible  to  suppose  that  Sir  Arthur  and  Lady
Becher  were  wrong  in  believing  the  door  of  the  bath-room  to  be  effectively
locked.  The  narrative  is  Avritten  by  General  Sir  Ai’thur  Becher,  of
S.  Faith’s  Mede,  Winchester,  Avho  in  sending  it,  says  : “ I am  not  at  all
a nervous  or  superstitious  person,  but  I bear  the  character  of  a ‘ ghost-
seer  ’ in  my  family,  as  I liaA'e  seen  other,  to  us,  ‘ uncannie  ’ A’isions,  but
not  of  sufficiently  clear  details  to  narrate  for  the  purposes  of  your


* There  seems  to  be  a slight  discrepancy  between  this  and  Miss  Hunt’s
statement  tliat  she  and  her  cousin  had  resolved  not  to  mention  the  apparition
to  Mr.  or  Mrs.  Bird.  Miss  Hunt  is  inclined  to  think  that  the  most  probable
explanation  of  it  is  that  it  Avas  Miss  Laurence  really  avIio  exclaimed  “that  a
similar  figure,”  &c.,  since  she  Avas  present  on  the  occasion.


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


110


[A.pril  24,


inquiry,  excepting  one  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  which  I also  enclose
for  you  to  do  what  you  like  with.”

April  11th,  1884.

General  Sir  A.  Becher,  who  held  a liigli  apjjointmeut  on  the  Staff  in
India,  went,  accompanied  hy  his  son  and  A.D.C.,  to  the  Hill  Station  of
Kussowlie,  about  March,  18(17,  to  examine  a house  he  had  secured  for  hi.s
family  to  reside  in  during  the  approaciiing  hot  season.  They  both  slept  in
the  house  that  night.  During  the  night  the  General  awoke  suddenly,  and
saw  the  figure  of  a native  woman  standing  near  his  bed,  and  close  to  an  open
door  which  led  into  a bath-room.  He  called  out,  “Who  are  you  ?”  and
jumped  out  of  bed,  when  the  figure  retreated  into  the  bath-room,  and  in
following  it  the  General  found  the  outer  door  locked,  and  the  figure  had
disappeared.

He  went  to  bed  again,  and  in  the  morning  he  wrote  in  pencil  on  a
doorpost,  “ Saw  a ghost,”  but  he  did  not  mention  the  circumstance  to  his
wife.

A few  days  after,  the  General  and  his  family  took  irossession  of  the  liouse
for  tlie  season,  and  Lady  Becher  used  the  room  the  General  had  slejjt  in  for  her
dressing-room.  About  7 p.m.  on  the  first  evening  of  their  arrival.  Lady
Becher  was  dressing  for  dinner,  and  on  going  to  a wardrobe  (near  the  bath-
room door)  to  take  out  a dress,  she  saw,  standing  close  by  and  within  the
bath-room,  a native  woman,  and,  for  the  moment,  thinking  it  was  her  own
ayah,  asked  her  “what  she  wanted,”  as  Lady  Becher  never  allowed  a servant
in  her  room  while  dressing.  The  figure  then  disappeared  by  the  same  door
as  on  the  former  occasion,  which,  as  before,  was  found  locked  I Lady
Becher  was  not  much  alarmed,  but  felt  that  something  unusual  had  occurred,
and  at  dinner  mentioned  the  event  to  the  General  and  his  son,  when  the
General  relocated  what  had  <iccurred  to  him  on  the  former  occasion.  That
same  night,  their  youngest  son,  a boy  about  8 years  of  age,  was  sleeping  in
the  same  room  as  his  father  and  mother,  his  bed  facing  an  oj^en  doer  leading
into  the  dressing-room  and  bath-room,  before  mentioned,  and  in  the  middle
of  the  night  the  boy  started  up  in  his  bed  in  a frightened  attitude,  and  called
out,  “What  do  you  want,  ayah?  what  do  you  want?”  in  Hindustani,
evidently  seeing  a female  figure  in  the  dressing-room  near  his  bed.  His  mother
quieted  him,  and  he  fell  asleep,  and  the  tigure  was  not  seen  by  us  on  that
occasion,  nor  was  it  ever  again  seen,  though  we  lived  for  months  in  the  house.
But  it  confirmed  our  feeling  that  the  same  woman  7(ad  appeared  to  us  cdl  three,
and  on  inquiry  from  other  occupants  we  learned  that  it  was  a frequent
ajjparition  on  the  first  night  or  so  of  the  house  being  occui)ied.

A native  Hill,  or  Cashmere  Aveman,  very  fair  and  handsome,  had  been
murdered  some  years  before,  in  a hut  a few  yards  below  the  house,  and
immediately  under  the  door  leading  into  the  bath  and  dressing-room,  through
which,  on  all  three  occasions,  the  tigure  had  entered  and  disappeared.  My
son  sleeping  in  another  side  of  the  house  never  saAv  it.

I could  give  the  names  of  some  other  subsequent  occupants  who  have  told
us  much  the  same  story.  *


* The  probable  address  of  one  only  of  these  other  occupants  has  as  yet  been
obtained,  and  she  has  not  answered  a letter  addressed  to  her  on  the  subject.


1885.]


Fliantanym  of  the  Dead.


Ill


Subsequently  Sir  Arthur  Beeher  write.s  : —

Winchester,  tMay  14f/(,  1884.

I write  to  say  Lady  Beeher  does  not  desire  to  write  anything  more  per-
sonally on  the  subject  of  the  “ Ghost  Story  ” I before  detailed,  as  she  says
my  account  of  it  was  given  in  connection  with  and  entirely  in  accordance
with  her  recollection  of  the  circumstances.  The  woman  appeared  to  me  in
the  night,  and  in  the  ordinary  light  of  a room  Avithout  any  blinds  or  shutters.

In  ansAver  to  inquiries,  he  furtlier  tells  us  that  the  bath-room  door
Avas  locked  on  the  inside  ; that  the  rooms  Avere  on  the  ground  floor ; but
that  there  Avas  no  exit  but  Ijy  the  doors  referred  to.  Also  that  the
child  had  certainly  not  heard  of  the  ghost  before  he  saAv  it.

The  folloAving  narrative  (G.  378)  is  sent  by  Mr.  John  D.  Harry  to
Mr.  Gurney,  avIio  is  not  personally  acquainted  Avith  him,  but  learns
from  two  common  acquaintances  that  he  is  a man  of  acumen  in  ordinary
affairs.  Mr.  Harry’s  residence  is  in  the  South  of  Europe.

December  8th,  1882.

Dear  Sir, — In  rejfly  to  your  circular  on  P.sychical  Besearch,  I haA’e  great
pleasure  in  affording  you  the  folloAving'facts,  of  Avhich  AA'e  (that  is,  inyself  and
three  daughters,  Avith  one  of  the  housemaids)  have  been  from  time  to  time
cognisant.  I think  it  Avas  in  the  Avinter  of  1871,  an  apparition,  in  the  exact
likeness  of  a fair  woman  draped  from  head  to  foot  in  Avhite,  glided  slowly
through  the  library  of  my  house  and  into  my  bedroom.  The  face  at  the
time  I did  not  see,  as  the  figure  preceded  me  to  my  bedroom.  She  ajApeared
tall  and  rather  slight.  On  her  entering  my  room,  I immediatelj^  followed  and
closed  the  door  after  me,  Avith  the  object  of  discovering  Avdio  the  person  aa'us
that  Avas  playing  some  sort  of  trick,  but  I could  find  no  one  in  the  room,  after
searching  it  thoroughly.  I,  hoAvever,  kejAt  the  circumstance  jierfectly  secret.
It  might  have  been  two  or  three  years  after  this  last  event  that  I heard  screams
from  all  my  daughters,  and,  as  it  appeared  after,  from  their  maid  as  Avell  ; this
was  about  10  o’clock  at  night,  and  about  the  same  hour  I had  seen  the  appari-
tion previously.  One  of  my  daughters  the  next  morning  rushed  to  tell  me
of  the  fright  they  had  had,  but  before  she  had  time  to  explain  the  cause  I
at  once  dared  her  to  talk  of  any  such  nonsense  as  ghosts,  as  they  might  be
sure  apparitions  Avere  only  in  the  imagination  of  nervous  people.  I did  not,
hoAvever,  tell  her  of  Avhat  I had  seen.  From  that  time  to  the  time  my  last
daughter  Avas  married,  it  Avas  never  alluded  to  betAveen  us,  and  I did  not
knoAV  till  then,  Avhen  my  daughter  Avas  leaving  the  house  for  her  maii-i.age
journey,  that  either  of  my  daughters  had  again  seen  the  apparition.  A feiv
minutes  before  she  left  the  house,  she  desired  to  speak  to  me  privately,  and
when  she  gave  me  the  full  particulars  of  the  female  apjAarition  which  she
had  seen  repeatedly,  I then  acknoAvledged  that  the  same  figure  had  on  seven
or  eight  occasions  apjAeared  in  my  bedroom  and  tAvice  in  the  librai-y,  and
that  on  one  occasion  it  lifted  up  the  mosquito  curtains  and  looked  closely
into  my  face.  On  this  occasion  I became  rather  startled,  as  it  Avas  so  sudden,
and  I used  not  veiy  polite  language,  Avhen  it  dropped  the  curtain  and  glided
slowly  aAvay.  It  never  appeared  to  Avalk,  but  to  glide.  It  is  noAv  nearly


112


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


tw'o  years  since  I have  witnessed  it  for  a certainty,  as  the  last  time,  I believe,
I was  merely  dreaming  of  it.  So  impressed  lias  the  face  become  in  my
imagination  that  I believe  I could  distinguish  it  among  thousands, — pale,
rather  handsome,  oblong  features,  and  about  35.  My  daughter  once  heard  her
sister’s  name  called  two  or  three  times,  but  there  was  no  one  in  the  room  or
near  to  account  for  the  voice.

Had  it  not  been  for  the  scene  at  my  daughter’s  marriage  it  would  never
have  been  spoken  of  (at  least,  by  me)  ; but  when  she  stated  in  the  presence
of  others  that  she  was  glad  to  leave  the  house,  and  hoped  never  to  sleep  in
it  again,  I very  reluctantly  told  some  of  the  friends  jiresent  ; but  this  took
place  eight-and-a-half  years  after  the  first  time  any  of  us  had  seen  the
apiiarition. — I am,  sir,  yours  truly,

John  D.  H ARRY.

P.S. — My  great  reason  now  for  keeping  the  matter  secret  is  that  the

property  I inhabit  might  not  be  depreciated,  as  the are  a most

nervous  and  superstitious  people.

I should  add  that  the  ligure  ajipeared  to  all  three  of  my  daughters  and
their  maid  at  one  time,  and  on  the  return  of  my  daughter  (the  eldest),  with
her  husband,  .she  again  saw  it,  and  her  husband  likewise  acknowledged
that  he  saw  something,  but  could  not  describe  it  as  he  had  just  awoke.

It  has  never  been  seen  by  any  of  us  except  on  the  particular  flat  where
the  sitting-rooms  and  bedrooms  are.

Tlie  following  account  is  from  one  'of  Mr.  Ifarry’s  daughters, — •
Mrs.  Knight.  It  will  lie  seen  that  the  details  are  not  in  complete
agreement  with  his  recollection  of  what  his  daughter  had  told  him,  but
this  only  illustrates  what  1 have  already  said  about  second-hand  informa-
tion. The  two  accounts  agree  in  the  important  point  that  a female
figure  draped  in  white  has  been  seen  by  several  persons  in  the  house,
and  independently  l>y  at  least  two  of  them.  It  was  apparently  seen  too
indistinctly  by  the  second  witness  for  any  clear  recognition  of  the
features,  or  she  would  hardly  have  taken  it  for  her  sister ; unless,
indeed,  she  means  us  to  understand  that  the  face  really  was  exactly
like  her  sister’s,  in  which  case  it  must  have  been  unlike  that  of  the
figure  seen  by  her  father,  aird  which  he  believes  he  could  distinguish
among  thousands.  I hope  we  may  ultimately  obtain  the  evidence  of
Mr.  Harry’s  other  daughters  as  well.

May  6th,  1885.

In  the  year  1871,  about  May,  we  moved  into  , the  family  con-

sisting of  my  father,  two  sisters,  and  myself.  I was  unpacking  clothes  one
evening,about  sunset,  in  the  first  week  of  our  being  there,  with  a woman  called
Pepina,  when  w'e  both  saw'  a shadow  of  a w'oman  rising  out  of  a bed  in  a room
which  oj^ened  out  of  the  one  we  w'ere  in.  I spoke  first,  when  w'e  had  recovered
our  presence  of  mind,  and  said,  “Pepina,  what  did  you  see  ?”  She  said,  “Miss
Louie,”  meaning  my  youngest  sister.  I said,  “ »So  did  I.”  We  were  not
frightened,  only  surprised.  The  next  evening,  at  sunset  again,  my  other
sister  and  I were  sitting  on  toji  of  the  house  as  is  the  general  custom  in
for  coolness  sake.  Suddenly  a figure  came  to  the  low  door  opening  on


1885.]


Phantasms  of  the  Bead.


113


to  tlie  roof,  and  disappeared.  I said,  “ Wasn’t  tliat  Louie  ? ” My  sister
replied,  “Yes,  I wonder  why  she  did  not  come  up.”  She  then  went  to  the
top  of  the  ladder  and  called  her,  but  there  was  no  answer.  Then  I remarked,
“That  is  the  second  time  I have  seen  Louie  in  this  house.  I hope  nothing
is  going  to  happen  to  her.”  Later  in  the  evening  I said  to  my  sister,  ‘ ‘ Did  you
come  up  to  the  roof  to-night  1 ” “ Oh,  no!  ” she  said,  “ I wasn’t  near  there.  I
was  downstairs  all  tlie  time.”  Then  I remarked,  “ Well,  something  is  going
to  happen  to  you,  for  we  have  seen  your  ghost  twice  following,”  but  she
only  laughed.

I told  my  father  of  it,  Init  he  was  very  angry  and  said  tliere  were
no  such  things  as  gliosts,  and  that  we  were  never  to  speak  of  such  things  for
fear  of  frightening  tlie  servants.

I lived  in  tliat  house  for  eight  years  and  never  saw  it  again.  The  last  ten
months  I was  alone  with  my  father,  and  slejit  in  a room  quite  away  from
anybody,  but  I never  saw  anything  again  nor  had  any  fear.  It  was  only  on
hearing  from  my  father,  after  I was  married,  that  he  had  seen  it  once  or
twice,  that  I was  afraid  to  go  to  the  house,  and  I do  not  think  anything  would
induce  me  to  go  there  again.

My  father  is  afraid  of  nothing,  but  I know  that  he  often  sees  this  shadow,

and  yet  does  not  believe  it  is  anything  supernatural,  onlj’ he  allows  that  he

cannot  account  for  it.  If  I had  seen  it  alone  I should  have  thought  I was  out.

of  health  or  imaginative,  but  as  there  were  two  people  each  time  it  could  nob

have  been  imagination.  c<  ■c’  t-

° &.  E.  Knight.


In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Knight  adds  : —

The  figure  rose  from  the  bed  with  its  arms  outstretched,  as  if  beseeching
or  asking  for  something.  I also  noticed  that  it  had  its  arms  stretched  out  in
the  same  manner  the  second  time  I saw  it.  It  vanished  into  the  wail  at  the
back  of  the  bed  as  we  ajipi’oached  it.  It  was  a white  shadowy  figure  of  a
young  woman.  The  face  looked  pretty,  but  very  sad.  I couldn’t  say  how  it
was  dressed,  it  all  looked  white  and  flimsy,  as  if  you  could  pass  through  it.
It  is  quite  as  clear  in  my  memory  now  as  at  the  time  I saw  it.  I daresay  you
have  heard  from  my  father  that  once  he  saw  it  in  grey  instead  of  white,  and
he  said  it  looked  to  have  grown  smaller.


Another  narrative  of  appearances  last  year,  in  a house  in  Sussex,
has  not  yet  been  printed  by  the  Committee,  because  they  liope  to  ob-
tain some  further  evidence  about  it  shortly,  but  it  has  been  shown  to
me  in  manuscript,  and  as  it  relates  to  a curious  variety  of  these  appari-
tions I will  give  a brief  account  of  it.  We  have,  I believe,  four  first-
hand accounts  from  difierent  percipients,  none  of  whom  had  previously
heard  what  the  ghost  was  like.  They  saw  in  the  night,  by  a wardrobe
in  a particular  room,  a column  of  light  vaguely  shaped  like  a w'oman,
which  in  some  cases  moved  without  changing  its  shape  or  attitude, from
the  wardrobe  to  the  fireplace,  and  then  slowdy  back  again,  and  from  the.
fireplace  to  the  wdndow,  there  disappearing  all  at  once.  The  servant,
having  heard  of  the  ghost,  slejit  in  the  room  wdth  a view  to  seeing  it,
and  succeeded  on  various  occasions,  but  to  her  it  appeared  more  like
a ball  of  light  with  a sort  of  halo  round  it.  She  saw  it  once  in  the


I


114


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  2i,


evening  as  she  passed  the  door  of  the  room,  and  called  others  to  see  it,
but  when  they  got  there  it  had  disappeared.  This  seems  to  have  been
the  only  occasion  on  which  it  was  seen  by  any  one  not  in  bed.  One  of
the  percij)ients  has  endeavoured  to  account  for  the  appearance  as  a
reflection  from  the  looking-glass,  a light  shining  in  at  the  window,  ic.,
but  does  not  seem  to  have  succeeded  in  doing  so  satisfactorily.  Pannour
in  the  village  says  the  house  is  haunted,  and  that  a woman  murdered
her  mother  there,  luit  such  village  gossip  cannot,  I think,  be  taken  as
of  any  value  without  very  careful  investigation,  since  it  may  quite
possibly  have  its  origin  in  the  very  circumstances  which  it  is  supposed
to  explain  and  confirm.

I have  now,  I think,  exhausted  the  cases  where  we  have  first-hand
testimony  from  two  or  more  witnesses  who,  without  knowing  what  the
apparition  was  supposed  to  be  like,  seem  to  have  seen  much  the  same
tiling.  But  there  are  other  cases  which  ought  not,  I think,  to  be  left
out  of  account,  where  we  have  lir.st-hand  evidence  of  appearances  to  one
percipient,  and  second-hand  accounts  of  others,  only  heard  of  by  the
narrator  of  the  first-hand  account  after  his  own  experience.  The
following  is  an  instance  (G.  G29).  Names  may  not  be  published,  and
further  information  cannot  be  obtained,  which  is  much  to  be  regretted,
as  the  story  might  become  very  interesting,  and  aflbrd  us  useful  informa-
tion. It  was  received  by  Mr.  Tlyers  from  a friend  who  wuites  on
January  1.5th,  1884.

The  following  was  written  to  me  by  a relative.  She  learnt  from  an  old
gardener  that  there  is  a story  connected  with  the  liouse,  but  what  the  story
is  .she  could  not  find  out.

“I  have  had  an  odd  sensation  in  summer,  early  in  the  morning,  that  there
was  a woman  in  the  room,  but  I could  not  look  up  till  she  had  gone.  I con-
sidered tliis  to  be  a species  of  nightmare,  till  last  August.  1 was,  as  before,
lying  awake,  when  the  same  feeling  came  over  me  ; this  time  far  more
strongly.  I heard  a dress  rustle,  and  fdt  a short,  dark  woman  was  coming
towards  my  bed.  She  put  her  hand  on  my  shoulder,  and  hjoked  over  at
my  face  ; then  the  spell  was  off,  and  I could  turn  round.

1 was  awake,  1 kmrw,  and  was  just  noticing  that  the  wardrobe  door  was  left
a little  oiien.  I felt  I could  not  stay  in  this  room  after  this,  and  so  moved
into  another.  1 told  my  maid  wliat  1 had  seen,  saying  it  must  be  nightmare,
when  she  said,  ‘ Whjq  that  is  what  15.  used  to  say.  A short,  salhnv
woman  \ised  to  come  into  liis  room,  and  pass  by  liim  to  the  window.’  This
B.  -was  our  late  man-servant,  and  his  ro(jm  was  over  mine.

I took  an  opportunity  of  asking  liim,  and  he  said  he  kneio  lie  was  awake,
and  got  up  to  look,  but  after  a few  times  he  got  used  to  it.

We  are  seldom  at  home  in  August.  1 nmo  remember  when  we  came  hero,
17  years  ago,  being  told  the  house  was  haunted,  but  never  believed  it  or
thought  of  it  again.

The  semsation  was  so  dreadful,  and  yet  1 felt  she  (the  ajiparition)  meant


1885.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


115


no  harm,  more  as  if  she  were  looking  kindly  at  me.  Her  face  seemed  in
darkness,  and  yet  I could  see  it.  You  will  laugh,  because  it  was  all  at  mv
back.  I am  curious  to  know  if  anj'one  will  believe  in  a uou-seeing  sight,  i
saw  her  in  the  back  of  my  head  ; my  face  was  to  the  wall.  I felt  I coidd  not
move.

This  is  a correct  version  of  my  exj^eriences  on  the  morning  of  August
11th,  1883.”

Here  it  will  be  observed,  unlike  the  other  cases  I have  quoted,  the
sensation  of  seeing  is  produced  without  any  possible  intervention  of
the  eyes.

The  following  (G.  383)  is  another  instance.  It  is  an  account  of  the
apparent  liauntings  of  a house  at  Hammersmith,  by  Mrs.  W.  B.
R d,  and  was  written  in  the  summer  of  1883.

When  we  went  to  live  in  our  house  at  Hammersmith,  we  had  never  heard
a word  of  its  being  haunted,  nor  had  we  any  sort  of  feeling  that  it  was  a
ghostly  house  or  anything  of  the  sort,  nor  had  we  ever  in  any  other  house
experienced  any  phenomena  of  the  kind.  Almost  immediately  after  taking
possession,  all  the  members  of  the  household  conqdained  of  hearing  noises
in  the  lower  part  of  the  house — windows  would  be  violently  shaken  every
night  between  2 and  4 o’clock,  and  steps  were  heard  ai^jiarently  going  about
the  house.  I myself  frequently  had  doors  oj^ened  for  me  before  entering  a
room,  as  if  a hand  had  hastily  turned  the  handle  and  thrown  it  open.  Then
occasionally  we  used  to  hear  sounds  as  of  someone  sobbing  and  sighing  (deep
long  sighs  at  all  times  of  the  day).  I used  to  hear  these  sounds  in  my  bed-
room, and  on  the  little  staircase  leading  to  it,  and  my  husband  would  hear  it
in  the  dining-room  underneath.  Sometimes  I would  hear  a sound  C'f  stitch-
ing in  the  room  out  of  my  bedroom,  as  if  some  very  hard  and  coarse  work
were  being  done,  and  then  a sound  as  of  scmething  being  dragged  across  the
floor.  I got  to  have  a feeling  which  was  most  uncomfortable,  at  times,  as  of
being  uKdchejl.  These  sort  of  things  w’ent  on  for  about  live  years,  when,  in
October,  1875,  about  3 o’clock  one  afternoon  I was  sitting  with  three  of  my.
children  in  the  dining-room,  reading  to  them.  I wanted  to  speak  to  the
parlour-maid,  and  I rang  the  bell  for  her  when  the  door  ojiened,  and  on  loolv-
ing  up  I saw  a figure  of  a woman  come  in  and  walk  up  to  the  side  of  the
table,  stand  there  a second  or  two,  and  then  turn  to  go  out  again,  but  before
reaching  the  door  she  seemed  to  dissolve  away.  She  was  a grey,  short-looking
woman,  apparently  dressed  in  grey  muslin.  I hardly  saw  the  face,  which
seemed  scarcely  to  be  defined  at  all.  None  of  the  children  saw  her,  and  I
did  not  mention  the  circumstance  to  them  nor  to  the  servants,  lest  they  should
get  frightened  and  leave.  I only  told  my  husband.  I was  in  perfect  health
at  the  time.

During  the  next  twm  months,  a figure,  described  exactly  like  the  one  1
had  seen,  was  seen  by  two  different  servants,  during  the  absence  of  the
family.  One  of  them  saw  itin  the  afternoon  in  daylight,  and  the  other  at  10
o’clock  at  night  ; one  saw  it  on  the  little  staircase,  and  one  in  the  day  nursery.
Neither  of  these  servants  had  by  any  possibility  heard  of  my  having  seen
anything  of  the  sort.  They  were  both  in  good  health,  and,  having  been
with  me  some  time,  had  long  grown  accustomed  to  the  noises  ; but  one  of

I 2


Phantasms  of  the  Bead.


116


[April  24,


tliein  was  so  upset  and  frightened  by  the  apparition  that  she  sent  word  to  us
at  once  that  sire  must  leave  us.

Tlie  following  summer,  in  July,  I was  awoke  in  the  night  by  a frantic
scream  of  terror  frimi  my  little  girl  (then  six  years  old),  who  slept  in  a tiny
room  opening  out  of  ours.  Her  father  ran  to  her,  when  she  said,  “ Oh  ! I
awoke  and  saw  a little  wicked-looking  old  grey  woman  standing  at  the  foot  of
the  bed,  looking  at  me  with  a horrid  face,  and  then  suddenly  she  went  down
through  the  floor  with  a loud  noise,  and  I screamed  out.”  The  child  was  in
good  health,  and  had  never  heard  any  talk  of  the  apparition.

In  the  autumn  of  1870  I was  awoke  one  night,  and  felt  an  icy  wind  blow-
ing through  my  room,  and  heard  loud  sobs  ; the  curtains  of  the  lied  were
pulled  back,  and  my  hair  was  pulled.  Another  night  1 was  awoke  by  a
brilliant  light  in  my  room  and  the  same  cold  wind.  Previously  to  this,  my
husband,  on  one  occasion,  heard  his  name  distinctly  called  in  his  studio,  as
lie  sat  at  work.  Since  all  this  (1870)  only  occasional  rappings  have  been
heard,  and  I have  not  felt  that  feeling  of  being  watched,  which  used  to  come
over  me  when  sitting  in  my  room,  the  feeling  which  1 had  for  years  before  I
saw  any  apparition.

The  following  are  letters  written  later  by  Mrs.  It cl.

March  llf/c,  1884.

Deak  Mr.  Guknev, — As  to  the  night  that  I told  you  of  last  September,
I was,  as  far  as  I can  remember,  awoke  by  the  dog  barking  about  1^  o’clock.
The  barking  stopped,  but  I heard  what  sounded  like  steps  downstairs.  Veiy
.soon  the  old  noises  began  in  our  little  library  ; jumping  about,  the  window
rattling,  the  whole  place  shaking,  till  my  windows  rattled  too.  The  dog
whined  incessantly,  and  the  banging  and  jumping  seemed  to  grow  more  and
more  boisterous.  1 got  up  and  made  some  noise  with  the  furniture  in  my  room,
lighted  my  candles,  and  went  on  to  the  landing  to  listen  if  there  were  noises
in  the  other  part  of  the  house,  but  all  was  perfectly  cpiiet  there,  though  in
the  little  room  downstairs  the  dog  seemed  to  grow  more  and  more  distressed,
and  the  noises  continued  nujre  violently  than  ever.  I listened  to  them  till  3
o’clock,  and  as  there  seemed  no  chance  of  their  sto])ping,  I left  my  room  and
passed  the  rest  of  the  night  in  Helen’s.  The  dog  evidently  was  still  afraid  of
the  room  wlien  tlie  morning  came.  I called  to  him  to  go  into  it  with  me,  and
he  crouched  down  with  liis  tail  between  his  legs, and  seemed  to  fear  entering  it.

Tliat  was  all  that  disturbed  me,  but  I found  it  enough,  as  1 was  alone  in
the  house  with  oidy  Helen  and  the  maid. — Yours  sincerely,  C.  R 1>.

A'pril  bth,  1884.

Dear  Mr.  Gurney, — I nev'er  heard  of  any  Clewer  Sisters  having  lived
here.  Some  2)erson  who  knew  the  house,  I cannot  remember  who,  told  me
an  old  invalid  lady  once  lived  liere,  but  she  is  a misty  jiersonage.

About  40  or  50  years  ago  a Mr.  Atwood,  the  then  vicar  of  Hammersmith,
lived  here,  and  we  bought  it  from  his  son.  Gur  immediate  jiredecossor  was
a Mr.  Seaton,  a gentleman  much  given  to  horseracing.

In  1804,  some  peojde  of  the  name  of  Scott  lived  here,  as  we  know  by
having  found  some  of  their  invitation  cards  behind  a mantelpiece,  but
that  is  all  1 can  tell  of  the  former  inhabitants  of  the  house. — Yours  very
sincerely,  Clara  R n.


1885.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


117


The  appearance  to  the  child  is  not,  I think,  important,  as  it  may
have  been  merely  a bad  dream,  but  there  can  hardly  be  a mistake  as
to  the  servants  having  seen  independently  a ligure  very  much  like  that

seen  by  Mrs.  R d.  It  will  be  observed  that  mysterious  noises

occupy  a prominent  place  in  this  narrative,  which  has  not  been  the  case
in  any  that  I have  yet  spoken  of  except  the  one  given  in  the
Proceedings,  Part  YI.

To  the  present  group  of  cases  belong  two  more  which  will  be  printed
when  a little  more  evidence  has  been  obtained.  Iwill  give  a brief  account
of  them  on  account  of  their  great  interest.  In  the  first,  the  appearances
have  taken  place,  so  far  as  we  know,  only  since  the  present  occupants
came  to  the  house  in  April,  1882.  They  have  occurred  mainly  in  the
summer,  and  have  been  very  frequent.  The  figure  seen  is  that  of  a
lady  in  widow’s  garb,  holding  a hand  and  handkerchief  up  to  her  brow
and  apparently  weeping  ; the  face  is  concealed.  It  moves  about,  and  has
been  seen  in  various  parts  of  the  house  and  garden,  but  most  frequently
is  first  seen  by  the  original  percipient  on  the  stairs,  and  has  constantly
been  followed  down  to  the  drawing- room,  where  it  sits  down  in  a particular
corner  of  a particular  sofa — or  if  the  percipient  sits  in  that  place  her-
self, the  apparition  stands  behind.  At  first  this  lady  only  saw  it,  and
for  some  time  said  nothing  about  it,  but  after  a time  a young  brother  of
eight  years  old  saw  independently  what  he  described  as  a lady  in  black
crying  in  the  drawing-room.  Three  other  persons  saw  independently
what  seems  to  have  been  the  same  figure,  and  since  then  other  members  of
the  family  have  seen  it,  though  some  who  have  tried  to  do  so  havefailed.
It  has  once  been  seen  by  two  together,  and  on  another  occasion  by  one
only,  though  others  were  present.  This,  and  its  apparently  disappearing
through  a closed  door,  preclude  the  idea  of  its  being  any  real  person.
The  house  where  this  occurs  is  only  about  2-5  years  old,  and  its  history  is
completely  known.  The  figure  seen  is  believed  to  resemble  a lady  who
foi’merly  lived  there,  and  whose  life  there  was  unhappy,  but  who  did  not
die  there.  She  was  not  known  to  the  percipients,  and  as  the  apparition
never,  I believe,  shows  its  face,  the  likeness  inferred  from  photographs
must  remain  somewdiat  conjectural.

The  other  unprinted  case  prelates  to  an  old  Elizabethan  manor
house.  It  is  well-known  as  a haunted  house,  and  various  exaggerated
accounts  of  the  ghost  may  be  met  with.  According  to  some  accounts
that  reached  the  Committee,  the  ghost  is  continually  appealing,  but
usually  only  shows  its  back,  which  is  fortunate  since  the  face  is  so
horrible  that  any  one  seeing  it  is  frightened  almost  into  fits  and
insists  on  leaving  the  house  ! The  true  history,  so  far  as  the  Com-
mittee yet  have  it,  is  less  sensational  and  seems  in  brief  to
be  as  follows.  The  house  was,  from  the  summer  of  1861  to
the  spring  of  1863,  occupied  by  a Mr.  and  Mrs.  II.  Before  he  rented


118


PlianfaHms  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


it  Mr.  H.  liad  heard  many  reports  of  its  being  haunted,  Imt  these  were
of  a general  chai’acter  ; he  heard  no  descri])tion  of  any  appearance.
We  know  also  from  other  sources  that  the  liouse  had  previously  this
reputation.  The  II. ’s  constantly  heard  noises  for  which  they  were
unable  to  account ; and  theii'  little  dog  behaved  somewhat  oddly  at  night,
refusing,  contrary  to  its  usual  habits,  to  leave  its  basket  on  any  provo-
cation. One  night  jMr.  H.  saw  an  old  woman  in  a dark  gown,  grey
shawl,  and  poke  bonnet  standing  at  the  foot  of  the  bed.  She  vanished,
and  he  got  up  and  examined  the  room,  satisfying  himself  that  it  was  no
illusion,  lie  never  spoke  of  this,  Avhile  Lhey  remained  in  the  house,  to
anyone  except  a sister-in-law  Avhom  he  bound  OA’er  to  secrecy,  and  he
is  certain  she  kept  the  secret.  During  his  tenancy  an  old  nurse,  after-
sleeping  one  night  in  the  house,  refused  ever  to  do  so  again,  but  would
give  no  reason.  After  they  left  they  persuaded  her  to  tell  them  why
she  had  acted  thus,  and  it  then  apjreared  that  sire  had  seen  a figure
which  she  described  exactly  as  Mr.  H.  did  his,  though  she  had  never
heard  of  his  experience.  The  nurse  is  dead  aird  rve  have  her  account
at  second-hand  only.

The  next  tenants  are  believed  to  have  had  experiences,  but  they  have
not  yet  been  got  at,  and  after  18G4  the  house  remained  empty  for  some
time.

From  1867  to  1875  it  was  inhabited  by  a clergyman  and  his  family.
In  the  autumn  of  1867  the  clergyman,  Mr.  B.,  Avhile unpacking  in  a dress-
ing-room opening  on  to  the  landing,  saw  passing  the  door  a lady  in  blue
with  her  hair  down  her  back,  svlio  could  not  possiljly  be  anyone  in  the
house.  In  July,  1868,  a similar  figure  was  seen  by  a lady  in  nearly  the
same  place.  She  saAv-  it  Amry  clearly,  including  face  and  bare  feet.  It
went  into  the  dressing-room  and  there  disappeared.  Of  these
two  apiAearances  Ave  have  accounts  at  first-hand,  but  they  Avere
probably  not  independent  in  the  sense  in  Avhich  I haA’e  used  the
word,  as  I l^elieve  the  lady  kneAV  Avhat  Mia  B.  had  seen.  There  are,
l)esides,  accounts  at  second-hand  of  tAvo  appearances  to  a housemaid  of
a figure  apparently  not  exactly  resembling  Mr.  B.’s  ; and  also  at  second-
hand of  two  appearances  to  a gentleman  staying  in  the  house,  Avho
descril)ed  the  Hgui'e  someAvhat  differently  again.  These  four  last-
mentioned  appearances  also  occurred  in  1868.  It  is  not  clear  Avhether
there  have  been  other  appearances  to  servants  or  not.  The  B.’s  left
the  house  in  1875.  It  Avas  tlien  somewhat  repaired  and  altered,  and
from  1876  till  now  lias  been  occupied  liy  another  family  Avho  have  seen
and  heard  nothing  at  all  remailvable.

We  have  here  the  remarkable  feature  that  the  haunting,  Avhich
continued  for  at  least  seven  years,  and  through  the  occupancy  of  at
least  three  families,  seems  to  haA’e  changed  its  character  in  a marked
degree.


1884.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


119


I may  add  tliat  the  ghost  is  said  to  he  the  spirit  of  a young  lady
murdered  in  the  middle  of  the  last  century  for  her  jewels.  But  the
story  of  this  murder  is  very  hazy,  and  has  its  origin,  I believe,  in  a
letter  received  from  America,  after  the  appearances  to  the  B.  family.
This  letter  professed  to  come  from  a person  who  had  learnt  the  story
from  the  last  surviving  member  of  the  murderer’s  family,  and  received
from  her  a seci’et  plan  showing  the  spot  where  the  treasure  was  hid.
Brom  internal  evidence,  I should  judge  it  to  be  a hoax.

1 will  now  give  some  cases  where  the  appearances  were  not  strictly
independent,  but  where  it  would  seem  that  the  previous  knowledge
possessed  by  some  of  the  percipients  as  to  the  form  of  the  ghost  can
hardly  have  operated  through  expectation  in  pi’oducing  it,  since  their
first  impression  was  that  they  saw  a living  human  being.

Tlie  account  of  an  apparition,  supposed  from  a resemblance  of  figure
to  be  possibly  that  of  Miss  A.,  printed  in  the  7'Vocee(/t«p’s,  Vol.  I.,p.  108,
is  a case  of  this.  It  is  a record,  as  will  be  remembered,  of  a shadowy
female  figure  seen  several  times.

A somewhat  similar  case  is  the  following  (G.  77),  obtained  through
Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedgwood.  The  house  is  in  Ireland,  but  neither  its
name  nor  that  of  the  percipients  may  be  published.  The  first  account
is  from  Miss  C.,  the  governess.

On  the  18th  of  April  (Thursday),  1867,  about  7.40  p.m.,  I was  going  to
my  room,  which  I at  that  time  shared  witli  one  of  my  i>upils,  when  just  as  I
had  reached  the  top  of  the  stairs  I plainly  saw  the  figure  of  a female
dressed  in  black,  with  a large  white  collar  or  kerchief,  very  dark
hair,  and  pale  face.  I only  saw  the  side  face.  She  moved  slowly
and  went  into  my  room,  the  door  of  which  was  open.  I thought
it  was  Marie,  the  French  maid,  going  to  see  about  A.’s  clothes,  but
the  next  moment  I saw  that  the  figure  was  too  tall  and  walked  better.  I
then  fancied  it  was  some  visitor  whf)  had  arrived  unexpectedly  (Mrs.  S.  had
done  so  a few  days  previously),  and  had  gone  into  the  wrong  bedroom,  and
as  I had  only  been  at  F.  H.  a short  time,  I felt  rather  shy  at  speaking  to
strangers,  so  waited  where  I was  a minute  or  two  expecting  to  see  the  lady
come  out,  but  I 'Hevfir  lost  sight  of  the  door.  At  last  I went  in,  and  there
was  no  one  in  the  room.  I looked  everywhere,  and  even  feltthe  back  of  the
hanging  side  of  the  wardrobe  to  see  whether  there  was  any  concealed  door
leading  into  the  next  room.  This  idea  would  not  have  occurred  to  me  had  I
been  able  in  any  way  to  account  for  the  lady’s  disappearance.  She  could
not  have  gone  by  the  window,  as  the  room  was  on  the  second  storey.  Going-
downstairs,  I met  the  cook  and  another  maid,  and  asked  them  if  any  stranger
had  arrived,  ;ind  was  answered  in  the  negative.  I had  never  heard  of  any
strange  appearances  in  the  liouse,  and  could  not  account  for  what  1 liad  seen
that  evening.

Some  years  after,  in  December,  1874,  as  I was  going  to  bed,  about  10  o’clock
(the  house  had  been  slightly  altered),  I saw  most  distinctly  a lady  in  black  leaning
over  the  fire  in  the  room  occupied  by  the  eldest  daughter.  She  was  shading


120


Fhantasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


her  eyes  with  her  liand,  and  seemed  looking  for  something  by  the  fender  ; her
other  hand  was  on  the  chimney-piece.  I walked  .slowly  towards  the  room,
and  said,  “Take  care,  C.,  you  will  burn  your  face,  it  is  so  near  the  flame.”
As  there  was  no  answer  I spoke  again,  I .sup2>ose  louder,  for  at  that  moment
C.,  whom  I sujiposed  the  lady  to  be,  came  out  of  her  sister’s  room  and  asked
what  I was  talking  about  and  why  I was  in  such  a fright  about  her  burning
her  face.  There  was  no  one  in  her  room  and  no  one  could  have  piassed  me
unobserved,  as  I was  standing  close  to  the  door.

Another  time,  late  (me  evening  in  September,  I was  sitting  in  the  school-
room with  the  door  open,  when  I saw  the  flgure  again,  standing  on  the  far
side  of  the  stove  in  the  lower  hall.  I at  once  got  uj)  to  see  who  it  was,  but
it  had  vanished.  I think  it  seemed  to  go  up  ( nie  step  of  the  .stairs,  but  am  not
sure,  as  this  was  the  only  time  I felt  rather  nervous  when  seeing  it,  and  that,
perhaps,  from  thinking  it  was  someone  who  had  no  business  in  the  house,  or
that  someone  was  jdaying  me  a trick.  Each  time  I have  seen  “the  black
lady  ” she  has  been  dressed  in  what  aj^jiearedto  be  black  serge  or  cashmere —
something  soft  and  in  heavy  fokks — with  the  same  large  white  collar  or
kerchief  on  her  neck.  Whatever  it  was,  I feel  as  certain  of  having  seen  it
as  that  I am  now  writing  this  account  of  it,  and  it  may  be  as  well  to  mention
that  I am  by  no  means  a nervous  person — cpiite  the  contrary.

In  answer  to  the  imiuiry  how  she  knows  the  dates  of  the  ajipearances.
Miss  C.  tells  us  that  she  “has  kejit  a diary  for  many  years,  putting  down
short  remarks  of  remarkable  and  interesting  events,  seeing  the  ‘ Black  Lady’
amongst  the  rest.”

She  adds  that  she  “ had  not  heard  anything  of  the  house  being  suj>2iosed
t(j  be  haunted  when  she  saw  the  ‘ Black  Lady  ’ in  the  S2)ring  of  1807.  It
was  not  till  some  months  afterwards  that  she  heard  the  story  of  Miss  M.,and
the  re])ort  that  she  was  seen  a at  times  walking  about  the  house  and  garden.”

As  regards  the  story  of  Miss  M.,  Mi.ss  C.  sa3's  : — “ Part  of  this  house,
nearly  all  of  it,  was  burnt  down  in  1752.  The  room  in  which  Miss  M.  slej^t,
and  in  which,  some  say,  the  lire  originated,  seems  to  have  been  near  what  is
now  the  drawing-room  and  front  hall.  Home  old  2)eo2)le  in  the  neighbourhood,
dead  now  for  some  years,  rejiorted  that  they  had  heard  long  ago  that  Miss
M.’s  door  was  locked  by  the  servants,  as  she  was  subject  either  to  fits  or  to
walking  in  her  sleei^  ; that  she  attenuated  to  escape  by  the  window,  which
was  not  a great  height  from  the  ground,  but  that  the  sash  fell  down  on  the
hand,  cutting  off  three  fingers  and  causing  her  to  fall  back  into  the  burning
room.  The  house  was  rebuilt  in  17G2.”


Miss  A.  M.’s  Account.  j o,-..,  iooo

June  2bth,  188.3.

I do  not  know  much  of  the  history  of  our  ghost ; all  I have  heard  is,  that  she
is  said  to  be  a lady  who  was  subject  to  fits  ; she  was  under  the  charge  of  servants
only,  and  one  night  she  was  locked  ujj  in  a room  by  herself,  the  house  was
burnt  down  at  that  side,  and  she  was  burnt  to  death.  In  trying  to  save  her-
self by  getting  out  of  the  window  she  smashed  tw(j  of  her  fingers.

1 do  not  remember  when  she  was  first  seen,  or  who  was  the  first  to  see
her,  but  two  of  my  sisters  saw  her,  when  they  were  cjuite  young,  at  different
times.  One  of  them  was  coming  out  of  the  nursery,  which  is  at  one  end  (jf
a passage,  and  she  saw  this  lady  standing  in  the  doorway  of  the  room  at  the


1885.]


rhantasms  of  the  Dead.


121


opposite  end.  iVIy  sister  -was  mucli  frightened,  and  called  out  that  there  was
a woman  with  a white  face  looking  at  her  ; when  some  one  came,  the  woman
had  disappeared.  I forget  how  she  appeared  to  the  other  child,  I think  she
saw  her  sitting  in  a chair  in  a room  she  had  just  come  into.  We  did  not  ask
the  child  much  about  it  for  fear  of  impressing  it  on  her  memoiy  and  frighten-
ing her.  ily  eldest  sister  was  one  evening  standing  in  her  room,  and  on  turn-
ing to  the  door,  there  was  the  ghost  standing  in  the  doorway.  She  disafi-
peared  almost  directly.

jNIy  mother  twice,  that  I know  of,  saw  her,  both  times  on  the  stairs.  The
first  time,  thinking  it  was  one  of  us,  she  called  but  got  no  answer  ; she  called
several  times  but  got  no  answer.  She  says  the  person  turned  round  and
looked  at  her,  but  my  mother,  who  does  not  see  very  well,  still  thought  it
was  one  of  us,  and  getting  angry  at  not  being  answered,  pursued  her  up  the
stah’s.  The  female  went  into  a very  small  room  at  the  top  and  shut  the
door.  INIy  mother  went  in  after  her  but  no  one  was  there.  The  other  time
the  lady  passed  my  mother  on  the  stau’s  ; she  thought  she  was  one  of  the  ser-
vants, which  it  was  afterwards  proved  she  was  not.  IMy  mother  is  not  at  all  of
an  imaginative  disposition.  One  of  my  sisters  and  myself  also  saw  her  at
the  same  time  one  evening.  We  were  sitting  in  the  school-room  rather  late  ;
there  is  a hall  outside  the  school-room  with  a large  stove  in  it.  We  had  no
light  but  the  firelight,  the  door  was  wide  open,  and  I was  standing  facing  the
hall,  and  I saw  standing  behind  the  stove  the  same  apparition.  She  apj^eared
so  tall  that  it  did  not  seem  as  if  she  could  be  standing  on  the  ground.  I
said  to  my  sister,  Look  round,”  which  she  did.  We  both  looked  at  her  for
a second  or  two,  and  then  the  fire  went  down  ; we  poked  it  up  but  saw  nothing
again.

Every  one  whc)  saw  her  gives  the  same  description  of  her,  that  she  is
a woman  about  middle  height,  dressed  in  black,  with  a shawl  over  her  head.
When  we  saw  her  in  the  hall  she  had  her  side  face  towards  us,  so  we  could
not  see  her  well.

I also  saw  a very  curious  reflection  once.  I was  sitting  in  my  sister’s
room,  and  was  leaning  back  looking  up,  when  I saw  on  the  ceiling  the
shadow  of  a head  and  a hand  that  appeared  as  if  it  had  only  three  fingers.
Thinking  it  was  my  sister’s  shadow  I thought  what  a curious  shadow  her
knitting  made,  and  looked  down  to  see  what  she  was  doiirg  with  it ; on  looking
up  the  reflection  was  gone.  We  then  found  that  both  our  shadows  were  on
the  floor.  I did  not  know  until  after  I had  seen  this  that  the  lady  had  lost
two  of  her  fingers  when  trying  to  get  out  of  the  window.

I omitted  to  say  that  there  w'as  no  egress  from  the  little  room  my  mother
followed  the  lady  into  excepting  the  one  by  which  my  mother  went  in.

In  answ'er  to  inquiries,  Miss  A.  M.  writes,  on  December  1st,  1882: —

We  none  of  us  except  IMiss  C.  put  dowm  the  dates  of  any  time  we  saw  the
ghost,  and  I hardly  remember  any  of  them.

I saw'  thereflection  in  MajplSTT.  I think  it  was  the  year  after  that  my  mother
saw  the  lady  go  up  the  stairs  in  front  of  her.  I think  it  must  been  in  January
■or  Februarj',  1880,  that  I and  MissG.  M.  saw  her  ; Miss  I.  INI.  in  May,  1880.
I am  afraid  I cannot  remember  any  of  the  other  dates.

The  ghost  was  seen  by  Mrs.  M.  twice  ; by  Mrs.  I.  [the  eldest  sister]  ; by
hliss  G.  M.  when  a child,  and  also  at  the  same  time  that  I saw  her  myself  ;


122


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


l)y  Miss  M.  M.  when  a child  ; by  Miss  I.  M.  Also  hy  Miss  C.,  our
governess,  whose  account  1 enclose.

I have  heard  stories  of  servants  seeing  her,  and  one  out-of-door  servant  says
he  saw  her  in  tlie  garden,  but  I can’t  rely  ui)on  these.

I have  put  all  names  with  every  confidence  that  they  will  be  kept
strictly  private.

Miss  1.  M.’s  Account.

I do  not  think  A.  knew  or  remembered  about  my  having  seen  her  when
she  wrote  her  account.  It  was  in  June,  1880  ; I had  been  out  fora  walk  [to
h.)ok  at  a dance  at  a ireiglibouring  liouse]  with  my  youngest  sister,  and  one  of
the  maids.  (Before  we  left  we  had  told  them  not  to  sit  ui^forus.)  When  we
got  back  it  was  about  12  o’clock,  but  it  was  a very  light  night.  I went  to  the
window  first  tliat  we  were  going  tcj  get  in  by,  and  looked  through  the  glass
and  saw  a lady  standing  atthebottom  of  the  stairs,!  thought  it  was  my  mother
at  first.  She  tlien  walked  slowly  across  the  hall,  and  I opened  the  window,
and  there  was  no  one  there.  1 could  not  see  her  face  ; she  was  all  in  black.
That  is  all^I  can  remember.

The  evidence  of  other  percipients  cannot  be  obtained  at  first-hand.
I do  not  wish  to  lay  much  stress  on  this  case  because  there  is  some
difierence  in  the  descriptions  given  of  the  figure.  All,  how-
ever, agree  that  they  saw  a lady  dressed  in  black.  The  curious
shadow  seen  on  the  ceiling  cannot,  I think,  as  described,  be  regarded  as
important,  as  it  is  not  shown  that  it  had  no  ordinary,  though
ileeting,  cause.  Of  the  accounts  at  first-hand  only  Miss  C.’s  and  Miss
I.  M.’s  describe  appearances  taken  at  first  for  a real  person.  Miss  A.M.
seems  to  have  surmised  at  once  that  she  saw  the  ghost.

The  next  narrative  (G.  110)  relates  to  an  old  house  in  Loudon,  but
the  names  are  here  also  to  be  kept  private.  Noises  again  take  a rather
prominent  place  in  this  account,  which  has  considerable  interest,  though
it  is  j^erhaps  a little  doubtful  whether  the  nurse  had  no  expectation  of
seeing  the  ghost ; she  was  certainly  in  a nervous  state.

The  first  part  of  the  account  was  written  down  by  Mr.  Podmore,
and  afterwards  corrected  by  IMrs.  II.  The  second  part  is  from  Mrs.
G.,  her  married  daughter.  The  third  part  is  from  the  nurse.  The
history  of  the  house  is  not  known.

The  scene  of  the  occurrences  mentioned  below  is  a lai’ge  house  in  London.
The  house,  which  is  an  old  one,  has  been  tenanted  by  its  iiresent  occupants
for  about  12  years.  Previously  to  this  it  had  the  rejmtation  of  being
haunted  ; Blrs.  H.  had  heard  rumours  to  that  effect  from  the  former
occui)ants.

Mrs.  H.,  the  lady  of  the  house,  has  herself  seen  nothing  abnormal  in
the  house,  but  she  has,  of  course,  heard  the  account  given  by  successive
servants,  and  the  facts  stated  below  may  be  taken  to  be  substantially
accurate.

Noises  as  of  footsteiis  were  heard  not  unfrequently  in  the  dusk  and  at
night  along  one  of  the  rooms  in  the  building  ; these  noises  would  appear  to


1885.]


Phantasma  of  the  Dead.


123


pass  quite  close  to  tlie  servant  who  heard  them,  but  nothing  would  ever  be
seen.  Other  strange  noises,  as  if  someone  were  digging,  would  be  constantly
heard  in  a jjarlour  on  the  ground  floor  of  the  liouse.  These  noises  w'ould  be
heard  by  two  or  three  persons  at  a time  ; and  either  at  niglit  or  in  the  day-
time. As  there  are  rooms  on  all  sides  of  tliis  parlour  belonging  to  the
house,  tliese  sounds  could  not  have  been  caused  by  anyone  outside  the
building  itself  ; and  no  natural  origin  could  be  assigned  for  tliem  within  the
ljuilding.

On  several  occasions,  perhaps  a dozen  in  all,  during  the  12  years  in  which
the  H.  family  had  lived  in  the  house,  the  servants  had  been  frightened  by
seeing  a woman’s  figure.  They  all  gave  the  same  description  of  the  figure :
a pale  woman  in  black,  with  an  evil  face.  The  figure  would  only  be  seen
momentarily  ; indeed  in  most  cases  the  witnesses  appear  to  have  been  too
much  frightened  to  wait  for  it  to  disappear.  As  ]\Irs.  H.  feared,  not
unreasonably,  tliat  some  injury  might  be  done  to  her  jjroperty  if  the  house
acquired  generally  the  reputation  of  being  haunted,  she  had  never  questioned
the  girls  closely  on  what  they  had  seen,  being  afraid  to  show  too  much
interest  in  the  matter.  She  had  always  laughed  olf  their  fears,  and
endeavoured  to  make  them  forget  all  about  it.  For  the  same  reason  she
could  not  allow  us  to  cross-question  the  witnesses  ourselves.  We  were  forced,
therefore,  to  be  content  wdth  the  following  details,  with  which  she  and  Mi.ss
H.  supi^lied  us.

The  figure  was  first  seen  about  11  years  ago,  by  Sarah  C.,  a young  servant-
girl  of  about  18.  She  was  coming  downstairs  in  tlie  daytime,  when  she  met
the  figure,  and  was  so  frightened  by  it  that  she  junqred  sideways  through
the  figure  and  over  the  stair-rail,  droiJping  a distance  of  from  four  to  six
feet  on  the  other  side.

On  another  occasion  it  was  seen  by  one  of  the  servants  going  downstairs
to  the  kitchen,  and  she,  thinking  it  to  be  a visitor,  wlio  had  missed  her  way,
followed  it,  and  found  no  one  there.

The  figure  was  also  seen  by  the  cook  on  one  of  the  upi:)er  landings,  in  full
gaslight,  and  disajjijearecl  before  the  cook  came  iqj  to  it.

Three  or  four  years  back,  two  servants  were  together  in  a lung  room  at
the  top  of  the  house,  in  the  daytime.  One  of  them  saw  a woman’s  figure
standing  by  a chest  of  drawers  at  the  far  end  of  the  room.  She  called  her
companion’s  attention  to  it,  saying,  “ Who  is  that  1”  but  when  they  looked
again  the  figure  had  gone.  There  was  no  possibility  of  retreat  for  a human
bemg  so  placed.

The  figure  was  last  seen  a few  weeks  ago,  by  a girl  now  in  the  house.
She  was  very  much  frightened,  and  could  give  no  particulars.

Mrs.  H.  and  her  daughter  fancy  they  have  detected  some  connection
Ijetween  the  apj^earance  of  this  figure,  and  the  subsequent  death  of  children,
who  have  been  lying  ill  at  the  time.

Miss  H.  took  us  all  over  the  house,  and  we  saw  each  spot  where  the
figure  had  been  seen.

From  Mrs.  G.  {Ntie  FT.)

The  incident  I have  been  asked  to  relate  happened  as  follows  : —

There  were  two  rooms  divided  by  a fireplace  ; on  the  left  liand  of  this
was  a doorway  connecting  the  rooms ; on  the  right,  a partition  of  glass  to  within


124


rhantasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


two  feet  or  so  of  the  ground,  and  wood  helow.  Tliis  i^artition  divided  the
room  1 was  in  from  a steep  staircase  into  the  kitchen  below,  which  staircase
opened  into  the  other  room  witli  a door  that  stood  open  against  the  wall.  In
tlie  further  room  opjiosite  the  staircase  was  a doorway  into  a garden,  on  the
right  side  of  this,  in  the  same  corner,  a door  leading  by  a passage  to  the  street.

Tlie  time  wuis  about  six  o’clock  on  a winter’s  evening,  Gas  was  burning
brightly  in  botli  rooms.  1 entered  the  room  liy  a door  on  your  right  hand  as
you  faced  the  fireplace,  and  at  the  opposite  end  to  it.  Thus,  as  1 turned  to
pass  into  the  second  room,  the  glass  partition  was  in  front  of  me.

Thrcnigh  tliis  glass  partition  I saw  a woman  advancing  towards  me  from
the  opposite  end  of  the  further  room.  She  was  tall,  dark,  and  pale,  dressed
in  black,  indoor  dress  ; her  liead  was  sideways,  resting  quite  upon  her  right
shoulder  as  if  her  neck  was  dislocated.  Her  hair  was  plainly  and  smoothly
dressed  across  the  sides  of  her  face.  She  came  swiftly  towards  me,  and  w'as
so  distinct  tliat  I did  not  supjiose  but  that  she  ivas  some  stranger  got  into  the
]daee.  When  she  came  to  the  stairs  she  suddenly  stood  still  an  instant,  and
then  disaiqieared  iierjiendicularly,  like  one  who  falls  through  a trap-door.  I
at  once  ran  to  the  partition,  and  looked  down  the  stairs,  but  nothing  could
be  seen,  nothing  had  been  heard.  I ran  down  to  the  kitchen,  but  the  people
there  had  not  seen  or  lieard  anything.  Botli  rooms  were  empty.  There  was
only  a cliild  with  me  about  six  yeai’s  old,  who  had  seen  nothing,

A montli  or  so  after,  I was  sitting  in  a room  in  the  same  house  one  after-
noon, when  a ciqiboard  standing  against  a w'ood  jiartition  between  the  room
and  a jiassage  was  rapped  as  if  someone  were  hammering  all  over  4t.  I
opened  the  door,  thinking  it  was  some  one  in  the  passage,  but  while  I stood
in  the  dciorway  commanding  both  the  room  and  jiassage,  the  knocks  were  as
loud  as  ever.  I felt  so  nervous  that  1 w'ent  to  the  nursery  and  fetched  a
child  about  five  or  sLx  years  old,  to  come  and  play  in  the  room  with  me.
She  was  amusing  herself  witli  some  toys,  and  I was  reading,  when  she
stopped,  and  htoked  intently  at  the  2)artition  just  above  the  cupboard.  It
was  2^ainted  a jdain  ccdour  ; there  was  no  2.)icture,  or  light  or  shadow  where
.she  W'as  looking.  I asked  the  child  w'hat  slie  was  looking  at.  ‘ ‘ At  the
face,”  she  rejdied.  “ Never  mind,”  I said,  go  <m  with  your  2)lay,”  ami  so
.slie  did,  but  very  soon  sto2>ped  again.  She  came  u^)  to  me,  and  looking  at
the  same  jdace,  she  said,  “()]i,  tlie  face.”  “Some  one  looking  out  of
window',”  I rejdied,  incoiiseijnently,  as  the  w'indow  w'as  behind  us.  “Oh,
no,”  she  said,  “ it  W'ants  you.  Miss  Alice,  it  w'ants  you.”  I saw'  nothing,  but
])icked  uj)  the  child,  and  took  refuge  in  the  nursery.

From  the  Nurse.

Fehruarii  13f//,  1883.

I never  feel  nervous  about  my  nursing  cai:>acity,  or  the  recovery  of  my
patients,  excejtt  I am  nursingin  the  place  where  I am  writing  this.

The  house  is  old,  and  like  most  old  houses  has  its  haunted  room,  in
addition  to  a subterranean  jtassage,  w'hich  w'as  blocked  ui”)  50  years  ago,  and
from  w'liich,  it  is  reported,  strange  sounds  have  come,  like  the  blow's  from  a
mallet,  and  the  sound  of  somebody  digging.  I have  never  heard  anything
of  the  sort,  but  this  much  I know  for  a fact,  that  often  when  taking  my  indes
or  watching  (juietlyby  my  j)atient,  with  a good  lire,  and  a light  burning,  I


1885.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


125


have  suddenly  felt  as  if  a cool  wind  was  blowing  about  me  so  tliat  I could  not
help  shivering,  and  as  if  fingers  were  lightly  touching  niy  shoulders,  and
more  than  once  feeling  positive  that  somebody  passed  (juickly  through  the
room.  Now  I have  never  e.xj)erienced  these  strange  sensations  when  nursing
in  any  other  house,  but  I ahvays  feel  when  called  here  to  nurse  that  1 am
about  to  do  battle  for  the  life  of  my  patient,  with  a foe  whose  exact  power  I
do  not  understand,  and  have  always  striven  to  defeat  an  influence  which  I felt
was  evil,  by  soliciting  the  protection  of  fine  Wh(j  is  Almighty.

Ab(mt  four  years  ago  I came  here  to  nurse  a little  girl,  five  years  of  age,
suffering  with  whoo2>ing  cough  and  inflammation  of  the  lungs.

My  i-iatient  was  isolated  as  much  as  jiossible,  as  there  were  other  children
in  the  house.  The  room  in  which  1 was  to  nurse  seemed  in  all  respects
suitable  for  nursing — large,  lofty,  projierly  heated  and  ventilated.  There
was  only  one  arrangement  I did  not  like,  and  that  I did  not  notice  until  I saw
my  little  patient  more  than  once  look  anxiously  towards  it,  being  a large
window  or  {partition,  jiartly  of  glass,  which  had  been  recently  added  t(.)  niake  the
room  lighter.  The  door,  also  2)artly  of  glass,  was  at  the  side  of  the  23artiti(jn
and  02)ened  directly  on  to  the  stairs.  One  day,  shortly  after  my  arrival,  I
was  informed  that  the  baby,  only  a few  months  old,  was  dangerously  ill.  The
d(.)ctor  did  not  think  it  would  recover.  Consec2uently  the  2>erson  who  had
charge  of  my  2)atient  while  I was  off  duty  could  not  be  s2Jared,  so  when  night
came  I was  rather  tired.  After  giving  my  2'atient  her  medicine,  making  her
comfortable  and  attending  to  the  hre,  I rested  for  a short  time  on  a S2jare  bed
which  was  in  the  room.  When  I arose  I looked  at  my  watch  ; it  was  just  10
minutes  to  1.  At  that  moment  the  child,  who  had  been  slee2ung  (2uietly,
sat  U23,  looked  wildly  at  the  2>artition,  gave  one  2»iercing  scream,  then  hid  her
face  in  the  bed  clothes.  I dared  not  look  at  the  2iartition,  but  turningmy  head
went  quickly  to  the  child  saying,  “ Did  anything  hurt  or  frighten  you  T She
would  neither  answer  nor  look  iq*.  I then  heard  a sound  on  the  stairs,  as  if
somebody  was  going  down  without  boots  on,  thud,  thud  ; sol  called  (.mt

“ Who’s  there  ? Do  S2ieak,  you  have  frightened  us.  Ts  it  you,  Mrs. ?”

meaning  the  2ierson  who  waited  on  us.  Not  receiving  an  answer  I waited
awhile,  then  softly  o2)ened  the  door  and  looked  out.  All  was  quiet  ; the  gas
was  burning  on  the  lower  landing.  By  its  light  I saw  a woman  standing  at
the  foot  of  the  stairs.  Her  face  was  turned  U2)  towards  me.  It  was  2»erfectly
colourless,  the  eyes  and  mouth  were  closed  ; her  hair  was  of  a dralibish  colour
and  her  neck  a2)2)eared  to  be  slightly  twisted.  I drew  back  instantly,  for  the
face  I had  seen  shocked  me  ; it  resembled  the  face  of  a coiqise.  For  a moment
I thought,  is  it  2)ossible  that  anybody  W(juld  attenqit  to  frighten  us  ? I
looked  again — the  woman  had  disa2)2'eared.

There  was  a bell  communicating  with  the  housekee2'ier’s  room.  I rang  it
violently,  waited  a few  minutes,  then  heard  the  well-known  footste2i  of  Mrs.

on  the  stairs.  As  she  came  into  the  room,  she  said,  “ Is  anything  the

matter,  nurse  Before  I could  answer,  she  said,  “ The  dear  baby's  gone.
She  died  just  10  minutes  to  1.”  “Well,”  I remarked,  “that  is  strange.”
Then  I told  her  what  had  occurred,  and  concluded  by  asking  her  if  she  had
heard  or  seen  either  of  the  servants  about  the  house.  “Oh,  it’s  not  the
girls,”  she  said.  “They  are  all  in  bed,exce2)t  the  nurse  that  has  been  with  the
baby.  It  is  not  the  first  time,  I can  tell  you,  that  strange  things  have  been


126


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


seen  and  heard  ; to  tell  you  the  truth,  nurse,  I wouldn’t  sit  in  this  room
alone,  no,  not  for  a pension.  <Jne  nurse  that  was  here  declared  that  her
patient’s  medicine  and  spoon  were  thrown  across  the  room,  and  I myself  once
went  through  the  nursery  and  saw  a woman  in  a dark  dress  looking  into  one
of  the  drawers.  I went  into  the  next  room  and  said  to  the  nurse,  ‘ Who’s
that  person  at  the  drawers  ? ’ She  answered,  ‘ You  must  be  mistaken,
there  isn’t  anybody  in  the  nursery.’  I went  back  to  see  and  the  woman  had
disappeared.  Yes,  it’s  strange,  but  it’s  true,  before  trouble,  sickness  or
death,  that  woman  is  always  seen,  but  there,”  she  said,  “it  does  not  do  to
talk  about  such  things.  You  know  what  i^eople  are,  and  there  wouldn’t  be  a
servant  got  that  would  stay  in  the  house  if  they  knew  all.”  Then  looking  at
my  patient  she  said,  “ I think  she  seems  worse  than  when  I last  saw  her.”
“Well,”  I said,  “she  has  been  dreadfully  frightened,”  and  I thought,  but  did
not  say,  if  she  dies,  it  will  bo  as  much  from  fright  as  any  other  cause.  A few
days  after,  I was  called  away  to  a very  imioortant  case.  My  little  patient
lived  only  two  or  three  days  after  my  departure.  More  than  once  since  then
1 have  asked  myself  this  question,  “ Was  she  frightened  to  death  f’

Tlie  following  (Cf.  46S)  is  again  an  account  of  apparent  liaunting  in
an  old  liouse  in  London — lb,  St.  Swithin’s  Lane.  The  events  took  place
in  1854  and  onwards.  Mr.  Gurney  has  seen  Mrs.  and  Miss  Vatas-
tSimpson  and  discussed  their  experiences  witli  them  personally.  I
begin  with  the  recollections  of  Yliss  Vatas-Simpson  (written  in  October,
1884),  whom  Mr.  Gurney  descril)es  as  a sensible  and  clear-headed
person,  and  who  has  never  had  any  other  hallucination,  veridical  or
otlierwise.


From  Miss  Mary  E.  Vatas-Simpson.

I remember  well  (when  a little  girl,  with  a sister  and  brothers  younger
than  myself)  an  old  lady  who  proved  the  greatest  trouble  we  children  had,
first  because  she  was  a mystery,  and  secondly  because  she  got  us  into  trouble
with  (jur  father.  It  happened  in  this  way.  t)urs  was  an  old  house,  the  dining-
room at  the  top,  three  windows  front,  a fireplace  each  end,  tw'o  doors
opposite  the  windows — one  leading  into  my  eldest  sister’s  bedroom  and  the
<jther  on  to  the  landing  at  the  toj)  of  the  stairs,  which  stairs  were  narrow,
with  enormous  bannisters  turning  at  eveiy  few  stairs  into  a great  scpiare
post,  on  which  we  used  to  delight  to  perch  ourselves  to  see  what  was  going
«jn  behjw,  particularly  if  the  servants  let  anyone  into  the  drawing-room,  which
was  under  the  dining-room.

One  day  1 was  sitting  thus  on  a post,  when  I saw  a tiny  old  lady  walk
slowly  into  the  room,  all  alone.  This  is  what  suiqu’ised  me,  for  this  reason.
Tlxere  was  across  the  staix-s  an  ornamental  iron  gate,  which  shut  off  my  father’s
offices  from  the  offices  of  tlie  lower  ixart  of  the  house.  Persons  ctilling  had
to  riixg  to  gain  admission,  as  they  would  tlo  at  a front  door.  This  old  lady
I saw  come  froixi  the  stairs  above  the  gate,  but  on  leaning  over  I saw  the  gate
v.'as  shut  and  no  one  there.  After  a little  whispered  convei’sation  with  my
br(xther  Walter,  who  was  sitting  astride  on  the  post  above  me,  we  thought
we  would  see  who  she  was.  So  we  went  gently  into  the  room,  x|uite
expecting  to  see  her  ; but  we  were  disappointed,  she  was  not  there.  I came


Plicmfasms  of  the  Dead.


127


1885.]


skipping  lightly  out  of  tli@  drawing-room,  knowing  we  had  no  business  there,
when  I screamed  with  astonishment,  for  out  of  a door  alwaj'S  kept  locked,  at
the  foot  of  tlie  very  stairs  on  which  we  had  been  sitting,  came  our  old  lady.
I ran  hito  the  drawing-room  to  tell  alter,  and  when  I reached  the  top  of  the
stairs  again,  T saw  her  below'  the  gate,  going  slowly  downstau’s.  She
was  just  out  of  our  sight  when  my  father  rushed  uj^stairs,  and  was  very  angry
indeed  with  us  for  the  noise  w'e  made.

A few'  days  after  this  we  w'ere  all  playing  at  a very  favourite  game— chairs
put  into  form  to  represent  a carriage,  in  w'hich  we  sat  and  covered  our  lieads
with  a blue  and  white  cotton  table-cover  for  a roof.  My  brother  Garry  hurt
me.  I threw  off  our  cover,  and  just  inside  the  half-opened  door  stood  the
old  lady,  dressed  like  she  w'as  before — black  shabby  dress,  rather  large  bonnet,
and  a good  deal  of  velvet  on  her  kind  of  hanging  mantle.  1 thought  she
must  have  nmde  a mistake  and  come  up  too  far  for  father’s  office.  Seeing  a
half-smile  on  lier  face  I walked  tow'ards  lier,  when  she  went  out  of  the
door  quite  slowly  and  turned  towards  my  sister's  bedroom.  1 quickly  ran
into  the  dining-room,  intending  to  catch  lier  to-day  by  the  door  between  the
two  rooms  ; but  I did  not  see  her.  Hushed  through  my  sister's  room,  on  to
the  landing,  dowm  the  stairs — w'hen  I saw',  two  or  three  turns  of  the  stairs
low'er  down,  Walter  was  running  after  the  old  lady,  who  went  very  quickly,
keeping  close  to  the  wall  all  down  the  staircase.  Once  again  my  father  came
out  of  his  office  and  told  Walter  he  w'ould  whip  him  if  he  heard  another
sound.  We  asked  the  servants  who  this  old  lady  was.  They  looked  at  each
other  and  said  “ only  an  old  lady  who  came  to  see  mamma.”  Though  we
often  saw  her  and  were  not  a bit  afraid  of  her,  yet  no  one  seemed  to  believe
us  ; so  though  w'e  children  often  talked  about  her  to  each  othei’,  we  did  not
mention  her  in  public.  This  we  did  do  : ( )ne  of  us  took  to  riding  outside  our
carriage  on  purpose  to  w'atch  our  strange  old  lady.  For  she  always  looked
a great  deal — or  seemed  to  our  youthful  eyes  to  do  so — and  we  all  thought
she  w'ould  do  something  horrid  to  us  the  first  time  she  caught  us  under  the
table-cloth.  We  even  kept  a large  ruler  close  to  us  on  purpose  to  throw'  at
her  if  she  touched  us.  She  was  very  real  indeed  to  us,  and  I seem  to  see  her
quite  vividly  now'  when  I recall  it  all  to  my  mind.

(Signed)  Mary  E.  Vatas-Simpsox.

What  follows  is  from  Mrs.  Yatas-Simpson’s  Diary.

This  is  veiy  strange.  What  can  it  mean  ? The  servants  say  that  they
see  queer  things  moving  about,  and  that  they  hear  peculiar  noises.  One
servant  has  left  us  in  consequence.  To-day  I was  told  by  a neighbour  that
the  people  who  lived  here  before  w'e  came  could  not  remain,  because  there
W'ere  always  noises  and  sounds  about  the  house  at  night,  and  that  even  his
little  cMldren  were  disturbed  by  them.  At  last  they  became  so  very  unbear-
able he  was  obliged  to  go  elsewliere.  One  hardly  knows  wdiether  to  believe
such  reports  or  to  laugh  at  them.  At  present  w'e  have  had  m.)  nocturnal
visitors,  and  I shall  not  tell  my  dear  ones,  to  cause  apprehension  of  ghosts
and  hobgoblins.

******

There  must  be  some  foundation  for  the  rumours  regarding  the  sounds,
noises,  and  appearances  in  this  old  house.  It  has  stood  here  since  the  Fire
of  London.  The  lower  part  of  the  house  is  very  extensive  ; and  then,  under-


128


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


ground,  dark,  big,  cavernous  cellarage  (which,  it  is  said,  has  not  been
thoroughly  explored  or  examined  for  years)  where  secret  passages  are  believed
to  exist,  and  from  whence  issue  sounds  of  moaning  and  sighing,  clearly  and
quite  unmistakably,  after  dark,  when  the  hum  of  the  busy  world  is  hushed.
Any  one  then,  by  placing  themselves  over  the  window  grating  may  hear
distinctly  the  peculiar  noises  within.  I try  to  tui’n  a deaf  ear  to  all  this,  and
to  combat  the  fears  such  revelations  inspire  in  the  household,  but  am
unsuccessful  with  the  servants,  as  they  leave  me  in  consequence.  My  husband
says  the  sounds  are  produced  by  the  contrary  winds  careering  through  th®
gratings,  and  perhaps  they  are.

A severe  illness  has  kept  my  j^en  idle  for  several  weeks.  Not  so,  however,
events.  To-day,  L.  told  me  that  when  the  children  are  playing  upstairs  an  old
woman  will  j^ersist  in  standing  in  the  doorway,  looking  in  very  disconsolately.
She  believes  in  the  reality  of  the  occurrence  ; says  that  it  is  an  annoyance  ;
would  I give  orders  to  the  servants  to  keep  our  gate  on  the  staircase  locked  ? —
the  iron  gate  that  shuts  in  the  private  portion  of  the  house  from  that  which
is  below,  making  it  thus  quite  impossible  to  ])ass  up  the  stairs  from  the  offices
below.

* * * * ^ *

So  late,  so  tired  and  weary.  Every  night  now  L.  and  I have  to  sit  up
long,  dreary  hours  to  wait  my  husband  coming  home,  for  we  are  afraid  to  go
to  bed  till  he  returns.  There  is  no  feeling  of  security  with  only  women  in
this  big,  grim,  and  hollow-sounding  house,  and  though  we  are  both  free
from  all  superstitious  fears,  and  far  from  timid,  we  cannot  but  be  sensible
of  our  unprotected  helplessness,  left  alone,  as  we  are,  till  the  night  wanes
into  morning.

To-night,  and  for  several  nights  now,  we  have  had  our  courage  put  to  the
test,  and  most  decidedly  it  has  not  been  found  wanting.  . . . The  first

evening,  about  11  o’clock,  sitting  with  the  drawing-room  door  open,  a man’s
face  was  clearly  seen  above  the  balustrade,  while  the  old-fashioned  size  and
the  carvings  of  the  supports  hid  his  form  from  our  view.  Instantly  we  both
jumped  up,  and  as  instantly  started  forward.  Both  thought  that  he  had  come
up  by  mistake,  or  purposely,  perhaps,  to  see  someone  in  the  house.  Ere  we
could  speak  he  was  g(me.

The  servants,  not  having  gone  to  bed,  were  summoned,  told  to  go  and
fasten  the  iron  gate,  and  reprimanded  for  their  negligence  in  forgetting  to  do
so.  The  gas  was  alight,  illuminating  the  house  from  the  ground-floor  to  the
very  roof  of  the  house.  We  stood  iqion  the  landing.  The  servants  went  down,
2)rotesting  that  they  had  locked  and  fastened  securely  the  gate  ; and  so  they
had — it  was  securely  fast.

Then  I went  for  the  key,  and  downstairs,  and  satisfied  myself  of  the  fact,
and  also  went  below  t(j  satisfy  myself  that  all  doors  and  every  jjlace  below
were  firmly  secured  for  the  night.

Now,  then,  how  did  that  man  get  in  ? — or  rather,  how  did  he  get  out  ?
It  is  j)o.ssible  he  might  have  been  concealed  during  the  evening,  and  so
have  been  on  the  stairs — but  where  could  he  go,  instantaneously  as  he  had
been  followed,  and  l.)y  both  of  us,  neither  of  us  suspecting  anything  more
than  that  he  had  olttaiued  entrance  through  the  forgetfulness  of  the  servants,
and  nothing  doubting  but  that  he  would  wait  to  be  sjjoken  to  ? Where  could


129


1885.]  Phantasms  of  the  Dead.

he  go  ? — for  in  an  instant,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  the  spot  where  he  had
a2)i)eared  was  vacant.

Well,  when  my  husband  came  home  1 told  him.  He  treated  it  as  a good
joke,  laughed  at  our  bewilderment,  and  said  we  must  all  have  been  asleep
and  dreaming.  He  has  such  a supreme  contemjh  for  any  supposition  of
the  supernatural.  Has  no  belief  in  spiritual  visions,  in  “■  ghosts,”  or  visions,
of  the  night.  He  is  far  too  practical,  and  only  derides  my  credulity.  At
present  I have  been  able  to  keep  all  suspicion  of  these  things  from  the
household.

*****■*■

Twice  lately,  sitting  up  during  the  night  hours,  my  L.  and  I have  been
disturbed  by  that  same  ajipearance  on  the  stau’s,  and  each  time  have  done
our  best  to  discover  the  mystery.  The  face  is  pale  to  sickliness,  and  the  eye
steady  and  mournful.  The  figure  is  shrouded  in  a sort  of  dark,  shadowy
indistinctness,  and  his  departure  is  sudden  and  noiseless.  The  first  time  he
came  W'e  slowly  advanced  to  him,  side  by  side,  quite  silently,  and  with  firm
decision  of  manner,  intending  to  show  him  our  determination  to  enforce  an
interview',  and  ask  explanation  for  his  intrusion.  Ah  ! he  is  gone.

The  second  time  I was  reading  an  interesting  bo(.)k.  L.  looked  up  from  her
employment  and,  seeing  him,  touched  me  gently  (we  w'ere  close  together),
when  both  of  us  made  a sudden  dart  forward,  only  to  find  the  spot  vacant
which  had,  one  instant  itreviously,  been  occupied  by  his  face  and  figure.  It
is  impossible  that  we  can  be  mistaken  or  deceived.  No,  no,  we  are  not.
There  is  no  misapprehension,  because  no  fear  quells  our  courage ; no
co'wardice  prevents  the  full  action  of  our  ijow'ers  of  perception  ; no  alarm
frustrates  our  intention  of  grapi:)ling  with  him  if  we  can,  or  of  pursuing  him,
or  of  holding  him  if  we  can  come  up  with  him.  We  are  on  our  guard  against,
surprise,  and  our  nerves  steady,  prepared  to  make  a decided  unequivocal
effort  to  find  out  wdio  and  what  this  nocturnal  intruder  may  be.

But  nothing  avails  ; he  is  not  here  ; he  is  not  anyw'here  near.  Looking
keenly  at  him  one  moment,  the  next  he  has  fled,  quick  as  a flash  of  lightning.
But  he  xvas  standing  there  ; we  both  saw  him,  positively  and  undoubtedly.

It  is  useless  to  contend  against  facts.  Nervous  terrors  and  timorous-
imaginations  have  nothing  wdiatever  to  do  in  suggesting  the  various
a2:)piearances  and  the  indescribable  sounds  wdiich  jiervade  the  rooms,  the
corners,  and  the  recesses  of  this  great  house.  Siqjerstition  might  indeed
supply  one  person  with  food  for  miracles  or  for  belief  in  deception  and
witchcraft  ; but  when  there  are  several  witnesses  of  all  ages  there  must  be  a
foundation  of  truth,  and,  at  all  events,  each  and  every  one  could  not  be
deceived.  If  all  that  is  going  on  here  is  a strange  delusion,  then  all  would
not  be  affected  at  the  same  moment.  If  it  is  but  a mere  sensation  or  impres-
sion, then  it  would  only  be  conceived  by  cme  mind,  not  by  all.  If  it  were
cajjable  of  detection,  then  so  many  jiersons  gathered  together  w'ould  surelj'-
find  out  that  it  W'as  imjjosture  and  decejjtion.

Besides,  there  is  nothing  done  to  annoy  any  one  of  us  ; no  attempt  is
made  to  frighten  or  even  to  surprise  us.  There  seems  no  system  or  organisa-
tion in  all  these  mysteries.  In  addition  to  the  little  old  woman  who  goes
about  the  upjjer  floor,  and  the  man  who  comes  occasionally  upon  the  stairs.


K


130


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


tliere  are  other  siglits  and  sounds,  and  other  nocturnal  disturbances.  Very
often  a babe  is  lieard  ■\vailing  and  crying  in  the  kitchen,  genei'ally  in  the
evening.  We  heard  these  piteous  wailings  when  we  first  came  here  to  live,
and  then  imagined  that  a babe  was  really  within  hearing  ; but  when,  after
the  lapse  of  many  months,  the  sounds  were  still  those  of  a new-born  babe,
no  stronger  in  tone  or  different  in  expression,  then  we  began  to  wonder,  and
to  strive  to  penetrate  the  mystery,  and  are  constrained  to  believe  that  no
living  infant  causes  those  sounds.

Then  again,  close  to  my  bedi’oom  door,  in  a recess,  there  are  notes  of  the
most  mournful  singing  the  ear  can  hear — real  notes — soft  and  sad,  but  clear
and  thrilling.  Then,  in  an  instant,  the  notes  are  prolonged,  and  change
into  short,  sharp  screams  of  ag(jny.  Then  total  silence.

All  this  takes  place  in  the  very  interior  of  the  house — in  jiarts  where
there  is  no  outside  wall,  but  where  the  wall,  thick  and  massive,  divides  one
room  from  another.

Incredulous  as  my  husband  has  always  been  when  I have  ctnnplained  of
our  incomprehensible  and  spectral  visitants,  yet  last  night  he  was  penetrated
with  the  belief  that  there  must  be  truth  in  our  representations,  at  all  events.
So  deeply  is  he  impressed  by  the  solemn  assurance  of  his  own  scrutiny  that
a vision  did  really  apiiuar  to  him,  that  doubting,  unbelieving,  and  sceptic  as
he  is,  he  confesses  himself  thrilled  and  pervaded  with  unwonted  sensations
of  awe  and  excitement.  I must  write  it  down.  It  all  happened  in  this  way  ; —

After  all  outer  doors  were  shut  and  business  hours  over,  my  husband  had
for  several  evenings  iiast  devoted  his  leisure  to  writing,  and  to  sorting  the
piles  of  letters  and  pajiers  which  had  accumulated  during  his  illness.  Corre-
spondence was  behindhand  ; so  shutting  himself  up  in  his  own  private  office,
he  directed  all  his  thoughts,  energy,  and  attention  to  reducing  the  number  of
letters  unanswered,  and  arranging  papers  and  documents  in  their  several
places.  His  orders  were  peremptory  to  the  servants  to  allow  no  one  to
disturb  him,  and  I took  my  part  in  securing  to  him  that  perfect  freedom
from  interruption,  so  absolutely  needed  in  such  an  occuijation.

This  evening  the  silence  in  the  house  was  almost  oppressive.  My  husband
had  not  once  come  up  to  the  drawing-room  since  he  left  it  after  dinner.  It
was  now  11  o’ch.)ck,  and  the  hour  f(jr  the  servants  to  retire  ft)r  the  night,
except  when  we  had  company.  I sat  with  the  door  (jpen  that  evening.  I have
a habit  of  doing  this  when  I am  alone.  Hie  large  landing  and  the  outlet  gives
more  freedom  and  air.  The  door  of  the  kitchen  is  in  close  proximity — an
outer  door — and  always  keiit  shut.  ( Ipposite  the  drawing-room  door,  across
the  landing,  is  the  staircase,  the  balustrade  of  the  stairs  forming  one  side  of
the  landing.  All  at  once  there  was  a great  tranpiing  uiion  the  olfice-floor
below  ; the  door  of  the  private  office  was  Hung  open  with  much  violence.  My
husband,  in  angry  tones,  called  to  the  servant,  and  demanded  “how  they
dare  permit  a stranger  to  come  to  him  at  that  time  of  night  ?”  "Which  servant
had  disobeyed  him  ?

No  one  had  done  so.

“ Don’t  deny  it.  Mdio  is  the  woman  ? "When  did  she  come,  and  what
does  she  want  ? I see  no  one  at  this  hour  of  the  night.  Let  her  be  here  to-
morrow if  she  wants  me  ; show  her  out  and  fasten  the  gate  again.”

All  this  was  spoken  as  if  the  person  who  had  disturbed  him  was  standing


1885.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


131


there  still  ; addressed  to  the  domestics  that  she  might  know  his  rules  had
been  transgressed,  and  that  she  might  hear  him  say  so.  It  was  in  vain  that
the  servants  protested  they  had  let  no  one  in  ; and  had  seen  no  one  pass  up
or  down  the  stairs,  that  every  door  and  window  was  fastened  and  secure.
Astonishment  kept  my  husband  mute  ; he  stood  still,  lost  to  all  outward
impressions  for  some  time,  like  one  in  a dream.  Then,  with  a sort  of
sliudder  he  moved  away  from  the  door  of  his  office,  from  whence  he  had  not
stirred,  and  told  the  servants  to  go  to  bed  ; he  would  hnd  out  on  the  morrow
who  liad  taken  tlie  liberty  of  intruding,  or  perhaps,  the  person  would  call
again  in  the  morning.

Tliis  was  to  them,  but  as  soon  as  we  were  alone  he  told  me  all  that  had

occurred Absorbed  in  deep  thought,  searching  amongst

his  papers  for  one  of  great  importance,  he  raised  his  head  from  them,  and
.saw,  just  within  his  office  doorway,  a little  old  lady  standing.  Even  though
an  unwelcome  intruder,  his  politeness  did  not  fail  ; so  rising  directly  he  ad-
dressed her.  Finding  thatslie  neither  spoke  nor  moved,  but  only  looked  at
him,  he  advanced  a little,  speaking  again.  Tliis  forward  movement  made  no
alteration  ; still  slie  was  mute,  still  not  a finger  stirred,  the  eyes  still  fixed
ujion  him  with  a soft,  sweet  exju’ession,  the  face  very  pallid.  After  allowing
sufficient  time  for  a reply  (even  if  the  old  lady  should  be  short  of  breath
from  coming  upstairs),  and  still  receiving  none,  he  approached  nearer,  when
she  moved  gradually  and  softly  a little  farther  into  the  room,  yet  scarcely
nearer  to  him,  for  the  room  is  very  spacious.  Again  he  altered  his  positifjn
while  she  remained  motionless,  thus  bringing  himself  into  closer  contact  with
her  ; still  she  was  motionless.

Making  now  a quick  stej)  towards  her,  determined  to  ascertain  tlie  cause
of  her  silence — lo  ! she  was  gone  ! To  liis  amazement  lie  lost  all  trace  of  her
in  one  moment.  It  was  then  we  must  have  heard  the  commotion  below.

After  telling  me  thus  far,  my  husband  paused  in  his  narrative.
Again  he  was  wrapt  in  deep  meditation.  His  face  was  agitated,  his  lips
quivered  ; evidently  he  was  mastering  strong  emotion.  Rousing  himself
from  the  reverie  which  I had  allowed  to  remain  unbroken,  he  continued  to
relate  the  incidents  of  the  visit,  and  his  own  conclusions  ujion  it.

Well,  he  said  he  didn’t  know  whether  his  office  door  was  ()i>en  while  she
was  there  ; he  knew  that  he  had  shut  it,  and  did  not  recollect  opening  it
when  he  missed  her  from  the  room.  The  gas  was  giving  a full  blaze  of  light,
and  no  shadow  of  darkness  rested  anywhere  to  deceive  him.  The  whole  place
was  illumined.

No  suspicion  entered  his  mind  of  anything  like  visionary  object  or
apparitions  ; his  whole  attention  was  rivetted  upon  his  letters  and  papers,
and  his  only  idea  was  that  this  old  lady  was  in  some  great  trouble,  had  come
to  him  for  advice,  and  that  her  age  and  probable  distress  might  l)e  the  excuse
for  her  untimely  visit.  It  was  with  such  considerations  that  he  first
addressed  her  as  he  would  any  lady  who  came  to  him  upon  office  business,
but  afterwards,  when  he  became  annoyed  by  her  silence,  he  permitted  his
irritation  to  be  visible  both  in  voice  and  manner.

His  description  of  her  appearance  is  this  : — “ A little  old  lady,  with  a very
l)ale  face,  and  her  hands  clasi)ed  before  her,  a cap  round  her  face,  and  a dark
bonnet,  with  strings  tied  under  her  chin.”  When  I asked  him  what  dress,

K 2


132


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


then  he  is  at  fault.  He  only  sawa  dark  form.  Well,  he  cannot  say,  he  was  only
lookingat  her  face.  It  must  have  been  a dark  dress,  he  believes — it  looked
dark.  She  moved  with  a gentle,  gliding  inotion  ; hooked  at  him  most  intently ;
did  not  move  her  hands.  His  face  is  quite  troubled,  and  he  is  much  excited.
Says  that  he  feels  bewildered  and  embarrassed,  and  is  most  unwilling  to
admit  the  reality  of  the  vision.

I believe  that  he  would  not  have  named  it  at  all  could  he  have  anticipated
the  termination  of  the  scene.  As  it  is,  no  explanation  can  do  away  with  the
fact,  and  it  is  useless  to  deny  what  he  has  once  admitted.  Either  way,  he  is
in  a dilemma,  from  which  he  cannot  escape.  He  sums  it  all  up  by  saying,
“ I have  told  y(ju  exactly  what  took  jdace.  I know  what  I saw,  and  am  (juite
aware  that  it  cannot  be  ex]dained.  As  it  is,  so  let  it  rest.”  He  will  never
again  laugh  at  us  for  our  absurd  notions  and  experiences  of  “ghosts,”  I am
quite  certain.  He  is  touched  in  a way  that  he  himself  cannot  com2)rehend.
He  does  not  like  it — his  own  feelings  ])uzzle  him.  It  will  be  a long  time
before  he  loses  the  novel  inq)ression  aroused  in  his  mind  by  that  visit  of  our
little  old  lady,  who  seems  to  wander  about  our  house  whenever  and  whereso-
ever she  jdeases.

In  the  above  narrative  I only  wish  to  lay  stress  on  the  ajipearance
of  the  little  old  lady.  The  man  on  the  stairs,  who  seems  to  have  ap-
peared always  in  the  same  place  and  to  have  been  seen  from  the  same
point  of  view,  may  2:)0ssibly  have  been  an  illusion;  and  the  sounds,  as
j\l  rs.  Simpson  suggests,  may  have  been  due  to  wind.

It  should  be  noted  that  though  Miss  Mary  A'atas-Simpson  has  not
at  a)iy  other  time  seen  ajiparitions,  the  family  seem  to  have  a speciiil
faculty  for  doing  so.  Mrs.  Yatas-Simpson  and  another  of  her  daughters
have  seen  them  in  two  or  three  houses  besides  this  one,  but  quite
different  in  each  house.  IMrs.  Vatas-Simpson  has  also,  it  would  seem,
some  jjower  of  receiving  telejiathic  communications  (as  one  would,
perhajjs,  expect  to  be  the  case  with  a person  who  sees  ghosts,  supposing
these  to  be  a form  of  communication  with  the  dead),  for  she  has  given
us  an  account  of  several  veridical  dreams  about  a son  absent  in
Australia,  between  whom  and  herself  there  was  a very  close  sym-
pathy.

In  the  narrative  1 wdll  next  quote  (11.  108),  it  will  be  seen  that  the
ghost,  which  has  a very  well  marked  character,  apparently  followed
the  princijial  percipient  from  one  house  to  another.

The  committee  are  not  allowed  to  give  names,  and  the  initials
used  are  not  the  right  ones.  hlr.  Podmore  says:  “ Miss  A.  T.,  a younger
sister  of  the  principal  percipient.  Miss  T.,  I'elated  to  me  the  incidents
described  below  in  great  detail,  and  after  questioning  her  at  some
length,  I drew  up  the  following  account  in  her  presence,  reading  over
to  her  each  paragraph  as  it  was  written.  Miss  A.  T.  has  not  actually
seen  the  figure  herself,  Imt  she  has  heard  the  particulars  of  each
aiq')earance  from  the  witnesses  of  it,  wdien  the  details  were  still  fresh


1885.]


Fhanfasms  of  the  Dead.


133


in  their  memory,  and  slie  has  rejieatedly  heard  tlie  whole  matter  dis
cussed  in  family  conclave,  when  tlie  di.sturbances  Avere  still  going  on.
Moreover,  slie  lias  lierself  heard  some  of  the  .strange  noises  described.
The  account  has  since  lieen  read  through  by  Miss  T.  herself,  and
tliougli  she  declines  to  give  us  any  further  particulars,  she  admits  that
this  account  is  ‘fairly  correct.’  Thougli  the  narratn’e,  tlierefore,  falLs  in
value  somewhat  beloAv  a first-hand  account  it  is  very  far  superior  to  an
ordinary  second-hand  ghost  story,  and  may,  I tliink,  be  taken  as  almost
entirely  correct.

i\lrs.  T.  and  tlie  unmarried  brother  mentioned  in  the  narrative
are  both  dead.  Tlie  family,  it  should  be  added,  have  again  removed,
but  the  ghost  has  not,  apparently,  folloAved  them.”

In  1870  the  T family  took  a house  in  West  Bronipton  on  lease  for

seven  years.  They  entered  the  house  in  the  spring  of  that  year.  This  house,
it  would  appear,  is  now,  and  has  been  since  1877,  in  the  occupancy  of  Captain

r •.  Captain  F has  been  asked  by  a friend  of  the  T family

whether  anything  unusual  has  occurred  in  the  house  during  his  tenancy,  and
he  has  replied  in  the  negative.  There  avouIcI  seem,  however,  to  be  some
reason  for  doubting  the  accuracy  of  this  statement.

Nothing  remarkable  occurred  during  the  tii'st  18  months  of  the  T

family  occupying  the  house.  In  the  autumn  of  1871,  Avhen  INIrs.  T and

Miss  T Acere  going  upstairs  to  bed,  leaving  the  hall  in  total  darkness,

hliss  T , Avho  Avas  then  on  one  of  the  upiier  landings,  thought  she  heard

her  brother  entering  the  house,  and  looked  over  the  bannisters.  She  saiv'  a
grey  figure  leave  the  dining-room,  cross  the  hall,  and  disappear  down  the

kitchen  stairs.  Miss  T told  nobody  of  Avliat  she  had  seen.  This  Avas  the

first  time  that  anything  abnormal  Awas  seen  in  the  house.

During  their  tenancy  of  the  house  this  same  figure  AA'as  seen  reiieatedly

by  at  least  five  indejjendent  AA’itnesses,*  IMiss  T being  the  one  AAdio  saAV  it

most  frequently.  The  figure  Avas  very  tall,  dressed  in  grey  drapery.  The
drapery  also  partially  eiiAmloped  the  head,  though  alloAA'ing  the  features  to  be
seen.  The  “ grey  ” AAvas  a light  grey — perhaps  such  a colour  as  a A\diite  object
Avould  assume  in  partial  darkness.  The  hands,  it  Avould  seem,  hung  doAA'n
and  Avere  clasped  in  front  of  the  figure.  The  expjression  of  the  face  AA-as  very
calm  and  peaceful — a good  face.  There  aauxs  no  hair  on  the  face,  and  it  aauis
only  from  the  unusual  height  of  the  figure  that  it  Avas  supqjosed  to  be  that  (jf
a man.

There  aaaas  nothing  indistinct  about  the  outline  of  the  figure.  The  dnqjery
Avas  shapeless — that  is,  it  had  no  definite  shape,  such  as  that  of  a dressing-
gOAAm,  or  a monk’s  goAAm,  — but  the  lines  of  it  Avere  firm  and  clear.  But  the
Avhole  figure  Avas  shadoAvy  and  unsubstantial-looking.  It  AA-as  never  seen  save
in  the  dark,  and  Av-ould  appear,  therefore,  to  liaA-e  been  faintly  luminous,  for
it  Avas  seen  in  all  jAarts  of  the  house,  and  sometimes  in  rooms  almost  entirely

dark.  The  figure  Avas  seen  chietly  in  Miss  T ’s  room,  or  on  the  landing

near  ; but  it  AA-as  also  seen  on  the  bath-room  stejAS,  on  the  stairs,  in  the

* It  does  not  seem  quite  clear  that  tlie  figure  AA-as  alAA-ays  identical.


134


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


dining-room,  and  in  other  bedrooms.  The  figure  never  moved  its  head  or
Ininds,  and  never  sj^oke  or  made,  apparentlj',  any  sound  (with  one  exception
to  be  noted  below).

Sometimes  Miss  T would  see  it  when  in  bed,  and  she  would  then

frequently  put  her  head  under  the  clothes  to  avoid  it.  But  if  she  saw  it
when  she  was  about  the  house  she  would  always  look  at  it  until  the  figure
vanished.  But  she  is  quite  unable  to  say  whether  she  looked  at  it  for
minutes  or  seconds.  It  would  finally  vanish  (quite  suddenly.  Occasionally,
however,  it  would  glide  away  into  another  room.  The  figure  never  walked  ;
it  glided.  There  was  never  any  sound  accompanying  its  movements.

The  figure  was  next  seen  by  an  old  nurse,  Mrs.  N , who  met  it  on

the  stairs  (?  in  the  autumn  of  the  same  year,  1871).  She  looked  at
the  figure  until  it  vani.shed.  She  also  told  nobody  at  the  time  of  what  she
had  seen.

Some  time  afterwards  a friend  of  the  family  was  staying  in  the  house.
She  complained,  on  the  morning  after  her  arrival,  that  she  had  been  keqjt
awake  by  the  noise  of  furniture,  &c.,  being  moved  about  in  the  rooms  above
her.  These  rooms  were  occupied,  and  no  one  else  had  heard  the  noises  com-
pjlained  of.  But  the  occurrence  led  to  a general  family  discussion.  Unac-
countable noises  had  been  often  heard  before  in  the  house,  and  Miss  T

and  Mrs.  N then  mentioned,  for  the  first  time,  the  figure  which  they

had  seen.

Mr.  T , the  brother,  also  saw  the  figure  frequently  ; on  one  occasion

it  was  in  the  hall,  when  he  ojiened  the  front  door.  On  another  when  re-
turning from  his  club  late  one  night,  he  saw  the  figure  from  the  street,  stand-
ing at  the  drawing-room  window.

Miss  T frequently  saw  the  figure  in  her  room  standing  at  her  bedside,

and  on  the  landing  near  her  room.  (Sometimes  she  woke  in  the  night,  and
found  it  at  her  bedside.

N , the  cook,  complained  angrily  to  his  wife  that  one  of  the  other

servants  would  sometimes  come  into  his  room  at  night.  He  had,  at  that
time,  not  heard  of  the  figure  being  seen,  but  he  subsequently  connected
these  aqqjearances  with  the  figure.

11 T , then  a little  boy  of  seven,  was  .sleeping  in  the  same  room

as  Miss  T . He  complained  (.me  morning  that  he  had  had  a “horrid

night” ! he  had  been  awake,  and  had  seen  L (Miss  T ) standing  at

his  bedside  in  her  night-dress,  “ only  it  wasn’t  L .”  Of  course,  nothing

had  ever  been  told  the  child  about  the  figure  which  had  been  seen.  It  is  not
clear  whether  any  q)eculiar  feelings  accompanied  the  appearance  of  the  figure;

but  Miss  T when  in  her  room,  frequently  exqiressed  a feeling  which  she

says  is  (quite  indescribable.  This  feeling  she  always  attributed  to  the  pre-
sence of  a figure  in  the  room,  though  she  was  unable  on  such  occasions  to
see  it.

Miss  T would  very  often  hear  footsteq)s  and  sighs  in  her  room,  as  if

someone  were  walking  about  and  sighing.  The  most  unaccountable  noises
were  heard  all  over  the  house  throughout  the  whole  of  these  seven  years —
most  fre(quently  in  the  autumn.  Footsteps,  knocks  at  the  door,  bells  rung
in  the  daytime,  etc.,  &c.  Tliere  W'ere  also  noises  as  if  a heavy  weight,  such
as  a bundle  of  clothes,  had  been  dropped  from  a great  height  on  to  one  of


1885.]


Phantasms  of  the  Bead.


135


the  landings — the  .sound  was  loud,  but  muffled.  These  noises,  except  the
bell-ringing,  were  heard  almost  invariably  at  night.

Sometimes  two  or  three  people  heard  the  noises,  or  were  woke  up  by  them.
At  other  times  only  one  person  would  hear  them.  On  one  New  Year’s  Eve,

when  Miss  T and  N were  alone  in  the  house,  N came  up  from

the  kitchen  to  the  dining-room  where  Miss  T was  sitting,  to  see  what

was  the  matter.  He  had  heard  loud  noises,  as  of  furniture  being  dragged

about  in  the  dining-room.  Miss  T had  heard  nothing,  and  the  liouse

seemed  perfectly  quiet.

On  another  occasion  Miss  T heard  the  same  noise,  as  of  furniture

being  mf)ved,  Ac.,  in  the  room  above  hers,  which  was  occu})ied  by  her

brother,  Mr.  T . She  went  up  to  see  what  was  the  matter,  and  knocked

at  his  door,  but  he  was  fast  asleep.  These  noises,  as  of  furniture  being  moved
about — always  in  the  room  above — were  of  fre(|uent  occurrence.

Tliis  house  formerly  belonged  to  a Mr.  G , an  artist,  who  has  now  sold

it.  He  was  very  anxious  for  Mrs.  T to  buy  it.  A few  months  after  the

T family  had  been  in  the  house,  and  before  they  had  experienced  any-
thing unusual,  Mr.  G came  to  see  Mrs.  T — — and  asked  her  if  she  was

(juite  comfortable  in  the  house.  As  she  rented  the  house  unfurnished,  the
question  struck  her  as  odd,  and  she  remarked  uimn  it  at  the  time.

In  the  autumn  of  1877  the  T family  removed  to  another  house  in  the

same  neighbourhood,  where  they  remained  until  April,  1880.  Miss  T

was  abroad  during  the  winters  of  1877  and  1878  ; but  was  in  the  house  during
the  summer  months  of  the  latter  year.  She  hnally  returned  in  the  spring  of

1870.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  T ’s  had  never  mentioned  the  subject

of  visions  and  disturbances  to  even  their  most  intimate  friends  whilst  they
were  still  in  the  first  house,  but  on  leaving  the  house,  believing  themselves
to  be  free  from  their  persecutors,  they  mentioned  the  subject  freely.  In  the

spring  of  1870  Miss  T heard  the  same  noise  as  before — footsteps  and

sighs — but  fainter.  They  gradually,  however,  increased  in  intensity  until
they  became  as  bad  as  over.  She  did  not  mention  the  subject.  The  noises,
however,  in  tlie  autumn  were  heard  by  all  the  household — including  Miss  A.

T , my  informant,  who  Ijeing  only  a child,  had  not  heard  them  in  the

other  house.  They  were  even  more  loud  and  fre([uent  than  hitherto,  and
their  character  had  somewhat  changed.  Footsteps  were  heard  as  before  ;
doors  were  banged,  where  no  doors  (jr  only  locked  doors  were  ; there  was  a
noise  as  of  a metal  tea  tray  being  rolled  downstairs.

There  was,  also,  frecpiently  a sound  of  a person  breathing  heavily,  and
walking  about,  heard  in  the  bedrooms.  Knocks  two  or  three  times  repeated
were  also  heard  at  the  doors.

A married  brother  was  staying  in  the  house  with  his  wife  and  little  girl  of
three  years.  One  night  they  all  three  heard  the  sound  as  of  a person  walking

up  and  down  the  room  and  breathing  loudly.  IMrs.  T struck  a light  and

lit  the  gas,  when  the  noises  ceased.  They  recommenced,  however,  when  the
gas  was  turned  out.

One  night  in  September,  1870,  when  H T , a boy  of  thirteen,  had

been  ill  for  many  months,  and  was  sleeping  in  the  back  dining-room,  with

Mrs.  T in  the  same  room  to  attend  upon  him,  they  both  heard  a noise

as  of  a door  opening  into  a third  room  on  the  dining-room  floor  being


136


riiantasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


opened,  and  the  window  of  that  room  being  thrown  open.  The  door  then
banged,  and  a match  was  heard  to  be  struck  outside.  All  the  household  were

upstairs  in  bed,  and  the  bo}'  became  ill  with  fright.  Mrs.  T had  to

attend  at  once  to  him  and  so  did  not  02ten  the  door.  In  the  morning  the
window  was  fouml  bolted,  and  the  door  of  the  back  room  hjcked.

This  noise,  as  t>f  a match  being  struck,  was  afterwards  heard  several
times,  both  in  the  middle  of  the  day  and  night,  and  by  several  itersons.  Also
in  different  jjarts  of  the  house  ; but  always  outside  a door.

From  this  time,  until  the  date  of  the  boy’s  death,  a fortnight  or  three
weeks  afterwards,  the  noises  were  louder  than  at  any  other  time,  and
disturbed  the  boy’s  rest  at  night.

(.)n  Christmas  Day,  1870,  Miss  T , going  to  early  service,  saw  the

figure  standing  just  below  her,  at  the  toj)  of  the  bath-room  stairs.  She  saw
the  figure  again  that  afternoon  at  the  foot  of  her  bed,  when  she  had  gone  uji
in  the  dusk  without  a light.  She  saw  the  figure  again,  more  than  once
before  she  left  the  house.  On  one  occasion,  wlien  slee])ing  in  the  same  room

with  Mrs.  T , Miss  T woke  and  saw  the  hgure  standing  between  the

beds,  near  the  foot.  There  was  a noise  as  of  a jtarcel  being  droi)i)ed  on  the

floor,  and  the  figure  vanished.  The  noise  woke  Mrs.  T , who  wanted  to

know  what  was  the  matter.

A child  of  three  years  (the  same  as  before  mentioned)  woke  u]>  one  night
with  a scream,  saying  that  something  had  come  to  take  her  away.  After  this
occasion  the  child  refused  to  be  left  alone,  as  long  as  she  stayed  in  the  house.

A housemaid  met  the  figure  standing  on  the  stairs  one  evening,  and  ran
down  in  great  fear  to  tell  the  other  servants.

A nurse,  on  another  occasion,  saw  a figure  which  she  sup2)osed  at  the  time
to  be  that  of  her  mistress,  leaving  the  bedroom  at  night.

It  is  t(j  be  noted  that  during  these  nine  years  Mrs.  T. and  Miss  A.

T , and  two  younger  children,  who  were  constantly  living  in  the  house,

never  saw  the  figure.  Nor  did  any  other  members  of  the  family,  except
those  mentioned,  though  an  elder  brother  stayed  until  1875  with  his  family
in  the  first  house,  and  a cousin  lived  with  them  for  18  months  in  the  second
house.

It  will  be  ob.served  that  in  the  cases  I have  quoted  or  mentioned  the
ghost  has  not  been  traced  beyond  a single  occupancy  of  the  house,  except
in  the  one  instance  where  its  chai’acter  seemed  to  change  with  the  tenants
to  whom  it  appeai’ed.  It  is  true  that  in  other  cases  there  are  vague
rejiorts  of  previous  haunting,  but  nothing  tliat  can  be  relied  on.  Nothing-
can  be  inferred  from  this,  however-,  as,  except  in  the  case  of  the  weeping-
ghost  in  -widow’s  garb,  where  w'e  seem  pretty  clearly  to  have  heard
about  the  beginning  of  the  haunting,  thei-e  is  no  more  evidence  of  tire
gliost’s  jn-evious  I'.on-appearance  than  there  is  of  its  appearairce.

There  is  in  certain  cases  evidence  of  the  aj-)parently  complete  cessa-
tion of  liaunting,  but  here  again  it  is  difficult  to  draw  any  cei-tain  in-
ference, because  the  analogy  of  experimental  tliought-ti-ansference  would
certainly  lead  us  to  expect  that  the  faculty  for  seeing  ghosts  should  vai-y  in
different  people  and  at  different  times,  so  that  the  apparent  absence  of


1885.]


Phantasma  of  the  Dead.


137


the  ghost  loiglit  arise  simply  from  the  absence  of  anyone  capalile  of
seeing  it,  and  because  the  long  and  irregular  intervals  that  are  liable  to
occur  between  manifestations  make  it  difficult  to  determine  what  length
of  interval  warrants  us  in  concluding  that  there  will  be  no  more.  It  is
worth  while,  however,  in  this  connection,  to  give  a narrative  (G.  317)  of
a ghost  traced  back  through  a considerably  longer  i:)eriod  than  any
other  yet,  I think,  in  the  collection.  I give  it  with  some  hesitation,  as  we
have  it  only  at  second-hand,  and  it,  and  in  a less  degree  the  narrative  last
quoted,  and  one  given  as  an  example  of  collective  hallucination,
are  the  oidy  ones  that  I shall  give  in  this  paper  where  none  of  the  most
important  evidence  is  at  first-hand,  but  it  seems  to  be  carefully
told,  and,  I should  think,  may  safely  be  trusted  for  its  main  statements.
It  is  much  to  be  reoretted  that  after  taking  the  trouble  to  make  the
investigation  Mr.  Hill  did  not  take  the  additional  trouble  to  record  the
results  in  wilting.  The  narrative  is  given  to  us  biy  the  Rev.  Chas.  C.
iStarbuck,  Andover,  Mass.,  U.S.A.,  a Congregational  minister,  and  de-
scribed by  Mr.  Alfred  E.  Aichols,  of  32,  Lawrence  Hall,  Cambridge,
Mass.,  as  “a  man  of  much  scholarship  and  absolute  trustworthiness.”

I wish  to  give  an  account  of  what  I call  “a  well  authenticated  apiiarition.”
I wish  to  give  it,  not  because  it  is  anj'  better  attested  than  a hundred  otliers,
nor  because  it  is  in  the  least  startling,  for  a quieter  ghost  never  was  ; but
because  there  is  so  little  in  it  that  is  unicjue,  and  it  is  therefore  an  excellent
type  of  the  better  sort  of  such  accounts,  and  because  the  facts  are  such  as
cannot  jiossibly  be  strained  into  an  exj)lanation  that  treats  them  as  the  effects
of  one  or  two  excited  imaginations,  and  also  because  their  entire  want  of
purpose  or  dramatic  effect  makes  them  more  credible,  and  lastly,  because  they
rest  on  so  eminent  and  unimpeachable  an  authoritju  They  were  communi-
cated to  me  in  all  their  details,  and  in  repeated  conversations,  by  the  late
Hon.  Richard  Hill,  of  the  Island  of  .Jamaica.  Mr.  Hill  [was  a gentleman
of  eminent  character  and  worth,  a jirivy  councillor  of  the  island,  but  much
more  distinguished  as  the  most  eminent  naturalist  of  the  West  Indies.
Charles  Kingsley,  in  his  charming  book  on  the  West  Indies,  speaks  of  Mr.
Hill  as  a man  whom  it  was  an  honour  to  know,  and  regrets  that  not  visiting
Jamaica  he  had  not  had  the  opportunity  to  enjoy  his  acquaintance.  He  died
about  six  years  ago  in  the  fulness  of  j-ears  and  honours,  and  in  the  fulness
of  a Christian  faith.

Mr.  Hill,  somewhere,  I believe,  about  1840,  took  a house  in  Spanishtown,
the  capital  of  .Jamaica.  The  liouse  was  of  brick,  and  was  thought  by  Mr.  Hill,
who  was  a great  antiquary,  to  have  been  built  before  1G55,  ata  time  when  St.
.Jago  de  la  Vega  was  still  a Spanish  city.  There  was  nothing  remarkable
about  the  dwelling  beyond  anj'  other  house  siuted  for  the  use  of  a family
in  good  circumstances.  Mr.  Hill,  it  appears,  moved  into  it  quite  unaware
that  there  was  anything  connected  with  it  above  the  common.  Nor,  in  the
series  of  facts  which  he  related  to  me,  are  there  more  than  one  or  two  which
of  themselves  amount  to  anything.  It  is  the  combination  alone  which  .gives
them  importance.

Mr.  Hill,  I may  remark,  was  a bachelor,  and  his  widowed  sister,  Mrs.


138


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


Hjirrisoii,  lived  witli  him  and  hejit  house  for  him.  The  shutters  of  his  bed-
room were  each  in  two  pieces.  One  nig'ht  it  clianced  that  the  upper  pieces
had  been  left  open,  and  the  rain  had  beaten  in.  In  the  morning  he  complained
to  his  sister,  who  i)romised  that  the  neglect  should  not  occur  again.  The
next  evening  he  was  lying  in  bed  awake,  while  a faint  light  came  into  the
I'oom  from  a hall  lamp  that  shone  through  the  transom.  While  lying  thus
he  saw  the  door  opened,  and  a woman  enter  the  room,  cross  the  floor  to  the
window,  and,  as  it  seemed  to  him,  look  up  at  it.  Her  face  was  muffled,  and
her  whole  garb  2)eculiar,  l)ut,  in  the  faint  light,  he  sujijiosed  her  to  bo  Ann,
his  sister’s  confidential  servant.  He  took  it  for  granted  that  having  just
bethought  herself  of  the  shutters,  she  had  come  in,  unaware  that  he  was  in
the  room,  to  make  sure  that  they  were  duly  fastened.  The  woman  then
turned  and  went  out,  but  as  she  was  leaving  the  room  Mr.  Hill  called
“Ann!”  She  gave  no  answer,  and  closed  the  door.  Su2)posing  that  she
was  startled  at  finding  that  he  was  in  bed,  he  thought  nothing  of  it.  In  the
morning  he  casually  remarked  to  his  sister  that  Ann  had  been  in  his  room
the  night  before,  and  had  been  thrown  (piite  out  of  countenance  by  discover-
ing that  he  was  in  bed  and  awake.  “ Oh  ! ” said  his  sister,  “ Ann  would
have  known  better  than  to  go  into  your  room  at  such  an  hour.”  She  then
summ()ned  Ann,  wlio  confirmed  her  mistress’s  statement,  but  intimated,
with  a mysterious  look,  that  she  could  give  an  o^'inion  as  to  who  the
intruder  was.  Mr.  Hill  then  learned  that  whisj^ers  were  current  in  the
household  to  the  effect  that  there  was  something  more  than  natural  in
the  new  house.  On  what  these  siu’inises  were  founded  will  2)resently
ai)i)ear.

Mrs.  Harrison  herself  had  thus  far  not  seen  the  strange  visitor,  and  her
little  experience  with  her  would  not  have  amounted  to  much  taken  by  itself.
Her  bedroom  ojiened  into  tlie  dining-room,  into  which  a door  also  oj^ened
from  the  hall,  or  from  some  other  room,  upon  two  or  three  stej^s.  This  door
was  at  the  head  of  Mrs.  Hanison’s  bed,  divided  from  it  by  the  jiartition.  One
niglit  Mrs.  Harrison  heard  it  02)en,  and  someone  come  down  into  the  dining-
room. She  was  startled,  Imt  jjresently  concluded  that  a chance  breeze  had
blown  the  door  oi)en  and  deceived  her  ear  by  counterfeiting  the  sound  of
footsteiis.  The  next  night,  however,  the  door  was  unmistakably  oldened  by
scmieone  who  came  down  the  stei)s  and  began  i)acing  round  and  round  the
dining-table.  Mrs.  Harrison  was  now  thoroughly  frightened,  although  what
had  hai)i)ened  ac(]uired  significance  only  from  its  fitting  in  so  xierfectly  with
what  took  })lace  at  other  times.

The  second  time  Mr.  Hill  saw  his  former  visitor  he  had  been  asleep,
and  awakened  with  a start,  such  as  we  sometimes  give  when  another  is
gazing  at  us.  He  found  her  standing  at  the  foot  of  the  bed,  and  aiiparently
looking  fixedly  down  at  him,  althougli  the  muffler  which  she  appeared  to  wear
concealed  her  face.  He  asked  her  who  she  was,  and  what  she  wanted.  She
made  no  answer,  but  turned  and  went  out.

Putting  together  his  own  remembrances  and  tlie  descrii>tion  of  others
who  had  seen  her,  he  came  to  the  conclu.sion  that  she  wore  the  garb  which
was  in  use  in  the  colony  in  the  reign  of  George  the  First,  that  is  about  115
years  earlier.

He  only  knew  of  her  coining  once  again  into  his  bedroom.  There  was


1885.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


139


an  old  negro  woman,  to  whom,  in  the  intermediate  period  of  apprenticeship
between  slavery  and  full  freedom,  which  jjrevailed  in  the  island  between  1834
and  1838,  he  had,  as  stipendiary  magistrate,  placed  in  charge  of  the  interests
of  the  half-emancipated  negroes,  had  opportunity  to  show  peculiar  kindness.
The  old  woman’s  gratitude,  like  a true  negro’s,  knew  no  bounds.  'When-
ever she  came  into  Spanishtown  from  her  little  place  a few  miles  out,  she
would  be  sure  to  visit  her  benefactor,  bilnging  some  little  present — a few
cocoanuts,  a few  yams,  or  a bunch  of  bananas.  And  once,  when  he  was
absent  from  town,  her  gratitude  took  the  grotesque  fcji'in  of  insisting  on
being  allowed  to  spread  her  mat  at  night  in  his  bedroom  and  sleep  there.
Mrs.  Harrison  humoured  her ; but  in  the  night  the  door  opened,  and  this
mysterious  lady  came  in.  It  must  be  that  the  old  woman  had  never  been
told  of  her,  or  else  even  her  gratitude  would  never  have  given  her  the
courage  to  sleej)  in  a haunted  spot.  However  this  may  be,  .she  at  once
surmised  a ghost,  and  rushing  out  in  great  aliright,  dragged  her  mat  to  the
stable,  and  spent  the  rest  of  the  night  there.

At  another  time  a new  servant-girl  had  just  come.  When  night  fell,  she
was  told  to  si)read  her  mat  in  the  veranda.  Chairs  were  standing  ab(.iut  hei’e
and  there  in  it,  as  they  had  been  used  through  the  day.  But  in  the  dead  of
the  night  the  servant-maid  heard  them  swung  back,  one  by  one,  against  the
wall,  and  some  one  begin  to  pace  back  and  forth  along  the  porch.  Like  a
true  negro,  she  too,  surmised  a ghost,  and  rushing  into  the  bedroom  t)f
another  maidservant,  squeezed  herself  into  bed  with  her  as  well  as  she  could.
In  the  morning  she  tremulously  asked  Mrs.  Hai’rison  ; “ Missis,  do  ’perrits
walk  this  house  ? ” Whether  she  soon  left,  I cannot  say,  but  my  impression
is  that  my  friend  was  obliged  to  submit  to  jn’etty  frequent  changes  of  servants
about  this  time,  though  I cannot  be  sure  that  I was  so  informed.

Another  person,  a former  servant,  had  more  nerve.  This  was  a respect-
able and  estimable  mulatto  woman  who  had  had  the  charge  of  Mrs.  Harrismi’s
little  girl  in  her  infancy.  She  came  once  to  pay  a visit  to  her  former  mistress
and  her  little  foster  child,  and  at  night  she  spread  her  mat  for  rest  in  an
unfurnished  chamber,  through  the  windows  of  which  the  full  tropical  moon-
light poured  in.  The  next  morning  she  said  to  Mrs.  Harrison  : “ Missis,  did
you  come  into  my  room  last  night  ? ” Mrs.  Harrison,  at  once  imagining
what  had  hajjpened,  replied  evasively,  wishing  to  lead  the  nurse  to  believe
that  she  had.  But  she  was  not  to  be  deceived.  “Oh,  no,”  she  said,  “it

was  not  you.  You  do  not  wear  ,”  mentioning  a kind  of  sli})i)er,

dragging  at  the  heel,  the  name  of  which  I cannot  recall,  but  which  is  mjw
worn  only  by  the  women  of  the  common  peoi)le,  and  which,  I fancy,  is  going
out  of  use  even  among  them,  having  probably,  like  so  many  styles,
descended  to  them  from  a higher  rank.  The  nurse  then  went  on  to  say  that
in  the  night  the  door  of  her  sleeping-room  opened,  and  this  same  lady
(whom,  having  seen  in  the  full  moonlight,  she  was  able  to  describe),  came
in,  and  began  to  march  round  and  round  her  mat,  apparently  locjking  down
fixedly  at  her,  although  I do  not  think  that  at  this  time,  or  any  other  time,
her  muffler  even  iiermitted  her  face  to  be  seen.  The  worthy  nurse  was
terribly  frightened,  but  being  a woman  of  great  nerve  she  held  her  ground,
and  after  a while  her  unwelcome  visitant  went  out.

One  day,  before  or  after  this  (for  I am  unable  to  give  the  sequence  of


140


FItantasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


these  incidents),  Mrs.  Harrison,  being  indisposed,  sent  out  a female  servant
to  bring  her  a cui)  of  tea  or  something  of  the  soit  from  the  kitchen,  which,
as  usual  there,  was  a little  distance  away — across  a paved  yard.  The  servant
met  this  lady  }nidway,  and  sujjposing  her  to  be  some  stranger,  and  j^robably
sinpi'ised  to  find  one  dressed  so  strangely  wandering  about  the  servants,
quarters,  asked  her  what  she  wanted.  She  turned,  and  with  some  sharp-
ness retorted  ; “ What  is  that  to  you  ?”  This  was  the  only  time  she  is  ever
known  to  have  spoken.  Assuming  her  to  have  been  from  the  other  side,  it
would  seem  as  if  not  even  death  could  extinguish  the  slave-holding  pride  of
an  old  colonist.  Search  was  made  for  her,  after  the  servant  had  returned  to
make  rejiort  to  her  mistress,  but  she  was  not  to  be  found.

One  day  Mrs.  Harrison  was  receiving  a call  from  another  lady  in  the
drawing-room,  wdiich  on  one  side  02iened  on  the  veranda.  Mrs.  Harrison’s
little  daughter  and  the  little  daughter  of  her  visitor  w^ere  in  one  of  the
windows  looking  <nit  iqxm  the  veranda  while  their  mothers  W'ere  talking.
Suddenly  the  children  uttered  an  exclamation,  and  the  ladies,  looking  iqq
saw  this  same  strange  visitor  jjassing  the  windo  w at  which  their  daughters
were  sitting.  She  appeared  to  be  coming  from  the  street,  and  to  be  going
towards  the  other  end  of  the  veranda,  at  which  there  was  only  a wdndown
All  four  looked  into  the  gallery  after  her,  but  slie  was  gone.

By  this  time  Mr.  Hill  began  to  be  greatly  interested  in  his  mysterious
guest,  or  hostess,  as  w'e  may  choose  to  take  it.  He  therefore  determined  to
sound  his  landlord,  a young  gentleman  to  whom  the  house  had  jiassed  from
an  uncle.  As  1 believe  his  name  to  have  been  Osborne,  I shall  call  him  so.
“Mr.  Osborne,”  said  his  tenant  one  day,  “there  is  an  interesting
peculiarity  about  your  house,  as  to  wdiich  I wish  to  rpiestion  you.  I hojie
you  will  answer  me  frankly,  for,  in  my  mind,  it  adds  ten  j^nnids  a year  to
the  value  of  the  house,  so  you  need  not  be  afraid  I am  going  to  lieat  you
down  in  tlie  rent.”  He  then  described  these  various  ajiiiearances,  and
added:  “ Now' wdiat  I want  to  ask  you  is,  was  this  visitor  know'ii  here  in
your  uncle’s  time  ? ” “ Since  you  think  so  w'ell  of  her,  Mr.  Hill,”  answered
his  landlord,  “ I w'ill  be  frank  ’ w'ith  you.  She  w'as  well  known  here  in  my
uncle’s  time.”  Mr.  Hill  next,  being  or  becoming  acquainted  w'ith  a lady  wdio
had  been  in  her  youth  a freipient  visitor  at  the  house,  asked  her  wdiat  she
knew'  of  this  mysterious  stranger.  This  friend  informed  liini  that  tlie
unbidden  guest  w'as  as  familiar  then  as  she  had  been  since  he  had  become  a
tenant.  He  then  i)rosecuted  his  inquiries  through  the  little  city  of  7,000
jieople,  and  W'as  able  to  trace  her  back  to  about  1800,  at  wdiich  time,  he  w'as
assured  by  his  informants,  no  one  knew  how'  much  longer  she  had  been
accustomed  to  frequent  the  house.  At  that  time,  he  w'as  told,  the  house
was  conveyed  by  its  owner,  a Mrs.  Deane,  or  some  such  name,  to  a jiur-
tdiaser.  As  the  i)arties  to  the  sale  w'ere  sitting  in  the  drawing-room,  about
to  sign  the  necessary  documents,  this  same  lady  was  seen,  as  once  after-
wards, to  jiass  along  the  veranda  in  front  of  the  draw'ing-room  wiiuhiw's.
<)neof  the  conqiany,  noticing  her  quaint,  unaccustomed  attire,  asked  Mrs.
Deane  who  that  old-fashioned  visitor  of  hers  w'as.  “Dh,”  said  she  care-
lessly, “it  is  a neighbour  of  ours  w'ho  comes  in  occasionally,”  and  the
matter  passed.

I may  remark  that,  although  this  iiersonage  sometimes  ai)2)oared  to  come


1885.]


Fhantasms  of  the  Bead.


141


from  the  street,  or  to  go  towards  it,  IVIr.  Hill’s  inquiries  brought  no  informa-
tion that  she  had  ever  been  seen  outside  of  his  house  and  court-j'ard.  This,
in  a small  city  of  7,000  inhabitants,  tlie  great  bulk  of  whom  were  negroes,
cuts  off  the  supposition  that  she  could  have  harboured  elsewhere,  and  re-
sorted at  all  times  of  day  and  night  to  a neighbouring  house.  This  would
be  an  incredible  explanation  even  if  it  only  applied  to  a year  or  two.  Applied
to  a space  of  time  outnumbering  a generation,  and  extending  back  beyond  a
time  within  the  memory  of  anyone  known  to  Mr.  Hil  1 that  was  acquainted
with  the  house,  the  exi^lanation  becomes  simply  preposterous.

In  1848  the  interior  of  the  house  was  completely  remodelled,  and  she  was
never  seen  again.  It  was  not  that  any  hidden  passages  were  blocked  up,  for
the  liouse  had  nothing  mysterious  about  it  except  its  mysterious  visitor.
But  inside  it  was  no  longer  the  same  dwelling.  It  appeared,  as  Mr.
Hill  said,  as  if  she  had  permission  to  abide  so  long  as  things  were  as  they
had  been.

Had  such  an  inexplicable  manifestation  occurred  to  one  alone,  or  to  more
than  one  wliose  minds  were  full  of  tire  story,  or  in  one  part  of  the  house,  or
only  at  night,  or  for  a few  months,  a plausible  explanation  would  be  easier.
But,  as  the  account  shows,  she  was  seen  at  all  times  of  tlie  day  and  of  the
night,  in  various  j^arts  of  the  house  and  in  the  court-yard,  by  persons  who
liad  lieard  of  her  and  by  jjersons  who  had  never  heard  of  her  ; by  persons
who,  when  they  saw  her,  at  once  imagined  lier  to  be  a ghost,  and  by  persons
who  never  suspected  but  tliat  she  was  a living  woman  ; while,  of  tlie  latter,
some  came  to  believe  her  a spirit,  and  some  remained  wholly  unaware  tliat
she  was  suspected  to  be  anything  of  the  kind.  This  last  point  alone  is  not
covered  by  anything  that  occurred  during  Mr.  Hill’s  occuj)ancy  of  the  house,
although  it  is  reasonably  well  attested.

I may  remark  that  hlr.  Hill,  having  African  blood  in  his  veins,  may  be
jiresumed  to  have  inherited  with  it  a certain  share  of  superstition  ; yet  he
was  an  eminently  well  educated  man,  schooled  in  England,  and  accustomed,
through  a long  life,  to  the  close  observation  and  weighing  of  facts,  both  as  a
magistrate  and  as  a naturalist.  Before  I had  ever  heard  of  the  existence  of
Charles  Darwin  from  any  one  else,  Mr.  Hill  mentioned  him  to  me  as  an  able
young  correspondent  of  his,  and  quoted  with  just  gratification  a sentence  of
a recent  letter  from  Darwin  to  him  ; “ You  are  an  observer  after  mj'  own
heart.”  And  in  the  previous  narrative  all  that  is  really  involved  is  his
veracity,  which  is  unimpeached.  The  facts  were,  for  the  most  part,  such  as
occurred  to  others,  and  the  combination  of  them  is,  of  course,  open  to  any
one  to  make  for  himself.  He  affected  no  mystery,  and  made  no  confidence
of  it,  but  freely  communicated  all  the  2)articulars  to  anyone  of  Ids  numerous
visitors  who  showed  any  desire  to  ascertain  them.  I may  remark  that,  rich
as  Jamaica  and  the  other  Antilles  i)resumably  are  in  ghostly  legends,  Mr.
Hill,  during  my  long  acquaintance  with  him,  never  advei’ted  to  one  of  them.
The  spirit  of  the  precise  antitjuary  always  prevailed  in  him  over  that  of  the
story  teller.  And  in  his  individual  experience,  with  one  exception,*  I never
learned  that  anything  had  ever  happened  which  bore  the  stamp  of  a visit
from  beyond  the  grave.

* This  one  exception  was  the  appearance  of  a friend  apparently  at  the  moment
of  death.


142


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


Tliere  are  in  the  collection  perhaps  half-a-clozen  other  well-attested
narratives  of  similar  apparitions  in  the  same  house  to  different  persons,
who  cannot  easily  be  supposed  to  have  been  in  a state  of  excited
expectation ; but,  for  various  reasons,  they  do  not  seem  to  me  quite
on  a par,  from  an  evidential  point  of  view,  with  those  above  given;
though  they  certainly  ought  not  to  be  left  out  of  account  in  estimating
tlie  wliole  evidence.  It  is,  of  course,  quite  possible  by  supposing  a
sufficient  amount  of  unconscious  inaccuracy — varied  occasionally  by
conscious  or  semi-conscious  inventiveness — on  the  part  of  our  witnesses,
to  explain  away  all  these  narratives,  and  any  numl^er  of  similar  ones
that  may  be  liereafter  collected.  And,  as  I have  already  said,  we
have  no  exact  measure  by  whicli  to  compare  the  improbability  of  the
required  amount  of  inaccuracy  or  inventiveness  with  the  inqn'obability
involved  in  supposing  the  narratives  to  be  substantially  true.  Hence
I can  only  say  that  having  made  every  effort  — as  my  paper
will,  I hope,  have  shown — to  exercise  a reasonable  scepticism,  I yet
do  not  feel  equal  to  the  degree  of  unbelief  in  human  testimony  necessary
to  avoid  accepting  at  least  provisionally  the  conclusion  that  there  are,  in  a
certain  sense,  haunted  houses,  i.e.,  that  there  are  houses  in  which
similar  quasi-human  apparitions  have  occurred  at  different  times  to
different  inhabitants,  under  circumstances  which  exclude  the  hypothesis
of  suggestion  or  expectation.  If  this  general  conclusion  be  accepted,
the  evidence  for  the  authenticity  of  the  particular  narratives  here  given
appears  to  me  sufficiently  good  to  justify  us  in  regarding  them  pro-
visionally as  accounts,  in  the  main  accurate,  of  actual  experiences,  and,
accordingly,  I propose  to  revieAv  and  compare  these  experiences  care-
fully, in  order  to  ascertain  what  positive  or  negative  characteristics
they  have  in  common,  and  what  explanation,  if  any,  their  common
chai-acteristics  suggest.

In  the  first  place,  we  find  no  foundation  for  the  very  general  idea
that  ghosts  haunt  old  houses  only  or  even  mainly.

(Secondly,  as  I have  already  said,  the  evidence  for  appearances  on
certain  anniversaries  rests,  so  far  as  this  collection  is  concenied,  on  one
story  only.

Thirdly,  the  evidence  connecting  such  appearances  with  some  crime
or  tragedy  is  e.xtremely  slight.  l\Ir.  X.  Z.  believes  he  identified  his
ghost  with  a person  who  committed  murder  and  suicide  ; the  other
ghost,  recognised  from  his  portrait,  had  died  of  delirium  tremens  ; but  I
have  adduced  reasons  for  some  slight  doubt  as  to  the  unmistakable
recognition  in  both  these  cases.  A native  woman  had  been  murdered  near
where  the  ayah  appeared  to  iSir  Arthur  and  Lady  Becher.  The  ghost
supposed  to  be  that  of  hliss  A.  vaguely  resembled  in  figure  a lady  who  had
lived  unhappily  and  died  mysteriously  in  the  house,  and  the  weeping
lady  in  widow’s  garb  resembles  in  figure  a former  unhappy  inmate.  But


1885.]


Pluaitasms  of  the  Dead.


143


this  is  all.  In  nine  cases  we  have  not  only  heard  no  rumour  of  a tragedy,
hut  no  attempt  is  made  to  conjecture  whose  ghost  it  is  that  is  seen.  In
the  four  remaining  ones  there  is  a I’eport  of  a violent  death,  but  so
vague  and  hazy  as  to  suggest  that  it  has  arisen  subsequently  to  the
appearance,  owing  to  the  supposed  necessity  of  accounting  for  it  in
some  such  way.  As  regards  identification,  moreover,  it  must  be
observed  that  in  many  cases — seven  out  of  the  eighteen  I have  discussed
— there  is  not  enough  seen  of  the  face  to  make  certain  recognition  at  all
possible.  In  this  connection  there  is  a curious  point  to  be  noticed.  In
these  eighteen  narratives  we  have  no  first-hand  account  of  a ghost
appearing  undoubtedly  in  the  dress  of  a distinctly  bygone  age.  Mr.
X.  Z.’s  ghost  would  apparently  have  been  entitled  to  such  a dress,  but
both  as  a man  and  as  a ghost  he  affected  a dressing-gown,  which  is  a
vague  costume.  The  blue  lady  in  the  old  manor  house  appeared  with
her  hair  dressed  in  Hogarth  fashion  to  one  percipient,  but  we  have  his
account  at  second-hand  only,  and  both  the  percipients  whose  accounts
we  have  at  first-hand  saw  her  with  her  hair  down  her  back.  Vague
cosUimes,  not  specially  appropriate  to  any  particular  period,  are  some-
what the  most  numerous  in  the  eighteen  selected  cases,  though  in  seven
or  eight  of  them  the  dress  seems  to  have  been  such  as  would  not  at  all
have  surprised  the  percipients  if  worn  by  a living  person  in  the  day-
time. And  these  remarks  apply  not  only  to  these  eigliteen  narratives,
but  with  comparatively  few  exceptions  to  the  whole  collection.  It  is
therefore  the  more  remarkable  that  among  all  the  fixed  load,  ghosts
described  in  the  collection,  who,  by  their  costume,  would  seem  to  be
connected  with  the  more  or  less  recently  dead,  we  have  no  single  case  at
first-hand,  and  I think  only  two  dubious  ones  at  second-hand,  of  an
apparition  of  any  one  known  to  any  of  the  percijjients  during  life.

Fourthly,  there  is  a total  absence  of  any  apparent  object  or
intelligent  action  on  the  part  of  the  ghost.  If  its  visits  have  an  object,
it  entirely  fails  to  explain  it.  It  does  not  communicate  important  facts.
It  does  not  point  out  lost  wills  or  hidden  treasure.  It  does  not  even
speak,  except  in  the  instance  mentioned  by  Mr.  Hill,  where  the  ghost
replied,  “ What  is  that  to  you  ? ” to  an  inquiry  ; but  for  this  incident
there  is  at  best  third-hand  evidence,  and  it  may  have  been  a mistake.
Its  very  movements  are  of  the  simplest  description  in  all  the  cases
that  I have  selected  on  evidential  "rounds.

* There  is  among  the  narratives  wliich  I liave  tlioTiglit  in  some  respects
insiifficiently  evidenced,  a case  of  a gliost  alleged  to  have  been  seen  by  one
person  only,  pointing  out  a missing  will  ; and  I will  quote  here  an  account
of  an  apparition  ( tl.  47-1 ) which  went  through  very  unusually  dramatic
action.  I have  not  included  it  among  the  evidentially  iirst-cla.ss  instances
of  haunted  houses,  because  with  the  amount  of  detail  given  I am  unable  to
determine  whether  the  figure  seen  by  different  percipients  was  similar  and
seen  independently.  But  for  the  occurrence  of  the  apparitions  the  evidence


144


riiantaams  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


Fifthly,  as  to  the  light  liy  which  ghosts  are  seen,  no  rule  can  he  laid
down.  They  are  seen  in  all  kinds  of  light,  from  Ijroad  daylight  to  the
faint  light  of  dawn — from  bright  gaslight  to  the  light  of  a dying  fire.
.Sometimes  they  seem  to  he  self-luminous,  and  sometimes  to  hiing  with
them,  as  it  were,  an  apparition  of  light  (like  Mr.  X.  Z.’s  ghost),  so  that
the  Avliole  place  appears  lighted  up,  though  there  is  no  real  light  there.
The  ghost  of  the  man  who  died  of  d/diriuia  tremens  seemed  to  disappear
owing  to  tlie  gas  being  turned  up  ; and  on  the  other  hand,  some
apparitions,  like  ordinary  external  objects,  can  no  longer  be  seen  when
the  liarht  ffoes  out.  There  is  even  one  case  where  the  "host  is  descril)ed
as  having  been  apparently  seen  in  the  back  of  the  percipient’s  head.

Sixthly,  as  to  sounds,  again  no  rule  can  be  laid  down.  In  some
cases  there  are  unaccounted-for  sounds  in  houses  where  ghosts  are  seen,
and  in  others  no  sounds  beyond  what  may  be  noticed  anywhere  seem  to
have  been  observed.  Where  there  are  mysterious  sounds  they  have
for  the  most  part  no  obvious  connection  with  the  apparitions.  The
apparition  itself  rarely  appears  to  make  any  noise.  To  hear  its  footsteps,
for  instance,  seems  to  be  unusual.  .Sometimes  an  apparition  seems  to  be
heralded  l»y  a noise — a sound  causing  the  percipient  to  look  in  the
direction  in  which  they  see  the  ghost,  but  it  is  difficult  to  say
whether  these  noises  are  not  real,  and  their  connection  with  the
ghost  accidental.*

is  good.  The  percipient-  on  tliis  particular  occasion  was  iNIis.s  X.  Vatas-Siinpson,
a sister  of  the  lady  who  as  a child  .saw  the  little  old  woman  in  the  house  in
St.  Swithin’s  Lane.

“ When  my  mother  was  ill,  and  I sat  up  during  the  night  with  her,  I heard
some  one  trying  the  lock  of  our  door,  which  1 had  locked.  I thought  it  Avas  W.
come  home  late,  as  rrsual,  so  I went  up  close  to  the  door  and  whispered  through,

‘ Do  not  come  in  ; mother’s  asleep.’  I went  hack  to  the  fire,  and  I do  not  know
Avhat  made  me  <lo  it,  hut  I gave  a great  jump,  and  on  looking  round  found  we
were  no  longer  alone — a short,  stout,  elderly  man  was  midway  between  tlie  bed
and  tlie  door.  He  went  and  stood  near  the  bed,  hut  not  close,  and  while  I
looked  I seemed  to  know  he  could  do  no  harm.  He  stood  looking  a long  time.
He  clasped  and  unclasped  his  hands  frequently.  Upon  the  little  linger  of  his
left  hand  he  wore  a wedding  ring,  and  he  turned  it  round  and  round  in  his  hand
as  he  stood,  and  his  lips  moved,  though  I could  not  hear  a sound.  I tried  to  flap
him  away  with  a towel,  as  I had  heard  that  a current  of  air  Avill  make  these  things
go  sometimes,  hut  to  no  purpose.  He  took  his  own  time  to  go.  After  seeming  to
speak  to  some  person,  Avhom  I could  not  see,  and  pointing  to  the  ceiling  a good
deal,  he  'moved,  I cannot  say  walked,  to  the  door  ; it  opened  ; he  went  out  ; it
closed  ; and  I went,  too,  to  try  the  door.  It  was  still  lejckcd.  I never  saAV
him  again.

“ Nettie  Vata.s-.Simpson.

“ September,  1884.”

* I said  in  the  earlier  part  of  this  paper,  that  I had  thought  it  best  to  defer
the  consideration  of  the  few  cases  in  this  collection  of  unaccounted  for  physical
phenomena  ; hut  it  is  as  well  to  mention  liere  that  there  are,  I think,  only  two
instances  in  it,  of  clearly  physical  phenomena  apparently  produced  by  an  aiipari-


1885.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


145


Seventhly,  the  mode  of  appearance  and  disappearance  of  apparitions
is  also  various.  The  ghost  is  usually  either  seen  on  looking  round,  as  a
human  being  might  be,  or  seems  to  come  in  at  the  door.  Some-
times it  forms  gradually  out  of  vhat  at  first  seems  a cloud-like
appearance.  1 do  not  think  there  are  any  cases  of  its  appearing  suddenly
in  a spot  which  the  percipient  was  actually  looking  at  and  perceived  to
be  vacant  before.  It  disappears  suddenly  in  this  way  sometimes,  and
sometimes  if  the  percipient  looks  away  for  a moment,  it  is  gone.  Some-
times it  vanishes  in  a cloud-like  manner,  sometimes,  retaining  its  form,  it
becomes  gradually  more  and  more  transparent  till  it  is  gone.  Frequently
it  disappears  through  the  door,  either  with  or  without  apparently
opening  it,  or  goes  into  a room  where  there  is  no  other  exit,  and
where  it  is  not  found.

Eighthly,  as  to  the  seers  of  ghosts  we  can  again  lay  down  no  rules.
The  power  is  not  limited  by  sex,  age,  or  profession.  It  does  not,  so  far
as  has  yet  been  ascertained,  depend  on  any  obvious  conditions  of  health,
temperament,  intellect,  or  emotion.  It  is  not  even  certain  that  it  is
possessed  by  some  persons  and  not  by  others,  although  there  are  reasons
for  thinking  this  probable.  If  several  persons  are  together  when  the
ghost  appears  it  will  sometimes  be  seen  by  all  and  sometimes  not,  and
failure  to  see  it  is  not  always  merely  the  result  of  not  directing
the  attention  towards  it.  Perhaps  the  truth  may  be  that  we  all  have
potentially  the  power  of  seeing  such  things,  but  that  it  requires  a special
state  of  mind,  or  body  in  us,  to  coincide  with  some  external  cause,
and  that  that  coincidence  rarely,  and  in  the  case  of  most  individuals,
never,  occurs.

And  this  brings  us  to  the  question.  What  external  cause  or  causes
operate  1 Assuming  provisionally  that  there  are  haunted  houses,  in
the  sense  in  which  I have  used  the  words,  what  theory  can  we  form  to
explain  them  ?

I must  confess  myself  quite  unable  to  form  any  satisfactory  theory  ;
— any  theory  which  makes  us  feel  that  if  it  be  true,  the  phenomena  are
just  what  we  should  expect.  I have  doubted  even  whether  it  is  yet  of
any  use  attempting  to  theorise,  but  I think  the  investigation  has,
perhaps,  arrived  at  a point  at  which  it  is  worth  while  to  formulate
such  hypotheses  as  seem  to  derive  any  support  whatever  from  the  evi-

tion.  One  of  these  is  an  account  of  a ghost  that  opens  a locked  door,  and  comes
into  the  room  giving  a horrid  little  laugh.  But  the  narrator  had  not  seen
the  apparition  herself — only  been  told  after  she  had  heard  the  laugh, and  forrnd
her  door  open,  that  others  had  experienced  the  same  phenomena,  hut  that  in
their  case  they  seemed  to  he  produced  hy  a man  in  grey.  In  one  other  narrative,
a cuphoard-door  is  really  opened  and  really  shut  in  apparent  connection  with  an
apparition  that  is  seen  coming  out  of  the  cuphoard,  hut  I do  not  feel  sure  that
draughts  of  air  may  not  have  had  something  to  do  with  this.

L


146


PJicDdasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


dence  before  us,  in  oi’der  tliat  further  observations  and  inquiries  may
be  partly  directed  to  proving  or  disprovingthem.  I will,  therefore,  proceed
briefly  to  state  and  discuss  the  only  four  theoiies  that  have  occurred
to  me.

The  two  which  I will  take  first  in  order  assume  that  the  apparitions
are  due  to  the  agency  or  presence  of  the  spirits  of  deceased  men.

There  is  first  the  popular  view,  that  the  apparition  is  something
belonging  to  the  external  world — that  like  ordinary  matter  it
occupies  and  moves  through  space,  and  would  be  in  the  room
whether  the  percipient  wei’e  there  to  see  it  or  not.  This  hypothesis
involves  us  in  many  difficulties,  of  which  one  serious  one — that  of
accounting  for  the  clothes  of  the  ghost — has  often  been  ui’ged,
and  never,  I think,  satisfactorily  answered.  Nevertheless,  I am
bound  to  admit  that  there  is  some  little  evidence  tending  to  suggest
this  theory.  For  instance,  in  the  account,  of  which  I have  given  an
abstract,  of  the  weeping  lady  who  has  appeared  so  frequently  in  a
certain  house,  the  following  passage  occurs:  “They  went  after  it  [the
figure]  together  into  the  drawing-room;  it  then  came  out  and  went  down
the  aforesaid  passage  [leading  to  the  kitchen],  but  was  the
next  minute  seen  by  another  Miss  D.  . . . come  up  the  outside

steps  from  the  kitchen.  On  this  particular  day  Captain  D.’s  married
daughter  happened  to  be  at  an  upstairs  window  ....  and  inde-
pendently saw  the  figure  continue  her  course  across  the  lawn  and  into
the  orchard.”  A considerable  amount  of  clear  evidence  to  the  appear-
ance of  ghosts  to  independent  observers  in  successive  points  in
space,  would  certainly  afford  a strong  argument  for  their  having  a
definite  relation  to  space  ; but  in  estimating  evidence  of  this  kind  it  would
be  necessary  to  know  how  far  the  observer’s  attention  had  been  drawn  to
the  point  in  question.  If  it  had  been  a real  woman  whom  the  Miss  D.’s
were  observing,  we  should  have  inferred,  with  perfect  certainty,  from
our  knowledge  that  she  could  not  be  in  two  places  at  once,  that  she
had  been  successively,  in  a certain  order,  in  the  places  where  she  was
seen  by  the  three  observei’s.  If  they  had  noted  the  moments  at  which
they  saw  her,  and  comparing  notes  afterwards,  found  that  according  to
these  notes  they  had  all  seen  her  at  the  same  time,  or  in  some  other
order  to  that  inferred,  Ave  should  still  feel  absolute  confidence  in  our
inference,  and  should  conclude  that  there  must  be  something  wrong
about  the  watches  or  the  notes.  From  association  of  ideas,  it  would  be
perfectly  natural  to  make  the  same  inference  in  the  case  of  a ghost
which  looks  exactly  like  a woman.  But  in  the  case  of  the  ghost  the
inference  Avould  not  be  legitimate,  because,  unless  the  particular  theory
of  ghosts  Avhich  Ave  are  discussing  be  true,  there  is  no  reason,  so  far  as
Ave  knoAv,  Avhy  it  should  not  appear  in  tAvo  or  more  places  at  once.
Hence  in  the  case  of  the  ghost  a Avell  founded  assurance  that  the  appear-


1885.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


147


ances  were  successive  would  require  a careful  obsei’vatioii  of  the  times,
which,  so  far  as  I know,  has  never  been  made.  On  the  whole,  there-
fore, I must  dismiss  the  popular  theory,  as  not  having,  in  my  opinion,
even  a j)rinia  facie  ground  for  serious  consideration.

The  theory  that  I will  next  examine  seems  to  me  decidedly  more
plausible,  from  its  analogy  to  the  conclusion  to  which  I am  brought  by
the  examination  of  the  evidence  for  phantasms  of  the  living.  This
theory  is  that  the  apparition  has  no  real  relation  to  the  external  world,
but  is  a hallucination  caused  in  some  way  by  some  communication,
without  the  intervention  of  the  senses,  between  the  disembodied  spirit
and  the  percipient,  its  form  depending  on  the  mind  either  of  the  spirit
or  of  the  percipient,  or  of  both.  In  the  case  of  haunted  houses,
however,  a difficulty  meets  us  that  we  do  not  encounter,  or  at  least,
rarely  encounter,  in  applying  a similar  hypothesis  to  explain  phantasms
of  the  living,  or  phantasms  of  the  dead  other  than  fixed  local  ghosts.
In  these  cases  we  have  generally  to  suppose  a simple  rajoport
between  mind  and  mind,  but  in  a haunted  house  we  have  a rapport
complicated  by  its  apparent  dependence  on  locality.  It  seems  necessary
to  make  the  improbable  assumption,  that  the  spirit  is  interested  in  an
entirely  special  way  in  a particular  house,  (though  possibly  this  interest
may  be  of  a subconscious  kind),  and  that  his  interest  in  it  puts  him  into
connection  with  another  mind,  occupied  with  it  in  the  way  that  that  of  a
living  person  actually  there  must  consciously,  or  unconsciously  be  ; while
he  does  not  get  into  similar  communication  with  the  same,  or  with
other  persons  elsewhere.

If  notwithstanding  these  difficulties,  it  be  true  that  haunting
is  due  in  any  way  to  the  agency  of  deceased  persons,  and
conveys  a definite  idea  of  them  to  the  percipients  through  the  resem-
blance to  them  of  the  apparition,  then  by  patiently  continuing  our
investigations  we  may  expect,  sooner  or  later,  to  obtain  a sufficient
amount  of  evidence  to  connect  clearly  the  commencement  of  hauntings
with  the  death  of  particular  persons,  and  to  establish  clearly  the  likeness
of  the  apparition  to  those  persons.  The  fact  that  almost  everybody  is
now  photographed  ought  to  be  of  material  assistance  in  obtaining
evidence  of  this  latter  kind.

My  third  theory  dispenses  with  the  agency  of  disembodied  spirits,
but  involves  us  in  other  and  perhaps  equally  great  improbabilities.  It
is  that  the  first  appearance  is  a purely  subjective  hallucination
and  that  the  subsequent  similar  appearances  both  to  the  original
percipient  and  to  others,  are  the  result  of  the  first  ajopearance ;
unconscious  expectancy  causing  them  in  the  case  of  the  original
percipient,  and  some  sort  of  telepathic  communication  from  the  original
percipient  in  the  case  of  others.  In  fact,  it  assumes  that  a tendency
to  a particular  hallucination  is  in  a way  infectious.  If  this  theory  be


14S


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


[April  24,


true  I should  expect  to  find  that  the  apparently  independent
appearances  after  the  first,  depended  on  the  percipient’s  having  had  some
sort  of  intercourse  vitli  some  one  who  had  seen  the  ghost  before,  and
that  any  decided  discontinuity  of  occupancy  Avould  stop  the  haunting.

I should  also  expect  to  find,  as  we  do  in  one  of  the  cases  I have  quoted,
that  sometimes  the  supposed  ghost  would  follow  the  family  from  one
abode  to  another,  appearing  to  haunt  them  rather  than  any  particular
house.

The  fourth  theory  that  1 shall  mention  is  one  which  I can
hardly  expect  to  appear  plausible,  and  which,  therefore,  I only
introduce  because  I think  that  it  corres^^onds  best  to  a certain  part  of
the  evidence  ; — and,  as  I have  already  said,  considering  the  altogether
tentative  way  in  which  we  are  inevitably  dealing  with  this  obscure
subject,  it  is  as  well  to  express  definitely  every  hypothesis  which  an
impartial  consideration  of  the  facts  suggests.  It  is  that  there  is  some-
thing in  the  actual  building  itself — some  subtle  physical  influence — ■
which  produces  in  the  brain  that  efiect  which,  in  its  turn,  becomes  the
cause  of  a hallucination.  It  is  certainly  difficult  on  this  hypothesis
alone  to  suppose  that  the  hallucinations  of  different  people  would  be
similar,  l)ut  we  might  account  for  this  by  a combination  of  this
hypothesis  and  the  last.  The  idea  is  suggested  by  the  case  of  which  I
have  given  an  altstract,  where  the  haunting  continued  through  more
than  one  occupancy,  but  changed  its  character ; and  if  there  be  any
truth  in  the  theory,  I should  expect  in  time  to  obtain  a good  deal  more
evidence  of  this  kind,  combined  with  evidence  that  the  same  persons  do
not  as  a rule  encounter  ghosts  elsewhere.  I should  also  expect  evidence
to  1)6  forthcoming  supporting  the  popular  idea  that  repairs  and  altera-
tions of  the  building  sometimes  cause  the  haunting  to  cease.*

As  I have  said,  the  evidence  before  us  is  quite  inadequate  to  enable
us  to  decide  among  these  theories,  or  even  to  say  that  any  one  of
them  is  strongly  supported  by  it.  The  only  thing  to  be  done,  therefore,
is  to  obtain  more  evidence,  both  for  the  occurrence  of  the  phenomena

In  an  earlier  part  of  this  paper,  I mentioned  cases  of  haunted  liouses  wliere
the  apparitions  are  various,  and  might  tlierefore  all  of  them  he  merely  subjective
halhicinations,  sometimes,  perhaps,  caused  by  expectancy.  It  is,  cf  course,  also
possible  to  explain  these  cases  by  the  hypothesis  we  are  now  discussing.  Another
class  of  cases  is,  perliaps,  worth  mentioning  in  this  connection.  We  have  in  the
collection  two  eases  of  what  was  believed  by  the  narrators  to  be  a quite  peculiar
feeling  of  discomfort,  in  houses  where  concealed,  and  long  since  decomposed
bodies  were  subsequently  found.  Such  feelings  are  seldom  clearly  defined  enough
to  have  much  evidential  value,  for  others,  at  any  rate,  than  the  percipient ; even
though  mentioned  beforehand,  and  delinitely  connected  with  the  place  where  the
skeleton  was.  But  if  there  be  really  any  connection  between  the  skeleton  and
the  feeling,  it  may  possibly  be  a .subtle  physical  inlluence  such  as  I am
suggesting.


1885.]


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


149


in  question,  and  about  the  houses  where  they  occur,  their  former  inhabi-
tants and  history.  The  investigation  is  likely  to  be  a long  and  laborious
one,  for  the  diihculties  of  tracing  back  such  unrecorded  history  are
often  very  great,  and  sometimes  insuperable  ; and  even  if  we  could  learn
all  the  facts  bearing  on  the  question  in  any  particular  case,  Ave  should
still  very  likely  lind  it  difficult  to  draw  the  right  conclusion,  owing  to
the  rare  and  irregular  appearances  of  most  ghosts,  and  the  consequent
difficulty  of  determining  definitely  the  times  at  which  haunting  begins
or  ends.  Nevertheless,  Avithout  such  investigation  Ave  cannot  hope  to
learn  the  true  explanation  of  the  phenomena ; and  the  eAudence  already
collected  seems  to  Avarrant  us  in  thinking  that  it  is  Avorth  undertaking,
and  not  likely  to  be  fruitless.  In  the  meaiiAA'liile,  it  is  to  be  hoped  tliat
all  Avho  take  an  intelligent  interest  in  the  subject,  and  have  the  good
fortune  to  live  in  haunted  houses  themselves,  and  to  see  ghosts,  Avill  help
in  the  search  for  the  truth,  by  finding  out  all  they  can,  both  about  their
OAvn  experiences  and  those  of  others,  and  about  the  history  of  the
houses  they  liA^e  in.

And  I should  like  to  say  here  that  it  Avould  be  o.  great  pity  if  any  one
thought  that  hallucinations,  Avhen  not  veridical,  Avere  indications  of
anything  seriously  amiss  Avith  the  brain.  This  is  entirely  unsupported
by  the  eA'idence  collected  by  the  Society.  Hallucinations  are,  no
doubt,  sometimes  symptoms  of  disturljance  produced  by  OA^erAvork  or
other  causes,  but  so  are  headaches,  and  no  one  is  either  ashamed  of  a
headache,  or  particularly  alarmed  by  it.  MoreoA'er,  if  the  theory  that  the
ghosts  of  haunted  houses  have  their  origin  in  unA’eridical  hallucinations
be  true,  one  thing  that  Avould  folloAv  Avould  be  that  seeing  such  things
is  not  necessarily  a sign  of  bad  health.  For  Ave  knOAV  that  among  our
Avitnesses  to  such  phenomena  we  have  persons  not  only  remarkably
sensible  and  practical,  but  remarkably  strong  and  healthy.

If  Ave  noAv  attempt  to  sum  up  the  evidence  afforded  by  the  Society’s
collection,  for  phantasms  of  the  dead,*  it  seems  to  stand  as  folloAA’s  : — •

Firstly. — There  are  a large  number  of  instances  recorded  of  appear-
ances of  the  dead  shortly  after  theirdeath,  but  generally  there  is  nothing
by  which  Ave  can  distinguish  these  from  simple  subjecti Am  hallucinations.
In  a few  cases,  hoAvever,  information  conveyed  seems  to  afford  the  re-
quired test,  but  these  are  at  present  too  feAv,  I tliink,  for  us  to  feel
sure  that  the  coincidence  may  not  have  been  due  to  chance.

Secondly. — There  are  cases  of  single  appearances  at  an  interval  of
months  or  years  after  death,  but  at  pi’esent  none  Avhich  Ave  liaAm  adequate
grounds  for  attributing  to  the  agency  of  the  dead.

* I must  again  remind  my  readers  that  I am  not  dealing  AA’ith  the  evidence
for  communications  at  the  time  of  death,  Avliich  is,  in  my  opinion,  A’ery  strong.
By  “phantasms  of  the  dead,”  I mean  communications  at  least  tAvehm  hours
after  death.


150


Phantasms  of  the  Dead.


[1885.


Thirdly. — There  are  numerous  cases  of  seemingly  similar  appari-
tions seen  in  particular  houses,  without  apparently  any  possibility  of  the
similarity  being  the  result  of  suggestion  or  expectation;  but  the  evidence
connecting  such  haunting  with  any  definite  dead  person  is,  on  the  whole,
very  small ; and  the  evidence  for  the  operation  of  any  intelligent  agency
in  the  haunting,  at  present  absolutely  nil ; and  until  we  can  discover
more  about  the  laws  that  seem  to  govern  such  haunting,  we
are  hardly  justified  in  forming  any  theory  as  to  its  cause,  except  as  a
provisional  hy23othesis.

As  regards  present  conclusions,  the  result  of  the  investigation  will,
I fear,  appear  to  many  very  unsatisfactory.  But  I do  not  myself
think  that  we  ought  to  expect  so  quickly  to  come  to  a conclusion  ;
and  my  examination  of  the  evidence  has  at  any  rate  convinced
me  that  the  inquiry,  though  likely,  as  I have  said,  to  be
long  and  difficult,  is  worth  pursuing  with  ^^atience  and  energy.


Note. — On  the  very  eve  of  going  to  [^ress,  Mr.  Gurney  has  received
the  following  letter  from  Mr.  Webley,  the  “ Mr.  W.”  of  case  477,
p.  93

84,  Wenman-street,  Birminghan,

May  18th,  1885.

Dear  Sir, — In  reidy  to  your  letter,  I shall  be  liapjiy  to  give  you  the
information  asked  for.  My  wife  died  on  2nd  February,  1884,  about  5.30  a. in.
The  last  hours  of  her  life  were  spent  in  singing.  I may  say  notes  came
from  her  within  ten  minutes  of  her  decease  ; and  beautiful  as  her  voice  was,
it  never  ajtpeared  so  exquisitely  beautiful  as  this.

Yours  sincerely,

Hexey  Webley.


Hallacinafions.


151


HALLUCINATIONS.
By  Edmund  Gurney.


SYNOPSIS  OF  THE  ARGUMENT.

Hallucinations  of  the  senses  are  first  distinguished  from  other
hallucinations,  by  the  fact  that  they  do  not  necessarily  imply  any  false
belief.

A definition  of  them  is  then  given  which  serves  to  mark  them  off  on
the  one  hand  from  true  perceptions,  and  on  the  other  hand  from  re-
membered images  or  mental  pictures.

The  old  method  of  distinguishing  the  ideational  and  the  sensory
elements  in  hallucinations  of  the  senses  is  criticised  ; and  it  is  shown
that  the  delusive  appearances  are  not  merely  imagined,  but  ai-e  actually
seen  2iVL(\.  heard — the  hallucination  differing  from  an  ordinary  jiercept
only  in  the  fact  of  lacking  an  objective  basis.

The  controversy  as  to  the  physiological  starting-point  of  the
phenomena  is  briefly  sketched  ; and  it  is  shown  that  the  creation
of  sensory  hallucinations,  which  is  central  and  the  work  of  the
brain,  is  quite  distinct  from  the  excitation  or  uiitiation  of  them,  which
may  be  ^^^rijdbercd  and  due  to  some  other  part  of  the  body  that  sets
the  brain  to  work.

This  excitation  may  even  be  due  to  some  objective  external  cause,
as  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  view  of  an  imaginary  object  may  some-
times be  affected,  in  just  the  same  way  as  the  view  of  a real  one  would
be,  by  a prism  or  a mirror.  The  imaginary  oliject  becomes  (so  to  speak)
attached  to  some  foint  de  repere — some  visible  point  or  mark,  at  or  near
the  place  ■where  it  is  seen — and  is  thus  made  to  follow  the  course  of  any
optical  illusions  to  which  the  said  point  or  mark  is  subjected.  But  this
dependence  on  an  external  stimulus  does  not  affect  the  fact  that  the
actual  sensory  element  in  the  hallucination  is  in  these,  as  in  all  other
cases,  created  and  imposed  by  the  brain.

There  are,  however,  a large  number  of  hallucinations  which  we  must
suppose  to  be  centrally  initiated,  as  well  as  centrcdly  created.  Cases  are
considered  where  the  hypothesis  that  the  hallucination  depends  on  an
external  stimulus,  if  possible,  is  yet  very  doubtful  •,  for  instance,  where
the  imaginary  object  is  seen  in  free  space ; or  where  it  appears  to
move  independently  of  the  eye.  But  there  are  many  other  cases
where  the  said  hypothesis  is  plainly  excluded ; and  where  the  excita-
tion or  initiation,  if  it  does  not  take  place  in  the  brain,  can  only  be


152


Hallucinations.


due  to  some  morbid  disturbance  in  the  sense-organs  themselves.  A
variety  of  instances  are  adduced  where  the  assumj^tion  of  such  a morbid
disturbance  would  be  gratuitous  or  impossible ; as,  especially,  in
auditory  hallucinations  ; in  hallucinations  which  conform  to  the  course
of  some  more  general  delusion  ; in  hallucinations  which  are  voluntarily
originated  ; and  in  the  so-called  “ psychic  ” hallucinations,  of  which  a
new  ex2:)lanation  is  offered.  A further  argument  for  the  central  initia-
tion is  drawn  from  the  fact  that  repose  of  the  sense-organs  seems  a con-
dition favourable  to  hallucinations.

This  discussion  as  to  the  excitation  of  hallucinations  is  follow'ed  by
a discussion  as  to  their  creation — the  cerebral  2)rocess  which  is  involved
in  their  having  this  or  that  particular  (and  often  elaborate)  form.
Where  in  the  brain  does  this  jjrocess  take  place  1 — in  the  particular
sensory  centre  concerned  1 or  in  some  higher  tract  1 Reasons  are  given
for  considering  that  both  i^laces  of  creation  are  available ; that  the
sim^^ler  sorts  of  hallucination,  which  are  often  also  recurrent,  may
take  shaj^e  at  the  sensory  centres  themselves;  but  that  the  more
elaborate  and  variable  sorts  must  be  traced  to  the  higher  origin  ; and
that  when  the  higher  tracts  are  first  concerned,  the  iDroduction  of
the  hallucination  is  due  to  a downward  escajoe  of  current  to  the
sensory  centre.

Finally,  an  argument  for  the  higher  origin  is  drawn  from  the  special
class  of  veridical  hallucinations ; the  nature  of  which  often  leads  us  to
conclude  that  those  tracts  of  the  percipient’s  brain  which  are  the
l^hysical  seat  of  ideas  and  memories  were  the  first  to  be  abnormally
affected.


1.  Definition.

Is  it  i^ossible  to  treat  hallucinations  as  a single  class  of  j^henomena,
marked  out  by  definite  characteristics  % The  [joiaular  answer  would  no
doubt  be  Yes — that  the  distinguishing  characteristic  is  some  sort  of
false  belief.  But  this  is  an  error  : in  many  of  the  best  known  cases
of  hallucination — that  of  Nicolai  for  instance — the  ^^ercij^ient  has
held,  with  respect  to  the  figures  that  he  saw  or  the  voices  that  he
heard,  not  a false  but  a true  belief,  to  wit,  that  they  did  not  corresj^ond
to  any  external  reality.  The  only  sort  of  hallucination  which  is
necessarily  characterised  by  false  belief  is  the  2^urely  non-sensory  sort
— as  where  a jierson  has  a fixed  idea  that  everyone  is  j^lotting  against
him,  or  that  he  is  being  secretly  mesmerised  from  a distance.  Of
hallucinations  of  the  senses,  l^elief  in  their  reality,  though  a frequent,
is  by  no  means  an  essential  feature  ; a tendency  to  deceive  is  all  that
we  can  safely  predicate  of  them.

If  we  seek  for  some  further  cjuality  which  shall  be  distinctive  of
both  sensory  and  non-sensory  hallucinations,  the  most  hopeful  sugges-


Ilalhicinatlons.


153


tion  would  seem  to  be  that  both  sorts  are  idiosyncratic  and  unshared.
However  false  a belief  may  be,  we  do  not  call  it  a hallucination  if  it
has  “been  in  the  air,”  and  has  arisen  in  a natural  way  in  a plurality
of  minds.  This  is  just  what  an  idee  fixe  of  the  kind  above-mentioned
never  does  : A may  imagine  that  the  woidd  is  jjlotting  against  him  ; but
B,  if  he  spontaneously  evolves  a similar  notion,  will  imagine  that  the
world  is  plotting  not  against  A,  but  against  himself.  Instances,  how-
ever, are  not  wanting  where  the  idee  fixe  of  an  insane  person  has
gradually  infected  an  associate  ;*  and  as  contact  between  mind  and
mind  is,  after  all,  the  “ natural  way  ” of  spreading  ideas,  we  can  make
no  scientific  distinction  between  these  cases  and  those  where,  e.g.,  the
leader  of  a sect  has  instilled  delusive  notions  into  a number  of
(technically)  sane  followers.  But  again,  hallucinations  of  the  senses  are
also  occasionally  shared  by  several  persons.  Most  of  tlie  alleged
instances  of  this  phenomenon  are,  no  doubt,  merely  cases  of  collective
illusion — an  agreement  in  the  misinterpretation  of  sensory  signs  pro-
duced by  areal  external  object ; but,  as  the  result  of  wide  inquiries,  I
have  encountered  several  instances  of  geiruine  and  spontaneous
collective  hcdlucination.  If,  then,  sensory  and  non-sensory  hallucina-
tions agree  in  being  as  a rule  unshared,  they  agree  also  in  presenting
marked  exceptions  to  the  rule  ; which  exceptions,  in  the  sensory  species,
are  of  a peculiarly  inexplicable  kind.  The  conclusion  does  not  seem
favoui’able  to  our  chance  of  obtaining  a neat  general  definition  which
will  embi’ace  the  two  species  ; and,  in  abandoning  the  search  for  one,  I
can  only  point,  with  envy,  to  the  convenient  way  in  which  French
writers  are  enabled  not  to  combine  but  to  keep  them  apart,  by  appro-
priating to  the  non-sensory  class  the  words  delire  and  conception
delirante.

Let  us  then  try  to  fix  the  character  of  hallucinations  of  the  senses
independently.  The  most  comprehensive  view  is  that  cdl  our  instinc-
tive judgments  of  visual,  auditory,  and  tactile  phenomena  are  hallucina-
tions, inasmuch  as  what  is  really  nothing  more  than  an  affection
of  ourselves  is  instantly  interpreted  by  us  as  an  external  object.
In  immediate  perception,  what  we  thus  objectify  is  present
sensation  ; in  mental  pictures,  what  we  objectify  is  remembered
or  represented  sensation.  This  is  the  view  which  has  been  worked
out  very  ingeniously,  and  for  psychological  purposes  very  effec-
tively, by  M.  Taine  but  it  is  better  adapted  to  a general  theory  of
sensation  than  to  a theory  of  hallucinations  as  such.  To  adopt  it  here

* See  Ur.  G.  H.  Savage’s  Note  on  the  “Contagiousness  of  Delusions,”  in
the  Journal  of  Mental  Science,  January,  1881,  p.  563  ; and  the  paper  on  “ Folie
a Deux,”  by  Dr.  iMarandon  de  IMontyel,  in  the  Ann.  Mklico-Psych.,  6th  series,
Yol.  V.,  p.  28.

f De  V Intelligence,  Vol.  I.,  p.  408,  &c.


154


Hcfllucinations.


■wonkl  drive  us  to  describe  the  diseased  Nicolai — when  he  saw  phantoms
in  the  room,  but  had  his  mind  specially  directed  to  the  fact  that  they
were  internally  caused — as  less  hallucinated  than  a healthy  person  in
the  unreflective  exercise  of  normal  vision.  I prefer  to  keep  to  the
ordinai’y  language  which  would  describe  Nicolai’s  phantoms  as  the  real
specific  case  of  hallucination.  And  I should  consider  their  distinctive
characteristic  to  be  something  quite  apart  from  the  question  whether  or
not  they  were  actually  mistaken  for  real  figui’es — namely,  their  marked
resemblance  to  real  figures,  and  the  consequent  necessity  for  the
exercise  of  memory  and  reflection  to  prevent  so  mistaking  them.  The
definition  of  a sensory  hallucination  would  thus  be  a 2)eTcept  lohich  lacks,
but  loliich  can  onltj  by  distinct  reflection  be  recognised  as  lacking,
the  objective  basis  wlbich  it  suggests — where  objective  bccsis  is  to  be  taken
as  a short  way  of  naming  the  possibility  of  being  shared  by  all  persons
with  normal  senses.*  It  may  be  objected  that  this  definition  would
include  illusions.  The  objection  could  be  obviated  at  the  cost  of  a little
clumsiness  ; but  it  seems  sufficient  to  observe  that  illusions  are  merely
the  sprinkling  of  fragments  of  genuine  hallucination  on  a background
of  true  percejDtion.  And  the  definition  seems  otherwise  satisfactory.
For  while  it  clearly  separates  hallucinations  from  true  jyerceptioyis,  it
equally  clearly  separates  them  from  the  phenomena  with  which  they
have  been  perpetually  identified — the  remembered  images  or  mental
which  are  not  perceptions  at  all.f  It  serves,  for  instance,  to
distinguish, on  the  lines  of  common  sense  and  common  language,  between
the  images  of  “ day-dreams  ” and  those  of  night-dreams.  In  both
cases  vivid  images  ailse,  to  which  no  objective  reality  corresponds  ; and

* I have  indeed  referred  above  to  collective  hallucinations ; but  they  may
fairly  lie  excluded  here,  not  merely  because  they  are  very  exceptional,  but
Ijecause  it  is  a nice  question  for  Idealism  to  determine  how  far,  or  in  what  sense,
they  lack  an  objective  basis.  To  put  an  extreme  case  : suppose  all  the  seeing
world,  save  one  individual,  had  a visual  percept,  the  object  of  which  neverthe-
less eluded  all  physical  tests.  Would  the  solitary  individual  be  justified  in  saying
that  all  the  others  were  victims  of  a subjective  delusion’  And  it  he  said  so
would  they  agree  Avith  him  ?

f M.  Taine’s  definition  and  mode  of  treatment  become  unsatisfactory
here.  Regarding  perceptions  as  in  essence  hallucinations,  he  naturally  regards
mental  images — since  they  are  the  shadowy  representatives  of  former  percep-
tions— as  hallucinations  ot  an  embryonic  sort.  This  metaphor  commits  him  to
showing  how  the  embryo  may  develop  into  the  full  product — which  Avill  happen
if  the  mental  image  be  then  and  there  externalised,  as  is  often  the  case  in
delirium.  The  result  of  this  transformation  is  inevitably  a false  hallucination  ;
and  a special  connection  is  thus  suggested  betAveen  mental  images  and  one  par-
ticular sort  of  percept,  namely  the  incorrect  sort.  Rut  in  ordinary  experience,
mental  images  are  of  course  far  more  closely  and  constantly  connected  Avith
correct  percepts,  M.  Taine’s  true  hallucinations,  Avhose  relics  and  representatives
they  are,  than  Avith  false  hallucinations,  into  Avhich  not  one  in  a million  of
them  is  ever  transformed.


Hallucincdions.


155


in  neither  case  is  aiay  distinct  process  of  reflection  applied  to  tlie  dis-
covery of  this  fact.  But  the  self-evoked  waking-vision  is  excluded  from
the  class  of  hallucinations,  as  above  defined,  by  the  point  that  its  lack  of
objective  basis  can  be  and  is  recognised  loithout  any  such  process  of
reflection.  We  liave  not,  like  Nicolai,  to  consider  and  remember,  before
we  can  decide  that  the  friends  whose  faces  we  picture  are  not  really  in
the  room.  AVe^eeZ  that  our  mind  is  active  and  not  merely  receptive —
that  it  is  the  mind’s  eye  and  not  the  bodily  sense  which  is  at  work  ;
without  attending  to  this  fact,  we  have  it  as  part  of  our  whole  conscious
state.  Dreams  on  the  other  hand  are,  as  a rule,  pure  cases  of
hallucination,  forcing  themselves  on  us  whether  we  will  or  no,  and  with
an  impression  of  objective  reality  which  is  uncontradicted  by  any
knowledge,  reflective  or  instinctive,  that  they  are  the  creatures  of  our
brain.

But,  though  our  definition  may  be  sufficient  for  mere  purposes  of
classification,  it  takes  us  but  a very  little  way  towards  understanding
the  real  nature  of  thephenomena.  It  says  nothing  of  their  origin  and,
though  it  distinguishes  them  from  mere  normal  acts  of  imagination  or
memory,  it  leaves  quite  undetermined  the  faculty  or  faculties  actually
concerned  in  them.  And  when  we  pass  on  to  these  further  points,  we
find  ourselves  in  a most  perplexed  field, where  doctors  seeui'tobe  as  much
at  variance  as  philosophers.  The  debate,  most  ardently  carried  on  in
France,  has  produced  a multitude  of  views  ; but  not  one  of  the  rival
theorists  seems  ever  to  have  convinced  any  of  the  others.  Still  jirogress
has  been  made,  to  this  extent  at  any  rate,  that  it  is  now  comparatively
easy  to  see  where  tlie  disputed  points  lie,  and  to  attack  them  with
precision.


2.  The  Dual  Nature  of  Hallucinations.

It  was,  of  course,  evident  from  the  first  that  there  was  a certain  duality
of  nature  in  hallucinations.  In  popular  language,  the  mind  and  the  sense
were  both  j^lainlj  involved : the  hallucinated  person  not  only
imagined  such  and  such  a thing,  but  imagined  that  he  saio  such  and
such  a thing.  But  in  the  early  days  of  the  controversy,  the  attempts
at  analysing  the  ideational  and  the  sensory  elements  were  of  a very
crude  sort.  The  state  of  hallucination  used  to  be  treated  as  one  in
which  ideas  and  memories — while  remaining  ideas  and  memories  and
not  sensations — owing  to  exceptional  vividness  took  on  the  character
of  sensations.  It  was  not  cleaily  realised  or  remembei’ed  that  sensa-
tions have  no  existence  except  as  mental  facts  ; and  that,  so  far  as  a
mental  fact  takes  on  the  character  of  a sensation,  it  is  a sensation.
This  was  cleaidy  stated,  as  a matter  of  personal  experience,  by  Burdach
and  Muller ; in  the  French  discussions,  the  merit  of  bringing  out  the


156


Hallucinations.


point  witli  new  force  and  emphasis  belongs  to  Baillarger.*  He  showed
that  wlien  the  hallucinated  pei’son  says  “ I see  so  and  so,”  “ I hear  so
and  so,”  tlie  words  ar’e  literally  true.  If  the  person  goes  on  to  say
Vote  ought  also  to  see  or  hear  it,”  he  is  of  course  wrong  ; but  when
lie  says  that  he  sees  or  hears  it,  his  statement  is  to  be  taken  svithout
reserve.  To  him,  the  experience  is  not  something  like  or  related  to  the
€.xperience  of  perceiving  a real  external  object : it  is  identical  with  that
experience.  To  the  psychology  of  our  day  this  may  seem  a tolerably
evident  truth.  Still  it  is  easy  to  realise  the  difficulty  that  was  long  felt
in  admitting  that  any  experience  that  was  dissociated  from  the  normal
functions  of  the  sense-organs  could  be  completely  sensory  in  character.
Popular  thought  fails  to  see  that  the  physical  question  which  for
practical  purposes  is  all-important — whether  the  object  is  or  is  not  really
there — is  j^sychically  irrelevant ; and  a man  who  has  been  staring  at
the  sun  will,  as  a rule,  think  it  less  accurate  to  say  that  he  sees  a
luminous  disc  wherever  he  looks  than  to  say  that  he  fancies  it.  The
best  corrective  to  such  a prejudice  is  Delboeuf’s  experiment,  which
it  will  be  convenient  briefly  to  set  forth,  for  the  sake  of  subsequent
reference.

Two  small  slits  are  made  in  a shutter,  and  one  of  them  is  filled
with  a piece  of  red  glass.  The  opposite  wall  is  therefore  lit  by  a
mixture  of  white  and  red  light.  A stick  is  now  placed  across  the  red
slit ; its  shadow  is  of  course  cast  on  the  wall  ; the  part  of  the  wall
occupied  by  the  shadow,  though  illuminated  only  by  white  rays  from  the
other  slit,  appears — owing  to  the  optical  law  of  conti’ast — a bright
green,  f Pet  this  shadow  now  be  looked  at  through  a narrow  tube,

* In  the  long  and  rather  barren  debates  wliich  took  place  in  the  Societe
IMcdieo-psychologique  during  ISoo  and  1856,  Jlaillarger,  no  doubt,  insisted  too
strongly  on  an  alrsolute  gulf  between  percepts  (true  or  false)  and  the  ordinary
images  of  fancy  or  memory.  But  his  oi)ponents  made  a far  more  serious  mistake
i 1 so  far  identifying  the  two  as  not  to  perceive  a dill'erence  of  kind,  at  the  point
where  the  .sensory  element  in  the  mental  fact  reaches  such  abnormal  strength  as
to  suggest  the  real  presence  of  the  object.  Griesinger’s  statement  [Ment.  Path,
and  Tkc)'.,  p.  89)  and  Wundt’s  (PAys.  PsycA.,  Vol.  II.,  p.  353)  seem  too  un-
guarded in  the  same  respect.  As  long  ago  as  1832,  the  late  Dr.  Symonds,  of
Bristol,  drew  exactly  the  right  distinction  between  images  and  Iiallucinations.
(Lecture  reprinted  in  Blisccllanics,  p.  241).

f Wundt  (Phj/s.  Psych.,  Vol.  I.,  ]>.  4G3)  has  described  some  experiments,  on
the  analogy  of  which  it  seems  to  me  that  this  first  result  shoidd  be  explained.
I at  any  rate  cannot  concur  with  Delbceuf's  explanation  of  it,  which  M.  Binet
adopts.  According  to  them,  it  is  due  to  two  things  : to  the  fact  that  the  rays
Avhich  pass  from  the  shadow  to  the  spectator’s  eye  are  really  grey  ; and  to  the
.spectator’s  knowledge  of  the  further  fact  that  the  only  colour  which,  seen
through  red  light,  looks  grey,  is  green.  They  hold  then  that  the  sen.sation,
though  of  grey,  excites  through  association  an  image  of  green.  To  this  there
seem  to  be  three  objections.  (1)  Not  one  person  in  20po.ssesses  the  supposed


Jlallucinatiom.


157


which  prevents  any  part  of  the  wall  external  to  the  shadow  from  being
seen.  ISTothing  red  is  now  in  the  spectator’s  view,  so  that  there  can  be
no  effect  of  contrast  : the  red  glass  may  even  be  removed  ; none  Imt
white  rays  are  passing  to  his  eye  from  the  shadow  ; yet  its  colour
i-emains  green.  And  in  this  case  the  chances  are  that,  unless  previously
warned,  he  will  tell  the  exact  truth  ; he  will  admit,  and  even  persist,
that  what  he  sees  is  green.  He  will  scout  the  idea  that  the  green  is  a
mere  memory  of  what  he  saw  before  he  applied  the  tube  ; he  will  assert
that  it  is  presented  to  him  as  an  immediate  fact.  And  such  is  assuredly
the  state  of  the  case ; but  it  is  a state  which,  from  the  moment  that
he  has  put  the  tube  to  his  eye,  is  kept  up  purely  as  a hallucination,  and
without  regard  to  the  facts  of  the  external  world.  The  delusion  is  of
course  instantly  dispelled  by  the  removal  of  the  tube — when  he  perceives
that  the  only  light  in  the  room  is  white,  and  that  the  shadow  is  grey  ;
but  for  all  that  he  will  probably  never  doubt  again  that  a genuine
hallucination  of  the  senses  is  something  more  than  “ mere  fancy.”

It  is  impossible  to  be  too  particular  on  this  point  : for  high
authorities,  even  in  the  present  day,  are  found  to  contest  it.  5yhen  a
jierson  who  habitually  sjjeaks  the  truth,  and  who  is  not  colour-blind,
looks  at  an  object  and  says  “ nly  sensation  is  green,”  they  contradict
him,  and  tell  him  that  however  much  he  sees  green,  his  sen.sation  is
yrey.  Whether  this  be  a mere  misuse  of  language,  or  (as  it  seems  to
me)  a misconception  of  facts,  it  at  any  rate  renders  impossible  any
agreement  as  to  the  theory  of  hallucinations.  For  it  ignores  the  very
point  of  Baillarger’s  contention — that  images  sufficiently  vivid  to  be
confounded  with  sensory  percepts  have  become  sensory  percepts.

When  once  the  truth  of  this  contention  is  perceived,  it  is  also
perceived  that  the  previous  speculations  had  been  largely  directed  to  a
wrong  issue  ; and  that  the  dual  character  of  a false  perception  is  after
all,  no  other  than  that  of  a true  perception.  A hallucination,  like  an
ordinary  percept,  is  composed  of  present  sensations,  and  of  images
which  are  the  relics  of  past  sensations.  If  I see  the  figure  of  a man,
then — alike  if  there  Ije  a man  there  and  if  there  be  no  man  there — my

piece  of  knowledge.  (2)  Even  for  one  who  does  possess  it,  the  moments  in  his
life  during  which  he  has  had  experience  of  the  fact  that  green  seen  through  red
light  looks  grey,  are  surely  not  sufficiently  striking  or  numerous  to  have
established  an  instinctive  and  inseparable  association  between  the  sensation  of
grey,  occurring  in  a place  where  red  light  prevails,  and  the  idea  of  green.  (?.)
Even  if  this  inseparable  association  could  be  conceived  possible,  one  fails  to  see
why  the  result  should  he  the  transformation,  in  the  spectator’s  consciousness,  of
the  idea  green  into  (what  at  any  rate  seems  to  him  to  be)  the  sensation  green  ;
that  being  the  very  sensation  which,  in  the  supposed  moments  of  experience,  has
been  conspicuous  by  its  absence.  On  Delboeuf’s  theory,  the  lawn  seen  through
red  glass  ought  not  only  to  excite  the  idea  of  green  (which  it  perhaps  may  do),
but  to  loolc  green.


lo8


Ilalludnations.


experience  consists  of  certain  visual  sensations,  compounded  with  a
variety  of  muscular  and  tactile  images,  which  re.joresent  to  me  properties
of  resistance,  weight,  and  distance;  and  also  with  more  remote  and
complex  images,  which  enable  me  to  refer  the  object  to  the  class  man,
and  to  compare  this  specimen  of  the  class  with  others  whose  appearance
I can  recall.  If  Baillarger  did  not  carry  out  his  view  of  hallucinations
to  this  length,  the  whole  development  exists  by  implication  in  the  term
by  which  he  described  them — psijcho-sensorial.  The  particular  woi’d

was,  perhaps,  an  unfortunate  one  ; since  it  suggests  (as  M.  Binet  has
pointed  out)  that  the  psychical  element  is  related  to  the  sensorial  some-
what as  the  soul  to  the  body  ; and  so,  either  that  psychical  events  are
independent  of  pliysical  conditions,  or  that  sensations  are  not  psychical
events.  Ideo-sensational  would  avoid  this  ditliculty  ; but  the  obverse
term  which  M.  Binet  proposes — cerebro-sensorial — is  on  the  whole
to  be  preferred.  For  this  brings  us  at  once  to  the  physical  ground
where  alone  the  next  part  of  the  inquiry  can  be  profitably  pursued —
the  inquiry  into  oriyin.  From  the  standpoint  of  to-day,  one  readily
perceives  how  much  more  deliiiite  and  tangible  the  problems  were  cer-
tain to  become,  as  soon  as  they  were  translated  into  pliysiological  terms.
So  far  as  the  controversy  had  been  conducted  on  a purely  psychological
basis,  it  had  been  singularly  barren.  In  the  vague  unlocalised  use,  “the
senses  ” and  other  ever-recurring  terms  become  sources  of  dread  to  the
reader.  But  as  soon  as  it  is  asked,  where  is  the  local  seat  of  the
abnormal  occurrence  1 and  on  what  particular  physical  conditions  does
it  depend  1 lines  of  experiment  and  observation  at  once  suggest  them-
selves, and  the  plienomena  fall  into  distinct  groups.


3.  The  question  of  Central  or  Peripheral  Origin  : the  difference  between

Creation  and  Excitation.

In  its  first  form,  the  question  is  one  between  central  and  peripheral
origin.  Do  hallucinations  originatd  in  the  brain — in  tlie  central
mechanism  of  perception?  or  in  some  immediate  condition  of  the  eye,
or  of  the  ear,  or  of  other  parts?  or  is  there  possibly  some  joint  mode  of
origin  ?

For  a long  time  the  hypothesis  of  an  exclusively  central  origin  was
much  in  the  ascendant.  But  this  was  greatly  because — as  already
noted — Esquirol  and  the  older  writers  did  not  recognise  the  sensory
clement  as  truly  and  literally  sensation,  but  regarded  the  whole  ex-
perience as  simply  a very  vivid  idea  or  memory.  If  the  central  origin
is  to  be  established  it  must  be  by  something  better  than  arbitrary
psychological  distinctions.  Hibbert  and  Ferriar,  going  to  the  other
extreme,  contended  that  the  memory  was  a retincd  one  ; if  a man  sees
what  is  not  there,  they  held,  it  can  only  be  by  a dii’ect  recrudescence  of


Hallucinations.


159


past  feeling  in  his  retina.  “ But,”  urged  Esquirol,  “the  hlind  ca.i\  liave
hallucinations  of  vision  ; the  deaf  can  have  hallucinations  of  hearing  ;
how  can  these  originate  in  the  peripheral  organs  ? ” The  obvious  answer,
that  this  did  not  necessarily  thrust  the  point  of  origin  back  as  far  as  the
cerebrum,  does  not  seem  to  have  been  forthcoming  ; and  the  opposite
party  preferred  to  fall  back  on  definite  experiment.  They  pointed  out,
for  instance,  that  visual  hallucinations  often  vanish  when  the  eyes  are
closed  ; or  (as  Brewster  first  observed)  that  they  may  be  doubled  by
pressing  one  eyeball.  But  though  there  was  eiiough  here  to  suggest
that  the  external  organs  ’participated  in  the  process,  there  was  no  proof
that  they  originated  it,  even  in  these  particular  cases  ; while  for  other
cases  the  observations  did  not  hold.  An  immense  advance  was  made  by
Baillarger,  who  maintained  tlie  central  origin  by  really  scientific  argu-
ments. He  pointed  out  (1)  that  the  external  organ  may  often  be

affected  by  local  irritants  ■ — inflammation,  blows,  pressure,

galvanism — without  the  production  of  any  more  pronounced
form  of  hallucination  than  flashes,  or  hummings  ; that  is  to  say,  the
peripheral  stimulation  fails  to  develop  hallucination,  even  under  the
most  favourable  conditions  : (2)  that  there  is  a frequent  correspondence
of  hallucinations  of  difterent  senses — a man  wdio  sees  the  devil  also
hears  his  voice,  and  smells  sulphur — and  that  it  is  impossible  to  refer
this  correspondence  to  abnormalities  of  the  eye,  ear,  and  nose,  occur
ring  by  accident  at  the  same  moment  : (3)  that  hallucinations  often
refer  to  dominant  ideas — a religious  monomaniac  will  see  imaginary
saints  and  angels,  not  imaginary  trees  and  houses.  Hence,  argued
Baillarger,  “ the  point  of  departure  of  hallucinations’’  is  always  “ the
intelligence” — the  imagination  and  memory — which  sets  the  sensory
machinery  in  motion.  He  naively  admitted  that  how  this  action  of  an
immaterial  principle  on  the  physical  apparatus  takes  place  passes  all
conception  ; but  it  might  be  forgiven  to  a medical  man,  writing  forty
years  ago,  if  he  had  not  fully  realised  “ brain  as  an  organ  of  mind,”
and  so  did  not  see  that  what  he  took  for  a special  puzzle  in  the  theory
of  hallucinations,  is  simply  the  fundamental  puzzle  involved  in  every
mental  act.  Passing  him  this,  we  may  say  that  his  treatment  of  the
question  entitles  him  to  the  credit  of  the  second  great  discovery  about
hallucinations.  He  had  already  made  clear  their  genuinely  sensory
quality;  he  no  vv  made  equally  clear  the  fact  that  the  mind  (or  its
physical  correlate)  is  their  creator — that  they  are  brain-products  pro-
jected from  within  outwards.

This  is  a most  important  truth  ; but  it  is  very  far  from  being  the
whole  truth.  Baillarger  saw  no  via,  media  between  the  theory  wdiich
he  rejected — that  the  nerves  of  sense  convey  to  the  brain  impressions
which  are  there  perceived  as  the  phantasmal  object — and  the  theory
which  he  propounded,  that  “ the  intelligence”  (he.,  for  us,  tlie  brain,  as


160


Hallucinations.


the  seat  of  memories  and  images)  of  its  own  accord,  and  without  any  im-
pulse from  the  periphery,  excites  the  sensory  apparatus.  It  seems
never  to  have  struck  liim  that  there  may  Ije  cases  where  the  sense-organ
supplies  the  excitant,  though  the  brain  is  the  creator — that  irritation
grassing  from  without  inwards  may  be  a means  of  setting  in  motion  the
creative  activity.  He  took  into  account  certain  states  of  the  organ — e.y.,
fatigue  produced  by  pi’evious  exercise — as  increasing  the  susceptibility
to  excitation  from  “ the  intelligence,”  and  so  as  conditions  favourable  to
liallucination  ; but  he  got  no  further.

The  facts  of  hallucination  absolutely  refuse  to  lend  themselves  to
this  indiscriminate  treatment.  Following  the  path  of  experiment,  we
are  almost  immediately  confronted  with  two  classes  of  phenomena,  and
tnoo  modes  of  excitation.  AVe  need  not  go,  indeed,  beyond  the  ele-
mentary instances  already  mentioned.  Delboeuf’s  experiment,  where
green  was  seen  by  an  eye  on  which  only  white  rays  were  falling,
fairly  illustrates  Baillarger’s  doctrine — the  green  being  produced  not  by
an  outer  affection  of  the  eye,  but  by  an  inner  affection  of  the  brain.
But  in  the  case  of  a person  who  has  been  staring  at  the  sun,  the  “after
image”  or  hallucination  can  be  clearly  traced  to  a continuing  local  effect
in  that  small  area  of  the  retina  wliich  lias  just  been  abnormally  excited;
and  it  will  continue  to  present  itself  wherever  the  eye  may  turn,  until
rest  has  restored  this  area  to  its  normal  condition.  A still  simpler
form  of  change  in  the  external  organ  is  a blow  on  the  eye  ; and  the
resulting  “ sparks”  are  genuine  though  embryonic  hallucinations.

Such  cases  as  these  last  are,  however,  hardly  typical;  for  in  them  the
brain  is  not  truly  creative  ; it  merely  gives  tlie  inevitable  response  to
the  stimuli  that  reach  it  from  below.  They  are  moreover  normal  ex-
periences, in  the  sense  that  they  would  occur  similarly  to  all  persons
with  normal  eyes.  Let  us  then  take  another  instance,  Avhere  the  mind’s
creative  role  is  fully  apparent,  while  at  tlie  same  time  the  primary  exci-
tation is  clearly  not  central.  Certain  hallucinations — as  is  well  known
— are  uniliteral,  i.e.,  are  perceived  when  (say)  the  right  eye  or  ear  is  act-
ing, but  cease  when  that  action  is  obstructed,  though  the  left  eye  or  ear
is  still  free.  How  this  is  in  itself  could  not  be  taken,  as  some  take  it,'^'
for  a proof  that  the  c.xciting  cause  was  not  central  ; it  might  be  a
lesion  affecting  one  side  of  the  brain.  But  very  commonly,  in  these
cases,  a distinct  lesion  is  found  in  the  particular  eye  or  ear  on  wliose
activity  the  hallucination  depends ; f and  it  is  then  natural  to  conclude
that  the  hallucination  was  the  result  of  the  lesion,  and  that  the  one-

*r)r.  Ilegis  in  L'E)iccphale,  1881,  p.  51  ; Prof.  Ball  in  L'Encc-phalc,
882,  p.  5.

f Dr.  Ilegis  in  L’Encrphalc,  1881,  p.  46;  AI.  A'oi.sin  in  the  Bulletin  de
Thh'upcutiquc.  A"ol.  XXXIX.  ; Dr.  Despine,  Bsychologie  Naturcllc,  Ami.  II.,
]).  29  ; Krall’t-Ebing,  Die  Sinncsdclirien,  p.  25.


IlaUucinations.


161


sidedness  of  the  one  depended  on  the  one-sidedness  of  the  other.  The
justice  of  the  conclusion  has  been  proved  in  many  cases  by  the
fact  that  tlie  hallucination  has  ceased  when  the  local  lesion
has  been  cured.  Other  cases  which  strongly  suggest  a morbid
condition  of  the  external  organ  are  those  where  the  imaginary
figure  moves  in  accordance  with  the  movements  of  the  eye.
The  visual  hallucinations  of  the  blind,  and  the  auditory  hallucinations  of
the  deaf,  would  also  naturally  be  referred  to  the  same  class — the  seat  of
excitation  being  then,  not  necessarily  the  external  organ  itself,  but
some  point  on  the  nervous  path  from  the  organ  to  the  brain.  In  the
case,  for  instance,  of  a partly-atrophied  nerve,  the  morbid  excitation
would  be  at  the  most  external  point  where  vital  function  continued.*
It  should  be  noted,  in  passing,  that  a distinct  lesion,  e.g.,  atrophy  of  the
globe  of  one  eye,  may  give  rise  to  hilnteral  hallucinations  ( Vienna
Asglum  Rei^ort,  1858),  or  to  unilateral  hallucinations  of  the  sound  eye —
the  latter  being  no  doubt  affected  directly  by  the  brain.

4.  External  Excitation  of  Hallucinations.

But  we  may  now  proceed  a step  further.  The  excitation  may  be
external  not  only  in  the  sense  of  coming  from  the  external  organ,  but
in  the  sense  of  coming  from  the  external  world.  It  may  be  due  not  to
any  abnormality  of  the  eye  or  the  nerve,  but  to  the  ordinary  stimulus
of  light-rays  from  real  objects.  M.  Binet  is  the  first  who  has  given  the
complete  evidence  for  this  fact,  accompanied  by  a scientific  explanation
of  it  ;t  and  in  so  doing,  he  has  made  a contribution  to  the  learning  of
the  subject  second  in  importance  only  to  that  of  Baillarger.

M.  Billet’s  experiments  were  conducted  on  five  hypnotised  girls  at
the  Salpetriere,  who  could  be  made  to  see  anything  that  was  suggested
to  them  ; and  also  on  an  insane  woman  at  St.  Anne,  who  had  a stand-
ing Ausual  hallucination  of  her  own.  The  experiments  may  be  divided
into  two  sets — those  conducted  with,  and  those  conducted  without,
special  optical  apparatus.  The  results  of  both  sets  confirmed  the  rule
first  enunciated  by  M.  Fere — that  “ the  imaginary  object  is  perceived

* Delusions  due  to  visceral  disturbances  are  often  quoted  as  cases  of
hallucination  excited  from  parts  below  the  brain.  Thus  a woman  dying  of
peritonitis  declares  that  an  ecclesiastical  conclave  is  being  held  inside  her
(Esquirol,  Mentales,  Vol.  I.,p.  211).  But  here  there  is  a prior  and

independent  basis  of  dLstinet  sensation  ; so  that  the  experience  would  at  most
be  an  illusion.  And  it  is  hardly  even  that ; for  one  cannot  say  tliat  the
false  object  is  sensorially  presented  at  all ; no  one  knows  what  a conclave  in
such  a locality  would  actually  feel  like ; the  conclave  is  merely  a delire — an
imagination  suggested  by  sensation,  but  which  does  not  'tself  take  a sensory
form.

T In  the  Revue  Philosophiquc,  April  and  Majq  1884.

M


162


Hallucinations.


under  the  same  conditions  as  a real  one  ” ; but  to  this  M.  Binet  adds
the  further  conclusion,  that  a sensation  derived  from  a real  external
source  occupying  the  same  position  in  space  as  the  imaginary  object
seemed  to  occupy,  was  an  indispensable  factor  of  the  hallucination.  The
results  obtained  Avithout  special  apparatus  do  not  appear  to  me  at  all  to
justify  this  conclusion.  They  Avere  (1)  suppression  of  the  imaginary
object  by  closure  of  the  eyes  ; (2)  suppression  of  the  imaginary  object
by  the  interposition  of  an  opacjue  screen  betAveeii  the  eye  and  the  place
where  the  object  seemed  to  be  ; (3)  doubling  of  the  imaginary  object
by  lateral  pressui’e  of  one  eycljall.  M.  Binet  argues  that  the  suppres-
sion in  the  first  two  cases,  and  the  doubling  in  the  third,  depended  on  the
suppression  and  the  doubling  of  a real  sensation,  physically  induced  by
rays  from  the  direction  in  Avhich  the  object  Avas  seen.  But  the  fact  that
external  objects  are  hidden  from  vieAV  by  the  interposition  of  our  OAvn
eyelids  or  any  other  opaque  obstacle,  has  become  to  us  a piece  of  abso-
lutely instinctive  knoAvledge  ; and  Ave  should  surely  expect  that  an  object
Avhich  Avas  but  the  spontaneous  projection  of  a morbid  brain,  might  still
be  suppressed  by  movements  and  sensations  Avhich  had  for  a lifetime  been
intimately  associated  Avith  the  suppression  of  objects.  And  as  regai'ds
the  doubling  by  pressure  of  the  eyeball,  it  can  be  perfectly  explained  on
Baillarger’s  principles — by  supposing  that  an  excitation  Avhich  has  been
centrally  initiated  spreads  outAvards  to  the  peripheral  expansion  of  the
optic  nerve.

When,  hoAvever,  Ave  turn  to  the  other  group  of  experiments,  the  ca.se
is  very  different.  The  instruments  used  Avere  a prism,  a spy-glass,  and  a
mirror.  It  Avould  occupy  too  much  space  to  describe  the  results  in
detail.  It  is  enough  to  say  that  tlie  prism  applied  to  one  eye
doubled  the  imaginary  ol.ject;*  that  the  spy -glass  removed  or
approximated  it  according  as  the  object-glass  or  eye-piece  Avas  applied
to  the  patient’s  eye  ; that  the  mirror  i-eflected  the  object  and  gave
a symmetrical  image  of  it ; and  that  the  optical  effect,  as  regards
angles  of  deviation  and  reflexion  and  all  the  details  of  the  illusion,
Avas  in  every  case  precisely  Avhat  it  Avould  have  been  had  the  object
been  real  instead  of  imaginary.  Here  then  Ave  are  fairly  driven  out-
side the  patient’s  OAvn  organism  ; it  seems  impossible  to  deny  that  some
point  of  external  space  at  or  near  the  seat  of  the  imagined  object  plays  a
real  part  in  the  phenomenon.!  To  this  point  M.  Binet  gives  the  name  of

* The  observation  Avas  first  made  by  iM.  Fere  ; see  Lc  Progv'cs  Medical,
1881,  p.  1040.

f One  reservation  must  be  made.  It  is  just  conceivable  that  the  clianges
Avrought  on  the  imaginary  percept  were  due,  not  to  tlie  optical  instruments,  but
to  thought-transference.  For  M.  Binet  and  liis  assistants  of  course  kneAV  them-
selves, in  each  case,  the  particular  optical  effect  to  be  expected.  An  experi-
menter Avho  has  not  expressly  recognised  the  reality  or  the  possibility  of  thought-


Halhicinations.


163


point  de  repere ; and  he  regards  it  as  producing  a nucleus  of  sensa-
tion to  which  the  hallucination  accretes  itself.  When  the  2^o{nt  de
repere  is  in  such  a position  as  to  be  reflected  by  the  mirror,  then  the  im-
aginary object  is  reflected,  and  not  otherwise ; the  object  is,  so  to  speak,
attached  to  its  point  de  repere,  and  will  follow  the  course  of  any  optical
illusions  to  which  its  sensory  nucleus  is  subjected.  According  to  this
view,  the  only  truly  sensory  part  of  the  phenomenon  is  supplied  by  the
point  de  repere  ; all  the  rest  is  a “ hypertrophied  image  ” imposed  on  it
by  the  mind.

These  conclusions  are  entirely  foreign  to  any  former  theory  of
hallucination.  hTone  of  the  contending  parties,  not  even  the  early
champions  of  a j^urely  peripheral  origin,  had  ever  dreamt  of  excitants
outside  the  eye  itself.  Oddly  enough,  M.  Binet  seems  hardly  aware  of
his  own  originality.  He  remarks  that  the  general  view  now  is  that
hallucinations  are  always  the  product  of  real  sensation  ; and  he  divides
them  into  two  classes, — those  where  the  sensation  is  initiated  in  the
sensory  organ  by  an  external  object(“  Itallacuiations  d cause  objective  ”) ;
and  those  where  it  is  initiated  b}^  a morbid  local  irritation  of  the  sensory
organ  itself  (“  ludlucinations  d cmise  subjective  ”).  As  pi’actically  the
inventor  of  the  former  class,  M.  Binet  is  really  the  first  person  who  has
had  a right  to  this  “general  view.”  But  his  modesty  connects  itself  with
a serious  historical  error.  For  he  still  retains  Baillarger's  term — psycho-
sensorial — and  actually  refers  to  Baillarger  as  having  meant  the  same
by  that  term  as  he  himself  does.  With  Baillarger — as  we  have  seen —
the  “ sensorial  ” element  was  imposed  or  evoked  by  “ the  intelligence,”
not  supplied  to  it ; and  was  not  an  unnoticed  peg  for  the  hallucination,
but  its  very  fulness  and  substance.  Baillarger  explicitly  lays  down,  as
one  of  the  prime  conditions  for  hallucination,  a “ suspension  of  external
impressions  ” ; and  gives  as  the  definition  of  a psycho-sensorial  hallucina-
tion “a  sensory  perception  independent  of  all  external  excitation
of  the  sense  organs,”  including  excitation  morbidly  initiated  in
the  organs  themselves.*  The  opposition  is  really  complete.  Of
all  the  optical  illusions  described  by  M.  Binet,  the  only  one
which  Baillarger’s  doctrine  would  explain  is  the  doubling  of  the

transference  would  never  think  of  so  arranging  his  experiment  that  he  himself
should  not  know,  till  after  the  result,  which  instrument  was  in  use  or  what  was
its  position  ; nor  indeed  is  it  easy  to  imagine  how  such  a condition  could  in
practice  be  carried  out.  The  point  seems  worth  suggesting,  as  it  would  be  most
interesting  if  a state  of  hallucination  turned  out  to  be  one  in  which  the
“ subject  ” is  specially  susceptible  to  “ transferred  impressions.’’

* Baillarger,  Dcs  HallHclnatioas,  pp.  426,  469,  and  470.  A similar
misreading  of  Baillarger,  contained  in  a single  sentence,  is  the  one  point  from
which  I dissent  in  the  extremely  clear  and  concise  chapter  on  the  subject  in  IMr.
Sully ’s  Illusions.


164


HaUucuiatlons.


object  by  jaressure  on  the  side  of  the  eyeball;  for  this  alone  could  be
accounted  for  by  supposing  the  retina  to  1 >e  excited  from  the  brain.  The
novelty  of  M.  Binet's  own  results  is  that  they  force  us  to  regard  the
external  impression  as  not  only  present  but  indispensable,  at  any  rate
at  the  moment  when  the  optical  instruments  produce  their  characteristic
effects.

But  while  admiring  tlie  manner  in  which  M.  Binet  has  marshalled
his  facts,  and  recognising  that  they  have  led  him  to  a most  interesting
discovery,  I cannot  accept  his  conclusions  beyond  a certain  point.  He
applies  conceptions  drawn  from  his  special  department  of  obsei'vation  to
the  whole  field,  and  considers  that  hallucinations  are  exhausted  by  the
two  classes  just  defined — i.e.,  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  central
initiation.  Now  even  for  the  cases  “ a cause  objective, to  which  the
novel  experimental  results  belong,  it  is  important  to  observe  that  though
the  excitation  comes  from  outside,  the  halliicinatiooi — the  object  as
actually  perceived — is  still  (as  Baillarger  taught)  a pure  product  of  the
mind.  Everything  about  it,  including  its  false  air  of  reality,  is  brain-
created  ; and  the  occasioning  or  evoking  cause  has  no  place  in  it.  But
if  this  be  so — and  M.  Binet  himself  has  practically  admitted  it — we
caniiot  consent  to  call  the  external  excitation  of  the  organ  scAisation.
IM.  Binet  so  treats  it  throughout — as  a sensation  atrophied,  indeed,  and
clothed  upon  with  hypertrophical  and  delusive  images  ; but  still  as
sensation — as  a psychical  element  in  the  result.  Now  in  considering
Delbceuf’s  experiment  above,  wm  objected  to  the  notion  that  the  spectator
had  a sensation  of  grey  which  he  clothed  with  an  image  of  green.  The
physical  rays  that  met  his  eye  were  such  as  normally  produce  the
sensation  of  grey  ; that  is  the  only  way  in  which  the  word  grey  can  be
brought  into  the  account ; psychically,  no  colour  but  green  was  present.
Just  the  same  objection  applies  to  saying  of  the  hypnotic  “ subject  ” that
he  is  receiving  from  part  of  the  table-cloth  a “ sensation  ” of  white,
Avhich  he  clothes  witli  an  image  of  a brown  butterfly  ; or  of  the  patient
in  delirium  tremens,  tliat  ho  is  receiving  from  the  wall-paper  “ sensa-
tions ” of  drab  which  he  clothes  with  images  of  black  mice.  In  neither
case  is  there  a “ perturbation  of  sensorial  functions  ” in  M.  Binet’s  sense.
Tlie  sensorial  elements,  the  bi’own  and  the  black,  spring  from  a new
activity  witliin ; they  are  not  the  outcome  of  functions  exercised  on
the  table-cloth  or  the  wall-paper — not  a perverted  transcript  of  white
and  dral).

Holding  fast  to  this  view,  Ave  can  still  perfectly  well
explain  M.  Binet’s  results,  even  in  tlie  hypnotic  cases  on  which
he  chiefly  relies.  If  the  yoint  de  repere  is  not  at,  but  close  to
tlie  spot  where  the  imaginary  object  apjDears  (as  seems  to
have  been  the  case  in  some  of  the  experiments),  there  is  no  difficulty.
The  -point  de  repere  is  then  itself  part  of  Avhat  is  all  along  perceived  ;


Hallucincdiom.


1G5


and  in  any  effects  produced  on  it  by  optical  apparatus,  it  will  carry  the
neighbouring  object  with  it  by  association.  If,  however,  the  actual
area  covered  by  the  object  is  sufficiently  distinguished  from  its  surround-
ings to  act  itself  as  2?oi7it  cle  reph'C,  and  no  other  possible  jwints  cle  reptre
exist  in  the  field  of  vision,*  the  case  is  different,  but  can  still  be
explained.  It  will  not  be  disputed  that  a slightly  longer  time  is  neces-
sary for  the  formation  of  the  image  of  a suggested  object  and  the
conversion  of  this  image  into  a percept,  than  for  the  experience  of
sensation  from  an  object  actually  before  the  eyes.  When  therefore  the
operator  points  to  a particular  place  on  the  white  table-cloth,  and  says
“ There  is  a lu'own  butterfly,”  Ave  may  suppose  that  in  the  patient’s
consciousness  a real  sensation  of  Avhite  precedes  by  an  instant  the
imposed  sensation  of  broAvn.  So  Avhen  the  cardboard  on  Avhich  a non-
existent portrait  has  just  been  seen  is  again  brought  before  the  patient’s
eyes,  it  is  almost  certain  that  the  recognition  of  it  as  the  same  piece  of
Avhite  cardboard  (known  by  its  points  de  repere)  precedes  by  an  instant
the  hallucinatory  j^rocess  and  the  re-imposition  of  the  jAortrait.  That
there  is  this  instant  of  true  sensation  seems  to  be  shown,  indeed,  by  one
of  M.  Binet’s  OAvn  experiments.  The  patient  having  been  made  to  see
an  imaginary  portrait  on  a blank  piece  of  cardboard,  this  Avas  suddenly
cOAnred  by  a sheet  of  paper.  The  patient  said  that  the  portrait  disap-
peared  for  a moment,  but  then  reappeared  on  the  paper  Avith  complete
distinctness.  We  may  thus  fairly  conclude  that  an  area  Avhich  Avas
actually  seen  before  the  hallucination  Avas  induced  in  the  first  instance,
Avill  also  be  actually  seen  for  a moment  Avhen  vision  is  redirected  to  it
(or  its  reflexion),  after  the  prism  or  spy-glass  has  been  brought  into  play.
During  that  moment,  it  Avill  of  course  be  seen  under  the  neAv  illusi\’e
optical  conditions  ; and  association  may  again  cause  the  object  Avhich
supplants  it  to  folloAv  suit.  There  can  be  no  objection,  hoAvcA^er,  to
supposing  that  the  supplanted  area  continues  further  to  provoke  the
hallucination,  in  the  same  sense  that  the  Avhite  rays  proAnked  the  green
percept  in  Delboeuf’s  experiment.  The  rays  Avhich  are  lost  to  sensation
continue  to  excite  the  sensorium  physically  ; and  Avhat  M.  Binet  says  of
the  sensation  only  needs  to  be  transferred  to  the  physical  excitation —
Avhich  AAull  have  definite  peculiarities,  corresponding  to  the  distinguish-
ing marks  of  the  area  Avhence  it  comes.  Double  this  excitation  by  a
prism,  or  reflect  it  from  another  quarter,  and  the  percept  Avhich  it

* I cannot  cprite  make  out  AA'hether  tliese  conditions  Avere  ever  exactly
realised.  In  the  case  Avhere  an  imaginary  portrait  had  been  CA'oked  on  a jnece
of  cardboard,  and  this  piece  Avas  subsequently  picked  out  by  the  patient  from
among  a number  of  similar  ones,  I gather  thattliere  Avas  some  recognisable  mark
external  to  the  area  of  the  portrait.  It  is  said  that  lateral  pressure  doubled  tlie
image,  even  Avhen  tlie  eyes  AA'ere  “fixed  on  the  uniform  surface  of  the  Avail.”
But  this  ]Aarticular  optical  effect,  as  Ave  have  already  noticed,  does  not  imply  the
presence  of  points  clc  repere  at  all.


166


IIaUucin(dlo)is.


provokes  may  naturally  be  doubled  or  seen  in  the  new  direction.  So,  if
both  eyes  were  emi^loyed  in  Delboeuf’s  experiment,  might  the  green
percept  be  artificially  doubled.

I am  aware  that  this  substitution  of  the  physical  for  the  psychical
term  may  appear  very  unimportant  and  even  pedantic  ; but  in  truth  it
is  not  so.  For  it  is  really  his  psychical  exi^ression  of  the  external
stimulus  in  these  cases  that  has  led  IM.  Binet  to  regard  hallucinations
as  simply  a monstrous  form  of  iUu>>ion,  and  to  enunciate  a general
formula  for  them  which — for  all  its  attractive  and  original  aii' — seems
radically  unsound.  He  considei’s  them  the  fntholoyieal — ns  ojyposed  to
the  normal — -form  of  external  inrception.  As  in  normal  perception,  we
have  a visual  sensation  which  we  associate  with  true  images,  so,  he
holds,  in  hallucinations  we  have  a visual  sensation  which  Ave  associate
Avith  false  images.  The  looseness  of  this  airalogy  is  surely  obvious,  and
the  apparent  symmetry  of  the  tAvo  cases  quite  unreal.  In  normal
vlision,  the  true  images  Avhich  (according  to  M.  Binet’s  OAvn  account)  Ave
primarily  associate  Avith  the  A’isual  sensation,  are  not  visual,  but
muscular  and  tactile  images,  Avhereby  Ave  attach  the  ideas  of  Aveight,
solidity,  and  distance  to  Avhat  Ave  see.  The  process  through  Avhich  Ave
get  the  perception  of  a real  external  object  is  thus  primarily  an  associa-
tion betAveen  jDsychical  elements  belonging  to  different  senses — a visual
sensation,  Avliich  the  brahi  receives,  and  non-visual  images,  Avhich  the
brain  supiAlies  ; and  if  Ave  convert  the  non-visual  images  into  sensations
liy  touching  or  ju'essing  the  object,  Ave  get  a Aerification  of  its  external
reality.  Xoav,  if  INI.  Binet’s  formula  is  to  hold,  and  hallucinations  are
the  pathological  foi'in  of  external  perception,  Ave  ought  to  find  that  they
are  produced  Avhen  for  the  true  images  of  normal  perception  Ave  substi-
tute,/((Zsc  images.  Is  this  the  case  1 Suppose  a hypnotic  j^atient  to  be
impressed  Avith  the  idea  that  a piece  of  Avhite  j^aper  is  a red  rose  ;
Avould  it  be  a right  account  of  his  hallucination  to  say  that  he
receiA’es  a A’isual  sensation,  and  then  associates  Avith  it  false
muscular  and  tactile  imaa’es  ? Certainlv  not  : Avhat  he  does  is
to  see  uirotKj  to  begin  Avith,  to  see  false  form  and  false  colour — things
quite  distinct  in  cliai'acter  from  ideas  of  Aveight,  solidity  and  distance,
and  Avhich  might  exist  in  the  absence  of  any  such  ideas.  It  is  true  that
Avhen  he  has  this  visual  experience,  habit  leads  him  to  go  on  and  connect
it  Avith  false  images  of  Aveight,  solidity  and  distance ; but  that  is  a
secondary  result.  Hallucination  does  not  depend  on  the  falsity  of  those
images  ; and,  indeed,  the  test  of  touching  and  pressing  Avould  often  fail
to  demonstrate  their  falsity,  OAving  to  the  freijiient  sympathy  of  several
senses  in  hallucination.  The  essential  fact  is  immediate,  and  consists
simply  in  having  a visual  experience  tvhich  others  cannot  share — in
seeing  Avhat  is  invisible  to  a normal  eye.  This  becomes  clearer  still,  if
Ave  make  the  imaginary  object  correspond  to  a real  object  in  eA'erything


Hallucinations.


167


except  colour.  Let  the  patient  be  led  to  believe  that  a green  stick  of
sealing-wax  is  a red  stick  ; then,  whatever  tests  be  adopted,  he  will
share  with  normal  persons  every  sensation  except  the  visual ; but  none
the  less  will  the  process  of  hallucination  be  complete.  This  process,
then,  is  no  way  parallel  to  that  of  normal  perception.  It  is  not,  as
that  was,  an  association  between  psychical  elements  belonging  to
different  senses ; and  its  sensory  part,  the  essence  of  which  is  redness,
is  not — as  in  the  normal  perception  of  a red  object — received  by  the
brain,  but  is  imposed  by  it.  By  what  right  can  processes  so  different
je  represented  as  co-ordinate — -as  the  healthy  and  the  morbid  exercise
of  the  same  function  ?

5.  Cases  where  External  Excitation  is  Doubtful.

So  far  I have  considered  M.  Binet’s  theory  only  in  relation  to  his
own  cases — where  it  wms  easy  to  concede  the  fact  of  excitation  from
without,  whatever  be  our  view  of  its  share  in  the  phenomena.  It
remains  to  consider  the  numerous  cases — the  large  majority  of  the
whole  body  of  hallucinations — where  this  excitation  is  itself  doubtful,
or  more  than  doubtful.  Let  us  take  the  doubtful  cases  first.

In  the  optical  experiments  it  was,  of  course,  convenient  that  the
hallucination  should  be  projected  on  a fiat  opaque  surface  ; and  on  such
a surface  the  objective  jjoints  de  repere  may  be  easily  found.  But  it  is
quite  as  easy  to  make  the  patient  see  objects  in  free  space — say,  out
in  the  middle  of  the  room  ; and  such  is  the  common  form  of  spontaneous
hallucinations,  both  of  sane  and  insane  persons,  where  human  figures
are  seen.  The  eyes  are  then  focussed,  not  on  the  real  objects  from
which  jjoints  de  repere  would  have  to  be  supplied,  but  on  the  figure
itself ; which  may  be  much  nearer  than  the  wall  behind  it,  and  may
thus  require  a very  diflerent  adjustment  of  the  eyes.  And  here  lies
a difficulty  for  the  hypothesis  that  the  hallucination  depends  on  some
definite  external  excitation  of  the  retina.  For  the  real  objects  wdiich
are  the  supposed  excitants,  though  in  the  line  of  sight,  are  not  within
the  range  of  clear  vision  for  eyes  adjusted  to  the  imaginary  object.
Can  the  i^oints  de  repere  be  supposed  to  excite  a percept  whose  position
is  such  that,  for  it  to  be  clearly  visible,  they  themselves  must  cease
to  be  so  ? It  is  a good  deal  to  require  of  them.  Still,  M.  Binet’s
experiment  with  the  insane  patient  is  a very  striking  one.  This  woman,
Celestine  by  name,  had  an  imaginary  attendant  called  Guiteau.
Guiteau  lent  himself  to  scientific  tests,  and  was  doubled  by  a prism  and
reflected  by  a mirror  in  the  most  orthodox  fashion.  This  undoubtedly
implied  points  de  repere — j^i’obably  situated  near,  and  not  on,  the  area
which  Guiteau  concealed.  One  would  like,  however,  to  know  exactly
how  his  figure  was  situated  in  relation  to  its  background.  The  distance


168


Hallucinations.


between  the  two  may  have  been  inconsiderable  ; and  in  that  case  the
fact  of  the  doubling  and  the  reflection  would  not  prove  the  2^oints  de
reph’e  to  have  been  an  essential  condition  of  the  hallucination.  For,
when  the  patient  is  made  to  look  attentively  at  the  figure,  as  a
preliminary  to  the  optical  tests,  the  very  fixity  of  the  gaze  may  then
and  there  establish  the  p)oints  de  repere  which  will  enal)le  those  tests
to  succeed-  It  would  be  interesting  to  know  whether  Guiteau  would
be  reflected  when  he  was  not  being  specially  stared  at,  supposing  that
there  was  a mirror  in  an  appropriate  position.*

The  supposed  necessity  of  the  external  excitation  might  be  other-
wise tested  thus.  Suppose  Celestine  to  be  placed  in  a white  spherical
chamber,  lit  from  a point  directly  above  her  head.  Here  there  would
be  no  points  de  repere—VLO  special  points  of  external  excitation  with
which  an  imaginary  object  could  be  connected.  The  only  excitant  to  the
eye  would  be  perfectly  uniform  white  light ; and  this  excitant  would

* In  the  case  of  the  hypnotic  “ subjects,”  a certain  peculiarity  in  the  fixed
regard,  such  as  might  establish  points  dc  rephrc,  is  strongly  suggested  by  the
following  fact.  In  some  cases,  after  a screen  had  been  interposed  between  the
patient’s  eyes  and  the  imaginary  object,  she  continued  to  see  not  only  that
object  (say,  a mouse),  but  a real  object  (say,  a hat)  on  which  it  had  been  placed.
Thus  the  hat  assumed  the  property — shared  by  the  imaginary  mouse,  but
unshared  by  any  other  real  objects — of  remaining  as  a percept  in  spite  of  an
opaque  barrier.

As  regards  reflexion,  the  following  case  from  the  Society’s  collection  is  of
interest  ; it  is  from  Mr.  Adrian  Stokes,  hl.R.C.S.,  of  Sidmouth  : —

“When  I was  living  in  Bedford  Street  North,  Liverpool,  in  the  year  1857
(I  think),  my  wife  roused  me  from  sleep  suddenly  and  said,  ‘ Oh  ! Adrian,
there’s  Agnes  ! ’ I started  uir,  crying,  ‘ Where  ? Where  ? ’ but,  of  course,
there  was  no  Agnes.  My  wife  then  told  me  that  she  had  awoke,  and  had  seen
the  form  of  her  only  sister,  Agnes,  sitting  on  the  ottoman  at  the  foot  of  the  bed.
On  seeing  this  form  she  felt  frightenetl ; but  then,  recalling  her  courage,  she
thought  if  the  figure  were  real  she  worrld  be  able  to  see  it  reflected  in  the  mirror
of  the  wardrobe,  which  she  liad  in  full  view  as  she  lay  in  bed.  Directing  her
eyes,  therefore,  to  the  mirror,  there  she  saw,  by  the  light  of  the  fire  that  Avas
burning  brightly  in  the  grate,  the  full  reliection  of  the  form  seated  on  the
ottoman,  looking  at  a bunch  of  keys  Avhich  she  appeared  to  hold  in  her  hand.
Under  the  startling  eifect  caused  by  this  sight,  she  called  me  to  look  at  it,  but,
before  I was  aAvake,  the  form  and  its  reflexion  had  vanished.  It  Avas  not  a
dream,  my  Avife  is  certain.

F.S. — When  my  Avife  saAV  her  sister  sitting  at  the  foot  of  our  bed  looking
at  the  bunch  of  keys,  she  (the  sister)  Avas  clad  in  the  ordinary  indoor  dress  of  the
time.  I remember  the  start  of  surprise  Avith  Avliich  I aAvoke  and  exclaimed.
My  AAufe  has  never,  that  I knoAv  of,  experienced  any  hallucination  or  delirium  ;
and  is  a Avoman  of  excellent  sense  and  judgment.  She  never  saAV  any  other
vision  but  that  one.”

Here,  hoAvever,  the  expectant  imagination  of  the  percipient  may  have  been
adequate  to  conjure  up  the  reflected  figure,  and  the  case  does  not  therefore
support  M.  Binet’s  theory.


HaUiicinations.


169


remain  identical,  in  whatever  direction  the  eye  tuimed.  Consequently,
if  the  external  excitation  he  a necessary  factor  in  the  production  of
Guiteau,  he  ought,  if  seen  at  all,  to  be  seen  wherever  Celestine  looked  ;
there  would  be  nothing  to  attach  him  to  any  particular  spot.  It  is  rash
to  prophesy  ; but  I strongly  suspect  that  he  wmuld  prove  more  amenable,
and  that  Celestine  would  retain  her  power  of  turning  her  back  on  him.
Such,  in  my  view,  would  be  the  natural  result  : a figure  spontaneously
projected  by  the  brain  would  be  located  as  an  independent  object,  and
looked  at  or  not  at  pleasure.  It  would  be  interesting  to  know,  further,
if  Guiteau  is  ever  seezr  in  the  dark.  But  it  should  be  observed  that
light  may  favour  and  darkness  hinder  the  projection  of  a phantasm,
owing  to  the  ditFerent  effect  of  the  one  and  the  other  on  the  general
physiological  state.  The  presence  of  light  might  thus  be  a necessity,
quite  apart  from  any  distinguishable  de  repere.  In  the  same  way

the  presence  of  light  is  occasionally  found  to  be  a condition  of  auditory
hallucinations  which  even  M.  Binet  would  find  it  hard  to  compound
out  of  a “ sensation  ” of  light  and  an  “ image  ” of  sound.

But  the  difficulty  of  regarding  external  points  of  excitation  as  a
necessary  condition  becomes  even  greater  when  the  hallucination  is  a
moving  one.  As  to  these  cases,  M.  Binet  can  only  say  that  the  point
de  repere  keeps  changing  ; that  is,  as  the  imaginary  figure  passes  along
the  side  of  the  room,  in  front  of  a multitude  of  different  objects —
pictures,  paper,  furniture,  ikc. — the  very  various  excitations  from  these
several  objects  act  in  turn  as  the  basis  of  the  same  delusive  image.  We
may  surely  hesitate  to  accept  such  an  assertion,  till  some  sort  of  proof
of  it  is  offered  ; and  it  is  hard  to  conceive  of  what  nature  the  proof  could
be.  The  case  of  course  differs  altogether  from  that  where  the  imaginary
figure  follows  the  movements  of  the  eye,  owing  to  some  morbid  alFection
of  that  organ  which  acts  as  a real  moving  substratum  for  it.  Instead  of
the  figure’s  following  the  eye,  the  eye  is  now  following  the  figure  in  its
seemingly  independent  course.  What  is  there  to  produce  or  to  guide
the  selection  of  ever-new  points  de  repere  ? To  what  external  cause  can
M.  Binet  ascribe  the  pei’petual  substitution  of  one  of  them  for  another  ?
On  my  view — that  the  figure  may  be  centrally  initiated,  no  less  than
centrally  created — none  of  these  difficulties  occur.  Such  a figure  may

* Ball,  Logons  sur  Ics  Maladies  Mcntalcs,  p.  116.  See  also  the  very  interest-
ing case  given  by  Professor  F.  Jolly  in  the  ArcJuv  fiir  Psychiatric,  Vol.  VI. ,p.
495.  His  paper  is  on  the  production  of  auditory  hallucinations  by  t. re  applica-
tion of  an  electric  current  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  ear.  In  one  case,  he
shows  good  reason  for  attributing  the  hallucination,  not  to  a stimulation  of  the
auditory  nerve,  but  to  a transference  to  the  auditory  centre  of  the  stizuulus
given  to  fibres  of  the  .^/VA  nerve.  For  the  subjective  sounds  did  not,  as  in  all
the  other  cases,  correspond  in  a regular  way  to  tlie  opening  and  closing  of  the
current,  but  appeared  under  all  conditions  in  which  was  produced.


170


Hallucinations.


just  as  well  appear  in  the  empty  centre  of  the  room  as  on  a piece  of
cardboard,  and  may  just  as  well  move  as  stand  still.  The  same  sort  of
argument  applies  to  the  case  where  the  percipient  is  haunted  by  a figure
which,  however,  can  be  seen  only  in  one  direction.*  Thus  Baillarger
describes  a doctor  who  could  not  turn  without  finding  a little  black  cow
at  his  side.  The  mind  may  locate  its  puppet  according  to  its  own
vagaries ; and  this  e.xjDerience  is  very  like  a sensory  embodiment  of  the
well-known  delusion  that  somebody  is  always  behind  one.

G.  Cases  ivhere  Exiernnl  Excitation  is  Absent.

So  much,  then,  for  M.  Binet’s  hallucinations  “ a catise  objective.”  We
turn  nowto  the  vasst  body  of  caseswhere  excitation  from  the  outer  world  is
plainly  absent.  This  class  includes  phantasms  seen  in  the  dark,  and  proba-
bly the  vast  majority  ofauditory  hallucinations,  which  haveso  far  been  dis-
regarded. To  bring  these  under  M.  Binet’s  theory,  it  has  to  be  assumed
that  in  every  case  they  are  initiated  by  some  morbid  or  abirormal
condition  of  the  eye  or  the  ear.  The  assumjition  is,  to  say  the  least,  a
very  violent  one.  We  have  duly  noted  the  cases  where  hallucinations
have  l>een  undoubtedly  due  to  injury  of  the  external  organ  ; but  this
does  not  establish,  or  even  strongly  suggest,  the  existence  of  a similar
condition  in  cases  where  it  defies  detection.!  As  a rule,  where  the

* Ball,  Lcf^oussuv  Ics  Maladies  Mcntalcs,  p.  73  ; Baillarger,  Dcs  Hallucina-
tions, 11.  312.  Another  type  of  the  moving  hallucination  is  presented  by  Bayle’s
case  (llcmic  Medicalc,  182.5,  Vol.  I.  p.  .34),  where  a spider  used  first  to  appear
life-size,  and  then  gradually  to  expand  till  it  filled  the  whole  room.

t The  sweeping  method  seems  as  much  in  favour  now  as  at  the  earlier  stages
of  the  controversy.  As  Rl.  Binet  has  stated  his  case  in  a masterly  way,  I need
not  encumber  the  course  of  the  argument  by  perpetual  references  to  cognate
statements.  But  there  is  one  mode  of  presenting  the  rival  views  which  seems  so
established  in  the  recent  French  literature  that  it  will  be  well  to  reproduce  it
here  in  a succinct  form.  Writers  of  authority  (Frof.  Ball  in  L’Enccplialc,  1882,
p.  6,  and  in  Maladies  Alentales,  p.  Ill,  ikc.,  and  Dr.  Regis  in  his  classical  jiaper
on  unilateral  hallucinations  in  L'Encephale,  1881,  p.  44),  seem  never  to  have
conceived  the  theory  of  a purely  central  origin  in  any  other  light  than  as  the
“projection  of  an  idea  outwards” — a doctrine  which  they  regard  as  now
abandoned,  and  wliich  they  refer  to  only  in  its  most  anti(iuated  shape.  They
start  by  treating  the  “ mixed”  or  “ psycho-sensorial  ” theory  as  if  its  point  and
juirpose  had  been  to  assert  that  the  hodg  counts  for  something  in  hallucinations
--in  opposition  to  the  former  crudely  “psychical”  theory,  which  made  “the
imagination  ” act  independently  of  any  bodily  affection.  They  then  point  to
cases  where  hallucinations  have  plainly  been  due  to  a lesion  or  morbid  irritation
of  the  sensory  apparatus  ; and  they  adopt  this  morbid  condition  as  the  bodily
element  or  physical  basis  of  the  phenomenon — that  which  gives  it  its  mixed
character  and  makes  it  jisycho-scjisordrf  instead  of  psychical.  Thence  they
a.ssert,  as  an  indispensable  condition  of  every  hallucination,  that  the  imagination
must  be  set  to  work  liy  some  “ abnormal  sensation  ” derived  from  some  point  of


Hallucinations.


171


abnormal  condition  has  been  made  out,  hallucinations  have  not  been  its
only  result.  The  ulceration  of  the  cornea  which  initiates  visual
hallucinations  has  begun  by  affecting  the  vision  of  real  objects.  Illusions,
or  false  perceptions  of  colour,  often  precede  the  appearance  of  more
distinct  phantasms.*  So,  in  cases  of  more  transient  abnormality — such
as  the  well-known  illusions  hypnagogiques — other  signs  precede  the
hallucination.  The  observer,  whose  eyes  are  heavy  with  sleep,  begins
by  seeing  luminous  points  and  streaks,  which  shift  and  change  in
remai'kable  ways  ; and  it  is  from  these  as  nuclei  that  the  subsequent
pictures  develop.  Similarly  one  of  the  seers  of  “Faces  in  the  Dark  ”
(St.  James's  Gazette.,  February  10th,  Loth,  and  20th,  1882)  described
the  frequent  vision  of  a shower  of  golden  spangles,  which  changed  into
a flock  of  sheeq:!.  Now,  since  our  physiological  knowledge  leaves  no
doubt  that  tlie  points,  streaks  and  spangles  are  due  to  the  condition  of
the  retina,  it  is  i-easonable  in  such  cases  to  regard  this  condition  as
initiating  the  hallucination.  But  it  is  not  equally  reasonable  to  coir-
clude  that  the  process  must  be  the  same  for  cases  where  the  points,
streaks  and  sjDangles  are  absent.  I do  not  forget  that  even  a normal
eye  is  subject  to  affections  which  escape  attention,  until  a special  effort
is  made  to  realise  them.  But  wherever  the  hallucination  can  be
gradually  traced  in  its  development  from  more  rudimentary  sensations,
these  last  are  very  distinct  and  exceptional  things,  unknown  in  the
experience  of  most  of  us,  and  the  vision  itself  is  commonly  of  a changing
kind — the  features  developing  rapidly  out  of  one  another  ; often  also  of
a swarming  kind — detailed  landscapes,  elaborate  kaleidoscopic  patterns,

actual  lesion.  This  is  both  confused  and  confusing.  Hallucinations,  as  Ave  have
seen,  are  psyclio-sensorial  in  virtue  of  iheirnaturc,  not  of  their  origin — because
they  present  distinct  sensory  qualities — are  things  actually  seen  and  actually
heard — not  because  this  or  that  starting-point  can  be  assigned  them.  As  for
their  physical  basis,  that  can  be  nothing  else  than  a concurrent  state  of  morbid
activity  at  certain  cerebral  centres.  In  some  cases  tliis  activity  is  no  doubt  due
to  lesion  at  some  point  along  the  sensory  track  ; in  others,  as  I here  contend,  it
may  originate  at  tlie  centres  themselves  and  may  be  independent  of  any  excita-
tion previous  to  or  other  than  itself.  ^Yhether  right  or  wrong,  this  contention
Avill  certainly  not  be  ref  uted  by  confounding  it  with  the  antiipiated  “psychical  ”
view,  Avhich  took  no  count  either  of  a physical  basis  or  of  sensory  qualities.  As
for  the  “iirojection  of  an  idea  outwards,”  that  of  course  is  an  expression  of  the
immediate  fact  of  hallucination,  apart  from  the  question  of  the  excitant.  Wliy
should  it  be  abandoned  ? Is  it  not  at  any  rate  as  well  suited  to  its  purpose  as
the  only  piece  of  information  that  Prof.  Hall  offers  us  in  its  stead — namely,
that  hallucinations  are  the  creation  of  a brain  predisposed  to  create  them  ?

The  advocacy  of  the  “ cerebral  origin  ” must,  of  course,  not  be  taken  to
imply  that  the  condition  of  the  brain  is  isolated  from  that  of  tlie  rest  of  the  body.
The  abnormal  excitability  of  the  brain  may  be  intimately  connected  with  morbid
conditions  elsewhere  : all  that  is  contended  is  that  no  immediate  sensory  stimu-
lant is  needed  as  a definite  basis  or  jieg  for  hallucinations.

* Dr.  Max  Simon  in  the  Lyon  Medical,  Vol.  XXXV.,  p.  4,S9.


172


Ilalliicinations.


showers  of  flowers,  lines  of  writing  on  a luminous  ground,  and  so  on.*
ITow,  compare  such  experiences  with  ordinary  cases  of  “ghost-seeing”
in  the  dark.  A man  wakes  in  the  night,  and  sees  a luminous
figure  at  the  foot  of  his  bed.  Here  the  hallucination  comes  sud-
denly, single  and  complete,  to  a person  whose  eyes  are  open
and  unfatigued  ; it  is  not  preceded  by  any  peculiar  affection  of  vision,
is  not  developed  out  of  anything,  and  does  not  move,  or  swarm,
or  develop  fresh  features  ; nor  does  it  fulfil  M.  Binet’s  test  of
hallucinations  due  to  the  state  of  the  external  organ,  by  moving  as  the
eye  moves. f Such  visions  are  commonly  explained — aird  often,  no
doubt,  with  justice — as  due  to  nervousness  or  expectancy.  But  nervous-
ness and  ex]oectancy  surely  act  by  exciting  the  mind,  not  by  congesting
the  retina  ; they  work  on  the  imagination,  and  their  physical  seat  is  not
in  the  eye,  but  in  the  brain.  Why,  then,  should  not  the  brain  initiate
the  hallucination  1 Why  may  not  “ visions  of  the  dark,”  which  vary  so
greatly  both  in  themselves  and  in  the  general  conditions  of  their  appear-
ance, vary  also  in  their  seat  of  origin  1

The  auditory  cases  are  even  plainer.  For  it  is  only  exceptionally
that  the  waking  ear,  like  the  waking  eye,  is  subjected  to  marked  and
continuous  stimulation  from  without,  such  as  might  serve,  on  M.  Binet’s
view,  as  a basis  for  a prolonged  hallucination.  It  is  not  even  subject  to
border-land  experiences  analogous  to  the  ilh'sions  liyjmngogiques.  The
only  alternative,  therefore,  to  supposing  the  phenomena  to  be  centrally
initiated,  is  to  suppose  some  abnormality  in  the  external  organ  itself.
Such  an  aljnormality  has  often  been  detected  ; and  even  where  not
absolutely  detected,  it  may  sometimes  be  inferred  from  other  symptoms.
Thus,  an  enlarged  carotid  canal,  or  a stoppage  which  produces  an
unwonted  pressure  on  the  vessels,  will  first  make  itself  felt  by  hum-
mings  and  buzzings ; hallucination  then  sets  in,  and  imaginary  voices
are  heard,  and  these  then  we  should  naturally  trace  to  the  local  irrita-
tion that  produced  the  former  sounds.  But  why  are  we  to  treat  in  the
same  way  cases  where  there  are  no  hummings  and  buzzings,  and  no

* QaXion,  Inguirics  into  Human  Facidtij,  pp.  159-16,3;  Maury,  Lc  Sommcil
ct  Ics  Ilcvcs,  p.  331.

t iM.  Binet  treats  all  “ gliost-seers  ”as  so  paralysed  with  terror  that  they  do
not  move  their  eyes  from  the  figure — which  leaves  it  open  to  him  to  guess  that
the  figure  would  move  if  their  eyes  moved.  Having  juade  a large  collection
of  cases  of  hallucinations  of  the  sane,  I am  in  a position  to  deny  this.  To
Wundt,  also,  stationary  hallucinations  that  can  be  looked  away  from  seem
unknown  as  a distinct  and  fairly  common  type,  and  he  inclines  to  regard  them
as  mere  illusions.  Brewster’s  case  of  Mrs.  A.,  and  the  well-known  cases  given
by  F.ater.son  [Edinburgh  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,  -January,  18-13)  would
alone  suffice,  I think,  to  refute  this  view.  See  also  Kandinsky’s  and  Schroder
van  der  Kolk's  own  experiences.  [Archio  fiir  Psychiatric,  1881,  p.  401,  and
Pathology  and  Thcrap.  of  Modal  Diseases,  p.  14.)


Hallucinations.


17-3


grounds  for  supposing  that  there  is  stoppage  or  lesion  of  any  sort  ?
Among  a numerous,  though  much  neglected,  class  of  j^henomena — the
casual  hallucinations  of  the  sane — the  commonest  form  by  very  far  is
for  persons  to  hear  their  name  called  when  no  one  is  by.  The  expeiaejice
is  often  remai’kably  distinct,  causing  the  heai-er  to  start  and  turn  round.
It  is  not  at  all  connected  with  conditions  that  produce  blood-pressure,
such  as  lying  with  one  ear  closely  pressed  on  the  pillow  ; it  comes  in  a
sudden  and  detached  way,  and  apparently  at  quite  accidental  moments.
Again,  among  the  insane  a well-known  form  of  hallucination  occurs  in
the  form  of  dialogue ; the  patient  returns  answers  to  the  voices  that
haunt  him,  and  is  answered  in  turn.  Are  we  to  suppose  here  an
intermittent  abnormality  of  the  ear,  which  always  sets  in  by  chance  at
the  very  moment  when  the  imaginary  speaker’s  reiDlies  fall  due  1 It  may
be  added  that  even  where  a distinct  morbid  cause  can  be  traced,  it  is  as
often  as  not  a ceyitrnl  cause.  After  a long  course  of  alcohol,  a man
begins  to  hear  voices;  but  alcohol,  while  admittedly  affecting  brain-
tissue,  has  no  I’ecognised  tendency  to  affect  the  ear.

A further  argument  for  the  central  initiation  of  many  hallucinations
of  the  more  distinctly  morbid  sort  may  l^e  drawn  from  the  course  which
the  morbid  process  takes.  The  first  stage  is  often  not  a sensory  halluci-
nation at  all ; it  is  a mere  delusion  ; the  patient  thinks  that  plots  are
being  concocted  against  him.  After  a time  his  secret  enemies  begin  to
reveal  themselves,  and  he  hears  their  abusive  and  threatening  language.
"We  surely  cannot  asci’ibe  the  sensory  experience  here  to  a lesion  of  the
ear  which  happens  to  occur  independently,  but  regularly,  at  this  parti-
cular stage  ; it  follows,  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  most  natural  way,  if
we  regard  it  as  imposed  from  within,  as  soon  as  the  disease  has  gone
far  enough  for  the  mind  to  clothe  its  imaginary  fears  in  a more  vivid
form.  Specially  conclusive  in  this  respect  are  the  cases  where  voices
begin  to  address  the  patient  in  the  most  internal  way,  without  sound,
and  only  after  a time  talk  in  a distinctly  audible  charactei'.*  But  the
most  interesting  of  all  the  cases  in  point  are  those  where  one  type  of
hallucination  assails  one  side  of  the  body  and  another  the  other,  f They
confirm  what  was  said  above — that  the  mere  fact  of  a hallucination
being  unilateral,  or  peculiar  to  one  side  of  the  body,  though
suggesting  a defect  in  the  external  oi’gan,  is  by  no  means  a proof
of  it.  J The  double  sensory  experience  follows  Avith  exactness  tlm
course  of  the  delusions.  The  patient  first  suffers  from  melancholy
and  discouragement ; this  develops  into  a belief  that  he  is  surrounded

“ Griesinger’s  Ment.  Path,  and  Thcr.,  p.  89.  The  bearing  of  this  fact  on
the  theory  of  central  origin  has  been  noted  by  Mr.  Sully,  Illusions,  p.  119.

t See  Dr.  IMagnan’s  account  in  the  Archives  clc  Neurologic,  Vol.  YI.,  p.  .930.

X Cf  Dr.  A.  Ilobertson  in  the  Picport  of  the  International  Medical  Congress,
1881,  Yol.  III.,  pp.  632-3.


174


HaUiicinations.


by  enemies  ; and  he  then  hears  insulting  voices  on  the  right  side.  To
this  unhappy  stage  succeeds  in  due  course  one  of  exaltation  and  self-
esteem ; the  patient  believes  himself  to  be  the  Son  of  God.  And  now
encouraging  and  eulogistic  voices  present  themselves , on  the  left  side.
“ The  good  and  the  evil  genii  form  a sort  of  Manicheism  which  governs
him.”  Here  the  imagination,  as  its  operations  became  more  complex,
and  established  an  opposition  of  character  between  its  creatures,  took
advantage  (so  to  speak)  of  the  fact  that  the  body  has  two  opposite  sides  •
it  located  friends  and  foes  just  as  they  might  be  located  in  a picture  or
play  which  represented  an  impending  contest.  It  cannot  surely  be
maintained  that  by  accident  the  right  ear  began  to  be  locally  affected,
just  at  the  time  wheJi  the  development  of  the  plot  necessitated  the
entrance  of  the  friendly  2iower  upon  the  scene.  Another  case  involves
the  sense  of  touch.  A man,  after  ^^raying  for  a year  that  his  actions
might  be  divinely  guided,  heard  a voice  say,  “ I will  save  thy  soul  and
from  that  time  forward  he  felt  his  left  or  his  right  ear  touched  by  an
invisible  attendant,  according  as  he  was  doing  right  or  wrong.*  Did
the  auditory  hallucination  concide  by  chance  with  the  commencement
of  local  ii'ritation  in  the  jiinna  ? Dr.  Magnan  adds  three  examjiles  of
alcoholism,  where  abuse  and  threats  were  heard  on  one  side,  praise  and
consolation  on  the  other.  In  these  cases  there  were  crises  of  fury,  in
which  hallucinations  of  all  the  senses  took  jolace,  involving  both  sides
alike,  and  masking  tlie  more  ordinary  condition.  On  the  decline  of  these
crises,  the  opposed  auditory  hallucinations  recommenced.  It  seems
impossilile  to  resist  Dr.  Magnan’s  view,  that  the  poison,  distributed
through  the  whole  brain,  j^rovokes  at  times  a general  crisis ; but  that
when  this  subsides,  it  localises  its  action  at  the  weakest  sj^ot.  Should
this  hapi^en  to  be  the  auditory  centre  on  one  side,  a single  unilateral
liallucination  would  be  the  result ; but  if  both  centres  remain  affected,
the  lu’ojection  may  assume  the  comiDlex  two-sided  form.

But  the  strongest  cases  of  all  in  favour  of  a j^urely  central  initiation
yet  I’emain — -the  cases  of  hallucination  vohmtarily  oriyinnted.
Wigan’s  instance  has  often  been  quoted,  of  the  jiainter  who,  after  care-
fully studying  a sitter’s  appearance,  could  project  it  visibly  into  space,
and  paint  the  j:)ortrait  not  from  the  original  but  from  the  phantasm.
He  ended  by  confounding  the  phantasmal  figures  with  real  ones,  and
became  insane.  Baillarger  rejoorts  another  painter,  Martin,  as  having
similaily  projected  })ictures,  which  so  interested  him  tliat  he  requested
anyone  who  took  ujj  a position  in  front  of  them  to  move.f  A still  more

* Iloilin,  Dcmoiioumou'c  dcs  Sorcicrs  (Edition  of  1850,  Paris),  p.  10.

f One  of  the  seers  of  “ Paces  in  the  Dark  ” reported  that  he  could  produce
the  vision  of  the  spangles  andslieep  at  will.  His  case  differs,  however,  from  those
given  in  the  text.  For,  in  the  first  {dace,  his  vision  was  one  of  old  standing  ; and,
in  the  .second  place,  his  retina  must  have  been  i)retty  constantly  in  the  abnormal


Hallucinations.


175


interesting  case,  recently  reported  by  Dr.  V.  Parant,  is  that  of  an
asylum  patient  who,  when  thwarted  or  annoyed,  would  go  to  special  spots
to  consult  imaginary  advisers  ; the  replies  she  received — it  need  hardly
be  said — always  corresponded  with  her  own  desires  and  prejudices.
Another  insane  woman  used  to  play  “ odd  and  even  ” with  an  imaginary
prefect  of  police,  whose  guesses  were  always  wrong.*  M.  Binet
will  surely  not  maintain  that  in  these  cases  the  person  first
establishes,  by  an  effort  of  will,  some  sort  of  peripheral  excitation,  and
that  this  then  re-acts  by  provoking  the  hallucination.  Such  a circuitous
route  might  with  equal  reason  be  imagined  for  any  simple  act  of  repre-
sentation or  memory,  f

The  only  other  group  of  phenomena  that  we  need  notice  is
one  that  all  writers  since  Baillarger  seem  to  have  agreed  to  treat
as  a quite  unique  type.  It  is  a class  of  which  frequent  examples
have  been  observed  among  religious  mystics  and  persons  who
believe  themselves  to  be  in  direct  communication  with  spiritual  guides.
Such  persons  describe  a voice  which  is  yet  soundless,  which  utters  the
“ language  of  the  soul  ” inside  them,  and  which  they  hear  by  means  of
“ a sixth  sense,”  and  without  any  apparent  participation  of  the  ear.
Owing  to  the  absence  of  a definable  sensoiy  quality,  Baillarger
distinguished  this  class  as  i^sycldc  hallucinations,  in  opposition  to
psychio-seusorial ; and  M.  Binet  himself  is  inclined  to  treat  them  as
exceptional,  and  to  grant  them  an  origin  from  within.  As  one  who
holds  that  that  is  equally  the  origin  of  a large  number  of  the  undoubted

state.  I should  thus  ascribe  the  phenomenon  to  a concentration  of  attention  on
actual  visual  sensations,  whicli  fell  by  habit  into  the  familiar  lines.  It  would
be  interesting  to  know  whether,  after  the  spangles  had  appeared,  it  was  possible
to  check  their  development  into  sheep.

* Annalcs Mklico-pmjch. , 6th  series, Vol.  VII.,p379;  Ball,  Maladies  Mcntalcs,
p.  98.  See  also  the  cases  described  by  Michea,  in  the^l««.  Mcdico-psych.  for
l856,  p.  389,  and  M.  Sandras ’s  own  exxierience  in  the  same  journal  for  1855,2).  542.
It  is  odd  to  find  invol  untar  incss  not  infrecpiently  taken  as  the  distinctive  al)nor-
mality  in  hallucinations  (Falret,  Des  Maladies  Mcntalcs,  p.  281,  Buchez  and  De
Castelnau  in  the  French  debates  of  1865-6) ; and  the  odder,  inasmuch  as  not
only  may  hallucinations  be  voluntary,  but  the  mental  xuctures  and  memories,
from  which  they  are  to  be  distinguished,  are,  of  course,  often  involuntary.

j I should  have  been  tenqrted  to  regard  these  voluntary  cases  as  conclusive
had  I not  found  Frof.  Ball  (Medadies  Mcntalcs,  p.  122)  explicitly  claiming
them  as  hallucinations  provoked  by  an  “ abnormal  sensation.”  He  does  not  tell
us  what  the  abnormal  sensation  is,  or  what  causes  it.  He  contents  himself  with
pointing  out  that  hallucinations  are  very  like  dreams;  that  some  dreams  are
(and  therefore,  apparently,  all  dreams  must  be)  xu’ovoked  by  external  stimulation
— say  a knock  at  the  door ; and  that  we  can  sometimes  direct  the  course  of  a
dream  at  will : ergo,  it  is  easy  to  see  how  some  X'cople  may  start  a hallucination
at  will.  It  would  be  more  to  the  xuirpose  if  he  would  introduce  us  to  a dreamer
who  can  designedly  start  a xire-arranged  dream  by  knocking  at  his  own  door.


176


Hallucinations.


jisycho-sensorial  hallucinations,  I cannot  recognise  this  excej^tion ; and
to  me  the  class  in  question  is  of  interest,  not  as  disfingtcished  from  the
psycho-sensorial  family,  but  as  a true  species  of  that  genus  presenting
the  sensorial  element  reduced  to  its  very  lowest  terms.  These  “ pyschic”
hallucinations  appear  to  me  as  the  first  stage  of  a graduated  series — the
embryonic  instance  of  the  investiture  of  an  image  or  representation
with  a sensory  or  presentative  character.  In  proportion  as  the  sensorial
element  in  hallucination  is  attenuated  and  dim,  or  full  and  distinct,
will  the  perception  appear  internal  or  external ; and  these  cases  are
simply  the  most  internal  sort,  between  which  and  the  most  external
sort  there  exist  many  degrees  of  2)artinl  externalisation.*  This  view  has
surely  eveiy thing  to  recommend  it.  We  can  but  take  the  patient’s  own
account — that  he  has  a distinct  inqiression  of  words  ; and  that  this
impression  has  an  actuality  Avhich  clearly  separates  it  from  the  mere
image  or  memory  of  words.  How  can  this  separation  be  conceived,
except  by  recognising  the  presence  of  a genuine,  though  faint,  sensorial
element  1 Of  what  e.xactly  this  element  may  consist,  is  another
question.  Dr.  Max  Simon  (in  the  Lyon  Mklical,  Vol.  XXXV.,  pp.  435,
486)  has  made  tlie  very  plausible  suggestion  that  Avhat  is  felt  is  a
muscular  impulse  to  form  the  words,  rather  than  the  sound  of  them —
an  impulse  exhibited  in  its  extreme  form  in  the  irresistible  continuous
vociferation  of  mania.  On  this  account  Dr.  Simon  even  refuses  to
regard  the  experience  as  hallucination  at  all.  Here,  however,  I cannot
folloAv  him.  For,  however  much  a motor-current  or  impulsion  towards
speech  be  involved,  the  jAatient’s  sensation  is  of  something  other  and
more  than  this.  For  him,  the  Avords  are  not  suggested  or  initiated,  but
actually  and  completely  produced  ; in  his  description  of  the  jAroduct  we
do  not  encounter  terms  of  impulse  or  movement,  any  more  than  tenns
of  sound.  Here  Ave  surely  trace  the  characteristic  delusive  element :
Avhat  a normal  person  Avould  recognise  as  purely  subjective  experience
has  assumed  an  objective  reality.  In  Avhat  then  does  the  experience
fall  short  of  hallucination  ? If  Ave  adopt  Dr.  Simon’s  aubav,  so  far  as
to  regard  it  as  hallucination  of  the  muscular  sense,  it  becomes  of
interest  to  note  that  it  does  not  admit  of  any  parallel  of  a visxud  sort ;
for  no  order  of  visible  objects  can  at  all  rival  language  in  the  closeness
and  directness  of  its  association  Avith  a particular  set  of  muscular

* Our  friend,  the  IleA’.  P.  H.  Newnliam,  of  Maker  Vicarage,  Devonport,  has
described  to  us  some  auditory  iin])ressions  of  his  own,  Avhicli  are  interesting  as
exemplifying  the  stage  just  above  that  of  the  so-called  “ ps.vchic  ” hallucina-
tions. He  has  occasionally  had  experience  of  these  “psychic”  hallucinations,
as  of  Avords  Avhich  “seem  to  he  formed  and  spoken  Avithin  the  chest.”  But  he
has  also  experienced  a soundless  voice  Avhich  yet  seems  to  speak  into  his  right
car  (he  is  deaf  of  the  left  ear) — and  Avhich  thus  produces  the  sense  of  externality,
though  not  of  actual  sound.


Hcdlucinations.


177


movements.  And  this  very  fact — this  absence  of  any  sightless  halluci-
nations to  compare  with  these  soundless  ones — is  perhaps  the  reason
why  the  latter  have  passed  as  an  isolated  non-sensory  class,  with  a
separate  mode  of  origin.  I am  concerneel  to  substitute  my  own  view
of  them  ; for  to  admit  a genuine  sensory  element  in  the  )no.st  “ internal  ”
species  of  hallucination — which  all  agree  to  be  centrally  initiated — will
practically  be  to  admit  a similar  initiation  for  other  p.sycho-sensorial
hallucinations.

And  this  leads  me  to  a concluding  word  of  criticism  on  i\I.  Binet’s
hypothesis.  We  have  seen  that  it  is  violent ; may  we  not  add  that  it
is  gratuitous  ? He  has  himself  most  rightly  insisted  on  the  fact  that
images  and  sensations  are  not  separated  by  an  impassable  gulf,  but
merge  into  one  another  ; and  he  will  allow  that  in  many  hallucinations,
the  iruao'e — however  evoked — "ets  charged  with  the  whole  fulness  and
vividness  of  sensation.  But  then  how  can  it  be  treated  simply  as  an
image,  superposed  on  a quite  difterent  sensation  ? To  recur  once  more
to  Helbojuf’s  experiment,  or  to  the  brown  butterfly  and  the  black  mice,
M.  Binet  will  admit  that  someirliere  in  the  brain  activities  corre.spond-
ing  to  green,  to  browii,  to  black,  are  going  on  : he  is  not  the  writer  to
make  “ the  imagination  ” bob  in  among  physical  facts  like  a deus  ex
mnchirid.  By  what  right,  then,  are  these  activities  to  be  confined  to
ideational  tracts,  and  excluded  from  all  access  to  a time  sensory  centre  ?
What  temptation  is  there  to  strain  facts  and  theories  in  order  to  make
out  that  the  central  initiation  of  sensation  is  impossible  1 The
hypnotic  “ subject  ” will  smack  his  lips  over  tlie  sweetness  of  sugar
when  there  is  nothing  in  his  mouth — will  sniff  with  delight  at  a piece
of  wood  when  told  it  is  a rose  ; may  not  the  brain  do  for  sight  and
hearing  what  it  does  for  taste  and  smell  1 M.  Binet  seems  really  to
have  been  led  off  the  track  by  his  own  brilliant  experiments  with
prisms  and  mirrors.  Even  in  those  cases,  as  he  admits,  the  whole  work
of  creation  is  done  by  the  brain.  Even  for  him  the  gist  of  the
experience  is  not  the  atrojihied  external  “sensation,”  but  the
hypertrojjhied,  brain-imposed  “image.”  We  do  but  ask  him  toi
concede  that  the  “ image,”  which  can  here  do  so  much,  can  else-
where do  a very  little  more  and,  while  charging  itself  with  full  sensa-
tion from  within,  can  dispense  with  the  ati-ophied  contrilnition  from
outside.  Why  should  it  not  i There  is  nothing  to  lead  one  to  suppose
that  images  would  assume  the  unwonted  vividness  of  sensations
specially  at  moments  when  the  external  organs  of  sense  are  occupied
with  other  sensations  ; rather  the  reverse.  Is  not  the  sort  of  day-dream
which  comes  nearest  to  hallucination  favoured  by  rej^iose  of  the  sense-
organs  ? When  we  want  to  call  up  the  vivid  image  of  a scene,  to  make
it  as  real — as  sensorial — as  possible,  do  we  not  close  our  eyes  1 And
what  are  the  seasons  of  life  in  which  genuine  hallucinations  are


N


178


HaUncinatiom.


commonest?  Are  they  not  seasons  of  sleep?  Are  not  dreamshj  far
the  most  familiar  instances  of  the  projection  i)y  the  mind  of  images
tliat  are  mistaken  for  realities  1 It  is  just  because  they  are  so  familiar,
and  waking-hallucinations  comparatively  so  rare,  that  we  are  in  danger
of  overlooking  the  essential  similarity  of  the  phenomena,  and  the  light
which  the  former  class  can  throw  on  the  latter.  Indeed,  if  waking-
hallucinations  are  to  be  taken  as  the  pathological  form  of  any  normal
function,  much  might  be  said  for  taking  them  as  the  pathological  fonn
of  dreaming ; and  we  might  present  the  w^aking-dreams  of  haschisch-
poisoning  as  a sort  of  intermediate  link.  The  normal  dream  disappears
when  sleep  departs ; having  been  able  to  impose  its  images  as  realities
only  because  in  sleep  our  sensory  faculties  are  to  a great  extent  be-
numbed, and  images  cannot  therefore  be  compared  with  actual  presen-
tations. Thus  the  normal  dream  cannot  survive  the  corrective  which
the  contact  of  the  Avaking-senses  Avith  the  external  Avorld  supplies  ; it
fades  like  a candle  at  sunrise  ; and  its  images,  if  they  survive,  survive
as  images  and  nothing  more,  emptied  of  all  lobust  smisory  quality.
The  hallucination,  or  pathological  dream,  on  the  other  hand,  does  not
require  to  be  thus  guarded  from  compari.son  Avith  real  presentations  ;
its  “ hypertrophied  images  ” are  able  to  resist  the  normal  corrective,
for  they  are  often  as  fully  charged  Avith  sensory  quality  as  the  e-xternal
realities  Avhich  compete  Avith  them.  But  though  Ave  may  thus  regard
hallucinations  as  a pathological  form  of  dream,  Avhat  is  here  more  in
point  is  the  converse  vieAv — that  dreams  are  a healthy  form  of  halluci-
nation. Bor  it  cannot  but  appear  less  likely  that  excitation  of  the
external  organs  is  a necessary  basis  for  hallucinations,  if  hallucinations
turn  out  to  be  most  common  at  precisely  those  times  Avhen  the  external
organs  are  least  excited.


G.  The  question  of  Cerebral  Localisation.

We  may  noAv  proceed  to  an  altogether  different  question — namely,
at  Avhat  part  or  parts  of  the  brain  the  creative  process  takes  place,  and
in  Avhat  it  can  be  conceived  to  consist.  The  distinction  that  has  so
long  occupied  us,  betAveen  central  and  peripheral  initiation,  may  hence-
forth be  dismissed  ; for  AvhereA'er  initiated,  hallucinations  are  assuredly
created  by  the  brain  from  its  oavu  resources.  An  initiating  stimulus
may  probably  come  from  any  point  on  the  line  from  the  external  organ
to  the  central  terminus,  along  Avhich  a nervous  cui’rent  passes  in  our
normal  perception  of  objects.  But  that  stimulus  Avill  clearly  not
determine  Avhat  the  imaginary  olqect  shall  be,  or  invest  it  Avith  any  of
its  qualities  : it  Avill  merely  set  the  creative  machinery  in  motion ; and
the  same  stimulus — the  same  inllammation  of  the  eye  or  ear — may  set
the  machinery  in  motion  a hundred  times,  and  each  time  evoke  a


Hallucinations.


179


difierent  hallucination.  Where,  then,  and  Avhat,  is  this  creative
machinery  ? It  would  be  out  of  place  here  to  attempt  any  minute
account  of  the  various  theories,  which  have  for  the  most  part  rested  on
anatomical  observations  ; and  the  more  so,  that  their  details  are  still
judice.  But  in  a more  general  way  the  problem  can  be  stated,  and  even
I think  to  some  extent  determined.

If  we  begin  at  the  beginning,  wm  lind  agreement  among  the
authorities  up  to  a certain  point.  All  are  agreed  in  recognising  some
pai’t  or  parts  of  the  brain  in  which  the  nerves  passing  fi’om  the  various
sense-oi’gans  terminate,  and  where  the  impressions  conveyed  by  the
nerves  produce  the  changes  which  are  the  physical  basis  of  sensa-
tion, or — in  the  oi-dinary  crude  but  convenient  language — where
“ impressions  are  transformed  into  sensations.”  As  to  the  locality  and
extent  of  these  paits,  there  is  a conflict  of  views,  which  may  be  to  some
extent  reconciled  if  we  regard  the  process  as  taking  place  in  sevei'al
stages.  Some  (Buys,  Ritti,  Fournie)  believe  the  principal  scene  of  action
to  be  the  large  central  masses  called  the  optic  thalami ; others  (Schroder
van  der  Kolk,  Meynert,  Kandinsky)  would  jjlace  the  centres  lower  down
— that  of  vision,  for  instance,  in  the  corpora  quadrigemina  ; others  again
(Hitzig,  Ferrier,  Tamburini)  locate  them  higher  up,  in  the  cortex  itself  ;
and  Goltz  assigns  them  so  diffused  an  area  that  the  word  centre
becomes  scai’cely  appropriate.  But  all  are  agreed,  I imagine,  that
they  are  distinct  from  the  tracts  associated  with  the  most  highly-
developed  phenomena  of  consciousness — complete  perception,  idea-
tion, memory,  and  volition  ; and  even  if  the  idea  of  local  separation
should  come  to  be  modified  in  the  direction  indicated  by  Goltz,  the
distinctions  would  be  re-interpi-eted  as  difierences  of  less  and  more
complex  activities.  The  authorities  agree  further  in  connecting  the
“ sensory  centres  ” in  a special  way  with  hallucinations.  It  could  not,
indeed,  be  otherwise  when  once  the  full  sensory  character  of  the
phenomena  is  recognised ; for  that  character  can  only  be  the  psychical
expression  of  changes  at  the  sensory  centres.  Any  particular  activity
of  these  centres  which  reaches  a certain  intensity  will  affect  us  as  <a
particular  sensation;  whether  excited  (I)  normally,  from  the  sense-
organ  ; or  (2)  pathologically,  by  local  irritation  of  the  sense-organ  of
along  the  line  of  nerve  from  it  to  the  centre;  or  (3)  pathologically,  but
spontaneously,  in  the  centre  itself.  In  the  first  case  the  sensation  will
be  a true  one,  i.e.,  will  correspond  with  a real  external  object ; in  the
second  and  third  cases  it  will  not ; but  as  sensation,  it  will  be  the  same
in  all  three.

Now  for  one  view  of  the  creation  of  hallucinations,  these
data  are  sufficient.  We  have  only  to  suppose  that,  in  cases
(2)  and  (3),  the  agitation  at  the  sensory  centre  falls  readily
into  certain  lines  and  combinations,  so  as  not  only  to  produce  a large

X 2


180


naUudnations.


variety  of  sensations — -colours,  if  it  be  the  visual  centre,  sounds,  if  it
be  the  auditory  one — Imt  to  arrange  these  elements  in  various  definite
groups.  Everything  'will  now  proceed  precisely  as  if  these  effects  had
been  due  to  the  presence  of  a real  object.  Tlie  excitation  will  pursue
its  ordinary  upward  course  to  the  highest  parts  of  the  brain,  and  will
lead  to  intelligent  perception  of  the  sensory  group  as  an  object ; while
by  a yet  further  process  (which  will  probably  take  place  only  in  the
most  complete  or  “ external  ” form  of  hallucinations),  a refluent
current  will  pass  downwaixls  to  the  external  organ,  and  the  perception
will  be  referred  to  the  eye  or  ear,  just  as  though  its  object  were  really
acting  on  those  organs  from  outside.^"  There  then  is  tlie  full-fledged
liallucination  ; and  its  creative  machinery,  according  to  this  view,  lies
wholly  in  the  sensory  centre.

But  tliere  is  another  view.  We  have  noted  tltree  ways  in  Avhich  the
machinery  may  be  set  in  motion  ; but  there  is  z,  fourth  possible  way.
The  excitation  may  come  downwards  from  the  higher  part  of  the  brain
— from  the  seats  of  ideation  and  memory.  And  clearly  this  sort  of
excitation  will  have  a dominance  of  its  own.  It  will  have  its  oion
psycliical  counterpart — an  idea  or  a memory ; and  when  it  sets  the
sensory  machinery  in  motion,  that  machinery  will  not  now  produce  or
combine  a group  of  sensations  determined  by  its  own  activity  ; but  will
merely  embody,  or  as  we  might  say  execute,  the  idea  or  memory
imposed  on  it.  Here,  then,  the  only  machinery  which  is  in  any  sense
creative  is  situated  in  the  higher  ideational  tracts.  And  if  we  wish

* Krafft-Ebing,  An' p.  11;  Defifme,  Etiidc  Sciciitifqiic  S7(r
le  SoinnamhuUs'iiic,  p.  .'liS  ; Tamburini  in  the  licrue  Sciciitifi/ptc,  1881,  p.  139.
The  mere  subjective  fact  of  this  reference  to  tlie  external  organ  would  not
prove  (as  Tamburini  seems  to  assume)  that  the  organ  had  been  actually  excited
by  the  refluent  current.  But,  in  the  case  of  vision,  we  have  at  any  rate  a fair
amount  of  proof.  First,  there  is  the  fact  already  noted,  that  pressure  on  the
side  of  one  eyehall  doubles  the  phantom.  It  seems  difficult  to  refer  this  result
to  association — the  doubling  of  ordinary  objects  by  such  pre.ssure  being  an
infrequent  and  little  noticed  experience.  Hecondly,  we  have  a case  of  hcmiojur
hallucination  recorded  by  Dr.  Pick,  of  Prague,'  where  only  the  upper  halves  of
imaginary  figures  were  seen  ; and  where  it  was  ascertained  that  the  upper  half
of  the  retina  (to  which  of  course  the  lower  half  of  the  figure  would  have  corre-
sponded) was  anopic.  Further,  it  has  been  noted  by  H.  Meyer  of  “ bypnagogic
illusions,”  and  by  (Jruithuisen  of  hallucinations  which  consist  in  the  surviving
of  dream-images  into  waking  moments,  that  they  can  give  rise  to  after-images  ;
this,  however,  might  jierhaps  not  imply  more  than  the  brief  continuance  of
excitation  at  the  central  cells.

Wundt  (Phgs.  I'sgcli.,  Vol.  IF,  p.  35G)  seems  to  think  that  this  centrifugal
retinal  stimulation  is  e.xcluded  in  the  cases  where  the  phantom  does  not  move
with  the  movement  of  the  eye.  But,  there  being  a physical  process  correspond-
ing to  the  idea  of  a stationary  phantom,  why  may  not  that  process  extend  to
the  whole  carrying  out  of  the  idea,  so  as  to  include  the  turning  on  or  off  of  the
retinal  stimulation  according  as  the  phantom  is  looked  at  or  away  from  ?


Hallucincdions.


181


to  identify  the  exact  starting-point  of  the  hallucination,  as  such,  Ave
must  fix  it  at  the  point  of  contact  between  the  ideational  and  the
sensory  activities.  As  long  as  the  nervous  actiA’ity  is  con-

fined to  the  ideational  tracts,  though  there  is  creation,  there
is  no  hallucination ; that  word  is  never  used  to  describe  the
mere  image  or  memory  of  an  object.  It  is  only  Avhen  the  activity
escapes  downwards,  Avith  such  force  as  strongly  to  stimulate  the  cells  at
the  loAver  centre,  that  sensation  Hoods  the  image,  and  Ave  get  the  delusive
percept  or  hallucination.  The  force  of  this  dowiiAvard  current  may
exhibit  all  degrees.  It  is  ^^I’obable  that  even  for  the  barest  idea  or
memory  of  an  object  there  is  some  slight  doAviiAvard  escape,  Avitli  a
corresponding  slight  reverberation  of  the  sensory  centre  ; and  Avhere,  as
in  rare  morbid  cases,*  the  escape  is  Avholly  barred,  all  poAver  of  calling-
up  Ausual  images  is  lost.  With  every  increase  in  the

force  of  the  escape,  there  Avill  be  a rise  of  sensory  quality,
and  a nearer  apjjroach  to  absolute  hallucination  ; and  every
stage  Avill  thus  be  accounted  for,  from  the  picture  “ in  the  mind’s
eye  ” to  the  iihantom  completely  externalised  in  sjAace.  15ut  Avliatev’er
the  degree  of  the  delusion,  its  local  oi’igin  is  the  place  Avhere  tlie  current,
so  to  speak,  bursts  the  sluice-gates  Avhich  physically  represent  the  dis-
tinction betAveen  ideas  and  percepts.

Here,  then,  are  the  tAvo  possibilities  : (1)  that  hallucinations  are
produced  by  an  independent  activity  of  the  specific  sensory  cells — the
sensations  Avhich  arise  there  being  perceived  as  objects  Avhen  the  ner-
vous current  passes  on  centripetally  to  the  higher  pai'ts  of  the  brain  ;
(2)  that  the  part  played  by  the  specific  sensory  cells  f is  only  a
response  to  Avhat  may  be  called  ideational  excitation,  propagated
centrifugally  from  the  higher  tracts  Avhere  the  image  has  been  formed.

In  attempting  to  decide  betAveen  these  possibilities,  Ave  shall  get
little  assistance  from  direct  pathological  and  physiological  observa-
tions. These  have  been  mainly  directed  to  an  end  rather  the
converse  of  ours — to  utilising  the  facts  of  hallucination  for  fixing
the  locality  of  the  centres,  by  inspection  of  the  brains  of  persons
AAdio  have  been  in  life  markedly  hallucinated.  But  cerebral  pathology,
as  Ball  trenchantly  remarks,  has  a Avay  of  lending  itself  to  the  demon-
stration of  Avhatever  one  Avants.  Lesions  rarely  confine  themselves
neatly  to  specific  areas.  We  find  W.  Buys,  the  chief  advocate  of  the

See  the  case  quoted  in  the  Archives  dc  Neurologic,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  352.  “ Je
reve  seulenient  paroles,  tandi.s  que  je  possedais  auparaA-ant  dans  nies  reA-e.s  la
perception  visuelle.  ” The  Progres  Medical,  July,  1883,  has  another  interesting-
case.

t I escheAv  here  the  expression  “ sensory  centres,”  merely  to  avoid  con-
fusion AA-ith  the  higlier  “ centres”  to  Avliicli  the  Avords  “centripetal”  and
“centrifugal”  refer.


182


Ilalliicimtions.


optic  tlialami  as  tlie  primary  seat  of  liallucinations,  admitting  the
constant  spread  of  lesions  from  the  thalami  to  the  cortex  and  Dr.
\\h  J.  Micklef  considers — as  the  result  of  a number  of  vei’y  careful
necroj^sies — that  in  cases  of  hallucination  “thalamic  disease  plays  a less
important  part  than  cortical.”  But  on  the  other  hand,  he  did  not  find
that  the  lesions  •were  definitely  a.ssociated  with  the  spots  in  the  cortex
which  Ferrier  and  the  advocates  of  restricted  cortical  localisation  mark
out  as  the  visual  and  the  auditoiy  centres  ; while  lesions  at  these
spots — the  angular  gyrus  and  the  first  temporo-sphenoidal  convolution —
seem  to  be  found  in  cases  where  no  hallucination  has  been  observed.;;;
This  want  of  correspondence  will  seem  less  surprising  if  we  remember
the  vast  number  of  casual  hallucinations  where  nothing  that  could  be
called  a lesion  exists  ; and  also  that  the  more  persistent  hallucinations
of  the  insane  belong,  as  a rule,  to  the  earlier  period  of  irritation,
rather  than  to  the  later  one  when  marked  lesion  has  supervened,  and
dementia  is  creeping  on.  § Even  if  we  take  subsequent  cortical  lesion
as  a sign  that  the  weak  spot  existed  from  the  first  in  the  highest  part  of
the  brain,  this  would  be  no  proof  that  the  specific  sensory  centre  is
cortical.  If  lesions  are  not  bound  to  be  locally  restricted,  much  less
are  irritations  ; and  there  is  nothing  to  refute  the  supposition  above
made,  that,  when  the  hallucination  occurs,  a current  has  passed  down-
wards to  the  lower  centre — the  mischief  in  the  cortex  having  been
primarily  an  excitant  of  ideational  activities  only,  and  the  hallucination
being  due  (as  Dr.  Mickle  well  expresses  it)  to  “ a tumultuous  disorderly
reaction  of  disturbed  ideational  centres  iqion  sensorial.”  The  same
may  be  said  of  the  artificial  iriitation  of  the  “ cortical  centres”  during
life.  Ferrier  regards  the  movements  which  result  when  an  electrical
stimulus  is  apj^lied  to  these  areas,  as  an  indication  that  visual  or
auditory  sensations  (he.,  hallucinations)  have  been  evoked.  We  may
quite  accept  this  interpretation,  fait  still  suppose  that  the  primary  seat
of  the  sensation  was  not  the  spot  where  the  stimulus  was  applied,  but
a lower  centre  on  the  path  along  which  the  irritation  passed. ||

Gazette  dc3  Hopitaux,  Dec.,  ISSO,  p.  4(5.

t Journal  of  Mental  Jcienre,  Oct.,  1881,  p.  382.

J Journal  of  Mented  Science,  Ocf.,  1881,  p.  381,  anil  Jan.,  1882,  p.  29.

§ buys.  Gazette  des  IL'ipitaux,  1881,  p.  27(5;  l)efi\nne,  Ann.  Medico-jisi/ch.,
6th  series,  V'ol.  ^'f.,  p.  375;  Tamburini  in  theA’crcc  Scientifique,  Vol.  XX^TI.,
p.  141.

II  ft  may  be  remarked,  by  the  way,  that  wbat  lias  been  here  said  as  to  the
relation  of  hedluci  nation  a to  cerebral  localisation  will  apply,  mutedis  mutandis,
to  blindness.  We  may  suppose  the  action  of  lower  centre.s  to  be  inhibited,  as
well  as  abnormally  excited,  by  stimulation  from  above.  Tims  the  fact  that
blindness  follows  certain  cortical  lesions  does  not  by  any  means  establish  the
location  of  the  jirincipal  sensory  centres  in  the  corte.x.  And  as  it  happens,  some
of  the  facts  of  blindness  seem  absolutely  adverse  to  that  location — I mean  the


Hallucinations.


183


W e are  thus  tlirowii  back  ou  less  direct  arguments,  derived  from  the
nature  of  the  hallucinations  themselves.  And  I think  the  mistake  has
again  been  in  imagining  that  one  or  other  of  two  alternatives  must  be
exclusively  adopted — that  either  the  lower  or  the  higher  origin  of
hallucinations  is  the  universal  one.  All,  I tliink,  that  can  be  fairly
said,  is  that,  while  the  tii’st  mode  of  origin  is  a prohahle  one  for  some
cases,  the  second  mode  is  a certain  one  for  others.  Hallucinations  pro-
duced at  the  will  of  the  perciyiient  must  first  take  shape  above  the
sensory  centres.  For  it  is  indisputable  tliat  the  idea,  of  the  object  to  be
projected — the  picture,  face,  sentence,  or  whatever  it  may  be — must
precede  its  sensory  embodiment  as  a thing  actually  seen  or  heard  ; and
the  idea,  as  well  as  the  volition,  is  an  affair  of  the  higher  ti’acts  ; MM.
Luys  and  Ritti  will  certainly  not  locate  either  of  them  in  the  optic
thalami.  But  if  the  advocates  of  the  first  mode  have  thus  ignored  an
important  class  of  cases,  the  advocates  of  the  second  have  erred'by  adopt-
ing a quasi-metaphysical  standpoint.  Thus  Dr.  Despine,  who  has  given
an  extremely  clear  account  of  the  centiufugal  process  i^Annales  Medico-
jmjcholofjiques,  6th  series,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  371),  argues  that  fora  hallucination
to  arise,  we  first  need  an  idea — “ an  object  loliicli  does  not  exist  ” ; and
if  in  a way  it  is  endowed  with  existence,  this,  as  a purely  constructive
act,  can  only  emanate  from  the  seat  of  the  highest  psychical  activities.
There  is  some  originality  in  extracting  a physiological  conclusion  from
the  relation  of  the  mind  to  the  non-existent.  But  at  this  rate  the  image
of  the  sun’s  disc  on  the  wall  would  originate  in  a constructive  act  of
the  mind  : it  is  as  much  “ an  object  that  does  not  exist  ” as  the  most
elaborate  phantasm.  The  non-existence  of  an  object  outside  the
organism  is  quite  irrelevant  to  the  course  of  nervous  events  inside ; and
whether  we  regard  a psychic  act,  for  any  given  case,  as  constructive  or
receptive,  depends  simply  on  whether  the  nervous  excitation  is  spon-

plienomena  of  so-called  “psychical  blindness, ’’where  cortical  lesion  has  produced
loss  of  memory  and  of  the  higher  functions  of  perception,  while  sensation,
(according  to  Munk’s  view)  remains  intact,  and  may  gradually  give  rise  to  new
perceptions  and  new  memories.  The  observations  of  Munk  and  Goltz  as  to  the
surrtval  of  vision,  though  not  of  intelligent  vision,  after  extensive  cortical  injiny,
seem  distinctly  favourable  to  the  theory  of  the  lower  piosition  of  the  .specihe
sensory  centres.  Nor  need  that  theory  conflict  with  the  most  extreme  view  as
to  the  absence  of  circumscribed  areas  in  the  cortex.  Goltz  himself  would  not
deny  that  some  place  or  places  on  the  paths  of  the  optic  and  the  auditory  nerve
are  specially  connected  with  the  fact  that  the  stimulation  of  the  one  corresponds
with  sight,  and  ot  the  other  with  sound.  It  cannot  be  maintained  that  this
psychical  distinction  has  no  local  representative  ; for  such  a contention  would
logically  lead  to  denying,  e.g.,  that  the  corpora  quadrigemina  in  the  lower
animals  have  any  particular  relation  to  vision.  Thus,  whatever  be  the  final
issue  of  the  vexed  question  of  cortical  areas  of  perception,  a local  distinction  of
genuine  centres  of  sensation  somewhere  in  the  brain  seems  as  certain  as  the
distinction  of  the  external  organs  themselves.


184


HaUncinatlons.


taneous,  or  is  received  from  below.  Now  this  may  be  applied,  as  we
have  seen,  to  the  lower  centres  of  sensation  as  reasonably  as  to  the
higher  tracts  of  perceptive  ideation  ; the  former  may  construct  as  truly
as  the  latter  ; that  is  to  say,  the  configurations  and  activities  of  their
cells  may  produce  definite  groupings  of  the  sensory  elements.

And  for  simple  and  recurrent  forms  of  hallucination,  much  may  be
said  in  favour  of  this  lower  origin.  It  is  in  accordance  with  all  that
we  know  or  conjecture  as  to  nerve-tissue,  that  certain  configurations
and  modifications  of  cells  would  be  rendered  easy  by  exercise  ; and  thus
the  changes  to  which  any  morbid  excitement  gives  rise  might  naturally
be  the  same  as  have  often  before  been  brought  about  by  normal  stimulation
from  the  retina  or  the  ear.  The  elements  would  fall  readily,  so  to
speak,  into  the  accustomed  pattern.  An  object  which  has  been
frequently  or  recently  before  the  eyes — a word  or  phrase  that  has  been
perpetually  in  the  ear — these  may  certainly  be  held  capable  of  leaving
organic  traces  of  their  presence,  and  so  of  e.stablishing  a sort  of
lower  memory.  That  this  lower  memory  should  act  automatically,
and  independently  of  the  will,  seems  natural  enough  -when
we  remember  how  large  a part  even  of  the  higher  memory
is  also  automatic  ; an  unsought  word,  suddenly  reverberating  in
the  sensorium,  is  on  a par  with  the  images  that  emerge  into
consciousness  without  our  being  able  to  connect  them  with  our  previous
train  of  ideas.  Now  it  is  remarkable  ho>v  large  anuml)er  of  hallucina-
tions are  of  this  primitive  type.  I mentioned  above  that,  among  the
sane,  the  commonest  of  all  cases  is  to  hear  the  name  called  ; and  even
with  the  insane,  the  vocabulary  of  the  imaginary  voices  often  consists
of  only  a few  threatening  or  abusive  words.*  So  of  optical  hallucinations.
With  the  sane,  a large  number  consist  in  the  casual  vision — an  after-
imaye,  as  Ave  might  say — of  a near  relative  or  familiar  associate.  More
persistent  cases  ai’e  still  fre({uently  of  a single  object.  I have  mentioned
the  doctor  and  the  black  cow;  similarly  a lady,  Avhen  in  bad  health,
always  saev  a cat  on  the  staircase. f And  among  the  insane,  a single
imaginary  attendant  is  equally  common  : our  friend  “ Guiteau  ” above
Avas  an  instance.  Wherever  such  simple  cases  are  not  connected  Avith
any  special  delire,  or  any  fixed  set  of  ideas,  they  may,  I think,  be  fairly
(though  of  course  not  certainly)  attributed  to  an  activity  folloAving  the
lines  of  certain  established  tracts  in  the  sensorium.  W’e  might  compare
this  locality  to  a kaleidoscope,  which  Avhen  sliaken  is  capable  of  turiiing
out  a certain  limited  number  of  combinations.;

* On  tliis  subject,  see  Dr.  V.  Parant  in  ihc.  Ann.  Medico-psych.,  ()i\\

Vol.  VII.,  p.  38-!-.  Tliese  embryonic  hallucinations  often  develop  into  more  com-
plex form  ; see  Pall,  Blaladics I\Icntidcs,  p.  07.

f Blandford, /H.s«/uYg  iYs  Trcatvicut,  p.  155.

X Chax  cot  {Lc  Progris  Med  iced,  1878,  p.  38)  has  noted  a curious  form  of


Hallucinations.


185


But,  on  tlie  other  hand,  the  astonisliing  variety  and  complexity  of
other  cases — whether  visual  appearances  or  verbal  sequences — seem
absolutely  to  drive  us  to  a higher  seat  of  manufacture  ; for  they  demand
a countless  store  of  elemeirts,  and  limitless  powers  of  ideal  combination.
The  patient  listens  to  long  discourses,  or  holds  conversations  with  his
invisible  friends  ; and  what  is  heard  is  no  echo  of  former  phrases,  but
is  in  every  way  a piece  of  new  experience.  So,  too,  the  number  and
variety  of  visual  hallucinations  which  may  occur  to  a single  person,
sometimes  even  within  the  space  of  a few  minutes,  is  astonishing.  The
shapes  and  features  of  Dr.  Bostock’s  apparitions  were  always  completely
new  to  him  ; the  seers  of  “ Faces  in  the  Dark”  who  had  in  the  course
of  their  lives  seen  many  thousand  phantasmal  faces,  had  never  seen  one
that  they  recognised  ; Nicolai,  who  was  never  otherwise  than
perfectly  sane  and  who  eventually  recovered,  continually  saw
troops  of  phantoms,  most  of  them  of  an  aspect  quite  new  to
him  ; and  in  insanity  such  a phenomenon  is  common  enough.
Even  in  the  casual  hallucinations  of  the  sane,  Avhat  is  seen  is  less  com-
monly a mere  revival  of  an  object  which  the  eyes  have  previously
encountered  than  an  unrecognised  person.  Here,  then,  we  have  an
immense  amount  of  high  creative  woi'k — of  what  in  psychical  terms  we
should  call  pu)’  excellence  the  work  of  the  imagination ; and  this  is  work
which  we  have  good  grounds  for  supposing  that  the  highest  cortical  tracts,
and  they  alone,  are  capable  of  performing.  From  our  e.xperience  of  the
number  and  mobility  of  the  ideas  and  images  that  the  mind  in  a normal
state  can  summon  up  and  combine,  we  know  that  the  cells  of  the
highest  cerebral  areas  are  pi’actically  unlimited  in  their  powers
of  configuration  and  association ; but  we  have  no  right  to  assume
the  same  inexhaustible  possibilities  as  existing  independently  in
any  specific  sensory  centre — we  might  almost  as  well  expect  a
kaleidoscope  to  present  us  with  an  ever-fresh  series  of  elaborate  land-
scapes. And  over  and  above  all  this,  we  can  point  to  tiie  constant
connection  between  the  delusions,  the  conce'ptions  delirantes  of  the
insane  and  their  sensoi’y  hallucinations,*  which  makes  it  almost  im-

unilateral  hallucination,  which  occurs  sometimes  to  hysterical  patients  on  the
side  on  which  they  are  hemianrcsthetic — animals,  passing  rapidly  in  a row  from
behind  forwards,  which  usually  disappear  when  the  eyes  are  turned  directly  to
them.  Examined  by  the  ophthalmo.scope,  the  eyes  of  these  patients  appear
absolutely  normal.  Charcot  attributes  amblyopy  and  achromatopsy,  occurring
in  the  same  persons  (as  well  as  in  nondiysterical  cases  of  hemianiosthesia),  to
lesion  at  a point  which  he  calls  the  carrcfouv  scnsitif  in  the  hinder  part  of  the
internal  capsule  ; and  I assume  that  he  would  refer  the  hallucination  to  the
same  point.  If  so,  he  may  be  quoted  as  an  authority  for  the  infra-cortical
initiation  of  simple  and  recurrent  forms  of  hallucination

* Falret,  Op.  cit.,  p.  2C9  : Wundt,  Op.  cit.,  Vol.  II.,  p.  ,356  ; Krafit-Ebing,
Op.  cit.,  p.  19  ; Griesinger,  Op.  cit.,  pp.  95-6.


186


Ilallucinations.


possible  not  to  regai-d  the  latter  as  a particular  eft'ect  of  the  more  widely
diffused  cerebral  disturbance.  The  conclusion  seems  to  be  that  for  many
hallucinations  the  mode  of  origin  can  be  no  other  than  what  I have
called  the  centrifiK/n] .

I have  throughout  tried  to  express  what  I have  called  the  centri-
fugal theory  in  such  terms  that  it  might  be  accepted  even  by  those  who
locate  the  sensory  centres  themselves  not  below,  but  in,  the  cortex.
According  to  these  physiologists,  the  whole  double  transformation  of
physical  impressions  into  visual  or  auditory  sensations,  and  of  these
sensations  into  complete  perceptions  and  mnemonic  images,  would  be
practically  referred  to  one  place.  It  must  be  admitted  that  this  view  seems
at  times  connected  with  the  want  of  a due  psychological  distinction  between
sensation  and  perception.  But  even  supposing  a specific  centre  of
sensation  to  be  thus  ecjually  the  seat  of  psychic  functions  higher  than
sensation,  it  would  still  be  none  the  less  liable  to  be  stimulated  by  parts
of  the  cortex  external  to  itself  ; and  the  nature  of  many  hallucinations
would  still  indicate  that  they  depend  on  this  stimulation,  and  not  on  a
mere  spontaneous  (juickening  of  morbid  activity  in  the  centre  itself.
For  instance,  a giil  is  violently  distressed  by  seeing  her  home  in
flames,  and  for  days  afterwards  sees  fire  wherever  she  looks.*  One
must  surely  trace  the  hallucination  to  the  distress,  and  so  to  an
“ escape  of  current  ” from  the  seat  of  ideas  and  images  other  than

visual  ones.  Again,  in  the  cases  described  above  where  the

hallucinations  faithfully  reflect  the  changes  of  the  whole  moral
and  intellectual  bias,  the  local  excitement  in  the  sensory  centre
would  still  be  traceable  to  an  abnormally  strong  irradiation

from  the  regions  where  the  highest  co-ordinations  take  place

— these  regions  being  themselves,  ex  hi/potbesi,  already  in  a
state  of  pathological  activity.  The  other  hypothesis  woidd  be  that
tlie  mere  hyper-excitability  at  tlie  centre  itself  made  it  impossible  for
images  to  arise  without  getting  hui-ried  on,  so  to  speak,  into  sensations
))y  the  violence  of  the  nervous  vibrations.  This  seems  to  l,)e  what
Wundt  has  in  view  when  he  speaks  of  hallucinations  as  originating,  not
in  an  actual  irritation,  but  in  a heightened  irritahiliUj,  of  the  sensory
centres.  But  tlien,  what  sliould  cause  images  belonging  to  one
j)ai-ticular  order  of  ideas — the  diseased  order — to  be  picked  out  for  this
fate  in  pi’eference  to  any  others  1 The  hyper-excitable  centre  in  itself,
as  an  arena  of  images,  could  have  no  ground  for  such  a partial  selection
among  tlie  crowd  of  them  which  emerge  during  every  hour  of  waking
life.  Among  tlie  endless  and  multiform  vibi-ations  involved,  why  should

* Griesiiiger,  Op.  rif.,  p.  97,  For  an  auditory  case,  cf.  the  account,  in  the
Li/on.  Medical,  V'ol.  XXXV.,  p.  437,  of  a young  Frenchman  who  was  rendered
insane  by  the  Berman  invasion,  and  who  was  then  haunted  by  the  sound  of
guns  firing.


Ilallucinatiom.


187


the  excessive  amplitude  that  corresponds  to  sensation  be  conhned  to  a
jjarticular  set  1 A reason  must  exist.  The  unique  agreement  between
the  sensory  liallucinations  and  the  more  general  moral  and  intellectual
disorder  must  have  its  particular  physical  counterpart  ; and  for  this  “ a
strong  downward  escape  of  current  ” is  at  any  rate  a sufficiently  compre-
hensible metaphor.*


7. — Veridical  Hallucinations.

There  is  one  topic  which  I cannot  altogether  pass  o^■er  here,  as  it  has
a distinct  bearing  on  the  centrifugal  origin  of  hallucinations.  There  is  a
class  of  phenomena,  not  yet  recognised  by  science,  and  for  which  the
evidence  has  never  yet  been  presented  witli  anything  like  convincing
fulness  ; but  which — I do  not  think  it  rash  to  say — will  be  accepted  as
genuine  by  a large  number  of  persons  who  quite  realise  the  strength  of
the  d fn'iori  presumption  against  it,  whenever  the  quantity  and  quality
of  the  evidence  shall  be  adequately  realised  ; and  which  is  accej^ted
already  by  a considerable  number  of  such  persons  as,  at  any  rate,
having  a strong  primd  facie  claim  to  attention.  Readers  of  these
Proceedings  will  hardly  need  to  be  told  that  I refer  to  the
telepathic  class — hallucinations  of  sight,  sound  or  touch,  which
suggest  the  presence  of  an  absent  person,  and  which  occur  simul-
taneously with  some  exceptional  crisis  in  that  person’s  life  or,
most  frequently  of  all,  with  his  death.  Visual  and  auditory  phan-
tasms occurring  at  such  moments  may  be  coitveniently  termed  reri-
dical  hallucinations  ; for  while  they  are  completely  delusive  as  far  as
the  percipient’s  senses  are  concerned — while  they  completely  conform  to
our  definition,  “ sensory  percepts  which  lack  the  objective  basis  which

"■  Kandinsky  (in  the  Archie  f Ur  Psychiatric,  1881),  agreeing  with  JMeynert,
denies  this  centrifugal  inlliienee,  and  regards  the  contribution  of  tiie  higlier
(front)  part  of  the  cortex  to  hallucinations  as  something  quite  different — i.e.,  the
remission  of  an  inhibitor j/  function  normally  exercised  by  this  jjart  on  the  specific
sensory  regions.  But  he  fails  to  make  out  even  a plausible  case.  His  argument
that  the  higher  part  cannot  initiate  hallucinations  restsonno  better  ground  than
his  own  inability,  when  suti'ering  from  hallucinations,  to  transform  mental
pictures  into  hallucinations  at  will  ; and  on  the  further  experience — which  was
decidedly  exceptional — that  his  hallucinations  did  not  corresi)ond  in  any  marked
way  with  his  more  general  mental  delusions.  Again,  if  one  asks  in  what  the
effect  of  the  supposed  inhibitory  function  would  normally  l>e  shown,  it  must
surely  be  in  ju'eventing  ordinary  mental  images  from  taking  on  the  more  vivid
characters  of  hallucinations.  Now  Kamlinsky  himself  admits  that  in  normal
acts  of  imagination  the  cortical  sensory  region  is  stimulated  from  the  higher  part
of  the  cortex  ; hence  he  seems  involved  in  the  difficulty  of  conceiving  stimula-
tion and  inhibition  to  proceed  at  the  same  moment  from  the  same  quarter.  Nor,
again,  does  he  make  any  attempt  to  show  why  the  supposed  inhibitory  function,
if  it  is  normally  operative,  does  not  equally  inhibit  the  normal  stimulation  de-
rived from  the  periphery,  i.e.,  normal  perception  of  objects.


18S


Hallucinations.


they  suggest” — they  nevertlieless  have  a cletinite  correspondence  with
certain  objective  facts,  namely,  tlie  exceptional  condition  of  the  absent
person.  Such  cases,  if  genuine,  militate  very  strongly  against  M.  Binet’.s
tlieory  that  excitation  from  the  extei-nal  sensory  apparatus  is  a sine  qua
non  of  hallucinations.  For  here  the  occurrence  of  the  hallucination
depends  on  the  distant  event ; that  is  what  fixes  it  to  take  place  at  a
particular  time  ; and  an  occurrence  thus  conditioned  cannot  be  supposed
to  be  conditioned  also  by  the  accidental  jn’esence  of  real  j^henomena
capable  of  supplying  points  de  reph-e,  or  by  an  accidental  morbid  dis-
turbance of  the  organ  or  the  nerve.  And  if  the  brain  Ije  admitted  to  be  the
primary  physical  seat  of  the  phenomena,  there  are,  further,  good  reasons
for  supposing  that  its  highest  tracts  are  those  first  affected,  and  so  tliat
tlie  hallucination  is  centrifugal.  The  chief  reasons  are  two.  (1)  The
pliantasm  is  often  bodied  forth  with  elements  of  a more  or  less  fanciful
kind — dream-imagei’y,  so  to  speak,  eijd)roidered  on  a groundwork  of
fact ; and  these  elements  seem  clearly  to  be  tlie  percipient’s  own  contri-
bution, and  not  part  of  what  he  receives.  (2)  Ca.ses  occur  where  actual
intercourse  between  the  two  persons  concerned  has  long  ceased  ; and
where  the  supersensuous  communication  can  only  be  supposed  to  be
initiated  liy  the  quickening  of  long-lmried  memories  and  of  dim  tracts  of
emotional  association.  The  hallucination  in  these  cases  would  therefore
be  a complete  exauiple  of  the  projection  of  an  idea  from  xvithin
outwards  : the  sensorium  reverberates  to  a tremor  which  must  start  in
the  inmost  penetralia  of  cerebral  process.


[Note. — I would  specially  jioint  out  that  the  argument  in  the  last  jiai’a-
graph  does  not  extend  beyond  the  limits  of  the  percipient’s  organism.  It
involves  no  physical  expression  of  the  fact  of  the  fransmisslun.  If  A is  dying
at  a distance,  and  B sees  his  form,  it  is  rarely  that  one  can  suppose  any
psychical  event  in  A’s  mind  to  lie  identical  with  any  jisychical  event  provo-
cative of  the  hallucination  in  B’s  mind.  That  being  so,  there  will  be  no
simple  and  immediate  concordance  of  nervous  viliratioii  in  the  two  lirains  ;
and  that  being  so,  there  is  no  very  obvious  means  of  translating  into  physical
terms  the  causal  connection  between  A’s  experience  and  B’s.  The  case  thus
differs  from  “ tlniught-transference”  of  the  ordinary  experimental  type,
where  the  image  actually  iiresent  in  the  one  mind  is  reproduced  in  the  other  ;
where,  therefore,  a physical  concordance  does  exist,  and  something  of  the
nature  of  a “ brain- wave”  can  be  conceived.  This  was  cpiite  rightly  jiointed
out  in  the  notice  of  the  Prorcedinjs  of  tlte  iSocidij  for  Psijcliical  Pescnrch  wliich
a]ij»eared  in  Mind  XXXVI.  But  it  had  also  been  pointed  out  by  Mr.  F.  W.
11.  ]\Iyersand  myself  in  the  “ Theory  of  Apparitions”  there  criticised.  In  our
rapprochrnient  of  veridical  hallucinations  to  experimental  thought-transference,
we  are  confining  ourselves  to  the  psijrhuad  aspect ; we  connect  the  phenomena
as  being  in  both  cases  affections  of  one  mind  by  another  occurring  otherwise
than  through  the  recognised  channels  of  sense.  The  objector  may  urge  that
if  we  have  not,  we  ought  to  have,  a p/q/.sii'u/ theory  which  will  embrace  all


Hallucinations.


189


the  phenomena — that  we  ought  not  to  talk  about  a rapport  l)etween  A’s
mind  and  B’s  unless  we  can  establish  a hruhje  between  their  two  brains.  This
seems  rather  to  assume  that  the  standing  puzzle  of  the  relation  between
cerebral  and  psychical  events  hi,  the  indimdnal,  B,  can  only  be  stated  in  one
crude  form — viz.,  that  the  former  are  prior  and  produce  the  latter.  For  ordi-
nary purposes  such  an  expression  is  convenient  ; but  the  convenience  has
its  dangers.  Still,  as  the  converse  proposition  would  be  equally  dangerous,
a crux  remains  which  we  cannot  evade.  Since  we  cannot  doubt  that
B’s  unwonted  experience  has  its  ajtpiv.jpriate  cerebral  correlate,  we  have  to
admit  that  the  energy  of  B’s  brain  is  directed  in  a way  in  which
it  would  not  be  directed  but  for  something  that  has  happened  to
A.  In  this  physical  effect  it  is  impossible  to  assume  that  an  external
physical  antecedent  is  not  involved  ; and  the  relation  of  the  antecedent  to
the  effect  is,  as  1 have  pointed  out,  very  hard  to  conceive,  when  the  neural
tremors  in  A’s  brain  are  so  unlike  the  neural  tremors  in  B’s  brain  as  they
must  be  when  A’s  mind  is  occupied  with  his  immediate  surroundings  or
with  the  idea  of  death,  and  B’s  mind  is  occiq^ied  with  a sudden  and  un-
accountable impression  (jr  vision  of  A.  I can  only  suggest  that  the
action  of  brain  on  brain  is  nob  bound  to  conform  to  the  simplest  type
of  two  tuning-forks  ; and  that  a crmsiderable  community  of  experience
(especially  in  emotional  relations)  between  two  pei-sons  may  involve
nervous  records  sufficiently  similar  to  retain  for  one  another  some  sort
of  revivable  affinity,  even  when  the  experience  has  lost  its  vividness
for  conscious  memory.  But,  however  that  may  be  on  the  physical
plane,  the  facts  of  which  we  have  presented  and  shall  continue  to  pre-
sent evidence  are  purely  psijehical  facts  ; and  on  the  psychical  plane,  we
can  give  to  a heterogeneous  array  of  them  a certain  orderly  coherence,  and
I)resent  them  as  a graduated  series  of  natural  jdienomena.  Will  it  be
asserted  that  this  treatment  is  illegitimate  unless  a concurrent  physical  theory
can  also  be  put  forward  1 It  is  surely  allowable  to  do  one  thing  at  a time.
There  is  an  unsolved  mystery  in  the  background  ; that  we  grant  and
remember  ; but  it  need  not  perpetually  oppress  us.  After  all,  is  there  not
that  standing  mystery  of  the  cerebral  and  mental  correlation  in  the  individual
— a mystery  equally  unsolved  and  perhaps  more  definitely  and  radically
insrjluble — at  the  background  of  every  fact  and  doctrine  of  the  recognised
psychology  ? The  itsychologists  work  on  as  if  it  did  not  exist,  or  rather  as
if  it  were  the  most  natural  thing  in  the  world,  and  no  one  complains  of
them.  May  we  not  claim  a similar  freedom  ? ]


190


The  Calculus  of  Prohahilifies.


THE  CALCULUS  OF  PROBABILITIES  APPLIED  TO
PSA^CHICAL  RESEARCH.

By  F.  Y.  Edgeworth.

“Nous  somnies  si  oloigiu's  de  connaitre  tou.s  les  agents  de  la  nature  qu’il
serait  peu  pliilosoplii([ue  de  nier  I’existence  de  plicnomenes,  uniquenient  parce-
<[ulls  sont  inexplicaLles  dans  letat  aetuel  de  nos  eonnaissances.  Seulenient  nous
devons  les  examiner  avec  une  attention  d autant  plu.s  scrupuleuse,  qu’il  parait
plus  difficile  de  les  adinettre  ; et  c’est  ici  que  I’analyse  des  ])roljabilites  devient
indisjiensable,  pour  determiner  jusfiu’a  quel  jioint  il  faut  multiplier  les
observations  on  les  exjxiriences,  pour  avoir,  en  faveur  de  I'existence  des  agents
<iu'elles  semblent  indiqiier,  une  ])robabilite  supcrieure  a toutes  les  raisons  que
Ton  peut  avoir  d’ailleurs,  de  la  rejeter. — Lai’D.yce.


It  is  proposed  liere  to  appreciate  by  means  of  the  calculus  of  pro-
babilities the  evidence  in  favour  (jf  some  extraordinary  agency  which
is  afforded  by  exj^eriences  of  the  following  type  : One  person  chooses
a suit  of  cai’ds,  or  a letter  of  the  alphabet.  Another  person  makes  a
guess  as  to  what  the  choice,  has  been.  This  experiment — a choice  by
one  party,  a guess  by  another — is  performed  N times.  The  number  of
successful  guesses  e.xceeds  the  number  which  is  the  most  j)robable  on
the  supj.iosition  of  mere  chance,  viz.,  up  where  m—Na  (in  the  above-
mentioned  cases  respectively  4 A and  .j+Y),  by  a considerable  number  ?/,,
where  it—Xv.  There  follow  a second  and  a third  similar  seiles  of  trials
in  which  the  nund)er  of  successes  exceeds  the  number  mo.st  probable  on
the  hypothesis  of  mere  chance,  viz.,  N'u'  iV"u",  l)y  71  71"  re.spectively.
As  the  number  of  these  series  is  increased,  there  occur  some  in  wdiicli
the  numbei'  of  successes  falls  below  the  most  proljable  number.  What
probability  in  favour  of  the  existence  of  some  agency  other  than  chance
is  afforded  l)y  (1)  a single  series  such  as  thetirst,  in  which  the  successes
are  in  excess  ; (2)  a set  of  series  such  as  the  first  two  or  three,  in  all
of  which  tlie  succe.sses  are  in  excess;  (3)  a chequered  set  of  series  in
some  of  which  the  successes  are  in  e.xcess,  in  others  in  defect  ?

These  problems  may,  for  our  purpose,  be  replaced  by  the  following  :
Out  of  an  uiTi  known  to  contain  an  infinite  number  of  white  and  black
balls  in  the  pi'oportion  d.  : 1 — have  been  drawn  A balls  whereof  A
(a  r)  are.  white;  and  again  A'  balls  whereof  A"'  + v')  are  white  ;

and  so  on.  v is  sometimes  negative.  What  is  the  probability  in  favour  of
agency  other  than  chance  deducible  (1)  from  the  first  series  ; (2)  from
a set  of  series  in  which  -v  is  positive  ; (3)  from  a chequered  set  of  series  ?

The  evaluation  of  such  a posteriori,  pT'obabilities  involves  three


The  Calculus  of  Frobabi/itics.


191


operations  which  may  he  distinguished  in  analysis,  though  implicated
in  practice.  The  first  (T.)  is  to  determine  what  function  the  required
probability  is  of  two  sets  of  variables;  namely,  a priori  probabilities  not
given  by  (or  deducible  from)  direct  statistical  experience,  and  “ objective  ”
probabilities  (to  use  the  phrase  of  Cournot),  which  are  derived  from
statistical  expei’ience.  The  second  operation  (II.)  is  the  treatment  of
the  a priori  probabilities;  the  discovery,  assumption,  or  ignoration  of
those  unknown  quantities.  The  third  operation  (HI.)  is  the  evaluation
of  the  objective  probabilities.  These  three  operations  are  taken  as  the
principle  of  division  for  this  study ; as  a principle  of  subdivision,  the
three  j^roblems  above  stated.

I.  There  is  apt  to  appear  something  arliitrary  in  the  form  of  the
function  expressing  an  a posteriori  proViability.  When  Donkin,  for
example,  constructs  a scheme  exj^ressing  the  probability  that  chessmen,
found  standing  on  a board  in  a certain  position,  or  that  neighbouring*
stars,  have  not  been  so  arranged  by  mere  chance,  one  does  not  feel  very
confident  that  tlte  formula,  not  merely  a formula,  is  assigned  by  him.
It  should  be  observed,  however,  first  that  an  identical  value  may  be
reached  in  different  ways ; very  much  as  a multiple  integral  may  Ite
expressed  in  different  forms.  Secondly,  and  more  importantly,  there  is  a
characteristic  defectf  of  the  calculus  of  probability,  which  leads  us  to
expect  a real  discrepancy  in  the  methods  of  performing  our  first
operation.  I allude  to  the  fact  that  we  are  often  unable  to  utilise  all
our  datum,  to  calculate  the  relative  probabilities  (in  favour  of  mere
chance  or  some  additional  agency)  for  the  part imlar  exewt  obseiwed,  but
only  for  a class  to  which  that  event  belongs.  And  thei’e  is  something
arbitrary  in  the  selection  of  this  class.  An  example;  of  this  peculiarity
will  presently  appear.

(1)  For  the  solution  of  our  first  problem  two  schemata  present
themselves,  each  recommended  by  high  authority  ; the  first  perhaps
more  frequently  employed  in  problems  of  the  general  sort  to  which  ours
belongs,  the  second,  I think,  more  appropriate  to  our  particular  problem.
According  to  the  («)  first  solution  we  regard  the  observed  event — the
drawing  of  N {u+r)  white  balls — as  hamng  resulted  from  some  real
constitution  or  proportion  of  the  balls  in  the  urn,  some  “ possibility,”
in  the  phrase  of  Laplace.  By  inverse  probability,  upon  the  principle  of
Bayes,  we  determine  the  probal)ility  that  this  constitution,  or  possibility,
or  cause  of  the  observed  event,  was  some  ratio  higher  than  k.
Let  {x)  be  the  a priori  probability  that  the  sought  ratio  should  have

been  the  particular  ratio  • Let  f (x)  be  the  objective  jirobability
that,  if  X : (W — x)  were  the  real  distribution  of  the  balls,  then  exactly

* Phil.  Mag.,  series  lY.,  Yol.  I.,  pp.  4C3-466.

f Cf.  Yenn,  Logic  of  Chance,  chap,  viii.,  sections  17-2.3.


t See  p.  193.


192


The  Calculus  of  Probabilities.


m+n  wliite  balls  would  be  drawn  iu  xY  trials.  Then  the  probability
that  the  observed  event  has  resulted  from  some  possibility  above  u,  is
expressed  by  2 {x)xf{x),  summed  from  m to  iY,  divided  by  the  same

expression  summed  from  o to  IT.

Tliis,  as  I understand,  is  the  method  pui-sued  by  Laplace  in  investi-
gating the  proljability  that  the  diiference  in  the  ratio  of  male  to  female
births,  as  observed  in  Paris  and  in  Londoii  (respectively  §1  is))
due  to  a real  difference  between  the  two  localities.  (“Theor.  Analytique
des  Prob.,”  Book  If.,  Art.  29)  ; vwtatis  omitmulis,  that  is,  it  being-
observed  hast  that  Laplace’s  m is  derived  only  from  a finite  set  of
observations  (say  at  London),  whereas  ours  is  derived  deductively  from
an  infinite  set  of  observations,  the  experience  of  games  of  chance  and
even  moi-e*  widely  diffused  experiences,  from  the  Ijeginning  of  time.
And  secondly,  in  comparing  our  formula  with  Laplace’s  method,  we
must  allow  for  his  charactei'lstic  neglect  of  d probabilities.

Laplace’s  reasoning  is  abridged  by  Mr.  Todhunter,  in  his  “ History  of
Probabilities,”  Arts.  902,  1018.  Laplace  is  followed  by  Hemorgan,  in
the  treatise  on  Probabilities  published  in  the  “ Encyclopa?d.  Metrop.,”
at  section  145,  which  the  author  entitles,  “Determination  of  the
Presumption  that  Increased  Frequency  of  an  vent  Elias  a Particular
Cause.”  The  same  method  is  employed  by  Cournot  in  his  masterly
discussion  of  d jmsferiori  Probabilities  (in  the  eighth  chapter  of
“Exposition  de  la  Theorie  des  Chances”).  The  reader  who  may  wish  to
see  tlie  identical  (or  as  nearly  as  possible  the  same)  problem  which  we
have  in  hand,  discussed  by  a first-rate  authority,  is  referred  to  Cournot,
section  99  ; -where  it  is  to  be  observed  that  our  case  is  that  noted  by
Cournot  when  his  vd  (our  iV)  is  “ tres  petit  par  rapport  a m ” (his  7a
corresponding  to  our  infinite  set  of  observations  afforded  by  games  of
chance,  Arc.).

But  however  well  established  the  preceding  formula  as  an  organon
of  statistics  (b),  tlie  following  schema,  savouring  more  of  Ber-
nouilli  than  of  Bayes,  is  iierhaps  more  appropriate  to  the  particular
problem  in  hand.  Let  a be  the  d priori  proliability  that  chance  alone
should  have  been  tlie  reyime  under  which  the  observed  event  occurred.
Let  p be  the  olijective  probability  that,  chance  being  the  reyime,  a
deviation  from  u in  the  direction  of  success  at,  least  as  yrent  as  v should
occur.  Let  /3  be  the  d priori  proliability  that  there  should  have  been
some  additional  agency.  Let  y be  the  (not  in  general  objective)  pro-
bability that,  such  additional  agency  existing,  the  obsei'ved  event  should
occur.  Then  the  required  d posteriori  probability  in  favour  of  the

additional  agency  is  — ; where  (i=l — /3.

" ■ py+ap

* I have  dwelt  upon  this  sort  of  experience  elsewhere  ; Mind,  April,  1884.
Hennathena,  1884.


The  Calculua  of  Probabilities.


193


Such,  as  I understand,  is  the  method  pursued  by  Laplace  in  his
investigation  (“Theor.Analyt.,”  Book  II., Art.  25)  whether  the  difference
between  barometrical  observation  at  different  hours  of  the  day  is  due  to
cause  or  chance  alone.  Laplace  is  followed  by  Deraorgan  in  his  section
139  entitled  “On  the  Question  whether  Observed  Discrepancies  ai’e
Consequences  of  a General  Law,  or  Accidental  Fluctuations.”  Such  also
is  the  method  employed  by  Herschel  (Essay  on  Quetelet)  in  determining
the  probability  that  the  difference  between  the  numbers  of  male  and
female  births  is  not  accidental,  and  that  the  connection  between  the
V)inary  stars  is  physical.

It  may  be  objected,  perhaps,  to  both  these  methods  that  they  do  not
utilise  all  our  knowledge ; for  that,  as  regards  the  second  method,  we
are  given  the  particular  deviation  from  namely,  v,  while  we  take
account  only  of  the  fact  that  the  deviation  belongs  to  the  class  extending
from  V to  1 — u.  In  tlie  first  method,  indeed,  we  take  our  stand  upon
the  particular  event,  the  deviation  of  exactly  v.  But,  on  the  other
hand,  we  do  not  take  account  of  our  exact  knowledge  of  u.  The  answer
would  have  been  the  same  if  we  had  been  given  only  that  this  fraction
was  somewhere  between  zero  and  what  we  now  know  to  be  its  exact  value.

This  difficulty  may  be  partially  cleared  up  by  the  following  illustra-
tion (borrowed  from  Laplace).  Suppose  we  know  that  there  are  a
thousand  tickets  in  a certain  lottery,  whereof  a hundred  are  red  and  the
rest  white,  and  that  each  has  a certain  number  inscribed.  If  a red  ball
is  drawn,  though  it  has  a particular  number  inscribed  on  it,  yet  we
cannot  utilise  that  knowledge  in  the  absence  of  any  knowledge  whether
the  agency,  other  than  chance,  would  prefer  one  number  to  another.
We  may  have  to  put  down  the  (objective)  probability  that  chance  alone
existing  the  red  ball  would  have  l^een  drawn  as  t),.  But  now  let  it  be
known  that  the  particular  number  was  prophesied,  or  is,  and  might  have
been  found  out  to  be,  the  prize-bearing  ticket ; then,  indeed,  we  obtain  a
hold  whereby  to  liring  to  bear  our  knowledge  of  the  differential  chance,
that  is  Yo’^yo-  In  our  problem,  with  reference,  for  example,  to  the  second
method  above  exhibited,  we  can  assign  Certednly  the  difierential  pro-
bability that  the  exact  deviation  v sliould  result  from  chance  alone.
But  we  cannot  similarly  differentiate  our  vague  knowledge  about  the
other  agency.  We  may  assign,  certainly,  the  form  of  such  an  argument,
but  when  we  come  to  our  second  operation  we  shall  find  that  it  is  an

empty  form.  This  foredoomed  form  might  be  where,  corre-

^ ° /3-y‘  +

spending  to  the  notation  above  employed,  pi  is  the  (very  small)  pro-
bability that  the  particular  deviation  v should  occur  under  the  regime  of
chance;  yi,  is  the  probability  {jrresumahhj  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude)
that,  an  additional  agency  existing,  the  exact  deviation  v should  have
occurred  ; a and  /3  are  as  before.


0


194


The  Calculus  of  Prohahilities.


The  only  interpretation  which  I can  put  on  Professor  Lodge’s  reason-
ing upon  the  problem  now  in  hand  (in  the  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.E,.,
Part  VII.),  is  that  it  is  an  attempt  in  some  way  to  evade  the  difficulty
here  noticed.  But  the  originality  of  his  reasoning  renders  it  difficult
for  the  book-taught  student  to  undei'stand  it.

(2)  Still  undei'  the  heading  devoted  to  the  first  operation,  we

come  now  to  our  second  problem.  It  seems  a sufficient  (though

for  reasons  ali'eady  intimated  it  is  an  imperfect)  statement  to  posit  the
same  formula  as  in  the  second  method  of  the  preceding  problem

( viz.,  , substitutino-  for  the  p of  that  formula  the  continued

V ’ Hy+ap)'  ° ^

product  j)  -p'  p",  Arc.,  expressing  the  probability  that  under  the  regime  of
chance  all  the  observed  results  m+n,  m+n',  Arc.,  would  have  diverged  in
the  same  direction  from  the  most  probable  result,  m by  n n',  Arc.
(Had  the  datum  been  that  the  observed  results  had  diverged  on  one
side  or  the  other,  it  would  have  been  proper  to  take  each  as  express-
ing that  degree  of  divergence  on  one  side  or  the  other.)  The  import
of  y is  analogously  modified.

It  will  be  noticed  that  this  foi’uiula  differs  from  that  offered  by
Mr.  Gurney  in  Part  VII.  of  tliese  Proceedings.  But,  as  above
intimated,  it  does  not  follow  that,  because  two  formula',  are  different,
both  cannot  be  light.  They  may  be  equally  sei'viceable  and  equally
imperfect.  In  the  present  case  Mr.  Gurney’s  formula  appears  to  be
quite  as  accurate  as  ours,*  but  not,  as  will  presently  be  pointed  out,
substantially  more  servicealde.

(.3)  The  third  problem  may  be  reduced  to  the  second  (or  first),  by
grouping  the  given  series  so  as  to  constitute  a set,  in  all  of  which  the
successes  are  in  excess.  This  method,  doubtless,  does  not  utilise  all  our
information.  But  it  is  convenient ; and  it  might  be  difficult  to  frame
a more  useful  formula  without  special  knowledge  of  the  subject-matter.
Much  would  turn  upon  the  proliability  that  the  agency  other  than
chance,  if  existing,  would  have  been  attended  by  the  observed  chequered
result.  If  it  were  known  or  suspected  to  be  a fitful  agency,  not  much
presumption  against  it  would  be  created  by  defective  series.

II.  For  the  methods  appropriate  to  the  second  operation  the  reader
is  referred  to  the  paper  on  d ptriori  prohahilities  in  the  Philosophical
Magazine,  September,  1884,  and  to  the  authorities  therein  cited.  It  is
pointed  out  in  the  article  referred  to  that  an  accurate  knowledge  of  the
values  under  consideration  can  often  Ije  dispensed  Avith,  and  that  an
inaccurate  knowledge  is  often  derivable  from  experience ) partly  by  a
copious  simple  induction,  and  partly  by  inference  from  the  success  which
has  attended  the  hypothetical  values  which  have  been  usually  assigned

* Poisson  [Ecserches,  Art.  64)  indicates  the  difference  between  these  two
procedures,  without  e.\'pressing  a preference.


The  Calculus  <■/  PvohahiliHes.


195


to  these  quantities.  To  apply  these  principles  to  the  problems  in  hand.
(1)  For  the  hrst  problem  and  the  («)  first  method  the  a 2'»'iori  facility
function  (j>  (x)  can,  to  a large  extent,  be  ignored,  when  N is  large ; as
Cournot  has  well  exhibited  in  the  eighth  chapter  of  the  work  already
referred  to.  I would  further  contend  that  there  is  some  empirical
ground  for  treating  the  function  as  a constant  (as  is  usual  in  inverse
reasoning  founded  on  Bayes’  theorem  and  the  cognate  theory  of  errors
of  observation).  Accordingly  the  sought  a posteriori  probability  reduces
to  the  objective  probability  2 / (x)  between  proper  limits,  divided  liy
the  same,  summed  between  extreme  limits.

As  to  the  second  formula  ofiered  above  under  (h)  — for  addi-

iSy  + njJ

tional  agency,  it  is  consonant,  I sul^mit,  to  experience  to  put  ^ both
for  a and  j3.  To  put  that  same  value  for  y,  appears,  while  not  contradicted
by,  yet  less  agreeable  to,  experience.  In  fact,  we  know  of  some  kinds
of  agencies  which,  if  they  e.xist,  are  extremely  likely  to  make  themselves
felt  {e.f/.,  imposture).  Accordingly  i\Iill,  discussing  a similar  problem
(“  Logic,”  Book  III.,  chap,  xviii.,  section  G),  says ; “ The  law  of
nature,  if  real,  would  certainly  produce  the  series  of  coincidences.”
And  so  Poisson,  in  a passage  above  referred  to,  supposes  “ une  cause
capable  de  le  [the  observed  event]  produire  necessairement.”  But
it  really  is  not  very  important  what  particular  value  we  assign  to
one  of  these  a priori  constants,  provided  that  we  are  careful  not  to  build
upon  any  particularity  which  does  not  rest  ujDon  our  rough  though  solid
ground  of  experience.  In  the  present  case  all  that  we  really  know
about  y is  that  it  is  substantial,  not  in  general  indefinitely  small.  But
we  must  not  build  any  conclusion  on  its,  fractional  character,  seeing  that
it  may  veiy  well  be  in  the  neighbourhood  of  unity.  The  importance  of
this  remark  Avill  appear  when  we  come  to  the  second  problem.  In  the
present  case,  since  neither  a nor  /3  nor  y is  very  small,  if  p is  very
small  the  above  written  expression  for  the  a posteriori  probability  in

favour  of  additional  agency  reduces  by  Taylor’s  theorem  to  1 —

Thus  the  objective  probability  may  be  taken  as  a lough  measure  of
the  sought  d postey’iori  probability  in  favour  of  mere  chance.  This
reasoning  is  authorised  l;)y  Donkin  and  even  by  Boole,  who  is  so
mightily  scrupulous  about  the  undetermined  constants  of  probabilities
(see  the  authorities  cited  in  the  paper  on  d Probabilities  in

Philosophical  Magazine).  The  conclusion  is  agreeable  to  the  summary
practice  of  Laplace  and  Herschel.  They  have  not  thought  it  worth
while  to  construct  a scaffolding  of  mrknown  constants  wdiich  would
have  to  be  taken  down  again.

The  third  formula  --f- — , attempts  to  utilise  our  knowledge  of
the  particular  deviation  n,  and  the  particular,  most  probable  value  froin

0 2


196


The  Calculus  of  Probabilities.


which  it  is  a deviation,  viz.,  m,  jA,  is  the  objective  probability  that  this
particular  deviation  should  occur  in  the  regime  of  chance,  f we  know ;
but  what  is  yi  1 It  is  a magnitude  2)resumahlg  of  the  same  order  as  ph
Accordingly  the  above  expression  is  thoroughly  indeterminate.  It  will
be  remembered  that  this  formula  is  here  criticised  not  as  being  identical
with  the  I'ule  given  by  Professor  Lodge,  but  as  that  tc  which  the
principle  lie  employs  might  seem  to  lead.  His  rule,  however  obtained,
is  so  far  a good  rule  as  (in  common  with  an  indefinite  number  of  rules
that  might  be  constructed)  it  always  varies  in  the  same  direction  as  the
rule  sanctioned  liy  Laplace,  Demorgan,  Herschel,  and  the  other  masters
of  the  science  of  probabilities.  What  is  here  termed  71  always  increases
with  the  increase,  and  decreases  with  the  decrease  of  Professor

Lodge’s  - {Proceedings,  Part  VII.,  p.  261,  top).  But  it  happens  that

Professor  Lodge’s  rule  does  less  than  justice  to  the  argument  in  favour
of  agency  other  than  chance.

(2)  We  come  now  to  the  second  problem,  concerning  which,  under
the  heading  of  the  second  operation,  there  need  hardly  be  added
anything.  As  under  (1)  we  see  (or  will  see  presently)  that  p is  the
eliective  measure  of  the  probability — the  d -posteriori  probability — of
mere  chance,  so  under  (2)  the  real  grip  of  proof  consists  in  py.f'A,  &c.
If  we  replace  1 which  Mr.  Gurney  as.signs  as  “ the  probability  of
obtaining  at  least  that  degree  of  success — if  chance  -pd”  act,  by
our  7,  his  “ final  value  ” will  become

X

X + ( -Y  X (Mi'"  (In  {^—x)

\yy

So  far  as  there  is  reason  to  think  (with  Mill)  that  “the  law  of  nature,
if  real,  would  certaiidy  produce  the  series  of  coincidences,”  Mr.  Gurney
seems  to  underrate  the  probability  in  favour  of  a cause  otlier  than  chance,

by  assigning  to  i a value  (2)  which,  being  raised  to  the  nth  power,

y " .

unduly  swells  the  denominator.  If  each^;  or  the  average — the  geometric
mean — of  the  jls  were  I,  Mr.  Gurney’s  formula  would  be  void  of  any
probative  content.  But  this  is  contrary  to  common  sense.  It  is
contrary  to  this  elementaiy  principle  of  statistics  : that,  if  an  event  may
indifferently  happen  one  way  or  another,  be  either  j:>lus  or  mhius,  and
it  repeatedly  happens  one  way,  then  there  must  be  a cause  other
tlian  chance  for  that  repetition.*  According  to  this  new  rule  it  is  no

* It  is  evidently  owing  to  a mere  lapsus  pluniw  on  the  part  of  Mr.  Gurney
that  this  consequence  can  he  fastened  upon  him.  For  at  p.  256  he  implies  the
principle  for  which  we  are  here  contending.  It  may  he  as  well  to  repeat  that
my  contention  is  not  against  Mr.  Gurney’s  reasoning,  which  is  excellent  ; hut
against  his  assumption  of  the  premiss  : that,  “ if  chance  +6”  act,  the  probability


The  Calculus  of  Probabilities.


197


argument  in  favour  of  causation  * tliat  all  the  planets  move  in  the  same
direction.  It  ■would  be  no  proof  of  asymmetry  in  a coin  that  it  ever  so
often  turned  up  in  succession  heads.  Doubtless  you  never  could  prove
by  repeated  throws  the  existence  of  such  a peculiar  kind  of  asymmetry,
such  a wabbling  load,  that  it  would  be  (for  each  throw)  “ as  likely  to
bring  the  degree  of  success  up  to  that  point  ” winch  is  observed,  that  is
to  give  heads,  as  “ not  to  do  so,”  that  is  to  give  tails.  Pure  chance
would  always  be  as  probable  an  hypothesis  as  that.  In  a word,  Mr.
Gurney’s  solution  underrates  the  evidence  in  the  case  where  tlie
divergence  from  the  most  probable  Amlue  is  small  or  not  known  to  be
large,  but  is  repeatedly  in  the  same  direction.  In  the  general  case
where  p is  t'ery  small  his  solution  does  not  differ  substantially  from

ours.  His  2p  is  as  good  as  our  _p,  may  be  regarded  as  of  the  same
order  of  magnitude.

It  should  be  obsertmd  that  this  criticism  relates  to  the  second,  not
tlie  first  operation,  as  performed  by  INIr.  Gurnej^  His  scaffolding  is
more  elaborate,  if  not  more  serviceable,  than  ours.  But  in  the  building
he  uses  some  materials  which,  though  solid  enough  for  ordinary  purposes,
yet  Avill  not  bear  certain  strains.  It  is  to  be  observed,  also,  that
Mr.  Gurney’s  “ at  least  that  degree  of  success  ” has  here  been  inter-
preted as  at  least  that  degree  of  divergence  from  the  most  probable
point  in  an  assigned,  say  the  joins,  direction.  If  we  interpret  (violently)
his  q as  probability  of  obtaining  that  degree  of  divergence  in  eith,er
direction,  Ave  shall  be  involved  in  still  greater  difficulties.

(3)  As  to  our  third  problem,  it  lias  been  already  resolved  into  the
other  tAvo.

III.  AVe  come  iioav  to  the  third,  the  calculative  portion  of  our  Avork.
(1)  As  an  example  of  the  application  of  first  principles  Avithout  the
intervention  of  approximative  formulte,  let  us  take  the  experiment
cited  by  Mr.  Gurney  at  p.  2-51  of  Part  VII.  of  these  Proceedings,
Avhere  the  “name  thought  of”  Avas  DOREMOND,  and  the  “letters

of  a certain  degree  of  success  being  attained  may  be  put  down  a.s  i.  The  ground
of  my  contention  is  that  Ave  are"  imt  [entirely  ignorant  of  the  probability  in
question.  For  Ave  have  the  datum  that  it  is  greater  than  the  probability  that
chance  alone  Ai'ould  attain  the  certain  degree  of  success.  For  it  is  absurd  to
suppose  that  chance  + a favouring  cause  is  less  likely  to  obtain  a certain
degree  of  success  than  chance  alone.  Accordingly  it  might  be  legitimate  to
put  7 + ; or  rather  to  regard  y as  an  independent  variable  in  P,  the  ex-

pression for  the  a posteriori  probability  in  favour  of  a cause,  and  to  integrate
P Avith  regard  to  y between  limits  p and  1 ; agreeably  to  the  practice  recom-
mended by  Donkin  in  his  masterly  discussion  cf  d priori  probabilities  (Phil.
Mag. , 1851).  It  is  clear  that,  Avhen  p is  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Mr.  Gurney’s
assumption  sacrifices  much  of  the  cumulative  force  Avhich  properly  belongs  to  P,

* Cf.  Laplace,  Essai  Philosophique.


198


The  Calculus  of  Probabilities.


produced  ” were  EPJYEIOD.  Here,  out  of  eight  guesses,  there  are
four  successes  ; if  success  consist  in  guessing  either  the  very  letter
thouglit  of,  or  eitlier  of  its  neai'est  alphabetical  neighbours,  in  short  any
one  of  an  assigned  consecutive  trij^let.  The  probability  that  a letter
taken  at  random  should  fall  within  any  assigned  triplet  is  Accord-
ingly (on  the  supposition  that  chance  is  the  only  agency),  the
probabilities  of  obtaining  in  the  course  of  eight  trials  no  successes,  one
success,  two  successes,  (fcc.,  are  given  by  the  first,  second,  third,  &c.,
terms  respectively  of  the  binomial  (h+s)®-  The  probability  of  obtaining
at  least  four  successes  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  fifth,  and  remaining
terms  ; that  is


(i)


or  'Oil.  The  probability,  then,  in  favour  of  an  agency  other  than
chance  is  about  '99.

When  larger  numbers  are  involved,  approximative  formula  become
necessary.  According  to  principles  familiar  to  those  who  have  studied
the  calculus  of  probabilities,  the  objective  probability  involved  in  either
foT'inula  (rt)  or  (b)  is  approximately*


where  T=v


I N

|2((.  (1 — u)


The  approximation  requires  that  n”  should  not  exceed  A,  and  that  K
should  be  large.  This  then,  according  to  the  reasoning  employed  in  our
second  part,  is  the  measure  of  the  a jmsteriori  probalulity  in  favour  of
chance  alone.

For  example,  in  the  first  instance  given  liy  Mr.  Gurney,  at  p.  241  of
the  December  number  of  this  Journal,  N is  2927,  if-  is  and  v is
oijS;-.  As  the  condition  required  for  the  validity  of  the  approximation
is  just  or  very  nearly  fulfilled,  the  answer  is,  if  I do  the  sum  correctly,
about  '93  as  the  probability  of  an  agency  other  than  chance ; no  very
crushing  probability,  as  statistical  evidence  goes.  Iir  Mr.  Gurney’s
next  instance,  N is  1833,  m still  j,  v is  xils-  Whence  in  favour  of
additional  agency  a very  respectable  probability,  -997.

(2)  and  (3).  As  an  illustration  of  the  second  problem  (including  the


Omitting  a certain  term  outside  the  sign  of  integration  (see  Todhunter,
sec.  997)  as  here  practically,  if  not  in  general  theoretically,  neglectible.  It  will
he  observed  that  in  halving  the  quantity  within  the  brackets  we  assume  that  an
excess  greater  than  -n  is  equally  probable  as  a defect  greater  than  the  same
quantity.  This  is  exactly  true  only  when  ii=h.  In  our  case  the  factor  4 is  too
large.  The  argument  becomes  a fortiori.


The  Caiculus  of  Proh abilities.


199


tliii'd),  let  us  suppose  that  the  series  just  instanced  breaks  up  into  four
series,  each  presenting  an  excess  of  successes,  with  about  tlie  same  v —
an  arrangement  to  which  the  experiments  of  M.  Richet  (described  at
p.  622-628  of  the  December  number  of  Revue  Philosojjhique)  seem  to
lend  themselves  without  violence.  Then  for  one  of  the  fractional  series
we  have  to  and  v as  before.  Whence  p is  found

about  '08.  Whence  about  'OGOO-l:.  And  1 — p^,  the  measure  of  the
sought  probability,  ='99996,  which  may  fairly  be  regarded  as  physical
certainty.  It  should  be  observed  that  if,  as  would  usually  happen,
the  V for  all  the  partial  series  should  not  be  the  same,  then  ceteris
paribus  the  above  estimate  would  be  below  the  mark.  On  the  other
hand,  if  the  partial  Ws  were  unequal,  ceteris  jxoribus  our  estimate  would
be  above  the  mark.  As  both  inequalities,  but  especially  the  former,
are  likely  to  make  themselves  felt,  the  conclusion  may  be  regarded
as  safe.

Such  is  the  evidence  which  the  calculus  of  probabilities  affords  as  to
the  existence  of  an  agency  other  than  mere  chance.  The  calculus  is
silent  as  to  the  nature  of  that  agency — whether  it  is  more  likely  to  be
vulgar  illusion  or  extraordinary  law.  That  is  a question  to  be  decided,
not  by  formulse  aiid  figures,  but  by  general  iDhilosophy  and  common
sense.


200


Annual  Business  Meeting,  [Jau.  30,  1885.


ANNUAL  BUSINESS  MEETING.


The  Third  Annual  Business  Meeting  of  the  Members  of  the  Society
was  held  at  II,  Dean’s  Yard,  London,  SAV.,  on  the  30th  of  January.

The  President,  Professor  H.  Sidgwick,  briefly  referred  to  the  growth
of  the  Society  during  the  previous  year.  He  remarked  that  during
1881  the  Society  nearly  doubled  the  number  of  its  Members  and
Associates.  At  the  close  of  the  year  the  Society  consisted  of  : —


Members  ...  223

Associates  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  258

Honorary  Members  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  (j

Corresponding  Members  ...  ...  ...  ...  9

Honorary  Associates  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  21

Vice-Presidents  who  are  not  Members  or  Associates  3


Total  520

The  President  also  referred  to  the  Library  as  numbering  nearly  800
volumes.  Of  these  works,  520  are  in  English,  135  in  German,  110  in
French,  and  15  in  other  languages.

An  audited  balance-sheet  of  the  receipts  and  expenditure  of  the
Society  during  the  year  1881  was  placed  before  the  Meeting.  In
commenting  on  it  the  President  said  it  appeared  that,  after  taking
account  of  moneys  due  and  owing  at  the  end  of  the  year,  there  was
still  a balance  on  the  right  side  ; in  addition  to  which  there  was
the  Library,  the  Stock  of  Froceedings,  and  the  furniture  and  fittings
belonging  to  the  Society.  It  was  agreed  that  a valuation  of  these  should
1)6  made  during  the  current  year’,  so  that  at  its  close  the  Society  might
know  its  exact  positioir  both  as  to  capital  and  as  to  receipts  and  ex-
penditure.

The  six  vacancies  on  the  Council,  caused  by  the  retirement  in
rotation  of  flve  Members,  and  by  the  death  of  Mi'.  Walter  H.  Browne,
were  filled  Iry  the  election  of  the  following  gentlemen  : —


G.  P.  Bidder,  Q.C.
Alexander  Calder.
Richard  Hodgson.


Rev.  W.  Stainton  Moses.

C.  Lockhart  Robertson,  M.D.
J . Herbert  Stack .


The  approval  of  the  Society  was  obtained  to  a change  in  the
relations  between  the  Council  and  the  investigating  Committees.  In
future,  the  responsibility  for  both  the  facts  and  the  reasonings  in
papers  published  in  the  Proceedings  will  rest  entirely  with  their
authors ; and  the  Council,  as  a body,  will  refrain  from  expressing  or
implying  any  opinioir  on  the  sulijects  thus  brought  forward.  The
papers  will,  however,  be  sulmiitted  to  a Committee  of  Reference  before
publication.


Statement  of  the  Committee.


201


PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  GENERAL  MEETINGS  IN
2Iay  and  June,  1885.

The  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  General  Meetings  of  the  Society  were
held  at  the  R,ooms  of  the  Society  of  British  Artists,  Suffolk-street,
Pall  Mall,  on  Friday,  May  29th,  and  Friday,  June  24th.

IMr.  F.  W.  H.  Myers  in  the  Chair.

The  programme  on  both  occasions  included  parts  of  Mr.  Hodgson’s
account  of  his  investigations  in  India,  and  of  the  paper  on  “Some
Higher  Aspects  of  Mesmerism,”  which  appear  below.  At  the  June
meeting  Professor  Sidgwick  read  the  conclusions  expressed  by  the
Committee  in  the  following  Report.


I.

REPORT  OF  THE  COMMITTEE

APPOINTED  TO

INVESTIGATE  PHENOMENA  CONNECTED  WITH  THE
THEOSOPHICAL  SOCIETY.*

1.  STATEMENT  AND  CONCLUSIONS  OF  THE  COMMITTEE.

In  May,  1884,  the  Council  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research
appointed  a Committee  for  the  purpose  of  taking  such  evidence  as  to
the  alleged  phenomena  connected  with  the  Theosophical  Society  as
might  be  offered  by  members  of  that  body  at  the  time  in  England,  or
as  could  be  collected  elsewhere.

The  Committee  consisted  of  the  following  members,  with  power  to
add  to  their  number  : — Messrs.  E.  Gurney,  F.W.H.  Myers,  F.  Podmore,
H.  Sidgwick,  and  J.  H.  Stack.  They  have  since  added  Mr.  R.  Hodgson
and  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  to  their  number.

For  the  convenience  of  Members  who  may  not  have  followed  the
progress  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  a few  words  of  preliminary
explanation  may  be  added  here.

The  Theosophical  Society  was  founded  in  New  York,  in  1875,  by
Colonel  Olcott  and  Madame  Blavatsky,  ostensibly  for  certain  philan-
thropic and  literary  purposes.  Its  headquarters  were  removed  to  India  in
1878,  and  it  made  considerable  progress  among  the  Hindus  and  other

* As  this  Committee  had  carried  out  a large  portion  of  its  work  before  the  appoint-
ment of  the  Committee  of  Reference,  its  Report  has,  by  exception  not  been  submitted
to  that  body.

P


2U2


iStalcment  of  ilie  Committed


cdiiccatecl  natives.  ‘-TheOccult  World,”  by  Mr.Sinnett,at  that  time  editot
of  the  Piomer,  introduced  the  Society  to  Englisli  readers,  and  tliat  work,
wldcli  dealt  mainly  with  phenomena,  was  succeeded  by  “ Esoteric
r.uddhisin,”  in  which  some  tenets  of  the  Occult  doctrine,  or  so-called
“Wisdom-religion,”  were  set  forth.  Eut  with  these  doctrines  the
Committee  have,  of  course,  no  concern.

The  Committee  had  the  opportunity  of  examining  Colonel  Olcott
and  INIadame  Elavatsky,  who  spent  some  months  in  England  in
the  summer  of  1884,  and  IMr.  Mohini  ]\I.  Chatterji,  a Brahmin
graduate  of  the  University  of  Calcutta,  who  accompanied  them.  Mr.
8innett  also  gave  evidence  before  the  Committee ; and  they  have
liad  before  them  oral  and  written  testimony  from  numerous  other
members  of  the  Theosophical  Society  in  England,  India,  and  other
countries,  besides  the  accounts  of  phenomena  published  in  “ The
Ocetdt  World,”  “ Hints  on  Esoteric  Theosophy,”  The  Theosoijhist^
and  elsewhere.

According  to  this  evidence,  there  exists  in  Thibet  a brotherhood
whose  members  have  acquired  a power  over  nature  which  enables  them
to  perform  wonders  beyond  the  reach  of  ordinary  men.  Madame
Elavatsky  asserts  hei’self  to  be  a Chela,  or  disciple  of  these  Brothers
[spoken  of  also  as  Adepts  and  as  Mahatmas),  and  they  are  alleged  to  have
interested  themselves  in  a special  way  in  tlie  Theosophical  Society,  and
to  have  performed  many  marvels  in  connection  with  it.  They  are  said
to  be  able  to  cause  apparitions  of  themselves  in  places  where  their
bodies  are  not,  and  not  only  to  appear,  but  to  communicate  intelligently
with  those  whom  they  thus  visit,  and  themselves  to  perceive  what  is  going
on  where  their  phantasm  appears.  This  phantasmal  appearance  has
been  called  by  Thcosophists  the  projection  of  the  “ astral  form.’’
The  evidence  before  the  Committee  includes  several  cases  of  such
illeged  appearances  of  two  Mahatma.®,  Koot  Hoomi  and  Morya.  It  is
further  alleged  that  their  Chelas,  or  disciples,  are  gradually  taught  this
art,  and  that  Mr.  Damodar  K.  Mavalankar  in  particular,  a Theosophlst
residing  at  the  headquarters  of  the  Society,  has  acquired  it,  and  has
practised  it  on  several  occasions.  It  may  be  observed  that  these
alleged  voluntary  apparitions,  though  carrying  us  considerably  beyond
any  evidence  that  has  been  collected  from  other  sources,  still  have
much  analogy  with  some  cases  that  have  come  under  the  notice  of  the
Literary  Committee.

But  we  cannot  separate  the  evidence  offered  by  the  Theosophists
for  projections  of  the  “astral  form,”  from  the  evidence  which  they  also
offer  for  a different  class  of  phenomena,  similar  to  some  which  are  said
by  Spiritualists  to  occur  through  the  agency  of  mediums,  and  which
involve  the  action  of  “ psychical  ” energies  on  ponderable  matter ; since
such  phenomena  are  usually  described  either  as  (1)  accompanying


On  Phenomena  connected  icith  Theosophy.


203


apparitions  of  the  Mahatmas  or  their  disciples,  or  (2)  at  any  rate  as
carrying  with  them  a manifest  reference  to  their  agency.

The  alleged  plienomena  which  come  under  this  liead  consist — so  far
as  we  need  at  present  take  them  into  account — in  the  transportation,
even  through  solid  matter,  of  ponderable  objects,  including  letters,
and  of  what  the  Theosophists  regard  as  their  duplication ; together
with  what  is  called  “ precipitation  ” of  handwriting  and  drawings  on
previously  blank  paper.  The  evocation  of  sound  without  physical
means  is  also  said  to  occur.

In  December,  1881,  the  Committee  considered  that  the  time  had
come  to  issue  a preliminary  and  provisional  Report.  This  Report,  on
account  of  its  provisional  character,  and  for  other  reasons,  was  circu-
lated among  Members  and  Associates  of  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research  only,  and  not  published.  In  drawing  up  the  present  Report,
therefore,  the  Committee  have  not  assumed  that  their  readers  will  be
acquainted  with  the  former  one.  The  conclusion  then  come  to  was
expressed  as  follow^s  : “ On  the  whole  (though  with  some  serious
reserves),  it  seems  undeniable  that  there  is  z.  primd  facie  case,  for  some
part,  at  least,  of  the  claim  made,  which,  at  the  point  which  the  investi-
gations of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  have  now  reached,  cannot,
with  consistency,  be  ignoi’ed.  And  it  seems  plain  that  an  actual
residence  for  some  months  in  India  of  some  trusted  observer — his  actual
intercourse  with  the  persons  concerned,  Hindu  and  European,  so  far
as  may  be  permitted  to  him — is  an  almost  necessary  pre-requisite  of
any  more  definite  judgment.”

In  accordance  with  this  view,  a member  of  the  Committee,  Mr.
R.  Hodgsoji,  B.A.,  Scholar  of  St.  John’s  College,  Cambridge,  pro-
ceeded to  India  in  November,  1884,  and,  after  carrying  on  his
investigations  for  three  months,  returned  in  April,  1885.

In  the  Madras  Christian  College  Magazine  for  September  and
October,  1884,  portions  of  certain  letters  w'ere  published  which  pur-
ported to  have  been  written  by  Madame  Blavatsky  to  a M.  and
Madame  Coulomb,  who  had  occupied  positions  of  trust  at  the  head-
quarters of  the Theosophical Society  for  some  years, but  had  been  expelled
from  it  in  May,  1884,  by  the  General  Council  of  that  Society  during
the  absence  of  Madame  Blavatsky  and  Colonel  Olcott  in  Europe.  These
letters,  if  genuine,  unquestionably  implicated  M d -me  Blavatsky  in  a
conspiracy  to  produce  marvellous  phenomena  fraudulently;  but  they  were
declared  by  her  to  be,  in  whole  or  in  part,  forgeries.  One  important  object
of  Mr.  Hodgson’s  visit  to  India  was  to  ascertain,  if  possible,  by  examining
the  letters,  and  by  verifying  facts  implied  or  stated  in  them,  and  the
explanations  of  the  Coulombs  concerning  them,  whether  the  letters
were  genuine  or  not.  The  editor  of  the  Christian  College  Magazine
lad  already,  as  Mr.  Hodgson  found,  taken  considerable  pains  to

p 3


204.


Statement  of  the  Committee


ascertain  this;  but  he  had  not  been  able  to  obtain  the  judgment  of
a recognised  expert  in  handwriting.  Accordingly  a selection  of  the
letters,  amply  sufficient  to  prove  the  conspiracy,  was  entrusted  by  the
editor,  (in  whose  chai’ge  Madame  Coulomb  had  placed  them,)  to  Mr.
Hodgson,  who  sent  it  home  before  his  own  return.  These,  together
with  some  letters  undoubtedly  written  by  Madame  Blavatsky,  were
submitted  to  the  well-known  expert  in  handwriting,  Mr.  Netherclift,
and  also  to  Mr.  Sims,  of  the  British  Museum.  These  gentlemen  came
independently  to  the  conclusion  that  the  letters  were  written  by
Madame  Blavatsky.  This  opinion  is  entirely  in  accordanee  with  the  im-
pression produced  on  the  Committee  by  the  general  aspect  of  the  letters,
as  well  as  by  their  characteristic  style,  and  much  of  their  contents.

The  Committee  further  desired  that  Mr.  Hodgson  should,  by  cross-
examination  and  otherwise,  obtain  evidence  that  might  assist  them  in
judging  of  the  value  to  be  attached  to  the  testimony  of  some  of  the
principal  witnesses ; that  he  should  examine  localities  where  pheno-
mena had  occurred,  with  a view  to  ascertaining  whether  the  explanations
by  trickery,  that  suggested  themselves  to  the  Committee,  or  any  other
such  explanations,  were  possible ; and  in  particular,  as  already  said,
that  he  should,  as  far  as  possible,  verify  the  statements  of  the  Coulombs
with  a view  to  judging  whether  their  explanations  of  the  phenomena
were  plausible.  For  it  is  obvious  that  no  value  for  the  purposes  of
psychical  research  can  be  attached  to  phenomena  where  persons  like
the  Coulombs  have  been  concerned,  if  it  can  be  plausibly  shown  that
they  might  themselves  have  produced  them  : while,  at  the  same  time,
their  unsupported  assertion  that  they  did  produce  them,  cannot  be
taken  by  itself  as  evidence.

After  hearing  what  Mr.  Hodgson  had  to  say  on  these  points,  and
after  carefully  weighing  all  the  evidence  before  them,  the  Committee
unanimously  arrived  at  the  following  conclusions  : —

(1)  That  of  the  letters  put  forward  by  Madame  Coulomb,  all  those,

at  least,  which  the  Committee  have  had  the  opportunity  oi
themselves  examining,  and  of  submitting  to  the  judgment  oi
experts,  are  undoubtedly  written  by  Madame  Blavatsky  ; and
suffice  to  prove  that  she  has  been  engaged  in  a long-continued
combination  with  other  persons  to  produce  by  ordinary  means
a series  of  apparent  marvels  for  the  support  of  the  Theosophic
movement.

(2)  That,  in  particular,  the  Shrine  at  Adyar,  through  which  letters

purporting  to  come  from  Mahatmas  were  received,  was  elabo-
rately arranged  wdth  a view  to  the  secret  insertion  of  letters  and
other  objects  through  a sliding  panel  at  the  back,  and  regularly
used  for  this  purpose  by  Madame  Blavatsky  or  her  agents.

(31  That  there  is  conseouentlv  a verv  stroncr  general  presumption


205


Phenomena  connected  ivith  Theosophy.

that  all  the  marvellous  narratives  put  forward  as  evidence  of
the  existence  and  occult  power  of  the  Mahatmas  are  to  be
explained  as  due  either  (a)  to  deliberate  deception  carried  out
by  or  at  the  instigation  of  Madame  Blavatsky,  or  (6)  to  spon-
taneous illusion,  or  hallucination,  or  unconscious  misrepresen-
tation or  invention  on  the  part  of  the  witnesses.

(4)  That  after  examining  Mr.  Hodgson’s  report  of  the  results  of  his
personal  inquiries,  they  are  of  opinion  that  the  testimony  to
these  marvels  is  in  no  case  sutHcient,  taking  amount  and
character  together,  to  resist  the  force  of  the  general  presump-
tion above  mentioned.

Accordingly,  they  think  that  it  would  be  a waste  of  time  to  prolong
the  investigation.

As  to  the  correctness  of  Mr.  Hodgson’s  explanation  of  particular
marvels,  they  do  not  feel  called  upon  to  express  any  definite  conclusion;
since  on  the  one  hand,  they  are  not  in  a position  to  endorse  every  detail
of  this  explanation,  and  on  the  other  hand  they  have  satisfied  them-
selves as  to  the  thoroughness  of  Mr.  Hodgson’s  investigation,  and  have
complete  reliance  on  his  impartiality,  and  they  recognise  that  his  means
of  arriving  at  a correct  conclusion  are  far  beyond  any  to  which  they  can
lay  claim.

There  is  only  one  special  point  on  which  the  Committee  think
themselves  bound  to  state  explicitly  a modification  of  their  original
view.  They  said  in  effect  in  their  First  Report  that  if  certain  phenomena
were  not  genuine  it  was  very  difficult  to  suppose  that  Colonel  Olcott
was  not  implicated  in  the  fraud.  But  after  considering  the  evidence  that
Mr.  Hodgson  has  laid  before  them  as  to  Colonel  Olcott’s  extraordinary
credulity,  and  inaccuracy  in  observation  and  inference,  they  desire  to
disclaim  any  intention  of  imputing  wilful  deception  to  that  gentleman.

The  Committee  have  no  desire  that  their  conclusion  should  be
accepted  without  examination,  and  wish  to  afford  the  reader  every
opportunity  of  forming  a judgment  for  himself.  They  therefore  append
Mr. Hodgson’s  account  of  his  investigation,  which  will  be  found  to  form
by  far  the  largest  and  most  important  part  of  the  present  Fveport.  In
it,  and  the  appendices  to  it,  is  incorporated  enough  of  the  evidence
given  by  members  of  the  Theosophical  Society  to  afford  the  reader
ample  opportunity  of  judging  of  both  its  quantity  and  quality.

There  is,  however,  evidence  for  certain  phenomena  which  did  not
occur  in  India,  and  are  not  directly  dealt  with  in  Mir.  Hodgson’s  Report.
Accounts  of  these  will  be  found  at  p.  382,  with  some  remarks  on  tliem
by  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick.

The  report  of  Mr.  Netherclift  on  the  handwriting  of  the  Blavatsky-
Coulomb  letters  will  be  found  at  p.  381.  Extracts  from  tlie  letters
themselves  are  given  in  Mr.  Hodgson’s  Report,  pp.  211-210


206


Statement  of  the  Committed

The  authorship  of  the  letters  attributed  to  Koot  Hoomi,  which
are  very  numerous,  and  many  of  them  very  long,  is  fully  discussed  in
]\Ir,  Hodgson’s  Heport.  It  may  be  mentioned  here  that  it  is  maintained
by  some  that  the  contents  of  these  letters  are  such  as  to  preclude  the
possibility  of  their  having  been  written  by  Madame  Blavatsky.  This
has  never  been  the  opinion  of  the  Committee,  either  as  regards  the
published  letters  or  those  that  have  been  privately  shown  to  them  in
manuscript.  Those  who  wish  to  form  an  independent  opinion  on  the
subject  are  referred  to  “The  Occult  World” and  “Esoteric  Buddhism,”
which  contain  many  of  the  letters  themselves,  and  much  matter  derived
from  others.

In  this  connection  may  be  conveniently  mentioned  what  the  Com-
mittee, in  their  First  Pteport,  called  the  most  serious  blot  which  had  then
been  pointed  out  in  the  Theosophic  evidence.  A certain  letter,  in  the
Koot  Hoomi  handwriting,  and  addressed  avowedly  by  Koot  Hoomi,
from  Thibet,  to  Mr.  Sinnett,  in  1880,  was  proved  by  Mr.  H.  Kiddle,
of  Kew  York,  to  contain  a long  passage  apparently  plagiarised  from  a
speech  of  Mr.  Kiddle’s,  made  at  Lake  Pleasant,  August  15th,  1880,
and  reported  in  the  Banner  of  LiglU  some  two  months  or  more  previous
to  the  date  of  Koot  Hoomi’s  letter.  Koot  Hoomi  replied  (some
months  later)  that  the  passages  were  no  doubt  quotations  from  Mr.
Kiddle’s  speech,  whicli  he  had  become  cognisant  of  in  some  occult
manner,  and  which  he  had  stored  up  in  his  mind,  but  that  the  appear-
ance of  plagiarism  was  due  to  the  imperfect  precipitation  of  the  letter
by  the  Chela,  or  disciple,  charged  with  the  task.  Koot  Hoomi  then
gave  what  he  asserted  to  be  the  true  version  of  the  letter  as  dictated
and  recovered  by  his  own  scrutiny  apparently  from  the  blurred  pre-
cipitation. In  this  fuller  version  the  quoted  passages  were  given  as
quotations,  and  mixed  with  controversial  matter.  Koot  Hoomi
explained  the  peculiar  form  which  the  error  of  precipitation  had
assumed  by  saying  that  the  quoted  passages  had  been  more  distinctly
impressed  on  his  own  mind,  by  an  effort  of  memory,  than  his  own
interposed  remarks ; and,  that  inasmuch  as  the  whole  composition  had
been  feebly  and  inadequately  projected,  owing  to  his  own  physical
fatigue  at  the  time,  the  high  lights  only,  so  to  speak,  had  come  out ;
there  had  been  many  illegible  passages,  which  the  Chela  had  omitted.
The  Chela,  he  said,  wished  to  submit  the  letter  to  Koot  Hoomi  for
revision,  but  Koot  Hoomi  declined  for  want  of  time.

The  weakness  of  this  explanation  was  pointed  out  (in  Lighf  by  Mr.
[Massey,  who  showed  (among  other  points)  that  the  quoted  sentences
seemed  to  have  been  ingeniously  twisted  into  a polemical  sense,  pre-
cisely opposite  to  that  in  which  they  were  written.

And  more  lately  (in  Light,  September  20Lh,  1884)  Mr.  Kiddle  has
sliown  that  the  passage  thus  restored  by  no  mean?  comprises  the  whole


On  Phenom'ina  connected  with  Theosophy.


207


of  the  unacknowledged  quotations  ; and,  moreover,  that  these  newly-
indicated  quotations  are  antecedent  to  those  already  admitted  by  Koot
Hoomi,  and  described  as  forming  the  introduction  to  a fresh  topic  of
criticism.  The  proof  of  a deliberate  plagiarism  aggravated  by  a
fictitious  defence,  is  tlierefore  irresistible.

In  conclusion,  it  is  necessary  to  state  that  this  is  not  the  oidy
evidence  of  fraud  in  connection  with  the  Theosophical  Society  and
Madame  Blavatsky,  which  the  Committee  had  before  them,  prior  to,  or
independently  of,  the  publication  of  the  Blavatsky-Coulomb  corre-
spondence. Mr.  C.  C.  INIassey  had  brought  before  them  evidence
which  convinced  both  him  and  them  that  Madame  Blavatsky  had,  in
1879,  arranged  with  a medium,  then  in  London,  to  cause  a “ Mahatma”
letter  to  reach  him  in  an  apparently  ‘'mysterious”  way.  Tlie  par-
ticulars will  be  found  at  p.  397.

It  forms  no  part  of  our  duty  to  follow  Madame  Blavatsky  into  other
fields.  But  with  reference  to  the  somewhat  varied  lines  of  activity
which  IMr.  Hodgson’s  Report  suggests  for  her,  we  may  say  that  we
cannot  consider  any  of  these  as  beyond  the  range  of  her  powers.  The
homage  which  her  immjdiate  friends  have  paid  to  her  abilities  has  been
for  the  most  part  of  an  unconscious  kind;  and  some  of  them  may  still  be
unwilling  to  credit  her  with  mental  resources  which  they  have  hitherto
been  so  far  from  suspecting.  For  our  own  part,  we  regard  her  neither
as  the  mouthpiece  of  hidden  seers,  nor  as  a mere  vulgar  adventuress  ;
we  think  that  she  has  achieved  a title  to  perminent  remembrance  as  one
of  the  most  accomplished,  ingenious,  and  interesting  impostors  in  history.


2.  ACCOUNT  OF  PERSONAL  INVESTIGATIONS  IN  INDIA,
AND  DISCUSSION  OF  THE  AUTHORSHIP  OF  THE
“IvOOT  HOOMI”  LETTERS.

By  Richard  Hodgson.


PART  I.

In  November  of  last  year  I proceeded  to  India  for  the  purpose  of
investigating  on  the  spot  the  evidence  of  the  phenomena  connected  with
the  Theosophical  Society.

It  will  be  known  to  most  of  my  readers  that  M.  and  Madame  Coulomb,
who  had  been  attached  to  the  Theosophical  Society^  for  several  years  in
positions  of  trust  had  charged  Madame  Blavatsky  with  fraud,  and  had
adduced  in  support  of  their  charge  various  letters  and  other  documents
alleged  by  them  to  have  been  written  by  Madame  Blavatsky.  Some  of
these  document.s  v/ere  published  in  the  Madras  Christian  College
Magazine  of  September  and  October,  1881,  and,  if  genuine,  unquestion-


203


Mv.  Hodgson’s  Report


ably  implicated  Madame  Blavatsky  in  trickery.  Madame  Blavatiky,
however,  a.s.serted  that  they  were  to  a great  extent  forgerie.s,  that  at
any  rate  the  incriminating  portions  were.  One  of  the  most  imjrortant
points,  therefore,  in  the  investigation  was  the  determination  of  the
genuineness  of  these  disputed  documents.

It  was  also  highly  important  to  determine  the  competency  of  the
witnesses  to  phenomena,  and  to  ascertain,  if  2iossible,  the  trustworthiness
in  particular  of  three  primary  witnesses,  viz.,  Mr.  Damodar  K.
Mavalankar,  Mr.  Babajee  D.  Nath,  and  Colonel  Olcott,  upon  whose
trustworthiness  the  validity  of  the  evidence  which  in  our  First  Report
we  considei’ed  2'>rimd  facie  important,  mainly  depended.

Before  proceeding  it  may  be  well  for  me  to  state  that  the  general
attitude  which  I have  for  years  maintained  with  respect  to  various
classes  of  alleged  phenomena  which  form  the  subject  of  investigation
by  our  Society  enabled  me,  as  I believe,  to  aj^proach  the  task  I had
before  me  with  comjDlete  impartiality ; while  the  conclusions  which  I
held  and  still  hold  concerning  the  important  positive  results  achieved  by
our  Society  in  connection  with  the  phenomena  of  Telepathy, — of  which,
moreover,  I have  had  instances  in  my  own  experience,  both  spontaneous
and  experimental,  and  both  as  agent  and  percipient, — formed  a further
safeguard  of  my  readiness  to  deal  with  the  evidence  set  before  me
without  any  jDrejudice  as  to  the  princi^iles  involved.  Indeed,  whatever
prepossessions  I may  have  had  were  distinctly  in  favour  of  Occultism
and  Madame  Blavatsky — a fact  which,  I think  I may  venture  to  say,
is  well  known  to  several  leading  Theosophists.

During  my  three  months’  investigation  I was  treated  with
perfect  courtesy,  both  at  the  headquarters  of  the  Theosophical  Society
and  by  the  gentlemen  connected  with  the  JIadras  Christian  College
Magazine.  I thus  had  every  o^iportunity  of  examining  the  witnesses
for  the  Theosophical  phenomena,  and  of  comparing  in  detail  the  disputed
documents  with  the  undoubted  handwriting  of  Madame  Blavatsky.
After  a very  careful  examination  of  the  most  important  of  these
documents,  and  after  considei’ing  the  circumstantial  evidence  offered
by  Theosophists  in  jjroof  of  their  being  forgeries,  I have  com"-  to  the
assured  conclusion  that  they  are  genuine.

And  it  seems  desirable  here  to  mention  a fact  to  which  attention
has  already  been  drawn  by  the  editor  of  the  Madras  Christian  College
Magazine,  in  his  reply  to  an  unfounded  charge  brought  against  him  by
Theosophists,  who  accused  the  authorities  of  the  magazine  of  having
published  the  disputed  documents  without  any  guarantee  of  their
genuineness.  So  far  was  this  from  being  the  case  that  prior  to  their
publication  of  the  documents  they  obtained  the  best  evidence  procurable
at  Madras  as  to  the  genuineness  of  the  handwriting.  There  v is  indeed
no  professional  expert  in  handwriting  to  be  consulted, but  the  judgments


Vn  Phenomena  connected  ivith  Theosophy.


209


which  were  obtained  included,  among  others,  the  opinions  of  gentlemen
qualihed  by  many  years’  banking  experience.

From  these  Blavatsky-Coulomb  documents  it  appears  that  Mahatma
letters  were  prepared  and  sent  by  Madame  Blavatsky,  that  Koot  Hoomi
is  a fictitious  personage,  that  supposed  “astral  forms”  of  the  Mahatmas
were  confederates  of  Madame  Blavatsky  in  disguise — generally  the
Coulombs;  that  alleged  transportation  of  cigarettes  and  other  objects,

“ integration  ” of  letters,  and  allied  phenomena — some  of  them  in  con-
nection with  the  so-called  shrine  at  Adyar — were  ingenious  trickeries,
carried  out  by  Madame  Blavatsky,  with  tlie  assistance  chiefly  of  the
Coulombs.  i

But  further  investigations  were  required.  Other  apparently  im-
portant phenomena  had  come  before  us  which  were  not  directly
discredited  by  the  Blavatsky-Coulomb  letters.  Among  these  phenomena,
for  example,  were  some  appearances  of  Mahatmas,  many  instances  of
the  alleged  precipitation  of  writing  independently  of  Madame  Blavatsky
and  the  Coulombs  ; and  there  were  also  the  “ astral  ” journeys  of  Mr.
Damodar.  Not  only  did  these  and  other  johenomena  require  special
investigation,  but  it  was  desirable  that  some  confirmation  should  be
obtained  of  the  genuineness  of  the  disputed  letters— that  any  con-
clusions concerning  them  should  not  depend  merely  and  exclusively
upon  questions  of  style  and  handwriting.  To  this  end  it  was  necessary
that  I should  examine  the  important  witnesses  involved  in  the  inci-
dents mentioned  in  these  documents.  It  may  be  added  that  additional
light  was  required  on  some  of  the  phenomena  mentioned  in  “The  Occult
AVorld,”  and  that  the  authorship  of  the  K.  H.  letters  could  not  be  put
aside  as  not  in  some  degree  bearing  on  our  res.,arch.

I may  now  express  in  brief  the  conclusions  to  which  I was  gradually
forced,  after  what  I believe  to  be  a thorough  survey  of  the  evidence
for  Theosophical  phenomena.

The  conclusion  which  I formed,  that  as  a question  of  handwriting
the  disputed  letters  were  written  by  INIadame  Blavat.skjq  is  corroborated
by  the  results  of  my  inquiries  into  the  details  of  the  related  incidents.

For  Mr.  Damodar’s  “ astral  ” journeys  I could  find  no  additional
evidence  which  rendered  pre-arrangement  in  any  way  more  difficult  than
it  appeared  to  be  under  the  circumstances  narrated  to  us  at  the  time  of
our  First  Report,  when  we  considered  that  collusion  between  Madame
Blavatsky  and  Mr.  Damodar  was  not  precluded.  On  the  contrary,
my  inquiries  have  revealed  that  pre  arrangement  betv.reen  Madame
Blavatsky  and  Mr.  Damodar  was  much  easier  than  we  then  supposed.
The  accounts  given  by  those  witnesses  who,  we  thought,  might  contri-
bute valuable  corroborative  evidence  in  the  way  of  showing  that  such
pre-arrangement  was  not  possible,  tended  rather  to  show  the  reverse.
The  cases,  therefore,  rested  entirely  upon  the  evidence  of  Mr.


210


Mr.  HodgsoMs  Report


Damodar  and  Madame  Blavatsky.  But  early  in  my  investigation  events
occurred  which  impelled  me  towards  the  belief  that  no  reliance  could  be
placed  on  Mr.  Damodar,  and  after  discovering  the  unmistakable  false-
hoods which  marked  hisown  evidence,  I could  come  to  no  other  conclusion
than  that  he  had  co-operated  with  Madame  Blavatsky  in  the  production
of  spurious  marvels.

I was  also,  for  reasons  that  will  hereafter  appear,  compelled  to  dis-
card altogether  the  evidence  of  Mr.  Babajee  D.  Nath,  who  appeared  to
us  at  the  time  of  our  First  Report  to  be  a primary  witness  for  the
ordinary  physical  e.Kistence  of  the  Mahatmas.

The  testimony  of  Colonel  Olcott  himself  I found  to  be  funda-
mentally at  variance  with  fact  in  so  many  important  points  that  it
became  impossible  for  me  to  place  the  slightest  value  upon  the  evidence
he  had  offered.  But  in  saying  this  I do  not  mean  to  suggest  any  doubt
as  to  Colonel  Olcott’s  honesty  of  purpose.

In  short,  my  lengthy  examinations  of  the  numerous  array  of
witnesses  to  the  phenomena  showed  that  they  were,  as  a body,
excessively  credulous,  excessively  deficient  in  the  powers  of  common
observation, — and  too  many  of  them  prone  to  supplement  that  deficiency
by  culpable  exaggeration.

Nevertheless,  I refrained  as  long  as  possible  from  pronouncing  even
to  myself  any  definite  conclusion  on  the  subject,  but  after  giving  the
fullest  consideration  to  the  statements  made  by  t he Theosophic  witnesses,
after  a careful  inspection  both  of  the  present  headquarters  of  theTheo-
sophical  Society  in  Madras  and  of  the  old  headquarters  in  Bombay,
where  so  many  of  the  alleged  phenomena  occurred,  I finally  had  no
doubt  whatever  that  the  phenomena  connected  with  the  Theosophical
Society  were  part  of  a huge  fraudulent  system  worked  by  Madame
Blavatsky  with  the  assistance  of  the  Coulombs  and  several  other
confederates,  and  that  not  a single  genuine  phenomenon  could  be  found
among  them  all.  And  I may  add  that  though,  of  course,  I have  not,
in  coming  to  this  conclusion,  trusted  to  any  unverified  statements  of
the  Coulombs,  still  neither  by  frequent  cross-examination  nor  by  inde-
pendent investigation  of  their  statements  wherever  circumstances  per-
mitted, have  I been  able  to  break  down  any  allegations  of  theirs  rvhich
were  in  any  way  material.

It  is  needless  for  me  to  enter  into  all  the  minutiie  of  so  complicated
an  investigation.  It  would  in  truth  Ije  impossible  either  to  reproduce
all  the  paltcrings  and  equivocations  in  the  evidence  offered  to  me,  or  to
describe  with  any  approach  to  adequacy  how  my  personal  impressions
of  many  of  the  witnesses  deepened  my  conviction  of  the  dishonesty
woven  throughout  their  testimony.  What  follows,  however,  will,  I
think,  be  more  than  enough  to  convince  any  impartial  inquirer  of  the
justice  of  the  conclusion  which  I have  reached.


(Jn  Phenomena  connected  with  Theosophy.  2li

I begin  by  giving  some  extracts  from  the  Blavatsky-Ooulomb  letters
which  will  justify  the  assertions  which  I have  made  above  concerning
the  contents  of  these  documents.  The  asterisk  (*)  placed  against  some
of  the  extracts  means  that  the  letters  from  which  those  extracts  are
taken  were  among  those  examined  by  Mr.  Netherclift.

1. — The  Sassoon  Telegram.*

The  following  is  an  extract  from  a letter  pur2:)orting  to  be  written
by  Madame  Blavatsky  from  Poona  to  Madame  Coulomb  at  Madras  in
October,  1883  ; —

Now,  dear,  let  us  change  the  programme.  Whether  somihhing  succeeds
or  not  I must  try.  Jacob  Sassoon,  the  happy  proprietor  of  a crore  of  rujrecs,
with  whose  family  I dined  last  night,  is  anxious  to  become  a Theosophist.
He  is  ready  to  give  10,000  rupees  to  buy  and  repair  the  headquarters  ; he  said
to  Colonel  (Ezekiel,  his  cousin,  arranged  all  this)  if  only  he  saw  a little
phenomenon,  got  the  assurance  that  the  Mahatmas  could  hear  what  was
said,  or  give  him  some  other  sign  of  their  existence  (?  I !)  Well,  this  letter
will  reach  you  the  26th,  Friday  ; will  you  go  up  to  the  Shrine  and  ask  K.  H.
(or  Christofolo)  to  send  me  a telegram  that  would  reach  me  about  4 or  5 in
the  afternoon,  same  day,  worded  thus  : —

“ Your  conversation  with  Mr.  Jacob  Sassoon  reached  Master  just  now.
Were  the  latter  even  to  satisfy  him,  still  the  doubter  would  hardly  find  the
moral  courage  to  connect  himself  with  the  Society.

“Ramalinga  Deb.”

If  this  reaches  me  on  the  26th,  even  in  the  evening,  it  will  still  produce  a
tremendous  impression.  Address,  care  of  N.  Khandalla valla,  Judge,
Poona.  J e fekai  le  keste.  Cela  coutera  quatre  ou  cinq  roupies.  Cela  ne
fait  rien.

Yours  truly,

(Signed)  H.  P.  B.

The  envelope  which  Madame  Coulomb  show's  as  belonging  to  tliis
letter  bears  the  postmarks  Poona,  October  24th;  Madras,  October
26th;  2nd  delivery,  Adyar,  October  26th;  (as  to  which  iMadame
Blavatsky  has  w'ritten  in  the  margin  of  my  copy  of  Madame  Coulomb’s
pamphlet : f “ Cannot  the  cover  have  contained  another  letter  ? Funny
evidence!”)  Madame  Coulomb  also  shows  in  connection  wdth  this  letter
an  official  receipt  for  a telegram  sent  in  the  name  of  Ramalinga  Deb
from  the  St.  Thome  office,  at  Madras,  to  Madame  Blavatsky,  at  Poona,
on  October  26th,  wdiich  contained  the  same  number  of  words  as  above.

' 2,  3,  4. — The  Adyar  Saucer.

The  following  are  said  to  have  been  written  by  Madame  Blavatsky
from  Ootacamund  to  IM.  and  Madame  Coulomb  at  Madras,  in  July  or
August,  1883  : — -

+ " Some  Account  of  my  Intercourse  witli  Madame  Blavatsky,”  &c.


212


Mr.  Hodgson’s  Regort


2.*

Ma  Ijien  chore  Amie,

Vous  n’avez  jjas  besoia  cVattcaTre  riiomnio  “Punch.”  Pourvii  quo  ce]a
soit  fait  on  prasonce  do  personae.'^  qui  sont  respectables  hcsUlea  our  own
familiar  mvffs.  Je  vous  siqqjlie  de  la  faire  a la  premiere  occasion.

3. *

Cher  IMonsieur  Coulomb,

C’est  je  crois  cela  (pie  vous  devez  avoir.  Tachez  done  si  vous  croycz  que
cela  va  rtiussir  d’avoir  plus  d’audience  cpie  nos  imheciles  domcstiques  seulement.
Cela  merite  la  peine— Car  la  soucoupe  d’Adyar  pourrait  devenir  historique
comme  la  tasse  de  Simla.  Soulibaya  ioi  et  je  n’ai  guere  le  temps  d'ecrire  a
mij)i  aise,  a vous  mes  honneurs  et  remerciinents.

(Signed)  H.  P.  B.

This  letter  is  said  by  Madame  Coulomb  to  have  contained  the
following  enclosure  : —

To  the  small  audience  jjresent  as  witness.  Now  Madame  Coulomb  hi3
occasion  to  assure  herself  that  the  devil  is  neither  as  black  nor  as  wicked  as
he  is  generally  represented.  The  mischief  is  easily  repaired. — K.  H.

4. *

Vendredi.

Ma  chere  Madame  Coulomb  et  Marquis, t

Voici  le  moment  do  nous  montrer — nc  nous  ca chons  pas.  Le  General  part
pour  affaires  a Madras  et  y sera  lundi  et  y passera  deux  jours.  II  est
President  do  la  »Soci(L'te  ici  et  veut  voir  le  shrine.  C’est  probable  qu’il  fera
une  question  que’coiupie  et  pent  etre  se  bornera-t-il  a regarder.  Mais  il  est
siir  qu’il  s’attend  a un  phenomene  car  il  me  I’a  dit.  Dans  le  premier  cas
suppliez  K.  H.  cpie  vous  voyez  tous  les  jours  ou  Cristofolo  de  soutenir
I’honneur  de  famille.  Dites  lui  done  qu’une  fleur  suffirait,  et  que  si  le  pot  de
chambre  casscUt  sous  le  poids  de  la  curiosite  il  serait  bon  de  le  reaqilacer  en
ce  moment.  Damn  les  autres.  Celui-la  vaut  son  pesant  d’or.  Perl’amordel
Dio  ou  de  qui  vous  voudrez  ne  manipiez  pas  cette  occasion  car  elle  ne  se
repdtera  plus.  Je  ne  suis  pas  la,  et  c’est  cela  qui  est  beau.  Je  me  fie  a
vous  et  je  vous  supplie  de  ne  pas  me  desappointer  car  tous  mes  projets  et
mon  avenir  avec  vous  tous — (car  je  vais  avoir  une  maison  ici  pour  passer  les
six  mois  de  I’ann^e  et  elle  sera  a moi  a la  Societe  et  vous  ne  s juUVirez  plus
de  la  chaleur  comme  vous  le  faites,  si  j’y  reussis).

**!(■***#

Voici  le  moment  de  faire  ('piehpiechose.  Tournez  lui  la  tete  au  General
et  il  fera  tout  pour  vous  surtout  si  vous  etes  avec  lui  au  moment  du
Christophe.  Je  vous  envoie  un  en  cas — e vi  saluto.  Le  Colonel  vient  ici
du  20  au  25.  Je  reviendrai  vers  le  milieu  de  Soptembre.

A vous  de  coeur,

Lun\  Melancoxica.

+ Marquis  and  Marquise  are  names  given  by  ^d.id.ime  Blavatsky  to  hi.  and
Madame  Coulomb.


On  Phenomena  conneeted  xvltli  Theosophy,


213


The  en  cas  referred  to  is  the  following  —

I can  say  nothing  — and  will  let  you  know  at  Ooty.

(Addressed)  Genehal  Mokgan.  (Signed)  K.  H.

Extracts  5 and  6,  from  letters  written  in  1880  by  Madame
Blavatsky,  apparently  in  Simla,  to  Madame  Coulomb  in  Bombay,
throw  some  light  upon  the  alleged  transportation  of  cigarettes,  Ac.

5.

I enclose  an  envelope  with  a cigarette  paper  in  it.  I will  drop  another
half  oi  a cigarette  behind  the  Queen’s  head  where  I dropped  my  hair  the
same  day  or  Saturday.  Is  the  hair  still  there  ? and  a cigarette  still  under
the  cover?

Madame  Blavatsky  has  written  on  the  fly-leaf  of  the  letter  from
which  this  passage  is  taken  :

Make  a half  cigarette  of  this.  Tube  care  of  the  edges.

And  on  a slip  of  paper  said  by  Madame  Coulomb  to  have  accompanied
the  cigarette-paper  referred  to  :

Boll  a cigarette  of  this  half  and  tie  it  with  II.  P.  B.’s  hair.  Put  it  on
the  top  of  the  cupboard  made  by  Wimbridge  to  the  furthest  corner  near  the
wall  on  the  right.  Do  it  quick.

6. *

Je  crois  que  le  mouchoir  est  im  coup  manquA  Laissons  cela.  Mais
toutes  les  instructions  qu’elles  restent  statu  quo  230ur  les  Maharajas  de  Lahore
ou  de  Benares.  Tons  sont  fous  pour  voir  quelquechose.  Je  vous  ecrirai
d’Amritsir  ou  Lahore,  mes  cheveux  feraient  bien  sur  la  vieille  tour  de  Sion,
mais  vous  les  mettrez  dans  une  envelof)e,  un  sachet  curieux  et  le  jjrendrez  eu
le  cachant  ou  bien  a Bombay — choisissez  bon  endroit  et — Ecrivez  moi  a Am-
ritsir  poste  restante,  puis  vers  le  1*^’^  du  mois  a Lahore.  Adressez  votre  lettro
a mon  nom.  Bien  de  irlus  jjour  S. — il  en  a vu  assez.  Peur  de  manquer  la
poste,  a revoir.  Avez-vous  mis  la  cigarette  sur  la  jjetite  arinoire  de  Wimb —

7.

Oh  mon  pauvre  Christofolo  ! II  est  done  mort  et  vous  I’avez  tue  ! Oh  ma
chere  amie  si  vous  saviez  comme  je  voudrais  le  voir  revivre  i * * »

Ma  benediction  a mon  pauvre  Christofolo.  Toujours  a vous,

H.  P.B.

This  extract  is  said  by  Madame  Coulomb  to  be  Madame  Blavatsky’, s
lament  for  the  destruction  of  the  dummy  head  and  shoulders  employed
for  the  Koot  Hoomi  appearances,  Christofolo  being  the  “occult’’
name  for  Koot  Hoomi.  IMadame  Coulomb  declares  that  she  had  burnt
the  dummy  apparatus  “in  a fit  of  disgust  at  the  imposture,”  but  that


214


Mr.  Hodgson's  Beporf


she  atterwards  made  aTiotlier.  The  following  letter  (8)  is  suggestive
ill  several  ways.  The  Coulombs  are  evidently  supposed  to  be  familiar
with  the  habits  and  customs  of  the  Brothers.  “ Le  Roi  ” is  said
by  Madame  Coulomb  to  have  referred  to  Mr.  I*adshah,  and  “ les
deux  lettres  ” sent  by  Madame  Blavatsky  to  Madame  Coulomb
(under  the  name  of  E.  Cutting)  appear  to  have  boon  Mahatma
documents.  General  instructions  for  the  transmission  of  such  docu-
ments are  exemplified  by  (9)  and  (10).

8.

Mes  chers  Amis,

Au  noiu  du  ciel  ne  croyez  pas  que  je  vous  oublio.  Je  n'ai  pas  le
temjjs  material  pour  respirer — voilii  tout ! Nous  sommes  dans  la  plus
grande  critsc,  et  je  ne  dots  pas  rr.iimiE  l.v  tete.  Jo  ne  pnis  ni  ose  rien  vous
^crire.  Alais  vous  devez  comprondre  qu'il  cst  ahsolmnent  nccessaire  que
quelquechose  arrive  ii  Bombay  taut  (juo  jo  suis  ici.  Lo  Roi  et  Dam.  doivent
voi  et  refevoir  lavisite  d’un  de  nosFreres  et — s’il  est  possible  quo  lo  premier
receive  une  lettre  que  j’enverrai.  Mais  les  voir  il  est  plus  nccessaire  encore.
Elle  devrait  lui  tomber  sur  la  tetc  comme  la  premiere  et  jo  suis  en  train  de
supplier  “Kootlioomi  ” de  la  lui  envoyer.  II  doit  battre  le  fer  taut  qu’il  cst
chaud.  Agissez  imUpendamment  de  moi,  mais  dans  les  habitudes  et  customs
de  Freres.  S’il  pouvait  arriver  quelquechose  ii  Bombay  qui  fasse  parlor  tout
le  monde — ce  serait  merveilleux.  Mais  quoi  ! Les  Freres  sont  incxorables.
Oh  cher  M.  Coulomb,  sauvez  la  situation  et  faites  ce  qu’ils  vous  demandent.
J’ai  la  fievre  toujours  un  peu.  On  I’aurait  a moins  ! Ne  voila-t-il  pas  que
Mr.  Hume  veut  voir  Kootlioomi  astrulcment  de  loin,  s’il  veut,  pour  pouvoir
dire  au  monde  qu’ii  sail  qu’il  existe  et  I'ecrire  dans  tous  les  journaux  car
jusqu’a  present  il  no  pout  dire  qu’une  chose  e’est  qu’il  croit  fermement  et
positivement  mais  non  qu’d  Ic  suit  parcequ’il  I’a  vu  de  ses  yeux  comme  Damo-
dar,  Padshah,  etc.  Snfiii  en  voil'i  d’un  probleme  ! Comprenez  done  que  ja
deviens  folle,  et  prenez  pitie  d’une  pauvre  veuve.  Si  quelquechose  d’inoui
arrivait  a Bombay  il  n’y  a rien  que  IMr.  Hume  ne  fasse  pour  Kootlioomi  sur
sa  demande.  Mais  K.  H.  ne  jicut  pas  venir  ici,  car  les  lois  occultcs  no  le  lui
permettent  pas.  Enfin,  ii  revoir.  Ecrivez  moi.  A vous  de  cceur,

H.  P.  B.

Demain  je  vous  enverrai  les  deux  lettres.  Allez  les  chercher  a la  poste  a
votre  nom,  E.  Cutling  = Couloinh.

P.S.— Jo  voudrais  que  K.  H.  ou  quehju’un  d’autre  se  fasse  voir  avant  le
reiju  des  lettres  1

9.

Ma  ch^re  Amie,

Je  n’ai  pas  une  minute  pour  r^ponde.  .Je  vous  supplie  faites  parvenir
cette  lettre  (here  enclosed)  ii  Damodar  in  a miracidous  nny.  It  is  very  very
important.  Oh  ma  chere  que  je  suis  done  malheureuse  ! De  tous  cotes  des
desagrements  et  des  horreurs.  Toute  a vous,


H.  P.  E.


On  Phenomena  connected  ivith  Theosophy.


21^


10.

Ve'uillez  O Scii’ciere  a lu'lle  ressoiirces  demanJer  a Chridofalo  quand  voas
le  verrez  do  trausinettro  la  lottre  ci-iiicluso  par  vole  aerlenne  astrale  ou
n’iinpoi'te  comuioiifc,  C’e.5t  ties  important.  A vous  ina  chore.  Je  vous
embrasse  bien.— Yours  faithfully.

Lon  .a  Mol.inconica.

Je  WHS  stipplie  FAITE.S  LE  CIEN.

In  the  following  extracts  from  letters  said  to  have  been  written  from
Ootacaraund  in  1883,  Madame  Blavatsky  apparently  .speaks  of  the
Ivoot  Hoomi  documents  provided  by  her  as  “ mes  enfauts.”

11.*

Cher  Marquis.  . . . Moiitrez  ou  envoyez  lui  [Damodar]  le  papier  ou

ie  slip  (le  petit  .saeristi  pas  le  grand,  car  se  dernier  doit  aller  se  couchir  23res
de  son  auteur  dans  le  tomijle  mural)  avec  I’ordre  de  vous  les  fournir.  J’ai
re^u  une  lettre  qui  a force  notre  maitre  ch4ri  K.  H.  d’ecrire  ses  ordres  aussi
a Mr.  Damodar  et  autres.  Que  la  Marquise  les  Use.  Cda  suffira  je  vous
I’assure.  All  si  je  pouvais  avoir  ici  mon  Christofolo  cheri  ! . . . Clier

Marquis — Je  vous  livre  le  destin  mes  eiifants.  Prenez  en  soin  et  faites
leurfaire  des  miracles.  Peut  etre  il  surait  inicux  do  faire  toraber  cellui-ci  sur
la  teteJ

H.  P.  B.

Cachetez  I’enfant  apres  Vaeoir  lu.  Enrcgistrez  vos  lettres  s’il  s’y  trouve
quelquechose — autrement  non.

(12)  (13)  and  (14)  are  also  said  by  Madame  Coulomb  to  have  been
written  from  Ootacamund,  during  Madame  Blavatsky’s  visit  there  in
1883.


12.*

La  poste  part  ma  chfere.  Je  n’ai  quu’n  instant.  Votre  lettre  arriv^e  troji
tard.  Oui,  laissez  Srinavas  Rao  se  prosterner  devant  le  shrine  et  s’il
lemande  ou  non,  je  vous  supplie  lui  faire  passer  cette  reponse  par  K.  H.
3ar  il  s’y  attend  ; je  sais  ce  qn'il  veut.  Demain  vous  aurez  une  grande
lettre ! Graudes  nouvelles.  IMerci.

H.  P.  B.

This  apparently  refers  to  a consoling  Koot  Hoomi  letter  provided  by
Madame  Blavatsky  for  Mr.  P.  Sreenevas  Rao,  Judge  in  the  Court  of
Small  Causes,  Madras,  and  actually  received  by  him.

13.

Ma  chbre  Amie, — On  me  did  (Damodar)  que  Dewan  Bahadoor
Ragoonath  Rao  le  President  de  la  Societe  veut  mettre  quelquechose  dans
e temple.  Dans  le  cas  qu’il  le  fasse  void  la  response  de  Cliristofolo.  Pour
Dieu  arrangez  cela  et  nous  .sommes  a cheval.  .Je  vous  embrasse  e vi  .sahOo.
Sles  amours  au  Marquis. — Yours  sincerely,

Luna  Melanconioa.

Ecrivez  lone.


21G


Mr.  lloilr/don’s  Report


I have  ascertained  that  Mr,  Ragoonath  Rao  did  place  an  Inquii)
in  the  Shrine,  but  left  without  having  received  an  answer,  although  it
would  seem  from  the  above  that  Madame  Blavatsky  had  provided
“ Christofolo’s  ” reply.  iM.  Coulomb  declares  that  he  feared  the  reply
might  not  be  suitable,  because  Mr.  Ragoonath  Rao  had  said  that  only
an  adept  could  answer  his  question,  and  moreover  that  he  did  not  wish  “ to
make  fun  with  this  gentleman  that  he  therefore  wrote  to  Madame
Rlavatsky,  enclosing  the  Sanskrit  document  placed  by  i\[r.  Ragoonath
Rao  in  the  Shi-ine,  stating  that  he  was  afraid  that  the  reply  she  had
furnished  beforehand  miglit  not  be  applicable,  and  asking  her  to  send
him  a telegram  if  she  still  wished  the  Koot  Iloomi  (Christofolo)  reply
to  be  placed  in  the  Shrine.  M.  Coulomb  received,  he  says,  an  answer
by  letter,  which  is  given  in  extract  (14),  from  which  it  would  appear
that  Madame  Blavatsky  considered  the  reply,  in  consequence  of  the
delay,  to  be  no  longer  suitable.  The  Koot  Iloomi  document  in  question,
which,  the  Coulombs  assert,  remained  in  their  possession,  and  which
they  produce,  consists  chiefly  of  Sanskrit,  but  there  is  also  a note  in
English,  and  this  note  exhibits  signs  of  Madame  Blavatsky’s  handiwork,
such  as  are  found  in  most  of  the  Koot  Iloomi  writings.  (See  Part  II.)

14. ^

Tropo  tardi!  Cher  Marquis.  Si  ce  (^110  “ Christophe”  a en  main  eut^te
donne  sur  I’heure  en  reponse  celaserait  beau  et  e’est  pourquoi  je  I’ai  envoye.
Maintenant  cela  n’a  plus  do  sens  coiuniun.  Votre  lettre  m’est  arriv^e  a
Gl>  h.  du  soil’  presque  7 heures  et  je  savais  que  le  petit  Punch  venait  a cinq  !
Quand  pouvais  je  done  envoyer  la  depeche  ? Elle  serait  arrivee  le  lendemain
ou  apres  son  depart.  Ah  ! quelle  occasii  n de  perdue  ! Enfin.  II  faut(iue  je
vous  prie  d’une  chose.  Je  puis  revenir  avec  le  Colonel  et  e’est  tres  probable
que  je  reviendrai,  mais  il  se  i>eut  que  je  reste  ici  jusqu’au  mois  d’Oetobre.
Dans  ce  cas  pour  le  jour  ou  deux  que  le  Colonel  sera  a la  maison  il  faut  me
renvoycr  la  clef  du  Shrine.  Envoyez-la  inoi  par  le  cheniin  souterrain.  Je
la  verrai  reposer  et  cela  suffit  ; rnai  jvi  ne  veux  pas  qu’en  nioii  absence  on
examine  la  bom  mehmcoiu'ca  du  ciqiboard,  et  cela  sera  examine  si  jenesuis
pas  Ih.  J’ai  le  trac.  Il  faut  que  je  revienne  ! Mais  Dieu  que  cela
m’embete  done  cpie  maintenant  tout  le  monde  d’ici  viendra  me  voir  la.  Tout
le  monde  voudra  voir  et — j’en  ai  assez.

By  “ Punch,”  the  Coulombs  say,  is  meant  Mr.  Ragoonath  Rao.  It
seems  clear  from  the  second  portion  of  the  above  extract  that  the  Shrine
would  not  bear  examination,  that  there  was  some  secret  construction  in
connection  with  it  of  which  Colonel  Olcott  was  ignorant,  and  which  he
must  have  no  opportunity  of  discovering.  Madame  Coulomb  states  that
“luna  melanconica”  here  means  the  opening  at  the  back  of  the  Shrine.
Hence,  in  case  Colonel  Olcott  should  return  to  IMadras  before  Madame
Blavatsky,  the  key  of  the  Shrine  was  to  be  concealed.  The  passage  is  a


On  Phenomena  eomieeted  with  Theomphi].  217

tesdinonial  to  Colonel  Olcott’s  honesty,  though  perhaps  hardly  to  his
perspicacity.

Oire  of  the  first  points  to  ascertain  with  regard  to  these  letters  is
whether  Madame  Blavatsky  did  treat  M.  and  Madame  Coulomb
with  the  complete  confidence  which  their  tone  throughout  implies.
Plenty  of  evidence  could  be  adduced  to  show  that  they  were  treated
with  confidence  both  by  Madame  Blavatsky  and  Colonel  Olcott,  and
that  they  held  positions  of  trust  (M.  Coulomb  being  Librarian  and
Madame  Coulomb  being  Assistant  Corresponding  Secretary  of  the
Society) ; but  it  is,  I think,  sufficiently  proved  by  the  fact  that  when
Madame  Blavatsky  was  at  Ootacamund,  in  1883,  Madame  Coulomb
had  charge  of  the  keys  of  the  Shrine ; and  that  when  Madame
Blavatsky  and  Colonel  Olcott  left  Madras  to  come  to  Europe  in
February,  1884,  M.  and  Madame  Coulomb  were  left  in  complete
charge  of  Madame  Blavatsky’s  rooms.  Further  evidence  may  be  found
in  a letter  of  Colonel  Olcott,  quoted  (with  some  omissions  not  specified
by  Dr.  Hartmann)  in  Dr.  Hartmann’s  pamphlet,  “ Report  of  observa-
tions made  daring  a nine  months'  stay  at  the  Headquarters  of  the  Theo-
sophical  Society,”  pp.  36,  37  ; and  in  another  letter  from  Colonel  Olcott,
which  I have  seen,  from  which  it  appears  that  he  had  wished  M.
Coulomb  to  be  a member  of  the  Board  of  Control  of  the  Theosophical
Society.  Moreover,  ISladame  Blavatsky  herself  spoke  of  Madame  Cou-
lomb in  Indian  newspapers,  of  1880,  as  “a  lady  guest  of  mine,”  and
as  “an  old  friend  of  mine  whom  I had  known  10  years  ago  at  Cairo,”'
and  by  admitting  nearly  all  the  non-incriminating  portions  of  the
Blavatsky-Coulomb  documents  to  be  in  substance  genuine,  clearly  proves
that  she  was  in  the  habit  of  addressing  Madame  Coulomb  in  a very
familiar  tone.

I may  now  proceed  to  showq  in  one  or  two  instances,  what  evidence
there  is  apart  from  the  style  and  handwriting  of  the  letters  tending  ta
establish  their  genuineness.

I will  begin  with  number  1,  relating  to  the  Sassoon  telegram.  The
matter  is  i-ather  complicated,  and  the  details  of  my  investigation  are
given  in  Appendix  I.  Here  I will  bi’iefly  state  the  results.  Firstly,  it
became  clear  to  me  from  conversations  with  Messrs.  A D.  and  M.  D.
Ezekiel,  who  spent  much  time  with  Madame  Blavatsky  during  her  visit  at
Poona  in  October,  1883,  and  from  the  written  statement  of  Mr.  N.  D.
Khandalvala,  in  whose  house  she  stayed,  that  the  actual  circumstances
during  her  stay  there  were  quite  consistent  wdtli  the  letter.  Secondly,
I liave  been  unable  to  obtain  any  trustworthy  evidence  for  the  existence
of  such  a person  as  Ramalinga  Deb,  who  was  represented  by  Madame
Blavatsky  as  a Chela,  residing  in  Madras,  of  tlie  Mahatma  with  whom
she  professed  to  be  in  occult  communication.  Thirdly,  a careful  com-
parison of  Madame  Blavatsky’s  attempt  to  disprove  the  gmiuineness  of

Q


218


Mr.  JIod[/soii*s  Rejwrt


this  letter  (see  Appendix  I.)  with  the  statements  of  Messrs.  Ezekiel
and  Khandalvala  appears  to  me  to  strengthen  tire  case  against  her  ; for
it  leads  us  to  the  conclusion  that  she  must  have  made  a specific  pre-
arrangement for  a conversation,  the  whole  point  of  which  was  that  its
subject  should  have  arisen  extempore.

I proceed  to  extracts  (2)  (3)  and  (4).

The  Coulombs  assert  that  a certain  saucer  was,  according  to
agreement  between  Madame  Blavatsky  and  Madame  Coulomb,  to  be
accidentally”  broken  and  the  pieces  placed  in  the  Shrine,  arrangements
being  made  for  the  substitution,  through  the  secret  back  of  the  Shrine,
of  another  similar  saucer,  unbroken,  in  lieu  of  the  broken  pieces.  (2)
(3)  and  (4)  they  say,  referred  to  this  ; letter  (3)  enclosed  a slij^  pro-
vided for  the  occasion,  and  (4)  suggests  that  the  phenomenon  should
occur  for  the  edification  of  General  Morgan.

Now,  it  is  not  disputed  that  the  so-called  “ saucer  phenomenon  ”
did  occur  in  the  presence  of  General  Morgan.  The  only  question  is
whether  it  was  pre-arranged,  and  if  so,  how  it  was  performed.  Here  is
General  Moi’gan’s  own  account  of  it,  published  in  the  Supplement  to  the
Theosophist  for  December,  1883.

In  the  month  of  August,  having  occasion  to  come  to  Madras  in  the
absence  of  Colonel  Olcott  and  Madame  Blavatsky,  I visited  the  head-
quarters of  the  Theosophical  Society  to  see  a wonderful  painting  of  the  Mahat-
ma Koot  Hoomi  kej^t  there  in  a Shrine  and  daily  attended  to  by  the  Chelas.
On  arrival  at  the  house  I was  told  that  the  lady,  Madame  Coulomb,  who  had
charge  of  the  keys  of  the  Shrine,  was  absent,  so  I awaited  her  return.  She
came  home  in  about  an  hour,  and  we  proceeded  up  stairs  to  open  the  Shrine
and  insj^ect  the  picture.  Madame  Coulomb  advanced  quickly  to  unlock  the
double  doors  of  the  hanging  cupboard,  and  hurriedly  threw  them  open.  In  so
doing  she  had  failed  to  observe  that  a china  tray  inside  was  on  the  edge  of
the  Shrine  and  leaning  agains*  one  of  the  doors,  and  when  they  were  opened,
down  fell  the  china  tray,  smashed  to  i)ieces  on  the  hard  chunam  floor.  Whilst
Madame  Coulomb  was  wringing  her  hands  and  lamenting  this  unfortunate
accident  to  a valuable  article  of  Madame  Blavatsky’s,  and  her  husband  was
on  his  knees  collecting  the  debris,  I remarked  it  would  be  necessary  to  obtain
some  china  cement  and  thus  try  to  restore  the  fragments.  Thereupon
M.  Coulomb  was  despatched  for  the  same.  The  broken  pieces  were  carefully
collected  and  placed,  tied  in  a cloth, within  the  Shrine,  and  the  doors  locked.
]\Ir.  DamodarK.  Mav.alankar,  the  Joint  Recording  Secretary  of  the  Society,
was  opposite  the  Shrine,  seated  on  a chair,  about  10  feet  away  from  it,
when,  after  some  conversation,  an  idea  occurred  to  me  to  which  I immediately
gave  expression.  I remarked  that  if  the  Brothers  considered  it  of  sufficient
importance,  they  would  easily  restore  the  broken  article  ; if  not,  they  would
leave  it  to  the  culprits  to  do  so,  the  best  way  they  could.  Five  minutes  had
scarcely  elapsed  after  this  remark  when  Mr.  Damodar,  who  during  this  time
seemed  wrapped  in  a reverie — exclaimed,  “I  think  there  is  an  answer.”  The
doors  were  oj^ened,  and  sure  enough,  a small  note  was  found  on  the  shelf


On  Phenomena  connected  with  ThcosopJnj.

of  the  Shrine — on  opening  which  we  read  “ To  the  small  audience  present,
Madame  Coulomb  has  occasion  to  assure  herself  that  the  devil  is  neither  so
iblack  nor  so  wicked  as  he  is  generally  represented  ; the  mischief  is  easily
repaired.”

On  opening  the  cloth  the  china  tray  was  found  to  be  whole  and  perfect  ;
mot  a trace  of  the  breakage  to  be  found  on  it  ! I at  once  wrote  across  the
aiote,  stating  that  I was  present  when  the  tray  was  broken  and  immediately
restored,  dated  and  signed  it,  so  there  should  be  no  mistake  in  the  matter.
1 1 may  be  here  observed  that  Madame  Coulomb  believes  that  the  many  things
■of  a wonderful  nature  that  occur  at  the  headquarters,  may  be  the  woik  of  the
•devil — hence  the  playful  remark  of  the  Mahatma  who  came  to  her  rescue.*

It  will  be  seen  that  there  is  nothing  in  this  account  inconsistent
with  Madame  Coulomb’s  assertion.  Moreover,  it  is  a very  suspicious
•circumstance  that  the  china  tray  should  have  been  “ leaning  against
one  of  the  doors.”  This  is  not  the  position  naturally  assumed  by  a
saucer  put  into  a cupboard  in  the  ordinary  way  through  the  doors.

The  whole  “ saucer  ” found  in  the  Shrine  was  shown  to  me  at  Adyar
at  my  request.  I examined  it  carefully,  and  I also  examined  carefully
the  broken  pieces  of  the  saucer  which  Madame  Coulomb  exhibited  as
those  for  which  the  whole  saucer  liad  been  sul)stituted.  The  two
.saucers  ” manifestly  formed  a pair.  The  incident  happened  in  August,
188-3.  Madame  Coulomb  alleged  that  she  purchased  the  pair  of  so-called
■“  saucers  ” at  a shopf  in  Madras  for  2 rupees  8 annas  each.  On  inquiry
I found  that  “ two  porcelain  pin  trays  ” (^words  which  properly  describe
the  so-called  “ saucers  ”)  were  purchased  at  this  shop  by  cash  sale  on
■July  3rd,  1883,  and  that  Madame  Coulomb  had  made  purchases  at
the  shop  on  that  date.  If  taken  as  referring  to  this  purchase  there  was
one  slight  inaccuracy  in  Madame  Coulomb’s  account ; inasmuch  as  she
said  the  “trays”  cost  2 rupees  8 annnas  each,  instead  of  2 rupees  8
•annas  the  pair.

An  incident  somewhat  similar  to  the  foregoing  is  related  in
Appendix  III.

It  will  be  seen  that  in  order  to  explain  the  “saucer  phenomenon  ”
I)y  ordinary  human  agency,  we  require  to  suppose  that  there  was  a
secret  opening  at  the  back  of  the  Shrine.  It  was  important,  therefore,
to  ascertain  what  ground  there  was  for  this  supposition,  apart  from
the  Blavatsky -Coulomb  letters,  in  whicli  its  existence  is  clearly  implied.
I now  proceed  to  give  the  result  of  my  investigations  in  this  directioju

The  Shrixe  (see  Plan,  following  p.  380).

On  my  arrival  at  the  headquarters  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  on
December  18th,  1881,  I wuas  informed  by  Mr.  Damodar  that  he  could

* A later  and  longer  account,  intended  by  General  Morgan  to  prove  that
there  could  have  been  no  deception,  will  be  found  in  Appendix  II.

f INI.  Faciole  and  Co.,  I’ophani’s  Broadway.

Q i


Mr.  Jlodffson's  Report


220,

not  allow  me  to  inspect  the  so-called  Occult  Room  or  the  Shrine  until  the
return  of  Colonel  Olcott  and  Madame  Blavatsky.  Colonel  Olcott  had  left
the  headquarters  some  days  previously  in  order  to  meet  Madame
BlaAatsky  at  Ceylon  on  her  return  fi’om  Europe.  Two  days  later
Madame  Blavatsky  had  reached  Adyar,  and  I again  requested
permission  to  examine  the  Shrine.  Madame  Blavatsky  professed
ignorance  on  the  subject,  saying  she  had  been  unable  to  discover  what
had  been  done  with  the  Shrine.  IMr.  Damodar  and  Dr.  Hartmann  both
denied  having  any  knowledge  of  it,  and  it  was  only  after  repeated
and  urgent  requests  to  be  told  what  had  liappened  that  I learnt
from  the  halting  account  given  by  Mr.  Damodar  and  Dr.  Hartmann  that
the  Shrine  liad  been  moved  from  the  Occult  Room  (see  Plan)  into
Mr.  Damodar’s  room  at  almut  mid-day  of  September  20th,  that  on  the
following  morning,  at  9 o’clock,  they  found  the  Slu'ine  had  been  taken
away,  and  they  had  not  seen  it  since.  They  threw  out  suggestions
implying  tliat  the  Coulombs  or  the  missionaries  miglit  have  stolen  it.

Moreover,  the  Occult  Room,  when  I hrst  received  permission  to
inspect  it,  had  been  considerably  altered  ; its  walls  w'ere  covered  with
fresh  plaster,  and  I was  informed  by  Mr.  Damodar  that  all  traces  of
the  alleged  “ machinations  ” of  the  Coulombs  in  connection  with  the
Slirinehad  Iteen  oltliterated.  Tliis  was  not  true,  for  the  bricked  frame  and
the  aperture  into  the  recess  still  existed  (see  p.  228).  However,  under
the  circumstances  it  was  impossible  for  me  to  test  the  accuracy  of
much  of  the  description  given  by  Theosophists  of  the  Occult  Room  and
the  Shrine  at  the  time  of  the  “ exposure  ” by  the  Coulombs.  But  by
analysing  and  comparing  the  evidence  given  by  various  witnesses,  I
was  able  to  put  together  the  following  history  of  the  Shrine  and  its.
surroundings.*

On  December  19th,  1882,  Adyar  l)ecame  the  headquarters  of  the-
Theosophical  Society.  One  large  upper  room  of  the  main  bungalow -was
used  by  IMadame  Blavatsky  (see  Plan).  The  Occult  Room  was  built  later,,
against  the  west  side  of  Madame  Blavatsky ’s  room.  The  north  window
on  this  side  was  removed,  and  a layer  of  bricks  and  plaster  covered  the
aperture  on  the  side  of  the  Occult  Room — a recess  about  15in.  deep
being  left  on  the  east  side.  The  south  window  wvas  transformed  into  a
doorway  leading  from  IMadame  Blavatsky’s  room  into  the  Occult  Room.
Madame  Blavatsky’s  large  room  was  divided  into  two  by  curtains  and  a
screen ; that  adjoining  the  Occult  Room  Ijeing  used  by  Madame
Blavatsky  as  her  bedroom,  and  at  tlie  end  of  1883  as  her  dining-room
also.  Tlie  accompanying  rough  sketch  made  from  measurements  of  my
own  shows  the  positions,  the  Occult  Room  being  about  2ft.  lower
than  Madame  Blavatsky’s  room.  The  general  entrance  to  the  Occult

* For  the  evidence  on  which  this  account  is  based,  see  Appendi.x  IV.


On  Phenomena  connected  icith  Theosophy.


221


Hoorn  was  through  Madame  Blavatsky’s  sitting-room.  Tlie  Shrine,  as
I gather  from  comparing  the  accounts  of  cliiFerent  Theosophists,  was  a
■wooden  cupboard  between  3ft.  and  4ft.  in  width  and  lieiglit,
and  1ft.  or  loin,  in  depth,  with  a drawer  below  the  cupboard
portion,  and  with  corner  brackets.  The  Shrine  was  made  with
three  sliding  panels  at  the  back.*  It  was  placed  against  that
portion  of  the  wall  in  the  Occult  Room  where  the  north  window  of
Madame  Blavatsky’s  room  had  previously  existed  (see  Plan),  covei’ing
most  of  that  portion,  a most  unfortunate  position  to  choose  for  it  if
there  was  no  fraudulent  intention.  It  rested  lielow  on  a plank  or  shelf,
but  its  chief  support  consisted  of  two  thick  iron  \^’es  which
were  attached  to  two  hooks  near  the  ceiling.  A certaiii'space  round
the  Shrine  was  enclosed  by  muslin  curtains,  which  were  drawn
aside  from  the  front  when  any  one  wished  to  approach  the  Shrine.
These  curtains  were  about  7ft.  high  on  the  sides,  but  on  the  wall
behind  the  Shi-ine  extended  nearly  to  the  ceiling.  The  wall  immediately
behind  the  Shrine  was  covered  by  white  glazed  calico,  tacked  to  the
wall.  Two  widths  of  the  calico  met  in  a vertical  line  passing  behind
the  centre  of  the  Shrine.  The  remaining  part  of  the  walls  of  the
Occult  Room  was  covered  with  red-and-white  striped  calico  tacked  to
the  wall.  The  ujiper  part  of  the  Shrine  evas  as  close  to  the  wall  itself
ns  the  muslin  and  calico  behind  it  would  allow.  The  lower  jjart  of  the
Shrine  was  near  to  the  wall,  at  a distance  from  it  differently
estimated  by  different  witnesses,  but  which  must  have  been  some-
where between  jin.  and  Ijin.,  and  was  probably  very  little,  if  at
nil,  more  than  4in.  The  Shrine  and  its  appurtenances  were  fixed
in  February  or  March,  1883.  Shortly  afterwards  a four-panelled
wooden  boarding  was  placed  in  Madame  Blavatsky’s  room,  at  the  back
■of  the  recess.  For  some  time  an  almirah  (cupboard)  stood  in  front
of  this  recess.  The  exact  dates  of  the  placing  of  the  boarding  and
almirah  and  of  the  removal  of  the  almirah  I have  not  been  able  to
ascertain.  The  almirah,  and  afterwards  the  recess,  were  used  by
Madame  Blavatsky  as  a closet  for  hanging  clothes.  The  above |is  put
together  from  the  statements  of  Theosophic  witnesses.  j

M.  Coulomb  states  that  he  removed  the  Shrine  just  a|ter  it
was  originally  placed  against  the  wall,  sawed  the  middle  panel  ^in  two,
and  attached  a piece  of  leather  behind  to  serve  as  a handle,  so  ^hat  the
top  portion  could  be  easily  pulled  up.  The  junction  between  the  two

* This  was  admitted  to  me  by  Madame  Blavatsky  herself,  who  alleged  that
(he  Shrine  was  so  made  in  order  that  it  might  be  more  easily  taken  to  pieces
and  packed  in  case  of  removal.  But  the  rest  of  the  Shrine  appears  to  have
been  of  solid  construction,  and  it  is  difficult  to  see  what  great  c.  nvenience
for  travelling  purposes  there  could  have  been  in  merely  taking  out  portions  of
the  back.


222


Mr.  Ifod(/son’s  Report


halves  of  the  panel  was,  he  says,  hidden  from  those  looking  at  the
inside  of  the  Shrine,  hy  a mirror  which  just  covered  it.  Behind  this
sliding  panel  a hole  was  made  in  the  wall.  A sliding  panel  was  also-
made  in  the  wardrobe  which  stood  in  front  of  the  recess  in  Madame  Bla-
vatsky’s  bedroom,  and  one  of  the  panels  of  the  teak -wood  boarding  was
also  made  to  slide  about  10  inches,  so  that  easy  communication  existed
between  Madame  Blavatsky’s  bedroom  and  the  Shrine.  The  panels  in
the  wardrobe  and  in  the  teak-wood  door  were  shown  by  M.  Coulomb  to-
the  Board  of  Control  when  he  gave  up  the  keys  of  Madame  Blavatsky’s
rooms  in  May,  1884.  The  hole  in  the  wall,  he  said,  had  been  blocked
up  in  January,  before  Madame  Blavatsky  departed  for  Europe.  He
states  also  that  the  two  portions  of  the  middle  panel  of  the  Shrine  were
replaced  by  a new  single  panel,  and  that  these  changes  were  made  at  the
re(juest  of  Madame  Blavatsky,  who  was  afraid  that  some  examination
might  be  made  of  the  Shrine  during  her  absence  in  Europe.  M.
Coulomb’s  statement  as  to  the  half  panel  cannot  of  course  be  verified,
and  must  be  taken  for  what  it  is  woi’th.  What  evidence  there  is  in
support  of  his  other  statements  will  be  seen  from  the  remainder  of  my
narrative,  derived  from  other  sources.

At  the  end  of  October  or  beginning  of  Novend)ei’,  188-3,  Madame
Blavatsky,  in  consequence  of  a doubt  expressed  by  Mr.  G. * con-

cerning the  panelled  boarding  connected  with  the  Shrine,  ordered
it  to  be  removed,  f and  the  front  part  of  the  recess,  that  towards^
Madame  Blavatsky’s  bedroom,  to  be  blocked  up.  The  panelled  boarding
was  placed  on  the  outside  of  the  north-east  opening  into  Madame
Blavatsky’s  drawing-room,  and  formed  tlie  back  of  a shelf,  and  thei’e  it
was  certainly  found  to  have  a sliding  panel  in  it  when  examined  by  the
Theosophists  in  May,  1884.  | A wooden  frame  of  about  8ft.  by  4ft.
was  made,  with  cross-pieces,  so  as  to  fit  the  front  of  the  recess-
A single  layer  of  half-size  bricks  was  placed  in  this  frame,  and
the  front  then  covered  with  plaster,  so  that  it  was  flush  with  the
ad  joining  wall.  The  hollow  left  in  the  wall  between  Madame  Blavat.sky’s.
room  and  the  Occult  Room,  was  about  1ft.  deep.  The  whole  wall  was
then  papered  over,  the  work  being  completed  about  the  middle  of
December,  1883,  or  perhaps  several  days  later.  Directly  afterwards  a
sideboard,  about  3ft.  high  and  34in.  wide,  was  placed  close  against  the
bricked  frame  forming  part  of  the  papered  wall.  It  covered  the  lowest
north  partition  of  the  frame,  and  it  was  found  on  the  expulsion  of  the
Coulombs  in  May,  1884,  that  the  bricks  from  this  partition  had  been  taken,
out,  so  that  there  was  communication  through  the  sideboard  (in  the  back

* See  Appendix  V.

.f  See  Mrs.  INIorgaii’s  evidence  in  Appendix  IV.

4 For  a case  where  this  panel  seems  to  have  been  used  in  the  new  position,
see  Appendix  VI.


On  Phenomena  conneded  with  Jhcosophy.


225


of  which  was  a hinged  panel)  with  the  hollow  space.  M.  Coulomb
states  that  he  removed  the  bricks  as  soon  as  the  sideboard  was  in
position  in  December,  1883.  However  this  may  be,  the  sideboard
remained  there  during  the  time  of  the  anniversary  celebration  in  1883  ;
and  Shrine-phenomena,  which  were  in  abeyance  during  these  alterations,
began  again  immediately  after  their  completion.  Thej'  ceased  altogether,
with  two  exceptions  to  be  afterwards  dealt  with  (see  p.  248),  about  or
shortly  before  the  middle  of  January,  1884.  On  May  17th  or  18th,  M.
Coulomb  gave  up  the  keys,  and  the  various  contrivances  for  trickery  were
investigated.  The  sliding  panel  in  the  almirah,  the  sliding  panel  in
the  boarding,  the  hinged  panel  at  the  back  of  the  sideboard,  the  opening
behind  it  where  the  bricks  had  been  removed,  and  the  hollow  space  of
the  recess  were  all  inspected.  Mr.  St.  George  Lane-Fox  then  examined
the  west  side  of  the  party-wall  behind  the  Shrine,  but  was  unable  at
that  time  to  find  any  ti’aces  of  the  hole  which,  according  to  M.  Cou-
lomb, had  previously  existed  between  the  hollow  space  and  the  Shrine.
He  also  examined  the  sideboard,  and  found  that  he  could  discover  no
signs  from  vnthout  of  the  aperture  which  led  into  the  hollow  space,  show-
ing that  this  aperture  would  remain  undetected  unless  examination  of  the
sideboard  were  made  from  within.  The  Theosophists  contended  that  the
structui’es  for  trickery  revealed  by  the  Coulombs,  who  had  had  exclusive
charge  of  Madame  Blavatsky’s  rooms  during  her  absence,  had  been  made
after  she  had  left ; that  they  had  never  been  and  could  not  be  used  in  the
production  of  phenomena;'^  that  the  hollowspace  and  the  aperture  leading
to  it  were  too  small  to  be  utilised  in  any  connection  with  the  Shrine,  and
moi’eover  that  M.  Coulomb’s  work  was  interrupted  before  he  had  time  to
make  a hole  through  the  wall  between  the  hollow  space  and  the  Shiiiie
itself.

To  establish  these  points,  the  Theosophical  Board  of  Control  sent
round  a circular  inquiry  in  August,  1884,  to  various  Theosophists  who
had  Ijeen  at  headquarters,  requesting  them  to  state  what  they  knew  of
the  condition  of  the  Shrine,  adjoining  walls,  Am.,  prior  to  and  after  the
expulsion  of  the  Coulombs.  I was  allowed  by  Dr.  Hartmann  to  read
the  packet  of  replies  to  this  inquiry.  I also  questioned  in  detail  all  the
important  witnesses  who  professed  to  have  made  an  examination  of  the
Shrine  and  its  surroundings ; — the  result  being  that  if  we  except
Madame  Blavatsky  and  the  Coulombs,  Madame  Blavatsky’s  native
servant  Babula,  and  Colonel  Olcott  (whose  statement  on  this  point  I
distrust  for  reasons  given  in  Appendix  IV.  where  it  is  quoted),  there

* One  ground  given  for  this  opinion  was  that  the  sliding  panels  worked
stiffly,  as  if  new  and  unused.  Disuse  for  a few  months,  or  a little  grit,  would,  I
hink,  account  for  this  fact.  See  comments  on  the  evidence  of  Mr.  J.  D.  B.
Gribhle,  Appendix  lY.


224


Mr.  Hodgson's  Heporf


is  no  evidence  to  show  that  any  person  ever  removed  the  Shrine  from
the  wall  or  saw  it  removed  from  the  wall  after  it  was  first  placed  there,
until  the  expulsion  of  tlie  Coulombs  ; that,  therefore,  no  careful  examina-
tion could  ever  have  been  made  of  the  back  of  the  Shrine  or  of  the  wall
in  immediate  juxtaposition.  Further,  that  no  such  examination  was
ever  made  of  the  east  side  of  the  party-wall  as  would  have  sufficed  to
discover  the  sliding  panels  and  apertures.  I must  add  that  the
testimony  offered  appeared  to  me  to  be  cliaracferised  by  much  mal-
observation,  sometimes  implying  a ludicrous  lack  of  ordinary  intelligence,
and  much  equivocation  sometimes  amounting  to  absolute  dishonesty.
Several  of  the  original  statements  of  the  witnesses  are  given  in  Appendix
IV.,  together  with  modifications  of  their  testimony  produced  by  my
questioning,  and  further  comments  of  my  own.

The  ultimate  fate  of  the  Shrine,  according  to  a statement  made  by  Dr.
Hartmann  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  CoojDer-Oakley,  Mr,  Hume,  and  my^self,  was
as  follows.  After  the  expulsion  of  the  Coulombs,  Mr.  J udge,  an  American
Theosophist,  then  residing  at  the  headquarters  of  the  Society,  was  desirous
of  examining  the  Slirine.  Mr.  Damodar,  who  possessed  the  keys  of  the
Occult  Room,  avoided  this  examination  several  times  on  one  pretext  or
another;  but,  eventually,  a party  of  Theosophists  proceeded  to  the  inspec-
tion of  the  Shrine.  The  Shrine  was  removed  from  the  wall  and  its  doors
were  opened.  Mr.  T.  Vigiaraghava  Charloo,  (commonly  called  Ananda)
a Theosophist  residing  in  an  official  position  at  the  headejuarters,  struck
the  back  of  the  Shrine  with  his  hand,  exclaiming,  “You  see,  the  back
is  cjuite  solid,”  when,  to  the  surprise  of  most  of  those  who  were  present,
the  middle  panel  of  the  Shrine  flew  up.  It  seemed  undesirable  to  some
of  the  witnesses  of  this  phenomenon  that  the  discovery  should  be  made
puljlic,  and  they  resolved  accordingly  to  destroy  the  Shrine.  To  do
this  they  considered  that  the  Shrine  must  b,e  surreptitiously  removed,  but
such  removal  was  inconvenient  from  the  Occult  Room.  The  Shrine  was
therefore  first  removed  openly  to  Mr.  Damodar’s  room,  and,  on  the
following  night,  was  thence  removed  secretly  )jy  three  Theosophists,
concealed  in  the  compound,  afterwards  broken  up,  and  the  frag-
ments burned  piecemeal  during  the  follov-ing  week.  Dr.  Hartmann
had  only  retained  two  portions  of  the  back  of  the  Shrine,
which  he  had  enveloped  in  brown  paper  and  kept  carefully  con-
cealed in  his  room, — substantial  pieces  of  cedar  wood,  black-
lacked.  It  was  of  such  wood,  according  to  a previous  statement  of
M.  Coulomb,  that  the  back  of  the  Shrine  was  made.

Dr.  Hartmann  has  since  furnished  me  with  a statement  in  writing
which  is  of  interest  as  allbrding  evidence  respecting  the  hole  between
the  recess  and  the  Shrine.  That  this  hole  had  manifestly
existed  and  had  been  blocked  up,  I had  been  assured  by
another  Theosophist  who  is  particularly  observant,  and  who  discovered


Oil  r/icnomciia  connected  with  TlicoHophn.


225


its  traces  independently  of  Dr.  Hartmann.  The  following  is  an  extract
from  Dr.  Hartmann’s  written  account : —

At  what  time  the  hole  in  the  wall  was  made  is  as  much  a mj-steiy  to  me
as  it  is  to  j'ou  ; but  from  a consideration  of  all  the  circumstances  as  laid  dcjwn
lu  my  pamjihlet,  I came  to  the  conclusion,  and  am  dill  of  the  opbdon,  that
they  were  made  by  M.  Coulomb  after  H.  P.  Blavatsky  went  to  Europe,
and  I am  now  inclined  to  believe  that  M.  Coulomb  made  them  to  ingratiate
himself  with  Madame  Blavatsky  to  facilitate  her  sujiposed  tricks.  All  the
traps  are  too  clumsy,  and  it  would  tax  the  utmost  credulity  to  believe
■that  such  phenomena  as  I know  of  could  have  been  made  by  their  means.
In  fact  I do  not  know  of  a single  phenomena  [sic]  that  happened  in  mij
presence  where  they  would  have  been  of  the  slightest  use.

Of  the  existence  of  a movable  back  to  the  Shrine  and  a filled-up
ai>erture  in  the  wall,  none  of  us  knew  anything,  and  although  superficial
•examinations  were  made,  they  divulged  nothing  ; because  to  make  a
thorough  examination,  it  would  have  been  necessary  to  take  the  Shrine
■down,  and  we  were  prevented  from  doing  this  by  the  suijerstitious  awe  with
Avhich  Mr.  Damodar  K.  Mavalankar  legarded  the  Shrine,  and  who  looked
ripon  every  Euroi^ean  who  dared  to  touch  or  handle  the  “ sacred  ” Shrine  as
a desecration.

At  about  the  time  when  Major-General  Morgan  sent  his  invitation  to
Mr.  Patterson  to  come  to  headquarters,  that  examination  was  made,  and  it
was  found  that  the  back  of  the  Shrine  could  be  removed,  and  on  moisten-
ing the  wall  behind  the  Shrine  with  a wet  cloth,  it  was  found  that  an  aperture
had  existed,  which  had  been  plastered  up.

^Vhy  these  discoveries  should  have  thrown  any  discredit  on  Madame
Blavatsky  I cannot  see,  because  they  as  well  as  the  other  traps  were  the
work  of  M.  Coulomb,  and  there  was  no  indication  whatever  that  H.  P.
Blavatsky  knew  anything  of  their  existence,  and  moreover  the  testimonials
•of  such  as  claimed  to  have  examined  the  Shrine  w'ent  to  show  that  they  were
•of  recent  origin.

Nevertheless,  I must  confess  that  it  seemed  to  me  that  if  at  that  in-
•opportune  moment  this  new  discovenj,  to  which  I then  alluded  in  the  papers
•(see  Madras  Mail),  wmuld  have  been  made  public,  it  would  have  had  a bad
•effect  on  the  public  mind.  If  I had  been  here  as  a delegate  of  the  Society
for  Psychical  Research,  or  as  a detective  of  the  missionaries,  I would,
perhaps,  not  have  hesitated  to  state  the  exact  nature  of  the  rmc  disevrery ;
but  in  my  ijosition  I had  to  look  out  for  the  interests  of  Madame  Blavatsky,
and  I did  not,  therefore,  consider  it  prudent  to  speak  of  this  discovery  ;
neither  was  I authorised  to  do  so,  neither  did  I (as  I then  stated)  feel  justified
in  letting  the  enemies  of  H.  P.  Blavatsky  invade  her  private  rooms  with-
•out  her  consent.

A gentleman  who  -was  present,  and  who  shared  my  opinions,  was  of  the
•opinion  that  the  Shrine  had  been  too  much  desecrated  to  be  of  any  more  use,
and  he  burned  the  Shrine  in  my  presence.  ...  I never  told  Colonel
'Olcott  nor  Madame  Blavatsky,  nor  any  one  else  at  headquarters  uj)  to  that
time,  what  had  become  of  the  Shrine.  But  when  you  and  Mr.  Hume,
besides  a lot  of  other  absurd  theories,  also  asserted  your  conviction,  that
Madame  Blavatsk}'  had  sent  her  servant,  Baboola,  for  the  purpose  of  doing


226


Mr.  Hodgson’s  Report


away  witli  the  Shrine,  and  that  he  had  done  so  by  her  orders,  1 thousjht  it
about  time  to  sliow  you  tliat  even  a member  of  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research  may  err  in  his  judgment.

We  learn  from  Dr.  Hartmann  that  any  thorough  examination  of
the  Slirine  was  prevented  by  the  “ superstitious  awe  ” with  which  Mr.
Damodar  regarded  it.  Dr.  Hartmann’s  assertion  is  corroborated  by
the  testimony  of  Mr.  Lane-Fox,  who  has  also  very  emphatically
expressed  to  me  his  conviction  that  no  examination  of  the  Shrine  by
native  witnesses  can  be  considered  as  of  the  smallest  value,  in
consequence  of  the  exceeding  reverence  in  which  it  was  universally
held.  But  it  will  be  observed  that  in  one  part  of  his  account  Dr.
Hartmann  appears  to  lay  some  stress  on  “ the  testimonials  of  such
as  claimed  to  have  examined  the  Shrine.”  Dr.  Hartmann  himself,,
indeed,  was  one  of  those  “who  claimed  to  have  examined  the  Shrine”'
before  the  exposure;  he  gave  me,  on  different  occasions,  accounts,
of  his  examinations,  and  these  accounts,  besides  being  inconsistent,
with  one  another,  are  inconsistent  with  his  final  statements, — as  he
at  once  ch.eerfully  admitted,  retracting  all  his  previous  uttei’ances
on  the  subject.

It  seems  clear  from  all  I have  said  (1)  that  the  position
selected  for  the  Shrine  was  peculiarly  convenient  for  obtaining  secret
access  to  it  from  the  back ; and  that  none  of  the  changes  from  time  to-
time  made  in  Madame  Blavatsky’s  bedroom  behind  the  Shrine,  though
made  with  the  ostensible  olject  of  removing  all  suspicion  of  trickery,
tended  to  diminish  this  convenience;  (2)  that  there  undoubtedly  were  all
the  necessary  apertures  for  access  to  the  Shrine  from  the  back,  at  some
period  before  the  Coulombs  left ; (3)  that  there  is  no  trustworthy  evi-
dence whatever  to  show  that  this  access  did  not  exist  during  the  whole
time  from  the  moment  the  Shrine  was  put  up  till  Madame  Blavatsky
left  for  Europe,  in  February,  1884,  except  during  the  alterations  con-
nected with  putting  up  the  bricked  frame,  when  Mrs.  Morgan  saw  the
whole  wall  papei-ed  over ; and  there  is  no  evidence  of  the  occurrence  of
any  Shrine  phenomena  during  those  alterations.

These  results — altogether  apart  from  the  Blavatsky-Coulomb-
correspondence — would  prevent  the  whole  mass  of  testimony  to  Shrine-
marvels  from  having  any  scientific  value ; taken  along  with  this,
corre.spondence,  they  can,  I think,  leave  no  doubt  in  the  mind  of  any
impartial  reader,  as  to  the  mode  of  production  of  the.se  marvels.

Mr.  Damodar’s  Evidence.

I now  come  to  the  question  as  to  what  weight  can  be  attached  to-
the  statements  of  Mr.  Damodar  K.  Mavalankar.  This  is  a fundamen-
tally important  question,  not  only  because  he  is  one  of  the  few  personss


0\i  Phenomena  connected  with  Theosoplnj.


227


besides  Madame  Blavatsky  wlio  testify  to  having  seen  the  Mahatmas  im
Thibet,  and  in  a way  which  precludes  tlie  possibility  of  liis  having  beem
deceived,  but  also  because  Mr.  Damodar  himself  is  said  to  liave  tlie
power  of  travelling  in  the  “ astral  form,”  and  the  reality  of  these
astral  journeys  of  his  depends  mainly  on  his  own  statements.  My  own
conclusion,  as  I have  said,  is  decidedly  unfavourable  to  the  trust-
worthiness of  Mr.  Damodar.  It  is  not  in  my  power  to  reproduce  here
the  whole  of  my  grounds  for  forming  this  conclusion,  but  I think  that  a
mere  analysis  of  his  statements  regarding  the  Shrine  will  go  far  to-
justify  it.

Babula,  the  native  servant  of  Madame  Blavatsky,  had  reached.
Adyar  on  his  return  from  Europe  at  9 p.m.,  on  September  20th,  as  I
found  from  a wi’itten  entry  in  the  Visitors’  Book.  My  original  con--
jecture  as  to  the  disai:)pearance  of  the  Shrine  was  that  Babula  had
concealed  or  destroyed  it  in  compliance  with  instructions  from
Madame  Blavatsky,  as  it  was  on  the  night  of  September  20th  that  the-
removal  of  the  Shrine  had  been  effected.  This  appears  also  to  have
been  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Subba  Row,  pleader  in  the  High  Court  of
Madras,  at  that  time  and  still  a leading  Theosophist,  wlio  vainly
questioned  and  threatened  Babula  in  the  hope  of  inducing  a confession.
I am  disposed  to  think  that  this  was  also  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Damodar,.
and  that  it  was  in  order  to  prevent  me  from  drawing  the  same  conclusion,,
that  in  reply  to  my  inquiries  at  an  eaily  stage  of  the  investigation,
he  endeavoured  to  conceal  the  fact  that  Babula  had  arrived  on  tlie
evening  of  September  20th;  saying  that  he  had  arrived  on  the
morning  of  September  21st,  and  had  immediately  requested  that  he
might  inspect  the  rooms,  when,  to  the  surprise  of  all  (not,  apparently,,
excluding  the  three  Theosophists  who,  according  to  Dr.  Hartmann,*
had  been  concerned  in  its  removal),  the  Shrine  could  not  be  found.
Mr.  Damodar  also  asserted  that  marks  were  discerned  on  the  partition
of  the  room  where  the  Shrine  had  been  j'laced,  as  though  the  Shrine
had  been  lifted  over  the  side,  and  that  statements  to  this  eflect  were
in  the  deposition  made  at  the  time  by  those  Theosophists  who  discovered
that  the  Shrine  had  disappeared.  Inquiring  of  another  Theosophist
who  had  been  present,  I was  assured  by  him  that  no  such  marks  were
observed,  and  that  in  fact  none  had  been  looked  for.  The  deposition,
of  which  I have  a copy,  contains  not  the  slightest  allusion  to  any  such,
marks.


* Dr.  Hartmann  stated  that  Mr.  Damodar  was  not  one  of  these  three.
That  they  should  not  take  him  into  confidence  in  the  matter  is  natural,  as  they
probably  sincerely  believed  in  the  “ superstitious  awe  ” with  which  he  regarded,
the  Shrine,  and  thought  that  it  would  lead  him  to  disapprove  of  their  pro-
ceedings.


:228


Mr.  IIoi  Iff  son's  Report


Turning  now  to  the  specific  statements  of  Mr.  Daraodar,  quoted  in'
Appendix  IV.,  Ave  find  that  he  makes  the  following  assertions  : —

1.  That  tlie  sideboard  aperture  leading  to  the  recess,  and  the  recess

itself,  were  so  small  that  he  could  enter  the  hole  Avith  diffi-
culty, and  Avhen  once  inside,  “ could  only  stand  abreast,
Avithout  being  able  to  moAm  either  A\my  an  inch,  or  to  lift  up  ”
his  hand.

2.  That  there  was  no  sliding-panel  to  the  frame  of  the  Shrine.

5.  That  he  Avas  present  on  several  occasions  Avhen  various  Avitiiesses

to  the  plienomena  “ had  scrutinised  carefully,  in  every
possible  Avay,  the  Shrine,  and  had  satisfied  themselves  that  it
Avas  intact,  and  had  no  imnels  or  anything  of  the  kind.”

■4.  That  he  Avell  rememliers  Mr.  Subba  Row  and  himself  “ very
carefully  examining  the  Shrine  and  the  Wall,”  and  that  they
Avere  “ both  satisfied  that  they  Avere  intact.”

6.  That  the  keys  of  the  Shrine  and  the  Occult  Room  Avere  in  his

charge  Avhile  Madame  Blavatsky  Avas  at  Ootacamund,  in
1883  : and  again

6.  That  the  keys  of  Madame  Blavatsky’s  rooms  and  of  the  Shrine

Avere  in  the  charge  of  Madame  Coulomb,  Avhile  Madame
Blavatsky  Avas  at  Ootacamund  in  1883.

7.  That  the  sideboard  did  not  come  into  existence  till  January,

1884,  Avhen  tlie  j^henomena  Avere  no  longer  produced  in  the
Shrine.

(1)  Noav,  Avith  respect  to  the  sideboard  aperture  and  the  recess,
these  Avere,  as  I aftorAvards  found,  still  in  existence  Avhen  I arrived
at  Adyar,  though  Mr.  Damodar  stated  to  me  that  the  recess  had
been  blocked  up.  This  last  statement  of  Mr.  Baniodar’s  I can
regard  only  as  a deliberate  misrepresentation.  Had  I knoAvn  that
the  recess  still  existed,  I should  of  course  myself  have  endeaA’oured
to  enter,  and  should  at  once  have  discovered  the  untruth  of
Mr.  Damodar’s  account  of  his  OAvn  entrance.  I Avas  afterwards
informed  by  another  Theosophist  that  he  regarded  the  ajAerture
and  the  recess  as  quite  large  enough  to  be  used  by  a person  of
ordinary  size  for  the  production  of  the  Slirine  phenomena,  and
in  the  meantime  I had  tested  the  accuracy,  or  rather,  inaccuracy
of  Mr.  Damodar’s  account,  by  constructing  for  myself  an  aperture
and  a recess  smaller  than  those  connected  Avith  the  Shrine.
Dr.  Hartmann,  in  his  pamphlet,  gave  the  dimensions  of  the
apertui’e  as  27in.  high  by  1 lin.  Avide,  and  these  dimensions  are  as
nearly  as  possible  correct.  This  I Avas  subsequently  able  to  ascertain
for  myself,  as  the  frame  had  been  stoAved  aAvay  in  the  compound.


On  Phenomena  connected  tvith  Thcosophij.


22S-

and  was  shown  to  me  by  another  Theosophist.  The  recess  was.
alleged  by  Dr.  Hartmann  to  be  about  12in.  deep,  and  about-
5£t.  high ; the  depth  given  is  about  correct,  but  the  height'
was  more  nearly  8ft. — as  I found  by  measurement.  I have  myself
entered  a space  through  a hole  the  dimensions  of  both  of
which  were  at  least  an  inch  le.ss  than  the  dimensions  given  by  Dr.
Hartmann.  The  hole  I made  for  the  purpose  measured  less  than.
13in.  by  26in.,  and  the  space  into  which  it  led,  and  in  which  I stood
upright,  was  less  than  llin.  in  depth.  In  this  space  I could  with  ease
lift  my  hand,  manipulate  objects,  and  utilise  the  position  generally  in
the  way  demanded  for  the  production  of  the  Shrine  phenomena.  Mr.
Damodar  draws  attention  in  his  account  to  his  own  thinness  and  leanness,,
and  certainly  my  own  organism  is  considerably  larger  than  Mr,
Damodar ’s,  and  I believe  also  than  M.  Coulomb’s  or  Babula’s.

(2)  Ml’.  Damodar ’s  next  assertion,  that  there  was  no  sliding  panel
to  the  frame  of  the  Shrine,  we  have  already  seen  to  be  untrue.  Had
this  statement  stood  alone,  however,  it  could  not  ha\  e been  regarded
as  implicating  Mr.  Damodar  in  any  falsehood,  but  would  merely  have
appeared  to  be  a hasty  inference  from  his  experience,  as  the  a<^sertioii
was  made  before  the  discovery  of  the  sliding  panel  by  Ananda,  as-
described  above.

(3)  The  careful  scrutiny  of  the  Shrine  “in  every  possible  way,”
w’hich  he  a.sserts  was  made  in  his  presence,  was  never  made.  In  no-
single  instance  was  the  Shrine  moved  in  the  least  degree  from  the  wall
by  any  of  these  various  witnesses  to  whom  he  refers.  iSTot  only  so,  but
Mr.  Damodar  afterwards  admitted  that  he  never  examined  the  back  of
the  Shrine  himself,  and  was  never  present  when  any  such  examinatioix
was  made.  This  appeared  in  connection  with  his  statement  that  Mr>
Subba  Row  and  himself  “ very  carefully  ” examined  the  Shrine  and.
the  wall.

(4)  I took  an  opportunity  inlMr.  Damodar’s  presence  of  questioning
Mr.  Subba  Row  concerning  this  alleged  examination.  Mr.  Subba  Row
denied  that  he  had  ever  made  any  examination  of  the  Shrine.  IMr..
Damodar  then  made  a similar  denial,  and  both  again  united  in
affirming  that  they  had  never  seen  the  Shrine  removed.  Yet  this
imaginary  examination  by  Mr  Subba  Row  and  himself,  Mr.  Damodar
declared  in  a previous  written  statement  that  he  well  remembered.

(5)  and  (6)  The  next  marked  contradiction  in  Mr.  Damodar’s  state--
ments,  is  that  when  Madame  Blavatsky  was  at  Ootacamund  in  1883,.
the  keys  of  the  Shrine  and  the  Occult  Room  were  in  his  charge,,
and  yet  were  in  the  charge  of  Madame  Coulomb.  This  contra-
diction is  not  easily  resolved,  but  an  explanation  of  it  can  be
suggested.  The  first  statement  was  made  on  August  19th,  1884^.
when  Mr.  Damodar  probably  deemed  it  to  be  of  capital  import-


230


Mr.  Hodgson's  Report


■ance  that  he  should  prove  that  tliere  was  no  panel  in  the  Shrine
before  the  middle  of  September,  1883.  The  second  statement  was
made  on  September  19th,  1884,  and  on  September  10th  the  Madras
Christian  College  Magazine  had  appeared,  in  which  various  Blavatsky-
Coulomb  letters  were  published.  An  attem25t  was  then  made  on  the
side  of  the  Theosophists  to  show  from  circumstantial  evidence  that
these  letters  must  be  forgeries.  Of  these  letters,  two  very  important
■ones  referred  respectively  to  the  Adyar  Saucer  and  to  a Shrine  letter
received  by  Mr.  P.  Sreenevas  llao.  In  General  INlorgan’s  previously
luiblished  account  of  the  former,  he  had  stated  that  IMadame
■Coulomb  had  charge  of  the  keys  of  the  Shrine,  and  the  strength
of  Mr.  P.  Sreenevas  Rao’s  case  for  the  genuineness  of  his  phenomenon
Tested  upon  his  statement  that  he  had  asked  Madame  Coulomb  to
be  allowed  to  see  the  Shrine,  had  managed  to  do  so  on  the  following
•evening,  and  that  Madame  Coulomb  could  not  in  the  interval  have
written  to  Madame  Blavatsky,  and  received  a Mahatma  letter  in  time
for  his  visit,  which  had  occurred  while  Madame  Blavatsky  was  at
Ootacamund  ; and  it  was  impossible  to  give  any  consistent  account  of
these  incidents  without  its  clearly  appearing  that  Madame  Coulomb  had
■charge  of  the  keys  during  Madame  Blavatsky’s  absence,  as  was  no
■doubt  actually  the  case.  It  is  difficult  to  sujipose  tliat  the  first  of  Mr.
Damodar’s  conflicting  wi’itten  statements  was  not  a wilful  and  deliberate
falsehood.  »

(7)  I\Ir.  Damodar  states  that  the  sidel)Oard  did  not  come  into  existence
bill  January,  1884,  when  the  2)henomena  were  no  longer  ^^I’oduced  in  the
.Shrine.  Dr.  Hartmann  in  his  ^’'^^mphlet  of  September,  1884,  wrote
that  on  the  suggestion  of  1\I.  Coulomb  “ a heavy  cupboard  was  con-
structed according  to  his  [M.  Coulomb’s]  jilan,  and  under  his  super-
vision, in  the  month  of  December.  1883,  and  the  said  cupboard  was
placed  against  the  said  wall  on  the  said  side  oi^posite  to  that  on  which
hung  the  ‘Shrine’ and  in  rejily  to  my  inquiry  he  stated  that  this  cup-
board [the  sideboard]  in  which  M.  Coulomb  showed  the  movable  back,
was  against  the  east  side  of  the  wall  behind  the  Shrine  during  the
•anniversary  [December  27th].  Its  jiresence  at  that  time  is  also
■certified  to  Ity  Mrs.  Morgan,  Mr.  Subba  Row,  Judge  P.  Sreenevas  Rao,
and  various  otlier  witnesses.  (See  Ajipendi.x  IV.)  Mr.  Damodar
therefore  is  in  disagreement  with  very  important  Tlieosopliical  witnesses,
.and  his  own  statement  looks  as  if  it  was  made  because  he  realised
the  cardinal  necessity  of  establishing  tlie  falsehood  that  the  sideboard
was  not  in  its  position  during  the  anniversary  celebration  of  December,
1883  (when  Shrine-phenomena  occurred),  if  the  allegations  made- by  the
•Coulombs  were  to  be  disproved.  I had  reason  to  think  that  he
forced  the  evidence  of  several  minor  witnesses  on  this  point.  I
found  that  in  more  than  one  instance  he  had  instructed  the  witness


On  Phenomena  connected  iclth  Theosophy.


231


beforehand  as  to  what  replies  should  be  given  to  my  questions.  I
naturally  endeavoured  to  preclude  this  preliminary  arrangement,  and  on
one  occasion,  having  unexpectedly  paid  a visit  to  Mi'.  Rathnavelu,  a
witness  whose  written  statement  liad  come  into  my  possession,  I was
greeted  by  the  significant  remark,  “ Damodar  didn’t  tell  me  you  were
coming.”  This  gentleman  admitted,  though  with  manifest  reluctance,
that  the  sideboard  was  in  its  position  at  the  time  of  tlie  anniversary  in
1883.  The  witnesses  who  state  the  contrary  are  all  of  them,  I think,
persons  whom  there  are  independent  reasons  for  regarding  as  un-
reliable.

These  contradictions  and  false  assertions  as  regards  the  Shrine,
constitute  by  themselves,  I think,  a sufficient  ground  for  regarding  Mr.
Damodar  as  for  our  purposes  an  untrustworthy  witness.

Mr.  Damodar's  “Astral”  Jourkeys.

I shall  now  proceed  to  show  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  circum-
stances connected  with  Mr.  Damodar’s  “ astral  ” journeys  which  renders
it  difficult  to  suppose  a pre-arrangement  between  him  and  Madame
Blavatsky  to  make  it  appear  that  he  took  them  ; and  even  that  some
of  the  circumstances  suggest  a suspicion  of  such  an  arrangement.  Colonel
Olcott  is  of  opinion  that  such  a pre-arrangement  was  not  possible,  but
I do  not  think  that  any  one  who  reads  his  evidence  will  agree  with  him,
especially  if  they  take  his  statements  in  connection  with  some  addi-
tional information  which  I have  since  acquired.  The  following  is  the
evidence  given  by  Colonel  Olcott  before  the  Committee  as  to  one  of
these  “ astral  ” journeys  : —

At  Moradabad,  N.W.P.,  India,  being  on  an  official  tour  from  Bombay  to
Cashmere  and  back,  I was  very  strongly  importuned  by  a gentleman  named
Shankar  Singh,  a Ooveriiment  official,  and  not  then  a Theosopliist,  to  under-
take the  cure  of  two  lads,  aged  12  and  14  years  respectively,  who  had  each  on
arriving  at  the  age  of  10  years  become  paralysed.  It  is  known,  I believe,
to  many  here  that  I have  the  power  of  healing  the  sick  by  the  voluntary
transference  of  vitality.  I refused  in  this  instance,  having  already  within
the  previous  year  done  too  much  of  it  for  my  health.  The  gentleman
urged  me  again.  I again  refused.  He  spent,  perhaps,  10  or  15  minutes
in  trying  to  persuade  me  and  endeavouring  to  shake  my  resolution  ; but,  as
I still  refused,  he  went  to  Mr.  Damodar,  who  was  travelling  with  me  in  his
■official  capacity.  Shankar  Singh  represented  the  case,  and  appealed  to  Mr.
Damodar’s  sympathies,  and  at  last  persuaded  him  to  go  in  the  double,  or
phantasm,  to  the  headquarters  of  our  Society  at  Madras,  and  try  to  enlist
the  goodwill  of  Madame  Blavatsky.

Mr.  Stack  : What  is  the  distance  of  Moradabad  from  Madras  ?

Colonel  Olcott  ; The  distance,  approximately,  by  telegraph  line  is,  I
should  say,  2,200  miles.

hiR.  Myers  ; Was  it  known  at  headquarters  that  you  were  at  Moradabad
on  that  day  ?


233


Mr.  llor/f/soii’s  Report


Colonel  Olcott  : Ifc  was  not  known  that  1 was  at  Moradabatl,  for,  owing:
to  the  rai)id  spread  of  our  movement  in  India,  I,  wliile  on  a tour,  was  con-
stantly obliged  to  interrupt  the  previously  settled  programme,  and  go  hither
and  thither  to  found  new  branches.  All  the  elements  are  against  any
procurement.  To  understand  the  i)resent  case,  you  must  know  that  it  is  the-
rule  in  those  Eastern  schools  of  mystical  research  that  the  pui)ils  are  not
permitted  to  seek  intercourse  with  Teachers  other  tlian  their  own.  Hence,
Mr.  Damodar,  who  is  the  pupil — the  Sanskrit  word  is  chela — of  the  Mahatma.
Koot  Hoomi,  could  not  himself  approach  my  own  Teaclier,  who  is  another
person.  (Colonel  Olcott  here  exhibited  the  portrait  of  his  own  Teacher,  but
jireferred  to  withhold  the  name  from  publicity,  though  he  mentioned  it  to-
tlie  Committee.)  Madame  Blavatsky  and  I arc  pupils  of  the  same  Master,
and  hence  she  was  at  liberty  to  communicate  with  him  on  this  subject.  Mr.
Damodar,  preparatory  to  taking  his  aerial  flight,  then  sent  Mr.  Shankar
Singh  out  of  the  room  and  closed  the  door.  A few  minutes  later  he  returned
to  his  visitor,  who  was  waiting  just  outside  in  the  verandah.  They  came  in
together  to  the  part  of  the  house  where  I was  sitting  with  a number  of  Hindu
gentlemen  and  one  Euroj)ean,  and  bdd  me  what  had  happened  in  consecpience
of  my  refusal  to  heal  the  boys.  Mr.  Damodar  said  that  he  had  been  in  the
double  to  headquarters  (Madras),  and  had  talked  v/ith  Madame  Blavatsky,.
who  had  refused  to  interfere.  But  while  they  were  conversing  together,
both  heard  a voice,  which  they  recognised  as  tliat  of  my  Teacher.

Mr.  Stack  : Not  of  Mahatma  Koot  Hoomi  ?

Colonel  Olcott  : No,  that  of  my  own  Teacher.  Mahatma  Koot  Hoomi
had  nothing  to  do  with  me  in  this  affair.  While  they  were  talking  they  heard
this  voice,  which  gave  a message,  and  Mr.  Damodar  remarked  that,  if  I
would  take  2)encil  and  paper,  he  would  dictate  from  memory  the  message.  I
did  so.

Mr.  Myer.s  : You  have  the  paper  ?

Colonel  Olcott  : Yes.  Shankar  Singh  then,  in  the  presence  of  all,
sat  doavn  and  avrote  a brief  statement  of  the  circumstances,  and  it  avas  en-
dorsed by  12  persons,  including  myself.

The  memorandum  states  that  Mr.  Damodar  added,  after  repeating  the
message  wliich  he  had  received  from  headquarters,  that  he  had  asked  Madame
Blavatsky  to  confirm  the  thing  to  me  by  sending  a telegram  repeating  the
message  or  its  substance,  either  to  himself  or  to  Shankar  Singh.  The  next
morning  the  expected  telegram  arrived.

it-  ***<(■  *

Mr.  Myers  ; You  do  not  know  whether  Damodar  was  seen  by  Madame
Blavatsky  ?

Colonel  Olcott  : She  told  me  that  she  had  seen  him.  At  the  head-
quarters resides  M.  .Alexis  Coulomb,  Librarian  of  the  Society.  He  was  at
the  time  of  Damodar’s  alleged  visit  engaged  at  some  work  in  the  room
adjoining  the  writing  bureau,  where  Madame  Blavatsky  was.  Suddenly  he
came  into  the  room  and  asked  Madame  Blavatsk}^  where  Mr.  Damodar  was
as  he  had  heard  his  voice  in  conversation  with  her.

Mr.  Myers  : From  whom  did  you  hoar  this  2


On  Phenomena  connected  with  Theosophy.


23-3


CoLOXEL  Olcott  : From  M.  Coulomb  himself.  He  said,  “I  have  just
heard  his  voice  distinctly.”  Madame  Blavatsky  said,  “ He  has  not  returned.”
M.  Coulomb  seemed  surprised  : he  thought  Mr.  Damodar  had  unexpectedly
returned,  and  could  hardly  be  persuaded  that  he  had  not  been  in  the  room
talking  to  Madame  Blavatsky.

The  following  is  the  message  : —

Received  by  D.  K.  M.  and  delivered  to  Colonel  Olcott  at  Moradabad  at
4.50  p.m.,  10th  November,  1883.

“ Henry  can  try  the  parties*  once,  leav'ng  strongly  mesmerised.  Cajapati
oil  to  rub  in  three  times  daily  to  relieve  sufferers.  Karma  cannot  be
interfered  with.”

The  evidence  of  various  witnesses  shown  to  us  by  Colonel  Olcott
establishes  the  delivery  of  the  message  by  Mi\  Damodar,  and  the
receipt  of  the  genuine  corresponding  telegram  from  Madame
Blavatsky.

In  order  to  show  the  little  probability  there  was  of  any  conspiracy
between  Mr.  Shankar  Singh  and  Mr.  Damodar,  Colonel  Olcott
stated : —

Notice  had  been  put  into  The  Theosophid  some  months  before  that  I was
going  to  make  such  and  such  official  tours  throughout  India,  and  that  persons
who  had  sick  friends  to  be  treated  might,  within  certain  hours  on  the  second
day  of  my  visit  to  each  station,  bring  them  to  me  to  be  healed.  Shankar
Singh  had  written  to  me  long  before  my  coming  to  Moradabad,  asking  me  to
undertake  the  cure  of  these  boys,  and  offering  to  bring  them  to  Madras  to
me.  I refused  to  see  anybody  there,  but  told  him  that  he  could  bring  the
boys  to  me  when  I came  to  Moradabad,  in  the  course  of  my  tour ; and  it  was
in  pursuance  of  that  authorisation  that  he  came  and  importuned  me  so.
He  said,  “Here  is  something  that  you  are,  in  a way,  pledged  to  undertake,”
and  that  is  what  made  him  so  urgent.

Now  in  dealing  with  the  real  sequence  of  events,  this  last  statement
should  be  considered  first.  It  appears  that  before  Colonel  Olcott
started  on  his  tour  it  was  known  at  headquarters  that  when  he  reached
Moradabad,  Mr.  Shankar  Singh  would  expect  him  to  fulfil  his  promise
and  mesmerise  the  boys.  But  what  were  the  peculiar  circumstances
which  would  compel  Colonel  Olcott  to  resist  the  importuning  of  Mr.
Shankar  Singh?  Before  starting  on  the  tour.  Colonel  Olcott  had
endeavoured  to  heal  certain  sick  persons  at  Poona  “ by  the  voluntary
transference  of  vitality.”  I was  informed  by  a Poona  Theo.sophist  that
some  200  patients  were  assembled,  and  that  Colonel  Olcott  had

* The  use  of  the  word  “ parties  ” seems  to  me  a suspicious  circumstance.
Why  should  this  general  and  rather  odd  word  be  used  if  it  were  not  to  cover
possible  but  unforeseen  contingencies ? The  word  “boys”  would  have  been,
shorter  and  more  natural.

R


231


Mr.  Modgsoiiis  Beport


striven  mesmerically  with  about  50  of  them,  the  result  being  nil,
wliereupon  the  Poona  TheosojAists  drew  up  a protest  against  Colonel
Olcott’s  disgracing  the  Theosophical  Society  by  professing  to  j^roduce
cures  in  the  face  of  such  conspicuous  failure.  Notwithstanding  this,
however,  Colonel  Olcott  might  have  been  persuaded  by  Mr.  Shankar
Singh  to  the  redeeming  of  his  promise  ; it  was,  perhaps,  for  this  reason
that  a special  injunction  against  his  undertaking  any  cure  was  issued
in  the  form  of  a Mahatma  document,  which  reached  him  through  Mr.
Damodar.

“October  19th. — Through  D.  K.  M.  got  an  order  from  the
Chohans  not  to  heal  any  more  until  further  orders. — (Colonel  Olcott' s
diary,  1883.)

In  this  way  Colonel  Olcott’s  refusal  was  ensured.  It  may  be
observed  that  this  important  fact  is  not  disclosed  in  Colonel  Olcott’s
depo-sition.  The  reason  there  given  by  liim  for  his  refusal  was  that  he
liad  “ already  within  the  pi'evious  year  done  too  much  of  it  [healing]
for  his  health.”  That  the  order  referred  to  in  his  diary  was  the  cause
of  his  refusal, whatever  the  alleged  cause  of  the  order  itself,  is  confirmed
by  Mr.  Brown’s  statement  (Some  Experiences  in  India,  pp.  14,  15)

Colonel  Olcott  . . . had  been  ordered  by  his  Gnrn  to  desist  from

treating  patients  until  further  notice,  and,  v/hen  application  was  made  to  him
by  j\Ir.  Shankar  Singh,  of  IMoradabad,  on  behalf  of  two  orphan  children,  he
was  under  the  necessity  of  refusing  the  retpiest.  Damodar,  however,  became
interested  in  the  matter,  and  said  that  he  would  ask  for  permission  to  be
granted  for  this  special  case.

But  the  most  crucial  point  of  the  incident  turned  upon  Madame
Blavatsky’s  ignorance  or  knowledge  that  the  travellers  were  at
Moradabad,  and  in  reply  to  the  definite  question  put  by  Mr.  Myers,
Colonel  Olcott  declared  that  it  was  not  known  at  headquai'ters  that  he
was  at  Moradabad.  Now,  some  time  after  my  arrival  at  Adyar,  I took
the  opportunity,  when  Colonel  Olcott  was  examining  his  diary,  of
requesting  him  to  furnish  me  with  the  dates  on  which  he  visited  the
various  towns  included  in  his  tour  of  1883.  He  replied  that  I could
get  them  from  the  programme  of  the  tour  antecedently  published  in  The
TAeosopAfsb  fis  the  programme  had  been  carried  out.  To  my  remark
that  I had  understood  from  hi.s  deposition  that  the  previously  settled
programme  was  interrupted,  he  answered  that  it  had  been  somewhat
altered  in  consequence  of  his  founding  new  branches  not  anticipated,  and
he  then  proceeded  to  quote  the  dates  fiom  his  diary.  I afterwards  com-
pared these  with  the  previously  published  i:)rogi’amme,  which  bears  the
date  of  October  1 7th.  Twelve  towns  were  mentioned  in  the  programme,
which  extended  over  the  dates  from  October  22nd  to  November  18th,
and  the  dates  correspended  in  every  case  but  one  with  those  of  Colonel


On  riicnomena  connected  icitli  Tlicoaophy.


235


Olcott’s  diary,  tlie  discrepancy  in  that  case  being  probably  apparent
only,  and  not  real.  (According  to  the  diary  Cawnpore  was  reached  on
November  2nd,  and  the  time  given  in  the  programme  was  12.24  a.m.
on  November  3rd.)

It  appeared  from  the  programme,  then,  that  Moradabad  was  to  be
reached  on  November  9th,  and  left  on  November  11th  (and  it  appears
from  Colonel  Olcott’s  diary  that  it  was  reached  on  November  9th,  and
left  on  November  11th),  so  that  it  was  known  long  previously  at  head-
quarters that  Colonel  Olcott  would  be  at  Moradabad  on  November  10th,
when  the  incident  occurred,  if  the  programme  were  not  interrupted.
Colonel  Olcott’s  reason  for  asserting  that  it  was  not  known  at  head-
quarters that  he  was  at  Moradabad  appears  to  be  that,  on  the  course
of  his  tours  generally,  he  was  constantly  obliged  to  interrupt  the
previously-settled  pimgramme,  and  that  therefore,  apparently,  no
■certain  reliance  could  be  placed  on  the  programme  for  this  particular
tour.  This  at  least  is  the  most  favourable  interpi’etation  of  the
evidence  which  he  gave  before  our  Committee.  I may  note,
however,  that  the  following  special  j^roviso  was  attached  to  the
list  antecedently  published  in  The,  Theosophist  ; “ This  programme

will  be  as  strictly  adhered  to  as  possible.  Any  change,  necessitated  by
unforeseen  contingencies,  will  be  signified  by  telegram.”  (Thus  in  case
of  change  of  programme,  Mr.  Damodar  would  have  had  an  adequate
reason  for  visiting  the  telegraph  oiSce,  and  might  have  sent  a warning
telegram  to  Madame  Blavatsky  without  exciting  any  su.spicion.)  But
the  programme,  as  we  have  seen  above,  was  closely  kept,  and  the  cir-
cumstances throughout  were  admirably  adapted  for  a pre-arrangement.

Yet  Colonel  Olcott,  after  asserting  that  it  was  not  known  at  head-
'quarters  that  he  was  at  Moradabad,  and  giving  a general  reason  for
supposing  that  it  could  not  be  known,  adds  : “ All  the  elements  are
against  any  procurement.”  His  promise  to  the  waiting  Shankar  Singh,
the  “ Chohans’  ” emphatic  prohibition  bestowed  upon  him  by  Damodar,
the  programme  which  pointed  with  a steady  finger  to  Moradabad  on
November  10th,  the  easy  opportunity  afforded  to  Mr.  Damodar  of
guarding  against  a fiasco  in  case  of  any  unforeseen  contingency — “ all
dhe  elements  are  against  any  procurement”  !

I may  notice  here  that  M.  Coulomb  has  stated  to  me  that  he  told
Colonel  Olcott  a falsehood  at  the  request  of  Madame  Blavatsky  ; and
I may  recall  the  fact,  which  we  felt  bound  to  mention  in  our  First
Report  (p.  40,  note),  that  when  Colonel  Olcott  quoted  to  us  M.
'Coulomb’s  testimony  as  that  of  a trustworthy  wdtness,  he  was  aware
that  M.  Coulomb  had  been  charged  with  making  trap-doors  and
other  apparatus  for  trick  manifestations.  Furthei’,  when  Colonel  Olcott
received  the  proof-sheets  of  his  deposition,  he  must  have  been  aware
that  the  Coulombs  had  been  expelled  from  the  Tlieosophical  Society.

R 2


236


Mr.  Jlodcjson's  Report


Colonel  Olcott  also  referred  to  M.  Coulomb  as  a witness  in  the  only
otlier  instance  of  Mr.  Dainodar’s  alleged  astral  journeys  which  cam©
within  tlie  scope  of  my  investigations  in  India.*

This  case  Colonel  Olcott  described  as  follows  : —

“ The  second  case  is  one  of  a similar  character  On  the  night  of  the  17th
of  November,  1883 — to  wit,  seven  days  later — I was  in  the  train  on  my  way
from  Meerut,  N.W.P.,  to  Lahore.  Two  persons  were  in  the  carriage  with
me — Mr.  Damodar,  and  another  Hindu  named  Narain  Swamy  Naidu,  who-
were  asleep  on  their  beds  at  either  side  of  the  saloon  compartment.  I
myself  was  reading  a book  by  the  light  of  the  lamp.  Damodar  had  been
moving  upon  his  bed  from  time  to  time,  showing  that  he  was  not  physically
asleep,  as  the  other  one  was.  Presently  Damodar  came  to  me  and  asked
what  time  it  was.  I told  him  that  it  was  a few  minutes  to  6 i).m.  He  said,
‘ I have  just  been  to  head(juarters  ’ — meaning  in  the  double — ‘ and  an
accident  has  happened  to  Madame  Blavatsky.’  I inquired  if  it  was  any-
thing serious.  He  said  that  he  could  not  tell  me  : but  she  had  tripped  her
foot  in  the  carpet,  he  thought,  and  fallen  heavily  upon  her  right  knee.

I thereupon  tore  a piece  of  paper  out  of  some  book,

and  on  the  spot  made  a memorandum,  which  was  signed  by  myself  and  the
second  Hindu.”

The  memorandum  runs  as  follows  : —

“In  train  at  Nagul  Stacion,  S.P.  and  D.  Railway,  at  5.55  p.m.,  17/11/83.
D.  K.  M.  says  he  has  just  been  (in  Sukshma  Sarira)  to  headquarters.  H.P.Ik
lias  just  tripped  in  carpet  and  hurt  right  knee.  Had  just  taken  K.  H.’s.
portrait  from  Shrine.  Heard  her  mention  names  of  General  and  Mrs.
Morgan.  Thinks  they  are  there.  Saw  nobody  but  H.  P.  B.,  hntfelt  several
others.”

“The  next  station  reached  by  the  train  was  Saharanpur,  where  a halt  of
half-andiour  for  supper  occurred.  I went  directly  to  the  telegraph  office,
and  se  it  a despatch  to  Madame  Blavatsky  as  near  as  I can  remember  in  the
following  words  : ‘ What  accident  happened  at  headquarters  at  about  6-
o clock  1 Answer  to  Lahore.’  "

To  this  Madame  Blavatsky  telegraphed  in  reply : —

“Nearly  broke  right  leg,  tumbling  from  bishop’s  chair,  dragging
Coulomb,  frightening  Morgans.  Damodar  startled  us.”

Colonel  Olcott  added  ; —

“The  presence  of  General  and  Mrs.  Morgan  at  headquarters  is  confirmed
by  this  telegram,  and  before  that  w^e  travellers  had  no  knowledge  of  their
having  come  down  fi’om  the  Niigiris.  ”

And  to  this  remark  Madame  Blavatsky  made  the  following  note

* Some  remarks  on  the  alleged  appearances  of  Mr.  Damodar  in  London  wiR
be  loimd  at  p.  388.


On  Phenomena  connected  with  Theosoplnj.  237

»vhen  she  looked  over  Colonel  Olcott’s  deposition  before  tlie  Coniruittee
in  proof  : —

“ They  had  just  arrived  from  Nilgherry  Hills. — H.  P.  Blavatsky.”

It  seemed,  then,  that  in  this  case  the  testimony  of  General  and
jMrs.  Morgan  miglit  afford  very  important  evidence  disproving  the  possi-
bility of  pre-arrangement  between  Madame  Blavatsky  and  Mr.  Damodai .
For  it  might  have  proved  (1)  that  their  presence  at  headquarters
could  not  be  known  to  Mr.  Damodar ; and  (2)  that  the  accident  to
Madame  Blavatsky  was  a genuine  one,  and  occurred  at  the  hour  named.
I learnt,  however,  from  General  and  Mrs.  Morgan  that  tliey  had  been
•at  headquarters  a week  ; that  they  had  been  specially  summoned  thither
by  a Mahatma  letter  ; and  even  then  were  not  direct  witnesses  of  the
accident.  Thus  every  obstacle  to  a pre-arrangement  vanishes.  Indeed,
the  summoning  of  the  Morgans  to  headquarters,  taken  in  connection
with  the  way  their  names  are  dragged  into  Madame  Blavatsky’s  tele-
gram, and  Madame  Blavatsky’s  own  note  as  to  their  having  just  arrived,
becomes  a very  suspicious  circumstance.

On  the  whole,  then,  when  I consider  the  probability  from  what  we
otherwise  know  of  Madame  Blavatsky,  that  any  marvel  in  which  she
plays  a part  is  spurious  rather  than  genuine  ; the  untruthfulness  of  Mr.
Damodar  as  displayed  in  his  testimony  about  tlie  Shrine  ; the  absence
of  any  evidence  for  these  marvellous  communications  except  that  of
IMadame  Blavatsky  and  Mr.  Damodar ; the  circumstances  favouring
pre-arrangement  between  the  two ; and  the  minor  points  that  I have
Tioted  which  positively  suggest  such  pre-arrangement ; the  conclusion
that  these  “astral”  journeys  were  fabulous  appears  to  me  to  be
irresistible.  And  from  this  conclusion  it  further  follows  that  no
importance  can  be  attached  to  any  other  accounts  of  apparent  marvels
which  can  be  explained  by  attributing  them  to  the  agency  of  Mr.
Damodar.  The  full  significance  of  this  inference  will  be  seen  later  on,
when  I come  to  discuss  the  accounts  of  Mahatma  letters  received  in
Madame  Blavatsky’s  absence.

CoLoxEL  Olcott’s  Evidence.

I have  already  dwelt  more  fully  on  Mr.  Damodar ’s  “astral”
journeys  than  w’as  demanded  merely  to  show  how  easy  was  pre-
arrangement between  IMadame  Blavatsky  and  Mr.  Damodar.  I have
■done  so  partly  in  order  to  show  how  worthless  Colonel  Olcott’s  state-
ments and  inferences  are  seen  to  he  when  placed  side  by  side  with  the
record  of  events  as  they  actually  occurred.  I will  give  another  instance
of  the  same  unreliability.

In  replying  to  a question  put  by  Mr.  Myers  in  connection  with


238


Mr.  Hodgson’s  Roport


Colonel  Olcott’s  account  of  the  alleged  “ astral  ” form  of  a Mahatma
■which  appeared  to  him  in  New  York,  Colonel  Olcott  stated  : —

“ I never  saw  a living  Hindu  before  I arrived  in  London  on  my  way  to
India.  I had  had  no  correspondence  with  anybody  until  then,  and  had  no
knowledge  of  any  living  Hindu  who  could  have  visited  me  in  America.”

Now  Colonel  Olcott  arrived  in  London  on  his  way  to  India  in
1879.  The  Theosophical  Society  was  founded  in  1875,  and  long  before
this  Colonel  Olcott  had  travelled  with  Hindus  from  New  York  to
Liverpool.  He  had  made  their  acquaintance  and  obtained  their  portraits,
which,  as  he  tells  one  of  them  in  a letter  which  I have  seen,  were
hanging  on  his  walls  in  1877.  During  the  years  1877  and  1878  he
wrote  many  letters  to  one  of  them,  Mr.  M.  T.,  who  became  a member
of  the  Theosophical  Society,  and  was  intimate  with  Colonel  Olcott  in
Bombay,  but  died  several  years  ago.

It  seems,  then,  that  Colonel  Olcott  had  been  in  familiar  relations
with  a Hindu,  whom  he  first  met  on  the  passage  from  America  to  Eng-
land, long  before  he  reached  London  on  his  way  to  India,  and  even  long
before  the  “ astral  figure  ” in  question  appeared  to  him  in  New  York.
Moreover,  it  was  M.  T.  who  first  began  the  Theosophical  Society  in
Bombay,  antecedent  to  the  removal  of  headiiuarters  from  America  to-
India.  What,  then,  is  the  explanation  of  Colonel  Olcott’s
statement  to  the  Committee  in  his  deposition  ? After  it  had
been  pointed  out  to  Colonel  Olcott  that  this  statement  was
quite  irreconcilable  with  fact,  as  could  be  easily  proved  from  letters
of  his  which  I had  examined,  he  admitted  that  he  had  met  M.  T.
long  previously,  and  he  showed  a remarkably  clear  recollection  of  the
circumstances — at  least  of  the  circumstances  which  were  referred  to  in
his  letters  to  M.  T.  He  accounted  for  his  statement  to  the
Committee  by  urging  that  his  attention  at  the  time  was
being  specially  directed  to  the  possibility  of  personation  of
the  Alahatma’s  “ astral  form,”  and  that  he  momentarily  forgot
his  experiences'**'  with  M.  T.  and  other  Hindus.  I do  not,  of
course,  deny  this  to  be  the  case,  though  part  of  Colonel  Olcott’s  state-
ment in  his  deposition  was  quite  uncalled  for,  and  appears  to  me  to
render  his  lapse  of  memory  somewhat  singular.  He  seems  to  have
volunteered  the  odd  remark  that  he  “had  had  no  correspondence  with
anybody  until  then,”  whereas  he  had  written  numerous  letters  to
IM.  T.  and  other  Hindus,  and  had  started  the  Theosophical  Society
of  India  by  means  of  such  correspondence.  And  it  must  be  remem-

■*  It  may  also  be  urged  in  Colonel  Olcott's  favour  that  his  later  experiences
witli  M.  T.  in  Bombay  would  tend  to  obscure  their  earlier  relations  ; but
against  this  again  we  must  place  the  fact  that  Colonel  Olcott  appears  from
his  letters  to  have  regarded  these  earlier  relations  as  very  specially  memorable.


On  Fhenomena  connected  in't/i  Thcosop/nj.


233


bered  that  Colonel  Olcott  had  the  opportunity  of  correcting  his  state-
ment in  proof,  when  he  could  not  have  been  aflccted  by  tliat  momentary
forgetfulness  which  overcame  him  in  the  presence  of  the  pointed
question  propounded  by  Jlr.  Myers.

Other  instances  of  the  unreliability  of  Colonel  Olcott’s  statements,
due  either  to  peculiar  lapses  of  memory’  or  to  extreme  deficiency  in  the
faculty  of  observation,  will  be  found  on  pp.  253,  309,  and  365.

I cannot,  therefore,  regard  Colonel  Olcott’s  testimony  as  of  any
scientific  value.  In  particular,  his  testimony  to  the  alleged  “astral”
appearance  in  New  York  proves,  in  my  opinion,  no  more  than  that  he
saw  some  one  in  his  room,  who  may  have  been  an  ordinary  Hindu,  or
some  other  person,  disguised  as  a Mahatma  for  the  purpose,  and  acting
for  Madame  Blavatsky.  And  the  same  may  be  said  of  all  his  testi-
mony to  apparitions  of  Mahatmas.

Evidence  of  Mk.  Mouini  M.  Chatterjee.

The  testimony  of  anotlier  gentleman,  Mr.  Mohini  M.  Chatterjee,
who  gave  evidence  as  to  the  apparitions  of  Mahatmas,  is  open  to
a similar  charge  of  lamentable  want  of  accuracy ; but  in  his  case
it  must  be  said  that  he  always  professed  that  he  had  never
paid  any  great  attention  to  phenomena.  Moreover,  his  testimony
never  appeared  to  us  to  be  of  special  importance  in  the  way
of  establishing  the  genuineness  of  the  supposed  marvellous  events
related  by  him,  because  we  never  thought  it  impossible  that  he  iniglit
have  been  deceived.  We  tliought,  however,  that  a further  acquaint-
ance with  the  localities  where  the  apparitions  occurred,  and  the  exami-
nation of  other  witnesses,  might  strengthen  his  evidence ; but  the
reverse  has  proved  to  be  the  case.  (See  Appendix  VII.)  After  con-
sidering the  statements  of  the  other  witnesses,  and  examining  the
places  where  the  alleged  events  occurred,  the  probability  that  the
witnesses  were  imposed  upon  becomes  much  more  manifest  than
appears  from  a reading  of  Mr.  Mohini’s  evidence  alone.  Indeed,  Mr.
Mohini’s  description  of  the  spots  where  the  alleged  “ astral  ” apparitions
appeared  is  more  than  merely  imperfect ; it  is  almost  ludicrous.

For  instance,  in  describing  the  second  alleged  “astral”  apparition,
hlr.  Mohini  stated  : —

“ We  were  sitting  on  the  ground — on  the  rock,  outside  the  house  in
Bombay,  when  a figure  ajipeared  a short  distance  away.”

All  the  other  witnesses  appear  to  be  agreed  that  the  party  were  sitting
in  the  verandah,  and  not  upon  what  some  of  them  descidbed  as  the  roc/c/
they  gave  this  name  to  the  irregular  summit  of  the  hill  upon  the  side
of  ■which  the  house  (Crow’s  Nest  Bungalow)  was  situated.  There  are
five  terrace-fields  or  gardens  on  the  side  of  the  hill,  and  the  verandah


240


Mr.  Hodgson^s  Report


where  the  party  were  sitting  was  on  the  same  level  as  the  topmost  of
these.  Above  and  beyond  rose  the  summit  of  the  hill  like  a high
bank,  to  which  there  was  easy  access  from  the  farther  side,  not  visible
from  the  terrace-garden  or  the  verandah ; and  it  was  upon  this  summit
that  the  “ ligure  ” appeared.  Having  pointed  this  out  to  Mr.  Mohini
in  a personal  interview,  I learn  that  he  attributes  the  inaccuracy  of  his
account  to  his  defective  knowledge  of  the  English  language,  and  that
by  “ rock,”  lie  meant  the  ground  of  tlie  top  terrace  just  outside  the
bungalow  ; the  use  of  the  word  “ rock  ” in  this  sense  is  certainly
inappropriate  ; the  spot  is  elsewliere  * described  as  the  “garden  of  the
upper  terrace.”  Mr.  Mohini  also  pleads  his  defective  knowledge  of  the

English  language  in  explanation  of  certain  other  inconsistencies to

which  1 drew  his  attention — between  his  statements  and  those  of  the
other  witnesses.

Again,  in  the  case  of  the  first  alleged  “ astral  ” apparition,  we  had
been  led  by  Mr.  Mohini’s  deposition  to  suppose  that  not  only  himself
Vmt  the  other  witnesses  had  recognised  the  figure.  Being  asked
whether  all  agreed  that  it  could  not  be  a real  man  walking  in  the  way
described,  Mr.  Mohini  replied  : —

“Certainly.  It  seemed  to  us  to  be  the  apparition  of  the  original  of  the
portrait  in  Colonel  Olcott’s  room,  and  which  is  associated  with  one  of  the
Mahatmas.”

In  reply  to  Mr.  Stack’s  question,  whether  he  could  distinguish  the
features,  Mr.  Mohini  replied  : “ Oh,  yes,  and  the  dress,  the  turban,  and
everything,”  but  afterwards,  in  reply  to  Mr.  Gurney’s  question  whether,
if  he  had  seen  the  face  alone,  he  would  have  recognised  it,  he  replied
that  he  did  not  know,  that  it  was  the  whole  thing  taken  together
which  produced  on  him  the  impression  that  it  was  the  apparition  of  the
original  of  the  portrait  in  Colonel  Olcott’s  room.

Now,  not  one  of  the  other  witnesses  whom  I examined  recognised
the  features  ; they  could  not  even  tell  whether  the  figure  had  aboard  or
not,  with  the  exception  of  Mr.  Ghosal,  who  “saw  something  like  a
beard,  but  not  very  distinctly.”

Nor  are  the  witnesses  by  any  means  agreed  about  other  points
to  which  Mr.  Mohini  refei’s.  For  instance,  Mr.  Mohini  said  the  figure
“seemed  to  melt  away.”  Mr.  Ghosal  said,  “ It  appeared  to  me,  and  a
few  of  those  present  were  of  the  same  opinion,  that  the  figure  walked
over  one  of  the  trees  and  suddenly  disappeared.”  Mr.  Mohini  now
explains  that  when  he  said  the  figure  seemed  to  melt  away,  he  meant
merely  that  the  figure  disappeared.  [In  his  deposition  before  the  Com
mittee  Mr.  Mohini  said  that  the  figure  disappeared,  and  when  Mr

* “ Hints  on  Esoteric  Theosophy,”  p.  99.


On  Phenomena  connected  ivith  Theosophy.


241


Myers  asked,  “In  what  way  did  it  disappear?”  Mr.  Moliini
replied,  “ It  seemed  to  melt  away.”J  Another  witness  described  the
figure  as  walking  to  and  fro  beiow  the  balcony  on  the  third  terrace  field,
and  appeared  to  think  it  could  not  have  been  an  ordinary  person,
because  it  would  have  been  difficult  for  a man  to  walk  freely  in  that
place,  which  he  alleged  to  be  full  of  thorny  trees.  But  I found  wlien  I
inspected  the  old  headquarters  in  Bombay  that  this  description  also  was
inaccurate,  and  that  it  was  perfectly  easy  for  any  one,  even  though
disguised-  in  flowing  robes,  to  walk  freely  over  any  of  the  terraces.
And  I took  care  to  ascertain  that  the  terraces  had  not  been  altered  in
the  interval.

In  short,  after  my  examination  of  the  locality,  I was  left  without
any  doubt  that  the  appearances  might  have  been  well  produced  by
]\L  Coulomb  in  disguise.  I have  seenM.  Coulomb  disguised  asa  Mahatma,
and  can  understand  that  the  figure  may  have  been  very  impressive.
A dummy  head  (with  shoulders),  like  that  of  a Hindu,  with  beard,  ifec.
and  fehta,  is  worn  on  the  top  of  the  head  of  the  person  disguised.  A
long  flowing  muslin  garment  falls  down  in  front,  and  by  holding  the
folds  very  slightly  apart,  the  wearer  is  enabled  to  see,  and  to  speak  also,
rf  necessary.  I do  not  think  it  in  the  least  degree  likely  that  any  of  the
witnesses  in  the  above  cases  would  have  penetrated  this  disguise  liad
the  figure  been  even  much  nearer  than  it  was,  and  the  light  much  better.

I was  unable  to  estimate  the  precise  distance  of  the  figure  in  the
second  case,  but  in  the  first  case  the  figure  must,  from  an  examination
tjf  the  locality,  have  been  certainly  more  than  40  yards  from  the  spec-
tators. We  can  hardly  attach  any  importance  to  the  supposed  recog-
nition, and  from  a portrait  only,  of  a figure  at  this  distance,  even  in
bright  moonlight.  Moreover,  a good  view  of  the  figure  must  have  been
almost  impossible  in  consequence  of  the  trees  and  shrubs  in  the
iieighboui'hood.

The  third  case  mentioned  by  Mr.  Mohini,  that  of  an  alleged  “ astral  ”
apparition  at  Adyar,  possesses,  if  possible,  still  less  evidential  \alue
than  the  foregoing,  especially  after  Mr.  Mohini’s  later  accounts  to
myself.  It  appears  from  Mr.  Mohini’s  deposition  tliat  tlie  figure
disappeared  on  one  side  of  the  balcony  * [terrace],  at  the  edge  of  the
balcony,  above  a flight  of  steps.

Mr.  Mohini  : After  a while  I said  that  as  I should  not  see  In'ui  tor  a
long  time,  on  account  of  my  going  to  Europe,  I begged  he  woidd  leave  .soma
tangible  mark  of  Ids  visit.  The  figure  then  raised  his  hands  and  seemed  to
throw  something  at  us.  The  next  moment  we  found  a sJuover  of  loses


This  is  the  flat  roof  above  the  ground  floor  of  tlie  bungalow,  m.aiked  on
the  Plan  as  Terrace.  Only  a portion  of  it  is  represented  within  the  limits  of  the
i’lan.


Mr,  Hodgson's  Ropor,


falling  over  u;;  in  the  room — roses  of  a kind  that  could  not  have  been  pro
cured  on  the  promises.  We  re<iuested  the  figure  to  disappear  from  that  sidt#
of  the  balcony  where  there  was  no  exit.  There  was  a tree  on  the  other  side^
and  it  was  in  order  to  prevent  all  suspicion  that  it  might  be  something  that-
had  got  d<Jwn  the  tree,  or  anything  of  that  kind,  that  we  requested  him  to-
disappear  from  the  side  wdiere  there  was  no  exit.  The  ligure  went  over  to-
that  spot  and  then  disappeared.

Mil.  Mveks  : You  saw  its  disajipearance  ?

Mil.  MoHfxi  : Oh  yes,  it  passed  us  slowly  until  it  came  to  the  edge  o£
the  balcony,  .and  then  it  was  not  to  be  seen  any  more.

Mil.  IMyeks  : The  disappearance  being  sudden  1

hill.  Moil  INI : Yes.

hln.  OuRNSY  : Was  the  height  of  the  balcony  such  that  any  one  could
liave  jumped  down  from  it  1

Mu.  .Mohini  : The  height  was  15  or  20  feet,  and,  moreover,  there  were
people  downstairs  and  ail  over  the  house,  so  that  it  would  have  been  impos-
sible for  a person  to  have  jumped  down  without  being  noticed.  Just  below
the  balcony  there  is  an  open  lawn.  There  were  several  persons  looking  at
the  moment,  and  my  own  idea  is  that  it  would  have  been  perfectly  impossible-
for  a person  to  liave  jumped  down.

Mr.  tii'ACR  : 'Why  ?

Mr.  hloiiiNi  : There  is  a small  flight  of  steps  just  below  the  balcony,,
and  if  a m:iM  had  jumped  from  the  balcony  he  must  have  fallen  upon  the
steps  an-1  broken  his  legs.  When  the  figure  passed  and  re-passed  us  we
heard  nothing  of  any  footsteps.  Besides  myself,  Damodar  and  Madame
Blavatsky  were  in  the  room  at  the  time.

Ml'.  Damodar,  whom  I questioned,  declared  that  the  figure  dis-
appeared at  a spot  which  he  pointed  out  to  me ; this  spot  was  not  near
the  edge  of  the  balcony,  and  was  just  opposite  and  close  to  the  door
of  the  Occult  Room  which  opens  on  the  balcony.  (See  Plan.)  I
thought,  at  the  time,  that  the  disagreement  between  this  account
and  Mr.  Mohini’s  might  be  due  to  a desire  on  Mr.  Damodar ’s  part  to
convince  me  that  Madame  Coulomb  was  not  acquainted  with  the  cir-
cumstances of  the  case.

hlr.  Mohini,  in  the  later  account  which  he  gave  to  me  in  our  first
interview  after  my  return  from  India,  described  the  figure  as  dis-
appearing at  a spot  whicli  to  a great  extent  appro.ximates  to  that
liointed  out  by  IMr.  Damodar,  but  is  nevertheless  not  quite  in  agreement
and  I fee!  bound  to  say,  after  careful  consideration,  tliat  had  it  been  in
complete  .agreement,  Mr.  Mohini’s  later  account  would  have  involved  a
clear  and  absolute  stultification  of  his  earlier  one ; and  even  as  it  is,.
IMr.  Mohini’s  two  .accounts  are  fundamentally  .at  variance.  Instead  of
the  figure’s  disappearing,  as  was  stated  in  his  origin.al  deposition,  on  one-
side  oj  the  balcony  and  above  a Jlhyht  oj  steps,  the  figure  is  now  made  to
disappear  at  a spot  which  should  be  described  rather  as  the  front  of
iite  balcony,  and  where  there  were  no  steps  below.  I cannot  attribute-


On  Phenomena  connected  icitli  Theoe,ophij.


243


any  evidential  value  to  these  conflicting  statements  : nor  does  the
case  seem  to  me  improved  by  the  explanation  given  to  me  by
Mr.  Moliini  in  our  last  interview  that  he  had  not  examined  the
place  to  see  whether  there  were  any  steps  below,  and  that  it  was
only  when  the  question  was  put  by  Mr.  Stack  as  to  why  it  was
impossible  for  the  figui’e  to  have  jumped  down  [Mr.  IMohini  having
made  the  statement,  and  Mr.  Stack  having  asked  vdiy  f\  that  he
thought  he  remembered  there  were  steps  under  the  balcony  in  that
spot  (i.e.,  the  spot  described  in  his  later  account).  In  Mr.  Mohini’s
earlier  account  the  point  of  disappearance  of  the  tigure  was  determined
by  the  side  of  the  balcony,  the  position  of  the  tree  on  the  other
side,  the  edge  of  the  balcony,  and  the  flight  of  steps.  I\Ir.  Mohini’s
later  account  contradicts  his  earlier  one  in  three  out  of  these  four
determining  conditions.

I may  now  say  that  the  passage  quoted  above  from  Mr.  Mohini’s
deposition  to  the  Committee,  which  was  made  before  anj  thing  was  known
here  publicly  of  the  charges  brought  by  the  Coulombs,  agrees  entirely,
so  far  as  it  goes,  both  as  to  the  movements  of  the  figure  and  as  to  the
place  of  its  disappearance,  with  the  account  furnished  to  me  indepen-
dently (that  is,  without  any  opportunity,  as  I believe,  of  knowing  what
Mr.  Mohini  had  said)  by  iladame  Coulomb,  who  alleges  that  she  acted
as  the  Mahatma  on  this  occasion.  The  spot  where  she  described  herself
as  finally  escaping  from  view  was  at  the  edge  of  the  balcony  on  one
side  of  the  balcony ; a flight  of  steps  was  just  below,  and  a tree  was
near  the  other  side  of  the  balcony.  Her  account  was  that,  after  dis-
guising herself  as  a Mahatma  in  the  bath-room — now  Mr.  Damodar’s
I’oom  (see  Plan) — she  passed  through  the  cupboard  with  the  secret
double  l)ack  into  the  Occult  Room,  and  thence  through  the  door  leading-
out  upon  the  terrace,  where  she  passed  along  close  to  the  wall  in  a
stooping  attitude  until  she  came  opposite  the  middle  window  of  the
sitting-room,  when  she  slowly  rose  to  full  height  (the  dummy  head  and
shoulders  being  added  to  her  own  stature).  The  spectators  in  the
room,  she  declared,  saluted  with  profound  respect.  She  was  provided,
'ihe  said,  with  flowers,  which  were  concealed  in  the  folds  of  her  muslin
lobe,  and  which  she  threw  over  Mr.  Mohini;  and  after  cvalking  up
ind  down  on  the  terrace  several  times,  she  finally  passed  away  at  the
cast  side  of  the  balcony,  departing  into  the  new  room,  which  was
ihen  in  process  of  construction,  and  thence  by  the  north  side
of  the  terrace  back  into  the  bath-room.  She  alleged  also  that  she  had
taken  off  her  shoes  in  order  to  move  silently,  and  that  it  was
so  dark  that  she  hurt  her  feet  against  some  nails  on  the  terrace
she  said  that  she  had  received  the  flowers  that  slie  had  thrown  over  Mr.
Mohini  from  a certain  IMadame  de  Wailly,  dressmaker,  nlio  IhkI
since  left  Madras  and  is  now  living  in  Colombo,  in  Ceylon.  T


Mr.  Iludgson's  Report


:244

-called  upon  Madame  de  Wailly  in  Colombo,  and  found  that  she
recollected  having  received  several  bunches  of  flowers  near  the
-Ijoginning  of  1884,  and  having  given  some  to  Madame  Coulomb.
There  was  one  slight  difference,  however,  between  the  statement
-of  Madame  Coulomb  and  that  of  Madame  de  Wailly.  The  former
was  under  the  impression  that  the  flowers  given  to  her  by  Madame
■de  Wailly  had  come  from  Bangalore,  a hill  station,  whereas
Madame  de  Wailly  was  inclined  to  think  that  she  had  received  tliem
irom  a friend  living  on  the  outskirts  of  Madras,  who  had  presented
her  with  a bouquet  of  magnificent  roses.  She  believed  that  it  was
these  roses  which  she  had  given  to  Madame  Coulomb.

Madame  Coulomb  stated  that  the  night  was  dark,  and  in  reply
do  my  special  inquiry,  said  that  there  was  no  moonlight.  Mr.  Mohini,
however,  had  said  in  reply  to  a question  put  by  Mr.  Myers,  that  there
was  moonlight  on  the  balcony.  On  reference  to  the  calendar  it  ap-
pears that  there  was  no  moonlight.  Mr.  Mohini  now  conjectures
that  he  may  have  mistaken  the  “fading  lamp-light”  or.  the  limit  of  the
balcony  for  moonlight.

1 do  not  myself  feel  quite  certain  about  the  existence  of  much
lamp-light  on  the  balcony ; but  it  may  be  desirable  to  add  here  that,  in
-any  case,  large  portions  of  the  terrace  must  have  remained  in  darkness,
and  that  although  the  reader  of  Mr.  Mohini’s  evidence  given  to  the
Committee  might  almost  suppose  tliat  the  only  exit  from  the  terrace
was  by  means  of  a “ tree,  or  anything  of  that  kind,”  there  are  various
ways  in  which  an  ordinary  person  disguised  might  have  made  his
escape.  The  spectators  were  in  the  sitting-room  looking  from  tlie
middle  window,  and  a reference  to  the  Plan  will  show  that  certain
portions  of  the  terrace  on  both  sides,  east  and  west,  were  entirely  hidden
4rom  their  observation.  The  terrace  might  have  been  easily  left  not
■only  by  the  help  of  trees,  but  by  proceeding  in  the  direction  of  the
mew  room,  or  by  mounting  the  roof, — not  to  speak  of  the  door  of  the
■Occult  Room,  and  the  double-backed  cupboard;  or,  considering  that  it
was  11  p.m.,  and  that  there  was  no  moonlight,  by  a ladder  from  the
terrace  to  the  ground.  Indeed,  I have  myself  often,  as  a lad,  per-
formed a greater  “ drop  ” feat  than  would  be  required  for  leaving  the
terrace  without  the  help  even  of  a ladder.

I ought  to  mention  that  Mr.  Mohini  had  not  the  opportunity  of
seeing  the  proof-sheets  of  his  deposition  and  correcting  any  errors  that
might  have  been  made  in  our  First  Report.  On  June  1st,  1885,  he  wrote
to  Ml-.  Myers  remarking  on  this  fact,  and  stating  that  he  had  been
looking  over  the  record  of  his  testimony  given  before  the  Committee,
.and  he  makes  a correction  in  one  particular.  I need  hardly  say  that
I have  not  used  the  statement  which  ]\Ir.  Mohini  thus  corrects  in  my
-ci-iticicm  of  Mr.  Mohini’s  evidence.  Mr.  Mohini,  however,  omitted  to


On  Fhcnomcna  connected  with  Thcosoplii/.  245'

correct  another  error,  tlie  discovery  of  which  contributes  to  destroy
the  interest  of  another  marvel  described  by  him  (see  Appendix  VII.)  -
namely,  the  case  of  an  alleged  phenomenal  letter  Avhich  appeared  oir
the  table  of  Mr.  Keightley,  a member  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  in
Paris,  and  which  referred  to  the  friends  ” of  Mr.  Mohini.  The-
question  was  asked  by  Mr.  Myers  : —

“ Could  the  letter  have  been  written  some  days  before,  and  the  allusion,
as  to  taking  your  friends  into  the  country  inserted  afterwards  ? ”

Mr,  Mohini  is  represented  in  the  deposition  as  replying  ; —

“ No,  because  Mr.  Keightley  and  Mr.  Oakley  only  came  to  the  house  by-
accident that  morning.”

Mr.  Oakley  has  told  me  that  he  went  frequently  to  the  Paris
apartments  and  might  be  expected  to  call.  Mr.  Keightley  has  told  me-
that  he  was  unaware  that  Mr.  Oakley  was  even  in  Paris,  and  that  Mr.
Oakley  had  called  unexpectedly.  But  both  Mr.  Keightley  and  Mr.
Oakley  are  .agreed  that  Mr.  Keightley  himself  was  living  in  the  rooms
at  the  time  with  Mr.  IVIohini.  After  this  discrepancy  had  been  pointed
out,  Mr.  Mohini  declared  that  the  reply  he  is  represented  as  giving
he  did  not  give,  and  that  the  shorthand  reporter,  who  took  down
the  evidence  given  before  the  Committee,  must  have  made  a
mistake.  But  the  reader  may  himself  compare  Mr.  Mohini’s  evidence
with  that  of  the  other  witnesses  (see  Appendix  VII.),  and  he  will  see
how  much  more  marvellous  the  incidents  . in  question  have  become-
under  the  constructive  and  destructive  action  of  Mr.  Mohini’s  memory
For  example,  in  the  case  just  referred  to,  of  the  letter  found  on  Mr..
Keightley’s  table,  it  would  appear  from  Mr.  Mohini’s  account  that  he-
had  gone  with  Mr.  Keightley  into  Mr.  Oakley’s  room,  that  Mr.  Oakley
and  Babula  were  together,  and  that  both  Mr.  Mohini  and  Babula  were-
in  Mr.  Keightley’s  sight  while  the  latter  was  absent  from  his  room..
Under  these  circumstances  it  was  not  easy  to  see  who  could  have  placed"
the  letter  on  the  table  in  the  interval ; but  when  we  find  that,  according
to  Mr.  Oakley  and  Mr.  Keightley,  Mr.  Mohini  did  not  enter  INIr..
Oakley’s  room  at  all,  that  Babula  was  not  with  Mr.  Oakley,  that
there  was  probably  a short  interval  of  time  during  which  both  Mr.
Mohini  and  Babula  were  out  of  the  siglit  of  Mr.  Keightley,  and  also  of
INIr.  Oakley,  the  incident  ceases  to  present  any  difficulty  in  the  way  of.
an  ordinary  explanation.

Remaining  Evidence  for  Appearances  of  Mahatmas.

I need  not  here  say  much  on  the  other  alleged  appearances  of'
Mahatmas,  in  either  their  ordinary  physical  or  their  “ astral  ” bodies.  A
confederate  in  disguise  is  generally  an  easy  and  sufficient  explanation  of’
them.  I have,  I think,  shown,  in  Appendi.x  VIII.,  that  th<  o real


216


Mr.  Hodgmi'a  Report


difficulty  in  applying  this  explanation  even  to  the  case  of  Mr.  Rama-
swaiuier,  whose  account  of  his  experience  has  made  so  much  impression  on
Mr.  Sinnett.  I have  dealt  similarly  Avith  other  appearances  in  Appen-
dices IX.  and  X.  The  statements  in  Mr.  Brown’s  pamphlet,  Some
Experiences  in  India,  concerning  which  he  was  unwilling  to  give  me
any  further  details,  need  not  detain  us  long.  The  only  time  he  saw
“ Mahatma  Koot  Hoomi  ” in  broad  daylight,  the  figure  Avas  at  a
distance.  Mr.  BroAvn  says  ; “On  the  morning  of  the  20th  became
to  my  tent,  and  said,  ‘Xow  you  see  me  before  you  in  the  flesh  ; look
and  assure  yourself  that  it  is  I,’  and  left  a letter  of  instructions  and
silk  handkerchief,  both  of  Avhich  are  noAv  in  my  possession.”  This  inci
dent  happened,  it  appears,  at  about  2 a.m.,  and  Mr.  BroAvn’s  particular
reason  for  thinking  the  figure  was  “ Koot  Hoomi  ” seemed  to  be  only
that  the  letter  given  to  him  Avas  in  the  same  liandAvriting  as  that  of
letters  “ phenomenally  ” received  at  headquartei’s  from  “Koot  Hoomi”.

The  chief  persons  Avho  testify  from  pei’sonal  exiaerience  to  the  actual
existence  of  the  Brotherhood  in  Thibet  are  (besides  Madame  BlaA-atsky)
]Mr.  Damodar  and  Mr.  Babajee  Dharbagiri  Xath.  Of  the  value  of  Mr.
Damodar’s  evidence  I have  already  said  enough.  With  regai’d  to  Mr.
Babajee  D.  Nath,  it  is  shoAvn  in  Appendix  I.  that  he  has  involved  him-
self in  the  attempted  attack  by  Madame  Blavat-sky  on  the  “ Sassoon
Telegram  ” letter,  and  a reference  to  Appendix  IV.  Avill  shoAv  that  he
has  made  statements  Avhich  I cannot  but  regard  as  Avilfully  false  con-
cerning matters  connected  Avith  the  Shrine.  Again,  he  stated  to  me
that  he  had  lived  with  the  Bi’others  only  during  certain  months  out  of
a specific  period  of  tivo  years  Avdiich  immediately  folloAved  his  leaving,
in  1878,  the  position  of  private  seci’etary  to  a deputy-collector  in
the  Kurnool  district,  although  he  had  previously  stated  to  Mr.  Sinnett
(“  The  Occult  World,”  pp.  154,  155,  Fourth  Edition)  that  he  had  been
living  Avith  Koot  Hoomi  for  ten  years.  Further,  it  AV'as,  he  said,  only  a feAV
months  after  the  lapse  of  these  tAvo  years  that  he  joined  the  Theosophical
Society  in  Bombay,  and  thencefoi’Avard  he  has  been  continuously  at  the
headquarters  of  the  Society,  except  when  he  paid  tAvo  visits  to  the
North,  one  to  Thibet,  and  the  other  to  the  borders  of  Thibet.  Noav,  from
this  account  it  is  clear  that  Mr.  Babajee  must  have  joined  the  Theo-
sophical Society  in  Bombay  at  least  as  early  as  1881,  and  remained
some  time  at  the  headquaiters  in  that  year.  But  he  does  not  seem  to
have  made  his  first  appearance  as  Babajee  Dharbagiri  Nath  until
toAA'ards  the  end  of  1882,  at  about  Avhich  time  he  visited  Mr.  Sinnett.
When,  later,  he  joined  the  headquarters  of  the  Society,  he  Avas  recog-
nised by  Theosophists  as  GAvala  K.  Deb,  avIio  had  been  there  before.
The  assertion  made  by  Madame  Coulomb  in  her  pamphlet,  * and


*■  “ Some  Account  of  my  Intercourse  Avith  Madame  Blavatsky,”  pp.  -18-50.


217


On  Phenomena  connected  with  Theosopkn.

repeated  more  explicitly  to  myself,  that  Mr.  Bahajee  D.  Nath  is  the
same  person  who  was  previously  known  in  the  heafhjuartevs  at  Bombay
as  Gwala  K.  Deb,  is  confirmed  by  the  testimony  of  Mr.  A.  0.  Hume,
Mr.  Tookaram  Tatya,  Mr.  Bal  Niiaji  Pitale,  and  Mr.  l^zekiei ; and  it
seems  to  be  the  only  explanation  of  the  above  stateiuents  made  to  me
by  Mr.  Babajee  himself.  Mr.  Babajee  indeed  affirms  that  he  never
passed  under  the  name  of  Gwala  K.  Deb,  but  it  is  by  no  means
likely  that  all  these  witnesses  should  mistake  another  person  for
Mr.  Babajee,  for  he  is  very  small,  and  his  voice  has  a very  peculiar
timbre.  Moi’eover,  he  seems  to  have  no  objection  to  assuming  difi'erent
characters,  since  at  this  very  time  lie  represents  two  persons  in  the  last
Official  Annual  Report  issued  by  the  Theosophica!  Society  ; that  is  to
say,  he  appears  under  two  difterent  names.  On  p.  8 he  appears  as  the
delegate  of  the  Vizianagram  Branch  under  tlie  name  of  Babajee  D.
Nath  (otherwise  wi’itten  on  pp.  83,  117,  120,  as  Mr.  Dharbagiri  Nath,
in  connection  with  the  Anniversary  Hall  Committee),  and  on  p.  131—
Appendix  A.  of  the  Theosophical  Society’s  Report — he  appears  as  one
of  the  Assistant  Recording  Secretaries  under  the  name  of  S.  Krishna-
swaini.  Yet  Babajee  Dharbagiri  Nath  is  the  same  person  as  S.  Krislma-
swami,  the  latter  being  Mr.  Babajee’s  real  name,  according  to  his  own
account  to  myself.  I think  that  all  will  .agree  that  the  mere  assertion  of  a
person  who  has  made  false  and  contradictory  statements,  and  has  appeared
under  different  aliases,  is  insufficient  to  prove  him  “ the  Chela  of  Root
Hoomi  that  he  declares  himself  to  be,”  though  it  is  difficult  to  avoid
the  conclusion  that  “ if  he  is  anything  else,”  to  use  Mr.  Sinnett’s  words,
“ he,  of  course,  must  be  a false  witness,  invented  to  prop  up  IMadame
Blavatsky’s  vast  imposture.”  Additional  evidence  of  this  will  be  found
in  Part  II.  I may  add  that  Mr.  Babajee,  if  I may  judge  from  the  account
{perhaps  not  very  reliable)  which  he  has  given  me  of  his  changeful  life,
appears  to  be  almost  isolated  and  entirely  homeless  apart  from  the
Theosophical  Society,  and  is,  I think,  eagerly  ready,  out  of  gratitude
for  sheltering  kindness  received  from  Madame  Blavatsky,  to  dispense  on
her  behalf  most  freely  with  the  truth.

Rama  Sourindro  Gargya  Deva,  from  whose  alleged  letter  to  Madame
Blavatsky,  asserting  his  intimacy  with  the  Masters  (published  in  The
Theosophist  for  December,  1883),  an  extract  was  quoted  in  our  First
Report,  cannot  be  regarded  as  an  independent  witness  ; seeing  that  his
own  existence  is  even  more  problematical  than  that  of  the  Mahatmas,
the  only  evidence  for  it  being  the  statement  of  Madame  Blavatsky,
Mr.  Babajee,  and  Mr.  Damodar,  that  they  know  him.  And  Mr.  Mirza
hloorad  Alee  Beg,  whose  assertions  (published  in  The  Theosophist  for
August,  1881)  committed  him,  as  we  thought,  nearly  as  fully  as
Madame  Blavatsky  and  Mr.  Dcanodar  are  committed,  to  the  existence
and  powers  of  the  Mahatmas,  turns  out  according  to  the  statements


248


Mr.  Hodgson's  Report


of  various  Theosophists,  to  be  altogether  untrustworthy  and  to  have
shown  evident  marks  of  insanity.  He  is  said  to  have  practised  Black
Magic  [!]  before  his  connection  with  the  Theosophical  Society,  which
he  left  long  ago,  and  became  a Roman  Catholic  ; he  is  now  a Mussul-
man. I must  conclude,  then,  that  the  strongest  apparent  evidence  for
the  existence  of  the  Mahatmas  comes  to  nothing  at  all.

Alleged  Precipitated  Writing,  ifec.

I now  pass  to  the  consideration  of  alleged  phenomenal  occur-
rences other  than  apparitions,  especially  those  connected  with  pheno-
menal letters  .and  the  alleged  precipitated  writing.

I will  first  draw  attention  to  the  statement  made  by  both  Mr.
Damodar  and  Mr.  P.  Sreenevas  Rao,  that  Shrine  phenomena  occurred
even  after  Madame  Blavatsky  left  Madras,  and  therefore  after  the
hole  in  the  party  wall  had  been  blocked  up,  according  to  M.  Coulomb’a
own  statements.

In  reply  to  my  inquiries  it  was  admitted  by  Mr.  Damodar  and  Mr.
P.  Sreenevas  Rao,  that  the  only  instances  of  these  later  Shrine  pheno-
mena are  the  two  given  in  .Appendix  XI.  It  will  be  noticed  by  the
reader,  on  reference  to  the  Appendix,  that  in  the  second  case,  where  a
letter  apparently  requiring  a specific  reply  is  placed  in  the  Shrine,  a.
considerable  interval  elapses,  and  is  probably  necessary,  before  the
answer  appears.  In  the  fir.st  case  no  letter  is  placed  in  the  Shrine,  no
specific  communication  is  required,  and  a Shrine  letter  can  be,  and  is,,
produced  without  delay.  It  will  be  obvious  to  the  reader  what  part
Mr.  Damodar  may  have  played  in  the  proceedings;  and  that  for  these
particular  phenomena  an  opening  in  the  back  of  the  Shrine  would  have
been  unnecessary.

It  had  been  alleged,  indeed,  that  when  Madame  Blavatsky  was  at
Madras,  instantaneous  replies  to  mental  queries  had  been  found  in  the
Shrine,  that  envelopes  containing  questions  were  returned  absolutely
intact  to  the  senders,  and  that  wlien  they  were  opened  replies  were
found  within  in  the  handwriting  of  a IMahatma.  After  numerous
inquiries  I found  that  in  all  the  cases  I could  hear  of,  the  mental  query
was  such  as  might  easily  have  been  anticipated  l)y  Madame  Bl.avatsky
indeed,  the  query  generally  was  whether  the  que.stioner  would  meet
with  .any  success  in  his  endeavour  to  become  a pupil  of  the  Mahatma,
and  the  answer  was  frequently  of  the  indefinite  and  oracular  sort..
In  some  cases  the  envelope  inserted  in  the  Shrine  was  one  whicL
had  been  previously  sent  to  he.adquarters  for  that  purpose,  so  that  the
envelope  might  have  been  opened  and  the  answer  written  therein,
before  it  was  placed  in  the  Shrine  at  all.  Where  sufficient  c.are  wag-
taken  in  the  preparation  of  the  inquiry,  either  no  specific  answer  was


On  Phenomena  connected  tcith  Theosophy.


249


given  or  the  answer  was  delayed.  Mr.  Ezekiel,  Theosophist  of  Poona,
has  described  to  me  the  details  of  a case  where  he  received  a
Mahatma  communication  intended  to  be  a reply  to  a specific  question
which  he  had  asked.  These  details  entirely  corroborate  my  conclusion
concerning  Madame  Blavatsky,  but  Mr.  Ezekiel  is  unwilling  that  they
should  be  published ; he  has  given  me  permission,  however,  to  state
that  the  following  passage  which  occurs  in  Madame  Coulomb’s
pamphlet  (p.  73)  is  quite  justified.

‘ ‘ There  is  another  phenomenon  which  I must  mention,  because  it  took
place  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Ezekiel,  whom  I shall  have  to  mention  again
later.  At  the  time  of  the  Anniversary,  among  the  many  delegates  that  came
on  this  occasion  was  the  above  gentleman.  He  was  in  company  with  otliers
in  Maclaine’s  apartment  when  a letter  fell  from  the  ceiling.  Mr.  Ezekiel
formed  the  natural  supposition  that  it  must  have  been  pulled  dowm  by  some
contrivance,  so  he  went  and  unburdened  his  heart  to  several  Fellows  of  the
Society,  giving  this  as  a great  secret.  However,  although  a secret,  it  came
to  Maclaine's  ears  and  she  immediately  asked  my  husband  to  take  out  the
screw-rings  through  which  the  string  had  passed,  and  stop  the  holes  wdth  a
little  paint  to  remove  all  traces  ; this  done,  she  called  some  one  to  sliow
how  ridiculous  the  accusation  had  been.”

This  letter  fell  in  Madame  Blavatsky’s  sitting-room,  and  was  proliably
arranged  in  the  same  way  as  the  “ phenomenal  ’ letter  prepared  for  me
by  the  Coulombs,  which  was  described  in  the  April  number  of  the
Journal,  in  the  words  of  a letter  written  by  me  from  India,  as
follows  : —


Madras,  January  Qth,  1885.

This  morning  I called  upon  the  Coulombs,  who  are  living  at  the  house
of  Mrs.  Dyer  in  St.  Thome.  I conversed  a short  time  with  M.  Coulomb
before  Madame  Coulomb  appeared.  In  the  course  of  the  conversation  that
follow'ed  I remarked,  concerning  certain  cases  of  premonition,  that  I had  no
satisfactory  theory  at  present  to  account  for  them.  At  this  moment  some-
thing white  appeared,  touching  my  hair,  and  fell  on  the  floor.  It  was  a
letter.  I picked  it  up.  It  was  addressed  to  myself.  M.  and  Madame
Coulomb  -were  sitting  near  me  and  in  front  of  me.  I had  observed  no  motion
on  their  part  wliich  could  account  for  the  appearance  of  the  letter.  Examin-
ing the  ceiling  as  1 stood  I could  detect  no  flaw  ; it  ai:)peared  intact.  On
opening  the  letter,  I found  it  referred  to  the  conversation  which  had  just
taken  place.  I transcribe  the  words  : —

‘ ‘ Because  the  existing  cause  of  to-day  foretells  the  effect  of  to-morrow
— a bud  assures  us  beforehand  the  full-blown  rose  of  to-morrow  ; on  seeing
tine  field  of  corn  in  which  are  buried  eggs  of  locusts,  we  are  to  foresee  that
that  corn  will  never  enter  the  granary  ; by  tlie  appearance  of  consumptive
father  and  scrofulous  mother  a sickly  child  can  be  foretold.  Now  all  these
causes,  which  bring  to  us  these  effects,  have  in  their  turn  their  effects  them-


250


Mr.  Hodgson's  Repori


solves,  and  so,  ad  infinitum ; and  as  nothing  is  lost  in  l!^aturo,  but  remains
iinin’essed  in  the  ahasa,  so  the  acute  perception  of  the  seer  beginning  at  the
source  arrives  at  the  result  with  exactitude.

“TfiE  New  Adept,  Columbus.”

M.  Coulomb  then  described  the  origin  of  the  letter.

A large  beam  supported  the  ceiling,  and  resting  on  this,  at  right  angles
to  it,  was  a series  of  small  beams  w'lth  S2mces  between  them.  These  spaces
were  filled  with  blocks  of  wood,  with  mortar  to  keejr  them  in  jdace.  Part
of  this  mortar  had  been  scraped  out  on  the  toi)  of  the  large  beam  and  between
two  smaller  ones,  so  that  a letter  could  be  inserted  and  lie  flat  on  the  toji  of
tlie  large  beam.  Round  the  letter  was  twice  jiassed  a piece  of  thread  of  the
same  colour  as  the  ceiling.  One  end  of  the  thread  remained  loose  on  the
letter,  the  other  end  was  in  the  hand  of  a person  outside  the  room.  The
thread  ran  from  the  letter,  close  to  the  ceiling,  jmssed  outside  and  hung
down.  I was  sitting  under  the  main  beam.  The  subject  of  conversation
Avas  led  up  to,  and  at  the  given  signal  (a  call  to  the  dog)  the  confederate  in
the  verandah  beyond  pulled  tire  thread  and  the  letter  fell.  The  confederate
drew  the  thread  entirely  away  and  left  the  spot.  The  crevice  for  the
letter  might,  in  a ferv  moments,  have  been  stoiijAed  up  and  covered  rvith
dust,  so  that  no  aperture  Avhatever  appeared  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the
ceiling.

The  ceiling  of  Maclaine  Blavatsky’s  sitting-room  was  constructed  in
the  same  wmy  as  the  one  liere  described,  and  would,  therefore,  be  suited
for  the  occurrence  of  similar  jAhenomena.  Besides  the  letter  received
by  Mr.  Ezekiel,  the  letter  mentioned  in  Aispenclix  V.  also  fell  in  this
room.  I examined  the  beam,  and  observed  a crevice  well  suited  for  the
production  of  the  ijhenomenon ; this  crevice  Avas  still  in  existence  Avhen
I left  Madras.

In  connection  witli  phenomenal  incidents  various  envelopes  liave
been  shown  to  me  Iry  Theosophists  Avhicli  Avere  sujiposed  to  have  been
completely  fastened,  but  from  all  of  these  the  contents  might  have  been
in  my  opinion  CAmn  more  easily  abstracted  than  from  the  sealed
envelope  described  in  detail  in  Appendix  V.,  Avhich  presented  clear
traces  of  Iiaving  been  surreptitiously  opened  by  the  withdraAval  of  tlie
right  flapi,  Avhich  had  just  escaped  being  securely  held,  if  held  at  all,
by  the  Avax.  In  the  case  of  one  large  sealed  envelope  shoAvn  to  me  by
a prominent  native  Theosophist,  the  wax  held  the  upper  and  loAver
flaps  only,  and  hardly  came  AAuthin  a quarter  of  an  inch  of  the  side
flaps ; the  crumjAling  suggested  that  the  right  flap)  here  also  had  been
AvithdraAvn.

After  hladame  Blavatsky’s  departure  for  Europe  the  Mahatma
communications — Avith  the  tAvo  exceptions  already  mentioned — Avere
found,  not  in  the  Shrine,  but  in  A-arious  other  places  about  the  house,
chiefly  the  office-room.  The  accounts  of  many  cases  of  this  kind  wei’e
published  in  our  Eirst  Report,  I made  careful  inquiries  concerning


251


On  Phenomena  connected  icith  Theosophy.

all  of  them,  and  found  that  in  every  instance  the  letter  might  have  been
easily  placed  by  Mr.  Damodar.

In  one  case  mentioned  by  Mr.  Babajee,  where  he  found  a letter  upon
liis  desk  in  the  office-room,  he  wrote  ; —

“ On  approaching  my  desk,  I saw  distinctly  an  envelope  and  paper
forminy  themselves.”  In  his  account  to  me,  however,  he  says  only  that
“ the  letter  appeared  to  increase  in  size  as  he  approached  his  desk  ” !

There  are,  I think,  only  two  instances  among  those  given  in  our
First  Report,  where  the  modus  operandi,  if  Mr.  Damodar  were  the
agent,  will  not  be  obvious,  and  I shall  briefly  describe  these.

Our  evidence  for  them  is  an  account  written  by  Mr.  Babajee  and
forwarded  through  Dr  Hartmann  to  IMr.  Myers  for  the  Committee,
and  after  what  I have  said  as  to  the  value  of  Mr.  Babajee’s  evidence,  it
may  seem  unnecessary  to  investigate  them  furthei’.  Still,  as  they  seem
to  me — the  second  especially — to  form  an  interesting  sample  of  the
kind  of  evidence  which  is  apparently  thought  at  the  headquarters  of
the  Theosophical  Society  to  be  valuable,  I will  give  them.  The  first  is
as  follows : —

“ On  or  about  the  Isfc  August,  1884,  I vas  examining  whether  the  wrap-
jjers  addressed  to  subscribers  (to  The  Theosophist)  were  correct,  sitting  in  the
I'oom  next  to  our  office-room  ; on  a large  camp  table  were  spread  tlie
addressed  wrappers.  With  some  noise  fell  a heavy  packet  (with  a covering
letter  to  me)  on  the  wrappers.  The  letter  contained  some  wholesome  and
timely  advice  to  me,  and  directed  me  to  hand  over  the  i:>acket  to  Mr.  St.
Ceorge  Lane-Fox.  I accordingly  gave  it,  and  found  that  in  the  packet  was  a
Chinese  envelope  and  letter  addressed  both  to  Dr.  F.  Hartmann  and  to  Mr.
Lane-Fox.  When  the  packet  fell  on  my  table,  there  was  nobody  then  in  tlie
room  or  in  the  office-room.  I was  alone.  The  letter  and  contents  were  in
the  well-known  handwritings  of  Mahatma  Root  Hoomi  and  of  B.D.S.”

I found  from  Mr.  Babajee  that  Mr.  Damodar  was  reclining  on  a
couch  outside  the  office-room,  and  adjoining  its  door.  Afr.  Babajee  was
sitting  with  his  back  turned  partly  towards  the  direction  of  the  spot
■occupied  by  Mr.  Damodar,  in  such  a position  that  no  movement  of
Mr.  Damodar’s  need  have  been  observed  by  him.  The  two  rooms  are
■divided  by  a partition  about  seven  feet  high,  the  lower  part  o which
is  zinc,  the  upper  part  being  formed  of  wire  trellis-work.  The  rooms
nre  twice  as  high  as  the  partition.  An  object  might  easily  be  thrown
from  the  office-room  entrance  so  as  to  fall  on  the  table.

The  other  case  is  the  following  : —

“ M.  R.  By.  G.  Sreenivas  Row  Garu,  Side  Registrar  of  Cumbum,
Kurnool  District,  India,  wrote  a letbm,  dated  15th  January,  1884,  to  the
address  of  Damodar,  who  gave  it  to  me  for  reply.  Early  in  the  morning,  at
7 a.m.,  I arranged  all  the  papers  to  be  answered  on  my  desk,  with  which

s 2


252


Mr.  Hodgson's  Report


nobody  ever  interferes.  I put  this  letter  of  Sreenivas  Row  in  a prominent
place  on  the  table,  and  then  after  locking  the  office-room  and  taking  the  key
witli  myself,  I went  out  to  take  a bath  ; at  about  8 a.m.  I returned  and
opened  the  office  door  ; on  approaching  my  table,  what  do  I find  ? Endorse-
ment on  Sreenivas  Row’s  letter  in  blue  pencil,  in  the  handwriting  of
Mahatma  K.H.,  ordering  me  to  answer  the  letter.  There  is  not  the  least
possibility  of  doubt  in  this  case.”


After  reading  this,  what  was  my  surprise  to  find  that  the  room
whicli  I have  just  described,  next  to  the  office-room,  and  divided  from
it  only  by  the  partition  reaching  half-way  to  the  ceiling,  was  never
locked,  and  that  there  is  no  lock  to  the  door,  while  a child  might  climb
from  the  table  over  the  partition  into  the  office-room  ! Truly  “there  i.s
not  the  least  possibility  of  doubt  in  this  case  ” that  the  phenomenon
might  have  been  produced  by  normal  means.

Various  other  letter-phenomena  which  were  mentioned  in  our  First
Report,  had  occurred  at  the  headquarters  in  Bombay.  Several  letters
liad  fallen  in  the  guest-chamber,  which  adjoined  Madame  Blavatskv’s
bedroom,  in  Crow’s  Nest  Bungalow.  Among  these  were  the  phenomena
I’ecounted  by  Professor  Smith,  Mr.  Shroff,  and  Mr.  Bal  Nilaji  Pitale
(see  “ Hints  on  Esoteric  Theosophy  ”),  and  that  described  by  Mr.
Sinnett  in  “ The  Occult  World,”  fourth  edition,  p.  120.  The  ceiling  of
this  room  is  boarded,  not  plastered  ; and  the  remark  which  we  made
in  our  First  Report,  that  all  accounts  of  letters  falling  in  such
places  must  be  regarded  with  suspicion,  I found  to  be  quite  justified.
In  Mr.  Shrofl’s  account  it  is  stated  that  the  wooden  ceiling  of  the
room  was  perfectly  intact.  Mr.  Shroff  informed  me  that  the  account
was  drawn  up  in  the  first  instance  by  himself,  and  thnt  afterwards
some  passages  were  added  and  alterations  made  at  the  suggestion
of  others  present.  He  did  not  appear  to  have  made  any  “examination” ;
he  said  that  he  had  “ looked  up  at  the  ceiling,”  that  he  had  been  posi-
tive beforehand  about  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena,  and  that  he
did  not  care  to  scrutinise  svith  the  eye  of  a critic.


M.  Coulomb  asse?.ted,  befoi’e  I went  to  Bombay,  that  in  a garret
above  this-  room  a ti'ap  was  fixed  with  a string  running  from  it  into
another  room.  The  letter  was  placed  in  the  trap  just  above  one  of  the
interstices  between  the  boards  of  the  ceiling,  and  on  a given  signal,  the
•string  was  pulled  and  the  letter  fell.  On  one  occasion,  when  J udge
Gadgill  was  present,  the  trap  would  not  work,  and  M.  Coulomb
had  hirasslf  ascended  the  garret  and  pushed  the  letter  down.  He
described  the  garret  particularly,  the  entrance  to  which  is  through  a
trap-door  in  the  ceiling  of  Madame  Blavatsky’s  bedroom.  The  trap,  he
asserted,  was  taken  away  when  J udge  Gadgill  desii’ed  to  inspect  the
case  where  Judge  Gadgill  was  present  is  mentioned  by


garret.  The


On  Phenomena  connected  with  Theosophy.


253


Colonel  Olcott  in  his  deposition,  but  as  there  given,  is  likely  to  be  very
misleading.  He  said  : —

“ Judge  Gadgill,  and  one  or  two  others,  knowing  that  they  had  to  deal
with  some  veiy  difficult  sceptics  at  Baroda,  who  would  demand  if  they  had
taken  the  precaution  to  examine  the  premises  and  see  if  the  letter  could
have  been  delivered  by  any  mechanical  device,  thereupon  made  a search  of
the  place,  and  even  got  a ladder  and  went  upon  the  tiled  roof.  He  will  tell
you  that  the  examination  made  then,  and  a subsequent  and  more  careful  one,
which  was  made  in  my  own  presence  and  with  my  assistance— for  I held  the
ladder — left  no  ground  for  suspicion  of  bad  faith.”

How  the  tiled  roof  spoken  of  was  above  the  garret,  and  there  is  not
the  slightest  trace  of  any  suspicious  circumstance  discoverable  from
there.  Moreover,  part  of  the  hill  very  closely  adjoins  thebungalowq  so
that  it  is  but  a short  step  from  the  bank  to  the  tiled  roof,  and  to  speak
of  getting  a ladder  and  going  upon  the  tiled  roof  is  quite  as  absurd  as
to  speak  of  getting  a ladder  and  going  upon  the  sofa.

According  to  M.  Coulomb,  when  Mr.  Gadgill  requested  to  examine
the  garret  Madame  Blavatsky  ordered  the  only  available  ladder  to  be
hidden,  so  that  Mr.  Gadgill  was  unable  to  examine  the  garret  at  the
time ; and  before  he  made  his  “ subsequent  and  more  careful  ” exami-
nation, having  obtained  a ladder  for  the  pui’pose,  M.  Coulomb  had
removed  the  trap,  filled  the  interstices  with  bits  of  bamboo  and  stick
and  dust,  and  endeavoured  to  make  the  garret  look  as  though  it  had
been  entirely  undisturbed  for  a long  time.

After  my  return  from  Bombay,  Colonel  Olcott  gave  me  another
account  of  the  incident,*  in  which  he  said  that  he  was  not  at  Bombay
when  the  letter  fell ; that  he  wms  told  that  Judge  Gadgill  wmot  on  the
tiled  roof  ;that  it  was  a week  or  so  later  when  Judge  Gadgill  examined
the  garret ; that  he  (Colonel  Olcott)  held  the  ladder  to  steady  it,  as  it
was  placed  on  a table  to  enable  the  trap-door  to  be  reached,  and  that  he
told  Judge  Gadgill  to  first  look  at  the  joinings  of  the  boards  and  see  if
they  were  not  choked  wfith  cobwebs,  dust,  itc.,  thus  showing  that  they

* Another  statement  made  by  Colonel  Olcott  in  his  deposition  concerning
the  above  incident  is  wmrthy  of  remark.  He  said  : “ One  of  those  present
suddenly  called  attention  to  a collection  of  vapour  that  had  that  instant
appeared  in  the  air  up  towards  the  corner  of  the  room  ; and  all  present,  looking,
saw  this  take  the  form  of  a letter.”  The  letter  which  fell  was  addressed,  “ To
Tookaram  and  Others,”  according  to  the  account  given  to  me  by  Mr.  Tookaram
Tatya  himself  ( “ merchant  and  commission-agent,  and  the  active  member
w’orking  at  the  Homoeopathic  Charitable  Dispensary  established  at  Bombay
under  the  auspices  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  and  practising  mesmerism  in
its  curative  branch  both  at  home  and  at  the  dispensary”).  Concerning  the  fal
of  the  letter,  Mr.  Tookaram  states : “ The  grandson  of  lyalu  Naidu  said
saw  a flash  of  light  near  the  ceiling,  which  contracted  into  a lei  ter,  and  fel
fluttering  on  the  floor.  I saw  the  letter  just  as  it  struck  the  flnor.”

How  a little  dust  can  blind  one’s  eyes  !


254'


3L'.  Hocigmis  Report


could  not  have  heen  used  for  pushing  letters  through.  I neglected  to '
ask  Colonel  Olcott  whether  this  suggestion  originated  from  himself  or'
from  Madame  Blavatsky.

I examined  carefully,  when  I was  at  Bombay,  the  room  and  the
garret,  the  entrance  to  which  is  through  a trap-door  in  the  ceiling  of
what  was  Madame  Blavatsky’s  bedroom.  The  appearance  of  the
garret  corresponded  so  accurately  with  M.  Coulomb’s  detailed  descrip-
tion as  to  convince  me  that  he  was  familiar  with  it.  Some  of  the
interstices  in  the  ceiling  were  open  ; others  had  evidently  been  carefully
tilled  with  bits  of  stick  and  dust,  and  I dropped  several  pieces  of
Ijamboo  which  I found  in  the  garret,  and  which  were  more  than  a
fj^uarter  of  an  inch  thick,  through  one  of  the  interstices.  A copy  of  our
Proceedings  might  easily  have  been  pushed  through,  and  interstices
were  plainly  A'isible  in  the  ceiling  from  below.  I was  unfortunately
unable  to  see  Judge  Gadgill  himself,  but  after  my  examination  of  the
room  I felt  that  he  could  probably  have  added  little  important  evidence.

There  were  also  instances  of  objects  falling  in  a room  roofed  by  a
ceiling-cloth,  which  was  occupied  by  Colonel  Olcott  in  another  house;  one .
of  these  (from  “ Hints  on  Esoteric  Theosophy  ”)  was  given  in  our  Eirst
Report.  I did  not  see  this  room,  but  Colonel  Olcott,  in  reply  to  my
inquiries,  informed  me  that  no  examination  of  the  ceiling-cloth  was  made,
so  that  Madame  Coulomb’s  statement  that  the  card  which  came  fluttering
down  was  pushed  from  above  through  a slit  made  in  the  ceiling-cloth  is.
very  probably  correct. -

But  cases  had  occurred,  not  only  of  the  appearance,  but  of  the
disappearance  of  letters.  Chief  among  these  was  the  disappearance  of
the  packet  in  the  Vega  case.  This  incident  is  described  in  “ Hints  on
Esoteric  Theosophy.”  It  was  alleged  that  a letter  was  conveyed  by  a
Mahatma  from  Mr.  Eglinton  on  the  steamship  Vega,  between  Colombo
and  Aden,  to  Madame  Blavatsky  at  Bombay,  and  again  from  Bombay
to  Mrs.  Gordon  at  Howrah.  It  is  clear  from  the  account  of  this
occurrence,  as  we  pointed  out  in  our  Eirst  Report,  that  there  was  no
l)roof  whatever  of  identity  between  the  letter  received  at  Bombay  and
that  shown  on  the  Vega.  The  fall  of  the  letter  in  Bombay  is  somewhat  <
striingely  described  in  the  following  certificate.  (See  “ Hints  on  Esoteric
Theosophy.”)

“At  8 p.m.  (Bombay  time),  on  Friday,  the  24th  March,  1882,  we  were
spending  our  time  with  Madame  Blavatsky  in  the  room  as  the  wind  was
blowing  powerfully  outside.  Madame  told  us  that  she  felt  that  something
would  occur.  The  whole  party,  consisting  of  7 persons,  then  adjourned’
on  the  terrace,  and  within  a few  minutes  after  our  being  there  we  saw  a>
letter  drop  as  if  from  under  the  ^ roof  above.  Some  of  us  saw  the  letter :
coming  slanting  from  one  direction  and  drop  quite  opposite  to  where  it  came
from . The  letter,  on  being  opened,  was  found  to  contain  a closed  envelope


On  Phenomena  connected  tcith  Phconophy.


255


to  the  address  of  Mrs.  Gordon,  Howrah  ; on  the  reverse  side  were  three
crosses  f ff  in  pencil.  The  envelope  was  of  bluish  colour  and  thin.  The  open
letter  written  in  red  pencil  contained  certain  instructions  to  Madame
Blavatsky,  and  accordingly  she  put  the  envelope,  together  with  three  visiting
cards,  and  strung  them  all  with  a blue  thread  of  silk  and  put  the  packet  as
directed  on  a bookcase,  and  within  5 minutes  after  it  was  put  there  it
evaporated,  to  our  no  small  surprise.

“ K.  M.  Shroff,

“ Vice-Presidmit  Bombay  T.  S.

“Gwala  K.  Deb,  F.T.S,


“ Damodar  K.  Mavalankar,  F.T.S.
“Martandrew  B.  Nagnatk,  F.T.S.

“ Dorab  H.  Bhartjcha,  F.T.S.

“Bhavani  Shankar,  F.T.S.”

“ The  packet  was  taken  away  from  the  bookcase  at  21  minutes  past  8
X-).!!!.  (9,  Madras  time).  A letter  from  Mr.  Eglinton  to  myself  was  also
received  by  me.  In  it  he  confesses  to  a firm  belief  in  the  ‘ Brothers.  ’ Speaks
of  Koot  Hoomi  having  visited  him  two  nights  ago  (the  22nd)  on  the

“ H.  P.  Blavatsky.”


Mr.  Martandrao  B.  Hagnath  and  Mr.  Bliavani  Shankar,  whom  I
questioned  at  Madras,  could  give  but  little  additional  information.
Mr.  Martandrao  said  that  he  first  saw  the  letter  in  the  air  at  about
10  feet  from  the  floor.  Mr.  Bhavani  (concerning  whom  see  p.  261  and
Appendix  IX.)  said  that  he  first  saw  the  letter  as  it  sti’uck  the  floor  of
the  verandah,  that  it  contained  an  enclosure  to  Madame  Blavatsky
beginning  “ Old  rvoman  get  up,”  and  ordering  her  to  get  some  cards
of  her  own,  and  sew  them  up  wdth  the  letter  with  green  thread,  and
put  the  packet  on  the  top  of  a large  cupboard  ; that  the  packet  was ;
placed  there  as  directed,  and  in  about  one  minute  afterwards  it  had
disappeared.  Mr.  Shroff,  whom  I saw  in  Bombay,  was  unable  at  first
to  recollect  the  incident  at  all,  and  when  he  did  recollect  it,  v-as  unable
to  give  me  any  details.

]\Ir.  Dorab  H.  Bharucha,  medical  student,  Avhom  I also  saw  in
Bombay,  said,  in  reply  to  my  inquiries,  that  he  saw  the  letter  in  the  air,
that  when  he  first  saw  the  letter  it  was  close  to  the  branches  of.  a ^
neighbouring  tree,  and  that  it  came  in  such  a way  that  it  might  have
been  thrown  from  the  tine.  It  should  be  noticed  that  no  opportunity
was  given  to  any  of  the  witnesses  to  place  any  test  marks  on  the  packet.*

* It  is  the  more  important  to  notice  this,  because  in  describing  the  incident
in  “ The  Occult  World,”  4th  ed.,  p.  132,  Mr.  Sinnett  says  the  cards  were  “written
on  by  them  at  the  time,”  an  c.vpression  Avhich  certainly  suggests  that  some  one
besides  Madame  Blavatsky  had  written  on  them.  That  this  was  not  the  c.aso
ma}'  be  inferred  from  the  above  accounts.  Moreover,  Mrs.  Gordon  describes  the
writing  on  the  cards  received  .at  Ilowrab,  but  makes  no  allusion  to  any  except
th.at  of  Madame  Blavmtsky  and  Mahatmas  Koot  Hoomi  and  il.,  so  that  if
others  did  write  on  them  .at  Bombay  there iva'i  a w'ant  of  corre.-^pondence  between
the  cards  seen  at  Bombay,  and  those  seen  at  Howrah.


256


Mr.  Hodgson^s  Report


It  was  to  Madame  Blavatsky  herself  that  the  instructions  were  given
in  “the  open  letter  written  in  red  pencil.”  Mr.  Bharucha  has  given  me
farther  details  which  throw  some  light  upon  the  evaporation  of  the
packet.  The  Avhole  pai-ty  entered  Madame  Blavatsky’s  sitting-room
after  the  letter  was  taken  up  ; and  when  Madame  Blavatsky  had  ful-
filled her  (own)  instructions,  and  placed  the  packet  on  the  bookcase,
the  whole  party  left  the  room.  Several  minutes  elapsed  before  they
returned  to  the  room,  and  when  they  returned  the  packet  had  dis-
appeared. Mr.  Bharucha  described  tbe  position  of  the  bookcase  where
the  letter  was  placed,  giving  me  a pencil  sketch  of  the  room.  He  did
not  know  that  any  opening  existed  on  that  side  of  the  room  where  the
bookcase  was  situated,  and  was  unaware  that  the  bookcase  stood  im-
mediately in  front  of  a double  venetianed  door,  which  communicates
with  a sort  of  alley,  part  of  which  formed  Babula’s  I’oom.  That  this
was  so  I had  ascertained  by  my  own  examination  of  the  room  at  Crow’s
Nest  Bungalow.  Probably  the  top  portion  of  the  venetianed  door  may
have  been  by  some  means  concealed  from  view.  M.  Coulomb  asserts
that  it  was  hidden  by  a piec“  of  carpeting,  and  this  would  account  for
Mr.  Bharucha’s  not  noticing  it.  The  Venetian  spaces  of  this  door  are
very  wide  and  allow  the  hand  and  most  of  the  forearm  to  be  thrust
through.  I presume,  therefore,  that  the  evapoi’ation  which  astonished  the
witnesses — I should  perhaps  say  the  non-witnesses — was  due  not  so
much  to  the  volatile  nature  of  the  packet  itself,  as  to  the  protrusile
capacity  of  Babula’s  hand.  As  to  the  fall  of  what  purported  to  be  the
same  letter  at  Howrah,  in  the  presence  of  Colonel  Olcott  and  Colonel
and  Mrs.  Gordon,  in  the  room  which  had  been  occupied  by  Mr.
Eglinton,  it  may  of  course  have  been  accomplished  by  a confederate,
in  one  of  the  ways  already  described.

Other  instances  of  “ phenomenal  ” letters  will  be  found  mentioned  in
Appendices  XII.,  XIII.  and  XIV.  It  remains  only  to  add  here  that  in
those  cases  where  the  immediately  previous  subject  of  conversation  was
referred  to  in  the  Mahatma  communication,  there  is  no  difficulty  in
supjmsing  that  the  special  topic  was  led  up  to  by  Madame  Blavatsky.

“ The  Occult  World  ” Phenomena.

The  phenomena  described  by  Mr.  Sinnettin  “The  Occult  World”  now
demand  consideration.  And  first  I shall  deal  with  several  cases
selected  by  Mr.  .Siunett  in  his  deposition  to  the  Committee,  as  these
Avere  presumably  thought  by  him  to  be  of  special  importance.  The  first
case  described  by  INIr.  Sinnett  to  the  Committee  was  that  of  a letter
which  he  had  written  to  Ivoot  Hoomi.

“ Having  completed  the  note,  I put  it  into  an  envelope,  and  took  it  to
IMadame  Blavatsky,  who  was  sitting  in  the  drawing-room  with  my  wife.  1


On  Phenomena  connected  with  Thcosophtj.


257


said  to  her,  ‘ Will  you  get  that  taken,  if  you  can,  and  get  me  an  answer  ? ’
Slie  put  the  letter  into  her  pocket,  and  rose  to  go  to  her  room.  All  the
windows  were  open,  as  is  usual  in  India.  As  she  passed  out  I walked  to
the  drawing-room  door.  She  was  out  of  my  sight  but  for  an  instant  of  time,
when  she  cried  out,  ‘Oh,  he  has  taken  it  from  me  now.’  I will  undertake
to  say  that  she  was  not  out  of  my  sight  for  10  seconds.  Having  uttered
that  exclamation,  she  returned  to  the  drawing-room,  and  we  tlien  proceeded
together  to  my  office  at  the  back  of  my  house.  I went  on  with  what  I was
doing,  and  she  simply  lay  on  the  sofa  in  my  full  view.  She  remained  there,
jrerhaps,  for  between  5 or  10  minutes,  when,  suddenly  lifting  her  head
from  the  pillow,  she  pointed  to  it  and  said,  ‘ There  is  your  letter.’  I should
mention,  as  a little  fact  which  may  bear  upon  occult  physics,  that  the  moment
before  I distinctly  heard  a peculiar  rushing  sound  through  the  air.  It  was,  I
think,  the  only  occasion  on  which  I had  heard  such  a sound,  and  she  asked
me  afterwards  if  I had  heard  it.  The  letter  lay  on  the  pillow,  the  name
which  I had  written  on  the  envelope  being  scratched  out,  and  my  own  name
written  immediately  above  it.  The  envelope  was  unopened,  and  in  precisely
the  same  state,  with  the  difference  I have  mentioned,  as  when  I gave  it  to
Madame  Blavatsky.  1 cut  the  envelope  open,  and  found  inside  an  answer
to  the  question  which  I had  asked  the  Mahatma.”

From  this  accouirt  it  appears  that  Madame  Blavatsky  was  not  out
of  Mr.  Sinnett’s  sight  for  ten  seconds,  but  in  the  account  given  in
“The  Occult  World”(pp.  96-97)  Mr.  Sinnett  undertakes  to  say  only  that
she  had  not  been  away  to  her  own  room  thirty  seconds,  admitting  that
she  was  also  out  of  his  sight  for  a muiute  or  two  in  Mrs.  Sinnett’s  room.
After  this  I cannot  feel  certain  that  Madame  Blavatsky  may  not  have
been  absent  in  her  own  room  considerably  more  than  30  seconds,  nor
do  I feel  certain  that  JMadame  Blavatsky  may  not  have  retired  to  some
other  room  during  the  interval  of  “a  feAv  minutes”  which  Mr.
Sinnett  assigns  to  her  conversation  with  Mrs.  Sinnett  in  the  adjoining
room.  Even  apart  fronr  this  uncertainty,  I cannot  attach  any  impor-
tance to  the  case  after  finding  that  on  my  second  trial  I could  open  a
firmly  closed  ordinary  adhesive  envelope  under  such  conditions  as  are
described  by  Mr.  Sinnett,  read  the  enclosed  note  and  reply  to  it,  the
question  and  the  reply  being  as  long  as  those  of  Mr.  Sinnett’s,  and
re-close  the  envelope,  leaving  it  apparently  in  the  same  condition  as
before,  in  one  minute  ; and  it  appears  to  me  quite  possible  that  Madame
Blavatsky,  with  her  probably  superior  skill  and  practice,  might  have
easily  performed  the  task  in  30  seconds.  I do  not  suppose  that  IMr.
Sinnett  would  wish  to  maintain  that  the  “peculiar  rushing  sound
through  the  air  ” could  not  have  been  produced  by  ordinary  means  at
the  disposal  of  Madame  Blavatsky.

The  next  case  mentioned  by  Mr.  Sinnett  was  the  fall  of  a letter  in
the  guest-room  at  Crow’s  Nest  Bungalow^  and  is  thu.v  described  in  his
deposition.


2a8


Mr.  Hodgson’s  Report


“ I had  been  expecting  a letter  froinKoot  Hoomi,  but  on  my  arrival  at
Bombay  I did  not  find  one  awaiting  me  at  tlie  headquarters  of  the  Theo-
sophical  Society  there.  I had  written,  asking  him  several  questions.  I had
got  in  late  at  night,  and  on  the  following  morning  I was  walking  about  the
verandah  talking  to  Madame  Blavatsky.  We  went  into  a room  which  Iliad
occujiied  as  a bedroom  during  the  night — a big  room,  with  a large  table  in  the
middle  of  it.  I sat  down  while  we  were  talking,  and  she  occupied  another
chair  at  a considerable  distance  from  me.  I said,  ‘Why  on  earth  have  I
not  had  a letter  in  answer  to  mine  ? ’ She  replied,  ‘ Perhaps  he  will  send  it
to  you.  Try  to  exercise  your  will-power  ; try  to  appeal  to  him.  Ask  him
to  send  it  to  you.’  I retorted,  ‘ No,  I will  wait  his  time  ; he  will  send  sooner
or  later,  no  doubt.’  At  that  moment  a packet  fell  before  me  on  the  table.
It  was  a large  envelope  containing  at  least  30  pages  of  manuscript — heavy
draft  paper.  The  packet  only  came  into  view  a few  feet — two  perhaps —
above  the  table,  though  I do  not  attach  much  importance  to  the  precise
distance,  as  in  a case  of  that  sort  the  eye  cannot  be  certain  to  a foot.  The
loom  was  brilliantly  light,  this  being  in  the  morning.

Mr.  Gurney  : Did  Madame  Blavatsky  know  that  you  had  written
a letter  and  were  expecting  an  answer,  before  this  conversation  with  her  ?

BIr.  Sinnett  ; Certainly  ; but  the  point  to  which  I attach  importance  in
this  case  is  that  the  thing  happened  in  broad  daylight  in  a room  which  I had
myself  occupied  the  previous  night,  and  which  I had  been  in  and  out  of
during  the  whole  of  the  morning.  Everything  occurred  fully  before  my  eyes.'
It  is  impossible  that  Madame  Blavatsky  could  have  thrown  the  letter  with
lierhand.  All  the  circumstances  are  incompatible  with  that.  I was  not
writing  at  the  time,  but  talking  to  her,  so  that  the  idea  that  she  could  have
tlirown  the  letter  is  simply  preposterous.  (See  The  Occult  World,”  p.  120.)

It  might  be  suggested  that  the  remarks  made  by  Madame  Blavatsky
were  calculated  to  render  this  phenomenon  more  striking  than  it'
actually  was  if  Mr.  Sinnett  could  have  been  prevailed  upon  to  “ exercise'
his  will  power,”  and  it  is  to  be  inferred  from  Mr.  Sinnett’s  accounts  that
he  made  no  examination  whatev'er  of  the  ceiling  either  from  the  room
1 lelow  or  from  the  gai  ret  above.  According  to  M.  Coulomb  the  packet  had
been  anmiged  in  the  traj)  in  the  garret  before  the  arrival  of  Mr.  Sinnett
on  the  previous  evening,  but  as  INIr.  Sinnett  was  late  in  ai'riving,  the
phenomenon  was  deferred  until  the  following  moniing.  The  room  wdiere
the  letter  fell  has  already  been  described  (p.  2.54),  and  the  incident  needs
no  further  comment.

The  third  case  was  that  of  a sealed  envelope,  a case  which  Mr.
Sinnett  seems  to  have  regarded  as  “quite  complete,”  in  his  deposi-
tion to  the  Committee.  (See  “The  Occult  World,”  pp.  95-96.)  This
envelope,  which  contained  a letter  for  the  Brothers,  and  which
Mr.  Sinnett,  after  gumming  and  sealing,  had  given  to  Madame  Blavatsky,
was  in  Aladame  Blavatsky’s  possession  for  several  hours,  and  when  it  was
returned  to  Mr.  Sinnett,  he  found  it  “absolutely  intact,  its  very  complete
fastenings  having  remained  just  as  ” he  had  arranged  them.  Cutting


On  Phenomena  connected  icitli  Theomphy.


259


the  envelope  open,  Mr.  Sinnett  found  inside,  not  only  the  letter  it  had
previously  contained,  but  also  another,  from  Koot  Hoomi.  Mr.  Sinnett
showed  me  the  envelope.  The  fastenings  were  not  by  any  means
wliat  I should  call  complete  ; so  far  was  this  from  being  the  case,  that
owing  to  the  length  of  the  dap,  which  was  only  sealed  at  its  lower
extremity,  the  letter  might  have  been  abstracted,  and  re-inserted  with
other  letters,  without  even  steaming  the  envelope,  or  loosening  the
adhesion  of  the  gum  by  any  other  process ; and  if  the  gum  had  been
loosened,  say  by  careful  steaming,  the  abstraction  and  re-insertion  would
have  been  superlatively  easy.

The  last  case  given  by  Mr.  Sinnett  in  his  deposition  to  the  Com-
mittee, and  emphasised  by  him  as  a “ phenomenal  test,”  is  the
alleged  instantaneous  transportation  of  a piece  of  plaster  plaque
from  Bombay  to  Allahabad.  (“The  Occult  World,”  pp.  126-131.)  The
important  facts  are  briefly  these.  Colonel  Olcott,  accompanied  by  Mr.
Bhavani  Rao  (now  Inspector  of  the  IST.W.  Theosophical  branches),  was-
on  his  way  from  Bombay  to  Calcutta,  and  was  staying  with  IMr.  Sinnett
at  Allahabad  on  the  route.  One  evening,  on  his  return  home,  IMr.
Sinnett  found,  in  one  of  several  telegram  envelopes  awaiting  him,  a note
from  Mahatma  M.,  telling  him  to  search  in  his  writing-room  for  “a
fragment  of  a plaster  bas-relief  that  M.  had  just  transported  instan-
taneously from  Bombay.”  Mr.  Sinnett  found  the  fragment  in  the-
drawer  of  his  wilting-table.  A document  signed  at  Bombay  shows  that
somewhere  about  the  same  time  as  Mr.  Sinnett  got  this  note  a loud
noise,  as  of  something  falling  and  breaking,  was  heard  by  several
persons  as  they  sat  in  the  verandah  adjoining  Madame  Blavatsky’s
writing-room.  A search  was  immediately  made  in  this  room,  which
proved  to  be  empty,  but  a certaux  plaster  mould  was  found  lying  in
pieces  oix  the  floor.  On  fitting  the  pieces  togethei’,  it  was  found  that-
one  fi'agment  was  missing.  Shortly  afterwards  Madame  Blavatsky
went  into  her  other  I'oom  aixd  shut  the  door.  After  a minute’s  interval,-
she  called  Mr.  Tookai'am  Tatya  and  showed  him  a paper  containiixg  the
handwriting  of  “ Mahatma  M.,”  which  informed  them  that  the
missing  piece  had  been  taken  to  Allahabad.  The  I’emaining  pieces
wei’e  seixt  a few  days  later  to  Mi’.  Sinnett,  and  he  found  that  his  piece
“ fitted  in  pei’fectly.”  Of  course,  the  weak  point  of  the  case  is  tliat
there  is  no  proof  whatever  that  the  piece  of  plaster  received  by  IMr.
Sinnett  was  in  Bombay  when  the  peculiar  breakage  occurred,  for  it
appeal’s  from  the  statement  of  the  witnesses  at  Bombay  (shown  to  us
by  Mr.  Sinnett,  but  not  printed  complete  in  “ The  Occult  Amrld  ”)  that
the  only  evidence  for  the  previously  unbroken  condition  of  the  plaster
mould  is  that  “ IMadame  Blavatsky  on  inquiry  ascertained  [!]  from  the
servants  th-at  all  the  furniture  had  been  cleaned  and  ducted  two  days
before,  ai  d the  portrait  was  intact  then.”


260


Mr.  Hodgson's  Report


What  arrangements  would  be  necessary  for  tlie  phenomenon  if  it  was
a trick  ? INIadame  Blavatsky,  we  may  suppose,  begins  by  breaking  off  a corner
of  tlie  plaster  mould,  and  in  so  doing  breaks  the  mould  into  several  pieces.
After  some  difficulties,  M.  Coulomb  fits  the  pieces  together — all  but
ojie — and  keeps  them  in  place  by  a strip  of  cardboard  frame  fastened  in
.such  a manner  that  it  can  be  jerked  away  by  a string  pulled  from  out-
side the  room  where  the  mould  was  su.spended.  The  cardboard  strip
containing  the  mould  is  arranged  on  the  nail.  As  M.  Coulomb  is  going
witli  Mackxme  Coulomb  to  Poona,  he  instructs  Babula  how  to  pull  the
string.*  Tlie  fragment  of  plaster  withheld  is  given  (or  sent)  to  some
confederate  to  be  placed  in  Mr.  Sinnett’s  drawer,  together  with  a note
in  the  handwriting  of  “ Mahatma  M.,”  which  is  to  be  jilaced,  if  possible,
in  some  “ closed  ” envelope  at  Mr.  Sinnett’s  house ; an  hour  is  agreed
upon,  say  7 p.m.,  March  11th,  Bombay  time,  and  at  the  a2ij)ointed
hour,  Babula  pulls  the  string,  the  plaster  falls  with  a crash,  and  witnesses
are  there  to  liear  the  noise  and  fit  the  fragments  together.  Madame
Blavatsky  enters  her  inner  room  alone  and  provides  a Mahatma  note.
Meanwhile,  the  confederate  has  succeeded  in  inserting  the  note  in  a
telegram  envelope  (}:(Ossibly  by  careful  manipulation  of  the  eyelets  which
are  used  to  fasten  telegram  envelopes  in  India  ; jiossibly  by  substituting
eyelets  slightly  larger,  so  as  to  cox'er  any  flaws  made  in  the  j^ajDer  of  the
enveloj^e).

To  the  same  confederate  may  have  been  confided  tlie  two  Koot
Iloomi  notes  received  by  Mr.  Sinnett  while  Mr.  Bhavani  Rao  was  at
Allahabad.  There  is  most  assuredly  nothing  in  those  portions  of  the
first  of  tliese  which  Mr.  Sinnett  (juotes  (“Occult  World,”  jj.  130)
which  might  not  have  been  written  beforehand,  and  the  second  might
well,  so  far  as  appears  from  Mr.  Sinnett’s  account  of  its  contents,  have
been  prepared  in  anticipation  of  Mr.  Sinnett’s  suggestions.  It  simply
said,  Mr.  Sinnett  tells  us,  “ that  what  I proposed  was  impossible,  and
that  he  [Koot  Iloomi]  would  write  more  fully  tln-ough  Bombay.”!  This

* M.  Coiilonih  declares  that  tlie  arrangements  were  as  here  described.

f From  a contemporary  account  of  the  occurrence  sent  by  Mr.  Sinnett  to
Mr.  Hume,  on  Marcli  14th,  and  from  the  copy  of  a contemporary  letter  written
by  Colonel  Olcott  to  Mailame  Blavatsky  on  March  12th,  it  would  appear  that  on
.March  11th  Mr.  Sinnett  put  a note  addressed  to  Mahatma  M.  into  bis  drawer,
from  which  on  IMarcli  12th  it  liad  disappeared.  But  there  is  no  mention  of  any
note  to  Koot  lioonii  except  the  one  given  to  Mr.  Bhavani  Rao  on  the  13th,  and
it  is  implied  in  a copy  of  a letter  from  Mr.  Bhavani  Rao  to  Mr.  Damodar  on
March  14th,  that  this  was  the  first  letter  which  he  had  received  for  “trans-
mission” to  a “Brother.”  Is  it  possible  that  there  is  a mistake  in  “ The  Occult
\Vorld,”  and  that  by  the  first  note  to  Koot  Iloomi  is  really  meant  the  note  to
M.  jiiit  into  the  drawer?  The  documents  which  I have  mentioned  point  clearly
to  this  conclusion.  Wliat  seems  to  have  hapiiened  during  Mr.  Bhavani  Rao’s
visit  is  that  Mr.  Sinnett  wrote  a note  to  Mahatma  M.  on  IMarcli  11th,  and  not


On  Phenomena  connected  with  Theompluj.


2G1


is  curiously  like  the  en  cas  which  was  provided  by  Madame  Illavatsky
for  General  Morgan  in  connection  with  the  Adyar  Saucer  phenomenon,
and  which,  as  General  IMorgan  did  not  ask  any  nuestions,  remained  in
possession  of  tlio  Coulombs  (see  p.  213).  If  it  be  objected  to  my
explanation  of  tliese  Allahabad  phenomena  that  the  oidy  possible  con-
federate was  Mr.  Bhavani  Rao  himself,  I must  reply  that  I cannot
regard  this  objection  as  an  important  one.  I have  already  shown
grounds  for  believing  tliat  Madame  Blavatsky  has  obtained  siiflieicnt
influence  over  two  educated  young  natives  to  induce  them  to  join  her
in  tricks,  and  from  what  I know  of  Mr.  Bliavani  Rao,  or,  as  he  is  more
generally  called,  Bhavani  Sliankar,  whose  acquaintance  I made  wliiie  I
was  in  India,  I can  find  no  improbability  in  the  supposition  of  his  being
a third.  I have  given  in  Appendix  IX.,  and  in  Part  II , p.  297,  what
I regard  as  instances  of  deliberate  misrepresentation  on  his  part

I pass  now  to  tlie  remaining  plienomena  mentioned  by  Mr.  Sinnett
in  “The  Occult  World.”  We  may  first  take  tlie  “ro.ps”  and  tlie  “astral
bells,”  which  Mr.  Sinnett  seems  to  regard  as  constituting  important
test  phenomena.  I may  here  quote  a passage  from  “ The  Occult
World,”  p.  35

“With  such  a mighty  problem  at  stake  as  the  trustworthiness  of
the  fundamental  theories  of  modern  physical  science,  it  is  impossible

only  did  he  get  no  reply  whatever  at  the  time  to  this  note,  hut  it  led  to  no
communication  of  any  sort  at  the  time  from  Blahatma  i)/. ; he  received,  however,
a K.  H.  communication  on  March  12th,  and  on  IMarch  1.3th  addressed  a letter  to
Koot  Hoomi  in  which  he  suggested  that  certain  other  things  should  he  done,  and
which  he  gave  to  Mr.  Bhavani  Eao  to  he  “transmitted.”  On  hlarch  14lh,  he
received  from  iSIr.  Bhavani  Kao  a K.H.  communication  which  merely  .said,
“impossible  ; no  power  ; will  write  through  Bombay.”  The  latest  form  of  this
incident  as  published  by  IMr.  Sinnett  occurs  in  the  Appendix  to  the  fourth  edition
of  “The  Occult ’World,”  p.  155,  where,  referring  to  Mr.  Bhavani  Rao,  he  writes  t
“ During  the  visit  I speak  of,  he  was  enabled  to  pass  a letter  of  mine  to  the
Master,  to  receive  back  his  reply,  to  get  off  a second  note  of  mine,  and  to  receive
back  a little  note  of  a few  words  in  reply  again.”  I find  it  impossible  to  reconcile
this  account  with  the  documents  which  I have  mentioned,  and  it  appears  also  to-
dilfer  .slightly  from  the  account  which  Mr.  Sinnett  gives  on  p.  130,  from  which  I
infer  that  the  note  which  he  says  he  wrote  to  Koot  Hoomi  and  gave  to  Mr.
Bhavani  Rao  on  March  11th,  was  not  anstve7’ed  hy  the  Koot  Hoomi  note  presented
by  hlr.  Bhavani  Rao  on  March  12th.  If  I am  right  in  this  inference  I may
venture  to  make  another,  and  that  is  that  Mr.  Sinnett  was  himself  dissatisfied
at  not  receiving,  in  Koot  Hoomi’s  communication  of  March  12th,  a reply  to  his
letter  of  March  11th,  and  that  when  he  wrote  the  words  that,  he  did,  c//ter  o/f,
exchange  letters  with  Koot  Hoomi,  it  was  with  the  feeling  that  his  dissatisfac-
tion had  been  partly  if  not  altogether  removed  by  the  final  Koot  Hoomi  note.
Does  Mr.  Sinnett  think  that  this  final  note  referred  so  .specially  to  his  own
suggestions  that  it  could  not  have  been  prepared  before  his  own  letter  was
written  ? In  this  case  it  would  be  interesting  to  know  the  exact  words  of
bof/t,  documents,  and  to  examine  the  handwriting  of  the  Koot  Iloon  i reidy.


f


2(52


Mr.  Hodgson's  Report


to  2)vocee(l  by  any  other  but  scientific  modes  of  investigation.  In  any
experiments  I liave  tried  I liave  always  been  careful  to  exclude;  not
merely  the  probability,  but  the  possibility  of  trickery  ; and  where  it  has
been  impossible  to  secure  the  proper  conditions,  I have  not  allowed  the
results  of  the  experiments  to  enter  into  the  sum  total  of  my  conclusions.”

That  Mr.  Simiett  looks  upon  the  cases  we  have  just  considered  in
detail  as  instances  of  the  passage  of  matter  through  matter  or  of  its  pre-
precipitation or  reintegration,  forces  me  to  the  opinion  that  his  modes
of  investigation  have  not  been  what  I should  call  “ scientific,”  and  that
the  same  lack  of  due  caution  probably  characterised  liis  observation  of
test-conditions  in  those  instances  which  I have  not  been  able  to  investi-
gate personally,  as  in  those  instances  where  I have  liad  the  opportunity
of  examining  the  conditions  applied.  Tims,  for  example,  I have  not  taken
part  in  forming  a pile  of  hands  such  as  Mr.  Sinnett  describes  on  p.  33,
but  I cannot  attribute  any  importance  to  his  confident  statement
concerning  this  and  similar  incidents,  now  that  I have  examined  some
of  the  possibilities  in  otlier  cases  about  which  lie  speaks  with  equal,  if
not  greater,  confidence.  The  raps  occurring  wlien  Madame  Blavatsky
places  her  hands  upon  the  patient’s  head,  I have,  however,  experienced,
— though,  as  Madame  Blavatsky  sat  behind  me  and  placed  her  hands
upon  the  back  of  my  head,  I was  unable  to  watch  her  fingers.
She  had  not  informed  me  w'hat  she  intended  doing,  and  I conjectured
that  she  was  attempting  to  “mesmerise”  me;  the  so-called  “shocks”
which  I felt  impressed  me  simply  as  movements  of  impatience  on
the  part  of  INIadame  Blavatsky.  IMy  attention  being  then  drawn  to  them
as  “ phenomena,”  they  were  repeated,  but  I found  them  not  at  all  like
the  “shocks”  experienced  when  taking  off  sparks  from  the  conductor  of
an  electrical  machine,  as  IMr.  Sinnett  descrilies  tliem.  The  sharp  thrilling
or  tingling  feeling  was  quite  absent.  Unfortunately,  I am  unable  to
gently  crack  any  of  the  joints  of  my  lingers,  I can  but  clumsily  and
undisguisedly  crack  one  of  the  joints  of  my  thumbs,  yet  I find  that  the
qnfditjj  of  the  feeling  produced  when  I thus  crack  my  thumb-joint  against
my  head  exactly  resembles  that  which  I perceived  under  the  supple
hands  of  Madame  Blavatsky.  The  explanation  which  accounts  satisfactorily
for  my  own  experience  I do  not  pretend  to  ofter  as  an  assured  explana-
tion of  the  experiments  made  by  hlr.  Sinnett,  though  I do  not  by  any
means  feel  certain  that  it  may  not  be  sufficient.  It  is  true  that  Mr.
Sinnett  regards  the  hypothesis  as  “idiotic  ” (“Occult  World,”  p.  33) ; but
then  he  regarded  the  suggestion  that  the  letter  he  described  as
“ materialised,  or  reintegrated  in  the  air,”  was  an  outcome  of  any  con-
cealed apparatus,  as  “ grotesquely  absurd  ” (p.  120),  notwithstanding
the  facts  that  the  phenomenon  occurred  at  the  headquarters  of  the
Theosophical  Society,  that  the  ceiling  of  tlie  room  abounded  with
interstices,  and  that  the  garret  above  might  have  been  crammed  up  to


On  .1  Acn'oniena  connected  with  Thco-sojif/j/.


263


the  tiled  roof  ■with  all  sorts  of  conjuring  devices  for  aught  he  kiiew  to
the  contrary.  Mr.  Sinnett  treats  Avith  scorn  the  supposition  that
Madame  Blavmtsky  could  have  produced  either  the  “ raps  ” or  the
“astral  bells”  by  means  of  any  machine  concealed  about  her  person  ;
but  I cannot  help  thinking  that  the  latter  sounds  at  least  might
have  been  produced  in  this  ■\vay.  Madame  Coulomb  asserts  that  they
were  actually  so  produced,  by  the  use  of  a small  musical-box,
constructed  on  the  same  pi’inciple  as  the  machine  employed  in  con-
nection with  the  trick  known  under  the  name  “ Is  your  watch  a
repeater?  ” and  she  produced  garments  which  she  asserted  had  belonged
to  Madame  Blavatsky,  and  showed  me  stains  resembling  iron-mould  on
the  riglit  side,  slightly  above  tlie  waist,  which  she  affirmed  had  been
caused  by  contact  with  tlie  metal  of  the  machine.  She  declares  also
that  the  machine  Avas  sometimes  carried  by  Babula,  on  the  roof  or
in  the  various  rooms  of  the  house  or  outside,  and  when  used  by  Madame
Blavatsky  herself  was  worked  by  a slight  pressure  of  the  arm  against  tlie
side,  which  would  have  been  imperceptible  to  the  persons  present.  I
think  the  “ astral  bells  ” may  be  thus  accounted  for,  and  I must  remind
the  reader  of  an  important  consideration  which  Mr.  Sinnett  seems  to
have  overlooked — namely,  the  great  uncertainty  in  all  localisation  of
sounds  of  which  the  cause  and  mode  of  production  are  unknown, especially
pure  tones  such  as  he  describes  the  “ astral  bell  ” sound  to  be,  and  the
great  ease  of  inducing  by  trifling  indications  the  adoption  of  an  altogether
erroneous  opinion  concerning  the  position  where  the  sonorous  disturbance
originates.  Further,  we  may  suppose,  Avithout  any  extra A^agance  of
hypothesis,  that  Madeune  Blavatsky  may  possess  more  than  one  of  these
machines  alluded  to,  so  that  the  sounds  may  be  heard  in  different
places  at  the  same  time.  Yet  the  possibility  that  if  Madame  Blavatsky
had  one  such  machine  she  might  have  had  tAvo  does  not  seem  to  have
occurred  to  Mr.  Sinnett,  if  I may  judge  from  his  argument  on  p.  41.

“ Managed  a little  better,  the  occurrence  noAv  to  be  dealt  Avith
would  have  been  a beautiful  test  ” (“Occult  World,’’  p.  43):  for  a certain
class  of  readers  it  is  told  “not  as  a proof  but  as  an  incident,”  and  it
is  worth  a brief  consideration  from  this  point  of  view.  Mrs.  Sinnett
“ went  one  afternoon  Avith  Madame  BlaAmtsky  to  the  top  of  a neigh-
bouring hill.  They  Avere  only  accompanied  by  one  other  friend.”  While
there  iladame  Blavatsky  asked  Mrs.  Sinnett  “ what  Avas  her  heart’s
desire.”  As  Mr.  Sinnett ’s  corre.spondence  with  “ Koot  Hoomi  ” appears
to  have  begun  .about  this  tiine,'*^  it  is  probable  that  much  interest  Avas
excited  by  the  idea  of  receiving  communications  from  the  “ Adepts,”
and  it  cannot,  therefore,  be  regarded  as  at  all  unlikely  that  Mrs.  Sinnett

* Whether  he  had  received  his  first  Koot  Hoomi  note  is  not  manifest ; he
had  certainly  not  received  his  second.


231


3Ii\  Hodgson's  lirport


should  ask  as  she  did  “ for  a note  from  one  of  the  Brotliers.”  Moreover,
it  does  not  appear  that  Madame  Blavatsky  guaranteed  the  fulfilment  of
Mrs.  Sinnett’s  “heart’s  desire  ” until  she  knew  what  the  desire  was,
any  more  than  she  guaranteed  tlie  fullilment  of  ]\Irs.  Sinnett’s  wish
tliat  the  note  should  “ come  fluttering  down  into  her  lap,”  and  this
last  wish  was  not  granted.  “ Some  conversation  ensued  as  to  whethei
this  would  be  the  best  way  to  get  it,  and  ultimately  it  was  decided
that  she  should  find  it  in  a certain  tree.”  Mr.  Sinnett  does  not
lay  any  stress  upon  the  identity  of  the  j)aper  folded  up  by  Madame
Blavatsky  with  the  paper  of  the  pink  note  received  l)y  Mrs.  Sinnett,
nor  will  any  person  e.xperienced  in  strawberry  hunts,  or  familiar  with
leafy  trees,  be  in  the  least  degree  surprised  that  Mrs.  Sinnett  did  not  at
once  perceive  the  “ little  pink  note  ” upon  the  “ twig  immediately  before
lier  face.”  The  note  was  “ stuck  on  to  the  stalk  of  a leaf  that  had
been  (juite  freshly  torn  off,  for  the  stalk  was  still  green  and  moist — not
witliered  as  it  would  have  been  if  the  leaf  liad  been  torn  off  for  any
length  of  time.”  “ Length  of  time  ” is  vague.

The  incident  ought  to  be  instructive.  Colonel  Olcott  was  the  friend
who  accompanied  Mrs.  Sinnett  and  Madame  Blavatsky  to  the  top  of
the  hill,  where,  according  to  his  diary,  tliey  had  seen  on  the  previous
day,  “tlirough  a field-glass,  a man  in  wliite  making  signals”  to  them.
The  “ man  in  white”  may  account  for  the  expedition  to  the  hill ; he  may
also  account  for  tlie  ihnk  2iote  in  the  tree.  We  are  unlikely  to  discover
how  many  of  Madame  Blavatsky’s  pre-arrangements  were  never  carried
out,  owing  to  the  complete  failure  of  her  anticipations  ; but  the  case
befoi-e  us  clearly  illustrates  a partial  failure.  If  Mrs.  Sinnett  liad
made  some  other  answer  than  the  one  she  actually  made  to  the  question,
put  “ in  a joking  way  ” by  Madame  Blavatsky,  we  should  probably
have  never  heai’d  of  the  conversation  or  the  expedition  at  all.  Mr.
Sinnett  has  not  told  us  definitely  whether  it  was  Madame  Blavatsky
or  Colonel  Olcott  (whose  name  is  not  mentioned  by  Mr.  Sinnett  at  all
in  connection  with  the  incident)  who  objected  to  Mrs.  Sinnett’s  reque.st
that  the  letter  should  “ come  fluttering  down  into  her  lap,”  nor  has  he
told  us  what  the  exact  objection  was.*  It  is  implied,  however,  that
Madame  Blavatsky  pointed  out  the  tree  supposed  to  be  chosen  by  the
“ Brother.”  Why  did  she  first  point  out  the  wrong  tree  ? Perhaps  she
anticipated  that  Mrs.  Sinnett  might,  for  her  own  satisfaction,  suggest

* I have  seen  a ne\vs])aper  account  in  v hicli  it  was  said  that  Madame
Blavatsky  expressed  the  “Adept’s  ” opinion  tliat  if  the  note  were  to  drop  into
Mrs.  Siiinett’s  lap,  it  might  he  urged  afterwards  that  Madame  Blavatsky  had
managed  the  phenomenon  hy  sleight  of  liand,  and  that  therefore  he  (the  Adept)
proposed  pnKiaig  the  note  into  a certain  tree.  This  ohjection  was  not  made  in
cases  where  tlie  witnesses  happened  to  he  sitting  under  creviced  beams  or
intersticed  ceilings.


On  Phenomena  connected  with  Thco'iophy.


265


the  other  tree  ; or  perhaps  there  may  have  been  a mistake  between  her-
self and  the  “ man  in  white.”  The  note  said,  “ I have  been  asked
to  leave  a note  here  for  you,  what  can  I do  for  you  1 ” The  words  are
not  remarkably  relevant ; according  to  the  account  gi‘\’en  by  jMr.  Sinnett,
the  “ Brother ’’had  chosen  the  spot  himself.

We  “come  now  to  the  incidents  of  a very  remarkable  day,”  (“Occult
World,”  pp.  44-59),  that  of  the  Simla  picnic,  October  3rd,  ISSO — the  day
of  the  cup  and  saucer,  diploma,  bottle  of  water,  and  Mrs.  Hume’s
brooch.  The  account  given  by  Colonel  Olcott.  dated  October  4th,  1880,
and  sent  round  at  the  time  as  a circular  to  the  Fellows  of  the  Theo.sophi-
cal  Society,  throws  a remarkable  light  upon  ]Mr.  Sinmdt’s  narrative.
Thus,  whereas  from  Mr.  Sinnett’s  description  of  the  events,  it  would
seem  that  Madame  Blavatsky  had  no  share  iir  the  choice  of  the  spot
chosen  for  luncheon,  almost  the  reverse  of  this  appears  from  the
opening  sentences  of  Colonel  Olcott’s  account : —

‘ ‘ Great  day  yesterday  for  Madame’s  phenomena.  In  the  morning  she,  with

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Sinnett,  Major , Mr.  S.  M.,  Mrs.  II.,  and  myself  went  on

a picnic.  Although  she  had  never  been  at  Simla  before,  she  directed  us  where

to  go,  describing  a certain  small  mill  which  the  Sinnetts,  Major and

even  the  jampmds  (palki- wallahs)  affirmed,  did  not  e.vist.  She  also
mentioned  a small  Tibetan  temple  as  being  near  it.  We  reached  the  spot  she
had  described  and  found  the  mill  at  about  10  a.m.  ; and  sat  in  the  shade  and
had  the  servants  spread  a collation.”

I received  from  Colonel  Olcott,  not  only  a copy  of  the  circular  from
which  the  above  extract  is  taken,  but  a transcript  from  his  diary-
account,  and  also  further  oral  explanations.  From  these  last  it
would  appear  that  Madame  Blavatsky  and  X.  were  in  front  of  th(-
others,  and  that  Madame  Blavatsky  described  the  road  which  they  should
take ; that  it  was  Madame  Blavatsky  and  X.  who  together  chose  pro-
visionally the  spot  for  the  picnic  encampment ; and  that  Mr.  Sinnett
and  X.  then  walked  on  further  to  see  if  a better  spot  could  be  chosen,
and  decided  to  remain  at  the  place  where  the  halt  had  already  been
made.

As  this  place  appears  in  Mr.  Sinnett’s  account  as  a place  they  “ were
not  likely  to  go  to  ” (p.  49)  we  cannot  attach  much  weight  to  his  opinion
that  the  cup  and  saucer  were  of  a kind  they  “ were  not  likely  to  take.”

Probably  Madame  Blavatsky’s  native  servant  Babula,  an  active
young  fellow,  who,  I am  assured  on  good  authority,  had  formerly
been  in  the  service  of  a French  conjurer,  could  throw  even  more  light
upon  the  day’s  proceedings  than  Colonel  Olcott’s  account.  The  previous
abstraction  of  the  cup  and  saucer,  their  burial  in  the  early  morning,  the;
description  of  the  spot  to  Madame  Blavatsky,  the  choice  of  the
particular  service  taken,  are  deeds  which  lie  easily  within  the  accomplish-
ment of  Babula’s  powers.  Concerning  a later  period  of  the  day,  when


T


266


Mr.  Jlodgsou’s  Hcport


the  party  had  shifted  their  quarters  to  another  part  of  the  wood,  Mr
Sinnett  writes,  on  p.  51  : “X.  and  one  of  the  other  gentlemen  liad
wandered  off.”  From  Colonel  Olcott’s  accounts  it  appears  that  they  had
gone  back  to  the  previous  encampment  in  order  to  ascertain  if  there
were  any  traces  of  a tunnel  by  which  the  cup  and  saucer  might  have
been  previously  buried  in  an  ordinary  way,  and  that  when  they  returned
they  expressed  their  conviction  that  the  cup  and  saucer  might  have
been  so  buried,  but  that  the  ground  about  the  spot  had  been  so  disturbed
by  the  digging  and  throwing  of  earth,  that  evidence  of  such  a tunnel
could  not  be  found.  Before  the  party  returned  from  the  picnic  it  was

known  that  three  of  them,  viz.,  Mrs.  R.,  Mr.  S.  M.,  and  Major

(mentioned  by  Mr.  Sinnett  as  X.),  were  dissatisfied  witli  the
“phenomenon”;  the  three  who  came  away  believing,  were  Mr.  and
Mrs.  Sinnett  and  Colonel  Olcott, — all  of  whom  seem  to  liavc  previously
fully  attained  the  conviction  of  Madame  Blavatsky’s  good  faith.  Shortly
afterwards  Major  Henderson  wrote  a letter  to  the  Times  of  India,  in
which  he  stated  : “ On  the  day  in  question,  1 declared  the  saucer  to  be
an  incomplete  and  unsatisfactory  manifestation,  as  not  fulfilling  proper
test  conditions.  My  reasonable  doubt  was  construed  as  a personal
insult,  and  I soon  discovered  that  a sceptical  frame  of  mind  in  the
inquirer  is  not  favourable  to  the  manifestation  of  the  marvels  of
Theosophy  ....  I am  not  a Theosophist  nor  a believer  in  the
phenomena,  which  I entirely  discredit,  nor  have  I any  intention  of
furthering  the  objects  of  tlie  Society  in  any  way.”

The  concealment  of  the  diploma  and  the  management  of  the  bottle
of  water  would  have  been  still  easier  tasks  for  Babula  than  the  burying
of  the  cup  and  saucer  in  the  rooted  bank.  Against  Mr.  Sinnett’s  account
of  the  finding  of  the  diploma  by  X.,  I have  to  set  Colonel  Olcott’s  state-
ment that  the  particular  shrub  where  the  diploma  was  found  was
pointed  out  to  X.  by  Madame  Blavatsky,  this  statement  being  made  in
connection  with  tlie  passage  in  Colonel  Olcott’s  diary : “ She  points  to
a bit  of  ground,  and  tells  him  to  search  there.  He  finds  his  diploma
under  a low  cedar-tree.”  In  continuation  Colonel  Olcott
writes  : “ Later,  we  are  out  of  water,  and  she  fills  a bottle  with  pure
water  by  putting  the  bottle  up  her  sleeve.”  In  connection  with  this
incident  ]\Ir.  Sinnett  has  much  to  suggest  about  the  abnormal
stupidity  of  a certain  coolie  who  had  been  sent  with  empty  bottles  to  a
brewery  with  a pencil  note  asking  for  water,  and  who,  finding  no
European  at  the  brewery  to  receive  the  note,  had  brought  back  the
“ empty”  bottles.  It  was — apparently — one  of  these  “ empty”  bottles
thus  brought  back  that  Madame  Blavatsky  took  for  her  experiment.
Who  was  this  abnormally  stupid  coolie  ? Surely  not  Madame
Blavatsky’s  personal  servant  Babula  ? It  is  difficult  to  suppose  that
I\[r.  Sinnett  would  speak  of  Babula  as  a coolie,  and  he  could  hardly


On  Phenomena  connected  with  Theosophy.


267


make  a greater  mistake  than  to  attribute  abnormal  stupidity  to  Babula
rather  than  abnormal  cleverness.  And  yet  Babula  was  in  some  way
concerned.  Colonel  Olcott  wrote,  after  saying  that  wanting  some  tea
they  found  they  were  out  of  water  : —

“ Servants  were  sent  in  various  directions  but  could  get  none.  While
Babula  was  off  on  a second  search  Madame  quietly  went  to  the  lunch-baskets,
took  an  empty  water-bottle,  put  it  in  the  loose  sleeve  of  her  gown,  and  came
straight  to  where  we  were  sitting  on  the  grass.  The  bvttle  imsfuU  of  dearest
and  softest  imter,  of  which  we  all  partook.”

Granted  that  Babula  was  present,  the  fact  that  all  the  bottles  became
empty,  and  that  afterwards  one  of  them  became  full,  may  be  easily
accounted  for  without  the  necessity  of  supposing  that  there  was  anything
more  substantial  than  a smile  in  Madame  Blavatsky’s  sleeve.  It  is
curious  how  much  Babula  has  been  kept  in  the  background  of  Mr.
Sinnett’s  account  ; carelessly,  no  doubt,  and  not  carefully  ; but  then,  if
carelessly,  Mr.  Sinnett  must  be  charged  with  a grievous  lack  of  ordinary
perspicacity.

Finally,  came  the  “celebrated  brooch  incident.”  (“Occult  "World,”
pp.  54-59.)  Of  this  it  will  suffice  to  say  that  the  brooch  formed  one  of
several  articles  of  jewellery  which  Mrs.  Hume  had  given  to  a person
who  had  again  parted  with  them  to  another  who  had  “ allowed
them  to  pass  out  of  their  possession.”  It  is  an  admitted  fact
that  many  of  these  articles,  parted  with  at  the  same  time  as  the
brooch,  did  actually  pa.ss  through  Colonel  Olcott’s  hands  very
soon  afterwards  Colonel  Olcott  does  not  remember  seeing  the  brooch  ;
hut  that  Madame  Blavatsky  may  at  that  time  have  had  an  opportunity,
which  she  seized,  of  obtaining  possession  of  it,  is  obviously  highly  pi’obable,
though  there  is  no  absolute  proof  of  this.  It  is  at  any  rate  certain  that
she  entrusted  a brooch,  which  needed  some  slight  repair,  to  Mr.  Hormusji
S.  Seervai,  of  Bombay,  who  shortly  afterwards  returned  it  to  Madame
Blavatsky.  When  the  “ brooch  incident  ” occurred  later,  and  the
account  of  it  was  published  containing  a description  of  the  brooch,
Mr.  Hormusji  found  that  the  description  exactly  fitted  the  brooch  which
had  been  entrusted  to  him  for  repair  by  Madame  Blavatsky.  For  these
facts  I rely  chiefly  on  statements  made  to  me  personally  by  Mr.
Hume  and  Mi’.  Hormusji,  though,  indeed,  the  first  links  of  the  chain  had
been  previously  published  in  various  forms,  and  were  never  challenged,
and  I may  add  that  Mr.  Hormusji’s  testimony  is  confirmed  by  that  of
two  other  witnesses  who  remember  his  immediate  recognition  of  the
•description  given  in  the  account  of  the  “ brooch  incident  ” as  that  of  the
brooch  Madame  Blavatsky  had  given  him  to  be  repaired.  The  above
•outline  is,  I think,  specific  enough  to  lead  the  reader  to  a right  conclu-
■sion.  The  fact  that  Mrs.  Hume  chose  the  lost  brooch  as  the  object  to

V 2


Mr.  Hodgson’s  Report


268

be  brouglit  to  her  by  the  “ Brother,”  Mr.  Hume  is  inclined  to  explain
as  a case  of  thought-transference  to  Mrs.  Hume  from  Madame  Blavatsky,
who  was  probably  willing  intensely  that  Mrs.  Hume  should  think  of  the
brooch.  I do  not  dispute  this  opinion,  though  I cannot  regard  the
case  as  a proven  instance  of  telepathy  ; Madame  Blavatsky  may  have
had  enough  knowledge  of  the  history  of  the  brooch  and  enough  prac-
tical acquaintance  with  the  laws  of  association,  to  make  it  easy  for
her  to  sugge.st  that  family  relic  to  the  thoughts  of  Mrs.  Hume,  without
exciting  the  suspicion  of  the  persons  present,  who,  by  Mr.  Sinnett’s
account,  seem  to  have  been  as  far  as  possible  from  attempting  to
realise  what  a special  chain  of  reminiscence  may  have  been  quickened
into  vivid  life  by  Madame  Blavatsky’s  woi’ds.

It  must  not  be  forgotten,  in  dealing  with  these  cases,  that  we  do  not
knowhow  many  “phenomenal  tests”  inay  have  been  arranged  by
Madame  Blavatsky  which  did  not  succeed.  She  may  have  failed  in
leading  to  the  needful  topic  of  conversation  ; she  may  have  been  asked
for  objects  she  had  not  obtained,  or  could  not  obtain,  and  so  refused  on
one  pretext  or  another  to  comply  with  some  request  made ; she  may
liave  offered  an  answer  to  a letter  neither  she  nor  any  confederate  was
able  to  read,  and  failed  in  her  ISIahatma-reply  to  make  any  reference
whatever  to  the  specific  question  asked  in  the  undecipherable  document  j
she  may  have  been  requested  to  produce  phenomena  in  a way  diflercnt
from  tliat  already  prepared  ; she  may  not  have  provided  for  contingen-
cies such  as  the  absence  of  the  persons  required  for  the  experiment,  and
so  on.  There  are  samples  of  these  several  kinds  of  failures,  which  would,.
I presume,  be  regarded  by  Mr.  Sinnett  merely  as  interesting  “incidents.”
A notable  incident  of  this  kind  may  be  given  as  it  is  closely  related  to  the
next  group  of  “proofs”  to  which  we  pass  in  Mr.  Sinnett’s  “Occult
World.”  It  appears  that  Madame  Blavatsky,  for  the  benefit  of  Captaini
[Maitland,  had  professed  to  send  a cigarette  tied  up  with  her  hair  to  a
place  under  the  horn  of  the  unicorn  on  the  coat  of  arms  under  the  statue
of  the  Prince  of  Wales,  opposite  Watson’s  Hotel  in  Bombay.  Captain
Maitland  telegraphed  (from  Simla)  to  Mr.  Grant  in  Bomljay,  asking  him
to  look  immediately  for  the  cigarette.  Mr.  Grant  found  no  cigarette  in
the  place  described.  Madame  Coulomb  asserts  that  she  was  the  person  whe
was  to  have  put  the  cigarette  theic,  but  tliat  she  “ never  went  near  the
place.”  (“Some  Account,”&c.,by  Madame  Coulomb,  pp.  lG-18.)  Hence  the
failure, not  mentioned  by  Mr.  Sinnett.  The  Blavatsky-Coulomb  documents
snfliciently  discredit  the  cigarette  phenomena,  and  it  can  be  seen  at  once
that  those  quoted  by  Mr.  Sinnett  might  have  been  arranged  with
perfect  ease  by  Madame  Blavatsky.  In  the  first  case,  that  of  Mi’s.
Goidon,  the  “ place  indicated  ” as  the  place  where  the  cigarette  would
be  found  is  not  stated.  In  the  two  other  instances  given,  thn
cigarettes  were  found  in  places  whei’e  they  would  probably  remain  un-


On  Phenomena  eonnectcd  icitJi  Theomphij.


269


discovered  for  some  time,  unless  particular  search  for  them  were  made,
and  Madame  Blavatsky — or,  by  her  instructions,  Babula — might  have
deposited  them  tliere  previously.  Mr.  Sinnett  says  that  “for  persons  who
have  not  actually  seen  Madame  Blavatsky  do  one  of  her  cigarette  feats  it
may  be  useless  to  point  out  that  she  does  not  do  them  as  a conjurer
would,”  and  certainly  it  is  difficult  for  such  pei’sons  to  understand
tlie pi’ofound  conviction  svhicli  Mr.  Sinnett  displays  (“Occult  World,”
p.  63)  concerning  the  identity  of  the  corner  of  the  paper  torn  off  witli
the  corner  given  to  the  percipient,  in  the  face  of  such  sleight-of-hand
performances  as  he  himself  describes  : —

“You  take  two  pieces  of  paper,  and  tear  off  a corner  of  both  together,  so
that  the  jags  of  both  are  the  same.  You  make  a cigarette  with  one  piece,
and  put  it  in  the  place  where  you  mean  to  have  it  ultimately  found.  You
then  hold  the  other  piece  underneath  the  one  you  tear  in  presence  of  the
spectator,  slip  in  one  of  the  already  torn  corners  into  his  hand  instead  of
that  he  sees  you  tear,  make  your  cigarette  with  the  other  part  of  the  original
piece,  dispose  of  that  anyhow  you  please,  and  allow  the  prepared  cigarette  to
be  found.  Other  variations  of  the  system  may  be  readily  imagined.”

Mr.  Sinnt*;t’s  na'ive  remark  that  the  certainty  of  the  spectator  would
be  enhanced  by  the  pencil-marks  drawn  upon  the  cigarette  paper  before
his  eyes,  compels  me  to  suppose  that  his  experience  in  conjuring  must  be
very  limited.  For  it  appears  that  the  pencil-marks  -were  chosen  and
drawn  by  Madame  Blavatsky  herself  ; she  declined  to  let  Captain  Mait-
land “mark  or  tear  the  papers”;  otherwise  there  might  have  been  no
apparent  similarity  between  tlie  paper  mai-ked  and  that  which  had
already  been  deftly  rolled  by  Madame  Blavatsky’s  fingers,  and  was
lying  snugly  on  a shelf  inside  the  piano,  or  in  the  covered  cup  on  the
bracket.

Mr.  Sinnett’s  confidence  that  the  cigarette  feats  are  not  conjuring
performances  will  appear  still  more  singular  to  persons  who  have
practised  palming,  as  I have  myself  done,  and  who  read  the  following
sentences  from  the  accounts  given  on  p.  62  : —

“The  cigarettes  being  finished, Madame  Blavatsky  stood  up, and  took  them
between  her  hands,  which  she  rubbed  together.  After  about  20  or
30  seconds,  the  grating  noise  of  the  paper,  at  first  distinctly  audible,
ceased.”

“With  the  remainder  of  the  paper  she  prepared  a cigarette  in  the  ordinary
manner,  and  in  a few  moments  caused  this  cigarette  to  disappear  fiom  her
hands.”

In  short,  if  Madame  Blavatsky  does  not  do  her  cigarette  feats  as  a
conjurer  would,  the  descriptions  quoted  by  Mr.  Sinnett,  pp.  60-63,  must
be  fundamentally  erroneous.

The  next  case  for  our  consideration  is  the  Pillow  Incident.  (“  Occult


1270


Mr.  Modgson's  Regm-t


World,”  pp.  75-79.)  Mr.  Siimett’s  “subjective  impressions”  of  the
previous  night  appear  to  be  in  close  relation  with  the  incident,  if  not
to  form  part  of  it ; but  as  they  are  not  exactly  described,  I am  unable,
of  course,  to  deal  with  them.  If  they  were  neither  hallucination  nor
extreme  illusion  suffered  by  Mr.  Sinnett,  they  may  have  been  due  to
Madame  Blavatsky’s  boldness  and  cleverness,  in  which  case  the  cushion
may  have  been  manipulated  before  Mr.  Sinnett  spoke  of  his  impres-
sions that  morning.  And  here  again  appears  the  invaluable  Baljula,
who  was  probably  the  “Brother”  who  inserted  the  brooch  and  the  note
provided  by  Madame  Blavatsky,  in  the  jam  pan  cushion.  Was  it
a remarkable  fact  that  this  particular  cushion  was  chosen  ?
There  may,  indeed,  have  been  a second  object,  and  a note  in
some  adjoining  tree  in  case  a tree  had  been  chosen,  and  there
may  have  been  a third  buried  in  the  ground ; though  I think
it  unlikely  that  Madame  Blavatsky  would  have  taken  any
trouble  to  provide  for  these  contingencies,  even  if  there  were  other
objects  which  might  have  “hinged  on”  to  Mr.  Sinnett’s  subjective
impressions.  Simply  because  such  places  as  the  ground  and  the  tree
had  been  chosen  before,  they  were  not  likely  to  be  chosen  again ; it
was  not  so  exceedingly  improbable  that  the  firmly-made  “ usual  jampan
cushion  ” which  Mrs.  Sinnett  might  certainly  be  expected  to  take  with
her  should  be  selected.  Madame  Blavatsky’s  intimate  acquaintance
with  Mr.  Sinnett  may  have  enabled  her  to  anticipate  with  considerable
confidence  tliat  he  would  choose  the  cushion.  Besides,  if  it  should
unfortunately  not  be  chosen,  some  conversation  might  ensue  as  to
whether  tlie  place  fixed  upon  was  the  best,  and  ultimately  it  might  be
decided  that  they  should  look  for  it  in  one  of  the  cushions.  If  any
mistake  were  made  about  the  cushion,  Madame  Blavatsky  might  again
get  into  communication  with  Koot  Hoomi,  and  ascertain  that  it  was  in
Mrs.  Sinnett’s  cushion  that  the  object  was  being  placed,  as  in  the  case
of  the  “ incident”  discussed  above,  p.  264.

But  Mr.  Sinnett  gave  a note  to  Madame  Blavatsky,  apparently  just
before  starting  out,  for  Koot  Hoomi.  This  note  is  said  to  have  di.s-
appeared  when  they  were  about  half  way  to  their  destination,  yet  no
reference  to  this  was  made  in  the  Koot  Hoomi  note  found  in  the
cushion.  Let  us  suppose,  allowing  the  picnic-spot  to  be  only  half  an
hour’s  distance,  that  this  involved  only  a quarter  of  an  hour’s  interval
between  the  disappearance  of  the  note  and  the  choice  of  the  cushion,
followed  by  the  preparation  of  the  “ currents.”  What  happened  during
this  quarter  of  an  liour  ? We  read  in  other  places  of  instantaneous
transportations  of  solid  objects,  instantaneous  precipitations  of  answers
to  questions,  <fec.  I suppose  this  quarter  of  an  hour  would  be  accounted
for  by  the  blundering  of  a Chela,  the  Chela  being  Madame  Blavatsky.
It  will  hardly  be  pleaded  that  “ the  currents  for  the  production  of  the


On  Vhenomena  connected  trith  Thcomphii.


271


pillow  dali  ” had  been  set  ready  some  time  before  the  pillow  had  been
chosen,  unless  it  is  intended  to  take  refuge  in  the  surrejoinder  that  Koot
Hoomi  knew  tliat  Mr.  Sinnett  would  be  certain  to  choose  the  pillow,
and  could,  therefore,  pre-arrange  the  “ currents,”  but  that  Koot  Hoomi
did  not  know,  wlien  lie  thus  pre-arranged  the  currents,  what  Mr.
Sinnett  had  written,  or  even  that  Mr.  Sinnett  had  written  a letter  at
all.  All  this  ignorance  on  the  part  of  Koot  Hoomi,  notwithstanding
the  fact  that  Mr.  Sinnett’s  letter  was  in  answer  to  a Koot  Hoomi  note,
and  that  Koot  Hoomi  was  supposed  to  be  busy  with  phenomena  for
]Mr.  Sinnett’s  behoof  ! Mr.  Sinnett ’s  faith,  however,  does  not  seem  to
have  been  affected  by  this  little  hiatus  of  time,  though  it  seems  to  liave
been  stimulated  by  the  underlining  of  a “k”  in  the  Koot  Hoomi
cushion  note,  as  on  the  previous  evening  “ Madame  Blavatsky  had  been
saying  that  Koot  Hoomi’s  spelling  of  ‘ Skepticism  ’ with  a ‘ k ’ was
not  an  Americanism  in  his  case,  but  due  to  a philological  whim  of  his.”
(This  “ philological  wliim  ” is  not  always  remembered  ; I have  myself
seen  “sceptic”  spelt  with  a “c”  in  a Koot  Hoomi  document.)  That
the  note  found  in  the  cushion  bore  reference  througliout  to  the  con-
versation (we  will  suppose,  not  led  up  to)  of  the  previous  evening,  but
contained  not  the  slightest  allusion  to  Mr.  Sinnett’s  note  of  the  follow-
ing morning,  leads  me  to  the  inference  that  the  said  Koot  Hoomi  note
was  inserted  in  the  cushion  in  the  interval — and,  as  I liave  stated,
by  Babula.

The  Jhelum  telegram  case  might  be  explained  in  a variety  of  ways,
but  Mr.  Sinnett  has  not  given  us  the  detail  necessary  to  enable  us  to
form  any  conclusion.  The  incident  was  briefly  as  follows.  (“Occult
World,”  pp.  80-83).  Mr.  Sinnett,  before  leaving  Simla  for  Allahabad,
wrote  a letter  to  Koot  Hoomi  which  he  sent  to  Madame  Blavatsky,
who  was  at  Amritsur.  This  letter  was  written  on  October  24th,
1880.  Tlie  envelope  of  this  letter  was  returned  to  Mr.  Sinnett  by
INIadame  Blavatsky,  and  bore,  as  I understand,  the  afternoon  postmark
of  October  27th.  On  October  27th,  Mr.  Sinnett,  then  at  Allahabad,
received  a telegram  from  Jhelum  sent  on  October  27th.  Tliis  telegram
contained  a specifle  reply  to  his  letter.  Afterwards  Mr.  Sinnett  was
requested,  through  Madame  Blavatsky,  to  see  the  original*  of  the  Jhelum


* I may  here  mention  a curious  document  which  was  unintentionally  lent  to
me  for  several  days  by  Jlr.  Damodar.  I had  with  some  difficulty  obtained
several  specimens  of  Mahatma  writing,  and  in  an  envelope  enclosing  some  of
these  I afterwards  found  a slip  of  paper,  Avhich  had  not — as  I concluded  when
later  I discovered  that  it  was  not  enumerated  among  those  lent  to  me —
been  observed  in  the  envelope  when  Mr.  Damodar  gave  me  permission  to
take  the  specimens  away.  This  document  was  a single  small  fragment  of
thin  paper,  undated  and  unsigned.  On  one  side  of  it  were  written  the  following
w'ords  in  red  ink,  and  the  writing  resembles  that  attributed  to  Mahatma  M.  :


272  Jlr.  Hodgson's  Itrport

ti'Iegrara.  Tliis  he  succeedtil  in  doing,  and  found  the  writing  to  be  that
of  Koot  l]  .00111  i.

Iict  us  suppose  t!iat  Madame  Llavatsky  did  not  forge  the  “evidential”
postniai  k ; that  post-ollice  peons  were  none  of  tliem  bribed  to  mark*  or
delix  or  a letter  otherwise  than  in  due  coui’se  ; that  the  letter  enclosed  by
.Mi'.Sinnett  in  the  envelope  was  actually  despatched  in  that  envelope;  that
previous  to  its  despatch  the  contents  were  known  to  no  one  but  Mr.
iSinnett,  and  that  no  one  ac(]uircd  any  knowledge  of  the  contents  before
tlie  letter  readied  Madame  Blavatd\y’s  liands.  Under  these  circum-
•stanccs  it  would  still  have  been  possible  for  Madame  Blavatsky  to  have
road  the  letter,  and  to  have  telegraphed  the  right  reply  to  a confederate
in  Jhelum,  who  might  then  have  penned  or  pencilled  the  telegram  to  Mr
Sinnett  in  sufficiently  close  imitation  of  the  -Koot  Hoomi  handwriting
ordinarily  produced  by  Madame  Blavatsky,  to  have  deceived  Mr.  Sinnett
1 have  made  all  the  above  suppositions  for  the  purpose  of  drawing  tin
reader’s  notice  to  the  fact  that,  presuming  that  the  Jhelum  telegram  docu
nient,  afterwards  inspected  by  Mr.  Sinnett,  was  actually  the  documenl
handed  in  as  the  message  to  be  despatched  to  him,  we  should  require
some  further  evidence  of  the  identity  of  its  handwriting  with  that  of  Mr.
Sinnett’s  Koot  Hoomi  documents  generally,  than  that  furnished  by  the
<‘.vaminatlon  of  IMr.  Sinnett  himself,  who  appears  not  to  have  observed
tiie  numei’ous  traces  of  Madame  Blavatsky ’s  handiwoi’k  in  the  earliest
Ivoot  I [oomi  letters  he  received.

I tliink  it  probable,  however,  that  the  document  in  question  was,
as  a matter  of  fact,  written  by  Madame  Blavatsky  herself,  and  that  Mr.
Sinnett ’s  letter  reached  her,  either  in  the  envelope  in  which  he  enclosed
it,  or  in  nnoth.er,  before  the  27th.  It  surprised  me  considerably  to  find
that  Amritsur  was  only  21  hoursf  from  Simla,  and  Jhelum  only  8 hours
from  Amritsur,  Madame  Blavatsky  is  said  to  have  received  Mr,
Sinnett’s  envelope  not  earlier  than  the  afternoon  of  October  27th, so  that,
if  the  Amritsur  postniark  was  bona  fide,  it  probably  left  Simla  on
October  26th.  Mr.  Siimett’s  letter  was  written  on  October  24th.  This
lai-ge  hiatus  of  time  is  not  alluded  to  in  Mr.  Sinnett’s  account,  which
is  remarkable  for  the  scantiness  of  ite  detail  concerning  the  most  impor-

“ Semi  this  by  copying  telegram  and  original  telegram  to  A.P.S.  Charge  to
iny  account  and  send  bill.  bet  Deb  study  more  carefully  his  part.”  Whether
this  document  had  anything  to  do  with  the  above  incident  I can  of  course  only
conjecture.  Tlie  relation  between  Gwala  K.  Deb  and  Mr.  Babajee  has  been
alre.ady  considered  (p.  247).

* While  at  Dladras  I was  informed  of  a recent  case  where  the  defendant  had
secured  an  elaborate  misuse  of  the  post-office  stamps  for  the  purpose  of  falsely
proving  .an  alibi.

t Simla  to  Umballa,  94  miles — horse  conveyance — 12  hours.  Umballa  to
Amritsur,  15o  miles — train — 9 hours.  Amritsur  to  Jhelum,  135  miles— train —
8 hours.


On  I'ncnomcna  connected  leitli  Tltcosoplitj.


275


tant  conditioning  elements.  He  docs  not  explicitly  mention  either  when
§ie  wrote  his  letter  (the  date  appears  on  p.  83  in  tlie  Koot  Hcomi
ipiotation)  or  when  or  by  whom  the  letter  was  posted.  He  does  net
mention  the  Simla  post-mark,  nor  does  he  make  any  suggestion,  for  the
benefit  of  the  Engli.sli  reader,  as  to  the  distances  between  Simla,
Amritsur,  and  Jhelum.  Yet  Mr.  Sinnett  seems  to  have  regarded  tliis
fragmentary  evidence  as  likely  to  appeal  to  other  minds  besides  Ids  own
^“Occult  World,”  p.  80);  no  doubt  it  may  do  so  if  they  take  for
granted  that  the  details  neglected  contribute  to  the  marvellousness  of
the  phenomenon.

AVith  reference  to  the  j^ortraits  drawn  in  Air.  Sinnett’s  house(“Occult
AVorld,”  pp.  137-139),  it  is  not  necessary  to  say  any  more,  considering
the  exiguity  of  Air.  Siiinett’s  account,  than  that  Aladame  Blavatsky  is
exceedingly  skilful  in  the  use  of  both  pencil  and  brush.  I have  seen
s'jecimens  of  her  handiwork,  not  only  in  certain  playing-cards,  which
Colonel  Olcott  showed  me — each  card  being  a clevei’,  humorous  sketch,
— but  in  drawings,  precisely  similar  to  that  mentioned  by  Air.  Sinnett,
where  the  face  on  the  white  paper  was  defined  by  contrast  with  “ cloudy
blue  shading.”*

On  the  whole,  then,  I think  I am  justified  in  saying  that  the
phenomena  relied  upon  by  Air.  Sinnett  in  “The  Occult  AVorld  ” can  be
accounted  for  much  more  satisfactorily  than  can  the  jrerformances  of
any  ordinary  professional  conjurer  by  the  uninitiated  observer,  hoAvever
acute  ; that  the  additional  details  which  I have  been  enabled  to  furni.sh
in  connection  with  some  of  the  incidents  Air.  Sinnett  has  recorded,
clearly  show  that  he  has  not  been  in  the  habit  of  exercising  due  caution
for  the  exclusion  of  tr  ickery  ; and  that  lie  has  not  proceeded  in  accordance
with  those  “ scientific  modes  of  investigation  ” which  he  explicitly
declares  (“Occult  AAYrld,”  p.  35)  he  regarded  as  necessary  for  the  task
lie  attempted.

Evidence  of  AIr.  A.  O.  Hume
(Late  Government  Secretary  of  India).

As  Air.  Hume  took  a prominent  part  in  the  early  development  of
the  Theosophical  Society  in  India,  and  even  published  two  pamphlets
on  the  subject,  “ Hints  on  Esoteric  Theo.sophy,”  Nos.  I and  2,  it
seems  to  me  desirable  to  draw  special  attention  to  the  considerable
change  which  has  taken  place  in  his  opinion  concerning  the  phenomena

* Blue  pencil  is  a favoured  instrument  at  the  Theosophical  headquarters.
I possessed  a specially  convenient  form  of  a patent  blue  pencil,  and  having
handed  this  to  Mr.  Babajee  for  the  purpose  of  enabling  him  to  write  a name
and  address  which  he  wished  to  give  me,  he  reii'aiked,  as  he  regarded  it  with

spontaneous  admiration,  “ Oh  ! this  would  do  well  for the  Koot  lloomi

scriptures,  thought  I,  but  my  spoken  comment  was  illtl'ercnt;  Mr.  Babajee’s
Lead  was  bowed,  his  tongue  was  dumb,  and  the  s meuce  was  never  completed.


274


Mr.  Ilochjsoii’s  Report


connected  with  Madame  Blavatsky.  I enjoyed,  while  in  India,  the
opportunity  of  having  various  long  interviews  with  Mr.  Hume,  and
liave  already  referred  to  his  conclusion  (reached  after  a most  careful!
inquiry)  in  connection  with  the  incident  of  the  recovery  of  Mrs.  Hume’s
brooch,  that  Madame  Blavatsky  may  very  well  have  obtained  the  brooch
previously  by  ordinary  methods.  Long  before  the  publication  of  the
Blavatsky-Coulomb  letters  in  the  Christiaii  College  Magazine,  Mr.
Hume  had  discovered  that  some  of  Madame  Blavatsky’s  phenomena
were  fraudulent,  and  that  some  of  the  professed  Mahatma  writing  was
the  handiwork  of  Madame  Blavatsky  herself.  Once  or  twice  he  had
.seen  notes  on  some  philosophic  question  which  had  been  made  by  Mr.
Subba  Row  (Vakil  of  the  High  Court,  Madras),  a leading  native
Theosophist.  The  substance  of  these  notes  appeared  afterwards  worked
up  into  a Mahatma  document  (received  by  either  himself  or  Mr.
tSinnett),  and  worsened  in  the  working.  I inquired  of  Mr.  Subba
Row,  the  ablest  native  Theosophist  I have  met,  whether  he  was
aware  of  the  episodes  which  Mr.  Hume  had  described.  He  replied
laconically,  “ It  may  be  so.”  When  the  Blavatsky-Coulomb  letters
were  first  published  Mr.  Hume  expressed  his  opinion  publicly  that
Madame  Blavatsky  was  too  clever  to  have  thus  committed  herself ;
latterly,  however,  and  partly  in  consequence  of  the  evidence
[ was  able  to  lay  before  him,  he  came  to  the  conviction  that
the  letters  in  question  were  actually  written  by  Madame  Blavatsky.
Further,  he  had  never  placed  the  slightest  credence  in  the  Shrine-
phenomena,  which  he  had  always  supposed  to  be  fraudulent.  I may
state  also  that  his  conclusions,  reached  independently  of  my  own  and
from  different  circumstances,  concerning  the  untrustworthiness  of
IVIessrs.  Damodar,  Babajee,  and  Babula,  entirely  corroborated  those
to  which  I had  been  forced.  Yet  Mr.  Hume  was  originally  just  as  fully
committed  to  the  gejiuineness  of  certain  phenomena  as  Mr.  Sinnett  him-
self, as  will  be  manifest  from  a perusal  of  his  “ Hints  on  Esoteric
Theosophy,”  from  which  some  of  the  narratives  quoted  in  our  First
Report  were  taken.  His  present  attitude  is  an  admirable  testimony  not
only  to  his  readiness  to  accept  the  truth  at  the  cost  of  negating  so
extensively  his  own  past  opinions,  but  also  to  the  systematic  pains  he
has  taken  in  sifting  the  antecedents  of  the  apparently  marvellous
phenomena  which  occurred  in  close  connection  with  himself.  For
example,  he  received  a Ivoot  Hoomi  communication  in  a letter  coming
from  a person  who  had  no  connection  with  Theosophy.  This  may
have  been  the  incident  referred  to  by  Mr.  Sinnett  (“Occult  World,’'
p.  21),  as  follows  ; —

“ When  this  Society  [the  Simla  branch  of  the  Theosophical  Society]  was
formed,  many  letters  passed  between  Root  Hoomi  and  ourselves,  which  were
not  in  every  case  transmitted  through  Madame  Blavatsky.  In  one  case,  for


On  Phenomena  connected  inth  Theosophy.


275


example,  Mr.  Hume,  wlio  became  President  for  tlie  first  year  of  the  new
Society  . . . got  a note  from  Root  Hoomi  inside  a letter  received

through  the  post  from  a person  wholly  unconnected  with  our  occult  pur-
suits, who  was  writing  to  him  in  connection  with  some  municipal  business.”

Mr.  Hume  has  informed  me  that  he  himself  received  the  letter,
which  was  large  and  peculiar  in  appearance,  from  the  postman’s  hands.
A long  time  afterwards,  when  reinvestigating  a number  of  supposed
phenomena  (not  published)  which  had  occurred  at  his  house,  he  learnt
incidentally  from  one  of  his  servants  that  just  such  a letter  had  been
taken  by  Babula  from  the  postman  early  one  morning,  and  carried  otf
to  Madame,  and  had  been  returned  to  the  postman,  when  the  postman
came  by  again,  Babula,  who  said  that  it  was  not  for  Madame  but  for
Mr.  Hume.  The  servant  had  wondered  at  the  time  why  Babula  had
not  taken  the  letter  to  Mr.  Hume  himself,  and  he  said  that  lie
thought  he  remembered  that  Babula  had  taken  and  returned
letters  in  the  same  'svay  on  other  occasions.  We  suggested  a somewhat
similar  procedure  on  the  part  of  Babula  in  our  First  Beport  as  an
explanation  of  instances  analogous  to  that  of  Mr.  Hume’s.  In  various-
cases,  which  it  is  unnecessary  to  reproduce  in  this  Beport,  it  will  be
seen  that  Madame  Blavatsky  may  have  been  enabled  in  a similar  way
to  tamper  with  the  letters  before  they  actually  reached  the  addressees.
It  may  be  instructive  here  to  quote  Mr.  Hume’s  testimony  to  the  fact
that  peculiar  envelopes  and  paper,  like  those  generally  used  by  Madame
Blavatsky  for  the  Mahatma  communications,  are  procurable  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Darjeeling,  that  they  were  not  used  for  the  earliest
Mahatma  documents,  which  appeared  before  Madame  Blavatsky  had
visited  Darjeeling,  but  w'ere  first  brought  into  requisition  for  that
purpose  at  a time  wBich  coincided  with  her  visit  to  that  place.  Mr.
Hume’s  position  at  present  is  that  “ despite  all  the  frauds  perpetrated,
there  have  been  genuine  phenomena,  and  that,  though  of  a Iqw"  order,
Madame  [Blavatsky]  really  had  and  has  Occultists  of  considerable
though  limited  powers  behind  her ; that  K.  H.  is  a real  entity,  but  by
no  means  the  powerful  and  godlike  being  he  has  been  painted,  and  that
he  has  had  some  share,  directly  or  indirectly — though  what  Mr.  Hume
does  not  pretend  to  say — in  the  production  of  the  Iv.  H.  letters.”  The
reader  already  knows  that  I cannot  myself  discover  sufficient  evidence
for  the  occurrence  of  any  “ occult  phenomenon”  whatever  in  connectioit
with  the  Theosophical  Society.

I have  thus  far  postponed  the  consideration  of  the  handwriting
purporting  to  have  been  “ precipitated.”  The  specimens  of  such  wu-iting
which  came  under  my  notice  in  India  were  of  three  kinds,  and  wore
alleged  to  have  emanated  from  Mahatma  Root  Hoomi,  Mahatma  M.,
and  the  Chela,  “Bhola  Deva  Sarma,”  respectively.  I made  a minute


176


3Ir.  ITodffsoii’s  Report


and  prolonged  examination  of  these  and  other  manuscripts  with  a view
to  determining  by  whose  liand  the  supposed  “ precipitated  ” communica-
tions were  written.  Tlie  conclusions  I reached  were  such  as  fully  to
confirm  tire  results  of  my  investigations  in  other  directions,  and  they
are  generally  and  briefly  as  follow  : —

That  the  one  specimen  of  the  Chela  B.  D.  S.  writing  which  I had
the  opportunity  of  carefully  examining  was  the  handiwork  of  Mr.
Babajee  D.  ISlath  : that  the  several  specimens  of  Mahatma  M.  (M.  C.)
writing  which  I had  the  opportunity  of  carefully  examining  were  the
handiwork  of  Madame  Blavatsky  : and  that  of  the  several  specimens  of
IMahatma  Koot  Hoomi  (K.  H.)  writing  which  I had  the  oppoi’tunity  of
carefully  examining,  one  was  the  handiwork  of  Mr.  Damodar  K.
I\Iavalankar,  the  others  were  the  handiwork  of  Madame  Blavatsky.

Since  my  return  to  England  I have  been  strengthened  in  this  last
■conclusion  by  an  examination  of  a large  quantity  of  K.  H.  mss.
forwarded  to  me  by  Mr.  Hume,*  a series  of  K.  H.  documents  entrusted
to  us  by  Mr.  Sinnett,  and  a K.  H.  document  sent  to  us  by  Mr.  Padshah
for  comparison  with  other  K.  IT.  writings.  The  K.  H.  communica-
tion belonging  to  Mr.  Padshah  is,  in  my  opinion,  the  handiwork  of
Mr.  Damodar,  and  the  K.  H.  documents  sent  by  Mr.  Hume  and  Mr.
■Sinnett  the  handiwork  of  Madame  Blavatsky.  It  is  probable,  therefoi’e,
that  vaiious  K.  H.  communications  received  in  India  during  Madame
Blavatsky’s  absence  in  1884  were  written  by  Mr.  Damodar.  Many  of
these  were  pi'oduced  under  circumstances  which  absolutely  precluded
the  possibility  that  Madame  Blavatsky  could  have  written  them,
but  under  which  it  v/ould  have  been  easy  for  Mr.  Damodar  to  have
written  them.  My  justification  for  the  conclusions  I have  expressed
above  concerning  the  authorship  of  the  handwriting  will  be  found  in
Part  II.  of  this  Report,  to  which  I now  proceed.


PART  II.

The  chief  questions  in  which  we  are  aided  by  caligraphic  evidence
concern  the  jvuthorship  of  the  Blavatsky-Coulomb  letters  and  the
authorship  of  the  Mahatma  documents.  I do  not  propose  to  go  into
any  detail  in  describing  the  similarities  between  Madame  Blavatsky’s
undoubted  handwriting  and  the  handwriting  of  the  Blavatsky-Coulomb

* I have  now  in  my  h.anils  numerous  documents  which  are  concerned  with
the  experiences  of  Mr.  Hume  and  others  in  connection  with  ^ladarne  Blavatsky
and  the  Theosoplucal  Society.  These  documents,  including  the  K.  H.  MSS.
above  referred  to,  did  not  reach  me  till  August,  and  my  examination  of  them,
particularly  of  the  K.  H.  MSS.,  has  involved  a considerable  delay  in  the  produc-
tion of  this  Report.


On  Phenomena  connected  nith  Thcomphy.


277


letters.*  These  letters,  befoi’e  publication  in  the  Christian  College
Magazine,  were,  as  I have  said,  submitted  by  tlie  editor  to  seA'eral
gentlemen  with  experience  in  handwriting,  who  were  unequivocally
of  opinion  that  they  were  written  by  Madame  Blavatsky.  The  .same-
opinion  was  also  expressed  by  Sir.  J.  D.  B.  Gribble,  of  Sladras,  in
“ A Report  of  an  Examination  into  the  Blavatsky  Correspondence,
published  in  the  Christian  College  MagazineC  But  the  most  im-
portant judgment  on  this  point  is  that  of  the  expert  in  handwriting,
Sir.  F.  G.  Netherclift,  who  has  no  doubt  whatever  that  the  disputed
letters  which  were  submitted  to  him  were  written  by  Sladame-
Blavatsky.  His  Report  will  be  found  on  p.  331.  Sir.  8ims,  of  the-
British  Sluseum,  is  also  of  the  same  opinion.

Under  these  circumstances  I need  say  little  more  than  that  I
examined  the  whole  of  these  documents,  and  throughout  I found  those-
characteristics  of  Sladame  Blavatsky’s  handwriting  which  were
present  in  the  document  I used  as  my  chief  standard,  viz.,  a letter
from  Madame  Blavatsky  to  Hr.  Hartmann,  written  froiii  Elberfeld  in
October,  1884.

I had  other  undoubted  writings  f of  Sladame  Blavatsky  in  my
possession,  which  rendered  me  some  assistance,  but,  as  will  appear
presently,  I was  unable  to  regard  tliese  as  altogetlier  trustworthy.
Further,  I found  no  peculiarity  Avhatever  in  the  BlaA'atsky-Coulomb-
letters  which  is  not  present  in  Sladame  Blavatsky’s  undoubted  hand-
writing. There  were,  indeed,  a few  forms  Avliich  are  not  found  very
often  in  Sladame  Blavatsky’s  ordinary  handwriting,  and  Avliich  are-
found  often  in  tlie  Koot  Hoomi  Avritings ; but  this  statement  applies
just  as  much  to  Sladame  BlaA-atsky’s  acknowledged  handwriting  as  it
does  to  the  Blavatsky-Coulomb  letters,  and  it  appears  to  me  to  suggest
an  additional  proof  of  the  fact  that  the  letters  in  question  Avere  one
and  all  Avritten  by  Sladame  Blavatsky.

In  Part  I.  of  this  Report  I have  shoAvn  that  the  circumstantial  ca  I-
dence  Avhich  I obtained  in  relation  to  these  disputed  letters,  adds  to  the
strength  of  the  conclusion  reached  on  grounds  of  handwriting,  that
Sladame  BlaA^atsky  Avrote  them.  I shall  show  later  that  there  is  evi-
dence Avhich  confirms  yet  furtlier  the  justice  of  this  conclu.sion.  In

* Several  of  these  letters  Avere  lent  to  me  for  my  OAvn  examination  hy  the-
editor  of  the  Christian  College  Magazine.  The  remaining  letters  I examined
at  the  house  of  a gentleman  in  whose  custody  they  Avere  at.  the  time.  Some  of
them  Avhich  I selected  myself  Avere  entrusted  to  me  to  he  sent  to  England  for
the  judgment  of  the  best  experts  obtainable,  Avith  the  special  request  that  they
should  be  returned  as  soon  as  possible,  and  1 found  upon  my  arrival  in  England
that  they  had  already  been  returned.

t I refer  to  the  B.  Marginal  Notes  and  the  B.  Ilejilics.  (See  pp.  282-
Vid  290. )


278


Mr.  Ilodf/son's  Rqwrt


order  to  appreciate  the  considerations  which  follow,  we  must  first
understand  the  circumstances  under  which  several  of  the  documents
demanding  our  attention  appeared.  I must  therefore  briefly  describe
tlie  course  of  events  at  the  headquarters  of  the  Tlieosophic.al  Society
after  the  departure  of  ISIadame  Blavatsky  and  Colonel  Olcott  for
Europe  in  February,  188b.

Before  tliis  time,  according  to  Dr.  Hartmann,  if  Madame  Coulomb

found  a willing  ear  she  would  never  hesitate  a moment  to  insinuate
that  the  whole  Society  was  a humbug,  the  phenomena  produced  by
fraud,  and  that  ‘ she  could  tell  many  things,  if  she  only  wanted  to  do
so.’  ” After  the  departure  of  Madame  Blavatsky  she  apparently  began
to  speak  more  freely  to  that  effect,  and  it  appeared,  moreover,  to  the
•officers  of  the  Society,  especially  Mr.  St.  George  Lane-Fox  and  Dr.
Hartmann,  that  the  Coulombs  were  wasting  its  funds.  Letters  on  the
subject  were  written  from  the  headquarters  to  Madame  Blavatsky  and
Colonel  Olcott.  In  particular,  Mr.  Damodar  wrote  to  Madame  Blavatsky,
probably  by  the  mail  leaving  India  on  March  12th,  which  woidd
arrive  in  Paris  about  April  1st,  informing  lier  that  Madame  Coulomb
was  spreading  reports  that  the  phenomena  were  fraudulent.  In
the  meantime  Mr.  Lane-Fox  and  Dr.  Hartmann  resolved  “ to  impeach
tliem  [the  Coulombs]  in  a formal  manner,”  and  began  to  draw  up  the
charges.  At  this  stage  Mr.  Damodar  produced  a Koot  Hoomi  letter
which  lie  declared  tliat  he  had  received  from  the  “ astral  form  of  a
Chela”  and  which  runs  as  follows  : — -

“So  long  as  one  has  not  developed  a perfect  sense  of  justice,  he  should
jirefer  to  err  rather  on  the  side  of  mercy  than  commit  the  slightest  act  of
iijustice.  Madame  Coulomb  is  a medium  and  as  such  irresponsible  for  many
diings  she  may  say  or  do.  At  the  same  time  she  is  kind  and  charitable.
Due  must  know  how  to  act  towards  her  to  make  her  a very  good  friend.
She  has  her  own  weaknesses,  but  their  bad  effects  can  be  minimised  by
exercising  on  her  mind  a moral  influence  by  a friendly  and  kindly  feeling.
Her  mediumistic  nature  is  a help  in  this  direction,  if  proper  advantage  be
taken  of  the  same.

“ It  is  my  wish  therefore  that  she  shall  continue  in  charge  of  the  household
business,  the  Board  of  Control  of  course  exercising  a in-oiier  supervisory
control,  and  seeing,  in  consultation  with  her,  that  no  unnecessary  expendi-
ture is  incurred.  A good  deal  of  reform  is  necessary  and  can  be  made  rather
with  the  help  than  the  antagonism  of  Madame  Coulomb.  Damodar  would
have  told  you  this  but  his  mind  was  purposely  obscured,  without  his  know-
ledge, to  test  your  intentions.  Show  this  to  Madame  Coulomb,  so  that  she
jnay  co-operate  with  you.  K.  H.”

*rhe  above  letter  is  docketed  as  having  been  received  on  March  22nd.
[I  shall  refer  to  this  letter  afterwards,  when  I shall  give  reasons  for
tliinking  tliat  it  was  written  by  Mr.  Damodar,  as  “K.  H.  (Y).”]  The


On  Phenomena  connected  with  Theosophy.


279


effect  of  it  was  that  “ an  armistice  was  concluded  with  tlie  Coulombs
by  treating  tlieni  witli  greater  consideration.”

On  April  1st,  according  to  Dr.  Hartmann’s  account,  Madame  Coulomb,
Mr.  Lane-Fox,  and  Mr.  Damodar  went  “ for  a cliange  ” to  Ootaca-
rnund.  By  this  time  the  letters  complaining  of  the  Coulombs  liad
reached  Madame  Blavatsky,  wlio  wrote  to  the  Coulombs  a letter  whicli
with  its  threats  and  its  pleadings*  speaks  for  itself  to  the  intelligent
reader.  Madame  Blavatsky  no  doubt  wrote  also  to  Mr.  Damodai-.
Her  letters  would  reach  IVladras  about  April  24th,  and  Ootacamund
on  April  26tli,  on  which  date  Mr.  Damodar  produced  a Mahatma  M.
letter,  declaring  tliat  it  had  fallen  in  his  room ; it  was  addressed  to
Dr.  Hartmann,  who  has  published  the  following  portions  of  it : —

“ For  some  time  already  the  woman  has  opened  communication — a
1‘egular  diplomatic  pcatrparfers — with  the  enemies  of  the  cause,  certain  padris.
She  hopes  for  more  than  2,000  rupees  from  them  if  she  helps  them  ruining
<ir  at  least  injuring  the  Society  by  injuring  the  reputation  of  the  founders.
Hence  hints  as  to  ‘ trap-doors  ’ and  tricks.  Moreover  tvhen  needed  trap-doors
H'iZi  he  found,  as  they  have  been  forthcoming  for  some  time.  They  are  sole
masters  of  the  top  storey.  They  alone  have  full  entrance  to  and  control  of
the  premises.  ‘ Monsier  ’ is  clever  and  cunning  at  every  handicraft — good
jnechanic  and  carpenter,  and  good  at  walls  likewise.  Take  note  of  th  k — ye
TTieosophists.  They  hate  you  with  all  the  hatred  of  failure  against  success  ;
Society,  Henry,  H.  P.  B.,  theosophists,  and  aye — the  very  name  of  theosti]>hy.
The  * * * are  ready  to  lay  out  a good  sum  for  the  ruin  of  the  Society
they  hate.  * * * Moreover  the  J * * * of  India  are  in  direct
understanding  with  those  of  London  and  Paris.  * * * Keep  all  said

above  in  strictest  confidence  if  you  would  be  strongest.  Let  her  not  suspect
you  know  it,  but  if  you  would  have  my  advice — be  prudent,  yet  act  without
delay.  * * * M.C.”

Mr.  Damodar  was  instructed  on  the  outside  of  tlie  letter  to  let  Dr.
Hartmann  have  it  without  delay ; and  Dr.  Hartmann  was  instructed
in  the  document  itself  to  show  it  to  Mr.  Lane-Fox.  The  writer
of  the  letter  was  evidently  unaware  that  Mr.  Lane-Fox  was  witli
Mr.  Damodar  at  Ootacamund,  and  that  Dr.  Hartmann  was  at  Madras.
IMr.  Damodar,  however,  remedied  the  ignorance  of  “ Mahatma  M.”,
and  sliowed  the  letter  to  Mr.  Lane-Fox  before  forwarding  it  to  Dr.
Hartmann.

As  a consequence  of  these  and  other  documents  and  the  resulting
altercations,  immediate  action  was  taken  by  Mr.  Lane-Fox  and  Dr.
Hartmann,  which  led  to  the  expulsion  of  Madame  Coulomb  on  May  14th,
on  the  ground  that  she  had  spoken  evil  of  the  Society.  According
to  Dr.  Hartmann,  “ M.  Coulomb  was  requested  to  resign,  but  as  lie


* See  Madame  Coulomb’s  pamplilet  “ Some  Account,”  &c.,  pp.  94-104.


280  3Ir.  lIodfjso)i's  Report

could  not  make  up  liis  mind  whether  he  would  do  so  or  not,  he  was
expelled  likewise.”

The  reader  will  remember  that  the  contrivances  for  trickery  were
investigated  when  M.  Coulomb  gave  up  tlie  keys  of  IVIadame  Blavatsky’s-
rooms  on  May  17th  or  18th.  Madame  Coulomb  showed  me  a telegram
sent  to  her  by  Madame  Blavatsky  on  May  19th  : “ Wliat  can  be  done  ?

Telegraph  ” ; and  asserted  that  this  telegram  was  in  I'eply  to  a letter
written  by  her  to  Madame  Blavatsky  at  the  end  of  April  (which  would
reach  Paris  about  May  19th),  threatening,  in  case  of  a rupture,  to
produce  incriminating  letters  written  by  the  latter.  M.  Coulomb
declares  that  he  showed  this  telegram  to  Mr.  Damodar,  who  refused  to
take  any  notice  of  it,  and  therefore  no  reply  was  sent  by  the  Coulombs
to  Madame  Blavatsky.

Home  time  later  Colonel  Olcott  received,  he  says,  in  a “cover  post
marked  Madras,”  a letter  forged  in  the  handwriting  of  Dr.  Hartmann,
Writing  to  Dr.  Hartmann  on  July  10th,  Colonel  Olcott  stated  that  he-
had  received  this  document  “ some  little  time  ago,”  and  had  laid  it  away
in  his  despatch-box,  but  that  in  going  through  his  papers  that  morning^
(July  10th),  “ I noticed  that  the  Master  had  been  putting  his  hand  upon
the  document  and  while  reading  his  endorsement  I heard  him  tell  me-
to  send  it  to  you  by  to-day’s  post.”

Tlie  endorsement — by  “ Mahatma  M.” — is  in  these  words  ; “ A
clumsy  forgery,  but  good  enough  to  show  how  mucli  an  enterprising
enemy  can  do  in  this  direction.  They  may  call  this  at  Adyar — a
pioneer.”

The  document  itself  is  as  follows

Plicate.  Adyar,  April  28(h,  1884.

My  Dear  Madame  Coudomb, — I was  very  glad  to  receive  your  kina
warning  : but  I need  a new  and  further  explanation  before  I will  beleive  in
Madame  Blavatsky’s  innocence.  Frcnn  the  first  week  of  iny  arrieval  I knew
she  wivs  a trickster  for  I had  received  intimation  to  that  effect,  and  had  been
told  so  by  Mr.  Lane-Fox  before  he  went  to  Ooty  (and  who  added  moreover,
that  he  had  come  from  England  with  this  purpose,  as  he  had  received  secret
instructions  from  the  London  fellows)  and  even  sayd  that  he  felt  sure  she
was  a spy).

She  is  worse  than  you  think  and  she  lied  to  me  about  lots  of  things  ; but
you  may  rest  assured  that  she  shall  not  bambuzle  me.

I hope  to  tell  you  more  when  I see  yovi,  upon  your  return  from  Ootocamund
and  show  you  that  Col  Olcott  is  no  better  than  he  should  be.

E.xcuse  short  letter.  I am  writing  in  the  dark.

Yours  faithfully.

Dr.  F.  Hartmann.

This  forged  Hartmann  document,  and  also  tlie  endorsement  thereon,
are,  in  my  opinion,  the  handiwork  of  Madame  Blavatsky.  I think


On  Phenomena  conncczed  tcith  Theosophij.


281


tliere  can  be  little  doubt  that  she  forged  this  Hartmann  document  for
the  purpose  of  attributing  the  foi'gery  to  the  Coulombs,  in  order  that
she  might  thus  prepare  the  way  for  lier  assertion  that  the  lllavatsky-
Coulomb  letters  were  also  forgeries.  The  evidence  for  this  will  appear
later.  I must  now  describe  the  manner  in  which  various  documents
used  by  me  in  my  examination  of  handwriting  in  India  came  into  my
possession.

Soon  after  my  arrival  at  Adyar,  I asked  for  a si^ecimen  of  INIadame
Blavatsky’s  undoubted  handwidting, — for  the  purpose  of  comparison
with  the  disjjuted  documents.  Mr.  Damodar  avoided  giving  me  any
before  Madame  Blavatsky  and  Colonel  Olcott  reached  headcpiarters,
and  after  I had  had  some  conversation  with  them  on  the  subject,  Colonel
Olcott  said  that  Madame  Blavatsky  Avould  write  me  a letter  at  once,  if
I wished,  which  I could  use  as  a test  document.  I replied  that  it  would
be  desirable  for  me  to  have  some  manuscript  that  was  written  before
the  appearance  of  the  Christian  College  Magazine  in  September,  where-
upon Colonel  Olcott  said  abruptly  that  he  could  take  no  action  as  to
giving  me  any  handwidting  of  Madame  Blavatsky’s  until  their  own
Committee  had  met  and  that  Madame  Blavatsky  was  in  the  hands  of
the  Theosophical  Society.

INfy  recpiest,  made  at  the  same  time,  for  IVIahatma  documents  for  the
purpose  of  .submitting  them  to  a caligraphic  expert  was  also  refu.sed.

I was  afterwards,  however,  enabled  to  obtain  some  documents  in  the
following  manner.  Mr.  Damodar  had  recounted  to  me  some  of  his
professed  experiences,  and  had  shown  me  several  Mahatma  documents  in
connection  with  them.  Mo.st  of  these,  he  alleged,  were  too  private  to  be
submitted  for  my  reading  throughout,  but  there  were  se^-eral  to  which
this  objection  did  not  apply,  and  among  these  were  some  IGI  pages
of  the  K.  H.  writing  in  black  ink,  which  had  formed  portions  of
the  reply  by  K.  H.  to  questions  which  had  been  i-aised  concerning
certain  statements  in  “ Esoteric  Buddhism.”  I pointed  out  to  Mr.
Damodar  that  there  could  be  no  possible  objection  to  my  having  these
for  examination,  and  he  agreed,  and  allowed  me  to  take  them  away  for
a few  days  for  my  own  inspection  only.  The  IGipp.  referred  to  I shall
speak  of  as  the  K.  H.  IGJpp.

I received  also  from  Dr.  Hartmann,  for  my  own  in.spection  only,,
the  letter  from  Madame  BlaA’atsky,  written  to  him  from  Elberfeld  in
October,  1884,  the  forged  Hartmann  document,  and  the  K.H.  (Y)
letter  already  mentioned.

Further,  I had  been  anxious  to  know  what  answer  Madame
Blavatsky  had  to  make  to  the  pamphlet  written  by  Madame
Coulomb,  entitled  “ Some  Account,”  &c.,  and  Madame  Blavatsky
had  taken  the  trouble  to  write  out  her  replies  to  the  first  portion
of  this  pamphlet,  although  I had  not  asked  her  for  a written

D


282


Mr.  Hodgson's  Report


statement,  and  although  she  made  oral  statements  as  well,  the
important  points  of  which  I took  down  at  the  time  in  writing.  This
written  statement  by  Madame  Blavatsky  covers  al)out  7|pp.  foolscap.
I shall  speak  of  it  as  the  B.  Replies.  In  addition,  INIadame  Blavatsky
wrote  various  statements  in  my  copy  of  IMadame  Coulomb’s  pamphlet.
These  I shall  speak  of  as  the  B.  Marginal  Kates.  Other  documents
came  under  my  notice,  which  it  will  suffice  to  specify  further  on
when  I have  occasion  to  lefer  to  them.

I now  proceed  to  consider  the  authorship  of  the  Mahatma
letter.s,  and  propose  in  the  first  place,  and  chiefly,  to  deal  with  the
K.  H.  seiies  of  documents,  these  being  by  far  the  most  abundant  and
the  most  important  of  tlie  Mahatma  writings.  It  is  upon  the  K.  II.
sei'ies  almost  exclusively  tliat  Mr.  Sinnett  has  relied  for  his  volume  on
“ Esoteric  Buddhism”  as  well  as  for  certain  portions  of  “ The  Occult
World”;  it  is  to  the  K.  H.  series  that  most  of  the  Mahatma  letters
written  to  other  persons  also  belong ; and  it  is  poitions  of  the  K.  II.
.series  alone  whicli  we  have  been  able  to  obtain  for  the  purpo.ses  of
careful  examination.

Witli  tlie  incriminating  Blavatsky-Coulomb  letters  which  wei’e
submitted  to  Mr.  ISTetherclift,  were  also  suljmitted  some  specimens  of
the  K.  H.  writing,  viz.,  several  small  slips  which  were  forwarded
from  India  Avith  tlie  Blavatsky-Coulomb  letters  proper,  a K.  H.
document  in  blue  ink  submitted  by  Mr.  Massey,  and  a K.  H.
document  in  blue  pencil  submitted  by  Mr.  Myers.  Mr.  Netherclift,  in
the  first  instance,  came  to  the  conclusion  that  these  K.  H.  documents
were  not  written  by  Madame  Blavatsky.  I had  already  expres.sed
my  own  conclusion,  I'eached  after  an  investigation  of  K.  H-
Avritings  in  India,  tliat  those  I had  examined  Avere,  Avith  the
exception  of  the  K.  H.  (Y),  Avritten  by  Madame  BlaA'atsky,  and
on  my  arrival  in  England  I Avas  surprised  to  find  that  Mr.  Netherclift
Avas  of  a different  opinion  concerning  the  K.  IT.  Avritings  submitted
to  him.  The  small  slips  I had  already  seen  in  India ; and  after
examining  the  K.  II.  Avritings  submitted  by  Messrs.  Massey  and  Myers,
I concluded  that  these  also  Avere  Avritten  by  Madame  BlaA'atsky.  My
judgment,  hoAvever,  Avas  originally  formed  upon  my  examination  of
the  K.  II.  IGlpp.,  in  which  the  marks  of  Madame  Blaratsky’s  handi-
Avork  Avere  more  patent  than  in  the  documents  Avhich  Mr.  Yetherclift
had  had  an  opportunity  of  examining.  In  the  meantime  Ave  had
obtained  from  Mr.  Sinnett  eight  specimens  of  the  Iv.  H.  Avriting,  Avliich
represented,  some  of  them  at  least,  consecutiA'e  periods  of  time,  beginning
Avith  the  earliest  letter  received  by  Mr.  Sinnett.  In  this,  Avhich  was
received  about  October,  1880,  the  traces  of  Madame  Blavatsky’s
handiwork  were  numerous  and  conspicuou.s,  and  from  this  omvards
the  gradual  dcA’clopment  of  the  K.  IT.  conA'entional  characteristics,


On  Phenomena  connected  ndth  Theo^nphij.


283


and  the  gradual  elimination  of  many  of  Madame  Blavatsky’s  pecu-
liarities, were  clearly  manifest.  The  K.  H.  writings  which  liad
been  submitted  to  Mr.  Netherclift,  were  written  after  Madajne.
Blavatsky  had  liad  years  of  practice.  I therefore  re-submitted  to  him
the  K.  H.  writings  belonging  to  Messrs.  Massey  and  Myers,  wliicli
we  still  had  in  our  possession,  together  with  the  series  forwarded
by  Mr.  Sinnett.  The  result  was  that  Mr.  Netherclift  came  to  tlie  con-
clusion that  the  whole  of  these  documents  were  without  doubt  written
by  Madame  Blavatsky.  Mr.  Sims,  of  the  British  Museum,  who  had
originally  expi’essed  the  same  conclusion  as  Mr.  Netherclift,  similarly
changed  his  opinion  after  inspection  of  the  documents  furnished  by  Mr.
8innett.

I may  now  give  some  of  the  results  of  my  own  comparison  of  tliese
documents  with  tlie  undisputed  liandwriting  of  Madame  Bla\  atsky.*
At  first  sight  Madame  Blavatsky’s  ordinary  liandwriting,  for  the
most  part  small  and  somewhat  irregular,  looks  very  dilferent  from  tlie
large,  bold,  round,  regular  writing  of  the  K.  H.  documents.  It  is  only
when  wc  examine  closely  the  formations  of  individual  letters  that  the
traces  of  the  same  handiwork  in  both  become  obvious.  The  little
importance  that  can  be  attached  to  the  mere  general  appearance  of  a
written  document  is  well  enough  known  to  persons  who  are  at  all
familiar  with  the  comparisons  of  iiandwritings.

I shall  now  endeavour  to  show —

I.  That  there  are  clear  signs  of  development  in  the  Iv.  IT.  writing,
various  strong  resemblances  to  Madame  Blavatsky’s  ordinary  hand-
writing having  been  gradually  eliminated.

II.  That  special  forms  of  letters  proper  to  Madame  Blavatsky’s
ordinary  writing,  and  not  proper  to  the  K.  H.  writing,  occasionally
appear  in  the  latter.

III.  That  there  are  certain  very  marked  peculiarities  of  Madame
Blavatsky’s  ordinary  writing  which  occur  throughout  the  K.  H.
writing.

I shall  specify,  under  each  of  these  heads,  the  most  important
instances  that  I have  observed,  but  shall  not  attempt  to  place  before
the  reader  any  exhaustive  .statement  of  them,  as  this  would  be  tedious.

1.  Facsimiles  of  the  series  of  K.  H.  letters  lent  by  Mr.  .Sinnett
v/ould  perhaps  have  been  interesting  and  suggestive  to  the  reader,  and
would  have  clearly  shown  the  development  of  the  K.  H.  hand ; but

* In  addition  to  the  manusevipts  which  I have  already  luentioned  as  pro-
viding me  with  a knowledge  of  Madame  Blavatsky’s  ordinary  handwriting,  I
have  in  my  possession  various  undisputed  writings  of  hers  produced  between
1877  and  1885,  among  which  are  three  letters  written  to  a Hindu  in  1878,  three
writings  to  Mr.  Hume  about  the  years  1881-1882,  and  other  more  recent  letters
to  IMessrs.  Massey  and  Myers.

V 2


284


Mi\  Hodr/soii’s  Report


Mr.  Sinnett  stx’ongly  emphasized  his  desire  tliat  no  use  ■whatever  sliouk!
he  made  of  tlie  specimens  he  submitted  except  for  comparison  of
handwriting,  and  the  facsimile  production  of  portions  of  the
documents  was,  of  course,  impossible  without  the  publication,  to
some  extent,  of  tlieir  substance.  I ha^■e  therefore  chosen  several
small  letters,  f g,  k and  y,  for  the  j^urpose  of  illustrating  the
development  I have  mentioned.  The  groups  of  individual  letters  in
Plate  I.  are  copied  from  tracings  of  my  own  made  from  the  original
documents,  and  hence  many  of  tliem  exhibit  a tremulous  appearance
which  is  not  cliaracteristic  of  tlie  original  mss.,  and  wdiicli  might  have
been  avoided  if  the  work  had  been  done  entirely  by  the  lithographic,
artist.  The  letters  in  the  first  row  of  each  of  the  groups  of
the  f,  g,  h,  y are  taken  from  undisputed  writings  of  Madame
Plavatsky,  those  to  Mr.  Hume  already  mentioned.  Tliese  letters  I
si  tail  call  (B).  The  remaining  five  rows  of  each  group  are  taken  from
tlie  first  five  documents  of  the  K.  H.  seiies  lent  by  Mr.  Sinnett.
The,se  I shall  speak  of  as  K.  H.  No.  1,  K.  H.  No.  2,  &c.  The  number.'s
do  not  mean  that  these  were  the  first  five  letters  received  by  INIr.
Sinnett  from  “ K.  H.”  Mr.  Sinnett  describes  tliem  as  follows  ; — ■

“ No.  1 ■*■*■*■  is  the  first  sheet  of  the  first  letter  I ever  had  from
him  certainly  through  another  hand.

“Nos,  2 and  3 selections  from  later  letters  of  the  old  series  written
before  the  publication  of  ‘ The  Occult  World.’

“No.  4 was  received  by  me  in  London  about  the  time  ‘Esoteric
Buddhism  ’ was  published.!

“No.  5 * is  from  a letter  certainly  in  K.  H.’s  own  handwriting.”

The  /,  it  will  be  observed,  in  Madame  Blavatsky’s  ordinary  hand-
writing (B),  is  commonly  loojied  only  below,  and  is  usually
jireceded  by  an  up-stroke.  It  is  easy  to  see  the  close  correspondence
between  the  f’s  in  (B)  and  tho.se  in  K.  H.  No  1.  Compare,  moreover,
the  second  ff  in  (B)  with  tlie  .//’  in  K.  H.  No.  2;  the  formation  is
jieculiar  and  tlie  resemblance  striking.  The  type  of  the y soon  changes.
I n K.  H.  No.  1,  the  forms  are  almost  all  looped  below,  but  in  K.  H.
No.  2 they  are  generally  looiied  above,  and  as  we  go  on  through  Nos.  3,
4,  and  5,  Madame  Blavat.sky’s  ordinary _/’ gradually  disappears  ; though
liere  and  there  in  later  Iv.  H.  documents  a stray /"looped  only  below
may  be  discovered,  sometimes  the  uiiper  loop  is  found  to  have  been
added  by  an  afterstroke,  and  the  tendency  to  make  f’s  with  a loop
below  is  manifest.

The  gs  in  K.  H.  No.  1.  are  very  various,  but  yet  suggest  an  effort
to  introduce  a new  type.  Various  as  they  are,  however,  I lielieve  that

* “ Tlie  Occult  World  ” (first  edition)  was  puhlislied  June  2nd,  1881.

+ “ Esoteric  Biiddliisiu”  (first  edition)  was  published  June  8th,  1883.


On  Phenomena  connected  with  TheoHophy.


285


by  a careful  search  I might  match  almost  every  form  in  K.  H.  No,  1
by  a corresponding  foiin  from  Madame  Blavatsky’s  acknowledged  liand-
writing.  Even  from  the  specimens  given  in  (B)  it  will  be  perceive,!
that  her  fjs  vary  gi’eatly,  and  that  there  are  one  or  two  cuiious  forms
that  hnd  fairly  close  parallels  in  K.  II.  Nos.  1 and  2.

The  characteristic  K.  II.  A',  which  is  formed  quite  differently  from
.^ladame  Blavatsky’s,  first  appears,  I think,  in  K.  II.  No.  2,  but  i.s
somewhat  narrower  in  formation  than  the  type  it  ultimately  reache  .
(Some  of  the  Ids  in  the  group  represent  capitals,  the  capital  h being
formed  on  the  same  type  as  the  small  h.  IMadame  Blavatsky’s
ordinary  h is  frequently  pi'eceded  by  an  upstroke  and  consists  of
a main  downstroke  from  the  bottom  of  which  the  next  stroke  starts
upwards,  trending  to  the  right,  without  the  pen’s  having  been
taken  off  the  jiaper.  Tlie  final  stroke  is  frequently  added  separately
and  often  not  connected  with  the  rest  of  the  letter ; but  in  many
cases  the  whole  of  the  letter  appears  to  be  made  in  one  continuou.s
movement.  All  these  habits,  togetlrer  with  other  little  peculiarities  of
curvature,  are  clearly  visible  in  the  h's  of  Iv.  H.  No.  1,  and  in  later
K.  H.  documents  the  gap  between  the  two  last  strokes  of  the  k con-
tinues to  be  common.  The  last  of  the  k's  selected  from  K.  H.  No.  3
is  particularly  noteworthy  as  exhibiting  a lapsus  calami  which  has
been  partially  covered  with  the  cloak  of  the  K.  H.  k curvature.

The  ys  in  the  early  K.  H.  documents,  most  of  which  have  a
nearly  straight  downstroke,  with  a little  cuiI  to  the  right,  are  just  a.s
suggestive  of  Madame  Blavatsky  as  are  the  f's,  and  they  begin  to
develop  nearly  as  rapidly  as  the  g's  and  in  the  same  direction,  the
<lownstroke  of  both  eventually  ending  in  a pronounced  curling  curve  to
the  left,  with  the  concave  side  habitually  vq)wards.  The  letter  j ha.s
developed  similarly,  and  so  also  apparently  has  the  letter  z,  all  of
these  letters  finally  exhibiting  a similar  curve  to  the  left.

In  the  group  of  letters  (B"),  all  of  which  are  taken  from  Madame
Blavatsky’s  ordinary  writing,  I have  given  various  forms  of  her  t.
All  these  forms  are  common  in  the  eailiest  K.  H.  documents ;
the  first  three  forms  are  common  in  the  developed  K.  H.
writing,  the  peculiarity  in  the  third  form  being  the  very  small  curl  to
the  right  at  the  end  of  the  downstroke.  The  fourth  form  occurs
occasionally  even  in  some  of  the  latest  K.  H.  writings  which  I
have  seen,  but  in  these  I have  observed  no  specimen  at  all  of  the  fifth
and  sixth  forms.  The  fifth  and  .sixth  forms,  with  the  curious  looi)  at
the  bottom  before  the  stroke  runs  on  to  the  next  letter,  abound  how-
ever in  a large  portion  of  the  K.  H.  mss.  in  my  possession,  written  about
1880-1882.  The  sixth  form  is  apparently  an  offshoot  of  the  fourth  form,
the  fifth  being  intermediate.  The  downstroke  of  the  first  form  of  t
is  aln'.ost  universally  non-looped,  as  represented  in  the  Plate,  in


286


Hr.  ITo'.I (/son's  Brport


Madame  Blavatsky’s  ordinary  writings  of  1878;  similarly  in  the
eai’liest  Iv.  H.  writing ; and  though  in  the  developed  K.  H.  writing
this  t is  commonly  looped,  the  non-looped  form  is  very  frequent.  Tlie
long  dashes  through  or  over  the  t's,  which  are  a marked  feature  of  the
K.  H.  writing ; may  lie  merely  the  expansion  of  a liabit  of  Madame
Blavatsky’s,  in  Avhose  oi-dinary  writings  these  dashes  are  just  as
jwonounced  as  they  are  in  the  earliest  K.  H.  documents.

Preceding  upstrokes,  which  are  preAmlent  in  Madame  BhiAmtsky’s
ordinaiy  handwriting,  are  far  more  numerous  in  the  earliest  than  in
the  latest  K.  H.  documents.

The  German  type  of  may  Tie  mentioned  as  a letter  which  has  been
gradually  eliminated  from  the  Iv.  H.  Avriting,  but  I shall  have  more  to
.say  about  this  further  on.

I liaA'e  noAv  in  my  liands  the  Koot  Hoomi  letter,  the  greater  part
of  Avhicli  is  quoted  by  Mr.  Sinnett  in  “ The  Occult  World,"  pp.  85-95.
It  bears  the  date  of  November  1st  (1880),  and  is  signed  in  full,  “ Koot
Hoomi  Lai  Sing,”  by  Avhich  name  it  may  be  designated.  The  second
group  of  capital  letters  in  the  Plate  is  taken  from  this  document ; the
first  group,  Avhich  I Avill  call  (B'),  is  taken  from  undisputed  Avritings  of
IMadame  Blavatsky — from  the  same  documents  Avhence  the  small
letters  (B)  are  taken.  These  capital  letters.  A,  D,  F,  P,  T,  I’equire  but
little  comment.  The  D,  F,  and  T,  of  the  Koot  Hoomi  Lai  Sing  are
especially  suggestive  of  Madame  Blavatsky’s  handiwork,  and  they  soon
disappear  from  the  K.  H.  documents.  The  hook  above,  at  the
end  of  the  roof-stroke  of  the  first  Koot  Hoomi  T,  presents  a similar
.appearance  to  that  shoAvn  by  a form  of  T Avhich  occurs  in  a letter  of
Madame  Blavatsky’s  in  1878.  The  common  forms  of  F and  T in  the
K.  H.  Avri tings  are  quite  different  from  Madame  Blavatsky’s  usual  forms;
the  specimens  in  square  brackets  represent  the  type  commonly  found
in  the  Koot  Hoomi  I^al  Sing.  Tlie  chai’acteristic  features  Avhich  occur
in  the  P’s  of  (B')  and  those  of  Koot  Hoomi  Lai  Sing  may  be  noted.
The  long  preliminary  upstroke,  the  crook  to  the  left  at  the  end  of  the
doAvnstroke,  seen  also  in  the  F’s  and  the  T’s,  the  doAvnward  curl  Avhich
begins  the  umbrella  cuiwature  aboA'e,  the  turn  to  the  left  which  ends  it,
and  the  little  final  scrape  doAvnAvards.  Some  of  these,  as  also  some  of
the  characteristics  of  the  T),  remain  throughout  the  K.  H.  Avriting,  but
others  almost  completely  disappear.

II.  We  are  iioav  to  consider  letters  Avhich  are  proper  to  Madame
Blavatsky’s  ordinary  Avriting,  and  not  to  the  K.  H.  Avriting,  but  Avhich  yet
occasionally  appear  in  the  latter — apparently  by  mistake.  An  attempt
is  often  made  to  remedy  the  mistake  by  afterstrokes,  transforming  the
letter  into  the  K.  H.  type.  Such  additions,  reformations,  cloakings
and  erasures  occur  in  the  case  both  of  small  and  of  capital  letters  ; they
appear  to  me  to  be  especially  significant,  and  to  place  it  almost  beyond


On  Phenomena  connected  with  Thcosophi/.


287


a doubt  that  the  person  who  wrote  the  K.  H.  mss.  where  they  occur
was  in  the  habit  of  producing  a different  handwriting,  and  that  that
person  was  Madame  Blavatsky.  I find  numerous  instances  throughout
the  K.  H.  documents  wliich  I have  examined,  but  especially  in  tlie
earlier  ones,  and  will  mention  a few  of  the  letters  in  which  these  mistakes
have  been  made.

Tlie  letter  e in  Madame  Blavatsky’s  ordinary  writing  is  uniformly
made  upon  the  common  type  which  we  are  all  taught  in  copybooks,  but
when  it  begins  a word  in  the  K.  H.  writing,  it  is  formed  on  the  same
tyjie  as  Madame  Blavatsky’s  capital  E in  her  ordinary  writing.  Yet
in  the  early  K.  H.  documents  there  are  many  instances  where  the  initial
small  e was  at  first  well  formed  in  the  ordinaiy  way,  and  then  transfonned
into  the  other  type  by  tlie  addition  of  a second  curve  at  tlie  top  ; there
are  instances  also  where  the  transformation  was  never  made,  and  tlie
initial  e of  the  ordinary  type  still  remains.

Instances  occur  in  the  K.  H.  writings  of  the  form  of  k which  is
most  characteristic  of  Madame  Blavatsky ; sometimes  the  form  has
been  cloaked  by  an  afterstroke,  as  in  the  case  already  mentioned,  and
sometimes  not.

The  letter  x in  tlie  K.  H.  writings  is  formed  even  from  the
first  in  an  entirely  different  way  from  that  used  by  Madame  Blavatsky
in  her  ordinary  writing ; a different  form  would  seem  to  have  been
deliberately  and  successfully  adopted.  Nevertheless,  there  are  one  or
two  cases  where  Madame  Blavatsky’s  ordinary  x was  first  made,
and  the  K.  H.  x superposed;  and  I have  also  discovered,
in  the  Koot  Hoomi  writings  now  in  my  hands,  two  instances — pure
and  free,  undimnied  by  any  cloakings,  and  untouched  by  any  after-
strokes— of  INIadame  Blavatsky’s  own  x.  One  of  these  stray  a:’*'  abides
near  the  sheltering  presence  of  a capital  Q lieginning  theword  “Quixottes”
(sic.),  which  is  suggestive  of  Madame  Blavatsky’s  peculiar  form,  and
which  is  very  different  from  the  Q which  I have  found  oftenest  in  the
K.  H.  writing.  Another  Q which  I have  found  in  the  K.  H.
writing  bears  a much  closer  resemblance  to  Madame  Blavatsky’s
ordinary  Q.

There  are  several  conspicuous  instances  of  alterations  in  the  K.  H.
capital  B,  Madame  Blavatsky’s  usual  form  having  been  first  made
either  partially  or  entirely.  I have  observed  two  very  notable  and
indubitable  specimens  of  this ; an  altered  capital  B,  which  the  reader
will  find  in  Plate  II.,  K.  H.  (I),  I regard  as  a doubtful  case.

Madame  Blavmtsky  uses  two  forms  of  cajntal  P,  the  one  illustrated
in  the  Plate,  and  another,  perhaps  the  commoner  of  the  two,  which
shows  a very  different  type.  I have  seen  a specimen  of  the  latter  in  the
K.  H.  Ih^pp.,  and  there  are  several  very  closely  resembling  it  in  the
K.  H.  MSS.  in  my  posse.ssion.


288


Mr.  Hodgson's  Report


Many  other  instances  miglit  be  given  nncler  tins  head,  and  some-
thing like  the  counter23art  of  what  I liave  been  pointing  out  is  also
true — viz.,  that  forms  of  letters  proper  to  the  K.  H.  writing,  and  not  to
Madame  Blavatsky’s  ordinary  Avriting,  occasionally  appear  in  the  latter.

This  is  perhaps  tlie  most  convenient  place  to  mention  the  stroke
over  the  m.  Tliis  stroke,  which  is  a peculiar  and  ajAjiarently  meaning-
less feature  of  the  K.  H.  Aviiting,  occurs  seA^eral  times  over
letters  Avdiich  resemble  an  English  in  in  some  Russian  wiiting'
which  I have  seen  by  Madame  BlaA’atsky.  There  are  two  Russian
letters  which  resemble  the  English  m,  and  these,  I am  informed
by  Mr.  W.  R.  8.  Ralston,  “being  much  alike  wlien  Avritten  carelessly,
they  are  sometimes,  but  rarely,  Aviitten  ” Avitli  a stroke  above  andbeloAv
resjiectively.  This  may  suggest  tlie  origin  of  the  stroke  OA’er  the  rn  in
tiie  Root  Hoomi  Avritings.

III.  I shall  noAV  2)i'oceed  to  sIioav  that  there  are  fundamental
peculiarities  in  some  of  Madame  BlaA^atsky’s  formations  of  certain
.small  letters  Avhicli  are  found  throughout  all  the  K.  If.  u-ritings
■u.fdcliIlMve  examined,  excepit  those  loh  lch  there  are  strong  positive  grounds
for  attributing  to  the  authorship  of  Mr.  Damodar.

The  evidence  Avliich  Ave  are  iioav  to  consider  is,  in  my  vieAv,  the
most  im^Aortant  of  all  in  proof  of  the  fact  tliat  the  K.  H.  Avritings
in  general  are  the  liandiAvmrk  of  Madame  Blavatsky.  This  evidence
cle^Jends  on  Madame  Blavateky’s  formation  of  the  group  of  letters  a,  d,
g,  o,  and  q.  The  joeculiarities  exliibited  in  these  letters  are  Amry
striking ; tliey  are  sufficiently  shoAvn  in  the  sjAecimens  of  a,  d,  o,  and  q,
Avhich  I have  given  in  group  B"  (all  tlie  letters  in  Avhich  are  taken
fi'om  tlie  undoubt'ed  Avritings  of  Madame  BlaA'atsky),  and  are  ajAparent
also  in  the  ditferent  groups  of  g’s  Avhich  I have  given  as  mani-
festing the  evolution  of  the  cliaractei'i.stic  K.  H.  g.  A properly  made
“ o ” formation  is  uncommon  both  in  Madame  Blavatsky’s  ordinary
haiulAvriting  and  in  the  Iv.  II.  Aviutings.  If  the  letter  requiring  such  a
formation  is  initial,  or  not  connected  Avith  the  preceding  letter,  the
tendency  in  both  liandAvritings  is  to  produce  a formation  akin  to  those
shoAvn  in  the  first  four  a’s,  the  first  three  English  d's,  and  the  first  four  q's.
1 f the  letter  is  connected  Avith  the  jAA’eceding  letter,  the  tendency  is  either
to  begin  the  “ o ” formation  high  up  Avith  a loop,  as  happens  most
commonly  in  the  case  of  the  d,  leaving  a gajA  abov'e, — or  to  begin  it
loAv  doAvn,  in  Avhich  case  the  curve  is  rarely  closed  by  a conqilete
baclvAvard  stroke, — and  a peculiar  gap  therefore  remains  on  the  left-
Jiand  side.  This  last  method  of  formation,  which  I shall  call  the  leg’t-
gap  stroke,  may  be  clearly  seen  in  some  of  the  q's  and  d’s,  and  is  yet
more  noticeable  in  the  g's  and  ofs,  of  Avhich  last  especially  it  is
die  common,  conspicuous,  and  most  h igldg  characteristic  feature,  hotlb  in
Madame  Blavalskg's  ordinary  writing  and  in  those  If.  II.  writings


On  Phenomena  connected  icith  Theosojihij.


289


^chicli  I attribute  to  her*  It  is  so  peculiai’,  that  were  it  found  but
rarely  in  both  sets  of  writings,  or  commonly  in  one  and  rarely  in
the  other,  it  would  still  be  a tolerably  definite  indication  of  identity
of  handiwork  : but  when  we  find,  as  we  do,  that  it  occurs  constantly
in  both  sets  of  writings,  that  any  otlier  form  (except  the  initial
forms  sj^oken  of)  is  comjtaratively  rare,  and  that  numerous  vaiieties
of  tlie  type  in  the  one  set  of  writings  can  be  exactly  paralleled
in  the  other,  there  can,  I think,  be  little  doubt  that  one  and  the  same
person  wielded  tlie  pen  throughout.  Ordy  a few  specimens  of  these
peculiai'  letters  are  given  in  tlie  plate.  Sometimes  the  stroke  ends  by
rolling  into  the  riglit-hand  part  of  the  curve,  so  that  in  tlie  case  of  tlie
<i  tlie  remaining  part  of  the  letter,  which  is  commonly  made
with  a new  stroke  of  the  pen,  aiipears  to  be  almost  or  quite
oontinuous  witii  the  first  stroke.  Frequently  the  second  part
of  tlie  letter  is  quite  unconnected  with  the  first  part,  and  frequently  it
begins  in  the  heart  of  the  space  partially  enclosed  liy  the  first  stroke.
.Sometimes,  again,  the  first  stroke  travels  farther  back  to  the  left  than
its  origin,  still  leaving  a gaj^,  and  sometimes,  but  seldom,  it  even  joins
its  origin,  so  as  to  form  a complete  enclosure.  It  must  be  difficult  for
jiny  person  to  trace  this  left-gap  stroke  throughout  a seiies  of  Madame
Blavatsky’s  acknowledged  writings,  and  throughout  a set  of  what  I
believe  to  be  her  K.  II.  wiltings,  compaiing  in  detail  all  the
swii'ling  ti'icks  and  fantastic  freaks  of  curvature  which  it  adopts,  and
at  tlie  same  time  resist  tlie  impression  that  the  same  person  executed
them  all.

There  are  two  types  of  d given  in  the  plate,  which  I may  speak  of  as
the  German  d (enclosed  in  square  brackets)  and  the  English  d.  It  is  the
English  tyjie  which  is  almost  universally  assumed  by  the  d in  all  but  tlie
earliest  writings;  while  the  German  type  is  now  almost  exclusively  used
by  Madame  Blavatsky  in  her  oi'dinary  wi-iting.  In  the  early  Root  Hoomi
writings,  however,  there  are  many  instances  of  the  German  d,  and  in
Madame  Blavatsky’s  writings  of  1878  and  1879  the  English  d frequently
occurs.  The  first  part  of  the  English  d is  formed  like  the  initial  a's,  or  with
a loop,  and  there  is  frequently  a wide  gap  between  the  loop  and  the  final
down  stroke  of  the  letter,  which  is  often  clipped  short,  as  shown  in  some
of  the  instances  in  the  Group  (B").  This  looped  d with  the  wide  gap  and
the  clipped  down  stroke  1 shall  call  the  clipped  loose  d ; it  is  the  character-
istic foim  of  tlie  developed  K.  H.  writing,  and  among  the  English  d's
of  Madame  Blavatsky’s  undoubted  handwi'iting  it  is  also  of  common
occurrence.  But  some  persons  wdio  possess  writings  of  Madame

* Mr.  Gribble,  in  his  pamphlet,  “A  Ifeport  of  an  Examination  into  the
Elavatsky  Correspondence,”  Ac.,  lias  drawn  special  attention  to  this  left  gap-
stroke  in  Madame  Blavatsky’s  ordinary  writing,  and  to  the  significance  of  its
occnrrence  in  some  K.  H.  writing.

O


290


Mr.  Hodgson's  Beport


lilaviitsky  may,  perhaps,  be  unable  to  find  any  specimens  at  all  of  the
English  d in  her  writing  ; and  this  brings  me  to  the  additional  evidence
which  I said  at  the  beginning  of  this  part  of  my  report  would  be  forth-
coming in  proof  of  the  fact  that  Madame  Blavatsky  wrote  the  Blavatsky-
(Joulomb  letters.

In  three  letters  written  l)y  Madame  Blavatsky  in  1878,  the  English
d occurs  about  80  times  and  tlie  German  d about  340  times.  In  a letter
to  Mr.  Massey  of  July,  1879,  the  English  d occurs  about  130  times  and
the  German  d about  .52.5  times.  In  her  three  writings  to  Mr.
Iluine,  ah’eady  mentioned,  of  about  1881-82,  the  English  d occurs
4 times  and  the  German  d about  674  times.  In  three  letters  (and  two
envelopes)  to  Mr.  Massey  in  1884  the  English  d occurs  6 times  and  the
German  d about  1106  times.  In  four  letters  (and  two  envelopes)  to  Mr.
Myers  in  1884  the  English  d occurs  5 times  and  the  German  d about
400  times.  In  the  Elberfeld  letter  to  Dr.  Hartmann,  1884,  d occurs
39  times,  and  is  always  of  the  German  type.

In  the  B.  Replies  the  English  d occurs  about  140  times  and  the
German  d about  220  times,  and  in  B.  Marginal  Notes  the  English  d
occurs  6 times  and  the  German  d about  89  times.  These  writiims  were

O

produced  in  the  time  covered  by  the  last  few  days  of  1884  and  the
first  few  days  of  1885,  the  Marginal  Notes  being  for  the  most  part
slightly  later  than  the  Replies.

Now,  it  can  hardly  fail  to  be  regarded  as  singular  that  the  English
d being  thus  frecpient  (about  210  to  865)  in  Madame  Blavatsky’s
ordinary  writings  in  1878  and  1879,  and  being  thus  rare  (15  to
about  2,200,  and  7 out  of  these  15  occur  on  envelojies)  in  Madame
Blavatsky’s  writings  from  1881  to  1884,  should  suddenly  be  found  in
such  abundance  as  appears  in  the  B.  Replies,  and  I have  been
able  myself  to  account  for  this  singular  fact  in  only  one  Avay.  Before
INIadame  Blavatsky’s  arrival  at  Adyar  at  the  end  of  1884,  Mr.  J.  D.  B.
Gril)ble,  of  Madras,  had  published  “ A Beport  of  an  Examination
into  the  Blavatsky  Correspondence  Published  in  the  Christian
College  Magazine,"  and  in  that  report  he  drew  special  attention,
in  connection  with  the  Blavatsky-Coulomb  letter  dated  1st  April,
1884,  to  the  uniformity  of  the  small  d of  tlie  German  ty2ie.  Now
hladame  Blavatsky  knew  that  I was  desirous  of  obtaining  a sjAecimen
of  her  undoubted  Avriting  for  the  purpose  of  testing  the  Blavatsky-
Coulomb  letters ; and  she  kneAV  that  I Avould  not  use  a letter  professedly
Avi'itten  to  meet  my  requirement  since  I had  already  declined  the  offer
made  by  Colonel  Olcott,  I .assume  at  her  instigation,  that  she  should
Avrite  such  a letter  (see  p.  281).  Is  it  not  possible  that  she  hoped,  never-
theless, that  I might  use  as  my  standard  a document  Avritten  by  her
osten.sibly  Avith  quite  another  object  ? Had  I used  the  B.  Replies,  Avith
its  numerous  English  d's,  as  a standard  of  reference  for  the  BlaA’atsky-


On  Phenomena  connected  with  Theosophy.


291


Coulomb  letters,  I should  have  been  compelled  to  conclude  tliat  the  rarity
of  the  English  d in  the  disputed  documents  was  certainly  an  argument
in  favour  of  their  having  been  forged.  But  a comparison  of  the  B.  Replies
in  this  respect  with  other  wiitings  of  Madame  Blavatsky  shows  that
uncpiestionably  this  frequency  of  the  English  d is  foreign  to  Madame
Blavatsky’s  ordinary  writing  produced  about  the  same  time  as  the  Jl-
Replies,  or  during  the  four  previous  years.  I cannot  help  thinking
therefore  that  the  use  of  these  English  d's  was  deliberate,  and  that
they  were  inserted  for  the  special  purpose  of  misleading  me  in  one  of
the  most  important  parts  of  my  investigatio]i.  In  one  or  two  other
minor  points  Madame  Blavatsky  has  also,  I think,  in  the  B.  Replies,
altered  her  usual  handwriting.  If  I am  right  in  this  conclusion  it
would  follow  that  Madame  Blavatsky  has  resorted  to  a device  which  an
innocent  pei’son  would  scarcely  be  likely  to  adopt;  and  when  I take  all
the  circumstances  into  consideration,  remembering  especially  tliat
Madame  Blavatsky  was  entirely  unaware,  as  I believe,  that  I intended
to  send  some  of  the  disputed  documents  to  England  for  examination —
the  manuscript  in  question  alibrds,  in  my  opinion,  strong  conliianatory
evidence  of  her  authorship  of  the  Blavatsky-Ooulomb  letters.

To  return  to  the  K.  H.  writings,  it  is  strongly  suggested  by  tlie
foregoing  facts  concerning  Madame  Blavatsky’s  d's  that,  since  the-
appearance  of  K.  H.  writing  with  the  English  d as  the  regular  form,
she  has  aimed  at  eliminating  the  Englisli  type  from  her  ordinary  hand-
writing, and  using  there  the  German  type ; but  wha,t  we  have  especially
to  note  here  is  that  the  very  marked  peculiarities  which  characterise
the  formation  of  tlie  English  d in  her  acknowledged  handwriting,
also  characterise  its  fonnation  in  the  K.  H.  manuscript  which  I
attribute  to  her.

There  are  other  minor  peculiarities  common  to  both  sets  of  writings.
One  of  these,  which  occurs  in  the  formation  of  the  letter  1,  deserves
special  mention,  and  several  specimens  are  given  in  the  Plate  (B").  ‘When
final,  it  is  frequently  clipped  very  short ; not  only  is  the  last  upstroke
frequently  wanting,  but  the  main  downstroke  is  often  carried  no  further
than  its  junction  with  the  first  upstroke  of  the  letter,  so  that  the  letter
remains  as  a mere  loop.  Moreover,  in  the  case  of  It,  the  second  I is
not  only  frequently  clipped  short,  but  it  takes  a different  angle  from
that  of  the  previous  I (compare  also  the_^’),  not  rising  so  high,  and  pre-
senting the  appearance  of  tumbling  over  to  the  right.  These  forms  of
I are  common  both  in  Madame  Blavatsky’s  undoubted  writing,  and  in
the  K.  H.  MSS.  which  I believe  to  have  been  written  by  her.

The  peculiar  formations  in  the  group  of  letters  a,  d,  y,  o
and  q,  were  entirely  absent  from  the  Iv.  II.  (Y),  but  they  wer:;
present  in  the  other  K.  H.  documents  which  I had  the  opportunity
of  carefully  examining  in  India.  In  some  of  these  latter  documents


292


Mr.  Hodgson’s  Report


there  were  further  traces  of  Madame  Blavatsky’s  handiwork — p g.,
in  the  K.  H.  IGipp.  there  were  various  alterations,  and  the  word
■or  letters  altered  were  usually  crossed  out,  but  in  three  places
-careful  erasures  liad  been  made,  and  these  erasures  were  just  where
the  K.  H,  k laid  been  afterwards  formed.  In  two  of  these
■cases  I was  unable  to  determine  what  the  previous  formation  had
l)een,  but  in  the  third  I could  still  trace  the  outline  of  Madame
Blavatsky’s  characteristic  k.  In  anotlier  place  in  the  same  MS.,  the
word  “ Buddhist  ” had  been  inserted  afterwards  in  faint  lead-pencil ;
this  was  written  in  Madame  Blavatsky’s  ordinary  handwriting;  upon
it  had  been  written,  in  ink,  the  same  word  in  the  K.  H.  writing,  but
■the  pencil  marks  had  not  been  erased.  In  the  Iv.  H.  document  alleged
by  Madame  Fadeeff  to  have  been  received  by  her  at  Odessa  from  “ un
messager  a ligure  asiatique,  qui  disparut  sous  rnes  yeux  mcmes,"  Madame
Blavatsky’s  characteristic  a formations  were  present,  and  there  were
also  many  in.stances  of  the  after  stroke  transforming  a well-formed  copy-
book e into  the  Greek  type.  These  were  the  most  noticeable  of  those
features  of  the  document'  which  struck  me  in  the  two  or  three  minutes’
inspection  of  it  which  I had  the  opportunity  of  making.

I have,  I think,  said  enough  to  justify  my  conclusion  that  Madame
Elavatsky  was  the  writer  of  nearly  all  the  K.  II.  documents  which  I
have  seen.  And  since  those  which  I attribute  to  her  include,  among
■others,  the  whole  of  the  K.  H.  manuscrijit  forwarded  to  me  by  Mr.
Hume,  as  well  as  every  .specimen  of  the  series  lent  to  us  by  Mr.  Sinnett,
I think  I may  assume  that  by  far  the  greater  portion  of  the  K.  H.
MSS.  is  the  handiwork  of  Madame  Blavatsky.

Different  specimens  of  Madame  Blavatsky’s  ordinary  writing  and


* I think  it  not  improbable  tliat  this  document  was  written  by  Madame
Blavatsky  in  1879  or  1880  when  tlie  idea  of  corresiionding  with  one  of  the
“Brothers”  ajtjiears  to  liave  been  lir.st  mooted.  In  weighing  the  statement  of
Madame  Fa<leetf  tliat  slie  received  the  document  about  the  year  1870,  we  should
remember  that  she  is  a Kussian  lady,  and  the  aunt  of  Madame  Blavatsky,  and
that  Madame  Blavatsky  may  have  been  inlluenced  by  political  motives  in  the
founding  of  the  Theo-soidiical  Society  {vid.  p.  3U).  It  may  be  mentioned  here
that  INIadame  Blavatsky,  when  she  heard  that  Mr.  Hormusji  had  given  evidence
that  he  had  received  a brooch  from  her  for  repair,  wliich  resembled  the  one
afterwards  prodiiced  at  Simla  for  INIrs.  Hume,  first  alleged  (to  IMr.  Hume)  that
the  brooch  Mr.  Hormusji  had  seen  was  square,  and  a few  days  later  (to  myself)
that  it  was  round,  and  had,  indeed,  some  resemblance  to  Mrs.  Hume’s,  that  she
(Madame  Blavatsky)  had  purchased  it  for  her  niece,  and  that  I could  ohlain
confirmation  from  Madame  Fadeeff.  Considering  Madame  Blavatsky’s  con-
tradictory statements  about  the  brooch,  this  ready  reference  to  Dladame  Fadeeff,
in  connection  with  it,  suggests  that  she  was  a convenient  per.son  to  appeal
to  when  no  other  corroboration  of  iladame  Blavatsky’s  assertions  could  he
■obtained.


On  Phenomena  connected  with  Theonoplnj.


29S


the  K.  II.  writing  may  be  seen  in  the  Plates  which  accompany  this-
Report,  and  IMrs.  Sidgwick’s  corroboration  of  my  observations  will  bo-
found  in  Appendix  XV.

I shall  now  proceed  to  give  the  barest  possible  outline  of  the  results-
of  my  examination  of  sundry  other  documents,  and  begin  with  the
K.  II.  (Y).  It  was  this  letter  to  which  Dr.  Hartmann  referred  when
he  wrote  to  us  last  year  that  it  was  “handed  to  me  by  Damodar,  who-
received  it  in  my  pi’esence  from  the  hands  of  the  astral  form  of  a
Chela.”  In  his  pamphlet,  p.  .33,  he  wrote  also:  “we  . . were  engaged

in  drawing  up  the  charges  [against  the  Coulombs]  in  my  room,  when
the  astral  body  of  a Chela  ap^^eared,  and  handed  the  following  letter
to  Damodar.”  Madame  Blavatsky,  in  a letter  to  Mr.  C.  C.  Massey,  on
May  4th,  1884,  wrote,  apparently  concerning  this  letter:  “When  the
Council  assembled  and  the  Board  of  Trustees  were  ready  to  lay  tlu^-
black  charges  against  her  and  have  her  expelled — there  falls  on  the
table  a letter  of  IMahatma  K.  H.  to  the  Board,  and  d(fendinfi  her,
speaking  with  his  Chri.st-like  forgiveness  and  kindness,  and  saying  that
she  was  a victim  and  not  a culprit,  and  that  it  would  one  day  be
proved.”  I asked  Dr.  Hartmann  about  this  incident,  and  he  told  me
that  Mr.  Damodar  had  left  the  room  (Dr.  Hartmann’s),  where  he  had
been  talking  with  Dr.  Hartmann,  but  had  returned  almost  immediate!}'
with  the  letter  in  question,  saying  that  he  had  just  received  it  from
the  “astral  form  of  a Chela”!  Madame  Coulomb  alleges  that  she
peeped  through  a small  hole  which  she  had  j^reviously  bored  through
the  wooden  partition  which  formed  one  side  of  Air.  Damodar’s  room,
and  that  she  saw  him  preparing  this  Alahatma  letter  ; and  I certainly
found  a small  hole  such  as  Aladame  Coulomb  described  to  me,  which
looked  as  if  it  had  been  made  on  purpose  to  serve  as  a spy-hole.

On  comparing  the  K.  11.  (Y),  in  India,  with  ether  K.  H.  mss.  in  my
hands  at  the  time,  I noted  that  there  was  a close  similarity  as  regards-
particular  chai’.acteristics  of  the  Iv.  H.  writing,  as  in  the  curls  to  the  left
of  the  downsti'okes  of  g,  j and  y,  the  stroke  over  the  in,  the  formation  of
the  initial  small  e,  the  x,  p,  ifec.  In  short,  those  peculiar  forms  which
I suppose  Aladame  Blavatsky  to  have  deliberately  and  successfully
employed  in  the  developed  K.  H.  writing,  and  which  she  would
natui’ally  teach  as  characteri.stics  of  the  handwriting  to  any  person
whom  she  wished  to  train  in  the  art  of  writing  it,  were  strongly  marked
in  the  K.  H.  (Y).  There  were,  however,  certain  differences  between
this  document  and  the  other  K.  H.  writings  with  which  I compared  it.

1.  It  contained  not  a single  instance  of  the  '•’‘left-gap  stroke,”  or  of
the  clipped  loose  d.

2.  There  was  not  a single  upstroke  preceding  the  words,  31  in
number,  beginning  with  m,  n,  or  i.


'-94  Mr.  Ilochjson's  Report

3.  The  abbreviated  <£•  Avas  very  different  from  any  specimen  in  the
-otlier  K.  H.  writings.

4.  The  curl  to  the  left  at  the  end  of  the  downstroke  in  g,  j,  and  g,
was  made  stiffly,  starting  abruptly  from  the  end  of  the  downstroke.

5.  It  shoAved  a habit  of  strongly  looping  tlie  main  doAvnstrokes  of
certain  letters — a habit  which  appeared  especially  in  the  capital  M and
the  small  d.  This  habit  is,  in  the  case  of  these  letters,  foreign  to  the
ordinary  K.  H.  Avritings,  but  is  eminently  suggestive  of  Mr.  Damodar’s
handiAvork.

6.  The  capital  D Avas  different  from  either  of  the  two  forms  usual
in  the  K.  H.  Avritings.  The  final  loop  of  the  D touched  Avithout
passing  to  the  left  of  the  main  downstroke.  Tliis  D was  a facsimile  of
some  which  I found  in  Mr.  Damodar’s  ordinary  Avriting.

7.  There  were  six  instances  of  a peculiar  small  a,  of  which  I
could  not  find  a single  instance  in  the  K.  H.  IGfpp.,  but  which  is
A’ery  common  in  Mr.  Damodar’s  ordinary  Avriting.

8.  The  style  Avas  much  less  floAving  than  is  usual  in  the  K.  H.
handAvritings,  but  I do  not  attribute  much  importance  to  this  fact.

There  Avere  other  minor  differences,  and  my  examination  of  the
document  led  me  to  the  conclusion  that  it  Avas  certainly  not  Avritten
liy  Madame  Blavatsky,  and  that  it  Avas  probably  written  by  Mr.
Damodar.  This  conclusion  has  been  strengthened  by  my  examination
of  a document,  Avhich  I shall  call  K.  H.  (Z),  submitted  to  us  for
examination  liy  Mr.  B.  J.  Padsliah,  avIio  received  it  last  year  direct
from  Adyar,  in  reply  to  a letter  Avhicli  he  had  sent,  and  Avho  thinks
that  Madame  Blavatsky  could  not  have  knoAvn  anything  about  the
letter,  she  being  at  the  time  in  Europe.  The  letter  is  .about  the  same
length  .as  K.  H.  (Y),  nearly  tAvo  p.ages  of  note-p.aper.

1.  It  contains  not  a single  instance  of  the  peculiarities  Avhich  I
have  described  in  the  group  of  letters  a,  d,  g,  and  o.  (The  letter  q does
not  occur.)

2.  There  is  only  one  case  of  a preceding  upstroke  in  the  16  words
beginning  Avith  i,  and  only  one  very  doubtful  case  of  a preceding  upstroke
in  the  18  Avords  beginning  Avith  m or  n.

3.  It  contains  an  abbreviated  of  the  same  formation  as  that
noted  in  the  K.  H.  (Y).

4.  The  turns  to  the  left  at  the  end  of  the  doAvnstroke  in  g,  j,  and  y
haA’e  .an  angular  corner,  and  the  curvature  of  the  stroke  to  the  left  is
ahvays  concave  doAviiAvards,  never  concave  upwards.

.6.  Several  of  the  d's  have  the  main  downstroke  A’ery  strongly
looped.

G.  A capital  L on  the  euA’ elope  is  difierent  from  any  L Avhich  I have
found  in  Avhat  I may  noAv  call  the  Blavatsky  K.  II.  Avritings.

7.  Mr.  Damodar’s  peculiar  a formation,  Avhich  I Avill  describe


On  Phenomena  connected  with  Thcosophi/.


295


presently,  is  obvious  in  two  a's,  and  there  are  clear  traces  of  it  in  other
■rt’s,  which  are  now  soniewliat  blurred.  A similar  formation  occurs  in
six  (j's,  and  the  tendency  to  this  formation  in  other  instances  is
manifest.

8.  The  style  is  less  flowing  than  is  usual  in  the  K.  H.  handwritings.

9.  The  main  downstroke  of  the  initial  t [type  of  the  first  t in  tlie
B"  group]  of  a word  is  invariably  strongly  looped ; and  that  of  the
final  t [type  of  the  second  t in  the  B"  group]  is  almost  invariably
looped.

10.  The  main  downstroke  of  the  h and  the  h is  invariably  looped.

Both  K.  H.  (Y)  and  Iv.  H.  (Z)  are  written  in  blue  pencil,  whereas

the  K.  H.  documents  which  I have  hitherto  discussed  are  chiefly  written
in  ink.  Lest  it  should  be  maintained  that  the  differences  noted  are
due  to  this,  I shall  now  compare  this  K.  H.  (Z)  with  another  K.  H.
letter,  also  in  blue  pencil  (8pp.),  and  written  approximately  at  the
same  time.  It  was  received  by  Mr.  Myers  from  the  hands  of  Madame
Blavatsky  when  she  was  in  Cambridge  last  year,  and  I find — ■

1.  That  the  Blavatskian  peculiarities  which  I have  described  in  the
group  of  letters  a,  d,  g and  o,  abound  throughout.

2.  That  of  the  first  16  words  (excluding  four  doubtful  cases)  beginning
with  i,  10  have  a preceding  upstroke,  and  that  of  the  first  18  vmrds
beginning  with  m or  n,  9 have  a preceding  upstroke.

3.  The  form  of  & is  different  from  the  form  in  K.  H.  (Z).

4.  The  corners  of  the  turns  to  the  left  at  the  end  of  the  down-
strokes  in  g,  j and  y are  almost  invariably  rounded  and  the  curvature
of  the  stroke  to  the  left  is  almost  invariably  concave  upwards.

5.  There  is  no  instance  of  a d with  its  main  downstroke  strongly
looped.

6.  A capital  L which  occurs  is  different  from  that  in  K.  H.  (Z).

7.  There  is  one  solitary  instance  (in  the  8pp.)  of  an  a formation
wliich  resembles  those  common  in  Mr.  Damodar’s  writing,  but  the
specimen  is  somewhat  doubtful.  There  is  no  tendency  to  this  formation
in  other  instances.

8.  The  style  of  handwriting  is  much  freer  and  swifter  than  that  of
the  K.  H.  (Z).

9.  The  downstroke  of  the  initial  t is  rarely  so  strongly  looped  as  in
Iv.  H.  (Z),  and  is  frequently  not  looped  at  all ; and  that  of  the  final  t is
commonly  not  looped.

10.  The  main  downstroke  of  the  h and  the  h is  frequently  not  looped.

There  are  other  points  of  difference  between  the  two  documents,

whicli,  however,  it  is  unnecessary  to  enumerate.

On  the  importance  of  (1)  I need  not  dwell  any  further.  The
contrast  noted  in  (2)  is  also  true  to  a certain  extent  inj,  u and  v).  To
none  of  these  lettei’S  when  beginning  a word  is  there  any  preceding  up


296


3Tr.  Hodgson's  Report


stroke  in  K.  H.  (Z).  Preceding  upstrokes  to  tlie  letters  mentioned  are
common  in  Madame  Blavatsky’s  ordinary  wiiting,  but  except  in  the
cases  of  m and  n*  comparatively  rai’e  in  Mr.  Damodar’s  ordinary
writing.  Tlius  in  a letter  of  his,  written  la.st  year,  there  are
17  initial  i’s,  and  only  two  have  the  upstroke  ; tliere  are  31  initial
w’s,  and  not  one  has  the  upstroke,  though  there  may  be  a slight  doubt
in  two  cases.

The  strong  looping  of  the  main  downstroke  of  the  d is
characteristic  of  Mr.  Damodar’s  writing,  as  may  be  seen  from  tlie
instances  in  Plate  I.,  Group  (D).  The  specimens  in  tliis  Group  are
taken  from  a letter  written  by  IMr.  Damodar  in  August,  1884.  The
last  in.stance  is  e.specially  jieculiar,  where  the  up.stroke  touclies  tlie
initial  point  of  the  letter  and  the  main  downstroke  cuts  the  initial
stroke,  which  thus  divides  the  extraordinary  loop  of  the  d into  two-
])arts.  There  is  a conspicuous  example  of  exactly  this  form  in  tlie
K.  H.  (Z).  It  is  also  particularly  to  be  observed  that  not  only  is  there
no  instance  of  the  clipped  loose  d,  but  there  is  never  the  sliglitest
tendency  to  such  a formation.  There  is  not  a single  instance  where  the
preceding  letter  runs  into  the  initial  stroke  of  tlie  d so  as.
to  form  a loop  with  it,  and  the  structure  of  the  letter

througliout  exactly  conforms  to  the  structure  of  the  Englisli
d found  in  Mr.  Damodar’s  ordinary  writing.  Mr.  Damodar

indeed  frequently  leaves  a gap  in  liis  ordinary  writing  between  the
beginning  of  the  d and  the  main  downstroke  ; tliis  seems  to  be  pai’tly
due  to  rapid  writing,  but  there  is  apparently  one  instance  of  it  in  tlie
K.  H.  (Z),  and  two  other  in, stances  may  be  considered  doubtful,  though
I think  myself,  after  careful  examination  with  a lens,  that  the  appear-
ance of  a gap  in  these  tw’o  cases  is  due  simply  to  the  attrition  of  tlie

first  part  of  the  pencilled  stroke.  The  other  most  important  trace  of

Mr.  Damodar’s  handiwork  in  the  K.  H.  (Z)  is  the  presence  of  what  I
shall  call  the  beaked  a formation,  of  which  several  instances  are  given  in
the  Plate  (Group  D).  The  initial  point  of  the  letter  is  considerably  farther
to  the  right  than  the  top  of  the  straight  downstroke  of  the  letter,  which,
moreover,  does  not  reach  so  high  as  the  upper  curvature.  It  is  this
beaked  a formation  to  which  I refer  above  in  (7)  ; it  is  very  common
in  Mr.  Daniodar’s  ordinary  writing.

My  own  view  is  tliatMr.  Damodar  unquestionably  wrote  the  K.  H.  (Z)
as  well  as  the  K.  11.  (Y).  Mr.  Netherclift  has  had  no  opportunity  of
seeing  the  K.  H.  (Y),  Avhich  was  only  lent  to  me  for  a short  time  in  India,
but  the  K.  II.  (Z)  Avas  .submitted  to  him  Avitli  the  other  K.  H.

* The  initial  curve  beginning  tlie  m or  n strictly  forms  part  of  the  letter  in
ordinary  Avriting,  but  in  tlie  K.  H.  Avriting  these  letters  are  made  on  the
pattern  of  the  letters  f and  so  that  the  absence  of  a first  upstroke  is  less
curious  than  it  Avonld  otheiAvise  be.


On  Phenomena  eonnected  xvilh  Theosojoluj.


297


documents  upon  which  he  was  asked  to  give  a second  opinion,  with  the
additional  liglit  afforded  by  those  lent  to  us  by  Mr.  Sinnett.  Mr.
Netherclift,  in  his  second  report,  stated  as  his  opinion  that  it  was  “quite
impossible  that  Damodar  could  have  accommodated  his  usual  style  to
suit  that  of  K.  H.,”  and  altliough  he  admitted  that  lie  was  unable
to  find  in  it  an  instance  of  wliat  I have  called  the  left-gap  stroke,  and
that  it  was  less  like  Madame  Blavatsky’s  than  other  of  the  K.  H.
documents,  he  appeared  to  think  that  this  may  have  been  due  to  tlie
increased  wariness  of  Madame  Blavatsky,  and 'placed  it  with  the  others  as
being  unmistakably  her  handiwork.  I then  submitted  to  him  my
analysis  of  the  document,  and  he  kindly  undertook  to  make  a further
examination,  expressing  his  confidence  that  he  would  prove  to  me  that
the  conclusion  which  I had  reached  was  erroneous.  Tlie  result,  how-
ever, of  a prolonged  comparison  which  he  then  made  wms  that  he  frankly
confessed  that  my  view  was  the  correct  one,  saying  that  in  the  whole  course
of  his  many  years’  experience  as  an  expert,  he  had  “ never  met  a more
puzzling  case,”  but  that  he  was  at  last  “ thorougldy  convinced  that  ” the
K.  H.  (Z)  “was  written  by  Damodar  in  close  imitation  of  tlie  style  adopted
by  Madame  Blavatsky  in  the  K.  H.  papers.”

Specimens  of  the  K.  H.  (Z)  and  the  other  K.  H.  letter  witli
which  I have  compared  it  are  given  in  Plate  II.,  and  it  may  be
noticed  that  the  K.  H.  characteristics  in  the  former  are  almost
all  rigidly  of  one  variety,  as  we  might  expect  to  find  in  the  work  of  a
copyist  adhering  to  Ms  lesson.

I may  here  make  brief  reference  to  a long  account  of  the  professed
experiences  of  a native  witness,  which  was  sent  to  the  headquarters  of
the  Theosophical  Society  while  I was  in  India.  Mr.  Bhavani  Shankar
alleged  that  he  was  copying  this  account  for  me,  and  that  he  had
already  copied  a portion  of  it.  At  the  time  I tliought  it  rather  odd
that  I never  saw  him  actually  engaged  in  the  copying,  and  when  after
the  lapse  of  some  days  I found  that  the  document  was  not  ready,  I
doubted  whether  I should  receive  it  at  all.  Eventually,  however,  I ditl
receive  it,  and  with  the  explicit  declaration  of  Mr.  Bhavani  Sliankar
that  it  was  his  copy.  Tlie  pointedness  of  his  assurance  that  he  had
made  the  copy  caused  me  to  wonder  slightly  why  he  was  so  an.xious  to
let  me  have  what  I should  know  was  a specimen  of  his  handwriting ; and
the  probable  explanation  did  not  occur  to  me  till  some  time  afterwards,
when  I was  struck  by  observing,  in  the  document  in  question,  some
peculiarities  which  I had  noticed  in  the  ordinary  writing  of  i\Ir.
Damodar.  I then  made  a careful  examination  of  the  document,
and  found  that  it  had  every  appearance  of  having  been  written  by  Mr.
Damodar,  beginning  with  an  elaborate  though  clumsy  attempt  at
disguise,  and  ending  with  what  can  hardly  be  called  any  disguise  at  all.
This  Incident  has  confirmed  me  in  my  opinion  of  the  untrustwortliincss


■208


Hr.  Hodgson's  Report


of  botli  Mr.  Damoclar  and  Mr.  Bliavani  Shankar.  But  as  to  ■'vliy  Mr.
B)liavani  Shankar  should  liave  made  this  attempt  to  deceive  me  con-
cerning the  cliaracteristics  of  his  handwriting,  I liave  only  a conjectural
view.

My  examination  of  another  document  which  T saw  in  India  con-
tirmed  me  in  my  opinion  of  the  untrustworthiness  of  Mr.  Babajee  B>.
Nath.  This  document  was  written  in  green  ink,  and  purpoi'ted  to  be
the  work  of  a Chela  B.  D.  S.  (Bhola  Deva  Sarma).  The  disguise  seemed
to  me  to  be  very  puerile,  most  of  the  letters  being  of  the  copy-book
type ; one  or  two  of  Mr.  Babajee’s  habits  being  traceable  throughout,
while  the  name  Nath,  which  occurred  in  it,  was  almost  a facsimile  of  a
“ Nath  ” which  I found  in  Mr.  Babajee’s  ordinary  signature.

The  forged  Hartmann  document  (see  p.  280),  which  I believe  to  have
oeen  forged  by  Madame  Blavatsky,  for  the  purpose  of  attributing  it  to
the  Coulombs,  was  alleged  by  some  Theosophists  to  have  been  the  work  of
the  Coulombs,  on  the  ground  that  the  sentence,  “Excuse  short  letter.  I
am  writing  in  the  dark,”  suggested  a j^eculiarity  of  Madame  Coulomb’s,
that  “writing  in  the  dark”  meant  “writing  in  a hurry,”  and  in  proof
of  this  an  old  letter  of  Madame  Coulomb’s,  in  which  she  used  a similar
expres.sion,  was  producedy’roTO  <7te  of  Madame  Blavatsky.  I

saw  this  letter,  and  the  expression  there  appeared  to  me  to  be  meant
literally.  The  forged  document  may  possibly  have  been  intended  to
bear  traces  of  its  forgei’y  on  the  face  of  it,  though  of  this  I cannot  be
sure.  The  imitation  of  Dr.  Hartmann’s  characteristics  is  for  the  most
paid  exceedingly  close,  and  on  this  point  I must  differ  entirely  from
]Mr.  Cribble,*  who  was  evidently  unfamiliar  with  Dr.  Hartmann’s
writing  ; moreover,  bad  spelling  is  noticeable  in  the  document,  and  bad
spelling  of  a similar  character  is  noticeable  also  in  Dr.  Hartmann’s
wi’itings  ; but  Dr.  Hartmann  himself  asserts  that  the  letter  is  a forgery,
and  the  fact  that  it  contains  fourteen  remakings  of  letters  is  enough  to
confirm  his  statement.  Although  there  were  ll  remakings  of  letters,
there  was  only  one  erasure  ; this  was  in  the  k of  the  word  dark.  Dr.
Hartmann’s  k is  peculiar;  so  is  Madame  Blavatsky’s;  but  the
erasure  had  been  so  thoroughly  made  that  I was  unable  to  trace  the

*“A  Report  of  an  Examination  into  the  Blavatsky  Correspondence,”  &c.,
p.  7.  Mr.  Grihhle  says: — “The  only  instance  .in  which  any  resemblance  to
.Dr.  Hartmann’s  writing  is  to  be  found  is  in  the  formation  of  the  capital  H,”  and
lie  mentions  the  capital  letters  A and  T,  and  no  others,  as  exhibiting
peculiarities  which  reminded  him  of  “similar  letters  to  be  found  in  Madame  B. ’s
acknowledged  writings.”  The  A and  T are,  in  my  opinion,  not  more  suggestive
of  Madame  Blavatsky  than  the  A and  T of  Dr.  Hartmann’s  undoubted  ordinary
writings.  I should  say  that  Mr.  Gribble  had  the  opportunity  of  e.xamining  the
document  only  very  hastily  during  a short  visit  of  an  hour  at  tlie  headcpiarters
of  tlie  Theosophical  Society,  when  he  examined  other  documents  also  ; and  this
no  doubt  accounts  for  the  mistakes  which  he  made  in  his  examination  of  it.


On  Phenomena  connected  with  Theosophy,


299


shape  of  the  letter  first  formed.  I compared  the  document  with
writing  of  M.  and  Madame  Coulomb,  and  could  not  find  in  it  any
traces  of  their  handiwork  ■,  but  comparing  it  with  Madame  Blavatsky’s
writings,  I found  several,  and  these  instances  formed  the  only  diver-
gencies which  I observed  from  Dr.  Hartmann’s  formations.  I attach
importance  to  the  following ; —

1 . The  figure  “ 8 ” in  the  dating  of  the  letter  was  not  Dr.  Hartmann’s,
but  Madame  Blavatsky’s.

2.  A capital  S w^as  not  Dr.  Hartmann’s,  but  Madame  Blavatsky’s.

3.  A small  z was  very  difl'erent  from  Dr.  Hartmann’s,  and  wms
almost  a facsimile  of  the  careful  in  the  IC.  H.  writings,  which  also
shows  exactly  the  same  type  as  the  careful  z (very  rare)  in  Madame
Blavatsky’s  ordinary  writing,  except  that  the  former  terminates  in  the
leftward  curl,  while  the  latter  termmates  in  the  usual  copy-book  up-
ward stroke,  trending  to  the  right,  cutting  the  lower  part  of  the  down-
stroke,  and  tlius  forming  a closed  loop  with  it.

4.  Dr.  Hartmann’s  small  x is  nearly  of  the  common  copy-book
type,  the  first  half  of  the  letter  being  formed  like  a reversed  c ; but  it
seems  that  he  habitually  keeps  his  pen  upon  the  paper  until  he  has  com-
pleted the  letter,  so  that  from  the  end  of  the  first  part  of  the  letter  a
diagonal  stroke  runs  up  to  the  beginning  of  the  second  part,  between  the
left  side  of  which  and  the  right  side  of  the  first  part  there  remains  a gap,
bridged  by  the  cross  stroke  ] at  a first  glance,  the  bridging  stroke  may
escape  notice,  and  the  x appear  to  be  of  the  copy-book  form.  How  x
occurs  three  times  in  the  forged  Hartmann  document.  The  first  of  these
is  formed  without  the  bridge,  and  the  two  strokes  of  the  letters  touch
each  other.  The  second  of  them  is  formed  like  Dr.  Hartmann’s  variety.
The  third  of  them,  however,  Avhich  occurs  in  the  last  sentence  of  the
letter,  ivas first  formed  as  Madame  Blavatsky’s  peculiar  x,  Dr.  HarUnann’ s
typeheing formed  over  it  ivithoutany  erasure’s  having  been  made.  On
close  inspection  this  was  clear  even  to  the  naked  eye,  and  examination
Avith  a lens  rendered  it  absolutely  unmistakable.

Let  us  noAv  consider  the  Mahatma  M.  endorsement  on  the  forced
Hartmann  document.

1.  In  fiA'e  of  the  seven  r’s  the  upper  loop  has  unmistakably  been
added  by  an  after  stroke,  and  apparently  in  the  other  two  also.  Very
heavily  croAvned  r’s  are  characteristic  of  the  M.  Avriting ; but  Madame
BlaA'atsky  in  her  ordinary  Avriting  is  frequently  obliged  to  tAvirl  the  top
•of  the  r Avith  an  afterstroke.  (Mr.  Gribble  also  regarded  the  r’s  of  this
document  a.s  suggestHe  of  Madame  BlaAmtsky.)

2.  The  letter  g in  the  Avords  good  and  forgery  exhibits  the  peculiar
left-gap  stroke.  The  gap  in  the  g of  goodhas,  been  partly  filled  by  another
stroke,  and  this  also  occasionally  but  rarely  happens  both  in  Madamo

V %


300


3Ir.  Hodgson’s  Report


Blavatsky’s  ordinary  writing  and  in  the  Iv.  II.  writing.  (See  the  final
«and  oil!  the  Plate,  Group  B".)

3.  The  letter  following  the  t in  the  word  “ enterprising  ” was
manifestly  first  made  as  ]\Iadame  Blavatsky’s  left-gap  stroke  a.  The
Avord  has  apparently  been  first  spelt  “ entaprising,”  and  the  second
part  of  the  a altered  into  an  r by  the  addition  of  a very  grotesque
loop,  awkwardly  placed  in  consequence  of  the  little  room  left  for  it.

I suppose  that  IMadame  Blavatsky,  having  forged  the  document  in
Dr.  Ilai’tmann’s  Avriting, and  enclosed  it  in  a “coA^er  postmarked  Madras,
in  Avhich  Colonel  Olcott  might  receive  it,  afterwards  obtained  it  again
surreptitiously  (on  finding,  as  I conjecture,  that  Colonel  Olcott  Avas  not
bringing  forward  the  document  and  stating  that  he  belieA'ed  it  to  be  a
forgery,  as  she  had  intended  him  to  do),  Avrote  the  endorsement  in  her
disguised  M.  handAvriting  and  replaced  it  in  Colonel  Olcott’s
despatch-box.  If  she  had  little  time  at  her  disposal  in  which  to  Avrite
the  endorsement,  this  Avould  account  for  the  exceptionally  glaring-
indications  of  her  handiAvork  Avhich  it  contains.

Everyone  Avill  admit,  I think,  that  the  forged  Hartmann  document
must  have  originated  either  with  the  Coulombs  or  Avith  Madame
Blavatsky.  If  the  Coulombs  Avere  the  authors,  it  is  difficult  to  see
the  point  of  the  last  sentence  about  “Avriting  in  the  dai’k,”  and  if  the
phrase  really  illustrates  a peculiarity  of  Madame  Coulomb’s,  an  old
letter  of  hers  in  the  possession  of  Madame  BlaAurtsky  being  adduced
as  proof,  tlie  Coulombs  Avould  seem  to  haA^e  committed  the  A-ery
curious  mistake  of  inserting  a statement  for  Avhat  looks  like  the  specific
purpose  of  indicating  themseh^es  as  the  authors.  That  they  should
not  only  have  done  this,  but  haA*e  also  perjjetrated  the  marA-ellously
subtle  fraud  of  making  seA^eral  slips  in  the  forged  document  Avhich
should  be  characteristic  of  Madame  Blavatsky’s  handiAvork,  is  a sup-
|)osition  which,  I think,  appears  in  itself  someAvhat  absurd,  besides
being  incompatible  Avith  the  hypothesis  Avhich  has  been  put  foi’Avard
that  they  forged  the  letter  in  order  to  make  mischief  between  the
founders  of  the  Society  and  Dr.  Hartmann  and  Mr.  Lane-Fox ; and
it  is  difficult  to  see  Avhat  other  motiA-e  they  could  possibly  haA-e  had.
In  short,  the  hypothesis  that  tlie  Coulombs  forged  the  document  is
fraught  Avith  so  many  great  difliculties  tliat  I do  not  imagine  any
impartial  readei-  Avill  entertain  it  for  a moment,  or  liaA’e  any  doubt
AvhateA^er  that  Madame  BlaA^atsky  Avrote  both  the  forged  document
and  the  Mahatma  M.  endorsement.  Her  action  in  this  respect  is  in
harmony  Avith  her  action  throughout,  and  her  object*  is  not  far  to

* I have  already  referred  to  Madame  Coulomh’s  allegation  that  at  the  end  of
April  she  Avrote  to  Madame  Blavatsky  threatening  to  produce  incriminating
letters  Avritten  by  the  latter.


On  Phenomena  connected  leith  Theosophij.


301


seek.  Tlie  remarks  in  the  Madras  Christian  College  Magazine  for
October,  1884,  p.  302,  are  entirely  justified  : —

“ Wliat  tlie  whole  Press  and  the  Indian  public  has  been  quick  enough  to
see  was  not  likely  to  be  concealed  from  Madame  Blaratsky,  viz.,  that  tlie
■only  chance  of  her  rehabilitation  lies  in  Madame  Coulomb’s  letters  being
jsroved  forgeries.  How  would  a iierson  of  Madame  Blavatsky's  genius  be
likely  to  parry  such  a thrust  ? Hot  by  a mere  assertion,  but  by  a proof  that
forgery  is  in  the  air — that  attacks  upon  Theosophy  are  being  made  through
the  forger’s  pen.”

She  therefore  forged  a letter  which  Avould  indubitably  be  shown  to
be  a forgery,  and  which,  at  the  same  time,  should  contain  eAudence
apparently  pointing  to  the  Coulombs  as  the  authors.  This  eA'idence
(the  aforesaid  phrase  about  “ Avriting  in  the  dark  ”)  appears  to  me  to
point  on  the  contrary  to  Madame  BlaA'atsky  herself  as  the  author.

I liaA^e  not  had  specimens  of  the  M.  Aviiting  Avhich  Avould
have  enabled  me  to  make  such  a full  examination  as  I have  made  of
the  K.  H.  Avriting,  but  I hawe  no  doubt  that  all  of  the  few  shoit
specimens  Avhich  I have  had  the  opportunity  of  carefully  examining
may  haA-e  been,  and  that  some  of  them  unquestionably  Avere,  Avritten  by
3Iadame  Blavatsky.  It  occurred  to  me  that  the  first  iM.  Avriting
may  have  been  Avritten  by  Madame  BlaAmtsky  A\uth  her  left  hand,  ami
that  she  aftertvards  imitated  Avith  her  right  hand  the  characteristic.s
thus  displayed ; and  on  trying  the  experiment,  making  some  of  Madame
Blavatsky’s  characteristic  strokes,  I found  that  several  of  her  peculiarities
took  the  roughened  form  Avhich  I liaA’e  observed  iir  some  of  the  IM.
writing.  But  whether  all  the  IM.  writing  Avas  the  handiAvork  of
Madame  BlaAuitsky,  or  Avhether  some  of  the  earliest  specimens  Avere
Avritten  by  Babula  under  the  guidance  of  Madame  Blavatsky — as
IMadame  Coulomb  asserts — or  Avhether  some  other  person  had  some  share
in  theii-  production,  my  limited  acquaintance  with  the  Aiss.  has  not
provided  me  A\uth  any  means  of  determining.  I observed  in  some
specimens  Avhich  Mr.  RamasAvamier  allowed  me  to  see,  an  instance  of
Madame  Blavatsky’s  characteristic  k,  Avith  another  k formed  over  it,  an
instance  of  her  terminal  r,  and  an  instance  of  her  peculiar  x.  In
perusing  the  Mahatma  M.  document  Avhich  Mr.  Damodar  alleged  had
fallen  into  his  room  at  Ootacamund,  on  April  26th,  1884  (see  p.  279),
I obserA'ed  the  folloAving  peculiarities  : — •

1.  There  were  a capital  H and  a caputal  P which  Avere  A^arieties  of
certain  H and  P types  found  both  in  the  K.  H.  and  in  Madame
BlaA’atsky’s  ordinaiy  Avritings.

2.  Many  of  the  k’s  exhibited  a double  stroke  Avhich,  though  not  a
facsimile  of  Madame  BlaA'atsky’s,  Avas  A’ery  strongly  suggestiA’e  of  her
handiwork.


302


2Ir.  Hodgson's  Regmrt


3.  The  a exhibits  new  peculiarities  in  the  M.  writing,  but  some
of  tlie  rt’s  liere  showed  the  left-gap  formation  notwithstanding.

4.  Several  p’s  exhiljited  IMadame  Blavatsky’s  ordinary  left-gap
stroke,  and  in  one  case  the  gap  liad  been  partially  filled  up,  so  that  it
presented  an  eminently  peculiar  appearance,  like  that  shown  in  the
final  a and  o of  the  Group  B".  (See  Plate  I.)

5.  In  two  words  the  initial  e had  been  first  made  in  the  common
type,  and  had  afterwards  been  altered  into  the  Greek  form.

6.  In  at  least  four  cases  the  top  of  the  r had  been  added  by  an
after  stroke.

A complete  examination  of  this  document  might  have  revealed  more
resemblances  to  Madame  Blavatsky’s  ordinary  handwriting,  but  I think
those  above  enumerated  are,  considering  the  circumstances  of  its  ap-
pearance, enough  to  justify  me  in  concluding  that  Madame  Blavatsky
was  the  writer.*  The  substance  of  the  document  is  certainly  much  more
suggestive  of  the  cunning  combined  with  the  inevitable  ignorance  of
IMadame  Blavatsky  in  Paris,  than  of  any  divine  wisdom  or  knowledge
of  the  supposed  “ Mahatma  M.”  in  India.  The  K.II.  (Y)  of  March  22nd,
and  the  Ootacamund  M.  letter  of  April  2Gth  are  not  easily  explained,
except  on  the  view  that  IMr.  Damodai'  wrote  the  former  and  Madame
Blavatsky  the  latter  ; for  the  documents  absolutely  contradict  each
otlier.  But  they  admit  of  a satisfactory  explanation  wheir  we  find
that  on  Marcli  22nd  Mr.  Damodar  was  doing  his  best  to  iivoid  a
rupture  with  the  Coulombs,  and  that  Madame  Blavatsky,  a -week  or  so
later,  ignorant  of  the  change  of  position  at  headquarters,  and  ignorant
that  IMessrs.  Lane-Pox  and  Damodar  were  at  Ootacamund,  while  Dr.
Hartmann  remained  at  Adyar,  w'as  j^reparing  a Mahatma  document
to  serve  as  a guard  against  the  disclosure  of  the  trick  apparatus,  just
as  she  afterwards  forged  the  Hartmann  document  to  ward  ofi'  tlie  blow
wliicli  fell  in  the  publication  of  her  own  incriminating  letters  in  the
Madras  Christian  ColUge  Magazine.

Even  greater  ignorance,  or  a curious  standard  of  morality,  is
disj)layed  in  another  Mahatma  document,  Avritten  to  IMr.  Hume.  It
contains  a reference  to  a “young  man”  to  wdiose  rapid  spiritual
development  “ K.  H.”  enthusiastically  draAvs  Mr.  Hume’s  attention.
After  referring  to  the  groAvth  of  this  young  man’s  “ inner  soul-poAver
and  moral  sense,”  &c.,  K.  H.  continues  : —

“ I have  often  Avatched  that  silent  yet  steady  2>rogress,  and  on  that  day
Avhcn  he  Avas  called  to  take  note  of  the  contents  of  your  letter  to  Mr.  Sinnett,

* Tlie  following  passage  occurs  in  the  document ; “She  hopes  for  more  than
2,000  Ilupees  from  them,  if  she  helps  them  ruining  or  at  least  injuring  the
Society,”  d:c.  Madame  lllaA-atsky  Avrites,  in  one  of  her  undoubted  letters  : “ I
ask  you  to  do  this  to  help  me  tracing  by  the  emanations  the  persons,”  &c.


On  Phenomena  connected  with  Thcoaophy.


303


coiicorning  onr  liuinblc  S6lv6Sj  cind.  the  coHclitioiis  you  iiiiposGtl  upon  us  I
have  myself  learned  a lesson.  A soul  is  being  breathed  into  him,  a new
Spirit  let  in,  and,  with  every  day  he  is  advancing  towards  a state  of  higher
development.  One  fine  morning  the  ‘ Soul  ’ ivill  find  him ; but,  uidike  your
English  mystics  across  the  great  Sea,  it  will  be  under  the  guidance  of  the  true
living  adept,  not  under  the  spasmodic  inspirations  of  his  own  untutored
‘ Buddhi,’  known  to  you  as  the  6th  principle  in  man.”  *

Mr.  Hume  appends  a note  that,  at  the  very  time  the  above  passage
was  written,  the  young  man  in  question  “ was  systematically  cheating
and  SAHndling  me  by  false  contracts,  besides  directly  embezzling  my
money.”

How  far  the  K.  H.  letters  received  by  Mr.  Sinnett,  upon  which
“Esoteric  Buddliism”  is  confessedly  founded,  emanated  from  the  brain
of  Madame  Blavatsky,  how  far  she  was  assisted  in  their  production  by
confederates,  how  much  of  their  substance  was  plagiarised  from  other
writers,  are  questions  which  lie  somewhat  outside  my  present  pi’ovince.
In  the  light  of  the  incident  mentioned  by  Mr.  Hume,  where  matter
furnished  by  an  able  native  had  been  used  in  the  preparation  of
Mahatma  documents — we  may  regard  it  as  not  improbable  that  Madame
Blavatsky  has  obtained  some  direct  or  indirect  assistance  from  native
learning  and  native  familiarity  with  Hindu  Philosophy ; and  the
“ Kiddle  incident,”  where  the  charge  of  plagiarism  has  eventually
been  admitted,  and  the  fraud  attributed  to  a Chela — is  enough  to
show  that  “K.  H.”  has  not  been  above  pilfering  the  very
language  of  a lecturer  on  Spiritualism.  But  apart  altogether  from
such  incidents  as  these,  we  must  remember  that  Madame  Blavatsky
appeared  in  the  last  decade  as  the  author  of  “ Isis  Unveiled.”  It  is  not
denied  that  a similarity  of  style  exists  between  a number  of  the  K.  H.
documents  and  portions  of  “ Isis  Unveiled  ” ; the  inference  made  by
those  who  accept  the  statements  of  Madame  Blavatsky  is  that
she  wrote  neither ; I think  it  much  more  probable  that  she ' wrote
both.

ISIadame  Blavatsky  at  times  writes  very  strange  English,  or  rather
a language  which  can  hardly  be  called  English.  This,  I believe,  she
frequently  does  intentionally,  and  sometimes  with  good  effect.  Thus,
towards  the  close  of  a long  passage  in  her  ordinary  handwriting,  and  in
her  good  English  style,  she  says  that  it  was  dictated  to  her  by  a “greasy
Tibetan,”  and  in  what  follows  immediately  afterwards,  Avhich  of  course
we  are  to  notice  is  her  own,  she  lapses  into  a markedly  poorer  form

* It  is  iioteAvorthy  that  in  the  same  K.  H.  document  the  following  passage
occurs  ; “Nor  can  I allow  you  to  l>e  under  the  misapprehension  that  any  adept
is  unable  to  read  the  hidden  thoughts  of  others  Avithout  first  mesmerising
them.”


304


Mr.  Hodgson's  Report


of  aitterance.  I liave  no  doubt  that  she  was  fully  aware*  of  the
importance  of  convincing  adherents  like  Mr.  Sinnett  that  she  was
untible  to  produce  the  K.  H.  writings,  and  that  one  of  her  devices
to  this  end  was  the  speaking  and  writing  of  purposely  deteriorated
English.  Her  best  English  style  appears  to  me  to  be  essentially  like
that  of  the  K.  PI.  writings,  especially  in  the  cumbrous  and  wordy  form
of  sentence  which  so  often  appears,  in  the  abundance  of  parenthetical
phrases  and  in  the  occasional  use  of  almost  oiUre  metaphors.

There  are,  indeed,  certain  oddities  in  Madame  Blavatsky’s  English
which  are  not  feigned — in  spelling,  in  the  division  of  words  at  the  end
of  a line,  and  in  grammatical  structure  ; but  I find  that  these  occur  in
the  E.  H.  writings  also ; where  the  frequency  of  dashes,  underlinings,
and  expressions  like  “please,”  “permit  me,”  itc.,  is  further  suggestive
of  Madame  Blavatsky’s  work.  I admit  that  some  of  the  quotations
which  have  been  published  by  Mr.  Sinnett,  from  the  K.  PI.  mss.,
attain  a standard  of  style  and  reflective  thought  which  I should  not
expect  Madame  Blavatsky  to  maintain  continuously  through  a long
series  of  documents,  and  I am  accordingly  not  sui’prised  to  learn  from
Mr.  Hume,  who  received  a large  quantity  of  the  K.  H.  mss.,  and  who
began  the  Avriting  of  “Esoteric  Buddhism,”  that  much  of  the  K.  H.
writing  is  considei’ably  below  the  level  of  those  fragments  Avhich  hav-’e
been  published,  and  tliat  the  task  of  eliminating  the  vast  mass  of
rubbish  was  exceedingly  difficult.  I conceive  myself  that  it  would  be
iiupossible  for  the  writer  of  the  K.  H.  mss.  now  in  my  possession  to
substantiate  any  claim  to  a familiarity  with  the  principles  of  either
(Science  or  Philosopliy,  and  I see  no  reason  why  they  should  not  have
been  written  by  Madame  Blav^atsky  herself,  without  any  assistance
whatever.  To  speak  about  “ a bacteria,”  as  K.  H.  does  in  one  of  these
documents,  is  to  .show  a knowledge  neither  of  Biology  nor  of  Philology;
and  to  say,  as  K.  H.  does  in  another  of  these  documents,  “that  man  has
a better  prospect  for  him  after  death  than  that  of  turning  into  carbolic
( sic ) acid,  water  and  ammonia  ” f shows  a lamentable  ignorance  of  the
constitution  of  the  liupa,  the  ordinary  human  organism,  the  first  of
the  “seven  principles.”

It  would,  however,  be  a tedious  and  a useless  task  to  analyse  these
Iv.  H.  documents  at  length,  and  I shall  now  simply  give  a few  instances
of  those  points  which  admit  of  a brief  illustration.  I take  the  followi)ig

* This  appears,  e.g.,  in  the  following  sentence  of  hers  in  a letter  to  hlr.
flume,  of  1882  : “ You  have  either  to  show  me  as  a champion  liar,  hut  cunning,
logical  ti\u\  with  a mostpAcnowienaf  memory  (in.stead  of  my  poor  failing  brains),
or  admit  the  theory  of  tlie  Brothers.  ”

t This  reminded  me  of  a passage  in  the  Contemporary  llevicw  for  September,
1876,  p.  54.5  ; “ The  man  resolves  into  carbonic  acid,  Avater  and  ammonia,  and
has  no  more  personal  future  existence  than  a consumed  candle.”


Oil  TJicnomcna  connected  with  Thcosoplnj.


805


from  the  ^oot  Iloomi  Lai  Sing  : “ Whatever  helps  restore  ” [=  what-
ever helps  to  restore].  Also,  “You  and  your  colleagues  may  help
furnish  the  materials.”  Similarly  Madame  Blavatsky  writes,  “ to  help
him  publish.”  The  Root  Iloomi  Lai  Sing,  as  I have  already  men-
tioned, is  quoted  almost  in  its  entirety  by  Mr.  Sinnett,  on  pp.  85-95  of
“ The  Occult  World.”  But  the  reader  will  find  that  the  word  to  is
inserted  before  its  verb  in  Mr.  Sinnett’s  version.  I was  cei’tainly  sui’-
prised  on  finding  this,  as  Mr.  Sinnett  had  written  (“The  Occult
World,”  p.  69):—

‘ ‘ I shall,  of  course,  throughout  my  quotations  from  Koot  Hoomi’s  letters
leave  out  passages  which,  specially  addressed  to  myself,  have  no  immediate
bearing  on  the  public  argument.  The  reader  must  be  careful  to  remember,
however,  as  I now  most  unequivocally  affirm,  that  I shall  in  no  case  a/#er
one  syllable  of  the  passages  actually  quoted.  It  is  important  to  make  this
declaration  very  emphatically,  because  the  more  my  readers  may  be  acquainted
with  India,  the  less  they  will  be  willing  to  believe,  except  on  the  most  i^ositive
testimony,  that  the  letters  from  Koot  Hoomi,  as  I now  publish  them,  have
been  written  by  a native  of  India.”

Yet  on  comparing  the  original  document,  Koot  Iloomi  Lai  Sing,
with  “ The  Occult  World,”  I find  that  there  are  more  than  sixty  differ-
ences between  the  two  (excluding  mistakes  of  spelling — lieSs  and
remarqued — and  excluding  also  omission  of  underlinings,  clianges  of
punctuation,  etc.).  Many  of  these  differences  consist  of  words  omitted
or  inserted,  others  of  words  changed,  and  although  some  of  these
differences  may  be  resolved  into  misprints  or  mis-coqnes,  by  no
means  all  of  them  can  be  explained  in  this  way.  For  examj^le,  in
the  original  document  I read;  “the  difference  between  the  modes  of
pliysical  (called  exact  often  out  of  mere  politeness)  and  metaphysical
sciences  ” ; but  in  “ The  Occult  World  ” (p.  88),  qwliteriess  appears  as
compliment.  Again  ; “ Education  enthrones  skepticism,  but  imprisons
spiritualism”;  spiritualism  in  “The  Occult  World  ”(p.  94)  appears
as  spirituality,  liemarqued  and  politeness  appear  to  me  to  be  more
suggestive  of  Madame  Blavatsky  than  of  the  K.  H.  described  to  us,
whose  peculiarities  ought  to  be  German  rather  than  French  and  it  is
curious  that  Madame  Blavatsky,  in  a letter  of  last  year  to  Mr.  Myers,
should  have  drawn  a contrast  “between  spiritualism  and  materialism,”
where  spiritualism  is  clearly  intended  to  bear  the  same  meaning  as  in
the  passage  quoted  from  the  K.  H.  documqnt.  I do  not  suppose  that
I'll’.  Sinnett  himself  knew  anything  of  these  and  other  alterations,  but

* Other  mistakes  suggesting  that  the  writer  was  accustomed  to  French
may  be  found  in  different  K.  H.  documents  ; for  instance,  montainior  mountain,
profond  im profound,  ranted  for  vaunted,  defense  for  defence,  “ you  have  to  heat
your  iron  lehile  it  is  yet  hot.'"


306


3L\  Ilodffsou’s  Report


he  is  certainly  chargeable  with  no  ordinary  negligence  for  not  having
ascertained,  after  the  emphatic  and  unequivocal  declaration  whiclj
I have  quoted,  that  no  copyist  or  printer’s  devil  or  reader  had
assumed  the  function  of  improving  Koot  Hoomi’s  English — unless,
indeed,  we  are  to  suppose  that  Koot  Hoomi  7«m(?)self  corrected  the
proof  for  the  press,  in  which  case  we  ought  to  have  been  told  that
lie  did  so,  and  how  and  when  it  was  done.  Such  exceeding  carelessness
on  tlie  of  Mr.  Sinnett  has  destroyed  the  confidence  which  I

formerly  had  that  his  quotations  from  Koot  Hoomi  documents  might
1)6  i-egarded  as  accurately  faithful  reproductions  of  the  originals.

The  following  short  groups  of  peculiarities  of  spelling  and  mistakes
of  idiom  may  be  compared  : —


Koot  Hoo.mi.  Madame  Blavatsky.

SpeUmg.


your’s,  her’s

your’s

fidlill,  dispell

expell

tliiefs

thiefs

leasure

deceaved,  beseached

(piarreling,  marshaling

quarreling,  quarreled

alloteil

cooly  (for  ‘ coolly  ’)

■in  lotto

lazzy,  lazziuess

circimistancial

conseiensciously,  liypocricy

defense

defense

&c.

&C.

Division  of  ivords  at  the  end  of  a line.

incessan — tly,  direc — tly

recen — tly,  hones — tly,  perfec— tly

una — ccpiaiiited

cha — nged

fun — ctions

correc — tness

discer — ning,  rea— ding,  rea— dily

retur — ning,  trea — ting,  grea — test

po — werless

po — wers

atnios — pliere

des — pite

cones — pondenee

En — glislnnan,  En — glish

Beacon  — sfields

inisnnders — food

lie.

&e.

On  Phenomena  connected  ivith  Theosophy.  307

Koot  Hooiu.  Madame  Blavatskt.

Structure.


‘ I give  you  an  advice'

‘ who,  ever  since  he  is  here,  has  been
influencing  him  ’

‘ we  mortals  never  have  and  will  agree
on  any  subject  entirely  ’

‘ one  Mdio  understands  tolerably  well
English  ’

‘ you  felt  impatient  and  believed
having  reasons  to  complain  ’

‘ to  take  care  of  themselves  and  of
their  hereafter  the  best  they  know
how  ’ — ‘ the  best  she  knew  hov'’

‘ that  the  world  will  not  believe  in  our
philosophy  unless  it  is  convinced
of  it  proceeding  from  reliable  ’

‘ there  are  those,  who,  rather  tlian  to
yield  to  the  evidence  of  fact  ’

‘ in  a direct  eoui'se  or  along  hundred  of
side-furrows  ’

their  active  mentality  preventing
them  to  receive  clear  outside  im-
pressions ’

‘ provided  you  consented  to  -wait  and
did  not  abuse  of  the  situation  ’

‘Immutable  laws  cannot  arise  since
they  are  eternal  and  uncreated,  pro-
pelled in  the  Eternity  and  that  God
himself — if  such  a thing  existed —
could  never  have  the  power  of
stopping  them  ’

‘ So  more  the  pity  for  him  ’

&c.


‘to  give  as  impartial  an  evidence
‘ offering  advices  ’

‘ for  14  or  15  years  that  I am  “preaching-
the  Brothers  ” ’

‘ they  have  never  and  never  will  rush
into  print  ’

‘ Olcott  says  jmu  speak  veiy  well
English  ’

‘ had  he  but  consented  becoming  m
rascal ’

‘ and  left  to  do  the  best  I knew  how  ’


‘ there  is  not  a tittle  of  doubt  for  it
being  so  ’

‘the  chelas  would  rather  be  anyday
insulted  themselves  than  to  hear
insulted  ’

‘the  accursed  lecture  with  hundred
others  ’

‘the  mediums  reproached  me  with
preventing  by  my  presence  the-
“spirits”  to  come’

‘ I have  never  written  anything  against
you  that  I could  fear  of  being
shown  to  you  ’

‘ since  Eastern  and  ^Yestern  ideas  of
morality  differ  like  red  and  blue
and  that  you  . . . inay  anpeai-

to  them  as,  and  more  immoral
perhaps  than  they  do  to  you  ’

‘ So  more  the  pitj^  for  those  ’

&e.


It  may  seem  strange  that  K.  H.  should  be  induced  by  a “ philo-
logical whim,”  to  spell  “skepticism”  with  a h (vi'cte  p.  271),  and  yet
make  such  mistakes  in  spelling  and  such  remarkable  divisions  of  words
as  I have  instanced  above.  And  throughout  the  K.  H.  documents  in
my  hands,  expressions  abound  which  can  hardly  be  termed  felicitates.


308  2[i'.  Ilodgsoii’s  Heport

tliougli  they  are  certainly  curiosce,  and  which  appear  to  me  to  be
eminently  Blavatski^n.

What  tlie  ethics  of  a real  Mahatma  would  be  we  perhaps  have  no
means  of  judging,  but  those  of  Madame  Blavatsky’s  Mahatma  certainly
are,  in  some  points,  those  which  we  should  expect  would  commend
themselves  to  a person  engaged  in  producing  fraudulent  phenomena.
There  is  evidence  in. one  of  the  K.  H.  documents  that  Iv.  H.  actually
endeavoured  to  incite  the  recipient  to  what  I think  every  honour-
able Englishman  Avould  regard  as  a falsehood.  The  moral  is  toler-
ably obvious,  and  the  reader  will  perhaps  rather  expect  the  advanced
■Chelas  of  “Mahatmas”  to  be,  by  virtue  of  that  very  position,
nntrustworthy  individuals.  That  there  are  persons  whose  actions
are  marked  by  the  liighest  integrity,  and  who  have  devoutly
and  sincerely  believed  tliemselves  to  be  acting  under  the  tutelage
■of  a “ Mahatma,”  I do  not  for  a moment  question ; though  there
can  be  little  douljt  that  there  are  also  instances  where  Madame
Blavatsky  has  endeavoured  to  persuade  natives  to  pretend  falsely
that  they  were  Chelas,  end  in  some  case.s,  as  I think  I have  shown,
lias  succeeded,  but  in  other  cases  has  failed.  Mr.  Hume  has  stated
to  me  his  conviction,  founded  on  their  own  confessions,  that  certain
natives  had  been  instigated  by  Madame  Blavatsky  to  fraudulent
assertion  of  their  Chelaship,  and  to  the  conveyance  of  “ Maliatma  ’’
messages  in  the  guise  of  Chelas ; this  would  appear  also  from  some
•of  the  documents  foinvarded  to  me  by  Mr.  Hume  ; and,  quite  indepen-
dently of  this  evidence,  I was  assiu’ed  by  an  educated  native  with  whom
I liad  a personal  interview,  that  Madame  Blavatsky  had  used  her
powers — not  only  of  persuasion,  but  of  tlu’eatening — to  induce  him
to  further  her  objects,  as  explained  to  him,  and  to  play  tlie  role  of
:a  dawning  Adept.  It  is,  in  short,  quite  certain  that  there  are
natives  who  have  charged  Madame  Blavatsky  witli  inciting  them  to
the  fraudulent  personation  of  Chelas  of  “Mahatmas,”  and  she  seems
to  have  worked  upon  patriotic  feeling  for  the  purpose  of  securing
their  assistance.

I have  now  dealt  with  the  main  points  of  the  evidence  for  the
alleged  marvellous  phenomena  in  connection  with  the  Theosophical
Society  which  were  directly  associated  with  my  investigations  in
India,  and  I regard  the  details  which  I have  given  as  sufficient  to
warrant  the  conclusion  which  I expressed  at  the  beginning  of  my
Beport,  tliat  these  alleged  marvellous  plienomena  have  been  fraudulent
tliroughout.  The  force  of  the  evidence  leading  to  this  conclusion  will
hardly  be  appreciated  except  by  those  who  have  followed  the  accounts
given  in  the  Appendices,  and  it  certainly  cannot  be  conveyed  in  a
mere  summary.  Yet  I think  it  well  that  the  reader  should  be  reminded
of  the  most  important  considerations  which  have  arisen  in  the  course


On  Phenomena  connected  with  ThcoHophu-


809


of  the  inquiry,  and  I shall  therefore  suggest  these  once  more — in  as.
few  words  as  possible.  But,  before  doing  so,  there  are  one  or  t’v^  o
collateral  questions  which  demand  some  brief  reference.

At  the  time  of  our  First  Report,  it  appeared  to  us  a serious  difficulty
in  the  way  of  adopting  the  hypothesis  of  fraud  that  we  should  have  to
suppose  Mr.  Damodar  to  have  exchanged,  within  a comparatively  short
time,  the  character  of  a confiding  dupe  for  that  of  a thorough-going*
conspirator.  This  difficulty  was  impressed  upon  us  all  the  more-
strongly  by  the  account  of  Mr.  Damodar  which  w*e  received  from
Colonel  Olcott,  wffio  stated  : —

‘ ‘ His  father  was  a wealthy  gentleman  occupying  a high  position  in  the-
Government  secretariat  at  Bombay ; and  the  son,  besides  the  paternal
expectations,  had,  in  his  own  right,  about  50,000  or  00,000  rujiees.  The
father  at  first  gave  his  consent  to  the  son’s  breaking  caste—  a most  serious
step  in  India — so  as  to  take  up  our  work.  But  subsequently,  on  his  death-
bed, his  orthodox  family  influenced  his  mind,  and  he  demanded  that  his  son
should  revert  to  his  caste,  making  the  usual  degi-ading  penance  required  in
such  cases.  Mr.  Damodar,  however,  refused,  saying  that  he  was  fullj^
committed  to  the  work,  which  he  considered  most  important  for  his  countiy
and  the  world  ; and  he  ultimately  relinquished  his  entire  property,  so  that
he  might  be  absolutely  free.”

The  impressiveness  of  this,  however,  was  considerably  reduced  by
further  investigation,  which  revealed  that  Colonel  Olcolt’s  statement
conveyed  utterly  erroneous  ideas  concerning  the  actual  facts  of  the
case.  From  evidence  I obtained  in  Bombay  from  several  witnesses,
and  from  a series  of  documents  Avhich  I was  allow*ed  to  peruse  by
an  uncle  of  Mr.  Damodar,  and  which  consisted  partly  of  lettens
written  by  Mr.  Damodar,  it  appeared  that  his  father  had  been  a
member  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  but  that  he  had  resigned  all
connection  'with  it  in  consequence  of  the  conclusion  he  had  reached  that
the  founders  of  the  Society  were  untrustworthy.  It  was  also  in
consequence  of  this  conclusion  that  he  so  earnestly  entreated  his  son
(not  to  “ revert  to  his  caste,”  but)  to  give  up  his  connection  with
Madame  Blavatsky  and  Colonel  Olcott,  or  at  least  to  live  no  longer  in
the  same  house  wfith  them.  It  was,  moreover,  in  consequence  of  the-
opinion  which  prevailed  among  some  of  Mr.  Damodar’s  acquaintances
in  Bombay  to  the  efi’ect  that  Madame  Blavatsky  and  Colonel  Olcott
had  sought  to  gain  power  over  Mr.  Damodar  for  the  purpose  of
obtaining  his  money — that  Mr.  Damodar  had  expressed  his  desire  to
relinquish  his  property.  And,  according  to  the  provisions  of  his
father’s  will,  he  may  yet  receive  the  property  on  cei’tain  conditions,  of
wliich  the  primary  one  is  the  severance  of  his  connection  with  the-
Theosophical  Society.  I must  add  that  die  correspondence  to  wdiich
I refer,  which  lasted  over  some  months,  afforded  ample  evidence  that


310


Mr.  Hodgson's  Report


Mr.  Damodar’s  father  had  been  painfully  impressed  by  his  want  of
truthfulness  and  honourable  dealing.

At  the  time  when  Mr.  Damodar  desired  to  give  up  all  claims  to  the
property,  he  wa,s,  I think,  not  a confederate.  When  he  first  began  to
suspect  fraud,  I have  no  means  of  ascertaining ; but  as  regards  the
transition  from  being  a dupe  to  becoming  himself  a conspirator,  there
is  this  to  be  said. — There  can  be  little  doubt  that  patriotic  feeling —
which,  I believe,  has  much  more  to  do  with  the  underworking  of  the
Tlieosopliical  Society  than  the  followers  of  Madame  Blavatsky  in
England  commonly  imagine — was  one  of  the  strongest  influences  which
attracted  him  to  the  Society,  and  which  afterwards  kept  him  an  active
worker  in  the  movement.  His  bitter  antipathy  to  the  “ conquering
race  ” was  sufficiently  obvious  in  those  letters  of  his  which  I had  the
•opportunity  of  perusing.  To  this  we  must  add  the  fact  that  he  had
espoused  the  Tlieosophical  cause  and  the  claims  of  Madame  Blavatsky
with  a burning  intensity  of  antagonism  to  those  who  alleged  that  these
claims  re.sted  on  a foundation  of  dishonesty.  It  was  not  easy  to  confess
to  the  Avorld  that  the  flaming  ardour  wliich  resisted  the  tender  and  wise
^rdvice  of  his  father,  and  perhaps  was  fed  by  the  importunate  cautions
and  scofluigs  of  his  friends,  v'as  but  the  folly  of  an  aspiring  youth,  who
was  not  quite  clever  enough  for  Madame  Blavatsky.  And,  after  all,
he  might  have  the  honour  of  posing  as  a Chela,  with  rapidly-developing
powers,  and  receiving  reverence  and  glory,  not  only  from  his  native
associates,  but  from  Englishmen  themselves.  In  the  face  of  such
considerations  as  these,  the  psychological  revolution  in  which  Mr.
Damodar  was  transformed  from  a dupe,  capable  of  deceiving  his  father,
to  an  impostor  in  the  supposed  interests  of  his  country,  is  perhaps  not
very  difficult  to  understand.  There  is  no  necessity  for  me  to  give  all  the
results  of  my  inquiiies  concerning  the  personal  characters  and  ante-
cedents of  those  persons  whom  I regard  as  confederates  of  Madame
Blavatsky.  As  Mr.  Damodar  is  the  only  one  of  her  followers  who  has
deprived  himself  of  any  substantial  property  by  his  action  in  connection
with  the  Theosophical  Society,  or  who,  in  my  opinion,  can  be  said  to
liave  sacrificed  his  worldly  prospects,  I have  thought  it  desirable  to
draw  special  attention  to  the  circumstances  under  which  the  sacrifice
was  made.

After  reviewing  the  instances  I have  given  of  the  unreliability  of
•Colonel  Olcott’s  testimony,  some  readers  may  be  inclined  to  think  that
Colonel  Olcott  must  himself  have  taken  an  active  and  deliberate  part
in  the  fraud,  and  have  been  a partner  with  Madame  Blavatsky  in  tlie
conspiracy.  Such,  I must  emphatically  state,  is  not  my  own  opinion,
though  I should  be  unwilling  to  affirm  that  Colonel  Olcott  may  not,
l)y  carrying  out  supposed  injunctions  of  liis  “Master,”  have  improperly
contributed,  either  by  word  or  action,  to  the  marvellousness  of  certain


0)1  Tlie)io))iena  mmectcd  tcith  Theosiophij,


311


phenomena.  It  is  clear,  for  example,  from  documents  in  my  posses-
sion, that  the  influence  of  “K.  H.”  has  been  exerted  unsuccessfully
in  the  case  of  another  gentleman,  for  the  purpose  of  strengthening  the
•evidence  for  an  alleged  “ occult  ” phenomenon,  and  I can  well  understand
that  Colonel  Olcott  may  have  been  induced  by  the  solemn  asseverations
of  his  “Master”  that  certain  events  occurred,  to  remember  incidents
which  never  happened  at  all ; and  how  much  may  have  been  exacted
from  his  blind  obedience  it  is  impossible  to  determine.  Fui’ther,
his  capacity  for  estimating  evidence,  which  could  never  have  been  very
gi’eat,  was  probably  seriously  injured  before  the  outset  of  his  Theoso-
phical  career  by  his  faith  in  Madame  Blavatsky,  who  herself  regarded
him  as  the  chief  of  those  “domestic  imbeciles  ” and  “familiar  muffs”
to  whom  she  refers  in  her  letters  to  Madame  Coulomb ; and  writing
about  him  from  America  to  a Hindu  in  Bombay,  she  characterised  him
as  a “ psychologised  baby,”  saying  that  the  Yankees  thought  themselves
very  smart,  and  that  Colonel  Olcott  thought  he  was  pai'ticularly  smaid,
evenfor  a Yankee,  but  that  he  would  have  to  get  up  much  earlier  in  the
morning  to  be  as  smart  as  she  was.  His  candour  was  shown  by  his
readiness  in  providing  me  with  extracts  from  his  own  diary,  and  the
freedom  with  which  he  allowed  me  to  inspect  important  documents  in
his  possession ; and  he  rendered  me  every  assistance  in  his  power
in  the  way  of  my  acquiring  the  evidence  of  the  native  witnesses.  Not
only  so,  but  observing,  as  I thought,  that  Mr.  Hamodar  was  unduly
endeavouring  to  take  part  in  my  examination  of  a witness  shortly  after  1
arrived  in  India,  lie  desired  me  not  to  hesitate  in  taking  the  witnesses
apart  for  my  private  examination,  and  he  made  special  arrangements
for  my  convenience.  Not  unmindful  of  the  opportunities  afforded  me
for  investigation  by  most  of  the  Theosojfliists  themselves,  it  is  with  all
the  more  regret  that  I now  find  myself  expressing  conclusions  which
must  give  pain  to  so  many  of  them.  But  Colonel  Olcott  himself  would
be  among  the  first  to  admit  that  the  interests  of  truth  must  not  be
•stopped  or  stayed  by  any  merely  personal  feelings,  and  although  in  a
letter  to  Madame  Coulomb,  he  implied  that  his  mind  could  not  “be
unsettled  by  any  trivial  things  ” — such  as,  among  others,  the  making
■of  trap-doors  and  other  apparatus  for  trick-manifestations  by  Madame
Blavatsky — he  wrote  also  ; —

“I  do  not  think  it  right  or  fair  that  you  should  continue  to  be  a member
■of  a Society  wliich  you  thought  flourishing  by  the  aid  of  trickery  and  false
representation.  If  I thought  my  Society  that  I would  leave  it,  and  wash  my
hands  of  it  for  ever.”

This,  how'ever,  is  a course  which  probably  Colonel  Olcott’s  mind
will  never  be  “unsettled”  enough  to  take,  and  he  still  apparently
continues  to  believe  in  the  genuineness  of  the  alleged  occult  phenomena.


312


3Ir.  Uoclgson's  Itejjort


CONCLUSION.

I may  now  draw  attention  to  the  main  points  involved  in  tlie  fore-
going inquiry.

In  the  first  place,  a large  number  of  letters  produced  by  M.  and
Madame  Coulomb,  formerly  Librarian  and  Assistant  Corresponding
Secretary  respectively  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  were,  in  the  opinion
of  the  best  experts  in  handwriting,  written  by  Madame  Blavatsky.  These
letters,  which  extend  over  the  years  1880-1883  inclusive,  and  some  of
which  were  published  in  the  Madras  Christian  College  Magazine  for
September,  1884,  prove  that  Madame  Blavatsky  has  been  engaged  iir
the  production  of  a varied  and  long-continued  series  of  fraudulent
phenomena,  in  which  she  has  been  assisted  by  the  Coulombs.  The
circumstantial  evidence  which  I was  able  to  obtain  concerning  the
incidents  referred  to  in  these  letters,  corroborates  the  judgment  of  the
experts  in  handwriting.

In  the  second  place,  apart  altogether  from  either  these  letters  or  tiie
statements  of  the  Coulombs,  who  themselves  allege  that  they  were
confederates  of  Madame  Blavatsky,  it  appears  from  my  own  inquiries
concerning  the  existence  and  the  powers  of  the  supposed  Adepts  or
Afahatmas,  and  the  marvellous  phenomena  alleged  to  have  occurred  in
connection  with  the  Theosophical  Society,

1.  That  the  primary  witnesses  to  the  existence  of  a Brother-

hood with  occult  powers, — viz.,  Madame  Blavatsky,  Mr.
Daniodar  K.  Mavalankar,  Mr.  Bhavani  Shankar,  and  Mr.
Babajee  I).  Nath, — have  in  other  matters  deliberately  made
statements  which  they  must  have  known  to  be  false,  and  that
therefore  their  assertions  cannot  establish  the  existence  of  the
Brotherhood  in  question.

2.  That  the  comparison  of  handwritings  further  tends  to  show  that

Koot  Hoomi  Lai  Sing  and  Mahatma  Morya  are  fictitious
personages,  and  that  most  of  the  documents  purporting  to
have  emanated  from  these  “ personages,”  and  especially  from
“ K.  H.”  (Koot  Hoomi  Lai  Sing),  are  in  the  disguised  hand-
writing of  Madame  Blavatsky  herself,  who  originated  the
style  of  the  K.  H.  handwriting;  and  that  some  of  the
K.  II.  writing  is  the  handiwork  of  Mr.  Damodar  in
imitation  of  the  writing  developed  by  Madame  Blavatsky.

3.  That  in  no  single  phenomenon  which  came  within  tlie  scope

of  my  investigation  in  India,  was  the  evidence  such  as  would
entitle  it  to  be  regarded  as  genuine,  the  witnesses  for  the  most
part  being  exceedingly  inaccurate  in  observation  or  memory,
and  having  neglected  to  exercise  due  care  for  the  exclusion  of
fraud ; while  in  the  case  of  some  of  the  witnesses  there  has.
been  much  conscious  exaggeration  and  culpable  misstatement.


On  Phenomena  connected  ivith  TttcoHophy.


313


4.  That  not  only  was  the  evidence  insufficient  to  estahlisli  the
genuineness  of  tlie  alleged  marvels,  but  that  evidence  furnished
partly  by  my  own  inspection,  and  partly  by  a large  number  of
witnesses,  most  of  them  Theosophists,  concerning  the  structure,
position,  and  environment  of  the  Shrine,  concerning  “ Mahat-
ma” communications  received  independently  of  the  Shrine,
and  concerning  vaidous  other  incidents,  including  many  of  the
phenomena  mentioned  in  “The  Occult  World,”  besides  the
numerous  additional  suspicious  circumstances  Avhich  I have
noted  in  the  course  of  dealing  in  detail  Avith  the  cases  con-
sidered, renders  the  conclusion  unaAmidable  that  the  pheno-
mena in  question  Avere  actually  due  to  fraudulent  arrange-
ment.

The  question  A\diich  Avill  now  inevitably  arise  is — Avhat  has  induced
INIadame  BlaA-atsky  to  live  so  many  laborious  days  in  such  a fantastic
Avork  of  imposture  ? And  although  I conceAe  that  my  instructions  did
not  require  me  to  make  this  particular  question  a province  of  my
iiiA'estigation,  and  to  explore  the  hidden  motiA'es  of  Madame  Blav-atsky,
I should  consider  this  Report  to  be  incomplete  unless  I suggest  Avhat  I
myself  believe  to  be  an  adequate  explanation  of  her  ten  years’  toil  on  be-
half of  the  Theosophical  Society.  It  may  be  supposed  by  some  who  are
unfamiliar  Avith  her  deficiencies  and  capacities  that  the  Theosophical
Society  is  but  the  aloe-blossom  of  a woman’s  monomania,  and  that  tiie
strange,  Avild,  passionate,  unconventional  Madame  BlaA’atsky  has  been
“finding  her  epos”  in  the  establishment  of  some  incipient  Avorld-
religion.  But  a closer  knoAvledge  of  her  character  would  show  such  a
supposition  to  be  quite  untenable;  not  to  speak  of  the  positive
qualities  which  she  habitually  manifested,  there  are  certain  A'arieties  of
personal  sacrifice  and  religious  aspiration,  the  absence  of  which  from
Madame  Blavmtsky’s  conduct  Avould  alone  suffice  to  remove  her  ineffably
far  from  the  St.  Theresa  type.

As  IMadame  Blavatsky  in  propria  persond,  she  can  urge  her
follOAvers  to  fraudulent  impersonations ; under  the  cloak  of  Koot
Hoomi  she  can  incite  “her”  Chelas  to  dishonourable  statements;  and  as
an  accomplished  forger  of  other  people’s  handwriting,  she  can  striA’e  to
saA^e  herself  by  blackening  the  reputation  of  her  enemies.  She  is,
indeed,  a rare  psychological  study,  almost  as  rare  as  a “ Mahatma  ” ;
she  was  terrible  exceedingly  AAdien  she  expressed  her  OA-erpoAvering
thought  that  perhaps  her  “ tAventy  years’  ” Avork  might  be  spoiled
through  Madame  Coulomb  ; and  she  deAmloped  a unique  resentment
for  the  “ spiritualistic  mediums,”  whose  trickeries,  she  said,  she  “ could
so  easily  expose,”  but  who  continued  to  draAv  their  disciples,  Avhile
her  own  more  guarded  and  elaborate  scheme  Avas  in  danger  of  being
turned  inside  out.  Yet  I must  confess  that  the  problem  of  her  motiA-es,


X


314


Mr.  Hodgson’s  Rcnort


when  I found  myself  being  forced  to  the  conclusion  that  her
claims  and  her  plaenomena  were  fraudulent,  caused  me  no  little
perplexity.

It  appeared  to  me  that,  even  should  the  assertions  of  Theosophists
that  their  Society  has  been  partly  dependent  upon  the  gifts  of  Madame
Blavatsky  prove  to  be  the  reverse  of  truth,  tlie  sordid  motive  of
pecuniary  gain  would  be  a solution  of  the  problem  still  less  satisfactory
than  the  hypothesis  of  religious  mania.  More  might  be  said  in  support
of  the  supposition  that  a morbid  yearning  for  notoriety  was  the
dominant  emotion  which  has  stimulated  and  sustained  her  energetic
ellbrts  in  the  singular  channel  which  they  have  so  long  pursued.  But
even  this  hypothesis  I was  unable  to  adopt,  and  reconcile  with  my
understanding  of  her  character.

At  last  a casual  conversation  opened  my  eyes.  I had  taken  no
interest  in  Central  Asian  perplexities,  was  entirely  unaware  of  the
alleged  capacities  of  Russian  intrigue,  and  had  i>ut  aside  as  unworthy
of  consideration  the  idea — which  for  some  time  had  currency  in  India —
that  the  objects  of  the  Theosojihical  Society  were  j^olitical,  and  that
Madame  Blavatsky  was  a “ Russian  sjjy.”  But  a conversation  with
Madame  Blavatsky,  which  arose  out  of  her  sudden  and  curious
excitement  at  the  news  of  the  recent  Russian  movement  upon  the
Afghan  frontier,  compelled  me  to  ask  myself  seriously  whether  it  was
not  possible  that  the  task  which  she  had  set  herself  to  perform  in
India  was  to  foster  and  foment  as  widely  as  possible  among  the
natives  a disaflection  towards  British  rule.*  Madame  Blavatsky's
momentary  emotional  betrayal  of  her  sympathies  in  the  onset
of  her  excitement  was  not  rendered  less  signiticant  by  the
too  strongly-impressed  “afterstroke”  of  a quite  uncalled-for  vitupera-
tion of  the  Russians,  who,  she  said,  “ w'ould  be  the  death-
blow of  the  Society  if  they  got  into  India.”  That  she  was  ever  seven
years  in  Thibet  there  is  much  reason  for  disbelieving.  In  a letter  she
wrote  to  a Hindu  from  America,  she  professed  no  more  than  that  she
had  acquired  some  occult  knowledge  from  some  wandering  Siberian
Shamans,  which,  being  interpreted,  pi’obably  means,  if  her  statement
has  any  foundation  of  truth  at  all,  that  she  learnt  their  conjiuing
performances.  According  to  her  own  account,  in  one  of  the  Blavatsky-
Coulomb  letters,  it  appears  that  before  her  acquaintance  with  Madame
Coulomb  at  Cairo,  in  1872,  she  had  been  tilling  a ]3age  which  she  wishes

* Tliere  i.s  a special  rule  in  tlie  Society  ])ro\  idiiig  for  secret  ineiiiberslnjj.
IMadaine  I>]avat.sky's  influence  is  felt,  moreover,  far  beyond  the  limits  of  the
Society.  Alien  she  returned  to  India,  at  the  end  of  last  year,  an  address  of
sympathy  was  presented  to  her  by  a large  body  of  native  students  of  -Madras,
of  whom,  apparently,  only  two  or  three  w'ere  Theosophists.


On  Fhenomcna  connected  with  Tlicoiopluj.


315


to  be  “ torn  out  of  the  book  ” * of  Iier  life.  This  part  of  her  history
does  not  at  pi’esent  concern  us,  except  that  it  proves  the  story  of  her
Thibetan  experiences  to  be  fabulous.  But  the  letter  also  refers  to  her
sojourn  at  Cairo  and  her  later  adventures,  and  it  appears  that  she  and
a certain  Madame  Sebire  had  established  a Society  in  Cairo,  which  was
evidently  “ spiritualistic,”  and  which  failed;  that  shortly  after  parting
with  Maclaine  Coulomb  in  Cairo,  she  went  to  Odessa,  taking  Madame
Sebii'e,  who  dragged  her  into  an  enterprise  of  “making  some  extra-
ordinai’y  inks,”  wliicli  proved  a losing  speculation  ; that  from  Odessa
she  iiroceedecl  to  India,  where  “ she  remained  over  eight  months,  and
then  returning  by  Odessa  to  Europe,  went  to  Paris,  and  thence
proceeded  to  America,”  where  the  Thebsophical  Society  was  established.
The  same  letter  contains  the  following  explanation  to  Madame
Coulomb,  clearly  in  order  that  the  latter  might  understand  that  the
new  Society  was  on  a different  basis  from  that  which  Madamfe^Blavatsky
had  countenanced,  in  1872,  in  Egypt.

“ We  believe  in  nothing  supernatural,  and  discard  every  miracle — those
of  the  Jewish  Bible  especially.  But  we  are  believers  in  and  students  of
jdienomena,  though  we  do  not  attribute  every  manifestation  to  ‘ sjnrits  ’ of
disembodied  people  solely,  for  we  have  found  out  that  the  of  the  Uvin/i

man  was  far  more  piowerful  than  the  spirit  of  a dead  person.  We  have
ejuite  a number  of  members  thcosojjhlsts  in  Ceylon  among  the  Buddhist
priests  and  others.

“How  far  this  agrees  with  your  present  ideas  I do  not  know.  But  I hope
you  will  answer  me  frankly,  dear  Mrs.  Coulomb,  and  say  what  you  think  of
it.  And  thus  we  may  be  able  to  elucidate  more  than  one  mystery  before  we
meet  each  other  again.”

It  seems,  then,  that  Madame  Blavatsky,  a Bussian  lady,  the
daughter  of  Colonel  Hahn  (of  the  Russian  Horse  Artillery),  and
quondam  widow  of  General  Blavatsky  (Governor  during  the  Crimean

ar,  and  for  many  years,  of  Erivan  in  Armenia),  assisted  in  starting
a spiritualistic  Society  in  Egypt,  which  failed ; that  she  afterwards
spent  eight  months  in  India,  and  then  proceeded  to  America  for  what

*That  thislife-page  was  partly  known  to  Madame  Coulomb,  and  thatlMadame
Blavatsky  feared  her  in  consequence,  is  borne  out  by  the  fact  that,  in  a dispute
which  arose,  in  1880,  while  Madame  Blavatsky  was  at  Ceylon,  between  Madame
Coulomb  andanother  member  of  tlie  Society  at  its  lieadrpiarters,  tlien  in  Bombay,
Madame  Coulomb  boasted  of  her  power.  Her  boast  was  apparently  justified
upon  IMadame  Blavatsky’s  return.  Madame  Coulomb  was  supported  by  ^Madame
Blavatsky,  and  therefore  also  by  Colonel  Olcott,  and  the  dispute  resulted  in  tlio
withdrawal  from  the  Society  of  some  of  the  most  influentiil  members  at  Bombay,
who  regarded  the  action  taken  in  the  matter  Ijy  tlie  founders  as  wanting  in
straightforwardness.  I have  liad  personal  interviews  with  some  of  these  ex-
members, wlic  consider  that  the  recent  exposures  of  the  Coulombs  have  thrown
much  light  on  the  formerly  mysterious  behaviour  of  IMadame  Blavatsky  and
IMadame  Coulomb  in  connection  with  the  Bombay  episode.


X


■2


316


3Ir.  HodtjsoH's  Report


would  appear  to  liav'e  been  the  express  pui’pose  of  becoming  an
American  citizen,  “for  tlie  sake  of  greater  protection  that  the  citizen-
ship of  this  free  country  affords.”  The  fact,  moreover,  that  she  wa.s
an  American  citizen  was  urged  on  her  behalf  wlien,  upon  her  arrival
in  India,  she  was  for  some  time  subjected  to  the  surveillance  of  tlie
Indian  Government  as  being  possibly  a Russian  agent.  She  apparently
made  the  mistake  in  the  first  instance,  of  adopting  “ an  attitude  of
obtrusive  sympathy  with  tlie  natives  of  the  soil  as  compared  with  the
Europeans,”  as  Mr.  Sinnett  tells  us  (“The  Occult  AVorld,”  ji.  25) ; but
she  soon  remedied  this  error  by  obtaining  the  public  adhesion  to  her
following  of  such  men  as  Mr.  A.  O Hume  (see  p.  273)  and  Mr.  Sinnett.
And  without  attempting  to  show  in  detail  how  strongly  the  patriotic-
feeling  of  the  natives  has  been  enlisted  in  connection  with  the
Theosophical  Society,  or  how  well  the  lu'ocedure  of  Madame
Blavatsky  may  be  shown  to  comport  with  the  view  that  her  ultimate
object  has  been  the  furtheiance  of  Russian  interests,  I may  quote
several  passages  which,  I think,  suggest  meanings  wdiich  Madame
Blavatsky  would  hardly  dare  to  blazon  on  the  banner  of  the  Theosophical
Society.  Thus  Colonel  Olcott  wu’ote,  and  apparently  italicised  the
sentence,  in  a letter  from  Hew  York  to  a Hindu,  in  1878  : —

“ Undle  we  have  no  political  designs,  yon  will  need  no  hint  to  understand
that  our  sympathies  are  with  all  these  who  are  deprived  of  the  right  of  governing
their  own  lands  for  themselves.  I need  say  no  more.'’

Madame  Blavatsky  wrote  to  the  same  person  : —

“ Is  our  friend  a Sikh?  If  so,  the  fact  that  he  should  be,  as  you  sny,

‘ veiy  much  jdeased  to  learn  the  object  of  our  Society  ’ is  not  at  all  strange.
For  his  ancestors  have  for  centuries  been — until  their  efforts  w-ere  paralysed
by  British  domination,  that  curse  of  every  land  it  fastens  itself  upon —
battling  for  the  divine  trutlis  against  external  theologies.  My  question  may
appear  a foolish  one — yet  I have  more  than  one  reason  for  asking  it.  You
call  liim  a Sirdar — therefore  he  must  be  a descendant  of  one  of  the  Sirdars
of  the  twelve  mizals,  which  were  abolished  by  the  English  to  suit  their  con-
venience—since  he  is  of  Amritsir  in  the  Punjab?  Are  you  personally
acquainted  with  any  descendant  of  Runjeet  Singh,  who  died  in  1839,  or  do
you  know  of  any  wdio  are  ? You  will  understand,  without  any  explanation
from  me,  how  important  it  is  for  us,  to  establish  relations  with  some  Sikhs,
whose  ancestors  before  them  have  been  for  centuries  teaching  the  great
‘ Brotherhood  of  Humanity  ’ — precisely  the  doctrine  we  teach.  * * *

“As  for  the  future  ‘ Fellows’  of  our  Indian  Brairch,  have  your  ejms  upon
the  chance  of  fishing  out  of  the  great  ocean  of  Hindu  hatred  for  Christian
missionaries  some  of  those  big  fish  you  call  Rajahs,  and  whales  knowm  as
Tilaharajahs.  Could  you  not  hook  out  for  your  Bombay  Branch  either
Gwalior  (Scindia)  or  the  Holkar  of  Indore — those  most  faithful  and  loyal
friends  of  the  British  (?).  The  young  Gwikovar  is  unfortunately  scarcely
weaned  as  yet,  and  therefore  not  elligible  for  fellowship.”


On  Phenomena  connected  v:ith  Thcoaophy.  .317

Tlie  note  of  interrosration  after  tlie  word  “British”  is  Madame

O

Blavatsky’s.  The  above  passages  are  from  documents  which  came  into
my  hands  quite  independently  of  tlie  Coulombs.  Indeed,  I am  m t
aware  that  the  Coulombs  even  know  of  tlieir  existence.  The
following  passage  is  from  a fragmentary  script  which  forms  one  ( f
the  Blavatsky-Coulomb  documents  ; on  one  side  of  the  paper  are  written
a few  broken  lines  in  Russian,  the  full  sigiiihcance  of  which  is  dubious
without  their  context,  and  on  the  other  side  are  written  these  words -

military  men,  more  than  any  other,  must  remember  that  the  approaching
act  of  the  Eastern  drama  is  to  be  the  last  and  the  decisive  one.  That  it  will
require  all  our  efforts,  every  sacrifice  on  our  part,  and  requires  far  more  care-
ful preiiarations  in  every  direction  than  did  the  last  war.  They  must  re-
member, that  to  sit  idle  now,  when  every  one  has  to  be  busily  preparing,  is
the  highest  of  crimes,  a treason  to  * their  countiy  and  their  Czar.  ”

“ He  who  hath  ears  let  him.

(A  facsimile  of  the  manuscript  of  tliis passage  is  given  in  Plate  I.)
While  I was  in  India  Madame  Blavatsky  obtained  a partial  knowledge
of  the  substance  of  this  document  (which  I liad  no  permission  at  the
time  either  to  show  to  her  or  to  publish),  and  she  said  that  it  was
probably  a portion  of  a translation  wliich  she  liad  made  from  a Russian
work,  and  was  not  her  original  com])osition.  Be  this  as  it  may,  L
cannot  profess  myself,  after  my  personal  experiences  of  Madame
Blavatsky,  to  feel  much  doubt  tliat  her  real  object  has  been  tl.
furtherance  of  Russian  interests.  But  although  I have  felt  bound  fo
refer  to  my  own  view  on  this  point,  I suggest  it  here  only
as  a supposition  wliich  appears  best  to  cover  the  known  incidents
of  her  career  during  the  past  13  or  II  years.  That  she  is  a
remarkably  able  woman  will  scarcely  be  questioned  by  any  save
those  of  her  followers  whose  very  infatuation  of  belief  in  her  “occult
relations  ” is  perhaps  the  most  conspicuous  proof  of  that  ability
which  they  deny  ; and  it  rvould  be  no  venturesome  prognostication  to
say  that,  in  spite  of  recent  exposures,  she  will  still  retain  a goodly
gathering  of  disciples  on  whom  she  may  continue  to  inculcate  the  ethics
of  a profound  obedience  to  the  behests  of  imaginary  IMahatmas.  The
resources  of  Madame  Blavatsky  are  great ; and  by  the  means  of  forged
letters,  fraudulent  statements  of  Chelas,  and  other  false  e^■iclenct■,
together  with  the  hypothesis  of  Black  Magicians,  she  may  yet  do  much
in  the  future  for  the  beirefit  of  human  credulity.  But  acting  in  accord-
ance with  the  principles  upon  which  our  Society  has  proceeded,  I must
e.xpress  my  unqualified  opinion  that  no  genuine  psychical  phenomena
•whatever  will  be  found  among  the  pseudo-mysteries  of  the  Russian  lady
alias  Koot  Hoomi  Lai  Sing  alias  Tlahatma  Morya  alias  Madame
Blavatsky.  ,

The  letters  “ Eu  ” crossed  out  in  this  place  may  be  observed  in  tl;e
f-<csimile  in  Plate  1.


318


Appendkcsi  to  Mr.  Hodgson's  Report


APPENDIX  1.


THE  SASSOOH  TELEGRAM  (vi<lc  i~,.  217),  Ac.

Some  of  the  details  which  follow,  and  which  serve  to  explain  the
extract  quoted  on  p.  211,  I have  learnt  from  the  oral  statements  of
INIossrs.  A.  D.  and  IM.  D.  Ezekiel,  and  the  written  statements  of  Mr.
ivhandalvala  shown  to  me  by  Dr.  Hartmann.

Madame  Blavatsky,  on  her  way  from  Bombay  to  Madras,  in  Octo-
ber, 1883,  stayed  at  Poona  several  days  at  the  house  of  Mr.  N.  D.
Khandalvala,  a member  of  the  Theosophical  Society.  On  October  23rd
she  dined  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Jacob  Sassoon,  who  was  desirous  of  seeing-
some  “ phenomenon.”  Madame  Blavatsky  despatched  the  letter  from
which  the  extract  is  taken,  to  Madame  Coulomb  on  the  morning-
of  the  2Ith.  While  driving  with  Mr.  A.  D.  Ezekiel  on  the  afternoon  of
the  24th,  she  expressed  her  desire  to  call  upon  Mr.  Sassoon.  Probably  she
intended,  when  she  wrote  to  Madame  Coulomb,  to  arrange  for  a con-
versation with  Mr.  Sassoon  on  the  afternoon  of  the  26th,  when  the  sub-
ject of  the  telegram  would  be  mentioned — only,  of  course,  after  much
entreaty  by  Mr.  Sassoon  for  some  phenomenon ; but,  linding  that  Mr.
Sassoon  purposed  leaving  Poona  on  the  25th,  she  was  compelled,  if  she
was  to  impress  him  at  all,  to  take  the  needful  action  earlier  than  she
had  anticipated.  On  this  afternoon,  then,  of  the  24th,  after  refusing
to  show  Mr.  Sassoon  any  phenomena, ^she  j^rofessed,  by  some  “occult”
mental  process,  to  get  the  opinion  of  Bamalinga’s  Master;  but,  having
imperfectly  heard  his  answer,  she  wished  mentally,  as  she  said,  that
Ramalinga  should  communicate  to  her  the  words  in  writing,  that  she
might  satisfy  herself  that  she  had  heard  aright.  She  wrote  down  at  the
time  the  words  she  expected  to  receive,  and  said  that  Ramalinga  would
send  a telegram  to  her  at  once,  or  that  she  might  not  receive  it  till  after
a day  or  two.  The  telegram  did  not  arrive  till  the  26th.  Madame
Blavatsky’s  explanation  of  the  delay  is  that  Ramalinga  sent  on  the
woi’ds  late  to  hlr.  Babajee  D.  Nath,  who  coj^ied  them  and  gave  them  to
hladame  Coulomb  to  be  sent  by  telegi’am.  This  explanation  was  given
to  me  by  Madame  Blavatsky,  and  appears  also  in  the  letter  professedly
written  by  her  on  October  26th  to  Colonel  Olcott.  Madame  Blavatsky
was  too  shrewd  ojoenly  to  lay  stress  upon  the  telegram,  but  I have  no
doubt,  after  conversations  with  Messrs.  A.  D.  and  M.  D.  Ezekiel,  who  were
present  at  Mr.  Sassoon’s  on  the  24th,  and  at  Madaine  Blavatsky’s  receipt
of  the  telegi’am  on  the  26th,  that  she  Avished  the  occurrence  to
be  regai’ded  as  “phenomenal,”  notAvithstanding  Mr.  A.  D.  Ezekiel’s
statement  to  the  contrary  in  his  letter  to  the  Times  of  India.

It  may  be  pointed  out  in  passing  that  Mr.  Babajee  D.  Nath  lends
liis  sanction  to  Madame  BlaAuxtsky’s  e.xplamation,  and  thus,  the


Oil  ritcnomcna  connected  icitli  Thcoso  dnj.  319

Blavatsky-Coulonil)  letters  being  genuine,  implicates  himself  in  the
frarid.

The  statement  made  by  INIadame  Blavatsky  when  the  Septembei
number  of  the  Christian  College  Magazine  appeared  in  Europe  is  as
follows  : —

The  third  letter,  supposed  to  be  written  from  Poona,  is  an  entire
fabrication.  I remember  the  letter  I wrote  to  her  from  Poona.  It  asked
her  to  send  me  immediately  the  telegram  contained  in  a note  from  Eamalinga
if  he  brought  or  sent  her  one.  I wrote  to  Colonel  Olcott  about  the  experi-
ment. He  thinks  he  can  find  my  letter  at  Madras.  I hope  to  either  get
back  Ramalinga’s  note  to  me  or  obtain  a statement  of  the  whole  matter  from
him.  How  could  i make  a mistake  in  W'riting,  however  hurriedly,  about
the  name  of  one  of  my  best  friends  ? The  forgers  make  me  address  him —
“ care  of  H.  Khandalawalla  ” — when  there  is  no  such  man.  The  real  name
is  N.  D.  Khandalawalla.

Kow',  in  the  first  place,  the  H originally  printed  in  the  Christian
College  Magazine  w'as  a misprint  or  a miscopy  for  the  IST  in  the
original  document.

As  for  the  letter  supposed  to  have  been  w’ritten  to  Colonel  Olcott,
it  proves  nothing,  even  were  it  written  at  the  time  it  professes  to  have
been  written,  viz.,  October  26th,  1883.  Colonel  Olcott  alleges  that  he
found  tills  letter  among  his  papers  at  Madras  on  his  return  thither  at
the  end  of  last  year,  though  he  w'as  unable  to  tell  me  how,  when,  or
where  he  had  originally  received  it.  I was  afteiwvards  informed  by  Mr.
Dainodar  that  IMadame  Blavatsky  had  sent  it  through  him  to  Colonel
Olcott,  whom  he  was  accompanying  on  his  tour  in  1883.  My  opinion
is  that  this  letter,  wdiich  was  showm  to  me,  is  ex  2)ost  Jacto,  and
was  not  written  earlier  than  towards  the  end  of  last  year.  There
are  tw'o  statements  in  the  letter  which  appear  to  me  to  point  to
its  having  been  written  at  the  later  date.  One  of  these  is  Madame
Blavatsky’s  expression  of  her  deep  distrust  of  the  Coulombs ; the
other  is  the  following : — IMadame  Blavatsky,  after  w'riting  that
Ramalinga  objected  to  give  the  words  to  Madame  Coulomb,  and  gave
them  to  Babajee,  who  gave  them  to  Madame  Coulomb  to  be  sent  as  a
telegram,  continues  : “ I received  the  telegram  to-day,  but  as  it  said,

‘ Master  hasyusi  heard  your  conversation  ’ — when  it  was  not  ‘just  now’
but  yesterday  that  the  conversation  took  place — it  was  a glorious
failure  ! ” Kow  the  letter  is  dated  October  26th,  therefore  “ yesterday”
rvould  be  October  25th.  But  the  conversation  took  place  on  October
24th.  If  the  letter  was  written  a year  after  the  events,  the  mistake  is
intelligible  enough.  It  was  probably  concocted  after  the  appearance  of
the  Christian  College  Magazine  \\\  Europe,  and  then — if  we  are  to  regard
Colonel  Olcott  as  a dupe  in  the  matter — sent  to  Mr.  Damodar  for
insertion  among  Colonel  Olcott’s  papers.


:320


Appendices  to  Mr.  Jlodr/soii’s  Rcjwrt


I have  also  seen  the  letter  alleged  to  have  been  written  by
llamalinga  at  the  time,  and  it  appeai’ed  to  me  to  be  written,  in  part  at
least,  in  tlie  disguised  hand  of  Madame  Blavatsky.  It  is  curious,  too,
tliat  in  this  letter  llamalinga  is  represented  as  expressing  a great  dread
of  Madame  Coulomb ; and  I may  say  here  that  my  inquiries  have  not
enabled  me  to  discover  that  Mi’.  Ramalinga  Deb’s  existence  has  ever
been  other  than  imaginary.

But  a more  serious  flaw  in  the  attempted  explanation  by  Madame
Blavatsky  yet  remains.  Messrs.  Khandalvala  and  Ezekiel  main-
tain that  Madame  Blavatsky  could  not  have  written  to  Madame
Coulomb  on  the  24th  after  the  conversation  took  place  at  Mr.
Sassoon’s  in  time  for  her  letter  to  reach  Madame  Coulomb  on  the
26th.  She  declares  in  her  statement  that  she  asked  Madame  Coulomb
to  send  her  “ immediately  the  telegram  contained  in  a note  from
llamalinga  if  he  brought  or  sent  her  one,”  and  from  her  sup-
posed letter  to  Colonel  Olcott  it  appears  that  this  expected  telegram
related  to  the  Sassoon  conversation.  Hence  this  alleged  request  must
have  been  made  before  the  aforesaid  conversation  occurred ; and  it  is
apparently  not  denied  by  Madame  Blavatsky  that  she  did  write  to
Madame  Coulomb  on  the  morning  of  the  24th.  On  Madame  Blavatsky’s
own  showing,  therefore — if  Messrs.  Ezekiel  and  Khandalvala  are  right
concerning  the  time  of  the  conversation  and  the  subsequent  events
which  prevented  her  afterwards  writing  a letter — a specific  pre-arrange-
ment must  have  been  made  by  her  for  a conversation,  the  whole  point
of  which  was  that  its  subject  should  have  arisen  extempore.


I nicay  liere  notice  some  of  Madame  Blavatsky’s  allegations  concerning
other  extracts  which  I have  quoted.  These  allegations,  among  others,  were
published  in  a pamphlet  issued  in  1884,  by  the  Council  of  the  London
Lodge  of  the  Theosophical  Society.  Against  extract  (G),  p.  213,  .she  said  :
“ There  is  no  ‘ Maharajah  of  Lahore,’  hence  I could  not  have  spoken  of  such
a irerson,  nor  have  been  attempting  mock  phenomena  for  his  deception.”  I
do  not  siqrpose  that  any  one  who  is  familiar  with  Madame  Blavatsky  would
maintain  that  she  could  not  have  written  les  Maharajah  de  Lahore  ou  de
Benares  simply  because  there  was  no  Maharajah  of  Lahore  but  only  of
Benares.

Concerning  extract  (7),  p.  213,  Madame  Blavatsky  said  : “ All  depends
upon  knowing  who  is  ‘ Christopdiolo  ’ — a little  ridiculous  figure  in  rags,  about
tliree  inches  high  ; she  wrote  to  say  it  had  accidentally  been  destroyed.  She
joked  over  it,  and  I too.”  In  reference  to  another  extract  (14) — where
“ Christofolo  ” occurred,  she  said  : “ ‘ Christopholo  ’ was  a name  by  which

she  [Madame  Coulomb]  called  an  absurd  little  figure,  or  image  of  hers.  Slie
gave  nicknames  to  everything.”  And  in  B.  IlepUes  she  wrote  d.  propos  of
extract  (7)  (which  occurs  at  the  end  of  a letter  about  her  intended  movements
for  the  next  few  months,  and  otlier  practical  matters),  “I  deny  having
written  any  such  thing  on  that  same  letter.  I remember  her  telling  me  in  a


On  Phenomena  connected  ivitli  Th(OHophij.


321


letter  her  magic  Cliristopliolo  liad  melted  in  the  sun,  and  I may  have  answei  ed
];er  something  to  that  effect.  But  that  after  the  serious  letter  that  ijrecedcs
I should  write  such  6os/i.  is  impossible,  uot  in  my  style  at  all.”

Concerning  extract  (13),  p.  215,  she  wrote  : “I  could  never,  in  writing  to
her  who  saw  the  man  every  day,  use  all  his  names  and  titles.  I should
simply  have  said,  ‘Dewan  Bahadur,’  without  adding  ‘Bajanath  Rao,  the
P'-esident  of  the  Society,’  as  if  introducing  to  her  one  she  did  not  know.
The  wdiole  nanre  is  evidently  put  in  now  to  make  it  clear  who  is  meant.”  blow
1 think  it  is  probably  true  that  Madame  Blavatsky  would  not  usually  write
the  full  iranie  and  titles  of  Mr.  Ragoonath  Rao,  and  I account  for  her  having
■writteir  them  in  the  present  case  by  supposiirg  that  she  had  just  written
them  in  the  K.  H.  hand  on  the  envelope  of  the  hlahatma  document
she  had  prepared,  and  that  they  were  consequently  running  in  her  mind.


APPENDIX  II.

THE  ATjYAR  saucer  (sec  21.  SIS).

Tire  subjoined  accouirt  is  that  of  IMajor-General  Morgan  himself,*
■who  thinks  it  sufficiently  proves  that  Madame  P>lavatsky  could  not
have  written  letter  No.  4 (p.  212)!  It  should  be  compared  wdth  Ids
earlier  account,  quoted  on  p.  218.

In  the  month  of  August,  1883,  I was  obliged  to  go  to  Madras  on
business  entirely  unconnected  ■with  Adyar  affairs.  Madame  Blavatsky  was
then  staying  in  my  house,  and  urged  me  to  stay  at  the  Adyar  during  my  visit
to  Madras.  This  I declined,  as  the  place  was  too  far  from  my  business.  Slie
then  advised  me  to  see  the  picture  of  the  hlahatma  in  the  Shrine,  as  it  was  a
very  peculiar  work.  1 replied  that  I should  make  a point  of  going  to  see  tlie
picture,  but  the  day  was  not  mentioned.  Two  or  three  days  after  my  anival
at  Madras  I wmnt  to  visit  the  headquarters,  and  found  that  the  woman
Coulomb  was  out,  and  was  requested  by  Damodar  to  await  her  return.  She
came  in  about  one  hour,  having  been  out  shopping  in  Madras.  On  my
mentioning  the  purpose  for  which  I had  come,  she  took  me  upstairs,  and,
instead  of  going  through  Madame  Blavatsky’s  room,  we  went  round  outside
to  the  Occult  Room, as  she  stated  that  the  rooms  of  Madame  were  locked  and
the  doors  blocked  up  with  furniture.  On  entering  the  room  she  hurriedly
approached  the  Shrine  or  cupboard,  and  quickly  opened  the  double  doors  ;
as  she  did  so,  a china  saucer,  which  appeared  to  have  been  placed  leaning
against  the  door,  fell  down  on  the  chunam  floor,  and  was  broken  to  pieces.
On  this  she  exhibited  great  consternation,  exclaiming  that  it  was  a much
cherished  article  of  Madame’s,  and  she  did  not  know  what  she  should  do.
She  and  her  husband,  who  had  come  with  us,  jiicked  up  the  pieces.  She  then
tied  them  up  in  a cloth  and  replaced  them  in  the  Shrine,  in  the  silver  bowl,
not  behind  it,  the  doors  were  shut,  and  Damodar  took  up  his  jjosition  on  a
chair  right  in  front  of  the  Shrine  and  only  a few  feet  distant  from  it  ; he  sat

* See  Reply  by  H.  R.  Morgan,  Major-General,  Madias  Army  (retired),  to  a
Report  of  an  Examination  into  the  Blavatsky  Correspondence,  by  J.  D.  B.
Cribble,  M.C.S.  (retired).


322


Appendices  to  2Ir.  Hodgson's  Report


intently  regarding  the  Shrine  and  in  a listening  attitude.  I was  not  then
aware,  as  I am  now,  of  the  fact  that  the  astral  electric  current  causes  a sound
exactly  like  that  of  the  ordinary  telegraph  to  be  distinctly  heard  in  the
Shrine  ; unaware  of  this,  I resumed  conversation  with  the  Coulombs  regard-
ing the  accident,  when  I remarked  that  it  would  be  well  if  he  got  some  mastie
or  glue  and  tried  to  put  the  pieces  together.  On  my  saying  this  he  started
to  get  some,  which  he  said  he  had  in  his  bungalow,  situated  about  100  yards-
from  the  house,  and  I,  turning  to  his  wife,  remarked,  “ If  the  matter  is  of
sutlicient  importance  the  Mahatmas  could  cause  its  repair,  if  not  you  must-
do  the  best  you  can.”  Hardly  had  I uttered  this,*  when  Damodar  said,.
“There  is  a message,”  and  he  immediately  opened  the  door  of  the  Shrine  and
took  down  the  silver  bowl  (in  which  the  letters  are  generally  found),  and  sure-
eni.iugh  there  was  a note,  which  on  opening  contained  the  following  lines

“To  the  small  audience  present  as  witnesses.  Now  Madame  Coulomb
has  (.)Ccasion  to  assure  herself  that  the  devil  is  neither  as  black  nor  as  wicked
as  he  is  generally  rej^resented.  The  mischief  is  easily  repaired. — K.H.”
W'^e  then  opened  the  cloth  containing  the  broken  saucer,  found  it  intact  and
whole  ! Three]  minutes  had  not  elapsed  since  I had  suggested  the  glue  should
be  procured  ! and  shortly  after  Coulomb  returned  with  the  glue  in  his-
hand.  If  he  could  have  gone  all  round  the  upper  >’ooms,  got  behind  the
Shrine,  removed  the  broken  saucer,  tied  uji  the  parcel,  having  placed  a
^^dlole  one  in  its  stead,  and  written  the  note  regarding  the  repair  of  the
sauce:-  (my  remark  about  which  he  liad  not  heai'd),  then  I say  his  feat  rivalled
that  of  the  Masters  ! When  I spoke  to  the  woman  about  the  wonderful
manner  in  which  the  saucer  had  been  restored,  she  replied,  “It  must  be  the
work  of  the  devil.”  Here  is  her  note  on  the  subject,  written  to  Madame
lllavat.sky,  then  in  Ootacamund.  The  devil  has  left  out  a whole

line  in  the  letter,  which  makes  mmsense  of  it,  both  in  Dr.  Hartmann’s
pamphlet  and  in  the  copies  I have  seen  (taken  from  this)  elsewhere.  Below
I give  a correct  copy.

Adyar,  13f/(  A^l■gnst,  1883.

My  Dear  Friend,

I verily  believe  I shall  go  silly  if  I stay  with  you.  Now  let  me  tell
you  what  has  happened.  On  my  arrival  home  I found  General  Morgan
sitting  in  that  beautiful  office  of  ours,  talking  with  Damodar  and  M.  Coulomb.
After  exchanging  a few  words,  I asked  whether  he  would  wish  to  see  the
“ Shrine,”  and  on  his  answering  in  the  affirmative  we  went  upstairs,  passing
on  the  outside,  on  account  of  the  furniture  of  your  sitting-room  being  heaped
up  to  block  the  doors  and  prevent  thieves  breaking  in.

* In  the  earlier  account  General  Morgan  says:  “ Five  minutes  had  scarcely
claused  after  tliis  remark.”  Tliis  fire  minutes  exhibits  here  a decided  tendency
to  api)roximate  to  nothing. — B.II.

f According  to  the  earlier  account  this  interval  was  con.siderably  longer,
being  five  minutes,  together  with  an  uncertain  inter\-al  spent  partly  in  con-
versation, partly  in  reading  the  note,  &c.  But  more  surprising  still
than  the  inconsistencies  between  General  Morgan’s  two  accounts,  is  the
ojunion  which  lie  apparently  holds,  that  if  the  phenomenon  was  fraudulent
hi.  Coulomb  himself  must  have  written  the  Koot  Iloomi  note, — and  must  have
written  it,  moreover,  in  the  very  interval  which  has  thus  dwindled  ! — Tl.H.


On  Vhenomena  connected  icith  Theoiophy.


32S


The  General  found  the  portraits  admirable,  hut  I wish  I had  never  gone
up,  because,  on  my  opening  the  “Shrine,”  I,  Madame  Coulomb,  who  never-
cares  either  to  see  or  to  have  anything  to  do  in  tliese  matters,  as  you  well
know,  must  needs  go  and  open  the  Shrine,  and  see  before  her  eyes,  and.
through  her  fingers  pass,  the  pretty  saucer  you  so  much  cared  for.

It  fell  down  and  broke  in  20  pieces.  Damodar  looked  at  me  as  much  as  to
saj"-,  “Well,  you  are  a fine  guardian.”  I,  trying  to  conceal  my  sorrow  on
account  of  General  Morgan’s  presence,  took  up  the  debris  of  the  cup,  and
put  them  in  a piece  of  cloth  which  I tied  up,  and  placed  ic  behind  the  silver
bowl.  On  second  consideration  I thought  I had  better  take  it  down,  Jest
some  one  should  throw  it  down  again  and  reduce  it  into  poicder  this  time.  So-
I asked  Damodar  to  reach  it  for  me,  and  to  our  unutterable  surprise  the  cuj)
was  as  perfect  as  though  it  liad  never  been  broken,  and  more,  there  was  the
enclosed  note  : —

[Then  follows  the  note  already  quoted  from  the  Master],  to  which  the
General  added  the  few  lines  and  signed  as  an  eye-witness.

Now  make  what  you  like  of  this.  I say  you  have  dealings  with  old  XicJ^..

Yours  ever  affectionately,

E.  Coulomb.*

There  is  a discrepancy  between  my  account  and  that  contained  in  the
above  letter,  as  to  why  the  doors  of  the  Shrine  were  opened  the  second  time  •
this  was  done  by  Damodar  of  himself  and  not  by  the  Coulombs’  desire.  I
may  hero  observe  that  on  this  occasion  everything  done  by  the  Coulombs-
was  done  mechanically,  as  if  imitelled  to  do  certain  things,  and  as  directed
1)}' me.  For  instance  it  was  on  mi/  suggestion  Coulomb -went  for  the  glue.
I remarked  that  the  Masters  could  repair  the  saucer  if  they  chose,  and  it  was
Damodar  who  said  “ there  was  a message,”  and  opened  the  Shrine
accordingly.

The  man  Coulomb’s  assertion,  that  the  saucer  was  pmt  in  at  the  back  of
the  Shrine:  I have  shown,  that  to  do  this,  in  the  short  time  allowed  him,  was
simply  impossible;  numbers  have  testified  to  the  fact  that  the  back  of  the
Shrine  has  never  been  tampered  with.  In  the  letter  under  discussion,  1 am
said  to  expect  a phenomenon  “ because  I told  ” Madame  Blavatsky  so.  1 never
did  so — I really  went  to  see  the  i^icture  of  the  Mahatma.  Madame  Blavatsky
knew  perfectly  well  that  I was  intimately  acquainted  with  Spirituahsm,  and
knew  all  about  jihenomena  and  had  no  childish  curiosity  on  that  head,,
therefore  she  was  very  unlikely  to  have  thought  I wanted  one.


APPENDIX  III.


COLONEL  OLCOirs  FLOWER  VASES.

A window  which  had  originally  been  in  the  north  wall  of  the  Occult  Room
was  transformed  into  a cupboard  with  a secret  double  back  (see  Plan,  No.  8),

* It  is  easy  to  read  between  the  lines  of  ^Madame  Coulomb’s  letter,  even
without  her  statement  that  Madame  Blavatsky  told  her  to  be  prudent  in  wliat
she  wrote. — R.H.


324


Appendices  to  Mr.  Hodgson's  Report


allowing  objects  to  be  placed  within  from  the  adjoining  outside  passage.  This
double  back  was  one  of  the  “ traj)  doors  ” discovered  at  the  time  of  the
expulsion  of  the  Coulombs.  Colonel  Olcott  informed  me  that  one  day  in  1883,
when  he  was  in  the  OccultRoom  with  Madame  Blavatsky,  a vase  appeared  in
this  cupboard — empty  just  before — as  a gift  to  Colonel  Olcott  from  one  of
the  Mahatmas.  Colonel  Olcott  apparently  wished  to  duplicate  this  vase  if
possible,  and  made  mesmeric  passes  before  the  closed  door  of  the  cuji-
board.  On  re-opening  the  cupboard  a second  vase  was  there,  the  facsimile  of
the  first.

Madame  Coulomb  declared  that  she  bouglit  these  vases  at  a shop  in
Madras,  and  that  they  were  placed  in  the  cupboard  througli  the  double  back
from  outside  the  Occult  Room.  The  shoj:)  where  tlie  vases  had  actually  been
obtained  was,  she  said,  Hassam’s,  though  they  were  purchased  through  M.
Faciole  and  Co.,  Poi)ham’s  Broadway,  Madras.  T saw  M.  Faciole,  who
remembered  accompanying  Madame  Coulomb  to  Hassam  and  Co.  ; and  he
Chinese  manager  at  Hassam’s,  whom  I also  saw,  showed  me  a pair  of  vases
somewhat  similar,  as  he  alleged,  to  the  two  pairs  purchased  by  Madame
Coulomb.  I afterwmrds  requested  Colonel  Olcott  to  sliow  me  the  vases,
when  he  found  to  his  surprise  that  they  were  not  in  his  bungalow,  and  he
was  unable  to  tell  me  when  they  had  disappeared.  He  sent  a few  words  of
imiuiry  concerning  them  to  Madame  Blavatsky,  to  the  main  bungalow,  about
40  yards  distant,  and  in  tlie  meantime  gave  me  a descrijition,  which,  as  far  as
it  w^ent,  in  shape,  height,  and  style  of  ornamentation,  exactly  tallied
wfith  the  description  of  the  vases  Madame  Coulomb  had  j)urchased  at
Hassam’s.

Madame  Blavatsky  herself  then  joined  us,  and  after  stormily  denying
that  she  had  taken  the  vases,  alleged  that,  after  Colonel  Olcott  had  received
them  from  the  Mahatma,  Madame  Coulomb  had  tried  to  obtain  vases  like
tliom,  but  had  failed  ; that  Madame  Coulomb  had  purchased  one  pair  of  vases
Mftcrwards,  and  that  these  differed  in  shape,  &c.,  from  those  received  by
Colonel  Olcott.  Madame  Blavatsky  then  proceeded  to  sketch  roughly  the
vases  Colonel  Olcott  had  received,  and  the  sketch  differed  greatly  from  the
description  Colonel  Olcott  had  just  given.  Moreover,  the  pair  of  vases  which
Madame  Blavatsky  said  had  been  brought  to  her  by  Madame  Coulomb  had
also  disappeared  as  mysteriously  as  Colonel  Olcott’s.  The  only  mention  of
the  vases  I could  find  in  the  books  at  Hassam’s  occurred  in  connection  w'ith
their  payment  by  M.  Faciole  and  Co.,  shortly  after  the  date  on  whicli  Colonel
Olcott  received  tliem.

Under  the  date  of  May  25th  (1883)  occurs  the  following  entry  in  the  day-
book of  M.  Faciole  and  Co.  : —

(Rupees.)

“1  Pair  Flower  Vase  ...  ...  7

1 Pair  ,,  ,,  ...  ...  6.”

These  items  appear  in  the  account  to  Madame  Coulomb,  but  have  been
struck  out.  Madame  Coulomb’s  explanation  of  this  is  that  she  wished  them
not  to  aj>pear  in  the  bill  rendered  to  headquarters,  and  she  therefore  paid
cash  for  them.


Oa  Plmwmena  connected  mth  Theosophy.  32'3‘

Another  entry,  under  date  May  25th,  occurs  in  the  receipt-book  of  JI
Faciole  and  Co.  : —

“ lleceived  from  Assam  and  Co. —

(Rupees.)

1 Pair  Cliapan  Flower  Vase  7 1 ^ Coulomb."

1 Pair  ,,  ,,  ,,  6J

Madame  Coulomb  therefore  purchnsed  the  vases  on  May  25th;  Colonel:
Olcott  received  them  on  May  2Gth.

Extract  from  Colonel  Olcott's  Diary.

“ May  26th.  Fine  phenomenon.  Got  pair  of  tortoiseshell  and  lacquer
vases  with  flowers  in  a cabinet  a moment  before  empty.”


APPENDIX  IV.


STATEMENTS  OF  WITNESSES  CONCERNING  THE  SHRINE  AND

ENVIRONMENT.

This  Appendix  contains  the  most  important  evidence  which  I roceivedl
concerning  the  Shrine  and  its  envh-onment.  The  accounts  of  “examinations”
of  the  Shrine  fairly  represent  much  of  the  “evidential”  material  which  I
gathered  from  Theosojihists  in  India  concerning  “occult  phenomena”
generally.  It  would  be  superfluous  to  print  the  whole  of  this  mateiial,  but
such  accounts  as  those  of  Messrs.  Rathnavelu,  Rajamiengar,  and  Unwala,,
given  in  this  Appendix,  may  be  regarded  as  typical.

Some  of  the  following  statements  consist  of  extracts  from  rej)lies  by
Theosophists  to  a circular  inquiry  {yuh  p.  223)  issued  in  August,  1884,  by
Dr.  Hartmann,  as  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Control  of  the  Theosophical
Society.  Others  were  made  in  rejily  to  my  questions  and  taken  down  by  me
at  the  time  in  writing  ; and  in  giving  these  here  I have  omitted  various
details,  which  chiefly  regard  certain  estimated  measurements  of  size,  distance,
&c.,  as  unnecessarily  burdensome  to  the  reader.

Comments  of  my  own  are  in  some  cases  added  in  further  elucidation  of
the  statements  of  the  witnesses  ; but  there  are  many  instances  of  incon-
sistency displayed  in  the  Theosophic  evidence  which  may  well  be  left  to  the:
reader’s  own  discernment.


Mrs.  Morgan.

In  reply  to  my  questions  : — When  Mrs.  Morgan  arrived  at  Adyar  early  in
November,  1883,  the  wooden  door  in  the  room  adjoining  the  Occult  Room,
which  had  blocked  that  portion  of  the  wall  immediately  opiiosite  the
Shrine,  had  been  removed,  and  a bricked  frame  was  being  substituted.  This
was  completely  plastered  over,  so  that  the  whole  wall  of  Madame  Blavatsky’s
bedroom  was  bare  and  visible,  and  there  was  no  aperture  of  any  kind.  This
smooth  wall  was  then  papered  in  the  presence  of  Mrs.  Morgan,  the  2)aper-
ing  being  comifleted  about  the  15th  of  December.

Mrs.  Morgan  did  not  see  the  door  which  had  previously  occupied  jiart  of
the  space  of  the  wall.  This  door  had  been  removed  in  consequence  of  a^


326


Appendices  to  Mr.  Hodgson's  Riport


doubt  expressed  by  Mr.  G.  Mr.  G.  had  jilaced  a sealed  letter  in  the
Shrine.  The  letter  disappeared.  It  was  afterwards  returned  to  him  with
the  seal  apparently  unbroken,  and  it  contained  the  handwriting  of  a hla-
hatma  in  reply  to  his  letter,  Mr.  G.  was  not  comjdetely  satisfied  tliab  the
letter  might  not  have  been  taken  out  from  the  back  of  the  Shrijie  and  tlie
letter  opened  witliout  destroying  the  seal.  Madame  Blavatsky  hearing  of
this,  wished  all  doubts  to  be  removed,  and  hence  ordered  the  wall  to  be
blocked  up  and  covered  with  chunam.

After  this  work  was  completed  it  was  suggested  by  hi.  Coulomb  that  a
•shelf  and  sideboard  should  be  made  for  the  room  adjoining  the  Occult  Room
as  a resting  place  for  the  dishes  which  might  be  passed  through  the  upper
part  of  a closed  door  issuing  from  this  adjoining  room  to  the  terrace.  This
proposal  was  made  to  save  the  servants’  passing  through  tlie  drawing-room  with
the  dishes,  as  this  adjoining  room  was  at  that  time  used  by  Madame  Blavatsky
as  her  dining-room.  This  suggestion  was  welcomed  by  MadameBlavatsky,  who
ordered  M,  Coulomb  to  make  the  sideboard  “ of  once — at  once.”  This  side-
board was  made  and  placed  against  the  wall  opposite  to  the  Shrine.  Whether
it  contained  drawers  or  was  opened  by  a door  Mrs.  Morgan  is  unable  to
recollect.  This  sideboard  remained  in  that  place  during  the  time  of  the
anniversary.  It  was  about  three  feet  high.  A 2dain,  single  shelf  was  also
made  and  [daced  so  that  dishes  could  be  easily  jmt  upon  it  by  the  servants
through  the  U252)eri)art  of  the  door  issuing  ujion  tlie  terrace.

*****■)(■***

The  Shrine  was  not  removed  at  any  time  in  the  iiiesence  of  Mrs.
Morgan.

Mrs.  Morgan  thinks  that  a cupboard  or  wardrobe  which  was  lieing  made
by  M.  Coulomb  for  the  new  rooms  might  have  been  adapted  for  iiurposes
of  trickery,  and  that  M.  Coulomb’s  first  intention  ivas  to  iirepare  trick-
jianels  and  cufiboards  in  the  new  rooms,  with  the  object  of  throwing  discredit
on  the  jihenomena,  but  that  lie  afterwards  thought  it  better  to  make  these
trick-panels,  &c.,  ajipear  in  the  old  rooms,  where  jihenomena  had  already
taken  place.

She  noticed  how  careful  M.  Coulomb  was  in  bevelling  and  trimming  the
planks,  and  thought  at  the  time  he  was  a remarkably  skilful  workman.

She  left  Ad}^!’  on  December  31st.


Mil.  SuBBA  Row  (Vakil  of  the  High  Court  of  hladras),  in  jn’esence  of

Mr.  Damodar.

In  reply  to  my  cpiestivns: — The  Slirine  was  jilaced  in  the  Occult  Room,
in  March,  1883.

if-if-if-******

Neither  Mr.  Subba  Row  nor  Mr.  Damodar  had  ever  .seen  the  Shrine
removed.

****•)(■*  -Sf-**

hlr.  G.  had  received  a rejdy  to  a letter  which  he  had  placed  in  the  Shrine,
and  had  afterwards  expressed  his  suspicion  that  his  letter  miglit  have  been
taken  out  from  the  shrine  at  the  back  and  through  a panelled  door  wliich  was
on  the  east  side  of  the  wall,  and  iinmediately  behind  the  Shrine.  Madame
hearing  of  this,  caused  this  jjanelled  door  to  be  removed,  and  a wooden


On  Phe)iO)ncua  connected  with  Thco^oidti/.


327


TDricked  frame  inserted  -vvliicli  was  filled  with  a layer  of  bricks,  and  then
covered  with  chnnam,  so  that  a hare  wall  without  aperture  was  formed.
This  wall  was  then  papered  over,  and  the  work  was  completed  about  a
fortnight  before  the  anniversary,  December  ‘27th,  of  1883.

A sideboard  was  made  and  placed  against  that  part  of  the  wall  where  the
bricked  frame  had  been  inserted.

%******  **

This  sideboard  was  placed  against  the  wall  before  the  anniversary,  and
remained  there  during  the  anniversary.  It  was  the  same  sideboard  in
which  M.  Coulomb  afterwards  exhibited  the  movable  back.  Mr.  Subba
Row  had  never  seen  the  inside  of  the  sideboard  before  M.  Coulomb  opened
it  at  the  time  of  the  “ Exposure.”

The  panelled  door  tvas  composed  of  four  jneces  of  teak  wood  together
with  cross-pieces,  ?md  resembled  the  door  now  fixed  in  the  side  of  Madame
Blavatsky’s  sitting-room,  but  he  cannot  say  certainly  whether  it  is  the  same
door  or  not.

[Mr.  Damodar  wished  to  demur  to  Mr.  Subba  Row’s  statement  that  the
sideboard  was  against  the  wall  before  the  anniversary.  He  did  not  venture
to  assert  so  himself,  but  said  that  Mr.  C.  Soubbiah  Chettj^  (whose  evidence
Mr.  Damodar  had  been  very  anxious  for  me  to  obtam)  declared  it  was  net
there  during  the  anniversary.  Mr.  Subba  Row  nevertheless  was  perfectly
confident  on  the  subject,  nor  did  Mr.  Damodar  venture  any  furtlier  to
dispute  Mr.  Subba  Row’s  statements.  But  see  Mr.  Damodar’s  evidence,
X)i/ra.]


Mk.  St.  George  Lane-Fox.

In  reply  io  my  questmis  : — Mr.  Lane-Fox  examined  the  Shrine  carefully
at  the  time  of  the  “Exposure.”  The  Shrine  was  close  to  the  wall,  and
muslin  and  other  stuff  between  the  Shrine  and  the  wall.

Mr.  Lane-Fox  desired  my  special  attention  to  the  fact  that  an  excessive
superstition  was  attaclied  to  the  Shrine  by  the  natives.  The  feeling  with
which  they  regarded  it  would  absolutely  interfere  with  any  careful  investiga-
tion of  either  the  Shrine  or  its  surroundings.  On  the  occasion  of  the
“Exposure,”  Mr.  P.  Sreenevas  Rao  and  others  urged  strong  remonstrances
against  his  proposal  to  remove  the  Shrine  and  examine  the  wall,  and  “ disturb
the  sacred  things.”  He  insisted,  however,  upon  doing  so.  He  endeavoured
to  look  behind  the  Shrine,  but  could  see  nothing.  M.  Coulomb  had  said
there  had  been  formerly  a liole  in  the  wall  just  behind  the  Shrine,  and
that  the  “saucer’"  phenomenon  was  thus  accounted  for.  Mr.  Lane-Fox,
therefore,  had  the  Shrine  lifted  up  and  he  pulled  the  muslin  away,  and  then
some  other  fabric  or  “ stuff  ” which  was  close  to  the  wall.  This  other  stuff
[which  the  tailor  who  prepared  the  hangings  of  the  Occult  Room  asserts
to  have  been  white  glazed  calico  tacked  to  the  wall]  was  joined,  not  sewn,
so  that  the  joining  ran  do^vn  the  wall  opposite  the  middle  of  the  Shrine.
He  examined  the  wall,  which  was  whitewashed,  very  carefully,  and  could
find  not  the  smallest  trace  of  the  previous  existence  of  a hole.

The  hole  in  the  east  side  of  the  wall,  behind  the  sideboard,  had
apiDarently  been  made  after  the  sideboard  was  placed  there,  and  could  not
be  seen  at  all  from  outside  w’hen  the  sideboard  was  closed.


828


Jppe  itiices  to  3L'.  Hodgson's  Report


Mr.  P.  Sreenevas  Rao  (Judge  of  the  Court  of  Small  Causes,  Madras),

August  31s#,  1884.

From  his  regjhj  to  the  circular  inquiry  : — The  Shrine  is  a rosewood  cabinet,
in  which  are  jdaced  the  portraits  of  the  two  Revered  Mahatmas  under  whose
auspices  the  Theosophical  Society  is  founded,  besides  certain  other  articles
which  are  considered  sacred.  This  cabinet  is  lodged  about  three  feet  from
the  door  at  one  end  of  a room — called  the  Occult  Room — on  the  upper  storey
of  the  main  building  of  the  headquarters  of  the  Society,  and  was  at  first
made  to  rest  against  a board  which  completely  covered  the  whole  length  and
breadth  of  a door  which  ojjened  into  the  adjoining  hall  ; but  subsequently,
this  door  having  been  closed  with  brick  and  chunam,  the  cabinet  was  allowed
to  rest  against  the  wall  thus  formed.  But  there  never  was  a hole  or  other
communication  of  any  kind  between  the  cabinet  and  the  door  or  wall  behind
it,  or  in  any  other  part  of  the  room.  . . . There  were  2)henomena,

I.e.,  in  other  words,  letters  jnit  in  the  Shrine  disap2:)eared,  and  rcjjlies  were
found  in  their  jdace,  even  after  Madame  Blavatsky  left  Madras, — that  is,
even  after  the  aforesaid  holes  had  been  closed,  as  alleged  by  Coulomb  ; thus
l»roving  beyond  a doubt  that  the  holes  were  not  necessary  for  the  production
of  idienomena.  .

And  lastly,  I have  to  notice  the  hapj)y  circumstance  that,  subsequent  to
the  above  noticed  Coulombs’  affair,  matters  are  going  on  in  statu  quo  in  our
Society.  After  a short  susjDense  in  the  interval  the  Shrine  was  oj:)ened  to
communication  as  freely  as  before,  and  while  the  founders  of  the  Society  are
still  absent  from  Madras  the  Masters  are  taking  aw'ay  our  communications
from  the  Shrine,  and  vouchsafing  their  readies  through  the  Shrine  and  often
ciutside  the  Shrine,  and  even  outside  the  Occult  Room  itself,  thus  establishing
the  broad  fact  that  for  the  exhibition  of  the  fdienomena  no  Shrine  or  cabinet
is  necessary,  much  less  any  mechanical  contrivance,  traji-doors  of  Coulomb’s,
invention

In  reply  to  mi  questions: — Mr.  P.  S.  Rao  thinks  that  the  Shrine  was  first
resting  against  the  planked  door,  but  is  not  certain,  as  he  never  himself  put
his  hands  behind  the  Shrine  to  feel  it.  The  Shrine  was  never  removed  in  his
l}resence.

He  never  heard  a ticking  sound  from  the  Shrine.  The  Shrine  was  close
to  the  wall.

The  sideboard  in  which  the  panels  were  sho^vn  by  M.  Coulomb  was
standing  in  its  position  during  the  anniversary  of  1883.

Mr.  P.  S.  Rao  does  not  know  of  any  instance  of  Shrine  phenomena  after
tlie  expulsion  of  the  Coulombs.

[Concerning  Shrine  idienomena  after  Madame  Blavatsky  left  Madras  see
Report,  p.  248,  and  Appendix  XI.]

Mr.  T.  Vijiaraghava  Charloo  (Ananda)  (Official  at  Headquarters).

In  rcyly  to  my  questions  : — The  wooden  door  which  had  once  been  on  the
east  side  of  the  wall  behind  the  Shrine  is  the  same  door  which  is  now  in  the
side  of  Madame  Blavatsky’s  sitting-room.

An  ahnirah  (cupboard)  was  standing  for  some  time  before  tliis  door  in
the  east  side  of  the  wall,  and  the  ahnirah  was  sometimes  removed  to  allov.'
sceptics  to  see  that  there  was  no  hole  to  the  Shrine.


On  Phenomena  connected  icith  Theosophy.


329


Mr.  G.  came  and  saw  the  hollow  place  where  some  clothes  of  hladame
Avere  hanging,  and  he  thought  his  letter  which  he  had  put  into  the  Shrine
might  have  been  taken  out  there.  Madame,  hearing  of  this,  had  a wooden
frame  made  to  fit  the  gap,  with  cross-pieces  of  wood.  Bricks  in  a single
layer  were  then  inserted,  and  the  outside  covered  with  chunam.  The  in-
terior was  left  holloAv  at  M.  Coulomb’s  suggestion  to  Madame  Blavatsky.
Coulomb  said  that  if  the  space  was  filled  up,  the  pressure  Avould  tell  too
much  upon  the  roof.

The  carpenters  say  that  Coulomb  told  them  only  to  glue  the  back  of  the
sideboard  which  was  made.

[At  first  Ananda  said  that  this  sideboard  thus  made  AAms  placed  against  the
east  side  of  the  Occult  Room  wall  before  the  anniversary,  but  afterwards
asserted  that  it  was  not  placed  there  till  after  the  anniversary,  and  that
during  the  anniversary  there  was  no  sideboard  in  the  room  adjoining  the
Occult  Room.  In  a later  conversation  I told  Ananda  that  otljer  Avitnesses
asserted  that  the  sideboard  Avas  present  during  the  anniversary,  and  he  then
said  that  he  did  not  know  whether  it  Avas  present  or  not.  that  he  was  absent
during  the  anniversary.]

The  Shrine  itself  Avas  never  moved  in  Ananda’s  presence,  and  it  was  close
to  the  Avail.  There  Avas  hardly  half  an  inch  of  space  between  the  back  of
the  Shrine  and  the  Avail.


Mr.  Baeajee  D.  JS'ath.

A iigust  30th,  1884.

In  reply  to  the  circular  inquiry  : — Havung  been  called  upon  to  state  Avhat
I knoAV  in  regard  to  the  Occult  Room  in  the  uxAstairs  and  its  condition  on,
before,  or  after  the  18th  May,  1884,  I beg  to  say  that  I had  before  that  date
examined  the  Occult  Room,  the  Shrine,  and  its  surroundings  several  times.
I had  an  interest  in  so  examining,  as  I Avanted  to  be  able  to  give  my  unquali-
fied testimony  conscientiously  to  a very  jArominent  scejAtical  gentleman  at
Madras,  Avho  knoAvs  me  Avell  and  Avho  urged  me  to  state  all  my  exjjeriences
about  XJhenomena.  Madame  Blavatsky  herself  asked  me  on  several  occasions
to  examine,  as  she  knew  my  relation  to  the  gentleman.  I was  also  x^resent
on  the  day  Avhen  Mr.  Coulomb  gave  the  charge  of  the  upstairs  to  our  x^arty
and  Avhen  he  exposed  himself  audaciously.  I remember  very  Avell  that,  during
the  last  (VIII. ) anniversary,  I one  day  tapped  Avell  on  the  papered  Avail  behind
the  Shrine  in  various  places,  and  found,  from  the  noise  produced,  that  it
Avas  a whole  Avail.  I have  tapped  on  the  wall  after  Coulomb’s  contrivances,
and  found  that  there  is  a marked  difference  between  the  portion  of  the
Avail  Avhere  he  has  cut  open  and  betAveen  other  portions  of  it.  The  former
Avhen  tax^x^ed  produces  noAv  the  noise  of  a holloAv,  incomplete  wall ; Avliile
the  latter  portion  stands  the  test  of  taiAx^ing.  I knoAV  more  of  the
Xdienomena,  of  Madame  Blavatsky,  and  of  the  Coulombs  than  any  outsider  ;
I am  in  so  intimate  relations  at  the  headquarters  that  I have  been  treated
Avith  matters  of  a confidential  nature  unreservedly.  Even  Madame  Coulomb
herself  had  been  along  treating  me  as  a real  friend,  and  telling  much  and
often  of  what  she  said  she  Avould  not  tell  others.  I have,  therefore,  no
hesitation  at  all  in  stating  for  a fact  that  any  contriA'ances  AvhateAmr,  like
trax^-doors,  &c.,  that  are  noAV  found  had  nothing  at  all  to  do  Avith  Madame
Blavatsky,  Avho  had  not  the  remotest  idea  of  them.  The  Coulombs  are  the

Y


330


Appendices  to  Mr.  Hod tj son's  Iteport


sole  authors  of  the  plot.  It  is  worth  mentioning  here  that  Mr.  Coulomb
worked  up  the  walls,  set  up  the  doors,  and  did  everything  without  allowing
a single  carjienter,  mason,  or  coolie,  to  go  uj^stairs  ; and  he  was  furious  if
any  of  us  went  up  to  see.  To  prove  that  Madame  Blavatsky  was  not  a party
to  the  scheme,  I shall  cite  one  fact.  She  allowed — nay,  requested — Mr.  G.
Subbiah  Chetty  Garu,  F.T.S.,  to  examine  the  wmrk  done.  He  W'entoneday
to  see  it.  Coulomb  was  furious,  and  did  not  allow  him,  but  drove  him  out,
;ind  told  Madame  Blavatsky  that  none  of  us  should  go  there  at  all,  since  he
said  he  w'as  working  without  clothes  alone.  This  w'as  a mere  pretext,  as  on
that  occasion  he  wuxs  not  so,*  and  as  we  have  all  seen  him  often  with  only  a
pair  of  dirty  trousers.  Instances  can  be  multiplied.  I must  conclude  by
saying  that  the  “phenomena”  of  the  Mahatmas  do  not  stand  in  need  of
Coulombian  contrivances,  as  I have  witnessed  at  diflerent  times  and  different
Iilaces  when  and  xvhere  there  xvere  no  such  trap-doors,  and  I have  seen  and
knoxv  those  exalted  sages  who  are  the  authors  of  the  “ f)henomena.”  I can
therefore  assure  all  my  friends  that  the  Coulombs  had  got  up  a “Christian
plot”  during  Madame  Blavatsky’s  absence.

In  reply  to  my  quedions  : — He  had  seen  the  boarding  on  the  east  side  of
the  Occult  Boom  wall  behind  the  Shrine  ; said  it  was  not  at  all  like  the  four-
panelled  door  now  in  the  north  side  of  the  sitting-room.  [At  tliis  moment  a
A^enetianed  window  caught  Babajee’s  eye.  He  said  the  boarding  xvas  “ like
tliat  ” — pointing  to  the  xvindow  !]  He  saw  tlie  w'all  bare  and  intact  some
time  before  the  anniversary,  and  saw'  it  completely  pa^xered.

The  sideboard  was  not  placed  there  till  February  at  the  earliest  ; it  was
the  same  sideboard  as  was  afterwvards  exhibited  by  Mr.  Coulomb.

The  four-panelled  door  now  in  the  north  side  of  the  sitting-room  xvas  not
set  up  there  till  after  the  anniversary,  [in  other  w'ords]  the  teak-wood  door
now  in  the  side  of  the  sitting-room  was  not  there  when  tire  phenomenon  of
“ Kamaswamy’s  arm”  occurred.

* **■)(■*  *

Mr.  Babajee  never  saxv  the  Shrine  removed,  but  examined  the  back  of
the  Shrine  before  it  was  set  up.  There  were  no  panels.  There  was  about
4in.  sjjace  between  the  Shrine  and  the  w'all,  and  the  wall  of  the  Occult
Boom  throughout  xvas  bare  and  xvliitewrished.

*#**#■*

[Concerning  Mr.  Babajee’s  statement,  it  may  be  remarked  that  the  wall
upon  which  he  tajxixed  w’as,  by  the  agreement  of  all  the  other  witnesses,
excejit  Babula,  just  as  hollow  during  the  anniversary  as  it  was  after  M.
Coulomb’s  “exposure;”  that  the  four-panelled  door  now' in  the  north  side
of  the  sitting-room  w'as  clearly  there  during  the  anniversary  and  at  the  time
of  the  occurrence  of  the  “Bamaswamy’s  arm  ” phenomenon,  and  is  identical
with  the  boarding  originally  on  the  east  side  of  the  Occult  Boom  wall  behind


Supposing  Mr.  Eabajee’s  account  to  be  correct,  the  fact  which  he  cites  to
prove  that  Madame  Blavatsky  was  not  a party  to  the  scheme,  shows  rather  the
contrary  ; it  seems  not  unlikely  that  Jl.  Coulomb,  when  the  incident  wliich  Mr.
Babajee  relates  occurred,  was  actually  euy  aged  in  the  preparation  or  alteration  of
trick  apparatus.  Aladame  Blavatsky  might  xvell  have  trusted  M.  Coulomb  to
supply  a “ pretext"  for  not  allowing  an  v cue  to  inspect  his  work.


On  I'nenomena  connected  uith  Theosophy.


£331


the  Shrine  ; that  the  back  of  tiie  Shrine  was  panelled  and  much  closer  to
the  wall  than  alleged,  the  wall  being,  moreover,  covered  vdth  fabric  ; and
that  the  sideboard  was  placed  in  position  before  the  anniversary.  T regard
Mr.  Babajee’s  statements  about  the  four-panelled  door  and  the  sideboard  at
least  as  involving  deliberate  falsification  on  his  part,  so  much  so  that  I must
regard  him  as  an  altogether  untrustworthy  witness.

It  will  be  seen  from  Mrs.  Morgan’s  evidence  that  she  left  Adyar  on
December  .31st,  so  that  the  sideboard  must  have  been  placed  in  its  jiosition
against  the  wall  behind  the  Slrrine  some  time  in  December.  Her  explicit
testimony  that  it  was  f)laced  in  its  position  before  the  anniversary,  and
remained  tliere  during  the  anniversary,  is  confirmed  by  the  statements  of
Dr.  Hartmann,  Messrs.  Subba  Row,  P.  Sreenevas  Row,  and  P.  Rathnavelu.
Messrs.  Ramaswainier  and  Cooppooswamy  Iyer  also  gave  me  their  testimony
to  the  same  effect.  As  to  the  four-pianelled  boarding  in  the  side  of  Madame
Blavatsky’s  sitting-room,  Ananda  and  even  Babula  stated  that  it  was  that
which  had  previously  been  at  the  back  of  the  recess  behind  the  Shrine,  and
Mr.  Subba  Row  stated  that  it  resembled  that  boarding.  The  reason  men-
tioned by  Sirs.  Morgan,  hlr.  Subba  Row,  and  Ananda  for  the  removal  of
the  boarding  from  its  original  position  in  the  recess  behind  the  Shrine,
agrees  with  that  alleged  by  Madame  Coulomb  (“  Some  Account,”  &c.,  p.  71),
viz. , that  Madame  Blavatsky  had  ‘ ‘ heard  that  some  one  had  hinted  at  the
existence  of  sliding  panels  in  this  massive  sham  door,  which  was  at  the  back
of  the  bricked-up  window  against  which  the  Shrine  leant.”  Against  this
statement,  in  my  copy  of  Madame  Coulomb’s  pamphlet,  Madame  Blavatsky
has  written  the  word  “never”  ! In  reply  to  my  very  definite  questioning
as  to  the  full  significance  of  this  word,  hladame  Blavatsky  asserted  that  no
one  had  hinted  at  panels,  and  that  there  never  had  been  a boarding.  I was
so  specific  in  repeating  my  inquiry  that  I believe  it  to  have  been  absolutely
impossible  that  Madame  Blavatsky  could  have  misunderstood  me,  yet  her
answer  was  to  the  same  effect  as  before.  Nevertheless,  after  I had
pointed  out  to  her  that  by  denying  the  existence  of  the  boarding  she  was
irretrievably  damaging  her  own  evidence,  inasmuch  as  the  statements  of
Theosophic  witnesses  clearly  established  that  such  a boarding  had  been
against  the  wall  behind  the  Slrrine,  she  pretended  that  she  had  misunder-
stood my  questions,  and  proceeded  to  give  me  a clear  and  accurate  enough
outline  of  the  open  history  of  the  boarding  under  discussion.]

Babux,4.  (Madame  Blavatsky’s  native  servant).

[Babula,  who  was  near  the  door  part  of  the  time  when  I was  questioning
Babajee,  gave  a similar  description  of  the  Shrine  and  the  space  between  the
Shrine  and  the  wall,  placing  his  fingers  in  the  same  manner  as  Babajee,  to
show  me  the  width  of  the  space  between  the  Shrine  and  the  wall.]
******

In  reply  to  my  cpiestions : — There  had  originally  been  a window  at  that
part  of  the  wall  where  the  Shrine  was  placed.  This  window  had  been  taken
away,  and  the  gap  bricked  up  on  the  Occult  Room  side,  and  covered  with
chunam.  The  Shrme  was  placed  against  this  bare  wall.  On  the  east  side
of  this  part  of  the  wall  a plank  boarding  was  erected.  This  boarding  was
afterwards  taken  away  and  placed  in  the  north  side  of  the  sitting-room,  and
is  the  same  as  that  to  be  now  seen  there.

Y 2


332


Appendices  to  Hr.  Hodgsons  Report


The  plank  hoarding,  when  on  the  east  side  of  tlie  wall  of  the  Occult
Room,  formed  the  back  of  a recess,  in  which  Madame  Blavatsky  used  to  hang
her  clothes.

Wlien  the  boarding  was  taken  away  a frame  was  made  of  wood  so  as  to  fit
the  outer  edges  of  this  recess  ; a layer  of  bricks  was  jilaced  in  this  frame,  and
the  whole  then  covered  with  clinnam.  [The  hollow  of  the  recess  Babula  was
not  sure  about  ; he  appeared  to  be  trying  to  get  some  cue  from  Babajee,  who
was  present ; said  first  it  had  been  filled  up,  but  finally  said  he  did  not  know,
but  thinks  it  was  filled  up.]  The  sideboard  was  put  against  the  wall  for  the
first  time  about  the  beginning  of  February.  He  saw  the  wall  papered  over
some  time  before  the  anniversary.

[See  comments  on  Mr.  Babajee’s  evidence.]


Mr.  P.  Rathnavelu  (Editor  of  The  Philosophic  Inquirer),  Madras.

[He  visited  Adyar  on  14th  September,  1884,  to  inspect  the  rooms,  &c.
Dr.  Hartmann,  Mr.  Judge,  and  Mr.  Damodar  led  him  to  the  Shrine.]

From  a letter  to  the  Editor  of  The  Theosophist,  21st  September,  1884.

I examined  it  [the  Shrine]  carefully  and  with  a critical  eye  of  course  some-
times touching  the  several  parts  tliereof  with  my  own  hand,  to  guard  myself
against  any  possible  illusion  of  the  sight.  There  was  no  ojjening  or  hole  on  this
side  of  the  cupboard  (Shrine)  for  any  one  to  reach  his  hand  from  behind  it.  It
was  rather  loosely  but  firmly  fixed  to  the  wall,  so  that  one  could  pass  a stick
tlirough  the  si)ace  between  tlie  back  board  of  the  Shrine  and  the  wall  to
which  it  is  attached.  On  being  satisfied  with  this  portion  of  the  Shrine,  I
was  led  into  the  adjoining  room  to  see  the  other  side  of  the  wall  to  which
the  Shrine  is  attached,  and  which  is  alleged  to  be  connected  with  it  by  a trap-
door or  back  door.  Alas  ! I was  shown  an  ingenious  piece  of  furniture-
like apparatus,  standing  close  to,  or  I might  say  even  fixed  to  the  mouth  of
the  Slirine,  to  which  was  fa.stened  a sliding  door  which,  when  ojiened,  led
into  a small  aperture  in  that  wall  nearly  two  by  three  feet  Inside  of  this
again  there  was  a hcdlow  space,  sufficiently  large  for  a lean  lad  to  stand  on
his  legs,  if  he  could  but  creei)  into  it  through  the  aperture,  and  hold  his
breath  for  a few  seconds.  I attempted  in  vain  to  creep  through  the  oi^ening
in  the  wall  myself,  and  simply  stretched  out  my  head  with  some  difficulty
into  the  small  hollow  to  see  its  internal  condition  and  structure.  It  had  no
communication  with  tlie  back  board  of  the  Shrine.  At  least  there  was
nothing  in  it  to  show  that  there  could  have  been  any  such  thing.  From
which  and  other  circumstances  I thought  within  myself  that  the  diabolical
machinery,  for  the  invention  of  which  the  Society  is  greatly  indebted  to  the
genius  of  Mr.  Coulomb,  the  “ Engineer-in-Chief  of  the  Devil,”  was  not
finished,  as  was  intended.  I was  shown  also  other  similar  inventions — such
as  sliding  panels,  sliding  doors,  &c.,  by  the  selfsame  gentleman  ; all  of  which
bore  the  stamii  of  the  freshness  of  unfinished  work.

* * * * * S!

Wlien  I had  seen  the  Shrine  and  its  surroundings  on  a previous  occasion,
as  stated  already,  on  the  1st  April,  1883,  there  was  a large  almirah  standing
against  the  wall,  just  on  the  very  spot  where  Mr.  Coulomb  has  been  pleased
to  put  up  his  machinery  trap-door  ; and  it  was,  if  I remember  aright,  in  the


On  Phenomena  connected  with  Thcosopluj.  303

bedroom  of  Madame  Blavatsky.  On  the  occurrence  of  tlie  phenomenon
recorded  in  The  Philosophic  Inrpdrer  of  the  8th  April,  1883,  which  was
neither  pre-arranged  nor  premeditated,  as  will  be  seen  from  my  report  in  tliat
journal,  I took  great  care  to  see  that  tliere  was  no  trap-door  or  opening
behind  the  Shrine  on  either  side  of  the  wall  to  which  it  is  fixed.  The
almirah  was,  at  our  request  to  Madame  Blavatsky,  removed  with  some
difficulty  from  its  place,  to  allow  of  the  wall  on  that  side  being  tapjied  and
sufficiently  examined  by  me.  I did  so,  and  was  then  convinced  thorouglily
that  there  was  no  attempt  at  deception  on  any  one’s  part.

[Said  he  had  not  heard  from  Mr.  Damodar  that  I was  coming.]

In  reply  to  my  questions  : — Mr.  Rathnavelu  insjjected  the  Shrine  in  April,
1883.  He  did  not  move  the  Shrine  from  tlie  wall.  There  was  muslin
between  the  Shrine  and  the  wall,  and  there  was  just  space  enough  to  pass  a
stick  up  and  down  between  the  Shrine  and  the  muslin,  the  Shrine  being
about  an  inch  from  the  wall.  He  passed  the  stick  up  and  down  in  this  man-
ner, and  it  moved  freely.  When  the  almirah  or  cupboard  in  the  room
adjoining  the  Occult  Room  was  removed,  there  was  visible  a plastered  wall,
which  sounded  hollow.  Tlie  plaster  covered  some  planking.

[At  first  I understood  that  Mr.  Rathnavelu  clearly  admitted  that  the
planking,  or  blocking  door,  was  visible  behind  the  almirah,  but  he  then
stated,  on  my  repeating  the  inquirjr  very  definitely,  that  this  blocking  door
was  covered  with  chunam.  On  my  asking  how  he  knew  there  was  a door
underneath,  he  said  he  had  been  told  so  at  the  time.]

Mr.  Rathnavelu  also  stated  that  he  was  present  at  the  anniversary,  27th
December,  in  1883,  and  admitted  that  the  sideboard  was  then  jiresent
against  the  wall  of  the  room  adjoining  the  Occult  Room.

[The  marks  of  the  nails  used  to  keep  the  plank  door  in  its  place  are
still  visible  in  the  recess  on  the  east  side  of  the  wall,  and  it  ajipears  clearly
that  the  dot)r  was  never  covered  with  chunam.  Mr.  Rathnavelu  is  quite
alone  in  this  peculiar  statement.]


Me.  T.  C.  Rajamiexgak  (native  doctor).

[Extract  from  an  account  quoted  in  the  Supplement  to  The  Theosopihist  for

November,  1884.]

I have  known  the  Shrine  at  Adyar  since  F etruary,  1883.  But  it  wuas  in
September,  1883,  that  I had  actually  an  opportunity  of  closely  examining
the  structure  of  the  Shrine,  so  as  to  see  whether  the  trickeiy,  now"  pretended
to  be  exposed,  had  ever  any  existence.  I may  say  that  I entered  the  room
containing  the  Shrine  with  the  mind  of  an  out-and-out  sceptic,  indeed,  all
this  time,  I may  say  I w"as  an  unbeliever,  though  I had  constantly  met  the
founders  of  the  Theosopjhical  Society,  and  read  much  of  their  writing.
Wliat  struck  me  about  the  doings  of  the  Theosophists  was,  ‘ ‘ What  necessity
is  there  for  these  modern  Theosophists  to  perform  their  phenomena  in  a
particular  locality,  and  that  in  a shrine,  while  our  ancient  sages  did  all  we
have  known  in  open  places  ? ” I was  soon  cpiieted  by  an  invitation  on  the
part  of  IMadarae  Blavatsky  to  inspect  the  Slirine,  and  satisfy  myself  about
it.

I shall  now  give  a brief  description  of  the  Shrine  and  its  situation  in
order  that  the  outside  public  may  see  whether  it  is  possible  that  the  en-


334


Aj)2)c)icliccs  to  Mr.  Hodgson's  Report


lightened  members  of  the  Society  could  have  been  subjected  to  the  trickery
that  the  Coulombs  now  boast  of  exposing.

Madame  Blavatsky  liad  her  sleeping  apartment  in  the  hall  upstairs  in  the
Adyar  jn-emises.  There  is  a door-way  leading  from  this  hall  to  a room  where
the  Shrine  is  suspended,  the  Shrine  itself  (a  cupjboard  as  they  call  it)  being
on  the  wall  about  four  feet  above  the  ground.  I opjened  the  doors  of  this  Slirine,
and  found  in  it  some  photos  and  a silver  cup  and  a few  other  things.  I
clearly  examined  every  portion  of  this  Slirine  from  within,  tapj^ing  with  my
hands  every  j^art  cf  it,  and  nowliere  could  I find  room  for  suspicion.  Not
satisfied  with  tliis,  I examined  the  outside  of  the  Shrine,  the  front  and  the
sides,  and  the  top  ; and  tliey  stood  the  test.  F or  fear  of  disarranging  the
things,  I did  not  move  the  Slirme  about,  but  what  was  more  satisfactory,  I
examined  the  back  portion  of  the  wall  on  which  rested  the  Shrine  (which
was  inside  the  hall  containing  Madame  Blavatsky’s  sleeping  apartment)  and
found  that  there  could  not  be  the  slightest  room  for  suspicimi  in  any
direction,  so  far  as  the  matter  of  the  structure  of  the  Shrine  is  concerned.

After  this  IMadame  Blavatsky  had  the  kindness  to  ask  if  any  of  us  (we
weretlien  about  five  there)  had  any  letter  to  send  to  Mahatmas.  One  of
us  immediately  produced  a letter  ; I took  ujr  the  cujr  from  the  Shrine,  having
carefully  examined  it,  and  the  gentleman  droj)ped  the  letter  into  it.  I placed
the  cup  with  the  letter  in  the  Shrine,  and  closed  it,  as  desired  by  the  above
lady.  Two  or  three  minutes  after,  Madame  Blavatsky,  who  was  standing
about  two  yards  off  from  the  Shrine,  said  she  felt  an  answer  came,  and  on
opening  the  Shrine  we  found  a letter  addressed  to  the  sender,  containing  four
pages  witli  not  less  than  20  lines  on  each,  which  would  occupy  any  mortal
writer,  simply  to  copy  it  in,  not  less  thair  half-an-hour.  It  must  be  remem-
bered that  there  must  have  been  time  for  one  to  read  the  letter,  and  then  to
prepare  an  answer  which  may  take  up  another  15  minutes.  But  all  this
took  jilace  in  the  course  of  two  or  three  minutes.

I shall  now  give  an  account  of  the  so-called  trap-door.  1 found  this  ti’ap-
door  in  an  incomplete  state  for  the  first  time  in  June,  1884,  a few  months
after  the  departure  of  th.e  founders.  It  is  so  small  a door  that  a tliin,  sjjare
boy  of  10  or  12  years  could  hardly  enter  through  it.  It  is  intended  to
be  understood  the  phenomenal  letters  were  ushered  into  the  Shrine  thr(jugh
this  passage,  but  any  one  seeing  tlie  passage  for  himself  would  be  convinced
of  the  imjiossibility  of  the  thing  being  done.

I must,  therefore,  take  this  occasion  to  represent  what  I know  of  these  ■
matters  to  allow  Truth  to  triumjjh  ; and  I feel  it  specially  necessary  now
that  every  one  of  us  should  sj'jeak  out  his  experience  of  the  Theosophists  and
their  doings,  that  they  may  furnish,  however  lightly  it  may  be,  answers  to
the  attacks  of  the  Coulombs  upon  the  conduct  of  persons  too  far  away  to
justify  themselves.

In  rephj  to  my  questions : — He  had  not  removed  the  Shrine  from  the  wall,
nor  had  lie  examined  the  back  of  tlie  Slirine  from  without  or  the  face  of
the  wall  juxtaposed.  The  wall  he  examined  was  in  the  other  room,  and
was  bare  and  intact  where  it  corresponded  to  the  Shrine.

The  letter  produced  was  one  which  had  been  previously  forwarded  to
Mr.  Damodar  to  be  sent  to  the  Mahatma,  and  Mr.  Damodar  placed  it  in  the
Shrine.


On  Phenomena  connected  with  TheoHoplnj.


335


[The  statements  of  Mr.  Rajamiengar  are  curiously  wide  of  the  truth.
He  describes  the  wall  behind  the  Shrine  in  Madame  Blavatsky’s  bedroom  as
“bare  and  intact”  in  September,  1883,  whereas  at  that  time  the  four-
panelled  boarding  was  certainly  there,  hlr.  P.  Parthasarathy  Chetty,  who
accompanied  Mr.  Rajamiengar,  recollected  that  “ in  the  room  adjoining  the
(Iccult  Room,  there  was,  immediately  behind  the  Shrme,  a door  which
appeared  solid  and  immovable,  and  which  sounded  hollow.”

Since  the  “ letter  ” had  been  previously  forwarded  to  Mr.  Damodar,  the
answer  might  have  been  easily  jirepared  beforehand.]


Colonel  Olcott.

It  was  not  until  after  my  investigations  had  been  continued  some  time,
and  I had  expressed  at  the  Theosophical  headcpiarters  my  appreciation  of  the
great  dearth  of  evidence  for  any  examination  of  the  west  side  of  the  wall
behind  the  Shrine,  that  on  one  of  my  visits  to  Adyar  I was  informed  that
Colonel  Olcott  had  that  morning  found  a letter  in  his  drawer,  written  in  red
ink,  and  said  to  be  from  hlahatma  M.  Colonel  Olcott  declared  that  he  had
entirely  forgotten  the  circumstances  to  which  this  note  refei-red  until  finding
it  in  his  drawer.  It  ran  as  follows  : —

“ Henry,  now  that  your  fever  is  cured  I want  you  perform  something
that  will  cure  it  for  ever.  It  would  not  do  for  you  to  have  it  at  Ceylon.
Call  Babula  and  a cooly  or  two  and  lifting  off  the  cuj)board  Shrine  clean  off
the  wall  (you  can  do  so  without  taking  it  ofif  its  wires  or  nail),  write  my  sign
on  that  spot  of  tlie  wall  which  corresponds  with  the  centre  and  four  coiners
of  the  cupboard.  The  signs  must  be  very  small,  and  thus.  [The  letter  con-
tained a rough  sketch  of  the  jiositions  of  the  marks.]  When  you  return  from
Ceylon  the  answers  will  be  there.  Copy  them.  You  must  not  let  Upasika
see  what  you  have  done,  nor  tell  her.  Esiiecially  keep  this  secret  from  the
Coulombs.”

Colonel  Olcott  then  told  me  that  the  finding  of  this  letter  had  recalled  to
his  mind  the  fact  that  he  obeyed  these  instructions.  He  calculated  the  date
to  be  December  17th,  1883.  He  declares  that  he  looked  again  on  a date
calculated  by  him  to  be  February  13th,  1884,  and  found  the  wall  in  the  same
condition  as  on  December  17 th.  There  was  no  mention  of  these  events  in
his  diary.  Colonel  Olcott  said  there  was  muslin  behind  the  Shrine,  and
Babula, — who  was  summoned  by  Madame  Blavatskj^,  not  at  my  request, —
said  that  he  remembered  the  incident,  and  that  he  moved  the  Shrine,  &c.,
very  carefully,  because  he  was  afraid  Madame  Blavatsky  would  be  angry.
Colonel  Olcott,  in  rejjly  to  my  inquiry  made  at  the  time  when  this  note  was
first  shown  me,  said  that  he  thoiight  he  must  have  observed  any  jmnel  or  hollow
if  there  had  been  such  behind  the  muslin,  which  he  said  was  moved  at  the
different  positions  so  as  to  allow  him  to  write  the  initials.  Colonel  Olcott’s
confidence,  however,  soon  increased  considerably,  and  in  a later  conversation
he  asserted  that  he  saw  the  whole  bare  wall  at  once  after  removing  the
“stuff”  between  it  and  the  Shrine  ! The  reader  however  may  remembei
that  to  see  the  whole  bare  wall  at  once  it  would  have  been  needful  to
remove  not  only  the  muslin  but  the  other  fabric,  which,  according  to  the
evidence  of  Mr.  Lane-Fox,  closely  covered  the  wall  immediately  behind  the
Shrine.


336


Appendices  to  Mr.  Hodgson's  Report


Examination,  of  Colonel  Olcott’s  testimony  in  other  cases  (see  Report,
pp.  231-239,  analysis  of  his  evidence  given  before  the  Committee),  even  with
out  the  discrepancy  noted  above,  is  enough  to  show  the  impossibility  of
placing  any  reliance  upon  his  isolated  “remembered”  indirect  observation  of
the  wall  behind  the  Shrine.

Most  probably  this  Mahatma  note  is  an  ex  post  facto  document  foisted
upon  Colonel  Olcott  by  Madame  Blavatsky.  Had  it  really  been  written  at
the  close  of  1883,  it  should  have  been  mentioned  in  Colonel  Olcott’s  detailed
diary,  and  it  should  have  been  found  by  Colonel  Olcott  immediately  on  his
arrival  at  Adyar  from  Europe  at  the  end  of  1884,  when  he  professes  to  have
made  a careful  search  through  his  25a2')ers  for  documents  of  value  as  against
the  Coulombs’  charges  ; nothing,  however,  was  heard  of  it  till  the  moment
when  evidence  for  insj^ection  of  the  Shrine  wall  was  known  to  be  lacking.


Mr.  Damodar  K.  Mavalankar.

Avgust  18th,  1884.

From  his  first  reply  to  circular  incpi  inj As  regards  the  hole  [through  the
sideboard  into  the  recess]  ...  in  the  jjresence  of  Dr.  Hartmann  and
Mr.  Lane-Fox,  1 attemjhed  to  enter  it.  All  who  know  me  or  have  seen
me  are  aware  how  thin  and  lean  I am  ; and  although  I was  almost  half  naked  at
the  time,  I could  enter  the  “ hole  ” with  difficulty.  And  when  once  inside  I
could  only  stand  abreast  without  being  able  to  move,  either  way,  an  inch,  or
to  lift  nj)  my  hand.  I was  there  hardly  10  seconds  when  I felt  choked,
and  I am  firmly  persuaded  to  believe  that  if  I had  sto2)ped  there  two  minutes
longer  I should  have  fainted  on  account  of  suffocation.  And  this  when  the
cupboard  attached  to  the  hole  w'as  removed,  and  there  was  i^assage  for  air
through  it.  How  much  more  suffocating  must  it  be  when  there  is  no  such
free  passage  for  air  ? Moreover,  the  ijiece  of  wall  on  which  the  “Shrine”
was  hung  is  intact.  Mr.  Coulomb  himself  told  us,  on  the  evening  of  the  18th,
that  there  was  no  communication  then  between  that  “w'all”  and  the
“Shrine.”  The  frame  of  the  “Shrine  ” was  also  intact,  and  there  was  no
sliding  panel  to  it.  All  this  he  himself  admitted,  adding,  however,  that  he
had  closed  them  up  before  Madame  Blavatsky’s  departure  from  Madras.  If
so,  there  are  several  witnesses  to  show  that  the  2)henomena  were  witnessed
even  in  the  “ Shrine  ” after  Mculame  Blavatsky' s departure,  and  when,  accord-
ing to  Mr.  Coulomb’s  own  admission,  the  communication  between  the
“Shrine”  and  thea^jerture  was  no  longer  existing.

August  19th,  1884.

From  his  second  reply  to  cireular  inepdry : — I had  not  myself  examined  the
wall,  nor  the  Shrine  for  some  time ; but  I was  pn’esent  on  several  occasions
when  the  various  wntnesses  to  the  “occult  jjhenomena”  had  examined  them.
One  or  two  of  these  were  themselves  engineers,  and  had  closely  and  minutely
examined  the  2)laces.  They  had  scrutinised  carefully,  in  every  ^lossible  way,
the  Shrbie,  and  had  satisfied  themselves  that  it  was  intact,  and  had  no  panels
or  anything  of  the  kind.  I say  all  this  because  the  several  examinations  in
my  presence  were  completely  satisfactory,  and  I had  no  reason  to  complain
in  any  way.  When  some  outsiders  had  made  unfavourable  observations,  I
mean  these  who  had  never  been  in  the  Occult  Boom,  Madame  Blavatsky
had  asked  me  to  examine  the  Shrine  ; and  one  day,  in  December  or  January


On  Phenomena  connected  with  Theo&ophy.


337


last,  I ■svell  remember  Mr.  Subba  Row  and  myself  very  carefully  examining
the  Shrine  and  the  icall  ; and  we  were  both  satisfied  that  they  were  intact.
But  I must  state  something  before  that  time.  To  the  other  side  of  the  wall,
behind  the  Shrine,  was  put  a wardrobe,  which  was  sometimes  removed  in  the
presence  of  several  witnesses,  and  we  had  all  every  reason  to  be  sure  that  the
wall  was  intact.  In  July  or  August  last  year  IMadame  Blavatsky  went  to
<Iotacamund ; and  shortly  afterwards  Colonel  Olcott,  who  was  then  visiting  the
South  Indian  Branches,  joined  her  there.  During  their  absence,  the  key  of
the  Shrine  and  of  the  Occult  Boom  were  in  my  charge,  and  every  week,  with-
out fail,  I used  to  take  all  the  things  out  of  the  SJtrine,  and  clean  it  myself
with  a towel,  many  times  in  the  presence  of  Madame  Coulomb,  and  some-
times when  others  were  there  I used  to  rub  the  frame  hard  with  the  towel,
and  if  there  were  any  workable  i^anel  at  that  time,  it  could  not  but  have
moved  under  the  pressure.  But  I noticed  nothmg  of  the  kind.  The  whole
frame  was  quite  intact,  and  I can  say  from  positive  knowledge  that  it  was  so
till  the  middle  of  September  last.  IMadame  Blavatsky  then  returned  to
Madras,  and  I handed  the  keys  over  to  her.  During  that  period  of  nearly

three  months,  I had  put  in  several  letters  in  the  Shrine,  the  key  being  in

my  possession,  and  invariably  I received  replies.  It  was  then,  during  that
period,  that  General  Morgan  saw  the  phenomenon  of  the  broken  sauceT
mentioned  by  him  in  The  Theosophid.

Then  he  showed  ns  three  sliding  j^anels  to  three  pieces  of  furniture
in  Madame  Blavatsk3'’s  room.  These  were  evidently  new.  They
could  not  be  moved  without  a great  deal  of  effort  and  a great
noise.  One  of  these,  moreover,  was  to  a shelf,  to  be  worked  from
outside,  i.e.,  the  passage  from  the  stairs  to  Madame  Blavatsky’s

rooms.  At  all  times  the  door  of  the  stairs  was  open,  and  any  one  going  up

could  easily  see  anyone  working  it.  And,  moreover,  hardly  any  pdienomena
were  produced  therein.  Another  of  these  panels  also  was  to  a shelf,  to  be
worked  from  outside,  so  that  anyone  standing  on  the  stairs  could  see  what
the  person  was  doing.  Moreover,  the  difficulty  and  the  great  noise  with
which  they  could  be  moved  distinctlj"  showed  their  very  recent  origin  and
the  impracticabilitj^  of  their  having  been  used  before.


From  Mr.  Damodar’s  Statement  concerning  the  Blavatsky-Coulomb
Letters.  (Printed  in  a pamphlet  compiled  by  Dr.  Hartmann.)

Sejdember  19th,  1884.

But  I must  say  a few  words  in  regard  to  the  Shrine  itself.  As  IMrs.
Coulomb  always  promised  to  look  after  the  books  and  furniture  of  IMadame
Blavatsky  during  her  absence,  the  latter  alwaj^s  entrusted  her  with  the  kej’s
of  her  room,  so  that  the  former  might  be  able  to  see  that  none  of  the  books
and  furniture  were  damaged.  Accordingly,  when  Madame  Blavatsky  went
to  Ootacamund,  the  keys  of  her  rooms  and  of  the  Shrine  were  as  usual
handed  over  to  Mrs.  Coulomb,  with  full  permission,  to  all  of  us,  to  use  her
■rooms  and  things  whenever  we  liked.  It  was  osly  in  .Tanuary,  1834,  when
Madame  Blavatskj^  began  to  dine  in  the  room  next  to  the  Occult  Room,  that
the  cupboard  was  put  to  the  wall,  so  that  dishes,  plates,  &c.,  might  be  jiut
in  it.  But  this  piece  of  furniture  came  into  existence  after  the  phenomena
were  nc  longer  produced  in  the  Shrine. — [Vide  pp.  228-231.]


A^ypcndiccs  to  2£r.  Hodgson’s  Iie2}ort


f>OQ

O'JO


BIe.  G.  N.  Unwala.

Bhaunnagar,  August  Srd,  1884,

Perhaps  I may  also  be  allowed  to  bear  testimony  as  an  expert,  as  the
lawyers  say,  to  the  gemiineness  of  an  occult  plienoinenou  that  I was
fortunate  enough  to  witness  at  the  Adyar  headquarters,  where  I was  a guest
fc'i’  three  weeks  in  May,  1883.

I humbly  venture  to  call  myself  an  “Exi^ert,”  and  I have  my  grounds
for  doing  so,  which  I am  constrained  to  enuinei’ate  in  this  place  in  the
interests  of  truth  and  of  justice  to  our  esteemed  and  venerable  teacher,
Madame  Blavatsky,  against  the  ill-advised,  fatuous,  and  malicious  attacks  of
our  enemies,  whose  wilful  ignorance  of  our  transcendental  sciences  is  as  great
as  their  infamous  and  wdcked  desire  to  distort  and  misrepresent  facts  for  their
<jwn  self-interest.

I had  a scientific  education  in  my  younger  days,  and  have  never  ceased
to  take  a keen  interest  in  all  that  appertains  to  the  progress  of  modern
.scientific  researches.  F or  the  last  12  yeai’s  or  more  I have  been  a teacher
inter  alia  of  Natural  Science,  and  have  also  delivered  public  lectures  on
.scientific  subjects,  siq-qdemented  and  illustrated  by  exi^eriments  of  various-
kinds.  When  I was  in  England  in  1870,  one  of  my  favourite  places  of  resort
was  the  Polytechnic  Institution,  where,  as  is  well-known,  scientific  lectures
are  delivered.  One  of  these  lectures,  I may  mention  here,  was  on  “ Raising
Ghosts,”  by  Professor  Pepper  ; and  I may  say  that  I am  fully  conversant
with  the  ajqfiiances  and  apparatus  he  used  to  illustrate  his  lectures.  As  a
humble  devotee  of  Natural  Science,  I have  studied  and  lectured  up)on  electric
and  magnetic  jdienomena,  and  although  it  would  be  jJi’esumptuous — nay,
alisurd — to  say  that  I “ know  all  about  it,”  yet  I may  say  that  I have  some
experience,  theoretical  and  practical,  in  manipulating  electiical  and  magnetic
apparatus,  including  the  telephone  and  the  microphone.  It  was  but  a few
days  ago  that  I was  established  in  this  city  under  the  patronage  of  the
Blaharaja.  Besides  these  imrsuits,  I maybe  allowed  to  state  that  I have  had
considerable  experience  in  “ Parlour  Blagic,”  “Prestidigitation,”  &c.,  &c.,
which,  I have  always  been  of  opinion,  are  not  only  i^roductive  of  innocent
amusement  but  also  of  instruction  and  Natural  Science.

As  this  letter  may  be  published,  I hasten  to  assure  you  that  it  is  with
very  great  reluctance  I make  these  personal  statements  to  prove  the  claim
I,  in  all  humility,  put  forth  to  be  looked  upon  as  an  “Exjiert”  in  the
technical  phraseology  of  the  Law  Courts.  I must  not  be  misunderstood — I
do  not  jjretend  to  know  much  ; I am  no  professor  !

In  May,  1883,  when,  as  1 said  above,  1 was  a guest  at  the  headquarters,’
I had  many  opportunities  of  being  in  the  “ Occult  Room,”  and  of  examining
it  and  the  Shrine  ; and  once,  I remember,  at  the  earnest  desire  of  Madame
Blavatsky,  before  and  after  the  occurrence  of  a phenomenon,  I can  safely
say,  without  any  equivocatif)n  or  reservation,  that  in  the  “ Occult  Room,’"
or  anywhere  within  the  i>recincts  of  the  headquarters,  I never  could  find  any-
thing, either  apparatus  or  a])pliances,  electric  wires,  galvanic  batteries,
telephones,  microphones,  traindoors,  springs,  double  walls,  resonant  tubes,
screens,  mirrors,  magic-lanterns,  photogenic  solutions,  &c.,  &c.,  in  any  way
suggestive  of  “ fraud  or  tricks,”  as  our  enemies  in  their  blatant,  mischievous
self-complacency  are  fond  of  designating  “Occult”  phenomena.


On  Phenomena  connected  uith  ThcosopJnj.


339


Two  more  phenomena  I have  had  the  good  fortune  to  witness — the
ringing  of  silvered-toned  bells  and  the  receipt  of  a letter  from  one  of  our
revered  Guru  Devs,  “ formed  ” in  a hollow  tin  model  of  Cleoi)atra’s  Needle.
But  these  took  place  before  Madame  Blavatsky  at  places  a thousand  miles--
from  the  headquarters.

This,  then,  I know  for  a certainty,  that  these  phenomena — occult  because
the  rationale  is  not  known,  not  because  “ unscientific,”  as  our  short-siglited
enemies  would,  in  their  culpable  perverseness,  have  it — are  produced  by  tlie
manipulation  of  certain  forces  of  nature  subtler  by  far  than  the  subtle
“ physical  forces”  of  modern  science,  still  imperfectly  known  and  inadequately
studied  or  investigated,  as  she  herself  frequently  has  to  confess.

Mb.  J.  D.  B.  Gbibble.

[From  “A  Report  of  an  Examination  into  the  Blavatsky  Correspondence,,
published  in  the  Christian  College  Magazine.”]

“I  was  also  shown  two  of  the  sliding  doors  and  panels,  said  to  have  been
made  by  M.  Coulomb  after  Madame  Blavatsky’s  departure.  One  of  these  is
on  the  outside  of  the  so-called  Occult  Room,  and  the  other  is  on  the  outside
of  the  sitting-room  iqjstairs.  Both  of  these  have  been  made  without  the
slightest  attempt  at  concealment.  The  former  is  at  the  top  of  a back  stair-
case and  consists  of  two  doors  which  open  into  a kind  of  book-shelf.  This
gives  the  idea  of  having  been  constructed  so  as  to  place  food  on  the  shelves
inside  without  opening  the  door.  The  other  contrivance  is  a sliding  jjanel
which  lifts  up  and  ojiens  and  shuts  with  some  diliiculty.  It  is  evidently  of
recent  construction.  Certainly  in  its  present  state  it  would  be  difficult  to
carry  out  any  phenomena  by  its  means.  In  this  case  also  there  is  no  attempt
at  concealment.  Neither  of  these  two  appliances  communicate  with  the
Shrine,  which  is  situated  on  the  cross-wall  dividing  the  Occult  Room  from  an
adjoining  bedroom.  I was  not  allowed  to  see  the  Shrine.”

[Mr.  Gribble  is  not  a Theosophist.  The  preceding  passage  refers  to  his
visit  to  the  headquarters  of  the  Society,  on  October  3rd,  1884,  and  the  Shrine
had  by  that  time,  according  to  Dr.  Hartmann,  been  destroyed.  It  would
appear  from  iMr.  Gribble’s  account  that  the  sideboard  and  the  entrance  to
the  hollow  S2mce  were  not  shown  to  him.  His  account  of  the  “two  doors
which  open  into  a kind  of  book-shelf  ” suggests,  moreover,  that  the  double-
backed  cu])board  (see  Plan,  No.  8)  had  been  altered  in  some  way  since  the
dismissal  of  the  Coulombs,  before  it  was  shown  to  Mr.  Gribble.  Dr.
Hartmann  (“  Report  of  Observations,”  &c.,  p.  43),  after  spea,king  of  “ three
secret  openings  and  sliding  panels,”  describes  one  of  them  as  “ opening  into  the
back  of  another  cujiboard  or  bookcase,  whose  front  was  covered  by  a mirror
and  which  W'as  made  accessible  from  the  hall.”  This  is  the  opening  to  which
Mr.  Gribble  must  be  supjjosed  to  refer,  though  he  was  apj^arently  not  in-
formed of  the  existence  of  the  mirror,  and  had  no  ojtportunity  of  exa,mining
the  fjosition  from  within  the  Occult  Room.

The  sliding-panel  to  which  Mr.  Gribble  refers  is  that  in  the  four-
jmnelled  boarding  (Plan,  No.  3).  This  I have  myself  thoroughly  examined,
and  certainly  it  could,  when  I saw  it,  be  opened  and  shut  only  with  consider-
able difficulty.

After  the  boarding  had  been  placed  in  its  present  exposed  position,  it  had


.310


Aj^j^eitdices  to  Mr.  Hodgsons  Eeport


been  utilised  only  once,  so  far  as  I could  ascertain,  in  the  production  of  a
jihenomenon.  This  instance  is  given  in  Appendix  VI.,  and  it  must  have
occuiTed  very  shortly  after  the  boarding  was  jilaced  in  the  side  of  the
sitting-room.  When  we  consider  that  the  2:ianel  had  a^ijiarently  in.it  been  used
for  about  five  months  jjrevious  to  the  dismissal  of  the  Coulombs,  and  that  for
several  months  afterwards  the  rooms  were  in  the  2>ossession  of  Mr.  Damodar,
we  should  be  surprised  if  Mr.  Gribble  had  found  the  j^anel  in  good  working
order.  Indeed,  a little  accidental  grit  would  account  for  the  stiffness
which  we  both  observed,  and  there  was  a considerable  amount  of  dirt  re-
sembling the  dust  of  mortar  in  the  hole  in  the  terrace  made  for  the  jianel  to
sink  into.  The  2)anel  which  slid  was  the  lower  east  iianel,  and  the  wooden
block  which,  according  to  M.  Coulomb,  had  ke2>t  it  in  its  normal  position,
had  apjiarently  been  removed.  The  2>osition  of  the  panel  when  I saw  it  was,
therefore,  jierfectly  obvious,  in  consequence  of  the  hole  manifest  beneath  it ;
but  no  trace  of  its  sliding  cajjacity  w^as  noticeable  in  the  jianel  itself  when  it
w'as  closed  ; it  was,  to  all  af)pearance,  just  as  firmly  fixed  as  the  other
qmnels.  F urtlier,  the  sliding  panel  did  not  seem  to  me  to  be  of  more  receart
construction  than  the  rest  of  the  boarding,  but  whether  the  whole  board-
ing W’as  only  six  months  old  or  a year,  or  much  longer,  I could  not
have  told  from  my  own  inspection.  The  question,  however,  is  decisively
enough  answered  by  Theosoidiists  themselves.  (See  comments  on  Mr.
Babajee’s  evidence.)

I may  here  refer  to  some  remarks  made  by  Mr.  Damodar  (see  his  evidence
quoted  in  this  Ajq^endix)  concerning  these  two  jheces  of  “ sliding”  ai)i:iaratu8
mentioned  by  Mr.  Gribble.  According  to  Mr.  Damodar,  whose  statement
■on  this  point  is  cc'rrect,  they  coidd  be  seen  from  the  stairs  ; and  he  tells  us
further  that  “ at  all  times,  the  door  of  the  stairs  w'as  023en.  ’ He  gives  this
information  in  order  to  show  that  the  a2iparatus  in  c2uestion  could  not  have
been  used  for  the  2)roduction  of  2'‘henomena  (though  he  scarcely  strengthens
his  argument  by  adding  that  “ hardly  any  2'lienomena  were  produced
therein”)  ; but  it  Avc>uld  seem  to  show  more  strongly  the  im23ossibility  of  M.
Coulomb’s  ha\'ing  2)re2i<'ired  the  a2qxaratus  at  the  time  he  is  declared  by
Theoso2ihists*  to  have  2>re2)ared  it,  viz.,  in  the  absence  of  Madame  Blavatsky
at  Wadw'han,  in  February,  1884,  after  she  had  left  Adyar,  but  before  she  had
left  India.  The  curiously  suspicious  incident  told  by  Mr.  Babajee  (see  23*
330)  occurred  while  Madame  Blavatsky  was  at  headquarters.

Now  it  would  a2ipear  that  after  Madame  Blavatsky’s  de2)arture  from
headquarters  in  1884,  the  Clccult  Room  and  tlie  Shrine  were  in  charge  of
Mr.Damodar  (see  A2)23endix  XL);  moreover  it  is  a2:)23arently  notdeniedby  the
Theoso2>hists  that  workmen  were  about  on  the  terrace  during  the  interval
assigned  to  M.  Coulomb  for  las  secret  w’ork,  and  according  to  Mr.  Damodar
the  door  of  the  stairs  w’as  at  all  times  o2)en.  If  M.  Coulomb  under  these
circumstances  could,  without  the  knowledge  of  any  persons  at  head-
quarters, have  constructed  the  double-backed  ciqjboard,  the  2)anel  in  the
boarding,  the  sideboard  2'anel,  and  the  <a2)erture  into  the  recess,  he  would
have  2)erformed  a feat  which  I should  find  much  more  difficult  of  ex2jlanation
than  all  Madame  Blavatsky’s  2dienomena  together.  And  the  discovery  that

*jrr  Browm,  member  of  the  Board  of  Control,  states  that  this  was  “ unani-
mously decided”  by  the  “ gentlemen  present”  at  the  “ disclosure.*’


On  Phenomena  connected  ivith  Thcowphij.


341


a hole  in  the  wall  immediately  behind  the  Shrine  had  previously  existed,  Init
had  been  blocked  up,  and  that  the  wall  face  in  the  Occult  Room  behind  tlie
Shrine  had  been  carefully  whitewashed  so  as  to  conceal  the  traces  of  tlie-
hole,  would  apjaarently  comjjel  the  Theosophists  to  assume  that  this  hole  was,
under  the  same  circumstances,  not  only  made  but  actually  closed  again,  and
hidden  so  effectually  by  M.  Coulomb  in  the  Occult  Room,  which  was  always
023en  to  Mr.  Damodar,  that  it  was  very  nearly  never  discovered  at  all.  And
of  these  alleged  marvellous  works  we  should  have  to  supjwse  that  Mr.
Damodar,  highly-developed  Chela  of  Mahatma  Koot  Hoomi,  remained
entirely  ignorant  ! ! I think,  therefore,  that  not  only  is  there  no  evidence  to-
establish  the  non-existence  of  the  apertures  and  jianels  in  question  at
the  time  when  idienomena  may  have  been  i)roduced  by  their  means,  but  that
an  insurmountable  difficulty  lies  in  the  way  of  siqiposing  that  they  could
have  been  manufactured  at  the  time  to  which  their  origin  is  attributed  by
the  Theosophists,  and  that  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  they  were  made
while  Madame  Blavatsky  herself  was  at  headquarters,  and  under  her  general
instructions.]


APPENDIX  Y.

MR.  G.'S  LETTER.

[Mr.  G.  gave  mean  oral  account  of  the  following  circumstances,  and  after-
wards kindly  revised  my  written  statement.]

Mr.  G.  had  had  several  conversations  with  Madame  Blavatsky  concerning
Theoso^diy  before  the  occurrence  of  the  following  incident.  He  had  not,
however,  expressed  any  intention  of  writing  a letter  to  Koot  Hoomi.

On  October  14th,  1883,  he  wrote  a letter  addressed  to  Mahatma  Koot
Hoomi  Lai  Singh,  and  after  gumming  and  sealing  the  envelope,  in  which
he  idaced  the  letter,  visited  the  Adyar  Headquarters,  accompanied  by  Mrs.  G.
The  letter  contained  some  inquiry  as  to  the  advisability  of  Mr.  G.’s  joinings
the  Theosophical  Society.  Having  obtained  permission  to  jjlace  the  letter  in
the  Shrine,  Mr.  G. , with  Mrs.  G. , Madame  Blavatsky,  Mr.  Subba  Row,  and  Mr.
Mohini,  entered  the  Occult  Room.  The  Shrine  was  opened,  and  Mr.  G.  was
invited  to  inspect  it,  which  he  did  from  within.  No  oj^ening  of  any  kind
was  visible  in  the  back  of  the  Shrine.  Mr.  G.’s  imjn-ession  is  that  the
Shrine  was  placed  immediately  in  front  of  a planked  wall  or  jiartition  which
separated  the  Occult  Room  in  this  j)art  from  the  adjoining  room.  The  Shrine
a2)peared  to  be  resting  closely  against  the  west  side  of  this  wall  or  partition,
but  the  Shrine  w’as  not  moved  at  all  from  its  jiosition.

After  the  letter  was  placed  in  the  Shrine  by  Mr.  G.  himself  the  door  of  the
Shrine  was  locked,  and  the  key  given  to  Mr.  G.  Shortly  afterwards  Madame
Blavatsky  left  the  room  for  a few  seconds,  and  iq)on  returning  she  asked  Mr,
G.  to  go  round  and  examine  the  eastern  side  of  the  wall  or  partition  behind
the  Shrine.  Mr.  G.  went  into  the  adjoining  room  (used  as  a bedroom  by
Madame  Blavatsky)  and  found  that  some  clothes  of  Madame  Blavatsky  were
hanging  upon  the  east  side  of  this  partition.  The  partition  consisted  of  teak
planking,  and  aj^peared  to  Mr.  G.,  in  the  cursory  examination  to  which  lie-
submitted  it,  to  be  of  solid  corstruction,  and  he  observed  no  sliding  ^lanels.


342


Appendices  to  Mr.  Hodgsons  Report


It  was  about  G.30  o’clock  in  tlie  evening,  and  the  light  was  good.

Mr.  G.  does  not  regard  his  examination  as  complete.  The  presence  of
Madame  Blavatsky’s  clothes  suspended  on  the  partition,  inconveniently  pre-
vented him  from  scrutinising  it  as  carefully  as  he  would  have  liked  to  have  done ;
and  he  felt  this  inconvenience  even  although  Madame  Blavatsky  herself  moved
some  of  the  clothes  apart  and  asked  him  to  satisfy  himself.  They  then
returned  to  the  Occult  Room,  and  Madame  Blavatsky  sat  down  with  her  back
to  the  Shrine,  and  drummed  with  her  finger  nails  upon  a small  table  in  front  of
her.  A curious,  rapid  ticking  was  also  heard  apparently  from  the  Shrine,
which  resembled  the  ticking  heard  inside  a watchmaker’s  shop.  Madame
Blavatsky  suddenly  asked  if  he  had  heard  anything.  Mrs.  G.  thought  she
heard  a noise  like  the  shutting  of  a door,  but  did  not  say  so  at  the  time,
though  she  afterwards  told  Mr.  G.  of  this  fact.  Madame  Blavatsky  remarked,
“ I suspect  the  letter  has  gone.”  Mr.  G.  then  opened  the  Shrine  and  found
his  letter  had  disappeared.

Mr.  G.  waited  some  time  at  the  headquarters  for  an  answer  to  his  letter,
but  at  last  left  without  having  received  one.  About  two  hours  later,  after
dinner,  Mr.  hlohini  came  over  to  Mr.  G.  ’s  house  (which  is  about  a mile  from
Madame  Blavatsky’s),  bringing  Mr.  G.’s  letter,  upon  the  envelopie  of  which
was  written  in  blue  pencil,  “ Mohini — forward  immediately  to  G.  Sahib.—
K.  H.”

Mr.  G.  examined  the  enveloj^e,  which  was  sealed  with  his  own  signet
ring  which  he  always  wears  on  his  left  hand,  and  the  envelope  appeared  to
him  at  that  time  to  be  intact.  He  found  no  trace  of  the  envelope’s  having
been  opened.  IMr.  Mohini  s.aid  the  letter  fell  in  the  midst  of  them  at  Madame
Blavatsky’s  as  they  were  talking,  and  that  he  had  immediately  set  off  with  ib
to  Mr.  G;  Mr.  G.  opened  the  enveloj^e  by  cutting  the  toj)  edge.  Upon
the  fly-leaf  of  his  letter  was  written  an  answer  to  his  question  in  blue
2)encil,  signed  K.  H.

Mr.  G.  had  jireviously  ho2:)ed  that  he  might  receive  an  immediate  answer  to
his  letter,  and  after  reviewing  the  circumstances  of  the  incident,  he  concluded
that  there  was  a possibility  that  his  letter  might  have  been  opened  in  some
way  or  other,  after  having  been  taken  surre2:)titiously  from  the  Shrine  through
the  teak-jmnelled  door  which  he  had  so  cursorily  examined.

He  therefore  wrote  another  letter  addressed  to  Root  Hoomi,  and  in  it
requested  that  the  answer  to  it  might  fall  in  the  op)en  air  outside  his  (Mr.
G.’s)  own  house.  This  letter  he  asked  Mr.  Mohini  to  take,  but  Mr.  Mohini
-declined  to  do  so ; and  hladame  Blavatsky  afterwards  wrote  to  Mr.  G.,  offering
reasons  why  his  request  could  not  be  comjdied  with.

Since  these  occurrences,  Mr.  G.  has  had  no  communication  with
Madame  Blavatsky.

Mr.  G.  kindly  j)ermitting  me  to  examine  the  envelo2)e,  I found  certain
noteworthy  peculiarities  in  the  seal-imj^ression.  A portion  of  the  wax  had
adhered  to  the  seal,  so  that  the  pajier  was  visible  at  one  jjoint  near  the  centre
of  the  seal-imjiression.  This  had  been  noted  by  Mr.  G.  at  the  time  of  his
making  tlie  inqn-ession,  and  the  seal  at  first  glance  a2)peared  to  be  entirely
intact.  The  right  fla2')  of  the  envelojie,  however,  a252ieared  crum2)led,  and  a
lens  revealed  a slight  crack  on  the  right  side  of  the  seal,  and  also  a very


On  Tncnomma  connected  with  Iltco^ophi/.


343


minute  fracture  on  the  same  side,  at  the  very  edge  of  the  wax,  heyond  the
limits  of  the  seal-impression.  It  seemed  as  though  a very,  small  fragment  of
wax  had  been  broken  away,  and  close  insjiection  showed  that  fixe  rujltf
flap  of  the  enxjelope  was  not  held  at  all  bij  the  luax.  Cutting  down  the  side-
edges  of  the  envelope  I found  the  riglit  flap  hardly  adhering  at  all  to  the  rest
of  the  paper,  and  the  part  which  had  been  covered  with  gum  presented  the
appearance  of  having  been  steamed,  or  otherwise  moistened,  though  this  is
somewhat  difficult  to  determine  with  any  certainty.  There  was  also  a mark
of  gum  exteirding  considerably  beyond  the  limit  of  the  flap.  The  appearance
suggested  that  the  right  flap  had  been  withdrawn,  that  a small  droji  of  gum
had  been  placed  near  the  edge  of  the  withdrawn  flap,  and  that  part  of  this
drop  had  oozed  out  beyond  the  line  of  the  flap  when  the  envelope  wasjwessed
<after  replacing  the  flap.  The  colour  of  this  gum  was  somewhat  different
from  the  gum  on  the  opposite  flajj,  being  yellower  and  dirtier  than  what
appeared  to  be  the  original  gum  of  the  envelopie.  There  was  also,  as  I after-
wards found,  a mark  of  wliat  appeared  to  be  gum,  in  a corresponding  position
on  the  enclosed  note  itself.

Mr.  G.  has  on  various  occasions  handled  the  envelope,  and  it  may  be
urged  that  the  seal-impression  held  all  the  flajD-joinings  together  when  the
letter  was  written  more  than  a year  previously.  This,  of  course,  cannot  be
disproved,  but  it  is  important  to  observe  that  Mr.  G.’s  attention  had  not
been  before  given  to  the  possibility  that  one  of  the  under  flaps  might  be
withdrawn  as  I have  suggested,  and  he  was  unaware  that  the  seal-impression
secured  only  three  of  the  flaps.  This  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  he  showed
me  the  sealed  letter  which  he  had  offered  to  Mr.  Mohini,  and  wliicli  he  still
had  in  his  possession.  The  right-iiand  flap)  of  this  envelopje  also  was  free
from  the  seal-impression  in  pjrecisely  the  same  way  as  the  flap5  of  the
other  envelop^e.

From  the  app^earances  described  I infer  that  Madame  Blavatsky  pjrobably
opened  the  letter  in  the  way  impjlied  above.

[P.S. — 1 had  given  to  Mr.  Sinnett  in  conversation  an  account  of  the  above
incident,  and  shortly  afterwards,  at  the  General  Meeting  of  May  29th,  Mr.
Mohini  informed  me  that  he  had  heard  a descripjtion  of  the  case  from  ]\Ir.
Sinnett.  Mr.  Mohini  then  pjroceeded  to  suggest  that  Mr.  G.  had  omitted
to  mention  an  impiortant  circumstance  to  me,  viz.,  that  Mr.  G.  had
attempted,  when  the  letter  in  question  was  returned  to  him,  to  open  it  by
applying  a heated  knife-blade  to  the  seal.  Mr.  Mohini,  I inferred,  had  not
heard  every  detail  of  the  case  as  above  given,  and  he  aptparently  tliought
that  the  disturbance  of  the  seal  and  the  crumjiling  of  the  envelopie  might  be
accounted  for  by  the  attempt  ^vllich  he  alleged  Mr.  G.  had  made.  They
could  not,  however,  be  thus  accounted  for,  and  I felt  certain,  from  my
examination  of  the  seal,  that  no  person  could  have  made  any  attempt  to
remove  it  by  means  of  a heated  knife-blade.  Moreover,  I thought  it  much
more  prrobable  that  Mr.  IMohini  should  have  remembered  an  event  which  had
not  occurred,  than  that  Mr.  G.  should  have  omitted  to  inform  me  of  the
circumstance  alleged.  Nevertheless,  Mr.  Mohini’s  statement  was  so  explicit
that  I considered  myself  bound  to  mention  it  at  the  meeting  of  June  26th,
when  I had  occasion  to  refer  to  the  incident.  In  the  meantime  I liad  taken
the  first  opq)ortLinity  of  writing  to  Mr.  G.  on  the  subject,  and  the  follondiig  is


314


J2)2)cn(Iiccs  to  3Ir.  Hodgson's  ltc2)ort


his  reply  of  June  25th,  which,  so  far  as  I am  concerned  in  it,  is  in  exact
accordance  with  my  own  recollections  : —

“ Mohini’s  memory  must  either  have  failed  him  or  else  he  must  have
wilfully  misrepresented  the  matter  to  you.  I did  not  attempt  to  open  the
seal  of  the  letter,  which  I put  into  the  cabinet,  with  a heated  knife,  but  I
(lid  take  another  si’idlar  envelope  and  the  same  sealing-wax  and  seal  that  I
had  used  for  sealing  that  letter,  and  liaving  sealed  the  envelope  I tried  to
see  if  a heated  knife-blade  would  lift  the  seal  and  found  it  would  not  do  so.
My  wife  was  present  and  saw  me  do  this,  and  now  contirms  my  statement.

“It  is  not  likely  that  I would  do  anything  to  the  seal  of  the  original  cover
fif  the  original  letter,  and  if  1 had  done  so  I should  have  told  you  of  the  fact
and  you  yourself  would  have  discovered  where  the  wax  had  been  melted  by
the  hot  knife-blade.

“The  origmalseal,  being  made  of  wax,  dropped  blazing  on  the  envelope,
burnt  the  paper  a little,  that  is,  it  singed  it  brown,  as  you  may  remember  I told
you  ; moreover,  a small  piece  stuck  to  my  signet-ring  and  came  away  with  it,
thus  rendering  it  impoi'siWc  to  attempt  any  trifling  with  the  seal  by  means  of
lieat  without  my  detecting  it  immediately,  while  any  such  attempt  on  my
part  would  probably  have  defaced  the  impression  of  the  signet-ring,  which  you
know  was  intact  and  perfect.”]


APPENDIX  VI.

THE  “BAMASWA3frS  AEM”  PJIEjyOlVEEOE'.

The  teak  door  in  its  new  position  {vide  p.  222),  seems  to  have  been
utilised  in  connection  with  the  following  ijhenomenon.

Sufjplement  to  The  TheosopMst,  February,  1884.

In  these  days  of  scepticism  and  unbelief,  the  following  testimony  to  a.
])henomenon,  not  ca])able  of  being  ex2)lained  on  any  theory  of  trick  or  fraud,
will  be  not  without  use  in  exciting  at  least  a sjjirit  of  calm  inquiry  in
reasonable  minds.

On  the  24th  of  November,  Mr.  S.  Ramaswamier  and  myself  both  went
to  the  Adyar  headquarters  at  about  9 p.m.  We  found  Madame  Blavatsky
seated  in  the  verandah  in  front  of  the  main  building  conversing  with  General
and  Mrs.  Morgan  and  Miss  Flynn,  then  on  a visit  to  the  headquarters,
and  a number  of  Chelas  and  officers  of  the  Theosophical  Society.  After
about  an  hour’s  conversation  there,  Madame  Blavatsky  wished  good-night
to  our  Euroi^ean  brethren  and  went  upstairs  to  her  own  room,  asking  us
to  follow  her  thither.  Accordingly  we  went  up.  There  were  seven  in  all  in
the  room,  which  was  lighted.  Madame  Blavatsky  seated  herself  facing  west
on  a chair  near  a window  in  the  north-eastern  corner  of  the  room.
S.  llamas wamier  and  myself  sat  on  the  floor,  one  behind  the  other,  right  in-
front  of  and  facing  Madame  Blavatsky,  close  by  an  open  shelf  in  the  ■wall  on
our  left.  Babu  Mohini  Mohun  Chatterji,  M.A.,  B.L.,  (solicitor,  Calcutta)
Messrs.  Babajee,  Ananda,  and  Balai  Chand  Mallik,  also  seated  on  the  floor
near  us,  opposite  the  wall-shelf  and  facing  it.  "What  had  originally  been  a
windo-sv  was  closed  with  a thick  wooden  plank,  which  on  careful  examination
I found  was  immovably  fixed  to  the  window  frame  and  thus  converted  into  a


On  Phenomena  connected  with  Theosojjhi/.


345


■wall-shelf  -with  Wo  cross  boards.  The  plank  behind  was  hung  and  the
boards  were  covered  and  ornamented  with  black  oil  cloth  and  fringe.  About
half-an-hour  after  conversation  began,  while  S.  Ramaswamier  -was  talking
about  certain  important  matters  concerning  himself  and  the  others  -n'ere
listening,  a slight  rustle  of  the  oil  cloth,  hanging  m the  back  of  the  middle
compartment  of  the  wall-shelf,  was  observed  by  the  four  gentlemen
seated  opposite  the  same.  From  it,  immediately  after,  -n'as  extruded  a
large  hand  more  brown  in  complexion  than  white,  dressed  in  a close  fitting
wdiite  sleeve,  holding  an  envelope  between  the  thumb  and  the  forefinger.
The  hand  came  just  opposite  my  face  and  over  the  back  of  S.  Raniaswamier’s
head,  a distance  of  about  two  yards  from  the  w'all,  and  at  a jerk  dropped
the  letter,  which  fell  close  by  my  side.  All,  except  S.  Ramaswamier,  saw’
the  phantom  hand  drop  the  letter.  It  was  visible  for  a few’  seconds,  and
then  vanished  into  air  right  before  oar  eyes.  I picked  up  the  envelope,
which  w’as  made  of  Chinese  paijer  evidently,  and  inscribed  with  some
characters  w’hich  I w’as  told  w'ere  Tibetan.  I had  seen  the  like  before  w’ith
S.  Ramasw’amier.  Finding  the  envelope  was  addressed  in  English  to
“ Ramasw’amy  Iyer,”  I handed  it  over  to  him.  He  opened  the  envelope  and
drew’  out  a letter.  Of  the  contents  thereof  I am  not  permitted  to  say  more
than  that  they  had  immediate  reference  to  ichat  S.  Ilamaswamier  was  speahltai
to  ns  rather  warmly  about,  and  that  it  ims  intended  by  his  Guru  as  a check  on
his  vehemence  in  the  matter.  As  regards  the  handw’riting  of  the  letter,  it
W’as  shown  to  me,  and  I readily  recognised  it  as  the  same  that  I had  seen  in
other  letters  shown  me  long  before  by  S.  Ramasw’amier  as  having  been
received  from  his  Guru  falso  Madame  Blavatsky’s  master).  I need  hardly
add  that  immediately  after  I witnessed  the  above  phenomenon,  I examined
the  shelf  wall,  plank,  boards,  and  all  inside  and  outside  w’ith  the  help  of  a
light,  and  was  thoroughly  satisfied  that  there  was  nothing  in  any  of  them
to  suggest  the  possibility  of  the  existence  of  any  w’ire,  spring,  or  any  other
mechanical  contrivance  by  means  of  which  the  phenomenon  could  have  been


produced.


V.  Coopoosw'AJiY  Iyer,  M.A.,  F.T.S.,

Pleader,  Madura.


27  th  November,  1883.

In  reply  to  my  questions : — I first  questioned  Mr.  Coopooswamy  Iyer
alone  dow’nstairs.  He  was  very  doubtful  about  the  distance  of  the  hand  from
the  wall,  and  seemed  surprised  that  in  his  account  the  distance  was  given  as
two  yards.  He  said  it  might  be  a yard  or  a yard  and  a-half.  He  had  not
observed  anything  beyond  the  hand  and  part  of  the  arm,  had  not  looked
beyond  this, — could  not  say  whether  it  ended  in  a stick,  or  in  nothing  at  all.
The  hand  and  arm  appeared  from  behind  the  hangings  of  the  shelf,  dropped
the  letter,  and  were  immediately  gone.  His  examination  of  the  shelf  and
planks  behind  appears  to  have  been  very  incomplete.  I took  him  upstairs
and  asked  him  to  describe  the  positions,  and  to  hold  his  finger  at  the  point
which  the  “hand”  reached.  Madame  Blavatsky  was  in  the  room,  and
requested  me  to  get  the  tape  and  measure  the  distance.  The  measuring  tape
was  in  another  room.  I observed  closely  the  position  of  Mr.  C.  Iyer’s
finger  before  I left  for  the  tape.  I was  away  about  half-a-minute,  leaving
Madame  Blavatsky  talking  with  Mr.  C.  Iyer  about  the  position.  When  I
returned  the  finger  was  at  least  afoot  further  away  from  the  wall.  The
distance  then  measured  was  4ft.  9in.


z


316


Appendices  to  Mr.  Ilo'tgsons  Ideport


I received  two  accounts  within  a few  minutes  from  Mr.  Ramaswamier  as
to  the  respective  positions  of  tlie  sitters,  and  in  his  second  account  both  he
and  Mr.  C.  Iyer  were  represented  as  sitting  in  2'ilaces  quite  two  feet  nearer
the  shelf  than  as  described  in  his  first  account.  Moreover,  the  words  in  the
letter  received  by  Mr.  Ramaswamier  were  not  more  si)ecific  than  might
easily  have  been  written  before  the  conversation  referred  to  took  jdace.
They  were  a general  injunction  beginning  “ Patience  ! Patience  ! ”

Mr.  Babajee  did  not  see  the  hand,  he  was  not  looking  in  that  direction
at  the  moment.  He  heard  a slight  noise  and  saw  the  letter  on  the  floor.

Ananda  (Mr.  T.  Vijiaraghava  Charloo)  saw  the  curtain  before  the  shelf
stirring  as  though  a wind  was  i:)assing.  He  then  saw  a hand  and  arm  come
out  from  behind  the  curtain.  It  came  out  about  a foot  or  a foot  and  a-half,
about  up  to  the  elbow.  The  letter  fell,  and  his  attention  was  drawn  to  the
letter.  Then  hand  and  arm  were  gone.


After  the  sliding  panel  was  shown  in  the  teak  door,  the  defence  made  was
that  the  arm  had  come  from  the  riV//it  side  of  the  shelf,  whereas  the  sliding
panel  was  on  the  left  side.  I found  it  perfectly  easy,  however,  to  thrust  my
arm  through  the  ga^i  made  when  the  i)anel  slid,  and  to  turn  it  in  the  shelf
recess  (which  wars  concealed  by  the  curtains)  so  that  it  should  aj^pear  beyond
the  curtains  in  front  of  the  right  j^anel  instead  of  the  left,  and  as  far  forward
as  described  by  Ananda.  I discussed  the  discrejiancies  in  the  different
accounts  with  Messrs.  Ramaswamier  and  Coojiooswamy  Iyer ; and  Mr.  Lane-
Fox,  who  afterwards  heard  of  the  different  accounts,  exjiressed  his  conviction
of  the  worthlessness  of  the  ijhenomenon  as  a test,  and  assured  me  that  in
a later  conversation  with  Madame  Blavatsky  she  admitted  that  the
“ i)henomenon  ” probably  originated  with  and  was  carried  out  by  the
Coulombs  for  the  i^urjjose  of  enabling  them  afterwards  to  discredit  other
“ jihenomena  ” more  easily.  Yet  Madame  Blavatsky  had  shortly  before  been
endeavouring  to  jiersuade  me  that  the  arm  must  have  been  “astral,”  and
urging  how  infinitely  imjiossible  it  was  for  the  “ jihenomenon  ” to  have  been
•other  than  a genuine  manifestation  of  the  “ occult  power,”  ivhich  the
initiates  of  the  “esoteric  science”  are  alleged  to  ^lossess.

According  to  M.  Coulomb  it  was  Babula’shand  that  apiieared,  by  Madame
Blavatsky  s instructions.  This  exjilanation  fits  in  "well  enough  with  Ananda’s
account.


APPENDIX  VII.

ACCOUNTS  OF  PHENOMENA  DESCRIBED  BY  MB.  MOIIINI  IN  HIS
DEPOSITION  BEFORE  THE  COMMITTEE  (See  Riport,  x>p.  239-245).

FIR.ST  AND  SECOND  ALLEGED  ASTRAL  APPARITIONS.

Account  by  Mr.  IMohini.

Mr.  Mohini  : It  was  in  the  month  of  December,  1882,  that  I saw
the  apparition  of  one  of  the  Mahatmas  for  the  first  time.  I do  not  remember
the  precise  date,  but  it  can  be  easily  ascertained.  It  was  a few  days  after
the  anniversary  of  the  Theosojdiical  Society  was  celebrated  in  that  year.


On  Phenomena  connceted  n-ith  Theosophy.


347


One  evening,  eight  or  ten  of  us  were  sitting  on  tlie  balcony  at  the  head  •
quarters  of  the  SocietJ^  I was  leaning  over  the  railings,  when  at  a distance
I caught  a glimpse  of  some  shining  substance,  which  after  a short  time  took
the  form  of  a human  being.  This  human  form  several  times  passed  and  re-
passed the  25lace  where  we  were.  I should  think  the  apparition  was  visible
for  four  or  five  minutes.

Mk.  Stack  : How  far  did  it  appear  to  be  from  you  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : About  20  or  30  yards.

IMr.  Myers  ; In  what  way  can  you  be  sure  that  it  was  not  an  ordinary
person  ?

IMr.  Mohiki  : From  the  position  in  which  it  appeared.  It  appeared  at  a
place  where  there  was  a declivity  in  the  hill,  the  house  being  at  the  top  of
the  hill.  There  was  also  a bend  at  the  spot,  so  that  if  an  ordinary  human
being  had  been  walking  there  it  would  have  been  imjDossible  for  him  to  have
been  seen.  I saw  the  whole  figure,  however,  so  that  it  must  have  been
floating  in  mid-air.

Mr.  Myers;  Other  persons  besides  yourself  saw  it?

Mr.  Mohini  : Oh,  yes.  One  was  ISTobin  Kri.shna  Bannerji,  who  is  deputy
■collector  at  Berhampore,  Moorshedabad,  Bengal.  Another  was  Ramaswamier,
ivho  is  district  registrar  at  Madiu-a,  Madras.  A third  was  Pundit  Chandra
Sekhara,  who  lives  at  Bareilly,  R.W.P.

Mr.  Myers  : All  those  witnesses  saw  the  same  figure  that  you  did  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : Yes.

Mr.  Myers  : Who  observed  it  first  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : It  was  first  observed  by  Ramaswamier  and  myself.

Mr.  Myers  : And  all  agreed  that  it  could  not  be  a real  man  walking  in
that  way  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : Certainly.  It  seemed  to  us  to  be  the  apjiarition  of  the
original  of  the  portrait  in  Colonel  Olcott’s  room,  and  which  is  associated  with
one  of  the  Mah'atmas.

Mr.  Myers  : In  fact,  Colonel  Olcott’s  Master  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : Yes.

Mr.  Myers  : What  amount  of  light  was  there  at  the  time  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : This  occurred  about  half-past  nine  or  ten  o'clock  on  abright
moonlight  night.

Mr.  Myers  : The  figure  walked  up  and  down  ?

Mr.  Mohini  ; Yes,  and  then  disajipeared.

Mr.  Myers  : In  what  way  did  it  disappear  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : It  seemed  to  melt  away.

Mr.  Stack  : Could  you  distinguish  the  features  at  the  distance  at  which
you  were  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : Oh,  yes,  and  the  dress,  the  turban,  and  everything.

Mr.  Miners  : What  height  did  the  figure  appear  to  be  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : I should  think  it  was  six  feet  or  so — a very  tall  man.

IMr.  Myers  : Because  we  heard  from  Colonel  Olcott  that  his  Mahatma
was  something  like  6ft.  5in.  in  height.

Mr.  Mohini  ; I could  not  tell  exactly,  but  it  was  very  tall.  I had  seen
the  portrait  several  times.  It  w^as  the  first  jiicture  of  a Mahatma  I had  ever
seen,  so  that  it  made  a great  impression  upon  me.

z 2


348


Ajjpendiccs  io  Mr.  Hodgson's  Bcport


Mr.  Myers  : When  was  the  second  time  that  you  saw  an  astral  appear-
ance ?

Mr.  Mohini  : Two  or  three  days  after  tliat.  We  were  sitting  on  the
ground — on  the  rock,  outside  the  house  in  Bombay,  when  a figure  appeare  1
a short  distance  away.  It  was  not  tlie  same  figure  as  on  the  first  occasion.

Mr.  Myers  : In  what  way  are  you  sure  it  was  not  a living  man  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : You  could  easily  find  that  out  from  the  colour.  This  was
the  same  shining  colour  as  before.

Mr.  Myers  : Did  the  apparition  seem  to  walk  or  to  float  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : It  seemed  to  float.  T.here  was  no  sound  accomiianying  it.

Mr.  Myers  : You  say  that  it  was  a shining  substance.  Was  it  phos-
phorescent ?

Mr.  Mohini  : It  seemed  like  phosphorus  in  the  dark.  The  hair  was
dark,  and  could  be  distinguished  from  tlie  face.

Mr.  Gurney  : Going  back  to  the  first  apparition,  it  seems  somewhat
startling  to  be  told  tliat  you  could  recognise  the  face  at  such  a distance  off,
and  in  moonlight.  Do  you  feel  sure  that  if  you  had  seen  the  face  alone  you
would  have  recognised  it  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : I cannot  answer  that.  I saw  the  whole  thing,  and  the
whole  thing,  taken  together,  jiroduced  upon  me  the  impression  that  it  was
the  apparition  of  the  original  of  the  portrait  in  Colonel  Olcott’s  room.  Had
I seen  the  face  alone,  peering  out  of  the  dark,  I do  not  know  whether  I
should  have  recognised  it  or  not.

Mr.  Stack  : Do  all  the  Mahatmas  dress  alike?

Mr.  Mohini  : Ho.  Colonel  Olcott  was  present  on  the  first  occasion,
and,  as  I have  already  stated,  the  apparition  that  ajipeared  was  that  of  his
Master.

Mr.  My'ers  : On  the  two  occasions  did  all  who  were  present  see  the
apparitions  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : Yes.

Mr.  Myers  : Can  you  give  us  the  names  of  the  persons  who  were  present
on  the  second  occasion  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : They  were  the  same  iiersons  that  were  present  on  the
first  occasion.

Mr.  Myers  : Did  the  apparition  say  anything  on  the  second  occasion

Mr.  Mohini  : No.

[The  following  accounts  were  taken  down  by  me  in  writing  at  the  time
the  statements  were  made  to  me  by  the  several  witnesses.  I received  also
additional  description  of  the  spots  wliere  the  alleged  astral  figures  were  said
to  have  appeared.  I was  thus  able  to  test  to  a certain  extent  the  accuracy
of  the  accounts,  when  I visited  the  old  headquarters  in  Bombay.]

Account  by  Mr.  Ramaswamier  (District  Registrar,  Madura).

1.

At  the  end  of  the  following  year  (1882),  at  the  headquarters  at  Bombay,
several  of  us  were  togetlier  on  the  upper  balcony.  I am  unable  to  recollect
any  of  the  others.  I suddenly  saw,  at  the  distance  of  about  15  paces,  a
gleaming  substance  whicli  assumed  the  figure  of  a man.  It  was  not  walking
on  the  ground,  but  apjieared  to  be  gliding  through  mid-air  among  the  top-


On  Phenomena  conneefed  ivith  Theosophy.


34a


most  brunches  of  the  trees.  It  glided  forwards  and  backwards  four  or  five
times.  I could  not  recognise  the  person,  could  not  see  whether  it  had  a
beard  or  not,  cannot  say  whether  it  was  tall  or  not.  The  night  was  moon-
light. Time  between  eight  and  nine  p.m.

2.

About  the  same  time,  at  the  end  of  1882,  I was  sitting  with  Madame
Blavatsky,  Madame  Coulomb,  Norendra,  Janaki,  Nobin  K.  Bannerji,  and
others  in  a verandah  adjoining  Madame  Blavatsky ’s  writing-room.

On  one  side  was  a hill  gradually  rising  to  a top.  The  hill  was  covered
with  thorns.  I saw  something  like  a flash  of  light,  and  gradually  it  assumed  the
figure  of  a person  about  20  feet  distant.  Time  between  7 and  8 p.m.
I cannot  say  whether  it  was  moonlight  or  not.  I did  not  recognise  the  figure  ;
cannot  say  whether  it  had  a beard  or  not ; cannot  say  whether  it  had  a
turban  or  not.  Madame  went  near  the  foot  of  the  hill  and  exchanged  some
signs  with  the  figure.  Madame  then  went  to  her  room  by  the  path  on  our
side,  and  the  figure  went  in  the  direction  of  Madanie’s  room  by  the  other  side.

Afterwards  Madame  came  to  us  in  great  excitement  and  said  that  one  of
the  delegates  had  polluted  the  house,  and  it  was  for  this  reason  the  figure
■could  not  come  near  us.  Shortly  after  the  figure  again  appeared  on  the  hill,
and  suddenly  vanished,  leaving  a brightness  which  gradually  faded  away.


Account  by  Mu.  Nosin'  Krishna  Bannerji  (Deputy  Magistrate  and
Deputy  Collector,  and  Manager-General  of  Wards’  Estates  in  Moorshe-
dabad,  Bengal).

1.

On  the  occasion  of  the  seventh  anniversai’y,  in  1882,  one  evening  before  the
anniversary  celebration,  at  about  7 p.m.,  I was  sitting  in  the  balcony  of
the  headquarters  in  Bombay,  in  company  wdth  Norendra  Natli  Sen,  Mohini,
Madame,  Ramaswamier,  and  several  others.  We  were  talking  when  Madame
said,  “ Don’t  move  from  your  seat  until  I say,”  or  something  to  that  effect.
This  made  us  expect  that  sometliing  -was  about  to  happen.  Some  were
standing  near  the  railing  of  the  balcony,  others  were  seated  a little  back.
After  a few  moments  those  standing  near  the  rails  saw  something,  and  made
some  remarks  which  induced  the  rest  of  the  party,  excepting  myself  and
Norendra,  to  get  up  and  go  towards  the  rails,  and  look  at  the  object.  We
didn't  stir,  as  nothing  further  was  said  by  Madame,  but  kej)t  turning  our
heads  in  expectation  of  seeing  something.  But  w^e  didn’t  perceive  anything.
Some  four  or  five  minutes  after,  we  inferred  from  the  remarks  made,
that  the  others  had  seen  some  luminous  astral  figure  walking  to  and  fro
below  the  balcony  on  the  side  of  the  hill.  It  'was  not  pitch  dark.  Objects
could  be  seen  at  a distance,  but  not  distinguished  clearly.

2.

The  same  party  with  the  addition  of  IMr.  Ghosal  were  sitting  together  on
the  north  extremity  of  the  bungalow  facing  the  sea,  at  about  7.30  p.m.,
vdien  some  remark  of  Madame’s  made  us  expect  to  see  something  imme-
diately. Shortly  after  we  saw  a form  standing  on  a rock  close  to  the
adjoining  bungalow,  about  10  yards  distant.  The  light  was  about  the  same


Appendices  io  Mr.  Hodgson's  Report


MjO

nsonthe  previous  occasion.  There  was  no  tree  near  and  the  figure  cculd
he  seen  clearly.  The  figure  was  dressed  in  a white  flowing  garment,  with
a light  coloured  turban,  and  a dark  beard.  The  figure  was  that  of  a man
of  apparently  ordinary  size,  but  I could  not  recognise  who  it  was.  From
my  description  Colonel  Olcott  recognised  one  of  the  Mahatmas.  He  men-
tioned the  name,  which  we  afterwards  found  to  be  correct,  as
Madame  and  Damodar  corroborated  it.  The  figure  seemed  faintly  luminous,
but  I am  unable  now  to  recollect  any  further  details  concerning  its
description.  The  figure  gradually  vanished,  and  for  a minute  or  two  after-
wards the  place  where  it  had  been  seemed  to  be  gleaming  with  a
milky  brightness.  The  rock  itself  has  some  date  and  otlier  trees  upon  it,
Ituc  the  spot  where  the  figure  appeared  was  bare.  The  figure  was  standing
still  when  we  saw  it.


Account  by  Mr.  Chandr.v  Sekhara  (Teacher  in  High  School,  Bareilly,
KW.P.).

1.

In  1882  I went  to  Bombay  in  November,  reaching  tliere  on  the  morning
of  26th  inst.  The  anniversary  was  postponed  from  November  27th  to
December  7th.  On  the  evening  of  the  27th,  about  8 p.m.,  we,  i.e.,  about
10  or  11  of  us,  including  tlie  delegates,  were  seated  in  the  balcony  with
Madame  B.  and  Colonel  Olcott.  Mohini  M.  Chatterji,  Bishen  Ball,  and
danaki  Nath  Ghosal  were  present.  We  were  chatting  together,  and  Madame
Blavatsky,  with  some  other  brethren,  quickly  rose  up,  and  looked  towards  the
garden  below  the  balcony.  I rose  iqi  and  looked  out,  but  not  in  the  proper
direction.  J.  N.  Ghosal  pointed  me  to  the  proper  quarter,  and  I saw  a
luminous  figure  walking  to  and  fro  below  the  balcony,  on  the  third  terrace
field.  [This  was  explained  to  mean  that  there  were  two  fields  and  a portion
of  a third  between  the  speaker  and  the  figure.]  Each  field  is  about  10  yards
wfide.  The  third  field  is  full  of  thorny  trees,  so  that  it, is  difficult  for  a man
to  walk  freely.  The  trees  varied  in  size,  and  the  foliage  occupied  a good
deal  of  space.  The  figure  was  iqiright.  I saw  him  walk  three  times  over
a distance  of  about  40  yards,  and  then  disappear.  There  was  no  moonlight,
'the  figure  appeared  nearly  6ft.  high,  well-built,  but  I could  not  distin-
.unish  the  features.  I could  not  tell  whether  he  had  a beard.  My  sight  is
ordinary.

2.

The  following  day  we  were  seated  in  the  verandah  near  the  Occult
Room,  w’hen  Madame  said  that  she  felt  something  extraordinary.  The  time
was  between  7 and  8 p.m.  Suddenly  we  saw  the  luminous  body  of  one
w'ho  was  explained  to  me  to  be  another  Mahatma,  on  the  high  rock  adjoin-
ing the  Occult  Room.  The  distance  of  the  figure  was  about  16  3’ards.
Madame  Coulomb  w'as  with  us.  I could  not  distinguish  the  features  clearly,
not  sufficient  for  recognition.  I cannot  say  wdiether  the  figure  had  a beard.
As  soon  as  w'e  saw  the  figure,  Madame  Coulomb  exclaimed,  in  a nervous
manner,  “There!  There!”  And  in  a minute  Colonel  Olcott  said,  “Madame
[Blavatsky],  go  to  the  foot  of  the  rock,  and  talk  to  the  Mahatma.”  Madame
went  to  the  rock,  and  in  a short  time  after  she  came  back  shivering,  and  said


On  Phenomena  connected  with  TheosopJnj.


351


the  Mahatma  would  he  willing  to  come  forward  to  talk  to  the  audierice,  hut
there  was  some  man  in  our  company  whose  sin  was  so  great  that  it  would  he
difficult  for  tlie  Mahatma  to  apitroach,  and  therefore  he  had  to  go  away.
The  figure  disappeared  suddenly  before  Madame  returned.

Account  hy  Mr.  J.  IST.  Ghosal  (Allahahad).

One  evening,  at  the  Bombay  headquarters,  on  the  27th  or  28th  of
Novomher,  1882,  about  9 or  10  p.m.,  Madame  Blavatsky,  Mohini,  Chandra
Sekhara,  Damodar,  Nobina  Krishn  Bannerji,  ISiorendra  Nath  Sen,  and  a,
few  others  besides  myself,  were  sitting  in  the  balcony.  Some  of  them  had
been  called  there  by  me.  as  I was  then  exj^ecting  that  some  phenomenon
would  take  place.  My  attention  was  drawn  by  a sound  among  some  trees
down  below,  about  10  yards  from  the  balcony.  The  sound  was  like  the
stirring  of  leaves.  Immediately  after  I saw  the  tall  figure  of  a man
apparently  more  than  Oft.  in  height,  clad  in  white,  near  the  trees.  It  was
a clear  moonlight  night.  The  figure  was  well-built.  I could  not  distinguish
the  features  very  well,  saw  something  like  a beard,  but  not  very  distinctly.
A white  turban  was  on  the  head.  The  figure  began  to  walk  backwards  and
forwards  for  two  or  three  minutes.  Madame  Coulomb  joined  the  groiqi,
and  the  figure  disapi^eared,  making  the  same  kind  of  sound,  like  stirring  of
leaves,  which  I heard  before  the  appearance  of  the  figure.  But  it  appeared  to
me,  and  a few  of  those  present  were  of  tlie  same  opinion,  that  the  figure
walked  over  one  of  the  trees  and  suddenly  disappeared.  Not  being  able  to
distinguish  the  features,  I inquired  of  Madame,  and  was  told  it  was  the
astral  appearance  of  her  Master.

Next  morning  I went  to  the  spot  where  the  figure  appeared,  and  found
the  spot  so  low  that  any  one  walking  on  the  ground  could  not  have  been  en-
tirely seen  from  the  balcony.

fThis  is  the  only  “ astral  figure  ” Mr.  Ghosal  has  seen.]

Account  by  Mr.  Norendra  Nath  Sen  (Editor  of  the  Indian  Mirror,  Calcutta).

I saw  the  astral  figure  on  the  rock  at  the  Bombay  headquarters.  It  was
7 or  8 p.m.,  and  the  figure  was  about  20  yards  distant.  I recognised  no  more
than  that  it  appeared  to  be  the  figure  of  a man,  who  came  down  from  the
rock  and  went  with  Bladame  Blavatsky  into  her  room.


THIRD  ALLEGED  ASTRAL  .iPPARITION.

hlR.  hloHiNi  : The  third  instance  which  I will  describe  was  the  last  that
occurred  just  before  my  leaving  India.  We  were  sitting  in  the  drawing-
room on  the  first  floor  of  the  house  at  Adyar.  It  was  about  11  o’clock  at
night.  The  window  loolis  over  a terrace  or  balcony.  In  one  corner  of  the
room  there  appeared  a thin  vapoury  substance  of  a shining  wliite  colour.
Gradually  it  took  shape,  and  a few  dark  spots  became  visible,  and  after
a short  time  it  was  the  fully-formed  body  of  a man,  apparently  as  solid  as
an  ordinary  human  body.  Tliis  figure  passed  and  repassed  us  several  times,
approaching  to  within  a distance  of  a yard  or  two  from  where  we  were
standing  near  the  window.  It  approached  so  near  that  I think  if  I had  put
out  my  hand  I might  have  touched  it.


052


Appendices  to  Mr.  Hodgson’s  Report


Mr.  Stack  : Did  you  see  the  face  clearly  ?

Mr.  MohijSTI  : Oh , yes  ; very  clearly.

Mr.  Myers  : And  it  was  Mr.  Sinnett’s  corresjiondent  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : Yes.

Mr.  Stack  : How  did  you  identify  him  as  Root  Hoomi  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : Because  I had  seen  his  portrait  several  times  before.

Mr.  Stack  : Had  you  ever  seen  him  in  the  flesh  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : I cannot  answer  that.  I explained  to  you  the  reason
why  I could  not.  Colonel  Olcott  can,  but  I cannot.

Mr.  Myers  : Are  we  to  understand,  then,  that,  when  favours  are
.accorded  by  a Mahatma  for  the  sake  of  the  Chela’s  own  spiritual  advance-
ment, there  is  a rule  which  forbids  the  Chela  to  describe  tliem,  with  the
view  of  preventing  spiritual  pride  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : I have  not  been  told  the  reason,  but  that  is,  I believe,  the
reason.

Mr.  Myers  : Will  you  continue  your  account  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : After  a while  I said  that  as  I should  not  see  him  for  a long
time,  on  account  of  my  going  to  Europe,  I begged  he  would  leave  some
tangible  mark  of  his  visit.  The  figure  then  raised  his  hands  and  seemed  to
throw  something  at  us.  The  next  moment  we  found  a shower  of  roses
falling  over  us  in  the  room — roses  of  a kind  that  could  not  have  been  pro-
cured on  the  premises.  We  requested  the  figure  to  disappear  from  that  side
of  the  balcony  where  there  was  no  exit.  There  was  a tree  on  the  other  side,
and  it  was  in  order  to  prevent  all  suspicion  that  it  might  be  something  that
had  got  down  the  tree,  or  anytliing  of  that  kind,  that  we  reijuested  him  to
disappear  from  the  side  where  there  was  no  exit.  The  figure  went  over  to
that  S2iot  and  then  disajqieared.

Mr.  Myers  : You  saw  its  disajipearance  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : Oli  yes,  it  passed  us  slowly  until  it  came  to  the  edge  of
the  balcony,  and  then  it  was  not  to  be  seen  any  more.

Mr.  Myers  : The  disappearance  being  sudden  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : Yes.

Mr.  Gurney  ; Was  the  height  of  the  balcony  such  that  any  one  could
have  jumped  down  from  it  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : The  height  was  15  or  20  feet,  anci,  moreover,  there  were
Iieople  downstairs  and  all  over  the  house,  so  that  it  w'ould  have  been  iuqiossi-
ble  for  a jierson  to  have  jumiied  down  witliout  being  noticed.  Just  below
die  balcony  there  is  an  open  lawn.  Tliere  were  several  jiersons  looking  at
the  moment,  and  my  own  idea  is  that  it  would  have  been  perfectly  impossible
for  a iierson  to  have  jumped  down.

Mr.  Stack  ; Why  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : There  is  a small  flight  of  stejis  just  below  the  balcony,  and
if  a man  had  jumped  from  the  balcony  he  must  have  fallen  upon  the  stejis
and  broken  his  legs.  When  the  figure  jiassed  and  re-passed  us  we  heard
nothing  of  any  footstejis.  Besides  myself,  Damodar  and  Madame  Blavatsky
were  in  the  room  at  the  time.

Sir.  SIyer.s  : Did  this  figure  speak  ?

SIr.  SIoiiini  : Rot  on  that  occasion.  What  it  did  could  not  be  called
sjjeaking.


On  Pnenomcna  connected  ivith  Thco&ophii.  353

Mr.  Stack  : Y/ere  you  all  in  the  room  u’hen  this  occurred,  or  out  on  the
balcony  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : In  the  room,  with  the  window  open.

Mr.  IMyers  : What  light  was  there  on  the  balcony  ?

IMr.  Mohini  : The  mooidight,  and  the  figure  came  to  within  so  short  a
distance  that  the  light,  which  was  streaming  out  of  the  window,  fell  upon
it.  This  was  at  the  Madras  headquarters,  about  either  the  end  of  January
or  the  beginning  of  February  last ; in  fact,  just  before  I left  Madras.

Mr.  Stack  : What  kind  of  roses  were  they  that  they  could  not  be  grown
at  Madras  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : I said  that  they  could  not  have  been  jirocured  on  the
premises,  though,  indeed,  I have  not  seen  any  such  roses  at  Madras.

Mr.  Stack  : What  was  the  colour  of  the  figure  ? Was  it  perfectly
natural  ?

Mr.  Mohini  ; When  it  came,  it  was  just  like  a natural  man.

Mr.  Myers  : Can  you  give  any  reason  why  this  figure  was  different  in
colour  and  asjiect  from  those  which  you  saw  on  the  former  occasions  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : The  luminosity*  dejiends  iqjon  whether  all  the  juinciples
which  go  to  make  uji  a double  are  there,  without  any  gross  particles  being
attracted.

Mr.  Myers  : Gross  matter  is  iiresent  when  the  figure  is  non-luminous  ?

Mr.  Mohini  ; Yes.

Mr.  Stack  ; This  figure  looked  like  an  ordinary  man  ? If  you  had  not
believed  that  it  was  the  Mahatma  Koot  Hoomi,  you  would  have  thought  it
was  an  ordinary  man  ?

IMr.  Mohini  : I never  would  have  thought  that  it  was  an  ordinary  man,
because  it  was  such  a striking  figure.

[See  the  comments  on  this  case  pp.  241-244.]

LETTER  received  AT  RARIS.

[See  comments  on  this  case,  p.  245.]

Account  by  Mr.  Mohini.

Mr.  Mohini  : I was  staying  in  Paris,  occupying  apartments  at  No.
46,  Rue  Notre  Dame  des  Champs.  Mr.  Keightley  and  Mr.  Oakley
were  in  the  house  with  me.  On  that  morning  we  were  discussing  as  to
wdiether  we  should  go  into  the  country,  to  a place  where  Madame
Blavatsky  was  then  staying,  and  we  decided  upon  doing  so.  The  two  gentle-
men I have  named  went  to  their  respective  rooms  to  get  ready  to  start  by  the
next  train.  I was  sitting  in  the  drawing-room.  ^Yithin  a few  minutes,  Mr.
Keightley  came  back  from  his  room,  and  went  to  that  of  Mr.  Oakley.  In
doing  so  he  passed  me,  and  I followed  him.

Mr.  Stack  ; Was  the  drawing-room  between  the  two  bedrooms  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : The  hall  also  intervened,  I think.  To  go  from  one  bed-
room to  another  the  easiest  way  was  through  the  drawing-room.  Arriving

* I have  no  doubt  that  what  Mr.  Mohini  terms  the  “luminosity”  was
merely  the  moonlight  reflected  from  the  ivhite  robes  of  the  figure.  On  the
“ former  occasions  ” there  was  moonlight,  but  in  this  third  case  there  was  no
moonlight— Mr.  Mohini’s  statement  that  there  was  being  erroneous.  (See  p.  244. )


o54  Appendices  to  il/r.  Hodgson's  Beport

in  the  bedroom  we  found  Mr.  Oakley  talking  with  Madame  Blavatsky’s  Indian
.servant.  Mr.  Keightley  inquired  if  Mr.  Oakley  had  called.  Mr.  Oakley
replied  in  the  negative,  and  Mr.  Keightley  then  returned  to  his  own  room,
fnllowed  by  myself.  There  was  a table  in  the  middle  of  the  room  occupied  by
]\Ir.  Keightley.  He  had  passed  the  edge  of  the  table  nearest  the  door,,
and  was  about  one  foot  and  a-half  distant — I had  not  yet  entered  the  room —
wlien,  on  the  edge  of  the  table  nearest  the  door,  I saw  a letter.  The
envelope  was  of  the  kind  always  used  by  one  of  the  Mahatmas.  Many
such  envelopes  are  in  my  possession,  as  well  as  in  the  possession  of  Mr.
Sinnett  and  others.  The  moment  I caught  sight  of  it  I stopped  short  and
called  out  to  Mr.  Keightley  to  turn  back  and  look.  He  turned  back  and
at  once  saw  the  letter  on  the  table.  I asked  him  if  he  had  seen  it  there
before.  He  answered  in  the  negative,  and  said  that  had  it  been  there  he
must  have  noticed  it,  as  he  had  taken  his  watch  and  chain  out  and  put  them
on  the  table.  He  said  that  he  was  sure  the  letter  was  not  there  when  he
passed  the  spot,  as  the  envelope  was  too  striking  not  to  have  caught  Ins
sight.

Mr.  St.vck  : What  are  these  envelopes  ? Are  they  peculiar  to  the  use
I >f  Mahatmas  ? Or  are  they  ordinary  Thibetan  envelopes

Mr.  Mohixi  : I have  only  seen  them  used  by  Mahatmas.

Mr.  Stack  ; They  are  made  of  paper,  and  have  Chinese  characters  on
tliem,  I tliink  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : Yes.

Mr.  Stack  : The  reason  I ask  is  that  Colonel  Olcott,  in  his  conversation,
spoke  of  them,  I think,  as  if  they  were  Thibetan  envelopes.  I thought
they  might  be  in  general  use  in  Thibet.

Mr.  Mohini  ; I have  never  been  to  Thibet,  nor  have  I ever  I’eceived  a
letter  from  thence.  Indeed,  I do  not  believe  that  there  is  any  postal  service
with  Thibet.

Mr.  Gurney  ; It  would  not  be  a hoj^eful  place  to  communicate  with,
then.

Mr.  Stack  : But  they  might  manufacture  such  envelopes  for  use  among
the  officials  there.

Mr.  Mohini  : I have  seen  one  Thibetan  pedlar,  but  he  did  not  offer  me
any  such  article  for  sale.  Returning  to  Mr.  Keightley,  he  also  said  that  he
had  been  looking  for  somotliing  on  the  table.

Mr.  Myers  : Wliat  other  persons  had  been  in  the  ap)artment  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : Myself,  Mr.  Keightley,  Mr.  Oakley,  and  Madame
Blavatsky’s  Indian  servant.

IMr.  Myers  : Our  object  would  be  to  ascertain  whether  anybody  could
have  placed  the  letter  in  the  room  during  Mr.  Keightley’s  absence.  Do  I
understand  that  wdiile  Mr.  Keightley  wms  absent  from  his  room  yourself,
IMr.  Oakley,  and  the  Indian  servant  were  in  his  sight  all  the  time  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : Yes.

Mr.  Myers  : Was  the  outer  door  of  the  house  closed  at  the  time  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : Yes.

Mr.  Myers  : Do  you  feel  morally  certain  that  nobody  was  secreted  in  the
room  ?

* See  evidence  of  Mr.  A O.  Hume,  p.  275.


On  Fhcnomcna  connected  icltli  Theosophy.


355>


Mr.  Mohini  : I do.  The  letter  was  directed  to  myself,  and  it  was  open eJ
in  their  presence.

Mr.  Myers  : What  were  the  contents  of  the  letter  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : The  letter  referred  to  some  matters  of  a private  character,
and  ended  with  a direction  to  me  to  take  down  my  friends  to  the  place  in  the
country.

Mr.  Myers  : Thus  appearing  to  show  a knowledge  of  events  of  the-
moment  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : Just  so.

Mr.  Myers  : Could  the  letter  have  been  written  some  days  before,,
and  the  allusion  as  to  taking  your  friends  into  the  country  inserted  after-
wards ?

Mr.  Mohini  : No  ; because  Mr.  Keightley  and  Mr.  Oakley  only  came  to
the  house  by  accident  that  morning.

Mr.  Stack  ; On  what  floor  were  these  rooms  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : On  the  first  floor.

Mr.  Myers  : Upon  what  did  the  windows  look  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : One  of  them  looked  out  upon  the  yard.

Mr.  Myers  : Do  you  consider  it  impossible  that  somebody  could  have'
climbed  up  to  the  window  and  thrown  the  letter  into  the  room  ?

Mr.  Mohini  ; Absolutely  impossible.  Mr.  Keightley  was  only  absent  a
few  seconds.

Mr.  Myers  : Could  nobody  have  reached  the  window  without  a ladder  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : Certainly  not.

Mr.  Myers  : Do  you  remember  whether  the  window  was  open  or  not  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : Most  likely  it  was  not  open.

Mr.  Myers  : Was  the  yard  which  you  referred  to  the  court-yard  of  the
hotel  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : The  back  court-yard.

Mr.  Myers  : Had  you  observed  any  men  moving  about  in  the  j^ard
during  your  stay  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : I had  not  observed  any.

Mr.  Myers  ; What  language  was  the  letter  written  in  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : In  English,  and  I recognised  the  handwriting  as  that  of  IMr.
Sinnett's  correspondent.  Were  I to  show  it  to  Mr.  Sinnett  he  would  at  once
identify  it.

Account  by  Mr.  A.  Cooper-Oakley,  B.A.  (Camb.).

In  rephj  to  my  inquiry  : — Madame  Blavatsky,  Mr.  Keightley,  and  Mr.
Mohini  had  been  staying  together  for  about  3 days  in  the  rooms  in  question.
The  day  before  the  occurrence  described,  Madame  B.  had  gone  to  Enghien.
Mr.  Oakley  went  frequently  to  the  Paris  apartments,  and  might  be
exjiected  to  call  every  day.  On  this  particular  morning  he  called  at  about
11.30  a.  m.,  and  after  some  conversation  as  to  what  they  should  do,  they
decided  to  go  to  Enghien.  Mr.  Oakley  went  into  a sort  of  spare  room  [to
shave].  Mr.  Keightley  went  to  his  own  room,  and  in  2 or  3 minutes
came  in  to  Mr.  Oakley,  and  asked  if  Mr.  Oakley  had  called  him.  He  had
heard  his  name  called— Bert.  [Bertram.]  Mr.  Keightley  then  left  IMr.
(>akley,  and  after  a shoi't  interval  returned,  and  asked  him  to  come  and  look
at  something  he  had  received.  Mr.  Oakley  went  back  with  him,  and  saw


^356


Apjycndkcs  to  Mr.  Ilodt/wn^s  Report


xil)on  a large  roun:l  table,  about  3 paces  from  the  door  of  Mr.  Keightley’s
room,  a letter.  The  letter  was  on  the  edge  of  the  table,  nearest  the  door.
It  was  addressed  to  Mohini,  and  asked  him  to  come  with  his  friends  to
Enghien.

Mr.  Oakley  is  positive  that  no  one  was  in  his  own  roojn  but  himself  when
Mr.  Iveightley  entered.  He  believes  that  Babula  was  in  a small  rvashroom
between  the  two  bedrooms,  and  is  certain  that  Babula  was  on  the  same  flat.
Mr.  Oakley  volunteered  the  remark  that  as  a tiuestion  of  strict  evidence,  the
•case  was  vitiated  by  the  presence  of  Babula  in  the  neighbourhood.

The  two  bedrooms  and  washroom  opened  on  the  same  side  into  a
passage,  and  Mr.  Mohini  was  in  a sitting-room  on  the  other  side  of  the
passage.  The  natural  way  of  ijassing  from  one  bedroom  to  the  other  was
■along  the  passage  past  tlie  washroom.

In  a later  conversation  I learnt  from  Mr.  Oakley  that  as  Mr.  Keightley
returned  to  his  room,  Mr.  Mohini  passed  into  Mr.  Keightley’s  room  just  in
front  of  Mr.  Keightley,  and  first  saw  the  letter.  Mr.  Keightley  explained
to  Mr.  Oakley  that  the  letter  was  not  on  the  table  when  he  left  the  room,  as
he  had  been  placing  some  articles  on  the  table,  &c.,  and  must  have  observed
it  had  it  been  there.  Mr.  Oakley  remarked  that  he  thought  it  possible  for
Babula  to  have  slijtped  into  the  room  immediately  after  Mr.  Keightley’s  leav-
ing it,  and  to  have  deposited  the  letter  on  the  table,  and  de2:)arted  without
having  been  seen  in  the  act.

Account  by  Mr.  B.  Keightley,  B.A.  (Camb.).

In  reply  to  my  inrpiiries  (June  24th,  1885)  : — Mr.  Keightley  says  that  he
was  living  in  the  rooms  at  the  time,  but  that  Mr.  Oakley  arrived  unexpectedly,
Mr.  Keightley  being  unaware  that  Mr.  Oakley  was  even  in  Paris.  Mr.
Oakley  had  not  been  to  the  rooms  previously.  Mr.  Keiglitley  heard  his
.name  called  and  left  his  own  room  to  inquire  if  Mr.  Oakley  had  called  him.
He  jiroceeded  to  the  room  where  Mr.  Oakley  was  engaged.  There  were
two  ways  of  entering  this  room  after  passing  a short  distance  along  the
passage  upon  which  Mr.  Keightley’s  room  opened.

One  way  was  through  the  corner  of  a small  dressing-room  between  Mr.
Keightley’s  room  and  tlie  room  where  Mr.  Oakley  then  was  ; another  way
was  through  the  di’awing-room  where  Mr.  Mohini  was  seated.  Mr.
Keightley  is  unalde  to  recollect  certainly  which  way  was  taken  by  him,  and
he  cannot  be  certain  whether  he  actually  went  into  Mr.  Oakley’s  room,  but
thinks  he  went  just  inside.  After  asking  Mr.  Oakley  whether  he  had
called  his  (Mr.  Keightley’s)  name  [Bert],  and  receiving  Mr.  Oakley’s  reply  in
the  negative,  he  returned  immediately  to  his  own  room,  and  Mr.  Mohini
followed  him  on  his  return.  Mr.  Keightley  on  returning  had  entered  his
room  and  had  not  quite  passed  the  table  when  hlr.  Mohini,  who  was  barely
inside  the  door,  called  out.  He  was  about  3 paces  from  the  table.  Mr.
Keightley  turned  round  and  saw  the  letter  lying  on  the  table,  between  him-
self and  the  door,  and  at  such  a distance  from  him  that  he  could  reach  the
letter  by  leaning  over.  Mr.  Mohini  had  not  touched  the  letter,  which  was
lying  squarely  on  the  table  as  though  neatly  placed  there.  The  letter  was
beyond  the  reach  of  Mr.  Mohini.  Mr.  Keightley  had  been  looking  for  some
object  just  before  leaving  his  room,  and  had  cleared  that  end  of  the  table


On  Phenomena  connected  icith  Theomplnj.


357


where  the  letter  appeared,  placing  moreover  his  ring  and  eyeglasses  upon
the  table  ; so  that  he  is  quite  certain  that  the  letter  was  not  on  the  table-
when  he  left  his  room.  He  feels  sure  also  that  the  letter  must  ha,ve  attracted
his  attention  had  it  been  on  the  table  when  he  entered  his  room  on  returning.
Mr.  Keightley  went  back  to  Mr.  Oakley  to  ask  him  to  come  and  see  the-
letter,  which  until  then  he  thinks  had  remained  untouched,  hlr.  Keightlejr
thinks  that  Babula  was  in  the  dressing-room  at  the  time.  This  dressing-
room  opened  into  the  corner  room  where  Mr.  Oakley  w'as,  but  not  into  Mr.
Keightley’s  room.

After  I had  read  Mr.  Oakley’s  account  to  him,  Mr.  Keightley  thought  he
coidd  negative  the  possibility  referred  to  by  Mr.  Oakley,  that  Babula  could
have  placed  the  letter  on  the  table.  Mr.  Keightley  thinks  the  time  of  his
absence  was  so  short  that  Babula  could  not  have  escaped  being  seen  by  him,
somewhere  in  the  room  or  in  the  passage,  while  ho  was  returning.

Account  written  by  Mr.  Keightley,  in  June,  1884.

On  the  following  day,  [May  14th,]  Madame  Blavatsky  and  hlr.  Judge
being  both  at  Enghien,  where  they  had  gone  the  previous  day,  I was  sitting
about  10.30  a.m.,  in  the  salon  chatting  with  Mr.  Oakley  and  Mi-.  Mohini.
We  had  decided  not  to  go  to  Enghien,  and  the  subject  had  been  dropped,
when  I felt  a sudden  impulse  to  go  there.  This  suggestion  of  a change  of
plan  was  accepted  after  a little  hesitation,  Mr.  Mohini  having  the  same
feeling.  I therefore  -went  to  our  room  to  get  ready,  and  was  engaged  in
arranging  my  toilette  when  I thought  I heard  Mr.  Oakley  calling  me.  Going,
out  into  the  passage,  just  outside  the  door,  I called  to  know  what  he  wanted.
Finding  that  he  had  not  called  me,  I re-entered  the  room,  Mr.  Mohini
following  me  from  the  salcn  at  a yard  or  two’s  distance.  I had  reached  the
middle  of  the  room  when  I heard  him  calling  me  from  the  doorway,  and
turning  round  I saw  him  standing  on  the  threshold.  I must  here  state  that
needing  a certain  article  which  I thought  was  on  the  table,  I had  thoroughly
searched  everything  on  it,  and  had  cleared  a space  at  the  etid  next  the  door
to  put  my  ring  and  glasses  on.

On  turning  lound  then,  I at  once  noticed  a Chinese  envelope  lying  as  if
carefullj'  placed  there,  on  the  cleared  end  of  the  table  next  the  door.  This
envelope  I at  once  recognised  as  being  like  those  used  by  Maliatma  K.  H. ,
and  also  recognised  his  writing  in  the  address.  Having  called  my  friend  Mr.
Oakley,  Mr.  Mohini  opened  the  envelope,  whicli  contained  a long  letter  from
his  Master  K.H.  (of  3 pages),  and  concluded  with  an  order  to  him  to  take
Mr.  Oakley  and  myself  with  him  to  Enghien  for  a few  hours,  thus  showing
an  acquaintance  with  the  question  previously  under  discussion,  and  also  the
fact,  known  only  to  three  or  four  persons  in  London,  and  about  the  same-
number  in  Paris,  that  my  friend  Mr.  Oakley  was  then  in  Paris  and  actually
in  the  house . Mr.  Oakley  was  staying  with  some  friends  about  20  minutes
walk  distant,  while  he  was  in  Paris.


THE  .STRANGE  VOICE.

[The  following  passage  from  Mr.  Mohini's  deposition  may  also  be
worthy  of  note.]

Mr.  Mohini:  There  is  one  other  circumstance  thatl  think  I ought  to  state.
It  seemed  to  me  a crucial  test.  1 was  seated  one  night  with  Madame  Blavatskj^


358


Appendices  to  Mr.  Hodgsons  Report


in  lier  room.  I had  addressed  a certain  question  to  one  of  the  Mahatmas,
and  Madame  Blavatsky  told  me  I would  have  a reply,  and  should  hear  the
Mahatma’s  own  voice.

Mr.  Gorney  : Had  you  asked  him  before  ?

Mr.  Mohini  : Yes,  by  letter.  1 had  asked  him  the  question  ; to  which
Madame  Blavatsky  said  I should  have  a reply  in  his  own  voice.  Madame
Blavatsky  said,  “You  shall  hear  his  voice.”  I thought  how  should  I know
that  it  was  not  Madame  Blavatsky  ventriloquising.  I began  to  hear  some
peculiar  kind  of  voice  speaking  to  me  from  one  corner  of  the  room.  It  was
like  the  voice  of  somebody  coming  from  a great  distance  through  a long
tube.  It  was  as  distinct  as  if  a person  were  speaking  in  the  room,  but  it  had
the  i^eculiar  characteristic  I have  indicated.  As  soon  as  I heard  the  voice  I
wanted  to  satisfy  myself  that  Madame  Blavatsky  was  not  ventriloquising.
A word  was  uttered  and  Madame  Blavatsky  would  repeat  it.  It  so
happened  that  before  she  had  finished  speaking  I heard  another  word
uttered  l^y  the  voice,  so  that  at  one  and  the  same  time  there  were  two
voices  speaking  to  me.  Madame  Blavatsky,  by  whose  side  I was  seated,
repeated  the  words  for  no  particular  reason,  so  far  as  I am  aware,  and  I
■came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Mahatma  had  known  what  my  thoughts
were.

[Concerning  this  incident,  I need  only  remind  the  reader  of  the  hollow  in
the  wall,  whicli  was  near  the  corner  of  Madame  Blavatsky’s  room.  The
confederate  may  have  been  Babula,  previously  instructed  in  the  reply,  and
with  a mango  leaf  in  his  mouth  to  disguise  his  voice.]


APPENDIX  VIII.


EXPERIENCES  OF  MR.  RAMASWAMIER.

As  considerable  importance  has  been  attached  to  the  experiences  of  Mr.
Ramaswamier,  it  will  be  best  to  give  the  reader  full  opportunity  of  judging
for  himself  what  they  come  to.  His  first  sight  of  a “Mahatma”  is  described
as  follows  (“Hints  on  Esoteric  Theosophy,”  No.  1,  pp.  72-73): —

[Certificate.]

“Bombay,  December  28th,  9p.m.,  1881.

“The  undersigned,  returning  a few  moments  since  from  a carriage  ride
with  Madame  Blavatsky,  saw,  as  the  carriage  approached  the  house,  a man
upon  the  balcony  over  the  porte  cochere,  leaning  against  the  balustrade,  and
with  the  moonlight  shining  full  upon  him.  He  was  dressed  in  white,  and
wore  a white  Fehta  on  his  head.  His  beard  was  black,  and  his  long  black
hair  hung  to  his  breast.  Olcott  and  Damodar  at  once  recognised  him  as  the
‘Illustrious.’*-  Be  raised  his  hand  and  dropped  a letter  to  us.  Olcott  jumped
from  the  carriage  and  recovered  it.  It  was  written  in  Tibetan  characters,
and  signed  with  his  familiar  cipher.  It  was  a message  to  Ramaswamier,  in
reply  to  a letter  (in  a closed  envelope)  which  he  had  written  to  the  Brother
a short  time  before  we  went  out  for  the  ride.  M.  Coulomb,  who  was  reading

*A  name  by  which  Colonel  Olcott’s  Chohaii  is  known  amongst  us. — H.X.


On  Phenomena  connected  icifJi  Theosophy.


359


inside  the  house,  and  a short  distance  from  the  balcony,  neither  saw  nor
heard  any  one  pass  through  the  apartment,  and  no  one  else  was  in  the
bungalow,  except  Madame  Coulomb,  who  was  asleep  in  her  bedroom.

“Upon  descending  from  the  carriage,  our  whole  party  immediately  went
upstairs,  but  the  Brother  had  disappeared.

“H.  S.  Olcott.

“DamodarK.  Mavalaxkar.”

“The  undersigned  further  certifies  to  Mr. that  from  the  time  when

he  gave  the  note  to  Madame  Blavatsky  until  the  Brother  dropped  the  answer
from  the  balcony,  she  was  not  out  of  his  sight.

“ S.  Ramaswamiek,  F.T.S.,  B.A.

“ District  Registrar  of  Assurances,  Tinnevelly.

“P.S. — Babula  was  below  in  the  porte-cochere,  waiting  to  open  tho
carriage  door,  at  the  time  when  the  Brother  dropped  the  letter  from  above.
The  coachman  also  saw  him  distinctly.

“S.  Ramaswamiek.

“Damodae  K.  Mavalahkab.

“H.  S.  Olcoit.”

The  following  is  Mr.  Ramaswamier's  account  of  what  subsequently
occurred  to  him  in  the  North,  published  in  The  Theosophist  for  Decembei’,
1882,  pp.  67-69.  It  is  abridged  from  “How  a ‘ Chela ’fouxi)  his  ‘Guru.'”
(Being  extracts  from  a private  letter  to  Damodar  K.  Mavalankar,  Joint
Recording  Secretary  of  the  Theosopliical  Society.)

“When  we  met  last  at  Bombay  I told  you  what  had  happened  to  me  at
Tinnevelly.  My  health  having  been  disturbed  by  official  work  and  worry,  I
applied  for  leave  on  medical  certificate  and  it  was  duly  granted.  One  day  in
September  last,  while  I was  reading  in  my  room,  I was  ordered  by  the  audible

voice  of  my  blessed  Guru,  M IMaharsi,  to  leave  all  and  proceed

immediately  to  Bombay,  whence  I had  to  go  in  search  of  IMadame
Blavatsky  wherever  I could  find  her  and  follow  her  ■wherever  she
■went.  Without  losing  a moment,  I closed  up  all  my  affairs  and  left  the
station.”  Mr.  Ramaswamier  then  describes  how  after  journeying  about,  lie
at  last  found  Madame  Blavatsky  at  Chandernagore,  and  followed  her  to
Darjeeling.  “ The  first  days  of  her  arrival  Madame  Blavatsky  was  living
at  the  house  of  a Bengalee  gentleman,  a Theosophist,  was  refusing  to  see
any  one ; and  jireparmg,  as  I thought,  to  go  again  somewhere  on  the  border.s
of  Tibet.  To  all  our  importunities  wo  could  get  only  this  answer  from  her  ;
that  ive  had  no  business  to  stick  to  and  follow  her,  that  she  did  not  want  us,
and  that  she  had  no  right  to  disturb  the  Mahatmas  with  all  sorts  of  questions
that  concerned  only  the  questioners,  for  they  knew  their  own  business  best.
In  despaii’ J determined,  come  ichat  might,  to  cross  the  frontier,  tYhich  is  about
a dozen  miles  from  here,  and  find  the  Mahatmas,  or — Die.”  He  describes
how  he  started  on  October  5th,  crossed  the  river  ‘ ‘ wliich  forms  the  boundarj^
between  the  British  and  Sikkhim  territories,”  walked  on  till  dark,  spent
the  night  in  a wayside  hut,  and  on  the  following  morning  continued  his
journey.

“It  was,  I think,  between  Sand  9 a.m.  and  I was  following  the  road
to  the  town  of  Sikkhim  whence,  I ■was  assured  by  the  peojde  1 met  rti  the


360


ApjKndiccs  to  3Ir.  Hodgson's  Report


road,  I could  cross  over  to  Tibet  easily  in  my  pilgrim’s  garb,  when  I suddenly
saw  a solitary  horseman  galloping  towards  me  from  the  opposite  direction.
From  his  tall  stature  and  the  expert  way  he  managed  the  animal,  I thought
he  was  some  military  ofheer  of  the  Sikkhim  Rajah.  Now,  I thought,  am  I
caught  ! He  will  ask  me  for  my  pass  and  what  business  I have  on  the  inde-
pendent territoiy  of  Sikkhim,  and,  perhaps,  have  me  arrested  and — sent  back,
if  not  worse.  But,  as  he  ai^proached  me,  he  reined  the  steed.  I looked  at
and  recognised  him  instantly.  . . I was  in  the  awful  jiresence  of  him,  of

the  same  Mahatma,  my  own  revered  Guru  whom  I had  seen  before  in  his
astral  body,  on  the  balcony  of  the  Theosophical  headquarters  ! It  was  he,  the
‘ Himalayan  Brother  ’ of  the  ever  memorable  night  of  December  last,  whO'
had  so  kindly  droi^ped  a letter  in  answer  to  one  I had  given  in  a sealed
envelope  to  Madame  Blavatsky — whom  I had  never  for  one  moment  during
the  interval  lost  sight  of — but  an  hour  or  so  before  ! The  very  same  instant
saw  me  prostrated  on  the  ground  at  his  feet.  I arose  at  his  command  and,
leisurely  looking  into  his  face,  I forgot  myself  entirely  in  the  con-
templation of  the  image  I knew  so  well,  having  seen  his  portrait  (the  one  in
Colonel  Olcott’s  possession)  a number  of  times.  I knew  not  what  to  say : joy
and  reverence  tied  my  tongue.  The  majesty  of  his  countenance,  which
seemed  to  me  to  be  the  impersonation  of  power  and  thought,  held  me  rapt  in
awe.  I was  at  last  face  to  face  with  ‘ the  Mahatma  of  the  Himavat  ’ and  he
was  no  myth,  no  ' creation  of  the  imagination  of  a medium,'  as  some  scej^tics
suggested.  It  was  no  night  dream  ; it  is  between  nine  and  ten  o’clock  of  the
forenoon.  There  is  the  sun  shining  and  silently  witnessing  the  scene  from
above.  I see  Him  before  me  in  flesh  and  blood  ; and  he  speaks  to  me  in
accents  of  kindness  and  gentleness.  What  more  do  I want?  My  excess  of
happiness  made  me  dumb.  Nor  was  it  until  a few  moments  later  that  I was
drawn  to  utter  a few  words,  encouraged  by  his  gentle  tone  and  speech.  His-
complexion  is  not  as  fair  as  that  of  Mahatma  Koot  Hoomi ; but  never  have  I
seen  a countenance  so  handsome,  a stature  so  tall  and  so  majestic.  As  in  his
portrait,  he  wears  a short  black  beard,  and  long  black  hair  hanging  down  tO'
his  breast  ; only  his  dress  was  different.  Instead  of  a white,  loose  robe  he  wore
a yellow  mantle  lined  with  fur,  and  on  his  head,  instead  of  a pagri,  a yellow
Tibetan  felt  cap,  as  I have  seen  some  Bhootanese  wear  in  this  country.  When
the  first  moments  of  rapture  and  surprise  were  over,  and  I calmly  compre-
hended the  situation,  I had  a long  talk  with  him.  He  told  me  to  go  n»
further,  for  I would  come  to  grief.  He  said  I should  wait  jiatiently  if  I
wanted  to  become  an  accepted  Chela  : that  many  were  those  who  offered
themselves  as  candidates,  but  that  only  a very  few  were  found  worthy  ; none
were  rejected — but  all  of  them  tried,  and  most  found  to  fail  signally,

especially and . Some,  instead  of  being  accepted  and  jiledged  this

year,  were  now  thrown  off  for  a year The  Mahatma,

I found,  speaks  veiy  little  English — or  at  least  it  so  seemed  to  me — and
sjyokc  to  me  in  my  mother  tongue — Tamil.  He  told  me  that  if  the  Chohan  per-
mitted Madame  Blavatsky  to  go  to  Pari-jong  next  year,  then  I could  come
with  her.  . . . The  Bengalee  Theosophists  who  followed  the  ‘ Upasika

(Madame  Blavatsky)  would  see  that  she  was  right  in  trying  to  dissuade  them
from  following  her  now.  I asked  the  blessed  Mahatma  whether  I could  tell
what  I saw  and  heard  to  others.  He  replied  in  the  affirmative,  and  that,
moreover,  I would  do  well  to  write  to  you  and  describe  all.


On  Phenomena  connected  with  Theosophy.


361


“ I must  impress  upon  your  mind  the  whole  situation  and  ask  you  to  keep
well  in  view  that  what  I saw  was  not  the  mere  ‘ aj^irearance  ’ only,  the  astral
body  of  the  Mahatma,  as  we  saw  him  at  Bombay,  but  the  living  man,  in  his
own  physical  body.  He  was  pleased  to  say  when  T ofl’ered  my  farewell  namas-
hnrams  (prostration)  that  he  approached  the  British  Territory  ■to  see  the
Upasika.  . . . Before  he  left  me,  two  more  men  came  on  horseback,  his

attendants,  I suppose,  probably  Ghelas,  for  they  were  dressed  like  lama-
yylongs,  and  both,  like  himself,  wdth  long  hair  streaming  down  their  backs.
They  followed  the  Mahatma,  as  he  left,  at  a gentle  trot.  For  over  an  hour  I
stood  gazing  at  the  place  that  he  had  just  quitted,  and  then  I slowly  retraced
my  steps.  Now  it  was  that  I found  for  the  first  time  that  my  long  boots  had
pinched  me  in  my  leg  in  several  places,  that  I had  eaten  nothing  since  the
day  before,  and  that  I was  too  w'eak  to  walk  further.  My  whole  body  was
aching  in  every  limb.  At  a little  distance  I saw  petty  traders  with  country
ponies,  taking  burden.  I hired  one  of  these  animals.  In  the  afternoon  I
came  to  the  Bungit  River  and  crossed  it.  A bath  in  its  cool  waters  renovated
me.  I purchased  some  fruits  in  the  only  bazaar  there  and  ate  them  heartily.
I took  another  horse  immediately  and  reached  Darjeeling  late  in  the  evening.
I could  neither  eat,  nor  sit,  nor  stand.  Every  part  of  my  body  was  aching.
My  absence  had  seemingly  alarmed  Madame  Blavatsky.  She  scolded  me  for
my  rash  and  mad  attempt  to  try  to  go  to  Tibet  after  this  fashion.  When  I
entered  the  house  I found  with  Madame  Blavatsky,  Babu  Parbati  Churn  Roy,
Deputy  Collector  of  Settlements  and  Superintendent  of  Dearah  Survey,  and
his  Assistant,  Babu  Kanty  Bhushan  Sen,  both  members  of  our  Society.  At
their  prayer  and  Madame  Blavatsky’s  command,  I recounted  all  that  had
happened  to  me,  reserving,  of  course,  my  jjrivate  conversation  wdth  the
Mahatma.  . , . They  were  all,  to  say  the  least,  astounded  ! . . After

all,  she  will  not  go  this  year  to  Tibet  ; for  which  I am  sure  she  does  not  care,
since  she  saw  our  Masters,  thus  effecting  her  only  object.  But  we,
unfortunate  people  ! We  lose  our  only  chance  of  going  and  offering  our
worship  to  the  ‘ Himalayan  Brothers’  who — I knoiv — will  not  soon  cross  over
to  British  territory,  if  ever  again.

“ I write  to  you  this  letter,  my  dearest  Brother,  in  order  to  show  how
right  we  were  in  protesting  against  ‘ H.X.’s’  letter  in  7/te  Theosophist.  The
ways  of  the  Mahatmas  may  appear,  to  our  limited  vision,  strange  and  unjust,
even  cruel — as  in  the  case  of  our  Brothers  here,  the  Bengalee  Babus,  some  of
whom  are  now  laid  up  with  cold  and  fever  and  perhaj^s  murmuring  against
the  Brothers,  forgetting  that  they  never  asked  or  personally  permitted  them  to
come,  but  that  they  had  themselves  acted  very  rashly.

“And  now  that  I have  seen  the  Mahatma  in  the  flesh,  and  heard  his  living
voice,  let  no  one  dare  to  say  to  me  that  the  Brothers  do  nol  exist.  Come  now
whatever  will,  death  has  no  fear  for  me,  nor  the  vengeance  of  enemies  ;
for  what  I know,  I Know  !

“ You  will  please  show  this  to  Colonel  Olcott,  who  first  opened  my
eyes  to  the  Gnana  Marga,  and  who  will  be  happy  to  hear  of  the  success
(more  than  I deserve)  that  has  attended  me.  I shall  give  him  details  in
person.

“ S.  Rajiaswamier,  F.T.S.

2 A


“Darjeeling,  October 7th,  1882.”


362


Appendices  to  Mr.  Hodgson  s Report


In  reference  to  the  above  incident  on  p.  76  of  the  same  number  of  The
27ieosop/iiA'i,  Mr.  Ramaswamier  says  that  he  recognised  tlie  Mahatma  “on
account  of  his  great  resemblance  to  a portrait  in  Colonel  Olcott's  possession,
which  I have  ref)eatedly  seen.”

Now  in  Mr.  Ramaswamier’s  first  exf)erience,  that  of  the  figure  on  the
balcony,  “ the  whole  force  of  the  evidence,”  as  we  remarked  in  our  First
Rej^ort,  “ depends  on  what  value  can  be  attached  to  a recognition  by  moon-
light of  a ijerson  on  a balcony  above  you.  Apart  from  this  recognition,
personation  through  the  agency  of  the  Coulombs  would  apjjear  to  be
peculiarly  easy  in  this  case.”  Mr.  Ramaswamier’s  account  of  it,  in  reply  to
iny  rpiestions,  is  as  follows  : —

“ I had  been  a member  of  the  Society  about  two  months,  when  I went  to
the  headquarters  at  Bombay.  After  being  there  2 or  3 days,  Madame  came
in  to  me  one  morning  and  said  I was  thinking  of  something  special,  and
that  she  had  Master’s  orders  to  tell  me  to  i^ut  it  in  writing  and  give  it  to  her.
I wrote  a letter  during  the  day.  Madame  asked  me  to  accompany  her  for  a
drive — somewhere  between  G and  7 p.m.  As  we  went  downstairs  to  get
into  the  carriage,  I gave  her  the  letter.  She  put  it  into  her  pocket,  and  we
immediately  got  into  the  carriage.  We  got  out  at  the  telegraph-office,  in
order  that  a telegram  might  be  sent  to  congratulate  some  friends  who  were
being  married.  Either  the  Colonel  or  Damodar  went  alone  to  the  telegraph-
office,  but  not  out  of  my  sight.

“ Madame  then  said  she  felt  the  presence  of  the  Masters  at  headquarters,
and  wanted  to  go  back  directly.  We  usually  walked  iqi  the  road  towards
the  house,  but  on  this  occasion  Madame  would  not  allow  us  to  leave  the
carriage.  As  the  carriage  neared  the  portico,  I saw  the  figure  of  a man
leaning  on  the  railing  of  the  balcony  with  a letter  between  finger  and
thumb.  We  all  remained  motionless  for  a short  time,  tlie  figure  on  the
balcony  also.  The  letter  was  then  thrown  down  by  the  figure.  It  fell
near  the  carriage,  on  the  ground.  Colonel  Olcott  got  out  and  took  it  up,
and  we  all  then  ran  up  to  the  balcony.  But  no  one  was  there.  The  night
was  bright  moonlight.  The  figure  was  tall,  about  Gft.,  well-built,  and  the
face  very  handsome.  The  eyes  were  very  calm  and  motionless,  giving  an
asjiect  of  serenity.  The  hair  was  dark  and  long,  the  beard  was  short.  He
had  a fehta  on  his  head,  and  did  not  speak.  I had  never  seen  the
figure  before.  Afterwards  I recognised  the  resemblance  between  this  figure
and  the  portrait  in  possession  of  the  Colonel,  which  I had  not  previously
seen.

“ The  letter  was  addressed  to  me,  and  contained  words  to  the  effect  that
every  man  must  have  his  own  deserts,  and  that  if  I deserved  well  of  the
Mahatmas  they  would  assist  me  ; also  that  my  desire  to  become  a pupil  had
not  been  long  in  existence,  and  that  I should  wait  to  see  whether  it  w'as  a
mere  passing  thought  or  not.  (In  my  letter  I had  expressed  a desire,
among  other  things,  to  become  a piqjil.)  This  was  the  whole  substance  of
the  letter,  in  my  own  words.  Time — betw^een  7 and  8 p.m.”

During  my  examination  of  Madame  Blavatsky,  concerning  some  of  the
letters  in  Madame  Coulomb’s  pamphlet.  Colonel  Olcott  gave  an  account  of
the  letter  which  Mr.  Ramaswamier  had  given  to  Madame  Blavatsky.


0)1  PJie)io)]iena  mmccfcd  uith  Theomphy.


363


According  to  his  account,  hlr.  Ramaswamier  gave  the  letter  to  Madame
Blavatsky  in  her  own  rooms,  shortly  before  dinner.  The  letter  was
placed  by  her  on  the  table,  and  in  a few  minutes,  on  looking  for  it,  it  could
not  be  found.  Madame  Blavatsky  confirmed  this  account  ; hlr.  Damodar
also  assented  to  it.  Madame  Blavatsky  was  alone  with  Mr.  Ramaswamier  at
the  time,  but  Colonel  Olcott  and  Mr.  Damodar  professed  to  have  heard  the
details  shortly  after.

I asked  Madame  Coulomb  if  she  knew  anything  of  this  letter.  She  said
that  hladame  Blavatsky  retired  to  the  bath-room,  where  she  (Madame
Coulomb)  was ; that  Madame  Blavatsky  was  in  a great  hurry,  saying
“ Quick  ! Quick  ! ” and  wrote  the  reply  in  a few  seconds,  which  she  gave  to
Madame  Coulomb,  to  be  dropped  by  M.  Coulomb  disguised  as  a Mahatma.
There  was  am2de  time  for  M.  Coulomb  to  have  doffed  his  disguise,
and  to  be  found  reading  “a  short  distance  from  the  balcony,”
and  I may  remark  that  an  expression  used  by  Mr.  Ramaswamier
seems  to  me  especially  applicable  to  the  eyes  of  a dummy  head,  like  that
exhibited  tc  me  by  M.  Coiilomb.  “The  eyes  were  very  calm  and  motion-
less, giving  an  asjject  of  serenity.”  The  “ Mahatma  ” communication  is
described  as  “written  in  Thibetan  characters,”  and  Mr.  Hume  has  informed
me  that  he  ascertained  that  Madame  Blavatsky  had  some  knowledge  of
Thibetan,  though  how  far  her  knov\dedge  extends  he  was  unable  to  say,  not
being  himself  a Thibetan  scholar.

I have  had  many  conversations  with  Mr.  Ramaswamier,  and  I questioned
him  closely  concerning  the  “Mahatma”  he  saw  on  the  borders  of  Thibet.
A loose  robe  covered  most  of  the  Mahatma’s  body.  The  feet  and  legs  were
not  bare.  The  feet  were  enveloj^ed  in  a sort  of  leather  used  in  that  district.
The  Mahatma  talked  to  him  for  about  half-an-hour,  spoke  to  him  of  Chelas
who  had  failed,  of  the  duties  of  a Chela, — told  him  he  should  work  for  the
Theosoi^hical  Society,  and  gave  him  certain  communications  by  which  per-
sons in  high  standing  in  the  Society  could  be  assured  he  had  seen  the  Master
himself.  Among  these  f)ersons  was  Colonel  Olcott,  and  I understood  that  the
knowledge  communicated  im^died  something  equivalent  to  a piassword.

Mr.  Ramaswamier  could  not  describe  the  Chelas,  ■who  passed  quickly  on
horseback.

I see  no  improbability  in  su2:>2)osing  that  the  Mahatma  was  personated  by
one  of  Madame  Blavatsky’s  confederates,  and  it  is  not  imjiossible  that  Mr.
Babajee  and  Mr.  Casava  Pillai  may  have  been  concerned  in  the  scheme,  as
Madame  Coulomb  im^dies  in  her  pamphlet.  They  are  both  familiar  ■ivith
districts  where  Tamil  is  commonly  s23oken.  Mr.  Babajee  had  not  been
accused  of  actually  playing  the  Mahatma  on  that  occasion,  but  he  was
nevertheless  2)articularly  anxious  to  2)rove  to  me  how  absurd  it  was  that  he,
the  little  Mr.  Babajee,  could  be  mistaken  for  a majestic  Mahatma.  Mr.
Casava  Pillai,  who  had  been  on  a contemporaneous  visit  to  the  North,  I
have  not  had  an  op2}ortunity  of  cross-examining  ; but  I obtained  incidentally
some  curious  information  from  Mr.  Muruganunthum  Pillai,  who  was  2^resent
when  Madame  Blavatsky  was  conversing  with  his  brother-in-law,  Mr.
Casava,  after  the  latter’s  return  from  the  North  and  when  he  was  on  a visit
to  Madras.  Madame  Blavatsky  had  “chaffed”  Mr.  Casava  Pillai  on  the
loss  of  his  beard.  Upon  inquiry  I learnt  that  Mr.  Casava  Pillai  habitually

’ 2 A 2


364


Appendices  to  2Ir.  Hodgson's  Report


wore  no  beard  ; he  seems,  therefore,  to  have  temporarily  acquired  a beard
in  the  course  of  his  journey  north  ! Mr.  Damodar,  who  was  present  when  I
was  questioning  IMr.  Muruganimthum  Pillai,  was  evidently  disconcerted
when  this  piece  of  suggestive  conversation  was  innocently  reproduced  by  the-
witness.  It  a])peared  to  us  in  our  First  Report  that  “ hallucination”  would
be  an  easier  hypothesis  to  aiqjly  to  ]\Ir.  Raniaswamier’s  experience
than  “i)ersonation”  ; but  my  acquaintance  with  Mr.  Ramaswamier,  taken
with  the  evidence  for  the  reverence  displayed  by  the  natives  towards  the
“ Mahatmas,”  which  would  interfere  with  any  careful  scrutiny,  has.
convinced  me  that  he  might  easily  have  been  deceived  by  a confederate  ot
Madame  Blavatsky’s  in  disguise.


APPENDIX  IX.


EVIDENCE  OF  MR.  MARTANDRAO  B.  NAGNATH,  &e.

From  “ Hints  on  Esoteric  Theosophy,”  No.  1,  p.  103.

“ On  another  night  a Brother  came  in  his  owir  physical  body,  walking
through  the  lower  garden  (attached  to  Colonel  Olcott’s  bungalow)  and  stood
quiet.  Madame  Blavatsky  then  went  down  the  wooden  staircase  leading
into  the  garden.  He  shook  hands  with  her  and  gave  her  a jracket.  After
a short  time  the  Brother  disappeared  on  the  spot,  and  Madame  coming  up  the
stairs  opened  the  packet  and  found  in  it  a letter  from  Allahabad.  Wc  saw
the  envelope  was  cpiite  blank,  i.e.,  unaddressed,  but  it  bore  a triangular
stamp  of  Allahabad  Post  Office  of  December  the  3rd,  1881,  and  also  a circular
postal  stanqr  of  the  Bombay  Post  Office  of  the  same  date,  viz.,  3rd  December.
The  two  cities  are  860  miles  apart.

“ I have  seen  letters,  or  rather  enveloires  containing  letters,  coming  or
falling  from  the  air  in  different  places,  without  an3drody’s  contact,  in  pre-
sence of  both  Theosophists  and  strangers.  Their  contents  related  to  subjects
that  had  beerr  the  topics  of  our  conversation  at  the  moment.

“ Now  I aver  in  good  faith  I saw  the  Brothers  of  the  first  section  and
jdienomena,  in  such  places  and  times,  and  under  such  circumstances,  that
there  could  be  no  jmssibility  of  anybody  j)laying  a trick.

‘ ‘ M.mitaxdeao  Baba.ji  Nagnath.

“Bombay,  14th  February,  1882.”

In  our  First  RejJort  we  said,  with  regard  to  this  statement,  that  we
thought  it  mu.st  “ be  regarded  as  of  small  value,  because  postmarks  can  be
imitated,  and  it  seems  improbable  that  an  unaddressed  letter  would  have
been  stamped  at  the  post-office  and  not  subsequently  missed.  It  is,  of
course,  curious  that  a Brother  .should  seem  to  ‘disappeiron  the  si^ot,’  bub
j\[r.  Martandrao  docs  not  seem  to  have  been  very  near.  It  seems  curious  in
another  way,  that  the  ‘brother’  should  think  it  worth  while  to  have  the
letter  scami)ed  at  the  post-office,  when  he  was  going  to  deliver  it  himself.”
Its  value  has  cerfiiinly  not  been  increased  by'  Mr.  Martandrao’s  later  account
in  reply  to  my  inquiries.  He  said

“ One  day'  we  were  sitting  in  the  small  verandah  at  Bombay.  There  were
present  Madame,  Bhavani  Shankar,  Mullwarman  Nathwarman,  and  myself.


On  Phenomena  connected  with  Thcompluj.


36)


We  were  talking  on  various  subjects  witli  Madame.  Madame's  attention  on
a sudden  was  abstracted.  Slie  stood  ujj  and  began  to  stare  far  towards  the
sea.  After  looking  for  a while,  she  sat  down  and  went  on  talking.  This
Iiajjpened  twice  or  tludce.  Tliere  was  no  moonlight  ; a clear  starlight  night.
Talking  was  going  on.  On  a sudden,  at  about  10  or  11  at  night,  a white
clad  figure  was  coming  through  the  garden  from  the  brow  of  the  hill  [down
which.  Colonel  Olcott  interposed,  there  was  no  patli  leading  to  the
common  road  at  the  foot].

“The  figure  wore  a fehta,  seemed  rather  tall,  and  had  a beard.  I could
see  the  man  clearly,  and  could  distinguish  his  fe.atures,  but  did  not  know
him.  He  came  fast  walking  towards  us.  When  he  came  within  G or  7
yards  of  us,  Madame  went  down  the  wooden  staircase,  and  met  the  figure
and  appeared  to  shake  hands  with  him.  I saw  a packet  delivered  by  the
figure  to  Madame.  After  some  minutes’  talk  with  the  figure  Madame
remounted  the  staircase  with  the  packet  in  her  hand,  and  told  us  to  go  into
the  bungalow  and  shut  the  door.  We  went  inside,  closed  the  door,  and  sat
on  a couch  close  to  the  right  of  the  door.  IVe  heard  Madame  talking  outside,
but  we  did  not  Know  the  language.  It  was  not  French  or  English.  After
some  minutes  Madame  came  in  and  showed  us  the  packet.  The  packet  was
intact,  and  had  three  postal  marks,  Calcutta,  Allahabad,  and  Bombay.
[Interrupted  by  Colonel  Olcott,  who  persuaded  him  there  were  only  two
postmarks.]  One  stamjD  was  triangular, — Allahabad.  These  postmarks  were
of  the  same  date.  The  letter  was  without  any  address.  It  was  opened  in  our
presence.  Madame  read  the  letter.  I believe  it  was  from  Mi’.  Sinnett.  It
came  from  Allahabad.”

Colonel  Olcott,  who  was  present  at  this  interview  with  IMr.  Martandra®,
said  there  was  no  path  leading  from  the  brow  of  the  hill  to  the  common  road
at  the  foot.  I found,  however,that  therewere  two  such  paths,  which  appeared
to  be  very  old,  and  which  I definitely  ascertained  were  in  existence  when
Crow's  Nest  Bungalow  formed  the  headquarters  of  the  Society.  Moreover^
I found  upon  trial  that  the  hill  could  be  ascended  where  no  path  had
been  made.

In  ]\Ir.  Martandrao’s  oral  account  there  ajipears  to  be  some  confusion
between  the  incident  quoted  above  from  “Hints  on  Esoteric  Theosophy,”
and  a different  incident,  of  which  the  account  previously  given  by  Mr.
Martandrao  in  the  same  piamphlet,  j).  104,  is  as  follows  ; —

“In  the  month  of  April,  1881,  on  one  dark  night,  while  talking  in
company  with  other  Theosophists  with  Madame  Blavatsky  about  10  p.m.  in
the  open  verandah  of  the  upper  bungalow,  a man,  G feet  in  height,  clad  in
a white  robe,  with  a white  roomed  or  plietta  on  the  head,  made  his  appearance
on  a sudden,  walking  towards  us  through  the  garden  adjacent  to  the  bungalow
fi’om  a point — a precipice — where  there  is  no  path  for  any  one  to  tread.
IMadame  then  rose  up  and  told  us  to  go  inside  the  bungalow.  So  we  went
in,  but  we  heard  Madame  and  he  talking  for  a minute  with  each  other  in  an
Eastern  language  unknown  to  us.  Immediately  after,  we  again  went  out
into  the  verandah,  as  we  were  called,  but  the  Brother  had  disap2)eared.’''

The  same  absurd  statement  that  there  was  no  path  occurs  in  this  account
also.  Mr.  Martandrao  (Clerk  in  Examiner’s  Office  of  Public  Account.s,


.366


Appendices  to  Mi’.  Ilodgsoii's  Ideport


Bombay,)  is,  I believe,  a very  honest  witness,  though  not  gifted  with  a great
amount  of  shrewdness,  and  not  able  to  describe  his  experiences  with  any
fluency  in  English.  It  was  quite  impossible  for  him  to  have  written  the
account  of  his  experiences,  as  it  stands  above  his  name  in  “ Hints  on  Esoteric
Tlieosophy.”  Colonel  Olcott  in  my  presence  has  corrected — as  to  absurd  or
faulty  expressions — the  wiitten  accounts  of  witnesses  ; and  he  may  have
erroneously  “corrected”  Mr.  Martandrao’s  account  in  the  above  particular
concerning  the  jiath,  just  as  he  made  the  addendum  when  Mr.  Martandrae
was  giving  the  oral  account  to  myself.  The  reader  will  see  that  either
account  is  perfectly  valueless  for  proving  that  the  figure  was  other  than  an
ordinary  man, — unless  the  brow  of  the  hill,  accessible  without  difficulty  on  the
farther  side  beyond  the  observation  of  the  witnesses,  were  first  transformed
into  the  summit  of  a pathless  precipice.  I may  here  say  that  the  grounds
which  form  the  environment  of  Crow’s  Nest  Bungalow,  with  their  many
paths  and  easy  hiding-places,  formed  an  admirable  stage  for  the  display
of  “astral  figures,”  which  appear  to  have  been  seen  much  more  frequently  at
Crow’s  Nest  Bungalow  than  elsewhere.  The  next  account  is  interesting  in
the  way  of  suggesting  exactly  how  the  “ astral  figures”  were  pre-arranged
in  that  particular  case  for  the  purpose  of  enabling  the  witnesses  to  testify  tO'
the  existence  of  the  “ Brothers.”

Mr.  Martandrao’s  Account  published  in  “Hints  on  Esoteric  Theosophy,”

p.  105.

“ Similarly,  in  a strong  moonlight  on  another  night,  I,  in  company  with
three  Brother  Theosophists,  was  conversing  with  Madame  Blavatsky.
Madame  Coulomb  was  also  present.  About  8 or  10  yards  distant  from
the  open  verandah  in  which  we  were  sitting,  we  saw  a Brother  known  to  us
as  Koot  Hoomi  Lai  Sing.  He  was  wearing  a white  loose  gown  or  robe,  with
long  wavy  hair  and  a beard  ; and  was  gi’adually  forming,  as  it  were,  in  front
of  a shrub  or  a number  of  shrubs  some  20  or  30  yards  away  from  us,
until  he  stood  to  a full  height.  Madame  Coulomb  was  asked  in  our  presence
by  IMadame  Blavatsky  : ‘ Is  this  good  Brother  a devil  1 ’ as  she  used  to  think
and  say  so  when  seeing  the  Brothers,  and  was  afraid.  She  then  answered  :
‘ No  ; this  one  is  a man.’  He  then  showed  his  full  figure  for  about  2
or  3 minutes,  then  gradually  disajjpeared,  melting  away  into  the  shrub.
On  the  same  night  again,  at  about  11  p.m.,  we,  about  7 or  8 in
number,  were  hearing  a letter  read  to  us,  addressed  to  the  London  Sjuritvaiist
about  our  having  seen  Brothers,  which  one  of  our  number  had  drafted,  and
which  we  were  ready  to  sign.  At  this  instant  Mr.  and  Madame  Coulomb
called  out  and  said:  ‘Here  is  again  our  Brother.’  This  Brother  (Koot
Hoomi  Lai  Sing  again)  was  sometimes  standing  and  walking  in  the  garden
here  and  there,  at  other  times  floating  in  the  air.  He  soon  passed  into  and
was  heard  in  Madame  Blavatsky’s  room  talking  with  her.  On  this  account,
after  we  had  signed  the  letter  to  the  London  Spiritualist,  we  added  a postscript
that  we  had  just  seen  him  again  while  signing  the  letter.  Koot  Hoomi  was
in  his  Maijavi  rupa  on  that  evening.”

Mr.  Martandrao's  account  in  rephj  to  my  inquiries : — “At  about  7 or  8
p.m.,  in  Bombay  headquarters— it  was  either  in  1881  or  1882 — we  were
sitting  in  the  verandah  upstairs,  Bhavani  Shankar,  Padshah  (elder  brother
of  Padshah  in  England),  Madame,  Mulwarman  Nathwarman,  and  Damodar.


On  riicnomena  connected  xdth  Theosophy.


367


We  were  talking  together  wlien  Madame  suddenly  became  abstracted.  She
got  up  and  went  to  the  railing,  and  stood  looking  towards  the  sea.  We
thought  something  would  hai:)pen.  Madame  told  us  to  go  on  talking  ;then  she
sat  down.  Again  we  were  talking.  Again  she  stood  up  ; and  at  once  we  also
stood  up,  and  saw  a figure  in  the  garden  among  the  shrubs,  about  30  yards  off,
on  the  brow  of  the  hill.  It  was  moonlight,  and  the  moonlight  shone  ujion  the
figui'e.  I saw  first  half  a figure,  and  then  a full  figure  approaching  a few
steps,  then  standing.  Then  the  figure  seemed  gradually  to  melt  away.
While  this  figure  was  standing,  Madame  sent  for  Madame  Coulomb  from
downstairs,  as  she  was  always  saying  the  jdace  was  haunted  by  devils.
Madame  Coulomb  came,  and  was  told  to  look  at  the  figure,  and  Aladame
Blavatsky  asked  in  a challenging  tone,  ‘ Is  that  the  devil,  or  a man  ? ’
She  said  quietly,  ‘ This  is  a man,  not  a devil.’  The  figure  was  very  tall,
5|  or  G feet.  The  figure  had  on  a loose  white  gown,  and  wore  a beard.  I
do  not  now  recollect  whether  the  figure  had  a turban,  or  not.  I did  not
recognise  the  person  as  one  whom  I had  known  before.  The  figure  remained
7 or  8 minutes.

“We  went  on  again  talking,  and  at  9 or  9.30  we  went  into  another
verandah,  and  Damodar  and  Padshah  drafted  a reidj^  to  be  sent  to  the  news-
paper Light.  After  about  10  or  12  lines  of  the  draft  were  written,  3 or  4
2.)ersons  signed.  The  rest  were  to  sign,  and  as  we  w^ere  called  to  sign  we
were  told  to  read  the  draft.  IVhile  reading,  our  attention  was  drawn  by
M.  Coulomb,  who  had  come  up,  to  a figiu-e  standing  in  the  garden.  At  that
time  the  moon  had  gone.  We  went  from  the  table  to  the  Venetian
■windows  facing  tow'ards  the  sea,  and  I saw  a figure  in  the  garden,  while
M.  Coulomb  and  others  were  standing  near  me.  The  figure  in  the  garden
was  tall,  about  G feet,  standing  erect  and  majestically,  with  a gowm  on,
wearing  a beard,  but  was  not  so  robust  as  the  previous  figure,  and  with  a
fehta  on  his  head.  Towards  that  figure  I folded  my  hands  in  reverence,
thinking  it  to  be  a Mahatma.  The  figure  stood  for  4 or  5 minutes,  at
about  12  yards  distance,  and  I then  began  to  talk  with  those  near  me,  and
suddenly  heard  Madame’s  servant,  Babula,  shouting  from  the  bungalow.
Madame  went  in  haste  to  the  porch,  and  thence  to  her  own  room.  I then
heard  Madame  talking  with  somebody.  Wlien  I heard  Babula  shout,  1
looked  up  again  for  the  figure,  and  it  was  no  longer  there.  Padshah  and
Damodar  suggested  that  as  we  saw  the  figure  while  we  were  about  to  sign
the  protest  we  should  add  a postscript  to  that  effect.  We  accordingly
did  so.”

With  these  accounts  may  be  compared  the  following  : —

Account  by  Mr.  Buavani  Kao  (Shankar)  printed  in  a compilation  by  Dr.

Hartmann  in  1885.

“ In  a bright  moonlight,  on  the  night  of  the  13th  July,  1881,  wo  were
engaged  in  a talk  with  Madame  Blavatsky  as  usual  in  the  same  verandah.
M.  Coulomb  and  Madame  Coulomb  were  present  on  the  spot,  as  also
all  the  persons  of  the  house,  and  hladame  Blavatsky’s  servant.  While  we
were  conversing  with  Madame  Blavatsky,  the  Alahatma,  kno-^vn  as  Mr.
Sinnett’s  correspondent  and  the  Author  of  the  letters  published  in  ‘ The
Occult  World,’  made  his  appearance  in  his  Mayavi  rupa  or  ‘Double,’


068


Ajipcndices  to  Mr.  Hodgson's  Report


for  a few  minutes.  He  was  clad  in  the  white  dress  of  a ‘Punjabee’  and
wore  a white  turban.  All  of  those  who  were  present  at  that  time  saw  his
handsome  features  clearly  and  distinctly,  as  it  was  a bright  moonlight  night.
On  the  same  night,  a letter  was  drafted  to  the  London  Spiritualist  about
our  having  seen  the  Mahatmas.  As  we  were  reading  the  letter  in  question,
the  same  Mahatma  showed  himself  again.  The  second  time  when  he  made
his  appearance,  he  was  very  near  us,  say  at  the  distance  of  a yard  or  two.
At  that  time,  M.  and  Madame  Coulomb  said,  ‘ Hei’e  is  our  Brother,’
Tiieaning  the  Mahatma.  He  then  came  into  hladame  Blavatsky’s  room  and
•was  heard  talking  with  her  and  then  disappeared.  M.  Coulomb  and
IMadame  Coulomb  signed  the  letter  drafted  to  the  London  Spiritualist
testifying  to  the  fact  of  their  having  seen  the  ‘Mahatma.’  Since  Madame
Coulomb  now  says  that  the  Mahatmas  are  but  ‘ crafty  arrangements  of
muslin  and  bladders,’  and  her  husband  represented  the  Mahatmas,  how  are
we  to  re.concile  this  statement  ■with  the  fact  that  in  the  London  S2nritualist
of  the  19th  August,  1881,  ajq^eared  a letter  signed  by  five  witnesses,  in-
cluding myself,  testifying  to  tlie  fact  of  their  having  seen  a Mahatma,  while
they  were  writing  that  letter  ; and  that  this  document  is  signed  by  both  the
Coulombs  ? There  is,  therefore,  no  doubt  that  they  were  with  the  company
who  signed  the  paper.  Who  was  it  then  that  appeared  on  that  occasion  as
a Maliatma  ? Surely  neither  M.  and  Madame  Coulomb  with  their
‘muslin  and  bladders,’  nor  Madame  Blavatsky's  servant,  wlio  was  also
present,  but  the  ‘ double  ’ of  a person  living  on  the  other  side  of  the
Himalayas.  The  figure  in  coming  up  to  Madame  Blavatsky’s  room  was  seen
by  us  ‘ to  float  through  the  air,’  and  we  also  distinctly  heard  it  talking  to
her,  while  all  of  us,  includiiuj  her  servant  and  the  Coulombs,  were  at  the
time,  together,  in  each  other’s  presence.”

Now  with  regard  to  the  statement  of  Mr.  Bhavani,  who  api>arently  earns
liis  living  as  an  official  of  the  Theosojihical  Society,  being  Inspector  of  the
N.  W.  Theosophical  branches,  I may  remark  that  the  figure  in  question,
although  neither  M.  nor  hladame  Coulomb,  nor  Madame  Blavatsky’s
servant,  may  still  have  been  a confederate  in  disguise.  It  does,  indeed,
appear  somewhat  odd  that  “all  the  persons  of  the  house,  and  Madame
Blavatsky’s  servant”  should  be  “present  on  the  spot”  with  those  Theoso-
phists  who  were  “engaged  in  a talk  with  Madame  Blavatsky,”  and  it  is
rather  unfortinrate  that  this  fact  or  fancy  was  not  exhibited  more  clearly
either  in  the  document  forwarded  to  The  Sjnritnalist  or  in  the  account  given
soon  afteinvards  (February,  1882)  by  Mr.  Martandrao.  A reference  to  7 he
Spiritualist  of  August  19th,  1881,  will  sliow  that  the  Coulombs  signed  onhj
the  postserpt,  which  runs  as  follows  : “As  we  were  reading  the  foregoing
over,  a Brother  was  with  us.  M.  and  Madame  Coulomb,  the  latter
Assistant  Corresponding  Secretary  of  the  Central  Theosoi)hical  Society,  have
seen  him  and  rvill  testify  to  the  same.”  Then  comes  the  statement
“ Tlie  above  postscrq')t  is  correct,”  which  is  signed  by  the  Coulombs.
Obviously,  this  postscrijA  proves  only  that  the  Coulombs  were  with  the
other  witnesses  when  the  alleged  apparition  was  seen  the  second  time.  But
this  has  never  been  denied  by  the  Coulombs.  M.  Coulomb  asserts  that  he
appeared  first  disguised  as  a IMahatma,  that  then  a letter  was  drafted  to
Ije  sent  to  The  S2)iritualist,  and  that  afterwards  Babula  appeared  disguised


On  Phenomena  connected  with  Theosophy.


360


ns  a Mahatma,  for  the  purpose  of  enabling  both  the  Coulombs  to  be  pre-
sent with  the  ether  witnesses,  and  to  add  their  testimony.  These  assertions
are  entirely  in  harmony,  not  only  with  the  document  printed  in  The  Spiri-
tnalist,  but  also  with  the  detailed  accounts  of  the  two  alleged  “astral”
appearances  given  by  Mr.  Martandrao,  in  whose  earlier  account  it  is
plainly  enough  implied  that  M.  Coulomb  was  not  present  with  the  other
witnesses  when  the  first  figure  was  seen,  and  that  Babula  might  have  been
absent  from  the  company  the  whole  evening.  His  later  account  confirms
his  earlier  one  in  these  particulars,  and  appears  to  me  to  be  further  cor-
roborative of  51.  Coidomb’s  assertions.  I think  it,  therefore,  highly  probable
that  the  appearances  were  produced  in  the  way  described  by  51.  Coulomb,
and  I cannot  myself  resist  the  impression  that  the  important  and  palpable
discrepancies  between  the  accounts  given  by  5Ir.  Bhavani  and  5Ir.  5Iar-
tandrao  are  due  to  deliberate  falsification  on  the  part  of  5Ir.  Bhavani,


APPENDIX  X.


ALLEGED  ASTRAL  APPARITION  WITNESSED  BY  MR.  AND  BIRS
ROSS  SCOTT.  REMARKABLE  PORTRAITS.

“ Hints  on  Esoteric  Theosojdiy,”  No.  1,  pp.  75,  76.

“ The  undersigned  severally  certify  that,  in  each  other’s  presence,  they
recently  saw  at  the  headcpiarters  of  the  Theosophical  Society  ” (at  Bombaj’)
“a  Brother  of  the  First  Section,  known  to  them  under  a name  which  they
are  not  at  liberty  to  communicate  to  the  pul)lic.  The  circumstances  were  of
a nature  to  exclude  all  idea  of  trickery  or  collusion,  and  were  as  follows  : —

“55^ewere  sitting  together  in  the  moonlight  about  9 o’clock  upon  the
balcony  which  projects  from  the  front  of  the  bungalow.  5Ir.  Scott  was
sitting  facing  the  house,  so  as  to  look  through  the  intervening  verandah  and
the  library,  and  into  the  room  at  the  further  side.  This  latter  apartment
was  brilliantly  lighted.

“The  library  was  in  partial  darkness,  thus  rendering  cdijects  in  the
farther  room  more  distinct.  5Ir.  Scott  suddenly  saw  the  figure  of  a man
step  into  the  space,  opposite  the  door  of  the  library  ; he  was  clad  in  the
wdiite  dress  of  a Rajput,  and  wore  a white  turban.  5Ir.  Scott  at  once  recog-
nised him  from  his  resemblance  to  a portrait  in  Colonel  Olcott’s  possession.
Our  attention  was  then  drawn  to  him,  and  we  all  saw  him  most  distinctly.
He  walked  towards  a table,  and  afterwards  turning  his  face  towards  y.s,
walked  back  out  of  our  sight.  55'^e  hurried  forward  to  get  a closer  view,  in
the  hope  that  he  might  also  speak  ; but  when  we  reached  the  room  he  was
gone.  5Ve  cannot  say  by  what  means  ho  departed,  but  that  he  did  not  jjass
out  by  the  door  which  leads  into  the  compound  we  can  positively  affirm  ; for
that  door  was  full  in  our  view,  and  he  did  not  go  out  by  it.  At  the  side  of
the  room  towards  which  he  walked  there  was  no  exit,  the  only  door  and  the
tw’o  windows  in  that  direction  having  been  boarded  and  closed  up.  Upon
the  table,  at  the  spot  where  he  had  been  standing,  laj^  a letter  addressed  to
one  of  our  number.  The  handwriting  was  identical  with  that  of  sundry
notes  and  letters  previously  received  from  him  in  divers  ways — such  as


370


Appendices  to  Mr.  Hodgson's  Keport


dropping  down  from  the  ceiling,  &c.  ; the  signature  was  the  same  as  that  of
the  other  letters  received,  and  as  that  upon  the  portrait  above  described.
His  long  hair  was  black,  and  hung  down  upon  his  breast  ; his  features  and
comjdexion  were  those  of  a Rajput.

“ Ross  Scott,  B.C.S.

“Minnie  J.  B.  Scott.

“ H.  S.  Olcott.

“H.  P.  Blavatsky.

“ M.  Moouad  Ali  Beg.

“ Damodar  K.  Mavalankar.

“ Bhavani  Shankar  Ganesh  Muleapoorkar.”


In  our  First  Report  we  said  : ‘ ‘ Personation  does  not  seem  imx)Ossible
in  this  case,  considering  the  distance,  and  that  there  may  have  been  modes
of  ingress  to  the  room  known  only  to  the  Coulombs.  Still  less  does  it  seem
impossible  that  it  can  have  been  the  real  man  in  the  flesh.”  That  it  was
a case  of  piersonation  I have  now  no  doubt.

The  accomiianying  rough  sketch  will
exxflain  the  iiosition.

M.  Coulomb  asserts  that  he  jdayed  the
Mahatma  on  this  occasion.  He  exjilained
to  me  that  the  door  leading  from  the
verandah  (V)  into  the  library  (L)  was  an
ordinary  double  one,  and  so,  likewise,  was
the  door  leading  from  the  library  into
Colonel  Olcott’s  office  (0),  where  the  figure
ai>i3eared  ; but  the  door  leading  from  the
office  into  the  compound  (C)  was  a quad-
riq)le  one.  The  line  of  sight  from  the
position  occup)ied  by  the  party  on  the
balcony  (B)  did  not  iiermit  the  whole  of
the  quadruxfle-door  exit  to  be  seen,  and  by
the  time  the  jiarty  had  reached  such  a
Xiosition  as  to  see  the  whole  s^iace  of  exit,
M.  Coulomb  had  left  the  room  by  the
further  side  jiart  of  the  quadriqfle-door.

One  side  of  the  door  leading  from  the
library  into  the  office,  M.  Coulomb  declares
he  had  jiushed  iiartly  to,  in  order  to  make
certain  that  his  departure  should  not  be
observed.

I performed  this  manenuvre  myself  in
Bombay,  and  it  succeeded  admirably.
With  the  door  pushed  partly  to,  as  repre-
sented in  the  diagram,  it  was  not  possible
for  the  party,  who  were  originally  on  the  balcony,  to  have  seen  the  point  of
M Coulomb’s  alleged  exit  before  reaching  the  spot  marked  P.  I requestecl
a gentleman  to  walk  in  the  direction  indicated  by  the  arrowed  line,  and
found  that  the  illusion  was  naturally  produced  that  he  had  continued  to  walk


On  Phenomena  connected  icitli  Thcomphy.


371


towards  X,  and  could  not  have  passed  into  the  compound.  Walking  thu.s.
into  the  compound  myself,  I found  it  especially  convenient  to  keep  my  face
turned  towards  the  spectators,  as  this  enabled  me  to  tell  exactly  when  I
was  beyond  their  line  of  siglit,  and  so  make  my  exit  unseen.  And  this  just,
answers  to  the  ijoculiar  description  of  the  disapi>earance  of  tlie  figure  given
in  the  above  account.  “ He  walked  towards  a table,  and  afterwards  turning
his  face  towards  us,  walked  back  out  of  our  sight.”  M.  Coulomb’s  asser-
tions, then,  were  so  entirely  corroborated  by  my  inspection  of  the  place,  as.
to  make  it  highly  probable  that  he  iiersonated  the  Mahatma  in  the  manner
he  alleges.

Mr.  Sinnett,  in  giving  some  additional  iirforination  to  Mr.  Hume  con-
cerning the  above  incident  shortly  after  its  occurrence,  writes  truly  that
“the  force  of  the  incident  turns  on  the  arrangement  of  the  rooms,”  and
proceeds  to  give  a sketch  of  the  rooms.  This  sketch  affords  airother  illustra-
tioir  of  the  remark  whicli  I have  made  in  dealing  with  “ The  Occult  World”'
phenomena — that  Mr.  Sinnett  has  not  exercised  by  any  means  sufficient  care
iir  his  investigation.  The  most  important  point  in  the  arrangement  of  the-
rooms  is  entirely  overlooked  by  him,  the  exit  into  the  compoinrd  being-
represented  as  no  wider  than  the  doorway  from  the  library  into  the  office.
In  Mr.  Sinnett’s  sketch,  tlie  three  doorways  appear  to  be  all  of  the  same
size  !

I may  here  draw  attention  to  a certificate,  a copy  of  which  was  sent  by
Colonel  Olcott  to  Mr.  hlyers  in  October  of  last  year  ;

[Copy.]

“ Colonel  Olcotc  having  to-day  shown  us  a portrait  in  oils,  we  at  once-
recognised  it  as  a very  good  likeness  of  a form  which,  in  January,  1882,  we
saw  at  the  headquarters  of  the  Theosophical  Society  in  Bombay,  and  said  to
be  that  of  one  of  tlie  Mahatmas  known  as  the  teaclier  of  Madame  Blavatsky
and  Colonel  Olcott.

“(Sgd.)  E.OS.S  Scott

“(Bengal  Civil  Service).

“(Sgd.)  Makia  J.  B.  Scott.

“Bonn,  Germany,  27th  September,  1884.”

This  refers  to  a portrait  painted  by  Mr.  Schmiechen  from  a photograpli
alleged  to  represent  Mahatma  M.  Tlie  features  of  Mahatma  M.  originated,
I believe,  with  an  artist  in  America.  It  appears  that  this  gentleman  was  re-
quested to  draw  a typical  Hindu  head.  He  did  so,  and  Madame  Blavatsky
declared  that  it  was  the  portrait  of  Mahatma  M.  It  was  after  this  occurrence
that  the  figure  whose  features  resembled  tho^e  of  the  fancy  portrait,
appeared  to  Colonel  Olcott  in  New  York.  Photographs  were  taken  from
this  “fancy  portrait,”  and  it  was  either  from  one  of  these
photographs,  or  from  the  original  portrait  that  hlr.  Schmiechen's
painting  was  made.  I have  compared  the  photograph  side  by  side  with  hlr.
Schmiechen’s  painting,  and  must  certainly  say  that  there  is  a close
resemblance  between  the  two.  Considering  then  that  the  dummy  head  with
its  equipment  of  turban,  &c.,  was  made  up  to  resemble  the  early  po- trait,
it  is  not  surprising  that  a painting  made  from  the  same  original  sliould  seem


372


Appendices  to  Mr.  Hodgson’s  Beport


-t  i Mr.  and  Mrs.  Russ  Scott  a good  likeness  of  the  disguised  figure  which
they  saw  ill  Bombay  helween  two  and  three  years  previously— and  at  a
distance  from  them  which  I concluded  when  I was  at  Crow’s  Nest  Bungalow,
was  probably  about  20  paces.

Mr.  Schmiechen  has  also  painted  a portrait  of  K.  H. , which  appears
to  me  to  r semble  his  painting  of  Mahatma  M.  more  nearly  than
it  resembles  the  portrait  of  K.  H.  which  was  formerly  kepit  in  the
Shrine.  Tlie  Shrine-iiortiait  and  Mr.  Schmiecheii’s  cannot  both  be
striking  likenesses  of  K.  H.  ; they  would  probably  be  taken  by  any  ordinary
observer  to  represent  difi'erent  persons.  In  the  Shrine-portrait,  which  is
alleged,  I think,  to  have  been  the  work  of  some  Chela  (and  if  so,  was  pro-
bably the  work  of  Madame  Blavatsky),  the  nose  is  much  more  aquiline,  and
the  eyes  more  almond-shaped  than  in  Mr.  Schmiechen’s  painting.  The
expression  of  the  eyes,  moreover,  is  very  different  from  tliat  in  Mr.
Schmiechen’s  rendering,  and  the  complexion  is  very  much  paler.  Also  the
hair  is  decidedly  curly  in  the  Shrine  iiortrait,  but  is  not  curly  in  Mr.
Schmiechen’s.  I drew  Colonel  Olcott’s  attention  to  the  lack  of  resemblance
dispdayed  in  some  of  these  respects,  and  he  admitted  that  there  was  a
difference,  which  he  described  as  being  such  as  one  would  exjiect  between
the  attempt  of  a schoolboy  and  that  of  a finished  artist.  As  for  the  hair,  he
said  that  “ Hair  gets  much  straighter  when  it  is  wet”  !

In  connection  with  these  jrortraits,  I may  refer  to  another,  alleged  to
have  been  produced  by  Madame  Blavatsky  in  less  than  a minute,  in  America.
It  apjmared  to  us,  at  the  time  of  our  First  Report,  that  there  was  no  proof
that  the,  piortrait,  said  to  repiresent  a Hindu  Fakir,  might  not  have  been
made  pn-eviously  ; but  the  case  seemed  to  be  of  some  interest  in  consequence
of  the  artistic  merits  of  the  qiicture  attested  to  by  Mr.  O’Donovan  and  Mr.
Le  Clear  (vide  “Hints  on  Esoteric  Theosoidiy,”  No.  1,  pjr.  85,  86).  Mr.
( f’Donovan,  in  the  statement  which  he  made  concerning  the  portrait,  said
that  “ the  black  tints  seem  to  be  an  integral  part  of  the  pajjer  upon  which
it  is  done.”  Mr.  Le  Clear  said  : “I  first  thought  it  chalk,  then  piencil,  then
Indian  ink  ; but  a minute  inspection  leaves  me  quite  unable  to  decide.
Certainly  it  is  neither  of  the  above  ” ; and  also  : “ The  tint  seems  not  to  be
laid  on  the  surface  of  the  common  wuiting-piaper  iqron  which  the  portrait  is
made,  but  to  be  combined,  as  it  were,  with  the  fibres  themselves.”  I think
it  is  impilied  by  the  statement  of  Mr.  O’Donovan  that  the  lighter  tints
appeared  to  have  been  laid  on,  and  not  to  form  an  integral  2)art  of  the  pajoer,
and  this  appeared  also  to  myself.  Madame  Coulomb  alleged  that  Madame
Blavatsky  had  told  her  that  she  had  laid  on  the  U2)i3er  tints  herself  upon  one
of  two  2)hotogra23hs  of  a Hindu  Fakir  which  she  25ossessed,  and  Madame
Coulomb  further  alleged  that  the  other  photograph  was  still  in  one  of
Madame  Blavatsky’s  alliums,  and  that  1 would,  without  doubt,  be  able  to
•see  the  portrait  in  the  album,  and  recognise  the  likeness  to  the  one  supposed
to  have  been  2^roduced  by  occult  methods.  I found  a 2iortrait  which  I thought
might  be  the  counterpart ; it  was  different  from  an  ordinary  2rhotograph,  the
surface  not  2>resenting  a 25olished  a25piearance,  and  it  seemed  to  me  to
resemble  rather  a mezzotint  engraving.  I had  no  opportunity  of  comparing
it  side  by  side  with  the  “ pihenomenal  ” portrait,  which  I had  not  seen  for
some  time  previously  ; and  all  I can  say  is  that  1 noted  a considerable


On  Phenomena  eonnected  with  TheosopJnj.


373;


resemblance  about  the  eyes  and  forehead  which  led  me  to  tliink  it  quite
possible  that  the  “phenomenal”  portrait  may  have  been  the  result  of
Madame  Blavatsky’s  artistic  skill  exercised  upon  a portrait  like  tlie  one  I
found  in  her  album.


APPENDIX  XL— 248.)


1


On  the  4th  IMarch,  1884 — (Madame  Blavatsky  and  Colonel  Olcott  were
at  this  time  on  the  ocean,  having  left  Bombay  on  February  20th  for
Marseilles) — I,  owing  to  certain  domestic  afflictions,  felt  exceedingly
miserable  ; could  not  take  a morsel  of  food  ; and  remained  in  the  most
wretched  condition  of  mind  all  that  day.  But  in  tlie  evening,  between  5
and  G p.m.,  1 2iroceeded  to  Adyar,  in  the  hoj^e  of  finding  some  consolation
there  ; and  was  seated  in  the  office-room  of  the  headquarters,  talking  to-
Mr.  Bawaji,  without,  however,  mentioning  to  any  body  the  circumstance  of
my  being  in  an  unhaj^jiy  condition.  In  the  meantime,  Mr.  Damodar  stepjjed
in  ; and  I at  once  ex2>ressed  to  him  my  desire  to  see  the  “ Shrine.”  He  very
kindly  conducted  me  to  the  Occult  Room  upstairs  forthwith  ; and  unlocked
the  “ Shrine.”  He  and  I were  standing  hardly  five  seconds  looking  at  the
Mahatma  K.  H.’s  portrait  in  tlie  “ Shrine,”  when  he  (Mr.  Damodir)  told  me
that  he  had  orders  to  close  the  “ Shrine  ; ” and  did  so  immediatelj'.  This
course  was  extremely  disajipointing  to  me,  who,  as  the  reader  will  have  j^er-
ceived  from  the  above,  was  sorely  in  need  of  some  consolation  or  otlier  at
that  time.  But  ere  I could  realise  the  jiangs  of  this  disapjiointment,  Mr.
Damodar  re-opened  in  an  instant  the  “ Shrine”  by  orders.  My  eye  imme-
diately fell  upon  a letter  in  a Thibetan  envelope  in  the  ciq)  in  the  “ Shrine,”
which  was  quite  enqity  before  1 I ran  and  took  the  letter,  and  finding  that
it  was  addressed  to  me  by  Mahatma  K.  H.,  I opened  and  read  it.  It  con-
tained very  kind  words  conveying  consolation  to  my  aching  heart  ; advising
me  to  take  courage  ; explaining  how  the  laws  of  Karma  were  inevitable  ; and
finally  referring  me  to  Mr.  Damodar  for  further  explanation  of  certain
passages  in  the  letter.

How  my  presence  before  his  portrait  attracted  the  instantaneous  notice
of  the  IMahatma,  being  thousands  of  miles  off  ; how  the  Mahatma  divined
that  I was  miserable  and  was  in  need  of  comfort  at  his  hands  ; how  he  pro-
jected his  long  and  consoling  letter  from  such  great  distance  into  the  closed
cabinet,  within  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  ; and,  above  all,  how  solicitous  he,
the  great  Mahatma,  is  for  the  well-being  of  mankind,  and  more  esi^ecially
of  persons  devoted  to  him, — are  points  which  I leave  to  the  sensible  reader
to  consider  and  jirofit  by.  Enough  to  say  that  this  unmistakable  sign  of
extraordinary  kindness  on  the  jjart  of  the  great  Master  armed  me  with  suffi-
cient energy  to  shake  off  the  miserable  and  gloomy  thoughts,  and  filled  my
heart  with  unmixed  comfort  and  excessive  joy,  coiqded  with  feelings  of  the
sincerest  gratitude  to  the  benevolent  Mahatma  for  this  blessing.

P.  Sreenevas  Row.


2


was  at  headquarters  very  often  during  my  sojourn  with  my  friend  H.
H.,  the  Thakore  Sahib  of  Wadhwan  at  Madras,  whither  we  had  gone  last


■374


Appendices  to  Mr.  Hodr/sou's  Eep)ort


March  for  the  celebration  of  his  marriage  with  the  daughter  of  the  Hon. '
Hujpati  E,o\r.  One  day  I asked  Mr.  D.  K.  Mavalankar  to  let  me  put  a letter
from  me  to  my  revered  Master  K.  H.  in  the  Shrine.  It  was  in  a closed
envelope,  and  was  regarding  private  personal  matters,  which  I need  not  lay
before  the  public.  Mr.  Damodar  allowed  me  to  put  the  letter  in  the  Shrine.
The  day  after  I visited  again  the  Shrine  in  company  with  my  wife.  On
opening  the  Shrine  I did  find  my  letter  unopened,  but  addressed  to  me  in
blue  pencil,  while  my  original  superscription,  : “ My  Revered  Master,”  had  a
pencil  line  running  through  it.  Tliis  was  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Mavalankar,
Hr.  Hartmann  and  others.  The  envelope  was  intact.  I opened  it,  and  on
the  unused  portion  of  my  note  was  an  answer  from  my  Master  K.  H.  in  his,
to  me,  familiar  handwriting.  I should  very  much  like  to  know  how  others
will  explain  this,  when  as  a fact  both  founders  were  thousands  of  miles
f.way.

Hahisinghji  Rupsinghji,  F.T.S.

Varel,  9th  September,  1884.


APPENDIX  XII.


Account  by  Mr.  P.  Iyaloo  Naidu.

(A  reply  to  Mr.  Myers’  inc|uiry  contained  in  his  letter  of  13th  ultimo.)

On  the  11th  February  last,  I received  a letter  from  Mr  Damodar  K.
Mavalankar,  dated  8th  idem,  Adyar.  In  it  there  was  a message  in  pencil  by
Mahatma  Koot  Hoomi,  regarding  a very  important  point.

On  the  same  day,  viz;.,  11th  February,  I received  another  envelope  by
the  same  jiost,  “ From  Bhola  Deva  Sarma,”  in  which  there  was  a Thibetan
envelope  containing  a message  in  Teloogoo  characters  on  a point  very  inii)or-
tant  to  me,  with  the  initials  of  our  revered  Guru  Deva  M.C.

In  the  last  month  (August)  I was  anxious  about  my  journey  to  this
•country  from  Hyderabad,  and  often  thought  of  the  Mahatma  M.  C.  About
the  2Gth  idem  I examined  my  clothes,  &c.,  at  Hyderabad,  and  found  the
initials  of  the  Mahatma  M.  C.  on  a cap  which  I use  during  my  meditation.

P.  Iyaloo  Naidu,  F.T.S. ,

Pensd.  Dep.  Collector,  Arnee.

19th  September,  1884.

In  reply  to  my  inquiries  : — Mr.  Naidu  had  sent  a letter  to  Mahatma  M.,
through  Damodar.  About  10  days  after,  on  February  11th,  he  received  a
letter  from  Damodar,  who  said  he  had  “ missed  ” the  letter  {i.e.,  that  he  had
2)laced  it  for  the  Mahatma  to  take,  and  that  it  had  gone),  tliat  Mahatma  M.
had  taken  it  and  w'ould  attend  to  it.  On  the  same  day  Mr.  Naidu  received  a
letter  from  Mount  Road  (nearly  four  miles  from  tlie  Theosoidiical  head-
ipiarters),  “ From  Bhola  Deva  Sarma,”  supposed  Chela  of  Maliatma  M.

The  c«|)  referred  to  had  been  given  to  him  by  Colonel  Olcott  about  20
months  jn'eviously.  The  cap  had  been  worn  several  times  during  this
interval  by  Mr.  Naidu,  who  had  been  staying  at  Hyderabad  the  wdiole  time.
The  initials  ajiiiear  as  though  marked  with  a blue  pencil,  and  Mr.  Naidu
himself  suggested  that  lie  .should  ask  Colonel  Olcott  if  the  initials  were  there
when  lie  received  the  cap.  He  thought  it  possible  the  initials  might  have


On  Phenomena  connected  loith  Thcoaophij.


375


"been  there  without  his  observing  them.  His  sight  is  not  good,  and  he  had
never  specially  examined  the  cap,  which  may  be  described  as  a smoking-cap
made  of  white  soft  fabric.  The  colour  of  the  initials  is  not  deep,  and
appears  to  have  suffered  the  wearing  away  due  to  friction.

When  we  issued  our  First  Report,  Mr.  Naidu’s  written  statement  seemed
to  have  some  interest  on  account  of  the  use  of  Teloogoo  characters  in  the
Mahatma  document,  but  assuming  that  Madame  Blavatsky  has  native  con
federates,  it  is  obvdous  that  no  importance  can  be  attributed  to  their  use.
Mr.  Babajee,  however,  in  reply  to  my  questions,  said  that  he  did  not  think
anyone  at  headquarters  knew  Teloogoo,  “ excejat  it  be  Damodar,”  but  when
I pushed  my  inquiry  further,  he  said  with  some  hesitation  that  he  thought
that  Mr.  Damodar  also  was  ignorant  of  Teloogoo.  The  Teloogoo  may  have
been  written  by  Mr.  Babajee  himself.  Some  writing  in  English,  alleged  to
have  been  precqiitated  by  “ Bhola  Deva  Sarma,”  showed  clear  traces  of  Mr.
Babajee’s  handiwork.  (See  Part  II.  of  Report.)  Another  instance  had  occurred
where  a Bombay  Theosophist  had  received  a pihenomenal  communication  in
the  Mahrathi  language; but  Mahrathi  is  Mr.  Damodar’s  vernacular.  Sanskrit
knowledge  could  also  be  secured,  but  a question  in  Hebrew  and  Arabic
proved  rather  too  hard  a knot  fer  the  Mahatma  Brotherhood.  Mr.
Damodar,  when  conversing  with  Madame  Blavatsky,  in  my  presence,  let
slq)  the  remark — in  reference  to  what  he  would  do  on  his  projected  visit
to  the  North — that  he  would  “ first  learn  Thibetan  and  Urdu.”  Madame
Blavatsky ’s  quick  glance  of  warning,  Mr.  Damodar’s  disconcertion,  and  the
speedy  change  of  subject  did  not  lessen  the  suggestiveness  of  the  utterance.


APPENDIX  XIII.

The  following  accounts  will  serve  to  illustrate  the  quality  of  many  of
the  letter-pthenomena.  They  were  given  in  rejjly  to  my  inquiries.

FALL  OF  A CALENDAR.

Account  by  Me.  T.  VuiAR.-rGHAVA  Charloo  (Airanda).

In  May,  1882,  Madame  Blavatsky  and  others  came  to  Nellore.  There
were  more  than  half-a-dozen  of  us  upstairs.  No  one  could  remember  the
date.  Madame  Blavatskj'  said  the  Masters  could  give  her  a calendar  if  they
liked.  We  were  sitting  in  a circle  or  semi-circle  in  front  of  Madame.  She
shook  violently,  and  a letter  struck  the  wall  behind.  It  was  a calendar.

Account  by  Mr.  Doraswamy  Naidu.

When  we  were  at  Nellore,  about  midday,  in  May,  1882,  we,  Soubbaya
'Chetty,  myself,  Ananda,  Madame,  and  some  others,  were  sitting  in  a room
together  in  an  up^per  storey.  Madame  wanted  to  know  the  date.  Soubbaya.
Chetty  gave  one  date,  and  another  gave  a different  one.  Madame  said,
“ Haven’t  you  got  any  calendar?”  The  repffy  was  No.  Some  one  asked
Madame  to  suppily  a calendar.  Within  two  or  three  seconds  something  fe  1
with  a noise  on  the  floor.  One  of  the  brothers  took  the  object  up:).  It  was  a
small  piapier  calendar  of  an  English  publisher,  ap^p^arently  epuite  new.
Madame  was  sitting  at  about  the  centre  of  one  side  of  the  room,  and  the
■calendar  fell  in  the  far  corner  of  the  room.


’ 376  Aj)2)cndices  to  Mr.  Iloihj^on’s  Ucj'.orl

MR.  Gosnrs  LETTER.

Account  by  Mr.  Baba.jee.

During  the  8th  anniversary,  M.  Goshi  was  a delegate.  He  came  to
me,  and  offered  lus  services.  He  wrote  a long' letter  of  5 or  6 big  pages.  I
gave  it  to  Damodar  to  give  to  IMadame,  who  returned  it  to  Damodar  with
the  words,  “Answer  him  as  you  please.”  Damodar  left  the  letter  on  the
table.  Goshi  watched  it,  and  answers  came  to  his  c[uestions  in  the  letter.
Goshi  was  watching  the  letter  all  the  time.

Account  by  Mr.  Lukshman  N.  Go.shi  (Pensioned  Sub-Judge  of  Sind).

I wrote  a long  letter  of  several  foolscap  pages,  and  gave  it,  through  Mr.
Brown,  to  Madame,  who  gave  it  to  Damodar  to  get  the  Master’s  account.
Damodar  said  he  left  it  on  the  table,  and  found  the  writing  of  Mahatma
Koot  Hoonii  in  it.  He  returned  it  to  me.

Mr.  Norendra  Nath  Sen,  editor  oit\\Q  Indian  Mirror,  did  not  appear  to
me  to  have  been  much  impressed  by  “phenomena.”  One  experience  of  his
was  as  follows : —

At  the  anniversary  of  1883,  Messrs.  Damodar,  Mohini,  Mullick,  Brown,
and  himself  were  sitting  together  when  Mr.  Damodar  asked  him  if  he  felt
anything.  The  reply  was  No.  Mr.  Damodar  then  said  that  the  Master
told  Norendra  to  look  in  his  pocket.  He  found  nothing  in  his  pocket,  but
found  a letter  on  the  seat — from  the  Mahatma.

Mr.  Nobin  Kri.shna  B.vnnerjee  received  a “ phenomenal”  letter  while
I was  at  Adyar,  but  not  in  my  presence.  He  gave  me  an  account  of  the
incident  almost  immediately  afterwards.

He  had  handed  some  folded  manuscript  of  his  own  to  Mr.  Damodar,  to  be
read  through  before  insertion  in  The  Theosophist.  Mr.  Damodar  took  the
manuscript,  turned  over  the  sheets  quickly,  said  he  would  read  it  directly,
refolded  the  manuscript,  and  placed  it  on  the  table.  Taking  uj)  the  manu-
script shortly  after,  it  was  found  that  a ‘ ‘ Tibetan  ” envelope  was  lying  in  the
folds,  addressed  to  Harisinghi  Rupsinghi  in  the  blue  pencil  writing  said  to.
be  that  of  Mahatma  Koot  Hoomi.

A TEST  PHENOMENON'  /

“ December  25th. — Grand  phenomenon  at  Shrine  : six  or  seven  notes  to
different  persons  simultaneously  appear  in  the  silver  bowl — one  in  Mahrathi
to  Tookaram,  in  which  his  secret  name  was  written.”  (Colonel  Olcott’s  diary
for  1883.)  To  the  copy  I possess  of  this  extract.  Colonel  Olcott  has
appended  the  following  note:  “A  Hindu  receives  from  his  Guru,  at  the
‘thread  ceremony,’  when  a boy  of  about  seven,  a mystical  name,  and  this
he  always  keeps  a secret.  This  test  was  therefore  perfect.”  This  note
of  Colonel  Olcott’s  has  been  crossed  through  by  a pencil  by  Mr.  Damodar,
who  read  through  the  extracts  from  Colonel  Olcott’s  diary  before  they
were  given  to  me,  and  who  has  substituted  the  statement : “ It  -^'as  apart  of
his  name,  but  never  used  by  him  in  con-espondence  or  anywhere  else,  and
therefore  unknown  to  even  his  friends.”

Mr.  Tookaram  Tatya  informed  me  that  the  name  was  his  “surname”  or
“family  name,”  and  he  told  me  at  once  what  it  wms  ; Padwal.  He  said  that


On  Phenomena  connected  icitJi  Theosophy.


377


nobody  knew  it  at  Madras,  but  his  only  ground  for  thinking  so  appeared  to
be  that  he  does  not  commonly  use  it.  The  name  is  no  secret,  and  he  said
that  friends  of  his  in  Bombay  may  know  it.  Mahrathi,  as  already  mentioned,
is  Mr.  Damodar’s  vernacular,  and  Mr.  Damodar  had  lived  in  Bombay  previous
to  the  removal  of  the  headquarters  of  the  Society  to  Madras.  But  the  mere
fact  that  the  knowledge  of  the  family  name  of  a prominent  Hindu  member
of  the  Society  has  thus  come  to  be  characterised  by  Colonel  Olcott  as  a
“perfect  test,”  is  enough  in  itself  to  betoken  upon  what  a flimsy  fabric  of
evidence  his  great  convictions  may  rest.


APPENDIX  XIY.


PROFESSOR  SMITH'S  LETTER  SEWN  WITH  SILK.

Colonel  Olcott  stated  in  his  deposition  that  a letter  which  had  been

addressed  by  Professor  Smith,  of  Sydney  University,  to  Maliatma  M ,

“and  sent  enclosed  in  a letter  to  Madame  Blavatsky,  and  which  was  sewed
through  and  through  many  times  with  silk  of  different  colours,  had  been
removed  and  anotlier  paper  substituted  inside  without  the  threads  having
been  broken.”  Madame  Coulomb  declared  to  me  that  it  was  she  herself  who,
with  very  great  care,  and  after  a long  examination  of  the  silk  threads,
unpicked  the  stitches  on  one  side  of  the  letter  and  sewed  them  back  by
means  of  a hair.  The  “Mahatma”  enclosure  had  been  inserted,  she  said,  by
Madame  Blavatsky,  who  had  previously  read  it  over  to  Madame  Coulomb,
and  the  latter  quoted  some  words  which  she  said  had  formed  part  of  Mahatma

M ’s  reply.  Madame  Coulomb  also  said  that  in  sewing  the  stitches  back

she  had  pulled  the  silk  somewhat  “tighter”  than  it  had  previously  been,  in
order  that  she  might  have  enough  silk  to  tie  the  final  knot,  and  as  a con-
sequence, after  tying  the  knot,  there  were  some  small  ends  of  silk  to  spare,
which  she  cut  off,  and  which  she  showed  to  me.

Having  written  to  Professor  Smith  on  the  subject,  I received  from  him  a
letter  in  which  he  kindly  sent  the  sewn  up  note  for  inspection,  and  made  the
following  statements  concerning  it : —

“It  contains  the  enclosure  with  which  it  was  returned.  I slit
up  the  side  of  the  paper  to  get  the  enclosure  out,  after  examining
the  whole  carefully  with  a magnifying  glass.  I could  believe  that
Madame  Coulomb  unpicked  the  silk  and  restored  it  again  only  if  I saw
her  do  it.  Observe  how  closely  the  ends  were  cut  off  so  as  to  leave  nothing

to  hold  by Madame  Coulomb’s  partial  knowledge  of  the  writing

on  the  enclosure  goes  for  little,  as  I described  it  all  in  a letter  to  Madame
Blavatsky.”

I examined  the  sewn-up  note,  and  observed  that  the  threads  on  one  side  had
been  clearly  pulled  tighter  than  those  of  the  other  side,  and  also  that  the  silk  of
the  more  tightly  pulled  stitches  had  been  handled  more  than  the  silk  of  the
other  side,  as  was  manifest  by  its  peculiar  frayed  appearance.  Apart  from  these
signs,  my  examination  of  the  note  left  me  without  any  doubt  that  the
opening  and  reclosing  of  it,  as  described  by  Madame  Coulomb,  were  far  from
being  impossible.  I was  desirous,  however,  of  clearly  establishing  whether
the  note  could  be  so  opened  and  closed  or  not,  but  as  the  operation  demanded

^ R


378


Appendices  to  3L-.  Hodgson's  Report


a certain  sort  of  delicate  care  in  which  I miglit  prove  deficient,  I requested
Mrs.  Sidgwick  to  undertake  the  task.

Account  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick.

Mr.  Hodgson  brought  me  a letter  which  Professor  Smith  of  Sydney  had

sent  to  Madame  Blavatsky  to  be  delivered  to  Mahatma  M . This  letter

had  been  carefully  folded  up,  and  the  edges  doubled  over  and  sewn  down
with  red  and  yellow  floss  silk.  It  was  returned  by  Madame  Blavatsky
apparently  intact,  but  on  cutting  open  one  side,  without  interfering  with  the
.silk.  Professor  Smith  found  inside  a note  jiurporting  to  come  from  the
Mahatma.  This  note  could  not,  I think,  have  got  there  by  natural
means  unless  the  sewing  had  been  unpicked  at  one  end.  Madame  Coulomb
asserted,  so  Mr.  Hodgson  told  me,  that  she  had  unpicked  the  silk  at  one
end,  and  sewn  it  up  again  by  means  of  a hair.  Pi’ofessor  Smith  did  not
think  this  possible,  and  Mr.  Hodgson  wished  me  to  repeat  the  operation,
which  Madame  Coulomb  asserted  that  she  had  performed,  with  a view  to
ascertaining  its  possibility.

I thought  I could  detect  slight  signs  of  Madame  Coulomb’s  operations  at
one  end  of  the  folded  paper,  and  as  she  said  that  in  sewing  it  up  again  she
had  pulled  the  silk  tighter  than  before  in  order  to  leave  a margin  for
fastening,  I selected  what  I thought  was  the  other  end,  in  order  to
secure  a margin  for  myself  too.  Before  undoing  the  sewing  I made  careful
diagrams  of  the  way  in  which  the  stitches  went,  and  of  the  relative  positions
in  each  stitch  of  the  two  colours.  The  fastening  knot  was  not  quite  easy
to  undo,  but  otherwise  the  unpicking  afforded  no  difficulties.  The  difficul-
ties in  sewing  it  up  arose  from  the  impossibility  of  using  a needle  in  the
ordinary  way  owing  to  the  shortness  of  the  silk.  Taking  Madame  Coulomb’s
hint,  however,  I found  no  great  difficulty,  though  the  [irocess  was  tedious,
in  pulling  the  silk  through  its  old  holes  by  means  of  a loop  of  hair.  By
pulling  the  stitches  tight  I secured  length  enough  for  fastening  at  the  end,
and  the  superfluous  fragments  I then  cut  off.  Before  replacing  the  sewing
1 wrote  initials  inside  to  prove  that  I had  undone  it.

Eleanor  Mildred  Sidgwick.

I returned  the  letter  afterwards  to  Professor  Smith,  with  statements  by
IMrs.  Sidgwick  and  myself,  and  have  received  a reply  from  Mrs.  Smith  on
behalf  of  her  husband  (who  was  too  ill  to  be  able  to  write  himself),  from
wdiich  it  appears  that  Professor  and  Mrs.  Smith  were  quite  satisfied,  in  con-
sequence of  the  operation  performed  by  IMrs.  Sidgwick,  that  the  supposed
evidence  of  “occult”  agency  was  worthless.


.APPENDIX  XY.  {Vide  p.  293.)

CONCERNING  HANDWRITING,  Ac.

Examination  by  Mr.s.  Sidgwick.

Mr.  Hodgson  was  anxious  that  his  statements  and  conclusions,  as  regards
the  handwriting  of  the  Koot  Hoomi  documents  and  some  other  points,
should,  as  far  as  possible,  be  verified  in  detail  by  some  other  i erson,  and  I
ha\  e accordingly  examined  all  the  m.ss.  in  c^uestion,  which  he  has  had  in


On  Phenomena  connected  with  Jheosophy.  379

tiis  hands  in  England,  with  great  care,  with  the  result  that  I find  myself  in
complete  agreement  with  him.  His  observations  on  documents  which  he  saw
only  in  India  I cannot,  of  course,  verify.

First,  as  regards  the  plates.  The  specimens  of  isolated  letters  are,  I
think,  so  far  as  I have  compared  them  with  the  originals  (or  in  the  case  of
those  taken  from  Mr.  Sinnett’s  series  with  tracings  which  I had  previously
compared  with  the  originals),  as  nearly  facsimiles  as  can  be  expected,  with
the  exception  of  a certain  tremulousness  which  they  ought  not  to  have,  but
which  does  not  aflect  them  for  our  present  purpose.  I have  thus  compared
the  larger  number  of  the  specimens,  and  where  1 have  not  compared  the
copy  with  the  particular  letter  from  which  it  was  traced,  I can  testify  to  its
strong  resemblance  to  many  other  specimens  that  might  have  been  selected.
The  plates  representing  short  passages  from  different  documents  give  a good
general  idea  of  the  writing,  but  in  some  instances  fail  in  giving  the
individual  character  of  particular  letters.  Still  they  are  quite  sufficiently
accurate  to  help  the  reader  to  understand  the  discussion.  Those  copied
from  writing  in  blue  pencil  are,  as  might  be  expected,  less  close  facsimiles
than  the  others.

I have  carefully  verified  every  statement  Mr.  Hodgson  makes  about  the
n,cknowledged  handwriting  of  Madame  Blavatsky,  and  about  the  K.H.  mss.
in  England  which  he  attributes  to  her.  I entirely  agree  with  all  he  says,
and  am  myself  strongly  convinced  that  the  same  person  wrote  both.  The
development  of  the  K.H.  writing  is  very  marked,  and  the  gradual  elimina-
tion of  Blavatskian  forms  is,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  suggestive.  The  argument
is  greatly  strengthened  by  the  occasional  spasmodic  appearance  of  Blavatskian
forms — seemingly  by  accident — throughout  the  K.H.  mss.  attributed  to  her
— and  that  this  is  an  accident,  and  an  accident  which  the  writer  desired  to
avoid,  is  proved,  I think,  by  the  erasures  and  alterations.  The  last  h
selected  from  K.H.  No.  3 on  Plate  III.,  which  occurs  in  the  original  in  the
word  Greeli,  is  a fair  instance  of  these  alterations.

But  convincing  as  the  two  considerations  already  mentioned  are,  I think
the  prevalence  of  certain  peculiarities  throughout  both  sets  of  documents  is
more  convincing  still,  and  in  particular  the  very  peculiar  a and  g constantly
occurring  in  both.  It  so  happened  that  when  Mr.  Gribble’s  pamphlet,  men-
tioned by  Mr.  Hodgson,  first  reached  me,  while  Mr.  Hodgson  was  still  in
India,  I had  in  my  hands  some  letters  of  Madame  Blavatsky’s  and  a long
K.H.  document,  and  naturally  turned  to  Madame  Blavatsky’s  handwriting
to  see  if  it  possessed  the  characteristics  mentioned  by  Mr.  Gribble.  There
without  doubt,  I found  among  others  this  peculiar  a,  but  it  was  with  a shook
■of  surprise  that  I found  this  same  a,  which  I had  never  seen  in  any  other
handwriting,  occurring  even  more  conspicuously  in  the  K.H.  document  than
in  Madame  Blavatsky’s  acknowledged  writing.  I have  seen  a somewhat
similar  formation  of  a in  the  handwriting  of  a Russian  gentleman.

I think  evidence  that  the  K.  H.  handwriting  is  a disguised  one  may  be
found  in  Ooher  variations  of  form  besides  those  which  show  development.
The  variations  I speak  of  remain  more  or  less  constant  through  a particular
document,  but  do  not  appear  in  other  documents,  and  thus  appear  to  me  to
suggest  that  the  writer  was  not  using  all  the  forms  of  letter’s  instinctively,
and  had  not  a perfectly  clear  and  persistent  idea  of  what  all  the  forms  should

2 B 2


380


Appendices  to  J/r.  Hodgson's  Report.


be.  No  doubt  some  variations  might  be  found  in  every  handwriting  from-
document  to  document,  due  to  a diiference  of  speed  in  the  writing,  to  the-
kind  of  pen  employed,  &c.  But  tliose  in  the  K.  H.  writing  seem  to  me
more  marked  than  this,  and  ai’e  the  more  noticeable  as  the  writing  is  regular
and  very  seldom  gives  one  the  impression  of  being  carelessly  done.

I have  counted  the  English  and  German  d’s  in  various  writings  of
Madame  Blavacsky.  It  is  a matter  of  considerable  difficulty  to  count
correctly  the  number  of  times  a letter  occurs  in  a long  ms.  if  it  is  at  all
frequent ; I am,  therefore,  not  surjjrised  to  find  that  my  numbers  are  slightly
different  from  Mr.  Hodgson’s.  As,  however,  we  in  no  case  differ  hy  so  mncli
as  5 per  cent,  it  is  evident  that  the  difference  is  of  no  importance  whatever
to  the  argument,  and  I therefore  considered  that  it  would  be  waste  of  time
to  repeat  the  counting.  The  extreme  rarity  of  the  English  d in  all  the
acknowledged  handwriting  of  Madame  Blavatsky  in  our  hands  which  has
been  written  since  the  K.  H.  correspondence  began,  except  in  the  B.  Beplies,
combined  with  its  comparative  abundance  in  the  earlier  letters  and  in  the
B.  Beplies,  is  very  striking,  and  it  is  difficult  to  attribute  it  to  accident.

I liave  verified  com2:)letely  every  statement  about  the  letter  called
K.  H.  (Z)  and  about  Mr.  Damodar’s  ordinary  writing,  and  have  little  doubt
tliat  the  K.  H.  (Z)  was  written  by  him.

I have  also  examined  tlie  long  document  professedly  in  the  handwriting
of  Mr.Bliavani  Shankar.  It  appears  to  me  to  bear  very  evident  indications  of
being  written  in  a disguised  hand,  and  to  have  enough  of  the  marked
characteristics  of  Mr.  Damodar’s  liand writing  to  point  to  him  as  the  writer.
I have  compared  the  letter  wliich  Mr.  Hodgson  has  called  the  ‘ ‘ Root  Hoomi
Lai  Sing”  witli  the  quotations  from  it  in  Mr.  Sinnett’s  “ Occult  World,”
and  find  as  Mr.  Hodgson  does,  more  than  GO  differences,  without  counting
mis-sfiellings,  changes  in  punctuation,  &c.

It  only  remains  to  speak  of  the  mis-spellings,  faults  of  idiom,  &c.,  quoted
by  Mr.  Hodgson  from  the  K.H.  documents,  and  from  Madame  Blavatsky’s
own  letters.  I have  compared  all  these  with  tire  originals  and  believe  them
to  be  correctly  transcribed.  More  of  the  same  kind  might  be  adduced.

Eleanoe  Mildked  Siugwick.


EXPLANATION  OF  PLATES,  (fee.


Plan  of  Occult  Room  and  Surroundings. — Vide  pp.  220-222.

Plate  I. — Concerning  the  groups  of  individual  letters  in  this  Plate,
whicli  are  very  close  facsimiles  of  my  own  tracings  from  tlie  original
documents,  vide  pp.  284-291,  290.

The  specimens  B (i.),  B(ii.),  &c.,  which  are  on  the  whole  very  good
representations  of  the  originals  though  not  accurate  in  eveiy  detail,  are
taken  from  Madame  Blavatsky’s  undoubted  writings,  with  the  excejition  of
B (x.),  which  represents  the  Blav'atsky-Coulomb  document  referred  to  on
p.  317.  The  remaining  Blavatsky-Coulomb  documents  being  in  India,  1 have
been  unable  to  produce  facsimiles  of  them  in  this  Report.

B (i. ) is  from  a letter  written  to  a Hindu  in  August,  1878.

B (ii.)  is  from  a letter  written  to  Mr.  C.  C.  Massey  in  July,  1879.

B (hi.),  B (iv.),  and  B (v. ) are  from  letters  lent  by  Mr.  Hume,  received
February — June,  1882.

B (vi.)  is  from  an  envelope  addressed  to  Mr.  C.  C.  Massey  in  1884.

B (vii. ) is  from  an  envelope  addressed  to  Mr.  Myers  about  the  beginning
of  October,  1884.

B (viii. ) is  from  a letter  to  Mr.  Myers  about  October,  1884.

B (ix. ) is  from  B Replies  (vide  p.  290),  written  about  the  end  of  1884  or
the  beginning  of  1885.

B (x.),  the  Blavatsky-Coulomb  document,  was  probably  written  at  some
time  between  1879  and  1883.


Plate  II. — The  specimens  K.H.  (i.),  K.H.  (ii.),  &c.,  are  from  K.H.
documents  which  I consider  to  be  the  handiwork  of  hladame  Blavatsky,  and
they  are  for  the  most  part  good  representations  of  the  originals.  The  K.H.
(vii  ),  however,  is  taken  from  writing  in  blue  pencil,  which  is  much  Idurred,
so  that  the  reproduction  is  not  so  good  as  in  the  other  cases,  the  originals  of
which  are  in  ink.

K.H.  (i.)  represents  apage  from  the  Root  Hoomi  Led  Sing  letter  to  IMr.
Hume,  of  November  1st,  1880.  I liave  placed  a small  dash  under
many  of  the  letters  for  tlie  purpose  of  directing  attention  to
Iieculiarities  mentioned  in  the  preceding  discussion.

K.H.  (ii.)  — K.H.  (vi.)  are  from  K.H.  documents  received  about  1881  —
1882,  K.H.  (ii.)  being  taken  from  the  commencement  of  one  of


these  documents,  and  K.H.  (iii.)  from  the  end  of  the  same
document.

K.H.  (vii. ) is  from  a letter  to  Mr.  Myers  in  1884.

K.H.  (z. ),  the  original  of  which  I attribute  to  Mr.  Damodar  (vide  pp.
294-297),  does  not  represent  one  continuous  extract.  I
obtained  permission  to  reproduce  different  portions  of  tlie  K.H.
(Z.)  document,  which  I directed  to  be  placed  together  as  in  the
facsimile.  The  original  is  in  blue  pencil,  and  much  blurred,  and
several  of  the  most  important  letters  appear  in  the  facsimile
without  their  original  characteristics.  Thus  the  a of  sympathise
(1  0),  is  in  the  original  document  a typical  specimen  of  the  beaked
a formation,  and  several  of  the  g’s  in  the  lithograph  have  lost  all
trace  of  a similar  beaked  formation  which  they  exhibit  in  the
original  document.  Still  the  correspondence  with  the  original  is
close  enough  to  enable  the  reader  to  see  several  important  differ-
ences between  it  and  K.H.  (vii.),  and  especially  that  it  contains
no  instance  of  tlie  left  yap  stroke,  of  whicli  he  will  find  various
instances  in  K.  H.  (vii. ),  received  about  the  same  time  in  1884.

D (I.)  and  D (ii. ) represent  two  specimens  of  Mr.  Damodar’s  undoubted
writing  in  1884.


PLAN  OF  OCCULT  ROOM,  WITH  SHRINE  AND  SURROUNDINGS.


(>>cri,i  Inwirrmfilt  fni-'K  ly  11  IMj.w,  hu  thr  HaKnituU  i'/  'J hioio/.I.K  icUiMitt.)


R E F e R£  N OE.

7 Mole  In  xkII  Iriilcd  llie  ml'MTe  [4oel  ol  Shrloo.

2 Koar  [^nrllod  leunlm;;  iitij<iiiellx  et  Laek  of  rKex  Irome^fliiel)'  Tnhlfid
i.  nHckrni  Jr^o  formio;*  froDt  of  rrcooi.

6.  ApeilorelomioJ  by  rewnrln/ Irklu /loin  one  |.»tlilli>a  of  Uie  Weked

0 r>oor  of  eMob'>ar’)

7.  Mir);;e4  fMorl  m Ufk  of  elifcbounl.


s


Hew  R«m


U


//////.


/ / / / ///  / //

//^/

/•/y/ /’///////’

K II  .Nm  I

/'  r/’f/f  //
///’///VV  //  /
y y y y ^

K II  I

? / ■)  i --r  -i  / j /

yy_y?yy-yyyLy.j'

K II  Nm  <

J yS ^ ^ ^ 0^ kJ^ -v,::^  u/

k/  v^y  yy \j \j'\j  jj

II

^ f k k.  L i

>.  M V..  V

y<  -y  XT  /y  <r  ///4'  yf'

fl  k ^ ^ /<  .<  /y  ^-4^/?^

■^J  AC  k<-  /V/Vy^Af

K II  N..  *.

/<  H- A !</-!  H H'“-
7yd'/-7  7 7 H 7 7 r

” X7  1'C7'tri  f

K Jl  N..  .•

7 77  7 7 77

J3jjy^


J.  -I-  ...^^.,/  ,,V.,...^J/

/C-  ■ yt,,..  jf^..  ^ ^ ^ ^

y-y.  ,..../,

7'  /"?

- ■*  ' >5r — yc/.  . X'


IPLA'I'K  I


.7'  .../->'.


i A ^.y  //..

V /-  . .

,.  /.  /5r ^_y

— y , ..  /Cy


/ ,/7d/,r/ .a\.,^,,.,^

rjk)  *■!

7


,>A7.


V'-


y - 'A'y  /— yr^  y y y/?/,

<-*-  '■•■  -y'  .'  y'

y,  {<7/...  , ..  y-y  ^ ^ . „ .,y  {

^7  7.,t  ..  7..  y„.,.^  /...  ..y-,^

7y'-i  /...y-r.


.Ai.  .■/ . •/  /i--  y.^y-.y,/'

7'~ --yy  —Y

X yr.^ /f :_  a-/ y . ,r  ^

i.  JyJ^z.  r.  'j.  n~...  ■//'.  /_y,',.,

^ Ay  r.  ^...,

Ay  A^l;.  /.  Y,.  y " f.  ...  i


'/v


'“  y..,-.V. //J.y  *^/.i,^..


.V  X-v,  /y.y  . .


, ^ y-


^

^ r'l;


' -A -7  7 J' -7  j 7~7  7


'7'^^''^.J7Jjc'J7  vyy

^ ^<7  sy  5^/^  ■'^y^
^ /f  ^ <7
^ '-6  07‘<7f[j='}
^3yrjyO/c<  ,^7^07' I ^1


TS:  cf<,  ^ A.  •>_  y,  SL  ^

C^  •’3  ay^.y-
7 f /!  7 -r  T / 7 7 /

^ y y,  ^ . r 1-  j-  ,


'7f-y.yu,/,^  Ai..^  /A.J‘'A77r  -Yy-YTyT—.-y  ■'
7Auy  ^y-TC,  A A.-y.,  l^A,


'77..  7A-A.  y A Y — 7.. — ,

.r.~7  ..^y  Y*..—  1*.  A — „ 7 7..

7r  ^ 'A/r-  'J.Y...A- A......  7A.  ,...  A ■■■...  ’y  ■

y-r-»-^-/ ,_v  '>*^  Al,,n^jr  ^ 4^-'/^—  /4i

y—.  . y — - y y.


7 --  y^.,JryACZ:py'iC


y -'


y—


^ *^*-3


y


7>A^A.A


yy.


-->yi  •


"yATy


-77


7 a-


<Si-  ^ ^ ^Cyyyi

yjy  ^-y  y..  . 2

'2r~'  £-  X ^


#**•<

y y-


y <e.  A


"V'


-yy.


^ yj  ^r;;y  f— -


cozi-j  y^af-‘f'c><j~c-‘>  ^ ao/ti


>y  <,<yKJL


■<.!  a c


^^>2^  '!.^^  5*— •’^V«j5''S-<X-  p-<‘(^  y/'-fic  ,c-<j-^/^ ^-

, ■ / ; . _1.‘  , /-

7r7^.Ayu*-  ^/U.<;>  /.j  Ci.t'z~''7-  CC^-^  ^.\'t.. .

(X,  j yty  <^^5nr  /; %n.<-u ^tfj o ^

£<^  ^ £py^ e>-c<yz-  ^/I'.'i.  -

yCu^  ^ a.- -t. ,/  t-i^r~r  dzch  6t.^.-,i

" C^"'  l<..<i-l^  dc/'Z-'-  ‘'-^  -^'  ft  ^ ^ -,  y

' ' ' ' ‘ ' y C-’  ' '

.^.  /ddi)  .^t^e'/  ^ <^-(.^  d^

yuTc^-CeddL  w £?f--^cd  a c'fi^

^cz^j'y  d^t-yc-dy,  '


y^-


Ct-di


difO  d-'*


'/


^ye-L'^y

' cu  <2 cdlt^co  ,y<'^  d^L^itad'  Cf^-,.yy.  d^Cz-^L  -f
■le^  tryddddd  diy  ✓/  U^d.

:y y £:  d

^ dd<-i  ^ ‘■d~'  £/  (fit.  ydy^  dXy~  ^ C*yty^ £yd

dCOiizz-y  c^.'!  kdt^-^d/^d^ £dyx.:^-jd/^yL  yt.,d^<y  £t,^

^ — y rj

^yz^y^tfodd'

7 /t-^^  yOr.


/'


^ddt  t/c^’  7


dd,  dL,

yu-t-y  <^-c<fC  /to-/

^ (-"^yd c-J  £1^  £:7.df^  t-d  <ddyy~  o i

i>*  (3-  tet yZAyZ<yi^  ^~i^'t,dC..  /t-o<.


<y


4


(f.  y f ‘- tj

/}  /.^

^ dt-coo!  yd*'  ycf-u-ydf/


' r-


d-'^^  y c*^-‘  > tjci  Zr

^y/-'’^  dzSZfi


-


xy


r %-jo^e/~Z)  s t*^y,  yy


‘^■'  ^ 4y“  £X^cd--  d


'ut^  £r*-t/n^4yc.  cU


f-


•~v  y ^ ^dr~dey^r77a/l  cd~y}  '(^'

_-^  ^ 2fe7  £-:jcz,  ^

•^yry-^-^-dL.  .jAifc-

^ & <i-^;  e^g  y

..^1^

Y a^Tsstix


ft-  ii  nil )

yy,

u ^

cZZt,  U . Zc  t-ZZU^  ~^e~X-^  /?■  ' —

IffTt

^ 4w>

, d^t-d/  (;>_„  • /3  1— ddZr

^^d..


A


H


I d-ddd~~0-yfjL  ^ A..**~J  ?A  .oT^

1' £.<ddd-t>  (x^  (d^o ^7yZydyz,»~*j !

" d t^y}  C

zdj  cit.^t*^  dd)

/y/cZ:^


I IPLATE  II.

--E


(^'-«/  'dZZTZet^  /f  didZj.


1^

h'  ■

jo  ^A;y  ddA-^  dVo


0-yj<yy  “r-t^  ey^JZ\


‘-W-Vvdl  U.^

d<  uZX.y,CK.Cd^

A ■>  A'^“

V d t-/t'  /2d5 1 0 t.*.fKyz>  eA  Y d5"*-t  ei  V /'d^^tJZ.  "A^J  > d^£l


c.^  A*'"

-•  ^y^j^yy^p  cyVxZzyzrc.

J C't~4d0


ddddr


i-^y  zyS*

y di^  *:2i.7TX,^  ,

^ ^'^>-O.J.^^  0.0^  d-<^..^y.fyj  y.rt./  *yry  d.t,^JJl^

'xti  P~y-Jx'  ^

, ty  u A/>  'dAw  iv/

A £<^1.


-TT^rUd.
/i^.d^dL  (fio


ceUo-T&zz


■/■/<•  ^ lyj  i.yZ^yT^


- '^^d€~lZZy

yd  Ot_d4^

, ^ .._  -•/‘--W,..

idt/  J ^^y-cd-zi^u..  ~Cd*-  ^ o-j  *1.5^

cddo  Cffri  t-.-d>^/w«J  i«*A-wk.

d^d^y.  J-d4^  (^ly^-d-.  O'  A''-'

//  7^

K.  II.  ft)

d/d /tyrd  dztjZdii  dy*  Cy^

ct  t4ttd-yJd'*dy-  *~y&yd.,

.' 3jt  f- ' cd  if}

"QddTTdrTdk^xz/tzdty  e-*^  ^A^  adwO^p

•’-Zjsxy^i  d sj^

/ JZ/tyCdd/^Zj  ciaa.y.  U^ftJuyy  «-

/Zuy^UfyfwSaZd  ^ijd^  Wc^  /y,ydd>& .
■"*^  /o-sx

TSZJZXMZ:^d,.^£^ -

cd  tfvfc^i-*


. -<--.T.»_^  - /^£^e  qd/d.oy

^x^yzxt


^ dU/x^ay, ^.^£.^..^J~-


C<r>7-«-«/^<yM<07^<.c  -<r  dye:c,^D  .

•AAOcAA^'^'Ar'd^  dt__^-

d /fe  yyd  £r  firiTJt^’-

■Csj' '~-

I7  III,

Ji^r  P -J^:-  f /C - f A--  - yi.  ,^,^-j

« ^l^,,~-eA.j)-iC^  _..

,urj:^..,fA./A'  c„,..y',f  l!.  i,f.,

/o^'  ^■j^'“-  ■ Atr>^  ^A — ^A//,

‘-C  /L^Ajg^  / li-.iif,.

'A-'  ■ ■--  f.  jjXA-,-.

"r  •-'/'  <;  /a.2  . '


y^.  r ^’-/'/..w  ..fr  ^’■•‘y'"  -y  . fr'y

rP:  >yy.*y£,.x^/../  'py.-y.,
A^—^zA.y  .APc  l^.yyi^.,l,  ^..


\


K'


r

V '


t


I


n


:M


. j


Report  1)1/  2lr.  NethcrcVift.


381


3.  REPORT  OF  MR.  F.  G.  NETHERCLIFT,  EXPERT  IX  HAXD-

WRITING,  OX  THE  BLAYATSKY-COULOMB  DOCUMEXTS.

10,  Bedford  Row,  AY.C.

March  1885.

In  ■ compliance  with  your  instructions,  I have  carefully  examined
and  compared  the  several  documents  you  have  submitted  to  me  for  my
opinion  as  a Professional  Expert  in  handwriting,  wliicli  are  contained
in  Two  Packets  as  follows  : —

Packet  1.

Consists  of  an  Envelope  marked  3,  in  which  is  contained  a slip  of
paper  the  writing  on  which  commences,  “ The  Mahatma  has  heard,”  Ac.
A Telegram  in  a dilferent  handwriting.  An  envelope  addressed
Madame  E.  Coulomb.  A letter  on  green  paper  ; and  a letter  on  pink
paper.  In  answer  to  the  first  question  in  my  instructions  the  whole  of
these  documents,  with  the  exception  of  the  Telegram,  were  written  by
Madame  Blavatsky.

The  Envelope  marked  7 containing  a scrap  of  ruled  paper  marked
10,  the  writing  on  which  commences  “ Za  imste,"  Ac.,  is  by  the  hand  of
Madame  Blavatsky.

An  Envelope  directed  Mme.  and  MoM-  Coulomb  is  likewise  to
Madame  Blavatsky’s  hand.

An  Envelope  marked  10,  containing  a lettei’  marked  2 the  writing
of  which  commences  “J/a  belle  chere  amie,”  is  likewise  by  the  hand  of
Madame  Blavatsky.

******

An  Envelope  marked  28  containing  a letter  of  several  pages  written
in  violet  ink.  The  whole  of  this  is  written  by  Madame  Blavatsky.

An  Envelope  marked  Xo.  11,  containing  a letter  written  in  violet
ink  commencing  “ J/a  chere  Madame  Coulomb”  is  all  by  the  hand  of
Madame  Blavatsky.

Packet  2.

An  Envelope,  postmark  “ Cambridge,”  containing  a letter  on
foreign  paper  addressed  to  Mr.  Myers  in  the  undoubted  handwriting
of  Madame  Blavatsky.

Scrap  written  in  pencil  commencing  “ Damodar  send  me,”  Ac.,
in  the  undoubted  handwriting  of  Madame  Blavatsky.

Envelope  containing  2 sheets  foreign  paper  dated  Elberfeld,
addressed  to  Mr.  Myers,  in  the  undoubted  handwriting  of  Madame
Blavatsky.

A letter  one  sheet  addressed  to  Mr.  Myers  commencing  “You  are
very  kind,”  Ac.,  in  the  undoubted  handwriting  of  Madame  Blavatsky.

A letter  consisting  of  a sheet  and  a-half  addressed  to  Mr.  Myers


382


Note  on  Certain  Phenomena  not


commencing  “ It  does  seem  extraordinary,”  &c.,  in  the  undoubted  hand-
writing of  Madame  Blavatsky.

*****

On  placing  Madame  Blavatsky’s  genuine  or  acknowledged  hand-
writings in  juxtaposition  [with  the  doubted  ones],  I really  cannot  see  that
there  has  been  any  attempt  to  disguise  the  hand  [in  the  latter].  Every
characteristic  of  her  handwriting  may  be  traced  throughout.  Some  off
the  writings  appear  more  rapidly  executed  than  others  ; as  will  alw'ays'
be  observed  in  looking  at  a mass  of  correspondence  ; but  all  the  writings,
I have  mentioned  as  being  positively  written  by  Madame  Blavatsky,  are
undeniably  hers  without  disguise.  If  she  intended  any  of  tliem  to  be  inj
a feigned  hand,  I can  only  say  that  the  disguise  is  so  flimsy  that  any
Expert  Avould  not  notice  the  attempt.

******

(Signed)  Frederick  George  Netiierclift
April  7th,  1885.

[The  a.sterisks  indicate  the  position  of  passages  about  Mr.  Damodar’s'
writing,  and  the  K.H.  Avritings  to  Avliich  Mr.  Hodgson  has  referred  on

O'  O O j

2).  282,  as  those  Avhich  Avere  originally  submitted  to  Mr.  Netherclift.
No  statements  of  Mr.  Netherclift  about  the  Blav^atsky-Coulomb  letters
themselves  have  been  omitted.  A second  batch  of  Blavatsky-CoulomB
letters  was  submitted  shortly  afteinvards  to  Mr.  Netherclift,  who
returned  them  all  in  a 25acket  along  Avith  the  undoubted  Avritings  of
Madame  Blavatsky  entrusted  to  him  for  com25arison.  This  2iacket  of
writings  was  endorsed  by  him  as  folloAvs  : “ The  whole  of  the  Avritings
contained  in  this  packet  are  by  the  hand  of  Madame  Blavatsky,
Avhether  acknoAvl  edged  to  be  genuine  or  othei’Avise.  Tliey  vary  in  the
degree  of  care  Avith  Avhich  they  are  Avritten,  but  in  my  opinion  there
is  no  attempt  to  disguise  the  hand. — (Signed)  F.  G.  N.”]


4.  NOTE  ON  CERTAIN  PHENOMENA  NOT  DEALT  WITH  IN
MR.  HODGSON’S  REPORT.

By  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick.

There  are  certain  narratives  of  2^1i®i^omena  connected  Avith  the
TheosojAhical  Society  Avliich  liaAm  been  brought  to  the  notice  of  the
Committee,  AvhichhaA-e  not  comeAvithin  the  scope  of  Mr.  Hodgson’s  investi-
gations. The  Committee  tliink,  hoAvever,  that  in  forming  a judgment  of
the  whole  eAudence  the  reader  should  hav'e  before  him  as  full  an  account
as  possible  of  all  such  2Ahenomena  as  there  seems  to  be  a facie

difficulty  in  exjdaining  by  the  recognised  laws  of  nature,  and  they
liave,  therefore,  asked  me  to  2iut  together  in  the  present  note  the  residuum


Dealt  with  in  Mr.  Hodgson's  Report.


385


of  narratives  with  wiiich  Mr.  Hodgson  has  not  dealt,  and  to  append  such
remarks  as  seem  to  me  to  throw  light  on  them.

I may  observe  that  all  to  which  there  will  be  occasion  for  me  to  refer
were  printed  in  our  first  report ; the  only  partial  exception  being  an
incident  described  by  Mr.  Hudolph  Gebhard  (see  p.  385),  of  which  we
liad  received  no  written  account  when  the  first  report  was  printed,  and
which  we,  therefore,  there  very  briefly  mentioned.  No  later  phenomena
liave  come  under  our  notice.

Tlie  plienomena  I shall  have  to  discuss  consist  of  four  cases  of
letters  received  in  a mysterious  manner,  and  four  cases  of  supposed
“ astral”  apparitions.  Tlie  mysterious  element  can  be  easily  eliminated
in  one  of  the  letter-phenomena,  and  in  the  case  of  an  apparition  of  wliicli
iMadame  Blavatsky  was  the  alleged  percipient.  As  regards  the  other
cases  of  letters,  it  is  difficult,  I think,  with  our  present  knowledge,  to
suggest  a completely  satisfactory  explanation  ; but  with  the  evidence
before  us  of  an  elaborate  combination,  under  Madame  Blavatsky’s
direction,  to  produce  spurious  marvels,  I cannot  attach  much  weight  to
this  difliculty.  The  remaining  cases  of  apparitions  are  undoubtedly
interesting,  but  for  reasons  wliich  I shall  give  later  on,  I do  not  think
that  stress  can  be  laid  upon  them  as  evidence  for  the  occult  powers  of
“ Mahatma  M.”  and  Mr.  Damodar.

The  following  account  is  from  Dr.  Hiibbe  Schleiden,  who  is  a well-
known  German  savant  and  publicist,  author  of  “ Etliiopien,”  and  other
works.  Madame  Blavatsky  was  in  England  at  the  time  of  the  incident.

Elberfekl,  August,  1884.

Dear  Madam, — You  requested  me  to  state  to  you  the  particular  circum-
stances under  which  I received  my  first  communication  from  Mahatma  K.H.
I have  much  pleasure  in  doing  so.

On  the  morning  of  the  1st  of  this  month  Colonel  Olcott  and  1 were  travel-
ling by  an  express  train  from  here  to  Dresden.  A few  days  before  I had
written  a letter  to  the  Mahatmas  which  Colonel  Olcott  had  addressed  and  en-
closed to  you,  which,  however,  as  I now^  liear,  never  reached  you  but  was  taken
by  the  Masters  whilst  it  was  in  the  hands  of  the  post  officials.  At  the  time
mentioned  I was  not  thinking  of  this  letter,  but  was  relating  to  Colonel
Olcott  some  events  of  my  life,  expressing  also  tlie  fact  that  smee  my  sixth  or
seventh  year  I had  never  known  peace  or  joy,  and  asking  Colonel  Olcott’s
opinion  on  the  meaning  of  some  striking  hardships  I have  gone  through.  In
this  conversation  we  were  interrupted  by  the  railway-guard  demanding  our
tickets.  When  I moved  forwards  and  raised  myself  partly  from  the  seat  in  order
to  hand  over  the  tickets,  Colonel  Olcott  noticed  something  white  lying  behind
my  back  on  that  side  of  me  which  was  ojiposite  to  the  one  where  he  was  sittmg.
When  I took  up  that  wliicli  had  appeared  there  it  turned  out  to  be  a Tibetan
envelope,  in  which  I found  a letter  from  Mahatma  K.  H.,  written  with  blue
pencil  in  his  well-known  and  unmistakable  handwriting.  As  there  were
several  other  persons  unacquainted  to  us  in  the  compartment,  I supiiose  the


384


I^otc  on  Certain  Phenotncna  not


Master  chose  this  place  for  depositing  the  letter  near  me  where  it  was  the
least  likely  to  attract  the  unwelcome  attention  and  curiosity  of  outsiders.
The  envelo2)e  was  jdainly  addressed  to  me,  and  tlie  communication  contained
in  the  letter  was  a consoling  reflection  on  tlie  oi>inion  which  I had  five  or  ten
minutes  ago  given  on  the  dreaiy  events  of  my  past  life.  The  Mahatma  ex-
]>lained  that  such  events  and  the  mental  misery  attached  to  it  were  beyond
the  ordinary  run  of  life,  but  that  hardships  of  all  kinds  would  be  the  lot  of
one  striving  for  higher  spiritual  develojnnent.  He  very  kindly  exj^ressed
his  opinion  that  I had  already  achieved  some  idiilantlirojjic  work  for  the
good  of  the  world.  In  tliis  letter  were  also  answered  some  of  the  c[uestions
which  1 had  put  in  my  first-mentioned  letter,  and  an  assurance  was  given
me  that  I was  to  receive  assistance  and  advice  when  I should  be  in  need  of  it.

I dare  say  it  would  be  unnecessary  for  me  to  ask  you  to  inform  the
Mahatma  of  the  devoted  thankfulness  wliicla  I feel  towards  him  for  the  great
kindness  shown  to  me,  for  tlie  Master  will  know^  of  my  sentiments  without
my  forming  them  into  more  or  less  inadequate  words. — I am,  dear  madam,
in  due  resjiect,  yours  faithfully,

Hubbe  Schleiden.

To  Madame  Blavatsky,  Elberfoid,  Platzhofistrasse,  12.

Elberfeld,  9/11/84.

Dear  Sir, — In  really  to  your  question  about  the  letter  from  Mahatma
K.  H.,  which  I received  in  a railway  carriage  of  an  express  train  wdiile  in
motion,  I beg  to  say  that  it  aiijiears  to  me  absolutely  impossible  that  the
letter  could  have  been  brought  into  the  train  by  any  siqiiiosed  agent  of
Madame  Blavatsky’s.  It  is  true  w^e  had  not  changed  carriages  since  leaving
Elberfeld,  but  the  letter  did  not  at  all  fall  out  of  the  air,  but  was  found
behind  my  back  when  I moved,  and  must,  therefore,  have  been  deposited
between  my  back  and  the  cushion  of  the  seat  against  which  I was  lying.
There  was  no  iiossibility  of  getting  there  for  any  matter  in  one  of  the  three  or
four  aggregate  states  knowm  to  our  Western  science.  Besides,  Madame
Blavatsky  could  have  nothing  to  do  with  this  letter,  which  was  a rejfiy  to
questions  which  I had  writk  i on  Tuesday,  the  29th  July,  and  which  left
Elberfeld  on  that  or  the  following  day  for  London,  addressed  to  Madame
Blavatsky.  Now,  these  (questions  could  not  have  been  delivered  in  Loiidon  be-
fore Thursday  or  Friday  of  that  w'eek,  and  a reidy  could,  in  the  ordinary  jjostal
way,  not  have  been  in  Elberfeld  before  Saturday  or  Sunday.  The  event  of
my  receiving  the  rejily  of  the  Mahatma,  hcuvever,  occurred  on  Friday  morning,
the  1st  August.  I may  mention  here  that  Madame  Blavatsky  assured  me
she  never  found  my  questions  enclosed  in  the  letter  to  her  ; these  must  have
been  taken  out  while  in  the  hands  of  the  jiGst.  My  best  proof  of  the
genuineness  of  this  jflienomenon,  I find,  though,  is  the  contents  of  the  letter,
for  it  was  not  only  a re^ily  to  the  said  questions,  but  also  referred  to  the
conversation  I wm  just  at  that  time  having  with  Colonel  Olcott.  I cannot
doubt  that  this  handwriting  of  the  Mahatma  must,  therefore,  have  been
I)reci2)itated  by  him  at  tliat  very  instant  and  transmitted  to  me  by  a magic
process  which  lies  beyond  the  iiower  of  ordinary  men. — I am,  dear  sir,  yours
very  truly,

Hubbe  Schleiden.

To  F.  W,  H.  Myers,  Esq.,  Cambridge.


Dealt  with  in  Mr.  Hodgson's  Report.


385


A fewmonths  earlier  a letteris  said  to  have  fallen  in  a railway  carriage
occupied  only  by  Colonel  Olcott  and  Mr.  Mohini,  in  the  express  train
between  Paris  and  London.  But  Madame  Blavatsky  and  Babula  were
tlien  in  Paris  or  its  neighbourhood,  and  though  Colonel  Olcott  and  Mr.
Mohini  both  maintain  that  the  letter  could  not  have  been  placed  in  the
compartment  before  they  started,  in  such  a manner  as  to  fall  in  the
course  of  their  journey,  they  have  both  shown  themselves  to  be  too
inobservant  and  inaccurate  as  witnesses  for  their  conviction  on  this
point  to  be  of  much  value.  But  in  Dr.  Hiibbe  Schleiden’s  case  I do
not  feel  able  to  make  a definite  suggestion  as  to  how  the  letter
reached  him  by  natural  means  ; for,  as  I have  said,  Madame  Blavatsky
was  in  England,  and  we  cannot  point  to  any  known  agent  of  hers  whom
we  know  to  have  been  at  Elberfeld  at  the  time.  Still,  we  cannot  say
that  there  were  none,  or  even  that  one  did  not  accompany  Colonel
Olcott  and  Dr.  Hiibbe  Schleiden  in  the  railway  carriage.  The  relevancy
of  the  Koot  Hoomi  letter  to  (1)  Dr.  Hiibbe  Schleiden’s  questions  in  his
letter  to  Madame  Blavatsky,  and  (2)  to  his  conversation  with  Colonel
Olcott,  I am  unable  to  treat  as  evidentially  important,  without  more
accurate  knowledge  as  to  the  contents  of  the  two  letters,  since  I cannot
regard  it  as  improbable  beforehand  that  the  conversation  should  take
the  particular  turn  which  rendered  the  Koot  Hoomi  letter  appropriate.
I do  not  profess,  however,  as  I have  said,  to  give  a completely
satisfactory  explanation  of  the  phenomenon.  I am  merely  suggesting
possibilities  and  giving  reasons  why  I cannot,  under  the  circumstances,
attach  weight  to  it  as  evidence  of  occult  agency.  Other  simjjler  and
easier  explanations  may  suggest  themselves  to  tlie  reader’s  mind.  It
must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  training  for  adeptsliip  under  Madame
Blavatsky’s  supervision  is  not  unlikely  to  include  orders  which  must  be
blindly  carried  out,  to  convey  letters  mysteriously  to  other  people.

I give  next  Mr.  Rudolf  Gebhard’s  account  of  his  experience,  written
out  by  him  for  Mr.  Hodgson.  This  phenomenon  also  must,  I think,
remain  without  special  explanation.  It  is  unfortunate  that  Mr.  Gebhard
did  not  wi’ite  an  account  of  it  at  the  time  it  occurred,  as  it  is  of  course
possible  that,  after  an  interval  of  three  months,  some  important  detail
may  have  escaped  his  memory,

Adyar,  December  31st,  1884.

Dear  Sir, — Complying  with  your  request  I shall  give  you  in  the  following
an  account  of  a phenomenon  as  witnessed  by  me  in  my  father’s  house  somo
couple  of  months  ago.

Before  I describe  what  has  happened,  allow  me  to  say  a few  words  about
myself  ; it  will  serve  to  show  that  I am  better  adapted  than  most  other  people
to  advance  an  opinion  on  these  subjects.

Since  my  earliest  boyhood  I have  always  had  a taste  and  a knack  for
conjuring  tricks.  When  in  London  I took  lessons  there  from  a professional
conjurer.  Prof.  C.  E.  Field,  a man  whom  I consider  to  be  one  of  the  best


380


Kofe  on  Certain  Phenomena  not


sleight-of-hand  men  I ever  met.  Later  on  I made  the  personal  acquaintance
of  most  of  our  leading  performers  in  that  line  and  exchanged  tricks-
with  them  ; there  is  not  a single  line  of  conjuring  I am  not  acquainted
with,  may  that  be  coin  or  card  tricks,  or  the  so-called  anti  - spiritualistic
tricks  in  imitation  of  a spiritualistic  stance.  I then  tliink  that  when  such
a jdienomenon  takes  place  in  my  presence,  it  is  quite  a natural  thing  for
me  to  keeji  my  eyes  wide  open,  in  order  not  to  be  deceived  by  a trick,  and
this  is  the  reason  why  I think  myself  especially  qualified  to  advance  an
opinion  about  the  matter  on  hand.

Account  of  a Phenomenon  that  occurred  in  PRherfeld  (Germany),  on

September—;  1884.

At  9 p.m.  of  the  above  named  date  a small  circle  of  friends,  Theosophist
and  non-Theosophist,  were  sitting  in  the  drawing-room  of  my  father’s  house
(PlatzhofFstrasse  12).  hladame  Blavatsky,  who  was  one  of  the  party,  was-
.seated  on  a couch  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  and  the  rest  were  seated  in
a semi-circle  around  her.

Whilst  the  conversation  was  going  on  Madame  Blavatsky  suddenly
looked  uj),  and  taking  a listening  attitude  said  tliere  was  something  going
on  in  the  room,  but  that  she  could  not  then  make  oixt  for  certain  vdiatitwas.

Mrs.  H.,  an  American  lady  and  a clairvoyante,  said  that  she  had
felt  an  influence  since  some  time  already,  and  Madame  Blavatsky  and  Mrs.
PI.  then  saw  like  a ray  of  light  going  towards  a large  oil  painting  hanging
over  a piano  in  the  same  room.

My  motlier,  sitting  witli  her  back  to  the  piano  and  ojiijosite  a looking-
glass,  said  that  she  had  seen  in  the  glass  like  a faint  fla.sh  of  lightning.  After
a minute  or  so  Madame  Blavatsky  asked  the  party  what  they  would  like
to  take  jdace,  as  she  now  felt  sure  that  the  “ Master  ” would  do  something
for  us  that  night.

Different  requests  were  made,  l)ut  finally  it  was  unanimously  resolved
‘ ‘ that  a letter  should  he  ashed  for,  addressed  to  my  father,  and  treating
on  a subject  that  he  should  mentally  ivish  for."  (I  draw  your  attention  te
the  three  2;)oints  ; nobody  knew  beforehand  that  the  whole  party  would
choose  a letter  ; second,  that  my  father  should  be  the  addressee  ; third,  what
subject  my  father  might  be  thinldng  of.  Madame  Blavatsky  did  not
influence  our  choice  as  she  did  not  advance  any  suggestion.)  Madame
then  said  she  saw  something  going  on  with  the  picture  above  spoken  of
and  that  2'>i’obal>ly  we  should  find  something  there.  I accordingly  got  up
and  examined  that  jjicture,  but  could  not  find  anything.  As  the  picture
was  fastened  to  the  wall  in  a slanting  position,  the  toj)  jjart  lianging  over,

I lifted  it  off  the  wall  and  examined  carefully  every  inch  of  it.  No
letter  ! The  space  tlien  between  the  wall  and  the  back  of  tlie  picture  was
fully  eight  inches  and  i>erfectly  lit  uj),  as  there  was  a gas  bracket  on  each
side  of  it.  I let  the  picture  fall  back  and  said  I could  not  find  anytliing,
but  Madame  Blavatsky  told  me  to  try  again,  and  I repeated  my  examination
in  the  same  way.  Not  contented  with  that  I got  up  on  the  i^iano  (a
grand,)  and  there  again  looked  beliind  the  jncture  and  passed  my  hand
along  the  toj)  f)f  it,  twice.  Nothing  ! (I  liad  been  searcliing  all  this  time
for  a letter,  not  for  another  article  where  perhajis  a sh'i)  of  j^aper  had


Dealt  u'ltli  in  3L'.  Hodgson's  Report.


387


escaped  my  attention. ) I turned  round  to  Madame  Blavatsky,  saying  that
I could  find  nothing,  when  she  exclaimed,  “ There  it  is  ! ” I turned
shaqdy  round  and  a letter  fell  dorni  from  behind  the  picture  on  the  piano.
I picked  it  up.  It  was  addressed  to  my  father,  (“  Herrn  Consul  Gebhard  ’ )
and  treated  of  the  subject  he  had  been  thinking  of.

Now  I wish  to  draw  your  attention  to  some  important  points.

1.  There  was  no  secret  receptacle  either  in  the  frame  or  at  the  back  of
the  picture.  2.  The  letter  was  in  size  Sin.  by  2iin.  not  folded  up  mto  a
smaller  compass.  3.  I was  the  only  one  who  came  near  the  picture  ; all  the
others  kept  their  seats  except  one  gentleman,  who  got  up,  but  whom  I did
not  allow  to  handle  the  picture.  Madame  Blavatsky,  seated  all  the  time  on.
the  couch,  distant  four  to  five  yards.  4.  Between  the  time  I last  touched
the  ijicture  and  the  moment  the  letter  put  in  an  appearance  there  elapsed..
from  15  to  20  seconds.  After  Madame  Blavatsky  had  said  “There  it  is,”  1
turned  round.  The  letter  then  had  not  appeared  but  came  in  view
about  one  second  after  that.  How  could  Madame  Blavatsky  have  seen
it  ? 5.  The  letter  lay  on  the  piano  about  five  inches  off  the  wall ! The-
pictui-e  frame  at  the  bottom  part  touches  the  wall,  because  as  I said
before  the  top  part  hangs  over.  Now  there  may  be  space  enough  for  a letter,
being  flat  against  the  wall,  to  glide  through,  but  then  that  letter,  continuing
its  way,  o^ujht  to  drop  behind  the  piano  (i.e.,  between  the  wall  and  the
piano  and  from  there  on  to  the  floor),  as  the  i^iano  does  not  touch  the  wall.
How  can  it  be  found  five  inches  off  the  w'all  ? 6.  The  subject  my  father  had

in  his  mind  was  kno\\ui  to  me,  because  I knew  he  had  that  very  morning;
received  a letter  from  my  brother  in  New  York  on  some  personal  matter,  and
when  the  letter  had  been  decided  upon  by  the  party  I whispered  to  my
father,  “Ask  for  an  ansunr  on  that  letter,  this  morning,”  and  he  said  he  would.

I consider  this  a most  complete  phenomenon,  and  I challenge  any
conjurer  of  to-day  to  repeat  it,  and  I am  willing  to  pay  £T00  to  see  it  done-
by  a conjurer  under  the  same  conditions.  Perhaps  hli-.  hlaskelyne  (Alessrs.
Maskelyne  and  Cooke,  Egyptian  Hall,  Piccadilly),  who  has  done  already  so
much  to  detect  mediumistic  frauds  (?),  will  take  up  this  challenge.

If  there  is  any  further  information  you  want,  I am  entirely  at  your
seinice. — I remain,  dear  sir,  your  obedient  servant,

R.  Hodgson,  Esq.,  Adyar.  Run.  Gebhakd.

I learn  from  Mr.  Hodgson  that,  in  reply  to  his  inquiries,  Mr.  Gebhard
stated  that  he  did  not  think  that  a confederate  could  have  thrown  the-
letter  -wdtliout  its  being  observed,  but  he  did  not  seem  to  have-
preHously  contemplated  the  possibility  of  a confederate  having  been
present.

The  following  is  an  account  of  another  letter-phenomenon  by  a lady
resident  in  London,  and  known  to  some  members  of  the  Committee  : —

One  morning  in  J uly,  [1884,]I  was  called  by  Madame  Blavatsky  to  her  room
where  she  was  still  in  bed.  She  desired  me  to  open  a drawer  and  give  her
out  a letter  ■which  was  lying  there  closed  and  addressed.  I did  so.  She
asked  me  to  notice  that  the  letter  was  addressed  in  the  handwriting  of  a
person  whom  I knew,  that  it  was  fastened,  and  apparently  had  not  been.


388


Note  on  Certain  Phenomena  not


•oisenecl.  Slie  then  took  a match  and  having  lighted  it  proceeded  to  burn  the
letter.  I jn-otested  against  this  being  done,  but  she  answered  “It  is  the
Master’s  orders,”  and  further  added,  “ You  had  better  go  to  your  room  and
meditate.”  I went  upstairs  into  my  room  and  shut  the  door.  I remained
there  some  time  considering  the  whole  affair.  The  window  of  the
room,  which  was  at  the  top  of  the  house,  was  wide  open  and  looked  out
into  a garden.  Before  the  window  was  a dressing-table  on  wliich  was  a pink
cloth  ; there  was  no  mirror  on  the  table,  only  one  or  two  small  articles  of
toilet,  and  the  sun  was  shining  full  into  the  room.  I went  to  the  window
without  any  definite  reason,  and  as  I approached  the  table  I jterceived  on  the
pink  cover  a large  white  envelope.  I took  it  up,  looked  at  it,  and  found  tliat
it  was  closed  and  evidently  contained  a letter,  but  there  was  no  superscrqition.
I had  the  letter  in  my  hand  for  a little  while  and  then  looked  at  it  again.  To
my  great  surprise  I found  that  where,  but  a few  moments  previously,  there
had  been  a blank  space,  there  was  distinctly  visible  a name  and  address  written
in  j^urple  ink,  in  a handwriting  which  I well  knew  as  being  that  of  one
jjf  the  Mahatmas.  The  name  and  address  was  that  of  the  writer  of  the  letter
1 had  itreviously  seen  burned.

A plienomeiion  of  this  kind  may  be,  and  in  this  case  was,  as  1 under-
:stand,  very  impressive  to  the  witness,  without  carrying  conviction  to
otlier  people.  For  it  is  imjiossible  for  tliern  to  feel  sure  tliat  it  wa.s
adequately  distinguished  from  wliat,  I suppose,  we  are  all  constantly
liable  to,  the  mere  non-observation  of  something  whicli  was  there  all  the
time.  It  is  j^ossible  also  that  some  combination  of  substances  may  have
been  used  instead  of  iidc,  which  would  become  coloured  (temporarily  at
.any  rate)  by  exposure  for  a few  minutes  to  the  air.  A chemist,  well
([ualified  to  give  an  opinion,  tells  me  that  he  tliinks  such  a combination
inislit  be  used  ; but  we  liaA'e  never  seen  and  have  no  access  to  the
writing  in  question,  and  without  tins  it  is  of  coui'se  impossible  to  obtain
an  expert’s  opinion  of  any  value  as  to  wliether  this  particular  writing
^'■ould  have  been  so  produced  or  not.  I do  not  myself  think  it  likely
that  it  was  so  produced.

As  to  a post-card  received  by  Mr.  Keightley  in  Paris,  on  which
Mahatma  M.’sinitials  were  written,  and  a letter  wliich  Madame  Blavatsky
professed  to  read  without  opening,  also  in  Paris,  it  is  unnecessary  to  say
more  than  that  Babula  seems  to  have  intervened  between  the  postman
and  the  recipient  in  both  cases.  The  letters  probably  came  by  an  earlier
delivery  than  that  by  which  they  appeared  to  arrive.

I proceed  to  “ astral”  apparitions.  In  August,  1884,  Mr.  Myers
received  the  following  letter  from  Mr.  Padshah,  a young  Parsee  gentle*
man  and  a Theosophist.

77,  Elgin  Crescent,  Netting  Hill,  W.

Saturday,  August  16th.

Dear  Mr.  Myers,— Madame  has  just  told  me  that  she  saw  Damodar  last
'light,  quite  distinctly,  standing  in  a corner  facing  the  chair  in  which  she  was


Dealt  ivilh  in  Mr.  Hodgson's  Rcjport.


389'


seated  in  the  drawing-room.  There  were  jjresent  in  tiie  room,  Mr.  and  Mi's.
Oakley,  Mr.  Gehhard,  and  otliers,  wlio  do  not  seem  to  have  known  or  felt
his  presence.  Madame  tells  me  that  he  had  come  to  ask  what  it  was  she  had
told  him  about  some  trunk  the  night  before.  It  ap2‘)ears  slie  had  told  him
the  jjrevious  night  to  take  care  in  the  Custom  House  of  a certain  trunk  taken
by  Babula,  who  has  2)roceeded  to  India  to-day.  Damodar,  unable,  however,,
to  make  himself  more  distinct,  as  Madame  desired,  seems  to  have  not  under-
stood her.  So  he  apj^eared  again  this  morning  more  than  once,  asking,
“ Why  do  you  not  answer  about  tlie  ti’unk  ? ” Madame  tells  me  she  related
the  appeai’ance  the  night  before  to  Mrs.  Z.,*  Mrs.  X.,*  and  Miss  Z.*  The^
circumstance  would  have  been  thought  of  no  more,  but  on  my  consulting
Madame  this  afternoon  about  some  articles  about  toai:)pear  in  The  Theosuphist
she  naturally  sjjoke  of  Damodar  ; and  among  other  things,  very  enthusiastically
of  his  latest  development.  It  occurred  to  me  that  this  was  a sjilendid  chance^
for  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  ; you  had  rej^eatedly  desired  me  to
commit  to  paj^er  what  I have  seen  or  might  see,  and  tliere  are  many  filends.
in  England  and  India  who  are  ready  to  trust  my  word.  I suggested  I should
write  to  you,  and  wait  for  Damodar’s  letter,  where  he  might  refer  to  his  astral
p)resence.  But  that  would  be  no  test.  1 suggested  an  immediate  des]Kitcli
of  a telegram,  and  also  a letter  to  you  signed  by  Mr.  Keightley  and  Mr.
Gebhard,  who  had  come  some  time  before,  and  myself.  Mr.  Keightley  made
some  difficulties  as  to  the  value  of  the  test,  alleging  that  our  word  may  not
suffice  for  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research.  I prefer  to  think  otlierwise..
And,  accordingly,  the  telegram  is  decided  ui)on.  It  is  in  tliese  terms  : —

To  Damodar,  Theosophist  Office,  Madras.

Telegraph  instantly  what  you  told  me  last  night.  Bl4.vat.sky


You  will  see  that  I have  suggested  the  telegram  should  be  from  Madame-
Blavatsky,  to  undo  any  difficulty  Damodar  might  make  to  reply  to  others —
for  instance,  to  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research.

Madame  is  going  to-day  to  Elberfeld,  and  I shall  open  the  answer  as  soon
as  Damodar  telegraphs  it,  and  send  you  a copy.

I ho2)e  Damodar  will  make  no  difficulties  now,  and  tlie  test  will  be,  we
trust,  if  not  complete,  at  least  of  considerable  scientific  value. — I remain,
dear  Mr.  Myers,  yours  sincerely,  Pad.siiah


The  telegram  received  from  Mr.  Damodar  in  reply  seemed  distinctly
irrelevant.  It  ran;  “Ma.ster  wants  you  here  to-night  don’t  fail  look  into-
your  pocket.”

On  August  30th  Mr.  Myers  proceeded  to  Elberfeld  and  inciuired  of
Mr.  Keightley  (a  Theosophist  and  a graduate  of  Trinity  College,  Cam-
bridge, who  was  staying  at  Mr.Gebhard’s  along  with  Madame  Blavatsky,
Mr.  Mohini,  Colonel  Olcott,  &c.),  Avhetlier  lie  had  received  Mr.  Damodar’s
telegram  and  wdiat  he  thought  of  it.  He  replied  tliat  tlie  party  had
left  London  on  August  16th,  and  arrived  at  Elberfeld  on  the  17th.  On
arriving  they  Avere  met  by  a telegram  from  Mr.  Padshali,  reporting  Mr..


♦ Fictitious  initials


S90


Note  on  Certain  Thcnomcna  not


Dfxmoclar’s  reply.  Tlie  wliole  party,  said  Mr.  Keiglitley,  were  surprised
and  distressed  at  what  seemed  to  them  also  th3  conspicuous  failure  of
the  intended  test.  Madame  Blavatsky  said  that  she  iiad  in  fact  received
such  a message,  and  had  found  such  a letter  in  her  pocket;  but,  of
course,  recognised  the  inadequacy  of  such  statement.  It  then  occurred
to  her  to  consult  her  private  note-book.  This  was  said  to  be  contained
in  a despatch-box  which  had  been  in  Mr.  Iveightley’s  charge  from  the
time  when  it  was  packed  and  locked,  just  after  the  telegram  liad  been
sent  to  Damodar,  and  just  before  the  party  left  London  by  an  evening
train,  August  1 6th,  for  Elberfeld,  viA  Queenborough  and  Flushing.  She
at  once  asked  Mr.  Keiglitley  to  go  and  fetcli  the  despatch-box.  In  the
note-book  was  found  the  entry  here  translated,  which  was  then  seen  by
all  present.  It  is  written  partly  in  Russian,  partly  in  English.  The
words  in  italics  are  in  English  in  the  original.

“ I saw  suddenly  Damodar  this  August  15tli.  Wliile  looking  on  I called,
trying  to  find  out  some  one  near  me  to  call  attention  to  him.  I was  sitting
under  the  looking-glass,  and  tried  to  make  myself  heard  by  Mrs.  Z.,  who  was
sitting  near  Mrs.  Oakley.  Upon  seeing  him,  I said  to  him  : Damodar,  can't
you  make  yourself  visible  to  all  ? Instead  of  answering,  he  says  to  me  some-
thing very  strange,  that  he  had  seen  me  the  night  before,  and  could  not
understand  what  I wanted  from  him.  He  said  : You  came  to  me  about  hco.

I covld  not  understand  ivhat  you  were  asking  me  for.  Is  it  for  a trunk  sent
here  ? Then  a few  minutes  later  he  again  ajipeared  and  said  ; Master  ivants
you  here  to-night.  Don't  fail.  Look  into  your  pocket."

On  AVednesday,  September  10th,  aletter  from  Mr.  Damodar  was  received
at  Elberfeld  by  Madame  Blavatsky  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Keiglitley,
who  noted  its  registered  envelope  ; * and  believes  that  the  letter  had  gone
first  to  London  and  been  forwarded  to  Elberfeld.

The  letter — which  all  who  have  examined  it  believe  to  be  in  Mr.
Damodar’s  handwriting — is  as  follows  : —

Adyar,  Madras,  IGth  August,  1884.

Respected  Upasika, — I could  not  make  out  what  you  wanted  here  when
you  came  here  on  the  morning  of  the  15th  at  about  two  or  three  of  Madras
time.  So  in  the  night  I attempted  to  come  and  ask  you.  It  was  between  10  and

II  in  the  night  here  ; so  it  must  be  between  five  and  six  in  the  evening  of
London  time.  AVho  was  that  gentleman  sitting  near  you  under  a big  looking-
o-lass  and  who  was  that  short  old  lady  about  ? I think  there  were  .several
others  in  the  room  at  the  time  ; but  I could  not  make  out  how  many  or  who


* Mr  Keiglitley  noiiced  that  the  envelope  was  registered,  with  Damodar,  he
believes,  written  in  the  corner,  and  that  the  letter  was  actually  in  the  envelope
—the  letter  being  in  Damodar’s  handwriting.  But  Air.  Keiglitley  and  Aladame
Blavatsky  between  them  then  lost  the  envelope.  AVe  have,  however,  ascer-
tained tliat  a registered  letter  answering  to  the  description  of  this  one  reached
London  on  September  7th.  It  left  Bomb.ay  on  August  19th,  and  therefore  pro-
bably was  sent  from  Aladras  on  August  IGth,  or  17th.


Dealt  with  in  3Ir.  Hodgsons  Rojwrf.


391


they  were.  If  I had  known  tliat  at  that  time  you  would  be  amidst  so  many
people  I would  not  have  attempted  to  come.  I might  have  seen  you  later,
when  you  were  alone.  And  why  was  it  that  you  asked  me  to  make  myse'*^
visible  to  all  ? You  know  I am  too  much  of  a beginner  yet,  in  this  line,
was  only  because  you  asked  me  to  do  so,  I attempted.  Wliether  I succeeded
or  failed,  I do  not  know.  And  in  all  this  aflixir,  the  main  object  I came  fur  was
not  quite  accomplished.  I wanted  to  know  exactly  what  you  liad  come  here
for  ? I heard  something  about  a trunk  ; but  whether  you  wanted  me  to  take
care  of  something  you  had  sent  or  whether  you  wanted  me  to  send  you
something  I do  not  quite  remember.  However,  I have  sent  you  a parcel
and  I believe  it  is  that  which  you  mean.  Did  you  find  in  your  j)ocket  that
Thibetan  order  from  the  Ma.stek  to  come  here,  to  notify  you  about  which  he
sent  me  to  you  again  ? I hope  yourself,  nor  the  friends  who  were  there,
will  not  speak  about  this  to  any  one  and  not  make  a public  talk  of  it  in  tlie
Society  for  Psychical  Research  and  such  other  places.  I am  sure  Mr.  Ewen
and  others  would  have  done  it,  if  I had  not  asked  you  jn-ivately  to  prevent
the  publication  of  the  fact  of  Mr.  Ewen  having  seen  me  wlien  I came  to  see
you  and  Colonel  Olcott  and  committed  a blunder.  I hojie  I have  not  com-
mitted a mistake  in  sending  you  the  parcel.

Ever  yours  respectfully  and  sincerely,

Damodar  K.  Mavalajjkae.

It  certainly  cannot  be  said  that  the  possibility  of  collusion  between
Madame  Blavatsky  and  Mr.  Damodar  is  in  this  case  excluded.  But
though  on  the  one  hand  it  may  seem  strange  that  a planned  imposture
should  not  have  been  better  carried  out,  it  must  be  observed  on  the
other  hand  that  there  are  points  in  the  evidence  which  look  decidedly
suspicious.  Of  course,  if  there  was  imposture — as,  consideiing  what  we
now  know  about  both  Madame  Blavatsky  and  Mr.  Damodar,  I cannot
myself  profess  to  doubt — we  cannot  be  sure  of  discovering  the  precise
modus  operandi  by  merely  reflecting  on  the  phenomemx  intended  to
appear.  But  the  following  may  be  suggested  as  a possible  course  of
events.

Let  us  suppose  that  some  time  in  July,  after  she  had  Ijegun  lier
residence  at  Elgin-crescent,  and  could  therefore  descrilxe  the  lookino-
glass  and  the  lady,  Madame  Blavatsky  wrote  to  Mr.  Damodar  telling
him  to  post  a letter  on  August  16th,  such  as  that  we  have  printed,  and
that  she  would  take  care  to  make  it  correspond  with  events  in  London  ;
and  further,  that  when  the  day  came  she  performed  more  or  less
imperfectly — or  perhaps  only  spoke  of — her  part  of  the  programme,
but  forgot  the  “ Master-wants-you-here-to-night-look-in-your-pocket  ”
part.  Let  us  further  assume  that  the  telegram  to  India  was  no
part  of  the  original  plan,  and  that  Mr.  Damodar  was  left  to  his  own
devices  in  replying  to  it.  It  would  not  be  unnatural  that  he  should
reply  as  he  did,  that  being,  in  fact,  the  only  thing  he  was  supposed  t*?
have  told  her  ; about  the  ti'unk  he  was  sixpposed  to  have  asked  her.  1
•cannot  regard  it  as  at  all  satisfactorily  established  that  iladann;


3J2


N'ote  on  Certain  Phenomena  not


Blavatsky  had  no  opportunity  of  obtaining  access  to  her  note-book
between  the  time  when  the  telegram  was  sent  to  Mr.  Damodar  and  tlie
time  when  the  book  was  shown  to  the  party  at  Elberfeld  ; and  I think
the  entry  may  have  been  made,  or,  at  any  rate,  the  last  sentence  added,
in  that  interval ; — either  after  Mr.  Damodar’s  telegram  was  received,  or
at  some  previous  moment,  wlien  it  recurred  to  lier  memory  that  he  Avas
to  be  supposed  to  have  made  that  remark  about  the  Master.  Thus  all
that  occurred  Avould  be  accounted  for.

It  is  possible  that  tlie  entry  in  Madame  Blavatsky’s  note-book  may
liave  been  made  much  earlier — at  tlie  time  Avhen  she  first  communicated
tlie  plan  to  Mr.  Damodar — and  corrected  afterwards;  for  the  names  of
the  persons  present — Mrs.  Z.  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Oakley — are  Avritten  in
lead  pencil  over  the  original  purple  pencil,  rendering  Avhat  is  underneath
illegible.  But  I am  not  myself  inclined  to  believe  that  the  greater  part
of  it*  Avas  Avritten  at  this  earlier  date,  because  if  it  had  been,  I think  that
Madame  Blavatsky’s  and  Mr.  Damodar’s  descriptions  of  the  scene
Avould  haAm  agreed  better  than  they  do.  Madame  BlaA’atsky’s  phrases,
“I  called,  trying  to  find  out  some  one  near  me”  . . . “tried  to

make  myself  heard  by  Mrs.  Z.,”  &c.,  do  not  correspond  Avell  Avith  Mr.
Damodar’s  question  about  the  gentleman  “ sitting  near  ” her.

Thei’e  is  another  point  Avhich  strikes  me  as  someAvhat  suspicious
about  Madame  BlaA-atsky’s  entry  in  her  note-book,  and  which  strengthens
my  impression  that  it  Avas  made  after  the  telegram  Avas  sent.  For
what  purpose  Avas  it  made  1 Why,  if  it  Avas  merely  as  a record  of  an
eA’ent  interesting  to  herself,  and  not  for  comparison  Avith  an  expected
letter  from  Mr  Damodar,  sliould  she  put  in  so  uninteresting  a fact  as
that  she  Avas  sitting  under  the  looking-glass  ? But  if  it  Avas  intended  for
this  latter  object,  it  Avould  have  been  natural  to  shoAV  it  to  some  one  at
the  time  the  sending  of  the  telegram  Avas  being  discussed,  had  it  been
then  in  existence,  and  thus  to  improve  tlie  test.  I think  it  probable,
tlierefore,  that  tlie  entry  Avas  made  after  the  telegram  Avas  sent,  though
very  likely  before  the  ansAVcr  Avas  receiA^ed.

The  allusion  at  the  end  of  Mr.  Damodar’s  letter  is  to  an  apparition
of  him  seen  by  Mr.  E.  D.  EAven,  of  Chattisgarh,  Central  Provinces  of
India.  Mr.  Eavcii,  avIio  is  a Scotch  gentleman  of  honourable  repute,
wliose  organisation  is  highly  nei’A’ous,  saAV  Mr.  Damodar  (Avith  Avhom
he  Avas  acquainted)  in  “ astral  ” form,  as  he  supposed,  on  May  23rd,,
1884,  in  London.  On  his  mentioning  this  at  a meeting  of  our
Society,  on  May  28th,  Mr.  Damodar  Avas  at  once  telegraphed  to  by
Colonel  Olcott  (Mr.  Myers  being  present)  in  the  folloAving  words:

* It  is  noticeable  that  tlie  first  sentence  is  AA-ritten  in  blue  pencil,  and  the  rest
in  purple,  Avith  the  exception  of  the  corrections  in  lead  pencil.  This  suggests  that
the  AA’hole  note  AA  as  not  Avritten  at  the  same  time.


Dealt  icith  in  Mr.  Hodgson's  Reg)ort.


393


“ Olcott  to  Damodar,  Adyar,  Madras.  Have  you  visited  London  lately?
write  Myers  full  details.”  To  this  telegram  no  reply  was  received,  from
which  it  is  a natural  inference  that  Mr.  Damodar  was  unaware  of  the
vision,  though  he  7}iag  liave  had  other  reasons  for  his  silence.  His
mentioning  it  in  his  letter  of  Augu-st  16th  proves  nothing,  of  course,
since  there  had  tlien  been  more  than  time  to  acquaint  him  by  post  with
the  facts.  We  are  thus  left  without  any  evidence  to  distinguish  Mr.
Ewen’s  experience  from  a merely  subjective  hallucination.

Two  other  visions  I liave  to  deal  with.  The  first  is  an  experience
that  occuri’ed  to  Mr.  Vsevolod  SoloviofF,  Page  of  Honour  to  tlie  Czar,
and  son  of  the  tutor  of  tlie  late  Czar,  and  a Russian  author  of  higli
rejiute.  He  describes  what  occurred  as  follows  ; —

“ 1 Octobre,  1884,  Paris.

“Ayant  recu  une  lettre  de  ma  compatriote,  Mine.  IJelene  Blavatsky,
dans  laquelle  elle  m’informait  du  mauvais  etat  de  sa  sante  et  me  priait  de
venir  la  voir  a Elberfeld,  je  me  suis  decide  a faire  ce  voyage.  Mais  puisquc
I’dtat  de  ma  proiiro  sante  me  forfait  a certams  managements,  j’ai  prefero
m’arreter  a Bruxelles,  que  je  n’ai  jamais  vu,  pour  me  reposer,  la  chaleur
etant  accablaute.

“ Je  suis  parti  de  Paris  le  24  Aout.  Le  lendemain  matin,  au  Grand  Hotel
de  Bruxelles  oil  je  m’etais  arrete,  j’ai  rencontre  Mile.  A.  (fille  de  feu  ambas-

sadeur  russe  h et  demoiselle  d’honneur  de  1’  Imjierati-ice  de  Russie).  En

apprenant  que  je  me  rendais  h Elberfeld  ^lour  voir  Mine.  Blavatsky,  qu’elle
connait  et  estime  beaucoup,  elle  s’est  decidee  h ni’accomjiagner.  Nous  avons
passd  la  journe'e  ensemble,  comptant  partir  le  lendemain  jiar  le  train  do
iieuf  heures  du  matin.

“A  huit  heures,  etant  deja  completement  pret  h partir,  j’entre  choz
Mile.  A.  et  je  la  trouve  dans  un  grand  embarras.  Toutes  ses  clefs,  qu’elle
a I’habitude  de  garder  toujours  sur  elle  dans  un  petit  sac  et  qu’elle  a eu  dans
ce  sac  en  se  couchant,  avaient  disparu  pendant  la  nuit,  quoique  la  jiorte  de
sa  chambre  fut  ferme'e  ii  clef.  Ainsi  toutes  ses  malles  etant  fermdes,  inq)os-
sible  d’emballer  les  effets  dont  elle  venait  de  se  servir.  Nous  fumes  obliges
de  remettre  notre  depart  jusqu’au  train  d’une  heure  de  I’apres  midi,  et  fime.s
venir  le  serrurier  pour  ouvrir  la  plus  grande  malle.  Lorsqu’elle  fut  ouverte
toutes  les  clefs  que  nous  cherchions  se  trouverent  au  fond  de  la  malle,  amsl
que  la  clef  de  cette  malle,  attachee  comme  d'hahitude  avec  les  autres.  Ayant  k
nous  toute  notre  matinee,  nous  voulumes  faire  une  promenade,  niais  soudain
je  me  sentis  dans  un  etat  d’^trange  faiblesse  et  en  proie  a un  irresistible
besoin  de  dormir.  Je  me  suis  excuse  aupres  de  Mile.  A.  et  me  suis  retire  dans
ma  chambre,  m’empressant  de  me  mettre  au  lit.  Mais  je  ne  pus  m’endonnir
et  restais  les  yeux  fermes,  lorsque  tout  a coup,  dans  I’etat  de  veille,  j’ai  vu
devant  mes  yeux  fermes  toute  une  serie  de  paysages  inconnus,  qui  se  sont
graves  dans  ma  memoire  avec  leurs  moindres  details.  Lorsque  cette  vision
fut  dissipe,  je  me  sentis  remis  de  ma  faiblesse  et  me  rendis  aupres  de
Mile.  A.,  a laquelle  certainement  j’ai  raconte  ce  qui  venait  de  se  passer  en
lui  depeignant  les  paysages  dans  tous  leurs  details.

‘ Nous  sommes  partis  par  le  train  d’une  heure,  et  voici  qu  ajires  une

2 c


304


Note  on  Certain  Phenomena  not


<lemi  lieiire  de  route  Mile.  A.  me  dit  en  regardant  par  la  fenetre  : ‘ Tenez,  voici
un  de  VOS  paysages  ! ’ Je  I’ai  reconnu  a I’instant,  et  jusqu’aii  soir  j’ai  revu,
les  yeux  ouverts,  tout  ce  que  le  matin  j’avais  vu  les  yeux  fermes.  J’dtais
content  d’avoir  raconto  ma  vision  en  detail  a Mile.  A. , car  elle  pouvait  en
attester  la  realisation.  11  faut  dire  que  la  route  entro  Bruxelles  et  Elberfeld
ni’est  coin2>letement  inconnue,  car  c’etait  la  j^i'eniiere  fois  de  ma  vie  que  je
visitais  la  Belgique  et  cette  jiartie  de  I’AHeinagne.

“ En  arrivant  a Elberfeld  le  soir,  nous  nous  sommes  arretes  dans  un
hotel  et  nous  nous  liatames  de  nous  rendre  aiq)res  de  Mine.  Blavatsky  dans
la  maison  de  M.  Gebliard.  Le  meme  soir,  les  membres  de  la  Society  Thdoso-
jiliique  qui  entourent  Mine.  Blavatsky  nous  ont  montre  deux  siqierbes
liortraits  k I’hiiile  des  Mahatmas  M.  et  Koot  Hoiimi.  Le  j^ortrait  de  M.
surtout  in’oduisit  sur  nous  une  iinjiression  extraordinaire,  et  ce  n’est  jias
e'toiinant  qu’en  revenant  h notre  hotel  nous  en  parlions  encore  et  I’avions
devant  nos  yeux.  C’est  ii  Mile.  A.  de  raconter  ce  qu’elle  a vu  et  senti
jiendant  la  nuit  suivante.  Mais  voici  ce  qui  ra’est  arrivd  : —

“Fatigue  jiar  le  voyage,  je  dormais  iiaisibleinent lorsque  tout  d’un  coiqi  je
fus  reveille  jiar  la  sensation  d’uii  souffle  bien  cliaud  et  [idnetrant.  J’ouvre  les
yeux  et  dans  la  faible  clarte  qui  entrait  dans  la  chambre  jiar  les  trois  fenetres,
jo  vois  devant  inoi  une  grande  figure  d’liomme  vetu  d’un  long  vetementblanc
ot  flottant.  En  memo  teinjis  j’ai  entendu  ou  senti  une  voix,  qui  me  disait,
j j lie  jmis  jire'ciser  en  quelle  langue,  bien  que  je  le  comjiris  jiarfaiteinent,
d’allumer  la  bougie.  Je  dois  dire  qii’au  lieu  de  m'effrayer  je  restais  tout  a
fait  tranquille,  seulement  je  sentais  mon  cceur  battre  avec  une  force
redoublee.  J’ai  alluine  la  bougie  et  en  rallumant  j’ai  vu  a ma  montre  qu’il
c'tait  deux  heures  du  matin.  La  vision  ne  disfiaraissait  jias.  C’etait  un
homme  bien  vivant  qui  dtait  devant  moi.  Et  j’ai  reconnu  I’instant  meme
on  lui  le  bel  original  du  iiortrait  que  nous  avions  vu  le  soir.  11  s’assit  jires
de  moi  sur  une  cliaise,  et  commenca  a me  jiaiier.  II  parla  longtemjis,
toucliant  les  questions  qui  m’iiitsressent,  mais  la  jilus  grande  jiartie  de  cet
entretien  ne  iieut  etre  rapjiorte'e  ici  car  il  s’agissait  de  choses  tout  ii  fait
liarsoniielles.  Je  iiuis  dire,ce2)endant,  qu’entro  autres  il  m’a  annonce  que
])our  le  voir  dans  son  corps  astral  j’ai  du  jiasser  jiar  beaiicouji  de  jirejiarations,
et  que  la  derniere  lecon  me  fut  donnee  le  matin  meme  lorsque  j’ai  vu,  les  yeux
fermds,  les  jiaysagesque  je  devais  revoir  en  realite'  le  meme  jour.  Puis  il  me
<lit  que  je  jiossede  une  grande  force  magnetique  en  voie  de  develojqiement.
Alors  je  lui  demandai  ce  que  je  devais  faire  avec  cette  force.  Mais,  sans
rcpondre,  il  disiiarut.

‘ ‘ J’etals  seul,  la  jiorte  de  ma  chambre  etait  fermue  a clef.  J’ai  cru  a une
hallucination  et  meme  je  me  suis  dit  avec  eff’roi  que  je  commence  il  i^erdre  la
tete.  A 2>eine  ai-je  eu  cette  idee  que  j’ai  revu  k la  meme  jilace  riiomme
sujierbe  aux  vetements  lilancs.  Il  hocliait  la  tete  et  en  souriant  me  dit  :

‘ Soyez  sur  que  je  ne  suis  pas  une  hallucination  et  que  votre  raison  ne  vous
quitte  2)as.  Blavatsky  vous  iirouvera  demain  devant  tout  le  monde  que  ma
visite  etait  reelle.’  Puis  il  disixarut.  J’ai  constate  ii  ma  montre  cpi’i!  etait
ju'is  do  troia  heures.  J’ai  eteint  la  bougie  et  je  me  suis  rcndormi  immediate-
merit  d’un  ])rofond  sommeil.

“ Lc  matin,  en  arrivant  avec  Mile.  A.  pres  de  Mme.  Blavatsky,  lairremiere
chose  qu’clle  nous  dit  avec  son  sourire  enigmati([ue  : ‘ Eh  bien  ! comment


Dealt  u'ith  in  Mr.  Hodgson’s  Deport.


31)5


avez-vovis  passe  la  niiit?’  ‘ Tres  bien,’  lui  ai-je  repondu,  et  j’ai  ajoiite,
‘Vous  n’avez  rien  a me  dire?’  ‘N’on,’  fit-elle,  ‘jesais  seulement  que  le
Maitre  a ete  cliez  vous  avec  uii  de  ses  eleves.’

“Le  soil’  dumeme  jour  M.  Olcott  a trouve  dans  sa  poche  un  petit  billet,
-fpie  tous  les  theosoplies  ont  reconnu  pour  etre  de  I’ecriture  de  M.,  concu  e;i
ces  termes  ; ‘ Certainement  j’etais  Ik,  mais  qui  pent  ouvrir  les  yeux  a celui
■qui  lie  veut  pas  voir  ? — INI.  ’

“ C’etait  la  reponse  a mon  incredulite,  puisque  toute  la  jouriiee  je
tacliais  de  me  persuader  que  ce  n’etait  qu’une  hallucination,  ce  qui  fachaib
Mine.  Blavatsky.

“Je  dois  dire  cpi’k  peine  revenu  a Paris,  oil  je  suis  actuellement,  mes
hallucinations  et  les  faits  etranges  qui  m’entouraient  se  sont  completement
dissipes.  “Vsevolod  Solovioff.”

This  was  certainly  a striking  experience.  M.  Solovioff  tells  us  that  ho
tried  to  persuade  him.self  throughout  the  folio  aung  day,  till  he  received
the  note,  that  it  was  a liallucination,  hut  it  was  very  unlike  tlio
hallucinations  that  are  known  to  occur  to  sane  and  healthy  persons.
I do  not  myself  think  that  there  is  the  same  difficulty  in  supposing  it
to  have  been  an  unusually  vivid  dream.  It  will  be  observed  that  no
satisfactory  test  of  an  objective  origin  is  afforded  by  the  occurrences  of
the  next  day.  Madame  Blavatsky’s  remark  that  the  Master  and  one  of
his  pupils  had  been  with  him,  was  a perfectly  safe  one.  “ The  Master  ”
would  do  either  for  Koot  Hoomi  or  M.,  and  the  Chela  would  cover  a
•considerable  range  of  other  possibilities ; while,  if  Madame  Blavatsky  had
been  wrong  in  assuming  that  the  question  “ Vous  n’avez  rien  a me  dire? '’
indicated  that  there  had  been  an  experience  of  some  sort,  the  non-seeing
of  the  Master  could  be  accounted  for  by  a want  of  sufficient  development
on  the  par£  of  M.  Solovioff  3 or  in  whatever  way  the  non-seeing  of  the
Chela  actually  was  accounted  for.  The  coiatents  of  the  note  found  in
Colonel  Olcott’s  pocket  added  no  confirmation,  and  the  note  might
easily,  it  would  seem,  have  found  its  way  there  by  natural  means  with-
out his  knowledge.  AVe  have  not  the  details  of  Aldlle.  A.’s  experience,
but  I believe  it  consisted  in  a dream  or  vision,  more  or  less  similar  to  M.
Soloviofl:”s.  It  is  possible  that,  if  we  had  the  details,  we  might  find  it
more  probable  than  not  that  the  dreams  were  telepathically  connected  ;
but  the  similarity  of  circum.stances  and  conditions,  of  trains  of  tliouglit
and  emotions,  before  retiring  to  rest,  might  easily  lead  to  similar
nocturnal  experiences.

Since  writing  the  above  I have  learnt  that,  owing  to  events  which
have  since  occurred,  M.  Soloffioff  no  longer  regards  his  experience  as
•affording  any  effidence  of  occult  agency.

If  hi.  Solovioff's  exjrerience  was  a dream,  Ave  have  no  reason  foi
regarding  the  following  experience  of  Mrs.  Gebhard,  with  Avhich  I will
•conclude,  as  anything  but  a Avaking  one.

Mrs.  Gebhard,  of  Elberfeld,  Avell  knoAvn  to  one  member  of  tho
Committee,  Avrites  as  folloAvs  with  regard  to  an  incident  which  occurred

2 c 2


396


Note  hy  Mt's.  II.  Sidyicick.


at  a meeting  of  the  London  Lodge  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  ora
April  7th,  1884.  On  that  occasion,  Madame  Blavatsky,  who  had  come
in  unexpectedly,  and  was  sitting  among  the  audience,  suddenly  called  to
Mr.  Mohini,  as  though  she  saw  some  one.  Mr.  Mohini  joined  her  in  a
lobby,  and  appeared  also  to  perceive  some  one,  whom  he  saluted  with
respect.  Colonel  Olcott’s  speech,  however,  was  not  interrupted,  and
nothing  was  said  to  .show  who  it  was  that  Madame  Blavatsky  and  Mr.
Mohini  thus  greeted  At  the  end  of  the  meeting,  they  both  stated  that
they  had  seen  Mahatma  M.

‘ ‘ On  the  7 th  of  April  last,  being  at  a meeting  of  the  Theosophical  Society
at  Mr.  Finch’s  rooms,  Lincoln’s  Inn,  I had  a vision,  in  which  I saw  the
Mahatma  M.  At  the  moment  I was  listening  attentively  to  Colonel  Olcott’s  open-
ing speech  to  the  Society.  I saw  standing  on  my  right  side,  a little  in  front,  a
very  tall,  majestic-looking  person,  whom  I immediately  recognised  to  be  the
Mahatma,  from  a picture  I had  seen  of  him  in  Mr.  Simiett’s  possession.  He
was  not  clad  in  white,  but  it  seemed  to  me  to  be  some  dark  material  with
coloured  stripes,  which  was  wound  round  his  form.  The  vision  lasted  only  a
few  seconds.  As  far  as  I could  learn,  tlie  only  jjcrsons  besides  myself  who
had  seen  the  Mahatma  were  Colonel  Olcott,  Mr.  Mohini,  and,  of  course,
Madame  Blavatsky.  “ Mary  Gerhard.”

This  may  have  been  a collective  hallucination,  and  as  sucli  would
have  ))een  very  interesting ; but  we  have  not  the  contemporaneous  and
independent  accounts  of  Mr.  Mohini  and  Colonel  Olcott  as  to  dress,
<fec.,  nor  the  evidence  as  to  the  time  of  the  appearance,  which  would  be
required  to  prove  this.

We  have  then,  as  I said  at  the  beginning,  three  experiences,  one  of
them  adapted  to  corroborate  the  assertion  that  Mi'.  Damodar  can
project  his  “ astral  form,”  and  the  other  two  apparently  confirmatory
of  the  existence  of  Mahatma  M.,  and  in  two  out  of  these  three  cases  the
percipient  was  probably  completely  awake.  It  must,  however,  be
remembered  that  one  result  of  the  investigations  of  the  Literary  Com-
mittee is  that  merely  subjective  hallucinations  occur  to  sane  and  healthy
persons  considerably  more  frequently  than  is  generally  supposed ; and
secondly,  that  what  makes  these  experiences  available  as  evidence  for
Madame  Blavatsky  is  her  previous  allegation  that  Mr.  Damodar  and
Mahatma  M.  were  liable  to  appear,  while  the  expectation  caused  by
this  allegation  may  have  operated  in  producing  the  hallucinations,  or
determining  their  form.

In  any  case,  though  the  experiences  are  interesting  and  important  ira
relation  to  the  general  investigations  of  the  Society — yet  in  the  absence
of  other  evidence  for  the  existence  of  M.,  or  for  Mr.  Damodar’s  power  of
voluntarily  appearing  ; and  in  the  absence  also  of  such  evidence  in  each
instance  as  we  should  require,  if  it  stood  alone,  to  distinguish  it  from  a
merely  subjective  experience — they  cannot  be  held  to  prove  any  of  the
powers  claimed  for  “ Adepts  ” and  their  disciples.


Details  of  the  Ei  idcncc  referred  to  on  Page  207.  397

4).  jjETAILS  of  the  evidence  referred  to  on  page  207.

In  July,  1879,  shortly  after  he  had  urgently  represented  to  Madame
Blavatsky  the  desire  of  himself  and  other  members  of  tlie  Theosophical
Society,  in  London,  for  independent  proof  of  the  existence  of
“ Adepts,”  Mr.  C.  C.  Massey  found  in  the  minute  book  of  tlie  Society
a letter  addressed  to  him,  and  purporting  to  come  from  one  of  the
Adept  “ Bi’otliers  ” ; Madame  Blavatsky  being  then  in  India.  Tins
discovery  was  made  at  the  lodgings  of  a member  of  tlie  Society  (who  was
at  that  time  a non-iirofessional  medium),  and  in  whose  custody  the
minute  book  then  was.  The  book  was  brought  to  Mr.  Massey  by  this
medium  in  connection  with  tlie  business  of  the  Society.  The  medium
will  be  here  described  as  X.,  and  the  medium’s  “control”  as  Z.*

In  May,  1882,  Mr.  Massey  was  shown  a letter  addressed  to  X.  (v/ho
had  then  ceased  to  reside  in  this  country),  apparently  in  Madame
Blavatsky’s  handwriting,  dated  28th  June,  1879,  and  contained  in
an  envelope  bearing  the  registered  London  post-mark,  21st  July,  1879.
He  took  a copy  of  the  first  part  of  the  letter,  which  was  as  follows : —

My  Dear  Good  Friend, — Do  you  remember  what  Z.  told  or  ratlier
promised  to  me  ? That  whenever  there  is  need  for  it,  he  will  always  be
ready  to  carry  any  message,  leave  it  eitlier  on  Massey's  table,  his  pocket,  (_.r
some  otlier  mysterious  place?  Well  now  there  is  the  most  ‘important  ‘need
for  such  a show  of  his  powers.  Please  ask  him  to  take  the  enclosed  letter
.and  put  it  into  M.  's  pocket  or  in  some  other  still  more  mysterious  place.
But  he  must  not  hioiv  it’s  Z.  Let  him  think  what  he  likes,  but  he  must  not
susjiect  3mu  had  been  near  him  witl.  Z.  at  your  orders.  He  does  not  distrust
y'ou,  but  he  does  Z.

Also  if  he  could  treat  L.  L.  with  some  Oriental  token  of  love  it  would  be
right,  but  none  of  them  must  suspect  Z.  of  it,  therefore  it  is  more  difficult
to  make  it  to  do  it  (sic)  than  it  would  otherwise  be  were  it  to  be  produced  at
one  of  your  seances  . . . &c.

Mr.  Massey  was  not  at  that  time  at  liberty  to  take  the  otlierwise
obvious  course  of  communicating  on  the  subject  with  Madame  Blavatsky
or  X.  (with  neither  of  whom,  moreover,  was  he  then  in  conespondence),
and  it  was  not  till  some  months  later — autumn  of  1882 — tliat,  the
circumstances  of  the  Society  seeming  to  him  to  rccpiire  the  disclosure,
lie  communicated  the  facts  privately  to  friends  in  it.

It  is  noteworthy  that  a letter  written  by  Aladame  Blavatsky  to  IMr.
Massey  on  July  2nd,  1879,  four  days  after  the  date  of  the  letter  to  X.,
seems  mainly  written  in  order  to  say  that  the  London  Fellows  of  the
Theosophical  Society  are  not  to  have  j^kenomena,  and  to  e.xplain  why.
Bhe  says  in  it : “I  tell  you  as  a fact  that  the  desires  of  the  London

* Tlie  suppression  of  these  n.ames  is  by  request  of  i\Ir.  IMassey.  It  i.s  not
material  to  puhlisii  them  for  the  present  purpose.


398


Details  of  the  Evidence  referred  to  on  Page  207.


Fellows  have  been  the  subject  of  earnest  consultation  among  our
brothers.  Some  have  been  half  inclined  to  gratify  the  wish  for

]ilienomena But  it  has  always  ended  in  the  unanimous

conviction  that  to  do  this,  would  only  degrade  adeptship,  and  help  the
false  theories  of  Spiritualism.”  Knowledge  of  the  letter  found  in  tlie
minute  book  seems  therefore  to  be  implicitly  denied.  Mr.  Massey
(uideavoured  to  obtain  some  explanation  of  it  from  Madame  Blavatsky,
))ut  without  success.

It  was  not  until  INIay,  1884,  that  on  receiving  a letter  from  INIadame
Blavatsky — the  first  for  several  years — on  another  matter,  he  sent  her
a copy  of  so  much  of  the  letter  to  X.  as  lie  had  transcribed,  and
olitained  in  reply  an  acknowledgment  that  slie  was  the  author  of  all
that  part  of  it  which  concerned  him.  The  following  are  extracts  from
lier  letter: —

Engliien,  Friday.

All  I have  the  honour  now  of  telling  you  is — on  my  iluosophical  leord  of
Honour, — 1 That  I am  the  author  of  but  the  first  part  of  the  letter  you  quote,
'i.e.  a few  hurried  lines  to  X.  after  receiving  the  letter  addressed  to  you  and
received  by  meat  Girgaum,  Bombay — asking  X.  to  remind  Z.  of  his  jiromise
and  convey  the  letter  to  you  by  any  means  provided  they  ivere  occidf.*  My
authorship  begins  with  “ My  dear  good  friend” — and  ends  with — “he  does
not  distrust  you  but  he  does  Z.”  What  follows  after  has  never  been  written  by
me,  nor  have  I any  knowledge  of  it,  all  you  may  say  to  the  contraiy.
Whether  the  remainder  of  it  is  harmless  or  not  ; and  whether  you  are  at  a
loss  to  conceive  why  it  should  be  forged — all  this  is  flapdoodle  for  me.  I
Jiave  not  written  it  and  that’s  all  sufficient /or  me;  whatever  it  is  for  you.
Who  the  devil  may  be  “ L.  L.”  is  immaterial;  since  the  Masters  do  not
evidently  want  me  to  see  at  the  bottom  of  the  trick.  It  is  forged — that’s,
all  I know  ; as  many  other  things  were,  and  may  be  yet — for  your  sf)ecial
benefit,  as  I think.  I had  for  years  and  entirely  lost  every  remembrance
of  tills  letter  and  now  it  comes  to  me  as  a flash  back  with  all  its  details.
4Mien  Olcott  sjioke  to  me  of  it  I had  no  clear  remembrance  of  it  and

now  I have And  now  to  the  2>ciiit.

What  do  you  find  of  so  deceitful  and  unpardonahle  in  this  first  jiart  of  my
letter,  which,  as  you  think,  is  really  tlie  only  one  that  incriminates  me  ? I
may  be  also  lacking — in  your  code  of  notions  of  honour — “ a sense  of  the
commonest  morality” — and  if  so,  then  all  I can  say,  it  must  be  so  in  your
sight,  surely  not  in  mine.  I have  not,  nor  have  I liad,  in  writing  it  the
smallest  or  faintest  notion  I was  thereby  deceiving  you,  trying  to  impose  upon
you,  &c.,  &c.  Do  you  call  intldiolding  facts  one  has  no  right  to  enter  upon
— deceiving  ? The  letter  forwarded  to  you  was  genuine,  from  as  genuine  a
“Brother”  as  ever  lived;  it  was  received  p/ienomoiaM;/ by  me  in  the  iiresence
of  two  theosoiihists  who  asked  me  what  it  was  and  whom  I told  it  was  none
of  their  business.  Was  I deceiving  them  also  ? I was  ordered  to  have  it
delivered  into  your  hands,  but  was  not  told  how  and  left  to  do  the  best  I


* This  proviso  docs  not  a2)pcar  in  the  letter  to  X


Details  of  the  Evidence  referred  to  on  Page  207.


390


knew  how.  I asked  Olcott,  how  I was  to  send  it  over  to  you  and  he  said  ho
did  not  know  ; audit  was  he  who  suggested  Z.  saying  “Cant  you  send  it
over  to  him  as  it  came  to  you  and  tlien  liave  him  deliver  it  to  Massey  if  it  is
so  difficult  for  you  to  send  it  direct  1 — I remember  saying  to  him  that  it
was  difficult  and  that  I would  anyhow  ask  Z.  to  drop  it  somewhere.  I do
not  know  whether  he  understood  what  I really  meant ; and  if  he  did,  he  has
long  ago  forgotten  all  about  it.  But  I remember  it  was  through  hun  that  the

idea  about  Z.  came  into  my  head And  would  I have  tried  to

deceive  you,  at  that  time,  above  all  ? You  who  had  entire  confidence*  in  me,
who  had  declared  as  mucli  in  the  Theosophist,  you  whom  I was  so  proud  to
have  in  the  Society,  I could  have  cheated  you  like  a paid  medium  ! . . .

to  say  that  in  the  case  of  t/(«t  letter  I had  plotted  consciously  to  deceive  you, —
I say  it  is  this  which  is  an  infernal  lie — wlioever  says  so  ! . . . .In  your

case.  Masters  had  forbidden  me  to  help  you  in  your  dealings  with  mediums —
to  encoiu’age  them  creii  with  X.,  for  fear  you  should  never  learn  to  discern
occult  from  Sjiiritual  xihenomena;  and  this  is  why  instead  of  writing  to  you —
“ Co  to  X.  and  you  will  get  a letter  from  a Brother  in  Scotland  through  Z.” —
I acted  as  I have.  That  I saw  nothing  in  it  then,  as  I do  not  see  now,  of  so
dreadful,  is  only  a proof  tliat  I have  not  received  my  education  in  London
and  that  our  notions  of  the  honourable  and  the  dishonourable  difier.  . .

There  are  thi’ee  points  wliicli  may  be  specially  noted  in  tliis  letter.
First,  tlie  part  of  the  letter  to  X.  acknowdedged  by  Madame  Blavatsky
clearly  indicates  a plan  of  imposing  on  Mr.  Massey  as  a manifesta-
tion of  the  power  of  the  Mahatmas  a phenomenon  which  she  knew  not
to  be  due  to  any  such  agency.  Secondly,  tlie  whole  letter  to  X.  as
above  quoted  suggests  a strong  suspicion  that  she  intended  the
phenomenon  to  be  produced  by  perfectly  natural  and  normal  agency.
This  suspicion,  however,  would  be  most  strongly  suggested  by  tlie  part
of  the  letter  Avhich  does  not  relate  to  Mr.  Massey.  Accordingly,
Madame  Blavatsky’s  method  of  dealing  with  the  situation  in  which  she
finds  hei’self  placed  is  to  acknowdedge  the  autliorsliqD  of  the  part  of  the
letter  wdiich  she  had,  aj^parently,  some  hope  of  explaining  to  IMr.
IMassey’s  satisfaction,  while  denying  the  authorship  of  the  latter  part.
Tier  method  of  dealing  with  the  Blavatsky-Coulomb  correspondence  is
precisely  similar.  Thirdly,  her  explanation,  however  ingenious,  is  not
perfectly  consistent,  for  it  is  impossible  to  explain  (1)  Why  she  did
not  send  the  “ Brother’s  ” letter  direct  to  Mr.  Massey  by  post,  unless
she  wdshed  to  make  him  believe  it  had  reached  him  by  occult  means  ;
(2)  Why  she  made  no  allusion  to  it  -when  she  wrote  to  him  about
letters  and  phenomena  on  July  2nd,  1879,  and  stated  so  positively
that  there  were  to  be  no  phenomena,  unless  she  wished  him  to  believe
that  she  had  nothing  to  do  with  it — that  it  had  not  passed  through  lier

* It  may  be  observed,  however,  that  Mr.  Massey’s  confidence  in  Madame
Blavatsky  liad  not  iirevciitcd  his  urgent  requirement  of  proof  of  the  “ Adents  ”
which  should  be  independent  of  any  such  confidence.


400


Details  of  the  Evidence  referred  to  on  Page  207.


hands  ; and  (3)  how  a “ Brother  ” in  Scotland  could  be  so  ignorant  of
geography,  or  about  Madame  Blavatsky’s  occult  acquirements,  as  to
tliink  it  desirable  to  send  a letter  for  INIr.  Massey  in  London  round  by
Bombay,  instead  of  posting  it  himself  at  the  nearest  post-office.

The  following  further  facts  may  be  noted: — (1)  That  “ K.  H.,”  in
letters  v/hich  have  been  seen  by  Mr.  Massey,  avowed  and  defended
Madame  Blavatsky’s  authorsliip  of  so  much  of  the  letter  as  she  herself
afterwards  admitted,  and  similarly  denied  the  parts  denied  by  her.
(d)  Tliat  X.  absolutely  denied  to  Mr.  Massey  all  knowledge  whatev'er
of  Madame  Blavatsky’s  letter,  or  of  having  seen  the  letter  enclosed
in  it  before  it  was  discovered  by  Mr.  Massey  in  the  minute  book.  (3)
That  “ K.  H.,”  in  a letter  which  Mr.  Massey  has  seen,  attempts  to
reconcile  this  contradiction  by  suggesting  that  X.  received  the  letter  in
a mediumistic  state  of  trance  or  quasi-trance  !


CONTENTS  OF  THE  FOilEGOING  REPORT.


Statement  and  Conclusions  of  the  Committee

Outline  of  Mr.  Hodgson’s  Investiga.tion  and  Conclusions
E.xtraots  from  and  Comments  upon  Blavatsky-Ooulomh  Letters

The  Shrine  a “ Conjurer’s  Box  ”

Untrustworthiness  of  Mr.  Damodar’s  Evidence  ...  . .

Collapse  of  Evidence  for  Mr.  Damodar’s  “Astral”  Journeys

"WorthlessneES  of  Colonel  Olcott’s  Evidence  ...

Worthlessness  of  Mr.  Mohini  M.  Chatterjee’s  Evidence
-Vnd  of  the  remaining  Evidence  for  Appearances  of  Mahatmas

Reasons  for  Distrusting  Mr.  Babajee  D.  Nath

Appearance  and  Disappearance  of  Letters  accounted  for  ...

The  “Occult  World”  Phenomena  and  Weakness  of  Mr.  Sinnett’s  Evidence

Mr.  A.  O.  Hume’s  Evidence

Handwriting  of  Blavatsky-Coulomb  Letters

Circumstances  under  which  certain  Documents  were  received

Mr.  F.  G.  Netherclift’s  Opinion  on  the  K.  H.  Writing

Reasons  for  attributing  K.H.  Letters  to  Madame  Blavatsky

Changes  in  the  use  of  the  English  d by  Madame  Blavatsky

Two  K.  H.  Letters  .attributed  to  Mr.  Damodar

Deception  by  Mr.  Bhavani  Shankar  ...  ...  ...

Chela  Document  signed  B.  D.  S.,  written  by  Mr.  Babajee  D.  Nath

Forged  Hartmann  Document  written  by  Madame  Blavatsky

Author  sluiJ  of  Mahatma  M.  Writing
Ignorance  Displayed  by  Mahatmas

Root  Hoomi’s  bad  English

Chelas  incited  to  Fraud

Possible  Motives  of  Mr,  Damodar...

Colonel  Olcott  ...

Summary  of  the  main  points  involved  in  the  Inquiry
Motives  of  Madame  Blavatsky
Appendices  ...

Mr.  F.  G.  Netherclift’s  Report  on  Blavatsky-Coulomb  Documents

Phenomena  that  have  occurred  in  Euroiie  ...  . .

.Evidence  suggestive  of  Fraud  by  Madame  Blavatsky  in  1879


PAGE

201-207

207-210

211-219

219-220

226-231

231-237

237-239

239- 24.5
245-248

240- 247
218-250
250-273
273-275
270-277
278-281

282- 283

283- 293
290-291
293-297

297

298
298-391

301- 302

302- 304
305-307

308

809-310

311

312- 313

313- 317
318-380
381-383
383-390
397-400


Some  Ilujlier  Asjjects  of  Mcsmcriam.


401


II.


SOME  HIGHER  ASPECTS  OF  MESMERISM.

By  Ed?jund  Gurxey'  and  Frederic  W.  H.  M\ers.


Touto  fiovov  neiffdevTes  St(o  TrpoaeKvpaav  eKacTTOi.

— Empedocles.

After  years  of  neglect,  Mesmerism  is  once  again,  though  in  a tone
less  violent  and  defiant  than  heretofore,  making  a very  distinct  claim
to  serious  attention.  It  has  not,  indeed,  passed  the  stage  of  having  it.s
existence  widely  doubted ; but  those  who  grant  its  existence  are  more
and  more  impressed  with  a sense  of  its  impoi’tance — not  as  a mcD!
isolated  group  of  marvels,  but  in  virtue  of  its  intimate  relations  witli
ps3n'hical  research  in  general ; and  it  is  with  tliis  view  of  it  that  we  are
ourselves  concerned  in  the  present  paper.  We  have  already  dealt  at
some  length  with  the  primaiy  thesis  of  the  reality  of  Mesmerism.*  M’o
have  considered  adverse  tlieories,  and  endeavoured  to  show  that,  beyond
the  recognised  effects  of  attention  and  inhibition  wliich  are  broadly
classed  under  the  name  of  Hypnotism,  there  is  sufficient  evidence  for  a
specific  influence  whereby  certain  individuals  can  originate  in  certain
others  a well-mai'ked  group  of  physical  and  mental  phenomena.  The
topics  with  which  we  have  further  to  deal  are  of  wider  scope,  and
stranger  complexion.  They  are  three  in  number,  and  may  be  brief!  v
designated  as  (1)  the  mesmeric  treatment  of  disease;  (2)  sihnt
“willing ’’and  “willing  ” at  a distance  ; (31  clairvoyance.

The  three  classes  difter  among  themselves  in  their  relations  Iroth  to
science  and  to  mesmeri.sm  proper.  In  the  first  class — that  of  “mesmeric
healing  ” — a very  large  number  of  cases  fall  within  (or  at  any  rate  not
much  beyond)  the  limits  of  admitted  physiological  law  ; and,  so  far,
are  not  (like  some  of  the  effects  discussed  in  former  papers)  crucial  tests
of  a specific  mesmeric  influence.  Some  of  them  may  be  ascribed  to  the
recognised  “ action  of  the  mind  on  the  body  ” ; others  may  be,  at  most,
merely  hypnotic  in  origin — due,  that  is,  to  the  profound  nervous  change
which  is  now  so  widely  admitted  as  a true  eftect  of  monotonous  sensory
stimulation.  It  is  possible,  indeed,  that  in  proportion  as  tlie  student
realises  the  complexity  and  profundity  of  the  changes  induced,  he  will
be  disinclined  to  assign  rigid  limits  to  the  possible  methods  of  inducing
them — and  the  more  so  if,  mingled  with  the  easily  explicable  cases,  lie


* Trocccdijiys,  Yol.  I.,  p.  2jl,  &c.  ; Vul.  II.,  p.  201,  &c.  ; and  p.  289,  &c.


402


Some  Higher  Asgyeds  of  Mesmerism.


encounters  others  to  which  (as  before)  the  theories  of  imagination  and
of  liypnotism  seem  manifestly  inappropriate.  Yet  even  of  tliese  latter
cases,  where  mesmeric  influence  has  to  be  accepted,  and  orthodox
physiology  is  so  far  left  behind,  some  sort  of  physiological  picture  of  the
events  is  still  conceivable.  The  same  may  be  said  of  our  second  class  of
cases,  those  of  silent  or  distant  “ willing.”  For  the  rapport  here
implied  may  be  represented  as  only  a special  extension  of  that
“ telepathic  ” sympathy  between  two  organisms,  the  doctrine  of  which
is  slowly  creeping  within  the  circle  of  scientific  acceptance,  and  may
almost  be  said  to  tremble  on  the  confines  of  orthodoxy.  With  our
class — clairvoyance— it  is  far  otherwise;  and  this  class  is  to  be
doubly  distinguished  from  the  others.  On  the  one  hand,  it  carries  us
at  a bound  beyond  all  conceivable  limits  of  physiological  explanation
while  on  the  other  hand  it  is  not  primd  facie  suggestive  of  any  mesmeric
influence  at  all.  IMesmerism,  if  that  is  indeed  the  means  by  which  the
clairvoyant  state  is  induced,  is  here  no  more  than  the  gate  which  intro-
duces us  to  an  unknown  world  ; and  the  question  of  the  method  of
induction  (hypnotic  or  mesmeric)  sinks,  one  may  say  into  insignificance,
in  comparison  with  the  extraordinary  proljlems  imesented  by  the
condition  itself.

We  are  fully  awai’e  of  the  difficulties  which  such  language  suggests,
and  of  the  attitude  of  contemptuous  disregard  which  it  is  apt  to  provoke.
That  attitude  is,  indeed,  one  which,  we  think,  admits  here  of  special
excuse.  For  of  all  subjects  Mesmerism  is,  pei'hap.s,  the  one  that  has
sufiered  most  from  its  own  supporters  ; and  he  who  attemj^ts  to  form  a
judgment  of  it  from  its  literature  finds  himself  too  often  wading  through
a morass  of  unstable  theory,  played  over  by  the  ignis  fatuiis  of  an  ill-
trained  imagination.  Even  attempts  at  more  direct  study  are  apt  to
lead  the  inquirer  into  dismal  realms  of  credulity,  ignorance,  and  im-
posture ; while  the  genuine  facts,  like  other  rare  vital  phenomena,
have  had  no  particular  tendency  to  spring  up  among  the  persons  best
fitted  to  weigh  or  recoi’d  them.  It  is  comparatively  seldom  that  a
comjjetent  eye  has  been  ready  to  note  them  as  they  arrived  ; and  en-
thusiasts have  been  wont  to  embroil  what  philosophers  have  declined  to
disentangle.  Such  a statement  is  itself  a lesson  of  caution ; and  in
attempting  here  a somewhat  more  accurate  treatment,  it  is  rather  wuth
the  facts  than  with  their  explanation  that  we  shall  be  concerned.  So
far  from  solving  difficulties,  our  task  will  be  rather  to  indicate
where  they  lie,  and  to  bring  out  their  true  magnitude.  But  as  regards
the  facts  themselves,  we  hope  to  show  that  insurmountable  as  the  h
priori  objections  to  them  may  seem,  and  embedded  as  the  record  of
thein  too  often  is  in  futile  and  flighty  speculation,  the  evidence  is  still
such  as  no  (i  priori  objections  can  suffice  to  invalidate.  Considering
Low  often  pri/udyacte  contradictions  in  Nature  have  been  afterwards


Some  Higher  Asjyecfs  of  Mesmerism.


403.


liarmonised,  it  is  too  late  in  the  day  for  positive  testimony  of  the
quantity  and  quality  which  is  forthcoming  on  these  matters  to  suffer  a
permanent  eclipse ; and  it  is  beyond  question  that  the  confidence  of
denunciation  with  which  that  testimony  has  been  swept  out  of  court
has  been  in  inverse  ratio  to  the  care  with  which  it  has  been  examined.

As  regards  the  first  of  our  topics — mesmeric  treatment  of  disease —
though  it  was  here  that  the  aim  was  most  popular  and  the  evidence
most  abundant,  there  were  special  reasons  why  it  never  effected  any
permanent  lodgment  in  the  public  mind.  The  first  of  these  reasons-
lies  in  a single  woi’d — ansesthetics.  At  the  very  moment  (1846)  when
mesmerism  was  being  forced  u2:ion  the  profession  by  the  cases  of
j^ainless  ojoerations  which  were  recorded  almost  weekly,  “ animal
magnetism,”  in  the  Lancet’s  words,  was  “ su})erseded  ” Ijy  the  inhalation
of  ether.  “ Hiu’rah  ! Rejoice  ! ” wrote  Mr.  Liston  in  the  JLorth-
British  Review.,  “ mesmerism  and  its  professors  have  met  Avith  a heavy
blow,  and  great  discouragement  ” ; and  although  the  exultation  might
perhajjs  have  been  better  bestowed  on  the  boon  to  sufferers  than  ( n tlie-
blow  to  rivals,  the  fact  was  beyond  a doubt.  For  whereas  cuiati\  e-
inesmei’ism  claims  to  possess  tAvo  main  poAvers,  the  poAver  of  ra^ndly^
ancesthetising  and  the  poAver  of  gradually  vitalising — assisting,  that  is.
to  say,  by  some  change  in  circulation  or  innervation  the  curative  pro-
cesses of  Nature — it  is  plain  tha,t  the  frequent  and  familiar  sight  of
the  first  of  these  poAvers  is  almost  a necessary  jAre-requisite  for  the
patience  needed  to  aAvait  the  sIoav  operation  of  the  second.  While
Esdaile  Avas  constantly  jjerforming  the  most  terrific  ojAerations  Avithout
evoking  a groan,  the  agency  Avhich  he  used  received  such  an  advertise-
inent  as  induced  ^Aeople  to  wait  long,  and  try  patiently,  in  order  to-
find  out  all  that  that  agency  could  do.  But  the  new  ansesthetics —
more  rapid  and  more  certain  than  mesmerism  in  Europe  has  ever  been
• — took  from  the  mesmeriser’s  hands  the  \*ery  patients  on  Avhom  he
might  have  proved  his  poAvers  at  a stroke.  When  there  ceased  to  be
any  brilliant  and  unmistakable  achievements  to  Avhich  he  could  point
— when  no  one  any  longer  begged  to  try  his  art  for  the  excisiorr  of  a
tumour  or  the  removal  of  a limb — his  merely  restorative  passes,  so.
often  continued  Avithout  obvious  results  for  many  a Aveary  hour,
.seemed  as  devmid  of  reassuring  potency  as  the  Prophet’s  prescription,
“ Wash  in  Jordan  and  be  clean.”

Nor  are  further  reasons  hard  to  find  Avhy  mesmeric  treatment  should
languish,  Avhen  once  the  uniqueness  cf  its  claim  vras  gone.  It  Avas
tedious  to  the  patient,  and  it  Avas  not  remunerative  to  any  one  else.  Not
one,  not  even  Mesmer  himself,  ever  made  a fortune  by  its  aid.  Nor  has:
it  those  characteristics  which  sometimes  niake  jAatients  secretly  cling  to
remedies  that  their  medical  advisers  laugh  at.  The  success  of  jAatent
pills,  for  iijstance,  depends  either  on  capital  or  on  cathartics.  if  the


404


Some  ITujher  Aspects  of  Jlesmcnsm,


vendor  can  paint  their  name  on  evei’y  rock,  in  sight  of  every  railway,  in
tl  e United  States,  lie  may  make  them  of  what  he  pleases.  If  he  cannot
push  them  thus,  he  must  teach  them  to  make  their  own  way  by  produc-
ing some  manifest  eflect,  though  it  may  not  be  precisely  the  effect  which
he  claims  for  them.  Now,  mesmerism  would  never  pay  to  advertise  ;
and  in  a great  majority  of  cases  where  it  is  tried  on  white  men,  it  pro-
duces no  effect  at  all.

So  far,  then,  the  advocates  of  curative  mesmerism  miglit  fairly  com-
plain of  bad  luck  ; but  there  were  further  sources  of  weakness  in  their
own  camp.

We  have  spoken  of  the  qunntit.y  of  evidence  which  they  lirought  to
boar;  but  the  reception  and  the  rejection  of  this  evidence  have,  we
think,  been  equally  uncritical.  It  seems  to  have  been  thought
necessary  either  to  accept  every  I’eported  case  as  conclusive  of  the
justice  of  the  mesmerist’s  claim,  or  to  refuse  to  attach  the  slightest  im-
portance to  a single  one  of  them.  Fairly  regarded,  the  cases  seem  to
demand  most  careful  distinction.  The  evidence  of  the  mesmeric  effects
on  sensibiliti/,  not  only  in  the  production  of  amesthesia  but  in  the  relief
of  chronic  pain,  seems  primA  facie  overwhelming ; and  in  the  same  class
we  may  include  the  benefit  accruing  from  the  production  of  sleep  in
cases  (such  as  chorea  and  delirium  tremens)  where  narcotics  are
unadvisable  or  useless.  But  it  is  far  otherwise  with  the  evidence  for  the
actual  curing  of  disease.  It  is  easy  to  see  beforehand  how  the  testimony
in  these  two  classes  is  certain  to  differ.  Pain  is  a subjective  fact,  the
attestation  of  which  always  has  come  and  always  must  come  from  the
patient,  and  the  value  of  such  lay  evidence  was  as  great  40  years  ago
as  it  is  now;  nor  do  the  facts  of  sleep,  and  the  power  of  observing  its
beneficial  effects,  belong  more  to  one  generation  than  another.  But  the
value  that  can  lie  attached  to  the  evidence  of  the  experts  of  the  past
diminishes,  as  time  goes  on,  with  the  advance  of  diagnosis  and  treat-
ment ; and  the  impression  produced  now  on  a medical  exi^ert,  as  he
turns  over  tlie  13  volumes  of  the  Zoist,  might  probably  be  that,  of
the  cases  competently  observed  at  the  time,  the  proportion  is  small
indeed  where  the  alleged  facts  may  not  be  accounted  for,  either  by  a mis-
taken diagnosis,  or  at  any  rate  by  a substitution  of  the  laissezfaire
system  for  the  previous  violent  treatment  by  blistering,  purging,  and
bleeding.  Similar  cures,  he  would  sayq  are  effected  now  without  mes-
merism and  without  medicine.  Moreover,  the  mesmeric  cases,  both  at
home  and  abroad,  are  recorded — though  often  fairly  enough  for  the
popular  eye — with  an  exas^Derating  lack  of  technical  detail  ;.  and  the  area
from  which  confident  conclusions  can  be  drawn  is  thus  much  restricted.
It  is  disappointing,  for  instance,  to  have  to  pass  over  case  after  case  of
extremely  rapid  healing  of  violently  inflamed  knees,  just  because  tho
reporter  of  them  has  neglected  to  state  whether  the  limb  had  been


Some  Hirjhcr  jUpccU  of  2IesmeriS)n.


405


previously  kept  quiet,  and  so  leaves  it  open  to  suppose  that  it  had  not,
and  that  simple  rest  Avas  the  cause  of  the  cure.  Then  the  ipsissiina  verba
of  the  patient  are  given  -tt-ith  rather  too  serious  an  air.  However
conscientiously  a lady  may  have  “ taken  her  £2.5  worth  of  Godbald's
balsam,”  we  find  it  hard  to  believe  that  she  habitually  “ brought  ui?
more  nourishment  than  she  swallowed”;  “leprosy”  is  not  likely  to  be
produced  by  drinking  cold  water  while  hot ; and  “ having  to  walk  with
two  sticks”  should  not  be  too  often  accepted  as  definitely  diagnostic  of
rheumatism.  It  is  only  fair,  however,  to  say  that  the  circumstances-
were  such  as  to  make  certain  defects  of  description  almost  unavoidable.
Cases  which  should  have  been  among  the  best  were  those  which  doctoi’s
had  despaired  of,  and  where  naturally  no  professional  opinion  was  taken
immediately  before  the  new  treatment  began.  Such  cases  were  con-
tributed to  mesmeric  records  either  by  the  successful  “ magnetisers,”
who,  however  honest  and  benevolent,  were  not  sufficiently  alive  to  the
importance  of  cross-examination ; or  by  the  patients  themselves,  whose
style  sometimes  did  more  honour  to  their  hearts  than  to  their  heads.
But  if  unfortunate  phrases  are  sometimes  used,  this  is  a danger  from
which  few  are  exempt  when  in  contact  with  facts  which  they  know  to  be
genuine,  but  which  they  caimot  understand ; and  where  there  is  a back-
bone of  strong  cases,  to  decide  the  more  doubtful  ones  always  against
the  witness  would  clearly  be  quite  unfair.

The  canons  of  evidence  which  may  reasonably  be  applied  to  this
class  of  phenomena  are  such  as  even  laymen  may  venture  to  indicate  : —

(1.)  The  case  should  be  reported  throughout  by  a medical  man  ; or,
at  the  very  least,  thei’e  should  be  a medical  man’s  diagnosis  and
2')rognosis  of  the  patient’s  malady  before  mesmerism  is  resorted  to,  and
satisfactory  evidence  of  the  restoration  to  health.

(2.)  The  case  should  be  reported,  as  nearly  as  may  be,  at  the  time,
and  publicly,  so  that  objections  may  be  taken  to  it  befoi’e  the  circum-
stances are  foi’gotten.

(3.)  The  case  must  be  one  in  which  no  other  form  of  medical  treat-
ment lias  been  concurrently  employed.

(4.)  The  recovery  should  be  such  as  cannot  reasonably  be  attributed
to  the  vis  medicatrix  naturae.

(5.)  The  influence  of  imagination  should  be,  as  far  as  possible,
excluded.  This  can  sometimes  be  done  with  completeness  : as  when  the
passes  are  made  upon  a person  blind,  asleep,  delirious,  comatose,  or
demented  ; or  upon  an  infant  or  brute  beast ; or  even  on  a person  wlio
has  never  heard  of  mesmerism,  and  pays  no  attention  to  what  is  being
done.  It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  the  exclusion  is  not  one  which
the  logic  of  the  case  rigorously  demands.  Imagination  is  an  ingredient
which,  though  it  does  not  figure  in  prescriptions,  few  practitioners  would
cai’e  to  see  expunged  from  their  list  of  remedies ; and  we  may  grant


406


Some  Higher  Aspects  of  Mesmerism.


that  it  lias  often  materially  assisted  mesmeidsm,  just  as  it  has  materially
assisted  amulets,  bread-pills,  and  the  Pharmacopoeia  itself.  But  if  the
beneficial  effects,  in  cases  where  the  patient  knew  that  mesmerism  was
being  employed,  are  all  to  be  ascribed  to  imagination,  then  mesmerism
may,  at  least,  claim  the  power  of  evoking  the  imagination  to  a degree
and  in  a manner  in  which  nothing  else  has  ever  evoked  it,  from
Holloway’s  ointment  to  fragments  of  the  True  Cross.

Now,  bearing  the  above  canons  in  mind,  and  making  every  allowance
for  exaggeration  and  inaccuracy,  we  do  seem  to  find  a residue  of  cases
where  the  evidence  of  a specific  influence  is  hard  to  controvert,  and,  at
any  rate,  never  has  been  controverted  in  a serious  manner.  Of  this
residue  we  desire  to  be  nothing  more  than  remembrancers.  We  are
far,  indeed,  from  the  presumption  of  deciding  where  doctors  disagree,
or  rushing  in  where  surgeons  fear  to  tread.  We  are  not  going  to  say
a single  word  which  either  arrogates  medical  knowledge  to  ourselves,
or  reflects  in  the  slightest  degree  on  orthodox  medical  practice.  We
shall  err,  if  we  err  at  all,  by  an  even  exaggerated  deference  to  the
dicta  of  the  Faculty.  It  is  true,  we  know  enough  of  the  history  of
medicine  to  recall  instances,  not  a few,  where  novel  remedies  have  run
away  with  one  and  another  sane  practitioner,  wliom  luck  and  en-
thusiasm have  enabled  to  report  a list  of  cures  that  have  somehow
never  got  confirmed  by  subsequent  exj^erience.  But  the  group  of
the  “ mesiuerists,”  here  and  on  the  Continent,  was  too  large,  and
their  evidence  too  concordant,  to  be  easily  dismissed  on  such  analogies
as  tliis.  And  it  does  not  seem  rash  to  assert  that,  when  a number
of  experienced  qdiysicians  and  surgeons  agree  in  maintaining  that  in
certain  cases  they  have  found  a certain  method  of  treatment  effective,
we  are  prima  facie  bound  to  attend  to  them — yes,  even  though  a
still  larger  number  of  physicians  and  surgeons  should  denounce  the
first  set  as  fools  and  liars,  on  the  ground  that  they  themselves  have
not  tried  the  treatment  in  question,  and  are  certain  that  if  they  ImcI
tried  it  they  would  have  found  it  absolutely  inert.  So  if  some  medical
controversialist  shall  roundly  charge  us  with  impudent  ignorance  for
holding  that,  among  some  thousands  of  inconclusive  cases,  there  may
be  here  and  there  a conclusi^’e  one,  we  shall  console  ourselves  with
the  reflection  that  we  are  martyrs  to  our  faith  in  the  honour  and
veracity  of  vaiious  emiirent  members  of  his  own  profession.

We  confess,  for  instance,  that  we  should  very  much  like  to  elicit
some  serious  criticism  on  the  medical  careers  both  of  Mr.  Braid  and
of  Dr.  Esdaile.  The  amoinit  of  their  success  seems  to  be  just  one  of
those  facts  as  to  which  a kind  of  “ con, spi racy  of  silence  ” has  really
existed  j and  this  is  the  stranger  in  that  Braid’s  name,  as  a scientific
discoverer,  is  now  widely  celebrated ; while  Esdaile  had  the  unique
good  fortune  to  secure  the  favour  of  the  Governor-General  of  India,  to


Some  Higher  Af^peds  of  Heiimerism.


407


'Control  a large  Government  hospital,  and  to  have  his  reports  officially-
published.  It  is  true  that  the  tide  of  neglect  is  beginning  to  turn ;
but  among  living  Englishmen,  capable  of  appreciating  the  signihcance
of  what  these  men  did,  how  many  could,  at  this  moment,  stand  an
examination  in  the  couple  of  small  and  unpretending  volumes  which
record  their  work  ? It  may,  perhaps,  be  said  in  reply  that  Braid  was  a
hypnotist,  who  disowned  mesmerism ; and  that,  though  Esdaile  was  a
professed  mesmerist,  yet,  as  his  favourite  method  of  treatment  was
gentle  rubbing,  his  cases  fell  well  within  the  hypnotic  theory,  and  are
valueless  in  support  of  mesmerism  proper.  This  excuse  for  neglecting
them,  whatever  it  may  be  worth,  could  hardly  be  made  by  those — the
majority,  we  think,  of  the  professed  opponents  of  mesmerism  even
in  our  day — who  have  never  distinguished  hypnotic  and  mesmeric
phenomena,  but  have  swept  all  alike  under  a common  condemnation.
But  the  objection  is  still  worth  considering,  inasmuch  as  it  suggests
what  is  really  an  important  fact — that,  next  to  ether  and  chloroform.
Braid’s  great  discovery  must  rank  as  the  chief  cause  of  the  collapse  of
the  mesmeric  crusade.  Having  ascertained  the  genumeness  of  tliat
abnormal  state  into  which  sensitive  “ subjects  ” can  be  thrown  by  a
strained  fixation  of  their  eyes,  and  having  riglitly  found  the  immediate
cause  of  that  state  in  a profound  and  peculiar  nervous  change.  Braid
had  a ready  explanation  for  all  his  cures.  His  “ profound  nervous
change  ” was  wide  and  vague  enough  to  cover  anything.  And
when,  in  addition  to  the  physical  peculiarities  of  the  state,  such  as
insensibility  and  rigidity,  it  is  observed  that  the  mental  condition  of
hypnotised  “subjects  ” is  often  one  of  marked  mono-ideism — of  strong
and  one-sided  attention — then  many  familiar  experiences  come  in  to
the  assistance  of  the  hypnotic  theory.  “ The  influence  of  mind  on
body  ” is  a medical  common-place  ; and  if  there  is  a state  in  which  the
mind  is  abnormally  concentrated  on  the  bodily  condition,  it  is  in  that
state  that  this  influence  is  likely  to  be  at  its  maximum  of  intensity.  In
this  way  the  influence  of  attention  and  expectation,  which  Braid
himself  most  carefully  distinguished  from  the  curative  influence  of  the
purely  nervous  change,  came  after  his  time  to  be  an  accepted  part,  and,
indeed,  chief  feature,  of  the  anti-mesmeric  doctrine.

But  while  the  point  of  Braid’s  work — the  establishment  of  a unique
nervous  change — was  thus,  to  a great  extent,  concealed  and  confused,  a
piece  of  simple  fact,  which  might  well  have  suggested  a truer  interpre-
tation of  his  results,  passed  unnoticed  and  unrecorded ; to  wit,  that
those  results  were  not  and  could  not  be  repeated,  even  by  those  who
most  admired  them.  The  power  of  fixation  of  the  eye  to  initiate  peculiar
physical  and  mental  phenomena  did  not  perish  with  Braid,  and  the
means  of  inducing  the  hypnotic  state  have  even  been  considerably
extended  since  his  death  ; but  his  series  of  cures — which  on  the  hypnotic


408


So)nc  Hiylicr  Asjjccis  of  Ilcslncrwn.


theory,  ought  to  have  been  equalled  Ijy  any  practitioner  who  chose  to
take  the  minimum  of  pains  for  the  maximum  of  effect — has  not  had
half-a-dozen  rivals  in  the  last  40  years.  Even  apart  from  the  ulterior
medical  effects,  his  power  of  pi’oducing  what  he  calls  the  “nervous
sleep  ” was  altogether  exceptional  \ and  the  number  and  certainty  of  his
successes  must  be  astounding  to  all  who  have  had— what  he  himself
seems  to  have  lacked — the  opportunity  for  comparing  the  results  which
he  obtained  by  what  he  imagined  to  be  purely  hypnotic  “means”  with
those  of  others.  And  inasmuch  as  he  was  careful  to  avoid  a dogmatic
denial  of  the  possibility  of  specific  “ mesmeric  ” power,  his  memory  will
not  be  wronged  by  suggestion  that,  if  that  power  be  a reality,  he  must
unknowingly  have  possessed  a considerable  share  of  it.  AVe  have  more
than  once  pointed  out  how  little  the  significance  of  the  rarity  of  strong
operative  power  has  been  realised,  and  how  feeble  have  been  the
attempts  to  account,  by  such  considerations  as  the  temperature  and
moisture  of  the  hand,  for  the  enormously  different  degrees  in  which
different  persons  can  produce  and  control  the  characteristic  hypnotic
effects.  And  this  argument  for  the  reality  of  mesmerism  will  only  be
reinforced  and  extended  if  the  further  phenomena  of  healing  be  taken
into  account.  For  so  far  as  the  evidence  goes,  it  seems  that  persons  of
strong  curative  power  are  exceptional,  even  among  those  in  whom  the
power  of  sending  persons  into  the  “ magnetic  ” sleep  is  strongly
developed.

The  case  of  Dr.  Esdaile  is,  at  first  sight,  different ; inasmuch  as  he
employed  many  assistants,  and  found  that,  with  care,  they  were  all
able  to  produce  the  trance  condition  in  almost  any  Hindoo  who  pre-
sented himself.  Still,  the  proof  of  the  exceptional  susceptibility  of  the
Indian  temperament  to  hypnotic  manipulation  cannot  possibly  affect
either  the  fact  that  in  England  similar  results  can  be  produced  by  only
a small  minority  of  persons,  or  the  argument  fi’om  that  fact — that  these
exceptional  persons  possess  an  exceptional  power.  And  fortunately  in
Esdaile’s  case  such  arguments  can  well  l)e  spared  ; for  the  proofs  which
his  pages  supply,  of  the  reality  of  the  specific  influence,  are  of  a far
moi’e  direct  and  crucial  kind.  We  may  quote  a single  instance.

It  may  be  remembered  that  in  a former  paper  we  recounted  some
experiments  of  our  ovvn,  tending  to  show  that  iiranimate  objects  could
be  imbued  with  the  ojoerator’s  influence  in  such  a manner  as  to  be  after-
wards detected  by  a sensitive  “subject.”*  Such  a phenomenon  is,
indeed,  in  England,  among  the  rai’est  that  mesmerism  presents ; and
the  attribution  to  the  “magnetisation  of  an  object”  of  efiects  which  a

* Proceedings,  Vol.  I.,  p.  261.  The  alternative  explanation  would  he
hypenesthesia  of  (we  think  we  may  say)  a quite  unexampled  degree,  in  a
person  who  gave  no  other  sign  of  any  abnormalities  of  sensation  whatever.


Some  IlUjher  Aspects  of  Ilesmerism.  40Q

few  precise  experiments  would  at  once  show  to  be  due  to  the  imagina-
tion of  the  person  who  liandles  it,  is  one  of  the  commonest  of  mesmeric-
fallacies.  We  have  seen  the  fingers  of  a “ subject  ” suddenly  cramped
at  the  touch  of  a “ magnetised  ” penny,  so  that  he  was  unable  to  drop  it
even  when  offered  five  pounds  to  do  so ; we  have  seen  his  whole  body
convulsed  when  his  finger  was  dipped  into  a glass  of  “ magnetised
water  ; but  the  cramp  and  convulsions  were  quite  equally  violent  when
the  previous  “ magnetisation  ” was  a fact  having  no  existence  except  in
his  own  imagination.  With  the  more  sensitive  Hindoos,  however,  the
genuine  phenomenon  appears  to  have  been  more  readily  obtained,  and
Esdaile  gives  the  following  account  of  his  application  of  it  to  therapeutic
purposes : —

From  multiplied  experiments  in  six  different  hospitals,  I should  as  soon
doubt  the  power  of  fresh  water  to  quench  thirst  as  that  of  mesmerised  water  t(  ►
induce  sleep,  in  persons  who  have  already  felt  the  mesmeric  influence.  Here
also  it  will  be  said  that  smell  and  taste,  suggestion  and  imagination,  and  no  ex-
traneous influence,  produced  the  result.  I repeat  that  the  only  experiments
on  wliich  I rely  were  first  trial ; they  were  made,  at  intervals  of  montlis
and  years,  in  six  different  hospitals,  and  my  test  experiments  were  thus
conducted  : the  mesmerised  water  was  medicated  with  tincture  of  rhubarb,
tincture  of  cardamoms,  aromatic  spirit  of  ammonia,  »tc.,  and  given  to  the
patients  at  their  usual  time  of  taking  physic,  so  tliat  it  was  impossible  to
excite  suspicion  or  expectation  of  anything  unusual  in  them.  The  result
was  that  a very  large  proportion  of  susceptible  subjects  were  so  profoundly
entranced  on  the  first  occasion  that  they  might  have  been  operated  on  with-
out pain  ; and  their  unhealthy  sores  were  frequently  burned  with  undiluted
nitric  acid  without  their  feeling  it,  when  sleeping  from  the  effects  of  mesmer-
ised water.  What  more  effectual  precautions  could  be  taken  by  those  wdio
deny  any  external  influence,  I cannot  in  my  simplicity  imagine.

And  here  a comment  suggests  itself  for  which  we  wmuld  specially
bespeak  attention.  Why  is  Esdaile’s  word  to  be  taken  when  he  tells
us  that  he  produced  amesthesia  by  hypnotic  pas.ses,  and  not  when  he
tells  us  that  he  produced  anesthesia  by  “ mesmerised  water  ” ? * Among
the  more  instructed  portion  of  the  medical  world,  hypnotic  ancesthesia
has  come,  in  recent  years,  to  be  an  accepted  fact.  As  yet  it  may  be
only  a few  who  realise  the  extent  to  which  the  jihenomenon  can  be
carried  ; but  the  doctrine  is  finding  its  way  into  first-class  medical
handbooks  ; and  its  scientific  future  is  indicated  by  that  clearest  sign,
that  those  on  whose  minds  it  has  dawned  mention  it  with  a fine  air  of
having  known  about  it  all  along,  and  even  make  use  of  its  sober  and

There  is,  however,  another  possible  hypothesis  which  must  not  be  lost
sight  of, — namely,  that  the  effect,  though  a real  one,  w-as  not  due  to  the  water,
but  to  the  idea  in  Esdaile’s  own  mind.  The  case  would  then  be  very  similar  to
some  of  the  instances  given  below,  of  the  production  of  the  trance  by  the  exercise
.»f  will.


410


Some  Higher  Asjjecfs  of  Mesmerism,


orthodox  character  to  point  a moral  against  the  heretical  vagaries  of
“mesmerism.”  Now,  to  accept  the  docti’ine  of  hypnotic  anaesthesia  is
almost  synonymous  with  accepting  Esdaile  as  one  of  the  ablest  and
most  trustworthy  of  modern  scientilic  discoverers  : no  doctrine  could
well  be  more  intimately  associated  with  the  name  of  a single  man.
Nor  do  instructed  physicians  shrink  from  acknowledging  this  ; among
.a  skilled  minority,  the  fame  of  Esdaile  now  ranks  almost  on  a par  with
hat  of  Braid, But  is  it  not  a little  curious  that  the  laudatory  notices,
»n  which  he  is  beginning  to  figure  as  one  of  the  great  founders  of
hypnotic  science,  contain  no  hint  of  his  strenuous  and  persistent
advocacy  of  mesmerism,  still  less  of  the  experiments  by  which  he
justified  the  faith  that  was  in  him  ? Winters  who  now,  for  the  sake  of
disci'editing  mesmerism,  find  it  convenient  to  take  their  stand  on /(ypiio-
tism  as  an  old-established  science,  with  Esdaile  for  its  corner-stone,
should  at  least  remember  (1)  that  he  was  the  warmest  champion  of  the
cause  which  they  attack  ; (2)  that  his  “ hypnotic  ” and  his  “ mesmeric  ”
work  stand  exactly  on  a par  as  regards  evidence  ; (3)  that  for  long
years  even  his  “ hypnotic  ” work  received  from  the  “ scientific  world  ”
nothing  but  incredulity  and  scorn.  Is  it  not,  perhaps,  easier  to  suppose
that  this  same  scientific  world  may  still  fall  sliort  of  infallibility,  than
that  there  were  two  Esdailes,  performing  experiments  in  the  same  place
at  the  same  time,  one  an  investigator  of  extraordinary  vigour  and  skill,
the  other  a credulous  dupe,  if  not  a wilful  impostor?

It  must,  however,  be  admitted  that  Esdaile’s  powers  as  a theorist  and
expositor  were  by  no  means  on  a par  with  his  courage  and  practical
sagacity  ; and  it  is  not  clear  that  he  ever  himself  distinguished  the
instances  which,  like  those  above  quoted,  are  distinct  evidences  of
mesmerism,  from  the  ordinary  run  of  his  cases,  where  amesthesia  was
produced  by  monotonous  rubbings  and  passes.  The  phenomena  are  all
mixed  up  together  in  his  random  talk  about  the  out-flowing  of  a
“ nervous  fluid,”  which  he  seems  to  have  regarded  as  always  on  tap  in
any  healthy  human  body.  Tui’ning  from  him  to  his  contemporaries  in
England,  and  especially  to  Dr.  Elliotson,  we  find  a similar  want  of  dis-
crimination. The  pages  of  the  Zoist  are  permeated  by  the  doctrine  that
the  mesmeric  power  is  one  which  almost  all  possess  in  a very  appreciable
degree  ; and  it  is  probable  that  the  violent  collision  of  this  doctrine  with
men’s  pre-conceptions  and  experiences  did  not  a little  to  cast  the  reality
of  the  power  into  discredit.  The  magnitude  of  the  claim  made  could  not
but  be  contrasted  with  the  smallness  of  the  area  with  in  which  it  was  even
pretended  to  be  justified.  In  mesmeric  hospitals  it  was  not  the  patients
but  the  healers  who  were  lacking  ; and  though  the  militant  party  might
maintain  that  this  was  only  because  so  few  persons  seriously  attempted

* "We  refer  specially  to  Dr.  Baslian’s  admirably  judicious  articles
“Braidism”  and  “ INIesmerlsm,”  in  Quain’s  Dictionarg  of  Medicine.


Some  nighev  Aspects  of  Mtsmcrism.  411

the  art,  yet  it  is  certain  tliat  the  attempt  must  have  been  made  again
and  again  in  a small  way,  by  persons  who  would  only  too  gladly  have
gone  on,  had  they  detected  the  slightest  symptoms  of  success.*  And
the  cause  would  have  had  a sounder  basis  had  this  been  seen,  and  its
moral  acknowledged.

The  mention  of  Dr.  Elliotson  suggests  a further  drawback  with
Avhich  the  mesmeric  cause  in  England  had  to  contend  in  its  most
critical  hour.  The  bitter  and  scornful  tone  which  that  fiery  champion
of  strange  discoveides  adopted  seems  to  us  to  have  been  as  ill-adapted
as  any  tone  could  be  to  ensure  their  reception.  He  should  surely  have
remembered  that  any  considerable  disturbance  of  traditional  views  is
almost  necessarily  received  at  first  with  resentment ; and  that  although
the  man  who  is  merely  advertising  his  own  merits  may  often  gain  by  a
little  assumption,  the  disinterested  advocate  of  new  truths  will  find  it
essential  to  be  almost  apologetically  urbane..  But,  nevertheless,
though  Dr.  Elliotson’s  tone  was  overbearing,  he  did  most  vigorously
marshal  fact  and  argument  to  back  it  up ; whereas  his  opponents,
whose  rejoinders  (thanks  to  the  almost  arrogant  candour  of  the  Zoist)
can  be  traced  with  ease  through  the  medical  journals  of  the  time
have  certainly  not  produced  counter-statements  of  a sufficiently
definite  kind  to  dissolve  away  the  nucleus  of  solid  evidence  to  which
we  have  above  referred.  The  supposed  exposure  of  the  Okeys  by  Mi’.
AVakley  is  not  now  worth  discussion  ; on  the  Lancet's  own  showing
it  was  one  of  the  hastiest  and  clumsiest  of  all  the  hasty  and  clumsy
attempts  which  have  been  made  to  disprove  new  phenomena  by  men
who  have  never  condescended  to  comprehend  them.  And  the  rest  of  the
solid  opposition  resolves  itself  into  an  attempt  (which  on  our  principle
of  not  attempting  to  decide  on  any  disputed  medical  point,  we  may
readily  count  as  successful)  to  show  that  in  some  of  the  minor  cases
recorded  in  the  Zoist  the  conditions  which  we  have  above  numbered
as  third  and  fourth  were  not  fulfilled — that  is  to  say,  that  the  patient’s
cure  may  have  been  owing  to  other  remedies,  or  to  the  operation  of

* Such  incidents  as  the  following — minus  its  happy  termination — must  have
occurred  often  enough  during  the  last  forty  years.  One  of  the  present  writers,
having  discovered  that  a hoy  with  a had  poisoned  finger  was  daily  visiting  an
amateur  mesmerist  to  have  the  pain  removed,  undertook  the  office  of  healer,
and  invited  the  patient  to  come  to  his  room  at  the  usual  time.  Every  means  was
taken  to  impress  him  with  a belief  in  the  superior  power  and  experience  of  his
new  operator ; and  a considerable  time  was  laboriously  spent  in  making  the
orthodox  passes  over  the  inflamed  member.  Its  owner’s  politeness,  and  his
evident  struggle  to  believe  that  he  felt  some  difference,  Avere  a touching
spectacle.  But  the  pain  was  too  real  for  the  fiction  to  be  kept  up  or  the  sufferer
kept  Availing  ; and  half-a-minute  of  light  passes  (Avithout  cOn  ct  of  any  sort)
from  his  usual  operator  sent  him  aAvay  smiling,  and  safe  froui  enemy  for  at
least  twelv’e  hours  to  come.

D 2


412


Some  Higher  Aspects  of  Mesmerism.


nature.  These  substantive  objections  cover  a small  part  indeed  of  the
field;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  we  find  plenty  of  language  of  a kind
which  reminds  us  that  heat  must  sometimes  I’ank  as  a very  low  form  of
energy.  We  give  a few  samples  below.*

Did  space  permit,  it  would  be  easy  to  multiply  indefinitely  such
inelegant  extracts,  and  to  show  that,  however  successful  the  onslaught
on  mesmerism  in  England  may  have  been,  there  is  little  in  its  literature
which  can  be  appealed  to  with  satisfaction  by  anti-mesmerists  of  a calmer

* “The  mesniero-mania,”  says  one  doctor  in  i\\Q  Medico-Chinirgical  Review,
“ has  nearly  dwindled  in  the  metropolis  into  anile  fatuity  ; but  lingers  in  some
of  the  provinces  with  the  gobemouches  and  chaw-bacons,  who,  after  gulping
down  ajjound  of  fat  j^ork,  would,  with  well-greased  gullets,  swallow  down  such
a lot  of  mesmeric  mummery  as  would  choke  an  alligator.”  “We  regard  the
abettors  of  mesmerism  as  quacks  and  impostors,”  says  the  ZoHcef;  “they  aught
to  he  hooted  out  of  i>rofessional  society.”  The  “subject,”  or,  as  Mr.  Wakley
more  graphically  puts  it,  “the  patient,  alias  the  victim,  alias  the  particeps
criminis,"  is  almost  as  had  as  the  operator  ; and  even  the  uian  who  reads  about
such  performances  is  “ a leper  {sic)  who  must  be  taken  with  his  spots.”  The
only  doubt  seems  to  be  whether  we  may  exult,  with  the  sanguine  Lancet,  in  the
conviction  that  “ the  brood  of  mesmerism  must  in  no  long  time  utterly  destroy
their  own  loathsome  dam  ” ; or  must  tremble  with  the  gentler  spirit  of  Div
liiadore,  before  the  softly-fanning  manipulator,  as

“Our  nation's  terror,  and  her  htoody  scourge.”

We  do  not,  however,  altogether  fail  to  find  the  utterances  of  a more
practical  spirit  and  a calmer  sceptism.  One  surgeon  demands  that  Government
should  “interfere  most  imperiously,”  and  adds,  wdth  a true  tactical  instinct,  “I
would  have  the  legislative  jneasure  without  waiting  for  any  investigation.”  And
an  eminent  surgeon  remarks,  “If  each  patient  were  to  testify  to  the  truth  of  his
statement,  I should  still  remain  incredulous.  I know  human  kind  too  well  to  be
deceived.”  Testimony,  indeed,  must  be  worse  than  suiaerfluous  to  one  fore-armed
with  so  complete  an  assurance  of  human  unreliability.  But  some  practitioners
appear  to  have  had  access  to  an  intuitive  knowledge  of  a yet  higher  type.  “ The
strong  blasts  from  the  Terrible  One,”  says  the  Apothecary  of  the  Middlesex
Hospital,  “ which  have  swept  over  my  soul,  as  I have  read,  seen,  and  heard
related  the  varied  deceptions  which  have  been  set  forth  by  the  disciples  of  mes-
juerism,  have  fully  convinced  me  that  it  is  an  infernal  system,  whose  coming  is-
after  the  Avorking  of  Satan,”  &c.,  &c.,  and  “closely  allied  to  that  terrific  and
unjiardonable  sin — blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost.  ”

We  may  seem  here  to  have  reached  a kind  of  climax.  But  there  is  yet  one-
remark  which  deserves  citation,  as  a warning  of  the  perilous  confusion  inta
which  the  mind  of  a professed  healer  may  fall,  in  the  desjierate  ellbrt  to  save

amour-propre  and  mate  an  antagonist.  Dr. , objecting  before  the  Medico-

Chirurgical  Society  to  the  confirmation  of  some  minutes  which  recorded  that
a certain  paper  had  been  read — -AA  hich  paper  contained  an  allusion  to  an
operation  performed  under  mesmeric  amcsthesia — contended  that,  ev'en  if  this
account  were  true,  “the  fact  was  unworthy  of  their  consideration;  because
pain  is  a wise  provision  of  nature,  and  patients  ought  to  suffer  pain  Avhile
the  surgeon  is  operating;  they  are  all  the  better  for  it,  and  recover  better.”

Unluckily  for  himself.  Dr. gave  utterance  to  this  dogma  on  the  very  eve  of

the  discovery  of  chloroform.


Some  Hitjher  AnpecU  of  Ilcsmermn.


413


age.  We  tliink,  indeed,  tliat  any  unbiassed  person  who  is  at  the  pains
to  study  the  controversy  in  detail  will  feel  that,  whatever  might  have
been  the  effect  of  better  strategy  on  the  other  side,  and  however
popular,  uncritical,  and  old-fashioned  much  of  the  mesmeric  testimony
may  now  look,  Bertrand,  Petetin,  and  Elliotson  were,  at  any  rate,  left
in  possession  of  the  field  ; and  that  the  primd  facie  case  is  still  in  favour
of  those  who  maintain  that  our  sanative  armoury  has  been  enriched  by
nn  agent  of  singular,  though  uncertain  and  limited,  power.  And  if  it  be
•only  fitting  that  the  vigour  of  the  scrutiny  should  be  jealously  propor-
tioned to  the  strangeness  of  the  facts,  we  still  fail  to  see  why  the
researches  into  mesmerism,  which  the  general  progress  of  science  must
undoubtedly  extend  and  renew,  should  be  vulgarised  on  any  side  by  the
slio'htest  taint  of  acridity  or  scorn.  In  this  problem,  as  in  many  others
which  concern  life,  it  is  possible  that  the  final  solution  may  not  yet
have  been  surmised  by  anybody ; but  thei’e  is  no  reason  why  all  parties
should  not  cordially  unite  in  seeking  it.

It  would  be  impossible  within  the  limits  of  this  paper  to  cite
verbatim  a sufficient  number  of  cases  to  give  any  fair  idea  of  a class  of
evidence  whose  force  must  of  necessity  be  cumulative.  If  only  a few
examples  be  considered,  however  extreme  the  condition,  and  however
rapid  the  improvement,  it  might  be  maintained  as  conceivable  tliat
nature  had  come  to  the  rescue  at  that  precise  moment.  The  impressive
points  are  (1)  the  strong  similarity  of  cases  coming  from  so  many
independent  quarters,  and  (2)  the  jierpetually  recurring  concomitance
■of  amendment  with  the  first  application  of  the  treatment,  of  relapse
with  its  casual  intermittence,  and  of  steady  recovery  with  its  regular
employment.  The  concomitance  is  far  too  marked  to  admit  of  being
referred  — like  the  list  of  cures  which  have,  from  time  to  time,  obtained
for  a spurious  remedy  some  amount  of  professional  vogue — to  luck,  to
rest,  or  to  mal-observation.  A careful  collation  of  testimony  indicates
pretty  distinctly  the  sort  of  maladies  in  which  there  was  found  to  be
an  appreciable  prospect  of  success.  First,  in  simplicity,  though  not  in
number,  come  the  cases  where  the  benefit  is  due  to  the  production  of

sleep whether  the  benefit  takes  the  negative  form  of  amesthesia

during  an  operation,  or  the  positive  one  of  restoration  and  i-evival.
Here,  if  we  could  forget  the  general  argument  for  mesmei’ism,  drawn
from  the  rarity  of  the  power  to  produce  the  effects,  the  hypnotic
hypothesis  has  most  to  be  said  for  it.  The  second  class  of  cases  includes
the  relief  and  removal  of  pain  of  all  sorts — whether  the  results  of
accident,  as  sprains  or  burns,  or  such  morbid  affections  as  tooth-ache,
rheumatism,  and  lumbago.  Here,  again,  the  hypnotist  would  probably
refuse  to  recognise  any  special  argument  for  the  “ mesmeric  ” influence.
In  cases  where  both  pain  and  treatment  are  restrictedly  local,  he
might  represent  the  relief  as  an  inhibitory  effect,  induced  by  tiie  gentki


414


Some  Ilirjher  Aspects  of  Mesmerism.


cutaneous  stimulation ; seeing  that  such  stimulation  is  capable  of
throwing  muscles  into  violent  spasms,  he  might  conceive  it  as  equally
capable  of  influencing  the  sensory  centres.  Even  so,  we  might  remind
him  that  the  relief  of  pain  without  loss  of  sensation  is  a very  diflerent
thing  from  the  production  of  insensibility,  which  is  the  common  result
of  hypnotic  manipulations.  But  it  would  be  more  difficult  to  describe
as  purely  hypnotic  phenomena,  cases  of  relief  in  deeply-seated  affections^
where  the  treatment  was  applied  neither  at  the  seat  of  the  pain,  nor  in
such  a way  as  to  produce  the  general  hypnotic  condition.  And  the
ditficulty  is  still  further  increased  in  many  of  the  cases  of  nervous
di.sturbance  which  form  the  third  great  class.  That  class  includes
neuralgia,  chorea,  hysteria,  some  paralyses,  perhaps  epilepsy,  and  chronic
nervous  exhaustion  in  its  many  perplexing  and  distressing  forms.
Experience  seems  to  show  that  instability  of  nervous  condition  is  itself
a sign  of  mesmeric  susceptibility,  the  susceptibility  in  many  I’ecorded
cases  ceasing  with  recovery  ; aird  it  is  a satisfaction  to  think  that  in
this  way  the  weak  and  hysterical  may  at  any  rate  reap  some  benefit
from  their  peculiarities.  Now  here,  so  far  from  necessary  was  it  that
the  patient  should  be  “ hypnotised  ” by  the  process  adopted,  that  a
slight  drowsiness  was  sometimes  the  utmost  of  which  he  or  she  was
conscious,  while  on  other  occasions  even  this  was  absent ; and  Braid’s
theory  of  a sudden  and  profound  nervous  change  as  the  source  of  the
curative  effects — a convenient  one  as  long  as  insensibility,  automatic
obedience,  the  transition  to  coma,  and  the  other  striking  features  of
hypnotism,  are  present  to  bear  witness  to  its  reality — ceases  to  be
plausible  when  the  effect  perceptible  at  the  time  is  no  more  than  is
induced  in  scores  of  instances  every  day  l)y  the  sound  of  the  sea,  or  the
voice  of  the  preacher.

Still,  however  genuine,  mesmerism  is  neither  a panacea,  nor  (in
the  medical  sense)  a specific  ; while  even  on  the  most  enthusiastic  view
of  its  chances  with  the  best-suited  cases,  the  difficulty  would  remain  of
finding  any  considerable  number  of  reliable  operators.  But  there  seems
at  any  rate  no  objection  to  making  the  search  for  these  as  wide  as
possible.  The  idea  of  danger  from  the  process  is  supported  only  in
cases  where  it  has  been  most  crudely  and  ignorantly  applied.  Ranked
on  a par  with  nursing  operations,  which  require  sense  and  care,  but
not  talent  or  education,  and  performed  under  due  professional  superin-
tendence, we  think  that  it  need  give  rise  to  no  fear  or  hesitation  what-
ever. Earnestly,  however,  as  we  desire  to  see  the  experiment  widely  and
systematically  made,  we  cannot  pretend  to  pre-judge  the  issue.  As  far
as  the  English  race  is  concerned  it  may  well  be  that  even  Dr.  Bastian’s
temperate  forecast  is  over-sanguine ; and  that,  beyond  sporadic  successes,
the  curative  effect  isnot  destined  to  rank  as  more  than  one  among  the
various  departments  of  a more  general  scientific  problem.  But  on  that


Some  Eidher  Aspects  of  Mesmerism.


415


ground  alone  it  is  entitled  to  a place  in  any  discussion,  however  cursory,
of  mesmeric  phenomena.

We  now  pass  to  our  second  main  topic  ; the  mesmeric  effects  which
the  “ subject  ” exhibits  without  any  preliminary  affection  either  of  his
senses  or  of  his  ideas ; as  when  the  mesmerist,  though  in  the  company  of
the  “ subject,”  gives  no  sign  or  hint  of  his  intention  to  exercise  his
power ; or  when  the  two  are  separated,  either  by  a mere  wall,  or  by
the  interval  of  a few  streets,  or  by  a longer  distance.  The  effects  in
question  embrace  both  (1)  the  definite  induction  of  the  mesmeric  state,
and  (2)  the  compulsory  performance  by  the  “subject,”  while  in  that
state,  of  some  act  “ willed  ” by  his  controller.  It  may  be  observed,  by
the  way,  that  if  we  examine  the  question  as  to  the  efficacy  of  the  will
in  cases  of  ordinary  mesmerisation,  we  find  a certain  conflict  of
testimony.  Some  operators  have  noted  that  their  passes  were  in-
efiectual  unless  accompanied  by  distinct  intention  and  volition.  The  E,ev.
C.  H.  Townshend  made  this  observation  in  an  experiment  with  the  cele-
brated naturalist,  Agassiz,  whom  he  was  mesmerising  while  himself  more
or  less  distracted  by  the  non-arrival  of  some  expected  letters.  “Although
I was  at  the  time  engaged  in  the  mesmeric  processes  to  all  outward
appearances  as  actively  as  usual,  my  patient  called  out  to  me  constantly
and  coincidentally  with  the  remission  of  my  thought,  ‘ You  influence
me  no  longer ; you  are  not  exerting  yourself.’  ” And  Dr.  Esdaile  gives
the  same  account  even  of  the  very  definite  manipulations  of  his  Hindoo
assistants,  where,  if  anywhere,  the  effects  might  have  been  naturally
attributed  to  a purely  physical  influence.  Elliotson,  on  the  other  hand
asserts  that  his  own  manipulations  were  often  successful,  howevei
mechanically  and  inattentively  carried  out ; Bertrand  (Du  Magnetisme
Animal,  p.  241)  makes  a similar  remark;  and  their  view  certainly
seems  the  most  natural  one  in  respect  of  all  cases  of  hypnotisation
where  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  any  specific  influence  to  be  at  work.
In  other  cases,  it  would  be  a very  possible  assumption  that  the  state  of
nervous  activity  which  admits  of  influencing  another  nervous  system  is
one  that  normally  corresponds  to  a sense  of  determined  efibrt ; and
this  element,  of  course,  assumes  unique  prominence  in  the  “ willing  ”
cases  which  we  are  now  to  consider.

Our  first  instance  shall  be  from  Esdaile  (Natural  and  Mesmeric
Clairvoyance,  pp.  227-8.)

I had  been  looking  for  a blind  man  upon  whom  to  test  the  imagination
theory,  and  one  at  last  presented  himself.  1 idaced  liiin  on  a stool  without
saying  a word  to  him,  and  entranced  him  in  ten  minutes  without  touching
him.  This  man  became  so  suscej)tible  that,  by  making  him  the  object  of  my
attention,  I could  entrance  liim  in  whatever  occujjation  he  was  engaged,  and
at  any  distance  within  the  hospital  enclosure.  . . . My  first  attempt  to


416


Some  IIi(jher  Aspects  of  31csmcnsm.


influence  the  blind  man  was  made  by  gazing  at  him  silently  over  a wall,
while  he  was  engaged  in  the  act  of  eating  liis  solitary  dinner,  at  a distance  of
twenty  yards.  He  gradually  ceased  to  eat,  and  in  a (quarter  of  an  hour  was
profoundly  entranced  and  cataleptic.  This  w^as  repeated  at  the  most
untimely  hours,  when  he  could  not  possibly  know  of  my  being  in  his
neighbourhood,  and  always  with  like  results.

With  this  case  we  might  compare  Reiclienbach’s  account  of
repeatedly  waking  a somnambulist  by  the  mere  exercise  of  will  {Dee
Sensitive  Mensch,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  66.5-6)  ; and  another  similar  instance  in
the  Report  of  the  Committee  of  the  French  Royal  Academy  of  Medicine,
23ublislied  in  18.31.  This  Committee  stated  that  they  could  not  doubt
the  reality  of  the  effect  i^roduced  on  one  of  their  subjects  by  an
influence  exercised  “ without  his  knowledge  and  at  a certain  distance
from  him.”  But  the  instances  which  they  rejeort  are  less  striking
than  the  following.  In  tlie  Zoist  for  April,  1849,  ISIr.  Adams,  a
surgeon  of  Lymington  (writing  some  four  months  after  the  incidents
occurred),  describes  how'  a medical  student,  a guest  in  his  own
house,  twice  succeeded  in  mesmerising  the  man-servant  of  a common
friend  at  a distance  of  nearly  20  miles,  the  time  when  the  attem|:)t
was  to  be  made  having  in  each  case  been  privately  arranged  with
the  man’s  master.  On  the  first  occasion,  the  unwitting  “subject”
fell  at  the  time  fixed,  7.30  p.m.,  into  a state  of  profound  coma  not  at
all  resembling  natural  sleep,  from  which  he  was  with  difficulty  aroused.
He  said  that  “ before  he  fell  asleep  he  had  lost  the  use  of  his  legs  ; he
had  endeavoured  to  kick  the  cat  away  and  could  not  do  so.”  On  the
second  occasion  a similar  fit  was  induced  at  9.30  in  the  morning,  while
he  was  in  the  act  of  walking  across  a meadow  to  feed  the  Jiig.s.

As  regards  the  further  class  of  cases,  where  a definite  action  or
course  of  action  is  produced  by  silent  or  distant  control,  the  first  thi)ig
to  remark  is  that  many  phenomena  are  popularly  referred  to  this  category
which  have  not  the  slightest  claim  to  a jilace  in  it.  There  is  a popular
idea  that  such  cases  are  not  rare,  and  depend  merely  on  strength  of  will ;
but  no  reliance  whatever  can  be  placed  on  the  alleged  instances.  Science
has  often  exposed — and  will  jnobably  have  often  to  expose  again — the
fallacy  which  attributes  the  ordinary  successes  in  the  “ willing-game”  to
anything  more  than  an  unconscious  reading  of  slight  muscular  hints.*

* Even  in  the  “ willing-game,”  however,  as  we  have  more  than  once  pointed
out,  exceptional  cases  occur  by  which  this  theory  of  unconscious  guidance  appears
to  be  somewhat  severely  strained.  For  instance,  in  one  ca.se  that  has  come  to
our  knowledge,  the  blind-folded  “ percipients”  who  were  willed  to  do  the  most
unlikely  things,  as  soon  as  they  were  lightly  touched  by  the  “ agents,”  “ would
suddenly  dart  olf  towards  the  object  of  the  ‘ willing,’  passing  round  the  various
articles  of  furniture  as  if  seeing  them  ; often  so  rapidly  that  we  (the  agents)  could
not  keep  up  with  them,  and  so  detaching  themselves  from  our  touch.  They
stated  that  they  had  no  idea  of  what  they  were  doing,  but cw  it  -were,  a


Some  Higher  Aspects  of  Mesmerism.


417


Again,  we  have  probably  all  of  us  heard  someone  claim  to  have  made
•someone  else  look  round,  in  church  or  tlieatre,  by  fixing  an  intent  gaze
on  him  ; but  such  cases  must  clearly  be  reckoned  as  mere  illusions
of  post  hoc  propter  hoc,  of  successes  noted  and  failures  foi-gotten.
Equally  fallacious  are  most  of  the  cases  that  are  claimed  as  distinctively
^‘mesmeric.”  The  common  platform  exhibition,  where  a profession  is
made  of  “ willing”  a particular  person  to  attend,  and  he  rushes  into
tlie  room  at  the  appointed  moment,  is  not  due  to  any  infiuence  then  and
there  exercised,  but  is  the  effect  of  the  command  or  threat  impressed  on
his  mind  when  in  its  wax-like  condition  of  trance  on  a previous  evening.
Nor, as  a rule,  do  the  cases  where  “subjects”  are  said  to  be  drawn  by  their
controller  from  house  to  house,  or  even  to  a distant  town,  prove  any
specific  power  of  his  will,  or  anything  beyond  the  general  infiuence
and  attraction  which  lie  has  established,  and  which  is  liable  every  now
and  then  to  recrudesce  in  his  absence,  and  to  manifest  itself  in  this
startling  form.

Very  much  rarer  are  the  really  crucial  cases,  where  the  intended
effect— the  origination  or  inhibition  of  motor-impulses — is  brought  about
at  the  moment  by  a deliberate  exercise  of  volition  ; but  for  a certain
number  of  them  the  evidence  is  such  as  it  would  be  absurd  in  us — who
have  ourselves  witnessed  the  phenomena — to  reject.  Several  sets  of
experiments  have  been  recorded  in  our  Proceedings  whereby  the
“ subject’s  ” power  of  response  to  a question  was  shown  to  be  at  the
mercy  of  the  unexpressed  will  of  his  controller — that  will  being  directed,
during  a long  series  of  trials,  in  accoi’dance  with  an  arbitrary  list  of  yeses
and  noes  drawn  up  by  ourselves.*  One  series  of  trials  conducted  by  Pro-
fessor Barrett,  gave  43  successes  without  a single  failure.  In  the
last  six  of  these  trials,  the  mesmerist,  who  was  a complete  stranger  to  the
^‘subject,”  was  at  a distance  of  seventeen  feet  from  him,  outside  a door,
through  a narrow  chink  in  which  he  received  from  Professor  Barrett  one
or  other  of  two  cards,  containuig  respectively  the  words  yes  and  no.  The
question,  “ Bo  you  hear  me?  ” was  every  time  addressed  to  the  “ sub-

‘ blind  force  compelling  them  to  certain  definite  actions.”  Now,  the  interesting  point
of  this  case  is  that  soma  specific  infiuence  seems  really  to  have  been  exerted  ; the
percipients  being  considerably  exhausted  by  two  or  three  minutes  of  the  perfor-
mance, which  also  “ gave  them  a queer  egare.  look  afterwards.”  The  moral,
from  a hygienic  point  of  view,  is  the  very  one  which  we  are  persistently  urging
from  a scientific  point  of  view— namely,  that  the  “willing-game”  should  be
played  in  some  form  which  involves  neither  contact  nor  movement,  l^et  the
“wilier”  concentrate  his  thoughts  on  some  object  (card,  name,  number,  scene,
taste,  tune,  or  whatever  it  may  be)  which  the  subject  is  to  name.  Records  of
successful  experiments  of  this  sort  are  gradually  being  accumulated  ; but  the
general  acceptation  of  thought-transference  might  be  indefinitely  hastened  if  we
could  induce  more  pcoi>lc  to  make  trials.

* Proceediivis  Vol.  I.,  p.  253  ; Vol.  II.,  pp.  13-17.


413


Some  n'Kjhcr  Aspects  of  Mesmerism.


jpct  ” by  Professor  Barrett.  To  ensure  a neutral  tone,  lie  took  care  (aftei
tiie  first  12  trials)  not  to  know  himself  which  of  the  two  cards  he
gave  to  the  mesmerist  until  after  the  result,  which,  according  to  the  will
that  had  been  exerted,  was  either  the  answer  “ yes,”  or  silence.  We  have
not  been  equally  successful  in  trials  directed  to  control  of  movements  of
a moi-e  visible  sort ; but  we  occasionally  meet  with  cases  where  attempts
to  make  people  look  round,  &c. — valueless  in  the  casual  foi'm  that  they
ordinarily  assume — have  been  made  the  subject  of  more  careful  and

persistent  experiment.  The  Bev.  J.  Lawson  Sisson,  Rector  of

Edingthorpe,  North  Walsham  (whose  interest  in  mesmerism,  like  that  of
so  many  others,  began  with  the  discovery  of  his  own  power  to  alleviate
jiain),  tells  us  that  he  has  made  several  definite  trials  on  sensitive
“ subjects  ” with  complete  success.  When  one  of  these  “ subjects  ” was
walking  many  yards  in  front  of  him,  engaged  in  conversation  and  totally
unaware  of  his  attention,  “ I could,”  he  says,  “ by  raising  my  hand  and
vdlling  it,  draw  her  head  quite  back.”  Quite  recently,  we  are  told,  a

similar  power  was  repeatedly  exercised  on  a patient  by  the  house-

physician  of  a large  London  hospital.  But  it  is,  of  course,  far  more
satisfactory  if  some  more  marked  interference  with  normal  conduct
i-aii  be  induced.  The  following  experiment  of  Mr.  Sisson’s  was
performed  on  an  incredulous  lady,  whose  first  experience  of  the  subject
had  been  a few  moments’  subjection  to  the  slightest  j^ossible  hypnotic
process  in  the  course  of  the  evening.

Conversation  went  on  to  other  topics,  and  then  followed  a light  supper.
Several  of  the  gentlemen,  myself  among  the  number,  were  obliged  to  stand.
I stood  talking  to  a friend,  against  the  wall,  and  at  the  back  of  Miss  Cooke,
some  three  or  four  feet  off  her.  Her  wine-glass  was  filled,  and  I made  up
my  mind  that  she  should  not  drink  without  my  “ willing.”  I kept  on  talk-
ing and  watching  her  many  futile  attempts  to  get  the  glass  to  her  mouth.
Sometimes  she  got  it  a few  inches  from  the  level  of  the  table  ; sometimes  she
got  it  a little  higher,  but  she  evidently  felt  that  it  was  not  for  some  reason  to
be  done.  At  last  I said,  “ Miss  Cooke,  why  don’t  you  drink  your  wine  ?”  and
lier  answer  was  at  once,  “ I will  when  you  let  me.”

The  Zoist  contains  several  well-marked  cases  of  the  same  kind.  Thus
Mr.  Barth  there  records  the  case  of  a patient  of  Ids  own  (Vol.  VII.,

p.  280).

When  she  wished  to  leave  the  room,  I could  at  any  time  prevent  her  by
willing  that  she  slioidd  stay,  and  this  silently.  I could  not  arrest  her  pro
gress  whilst  she  was  in  motion,  but  if  she  stood  for  a moment  and  I mentally
said  “ Stand,”  she  stood  unable  to  move  from  the  spot.  If  she  jdaced  her
hand  on  the  table  I could  afti.K  it  by  my  will  alone,  and  unfix  it  bj'  will.
If  she  held  a ruler  or  iiaper-knife  in  her  closed  hand,  1 could  conq^el  her  by
will  alone  to  unclose  her  hand  and  drop  the  article.  Frequently  when  she  has
been  at  the  tea-table,  and  I quite  behind  and  out  of  sight,  have  I locked  hei


Some  Higher  Aspects  of  Mesmerism.


419


jaws  or  arrested  her  hand  with  her  bread-and-butter  in  it,  when  half  way
betwixt  her  plate  and  her  mouth.

Mr.  N.  Dunsconibe,  J.P.  (Vol.  IX.,  p.  438),  records  of  himself  that,,
having  attended  some  mesmeric  performances,  he  was  for  some  time  at
the  mercy  of  the  operator’s  silent  will.

He  has  caused  me,  by  way  of  experiment,  to  leave  my  seat  in  one  part  of
my  house,  and  follow  him  all  through  it  and  out  of  it  till  I found  him.  He
■was  not  in  the  room  with  me,  neither  La  I I the  slightest  idea  of  his  attempt-
ing the  experiment.  I felt  an  unaccountable  desire  to  go  in  a certain
direction.

The  Rev.  L.  Lewis  (Vol.  V.,  p.  324)  describes  the  assumption  by  a
young  lady,  under  the  influence  of  the  silent  will  of  his  son,  of  several
distinctly  marked  roles — among  others,  those  of  the  Queen  and  of  Sir
R.  Peel.  And  more  remarkable  still  are  the  cases  of  acts  performed
under  the  silent  control  of  Mi'.  H.  S.  Thompson,  of  Moorfields,  York,,
of  which  we  have  elsewhere  given  one  or  two  instances.  The  recorders-
of  these  experiments  have  unfortunately  seldom  recognised  the  need  of
making  clear  to  the  reader  that  all  chance  of  physical  indications  ivas
excluded ; and  it  is,  we  know,  difficult  to  convince  persons  not  present
at  the  time  that  adequate  precautions  have  been  taken.  But  after  a
little  experience  such  precautions  are  not  really  difficult  to  take.

It  will  be  observed  that  we  have  cited  one  case  where  mesmeric
sleep  was  induced  at  the  distance  of  fifty  miles ; but  there  is  hardly  any
well-attested  record  of  the  induction  of  actions,  when  the  “ wilier  ” and
the  “ willed  ” have  been  further  removed  from  one  another  than  tiva
neighbouring  rooms.  The  liability  to  have  definite  acts  compelled  fi  om
a distance,  which  figures  in  I’omance  and  in  the  popular  imagination  as.
the  natural  and  terrible  result  of  mesmeric  influence,  is  precisely  the
result  for  which  we  can  find  least  evidence.  Our  friend,  Mr.  B.,  how'-
e^■er,  to  whose  powers  of  this  kind  we  have  elsewhere  referred,  has  sup-
plied us  with  an  instance  wdiere  the  impulse  to  action  was  transferred,,
though  imperfectly,  over  a distance  of  five  miles.  The  case  is  wortli
quoting,  though  the  agency  cannot  be  sliown  to  have  been  specifically
ine.smei’ic.

On  Wednesday,  July  26th,  1882,  at  10.30  p.m.,  I willed  veiy  strongly
that  Miss  V.,  who  was  living  at  Clarence  Road,  Kew,  should  leave  any  part
of  that  house  in  which  she  might  happen  to  be  at  the  time,  that  she  should
go  upstairs  to  her  bed-room,  and  remove  a portrait  from  her  dressing-table.

On  the  Friday  following  I received  a letter,  saying  that  on  the  above  day,,
and  at  the  time  above  mentioned,  Miss  V.  experienced  a strong  influence  to-
go  and  remove  something  from  her  dressing-table,  but  she  was  not  sure  as  to
the  exact  article.  She  obeyed  the  impulse,  and  removed  something,  but  not
the  portrait  determined  upon  by  myself.

At  the  time  of  the  experiment,  I was  at  a distance  of  five  miles  (viz.,
Southall,  Middlesex)  from  the  lady  in  question.


420


Some  Higher  Aspects  of  Mesmerism.


[This  account  was  drawn  up  for  us  in  1883,  from  an  entry  in  a diaiy
written  immediately  after  the  occurrence.]

On  Thursday,  July  27th,  wdthout  having  seen  or  had  any  communication
with  Mr.  B.,  Miss  V.  wrote  to  him  as  follows  : —

“ What  were  you  doing  between  10  and  11  o’clock  on  Wednesday
evening  ? If  you  make  me  so  restless,  I shall  begin  to  be  afraid  of  you.  I
positively  cunid  not  stay  in  the  dining-room,  and  I believe  you  meant  me  to
be  upstairs,  and  to  move  something  on  my  dressing-table.  I want  to  see  if
you  know  what  it  was.  At  any  rate,  I am  sure  you  wmre  thinking  some-
thing about  me.”

Mr.  B.  then  wrote  and  told  Miss  V.  that  the  object  he  liad  thought  of
was  Mr.  G.’s  photograph.  She  answ^ered  : —

“I  must  tell  you  it  was  not  G.’s  photo,  but  something  on  my  table
which,  iierhaps,  you  would  never  think  of.  Howmver,  it  was  really  wonder-
ful how  impossible  I found  it  to  think  or  do  anything  until  1 came  iqistairs,
and  I knew  for  certain  that  your  thoughts  were  here;  and  in  fact  it  seemed  as
if  you  were  very  near.”

[Mi.ss  V.,  whom  we  regard  as  a completely  trustworthy  witness,  has  since
given  an  independent  account,  agreeing  with  the  above  in  every  detail,  to
■one  of  the  present  writers,  who  has  also  examined  the  original  letters.]

Similarly  there  are  a few  cases  on  record  wliei’e  hallucinations  have
been  induced  by  the  will  of  a distant  operator.  And  such  exceptional
command  of  the  sensory  faculties  of  another  is,  from  our  point  of  view,
of  even  greater  interest  than  the  command  of  his  actions  ; for  it  forms
a specially  convenient  link  between  the  ordinary  “ thouglit-trans-
ference,”  which  deals  with  simple  and  unemotional  impressions,  and
those  strong  invasions  of  the  senses  or  the  mind  by  the  preseiice  of
friends  who  are  really  dying  or  in  some  unusual  state  of  excitation  far
away,  of  which  we  have  already  given  some  account  (and  liope  soon  to
give  a much  fuller  one)  under  the  title  of  “ Pliantasms  of  the  Living.”
The  examples  which  we  liave  already  published  liave  been  unconnected
with  mesmerism.  But  in  the  following  case,  if  correctly  described,  tlie
rapport  seems  to  have  been  distinctly  due  to  previous  mesmerisation.
Mr.  John  Moule,  of  Codicote,  near  Welwyn,  who  gives  tlie  account,  is
personally  known  to  one  of  us.  He  tells  us  that,  as  a young  man,  he
had  considerable  success  in  mesmerising  his  friends.

In  the  year  1855  I felt  very  anxious  to  try  and  affect  the  most  sensitive
•of  my  mesTueric  subjects  away  from  my  house  and  unknown  to  them.  I
-chose  for  this  purpose  a young  lady,  a Miss  Drasey,  and  stated  that  some
day  I intended  to  visit  her,  wherever  she  might  be,  although  the  i)lace
might  be  unknown  to  me  ; and  told  her  if  anything  particular  should  occur,
to  note  the  time,  and  when  she  called  at  my  house  again,  to  state  if  anything
had  occurred.  One  day,  about  two  months  after  (I  not  having  seen  her  in
the  interval),  I was  by  myself  in  my  chemic.al  factory,  Redman’s  Row,  Mile
End,  London,  all  alone,  and  I determined  to  try  the  experiment,  the  lady
being  in  D.dston,  about  three  miles  off.  I stood,  raised  my  hands,  ami


Some  Higher  Aspects  of  Mesmerism.


42 1


willed  to  act  on  the  lady.  I soon  felt  that  I had  expended  energy.  I
immediately  sat  down  in  a chair  and  went  to  sleep.  I then  saw  in  a dream
my  friend  coming  down  the  kitchen  stairs,  where  I dreamt  I tvas.  She  saw
me,  and  suddenly  exclained,  “ Oh  ! Mr.  Moule,”  and  fainted  away.  This  I
dreamt,  and  then  awoke.  I thought  very  little  about  it,  supposing  I had  had
an  ordinary  dream  ; but  about  three  weeks  after  she  came  to  my  house,  and
related  to  my  wife  the  singular  occurrence  of  her  seeing  me  sitting  in  the
kitchen,  where  she  then  was,  and  that  she  fainted  aw^ay,  and  nearly  dropped
some  dishes  she  had  in  her  hands.  All  this  I saw  exactly  in  my  dream,  so
that  I described  the  kitchen  furniture  and  where  I sat  as  perfectly  as  if  I
had  been  tliere,  though  1 had  never  been  in  the  house.  I gave  many  details,
and  she  said,  It  is  just  as  if  you  had  been  there.”  After  this  she  made-
me  promise  that  I w’ould  never  do  it  again,  as  she  would  never  feel  happy
with  the  idea  of  me  ajjpearing  to  her.  Some  time  after  this  she  left  this-
country  for  Australia,  and  died  a few  years  afterwards.

[Tliis  case  is,  of  course,  somewhat  w'eakened  by  the  fact  that  the  intended
trial  had  been  mentioned — though  some  time  before — to  the  “subject.”]

So  much  for  our  second  liead,  which  brings  us  nearly  to  the  end  of
our  space.  Reserving  our  final  topic — clairvoyance — for  independent
treatment,  we  may  conclude  with  a brief  summary  of  the  wmys  in
which  our  review  of  mesmerism,  as  so  far  published,  appears  to  us  to-
have  differed  from  former  discussions  of  the  subject.  In  the  first  place,
while  making  a clear  distinction  between  Hypnotism  and  Mesmerism,,
we  have  maintained  the  independent  reality  of  both  sorts  of  phenomena.
We  have  thus,  on  the  one  hand,  separated  ourselves  from  the  writers
on  mesmerism  who,  in  ignoi’ance  of  the  woi’k  of  Braid  and  his  followers,
and  judging  from  purely  superficial  indications,  have  confused  together
all  the  phenomena  at  which  the  ordinary  uninstructed  person  will  gape,
and  have  attributed  to  some  mysterious  agency  effects  which  science
clearly  perceives  to  be  due  to  a peculiar  nervous  condition,  induced  by
a particular  sort  of  stimulation.  On  the  other  hand,  we  have  equally"
separated  ourselves  from  the  party  who  find  in  this  peculiar  condition,
and  in  the  mono-ideism  and  automatic  obedience  which  it  entails,  a
key  to  the  whole  range  of  the  phenomena.  For  we  have  both  pointed
out  facts  in  the  ordinary  path  of  hypnotic  experiment,  which  hadi
never  been  faced,  or  in  any  way  explained  by  the  hypnotic  theorists ;
and  we  have  further  devised  special  experiments,  as  precise  as  their
own,  with  the  express  view  of  eliminating  the  factors  on  which  they
relied.  The  complete  success  of  these  experiments  was  too  much  in
accordance  with  the  testimony  of  previous  observers  to  cause  us  much
astonishment ; our  own  claim  is  for  the  first  time  to  have  established
their  truly  crucial  character  by  carefully  distinguishing  them  from  the
cases  to  which  the  hypnotic  theory  may  be  reasonably  applied,  and  by
emphasising  wliich  “ hypnotists  ” have  always  seemed  to  themselvea
able  to  refute  “ mesmerists.’’


422


Some  Higher  Aspects  of  Mesmerism,


We  then  pointed  out  how,  in  many  cases,  mesmerism  seems  only  to
■determine  with  special  certainty  events  which  are  found  also  capable  of
spontaneous  occurrence— that  the  power  seems  to  be  that  of  directing
•and  controlling  nervous  conditions  previously  observed,  or,  at  any  rate,
previously  existing.  In  the  department  of  somnambulism  the  natural
phenomena  are  as  distinct  as  the  induced,  and  have  been  as  distinctly
recorded  ; but,  as  regards  the  sanative  influence  of  one  organism  on
another,  this,  until  specialised  by  mesmerism,  was,  by  its  very  nature,
so  vague  and  diffusive  that  we  can,  perhaps,  point  to  no  more  exact
record  of  it  than  is  contained  in  the  widely-spread  popular  belief  in
physical  sympathies  and  antipathies,  and  in  the  beneticial  influence  on
the  old  of  contact  .with  the  young.  The  notion  of  mesmerism  as
directing  and  concentrating  influences  which  yet  may  assert  themselves
in  its  absence,  Avas  again  strongly  suggested  in  the  obvious  relationship
which  the  domination  of  an  absent  person  by  the  specific  power  bears  to
the  experimental  cases  of  thought-transference  and  “willing,”  and  to
the  spontaneous  cases  of  telepathic  apparitions.  And  the  same  notion
Avill  find  further  confirmation  in  connection  with  the  topic  of
■clairvoyance.

But  our  main  object  throughout  has  been  to  stimulate  rather  than
to  expound — to  suggest  questions  rather  than  to  resolve  them.  The
immediate  need  is  a far  lai’ger  body  of  contemporary  evidence.  The
subject  is,  no  doubt,  one  which,  on  its  practical  side,  demands  care  and
■caution,  but  there  is  no  reason  why  experiments  should  be  confined  to
the  hospital,  or  even  to  the  “ psycho-physical  laboratory.”  Experiments,
for  instance,  in  “ community  of  sensation  ” or  in  “ silent  Avilling  ”
depend,  in  no  way,  on  the  pi’esence  of  morbid  or  hysterical  subjects,
and  are  well  worth  trying  by  any  patient  observer  who  can  induce  the
necessary  trance.  Some  experienced  guidance  is  needed  at  the  outset,
and  such  guidance  it  is  one  of  the  objects  of  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research  to  afford.  But  it  Avould  be  a grave  retardation  of  science  were
it  assumed  that  this  strange  metupsychosis  was  a medical  curiosity  alone.
It  is  much  more  than  this.  It  is  the  key  which  seems  likeliest  to  unlock
the  mysteries  of  attention  and  memory;  of  sleep,  dreams,  and  halluci-
nation ; of  “ doidfle  consciousness  ” and  of  religious  ecstasy.  It  is  by  thus
throwing  the  mental  machinery  slightly  out  of  gear  that  we  discern  the
secrets  of  its  adjustment,  or  (to  use  a more  fanciful  metaphor)  “ the
soul  that  rises  in  us,  our  life’s  star,”  acquires  from  this  displacement  a
sensible  parallax,  and  reveals  laws  of  its  motion  which  direct  introspec-
tion could  iiev'er  discover.  Those  who  engage  in  this  as  in  other
branches  of  psychical  research  must  be  prepared  to  face  much  wearisome
failure,  much  deceptive  ambiguity.  Yet  thus,  perhaps,  may  they  with
most  reason  hope  to  lay  the  corner-stone  of  a valid  experimental
l)sychology,  and  to  open  up  our  deepest  inlet  into  the  inner  man.


Sojue  Higher  Aspects  of  Mesmerism.


423


[Since  the  above  pajier  was  written,  the  views  therein  expressed  con-
cerning the  existence,  limits,  and  varieties  of  mesmerism,  as  a tliera-
peutical  agency,  have  received  remarkable  and  unexpected  corroboration  from
some  results  which  had  not  b3eu  made  public  in  England  at  the  time  that  we
wrote.  The  origin  of  the  important  hypnotic  work  at  the  town  of
Isancy,  in  France,  dates  from  many  years  back,  wdien  Dr.  Liebeault
first  established  himself  there  in  private  practice.  His  labours  have
of  late  years  received  recognition  from  the  authorities  of  the  medical
scliool  ; and  in  the  Hopital  Civil,  for  the  first  time  since  the  days  of
Elliotsoii  and  Esdaile,  hypnotism  is  now  being  practised  on  a large  scale  by
a physician  of  repute.  Professor  Bernheim  is  preparing  a second  edition
of  liis  book,  “La  Suggestion  Hyjmotique,”  in  wdiich  liis  recent  observa-
tions on  the  therapeutical  aspect  ot  the  subject  will  be  included.
Through  his  kindness,  and  that  of  Dr.  Liebeault,  we  have  ourselves  witnessed
their  methods  ; and,  in  company  with  Dr.  A.  T,  Myers,  have  examined  many
of  their  patients.  Tlie  conclusions  to  be  drawn  seem  to  be  com-
pletely congruous  w’ith  those  wliich,  in  the  foregoing  article,  we  have
derived  from  the  earlier  records.  The  success  attained  has,  in  the  very  large
majority  of  instances,  consisted  in  the  relief  of  pain  and  the  removal  of
functional  disturbances — that  is  to  say,  in  results  wdiich  (as  we  have  pointed
out)  afford  little  if  any  proof  of  a specific  or  “ mesmeric  ” influence  ; and  Dr.
Liebeault’s  work,  “Du  Sommeil  et  des  Etats  Analogues,”  published  in  18CG,  is
in  fact  opposed  to  the  “mesmeric”  hypothesis.  But  further  exiieriences,
esf)ecially  wdth  veiy  young  children,  have  now  convinced  him  that  the
hypothesis  wdiich  we  have  advocated  in  resiiect  of  a certain  residue  of
cases  is  fully  justified,  and  that  a specific  influence  is  in  some  cases  exer-
cised ; and  this  view'  he  has  ivdth  great  candour  expressed  in  a recent
tractate,  “ Le  Zooniagndtisme.’

In  view  of  the  Nancy  record,  it  might  seem  that  the  prospects  of  this
form  of  treatment  were,  after  all,  rather  brighter  than  w'e  have  supposed.
But  we  are  bound  to  add  that  the  remarks  made  above  in  relation  to  Esdaile  s
Hindoos,  as  to  differences  of  suscejitibility  in  different  nations,  appear  to  a
very  considerable  extent  to  hold  good  of  the  French  temperament,  as  coni-
jiared  with  the  English.  A far  larger  proportion  of  patients  are  distinctly
affected  in  the  Nancy  w’ards  than  our  own  English  experience  would  have
led  us  to  anticipate.  At  the  same  time,  what  we  saw  there  cannot  but
increase  our  desire  to  see  the  same  line  of  experiment  boldly  entered  upon,
■or  at  any  rate  fairly  recognised,  by  English  medical  men.  No  jiatieiit  has
ever  been  the  worse  for  it ; and  the  alleviation  in  certain  cases  seems  to  be
■of  a more  pronounced  kind  than  is  safely  attainable  in  any  other  way.]


424


Furthc)'  Report  on  Thonght-Transference.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  GENERAL  MEETING  ON
July  loth,  1885.

The  sixteenth  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  at  the
rtooms  ot  the  Society  of  British  Artists,  Suffolk  Street,  Pall  Mall,  on
Friday,  July  lOth,  1885.

Professor  Balfour  Stewart,  F.R.S.,  President,  in  the  Chair.
Mr.  Malcolm  Guthrie  read  part  of  the  following  paper  : —

III.

FURTHER  REPORT  ON  EXPERIMENTS  IN  THOUGHT-
TRANSFERENCE  AT  LIVERPOOL.

By  Malcolm  Guthrie,  J.P.


In  November,  188.3,  I read  a paper  before  the  Society  for  Psychical
Reseai’ch  on  some  experiments  in  thought-transference  carried  on  by
Mr.  James  Birchall  and  myself,  many  of  them  in  the  presence  of
various  members  of  the  Literaiy  and  Philosophical  Society  of  Liver
pool,  who  took  an  interest  in  the  investigation.  Tlie  experiments
were  resumed  and  carried  on  till  Christmas,  when  I was  obliged,  by
ill-health,  to  discontinue  all  further  intellectual  work.

However,  as  I had  commenced  the  investigations,  and  as  it  appeared
that  the  cases  of  the  possession  of  the  power  M’ere  very  few,  I considered
it  my  duty  to  pursue  the  inquiry  in  the  interests  of  science  ; and  my
first  endeavour  was  to  secure  the  aid  of  some  good  scientific  authorities.
I first  asked  my  cousin.  Dr.  Guthrie,  Professor  of  Physics  at  South
Kensington,  to  be  present.  He,  however,  -was  only  able  to  attend  one
evening  and  part  of  another,  and  expressed  no  opinion.  I therefore
made  it  a rule  that  I M’ould  entrust  the  investigation  to  no  one  who.
Avould  not  promise  to  attend  four  evenings  at  least,  as,  moreover,  I
found  the  presence  of  strangers  sometimes  disconcei’ting.  In  the
spring  of  1884  I was  fortunate  enough  to  secure  the  assistance  of  Dr,
Lodge,  Professor  of  Physics,  University  College,  Liverpool,  Avhose
report  was  presented  to  our  Society  and  Avas  published  in  Vol.  II.  of
the  Proceedings.  This  report  vouched  for  the  genuineness  and  accuracy
of  the  experiments,  and  contained  an  account  of  some  neAv  arrange-


Further  Report  on  Thought-Transference.


425


nients.  In  the  autumn  I also  had  the  company  of  Dr.  Herdman,
Professor  of  Biology  at  the  same  college.  AYe  were  sufficiently
successful  under  lus  observation,  but  not  as  much  so  as  previously.

In  the  summer  we  lost  the  services  of  one  of  our  percipients.
Miss  Edwards,  who  left  to  be  married  and  was  no  longer  available.
Miss  Relph,  however,  kindly  continued  to  give  her  assistance  at
meetings  during  the  autumn,  which  were  attended  by  Dr.  Herdman,
Mr.  R.  C.  Johnson,  F.R.A.S.,  Mr.  H.  E.  Rensburg,  and  others.

At  Christmas  there  was  an  interregnum,  owing  to  Miss  R.  sufi’ering
from  a quinsey,  and  we  did  not  resume  work  until  the  month  of  April.
Dr.  Herdman  was  not  able  to  attend,  on  account  of  extra  work  con-
nected 'svith  the  new  marine  biology  studies  ; but  he  recommended  three
medical  men,  of  whom  one  only.  Dr.  Hyla  Greves,  was  able  to  take  up
the  inquiry.  Dr.  Hicks,  President  of  the  Microscopical  Society  of
Liverpool,  also  joined  in  the  inquiry ; and  these  two  gentlemen  have
both  expressed  themselves  as  perfectly  satisfied  with  the  fact  of  the
mental  transference  of  impressions  without  contact  from  one  person  to
another,  as  exhibited  by  our  varied  experiments.  Throughout  the
studies  of  the  autumn  and  winter  I have  had  the  valuable  assistance  of
Mr.  R.  C.  Johnson,  and  of  Mr.  James  Birchall,  the  hon.  secretary  of
the  Literary  and  Philosophical  Society  of  Liverpool.

I have  noticed  a failing  off  in  the  facility  and  success  of  our
experiments  since  our  first  great  results  were  obtained.  I do  not  know
to  what  cause  to  attribute  this  declension.  Personally,  I find  I am  not
equal  to  my  former  self  in  my  power  to  give  off  impressions,  and  if  I
exert  myself  to  do  so  I experience  unpleasant  effects  in  the  head  and
nervous  system.  I therefore  seldom  join  in  the  active  experiments,
but  leave  the  thinking  for  the  most  part  to  others.  Then  we  have  lost
one  of  our  percipients  ; and  as  the  novelty  and  vivacity  of  our  seances
has  departed  there  is  not  the  same  geniality  and  freshness  as  at  the
outset.  The  thing  has  become  monotonous,  whereas  it  v/as  formerly  a
succession  of  surprises.  We  have  now  nothing  new  to  try.  I do  not
know  if  there  is  loss  of  power  on  the  part  of  the  percipient ; it  is  just
as  likely  that  the  agents  are  in  fault.

I have  been,  I need  hardly  say,  very  anxious  to  find  additional
cases  of  percipiency,  and  I have  induced  quite  a number  of  people
to  make  trials  in  tliis  direction,  but  hitherto  without  any  satis-
factory result.  I have,  indeed,  heard  of  several  apparently  genuine
cases,  but  have  never  been  able  to  get  at  them.  There  has  always
been  a reticence  which  has  caused  me  to  meet  with  disappointment,
when  I have  expressed  a desire  for  a scientific  investigation.  Some-
cases  reported  to  me  turned  out  to  be  simply  varieties  of  the  willing-
game  done  under  contact,  and  evidently  the  result  of  unconscious
muscular  indicatioms.  One  case  I investigated,  in  which  five  or  six

2 B


426


Further  Report  on  Thought-Transference.


persons  were  supposed  to  possess  the  power,  was  evidently  explainable
by  the  limited  number  of  objects  experimented  with,  all  known  to
the  supposed  percipients,  and  conjured  up  by  them  in  the  mind’s  eye.
This  was  merely  a case  of  guessing.

I have  not  much  in  the  way  of  novelty  to  report  beyond  my
previous  range  of  experiments.  These  included  tlie  successful  transfer,
with  and  without  contact,of  («)  visual  impressions,  actual  and  imagined,
extending  up  to  complicated  pictures  ; (6)  impressions  of  pains

under  contact,  and  (c)  impressions  of  tastes  and  smells  under
contact  ; {d)  impressions  of  names  and  numbers,  with  and  witli-
out  contact  ; (e)  willing  without  contact.  Dr.  Lodge  tried

the  remarkable  experiment  of  two  independent  visual  impressions,
transferred  at  the  same  time  by  two  agents  to  the  mind  of  one  per-
cipient, which  resulted  in  a combined  impression,  in  which  the  two
originals  were  absolutely  united.  At  the  suggestion  of  Dr.  Herdman,
we  tried  pains  without  contact.  The  percijhent,  blindfolded  and  isolated,
sat  with  her  back  towards  the  company,  who  simultaneously  inflicted
upon  themselves  a pain  in  a given  spot,  and  this  has  been  repeatedly
indicated  with  great  exactness  by  the  percipient.  Another  novelty  has
been  the  transference  of  imagined  tunes.  This  has  not  been  done  with-
out contact,  and  naturally  gave  rise  to  the  inquiry  whether  the  notion  of
tune  could  have  been  transferred  by  muscular  indications.  We  there-
fore tried  to  transfer  tunes  by  muscular  indications  to  all  the  persons
present,  but  failed  ; and  it  seems  not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  a
person  who  is  on  his  guard  can  prevent  himself  from  conveying  the
sharply-defined  rhythm  of  a tune  by  a series  of  pats  or  sudden  pressures
on  another  person’s  hand  ; and  also  that  without  consciousness  of  the
rhythmic  i . dications  on  the  percipient’s  part,  the  tune  could  not  be
identified.

Some  recent  experiments  in  the  presence  of  Dr.  Greves  have  been
a little  remarkable  as  illustrating  the  phenomena  of  inversion  and
reminiscence.  It  has  been  observed  that  visual  impressions  are  some-
times given  right  as  left,  and  left  as  i-ight  In  many  cases  lately  pains
have  been  correctly  localised,  but  placed  on  the  right  side  of  the  body
instead  of  the  left,  and  on  the  left  side  instead  of  the  right.  Then  as  to
reminiscence — in  some  taste  experiments  recently,  it  happened  three
times  running  that  the  taste  which  the  percipient  described  was  not  the
one  which  the  agent  was  at  that  moment  tasting,  but  the  one  which  he
Jiad  been  tasting  in  the  preceding  trial  a minute  before,  none  of  the
substances  having  been  named  during  the  course  of  the  experiments.
In  looking  back  over  the  volumes  of  diagrams  I possess,  I find  that
a good  many  which  I considered  failures  at  tlie  time  are  evidently  due
to  reminiscence  of  the  preceding  diagram  which  had  not,  in  the  majority
of  instances,  been  shown  to  the  percipient  in  the  interval.  My  atten-


Further  Report  on  Thought-Trantference,


427


tion  was  first  called  to  a case  of  this  kind  by  Dr.  Guthrie  in  regard  to
one  of  the  drawings  executed  in  his  presence.

We  have  now  a record  of  713  experiments,  and  I recently  set
myself  the  task  of  classifying  them  into  the  4 classes  of  successful,
partially  successful,  misdescriptions,  and  failures.  I endeavoured  to
work  it  out  in  what  I thought  a reasonable  way,  b it  I experienced
much  difficulty  in  assigning  to  its  proper  column  each  experiment  we
made.  This,  however,  is  a task  which  each  student  of  the  subject  will
be  able  to  undertake  for  himself  according  to  his  own  judgment.  I
do  not  submit  my  summary  as  a basis  for  calculation  of  probability.  A
few  successful  experiments  of  a certain  kind  carry  greater  weight  with
them,  than  a large  number  of  another  kind  ; for  some  experiments  are
practically  beyond  the  region  of  guesses.  I doubt,  indeed,  if  any  amount
of  calculation  of  probabilities  will  help  to  convince  of  the  trustworthiness
of  the  experiments.  One  successful  evening  when  the  conditions  are
strict  is  absolutely  convincing ; and  the  simple  genuine  truthfulness
of  the  percipients  is  a better  guarantee  than  any  amount  of  subsequent
cross-examination  as  to  the  conditions  of  trial.

Tlie  following  is  a summary  of  the  work  done,  classified  to  the  best
of  iny  judgment.


First  Series.


Experiment  and  Conditions.

Total.

Nothing

perceived.

O

4^

V

'ft

s

o

a

Partial.

Misdescrip-

tions.

Tisual — Letters,  figures,  and  cards — Contact

26

2

17

4

3

do.  do.  do.  Non -contact...

16

0

9

2

5

Visual— Objects,  colours,  &c. — Contact

19

6

7

4

2

do.  do.  Non-contact

38

4

28

6

0

Imagined  visual. — Non-contact

18

5

8

2

3

Imagined  numbers  and  names — Contact  and
Non-contact

39

11

12

6

10

3

Pains — Contact

52

10

30

9

Tastes  and  smells — Contact

94

19

42

20

13

302

57

153

53

39

Diagrams — Contact

37

7

18

6

6

do.  Non-contact

118

6

66

23

23

457

70

237

82

68

There  were  also  40  diagrams  for  experimental  evenings  with  strangers,  in
series  of  sixes  and  sevens,  all  misdrawn,  and  not  fairly  to  be  reckoned  in  the
above.

457  experiments  under  proper  conditions.

70  nothing  perceived.

387

319  wholly  or  partially  correct ; 68  misdescriptions  = 18%

2 E 2


428


Further  Report  on  Thougld-Tramfcrence,


Second  Series.


Experiment  and  Conditions.

Total,  1

1

1 Nothing

perceived.

Complete.

Partial.

Misde-

1 scribed.

Visual — Various  objects — Contact

18

3

7

7

1

do.  do.  Non-contact

15

6

o

3

4

Visual — Cards,  &c. — Contact

18

1

7

2

8

do.  Non-contact

3


3

Imagined  visual

1

1

—


Imagined  numbers  and  names — Contact  and
Non-contact

1

1

Pains — Contact

21

—

6

7

8

Tastes  and  smells — Contact

6

—

1

2

3

83

11

23

21

28

Diagrams — Contact

8

2

4

2

—

do.  Non-contact

32

2

12

11

7

123

15

39

34

35

Total 123

Nothing  perceived  ...  15


108


Complete  and  partial .. . 73

Misdescriptions 35


108


This  table  exhibits  32%  failures,  as  against  18%  of  the  lirst  set.
Third  Series.


Experiment  and  Conditions.

Total.

Nothing

perceived.

Complete.

Partial.

•§1
to  ~

1

Visual — Various  objects — Contact

10

2

3

2

3

do.  do.  Non-contact

28

4

8

10

(>

Visual — Cards,  &c. — Contact

5

1

1

1

2

do.  Non-contact

20

5

3

8

4

Imagined  visual

3

1

1

0

1

Imagined  numbers  and  names

3

2

0

1

0

Contact  and  Non-contact

4

1

1

1

1

Pains— Contact

22

3

8

4

7

do.  Non-contact

14

2

8

0

4

Tastes  and  smells — Contact

18

1

4

2

11

Tunes — Contact

6

2

3

0

1

Diagrams — Contact  ...  \ Only  a few,  classed
do.  Non-contact  j in  above  as  objects.

133

24

40

29

40

1 otftl  ...  . . • •••

...  133

Completely  or

partially  correct

69

Nothing  perceived  ...

...  24

Misdescribed

•••  •••

40

109

109

Showing  a further  declension  of  success  from  the  second  series  or  37%  of  failures.


Further  Report  on  Thouglit-Tramference.


429


I append  the  record  of  a few  of  our  evenings.  I may  remark  that
since  November,  1883,  owing  to  a suggestion  of  Dr.  Guthrie’s,  the
objects  in  all  our  visual  experiments  have  been  placed  on  a screen  fixed
to  the  back  of  the  chair  upon  which  the  percipient  is  seated,  blind-
folded— the  agents  taking  their  places  in  front  of  the  screen  at  a distance
generally  of  three  or  four  feet.  In  previous  experiments  of  this  kind
the  percipient,  blindfolded,  had  faced  the  agents,  the  object  or  diagram
experimented  with  having  been  placed  at  a distance  behind  the  per-
cipient, and  the  agents  looking  over  her  shoulder.  I do  not  consider
that  the  change  of  position  made  any  difi'erence  in  the  result  of  the
e.xperiments.

The  following  examples  will  give  the  most  important  of  the  results
from  the  point  where  my  former  account  broke  otf.  In  every  case  all
the  experiments  made  on  that  occasion  are  given.

London,  24th  November,  1883.  Evening.

Present : Miss  Relph,  Miss  Edwards,  Mr.  Hughes,  and  Mr.  Guthrie,
Visitors  expected,  but  it  was  hoped  they  would  not  come,  the  comjiany
feeling  dispirited.  Miss  Relph  jiroposed  to  try  some  of  the  experiments
in  colours  and  outlines.  Miss  Relph  was  blindfolded  and  isolated,  all
joining  in  as  operators.

1.  — A round  red  spot  on  satin  was  ex-

hibited on  a black  background,
behind  the  subject.

2.  — A pink  diamond.

3.  — A strip  of  green  ribbon  of  this

shape


Not  seen  at  all.

Reply — “Colour  bluish  green.”

Afterwards  said  to  be  a diamond.
Rejjly — “It  is  green  . . shape  square

with  a quarter  cut  out,  thus


Somebody  proposed  experiments  in  tastes,  and  Mr.  G.  suggested  a few
preliminary  experiments  in  the  transference  of  pjains.  This  being  received
with  zest  by  tlie  company.  Miss  Relph  became  the  subject,  and  IVIr.  Hughes,
taking  her  hand,  received  the  following  pains  : —


Positions.


Percipient  -I-


Table


Mr.  H.  agent.

-4

+ Mr.  G.

operator.


+ Miss  E.  or  Miss  R.
as  spectator.


1.  — Little  finger,  right  hand,  pinched.  Subject  pointed  out  the  spot  exactly.

2.  — Lobe  of  left  ear  pinched.  Ditto.

3.  — Right  upper  arm  pinched.  Ditto.

Miss  E. , who  had  not  tried  this  experiment  before,  here  expressed  a
wish  to  become  the  subject.


430


TudUer  Repod  on  Thought-Transference.


4. — Left  hand  pricked  with  a pin.


5. — Right  ankle  severely  pinched.

0. — Back  of  neck  pinched.

7. — Left  nostril  tickled  with  the
corner  of  a piece  of  papier.  Mr.
H.  suffered  very  much.


Said  she  felt  by  the  shaking  that  they
were  doing  something  to  the  left
arm,  so  this  experunent  wa^
abandoned.

Subject:  “Oh!”  putting  her  hanc
to  the  spot.

Sjiot  indicated  by  subject.

“Something  funny,”  putting  hei
hand  to  the  part,  and  then  sud-
denly started  as  if  the  sensation
had  become  unbearable.


Mr.  G.  here  asked  Mr.  H.  to  come  away  for  consultation.  Miss
Relidi  attended  to  the  fire,  and  Mr.  H.  obeyed  Mr.  G.’s  silent
directions  to  take  off  one  of  his  shoes.  Poker  put  in  fire  by  Mr.
G.  on  returning.


8.  — Inside  middle  of  left  foot

pinched.

9.  — Front  of  neck  pinched.

10.  — Hair  of  head  pulled.

11.  — Violent  pressure  of  Mr.  G.’s

hands  round  Mr.  H.’s  right
wrist.

12.  — Pressure  of  nail  between

knuckles  of  the  same  hand.

13.  — Red  hot  jioker  held  by  Mr.  G.

while  Mr.  H.  jiut  his  hand  over
it,  and  drew  it  away  when  the
heat  became  unbearable.

N.B. — In  answer  to  question
feel  the  sensation  of  heat.

14.  — Toj)  of  left  instei)  jn’icked  with

two  pins  quickly.

15.  — Top  of  right  arm  i)inched.


Subject  indicated  the  spot.

Ditto.

Nothing  felt.

‘ ‘ Something  tight,  like  a band  round
the  wrist.”

Still  felt  pain  in  the  right  wrist.

“ Something  about  the  right  hand  as
if  I wanted  to  take  liold  of  some-
thing and  then  drew  it  away,  as  if
I was  frightened  to  take  hold  of  it.”

afterwards  subject  said  she  did  not

Left  foot  indicated — then  suddenly,
“Oh!  my!  did  you  ever  feel
pins  and  needles.”

Spot  indicated  by  subject.


Here  Mr.  G.  tried,  as  subject,  to  receive  a pain.  He  felt  a slight
sensation  in  the  middle  joint  of  the  right  little  finger,  and  thought
of  naming  the  spot,  but  thought  it  would  only  be  a guess  and
refrained.  It  afterwards  appeared  that  the  pain  was  located  there.
He  tried  another  and  failed  to  receive  any  impression.


Tastes  were  next  tried.

1. — Miss  Reljdi,  with  Mr.  H.  as  “Acid  . . . makes  the  mouth  feel
agent.  Citric  acid.  rough  and  the  teeth  inside  . . .

might  be ” Nothing  else  said.


Further  Report  on  Thought-Transference.


4:jl


2.  — Miss  Relph  ^dth  Mr.  G.  Cloves.


3.  — Miss  Relph  with  Mr.  H.  Coffee.
The  sample  had  no  smell,  being
very  old  and  the  aroma  all  gone.


“A  sharp  taste  but  very  pleasant.”
(After  a while.)  “Now  it  is
becoming  bitter.  ” N.  B . — The  taste
of  cloves  changes  in  the  mouth.

Miss  Relph  said  : “Tastes  rather  like
coffee.”


At  this  point  all  the  objects  for  taste  were  removed  from  the  room—
they  had  been  placed  behind  a screen.


4. — IMiss  Reljjh  and  Mr.  H.
Vinegar.


5. — Miss  E.  and  Mr.  G.  Olive  oil.

6.  — Mr.  G.  then  took  Miss  Relph’s

hand.

7.  — Miss  E.  and  Mr.  H.  Mustard.


“ Sour  and  nasty  ...  it  isn’t  vine-
gar, is  it?”  (Mr.  H.  remained  silent
some  time  as  if  implying  a nega-
tive.) “Is  it  some  kind  of  sauce
with  vinegar  in  it?”  (Another  long
pause.)  “No;  I can  only  taste
vinegar.”

Nothing  i^erceived.

“Is  it  oil  like  in  sardines  ?”

Described  as  something  hot.


Here  some  experiments  in  willing  the  action  and  position  of  the  arms
were  tried  without  success.


Then  the  experiments  in  pains  were  resumed.


16.  — Back  of  neck  pinched  with

scissors.

17.  — Tumbler  half  full  of  cold  water

grasped  in  Mr.  H.  ’s  right  hand.


13. — Water  dropped  in  drops  upon
Mr.  H.  ’s  right  hand.


19. — Nostrils  tickled.


20. — Pricking  with  two  pins  between
thumb  and  forefinger  of  right
hand.


Miss  Relph  and  Mr.  H.

“Dull  pricks  back  of  neck.”

“Is  it  something  in  the  right  hand  ?”
(going  through  the  action  of  grasp-
ing something  upright)  . . . “ a
sort  of  cold  feeling.”

Miss  Relph  said  : “What  are  you
doing  with  water  ? — I feel  some
splashes  on  the  left  arm.”  (There
were  some  splashes  and  the  experi-
ment was  abandoned. )

Could  not  say,  but  kept  putting  her
hand  to  her  nose  as  if  feeling  veiy
uncomfortable.

“ I feel  a pricking  here  ” — indicating
the  spot  with  precision.


432


Further  Report  on  Thonght-Tramference.

December  5th,  1883.

Present : Mr.  Guthrie,  Miss  Relph,  Miss  Edwards,  and  Miss  Redmond.

An  informal  meeting.

Mr.  G.  in  contact  with  Miss  E.

Figure  15  thought  of.  Failure.

Mr.  G.  thought  of  a name,  “ Mary  Queen  of  Scots,”  and  tried  contact

■with  Miss  E.  Failed.  Then  with  Miss  R.  and  failed.  Then  all  thought  of

it.  Miss  R.  being  the  subject.  She  said,  “Ann — James — William,”  and

then  gave  it  up.

1.  — Miss  Redmond  and  Mr.  G.  tasted  powder  of  dried  celery.

In  contact  with  Miss  Relph  and  Miss  E.  Miss  E.  said  “ Celery.”

2.  — Miss  Redmond  tasted  and  smelled  camphor.

These  two  experiments  were  imperfect.

Miss  Relph  and  Miss  E.  were  then  left  in  one  room,  and  a trap-door  in
the  wooden  partition  was  opened  into  the  next  room,  the  space  being
filled  up  with  a frame  covered  with  india  rubber,  and  fitting  tiglitly.
A slit  in  it  admitted  the  passage  of  the  operator’s  hand,  which  was  in
contact  with  both  the  subjects.  There  was  no  other  means  of
communication  ; and  no  scent  perceptible  to  normal  organs  could  pass
from  one  room  to  the  other.

3.  — Miss  Redmond  tasted  powdered  nutmeg.

Miss  E.  said  “ Ginger.”  Miss  Relph  : “ Nutmeg.”

4.  — Mr.  G.  tasted  powder  of  dry  celery.

Miss  E.  : “A  bitter  herb.”

Miss  Relph  : “ Something  like  camomile.”

5.  — Miss  Redmond  tasted  coffee.

At  the  same  time,  without  any  previous  intimation,  Mr.  G. , with  two
pins,  pricked  the  front  of  the  right  wrist  of  Miss  Redmond.

Miss  E.  said  : “ Is  it  a taste  at  all  ?”  Mr.  G.  ; “ Why  do  you  ask  ?”
Miss  E.  : “ Because  I feel  a sort  of  jn-icking  in  the  left  wrist.”  Told
it  was  the  right  wrist,  but  she  said  she  felt  it  in  tlie  left.  Miss
Relph  : “ Is  it  cocoa  or  chocolate  ?”  Answer  given  in  the  negative.
MissE:  “Is  it  coffee?”

G. — Mr.  G.  tasted  Worcester  sauce.

Miss  Relph ; “ Something  sweet  . . . also  acid  ...  a curious

taste.”

Miss  E.  : “ Is  it  vinegar  ?”

V. — Miss  Redmond  smelled  eau  de  Cologne.

Miss  Relph  ; “ Is  it  eau  de  Cologne  ?”

8.  — Miss  Redmond  smelled  camphor.

Miss  E.  : “ Don’t  taste  anything.”

Miss  Relph  : Nothing  perceived.

9.  — Mr.  G.  smelled  carbolic  acid.

Miss  Relph  ; “ What  you  use  for  tooth-ache  . . . creosote.”

Miss  E.  afterwards  said  she  thought  of  pitch.


Further  Report  on  Thought-Transference,


433


10. — Mr.  G.  Right  instep  i)ricked  with  pins.

Miss  E.  said  on  face,  tiien  on  left  shoulder  ; then  Miss  Relph  said
pain  was  on  right  foot.

Pain  immediately  changed  to  left  foot.  Miss  E.  said  pain  was  ou
left  foot.  Both  maintained  their  opinions.


December  11th,  1883.

i'rfsent : Messrs.  Guthrie  and  Steel,  and  afterwards  Miss  Redmond  in  one
room,  and  Miss  Reljjh  and  Miss  Edwards  in  the  adjoining  room,
the  agent’s  hand  being  passed  through  the  slit  as  before.  For  the  most
part  Mr.  G.  only  (besides  the  agent)  knew  the  substance  employed.

T his  is  a plan  of  the  twm  rooms  ; —


Miss  R.

+

Substances

or

Diapliiagm

Mr.  G.
or

+ Agent

Mr.  S.

Miss  E.

+

+

Miss  Redmond

-I-

Sometimes  the  subjects  were  told  the  nature  of  the  exjjeriment — some-
times not.


1.-6.  2.
6.  6.

2.-6.  8.
6.10.

3. — 6.11.

6.12.

4. — 6.12.

6.13.

5.  — 6.15.

6.18.

6. — 6.19.

6.20.

7. — 6.21.

6.24

8. — 6.30.

6.33.


9.— 6.35.


10.— 6.37.
6.40.


Miss  Relph  with  Mr.  G.  Taste — Spanish  liquorice.

“Something  juicy  and  sweet  . . . Anything  like  Spanish

liquorice  ?”

Miss  Relph  with  Mr.  S.  Cheese.

“ Something  sweet  . . . No  flavour.”

Miss  Relph  with  Mr.  G.  Cheese.

“ Still  taste  liquorice.”

Miss  E.  with  Mr.  G.  Clieese.

“ Pepper  or  spice.”

Miss  Relph  with  Mr.  G.  Smell — creosote.

“ Creosote  or  tar.”

Miss  E.  with  Mr.  G.  Taste — peppermint  lozenges.

“ Sweet  . . . chocolate  ?”

Miss  Relph  with  Mr.  G.  Taste — peppermint  lozenges.

‘ ‘ Acid  drop  . . . sweet  . . . Cannot  distinguish  any

flavour  . . . Acid  drop  or  raspberry  drop.  ”

Miss  E.  with  Mr.  S.  Horehound  and  aniseed  lozenge.

“Sweet  and  rather  sickly.”  Mr.  S.  said  it  was  a cocrcco
description.

Miss  E.  with  Mr.  G.  Smell — lavender  water.

“A  scent — lavender  water  or  rondeletia. ”

Miss  Relph  with  iVIr.  G.  Taste — camomile.

“ Sometliing  fearfully  bitter.”


434


Further  Report  on  Thought-Transference.


11.  — 6.41.  Mi.ss  E.  with  Miss  Redmond.  Taste — musk  lozenges.

6.44.  “ Is  it  sweet  ? . . . musk,  I think.”

12.  — 6.47.  Miss  E.  with  Miss  Redmond.  Taste — cheese.

6.48.  “ Don’t  taste  anything.  ” (No  successes  with  cheese.)

13.  — 6.49.  “ Miss  E.  with  Miss  Redmond.  Smell — salts.

6.52.  “ Are  you  smelling  anything  ? . . . A raisin.”

14.  — 6.53.  Miss  Relph  with  Miss  Redmond.  Smell — salts.

6.54.  “ Is  it  smelling  salts  ?”

15.  — Miss  E.  with  Mr.  G.  Taste — anchovy  sauce.

“Are  you  tasting  something  ?”

16.  — Miss  Relph  with  Mr.  G.  Taste — anchovy  sauce.

“Is  it  something  pleasant  . . . anything  like  vinegar?  , . .
Don’t  know  what  it  is.”

17.  — 7.4.  Miss  Relph  and  Miss  Redmond.  Taste — nutmeg.

“ Something  hot  and  spicy  . . . seems  to  be  something  like  spice

. Is  it  nutmeg  ?”

18.  — Miss  E.  with  Miss  Redmond.  Taste — quinine.

“Are  you  tasting  anything  ? . . . Something  nasty  . . bitter.”

19.  — Miss  Relph  with  Miss  Redmond,  Taste — quinine.

“ Is  it  anything  like  , . . Oh,  it’s  bitter!  but  I don’t  know  ■v/hat

it  is.”

20.  — Miss  Redmond  with  Mr.  G.  Smell — camphorated  spirit.

‘ ‘ A smell  . . . Is  it  lavender  water  ? . . , Another  smell,  but

I cannot  make  it  out.”

21.  — Miss  Relijh,  with  Mr.  G.  Taste — coltsfoot,

“ I don’t  get  anything  at  all.”

22.  — Miss  E.  with  Mr.  G.  Taste — coltsfoot.

“ I don’t  get  anything.”

23.  — Miss  Relph  witli  Mr.  G.  Taste — coffee.

Notliing  perceived.

24.  — Miss  E.  with  Mr.  G.  Taste — coffee.

“Is  it  chocolate  ? . . . No  ; I don’t  get  it.”

25.  — Miss  E.  with  Miss  Redmond.  Smell — onion.

“ Smelling  a lemon,  or  something  like  an  orange  or  a lemon  . . .

Something  liot  . . . something  that  makes  the  nose  feel  funny,

as  if  one  would  like  to  rub  it  ...  It  makes  the  tears  come  in
my  eyes,  as  if  I was  smelling  onions  . . , If  it  is  not  an  onion,  I

don’t  know  what  it  is.  ”

20.  — No  notice  was  taken  of  the  foregoing  ; and,  as  if  in  despair,  Mr.  G.
I’equested  Miss  Relph  to  try.

Miss  Relidi  said  ; “An  onion  . . . oh  ! quite  strong.”

27.  — Miss  E.  with  Miss  Redmond.  Taste — vinegar.

“ Seems  as  if  you  had  some  liquid,  but  don’t  know  if  it  has  any  taste.”

28.  — Miss  Relph  with  Miss  Redmond.  Taste — vinegar.

Nothing  perceived.

29.  — Miss  Relph  with  Mr.  G.  Smell — French  polish.

“ Smells  like  vinegar  or  some  kind  of  sauce.”  The  bottle  of  stuff  was
afterwards  smelled  by  Miss  Relph,  but  she  could  not  tell  then  what
it  was.


Further  Report  on  Thought-Transference,


435-


17th  December,  1883.

Present : Professor  BaKour  Stewart,  Mr.  Guthrie,  Miss  Redmond,  and  after-
wards Mrs.  Guthrie,  in  one  room  ; and  Miss  Relph  and  Miss  Edwards
in  the  other  room.  Thus  : —


Agent.  Screen.


Miss  R,

+

Thus

A

±

Table  with
substances

Slit

or

Miss  E.

+

thus

V

n

Spectators

The  subjects  were  told  that  the  exfieriments  would  be  in  tastes,  smells,,
and  pains,  but  they  would  be  varied  without  specifying  the  nature  of  each
one.  The  substances  used  were  not  known  to  the  spectators  till  after  each
experiment.  These  experiments  were  made  with  contact  through  the  slit»
as  above  described  ; and  perfect  silence  was  observed  during  their  progress.
All  the  observations  made  by  tlie  percipients  are  recorded,  and  the  answers
made  to  inquiries  of  percipients  were  not  made  till  the  conclusion  of  the-
experiment.


1. — G.24.

6.25.

2. — 6.25.

6.26.

3. — 6.27.

6.28.

4. — 6.29.

6.30.

5. — 6.31.

6.34.

6. — 6.40.

7. — 6.43.


8. — 6.45.

6.47.

9. — 6.48.

6.52.
10.— 6.52.
6.59.


Miss  E.  with  Mr.  G.  Taste — musk  lozenge.

“ Is  it  musk  ? ”

Miss  E.  with  Professor  S.  Taste — substance  not  recorded.

“ Anything  bitter  ? . . . Cannot  get  anything.”

Miss  E.  with  Mr.  G.  Taste — salt.

‘ ‘ Any  tiling  spicy  ? ” (N.  B. — The  taste  was  a mixture  of  musk  and
salt. )

Miss  Relph  witli  Mr.  G.  Taste — salt.

“Beef-tea,  or  Liebig’s  Extract  of  Beef.”  (N.B. — Taste  was  a
mixture  of  musk  and  salt. )

Miss  E.  with  Miss  Redmond.  Taste — salt.

“Like  salt.”

Miss  E.  and  Miss  Reljili  with  Mr.  G.  Smell — smelling  salts.
Nothing  discerned.

Miss  E.  and  Miss  Relph  separately  with  Mr.  G.  Taste — tincture
of  quinine  much  diluted.

Miss  Reljih  : “Something  acid.”  Miss  E. : Nothing  discerned.
Miss  Reliih  with  Miss  Redmond.  Smell — lavender  water.

“Is  it  a scent?  . . . lavender  water. ”

Miss  E.  with  Miss  Redmond.  Taste — peppermint  lozenge.
Nothing  discerned.

Miss  Relph  witli  Miss  Redmond.  Taste — peppermint  lozenge.

‘ ‘ Something  hot  ' . . . cayenne  ? . . . It’s  hot  . . .

something  veiy  hot.”


436


Further  Report  on  Thought-Transference.


Jl. — 7.  0.  Miss  E.  with  Miss  Redmond.  Smell — ssnelling  salts.

7.  4.  “ Smelling  something  , . . don’t  know  what  . . . Is  it

aromatic  vinegar  ? ”

12.  — 7.  5.  Miss  E.  with  Miss  Redmond.  Pain — front  of  left  wrist  pricked

with  pins.

7.  9.  “ Is  it  a pain  ? . . . A funny  sensation  in  the  left  wrist.”

13.  — 7.10.  Miss  E.  with  Miss  Redmond.  Pain — left  ear  jJinched.

7.10.  “Pain  in  left  ear.”

14.  — 7.11.  Miss  E.  with  Miss  RedmoiR.  Pain — nose  tickled  with  piece  of

paper.

Nothing  discerned.


IG.— 7.20.
17*-
18.-
19.-


-7.25.

7.27.

-7.29.

7.34.

-7.35.


15. — 7.19.  Miss  Relpli  with  Miss  Redmond.  Pain — nose  tickled  with  piece
of  paper.

Nothing  discerned.

Miss  E.  with  Professor  S.  Smell — substance  not  recorded.

“A  smell,  but  I cannot  tell  what.”

Miss  E.  with  Mrs.  G. , sen.  Smell  and  taste — creosote,

“ Is  it  that  horrible  stuff — tar  1”

Miss  Relj^h  with  Mr.  G.  Taste — Spanish  liquorice.

“ Something  sweet  and  hot.”

Miss  Relish  with  Mr.  G.  Pain — sole  of  right  foot  pricked  with
pins.

Failure.  Professor  S.,  who  was  with  the  subjects,  reports  that
Miss  E. , not  in  contact,  located  the  pain  in  the  right  foot.

20. — 7.50.  Miss  Relph  with  Mrs.  G.,  sen.  Smell — onion.

7.51.  “ Are  you  smelling  some  kind  of  fruit  ?”

7.52.  “Is  it  an  onion  ?”

:21. — 7.53.  Miss  Relph  with  Mrs.  G.,  sen.  Taste — Spanish  liquorice.

7.54.  “ Tasting  something  . . . liquorice.”

22.  — 7.55.  Miss  Relph  with  Mrs.  G.,  sen.  Pain — nose  tickled.

Pain  in  riglit  hand — afterwards  foot.

23.  — 8.  0.  Miss  Relph  and  Miss  E.  with  Mr.  G.  Pain — chin  pinched.

Nothing  discerned.

24.  — 8.  4.  All  the  company  now  met  in  one  room.  Miss  Relijh  being

placed  with  her  face  in  tlie  coi’uer  and  blindfolded.  Thus  : —


1.  Miss  Relph.

2.  Professor  S.

3.  Mrs.  G.

4.  Miss  Redmond.
.5.  Miss  E.

6.  Mr.  G.


Mr.  G.  produced  a bunch  of  small  keys,  hanging  on  a chain,  from
his  pocket,  and  held  tliem  up  behind  Miss  Relph.  The  experi-
ment took  about  five  minutes.

Miss  Relph  said  : “Is  it  something  bright?  like  a lot  of  icicles
hanging  down.”


Furiher  Report  on  Thoxight-Transference.


437


25. — Professor  S.  wrote  down  “Tom  Thumb,”  and  passed  it  round,  telling
Miss  Relph  we  were  going  to  think  of  a fancy  name.

Miss  Relph  received  no  impression.

The  spring  of  1884  was  taken  up  by  experiments  under  the  supervision  of
Dr.  Lodge,  already  reported  in  the  Proceedings,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  189-200.

November  6th,  1884.

Present:  Miss  Relph,  Miss  Redmond,  Mr.  Guthrie,  and  Professor  Herdman.-
Percipient : Miss  Relph,  Object  on  a screen  at  the  back  of  her  chair.

No  contact.

1.  — Object — Red  paper  cut  in  the  form  of  an  egg-cup  with  a white  egg  in  it.

Miss  Relph  : “ It  is  something  red  ; longer  tlian  wide.”  She  could  not
describe  the  shape.

2.  — Object — Blue  paper  cut  in  the  form  of  a jug.

Miss  Relph:  “Is  it  blue  ? wider  at  the  top,  then  goes  in,
then  wider  again  ...  It  looks  like  a jug.”  (See
drawing — handle  reversed. )

3.  — Object — Red  paper  cut  in  the  form  of  a vase.

Miss  Relph  : “ Is  it  red  ? . . . I can  get  the  colour,  nothing  more.”

4.  — Object — A new  nutmeg-grater.

Miss  Relph  ; “ It  is  something  bright  . . . sQver  or  steel  , , ►-

long  and  narrow.”

5.  — Object — A round  wooden  counter  on  a black  ground.

Miss  Relph  ; “I  can’t  see  anything  at  all.”

6.  — Object — A red  counter.

Miss  Relph  : “ Is  it  red  ? . . . It  is  round  and  red.”

7.  — Object — No.  5 over  again.

Miss  Relph  : “Is  there  any  red  about  it  ? . . . Yellowish  red — a-

kind  of  light.”

8.  — Object — Silver  paper  cut  in  the  form  of  a teapot.

Miss  Relph  : “ Is  it  bright  silver,  something  like  a kettle  ? ...  A
teapot.”

9.  — Object — A long  yellow  rectangular  paper.

Miss  Relph  : “ Is  it  yellow  ? . . . It  seems  longer  than  wide.  *

10.  — Object — A sovereign.

Miss  Relph  : “ Is  it  bright  yellow  ? . . gold  . . Is  it  round?”

11.  — Object — The  three  of  hearts.

Miss  Relph : “Is  it  a card  with  red  spots ? . . . Thi’ee,  one-

above  the  other.”

12.  — Object — -The  five  of  spades.

“Is  it  another  card  with  five  black  spots  ?”

13.  — Object — The  eight  of  diamonds.

“ Is  it  a card  with  a lot  of  spots  1 , ,


. red  .


the  ten  ?”


438


Further  Report  on  Thought-Transference.


14.  — — A card  with  two  red  X’s-

I\liss  Kelph  : “ Is  it  something  j^ellow  and  bright  ?”  ...  I see  no

shape  at  all  . . . Is  it  a card  with  red  spots  ? • . . I see  no

shape.”

15.  — No  object.  We  thought  of  a white  X on  a black  ground.

Miss  Relph  : “I  see  something  white  and  black  ...  I see  two
lines.”

November  13th,  1884.

Present : Misses  Relph  and  Redmond  ; Messrs.  Guthrie  and  Johnson  ; and
Professor  Herdman.

Pahi  Experiments.

Percipient : Miss  Relph,  blindfolded.  Contact.

1.  — Mr.  J.’s  left  arm  pinched.

Miss  Relph  ; “ Somewhere  about  this”  (left)  “arm.”  She  indicated  the
riglit  spot.

2.  — Mr.  G.  twisted  a cord  tightly  round  Mr.  J.’s  right  wrist.  (No  contact.)

No  result.

Contact  with  left  hand.  Miss  Relph  : “ Is  it  this  ” (right)  “ wrist?”

3.  — Mr.  G.  rubbed  a grater  on  Mr.  J.’s  left  hand.  (Contact  with  right  liand.)

Miss  Relph  pointed  to  tlie  iilace  and  said  : “ It  is  a nij^jjing  pain.”

Object  Experiments.

1.  — Object — A bird’s-claw  brooch,  with  silver.

No  result.  Nothing  seen.

2.  — Object — Small  letter  “d.”

Miss  Relph  : “Are  there  black  lines  on  a white  ground  ?”  (“Yes.”)
‘ ‘ I can’t  see  any  distinct  shape.  Tliere  seems  to  be  a line  down  and
another  going  round.”  (“  Can  you  draw  it  ?”)  “Yes.”  Miss  Relph

then  drew

3.  — Object — The  small  letter  “k.”

Miss  Relph  : “It  seems  something  the  same  as  the  last,  a white  ground
and  dark  lines  ...  I can’t  see  anything  distinctly.”

No  result.

4.  — Object — A gold  hoi'seshoe  on  black.

Miss  Reljih  ; “Is  it  something  bright  and  yellow?”  (“Yes.  What
shape  is  it  ? ”)  “ I can  see  no  shape.”  No  further  result.

5.  — Object — The  capital  letter  Q,  wliite  and  black.

Miss  Relpli  : “Is  it  round,  with  something  at  the  bottom  ? ” (“  Yes.”)
“ It  might  be  a letter.”  (“  Which  letter  ? ”)  “ Is  it  O or  Q ? ”

C. — Object — The  letter  T.

Miss  Relph  : “ Is  it  another  letter  ? . . . Is  it  anything  like  a T ? ’

7. — Object — A pair  of  scissors  on  a white  ground.

Miss  Relph  : “ Is  it  briglit  like  silver?  ...  It  seems  wider  than
long,  but  I can’t  see  any  distinct  shajje.”  No  further  result.


Further  Report  on  Thought-Transference.


439


8.  — Object — Red  paper  cut  in  the  form  of  a teacup  and  saucer.

Miss  Relpli : “It  is  red.”  (“  Wliat  shape  is  it  ? ”)  No  shape  visible.

9.  — Object — Blue  paper  cut  in  the  form  of  a jug.

Miss  Relph  : “ Is  it  square  1 ...  1 still  see  red,  also  blue  .

It  is  wider  at  the  bottom  and  goes  up  narrower  . , . Are  there

two  objects?”  (“No.”)

1.  — We  agreed  to  think  of  the  number  4.

Miss  Relph;  “Is  it  3 or  5?”  (“No.”)

2.  — Number  18  thought  of,  and  contact.

Miss  Relph:  “Is  it  3?  . . . Is  it  9?”  (“No.”)

Pain  Experiments.  With  contact.

1.  — Back  of  Mr.  J.’s  neck  scratched  with  2»in.

Miss  Reljdi : “ Is  it  the  back  of  the  neck  ?”

Right.

2.  — Mr.  J.’s  left  shoulder  jmicked.

Miss  Relph  pointed  to  the  right  place.

3.  — Mr.  J.’s  left  wrist  squeezed.

Right.

4.  — Mr.  J.’s  left  ankle  squeezed.

Right

Without  contact.  Miss  Relph,  blindfolded  and  isolated,  seated  with  back  to
company — a suggestion  of  Dr.  Herdman’s.

1.  — Back  of  left  hand  pricked.

Guessed  rightly.

2.  — The  left  lobe  of  the  ear  pricked.

Also  guessed  rightly.


November  20th,  1884.

J^resent ; Misses  Relph,  Redmond,  James  ; Messrs.  Guthrie  and  Johnson  ;
and  later.  Professor  Herdman.

Percipient : Miss  Relph.

1.  — Object — A red  ball  on  a blue  ground.

Miss  Relph  ; “ Is  it  orange  or  yellow,  and  round  ? ”

2.  — Object — The  three  of  spades.

Miss  Reljih : “Is  it  a card  ? . . . with  black  s^^ots  ? . , . I

think  there  are  four  or  five  . . . in  a straight  line.  ”

3.  — All  pricked  the  left  wrist  with  a pin.  No  contact.

Miss  Relph  ; “Is  it  in  the  left  hand?”  (Pointing  to  the  back  near
the  little  finger. )

4.  — All  twisted  thick  -wire  round  the  third  finger  of  the  left  hand.

Discovered  correctly,  but  one  joint  lower  down,
o. — Object — A silver  egg-cup.

Miss  Relph:  “Is  it  something  like  silver?  . . . standing  up?”

Miss  Relph  could  not  describe  the  shape.


440


Farther  Report  on  Thonght-Transference.


G. — Object — A square  patch  of  blue  silk.

Miss  Relph  : “Is  there  a lot  of  blue  about  ? . . . Is  it  square  ?”

7.  — Object— The  figure  7 — black  on  white.

Miss  Relph  ; “I  think  I see  some  black  lines.  ” Miss  Relph  could  not
define  further.

8.  — Object — red  chess  queen.

No  result.

9.  — Object — A square  patch — dark  red.

No  ini2)ression.  It  was  rather  far  from  the  light.

10.  — Object — A round  red  patch  on  a white  ground.

Miss  Relidi ; “Is  there  a lot  of  red  ? It  seems  to  be  round.”

11.  — Object — The  two  of  spades.

Not  made  out.  Imimession  of  a lot  of  colours.

12.  — We  all  tliought  of  a carrot.

No  result.

13.  — Object — A silver  spoon.

Miss  Relph  : “ There  seems  to  be  something  long  standing  up  . , »
silver  or  steel.”  Miss  Relph  could  not  get  any  shape.

14.  — Object — The  two  of  hearts.

Miss  Relph : “ Is  it  a card  with  two  red  spots?  . . . They  look  like

hearts.”

15.  — Object — A card  with  two  red  X’s-

Miss  Reljdi : “ Is  it  a card  with  two  red  sj)ots  ? ”

16.  — Object — A square  jiatch,  red.

Miss  Relph  : “I  see  a lot  of  red  . . . Is  it  square  ? ”

17.  — Object — The  ace  of  clubs.

Miss  Relph  : “ Is  it  a card  ? . . . The  ace  of  clubs.”


November  27th,  1884.

Present : Miss  Relph  and  Miss  Redmond  ; Messrs.  Guthrie,  Rensburg,  and

R.  C.  Johnson.

Percipient : Miss  Relph.

1. _Mr.  G.  pinched  Mr.  J.’s  arm.  Contact.

Immediately  discovered.

2.  — Mr.  G.  pinched  Mr.  J.’s  right  hand.

Immediately  discovered.

3.  — No  contact  as  above.  All  pricked  the  right  hand.

Miss  Relph  (after  a minute)  : “ I feel  a tingling  at  the  back  of  my  right
hand.”

4.  — Object — The  ten  of  clubs.

Miss  Relidi  : “It  seems  to  be  a card  with  black  spots  . • . four  or

five  . . . It  is  not  distinct.”

6. — Object— A white  jug.

No  result.

6. — Object— A square  of  blue  silk.  No  contact.

No  result.  Contact  with  Mr.  J.  Miss  Relph;  “Something  blue.”
Miss  R.  could  not  see  any  shape.


Faitlier  Report  on  Thought-Transference.


441


Percipient : Rensburg,  in  contact  with  hlr.  G.

7.  — jMt.  G.’s  left  ann  pinched.

Rightly  discovered.

8.  — Object — Square  red  patch.

Nothing  seen  in  two  minutes.

Percipient : Miss  Relph.  Contact  with  Miss  Redmond.

9.  — Object — Shape  of  a diamond,  pink.

Miss  Relph  : ‘ ‘ Are  there  black  lines  ? ” No  result.

10.  — i\Ir.  G.  pmched  IMiss  Redmond’s  second  finger  of  the  right  hand.

The  exact  spot  was  discovered  in  a few  seconds.

Miss  Relph  in  contact  with  Mr.  R,

11.  — Mr.  G.  pinched  Mr.  R.’s  right  ear.

hliss  Relph  felt  pain  in  the  left  ear.

12.  — The  left  ankle  pinched.

Discovered  immediately.

13.  — The  back  of  neck  pmched.

Discovered  immediately.

14.  — Pressure  of  the  left  wrist.

A numb  pain  immediately  felt,  like  being  asleep.

15.  — Object — A pink  diamond  on  a black  ground.

hliss  Relph  (in  a minute) : “ Is  it  pink  ? ...  It  seems  wider  than
long.”

16.  — Object — A blue  square  on  a black  ground.

Miss  Relph  : “ Is  it  blue  ?”

17.  — Object — A silver  basket  on  a black  ground.

hliss  Relph  : “Is  it  silver?  . . . Is  it  Uke  scissors  ?”

Percipient : Miss  Relph.  No  contact.

18.  — Object — A bunch  of  keys.

No  result.

19.  — Object — Bright  steel  gas  pliers.

Miss  Relph  : “ Is  it  yellow,  or  golden  ?”  Shape  not  made  out.

20.  — Object — A red  bell.

Miss  Relph  : “Is  it  red  ? . . . Is  it  longer  than  wide?”  Shape

not  made  out.

21.  — Object — A gold  chain  belonging  to  Mr.  Rensburg.

Miss  Relph:  “Is  it  bright — gold?  . . . Like  a chain?  . . ,

ht.  R.’s  watch-cham.”

22.  — Object — A latch  key  on  black  ground.

hliss  Relph  : “ Is  it  something  standing  up  ? . . . Is  it  long —

curved  ?”

23.  — Object — A gold  watch.

Miss  Relph  : “ Is  it  bright  ? . . . gold  . . . round  . . .

a little  ring  at  the  top  . . . a watch.”

24. — Object — Diagram  :

Not  discovered.

' 2 F


442


Further  Report  on  Thought- Tramfcrence.


December  4th,  1884.

Present : Misses  Relj^h  and  Redmond  ; Messrs.  Guthrie  and  Johnson,  and

Professor  Herdman.

Percixnent : Miss  Relph.  No  contact.  Professor  Herdman  left  the  room,
made  a drawing,  returned,  and  placed'  it  on  the  screen.


1.—


2.—


a—

4. —

5. —


6. —


7.—


8.—


9.—


10.—


11.—


No  result.


For  this  a square  was  drawn,  one  side  being  partially
broken  in.  (Query  ? — Mirage  of  first  in  mind  ?)


Result — •


Mr.  J.  only  agent.


Top  part  first  and  then  the

A


^ Drawn.


Mr.  J.  only  agent.  Result — — | — and  !f\

and  on  a second  trial  the  figure  was  drawn  correctly.
Mr.  J.  only  agent.  No  result.


Professor  H.  only  agent.


Result —


Tl.

Professor  H.  only  agent.  Residt —


All  agents.  Result —


All  agents.  Result —


All  agents.  No  image  at  all.


Note.— This  set  of  diagrams  is  of  course  a very  un.successful  one.  It  is  introduced
ill  order  not  to  break  tiie  rule  of  giving  tlie  complete  results  of  each  evening’s  trials.


Farther  Itcport  on  Thought-Transference.


443


Experiments  in  Pain  Transference.

Actual  Pains.  No  contact  as  described  before.

12.  — All  scrajied  the  left  wrist  with  pins.

Miss  Relph  : “ It  is  in  the  left  wrist,  like  being  scratched.”

13.  — Left  ankle  pricked.  '

Found  at  once.

14.  — Pricked  behind  left  ear.

Not  found.

15.  — Pricked  right  knee.

Rightly  discovered.

16.  — Pricked  right  shoulder.

Rightly  discovered.

17.  — Hands  burned  over  gas.

Miss  Relph  : “It  is  like  a pulling  pain  . . . Then  tingling,  like

cold  and  hot  alternately.”  (Hands  indicated.)

Imaginary  Pains.  No  contact.

18.  — Biting  the  end  of  the  tongue.

No  result.

Actual  Pain.

19.  — Biting  the  end  of  the  tongue.

Miss  Relph  : “ It  is  in  the  lip  or  the  tongue.


December  18th,  1884.

Present : Misses  Relph  and  Redmond  ; Messrs.  R.  C.  Johnson  and

M.  Guthrie.

Professor  Herdman  was  expected,  and  while  waiting  for  him  it  was
•determined  to  try  some  new  experiments.  Mr.  J.  proposed  the  transference
of  pains  through  obstructions,  and  Miss  Reliih  went  into  the  next  room,
separated  by  a wooden  j^fu’tition.  Two  exiieriments  were  tried,  but  in
neither  instance  was  anything  felt ; one  guess  was  made,  but  it  was  wrong.

On  Miss  Reljih’s  return,  Mr.  G.  proposed  thinking  of  a word,  and  wrote
“Victoria”  on  a card,  which  was  silently  passed  round.  This  was  the
position  ; —


Miss  R.

o


Table


Settee


I +


Miss  Redmond


O Mr.  J.
Mr.  G.


Nothing  was  perceived.

Mr.  G.  then  proposed  pictures,  and  it  was  understood  that  pictures  from
tlie  Autumn  Exhibition  would  be  thought  of.  Mr.  G.  wrote  on  a card,  a.nd
nassed  round  silently,  “Too  Late,”  the  name  of  a well-known  picture,  and

2 F 2


441


Further  lieport  on  Thou<jht- Transference.


one  easily  to  be  remembered.  In  five  minutes  Miss  Relifii  said,  “Is  it
‘ Too  Late  ’ ? ” (“  Yes.”)  “ Oh,  it  came  to  me  so  quickly — in  two  or  three

seconds  after  I started.”  (“Did  you  see  it,  or  did  the  idea  come  to  you  ?”)
“I  saw  it.”  (“Why  did  you  not  name  it  before?”)  “ I wanted  to  make
sure,  and  it  would  not  go  away.”

Mr.  G.  then  wi'ote  as  before,  “The  Last  Supijer,  by  Leonardo  da  Vinci.”
In  about  five  minutes  Miss  Relph  said  ; “ Is  it  the  last  days  of  somebody  ?
Somehow  there  seems  to  be  a dying  man  and  a lot  of  people  in  the  room.  A
bed  with  a dying  man,  and  someone  holding  a paper  or  something  to  him,  or
else  he  is  holding  it.  I don’t  remember  the  X)icture.”  Miss  R.  was  then
told  it  was  not  in  the  Autumn  Exhibition,  as  she  seemed  to  think,  but  that
she  knew  the  jjicture.  She  said  : “ It  can’t  be  the  Death  of  Nelson.”  Mr.
G.  exj)lained  that  he  imagined  a long  table  covered  with  a pure  white
table-cloth,  in  a room,  with  2)eople  behind  it.  Miss  R.  said:  “I  saw  a lot  of
heads  straight  uj)  and  down,  like  as  if  kneeling  on  the  other  side  of  the  bed.’'
(“What  jiicture  do  you  think  it  was?”)  “The  Last  Sufij^er. ” Mr.  G.
inquired  as  to  the  details  of  the  j^icture,  as  he  had  imagined  Christ  to  be
holding  a large  goblet  in  His  hand,  and  Judas  leaning  over  between  Him  and
John,  dii^ifing  something  into  it.  This  in  exjilanation  of  fiart  of  Miss  R.’s
doscri2)tion.

The  ificture  of  “ Dante  meeting  Beatrice  and  her  Two  Comjranions,  ” in
the  Autumn  Exhibition,  was  then  tried,  but  nothing  was  2>erceived.


The  above  is  recorded  by  Mr.  G.  The  following  is  by  Mr.  J . : —

Mr.  G.  then  left  the  room,  and  the  name  of  a picture,  “The  Flight
into  Egypt”  (by  Goodall),  was  written  by  Mr.  J.  and  2>assed  to  Miss
Redmond.  In  about  four  minutes  Miss  Rel2fii  said  : “ Is  it  the  Flight  into
Egypt?  I see  it  quite  distinctly.”

In  the  same  way  Miss  Redmond  and  Mr.  J.  agreed  to  think  of  the
2>ortrait  of  “ Miss  Mary  Anderson  ” in  same  exhibition,  but  after  a similar
interval  had  elapsed  with  no  result  the  ex25eriment  was  discontinued.

Miss  Redmond  then  left  the  room,  and  Mr.  J.  thought  of  “ Ellen  Terry
as  Portia,”  which  was  named  correctly  in  about  two  minutes.

Mr.  J.  then  thought  of  the  “ S2)irit  of  Music.”  In  two  or  three  minute.?
Miss  Rel2Ji  said  ; “ Gelert  comes  into  my  mind.”  On  being  informed  that
this  was  incorrect,  she  said  she  could  not  see  anything  else.

“The  Druidess,”  a water  colour,  was  then  thought  of  by  Mr.  J.  This
also  was  not  seen.


Universal  Position  for
Non-Contact  ExPEniMENT.s.


^ Percipient,  facing
N corner  of  room


Chairs  and  settee
for  agents

V V ^


Perfect  silence.  No  one  al-
lowed to  S2ieak  ; Mr.  G.  merely
saying;  “This  is  an  object
experiment.”  “This  is  a pain
ex2)eriment. ” “Now  we  are
ready.  Miss  Rel2jh.”


Folding  Screen,.

measuring,
when  opened
out.  Sin.  high  by
12in.  long.


/


Chair  for  percipient.


Further  Eeport  on  Thought-Transference.
Slarcli  25th,  1885.


445


Present;  Dr.  Hicks,  Messrs.  Guthrie,  Birchall,  and  R.  C.  Johnson  ; and
JMisses  Redmond  and  Relph.


1. — Miss  ReliJi,  in  contact  with  Dr.  Hicks.

Doctor’s  left  arm  (biceps)  pinched  by  Mr.  G.
Pain  said  to  be  in  left  shoulder.


2.  — Miss  Relish.  Ho  contact.

All  pricked  palm  of  left  hand  with  pins.

Answer — “ Is  it  a tingling  pain  in  the  hand,  here  ?”  (placing  her  finger
on  the  palm  of  the  left  hand).

3.  — The  same.  No  contact.

All  pricked  back  of  their  necks  with  pins.

Answer — “ Is  it  a jiricking  in  the  neck?”  (touching  the  back  of  the  neck
near  centre,  a little  to  the  riglit).


4. — The  same.  No  contact.

Object — Mr.  G.  held  the  back  of  his  gold  watch  against  his  coat.

Answer — “ Are  you  looking  at  something  yellow?  . . Is  it  round;

something  like  an  orange  ? . . . But  it  is  not  an  orange.”


5.  — The  same.  No  contact.

'Mr.  G.  held  as  before  a pair  of  bright  steel  pincers  (closed).

Answer — “ Is  it  something  bright  ? . . . saw  a flash  of  bright  light,

but  no  shape.”

6.  — The  same.  No  contact.  ^

Object — A piece  of  bluish-green  silk,  this  shape.  I

Answer — “ Is  it  blue  ? A greenish  blue  ? Shape  not  well  defined.”


7.


— The  same.  No  contact.

Object — A diagram,  drawn  by  Dr.  H.  in  another  room,  and  then
brought  in.  Shaj^e  was  a square.

Answer — No  result.


8.  — Same  repeated  ; but  Miss  Redmond  and  Mr.  G.  left  the  room,  and

Dr.  H.  as  chief  agent.  No  contact.

Answer — ‘ ‘Are  there  three  lines  in  it  ? . . . anything  like  a triangle  ?

. . . am  doubtful  as  to  any  shape  . . . cannot  fix  the  lines.”

9.  — The  same.  No  contact.

Object — Letter  S.

Answer — “ Is  it  anything  like  a bell — narrow  at  top,  and  growing  wider
at  bottom  ?”

0.  — All  present.  No  contact.

Object — Letter  P.  Miss  Relph  was  placed  with  lier  face  to  the  light,
and  the  object  was  kejjt  in  shade,  to  test  any  effect  of  light.

Answer — No  result  at  all.

1.  — The  same.  No  contact ; and  Miss  Relph  in  same  position.

All  looked  intently  at  the  illuminated  gas  globe.

Answer — “ Is  there  any  colour  about  what  you’re  looking  at  ? ...  is
there  any  green  ? . . . Don’t  see  anything,  except  a white  light

without  shape.


446


Further  Report  on  ThoiKjld-Trainp'erciice.


12.  — Tlie  same.  No  contact.

Object  as  above  ; but  the  other  gas  being  put  out,  Miss  Relph  now
faced  only  the  shaded  wall.

Answer — “ Is  there  any  red  or  pink  about  it  ? ”

13.  — The  same.

Object — Word  “ Richard  ” to  be  thought  of.  Miss  Relph  told  we  were
going  to  think  of  a name.

Answer  (after  along  interval) — “Is  it  something  beginning  with  an  S ?”


April  15th,  1885.

Present : Dr.  Hicks,  Messrs.  Guthrie  and  Birchall  ; Misses  Redmond  and

ReljJi.

Miss  Relph  in  adjoining  room,  alone.

1.  — 6.45.  Miss  Relxdi.  Contact  through  trap-door  with  Mr.  B. , who  tasted

sugar.

6.50.  Answer — Coffee.

2.  — 6.51.  Same.  Contact  with  Dr.  Hicks.

Tasted  jiepijermint.

6.53.  “ Something  that  makes  the  tongue  feel  dry  and  rough.”

6.54.  “ Has  a sweet  taste.”

3.  — 6.56.  Same.  Contact  with  Dr.  H.

Doctor’s  lobe  of  right  ear  2>inched  rvitli  American  wood  letter
clijj  Iiy  Mr.  G.

6.58.  “ Is  it  something  on  the  right  side  of  the  neck  ? ” (pointed  to  the
lobe  of  the  right  oar).

4.  — 7.  0.  Same.  Contact  with  Dr.  H.

Mr.  G.  I'jricked  the  Doctor’s  right  ankle,  on  the  outside.

7.  3.  “Is  it  in  your  arm  1 ” (Dr.  H.  : “ No.”)

7.  5.  “ I don’t  feel  anything.”

6. — Miss  Reljdi,  in  contact  with  Miss  Redmond.

(Note. — PercijDient  unaware  of  the  nature  of  this  experiment.)
7.  6.  Agent  tasted  musk  lozenges.

7.10.  “ Can’t  feel  any  2)ain  . . . It  is  something  sweet  . . . Are

you  tasting  something  ? . . . I can  taste  something  quite

sweet.”

7.12.  “ Can’t  tell  what  it  is.”

6.  — The  same.  Contact  as  above.  Again  ignorant  of  nature  of  exi^eriment.

7.15.  Miss  Redmond  smelled  lavender  water  on  a scented  handkerchief.
7.15.  “ Are  you  smelling  something  ? ”

7.19.  “ Some  kind  of  scent  ...  I don’t  know  ...  Is  it
lavender  water  ? ”

7.  — 7.21.  The  same.  Contact  with  Mr.  G.,  who  tasted  salt.

7.25.  “Are  you  tasting  sweet  biscuits  ? ”

7.28.  “ Are  you  tasting  ^Jarsley  or  celery  ? ”

8.  — 7.30.  The  same.  Contact  with  Dr.  H.,  who  tasted  alum.

7.35.  “ Are  you  tasting  something  sweet  ? ” (Dr.  H. , feelingly  : “No
Miss  Rel^jh,  I am  not ! ”)


Further  Report  on  Thought-Transference.


447


9.— 7.36.

7.40.

7.41.


10.— 7.  0.
7.45.
7.47.


Miss  Relpli.  Contact  with  Dr.  H. , who  siiielleci  carbolic  acid.

Are  yon  smelling  something  ? . . . salts.”  (Dr.  H.  ; “lam

smelling  something,  but  it’s  not  salts — ammonia.”)

“ I smell  something,  but  don’t  know  what  it  is  . . . It’s  not

nice — not  a scent.”

Miss  Relph  ignorant  of  the  nature  of  the  experiment.

Same.  Contact  with  Mr.  G.

Mr.  G.’s  little  finger  of  left  hand  pinched  by  the  wooden  clip.
“No,  Mr.  Guthrie,  I don’t  get  anything.”


April  21st,  1885.

Present : Messrs.  Guthrie  and  Birchall,  and  Miss  Relph.

1.  — Miss  Relph,  in  contact  with  Mr.  B.

Object — A bright  steel  key  suspended  upright  against  Mr.  G.’s  coat.
Answer — “ Saw  something  bright  for  a moment  . . . like  an  upright

line.”

2.  — Miss  Relph,  in  contact  with  Mr.  G.

Mr.  G.  looked  intently  at  Mr.  B.

No  result.

Miss  Redmond  here  entered  the  room,  and  remained.

3.  — The  same,  in  contact  with  Mr.  G.

Object — The  earring  in  Miss  Relph’s  ear.

Miss  Relph  twice  put  her  hand  to  this  ear,  saying  she  felt  something
there.

4.  — Miss  Relph.  No  contact  at  first,  and  then  with  Miss  Redmond.

All  thought  of  the  tune  “ Auld  Lang  Syne,”  Mr.  G.  beating  tune
behintl  the  jDercipient.

Answer — “Auld  Lang  Syne.”

5.  — Miss  Relph,  in  contact  with  Mr.  B.

Object — Imaginative  jjicture,  tlie  Three  Graces  in  marble.  Sir.  B.  said
he  was  unable  to  form  a definite  conceiition  of  the  groujj.

No  result.

6.  — The  same.  Contact  with  Mr.  B.

Object — A tune,  “ Girl  I lefc  behind  me.”

No  result.  Percipient  could  not  banish  “ Auld  Lang  Syne  ” from  her
mind.

N.B. — A second  experiment  with  a tune,  not  noted,  was  unsuccessful,
“Auld  Lang  Syne  ” still  haunting  Miss  Relph’s  mind.

May  Gth,  1885.

Present:  Slessrs.  Guthrie,  Birchall,  and  R.  C.  Johnson;  Misses  Redmond

and  Relph.

1.  — Sliss  Relph.  No  contact.

All  pricked  front  of  left  arm  above  the  elbow.

Answer — The  pain  was  fixed  almost  immediately  on  the  spot.

2. — The  same.

The  three  gentlemen  jn’icked  just  above  the  left  ankle.

Answer — Tlie  seat  of  the  pain  was  again  fixed  accurately,  almost  on  the
instant.


448


Further  Report  on  Thought-Transference,


3.  — The  same.

All  pricked  right  arm  just  above  the  wrist.

Answer — “ I am  not  cpiite  sure,  but  I feel  a pain  in  the  right  arm,  from
the  thumb  upwards  to  above  the  wrist.”

4.  — The  same.

All  thought  of  the  number  84.

Answer — “Is  there  an  8 in  it?”  (Mr.  G.  : “There’s  more  than  one
thing.”)  “Yes  . . . there’s  something  else.  ” (All  here  signalled

to  think  of  the  4. ) Miss  Relph  said  she  would  be  unable  to  do  more.

On  being  cpiestioned,  said  she  sato  the  figure.  It  was  not  a conception,
but  a visible  object.

5.  — The  same.

All  thought  of  the  name  “Esmeralda.”

Answer  (after  a short  interval) — “ No ; I don’t  think  of  anything  at  all.”
Mr.  J ohnson  then  took  contact,  but  no  result  followed.

6.  — The  same.

Object — A scjuare  of  yellow,  set  against  a black  hat  on  the  table.  A
large  piece  of  blue  paper  was  near  it.

Answer — Percijjient  at  first  caught  a glimpse  of  yellow  for  a second,  and
then  saw  a colour,  blue  or  green.

7.  — The  same.

All  thought  of  the  tune,  “ Home,  Sweet  Home.”

No  result.

Mr.  B.  then  took  contact.  No  result  ; but  when  asked  if  she  had  no
thought  of  any  tune,  said,  “Was  it  ‘ Home,  Sweet  Home  ’ ? ”

8.  — Tlie  same.

Mr.  G.  and  Miss  Redmond  alone  thought  of  the  ab;  “ Ehren  on  the
Rhine.”

No  result.

Miss  Redmond  then  took  contact,  and  percipient  named  the  air.

9.  — The  same.  Mr.  B.  in  contact.

All  thought  of  the  air,  “Jenny  Jones.”  The  hands  not  clasped  in
contact,  but  held  flat  against  each  other.

Answer — “ The  Meeting  of  the  Waters.”

10. — The  same.  Mr.  B.  in  contact.

“ Bonnie  Dundee  ” thought  of.

No  result.


June  4th,  1885.

Present : Mr.  Guthrie,  Dr.  Greves  ; Misses  Relph  and  Redmond.

Miss  Relph  percipient  throughout.

1.  — Mr.  G.  in  contact.

Dr.  G.  pricked  knuckle  of  left  forefinger  of  Mr.  G.  with  a ^jin  ; but
Miss  Relph  failed  to  perceive  any  pain.

2.  — No  contact.

Object — Piece  of  green  ribbon.

*•  Is  it  green  ? . . . Is  it  longer  iq)  and  down  than  from  side  to

side  ? ” (moving  fingers  to  indicate  its  shape.)


Further  Report  on  Thought-Transference.


449


3.  — No  contact.

Object — A round  piece  of  scarlet  material.

“Is  it  pink?  . . . Cannot  tell  shape,  outline  appears  indistinct.”

4.  — No  contact.

Object — Six  of  diamonds.

“Is  it  white?  . . . I see  black  spots  on  it.”  In  reply  to  “How

many  ? ” Miss  Relpli  answered,  “ Six.  Is  it  the  six  of  clubs  ? ”

5.  — No  contact.

Object — Letter  M.

“ Is  it  black  and  white?  ...  I see  up  and  douni  lines,  seem  to
run  together.  . . . Cannot  make  them  out  distinctly.”

6.  — No  contact.

Object — Miniature  green  kite,  with  red  tail  and  tassels.

After  some  time  she  said  : “I  don’t  see  anything  distinctly,  but  at  first
I thought  I saw  something  red.”

7.  — Dr.  G.  alone  jiresent.  Mr.  G.  and  Miss  Redmond  in  adjoining  room.

No  contact.

Object — A piece  of  cardboard,  about  size  of  oi’dinaiy  playing  1 T
card,  with  five  large  blue  figures  like  “ inverted  commas  ” ‘

•i.  ‘ ‘

on  it.

“ Is  it  blue  ? . . . I see  nothing  but  curves,  wliich  run  into  each

other.  . . . It  is  wider  at  the  top  and  bottom  than  in  the  middle,

where  the  blue  colour  is  very  distinct.  . . . Cannot  see  any

separate  marks.”

8.  — Dr.  G.  alone  present.  No  contact.

Object — Letter  P.

“Is  it  black  and  white  ? ...  It  looks  something  like  an  umbrella

upside  down  ; or  like  part  of  an  anchor  wfith  one  half  gone.”
(N.B. — Miss  Relph  evidently  had  an  inverted  image  of  the  letter,  and
failed  to  recognise  it  as  the  letter  P.)

June  11th,  1885.

Present:  Messrs.  Guthrie,  Johnson,  Greves  ; Misses  Relph  and  Redmond.

Miss  Relph  percijiient  throughout.

1.  — No  contact.

Mr.  G.,  Mr.  J.,  and  Dr.  G.  pricked  the  inner  side  of  left  ankle.

“ I feel  a pain  in  the  left  ankle.  It  is  just  on  the  outside.”  (pointing
to  the  corresponding  S2:iot  on  the  outer  side  of  the  ankle.)

2.  — No  contact.

Same  three  pricked  a spot  immediately  beneath  the  right  collar  bone.

“ I feel  a jjain  in  my  left  shoulder.”  (pointing  to  exactly  the  correspond-
ing  spot  on  the  opposite  side. )

3. - — No  contact.

Same  three  pulled  hair  at  back  of  head  ; but  Miss  Relph  did  not
jjerceive  any  pain  at  all.

4.  — Miss  Redmond  here  came  in.

No  contact.

Object  on  screen — Nine  of  hearts.

Percipient  did  not  see  anything.


Further  Report  on  Thought-Transference.


tbO

5. — No  contact.

Object — Ten  of  clubs.

“ I see  something  white  with  black  rings  on  it.”  In  reply  to  how
many,  “ They  seem  to  be  moving  about.  Are  there  three  1 ”

G. — No  contact.

Object — An  equilateral  triangle  in  black  and  white.

Miss  Relph  for  some  time  could  not  see  anything.  Mr.  G.  then  left  the
room.  (He  subsequently  stated  that  he  felt  rather  fatigued  and

worried,  and  thought  tlie  exjjeriments  might  succeed  better  in  his

absence.)  After  a few  minutes  Miss  Relidi  said,  “I  see  up  and
down  black  lines  on  a white  ground,  but  cannot  tell  what  shape  it  is.”

7.  — Object — A piece  of  crimson  material.  | |

“Is  it  red  ? . . . It  is  nearly  square,  longer  one  way.”

8.  — Mr.  G.  here  came  in  again.

Object — Figure  5.

“ Is  it  black  and  white  ? . . . Cannot  tell  shape.”

!). — Mr.  Johnson  alone  present  as  agent.  No  contact.

Object — Same  figure  5.

“ Can  only  see  black  lines  . . . cannot  tell  shape.”


Pains.

10.  — With  contact.  Mr.  J.  in  contact.

Mr.  J.  a2)plied  jiair  of  inncers  to  back  of  right  ankle,  immediately  above
heel.

“ I feel  a dull  aching  pain  in  the  right  ankle.”

11.  — Mr.  J.  in  contact.

Pincers  aj^plied  by  Dr.  G.  to  skin  on  inside  of  left  forearm.

“ I feel  a 2>ain  in  the  left  wrist,  shooting  u^)  arm.”

1-’. — Dr.  G.  in  contact.

Mr.  G.  lunching  skin  on  left  side  of  neck  with  pincers.

Almost  at  once:  “I  feel  a 2:iain  in  my  neck”  (jjointing  to  identical
spot).

Id. — Dr.  G.  in  contact.

Mr.  G.  i^inching  skin  on  back  of  right  calf.

“I  feel  a pain  in  the  left  knee.”

14.  — Dr.  G.  in  contact.

Mr.  G.  i^inching  skin  of  neck  immediately  below  chin.

“ I feel  a kind  of  irritation  all  over  face,  beginning  in  chin  and  passing
down  neck.  It  is  getting  iminful.”

Tastes.

15.  — Dr.  G.  in  contact,  having  taken  a little  salad  oil.

“ I feel  a cool  sensation  in  my  mouth,  something  like  that  j^roduced  by
sal  prunelle.”

10. — Mr.  J.  in  contact,  having  tasted  Worcestershire  sauce.  (Mr.  J.  left
room,  to  avoid  uncorking  bottle  in  room. )

“I  taste  sometliing  oily;  it  is  veiy  like  salad  oil.”  (N.B. — Nothing
had  been  said  at  all  about  the  substances  tasted  either  by  Dr.  G.  or
IMr.  J.)  A few  minutes  after  contact  with  Mr.  J.  had  ceased,
hliss  ReliJi  said,  “My  mouth  seems  getting  hot  after  the  oil.”


Further  Feport  on  Thought-Transference.


451


17.  — Dr.  G.  in  contact,  having  tasted  bitter  aloes.

“I  taste  something  friglitfully  hot  . . . something  like  vinegar

and  pepper  . . . It  is  Worcestershire  sauce.  ”

18.  — Mr.  Guthrie  in  contact,  also  having  tasted  bitter  aloes.

“ I taste  something  extremelj'  bitter,  but  don’t  know  what  it  is,  and  do
not  remember  tasting  it  before  . . . It  is  a veiy  horrid  taste.  ”


July  1st,  1885.

Present:  Dr.  Greves,  Messrs.  Guthrie,  Birchall,  and  Johnson;  and  ]Mi,sseti.
Relph,  Redmond,  and  McLeod.

1.  — 6.50.  Miss  Relph.  No  contact.

All  pricked  inside  of  right  wrist.

6.51.  “ Is  it  a pain  in  the  right  foot  ? ”

6.52.  “ I feel  a pain  in  the  right  foot.”

2.  — 6.53.  Miss  Relijh.  Mr.  G.  in  contact.

Mr.  G.’s  little  finger  left  hand  pinched  by  Dr.  G.

6.53i.  “ Is  it  here  ? ” (toucliing  side  of  palm  on  left  hand).

hliss  Redmond  and  Miss  hi.  here  entered  the  room.


3.  — Miss  Relph.  No  contact.

6.55.  Object — Mr.  G.’s  gold  watch,  face  in  front.

6.57.  “ Are  you  looking  at  something  red  ? ” (Mr.  G.  : “No.”)

6.59.  “ No  ; I don’t  know  what  it  is.”

4.  — Miss  Relph.  No  contact.

7.0.  Object — An  orange.

7.1.  “ Is  there  anything  yellow  ? ”

7.2.  “ Just  a round  yellow  thing.”  (Asked  if  she  could  tell  the  shade;

of  yellow,  said  ; “ It’s  rather  a deep  shade.”)

6. — Miss  Relph.  No  contact.


7.4.  Object — A penknife,  white  haft,  two  blades  open.


7.6.  “ Seems  to  be  something  bright  . . . some  kind  of  metal.”

7.7.  “Don’t  know  what  it  is  . . . seems  to  be  something  briglit

. standing  up  like  . . . but  can’t  see  the  shape.  ”

6.  — Miss  Relidr.  No  contact.

7.10.  Object — hir.  G.’s  watch  again,  face  in  front.

7.14.  “ Can  still  see  something  bright  . . . like  up  and  do-rnr.”

7.15.  “Don’t  know  what  it  is  . . . Seemed  to  see  something  red.

once  . . . then  it  seemed  something  like  gold.”

7.16.  “ Is  there  anything  round  ? Seems  to  be  something  round  . ,

gold.”

7.17.  “ Is  it  anything  like  a locket  or  a watch  ? Doesn’t  look  as  large

as  a watch.”

N.B. — All  the  agents  not  at  equal  distances  from  the  object.

7.  — Miss  Reljih.  No  contact.

7.20.  Object — a diagram  ; a square,  side  lin.  All  agents  at  sama

distance.

7.21.  “ Is  it  yellow  N’


452


Further  Report  on  Thought-Transference


7.25.  “No,  I don’t  see  anything  . . . Thought  I saw  something

yellow.”

IMiss  Redmond  here  took  contact,  and  was  the  only  agent.

7.27.  “No,  I don’t  get  it.”

8.  — Miss  M.  Contact  with  Mr.  G.

7.30.  Mr.  G.’s  left  little  finger  pinched  with  pincers  by  IMr.  J.

7.31.  “Pain  here”  (touching  right  arm  under  elbow).  This  arm  was

in  contact.

7.33.  “ Feel  it  in  this  ” (the  left)  “ arm.”

9.  — Miss  M.  Miss  Redmond  in  contact.

7.34.  Same  pain  as  above,  given  by  Mr.  G.

7.35.  “In  thumb,  left  hand.”

10.  — Miss  M.  Contact  with  Miss  Redmond.

7.30.  Agent  pinched  just  above  left  wrist  by  Dr.  G.

“Seems  to  be  a ijain  about  my  left  elbow.”

7.37.  “ In  this  ” (the  left)  “arm.”

11.  — Miss  M.  No  contact.

7.39.  Object — An  orange.

7.43.  No  reply  being  made,  Mr.  G.  asked  if  she  got  anything  at  all.
Answer — “ No  ; once  I saw  something  white  and  straight.”

Mr.  G. , Miss  R. , and  Miss  M.  here  left  the  room.

12.  — Miss  Relph.  No  contact.

7.45.  Object — A diagram  ; a triangle.

Agents  (Dr.  G.,  Mr.  B.,  and  Mr.  J.)  within  2ft.  of  object.

7.47.  “ Is  it  black,  on  a wdiite  ground  1 Can  see  a line  straight  across.”

7.48.  “And  then  there  seem  to  be  two  lines  coming  down.”  (Percipient

shajjed  with  her  hands  in  the  air,  as  if  tracing  a V-)  .

“And  then  they  get  lost  . . . something  like  an  un-
finished V.”

V.49.  “It’s  like — hazy  . . . Can  see  the  top  very  clearly  . . .

but  not  . . .”

7.50.  IVhile  still  blindfolded,  drew  a figure  thus

13.  — Miss  Relph.  No  contact.

7.51.  Object — A diagram  ; square,  2|in.  side.  Agents  within  2ft.  of

diagram.

7.54.  “ I still  see  the  same  black  lines  . . .

7 55.  “ It’s  gone  altogether  now.”


like  half  an  oval.”


Local  Ancedhesia.


453


IV.

LOCAL  AX^STHESIA  INDUCED  IN  THE  NOEMAL  STATE
BY  MESMERIC  PASSES.


The  experiments  ■n'hich  forpi  the  subject  of  this  paper  ■were  a repeti-
tion of  those  described  in  the  Proceedings,  Yo\.  I.,  pp.  257-260, and  Vol.II.,
pp.  201-205,  and  were  made  with  the  same  operator,  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith,
and  the  same  subject,  Mr.  F.  Wells.  They  were  made  in  the  presence
and  under  the  superintendence  of  Professor  and  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick,  Mr.
E.  Gurney,  and  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers,  on  March  20th  and  21st,  and  July  3rd,
1885,  in  a room  at  a hotel  at  Brighton,  engaged  for  the  occa-
sion. On  March  20th,  Mr.  Bull,  F.R.C.S.,  and  Mr.  White  Cooper
were  also  present.

Mr.  Wells  has  been  frequently  mesmerised  by  Mr.  Smith,  and  falls
very  easily  into  the  sleep-waking  state  under  his  influence.  But  in  the-
present  experiments  he  is  not  put  into  any  sleep,  but  remains  in  an
apparently  completely  normal  condition.  He  lays  his  hands  on  the
table  with  the  fingers  extended  and  separated,  Mr.  Smith  holds  his
hand  pointed  downwards,  and  with  the  four  fingers  in  a line  along  one
of  Mr.  Wells’  fingers,  at  a distance  varying  from  say,  two  inches  down-
wards. With  his  hand  in  this  position,  he  makes  passes  for  some-
minutes  along  the  finger  ; after  which,  if  the  experiment  is  successful,
the  finger  over  which  the  passes  are  made,  and  that  only,  is  found  to-
ll ave  lost  all  sensitiveness  and  to  have  become  rigid.  The  effect  goes  ofT
after  a time  in  any  case,  but  recovery  seems  to  be  materially  hastened
by  reverse  passes.

The  measures  taken  to  test  the  effect  will  be  given  in  detail
presently.  With  regard  to  the  cause,  the  present  experiments  did  not
take  us  very  far ; indeed,  they  are  so  little  more  than  a mere  repetition
of  part  of  what  was  done  before,  that  the  only  excuse  for  publishing-
them  is  that  in  the  case  of  a phenomenon  so  little  observed  or  recog-
nised the  mere  verification  of  the  fact  that  it  occurs  is  worth  some-
thing, and  so  also  is  the  testimony  of  fresh  witnesses,  which  Mr.  and
Mrs.  Sidgwick  were.  It  was  hoped  that  Mr.  Bull  and  3Ir.  White
Cooper  might  have  been  so  too  ; but  the  experiments,  on  the  only
day  on  which  they  were  able  to  be  present,  cannot  be  regarded  as
successful.

Of  the  possible  explanations  of  the  phenomenon  we  only  endeavoured
to  eliminate  two,  namely,  an  influence  on  the  nerves  due  (1)  to  expecta-


454


Local  Amedlicsia  induced  in  the


tion  on  Mi’.  Wells’  part,  or  (2)  to  mere  monotonous  stimulation  clue  to
the  passes  and  independent  of  the  person  making  them.  There  remain
the  several  possibilities  of  a mesmeric  effluence,  such  as  Esdaile
believed  water  to  be  affected  by  when  he  mesmerised  it;  of  some  sort  of
what  we  may  j^erhaps  call  nervous  induction  ; and  of  suggestion  con-
veyed through  unconscious  telepathy.  Mr.  W ells  is,  according  to  his
own  account,  cpiite  unconscious  of  any  effect  whatever,  mental  or
physical ; so  that,  for  instance,  if  he  closes  his  hand  he  is  unaware  that
the  affected  finger  remains  extended,  unless  he  can  see  it.  From  jire-
vious  experiments  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  203,  204)  there  is  some
reason  to  think  that  the  effect  is  only  produced  if  Mr.  Smith  knows
which  finger  he  is  making  passes  over,  which  suggests  that  a

oonscious  direction  of  his  thoughts  or  will  is  necessary.  It

is,  however,  very  difficult  to  be  sure  that,  in  making  this

experiment,  the  absence  of  definite  direction  of  attention  was

the  only  change,  having  a bearing  on  the  experiment,  whicli  the  new
conditions  introduced.  For  instance,  a want  of  confidence  on  the  part
of  the  operator  may  have  been  the  real  cause  of  failure.  That
mental  disturbance  has  an  important  effect  is  at  any  rate  suggested  by
part  of  our  experience  in  the  present  series  of  trials.  The  reader  will
.see,  on  turning  to  the  table  of  experiments  (pp.  457-9)  that  the  success
oir  the  first  day  was  very  poor.  The  first  experiment  succeeded  well
enough,  but  the  second  was  broken  off  abruptly  because  we  thought
that  Mr.  Smith  had  accidentally  touched  Mr.  Wells’  finger,  which  would
have  nullified  the  precautions  taken  to  prevent  his  knowing  which  finger
was  being  operated  on.  It  was  very  important,  of  course,  to  take  note
of  this  fact ; but  we  made  a mistake  in  breaking  off  the  experiment,
since  this  was  very  likely  to  produce  a disturbing  effect  on  the  minds
of  both  operator  and  subject.  And  it  seems  not  impi’obable  that  the
failure  of  the  subsequent  experiments  on  that  day  may  have  been  due
to  this  cause.  Further  experiments  to  throw  light  on  the  cause  of  the
phenomenon  are  much  to  be  desired,  but  experimentation  witli  Mr.  Wells
is  attended  with  much  difficulty.  He  is  a busy  and  pro.sperous  young
man,  not  himself  interested  in  the  investigation  ; and,  notwithstanding
some  remuneration  given  for  loss  of  time,  finds  it  difficult  to  make
the  arrangements  necessary  to  enable  him  to  leave  his  business — that
of  a baker  and  confectioner — during  the  time  necessary  for  the
experiment.  The  consequence  is  that  we  have  found  it  difficult  to
obtain  his  services  at  all,  have  found  it  still  more  difficult  to  make
ra  rangements  befoi’ehand,  and  when  Mr.  Wells  has  come  have  had  to
work  under  an  inconvenient  sense  of  limited  time.  We  are,  however,
grateful  to  hi)n  for  the  opportunities  he  lias  given  us  of  trying  experi-
ments which  must  be,  to  him,  very  tedious  and  uninteresting.

Yv^c  proceed  to  the  precautions  taken  to  exclude,  as  far  as  possible,


Normal  State  hy  Mesmeric  Passes.


455


the  operation  o£  expectation.  Mi*.  Wells  was,  of  course,  aware  of  the
nature  of  the  experiment,  and  that  one  of  his  fingers  was  to  be  made
insensitive ; but  he  was  effectually  prevented  from  seeing  which  of
the  ten  it  was  by  two  large  sheets  of  thick  brown  paper,  through
holes  in  which  his  hands  were  passed.  This  screen  extended  in  all
directions  far  enough  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  his  seeing  round  it,
and  the  armholes  fitted  closely  enough  to  prevent  his  seeing  througli
them.  We  were  unable  oui'selves  to  feel,  by  air  currents  or  otherwise,
passes  made  over  our  fingers;  and  unless  Mr.  Wells’  perceptions  are
more  acute,  the  paper  screen  seems  to  reduce  the  chance  of  his  forming
a correct  opinion  as  to  which  finger  was  being  operated  on  to  1 in  10.
As  a further  precaution,  Mr.  Smith’s  passes  were,  in  most  of  the  experi-
ments, imitated  over  some  other  finger  by  one  of  the  other  persons  pre-
sent; so  that  if  the  passes  could  be  felt,  they  might  be  felt  in  two  finger.s.
This  would  not  guard  against  the  possible  perception  of  some  subtle
difference  between  Mi’.  Smith’s  passes  and  others  which  eluded  our  own
observation,  but  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  this  can  be  guarded  against.
The  finger  to  be  operated  on  was  always  selected  by  some  person  other
than  Mr.  Smith  ; but  the  proximity  of  the  operator  and  the  “ subject  ”
is  such  as  would  make  it  liard  absolutely  to  preclude  the  foi’mer  from
informing  the  latter,  by  auditory  or  other  signs,  which  is  the  selected
finger,  did  he  wish  to  do  so.  We  have,  however,  every  reason  to
believe  Mr.  Smith  to  be  as  much  interested  in  carrying  out  a genuine
experiment  as  the  other  persons  present.

The  passes  made  simultaneously  over  a different  finger  by  another
person  served  further  to  exclude  the  second  explanation  we  have  spoken
of,  namely,  that  the  aiiEesthesia  may  be  due  to  the  effect  of  mere  passes
on  the  nerves.  Here  again,  however,  as  it  seems  almost  impossible  to
prove  tliat  there  is  not  some  mechanical  difference  between  the  passes
of  Mr.  Smith  and  his  imitators,  which  cannot  be  discerned  by  tlie  eye,
the  explanation  is  not  completely  excluded  ; and  it  is  just  conceivable
tliat  some  unconscious  mechanical  change  in  Mr.  Gurney’s  mode  of
making  the  passes  may  explain  the  fact  that  in  one  experiment
(Ho.  9)  the  finger  that  he  operated  on  imitatively,  as  well  as  that
operated  on  by  Mr.  Smith,  became  insensitive.  This  happened  again,
but  to  a very  slight  extent,  in  experiment  Ho.  12.  The  fact  seems
important,  though  the  exact  import  of  it  cannot  be  ascertained
without  further  investigation.  It,  at  any  rate,  seems  to  afl'ord  an
argument  against  the  hypothesis  that  the  effect  is  due  to  mesmeric
effluence.

This  may  be  the  most  convenient  place  to  mention  two  other
anomalies  observed,  and  which  we  cannot  at  present  interpret.  In
experiment  Ho.  6 Mr.  Smith  operated  on  the  middle  finger  of
Mr.  Wells’  right  hand,  but  it  was  the  index  finger,  and  not  the


456


Local  Anmflmia  induced  in  the


middle  finger,  which  became  insensitiv'e  and  to  some  extent  rigid.  And
in  the  next  experiment  (No.  7)  when  the  fourth  finger  was  operated  on
with  success,  the  middle  finger,  which  should  have  been  rendered
insensitive  in  the  previous  experiment,  seemed  to  be  to  a slight  extent
affected,  though  this  was  a little  doubtful.  We  have  no  note  of  reverse
passes  having  been  made  over  this  finger  after  the  previous  experiment,
nor  of  any  imitative  passes  being  made  in  experiment  No.  7.  Something
of  the  same  kind  occurred  in  experiment  No.  19.  In  the  previous
experiment  the  fourth  finger  of  the  left  hand  liad  been  operated  on,  but
only  for  two  minutes  and  with  slight  success.  Reverse  passes  were
then  made  and  sensitiveness,  as  we  believed,  completely  restored.  In
experiment  No.  19  the  little  finger  of  the  right  hand  was  operated  on
successfully,  but  the  finger  of  the  previous  experiment  became  even
more  insensitive,  and  it  was  not  the  one  over  which  imitative  passes,
were  made.

To  test  the  insensitiveness,  electric  shocks  were  given  by  means  of  a
medical  magneto-electric  machine.  One  terminal  ending  in  a cylindrical
brass  handle,  was  placed  under  the  palm  of  Mr.  Wells’  hands,  and  con-
tact was  made  with  the  finger  to  be  tested  by  means  of  the  point  of  a wire
forming  the  other  terminal;  or,  in  experiments  10  to  16,  witli  the  edge  of
a cylindrical  brass  handle.  The  machine  was  adjusted  to  give  the
strongest  current  it  was  capable  of,  and  the  handle  turned  as  fast  as  we
could,  that  is  about  2.^  times  a second.  Each  turn  of  the  handle
represented  about  8|tunis  of  the  coils.  In  experiments  10,  and  17  to  20^
inclusive,  care  was  taken  that  the  palm  of  the  hand,  which  rested  on  the
electrode,  should  be  moist;  and  in  the  last  four  experiments  the  point  of
the  wire  witli  which  the  other  contact  was  made  was  jDreviously
dipped  in  water.  In  experiment  16  the  palms  of  the  liands  were-
wetted  with  a sponge  after  the  passes  had  been  made,  but  before  the
insensitiveness  was  tested.  It  was  then  found  that  a prick  could  be
felt  in  the  finger  operated  on,  but  apparently  not  the  electrical  shock
but  curiously  enough  this  was  the  only  experiment  in  which  the  electri-
cal shock  contracted  the  fingers.  The  partial  insensitiveness  quickly
disappeared  without  reverse  passes,  and  renewed  passes  did  not  restore
it  for  some  time,  and  then  not  completely.  As  we  supposed  that  this
might  be  due  to  fatigue,  the  experiments  were  discontinued  for  that  day.
Rigidity  was  not  looked  for  ; but  no  reverse  passes  were  made,  and  Mr..
Wells,  on  ti'ying  to  close  his  hand  after  the  screen  was  removed,  found
the  finger  to  be  rigid.

In  some  of  the  experiments  the  insensitiveness  was  tested  by  a
.severe  prick  (applied  in  experiments  1 and  15  under  the  nail)  as  well
,is  by  the  electric  shocks.

During  the  first  experiment  Mr.  Bull  noticed  that  Mr.  Wells
trembled  a good  deal,  suggesting  a,n  exercise  of  self-control.  But  it  is


Normal  State  by  Mesmeric  Passes.


457


not  unlikely  that  the  trembling  ^Yas  simply  caused  by  the  rather  violent
tremor  in  the  table  on  which  his  hands  rested,  caused  by  turning  the
electrical  machine.  In  experiment  No.  5 Mr.  Bull  observed  the  same
trembling,  but  did  not  think  it  coincided  with  the  severest  shocks ; and
his  final  opinion  was  that  the  trembling  had  had  no  emotional  signific-
ance. Care  was  taken  throughout  the  experiments  to  turn  the  machine
when  no  contact  was  made,  so  that  the  exact  moment  of  the  shocks
should  not  be  known  by  the  shaking  or  the  sound.  During  the  last  six
experiments  of  March  21st,  Mr.  Wells  was  reading  to  himself  behind  the
screen,  and  as  far  as  we  could  judge  went  on  doing  so  calmly  when  the
shocks  were  applied.  During  two  of  these  experiments  Dr.  Myers
especially  noticed  that  the  motion  of  his  eyes  travelling  across  the  page
was  quite  equable,  which  seems  a good  proof  of  unconsciousness  of  pain.
On  July  3rd  Mr.  Wells  was  engaged  the  whole  time  in  conversation
with  Dr.  Myers,  and  during  the  last  expei’iment  especially  he  was
talking  steadily  and  confidentially.  Dr.  Myers  had  good  opportunity
of  observing  the  pupils  of  his  eyes,  and  could  see  no  change  due  to
pain.  The  proof  of  insensitiveness  is  therefore,  we  think,  pretty
complete.

The  following  is  a synopsis  of  the  experiments.  The  fingers  are
numbered  in  order  beginning  with  the  thumb  of  each  hand,  and  the
hands  are  distinguished  as  R.  and  L.,  so  that,  for  example,  L2  means
the  index  finger  of  the  left  hand.  All  the  experiments  are  included.


Experiments  of  March  'IQth


Ko.

Finger

operated  on  by
Jlr.  Smith.

Finger  operated  on
imitatively.

Apparent  Result  and  Remarks.

Degree

of

Success.

1

L2

Two  Other  fingers

L 2 insensitive  to  severe  pricks
and  electric  shocks,  and  in
some  degree  rigid.  (When  the
liand  was  closed  L 2 followed
the  other  fingers  very  slowly)

Success.

2

K3

A finger  of  L

Experiment  broken  off  because
Mr.  Smith  was  thought  to
have  touched  the  finger.

3

K2

at  about
2in.  distance.

No  result.

Failure.

4

E 2

at  about
tin.  distance.

No  result.

Failure.

5

L 2

stroked.

Insensitiveness  to  electric
current.

2 G


Local  Aiuvsl/icsia  induced  in  the


‘ibS


Experiments  of  March  21sf.


No.


Finj^er

operaleil  on  by
Mr.  Muilh.


G K 3


K 4


8

9

10
11


12

13

14

15

16


L 3
R 5

R 1
R4


L2

L 5
L 1
L 5

R3


Fiu;rer  operated  on
imitativeiy.


L 3 by  A.T.M.


R 4 by  E.G.
L 2 by  E.G.

L 5 by  E.G.
L 4 by  E.G.


L5by  E.G.

R 2 by  E.G.
R 2 by  11.  S.
L 1 by  E.G.

L 5 by  E.G.


Apparent  Result  and  Remaiks.


R 2 aiul  not  R 3 became  in-
sensitiv'e  to  severe  prick  and
electric  shock,  and  in  some
degree  rigid.

R 4 insensitive, and  R 3i)erliaps
partially  so.

L 3 alone  insensitive.

Both  R 5 and  L 2 insensitive
and  rigid.

R 1 alone  insensitive  and  rigid.

R 4 alone  insensitive.  R 4 and
R 5 both  remained  extended
when  the  hand  was  clenched,
but  this  was  probably  due  to
the  well  known  muscular
connection  between  those
fingers.

L 2 insensitive.  L 5 insensitive
to  jirick,  but  when  afterwards
electricity  was  applied  was
sensitive.  E 2 only  rigid.

L 5 alone  insensitive  and  rigid.

L 1 alone  insensitive  and  rigid.

L 5 insensitive  (it  was  tested
both  by  severe  prick  under
nail  .and  by  electric  shock)
and  rigid.

The  hands  were  sponged  .after
the  passes  had  been  m.ade.
R 3 was  theTi  sensitive  to
]nick  but  not  to  electric
shock,  though  contracted  by
it.  Complete  sensitiveness
shortly  recovered  without
reverse  passes,  and  in-
sensitiveness not  renewed  by
further  passes.  R 3 rigid,
however.


Degree

of

Success.


Doubtful,


Sticcess.


Success.

Doubtful.


Success.

Success.


Doubtful.


Success.

Success.


Success.


Doubtful.


Normal  Slate  htj  2Icsmcric  Passes.


459


Experiments  of  Julp  2>rcl.


1*0.

Finjjer
operated  on

by

Mr.  Smith.

Finger
operated  on
imitatively.

Timn  during
which  the
passes  were
made.

Apparent  Result  and  Remarks.

Degree

ot

Success.

17

112

L 3 by  H.S.

R 2 slightly  insensitive  to
electric  shock  and  not
completely  rigid.  There
was  plenty  of  opportunity
given  to  Mr.  Wells  in  this
case  of  knowing  which
huger  Mr.  Smith  was
operating  on.

Doubtful.

18

L 4

2 iiiiiaite-s

L 4 very  slightly  insensitive.
Reverse  passes  made.

Doubtful.

19

R 5

L2  1y  H.S.

5 minutes

R 5 decidedly  insensitive,
but  L 4 rather  more  so.
Neither  rigid.

Doubtful.

20

R3

L 5 by  H.S.

3 minutes

R 3 alone  quite  insensitive
and  rigid.

Success.

O 2


Report  on  an  Alleged  Physical  Phenomenon.


^60


V.

REPORT  ON  AN  ALLEGED  PHYSICAL  PHENOMENON.

Committee : — William  Crookes,  F.R.S.  ; Victor  Horsley,  F.R.C.S.  ;
W.  C.  Bull,  F.R.C.S.  ; and  A.  T.  Myers,  M.D.


On  April  ITtli,  1885,  Mr.  Husk  met  us  at  24,  Clarges  Street,  and
courteously  agreed  to  such  slight  inconveniences  as  our  examination  of
necessity  involved.

We  found  a metal  ring  on  his  left  forearm  ; and  our  inquiry  was


limited  soiety  to  the  determination  whether  that  ring  could  have  come
into  tlie  position  it  then  held  ijy  known  natural  forces.

Th®  ring  was  cf  iron,  solid,  formed  of  a continuous  bar,  skilfully


Report  on  an  Alleged  Physual  Phenomenon.


461


welded  in  one  place,  bearing  marks  of  a file  throughout,  especially  near
the  place  of  welding.  The  internal  circumference  (as  determined  by
the  mean  of  two  independent  measurements,  difiering  from  one  another
by  1mm.  only)  was  182-5mm.  ; the  thickness  of  the  iron,  4-5mm.  In
shape  it  was  roughly  elliptical,  the  length  of  the  major  and  minor  axe.s
being  68mm.  and  48mm.  The  hand  was  fairly  normal  in  size  and
proportion,  and  contained  no  soft  tissues  in  excess  ; all  tlie  joints  were
loosely  articulated  ; the  fingers  turned  slightly  outwards.  No  scars
were  observed.  A short  transverse  line  was  drawn  on  the  back  of  the
hand  at  the  level  of  the  lowest  point  of  the  styloid  process  of  the  radius,
and  at  right  angles  to  it  another  line  down  the  long  axis  of  the  third
metacarpal  bone,  to  the  centre  of  the  knuckle  of  the  middle  finger  (thii-d
metacarpo-phalangeal  joint).  The  length  of  this  was  found  to  be
8 centimetres,  as  shown  in  the  diagram.  It  was  divided  into  eight
parts,  and  used  to  determine  some  other  measurements.

The  hand  was  held  out  loosely,  with  the  fingers  in  nearly  complete
extension,  and  the  thumb  turned  inwards  and  lying  across  the  palmar
surfaces  of  the  hand.  In  this  position,  under  slight  compi’ession,  the
greatest  circumference  of  the  hand  was  found  to  be  230mm.  Before
other  measurements  were  taken,  the  hand  was  reduced  to  a more
compact  shape  by  gentle  manipulation  ; it  was  ‘‘  troughed,”  i.e.,  the
iimer  and  outer  palmar  surfaces  were  approximated,  the  back  was
thereby  made  more  convex,  and  the  thumb  was  drawn  downwards  and
inwards,  so  as  to  lie  almost  completely  in  the  trough  so  formed  in  tlie
palm  of  the  hand.  Measurements  of  the  circumference  were  then
taken,  first  with  metallic  tape,  afterwards  with  copper  wire,  at  points
marked  in  the  diagram  ; moderate,  but  not  painful  pressure  was  used
at  the  moments  of  measurement.  The  measurements  showed  : —


With  Metallic  Tajje.
mm.

AtO  148

1  —

2  184

O

k)

4 193

5 .*....  200

0  198

8 200


With  Copper  Wire,
mm.


0 147

1 171

2 183

3 189

4 192

C 194

8 193


The  measurement  at  5,  with  the  metallic  tape,  was  repeated  after
flexure  of  the  wrist,  but  showed  no  appreciable  difference.

The  greatest  circumference  of  the  hand,  measured  as  described
before  it  was  “ troughed,”  exceeded  the  internal  circumference  of  the


4G2


lirjwrt  on  an  Alleged  Plu/sical  Phenomenon.


ring  by  47’5min.,  or  about  Isin.  j after  it  liad  been  “ troughed,”  by
ll'Snim.,  or  under  4in.

Wliere  the  ring  fitted  most  loosely,  i.e.,
about  an  inch  above  the  wrist  joint,  it  was
found  easy  to  insert  between  it  and  the  forearm
a solid  body  of  about  23mm.  square,  as  is
roughly  shown  in  section.

It  was  considered  that  any  attempt  to  take  measurements  of  the
smallest  circumference  to  which  Mr.  Husk’s  hand  could  be  reduced,
would  necessitate  considerable  jjressure  for  the  emptying  of  the  blood-
vessels as  far  as  possible,  and  the  decisive  elimination  of  all  voluntary
or  involuntary  muscular  contraction,*  and  might  possibly  be  so  painful
as  to  be  unjustifiable  without  the  administration  of  an  anpesthetic.  As
Mr.  Husk  was  disinclined  for  this,  no  such  attempt  was  made.

Mr.  Victor  Horsley  subsequently  took  measurements,  with  metallic
tape,  of  the  circumference  of  the  right  hands  of  three  men — Mr.
Crookes  assisting  in  two  of  the  cases — (1)  under  the  same  conditions
as  those  applied  to  Mr.  Husk  ; and  (2)  again  when  they  were  under
the  full  influence  of  ether,  but  no  other  additional  means  had  been
taken  to  reduce  the  volume  of  the  hand,  e.y.,  by  pressure,  etc.,  etc.  The
points  of  measurement  were  distant  1,  2,  3,  ifcc  , centimetres  from  the
styloid  j^rocess  of  the  radius,  along  the  metacarpal  bone  of  the  inde.v
fingei,  after  the  plan  adopted  with  Mr.  Husk.  The  results  were  as
follow  : —


No.  1.


Circumference

Circumference

Distance  from

in  inin.  before

under  full

styloid  i)roces.s.

etherisation.

etherisation.

1

182

179

2 200  193


210  198


4

218

204

5

220

205

0

225

210

7

ooa.

215

8

222

215

9 214  205


No.  2.

1

184

176

2

204

196

3

213

203

4

214

207

* Such  contraction  of  the  intrinsic  muscles  of  the  haiul  was  felt  to  occur
during  the  “ troughing  ” of  the  hand.


Report  on  an  Alleged  Physical  Phenomenon.


463


Distance  from
styloid  process.

5

G

7

8


Circumference
in  mm.  before
etherisation.
212

209  ....

209  ...,

200  ....


Circumference
muier  full
etherisation.

210

201

201

190


No.  .3.

1

155

149

2 175  102


4

195

189

5

19G

188

6

191

18G

7

189

188

These  sliow  a decrease  in  the  tliree  largest  nieasureraents  of  a
avers  ge  of  10mm.

The  conclusion  to  which  we  are  brought  is,  that  under  the  con-
ditions of  measurement  in  Mr.  Husk’s  case,  the  greatest  circumference
of  the  hand  exceeded  that  of  the  internal  circumference  of  the  ring  Iw
ll-5mm.,  or  rather  less  tlian  half  an-inch  ; and  tiiat,  as  we  do  not
consider  these  conditions  to  be  those  best  adapted  to  reduce  the
circumference  of  the  hand  as  much  as  is  possible,  we  cannot  infer  that
it  is  impossible  that  die  ring  should  have  come  into  the  position  in
vvliich  we  found  it  by  known  natural  forces.


464


Abridged  Library  Catalogue.


VI,

LIBEAEY  CATALOGUE  (Abridged).

1885.

A COMPLETE  CATALOGUE  CAN  BE  CONSULTED  IN  THE  ROOMS  OF  THE  SOCIETY.
[R]  indicutes  that  the  hook  is  for  reference  only.


ENGLISH.

Abercrombie  (John,  M.D.)  Inquiries  concerning  the  Intellectual

Powers,  and  the  Investigation  of  Truth London,  1841

[H]  Account  of  a Strange  and  Dreadful  Apparition  at  Sea  ...London,  1627

Ashburner  (John,  M.D.)  Philosophy  of  Animal  Magnetism  and

Spiritualism  (2  copies)  London,  1867

Aubrey  (Jolm,  F.R.S.)  Miscellanies London,  1784

Basti.an  (H.  Charlton,  M.D.,  F.R.S.)  The  Brain  as  an  Organ  of

Mind.  3rd  edit London,  1882

Baxter  (Robert)  Supernatural  Manifestations  in  Mr.  Irving’s  Con-
gregation Londmi,  1833

Beard  (George  M.,  M.A.,  M.D.)  The  Psychology  of  the  Salem

Witclicraft  Excitement  of  1692  Neiv  York,  1882

Trance  and  Muscle-Reading  Netv  York,  1882

[R]  Beaumont  (John)  A Treatise  of  Sjiirits,  Apparitions,  Witchcrafts,  &c.

London,  1705

Belden  (L.  W.,  M.D.)  An  Account  of  Jane  C.  Rider,  the  Springfield
Somnambulist.  Lecture  to  Springfield  Lyceum  (2  copies)

tdprirujfield.  Mass.,  U.S.A.,  1834

Boismont  (A.  Brierre  De,  M.D.)  A History  of  Dreams,  Visions,
Ap2>aritions,  Ecstasy,  Magnetism  and  Somnambulism.  1st
America'ii,  from  the  2nd  Paris  edition Philadelphia,  1855

— On  Hallucinations.  From  the  French,  by  Robert  T.  Hulme,F.L.S.

(2  copies)  London,  1859

Braid  (James,  M.R.C.S.,  &c.)  Neurypnology  ; or,  the  Rationale  of

Nervous  Sleeji  (2  copies) London,  1843

Observations  on  Trance  ; or.  Human  Hybernation London,  1850

Brew.ster  (Sir  David)  Letters  on  Natural  Magic,  hth  edit 1842

Brown  (J.P.  ) The  Dervdshes,  or  Oriental  Siiiritualism London,  1868

[R]  Burthogge  (Richard,  M.D.)  An  Essay  iqion  Reason  and  the  Nature

of  Spirits  (2  copies).. London,  1694

Carpenter  (William  B.,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  Ac.)  Mesmerism,  Spiritualism,

&c.,  Historically  and  Scientifically  considered London,  1877

Princiides  of  Mental  Physiology,  Gth  edit London,  1881

Clark  (W.W.)  A Forecast  of  the  Religion  of  tlie  Future  London,  1879


Abridged  Library  Catal  gue.  465

CoBBE  (Frances  Power)  Dai-^vinism  in  IMorals  and  other  Essays.

London,  1872

The  Peak  in  Darien London,  1882

CoELYER  (Robert  H. , M.D.)  Psychography Philadelphia,  1843

Exalted  States  of  the  Nervous  System  (2  copies)  Londo)i,  1873

CoLQUHOw  (J.C.)  Report  (1831)  on  Animal  Magnetism  of  the  French

Academy  of  Sciences.  From  the  French  (2  copies)  ...Edinburgh,  1833

CoxTES  (Professor  Elliott)  Biogen  : A Speculation  on  the  Origin  and

Nature  of  Life  Boston,  U.S.A.,  1884

Cox  (Edward  W.)  A Monograph  on  Sleejx  and  Dreams London,  1878

The  Mechanism  of  Man : An  answer  to  the  Question — What  Am  1 1

Yol.  I.  The  Mechanism  (2  copies)  London,  187(1

Yol.  II.  The  Mechanism  in  Action London,  1879

Ckooke.s  (William,  F.R.S.)  Researches  in  the  Phenomena  of  Spiritu-

ahsni London,  1874

R]  Dee  (Dr.  John)  On  Spirits.  With  a Preface  by  M.  Casaubon,  D.D.

London,  1G50

Del.yage  (Henri)  Pamphlets,  &c.,  including  Biography  of  the
somnambule  Alexis

Deleuze  (J.  P.  F.)  Practical  Instructions  in  Animal  hlagnetism.

From  the  French,  by  Thomas  C.  Hartshorn  Keiv  York,  1879

Deettz.sch  (Franz,  D.D.)  A System  of  Biblical  Psychology.  From  the
German,  by  the  Rev.  R.  E.  Willis,  Ph.  D.,  2nd  English  edit.

Edinburgh,  1879

R]  De  Loire  (Peter)  A Treatise  of  Specters  or  Strange  Sights.  F roni  the

French London,  1605

DiALECTiCAE  SOCIETY,  Report  of  the  Committee  on  Spiritualism

London,  1873

Dix'ixatiox  by  the  Crystal  (A  Treatise  upon)  MS.  extracted  from  a.

MS.  in  the  Librarj^  of  the  late  Queen  Charlotte  at  Buckingham
Palace  N.D.

Edmoxds  (Judge)  An  Appeal  to  the  Public  on  Spiritualism  New  York,  1858

Letters  and  Tracts  on  Spiritualism London,  N.D.

RJ  Elliotsox  (Jolm,  M.D.,  F.R.S.)  Surgical  Operations  in  the  Mesmeric

State London,  1843

Exxemo.ser  (Joseph)  The  History  of  Magic.  From  the  German,  by
Wdliam  Howitt.  With  an  Appendix  by  IMary  Howitt.  2 vol.

London,  1854

Esdaile  (James,  M.D.)  Mesmerism  in  India  London,  1846

The  Introduction  of  Mesmerism  with  Sanction  of  Government

into  the  Public  Hospitals  of  India.  2nd  edit London,  1856

Natural  and  Mesmeric  Clairvoyance  (2  copies) London,  1852

Ferriar  (John,  IM.D.)  An  Essay  towards  a Theory  of  Apparitions

London,  1813

Forbes  (John,  M.D.,  F.R.S.)  Illustrations  of  Modern  Mesmerism

Lond.on,  1845


466


Abridged  Lihranj  Catalogue.


Galton  (Francis,  F.R.S.)  Inquiries  into  Human  Faculty London,  1883

[H]  Glanvil  (Josei)h)  Saducismus  Triumphatus  ; or,  Evidence  Concerning

Witches  and  Apparitions,  3;'d  edit London,  1G8!)


(Also  cold inuoushj  paged  xolth  the  above.)

A Continuation  of  the  Collection,  by  Henry  More,  D.D.  London,  1G8S
A Whip  for  the  Droll,  &c.,  in  a Letter  to  Dr.  Henry  More,  D.D.  1G88
An  Account  of  What  Happened  in  the  Kingdom  of  Sweden,


bv  A.  Hornech,  D.D 1688

[R]  The  Mh  edit,  of  the  above  ivith  additions London,  1726

[R]  Geeatrak  (Valentine)  Account  of  Strange  Cures  ; written  by  himself

in  a Letter  to  Robert  Boyle  (And  other  paniphlets.)  London,  1666


[RJ  Hale  (Lord  Cliief  Justice)  Matter  of  Fact  Concerning  Witches  and

Witchcraft.  Part  I London,  1693

Ham.mond  (William  A.,  M.D.)  Spiritualism  and  Nervous  Derangement

London,  1876


Hare  (Robert,  M.D.)  Experimental  Investigation  of  the  Sjiirit

Manifestations  New  York,  1855

Heidenhain  (Professor  Rudolf,  M.D. ) Animal  Magnetism.  From  the
German,  liy  J.  C.  Wooldridge,  B.  Sc.  With  a 2>i’eface  by  J.  G.
Romanes,  M.A.,  F.R.S London,  1880

iliRBERT  (Samuel,  M.D.,  F.R.S. E.)  Sketclies  of  the  Philosoidiy  of

A2)paritions.  '2nd  edit Edinburgh,  1825

Houdin  (Robert)  The  Sharpers  Detected  and  Exposed  1863

[R]  Hutchin, SON  (Francis,  D.D.)  An  Historical  Essay  Concerning  Witch-
craft London,  1718


Jung-Stillino  (Dr.  J.  H.)  Tlieory  of  Pncumatology,  From  the  Ger-
man, by  Samuel  Jackson  (2  CMpies) London,  1834


Keener  (.Tustinus)  The  Seeress  of  Prevorst.  From  the  German,  by

Mrs.  Crowe London,  1845


Lee  (Edwin  Lee,  M.D. ) Animal  Magnetism  London,  1866

Lenormant  (Francois)  Clialdean  Magic,  from  the  F rench  N.D.

jM.A.  (Oxon.)  Psychograidiy,  2nd  edit London,  1882

jMacnish  (Robert)  The  PliilosojJiy  of  Sleep,  3rd  edit Glasgow,  1836

IMaud.sley  (Heniy,  M.D.)  Tlie  Pathology  of  Mind  London,  1879

Body  and  Will  London,  1883

Mayo  (Herbert,  M.D.)  On  the  Truths  contained  in  Poi)ular  Suj>ersti-

tions.  With  an  account  of  Mesmerism,  '2nd  edit Edinburgh,  1851

Me.smef.ism  : Its  History,  Phenomena,  and  Practice.  With  Rejmrts  of

Ca.ses  develoj)ed  in  Scotland  Edinburgh,  1843

[R]  Moor  (Major  Edward,  F.R.S.)  Bealings  Bells Woodbridge,  1841


PirANTAS.MOLOGiCAL  SOCIETY  (Selection  from  the  Papers  of)  Printed  for

Private  Circulation Oxford,  1883


Abridged  Library  Catalogue.  467

Psychical  Reseakch  (Proceedings  of  Society  for).  Vols.  I.  and  II.

London,  1883-4

(Journal  of  Society  for).  Yol.  I ...London,  1884-5

PsvcHOLOGicAL  Revleiv.  Yol.  I London,  1879’


Reichexbach  (Baron  Charles  von)  Researches  on  Magnetism,
Electricity,  &c.,  in  their  Relations  to  Yital  Force.  From  the
German,  with  Preface  and  Notes,  by  John  Ashburner,  IM.D.

(2  copies)  Lo)idon,  1850-


Sandby  (Rev.  George,  jun.,  M.A.)  Mesmerism  and  its  Opponents

(2  copies)  London,  1844

Savile  (Rev.  Bourchier  Wray,  M.A.)  Apparitions  : A Narrative  of

Facts Lo)idon,  1874

ScoKESBY  (Rev.  W.,  D.D.,  F.R.S.)  Zoistic  Magnetism London,  1841>

Scott  (Sir  Walter)  Letters  on  Demonology  and  Witchcraft  ...London,  ISSQ-

Skey  (F.C.,  F.R.S.)  Hysteria  ; Six  Lectures  at  St.  Bartholomew’s

Hospital  London,  18(it)

Squierell  (Elizabeth)  Autobiography  of.  By  One  of  her  Watchers


London,  1853

Stew.crt  (Professor  Balfour,  F.R.S.,  and  P.  G.  Tait,  F.R.S.)  The

Unseen  Universe  London,  1875

Stock  (St.  George)  Attempts  at  Truth London,  1882

Sully  (James)  Illusions  : A Psychological  Study,  2nd  edit London,  188li

Symokds  (John  Addington,  M.D.)  Sleep  and  Dreams  : Two  Lectures

delivered  at  Bristol London,  1851


Teste  (Alphonse,  M.D.)  A Practical  Manual  of  Animal  Magnetism.

From  the  French,  by  D.  Spillan,  M.D.,  M.A London,  1843

Topham  (W.  and  W.  Squire  Ward)  Case  of  Amputation  of  Thigh

during  Mesmeric  State London,  1842

Towkshekd  (Rev.  C.  H.,  M.A.)  Facts  in  Mesmerism,  2nd  edit.

London,  1844

Mesmerism  Proved  True Lo^idon,  1854

Truesdell  (John  W.)  The  Bottom  Facts  Concerning  the  Science  of

Spiritualism New  York,  1883

Tuke  (Daniel  Hack,  M.D.)  The  Influence  of  the  Mind  upon  the  Body,

2 vol London,  1884

Sleep  Walking  and  Hypnotism  London,  1884


Upham  (Rev.  Charles  ^Y.)  Lectures  on  Witchcraft.  Comprising  a

Histoiy  of  the  Delusion  in  Salem,  1692  Boston,  U.IS.A.,  1831


W allace  (Alfred  Russel)  On  Miracles  and  Modern  Spiritualism,  2nd

edit London,  1881

W lEKHOLT  (Dr.  Arnold)  Somnambulism.  From  the  German,  Iiy  J.  C.

Colquhoim Edinhunjh,  1845


468


Abridged  Lihrarij  Catalogue.


Wilson  (John)  (Physician  to  the  Middlesex  Hospital)  Trials  of

Animal  Magnetism London,  1839


Zerffi  (Professor  G.  G.,  Ph.D.)  Spiritualism  ai^  1 Animal  Magnetism

London,  1871

ZoiST  (The)  A Journal  of  Cerebral  Physiology  and  Mesmerism,  13

vol.  (2  copies)  London,  1844-1856

ZdLLNER  ( J ohann  Carl  F riedrich)  Transcendental  Physics.  Fi-om  the

German,  by  C.  C.  Massey London,  1882


FRENCH.

Annales  DU  Magneti.sme  Animal,  8 vol.  (bound  in  four)  Paris,

1814-1816


Baillarcjer  (M.  J.)  De  I’lnfluence  des  Hallucinations Paris,  1846

Baillif  (Dr  Louis  Ernest)  Du  Sommeil  Magnetique  dans  I’Hysterie

Strashnrg,  1868

Barety  (Dr.)  Force  Neurique  Rayonnante Paris,  1882

Beauvallon  (Gaultier  de)  Essai  sur  les  Hallucinations Paris,  1883

Bergasse(M. ) Considerations  sur  le  Magndtisme  Animal  ...La  Ilaye,  1784

Berillon  (Edgar)  Hypnotisme  Expe'rimental  Paris,  1884

Beenheim  (Professor  H.)  De  la  Suggestion  dans  I’Etat  Hypnotique

Paris,  1884

De  la  Suggestion  : Reponse  a M.  Janet  Paris,  1884

Contribution  a I’Etude  de  rAjihasie  ; de  la  Cecite'  Psychique

des  Choses  Paris,  1885

Bertrand  (Alexandre)  Traite  du  Somnambulisme Paris,  1823

Du  Magndtisme  Animal  en  France  Paris,  1826

Bertrand  (Prof.  Alexis.)  L’Aperception  du  Corps  Humain  par  la

Conscience  Paris,  1884


BiELiOTiibQUE  DU  Magneti.sme  Animal,  8 vol.  (bound  in  four)  Paris

1817-1819

Boismont  (A.  Brierre  De,  M.D.)  Des  Hallucinations,  2Rd  edit.,  Paris,  1852


Bottey  (Dr.  Fernand)  Le  Magnetisme  Animal Paris,  1884

Burden  (C.  et  Dubois  Fred.)  Histoire  Academique  du  Magnetisme

Animal Paris,  1841

Cahagnet  (L.  a.)  Magnetisme,  2 vol Paris,  1848-9

CiiARDEL  (C.)  Essai  de  Psychologie  Physiologique Paris,  1844

Chari‘IGNOn(J.)  Physiologic,  McdecineetMe'taphysiquedu  Magnetisme

Paris,  1848

CoLSENET  (Dr.  Edmond)  La  Vie  Inconsciente  de  I’Esprit  Paris,  1880


Comet  (Dr.)  La  Verite  aux  IMe'decins  et  aux  Gens  du  Monde... Pni’R!,  1841


Abridged  Library  Catalogue.


46&

[R]  De  L’Ancke  (P.)  Incredulite  et  Mescreances  du  Sortilege  Plainement

Convaincue Paris,  1G22

Deeeuze  (J.  P.  F.)  Defense  du  Magnetisine  Animal Paris,  ISlff

Histoire  Critique  du  Magnetisme  Animal,  2 vol.  (bound  in  one),

2nd  edit Paris,  1811>

De  Putsegue.  Reclierclies  Pliysiologiques  sur  THomme  Paris,  1811

Appel  de  la  Decision  portee  contre  le  Magnetisme  Animal  Paris,  1815

Memoires  pour  servir  k rHistoii'e  et  k I’Etablissement  du

Magnetisme  Animal,  3rd  edit Paris,  1820

Du  Magnetisme  Animal  considere  dans  ses  rapports  avec  diverses

branches  de  la  Physiejue  Generale,  2nd  edit Paris,  1820

De  Potet  (Le  Baron)  Manuel  de  L’Etudiant  Magnetiseur  Paris,  1851

Espixas  (De.  A. ) Du  Sommeil  Provoque  chez  les  Hysteriques

Bordeaux,  1885

Expo.se  des  Cuee.s  Oi^erees  en  France  par  le  Magnetisme  Animal,  2 vol.

Paris,  1820

Foi.s.sac  (P.,  M.D.)  Rapport  et  Discussions  de  I’Academie  Royale  de


Medecine  sur  le  Magnetisme  Animal  Paris,  1835

GAKcrx(Dr. ) Le  Magnetisme  Explique  par  Lui-meme  Paris,  1855

Gauthier  (Aubin)  Histoire  du  Somnambulisme,  2 vol Paris,  1842

[R]  Histoiee  de.s  Diables  de  Louduh  Amsterdam,  1710

Lelut  (L.F.)  Du  Demon  de  Socrate  Paris,  1850

Lemoixe  (Albert)  Du  Sommeil  Paris,  1855

Leuret  (Frangois)  Fragmens  Psychologiques  sur  La  Folie  Paris,  1834

Leveque  (Ch.)  La  Science  de  rinvisible  Paris,  18G5

Li^beauxt  (Dr.  A.A.)  Du  Sommeil  et  des  Etats  Analogues  Paris,  1860

Ebauche  de  Psychologie  Paris,  1875

Etude  sur  le  Zoomagnetisme  P aris,  1885

Liegeois  (Jules)  De  la  Suggestion  Hypnotique  dans  ses  Rapports  avec

le  Droit  Civil  et  le  Droit  Criminel Paris,  1884

Luys  (Dr.  J.)  Le  Cerveau,  3rd  edit Paris,  1878

Maury  (L.  F.  Alfred)  La  Magie  et  I’Astrologie  Paris,  1860

Le  Sommeil  et  les  Reves Paris,  1878

Memoires  pour  servir  h THistoire  et  h I’Etablissement  du  Magnetisme

Animal,  2 vol.  (bound  in  one)  2nd  edit Paris,  1800

Mesmee  Memoires  et  Aphorismes  de Paris,  1846

Mich^a  (C.  F.)  Du  Delire  des  Sensations.  2nd  edit Paris,  1851


Perronxet  (Dr.  Claude)  Le  Magnetisme  Animal
Petetix  (D.  M.)  Electricite  Animale


.Lons-le-Savnier,  1884
Paris.  1808


470


Abridged  Lihrenvj  Catalogue.


Pkoc'i'cS  Yeeeal  Fait  pour  Delivrer  une  Fille  possedeo  par  le  Malin
Esprit  a Lovviers,  puldie  d’apres  le  MS.  Original,  par  Armand

Benet  Paris,  1883

PuEL  (T.)  De  la  Catalepsie(2  co/nes) Paris,  1856

Pevoe  de  PiSYCHOLOGiE  EXPERIMENTAL,  public  par  T.  Piiel.  Nos.  1-G

Paris,  1874

Revue  Philosophique Paris,  1884-5

Ribot  (Th.)  Les  Maladies  de  la  Personnalite  Paris,  1885

Richer  (Paul)  Etudes  Cliniques  sur  la  Grande  Hysterie  Paris,  1885

Riciiet  (Charles)  L’Hommo  et  I’lntelligence  Paris,  1884

Roullier  (Auguste)  Exposition  Physiologi(|ue  dos  Phenoiuenes  du

Magnetisme  Animal  et  du  Soinnambulisine  Paris,  1817

Schmidt  (Oscar)  Les  Sciences  Naturelles  et  la  Pliilosopliie  de

rinconscient  Paris,  1879

ScOBARDi  (R.  P.)  Rapport  Confidentiel  sur  le  Magnetisme  Animal,

2ncl  edit Paris,  1839

Sere  (G.  Louis  de)  Application  du  Somnambulisme  Magndtique  Paris,  185.5

SiciLiANi  (Pierre)  Prolegomones  ii  la  Psycliogenie  Moderne Paris,  1880

SzAFKOW.SKi  (Louis-Rufin)  Recherclies  sur  les  Hallucinations  ...Pa^-is,  1849

Taine  (H.)  De  rinteliigence,  2 vol.,  4:th  edit Paris,  1883

Teste  (Alphonse,  M.D.)  Le  Magnetisme  Animal  Explique  Paris,  184.5

Manuel  Pratique  de  Magnetisme  Animal,  2iid  edit Paris,  1845

Vallement  (L.L.  de)  La  Physique  Occulte Paris,  1709

Yung  (Dr.  Emile)  Le  Sommeil  Normal  et  le  Sommeil  Pathologi(pie,

Paris,  1883


GERMAN.

Archiv  fur  den  Thierischen  Magneti.smus,  G vol Leipzicj,  1817-1820

Burdach  (Karl  Friedrich)  Blicke  ins  Leben,  Vols.  L,  II.,  III.  and  IV.

(Posthumous)  Leipzuj,  1842-8


Daumer  (Prof.  G.  W. ) Das  Reich  des  Wundersamen  und


Gelieimnissvollen Pegenshunj,  1872

Du  Prel  (Dr.  Carl)  Die  Philosojihie  der  IMystik Ltdpzig,  1885


Ennemoser  (Dr.  .Joseph)  Untersuchungen  iiber  den  Ursprung  der

Menschlichen  Seele,  2n,d  edit Tiihliajen,  1851

Eschenmaver  (Prof,  C.  A.  v.)  Yersuch  die  Scheinbare  Magie  des
Tliierischen  Magnetismus  aus  Physiologischen  und  Psychischen
Gesetzen  zu  erklaren  t^tiittgart,  181G

Myscerien  des  innern  T.ebena  Tiihingcn,  1830


Abridged  Lihranj  Catalogue.  47]

Fischer  (Prof.  Fr.)  Der  Somnambulismus,  3 vol Basle,  183!l


Gravell,  UeberdieFortdauer  unsererGefiililenachclem  Tode,  Leipzig,  1821

Hartmaxn  (Eduard  von)  Der  Spiritismus Leipzig  and  Berlin,  18S5

Hellexbach  (L.  B.)  Die  Magie  der  Zahlen JVien,  1882

Geburt  und  Tod  JVien,  1888'

Hexxixgs  (Justus  Christian)  Von  den  Triiumen  und  Nachtwand-

lern  Weiinar,  178  :

Hensler  (Dr.  P.  J.)  Der  Mensclien-Magnetismus  in  seiner  Wirkun-

gen  auf  Gesundlieit  und  Leben  JVurzbnrg,  1887

Jankowski  (Eduard)  Phanomenologie  und  Metaidiysik  derAnonnalen

Sinnesbilder Leipzig,  1882


Kerner  (Justinus)  Geschichte  zweyer  Somnambiilen Karlsruhe,  1824

Die  Seherin  von  Prevorst,  2 vol.  (bound  in  one)  2h(Z  edif.

Utiiitgart,  1832

Geschichten  Besessener  Neuerer  Zeit Stuttgart,  1834

Bliitter  aus  Prevorst,  12  vol.  (bound  in  three)  Karlsruhe  and

Stuttgart,  1831-!)

Kieser  (Dr.  D.  G.)  System  des  Tellurismus  oder  Thierischen

Magnetismus,  2 vol Leipzig,  182(-

Kluge  (Carl  A.  G.)  Versuch  einer  Darstellung  des  Animalischen

Magnetismus  als  Heilmittel,  2nd  edit Berlin,  181  .o

Krausz  (Friedrich)  Kothschrei  eines  Magnetisch  - Vergif teten

Stuttgart,  1852

Meier  (Dr.)  Gescliichte  der hellsehenden  Auguste  Muller  ...Stuttgart,  1818

Mittheilungen  aus  dem  magnetischen  Schlafleben  der  Somnambiile
Auguste  K.  in  Dresden.  [The  preface  is  signed  by  Johann  Karl
Bahr  and  Rudolph  Kohlschiitter  as  editors.]  Dresden,  1843


[R]  Nicolai  (Friedrich)  Beispiel  einer  Erscheinung  mehrerer  Phantasmen

Berlin,  1799

[R]  Pamphlets,  German,  Vol.  I. —

Ennemoser  (Dr.  Joseph)  IJntersuchungen  iiber  den  Urspriing  und


das  Wesender  Menschlichen  Seele Stuttgart,  18.51

Leubuscher  (Rud.)  Ueber  die  Entstehung  der  Sinnestauschung

Berlin,  1852

Siebeok  (Prof.  H.)  Das  Traumleben  der  Seele  Berlin,  1877

Schubert  (Dr.  G.  H.  von)  Veber  Ahnen  und  AVissen Munich,  1847

AVindt  (Prof.  AV.)  Der  Spiritismus  Leipzig,  187!)

[R]  Pamphlets,  German,  Vol.  II.

Baader  (Franz)  Fine  Geisterscheinung  Miinster,  1833


Clemens  (Dr.  A.)  Das  Perngefuhl  Franhfurt-avi-Mahi,  1857


472


Abridged  Lihrarg  Catalogue.


Iloflinann  (Dr.  II.)  Die  Physiolog'ie  der  Sinnes-H<aTlucinationen

Fra  n lifu  rt-a  m-Main,  18  .i  1

Leben  (das)  und  der  Tod Lripzi(j,  18.50

Scherer  (Friedrich)  Das  Walten  von  Wahrheit  und  Wahn

(Im  Sclhstrcrlngc  des  VerfaHsers)  JV.T).

Wegners  (Georg  Wilhelm)  Abhandliuig  von  Gespenstern Berlin,  1717

Wellmer  (Meta)  Geistergeschichten Fordhausen,  187.5

Pamphlet.s,  German,  Vol.  III.

Blicke  in  die  Tranm  und  Geisterwelt Lr/jKitj,  1854

E (II.  von)  Gescliichten  von  Lebendig  begrabenen  Personen

FraiiJifnrt,  1798

Horst  (Georg  Conrad)  Theurgie  Mainz,  1820

Meier  (Dr.)  Geschichte  der  Magnetisch  hellsehenden  Augu.ste  Muller

in  Karlsruhe Stiitt^art,  1818

Passavant  (Dr.  Johann  Carl)  Untersuchungen  iiher  den  Lehens-

niagnetisnius  und  das  Hellsehen,  2nd  edit.  . . .Frmdifnrt-am-Main , 1837
Peiity  (Prof.  Dr.  Maximilian)  Die  Realitiit  magisclier  Kriifte  und
Wirkungen  des  Menschen  gegen  die  Widersaclier  vertheidigt
( 2 errp  ies) Le  ipzig,  18G3

Blicke  in  das  verborgene  Leben  des  Menschengeistes  (2  copies)

Leipzig,  ISO!)

Die  Mystischen  Ersclicinungen  der  Menschliclien  Natur  (2  copies)

2n'leiit Leipzig,  1872

Die  Sich'bare  und  die  Unsichtbare  Welt  Leipzig,  1882

Pkey'ek  (Professor  W.)  Die  Entdeckung  der  Hyjmotismus Berlin,  1881

P.sYCHisCHE  Studied.  Vols.  I. -XII Leipzig,  1874-85

Rieger  (Dr.  Conrad)  Der  Hypnotismus  Jena,  1884

und  M.  Tippel,  Experimentelle  untersuchungen  iiber  die

Willensthiitigkeit  Jena,  1885


ScHOPENH.A.UER(A.)Parerga  und  Paralipomena,  4f/i.  edit.  2 vol.  Leipzig,  1878

Spitta  (Dr.  Heinrich)  Die  Schlaf-  und  Traumzustiinde  der  Mensch-

lichen  Seele.  1st  and  2 nd  edit Tiihingen,  1878-83

Splittgerber  (Franz)  Tod,  Fortleben  und  Auferstehung llcdle,  1871*


'WiRTii  (J.  U.)  Theorie  des  Somnambulismus  oder  des  Thierischen

Magnetismus  Leipzig,  1832

WiRTH  (Moritz)  Professor  Zdllner’s  Experimente  mit  den  Amerikani-
sclien  jMedium  Herrn  Slade  und  seine  Hyi)othese  intelligenter
vierdimensionaler  Wesen  Leipzig,  1882


Zeit.schrifx  fxtr  P.SYC'Hi.scnE  Aerzte.  Herausgegeben  von  Friedrich


Nasse.  Vols.  I. — V Leipzig,  1818-1822

ZoELNEB  (F.)  Zur  Aufkliining  der  Deutschen  Volkes  iiber  Inhalt  und

Aufgabe  der  Wissenschaftlichen  Abhandlungen  Leipzig,  1880


Ahrldged  Library  Catalogue,


473


LATIN,

[R]  Compendium  Maleficarum  .Milan,  1G2(>

[R]  De-Thardingius (Dn.  Georgius)  Dissertatio 1724


Fabius  (Everardus)  Specimen,  de  Somniis


Amsterdam,  183G


[R]  Magica  Seu  mirabilium  Historiarum  de  Spectris  et  Apparitionibus

Spirituum  (2  copies)  Eishben,  1597


[R]  Pamphlets,  Latin,  for  Vol.  I.

Wedelius  (Ernestus  Henricus)  Dissertatio Medica  de  Spectris. .../eRri,  1693
[R]  Porta  (.J.  Ba23tista)  Magiie  Naturalis Antiverp,  1560

[R]  PsELLUS  (Michael)  De  Operatione  dsemonum  Dialogus  (Greek  and

Latin)  Paris,  1615


[R]  Semler  (Salomonis  Joannis)  Commentatio  de  Diemoniacis  quorum  in


N.  T.  tit  mentio Halle,  1797

[R]  Speenger.  Malleus  Maleficarum.  2 Vols London,  1020

[R]  Thye.ei  Petri  Opera Cologne,  IGOO

[R]  Trithemios  (Joannes)  Steganographia  ..Frankfort,  IGOG

[R]  WiEEi  ( Joannis)  Opera  Omnia Amsterdam,  IGGO


474


Abridged  Library  Catalogue.


THE  LIBRAE Y.


The  Society’s  Library  of  books  and  periodicals  is  open  to  Members
and  Associates  alike,  for  consultation  at  the  Society’s  Rooms.
Members  have  the  additional  privilege  of  taking  out  books,  except  those
marked  [R],  which  are  for  reference  only,  according  to  the  following
Rules  : —

1.  Members  may  obtain  books  either  by  writing  to  the  Assistant-

Secretary,  or  by  taking  them  from  the  shelves,  in  which  latter
case  they  must  leave  a written  acknowledgment  on  the  form
provided  for  the  purpose,  entering  also  any  books  Avhich  they
may  at  the  same  time  return.  Members  must  pay  for  the
carriage  of  books  sent  to  them  or  returned  by  them.

2.  No  Member  may  have  more  than  two  volumes  out  at  once,  or

retain  any  volume  more  than  three  weeks,  without  special
permissioir  from  the  Assistant-Secretary.  In  the  case  of
Members  of  Committees  engaged  on  work  for  the  Society  i)i
which  the  books  are  needed,  this  Rule  will  be  relaxed.

3.  Associates  temporarily  in  London,  or  who  may  otherwise  wish

to  borrow  books  from  the  Library  during  a short  period,  can
do  so  on  the  following  terms  ; —

For  One  Month  ...  5s.  | For  Three  Months  ...  10s.

Should  persons  who  are  neither  Members  nor  Associates  of  the
Society  desire  to  make  use  of  the  Library,  special  facilities  will  be
granted,  in  cases  where  there  seems  to  be  sufficient  reason  for  doine;  so.

Further  Rules  will  be  added  if  occasion  arises,  but  it  is  hoped  that
Members  will  co-operate  in  taking  care  of  the  books,  and  returning
them  promptly  for  the  use  of  others.  Many  of  the  books  are  rare,  and
would  be  hard  to  replace  if  lost.

A suggestion  book  is  kept  in  the  Society’s  Rooms,  where  names  of
books  recommended  for  piu'chase  may  be  entered  by  Members  and
Associates ; or  suggestions  may  be  sent  in  writing  to  the  Assistant-
Secretary.  Any  such  recommendations  will  be  carefully  considered  by
the  Library  Committee.

A large  proportion  of  the  existing  books  have  been  acquired  by  gift.
The  books  purchased  with  the  Society’s  funds  have  been,  for  the  most
part,  of  a distinctly  scientific  character.

The  Council  take  this  opportunity  of  expressing  their  thanks  to
the  numerous  donors  of  books  to  the  Library  for  their  acceptable
presents.


List  of  Memhers  and  Associates,


475


VII.

LIST  OF  MEMBERS  AND  ASSOCIATES.

(December,  1885.)


PRESIDENT.

Professor  Balfour  Stewart,  F.R.S.,  The  Owens  College,  Manchester.

VICE-PRESIDENTS.

Arthur  J.  Balfour,  Esq.,  M.P.,  4,  Carlton-gardens,  S.W.

Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  Royal  College  of  Science,  Dublin.

The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  Carlisle,  Rose  Castle,  Carlisle.

John  R.  Hollond,  Esq.,  57,  Lancaster-gate,  London,  W.

Richard  H.  Hutton,  Esq. , Englefield  Green,  Staines.

Rev.  W.  Stainton  Moses,  21,  Birchington-road,  London,  N.W.

Hon.  Roden  Noel,  57,  Anerley  Park,  London,  S.E.

Lord  Rayleigh,  D.C.L.,  F.R.S.,  Terling  Place,  Withani,  Essex.

The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of  Ripon,  The  Palace,  Ripon.
Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  "

W.  H.  Stone,  Esq.,  M.B.,  14,  Dean’s-yard,  Westminster,  S.W.
Hensleigh  Wedgwood,  Esq.,  31,  Queen  Ann  e-street,  London,  W.

HONORARY  MEMBERS.  '

Professor  J.  C,  Adams,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.,  The  Observatory,  Cambridge.'
William  Crookes,  F.R.S.,  7,  Kensington  Park-gardens,  London,  W.
The  Right  Hon.  W.  E.  Gladstone,  M.P.,  Hawarden,  North  Wales.
John  Ruskin,  LL.D.,  D.C.L.,  Brantv/ood,  Coniston,  Lancashire.

Lord  Tennyson,  Farringford,  Freshwater,  Isle  of  Wight.

Alfred  Russel  Wallace,  F.R.G.S.,  Nutwood  Cottage,  Frith  Hill,
Godaiming.

G.  F.  Watts,  R.A.,  Little  Holland  House,  London,  W.

CORRESPONDING  MEMBERS.

Professor  Berniieim,  Hopital  Civil,  Nancy.

Professor  Boutlerof,  The  University,  St.  Petersburg.

Professor  H.  P.  Bowditcii,  M.D.,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Boston,
U.S.A.  '

Theodore  Bruiins,  Simferopol,  R-ussia.

Professor  Nicholas  Murray  Butler,  Columbia  College,  New
York,  U.S.A.  .

The  Chevalier  Sebastiano  Fenzi,  Florence.

Dr.  FERf),  Hopital  de  la  Salpetriere,  Paris.  ' .

2 H 2


476  List  of  Members  and  Associates.

Pkofessor  G.  S.  Fullerton,  Pennsylvania  University,  Philadelphia,

U.S.A.

Professor  Stanley  Hall,  Johns  Hopkins  University,  Baltimore,
U.S.A.

Professor  W.  James,  Harvard  University,  Cambridge,  U.S.A.

Dr.  Lieueault,  A.  A.,  Nancy.

Professor  E.  0.  Pickering,  The  Observatory,  Cambridge,  U.S.A,

Dr.  Charles  Riciiet,  15,  Rue  de  I’Universite,  Paris.

Rev.  R.  Wuittinguam,  Pikesville,  Maryland,  U.S.A

MEMBERS.

Aksakof,  Hon.  Alexander  D.,  6,  Nevsky  Prospect,  St.  Petersburg,
Allen,  Walter  W.,  Topeka,  Kansas,  U.S.A.

Ahgles,  Miss  Edith  M.,  Lady  Margaret  Hall,  Oxford.

Ashburton,  The  Lady,  Kent  House,  Knightsbridge,  London,  S.W.
Baillie,  Edmund  J.,  F.L.S.,  Woodbine,  Eaton-road,  Cheater.

Balfour,  Arthur  J.,  M.P.,  4,  Carlton-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Balfour,  G.  W.,  M.P.,  32,  Acldison-road,  London,  W.

Balfour,  Miss,  4,  Carlton-gard«ns,  London,  S.W.

Balliston,  W.  H.  T.,  5,  Sutherland-avenue,  Maida  Hill,  London,  W,
BASiTFYLDE,  Hon.  Mrs.,  144,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.

Barber,  Mrs.  J.  AV.,  Ferndene,  Abbeydale,  near  Sheffield.

Barrett,  Professor  AV.  F.,  F.R.S.E.,  &c.,  6,  De  Vesci-terrace,  Kings-
town, Co.  Dublin.

Barrett,  Mrs.,  30,  Courtfield-gaidens,  South  Kensington,  London,  S.AY.
Barrington,  Hon.  Eric,  62,  Cadogan-place,  London,  S.AV.

Baynes,  Robert  Edward,  M.A.,  Christ  Church,  Oxford.

Beatty,  Octavius,  14,  Beaumont-street,  Oxford.

Beaumont,  Captain  Alexander  S.,  South  Norwood-park,  London,  S.E.
Benham,  Robert  Fitzroy,  M.R.C.S.,  Abercoen  House,  Baron’s  Court,
London,  S.W.

Bennett,  Edward  T.,  27,  Church-road,  Richmond,  near  London.
Bentall,  F.  ay.,  Holloway-road,  Heybridge,  Maldon,  Essex.
Beveridge,  Erskine,  St.  Leonard’s  Hill,  Dunfermline.

Bidder,  G.  P.,  Q.C.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey.

Bidder,  Mrs.  G.,  Ravensbury  Park,  Mitcham,  Surrey.

Biddell,  Sidney,  32,  The  Grove,  Boltons,  London,  S.AY.

Blaquiere,  Mrs.  Charles  de,  1,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  W.
Bodmer,  J.  J.,  44,  Aberdeen  Park-road,  London,  N.

Bridson,  Joseph  Ridgway,  Belle  Isle,  AV^indermere.

Browning,  Oscar,  M.A.,  King’s  College,  Cambridge,

Bryce,  J.  P,  J.P.,  Bystock,  near  Exmouth,  Devon.

Budden,  Edw'ard  Russell,  Eversley  Lodge,  Ealing  Common,  W.
Bugby,  William,  HiUsboro,  South  Beddington,  Carshalton,  Surrey.


Lid  of  Members  and  Associates


477


Bundy,  Colonel  John  C.,  Chicago,  U.S.A.

Bushby,  Henry  North  Grant,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Bushell,  Rev.  W.  D.,  M.A.,  Harrow-on-the-Hill,  near  London.
Butler,  Edward,  2,  Hatlierley-road,  Ivew  Gardens,  S.W.

Caithness,  The  Countess  of,  Duchesse  de  Pomar,  51,  Rue  dt
rUniversite,  Paris.

Calder,  Alexander,  1,  Hereford-square,  South  Kensington,  London,
S.W.

Carpenter,  Major  Geo.  W.  Wallace,  28,  Ashley-place,  Yictoria-
street,  London,  S.W.

Castle,  Robert,  9,  Canterbury-road,  Oxford.

Chase,  Lieutenant  W.  S.  L.,  Y.C.,  D.A.Q.M.-General,  Quetta
District,  Beluchistan.

Chiltoff,  a.,  M.D.,  University  of  Kharkoff,  Russia.

Close,  Charles  Arthur,  M.A.,  B.C.L.,  30,  St.  James’-square,  London,
S.W.

Close,  Rev.  Maxwell  H.,  M.A.,  University  Club,  Dublin.

Coffin,  Walter  H,  P.L. S.,  94,  Coniwall-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Colchester,  W.  P.,  Ellershouse,  Nova  Scotia.

Coventon,  Charles  H.,  Morwenstow,  Enfield,  Middlesex.

Orawshay,  Robert,  16,  Berkeley-square,  London,  W.

CuFFE,  Hon.  O.  Frederick  Seymour,  2,  Ted  worth-square,  Chelsea,  S.W
Dakyns,  Henry  Graham,  M.A.,  3,  Upper  Belgrave-road,  Clifton
Bristol.

Dashwood,  Alfred,  Roseville,  Ryde,  Isle  of  Wight.

Dawe,  N.  Eabyan,  Old  Grove  House,  Hampstead  Heath,  London,  N.  W.
De  Grey,  The  Countess,  1,  Carlton-gardens,  London,  S.W.

Delmar,  E.,  17,  St.  Petersburgh-place,  Bayswater,  London,  W.

Dobbie,  a.  W.,  Gawler-place,  Adelaide,  Australia.

Dodgson,  Rev.  Charles  Lutwidge,  M.A.,  Christ  Church,  Oxford.
Downing,  Charles,  Trevethan,  Brentwood,  Essex.

Drayson,  Major-General,  R.A.,  Royal  Albert  Yacht  Club,  Southsea.
Elder,  Frederick,  Campden  House,  Kensington,  London,  W.

Elder,  Miss  M.  C.,  Campden  House,  Kensington,  London,  W.

Elvey,  Miss  Mary  M.,  Finborough-road,West  Brompton, London,  S.W.
Elwyn,  Rev.  Canon,  Master’s  Lodge,  Charterhouse,  London,  E.C.

Eno,  J.  C.,  Wood  Hall,  Dulwich,  London,  S.E.

Finch,  Gerard  Brown,  M.A.,  1,  St.  Peter’s-terrace,  Cambridge.
Florence,  Ernest  B.,  33,  Redcliffe-square,  South  Kensington,

London,  S.\Y.

Flower,  Mrs.  Cyril,  Aston  Clinton,  Tring.

Ford,  Mrs.  Lawson,  Adel  Grange,  Leeds.

Fountain,  Alfred,  Highfield,  Hillingdon,  Uxbridge,  Middlesex.

Fox,  St.  George  Lane,  Garden  Mansions,  Queen  Anne’s-gate,  London,

S.W.


473.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Fry,  Lewis  George,  Goldney  House,  Clifton,  Bristol.

Gardner,  Herbert,  46,  Dover-street,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.

Garrett,  Miss  Agnes,  2,  Gower-street,  London,  W.O.

Gary,  Baron  Raymond  de,  17,  Rue  d’Anjou  St.  Honore,  Paris.

Gatty,  Alfred  Scott,  71,  Warwdck-road,  London,  S.W.

Geiler,  Mrs.  Hermann,  Warton-street,  Lytham.

Cell,  Philip  Lyttelton,  M.A.,  Balliol  College,  Oxford.

Glinka,  Mademoiselle  de,  1,  Rue  Lincoln,  Champs  Elysees,  Paris.
Goodiiart,  Rev.  Charles  A.,  M.A.,  St.  Barnabas  Vicarage,  Sheffield.
Gordon,  Robert,  M.  Inst.  C.E.,  74,  Elgin-crescent,  Hotting  Hill,
London,  W.

Graham,  Alexander,  9,  Gray’s  Inn-square,  London,  W.O.

Grant,  Thomas,  Shiidey  House,  Maidstone.

Greig,  Rev.  David,  M.A.,  Addington  Rectory,  Winslow.

Griffin,  Francis  Charles,  1,  Kensington  Palace-gardens,  London,  W.
Grubbe,  Hubert  H.,  29,  Holland-park,  London,  W.

Gurney,  Edmund,  M.A.,  26,  Montpelier-square,  London,  S.W.

Gurney,  Rev.  Alfred,  M.A.,  St.  Barnabas  Parsonage,  Pimlico,  London,
S.W.

Gurney,  Mrs.  Russell,  3,  Orme-square,  London,  W.

Guthrie,  Malcolm,  J.P.,  2,  Parkfield-road,  Liverpool.

Haddington,  The  Countess  of,  Tyninghame,  Prestonkirk,  N.B.
Hamilton,  Miss,  47,  Albert-hill  Mansions,  Kensington  Gore,  London,

S.W.

Hargreaves,T.  Sidney,  2 1 8,  Golborne-road,  North  Kensington,  London,  W.
Harrison,  William,  The  Horsehills,  Wolverhampton.

Hartley,  Lieut.-Col.  J.,  LL.D.,  D.L.,  The  Old  Downs,  Hartley,  near
Fawkham,  vid  Hartford.

Haugiiton,  G.  D.,  High  View,  Bevois  Hill,  Southampton.
Henniker-Major,  The  Hon.  Mary,  6,  Grafton-street,  London,  W.
Hennings,  Mrs.  Mara',  Sunninghill,  78,  Thicket-road,  An&rley,  S.E.
Heron- Allen,  Edward,  Constitutional  Club,  London,  S.W.
Herringiiam,  Mrs.,  22,  Bedford -square,  London,  W.C.

Hibbs,  Reginald  R.,  13,  St.  Lawrence-road,  North  Kensington,
London,  W.

Hodgson,  Richard,  B.A.,  St.  John’s  College,  Cambridge.

Hogg,  Miss  A.  M.  M.,  Berry  Head  House,  Brixhara.

Hogg,  Henry  R.,  M.A.,  Melbourne  Club,  Melbourne,  Australia.

Hogg,  Jonathan,  Stratford,  Rathgar,  Co.  Dublin.

Holland,  Sydney  G.,  21,  Queen-street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.

Hollond,  John  R.,  57,  Lancaster-gate,  London,  W.

Holt,  H.  Siierwtn,  Ogbeare  Hall,  Holsworthy,  Devon.

Hood,  H.  J.,  M.A.,  115,  St.  George’s-road,  London,  S.W.

IIoPKiNSON,  Professor  Alfred,  M.A.,  B.O.L.,  The  Owens  College,
Manchester.


List  of  Memhers  and  Associates.


479


Horsfall,  Charles  Edward,  Grassendale  Priory,  Liverpool.

Hughes,  Frank  Septimus,  11,  Staples  Inn,  London,  E.O.

Hughes,  Captain  Henry  Morgan,  F.R.G.S.,  Brooklyn,  Wilbury-road,
Hove,  Sussex.

Hume,  A.  O.,  Simla,  India.

I’Anson,  W.  a.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Westgate  Hill  House,  Newcastle-
on- Tyne.

Irving,  Dr.  Lewis  A.,  Government  House,  Ganesh  Khind,  Bombay.
James,  Arthur  Gwynne,  LL.B.,  2,  Temple-gardens,  London,  E.C.
Jameson,  F.,  6,  Westbourne  Park-villas,  London,  W.

Jameson,  Miss,  Glencormac,  Bray,  Ireland.

Jebb,  Major  J.  de  Witt,  Junior  United  Service  Club,  London,  W.
Jebb,  J.  Gladwyn,  11,  Chester-place,  Hyde  Park-square,  London,  W.
Jeune,  Mrs.,  37,  Wimpole-street,  London,  W.

Joyce,  Samuel,  Junr.,  European  Telegraph  Works,  Pownall-road,
Dalston,  London,  E.

Kay,  H.  a.,  13,  Mai  da  Yale,  London,  W.

Keigiitley,  Bertram,  B.A.,  30,  Linden-gardens,  London,  W.

Kelso,  Commander,  R.N.,  96,  Hyde  Park-square,  London,  W.

Klmber,  Mrs.,  3,  Roland-gardens,  South  Kensington,  London,  S.W.
Kirwan,  j.  j..  Reform  Club,  London,  W.

Lafone,  Alfred  William,  Hatton,  Bedfont,  Middlesex.

Lafone,  Harold,  B.  A , Hanworth  Park,  Feltham,  Middlesex.
Lamplugii,  Rev.  David,  M.A.,  Yalding  Vicarage,  Maidstone.

Latham,  Mrs.  P.  W.,  17,  Trumpington-street,  Cambridge.

Laurie,  Reginald  Northall,  4,  Queen  Anne’s-gate,  Westminster,  S.W,
Leaf,  AValter,  M.A.,  Old  Change,  London,  E.C.

Leonard,  Arthur  G.,  M.A.,  44,  Highbury-hill,  London,  N.
Leycester,  Mrs.,  6,  Cheyne-walk,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.

Leyson,  Miss  Kate,  Penscynnor,  Neath,  South  Wales.

Lincoln,  The  Very  Rev.  the  Dean  of.  The  Deanery,  Lincoln.
Longstaff,  George  Blundell,  M.A.,  M.B.  (Oxon.),  Southfield  Grange
Woodhill-road,  Wandsworth,  S.W.

MacAlister,  John  Y.  W.,  Leeds  Library,  Leeds.

MacColl,  Rev.  Canon  Malcolm,  M.A.,  1,  New  Burlington-street,
London,  W.

Manders,  H.,  F.R.C.S.,  Agincourt  House,  Yorktown,  Farnborough
Station,  Hants.

IMarsiiall,  Mrs.  Edgar,  care  of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Glover,  Alderton
Vicarage,  near  Chippenham.

Marshall,  John  William,  M.A.,  The  Holt,  Godaiming.

Massey,  Charles  C.,  1,  Albert  Mansions,  Victoria-street,  London,  S.AV.
Matthews,  Frank  Herbert,  B.A.,  King’s  School,  Canterbury.

Miles,  Frank,  26,  Tite-street,  Chelsea,  London,  S.AV.

Money,  Colonel  Gerard  Noel,  C.B.,  F.R.G.S.,  Vigo  House,  Wey bridge.


480


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Montefiore,  F.,  4,  Great  Stanhope-street,  London,  W.
Money-Coutts,  Francis  Burdett,  Ancote,  Weybridge.

Morell,  J.  D.,  LL.D.,  Clevelands,  Fitzjohn’s-a venue,  London,  N.W.
Moses,  Rev.  W.  Stainton,  M.A.,  21,  Bircliington-road,  London,  N.W.
Mount-Temple,  The  Lady,  Broadlands,  Romsey,  Hants.

Muieiiead,  Henry,  M.D.,  M.A.,  Bushy  Hill,  Cambuslang,  Glas-
gow, N.B.

Murray- Aynsley,  Mrs.,  Great  Brampton,  near  Hereford.

Myers,  Frederic  W.  H.,  M.A.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
Myers,  A.  T.,  M.D.,  9,  Lower  Berkeley-street,  Portman-square,
London,  W.

Newniiam,  Rev.  P.  H.,  Maker  Vicarage,  Devonport.

Pagan,  Miss  C.,  Marston  Lodge,  Harrow-on-the-Hill,  near  London.
Page,  A.  C.,  M.D.,  Truro,  Nova  Scotia.

Paice,  Wm.,  M.A.,  28,  Caversham-road,  London,  N.W,

Parker,  Hon.  Mrs.,  60,  Elm  Park -gardens,  London,  S.W,

Parker,  Edward  W.,  Little  Rock,  Arkansas,  U.S.A.

Pasciikoff,  a..  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Paynter,  William,  Bute  Chambers,  Cardiff.

Pease,  Edward  R.,  17,  Osnaburgh-street,  Regent’s  Park,  London,  N.W.
Percival,  Francis  W.,  M.  A.,  F.S.A.,  36,  Bryanston-street,  London,  W.
Pilcher,  Giles  Theodore,  33,  Nottingham-place,  London,  W.
Pilcher,  R.  H.,  East  India  United  Service  Club,  14,  St.  James’s-
street,  London,  S.W.

Podmore,  Frank,  M.A.,  14,  Dean’s-yard,  Westminster,  S.W.

Portal,  Spencer,  Malshanger,  Basingstoke.

Porter,  Miss,  16,  Russell-square,  London,  W.O.

Porter,  Miss  A.,  47,  Brompton-square,  South  Kensington,  London,S.W.
Powys,  Hon.  Mrs.  Fox,  11,  George-street,  Hanover-square,  London,  W.
Pratt,  Thomas,  Camden  House,  Lower  Merton,  Surrey.

Prim,  Jose,  188,  Gresham  House,  Old  Broad-street,  London,  E.C.
Prower,  Nelson,  M.A.,  12,  Cambridge-terrace,  Hyde  Park,  Lon-
don, W.

PuRDON,  John  E.,  M.B.,  Surgeon-Major,  Valley  Head,  Alabama,  US. A.
Pye,  William  A.,  24,  Daleham-gardens,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.
Rayleigh,  Clara,  Lady,  90,  Onslow-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Rensselaer,  Mrs.  P.  L.  Van,  14,  Beacon-street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Ridley,  Henry  N.,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  20,  Portsea-place,  Oonnaught-square,
London,  W.

Robertson,  C.  Lockhart,  M.D.,  Grand  Avenue  Mansions,  West
Brighton.

Rodd,  Rennell,  B.A.,  Foreign  Office,  London,  S.W.

Rogers,  E.  Dawson,  Rose  Villa,  Church  End,  Finchley,  N.

Rogers,  Rev.  Edward  H.,  M.A.,  Vicarage,  Thames  Ditton,  Kingston-
on-Thames.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


481


Rogers,  George  Frederick,  Caius  College,  Cambridge.

Rogerson,  George  Russell,  F.R.A.S.,  F.R.G.S.,  Calderstone-road,
Allerton,  Liverpool.

Russell,  The  Earl,  Ferislitah,  Hampton,  Middlesex.

Russell,  John,  B.A.,  Fern  Cottage,  Eastleigh,  Southampton.

Rylands,  Thomas  Glazebrook,  F.L.S.,  F.G.S.,  Highfields,  Thelwall,
near  Warrington.

Salt,  Titus,  J.P.,  Milner  Field,  Bingley,  Yorkshire.

Saunders,  Latimer  Henry,  St.  Helen’s,  near  Ryde,  Isle  of  Wight.
Schuster,  Professor  Arthur,  Ph.D.,  F.R.S.,  The  Owens  College,
Manchester.

Scott,  Sydney  C.,  Hatherleigh,  28, The  Avenue,  Gipsy  Hill,  London,S.E.
Sennett,  Alfred  R.,  M.S.T.E.,  62,  Hatton-garden,  London,  E.G.
Sidgwick,  Professor  Henry,  Hill  Side,  Chesterton-road,  Cambridge.
SiDGWicK,  Mrs.  H.,  Hill  Side,  Chesterton-road,  Cambridge.

Sidgwick,  Arthur,  ]\LA.,  77,  Woodstock-road,  Oxford.

Singleton,  Mrs.,  8,  Prince’s-gate,  London,  S.W.

Smith,  Henry  Arthur,  1,  New-square,  Lincoln’s  Inn,  London,  W.G.
Smith,  Martin  Ridley,  13,  Upper  Belgrave-street,  London,  S.W.
Smith,  R.  Pearsall,  4653,  Germantown-avenue,  Philadelphia,  U.S.A.
Smith,  Mrs.  Sidney,  7,  The  Terrace,  Barnes,  S.W.

SOLOVIOFF,  WsEVOLOD,  chez  Mine,  de  Morsier,  71,  Rue  Claude  Bernard,
Paris.

Speer,  Stanhope  Templeman,  M.D.,  13,  Alexandra-road,  South
Hampstead,  London,  N.W.

Stack,  J.  Herbert,  30,  Kensington  Park-gardens,  London,  W.
Stapelton,  Josiah  G.,  47,  Lee-terrace,  Lewisham,  S.E.

Stearn,  H.  T.,  M.A.,  King’s  College,  Cambridge.

Stewart,  Professor  Balfour,  M.A.,  F.Pt.S.,  The  Owens  College,
Manchester.

Stock,  St.  George,  8,  Museum-villas,  Oxford.

Stone,  William  Henry,  M.A.,  M.B.  (Oxon.),  ikc.,  14,  Dean’s-yard,
Westminster,  S.W.

Stopford,  Francis  James,  Junior  Army  and  Kavy  Club,  St.  James’s-
street,  London,  S.W.

Sturgeon,  Wentworth,  10,  Park-road,  Regent’s  Park,  London,  N.W.
Sturgis,  Julian,  M.A.,2,  Gloucester-p)ace,Portman-square,  London,  W.
Surtees,  William  Edward,  Tainfield,  near  Taunton.

Swan,  Joseph  Wilson,  Lauriston,  Bromley,  Kent.

Tattersall,  Robert  W.,  31,  New  Inn  Hall-street,  Oxford.

Taylor,  Rev.  Charles  J.,  M.A.,  Toppesfield  Rectory,  Halstead,  Essex.
Taylor,  Miss  Edith,  9,  Endsleigh-gardens,  London,  N.W.

Taylor,  Major  G.  L.  Le  M.,  Royal  Military  College,  Farnborough
Station,  Hants.

Tebb,  Mrs.,  7,  Albert-road,  Gloucester-gate,  Regent’s  Park, London,  N.W.


482


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Teetgen, William,  Lea  View,  Mount  Pleasant-lane,  Upper  Clapton,  N,
Theobald,  Morell,  62,  Granville-park,  Blackheath,  S.E.

Thomson,  Professor  Joseph  John,  M.A.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Thornton,  Rev.  R.,  D.D.,  St.  John’s  Vicarage,  Netting  Hill,  London, W..
Thorpe,  Mrs.  Mary,  Lenton  House,  Lenton,  Nottingham.

Tidman,  Paul  Frederick,  Chislehurst,  Kent.

Tod,  Alexander,  St.  Mary’s  Mount,  Peebles,  N.B.

Topham,  Lieut.-Col.  Sir  William,  Noirmont,  Weybridge,  Surrey.
Travers,  John  Amory,  St.  Ives  House,  Ringwood,  Hants.

Tulloch,  Conrad,  Lin  wood,  Erith,  Kent.

Vane,  Francis  P.  F.,  Isthmian  Club,  12,  Craff: on-street,  London,  W»
Vicars,  Ceorge  Rayleigh,  B.xA,  Woodville  House,  Rugby.

Wallace,  Shepherd,  B.A.,  Friars  School,  Bangor,  North  Wales.
Walrond,  E.  D.,  B.A.,  Hillingdon,  Uxbridge,  Middlesex.

Warrender,  Miss,  Bruntisfield  House,  Edinburgh.

Webb,  Godfrey,  36,  Hans-place,  London,  S.W.

Webb,  Matthew  W.,  45,  Steimdale-road,  AVest  Kensington  Park,
London,  W.

Wedgwood,  Hensleigh,  M.A.,  31,  Queen  Anne-street,  London,  W,
Welldon,  Rev.  J.  E.  C.,  M.A.,  Harrow-on-the-Hill,  Middlesex.
Wemyss,  Mrs.  M.  Erskine,  The  Clock  House,  Chelsea  Embankment,
London,  S.W.

WiiisiiAW,  Bernhard,  B.A.,  70,  Great  Prescot-street,  London,  E.
AA^iiishaw,  Mrs.  Bernhard,  70,  Great  Prescot-street,  London,  E.
White,  Harold  Holden,  96,  Queen’s-gate,  London,  S.W.

AViiitear,  Rev.  W.,  B.A.,  4,  The  Bank,  Crouch  Hill,  Hornsey,
London,  N.

AVild,  Charles,  Jesus  College,  Cambridge.

AA^illmott,  Miss  R.,  AVarley  Place,  Great  AA^arley,  Essex.

AA^ilson,  Charles  M.,  Ptose  Villa,  North  Strand,  Limerick.

AVingfield,  Mrs.,  The  Redings,  Totteridge,  Herts.

AVoodhouse,  C.  H.,  Heath  Bank,  Bolton.

Wilson,  David  H.,  M.A.,  Rosemont,  Hyeres,  France.

AA^incii,  AVilliam  Richard,  4,  Fenchurch-street,  London,  E.C.

Wyld,  George,  M.D.,  41,  Oourttield-road,  South  Kensington,  S.W.
AVyndham,  Hon.  Percy,  M.P.,  44,  Belgrave-square,  London,  S.AV,
Yarrow,  Thomas  A.,  Cleveland  House  School,  AAYy mouth.

Yorke,  Hon.  Alexander,  32a,  Orchard-street,  London,  W.

HONORARY  ASSOCIATES.

Beard,  Sidney  H.,  The  Chestnuts,  Torrington  Park,  North  Finchley,  N.
Birciiall,  James,  Kirkdale,  Liverpool.

Brietzcke,  Mrs.,  72,  Sterndale-road,  AAYst  Kensington  Park,
London,  AV.


List  of  Members  and  Associates,


483.


Carmichael,  Rev.  F.,  LL.D.,  Ranelagh,  Dublin.

Cheery,  Rev.  A.  M.,  B.A,,  Victoria-terrace,  Murray-street,  Highei-
Broughton,  Manchester.

Curtis,  Miss  Mary,  Laugliarne,  St.  Clears,  South  Wales.

Dougall,  J.  R.,  294,  Drumraond-street,  Montreal,  Canada.

Fryer,  PtEV.  A.  T.,  20,  Holford-square,  London,  W.C.

Grubb,  Edward,  Rye  Croft,  Fulford-road,  Scarborougli.

HAycocK,  Miss,  Exmouth,  Devon.

James,  Captain,  68,  Hereford-road,  Bayswater,  London,  W.

Jenkins,  E.  Vaughan,  Fcrndale,  Revington-road,  Oxford.

Keulemans,  J.  G.,  34,  Matilda-street,  Barnsbury,  London,  N.
Macdonald,  Rev.  J.  A.,  Epworth  Lodge,  Rhyl.

Moore,  Hon.  Mrs.  Montgomery,  Gipsy  Lodge,  Gipsy  Hill,  IJpper-
Horwood,  London,  S.E.

Morgan,  Owen,  Pontypridd,  South  Wales.

ISiisBET,  E;  T.,  135,  Horthumberland-street,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.

Saxby,  Mrs.,  Mount  Elton,  Clevedon.

Scudamore,  Mrs.,  The  Grove,  Pluckley,  Ashford,  Kent.

SuGDEN,  Rev.  E.  H.,  B.A.,  B.Sc.,  Prospect  House,  Great  Horton,.
Bradford,  Yorkshire.

WoODHULL,  Major  A.,  M.D.,  David’s  Island,  Pelham,  New  York,  U.S.  A.

ASSOCIATES.

Abercrombie,  Cavendish  D.,  Scottish  Club,  39,  Dover-street,.
London,  W.

Adams,  Mrs.,  The  Observatory,  Cambridge,

Allen,  Miss  Mary  Gray,  1,  Florence-terrace,  Londonderry.

Amy,  Miss  Annie  F.,  Cross  Bow,  Trinity,  .Jersey.

Anderson,  James  Arbutunot,  46,  War  wick-gardens,  Kensington,.
London,  W.

Arciidale,  Audley  S.,  280,  Upper  Brook-street,  Manchester.
Arkwright,  Walter  George,  Balliol  College,  Oxford.

Badelier,  Emile,  Rangoon,  British  Burmah.

Baikie,  Robert,  M.D.,  55,  Melville-street,  Edinburgh.

Bailey,  Walter,  13,  Albemarle-crescent,  Scarborough.

Ball,  W.  W.  R.,  M.A.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Balmain,  Mrs.,  Basset,  Southampton.

Barker,  Miss  Alice  R.,  Albrighton  Hall,  Wolverhampton.

Bateson,  Mrs.,  8,  Harvey-road,  Cambridge.

Bateson,  William,  St.  John’s  College,  Cambridge.

Beazley,  Lieutenant-Colonel  George  G.,  74,  Redcliffe  square,
Loudon,  S.  W.

Becket,  Miss  IVLvria,  Hotel  Vendome,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Benson,  Mrs.,  The  Palace,  Lambeth,  London,  S.W.

Beresford,  Edward  A.,  21,  Hereford-square,  London,  S.W


484


List  of  Members  and  Associates


Bevan,  Mrs.,  56,  Hans-place,  London,  S.W.

Bickford-Smith,R.  A.H.,  B.A.,13,Lydon-road,  Clapham,  London,  S.W.
Bicknell,  Rev.  Clarence,  M.A,  Villa  Rosa,  Bordighera,  Italy.
Bidder,  George  P.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Birrell,  Miss,  37,  Addison-gardens  North,  London,  W.

Boldero,  Mrs.  A.,  28,  Westbourne-gardens,  Folkestone.

Borland,  Mrs.,  53,  Broinpton-crescent,  London,  S.W.

Bonus,  Arthur  R.,  Balliol  College,  Oxford.

Bostock,  Miss  E.  A.,  Penmaen  Gower,  Swansea.

Bowden-Smith,  Mrs.,  The  Rectory,  Weston  Patrick,  Odiham,  Hants.
Bramston,  Miss  M.,  41,  Dingwall-road,  Croydon.

Brayshaw,  John  L.,  Settle,  Yorkshire.

Brett,  George,  The  College,  Weston-super  -Mare.

Brill,  Alice  B.,  M.D.,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Britten,  James,  F.L.S.,  18,  AVest-square,  Southwark,  S.E.
Brock-Arnold,  Rev.  George  M.,  M.A.,  St.  Giles’  Vicarage,  ’Well-
street,  Cripplegate,  London,  E.C.

Brown,  Mrs.,  43,  St.  Giles,  Oxford.

Brown,  Miss  Johnson,  Edgbaston  House,  Pittville,  Cheltenham.
Browne,  Edward  G.,  B.A.,  24,  Bernard-street,  Russell-square,  London,
W.C.

Bryce,  Miss,  35,  Bryan ston-square,  London,  W.

Buck,  E.  C.,  Civil  Service,  Simla,  India.

Burt,  Percival  J.,  16,  Leadenhall-street,  London,  E.O.

Burton,  Mrs.,  Longner  Hall,  Shrewsbury.

Busk,  Miss  Edith,  Sutgrove  House,  Cirencester.

Caldecott,  Rev.  Alfred,  M.A.,  St.  John’s  College,  Cambridge.
Campbell,  Miss  E.,  South  Hall,  Colintraive,  Argyllshire,  N.B.
Campbell,  James  A.,  Barbreck,  vid  Loch-Gilp-Head,  Argyll,  N.B.
Campbell,  Robert  Allen,  C.E.,  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  U.S.A.

Cannon,  Mrs.,  Hill  Cot,  Sharpies,  Bolton.

Carleton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Pigott,  Greyhill,  Winchfield.

Castelloe,  Mrs.  B.  F.  C.,  33,  Chancery-lane,  London,  AV.O.

Oaulfeild,  Miss  Sophia  F.  A.,  1,  Hyde  Park  Mansions,  London,  W.
Cazalet,  Mrs.,  Grenehurst,  Uorking.

Chandler,  Rev.  H.  C.  D.,  M.A.,  Waterbeach  Vicarage,  Cambridge.
Chowne,  Colonel  W illiam  C.,  114,  Lexham-gardens,  Kensington,
London,  W.

Chowne,  Mrs.,  114,  Lexham-gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Christopher,  H.  Carmichael,  50,  Romola-road,  Herne  Hill,  London,
S.E.

Clavequin,  Edward,  Munster  Lodge,  Monkstown,  Dublin.

Clay,  A.  Keatinge,  Anglesea,  Killiney,  Co.  Dublin,

Clemens,  S.  L.,  Hartford.  Conn.  U.S.A.


List  of  Members  and  Associates.  48

Clissold,  Edward  Mortimer,  M.A.,  United  University  Club,  Pall
Mall  East,  London,  S.W.

Cobden-Sandersox,  T.  I.,  3,  Paper-buildings,  Temple,  London,  E.O.
Cock,  Rev.  Thomas  A.,  18,  Rodney -street,  London,  N.

Collins,  Sir  Robert  H.,  K.C.B.,  Bayton  Lodge,  Claremont,  Esher,
CoLTiiURST,  Lady,  47,  Hill-street,  Berkeley-square,  London,  M'.

Colton,  C.  Gardner,  32,  Southampton-buildings,  London,  W.C.
CooKsoN,  Mrs.  Montague,  29,  Rutland-gate,  London,  S.W.

CooMBE,  Charles  Frederick,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  General  Infirmaiy,
ShefBeld.

Corbet,  Miss  Mary  E.,  Stoke  Rectory,  Hodnet,  Shropshire.

Codes,  Professor  Elliott,  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,
US.  A.

Cox,  John,  M.A.,  Cavendish  College,  Cambridge.

Craufurd,  of  Auchenames,  Mrs.,  109,  St.  George’s-square,  London,  S.W,
Crawford,  W.  C.,  1,  Lockharton-gardens,  Slateford,  Midlothian,  N.B.
Crossley,  Mrs.  Herbert,  Ferney  Green,  Windermere.

Cumin,  Mrs.,  16,  Chester-square,  London,  S.W.

Cunningham,  George,  D.M.D.  (Harvard,  U.S.A.),  Downing  College,
Cambridge.

Cunningham,  Rev.  W.,  M.A.,  2,  St.  Paul’s-road,  Cambridge.

Darley,  Mrs.,  Quambi,  Woollohra,  New  South  Wales.

Darbishire,  Samuel  D.,  M.D.,  60,  High-street,  Oxford.

Davey,  James  George,  M.D.,  4,  Redland  Park- villas,  Bristol.

Davey,  S.  John,  Alfriston,  Hayne-road,  Beckenham,  London,  S.E.
Davidson,  Miss  Florence  E.,  Devon  House,  Tunbridge-road,  Maidstone,
Davies,  William,  Bellfield,  Kingsbridge,  Devon.

Davis,  Thomas  Henry,  The  Western  and  Brazilian  Telegraph  Company,
Caixa,  453,  Rio  Janeiro,  Brazil.

Debeniiam,  Ernest  Ridlby,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Dewar,  James,  M.D.,  Drylaw  House,  Davidson’s  Mains,  Midlothian,
N.B.

Dicksee,  Frank,  A.R.A.,  108,  Peel-street,  CampdenHill,  London,  W..
Doveton,  F.  B.,  10,  Grange-gardens,  Eastbourne.

Eaden,  Mrs.,  Little  Shelford,  Cambridge.

Eady,  Mrs.,  Combe  Royal,  Kingsbridge,  South  Devon.

Edelsten,  John  A.,  Quernfield,  Latchford,  Warrington
Egerton,  Miss  Mary  L.,  Whitwell  Hall,  York.

Elliott,  Charles  Alfred,  Lismore,  St.  Leonards-on-Sea.

Elliot,  William  Scott,  Junr.,  29,  Hyde  Park-place,  London,  "W.
Everest,  Miss,  62,  Queensborough-terrace,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W,
Fagan,  Mrs.  Louisa  M.,  26,  Manchester-square,  London,  W.

Fisher,  Joseph,  Loughbrow  Park,  Hexham,  Northumberland.
FitzGerald,  Desmond  G.,  M.S.T.E.,  6,  Akerman-road,  Brixton,  S.W..


cn


486


List  of  Members  and  Associates,


Fletcher,  Rev.  W.  Roby,  M.A.,  Vice-Chancellor  of  the  University  of
Adelaide,  Australia.

Fleming,  A.,  Broxbourne,  Herts.  I

Folkestone,  The  Viscountess,  8,  Ennismore-gardens,  London,  S.W.
Ford,  Miss  Emily  S.,  27,  Albany-street,  London,  N.W.

Fowler,  James  Kingston,  M.B.,  35,  Olarges-street,  Piccadilly,
London,  W.

UiBSON,  Thomas,  Castle  Park,  Lancaster.

Gibson,  Mrs.  Sumner,  Old  Church,  Penrith,  Cumberland.

Gladstone,  Miss  Catherine  Annie,  Shedfield  Ccttage,  Botley,  Hants.
Glover,  John,  J.  T.,  124,  Stephen’s  Green,  W.,  Dublin.

Glyn,  The  Hon.  and  Rev.  E.  Carr,  The  Vicarage,  Kensington,  S.W.
Gonemys,  Le  Comte  Dr.  Nicolo,  Corfu,  Ionian  Islands.

Goodman,  Roger  N.,  B.A.,  B.  Sc.,  56,  Gore-road,  Victoria  Park,
London,  E.

Gow,  James,  M.A.,  35,  Fitzroy-square,  London,  W.

Graham,  J.  W.,  B.A.,  Oliver’s  Mount  School,  Scarborough.
Greenfield,  Miss  M.  T.  0.,  66,  Crystal  Palace-park,  Sydenham,  S.E.
Gregg,.  Mrs.,  Temple  Grafton  Court,  Alcester.

Griffith,  Robert  W.,  M.  A.,  The  Old  House,  Llandaff.

Grignon,  Rev.  William  S.,  M.A.,  The  Grove,  Pluckley,  Kent.
Gudgeon,  James,  Stowmarket.

Guinness,  Miss  Henrietta,  23,  Lower  Leeson-street,  Dublin.

Gunton,  Rev.  F,  Magdalene  College,  Cambridge.

Hackett,  James  F.,  B.A.,  71,  King  William-street,  Adelaide,  Australia.
Haddon,  Professor  Alfred  C.,  M.A.,  Royal  College  of  Science,
Stephen’s  Green,  Duldin.

Hadland,  Miss,  Milton  Mount  College,  Gravesend.

Hall,  T.  P.,  B.A.,  F.C.S.  (Eng.),  W’oodstock,  Ontario,  Canada.

H ameed-Ullaii,  M.,  Christ’s  College,  Cambridge.

Hansford,  Charles,  3,  Alexandra-terrace,  Dorchester.

Harpur,  Rev.  George,  B.A.,  Clifton  Vicarage,  Newark.

Harris,  J.  Chantrey,  New  Zealand  Times  Office,  Wellington,  New
Zealand.

Harris,  Miss,  40,  Lothrop-street,  Queen’s  Park,  Harrow-road,  Lon-
don, W.

Harrison,  Miss  Jane  E.,  45  (D),  Colville-gai'dens,  London,  W.

Hart,  S.  Lavington,  M.  A.,  St.  John’s  College,  Cambridge.

Hastings,  Miss,  3,  Ridgway-place,  AVimbledon.

Havers,  Miss,  76,  Westbourne  Park  road,  Bayswater,  London,  W.
Hawels,  Pi.EV.  R.  H.,  M.A.,  Amber  House,  St.  John’s  Wood,  London,
N.W.

Hayes,  Joseph  Walton,  1,  George’s-street,  Enniscorthy.

Heartley,  Rev.  C.  T.,  M.A.,  Cheveley  Rectory,  Newmarket.

Heaton,  James  A.,  8,  St.  Bartholomew-road,  Tufnell  Park,  London,  N


Lid  of  Members  and  Associates.


487


Hennings,  Rev.  James,  Duncombe  House,  Kingsbriclge,  Devon.

Henty,  Walter,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Club,  London,  S.W.
Herbert,  Hon.  Auberon,  M.A.,  Burley,  Ringwood,  Hants.

Hill,  Arthur  G.,  M.A.,  F.S.A.,  47,  Belsize-avenue,  London,  IST.W,
Hill,  Miss  E.  D.,  Somerdon,  Sidmouth.

Hime,  Robert  D.,  10,  Rue  Alexander  Taylor,  Pau,  France.

Hodgkin,  John  Eliot,  Child  wall,  Richmond,  Surrey.

Hoffmann,  Oskar  von,  7,  Augustus  Platz,  Leipzig.

Hogg,  Robert  W.,  B.A.,  St.  John’s  College,  Cambridge.

Holland,  Mrs.,  7,  Hyde  Park-square,  London,  W.

Hqoke,  Richard,  Kersall  Dale,  Higher  Broughton,  Manchester.

Horne,  Alderson,  46,  Russell-square,  London,  W.C.

Horner,  Andrew  L.,  B.A.,  Limavady,  Co.  Londonderry.

Howe,  Edward  R.  J.  Gambier,  7,  New-square,  Lincoln’s  Inn,  London,
W.C.

Howorth,  Henry  H.,  Derby  House,  Eccles,  near  Manchester.
Hubbe-Schleiden,  Dr.  T.  U.,  Neuhausen,  near  Munich.
loNiDES,  Constantine  A.,  80,  Holland  Villas-road,  Kensington,
London,  W.

IsHAM,  Lady,  Lamport  Hall,  Northamptonshire.

Jackson,  William  Hatchett,  M.A.,  F.L.S.,  Penwartha,  Weston-
super-Mare.

James,  Mrs.,  10,  Pelham-place,  South  Kensington,  London,  S.W.
Jeaffreson,  Rev.  H.  H.,  M.A.,  11.5,  Clifton  hill,  St.  John’s  Wood,N.W.
Jebb,  Miss  C.,  Girton  College,  Cambridge.

Jebb,  Mrs.,  The  University,  Glasgow.

Jeffreys,  Mrs.,  Glandyfi  Castle,  Glandovey,  R.S.O,

Johnson,  G.  I.,  24,  Cross-street,  Manchester.

Johnson,  Miss  Lucy,  LlandafF  House,  Cambridge.

Johnson,  William  Ernest,  B.A.,  Llandaff  House,  Cambridge.

Jones,  Miss  Constance,  Girton  College,  Cambridge.

Jordan,  Mrs.  Lutley,  22,  Lexham-gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Joyce,  T.  He.\tii,  21,  Camden-square,  London,  N.W.

Kane,  J.  G.  Auriol,  Sloperton  Lodge,  Kingstown,  Co.  Dublin.

Keene,  Rev.  James  B.,  M.A.,  The  Rectory,  Navan,  Co.  Meath.

Keep,  A.  P.  Perceval,  122,  Blackheath-hill,  London,  S.E.

Kelso,  C.  E.,  22nd  and  Gratiot-street,  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  U.S.A.

Ker,  Dr.,  Hadley  House,  Cheltenham.

Kersey,  H.  A.,  4,  Eslingtpn-terrace,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.

Knightley,  Lady,  Fawsley,  Daventry.

Lach-Szyrma,  PtEV.  W.  S.,  M.A.,  F.R.H.S.,  The  Yicarage,  Newlyn
St.  Peter,  Penzance.

Lambert,  Rev.  Brooke,  M.A.,  B.C.L.,  The  Vicarage,  Greenwich.
Lane-Poole,  Stanley,  M.R.A.S.,  Savile  Club,  London,  W.

Darken,  Rev.  E.  P.,  Gatton  Tower,  Reigate.


488


List  of  Memhvrs  and  Associates.


La  Tour,  Miss  Juliet,  Broadlands,  Romsey,  Hants.

Laycock,  Rev.  James  A.,  2,  Eton-terrace,  Harrogate.

Leaf,  Arthur  H.,  Old  Change,  London,  E.C.

Lee,  William  Arthur,  39,  The  Walk,  Tredegarville,  Cardiff.

Leigh,  W.  Austen,  M.  A.,  2,  Norfolk-crescent,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W,
Leith,  Miss  Alicia  Amy,  8,  Dorset-square,  London,  N.W.

Lewis,  Mrs.  W.  B.,  Weybridge  Heath,  Surrey.

Leymarie,  P.  G.,  5,  Rue  des  Petits  Champs,  Paris.

Limond,  Miss  Catherine,  15,  Eaton-terrace,  London,  S.W.

Lindsay,  Miss  Beatrice,  Greenfield  House,  Onchan,  Isle  of  Man.
Lloyd,  Francis,  Gi-enadier  Guards,  43,  Rutland-gate,  London,  S.W.
Lodge,  Professor  O.  J.,  D.Sc.,  University  College,  Liverpool.

Lomax,  Benjamin,  C.E.,  Free  Library  and  Museum,  Brighton.

Lowe,  Frederick  J.,  1,  Elm  Court,  Temple,  London,  E.C.

Lyttelton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Alfred,  4,  Upper  Brook-street,  London,  W.
Lyttelton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Arthur,  Selwyn  College,  Cambridge.
Macalister,  Professor,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  Strathmore  House,  5,  Harvey-
road,  Cambridge.

Mackenzie,  John,  1,  Greig-street,  Inverness,  N.B.

Mackenzie,  Miss  Minna,  Pool  House,  Pool  Ewe,  Ross-shire,  N.B.
Maguire,  Miss  F.  M.,  The  Vale,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.

Maitland,  Edward,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Club,  London,  S.W,
Marshall,  Arthur,  Weetwood  Hall,  Leeds.

Marshall,  William  Cecil,  M.A.,  1,  Torrington-street,  London,  W.C.
Marson,  Gervase,  Birk  Crag,  Great  Olowes-street,  Higher  Broughton,
Manchester.

Marten,  Miss  A.  R.,  30,  Woodland-villas,  Blackheath,  S.E.

Martin,  Mrs.  Elizabeth  G.,  42,  Rue  Gambetta,  Honfleur  (Calvados)
France.

Martin,  W.  R.,  Pine  Craig,  South  Queensferry,  Scotland.

Mathews,  George  B.,  B.A.,  9,  Menai  View-terrace,  Upper  Bangor,
North  Wales.

Max,  Professor  Gabriel,  17,  Heustrasse,  Munich.

INIetcalfe,  Captain  Henry,  Wateruliet  Arsenal,  West  Troy,  New
York,  U.S.A

INIiddleton,  Miss  Alice  Edith,  3,  Porchester-gate,  London,  W.
Miley,  M.,  B.A.,  21,  Bel  size-avenue,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.
INIillar,  Alexander,  Airdrie  House,  19,  Orlando-road,  Clapham,
London,  S.W.

IVIiLLER,  Robert,  6,  Ohester-street,  Edinburgh.

INIiller,  Mrs.  William  Pitt,  Marlewood,  Grange-over-Sands,  Lancashire.
Milnes,  George  Hutchinson,  M.R.O.S.,  L.R.O.P.,  Downing  College,
Cambridge.

Minot,  Dr.  Charles  Sedgwick,  25,  Mount  Vernou-st  -eet,  Boston,  U.S.A.
Moleswortii,  Guilford  L.,  Simla,  India.


List  of  2Icinhcrs  and  Associates.


489


Moore,  ^Ia.tor-Gexeral  Montgomery,  Gipsy  Lodge,  Gipsy  Hill,  Upper
Xorwood,  London,  S.E.

iMoRRis,  Miss  E.,  13,  Park-street,  Park-lane,  London,  W.

Mortlock,  Rev.  E.,  M.A.,  Snailwell  Rectory,  Xewinarket.

Moule,  John,  Codicote,  Welwyn,  Herts.

Mullan,  Rev.  David,  B.A.,  Kingstown,  Co.  Dublin.

Murray’,  R.  Milne,  M.A.,  M.B.,  M.Pc.O.P.  (Edin.),  10,  Hope-street,
Edinburgh.

IMusk,  Miss  Agnes,  Market-place,  Mildenhall,  Suffolk.

31y’ers,  3Irs.,  Brandon  House,  Cheltenham.

31yers,  31rs.  F.  W.  H.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.

3Iylne,  3Irs.,  22,  Gloucester-place,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Xeate,  Percy’  John,  E.G.S.,  3I.M.E.,  Medway  Iron  Works,  Rochester.
Xevill,  The  Lady  Dorothy,  45,  Charles-street,  Berkeley-square,
London,  W.

Xeville,  Francis  Henry’,  31. A.,  Sidney  Sussex  College,  Cambridge.
Newton,  Richard  Heber,  Garden  City,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Nichols,  3Iiss  Irene,  Lawford  Plall,  3Ianningtree.

Nicholson,  Sir  Charles,  Bart.,  D.O.L.,  LL.D.,  JJ.D.,  The  Grange,
Totteridge,  Herts.

Ni.xon,  Brinsley’,  Westward  Ho,  North  Devon.

Noel,  Hon.  Roden,  57,  Anerley  Park,  London,  S.E.

Norway,  Arthur  H.,  Secretary’s  Office,  GeneralPost  Office,  London, E.C.
Parker,  Keny’xYN  C.  S.,  13,  Old-squarc,  Lincoln’s  Inn,  London,  3V.C.
Passingham,  3Irs.,  hlilton,  Cambridge.

Patterson,  3Irs.  Jane,  23,  Brompton-square,  London,  S.AV.

Peard,  iliss  Frances  3Iary’,  Sparnon,  Torquay.

Perry,  Edwin  0.,  31. A.,  2,  Harcourt-buildings,  Inner  Temple,  E.C.
PiiEAR,  Rev.  Dr.,  Emmanuel  College  Lodge,  Cambridge.

Phillipps,  Alfred  3Iarch,  Hitcham  Hall,  Ipswich.

PoDMORE,  Austin,  14,  Dean’s-yard,  MYstminster,  S.W.

PoDMORE,  Rev.  Thompson,  3I.A.,  The  College,  Eastbourne.

Pope,  George  H.,  31.  A.,  B.O.L.,  14,  The  Ax’enue,  Clifton,  Bristol.
Postgate,  Professor  J.  P.,  31.  A.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
Powell,  George  Thompson,  Rotherwood,  Sydenham  Hill,  S.E.
Praed,  3Irs.  Campbell,  16,  Talbot-square,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Prothero,  3Irs.,  Trumpington-street,  Cambridge.

Randolph,  Edmund,  34,  Upper  Brook-street,  Park-lane,  London,  W.
R.vniDONNELL,  The  Dowager  Lady,  Drumcar,  Dunleer,  Co.  Louth.
Rawson,  Henry  G.,  Toynbee  Hall,  28,  Conimercial-sti-eet,  London,  E.
Richardson,  3Iiss  C.,  3Ioyallen  House,  Gilford,  Co.  Down.

Ricketts,  Captain  C.,  Hawthorn  Bank,  Westbury  Park,  Bristol.
Ridley’,  3Iiss,  19,  Belsize  Park,  London,  N.3V.

Robin,  Percy  A.,  B.A.,  George-street,  Parkside,  Adelaide,  Australia.

2 I


490


List  of  Members  and  Associates,


Robins,  Mrs.  Elizabeth,  8,  Marlborough-road,  St.  John’s  Wood,
London,  N.W.

Rolleston,  Thomas  W.,  Fairview,  Delgany,  Co.  Wicklow,

Ross,  Joseph  Carne,  M.D.,  Shian,  Penzance.

Roxburgh,  Robert,  M.B.,  F.R.C.S.E.,  1,  Victoria-buildings,  Weston-
supei'-Mare.

Sampson,  Colonel  Dudley,  Buxshalls,  Lindfield,  Haywards  Heath,
Sussex.

Sampson,  Mrs.  Dudley,  Buxshalls,  Lindfield,  Haywards  Heath,  Sussex
Sandars,  Miss,  Lower  Soughton,  Northop,  Flintshire.

Sawyer,  Miss  Eliza  A.,  2.5,  Lansdowne-crescent,  Cheltenham.
Sawyer,  R.  D.,  7,  Avenue  Gourgand,  Paris.

Schiller,  F.  C.  S.,  Balliol  College,  Oxford.

Schindler,  Miss  Martina,  New-street,  Breda,  Holland.

Scholefield,  Rev.  C.  C.,  M.A.,  Eton  College,  Windsor.

Sellin,  Professor  C.  W.,  59,  Borgfclde,  Mittelweg,  Hamburg.
Seymour,  Captain  Edward  H.,  Pt.N'.,  United  Service  Club,  Pall  Mall,
London,  S.W.

Shadwell,  Miss  Blanche,  21,  Hottingham-place,  London,  W.

Sharpe,  Mrs.  Reginald,  11,  Victoria-road,  Kensington,  London,  W..
Shoobridge,  Leonard  K.  H.,  Albury  House,  Ware,  Herts.
Sidebotham,  Edward  J.,  4,  South -square,  Gray’s  Inn,  London,  W.C.
SiDGWiCK,  Mrs.  Edward,  29,  Gloucester-square,  London,  W.

Simpson,  Reginald  Wynne,  B.A.,  14,  Cornwall-gardens,  London,  S.W,
SiNKissoN,  Mrs.  E.  J.,  9,  St.  Stephen’s-road,  Westbourne  Park,
London,  W.

Skene,  Miss  F.  M.  F.,  13,  New  Inn  Hall-street,  Oxford.

Smith,  Rev.  Canon,  M.A.,  Grange-over-Sands,  Carnforth.

Smith,  Andrew,  Lanark,  N.B.

Smith,  Francis  Nicholas,  J.P.,  B.A.,  11,  Wilton-crescent,  Belgrave-
square,  London,  S.W.

Smith,  H.  B.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Smith,  Mrs.  Martin,  11, Wilton-crescent,  Bel grave-square,  London,  S.W.
Smith,  E,ev.  Canon  R.  Travers,  B.D.,  Vicarage,  Clyde-road,  Dublin.
Smith,  Mrs.  J.  Grant,  25,  Leins ter-gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.
Smith,  Mrs.  Richard,  174,  Crora well-road,  London,  S.W.

Smyth,  Miss  M.  G.  Maidstone,  49,  Linden-gardens,  London,  W.
SoLLAS,  Professor  W.  J.,  M.  A., F.R.S.E.,F.G.S.,TrinityCollege, Dublin.
Southward,  Rev.  W.  T.,  M.A.,  St.  Catherine’s  College,  Cambridge.
Spencer,  Miss  Georgiana  M.,  25,  York-street,  Portman-square,
London,  W.

Stanley,  Miss  Sara,  16,  Marlborough-place,  Hamilton-terrace,
London,  N.W.

Stephen,  O.  Leslie,  4,  Collingham-place,  Crom well-road,  London,  S.W.
Stepney,  Hon.  Lady,  3,  Chesham-street,  London,  S.W.


Lid  of  2£emhers  and  Associates.


491


Stevenson,  Arthur  G.,  Westoe,  Soutli  Sliields.

Stewart,  David,  Kincaid  House,  Milton  of  Campsie,  N.B.

Stillman,  W.  J.,  3,  Challoner-street,  Baron’s  Court,  West  Kensington,
London,  W.

Stone,  Miss  Edith  L.,  Shute  Hay,  Walditch,  Bridport.

Stout,  George  F.,  B.A.,  St.  John’s  College,  Cambridge.

Symonds,  John  Addington,  M.A.,  Davos-Platz,  Switzerland.
Tattersall,  James  Granville,  Hanover-square  Club,  London,  W.
Taunton,  Mrs.  B.  H.,  Brook  Vale,  Witton,  near  Birmingham.
Taylor,  I.  O.  Howard,  Pine  Banks  Tower,  Thorpe,  Norwich.
Taylor,  Miss  Marian,  Ayton  House,  Great  Ayton,  Yorkshire.
Templeton,  J.  Murray,  1,  Park-circus,  Glasgow.

Tennant,  Mrs,,  2,  Bichmond-terrace,  Whitehall,  London,  S.W.
Tennant,  Miss  Dorothy,  2,  Bichmond-terrace,  Whitehall,  London,  S.W,
Thrupp,  Mrs.  Leonard,  67,  Kensington  Gardens-square,  London,  W.
Thurstan,  Frederick  W.,  M.A.,  Kingsley  College,  Westward  Ho,
Devon.

Thurtell,  William  Ellis,  M.A.,  13,  Monmouth-road,  Westbourne-
grove,  London,  W.

Tomson,  Arthur,  57,  Bedford-gardens,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.
Trench,  Bev.  F.Ohenevix,  M.A.,St.  John  Baptist, Tuebrook,  Liverpool.
Trench,  J.  Townsend,  J.P.,  Kenmare,  Ireland.

Tucker,  Miss  Mildred  A.  B.,  4,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Mansions
London,  N.W.

Turner,  John  P.,  Beaulieu,  Farquhar-road,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.
Turner,  Miss  Lucy,  4,  Brigstock-road,  Thornton  Heath,  Croydon.
Tyrer,  Mrs.  W.,  Woodleigh,  Prescot.

Venman,  Hezekiah,  20,  Pimlico-road,  London,  S.W.

ViALLS,  Mrs.,  Teddington  House,  Teddington,  S.W.

Vincent,  Maria  Lady,  8,  Ebury-street,  London,  S.W.

Vivian,  H.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

Walker,  Fr.ynk  Cooper,  21,  Alma-squai-e,  St.  .John’s  Wood,  London,
N.W.

Walker,  Miss  M.,  17,  Gloucester-street,  Warwick-square,  S.W.
Walwyn,  Mrs.,  9,  Sion-hill,  Clifton,  Bristol.

AVassell,  Henry  A.,  Addenbrook  Villa,  Love-lane,  Stourbridge.
AVaterhouse,  Charles  H.,  M.D.,  36,  Carl  Ludwig  Strasse,  AVahring,
A’’ienna.

AVethered,  F.  j.,  M.B.C.S.,  London  Hospital,  London,  E.C.

AA'herry,  G.  E.,  F.B.C.S.,  Corpus-buildings,  Cambridge.

AA’hite,  AVilliam,  Alorden  House,  55,  Highbury-hill,  London,  N.
AA^hite,  Mrs.  Henry,  22,  Grosvenor-place,  London,  S.AV.

AA^iiitley,  Edward  Forbes,  Penarth  House,  Truro,  Cornwall.
AA^hitridge,  Frederick  AV.,  University  Club,  New  York,  IJ.S.A.

2 I 2


492


List  of  Members  and  Associates.


Willett,  Mrs.,  Beadles,  Lindfield,  near  Haywards  Heath,  Sussex.
WiLLiAJis,  Miss  S.,  41,  Stirling-road,  Edgbaston,  Biriningliam.
Williams,  Thomas,  B.A.,  LL.B.,  71,  Bouverie-street,  Cliester.
Williamson,  Charles  H.,  National  Liberal  Club,  Trafalgar-square,
London,  S.W.

Willson,  Bev.  T.  B.,  M.A.,  11,  Canterbury- villas,  Thornton  Heath,
Croydon.

WiNCKLEY,  Mrs.,  Flambards,  Harrow-on-the-Hill,  near  London.
Withers,  John  James,  King’s  College,  Cambridge.

Wood,  Rev.  Canon,  M.A.,  Newent  Rectory,  Gloucestershire.
WooDiiEAD,  JohnE.,  171,  West  Washington-street,  Chicago,  U.S.A
WooDHOUSE,  Otway  E.,  A.I.O.E.,  20,  Upper  Phillimore-gardens,
Kensington,  London,  W.

Woods,  Miss  Alice,  8,  Bath-road,  Bedford  Park,  Chiswick,

Woods,  Arthur,  A.I.O.E.,  Mickleham,  Surrey.

Workman,  Walter  Percy,  B.A.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
WoRSLEY,  Mrs.,  Bromley  College,  Kent.

Wright,  Arthur  J.,  M.A.,  Kensington  Palace  Mansions,  London,  W.
Wright,  Thomas  Herbert,  Assistant  Engineer,  Public  Works
Department,  N.W.P.,  India,  or  care  of  H.  S.  King  and  Co.,
65,  Cornhill,  London,  E.C.

Yotjng  Mrs.  Les  Combournaises,  Dinan,  Cotes  du  Nord,  France.

B,—  Members  and  Associates  are  requested  to  send  information  of  any  change
of  .address  to  the  Assistant-Secretary,  14,  Dean’s-yard,  Westminster,  S.W.


COUNCIL  FOR  1885.

Prof.  Balfour  Stewart,  F.R.S.,  President.


Prof.  J.  0.  Adams,  F.R.S.
Prof.  W.  F.  Barrett.

G.  P.  Bidder,  Q.C.

Alexander  Calder,

Walter  H.  Coffin.

Edmund  Gurney.

Richard  Hodgson.

Prof.  Oliver  J.  Lodge,  D.Sc.
Charles  C.  Massey.

Rev.  W.  Stainton  Moses.
Frederic  W.  H.  Myers.


Edward  R.  Pease.

Frank  Podmore.

Lord  Rayleigh,  F.R.S.

0.  Lockhart  Robertson,  M.D.
E.  Dawson  Rogers.

Prof.  Henry  Sidgmtck.

Henry  A.  Smith.

J.  Herbert  Stack.

W.  H.  Stone,  M.B.

Hensleigh  Wedgwood.


HON.  TREASURER.

Alexander  Calder,  1,  Hereford-square,  South  Kensington,  S.W.

HON.  SECRETARY.

Edmund  Gurney,  26,  Montpelier-square,  London,  S.W.


Conditiition  and  Rales.


493


VJII.

CONSTITUTION  AND  RULES.

1885.


Title.

1.  — The  name  of  the  Society  is — -The  Society  for  Psychical  Research.

Objects.

2.  — The  objects  for  which  this  Society  is  established  are  ; —

(a)  To  unite  students  and  inquirers  in  an  organised  body,  with
the  view  of  promoting  the  investigation  of  certain  obscure
phenomena,  including  those  commonly  known  as  Psychical,
Mesmeric,  or  Spiritualistic ; and  of  giving  publicity  to  the
results  of  such  research.

(b)  To  print,  sell,  or  otherwise  distribute  publications  on
Psychical  and  kindred  subjects ; to  afford  information  to
inquirers  into  these  suljects  by  correspondence  and
otherwise ; to  collect  and  arrange  facts  respecting  them  ;
to  open  Libraries,  Reading-rooms,  and  other  suitable
Premises  and  Offices ; and  generally  to  do  all  such  other
things  as  may  be  conducive  to  the  attainment  of  the  above
objects.

Note. — To  frevent  misconceptio7i,  it  is  here  expressly  stated  that
Membership  of  the  Society  does  not  imply  the  acceptance  of
any  particular  explanation  of  the  phenomena  investigated,
nor  any  belief  as  to  the  operation,  in  the  physical  world,  of
forces  other  than  those  recognised  by  Physical  Science,

Government.

3.  — The  Society  shall  be  governed  by  a Council  consisting  of
twenty-four  Members.  The  Council  shall  elect  from  amongst  the
Members  of  the  Society  a President,  who  shall  be  President  of  tlie
Society,  and  an  ex-offlcio  Member  of  the  Council  and  of  all  Committees,
and  who  shall  retire  from  office  yearly  at  the  first  Meeting  of  the


Constitution  and  Rules-.


Council  after  the  Annual  General  Meeting  of  the  Members  of  the
Society.  He  shall,  however,  be  eligible  for  re-election,  and  shall  be
deemed  as  retaining  his  offices  until  he  shall  have  been  re-elected  or  his
successor  appointed.  The  Council  shall  also  from  time  to  time  elect
Vice-Presidents,  who  shall  be  ex-officio  Honorary  Members  of  the
Society,  and  shall  have  the  privilege  of  being  present  at  any  of  the
Meetings  of  the  Council.

C0NSTITUTI0,N.

4.  — The  Society  shall  consist  of —

{a)  Members,  who  shall  contribute  not  less  than  two  guineas
annually,  or  a single  payment  of  twenty  guineas,  and  who
shall  be  eligible  to  any  of  the  offices  of  the  Society ; and
shall  be  entitled  to  vote  in  the  election  of  the  Governing
Council  and  at  all  meetings  of  the  Society ; to  use  its
Reading-rooms  and  Libraries ; to  borrow  books  from  its
Libraries;  and  to  the  free  receipt  of  any  journal,  transactions,
or  periodical  publication  which  may  be  issued  by  the  Council.

{b)  Associates,  who  shall  contribute  not  less  than  one  guinea
annually,  or  a single  payment  of  ten  guineas,  and  who  shall
be  eligible  to  any  of  the  offices  of  the  Society ; and  shall
be  entitled  to  attend  all  Meetings  of  the  Society,  except  such
as  are  convened  for  business  purposes  only,  and  to  the  free
receipt  of  the  oi’dinary  published  Proceedings  of  the  Society ;
and  shall  have  free  access  to  its  Reading-rooms  and  Libraries.

IMembers  and  Associates  shall  be  entitled  to  purchase  all  the
publications  of  the  Society  at  half  their  published  price.

5. — All  Members  and  Associates  of  the  Society  shall  be  elected  by
the  Council.  Every  candidate  for  admission  shall  be  required  to  give
such  references  as  shall  be  approved  by  the  Council,  unless  he  shall
liave  been  proposed  in  writing  by  two  or  moi’e  Members  or  Associates,
who,  on  his  behalf,  and  by  his  authority,  shall  assent  to  the  Constitution
and  Rules  of  the  Society,  and  consent  to  abide  and  be  governed  by
them,  one  of  wl.'om  shall  have  certified  in  writing,  from  personal
knowledge  of  him,  that  he  is  a fit  person  for  admission.  Every  such
certificate  having  been  read  and  approved  at  a Meeting  of  the  Council,
the  election  shall  be  proceeded  with  ; the  election  to  be  by  ballot,  and
one  black  ball  in  six  to  exclude.  The  Council  shall  cause  the  result  to


Constitution  and  Rules.


495


he  made  knowm  to  the  candidate,  who,  if  elected,  sliall  he  furnished
with  a certificate  of  election  and  a copy  of  the  “ Constitution  and
Rules.”

6.  — The  subscription  shall  become  due  immediately  on  election,  and
afterwards  in  advance  on  the  first  day  of  January  in  each  year.  In
the  case  of  any  Member  or  Associate  being  elected  on  or  after  the  1st
of  October,  his  subscription  shall  be  accepted  as  for  the  following  year.
The  subscription  of  each  year  remaining  unpaid  on  and  after  the  1st
of  July,  will  be  considered  as  in  arrear,  and  no  Member  or  Associate
so  in  arrear  shall  be  entitled  to  enjoy  any  of  his  privileges  while  such
subscription  remains  unpaid.  Any  Member  or  Associate  who  is  more
than  three  months  in  arrear,  and  who  fails  to  pay  after  twm  applica
tions  in  writing,  shall  be  liable  to  be  struck  oil’  tlie  list.

7.  — If  any  Member  or  Associate  desire  to  resign,  he  shall  give
written  notice  thereof  to  the  Secretary.  He  shall,  however,  be  liable
for  all  subscriptions  which  shall  then  remain  unpaid.

Honorary  Members  and  Honorary  Associates.

8.  — The  Council  may  invite  any  person  who

(i)  is  either  distinguished  for  knowledge  or  experience  in  Psychical

Research  or  otherwise  eminent,  to  become  an  Honorary
Member  of  the  Society  ; or  any  person  who

(ii)  has  rendered  services  to  the  Society,

to  become  an  Honorary  Associate,  such  person  to  be  eligible
for  re-election  annually.

Honorary  Members  and  Associates  shall  have  the  privileges  without
the  obligations  attaching  to  Associates.

Corresponding  Members.

9.  — The  Council  shall  have  power  to  elect  as  Corresponding
Members,  who  shall  be  on  the  same  footing  as  Honorary  Members,
persons  able  and  willing  to  fomvarcl  the  objects  of  the  Society.  They
shall  be  eligible  for  re-election  annually.

General  Meetings.

10.  — The  Anniversary  or  Annual  General  Meeting  of  the  Memlicrs
of  the  Society  shall  be  held  in  the  month  of  J anuary,  on  a day  to  l ie
fixed,  by  the  Council,  and  of  which  not  less  than  twenty-one  days’  notice

2 K 2


496


Comditution  and  Rides.


shall  be  given.  Tlie  business  of  such  Anniversary  Meeting  shall  be  to
receive  the  Annual  Report  of  the  Council,  and  Statement  of  Assets  and
Liabilities,  to  elect  New  Members  of  Council,  and  to  discuss  questions
on  the  Rules  and  management.  A Member  shall  not  moot  any  question
on  the  Rules  or  management  of  the  Society  unless  he  shall  have  given
at  least  fourteen  days’  notice  thereof  to  the  Secretary,  but  amendments
to  any  motion  may  be  brought  forward  without  notice,  provided  they
relate  to  the  same  subject.  The  Secretary  shall  give  seven  days’  notice
to  every  Member  of  all  questions  of  which  such  notice  shall  have  been
given  to  him.

11.  — Special  General  Meetings  of  the  Members  of  the  Society  may
be  convened  by  the  Council,  or  by  the  President,  or  by  the  Secretary  on
the  requisition  of  ten  Members,  and  notice  of  such  Meetings,  stating  the
objects,  shall  be  given  at  least  ten  days  previously,  and  no  other
business  shall  be  entered  upon  at  such  Meetiirgs  than  that  stated  in  the
notice.

12.  — All  General  Meetings  of  the  Members  of  the  Society  shall  be
convened  by  circular  to  the  Membei’S.

Proceedings  in  General  Meeting

13.  — The  quorum  necessary  to  constitute  a General  Meeting  shall
be  ten.

14.  — The  President  of  the  Society  shall  preside  ex-officio;  in  his
absence  any  one  of  the  Vice-Presidents  who  may  at  the  same  time  be  a
]M  ember  of  the  Society  ; or  should  no  such  Vice-President  be  present,
a Member  of  Council.  In  their  absence  the  Meeting  shall  nominate
its  Chairman.

1-5. — If  within  one  hour  from  the  time  appointed  for  the  Meeting  a
quorum  is  not  present  the  Meeting  shall  stand  adjourned  for  one  week.
At  the  adjourned  Meeting  the  number  present  for  the  time  being  shall
constitute  the  legal  number.

16. — All  questions  shall,  at  a General  Meeting,  be  determined  by  a
majority  of  the  Members  present,  except  in  the  election  of  Members  of
Council  at  the  Annual  General  Meeting,  for  which  election  voting
papers  shall  be  accepted.  The  Chairman  shall  have  a second  or  casting
vote  at  all  General  Meetings  of  the  Society.


Constitution  and  Rules.


497


Election  and  Business  of  Council.

17. — The  Council  shall  consist  of  eighteen  members,  elected
annually  at  a General  Meeting,  and  of  other  members  co-opted  from
time  to  time  by  the  Council,  provided  that  the  whole  number  shall  not
exceed  twenty-four.  The  names  of  persons  for  the  first  time  proposed
to  be  co-opited  on  the  Council  shall  be  brought  forward  at  one  Medium
of  the  Council,  and  shall  be  sent  round  to  all  members  of  Council
previous  to  its  next  Meeting,  when  the  voting  shall  be  by  ballot,  and  a
unanimous  vote  of  those  present  shall  be  requisite  to  carry  the  election.
The  members  co-opted  from  time  to  time  by  the  Council  shall  cease  to
hold  office  at  the  Annual  Meeting  at  which  new  members  are  elected,
but  may  be  co-opted  afresh  at  the  First  Meeting  of  the  Council  after
such  Annual  Meeting.

18.  — Of  the  eighteen  elected  Members  of  the  Council  of  the  Society
so  ap^pointed,  six  or  whatever  number  may  be  required  to  reduce  the
number  of  elected  Members  to  twelve  shall  go  out  of  office  at  the  time
apipointed  for  election  of  Council  in  the  year  1883  ; one  other  third,  at
the  time  appointed  for  such  election  in  the  year  1884,  and  the  remainder
at  the  time  ap^pointed  for  such  election  in  the  year  1885,  and  the
vacancies  so  made  shall  be  filled  by  fresh  elections.  All  Members  of
Council  from  time  to  time  elected  at  the  annual  elections  shall  go  out
of  office  at  the  time  appointed  for  the  annual  election  in  the  third
following  year.  The  Secretary  shall  every  year,  at  least  twenty-one
days  before  the  ensuing  Annual  General  Meeting,  send  to  all  the  Members
of  the  Society  a list  of  the  retiring  Members  of  Council,  and  a statement
whether  all,  and  if  not,  which  of  them  are  candidates  for  re-election.  In
all  cases  the  retiring  Members  shall  be  deemed  as  remaining  in  office
until  they  shall  have  been  re-elected  or  their  successors  ap^pointed.

19. - — Any  Member  or  Associate  of  the  Society  who  shall  have  paid  up
all  subscriptions  due  from  him,  including  that  for  the  current  year,  or  any
Vice-President,  Honorary  Member,  or  Honorary  Associate  of  the  Society,
sliall  be  eligible  for  election,  or  re-election,  as  a Member  of  Council,
provided  he  shall  have  been  nominated  in  writing  by  a Member  of  the
Society,  duly  qualified,  and  such  nomination  shall  have  been  forwarded
to  the  Secretary  fourteen  days  before  tlie  time  of  holding  the  Annual
General  Meeting.  A list  of  the  persons  so  nominated  shall  be  forwarded
to  all  the  Members  of  the  Society,  at  least  ten  days  prior  to  the


Conditatlon  and  Rules.


•3C8

meeting.  In  case  more  persons,  duly  qualified,  shall  be  nominated  for
election  at  any  Annual  General  Meeting  than  are  required  to  fill  up  the
vacant  places  of  those  retiring  by  rotation,  then  such  persons  shall  be
preferred  and  declared  elected  as  shall  obtain  the  higliest  number  of
votes.

20.  — If  the  number  of  nominations  for  election  to  the  Council
exceed  the  number  of  vacancies,  voting  papers  shall  be  sent  round  to  all
Members  of  the  Society,  at  least  ten  days  prior  to  the  Annual  General
Meeting.  These  papers  must  be  in  the  hands  of  the  Secretary  of  the
Society  befoi'e  the  commencement  of  the  Meeting.  They  shall  be  duly
signed  by  the  Member  voting,  and  be  enclosed  in  envelopes  securely
fastened  and  marked  on  the  outside  “ voting  paper,”  and  enclosed  in  a
letter  sent  to  the  Secretary  and  signed  by  the  Member  ^'oting,  and  they
shall  not  be  opened  till  so  directed  by  the  Chairman  at  the  Meeting.

21.  — The  Council  shall  at  their  first  Meeting  after  every  Annual
General  Meeting,  elect  a President  as  provided  for  in  Pule  3.  At  the

'me  Meeting  they  shall  also  elect  a Treasurer  and  Auditoi’,  and  such
other  officers  as  they  ni„_^  deem  expedient,  who  shall  retire  from  office
annually,  at  the  same  time  and  under  the  same  conditions  as  provided
for  in  the  case  of  the  President  by  Pi,ule  3.  They  shall  from  time  to  time
elect  Vice  Presidents,  Members  of  the  Society,  and  Honoi’ary  Members,
as  provided  for  by  Pules  3,  5,  and  8.  They  shall  have  power  to  appoint  a
salaried  Secretary,  and  such  other  paid  officers,  assistants,  and  servants
as  they  may  deem  necessary,  and  to  determine  their  duties.  All  the
appointments  made  by  the  Council,  the  Council  may  at  their  pleasure
revoke.

22.  — The  Council  shall  elect  persons  duly  qualified  to  fill  up  any
vacancies  which  may,  from  time  to  time,  occur  in  their  own  body  ; and
any  such  persons  so  elected  shall  go  out  of  office  at  the  time  when  the
term  of  office  of  the  persons  in  whose  places  they  %vere  respectively  ap-
pointed wmuld  have  expired.

23.  — The  Council  shall  meet  monthly,  unless  otherwise  determined.
An  attendance  book  shall  be  kept,  and  signed  by  each  Member  of  the
Council  at  the  time  of  entering  the  Council-room.  In  all  Meetings  of
the  Council  four  shall  be  a quorum  ; all  questions  shall  be  decided  by
vote,  and  a decision  of  the  majority  shall,  except  where  otherwise


Cor.stittdion  and  Rules.


499


provided  by  these  Rules,  be  the  decision  of  the  Meeting  ; the  Chairman
to  have,  in  addition  to  his  own,  a casting  vote.  The  Cliair  shall  be
occupied  by  the  President ; or  in  his  absence  by  a Vice-President  who
is  a subscribing  Member  of  the  Society,  or  should  nosucli  Vice-President
be  present,  by  a Member  of  Council  chosen  by  the  ileeting.

24.  — The  Council  shall  have  power  to  appoint  for  special  purposes
Committees  composed  of  IMembers  of  the  Society  or  other  suitable
persons.  Every  Committee  appointed  by  the  Council  shall  report  its
proceedings  to  the  Council  through  the  Chairman  or  Secretary  of  such
Committee,  one  of  whom  must  be  a Member  of  Council,  and  no  report
shall  be  published  without  the  sanction  of  the  Council.

25.  — The  Council  shall  have  power,  by  a majority  of  three-fourths
of  the  Members  present,  in  a Special  Meeting  of  their  own  body  duly
convened  for  the  purpose,  and  of  which,  and  of  the  objects  thereof,  not
less  than  seven  days’  notice  shall  have  been  given  to  each  Member  of
the  Council,  to  add  to,  suspend,  or  alter  any  of  the  rules,  regulations,
and  bye-laws  of  the  Society  ; such  alteration  to  be  in  force  only  until
the  next  ensuing  Anniversary  ileeting,  unless  it  be  then  confirmed
by  the  vote  of  a majority  of  the  3Iembers  of  the  Society  there
present.

26.  — The  Council  shall  have  power  to  employ  the  funds  of  the
Society,  including  any  funds  obtained  by  donation,  bequest,  or
otherwise,  in  any  manner  consistent  with  the  objects  thereof,  and  they
may  invest  any  surplus  funds  in  such  securities  and  in  such  manner
as  they  may  deem  proper  ; and  they  may  sell,  employ,  or  re-invest  the
said  funds.

27.  — The  Council  may  establish  Branches,  and  Local  or  Provincial
Societies,  in  any  part  of  Great  Britain  or  elsewhere,  under  such  regula-
tions, and  subject  to  such  limitations  as  they  may  deem  fit.

28.  — The  Council  shall  have  pov/er  from  time  to  time  to  co-operate
with,  or  accept  the  alliance  of,  other  Societies,  having  similar  objects  in
view.

Auditors.

29.  — Tliere  shall  be  two  Auditors — one  chosen  by  the  Members
of  the  Society,  and  one  chosen  by  the  Members  of  the  Council.  These
shall  aucliC“the~  accounts  bf  the  Society,  and  report  thereon  to  the
Council.  The  auditors  shall  be  t mpowered  to  examine  into  the  par-


.'■.00


Constitutio  i and  Rules.


ticulars  of  all  expenditure  of  the  funds  of  the  Society,  where  they
shall  see  occasion;  and  may  report  their  opinion  upon  the  wliole  or
any  part  of  it,  whether  it  has  been  expended  in  accordance  with  the
constitution  of  the  Society.

Finance.

30. — The  Council  shall  cause  true  accounts  to  be  kept  of  all  sums  of
money  received  and  paid,  and  shall  submit  the  accounts  of  the  Society,
■with  a statement  of  the  assets  and  liabilities,  to  the  Annual  General
Meeting.

Property  and  Funds.

31.  — Every  paper  accepted  by  the  Society  for  reading  or  publication
shall  become  tlie  absolute  property  of  the  Society,  unless  the  author’s
rights  be  specially  reserved.

32.  — The  property  of  the  Society  shall  be  invested  in  Trustees
chosen  by  the  Council.  The  Trustees  shall  be  eligible  to  any  other
office  in  the  Society.

Notices.

33.  — The  posting  of  a notice  to  the  registered  address  of  a Member
or  Associate  shall  be  deemed  service  of  a notice.  Members  or
Associates  residing  abroad  shall  name  a place  of  address  in  the  United
Ivingdom.  In  default  of  such  address,  the  posting  of  a notice  in  a
conspicuous  place  at  the  Offices  of  the  Society  shall  be  deemed  to  be  a
notice.

34.  — A notice  forwarded  by  post  to  the  Secretary  of  a Branch  or
Allied  Society  shall  be  deemed  a notice  to  the  Members  of  the  Society
of  which  he  is  Secretary.

Interpretation  of  Rules.

35.  — In  the  Interpretation  of  these  Rules  words  importing  the
singular  number  only,  include  the  plural,  and  words  importing  the
masculine  gender  only,  include  the  feminine.


National  Press  Ageney,  Limited,  13,  Whitefriars  Street,  E.C.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE


SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


INDEX  TO  VOL.  III.


A.


A.,  Me.,  Case  contributed  by  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  1

Adams,  Mr. , Case  recorded  l)y  416

Adyar  Saucer,  Tlie •211,218-19,  321

Agraphy  and  Aphasia,  Considered  with  reference  to  the  Phenomena  of

Automatic  Writing  ...  32-63

Allbright,  Mr. , Case  contributed  by  ...  ...  ...  4

Anaesthesia,  Local,  Produced  in  Normal  State  by  IMesmeric  Passes  ...  453

Anonymously  Contributed  Cases  ...  80,  89,  92  (and  150),  99,  100-1,  113,

114, 117,  119,  387

Automatic  Writing,  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on  1

,,  Instances  of  ...  ...  ..  ...  ...  2-23,25,37,40


B


B.  Me.  , Case  contributed  by

Babajee  D.  Nath,  Evidence  on  Theosophical  Phenomena

Baillarger,  M.,  on  Hallucination

Barth,  Geo.,  Case  recorded  by  ...

Becher,  General  Sir  A. , Case  contributed  by

Bernard,  Dr.,  Cases  recorded  by

,,  on  the  Processes  of  Speech  and  Writing

Bernheim,  Professor,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of

Bhavani  Rao,  Evidence  on  Theosophical  Phenomena  . . .

Binet,  M.,  on  Hallucination

Blavatsky-Coulomb  Letters,  The.  See  Reports


419

210,  -246-47,  -251,

298,  .329,  376
...  156T59,  163,  174

418

109

35,  38

50-1

33,  423

•260,261,367
158,  16M78
OH  Theosophical


Phenomena
Braid’s  Hypnotic  Experiments
Brietzcke,  Mrs. , Case  contributed  by
Brighton  Experiinents


201,  207-317,  318-382,  397
406-408

37

453


11


Index  to  Vol  III.


C.


Chandra  Sekhara,  Evidence  on  Tlieosopliical  Plienoniena  ...  ...  350

Charcot,  M. , on  Aphasia  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  35

, , Case  recorded  by  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  48

,,  on  the  Proce.sses  of  Speech  and  Writing  50-1

Committees  of  the  Society,  Alteration  in  the  Relations  of,  to  Council  ...  200

Constitution  and  Rules  of  the  Society  ...  ...  493

Council  of  the  Society,  List  of  Members  of  200,  492

Crookes,  W.,  Report  on  an  Alleged  Physical  Phenomenon  ...  ...  ...  460


D.


D.,  Mr.,  Case  contributed  by  ...  ...  ...  95

Daniodar  K.  Mavalankar,  Evidence  on  Theosophical  Phenomena,  and
Alleged  Occult  Powers  of  202,  20S-210,  226-237,  242,  278,  293-298,

309,  310,  312,  337,  340,  388-393,  396
Delbceuf,  M. , Experiments  in  Hallucination  ...  ...  ...156,  157,  165,  166

Diagrams  and  Plates —

Diagrams  of  Spoken  and  Written  Speech  50

Plan  of  the  Occult  Room  at  Adyar  ...  ...  ...  ...  380-381

Specimens  of  the  Blavat.sky-Coulomb  Letters  ...  ...  ...  380-381

Dunscombe,  N. , Case  recorded  by  ...  ...  '...  ...  ...  ...  419


E.


Edgeworth,  F.  Y.,  The  Calculus  of  Probabilities  applied  to  Psychical
Research


190


Edwards,  Miss,  Thought-transference  Experiments  with

Esdaile,  Dr.,  Cases  recorded  by

Ezekiel,  A.D.,  Evidence  on  Theosophical  Phenomena


425,  429-437
406-410,  415
...  249


F. , Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by


76


G.


G.,  Mr.,  Evidence  on  Theosophical  Phenomena  ...  ..  ...  222,341

Gebhard,  Mrs.,  Evidence  on  Theosophical  Phenomena 395

,,  Rudolf,  Evidence  on  Theosophical  Phenomena  385

Ghosal,  J.  N.,  Evidence  on  Theosophical  Phenomena 351


Index  to  Vol.  III.


Ill


Ghosts See  Phantasms  of  the  Dead , (yd-loQ

Goslii,  L.  N.,  Evidence  on  Tlieosophical  Phenomena 376

Gribble,  J.  D.  B.,  Evidence  on  Theosophical  Phenomena  ...  ...  ...  339

Gurney,  Edmund,  on  Hallucinations  151

,,  ,,  and  Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  on  Some  Higher  Aspects  of

Mesmerism  ...  401

Guthrie,  Malcolm,  on  Thouglit-transference  424


H.


H.,  Mr.,  Case  contributed  by

H. , Mrs. , Case  contributed  by

Hallucinations,  Edmund  Gurney  on

Haly,  Mrs. , Case  contributed  by

Harisinghji  Rupsinghji,  Evidence  on  Theosopliical  Phenomena

Harry,  J.  D.,  Case  contributed  by

Hartmann,  Dr.,  Evidence  on  Theosophical  Phenomena  217,  223-230,

278-281,  298-300,


117

122

151

91

374

111

367


“ Haunted  Houses  ” —

Apparitions  seen  in 75,81-2,100-116,118-144

Consiileration  of  Certain  Popular  Beliefs  as  to  the  Causes  of

Phenomena  in 142,143

General  Conclusions  with  Regard  to  142-150

Phy.sical  Phenomena  observed  in  ...  80-83,  89,  104,  105,  107,

114-116,  122-3,  125  128,  130,  134  136,  138-9,  144-5

Hodo-son,  R.,  Personal  Investigations,  in  India,  of  Theosoi)hical  Phenomena

203-205,  207-317

,,  Appendices  to  Report  ...

Hume,  A.  O.,  Evidence  on  Theosophical  Phenomena

Hunt,  Miss  K.  Leigh,  Case  contributed  by

Husk,  C.,  Report  on  the  alleged  “ Ring  Te.st,”  thiough
Hypnotism,  Phenomena  of


318-381
267-268,  273-275

106

460

See  Mesmerism


J.

Journal  for  Psychical  Research,  Commencement  of

Joy,  Algernon,  Case  contributed  by

Jupp,  Ch.,  Case  contributed  by


K.

K.,  Miss,  Thought-transference  Experiments  with  44

Keightley  Bertram,  Evidence  on  Theosophical  Phenomena  245,  356-7,

° J'  ’ 389-390


IV


Index  to  Vol.  III.


L.

Lane-Fox,  St.  George,  Evidence  on  Tlieosophical  Plienomena  ...  223,

278-279,  327

Lewis,  Rev.  Gerrard,  Case  contribnted  by  93

LeAvis,  Rev.  L.,  Case  recorded  by  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  419

Library  Catalogue  ...  ...  ...  . . . . ...  ...  464

,,  Increase  of  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  66

,,  Rules  474

Liebeault,  Dr. , Hypnotic  Experiments  made  T>y  ...  ...  ...  ...  423

Liverpool  Experiments  ...  ...  ...  424

Loughborough,  Rev.  R.  L. , Case  contributed  by  ...  ...  ...  ...  82


hi.


Martandrao  B.  Nagnath  255,  364-367

Massey,  C.  C.,  Evidence  on  Tlieosophical  Phenomena  ...  206-7,  397

Members  of  the  Society,  List  of  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  475

Meetings  of  the  Society  1,  64,200-1,424

Mesmerism —

Experimental  Evidence —

Local  Anesthesia  produced  in  the  Normal  State  l)y  Passes  453-459
Mesmerised  Water  alleged  to  induce  Sleep  ...  ...  ...  ...  409

Sensitiveness  to  Inlluence  of  the  Mesmerist  ...  ...  ...  408-9,411

Will,  Power  of  the  Silent  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  415-420

Messrs.  E.  Gurney  and  F.  W.  II.  Myers  on  Some  Higher  Aspects  of,  401

Taltle  of  Results 457-459

Mohini  M.  Chatterjee,  Evidence  on  Tlieosophical  Phenomena  239-245,

343,  346-348,  351-358

Morgan,  General,  Evidence  on  Tlieosophical  Plienomena  218,  321

Morgan,  Mrs.,  ,,  ,,  ,,  2.30,  .325

Moiile,  .1.,  Case  contributed  by  ...  ...  ...  420

Muscle-reading,  Rev.  E.  H.  Sugden’s  Experiments  in  ...  ...  ...  4

Myers,  Dr.  A.  T.,  Report  on  an  Alleged  Physical  Phenomenon  ...  ...  460

Myers,  F,  W.  H.,  on  Automatic  hVriting  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  1

,,  and  Edmund  Gurney,  on  Some  Higher  Aspects  of

Mesmerism  ...  ...  ...  401


N.

Naidxt,  P.  L,  Evidence  on  Tlieosophical  Plienomena  374-5

Netherclift,  F.  G.,  Reports  on  the  Blavatsky-Coulomli  Letters  204-5,

277,  282-283,  381

Newnham,  Rev.  P.  H.,  Cases  contrihnted  by  ...  ...  6,  8-24,  176

Nobin  K.  Bannerji,  Evidence  on  Tlieosophical  Phenomena  ...  349,376

Norendra  Nath  Sen,  Evidence  on  Tlieosophical  Phenomena  376


Index  to  Vo/.  III.


\


0.

Oakley,  Alfred  Cooper,  Evidence  on  Tlieosophical  Phenomena  245,  355

Otficer.5  and  Council  of  the  Society  for  1885  200,  492

Olcott,  Colonel,  Evidence  on  Theosophical  Phenomena  ...  205,  210,

231  239,  253,  265-267,  310-11,  323,  335


P.

Pad.SII All,  I>.  J.,  Evidence  on  Theosophical  Plienomena  ...  388

Phantasms  of  the  Dead,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  on  69

Physical  Phenomenon,  Pieport  on  an  Alleged  460

Presidential  Addre.ss ...  ...  ...  ...  . . ...  ...  ...  ...  64

Probabilities,  E.  Y.  Edgewortli,  on  the  Calcnlns  of,  as  applied  to  Psychical

Research ...  ..  190

R.


Rajamiengar,  T.  C.,  Evidence  on  Theosophical  Phenomena  333

Ramaswamier,  S.,  Evidence  on  Theosophical  Phenomena  ...  348,  358-364

Ramaswamy’s  Arm  Phenomenon,  The  344

Rathnavelii,  P.,  Evidence  on  Theosophical  Phenomena  ...  ...  ...  332

R d,  Mrs.  W.  B.,  Case  contributed  by  ...  115

Relph,  Miss,  Tliought-transference  Experiments  with  ...  425,  429-452

Riddell,  W. , Case  contributed  by 5


S.


Sassoon,  Telegram,  The 211,217,318

Schleiden,  Dr.  Iltibbe,  Evidence  on  Theosophical  Phenomena  383

Scott,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Ro.ss,  Evidence  on  Theo.sophical  Phenomena 369

Sidgwick,  Mrs.,  Theosophical  Phenomena  378  380,382

,,  on  Phantasms  of  the  Dead  69

Sims,  R.,  on  the  Blavatsky-Coulomb  Letters 201,277,283

Sinnett,  A.  P.,  Evidence  on  Theosophical  Phenomena  256-273

Sisson,  Rev.  J.  Lawson,  Case  contributed  by  ...  ...  ..  ...  ...  41S

Smith,  G.  A.,  Mesmeric  Experiments  453

Smith,  Professor,  Evidence  on  Theosophical  Phenomena  ...  ...  ...  377

Society  for  Psychical  Research —

Annual  General  INIeeting  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  200

Constitution  and  Rules  200, 493

Library  Catalogue  464

,,  Increase  of  200

,,  Rules  474


VI


Index  to  Vol.  II L


Society  for  Psychical  Research —

General  Meetings  (ordinary)  ...  ...  ...  1,  64,201,424

Members,  Increase  of  ...  ..  65,  200

,,  Associates  and  Honorary  Members,  List  of  ...  ...  475

Officers  and  Council  ...  ...  ...  200,  492

Report  and  Financial  Statement  ..  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  200

SolovioiF,  V.,  Evidence  on  Theosophical  Phenomena 393

Sreenevas  Rao,  P.,  Evidence  on  Theosophical  Phenomena  ..  248,  328,  373

Starbuck,  Rev.  C.  C.,  Case  contributed  by  137

Stewart,  Prof.  Balfour,  Presidential  Address 64

Stokes,  Adrian,  Case  contributed  by  168

Stone,  W.  H.,  Case  contributed  by  ..  83

Subba  Row,  T.,  Evidence  on  Theosophical  Phenomena  ...  ...  229-30,326

Sugden,  Rev.  E.  H.,  on  Muscle-reading  ...  ..  ...  ...  ...  4

Summerbell,  Miss,  Case  contributed  by  ...  ...  2

Swann,  G.  W.,  Ca.se  contributed  by  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  82


T.


T.,  Mi.ss,  Case  contributed  by  132

Taine,  M. , on  Hallucination  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  153

Tandy,  Rev.  G.,  Case  contriluited  by  ...  91

Telepathy,  Connection  between,  and  Automatic  Writing  ...  1-34

Theoso]ffiical  Phenomena —

Alleged  Occult  Plienomena,  Astral  A|>paritions,  202,  231-2.33,  236,

239-248,  344,  346-347,  358-373,  388-396
,,  ,,  Miscellaneous  Phenomena  ...  211,  218,

219,  245,  248-275,  318  380,  382-.396,  397-400

Analysis  of  Reports  on  400

Authorship  of  the  Blavatsky-Coulomb  Letters  ...  204,  205,

206,  207-219,  271-273,  275,  270-317,  378-.382
,,  ,,  ■ Opinions  of  Experts  on,  204  5,  277,  282-3,  381

Committee’s  Report  on  201

Evidence,  Various,  on  ...  ...  317-400

Hodgson,  R. , Personal  Investigations  in  India  into  207-317

,,  ,,  Appendices  to  Report  317-381

Occult  Room  and  Shrine,  Evidence  concerning  219  226,  325  344,  380-381

Thompson,  H.  S.,  Case  contributed  by ...  419

Thought-transference —

Declension  of  Power  with  Declen.sion  of  Interest  ...  425


Experimental  Evidence —
With  Colours  ...

,,  Names  ...

,,  Numbers
,,  (.Ibjects...

,,  Pains  ...


427,429,436-441,445-9,451-2

426-428,  432,  437,  443,  446,  448

426-428,  432,  439,  448

44,  416,  426-429,  436-441,  445-452
426  428,  429-433,  430,  438-441,  443,  445-52


Index  to  Vol.  III.


Vll


Thought-transference —

Experimental  Evidence —

With  Pictures  44,  427-428,  441-2,  445,  447,  450-1

„ Playing  Cards  427-8,  437,  440,  449-50

Scenes  and  Places,  Transferred  Impressions  of  426-428,  443-4,  447

Seen  by  the  Sensitive  as  Inverted  44

Tastes  and  Smell  ...  426-428,430-436,446-7,450-1

Tunes ...  ...  428,  447-8

Words  and  Sentences  . . ...  44

Physiological  Effect  on  Sensitives 44,  417

,,  ,,  tlie  Agent  425

Table  of  Kesults  427-8

Townsend,  Mrs. , Case  contributed  by  ...  74

Townshend,  Rev.  C.  H.,  Case  recorded  by  415

U.

Unwala,  G.  N.,  Evidence  on  Thco.sophical  Phenomena  ...  338

V.

Vatas,  Simpson,  Mrs.  and  Miss  M.,  Case  contributed  by 126

,,  Miss  Nettie,  Case  contributed  by  144

Vijiaraghava,  Charloo,  T.,  Evidence  on  Theosophical  Phenomena  ...  ...  375

W.

W.,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  . ..  ...  ..  102

Wambey,  Rev.  C.  C.,  Case  contributed  ))y  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  90

Watson,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  81,  82

Webley,  Mrs.,  Case  of  92,150

Wedgwood,  Hensleigh,  Case  contrilmted  Ijy  ...  ..  ...  ..  119

WeUs,  Fred,  Mesmeric  Experiments  witli  ...  ...  ...  ...  453

Willing-Game,  The  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  See  Mnscle-rcading.

Windridge,  Mrs. , Case  contributed  by  ...  . . . . . . 89
