Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. XXVI (1913)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1913 Glasgow: Robert MacLehose and Co. edition (Parts LXV-LXVII) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc26soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research


VOLUME  XXVI

(CONTAINING  PARTS  LXV,  LXVI,  LXVII)
1913


The  responsibility  for  both  the  facts  and  the  reasonings  in  papers
published  in  the  Proceedings  rests  entirely  with  their  authors


PRINTED  FOR  THE  SOCIETY  BY

ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  &  COMPANY  LIMITED
UNIVERSITY  PRESS,  GLASGOW
1913

Age?its  for  the  sale  of  publications  :

LONDON :  FRANCIS  EDWARDS,  83  High  Street,  Marylebone,  W.
GLASGOW  :  JAMES  MACLEHOSE  &  SONS,  61  St.  Vincent  Street
AMERICA:  THE  W.  B.  CLARKE  CO.,  26-28  Tremont  Street,  Boston,  Mass.

All  rights  reserved


CONTENTS


PAET  LXV.
September,  1912.

PAGE

General  Meetings,  1

I. Presidential  Address. By  the  Eight  Rev.  Bishop  W.  Boyd

Carpenter,  D.D.,  2

II. A  Month's  Eecord  of  Automatisms. By  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall,  24

III.  Correspondances  Croisees. By  Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.,  . .  57
Editorial  Note, 145

IV.  The  Latin  Message  Experiment. By  Mrs.  Anna  Hude,  . .  147
Note  on  Mrs.  Hude's  Paper. By  J.  G.  Piddington,  . . .  171

V. A  Hitherto  Unsuspected  Answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.

By  J.  G.  Piddington,  174

Some  Observations  on  Mr.  Piddington's  Paper. By  the  Eight

Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour,  221

A  Reply  to  Mr.  Balfour's  Observations. By  J.  G.  Piddington,  231
VI. Two  Tennysonian  Quotations  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  Scripts.  By

J.  G.  Piddington,  245

Supplement  :  Review :

N.  Vaschide's  "Les  Hallucinations  Telepathiques."  By

Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  251


PART  LXVI.
November,  1912.

I. Some  Types  of  Multiple  Personality.  By  T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.,  257

II.  A  Study  in  Hysteria  and  Multiple  Personality,  with  Report  of

a  Case. By  T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.,  286

III.  A  Note  on  the  Unconscious  in  Psycho- Analysis. By  Professor

Sigm.  Freud,  M.D.,  LL.D.  (Vienna),  312

IV.  The  Theory  of  the  Subconscious. By  Boris Sidis,  M.A.,

Ph.D.,  M.D.,  "  319

Supplement  :  Reviews  :

Mr.  M'Dougall's  "  Body  and  Mind,  a  History  and  a  Defence

of  Animism." By  the  Right  Hon.  Gerald  W.  Balfour,  .  344

loo  I 84


> -  ~- v v  c

e* c  **  c c.  e o  p  «-

t>  c  • #■  ©6  e c  (i  c  eo

« t r  c  e  • f c r  »  <


PAGE

Prof.  Dr.  E.  Bleuler's  "  Die  Psychanalyse  Freuds."  By

V.  J.  Woolley,  M.D.,  367

Dr.  Edwin  Ash's  "  Faith  and  Suggestion."  By  C.  Lloyd
Tdckey,  M.D.,  370

The  Liverpool  Psycho-Therapeutic  Clinic. By  A.  Betts

Taplin,  L.R.C.P.,  373


PART  LXVII.
July,  1913.

I. A  Reply  to  Dr.  Joseph  Maxwell's  Paper  on  "  Cross-Correspon-
dences and  the  Experimental  Method." By  Mrs.  Henry


Sidgwick, 375

Appendix  I. By  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall, ....  401

„ II. By  Alice  Johnson, 409

„ III. By  J.  G.  Piddington, 415

II.  Andrew  Lang  and  Psychical  Research. By  the  Rev.  M.  A.

Bayfield, 419

III.  A  Study  of  Dreams. By  Dr.  Frederik  van  Eeden, . .  431

IV.  Presidential  Address. By  Professor  Henri  Bergson, . .  462

Officers  and  Council  for  1913, 481

List  of  Members  and  Associates.  ........  482

Index  to  Vol.  XXVI., 522


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research.

PART  LXV.

September,  1912.


PROCEEDINGS  OF  GENERAL  MEETINGS.

The  139th  General  Meeting  of  the  Society  was  held  in  the
large  Hall  at  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.,  on  Monday,
February  19th,  1912,  at  8.30  p.m.,  Sir  William  Crookes  in
the  Chair.

Dr.  L.  Forbes  Winslow  read  a  paper  on  "  The  Need  for
Advance  in  Psychology."

The  14 0th  General  Meeting  was  held  in  the  Queen's  (Small)
Hall,  Langham  Place,  London,  W.,  on  Thursday,  May  23rd,
1912,  at  5  p.m.,  the  President,  The  Right  Rev.  Bishop
W.  Boyd  Carpenter,  D.D.,  in  the  Chair.

The  President  delivered  the  Address  which  is  printed  below.


A


2


Right  Rev.  Bishop  W.  Boyd  Carpenter.  [part


I.

PKESIDENTIAL  ADDEESS.

Delivered  on  May  23rd,  1912.
By  the  RIGHT  REV.  BISHOP  W.  BO  YD  CARPENTER,  D.D.

I  had  much  hesitation  in  accepting  the  office  which  I  have
the  honour  now  to  hold.  I  did  not  deem  that  I  possessed
the  requisite  original  equipment  or  the  acquired  knowledge  to
deal  worthily  with  the  work  and  objects  of  the  Society.  Never-
theless, the  kind  and  sympathetic  way  in  which  my  difficulties
were  met  by  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick  and  Sir  William  Barrett
awakened  another  feeling,  and  led  me  to  fear  lest  churlishness
or  indolence  might  be  urged  against  me  if  I  sought  to  escape
the  task  to  which  I  was  invited.

I  occupy  from  the  nature  of  the  case  a  position  somewhat
different  from  that  of  my  predecessors  in  this  office.  They
were  experts ;  I  am  not :  they  held  high  place  in  the  world
of  thought ;  I  do  not.

I  cannot  claim  that  happy  acquaintance  with  detailed  experi-
ments, or  that  patient  study  of  phenomena,  which  were  so
evident  in  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick's  Presidential  Address :  I  cannot
claim  the  right  of  continued  study  which  would  lead  me  to  follow
Mr.  Arthur  Balfour  or  Mr.  Gerald  Balfour  into  the  regions  of
profounder  philosophy :  I  cannot  claim  scientific  authority,  made
secure  by  brilliant  and  successful  investigations,  which  gave
weight  to  the  utterances  of  Sir  Oliver  Lodge :  I  cannot  claim
the  wide  range  of  knowledge  and  happy  gifts  of  my  predecessor
in  office :  I  come  to  you  from  a  life  whose  studies  have  been
crippled  by  the  continuous  interruptions  of  inevitable  duties :  I
cannot  claim  to  do  more  than  put  before  you  some  thoughts
which  have  been  pressed  upon  me  from  many  sides  and  which
may  give  you,  if  not  any  useful  contribution  to  your  investigations,


LXV.]


Presidential  Address.


3


at  least  the  suggestion  of  some  questions  which  may  have
occurred  to  the  minds  of  others.

First,  may  I  make  my  confession  of  faith  and  speak  of
the  conviction  which  led  me  to  take  an  interest  in  the  work
of  the  Society  ?  My  interest  was  aroused  by  the  studiously
scientific  spirit  which  it  claimed.

There  are  some  people  who  are  attracted  to  this  Society  by
a  vague  hope  of  some  startling  or  sensational  facts :  the  vague
and  vulgar  world  prefers  sensation  to  truth.  But  the  very  title
adopted  by  the  Society  carries  a  constant  caution :  it  is  a
Society  for  research,  and  research  needs  those  qualities  of  mind
and  thought  which  we  associate  with  the  adjective  scientific,
viz.  extreme  caution  in  accepting  evidence,  rigorous  investigation
of  facts,  determined  refusal  of  doubtful  narratives,  a  prudent
scepticism  and  a  vigorous  maintenance  of  mental  equilibrium.
The  true  spirit  of  research  does  not  want  romance  :  it  carries
a  wholesome  distrust  of  eager  garrulity :  it  knows  that  the
evidence  of  the  senses  is  often  deceptive.  Whatever  attractive
adornments  may  embellish  a  tale,  it  is  better  to  be  loyal  to
truth  than  to  be  the  victims  of  illusion :  and  as  members  of
this  Society  we  are  not  seeking  copy  for  works  of  imagination  :
we  are  anxious  to  reach  fundamental  facts ;  we  seek  the  gold
which  will  stand  test :  we  are  ready  to  crush  into  powder  the
great  masses  of  ignorance  and  superstition  in  which  it  may
be  embedded.

A  very  interesting  paper  was  written  seventy  years  ago  by
the  Secretary  to  the  Eoyal  Institution,  the  Eev.  John  Barlow.
The  subject  of  the  paper  was  Man's  power  over  himself  to
prevent  or  control  insanity.  In  1843  men  did  not  possess
the  physiological  knowledge  of  to-day ;  but  the  suggestions
made  by  the  writer  are,  if  I  mistake  not,  as  useful  to-day  as
they  were  two  generations  ago.  According  to  Mr.  Barlow,  the
difference  between  the  madman  and  the  sane  is  not  in  the
presence  of  the  illusion,  but  in  the  power  or  want  of  power
or  resolution  to  examine  it.  The  illusion  is  not  the  madness  :
even  the  mental  derangement  is  not  the  madness.  The
resolution  to  discriminate  is  the  protective  power,  which  keeps
madness  at  arm's  length.  To  illustrate  this  position  he  cited
the  case  of  Dr.  Nicolai  of  Berlin  (1799).  Dr.  Nicolai  had
passed  through  times  of  much  anxiety  and  trouble,  and  he


4  Right  Rev.  Bishop  W.  Boyd  Carpenter.  [part


became  subject  to  painful  experiences :  he  saw  in  his  room  the
figure  of  a  dead  acquaintance :  he  realized  that  this  experience
was  due  to  some  brain  derangement,  and  he  refused  to  yield
to  the  illusion.  As  his  health  was  re-established,  the  haunting
presence  vanished.  A  similar  experience  befell  Dr.  Bostock  of
London.  In  both  these  cases  some  derangement  had  taken
place :  in  both  cases  the  men  possessed  the  vigour  of  mind  to
discriminate  between  fact  and  illusion :  both  were  victorious  in
a  struggle  which  might  have  ended  in  insanity.

Now  no  reasonable  member  of  a  Society  whose  purpose  is
careful  research  will  do  other  than  applaud  the  attitude  of
mind  which  so  preserved  its  equipoise  as  to  refuse  to  be  terrified
out  of  its  wits,  and  which  by  holding  fast  its  integrity  was
able  to  show  that  even  brain  derangement  ought  to  be  faced,
watched  and  conquered,  while  in  the  conquest  the  true  nature
of  the  illusion  was  made  manifest.  "I  took  occasion"  (writes
Mr.  Barlow)  "  to  notice  a  peculiar  force  in  man,  which  is  capable
of  assuming  control  over  this  (a  certain)  portion  of  the  brain ;
and,  through  it,  over  the  greater  part  of  the  bodily  functions —
a  force  whose  agency,  as  Professor  Liebig  has  well  observed,  is
entirely  distinct  from  the  vital  force,  with  which  it  has  nothing
in  common ;  but  in  so  far  as  it  is  in  connection  with  matter,
manifests  itself  as  an  acceleration,  a  retarding  or  a  disturbance
of  the  '  processes  of  life.'  We  find  therefore,  as  this  acute
observer  (i.e.  Dr.  Liebig)  goes  on  to  state,  two  forces  in  authority
together,  namely,  the  mechanical-vital  force,  or  as  he  terms
it  the  vegetative  life,  and  the  source  of  the  higher  phenomena
of  mental  existence  which  is  of  a  perfectly  distinct  and  so  far
superior  nature,  that  it  is  able  sometimes  to  exercise  a  dominion
over  the  vital  force,  which  nullifies  its  action  and  at  all  times
modifies  and  controls  it."

We  should  not  state  these  matters  in  the  same  terms  to-day,
but  their  statement  even  in  obsolete  phraseology  will  be  welcome
because  of  the  strong  and  vigorous  good  sense  in  which  Mr.
Barlow  deals  with  illusions,  and  because  of  the  clear  way  in
which  he  insists  on  the  influence  which  the  mind  can  exercise
over  the  body  and  its  functions.  We  have  travelled  far  since
Mr.  Barlow  wrote  his  paper,  but  to  me  it  was  a  surprise  to
find  in  1843  such  modern  conceptions.  I  do  not  suppose  that,
notwithstanding  our  advance  in  knowledge,  there  is  anything


lxv.]  Presidential  Address.  5

in  Mr.  Barlow's  substantial  position  which  will  be  seriously
challenged  to-day,  and  I  feel  sure  that  the  members  of  this
Society  will  endorse  the  wisdom  of  his  conclusions,  viz.  that
the  resolution  to  maintain  our  power  of  discrimination  in  the
presence  of  abnormal  phenomena  is  essential  to  the  maintenance
of  our  mental  equilibrium.  I  am  glad,  therefore,  to  think  that
the  bridle  of  a  wholesome  scepticism  is  always  provided  in  this
Society :  the  nature  of  the  incidents  and  phenomena  which
form  our  stock-in-trade  are  of  a  character  which  might  tempt
the  unwary  or  the  imaginative  to  give  free  rein  to  their  fancy.
In  societies  as  well  as  in  individuals  we  need  to  avoid  being
taken  captive  by  illusions :  we  need  the  dry  light  of  reason :
we  need  the  persistent  and  trained  habit  which  can,  not  only
listen  to,  but  cross-question  evidence.  A  lawyer  of  unusually
wide  experience  said  to  me,  "  There  is  little  truth  in  the  witness
box."  It  is  the  task  of  the  skilful  counsel  to  extract  the  modicum
of  truth  which  is  there.  No  progress  will  be  made  by  rejecting
all  evidence  as  tainted  on  the  plea  that  human  weakness  and
even  human  wickedness  may  be  met  with  in  our  investigations.
It  is  a  difficult  task  to  separate  the  chaff  from  the  wheat  or
to  extract  the  gold  from  the  rocky  mass  in  which  it  is  embedded  ;
but  if  we  want  either  the  fruit  of  the  harvest  or  the  precious
ore,  we  must  face  the  difficulties,  and  we  must  possess  the
patience  of  mind  which  can  detect  some  rational  sequence  even
among  irrational  and  inconsequential  statements  of  fact.

We  may,  therefore,  readily  welcome  all  material  supplied  for
investigation,  as  long  as  we  are  candid  enough  to  publish
criticisms  from  all  intelligent  sources :  those  who  welcome  Sir
Oliver  Lodge's  happily  safeguarded  and  suggestive  lines  of  thought
or  Sir  W.  Barrett's  careful  exposition  of  Poltergeists,  Old  and  New,
will  not  resent  the  humorous  scepticism  of  Mr.  Andrew  Lang
or  the  healthy  doubts  of  Count  Solovovo.  The  last  number
of  the  Proceedings  (Part  LXIV.)  seemed  to  me  to  be  felicitously
typical  of  the  fitting  attitude  of  the  members  of  this  Society.

It  may  be  asked,  and  it  is  right  that  the  question  should
be  asked,  whether  this  Society  has  contributed  any  influence
of  practical  good  to  the  world.  The  man  in  the  street,  to
use  a  familiar  and  suggestive  expression,  may  be  pardoned  if
he  looks  askance  at  inquiries  which  must  seem  to  him  specu-
lative, vague  and  irrelevant  to  life's  practical  activities,  and  he


6  Right  Rev.  Bishop  W.  Boyd  Carpenter.  [part


may  be  forgiven  if  in  his  resentment  against  what  he  deems
wasted  time  and  energy  he  asks  whether  anything  which  can
be  translated  into  terms  of  practical  value  has  been  given  to
mankind  as  a  result  of  these  prolonged  and  costly  inquiries.
We  must  not  be  surprised  that  men  who  measure  all  things
by  utility  ask — what  good  does  it  do  ?

Now  there  is  one  reply  to  this  question  which  I  venture
to  make — at  the  same  time  emphasizing  the  caution  that  this
Society  cannot  be  held  responsible  for  the  views  of  any  of  its
officials,  and  that  the  President,  even  in  his  presidential  address,
can  only  speak  for  himself.  One  good,  however,  I  think  can
be  claimed  as  a  practical  result  towards  which  the  work  of
this  Society  has  contributed.  We  passed — I  speak  of  those
who  have  reached  threescore  and  ten — we  passed  through  a
period  of  very  crude  and  blatant  materialism  some  forty  or
fifty  years  ago :  the  pages  of  popular  magazines  blazed  with
the  firework  conclusions  of  scientific  materialism.  Matter  was
the  fundamental  fact  in  the  universe :  nothing  could  be  done
without  matter :  thought  was  only  a  smoke  given  off  by  heated
matter :  genius  not  merely  depended  for  its  expression  upon
the  material  in  the  brain,  but  was  simply  a  manifestation  of
brain  stuff.  I  remember  being  challenged  by  a  dying  man
with  this  question :  how  could  God  think,  seeing  that  He  was
spirit  and  therefore  could  have  no  brain  ?  In  such  crude
forms  of  thought  the  materialism  of  the  day  revelled.  Men
think  differently  now.  Mind  then  was  nothing  but  an  effluvium
of  the  brain-cells.  Now  we  are  told  that  "  matter  is  a  pauper-
denizen  of  the  conceptual  world." 1

To-day  the  attitude  of  science  is  changed :  the  relation  of
brain  to  thought  is  better  understood :  we  realize  that  our
physical  nature  puts  limitations  upon  our  opportunities  of
thought,  and  also  that  limits  have  been  set  to  the  materialist
hypothesis.  No  sane  man,  indeed,  will  deny  that  our  powers
of  thought  are  largely  governed  by  brain  conditions :  every  one
recognizes  the  strong  and  constant  influence  of  the  body  over
the  mind :  we  know  that  the  power  to  express  ourselves  is
not  unlimited,  but  strictly  limited  by  the  instrument  put  into
our  care :  we  cannot  contribute  to  the  world  more  than  the
instrument  will  allow,  any  more  than  a  violin  can  give  forth
'See  Mind,  April,  1912,  "Matter  and  Memory,''  by  E.  D.  Fawcett.


LXV.]


Presidential  Address.


7


the  sounds  of  a  trumpet  or  the  cymbals  take  the  range  of  the
organ.  Live  things,  as  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  has  reminded  us,1
cannot  alter  the  quantity  of  energy,  they  can  merely  utilize
available  energy  like  any  other  machine.  To  use  the  image
employed  by  a  French  bishop,  Monsigr.  d'Hulst,  "  The  master
of  a  house  may,  if  he  is  not  satisfied,  discharge  his  servants,
but  the  soul  of  man  does  not  possess  a  like  freedom :  it  must
be  content  with  the  bodily  organs  which  are  in  this  sense  his
servants ;  but  its  dependence  upon  them  goes  even  further ;  for
even  for  the  most  purely  intellectual  processes  a  co-operation
and  co-ordination  of  physical  powers  is  necessary :  thought
demands  blood,  and  when  the  blood  supply  is  scant  and  poor
the  energy  of  thought  is  impaired."

We  may  admit  all  this,  but  nevertheless  the  sturdy  materi-
alistic hypothesis  of  a  generation  ago  has  given  place  to  a
more  modest  and  reasonable  judgment.  If  the  body  has  power
over  the  mind,  the  mind  has  power  over  the  body  :  the  world
has  realized  this :  the  very  extravagances  of  what  is  called
Christian  Science  are  the  evidence  of  the  reaction  which  has
taken  place.  We  are  not  bound  to  leap  to  extremes,  but  we
must  recognize  that  the  materialist  of  other  days  rode  his
hobby-horse  till  he  killed  it.  Reasonable  men,  men  of  reflec-
tive powers,  and  men  of  scientific  experience,  who  frankly
acknowledge  the  power  of  the  body  over  the  mind,  are  never-
theless as  strongly  convinced  of  the  power  of  the  mind  over
the  body.  Professor  Dubois  does  not  hesitate  to  declare  that
the  ills  brought  upon  men  through  the  mind  are  more  frequent
than  those  caused  by  bodily  disorders.  He  relates  that  a  man,
through  mere  mental  impression,  caught  a  cold  because  his
neighbour  turned  the  page  of  a  newspaper  quickly  and  in  doing
so  caused  a  slight  current  of  air.2  This  may  remind  us  that
when  large  panes  of  glass  were  introduced  into  windows
instead  of  the  old-fashioned  small  panes,  Samuel  Eogers,  the
poet,  caught  cold,  because  being  placed  with  his  back  to  one
of  the  new  large-paned  windows,  he  could  not  rid  himself  of

1  Life  and  Matter,  p.  133.

"Be  Finfluence  de  Fesprit  sur  le  corps  (Fraulke,  Berne,  1908),  p.  75.  See,  how-
ever, Prof.  Mosso  on  Fatigue  (p  195),  who  noted  that  consciousness  returns
when  awaking  from  sleep  without  any  change  in  the  blood  circulation  of  the
brain.


8


Right  Rev.  Bishop  W.  Boyd  Carpenter.  [part


the  idea  that  the  window  behind  him  was  open.  If,  said  a
physician  to  me  at  one  of  our  large  provincial  hospitals,  we
could  calm  the  minds  of  our  patients,  the  cure  of  their  bodies
would  be  more  simple  and  rapid.  Everywhere  the  power  of
mind  over  the  body  is  recognized :  hypnotism,  auto-suggestion,
and  a  hundred  other  words  tell  the  same  tale,  viz.  that
inquiry  to-day  is  turning  more  and  more  to  the  deeply
interesting  problem — is  the  mind  or  soul  of  man  endowed
with  power  to  govern  or  modify  physical  nature  ?  We  do  not
now  believe  that  matter  is  the  sole  antecedent  and  condition
of  mind :  we  are  much  more  likely  to  follow  out  the  sugges-
tion that  mind  can  sway  matter,  and  the  question  which  we
are  putting  to  ourselves  is  not  whether  it  can  be  done ;  for
we  know  that  it  can,  but  what  are  the  limits  and  conditions
under  which  mind — the  human  mind  as  we  know  it — can  con-
trol or  modify  the  action  of  the  body  or  the  physical  world
which  environs  us.  And  here  the  work  of  this  Society  has
been  recognized.

One  very  ardent  advocate  of  the  virtue  of  this  mental
power  has  referred  his  hearers  to  the  Proceedings  of  this
Society  as  giving  the  best  and  most  helpful  material  for
arriving  at  a  just  and  wise  conclusion  on  this  matter.  It
cannot  be  denied  that  in  the  revolt  against  the  low-levelled
materialism  which  threatened  to  rob  mankind  of  its  noblest
prerogatives,  its  most  splendid  inheritances,  and  its  most  in-
spiring outlook,  this  Society  has  played  a  quiet,  modest  and
most  effective  part  in  recalling  men's  thoughts  to  the  need  of
a  more  careful  study  of  their  own  innermost  nature,  if  they
are  to  measure  rightly  the  position  which  man  holds  and  is
meant  to  hold  in  the  universe,  and  if  they  are  to  understand
the  significance  and  value  of  the  priceless  gift  of  life,  which
opens  to  us  such  wondrous  opportunities  of  knowledge  and
self-culture,  of  hope  and  high  endeavour.

I  have  thus  touched  on  the  spirit  and  achievements  of  the
Society.  I  now  must  proceed  with  greater  caution,  as  I  do  with
greater  hesitation,  when  I  venture  to  set  before  you  some
thoughts  connected  with  the  work  which  lies  before  us.

We  speak  of  man  as  human  being,  but  man  is  not  a  com-
pleted being :  he  is  a  being  in  process.  He  is  one  in  whose
nature  is  held  not  only  present  consciousness  but  notes  of  the


LXV.]


Presidential  Address.


9


past.  If  so,  may  not  some  of  the  exceptional  phenomena  which
challenge  investigation  result  from  the  dim  inheritances  or  relics
of  old  forces  ?  But  further,  man  is  a  being  in  process,  and
anticipations  of  the  future  may  find  place  in  him.  May  not
some  phenomena  be  accounted  for  as  movements  of  nascent
activities  in  man's  nature  ?

To  make  the  proposition  good,  it  needs  to  be  shown  that—
Man  is  a  being  in  process  of  completion,
That  he  still  holds  within  his  nature  relics  of  the  past,
That  his  is  not  a  stationary  nature,  but  a  nature  con-
stantly acquiring  powers  and  in  doing  so  forming  new
capacities.

(1)  Man  is  a  being  in  process  of  completion:
In  investigations  concerning  the  conditions  of  human  per-
sonality, it  has  been  too  often  taken  for  granted  that  we  are
dealing  with  a  completed  organism,  whereas  I  am  obliged  to
view  man  as  an  incomplete  being :  he  is  indeed  not  so  much  a
being  as  a  becoming :  he  is  still  in  the  great  factory  of  Nature.

If  we  ignore  this  point  of  view  we  shall  fall  into  the  error
which,  without  his  fault,  beset  Paley's  argument  for  design.
Paley  started  with  the  illustration  of  a  watch — a  piece  of
mechanism  made  and  completed  for  a  purpose :  he  could  point
to  the  evidences  of  purpose  in  the  various  parts  of  the  mechanism
and  in  the  arrangement  of  the  dial ;  but  the  illustration  which
was  natural  enough  when  Paley  wrote,  became  no  longer
applicable  when  the  great  evolutionary  drama  was  disclosed :
the  Universe  was  not  like  a  watch — a  completed  machine :  it
was  a  growth,  and  more,  it  was  still  in  process  of  formation :
its  purpose  was  not  written  there  as  upon  a  finished  piece
of  mechanism  :  we  were  living  in  a  Universe  which  was  still
in  the  making.  The  simple  but  rough  argument  from  design
could  not  be  applied  to  a  vast  but  uncompleted  system.
Investigations  must  henceforth  be  made  with  the  remembrance
that  movement  of  development  was  still  going  on,  and  that
while  we  might  notice  what  has  been  called  a  dramatic
tendency  in  the  history  of  things,  we  could  not  so  readily  or  so
obviously  speak  of  definite  and  detailed  purpose.  "  Eeality  .  .  .
is  still  in  the  making  and  waits  part  of  its  complexion  from
the  future  .  . .  the  universe  is  still  pursuing  its  adventures."  1

1  Prof .  James,  Pragmatism,  p.  257,  quoted  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXV.,  p.  17.


10  Bight  Rev.  Bishop  W.  Boyd  Carpenter.  [part


Now,  the  same  fact  needs  to  be  kept  in  mind  when  we
examine  into  the  nature  of  man  :  he  is  not  yet  a  completed
being :  he  is  a  being  in  process  of  formation.  We  can,  with
Prof.  Fiske,1  follow  the  history  of  his  formation :  we  can  go
back  to  the  long  and  wondrous  story  of  those  changes  which
tell  of  Natural  Selection,  of  the  influence  of  slight  physical
variations  on  succeeding  generations,  of  the  dawn  of  changes
which  brought  psychical  powers  into  prominence,  when  touch
was  translated  into  vision  till  a  stage  is  reached  when  psychical
changes  became  of  more  moment  than  physical.  Then  came
that  condition  of  animal  life  when  strong  physical  resemblances
might  be  seen  allied  to  great  psychical  differences.  We  all
realize  the  fact  that  through  long  periods  the  development  of
man  went  on :  we  need  to  remember  that  it  still  goes  forward ;
no  longer  as  far  as  we  can  see  on  the  physical,  but  on  the
psychical  plane.  In  all  our  inquiries  concerning  man  this  fact
needs  to  be  kept  in  view  :  we  are  not  examining  a  finished
organism :  we  are  dealing  with  a  being  whose  past  has  been  a
record  of  great  physical  changes,  and  who  to-day  is  still  the
subject  of  such  psychical  changes  as  are  leading  forward  to
developments  of  power  and  capacity  which  can  only  be  dimly
guessed  at  now.  The  only  difference,  so  far  as  we  can  judge,
between  the  past  and  the  present  movement  is  that  Nature  is
no  longer  concerned  to  develop  man's  physical  conditions  or
structure  :  her  task  now  is  to  bring  humanity  to  a  higher  and
truer  perfection  in  the  possession  of  qualities  of  soul  whose  full
value  can  only  be  estimated  when  physical  nature,  as  we
know  it,  is  finally  laid  aside.

Will  any  one  think  that  psychical  research  offers  a  barren
field  of  inquiry  when  once  it  is  realized  that  it  is  in  the  path
of  psychical  and  not  of  physical  development  that  man  is  now
being  led  by  the  same  strong  and  mysterious  force  which  first
fashioned  and  brought  to  perfection  his  physical  framework  ?

But  it  is  upon  the  simple  fact  that  man  is  a  being  still  in
process  of  formation  that  I  wish  to  fix  our  thoughts.  The  history
of  the  past  gives  us  witness  of  this :  science  with  its  clear
testimony  shows  that  through  the  action  of  what,  for  lack  of  a
better  word,  we  may  call  laws,  there  has  emerged  from  lower  to
higher  life  man  as  we  now  know  him,  and  that  even  now
^iske,  Destiny  of  Man,  pp.  27-8.


LXV.]


Presidential  Address.


11


changes  are  working  if  no  longer  for  his  physical,  yet  through
his  physical  experiences  for  his  psychical  development.

I  turn,  therefore,  to  one  aspect  of  man's  psychical  growth.
From  the  standpoint  of  science  man  is  not  a  stationary  being,
but  a  being  in  process  of  development — the  subject  of  growth.
The  same  is  true  when  we  ask  about  man's  consciousness  of
self :  here  too  we  meet  the  law  of  growth.  Self — is  there
anything  more  certain  to  us  than  self  ?  Each  of  us  is  daily
experiencing  the  power  of  saying — It  is  I  who  felt  this  :  It  is
I  who  did  that :  It  is  I  who  forms  this  judgment.  In  other
words  our  life  is  inconceivable  to  us  apart  from  this  most  certain
thing  "  Self,"  and  yet  our  consciousness  of  self  may  be  said  to
be  a  growth :  this  self  is  in  truth  a  thing  of  which  we  gain
conviction — not  immediately,  but  through  a  repeated  number  of
experiences :  it  is — as  Dr.  Ward  has  said — a  product  of  thought,
not  a  datum  of  sense.  It  is,  shall  I  say  ?  a  resultant  of
experience.

The  baby  new  to  earth  and  sky,
What  time  his  tender  palm  is  prest
Against  the  circle  of  the  breast,

Has  never  thought  that  '  this  is  I :  '

But  as  he  grows  he  gathers  much,
And  learns  the  use  of  '  I '  and  'me,'
And  finds  '  I  am  not  what  I  see,

And  other  than  the  things  I  touch.'

So  rounds  he  to  a  separate  mind

From  whence  clear  memory  may  begin,
As  thro'  the  frame  that  binds  him  in

His  isolation  grows  denned.

In  Metnoriam,  xlv.

What  Tennyson  expressed  in  verse,  science  tells  tersely  in
prose.  "  The  body  first  of  all  gives  to  self  a  certain  measure
of  individuality,  permanence  and  inwardness." 1

The  conviction  of  self  then  is  a  resultant  of  experience :  a
conviction  due  to  continuous  presentations.  Our  sense  of  per-
sonality is  in  fact  a  growth,  and  as  a  growth  it  carries  with
it  a  history,  and  as  a  growth  it  may  carry  with  it  some
prophecy  also  ;  for  all  things  which  grow  pass  through  stages —
1  Dr.  James  Ward,  Encycl.  Brit.  Article  "Psychology,"  p.  84a.


12


Right  Rev.  Bishop  W.  Boyd  Carpenter.  [part


in  other  words,  they  possess  folded  up  within  themselves
the  records  of  the  past  and  the  preparations  for  the  future  :
the  blossom  is  the  product  of  months  of  growth  :  it  is  also  the
harbinger  of  fuller  and  richer  developments.

It  is  perhaps  well  to  consider  this  aspect  of  selfhood.  We
are  so  ready  to  limit  ourselves  by  the  Here  and  Now  that
we  may  lose  sight  of  the  truth  that  if  we  are  beings  we
are  also  "  becomings " :  our  days  glide  on  and  we  step  from
stage  to  stage  of  self-realization,  and  just  as  there  was  an  epoch
when  we  were  without  ability  to  realize  ourselves  or  to  express
ourselves,  so  it  may  well  be  that  our  self-realization  is  as  yet
incomplete,  just  as  we  painfully  know  that  our  powers  of  self-
expression  are  woefully  defective :  we  are  growths,  not  only  in
the  sense  that  we  have  each  individually  grown,  nor  in  the
sense  that  the  race  has  grown  through  aeons  of  change,  but
that  we  also  are  upon  the  platform  of  growth,  holding  within
ourselves  a  vast  and  unexplored  inheritance  of  past  experiences
and  the  potentialities  of  further  developments — when  self-
realization  will  be  yet  more  vivid :  when  possessed  of  a  self  more
fully  identified,  and  also,  perchance,  endowed  with  a  vehicle  of
expression  more  plastic  and  responsive  than  present  physical
conditions  can  allow,  we  shall  be  able  to  give  fuller  and  nobler
expression  to  the  speechless  aspirations  of  our  nature.  We  are
but  creatures  in  process  of  formation :  we  know  not  what  we
shall  be :  we  scarcely  even  know  what  we  are.  The  mystery
which  hangs  around  those  wonderful  convictions  which  we
describe  as  Self — Personality — the  Ego — the  Soul — is  largely  due,
as  it  seems  to  me,  to  the  fact  that  our  present  life,  like  our
ante-natal  life,  is  embryonic  as  compared  with  that  towards
which  we  are  tending.  We  are  like  people  called  upon  to
report  upon  machine  while  it  is  going :  we  are  at  a  dis-
advantage, for  we  want  to  stop  it  to  understand  how  it  goes.
But  even  this  illustration  is  quite  inadequate,  for  a  machine  which
is  working  is  not  subject  to  growth :  in  its  case  it  is  rapidity
of  movement  only  which  thwarts  our  examination  of  it,  but  in
regard  to  ourselves  and  our  own  selfhood,  we  are  dealing  with
not  a  finished  machine,  but  a  complex  organization  which  is  still
in  process  of  development.

This  strange  self  then  we  cannot,  with  Hume,  describe  as
a philosophical  fiction : we  may  call  it,  with  Dr.  Ward,  a


LXV.]


Presidential  Address.


13


product  of  thought  or  an  idea  of  the  reason,  but  we  do  not
therefore  deem  it  an  unreality,  it  reveals  itself  too  vividly  for
that :  it  possesses  what  we  may  call  cross-currents — an  ebb
and  flow  of  the  tides  of  selfhood.  Self  does  not  always  give
us  the  same  self-interpretations  or  presentations.  So  marked
are  the  differences  of  presentations  that  the  self  was  split  up
by  some :  and  we  heard  much  of  dual  personality — or  of  a
soul  which  is  over  and  separate  from  the  soul  which  is  under.
The  theory  of  an  over  soul 1  has  had  fascination  for  many
minds :  its  existence  was  postulated  to  explain  some  phenomena
or  experiences  which  could  not  be  explained  (so  it  seemed)  by
the  ordinary  action  of  the  conscious  mind.  Here  we  need  to
be  cautious  in  words  lest  we  should  appear  to  divide  what,  by
its  very  nature,  must  be  one  and  indivisible.

The  soul  is  individual :  this  seems  to  be  the  final  word  of
human  thought  on  the  matter :  to  think  otherwise  is  to  lose
hold  of  all  anchorage  for  thought.  I  may  be  told  that  science
has  been  obliged  to  abandon  her  faith  that  atoms  were  indi-
visible, and  that  now  she  is  committed  to  a  perpetual  bull  by
enlarging  upon  the  marvellous  subdivisions  which  subsist  in  the
indivisible  thing  called  an  atom.  But  the  cases  are  different :
the  physical  atom  could  be  treated,  examined,  analyzed  till  its
elusive  elements  were  compelled  to  disclose  themselves ;  but  the
self  cannot  be  so  dealt  with,  and  we  might  as  well  abandon  all
inquiry  as  admit  that  essentially  the  self  was  other  than  indi-
vidual. Were  it  so,  there  would  be  no  reason  for  revulsion
of  feeling  when  alienist  experiences  were  brought  to  our  notice.
We  must,  I  think,  postulate  the  individuality  of  the  soul  or
self  if  we  are  to  study  its  activities,  conditions  and  moods,
with  any  hope  of  advantage.  It  is  well,  therefore,  to  avoid
any  language  which  implies  a  duality  or  multiplicity  in  self.
We  need,  however,  words  or  phrases  to  distinguish  between  the
different  aspects  in  which  the  self  or  soul  manifests  its  energy.

1  Compare  Dante's  words,

"Whenever  by  delight  or  else  by  pain,
That  seizes  any  faculty  of  ours,
Wholly  to  that  the  soul  collects  itself,
It  seemeth  that  no  other  power  it  heeds  ;

And  this  against  that  error  is  which  thinketh
One  soul  above  another  kindles  in  us.''

Purgatorio,  iv.  1  -6.


14  Rigid  Rev.  BisJiojo  W.  Boyd  Carpenter.  [part


Mr.  Myers  chose  a  word  which  avoided  the  suggestion  of  any
dualism.  The  subliminal  self  was  not  another  self  but  the
same  self  working  in  other  conditions :  this  subliminal  self  or
subconscious  self  has  made  its  footing  too  good  in  human  ex-
perience to  be  treated  as  an  unreality  or  a  delusion.  Fechner,
if  I  mistake  not,  suggested  a  similar  thought  when  he  spoke
of  consciousness  being  present  and  awake  when  the  psycho-
physical activity  was  raised  beyond  the  degree  which  we  call
the  threshold  (On  Life  after  Death,  p.  78  n.)  I  am  not  careful
or  anxious  about  the  word  by  which  we  describe  it,  but  of  the
fact  that  the  self  sometimes  acts  with  conscious  effort  and  at
other  times  with  unobserved  effort  there  can,  I  think,  be  no  doubt.
But  there  does  not  seem  to  me  to  be  any  need  to  set  up  an
arcanum  of  ideas  or  a  Valhalla  of  strange  potentialities  in  order
to  account  for  facts  which  are  deeply  interesting  and  at  times
mysteriously  so,  but  which,  if  I  mistake  not,  fall  within  the
realm  of  what  I  may  call  psychical  order.

We  are  beings  still  in  a  state  of  growth ;  and  the  tendency
of  this  growth  seems  to  be,  not  towards  a  multiple  personality,
but  towards  completed  individuality.  Growth  in  capacity  takes
place  through  repeated  effort,  and  through  such  experiences
comes  true  and  full  self-realization.

Man's  inheritance  through  the  past  is  never  thrown  away :
it  must  enter  into  the  education — or,  if  you  prefer  the  words,
the  formation  of  the  conditions — of  his  nature.  But  all  this
antecedent  growth  bears  the  mark  of  struggle :  at  every  stage
of  the  evolutionary  process  the  marks  of  conflict,  i.e.  of  effort,
were  to  be  seen,  and  though  now  these  records  slumber  as  it
were  in  our  nature  there  was  a  time  when  their  tale  was  one
of  continued  struggle.  The  truth,  as  it  seems  to  me,  is  that
the  condition  of  progress  or  growth  is  this,  that  conscious  effort
is  continuously  being  transformed  into  unconscious  capacity.

Let  me  ask  your  experience  on  this  point.  We  are  sensible,
of  course,  of  our  conscious  efforts,  because  the  very  conscious-
ness of  any  effort  serves  to  impress  us.  But  effort,  though  it
is  a  witness  of  energy,  is  not  the  evidence  of  accpuired  capacity:
it  is  only  a  step  towards  it.  In  this  sense  it  may  be  said
that  our  conscious  efforts  are  not  manifestations  of  our  real
power,  but  rather  of  our  capacity  to  gain  it.  Conscious  efforts
are  only  means  for  the  storage  of  power :  they  are  needful,  for


LXV.]  Presidential  Address.  15

without  them  the  accumulation  of  power  would,  cease.  The
energy  once  seen  in  vegetable  growth  has  been  transformed
into  the  quiescent  energy  which  sleeps  in  our  coal  seams.  Or
to  carry  the  illustration  a  step  further,  our  conscious  efforts
are  like  the  coaling  of  the  ship :  they  will  become  power  as
coal  does  when  once  the  furnaces  are  kindled  and  the  steam
is  generated.  Our  conscious  efforts  are  supplying  the  fuel  for
further  activities,  but  the  larger  number  of  these  activities  will
be  carried  on  without  conscious  exertion.  The  man  who  has
practised  at  the  wicket,  taking  careful  lessons  from  the  pro-
fessional cricketer,  is  making  keenly  conscious  effort  when  he
gives  thought  and  attention  carefully  to  carry  out  the  instruc-
tions of  the  professional,  but  the  final  measure  of  his  skill  as
a  cricketer  is  when  he  can  play  the  ball  with  such  an  unerring
instinct  that  he  is  no  longer  conscious  of  any  mental  effort  in
determining  how  to  play  it.  This  is  an  example  of  conscious
effort  being  slowly  transformed  into  unconscious  power.  Illus-
trations might  be  multiplied,  but  it  remains  true  that  the
skilled  billiard  player,  the  efficient  soldier,  the  successful  actor,
the  popular  singer,  only  reach  their  highest  when  a  very  large
part  of  their  task  is  discharged  without  painful,  conscious  or
mental  effort.  We  only  do  things  well  when  we  don't  know
how  we  do  them ;  but  the  process  by  which  such  skill  is
reached  is  through  continuous  exercise  of  conscious  effort.
Action  in  the  hour  of  necessity  must  be  the  resultant  of  in-
stinctive skill,  i.e.  power  used  without  consciousness  of  effort.
The  good  billiard  player  shows  power  without  calculated  effort :
his  power  is  the  resultant  of  many  conscious  and  calculated
efforts,  but  for  him  the  calculated  effort  is  no  longer  needful.
Conscious  effort  has  been  translated  into  unconscious  power.
He  has  but  to  will  and  the  trained  capacity  answers  to  his
will.

Our  conscious  powers  are  at  work  when  we  read,  or  when  we
think  out  a  problem  ;  for  then  we  are  acting  like  accumulators  :
we  are  storing  up  material  for  use  or  action.  In  acquisitive
work  we  use  conscious  effort.  In  creative  work  of  the  highest
order  such  a  sense  of  conscious  effort  would  be  fatal  to  the
highest  results.  When  the  great  spirit  of  genius  calls,  the  mind
is  swept  into  an  activity  in  which  it  is  no  longer  conscious  of
effort :  he  does  not  toil,  neither  does  he  spin,  but  the  creation


16  Right  Rev.  Bishop  W.  Boyd  Carpenter.  [part

« • «  c  • tf •  c « ■  •  c  «  •  •  «

• •*.<••,"••' •  •  ■ «, »« • *  -

of  the  hotfr  is  strayed,  in  ta  ffeKio^  which  no  conscious  effort
could  achieve.  Here  the  old  distinction  comes  into  service.
Talent  does  what  it  can  :  genius  does  what  it  must.  Talent  is
deliberate  and  constantly  conscious  of  effort  put  forth.  Genius
acts  under  a  necessity.  He  lisps  in  numbers,  for  the  numbers
come.  He  sings  the  inevitable  song.  He  pipes  but  as  the
linnets  do.  There  is  no  painful  consciousness  of  efforts :  there
is  no  smell  of  the  lamp  on  such  work  as  this :  it  is  ready,
spontaneous,  springing  out  of  the  necessity  of  nature :  it  is  the
splendid  manifestation  of  great  stores  of  power  so  happily  stored
that  they  are  immediately  available.

The  unconscious  power  is  the  resultant  of  conscious  effort :
conscious  effort  has  stored  up  somehow  and  somewhere  the
stores  from  which  capacity  derives  her  skill.  There  are  numbers
of  unrecognized  powers  at  work  in  the  average  man,  of  whose
existence  he  is  hardly  aware  and  whose  genesis  he  could  scarcely
trace.  Is  it  not  admitted  that  when  dealing  with  our  fellow-
men,  we  come  across  unexpected  barriers  of  taste,  feeling,
prejudice?  Convictions  and  judgments,  standards  of  conduct  and
bearing  have  been  acquired  from  early  training.  Precept  and
example,  often  repeated  and  enforced,  have  accumulated  in
man's  nature  forces  which  are  now  unconsciously  operative
throughout  the  whole  range  of  his  life.  In  dealing  with  any
fresh  matter,  he  will  meet  it  with  the  force  of  a  number  of
long-stored  conditions :  his  judgment  on  a  new  question  will
depend  upon  what  has  been  described  as  his  entire  psycho-
statical  conditions,  his  nature  and  stock  of  ideas,  or,  in  other
words,  his  character,  habits,  memory,  education,  previous  ex-
perience and  momentary  mood.  Does  the  average  man  deal
with  any  new  subject  on  the  basis  of  pure  logic  ?  It  is  not
his  reasoning  faculty  only  which  he  calls  into  the  judgment
seat :  the  whole  mass  of  inherited  experiences  hurry  to  the
assize  and  resolve  to  be,  if  not  judge,  at  least  jury  in  the  case.
"There  is,"  says  Professor  James  {Psychology,  p.  327),  "an
everlasting  struggle  in  every  mind  between  the  tendency  to
keep  unchanged,  and  the  tendency  to  renovate  its  ideas."
Does  not  this  mean  that  when  we  approach  a  new  experience
we  feel  divided  in  mind,  doubting,  wishing  to  examine  and
yet  feeling  that  it  is  valueless  unless  we  can  bring  it  into
automatic relationship with our  previous  stock of  thought.


LXV.]


Presidential  Address.


17


Our  conscious  efforts  are  challenged  by  the  new  thing,  but  we
feel  the  necessity  of  transferring  it  into  the  storehouse  of  personal
powers  or  capacity.  In  other  words,  we  are  always  seeking
mental  food,  and  always  feeling  that  the  only  value  of  it  is
found  when  it  is  translated  into  some  kind  of  personal
energy.

Only  when  this  personal  energy  is  set  free  from  the  anxiety
of  conscious  exertion  can  it  be  said  to  have  reached  perfection.
All  the  experiences  of  life,  the  solicitudes  which  have  been
our  portion,  the  pressure  of  responsibility,  the  weight  of  sorrow,
the  fatigue  of  effort,  all  have  been  of  the  nature  of  conscious
exertions,  and  therefore  have  contributed  to  the  storehouse  of
powers  which  can  be  used  in  effortless  manner  later  on.  The
quiet  sympathy  which  the  sorrowful  life  has  created  no  less
than  the  ready  intellect  which  works  easily,  is  an  instance  of
conscious  effort  transformed  into  unconscious  power.

Hence  there  is  being  slowly  formed  in  man — through  repeated
conscious  efforts — an  inheritance  of  powers  and  capacities  which
can  work  without  the  sense  of  strenuous  effort.  All  the
experiences  of  life's  continuous  struggle  are  contributing  to
the  endowment  of  man  with  new  powers.  Is  it  then  difficult
to  suppose  that  among  the  accumulated  powers  of  man  there
may  be  resident  capacities  which  can  come  into  play  without
conscious  effort  ?  The  range  of  automatic  powers  increases  with
our  development.  Continually  the  conscious  effort  passes  over
to  man's  nature  a  fresh  heritage  of  automatic  power — which
enriches  his  personality  and  contributes  even  more  and  more
to  his  self-realization.  He  is  only  free  in  the  exercise  of  self
when  he  can  achieve  without  the  servitude  of  continuous
effort.

This  constant  transference  of  effort  into  power  is  building
up  personality  :  it  is  enlarging  the  realm  of  self.  All  Nature's
method  is  in  the  direction  of  building  up  into  an  intelligible
unity — not  in  the  direction  of  dislocating  powers :  her  policy
is  continuous  unification,  not  separation  ;  and  as  she  follows  it,
the  range  of  powers  which  are  bestowed  upon  man  increases ;
and  it  would  not  be  strange  if  new  capacities  were  thus  brought
within  the  sovereignty  of  his  soul,  and  with  the  increase  of  new
capacities  enjoyed  by  countless  individualities  new  phenomena
might  spring  into  notice. The  completion  of  personality  would

B


18  Right  Rev.  Bishop  W.  Boyd  Carpenter.  [part

mean  the  extension  of  powers,  and  the  manifestation  of  these
powers  would  give  rise  to  new  phenomena.

We  are  beings  in  a  state  of  growth :  the  treasure-house  of  a
wonderful  past  is  ours :  often  out  of  the  unexplored  treasure-
house  of  our  ancient  inheritance  there  may  come  to  us  messages
from  the  dim  past  which  fill  us  with  wonder,  but  which  need
not  be  counted  incredible,  for  they  are  the  breathings  of  forgotten
experiences  of  the  race.  As  an  inscription  in  some  unknown
character  is  dug  up  among  the  ruins  of  some  ancient  shrine,
so  there  may  come  to  us  some  undecipherable  expression  of
facts  or  methods  of  life  which  belong  to  a  past  which  has  gone
out  of  human  recollection.  "  Every  element  in  an  experience
is  correlated  with  some  alteration  in  the  nervous  system,  '  and
we  must  infer  that  some  kind  of  residue  or  impression,  chemical
or  physical,  is  left  in  the  neurones  in  consequence  of  which
they  have  a  disposition  to  reproduce,  when  again  stimulated,  the
original  experience,  whether  an  idea  or  physiological  reaction.'"1
Without  being  materialists  we  must  surely  admit  that  whatever
is  built  up  with  our  bodily  framework  must  constitute  a  part
of  our  life's  equipment,  and  may  tend  to  become  a  suggestive
factor  in  our  activities.  As  those  with  whose  very  nature  the
past  has  been  wondrously  built  we  must  be  liable  to  influences
arising  from  our  physical  relationship  with  the  past.  How
closely  the  past  does  intertwine  itself  with  our  organism  may
be  realized  when  we  read  Dr.  Alexander  Hill's  account  of
pre-natal  growth.

In  a  few  days  or  weeks  or  months  a  drama  is  acted  which  has  taken
geological  aeons  to  rehearse,  for  every  individual  recapitulates  in  its
growth  the  successive  stages  to  which  its  ancestors  attaiued  and  at
which  they  severally  stopped.  What  explanation  could  the  teacher
of  fifty  years  ago  give  of  the  gill-slits,  or  tail,  or  a  hundred  other
resemblances  to  lower  vertebrates  which  the  human  embryo  presents
in  the  course  of  its  development  ?  They  are  by  no  means  necessary
preparations  for  adult  structure.  They  never  can  be  useful.  Not
infrequently  they  are  mischievous.  Man's  organs  reach  their  per-
manent form  by  many  a  roundabout  road.  These  digressions  are
indicative  of  the  tenacity  of  Nature's  memory. She  can  attain  her

'Dr.  T.  W.  Mitchell,  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  667.  Review  of  Dr.
Morton  Prince's  paper  on  "The  Psychological  Principles  and  Field  of  Psycho-
therapy."


lxv.]  Presidential  Address.  19

goal  only  by  tracing  over  again — with  a  jump  here  and  a  short  cut
there  it  may  be,  but  without  letting  go  of  the  clue — the  path  which
she  followed  when  she  first  discovered  it.

Thus  the  conditions  into  which  we  are  born  are  conditions
which  are  instinct  with  the  power  of  a  great  past.  In  a  sense
different  from  that  of  the  ancient  writer,  God  has  set  the
world,  as  it  were,  in  our  heart.  Is  it  surprising  then  that  at
times  glimpses  of  the  past  should  show  themselves  ?  May  not
the  unexpected  phenomena  of  human  life  sometimes  find  their
explanation  in  the  coming  to  the  surface  of  some  ancient
stratum  of  experience?  As  an  earth -shock  may  thrust  up
some  rock  which  tells  us  the  story  of  earlier  earth  movements,
may  not  some  startling  event  in  life  call  into  activity  some
long  buried  aptitude  of  our  slowly  built  nature  ?  There  may,
indeed,  be  stored  within  us  forces  which  some  strange  experi-
ence may  vivify  and  liberate.  The  explanation  of  some  strange
capacities  of  our  nature  may  be  locked  up  in  the  bosom  of
the  past.

Are  not  some  of  the  phenomena  which  demand  investigation
probably  due  to  the  activities  of  obsolescent  organs,  or  of
capacities  which  have  been  weakened  but  not  wholly  suppressed
in  the  process  of  civilization  ?  May  we  not  in  this  way
account  for  the  power  which  some  show  in  the  use  of  the
Divining  Kod  ?  Does  not  the  instinct  which  warns  animals  of
the  approach  of  the  storm  or  the  impending  earthquake  find
its  counterpart  in  human  beings  ?  and  do  not  both  find  their
explanation  in  the  experiences  which  from  the  past  are  still
stored  up  in  the  very  physical  framework  which  man  and
animals  inherit  ?  It  is  no  part  of  wisdom  to  laugh  at  the
expression  or  manifestation  of  instincts,  whose  existence  is
derived  from  and  throws  light  back  upon  the  story  of  develop-
ing life.  When  the  seafaring  man  declares  that  he  is  warned
of  the  proximity  of  ice  by  his  sense  of  smell,  it  seems  to  be
no  mark  of  intelligence  to  ridicule  the  suggestion.  Inquiry  is
wiser  than  ridicule.  It  does  not  seem  to  me  passing  strange
that  in  the  vast  community  of  mankind  there  should  be  found
scattered  individuals  in  whom  the  relics  of  past  instincts  are
still  strong  enough  to  be  factors  serviceable  in  life  as  we
know  it.

But  if  we  are  beings  still  in  the  making,  is  it  beyond  the


20  Right  Rev.  Bishop  W.  Boyd  Carpenter.  [PART


range  of  probability  that  anticipations  of  the  future  may  be
discovered  ?  If  embryonic  life  contains  records  of  the  past,
does  it  not  also  contain  prophecies  of  the  future  ?  In  the
sacred  casket  wherein  the  dawning  life  lies  enshrined  there  is
written  not  only  the  story  of  the  past,  but  the  anticipations
of  the  future.  Nature  is  beforehand  with  her  work.  Judged
by  present  necessities,  we  find  organs  provided  which  serve
no  purpose.  In  the  secluded  existence  where  light  does  not
shine,  eyes  can  fulfil  no  function :  within  those  closed  doors,
shut  out  from  the  converse  of  men,  ears  have  no  exercise ;
yet  in  that  dim  life  shut  off  from  sunshine  and  the  song  of
birds,  organs  of  sight  and  sound,  of  taste  and  smell  are  to  be
found.  They  serve  no  purpose  as  yet,  but  they  are  prophetic
of  a  life  in  which  they  will  play  a  great  and  serviceable  part.
Nature  works  not  only  in  preserving  relics  of  past  experience,
but  in  storing  up  forces  in  anticipation  of  future  needs.  Process
and  capacities  are  produced  without  their  object  being  apparent:
one  day  they  become  of  service :  they  are  made  for  a  condition
of  existence  which  is  to  come.

And  may  it  not  be  that  our  present  life  compared  with  the
future  life  is  an  embryonic  life  ?  May  there  not  be  faculties
and  powers  which  are  now  being  formed  whose  full  significance
and  value  will  only  be  evident  when  we  pass  into  a  life  of
new  conditions  ?  If  so,  would  it  be  a  strange  thing  if  these
nascent  capacities  sometimes  made  their  presence  felt  within
the  experience  of  the  life  present  ?  The  embryonic  life  is  cut
off  from  the  world  as  we  know  it,  but  it  is  not  wholly  passive  :
stirrings  and  movements,  which  cut  across  normal  experiences,
make  themselves  felt.  Is  it  impossible  to  suppose  that  the
growing  forces,  which  beneath  the  surface  are  being  prepared
for  the  wider  life  of  the  hereafter,  may  make  themselves  felt
in  ways  which  are  not  those  of  commonplace  life  ?  May  not
some  phenomena,  which  we  cannot  classify  according  to  normal
usage,  be  the  dawning  activity  of  powers  and  capacities  which  will
unly  be  fully  ours  hereafter  ?  The  stirrings  of  such  capacities
are  but  the  movement  of  forces,  which  are  real,  but  whose
meaning  and  purpose  cannot  be  fully  understood  till  the  con-
ditions have  arisen  which  make  these  activities  natural  and
intelligible.  For  the  present,  therefore,  any  manifestation  of
these  growing  powers  must  be  reckoned  as  super-normal.


LXV.]


Presidential  Address.


21


Briefly,  if  we  are  beings  in  process  of  formation,  movements
may  be  expected  which  presage  future  conditions  as  well  as
those  which  bear  witness  to  conditions  which  are  passing  away.
As  becomings,  the  mark  of  what  has  been,  as  well  as  of  that
which  will  be,  may  now  and  then  rise  to  the  surface.  If  the
plane  of  evolution  is  no  longer  physical,  but  psychical,  these
movements  which  are  anticipative  of  future  conditions  of  life
must  be  expected  within  the  psychical  realm.  The  life  towards
which  we  tend  is  one  which  will  be  largely  free  from  physical
conditions  as  we  now  know  them.  The  forces  which  will  be
operative  in  that  life  are  not  created  out  of  things  physical :
their  origin  is  to  be  found  in  our  psychical  activities :  voli-
tions, thoughts,  resolutions,  actions,  habits  are  the  matrix  out  of
which  will  spring  the  characteristic  capacities  which  will  be
ours  in  the  life  of  new  conditions.  Only  then  will  the  new
self  emerge  from  the  discipline  and  formative  influences  of  our
present  life ;  and  that  new  self  will  be  endowed  with  powers
and  capacities,  which  will  be  great  or  small,  mean  or
noble,  according  to  our  habits  here,  but  which  will  be  fitted  at
least  for  use  and  service  in  the  life  in  which  the  natural  has
given  place  to  the  spiritual.

The  suggestions  which  I  have  ventured  to  make  will  indicate
the  line  which  I  think  the  work  of  our  Society  ought  to
pursue.  While  being  strictly  vigilant  against  fallacious  represen-
tations of  phenomena,  vigorous  in  examining  all  facts  and
circumstances  brought  to  notice,  it  ought  to  hold  a  mind  open
enough  to  welcome  hints  and  helps  from  every  quarter :  it
ought  to  be  as  stern  in  rejecting  what  is  irrelevant  as  it  should
be  keen  to  perceive  the  importance  which  may  lurk  in  what  is
insignificant.  "  Though  truths  in  manhood  darkly  join,"  we  are
none  the  less  entitled  to  search  out  such  truths  and  brino;
them  to  light :  and  in  this  search  we  shall  render  to  the  body
that  which  is  the  body's  and  to  the  soul  that  which  is  the
soul's.  We  shall  be  just  and  even-handed,  to  rob  neither  our
physical  nor  our  spiritual  nature  of  its  due,  but  we  shall
recognize  that  in  a  being  compact  of  body,  soul  and  spirit,  the
resultant  of  long  ages  of  growth  and  development,  powers  and
capacities  may  be  lodged  which  are  not  always  explicable  by
present  knowledge ;  we  shall  be  awake,  therefore,  to  mark  those
effects  which  show  the  working  of  interacting  human  powers.


22


Right  Rev.  Bishop  W.  Boyd  Carpenter.  [part


Every  substantial  form,  wrote  Dante,

Every  substantial  form  that  segregate

From  matter  is,  and  with  it  is  united

Specific  power  has  in  itself  collected,
Which  without  act  is  not  perceptible,

Nor  shows  itself  except  by  its  effect,

As  life  doth  in  a  plant  by  the  green  leaves.

And  while  pursuing  with  a  careful  and  open  mind  the  fasci-
nating investigations  which  are  our  task,  we  may  perhaps  well
call  to  mind  the  caution  which  one,  who  was  more  ready
to  welcome  super-normal  phenomena  than  most  of  us  are,
nevertheless  gave  to  the  world :  "  Sometimes  a  little  chink  does
open,  suddenly  and  quickly  close  again,  in  the  gate,  generally
shut  up,  between  this  world  and  the  next,  the  gate  which  only
death  is  to  open  for  good  and  ever.  Nor  is  it  well  for  us  to
peep  through  those  chinks  before  the  time.  But  such  exceptions
from  the  rule  of  our  present  life  are  still  in  harmony  with
the  greater  rule  which  comprehends  both  this  life  and  the  life
hereafter.  .  . .  However,  all  those  things  are  no  signs  of  a
healthy  life.  For  in  this  life  we  have  only  to  work  out  our
bodies  for  the  hereafter,  not  to  see  or  hear  with  the  eyes  and
ears  of  the  hereafter.  A  flower  when  opened  before  its  time
will  not  thrive.  And  though  our  belief  in  a  life  to  come  may
be  supported  by  such  occasional  glances  caught  in  this  life,  it
must  not  take  its  foundation  on  them.  A  sound  and  healthy
belief  is  founded  on  argument."

Such  are  the  counsels  of  Fechner,1  to  which  perhaps  we
may  add  our  hope  that  in  the  process  of  human  develop-
ment new  capacities  may  slowly  unfold  themselves,  and  if
the  sunset  of  life  gives  mystical  lore,  the  advancing  age  of  the
world  may  bring  a  cpuickening  of  perceptive  and  intuitional
powers.

The  soul's  dark  cottage,  battered  and  decayed,
Lets  in  new  light  thro'  chinks  that  time  has  made  :
Stronger  by  weakness,  wiser,  men  become,
As  they  draw  near  to  their  eternal  home.
Leaving  the  old,  both  worlds  at  once  they  view,
That  stand  upon  the  threshold  of  the  new.


fechner,  Life  after  Death,  pp.  79-81.


LXV.]


Pres idential  A ddress.


23


And  the  new,  when  it  dawns,  will  not  find  our  nature
shattered  and  decayed,  but  so  endowed  with  richer,  nobler
powers  that  the  life  which  opens  before  us  will  be  one  in
which  our  reinvigorated  nature  will  pass  to  the  pursuit  of
better  tasks  with  glad  energy,  widened  outlook,  and  unabated
hopefulness.


24


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


II.

A  MONTH'S  EECOED  OF  AUTOMATISMS.1

By  MRS.  A.  W.  VERRALL.

The  automatic  phenomena  described  in  the  following  paper  are
of  various  types,  but  all  came  under  my  personal  cognisance
within  about  a  month,  between  the  middle  of  July  and  the
middle  of  August  of  the  year  1907.  Their  main  interest  con-
sists in  their  variety  and  their  frequency  during  a  particular
period.  In  all  the  cases,  my  daughter  or  I  was  concerned,
but  where  cross-correspondences  were  produced,  our  scripts  were
not  always  in  the  same  relation  to  one  another,  sometimes  one
and  sometimes  the  other  appearing  to  take  the  initiative.  Nor
was  the  automatism  always  of  the  same  kind  ;  besides  automatic
script  we  employed  the  method  of  table-tilting  by  two  persons.
The  experiments  seem  to  have  resulted  in  the  production  not
only  of  cross-correspondences,  but  of  statements,  subsequently
verified,  about  events  unknown  to  the  automatists.

I  have  narrated  the  four  incidents  in  their  chronological
sequence,  appending  a  short  general  discussion  of  the  inferences
which  may  be  drawn  as  to  their  origin.

I. Dream,  Dawn  and  Diana.

This  group  of  phenomena  is  somewhat  complex,  and  it  will  be
simplest  to  describe  the  various  automatic  phenomena  as  they
occurred,  adding  to  the  scripts  for  the  sake  of  clearness  explana-
tions derived  from  subsequent  investigations,  and  explaining
what  at  each  point  was  the  normal  knowledge  of  each  automatist
concerned.  I  begin  with  a  script  of  my  own  written  during
my  absence  from  home.

1  Part  of  this  paper  was  read  at  a  meeting  of  the  Society  on  December  8th,
1910.


LXV.]


A  Month's  Record  of  Automatisms.


25


M.  V.  July  14,  1907: 11  p.m.

nec  non  sine  adiutore  Deo — quis  custodivit.1  Unless  God
guard  the  house,  the  watchman  watcheth  but  in  vain.2  Domini
canes  conantur.3

On  the  table  a  letter  lies  white  roughish  paper  not  square.
The  news  has  disturbed  you — oh  you  of  little  faith — wait  a
happy  issue.4

But  you  write  not  want  I  want  [sic].  Dream  pictures
give  the  idea.  Do  nolbe  [sic]  things  not  dream  them.0  Then
comes  Queen  Mab,  the  queen  of  fairy  dreams.  Dream  through
the  lightening  darkness  of  your  night,  with  glimpses  of  the
real  remembered  waking — no  it  should  be  different.  Dream
through  the  growing  whiteness  of  the  dawn — aube  is  the  word
— you  had  that  before — the  white  mountain — Mons  Albanus —
and  the  dream  of  dawn,  the  dream  that  is  the  truth.  Say
dreamer  say.

A  slumber  did  my  spirit  seal 6 — but  in  a  dream  came  the
knowledge. Now  write  the  word
DREAM.

It  is  obvious  at  once  that  the  main  point  of  this  script  is  the
word  "  dream."  It  occurs  nine  times,  as  noun  or  verb,  and
the  word  dreamer  once.  Moreover,  emphasis  is  given  by  the
large  writing  of  the  final  word  DEEAM.

A  secondary  idea  running  through  the  script  is  "  dawn."
This  word  actually  occurs  twice,  the  French  word  aube  once,
and  the  Latin  derivative  albanus  once ;  while  the  "  lightening
darkness  "  and  "  growing  whiteness  "  represent  the  same  idea.

The  allusion  to  aube  and  mons  albanus  which  has  "been
before,"  refers  to  an  earlier  script  (of  February  18,  1907),  con-
sidered by  Mr.  Piddington  to  contain  a  cross-correspondence
with  Mrs.  Piper  on  the  word  "  arrow," 7  but  this  was  not
known  to  me  when  the  script  of  July  14  was  produced.

1  "  And  not  without  God  as  helper— who  has  guarded?"
2Cf.  Ps.  127,  1,  2.

3 "  The  Lord's  dogs  (i.e.  the  Dominicans)  make  endeavour."  In  the  Golden
Legend  three  explanations  are  given  for  the  meaning  of  the  name  Dominic  as
"keeper  of  our  Lord."

4  This  paragraph  had  no  meaning  for  me.

5  C.  Kingsley.  6  Wordsworth.
7  Proc.  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  82.


26


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


The  next  script  for  the  purpose  of  this  paper,1  also  produced
while  I  was  away  from  home,  is  that  of

M. V.  .Inly  17,  1907. 1.5  p.m.

Ching  China  to  Japan.  Unfold  the  tale,  nusquara  impediet
tibi  quod  ceteris  saepe  impedit  :  cum  vocavero,  tu  audies.'2

From  hill  to  hill  the  call  resounds
The  shepherds  drive  their  flocks.

And  the  grey  clouds  above  like  the  grey  sheep  below
slowly  move  homewards  along  the  darkening  ways  of  night.
Guardian  of  the  parting  ways,  bring  home  in  safety  ewes  and
lambs  !

The  fleecy  flocks  move  peacefully  round  the  watching  moon,
and  so  the  night  passes — with  the  DAWN  comes  a  streak  of
colour  in  the  sky — and  then  wakes  '  Sweet  Auburn  loveliest
village  of  the  plain.'3  Again  what  is  aubanel  but  a  morning
song.

All  points  the  same  way — and  the  scented  eve  and  twilight
grey  are  followed  by  the  rosy  fingered  Dawn.
And  the  black  bat  Night  is  flown.4

But  keep  what  you  wiite,  and  light  will  come  to  you  some
day.  I  wish  I  could  talk  to  you  again,  but  perhaps  that  will
come. All  this  next  month  listen  and  write.  .  .  .5

Keep  your  thoughts  free.

This  script  repeats  with  emphasis  the  "  dawn  "  of  the  last
script.  The  word  occurs  twice,  once  in  large  letters,  and  the
two  words  "  Auburn  "  (in  Goldsmith's  line)  and  "  aubanel "
(not  an  actual  word)  suggest  the  French  word  auhe,  which
had  occurred  in  the  earlier  script.  The  main  idea  then  of
this  script  is  "dawn,"  just  as  that  of  July  14  was  "dream."
Both  these  words,  as  will  be  seen,  were  subsequently  the  sub-
ject of  cross-correspondence.

1  One  other  script  intervened,  on  July  15,  but  it  deals  with  other  matters,
mainly  non-evidential.

2  "  That  which  often  hinders  others  will  nowhere  hinder  you  ;  when  I  shall
call,  you  will  hear."

'Goldsmith, The  Deserted  Village.

4  Tennyson,  Maud.

5  The  sentences  omitted  are  of  personal  application,  and  serve  to  deter-
mine the  attribution  of  this  script  to  Myersv


lxv.]  A  Month's  Record  of  Automatisms.  27


But  before  describing  the  sequel,  I  must  here  digress  to
comment  on  some  points  in  the  script  of  July  17,  which  seem
to  have  been  veridical.

The  phrase  "  guardian  of  the  parting  ways,  bring  home  in
safety  ewes  and  lambs "  recalls  to  a  classical  student  two
aspects  of  the  same  goddess,  namely,  Diana.  Diana  is  at  once
a  patroness  of  parting  ways — cross-ways — and  the  protector  of
young  animals.  A  third  aspect  of  the  same  goddess  is  intro-
duced by  the  watching  moon.  So  that  a  subsidiary  idea
running  through  the  earlier  part  of  the  script  is  "  Diana."

This  of  course  I  noticed  at  the  time,  and  I  supposed  it  to
refer  to  Mrs.  Forbes,  whose  Christian  name,  Diana,  has  been
referred  to  more  than  once  in  my  earlier  script.1  Accordingly,
at  my  next  opportunity,  at  the  end  of  August,  when  Mrs.
Forbes  was  staying  with  me,  I  asked  her  what  she  had  been
doing  in  the  middle  of  July.  She  had  been  staying  with  a
friend  in  the  middle  of  the  Yorkshire  moors.2  She  told  me
that  between  July  1  and  the  middle  of  the  month  there  was
a  great  sheep-shearing  going  on  all  around  her,  fifteen  hundred
sheep  sheared,  great  bleating  and  calling  of  ewes  to  lambs,
and  much  fear  lest  the  lambs  should  be  separated  from  the
ewes.

It  thus  appears  that  there  was  some  reason  for  the  con-
nexion in  the  script  of  Mrs.  Forbes's  name  with  a  description
of  shepherds  driving  their  flocks,  of  the  call  resounding  from
hill  to  hill,  and  of  the  invocation  to  the  goddess  Diana,  pro-
tector of  young  animals,  to  bring  home  in  safety  ewes  and
lambs.  I  had  myself  never  been  in  the  North  of  England  in
July  or  in  any  summer  month,  and  had  no  idea  that  the
allusion  to  ewes  and  lambs  could  be  in  any  way  appropriate
at  so  late  a  season  of  the  year.

But  there  is,  I  think,  another,  and  perhaps  more  definite,
link  of  connexion  in  this  script  with  Mrs.  Forbes.  Mrs.
Forbes  sketches,  and  her  sketch-book  often  serves  as  a  sort  of
diary  of  her  occupations  and  interests.  When  she  came  to
stay  with  me  at  the  end  of  August  she  showed  me  her  sketches
made  during  July,  1907,  and  before  I  had  said  anything  about
the  script of  July 17 she drew my attention to  a  sketch

1  Cf.  Proc.  Vol.  XX.,  p.  222.
This  I  learnt  first  from  a  letter  received  on  July  30,  1907.


28


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


which  she  had  made  of  Yorkshire  moors,  seen  at  sunset,  and
with  a  crescent  moon.  The  date,  attested  by  the  note  on  her
sketch,  was  July  17.  So  that  on  the  very  day  on  which  my
script  had  made  reference  to  Diana  and  the  moon,  Mrs.  Forbes
had  made  a  sketch  of  a  crescent  moon,  amid  surroundings  of
the  type  described  in  the  script.

It  will  be  noted  that  the  moon  of  the  script  does  not
suggest,  though  it  does  not  exclude,  a  crescent  moon ;  the
picture  suggested  by  the  word  "  watching "  is  that  of  a  moon
full,  or  nearly  so,  at  any  rate  of  a  moon  at  night,  not  of  a
crescent  moon  at  sunset.  This  point  is  of  some  interest  in
view  of  the  sequel.

So  far  then  for  the  veridical  contents  of  this  script,  as  sub-
sequently ascertained.  I  pass  on  to  my  next  script,  also  written
during  my  absence  from  home. It  is  as  follows  :

M.  V.  July  20,  1907. 11  p.m.

Venditor  spernit  agrum  pulchellum  sed  emptor  invenietur
qui  thesauros  conditos  in  medium  proferat. Audi  et  tu.1

Bonaventura  is  the  name  and  then  write  Desiderio.  Desi-
derium  semper  pro  amico — pone  desiderium.  spes  et  fides  sorores
illae  inter  se  coniunctae  amicum  tibi  reddere  praevalent.2  0
death  where  is  thy  sting  1  Beyond  our  darkness  there  is  light.
The  impenetrable  seeming  gloom  is  full  of  light.  Look  light
wards  listen  to  the  rippling  sound  of  the  long  light  waves
breaking  on  the  beach.

Tell  Helen  I  said  so  lately  quite  lately — she  will  under-
stand. .  .  .3

The  opening  paragraph  of  this  script  may  be  taken  as  a
symbolic  indication  that  it  is  not  such  nonsense  as  the  auto-
matist  supposes,  but  will  some  day  be  found  to  have  a  point.
Possibly  that  point  is  contained  in  the  next  word,  "  Bona-
ventura." This  conveyed  nothing  to  me  at  the  time,  but  in
February, 1911, Mr.  Piddington  drew  my  attention  to  two

1  "  The  seller  despises  the  pretty  bit  of  land,  but  a  buyer  will  be  found  to
bring  forward  into  our  midst  its  hidden  treasures. Do  you  too  hearken."

2  "  Longing  [there  is]  always  for  a  friend  ;  lay  aside  longing.  Hope  and  Faith,
those  sisters,  joined  together,  have  power  to  restore  to  you  your  friend."

3  The  sentences  omitted  refer  to  personal  matters.


LXV.]


A  Month's  Record  of  Automatisms.


29


facts:  (1)  that  Bonaventura  is  the  Franciscan  who  in  Dante's
Paradiso  (Par.  XII.  28  ff.)  pronounces  a  eulogy  on  Dominic,
and  (2)  that  the  preceding  M.  V.  script  of  July  14 — already
seen  to  be  connected  with  the  script  of  July  20  by  its  references
to  "  lightening  darkness,"  etc. — alludes  to  the  Dominicans.

Mr.  Piddington  further  suqoested  that  a  reason  for  the  intro-
duction  of  Dominic's  Order  into  the  script  of  July  14 — the
script  which  emphasises  the  word  Dream — may  be  found  in
the  prophetic  dreams  which  legend  associates  with  St.  Dominic,
and  the  founding  of  that  Order.  These  prophetic  dreams  are
mentioned  by  Bonaventura  in  close  connexion  with  his  name  ;


"  la  donna  .  .  .
vide  nel  sonno  il  mirabile  frutto
ch'uscir  dovea  di  lui  e  delle  rede
e  perche  fosse,  quale  era,  in  costrutto,
quinci  si  mosse  spirito  a  nomarlo
del  possessivo  di  cui  era  tutto.
Domenico  fu  detto."  (11.  64-70.)


The  details  of  the  dreams,  not  mentioned  by  Dante,  are  as
follows  :

Dominic's  mother,  before  his  birth,  dreamt  that  she  bore  a
black  and  white  dog  (canis)  with  a  lighted  torch  in  his  mouth  :
while  his  godmother  dreamt  that  on  his  brow  was  a  star  that
illuminated  the  world :  or,  according  to  another  version,  on  his
brow  and  on  the  back  of  his  head  were  two  stars  which  lighted
the  East  and  the  West.

If,  as  seems  probable,  the  words  in  the  script  of  July  20,
"  Bonaventura  is  the  name,"  point  to  a  reminiscence  of  Dante's
Paradiso,  the  form  taken  by  the  simile  in  the  introductory
symbolism  may  be  determined  in  the  same  way.  For  Bonaven-
tura, immediately  after  naming  Dominic,  describes  him  as  a
husbandman  or  cultivator  of  land :


la  sua  mente  .  .  .  nella  madre


lei  fece  profeta.


(11.  58,  59);


"  ed  io  ne  parlo
si  come  dell'  agricola,"


(11.  70,  71.)


and  a  similar  comparison  recurs  several  times  in  the  following
lines. Thus  he  is  set  "to  go  round  the  vineyard,"  "to  fight


30


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


for  that  seed  wherefrom "  grew  the  Order,  and  from  him  came
the  streams  "  whereby  the  Catholic  orchard  is  watered."  1

I  have  read  the  Paradiso  more  than  once,  though  I  am  not
so  familiar  with  it  as  with  other  parts  of  the  Divina  Commedia.
But  the  word  Bonaventura  did  not  recall  this  passage  to  me,
though  I  of  course  recognised  an  allusion  to  the  Dominicans,  in
the  Domini  canes  of  July  14.  I  had  no  recollection,  however,
of  any  prophetic  dreams  in  connexion  with  Dominic,  never
having  taken  any  interest  in  either  hagiology  in  general  or
Dominic  in  particular.

In  consequence  of  the  directions  in  the  script  of  July  20,
on  my  return  home  on  July  22,  I  asked  my  daughter  if  she
had  lately  been  writing  automatically,  and  heard  that  she  had
not  tried  for  script  since  the  end  of  June,  1907.  On  July  23,
I  read  her  the  above-quoted  M.  V.  script  of  July  20,  and  she
began  again  to  write  automatically,  and  continued  writing  pretty
regularly  for  a  month  or  two.

Two  of  her  scripts  seemed  to  me  when  1  saw  them  on
Aug.  1,  1907,  to  present  points  of  contact  with  my  scripts
of  July  14  and  17,  which  were  not  known  to  her.  The  points
are  as  follows :

H.  V.  Jul,,  25,  1907. 10.30  p.m.

.  .  .  The  only  road  is  by  the  freedom  of  thought  which  belongs
to  those  who  are  born  free.

This  recalls  the  "  keep  your  thoughts  free "  of  my  script.
The  point  is  a  small  one,  and  would  be  hardly  worth  noting
if  it  stood  alone.  But  taken  in  conjunction  with  a  passaga
in  the  next  following  H.  V.  script,  it  suggests  a  supernormal
connexion  with  the  M.  V.  script.

H.  V.  July  26,  1907. 10.15  p.m.

.  .  .  The  eye  of  fate  is  never  closed,  it  watches  even  in  the
blackest  darkness.

Per  tenebras  ad  lumen,2  the  casement  slowly  grows  a  glimmer-
ing square.3

1  The  same  idea  is  found  in  the  Golden  Legend,  where  Dominic  is  called  the
"keeper  of  the  vineyard  or  the  flock  of  our  Lord."

2  "  Through  darkness  to  the  light."  "'Tennyson,  Tears,  idle  tear*.


lxv.]  A  Month's  Record  of  Automatisms.  31

The  Latin  words  reinforce  the  idea  which  had  emerged  in
my  script  of  July  14,  "the  lightening  darkness  of  your  night,"
while  the  quotation  from  Tennyson  closely  reproduces  the  next
sentence  in  that  script,  "  the  growing  whiteness  of  the  dawn,"
the  line  in  question  being  part  of  a  description  of  the  approach
of  dawn  in  the  chamber  of  death  :

Ah,  sad  and  strange,  as  in  dark  summer  dawns

The  earliest  pipe  of  half-awaken'd  birds

To  dying  ears,  when  unto  dying  eyes

The  casement  slowly  grows  a  glimmering  square.

It  is  true  that  the  general  idea  of  light  beyond  darkness
was  suggested  to  my  daughter  by  my  script  of  July  20,  which
I  had  read  to  her,  but  1  think  that  there  is  evidence  of  super-
normal knowledge  of  the  M.  V.  scripts  of  July  14  and  July  17
(which  had  not  been  read  to  the  automatist)  for  two  reasons:

(1)  the  selection  (on  July  26)  of  a  quotation  which  is  at
once  closely  parallel  to  a  sentence  in  the  script  of  July  14 —
"  the  growing  whiteness  " — and  contains  an  implicit  allusion  to
the  word  emphasised  in  the  script  of  July  17,  "Dawn";

(2)  the  introduction  (on  July  25)  of  a  sentence—"  the  thoughts
of  the  free " — recalling  a  similar  sentence  in  the  script  of
July  17.

It  looks,  in  fact,  as  if  the  automatist's  normally  obtained
knowledge  of  the  M.  V.  script  of  July  20  had  stimulated  the
production  of  evidence  of  supernormal  knowledge  of  earlier  M.  V.
script,  and  it  is  even  possible  that  some  such  stimulus  was
necessary.  It  will  be  noted  that  the  M.  V.  script  which  con-
tained a  message  to  be  conveyed  to  my  daughter  did  not
introduce  either  of  the  emphasised  words  "  Dream  "  or  "  Dawn,"
though  if  the  above-suggested  interpretation  of  Bonaventura  be
admitted,  it  implicitly  alluded  to  both  those  topics.

My  next  script  was  obtained  on  the  morning  of  July  30;  it
carries  on  or  supplements  the  previous  script  of  July  17  ;  thus:

M.  V.  July  30,  1907. 10.50  a.m.
Teucro  duce  et  auspice  Teucro.1

Rectorem  post  ponis  quern  omnium  Directorem  adposui.  Fac
auscultes.


1  Hor.  C.  I.  vii.  37. "Under  the  auspices  and  leadership  of  Teucer."


32


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


Omnia  in  ordine  bene  dicta  comprehendere  potes.  sed  sena-
torium  signum  illud  nondum  percepisti — lunatum  epi  cothurno
sigillum.  Id  iam  saepe  antea  in  scriptis  apparuit, — tanquam
inter  astra  per  noctem  serenam  luna  ipsa  crescens.1  The  only
image  that  I  like  in  the  Hugo  poetry — the  golden  sickle  in  the
gleaner's  field.-

with  borrowed  light — and  then  repercussion  of  light  in  the
opening  passage  of  the  ^Eneid.  ^Eneas  lay  all  night  and  watched
the  quivering  light  on  the  roof  break  and  join.3

FWHM. quod  fecit  per  alium  fecit  per  se.4


In  this  script  the  emphasis  is  plainly  thrown  on  "  Moon,"  and
this  time  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  moon  is  a  crescent  moon,
that  aspect  of  the  moon — an  aspect  hitherto  overlooked — being
represented  four  times  in  the  script,  namely  by

(a)  the  senatorial  crescent,  a  decoration  on  the  shoe  of  a
Eoman  senator ;

(b)  the  crescent  moon  amid  the  stars ;

(c)  Hugo's  comparison  of  the  crescent  moon  with  a  golden
sickle ;

(d)  the  drawing  of  a  crescent  on  a  stick,  this  last  being  perhaps
a  reminiscence  of  a  drawing  of  Blake's.5

1,1  You  postpone  Rector  whom  I  have  set  to  be  the  Director  of  all.  Now
listen.  All  that  has  been  well  said  in  due  order  you  are  able  to  understand  ;
but  you  have  not  yet  perceived  the  senatorial  symbol,  the  crescent- shaped  sign
upon  the  shoe.  That  has  often  appeared  in  writings  before  now, — as  it  were,
amid  the  stars  on  a  serene  night  the  moon  herself,  the  crescent  moon."

2  V.  Hugo,  La  Ligende  des  Siecles,  Booz  Endormi.

3  Mneid,  VIII.,  11.  18-25.

4  "  What  he  has  done  by  another,  he  has  done  by  himself."

5  Gates  of  Paradise,  No.  9,  where  a  man  is  about  to  climb  a  ladder  set
against  a  crescent  moon  (Gilchrist's' Life  and  Works  of  Blake,  Vol.  L,  p.  100).


lxv.]  A  Month's  Record  of  Automatisms.  33


I  had  at  this  time  no  knowledge  of  Mrs.  Forbes's  sketch  of
the  crescent  moon.  But  as  the  name  Diana  had  been  symbolised
in  earlier  scripts  by  a  crescent  moon,  the  emergence  of  the
crescent  in  this  script  may  be  accounted  for — or  at  least  may
have  been  helped — by  my  having  received  a  letter  from  Mrs.
Forbes  on  the  morning  of  July  30.  I  did  not  at  the  time,
however,  connect  the  crescent  moon  of  my  script  with  her.

I  noted  at  the  time  the  references  in  the  script  to  Blake's
drawing,  Hugo's  poem,  and  the  passage  from  the  opening  of  the
Eighth  JEneid.  In  Hugo's  poem,  Booz  Endormi,  in  the  first
volume  of  La  LSgende  des  Sticks,  Ruth  is  described  as  lying
j,wake  watching  the  moon  amid  the  stars,  and  wondering

Quel  dieu,  quel  moissonneur  de  l'eternel  ete,
Avait,  en  s'en  allant,  negligemment  jete
Cette  faucille  d'or  dans  le  champ  des  etoiles.

Many  years  ago  Mr.  Myers  in  conversation,  after  a  good  deal
of  adverse  criticism  of  Hugo's  poetry,  had  expressed  admiration
of  this  poem,  and  in  particular  of  the  simile  of  the  "  sickle "
in  its  context.  ISTo  evidential  value  therefore  attaches  to  this
allusion  in  the  script.

The  same  idea  of  a  person  lying  awake  at  night  with  eyes
open  is  suggested  in  what  the  script  calls  the  "  opening  passage
of  the  Aeneid  " — meaning,  as  I  noted  at  the  time,  the  opening
of  the  Eighth  Book,  where  the  wandering  thoughts  of  the
wakeful  iEneas  are  compared  with  the  glancing  reflexions  on
a  metal  bowl  of  water  made  by  sunlight  or  "  the  image  of  the
shining  moon,"  which  flit  to  and  fro  and  strike  upon  the  painted
ceiling.1

The  script,  then,  of  July  30,  reinforces  the  moon,  mentioned
in  an  earlier  script,  making  it  a  crescent  moon  and  introduces
Hugo's  poem.

1  JEneid,  VIII.,  1.  18  ff.  During  the  sleep  which  follows  these  thoughts,
^Eneas  is  visited  in  dream  by  the  river  Tiber,  and  waking,  as  the  god  departs,
sees  the  "rising  light  of  the  sun  in  heaven."  So  that  this  Virgilian  passage
combines  with  a  simile  introducing  the  moon  the  two  ideas  of  Dream  and
Dawn.  Possibly  the  first  hint  of  a  reference  to  this  passage  is  to  be  found
in  the  "  Mons  Albanus  "  of  July  14.  For  the  purpose  of  the  dream  is  to
announce  to  JEneas  the  approach  of  the  "omen"  which  is  to  set  a  limit  to
his  wanderings  and  determine  the  name  of  the  long  white  city,  Alba  Longa,
which  his  son  shall  found  upon  the  slopes  of  the  Alban  Mount.

C


34


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


The  automatic  writing  next  to  be  considered  involves  two
automatists,  being  produced  not  in  script  but  by  table-tilting
on  the  part  of  my  daughter  and  Mr.  Bayfield.  He  and  she
have  table-tilted  on  several  previous  occasions  and  produced
results,  some  of  which  have  been  reported  to  this  Society  and
published  in  the  Journal.1  Their  first  sitting  at  this  time  was
on  July  29,  1907,  at  6  p.m. — the  day  before  the  above-described
script.

On  July  29,  after  some  rubbish  of  a  kind  only  too  familiar
to  us  all,  just  before  leaving  off,  Mr.  Bayfield  suggested  that
"  something  evidential  about  some  one  "  should  be  «iven  on  the
next  occasion.  To  this  the  table  assented.  Mr.  Bayfield  asked
if  it  would  be  "  about  Piddington,"  but  the  table  said  "  No."
He  then  said  "  suggest  something,"  and  the  table  replied  "  Mrs.
Forbes."  Accordingly,  on  the  next  occasion  this  subject  was
introduced  as  follows :

July  30,  1907. 6  p.m. M.  A.  B.  and  H.  de  G.  V. (M.  de

G.  V.  taking  notes.)

(M.A.B.  What  about  Mrs.  Forbes?)

Torquay,  she  is  there 2 with  her  mother ask  her

about  the  letter  she  wrote  yesterday.

I  was  present,  taking  notes,  as  I  had  been  on  July  29,
but  I  did  not  touch  the  table.  I  had  received,  as  I  have  said
above,  a  letter  from  Mrs.  Forbes  on  this  very  morning  of
July  30,  but  had  said  nothing  of  it  to  either  automatist.
The  table's  spontaneous  selection  on  July  29  of  Mrs.  Forbes
as  the  subject  of  a  verifiable  communication  was  recalled  to
me  when  I  received  a  letter  from  her  on  July  30,  and  I
awaited  with  interest  the  tilting  of  that  day.  It  seems  as
though  this  interest  of  mine,  and  this  only,  were  so  far
reflected  by  the  table.  The  information  that  Mrs.  Forbes  was
at  Torquay 3  was  incorrect.  Her  letter  announced  that  she
was  in  the  North  and  about  to  join  her  mother  in  Surrey  on
Aug.  1.  But  it  was  appropriate  to  say,  "  Ask  her  about  the
letter  she  wrote  yesterday."

1See,  for  instance,  S.P.R.  Journal  for  March,  1907.

2  The represents  a  pause  in  the  tilting  of  the  table.

3  So  far  as  I  know,  there  is  no  association  between  Mrs.  Forbes  and  Torquay.


lxv.]  A  Month's  Record  of  Automatisms.  35

There  followed  a  very  short  attempt  to  give  the  contents  of
the  letter,  which  was  incorrect.  The  table  then  passed  away
from  this  subject  to  its  familiar  pretence  to  give  verifiable  names
and  incidents.  Then,  after  a  considerable  pause,  the  following
occurred :

July  30,  1907. M.A.B.  and  H.  dc  G.  V.

(M.  A.  B.  Give  us  anything  you  like  of  value.)

Pour  etre  grand  il  suffit  de  connaitre  ce  qu'on  veut.  Hugo.

(M.  A.  B.  Where  is  the  quotation  ?)

Notre  Dame.1
{M.A.B.  Why  was  it  given  1)

Came  to  me  when  I  was  thinking  about  Mrs.  Forbes.

(M.A.B.  Has  it  any  connexion  with  Mrs.  Forbes'!)
Yes.

(M.A.B.  What  is  the  connexion?)
I  don't  know.

Here  I  told  the  automatists  that  Hugo  had  been  referred
to  in  my  script  of  that  morning,  but  that  their  allusion  was
not  the  same,  my  script  referring  to  a  poem,  whereas  the
table  had  given  a  prose  sentence.  I  did  not  at  this  time  see
any  point  in  the  statement  that  the  phrase  from  Hugo  had  a  con-
nexion with  Mrs.  Forbes.  Instructions  were  given  to  the  table
to  think  things  over  and  to  explain  further  its  point  about
Hugo.  We  waited  three  or  four  minutes,  and  then  the  tilting
was  resumed.

A  dream  of  life  comes  in  poem  a  dream.

(H.  de  G.  V.  Give  it  in  French.)
La  vie  est  breve.

I  here  recognised  the  first  line  of  a  verse  very  familiar  to
me,  and  quoted  the  whole  verse,  saying  it  was  not  the
quotation  in  my  script.

La  vie  est  breve
Un  peu  d'espoir
Un  peu  de  reve
Et  puis  bonsoir.

1  The  accuracy  of  this  statement  has  not  been  tested.


36


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


I  was  at  the  time  under  the  mistaken  impression  that  this
verse  was  by  Victor  Hugo.1 The  tilting  was  then  resumed.

(M.  A.  B.  Why  did  the  script  [i.e.  the  M.  V.  script]  talk  of  Hugo])
Association  of  thought.

(M.  de  G.  V.  Repeat  what  was  told  in  my  script  [i.e.  that  this  was
the  only  simile  liked  by  F.  W.  H.  M.].)
Conversation.

(M.  A.  B.  Between  what  two  people  ?)
Mrs.  V. Mr.  Myers.

(M.  de  G.  V.  What  was  said  about  the  quotation  1)

He  thought  it  expressed  the  thought  best.
(M.deG.  V.  Give  a  word  from  the  quotation.)

Reve.

This  ended  the  experiment  for  that  day.  I  comment  on
the  preceding  extracts  before  going  on  to  describe  the  next
day's  table-tilting.

"  A  dream  of  life,"  followed  as  it  was  by  the  line  "  La
vie  est  breve,"  seemed  at  the  time  to  me  to  have  no  con-
nexion with  the  poem,  Booz  Endormi,  referred  to  in  my  script,
and  certainly  had  no  application  to  the  actual  verse  there
alluded  to — the  simile  of  the  crescent  moon.  But  as  a
matter  of  fact  in  V.  Hugo's  poem,  Booz  has  a  dream,  a  pro-
phetic dream,  foretelling  that  he  will  have  a  long  race  of
illustrious  descendants,  he  being  at  the  time  a  childless
widower.  So  that  "  a  dream " 2  does  "  come "  in  the  poem,
and  "  a  dream  of  life "  is  a  not  inappropriate  description  of
that  dream. The  dream,  called  a  "  Songe,"  is  thus  introduced  :

Or,  la  porte  du  ciel  s'etant  entre-baillee

Au-dessus  de  sa  tete,  un  songe  en  descendit

Et  ce  songe  etait  tel  que  Booz  vit  un  chene.  .  .  .

Later  in  the  poem  the  word  "  reve "  is  used :

Ainsi  parlait  Booz  dans  le  reve  et  l'extase.
The  statements  following  upon  the  quotation,  "  La  vie  est

1  The  poem  of  which  this  verse  is  part  was  subsequently  the  subject  of  a
cross-correspondence  between  the  Mac  script  and  my  daughter's  script,  as
related  in  Proc.  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  297,  and  Vol.  XXV.,  pp.  320-334.

2  The  poem  is  divided  into  four  parts,  containing  respectively  6,  2,  7  and  7
stanzas. The  dream  occupies  the  7  stanzas  of  the  third  part.


LXV.]


A  Month's  Record  of  Automatisms.


37


breve,"  call  for  no  comment ;  in  so  far  as  they  are  correct,
they  are  not  beyond  a  guess  on  the  part  of  the  automatists.
Association  of  thought  with  the  preceding  "  luna  ipsa  crescens  "
may  certainly  account  for  the  introduction  in  M.  V.  script  of
the  allusion  to  Hugo's  poem ;  Mr.  Myers  did  express  his
admiration  of  Hugo's  simile  in  conversation,1  and  the  speakers
were  Mr.  Myers  and  myself.  But  neither  of  the  two  concluding
statements  are  correct  answers  to  the  questions  put,  though
they  are  perhaps  not  wholly  irrelevant  contributions  to  the
subject  in  general ;  there  is  a  certain  resemblance  between
"  expressed  the  thought  best "  and  "  the  only  simile  that  I
like,"  and,  as  said  above,  the  word  rive  is  contained  in  the
poem,  though  not  in  the  script.

Before  the  next  table-tilting  I  read  over  the  poem  of  Hugo,
and  removed  it  from  the  bookshelf,  so  that  no  one  else
should  read  it.  I  now  saw  what  was  meant  by  the  associa-
tion between  Hugo  and  Mrs.  Forbes  in  the  table-tilting — "  came
to  me  when  I  was  thinking  of  Mrs.  Forbes."  A  similar  asso-
ciation was  shown  in  my  own  script,  which  combined  the
crescent  moon  and  Hugo  by  a  reference  to  Hugo's  simile,
comparing  the  moon  to  a  sickle  forgotten  in  the  harvest  field.
The  crescent  moon,  as  I  now  realised,  had  occurred  more  than
once  in  my  earlier  script  as  a  symbol  of  Mrs.  Forbes —
an  allusion  to  her  Christian  name,  Diana.  Thus  on  Decem-
ber 5,  1901,  after  a  message  from  Talbot  Forbes,  came  the
words :

The  tufted  wheat  and  golden  sickle  not  to  cut,2

clearly  a  reference  to  the  crescent  moon,  and  possibly  to  this
very  poem.

At  this  stage,  then,  of  the  experiment  I  realised  :

(1)  that  the  table  chose  Mrs.  Forbes  as  the  subject  of  an
experiment  of  evidential  value  on  July  29,  the  day  on  which
she  wrote  to  me ;

(2)  that  my  script,  produced  after  receiving  her  letter  on

1  Not  however,  as  Mr.  Bayfield's  question  suggested,  in  a  conversation
between  two  people,  but  in  a  discussion  on  Hugo's  literary  merits,  at  a  French
conversation  class  in  my  house,  where  Mr.  Myers  and  I  represented  respectively
the  critical  and  the  commendatory  view  of  Victor  Hugo's  work.

2  See  Proc.  Vol.  XX.,  p.  226.


38


Mrs.  A.  W.  V err  all.


[part


July  30,  connected  the  crescent  moon,  an  emblem  of  her  name
Diana,  with  a  simile  in  a  poem  of  Hugo,  familiar  to  me;

(3)  that  the  table  on  July  30  connected  together  Mrs.
Forbes  and  Hugo,  without  knowing  why ;

(4)  that  the  table,  challenged  to  say  something  about  the
contents  of  the  poem  by  Hugo  in  my  script,  stated  that  it
was  about  a  "  dream  of  life,"  and  contained  the  word  "  reve."

I  did  not  then  remember  that,  shortly  before,  my  script
had  emphasised  the  word  "  dream."  Of  my  impressions  I  said
nothing  to  the  automatists.

I  pass  to  the  next  day's  table  tilting : 1

July  31,  1907. 11  a.m. M.A.B.  and  H.  de  G.  V. (M.  de

G.  V.  taking  notes.)

(a)  (M.  A.  B.  Tell  us  about  the  Hugo  quotation.)

Sound  expressive  of  thought.
(M.  A.B.  Be  definite.)

Falling  sound

(31.  A.  B.  Do  you  mean  the  thought  of  falling  1)

Yes

(M.  A.  B.  Say  anything  further  to  help  us  that  you  can.)
Tombe  "

(H.  de  G.  V.  We  all  know  the  French  for  to  fall.)

(M.  de  G.  V.  Don't  stop  it ;  the  word  might  be  tombeau  not  tombe.)

De  son  altesse — inflni

(M.  A.  B.  Can't  you  go  on  ?)

No

[Here  there  was  a  long  pause.]

(b)  Pourvu  que  ton  regard  ton  beau  regard  me  suit  je  ne
demande  pas  qu'on  m'eclaire  la  nuit.

[Here  I  said  that  the  general  ideas  were  appropriate  to  the
quotation  in  my  script,  but  I  wanted  something  definite.  By
general  ideas  I  meant  the  references  to  night,  light  by  night,  the
importance  of  a  look,  all  of  which  represented  ideas  prominent  in
Hugo's  poem,  which  is  based  on  the  Old  Testament  story.]

(c)  Et  l'horizon  s'etend  et  la  mer  s'eleve  l'ombre  profonde
les  tenebres

[Here  there  was  another  long  pause. All  this  last  portion  (c)

1  For  convenience  of  reference,  I  have  divided  this  record  into  parts,  dis-
tinguished by  letters  (a),  (b),  etc.


lxv.]  A  Month's  Record  of  Automatisms.  39

had  been  tilted  out  with  great  slowness  and  apparent  difficulty

or  sulkiness  on  the  part  of  the  table.]
(M.  A.  B.  to  M.  de  G.  V.  Does  that  make  sense  X)
(M.  de  G.  V.  Well,  there's  a  verb  wanted.)
S'approchent

(d)  [Another  long  pause,  then  suddenly  with  great  briskness  and
speed :]

Mais  le  jour  est  la.

[We  could  get  nothing  further.  We  commented  laughingly
on  the  table's  exemplification  of  its  first  remark,  concerning  the
adaptation  of  sound  to  sense,  by  its  own  methods  of  tilting —
extreme  gloom  and  slowness  during  the  remarks  about  darkness,
followed  by  great  vivacity  when  the  break  of  day  was  announced.]

(a)  It  is  characteristic  of  Hugo's  poetry,  with  which  both
automatists  were  acquainted,  though  neither  was  familiar,1  that
the  sound  should  be  expressive  of  the  thought.  The  next  words
tilted  out  ought  to  imply  that  this  characteristic  is  exemplified
in  a  line  containing  the  thought  of  falling  and  the  word  tombe.

This  I  believe  to  be  the  case.  When  I  re-read  the  poem
with  care  for  the  purposes  of  this  paper,  I  noticed  that  there
is  a  line  in  which  comes  the  idea  of  falling  and  the  word
tombe,  and  that  this  line  is  metrically  arranged  to  express  the
thought  by  the  sound.  It  has  the  four  regular  accents  on  the
3rd,  6th,  9th,  12th  syllables  of  the  Alexandrine,  and  moreover
the  punctuation  and  breaks  between  the  words  emphasise  those
accents.  A  line  of  this  kind  is  not  common  in  French  versifi-
cation,2 and  among  the  eighty-eight  lines  of  this  poem  of  Hugo's
there  is  no  other  in  which  this  particular  rhythmical  effect  is
obtained. The  line  runs  :

Je  suis  ve'uf,  |  je  suis  se'ul,  |  et  sur  moi  |  le  soir  tombe.  |

The  next  words,  de  sou  altessc  iufini,  are  apparently  without
point. They may be translated "from or by his  infinite

*I  subsequently  ascertained  that  neither  of  them  had  read  the  Legende  des
Siedes.  I  am  myself  very  familiar  with  a  good  deal  of  Hugo's  poetry,  and
have  lectured  on  his  metrical  effects.

2  A  famous  illustration  of  the  effect  of  this  particular  rhythm  is  found  in  the
despairing  conclusion  of  the  great  dialogue  between  Chimene  and  Rodrigue  m
Corneille's  Le  Cid  :  (
Que  notre  heur  fut  si  proche,  et  si  tot  se  perdit.


40


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


majesty,"  a  phrase  which  has  no  bearing  upon  either  poem  or
script.1  Possibly  the  flow  had  been  interrupted  by  my
daughter's  contemptuous  remark.  Anyhow  the  table  seemed  to
recognise  its  incapacity,  and  after  a  long  pause  broke  fresh  ground.

(b)  The  next  phrases  seem  to  mark  a  distinct  advance
towards  describing  the  poem.  The  "  look " — regard — is  an
important  element  in  the  story,  as  every  one  will  remember.
Ruth  obtains  Naomi's  permission  to  glean  ears  "  after  him  in
whose  sight"  she  should  find  grace  (Ruth  ii.  2);  Boaz  sees  her
in  the  field,  and  gives  her  permission  to  glean  (ii.  6) ;  she
wonders  why  she  has  "found  grace  in  his  eyes"  (ii.  10);  and
hopes  to  li  find  favour  in"  his  "  sight"  (ii.  13).  The  sentence
tilted  by  the  table  represents  the  general  idea,  not  the  words,
of  the  poem  ;  regard  does  not  occur  in  the  French.

The  idea,  too,  of  unlighted  night, — "je  ne  demande  pas  qu'on
m'eclaire  la  nuit " — fits  with  the  description  in  the  poem
which  emphasises  the  darkness  all  around,  with  only  a  crescent
moon  amid  the  stars. Ruth  is  waiting  for

on  ne  sait  quel  rayon  inconnu,
Quand  viendrait  du  reveil  la  lumiere  subite.

Again,  the  metre  of  the  poem  is  reproduced  in  this  portion
of  the  tilted  sentences,  which  contains  two  Alexandrine  lines :

Pourvu  que  ton  regard,  ton  beau  regard,  me  suit,
Je  ne  demande  pas  qu'on  m'eclaire  la  nuit,

where  the  rhyme  is  obtained  at  a  sacrifice  of  grammatical
accuracy.

(e)  The  next  group  of  words  breaks  away  altogether  from
the  meaning  of  the  poem,  which  has  no  allusion  to  "  horizon  "
or  to  "  sea."  These  words,  in  fact,  do  not  make  much  sense ;  a
"  widening  horizon  "  and  a  "  rising  sea  "  seem  unconnected  with
"  deep  shadow  "  or  "  approaching  darkness."  The  actual  words
ombre  and  profond,  do  occur  in  the  poem :

Les  astres  emaillaient  le  ciel  profond  et  sombre  ;
Le  croisson  fin  et  clair  parmi  ces  fleurs  de  l'ombre
Brillait  a  Poccident.

1  It  has  been  suggested  to  me  that  in  these  words  there  may  be  an  allusion
to  the  godlike  reaper — "quel  dieu,  quel  moissonneur  de  l'eternel  ete  " — who  had
left  his  sickle  in  the  field  of  the  stars  ;  or  the  reader  may,  if  he  choose,  correct
altesse  ivfini  to  altitude  infinie.


LXV.]


A  Monties  Record  of  Automatisms.


41


(d)  The  final  sentence  of  the  script  presents  a  certain
parallelism  with  a  line  in  the  poem,  as  well  as  with  the
general  idea.  Boaz,  meditating  over  his  dream  and  the  dim-
culty  of  supposing  its  fulfilment  probable,  contrasts  his  feeling
with  that  of  the  young,  whose  dawn  comes  out  of  night  as
from  a  victory :

Le  jour  sort  de  la  nuit  comme  d'une  victoire.

It  is  noticeable  that  in  their  attempts — attempts  at  least
partially  successful — to  identify  the  quotation  from  Victor  Hugo
alluded  to  in  my  script  of  July  30,  1907,  the  automatists
produced  both  the  words  Dream  and  Dawn,  which  had  been
emphasised  in  my  earlier  scripts  of  July  14  and  July  17.
and  which  were  known  to  me,  but  not  to  them,  when  the
experiment  was  made.  On  July  30,  they  produced  the  word
Dream  explicitly  thrice  (once  in  French)  and  implicitly  once
(by  quoting  a  line  which  rhymes  to  the  French  word),  and
on  July  31  the  statements  terminated  with  an  allusion  in
French  to  the  break  of  day.  But  they  did  not  produce  the
Crescent  Moon,  on  which  my  attention  was  definitely  fixed,  and
I  therefore  at  the  time  regarded  the  experiment  as  not  very
successful.  It  was  not  till  some  years  later  that  I  recognised
that  the  poem  Booz  Endormi,  to  which  we  had  found  allusions
in  both  sets  of  writings — the  M.  V.  script  and  the  table-tilting
— combines  the  ideas  of  Dream  and  Dawn  with  the  well-
known  emblem  of  Diana,  the  crescent  moon.  For  while  Booz
is  visited  by  a  prophetic  dream,  Buth  lies  waiting  for  the
dawn,  and  gazing  at  the  "  golden  sickle  "  of  the  moon.

On  the  conclusion  of  the  table-tilting  on  July  31,  I  showed
the  automatists  my  script  of  the  preceding  day,  and  my
daughter  at  once  said  that  a  drawing  somewhat  similar  to  the
drawing  which  terminates  that  script  had  occurred  in  a  recent
script  of  hers.  She  thereupon  showed  me  the  script  in  question,
which  I  then  saw  for  the  first  time.1 I  quote  the  whole  script :

H.  V.  June  28,  1907. 10.30  p.m.
omnibus  suppeditis  abest  omen2

The  Canterbury  bells  are  blossoming  under  the  hedge  lie

JI  had  seen  and  heard  nothing  of  H.  V.  script  since  March  17,  1907,  and
did  not  know  whether  she  had  been  writing  automatically  or  not.
2 "  All  things  being  prepared  (reading  suppeditatis)  the  omen  is  lacking.  "


42


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


still  for  a  little  space  and  listen  to  the  fairy  chimes.  Lavender
is  sweet.

Mary  [scribble]  Pingott  (?)


mist  will  show  you  the  way.

the  moonlit  spaces  on  the  heather  are  bright  with  fairy
lamps  glittering  dewdrops  spread  from  spray  to  spray.

What  of  the  hunting,  hunter  bold  1


The  resemblance  between  the  drawings  needs  no  comment ;
no  such  object  had  ever  before  appeared  in  the  script  of  either
automatist.  "  Lavender  is  sweet "  was  understood  at  the  time
by  my  daughter  to  be  an  allusion  to  the  name  of  a  pony  of
Mrs.  Forbes's,  Sweet  Lavender,  which  had  belonged  to  Talbot
Forbes,  and  the  allusion  to  hunting  fits  both  the  goddess  and
her  namesake,  Mrs.  Forbes.

The  rest  of  the  script  is  not  intelligible  to  me,  but  it  is
clear  that  three  allusions  to  Diana  (Mrs.  Forbes's  pony,  hunting,
crescent)  occurred  in  this  H.  V.  script,  which  preceded  by
19  days  the  two  allusions  to  Diana  (guardian  of  parting  ways,
protector  of  young  animals)  in  M.  V.  script.

Under  these  circumstances,  I  think  this  H.  V.  script,  though
not  included  in  the  "  Month's  Kecord  "  described  in  this  paper,
must  be  taken  as  belonging  to  the  group  of  cross-correspondences
on  Dream,  Dawn,  Diana.

Only  one  other  H.  V.  script  was  obtained  between
March  17,  1907,  and  July  1907,  and  this  script,  written  on
May  26,  1907,  was  also  shown  to  me  on  July  31,  at  the
conclusion  of  our  experiment.  It  appears  to  me  to  have  a
possible  connexion  with  the  rest  of  the  group,  and  I  therefore
quote  it  here  :


Ad  urbem  restitutam  ingreditur  supplex  remanet  judicium  -
1  R.  Kipling.

-"He  approaches  the  restored  city,  as  a  suppliant.  Judgement  endures,  or
awaits  (him)."


the  white  lady  of  the


H.  V.  May  26,  1907. 6.10  p.m.


LXV.]


A  Month's  Record  of  Automatisms.


43


When  the  day  dawns

And  the  light  on  the  hills  is  spreading  its  rays,
When  the  upland  lawns

Are  spangled  with  dew  in  the  morning  blaze
Of  a  sun  whose  eyes

Have  viewed  since  his  sails  in  the  West  were  furled
The  laughter  and  sighs

Of  a  far-off  people,  an  alien  world —
Shall  he  gaze  on  me

An  outcast  derelict  here  on  the  seas  of  life  1
Nay  let  him  rather  see

A  beaten  fighter  released  from  the  strife.
A  dragon-fly  blue  and  gold  flitting  hither  and  thither  over
the  pool  in  the  heat  haze  of  a  summer  day,  now  poised  now
like  a  flash of  living fire (illegible words) Monopol  Hotel
(illegible  attempt  at  signature).

It  is  true  that,  as  my  daughter  said  at  the  time,  there  was
nothing  in  her  recent  script  resembling  the  sentences  in  the
M.  V.  script  of  July  20,  which  I  read  to  her;  there  is  no
"  light  beyond  darkness,"  no  "  rippling  sound  of  long  light
waves."  But  these  phrases  clearly  connect  with  the  expressions
of  M.  V.  script  of  July  14,  and  make  part  of  the  idea  of
"  Dawn."  This  was  not  known  to  my  daughter,  so  that  she
failed  to  see  any  point  in  the  opening  line  of  the  verse  in
the  H.  V.  script,  "  When  the  day  dawns."

The  two  H.  V.  scripts  of  May  26  and  June  28  are  perhaps
interconnected  by  the  reference  in  both  to  "  dew,"  or  "  dew-
drops,"  and  both  indicate  natural  surroundings  not  inconsistent
with  those  of  Mrs.  Forbes  during  the  ensuing  July  ;  her  sketch
with  the  crescent  moon  shows  "  upland  lawns,"  "  hills,"  and
"  spaces  on  the  heather."

I  conclude  the  account  of  this  somewhat  complicated  incident
by  a  summary  in  chronological  order  of  the  automatic  pheno-
mena and  the  events  which  bear  upon  them.  Italics  represent
the  automatic  phenomena ;  implicit  or  indirect  references  are
placed  within  brackets.

1907.

"A.  May  26. H.  V.  "-when  the  day  dawns"'
_B.  June  28. H.  V.  (Diana).


44


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


(1)  July  14. M.V.  "DREAM-  Daim."

(2)  July  17. M.V.  "DAWN;  (Diana);  keep  thoughts  free."

(3)  July  17. Mrs.  Forbes  (Diana)  finishes  a  sketch  of  the

crescent  moon.

(4)  July  20. M.V.  "  Bonaventura; Light  beyond  darkness;

Tell  Helen."

(5)  July  22. H.  deG.V.  learns  of  No.  4.

(6)  July  25. #.  V.  "freedom  of  thought."

(7)  July  26.  F. "through darkness to light;  casement

grows  a  glimmering  square  (Dcnvn)."

(8)  July  29. H.  V.  and  M.  A.  B.  "something  evidential  about

Mrs.  Forbes  {Diana)  to-morrow"

(9)  July  30. M.  de  G.  V.  receives  a  letter  from  Mrs.  Forbes

(Diana).

(10)  July  30. M.V.  "Crescent  moon;  Hugo's  simile  (in  Booz

Endormi)."

(11)  July  30. H.  V.  and  M.  A.  B.  "Hugo  associated  with  Mrs.

Forbes  (Diana) ;  Dream."

(12)  July  31. H.  V.  and  M.  A.  B.  "Light  by  night;  Break  of

Day  (Dawn)."

(13)  July  31. M.  de  G.  V.  learns  of  Nos.  6  and  7,  A  and  B.

II.  Water  Eights.  Pollution.

In  the  interconnexions  just  described  my  script  appears  in
the  main  to  have  played  the  part  of  agent,  though  it  is  to  be
noted  that  on  July  17,  in  so  far  as  its  contents  were  veridical,
they  represented  an  impression  received  from  Mrs.  Forbes,  who
may  therefore  be  regarded  as  the  agent.

In  the  next  case  my  own  normal  thoughts  seem  to  have
impressed  themselves  upon  two  automatists,  who  apparently  also
received  a  veridical  impression  from  another  person.  These
automatists  were  my  daughter  and  her  cousin,  Mrs.  Riviere.

On  July  30,  1907,  my  niece,  Mrs.  Puviere,  came  to  stay
with  us  in  Cambridge ;  her  husband,  a  barrister,  was  expected
to  join  us  on  the  afternoon  of  August  2,  but  a  telegram  was
received  from  him  that  day  saying  that  he  had  been  kept  in
town  by  work  and  would  not  arrive  till  after  10  p.m.

My  daughter  and  her  cousin  have  often  tried  table-tilting
together,  and  on  August  2,  at  9.50  p.m.,  during  my  absence


LXV.]


A  Month's  Record  of  Automatisms.


45


from  the  drawing  room,  they  sat  down  to  the  table.  The
words  tilted  were  as  follows  :

e  fontaine

I  demur  to  your  plea  your  claim  is  void

At  this  point,  my  daughter,  who  was  writing  down  the
words,  said  that  perhaps  this  referred  to  Mr.  Riviere's  cases,
meaning  the  cases  which  had  unexpectedly  detained  him  in
town.

Tilting  was  then  resumed,  and  the  words  came

Simpkinson  is  claimant
Water  rights.

During  the  tilting  of  these  last  words  "water  rights,"  I  returned
into  the  drawing  room,  and  took  notes  of  the  following  words,
which  were

Pollution steam  laundry.

The  meaning  of  these  last  words  struck  me  at  once.  Just
before  leaving  the  drawing  room,  after  9.30  p.m.,  I  had  read  in  a
local  paper  of  an  outbreak  of  enteric  fever  at  Fulbourn  Asylum,
near  Cambridge,  and  of  some  consecpuent  anxiety  as  to  the
source  of  infection  and  the  risk  to  the  Cambridge  water  supply,
which  comes  from  the  Fulbourn  district.  There  is  also  a  steam
laundry  near  Fulbourn.  The  laundry  was  not  mentioned  in
the  paragraph  which  I  had  read,  but  at  the  time  of  an  earlier
outbreak  of  enteric  at  Fulbourn  I  had  discussed  with  a  friend
the  risk  of  contamination  to  users  of  the  laundry — of  whom  I
was  not  one — and  it  is  probable  that  the  news  of  this  second
outbreak  revived  in  my  mind  a  thought  of  possible  danger  from
the  laundry.  I  deliberately  refrained  from  mentioning  the  out-
break of  enteric  to  my  daughter  or  my  niece,  and  noticed  as
I  left  the  room  that  the  paragraph  in  the  paper  which  I  had
been  reading  on  the  sofa  was  not  visible.

But  my  precautions  were  rendered  useless  by  the  automatic
results.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  words  "  pollution
steam  laundry  "  were  the  reflexion  of  my  thoughts.  The  words
had  no  meaning  for  either  automatist.  Neither  of  them  knew
that  there  was  anywhere  any  risk  of  pollution,  or  that  there
was  any  steam  laundry  near  Fulbourn.  They  had  not  looked
at  the  paper.


40


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


It  appears  as  if  my  arrival  in  the  room,  while  they  were  tilting
the  words  "  water  rights,"  had  diverted  the  automatic  utterances
from  Mr.  Riviere's  supposed  concerns  to  mine,  and  as  if  the  word
"  water  "  served  to  effect  the  transition  from  one  subject  to  the
other.

Mr.  Riviere  arrived  before  anything  further  was  obtained  by
tilting.  On  being  asked  what  cases  had  detained  him,  he  replied
that  he  had  been  engaged  in  the  afternoon  of  August  2  on  a
water-rights  case.  But  the  name  Simpkinson  had  no  meaning
for  him.

There  thus  appears  here  to  have  been  an  attempt  to  produce
veridical  matter  concerning  Mr.  Riviere's  occupations,  though,
without  the  corroborative  force  of  the  sequel,  in  which  my
thoughts  were  tapped,  we  could  perhaps  not  claim  more  for  the
earlier  words  than  that  they  were  due  to  a  lucky  guess.  The
name  given,  Simpkinson,  was,  as  usual  in  our  experience  of
table-tilting,  meaningless,  so  that  "  water  rights "  might  have
been  a  mere  shot,  though  I  understand  that  water-right  cases
are  not  so  common  as  to  give  much  chance  of  success  to  such
a  random  shot.

The  idea  of  water  seems  to  have  underlain  the  whole  incident ;
the  opening  words  were  "  e  fontaine,"  and  both  the  following
veridical  statements  concerned  water.  In  this  connexion,  it  is
worth  noting  that  the  name  of  one  of  the  automatists  suggests
water,  and  as  E.  is  the  initial  of  Mr.  Riviere's  Christian  name,
it  is  possible  that  the  first  words  "  e  fontaine  "  are  a  symbolic
reference  to  him.

However  that  may  be,  it  is  probable  that  the  automatists  had
access  to  Mr.  Riviere's  thoughts,  and,  I  think,  indisputable  that
they  tapped  thoughts  of  mine  which  I  had  deliberately  refrained
from  communicating  to  them.

III.  Requiescat.

In  the  next  case  my  niece  and  my  daughter — percipients  in
the  last  incident — appear  to  be  agents,  and  the  part  of  the
percipient  is  played  by  my  script.

On  August  1907,  my  daughter  and  Mrs.  Riviere,  table-
tilting  in  a  room  by  themselves,  obtained  the  words :

Strew  on  her  roses  roses.


lxv.]  A  Month's  Record  of  Automatisms.  47

These  words  were  described  as  a  quotation.  The  line  being
familiar — it  is  the  first  line  of  a  poem  of  Matthew  Arnold's
called  Hcquicscat — no  evidential  value  was  attached  to  it  by  the
automatists  and  no  mention  was  made  of  its  appearance.

On  August  14, 1  being  then  in  ignorance  of  what  had  occurred,
my  script  alluded  to  the  same  poem,  thus :

M.  V.  August  14,  1907. 11  p.m.

. .  .  Strew  on  her  roses  roses  In  quiet  she  reposes.  Ah

would  that  I  did  too.

I  want  Mrs  [Holland]  to  make  the  same  allusion  to  Matthew
Arnold's  Requiescat .  . .

Here  then  three  lines  from  this  poem  were  given  with  the
evident  intention  that  they  should  form  part  of  a  cross-corre-
spondence. A  week  later  my  script  concluded  with  the  first
line  of  the  poem,  thus :

M.V.  Aug.  21,  1907. 11.15  p.m.

not  in  direct  communion  but  through  the  mind  of  another
does  the  message  pass.  Henry  Sidgwick  has  his  share  in  the
work — which  you  have  not  recognised. . . .

. . .  Sorrow  had  done  its  work.  Try  to  see  her  grave  Strew
on  her  roses  roses.

On  August  28,  1907,  my  daughter  and  I  compared  our
scripts,  and  she  then  told  me  of  the  table-tilting  incident.  On
Aug.  31,  her  recollection  of  this  was  confirmed  by  the  inde-
pendent written  statement  of  Mrs.  Eiviere,  who  had  returned
to  London  on  August  10,  before  the  first  emergence  in  my  script
of  any  reference  to  the  poem.

The  poem  is  familiar  both  to  my  daughter  and  to  me,  and
references  have  subsequently  been  made  to  it  in  both  our  scripts,
but  the  emergences  just  described  in  August,  1907,  were  the
first  appearances,  and,  especially  in  view  of  the  numerous  inter-
connexions between  us  at  this  time,  it  seems  that  the  connexion
is  not  accidental.

The  reason  for  saying  that  Mrs.  Eiviere  and  my  daughter
"  appear "  to  have  acted  as  agents  in  this  matter  is  that  I
subsequently  learnt  that  in  the  waking-stage  of  Mrs.  Piper's
trance  of  March  13,  1907,  a  word  interpreted  by  Mr.  Piddington


48


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


at  the  time  as  "  Kequiescat "  had  been  uttered,  as  intended  for  a
subject  of  cross-correspondence,  thus :

Faith  hope  charity
I'll  give  it.
Reseat  resquiat.

If  this  is  the  origin  of  the  emergence  of  the  quotation  in  the
table-tilting,  the  table-tilters  may  be  regarded  not  as  agents  but
as  percipients.

IV. Announcement  of  Comet.

On  August  9  my  daughter  and  Mrs.  Eiviere  appear  to  have
produced  a  veridical  statement  concerning  a  comet.  I  quote  the
whole  of  the  very  odd  and  disjointed  remarks  obtained  by  table-
tilting.  Possibly  readers  of  this  paper  who  know  more  about
comets  than  I  do  may  be  able  to  throw  light  on  some  of  the
less  intelligible  portions.  But  the  opening  sentences  seem  to
admit  of  only  one  interpretation.

August  9,  1907. 9  p.m. J.  R. and H.  de G.  V. (M.  de

G.  V.  taking  notes.)

Quite  right

(H.  de  G.  V.  What's  quite  right?)

I — meteoric  sign  in  the  east  at  dawn  perchance  some  wanderer
on  the  lonely  heath  had  watched  its  phantom  course  across
the  sky.

(short  pause).

lose  understanding  read  read.

(The  table  refused  to  move,  so  M.  de  G.  V.  read  over  aloud
what  had  been  tilted  out,  and  asked  :  Do  you  understand  now  ?)
Yes.

(M.  de  a.  V.  Go  on)

porrigit  et  vortex  flammarum  pallidus  ignis  coeligenae  mon-
strum  torquens  monstrosus  et  ipse.1  end.

(M.  de  G.  V.  after  reading  above  aloud ;  Give  more  about
the  meteoric  sign.)

is  a  sign  tell  Piddington.

1  These  ungrammatical  Latin  hexameters  do  not  admit  of  accurate  translation.
They  contain  words  that  mean  "a  whirl  of  flames,"  "pale  fire,"  "inhabitants
of  the  sky,"  "itself  a  portent  whirling  something  portentous."


LXV.]


A  Month's  Record  of  Automatisms.


49


(M.  de  G.  V. Is  there  anything  more  1)

tot  viridis  texit  ripas  aegyptius  amnis  caespitibus prae-

betque  suum  sic  cuique arigo.1

(M.  de  0.  V.,  after  reading  above  aloud  :  What  is  the  mean-
ing of  the  last  word  ?)

corn frumentum 2

(M.  de  G.  V. Is  there  any  connexion  with  the  meteoric  sign
in  these  last  statements  ?)
yes  meteor  brings  fertility.

That  the  "  meteoric  sign  in  the  east  at  dawn "  is  a  comet
is  made  clear  by  the  Latin  words  in  the  immediately  following
description,  vortex  flammarum,  "  a  whirl  of  flames,"  torquens
"  whirling,"  words  appropriate  to  no  other  meteoric  sign.

The  implication  in  the  concluding  remarks  seems  to  be  that
the  comet  is  not  malignant  but  portends  fertility,  such  as  the
Nile  brings  to  Egypt.  In  that  case  the  word  pcdlidus  is  appro-
priate, for  a  red  comet  seems  to  have  been  regarded  by  the
ancients  as  specially  malignant.3

The  words  "  tell  Piddington  "  are  constantly  used  when  the
accompanying  statement  claims  to  be  of  evidential  value,  and
were  interpreted  in  that  sense  on  this  occasion.  In  view  of
the  sequel  it  seems  that  in  this  case  the  intention  was  to
produce  not  a  cross-correspondence  with  some  other  automatist,
but  veridical  matter.

On  August  10,  1907,  the  morning  after  the  above-described
table-tilting,  the  Times  and  other  morning  papers  contained
notices  of  a  comet.  The  paragraph  in  the  Times  concluded  as
follows :

The  comet  is  now  visible  in  the  morning  sky  in  the  eastern
quarter  between  2  and  3  a.m.

There  can  be,  I  think,  no  reasonable  doubt  that  the  statement
of  the  table  at  9  p.m.  on  August  9  is  directly  connected  with
the  statement  of  the  Times  on  August  10.  The  question  is
whether  any  previous  notice  in  any  paper  could  have  been  seen

1  Here  again  the  Latin  hexameters  defy  translation.  The  last  word  is  nonsense
and  metrically  impossible;  the  translateable  words  are  as  follows:  "So  many
green  banks  does  the  Egyptian  river  weave  with  green  growth  (?),  and  so  gives  his
own  ...  to  each."

zfrume.ntum  means  "corn.''

3  Cf .  Virg.  JEn.  X.  272,  3;  cometae  sanguinei  lugubre,  rv.be.nt:  "bloody  comets
show  a  fatal  red."

D


50


Mrs.  A.  W.  V err  all.


[part


by  either  automatist,  and  particularly  whether  there  was  any
reason  why  they  should  anticipate  the  appearance  of  a  comet
just  at  that  date.  There  had  been  table-tilting  on  August  2,
3,  8,  and  9,  but  no  reference  whatever  to  a  meteoric  sign  or
comet  appeared  except  as  above  quoted  on  August  9.

We  at  once  searched  for  notices  of  an  approaching  comet
in  the  back  numbers  of  all  papers  that  we  were  in  the  habit
of  seeing,  but  could  find  nothing  bearing  on  the  subject.  There
was  no  mention  of  any  comet  in  the  evening  paper  of  August  9
which  we  had  seen,  nor  in  the  Times  for  a  month  before
the  date  in  question.  The  only  paper  in  which  I  could  find
any  notice  of  it  was  Nature — a  paper  which  no  one  of  the
automatists  ever  sees,  and  which  I  went  to  a  library  to
consult.  The  following  notes  represent  what  appeared  in
Nature  in  the  "  Astronomical  News."

On  June  20,  it  was  stated  that  a  telegram  from  Kiel
announces  the  discovery  of  the  4th  comet  of  this  year  by
Mr.  Daniel  of  Princeton  on  June  14.

On  June  27,  July  4,  July  11,  July  18,  there  were  notes
of  the  progress  of  "  1 9  0  7  d  (Daniel's  comet)."

On  July  25,  it  was  said  to  be  "very  probable  that  it  will
become  an  easy  naked-eye  object  during  August,"  and  that
on  July  18  it  had  been  seen  with  a  small  telescope  at
S.  Kensington.

On  Aug.  1  an  account  of  its  position  from  Aug.  3  to
Aug.  19  was  given  with  a  map.

On  Aug.  8  in  one  paragraph  the  comet  was  said  to  be
"  now  approaching  the  naked-eye  stage,"  and  the  dates  of  its
rising  on  August  9,  and  of  its  approximate  position  on  August
14,  were  given.  In  another  paragraph  in  the  same  issue  of
Nature,  it  was  said,  "  Daniel's  comet  has  been  visible  to  the
naked  eye  since  the  first  few  days  of  July,1  and  is  now  suffi-
ciently conspicuous  to  arrest  the  immediate  attention  of  any-
one who  will  look  towards  the  eastern  sky  before  the  morning
twilight  becomes  too  strong."  Then  follows  a  description  of
its  appearance  at  3  a.m.  on  August  5,  and  its  "  Ephemeris "
for  some  days,  showing  that  its  greatest  brightness  would  be
on  August  22.

1  So  printed  in  Nature  But  it  seems  clear,  from  the  note  of  July  25th  quoted
above,  that  "  Jul}'  "  is  here  a  misprint  for  "  August."


lxv.]  A  Month's  Record  of  Automatisms.  51

There  does  not  appear  from  these  notices  in  Nature  any
reason  why  the  9th  of  August  should  have  produced  an
allusion  to  the  comet  rather  than  some  other  date  in  August
— the  8th,  for  instance — on  which  table-tilting  under  precisely
similar  conditions  took  place.  The  connexion — if  connexion
there  be — seems  rather  to  be  with  the  fact  that  the  evening  of
the  table-tilting  was  the  evening  preceding  the  day  of  announce-
ment in  more  than  one  daily  newspaper.  So  that  the  source
of  the  automatic  phenomena  is  perhaps  to  be  sought  in  the
minds  of  the  writer  or  writers  of  the  newspaper  paragraphs.1

It  remains  to  consider  whether  anything  can  be  inferred  as
to  the  source  of  the  automatic  phenomena  above  described.
The  successful  results  may  be  classed  under  eight  heads,
briefly  described  as :

(1)  Dream.

(2)  Dawn.

(3)  Diana.

(4)  Hugo.

(5)  Eequiescat.

(6)  Water  Eights.

(7)  Steam  Laundry.

(8)  Comet.

Of  these  the  three  last  are,  or  may  be  claimed  to  be,  veri-
dical statements,  four  of  the  others  (Nos.  1,  2,  4,  5)  are
cross-correspondences,  and  one,  Diana  (3),  is  both  a  subject  of
cross-correspondence  and  of  veridical  statement.

In  the  last  three  cases  the  automatists  are  the  same,  my
daughter  and  her  cousin,  and  the  facts  to  which  the  automatists
alluded  were  in  each  case  known  to  one,  or  more,  living  mind,
though  no  one  living  mind  possessed  the  knowledge  of  the  three
facts,  namely,  that  on  Aug.  2  Mr.  Kiviere  was  occupied  with
a  water-rights  case,  and  that  a  steam  laundry  was  in  danger  of
pollution,  and  that  on  Aug.  9a"  wanderer  "  on  that  night  might
see  a  "  meteoric  sign  in  the  east  at  dawn."  Moreover,  the
transition  on  Aug.  2,  at  my  coming  into  the  room,  from  legal
matters  to  a  subject  recently  in  my  thoughts,  strongly  suggests

lCf.  Proc.  Vol.  XX.,  pp.  324-326  and  328-330  for  two  somewhat  similar  cases
where  M.  V.  script  seems,  in  part  at  least,  to  have  anticipated  paragraphs  in
the  Giomale  d'ltalia  on  June  27,  1902,  and  the  Daily  Mail  on  May  11,  1901.


52


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


that  my  mind,  whether  or  not  the  original  and  ultimate  source
of  the  phenomena,  was  at  least  contributory.  So  that  in  the
absence  of  further  evidence  it  seems  likely  that  the  explanation
of  these  three  cases  is  to  be  sought  in  telepathy  with  the  living.

Further,  it  is  certain  that  the  action  of  the  living  mind  was
altogether  unconscious ;  Mr.  Eiviere  did  not  know  that  his  wife
and  my  daughter  were  experimenting,  and  the  same  may
certainly  be  said  of  the  journalists  who  composed  the  press
notices  of  the  comet.  I  had  definitely  desired  that  the  possi-
bility of  "  pollution  "  to  Cambridge  water  should  not  be  known,
and  had  not  consciously  thought  of  its  connexion  with  a  steam
laundry.

But  if  access  to  the  mind  of  the  living  without  the  conscious
volition  of  that  mind  is  responsible  for  these  three  cases,  there
still  remains  the  question  who  or  what  is  responsible  for  the
selection  of  the  particular  material  conveyed.  Is  it  deliberate,
or  due  to  an  accidental  association  of  thought  ?  As  has  been
pointed  out,  the  word  "  water "  serves  as  a  link  between  the
contents  selected  from  Mr.  Riviere's  mind  and  from  mine  on
Aug.  2,  and  that  word  itself  is  easily  associated  with  the  name
of  one  automatist.  Again,  in  the  last  case,  the  comet  was  to
be  seen  "  at  dawn,"  and  the  word  "  Dawn "  had  been  very
prominent  in  the  automatic  phenomena  shortly  before  obtained.
But  without  further  evidence  and  more  abundant  material,
speculation  on  this  subject  is  premature.

There  is  no  internal  evidence  bearing  on  the  source  to  be
derived  from  the  automatic  phenomena  themselves ;  no  claim
is  made  as  to  the  origin  of  the  statements,  and  no  "  communi-
cator "  is  named  or  suggested.

It  is  not  easy  to  determine  with  certainty  the  starting  point
of  a  cross-correspondence,  still  less  to  discover  its  ultimate
source.  Priority  of  emergence  may  be  an  indication,  but  cannot
be  a  proof,  of  priority  of  impression,  as  allowance  must  be  made
for  delay  in  the  automatic  record.  In  the  case  of  "  Bequiescat "
(No.  5)  the  first  emergence  seems  to  be  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance
in  March,  1907,  the  second  in  the  table-tilting  of  my  daughter
and  her  cousin  on  Aug.  3,  the  third  and  fourth  in  M.  V.  script
of  Aug.  14  and  21.  Mrs.  Piper's  trance-speech,  which  gave  the
word  Bequiescat  as  a  topic  for  cross-correspondence,  may  have
been  the  starting  point. If  so,  a  completely  new  form  was  given


LXV.]


A  Month's  Record  of  Automatisms.


53


to  the  idea  by  the  appearance  in  the  table-tilting  of  the  first
line  of  a  poem  called  Bequiescat,  familiar  to  one  at  least  of  the
automatists,  and  it  was  this  form  which  emerged  some  days  later
in  M.  V.  script.  The  starting  point  of  the  cross-correspondence
may  be  located  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance,  or  in  the  table-tilting  of
my  daughter  and  Mrs.  Eiviere,  according  as  we  associate  or  do
not  associate  together  the  quotation  from  Matthew  Arnold's
poem  and  the  words  "  reseat  resquiat."

There  is  little  internal  evidence  in  the  automatic  records
themselves  as  to  the  supposed  source  of  this  cross-correspondence.
Myersv  is  the  communicator  of  both  my  scripts,1  and  the  second
alludes  to  "  Henry  Sidgwick."  MyersP  was  the  principal  control
of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  on  March  13,  and  the  words  "Faith
Hope  Charity "  have  constantly  been  associated  in  script  with
Mr.  Sidgwick.2  But  the  table-tilting  makes  no  claim  or  allusion
either  to  Frederic  Myers  or  to  Henry  Sidgwick,  so  that  the
internal  evidence  is  far  from  complete.  And  even  if  the  internal
evidence  consistently  specified  a  particular  "  communicator "  as
originating  a  successful  cross-correspondence,  much  further  corro-
borative evidence  would  be  recpuired  before  such  a  view  could
be  accepted.

The  other  four  topics  (Nos.  1,  2,  3,  4)  are  the  subjects  of
successful  cross-correspondence  both  individually  and  as  parts
of  a  whole  which  we  may  here  call  Victor  Hugo's  Poem,  or  Booz
Enclormi.  Let  us  first  consider  them  individually,  and  note  the
order  of  their  emergence.

No.  1.  Dream.  This  emerged  first,  explicitly  and  emphati-
cally, in  M.  V.  script  on  July  14  ;

and  next  explicitly  in  the  table-tilting  (H.  V.  and  M.  A.  B.)
on  July  30.

No.  2.  Dawn.  This  also  emerged  first  in  M.  V.  script,
explicitly  on  July  14,  explicitly  and  emphatically  on  July  17;

next  implicitly  in  H.  V.  script  of  July  26  ;

and  then  explicitly  in  the  table-tilting  (H.  V.  and  M.  A.  B.)
of  July  31.

No.  3.  Diana.  Allusions  to  Diana  are  in  no  instance  ex-
plicit ; the  name  Diana  does  not  occur. The  allusions  are  of

1  This  is  clear  from  the  contents,  but  neither  script  is  signed.
2Cf.  Proc.  Vol.  XX.,  pp.  421-423  (published  1906);  Vol.  XXI.,  p.  224  ff.  ;
Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  308.


54


Mrs.  A.  W.  V err  all.


[part


three  types,  (a)  to  Mrs.  Forbes,  (b)  to  the  crescent  moon,  (c)  to
the  classical  goddess,  huntress,  protector  of  young  creatures,
guardian  of  cross-roads.  They  emerge  as  follows :  first  in  H.  V.
script  of  June  28,  allusions  to  all  three  types,  (a)  "Lavender  is
sweet,"  (b)  drawing  of  crescent,  (c)  "hunting,  hunter";

next  in  M.  V.  script  of  July  17,  direct  allusions  to  two  aspects
of  type  (c),  "  guardian  of  parting  ways,"  "  bring  home . . .  ewes
and  lambs,"  and  indirect  allusions,  by  means  of  a  veridical
reference  to  Mrs.  Forbes's  occupations,  to  types  (a)  and  (b) ;

next  in  table-tilting  (H.  V.  and  M.  A.  B.)  on  July  29,
explicit  allusions  to  type  (a)  Mrs.  Forbes ;

again  in  M.  V.  script  of  July  30  type  (b)  "  luna  crescens,"
"  golden  sickle,"  drawing  of  crescent ;

lastly  in  table-tilting  (H.  V.  and  M.  A.  B.)  on  July  30,
type  (a)  "  Mrs.  Forbes  associated  with  Hugo."

No.  4-  Hugo.  This  emerged  first  explicitly  in  M.  V.  script
of  July  30  ;  *

and  next,  also  explicitly,  in  the  table- tilting  (H.  V.  and
M.  A.  B.)  later  on  the  same  day,  July  30.

If  we  accept  priority  of  emergence  as  an  indication  of  the
starting-point,  we  shall  assign  Dream,  Dawn,  and  Hugo  to  my
script,  and  Diana  to  my  daughter's.  "We  may  also  note,  as
perhaps  confirmatory  of  this  view,  that :

(No.  1)  as  between  the  two  explicit  references  to  Dream,  the
earlier  one  in  M.  V.  script  is  much  more  emphatic  than  the  later
one  in  H.  V.  script,  being  marked  by  constant  repetition  and
capital  letters ;

(No.  2)  in  the  case  of  Dawn  also  emphasis  is  thrown  on  the
emergence  in  M.  V.  script,  by  repetition  and  large  writing  on
the  second  occasion  ;

(No.  3)  the  only  instance  of  definite  allusion  to  the  three
types  of  Diana  is  at  the  first  emergence  in  H.  V.  script  of  June ;

(No.  4)  but  here  I  can  detect  no  difference  of  emphasis  in  the
emergence  of  Hugo  in  the  M.  V.  script  and  in  the  table-tilting
by  H.V.  and  M.  A.  B.  on  July  30.

Priority  of  emergence  does  not,  as  I  have  said,  necessarily
connote  priority  of  impression,  but  when  to  priority  is  added
marked  emphasis,  the  claim  to  be  the  starting-point  of  the
cross-correspondence  may  be  said  to  be  considerably  reinforced.


lxv.]  A  Month's  Record  of  Automatisms.  55

I  am  therefore  disposed,  in  the  present  state  of  the  evidence,  to
regard  my  script  as  the  starting-point  of  Dream  and  Daivn,  and
my  daughter's  script  as  the  starting-point  of  Diana ;  there  is  not
sufficient  evidence  to  assign  Hugo  to  either  set  of  automatists.

But  these  four  topics  are,  as  I  have  said,  parts  of  a  single
topic  which  includes  them  all — Hugo's  poem,  Booz  Endormi,
containing  the  simile  of  the  crescent  moon,  and  the  allusions  to
Dream  and  Dawn.  This  poem  was  itself  the  subject  of  a  cross-
correspondence  between  M.  V.  script  of  July  30,  and  H.  V.  and
M.  A.  B.  tilting  on  July  30  and  July  31.  Following  the  line
of  argument  as  above,  my  script  of  July  30  may  be  regarded  as
the  starting-point  of  the  actual  topic  of  Booz  Endormi,  for  it  is  at
once  prior  to  the  table-tilting  allusions  and  more  definite.  If
the  allusions  to  this  poem  in  the  scripts  were  confined  to  the
actual  cross-correspondence  on  the  subject  produced  on  July  30
and  July  31,  I  think  we  ought  to  seek  the  source  as  well  as
the  starting-point  in  my  script,  and  as  the  poem  was  familiar  to
me,  there  would  be  no  reason  to  look  beyond  my  memories  and
associations  in  order  to  explain  the  selection  of  this  particular
topic  for  automatic  use.

But  I  find  it  impossible  to  separate  the  allusions  to  Booz
Endormi  from  the  earlier  subjects  of  cross-correspondence,
Dream,  Dawn,  and  Diana's  Crescent  Moon.  Two  of  those  three
topics  my  script  is  probably  responsible  for  starting,  namely,
Dream  and  Dawn.  But  the  third,  Diana,  first  emerged  on
June  28  in  my  daughter's  script,  and  H.  V.  script  takes
precedence  of  M.  V.  script  in  the  whole  series  of  scripts  dealing
with  this  group  of  topics.  The  H.  V.  script  of  June  28  is
closely  connected  with  my  script  of  July  30 — which  contains  a
definite  allusion  to  Booz  Endormi — by  the  drawing  of  the
crescent.  In  both  scripts  the  crescent  is  placed  at  the  end  of
a  long  stick  ;  in  one  case  the  stick  is  horizontal,  in  the  other
vertical.  No  other  drawing  remotely  resembling  those  drawings
had  occurred  in  the  script  of  either  automatist,  so  that  these
analogous  and  distinctive,  though  not  precisely  similar,  drawings
make  an  indisputable  link  between  the  H.  V.  script  of  June  28
and  the  M.  V.  script  of  July  30.

But  if  we  see  in  the  H.  V.  script  of  June  28  the  starting-
point  of  one  of  the  four  contributory  topics — Diana's  crescent,
the  crescent  of  Hugo's  simile — we  cannot  here,  as  in  the  case  of


56


Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.


[part


my  script  of  July  30,  seek  the  source  in  the  automatist's  memory
and  associations,  for  the  poem  was  not  known  to  her.  And  if  we
account  for  the  H.  V.  script  of  June  28  by  giving  the  auto-
matist  credit  for  access  to  my  memories  and  associations,  we
have  still  to  consider  the  bearing  on  the  whole  question  of
Mrs.  Forbes's  sketch  of  the  crescent  moon  on  July  17,  to  which
attention  was  drawn  by  the  allusions  to  Diana  in  my  script
of  the  same  day.  Is  this  unique  action  of  Mrs.  Forbes — for
on  no  other  occasion  has  she  ever  sketched  a  crescent  moon —
to  be  attributed  to  chance,  to  the  action  of  my  subliminal  self,
or  to  some  other  intelligence  directing  the  whole  series  of
allusions  to  Hugo's  poem  ?

As  to  the  claims  made  by  the  documents  themselves,  none
of  the  H.  V.  scripts  are  signed  or  offer  any  reason  for  attri-
buting them  to  a  particular  communicator,  and  the  same  may
be  said,  as  usual,  of  the  table-tilting  (H.  V.  and  M.  A.  B.).  In
the  M.  V.  scripts  no  claim  is  made  on  July  14;  Myersv  is
responsible  for  the  scripts  of  July  17  and  July  30,  while  the
script  of  July  20  is  signed  with  a  Greek  capital  2,  a  signature
almost  certainly  intended  to  represent  Henry  Sidgwick.


lxv.]  Gorrespondances  croisees  et  la  Methode  experiment  ale.  57


III.

LES  GORRESPONDANCES  CROISEES  ET  LA
METHODE  EXPERIMENTALE.

Par  JOSEPH  MAXWELL,  M.D.

Lbs  dernieres  publications  de  la  S.P.R,  soulevent  une  grave
difficult^,  celle  de  la  methode  dans  les  Sciences  Psychiques.
Elle  est  d'une  extreme  importance.  La  methode  doit  etre
d'autant  plus  severe  que  l'objet  d'une  science  est  plus  conteste.
Pour  cela,  chaque  detail  d'une  experience  doit  etre  controls,
chaque  fait  initial  doit  etre  indiscutable.  L'imagination  doit
etre  ecartee  avec  soin  de  la  discussion ;  s'il  est  permis  de
construire  des  hypotheses  sur  les  faits,  ces  derniers  ne  peuvent
etre  eux-memes  hypothetiques.

Le  point  de  depart  du  mouvement  actuel  se  trouve  dans  les
travaux  de  MM.  Hodgson  et  Myers.  L'oeuvre  de  M.  Myers
est  de  premier  ordre.

Je  ne  fais  pas  le  meme  cas  des  travaux  de  M.  Hodgson.  Le
jugement  chez  lui  n'est  pas  toujours  sur,  il  est  altere  par  des
idees  preconcues.  Ses  conclusions  ont  toutes  leurs  precedents
dans  la  litterature  spirite  et  aboutissent  a  une  contradiction
(Proceedings,  Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  404-405):  "even  the  best  of  direct
'  communicators '  through  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  is  partly  asleep!'
.  .  .  "  the  consciousness  producing  the  writing — whatever  that
consciousness  may  be  .  .  .  — is  not  conscious  of  writing."  Quelle
base  peut  offrir  a  la  recherche  serieuse  une  communication  dont
le  communiquant  n'a  pas  conscience  ? 1

Au  point  de  vue  de  l'analyse  intime  de  la  personnalite  de
la  trance,  le  systeme  de  M.  Hodgson  conduit  a  une  impasse.
En  realite,  cet  observateur  avait  constate  un  fait,  deja  signale  :
les  processus  mentaux  de  l'automatisme  presentent  beaucoup

1Voy.,  par  exemple,  Stainton  Moses:  "Communicating  spirits  are  probably  in
an  abnormal  state." Light,  188- ,  p.  186.


58


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


d'analogie  avec  ceux  du  reve ;  ils  revelent  chez  l'auteur  des
messages,  quel  qu'il  soit,  des  etats  de  conscience  "  oniriques."
L'analyse  n'a  pas  permis  de  determiner,  dans  tous  les  cas,  la
source  des  informations  manifestoes  par  la  personnalite  servant
de  support  a  ces  etats  de  conscience.  Les  travaux  anterieurs
de  la  societe  ont  etabli  que  la  telepathie  etait  une  de  ces
sources  possibles.

L'etude  psychologique  de  l'automatisme  a  ete  faite  avec  soin
par  M.  Myers ;  cet  aspect  du  problems  a  echappe  a  peu  pres
completement  k  M.  Hodgson,  qui  a  cherche  une  solution  generale
a  toutes  les  dimcultes  rencontrees  par  lui.  Cette  solution,  la
theorie  spirite  l'offrait  aisement ;  l'hypothese  quelle  adopte
supprime,  par  definition,  toutes  les  dimcultes.

La  methode  inauguree  par  M.  Hodgson  a  ete  suivie  par  les
recents  experimentateurs.

I.

C'est  apres  la  mort  de  M.  Myers  que  le  mouvement  nouveau
a  pris  naissance.  II  a  trouve  un  apotre  admirable  dans  Mme
Verrall.

L'etude  des  dernieres  publications  de  la  S.P.R.  doit  done
commencer  par  l'analyse  du  memoire  de  Mme  Verrall  sur  son
eeriture  automatique  {Proceedings,  Vol.  XX.).  C'est  Ik  qu'est
l'origine  des  Correspondances  croisees  dont  Mile  Johnson  a
plus  tard  formule  la  theorie.

Ce  memoire  nest  pas  une  analyse,  mais  un  plaidoyer.  II
ne  pouvait  en  Otre  autrement.  On  ne  peut  etre  juge  dans
sa  propre  cause.  Mme  Verrall,  avec  la  meilleure  volonte,
ne  pouvait  etre  impartiale.  Un  medium  peut  decrire  ses
impressions  subjectives,  non  apprecier  la  valeur  des  ses
phenomenes.

Madame  Verrall  peut  d'autant  moins  etre  impartiale  qu'elle
a  fini  par  avoir  foi  en  son  eeriture  automatique,  foi  au  point
de  provoquer  l'ouverture  imprudente  de  la  lettre  posthume  de
M.  Myers.  Cette  confiance  explique  beaucoup  de  choses  qui
surprennent  dans  son  mimioire :  distractions,  legeres  erreurs  de
traduction,  omissions,  qui  ne  sont  pas  comprehensibles  si  on
ne  tient  pas  compte  de  ce  sentiment.  Mme  Verrall  perd
de  vue  les  faits  en  eux-mOmes ;  elle  n'apereoit  que  les  details


lxv.]  Correspondances  croisees  et  la  Methode  experimentale.  59

favorables  a  sa  these. Les  autres  lui  echappent,  completement
quelquefois. Je  vais  en  donner  des  exemples.
Le  31  Janvier  1902,  elle  ecrivit:

"  Panopticon  <r(patpa<;  ariTaXXet  avvSeyiuu  /nvaTiKor.  t'l  ovk
e$lSws;  volatile  ferrum.  pro  telo  impinget "  (Vol.  XX.,  p.  214).

Les  mots  latins  suggererent  a  Mme  Verrall  l'ide'e  d'une  lance,
et  elle  nota,  le  7  Fevrier  1902,  que  Virgile  emploie  cette
expression  dans  le  sens  de  lance,  "  spear."

Le  28  Janvier  1902,  apres  une  allusion  a  une  pretendue
vision  de  Mile  Verrall,  le  controle  de  Mme  Piper  fut  invite
par  M.  Hodgson  a,  apparaitre  a  Mile  Verrall  avec  une  lance
(spear)  a  la  main.  —  "  Why  a  sphere  ?  "  demanda  le  controle  ?  —
M.  Hodgson  repeta  "  spear,"  et  le  controle  consentit.  Le
4  Fevrier,  il  pretendit  avoir  reussi  a  se  faire  voir  a  Mile
Verrall  avec  une  "sphear"  [sic]  a  la  main.  La  confusion
entre  sphere  et  spear  persistait,  dit  Mme  Verrall.

Mile  Verrall  n'eut  aucune  impression,  ni  aucune  vision.
Mais  "  between  those  dates,  my  script  (as  interpreted  by  me
at  the  time)  said  that  the  seeing  of  a  sphere  effected  a
mysterious  '  co-reception,'  and  associated  this  statement  with  a
reference  to  a  spear.  It  seems  to  me  that,  though  the  pro-
posed experiment  did  not  succeed  in  the  way  intended,  there
is  strong  reason  for  thinking  that  my  script  was  in  some  way
affected  by  it"  (Vol.  XX.,  p.  216).  Ce  texte  etait  signe  d'une
croix  grecque  que  l'ecriture  (en  Juin  1903,  Vol.  XX.,  p.  78)
attribue  k  Lector.

L'analyse  de  Mme  Verrall  est  fantaisiste.  "  Panopticon  "  ne
veut  pas  dire  la  vue.  C'est  un  mot  anglais  cite  par  Webster ;
il  y  a  une  association  subliminale  anterieure  entre  ce  mot  et
sphere,  dans  les  textes  Verrall  (14  Mars  1901,  on  figurent
trois  croix) ;  a-ui'Seyiua  n'est  pas  un  mot  grec.  Le  texte,  tel
que  Mme  Verrall  le  traduit,  est  inapplicable  aux  circonstances,
car  personne  n'a  vu  de  sphere,  et  on  n'apercoit  pas  de  co-
reception.

Volatile  ferrum  ne  veut  dire  spear  que  par  suite  d'une
erreur  probable  de  Mme  Verrall. Le  sens  virgilien  est  fleche.1

1  II  suffit  de  lire  les  passages  de  Virgile  (Eniide,  IV.,  71;  VIII.,  694)  pour
voir  qu'il  s'agit  de  fleches.  Par  exemple,  IV.,  71:  "Qualis  conjecta  cerva
sagitta,  Quam  procul  incautam  .  .  .  fixit,  Pastor  agens  telis  liquitque  volatile
ferrum,  nescius  .  .  .  hteret  letalis  arundo."


60


Joseph  Maxwell,  31.  D.


[part


Le  mot  latin  pour  lance  est  hasta,  quelquefois  associe  a  volans
(EnMdc,  IX.,  411).  L'association  phonetique  de  Dido,  volatile
ferritin,  s'explique  par  des  lois  connues.1  En  effet,  le  passage
de  YUne'idc  est :  "  Uritur  infelix  Dido  .  .  .  qualis  conjecta  cerva
sagitta,"  etc.  (voir  note  precedente).

Enfin,  le  texte  de  Mme  Verrall  est  en  latin.  Or,  nous
apprenons  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  314)  que  Kector-Piper
ne  sait  pas  le  latin.  II  y  a  la  une  singuliere  contradiction,
si  ce  controle  joue  un  role  quelconque,  conime  tend  a  le
croire  Mme  Verrall.  En  tous  cas,  il  ne  transmet  pas  l'image
promise  et  ne  s'adresse  pas  a  la  personne  convenue.  La  croix
ne  signifie  pas  grand  chose,  car  nous  trouvons  des  croix  dans
le  texte  du  14  Mars  1901  ou  figurent  aussi  Panopticon  et
splice  rev.

L'incident  relatif  a  la  communication  simultanee  donnee  par
le  controle  Talbot  Forbes  chez  Mme  Forbes  et  chez  Mme
Verrall  est  encore  expose  avec  le  meme  defaut  de  methode.
Mme  Verrall  resume  les  concordances  ainsi  (Vol.  XX.,  p.  223):
"  On  a  certain  day  '  Talbot  Forbes,'  in  Mrs.  Forbes'  script,
declared  that  he  was  seeking  and  implied  that  he  had  found
another  automatic  writer  through  whom  to  communicate  with
her.  On  the  same  day  a  statement  was  made  in  my  script
about  fir-trees  planted  in  a  garden  which  had  a  meaning  for
Mrs.  Forbes  and  a  special  connexion  with  her  automatic  experi-
ments, and  the  signature  of  this  script,  to  which  attention  had
been  directed,  represented  partially  the  badge  of  Talbot  Forbes'
regiment,  together  with  a  sword."

Les  faits  n'ont  pas  exactement  la  physionomie  qu'elle  leur
prete ;  "  conifera  arbos "  ne  veut  pas  dire  des  sapins  (fir-trees),
mais  un  arbre  conifere.  Mme  Verrall  substitue  un  nom  de
genre  a  celui  d'une  famille  botanique  et  donne  a  son  texte,  par
cela  et  par  l'indication  du  plurieL  une  ressemblance  plus  grande
avec  les  faits  qu'il  n'est  legitime  de  le  faire.

Elle  ad  met  ensuite  que  le  dessin  representant  une  croix
est  une  epee;  mais,  (1)  la  garde  d'une  epee  moderne  n'est
pas  en  forme  de  croix ;  (2)  le  mot  fir-tree  est  associe  incontes-
tablement  a  une  croix  dans  les  textes  des  25  et  26  Aout,
1902.

D'ailleurs,  le texte  de  Mme  Forbes  s'applique-t-il  a  Mme

1  c'SiSws,  Aidw,  Dido,  uritur,  etc.


lxv.]  Correspondances  croisees  et  la  Mdihode  experimentale.  61

Verrall  ?  Dans  le  premier,  Talbot  F.  ecrit  qu'il  doit  faire  seance
avec  M.  Gurney  pour  controler  le  sensitif  et  prouver  a  M.  Forbes
pere  que  c'est  bien  lui,  son  fils,  qui  ecrit  par  la  main  de  Mme
Forbes.  Eien  ne  rappelle  ces  details  clans  le  texte  de  Mme
Verrall,  ou  il  n'est  pas  question  de  M.  Gurney.

Si  on  retablit  dans  son  integralite  le  texte  du  28  Aoiit  divise
en  trois  fragments  par  Mme  Verrall  (op.  cit,  pp.  388,  404,  417)
on  constate :

(1)  qu'il  y  est  question  de  croix.

(2)  qu'il  rappelle  le  texte  du  15  Mars  1901,  "Pollux  Cappa
docus  ponct  tigillum."

(3)  qu'il  rappelle  celui  du  14  Mars  1901,  "  Marmario
glyptato  .  .  ,  cidtellario."

(4)  Mme  Verrall  y  voit  un  essai  de  reponse  a  la  question
des  mots  grecs.  Si  l'influence  du  controle  Talbot  doit  etre
admise,  comment  devient-elle  intelligible  ?  II  veut  prouver  a
son  pere  qu'il  fait  ecrire  Mme  Forbes,  mais  il  ne  s'occupe
que  de  ^experience  de  M.  Verrall  et  d'une  inscription  ;  il  ne
se  revele  que  par  la  lointaine  allusion  "  conifera "  et  le  cor
suspendu.

II  ne  semble  y  avoir  aucune  continuite'  de  conscience  entre
les  textes  de  Mme  Forbes  et  Verrall.

"  Omina  sibimet  ostendit "  est  traduit  par  "  gives  its  own
portent." Le  traducteur  oublie  le  sens  rifle'chi  de  sibimet.

II  ne  saurait  etre  question  de  la  competence  incontestee
de  Mme  Verrall ;  elle  commet  ces  erreurs  de  traduction,  non
par  ignorance  du  latin,  mais  par  suite  de  son  e'tat  d'esprit.
Persuadee  de  la  valeur  supranormale  de  ses  textes,  elle  choisit
inconsciemment  tous  les  elements  de  nature  a  confirmer  sa
these,  et  s'arrete  a  des  interpretations  discutables,  pour  peu
qu'elles  soient  favorables ;  les  autres  interpretations,  plus
probables,  lui  echappent.

L'incident  des  mots  grecs  /uovottcoXov  e?  aw  est  instructif
a  ce  point  de  vue.

En  Avril  1901,  le  Dr.  Verrall  essaya  de  faire  ecrire  auto-
matiquement  par  Mme  Verrall  ces  mots  grecs ;  ils  n'ont
jamais  ete  ecrits,  le  sens  n'en  a  jamais  ete  donne,  comme  Mme
Verrall  le  reconnait  d'ailleurs.  Un  experimentateur  ordinaire
n'aurait  jamais  songe  a  faire  etat  d'une  semblable  experience
de  communication  de  pensee  entre  deux  epoux,  vivant  sous  le


62


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


meme  toit,  alors  surtout  que  l'experience  se  prolonge  pendant
1 5  mois.

La  phrase  grecque  est  obscure :  elle  signitie  "  vers  l'aurore,"
mais  on  n'est  pas  d'accord  sur  le  sens  de  novcnrwkos  qui  signifie
"  a  un  seul  cheval  "  ;  M.  Verrall  prefere  le  sens  "  solitaire."  Ces
mots  sont  extraits  de  YOreste  d'Euripide ;  ils  figurent  dans  un
passage  dont  la  traduction  fut  donnee  en  1873  a  un  Concours
auquel  le  Dr.  Verrall  prit  part.

M.  Verrall  n'avertit  pas  sa  femme  de  son  experience ;  celle-ci
nous  dit  qu'il  ne  lui  en  parla  pas  au  cours  des  essais  faits  pour
reproduire  les  mots  grecs ;  on  verra  au  contraire  que  le  Dr.
Verrall  laissa  bientot  deviner  qu'il  attendait  quelque  chose.
Des  le  16  Aofit  1901,  apres  la  lecture  d'un  texte,  il  dit  a
Mine  Verrall  "  that  he  thought  it  [the  writing]  was  trying  to
say  what  he  wanted"  (Vol.  XX.,  p.  388).

L'examen  des  textes  montre  que  l'ecriture  automatique  a  ete
guidee  par  le  Dr.  lui-meme,  qui  voyait  les  textes,  et  disait  s'ils
etaient  ou  n'etaient  pas  interessants  pour  lui.  Un  peu  d'atten-
tion  revele  les  procedes  de  la  conscience  liee  aux  automatismes
de  Mme  Verrall.

L'experience  commence  en  Avril  1901.  La  premiere  allusion
signalee  est  "Five  stars  in  the  East  .  .  ."  (16  Juin  1901,
Vol.  XX.,  p.  387).

Le  4  Juillet  1901:  "Yellow  is  the  colour  of  the  dawn"
(Tithoni  croceum  linquens  aurora  cubile,  vers  trois  fois  repete
dans  Virgile).

Le  contexte  cite  p.  416  se  refere  a  toute  autre  chose  que
les  mots  grecs,  et  le  Dr.  Verrall  n'a  point  dit  que  ce  texte
l'interessait.

Le  premier  texte  auquel  il  ait  donne  son  approbation  est
celui  du  31  Juillet  (p.  388)  ou  nous  voyons,  dans  le  fragment
public,  les  idees  suivantes :

Longsevus,  senex,  barba,  alba,  p.ovoyj.Tm>o<i,  albipannosus,
signifer,  7  mots  comportant  un  grand  nombre  d'associations.

L'idee  relative  a  albus,  alba,  blanc,  est  deux  fois  repetee,
sans  avoir  rien  de  commun  avec  aube,  aurore  (barbe  blanche,
vetements  blancs).

Ceux  d'entre  mes  lecteurs  qui  sont  familiers  avec  la  psycho-
logie  des  etats  de  conscience  oniriques  ne  seront  pas  etonnes
de  voir  surgir  plus  tard  (13  Aout 1901,  p.  388)  l'idee  de


lxv.]  Oorrespondances  croise'es  et  la  Methocle  experimentale.  63

blancheur  developpee  avec  des  jeux  de  mots,  des  alliterations
et  des  images ;  ce  theme  aboutit  a  "  crested  cock  that  crows
.  .  .  — not  a  real  bird,  heraldic — with  a  motto — Cano,  canam
albam "  (je  chante  l'aube  blanche):  epithete  qui  ne  rappelle
pas  celle  du  4  Juillet,  "yellow"  (jaune),  mais  sert  de  lien  entre
Cano,  canam  et  albam.

M.  Verrall  n'a  rien  trouve  dans  ce  texte  qui  lui  parut  se
referer  a  ses  mots  grecs.  II  est  meilleur  juge  et  plus  desin-
teresse.  Depuis  le  31  Juillet  au  moins,  malgre  quelle  dise  le
contraire  (note,  Vol.  XX.,  p.  157),  Mme  Verrall  sait  que  les
textes  peuvent  interesser  son  mari  (Vol.  XX.,  p.  388).

Le  texte  du  16  tatonne  apres  l'echec.  II  reprend  l'idee  du
vieillard  a  barbe  blanche,  vetu  de  blanc,  le  decrit  avec  un
baton,  une  boite,  quelqu'un  le  regarde  et  observe  la  lumiere
qui  passe  d'une  fenetre  a  l'autre,  allant  vers  l'orient.  A.  W.  V.
comprendra. Le  texte  contenait  quelques  mots  grecs.

Ce  texte  est  approuve,  mais  l'ecrivain  des  textes  ne  sait  pas
pourquoi.  Cela  rend  l'hypothese  d'une  coincidence  fortuite  plus
probable  que  celle  d'une  action  telepathique  et  exclut  Faction
d'une  intelligence  directrice.

L'inintelligence  du  but  de  l'experience  se  revele  dans  le  texte
suivant,  qui  brode  sur  le  theme  "  fenOtre,"  mais  n'obtient  aucune
approbation  (20  Aout).

Le  23,  retour  a  l'idee  du  coq,  assortie  d'une  tentative  vers
la  description  d'une  inscription  avec  un  mot  grec ;  ce  texte
ne  provoque  aucune  approbation,  aussi  l'idee  de  coq,  apres  une
emergence  voilee  dans  le  texte  du  28  est  abandonnee  et  ne
persistera  que  dans  la  selection  du  sens  ou  s'orientera  la  con-
science onirique,  c'est  k  dire  vers  can,  de  cano,  canam,  approuves
avec  le  texte  du  16  (malgre  la  non  approbation  du  texte
du  13).

L'idee  de  can-o  est  dissociee :  la  premiere  syllable  sert  de
theme  k  des  associations  oniriques  paralleles  aux  precedentes,
developpees  dans  le  sens  d'allusions  a  une  chapelle  et  au  Dr.
Benson.


[Texte


64


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


Texte  du  28  Aofit  1901.  Comparez  :

"  Cups  and  a  cross,  the  cross  between, "  A  cross  in  the  east

and  a  bright  light  falls  from  above  upon  .  .  . Cantuar  is  sedile  "

them  and  him  .  .  .  AW  .  .  .  will  recog-  (12  Avril  1902,p.l87).
nise  this. I  speak  with  the  tongue  of "  Sedet  super  sedilia

brass  .  .  . Cappa  .  .  . Cantilupe  .  .  .  circumspectans  "  (27

cant ilenam. Cantiaris sedile jam  Juin  1901,  p.  419).
sedet  super  mundum  circumspectans  .  . . Cantilupe  and  the  old

in  the  east  to  the  day  light  ...  it  runs  man  in  the  long  white

round  a  dial  or  font  .  .  .  glyptatus  in  robe  with  the  unje  welled

marmoreo  lapide  cultellario  .  .  . Signa  crown. This  belongs  to

sigillo. Conifera  arbos  in  horto  jam  A.  W.  V.  past  master

insita  omina  sibimet  ostendit "  (c'est  le  (12  Oct.  1901,  p.  401).
texte  attribue  a  Talbot  Forbes  ').

Le  texte  est  manifestement  associi'  a  l'ancien  maitre  du  Dr.
Verrall,  l'archeveque  de  Cantorbc'ry,  Ur.  Benson,  a  une  chapelle
(tongue  of  brass,  font,  cross,  etc.)  et  a  ses  alentours.

Ce  texte  est  approuve ;  il  y  a  quelque  chose  d'intelligible
pour  le  Dr.  Verrall,  outre  le  cadran  solaire,  qui  y  est  mentionne
(pp.  cit.,  p.  3S9).

Le  meme  ordre  d'idees  est  sous-jacent  au  texte  du  lende-
main.  Le  texte  du  28  parlait  d'un  mot  autour  d'un  cadran
solaire  ou  de  fonts  baptismaux  (?);  celui  du  29  essaye  de
donner  ce  mot ;  "  The  shape  of  the  letters  is  archaic  .  .  .
Cantilect  .  .  .  Cantuar  6C  and  a  heraldic  bird,  in  colours — the
light  comes  through,  on  a  window  to  the  east, more  than  one."

L'idee  de  l'oiseau  h<'raldique  et  de  la  chapelle  persistent
avec  celle  d'inscription  ;  il  s'agit  clairement  d'une  verriere.1

Les  associations  s'expliquent  ainsi  facilement.  L'est,  les
fenetres,  le  vieillard  en  robe  blanche,  les  inscriptions,  la  chapelle,
la  croix,  etc.

La  lecture  attentive  des  textes,  apres  les  avoir  rapieces  et
places  en  ordre  chronologique,  ne  laissera  aucun  doute  sur  ce
point.  A  cette  date,  la  conscience  automatique  s'oriente  toujours
vers  la  chapelle  et  l'inscription.  Le  hasard,  aide  par  le  Dr.
Verrall,  va  l'orienter  sur  le  mot  grec  qui  figure  dans  le  passage
d'Euripide.

1  Voy.  Vol.  XX.,  p.  18S.  II  s'agit  probablement  de  la  chapelle  de  Wellington
College.


lxv.]  Gorrespondances  croisees  et  la  Methode  experimentale.  65

Et  ici,  on  apercoit  les  precedes  de  Mine  Verrall.  Les
lettres  E  C  de  son  texte  sont  visiblement  associees  au  Dr.
Benson. Le  texte  da  2  Juki  1902  (op.  cit,  pp.  426  et  302)

applique  EtC,  ^  j£ au  Dr.  Benson. C'est  bien  E  C  qu'a

ecrit  Mine  Verrall  car  nous  savons  qu'elle  a  conscience  des
mots  ecrits  par  elle ;  si  elle  a  lu  EC,  c'est  qu'elle  avait  bien  eerit
ces  lettres  qu'elle  considerait  avec  raison  comme  des  initiales.

Mais  le  Dr.  Verrall,  preoccupe  de  ses  mots  grecs,  lit  6C  (e?)
en  grec.  Des  lors,  le  subliminal  est  fixe  et  e?  est  ecrit  dans
presque  tons  les  textes  suivants  (10,  11,  12,  13,  14,  15,  16);
il  ne  disparaitra  comme  mot  isole  qua  partir  du  l7e,  a  la
suite  d'essais  infructueux.

Le  texte  du  2  Septembre  ne  revele  par  la  moindre  notion
des  mots  a  transmettre,  sauf  l'essai  suggere  e?  to  ;  il  insiste
sur  la  presence  du  mot  vale.

Le  4,  une  forte  impulsion  a  ecrire  survient.  Le  texte  prece-
dent n'avait  rec,u  aucnne  approbation  du  Dr.  Arerrall ;  le  nouveau
combine  certains  elements  figurant  dans  des  textes  approuves
anterieurement,  des  mots  grecs  en  novo-,  rappel  du  31  Juillet ;
GC,  rappel  du  19  Aout;  la  draperie  blanche,  rappel  du  16  Aout.
Des  idees  sont  essayees ;  le  nom  Charles,  Chalfont,  un  endroit
pres  d'une  riviere,  puis  le  personnage  associe  a  la  draperie
blanche  (16  Aout). Ce  texte  est  approuve.

Le  meme  jour,  le  nom  de  M.  Balfour  est  substitue  a  Chal ;
"  esagi  "  est  ecrit  en  vieux  caracteres  grecs,  puis  le  mot  "  sunto."
Pas  d'approbation.

Le  7  Septembre  "  seven  in  a  row — or  was  it  five — away  in
the  east  like  stars.  Mol  es  to  .  .  .  there  are  o  and  1  before
the  es.  oX-e?.  Tender  es  fusa — a  long  word  like  that, — foreign,
Indian  I  think — Banipal  and  Assur  .  .  .  Asta,  aster."

Ce  texte  ne  parait  pas  avoir  interesse  le  Dr.  Verrall ;  l'ecriture
automatique,  toujours  aiguillee  sur  oX-e?  qui  ont  figure  dans
des  textes  approuves,  part  de  quelque  chose  comme  moleskin,
l'apparence  non  le  sens,  et  revient  a  1'idee  d'oiseau  mais  avec
des  associations  clairement  oniriques.  "  Pye  is  a  bird  too  but
not  ours"  eveille  evidemment  1'impression  de  pie,  oiseau  francais ;
le  mot  "  gasur  "  rappelle  l'italien  gazza,  pie,  magpie,  pye  en  anglais;
"  dailey  is  more  like,  daily  bent,  —  —  —  is  how  it  goes  and
the  first  rhymes  to  a. Find  the  herb  moly  that  will  help."

E


66


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


Eien  ne  se  rapporte  aux  roots  choisis  par  le  Dr.  Verrall.
L'apparition  de  moly  s'explique  par  les  associations  oniriques.
Pie  frangais,  pye  anglais  (pal,  comuie  paille  en  frangais)  eveillent
chez  Mme  Verrall  l'idee  d'ail,  qui  est  represents  par  d-ail-ey,
d-ail-y  ;  —  —  —  est  la  quantite  de  allium  en  latin,  qui  est  l'equi-
valent  cle  ail  {garlic).  De  la  a  moly  l'association  est  evidente,
l'allium  moly  est  une  belle  plante  indigene  a  fleurs  jaunes.  On
comprend  que  moly  conduise  a  a-lli-um  dont  la  premiere
voyelle  rime  bien  avec  a.

Cette  explication  simple  ne  se  presente  pas  a  l'esprit  de
Madame  Verrall  qui  nous  en  propose  une  autre,  supranormale
bien  entendu.  Le  texte  ne  lui  avait  paru  avoir  aucun  sens,
mais  en  1905,  elle  decouvrit  que  le  concours  de  1873  com-
prenait  la  version  d'Oreste  oil  se  trouve  fxovowwXoi'  ey  aw  et
comme  epreuve  de  vers  latins,  la  traduction  du  passage  de
Milton  (Comvs),  finissant  par  "  That  moly  which  Hermes
once  to  wise  Ulysses  gave." 1

II  y  a  la  une  coincidence,  curieuse  si  Ton  veut,  mais
lemerge  Moly  me  parait  avoir  une  cause  plus  naturelle
et  par  consequent  plus  probable.  L'explication  que  j'ai
proposee  rend  compte  cle  tous  les  details  du  texte,  ils  sont
incomprehensibles  dans  le  systeme  supranormal  de  Mme
Verrall.

Le  Dr.  Verrall  declara  que  ce  texte  constituait  un  progres.

Le  12,  l'ecriture  prend  /uoX-es,  naturellement,  comme  theme:
le  Thibet  intervient,  sans  doute  par  association  onirique  a
termes  latents  (mollis  .  .  .  woollen,  woollen  .  .  .  cloth)  Thibet
.  .  .  Pye  est  repris :  "  Pye  gives  one  clue,  but  there  is
another — a  dark  man  who  smoked."

L'ecriture  automatique  bat  les  buissons.  Pye  est  un  indice,
comme  l'homme  brun,  ce  qui  ne  s'accorde  pas  avec  l'explication
de  Mme  Verrall  au  sujet  cle  la  finesse  avec  laquelle  Pye  est
introduit  pour  representer  la  lettre  tt.

1  L'explication  donnee  par  Mme  Verrall  de  l'emergence  de  Pye  est  celle-ei  ;
l'ecriture,  "after  stating  correctly  that  '  m  conies  before  the  es  agiles '  .  .  .  goes
on  to  introduce  the  'p,'  a  conspicuous  omission  in  its  previous  attempts  to
represent  fxovbtvuKov.  This  it  did  in  a  very  quaint  fashion  .  .  .  without  betraying
any  notion  that  what  was  wanted  was  the  Greek  letter  Pi,  it  suddenly
remarked  :  Pye  is  a  bird  too"  .  .  .  (Vol.  XX.,  p.  162),  etc.

Cela  ne  semble  pas  serieux.  L'idee  de  la  lettre  ir  n'apparait  pas  le  moins
du  monde.


lxv.]  Correspondances  crois4es  et  la  Methods  expe'rimentale.  67


Les  textes  ne  se  rapprochent  uu  pen  de  l'idee  d'aurore  que
le  12  decembre,  au  milieu  d'erreurs  sans  nombre.

Je  ne  retiendrai  que  deux  incidents  :  le  premier  est  relatif
au  texte  du  18  Septembre,  qui  est  un  message  pour  nne  dame;
Mrue  Verrall  en  utilise  une  partie  (p.  206)  pour  justifier  des
allusions  a  une  dame  Archdale.  II  est  plus  probable  que  le
"her"  est  cependant  Mme  Forbes.  En  tous  cas,  il  s'agit  d'un
message  relatif  h  "a  knife — on  a  table,  with  letters  engraved

upon  it — not  English — (~~ M  t  Tf  *7T  Q  £  tne  letters  look

like  that. It  is  a  friendly  wish. Ask  her  .  .  ."

II  est  clair  que  ces  mots  ne  concernent  pas  du  tout  l'ex-
perience  ;  "  cependant,"  dit  Mme  Verrall,  "  le  texte  "  s'empara  de
l'unique  idee  non  encore  representee,  celle  de  cheval,  dans  le
sens  ordinaire  de  yUoyoVwAo?.  Le  mot  suggere  euiinros  qui  a
de  bons  chevaux.  Pendant  que  Mme  Verrall  ecrivait,  son  mari
essayait  de  l'impressionner.  II  est  possible  que  l'apparition  des
lettres  grecques  soit  due  a  une  transmission  de  pensee,  mais
cela  est  incertain.  Nous  savons  que  M.  Verrall  traduit  fxovo-
7r(oXo9  par  solitaire.  Pourquoi  l'idee  de  cheval  est-elle  transmise  ?
II  y  a  la  un  point  difficile  a  comprendre.

Le  sens  general  du  contexte  rend  improbable  l'explication
donnee  par  Mme  Verrall ;  il  suffit  de  s'y  reporter.

S'il  y  a  une  action  telepathique,  elle  se  produit  d'une
maniere  qui  rappelle  tout  a  fait  les  correspondances  croisees
du  type  mosaique  et,  comme  l'a  fait  observer  M.  Pigou,  cette
action  telepathique  ote  tout  fondement  aux  theories  de  Mile
Johnson  sur  ce  genre  de  correspondances.

Le  second  incident  est  l'aveu  que  lecriture  automatique  fait
elle-meme  de  son  ignorance.  "  What  is  the  word  he  wants  to
complete,  neither  you  nor  I  know  it.  so  it  is  hard  to  get.
It  all  belongs  to  him  but  not  to  me,  his  friends  but  not  mine.
ISTo  one  here  knows  but  one  and  her  I  have  not  met.  I  will
ask  Arthur  .  .  ."

Jusqu'au  dernier  moment  l'ecriture  n'a  rien  percu  des  mots
grecs,  car  le  dernier  texte  cite  parle  d'Hannibal,  de  Sagonte,
de  "  molens,"  et  finit,  symboliquement  sans  doute,  par  "  no  nono  "
(Vol.  XX.,  p.  392).

C'est  sur  cette  mauvaise  experience  que  Mme  Verrall  se
fonde  pour  dire  que  son  texte  a  essaye  de  reproduire  tantot  le


68


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


sens,  tantot  le  son  des  mots  grecs  (Vol.  XX.,  p.  159).  Elle  est
trop  favorable  a  ses  essais.  Je  ne  puis  voir  par  exemple  une
approximation  de  fiovoiroAos  clans,  "  blow  hot,  blow  cold "
(p.  393).

De  plus,  la  telepathic,  telle  que  nous  la  connaissons,  ne
transmet  ordinairement  pas  des  alternatives.  On  peut  trans-
mettre  le  son,  la  forme,  tout  element  sensoriel,  ou  l'idee  abstraite.
Si  M.  Verrall  donne  mi  sens  a  //oi'oVwAo?  il  n'en  transmettra
pas  deux.  Cependant  (p.  392)  Mme  Verrall  nous  indique  la
double  traduction  de  ei't7T7ro?  ou  et?  (7T7ro?,  soit  qui  a  un  bon
cheval,  soit  qui  a  un  seul  cheval,  lecture  alternative  d'un  mot
douteux,  si  on  veut  l'idee  de  cheval.  Si  Ton  prefere  l'idee  de
solitaire,  elle  re'sulte  de  ces  mots,  "  alone  with  God  and  none
other,"  et  de  ceux-ci,  "  Planet  or  play  net  illustre  vagatur  coelo
sine  comite."

Je  doute  que  Ton  puisse  prendre  au  serieux  ces  arguments.
C'est  l'inauguration  du  systeme  des  interpretations  symboliques
dont  on  verra  le  developpement  ulterieur.

II  y  a  encore  un  autre  facteur  qui  est  important,  car  il
explique  bien  des  coincidences.

On  compte,  dans  les  textes  publies,  234  mots  ou  idees
differentes.  Une  analyse  admettant  l'approximation  morpho-
logique,  phonetique,  symbolique  et  ideologique  peut  trouver  a
coup  sur,  dans  1'immense  quantite  de  materiaux  que  fournissent
234  idees  et  leurs  combiuaisons,  une  certaine  proportion  de
concordances.

Quant  aux  faits  exacts  concernant  des  details  etrangers  aux
mots,  objet  de  l'experience,  je  doute  qu'ils  aient  une  valeur
supranormale.  Leur  connaissance  subliminale  s'explique,  nota-
ment  les  details  relatifs  aux  examens  du  Dr.  Verrall.  Je  ne
vois  pas  comment  Mme  Verrall  peut  se'rieusement  soutenir  qu'il
n'en  a  jamais  etc  question  entre  elle  et  son  mari.  J'admets
qu'elle  n'a  aucun  souvenir  conscient  de  conversations  a  ce  sujet;
cela  ne  prouve  pas  que  de  pareilles  conversations  n'aient  jamais
eu  lieu.

Les  methodes  d'analyse  de  Mme  Verrall  se  montrent  encore
clairement  dans  l'incident  Constable.

Mme  Verrall  reconnait  que  l'experience  a  echoue ;  cependant
elle  trouve  dans  l'indication  repetee  de  prenoms  en  "  ia "  une
tentative  pour  arriver  au  mot  "  fuchsia,"  que  contenait  la  lettre


lxv.]  Gorresjwndances  croisees  et  la  Methode  experivientale.  69


dont  elle  devait  dormer  medianiquement  le  sens,  et  pense  que
son  texte  du  3  Novembre  1902,  jour  ou  M.  Constable  ecrivit
la  lettre,  objet  de  l'experience,  decrit  l'etat  d'esprit  de  ce
monsieur  (voy.  Vol.  XX.,  p.  170).  En  effet,  le  texte  (p.  171):
"  suggests :

(1)  an  utterance  from  a  stranger,

(2)  a  division  of  a  task  between  two  persons,

(3)  the  obtaining  of  a  clue  from  some  one  (masculine),

(4)  an  effort  of  some  one  other  than  myself  (feminine)  to

give  words."

Ce  texte,  qui  demeure  iniutelligible  pour  Mine  Verrall,  s'il
ne  se  refere  pas  a  M.  Constable,  se  refere  manifestement  a
Mme  Forbes  et  aux  controles.

Le  3  Novembre  1902  Mme  Verrall  (p.  239)  regoit  une
lettre  de  Mme  Forbes  contenant  un  message :  "  (Myers)  sees
the  words,  not  so  strong  as  your  son's  writing,  but  clearer.
Will  you  be  sure — you — tell  Mrs.  Verrall  to  be  sure  I  am  the
writer  ..."  etc.

A  cette  epoque  il  y  avait  des  essais  de  correspondance  tele-
pathique  entre  Mines  Verrall  et  Forbes  :  par  exemple,  texte
du  27  Octobre  1902  (p.  238):

"  Mrs.  Forbes  has  the  other  words — piece  together.  Add
hers  to  yours."

31  Octobre  1902  (p.  238):

"  She  has  had  some  words  incomplete,  to  be  added  to  and
pieced  and  make  the  clue."

Le  7  Novembre  1902  (p.  240):

"  Your  message  comes  through  Mrs.  Forbes."

Comparez  maintenant  le  texte  intercalaire  du  3  Novembre :

(a)  "  None  the  less  through  others  not  known  speaks  the  fate.

(b)  I  will  give  the  words  between  you  neither  alone  can
read,  but  together  they  will  give  the  clue  he  wants  .  .  .  hers
are  in  English  and  will  fill  the  gaps — Wait  some  time  for
hers,"  etc.

La  premiere  phrase  parait  un  de  ces  apophtegmes  frequents
dans  l'ecriture  automatique.  Elle  est  inapplicable  a,  M.  Con-
stable, qui  ne  rendait  aucun  oracle.  Le  reste  est  la  con-
tinuation du  courant  d'idees  indique  dans  les  textes  des  27
et  31  Octobre.  "He"  est  le  controle  de  Mme  Forbes,  et  le
"clue"  est  manifestement  celui  que  vise  le  texte  du  31  Octobre:


70


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


la  repartition  des  mots  est  clairement  entre  Mmes  Forbes  et
Verrall.

Cela  sauterait  aux  yeux  si  Mme  Verrall  avait  joint  a  son
commentaire  le  texte  complet  qu'elle  commente.

La  seconde  experience  avec  M.  Constable  montre  encore  le
rneme  precede  (Vol.  XX.,  p.  172).

Mme  Verrall  se  trompa,  mais  indiqua,  soit  dans  son  texte,
soit  dans  les  commentaires  l'accompagnant :
"(1)  that  the  contents  of  the  letter were less  important
than  the  circumstances  of  the  experiment ;

(2)  that  the  experiment  was  suggested  to  M.  Constable  by

some  one  else ;

(3)  that  the  experiment  was  connected  with  the  sealed
envelope  {i.e.  the  Myers  envelope  which  there  was  a
question  of  opening),  and  meant  as  a  preliminary  trial ;

(4)  that  the  sealed  envelope  sent  me  was  one  of  two  and
the  less  important."

Dans  son  memoire,  Mme  Verrall  omet  de  nous  indiquer  mi
point  capital,  que  la  lecture  de  l'appendice  revele ;  elle  assistait
au  diner  du  Conseil  ou  M.  Constable  parla  de  l'ouverture  de
la  lettre  de  M.  Myers  (p.  400).  Mme  Verrall  repondant  a
M.  Constable,  assure  qu'elle  n'a  pas  entendu  la  conversation
a  table,  etant  assise  a  l'autre  bout,  et  qu'elle  ignorait  qu'on  eut
agite  la  question  de  l'ouverture  d'une  enveloppe  scellee.

Ce  detail  ote  toute  valeur  a  l'experience.  Mme  Verrall
n'a  certainement  pas  conscience  d'avoir  entendu  cette  conver-
sation, mais  peut-elle  affirmer  qu'aucun  mot  ne  lui  en  est
parvenu  ?  Qu'elle  n'a  rien  surpris  "  subconsciemment "  de  cette
conversation,  fort  naturelle  dans  les  circonstances,  et  qui
l'interessait  directement  ?

Ces  quatre  impressions  sont  correctes  dans  leur  ensemble,
dit-elle  (p.  173).  M.  Constable  cependant  ecrit :  "I  think  the
experiment  was  not  suggested  to  me  by  anyone — I  worked  out
the  idea  myself"  (p.  399).1

1  Voyez,  au  meme  point  de  vue,  revolution  qui  s'est  produite  dans  1'esprit
de  Mme  Verrall  a  1'occasion  des  textes  des  8  Juillet  et  25  Novembre  1901,  qui
emanent  manifestement  du  m&me  communicateur,  M.  Balfour.  L'incident
raconte  parut  imaginaire  ;  plus  tard,  Mme  Verrall  decouvrit,  sur  une  indication
imprecise  de  son  <5criture,  dans  la  Biographie  du  Professeur  Sidgwick,  un  incident
analogue  concernant  M.  Sidgwick  et  Sir  G.  Trevelyan.  Elle  arriva  insensible-
ment  a  attribuer  au  premier  des  textes  qu'elle  avait  d'abord  attribues  a  M.


lxv.]  Gorrespondances  croisees  et  la  Methode  expe'rimentale.  71


Je  terminerai  en  analysant  deux  cas  interessants.  Dans  la
nuit  du  11  an  12  Mai  1901  deux  jeunes  gens  veillent  dans
un  chain bre  hantee,  a  Londres ;  ils  entendent  et  voient  les
portes  s'ouvrir  a  diverses  reprises.  Ils  avaient  repandu  de  la
craie  (ou  chaux  ?)  en  poudre  sur  le  plancher  et  constaterent
des  empreintes  semblables  aux  traces  des  pattes  d'un  gros
oiseau.  Le  meme  jour,  Mme  Verrall  avait  ecrit :  "...  calx
pedibus  inhaerens  difficultatem  superavit  .  .  .  "  et  dessine  un
gros  oiseau  a  tete  hurnaine  grotesque,  suivi  d'un  V  entre
deux  traits  — V — .  Au-dessous  est  ecrit  et  hoc  genus  omne
(p.  328).1

Le  fait  est  fort  curieux,  car  il  a  un  rapport  assez  vague
avec  un  article  du  Daily  Mail  publie  sur  ce  phenomene  de
hantise  deux  ou  trois  jours  apres.  J'ai  eu  l'occasion  d'observer
des  cas  de  ce  genre,  dont  on  trouve  un  autre  exemple  p.  324
et  suivantes.

Ce  fait  est  trop  imprecis  pour  avoir  une  valeur  probante.
Calx  a  deux  sens,  et  l'oiseau  dessine  est  une  caricature.  Ces
deux  details  uniques  d'identification  sont  douteux.

Le  second  incident  nous  ramene  aux  questions  de  methode,
auxquelles  j'attache  une  grande  importance.  Le  11  Dec.  1901  :
"  Frost  and  a  candle  in  the  dim  light  Marmontel  he  was
reading  on  a  sofa  or  in  bed — there  was  only  a  candle's  light.
She  will  surely  remember  this.  The  book  was  lent  not  his
own— he  talked  about  it"  (Vol.  XX.,  p.  331).

Le  17  Decembre :  ".  .  .Marmontel  is  right.  It  was  a  French
book,  a  Memoir  I  think.  Passy  may  help  Souvenirs  de
Passy  or  Fleury.  Marmontel  was  not  on  the  cover — the  book
was  bound  and  was  lent — two  volumes  in  old-fashioned  binding
and  print.  It  is  not  in  any  papers — it  is  an  attempt  to
make  someone  remember — an  incident  "  (Vol.  XX.,  p.  332).

_On  trouve  d'autres  fragments  de  ce  texte,  pages  375  et  405.

Un  ami  de  M.  Verrall,  en  Fevrier  suivant,  lut  a  Paris  les
Memoires de Marmontel, dans son  lit ou etendu sur  deux

Balfour,  dont  la  signature  et  l'ecriture  sont  iniites  ;  circonstance  bien  invrai-
semblable  si  le  controle  est  M.  Sidgwick.  (Voy.  notamment  pp.  26,  27,  152,  185,
225  ;  comparez  avec  278).

1I1  y  a  peut-etre  entre  la  caricature  et  le  texte  un  lien  classique,  reminiscence
de  la  satire  d'Horace  :  "  Ambubaiarum  collegia,  pharmacopolae  Mendici,  mimi,
balairones,  hoc  genus  omne."


72


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


chaises ;  dans  le  volume  il  etait  question  de  la  decouverte,  a
Passy,  d'un  panneau  qui  se  trouvait  mele  a  une  histoire
int^ressant  Fleury.1  "  It  will  ...  be  noted  "  (dit  Mme  Verrall)
"that  the  script  in  December,  1901,  describes  (as  past)  an
incident  which  actually  occurred  two  and  a  half  months  later,
.  .  .  an  incident  which  at  the  time  of  writing  was  not  likely
to  have  been  foreseen  by  anyone."

Sur  quoi  se  fonde-t-elle  pour  considerer  ce  texte  comme
une  prediction?  Si  on  l'etudie,  on  trouve  14  details;  5  sont
exacts,  8  faux,  1  douteux :


Exacts :

(1)

Marmontel.

(2)

Lecture  an  lit.

(3)

1 leury.

(4)

Passy.

(5)

Memoires.

Faux :

(6)

Le  nom  de  l'auteur  est  au  dos  de  la  couver-

ture.

(7)

Pas  de  gelee.

(3)

Trois  volumes  et  non  deux.

(9)

Keliure  qui  n'est  pas  neuve,  mais  qui  n'est

pas  ancienne.

(10)

11  n'y  a  aucune  femme  dans  l'incident.

(ID

11  ne  s'agit  pas  d'un  souvenir.

(12)

Souvenirs  de  Passy  ou  Pleury.

(13)

Pas  de  sofa,  des  chaises.

Douteux

••  (14)

Le  livre  n'est  pas  prete.

Les  details  2

et  3 sont  d'une  grande  banalite  et  ne  pre-

sentent  aucun  interet  par  eux-memes.  lis  ne  prennent  quelque
valeur  que  par  leur  association  avec  les  autres  details.  Mais

1Je  dois  a  la  conrtoisie  de  Mine  Verrall  la  precision  de  l'incident  auquel
elle  fait  allusion.  C'est  la  decouverte  de  la  plaque  de  cheminee  mobile  par
laquelle  le  Marechal  de  Kiehelieu  s'introduisait  chez  Mme  de  la  Popeliniere.
Je  n'avais  pas  songe  a  identifier  cet  incident  bien  connu,  car  le  Cardinal  de
Fleury  ne  joue  aucun  role  dans  cette  histoire  (the  rinding  at  Passy  of  a
panel  connected  with  a  story  in  which  Fleury  plays  an  important  part.  Vol.
XX.,  p.  333).

Le  seul  role  joue  par  le  Cardinal  de  Fleury  a  ete  d'obliger  La  Popeliniere
a  epouser  sa  femme.  II  n'a  rien  de  commun  avec  l'histoire  de  la  plaque
mobile,  a  mon  avis.  (Marmontel,  Mimoires,  I.  238,  ed.  Jouaust,  Paris,
1891,  3  vol.  in  1G°.)


lxv.]  Correspondances  croise'es  et  la  Methode  experimental?.  73


la  prophetie  est  si  vague,  si  indeterminee  quelle  se  realisera
si  n'importe  qui,  n'importe  ou,  n'importe  quancl  lit  au  lit  a  la
lueur  d'une  bougie,  des  memoires  oil  les  noras  de  Marmontel,
Passy  et  Fleury  seraient  cites.

II  y  a  une  multitude  de  solutions  possibles.

Un  fait  domine  l'incident.  II  ne  s'agit  pas  d'une  prophetie,
mais  d'un  evenement  passe,  dont  une  dame  se  souviendra.
Ce  sens  est  tellement  clair  que  Mme  Verrall  a  pense  qu'il
etait  question  de  Mme  Sidgvvick  et  s'est  renseignee  aupres
d'elle.

II  ne  faut  pas  dire,  et  Mme  Verrall  ne  le  dit  d'ailleurs
pas  a  cette  occasion,  que  les  controles  sont  independants  du
temps.  L'ecriture  automatique  de  Mme  Verrall  est  pleine
d'allusions  precises  au  temps  (pp.  371-373).  Aussi  tourne-
t-elle  la  difficulte.  "  It  is  possible  that  what  the  writing  in-
tended to  convey  was  that  when  the  actual  incident  was
spoken  of  in  the  presence  of  the  writer — as  it  was  on  March
1st,  1902,  by  Mr.  Marsh — 'she  would  surely  remember'  that
this  incident  had  been  described  in  the  script"  (p.  335).

Peut-on  admettre  un  pareil  systeme  ?  II  est  oppose  au
sens  naturel  des  mots.  La  meilleure  preuve  est  la  phrase,  "  it
is  not  in  any  papers,"  indication  contradictoire  avec  l'idee
d'une  prophetie.  Quelque  simplicity  que  Ton  prete  de  temps
en  temps  aux  controles,  on  ne  saurait  aller  jusqu'a  admettre
qu'ils  prennent  soin  de  preciser  qu'un  evenement  a  venir  n'est
pas  dans  les  gazettes.1

II  serait  facile  de  multiplier  les  exemples  de  ces  inter-
pretations forcees,  qui  n'indiquent  pas  un  etat  d'esprit  de
chercheur  sans  parti  pris.  Comment,  par  exemple,  admettre
serieusement  la  discussion  de  Mme  Verrall  soutenant  que
son  texte  a  elabore  une  ingenieuse  allusion  a  Syringa  en
parlant  de  M.  Hodgson,  d'Orotava,  d'Oriona,  de  couronne
d'Ariane  et  de  Berenice  ?  Pourquoi  ?  Le  syringa  est  botani-
quement  le  Philadelphus  Coronarius.  Ses  allusions  a  Oriona,
etc.,  sont  des  essais  pour  arriver  a  la  couronne  d'Ariane  (?)
et  au  mot  coronarius.  Quant  a  l'autre  constellation,  la  chevelure
de  Berenice,  e'est  une  allusion  implicite  a  Ptolemee  Philadelphe,
et  par  suite  a  Philadelphus !

1Voyez  snr  les  conditions  de  validite  d'une  prophetie,  la  juste  severite  de
M.  Piddington,  Light,  1903,  p.  447.


74


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


Nous  avons  ici  un  des  premiers  exemples  de  la  methode
analytique  par  rebus  et  calembourgs.

Ceux  qui  auront  la  patience  d'etudier  ruinutieusemeut  le
travail  de  Mme  Verrall  remarqueront  les  defauts  suivants :

Traduction  quelquefois  contestable ;
Textes  arbitrairement  decoupes ;

Substitution  d'un  sens  indirect  ou  allegorique  au  sens  direct ;
Imprecision,  vague,  ambiguite  ;

Banalite  des  details ;  par  exemple :  il  y  a  un  portrait
encadre.  dans  la  chambre ;  le  rnedaillon  est  attache  k
une  chaine,  et  il  a  ete  donne  apres  la  confection  du
portrait.

II  fait  mauvais  temps,  etc.

Aucun  compte  n'est  tenu  de  la  cryptomnesie.

Affirmations  sans  fondement  suffisant.

II.

L'etude  du  rapport  de  Mile  Johnson  revele  les  memes
defauts  de  methode.

La  premiere  constatation  que  Ton  fasse  est  la  maniere
superficielle  dont  elle  se  renseigne  sur  les  sources  normales
des  textes  de  Mme  Holland.  Chez  cette  sensitive,  la  crypto-
mnesie joue  un  role  considerable  et  Mile  Johnson  en  cite
des  exemples  (Vol.  XXL,  p.  286  et  ss.).  Malgre  cela,  et
malgre  qu'elle  soit  avertie  de  l'impossibilite  d'atteindre  la
conscience  subliminale  du  sujet  en  interrogeant  sa  conscience
normale  (Vol.  XXL,  p.  3 8 9),  elle  commet  constamment  cette
erreur.  Je  crains  que  Mile  Johnson  ne  soit  pas  tres  familiere
avec  les  recentes  recherches  faites  sur  la  psychologie  du
subconscient.  La  dissociation  de  la  conscience  qu'elle  soupoonne
dans  l'automatisme  (Vol.  XXL,  p.  263)  est  signalee  depuis
longtemps.

Ce  manque  d'informations  speciales  ote  beaucoup  de  valeur
aux  analyses  de  Mile  Johnson.  Cependant,  elle  aurait  pu,
avec  un  pen  d'attention,  acquerir  la  conviction  que  Mme
Holland  connait  les  Proceedings  et  le  Journal.  Voici  les  raisons
qui  me  determinent :

Le  7  Mars  1906,  Mme  Verrall  donne  un  texte  concernant
Mme  Holland,  avec  des  details  banals,  indetermines  ou  faux.


lxv.]  Corresjoonclances  croisees  et  la  Methode  experimentale.  75


Puis  elle  ecrit  des  vers  contenant  des  reminiscences  du  poeme
de  Tintadgel,  de  Eoden  Noel  (Vol.  XXI.,  p.  317).

Ce  texte  est  communique  a  Mme  H.  qui  ne  voit  rien  pouvant
s'appliquer  a  elle :  les  vers  ne  lui  suggerent  rien.  Mais  ils
inspirent  son  texte  du  1 1  Mars  1906;  la  on  voit  apparaitre
la  date  du  26  Mai  1894,  mort  de  M.  Noel,  et  une  dissertation
paraissant  emaner  de  lui  et  du  Dr.  Sidgwick.

Le  14,  le  texte  ecrit  "  Eighteen  fifteen  four  five  fourteen —
Fourteen  fifteen  five  twelve.  .  .  .  See  Eev.  13-18.  but  only
the  central  8  words  .  .  .  H.  S.  E.N.  June  1st  1881—"  Le
texte  de  l'Apocalypse  est  "  car  c'est  le  nombre  d'un  homme."
Mile  Johnson  suivit  le  conseil  du  texte  et  trouva,  ce  qui
etait  facile,  Eoden  Noel.  "  I  found  afterwards,"  ajoute-t-elle,
"  that  Mrs.  Holland  had  not  looked  up  the  text  and  had  no
idea  of  what  it  was  or  of  what  the  numbers  meant." 1
Cela  est  bien  invraisemblable,  le  nom  de  M.  Hodgson  ayant
ete  donne  un  mois  auparavant  par  le  meme  procede  (Vol.  XXI.,
pp.  304  et  305):  et  le  procede  venant  de  lui  etre  explique
(p.  321).

La  source  du  texte  de  Mme  Holland  est  l'article  necro-
logique  paru  dans  le  Journal  S.P.E.  en  Juin  1894  sur  M.  Noel
et  signe  H.  S.  (Journal,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  262).  La  date  de  la  mort,
26  Mai  1894,  est  indiquee.  On  trouve  de  plus  les  analogies
suivantes,  entre  autres :


Necrologie.

Eiddleofthe  painful  Earth  .  .  .

He  never  gained  the  ear  of
the  general  public  .  .  .

The  delight  of  natural  beauty
and  of  the  physical  life.


Texte.

Eiddle  of  death.

The  quest  was  more  to  me
than  the  prize.

The  inherent  truth  and
Beauty  into  which  all  the  in-
evitable uglinesses  of  existence
finally  resolve  themselves.


Le  texte  contemporain  du  7  Mars  nous  donne  la  meme
impression. On  y  voit

1Comparez:  "The  medium  asked  me  who  was  Bob  Sawyer,  so  it  is  clear
that  she  has  never  read  TPickwick 13  {Light,  1905,  p.  389).  *  *  He  gripped  my
hand  with  a  Forester's  grip  well  known  to  him  .  .  .  This  was  to  me  a  very
good  test,  as  Mr.  B.  (the  medium)  assured  me  that  ...  he  did  not  know  the
sign"  {Light,  1908,  p.  246). Mile  Johnson  n'est  pas  plus  exigeante.


76


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


"  Brittleworth — Brickeldale.  Britleton — No — not  him  and  not
James — Brit — Brittle  Brick  Brickleton — Hugo — H.  M.  Minster
Berg.  Hugo  .  .  .  E  H"  (Vol.  XXL,  p.  306).

En  lisant  le  Daily  Express  du  8  Mars,  Mme  H.  qui  n'avait
pas  devine  le  nom,  pourtant  bien  connu,  de  Miinsterberg,  est
frappee  par  le  nom  de  Lorberg,  et  le  sigtiale  a  Mile  Johnson.

Nous  trouvons  dans  le  volume  XIV.  des  Proceedings  une
critique  du  Prof.  Hugo  Miinsterberg,  dans  laquelle  l'auteur,  M.
Schiller,  cite  les  noms  de  James  et  de  Hodgson,  que  nous  avons
deja  dans  le  texte  du  7  Mars :  James,  Hugo  Miinsterberg  et
I!.  H,  initiates  s'appliquant  certainement  a  Hodgson.

Ce  n'est  pas  tout.  Le  nom  de  Lorberg  figure  dans  le  meme
volume  (XIV.,  p.  215),  dans  un  article  de  Mile  Johnson  "On
Chance  Coincidences."  Or,  ce  nom  a  provoque  l'attention
subliminale  de  Mme  Holland,  justement  a  l'occasion  du  texte
oil  se  trouvent  cites  les  trois  autres  noms  associes  dans  la
meme  partie  du  volume  XIV.  Dans  cet  article  encore,  nous
trouvons  (p.  199)  les  noms:  Brett,  Shuttleworth.

L'origine  cryptomnesique  de  cette  quadruple  association  n'est
pas  douteuse  et  Mme  Holland,  dans  la  rnesure  on  les  preuves
humaines  out  quelque  valeur,  a  certainement  parcouru  les  articles
de  Mile  Johnson  et  de  M.  Schiller,  ou  en  a  lu  des  comptes-
rendus,  et  l'a  oublie.

Remarquons  combien  il  serait  naturel  que  Mme  Holland  ait
lu  les  Proceedings  et  le  Journal,  et  combien  il  est  improbable
qu'elle  n'ait  pas  eu  cette  curiosite.

Voici  un  exemple  qui  concerne  le  Journal  Light :

Le  6  Fevrier  1906,  Mme  Holland  ecrit  un  texte  ou  Ton
trouve  :  "  This  scribe  .  .  .  thoughts  of  this  scribe — Medium  is  not
the  best  word  ..."  (Vol.  XXL,  p.  283).

Ce  texte  communique  a  M.  Piddington  lui  parut  supranormal :
Le  mot  Scribe,  est  associe.  a  Mme  Verrall ;  or,  M.  Piddington,
a  la  fin  de  Janvier,  l'avait  propose  a  Mme  Verrall  pour  designer
le  controle.  II  ne  connait  pas  d'exemple  de  ce  mot  ainsi
employe  (ib.,  p.  284).  Plus  tard  cependant,  il  eut  connaissance
d'un  livre  pen  repandu,  public  en  Amerique,  Letters  of  et  Spirit,
dans  lequel  l'automatiste  s'appelle  le  scribe.

Le  mot  avait  etc  deja  employe  dans  Light,  notamment  le
17  Octobre  1896  ;  un  dcrivain  signant  Scriba,  critique  dans  un
article  le  mot  "  automatique"  dont  let  S.P.R.  fait  usage.


lxv.]  Oorrespondances  croisees  et  la  Methode  experimentcde.  77

Un  grand  nombre  de  faits,  qui  nous  sont  presentes  comme
supranormaux,  peuvent  n'etre  que  de  simples  cas  de  cryptomnesie  ;
par  exemple,  l'adresse  du  Dr.  Verrall  {Proc.,  Vol.  XL,  p.  190  ;
Vol.  XII.,  p.  124)  ;  une  toux  nerveuse,  un  homme  grand
{Proc,  Vol.  VI.,  pp.  584,  585,  586),  etc.  II  y  aurait  des
recherches  psychologiques  interessantes  a  faire  sur  les  sources
normales  spirites  des  textes  automatiques  des  mediums  de  la
S.P.R. ;  cette  recherche  n'a  pas  ete  serieusement  faite.1

Mais,  dit  Mile  Johnson,  l'origine  reelle  des  textes  est  moins
importante  que  l'apparition  des  coincidences  observees  entre
Mme  Verrall  et  Mme  Holland.  Soit,  mais  alors,  pourquoi
insister  constamment  sur  l'impossibilite  ou  est  le  sensitif
d'avoir  normalement  connaissance  des  faits  indiques  par  lui  ?
Pourquoi  en  faire  etat  comme  clans  la  correspondance  Poden
Noel  (Vol.  XXL,  p.  387)  tout  en  reconnaissant  la  faiblesse  de
l'argument  ?

Analysons  done  le  meilleur  cas  de  correspondance  croisee
entre  Mmes  Verrall  et  Holland,  Ave  Roma  Immortalis.
"  A  number  of  details  .  .  .,  quite  unintelligible  to  herself,  were
given  by  Mrs.  Verrall,  while  a  single  other  important  detail,
clinching  the  whole  matter,  was  given  by  Mrs.  Holland,
accompanied by a  remark implying that Mrs. Verrall  had

JVoy.  encore  l'association  entre  M.  Everard  Feilding,  son  voyage  en  Malaise  et
Particle  sur  le  Spiritisme  Malais,  de  Skeat  (auteur  de  Malay  Magic),  Proc,
Vol.  XVII.,  pp.  -290-298.  L'apparition,  dans  le  texte  du  9  Fevrier,  190G,
de  "  K.  57  [a  Christian  name]"  (Vol.  XXL,  p.  304)  est  explicable  normalement.
La  lettre  L  est  employee,  suivie  d'un  numero  pour  designer  une  certaine
categorie  d'hallucinations  locales.  Or,  la  lettre  K  precede  immediatement  la
lettre  L  ;  une  substitution  analogue  a  celle  qui  dissimule  le  nom  de  M.  Hodgson
au  commencement  du  texte  l'explique  bien  simplement.  Cela  est  d'autant  plus
vraisemblable  que  nous  vo3*ons  encore  "K.  37  not  in  the  Appendix"  dans  une
texte  du  ler  Avril,  1906  (Vol.  XXL,  p.  346) :  ce  qui  fait  penser  a  Human
Personality,  oil  la  plupart  des  cas  sont  cites,  sans  etre  prefixes  cependant  de
la  lettre  et  du  chiffre  :  l'apparition  de  ce  detail  conduit  aux  Publications  de
la  S.P.R.

Le  texte  precedant  immediatement  "K.  37"  porte  :  "Give  her  father's  love.
The  little  grave."  Or  dans  Human  Personality,  Vol.  II.,  p.  37,  il  est  question
d'un  pere  qui  est  enterre,  et  qui  apparait  a  sa  fille.

La  lettre  K.  figure  dans  l'article  de  Mile  Johnson  (Proc,  Vol.  XIV.,  p.  186).
Comparez  aussi  le  texte  du  11  Avril  1906.  L— 1559,  L.  579,  donne  comme
le  numero  d'une  automobile  (Vol.  XXL,  p.  365).  En  Mars  1905,  Mile  Johnson
a  communique  a  Mme  H.  le  texte  du  15  Mars  1905  de  Mme  Verrall,  ou  Ton
voit  "K.  L.  Jan.  11"  (Vol.  XXL,  p.  255).


78


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


been  purposely  kept  in  the  dark,"  dit  Mile  Johnson  (Vol.
XXI,  p.  387).

Les  textes  de  Mme  Verrall  sont  donnes  pp.  297  et  ss.

2  Mars  1906.

(1)  Non tali  auxilio  invenies quod  velis  non  tali  auxilio

nec  defensoribus  istis  .  .  .

(2)  Primus  inter  pares  (3)  ipse  non  nominis  imraemor.  (4)

Cum  eo  frater  (5)  etsi  non  sanguine  (6)  amnio
consanguineus  (7)  ii  ambo  tibi  (8)  per  aliam  (9)  vocem
mittent  .  .  .

4  Mars  1900.

(10)  Pagan  and  Pope.  (11)  The  Stoic  persecutor  (12)  and
the  Christian.  (13)  Gregory  not  Basil's  friend  ought
to  be  a  clue  ...  (14)  Pagan  and  Pope  and  Reformer
(15)  all  enemies  as  you  think.  (16)  Crux  significa-
tionem  habet. (17)  Crucifer  qui  olim  fertur.  .  .  .

5  Mars  1906.

(18)  Leonis  pelle  sumpto  (19)  claviger  (20)  in  scriptis
jam  antea  bene  denotatus.  Corrigenda  sunt  quaedam.
Ask  your  husband  he  knows  it  well.  (21)  Stant  inde
columnae  (22)  relicta  Calpe.  jam  finis.  ISTo  you  have
left  out  something  (23). Assiduo  lectore  columnae.

J'ai  numterote  les  mots  ou  idees  utiles,  pour  eviter  des
redites.  (1)  Est-ce  une  allusion  au  siege  de  Troie  (En.  II.,  521).
Son  association  avec  (2)  et  (4)  donnerent  au  Dr.  Verrall
l'impression  que  le  texte  avait  en  vue  le  tableau  de  Raphael
"  St  Leon  arretant  Attila."  II  indiqua  a  Mme  Verrall  le  vers
de  YUnMdc,  et  appliqua  primus  inter  pares  au  Pape ;  chose
douteuse.

Eeconnaitre  la  fresque  de  Raphael  sur  ces  details  indeter-
mines  :

(1)  Impuissance  de  Priam  a  sauver  Troie  ;

( 2 )  Le  premier  entre  ses  pairs,  non  oublieux  de  son  nom  ;

(3)  Avec  lui  son  frere,  sinon  par  le  sang,  du  moins  par

l'esprit ;

e'est  faire  preuve  de  beaucoup  de  perspicacite.


lxv.]  Gorrespoiidances  croisees  et  la  Methocle  experimentale.  79

Le  reste  du  texte  est  inconciliable  avec  1'opinion  du  Dr.
Verrall.  Si  primus  inter  pares  s'applique  au  Pape  St-Leon,
cum  eo  f rater,  etc.,  ne  s'applique  pas  a  St-Paul.  D'un  autre
cote  il  est  difficile  d'appliquer  a  St-Pierre  le  "primus  inter
pares  ipse  own  nomioiis  imonemor."

Enfin,  le  texte  annonce  que  les  deux  personuages  indeter-
mines  enverront  a  Mme  Verrall  un  mot  par  une  autre.
On  verra  que  ce  n'est  ni  St-Pierre  ni  St-Paul,  ni  St-Leon
qui  envoient  un  message.

L'emergence  de  l'idee  du  Pape  clans  les  textes  des  4  et
5  Mars  est  due  a  la  suggestion  du  Dr.  Verrall  (Vol.  XXL,
p.  299).  Sa  femme  sait  qu'il  voit  oil  le  texte  veut  en  venir ;
il  y  a  un  pape,  un  frere  par  l'esprit,  un  siege.  C'est  la-dessus
que  le  texte  brode ;  l'idee  d'un  siege  de  Eome,  residence  du
pape,  eveille  l'idee  de  paiens  ou  de  reformes  et  rappelle  les
papes  St-Gregoire  (qui  reussit  a  ecarter  les  Lombards  a  la
fin  du  vie  siecle),  Gregoire  VII.  (assiege  par  l'Empereur  Henri,
grand  reformateur,  Gregoire  XIII.  (reformateur  du  calendrier),
et  St-Leon  (assiege  par  Attila).  On  trouve  ces  indications
melees  vaguement  et  associees  a  Hercule  (Claviger,  Columnae,
Calpe).

Le  7  Mars,  Mme  Holland  donna  un  long  texte  ou  se  trou-
vent  melangees  au  moins  70  idees  differentes,  susceptibles
d'associations  nombreuses.  On  lit :  "  Ave  Eoma  immortalis.
How  could  I  make  it  any  clearer  without  giving  her  the
clue  ?  How  cold  it  was  that  winter — Even  snow  in  Eome —
we  might  have  stayed  at  home,  etc."  (Vol.  XXL,  p.  295).

Mile  Johnson  trouve  la  un  cas  de  correspondance  typique.
II  n'est  pas  impossible,  dit-elle,  que  l'idee  de  Eome  ait  ete
transmise  telepathiquement  par  M.  Verrall,  mais  alors  pourquoi
Mme  Holland  a-t-elle  ajoute :  "  Comment  pouvais-je  le  rendre
plus  clair  sans  lui  donner  l'indieation  ? "  Cela  n'etait  pas
dans  la  conscience  de  M.  Verrall.

Au  point  de  vue  de  la  telepathie  le  raisonnement  de  Mile
Johnson  est  contestable;  M.  Verrall  a  eu  le  sentiment  traduit
par  le  texte,  puisqu'il  a  dit  a  sa  femme  qu'il  voyait  ou
l'ecriture  voulait  en  venir,  mais  qu'il  a  garde  le  silence  sur
l'indieation  precise,  l'episode  peint  par  Eaphael.

La  telepathie  n'est  pas  necessaire ;  il  y  a  une  simple
coincidence. M.  Myers  est  mort  a Eome,  et  on trouve  de


so


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


nombreuses  references  a  Home  dans  les  textes  public's  de  Mme
Holland  :  le  contexte  montre  beaucoup  d'erreurs  et  de  contra-
dictions difficiles  a  comprendre  s'il  y  a  une  intelligence  unique
dirigeant  les  communications.

L'analyse  du  cas  "  Elicu  !  fugaccs "  conduit  aux  memes
conclusions.  On  nous  dit  que  le  texte  de  Madame  Verrall
(cite.  Vol.  XXI.,  p.  363)  repete  plusieurs  fois  l'idee  de  fuite.
On  pent  contester  cette  interpretation  qui  serait  fondee  sur
la  description  d'un  enlevement  imaginaire.  Je  vois  bien  l'idee
d'une  promenade  que  font  ensemble  des  personnes  indeter-
minees,  en  voiture,  avec  de  la  neige,  un  brillant  soleil,  le
bruit  des  clochettes  et  du  fouet ;  mais  je  n'apereois  pas  la
fuite,  ni  l'enlevement.  On  ne  choisit  pas  pour  fair,  ni  pour
enlever,  un  brillant  soleil,  on  ne  claque  pas  du  fouet  et  on
ne  garnit  pas  les  harnais  de  sonnettes,  c'est  levidence  merae.
Mme  Verrall  fait  allusion  a  une  promenade  en  voiture,
dans  l'Engacline,  si  Maloja  traduit  le  seuil  de  Maloggia,  ortho-
graphic a  l'anglaise.

Viennent  ensuite  l'idee  de  chauve-souris  qui  s'enfuit  (on
s'est  envolee),  une  dame  est  seule.  Puis:  "There  is  an  effort
to  have  the  same  words  this  time";  en  fin :  "On  bat's  wings
rides  Queen  Mab."  Le  seul  mot  repete  est  "  bat,"  chauve-
souris.

Le  mOme  jour,  Mme  Holland  ecrit :  "  A  great  black  shadow
and  the  sound  of  a  wailing  wind — Eheu  fuo;aces  ' "

o  o

Cela  suffit  a  Mile  Johnson  pour  nous  assurer  qu'il  y  a  une
correspondance  croisee.  L'idee  de  fuite  si  richement  decrite  par
Mme  \rerrall  est  resumee  dans  un  seul  mot  latin  par  Mme
Holland,  comme  on  l'a  observe  (?)  clans  le  cas  "  Ave  Roma."

La  seule  idee  de  fuite  observable  dans  le  texte  de  Madame
Verrall  est  relative  a  la  chauve-souris.  Elle  n'a  aucun  rapport
avec  l'idee  d'ombre  noire  et  de  vent  qui  gemit,  exprimee  par
Mme  Holland.  Les  mots  latins,  qui  se  trouvent  dans  tous  les
recueils  de  citation  (p.  ex.  Wood),  expriment  seuls  l'idee  corres-
pondante,  mais  l'expression  en  est  fort  differente,  car  Horace
ne  vent  peindre  que  lY-coulement  rapide  des  annees.  C'est
l'idee  de  vitesse,  non  de  fuite  qui  inspire  ses  vers.

L'emergence  du  latin  s'explique  par  le  desir  d'avoir  un
message  semblable  a  celui  de  Madame  Verrall  dont  les  textes
sont  fertiles  en  mots  latins. On  trouve  l'indication  du  desir


lxv.]  Gorrespondances  croisees  et  la  Methode  experimental e.  81


que  j'indique  dans  une  lettre  ecrite  par  Mine  Holland  (Vol.  XXI.,
p.  364).

Mile  Johnson  fait  done  dire  au  texte  de  Mme  Verrall  plus
qu'il  ne  contient,  ou  autre  chose  que  ce  qu'il  dit ;  ensuite,  elle
s'appuie  sur  une  concordance  eloignee,  douteuse  quand  au  sens,
et  dont  l'un  des  termes  est  une  locution  latine  devenue  pro-
verbiale.  D'un  autre  cote  elle  oublie  que  le  controle  annonce
qu'il  essay e  de  transmettre  les  mimes  mots,  car  Mmes  Verrall
et  Holland  ecrivent  le  meme  jour,  apres  convention.  Or,  chose
significative,  il  n'y  a  aucun  mot  latin  dans  le  texte  de  Mme
Verrall,  tel  qu'il  est  publie,  ce  qui  est  contraire  a  ses  habitudes.
En  revanche,  Mme  Holland  cite  du  latin,  ce  qui  est  egalement
contraire  a  ses  habitudes.  On  voit  dans  ce  petit  detail  la  trace
d'un  effort  subconscient,  qui  aboutit  a  des  resultats  contra-
dictoires,  et  exclut  manifestement  l'idee  d'un  intelligence
directrice.

Une  methode  prudente  devrait  tenir  compte  des  elements
que  je  signale,  et  eviter  de  considerer  comme  demontres  des
faits  douteux  ou  indetermines.  Or  on  constate  trop  souvent
ce  vice  de  raisonuement  chez  Mile  Johnson.  En  voici  d'autres
exemples.

Mme  Verrall,  21  Mars  1906,  ecrit:  "  Posilippo,  and  a  terrace
there,  blue  sea  beyond  the  marble  balustrade "  (Vol.  XXL,
p.  334).

Une  heure  auparavant,  Mme  Holland  avait  ecrit :  "  M.  saw
a  real  place  that  last  time  but  she  has  never  seen  the  place
itself  and  did  not  describe  it  very  clearly."

Les  deux  textes  ne  coincident  pas,  puisque  Mme  Holland
ecrit  a  10  heures  10,  alors  que  Mme  Verrall  n'a  pas  encore
ecrit.  De  plus  Mme  Verrall  n'a  rien  vu,  a  moins  que  l'ana-
logie  ne  permette  de  prendre  le  mot  see  comme  synonyme  de
write.  Quant  a  la  description,  elle  est  applicable  a  cent  mille
endroits  ou  il  y  a  des  terrasses,  avec  des  balustrades  de  marbre
dominant  la  mer.

Le  texte  de  Mme  Holland  est  encore  erronne,  si  on  le  compare
a  celui  de  Mme  Verrall,  en  ce  sens  que  si  la  description  est
insuffisante,  le  nom  de  l'endroit  est  donne ;  il  est  done  clairement
reconnaissable.

II  est  vrai  que  Mme  Verrall  n'est  pas  allee  a  Naples  et  n'a
pas  vu  le  Pausilippe,  mais,  si  le  texte  de  Mme  Holland  voulait

F


82


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.J).


[part


avoir  le  moindre  sens,  il  devait  faire  allusion  a  un  evenement
supranormal ;  decrire  un  endroit  connu  n'a  rien  d'extraordinaire ;
il  fallait  done  que  la  description  s'appliquat  a  un  endroit  inconnu
de  Mme  Verrall.

Je  n'attache  pas  d'importance  a  l'allusion  a  Marseille ;  Mmes
Verrall  et  Holland  etaient  en  correspondance.

Lemergence  des  allusions  a  M.  Noel  a  ete  determinee  chez
Mme  Holland  par  la  lecture  des  textes  de  Mme  Verrall,  on
il  est  question  de  "  Tintagel  and  the  sea  that  moaned,"  etc.
Mme  Holland  n'avait  d'abord  pas  reconnu  la  reminiscence,  mais
Mile  Johnson,  deux  ans  plus  tard,  communiqua  de  nouveau
les  vers  de  Mme  Verrall  a  Mme  Holland  (6  Fevrier  1908,
ATol.  XXI.,  p.  325)  qui  reconnut  Eoden  Noel  cette  fois.  Cela
eveilla  l'attention  de  Mile  Johnson  qui  demanda  des  explica-
tions :  "  Did  you  say  Eoden  Noel  because  you  remembered  that
you  had  had  references  to  him  ...  or  do  you  think  that  you
subliminally  recognised  the  verses  ?  "

Et  Mme  Holland  a  repondu  que  le  nom  de  Eoden  Noel
lui  a  ete  transmis  UUpatJiiquement  par  Mile  Johnson.

II  est  difficile  de  prendre  cela  serieusement,  puisque  la
reconnaissance  subliminale,  certaine  dans  le  cas  cite,  explique
les  concordances  dont  on  fait  des  correspondances.  Cependant
Mile  Johnson  se  contente  de  cette  explication  (Vol.  XXI.,
p.  326);  Mme  Holland  a  une  excellente  memoire  normale
pour  la  poesie ;  si  elle  avait  lu  Eoden  Noel  elle  s'en  serait
souvenue,  et  aurait  reconnu  la  source  de  ses  allusions !

Comme  logique  cela  laisse  ;i  desirer ;  d'ailleurs,  l'incident
abonde  en  illogismes,  et  je  signalerai  la  question :  "  Croyez-
vous  avoir  reconnu  subliminalement  les  vers  ? "  Comment
peut-on  le  savoir,  si  la  reconnaissance  a  ete  subliminale,  et
quelle  valeur  aura  une  reponse  negative  ?  "  We  can  only
interrogate  their  supraliminal  consciousness,"  dit  Mile  Johnson,
page  389.

C'est  dans  les  textes  de  Mesdames  Verrall  et  Holland  que
Mile  Johnson  a  decouvert  le  principe  des  correspondances
oroisees,1  sur  lesquelles  s'appuye  la  croyance  a  l'intervention

1  On  trouve  dans  la  litterature  spirite  de  curieux  precedents ;  voy.  Mile
F.  J.  Theobald,  "Similar  messages  through  different  mediums,"'  Light,  1881,
41,  54,  63,  171  ;  comparez  les  messages  complementaires  recus  de  Benjamin
Coleman  par  M.  Newton  en  AmeYique  et  M.  S.  Moses  ii  Londres,  Light,  1884,


lxv.]  Correspondances  croisees  et  la  Methode  experimentale.  83


posthume  de  M.  Myers  et  des  membres  decedes  de  la  S.P.E.
La  definition  est  donnee,  p.  375.  "We  do  not  get  in  the
writing  of  one  automatist  anything  like  a  mechanical  verbatim
reproduction  of  phrases  in  the  other ;  we  do  not  even  get  the
Siime  idea  expressed  in  different  ways, — as  might  well  result
from  direct  telepathy  ...  we  get  ...  a  fragmentary  utterance
in  one  script,  which  seems  to  have  no  particular  point  or
meaning,  and  another  fragmentary  utterance  in  the  other,  of  an
equally  pointless  character ;  but  when  we  put  the  two  together,
we  see  that  they  supplement  one  another,  and  that  there  is
apparently  one  coherent  idea  underlying  both,  but  only  partially
expressed  in  each."

Cela  exclut  la  possibility  de  la  telepathie  entre  personnes
vivantes,  car  il  est  difficile  de  supposer  que  la  perception
telepathique  d'un  fragment  pourrait  conduire  a  la  production
d'un  autre  fragment,  clont  le  rapport  au  premier  ne  sera  reconnu
qu'apres  une  comparaison  attentive.

La  preuve  de  la  survie  a  jusqu'ici  ete  cherchee  dans  les
souvenirs  conserves ;  ceux-ci  ne  peuvent  etre  verifies  qu'au
moyen  des  souvenirs  d'une  autre  personne,  forcement  vivante,
et  par  consequent  cette  personne  peut  etre  l'agent  inconscient  de
la  telepathie.  Le  controle  ne  peut  songer  a  communiquer  des
renseignements  sur  sa  vie  actuelle ;  on  ne  pourrait  pas  les
verifier,  cela  est  possible  pour  les  vivants  et,  c'est  en  cela  que
consiste  la  difference  fondamentale  entre  la  telepathie  provoquee
par  les  vivants  et  les  morts.

Les  correspondances  croisees  perniettraient  aux  Esprits  une
sorte  de  telepathie  relative  a  des  faits  actuels :  les  ev^nements
correspondants  sont  inconnus  de  toute  personne  vivante  puisque
le  sens  et  la  portee  des  messages  demeurent  incompris  des
mediums  eux-memes,  jusqu'au  moment  ou  la  comparaison  des
textes  les  revelent.  La  preuve  de  ces  faits  contemporains  se
trouve  dans  les  ecrits  et  par  consequent,  la  methode  employee
tend  a  satisfaire  toutes  nos  exigences.

Telle  est  la  these  de  Mile  Johnson.

Tout  cela  est  une  affirmation  que  l'examen  des  cas  retenus
ne  justifie  pas. Sur  huit cas,  faible recolte,  Mile  Johnson

54.  A  ce  sujet  M.  Moses  ecrit :  "He  (B.  Coleman's  spirit)  gave  the  evidence
of  a  plan,  a  scheme  of  work  underlying  the  apparently  dissociated  phenomena,
that  marks  the  interference  of  a  spirit  with  our  world,  etc."


84


Joseph  Max  well,  M.D.


[part


reconnait  que  le  premier,  le  texte  Selwyn  (texte  connu  de  bien
des  vivants)  n'est  pas  probant.  Le  second  cas,  notes  de  miisique,
peut-etre  de  la  telepathie  simple.  Le  4°,  Eoden  Noel,  comme
le  reconnait  a  la  fin  Mile  Johnson  (p.  387)  peut  avoir  une
explication  naturelle.

II  reste  les  cas:  (3)  "not  in  the  Electra  "  and  "Henry  was
not  mistaken."  (5)  Ave  Koma  ;  (6)  Posilippo  ;  (7)  Eheu  fngaces  ;
(8)  Fawcett.

Le  cas  (8)  est  une  coincidence  de  noms,  les  personnes  designees
par  les  automatistes  ne  sont  pas  les  memes,  et  les  details  qui
permettent  a  Mme  Verrall  de  reconnaitre  sa  cousine,  Mme
Fawcett  sont:  (1)  une  allusion  a  Broadlands  qui  concerne
M.  Myers,  (2)  "  F.  a  blue  jewel."  C'est  insuffisaniment
determine.

Quant  au  cas  No.  3,  il  peut  servir  d'introduction  aux  corre-
spondances  croisees  que  signalent  les  travaux  ulterieurement
publies.

Le  6  Fevrier  Mme  Holland  essaye  d'eerire  des  mots  grecs,
inintelligibles  d'ailleurs  (Vol.  XXL,  p.  310).  Le  9,  Mme  Verrall
donne  un  texte  contenant  du  grec,  notamment  une  citation
d'Eschyle,  Agamemnon,  124-125.  Le  19  "...  Ask  for  the
volume  .  .  .  She  will  know."  Le  20,  "Get  her  to  write
cukivov  a'lXivov  and  the  rest."

Le  21,  les  deux  mediums  se  rencontrerent  dans  le  bureau
de  Mile  Johnson  et  Mme  Verrall  fit  encore  allusion  au  livre
que  Mme  Holland  ne  connaissait  pas ;  c'est  une  traduction
d'Euripide,  par  M.  Murray.  L'ecriture  automatique  de  Mme
Verrall  se  trompa  done ;  il  est  curieux  de  noter  qu'au  meme
moment,  on  jouait  a  Londres  une  traduction  de  YEIectre  d'Euri-
pide, par  Murray.

Un  texte  du  28,  ne  contient  encore  aucune  allusion  intel-
ligible pour  Mme  Holland.  Le  meme  jour  celle-ci  donne  un
message  ou  Ton  compte  1 71  iddes  differentes ;  combien  de  cor-
respondances  pourraient  s'y  greffer  si  Ton  suivait  la  methode  de
Mile  Johnson  ?

On  y  lit  "  Not  in  the  Electra.  M.  will  know  better."  C'est
1'allusion  au  vers  grec,  qui  en  effet  n'est  pas  dans  YEIectre  de
Sophocle  ni  dans  celle  d'Euripide,  comme  le  sait  M.  (Mme
Verrall).  "  It  may  be  taken  to  apply  to  the  Greek  line  quoted
by  Mrs.  Verrall  for  the  third  time  on  February  28th.  .  .  .  There


lxv.]  Corresjoondances  croisees  et  la  Metliode  experimentale.  85


is  a  certain  point,  Mrs.  Verrall  thinks,  in  mentioning  the  Electro.
in  this  connexion,  because  the  Electra  (of  Sophocles  or  Euripides)
is  equivalent  to  the  second  play  of  the  ^Eschylean  Trilogy,  of
which  the  Agamemnon  is  the  first ;  so  that  Mrs.  Holland's  script
might  be  taken  to  mean :  the  line  is  in  the  Trilogy,  but  not
in  the  second  play  (  =  Electra),  which  was  true."

C'est  ainsi  qu'on  transforme  en  chose  precise  une  declaration
ambigue.  En  realite,  Mme  Holland  pouvait  dire  "  Not  in
the  Electra — M.  will  know  better "  sans  se  compromettre ;
les  textes  de  Mme  Verrall  contiennent  souvent  des  citations
grecques,  et  il  y  a  une  infinite  de  chances  pour  que  ces  citations
soient  empruntees  a  d'autres  sources  que  YElectre ;  1'idee  de
cette  derniere  piece  se  presentait  d'ailleurs  toute  seule  a,  l'esprit,
puisqu'on  la  jouait  a  Londres.  Tout  cela  est  conforme,  comme
procedes  et  sources,  aux  lois  psychologiques  les  plus  communes
des  ph^nomenes  automatiques.

Eien  ne  permet  d'admettre  l'interpretation  de  Mme  Verrall.
On  ne  trouve  pas  la  moindre  indication  de  l'idee  de  trilogie.

Les  allusions  de  Mme  Holland,  impliquees  dans  le  mot  Electra,
sont  indeterminees.

Ce  n'est  pas  sur  des  interpretations  pareilles  que  Ton  peut
etablir  un  raisonnement  scientifique.  Malheureusement,  le  mode
de  raisonnement  s'est  generalise.  Mile  Johnson  montre  que  le
principe  des  correspondances  croisees  est  contenu  explicitement
dans  les  textes  de  Mme  Verrall :  l'invention  de  l'interpretation
analogique  ou  symbolique  revient  encore  a  cette  automatiste.


III.

Le  rapport  de  M.  Piddington  marque  un  pas  en  avant  dans
l'application  de  cette  singuliere  methode.

Ce  rapport  resume  les  concordances  observes  entre  Mme
Piper,  Mile  et  Mme  Verrall  et  Mme  Holland.  74  seances
de  l'une,  63  textes  de  Mme  Verrall,  17  de  Mile  Verrall,  38
de  Mme  Holland  sont  analyses.  On  voit  combien  cela  repre-
sente  de  mots  susceptibles  de  concorder.  On  a  chez  les  trois
dernieres,  plus  de  2.500  centres  d'associations  explicites,  ou
nnplicites.  Quant  aux  idees  exprimees  par  Mme  Piper,  il  est
difficile  de  les  evaluer  k  moins  de  plusieurs  milliers.


86


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[PAItT


M.  Piddington  a  trouve,  dans  cette  masse  de  documents,  24
concordances  seulement  dont  quelques  unes  sont  complexes.  La
moisson  demeure  bien  maigre.  II  est  regrettable  que  les  experi-
mentateurs,  sauf  Mme  Sidgwick,  ne  nous  donnent  aucune
indication  sur  la  proportion  des  succes  aux  insucces.  Nous
savons  seulement  (Vol.  XXII.,  p.  23)  que  sur  18  mots  choisis
par  les  experimentateurs,  pour  etre  transmis,  un  seul  reussit
a  l'Gtre.

Les  correspondances  croisees  signalees  par  M.  Piddington
concernent  quelquefois  des  mots  si  communs,  que  leur  sur-
venance  a  des  epoques,  meme  rapprochees,  dans  plusieurs  textes
ne  signifie  rien.  Tels  sont  Steeple — Hope — Star — Arrow — Giant
and  Dwarf — Laurel  wreath — Violets — Cup — Spirit  and  Angel- —
Mountains,  Seas,  Lakes,  Eivers — Music — Azure,  Horizon.

Pour  faire  la  partie  belle  aux  experimentateurs,  j'analyserai
seulement  leurs  meilleurs  cas.

Celestial  Halcyon  Days.

Le  15  Janvier  1907,  Myers-Piper  pretend  avoir  donne  a
Mme  Verrall;  "Celestial  Halcyon  Days"  (Vol.  XXII.,  p.  103).

Mme  Verrall  ne  se  souvenait  pas  d'avoir  lu  ces  mots
(qu'elle  n'a  jamais  obtenus  en  realite).  Le  22  Janvier  elle  ecrivit
un  texte  ou  figure  le  mot  inusite  "  supern  "  et  Mme  Verrall
se  souvint  d'avoir  eu  trois  ans  et  demi  auparavant  le  mot
supernal.  Le  3  Juillet  1903,  elle  avait  ecrit  une  communica-
tion relative  a  la  paix,  a  la  contemplation  sur  de  hauts  sommets
et  finissant  par  "  the  storm  and  whirlwind  consume  the  blue
clear  space  between  the  worlds,  but  the  supernal  peace  is
undisturbed."

"  The  fundamental  idea  of  halcyon  days,  nous  dit-on, — an
interval  of  calm  between  storms — seems  to  be  represented  in
the  words  '  the  storm  and  whirlwind  consume  the  blue  clear
space  between  the  worlds.'  The  main  point  of  the  script,
however,  seems  to  be  that  while  halcyon  days  in  this  world
are  transitory,  in  the  celestial  world  they  are  unending."

Cela  suffit  aux  experimentateurs  pour  etablir  une  correspon-
dance;  Mme  Verrall  avait  bien  exprime,  des  1903,  l'idee
indiquee  par  le  controle.

En  admettant  que le texte de Mme  Verrall ait le  sens


lxv.]  Correspondances  croisees  et  la  Metlwde  experimentale.  <S7


allegue,  sa  citation  par  Myers-Piper  ne  prouve  absolument  rien,
car  ce  texte  figure  au  Vol.  XX.,  p.  64.  On  y  trouve  (texte
et  note)  les  mots  "  stillness  in  the  air,"  "  peace,"  "  storm  and
whirlwind."  Mme  Piper  connait  le  memoire  de  Mine  Verrall
(Vol.  XXII.,  p.  106).  L'expression  "halcyon  days"  signifie  les
jours  de  calme  entre  les  tempetes  du  solstice  d'hiver,  et  derive
de  la  fable  mythologique  de  Ceyx  et  Alcyone.  Elle  est  citee
dans  Webster.

La  source  de  i'information  est  normale,  "  but  even  if  this
was  the  case,"  dit  M.  Piddington,  "  it  is  difficult  to  imagine
that  auy  part  of  the  consciousness  of  Mrs.  Piper,  who  is
entirely  without  classical  scholarship,  should  have  summarised
[Mrs.  Verrall's  script]  in  the  words  '  Celestial  Halcyon  Days.' "

Cela  est  au  contraire  probable ;  l'idee  de  "  celestial "  a  son
origine  dans  "the  rest  of  the  heaven"  (Vol.  XX.,  p.  64,  note);
les  mots  de  Mme  Piper  sont  une  traduction  maladroite  du
texte  de  Mme  Verrall ;  un  erudit  n'aurait  pas  traduit  "  the
supernal  peace  is  undisturbed "  par  "  Celestial  halcyon  days."
Les  jours  halcyoniques  etant  etymologiquement  une  periode
de  deux  semaines,  entre  les  tempetes  du  solstice  d'hiver,  ils
signifient  un  temps  de  calme  passager,  idee  contraire  a  celle
de  supern  dans  le  texte  de  Mme  Verrall.

Quant  au  moyen  par  lequel  lecriture  automatique  rappelle
a  Mme  Verrall  son  texte  anterieur,  c'est  un  cas  classique  tie
cryptomnesie,  tout  au  plus.

On  voit  a  quoi  se  red  nit  ce  phenomeue.  Les  indications
donnees  par  Mme  Piper  existaient  dans  un  texte  imprime
connu  d'elle.  Le  rapporteur  raisonne  comme  les  personnes  qui
se  fondent  sur  l'apparente  incapacite  des  mediums  pour  attri-
buer  leurs  messages  a  des  esprits.1

Crossing  the  Bar 2  et  Vincident  auras  ovpavos  ukvjulov.

Prappee  de  la  vraisemblance  de  la  personnihcatioii  Myers-
Piper  et  de  la  connaissance  que  ce  eontrole  avait  des  parties
inedites  de  son  ecriture  automatique,  Mme  Verrall  imagina
une  experience  cruciale  pour  demontrer  que  Myers-Piper  avait
acces  aux  souvenirs  personnels  de  feu  M.  Myers.  Elle  demanda
au  eontrole  de  traduire  les  trois  mots  grecs  ci-dessus  cites ;  ils

1  Les  curieux  pourront  comparer  le  texte  de  Mme  Verrall  a  Spirit  Teachings,
Memorial  Edition,  pp.  ITS,  179  et  notamment  180,  ligne  1  a  3.
2Ce  poeme  de  Tennyson  est  deux  fois  cite  dans  Light,  1890.


88


Joseph  Maxwell,  M  D.


[part


servent  d'epigraphe  a  une  ode  de  Myers  a  Tennyson,  publiee
dans  Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry.  On  nous  assure  que
Mine  Piper  n'en  a  pas  connaissance.  Pour  le  demontrer  M.
Piddington  nous  cite  (Vol.  XXIL,  p.  109,  footnote)  le  resultat
d'une  enquete  faite  ...  en  Amerique ;  mais  Mme  Piper  a  pu
voir  ce  livre  soit  chez  les  amis  de  M.  Myers,  soit  au  siege
de  la  S.P.E.  soit  dans  une  bibliotheque.  En  effet,  le  fascicule
LI.  des  Proceedings,  paru  en  Decembre  1906,  contient  une
analyse  de  ce  livre ;  de  plus,  le  rapport  de  Mile  Jobnson
iudique  comment  Mine  Holland  a  pu  consulter  sans  difticulte
l'ouvrage  de  M.  Myers  dans  une  bibliotheque  de  Londres  (Vol.
XXL,  p.  246).

La  reponse  complete  comportait  (1)  la  traduction  ;  (2)  une
allusion  au  poeme  de  Myers  sur  Tennyson;  (3)  une  allusion
a  Plotin  et  a  la  derniere  par  tie  de  Human  Personality.

Le  controle  (Vol.  XXIL,  p.  142)  voulut,  des  le  debut,  savoir
ce  que  les  mots  avaient  "  to  do  with  our  experiments  ? ".

Mine  Verrall  lui  apprit  ceci  "  J  think  you  have  spoken  of
them  to  'nte  before,  or  something  like  them."  Indication  precieuse
qui  fut  utilisee.

Des  le  lendeinain,  Mme  Verrall  crut  trouver  des  allusions.
La  phrase  "haven  of  rest"  fut  mentionnee  comme  pouvant  lui
rappeler  des  souvenirs  de  M.  Myers.  A  la  fin  de  la  seance
il  y  eut  des  allusions  aberrantes  a  "  Larches "  et  "  Laburnum "
qui  evoquent  chez  Mme  Verrall  l'idee  de  Tennyson.  Ces
associations  paraissent  etre  personnelles  a  cette  dame  et  rien
n'indique  que  M.  Myers  les  connut.

Le  rapporteur  insiste  cependant  sur  le  mot  Larch  qui  figure
dans  un  poeme  de  Tennyson,  Ln  Memoriam,  XCL,  ou  il  y  a
une  allusion  a  lAlcyon  (Martin-pecheur)  "the  sea-blue  bird
of  March."  Cela  rappelle  la  correspondance  "  Celestial  Halcyon
Buys."

II  est  probable  en  effet  que  le  controle  s'en  est  servi ;  il
a  utilise  le  memoire  de  Mme  Verrall ;  cela  semble  resulter  de
l'equivalence  "rest  of  Heaven"  (Vol.  XX.,  p.  64,  note)  et
"  Haven  of  Rest."  L'allusion  a  "  un  siege,  sur  lequel  il  s'asseyait  "
(Vol.  XXIL,  p.  144)  rappelle  etonnamment  "  The  corner  of  the
seat  .  .  .  where  he  always  sect " :  ce  qui  implique  l'idee  d'un
vaste  siege  (Vol.  XX.,  p.  239).

Nous  avons  la  une  origine  normale  des  allusions,  a  haven


lxv.]  Correspondances  croisees  et  la  Methode  experimental .  89


of  rest ;  elles  out  £te  provoquees  par  la  phrase  de  Mme  Verrall
"  Vous  m'en  avez  deja  parle  "  qui  limifce  le  cercle  des  recher-
ches  du  controle.

De  plus,  Larches  et  Laburnum  sont  indiques  comme  "  I
mentioned  larches  to  you  before",  ce  qui  est  le  rappel  d'une
pretendue  transmission  de  M.  Myers  a  Mine  Verrall.  Laburnum,
ecrit  Laburman,  est  depourvu  de  contexte.  Eien  ne  suggere
l'idee  d'une  reponse  aux  mots  grecs.

M.  Piddington  examine  ensuite  les  allusions  que  Mme  Verrall
fait  elle-meme  a  sa  question.  C'est  la  une  methode  deconcer-
tante,  puisque  cette  dame  a  pose"  la  question  et  connatt  la  reponse.
Les  experiinentateurs  ne  semblent  pas  s'apercevoir  que  les  con-
cordances qui  pourront  survenir  entre  Mme  Verrall  et  Mme
Piper  ne  depasseront  pas  desormais  les  possibilites  de  la  tele-
pathic. Je  crois  inutile  de  suivre  M.  Piddington  dans  ses
commentaires  sur  les  reponses  que  Mme  Verrall  se  fait  a
elle-meme.  L'interet  de  l'experience  ne  va  pas  au  dela  des
concordances  observes  entre  les  deux  mediums.

Le  6  Fevrier,  M.  Piddington  lit  une  lettre  de  Mme  Verrall,
qui  felicite  les  controles  des  excellentes  reponses  donnees  par
eux  les  29  et  30  Janvier.  "Especially  F.  W.  H.  Myers  seems
to  me  to  have  shown  on  January  30  that  he  understood  my
three  Greek  words."  C'est  donner  une  indication  au  controle
qui  a  parle  de  jours  alcyoniques  le  30.  II  se  fixe  dans  le  cycle
d'idees  associees  a  ces  mots.

Le  6  Mars,  Myers-Piper  annonea  qu'il  avait  fait  dessiner  a
Mme  Verrall  un  triangle  dans  im  cercle.  Ce  sione  devait
servir  a  marquer  des  correspondances  croisees.1  M.  Piddington
demande  aussitot  (Vol.  XXII.,  p.  148)  quand  ce  sigue  a  ete
trace  et  quels  sont  les  mots  transmis  en  meme  temps.  Hector
repond  qu'il  ne  sait  pas  si  on  pourra  indiquer  la  date,  mais-
le  mot  pourra  l'etre.  Et  il  ajoute  aussitot  "  cloudless,  sky,
horizon."  Quoiqu'en  dise  M.  Piddington  (Vol.  XXII.,  p.  1-49)
Kector  repond  manifestement  a  la  question  qui  vient  de  lui
etre  posee.

Mais  M.  Piddington  a  l'esprit  prevenu  a  tel  point  qu'il
explique  ainsi  la  difficulte  eprouvee  par  lui  a  lire  le  mot
"  horizon  " ;  " '  sky  '  is  not  a  word  which  one  would  expect  to

1  "  You  wish  me  to  make  a  sign  when  giving  a  word  at  Mrs.  Verrall's,  also
at  Mrs.  Holland's?" Mr.  Piddington— "  Yes,''  etc.  (Vol.  XXII.  pp.  36-7).


90


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[  PART


find  immediately  followed  by  'horizon'"  (Vol.  XXII.,  p.  149).
Webster  definit  pourtant  horizon  "  the  apparent  junction  of  the
earth  and  sky."

Au  reveil  Mme  Piper  pronone^a  ces  mots  "  moaning  at  the
bar  when  I  put  out  to  sea.  .  .  .  Arthur  Hallam.  Good-bye,
Margaret " ;  ce  qui  indiquerait  une  correspondance  croisee  avec
Mme  Verrall.  Certains  d'entre  eux  sont  d'une  lecture  incer-
taine,  mais  on  peut  admettre  les  indications  de  M.  Piddington,
qui  declare  que,  suivie  des  mots  ci-dessus,  la  phrase  "  cloudless
sky  beyond  the  horizon,"  est  une  paraphrase  de  auras  oupavos

OLKV/XOOV.

On  ne  peut  laisser  passer  cette  affirmation  sans  reserves.
Les  eubrts  tendant  a  demontrer  que  l'adjonction  de  "  beyond
the  horizon  "  a  "  sky  "  est  faite  pour  traduire  ovpavog  et  le  dis-
tinguer  de  arjp  est  de  l'imagination  pure.  Un  erudit  n'aurait
pas  traduit  aKu/mwi/  par  "  cloudless  "  (M.  Myers  le  traduit  "  Let
Heaven  itself  be  still ").

Pour  justifier  l'appropriation  de  la  paraphrase  aux  mots
grecs,  on  invoque  encore  la  concordance  apparente  entre  les
textes  de  Mine  Verrall,  etablissant  un  parallele  entre  Plotin
et  Tennyson,  citant  In  Memoriam  et  Crossing  the  Bar  et  les
allusions  faites  par  Mme  Piper,  au  stade  du  reveil,  a  ces  poemes.

Cette  association  existait  dans  l'esprit  des  experimentateurs,
son  emergence  dans  les  ecrits  ou  les  discours  de  Mme  Piper  ne
depasse  done  pas  les  ressources  connues  de  la  transmission  de
pensee.  M.  Piddington  a  trop  d'experience  pour  ne  pas
apercevoir  cette  objection. II  y  repond  ainsi :

Je  n'avais  pas,  a  la  date  du  6  Mars,  vu  les  textes  de
Mme  Verrall  qui,  le  11  Mars,  developpent  le  parallele  entre
l'extase  telle  que  la  decrivent  Plotin  et  Tennyson.1  Je  ne
eonnaissais  que  l'allusion  faite  par  Mme  Verrall  a  Crossing
the  Bar ;  je  n'avais  pas  distingue  la  citation  d'ln  Memoriam
(6  Mars).  Je  ne  suis  done  pas  l'agent,  puisque  je  n'avais
pas  la  notion  de  ces  concordances,  sauf  pour  Crossing  the  Bar}

1  Mme  Verrall  publie  une  dissertation  qui  semble  faire  bon  march  e  des  propres
paroles  de  Tennyson  ;  le  poete  s'entrancait  en  repetant  tout  bas  son  nom  {Ancient
Sage),  il  ne  demande  pas  que  l'air  soit  immobile.  ('■'The  air  that  smites  his
forehead  is  not  air  but  Vision" — Holy  Grail.)

2  Crossing  the  Bar  est  une  expression  familiere  aux  spii  ites.  C'est  le  titre  du
Ier  Chapitre  des  Letters  from  Julia,  de  M.  Stead.


lxv.]  Correspondances  croisees  et  la  Methode  experimentcde.  91

"  To  suppose  that  subconsciously  I  grasped  the  real  significance
and  connection  of  these  oracular  scripts  and  passed  my  know-
ledge on  to  Mrs.  Piper  is  too  strained  a  hypothesis  for  me  to  have
patience  with.  If  the  knowledge  shown  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance
was  obtained  from  any  living  person  it  was  from  Mrs  Verrall "
(Vol.  XXII.,  p.  128,  note).  L'hypothese  qui  indigne  M.  Pid-
dington,  p.  128,  devient  raisonnable,  p.  129,  des  qu'il  s'agit
de  Mme  Verrall.  "  One  must  assume  either  that  Mrs.  Verrall's
subconsciousness  had  worked  out  the  connection  between  In
Memoriam  and  avros  ovpavo?  ukv/uwv  some  five  or  six  days
before  she  normally  grasped  it — a  perfectly  reasonable  hypo-
thesis," etc. Cette  hypothese,  en  effet,  est  la  plus  vraisemblable.

L'analyse  de  ce  cas  revele  le  manque  de  sang-froid  des
operateurs  (Vol.  XXII.,  p.  163).  Le  controle  parle  de  ses
efforts  pour  trausmettre  un  mot  commencant  par  D.  Mme
Verrall  s  eerie  aussitot :  "1  know  the  word.  I  told  it  to  my
husband  yesterday.  Shall  I  say  it  ?  " — "  Yes  what  is  it  ?  ",  repond
Myers-Piper — "Dante."  Dante  a  beau  figurer  parmi  les  grands
visionnaires  cites  par  M.  Myers,  il  est  clair  que  l'emergence
de  son  nom  a  ete  directement  suggeree  par  Mme  Verrall.

D'ailleurs,  le  controle  en  est  toujours  a  Halcyon  days.  II
veut  indiquer  l'auteur  des  mots  grecs,  il  le  connait  bien  et  l'a
donne  deja  en  reponse,  a  l'occasion  du  poerue  Hcdcyon  days,  etc.
II  est  evident  que  Myers-Piper  est  dans  la  plus  complete
ignorance  de  la  vraie  reponse,  bien  qu'il  affirme  avoir  repondu
(Vol.  XXII.,  p.  16-1).  M.  Piddington  ajoute  "However  want-
ing in  definiteness  many  of  the  statements  .  .  .  were,  it  is
important  to  note  that  Mrs.  Verrall  at  the  time  took  the
references  to  St.  Paul  and  Swedenborg  to  be  connected  with
her  question  about  the  authorship  of  the  Gi-reek  words,  in
spite  of  the  fact  that  at  the  time  she  failed  to  see  any
relevance  in  them."

La  conviction  des  experimentateurs  est  done  faite  d'avance.
Bien  que  Swedenborg  et  St-Paul  soient  representee  comme  des
correspondances  deja  donnees,  on  ne  s'attache  pas  aux  paroles
du  controle;  on  cherche  une  allusion  symbolique  et  on  la  trouve
dans  ce  fait  que  ces  noms  figurent  dans  le  passage  ou  les  mots
grecs  sont  traduits.  Je  ne  crois  pas  qu'il  soit  possible  de  preter
aux  controles  a  la  fois  une  connaissance  merveilleuse  des  choses
et  une  grande  maladresse  a  les  exprimer. Nous  ne  connaissons


92


Joseph  Maxwell,  31.  D.


[part


leur  pensee  que  par  son  expression,  et  nous  n'avons  pas  le
droit  de  negliger  cette  expression  pour  nous  attacher  seulement
a  des  coincidences  de  mots.  D'autant  plus  que  St-Paul  a  deja
fait  l'objet  d'une  correspondance  croisee.

L'origine  supranormale  de  ces  mots  n'est  done  pas  certaine ;
encore  le  doute  ne  peut-il  subsister  que  pour  Swedenborg.
Mais,  en  admettant  menie  ce  doute  comme  favorable  a  la  these
des  experimentateurs,  il  n'en  reste  pas  moins  clair  que  Mme
Verrall  sait  ce  que  doit  etre  la  reponse,  puisqu'elle  cherche  des
allusions  au  passage  de  Human  Personality  oil  ces  noms  sont
mentionnes  (Vol.  XXII.,  p.  132).  On  demeure  toujours  dans
le  domaine  de  la  telepathie,  et  il  ne  semble  pas  que  les  experi-
mentateurs en  aieut  conscience,  car  ils  estiment  que  le  controle
niontre  "  The  vigilance,  real  or  admirably  simulated,  of  a
trained  experimenter,  as  anxious  as  Mr.  Podmore  himself  to
eliminate  thought-transference  from  the  sitter."  On  peut  juger
du  bien  fonde  de  cette  observation  (Vol.  XXII.,  p.  129,
note  1).

En  tons  cas,  le  controle  s'apereoit  des  erreurs  qu'il  fait ;  la
froideur  de  Mme  Verrall  k  la  seance  du  29  Avril  l'avertit
qu'il  se  trompe,  et  apres  avoir  clos  l'incident  le  29  en  disant,
"  Amen  !  Amen  at  last ! ",  il  la  rouvre  des  le  lendemain  et  il
dit  timidement  Homere.  "  Omer's  III  lard;  it  is  the  name  of
the  author"  (Arol.  XXIL,  p.  166).  Mile  Johnson  cache  mal
sa  surprise,  mais  le  controle  persiste  dans  son  absurde  reponse,
qu'il  renouvelle  a  l'arrivee  de  Mme  Verrall,  et  il  exprime
l'opiniou  que  sa  reponse  aux  mots  grecs  est  complete  (p.  167).
Mme  Verrall  laisse  voir  son  desenchantement ;  pas  de  felicitations
cette  fois,  mais,  des  reponses  clairement  mecontentes.  Je  crois
avoir  repondu  completement  dit  le  controle  :  "  Very  likely,  yes,
I  think  so,"  replique  glacialement  Mme  Verrall.

Le  controle  voit  qu'il  a  fait  fausse  route,  et  il  change  aussitot
de  reponse  :  Pa  .  .  .  (que  Ton  prend  pour  Platon),  Soc,  Socratese,
et  Homere.1  Mme  Verrall  persiste  dans  sa  froideur  et  le  con-
trole hesite,  il  peut  avoir  repondu,  mais  il  reflechira  encore.

On  voit,  qu'au  30  Avril,  Myers-Piper  est  encore  dans
l'ignorance  absolue.  II  se  trompe  lourdement,  si  on  prend  ses
reponses  dans  leur  sens  nature! Mais  la  methodc  symbolique

1  Voyez  l'association  de  Platon,  Homere  et  Socrate  clans  un  entrefilet  de
"Light,"  1906,  p.  192,  signe  V. Cela  peut  etre  aussi  une  correspondance.


lxv.]  Correspondances  croisees  et  la  Metlwde  experimental e.  93


permet  de  trouver  la  verite  desiree,  au  milieu  de  ces  erreurs
offertes.  Homere,  Ylliade,  Pa  transforme  en  Platon  et  Socrate
sont  tres  appropries,  parce  que,  dans  le  Criton,  Platon  raconte  la
vision  de  Socrate ;  une  femme  vetue  de  blanc  lui  apparait  et
lui  dit  un  vers  de  Ylliade  d'Homere.  La  preuve  resulte  des
recherches  de  Mme  Verrall ;  son  ecriture  automatique  porte  le
ler  Mai,  "Eagle  soaring  cd>ove  the  tomb  of  Plato."  C'est  une
phrase  du  passage  cherche  de  Human  Personality ;  la  il  est
question  de  Swedenborg,  Dante,  St-Paul ;  dans  les  33  dernieres
pages,  le  mot  Vision  avec  une  majuscule  est  employe  deux  fois1;
la  premiere  a  l'occasion  de  la  vision  de  Socrate,  la  seconde  fois
a  propos  de  Plotin.  Cela  parait  decisif  a  Mme  Verrall.  Seule
une  intelligence  familiere  avec  les  deux  derniers  chapitres  du
livre  pouvait  voir  une  connexion  entre  la  vision  de  Socrate  et
celle  de  Plotin.

On  est  un  peu  deconcerte  par  tant  de  subtilite,  on  perd  de
vue  le  texte,  et  on  ne  voit  pas  les  erreurs  de  fait  qui  sont  a
la  base  de  l'ingenieuse  construction  de  Mme  Verrall  et  de
M.  Piddington.  On  ne  se  rend  pas  compte  d'une  chose  bien
simple.  Myers-Piper  repond  a  tort  et  a  travers.  Homere,
Socrate,  Pa,  sont  donnes  comme  le  nom  de  l'auteur  des  mots
grecs,  il  n'est  pas  question  de  vision,  ni  de  Human  Personality ;
Myers  cherche  k  nommer  l'auteur.  M.  Piddington  n'a  pas  le
droit  de  preter  aux  mots  du  controle  un  sens  manifestement
etranger  au  contexte.

D'ailleurs  l'assimilation  est  fantaisiste.  La  vision  de  Socrate
n'a  rien  de  commun  avec  l'extase,  ni  avec  ses  conditions
atmospheriques.  L'extase,  consciente  et  philosophique  de
Plotin,  n'est  pas  l'extase  somnambulique,  ni  meme  mystique
religieuse  proprement  dite.  La  vision  est  cliniquement  une
hallucination  sensorielle  ;  or  la  philosophie  mystique  en-
seigne  que  le  caractere  de  l'intuition  directe,  survenant  dans
l'extase,  est  d'etre  un  phenomene  de  l'entendement,  presque
depouille  d'elements  sensoriels.  II  peut  y  avoir  des  extases
sans  vision,  comme  des  visions  sans  extase.

La  discussion  de  Mme  Verrall  peut  etre  ainsi  resumee  :  si
nous  negligeons  le  sens  direct  des  reponses  de  Myers  nous
trouvons  qu'il  cite,  le  29,  trois  noms  qui  figurent  page  291

xVoy.  Vision,  ainsi  ecrit  par  M.  Myers,  dans  d'autres  circonstances,  Journal,
Vol.  IX.,  p.  -290.


94


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[PAKT


de  Human  Personality,  qu'il  cite,  le  30,  Pa  (pris  pour  Platon),
Socrate  et  Homere  cites  egalement  dans  les  derniers  chapitres
du  livre.1  Done,  il  fait  allusion  a  ce  livre,  et  il  fait  allusion  a
l'Extase  parce  que  Swedenborg,  Dante  et  St-Paul  sont  des
extatiques,  et  que,  le  livre  parle  de  la  vision  de  Socrate  et
d'un  vers  de  Ylliade.  Que  d'allusions  possibles  avec  ce
systeme !

Mme  Verrall  oublie  que  e'est  elle  qui  a  suggere  Dante,
auquel  le  controle  ne  songeait  pas ;  que  e'est  elle  qui  complete
l'allusion  au  nom  de  Swedenborg ;  que  St-Paul  est  une
correspondance  recente,  qu'enfin  les  noms  de  Socrate  et  de
Pa  ...  ne  sont  que  des  tatonnements  provoques  par  son
attitude.

Le  nom  de  Plotin  ne  fut  donne  que  le  6  Mai,  a  Mine
Sidgwick,  qui  l'attendait,  car  Mme  Verrall  avait  deja  indique
a  Mile  Johnson  et  k  Mme  Sidgwick  qu'il  y  avait  des  allusions
a  Human  Personality  dans  les  seances  du  29  et  du  30  Avril,
et  qu'il  ne  manquait  plus  que  le  nom  de  Plotin.

En  realite,  l'experience  a  dure  du  15  Janvier  au  6  Mai,
pres  de  quatre  mois ;  Mme  Verrall  et  les  autres  experimentateurs
connaissaient  les  reponses  cherchees.  Elles  out  ete  obtenues
peniblement,  avec  des  erreurs  grossieres  et  prolongees ;  jamais
la  traduction  exacte  des  mots  grecs  n'a  ete  donnee,  les  experi-
mentateurs ont  signale  par  leur  attitude  les  erreurs  du  controle
qu'ils  ont  inconsciemment  guide.  Sur  ces  faits  M.  Piddington
se  fonde  pour  assurer  que  "  Myers-Piper  gives  various  answers
.  .  .  all  intelligent  and  all  but  one  provably  correct.  .  .  .
Besides  this,  Myers-Piper  shows  that  he  knows  that  Myers-
Verrall  had  previously  shown  knowledge  of  his  (MyersP)
answer.  .  .  .  The  facts  .  .  .  emerged  in  a  manner  which  indi-
cates that  the  intelligence  responsible  for  their  emergence
was  as  intimately  conversant  with  the  closing  chapters  of
Human  Personality  as  Frederic  Myers,  its  author,  must  have
been"  (Vol.  XXII.,  p.  139).

II  ne  faut  pas  etre  difficile  en  matiere  de  preuves  pour
admettre  ces  conclusions  que  l'analyse  des  faits  dement  detail
par  detail.

1  Pourquoi  ne  sont-ils  pas  simplenient  empruntes  au  Journal  Light?


lxv.]  Correspondences  croisees  et  la  Methode  experiment  ale.


95


Light  in  West}

Je  ne  discuterai  pas  les  raisonnenients  litteraires  de  M.
Piddington  et  me  bornerai  a  montrer  ses  points  faibles,  ainsi
que  les  sources  normales  des  concordances  relevees.  Je  suis
l'ordre  du  tableau  I.,  page  280,  Vol.  XXII.

(1)  Hercule  furieux  d'Euripide  (Mme  V.  4  et  25  Mars).  Le
8  Avril  Mme  Holland  cite  le  nom  des  personnages  de  la
traduction  de  Browning,  inseree  dans  Aristophanes  Apology
(Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  25).  M.  Piddington  se  fonde  sur  la  reunion
de  ces  noms  pour  demontrer  l'intervention  d'une  intelligence
directrice.

Mais  Euripide  et  l'Hercule  furieux  sont  mentionnes  au  Vol.
XX.,  p.  61  des  Proceedings.  Mme  Holland  possede  Browning,
et  M.  Piddington  reconnait  qu'elle  a  pu  parcourir  l'apologie
bien  qu'elle  dise  ne  l'avoir  pas  lue  (Vol.  XXIV,  p.  25).

(2)  Euripide,  Mme  Piper  8  Avril,  Mme  Verrall  4  et  25
Mars.

Source  normale,  voy.  Vol.  XX.  p.  61.

(3)  Browning's  Hercddes,  voy.  ci-dessus  No.  1.

(4)  Umbrae,  Shadow,  Shades,  elSwXov.

Mme  Verrall  25  Mars,  Mme  Holland  27  Mars.

Voy.  Human  Personality,  Vol.  II.,  p.  290.  Mme  Holland
parle  de  Shadow  seulement  clans  le  sens  de  ombre  opposee  a
lumiere. Ce  mot  est  tres  banal.

On  voit  dans  "  Peter  is  the  second  one "  une  allusion  a
St-Pierre,  implicitement  designe  par  Mme  Verrall  dans  le
symbole  d'Hercule  claviger  et  de  Janus  (Vol.  XX.,  p.  258).
Comparez  avec  Ave  Eoma  Immortalis,  Vol.  XXL,  pp.  297,  299.

(5)  Shadow,  Tenebrae,  Spirit :  banalites.

(8)  Geryon  d'Euripide,  et  Geryon  de  Dante.

Ces  mentions  isofees  out  ete  obtenues  en  presence  de  Mme
Verrall.  La  table  dicta  d'abord  "  geryoneshefollostkdevio"  ;  Mine
Verrall  fit  observer  que  cela  ne  signifiait  rien.  La  table  recom-
mence :  "  Geryontes  mefistoles  probemium "  que  Mme  Verrall
lut  problem.  Invitee  k  s'expliquer  la  table  suivit  l'indication
et  dicta :  "  mefistofiles  and  geryon  double  aspect  of  one
problem."

1  Light  in  the  West  est  le  titre  d'un  journal  spirite  publie  aux  Etats  Unis
(Light,  1885,  543).


96


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


Mrae  Verrall  a  done  provoque  le  developpement  d'une  serie
d'idees  contenues  dans  Geryones,  elle  commente  et  interprete
ensuite  ce  message  edifie-  avec  sa  collaboration  et  trouve  deux
allusions:  (1)  a  Geryon  du  Dante,  a  cause  de  l'apparition  de
Mefistoiiles  qu'elle  assimile  a  Mephistopheles,  dont  le  Dante
n'avait  certainement  pas  entendu  parler ;  (2)  a  Geryon  grec,
monstre  tue  par  Hercule.  Geryon  est  mentionne  dans  YHercule
Furieux,  done  il  y  a  une  allusion  implicite  k  cette  tragedie.
Les  deux  arguments  sont  typiques.  L'un  repose  sur  un
anachronisme  amusant,  Yitalianisation  de  la  creation  germanique
de  Goethe,  la  confusion  du  xinc  et  du  xtx6  siecles.  L'autre
sur  une  indetermination,  car  Geryon  est  cite  dans  bien  des
auteurs,  notamment  Virgile,  Eneidc  VII.  et  VIII.,  202.  On
voit  l'abus  resultant  de  ces  methodes  d'analyse.  Un  mot  com-
porte  une  allusion  implicite  a  tout  l'ouvrage  on  il  se  trouve.
La  reunion  de  Geryon  monstre  infernal  k  Mefistofiles,  approxima-
tion onirique  de  Mephistopheles,  personnification  du  diable,  a
son  origine  dans  l'idee  sous-jacente  d'Enfer.

(9)  Hercule  comme  type  de  1'Union  de  l'Est  et  de  l'Ouest.
Ce  point  represents  comme  une  allusion  explicite,  ne  resulte

pas  du  texte  du  25  Mars,  de  Mme  V.  II  en  est  deduit  par
M.  Piddington  apres  cinq  pages  de  commentaires  (Vol.  XXII.,
pp.  253-257). Cette  theorie  est  d'ailleurs  fort  contestable.1

M.  Piddington  voit  une  allusion  k  cette  idee  dans  les  mots
"  The  Constellation  of  Orion  " ;  il  y  arrive  par  un  raisonnement
d'une  subtilite  extraordinaire,  qu'on  pent  lire  dans  le  Vol.  XXII.,
pp.  273  et  s.s.

Je  crois  qu'il  y  a  une  simple  allusion  banale  dont  on  trouve
un  precedent  dans  le  Vol.  XX.,  p.  248.  Avec  le  systeme  de
M.  Piddington  on  pourrait  trouver  des  correspondances  partout,
Orion  rappelerait  l'Est,  par  l'Aurore  qui  lui  rendit  la  vue,
Diane  (cas  XIV.),  Giant  and  Dwarf  (cas  VIII.),  Arrow  (cas
VII.),  etc.,  sans  compter  tous  les  livres  ou  il  est  cite\

(10)  Crossing  of  the  Hellespont  (par  Hercule,  et  Xerxes)
Mme  V.  25  Mars,  p.  252. II  y  a  une  allusion  implicite  k

1  Voici  le  schema  du  raisonnement :  Claviger,  porte  massue  et  porte  cl£s,
rappelle  Hercule  et  St-Pierre,  et  Janus  a  qui  Ovide  donne  cette  epithete.  Ces
personnages  representent  tous  l'union  de  l'Est  et  de  l'Ouest.  Hercule,  divinite
orientale  et  occidentale,  St-Pierre,  Oriental  qui  devint  le  premier  eveque
d'Occident,  Janus,  qui  voyait  a  la  fois  l'Est  et  l'Ouest.  M.  Piddington,  grace
a  Pinterpretation  symbolique,  trouve  tout  cela  dans  l'unique  mot  Claviger.


lxv.]  Gorrespondances  croisees  et  la  Methode  expe'rimentale.  97


ce  passage,  de  l'Hellespont  dans  le  texte  Holland  du  8  Avril.
Savez-vous  pourquoi  ?  Parce  qu'il  y  est  dit :  Marthe  devint
comme  Marie  et  Lia  conmie  Rachel.  En  effet  (Vol.  XXII.,
pp.  265-268),  il  est  question  de  Lia  et  Eachel  au  XXVIP
chant  du  Punjatoirc,  et  au  chant  XXVIII. ,  qui  suit,  on  voit
une  allusion  a  la  traversee  de  l'Hellespont  par  Xerxes  !

Ici  encore  il  suffit  d'un  nom  on  deux,  banals  d'ailleurs  car
les  episodes  de  Marthe  et  Marie,  de  Lia  et  Eachel  sont  du
classique  tres  use,  pour  que  Ton  s'autorise  a  retenir  comme
allusion  implicite  tout  incident  figurant,  non  plus  dans  le  meme
chant,  raais  dans  le  meme  poeme.

En  realite,  il  n'y  a  qu'une  idee  clans  le  texte  de  Mme
Holland,  l'identification  des  contraires,  qui  est  deux  fois  indiquee
dans  le  memoire  de  Mme  Verrall,  pp.  129  et  131  (Vol.  XX.).

(11)  (12)  (13)  Est  et  West  sont  des  banalites.  Leur
apparition  a  des  intervalles  de  15  a  20  jours  dans  diffcrents
textes  ne  signiiie  rien,  on  trouve  ces  mots  a  chaque  instant.
On  voit  dans  Proc,  Vol.  XX.,  p.  3  92,  un  liste  d'allusions  a
East,  dans  les  textes  de  Mme  Verrall,  liste  d'ailleurs  incomplete.

(14)  (15)  L'identification  de  l'Est  et  de  l'Ouest  et  des
contraires  a  son  origine  dans  Proc.,,  Vol.  XX.,  pp.  129  et  131.

La  citation  Verrall  du  8  Avril  est :  "  The  words  were  from
Maud,  but  you  did  not  understand.  Eosy  is  the  east,  and  so
on."  Elle  ne  peut  faire  allusion  au  texte  de  Mme  Holland
du  27  Mars  "Birds  in  the  high  hall  Garden,  not  Maud  Sylvia,"
quelle  ne  connaissait  pas  normalement ;  l'id^e  de  Maud  est
explicite  dans  le  texte  Holland.

M.  Piddington,  constatant  l'erreur  de  citation  (le  vers  est  Eosy
is  the  West),  y  signale  une  correspondance  croisee  antithetique
(sic)  avec  "  Light  in  West "  dit  quelques  heures  auparavant
par  Mme  Piper.  L'antithese  est  ingenieusement  effectuee  par
l'erreur  de  citation  dont  le  but  est  de  souligner  le  mot  important.

Ou  arrivera-t-on  vraiment  si  tout  devient  un  argument  ?  Si
l'erreur  devient  une  combinaison  ingenieuse,  utilisable  au  meme
titre  que  la  verite  ?  Si  la  concordance  resulte  non  seulement
des  ressemblances  mais  aussi  des  dissemblances  ?  Enfin  si
l'allusion  implicite  peut  etre  justifiee,  par  les  moyens  que  Ton
sait  ?

On  peut  ajouter  que  le  poeme  de  Maud  est  deux  fois  cite"
par  Mme  Verrall  (Vol.  XX.)  et  que  les  vers  "  Come  into  the

G


98


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


garden  Maud,  for  the  black  bat,  night,  has  flown,"  etc.,  sont
dans  Sesame  and  Lilies  de  Buskin  (§  94).  lis  ont  ete  utilises
deja  dans  la  correspondance  Eheu  fugaces  entre  Mmes  Verrall
et  Holland  (Vol.  XXI.,  p.  297).

(17)  Orion  est  une  banalite  (Mine  Holland,  8  Avril).

(18)  Aphrodite  est  encore  une  banalite  mythologique.

(19)  Cytheree  (qui  constitue  sans  doute  la  correspondance
avec  Aphrodite  dit  le  8  Avril  par  Mme  Piper  au  reveil)  se
divise  en  Cytheree  deesse,  et  Cytheree  planete.  On  y  trouve
des  allusions  implicites,  parce  que :  (a)  la  deesse  Aphrodite,
c'est  Venus  ou  Cytheree,  (b)  l'allusion  faite  par  Mme  Holland
le  meme  jour  a  Lia  et  Rachel  iraplique  une  allusion  au  XXVIP
chant  du  Purgatoire,  ce  qui  implique  une  allusion  au  vers  on
Ton  voit  "  C'etait  je  crois  l'heure  ou  Cytheree,"  etc.;  done  c'est
une  reference  implicite  a  Cytheree  que  de  dire  Lia  et  Rachel !
(Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  265,  266).

(20)  La  riviere  du  Lethe  et  la  Montagne  du  Purgatoire
sont  des  lieux  communs.  Ici,  nous  trouvons  une  extraordinaire
application  de  la  methode  d'interpretation  symbolique.

Le  6  Avril  1907  Mme  A^errall  ecrit  un  texte  (Vol.  XXII.,
p.  237)  ou  l'idee  de  peinture  est  quatre  fois  r6p6Ue,  "the
painting  of  Letherbridge  .  .  .,  Lether  bridge.  .  .  .  The  water
.  .  .  gains  volume  as  it  rushes  to  the  sea  ...  a  broadening  river
by  the  storied  mount,  an  open  lake  beside  the  lawns  of  LEA."

La  savante  automatiste  recommit  le  Lethe  dans  la  peinture
du  pont  de  Lether  et  le  Purgatoire  de  Dante  aux  mots  "  La
montagne  etagee "  et  Lea.

M.  Piddington  dit,  page  263:  "I  took  Mrs.  Verrall 's  script
of  April  6th,  ...  to  be  .  .  .  various  ways  of  expressing  one
idea,  namely,  the  Wordsworth  Country.  Mrs.  Verrall  however
had  placeel  another  interpretation  on  her  script  of  Apjril  Qth."

Cette  contradiction  n'embarrasse  pas  M.  Piddington.  II  admet
son  interpretation  et  il  ad  met  aussi  celle  de  sa  collaboratrice.
"  That  ...  a  script  should  possess  a  double  reference  will  not,
I  hope,  seem  to  be  an  improbable  hypothesis "  (Vol.  XXII.,
p.  264).

Et  voila  ce  qu'on  nous  propose  serieusement.  Symboliquement,
le  texte  de  Mine  Verrall  fait  allusion  au  Purgatoire,  ou  il  y
a  une  riviere  et  une  montagne,  et  au  pays  de  Wordsworth,  le
district  des  lacs,  ou  il  y  a  des  rivieres,  des  montagnes,  des  collines


lxv.]  Correspondances  croisees  et  la  Methode  experimentale.  99


et  des  lacs,  signalement  qui  s'applique  a  tous  les  pays  montagneux.

On  remarquera  le  procede  d'interpretation  des  experinientateurs.

Mme  Verrall  ne  retient  que  "  Lether,"  quelle  corrige  en  Lethe,

"storied  mount,"  et  "Lea"  qu'elle  prend  pour  Leah. Tout  le  reste

du  texte  est  neglige,  malgre  son  importance  mise  en  relief  par

la  repetition, „  . 7  „

-Tainted  leather.

Fethevbridge.

Painted  Severn  bridge.

Painting  of  Severn  bridge.

Painting  of  l&therbridge.

Le  th  er  Bridge.

Painting  4  fois,  bridge  5  fois  repete,  sont  negliges  complete-
ment,  malgre  ce  qu'on  nous  dit  de  la  repetition  comme  indice
de  correspondance ;  Mme  Verrall  neglige  aussi  toutes  les  allusions
a  rivieres,  collines,  vallees,  melezes,  pins,  mer,  lacs  qui  ne
rappellent  pas  le  Purgatoire  de  Dante.  M.  Piddington  au
contraire,  poursuivi  par  son  idee,  ne  releve  que  les  details
alpestres. La  peinture  et  le  pont  passent  inapercus.

Est-ce  une  analyse  serieuse  ?  Ne  doit-on  pas,  en  etudiant
un  texte,  tenir  compte  de  tous  ses  elements,  sans  exception  ?

C'est  ainsi  qu'on  en  arrive  a  nous  presenter  des  identifications
assez  fantaisistes  pour  que  les  experts  nous  disent  l'un  :  c'est
le  Purgatoire  de  Dante,  l'autre  c'est  le  pays  pittoresque  de
Wordsworth,  et  qu'ils  se  mettent  d'accord  pour  nous  dire
serieusement :  c'est  tous  les  deux.

Bien  entendu,  il  y  a  encore  une  correspondance  croisee  avec
le  Purgatoire  et  le  Lethe.  Tout  h  l'heure  les  mots  Lia  et
Eachel  signifiaient  implicitement  Cytheree  ;  ils  ont  signifie  Geryon,
le  mephistophelique  ;  ils  signifient  maintenant,  toujours  implicite-
ment, la  montagne  du  Purgatoire,  oil  Dante  voit  Lia  en  reve,
et  le  Lethe  qui  coule  le  long  du  Purgatoire.

(21)  Paradiso,  Paradise.  Mot  encore  banal.  L'allusion  ;\
Dante  resulte  du  mot  "  Lost  Paradise  Eegained "  qui  rappelle
Milton  (Mme  Verrall  3  Avril,  Vol.  XXIL,  p.  227);  Paradiso
est  dans  le  texte  du  8  Avril  de  Mme  Holland.1

1  M.  Piddington  a  oublie  une  importante  correspondance  entre  Mme  Holland,
Mme  Verrall  et  Mme  Piper  (Vol.  XXIL,  pp.  228,  262.  269).  Elle  explique
meme  Roland  et  les  Val,  allusions  demeurees  insondables.  Roland,  c'est  le
preux  mort  a  Roncesvalles  ou  Roncevaux,  comme  le  montre  les  Val ;  inversion


100


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


(22)  Purgatorio  est  une  correspondance  implicite  resultant
1°  de  la  mention  de  "painting  of  lether  bridge,"  etc.,  parce
qu'elle  signifie  le  Lethe  et  implique  le  Purgatoire  (Mine  Verrall,
6  Avril),  et  2°  des  mots  Leah  et  Rachel  (Mme  Holland,  8  Avril)
qui  signifient  le  Purgatoire  (Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  227,  262,  265)!

(23)  Le  29  Avril,  au  reveil,  Mme  Piper  (Vol.  XXII.,  p.  279)
dit  "  Dante's  Inferno."  M.  Picldington  oublie  de  nous  apprendre
qu'il  a  6te  question  de  Dante  plusieurs  fois  au  cours  de  la  seance
de  ce  jour  (Vol.  XXII.,  p.  163).  Le  mot  Dante  a  6U  introduit
par  Mme  Verrall.  On  voit  combien  son  Emergence  est  facile-
ment  explicable.  Or  YEnfer  du  Dante  est  une  ceuvre  que
Ton  peut  connaitre  de  nom,  sans  etre  un  lettre.  La  correspon-
dance est  encore  ici  assuree  par  l'utile  Geryon,  toujours  celui
de  Mephistopheles.

(24)  (25)  Daffodils  (narcisses)  se  divise  en  deux  especes :
celle  de  Tennyson,  dont  le  tableau  ne  nous  indique  pas  les
correspondances ;  elles  resultent  sans  doute  des  allusions  a
Maud  (Vol.  XXII.,  p.  273)  ou  Ton  voit  ces  vers:

The  shining  daffodil  dead  and  Orion  low  in  his  grave.

And  the  shining  daffodil  dies,  etc.

Cela  conduit  aux  narcisses  de  Wordsworth,  cites  au  reveil
le  17  Avril  par  Mme  Piper  (Vol.  XXII.,  p.  233),  et  impli-
citement  rappeles  par  les  allusions  k  Wordsworth  "  I  wandered
lonely,  etc."  (Vol.  XXII.,  p.  232,  Mme  Piper)  et  par  l'allusion
aux  montagnes,  lacs  et  rivieres  (et  Purgatoire)  du  texte  de
Mme  Verrall  (6  Avril,  p.  263).

(26)  Wordsworth  Country,  resulte  de  ce  texte,  implicitement
suivant  M.  Picldington.

(27  a  29)  Silvia,  Harold,  Leopold  sont  les  noms  des  trois
enfants  de  M.  Myers,  Mme  Holland  cite  Silvia  et  Leopold,
les  27  Mars  (Vol.  XXII.,  p.  261)  et  16  Avril  (Vol.  XXIL,
p.  278);  Harold  est  cite  le  8  Avril  par  Mme  Piper.

Ces  noms  etaient  connus  de  tous  les  mediums.

En  examinant  toutes  les  correspondances,  on  leur  trouve  (1)
des  sources  normales  imprimees,  la  plupart tres  connues;  (2)

de  Valles  pour  Roncesvalles  ;  cette  adjonction  exclut  Roland  furieux  de  l'Arioste
et  nous  fixe  sur  le  Roland  du  Dante,  Paradia,  chant  XV.  L'interpretation
vaut  celle  de  Lia  et  Rachel.


lxv.]  Correspondances  croisees  et  la  Methode  experimentale.  101


le  plus  grand  nombre  resulte  d'interpretations  arbitraires;  (3)
sur  les  26  correspondances  10  ont  pour  objet  des  mots  tres
communs :  comme  Spirit,  Shadow,  Umbrae,  East,  West,  Daffodils,
ou  banals  :  Euripide,  Orion,  Hercule,  Cytheree,  Aphrodite,  etc. ;
(4)  les  idees  un  peu  originales  (1,  14,  15)  sont  probablement
empruntees  aux  textes  de  Mme  Verrall,  ou  inspirees  par  elle
(7  et  8).

Je  ne  trouve  aucune  valeur  a  eette  serie  de  correspondances,
ou  l'element  supranormal  me  parait  meme  tres  douteux.

Le  Message  Latin.

M.  Piddington  a  pose  une  question  en  latin,  dont  les  controles
n'ont  jamais  pu  donner  une  traduction  exacte  et  1 'experience
a  dure  cinq  mois !  Ce  fait  a  deja  ete  signale :  mais  M.
Piddington  enregistre  comme  un  succes  une  reponse  interpreted
symboliquement  par  lui,  negligeant  l'inexactitude  des  reponses
directes. C'est  un  procede  difficile  a  accepter.

Comme  pour  les  mots  grecs,  la  reponse  aux  mots  latins  est
donnee  par  Mme  Verrall,  qui  connait  la  question.  Cette
experience,  destinee  a  demontrer  Taction  d'une  intelligence
exterieure  aux  mediums,  devient  une  simple  transmission  de
pensee,  car  tout  le  monde  va  chercher  a  faire  repeter  par
Mme  Piper  ce  qua  deja  dit  Mme  Verrall.

C'est  M.  Piddington  qui  aurait  decouvert  le  premier  la
reponse  que  sa  collaboratrice  avait  ecrite.  C'est  un  passage
de  Browning  (AM  Vogler)  "  Out  of  three  sounds  he  frame,
not  a  fourth  sound,  but  a  star," 1  et  c'est  une  reponse
symbolique  a  la  question  :  "  donnez-nous  par  deux  mediums
differents  deux  communications,  entre  lesquelles  aucune  con-
nexion n'apparaisse,  donnez  ensuite  une  communication  par  un
troisieme  medium,  revelant  le  lien  latent  existant  entre  les
deux  premieres."

L'appropriation  du  symbole  ne  signifie  rien,  etant  donnees
l'erudition  et  l'intelligence  de  Mme  Verrall.  La  convenance
des  allusions  de  Mile  Verrall  ne  doit  pas  etre  retenue
davantage,  pour  des  raisons  evidentes.  Seules  les  reponses
du  controle  peuvent  interesser.

1  Ces  vers  servent  d'epigraplie  a  une  conference  de  M.  Podniore,  "Miracles
and  Prophecies,"  Light,  1882,  151.


102


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


Le  27  Fevrier,  —  la  question  etait  posee  depuis  le  mois  de
Decembre,  —  il  donne  une  traduction,  encore  fausse,  que  M.
Piddington  accueille  fort  mal.

"  J.  G.  P.  You  say  you  have  replied.  I  am  quite  prepared
to  believe  it,  but  tell  me  in  what  messages  your  reply  is  given  "
(Vol.  XXIL,  p.  334).  C'est  indiquer  au  controle  qu'il  doit
chercher  dans  ses  messages  anterieurs. II  repond  aussitot :

"  In  my  messages  reported  here  and  through  Mrs.  Verrall."

"  That  agrees  with  what  I  thought,"  dit  M.  Piddington,  "  but
give  .  .  .  some  important  point  from  them  [the  messages]."

Myers-Piper  revient  a.  Halcyon  days,  aux  poemes  auxquels
il  a  fait  allusion,  a  Evangelic,  a  Syringa.

"  Quels  poemes  ?  "  continue  M.  Piddington.

"  B  my  own  Browning  .  .  .  Horace  .  .  .  chiefly  Browning's
lines  as  given  through  Mrs.  Verrall  and  another  which  I
referred  to  before."

"  I  think  you  are  making  it  clear,"  dit  M.  Piddington,  qui
continue  a  prodiguer  les  indications,  au  point  que  le  controle
declare  (p.  335):

"  I  understand  that  you  asked  me  to  reply  referring  to  my
utterances  through  Mrs.  Verrall."

Le  6  Mars,  l'experimentateur  donne  des  renseignements
encore  plus  clairs  (p.  336).

"  You  have,  I  believe,  given  an  answer  worthy  of  your
intelligence, — not  to-day,  I  mean,  but  some  time  back — but
.  .  .  you  must  explain  your  answer  at  this  light."

—  Oui  repond  le  controle.

J.  G.  P.  "  You  could  do  it  in  two  ivords."
"  Yes,  I  understand."

J.  G.  P.  "  Well?"

"  Hope,  Star."

J.  G.  P.  "  Well?  Yes?"
"  Browning."

J.  G.  P.  "Exactly. It  could  not  be  better"
"  That  is  my  answer."

M.  Piddington :  "  Now,  Myers,  I  can't  thank  you  enough,
that  is  what  I  have  been  waiting  for."

Peut-on  concevoir  une  methode  moins  sure  ?  Le  controle
n'a  meme  pas  eu  a  chercher,  on  lui  a  donne  tous  les
renseignements.


lxv.]  Correspondances  croisees  et  la  Methode  experirnentcde.  103


M.  Piddington  le  sait  bien.  II  dit  en  note,  que  s'il  a
donne  une  indication  en  disant  vous  pouvez  r^pondre  en  deux
mots,  il  ne  l'a  pas  fait  expres ;  cpue  d'ailleurs  la  reponse  est
en  trois  mots.  II  suffit  de  lire  le  texte  pour  voir  que  le
controle  est  embarrasse :  il  est  presse  par  M.  Piddington  et
il  choisit  celle  de  scs  correspondances  qui  se  rapproche  le  plus
de  Vindication.  A  cette  epoque,  il  sait  que  quatre  correspon-
dances ont  reussi.  Library,  my  own  name,  et  Mmc  Sidgwick
n'est  pas  la  reponse  au  message  latin,  c'est  evident.  Kestent
Arrow,  qui  n'a  qu'un  mot,  et  Browning,  Hope,  Star,  ou  A
triangle  within  a  circle ;  mais  ceci  est  le  signe  convenu  des
correspondances,  et  n'est  pas  un  mot.  C'est  une  figure.  Par
consequent  Myers-Piper  ne  pouvait  pas  choisir  autre  chose  que
Browning,  Hope,  Star,  qui  etaient  indiques.1

Mais  M.  Piddington  demandait  deux  mots ;  aussi  Myers-Piper
ne  lui  donne  que  Hope  et  Star,  et  c'est  sur  l'insistance  de
l'experimentateur  (Well?  Yes?  p.  336)  qu'il  ajoute  Browning.
Cela  prouve  qu'il  ne  comprenait  pas  pourquoi  sa  reponse  etait
juste,  car  le  nom  de  Browning  est  la  partie  la  plus  importante
de  cette  reponse.  Hope  et  Star  se  trouvent  dans  beaucoup  de
poemes.

De  semblables  tatonnements  se  sont  produits  pour  arriver  au
titre  du  poeme.  Le  controle  est  si  pen  fixe  qu'il  cite  d'abord
le  poeme  de  Browning  My  Star  (p.  337),  puis  laborieusement
JEvelyn  Hope ;  ce  qui  indique  clairement  la  nature  de  ses  opera-
tions mentales.  Le  controle  George  Pelham  explique  les  erreurs
par  la  stupidiU  de  Hector  (p.  3-40)  qui  ne  sait  pas  le  latin
(p.  314).*

Le  poeme  de  Browning  qu'il  a  en  vue  est  celui  qui  contient
Hope  et  Star.  Eeponse  peu  intelligente  car  plusieurs  poemes
de  Browning  contiennent  ces  mots  communs.

1  Cela  n'empeche  pas  que  Myersp  a  essaye  aussi  le  triangle  efc  le  cercle,
pour  completer  sa  reponse,  quoiqu'en  dise  M.  Piddington.  Comparez  Vol.
XXII.,  pp  345  et  343.  Pourquoi  a-t-on  supprime'  dans  la  question,  p.  345,
les  mots  "I  was  going  to  add  to  a  poem,"  cites  p.  74?

2  Les  controles  de  M.  Piper  ne  sont  pas  ceux  de  Stainton  Moses  dont  ils  ont
pris  les  noms.  Rector  est  d'apres  M.  Moses,  St.  Hippolyte,  martyr,  eveque
d'Ostie.  Comment  ce  prelat  a-t-il  oublie  le  latin '!  (Light,  1896,  p.  267).
Prudens  est  Plotin  (Light,  1896,  291).  Ces  elements  ont  leur  importance  quand
on  vent  raisonner  sur  l'identite  des  contr<31es  spirites  de  Madame  Piper,  ils
rendent  bien  suspectes  les  personnifications  qu'ils  representent.


104


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


On  lui  a  fait  comprendre,  par  la  froideur  de  l'accueil,  que  les
reponses  My  Star  et  Evelyn  Hope  ne  sont  pas  bonnes  (Vol.
XXII.,  pp.  340,  347) ;  il  cherche  autre  chose,  tente  Andrea  del
Sarto,  autre  poeme  de  Browning  (Vol.  XXII.,  p.  344),  et  s'accroche
k  la  coiTespondance  reussie  "  Triangle  et  cercle,"  qui  le  conduit
a  Ring  (p.  345)  "qui  le  fait  penser  a  un  poeme."  Evidemment
Myersp  pense  k  essayer  The  Pang  and  the  Booh,  ce  qui  explique
sa  reponse  li  not  exactly  to  a  poem  .  .  .  but  it  suggested  a  poem."
C'est  en  effet  un  titre  general  comprenant  divers  poemes,  notam-
ment  Pompilia  et  Giuseppe  Caponsacchi.1  M.  Piddington  ecarte
cette  idee  en  disant,  k  propos  de  Ring  et  Circle,  "  The  Latin
message  does  not  refer."  Ce  qui  eclaire  le  controle ;  le  cercle
ne  devient  plus  qu'un  simple  lien  d 'association  (p.  346).

Tenace,  M.  Piddington  (13  Mars)  insista  pour  avoir  une
reponse  claire ;  il  ne  l'obtint  pas.  Mine  Sidgwick  dirigea  les
seances  suivantes ;  le  controle  manifesta  la  plus  complete  igno-
rance du  poeme  oil  il  avait  trouve  la  reponse  donnee  a  Mme
Verrall.  Le  20  Mars,  il  parle  d'un  poeme  de  Browning  oil  les
etoiles  et  la  vie  se  rencontrent ;  il  bat  les  buissons  et  au  lieu
de  repondre,  interroge :  vous  comprenez  bien  de  quel  poeme  je
parle  ?

—  Oui  repond  Mme  Sidgwick. Au  sujet  d'etoiles.

Le  controle  ne  quitte  pas  cet  ordre  d'idees  et  parle  le
8  Avril  d'un  poeme  de  Browning  aux  Etoiles,  il  y  mele  Words-
worth, et  essaye,  peut-etre,  "  Pisgah-Sights  "  (li  Pi  ...  it  begins,
with  P.  and  Sai.  P.  is  right."  Pisgah-Sights  II  finit  par  "  Star
that  now  sparkiest."  (II  y  a  aussi  un  poeme  intitule  Pippa
passes.)

Mme  Sidgwick  corrige  le  controle  en  lui  apprenant  que  P.
est  erronne  (Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  362-363).  Eel  est  alors  propose
("A  Lovers'  Quarrel,"  "Herve  Rid,"  "  Martin  Relph  ").  Fatigue  de
ces  efforts  inutiles,  le  controle  ne  dit  plus  rien  de  bon  ;  il  revient
a  la  question  le  17  Avril,  et  rappelle  sa  mauvaise  reponse  "I
wander  lonely,"  "  lonely  wandering  star "  et  propose  indirecte-
ment :  Confession  (poemes  de  Browning :  Confessions,  The  Con-

1  Ou.  Ton  trouve  (Ed.  Tauchnitz)  Soar  to  the  sky  (Plato,  p.  41),  Assisi  (49),
moaned  low  (51),  Mars  (57),  St-Peter,  St-James,  St-John  (67),  Silver  cup  (34),
Paradise  (102),  wings  of  music  (108),  Peter  and  Paul  (121),  one  point  of  the  circle
(130),  Shadow  (133),  sans  compter  Star  et  Hope.  La  tin  de  Pompelia  est  trea.
appropriee.


lxv.]  Gorrespondanc.es  croisees  et  la  Methode  experimentcde.  105


fessional)  Chapel,  et  Siazies,  Siaz,  Siaraz — "  la  Saisiaz 1  dit  Mme
Sidgwick."— "  Oui."

La  reponse  ne  provoque  aucune  approbation  ("  All  right,"  "  I
see ").  Le  controle  voit  son  erreur  et  bat  la  campagne.  II
revient  a  Pe,  Pi,  puis  a  la  Saisiaz,  clairement  resumee  ainsi :
"  the  poem  in  which  he  was  left  alone  and  later  it  all  came  to
him."

Le  22  Avril  il  propose  indirectement  "  Saul,"  autre  poeme  de
Browning,  en  citant  "  as  star  follows  star."

Enfin  il  approche  du  but ;  il  a  essaye,  toujours  indirectement
Rabbi  ben  Ezra;  Death  (sous  la  forme  grecque  Thauatos);  Tyrannus
(Insfaas  Tyrannus)  (17  Avril);  passes  (Pippa  passes  1  8  Avril);
May  (23  Avril);  Spirit  and  Angel  (The  guardian  angel,  8  Avril,
nettement  associe  a  la  reponse  au  message  latin,  voy.  p.  220).

Or,  dans  le  "  Pocket  volume "  de  Browning  (London,  Smith
Elder,  1910)  on  remarque  (fin  de  la  page  vi,  et  commencement
de  la  page  vii)  les  titres  suivants :  The  guardian  Angel,  Abt
Vogler,  Rabbi  ben  Ezra,  Confession,  May  and  Death,  Pisgah  Sights,
titres  tous  plus  ou  moins  clairement  proposes,  et  mal  accueillis.
Eestait  cependant  Abt  Vogler.  Mme  Piper,  le  2-1  Avril  dit,  en
reponse  aux  mots  "  quel  est  le  poeme " — "  Vol  is  right."
Eeponse  inexacte,  mais  qui  contient  quelques  lettres  du  mot
Vogler  (Vol.  XXII.,  p.  286)  ;  Mme  Sidgwick  encourage  le  controle,
qui  se  risque  plus  tard  a  une  approximation  plus  precise,  "  vol
gar"  (p.  371).

"  I  think  I  see,"  dit  Mme  Sidgwick.

Le  controle  continue,  "  vol,  ...  V  M,  .  .  .  A  B  volugevar  "  ;
les  encouragements  ne  cessent  pas  ("  You  have  got  something
like  the  name  of  a  poem.  It  is  not  quite  right,  but  .  .  .  You've
really  very  nearly  got  it")

"  Volugur  Abt."

"  .  .  .  I  am  quite  satisfied."

Mais  Myers  est  encore  si  peu  fixe1,  qu'il  cite  un  vers  de  Saul.
—  Abt.  Vo.

1  Le  decoupage  des  proces-verbaux  est  un  deplorable  precede  ;  cela  ote  aux
phenomenes  leur  physionomie  reelle,  et  rend  tres  difficile  l'analyse  des  contextes.
Si  on  compare  les  pages  286,  295,  366,  etc.,  on  voit  que  la  Saisiaz  se  mele  a
Cloudless,  sky,  horizon  ;  le  controle  essaye  de  placer  sa  reponse  aux  mots  grecs.
En  effet  il  y  a  une  raison  a  cela,  car  on  lit  dans  la  Saisiaz  (p.  155  ad.  cit. )  "our
sky  from  cloud  as  clear."  Le  controle  raisonne  ses  essais.  Voy.  la  note
suivante.


106


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


Et  c'est  Mme  Sidgwick  qui  dit  Vogler.

Le  controle  a  essays  quatorze  reponses  au  moins  et  est  arrive
a  AM  Vogler  probablement  en  se  rappelant  vaguement  une  table
des  matieres ;  il  y  a  ete  guide'  d'ailleurs  pas  a  pas,  mais  il  y  est
arrive  sans  comprendre  pourquoi,  car  il  ne  sait  pas  encore  on  se
trouve  la  reponse  contenue  dans  le  poeme. En  voici  la  preuve.

Des  le  24  Avril,  Mme  Verrall  demande  des  precisions  (p.
376);  Myers-Piper,  apres  beaucoup  de  banalites,  cite  un  passage
qui  devait  etre  naturellement  choisi  par  quelqu'un  comprenant
le  message  latin  de  la  nianiere  inexacte,  dont  Myers-Piper  et
G.  Pelham  ont  donne  des  echantillons.  Leurs  traductions
fmissaient  par  ces  mots :  "  nous  convaincre  de  votre  survie."
C'est  sur  une  idee  de  cette  nature  que  se  fixe  le  controle  et
il  cite,  assez  mal  d'ailleurs,  les  vers  ou  il  est  parle.  des  morts
qui  ont  passe  par  le  corps  et  sont  partis,  mais  qui  reviennent,
une  fois  encore,  respirer  dans  un  vieux  monde,  etc.  (ler  Mai,
p.  379);  Myers-Piper  est  clone  logique  avec  lui-meme,  il  declare
que  c'est  le  passage  (p.  386),  auquel  il  a  fait  specialement
allusion  et  qu'il  a  essaye  de  transmettre.  II  s'en  souvient
specialement  comme  ayant  ete,  l'objet  d'un  reference  dans  les
textes  de  Mme  Verrall ;  ces  affirmations  sont  accueillies  sans
■enthousiasme  par  Mme  Sidgwick,  qui  sinformera  aurpres  de  Mme
Verrall  (p.  387)  revelant,  par  cela  seul,  que  ce  n'est  pas  la
reponse  attendue ;  celle-ci  n'aurait,  en  effet,  exige  aucune
verification.

A  la  seance  suivante,  Myers-Piper  essaye  autre  chose,  comme
quelqu'un  qui  a  reflechi  au  poeme  et  s'efforce  de  deviner  le
vers ;  le  mot  hope  n'est  pas  dans  le  texte ;  star  y  est  deux
fois,  dans  la  stance  IV.,  dont  le  vers  tronque  a  et£  accueilli
froidement,  et  dans  la  stance  VII.  dont  on  attend  la  citation.
C'est  naturellement  encore  a  ce  dernier  que  pensera  le  controle ;
et  c'est  si  bien  au  mot  star  qu'il  pense,  que  le  mot  sound  n'est
pas  prononce ;  mais  Mme  Sidgwick  hesite  dans  la  lecture
(p.  388)  et  le  controle  craint  de  se  tromper ;  il  passe  alors  a  une
autre  idee,  se  rapprochant  de  la  seconde  proposee  par  lui,  et
il  fait  allusion  au  vers :  "  And  the  emulous  heaven  yearned
down,  made  effort  to  reach  the  earth,  As  the  earth  had  done
her  best,  in  my  passion,  to  scale  the  sky."  II  insiste  la-dessus,
repete  plusieurs  fois  sky,  qui  a  fait  partie  d'une  correspondance
croisee  anterieure,  et  passion ;  Mme  Sidgwick  lui  dit  alors  qu'il


lxv.]  Correspondances  croisees  et  la  Methode  experimentale.  107

n'a  pas  besoin  de  continuer ;  le  controle  persiste  a  donner  ciel
et  passion  corame  caracteristiques  du  vers :  c'est  encore  l'investi-
gatrice  qui  lui  fait  savoir :  "  The  line  I  wanted  was  the  one
about  the  '  star.'  " — "  Yes  I  know,"  repond  le  controle,  "  but  I
am  only  explaining  in  my  passion  to  reach  you  as  clear  as
the  sky.  I  quote  if  out  of,  if  instead  of  the  fourth  framed  a
star."  Et  il  insiste  encore  sur  etoile  et  revient  a  son  explica-
tion ingenieuse  de  la  fausse  citation  concernant  passion.

Le  mot  "sound"  (son),  fut  donne  au  stade  de  reveil.

Voila  le  resume  d'une  des  plus  belles  performances  du
controle ;  il  est  visible  qu'il  a  tatonne,  battu  les  buissons  et
ete  finalement  guide  par  les  experimentateurs  eux-memes.  Les
extraits  que  j'ai  cites  montrent  les  fautes  operatoires  commises,
et  l'expose  de  l'experience  revele  son  inutility  complete.  La
reponse  etait  connue  de  tout  le  monde,  et  la  seule  chose  qui
puisse  surprendre  c'est  de  voir  la  difficulte  eprouvee  a  la  donner.
Le  succes  ne  pouvait  en  tous  cas  rien  prouver  de  plus  qu'une
transmission  ou  une  lecture  de  pensee.

Enfin,  et  c'est  la  le  plus  grave  reproche  que  Ton  puisse
faire  aux  experimentateurs,  il  n'est  pas  permis  de  dire  serieuse-
ment  qu'une  traduction  symbolique  doive  etre  preferee  k  une
traduction  litti'rale.  Quand  les  erreurs  de  celle-ci  sont  mani-
festes,  elles  ne  sauraient  disparaitre  parce  qu'une  reponse  en
symboles  est  donnee.

Ce  n'est  pas  tout.  Si  Ton  se  reporte  a  la  page  415  du
memoire  de  M.  Piddington,  on  constate  des  faits  de  nature  h
rendre  ties  suspectes  les  reponses  de  Mme  Piper.  La  bonne
foi  de  ce  remarquable  sujet  est  hors  de  cause,  mais  est-elle
responsable  de  ses  trances  ?  De  ses  automatismes  ?  J'aurai  a
examiner  cette  question  plus  loin ;  je  signalerai  simplement
les  faits  suivants :

Mme  Piper  dit  a  Mme  Sidgwick,  qu'elle  n'avait  pratiquement
rien  lu  de  Browning,  qu'elle  croit  aussi  eloigne  que  Shakespeare
(7  Mai).  Le  lendemain  elle  a  r^flechi :  M.  Stead  lui  a  envoye
un  choix  de  poesies  de  Browning ;  Minerva,  la  plus  jeune  des
demoiselles  Piper  a  quelques  volumes  de  ce  poete.

Le  26  Mai,  Mile  Keid,  qui  habitait  avec  Mme  Piper,  dit
l'avoir  vu  parcourir  un  volume  de  Browning  appartenant
a  Minerva.  II  y  avait  environ  un  mois  de  cela.  C'est  le
24  Avril  que  le  poeme  est  cite  (p.  415).


108


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


Le  29  Mai,  Mme  Piper  dit  a  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  qu'elle
commit  Evelyn  Hope,  the  Flight  of  the  Duchess ;  elle  ne  connalt
pas  Abt  Vogler  que  Lodge  vient  de  lui  lire.  Elle  a  une  belle
edition  de  Browning  chez  elle  en  Amerique.  Les  demoiselles
Piper  cependant  ont  appris  Abt  Vogler  a  la  pension  (p.  416).

Le  rapporteur  ne  fait  aucun  commentaire  sur  ces  faits  qui
auraient  cependant  merite  une  discussion  s^rieuse.

L'emergence  occasionnelle  d'etats  sonmambuliques  larves  est
une  hypothese  dont  les  investigateurs  ne  paraissent  pas  avoir
eu  le  soupgon.

11  en  est  de  meme  de  la  memoire  latente.  A  lire  leurs
rapports,  on  se  persuade  qu'ils  sont  peu  au  courant  des
phenomenes  de  cryptomnesie.

Par  exemple,  M.  Piddington  (Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  17)  cite  comme
preuve  de  la  ressemblance  des  controles  Myers  avec  le  veritable
Myers,  une  serie  de  concordances  entre  les  automatismes  et
les  ecrits  de  cet  auteur.  La  prudence  commande  de  considerer
ces  ressemblances  comme  1'indication  d'une  origine  normale.
Ce  sont  des  souvenirs  latents,  tres  naturels  chez  des  personnes
fort  au  courant  de  l'oeuvre  de  M.  Myers.

M.  Piddington  l'admet  (Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  19),  mais  il  insiste
sur  le  caractere  suprauormal  de  l'erudition  classique  de  Mme
Piper,  qui  s'interesse  peu  aux  choses  litteraires.  Examinons
done  les  connaissances  litteraires  des  controles  Piper.

C'est  Mme  Verrall  qui  a  pris  soin  d'analyser  ce  point.  II
convient  de  noter  qu'aucun  des  investigateurs  ne  s'est  preoccupe
des  acquisitions  que  Mme  Piper  avait  pu  faire  dans  des  lectures,
ailleurs  que  chez  elle :  revues,  livres,  journaux,  ou  dans  des
conversations.  Et  il  y  a  un  detail  qui  est  de  nature  a  retenir
l'attention.  M.  Hodgson  avait  le  gout  de  la  poesie  et  aimait
a  declamer  des  vers  (Vol.  XIX.,  p.  o70).  Peut-on  savoir  ce
qu'il  a  lu  a  Mme  Piper  dans  sa  longue  collaboration  avec  elle  ?
M.  Myers  declamait  aussi  des  vers  pendant  les  seances.

II  y  a  la  des  possibility  sans  nombre  pour  le  jeu  de  la
memoire  latente.

11  est  impossible  de  fournir  la  preuve  de  l'ignorance  de  Mme
Piper ;  ce  n'est  pas  en  causant  avec  elle  que  i'iiivestigateur
prudent  peut  se  renseigner,  comme  le  fait  M.  Dorr  (p.  45)  ;
celui-ci  se  contente  de  dire  qu'il  avait  "  found  in  general  talk
that  Mrs.  Piper  knew  nothing  of  Milton's,  but  Paradise  Lost."


lxv.]  Correspondances  croisees  et  la  Methode  expdrimentale.  109

II  lui  lit  un  extrait  de  Comus,  facile  a  reconnaitre,  car  c'est  le
morceau  classique  "  Sabrina  fair,  etc.,"  cite  dans  les  Anthologies
(Gems,  412);  Comus  avait  un  interet  particulier  pour  le  groupe
des  investigateurs,  car  on  le  jouait  a  Cambridge  cette  annc'e
(V.  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  199);  Mme  Piper  a-t-elle  ignore  ce  detail?

Quant  a  lerudition  du  controle,  en  voici  des  specimens :  Le
31  Mars  on  lui  lit  la  traduction  &' Agamemnon.  "Zeus  a
ordonne  que  Ton  n'arriverait  a  la  sagesse  que  par  la  triste
route  de  la  souffrance,  etc."  Myers  dit  qu'il  comprend,  et  com-
mente  ce  vers,  d'apres  Hodgson,  de  la  maniere  puerile  et
incorrecte  que  voici :  "  Troubles  and  trials,  and  the  better  you
go  through  them,  the  better  your  [life]  here  ;  and  if  you  don't
develop,  it's  your  own  fault  "  (p.  47).

II  faut  15  jours  a  Myers-Piper  pour  reconnaitre  la  traduc-
tion de  son  frere,  et  il  en  commente  le  sens  comme  on  sait.

On  a  un  exemple  du  parti  pris  de  Mme  Verrall  dans  son
resume,  p.  52.  II  faut  l'etudier.  Elle  omet  d'indiquer  les
details  suivants :  "  0  Zeus,  troubles  and  trials "  sont  dans  le
passage  anterieurement  lu  a  Mrs  Piper  (drear  road  of  Pain) ;
"He'd  sing  of  the  Odes"  ne  veut  pas  dire  "great  chorus"',  "wrote
three  plays  "  veut  dire  a  e'crit  trois  pieces  et  non  pas  "  trilogie  "  ;
Eschyle  a  ecrit  environ  70  tragedies  et  nous  en  possedons
sept. Mme  Verrall  se  contente  trop  facilement  d'a  peu  pres.

Meme  ignorance  au  sujet  d'Ajax  et  d'Ulysse,  qui  se  rattachent
au  cycle  des  allusions  empruntees  a  Ovide.  Ajax,  Ulysse  et
l'idee  de  bateau  sont  associes  dans  Metamorphoses,  XIII.,  5  et
suiv.  Ajax  dit  "  Agimv.s  .  .  .  ante  rates  causam  et  mccum  con-
fertur  Ulysses."  Mais  il  y  a  une  inintelligence  complete  du
caractere  d'Ajax,  dont  Mme  Piper  fait  un  dieu,  theorie  que
Mme  Verrall  essaye  vainement  de  justifier  (p.  54,  note  1).

Parthenon,  Pallas  Athena,  Virgin's  chamber,  est  la  para-
phrase banale  des  Encyclopedies  populaires ;  on  lit  dans
Nuttall's  "  Means  the  chamber  of  the  maiden  Goddess,  that
is  Athena."

Les  incidents  de  YEne'icle  sont  encore  plus  demonstratifs.
On  demande  le  25  Fevi'ier  a  Hodgson  de  traduire  "  arma
virumoue  cano ")  ce  qu'un  eleve  de  dix  ans  pourrait  faire.  II
est  oblige  d'appeler  Myers  a,  son  aide ;  ce  dernier  ne  traduit
pas  les  mots  banals  et  reconnaissables,  mais  donne  le  sens
general  des  traductions  du  commencement  de  YEn&ide.


110


Joseph  Maxwell,  31. D.


[part


Mme  Piper,  qui  pour  netre  pas  litteraire  a  cependant  appele
ses  filles  Alta  et  Minerva,  connait  vaguement  \'En6ide,  mais
s'embrouille,  et  dit  des  inexactitudes  que  Myers  n'aurait  jamais
sugger^es,  meme  tek'pathiquement.  Par  exemple  Junon  est  en
colere  centre  Enee  qui  a  bati  une  ville,  elle  contribue  a  detruire
cette  ville,  ce  qui  oblige  Enee  a  s'enfuir  (p.  66).

II  n'est  pas  juste  de  considerer  comme  des  preuves  derudition
classique  l'association  de  Didon  et  d'une  fete,  de  Neptune  et
du  Trident.  Ce  sont  choses  trop  banales.  Neptune  calmant
la  tempete  est  un  lieu  commun ;  e'est  dans  YEne'ide  (I.,  135)
que  se  trouve  le  celebre  "  Quos  Ego  ! "  L'incident  fait  le  sujet
de  nombreux  tableaux  ou  gravures.

Le  "  considerable  knowledge "  de  Virgile  que  signale  Mme
Verrall  n'existe  pas ;  e'est  une  connaissance  rudimentaire,  mal
coordonnee ;  elle  reproduit  les  formes  de  souvenirs  rappeles,  par
ce  que  e'est  justement  de  la  cryptomnesie,  ce  qui  explique
les  cas  ou  les  souvenirs  ont  ete  opposes  aux  indications  de
M.  Dorr ;  enfin  les  erreurs  ne  sont  pas  dues  ;\  l'oubli  ni  k  la
confusion,  mais  bien  a  une  science  incomplete  et  primaire.

M.  Pidclington  s'est  specialement  occupe  de  l'analyse  de
quelques  incidents,  notamment  les  reponses  faites  k  cette
question  ;  "  Que  vous  rappelle  le  Lethe  ?  "

Le  probleme  etait  le  suivant :  Des  indications  sont  donnees,
visiblement  emprunt^es  aux  Metamorphoses ;  ont-elles  leur  source
dans  les  souvenirs  de  Mme  Piper  ou  sont  elles  inspirees  par
feu  M.  Myers?

Le  premier  point  repose  sur  une  demonstration  negative.
M.  Pidclington  nous  assure  que  ni  Mme  Piper  ni  M.  Dorr
n'ont  In  Ovide.  Ce  dernier  en  effet  l'a  demande  a  Mme  Piper,
qui  ignore  jusqu'au  nom  d' Ovide  (Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  140).  Ayant
ainsi  interro°e  le  medium  et  l'investigateur,  M.  Piddin^ton  est
satisfait  et  il  se  croit  en  mesure  d'affirmer  l'ignorance  de  l'un
et  de  l'autre  (Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  142).  Cela  fait  douter  du  sens
critique  de  l'experimentateur,  car  son  enquete  est  absolument
inutile ;  il  se  renseigne  sur  la  memoire  personnelle  consciente,
non  sur  la  memoire  subliminale,  la  seule  interessante.  II  faut
noter  d'ailleurs  que  les  demoiselles  Piper  ont  consulte,  en
pension,  des  livres  de  mythologie  ou  se  trouvent  les  indications
donnees  par  le  medium  (Arol.  XXIV.,  pp.  142,  143).

Qu'importe  aussi  l'ignorance  des  dames  Verrall  en  ce  qui


lxv.]  Gorrespondances  croisees  et  la  Methode  experimentale.  Ill

concerne  Ovide  ?  (pp.  121-123).  Si  la  telepathie  est  possible
pourquoi  la  limiter  aux  dames  Verrall  ?

D'ailleurs,  l'etude  des  cas  rend  a  peu  pros  certaine  l'existence
de  phenomenes  de  simple  cryptomnesie.  Les  indications  donnees
par  Mine  Piper  existent  dans  de  nombreux  livres,  traductions,
etudes  mythologiques,  dictionnaires  varies.  M.  Piddington  ne
prouve  pas  et  ne  peut  pas  prouver  ce  fait  negatif:  Mme  Piper
n'a  jamais  rien  lu  ni  entendu  la-dessus.1

Le  second  point  qu'il  faudrait  prouver  est  l'inspiration  due
a  l'influence  d'un  controle  Myers  dirigeant  tous  les  auto-
matistes.

D'abord,  dit  M.  Piddington,  (p.  123),  nous  observons  chez
Mme  Piper  des  precedes  comparables  a  ceux  dont  Mmes  Verrall
et  Holland  nous  ont  offert  des  exemples.  La  reponse  a  la
question  du  Lethe  contient  des  mots  discontinus  qui  paraissaient
inintelligibles  avant  la  dicouverte  de  deux  passages  litteraires
(Eitiide  VI.,  703-723  et  Mttam.  XL  etc.)  ou  ces  fragments  se
trouvent  incorpores  et  ou  ils  peuvent  trouver  un  lien  d'unification
coherente.

Le  raisonnement  est  critiquable ;  parler  de  la  dScouverte  de
deux  passages  aussi  connus,  est  fait  pour  surprendre,  car  le
bachelier  qui  ignorerait  ces  passages  classiques  pourrait  etre
refuse  a  ses  examens.  Le  lien  entre  les  allusions  de  Mme
Piper  et  leur  source  classique  existait  independamment  du
controle  Myers,  et  il  faut  autre  chose  que  l'enquete  inoperante
de  M.  Piddington  pour  demontrer  que  les  nombreuses  sources
d 'information  normale  doivent  etre  ecartees.

Si  on  examine  les  quatre  exemples  cites  comme  etablissant
l'existence  de  ce  procede  inintelligent  d'identification  posthume,
qui  consiste  a  reproduire  dans  une  communication  des  allusions
banales  aux  manuels  de  mythologie,  ou  aux  poemes  qu'appren-
nent  les  ecoliers,  on  reconnait  que  M.  Piddington  presente
comme  certains,  des  faits  hypothetiques,  ou  comme  supra-
normaux,  des  faits  normaux.

Le  ler  cas  est  le  mot  claviger  (Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  124);  la
dtcouverte  (!)  que  ce  mot  est  employe  par  Ovide  dans  le  sens
de  "  porte-cles "  (Fastes  I.,  228)  et  de  porte-massue,  apprit  (a)
que  le  texte  de  Mme  Verrall  du  25  Mars  1907,  se  referait

1  L'episode  de  Oeyx  est  lie  a  l'origine  de  l'expression  halt/con  days  qui  joue
un  grand  role  dans  les  experiences  de  Decembre  1906  ;i  Juin  1907.


112


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


a  Janus,  (b)  eclaira  un  texte  de  Mme  Holland  du  8  Avril,
(c)  des  paroles  de  Mme  Piper  du  meme  jour.

(a)  Claviger  est  une  allusion  a  Hercule,  peut-etre  k  Janus,
mais  Mme  Verrall  connait  les  Fastes  (XXIV.,  121)  sur  les-
quelles  elle  a  fait  un  cours  en  1881  ;  elle  rappelle  ce  double
sens  dans  son  memoire  (Vol.  XX.,  p.  61).

M.  Piddington  y  voit  une  allusion  symbolique  a  l1  Union
de  Test  et  de  l'ouest ;  mais  c'est  une  interpretation  que  lui  a
inspire  le  texte  de  Mine  Holland,  selon  tout  probability.

(b)  Aucune  lumiere  n'est  jetee  par  le  texte  de  Mme  Verrall
sur  celui  de  Mme  Holland,  qui  indique  clairement  Identification
des  contraires,  idee  qui  n'apparait  pas  dans  le  texte  Verrall.

Cette  idee  est  developpee  d'ailleurs  dans  le  memoire  de  Mme
Verrall  (Vol.  XX,  pp.  129-131).

(c)  Light  in  West,  auquel  fait  allusion  M.  Piddington,  ne
concorde  pas  avec  le  texte  Verrall  du  25  Mars,  qui  ne
l'eclaire  pas.  II  faut  de  l'imagination  pour  y  voir  "  une
correspondance  antithetique "  (sic)  avec  le  texte  Verrall  du
8  Avril  qui  porte  par  erreur  "  rosy  is  the  east "  au  lieu  de
"  rosy  is  the  west."

(2)  Le  second  cas  est  la  mention  de  Lia  et  Eachel  clans  le
meme  texte  Holland,  du  8  Avril.  J'ai  montre  l'abus  fait  de
l'allusion  implicite  dans  ce  cas.

(3)  Le  troisieme  est  encore  dans  le  texte  de  Mme  Verrall
du  8  Avril ;  il  se  confond  avec  les  precedents  (identification
des  contraires).

(4)  L'allusion  a  Aristophanes'  Apology  de  Browning  est
une  coincidence  cryptornnesique  ;  YHercule  Furieux  d'Euripide
etant  justement  mentionne  dans  le  volume  XX.,  p.  61,  a
l'occasion  du  mot  clavis,  et  d'un  texte  ou  le  double  sens  de
Claviger  (Vol.  XX.,  p.  423)  est  signal  e.

(5)  C'est  le  cas  du  Lethe,  ou  les  allusions  sont  encore
empruntees  a  un  texte  imprime.

Aussi,  peut-on  faire  remarquer  a  M.  Piddington  que  ce
n'est  pas  le  controle  Myers,  qui  a  employe  la  meme  methode  (?)
avec  les  trois  mediums,  mais  M.  Piddington,  qui  trouve
des  analogies  grace  k  la  methode  qu'il  applique  a  tous  les
cas :  l'interpretation  symbolique.  Ces  procedes  paraissent  dif-
fieilement  acceptables ;  il  est  impossible  de  suivre  le  rapporteur
dans  une  discussion  dont  les  points  de  fait  sont  aussi  douteux.


lxv.]  Correspondences  croise'es  et  la  Methode  experimental^.  113

Quant  a  sa  comparaison  des  controles  Myers  avec  M.  Myers,
elle  me  semble  aussi  peu  fondee  que  possible.1  II  est  certain
que  M.  Myers  savait  tout  ce  que  les  mediums  ont  dit  de  vrai ;
mais  il  est  non  moms  certain  que  ce  n'est  pas  lui  qui  place
la  course  de  Marathon  dans  les  jeux  olympiques  (Vol.  XXIV.,
p.  105);  qui  dit  "latin  for  sleep"  (detail  revelant  l'usage
d'une  traduction  "  cave  of  sleep "  et  non  "  cave  of  '  the  god '
somnus ") ;  qui  met  un  arc  et  des  Heches  dans  la  main  d'Iris  ;
qui  ne  sait  rien  d'Ajax  ni  d'Ulysse ;  qui  ecrit  Styx,  sticks ;
qui  dit  de  Pygmalion,  "  greek  play,"  par  association  subliminale
avec  l'opera  moderne  de  Galathee,  ou  la  piece  de  Gilbert,  etc.

En  realite,  tout  ce  que  Mme  Piper  debite  au  sujet  du
Lethe  et  d'Ovide  est  marque  au  coin  d'associations  oniriques
cryptomnesiques.  Si  M.  Myers  inspirait  le  medium,  il  n'aurait
pas  parle  de  Pomone,  de  Janus,  de  Saturne,  d'Olympe,  de
Neptune,  d'Ajax,  d'Ulysse,  de  Centaures,  de  Cyclopes,  de  Sibylle,
de  Meduse,  de  Pygmalion.  Tout  cela  est  dans  les  Metamorphoses.
Janus  et  Saturne:  histoire  de  Picus  (XVI.,  1,  320  et  s.) ;
Pomone  et  garden  (XIV.,  623);  Ajax  et  Ulysse,  bateaux
(XIII.);  Cyclopes  et  Centaures  (XIV,  IX.,  XII);  Sibylle
(XIV.);  Neptune,  Troie,  trident  (XL);  Meduse  (IV,  780  s.),
etc.  II  n'y  a  pas  d'associations  logiques  et  intelligentes  dans
tout  ce  "  deballage " ;  les  souvenirs  des  Metamorphoses  sont
deroules  pele-mele  avec  une  predominance  des  liens  de  contiguiU.

Mme  Piper  a  certainement  connaissance  des  Metamorphoses
d'Ovide ;  cette  connaissance  a  pu  disparaitre  de  sa  conscience
normale,  c'est  pour  cela  que  les  mots  qu'elle  prononce  sont
sans  association  logique  et  ont  tous  les  caracteres  de  l'imagina-
tion  onirique.  Ce  trait  est  bien  marque  dans  les  allusions  a
Sibylle,  Muses,  Graces,  Hero,  Phyllis,  Olympe,  Mercure  qui
figurent  dans  les  poemes  de  Virgile ;  aucun  lien  raisounable
n'apparait  dans  le  melange  de  ces  noms  disparates.

II  ne  faut  pas  nous  presenter  comme  l'indication  d'une
erudition  quelconque  (Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  147)  l'emploi  de  Sibylle
au  pluriel,  ni  l'association  d'Icare  et  d'Anchise ;  ce  dernier  detail
est  du  reste  convaincant ;  il  demontre  la  nature  illogique  du
lien  entre  les  noms  propres ;  ils  n'ont  qu'une  association
materielle  de  contiguiU  (VIe  chant  de  YEnSide). Je  ne  puis

1 II  semble  que  la  famille  de  M.  Myers  ait  une  impression  opposee  a  celle  des
experinientateurs. (Voy.  lettre  au  Times,  citee  dans  Light,  1908,  p.  526).

H


114


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


com  prendre  qu'on  transforme  ce  caractere  onirique  en  signe
d'intelligence  refk'chie.

Mais  les  raisonnements  de  M.  Piddington  ne  reclament  aucune
precision ;  nous  en  avons  souvent  la  preuve.1  Un  des
exemples  les  plus  curieux  de  l'a  peu  pres  scientitique  dont  se
contentent  les  experimentateurs,  se  trouve  dans  les  allusions
que  Ton  nous  montre,  dans  les  textes  de  Mine  Verrall,  a  l'ode
d'Horace.  Le  controle  MyersP  a  cominis  pas  mal  d'erreurs
dans  cet  incident,  transformant  oniriquement  Odes  en  Odesies
et  Odyssee  (Vol.  XXII.,  p.  381),  et  n'indiquant  jamais  claire-
ment  l'ode  dont  il  veut  parler ;  mais  M.  Piddington  n'en  est
pas  embarrasse.  II  serait  difficile  d'embarrasser  un  dialecticien
auquel  il  importe  relativement  peu  que  l'allusion  soit  a  la
reincarnation,  comme  le  pense  Mme  Verrall,  ou  a  la  superiority
de  la  vie  future  comme  le  croit  M.  Piddington  (Vol.  XXII.,
p.  407).  Des  raisonnements  fondes  sur  des  k  peu  pres  aussi
indi'termines  sont  Men  faibles.

Pour  etayer  son  interpretation  de  la  reponse  synibolique
qu'aurait  donnee  MyersP  en  faisant  allusion  aux  poemes
publics  de  M.  Myers,  M.  Piddington  a  cherche,  dans  les  textes
anciens  de  Mme  Verrall,  les  mentions  directes  ou  indirectes
relatives  k  l'ode  d'Archytas.  II  en  retient  une  qui  inerite
d'etre  examinee.  Le  12  Mars  1901,  cinq  ans  plus  tot,  Mme
Verrall  aurait  ecrit  adscripta  glebis:  le  27  Avril  ascripta  es
glcbac,  o  libera  animam,  etc.  (Vol.  XXIAr.,  pp.  163,  164).  C'est
la  traduction  latine  de  "  earth-bound  "  ;  on  se  demande  par  quelle
combinaison  d'associations,  Mme  Verrall  a  pu  y  voir  une  allusion
a  l'Ode  d'Horace  ?  Voici  comment  elle  y  est  arrivee.  Elle
accepte  la  traduction  proposee  par  certains  commentateurs  du
mot  grec  eirdpovpos  qui  existe  seulement  dans  YOdyssSe.  II
est  place  dans  la  bouche  d'Achille,  qui  aimerait  mieux  etre
paysan  travaillant  pour  un  modique  salaire  chez  un  homme
pauvre,  que  de  regner  sur  les  ombres.  Or  le  commentateur
applique  une  phrase  latine  employee  pour  definir  un  etat  social
du  moyen  age,  ;t  un  etat  social  anterieur  de  vingt-cinq  siecles,

1  Voy.  par  exemple  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  12.  On  trouve  une  allusion  an  poeme  de
Browning  "My  Star"  dans  ces  mots  Androsace,  Carthusian,  Candelabrum.  II
est  indifferent  a  la  conclusion  que  Candelabrum  soit  une  fleur  ou  un  chandelier  ;
androsace  est  un  noni  de  genre,  on  Fapplique  a  une  e«pece  (alpine,  androsace  rubra
je  crois).


lxv.]  Correspondances  croisees  et  la  Methode  experimentale.  115

dans  lequel  le  serf  inscrit  a  la  glebe  n'existait  pas,  au  moins
a  ma  connaissance.  II  n'y  avait  pas  de  registres  fonciers  et
les  droits  immobiliers  setablissaient  par  temoignage  (voy.  par
exemple  la  loi  de  Gortyne  1,  2,  14,  17,  18).  L'idee  d' "  ad-
scriptus  "  n'est  pas  inipliquees  dans  eirdpovpo<;  que  les  diction-
naires  traduisent  par  rusticus.  L'esclavage  d'ailleurs,  au  temps
d'Ulysse,  n'etait  pas  compatible  avec  le  salaire  dont  parle  Achille.
Si  je  ne  me  trompe,  le  commentateur  dont  Mme  Verrall  accepte
la  paraphrase  commet  une  erreur  juridique  et  etymologique.
M.  Myers  n'aurait  pas  commis  cette  derniere,  car  il  connaissait
bien  la  langue  grecque.

Une  analyse  precise  des  faits  conduit  a  des  conclusions  fort
differentes  de  celles  que  M.  Piddington  propose  (Vol.  XXIV.,
p.  168).1  Xon  seulement  Intelligence  automatique  n'est  pas
celle  d'un  helleniste  et  d'un  lettre,  mais  on  pent  montrer  qu'elle
est  empreinte  des  caracteres  propres  aux  operations  mentales
oniriques,  telles  qu'elles  apparaissent  dans  les  processus  sublimi-
naux  inferieurs.  J'essayerai  de  le  demontrer,  pour  repondre  a
l'invitation  du  rapporteur  lui-meme.

Je  veux  auparavant  analyser  encore  quelques  correspondances
parmi  les  plus  remarquables.  J'emprunterai  a  Mile  Johnson
le  cas  "  sevens "  dans  lequel  les  nouvelles  methodes  conduisent
aux  resultats  les  plus  imprevus.  Je  laisserai  de  cote  des
banalites  comme  Janiculum,  yellow,  blue  flowers,  church,  etc.
II  y  a  quelques  cas  de  telepathie  probable,  tel  que  l'incident
de  la  hole  de  poison  oubliee  clans  le  laboratoire  des  fils  de  Sir
Oliver  Lodge  (Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  216).  Savonarole  est  un  cas
interessant  pourtant  (ibid.,  p.  211);  Mile  Verrall  habille  les
chartreux  en  noir,  erreur  que  n'admet  pas  Mine  Verrall ;  elle
en  conclut  qu'il  y  avait  d'autres  moines  dans  la  procession.
Sur  deux  ou  trois  details  banals,  elle  reconnait  la  procession
decrite  dans  Romola.  A  la  menie  epoque,  8  Octobre,  Mme
Holland  ecrit  "  ask  his  daughter  about  the  dream — grey  monks
of  long  ago,"  ce  qui  n'a  rien  de  commun  avec  une  procession
et  fait  allusion  a  un  reve. II  n'y  a  done  visiblement  aucune

JM.  Myers  ne  penserait  pas  autrement,  si  j'en  juge  par  ce  qu'il  ecrivait
dans  le  Journal,  S.P.I',  aout  1885:  "The  gross  want  of  comprehension  of  the
subjects  inquired  about,  and  the  palpable  blunders  which  the  replies  contain,
seem  to  me  to  preclude  us  from  regarding  the  case  as  affording  evidence  of
the  guidance  of  a  scientific  spirit."


116


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


continuite  de  conscience  entre  le  controle  de  Mme  Holland  et
ceux  des  dames  Verrall ;  la  concordance  assez  vague  resultant
de  l'allusion  banale  a  des  moines  ne  depasse  certainement  pas
les  limites  d'une  coincidence  fortuite.

"Sevens"  (Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  222)  nous  transporte  dans  des
spheres  plus  elevees.  Sept  automatistes  font  allusion  au  nombre
mystique  sept,  nombre  banal,  et  dont  tous  les  occultistes  ont
abuse.  D'abord  Mme  Piper :  M.  Dorr  lui  repete  en  Avril  et
Mai  1908  un  quatrain  en  mauvais  latin,  que  les  membres  du
Tavern  Club  de  Boston  imprimaient  sur  leurs  menus.  Hodgson
en  etait  membre ;  mais  comme  controle  il  ne  peut  donner
une  traduction  correcte.  II  commet  des  erreurs  qui  revelent
1'inHuence  de  la  conscience  normale  de  Mme  Piper :  par  exemple,
mori  est  traduit  par  custom  (habitude)  et  non  par  mourir.  Erreur
explicable,  a  cause  de  la  prononciation,  qui  rapproche  ce  mot
de  "  more,"  custom,  habit,  en  latin ;  Webster  donne,  avec  la
traduction,  les  expressions  courantes  anglaises,  more  Hibernico,
more  majorum,  more  suo ;  propositum  est  traduit  par  "  habit "
par  simple  attraction.  Ce  contre-sens  est  utilise  comme  corres-
pondance  croisee,  alors  que  son  apparition  est  explicable
normalement.

Dans  les  vers  latins  il  y  a  "  angelorum  chorus"  que  Mme
Piper  traduit  par  "  Angel  band."

Le  8  Mai,  au  reveil,  Mme  Piper  prononce  "Habit,  We  are
Seven,  Clock!  Tick,  Tick,  Tick,  Stairs."  Mile  Johnson  y
voit  une  allusion  a  un  poeme  de  Longfellow,  "  The  Old
Clock  on  the  Stairs,"  mais  c'est  simplemeut  une  allusion  a  la
pendule  de  l'escalier  du  Tavern  Club  (see  Proc.  Vol.  XXV.,
p.  298).

Le  12  Mai  "  We  are  seven"  est  attribue  a,  Wordsworth,  mais
le  controle  ajoute :  "  but  we  were  seven  in  the  distance  as  a
matter  of  fact."  Puis  il  pretend,  inexactement  je  crois,  avoir
donne  divers  messages  a  Mme  Verrall.

Le  27  Avril  1908,  Mme  Verrall  ecrit  des  chiffres  ou  figurent
bien  en  evidence  les  nombres  3,  6  et  7.  Ce  n'est  pas  rare
dans  ses  textes  (voy.  Vol.  XX.,  pp.  245,  272,  321,  No.  9,  12,
14,  15,  27;  p.  418,  No.  13  d.,  etc.).

Le  8  Mai,  elle  ecrit  des  vers,  apres  avoir  lu  Dante ;  elle
fait  probablement  allusion  a,  Virgile.  On  y  voit  "  Blest  are
the  messengers  .  .  .  borne  far  aloft  on  oarage  of  their  high


lxv.]  Gorrespondances  croise'es  et  la  Methode  experimentale.  117

wings,  etc."  Ces  anges  qui  planent,  soutenus  par  leurs  ailes,
rappellent  a  Mile  Johnson  .  .  .  l'echelle  de  Jacob  decrite  par
Dante  !

Mile  H.  Verrall  a  son  tour  ecrit :

Le  29  Avril :  the  figure  3  that  seems  wanted.

Le  4  Mai :  8,  eight,  A  a  triangle.

Le  11  Mai,  un  texte  que  Ton  trouvera  page  228,  Vol.  XXIV.

Le  commentaire  de  ce  texte  fait  par  Mile  Johnson  est
deconcertant.  II  y  est  question  de  l'echelle  de  Jacob ;  d'une
toupie  qui  tourne,  plusieurs  couleurs  qui  se  fondent  en  une
seule  en  tournant.  Cette  allusion  a  un  jeu  commun,  devient
pour  Mile  Johnson,  h  qui  Mine  Verrall  le  suggere,  la  roue
mentionnee  au  Xe  chant  du  Paradis.  Eien  ne  legitime  cette
interpretation ;  mais  Mile  Johnson  la  prend  comrae  point  de
depart  d'un  enchainement  allegorique  qui  conduit  a  des  cercles
accomplissant  leurs  revolutions,  a  Iris,  a,  l'arc  en  ciel,  mentionne
dans  le  texte  de  Mile  Verrall.  De  la  nous  passons  a  Platon
et  au  Mythe  d'Er,  qui  nous  amenent  aux  huit  spheres  celestes
et  a  d'autres  correspondances.

Toutes  ces  hypotheses  paraissent  peu  solides ;  il  est  fort
possible  que  Mile  Verrall  n'ait  aucune  connaissance  de  Dante ;
elle  ne  l'a  jamais  lu,  dit-elle.  Mais  on  peut  connaitre  un  poete
sans  l'avoir  lu,  alors  surtout  qu'il  a  la  celebrite  du  Florentin.
Qui  n'a  pas  vu  les  gravures  de  Gustave  Dore  ?  Je  ne  puis
penser  qu'une  jeune  fille  aussi  instruite  ignore  completement
la  Divine  Comklu ;  il  est  inutile  d'insister,  car  Mile  Johnson
admet  la  possibilite  d'une  simple  influence  telepathique  entre
les  dames  Verrall.

Toutefois,  les  allusions  sont  fort  incertaines ;  rien  ne  permet
de  voir  dans  ces  mots  "  the  seven  branched  candlestick  it  is  an
image  .  .  .  seven  candles  united  in  one  light  and  seven  colours
in  the  rainbow  too,"  une  allusion  a  la  procession  decrite  dans
le  XXIV6  chant  du  Purgatoire.  Les  seuls  points  de  contact
sont  les  sept  flambeaux  (candles)  unis  en  une  lumiere  et  les
sept  couleurs  de  l'arc  en  ciel.  Ce  sont  la  des  details  d'une
grande  banalite,  alors  surtout  qu'il  venait  d'etre  fait  mention
dans  le  texte  du  chandelier  a  sept  branches.  Les  autres
details  ne  concordent  pas.  Dante  ne  parle  pas  des  sept  eglises
ni  du  chandelier  a  sept  branches,  Mile  Verrall  ne  parle  pas
des  sept  nymphes,  tout  indiquees  pourtant,  ni  des  vieillards,


118


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[PAKT


ni  des  quatre  animaux.  II  y  a  une  absence  complete  d'identi-
rication ;  Mile  Johnson  et  Mme  Verrall  reconnaissent  le
passage  a  des  details  indetermines.  En  realite,  le  texte  de
Mile  Verrall  est  une  paraphrase  du  nombre  7,  elle  le  termine
par  le  mot  de  Mme  Piper,  "  We  are  seven."

La  quatrieme  contribution  a  la  correspondance  est  due  k
une  dame  Frith;  en  Janvier  1908.  Mme  Verrall  tit  une
experience  qui  ne  donna  pas  les  resultats  cherches :  "  can
E.  H."  c'est-a-dire  le  controle  Hodgson  "  say  what  are  his  asso-
ciations with  the  words,  '  Climb  the  mount  of  Blessing.'  " 1  La
reponse  fit  allusion  au  mont  Pisgah  d'ou  Moise  apercut  la  terre
promise.  On  voit  une  reference  a  Dante  et  a  la  montagne  du
Purgatoire,  d'ou  Virgile  apeivut  le  Paradis,  ou  il  ne  pouvait  entrer.
Les  derniers  mots  de  la  reponse  sont  "till  the  mystic  seven2  lights
up  the  golden  candlestick  of  dawn."  II  y  a  une  concordance
avec  le  texte  de  Mile  Verrall,  que  Mme  Verrall  connaissait
depuis  le  6  Juin.  La  question  posee  le  14  Fevrier  1908  ne
regut  une  reponse  que  le  11  Juin,  soit  quatre  mois  apres,  ce
qui  est  une  mauvaise  condition  d'expe'rimentation.

Mme  Holland  intervient  ensuite ;  le  15  Juin  1908,  elle
reve  au  chiffre  6;  le  23  Juillet  elle  ecrit :  "there  should  be
three  at  least  in  accord,  and  if  possible  Seven  "  .  .  .  "  take  this
for  token  '  green  beyond  belief  .  .  .  Not  only  on  the  ocean
may  the  Green  Eay  appear."

La  repetition  du  mot  "  green "  impressionna  Mile  Johnson  ;
elle  chercha  ce  que  cela  pouvait  signifier  et  trouva .  .  .  une
nouvelle  allusion  a  Dante !  II  semble  ici  que  les  limites  de
rindetermination  soient  atteintes.  L'idee  de  vert  est  une
reference  au  XXXI6  chant  du  Purgatoire,  parce  que,  la,  il  est
parle  des  yeux  d'emeraude  de  Beatrice.  Toute  autre  couleur
aurait  egalement  etc  une  aussi  bonne  allusion,  si  vert  correspond
a  l'emeraude,  rouge  aurait  correspondu  au  griffon,  ou  aux  sept
personnages  couronnes  de  fieurs  rouges,  blanc  aux  vieillards
couronnes  de  lys,  jaune  aux  chandeliers  d'or,  etc.  Le  mot  le
plus  banal  sufht,  on  le  voit,  h  etablir  uue  correspondance.

Enfin,  le  25  Novembre,  Mme  Holland  apres  avoir  vu  Mile
Johnson,  ecrivit :  "  then  an  octave  struck  the  answer"  citation
de  Browning  (Vol.  XXIV,  p.  241).

1  Ces  mots  avaient  fait  1'objet  (Tun  article  de  Light,  1906,  p.  16.

2  The  mystical  number  seven,  Light,  1907,  p.  306.


lxv.]  Correspondances  croisees  et  la  Methode  experimentale.  119

Mme  Home  joue  le  sixieme  role.  Le  24  Juillet  1908,
elle  dit,  etant  entrancee :  "  seven  times  seven  and  seventy-
seven "  et  conseilla  de  eommuniquer  ces  mots  a  Mile  Johnson.

La  derniere  allusion  a  7  est  due  k  M.  Piddington  qui,  le
13  Juillet  1904,  avait  ecrit  une  lettre  "  posthume  "  (sic).  Elle
faisait  connaitre  son  intention,  s'il  survivait,  de  eommuniquer
k  un  sensitif  le  nombre  7.

" '  The  seven  lamps  of  architecture,'  '  the  seven  sleepers  of
Ephesus,'  'unto  seventy  times  seven,'  'we  are  seven,'  and  so
forth."  7  est  un  "  tic  "  chez  lui,  une  habitude,  "  habit "  (ibid.,
p.  244).

Evidemment,  il  y  avait  la  un  phenomene  supranormal.
Cette  croyance  etait  confirmee  par  le  reve  de  Mme  Holland,
a  qui  on  avait  montre  en  songe  un  vieux  carnet,  ou  etaient
ecrits  ces  mots,  "Since  in  1872  a  dear  friend  chose  as  a
sign  by  which  to  communicate  with  me  the  figure  6,  I,  in
my  turn,  will  try,  in  the  time  to  come,  to  send  the  figure  6, —
simply  the  sign  of  6  "  (ibid.,  p.  238).  Un  nombre  etait
indique  comme  le  sujet  d'une  communication  posthume.  La
coincidence  ne  portait  que  sur  ce  point,  puisque  les  deux
chiffres  ne  concordaient  pas,  mais  le  choix  d'un  nombre  dans
ce  but  parut  k  M.  Piddington  une  chose  difficile  k  deviner.
Enfin  Mme  Piper  avait  parle  de  "  habit "  et  de  "  tick,"  ce
qui  rappelait  encore  les  expressions  de  la  lettre  posthume.

Ce  n'est  pas  tout.  Mile  Johnson  nous  apprend  que  le
phenomene  etait  prepare  depuis  quatre  ans.  Au  moment  ou
M.  Piddington  ecrivait  sa  lettre,  Mme  Verrall  produisait  un
texte,  "...  it  is  something  contemporary  that  you  are  to
record — note  the  hour — in  London  half  the  message  has  come  "
(ibid.,  p.  246).  II  est  evident  que  e'est  une  allusion  a  la
lettre  de  M.  Piddington ;  cette  derniere  en  effet  ne  contient
que  des  references  a  7,  Dante  n'y  apparait  pas.  Done  il  n'y
a  que  la  moitie  du  message  total  dans  la  lettre.

Cette  interpretation  est  appuyee  sur  le  texte  de  Mile
Verrall  du  15  Juillet  1904,  ou  on  lit  "Deficit  omne,"  ce  qui
peut  etre  regarde  "  as  equivalent  to  Mrs.  Verrall's  more  definite
statement"  (Vol.  XXIV,  p.  248).

Voila  done  une  correspondance  croisee  ou  7  automatistes  se
rencontrent  sur  le  mot  7,  plus  ou  moins  combine  avec  des
allusions  k  Dante.


120


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


Si  on  analyse  avec  impartialite  le  systerne  de  Mile  Johnson,
on  trouve  d'abord  que  les  allusions  a  Dante  sont  incertaines,
comme  je  l'ai  indique,  sauf  pour  Mine  Verrall,  qui  lisait,  au
moment  de  la  production  de  ses  textes  de  1908,  le  Purgatoire,
Chez  Mile  Verrall  on  ne  trouve  que  l'echelle  de  Jacob,  sept
flambeaux  et  sept  couleurs  de  l'arc  en  ciel,  ce  qui  est
insuffisant  pour  determiner  l'allusion  avec  certitude.  II  faut
remarquer  au  surplus  que,  dans  le  texte  de  Mme  Verrall,  il
n'y  a  pas  d'allusion  a  l'echelle  de  Jacob :  ses  anges  planent
soutenus  par  leurs  ailes,  tandis  que  les  anges  de  Jacob  montent
et  descendent  sur  leur  echelle ;  les  deux  images  ne  concordent
ni  dans  leur  expression  verbale  ni  dans  leur  sens,  sauf  sur  le
theme  "  anges,"  qui  est  banal.  De  meme,  il  faut  beaucoup  de
bonne  volonte  pour  voir  une  allusion  au  Purgatoire  dans  les
mots  le  mystique  sept  et  le  chandelier  d'or,  green  beyond
belief,  the  green  Pay,  et  seven  times  seven.

"  The  mystic  seven  "  est  une  banalite.  Le  caractere  mystique
du  nombre  7  est  un  lieu  commun  pour  tous  ceux  qui  se  sont
occupes  des  soi-disant  sciences  occultes.  Mme  Blavatsky  (Secret
Doctrine  I.,  114),  parle  des  "Seven  mystic  sages."  Pres  de
cinq  colonnes  sont  consaerees  a  ce  nombre  dans  l'lndex  (pp.
257-260).

Quant  a  "  Seven  times  seven,"  ou  49,  c'est  une  reminiscence
de  Stainton  Moses.  On  voit,  Light,  1897,  p.  183:  "when  we
commenced  to  influence  you  ...  we  told  you  of  an  organised
band  of  49  spirits  who  were  concerned  in  the  working  of  our
plan."  Et,  1892,  p.  189:  "seven  circles  of  seven  spirits"  sont
attaches  a  M.  Moses. Imperator  en  est  le  chef.

Le  journal  Light  est  une  veritable  mine  d'allusions  aux  textes
medianiques.  J'en  recommande  l'analyse  a  Mile  Johnson  et
a  Mme  Verrall.  La  premiere  verra  (n°  du  5  Novembre  1904)
une  analyse  de  Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry  de  Myers  ou  est
cite  le  passage  reproduit  par  elle  "  from  ten  to  sixteen,  etc."
II  y  a  toute  une  serie  de  relations  entre  East  et  West  dans
le  meme  volume :  "  there  is  something  mysterious  in  the  leaning
of  the  East  towards  the  West  just  now  (29  Oct.  1904);  Light
cometh  from  the  East  (1904,  p.  270);  where  farther  East  and
farthest  West  meet  .  .  .  ;  the  light  has  moved  away  from  the
East"  (ibid.);  "Pharaoh's  daughter"  est  meme  imprime,  p.  224.
II  ne  semble  pas  que  les  experimentateurs  anglais  aient  pense


lxv.]  Correspondances  croisees  et  la  Methods  experimentale.  121

a  cette  source  normale  de  renseignements  quest  la  litterature
spiritualiste.  lis  y  auraient  trouve  a  peu  pres  toutes  leurs
correspondances  croisees.  C'est  dans  l'oeuvre  de  M.  Moses,  que
personnellement  j'admire  beaucoup  ;i  cause  de  son  elevation
morale,  que  Ton  trouve  la  source  du  message  de  Mme  Home,
et  de  bien  d'autres.

Done,  pas  d'allusion  certaine  a  Dante :  le  contraire  est
probable  et  j'indique  la  source  vraisemblable  de  sept  fois  sept.

Quant  aux  correspondances  sur  ce  nombre,  elles  sont  vrai-
ment  trop  banales  pour  n'etre  pas  explicables  par  de  simples
coincidences.

La  lettre  de  M.  Piddington  n'ajoute  rien  a  ces  circonstances  ;
aucune  des  idees  qu'il  voulait  transmettre  n'a  6te  reproduite.
De  plus,  il  faut  conserver  notre  bon  sens  et  ne  pas  lui  imposer
de  trop  lourds  sacrifices.  Dans  le  message  de  Mme  Verrall
du  13  Juillet,  rien  n'indique  l'idee  d'une  communication  a
M.  Piddington.  Sa  lettre  n'est  pas  un  message  arrive  k  Londres,
mais  bien  l'annonce  d'un  message  qu'il  transmettra  s'il  le  peut
apres  sa  mort.  L'idee  du  texte  de  Mme  Verrall  est  inapplicable
a  la  lettre  de  M.  Piddington.  A  cette  date,  Mme  Verrall
essayait  de  correspondre  avec  Mme  Porbes  (Vol.  XX.,  p.  267),
et  on  trouve  le  mot  message  applique  a  Mme  Forbes  le  23
Novembre  1903,  les  25  Janvier,  21  et  28  Decembre  1904;
une  allusion  a  la  difficult^  de  transmettre  les  mots  grecs  (du
Symposium)  par  cette  dame  est  faite  le  15  Juillet  (Vol.  XX.,
p.  408).  Telle  est  probablement  la  veritable  allusion  au  message
a  demi  arrive  a  Londres.

Enfin,  pouiquoi  penser  que  Myers-Verrall  fera  une  prediction
admirable  a  quatre  annees  de  distance  et  revelera  les  pensees
de  M.  Piddington,  alors  que  dans  le  meme  texte  il  se  trompe
completement  sur  sa  propre  lettre  postbume  ?  Cela  est  bien
peu  vraisemblable.

On  pourrait  faire  des  critiques  semblables  sur  les  autres  details
de  la  correspondance,  cela  allongerait  inutilement  l'analyse.  Je
finirai  en  signalant  le  long  espace  de  temps  qui  s'ecoule  entre
le  commencement  et  la  fin  de  la  correspondance,  plus  de  quatre
ans,  et  les  delais  qui  separent  les  interventions  des  differents
mediums.  Cela  rend  leurs  concordances  inutilisables  pour  une
demonstration  scientifique  de  leur  realite,  a  moins  de  se  fier
implicitement  a  eux,  ce  qui  est  une  erreur  de  metbode.


122


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


La  correspondance  sur  Sesame  and  Lilies  est  d'une  grande
banalite ;  j'en  dirai  autant  de  door  et  de  key  que  nous  retrouvons
d'ailleurs  dans  les  experiences  faites  avec  Mrne  Willett.  La,
Sir  0.  Lodge  n'a  pas  experiments  avec  la  prudence  h  laquelle
il  nous  a  accoutumes.

II  demande,  par  lettre,  au  controle  de  Mine  Willett,  ce  que
lui  rappelle  le  Lethe.  La  reponse  ne  fut  obtenue  qu'au  bout
de  quatre  mois ;  le  medium  a  conserve  pendant  tout  ce  temps
la  lettre  de  Sir  Oliver  Lodoe.

-Te  pense  pourtant  que  Mme  Willett  n'a  pas  fraude ;  la
mediocrite  des  responses  prouve  qu'elle  ne  s'est  pas  renseignee,
et  elle  nous  donne  des  details  etablissant  sa  sincerite.

II  y  a  trois  ordres  de  faits  k  analyser  dans  ces  experiences :
d'abord  l'indication  du  nom  de  M.  Dorr :  elle  est  due  k  l'impru-
dence  de  Mme  Verrall  qui  avait  averti  "  les  controles  de  Mme
Willett  (sic) "  des  bons  resultats  donnes  par  les  seances  de  M.
Dorr  avec  Mme  Piper  (Vol.  XXV.,  p.  125).  Dans  les  indi-
cations donnees  par  Mme  Verrall  sur  ses  communications  avec
Mme  Willett,  cette  information  n'est  pas  signalee,  il  me  semble ;
l'omission  d'un  renseignement  aussi  important  serait  un  grave
oubli.

L'emergence  du  nom  de  M.  Dorr  ne  depasse  done  pas  les
limites  de  la  divination  subliminale,  et  je  ne  vois  aucun  element
supranormal  dans  ce  fait,  malgre  la  mise  en  scene  accompagnant
sa  production.

Le  second  point  est  la  connaissance  que  le  controle  Myers
montre  des  experiences  faites  avec  Mme  Piper.  Sur  ce  point,
il  est  visible  qu'il  connait  simplement  ce  qua  lu  Mme  Willett
(au  moins  les  volumes  XXI.  et  XXII.  des  Proceedings)  et  qu'il
se  trompe  sur  la  portee  des  experiences  de  M.  Dorr.  Ce  dernier
(Vol.  XXV.,  p.  127),  dit-il,  desire  que  le  controle  montre
"  different  aspects  of  thought  underlying  which  unity  is  to  be
found."  Ces  phrases  sont  empruntees  a  Mile  Johnson  :  "  the
statements  ...  of  one  writer  were  by  no  means  a  simple
reproduction  ...  of  the  other  but  seemed  to  represent  different
aspects  of  the  same  idea  (Vol.  XXL,  p.  373);  there  is  .  .  .
one  coherent  idea  underlying  both"  (Vol.  XXL,  p.  375);  on
trouve  l'idee  de  "  access  to  hnoivlcdgc  shown  elsewhere "  dans  le
rapport  de  M.  Piddington.  M.  Dorr  voulait  surtout  examiner
les  souvenirs  classiques  de  Myers-Piper  (Vol.  XXV.,  p.  120);


lxv.]  Correspondances  croisees  et  la  Methocle  experimentale.  123


Mme  Willett  attribue  a  M.  Dorr  les  pensees  et  les  ex-
pressions de  Mile  Johnson  et  de  M.  Piddington  quelle  connait
normalement.

Quant  au  troisieme  point,  il  concerne  justement  les  souvenirs
classiques  de  Myers- Willett.  Celui-ci  ne  dit  rien  d'Ovide,  mais
est  plein  d'allusions  Virgiliennes ;  or  Mme  Willett  a  lu  les
etudes  de  Myers  sur  Virgile  et  possede  un  ouvrage  sur  le
poete  latin.  II  est  naturel  que  Ton  trouve  des  reminiscences
des  unes  et  de  l'autre.

(1)  "  Once  only  does  the  soul  descend  the  way  that  leads  to
incarnation"  (Vol.  XXV.,  p.  123),  est  inspire  par  Spirit
Teachings  plutot  que  par  Tennyson.  "  Christ  existant  in  the
ages  past  descends  to  incarnation  (p.  259-260,  Memorial  Edition);
Reincarnation  .  .  .  was  not  true"  (Light,  1893,  p.  76).

(2)  "  The  llcnding  of  the  essence  with  the  instrument "  ne
rappelle  pas  mens  agitat  molem,  mais  plutot  "  Veiling  in
human  flesh  the  radiance  of  his  pure  spirit"  (Memorial  Edition,
p.  259).

(3)  "  Tu  Marcellus  eris"  est  une  banalite.

(4)  "  In  valle  reducta "  est  emprunte  ;i  un  texte  Mac  (Vol.
XXV.,  p.  137),  ou  etait  indiquee  la  source  de  la  citation:  VJ°
chant  de  YEniide.  L'association  du  rameau  d'or,  des  colombes
et  des  ombres  est  done  naturelle  et  normale,  utant  donnee  cette
indication.  Ces  mots  figurent  d'ailleurs  dans  des  textes  publics
aux  Proceedings,  Vols.  XXL,  XXII.

(5)  "the  door  to  which  I  found  no  hey"  (Vol.  XXV,  p.  130)
est  emprunte  a  Omar  Khayyam,  soit :  mais  la  citation  est
banale  et  il  y  a  une  serie  d'articles  dont  ces  mots  forment  le
theme  dans  Light,  1905,  p.  99;  the  Key,  an  allegory,  by
Mme  d'Esperance.  Des  savants  ne  peuvent  ouvrir  la  porte
d'une  chambre  secrete :  un  enfant  arrive  disant  "  I  have  found
the  key  .  .  .  and  lo !  the  door  was  open."  L'allegorie  est
reprise,  p.  124  et  155.  II  semble  que  Myers-Willett  y  fasse
allusion.

(6)  La  mention  d'Haggi  Baba  a  ete  rattachee  par  les  com-
mentateurs  au  conte  d'Ali  Baba;  en  realite,  l'emergence  de  ce
nom  depend  entierement  de  door  et  de  hey  et  se  relie  a  une
publication  de  James  Morier  The  adventures  of  LTajji  Baba
of  Lspahan,  ou  il  est  question  de  porte  et  de  cle  (S.P.R.
Journal,  Vol.  XV.,  p.  101). L'allusion  au  conte  des  quarante


124


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


voleurs  n'existe  pas,  car  aucune  cle  n'ouvrait  la  porte  de  la
caverne  des  voleurs :  elle  obeissait  a  une  formule  magique
seulement.  Nous  avons  encore  la  un  exemple  d'interpretation
hative,  comme  dans  l'attribution  a  Tennyson  d'une  citation
empruntee  a  un  hynine  religieux  (conf.  Vol.  XXV.,  p.  140  et
Journal,  Vol.  XV.,  p.  104).

Dans  le  texte  du  10  Fevrier  (Vol.  XXV,  p.  148)  nous
trouvons  des  associations  normales :  Lydia,  et  l'Ode  d'Horace,
bien  connue  (I.,  8e) ;  Seneque,  Ulysse,  qui  n'ont  aucune  associa-
tion avec  le  Lethe.  Seneque  a  ecrit  un  livre  pour  consoler
sa  mere  Helvia,  mais  il  a  fait  au  Senat  l'apologie  du  meurtre
d'Agrippine  et  n'est  pas  cite  comme  un  modele  de  piete  filiale.

Ulysse  rencontre  sa  mere  Anticlee  lorsqu'il  evoque  les  morts,
mais  ce  fils  pieux  ne  laisse  sa  mere  approcher  de  lui  qu'apres
avoir  termine  ses  affaires  avec  Tiresias.  Business  is  business
(Ochjs.  XL,  88-89).

Lemergence  de  nightingale  s'associe  avec  le  Lethe,  a  cause
du  4e  vers  de  l'ode  de  Keats,  qui  est  tres  connue  (Gems,  228).
II  est  possible  que  Mme  Willett  connaisse  le  fameux  passage
des  Gdorgiques  "  Qualis  .  .  .  Philomela  sub  umbra,"  et  dans
ce  cas  Ulysse,  les  ombres,  Philomele,  le  Rossignol,  etc.,  sont  des
associations  oniriques  de  type  connu.  Mais  je  ne  pense  pas
que  l'allusion  a  Keats  soit  correcte,  parce  que  ce  poete,  dans
son  ode  au  rossignol,  dit  que  son  esprit  s'endort  dans  l'oubli
tandis  que  le  controle  veut  montrer  qu'il  n'a  rien  oublie.  II
n'y  a  done  qu'un  lien  verbal  (Lethcwards)  entre  l'idee  de  Keats
et  l'idee  differente  de  Myers-Willett.

Voih't  ce  qu'une  analyse  simple  fait  penser ;  voici  ce
qu'imagine  Mme  Verrall :  l'allusion  a  Shelley  est  expliquee
par  les  mots  once  more  ye  Laurels  qui  sont  empruntes  au
Lycidas  de  Milton,  prototype  de  YAdonais  de  Shelley,  dans
lequel  on  lit  (stance  XVI L),  Thy  spirit's  sister,  the  lorn  nightin-
gale. ... Ce  qui  est  une  allusion  voilee  a  l'ode  de  Keats !

Comme  dans  YAdonais  on  trouve  Echo,  Hyacinthe  et  Nar-
cisse  dont  a  parle  Mme  Piper  dans  les  seances  Dorr,  l'allusion
est  manifeste.  C'est  intentionnellement  que  Myers-Willett  n'a
pas  nomme  Ovide  (Vol.  XXV.,  p.  159)  !

Tout  cela  est  contenu  implicitement  dans  Shelley  et  once
more  ye  Laurels.

On  trouve  cependant  ces  mots  ailleurs  que  dans  Adonais ;


lxv.]  Gorrespondances  croisees  et  la  Methode  experimentale.  125

voyez  Narcisse,  Hyacinthe  dans  The  Sensitive  Plant ;  Hyacinth,
Echo,  Apollo,  sont  dans  Promethie.  Toutes  ces  allusions  sont
banales.

II  suffit  a  Mme  Verrall  pour  relever  une  correspondance,
qu'il  y  ait  l'indication  d'un  poeme,  par  une  citation,  du  nom
d'un  autre  poete  et  une  analogie  quelconque  entre  la  premiere
ceuvre  et  le  second  poete.  Une  pareille  maniere  de  raisonner
n'est  pas  serieusement  discutable,  car  on  peut  trouver  toutes
sortes  de  correspondances  dans  des  conditions  aussi  indeter-
minees.

En  realite,  Mme  Willett  ecrit  une  foule  de  reminiscences
empruntees  aux  Proceedings ;  Shelley,  Keats,  Writ  in  water
(Vol.  XXL,  p.  355),  Laurels,  Scribe,  Sybil,  flavicomata,  Waters
of  Babylon,  Zion,  l'allusion  a  l'ornbre  d'Achille,  etc.,  figurent
dans  ces  documents.  On  ne  trouve  rien  d'original  dans  les
textes  de  Mme  Willett,  tout  est  emprunte,  ou  banal.

Quant  aux  connaissances  litteraires  du  controle  Myers-Willett,
elles  sont  manifestement  d'ordre  inferieur.  II  confond  les  deux
Ajax ;  la  traduction  de  eV  c>e  <paei  kui  oXecraov  n'est  pas
"  though  it  should  blind  me,"  mais  "  detruis  moi  (si  tu  le
veux)  mais  a,  la  lumiere."

II  faut  prendre  garde  a  l'imagination.  Je  vais  en  montrer
les  dangers  pratiques  en  indiquant  a  Mme  Verrall  une
correspondance  imaginaire  dans  laquelle  elle  trouvera  les  plus
surprenantes  coincidences.  C'est  en  examinant  les  textes  Mac
que  cette  demonstration  peut  se  faire.

Le  16  Mars  (Vol.  XXIV,  p.  297)  Mile  Verrall  cite  un
quatrain,  inexactement  attribue  a  Victor  Hugo,  parle  de  la
rose  de  Saron,  de  "  Gautier,  and  Hugo,  those  together  types  to
be  compared.  Unless  there  is  a  possibility  of  setting  the  two
side  by  side  there  would  be  no  opportunity."

Le  27  Juillet  le  texte  Mac  porte  "A  little  love  and  then
the  joy  fades  and  the  rose  is  crumpled  and  withers  up — fane. —
French  (fane)  .  .  .  hollow  and  mortal  vain  is  life  without
a  meaning."

Cela  rappelle  a  Mme  Verrall  une  poesie  de  "  Victor  Hugo "
qui  hd  est  iris  familifrre,  et  dont  sa  fille  a  cite  la  premiere
stance ;  "  La  vie  est  vaine,  un  peu  d'amour,  un  peu  de  haine
et  puis  bonjour."  Les  souvenirs  de  Mme  Verrall  (Vol.  XXIV.,
p.  298)  sont  en  realite incertains,  car  le  quatrain  n'est  pas


126


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


de  Victor  Hugo,  il  est  d'un  poete  peu  connu,  M.  de  Montenaeken  ;
il  est  cite  dans  Trilby,  roman  de  Du  Maurier,  paru  en  1894
(Vol.  XXV.,  p.  321).  Cela  n'a  etc  decouvert  que  plus  tard,
car  sur  le  moment,  Mine  Verrall  ecrivit  a  Mile  Mac  pour  lui
demander  si  son  texte  ne  lui  rappelait  pas  wi  poeme  de  Hugo ;
et  Mile  Mac  de  repondre  affirmativemeut ;  l'allusion  lui  avait
paru  familiere.

L'original  etait  done  connu  de  toutes  les  parties;  le  fait
interessant  pour  Mme  Verrall,  est  la  correspondance  croisee
k  laquelle  il  sert ;  sa  fille  cite  une  strophe  et  Mile  Mac  l'autre.
II  n'y  a  pas  de  simple  coincidence,  parce  que  la  mention  d'une
rose,  qui  apparait  dans  les  deux  textes,  les  fixe  et  les  relie
(Vol.  XXIV,  p.  299).

La  comparaison  conseillee  entre  Gautier  et  Hugo  preoccupa
Mme  Verrall ;  "  (it)  would  be  completely  justified,"  dit-elle,  "  if,
for  instance,  there  existed  poems  by  Hugo  and  Gautier  charac-
teristic of  their  respective  authors  and  referring  to  the  topic
which  is  the  subject  of  the  poem  whose  second  stanza  is
quoted  in  the  script — the  emptiness  and  brevity  of  life "
(Vol.  XXV.,  p.  322).  Des  recherches  furent  faites  et  elles
aboutirent  aux  resultats  suivants :  rien  dans  l'ceuvre  poetique
de  Gautier  ni  dans  celle  de  Hugo  ne  rappelait  la  citation.

Mme  Verrall  fut  alors  mise  sur  la  voie  par  son  ecriture
automatique ;  elle  avait  eu  communication  des  proces-verbaux
des  seances  Piper,  de  Juillet  1910,  le  22  Septembre  de  la  meme
annee.  Le  mot  meditation  y  figurait  comme  etant  l'objet  d'une
correspondance  croisee.  II  y  etait  mis  en  vigoureux  relief.  Je
cite  les  passages  des  proces-verbaux  sur  lesquels  j 'attire  speciale-
ment  1 'attention  du  lecteur  (Vol.  XXV.,  pp.  331-332).

8  Juillet:  (au  re  veil)  "Myers,  Meditation"  (puis  des  vers  sont
dits;  on  ne  saisit  que):  "meditation  .  .  .  sleeping  dead.  Laurels
round  .  .  .  ever  grow.  Meditation  links  it."  (Les  vers  sont
repris):  "churchyard  tree  .  .  .  walked  with  gorgeous  feet  .  .  .
about  the  sleeping  dead.  Meditation  links  it.  Life  open  peace
completes  the  semblance  ..."

Le  16:  "Meditation  .  .  .  connects  it."  Lodge  fait  observer
qu'il  n'a  pas  trouve  de  poeme  intitule  "  Meditation."  "  Medita-
tion comes  out  in  Mrs.  Holland's  also  will  appear  at  Mrs.  Ws.
Wait  for  it."  Sur  demande  de  Lodge,  le  controle,  qui  est
Hodgson,  reprend  les  vers ;  il  ecrit :  "  Elegy  ...  as  through


lxv.]  Correspondanees  croisees  et  la  Methode  experimentale.  127

the  graveyard's  lone  retreat  my  Meditation  led  Slow  I  walked
with  cautious  feet  above  the  sleeping  dead."  Interroge  sur  le
poeme  dont  provient  la  citation,  le  controle  repond  "  Elegy."
"  Do  you  mean  Gray's  Elegy  ?  "  "  Yes "  (suggestion  fausse
aussitot  acceptee).  "  But  Meditation  will  play  a  most  interesting
part  and  the  last  two  lines "  seront  donnes  "  through  both
lights  "  (mediums)  etc.

Le  mot  meditation  apparait  immediatement  apres  la  lecture
des  proces-verbaux  dans  les  textes  de  Mme  Verrall ;  le  4
Octobre,  notamment :  "  Samaritan  .  .  .  M "  (et  une  lettre  qui
est  nettement  un  P)  ".  .  .  Meditation  is  a  good  long  word  in
M —  .  .  .  ask  about  the  Golden  Numbers.  It  seems  impossible
to  get  you  to  distinguish  sometimes  between  your  thoughts  and
ours, — and  you  constantly  overlook  idiosyncrasies  wh.  ought  to
tell  you  who  the  writer  is—"  (Vol.  XXV.,  p.  324).

Le  10  Octobre:  "...  Meditation,  Fancy's  child — no  sweet
Meditation  heavenly  maid  .  .  .  there  are  Augustine's  Medita-
tions— but  they  are  not  what  I  want.  It  is  a  purely  poetic
association  with  the  word.  Pacing  in  the  cloister  slow  no
cloister's  shade,  etc"  (ibid.,]).  324).

La  lumiere  se  fit  dans  l'esprit  de  Mme  Verrall  en  Janvier
1911  ;  elle  lut  un  livre  d'Edith  Wharton  qui  faisait  allusion  a
l'axiome  de  Gautier  (?)  "  Gautier's  axiom";  la  phrase  de  l'auteur
anglais  contrastait  la  rose  et  le  laurier.  En  meme  temps  elle
examina  1'ecriture  automatique  de  sa  fille  et  y  trouva  des  coin-
cidences avec  la  sienne,  notamment  des  instruments  a  cordes
etaient  l'objet  de  diverses  allusions,  et  "  toute  la  lyre  "  de  Hugo
etait  citee.

Le  27  Janvier,  elle  trouva  l'axiome  (?)  dans  un  poeme  de
Gautier  intitule  Meditation :

"  Ce  qui  charme  s'en  va,  ce  qui  fait  peine  reste
La  rose  vit  une  heure  et  le  cypres  cent  ans."

Elle  trouva  les  trois  conditions  remplies :  poeme  caracteristique
de  l'auteur  (affirmation  faite  pour  surprendre  un  familier  des
poemes  de  Gautier) ;  allusion  a  la  brievete  de  la  vie  (inais  non
tl  Scl  vanite),  portant  le  titre  Meditation.

Kestait  a  comparer  Hugo  et  Gautier.  Dans  "  Toute  la
Lyre "  elle  trouva  une  piece  de  vers  dediee  a  Gautier ;  puis
une  autre,  Epitaphe  d'enfant,  ou  l'idee  de  la  brievete  de  la  vie


128


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


est  presentee  sous  un  jour  contraire  a  celui  que  eclaire  la
"  Meditation  "  de  Gautier :

"  Qu'as-tu  done  fait  pour  que  ta  vie
Ait  sitot  merite  la  mort  ?  "

Le  choix  du  mot  "  rose "  pour  fixer  la  eorrespondance
s'explique  aussi,  car  la  rubrique  du  poeme  de  Gautier  est  em-
prunteee  a  Malherbe.  "  Ce  monde  ou  les  meilleures  choses  ont
le  pire  destin "  est  un  passage  de  l'Ode  cedebre  ou  se  trouve
le  vers  "  Et  rose  elle  a  vecu  ce  que  vivent  les  roses,  etc."

Mme  Verrall  estime  que  ces  allusions  subtiles  a  Gautier  et
a  Hugo  revtdent  une  connaissance  de  leurs  oeuvres  bien  supe-
rieure  k  celle  quelle  et  sa  fille  en  ont ;  elle  reconnait  qu'avaut
d'avoir  ecrit  les  textes  cites,  elle  avait  parcouru  la  table  des
matieres  des  ouvrages  des  deux  poetes  franqais,  et  que  par  con-
sequent l'emergence  de  "  Meditation "  et  de  "  Toute  la  lyre "
pent  s'expliquer  en  partie,  mais  il  n'en  est  pas  moms  vrai
qu'au  moment  ou  les  textes  de  Miles  Verrall  et  Mac  ont  ete
produits,  en  1908,  leur  ignorance  etait  encore  complete,  en  ce
qui  concerne  Meditation  de  Gautier  et  E}ntaphc  d'enfant  de
Hugo.

A  ces  documents,  que  cite  Mme  Verrall,  j'ajouterai  pour  la
discussion  qui  va  suivre,  un  texte  d'elle  du  5  Octobre  1910,
contemporain  de  ceux  qu'elle  analyse,  et  qui  rentre  dans  la  serie
des  coincidences  fortuites  que  je  vais  faire  connaitre  an  lecteur.

(Dessin  d'une  croix)  "How  often  bas  the  tune  been  played
before  ?  then  say  minstrel  the  minstrel  was  infirm  and  old "
(dessin  de  deux  harpes)  "  toute  la  lyre.  No  you  do  not  get  the
shape — ap  hoel— I  do  not  think  you  have  got  the  first  word  at
all.  What  you  have  is  the  second  group.  Hoel's  lays.  That
is  better."

11  y  a  dans  la  discussion  de  Mme  Verrall  bien  des  details
qui  paraissent  tres  particuliers  a  un  Fran<jais  moderement
instruit  dans  la  litterature  contemporaine.  L'axiome  de  Gautier
par  exemple  ne  lui  rappelle  rien  de  precis,  et  il  ne  songerait
pas  a  la  fragilite  de  la  beaute.  La  comparaison  entre  Gautier
et  Hugo  lui  paraitrait  pleine  d'insurmontables  difficultes.

II  y  a  autre  chose ;  la  lecture  des  textes  de  Mme  Verrall  et
de  Mme  Piper  attirerait  son  attention  sur  un  autre  poete,  dont
le  nom  est  etroitement  associe  a  "  Meditation  "  :  Lamartine.  II


lxv.]  Correspondances  croisees  et  la  Afethocle  experimentale.  129

verrait  dans  les  allusions  a  Gautier  et  a  Hugo  non  une  invita-
tion a  chercher  dans  l'oeuvre  de  ces  poetes,  mais  une  indication
invitant  a  examiner  la  litterature  francaise,  examen  qui  resultera
de  la  comparaison  des  types  et  fournira  l'occasion  prevue.

Le  texte  de  Mme  Verrall  contient  M  P,  meditations  poetiques,
interpretation  confirmee  par  le  texte  du  1 0  Octobre  "  une  associa-
tion purement  poetique  a  meditation."  II  verrait  dans  la  preface
du  "  Dernier  chant  de  Childe  Harold "  qui  fait  partie  des
"  Meditations  Poetiques  "  de  Lamartine,  ces  mots  "  Harold  est
un  enfant  de  V imagination."  ("Fancy's  child.")  II  trouverait
19  lettres  dans  le  nom  d'Alpho?ise  de  Lamartine,  et  19  est  le
total  des  nombres  el' or;  dans  "  ap  hoel  "  il  verrait  un  anagramme
incomplet  d'Alphonse.

Appliquant  son  hypothese  au  texte  de  Mme  Piper,  il
chercherait  une  elegie  dans  les  Meditations,  et  la  trouverait,
piece  XL,  Nouvelles  Me'elitcdions.  La,  il  reconnaitrait  le  theme
general  cherche  par  Mme  Verrall,  la  vanite  et  la  brievete
de  la  vie,  les  deux  icUes  y  sont  exprimees  et  non  une  seule
comme  elans  Gautier.  II  serait  frappe  d'abord  par  le  premier
vers :

"  Cueillons,  cueillons  la  rose  au  matin  de  la  vie
Des  rapides  printemps  respire  au  rnoins  les  fleurs."

Et  encore :

"  Hatons-nous  d'epuiser  la  coupe  de  la  vie
Pendant  quelle  est  entre  nos  mains


Soit  que  le  laurier  nous  couronne

Nous  allons  echouer  tous  au  meme  rivage

Qu'importe  au  moment  du  naufrage
Sur  un  vaisseau  fameux  d'avoir  fendu  les  airs

Ou  sur  une  barque  h'gere,  etc."

Ce  n'est  pas  tout ;  si  nous  feuilletons  les  Meditations  nous
trouvons  des  vers  dont  la  seance  du  16  Juillet  donne  la
paraphrase ;  cela  est  interessant,  parce  que  nous  les  trouvons
dans  la  suite  de  Childe  Harold,  ecrite  par  Lamartine,  ce
qui est un lien entre le  litterature anglaise et  franchise.

i


130


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


Comparez  en  effet  les  extraits  donnes  plus  haut  avec  ces  vers,
pris  dans  la  stance  XXXVIII :

"  Harold  rcdentissant  ses  pas  silencietix
S'assied  sur  mi  tombemi :  Quelle  paix  en  ces  lieux
Dit-il,  et  que  ces  morts  dont  je  foule  la  picrre
Dorment  profondAment  elans  leur  lit  de  poussiere
L'espace  qu'en  ces  lieux  je  couvrc  cle  mon  pU
A  suffi  pour  ces  saints  etc."

Harold  est  le  nom  d'un  des  enfants  de  M.  Myers.

On  retrouve  done  toutes  les  idees  exprimees  par  le  controle
Myers  chez  les  deux  mediums,  Mme  V.  rappelle  Childe  Harold  ;
Mme  Piper,  ce  poeme  et  Elegie ;  enfin  Mine  Piper  ramene  par
cette  Elegie  la  correspondance  aux  textes  Mac  et  H.  Verrall,
par  la  mention  de  la  rose  et  le  theme  de  l'elegie.

On  rernarquera  dix-neuf  coincidences  entre  le  poeme  et  les
textes,  dont  quelques  unes  sont  tres  frappantes  et  portent  sur
les  idees  et  les  mots.  II  est  evident  que  nous  sommes  en
presence  de  coincidences  fortuites,  que  la  banalite  de  certains
sujets,  comme  rose,  brievete  et  vanite  de  la  vie,  tombeaux,  pas
silencieux,  sommeil  des  morts,  laurier,  elegie,  etc.,  explique
facilement,  mais  il  y  a  d'autres  rencontres  plus  curieuses,  telles
que  "  mentations  poitiqites"  "  Harold  enfant  de  V imagination."

II  me  semble  que  cette  correspondance  est  encore  mieux
6tablie  que  celles  dont  le  Pvrgatoire  de  Dante  nous  est  cite
comme  un  exemple.

On  voit,  ainsi,  ou  peuvent  conduire  la  nmthode  symbolicme,
l'interpretation  et  l'imagination.


Metiiohs.

We  have  now  to  deal  with  criticisms  of  a  more  general
nature.  They  involve  questions,  the  solution  of  which  is  of
vital  importance  for  the  future  of  Psychical  Eesearch.

It  has  been  already  pointed  out  that  the  phenomena  of  the
S.P.E,  automatists,  whose  work  is  under  consideration,  are
liable  to  a  serious  objection.  They  are  not,  as  a  rule,  really
proven  by  objective  evidence.  We  must  admit  the  automatists'
good  faith.


lxv.]  Correspondances  croisees  et  la  Methode  experimentale.  131

I  have  the  greatest  confidence  in  their  truthfulness  and  I
am  personally  quite  ready  to  believe  that  they  are  not  guilty
of  any  collusion.  The  remarks  which  I  am  about  to  make
do  not  apply  to  the  experimenters  or  the  mediums  individually ;
they  have  a  wider  range  and  are  above  personalities.

The  value  of  an  experiment,  according  to  Dr.  Sidgwick
(Proceedings,  Vol.  V.,  p.  401-402),  is  worthless  when  the
possibility  of  conscious  or  unconscious  fraud  is  not  excluded.

I  need  not  insist  on  the  fact  that  such  a  condition  is  not
fulfilled  by  the  latest  experiments.  The  automatists  might
have  exchanged  letters,  combining  beforehand  their  correspon-
dences ;  the  investigators  could  not  be  aware  of  their  underhand
agreement  to  fraud.  The  medium's  good  faith  must  be  implicitly
admitted  as  an  element  of  the  experiment.

If  the  respectability  of  the  well-known  ladies  and  gentlemen
who  are  either  mediums  or  investigators  is  held  to  make  such
an  admission  legitimate  ;  then  I  fear  that  we  forfeit  the  right
of  doubting  other  honourable  people's  statements  in  similar  cir-
cumstances. The  S.P.R.  cannot  claim  the  monopoly  of  honesty
and  good  faith  for  their  mediums  or  enquirers.

Having  gone  so  far,  they  are  not  entitled  to  impose  on
other  experimenters  the  rules  which  they  do  not  observe  in
their  own  experiments.  They  give  thus  a  bad  example,  and
lose  the  right  of  criticising  the  value  of  sittings  held  according
to  their  own  standard.

Rules  must  be  binding  for  every  one.  Scientific  research
knows  no  privilege.  If  we  are  to  make  exceptions  for  certain
mediums,  we  cannot,  without  giving  offence,  refuse  to  treat
other  mediums  as  we  treat  our  own,  whosoever  they  may  be.

Instances  of  that  grave  defect  of  method  are  easy  to  give.  When
Sir  0.  Lodge,  who  is,  as  a  rule,  a  very  prudent  experimenter,
left  a  letter  during  four  months  in  the  hands  of  a  medium
before  getting  an  answer,  he  forgot  the  rules  wisely  drawn  by
Professor  Sidgwick.  The  medium  had  simply  to  read  the
question  when  she  got  the  letter,  and  she  had  plenty  of  time
for  preparing  an  answer.

ISTo  better  provisions  were  made  against  unconscious  fraud.
We  know  very  little  as  yet  of  the  psychological  conditions
in  which  the  automatist's  mind  moves  itself.  There  are  many
varieties of unconscious fraud, some being connected  with


132


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


abnormal  states  of  consciousness,  some  being  simply  dependent
upon  prejudice,  bias,  monoideism ;  tbe  latter  are  hardly  frauds,
though  we  cannot  draw  the  line  between  these  and  the  former
ones.  And  this  fact  is  not  easy  to  grasp,  when  one  is  not
familiar  with  the  psychological  phenomena  of  trance,  crepus-
culary  states  of  consciousness  and  ordinary  absent-mindedness,
lack  of  attention,  or  bias.  Between  these  typical  forms  of  the
loss  of  the  sense  of  reality  (sens  du  reel)  there  are  a  number
of  boundary  and  complicated  forms ;  and,  according  to  the
degree  of  dimness  to  which  the  normal  consciousness  sinks
down,  we  have  various  forms  of  unconscious  fraud.

I  fear  that  psychical  researchers  are  not  quite  familiar  some-
times with  the  difficulties  which  are  encountered  in  the  study
of  these  psychological  states,  chiefly  the  crepusculary  states  of
consciousness.

We  find  them  in  some  diseases  of  the  brain  or  of  the  nervous
system,  chiefly  in  hysteria  and  epilepsy.  But  they  are  not,
by  themselves,  a  pathological  symptom,  no  more  than  auto-
matism is  a  symptom  of  hysteria.  They  are  easy  to  observe
in  healthy  persons.

When  a  question  is  put  to  an  entranced  medium,  if  the
answer  is  not  immediately  given,  we  leave,  in  the  medium's
subliminal,  the  seed  of  a  desire,  and  the  latent  desire  may
induce  an  impulsion,  and  a  transitory  trance,  if  the  seed  has
been  deposited  during  the  trance.  Auto-suggestion,  like  hetero-
suggestion,  tends  to  the  production  of  the  state  of  conscious-
ness, during  the  carrying  on  of  the  impulse,  which  obtained
when  the  suggestion  was  given,  or  the  cause  of  the  self-
suggestion  was  born.

Can  we  suspect  such  transient  states  of  consciousness  in
the  mediums  of  the  S.P.R.  ?

Mrs.  Piper  is  quite  trustworthy ;  how  can  we  adjust  this
fact  with  the  other  one,  her  perusal  of  Browning  ?  She  may
have  been  in  a  transitory  trance  while  looking  through  the
volume ;  the  trance  was  self-induced,  and  owed  its  cause  to
the  questions  which  had  been  asked  during  the  sittings.

This  is  only  an  hypothesis,  but  I  feel  sure  that  its  possi-
bility will  not  be  denied  by  neuropathologists.  The  experimenters
have  completely  overlooked  such  possibilities ;  they  have  not
taken  care  to  exclude  them ;  their  conclusions  are  founded  on


lxv.]  Gorrespondances  croisees  et  la  Methode  experimentale.  133

facts  which  are  not  free  from  the  suspicion  of  unconscious
fraud.

Such  impulsions  may  occur  without  a  complete  trance ;  a
simple  crepusculary  state  may  obtain,  that  is  an  obnubilation
of  the  normal  consciousness.

These  crepusculary  states  of  consciousness  may  be  very
short,  the  shading  off  of  the  normal  self  may  be  very  light ;
it  does  not  alter  the  case  and,  as  a  rule,  there  is  a  consecutive
amnesia.

Lighter  grades  of  dimming  are  to  be  observed  in  the
normal  consciousness,  when  one  is  absent-minded.  It  seems,
at  first  sight,  hardly  credible  that  a  simple  absence  or  lack  of
attention  may  be  held  as  a  psychological  state  of  the  same
order  as  impulsions,  motor  automatisms  or  trances.  If  we
are  to  consider  them  from  a  general  point  of  view,  taking  in
all  their  characteristics,  we  cannot  naturally  perceive  the
features  which  are  common  to  all.  Their  connexion  appears,
however,  when  we  take  into  account  the  relations  between  the
normal  consciousness  and  the  subliminal,  or  rather,  as  I  propose
to  say,  the  organic  or  general  consciousness.  In  that  case,  we
note  always  a  diminution  of  the  former,  the  field  of  which  is
narrowed.

It  is  usually  associated  with  a  loss  of  the  sense  of  reality.
We  observe  such  narrowing  of  consciousness  in  deep  thought,
and  we  know  that  genuine  motor  automatisms  may  then  take
place.  In  our  states  of  abstraction,  we  are  apt  to  leave
things  in  the  wrong  place  and  to  forget  where  we  put  them.
Such  a  loss  of  memory  is  a  real  amnesia.

I  do  not  pretend  to  say  that  the  automatists  may  have
looked  abstractedly  into  a  book  and  picked  up  the  knowledge
which  they  showed  afterwards  in  their  script,  with  amnesia  of
the  act  through  which  it  was  gained.  I  have  no  reason  to
suspect  automatisms  of  this  kind  in  the  facts  which  we  are
analyzing.

The  study  of  the  states  of  distraction,  as  they  say  in
French,  and  of  the  consecutive  amnesia  is,  however,  full  of
meaning.  We  forget  the  greater  part  of  what  we  do,  and
see,  and  hear,  and  read.  A  few  days,  or  a  few  months,
or  a  few  years,  blot  our  memories ;  but  this  is  true  only
of  our  normal  memory ;  it  seems  probable  that  our  organic


134


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


memory  keeps  the  record  of  every  perception  stored  up  by  our
senses.  Though  not  generally  accepted,  this  hypothesis  is  very
likely  true.  We  know  that  our  subconscious  memory  is  in
any  case  infinitely  richer  than  our  conscious  one ;  the  latter
has  no  knowledge  of  the  stores  accumulated  in  the  former,  and
there  are  no  means  of  gauging  the  first  through  the  second,
though  the  reverse  may  be  possible.

And,  here,  we  get  at  a  serious  defect  in  the  methods  used
by  the  experimenters.  They  are  always  asking  from  the
mediums  information  about  their  conscious  or  normal  know-
ledge, and  seem  to  believe  that  such  information  is  adecpuate.
I  use  the  word  seem,  as  some  of  them  are  well  aware  of  the
utter  inutility  of  their  enquiries  (Vol.  XXL,  p.  387).  Why,
then,  do  they  take  so  much  pain  to  ascertain  what  are  the
conscious  recollections  of  the  automatists  ?  The  scripts  are  not
the  product  of  the  normal  consciousness,  but  grow  out  of  the
subconscious  self,  the  potentialities  of  which  may,  and  probably
do,  depend  on  the  forgotten  experiences  of  their  whole  life.

Two  other  points  may  be  considered  in  connexion  with
those  losses  of  memory.  The  first  is  the  impossibility  of  ascer-
taining what  a  medium  does  not  subconsciously  know.  It  is
already  difficult  to  gauge  the  extent  of  his  knowledge ;  the
difficulty  becomes  immensely  greater  when  we  have  to  prove
that  lie  does  not  know  something.  We  are  confronted  by  a
negative  fact,  which  cannot  really  be  proven.  We  may  infer
that  a  given  knowledge  is  out  of  the  medium's  reach,  but  we
cannot  prove  our  assumption.

Secondly,  we  cannot  know  whether  the  knowledge  displayed
by  a  medium's  automatism  has  a  supernormal  source  or  is
due  to  "  cryptomnesia " ;  this  is,  the  consequence  of  the  first
point  above  discussed.

A  third  point  is  even  to  be  taken  into  account,  always  in
connexion  with  the  losses  or  gains  of  memory  related  to  abnormal
states  of  consciousness.  Some  of  the  experimenters  hold  that
the  trance  consciousness  of  Mrs.  Piper,  for  instance,  is  shut
from  the  normal  one.  They  think  that  the  two  fields  are
completely  apart  one  from  the  other.

I  am  not  disposed  to  agree  with  them.  We  have  but  one
means  of  testing  the  links  between  normal  and  abnormal  states
of  consciousness,  and  it  is  by  an  analysis  of  their  respective


LXV.]  Correspondances  croisees  et  la  Methods  experimentale.  135

memories.  And  a  first  observation  must  be  made ;  the  relative
amnesia  is  without  doubt  a  functional,  not  an  essential  one.  It
can  be  compared  with  amnesia  in  cases  of  hysteria.  And  even
in  such  cases  we  note  a  modification  of  the  language,  for  instance,
in  Pitre's  "  Ecmnesia."  The  trance  does  not  show  a  serious  altera-
tion of  language.  The  medium  may  speak  with  a  different
accent,  he  may  use  a  particular  style  of  expressing  himself;
these  changes  are  superficial ;  the  bulk  of  the  speaking  material
is  not  altered.

If  the  memories  of  the  normal  consciousness  were  absolutely
shut  from  the  trance  personality,  we  should  observe  "  mnesic
aphasia,"  that  is  the  loss  of  speech,  through  loss  of  memory,
as  we  note  it  sometimes  in  neuropathology.  The  conservation
of  speech  shows  that  the  relative  amnesia  is  not  deeply  rooted.

And  there  is  evidence  that  the  trance  consciousness  draws
sometimes  its  supply  from  the  normal  stores.  We  can  find
an  instance,  I  think,  of  the  fact  in  the  Dorr  sittings,  when
MyerSp  put  on  the  track  of  the  Olympic  games,  spoke  of
the  modern  Marathon  races.  Such  a  blunder  is  manifestly
borrowed  from  the  normal  personality's  memory.

I  fear  that  the  whole  conception  of  the  psychological  con-
dition of  the  trance,  to  use  Mr.  Dorr's  words,  of  its  depth,
not  of  its  genuineness,  held  by  the  experimenters  are  not  cpuite
satisfactory.  My  conclusions,  if  they  impair  the  worth  of  the
latest  experiments  about  cross-correspondence  and  literary  know-
ledge, do  not  impair  the  worth  of  the  former  experiments  made
with  Mrs.  Piper,  whose  good  faith  is  not  suspected.  Her
trance  remains  genuine,  but  its  depth  is  not  such  as  some
experimenters  believe  it  to  be ;  and  by  depth,  we  must  under-
stand Mr.  Dorr's  peculiar  meaning,  that  is,  its  depth  in  relation
to  the  normal  consciousness.

The  experimenters  seem  to  ignore  the  work  done  outside
the  society.  I  am  not  sure  that  here  "  things  are  not  what
they  seem,"  but  still  their  conclusions  would  have  more  weight
if  they  were  grounded  on  a  knowledge  less  superficial  in
appearance.

Unfortunately,  there  are  other  reasons  for  suspecting  the
experimenters  of  a  little  superficiality.  Their  statements  are
sometimes  hasty.  A  great  number  of  these  statements  had
to  be  corrected. I may  add to  the  examples  given  above,


136


Joseph  Maxwell,  31.  D.


[part


Mrs.  Verrall's  commentary  on  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  Novem-
ber 10,  1909.  She  sees  in  "O  singer  of  Persephone  from
the  far  meadows  desolate  hast  thou  forgotten  Sicily "  allusions
to  Tennyson's  Demeter  and  Persephone,  while  the  verses  are
a  quotation  from  Oscar  Wilde's  Theocritus  (S.P.li,  Journal,
Vol.  XV.,  p.  105).  The  implicit  reference  to  "Nightingale"
is  consecpuently  very  doubtful.

From  these  examples  may  be  gathered  the  feeling  that  the
conclusions  founded  upon  such  weak  and  doubtful  references
are  very  uncertain,  not  to  say  more.  And  the  feeling  becomes
a  rational  impression  when  other  symptoms  of  superficiality
are  met  with,  examples  of  which  I  have  given.

The  experimenters  have  an  unconscious  tendency  to  adapt
the  facts  to  their  opinions  and  wishes,  not  to  suit  the  latter
to  the  first.

Miss  Johnson  gives  an  amusing  example  of  her  onesidedness.
The  incident  is  so  extraordinary  that  it  stands  as  a  token  of
sincerity :  but  I  fear  that  Miss  Johnson  did  not  perceive  its
humourous  side.

On  March  28,  1900,  Mrs.  Holland  gave  a  description  of
Mr.  Poden  Noel  "  clear  eyes  under  a  broad  brow  a  shock  of  grey
hair  that  was  still  thick,  etc."  The  description  tallies  with  a
portrait  published  in  Mr.  Noel's  collected  poems.  Mrs.  Holland
is  not  aware  of  having  ever  seen  the  portrait ;  Miss  Johnson
states  that  the  poet's  personal  appearance  was  correctly  described-
(Vol.  XXL,  p.  324).  Miss  Noel  wrote  (Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.  5-6)
that  the  description  was  not  very  accurate ;  her  father's  hair
was  "  very  thin  latterly,  though  curly,  and  it  was  hardly  grey."
But  Miss  Johnson  knows  better.  "  My  own  recollection  of
the  one  occasion  on  which  I  saw  him  is  that  his  hair  was
then  decidedly  thick  and  curly,  as  shown  in  the  portrait
prefixed  to  his  Collected  Poems."  Here  we  have  another  instance
of  the  analyst's  mental  process.  She  saw  Mr.  Noel  once  only,
but  has  more  faith  in  her  own  recollection  than  in  the  fresh
and  safer  memory  of  the  poet's  daughter.

I  point  out  all  these  little  facts  in  order  to  show  the  new
experimenters'  "  mentality."  They  are  acting  upon  faith  and
enthusiasm,  but  they  do  not  appear  to  be  guided  by  calm
and  unprejudiced  reason.  The  careful  reader  will  find  a  number
of  similar  instances.


lxv.]  Gorrespondances  croisees  et  la  Methocle  experimentale.  137

And  I  may  say  it  again  most  expressedly,  there  is  not  the
slightest  doubt  in  my  mind  about  the  sincerity  and  the  good
faith  of  the  mediums  or  of  the  analysts.  They  are  unconsciously
guided  by  their  feelings  and  their  sentiments,  and  they  are
not  in  a  position  sufficiently  broadminded  to  perceive  what
does  not  fit  with  their  immediate  wants.  They  suffer  from  a
kind  of  monoideism,  which  tends  to  the  overlooking  of  any
fact  contrary  to  their  own  notions,  provided  of  course  that
such  facts  be  not  too  striking.

The  danger  arising  from  such  tendencies  is  the  more  serious
the  more  we  deal  with  impressions,  not  with  facts.  And  here
we  encounter  the  gravest  peril  of  the  new  methods.  They
are  ultimately  founded  upon  analogy  and  symbolism.  The  duty
of  Psychical  Kesearchers,  true  to  the  old  and  prudent  spirit
of  the  founders  of  the  Society,  is  to  protest  against  the  intro-
duction of  methods  in  which  imagination  plays  too  great  a
part.

Analogy  and  symbolism  may  have  their  proper  value  when
used  in  their  proper  places ;  but  they  are  outside  the  realm  of
scientific  inquiry.  Symbols,  when  they  are  fixed  by  tradition,
as  the  case  may  be  in  Religion,  Art,  Secret  Societies,  etc.,  may
have  a  definite  meaning.  In  other  cases  they  have  not,  and
one  finds  in  the  symbol  what  one  has  already  put  into  it.

A  very  remarkable  instance  of  the  resources  offered  by
symbolism  is  shown  in  Mr.  Piddington's  Report  (Vol.  XXII.r
p.  182).

A  knot  of  bine  ribbon,  is  "  no  more  than  a  first  attempt  to
get  the  name  John."  Why  ?  Because  there  is  a  piece  of
poetry  in  which  occur  both  the  name  John  and  the  words
"  a  bunch  of  blue  ribbon."  Can  we  really  seriously  discuss  such
arguments  ?  The  damage  would  not  be  great  if  we  had  to
deal  only  with  sporadic  illustrations  of  the  new  method.
Unfortunately  we  meet  with  it  everywhere.

The  worst  point  of  this  method  is  its  indetermination.  There
are  a  number  of  solutions  to  such  indeterminate  problems.  Mr.
Piddington  is,  however,  well  aware  of  the  necessity  of  precision.
He  gives  us  some  very  good  rules  on  the  subject  in  his  answer
to  some  criticisms  {Light,  1904,  p.  447)  about  the  prediction
of  the  Servian  assassinations.  "  The  central  fact  of  a  pre-
diction must  be  beyond  intelligent  anticipation  ;  the  prediction


138


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


must  contain  a  sufficient  number  of  detailed  statements  about
the  time,  place  and  other  circumstances  to  justify  its  fulfilment,
being  attributed  not  to  chance  coincidence  or  some  oilier  known
causer

What  are  we  to  think  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  intimation  of  future
events  according  to  these  rules  of  evidence  ?  And  what  are
we  to  think  of  cross-correspondences,  when  there  are  such  con-
stant discrepancies  about  the  time  ?  Where  is  the  "  one  rule
for  all  "  standard  ?

I  fear  that  if  the  new  method  is  allowed  to  obtain  in  our
experiments,  our  conclusions  might  lose  much  of  their  evidential
value.

We  must  not  forget  that  psychical  phenomena,  either  of
the  physical  or  of  the  intellectual  type,  are  very  difficult  to
investigate.  I  do  not  wish  to  vindicate  here  the  value  of  the
first,  T  want  only  to  point  out  that  both  types  seem  to  have
the  same  apparent  origin,  our  subconscious  self,  and  that  the
study  of  the  latter  is  still  more  complicated  than  the  inves-
tigation of  the  former.  If  physical  phenomena  be  observed,
we  have  only  to  guard  ourselves  against  illusion  and  deception.
But  if  we  can  observe  them  again  and  again,  we  can  gradually
narrow  the  field  of  uncertainty,  we  have  to  deal  with  a
material  fact.

In  intellectual  phenomena,  on  the  contrary,  we  are  confronted
by  a  great  number  of  unknown  data,  the  darkest  of  which  are
the  subliminal  memories  and  faculties  of  the  mediums.  We
cannot  test  them  with  any  degree  of  certainty,  especially  when
we  deal  with  known  or  published  facts.

And  we  must  not  think  that  if  we  meet  with  fraud  in
the  physical  phenomena,  we  do  not  meet  with  it  in  the
intellectual.  Frauds  are  easier  to  practise,  consciously  or
unconsciously  in  the  latter,  and  they  are  more  difficult  to
detect.

And  there  is  a  double  form  of  fraud  in  the  intellectual
type  of  phenomena, — the  medium's  fraud  and  the  control's
fraud.  If  an  entranced  medium  gives  a  spurious  physical
phenomenon,  we  say  that  there  is  cheating  and  deceit.  We
should  not  hold  in  every  case  the  normal  personality  respon-
sible for  the  fraud ;  but  as  a  rule  we  make  no  distinctions
and  we  discard  the  medium,  though the  responsibility  may


LXV.]  Correspondances  croisees  et  la  Methode  experimentcde.  139

fall  exclusively  on  the  somnambulic  personality,  that  is  on  the
so-called  control.

A  fraud,  in  the  physical  type  of  phenomena,  is  a  kind  of
lie ;  when  we  detect  lies  in  the  messages  of  the  control,  what
are  we  to  decide  ?  Is  there  an  essential  difference  between
a  lying  control  and  a  cheating  one  ?  I  might  here  write
many  things  about  control-psychology,  but  I  want  only  to
show  the  analogies  and  the  difficulties.  Cross-correspondences,
such  as  we  have  them  now,  are  particularly  open  to  criticism
of  this  nature.

The  evidence  collected  is,  I  think,  unable  to  demonstrate
the  fact  of  spirit  agenc}^.  We  want  a  proof,  and  we  must
be  exacting  in  our  tests ;  the  system  of  cross-correspon-
dences is  founded  upon  negative  facts ;  the  mediums  have
no  knowledge  of  the  antecedent  publications,  they  have  not
heard  of  them,  they  have  not  practised  deception,  they  have
not  exchanged  letters,  they  have  not  met,  and  got  useful
information,  etc.  Negative  facts  are  an  unsafe  basis,  for  they
are  always  liable  to  be  discarded  when  we  get  a  positive
one.

A  positive  fact,  on  the  contrary,  stands  by  itself  and  has  a
permanent  value.  We  want  such  facts  and  such  proofs.  Cross-
correspondences  cannot  give  them.  Cases  like  the  incidents
quoted  by  S.  Moses  (Abraham  Florentine,  Mrs.  Abercrombie,
etc.)  are  more  striking  and  have  a  stronger  evidential  value.
The  same  might  be  said  of  Mrs.  Piper's  early  experiments.
(See  Mr.  Hyslop's  paper,  Jour.  Am.  S.P.B.,  September,  1909.)
They  do  not  exclude  the  possibility  of  telepathy,  or  of  clair-
voyance, but  the  cross-correspondences  do  not  exclude  it  either.
M.  Pigou  has,  I  think,  clearly  shown  that  even  cross-corre-
spondences of  the  mosaic  type  may  be  due  to  fragmentary
telepathic  thought-transference.

I  do  not  see  how  we  could  prove  that  telepathy  cannot
explain  fragmentary  and  complementary  thought-transference,
even  if  we  admit  that  the  cross-correspondences  quoted  possess
always  such  a  character,  which  I  think  not.

The  line  of  enquiry  followed  by  the  experimenters  seems  to
lead  to  "  nowhere  " ;  ineffectual  in  their  possible  results,  their
methods  of  investigation  appear  to  be  defective  from  a  technical
point  of  view. Too  many  questions  are  asked  at  the  same


140


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


time  ;  an  experimenter  takes  a  dream  for  a  real  event,  another
forgets  the  question  asked  some  weeks  before,  etc.  The  controls
are  too  often  guided  so  benevolently  that  they  need  not  fish.
(Hope,  Star  and  Browning,  Dante,  Abt  Vogler,  etc.)

Lastly,  I  fear  that  the  new  style  of  phenomena  may  not
agree  with  Mrs.  Piper's  mediumship.  In  some  of  the  sittings
the  experiment  amounted  simply  to  thought-transference  (civto?
ovpavog  aicv/uwv,  Plotinus,  the  Latin  Message),  but  she  gave  the
correct  answer  with  much  difficulty.  Her  former  sittings  were,
I  think,  singularly  more  interesting.  It  would  have  been  better
not  to  interfere  with  her  controls  and  her  style  of  mediumship.
Imperator,  Prudens  (Plotinus),  Hector  (St.  Hippolytus),  Doctor
( Athenodorus),  Mentor  (Algazzali)  are  certainly  not  the  same
controls  as  their  similarly  named  ones  of  Mr.  Moses,  and  are
painfully  inferior  to  them.

Since  Mr.  Hodgson's  lamented  death  it  seems  that  the  old
form  of  mediumship,  the  trance-utterance,  is  regaining  its  lost
ground.  The  best  results  have  been  given  in  the  waking-stage,
during  which  the  old  verbal  automatism  is  used.

The  same  might  be  said  of  Mrs.  Holland.  Her  imitation
of  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  does  not  appear  to  be  really  desirable.
The  safest  course  to  take,  in  dealing  with  automatic  phenomena,
is  to  leave  the  manifestation  alone  as  much  as  possible.  The
only  conditions  on  which  we  must  insist  are  those  concerning
the  sincerity  and  good  observation  of  the  phenomenon ;  these
conditions  excepted,  it  is  better  to  watch  the  spontaneous  de-
velopment of  the  facts  without  attempting  to  guide  them
according  to  our  limited  views.  We  have  almost  everything
to  learn  about  automatism,  and  it  might  be  safer,  and  more
scientific,  to  study  first  the  laws  governing  automatic  mental
processes.  When  we  know  them,  we  shall  be  better  prepared
for  grasping  the  problem  of  their  supra-human  causes.  In
such  a  study  many  points,  however,  are  worthy  of  attention.
Their  interesting  features  are  not  sensational,  and  are,  of  course,
far  from  the  main  point  at  issue,  but  I  fear  that  we  must
study  carefully  the  psychological  process  involved  in  the  various
modes  of  automatic  expression  before  we  are  really  able  to
investigate  their  spiritual  kernel.

The  difficulty  lies  in  the  identity  of  the  communicating
intelligence. It  is  sometimes  quite  easy  to  trace  the  source  of


lxv.]  Correspondances  croisees  et  la  Me'thode  experimentale.  141

the  message,  which,  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten,  is  in  the  auto-
matist's  own  mind.

In  the  tenth  case,  we  cannot  discover  the  spring  from  which
flows  the  information,  but  we  are  not  entitled  to  conclude,
from  our  inability  to  trace  the  normal  source  of  knowledge,  that
a  supernormal  one  must  be  admitted.  For  reasons  already
explained,  we  cannot  rely  on  the  automatists  themselves  for
instructing  us ;  we  have  to  deal  with  their  subconsciousness,
and  the  normal  self  is  not  aware  of  the  amount  of  knowledge
stored  up  in  the  subliminal  memory.

Hence  the  radical  objection  which  is  to  be  made  to  cross-
correspondences.  They  may  serve  as  evidence  for  telepathy,
but  they  cannot  go  farther,  and  even  in  these  narrow  limits
they  are  not  of  great  value.  They  concern  words,  or  ideas,
which  are  to  be  found  in  books  easily  obtainable.  All  the
literary  references,  of  which  the  latest  papers  make  so  much,
seem  to  me  consequently  very  uncertain  evidence.

Moreover,  we  are  not  in  a  position  to  exclude  the  possi-
bility of  various  modes  of  supernormal  acquisition  of  knowledge,
such  as  clairvoyance  ;  even  in  the  Spirit  hypothesis  how  can
we  be  sure  that  we  are  in  touch  with  the  real  personality
purporting  to  communicate  and  not  with  a  personating  spirit  ? 1

But  I  am  not  prepared  to  discuss  such  remote  possibilities.
I  allude  to  their  existence  in  order  to  show  how  many  diffi-
culties creep  into  the  investigation  of  spirit  agency.

Our  immediate  work,  I  think,  ought  to  be  chiefly  directed
to  the  study  of  the  psychological  processes  of  automatic
messages.

Errors,  and  their  cause,  are  very  instructive.  No  serious  study
of  the  subject  appears  to  have  been  made.  I  believe  that  the
experimenters  whose  work  I  am  criticising  are  well  qualified
for  achieving  serious  progress  in  our  knowledge  of  these  psycho-
logical questions ;  we  must  clear  them  up  before  gaining  a  sure
ground ;  we  cannot  hope  to  make  any  safe  advance  without
such  preliminary  work.

1  Prudence  grows  with  increasing  experience.  Here  is  M.  Stainton  Moses's
opinion  on  Spirit-Identity  :  "  At  the  time  I  should  not  have  seriously  questioned
the  identity  of  these  Beings.  But  there  are  problems  connected  with  the
question  of  identity  which  are  ponderously  difficult,  and  I  am  by  no  means
sure  that  we  have  the  means  of  settling  them,"  Light,  1884,  p.  2.52.


142


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


Mrs.  Verrall,  Mrs.  Holland,  and  the  other  automatists  are
intelligent,  cultured,  observing  minds.  They  are  endowed  with
remarkable  powers,  which  give  them  every  facility  for  a  study,
the  necessity  of  which  I  am  advocating.

How  ought  to  be  conducted  such  a  work  ?  Many  methods
might  be  used,  and  1  am  not  prepared  to  discuss  their  value.

I  have  observed  cases  similar  to  Mrs.  Verrall's  or  Mrs
Holland's  experiences.  For  instance,  I  have  a  very  curious
record  of  messages  concerning  the  Eusso-Japanese  war,  untrue
almost  without  exception,  but  anticipating  sometimes  the  false
news  given  by  the  papers.  I  noticed  cases  akin  to  this  one
in  Mrs.  Verrall's  report.

Why  does  such  false  news  creep  into  the  scripts  ?  Is  there
a  special  telepathy,  originated  in  the  mind  of  the  newsmonger  ?
Is  there  a  selective  telepathy,  acting  according  to  affinities  of
race,  culture,  civilisation,  and  propagating  its  waves  in  certain
directions  rather  than  in  others  ?  The  problem  is  difficult  and
complex,  but  there  are  simpler  ones.

Can  we  get  at  the  real  process  of  telepathy  ?  Sir  Oliver
Lodge  has  already  shown  how  important  would  be  the  solution
of  the  question.  Well,  the  study  of  errors  can  give  us  some
insight  into  the  process.

For  instance,  in  Miss  Johnson's  first  report,  Vol.  XXL,
pp.  346-348,  we  read  that  Mrs.  Holland  tried  to  get  some
impressions  by  psychometry ;  she  held  a  glove  and  had  the
impression  of  "  Lincoln. The  bronze  is  out  of  place."

The  owner  of  the  glove  (which  had  belonged  to  the  late  son
of  Mrs.  Forbes)  had  a  bust  of  Washington,  which  at  the  time
was  out  of  its  usual  place.

Here  we  have  a  curious  error.  Lincoln  and  Washington
were  both  Presidents  of  the  U.S.  of  America.  We  are  led  to
think,  in  this  case,  that  no  sensory  image  was  transmitted ;
Washington  and  Lincoln  were  not  alike.  We  suspect  then
that  a  mere  idea  was  conveyed,  that  of  a  bust,  and  of  a
President  of  the  American  Eepublic. But  why  Lincoln  ?

The  emergence  of  this  name  is  perhaps  due  to  a  working
out  of  the  root  impression  by  the  conscious  self  or  by  the
strata  of  the  subliminal  which  are  nearer  to  the  normal
consciousness.

An  observation  of  mine  points  to  such  an  explanation.  A


Lxv.]  Govrespondances  croisees  et  la  Methode  experimentale.  143

medium — not  a  professional  one — describing  the  sitter's  grand-
mother, with  sufficient  accuracy,  gave  her  name  as  "  Clementine."
The  answer  was  noted  as  incorrect,  the  real  name  being
"  Augustine."  But  the  family  used  to  call  the  dead  lady
Maman  Tine,  and  in  the  familiar  nickname  we  have  the  three
last  syllables  of  the  wrong  name.  Clementine  is,  I  think,
almost  the  only  usual  name  terminating  in  "  mentine "  in
French.

Is  there  a  kind  of  correction  worked  out  by  the  mind,  in
those  cases  of  supranormal  perception,  correction  which  could
be  compared  with  the  building  of  an  illusory  optical  image
out  of  disconnected  blots  or  shapes  ?

The  same  study  could  be  made  in  cases  where  impressions
get  mixed  up.  when,  for  instance,  a  person  is  correctly
described,  but  is  depicted  with  the  dress  of  another.  How
does  the  mixing  up  creep  in  ?  Observations,  if  repeated  and
carefully  made,  might  give  clues  to  the  process.

Some  observations  seem  to  show  that  the  percipient  gets  an
impression,  not  of  an  abstract  idea,  but  of  a  concrete  element
of  the  image.  Things  seen  by  the  supposed  agent,  when  he
was  very  young,  are  sometimes  described  by  the  sensitive  as
larger  than  they  were  really :  in  one  case,  the  description  of
a  room  was  incorrect,  inasmuch  as  what  was  on  the  right  side
was  said  to  be  on  the  left,  and  vice  versa.  The  sensitive
seemed  to  see  an  inverted  image,  as  in  a  looking-glass.  Did
he  perceive  something  like  a  print  of  the  former  perception
existing  somewhere  in  the  agent's  brain  ?

In  the  same  case,  the  sensitive  said  that  "  butterflies  were
pinned  to  the  wall  of  the  room,  above  a  desk."  There  were
no  butterflies,  but  on  the  wall  was  hung  a  picture,  "  La  femme
aux  papillons."  The  idea  of  butterflies  was  only  picked  up
and  interpreted  either  by  the  conscious  or  unconscious  mind.
It  might  be  possible  to  discover  which  of  the  two  parts  of
the  mind  is  responsible  for  these  interpretations :  such  a
knowledge  would  be  full  of  meaning.

Thus  the  study  of  errors  may  be  very  useful,  and  we  can
investigate  their  modes,  processes,  and  perhaps  even  their
causes  with  some  chances  of  success.  A  French  author,  Mr.
Duchatel,  published  last  year  a  book  on  Psychometry,  where
the  subject  is  tackled.


144


Joseph  Maxwell,  M.D.


[part


It  is  not  necessary,  however,  to  show  how  many  things
may  be  investigated  in  the  unknown  fields  of  Psychical
Kesearch  ;  the  work  is  as  yet  at  its  beginning.  But  we  must
keep  strictly  to  sound  methods,  give  imagination  and  fancy  a
wide  berth,  and  study  simple  questions  before  trying  to  solve
the  most  complicated  ones. .  II  ne  faut  pas  mettre  la  charrue
devant  les  boeufs.


LXV.]


Editorial  Note  on  Dr.  Maxivell's  Paper.


145


EDITORIAL  NOTE  ON  DR.  MAXWELL'S  PAPER.

The  interpretation  of  the  automatic  writings  which  have  been
presented  to  the  Society  of  recent  years,  and  the  inter-
connexions between  them,  constitute  so  complicated  a  problem
that  there  are  probably  few — even  among  our  own  members —
who  have  attempted  to  work  at  it  seriously,  and  there  are  fewer
still  who  have  favoured  us  with  any  systematic  observations
thereon.  We  welcome,  therefore,  the  above  contribution  from
Dr.  Maxwell,  who  will  be  well  known  to  most  of  our  readers
as  the  author  of  Les  PMnomenes  Psychiqiues.

His  paper  is  clearly  the  result  of  a  painstaking  study  of
the  large  mass  of  published  material ;  and  as  such  clearly
merits  a  reply.  We  shall  reserve  the  publication  of  this
reply  to  a  later  Part  of  Proceedings ;  but  meanwhile  it  may
be  well  to  point  out  in  general  terms  that  Dr.  Maxwells  paper
contains  mistakes  as  to  facts,  and  that  his  criticism  is  to  a
large  extent  based  on  a  fundamental  misapprehension  of  the
views  of  the  writers  whom  he  is  criticising  as  to  what  is
and  what  is  not  evidential  of  supernormal  activity.  Their  aim
has  been  to  give,  if  not  a  complete,  at  least  a  representative,
view  of  the  phenomena  as  a  whole,  and  not  only  of  their
evidential  aspect.  This  was  pre-eminently  the  case  with  Mrs.
Verrall's  report  on  her  own  script,  while  she  and  all  the
other  writers  have  emphasised  again  and  again  the  subjective
element  in  a  large  proportion  of  all  the  scripts.

In  so  doing  they  have  acted  consistently  with  the  general
principle  of  the  S.P.R.,  which  does  not  confine  itself  to  the
publication  of  "  evidential "  facts,  but  includes  in  its  survey
whatever  incidents  appear  to  be  of  psychological  interest  or
instructive  in  any  way,  no  matter  whether  they  tell  for  or
against  a  supernormal  hypothesis.  This  has  been  so  long  the
practice  in  S.P.R.  publications  that  it  is  not  always  considered
necessary  to  state  in  so  many  words  to  which  category  a  fact
is supposed to belong, especially as this may often  be  a

K


14C


Editorial  Note.


[part


matter  of  opinion.  The  great  majority  of  our  readers  have
probably  understood  this  practice ;  but  it  seems  clear  that  Dr.
Maxwell  has  not  understood  it.

Thus,  for  instance,  he  brings  forward  various  incidents  as
evidence  of  cryptomnesia  (subliminal  memory)  as  though  the
writers  he  is  criticising  had  ignored  this  explanation  ;  whereas,
as  a  matter  of  fact,  in  nearly  every  instance,  they  have  either
explicitly  stated  or  allowed  it  to  be  understood  that  they
regarded  those  incidents  as  probable  or  possible  examples  of
cryptomnesia.  If  there  is  any  difference  between  them  and
Dr.  Maxwell  in  this  matter,  it  is  that  they  are  sometimes
less  confident  than  he  is  that  cryptomnesia  is  a  complete
explanation  in  a  given  case,  and  so  have  been  careful  to
lay  before  the  reader  all  the  evidence  in  their  possession,
whether  it  told  for  or  against  that  explanation.  An  extract
from  Miss  Johnson's  First  Eeport  on  the  Automatic  Writing
of  Mrs.  Holland  may  perhaps  suffice  to  put  the  reader  on  his
guard  against  accepting  too  readily  the  charge  that  Dr.
Maxwell  has  brought  against  them  of  having  paid  too  slight
attention  to  the  possibilities  of  cryptomnesia :

"  The  whole  study  of  this  case  tends  to  confirm  the  view
that  no  statement  in  automatic  script  that  has  ever  [previously
appeared]  in  print,  or  is  of  such  a  nature  as  to  be  known  to
a  good  many  people,  can  be  regarded  as  really  good  evidence
of  supernormal  knowledge."  1

In  replying  to  Dr.  Maxwell,  an  effort  will  be  made  to
explain  further  the  general  principles  that  have  guided  the
writers  in  their  exposition  and  discussion  of  the  scripts,  as
well  as  to  deal  in  some  detail  with  Dr.  Maxwell's  criticisms
of  individual  cases.


i Proceedings,  Vol.  XXL,  p.  36S.


LXV.]


The  Latin  Message  Experiment.


147


IV.

THE  LATIN  MESSAGE  EXPERIMENT.

By  MRS.  ANNA  HUDE,  Ph.D.  (Copenhagen).

One  of  the  most  interesting  experiments  described  by  Mr.
Piddington  in  his  well-known  paper,  A  Series  of  Concordant
Automatisms,  is  no  doubt  the  one  called  The  Latin  Message.1
But  at  the  same  time  it  is  one  whose  value  has  been  much
disputed  ;  Mr.  Podmore  in  his  last  work,  The  Newer
Spiritualism,  made  it  the  subject  of  a  destructive  criticism,
based  on  the  assertion  that  the  Piper-Myers  never  understood
the  message ;  Mr.  Bayfield,  in  his  review  of  the  book,  sub-
scribes to  this  assertion.-  This  is  what  I  myself  must  do ;
but  with  the  conclusions  drawn  from  it  by  the  two  authors  I
entirely  disagree,  and  I  should  be  glad  to  give  here  my
reasons  for  so  doing.

Eeaders  of  the  Proceedings  will  remember  the  outlines  of  the
experiment.  In  Latin,  and  in  purposely  intricate  and  difficult
sentences,  the  trance-personality  called  MyersP  is  asked  to  try
a  new  and  complex  type  of  cross-correspondence  by  giving  to
two  mediums  two  different  messages,  with  apparently  no  con-
nection between  them,  and  afterwards  to  a  third  medium  a
third  message  revealing  the  hidden  connection.  Some  time
after  the  transmission  of  this  message  MyersP  asks  Mr.  Pid-
dington whether  Mrs.  Verrall  has  received  his  reference  to  Hope,
Browning,  and  Star,  and  thus  directs  his  attention  to  a  script  of
Mrs.  Verrall's  where  Browning's  poem  AM  Vogler  is  mentioned.
Mr.  Piddington  reads  Alt  Vogler,  and  there  finds  a  passage
which  seems  to  him  to  symbolise  in  an  appropriate  and
ingenious  manner  the  idea  of  the  co-operation  of  the  three
mediums  expressed  in  the  Latin  message ;  in  music,  the  poet
says,  the  gift  is  allowed  to  man  "  that  out  of  three  sounds
1  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  312-416. 2  Ibid.  Vol.  XXV.,  p.  78.


148


Mrs.  Anna  Hade,  Ph.D.


[part


he  frame,  not  a  fourth  sound,  but  a  star."  As,  moreover,  the
script  begins  with  the  word  Aster  (i.e.  star),  and  Miss  Verrall
a  few  days  after  its  production  has  drawn  a  star,  it  seems
probable  to  Mr.  Piddington  that  MyersP  has  in  this  way  meant
to  answer  the  message,  and  that  all  that  is  now  wanting  is
his  affirmation  through  Mrs.  Piper  of  this  being  really  the
case.  A  couple  of  months  pass  with  no  definite  result ;  but
at  last  the  name  Alt  Voglcr  is  spelt  out  ;  a  fortnight  later
the  line  about  the  fourth  sound  and  the  star  is  given.  And
in  two  sittings  with  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  MyersP  clearly  states
that  this  line  contains  his  answer  to  the  Latin  message.1

Thus  presented,  with  a  great  many  details  omitted,  the
experiment  looks  fairly  successful.  Put  there  is  one  circum-
stance which  cannot  be  omitted.  When  MyersP  in  his  two
meetings  with  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  shortly  recapitulates  the  whole
experiment,  he  shows  no  comprehension  whatever  of  its
leading  idea ;  he  knows  of  no  cross-correspondence  save  the
simple  one  between  two  mediums,  viz.  Mrs.  Verrall  and
Mrs.  Piper.2  But,  this  being  the  case,  how  is  the  line  about
the  fourth  sound  and  the  star  to  be  accounted  for  ?  No
longer  a  symbol  of  the  co-operation  of  three  mediums,  it  has
lost  its  meaning  in  relation  to  the  message.  And  yet  MyersP
has  quoted  it  as  an  appropriate  reply.

No  doubt  it  is  some  such  train  of  thought  that  has,  for
instance,  made  Mr.  Balfour 3  declare  "  that  he  feels  inclined
to  put  the  Alt  Voglcr  incident  in  the  class  of  thought-
transference  from  those  present "  ;  Mr.  Podmore 4  goes  further,
and  sums  up  the  result  of  the  whole  experiment  in  the  ver-
dict "  that  the  Piper-Myers  is  an  intelligence  of  distinctly
inferior  capacity " ;  and  Mr.  Bayfield,  in  his  review,  says  that
the  incident  "  has  always  seemed  to  him  peculiarly  damaging
to  his  claims."  But  is  it  possible  to  aecpiiesce  in  this  result?
Has  not  every  reader  who  has  followed  MyersP  through  the
numerous  dialogues  where  the  Latin  message  is  dealt  with  felt

1  "  The  lines  which  1  quoted  before  [viz.  'instead  of  a  fourth  sound  came  a
star']  were  the  most  appropriate  I  could  find."

2  "  He  wished  me  to  give  a  message  through  Mrs.  Verrall  and  this  light
concerning  the  same  subject."

3  The  Hibbert  Journal  of  Jan.,  1909,  p.  259.

4  The  Newer  Spiritualism,  p.  254.


LXV.]


The  Latin  Message  Experiment.


149


that  qualities  are  there  displayed  not  to  be  accounted  for  by
thought-transference  nor  bearing  the  stamp  of  mental  incapacity  ?
It  is  true  that  the  issue  of  the  experiment  is  self-contradictory,
and  can  only  be  explained  on  the  presumption  of  some  mis-
understanding having  taken  place  between  the  trance-personality
and  the  experimenters.  But,  if  we  review  its  different  phases
in  the  light  of  the  whole  of  it,  I  believe  we  shall  find  that
such  is  the  case ;  moreover,  that  the  misunderstanding  will  be
the  means  of  revealing  the  trance-personality  as  more  inde-
pendent and,  perhaps,  more  intelligent  than  a  successful  ex-
periment might  have  done.  Along  these  lines,  then,  I  beg
the  readers  to  accompany  me,  though  the  task  cannot,  I  fear,
be  so  easy  as  I  could  wish.

The  message,  which  I  think  it  necessary  to  give  in  ex-
tenso,  runs  as  follows :

Diversis  internuntiis  quod  invicem  inter  se  respondentia  jamdudum
committis,  id  nec  fallit  nos  consilium,  et  vehementer  probamus,
Unum  accesserit  gratissimum  nobis,  si,  cum  duobus  quibusdam  ea
tradideris,  inter  quae  nullus  appareat  nexus,  postea  quam  primum
rem  per  tertium  aliquem  ita  perficias,  ut  latens  illud  in  prioribus
explicetur.

The  literal  translation  into  English  is  as  follows :

As  to  the  fact  that  for  some  long  time  past  you  have  been  entrusting
to  different  intermediaries  things  which  correspond  mutually  between
themselves,  we  have  observed  your  design,  and  we  cordially  approve
it.  One  thing  besides  this  most  agreeable  to  us  will  have  happened
if,  when  you  shall  have  delivered  to  two  particular  persons  things
between  which  no  connection  is  apparent,  afterwards  as  soon  as
possible  through  some  third  person  you  so  complete  the  matter  that
that  which  was  latent  in  the  first  two  may  be  revealed.

The  message  was  dictated  in  small  portions  in  five  sittings
from  Dec.  17,  1906,  to  Jan.  2,  1907.  It  appeared  to  be
extremely  difficult  for  the  trance-personalities  to  catch  the
sound  of  it.  Again  and  again  the  words  and  sentences  had
to  be  repeated,  long  after  the  whole  of  it  had  been  delivered.
Thus  jamdudum  committis  was  spelt  out  twice  on  Jan.  16  :
most  of  the  message  was  repeated  on  Jan.  23  ;  the  first
sentence  on  Feb.  19,  with  a  special  repetition  of  jamdudum  ;


150


Mrs.  Anna  Hade,  Ph.D.


[part


and  the  last  sentence  on  Feb.  27  and  later.  And  yet  it
seems  to  have  reached  MyersP  in  fragments  only ;  a  natural
consequence  of  its  being,  presumably,  transmitted  orally  through
an  intermediary  who  did  not  himself  (or  herself)  understand
one  word  of  it. It  is  true  that  Mr.  Piddin°;ton  at  the  begin-

o  o

ning  of  the  experiment  had  asked  "  Hector "  if  he  had  any
means  of  registering  permanently  the  words  dictated  to  him;
but  Eector  had  made  no  answer,  and  from  many  following
incidents  it  is  evident  that  he  did  not  do  this,  but  repeated
the  Latin  "  by  sound "}  On  account  of  this  slow  and  uncer-
tain method  of  transmission  all  efforts  for  a  long  time  must
be  directed  to  the  translation  of  the  message,  as  a  necessary
introduction  to  its  being  replied  to.  On  Jan.  2,  while  the
last  sentence  was  still  incomplete,  Eector  said :  "  Hodgson  is
helping  Myers  with  his  translation " ;  a  little  later  MyersP
himself  expressed  his  willingness  to  translate  the  Latin.  On
Feb.  27  he  said  that  he  had  wished  to  translate  the  whole
message  into  English ;  in  his  own  opinion  he  had  then
translated  the  beginning  of  it.  That  the  trance-personalities
might  have  accomplished  the  feat,  if  all  the  words  had
reached  them  correctly,  is  made  probable  among  other  things
from  an  incident  which  took  place  on  Feb.  19.  Mr.  Pidding-
ton  was  repeating  some  of  the  Latin  to  HodgsonP  on  behalf
of  MyerSp ;  when  he  had  pronounced  jamdudum  committis
HodgsonP  asked  for  "  the  next  to  the  last  word "  to  be
repeated  once  more.  Mr.  Piddington  now  told  him  that  the
first  syllable  was  "  spelt  like  the  English  word  jam — preserves."
"  Oh  yes,  I  understand,  Marmalade,"  HodgsonP  exclaimed — and
the  difficulty  was  conquered ;  the  word  once  really  grasped  its
meaning  was  understood  immediately,  for  at  the  following
sittings  jamdudum  was  rightly  translated  "  long  since ".  At
the  same  time,  if  a  simple  syllable  like  jam  was  so  difficult
to  grasp,  it  is  no  wonder  that  a  correct  transmission  of  the
whole  message  proved  impossible.

Under  these  circumstances  MyersP  of  course  could  not  for  a

1  See  his  remarks  to  Dr.  Hodgson  on  Feb.  25,  1903  :  "  We  do  not  clearly
see  the  registering  as  thou  dost.  We  repeat  by  sound"  (Proc,  Vol.  XXIV.,
p.  555).  Mr.  Piddington  informs  me  that  Eector  or  Hodgsonp  somewhere
claimed  to  be  able  to  make  a  permanent  register,  but  perhaps  this  could  not
be  done  immediately.


lxv.]  The  Latin  Message  Experiment.  151


long  while  think  of  answering  the  message ;  several  times  he
begged  Mr.  Piddington  to  be  patient  with  him.1  But  an  im-
pression of  its  general  meaning  he  had  no  doubt  received.  An
utterance  to  Mr.  Piddington  on  Jan.  23  points  to  this:  "I
believe,"  he  says,  "  I  can  send  you  a  message  which  will  please
you,  if  I  understand  it  [the  message]  clearly."  The  conception
he  had  formed  appears  in  his  first  attempt  to  reply.  The  idea
he  got,  he  says  on  Feb.  20,  repeating  it  on  Feb.  27,  was  that
lie  should  be  a  messenger,  an  intermediary.  It  is  the  word
internuntiis  he  has  misheard  as  inter nv.ntius  and  applied  to
himself,  while  in  the  message  it  is  used  to  designate  another
kind  of  intermediaries — the  mediums  or  automatists.  The  con-
sequences of  his  being  led  to  think  of  himself  as  an  inter-
mediary between  the  living  and  the  dead,  between  earth  and
"  heaven ",  will  appear  later.  That  he  got  no  further  in  his
understanding  of  the  message  was  for  one  thing 2  due  to  the
fact  that  the  part  referring  to  the  third  medium  at  this  point
had,  so  to  speak,  disappeared  from  the  problem.  On  Jan.  23
MyerSp  had  told  Mr.  Piddington  that  he  would  like  to  go
over  "  the  first  and  second  sentences "  of  the  message ;  Mr.
Piddington  had  then  repeated  it  from  the  beginning  as  far  as
nexus.  Possibly  MyersP  thought  that  he  had  now  got  the
whole  message  ; 3  in  any  case  the  difficulties  of  transmission
make  it  unthinkable  that  its  final  sentence  should  have  been
understood  at  an  earlier  date ;  thus  for  a  time  it  was  com-
pletely lost  sight  of.

This  was  the  situation  immediately  before  the  production  of
Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Jan.  28,  destined  to  play  a  prominent
part  in  the  history  of  the  message.  A  fortnight  later,  on
Feb.  11,  the  following  conversation  took  place  between  MyersP
and  Mr.  Piddinoton  :

M.  Did  she  [Mrs.  Verrall]  receive  the  word  Evangelical?
Mr.  P.  I  don't  know,  but  I  will  enquire.

1  See  on  Jan.  15  and  16,  Feb.  6  and  12.

2  Another  ground  for  his  acquiescing  in  his  first  conception  of  the  message
is  to  be  found  in  the  circumstance  that  Mr.  Piddington,  to  prevent  him  from
guessing  the  real  point  of  it,  had,  on  Jan.  16,  highly  recommended  cross-cor-
respondences of  the  simple  type.  Myersp  had,  in  this  way,  been  led  to  regard
them  with  increased  interest;  vide  Rector's  remark  on  Jan.  22  (Proc,  Vol.
XXII.,  p.  231):  "Myers  is  specially  interested  in  taking  messages."

3  Cf.  p.  155,  note.


152


Mrs.  Anna  Hude,  Plt.D.


[part


M.  I  referred  also  to  Browning  again.

Mr.  P.  Do  you  remember  what  your  exact  reference  to  Browning  was  1
M.  Yes. I  referred  to  Hope  and  Browning. I  also  said  Star.

He  was  interrupted  here,  but  before  departing  said :  "  Mean-
while look  out  for  Hope  Star  and  Browning."

In  the  sittings  of  Feb.  27  and  March  6  it  became  evident
that  Evangelical  was  a  mistake  for  Evelyn,  this  name  together
with  Hope  being  the  title  of  one  of  Browning's  poems,  while
Star  referred  to  another,  My  Star ;  but  of  course  it  was  impos-
sible to  suspect  this  at  that  time.  Mr.  Picldington  found  in
Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Jan.  28  both  Star  (Aster)  and,  among
divers  quotations  from  Browning,  the  line  "  the  hope  that
leaves  the  earth  for  the  sky,"  where  hope  had  been  substituted
for  "  passion  ",  and  by  means  of  this  substitution,  perhaps,  the"
more  emphasised.  So  on  the  following  day  he  told  MyersP
that  "  the  message  he  said  he  gave  to  Mrs.  Verrall  about
Browning,  Star  and  Hope "  had  come  out  clearly.  MyersP
was  very  pleased  to  hear  this,  and  it  will  be  seen  that  after-
wards he  felt  sure  that  Evelyn  Hope  and  My  Star  had
appeared  in  a  script  of  Mrs.  Arerrall's.

About  a  week  after  this  incident,  on  Feb.  20,  MyersP  made
his  first  attempt  to  reply  to  the  Latin  message.  It  was  with
extremely  different  preconceptions  that  he  and  Mr.  Piddington
came  together  on  this  day — Mr.  Piddington  filled  with  the
idea  that  the  message  had  already  been  answered  ;  MyersP
hesitating,  conscious  that  his  understanding  of  it  was  incomplete.1
As  might  be  expected,  the  result  was  small.  MyersP  began : 2
"  The  idea  I  got  was  that  I  should  be  a  messenger  and  hand
through  [i.e.  committor]  coherent  messages  [i.e.  invicem  inter  se
respondentia]  to  you  "  ;  but  as  Mr.  Piddington  remained  silent —
only  asking  for  repetition  of  an  illegible  word — he  interrupted
himself  and  said :  "  I  will  go  over  my  utterances  again  and
repeat  them  here  to  you."  This  it  was  agreed  upon  should  be
done  a  week  later.

1  See  his  utterances  on  Feb.  11  :  "I  will  let  you  know  at  our  next  meeting
how  far  I  have  understood"  ;  and  on  Feb.  '21  :  "As  far  as  I  could  understand,
and  I  may  have  to  think  it  over  again  ..."

2  Of  course  I  must  abbreviate  the  extracts,  skipping  repetitions  and  the
like  ;  but  I  trust  that  the  reader  will  find  I  have  omitted  nothing  that  has
any  bearing  upon  the  question.


LXV.]


The  Latin  Message  Experiment.


And  this  time  he  is  determined  to  give  his  opinion.  On
the  whole,  it  is  characteristic  of  the  Latin  message  case  that
the  trance-personality,  when  at  a  standstill,  far  from  making
guesses  or  feeling  his  way,  simply  defers  his  answer  to  a  later
sitting,  and  in  the  mean  time  seems  to  go  on  with  his  own
train  of  thought.  On  Feb.  27  MyersP,  on  meeting  Mr.  Pid-
dington,  immediately  reverts  to  the  question.  Assuming  as
before  that  it  is  he  who  is  the  internxmtius  of  the  message,  he
gives  the  following  version  of  its  beginning :  "  Although  you
as  intermediary  have  long  since  united  mutually  ideas,  you  fail,"
continuing  without  reference  to  the  actual  words :  "  to  convince
us  of  your  existence."  Jamdudum  has  here  found  its  place  as
"  long  since ",  and  "  united  mutually  ideas  "  shows  better  than
the  earlier  translation — "  coherent  messages  " — that  invicem  inter
sc  respondentia  has  been  comprehended.  Quod  has  been  taken
to  mean  "  although  "  ;  "  you  fail "  is  a  mistake,  caused  probably
by  the  Latin  word  fallit :  a  mistake,  however,  which  is  the
outcome  of  a  most  logical  reasoning.  MyersP  has  no  knowledge
of  the  plan  about  the  third  medium,  and,  therefore,  must
believe  that  it  is  a  simple  cross-correspondence  he  "  as  interme-
diary "  is  asked  to  bring  about ;  this  is  what  he  has  "  long  since  "
done  ;  accordingly,  something  must  be  wrong  with  his  former
experiments.  How  necessary  it  is  for  him  to  state  things
logically  is  seen  from  the  paraphrase  of  the  same  sentence
he  on  May  27  gives  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  Then  he  has  long
aero  understood  that  the  message  contained  no  blame  against
him ;  so  he  gives  the  beginning  of  it  in  the  following  words  :
"  You  have  long  since  been  trying  to  assimilate  ideas."  It  is
''  failed  "  in  disguise — indispensable  if  the  want  of  a  new  cross-
correspondence  should  be  properly  explained.

This  much  for  the  translation.  Even  Mr.  Podmore  admits
that  it  would  be  impossible  to  give  it  without  some  knowledge
of  Latin.  The  mistake  of  it — the  belief  of  MyersP  that  his
performances  were  thought  unconvincing — was,  however,  destined
to  have  far-reaching  consequences.  It  led  him  to  mention  a
few  of  these  performances,  and  among  them  Browning's  poems
Evelyn  Hope  and  My  Star.  The  importance  of  this  will  appear
from  an  extract  of  the  conversation  held  on  Peb.  27  between
himself  and  Mr.  Piddington.  MyersP  has  given  his  "  transla-
tion "  and  continues :


154


Mrs.  Anna  Hude,  Ph.D.


[part


Now  I  believe  that  since  you  sent  this  message  to  me  I  have
sufficiently  replied  to  your  various  questions  to  convince  the
ordinary  scientific  mind  that  I  am  at  least  a  fragment  of
the  once  incarnate  individual  whom  you  called  Myers.

Mr.  P.  You  say  you  have  replied.  Tell  me  in  what  messages
your  reply  is  given.

M.  In  my  messages  reported  here  and  through  Mrs.  Verrall.  The
poems,  the  Halcyon  days,  Evangelic.  .  .  .

Mr.  P.  Tell  me  what  poems.

M.  Chiefly  Browning's  lines  as  given  through  Mrs.  Verrall.

Mr.  P.  Thank  you  very  much.  I  think  you  are  making  it  clear ;
but  I  want  you  to  make  it  completely  clear.  I  think  if
you  can  get  through  a  clear  and  complete  answer  to  my
Latin  message  you  will  have  forged  a  new  and  strong  link
in  the  claim  of  evidence  for  survival  of  bodily  death.

M.  I  understood  that  you  asked  me  to  reply  referring  to  my
utterances  through  Mrs.  Verrall.

Mr.  P.  Now  I  think  you  have  done  enough  for  to-day  in  the
matter  of  replying  to  the  Latin  message.

MyerSp  then  asked  for  the  last  sentence  of  the  Latin  to
be  repeated,  which  was  done.  Afterwards  Mr.  Piddington
said  :

I  want  to  say  that  you  have,  I  believe,  given  an  answer  worthy
of  your  intelligence — not  to-day,  I  mean,  but  some  time  back
— but  the  interpretation  must  not  be  mine.  You  must  explain
your  answer  at  this  light.

M.  Yes.

Mr.  P.  You  could  do  it  in  two  words.

M.  Yes,  I  understand.

Mr.  P.  Well?

M.  Hope  Star.

Mr.  P.  Well?  Yes?

M.  Browning.

Mr.  P.  Exactly. It  couldn't  be  better.
M.  That  is  my  answer.

Mr.  P.  I  can't  thank  you  enough.  That  is  what  I  have  been
waiting  for.

M.  Well  what  I  wished  was  to  translate  the  whole  message  for
you  into  English.  But  from  your  kindness  in  replying  to
my  request  in  repeating  the  whole  of  the  last  sentence  so


LXV.]


The  Latin  Message  Experiment.


155


that  each  word  reached  my  understanding  clearly  and  con-
cisely I  am  able  with  Pelham's  help  to  reply  to-day.

Mr.  P.  Translate  into  English  certainly,  if  you  like.  ...  In
telling  me  that  "  Browning,  Hope  and  a  Star "  contains
your  answer  to  the  Latin  message  you  have  given  an
answer  which  to  me  is  both  intelligible  and  clear ;  but  still
I  should  like  you  to  bring  out  one  more  point  still,  so  as
to  leave  no  doubt  in  any  one's  mind  of  your  meaning.

M.  My  Star.  Evely.  ...  I  am  too  [weak]  to  tell  it  to-day.  My
thoughts  wander.  .  .  .

Seen  in  the  light  of  later  developments,  it  will  probably  be
clear  to  all  readers  that  Mr.  Piddington  and  MyersP  have
spoken  of  quite  different  things.  MyersP  does  not  mean  that
he  has  answered  the  Latin  message,  but  mentions  his  replies
to  Mr.  Piddington's  various  questions  and  the  cross-correspon-
dences between  Mrs.  Piper  and  Mrs.  Verrall  as  performances
that  are  not  quite  despicable.  When  in  the  midst  of  this
Mr.  Piddington  reverts  to  the  Latin  message,  he  doesn't  seem
to  comprehend  why  the  conversation  has  been  turned  that
way,  but  says  with  some  astonishment :  "  I  understood  that  you
asked  me  to  reply  referring  to  my  utterances  through  Mrs.
Verrall,"  i.e.  to  the  cross-correspondences.  And  beginning  now
to  suspect  that  Mr.  Piddington  is  speaking  of  something  he
doesn't  understand,  he  asks  for  a  repetition  of  the  last  sentence
of  the  message.  Afterwards  Mr.  Piddington  praises  him  for
the  reply  already  given,  but  adds  that  he  must  explain  it
through  Mrs.  Piper.  MyersP  tries  to  escape  with  a  vague
"  Yes,"  but  Mr.  Piddington  continues :  "  You  could  do  it  in
two  words."  It  is  fatal,  but  not  to  be  wondered  at,  that
MyerSp  believes  that  Mr.  Piddington  has  in  mind  the  two
words  of  the  cross-correspondence  that  has  formerly  been  spoken
of  as  a  great  success — Hope  and  Star.  Evidently  he  is  unable
to  understand  his  enthusiasm  on  receiving  them,1  and  quite
at  a  loss when  asked  to  "  bring  out  one  more point."  He

xAt  this  point  lie  offers  to  reply,  then  and  there,  remarking  that  the  whole
of  the  last  sentence  has  now  reached  his  understanding,  thus  implying  that
he  has  not  understood  it  before.  As  his  offer  is  not  accepted,  it  is  impossible
to  conjecture  what  and  how  much  he  has  really  grasped.  To  judge  from
later  sittings,  and  from  the  manner  in  which  the  first  sentence  was  received,
it  has  been  fragments  only  (cf.  p.  169,  note  1).


156


Mrs.  Anna  Hude,  Ph.D.


[part


makes  a  feeble  attempt  to  explain,  faltering  out  at  last  the
real  titles  of  the  two  poems,  and  leaves  the  matter  there  for
the  time  being.

As  usual  MyerSp  apparently  does  some  thinking  before  he
goes  to  another  meeting.  Meanwhile,  I  want  to  point  out
how  strongly  the  view  taken  above  is  confirmed  by  the  con-
versation, on  March  G,  between  Mr.  Piddington  and  the
trance-personality  "  George  Pelham  ",  who  seems  determined  to
throw  a  little  light  upon  the  case.  "  Did  he  [i.e.  Myers]  tell
you  about  My  Star  ? "  he  asks.  "  He  did,-'  Mr.  Piddington
replies ;  "  can  you  explain  about  My  Star  ?  "  "  Yes  it  was  a
poem  he  had  on  his  mind  of  Browning's."  "  And  why  had
he  this  poem  on  his  mind  ? "  "  He  said  because  it  was  one
of  his  test  experiments  with  a  lady  in  the  body  to  whom  he
refers  as  V.  He  also  had  another :  Evelyn — Evelyn  Hope."
"  Is  that  the  explanation  of  the  word  which  came  out  here
as  Evangelical  ?  " "  Yes."

Nothing  could  be  clearer.  Afterwards  George  Pelham  repeats
the  "  translation "  given  by  MyersP  of  the  beginning  of  the
message,  adding  to  it  as  follows :  "  Now  if  you  can  give  a
clear  message  through  Mrs.  V.  and  reproduce  it  here  it  will
convince."  A  little  later  he  says :  "  And  the  answer  was
that  lie  had  given  a  message,  viz.  Browning  Star  Hope,  and
reproduced  it  here."  This  is  what  George  Pelham  feels  justi-
fied in  concluding  from  the  sitting  of  Feb.  27  where  Mr.
Piddington  had  praised  MyersP  for  his  answer  through  Mrs.
Verrall,  and  afterwards  warmly  thanked  him  for  the  repetition
of  the  three  words.  Mr.  Piddington  replies :  "  You  show  a
general  knowledge  of  the  meaning  of  the  message ;  but  one
special  point  you  have  not  brought  out.  The  answer  he  gave
to  Mrs.  Verrall  was  clever  and  characteristic ;  but  though  he
has  referred  to  that  here,  he  has  not  made  it  clear  here  why
it  was  so  appropriate."

In  these  words  Mr.  Piddington  has  confirmed  the  conception
of  the  Latin  message  as  referring  to  cross-correspondence  between
Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Piper ;  he  has  stated  that  he  believes
it  to  have  been  answered  through  Mrs.  Verrall  and  a  reference
to  this  answer  to  be  contained  in  the  words  Hope,  Star  and
Browning.  From  this  moment  the  actual  message  has  lost
all  importance. George  Pelham,  on  asking  for  a  repetition  of


LXV.]  The  Latin  Message  Experiment  157

the  "  lines  in  Latin "  which  referred  to  the  "  special  point ",
got  the  last  sentence  spelt  out ;  but  it  is  evident  that  small
use  was  made  of  the  fragments  which  eventually  came  through,1
— the  trance-personalities  taking  it  for  granted  that  they  con-
tained much  the  same  as  Mr.  Piddington's  own  utterances.
What  in  this  way  was  put  into  them  may  be  seen  from  the
version  MyersP,  on  May  27,  gave  of  the  message  to  Sir  Oliver
Lodge;  "he  [Mr.  Piddington]  mentioned  my  own  words  in
it,"  he  says,  "  viz.  the  survival  of  bodily  death  " ;  this  expression
from  the  title  of  Frederic  Myers's  great  work  had  been  used
by  Mr.  Piddington  on  Feb.  27  in  connection  with  the  message.2

Thus  MyerSp  never  got  to  know  what  Mr.  Piddington  had
really  wanted  him  to  do.  A  new  direction  was  given  to  the
experiment,  and  MyersP  had  got  a  quite  new  task  before  him.
After  the  sitting  of  Feb.  27,  and  still  more  after  George
Pelham's  conversation  with  Mr.  Piddington,  he  could  not  help
seeing  that  the  latter,  when  speaking  of  "  Hope  Star  Browning  ",
had  meant  something  different  from  what  he  had  himself  clone.
When  George  Pelham  had  left,  Rector  says :  "  I  understand
it  was  a  cross-correspondence  message  and  to  her  [Mrs.  Verrall]
he  gave  the  same  words  that  I  brought  out  here " ;  and
Myersp  adds :  "  it  was  the  poem  in  which  Hope  and  Star
came  out,"  thus  showing  that  he  no  longer  thinks  that  Mr.
Piddington  had  referred  to  the  two  poems  which  had  been
the  subjects  of  his  own  experiments,  but  has  begun  to  com-
prehend that  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  contained  another  Browning-
poem  about  hope  and  star.

A  question  which  here  presents  itself  is  that  of  the  relation
of  MyersP  to  the  script  of  Mrs.  Verrall.  It  is  a  question,
however,  that  can  only  be  answered  through  the  solving  of
the  larger  problem — that  of  the  identity  of  MyersP.  Here
it  must  suffice  to  say  that  MyersP  himself  claims  to  take  a
part  in  the  production  of  the  script,  and  that  his  claim  is
supported  by  the  knowledge  of  it  which  he  no  doubt  displays.
How  far  it  is  probable  that  he  can  have  acquired  this  knowledge
in  other  ways — by  mind-reading  or  through  the  utterances  of
the  experimenters — the  study  of  the  case  itself  must  show.
Provisionally  it  must  be  allowable  to  adopt  the  first  alter-
native.

1  V.  p.  169,  note  1.  -  V.  p.  154.


15S


Mrs.  Anna  Hude,  Ph.D.


[part


But,  even  if  we  suppose  that  part  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  is
due  to  impressions  received  from  the  personality  who  claims
to  be  Myers,  he  could  not  know  for  certain  whether  those
impressions  came  really  through  ;  "  I  am  very  pleased  to  hear
that  she  fully  registered  the  thoughts  I  indubitably  gave  her,"
he  says  once,  when  told  of  a  success.1  And  no  doubt  he
might  in  the  course  of  time  forget  some  of  his  attempts.  In
the  present  case,  it  must  be  remembered  that  no  script  of
Mrs.  Verrall  had  for  MyersP  the  importance  which  Mr.
Piddington  ascribed  to  one  of  them — that  of  being  the  answer
to  the  Latin  message.  Neither  could  it  be  of  much  help  to
him  to  have  learned  that  Hope  and  Star  played  a  part  in
the  poem,  if  he  had  not  thought  specially  of  these  words
when  he  gave  it.

With  Browning,  however,  it  was  quite  different.  There  is
every  reason  to  believe  that  the  Latin  message  had  made
MyerSp  think  of  Browning,  as  he  himself  says  later.  The
message  had  made  him  realise  his  position  as  an  intermediary
between  two  worlds ;  such  a  thought  might  well  have  filled
his  mind  with  recollections  of  words  and  lines  from  this
poet  that  speak  of  earth  and  heaven  and  the  intercourse  between
them,  and  induced  him  to  attempt  to  bring  them  out  in  a
script  of  Mrs.  Verrall's.  Such  a  script  had  been  produced ;
and  he  seems  to  know  of  its  existence  even  if  he  could  have
only  a  general  notion  of  its  contents.

The  script  is  that  of  Jan.  28,  1907,  spoken  of  above,  and
runs  as  follows  :

Aster  [star]

repas  [wonder]

the  world's  wonder

And  all  a  wonder  and  a  wild  desire.

The  very  wings  of  her

A  WINGED  DESIRE

iVo7i-Tepos  epws  [winged  love]

Then  there  is  Blake

and  mocked  my  loss  of  liberty.

But  it  is  all  the  same  thing — the  winged  desire  epois  ttoQulvos
[passion]  the  hope  that  leaves  the  earth  for  the  sky — Abt


lProc,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  55.


LXV.]


The  Latin  Message  Experiment.


159


Vogler — for  earth  too  hard  that  found  itself  or  lost  itself —
in  the  sky.
That  is  what  I  want —
On  the  earth  the  broken  sounds

threads
In  the  sky  the  perfect  arc.
The  C  major  of  this  life
But  your recollection  is  at  fault


ADB  is  the  part  that  unseen  completes  the  arc.

No  doubt  the  personality  who  impressed  these  words  was
filled  with  thoughts  of  an  unseen  world — of  the  hope  that  leaves
earth  to  find  it,  the  winged  desire  that  overleaps  distance — and
strove  to  express  them  through  all  that  came  to  his  mind  about
that  which  was  "  all  the  same  thing  ".  That  more  may  have  been
in  his  thoughts  without  gaining  expression  goes  without  saying.

That  MyerSp  had  in  his  thoughts  reverted  to  this  script  is
seen  already  on  March  6  before  Mr.  Piddington's  conversation
with  George  Pelham.  Spontaneously  and  for  the  first  time  he
speaks  of  his  attempt  to  draw  through  Mrs.  Verrall  a  circle  and
a  triangle.  This  refers  to  an  experiment  suggested  by  Mr.  Pid-
dington  on  Jan.  16,  and  though  the  drawings  in  the  script  of
Jan.  28  serve  another  purpose,  it  can  scarcely  be  doubted  that
it  is  these  figures  MyersP  is  thinking  of ;  they  appear  in  no
other  script  of  Mrs.  Verrall's.  On  March  13  he  connects  them
directly  with  the  Latin  message.


IGO


Mrs.  Anna  Hucle,  PJt.D.


[part


I  have  tried  to  trace  the  thoughts  of  MyersP  after  the  sitting
of  Feb.  27.  But  of  course  he  couldn't  at  once  feel  certain  that
he  was  on  the  riqht  track.  When  on  March  13  Mr.  Piddinsfton
asked  for  a  clear  answer,  he  said  openly  :  "  I  think  I  can  get
your  idea  and  when  it  is  quite  clear  to  me  I  shall  give  my
answer.  I  believe  I  get  a  glimmer  of  what  you  wish."  At
this  time  he  is  groping  his  way,  so  to  speak.  At  the  beginning
of  the  sitting  he  himself  had  introduced  the  question,  saying :
"  I  understood  your  reference  to  the  poem  in  your  Latin  message
to  me  which  led  me  to  refer  to  Browning,  and  the  circle  gave
me  a  better  understanding  of  it,  as  it  came  to  me  through  this
light.  I  helped  Mrs.  Verrall  to  draw  it."  As  Mr.  Piddington
did  not  understand  this  utterance,  MyersP  added :  "  Re-read  the
part  where  you  refer  to  the  poem,"  and,  Mr.  Piddington  now
denying  that  the  message  referred  to  a  poem,  he  continued :
"  Not  exactly  to  a  poem,  but  it  suggested  a  poem  to  my  mind.
Hence  B  H  S  etc."  With  this  correction  the  utterance  may  be
taken  to  mean :  "  I  understood  your  reference  to  another  life
[i.e.  to  '  messenger ']  in  the  message  which  [reference]  led  me
to  refer  to  Browning ;  as  this  reference  came  to  me  through
Mrs.  Piper  [i.e.  through  the  mention  of  '  Survival ']  the  remem-
brance of  the  circle  [i.e.  of  the  script  of  Jan.  28]  made  me
understand  it."  Later  in  the  sitting  Mr.  Piddington  asked  him
to  make  it  clear  why  the  passage  given  to  Mrs.  Verrall  and
described  through  Mrs.  Piper  as  "  Browning,  Hope  and  Star "
furnished  an  excellent  answer  to  the  message.  Mr.  Piddington
himself  points  out  that  he  ought  not  to  have  said  "  the  passage  ",
as  the  line  about  the  star  was  not  quoted  in  Mrs.  Verrall's
script ;  at  all  events  MyersP  must  needs  take  it  to  mean  the
poem.  "  Poem  ?"  he  asked,  "  I  understand  she  [Mrs.  Verrall]  got
it  in  my  answer,  but  I  did  not  give  it  here ;  is  that  what  you
say?"  This  is  a  concise  statement  of  his  view  of  the  case:  he  has
given  through  Mrs.  Verrall  quotations  from  a  poem  or  the  title
of  a  poem  which  he  has  not  given  through  Mrs.  Piper.  What
he  now  wants  is  to  have  the  correctness  of  this  conception
confirmed.  When  Mr.  Piddin«?ton  asks  him  to  qive  "a  detailed
reference  to  a  particular  passage,"  he  answers  vaguely :  "  Oh  yes
I  understand,"  and  the  sentence  is  altered  to :  "I  want  you  to
give  more  details  through  this  light."  This  at  last  is  some-
thing he  can understand. It  is  with evident  joy  that  he


LXV.]


The  Latin  Message  Experiment.


161


answers :  "  I  see  now  what  you  wish  me  to  [do] :  repeat  or
give  more  words  perhaps.  I  understand  and  will  go  over  it
and  do  so.  T  for  the  first  time  clearly  understand  your  special
point1.  You  have  at  last  made  me  understand,  I  am  glad  to
say."  This  is  his  last  meeting  with  Mr.  Piddington,  but  he
has  now  got  a  firm  basis  to  stand  upon.  It  seems  clear  to  him
that  one  of  the  Browning  poems  referring  to  another  life —
i.e.  to  hope  of  Survival — which  he,  impressed  by  the  thought
of  being  an  intermediary,  has  quoted  through  Mrs.  Verrall —
a  poem  about  stars,  too — has  been  taken  by  Mr.  Piddington  to
be  a  direct  answer  to  the  message,  and  that  by  showing  his
knowledge  of  it,  by  "  repeating  or  giving  more  words  perhaps,"
he  can  complete  the  cross-correspondence  message  wanted  from
him.2

At  the  first  sitting,  on  March  20,  with  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  who
had  taken  the  place  of  Mr.  Piddington,  MyersP  displays  great
eagerness  to  get  his  view  confirmed  by  the  new  leader  of  the

1  This  expression  dates  from  the  conversation  with  George  Pelham  (v.  p.  150).

2  A  curious  mistake  occurred  at  the  sitting  of  March  13,  Myersp  transferring  to
the  Hope-Star-incident  a  number  of  details  belonging  to  another  case.  On  Feb.
12  Mr.  Piddington,  after  telling  him  that  "  Browning,  Star  and  Hope  "  had  come
out  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script,  added  that  he  had  succeeded  besides  in  getting
through  a  communication  which  he  himself  had  denied  having  seen,  but  which
Myers?  had  asserted  he  had  given  together  with  his  own  name  ;  it  referred
to  a  conversation  between  the  late  Mr.  Myers  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick.  A  few  days
before,  on  Feb.  5,  Myersp  had  been  in  a  great  hurry  ;  Eector  explained  that  he
was  going  to  give  a  message  to  Mrs.  Verrall.  On  Feb.  11  Myersp  connected  this
hurry  with  the  above-mentioned  script  where  his  name  was  given — as  a  matter  of
fact  this  script  was  produced  on  Feb.  4,  but  this  mistake  is  of  no  account  here —
saying  to  Mr.  Piddington  :  "  Did  I  not  tell  you  I  would  go  to  Mrs.  Verrall  ?  Did
I  not  refer  to  that  ?"  On  the  next  day  Mr.  Piddington  excused  his  own  mistake,
and  with  great  pleasure  acknowledged  that  Myersp  had  given  the  communication
and  signed  it  with  his  name  ;  Myersp  was  very  glad  at  having  succeeded.  Later,
however,  he  confused  the  two  things  he  had  been  praised  for  on  Feb.  12.  When
on  March  13  he  is  trying  to  recollect  the  script  of  Jan.  28  and  of  the  circle  he
says:  "IhelpedMrs.  Verrall  to  draw  it,"  and  adds  :  "  and  signed  my  name  to  it,"
and  afterwards:  "It  [the  Latin  message]  suggested  it  [the  poem]  so  strongly  I
rushed  off  to  Mrs.  Verrall,  gave  it  her,  rushed  back  here  and  although  you  did
not  understand  it  at  the  time,  you  did  later,  if  I  remember  rightly";  all  three
circumstances — the  signing  of  the  name,  the  hurrying  from  one  medium  to
another,  Mr.  Piddington's  not  having  understood  at  first — being  transferred  from
one  successful  case  to  the  other.  Mr.  Piddington's  answer:  "Yes  that  is  quite
right"  confirmed  him  in  his  mistake,  and  on  April  8  the  hurrying  from  Mrs.  Piper
to  Mrs.  Verrall  once  more  was  connected  with  the  writing  of  the  poem.

L


162


Mrs.  Anna  Hude,  Ph.D.


[part


experiment.  He  immediately  begins :  "  I  told  Mrs.  Verrall
about  Browning,  hope  of  [survival  of]  bodily  death. .  .  .  No  not
quite  understood.  I  said  I  told  her  of  the  passage  in  Browning's
poems  where  stars  and  life  meet."  "  Stars  and  life "  is  at  a
later  sitting  repeated  as  "  this  life  and  the  stars";  accordingly
life  means  life  after  death ;  "  hope  of  bodily  death  "  is  probably
abandoned  on  account  of  the  words  omitted ;  in  any  case  the
expression  shows  how  MyersP  had  combined  Hope  with  his  own
idea  of  the  point  of  the  message.  He  goes  on  asking  Mrs.
Sidgwick  whether  she  knows  which  poem  he  had  referred  to :
"  You  remember  Browning's  poem  I  was  fond  of  and  to  which
I  referred?"  "You  remember  the  poem  I  referred  to,  do  you
not?"  and  as  she  answered  vaguely:  "Yes  you  referred  to
poems  of  Browning":  "But  you  do  understand  which  one?"
It  is  evident  that  he  wants  to  be  sure  of  its  being  one  special
poem  Mr.  Piddington  is  thinking  of.  Of  course  he  doesn't  ask
her  what  poem  it  is.  On  the  contrary,  he  puts  the  question
almost  as  if  he  himself  knew  the  name  of  it ;  his  uncertainty
on  this  point  he  must  prefer  to  conceal  while  he  is  still  searching
his  memory  for  the  answer.

Mrs.  Sidgwick's  replies  to  the  utterances  of  MyersP,  on  March
20,  had  been  too  vague  to  help  him.  But  for  the  sitting  of
April  2  Mr.  Piddington  had  furnished  her  with  two  written
questions  to  be  answered  by  him,  of  which  the  first  gave  him
the  assurance  that  he  wanted.  "  Mr.  Piddington  says,"  Mrs.
Sidgwick  read,  "  you  promised  to  try  to  tell  us  what  particular
poem  of  Browning's  you  meant  to  refer  to  by  the  words  Brown-
ing, Hope  and  Star."  MyersP  replied  :  "  Oh  yes.  I  am  glad  you
remind  me  of  this  so  clearly.  I  will  answer  this  at  our  next
meeting.  Meanwhile  I  will  think  it  over."  The  simple  question
had  confirmed  him  in  his  opinion  and  held  no  disturbing  elements
like  those  which  had  confused  him  before ;  so,  leaving  aside  the
second  question  which  referred  to  "  the  passage  ",  he  on  the  very
next  occasion  when  Mrs.  Sidgwick  was  present  alone,  on  April  8,
made  his  first  attempt  to  answer  about  "  the  poem  ".

His  answer  was  that  it  was  Browning's  poem  La  Saisiaz
the  message  had  made  him  think  of.  "  Do  you  remember  the
Latin  message  ?  "  he  began ;  "  I  thought  I  could  tell  you  that
I  specially  thought  of  the  poem  about  the  stars  which  read
thus,"  afterwards  describing  it  in a  manner  that  sufficiently


LXV.]


The  Latin  Message  Experiment.


163


shows  what  he  is  thinking  of :  "  one  of  Browning's  poems
which  he  wrote  to  a  friend,"  "  lonely  wandering,"  "  which  had
also  hope."  This  long  poem,  as  will  be  remembered,  has  for
its  sole  subject  the  possibility  of  another  life ;  ending  with
a  vision  of  Hope,  whose  arrow  pierces  the  cloud  of  doubt.
MyerSp,  however,  was  far  from  sure  of  having  found  the  right
poem  ;  "  I  thought  I  could  tell  you  "  is  indicative  of  his  uncer-
tainty ;  "  specially "  shows  that  he  had  thought  of  more  than
one.  And  of  course  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  surprise  must  add  to  his
doubts.  So  at  the  sitting  of  April  17,  though  in  no  way
trying  to  cover  up  his  mistake — on  the  contrary  spontaneously
reverting  to  La  Saisiaz,  and  this  time  succeeding  in  giving  the
name — he  has  evidently  ceased  to  regard  it  as  the  poem  and
is  once  more  searching  his  memory.  But  it  will  be  seen
what  significance  this  attempt  has  even  through  being  a  failure.
Alt  Vogler  MyersP  might  have  got  by  mind-reading ;  La  Saisiaz
cannot  be  thus  explained,  while  it  is  easily  accounted  for  on  the
supposition  here  adopted.

Probably  MyersP  has  thought  of  other  possibilities,1  which
are,  however,  now  rejected,  as  at  this  point  he  has  found  the
poem — Abt  Vogler.  At  last  it  has  come  to  his  memory,  and
on  April  24  he  succeeds  in  getting  through  the  difficult  German
name.  That  he  is  right  now  he  has  not  the  slightest  doubt ;
Mrs.  Sidgwick's  thanks  tell  him  so,  but  he  is  also  him-
self fully  satisfied;  for  even  this  poem,  which  he  can  now
be  certain  of  having  quoted  through  Mrs.  Verrall,  more  than
anything  expresses  the  idea  that  for  him  has  been  the  central
thought of the message. "  The thing which impressed  me

1I  cannot  help  believing  that  Myersp  has  thought  of  the  sentence  "A  cloudless
sky  beyond  the  horizon "  as  possibly  belonging  to  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of
Jan.  2S.  On  March  6  it  is  connected  with  the  circle ;  on  April  10 — after
the  attempt  with  La  Saisiaz  on  April  8 — it  is  mentioned  again  :  on  April  15
Myersp  says  that  "  it  was  brought  to  his  mind  because  of  Piddington's  message,"
and  on  April  17  he  explains  :  "it  came  out  I  believe  with  a  star  being  drawn
(r.  p.  168)  .  .  .  horizon  yes  which  comes  from  the  poem."  Before  April  24,
however,  he  has  seen  that  this  was  a  mistake :  horizon  does  not  belong  to
Mrs.  Verrall's  script  with  the  poem.  The  sitting  of  that  day  begins  with
Hodgsonp  asking  if  "horizon"  did  not  come  out  at  Mrs.  VerralFs  later  than
the  lines  of  Browning's  poem  ;  and  when  afterwards  Myersp  happens  to  say
"  Hope  Star  Horizon,"  he  immediately  corrects  himself,  saying  :  "  Horizon  comes
elsewhere,"  and  asking  Mrs.  Sidgwick  to  excuse  the  confusion.  Later  he  doesn't
return  to  the  Horizon-sentence,  having  now  found  Abt  Vogler.


164


Mrs.  Anna  Hude,  Ph.D.


[part


most  was  the  lines  beyond  the  grave,"  he  goes  on  when  he
has  got  the  name  through  and  expressed  his  joy ;  he  would
have  added  something,  but,  as  implied  by  Rector  and  confirmed
at  a  later  sitting,  some  words  are  left  out  here.  Afterwards
he — as  Rector  has  it — "  tries  to  explain  a  little  about  the
poem,"  speaking  of  the  resemblance  between  his  own  experience
and  Abt  Vogler's  "  doubts  and  fears,  then  his  acceptance  of
God  and  faith  in  him." 1  Now  he  believes  himself  to  have
performed  his  task,  and  asks :  "  Now  can  I  do  more  to  help
you  than  give  other  messages  ? "  But  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  who  has
not  got  the  explanation  of  his  choice  of  the  poem  expected  by
Mr.  Piddington,  answers :  "  I  should  like  you  to  say  exactly
why  that  poem  was  so  appropriate  as  an  answer  to  the  Latin
message."  MyersP  repeats :  "  Because  of  the  appropriate  con-
ditions mentioned  in  it  which  applied  to  my  own  life ;  and
nothing  I  could  think  of  so  completely  answered  it  to  my
mind  as  those  special  words."  That  he  is  speaking  of  the
words  "  beyond  the  grave "  and  the  lines  left  out  by  Rector
is  made  clear  in  the  following  sittings.  It  is  Abt  Vogler's
faith  in  a  future  life  he  has  thought  of  and,  above  all,  the
lines  about  the  dead  who  return  to  earth  !

Mrs.  Sidgwick  got  no  other  reply  that  time ;  but  MyersP  did
not  forget  that  at  the  end  of  the  sitting  she  had  seemed  less
content  than  when  he  had  first  spoken  of  Abt  Vogler.  So
when  he  met  with  her  again,  on  May  1,  he  at  once  began :
"  I  am  anxious  to-day  to  clear  one  or  two  things.  Do  you
remember  my  reference  to  the  poem  ?  Did  you  wish  to  ask
anything  more  ?  Do  you  remember  when  I  said  I  had  passed
through  my  body  and  returned  ?  I  tried  to  give  it  clearly,
but  was  not  sure  that  you  understood."  And  as  Mrs.  Sidgwick
asks  :  "  Do  you  mean  you  gave  the  name  of  the  poem  ? "  he
goes  on :  "  Oh  yes.  I  mean  I  tried  to  give  another  part  also
which  referred  to  completed  happiness  in  this  life  and  the
possibility  of  returning  to  the  old  world  again  to  prove  the
truth  of  survival  of  bodily  death."  All  that  the  message  has
meant  to  him  is  given  in  this  single  sentence.  But  he  feels
the  absence  of  sympathy  and  says  entreatingly  :  "  Mrs.  Sidgwick,
dear  old  friend,  do  you  hear  me  at  all  ? "  "  Yes,"  she  answers,
"  and  I  think  I  shall  understand." He  makes  a  last  effort,

1  Abt  Voghr,  Stanza  IX.


LXV.]


The  Latin  Message  Experiment.


165


exclaiming :  "  I  believe  you  will  when  I  tell  you  I  have
returned  to  breathe  in  the  old  world  which  is  not  however
better  than  our  new."  1

This  time  he  believes  himself  to  have  answered  completely  ;
no  lack  of  enthusiasm  on  the  part  of  the  experimenters  can
make  him  doubt  the  sufficiency  of  this  response.  So  at  the
next  meeting,  on  May  6,  it  is  not  he  who  reverts  to  the
message  ;  on  the  contrary,  he  says  a  propos  of  another  question  :
"  and  the  Latin  I  have  previously  answered  through  both
lights  sufficiently  for  you  to  understand  that  I  have  really
answered  at  last."  When  Mrs.  Sidgwick  replies  :  "  The  Latin
message,  as  you  know,  refers  to  cross-correspondences,  but  also
to  something  more,  and  there  is  a  line  in  Aht  Vogler  which
we  think  you  had  in  your  mind  as  describing  that  something-
more,"  he  at  first  doesn't  understand.  "  Did  you  say  line  ? "
he  asks  ;  "  [of  the]  poem  ? "  He  has  ceased  to  think  of  it
now  and  is  unprepared  to  return  to  it.  "  I  remember  the
message  as  referring  to  my  giving  proofs  of  survival  of  bodily
death  through  cross-correspondence  messages.  ...  I  could  not
help  thinking  of  Browning."  Only  after  a  time  he  is  able
to  repeat  his  former  reply, — that  the  point  where  the  poem
suggested  itself  to  him  was  this :  "  those  who  passed  beyond
do  return,  those  beyond  mortal  vision." 2  This  and  no  other
is  the  central  point  to  him ;  the  message  asked  him  to  prove
the  survival  of  bodily  death ;  he  had  done  so  by  returning  as
a  messenger  from  the  life  beyond.

And  what  a  faithful  and  untiring  messenger  he  is  !  Before
the  sitting  of  the  next  day  he  has  meditated  upon  Mrs.  Siclg-
wick's  words  and  comprehended  that  he  cannot  yet  have  done
all  that  was  wanted  of  him.  And,  certainly,  there  is  one
thing  which  in  his  eagerness  to  explain  his  choice  of  Aht
Vogler  he  has in  the  later  sittings  quite  lost  sight  of:  the

1  Abt  Vogler,  Stanza  v.  :  '•  The  wonderful  Dead  who  have  passed  through  the
body  and  gone,  but  were  back  once  more  to  breathe  in  an  old  world  worth
their  new."

2  Afterwards  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  who  did  not  recognise  the  quotation,  sug-
gested that  it  might  apply  to  another  question, — that  of  the  Horace  Ode.
Myersp  accepted  her  suggestion  ;  but  he  had  not  before  given  the  slightest
hint  of  so  applying  it,  and  his  compliance  can  in  no  way  alter  the  main
fact, — that  the  lines  about  the  return  of  the  dead  were  quoted — in  two  sittings,
moreover — in  answer  to  the  Latin  message.


166


Mrs.  Anna  Hade,  Ph. J).


[part


Star.  Of  course  it  had  been  clear  to  him  that  the  Hope-
Star-poem  must  in  some  way  be  connected  with  stars ;  at
the  first  sittings  with  Mrs.  Sidgwick  he  had  described  it  as
referring  to  life  after  death  and  stars ;  in  La  Saisiaz  he  had
unsuccessfully  tried  to  introduce  them  ("poem  about  the  stars,"1
"  which  he  wrote  to  a  friend  about  star  and  hope  "),  and  as  to
AM  Voglcr,  he  once  mentions  "  his  questioning  and  the  answer
through  his  seeing  a  star " ;  it  is  only  a  passing  remark,  but
the  mistake — which  is  not  at  all  like  MyersP — may  be  due  to
the  idea  of  a  star  as  part  of  the  poem.  But  the  star  had  another
significance  for  him,  which  appears  for  the  first  time  at  the
sitting  of  April  8  when  he  tried  to  give  La  Saisiaz  as  the
poem  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  script.  He  had  done  his  best  to  explain
that  he  spoke  about  the  poem  that  was  his  answer  to  the
Latin  message.  He  strove  to  make  clear  which  script  he  was
referring  to.  "  I  made  a  circle,"  he  said,  "  as  it  suggested  it
to  my  mind,"  and  immediately  added :  "  I  then  drew  or  tried
to  draw  a  star  yes  through  the  other  light  [i.e.  Mrs.  Verrall]
and  I  did  so  so  you  would  understand  that  I  understood  the
message.  ...  I  drew  it  so  you  would  understand  that  I  did  it.
Also  a  crescent."  He  has  here  spoken  of  three  different  figures.
To  understand  this  it  will  be  necessary  to  revert  to  an  incident
slightly  referred  to  before 2  which  had  preceded  the  production
of  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  Jan.  28.

On  Jan.  16  Mr.  Piddington  had  spoken  to  MyersP  as  follows3:
"  Myers,  when  you  send  a  message  to,  say,  Mrs.  Verrall,  and
then  a  similar  message  to  Mrs.  Holland,  could  you  not  mark
each  with  some  simple  but  distinctive  sign — say,  a  triangle  within
a  circle  ?  "

MyerSp  had  replied :

"  I  think  I  understand.  You  wish  me  to  make  a  sign  when
giving  a  word  at  Mrs.  Verrall's  also  at  Mrs.  Holland's,  the  same
sign."

1 1  should  think,  however,  that  some  of  the  Stars  are  due  to  Rector's
inability  to  grasp  the  name  Saisiaz.  Once,  on  April  8,  the  script  has  S'tars,
and  Rector  answers  "Yes"  when  Mrs.  Sidgwick  asks  whether  it  is  Stars,  but
Myersp  exclaims:  "I  wish  you  could  hear  what  I  am  saying,"  which  points
to  the  answer  being  wrong.  On  April  17  the  script  has  Siazies,  and  afterwards  :
"To  the  Stars.  Siacriez."

2  V.  p.  159.  3iVoc,  Vol.  XXII. ,  p.  36.


The  Latin  Message  Experiment.


167


It  will  be  seen  that  MyersP  had  comprehended  that  the
triangle  within  a  circle  was  mentioned  only  by  way  of  exempli-
fication ;  that  this  was  also  the  case  with  the  mediums  he  is
sure  to  have  understood,  although  not  clearly  stating  it.  And
in  the  following  time  he  seems  to  have  made  several  attempts
to  carry  out  the  idea.  It  is  true  that  the  drawing  in  Mrs.
Verrall's  script  of  Jan.  28  is  used  as  an  illustration  to  the
quotation  from  Abt  Vogler,  which  correctly  runs :  "  On  the  earth
the  broken  arcs ;  in  the  heaven  a  perfect  round."  But  the
thought  of  thus  illustrating  it  may  have  come  to  his  mind
through  Mr.  Piddington  mentioning  the  figure ;  when  on  March  6
he  speaks  to  him  of  his  attempt  to  draw  a  triangle  within  a
circle  he  adds :  "  as  you  suggested " ;  thus  he  seems  to  have
made  a  double  use  of  it.1

From  the  beginning,  however,  MyersP  seems  to  have  preferred
another  sign.  Mrs.  Verrall  herself  never  drew  a  star ;  but  her
script  of  Jan.  28  begins  with  the  words  Star  Sign  ;  on  Feb.  6
she  writes  "  five  pointed  star  " ;  Miss  Verrall's  script  of  Feb.  3
has  the  following  words  and  figures :

the  crescent  moon


remember  that


and  the  star


and  that  of  Feb.  17  :


that  was  the  sign  she  will  understand
when  she  sees  it.

Imperfect  as  they  are,  in  view  of  his  later  utterances  these  seem
attempts  to  carry  out  Mr.  Piddington's  plan.  But  he  seems  to
have  thought  of  the  crescent  as  another  sign  ;  thus  he  makes
the  mistake  of  connecting  it  with  the  star  when  on  April  8
he  for  the  first  time  mentions  this  figure,  though  the  crescent

1  On  March  13  he  mentions  the  circle  as  "a  connecting  link";  on  April  8
he  says:  "I  made  a  circle,  as  it  [i.e.  the  message]  suggested  it  to  my  mind."


168


Mrs.  Anna  Hude,  Ph.D.


[part


has  no  place  in  the  script  of  Jan.  28.  The  parallel  use,  how-
ever, of  the  two  words  confirms  the  conception  that  on  this
occasion  the  star  too  is  mentioned  as  a  sign  only.

Returning,  then,  to  the  sitting  of  April  8,  it  is  clear  that
Myersp  had  called  attention  to  the  star  as  a  sign  used  by  him
to  make  it  understood  that  it  was  he  who  impressed  Mrs.
Verrall  when  "  the  poem  "  was  quoted  ("  so  you  would  under-
stand that  I  did  it,"  i.e.  wrote  it).  Evidently  he  didn't  know
that  on  that  occasion  no  star  was  drawn,  but  only  the  word
aster  written,  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  answer :  "  Yes,  there  was  a
star  drawn,"  confirmed  him  in  his  opinion.  Thence  onwards  he
unhesitatingly  connects  the  star  with  the  script  of  "  the  poem  ",
while  the  circle  is  no  more  mentioned.  On  April  24,  immedi-
ately before  his  efforts  to  give  the  name  Abt  Vogler,  a  star  is
drawn  and  he  exclaims :  "  I  remembered  Vol  [i.e.  Vogler]  as  it
[the  star]  came  to  my  memory."  But  it  is  as  the  sign  that
it  makes  him  recollect  Abt  Vogler.  When  he  quotes  from  the
poem,  it  is  no  star  but  the  return  of  the  dead  that  fills  his
thoughts.

Mrs.  Sidgwick,  however,  has  not  been  satisfied  with  his
quotations;  she  has  asked  for  a,  line  which  is  not  among  them.
Then  he  remembers  the  star  which  of  course  must  not  be  want-
ing in  the  Hope-Star-poem.  And  he  succeeds  in  recalling  a
line  about  a  star.  It  is  not  among  those  which  have  impressed
him  ;  indeed  his  remembrance  of  it  is  faint.  But  its  significance,
he  believes,  is  that  of  referring  to  the  sign.  So  he  strives  to
reproduce  it  at  the  sitting  of  May  7.  A  star  is  drawn,  and
alluding  to  another  line  from  Abt  Vogler,  he  says :  "  In  my
passion  to  reach  you  as  clear  as  the  sky  I  quote :  if  instead
of  a  fourth  1  framed  a  star — came  a  star.  And,"  he  adds,  "  to
make  it  clearer  I  drew  a  star.  This  completes  my  answer  to
the  Latin  message,  if  you  have  received  all  my  words  clearly.
In  my  passion  to  reach  you  clearly  I  have  made  Bector  try
to  draw  a  star  for  me  so  there  can  be  no  mistake.  When  I
quoted  to  Mrs.  Verrall  I  drew  the  star  so  as  to  make  it  clearer
and  I  wished  Bector  to  reproduce  it  in  connection  with  the
words  in  the  line."

Thus  at  last  MyersP  has  really  "  completed  his  answer  ".  But
the  message  is  reverted  to  in  his  very  interesting  dialogues  with

1"  Sound"  gets  through  in  Mrs.  Piper's  waking-stage  and  later.


LXV.]


The  Latin  Message  Experiment.


169


Sir  Oliver  Lodge  on  May  27  and  June  2,  1907.  In  the  former
he  explains  that  Mr.  Piddington  had  wished  him  to  prove  con-
clusively the  survival  of  bodily  death  by  giving  a  message
through  Mrs.  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Piper  concerning  the  same
subject ;  the  message  had  suggested  Browning  to  him,  and  from
its  last  sentence1  he  had  got:  "Instead  of  a  fourth  sound  came
a  star."  At  the  sitting  of  June  2  he  is  more  explicit,  and
though  it  will  be  seen  that  he  is  unable  to  reproduce  the  message
so  as  to  give  a  meaning  to  it,  at  the  same  time  a  clear  light
is  thrown  upon  the  development  of  his  own  conception  of  it.

He  begins  by  saying  that  Mr.  Piddington  had  said :  "  If  you
will  give  me  a  message,  not  a  message  really  but  a  sign  of
some  kind  through  the  lights,  corresponding  message  which  I
cannot  mistake,  I  shall  consider  it  the  greatest  proof  of  your
survival  of  bodily  death,"  adding  :  "  Hence  my  reason  for  draw-
ing a  star."  But  he  seems  to  discover  that  he  has  here  confused
the  message  with  Mr.  Piddington's  request  to  him  about  the
sign  (on  Jan.  16);  so  he  reverts  to  the  beginning,  giving  a  fairly
correct  translation  of  the  first  Latin  words.  "  The  message  in
Latin  was  this,"  he  says.  "  For  a  long  time  you  have  been
assimilating  ideas  one  with  another  through  different  lights,2  but
what  is  most  important  of  all  if  to  prove  the  survival  of  bodily
death  is  for  you  to  give  in  a  certain  way  a  sign."  He  perceives
that  he  is  on  the  wrong  track  once  more  and  alters  the  last
sentence :  "  But  what  we  want  is  for  you  to  give  us  proof  in
such  a  way  as  to  make  your  proof  conclusive."

No,  he  cannot  make  it  clear !  So  he  leaves  aside  the  message
and  describes  the  experiment  from  his  own  point  of  view  :  "  I
wish  you  would  follow  me  now  for  a  moment.  Kemember  when
Piddington  gave  me  his  message  the  special  point  in  it  was

1  Of  course  Myers?  must  connect  "  the  line  "  with  the  last  part  of  the  message.
From  the  sittings  of  April  17  and  May  27  it  is  seen  that  he  had  caught  at
least  some  words  from  the  last  sentence  :  nullus — appareat — perficias — illud —
prioribus  ;  probably  he  had  taken  them  to  mean  that  he  should  mcike  apparent
and  complete  more  than  in  former  messages.  Complete  is  a  word  he  often  makes
use  of  in  connection  with  the  Latin  message.

-Here  for  the  first  time  Myersp  has  correctly  translated  the  words  diversis
internuntiis  ;  this  part  of  the  message — the  only  one  which  had  really  come
through  before  Mr.  Piddington's  idea  gave  a  new  direction  to  the  experiment —
he  has  thus  been  able  to  understand  completely,  though  he  did  not  succeed  in
doing  so  at  once.


170


Mrs.  Anna  Hade,  Ph.D.


[part


for  me  to  give  definite  proof  through  both  lights.  The  first
thought  I  had  was  to  repeat  a  few  words  or  lines  of  Browning's
poem,  but  in  order  to  make  it  still  more  definite  I  registered
a  star,  and  the  lines  I  quoted  to  you  before  [on  May  27]  were
the  most  appropriate  I  could  find."  Here  in  a  few  words
MyersP  gives  the  outlines  of  the  whole  experiment  from  the
moment,  on  March  13,  when  he  had  said  that  he  for  the  first
time  clearly  understood  what  Mr.  Piddington  wished  him  to  do :
"  to  repeat  or  give  more  words  of  Browning's  poem."  Ever  since
he  had  tried  to  do  this ;  with  the  words  from  Alt  Vogler  about
the  returning  dead  he  had  believed  that  he  had  solved  the
problem.  Perceiving  that  more  was  wanted  he  had  drawn  the
star  and  quoted  "  the  line,"  not  knowing  what  Mr.  Piddington
had  seen  in  it  and  not  having  thought  of  it  before.  To  the
last  his  recollection  of  it  is  imperfect.

It  is  true,  then,  that  MyersP  has  neither  understood  nor
replied  to  the  Latin  message.  But  had  he  not  performed  a
greater  task  ?  He  had  found  a  meaning  where  an  ingenious
but  unfounded  idea  had  brought  confusion ;  he  had  clung  to  his
own  thought  in  spite  of  all  discouragement ;  he  had  in  a  beautiful
manner  illustrated  his  understanding  of  the  message,  such  as  it
was.  Naturally  he  must  believe  that  it  had  a  meaning ;  the
incongruities  he  explained  through  the  difficulties  of  the  trans-
mission.1 Thus  it  became  possible  that  in  his  own  way,  though
of  course  guided  by  the  sympathy  or  want  of  it  with  which  his
words  were  received,  he  could  obtain  a  result  that  satisfied  both
himself  and  the  experimenters.  His  identity  may  be  questioned  ;
his  intelligence  seems  to  me  indisputable.

1  Of  course  Eector  was  made  responsible  ;  "I  did  have  a  time  of  it  in  making
him  understand  my  meaning,"  Myersp  says  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  (Proc. ,  Vol.  XXIII.,
p.  249).


LXV.]


Note  on  Mrs.  Hudes  Paper.


171


NOTE  ON  MBS.  HUDES  PAPEB.

By  J.  G.  PIDDINGTON.

Mrs.  Hude  may  be  right  in  her  contention  that  MyersP  and
I  were  at  cross-purposes  over  the  Latin  Message  experiment.
It  was,  anyhow,  unfortunate  that  I  read  into  Mrs.  Verrall's
script  of  Jan.  28,  1907 — no  matter  whether  justifiably  or  not
— an  answer  to  the  Latin  Message ;  for,  whether  I  would  or  no,
from  Feb.  19,  1907,  onwards,  I  could  not  help  expecting
MyerSp  to  confirm  my  interpretation  of  this  script.

But  I  am  dissatisfied  with  my  conduct  of  this  experiment
for  other  reasons.1

I  did  my  best,  of  course,  to  give  no  hints  to  the  trance-
personalities  which  might  help  them  to  guess  either  the  meaning
of  the  Latin  or  the  general  purport  of  the  experiment.  Some
of  my  critics  say  I  did  give  hints,  and  so  enabled  the
trance-personalities  to  score  a  partial  success.  Other  critics  take
the  view  that  the  trance-personalities  showed  no  signs  of  having
understood  the  object  of  the  experiment :  from  which  it  seems
to  follow,  either  that  I  gave  no  useful  hints,  or  that,  if  I  did,
the  trance-personalities  did  not  turn  them  to  account.

I  suspect  that  the  truth  lies  between  these  two  extremes ;
and  that,  while  I  may  have  given — though  quite  accidentally
and  unintentionally — one  useful  hint  (see  Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.
336,  footnote),  more  than  once,  in  our  efforts  to  avoid  helping
the  trance-personalities,  both  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  I  did  the
precise  opposite  and  misled  them.

The  main  error,  in  my  opinion,  lay  partly  in  an  experiment
of  this  kind  being  conducted  by  experimenters  who  knew  the

1  In  speaking  of  myself  only  I  am  not  forgetting  Mrs.  .Sidgwick's  share  in  the
conduct  of  the  experiment.  But  Mrs.  Sidgwick  hardly  had  a  free  hand.  She
was  in  the  difficult  position  of  having  to  carry  on  an  experiment,  for  the  initial
stages  of  which  I,  and  not  she,  was  responsible.  Consequently  blame  must
attach  to  me  and  not  to  her  for  any  faults  in  the  experimentation.


172


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


answer  required;  and  partly  in  their  having  to  conduct  it  with
trance-personalities,  who  need  encouragement  if  they  are  to  do
their  best,  who  are  inclined  to  "  fish,"  and  who  can  talk  hack.

One  learns  by  experience,  and  had  I  to  carry  out  another
experiment  of  the  kind  I  would  not  do  it  with  Mrs.  Piper,
but  with  Mrs.  Holland  or  Mrs.  Verrall,  whose  "  communicators  "
can't  talk  back.

In  dealing  in  such  a  case  as  this  with  trance-personalities
like  Mrs.  Piper's,  it  is  difficult  for  the  experimenter  to  avoid
committing  one  or  both  of  two  blunders :  he  will  be  likely  either
to  "  give  himself  away,"  or  to  mystify  unfairly  and  so  discourage
the  trance-personalities.

One  result  of  conducting  the  Latin  Message  experiment  under
the  conditions  obtaining  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  was  the  accumu-
lation of  a  large  mass  of  material — much  of  it  consisting  of
"  cross-questions  and  crooked  answers."  Of  so  voluminous,  un-
wieldy, and  labyrinthine  a  character  is  the  material  thus
accumulated,  that  we  need  not  be  surprised  if  various  inter-
pretations can  be  placed  upon  it,  all  more  or  less  possible.
Though  my  own  reading  of  the  facts  seems  to  me,  on  the
whole,  less  unsatisfactory  than  other  interpretations  of  them  that
have  been  ottered,  considering  the  nature  of  the  evidence,  I
doubt  whether  the  problem  is  ever  likely  to  receive  a  con-
vincing solution.  Hence  I  am  inclined  to  deprecate  further
discussion  of  the  case  as  a  whole.  If  it  deserves  further
attention  at  all,  I  think  that  various  episodes  contained  in
it  would  otter  a  more  profitable  field  for  study.

Although  I  have  read  Mrs.  Hude's  paper  with  some  degree
of  adhesion,  I  must  protest  against  one  point  in  it.

She  makes  certain  phrases  which  I  have  connected  with  the
Horace  Ode  Question  form  part  of  the  answer  given  by  MyersP
to  the  Latin  Message. The  phrases  in  question  are  these :

"  passed  out  of  their  bodies  and  gone,"  "  every  peak  and
point"  (Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  377-378),  "the  possibility  of
returning  to  the  old  world  again,"  "  peak  followed  star,"  "  I
have  returned  to  breathe  in  the  old  world  which  is  not  however
better  than  our  new"  (id.  ib.y  pp.  379-380),  "Those  who  passed
beyond  do  return,"  "  Passed  through  body  and  gone "  (id.  ib.,
pp.  385-386).

I  do  not  think  that  Mrs.  Hude  has  paid  sufficient  attention


Note  on  Mrs.  Hudes  Paper.


173


to  the  fact  that  on  April  24,  1907,  the  Horace  Ode  Question
was  put  to  Myersp  for  the  third  time,  and  on  April  30,
1907,  for  the  fourth  time,  and  to  the  fact  that  before  it  was
put  the  fourth  time  MyersP  had  spontaneously  announced  his
intention  of  answering  it  on  May  1,  1907.  I  cannot  go  over
all  the  ground  in  detail  again ;  but  if  the  reader  will  study
carefully  the  relevant  extracts  from  the  Piper  sittings  of
April  24  and  30,  and  May  1,  6  and  7,  1907,  given  in  Proc,
Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  376-393,  and  what  I  have  to  say  about
them  on  pp.  402-404  of  the  same  volume,  and  in  my  third
paper  on  the  Horace  Ode  Question  (see  above,  pp.  201  and  233-
235),  I  believe  he  will  not  accept  Mrs.  Hude's  interpretation,
and  will  agree  with  me  that  MyersP  meant  to  connect  these
phrases,  not  with  the  Latin  Message,  but  with  the  Horace  Ode
Question ;  and  did  so,  not  as  Mrs.  Hude  says,  in  consequence
of  a  hint  given  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  but  on  his  own  initiative.

If  Myersp  did  not  connect  these  phrases  with  the  Horace
Ode  Question,  or  dissociate  them  from  the  Latin  Message,  as
clearly  and  explicitly  as  could  be  wished,  I  believe  that  was  due
to  the  fact  that  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  Miss  Johnson,  as  was  only
natural  in  the  circumstances,  were  under  the  misapprehension
all  the  time  that  these  phrases,  being  reminiscent  of  Alt  Vogler,
must  be  meant  to  apply  to  the  Latin  Message.  Their  misappre-
hension tended  to  unsettle  and  perplex  MyersP  somewhat ;  but
I  claim  that  on  the  whole  he  came  successfully  through  the
ordeal,  and  indicated  with  sufficient  clearness  that  he  meant
these  particular  phrases  to  form  part  of  his  answer  to  the
Horace  Ode  Question.


174


J.  G.  Pidclhigton.


[part


V.

A  HITHERTO  UNSUSPECTED  ANSWER  TO  THE
HORACE  ODE  QUESTION.

By  J.  G.  PIDDINOTON.

I  saw  the  spiritual  city  and  all  her  spires
And  gateways  in  a  glory  like  one  pearl —
No  larger,  tho'  the  goal  of  all  the  saints —
Strike  from  the  sea.

Tennyson,  The  Holy  Grail.

Eive  years  ago  a  question  was  put  to  MyersP  about  an  Ode
of  Horace;  and  already  twice  (Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  397-407,
and  Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.  150-169)  I  have  dealt  with  the  answers
to  it.  For  returning  to  the  subject  once  again  I  offer  three
excuses.  First,  this  case,  in  my  opinion,  in  spite  of  its  com-
plexities and  in  spite  of  the  conjectural  character  of  some
parts  of  my  interpretation  of  it,  constitutes  some  of  the  best
evidence  we  possess,  not  merely  of  the  supernormal  but  also
of  the  identity  of  a  professing  communicating  spirit.  Secondly,
I  know  of  no  published  case  more  difficult  to  explain  on  any
hypothesis  that  postulates  the  action  of  living  persons  only
to  the  exclusion  of  the  dead.  And  thirdly,  fresh  light  has
been  thrown  on  the  whole  subject  by  certain  scripts  of  Mrs.
Verrall's  written  in  1907  whose  connexion  with  the  Horace
Ode  test-question  has  until  quite  recently  remained  unsuspected.
The  present  paper  is  mainly  devoted  to  the  discussion  and
interpretation  of  the  new  evidence  furnished  by  these  scripts ;
though,  in  order  to  render  the  new  evidence  intelligible,  it
will  be  necessary  first  to  recapitulate  some  of  the  chief  points
of  my  two  earlier  papers.

The  whole  business  of  the  Horace  Ode  Question  was  started
— at  least  so  far  as  the  normal  activities  of  any  of  us  were
concerned — by Mrs. Verrall's coming across on  January  1,


lxv.] Unsuspected  Answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.  l7-">


1907,  an  old  letter  of  Frederic  Myers's1  in  which  he  had
expressed  himself  to  Dr.  Verrall  in  the  following  terms :

The  first  6  lines  of  Archytas  [i.e.  Hor.  C.  i.  28]  have  entered  as
deeply  as  almost  any  Horatian  passage  into  my  own  inner  history.2

The  discovery  of  this  letter  led  Mrs.  Verrall  to  ask  me  to
put  the  following  question  to  MyersP :  "  Which  Ode  of  Horace
entered  deeply  into  your  inner  life?";  and  this  question  I
put  on  January  23,  1907.

No  answer  was  given  or  attempted  so  long  as  I  was  in
charge  of  the  Piper  sittings.  But  on  April  17,  1907,  Mrs.
Sidgwick,  who  had  taken  my  place,  repeated  the  question,3
and  MyersP  at  once  replied :  "  Oh !  yes,  ...  I  recall  the
question  and  I  had  Ode  to  Nature  on  my  mind,  hut  as  I
thought  I  loved  another  ode  better  I  did  not  reply  until  I
could  say  it  more  clearly.  Do  you  remember  imortality  [sic]
.  .  .  I  thought  I  could  answer."

Neither  Mrs.  Sidgwick  nor  I  saw  any  sense  in  this  answer.
Mrs.  Verrall  was  told  nothing  about  it ;  and,  as  will  appear
later,  it  is  all  to  the  good  that  she  was  kept  in  ignorance
of  it.

This,  however,  was  not  the  only  answer.

On  April  29  and  May  1,  1907,  MyersP  quoted,  not  quite
correctly  but  recognisably,  the  two  following  passages  from
Browning's  Abt  V~ogler :

.  .  .  the  wonderful  Dead  who  have  passed  through  the  body
and  gone,

1  When  Mrs.  Verrall  read  this  letter  of  Myers's  on  January  1,  1907,  she
was  reminded  by  it  of  the  reminiscences  of  Hor.  C.  i.  28  in  her  scripts  of
March  and  April,  1901  (for  which  see  Proc,  Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.  162-166,  and
below,  pp.  171,  181,  226  and  227).  That  as  a  matter  of  fact  her  normal
memory  was  thus  stimulated  is  not,  however,  a  point  of  much  importance ;
for  we  should  in  any  case  have  been  bound  to  assume  that  the  reading  of  the
letter  provoked  a  subconscious  recollection  of  the  content  of  these  scripts.

2 It  should  be  observed,  by  the  way,  that  Myers  spoke,  not  of  any  purely
literary  or  pedantic  interest  in  the  "Archytas"  Ode,  but  of  its  emotional  or
moral  influence  on  him.

aMrs.  Sidgwick  repeated  the  question  at  my  suggestion.  I  had  written  to  her
on  April  15,  1907,  as  follows  :  "  Perhaps  [an  answer]  has  been  given  since  I  left ;
but  if  not,  I  think  it  should  Depressed  for,  not  only  because  the  question  is  a  good
one  to  ask,  but  also  because  reference  to  it  might  very  possibly  produce  a
spontaneous  cross-correspondence  with  Mrs.  Verrall."


170


./.  G.  Piddington.


[part


But  were  back  once  more  to  breathe  in  an  old  world  worth
their  new;

and

Not  a  point  nor  peak  but  found  and  fixed  its  wandering  star ;

and  on  Majr  6,  1907,  definitely  connected  the  former,  and
may  be  fairly  said 1  to  have  connected  the  latter  also  by
implication,  with  his  answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.2

Mrs.  Sidgwick,  on  May  4,  1907,  told  Mrs.  Verrall  of  the
allusion  to  these  two  quotations  on  May  1,  and  Mrs.  Verrall
thought  that  the  first  of  the  two  might  have  been  used  to
identify  the  "  Archytas "  Ode,  which  has  an  incidental  allusion
to  the  reincarnation  of  Euphorbus  as  Pythagoras.

At  that  time  Mrs.  Verrall  thought,  and  ever  since  she  had
come  across  the  letter  to  her  husband  had  thought,  and  for
nearly  a  year  to  come  continued  to  think,  that  it  was  this
allusion  to  reincarnation  that  had  specially  interested  Frederic
Myers  in  the  "  Archytas "  Ode.3  Consequently  the  first  AM
Vogler  quotation  seemed  to  her  a  not  unpromising  attempt  at
identifying  the  Ode.

We  pass  on  now  to  a  year  later.

On  this  side  of  the  Atlantic  I  was  at  work  on  the  Piper
records  of  1906-1907,  and  on  April  25,  1908,  I  interpreted
the  first  answer  given  by  MyersP,  viz. :  "  I  had  Ode  to  Nature
on  my  mind.  .  .  .  Do  you  remember  Immortality  ?  ",  as  mean-
ing that  a  poem  of  Frederic  Myers's,  entitled  Ode  to  Nature,4"
contained  echoes  of  Hor.  C.  iii.  4,5  and  that  another  poem  of
his,  entitled  Immortality?  contained  echoes  of  Hor.  C.  i.  28,
the  "  Archytas  "  Ode.  While  I  thought  the  connexion  between
Ode  to  Nature  and  Hor.  C.  iii.  4-  was  merely  incidental,  I
argued that between Immortality  and the  "  Archytas "  Ode

1  See  for  a  summary  of  the  facts,  Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  402-403.

"  In  view  of  what  follows  (see  pp.  204-206  below),  it  should  be  noted  that  in
each  of  these  quotations  from  Abt  Vor/ler  is  involved  the  idea  of  the  dead
being  in  touch  with  the  living,  and  of  both  mutually  influencing  each  other.

3 This  supposition  of  Mrs.  VerralFs  was  clearly  wrong,  for  Myers  says  in  the
letter  that  it  was  "the  first  6  lines"  of  the  Ode  that  had  entered  deeply  into
his  inner  history,  and  the  allusion  to  Pythagoras  does  not  come  in  these  lines.

4  These  two  poems  appear  in  Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry,  pp.  127  and  172
respectively.

5 See  Proc.,  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  401-402.


lxv.] Unsuspected  Answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.  177

there  were  not  only  incidental  coincidences  of  expression,  but
also  and  chiefly  a  connexion  of  thought  as  well.  Myers,  I
suggested,  in  Immortality  was  re-echoing,  and,  as  the  '  verbal
coincidences  indicated,  consciously  re-echoing,  the  gloomy  pre-
sentiments about  man's  destiny  to  which  Horace  gives  utter-
ance in  the  "  Archytas  "  Ode.

Meanwhile,  on  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic,  Mr.  Dorr
was  having  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper,  and  putting  to  MyersP  a
number  of  questions  on  literary  and  classical  subjects.  In  the
course  of  answering  them  MyersP,  between  February  25  and
May  26,  1908,  in  a  very  ingenious  manner1  clearly  identified
the  Ode  which  had  formed  the  subject  of  the  Horace  Ode
Question.  This  he  did  off  his  own  bat,  quite  independently
of  any  hint  or  help  from  Mr.  Dorr,  who  did  not  know  that
any  question  about  an  Ode  of  Horace  had  ever  been  put  to
MyerSp.  Moreover,  MyersP,  it  would  seem,  connected  the
"  Archytas "  Ode  with  those  lines  in  the  Eleventh  Book  of
the  Odyssey  where  Achilles  says  to  Odysseus  when  they  meet
in  the  Under-world :  "  Nay,  speak  not  comfortably  to  me  of
death.  .  .  .  Eather  would  I  live — e7rdpovpo<;— attached  to  the
soil  (or,  "  above  ground ")  as  the  hireling  of  another,  than
bear  sway  among  all  the  dead  that  be  departed " : 2  words
obviously  in  harmony  with  the  sentiments  of  the  "  Archytas "
Ode  and  Immortality,  and  out  of  harmony  with  those  expressed
in  Alt  Vogler.

"We  pass  on  now — nearly  a  year — to  February,  1909,  at
which  time  I  was  working  at  the  records  of  the  Dorr-Piper
sittings  of  1908.  The  references  which  they  contained  to  the
Horace  Ode  I  discussed  in  a  paper  entitled  "  A  Prelude  and
a  Sequel  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question."  What  I  called  the
"  Prelude  "  was  some  very  early  scripts  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  written
in  1901,  a  few  weeks  after  Myers's  death.  Conjoined  in  them
were  quotations  from  the  "  Archytas "  Ode  and  allusions  to
the  words  of  Achilles  which  I  have  just  quoted  :  the  allusions
being  effected  by  means  of  the  phrase  adscriptus  glebae,  "  bound
to  the  soil,"  which  is  one  rendering  of  e-irdpovpo^.

These  early  scripts  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  thus  seemed  to  fall
into  line  not  only  with the Horace Ode references in  Mr.

xFor  details  see  Proc,  Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.  157-158.
2  See  Proc,  Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.  155-156,  159-160.

M


178


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Dorr's  Piper  sittings  of  1908,  but  also  with  the  answers  to
the  Horace  Ode  Question  given  by  MyersP  in  1907, — at
least  with  those  answers  as  I  interpreted  them  in  February
1908,  without  reference  to  the  contemporaneous  Dorr  sittings
or  to  Mrs.  Verrall's  early  scripts  of  1901.

But  besides  the  quotations  from  the  "  Archytas "  Ode  and
the  allusions  to  Achilles'  words,  there  were,  I  suggested,  in
these  early  scripts  of  Mrs.  Verrall's,  allusions  to  Myers's  Im-
mortality and  to  another  poem  of  his,  called  On  a  Spring
Morning  at  Sea:  a  poem  which  was  not  published  till  1904,
and  which  Mrs.  Verrall,  to  the  best  of  her  belief,  never  saw
until  it  was  published  in  Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry  (p.  54).

In  this  latter  poem  Myers  has  prefigured  the  life  to  come
in  terms  of  the  rosiest  optimism,  painting  a  picture  of  it  as
much  opposed  as  can  be  to  the  melancholy  that  pervades  the
forebodings  of  Horace  in  the  "  Archytas "  Ode,  of  Homer  in
the  Eleventh  Book  of  the  Odyssey,  and  of  Myers  himself  in
Immortality.

By  conjoining  in  these  early  Verrall  scripts  allusions  to
Achilles'  words  from  the  Eleventh  Book  of  the  Odyssey,  to  the
"  Archytas "  Ode,  and  to  the  poems  Immortality  and  On  a
Spring  Morning  at  Sea,  Myersv  meant,  I  suggested,  to  compare
and  contrast  the  various  views  about  the  next  life  represented
in  these  various  poems.

This  completes  the  epitome  of  the  old  evidence.  Before,
however,  I  begin  to  discuss  the  new  evidence,  it  will  be  con-
venient to  show  what  the  verbal  coincidences  are  between
On  a  Spring  Morning  cd  Sea  and  Mrs.  Verrall's  four  early
scripts  of  1901.

Coincidences  between  "  On  a  Spring  Morning  at  Sea  "
and  Four  Early  Scripts  of  Mrs.  Verrall's.

In  estimating  what  the  coincidences  are  worth  the  reader
must  bear  in  mind  that  the  four  scripts  all  belong  to  the
very  earliest  stages  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  development  as  an  auto-
matic writer,  are  spasmodic  in  style,  and  are  most  markedly
inferior  both  in  coherence  and  grammatical  construction  to  her
later  scripts ;  and  that  consequently  the  coincidences  may
appear  more  indeterminate  than  they  otherwise  would.


LXV.] Unsuspected  Answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.  179

The  first  of  the  four  scripts  has  the  following  string  of
words :  Postridie  [on  the  morrow]  morgenstern  [morning  star]
opus  [work]  rosea  [rosy]  angelica  [angelic].

The  fourth  script  has  omnia  ibi  plana,  omnia  rosea  suffusa
luce  vel  caecis  bene  [e]videntia  oculi  autem  tui  caligine  circum-
fusi ;  which  means,  "  There  all  is  clear,  all  bathed  in  rosy  light,
plain  even  for  the  blind  to  see — but  thine  eyes  are  shrouded
in  darkness."

If  in  place  of  opns  (meaning  "  work ")  opedus  (meaning
"  opal ")  is  read,  we  get  five  coincidences  with  leading  words
in  the  first  five  lines  of  the  poem  On  a  Spring  Morning  at  Sea.

Thus  :

"And  such  a  sight  as  this  is,  I  suppose,

Shall  meet  thee  on  the  morrow  of  thy  death ;
And  pearl  to  sapphire,  opal  into  rose,

Melt  in  that  mom  no  heart  imagineth
Fair  as  when  now  thine  eyes  thou  dar'st  not  close  "

The  foregoing  were  all  the  coincidences  between  the  four  scripts
and  the  poem  which  I  cited  in  my  second  paper  on  the  Horace
Ode  Question  (Proc.,  Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.  166-167).  I  had,  how-
ever, discovered  more  coincidences  than  these,  but  refrained
from  publishing  them  in  deference  to  the  advice  of  Mrs.  Sidgwick
and  Mrs.  Verrall,  who  thought  them  too  fanciful  to  gain
credence,  if  not  to  be  true.  But  the  discovery  of  similar,
though  not  identical,  verbal  coincidences  between  the  poem  and
a  script  of  Mrs.  Verrali's  written  long  before  the  coincidences
between  the  poem  and  the  four  early  scripts  of  1901  were
noticed  (see  pp.  185-186),  emboldens  me  to  publish  here  the
cancelled  sentences  from  my  second  paper. They  ran  thus :

Nor  were  these  [i.e.  the  coincidences  described  above  and  on
pp.  167-168  of  Proc,  Vol.  XXIV.]  the  only  attempt  in  these  four
scripts  to  give  leading  words  from  the  poem.  Not  without  misgiving
— for  I  am  only  too  well  aware  how  preposterous  such  an  inter-
pretation will  seem  to  all  but  those  who  have  made  a  close  study
of  the  peculiar  mental  processes  exhibited  in  automatic  writings — I
venture  to  put  forward  the  following  suggestion :  That  the  two
Horatian  quotations  in  the  script  of  March  12,  1901  [quoted  in  full
in  Proc.,  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  163],  Splendidior  vitro  o  fans  and  eras  ingens
iterabimus  aequor  are  the  form  into  which  the  automatist  rendered


180


G.  Piddington.


[part


three  leading  words  from  the  poem,  namely,  "spring"  and  "glassy-
sea."  The  scribe,  whose  thoughts  were  at  the  same  time  occupied
with  an  Ode  of  Horace's,  was,  I  conceive,  trying  to  impress  on  the
automatist's  mind  the  words  "spring"  (the  season)  and  "glassy  sea."
The  message  was  misinterpreted  and  entangled  by  the  automatist,
and  emerged  in  the  form  of  two  Horatian  quotations  embodying  the
words  fons  (spring  of  water),  vitro  (glass)  and  aequor  (sea).

Thus  far  the  deleted  passage.  To  it  I  now  add  the  following
points  :

(1)  The  conjunction  of  splendidior  vitro  o  fons  and  eras  ingens

iterabimus  aequor  may  have  been  suggested,  or  at  any
rate  aided,  by  the  assonance  between  eras  donaberis  (part
of  the  third  line  of  the  Ode  which  begins  0  fons
Bandusiac,  splendidior  vitro)  and  eras  .  .  .  iterabimus ;

(2)  Cras  ingens  iterabimus  aequor  may  have  suggested  itself

as  an  appropriate  quotation,  because  it  introduces  not
only  the  word  aequor  ("  sea ")  but  also  the  word  cras
("  to-morrow  "  or  "  on  the  morrow  ") :  both  leading  words
in  the  poem ;

(3)  An  instance  of  "  spring "  being  used  equivocally,  as  I

suggest  fons  (a  spring  of  water)  was  here,  occurs  in
Miss  Verrall's  script  of  Nov.  19,  1908,  where  the
drawing  of  a  mechanical  spring  is  followed  by  the
words  "  a  spring — spring  the  season  also  both  will
serve."

The  Horatian  quotations,  then,  in  the  script  of  March  12,
1901,  represent,  I  suggest,  an  attempt  at  three  words  in  the
following  couplet  of  the  poem :

"  Ay !  there  some  jewelled  visionary  spring

Shall  charm  the  strange  shore  and  the  glassy  sea."

So  much  for  the  verbal  coincidences.  But  there  is  besides,
I  suspect,  a  coincidence  in  subject  between  On  a  Spring  Morning
at  Sea  and  the  four  early  scripts  of  1901.  In  her  report  on
her  own  script  from  the  time  of  its  inception  to  the  end  of
1904  (Proc.,  Vol.  XX.,  pp.  1-432)  Mrs.  Verrall  writes:

There  occur  from  time  to  time  in  the  script  descriptions  .  .  .  which
seem  to  relate  to  a  visionary  dwelling  place,  a  kind  of  Elysian  Fields
or  Isles  of  the  Blest.  .  .  . Though  the  first  unmistakeable  description


lxv.] Unsuspected  Answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.  181

of  an  "Isle  of  the  Blest"  did  not  appear  till  nearly  two  years  after
the  inception  of  the  script,  there  are  among  the  quite  early  writings
fragments  which  suggest  that  some  such  idea  had  been  seeking
expression  earlier  in  the  subliminal  consciousness  (id.  ib.,  p.  112).

As  illustrations  of  these  early  fragments  she  then  proceeds
to  quote  and  discuss  her  scripts  of  March  11,  March  29,  and
April  27,  1901. Of  this  last  she  says:

On  April  27,  1901,  some  one,  probably  myself,  is  reproached  with
having  a  mind  too  much  fixed  on  this  earth,  and  urged  in  language
reminiscent  of  Horace's  Ode  to  Archytas,  and  of  Lucretius'  address
to  Epicurus,  to  let  the  soul  soar  to  the  regions  of  the  sky,  "where
all  is  clear,  all  bathed  in  rosy  light"  .  .  .  (id.  ib.,  p.  113).

Since  Mrs.  Verrall  included  the  script  of  April  27,  1901,  in
her  list  of  scripts  descriptive  of  some  Abode  of  the  Blest,1  we
are,  I  think,  justified  in  including  what  for  convenience'  sake
I  have  called  "the  four  early  scripts  of  1901"  in  the  same
category,  for  the  script  of  April  27,  1901,  is  one  of  these  four,
and  (for  reasons  explained  on  p.  167  of  Proc.,  Vol.  XXIV.)  the
other  three  unquestionably  form  part  of  a  suite  with  it.  Hence,
since  On  a  Spring  Morning  at  Sea  describes  a  vision  of  the
Abode  of  the  Blest,  there  is  a  coincidence  of  subject  between
it  and  the  four  scripts,  as  well  as  coincidence  in  phraseology.

The  reader  should,  however,  keep  his  judgement  about  these
coincidences  in  suspense  for  the  present.  Further  on  (see
pp.  185-186)  I  shall  show  that  six  years  later  two  other
scripts  of  Mrs.  Verrall's,  connected  like  those  of  1901  with  the
"  Archytas  "  Ode,  likewise  contain  coincidences  with  On  a  Spring
Morning  at  Sea.  The  fact  that  coincidences  with  the  poem  thus
exist  in  two  different  sets  of  scripts,  both  connected  with  the
"  Archytas  "  Ode,  increases  the  probability  that  the  coincidences
in  both  sets  with  On  a  Spring  Morning  at  Sea  are  not  accidental.
I  am  sorry,  both  for  my  own  sake  and  the  reader's,  that  I
have  had  to  spend  so  much  time  over  the  question  of  these
particular  coincidences  ;  but  from  a  theoretical  point  of  view  so
much  depends  on  the  character  of  them  (i.e.  whether  they  are
fortuitous  or  purposive)  that  detailed  discussion  could  hardly
be  avoided.


JSee  also  Proc,  Vol.  XX.,  pp.  377-379  and  340-345.


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Discussion  of  the  New  Evidence.

We  are  now  free  to  examine  and  discuss  the  scripts  of  Mrs.
Verrall's — five  in  all — which  constitute  the  new  evidence.  They
are  reproduced  below  in  chronological  order,  and,  in  accordance
with  the  numbering  adopted  in  a  complete  collection  of  Mrs.
Verrall's  scripts  prepared  for  private  use,  are  numbered  respec-
tively 136,  171,  176,  178  and  180.

I  shall  refer  to  these  scripts  by  their  numbers,  as  this  is
a  far  more  convenient  plan  than  reference  by  dates.

(136)  (February  12,  1907. 11  a.m.)

The  voyage  of  Maeldune  faery  lands  forlorn  and  noises  of  the
western  sea.

thundering  noises  of  the  western  sea.

It  is  about  Merlin  and  Arthur's  realm  Merlin's  prophetic
vision —

'  all  night  long

mid  thundering  noises  of  the  western  sea '

and  how  he  would  not  go — the  passing  of  Arthur.

And  then  the  island  valley  of  Avilion

where  blows  not  any  wind  none  nor  ever  falls  the  least  light —
no  not  that  but  you  have  the  sense

there  falls  no  rain  nor  snow  nor  any  breath  of  wind  shakes  the
least  leaf.

I  will  try  to  get  the  idea  elsewhere  conveyed — but  it  is  hard  and
I  know  I  have  failed  before.

Why  will  you  not  put  the  signature  ?
Surely  you  know  now  that  it  is  not  you.

F.W.H.M.

(171)  (April  29,  1907.)

Victor  in  Poesy Victor  in  Romance
and  Lord  of  Human  Tears —

think  of  the  phrase  '  fine  flower  of  poesy ' — and  again  '  posy  of
a  ring ' — pro  patria  [for  fatherland]  is  written  on  a  circle,  not  I
think  a  ring.  But  I  mean  a  wider  thing,  a  universal  country,  the
mother  of  us  all,

Not  '  0  fair  city  of  Cecrops,'
but  Oh  fair  city  of  God.


lxv.] Unsuspected  Answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.  183


That  gives  one  clue — I  have  long  wanted  to  say  that — I  tried
before — I  spoke  of  Athens,  but  you  did  not  complete.

Golden  City  of  God.  The  city  of  Cecrops  is  violet  and  hoary —
look  back  at  that.  The  Universal  City  is  all  colours  and  no  colour,
but  best  described  as  a  golden  GLEAM.

(176)  (May  7,  1907.)

Nec  non  tibi  etsi  ceteris.
[To  you  if  not  to  others.]

Write  in  a  small  regular  hand  without  ever  taking  the  pencil
off  the  paper.  It  makes  it  easier  to  keep  the  attention  to  the
immediate  subject  of  communication.

But  you  cannot  work  like  that.

Spires  of  flame  like  the  tops  of  cypress  trees,

cypress  tops  against  a  pearly  sky  no  movement.  It  is  the  sky  of
early  morning  but  there  is  no  sun.  There  is  a  building  and  a
tower  on  the  left,  white  faintly  white  but  the  colours  are  hardly
visible


Dance

with  dances  and  delight.
That  is  different  altogether.

May  13 thirteen  has  been  given  you  for  a  date.
Tell  Helen  to  try  for  the  answer  then — and  after  that  you  shld  [sic]
write  no  more  till  we  give  the  word.


184


J.  G.  Picldington.


[part


(178)  (May  13,  1907.)


O and cuoA.09 [gleaming] and idXXecv  [to
C  brandish].

There  is  some  play  upon  those  words.

The  gleaming  light.
The  light  that  gleamed  on  sea  and  shore
The  light  that  never  was  on  sea  or  shore
Ask  about  the  pearl pearl  I  think — the  pearly  light  of  dawn
in  orient  pearl in  pearly  contours  lost
The  gates  of  pearl

No  you  do  not  get  it  quite  right.
It  should  be  about  the  dawn,  a  dawn  of  pearl,


pearl  and  mother  of  pearl  gives  the  idea — and  all  the  glow  of  the
Orient  in  their  opalescent  radiance  of  soft  light.

(180)  (June  24,  1907. 10.45  p.m.)

Regina  vespertino  cruore  omnes  tentavit  vias  nusquam  invenit.
[The  queen  with  bloodshed  at  evening  tried  all  the  ways,  but
nowhere  found  one]

They  keep  the  even  tenor  of  their  way —
Drops  was  to  be  written
pearly  drops
like  liquid  pearls  dissolved  in  sparkling  cup
By  the  swarthy  queen  of  Egypt

I  am  dying  Egypt,  dying
And  so  take  up  the  tale —

Antony  and  Cleopatra.

The  Connexion  between  176  and  178.


In  discussing  and  collating  these  five  scripts,  I  think  it  will
be  best  not  to  adhere  to  chronological  order,  but  to  take  first
176  and  178.


lxv.] Unsuspected  Answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.  185


176  has  "a  pearly  sky  .  .  .  the  sky  of  early  morning";  while
178  has  "the  pearly  light  of  dawn  ...  It  should  be  about
the  dawn,  a  dawn  of  pearl."

176  has  "  there  is  no  sun,"  while  178  has  "  the  gates  of  pearl."
These  two  phrases  seem  to  be  reminiscent  of  the  following
passages  from  the  Revelation  of  St.  John  the  Divine :

And  the  twelve  gates  were  twelve  pearls ;  every  several  gate  was
of  one  pearl.  .  .  .  And  the  city  had  no  need  of  the  sun  ...  to  shine
in  it :  for  the  glory  of  God  did  lighten  it.  Bev.  xxi.  21,  23.

They  need  no  candle,  neither  light  of  the  sun  ;  for  the  Lord  God
giveth  them  light.1  id.  xxii.  5.

Another  sign  of  connexion  between  these  two  scripts  is  that
in  176  the  automatist  is  reminded  of  an  injunction  given  in  a
previous  script  (that  of  May  1,  1907)  to  write  on  May  13,  the
date  of  178.2

Then  both  176  and  178  contain  several  words  and  phrases,
either  identical  with,  or  closely  corresponding  to,  words  and
phrases  in  Myers's  poem  On  a  Spring  Morning  at  Sea.3  Thus:


Scripts.

"  Pearly  sky no movement "
(176)

"It  is  the  sky  of  early  morning"
(176)

"  a  dawn  of  pearl"  (178)
"PEARL"  "opalescent  radi-
ance" (178)
"  sea  and  shore  "  "  sea  or  shore  "
(178)

"liquid  pearls  dissolved"  (180)4


Poem.

"And  pearl  to  sapphire,  opal
into  rose,  Melt  in  that
morn  "

"the  strange  shore  and  the  glassy

sea  "

"  the  heaven's  repose  "

"  A  spring  morning  at  sea  "


1  The  words  "there  is  no  sun"  in  176  have,  I  believe,  a  double  significance.
See  below,  pp.  198-199.

2 The  injunction  in  the  script  of  May  1,  1907  (174)  runs  as  follows:  "I  want
you  to  try  a  special  experiment.  On  May  13  wait  for  a  message  I  cannot  tell
how  it  will  reach  you — but  there  is  some  special  interest  in  that  day  .  .  .  Don't
ask  more — a  veil  is  best — but  in  the  end  you  will  understand  and  find  the
record  complete." For  the  full  text  of  this  script  see  pp.  238-239.

3  See  Note  A,  p.  211.

1  Later  on  (p.  189)  I  shall  justify  the  insertion  here  of  an  extract  from  180
by  showing  that  between  178  and  180  a  very  close  link  exists.


186


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


I  believe  that  the  misquotation  in  178  of  Wordsworth's  line,
"  The  light  that  never  was  on  sea  or  land,"  was  purposive,  the
substituted  words  "  sea  or  shore  "  serving  to  introduce  two  words
from  On  a  Spring  Morning  at  Sea.  If  it  was  not  purposive,  it
is  not  easy  to  account  for,  since  the  line  in  its  proper  form  is
very  well  known,  and  had  only  a  few  weeks  earlier  (Feb.  20,
1907)  been  correctly  given  in  a  script  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  (140),
except  for  the  transposition  of  "  land "  and  "  sea."  1

The  Connexion  between  136,  171  and  178.
Next  let  us  turn  to  136  and  171.

136  speaks  of  "  Merlin's  prophetic  vision,"  "  the  passing  of
Arthur,"  and  "  the  island  valley  of  Avilion  where  .  .  .  falls  no
rain  nor  snow."

At  the  time  when  this  script  was  written  Mrs.  Verrall  did
not  understand  the  meaning  of  "  Merlin's  prophetic  vision,"  but
five  weeks  later — on  March  15,  1907 — she  interpreted  it  as  an
allusion  to  Tennyson's  Merlin  and  the  Gleam,  which  she  read  for
the  first  time  on  that  day.

171  has  "  a  universal  country,  the  mother  of  us  all,  Not  '  0
fair  city  of  Cecrops,'  but  Oh  fair  city  of  God  .  .  .  Golden  City
of  God.  The  universal  City  is  all  colours  and  no  colour,  but
best  described  clS  <&  golden  GLEAM."

In  her  contemporaneous,  or  nearly  contemporaneous,  notes  on
171  Mrs.  Verrall  gives  a  reference  back  to  Merlin  and  the  Gleam
mentioned  in  her  note  on  136.  So  "  Gleam"  serves  as  a  con-
necting link  between  136  and  171.  But  "  gleam"  occurs  thrice
explicitly  in  178,  and  once  implicitly,  because  the  context  of  "  the
light  that  never  was,  on  sea  or  land  "  is

Ah  !  THEN,  if  mine  had  been  the  Painter's  hand,
To  express  what  then  I  saw  ;  and  add  the  gleam,
The  light  that  never  was,  on  sea  or  land.

So  the  word  "gleam"  links  together  not  only  136  and  171,  but
178  also.

Before  I  point  out  further  links  between  the  five  scripts,  let
me  go  back  again  for  a  moment  to  the  context  of  "  the  light  that
never  was,  on  sea  or  land." In  the  poem  from  which  these

1  This  script  is  quoted  and  discussed  in  Note  B,  pp.  212-213.


lxv.] Unsuspected  Answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.  187

words  come — Elegiac  Stanzas  suggested  by  a  Picture  of  Peele  Castle
in  a  Storm — occur  the  following  lines :

Four  summer  weeks  I  dwelt  in  sight  of  thee :
I  saw  thee  every  day ;  and  all  the  while
Thy  Form  was  sleeping  on  a  glassy  sea.

The  fact  that  these  lines  are  part  of  the  context  of  a  quotation
occurring  in  178  tends  to  confirm  my  theory  that  178  presents
coincidences  with  On  a  Spring  Morning  at  Sea,  since  both  poems
contain  the  words  "  glassy  sea."

The  Connexion  between  171,  176  and  178.

I  was  explaining,  before  this  digression,  how  136,  171  and  178
are  linked  together  by  the  word  "  Gleam."  I  now  proceed  to
point  out  that  171,  176  and  178  are  also  connected  together  :  the
link  in  this  case  being  made  by  means  of  allusions  in  all  three
to  the  description  of  the  Heavenly  Jerusalem  in  the  21st  chapter
of  The  Revelation  of  St.  John  the  Divine.  176  seems,  as  I  have
already  mentioned,  to  allude  to  the  Heavenly  City's  having  no
need  of  the  sun,  and  178  to  its  gates  of  pearl ;  while  the  phrase
in  171  "Golden  City  of  God  "  recalls  vv.  13  and  21:  "the  city
was  pure  gold,  like  unto  clear  glass,"  "  and  the  street  of  the  city
was  pure  gold,  as  it  were  transparent  glass."

In  support  of  my  theory  that  these  coincidences  with  the
Apocalypse  are  not  due  to  chance,  I  would  point  out :  first,
that  the  imagery  of  the  21st  chapter  of  Revelation,  like  that
of  On  a  Spring  Morning  at  Sect  (with  which  poem  178  presents
coincidences  of  word  and  phrase)  is  drawn  from  jewels  and
colours ;  and,  secondly,  that  the  "  sea  of  glass  "  that  was  before
the  throne  of  God  (Rev.  iv.  6)  recalls  both  the  "  glassy  sea "
of  On  a  Spring  Morning  at  Sea :

Ay,  there  some  jewelled  visionary  spring

Shall  charm  the  strange  shore  and  the  glassy  sea ;

and  the  "  glassy  sea "  of  Wordsworth's  Stanzas  suggested  by
a  Picture  of  Peele  Castle  in  a  Storm :

and  all  the  while
Thy  Form  was  sleeping  on  a  glassy  sea.


188


J.  G.  Pidclington.


[part


And  this  coincidence  with  the  Wordsworth  poem  is  not  a
merely  verbal  one.  There  is  a  real  connexion  of  thought  as
well,  for  the  sight  of  Peele  Castle  reflected  in  the  glassy  summer
sea  brings  to  the  poet's  mind  the  thought  of  Heavenly  or
Elysian  calm :

Thou  shouldst  have  seemed  a  treasure-house  divine
Of  peaceful  years ;  a  chronicle  of  heaven  ;

and

A  Picture  had  it  been  of  lasting  ease,
Elysian  quiet,  without  toil  or  strife  ;
No  motion  but  the  moving  tide.

136,  176  AND  178.

Now  let  us  turn  for  a  moment  to  136,  176  and  178.  176
and  178,  I  have  suggested,  allude  to  On  a  Spring  Morning  at
Sea,  the  poem  in  which  Myers  has  painted  a  vision  of  the  next
world,  and  also  to  the  21st  chapter  of  Revelation  wherein  is
described  the  Heavenly  Jerusalem.  136  mentions  the  Island
of  Avilion,  which  was  "  in  Welsh  mythology  the  kingdom  of
the  dead,"  and  at  a  later  date  became  "  an  earthly  paradise
in  the  western  seas "  (Unci.  Brit.  s.v.  Avalon).  Visions  of
another  world  form,  then,  a  common  subject  of  these  three
scripts.  I  have  mentioned  three  of  these  visions,  but  I  believe
that  indirect  allusion  to  a  fourth  is  involved  in  the  quotation
from  Tennyson's  Morte  d' Arthur,  which  follows  the  mention  of
the  Island  of  Avilion  in  136.  This  quotation — I  give  it  in  its
correct  form,  instead  of  in  the  form  in  which  it  appears  in
the  script — is  as  follows :

the  island-valley  of  Avilion ;
Where  falls  not  hail,  or  rain,  or  any  snow,
Nor  ever  wind  blows  loudly.

These  lines  are  Tennyson's  version  of  a  passage  in  the  Fourth
Book  of  Homer's  Odyssey  (11.  566-568),  where  Proteus  says  to
Men  elans  :

But  thou,  Menelaus,  son  of  Zeus,  art  not  ordained  to  die  .  .  . ,
but  the  deathless  gods  will  convey  thee  to  the  Elysian  plain  and
the  world's  end  .  .  . ,  where  life  is  easiest  for  men.  No  snow  is
there,  nor  yet  great  storm,  nor  any  rain;  but  always  ocean  sendeth


lxv.] Unsuspected  Answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.  189

forth  the  breeze  of  the  shrill  west  to  blow  cool  on  men  (Butcher
and  Lang's  Translation).

So  I  think  that  136  may  be  said  to  contribute  implicitly
a  fourth  vision  of  the  Heavenly  City.

The  Connexion  between  178  and  180.

In  180,  the  next  script  but  one  after  178,  there  is  a  refer-
ence to  the  story  of  Cleopatra's  first  melting  a  pearl  ear-drop
and  then  drinking  it  in  Antony's  honour,  and  this  is  followed
by  a  quotation — "  I  am  dying,  Egypt,  dying  " — from  Shakespeare's
Antony  and  Cleopatra.

In  178  occur  the  words  "  in  orient  pearl  "  and  "  P  E  A  E  L
pearl  mother  of  pearl  gives  the  idea — and  all  the  glow  of  the
Orient."

In  Shakespeare's  play  Antony  sends  as  a  gift  to  Cleopatra
an  "  orient  pearl  " ;  and  the  coincidence  establishes  clearly,  I
think,  the  close  connexion  between  178  and  180.

The  connexion  between  178  and  176  has  already  been  ex-
plained, and  accordingly  I  feel  justified  in  treating  176,  178  and
180  as  what  may  be  called  a  suite  of  scripts.

The  Connexion  between  a  Poem  of  Myees's  entitled  "Venice"

AND  176, 178  AND  180.

In  January  1912,  I  told  Mrs.  Verrall  of  my  theory  that
176  and  178 1  contain  allusions  to  On  a  Sirring  Morning  at  Sea.
In  reply  she  pointed  out  to  me  that  in  these  two  scripts  there
seems  to  be  also  a  verbal  coincidence  with  another  poem  of
Myers's  named  Venice.  Thus,  while  176  has  "  a  pearly  sky "
and  178  mentions  the  sea  and  "  a  dawn  of  pearl,"  in  Venice
occurs  the  phrase  "  her  melted  Pearl  of  sky  and  sea."

Seven  considerations,  all  unnoticed  by  Mrs.  Verrall,  support
her  conjecture,  and  go  to  show  that  the  coincidence  is  not
accidental.

First,  the  reference  to  "  pearly  drops  like  liquid  pearls  dis-
solved "  in  180 — a  script,  which,  as  we  have  just  seen,  forms  a

1 1  said  nothing  to  Mrs.  Verrall  about  180,  because  at  this  time  I  had  not
noticed  its  close  connexion  with  176  and  178.


190


/.  G.  Piddington.


[part


suite  with  178  and  176 — may  be  taken  to  represent  an  attempt
at  the  "  melted  Pearl  of  sea  and  sky "  of  Venice.1

Secondly,  the  symbols,  with  which  178  opens,  may  be  the
first  letters  of  the  word  "  Venice."  The  first  is  a  capital  V,
and  the  second  a  Greek  epsilon  (  =  English  short  e).

Thirdly,  in  Mrs.  Yerrall's  script  of  January  18,  19  0  8  (  223)
occur  the  words :  "  The  Orient  splendours  of  the  dawn  The
pearl  of  sea  and  sky  no  not  that."  The  conjunction  of
"  Orient,"  "  dawn "  and  "  pearl "  here  seems  to  connect  this
script  with  178,  which  likewise  has  "  Orient,"  "  dawn "  and
"pearl";  and  the  phrase  in  223,  "The  pearl  of  sea  and  sky,"
is  very  like  the  phrase  in  Venice,  "  melted  Pearl  of  sky  and
sea."  Moreover,  the  fact  of  this  phrase  in  223  being  followed
by  the  comment,  "  no  not  that,"  suggests  to  any  one  familiar
with  the  mannerisms  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  that  the  phrase
thus  negatived  has  previously  emerged  in  some  other  script.
As  a  matter  of  fact  it  had  not ;  but  I  would  suggest  that  the
scribe  had  intended  to  get  this  phrase  recorded  in  176  or  178,
and  thought  that  either  the  actual  phrase  or  something  very
like  it  had  been  recorded.2

Fourthly,  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  February  20,  19  0  7  (140),
which  is  connected  with  178  by  means  of  a  Wordsworth
quotation  common  to  each  ("  The  Light  that  never  was,  on  sea
or  land  "),  contains  reminiscences  of  some  lines  in  Shakespeare's
Merchant  of  Venice,  and  a  connexion  with  Venice  is  thereby
suggested.  Moreover,  140  opens  with  the  word  "  Chiaroscuro,"
which  in  the  form  "  Clear-obscure "  occurs  in  Myers's  Renewal
of  Youth  in  reference  to  Tintoretto's  pictures,  some  of  which,
as  we  shall  see  later  (pp.  197-199),  are  almost  certainly  referred
to  in  the  poem  Venice?

Fifthly,  the  script  of  May  1,  19  0  7  (174)— the  script,  that
is,  in  which  Mrs.  Verrall  was  enjoined  to  "  wait  for  a  message  "
on  May  13,  the  date  of  178 — opens  with  the  word  "Evangel";4

1  It  also  serves,  as  I  have  already  suggested  (see  p.  185),  to  represent  the
similar  expression  in  On  a  Sjjring  Morning  at  Sea:  "And  pearl  to  sapphire,
opal  into  rose  Melt."  Besides  this  verbal  similarity  between  the  two  poems,
I  hope  to  show  later  (see  p.  206)  that  a  connexion  of  thought  also  exists
between  them.

-For  full  details  on  this  point,  see  Note  C,  pp.  213-214.

3  For  the  text  of  140,  and  comments  on  it,  see  Note  B,  pp.  212-213.

4  For  the  text  of  this  script,  see  pp.  238-239.


lxv.] Unsuspected  Answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.  191

and  by  means  of  this  word  seems  to  refer  back  to  the  only
other  script  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  between  January  1905  and
May  1910,  in  which  the  word  "Evangel"  is  found.  This
script,  written  on  October  27,  1905,  presents  some  curious
coincidences  with  Myers's  poem  Venice}

Though  by  itself  any  one  of  these  five  considerations  may
not  be  very  cogent,  cumulatively  they  seem  to  me  to  have
very  considerable  force.

The  sixth  and  seventh  considerations  in  support  of  a  con-
nexion between  176  and  Venice,  being  full  of  complexities,  will
best  be  dealt  with  in  separate  sections.

Comparison  of  176  with  a  Passage  in  George  Sand's  _
lettb.es  i)  un  voyaoeur.

The  sixth  consideration  is  the  most  cogent ;  though  I  did  not
discover  the  facts  on  which  it  is  based  until  the  whole  of
this  paper  (except,  of  course,  the  paragraphs  in  which  it  is
explained)  and  the  appendices  were  completed.

The  opening  pages  of  the  second  chapter  of  George  Sand's
Lettres  cVun  Voyagew  (pp.  34-40  in  the  edition  published  by
Michel  Levy  Freres,  1869)  are  occupied  with  a  description
of  a  dream  which  the  Traveller  (George  Sand  herself,  of
course)  has  experienced  again  and  again  from  early  childhood
onwards.  When  the  dream  begins  the  dreamer  is  sitting  on
a  desolate  shore.  A  bark  approaches,  and  he  is  hailed  by
unknown  friends  aboard  it.  He  joins  them,  and  off  they  sail
to  an  enchanted  land,  beautiful  beyond  description ;  and  here,
singing  and  crowned  with  flowers,  they  frolic  through  scented
woodlands.  At  this  point  the  dreamer  wakes ;  but  when
awake  he  cannot  recall  either  the  looks  or  names  of  his  dream-
companions,  or  the  words  of  their  songs.  "  Who,"  he  asks,
"  are  these  unknown  friends  who  come  to  summon  me  in  my
sleep  and  lead  me  into  fairy  land  ? "  He  debates  whether
they  are  spirits  of  the  dead,  or  ghosts  of  old  loves,  or  dim
prefigurements  of  loves  to  be,  or  merely  the  creation  of  an
active  imagination  ? Though  he  returns  no  certain  answer  to

1  For  the  text  of  the  script  of  October  27,  1905,  and  comments  on  it,  see
Note  D,  pp.  215-217.


192


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


his  own  question,  he  seems  to  lean  towards  a  mystical  inter-
pretation of  his  experience  :

Je  brule  de  savoir  s'il  y  a  dans  les  songes  quelque  sens  prophetique,
quelque  revelation  de  l'avenir,  soit  pour  cette  vie,  soit  pour  les  autres.

And  again,

Mon  reve  .  .  .  ressemble  a  la  terre  libre  et  vierge  que  je  vais
cherchant,  et  que  je  peuple  d'affections  saintes  et  de  bonheur
impossible.  .  .  .

Then  he  goes  on  to  describe  how,  seated  one  evening  in
the  Giardini  Pubblici  at  Venice,

il  m'est  arrive  .  .  .  de  me  trouver  en  realite  dans  une  situation
qui  ressemblait  un  peu  a  mon  reve  .  .  .

.  .  .  Le  petit  promontoir  plante  a  l'anglaise  est  si  beau,  si  touffu,
si  riche  de  fleurs,  de  parfums  et  d'aspects,  que  je  me  demandai  si
ce  n'etait  pas  la  le  rivage  magique  que  mes  reves  m'avaient  fait
pressentir.  Mais  non,  la  terre  promise  est  vierge  de  douleurs,  et
celle-ci  est  deja  trempee  de  mes  larmes.

And  then  comes  the  following  passage  .  (quoted — with  slight
variations  of  text — in  Hare's  Venice,  p.  121  of  the  2nd
edition) :

Le  soleil  efcait  descendu  derriere  les  monts  Vicentins.  De  grandes
nuees  violettes  traversaient  le  ciel  au-dessus  de  Venise.  La  tour
de  Saint-Marc,  les  coupoles  de  Sainte-Marie,  et  cette  pepiniere  de
fieches  et  de  minarets  qui  s'elevent  de  tous  les  points  de  la  ville,  se
dessinaient  en  aiguilles  noires  sur  le  ton  ^tincelant  de  l'horizon.  Le
ciel  arrivait,  par  une  admirable  degradation  de  nuances,  du  rouge-
cerise  au  bleu  de  smalt ;  et  Veau,  calme  et  limpide  comme  une  glace,
recevait  exactement  le  reflet  de  cette  immense  irisation.  Au-dessous
de  la  ville  elle  avait  l'air  d'un  grand  miroir  de  cuivre  rouge.  Jamais
je  n'avais  vu  Venise  si  belle  et  si  feerique.  Cette  noire  silhouette,  jetie
entre  le  ciel  et  Veau  ardente  comme  dans  une  mer  de  feu,  ttait  alors
une  de  ces  sublimes  aberrations  d 'architecture  que  le  poete  de  I' Apocalypse
a  du  voir  flotter  sur  les  greves  de  Patmos  quand  il  remit  sa  Jerusalem
nouvelle,  et  qu'il  la  comparait  a  une  belle  epousee  de  la  veille.

Peu  a  peu  les  couleurs  s'obscurcirent,  les  contours  devinrent  plus
massifs,  les  profondeurs  plus  mysterieuses.  Venise  prit  I'aspect  d'une
flotte  immense,  puis  d'un  bois  de  hauls  cypres  oil  les  canaux  s'en-
foncaient  comme  de  grands  chemins  de  sable  argente.  Ce  sont  la
les  instants  oil  j'aime  a  regarder  au  loin. Quand  les  formes  s'effacent,


lxv.] Unsuspected  Answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.  19o


quand  les  objets  semblent  trembler  dans  la  brume,  quand  mon
imagination  pent  s'elancer  dans  un  champ  immense  de  conjectures
et  de  caprices,  quand  je  peux,  en  clignant  un  pen  la  paupiere,
renverser  et  bouleverser  une  cite,  en  faire  une  foret,  un  camp  ou
un  ciniitiere ;  .  .  .  alors  je  jouis  vraiment  de  la  nature,  j'en  dispose  a
mon  gre,  je  regne  sur  elle,  je  la  traverse  d'un  regard,  je  la  peuple
de  mes  fantaisies.

Let  me  compare  the  phrases  which  I  have  underlined  with
140,  171,  176  and  178 ;  and  the  whole  passage  with  the  closing
lines  of  Myers's  Venice :


George  Sand.

(1)  "  cette  pepiniere  de  flecbes  "
— "Venise  prit  l'aspect  .  .  .
d'un  bois  de  hauts  cypres" —


(2)  "  l'eau, calme et  limpide


(3)  The  whole  passage  quoted
above.


(4)  "  Cette  noire  silhouette—
sa  Jerusalem  nouvelle."


Scripts  and  Venice.

(1)  "Spires  of  flame  like  the
tops  of  cypress  trees,  cypress
tops  against  a  pearly  sky  "
(176).


(2)


"  The  glassy  sea  "  implicit  in
the  Wordsworth's  quotations
in  140  and  178.  (Cf.  also
"  the  glassj7  sea "  of  On  a
Spring  Morning  at  Sea,  and
the  "sea  of  glass"  of  the
Apocalypse.)


(3)


"  but  she  [i.e.  Venice]
Dreams  in  her  melted  Pearl  of

sky  and  sea.
For  me  too  dreaming  let  the

sunset  fire
Shade  the  dark  dome  and  pierce
the  pillared  spire  !  "  etc.

(Myers's  Venice.)

(4)  The  allusions  to  the  New
Jerusalem  of  the  Apocalypse
in  three  scripts  (171,  176,
178),  which,  for  various
reasons  already  cited  or  to  be
cited,  I  connect  with  Myers's
poem  about  Venice,  written
at  Venice,  and  called  Venice.


N


194


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


It  seems  to  me  not  unlikely  that  wheu  writing  the  last
stanza  of  his  poem  Venice  Myers,  who  was  a  great  admirer
of  George  Sand's  works  and  had  written  an  essay  on  her,
in  which  the  Lettres  d'un  Voyageur  are  highly,  if  briefly,
praised  {Essays  Modern,  p.  87),  had  this  passage  in  his  mind.1

That  the  intelligence  responsible  for  140,  171,  176  and  178
knew  the  George  Sand  passage  I  can  hardly  doubt,'2

The  reader  will  not  be  in  a  position  to  appreciate  the  full
force  of  these  parallelisms,  and  especially  of  the  fourth,  until
he  reaches  the  end  of  this  paper.  When,  arrived  at  that
point,  he  realises  how  close  a  parallel  my  interpretation  of
Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  presents  with  the  passage  in  the  Lettres
d'un  Voyageur  about  Venice  and  the  vision  of  the  New
Jerusalem,  let  him  remember  what  I  have  said  above  and
now  repeat  and  emphasise :  namely,  that  my  interpretation  of
the  new  evidence  presented  in  this  paper  was  completed  in
its  present  form  before  I  knew  of  the  existence  of  the  George
Sand  passage,  and  before  I  knew  that  she,  or  for  that  matter
any  writer,  had  ever  traced  any  sort  of  relationship  between
the  vision  of  the  New  Jerusalem  and  Venice.3

1  He  probably  knew  it  in  the  original ;  but  it  is  not  unlikely  that  he  came
across  it  in  Hare's  Venice  during  his  stay  at  Venice  in  1900.  He  was,  I
know,  fond  of  Hare's  Borne,  and  had  it  in  Rome  with  him  on  one  of  his  last
visits  there.  I  do  not  know  that  he  had  Hare's  Venice  with  him  at  Venice
in  1900,  but  in  view  of  his  fondness  for  Hare's  Rome,  it  seems  a  likely
conjecture  that  he  had.

2  As  the  allusion  to  the  Lettres  d'un  Voyayeur  in  Essays  Modern  shows,
Frederic  Myers  may  well  have  known  the  passage.  Had  Mrs.  Verrall  ever
read  it?  On  June  3,  1912,  she  wrote,  in  answer  to  my  enquiries:  "I  am
sure  I  have  never  read  Hare's  Venice.  ...  I  have  never  been  or  planned
to  go  to  Venice,  and  I  have  no  knowledge  of  any  books  about  Venice,  except
Ruskin's  Stones  of  Venice,  and  an  old  Baedeker."  Then,  on  June  6,  1912,
having  looked  up  the  passage  first  in  Hare's  Venice  and  then  in  the  original,
and  after  looking  through  Lettres  d'un  Voyageur  generally,  she  wrote  :
"  Nothing  in  it  was  in  the  least  familiar,  and  no  faintest  recollection
suggested  that  I  had  any  previous  acquaintance  with  it."

3  Since  writing  the  above  I  see  that,  according  to  Ruskin  (St.  Mark's  Rest,
ch.  I.  and  II.),  the  Venetians,  as  a  result  of  their  conquest  of  Tyre  and  of
their  acquisition  under  treaty  from  Baldwin  II.  of  a  street  in  the  city  of
Sion,  came  to  associate  their  own  city  with  the  civitas  Dei  of  the  86th  Psalm.
I  have  also  come  across  a  passage  in  Modern  Painters  (quoted  in  Hare's
Venice,  p.  9)  which  suggests  that  in  Ruskin's  mind  the  New  Jerusalem  of
Revelation  and  Venice  were  associated  :

"  A  city  of  marble,  did  I  say  ?  nay,  rather  a  golden  city,  paved  with
emerald.  For  truly,  every  pinnacle  and  turret  glanced  and  glowed,  overlaid
with  gold,  or  bossed  with  jasper."


lxv.] Unsuspected  Answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.  195


176  and  the  Poem  "  Venice."

It  would  have  been  convenient  for  all  concerned  had  I
been  able  to  reprint  at  this  point  the  full  text  of  the  poem
Venice  as  it  appeared  in  Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry,
pp.  121-122.  But  as  permission  to  do  so  has  been  refused,
my  readers  must  either  refer  to  the  book  for  the  original
poem,  or  content  themselves  with  the  following  paraphase  of  it
in  prose  :

With  good  reason  one  of  the  Venetian  painters  placed  the  guardian
Margaret  between  Doge  and  Doge ;  and  represented  the  Madonna
and  Child  as  smiling  from  "  a  soft  and  whirling  glory  "  upon  Venice,
and  the  Doges  as  kneeling  before  them  and  hearing  the  words
Pax  tibi,  Marce  Evangelista  mens,  and  as  so  deeply  enraptured  that
their  earthly  city  and  its  buildings  fade  from  their  sight,  eclipsed
by  the  glory  of  the  Heavenly  Visitants,  who  throng  to  welcome
them.

The  saints  truly  were  with  these  faithful  Doges.  Angels  are  but
discarnate  men  that  have  passed  to  a  higher  sphere ;  and  we  too
may  have  visions  of  their  vanished  light  and  know  that  without
us  their  joy  cannot  be  complete.  If  we  hold  fast  to  our  belief  in
them  we  shall  obtain  grace  from  them.  They  foresee  our  fates
and  look  forward  to  our  rejoining  them  ;  they  still  share  our
quenchless  aspirations ;  they  still  love,  and  still  are  fair.

Venice  now  slumbers,  and  her  old  fights  and  politics  are  but
remote  memories.  Her  fame  still  lives,  but  she  herself  only  dreams
"in  her  melted  Pearl  of  sky  and  sea."  Would  that  I  too  might
dream,  and  see  the  rays  of  the  setting  sun  pierce  between  the
pillars  of  the  spire  and  throw  the  dome  into  deeper  shade,  until
at  last  night  and  peace  bring  with  them  the  fulfilment  of  the
cosmic  promise,  and  my  soul  dreams  itself  into  the  celestial
dawn  !

176  has  "  There  is  a  building  and  a  tower  on  the  left,  white
faintly  white  but  the  colours  are  hardly  visible,"  these  words
being  followed  by  drawings,  evidently  meant  to  represent  the
building  and  the  tower  on  the  left  of  the  building.  The  poem
Venice  speaks  of  the  distant  view  of  Venice  which  forms  the
background  of  some  picture  or  pictures  :


196


J.  G.  Piddivgton.


[part


Till  for  the  grave  enraptured  kneeling  man,

Thro'  that  clear  vision  fades,  remotely  fair,
The  imperial  City  of  all  his  earthly  care,
Whose  few  last  arches  glimmer, —

When  Mrs.  Verrall  pointed  out  to  me  the  verbal  coincidences
with  the  poem  Venice  in  176  and  178,  it  occurred  to  me  that
the  words,  "  There  is  a  building  and  a  tower  on  the  left," 1
and  the  two  drawings  in  176  might  be  meant  to  represent  the
distant  view  of  "  the  imperial  City  "  in  the  background  of
the  picture  or  pictures  described  in  the  poem.  Though  I  had
not  the  faintest  notion  at  that  time  as  to  what  picture  is  the
subject  of  the  poem  Venice,  I  communicated  this  conjecture  to
Mrs.  Verrall,  and,  with  a  view  to  testing  whether  there  was
anything  in  it,  asked  her  if  she  knew  what  picture  it  was
that  had  inspired  the  poem.

Mrs.  Verrall  in  reply  told  me  that  in  the  autumn  of  1908
she  had  taken  a  good  deal  of  trouble  (for  reasons  which  have
nothing  to  do  with  the  subject  of  this  paper)  to  identify  the
picture  described  in  Venice.  As  a  result  of  her  own  enquiries
and  of  investigations  made  at  Venice  by  a  friend  on  her
behalf,  she  had  come  to  the  conclusion — which  she  had  duly
recorded  at  the  time  of  forming  it — that  the  poem  was  "  based,
not  on  a  special  picture,  but  on  the  general  type  of  pictures
in  the  Ducal  Palace."

With  this  conclusion  I  find  myself,  after  a  long  investigation,
in  complete  agreement.

Two  considerations  especially  have  convinced  me  that  Myers
in  the  poem  Venice  is  referring  not  to  one  particular  picture,
but  to  a  general  type.  The  first  of  these  considerations  is
the  actual  words  of  the  poem  :

Till  for  the  grave  enraptured  man,
Grimani,  or  Priuli,  or  Loredan.

If  the  poem  were  referring  to  a  single  picture,  these  words
could  only mean that the  poet had forgotten exactly  what

1  Grammatically  these  words  may  mean  either  that  both  building  and  tower
are  on  the  left  of  something  unnamed,  or  that  there  is  a  tower  on  the  left
of  the  building.  The  second  meaning  is  much  the  likelier  of  the  two,  because
the  drawing  places  the  tower  on  the  left  of  the  building.


lxv.] Unsuspected  Answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.  197

Doge  it  was  that  figured  in  the  picture,  and  that  he  hadn't
troubled  to  identify  him.  Now,  no  poet  could  surely  be  quite
so  easy-going  and  casual  as  that !  The  meaning  must  be  that
the  poet  has  in  mind  a  whole  class  of  pictures  in  which
one  Doge  or  another  is  represented  in  a  kneeling  attitude
before  the  Virgin  or  the  Holy  Child.  This  type  of  picture  is
"  frequently  to  be  met  with,"  says  Bio,1  "  in  private  collections,
in  the  churches,  and  above  all  in  the  Ducal  Palace,  in  which
these  allegorical  compositions,  intended  to  express  the  close
alliance  between  Eeligion  and  the  State,  seem  to  have  been
purposely  multiplied."

The  second  consideration  is  that  in  spite  of  enquiries  made
on  the  spot  by  Mrs.  Verrall's  friend  and  others,  and  of  searches
through  works  of  reference,  guide-books  and  picture-catalogues
by  Mrs.  Verrall,  Miss  Johnson  and  myself,  we  have  failed  to
trace  any  one  picture  at  Venice  which  comprises  all  the  details
mentioned  in  the  poem.

On  the  assumption,  then,  that  the  details  given  in  the  poem
are  not  to  be  found  in  any  one  single  picture  at  Venice,  but
may  be  found  scattered  over  various  pictures  belonging  to  the
special  type  just  mentioned,  I  propose,  first,  to  state  what  the
details  are,  and  then  to  look  for  them  in  examples  of  the  type
in  question.

The  details  are  these :  the  Madonna  and  Holy  Child  with
Saints  and  Angels  in  a  "  whirling  glory " ;  St.  Mark  and  the
motto  of  Venice,  Pax  tibi,  Marce,  Evangelista  mens  (rendered
in  the  poem,  "My  peace  be  with  thee,  Mark  Evangelist");  a
Doge  or  Doges  (e.g.  a  Grimani,  Priuli  or  Loredano)  kneeling
before  the  Madonna  and  Holy  Child ;  a  distant  view  of  Venice  ;
and  "the  guardian  Margaret"  "set  'twixt  Doge  and  Doge."

In  Tintoretto's  "  Doge  Loredano  praying  to  the  Virgin "
(Plate  1),  we  find  the  Madonna,  "  the  thronging  welcome  of
the  Blest "  and  the  "  whirling  glory " ;  the  Doge  Loredano
kneeling  before  the  Madonna ;  St.  Mark  and  the  motto  of
Venice  ;  in  the  background,  a  view  of  Venice ;  arches,  and,  as
176  says,  "  a  building  and  a  tower  on  the  left."  But  there  is
no  Holy  Child,  and  no  St.  Margaret  "  set  'twixt  Doge  and
Doge."

In  the  picture  by  Palma  Giovine  (Plate  2),  we  find  the

1  Quoted  in  Hare's  Venice,  p.  43.


198


J.  G.  Piddington.


[PART


Madonna  with  Christ  (but  not  as  a  Child) ;  two  Doges,  the
brothers  Lorenzo  and  Gerolamo  Priuli,  kneeling ;  a  "  whirling
glory " ;  St.  Mark  ;  a  distant  peep  of  Venice ;  arches  in  the
remote  distance ;  "  a  building  and  a  tower  [the  Campanile]
on  the  left."  But  there  is  no  St.  Margaret,  and  the  motto  of
Venice  does  not  appear.

In  Titian's  "  Grimani  kneeling  before  Eeligion "  (Plate  3),
we  find  a  "  whirling  glory  "  ;  Doge  Grimani  kneeling  ;  St.  Mark  ;
and  a  distant  view  of  Venice.  But  there  is  no  Madonna,  no
Child,  no  St.  Margaret,  and  no  motto  of  Venice.

The  picture  of  the  Doge  Mocenigo  kneeling  before  Christ
(Plate  4)  shows  a  view  of  Venice  in  the  background,  and
the  motto  of  Venice  on  the  open  book  to  the  right  of  St.  Mark's
lion.

Tintoretto's  picture  of  the  Virgin  in  Glory  and  the  .Doge
Nicolo  da  Ponte  (Plate  5)  contains  the  Virgin  and  Child,  the
kneeling  Doge,  St.  Mark,  the  "  whirling  glory "  and  the
"  thronging  welcome  of  the  Blest,"  and  a  distant  peep  of
Venice.

Carpaccio's  "Lion  of  St.  Mark"  (Plate  6),  though  displaying
only  the  motto  of  Venice,  and  a  view  of  Venice  with  the
Campanile  on  the  left,  may,  I  think,  have  contributed  to  the
composite  impression  which  Myers  received,  and  recorded  in
the  poem,  during  his  stay  in  Venice.

Tintoretto's  "Espousals  of  St.  Catherine"  (Plate  7)  shows
the  Madonna  and  Child,  a  kneeling  Doge  (F.  Dona) ;  St.  Mark  ;
a  "  whirling  glory  "  (of  which,  however,  only  part  is  shown  in
the  reproduction) ;  the  guardian  Saint  Catherine  (not  Margaret) ;
in  the  middle  distance  on  the  right  some  arches ;  and  beyond
them  in  the  background,  buildings  and  a  tower.

Immediately  preceding  the  reference  in  176  to  the  building
and  the  tower  on  the  left,  come  these  words :  "  a  pearly  sky
no  movement.  It  is  the  sky  of  early  morning  but  there  is
no  sun."  I  am  inclined  to  see  in  them  an  allusion  to  the
lighting  of  the  pictures  described  in  Venice.  In  none  of  the
examples  reproduced  here,  and  in  no  examples  of  the  same
type  that  I  have  examined,  is  the  sun  visible.  The  natural
light  in  the  backgrounds  seems,  so  far  as  I  can  judge,  to  be
that  of  a  calm,  early  morning  sky.  The  foregrounds  are  so
lit  by  the  glory  of  the  Heavenly  Visitants,  that  the  earthly


lxv.] Unsuspected  Answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.  199

citizens  "  need  no  candle,  neither  light  of  the  sun." 1  Or,  as
the  poem  says :

"Thro'  that  clear  vision  fades,  remotely  fair,
The  imperial  City  ....

and  all  the  test
Whelmed  in  that  thronging  welcome  of  the  Blest."

On  the  whole,  the  pictures  which  fit  the  poem  best  are
Tintoretto's  "  Doge  Loredano  "  and  "  Espousals  of  St.  Catherine."

It  will  be  noticed  that  no  example  is  given  of  a  picture
showing  St.  Margaret,  whether  "  set  'twixt  Doge  and  Doge  "
or  not.

I  am  entirely  puzzled  by  the  reference  in  the  poem  to  St.
Margaret.  Why,  in  the  first  place,  is  she  called  "  the  guardian  "  ?
Venice  has,  or  has  had,  several  guardian  or  patron  saints — e.g.
St.  Theodore,  St.  Justina,  St.  Catherine,  St.  Mark — but  St.
Margaret  is  not  one  of  them.  Then,  what  does  "  set  'twixt
Doge  and  Doge  "  mean  ?  Does  it  mean  a  picture  wherein  St.
Margaret  is  represented  with  a  Doge  on  either  side  of  her  ?
If  so,  I  can  only  say  that  enquiries  made  at  Venice,  and
careful  search  through  catalogues,  have  so  far  failed  to  reveal
any  such  picture  at  V euice ;  or,  indeed,  any  picture  showing
St.  Margaret  with  any  Doge.  Or,  does  it  mean  that  there  is
a  picture  of  St.  Margaret  with  pictures  containing  portraits  of
Doges  on  either  side  of  it  ?  If  so,  the  only  picture  of  St.
Margaret  that  I  have  been  able  to  trace  in  the  Ducal  Palace
is  one  by  Tintoretto  showing  her  in  company  with  St.  Louis
and  St.  George ;  and,  if  the  guide-books  can  be  trusted,  this
picture  is  not  flanked  on  either  side  by  portraits  of  Doges.

I  do  not,  of  course,  assert  that  "  there's  no  sich  a  "  picture ;
though  I  am  bound  to  say  that,  if  there  be,  it  is  of  a  retiring
disposition,  and  that  as  great  mystery  seems  to  surround  it  as
surrounded  the  "  lady  of  the  name  of  Harris."

Should  there  prove  to  be  no  picture  at  Venice  of  St.  Margaret
"  'twixt  Doge  and  Doge,"  then  the  only  suggestion  I  can  offer
is  that  Myers  mistook  Tintoretto's  St.  Catherine  for  St.  Margaret.
He  might  have  been  misled  by  the  pearls  which,  among  other
jewels,  St.  Catherine  is  wearing,  for  in  sacred  pictures  St.
Margaret  is  sometimes  represented  with  pearls  (margaritae)  in

JSee  p.  185.


200


J.  G.  Piddington.


[PAKT


her  hair.  Tintoretto's  St.  Catherine  hangs  in  the  Salxi  del  Collegia,
where  hang,  too,  several  pictures  containing  portraits  of  Doges  ;
and  this  might  perhaps  be  held  to  explain  "  'twixt  Doge  and
Doge."

Still,  whatever  be  the  true  explanation  of  the  reference  to
St.  Margaret,  I  think  it  is  hardly  open  to  dispute  that  Myers
in  Venice  was  thinking  of  a  type  of  picture,  and  that  the
examples  reproduced  above  belong  to  this  type.  So  far  I  feel
on  firm  ground.  But  I  do  not  feel  equally  sure  that  a  con-
nexion exists  between  the  drawings  in  176  and  the  buildings  which
form  the  backgrounds  of  some  of  the  pictures  we  have  been
discussing.  I  do,  indeed,  suggest  that  there  may  be  a  connexion ;
but  I  lay  more  stress  on  the  verbal  coincidences  between  176,
178  and  180  on  the  one  hand  and  Venice  on  the  other,  and  on
the  five  considerations  adduced  in  their  support  in  the  last
section  but  one,  and  still  more  on  the  sixth  consideration
discussed  in  the  last  section.  The  drawings  in  176  and  the
accompanying  text — "  There  is  a  building  and  a  tower  on  the
left,  white  faintly  white  but  the  colours  are  hardly  visible " —
do  show  a  certain  correspondence  with  some  of  the  back-
grounds of  the  pictures ;  but  I  do  not  wish  to  press  the
coincidence,  or  to  treat  it  as  more  than  an  auxiliary  argu-
ment.

The  conclusion  I  draw  from  the  facts  dealt  with  in  this  and
the  two  preceding  sections  is  that  176,  178  and  180,  partly  by  means
of  verbal  coincidences,  partly  by  coincidences  of  subject,  and  partly
by  means  of  graphic  coincidences,  were  intended  to  refer  to
Venice. But  if  so,  what  was  the  object  of  the  reference  ?

The  Object  of  the  Reference  to  "  Venice,"  and  the
Meaning  of  that  Poem.

My  answer  to  that  question  will  not  be  intelligible  unless  1
first  recall  some  facts  and  theories  published  in  my  two  previous
papers  on  the  Horace  Ode  Question,  and  unless  at  the  same  time
I  disclose  an  essential  fact  relating  to  176  which  I  have  hitherto
withheld.

The  Horace  Ode  Question  was  first  put  to  MyersP  on  Jan.  23,
1907.  It  elicited  no  response  till  April  17,  1907,  when,  on
its  being  repeated,  MyersP  gave  his  first  answer — "  I  had  Ode


Plate  I.


TINTORETTO.— DOGE  LOREDANO  PRAYING  TO  THE  VIRGIN.


lxv.] Unsuspected  Answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.  201


to  Nature  on  my  mind.  .  .  .  Do  you  remember  Immortality?".
Of  this  answer  Mrs.  Verrall  knew  nothing,  and  in  it  no  one
saw  any  sense  until  a  year  later.  iSTo  meaning  being  apparent
in  this  first  answer,  on  April  2d,  1907,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  again
put  the  question;  and  on  April  29,  1907,  MyersP  said  he
would  give  his  answer  on  May  1,  1907.

In  the  waking-stage  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  of  April  29,  1907,
— at  which  Mrs.  Verrall  was  present — came  the  words  "  Myers
.  .  .  passed  out  of  their  bodies  and  gone  [thrice  repeated]
every  peak  and  point  .  .  .  star  Abt."  On  May  1,  1907,  MyersP
said  "  Do  you  remember  when  I  said  I  had  passed  through
my  body  and  returned  .  .  .  those  words  were  lingering  in  my
memory  and  I  gave  it  as  peak  followed  Star " ;  and  at  the
end  of  the  sitting  made  a  spontaneous  reference  to  Horace's
Odes  (see  Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  379-381).  The  intention  was
clearly  to  quote  the  following  lines  from  Abt  V oyler :

Not  a  peak  nor  point  but  found  and  fixed  its  wandering  star,

and

the  wonderful  Dead  who  have  passed  through  the  body  and
gone,

But  were  back  once  more  in  an  old  world  worth  their  new.

On  neither  occasion  were  the  quotations  definitely  connected
with  any  particular  subject.  It  should,  however,  be  noted  that
the  first  time  they  occurred  was  during  a  sitting  at  which
MyerSp  had  announced  his  intention  of  answering  the  Horace
Ode  Question  on  May  1,  1907  ;  and  the  second  time  was
during  a  sitting  held  on  that  particular  day.  Anyhow,  on
May  6,  1907,  MyersP  definitely  and  without  any  beating  about
the  bush  did  connect  the  Abt  Vogler  lines  with  the  Horace
Ode.

Meanwhile  on  May  4,  1907,  Mrs.  Verrall  happened  to  meet
Mrs.  Sidgwick  when  she  (Mrs.  Sidgwick)  was  engaged  upon
writing  out  the  record  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  of  May  1.  Mrs.
Sidgwick  read  out  to  her  parts  of  the  record,  and  among  others
the  part  where  MyersP  gave  the  words  "  passed  through  my  body
and  returned."  It  struck  Mrs.  Arerrall  at  once  that  these  words
(which,  by  the  way,  neither  she  nor  Mrs.  Sidgwick  at  that  time
recognised  as  being  reminiscent  of  Abt  Vogler)  might  have  been


202


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


intended  as  an  allusion  to  the  case  of  reincarnation  mentioned
in  the  "  Archytas  "  Ode.1

We  now  come  to  May  7,  1907,  the  date  of  Mrs.  Verrall's
script,  No.  176.

On  the  morning  of  May  7,  1907,  Mrs.  Verrall,  before
beginning  to  try  for  script,  deliberately  read  and  fixed  her
attention  on  the  "  Archytas "  Ode.  Her  idea — recorded  con-
temporaneously— was  that  if  MyersP  had  meant  "  passed  through
my  body  and  returned  "  to  refer  to  the  reincarnation  of  Pytha-
goras mentioned  in  the  "  Archytas "  Ode,  he  might  make  his
intention  plain  and  unmistakable  by  giving  through  Mrs.  Piper
some  distinctive  word  such  as  "  Pythagoras  "  or  "  Panthoides  "  ;
and  that  this  might  be  facilitated  by  her  fixing  her  mind  on
the  Ode.  The  reasons  which  thus  led  her  to  fix  her  attention
on  the  "  Archytas "  Ode  before  writing  automatically,  she  re-
corded in  two  notes:  the  first  written  at  10.55  a.m.,  five
minutes  before  the  script  began,  the  second  at  11.30  a.m.,
just  after  the  script  was  finished.2

Now,  although  it  is  perfectly  true  that  the  object  of  Mrs.
Verrall's  experiment  was  not  to  bring  about  an  explanatory
reference  in  her  own,  but  in  Mrs.  Piper's  script,  yet  the  fact
remains  that  her  script  of  May  7,  1907,  was  written  just
after  her  mind  was  purposely  concentrated  on  the  "  Archytas "

1  Mrs.  Verrall  made  the  following  note  in  her  diary  on  May  4,  1907:  "From
what  Mrs.  S[idgwick]  told  me  this  morning  of  the  sitting  of  May  1,  1  think
there  may  be  something  about  the  Ode  of  Horace  (i.  28)  for  which  I  asked.
There  was  a  sentence  suggesting  re-incarnation,  but  no  connexion  with  Horace,
though  Horace  was  referred  to  in  the  course  of  the  sitting."

Why,  it  may  be  asked,  had  it  not  occurred  to  Mrs.  Verrall  on  April  29,  when
she  heard  the  words  "  passed  out  of  their  bodies  and  gone "  uttered  in  the
waking-stage,  to  connect  them  with  the  "Archytas"  Ode?  Possibly  it  was
because  "passed  out  of  their  bodies  and  gone"  does  not,  as  does  "passed
through  my  body  and  returned,"  suggest  reincarnation ;  but  much  more
probably  it  was  because  on  April  29  the  Horace  Ode  Question  had  passed  so
completely  out  of  her  mind  that  even  when  Myersp  made  an  explicit  reference
to  it  she  did  not  understand  what  he  was  talking  about  (see  p.  234).

2  It  may  occur  to  students  of  this  case  to  ask  why  in  my  two  previous
papers  I  never  made  any  reference  to  this  experiment  of  Mrs.  Verrall's.  The
reason  is  that  I  never  realised  until  January  1912,  that  she  ever  had  made
any  such  experiment.  I  never  saw  the  original  sheet  of  paper  on  which  the
script  of  May  7,  1907,  and  the  two  accompanying  notes  were  written,  but
only  a  typed  copy,  in  which  Mrs.  Verrall's  two  contemporaneous  notes  were
compressed  into  the  following  inadequate  summary:  "Before  writing  above  script,
I  had  fixed  my  attention  on  Hor.  Od.  i.  28."  This  brief  note  escaped  my
observation  until  January  1912.


lxv.] Unsuspected  Answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.  203


Ode,  and  that  after  the  script  was  finished  her  thoughts  at
once  reverted  to  it.  Of  the  hundreds  of  scripts  which  she
has  written,  before  and  after  this  date,  she  has  never  written
a  single  other  one  under  similar  conditions :  that  is  to  say,
with  the  "  Archytas  "  Ode  or  the  Horace  Ode  Question  specially
and  definitely  in  her  mind.  Hence  it  cannot  be  said  that  I
have  picked  a  script  at  random  out  of  hundreds  of  others,
or  picked  one  simply  because  it  happened  to  suit  my  book.
I  think,  on  the  contrary,  that  I  can  fairly  claim  that  I  have
fixed  upon  the  only  script  of  Mrs.  Verrall's,  which,  apart
from  internal  evidence,  there  is  any  reason  for  connecting
with  the  "  Archytas"  Ode.

From  Mrs.  Verrall's  point  of  view  her  experiment  of  May
7,  1907,  failed.  But  the  remainder  of  this  paper  will  be
largely  taken  up  with  an  attempt  to  show  that  nevertheless
it  did  have  a  successful  result,  though  the  result  was  quite
different  from  the  one  she  aimed  at,  and  was  achieved  in  a
manner  the  very  reverse  of  what  she  expected.  Mrs.  Verrall
was  looking  for  an  answer  in  Mrs.  Piper's  script :  the  answer
came  in  her  own.  She  thought  the  answer  would  consist  of
an  allusion  to  reincarnation,  and  the  event  belied  her.  She
hoped  that  the  result  of  her  experiment  would  be  to  confirm
her  own  interpretation  of  the  second  answer  given  by  MyersP ;
whereas,  as  we  shall  see,  it  did  not  do  so,  but  instead  fell
into  line  with,  and  so  confirmed,  the  first  answer  of  MyersP
(which  had  nothing  to  do  with  reincarnation),  although  Mrs.
Verrall  did  not  know  what  this  first  answer  was,  nor  indeed
that  a  first  answer  had  been  given  at  all.1

Six  days  after  making  the  experiment  in  connexion  with
176  described  above,  Mrs.  Verrall  wrote  178 ;  and  then  six  weeks
later  180.2 These  three  scripts,  as  I  have  already  explained,

1  From  the  theoretic  and  evidential  point  of  view,  too  much  stress  cannot  be
laid  on  the  fact  that  Mrs.  Verrall  wrote  176  and  its  sequels  178  and  180  in
entire  ignorance  of  the  first  answer  of  Myersp  ("I  had  Ode  to  Nature  on  my
mind  .  .  .  Do  you  remember  Immortality?"');  many  months  before  the  only
people  (Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  myself)  who  knew  of  this  first  answer,  saw  any
sense  whatever  in  it ;  and  two  years  before  any  one  suggested  any  sort  of  link
between  the  "Archytas"  Ode  and  On  a  Spring  Morning  at  Sea.

2  After  May  13,  1907,  the  date  of  178,  Mrs.  Verrall  gave  up  writing  script
till  June  19,  1907.  180  was  the  second  script  she  wrote  after  resuming.  So
between  176  and  178,  and  178  and  180  (as  the  numbers  show)  only  one  script
intervened  respectively.


204


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


form  a  suite,  and  contain  allusions  to  Venice  and  On  a  Sjwing
Morning  at  Sea.

As  I  have  already  (see  Proc.,  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  168,  and  above,
p.  178)  twice  explained  what  in  my  view  was  the  meaning-
underlying  the  combination  of  allusions  to  On  a  Spring  Morning
at  Sea  and  the  "  Archytas "  Ode  when  discussing  the  allusions
to  both  found  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  early  scripts  of  1901,  I  need  now
only  say  that  I  place  the  same  interpretation  on  the  occurrence
of  allusions  to  the  same  poem  in  a  suite  of  scripts,  of  which  the
first  (176)  is  closely  associated  with  the  "Archytas"  Ode  by
reason  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  experiment.

The  way  is  now  clear  to  answer  the  question  which  I
left  unanswered  some  time  back :  "  "What  was  the  object  of
the  reference  to  Venice  ?  "

I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  Gerald  Balfour  for  being  able  to  supply
what  I  hope  will  seem  to  be  not  only  a  plausible  but  a  con-
vincing answer.  I  felt  sure  that  176,  178  and  180  do  allude
to  Venice ;  but,  as  I  could  not  understand  the  poem,  I  not
unnaturally  failed  to  see  any  reason  for  the  allusions.  Mr.
Balfour  interpreted  the  poem  for  me,  and  at  the  same  time
showed  me  why  the  allusions  to  it  were  appropriate.  The  poem
is  obscure,  perhaps  intentionally  obscure ;  but  I  have  no  doubt
that  Mr.  Balfour  is  right  in  his  interpretation  of  it,  which,
rendered  into  my  own  language,  is  this  :

It  was  a  true  instinct  that  led  the  Venetian  painters
to  portray  their  Doges  in  a  setting  in  which  were  embodied
both  the  Heavenly  City  of  their  spiritual  aspirations  and
the  City  of  their  "  earthly  care,"  the  one  gradually  eclipsing
the  other  and  more  transient  interest.  It  was  a  true
instinct,  because  "  the  wonderful  Dead  who  have  passed
through  the  body  and  gone"  are  still  mindful  of  those
"  militant  here  on  earth " ;  not,  indeed,  restricting  their
interest  to  a  merely  passive  sympathy,  but  rather  actively
guiding  and  inspiring  the  "  race  of  men."  Moreover,  this
"  communion  of  saints  "  is  no  one-sided  fellowship,  for  the
spirits  of  "just  men  made  perfect"  need  our  love  and
remembrance  that  their  joy  may  be  full.1

lrrhis  paraphrase  does  not  cover  the  concluding  lines  of  the  poem,  which  I
shall  touch  on  later  (see  p.  210).


lxv.] Unsuspected  Answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.  205


The  general  correctness  of  the  interpretation  here  offered  is,
I  think,  proved  by  the  motto — Nee  me  meet  cura  fefellit —
attached  to  the  poem  in  Fragments.  This  motto  is  taken  from
the  first  words  of  greeting  spoken  by  Anchises  when  Aeneas
meets  him  in  the  Elysian  Fields :  "  Art  thou  come  at  last,
and  has  thy  love,  child  of  my  desire,  conquered  the  difficult
road  ?  Is  it  granted,  0  my  son,  to  gaze  on  thy  face,  to  hear
and  to  answer  in  the  speech  we  know  ?  Thus  indeed  did  I
forecast  in  spirit,  counting  the  days  between  ;  nor  has  my  care
misled  me."  1

(Sic  cquidem.  ducebam  animo  rebarquc  futurum,
Tcmpora  dimimcrans,  nee  me  mea  cura  fefellit.)2

Moreover,  to  a  MS.  copy  of  the  poem  which  Myers  sent  to
a  friend,  he  had  affixed  another  motto,  in  place  of  the  Vergilian
one,  which  equally  indicates  the  intention  of  the  poem.  This
other  motto  was  Ut  non.  sine  nobis  consummarentur,  the
Vulgate  version  of  the  last  half  of  the  last  verse  of  the
eleventh  chapter  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  I  will  quote
its  context  in  order  to  make  the  applicability  of  the  motto
plain  :

And  these  all  [i.e.  the  fathers  of  old  time],  having  obtained  a  good
report  through  faith,  received  not  the  promise  :  God  having  provided
some  better  thing  for  us,  that  they  without  us  should  not  be  made
perfect  [Ut  non  sine  nobis  consummarentur].  Wherefore  seeing  we  also
are  compassed  about  with  so  great  a  cloud  of  witnesses.  .  .  .3

1  Mackail's  Translation.

2  The  first  line  and  half  of  the  second  are  thus  paraphrased  in  the  poem  :

"They  count  thy  coming,  and  thy  fates  foreknow."

3  The  MS.  copy  of  Venice  with  the  motto  Ut  non  sine  nobis  consummarentur
is  dated  March  21,  1900.  Since  this  paper  was  written  Miss  Alice  Johnson
has  pointed  out  to  me  that  the  words  Ut  non  sine  nobis  consummarentur  occur
in  Myers's  Presidential  Address  which  was  delivered  on  May  18,  1900,  and
occur  in  a  context  which  gives  expression  to  exactly  the  same  thought  as
informs  Venice.

"Perhaps,"  writes  Myers,  "in  the  spiritual  world  as  well  we  have  strained
our  gaze  too  exclusively  on  luminaries  that  are  beyond  the  parallactic  limit  :
and  eyes  turned  steadily  on  some  nearer  brightness  may  teach  us  at  last  our
kinship  and  community  in  the  firmament  of  souls.

"  Not,  then,  with  tears  and  lamentations  should  we  think  of  the  blessed  dead.
Rather  we  should  rejoice  with  them  in  their  enfranchisement,  and  know  that


206


J.  G.  Pidclington.


[part


The  thought  that  inspired  Venice,  the  thought,  that  is,  of
the  dependence  of  the  two  worlds  on  each  other,  of  the  con-
tinued interest  of  the  dead  in  us,  and  of  their  desire  for  our
continued  interest  in  them,  how  complete  a  contrast  it  pre-
sents with  the  thought  of  the  "  Archytas "  Ode  and  with
the  doubts  and  misgivings  of  Im  mortality  !

But  let  us  go  back  for  a  moment  to  On  a  Spring  Morning
at  Sea.  This  poem  is  clearly  in  harmony  with  Venice  on  the
one  hand,  and  as  clearly  in  disaccord  with  the  "  Archytas "
Ode  and  Immortality  on  the  other  ;  though  both  the  harmony
and  the  disaccord  will  be  all  the  more  plainly  revealed  if  we
read  the  context  in  which  On  a  Spring  Morning  appears  in
Myers's  Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry  (p.  53). It  runs  thus:

We  need,  as  I  have  elsewhere  said,  a  summons  "  to  no  houri-
haunted  paradise,  no  passionless  contemplation,  no  monotony  of  prayer
and  praise ;  but  to  endless  advance  by  endless  effort,  and,  if  need
be,  by  endless  pain."  Be  it  mine,  then,  to  plunge  among  the  unknown
Destinies,  to  dare  and  still  to  dare  !

Meanwhile  the  background  of  Eternity  shows  steadfast  through  all
the  pageants  of  the  shifting  world.  .  .  .

And  then,  except  for  four  lines  which  I  need  not  quote,  comes
the  poem.  For  my  part  I  find  it  impossible  to  believe  that
Myers  could  have  written  the  opening  sentence  of  the  above
extract  without  having  in  his  mind  the  second  stanza  of  his
poem  Immortality.

The  image  in  the  last  sentence  about  "  the  background  of
Eternity "  showing  "  steadfast  through  all  the  pageants  of  the
shifting  world "  exactly  reverses  the  imagery  in  Venice :

Thro'  that  clear  vision  fades,  remotely  fair,
The  Imperial  City  of  all  his  earthly  care,
Whose  few  last  arches  glimmer, — and  all  the  rest
Whelmed  in  that  thronging  welcome  of  the  Blest.

they  are  still  minded  to  keep  us  as  sharers  in  their  joy.  It  is  they,  not  we,
who  are  working  now  ;  they  are  more  ready  to  hear  than  we  to  pray  ;  they
guide  us  as  with  a  cloudy  pillar,  but  it  is  kindling  into  steadfast  fire.

"  Nay,  it  may  be  that  our  response,  our  devotion,  is  a  needful  element  in
their  ascending  joy  ;  and  God  may  have  provided  some  better  thing  for  us,
that  they  without  us  should  not  be  made  perfect; — Ut  non  sine  nobis  consum-
marentur." (Pror.,  Vol.  XV.,  p.  123.)


lxv.] Unsuspected  Ansiver  to  tJte  Horace  Ode  Question.  207


Here,  as  also  of  course  in  the  pictures  which  inspired  the
poem,  Eternity  is  in  the  foreground  and  the  earthly  city  in
the  background.  But  though  the  imagery  differs,  the  funda-
mental thought  is  the  same  ;  and  I  think  it  not  unlikely
that  Myers  had  this  part  of  the  context  of  On  a  Spring
Morning  at  Sea  in  his  mind  when  he  wrote  the  lines  in
Venice.1

While,  then,  on  the  one  hand,  we  have  reasons  for  believ-
ing that  in  Frederic  Myers's  mind  the  "  Archytas "  Ode  was
associated  with  Immortality,  and  Immortality  in  turn  with
the  context  of  On  a  Spring  Morning  at  Sea,  and  hence  with
the  poem  itself,  and  some  grounds  for  thinking  that  the
context  of  On  a  Spring  Morning  at  Sea,  and  accordingly  the
poem  itself,  may  have  been  associated  in  his  mind  with
Venice — while,  I  say,  we  have  reasons  for  thinking  that  these
associations  did  exist  or  may  have  existed  in  the  mind  of
Frederic  Myers ;  we  have  reasons  also  for  believing  that
MyersP  and  Myersv  shared  these  associations.

"  Ode  to  Nature."

Myersp  and  Myersv  and  Frederic  Myers,  I  have  suggested,
associated  Immortality,  On  a  Spring  Morning  at  Sea  and
Venice  with  the  "  Archytas  "  Ode,  and  with  each  other,  because
these  three  poems  give  utterance  to  views  about  man's  destiny
either  accordant,  discordant  or  comparable  with  the  view
expressed  by  Horace  on  the  same  subject  in  the  "  Archytas "
Ode.

But  Myersp,  it  will  be  remembered,  also  associated  a  fourth
poem  of  Frederic  Myers's  with  the  Horace  Ode,  namely,  Ode
to  Nature.  It  was,  indeed,  so  he  said,  the  first  poem  that
came  to  his  mind  in  connexion  with  the  question :  "  Which
Ode  of  Horace  had  entered  deeply  into  your  inner  life  ? "

The  only  explanation  I  have  hitherto  been  able  to  offer
(Proc.,  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  401-402)  of  why  MyersP  mentioned
Ode  to  Nature  in  connexion  with  the  Horace  Ode  Question  is
that  it  contains  echoes  of  Hor.  C.  iii.  4,  an  ode  entirely  dis-
tinct from  C.  i.  28,  the  "Archytas"  Ode.

1  On  a  Spring  Morning  at  Sea  and  the  passages  quoted  above  from  Fragments
were  written  not  later  than  1893. Venice  was  composed  in  1900.


208


G.  Piddington.


[part


Although  I  still  think  that  Ode  to  Nature  does  contain
echoes  of  Hor.  C.  iii.  4,  this  explanation  no  longer  appears  to
me  a  sufficient  one.  Miss  Johnson  has  discovered  another
solution,  and,  as  I  think,  a  much  better  one,  because  it
explains  the  reference  to  Ode  to  Nature  on  exactly  the  same
lines  as  I  have  explained  the  references  to  the  three  other
poems  of  Myers's.

But  before  stating  what  Miss  Johnson's  interpretation  is,  I
had  better  first  quote  and  discuss  the  exact  words  in  which
the  reference  to  Ode  to  Nature  was  made  by  MyersP.  They
were  as  follows :  "  I  had  Ode  to  Nature  on  my  mind,  but  as
I  thought  I  loved  another  ode  better  I  did  not  reply  until  I
could  say  it  more  clearly.  Do  you  remember  imortality  [sic]  .  . ."
(Proc.,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  369).

In  my  first  paper  I  took  "  another  ode "  to  mean  another
Ode  of  Horaces.  This  interpretation,  in  the  first  place,  in-
volves the  assumption  that  MyersP  at  first  hesitated  as  to
which  Ode  of  Horace's  was  the  subject  of  Mrs.  Verrall's
question.1  In  the  second  place  it  involves  taking  the  actual
words  of  MyerSp  in  a  sense  which,  though  legitimate,  is  not,
I  think,  on  the  whole  the  most  obvious  one  ;  for  while  the
first  "  Ode "  certainly  means  Myers's  Ode,  I  had  to  make  the
word  "  ode "  when  it  occurred  a  second  time  refer  to  an
Horatian  Ode.

But  let  us  apply  the  second  "  ode "  as  well  as  the  first  to
Myers's  poems.  Then  "  another  ode "  must  mean  Immortality.
I  need  not  debate  the  purely  academic  question  of  whether
Immortality  may  properly  be  called  an  "Ode";  though  I  am
told  on  good  authority  that  it  has  at  least  as  good  a  claim  to
the  designation  as  many  other  English  poems  so  entitled.  What
we  need  is  evidence  to  show  that  MyersP  called  Immortality
an  Ode.  Evidence  to  this  effect  is  to  be  found  in  one  of  Mr.
Dorr's  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  On  March  10,  1908 — nearly
a  year  after  the  Horace  Ode  Question  had  been  asked  and
answered — Mr. Dorr,  who  knew nothing  whatever  about  the

1  In  saying  this  I  must  not  be  understood  to  imply  that  such  hesitation
would  he  prejudicial  to  the  theory  that  Myersp  has  access  to  the  memories  of
Frederic  Myers  ;  for  a  man  with  the  readiest  and  best  equipped  of  memories,
if  challenged  to  recall  a  literary  judgement  that  he  had  passed  in  years  gone
by,  might  surely  show  some  hesitation  about  his  reply,  and  yet  run  no  risk
of  the  integrity  of  his  personality  being  called  in  question.


lxv.] Unsuspected  Answer  to  tUk  Horace  Ode  Question.  209-

question  or  the  answers  to  it,  on  his  own  initiative  read  to
MyerSp  a  passage  from  Fragments  in  which  Frederic  Myers
describes  his  early  familiarity  with  various  Greek  and  Latin
poets,  among  them  Horace.  As  the  name  Horace  was  read  out,
MyerSp  wrote  :

Ode  to  i  motalty  imortality
.  .  .  Ode Horace to  Mortality.

Here  it  seems  clear  that  the  poem  Immortality  is  called
"  Ode  to  Immortality."  I  do  not  think  that  it  is  an  error  for
"  Ode  to  Mortality "  which  immediately  follows  it.  On  the
contrary,  I  believe  that  "  Ode  to  Immortality "  is  meant  to
refer  to  Myers's  poem,  and  that  "  Ode  to  Mortality  "  is  a  title
— and  not  a  bad  title,  either — invented  by  MyersP  to  designate
the  "  Archytas  "  Ode.

So  I  now  am  of  opinion  that  MyersP  did  not  connect  Ode  to
Nature  with  one  Horatian  Ode  and  Immortality  with  another,
but  that  he  connected  both  poems  with  one  and  the  same  Ode
of  Horace,  namely,  the  "  Archytas  "  Ode.

What,  then,  is  the  connexion  between  Ode  to  Nature  and  the
"  Archytas "  Ode  ?  Miss  Johnson's  answer  to  that  problem  is
this :  In  Ode  to  Nature  Myers  assigns  to  the  soul  after  the
death  of  the  body  only  some  sort  of  un-individualised  existence.
Nature  only  "  endureth  to  the  end  " :  the  soul  at  death  is
reabsorbed  into  the  blind  world  of  Nature  from  which  it
sprang :

Let  all  in  darkness  end,  as  darkly  all  began  !

Hence,  hence  I  too  had  birth,

One  soul  with  the  ancient  Earth,
Beyond  this  human  ancestry  of  pain  : —

My  soul  was  even  as  ye ; 1 —

She  was, — and  she  would  be;  —
O  Earth,  and  Night,  and  Nought,  enfold  her  once  again  !

So  Ode  to  Nature  strikes  as  sombre  a  note  as  the  "  Archytas  "
Ode,  for  absorption  into  the  physical  universe  is  the  annihilation
of  personality.

1  "  Ye  "  means  the  blind  forces  of  nature.
0


210


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Now  contrast  the  cheerless  speculations  of  Ode  to  Nature  with
the  closing  lines  of  Venice  : 1

but  she  [i.e.  Venice]
Dreams  in  her  melted  Pearl  of  sky  and  sea.
For  me  too  dreaming  let  the  sunset  fire
Shade  the  dark  dome  and  pierce  the  pillared  spire  !
Let  night  and  peace  the  cosmic  promise  pay,
And  even  the  Soul's  self  dream  into  the  day!

There  is  no  loss  of  personality  here ;  the  self  is  no  longer
to  he  enfolded  into  Night  and  Nought,  but  dreams  "  into  the
day."

Conclusion.

As  I  have  now  done  my  best  to  explain  why,  in  answering
the  Horace  Ode  Question,  MyersP  referred  to  Ode  to  Nature  and
Immortality,  and  Myersv  to  Venice  and  On  a  Spring  Morning  at
Sea,  it  only  remains  for  me  to  state  in  a  few  words  the  upshot
of  the  new  evidence.

The  five  scripts  of  Mrs.  Verrall's,  136,  171,  176,  178  and  180,
which  constitute  the  new  evidence,  tend,  I  submit,  to  confirm
the  interpretation  which  in  1909  I  placed  upon  her  four  early
scripts  of  1901.  They  likewise  tend  to  confirm  the  two
interpretations,  which  I  arrived  at  in  1908  and  1909,  of  the
answers  given  by  MyersP  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question  in  1907
and  1908.

But  they  do  something  more.

In  my  two  previous  papers  I  suggested  that  Myersv  and
MyerSp  had  contrasted  the  dismal  speculations  about  "  the
doubtful  doom  of  human  kind "  in  the  "  Archytas "  Ode  and
Immortality  (and  to  these  I  should  now  add  Ode  to  Nature)
with  the  optimistic  forecasts  of  Abt  Vogler  and  On  a  Spring
Morning  at  Sea. If  I  have  interpreted  the  new  evidence

1  For  the  assistance  of  readers  who  may  wish  to  trace  the  development  of
Myers's  views  about  a  future  life,  I  append  the  dates  of  the  four  poems  dis-
cussed in  this  paper  :

Immortality  was  first  published  in  1870  ;

Ode  to  Nature  was  written  between  1869  and  1873  ;

On  a  Spring  Morning  at  Sea  was  written  not  later  than  1893  ;  and

Venice  was  written  in  March  1900,  some  ten  months  or  so  before  Myers's
death.


lxv.] Unsuspected  Answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.  211

aright,  to  these  two  happier  forecasts  must  now  be  added  the
Heavenly  Jerusalem  of  the  Apocalypse,  the  Elysian  plain  of
the  Fourth  Book  of  the  Odyssey,  the  Paradise  of  Celtic  Legend,
the  Tennysonian  Island- Valley  of  Avilion,  and  that  "  Universal
Country,"  depicted  for  us  in  Venice,  which  embraces  in  one
common  and  conscious  citizenship  both  the  living  and  the  dead.

Note  A.

On  the  Discovery  of  Coincidences  between  178  and
"  On  a  Spring  Morning  at  Sea."

The  verbal  coincidences  between  this  poem  and  178  I  first
noticed  in  1910,  when,  some  months  after  the  publication  of  my
second  paper  on  the  Horace  Ode  Question,  I  was  engaged  in
indexing  and  annotating  a  large  batch  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts.
In  this  second  paper  I  had  pointed  out  the  verbal  resemblances
between  On  a  Spring  Morning  cd  Sea  and  four  early  scripts
of  Mrs.  Verrall's  written  in  1901.  But  as  I  did  not  in  1910
notice  the  connexion  between  178  and  176,  and  was  not  then
aware  of  any  sort  of  link  between  176  and  the  "  Archytas  "  Ode,
the  discovery  of  verbal  coincidences  between  the  poem  and  178,
while  they  appeared  interesting  enough  to  be  worth  noting,
conveyed  nothing  further  to  my  mind.  The  date  of  the  discovery
is  important,  because  it  shows  that  in  detecting  the  coincidences
I  could  not  have  been  influenced  by  the  interpretation  of  176  and
178  at  which  I  arrived  only  in  January  1912.  In  other  words,
after  interpreting  176  and  178  as  an  answer  to  the  Horace  Ode
Question,  I  did  not  say  to  myself,  "  Go  to !  you  must  now
discover  in  176  and  178  coincidences  with  On  a  Spring  Morning
at  Sea."  Likewise,  after  discovering  the  coincidences  with  the
poem,  I  did  not  say  to  myself,  "  You  must  now  by  hook  or  crook
somehow  manage  to  hitch  178  on  to  the  Horace  Ode."  The
discovery  of  the  coincidences  between  178  and  the  poem,  and  the
discovery  of  the  connexion  between  176  and  the  "  Archytas "
Ode  were  independently  made.


212


G.  Piddington.  [part


Note  B.

Mrs.  Verrall's  Script  of  Feb.  20,  1907  (140).

(140) (February  20,  1907. 11.10  a.m.)
Chiaroscuro

non  semper  possum  tibi confidere  hortationes
meas. sed  auscrdta.

[I  cannot  always  confide  to  you  my  exhortations,  but  listen.]
There  are  messages  for  you  in  Monday  and  Wednesday's  words

not  on  Tuesday. To-day  is  important. Sit  still  and  help — it  will

not  come  to  you but  to  Piddington.


no  the  word  is  very  difficult  to  give


Print  it  Rector.
Behind  the  darkening  billows  there  is  peace
Peace — and  the  Light  that  never  was On  Land  or  Sea
No  not  right  but  partly. Do  not  write — sit  still  and  wait.
Behind  our  darkness  there  is  light.
'  High  Emprize  ' adventure  forth — a  full  sail
Argosy '  comes  beetling  forth  '.

"  Chiaroscuro  "  occurs  in  the  form  "  clear-obscure  "  in  F.  W.  H.
Myers's  Renewal  of  Youth,  p.  223,  with  reference  to  Tintoretto's
pictures.  Tintoretto  was  one  of  the  Venetian  masters  who
painted  those  "  allegorical  compositions  intended  to  express  the
close  alliance  between  Religion  and  the  State "  which  are
described  in  Myers's  Venice.  Two  examples  of  this  type  of
picture  painted  by  Tintoretto  have  been  reproduced  and  dis-
cussed above  (Plates  1  and  7).

"  The  Light  that,  never  tvas  On  Land  or  Sect "  occurs  again
in  178  in  the  forms  "  The  light  that  gleamed  on  sea  and
shore  The  light  that  never  was  on  sea  or  shore " :  all
three  being  incorrect  versions  of  Wordsworth's

and  add  the  gleam,
The  light  that  never  was,  on  sea  or  land.


lxv.] Unsuspected  Answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.  213

It  is  by  means  of  this  Wordsworthian  reminiscence  common
to  both  that  140  is  linked  on  to  178.

But  if  I  am  right  in  seeing  in  178  allusions  to  Myers's
Venice,  there  is  another  link  between  140  and  178,  for  the
words  "  adventure  forth — a  full  sail  Argosy  "  in  the  former  are
clearly  reminiscent  of  phrases  in  Shakespeare's  Merchant  of
Venice. Thus :

Salarino.  There,  where  your  argosies  with  portly  sail,
Like  signiors  and  rich  burghers  on  the  flood,
Or,  as  it  were,  the  pageants  of  the  sea,
Do  overpeer  the  petty  traffickers,
That  curtsy  to  them,  do  them  reverence,
As  they  fly  by  them  with  their  woven  wings.

Salanio. Believe  me,  sir,  had  I  such  venture  forth.  .  .  .

Act  i.  Sc.  i.

and  again :

Shylock.  ...  he  hath  an  argosy  bound  to  Tripolis,  ...  a  fourth
for  England,  and  other  ventures  he  hath.

Note  C.

On  the  Occurrences  of  "  Pearl,"  "  Pearly,"  etc.,  in  Mrs.
Verrall's  Scripts  between  January  1905  and  May
1910.

"  Pearl,"  or  a  derivative  of  it,  occurs  in  only  seven  scripts  of
Mrs.  Verrall's  between  Jan.  1905  and  May  1910.

First  in  93  (Sep.  1,  1906):  "pearls  and  a  jasper  gate";

next,  as  cpuoted  above,  in  176,  178  and  180  ;

next  in  212  (Nov.  26,  1907):  "Aurora's  faintest  light  in
Eastern  skies  and  then  the  pearled  chariot  of  the  Dawn " ;

next  in  223  (Jan.  18,  1908):  "The  Orient  splendours  of  the
dawn The  pearl  of  sea  and  sky no  not  that " ;

and  last  in  344  (Dec.  22,  1909):  "Soft  draperies  of  pearly
grey  Have  veiled  the  Empyreal  Blue  So  rising  mists  at  break
of  day Obscure  the  distant  view."  1

1 1  have  purposely  omitted  from  the  above  list  the  occurrence  of  "  these  pearls  "
in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  April  18,  1906  ;  for  while  writing  this  script  Mrs.
Verrall  was  holding  an  ornament  containing  pearls  in  her  hand  or  lap,  for  the
purpose  of  an  experiment  ;  and  to  this  ornament  "  these  pearls  "  refers.


214


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


In  every  instance,  except  perhaps  the  last  (and  even  there  we
find  combined  the  ideas  of  a  pearly  sky  and  of  early  morning),
the  emergence  of  the  word  "  pearl  "  is,  I  believe,  traceable  to
one  and  the  same  group  of  associated  ideas  as  is  exhibited  in
the  scripts  connected  with  the  Horace  Ode.  Thus,  "  orient
pearl "  occurs  in  178 ;  "  pearl "  occurs  in  180  in  connexion  with
Cleopatra  and  with  a  quotation  from  Antony  and  Cleopatra,  in
which  play  Antony  makes  a  gift  to  Cleopatra  of  an  "  orient
pearl";  "pearl"  and  "Eastern"  occur  in  212,  a  script  containing
reminiscences  of  a  passage  in  Paradise  Lost,  Book  Y. ;  and
"  orient "  and  "  pearl "  occur  in  223,  a  script  containing  reminis-
cences of  the  same  passage  in  Paradise  Lost ;  and  in  176,  178,  212,
223  and  344,  "  pearl "  is  combined  with  "  early  morning "  or
"  dawn."  Moreover,  223  has  "  the  pearl  of  sky  and  sea,"  which
looks  like  an  echo  of  "her  melted  Pearl  of  sky  and  sea"  in
Venice.  The  fact  of  this  close  approximation  to  the  phrase
in  Venice  being  followed  by  the  words  "  no  not  that "  goes
to  support  Mrs.  Verrall's  theory  that  there  are  allusions  to  Venice
in  176  and  178  ;  for  to  a  student  familiar  with  the  scripts  "  no
not  that"  signifies  that  the  phrase  thus  negatived  has  previously
emerged  in  some  other  script.  It  is  true  that  the  phrase  "  pearl
of  sky  and  sea  "  had  not  occurred  before  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script,
but  we  may  legitimately  suppose  that  the  scribe  thought  that
either  the  actual  phrase  or  a  sufficiently  close  approximation  to
it  had  been  recorded  in  176  and  178.

This  way  of  retracting  words  or  phrases  written  by  the
automatist  by  means  of  some  such  negatory  comment  as  no,
not  that,"  "  no,  that  is  different,"  is  very  common,  and  is
usually,  I  believe,  confined  to  cases  where  in  the  course  of  an
attempt  to  express  some  new  phrase  or  idea,  an  old  phrase  or
idea,  like — though  not  the  same  as — the  new  one  has  re-emerged
by  mistake.

The  facts  detailed  above  show  that  the  occurrence  of  "pearl"
in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  is  no  haphazard  affair,  and  tell  in  favour
of  the  synthesis  of  "  pearl "  scripts  propounded  in  this  paper.
"  Pearls  and  a  jasper  gate"  in  93  suggests  the  imagery  of  the
21st  chapter  of  Pevelation.


lxv.] Unsuspected  Ansiver  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.  215


Note  D.

Mrs.  Verrall's  Script  of  October  27,  1905  (51),  and  its
connexion  with  174,  176  and  178.

(51)  (Oct.  27,  1905)

[About  10  p.m.  in  train  before  Hatfield.]

Pathorne  evangel  S.  Marco.  Leone  caneque  dormientibus  iuxta
ipse  sedet  biblia  sacra  studiose  legens.  Apparet  angelus  cum  magna
pennata  donaki  quam  Sancto  dedit.  quocirca  quod  nondum
scriptum  esset  post  haec  aureochalcatis  symbolis  in
papyrum  pinxit  ille  magister.

Historiam  bene  cognitam  dictitas.  non  facile  vel  credentibus
acceptam.  [With  a  lion  and  a  dog  asleep  by  his  side,  he  him-
self sits,  attentively  reading  the  sacred  books.  An  angel  appears
with  a  large  winged  pen,  which  he  gave  to  the  Saint.  Where-
fore what  had  not  yet  been  written,  that  master  thereafter
painted  upon  the  parchment  in  brazen  signs.  You  repeat  a  story
well  known  but  not  easily  accepted  even  by  believers.]  But  anyone
will  show  you  where  the  second  pen  took  up  S.  Mark's  narrative —
right in  the  middle  of  a  chapter.1

There  is  a  picture — is  it  at  Perugia.
[Hatfield.]

It  is  not  the  St.  Jerome  story — quite  another  S.  Marco.

"  Evangel "  does  not  occur  again  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script
till  May  1,  1907,  the  date  of  the  script  (174)  in  which  she
was  instructed  to  "  wait  for  a  message  "  in  connexion  with  "  a
special  experiment"  till  May  13,  1907,  the  date  on  which
178  was  written.

Consequently,  by  means  of  the  catch-word  "  Evangel,"  51  is
linked  with  174  and  178 :  and,  since  178  is  a  sequel  to  176,  51
seems  to  be  one  of  a  series  consisting  of  itself,  174,  176  and  178.

As  we  know,  176  and  178  present  coincidences  with  Myers's
Venice.  I  believe  that  51  represents  a  partially  successful,
though  muddled,  attempt  to  refer  to  the  same  poem,  and  to

'On  Oct.  29,  1905,  Mrs.  Verrall  made  the  following  note:— "A.  W.  V.
[i.e.  Dr.  Verrall]  says  the  end  of  St.  Mark  is  lost ;  he  has  been  reading  this
term  an  article  on  it  in  the  Hibbert  Journal  for  July.  I  find  there  that  St.
Mark  xvi.  9-20  is,  'as  is  well  known,  an  old  addition,  added  presumably  by
a  certain  Ariston.'" Mrs.  Verrall  at  the  time  knew  nothing  of  this.


21G  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

some  of  the  details  found  in  the  type  of  pictures  described
in  it.

Thus,  with  evangel  S.  Marco.  Leone  caneque  donnientibus
juxta  ipse  sedet  biblia  sacra  studiose  legens,  compare  the  following
details  in  the  pictures  reproduced  above :

(1)  St.  Mak  with  the  "sacred  books"  (Plates  2,  3,  5  and  7);

(2)  St. Mark with a lion at his feet or by his  side

(Plates  1,  2,  3,  4  and  7);

(3)  Near  either  St.  Mark  or  his  lion  the  motto  of  Venice

Pax  tibi,  Marce  Evangelista  meus  (Plates  1,  4  and  6),
rendered  in  the  poem  "  My  peace  be  with  thee,  Mark
Evangelist !  "

The  coincidences  with  the  poem  are  verbal,  and  are  as  follows:

Script.  Poem.
"  evangel  S.  Marco."  "  Mark  Evangelist."

"  ille  magister."  "  that  Venetian  master."

If  it  should  seem  to  the  reader  absurd  to  lay  any  stress
on  the  second  of  these  verbal  coincidences,  I  would  ask  him
to  observe  that  the  word  pinxit  ("  he  painted  "),  which
immediately  precedes  ille  magister,  adds  something  to  the  coin-
cidence, for  "  that  Venetian  master "  of  the  poem  is,  of  course,
a  painter.

That  the  script  is  about  a  picture  is  shown  by  the  words
"  There  is  a  picture " ;  and  that  the  picture  is  an  Italian  one
is  suggested  by  the  query  "  is  it  at  Perugia  ? "  and  by  St.
Mark's  name  being  twice  given  in  its  Italian  form.  The
scribe,  it  should  be  noticed,  recognises  that  there  has  been
some  confusion  between  the  picture  he  is  trying  to  describe
and  a  picture  connected  with  St.  Jerome ;  for  he  remarks :  "  it
is  not  the  St.  Jerome  story — quite  another  S.  Marco."  I
should  explain  the  confusion  in  this  way :  The  scribe  wishes  to
make  the  automatist  describe  some  of  the  details  commonly
found  in  the  type  of  pictures  described  in  Venice.  So  he  begins
by  thinking  of  the  patron  Saint  of  Venice,  St.  Mark  the
Evangelist,  book  in  hand,  and  his  lion  couchant  at  his  feet.
But  once  the  automatist  has  got  hold  of  the  idea  of  a  picture
of  a  Saint  with  a  book  and  a  lion,  it  suggests  to  her  pictures
of  St.  Jerome,  whose  regular  emblem  is  a  lion,  and  who  is
very  frequently  represented  studying  "  the  sacred  books  "  or  trans-


Lxv.] Unsuspected  Answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.  217


lating  them.  Frequently,  too,  an  angel  is  inspiring  or  dictating
to  St.  Jerome.  Hence  the  angel  of  the  script.  And  in  one
picture,  at  least — -and  that  one  very  familiar  to  Mrs.  Verrall
in  a  photographic  reproduction — Carpaccio's  "  St.  Jerome  in
his  Study "  (in  the  chapel  of  S.  Giorgio  dei  Schiavoni  at
Venice),  there  is,  as  Euskin  says,  a  "  happy  white  dog "
"  watching  his  master  translating  the  Bible,  with  highest  com-
placency of  approval."  And  in  Diirer's  engraving  with  the
same  title — also  known  to  Mrs.  Verrall — St.  Jerome  is  seated
at  a  desk  in  the  background,  while  in  the  foreground  a  lion
and  another  animal,  which  some  authorities  call  a  dog  and
others  a  fox,  are  asleep.  Hence  the  leone  eaneqne  dormientibus
of  the  script.

The  script,  then,  is  the  resultant  of  a  struggle  between  the
scribe's  thoughts  and  thoughts  aroused  thereby  in  the  auto-
matist's  mind.  On  the  whole  the  scribe  managed  to  hold  his
own  fairly  well,  for  he  succeeded  in  negativing  the  allusions  to
St.  Jerome,  and  in  insisting  on  his  original  reference  to  St.  Mark.

It  may  be  that  the  emergence  of  the  automatist's  recollec-
tions of  the  St.  Jerome  picture  was  facilitated  by  there  being
latent  in  the  scribe's  consciousness  a  recollection  of  the  picture
by  Palma  Giovine  (Plate  2),  in  which  St.  Mark  and  St.
Jerome  both  appear  with  their  respective  lions.

It  should  be  noted  that  this  script  (as  also  the  script  of
August  15,  1906,  discussed  in  Note  E),  was  written  after  the
publication  of  Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry,  and  accordingly
after  Mrs.  Verrall  was  normally  acquainted  with  the  poem
Venice.


Mrs.  Verrall's  Script  of  August  15,  19  0  6  (88),  and


Note  E.


ITS CONNEXION WITH  176  AND  178.


(88)  (Aug.  15,  1906. 10  p.m.)


Mary  Tredegan. on  a  long  green  slope  crowned  with


firs  against  a  western  sky.


218


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


There  has  been  till  to-night  no  trace  of  connexion  but  to-night
we  have  made  her  understand.  She  has  thought  of  the  double
thread.

Richard  Hodgson  is  on  her  paper  what's  the  line  about  not
wanting  to  be  a  King  in  Hades —  Achilles  I  mean,  write  that  line.
Phthia  and  a  slave  there.

The  initial  capital  V  with  which  this  script  opens  is  found
again  in  none  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  except  178.  The  V
in  178,  I  have  suggested,  is  the  initial  letter  of  the  word
Venice. Here,  I  fancy,  it  may  have  the  same  significance.

The  words  in  88  "  on  a  long  green  slope  crowned  with  firs
against  a  western  sky "  may  be  compared  with  the  words  in
176 :  "  Spires  of  flame  like  the  tops  of  cypress  trees,  cypress
tops  against  a  pearly  sky"  (see  pp.  183  and  193).

The  last  paragraph  of  88  unmistakably  refers  to  the  passage
in  Odyssey,  XI.  487-491,  where  Achilles  says  to  Odysseus:

Nay,  speak  not  comfortably  to  me  of  death,  oh  great  Odysseus.
Rather  would  I  live  attached  to  the  soil  (or,  "  above  ground ")
as  the  serf  of  another,  with  a  landless  man  who  had  no  great
livelihood,  than  bear  sway  among  all  the  dead  that  be  departed.

Now  it  was  to  these  very  words  that  reference  was  made
in  Mrs.  Verrall's  four  early  scripts  of  1901  by  means  of
the  phrase  adscriptus  glehae,  "  attached  to  the  soil  " 1 ;  and  these
four  early  scripts  contained  reminiscences  of  the  "  Archytas "
Ode,  and  also,  I  have  suggested,  allusions  to  Myers's  Immortality
and  On  a  Spring  Morning  at  Sea.

But  176  and  178  are  connected  with  the  "  Archytas "  Ode,
and  present  coincidences  with  On  a  Spring  Morning  at  Sea,  and
Venice.  Hence,  if  I  am  right  in  connecting  176  and  178  with
the  first  paragraph  of  88,  88  links  Achilles'  speech  to  Odysseus
with  Myers's  Venice ;  and  so,  I  would  argue,  contributes
another  instance  of  contrasted  forecasts  of  the  future  life.

The  middle  paragraph  of  88  I  interpret  as  follows :

" 1  There  has  been  till  to-night  no  trace  of  connexion '
between  Venice  and  the  words  of  Achilles  to  Odysseus.  She
(i.e. Mrs. Verrall) has previously got references to  each

1  On  a  future  occasion  I  hope  to  show  that  Dr.  Maxwell's  criticism  of  our
interpretation  of  adscriptus  glebcce  as  an  allusion  to  ewdpovpos  (see  pp.  114-115)
is  beside  the  mark.


lxv.] Unsuspected  Answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.  219


separately,  namely  to  Achilles'  words  in  her  early  scripts  of
1901,  and  to  Venice  in  her  script  of  Oct.  27,  1905  (see
note  D  above) ;  but  hitherto  she  has  never  connected  the  two.
'  But  to-night  we  have  made  her  understand.  She  has  thought
of  the  double  thread.' "

If,  then,  my  interpretation  of  this  script,  of  Mrs.  Verrall's
script  of  October  27,  1905  (see  Note  D),  and  of  her  four
early  scripts  of  1901,  is  right,  MyersP  and  Myersv  in  1907
constructed  their  answers  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question  largely
out  of  old  material  taken  from  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts.  New
illustrations  were  indeed  introduced — namely,  Ode  to  Nature
and  the  lines  from  Aht  Vogler  by  MyersP,  and  the  allusions
to  the  Heavenly  Jerusalem  and  so  on  by  Myersv ;  but  the
keynote  was  the  same  throughout.

It  is  by  no  means  rare  to  find  a  subject  being  thus
pursued,  with  what  seems  almost  relentless  and  tiresome  per-
sistence, over  a  period  of  several  years.  It  is  a  feature  common
to  the  scripts  of  Mrs.  Verrall,  Miss  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Holland,
both  jointly  and  severally.  And  one  of  the  most  interesting
points  about  it  is  that  only,  as  a  rule,  in  the  most  obvious
instances  is  the  automatist  aware  of  the  reiterations :  and,
even  when  she  is,  she  seldom  sees  the  point  of  them.
It  has  usually  been  reserved  for  a  student  of  the  scripts  to
trace  the  series  of  allusions — often  taking  very  diverse
shape — to  a  given  subject  running  through  a  number  of  widely
separated  scripts,  and  to  furnish  a  clue  to  their  meaning.
Sometimes,  however,  light  has  been  thrown  on  the  meaning
of  such  a  series  occurring  in  the  script  of  A  by  a  comment
or  comments  in  the  script  of  B,  who  in  some  cases  has,  and
in  others  has  not,  been  acquainted  with  A's  scripts.  Some-
times, too,  Mrs.  Verrall  has  traced  such  a  series  of  allusions
in  her  own  or  others'  scripts,  and  worked  out  the  meaning
underlying  them ;  but  then  she  is  in  the  exceptional  position
of  playing  at  one  time  the  role  of  automatist,  at  another
that  of  student.  In  this  case,  however,  it  should  be  clearly
understood  that  she  is  not  responsible  for  the  interpretation
of  any  of  the  scripts  discussed  in  this  paper.  Her  only
contribution  was  to  point  out  that  176  and  178  contain  verbal
coincidences  with  Venice.

The ideas which eventually constituted the answers  of


220


J.  G.  Pidclington.


[part


Myersp  and  Myersv  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question  had,  then,
it  would  seem,  been  lying  dormant  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script
for  several  years.  But  they  had  been  so  cryptically  or
imperfectly  expressed,  had  emerged  in  so  disconnected  a
fashion  and  at  such  long  intervals,  that  their  meaning  had
escaped  detection.

Then  in  1907  the  putting  of  a  test-question  about  an
Ode  of  Horace  afforded — though  quite  undesignedly — an  appro-
priate focus  for  the  scattered  fragments  of  former  years.
Myersp  and  Myersv  seized  the  chance,  and  grouped  the  frag-
ments round  the  "  Archytas  "  Ode.  But  the  fact  of  176  being
connected  with  the  "  Archytas "  Ode  was  overlooked  until
1912,  and  it  was  only  then,  when  the  connexion  was  for
the  first  time  recognised,  that  the  entire  series  of  fragmentary
allusions  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  between  1901  and  1907
could  be  put  together  so  as  to  yield  a  coherent  meaning.

When  indexing  and  annotating  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  in  1910
and  1911,  I  had  noted  many  of  the  verbal  coincidences
between  55,  88,  136,  140,  171,  174,  176,  178  and  180,  which  I  have
pointed  out  in  the  course  of  this  paper.  But,  though  fully
alive  to  the  importance  of  such  coincidences  as  indicating  how
one  script  should  be  dovetailed  with  another,  the  unifying
thought  that  explains  and  justifies  the  synthesis  indicated  by
the  superficial  coincidences  would  have  remained  unrevealed,
had  not  the  connexion  of  176  with  the  "  Archytas "  Ode
supplied  the  clue.


lxv.] Some  Observations  on  the  Foregoing  Paper.


221


SOME  OBSERVATIONS  ON  THE  FOREGOING  PAPER.

By  the  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  BALFOUR.

There  are  altogether  four  sets  of  scripts  which  hear  on  this
case. These  are :

(1)  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  of  1901.

(2)  Mrs.  Piper's  scripts  of  1907.

(3)  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  of  1907.

(4)  Mrs.  Piper's  scripts  of  1908.

Let  us  for  the  moment  dismiss  from  our  minds  the  first
and  last  of  these,  and  confine  our  attention  entirely  to  the
scripts  of  1907.  It  was  in  that  year  that  the  Horace  Ode
Question  was  asked  and  answered,  and  it  is  with  this  question
and  the  answer  to  it  that  we  are  primarily  concerned.

The  question  was  first  put  to  MyersP  on  Jan.  23,  1907  :
"  Which  Ode  of  Horace  entered  deeply  into  your  inner  life  ? ".
Any  answer  would  be  correct  which  pointed  directly  or  indirectly
to  the  Archytas  Ode.

No  direct  answer  was  attempted ;  but  if  we  are  to  accept
Mr.  Piddington's  views,  a  satisfactory  indirect  answer  may  be
elicited  (1)  from  the  Piper  scripts  taken  alone,  (2)  from  the
Piper  scripts  and  the  contemporaneous  Verrall  scripts  when
compared  together.

The  Piper  scripts  taken  alone  connect  the  desired.  Ode  of
Horace  (a)  with  certain  lines  in  Alt  Vogler;  (b)  with  Myers's
poem  Immortality ;  (c)  with  the  Odyssey,  and  so  by  implication —
though  this  is  conjectural — with  the  famous  declaration  of  Achilles
in  the  Underworld  that  a  living  serf  is  better  off  than  a  king
among  the  dead.  These  literary  references  ail  have  a  bearing
on  man's  state  after  death ;  and  as  this  subject  also  forms
the  burden  of  the  "  Archytas  "  Ode,  and  as,  moreover,  the  poem
on Immortality  seems to  show  some  coincidence  of  language


222


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


as  well  as  of  thought  with  the  "  Archytas "  Ode,  an  intention
to  indicate  the  latter  as  the  Ode  in  question  may  be  inferred
with  a  great  measure  of  probability.

Mr.  Piddington  further  points  out  that,  whereas  in  the
"  Archytas "  Ode,  in  Myers's  Immortality,  and  in  the  eleventh
book  of  the  Odyssey,  gloomy  views  are  taken  of  man's  hereafter,
a  different  and  happier  conception  of  it  inspires  Abt  Vogler.
Accordingly  he  suggests  that  this  also  is  intentional,  and  that
MyerSp  deliberately  meant  to  call  attention  to  the  contrast.
Here  we  are  clearly  on  more  doubtful  ground,  since  there  is
no  hint  of  such  intention  in  the  script  itself.1

I  now  pass  to  the  connexion  which  Mr.  Piddington  believes
he  has  discovered  between  the  Horace  Ode  Question  and  certain
of  Mrs.  Verrall's  contemporaneous  scripts.  If  he  is  right,  the
answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question  given  in  the  Piper  scripts  is
supplemented  and  confirmed  by  a  cross-correspondence  between
those  scripts  and  Mrs.  Verrall's.

The  five  Verrall  scripts  cited  by  Mr.  Piddington  contain
unmistakable  allusions  to  mystic  or  legendary  descriptions  of
the  Abode  of  Blest.

The  "  island  valley  of  Avilion  "  of  the  Morte  d' Arthur  and  the
"  Heavenly  City  "  of  the  Apocalypse  are  quite  definitely  referred
to  ;  and  I  am  disposed  to  agree  with  Mr.  Piddington  that  allusions
are  probably  made  to  Myers's  Venice,  and  perhaps  also  to  his
On  a  S2rring  Morning  at  Sea,  both  of  which  poems  depict  in
celestial  colours  the  future  in  store  for  those  who  have
"  passed  through  the  body  and  gone."

It  is  clear,  then,  that  we  have  here  the  elements  of  a  cross-
correspondence,  man's  future  destiny  forming  the  central  topic
round  which  all  the  scripts  turn,  and  different  views,  favour-
able or  unfavourable,  of  that  destiny  forming  the  subordinate
topics  distributed  between  the  two  automatists.  What  is  not
so  clear  is  that  the  cross-correspondence  is  intentional,  in  other
words,  that  the  allusions  in  the  Verrall  scripts  are  meant  by

1  Mr.  Piddington  now  connects  the  mention  of  Myers's  Ode  to  Nature  in  the
Piper  sitting  of  April  17,  1907,  with  the  "Archytas"  Ode,  whereas  formerly  he
took  it  to  refer  to  another  Ode  of  Horace  altogether,  viz.  C.  iii.  4,  which
Myersr  ultimately  rejected  as  not  being  the  Horatian  Ode  which  "  entered  most
deeply  into  his  inner  life."  For  reasons  which  it  is  unnecessary  to  go  into
now,  I  believe  his  original  interpretation  was  right.  I  have  accordingly
omitted  all  mention  of  the  Ode  to  Nature  from  my  remarks  on  the  case.


lxv.] Some  Observations  on  the  Foregoing  Paper.


223


the  communicating  intelligence  to  be  taken  as  part  of  the
answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.

If  we  confine  our  attention  to  the  two  sets  of  scripts
produced  in  1907,  what  reasons  are  there  (apart  from  the
general  similarity  of  subject)  for  thus  connecting  them
together  ?

Mr.  Piddington  gives  one  reason  and  one  reason  only.
On  May  7,  the  date  of  Script  No.  176,  which  he  interprets
as  referring  to  Myers's  Venice,  Mrs.  Verrall,  before  beginning
to  write,  deliberately  fixed  her  attention  on  the  "  Archytas  "  Ode.
From  this  circumstance  Mr.  Piddington  thinks  we  are  entitled
to  infer  that  the  script  which  followed  was  intended  by  the
"  communicator "  to  be  taken  in  connection  with  the  Horace
Ode  Question.  It  is  certainly  noteworthy  that  a  script  produced
under  these  conditions  should  be  found  capable  of  being  fitted
into  the  answer  to  that  question.  But  I  cannot  regard  the
argument  as  by  any  means  conclusive.  The  odds  against  such
a  coincidence  are  surely  not  so  great  as  Mr.  Piddington  seems
to  imply.  Mrs.  Verrall  produced  only  a  limited  number  of
scripts  during  the  time  that  she  had  any  reason  for  fixing
her  miud  on  the  "  Archytas  "  Ode,  and  of  this  limited  number
at  least  five,  according  to  Mr.  Piddington's  own  showing,
are  capable  of  being  fitted  into  the  answer  to  the  Horace  Ode
Question.

On  the  other  hand,  there  are  two  considerations  which,  so
far  as  they  go,  seem  to  me  to  tell  against  Mr.  Piddington's
contention.  The  first  of  these  is  the  complete  absence  from
the  Verrall  scripts  themselves  of  any  hint  of  a  connexion
with  the  Horace  Ode  Question.  The  second  is  the  possibility
of  connecting  them  with  what,  prima  facie  at  least,  must  be
regarded  as  a  different  topic  altogether.

Mr.  Piddington  has  not,  1  think,  noticed  in  his  paper  that
one  of  the  five  Verrall  scripts  which  he  quotes  has  been
already  cited  by  him  (in  Arol.  XXII.  of  the  Proc.)  as  belonging
to  the  avros  ovpavo?  oucufiaiv  series.  I  refer  to  Script  No.  136,
which  contains  the  passage  about  "  the  island  valley  of  Avilion
where  blows  not  any  wind,"  etc.  The  date  of  this  script  is
Feb.  12,  1907,  and  it  was  followed  on  Feb.  25  by  another
which  quotes  from  the  well-known  passage  in  Tennyson's
Lucretius,  describing  the  abode  of  the  Epicurean  gods  :


224  The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.  [part

The  lucid  interspace  of  world  and  world

Where  never  creeps,  a  cloud,  nor  moves  a  wind,  <

Nor  ever  falls  the  least  white  star  of  snow,

Nor  ever  lowest  roll  of  thunder  moans,

Nor  sound  of  human  sorrow  mounts  to  mar

Their  sacred  everlasting  calm  !  and  such

Not  all  so  fine,  nor  so  divine  a  calm,

Not  such,  nor  all  unlike  it,  man  may  gain

Letting  his  own  life  go.

This  script,  like  No.  136,  is  included  by  Mr.  Piddington  in
the  avTog  oupavo<;  uKufxcov  series,  and  if  it  is  legitimate  to
connect  No.  136  with  the  Horace  Ode  series,  I  do  not
understand  why  the  script  of  Feb.  25  is  not  entitled  to  the
same  distinction.

A  "  heavenly  calm "  may  indeed  be  said  to  be  a  prominent
feature  in  every  one  of  the  visionary  Abodes  of  the  Blest  alluded
to  in  the  five  Verrall  scripts  selected  by  Mr.  Piddington  as
forming  part  of  the  answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question,  and
all  of  them,  it  seems  to  me,  might  find  an  appropriate  place
in  the  avTog  ovpavos  cucufutiv  series.  It  is  no  doubt  possible
that  they  may  have  been  intended  to  play  a  double  part.
I  certainly  do  not  summarily  reject  such  a  hypothesis ;  but
I  think  it  is  one  which  should  be  received  with  caution.

On  the  whole,  if  account  is  taken  of  the  1907  scripts  only,
it  does  not  appear  to  me  that  a  strong  case  has  been  made
out  for  the  supposed  cross-correspondence.  Is  any  further  light
thrown  upon  the  question  by  the  Verrall  scripts  of  1901  or
the  Piper  scripts  of  1908  ?

Of  the  Piper  scripts  of  1908  (produced  in  America  in  the
presence  of  Mr.  Dorr,  who  was  in  complete  ignorance  that
any  question  about  an  Ode  of  Horace  had  been  either  asked
or  answered),  it  may  at  once  be  said  that,  while  they  confirm
in  the  strongest  manner,  and  indeed  in  my  judgment  make
practically  certain,  the  general  correctness  of  Mr.  Piddington's
interpretation  of  the  answer  given  to  it  in  the  Piper  scripts
of  the  previous  year,  they  give  us  no  assistance  in  forming  a
conclusion  on  the  further  issue  raised  in  his  latest  paper.

It  is  otherwise  with  the  Verrall  scripts  of  1901.  These
scripts,  which  at  first  seemed  little  better  than  mere  gibberish,
are  now  turning  out  to  be  of  great  interest  and  possibly  of


lxv.] Some  Observations  on  the  Foregoing  Paper.  225

great  importance.  For  they  not  only  seem  to  associate  the
"  Archytas  "  Ode  with  the  stanzas  on  Immortality  and  with  the
€7rdpovpo<;  passage  of  the  eleventh  book  of  the  Odyssey  (thereby
anticipating  the  Piper  scripts  of  1907  and  1908),  but  also —
possibly — with  Myers's  lines  On  a  Spring  Morning  at  Sea,  a
poem  which  was  not  published  until  the  year  1904.  The
elucidation  of  these  early  Verrall  scripts  we  owe,  like  that
of  so  many  others,  to  the  ingenuity  of  Mr.  Piddington,  and
if  his  interpretation  of  them  is  correct,  they  practically
contain,  in  skeleton,  the  whole  of  the  answer  to  the  Horace
Ode  Question  which  he  reads  into  the  subsequent  Piper  and
Verrall  scripts  of  1907.

I  shall  probably  be  doing  Mr.  Piddington  no  injustice  in
surmising  that  had  it  not  been  for  the  early  Verrall  scripts
of  1901  the  idea  of  connecting  the  later  Verrall  scripts  of
1907  with  the  answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question  would
never  have  occurred  to  him.  At  the  same  time,  I  must  frankly
admit  that  the  fact  of  the  earlier  and  the  later  Verrall  scripts
both  lending  themselves  to  his  interpretation  is,  to  say  the
least  of  it,  curious ;  and  whatever  the  explanation  of  the  fact
may  be,  it  does,  I  think,  very  materially  corroborate  his  view
of  the  case  as  a  whole.  I  still  cannot  regard  as  definitely
proved  either  the  connexion  of  the  Verrall  scripts  of  1907
with  the  Horace  Ode  Question,  or  the  hypothesis  of  a
deliberate  cross-correspondence  intended  to  suggest  a  contrast
between  the  despairing  and  the  hopeful  conceptions  of  man's
destiny  after  death.  But  the  cumulative  effect  of  the  evidence
does,  in  my  judgment,  make  Mr.  Piddington's  interpretation
plausible  and  even  probable.

The  question  still  remains,  What  is  the  significance  of  the
entire  incident,  and  what  light  does  it  throw  upon  the  source
from  which  the  scripts  emanate  ?

The  new  matter  now  brought  forward  by  Mr.  Piddington
has  a  bearing  on  the  answer  to  this  question,  as  will  presently
be  seen. But  for  the  moment  let  us  ignore  it.

The  outstanding  point  in  the  case  will  still  be  this :  that
the  materials  employed  in  providing  a  correct,  though  indirect,
reply  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question  in  the  Piper  scripts  of  1907
and  1908  are  also  found  conjoined  in  the  early  Verrall  scripts
of  1901.

p


226


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


Thus  we  have :


Two  quotations  from  the  "  Archy-


In  V.  Scripts  of  1901.


In  P.  Scripts  of  1907-8.
a;  =  the  "Archytas  "  Ode.


tas  "  Ode.


"  Sperne  elegos  quos  audax
composui  "  (probably  an  allusion
to  the  poem  Immortality).


Ode  to  Immortality.


Adscripta  glebse  =  i-apovpos.


Odyssey — Achilles.


The  coincidence  can  hardly  be  accidental.  Nor  can  it  be
ascribed  to  any  normal  knowledge  acquired  by  Mrs.  Piper
before  1907  of  the  early  Verrall  scripts,  because  these  scripts,
even  if  she  had  read  them  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  volume  published  in
October,  1906,  must  have  been  quite  unintelligible  to  her  without
explanation,  and  no  explanation  had  at  that  time  been  offered.

Nor  again  can  we  ascribe  it  to  Mrs.  Verrall's  supraliminal
consciousness,  for  her  conscious  understanding  of  the  interest
taken  by  Myers  in  the  "  Archytas "  Ode  would  have  suggested
quite  a  different  answer  from  that  which  MyersP  actually  gives.

It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  we  must  attribute  the  coinci-
dence either  to  the  action  of  some  intelligence  external  to
both  automatists,  or  else  to  a  supernormal  communication  of
ideas  between  their  subconscious  selves.  This  latter  is  the
hypothesis  to  which  the  cautious  enquirer  would  naturally
have  recourse  in  the  first  instance,  especially  in  view  of  the
fact  that  the  question  started  from  Mrs.  Verrall  herself,  that
she  knew  the  straightforward  answer  to  it,  and  that  the
"  Archytas  "  Ode  already  had  associations  in  her  own  script,  the
significance  of  which  might  have  been  comprehended  by  her
subliminal,  though  hidden  from  her  normal,  self.

The  weak  point  in  this  explanation  is  that  it  takes  no
account  of  the  origin  of  the  early  Verrall  scripts.  Are  we  to
regard  these  as  purely  the  work  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  subliminal
imagination  ?

The  references  to  the  "  Archytas "  Ode  might  no  doubt  be
due  to  subliminal  memory  of  Myers's  letter  to  Dr.  Verrall,  in
which  he  specially  emphasises  the  impression  produced  on  his
mind  by  lines  5  and  6  of  the  "  Archytas "  Ode :


Aerias  tentasse  domos  animoque  rotundum
Percurisse  polum  morituro."


lxv.] Some  Observations  on  the  Foregoing  Paper.  227


(It  is  from  these  very  lines  that  the  reminiscent  phrases  in  the
Verrall  scripts  of  Mar.  5  and  Apr.  27,  1901,  are  drawn.)  Myers's
letter  was  written  in  1884,  and  had  not  been  seen  by  Mrs.
Verrall  since  the  beginning  of  1885  ;  but  there  is  nothing
unusual  in  the  emergence  of  a  cryptic  memory  after  that
interval  of  time.  References,  on  the  other  hand,  to  Immortality
and  to  On  a  Spring  Morning  at  Sea  cannot  be  explained  in
this  easy  manner.  For  Mrs.  Verrall  is  confident  that  she
never  saw  either  of  these  poems  until  several  years  later.
She  might  be  mistaken  with  respect  to  Immortality,  which  had
been  published  in  1870  and  again  in  1875,  although  it  had
been  long  out  of  print  in  1901.  But  she  could  hardly  be
mistaken  as  regards  On  a  Spring  Morning  at  Sea,1  which
did  not  see  the  light  until  it  was  published  in  Fragments  of
Prose  and  Poetry  in  1904.  Immortality  also  was  reprinted
in  this  volume,  and  was  there  read  by  Mrs.  Verrall  (as  she
firmly  believes)  for  the  first  time.

If  it  be  admitted  that  Mrs.  Verrall  never  saw  the  two
poems  until  1904,  it  is  obvious  that  the  question  whether  her
early  scripts  really  do  contain  references  to  them  becomes
the  most  important  of  all  the  questions  raised  by  the  entire
incident.  An  affirmative  answer  clearly  carries  with  it  the
conclusion  that  some  source  of  information  other  than  her
conscious  or  subconscious  self  must  have  been  drawn  upon  in
producing  the  scripts.

No  doubt  it  might  still  be  argued  that  the  external  source
of  information  was  the  mind  of  some  living  person  to  whom
the  poems  were  known,  and  not  the  surviving  personality  of
Frederic  Myers ;  and  that  Mrs.  Verrall's  subliminal  self,
having  acquired  knowledge  of  the  poems  in  this  way,  proceeded
to  weave  it,  together  with  other  materials,  into  the  texture
which  Mr.  Piddington's  ingenuity  has  at  last  succeeded  in
unravelling.  While  such  a  view  cannot,  I  think,  be  definitely
refuted,  I  will  only  say  that  it  seems  to  me  to  throw  a
burden  on  Mrs.  Verrall's  subliminal  consciousness  which  we
cannot  lightly  accept  for  it.

If  we  believe  that  the  early  Verrall  scripts  contain  allusions
to  poems  by  Myers  which  Mrs.  Verrall  had  never  seen  or
even  heard  of,  and  the  communicator  professes  to  be  Myers

1  See,  however,  the  Note  appended  to  this  Paper.


228


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


himself,  the  explanation  which  consists  in  accepting  his  state-
ment is  so  much  simpler  than  any  other,  that  it  is  likely  to
commend  itself  to  all  but  those  who  beg  the  question  at  issue
by  declaring  survival  to  be  a  priori  an  impossibility  ;  and  once
this  was  granted  it  would  no  longer  be  worth  while  to  resist
the  conclusion  that  the  answer  given  in  the  Piper  scripts  of
1907  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question  had  also  been  inspired
from  the  same  source.

But  can  we  be  sure  that  the  early  Verrall  scripts  do
really  allude  to  Immortality  and  On  a  Spring  Morning  at  Sea  ?
My  own  position  is  that  I  think  these  poems  probably
arc  alluded  to,  but  that  I  could  wish  the  evidence  were
sti'onger.  Judgment  on  this  point  must  rest  in  the  main  on
the  considerations  set  forth  in  a  previous  paper  published  by
Mr.  Piddington  in  Vol.  XXIV.  of  the  Proceedings  (pp.  162-169);
and  to  the  account  there  given  of  the  internal  evidence  to  be
derived  from  the  scripts  themselves  I  have  nothing  to  add.
The  case,  however,  comes  so  near  to  affording  a  crucial  test
of  the  truth  of  survival,  that  any  confirmatory  evidence,  slight
though  it  may  be,  is  yet  of  value.

We  have  seen  that  a  certain  group  of  references  in  the
early  Verrall  scripts  is  subsequently  utilised  in  the  Piper
scripts  of  1907  to  provide  an  answer  to  the  Horace  Ode
Question.  Xow  if  to  this  group,  as  contained  in  the  early
Verrall  scripts,  we  are  to  add  allusions  to  On  a  Spring
Morning  at  Sea,  we  should  naturally  expect  that  in  this
answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question  a  corresponding  allusion
would  appear.  In  the  Piper  scripts  there  is  no  trace  of  it ;
but  if  Mr.  Piddington's  latest  theory  is  sound,  our  expectation
would  be  equally  well  satisfied  by  finding  the  required  allusion
in  one  or  more  of  the  five  Verrall  scripts  of  1907,  which
according  to  him  form  a  cross-correspondence  with  the  Piper
answer  to  the  question.  Indeed,  we  should  naturally  look  for
it  in  the  Verrall  scripts  rather  than  in  the  Piper  scripts ;
for  this  cross-correspondence,  if  it  be  one,  is  in  so  far  of  the
"  complementary "  type,  that  all  the  unfavourable  previsions
concerning  a  future  life  are  allotted  to  Mrs.  Piper,  and  to
Mrs.  Verrall  none  but  favourable  ones.

Mr.  Piddington  has  given  his  reasons  for  believing  that  the
Verrall Scripts 176  and 178 do actually contain  references


lxv.] Some  Observations  on  the  Foregoing  Paper.  229

to  On  a  Spring  Morning  at  Sea.  These  reasons  may  not  be
conclusive,  but  neither  can  they  in  my  opinion  be  summarily
set  aside.  It  is  not  certain  that  this  poem  is  alluded  to  in
the  early  Verrall  scripts  ;  it  is  not  certain  that  it  is  alluded
to  in  the  later.  But  the  affirmative  view  can  be  plausibly
maintained  in  both  cases,  and  on  independent  grounds ;  and
while  two  uncertainties  do  not  make  a  certainty,  two  "  fairly
probables "  may,  and  in  this  instance  do,  I  think,  go  some
way  to  corroborate  each  other.

Be  that  as  it  may,  the  case  is  undeniably  one  which
deserves  the  serious  attention  of  all  who  are  interested  in
the  evidence  for  personal  survival  after  bodily  dissolution.

Note.

Since  this  paper  was  sent  to  the  printers  Mrs.  F.  W.  H.
Myers  (to  whom  a  proof  was  submitted)  has  called  my  attention
to  the  possibility,  or  even,  as  she  thinks,  the  probability,  that
the  poem  Immortality  and  also  On  a  Spring  Morning  at  Sea
were  unconsciously  seen  by  Mrs.  Verrall  in  the  early  spring
of  1901  when  helping  her  to  arrange  and  sort  her  late  husband's
papers.  Manuscript  copies  of  On  a  Spring  Morning  at  Sea  were
lying,  Mrs.  Myers  states,  in  note- books  on  the  table  of  the
study  at  Leckhampton,  a  room  which  Mrs.  Verrall  was  often
in  at  that  time,  and  in  the  same  room  were  also  four  copies
of  the  early  editions  containing  Immortality.

I  sent  Mrs.  Myers's  observations  to  Mrs.  Verrall  and  have
received  from  her  the  following  reply  dated  from  Switzerland,
July  16,  1912:

It  is  possible  that  during  my  visits  to  Mrs.  Myers  in  the  early
spring  and  summer  of  1901,  I  may  have  seen,  without  noticing  at
the  time,  books  or  papers  that  were  lying  about  in  the  library  at
Leckhampton  House.  Such  a  possibility  I  recognised  in  my  comments
on  the  allusions  in  my  script  to  the  Symposium  incident  (Proc,  Vol.
XX.,  p.  317,  footnote) ;  though  I  feel  certain  that  I  took  out  no
books  from  the  shelves,  and  that  I  read  no  papers  except  such  as
were  shown  to  me  by  Mrs.  Myers  or  given  to  me  to  sort.

It  is  thus  not  impossible,  though  I  think  it  unlikely,  that  at  that
time  one  or  both  of  the  poems,  Immortality  and  On  a  Sjning  Morning


230


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[PAKT


at  Sea,  came  within  the  range  of  my  normal  knowledge,  though  not
within  my  conscious  observation.

Nor  can  it  be  actually  proved  that  some  knowledge  of  these  poems
had  not  been  conveyed  to  me  at  an  earlier  period,  before  the  incep-
tion of  my  automatic  writing,  at  a  time  when  I  was  not  keeping
careful  record — as  I  have  done  since  my  experiments  began — of
anything  likely  to  affect  the  contents  of  my  script.  It  is,  for  instance,
impossible  for  me  to  assert  positively  that  neither  the  MSS.  of  the
poems  nor  the  printed  Immortality  (in  the  early  volume)  fell  under
my  observation  during  one  of  my  talks  with  Mr.  Myers  in  his
library.

All  I  can  assert  is  (1)  that  Mr.  Myers  never  read  or  quoted  to
me  any  unpublished  poem  of  his,  and  (2)  that  when,  upon  its  pub-
lication in  October,  1904,  I  read  with  great  interest  and  close  attention
the  volume  of  Fragments,  neither  of  these  poems  awoke  in  me  the
least  recollection  or  suggestion  of  previous  acquaintance.  To  the
best  of  my  belief  I  came  across  both  poems  for  the  first  time  in
October,  1904.

The  footnote  to  Proc,  Vol.  XX.,  p.  317,  is  as  follows:

"  The  proofs  of  Human  Personality  were  in  Mrs.  Myers's
house  at  Cambridge  where  I  was  a  frequent  visitor  during  the
spring  and  summer  of  1901.  It  is  therefore  not  impossible
that  I  should  have  seen,  without  consciously  noticing,  the  direct
reference  to  Diotima  in  the  first  volume  or  the  indirect  allusion
to  the  Dialogue  in  the  second  volume."

This  statement,  published  in  1906,  was  overlooked  by  me
in  preparing  my  paper,  and  the  fact  that  the  two  poems  may
have  come  under  Mrs.  Verrall's  eye,  whether  they  actually
did  so  or  not,  does  undoubtedly  weaken  the  cogency  of  any
inferences  based  on  the  contrary  assumption.

I  freely  recognise,  therefore,  that  certain  of  the  expressions
in  the  present  paper  are  stronger  than  I  should  now  feel  justified
in  using ;  and  I  should  have  introduced  some  modifications  into
the  text  had  not  the  substance  of  what  I  have  written  been
already  read  to  a  meeting  of  the  S.P.E.  In  the  circumstances
it  seemed  best  to  allow  the  text  to  remain  unaltered,  and  append
this  Note  to  correct  any  mistaken  impression  which  might
otherwise  be  left  in  the  reader's  mind.


lxv.]  A  Reply  to  Mr.  Balfour's  Observations.


231


A  EEPLY  TO  MR.  BALFOUR'S  OBSERVATIONS.

By  J.  G.  PIDDINGTON.

Ml:.  Balfour  has  laid  his  finger  on  a  weak  spot  in  my
argument :  namely,  the  reason  I  gave  in  support  of  my  theory
that  Myersv  intended  176  to  be  read  in  connexion  with  the
Horace  Ode  Question.  I  agree  that  I  exaggerated  the  odds
against  the  chance  of  this  particular  script  proving  relevant
as  an  answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.  I  propose
accordingly  to  substitute  the  following  argument  for  the  one
offered  on  pp.  202-203  :—

Mrs.  Verrall's  subconscious  thoughts  may  be  presumed  to
have  been  occupied  with  the  Horace  Ode  Question  between
January  1,  1907,  when  she  first  formulated  it,  and  June  2,
1907,  when  Mrs.  Piper's  sittings  came  to  an  end.  During
that  period  Mrs.  Verrall  wrote  57  scripts.  Four  of  them  (140,
171,  176  and  178)  I  claim  as  relating  exclusively  ;  three  of  them
(136,  141 1  and  174)  as  relating  partly  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.'2
It  was  apparent  to  me  when  indexing  and  collating  Mrs.
Verrall's  scripts  in  1910  and  1911  that  these  seven  scripts
are  linked  together  by  various  devices,  such  as  catch-words,
cross-references,  similar  quotations  or  phrases.  But  though
these  superficial  coincidences  were  then  known  to  me,  and
though  I  was  fully  alive  to  the  fact  that  coincidences  of  this
kind  usually  betoken  the  existence  in  the  scripts  so  linked
of  some  deeper  underlying  meaning,  I  had  no  inkling  of  what
this  deeper  meaning  might  be.  To  discover  it  a  clue  was
needed. The  clue  had  been  there  all  the  time — by  which  I

1 1  have  not  hitherto  claimed.  141  as  belonging  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question
group  of  scripts  ;  but,  as  will  appear  later,  a  suggestion  of  Mr.  Balfour's  has
now  led  me  to  do  so.

2 1  say  "partly,"  because  I  regard  136,  141  and  174  as  relating  also  to  the
avro%  ovpavos  &Kvfj.wv  topic.  I  make  no  mention  here  of  180,  because  it  was  not
written  until  June  24,  1907,  and  so  does  not  fall  within  the  period  in
question.


232


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


mean  the  connexion  established  by  Mrs.  Verrall's  experiment
between  the  "  Archytas "  Ode  and  176 — but  until  January
1912  it  was  overlooked.  When  once  it  was  perceived,  the
problem  was  solved.  Now,  though  it  cannot  be  said  that  the
clue  was  attached  to  one  of  the  seven  scripts,  it  can  be  said
that  one  of  the  seven  scripts  was  attached  to  the  clue.  The
odds  against  this  being  accidental  are  not  so  great  as  I
represented  them  to  be  on  p.  203,  but  they  are  still  not
negligible.

But  even  had  they  been  as  great  as  I  previously  represented
them  to  be,  there  would  still  have  been  something  wanting  to
make  the  evidence  for  design  completely  satisfactory.  The
want  would  have  been  met  by  a  statement  or  hint  in  176  to
the  effect  that  this  script  had  reference  to  the  Horace  Ode
Question ;  and  had  there  been  besides  a  hint  that  this  script
was  meant  as  a  counterpart  to  the  answers  to  the  Horace
Ode  Question  given  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance,  it  would  have
been  better  still.  But  no  such  statements  or  hints  appear  in
176  or  in  the  scripts  allied  with  it ;  and  so  we  must  content
ourselves  with  the  presumptive  evidence  to  be  derived  from
the  coincidence  that  176  was  written  immediately  after  Mrs.
Verrall  had  been  fixing  her  thoughts  on  the  "  Archytas "  Ode.
Nevertheless,  although  176  contains  no  statement  indicating  a
connexion  between  itself  and  the  Horace  Ode  Question,  174
and  176  do  contain  statements  which  indicate  that  174,  176  and
178  have  to  do  with  a  special  experiment,  and  that  this
experiment  involves  the  answering  of  some  question.  The
relevant  passages  are  as  follows :

I  want  you  to  try  a  special  experiment.  On  May  13  wait  for  a
message,  I  cannot  tell  how  it  will  reach  you — but  there  is  some
special  interest  in  that  day.  Tell  Helen  too — she  might  help.
Don't  ask  more — a  veil  is  best — but  in  the  end  you  will  understand
and  find  the  record  complete.  (174.)

May  13  thirteen  has  been  given  you  for  a  date.

Tell  Helen  to  try  for  the  answer  then — and  after  that  you  shld
[sic]  write  no  more  till  we  give  the  word.  (176.)

As  she  wrote  no  script  between  March  18  and  May  26,
1907,  we  can  leave  out  of  account  the  references  to  Miss


LXV.]


A  Reply  to  Mr.  Balfour's  Observations.


233


Helen  Verrall,  except  iu  so  far  as  they  suggest  that  "  the
answer "  is  to  be  given  partly  through  one  automatist  and
partly  through  another :  in  other  words,  by  means  of  a  cross-
correspondence.

Obviously  part  of  "  the  answer "  is  to  be  given  in  Mrs.
Verrall's  script  on  May  13,  1907  :  the  date  of  178.  But  it
is  not  necessary  to  conclude  that  178,  the  script  of  May  13,
1907,  is  to  be  the  only  script  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  to  convey
this  answer.  It  seems  legitimate  to  assume  that  any  script
of  hers  between  which  and  178  a  connexion  can  be  clearly
established  may  contribute  to  it.

Certain  facts  which  I  am  about  to  cite  create  a  fairly
strong  presumption  that  the  "  special  experiment  "  requiring
an  answer  had  reference  either  to  the  avros  ovpavog  a/cu/uLwv
Question  or  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question,  and  more  probably
to  the  latter  than  to  the  former.

Two  test-questions  formed  the  subject  of  two  experiments
during  the  Piper  sittings  of  1906-1907.  Both  had  been
formulated  by  Mrs.  Verrall,  and  were  put  to  MyersP  at  her
instance:  the  Horace  Ode  Question  on  Jan.  23,  and  the
avros  ovpavos  aKv/mwv  Question  on  Jan.  29,  1907.  By
March  13,  1907,  MyersP  had  shown  knowledge  of  the
associations  of  uvtos  ovpavos  aKvfj.wv  with  In  Memoriam  and  with
Myers's  poem  To  Tennyson,  and  had  given  a  satisfactory  para-
phrase of  the  three  Greek  words.  But  he  had  not  named  the
author  of  them,  Plotinus.  Accordingly,  Mrs.  Verrall  had  sittings
with  Mrs.  Piper  on  April  29  and  30,  1907,  and  explained  to
MyeiSp  that  though,  so  far  as  it  went,  his  answer  to  the  au-o?
ovpavos  ukv/jlwv  question  was  clear  and  satisfactory,  he  had  not
given  the  author's  name.  She  also  wished  that  MyersP  would
display  knowledge  of  the  fact  that  a  translation  of  the  three
Greek  words  occurs  in  Human  Personality :  but  did  not  actually
express  her  wish  to  him.  Without  going  into  details — which
are  fully  given  in  Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  130-136  and  157-168
— -I  may  say  that  by  the  afternoon  of  May  6,  1907,  Mrs.  Verrall
knew  that  MyersP  had  satisfied  her  on  both  points :  he  had
alluded  to  Human  Personality  and  given  the  name  Plotinus.
ISTow,  since  these  were  admittedly  the  only  associations  wanting
to  round  off  and  complete  the  answer  of  MyersP,  and  as  Myersv
had  completed  his  answer  as  far  back  as  March  11,  1907


234


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


{id.  ib.,  p.  116),  it  seems  justifiable  to  assume  that  by  the  after-
noon of  May  6,  1907,  Mrs.  Verrall's  immediate  interest  in
the  au-ro?  oupavos  ukv/j.wv  experiment  ceased.

But  not  so  her  interest  in  the  other  test-question,  the  Horace
Ode  Question.  In  this  her  interest  was  still  alive,  for  so  far
(or  so,  at  least,  she  thought)  MyersP  had  given  no  satisfactory
answer  to  it.

The  Horace  Ode  Question  was  first  put  to  MyersP  on  Jan.  23,
1907.  MyerSp  gave  his  first  answer  to  it1  on  April  17,  1907;
but  Mrs.  Verrall  was  told  nothing  about  it,  nor  had  she  even
been  told  that  the  question  had  ever  been  asked  at  all.

When  Mrs.  Verrall  had  her  sitting  with  Mrs.  Piper  on
April  29,  1907,  MyersP  spontaneously  referred  to  the  subject
of  the  Horace  Ode  Question.  So  completely,  however,  had  the
matter  passed  out  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  mind,  that  she  did  not
understand  the  reference.2  After  the  sitting  she  recalled  the
matter,  and  at  the  sitting  next  day,  April  30,  she  herself
put  the  Horace  Ode  Question  to  MyersP,  and  asked  for
an  answer.  Then  on  May  4,  she  heard  from  Mrs.  Sidgwick
about  the  Aht  Vogler  quotation,  and  thought  it  might  have  been
meant  to  identify  the  "Archytas"  Ode.  But  in  view  of  the  fact
that  the  Alt  Vogler  quotation  had  been  given  disconnectedly  and
without  reference  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question,  she  decided  on
May  7,  1907,  before  trying  for  script,  to  fix  her  mind  on  the
"  Archytas "  Ode :  her  idea  being  that,  if  MyersP  had  really
meant  the  Aht  Vogler  quotation  to  be  connected  with  the  Horace
Ode,  she  might  thereby  help  him  to  establish  the  connexion
clearly.

So  it  appears  that  while  Mrs.  Verrall's  immediate  normal
interest  in  the  avro?  ovpavos  (akv/jloov  Question  ceased  on  the
afternoon  of  May  6,  her  normal  interest  in  the  Horace  Ode
Question  continued  at  least  until  May  7,  1907,  and  possibly
longer.

1  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  myself  were  the  only  people  who  knew  of  this  answer ;
and  to  both  of  us  it  seemed  to  be  meaningless.

2  It  is  perhaps  not  without  significance  that  Myersp  spontaneously  mentioned
the  Horace  Ode  Question  to  Mrs.  Verrall  at  the  sitting  of  April  29,  for,  an  hour
or  so  before  the  sitting  began,  171  — a  certain  Myersv  script — had  been  written  ;
and  171  is  the  first  script  after  141  (written  on  Feb.  25,  1907)  which,  according
to  my  interpretation  at  least,  has  any  relevance  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.


lxv.]  A  Reply  to  Mr.  Balfour's  Observations.


235


Although  it  does  not,  of  course,  necessarily  follow  that,  because
Mrs.  Verrall  ceased  on  May  6  to  be  preoccupied  in  her  normal
state  with  the  Plotinian  Question,  the  consciousness  concerned
in  the  production  of  her  scripts  followed  suit ;  still  it  does
seem  likely  that  the  "  script "  consciousness  should,  like
the  normal  consciousness,  occupy  itself  with  the  incomplete
rather  than  with  the  completed  experiment.  That  in  fact
it  did  so,  is  rendered  probable  by  a  comparison  of  the
scripts  wi'itten  while  Mrs.  Verrall  was  normally  interested  in
both  test-questions  with  the  scripts  written  while  she  was
interested  in  the  Horace  Ode  Question  only.  The  former,
I  hope  to  show,  reflect  both  interests :  the  latter  make  far
better  sense  if  interpreted  as  answers  to  the  Horace  Ode
Question,  than  they  would,  if  interpreted  as  reverberations  of
the  Plotinian  topic.

In  the  course  of  producing  the  evidence  on  which  I  base
these  statements,  I  shall  at  the  same  time  deal  with  an  objec-
tion raised  by  Mr.  Balfour.  This  objection  may  be  formulated
as  follows : — There  being  no  hint  in  those  Verrall  scripts  which
I  have  connected  with  the  Horace  Ode  Question  of  such  a  con-
nexion having  been  intended,  it  may  be  urged  that  all  the  scripts
really  belong  to  the  series  of  avros  ovpavos  ctKUjuun'  scripts,  with
which  they  show  certain  analogies  and  among  which  they  would
find  an  appropriate  place.  That  as  a  matter  of  fact  I  have
included  one  script,  136,  in  the  Horace  Ode  series,  which  I  had
previously  included  in  the  avrog  ovpavos  aKv/uwp  series  ;  and
that,  to  be  consistent,  I  ought  to  have  included  another  avro?
ovpcwos  cIkv/uloov  script,  that  of  Feb.  25,  1907.  These  two
scripts,  it  is  true,  may  possibly  have  been  intended  to  belong
to  both  series,  but  such  a  hypothesis  must  be  received  with
caution.

As  it  may  perhaps  be  a  help  to  the  reader,  I  will  state  in
advance  what  form  my  answers  to  the  points  raised  by  Mr.
Balfour  will  take. I  shall  maintain

(1)  that  the  script  of  Feb. 25, 1907  (which  I  shall  in

future  refer  to  as  141)  does  belong,  and  should  therefore
be  added,  to  the  group  of  scripts — 136,  140,  171,  174,  176,
178  and  180 — which  I  have  already  connected  with  the
Horace  Ode  Question  ;

(2)  that  out  of  this  group — as  now  enlarged  by  the  addition


236


J.  G.  Pidclington.


[part


of  141 — 136,  141  and  174  relate  to  the  avros  ovpavos
aicvfxwv  Question  as  well  as  to  the  Horace  Ode
Question  ;

(3)  that  references  to  both  topics  were  combined  in  136  and  141,

because  for  Myersv  the  two  topics  were  closely  inter-
woven, as  they  had  been  in  the  mind  of  Frederic
Myers  ;  and

(4)  that if  140,  171,  176,  178 and 180 are referred,  as  Mr.

Balfour  suggests  they  might  be,  to  the  avros  ovpavos
aKviJ.wv  topic,  they  contribute  nothing  of  any  importance ;
while  if  they  are  referred  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question
they  contribute  an  intelligent  and  appropriate  answer
thereto.

Let  us  begin  by  considering  141,  the  script  which  I  formerly
connected  with  the  Plotinian  Question  and  am  now  prepared
to  connect  as  well  with  the  Horatian  Question.  The  text  of
it  is  as  follows :

(141)  (Feb.  25,  1907. 6.45  p.m.)

Not  each  but  all  United  stand  — a  firm  knit  band  — but,  single,
fall.

Test  the  weakest  link  but  even  that  stands  firm

I  stretch  my  hand  across  the  vaporous  space,  the  interlunar
space — 'twixt  moon  and  earth, — where  the  gods  of  Lucretius  quaff
their  nectar.

Do  you  not  understand  1

The  lucid  interspace  of  world  and  world

Well  that  is  bridged  by  the  thought  of  a  friend,  bridged  before
for  your  passage,  but  today  for  the  passage  of  any  that  will  walk
it,  not  in  hope  but  in  faith.

The  bridge  has  been  built  from  our  side,  it  is  our  thought  that
builds  it — but  it  rests  on  a  pier  of  your  founding, — not  yours — of
you  only, — of  all  of  yours

Non  T  U  a  opera,  sed  omnibus  adiuvantibus  qui  in  ista  causa
laborant.

[not  by  T  H  Y  help,  but  with  the  assistance  of  all  who  labour  in
this  cause.]

not  tua  but but  vestra  he  means

R  [i.e.  Rector]

but  he  does  not  talk  our  language.


LXV.]


A  Reply  to  Mr.  Balfour  s  Observations.


237


The  lucid  interspace  of  world  and  world  is  a  quotation  from
Tennyson's  Lucretius :

The  Gods,  who  haunt
The  lucid  interspace  of  world  and  world,
Where  never  creeps  a  cloud,  or  moves  a  wind,
Nor  ever  falls  the  least  white  star  of  snow,  .  .  .

Tennyson  is  here  paraphrasing  11.  18-22  of  the  third  book
of  Lucretius'  Be  Poerum  Natura.

Exactly  the  same  idea  of  Elysian  calm  had  already  been
implicitly  expressed  in  136  by  means  of  a  reference  to  the
following  lines  from  Tennyson's  Morte  d' Arthur :

the  island-valley  of  Avilion  ;
Where  falls  not  hail,  or  rain,  or  any  snow,
Nor  ever  wind  blows  loudly  .  .  .

which  (see  p.  188)  are  a  paraphrase  of  Odyssey,  IV.  566-568.
They  appeared  in  the  script  in  this  form  :

the  island  valley  of  Avilion  where  blows  not  any  wind  nor  ever
falls  the  least  light — no  not  that  but  you  have  the  sense — there
falls  no  rain  nor  snow  nor  any  breath  of  wind  shakes  the  least
leaf.

The  words  I  have  underlined  seem  clearly  to  be  an  attempt
at  the  line —

"  Nor  ever  falls  the  least  white  star  of  snow  " — which  belongs
to  the  passage  from  Tennyson's  Lucretius  quoted  in  141.

The  passage  from  Tennyson's  Lucretius  is,  I  have  said,  an
imitation  of  Lucretius,  Book  in.  11.  18-22,  which  are  them-
selves in  turn  an  imitation  of  the  following  passage  in  the
Sixth  Book  of  the  Odyssey  (11.  42-45):

Athene  .  .  .  departed  to  Olympus,  where,  as  they  say,  is  the
seat  of  the  gods  that  standeth  fast  for  ever.  Not  by  winds  is  it
shaken,  nor  ever  wet  with  rain,  nor  doth  the  snow  come  nigh
thereto,  but  most  clear  air  is  spread  about  it  cloudless,  and  the
white  light  floats  over  it. (Butcher  and  Lang's  translation.)

The  resemblance  between  Odyssey,  iv.  5  66-568  (the  original
of  the  Morte  d' Arthur  passage)  and  Odyssey,  VI.  42-45  (to
which  the  Lucretius  passage  ultimately  goes  back)  is  obvious


23S


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


at  a  glance,  and  is  a  matter  of  common  knowledge  to  classical
scholars.

Hence  it  is  as  certain  as  anything  based  merely  on  internal
evidence,  as  apart  from  direct  statements,  can  be,  that  the  two
Tennysonian  quotations  are  meant  to  stand  in  close  relation
to  each  other,  and  that  the  quotation  from  Lucretius  in  141
is  an  intentional  reference  back  to  the  quotation  from  Morte
d' Arthur  in  136.

As  there  were,  then,  allusions,  and  closely  related  allusions,
in  136  and  141  to  the  calm  of  external  nature,  I  naturally —
and,  I  think,  rightly — included  both  in  the  series  of  auTo?
ovpavos  aKi'/uwi'  scripts.1

While,  however,  retaining  both  in  the  avros  ovpavds  cckv/jlodv
series,  I  have  included  136  (for  reasons  explained  on  pp.  186  and
188),  and  I  now  include  141,  in  the  series  of  Horace  Ode
Question  scripts.

I  include  141  in  this  series  not  simply  because  it  links  on
to  136— though  that  is  one  of  my  reasons — but  also  because
it  links  on  to  174.  The  link  that  unites  141  with  174,  as  will
be  seen  on  reference  to  the  appended  copy  of  the  latter,  is
the  same  link  that  unites  141  with  136 :  namely,  the  quotation
from  Tennyson's  Lucretius.

(174)  (May  1,  1907. 10.50  a.m.)
Evangel

then  speed  the  word
Sleep  Death's  twin  brother

I  stretch  my  hand  across  the  gulf  of  time — that  was  said  before
to  you.  the  intervening  space  twixt  world  and  world,  the  lucid  inter-
space. I  want  you  to  try  a  special  experiment.  On  May  13  wait
for  a  message  I  cannot  tell  how  it  will  reach  you — but  there  is
some  special  interest  in  that  day.  Tell  Helen  too — she  might  help.
Don't  ask  more — a  veil  is  best — but  in  the  end  you  will  understand
and  find  the  record  complete.

Try  to  say  the  eagle  soaring  over  Plato's  tomb.

(Draiving  of  bird  with  large  outspread  wings.)

I I  included  them  in  this  series  solely  because  they  possessed  a  certain
psychological  interest  (see  Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  112-113),  not  because  I
attached  any  evidential  value  to  them.  Lately,  for  reasons  explained  in  a
separate  note  on  pp.  245-250,  I  have  come  to  attach  considerable  evidential
importance  to  them.


lxv.]  A  Reply  to  Mr.  Balfour's  Observations.  230


write  slowly  for  him  to  repeat  again
vagitus  Wailing
kwkvto?  [wailing.]

We  cease  and  may  the  blessings  of  the  Most  High  rest  on  you

all  Farewell  R  ^'€'  Recfcor-]

The  sentence  beginning  "  I  stretch  my  hand "  and  ending
"  lucid  interspace " 1  is  an  unquestionable,  and  also  a  deliberate
reference  back  to  the  passage  in  141  beginning  "  I  stretch
my  hand "  and  ending  "  the  lucid  interspace  of  world  and
world."

But,  like  136  and  141,  174  contains  matter  relating  to  the
cwto?  ovpai'os  aKUjULwv  case ;  for  the  words  "  the  eagle  soaring
over  Plato's  tomb "  are  a  quotation  of  a  quotation  applied  to
Plotinus  in  Human  Personality  {Xo\.  II.,  p.  26 1).2

We  have  arrived,  then,  at  this  position :  136,  141  and  174
contain  matter  relevant  to  the  aurog  ovpavos  ukv/j-oov  Question ;
and  136  and  174  matter  relevant  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.
But  I  have  claimed  141  as  belonging  to  both  series.  What
matter,  then,  does  it  contain  relevant  to  the  answer  to  the
Horace  Ode  Question  ?

In  my  opinion  the  whole  of  141,  including  the  Lucretian
passage,  forms  part  of  the  answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question
given  by  Myersv  in  the  following  group  of  Verrall  scripts,
140,  171,  174,  176,  178  and  180;  into  which  group  141  is  entitled
to  enter  by  virtue  of  its  correlation  with  174.

The  whole  of  141  insists  on  the  need  of  co-operation  between
incarnate  and  discarnate  spirits ;  and  one  passage  in  it — "  The
bridge  has  been  built  from  our  side,  it  is  our  thought  that
builds  it " — speaks  of  the  preponderant  share  borne  by  the

1Note  that  this  sentence  is  followed  immediately,  without  the  slightest  break  in
the  writing,  by  the  reference  to  the  "special  experiment"  which  is  to  form
the  subject  of  a  message  in  the  script  of  May  13  (178).

It  may  also  be  noted  that  both  141  and  174  are  signed  by  Rector  on  behalf
of  the  communicator  (whom  the  internal  evidence  shows  to  be  Myersv)  :  a
fact  which  suggests  that  both  these  scripts  are  intended  to  form  part  of  a
cross-correspondence  with  Mrs.  Piper.  Only  two  other  scripts  of  Mrs.  Verrall's
during  the  period  contemporaneous  with  the  Piper  sittings  of  1906-1907  are
signed  by  Rector.

2  The  significance  of  the  appearance  of  this  quotation  in  174  is  explained  in
Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  131-133.


240


G.  Piddington.


[part


discarnate  in  that  co-operation.  But  these  are  the  very
themes  of  Myers's  Venice,  and  of  that  passage  in  his  almost
contemporaneous  Presidential  Address,  which,  as  I  have  pre-
viously pointed  out  (see  footnote  to  p.  205),  reproduces  in
prose  the  thought  poetically  expressed  in  Venice.

To  appreciate  the  parallelism  fully  the  reader  should  peruse
the  whole  of  the  9th  paragraph  of  Myers's  Address  (Proc,
Vol.  XV.,  pp.  122-123).  Meanwhile  I  will  copy  here  the
.specially  pertinent  sentences  :

The  new  conception  is  neither  of  benefactors  dead  and  done  for,
inspiring  us  automatically  from  their  dates  in  an  almanac  .  .  .  ; — but
rather  of  a  human  unity,  .  .  .  wherein  every  man  who  hath  been  or
now  is  makes  a  living  element ; — inalienably  incorporate,  and  im-
perishably  co-operant,  and  joint-inheritor  of  one  infinite  Hope.  .  .  .

It  is  they  [i.e.  the  blessed  dead],  not  we,  who  are  working  now ;
they  are  more  ready  to  hear  than  we  to  pray.  .  .  .

Nay,  it  may  be  that  our  response,  our  devotion,  is  a  needful
element  in  their  ascending  joy;  and  God  may  have  provided  some
better  thing  for  us,  that  they  without  us  should  not  be  made  perfect;
ut  non  sine  nobis  consummarentur.1

So  I  regard  136  and  141  as  double-barrelled  scripts,
designedly  framed  in  such  a  manner  as  to  be  relevant  to  both
test-questions.  To  Mrs.  Verrall,  in  her  normal  state  at  least,
the  avTo?  ovpavos  clkv/awv  and  the  Horace  Ode  Questions  were
two  absolutely  distinct  things.  But  to  Myersv  they  were  not.
To  him — or,  if  you  will,  to  it — they  were  yoked  by  a  natural
association  of  ideas.  Tor,  while  one  was  concerned  with  the
Ode  of  a  pagan  poet,  who  would  never  have  uttered  his
hopeless  "  Eat  and drink ; for  to-morrow we die,"  had  he

1  Ut  non  sine  nobis  consummarentur,  it  will  be  remembered  (see  p.  205),
was  the  motto  affixed  to  Venice  in  a  MS.  copy  of  it  sent  by  Myers  to  a
friend.  Mrs.  Verrall  saw  a  copy  of  this  MS.  in  1903.  She  did  not,  how-
ever, recognise  the  source  of  the  motto,  from  which  the  important  word  sine
had  been  accidentally  omitted,  until  a  year  or  two  later,  perhaps  in  1905.  It
is  conceivable  that  in  1905,  or  at  some  time  previous  to  the  dates  of  141  and
174,  the  motto  affixed  to  the  poem  in  the  MS.  copy  reminded  her  of  the  passage
in  Myers's  Presidential  Address  into  which  the  same  motto  is  introduced  ;  and
that  this  may  explain  the  connexion  of  141  (which  seems  to  reflect  the  passage
in  the  Address)  with  174  and  the  other  "  Venice"  scripts.  But  if  this  was  so,
it  at  any  rate  strongly  enforces  my  view  that  176,  178  and  180  allude  to  Myers's
Venice.


lxv.]  A  Reply  to  Mr.  Balfour's  Observations.


241


known  of  man's  "  kinship  and  community  in  the  firmament  of
souls " ;  the  other  bore  upon  the  conditions  under  which  the
realisation  of  this  kinship  and  community  could  best  be
attained.

That  it  was  appropriate  for  a  personality  who  claims  to
be  Frederic  Myers  thus  to  fuse  these  two  distinct  subjects,
the  reader  will,  I  think,  agree,  if  he  will  study  carefully
the  8th  and  9th  paragraphs  of  Myers's  Presidential  Address
(Proc,  Vol.  XV.,  pp.  119-123)  and  sections  1013  and  1014  of
Human  Personality  (Vol.  II.,  pp.  290-291).1

But  for  the  sake  of  argument  let  us  accept  Mr.  Balfour's
suggestion  and  assume  that  171,  174,  176,  178  and  180  have  no
reference  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question  and  are  really  avros
ovpavo?  aKi'/uwi'  scripts ; 2  and  consider  whether  they  contribute
matter  relevant  thereto,  and,  if  so,  whether  this  matter  is  of
any  interest  or  of  evidential  value.

I  may  say  at  once  that  they  do  contain  matter  vaguely
applicable  to  the  Plotinian  topic — as,  indeed,  on  the  hypothesis
that  the  answers  to  the  two  test-questions  were  drawn  from
a  common  range  of  ideas,  might  have  been  expected ;  but
in  my  opinion  it  has  neither  interest  nor  evidential  value.

The  passage  of  Plotinus,  from  which  the  words  avTOs  ovpavos
aKujtioov  come,  lays  down  the  conditions  essential  to  communion
with  the  Divine  Soul ;  and  one  of  these  conditions  is  the
complete  tranquillity  of  external  nature :  "  Calm  be  the  earth,
the  sea,  the  air,  and  let  Heaven  itself  be  waveless."

To  this  condition  the  reference  to  "  the  lucid  interspace  of
world  and  world "  in  174,  to  "  a  pearly  sky  no  movement "  in
176,  to  On  a  Spring  Morning  ed  Sea  and  Wordsworth's  Peele
Castle  in  178,  to  "  the  melted  Pearl  of  sky  and  sea "  in  178  and
180,  may  be  supposed  to  relate.  If  the  phrases  in  171,  176
and  178  reminiscent  of  the  Apocalypse  are  regarded  as  allusions

]I  would  direct  his  attention  especially  to  the  passage  about  "a  Plato  and
a  Newton "  in  the  Address,  because  it  exactly  reverses  what  Horace  says
about  Archytas  in  the  first  six  lines  of  the  "Archytas"  Ode;  and  to  "the
cloud  encompassing  of  unforgetful  souls "  in  the  1013th  section  of  Human
Personality,  because  it  seems  like  a  reminiscence  of  part  of  the  context  ("we
also  are  compassed  about  with  so  great  a  cloud  of  witnesses")  of  at  nnn  sine
nohis  consummarentur.

2  It  is  unnecessary  to  take  136  and  141  into  account  here,  because  I  agree
that  they  do  in  part  belong  to  the  avros  ovpavos  aKVfiwv  group.

Q


242


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


to  the  Heavenly  Jerusalem,  they  might  be  taken  in  the  same
sense;  but  they  might  be  regarded  as  allusions  to  the  vision
of  John  ("  I  was  in  the  Spirit  on  the  Lord's  day  ")  suggested
by  the  ecstatic  vision  of  Plotinus.  These  are  the  only  refer-
ences which,  so  far  as  1  can  see,  could  be  claimed  as  having
any  relevancy  to  the  outos  ovpavos  aKVfiwv  topic.  Let  us
now  compare  them  with  the  earlier  references  to  this  topic  in
Mrs.  VerraU's  script :  that  is  to  say,  with  the  references
which  began  on  February  12  and  ended  on  March  11,  1907
(see  Proc,  Vol.  XXIL,  pp.  112-118).1

The  script  of  February  12,  19  0  7  (136)  quoted  the  lines
from  Tennyson's  Morte  <V  Arthur  descriptive  of  the  calm  of  the
island-valley  of  Avilion.  This  was  followed  on  Feb.  25,  1907
(141)  by  the  quotation  from  Tennyson's  Lucretius  descriptive  of
the  "  sacred  everlasting  calm "  of  the  gods.  This  again  was
followed  on  March  6,  1907,  by  a  quotation  from  Section  xi.
of  Tennyson's  In  Memoriarn  :  "  Calm  is  the  sea — and  in  my
heart  if  calm  at  all,  if  any  calm,  a  calm  despair "  :  and  to  it
this  comment  was  appended :  "  That  is  only  part  of  the
answer — just  as  it  is  not  the  final  thought.  The  symphony
does  not  close  upon  despair  but  on  harmony.  So  does  the
poem. Wait  for  the  last  word."

But  there  was  no  need  for  "  the  last  word "  to  be  spoken,
for  sufficient  clues  had  already  been  afforded  to  make  the
purport  of  these  scripts  plain.  Starting  from  Tennysonian
passages  descriptive  of  nature  at  peace  (the  Mortv  d 'Arthur  and
Lucretius  passages)  the  scribe  had  led  up  to  a  passage  (In
Memoriarn  xi.  and  XII.)  where  a  trance,  occurring  under  some,
though  not  all,  of  the  conditions  laid  down  by  Plotinus  as
essential  to  communion  with  the  Divine,  brings  no  assurance
of  reality;2  and  then  had  indicated  that  In  Memoriarn  contains
another  passage  which  would  be  found  to  harmonize  more
closely  with  the  context  of  avro?  ovpavos  a.Kv/u.a>v.  Following

1  After  March  11  there  is  nothing  in  Mrs.  VerraU's  scripts  which  seems  to
bear  upon  the  avros  oupavos  ant'iAw  topic  until  April  29,  J 907  (the  date  of  171),
except  the  following  sentence  on  March  27,  1907  :  "  The  In  Memoriarn  passage
is  not  the  only  one  I  have  explained  to  you— there  are  others,  which  perhaps
are  not  clear."

2 The  earth,  sea  and  air  are  calm,  but  the  poet's  heart  is  filled  with  "wild
unrest."  Hence  true  ecstatic  communion  does  not  ensue.  (See  Proc,  Vol.
XXIV.,  pp.  19-20.)


lxv.]  A  Reply  to  Mr.  Balfour's  Observations.


243


the  hints  thrown  out  by  her  script,  Mrs.  Verrall  made  the
discovery  that  Sections  xciv.  and  xcv.  of  In  Memoriam  describes
a  trance  which  took  place  under  all  the  conditions  laid  clown
by  Plotinus,  and  resulted  first  in  communion  with  a  discarnate
spirit  and  at  its  culmination  in  communion  with  the  Divine.

The  parallelisms  between  In  Memoriam  xi.,  XII.,  xciv.  and
xcv.  were,  to  the  best  of  our  belief,  revealed  for  the  first
time  by  Mrs.  Verrall's  script ;  for,  so  far  as  we  can  discover,
they  had  not  been  observed  by  any  of  the  commentators,  and
they  were  not  within  Mrs.  Verrall's  normal  knowledge.
Additional  interest,  moreover,  was  lent  to  the  parallelism  with
In  Memoriam  xciv.  and  xcv.  by  the  discovery  that  the  actual
language  in  which  Tennyson  there  records  the  conditions  ante-
cedent to  his  trance  appears  to  reflect  the  language  used  by
Plotinus  in  the  cwto?  ovpavos  aKv/xav  passage.

Now,  whatever  view  be  taken  of  the  source  of  this  answer,
its  great  originality,  effectiveness  and  appropriateness  must  be
admitted.  On  the  other  hand,  the  passages  in  171,  174, 176, 178  and
180,  which,  for  argument's  sake,  we  are  assuming  to  be  connected
with  the  avros  ovpavos  UKVjuwv  topic,  either  merely  reproduce
illustrations  of  nature  at  peace  given  in  earlier  scripts  (e.g.  the
quotation  from  Lucretius  in  174),  or  merely  accumulate  fresh
illustrations  of  the  same  topic  (e.g.  the  "  Elysian  quiet"  of
AVordsworth's  Peek  Castle,  of  the  Heavenly  Jerusalem,  of  On
a  Spring  Morning  at  Sea  and  Venice)  which,  not  being  associated
in  any  way  with  ecstacy,  have  no  particular  point ;  or  allude
to  a  vision,  that  of  John  in  Revelation,  which  presents  no
analogy,  as  do  the  trances  of  In  Memoriam  xn.  and  xcv.,  to
the  Vision  of  Plotinus.  Kegarded,  then,  as  contributions  to
the  cwto?  ohpavos  aKupiwv  topic,  I  must  pronounce  these  passages
to  be  either  vain  repetitions,  or  inappropriate  or  otiose  rever-
berations, and  as  falling  very  far  below  the  standard  of  the
earlier  references.

A  priori  it  would  not  be  surprising  to  find  pointless  repe-
titions and  stale  rehashes  in  automatic  script  or  speech  ;  and
in  fact  they  are  not  uncommon  features  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trances.
In  Mrs.  Verrall's  case  repetitions  and  reverberations  are  plentiful
enough ;  but  the  longer  I  study  her  script,  the  more  clearly
have  I  come  to  realise  that  they  are  rarely  otiose.  As  a  general
rule  they  either  serve  the purpose of useful,  sometimes  of


244


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


indispensable,  guides  through  the  maze,  and  indicate  how  various
topics  or  scripts,  apparently  disconnected,  are  to  be  synthesized ;
or  else  they  are  devices  for  effecting  a  transition  from  one  idea
to  another  of  similar,  though  not  identical,  character.1

Hence  I  am  not  readily  disposed  to  consider  the  references  in
171,  174,  176,  178  and  180  which  we  have  been  discussing,  as  otiose
reverberations  of  the  avros  ovpavos  aKVjuwi'  subject.  If,  however,
they  really  are,  then  it  must  not  be  lost  sight  of  that  they
possess  the  remarkable  property  of  being  convertible  into  an
appropriate  answer  to  the  Horace  Ode  Question.  Whether
in  so  converting  them  I  have  gone  beyond  the  intentions  of
the  communicator,  is  a  question  that  I  must  leave  to  the  reader
to  decide.

In  conclusion  I  should  like  to  express  my  thanks  to  Mr.
Balfour  for  his  comments  on  my  paper.  They  have  proved
instructive  and  suggestive  in  various  ways,  and  have  enabled
me  to  perceive  connexions  between  the  answers  given  by  Myersv
to  the  two  test-questions  which  otherwise  would  have  escaped
my  observation.

1  An  example  of  this  can,  I  think,  be  seen  in  the  quotation  from  Tennyson's
Lucretius  common  to  141  and  174.  In  141  it  is  used  as  an  illustration  of  nature
at  peace  ;  in  174  as  an  illustration  of  an  Abode  of  the  Blest.


lxv.]  Two  Tennysonian  Quotations.  245


VI.

TWO  TENNYSON  IAN  QUOTATIONS  IN
MRS.  VEKKALL'S  SCEIPTS

Relating  to  the  avro?  ovpavos  ukv/uwv  Case.

By  J.  G.  PIDDINGTON.

Ill  my  account  of  the  avro\  ovpavos  aKVfxwv  ease  (Proc,
Vol.  XXIL,  pp.  107-172)  I  treated  the  references  in  136  to
the  island-valley  of  Avilion,

Where  falls  not  hail,  or  rain,  or  any  snow,
Nor  ever  wind  blows  loudly  ;

and  the  references  in  141  to

Tlie  lucid  interspace  of  world  and  world,
Where  never  creeps  a  cloud,  or  moves  a  wind.
Nor  ever  falls  the  least  white  star  of  snow,

as  possessing  only  a  general  relevancy  (id.  ib.,  pp.  112-114).
I  supposed  either  that  their  emergence  was  due  to  Mrs.
Verrall's  thoughts  having  been  directed  by  the  Plotinian  passage
to  descriptions  of  nature  at  peace ;  or  else  that  these  two
Tennysonian  passages  had  served  to  smooth  the  way  towards
the  desired  goal,  namely,  other  Tennysonian  passages  (In
Memoriam,  XL,  xciv.,  and  xcv.),  where  trance  occurs  during  a
profound  calm.

But  I  have  since  noticed  a  fact  which  suggests  that  the
references  to  the  Morte  d 'Arthur  and  Lucretius  passages  may
possess  a  far  more  pointed  significance.

As  previously  stated  (see  p.  188),  the  Morte  d' Arthur  passage
is  modelled  on  Odyssey,  iv.  566-568,  and  the  Lucretius  passage
on  Lucretius,  in.  18-22,  which  in  turn  is  modelled  on  Odyssey,
vi.  42-45.  Now,  neither  Tennyson,  Lucretius,  nor  Homer  in
these  passages  touches  upon  trance  or  ecstasy  or  the  conditions


•246


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


favourable  thereto.  There  is,  however,  a  passage  in  the
Bisscrtationcs  of  the  little-known  and  less  read  Platonic  philo-
sopher, Maximus  of  Tyre,  where  both  the  Odyssey  passages
(the  originals  of  the  Lucretian  and  Tennysonian  imitations)
are  in  the  most  direct  manner  connected  with  the  subject  of
ecstatic  intuition.

The  soul,  according  to  Maximus,  has  a  higher  and  a  lower
reason.  While  the  lower  is  concerned  with  the  things  of
sense,  with  the  higher  we  may  see  God,  even  while  in  the
body,  if  freed  for  a  moment  from  the  tumult  of  the  sensuous
world.

If  with  upright  and  steadfast  soul  a  man  gaze  without  growing
dizzy  on  that  unsullied  light,  and  look  not  back  earthwards  ;  if  he
stop  his  ears,  and  turn  his  sight  and  all  his  other  senses  inwards
upon  himself ;  if,  utterly  unheeding  of  earthly  cares  and  afflictions,
of  pleasures  and  honours,  of  glory  and  infamy,  he  let  himself  be  led
by  true  reason  and  steadfast  love  .  .  .  then,  as  he  goes  thitherwards
and  leaves  the  world  behind  him,  always  that  which  is  in  front  of
him  shall  grow  clear  and  brilliant,  preluding,  as  it  were,  the  Godhead.
So,  as  he  travels  on,  he  shall  hear  the  Godhead,  and,  the  journey
done,  shall  behold  it  face  to  face.

Yet  his  journey's  goal  is  not  the  firmament  of  heaven,  nor  such
bodies  as  are  therein,  .  .  .  but  he  must  pass  beyond  these,  and
overstep  the  firmament 1  until  he  reach  the  real  goal  and  its  perfect
calm,

"Where  neither  is  great  winter-storm,  nor  is  it  ever  wet
with  rain ;  but  most  clear  air  is  spread  about  it  cloudless,1  and
the  white  light  floats  upon  it " ;

and  where  no  fleshly  affection,  such  as  vexes  the  wretched  soul  here
below,  can  trouble  the  vision.2

(Dissertationes,  xvn.  10-11.)

In  this  passage  Maximus  combines  Odyssey,  iv.  566  and  VI.
43-45  in  a  curious  and  unmetrical  manner,  quoting  neither
correctly,  as  the  following  comparison  will  show :

1  Compare  the  paraphrase  given  in  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  of  the  words  avros
vrpavos  a.KU/j.wi'  :  "Cloudless  *ky  beyond  the  horizon"  (Proc,  Vol.  XXII.,  p.  12(5).

'-'The  above  is  a  close  paraphrase,  but  does  not  profess  to  be  a  literal
translation.


lxv.]  Two  Tennysonian  Quotations.  247

Homer.  Maximus  of  Tyre.


ei'd'  ovk  €(tt  out'  dp  yei/xwv  —  oAi's,

ovSe  — ot'  ofippa)
Several,  dXXd  yudA'  aWpi]

—(.— raTiii  direc^eAos,  XevKi]  5'  e— iSe-
8pop.ev  alyXq.


OV  l't</)€TOS,  out'  dp  xeiyuuv  7ToAi'S,  OVT€
7T0t'  0/x/?/30S.

Oa7.,  iv.  566.
.  .  .  out' dvkjioMTi TivdtTcre.Ta.1  ovre

TTOT  O/x/3/30)

<5eu€Tat  ouYe  X'tov  £— t— [Xvarac.  dAAa

/-id A'  aWpi]
—€TTTarai.  dve(j>eXo<;,  \evK7j S'  eVtSe-
opo[X€v  atyXij.

Od.,  vi.  43-45.


Since  the  Mortc  d' Arthur  passage  is  an  imitation  of  Odyssey,
iv.  566-568,  and  the  Liicretius  passage  is  an  imitation  of
Lucretius,  ill.  18-22,  which  is  in  turn  an  imitation  of  Odyssey,
vi.  4  3-45,  136  and  141  together  may  in  a  sense  be  said  to
combine  the  two  passages  here  combined  by  Maximus  of  Tyre.
But  as  a  matter  of  fact  136  alone  combines  the  two  Homeric
passages,  and  does  so  in  much  the  same  way  as  Maximus  of
Tyre,  as  the  following  comparison  shows :

"  the  island  valley  of  Aviliou  I  "...  the  island-valley  of  Avilion  ;

where  blows  not  any  wind  none  Where  falls  not  hail,  or  rain,  or

nor  ever  falls  the  least  light — .  .  .  any  snow,

there  falls  no  rain  nor  snow  nor  Nor  ever  wind  blows  loudly."

any  breath  of  wind  shakes  the  I  Tennyson's  Morte  d' Arthur.

least  leaf." !  £(  The  lucid  interspace  of  world

and  world,
Where  never  creeps  a  cloud,  or
moves  a  wind,

Nor  ever  falls  the  least  white  star


oi  snow.


Tennyson's  Lucretius


In  view  of  these  coincidences,  I  find  it  difficult  to  believe
that  the  quotations  from  Tennyson's  Morte  d' Arthur  and
Lucretius  in  136  and  141  were  not  intended  to  connect  the
passage  from  Maximus  of  Tyre  quoted  above  with  the  uvtos
ovpapos  aKu/jLwv  topic.

I  came  across  the  passage  from  the  Dissertationes  about  the


248  J,  G.  Piddington.  [part

end  of  October  1010:  not,  however,  in  the  original,  but  in
Dill's  Roman  Society  from  Nero  to  Marcus  Au.relius.  On
pages  421-423  of  this  book  Dill,  in  the  course  of  giving  some
account  of  the  philosophy  of  Maximus,  paraphrases  concisely
various  passages  in  Dissertationes,  IV.,  VIII.,  x.,  XVI.,  and  XVII.
The  particular  passage  in  Dissertationes,  xvn.,  with  which  we
are  concerned,  he  paraphrases  thus  :

It  is  by  this  higher  faculty  that  God  is  seen,  so  far  as  He  may  be,
in  this  mixed  and  imperfect  state.  For  the  vision  of  God  can  only
in  any  degree  be  won  by  abstraction  from  sense  and  passion  and
everything  earthly,  in  a  struggle  ever  upwards,  beyond  the  paths
of  the  heavenly  orbs,  to  the  region  of  eternal  calm  "  where  falls
not  rain  or  hail  or  any  snow,  but  a  white  cloudless  radiance  spreads
over  all"  (p.  421).

When  I  read  this  passage  in  Dill's  book  (which  was  first
published  in  1904)  it  reminded  me  at  once  of  136  and  141:
and  I  naturally  suspected  that  Mrs.  Verrall  had  read  it,  and
read  it  before  1907.  Accordingly  I  wrote  and  asked  her —
without,  however,  explaining  the  reason  for  my  question —
whether  she  had  read  Dill's  Roman  Society  from  Nero  to  Marcus
Aurelius.

She  wrote  in  reply  on  Nov.  5,  1910,  as  follows:

I  have  never  read  Dill's  Roman  Society,  etc.,  nor  seen  the  book —
though  of  course  I  know  of  its  existence,  and  have  probably  read
reviews.

I  cannot,  of  course,  pretend  to  prove  that  the  passage  quoted
above  has  not  been  reproduced  in  some  review  of  Dill's  book  ;
but  a  passage  of  this  kind,  half  summary  and  half  paraphrase,
is  not  at  all  a  likely  one  to  be  selected  by  a  reviewer  for
quotation.

I  next  wrote  and  asked  Mrs.  Verrall — again  without  explain-
ing why  I  wanted  the  information — whether  she  had  ever  read
the  Dissertationes  of  Maximus  of  Tyre.  Her  reply,  dated  Nov.  7,
1910,  was  a  large  and  emphatically  underlined  "No."'

Here  again  it  is  impossible,  of  course,  to  exclude  the  possi-
bility of  Mrs.  Verrall's  having  come  across  Dissertationes,  xvu.,
in  an  "  Unseen  Translation  "  paper,  or  in  some  such  way ;  but
to  those  who  know  the  kind  of  passages  selected  for  "  Unseen


LXV.]


Two  Tennysonian  Quotations.


249


Translation "  at  the  Universities,  and  who  are  good  enough
Grecians  to  appreciate  how  crabbed  the  style  of  Maximus  is
in  this  passage — if,  indeed,  the  text  is  not  corrupt — this
possibility  will  appear  to  be  remote.

Having  learnt  that  Mrs.  Verrall  had  read  neither  Dill's  book
nor  the  Dissertationes,  it  occurred  to  me  to  inquire  whether
Frederic  Myers  had  been  acquainted  with  the  writings  of
Maximus  of  Tyre.  I  accordingly  searched  through  Myers's
books,  and  found  the  following  reference  to  the  Dissertationes
in  his  Essay  on  Greek  Oracles  {Essays  Classical,  p.  60) : —

Alexander  himself  consulted  Zeus  Amnion  not  only  on  his  own
parentage  but  as  to  the  sources  of  the  Nile,  and  an  ingenuous  author
regrets  that,  instead  of  seeking  information  on  this  purely  geographical
problem,  .  .  .  Alexander  did  not  employ  his  prestige  and  his  oppor-
tunities to  get  the  question  of  the  origin  of  evil  set  at  rest  for  ever.

Who  the  "  ingenuous  author "  is,  is  explained  by  a  foot-note
— "Max.  Tyr.  Diss.  25" — -appended  to  this  sentence.1

This — the  only  reference  that  I  have  traced  in  Myers's
writings  to  Maximus  of  Tyre — establishes  the  fact  that  Myers
had  some  acquaintance  with  the  Dissertationes.  And  he  may
well  have  been  familiar  with  them,  for,  as  is  well  known  and
as  his  writings  bear  witness,  he  was  deeply  read  in  Neoplatonic
literature,  and  Maximus  of  Tyre  was  a  2nd  century  precursor
of  the  Neoplatonists  of  the  3rd  century.

Moreover,  Myers's  study  of  the  Daemon  of  Socrates  (see
Proc,  Vol.  V.,  pp.  538-543,  and  Human  Personality,  Vol.  II.,
pp.  95-100)  is  likely  to  have  sent  him  to  the  Dissertationes
of  Maximus,  since  they  are  one  of  the  sources  of  information
on  this  subject  (see  Dissertationes,  xiv.  and  XV.).2

In  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.  16-19,  I  have  given  a  list
of  nine  instances  of  what  I  have  called  "  literary  personation  "
of  Frederic  Myers  by  Myersv,  MyersHV,  and  MyersP.

These  instances,  however,  with  the  probable  exception  of
the  eighth,  are  not  on  all  fours  with  the  apparent  knowledge

1  "  Diss.  25"  =  Diss.  xli.  in  Diibner's  edition:  the  edition  to  which  I  have
given  references.

ZL.  F.  Lilut  in  Le  D4mon  de  Socrate,  which  Myers  (loc.  cit.)  criticises
adversely,  thrice  at  least  refers  to  Maximus  and  his  Dissertationes.  For  this,
if  for  no  other  reason,  Myers's  attention  is  likely  to  have  been  drawn  to
them.


250


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


of  a  passage  in  the  Dissertation.es  shown  by  Myersv;  for  in  them
the  "  literary  personation  "  was  effected  by  means  of  allusions  to
passages  in  the  writings  of  Frederic  Myers  which  had  been,  or
may  reasonably  be  supposed  to  have  been,  within  the  cognisance
of  the  automatist  in  whose  script  the  allusions  appeared.

The  present  case  is  rather  to  be  compared  with  those  cases
where  an  automatist's  script  has  contained  allusions  to  passages
in  literature  witli  which  she  herself  to  the  best  of  her  know-
ledge and  belief  has  never  been  acquainted,  but  which  either
certainly  or  probably  had  once  been  within  the  range  of
Myers's  knowledge  (see  Proa,  Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.  23-30,  98-
120,  128-13:'.,  138-141,  142-144,  144-150;  Vol.  XXV.,
pp.  246-250;  and  above  pp.  191-194  and  footnotes  to  p.  194).


Review.


251


SUPPLEMENT.


EEVIEW.

Les  Hallucinations  Telepathiques,  by  N.  Vaschide.  100  pp.  ("Biblio-
theque  de  Psychologie  Experimentale  et  de  Metapsychie."
Librairie  Bloud  et  Cie. Paris,  1908).

It  must  be  by  an  oversight  that  this  interesting  little  book,  published
posthumously,  has  not  yet  been  reviewed  in  our  Proceedings,  for  it
is  in  effect  an  attack  on  an  important  part  of  the  work  of  the
S.P.R.  The  author,  who  was,  as  he  tells  us  on  p.  28,  led  to  the
investigation  of  telepathy  by  perusal  of  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  found
that  the  results  of  his  own  observations  did  not  agree  with  those
arrived  at  in  that  work.  In  his  opinion  this  is  probably  due  to
want  of  intimate  acquaintance  by  the  authors  of  Phantasms  of  the
Living  with  the  psychological  conditions  affecting  their  percipients  ;
but  examination  seems  to  us  to  show  that  it  is  chiefly  due  to  the
fact  that  his  own  observations  concern  a  different  order  of  phenomena
from  that  with  which  he  compares  them.

M.  Vaschide  made  his  observations  on  the  experiences  of  thirty-
four  persons — friends  or  colleagues  of  his  own,  or  persons  with  whom
he  was  intimately  as-ociated — twenty-one  of  whom  were  Roumanian
and  thirteen  French  men  or  women.  During  periods  varying  for
different  persons  from  six  months  to  nine  years,  the  average  period
being  between  four  and  five  years,  he  noted  down  at  the  time  of  its
occurrence  every  "  telepathic  hallucination "  experienced  by  those
persons  which  came  to  his  notice,  and  compared  them  with  the  contem-
poraneous condition  of  the  supposed  agent.  He  thus  noted  1374  experi-
ences !  This  gives  an  average  of  over  forty  per  head.  Only  one  person
had  as  few  as  two  such  experiences,  and  this  person  was  observed  for
four  years.  On  the  other  hand,  one  person  had  100  experiences  in  the
two  years  during  which  he  was  observed,  or  on  an  average  nearly
one  a  week; and  another  person,  a  woman,  had 172  experiences


252


Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.


[part


noted  by  M.  Vaschide  in  the  course  of  five  years.  These  figures  are
certainly  startling.  It  appears,  however,  that  M.  Vaschide  merely
means  by  "hallucinations  telepathiques  "  an  experience  having  some
sort  of  sensory  quality,  and  suggesting  in  some  way  to  the  percipient
a  definite  person  at  a  distance.  He  does  not  regard  the  term  tele-
pathic as  implying  that  any  communication  otherwise  than  through
the  ordinary  channels  of  sense  actually  occurred  between  agent  and
percipient.  This  is  clear,  because  in  only  forty-eight  of  the  1374
cases  did  he  find  any  real  coincidence  between  the  "  hallucination  "
and  the  condition  of  the  agent,  counting  as  a  coincidence  a  certain
amount  of  agreement  between  the  state  of  the  agent  and  the  impression
of  the  percipient  within  a  period  of  from  six  to  sixty  hours.1  It  is
an  interesting  fact,  however,  that  in  1325  of  the  1374  cases  the
percipients  believed,  presumably  at  the  time  of  the  experience,  that
it  was  veridical ;  and  we  are  left  to  infer  that  for  the  most  part
their  confidence  was  not  disturbed  by  subsequent  discovery  that  the
coincidence  was  inadequate.  Some  explanation  could  always  be
found — some  adaptation  of  recollections  on  comparing  notes  with
the  agent.  The  possibility  of  such  persistent  though  misplaced
confidence  is  not  surprising  to  the  psychical  researcher;  what  is
new  is  the  scale  on  which  with  M.  Vaschide's  subjects  it  actually
occurred.  This  is  probably  due  to  an  uncritical  habit  of  mind
induced  by  the  social  milieu  in  which  the  percipients  lived,  in  which
one  gathers  that  belief  in  the  frequency  of  a  kind  of  second  sight
was  very  general.

Quite  apart  from  questions  of  veridicality,  however,  M.  Vaschide's
numbers  would  be  very  surprising — indeed  almost  incredible,  as  his
percipients  are  apparently  ordinary  sane  and  healthy  people — if  he
meant  the  same  thing  by  "  hallucination  "  as  is  meant  in  Phantasms
of  the  Living  and  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.  generally.  From
the  specimens  he  gives  us  in  detail,  however,  it  would  appear  that
his  "hallucinations"  are  not  those  fully  externalised  hallucinations —
hallucinatory  percepts  which  lack,  but  can  only  by  distinct  reflection
be  recognised  as  lacking,  the  objective  basis  which  they  suggest —
which  have  been  the  subject  of  statistical  investigation  by  the  S.P.R.
They  seem,  on  the  contrary,  to  be  the  phenomena  called  in  our
Census  of  Hallucinations  (after  Kandinsky)  pseudo-hallucinations.
These  appear  to  the  percipient  to  be  seen  with  the  eye  of  the  mind,
not  the  bodily  eye;  to  be  heard  with  the  mental,  not  the  bodily,
ear.  The  degree  of  externalisation  was  not  apparently  a  matter  of
1  Apparently  none  were  closer  than  six  hours.


LXV.]


Review.


253


enquiry  by  M.  Vaschide,  and  it  is  even  possible  that  he  never  came
across  a  case  of  really  externalised  hallucination,  at  least  of  a  visual
sort.

M.  Vaschide  gives  interesting  classifications  of  the  content  of  the
impressions,  but  describes  only  four  "hallucinations  visuelles"  speci-
fically— one  experienced  by  a  Madame  N.  and  three  by  himself.
Madame  N.'s  impression,  which  occurred  while  she  was  at  supper,
was  like  a  clear  vision  of  her  daughter  dying  (comme  la  vision  claire
de  sa  fille  mourante)  wrapped  in  white  sheets  and  on  the  point  of
yielding  her  last  breath.  Madame  N.  was  in  some  anxiety  about
her  daughter,  but  did  not  know  that  she  was  ill  with  typhoid  fever
and  that  fifteen  hours  earlier  she  had  gone  through  the  crisis  of  the
illness.  The  experiences  of  Monsieur  Vaschide  himself  which  he
describes  were  connected  with  the  death  of  his  father,  who  was
seventy-three  years  of  age  and  ill,  and  about  whom  his  son  was  feeling
anxious.  Coming  in  with  his  wife,  the  latter  remarked  that  she  had
an  impression  of  the  smell  of  quinces1 — a  smell  which  she  recognised
as  characteristic  of  his  father's  house,  distant  three  days'  railway
journey.  Thereupon  he  saw  his  father  dying  (a  ce  rappel  j'ai  vu
mon  pere  mourant).  As  he  learnt  afterwards,  his  father  had  died
seven  hours  earlier.  The  day  before  he  had  had  "  une  hallucination
vague  de  son  regard  bleu  et  doux,"  and  on  the  evening  of  his  death
— perhaps  while  he  was  dying — he  had  had  a  "hallucination"  of  his
state  (j'avais  eu  hallucination  de  son  etat).  He  saw  him  as  he  had
left  him,  with  his  habitual  expression  and  gestures,  and  he  seemed
to  have  greatly  changed.

Any  one  who  takes  the  trouble  to  compare  these  experiences,  the
only  visual  ones  described  in  detail  by  M.  Vaschide,  with  Mrs.
Bettany's  case  described  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  I.  Chap.  v.
§  3,  or  with  those  given  in  Chap.  vi.  §  5  of  the  same  volume,  or  with
Chap.  iv.  of  the  "  Census  of  Hallucinations,"  S.P.R.  Proceedings,
Vol.  X.,  will,  we  think,  agree  with  us  that  they  should  be  classified
as  pseudo-hallucinations.  Such  experiences  may  be  very  impressive,
but  may  easily  be  the  reverse  and,  like  dreams,  easily  forgotten.2

Olfactory  impressions  were  unexpectedly  frequent  among  the  "hallucina-
tions telepathiques  "  noted  by  M.  "Vaschide,  more  so  than  tactile  impressions.
He  recorded  seventy-four,  he  tells  us.

2  The  distinction  between  hallucinations  and  pseudo-hallucinations  is  not  of
course  in  vividness  or  impressiveness.  Some  of  the  pseudo-hallucinations  described
in  the  chapters  of  Phantasms  and  of  the  "Census"  referred  to  above  were  very
vivid  and  impressive.  On  the  other  hand,  the  colourless  and  somewhat
formless figures seen by  Dr.  Henry Head's patients when suffering  from


254


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


They  are  not  experiences  to  which  we  have  attempted  to  apply  any
statistical  method  of  investigation,  and  there  is,  therefore,  nothing  in
the  publications  of  the  Society  with  which  M.  Vaschide's  results  are
exactly  comparable.  This  is  indeed  the  reason  why  his  results  are
new  and  interesting.  He  has  had  an  opportunity  of  observing,  at
the  time  of  their  occurrence,  evanescent  phenomena,  the  frequency
of  which  in  any  circle  it  would  be  otherwise  impossible  to  ascertain,
and  of  showing  how  little  the  impression  of  the  percipients  in  his
circle  that  they  are  veridical  is  warranted.  It  is  only  to  be  re-
gretted that  he  has  not  given  a  fuller  account  of  his  observations,
and  especially  particulars  of  more  of  the  actual  experiences.

The  1374  experiences  noted  by  M.  Vaschide  consisted  of  962
visual,  298  auditory,  74  olfactory,  and  40  tactile  cases.1  The  per-
centage of  what  he  counts  as  coincidental  cases  as  defined  above
was  3-49.  He  gives  rather  more  particulars  about  the  Roumanian
results.  The  total  of  these  was  1011  with  forty  coincidences  (3  96  per
cent.),  of  which  in  nineteen  cases  the  percipient's  experience  preceded
and  in  twenty-one  followed  the  corresponding  event  in  the  agent's  life.
There  were  740  visual  cases  among  the  Roumanian  ones,  of  which
twenty-one  (2-84  per  cent.)  are  counted  by  M.  Vaschide  as  coin-
cidental. M.  Vaschide  is  sceptical  about  the  applicability  of  a  mathe-
matical calculation  of  chances  to  any  real  facts  so  far  as  I  understand
him,  and  at  any  rate  to  psychological  facts.  And  certainly  it  is  difficult
to  see  how  it  could  be  applied  to  his  figures  in  the  absence  of  any
definition  of  the  event  in  the  asrent's  life  with  which  coincidence  is
to  be  counted,  or  knowledge  of  the  frequency  of  that  event.
However,  without  calculation  he  expresses  confidence  (p.  81)  that  the
coincidences  he  has  observed  exceed  what  chance  alone  would  give
(la  veracite  de  ces  48  cas  de  coincidences  .  .  .  montre  suffisament  qu'elles

visceral  disease  (see  Mr.  Piddington's  discussion  of  Dr.  Head's  Goulstonian
Lectures,  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIX.,  pp.  "267-341)  must  in  themselves  have  been  unim-
pressive. Nevertheless  these  last  were  truly  externalised  hallucinations,  as
various  things  indicate.  Thus,  for  instance,  some  patients  before  admission  to  the
hospital  sprang  out  of  bed  to  seize  the  figure  standing  near  their  beds,  which
they  supposed  to  be  a  person  who  had  entered  the  room  (p.  291).  This  would
not  happen  with  a  vision  seen  with  the  mind's  eye  only.

1 M.  Vaschide  very  rarely  found  in  the  cases  observed  by  him  that  two
senses  appeared  to  be  concerned  simultaneously  or  nearly  so  (p.  54).  This  is
probably  due  to  their  being  pseudo-hallucinations.  In  the  externalised  and
therefore  more  realistic  experiences  dealt  with  in  our  "  Census  of  Hallucina-
tions"  about  14  per  cent,  are  reported  as  affecting  simultaneously  two  or  more
senses.


lxv.]  Revieiv.  255

depassent  la  probability).  He  gives  us  no  means  of  forming  an  inde-
pendent judgment  on  this  conclusion,  but  it  is  not  necessary  that
we  should  do  so,  as  he  practically  withdraws  it  two  pages  further
on,  where  he  says  that  he  does  not  regard  the  proportion  ot
veridical  cases  as  a  chance,  but  as  an  accidental  coincidence  easily
explicable  (cette  proportion  des  cas  veridiques  nous  ne  la  considerons
pas  comme  un  hasard  ;  c'est  une  coincidence  fortuite  facilement
interpretable).  The  explanation  is  a  little  obscure,  but  seems  to  be
that  all  "  telepathic  hallucinations "  in  M.  Vaschide's  sense  depend
on  a  special  mental  state  of  the  percipient — chiefly  of  emotional
sympathy  with  the  agent  apparently — and  that  in  most  veridical
cases  there  is  a  kind  of  pre-established  intellectual  harmony  (harmonie
intellectuelle  preetablie)  (p.  95 ;  see  also  p.  73).  At  any  rate  the
emotional  condition  of  the  percipient  seems  a  sufficient  explanation
of  the  form  of  the  impression  in  the  cases  described  by  M.  Vaschide,
and  no  one  we  imagine  would  be  inclined  to  found  a  theory  of
telepathy  on  them.

It  would  be  interesting  to  know  to  what  extent  M.  Vaschide  has
really  studied  the  work  of  the  S.P.K.  He  claims  acquaintance  with
the  French  (abbreviated)  translation  of  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  and
has  seen  summaries  of  the  papers  on  our  "  Census  of  Hallucinations  "
(Proceedings,  Vol.  X.)  read  at  the  Psychological  Congress  held  at
Munich  in  1896.  But  his  use  of  the  terminology  of  Phantasms  of
the  Living  in  a  new  sense  and  without  explanation  while  criticising
that  work,  his  failure  to  distinguish  between  hallucinations  and
pseudo-hallucinations,  his  impression  that  information  was  accepted
by  the  authors  of  Phantasms  from  anonymous  persons  (p.  70),  and
even  that  the  inquiry  was  carried  on  through  newspapers  (p.  71),
as  well  as  other  errors,  suggest  a  very  superficial  reading.  We
cannot  regard  his  book  as  affording  useful  criticism  either  of  the
methods  or  the  results  of  the  investigations  of  our  Society ;  but  his
own  investigation  is,  as  already  said,  interesting  and  useful,  and
should  not  be  lost  sight  of.  We  only  regret  that  he  has  not  given
his  results  to  the  world  in  greater  detail.

Eleanor  Mildred  Sjdgwjok.


SPECIAL  MEDICAL  PART

OF  THE

PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research.

PART  LX.VI.
November,  191 2.


I.

SOME  TYPES  OF  MULTIPLE  PERSONALITY.

By  T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.

Well-marked  cases  of  multiple  personality  are  rare,  and  if
we  confined  ourselves  to  the  study  of  these  cases  alone  we  should
make  little  progress  towards  an  understanding  of  the  strange
and  seemingly  inexplicable  phenomena  which  they  present.
Fortunately,  however,  these  are  not  the  only  ones  that  occur.
When  we  examine  the  records  we  find  that  a  great  variety  of
forms  may  be  observed,  and  that  there  are  many  gradations
between  the  well-marked  cases  and  those  which  can  hardly  be
looked  upon  as  examples  of  multiple  personality  at  all.  An
examination  of  some  of  these  latter  conditions  will  provide  the
best  introduction  to  the  study  of  the  complex  phenomena  of
double  and  multiple  personality.

It  is  now  very  generally  admitted  by  psychologists  that  in
some  persons  at  least  consciousness  may  be  split  up  into  two
or  more  parts.  The  split-off  or  dissociated  portion  may  be  but
a  fragment  of  the  whole  self,  or  it  may  be  so  extensive,  so

R


258


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


complex,  and  so  self-sufficient  as  to  be  capable  of  fulfilling  all
the  functions  of  a  personal  consciousness.  In  hysteria  we  find
isolated  paralyses  or  localized  anaesthesias  which  are  due  to
the  dissociation  of  relatively  simple  ideas,  or  we  may  find  a
splitting  so  deep,  a  dissociation  of  so  many  kinds  of  mental
activity,  that  it  leads  to  a  complete  change  of  personality.

All  ideas,  feelings,  and  actions  associated  in  experience  tend
to  become  linked  together  into  systems  or  groups  in  such  a  way
that  the  stimulation  of  one  element  of  a  group  excites  the
activity  of  all  the  rest.  Such  a  system  or  group  is  commonly
referred  to  as  a  complex.  Now  just  as  dissociation  may  fall
upon  a  relatively  simple  idea,  such  as  the  use  of  a  limb,  so
it  may  fall  upon  a  complex  of  ideas  related  to  some  particular
experience.  A  complex  formed  in  relation  to  some  event  accom-
panied by  great  emotion  may  become  dissociated  from  the
personal  consciousness,  so  that  all  recollection  of  the  event
and  of  the  feelings  and  actions  connected  with  it  becomes
impossible.  A  complex  so  dissociated  does  not  cease  to  be
capable  of  functioning.  For  the  time  being  it  may  become
latent,  but  it  may  occasionally  exhibit  extremely  independent
activity.  A  case  recorded  by  Professor  Janet 1  well  illustrates
the  results  of  the  functioning  of  such  dissociated  complexes.

A  young  girl  nursed  her  dying  mother.  The  poor  woman,
who  had  reached  the  last  stage  of  consumption,  lived  alone
with  her  daughter  in  a  poor  garret.  Death  came  slowly  with
suffocation,  blood  vomiting,  and  all  its  frightful  procession  of
symptoms.  The  girl  struggled  hopelessly  against  the  impossible.
She  watched  her  mother  during  sixty  nights,  working  at  her
sewing-machine  to  earn  a  few  pennies  necessary  to  sustain  their
lives.  After  the  mother's  death  she  tried  to  revive  the  corpse,  to
call  the  breath  back  again ;  then  as  she  put  the  limbs  upright
the  body  fell  to  the  floor,  and  it  took  infinite  exertion  to  lift
it  up  again  into  the  bed.  Some  time  after  the  funeral  the
young  girl  began  to  fall  into  somnambulic  attacks  in  which
she  acted  again  all  the  events  that  took  place  at  her  mother's
death,  without  forgetting  the  least  detail.

One  of  the  characteristics  of  these  recurrent  psychomotor
states  or  somnambulisms,  as  Janet  calls  them,  is  that  they
repeat  themselves  indefinitely. Not  only  are  the  attacks  always

1  The  Major  Symptoms  of  Hysteria,  p.  '29.


lxvi.]  Some  Types  of  Multiple  Personality.  259

exactly  alike,  repeating  the  same  movements,  expressions  and
words,  but  in  the  course  of  the  same  attack  the  same  scene
may  be  repeated  many  times  exactly  in  the  same  way.  The
patient  acts  out  some  past  experience  as  if  in  a  dream,  and
during  the  attack  the  senses  are  shut  to  all  impressions  not
connected  with  the  dream.  He  perceives  nothing  except  the
idea  he  is  possessed  of,  and  he  remembers  nothing  except  that
one  idea.  When  the  attack  is  over  there  is  a  return  of  all
sensations,  the  lost  memories  of  waking  life  are  restored,  and
the  events  of  the  dream  are  forgotten.  This  loss  of  memory
bears  not  only  on  the  period  of  the  somnambulism ;  it  bears
also  on  the  event  that  has  given  birth  to  the  somnambulism,
on  all  the  facts  that  are  connected  with  it,  and  on  the  feelings
that  are  related  to  it.  Thus  the  young  girl  referred  to  forgot
during  her  waking  state  all  the  events  connected  with  her
mother's  illness  and  death.  She  was  callous  and  insensible,
and  her  filial  love,  the  feeling  of  affection  she  had  felt  for
her  mother,  seemed  to  have  quite  vanished.

Many  separate  experiences  may  have  taken  part  in  the
formation  of  a  dissociated  complex,  but  they  are  all  bound
together  by  some  common  element  of  feeling  or  emotion.
When  these  experiences  are  reproduced  in  somnambulic  attacks,
the  various  episodes  are  enacted  in  succession,  though  not
always  in  the  same  order,  and  the  reproduction  may  or  may
not  be  modified  by  perception  and  association  of  ideas.  When
the  reproduction  is  not  modified  by  external  impressions,  the
attacks  are  very  similar  to  those  already  described.  But  if
ability  to  perceive  surrounding  objects  be  retained,  the  regular
development  of  the  somnambulism  may  be  interfered  with  and
modified  by  the  performance  of  actions  determined  by  the
actual  situation.  In  other  cases  still  further  modifications  may
be  introduced  by  association  of  ideas.  When  dissociation  bears
upon  any  large  section  of  mental  life,  the  interlinking  of  the
various  dissociated  complexes  may  afford  material  for  the  deter-
mination of  a  great  variety  of  somnambulic  acts.  In  illustration
of  this  we  may  refer  to  the  case  of  the  old  soldier  recorded  by
Mesnet.  This  man  had  received  a  gunshot  wound  in  the
head  and  was  afterwards  subject  to  attacks  of  somnambulism
in  which  he  gave  an  exact  repetition  of  events  of  his  life
when  in  hospital. But  when  a  pen  was  put  into  his  hand


2G0


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.J).


[part


during  the  somnambulic  state,  he  would  write  letters  having
reference  to  other  periods  of  his  life.  He  could  hear  nothing
in  this  state,  but  if  ideas  were  suggested  to  him  through  the
sense  of  touch,  he  would  perform  appropriate  actions  which
were  determined  by  old  memories.

In  all  these  cases  conduct  consists  mainly  of  repetitions  of
actions  appropriate  to  past  events  in  the  patient's  history,
and  it  is  not  relevant  to  his  actual  circumstances  during  the
somnambulism.  When  the  dissociation  is  of  such  a  nature  as
to  permit  a  just  appreciation  of  the  surroundings  during  the
secondary  state,  and  ability  to  react  in  an  appropriate  manner,
there  is  a  tendency  for  the  state  to  be  prolonged  and  to  be
filled  up  by  a  course  of  conduct  in  which  are  displayed  the
purpose  and  contingency  which  we  usually  regard  as  character-
istic of  waking  life.  Attacks  of  this  kind  usually  take  the
form  of  fugues  or  ambulatory  automatisms  and  are  generally
described  as  such ;  but  the  change  of  character  which  is
sometimes  exhibited  during  the  secondary  state,  and  the  amnesia
for  the  events  of  the  fugue  which  ensues  when  the  normal
state  is  restored,  justify  us  in  regarding  them  as  genuine
instances  of  double  personality.

Prolonged  fugues  appear  to  be  generally  of  hysterical  origin,
but  shorter  periods  of  intelligent  conduct  followed  by  amnesia
are  frequently  met  with  as  a  result  of  a  variety  of  causes.
Head  injuries,  profound  emotional  shock,  carbon  monoxide  poison-
ing, alcoholic  intoxication,  epileptic  attacks,  and  other  conditions,
may  so  affect  consciousness  that  acts  performed  during  hours  or
days  subsequent  to  the  trauma  are  completely  forgotten  when
recovery  of  normal  health  occurs.  But  the  lost  memories  are  not
destroyed ;  they  are  merely  dissociated ;  and  by  using  various
artificial  measures,  such  as  hypnotism  or  hypnoidization,  they
can  be  restored,  and  an  account  of  what  happened  during  the
abnormal  state  may  be  obtained.

Fugues  are  of  not  infrequent  occurrence,  and  many  of  the
cases  of  loss  of  memory  reported  from  time  to  time  in  the
newspapers  are  undoubtedly  of  this  character.  These  people
have  lost  for  the  time  being  the  memory  of  their  real  personality.
Some  system  of  thoughts  which  determines  their  wandering  has
become  dissociated  from  the  personal  consciousness.  As  is  the
tendency  of  all  dissociated  ideas,  this  system  of  thoughts  takes


lxvi.]  Some  Types  of  Multiple  Personality.  261


on  independent  functioning,  and  when  it  is  working  itself  out
in  action,  the  other  systems  of  thoughts  relating  to  the  per-
sonality, to  the  former  life  and  its  responsibilities,  become
latent.  The  whole  personality  is  no  longer  in  control  of  con-
duct. When  through  some  chance  association  or  through
artificial  means  the  memory  of  the  former  existence  is  restored,
the  lately  active  complex  becomes  latent  again,  and  the  events
associated  with  its  recent  activity  are  forgotten.

The  principal  characteristics  of  a  fugue  are  well  brought
out  in  the  following  case,  which  I  quote  from  Professor  Janet :

The  subject  is  a  boy  of  seventeen,  Rou.,  son  of  a  neuropathic
mother,  rather  nervous  himself,  who  already  had,  when  he  was  ten
years  old,  tics  and  contractures  in  the  neck.  ...  At  thirteen  he  often
went  to  a  small  public-house,  visited  by  old  sailors.  They  would
urge  him  to  drink,  and,  when  he  was  somewhat  flustered,  they
would  fill  his  imagination  with  beautiful  tales  in  which  deserts,
palm  trees,  lions,  camels,  and  negroes  were  pictured  in  a  most
wonderful  and  alluring  way.  The  young  boy  was  very  much  struck
by  those  pictures,  particularly  as  he  was  half  tipsy.  However,
when  his  drunkenness  was  over,  the  stories  seemed  to  be  quite
forgotten  ;  he  never  spoke  of  travels,  and  on  the  contrary  led  a
very  sedentary  life,  for  he  had  chosen  the  placid  occupation  of  a
grocer's  boy,  and  he  only  sought  to  rise  in  that  honourable  career.

Now  there  came  on  quite  unforeseen  accidents,  almost  always  on
the  occasion  of  some  fatigue  or  a  fit  of  drunkenness.  He  then  felt
transformed,  forgot  to  return  home,  and  thought  no  more  of  his
family.  ...  I  will  dwell  on  only  one  of  his  fugues,  which  is
particularly  amusing,  and  was  of  extraordinary  duration,  for  it
lasted  three  months.  He  had  left  Paris  about  the  fifteenth  of  May,
and  had  walked  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Melun.  This  time  he  was
thinking  about  the  means  of  succeeding  in  his  scheme  and  of
getting  safely  to  the  Mediterranean.  Until  then  he  had  failed,
owing  to  fatigue  and  misery :  the  question  was  to  find  means  of
living  as  he  went  along.  A  bright  idea  had  occurred  to  him  ;  not
far  from  Melun,  at  Moret,  there  are  canals  that  go  more  or  less
straight  to  the  south  of  France,  and  in  those  canals  there  are  ships
laden  with  goods.  He  succeeded  in  being  accepted  as  a  servant
on  a  ship  laden  with  coal.  His  work  was  terrible ;  now  he  had
to  shovel  the  coal,  now  to  haul  the  rope  in  company  with  a  donkey
called  Cadet,  his only friend. He  was  badly  fed,  often  beaten,


262


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


exhausted  with  fatigue,  but,  though  you  would  scarcely  believe  it,
he  was  radiant  with  happiness.  He  thought  only  of  one  thing, —
of  the  joy  of  drawing  nearer  to  the  sea.  Unhappily,  in  Auvergne,
the  boat  stopped,  and  he  was  forced  to  leave  it  and  continue  his
journey  on  foot,  which  was  more  difficult.  In  order  not  to  be
resourceless,  he  hired  himself  as  a  helper  to  an  old  china  mender.
They  went  slowly  along,  working  on  the  road.

Then,  one  evening,  an  unlooked-for  event  took  place  again.  The
day's  work  had  been  a  success ;  the  two  companions  had  earned
seven  francs.  The  old  china  mender  stopped  and  said  to  E.,  "  My
boy,  we  deserve  a  good  supper :  and  we  will  keep  to-day's  feast ;
it  is  the  fifteenth  of  August."  On  hearing  this,  the  boy  heedlessly
said :  "  The  fifteenth  of  August  1  Why,  it  is  the  feast  of  the
Virgin  Mary,  the  anniversary  of  my  mother's  name-da}'."  He  had
scarcely  uttered  these  words  when  he  appeared  to  be  quite  changed.
He  looked  all  round  him  with  astonishment,  and  turning  to  his
companion,  said,  "  But  who  are  you,  and  what  am  I  doing  here
with  you  1 "  The  poor  man  was  amazed,  and  was  quite  unable  to
make  the  boy  understand  the  situation ;  the  latter  still  believed
himself  in  Paris,  and  had  lost  all  memory  of  the  preceding  months.
They  had  to  go  to  the  village  mayor's,  where,  with  great  difficulty,
the  matter  was  made  more  or  less  clear.  The  mayor  telegraphed  to
Paris,  and  the  prodigal  child  was  sent  back  home.1

In  this  case  we  see  something  of  the  way  in  which  fugues
may  originate.  It  is  exceptional  in  showing  so  clearly  how
the  ideas  and  desires  which  determined  the  fugue  became
implanted  in  the  patient's  mind,  and  how  they  became  dis-
sociated from  the  waking  consciousness  under  the  influence
of  alcoholic  intoxication.  As  a  rule  it  is  not  so  easy  to  dis-
cover how  the  determining  ideas  found  an  entrance  into  the
mind  or  how  they  became  dissociated.  In  some  cases  they
seem  to  have  originated  in  day-dreaming  or  in  other  states  of
abstraction.  Sometimes  they  appear  to  be  ideas  or  wishes
that  have  been  entertained  in  the  normal  state,  but  have  been
voluntarily  repressed  as  being  incompatible  with  the  general
character  and  purposes  of  the  individual.

The  termination  of  this  fugue  is  also  instructive.  Just  as
an  attack  of  hysterical  somnambulism  may  be  artificially  repro-
duced by  insistently  directing  the  patient's  attention  towards

'Janet,  loc.  cit.,  p.  51.


lxvl]  Some  Types  of  Multiple  Personality.  263

the  idea  which  dominates  it,  so  a  fugue  may  he  brought  to
a  close  by  some  chance  impression  which  succeeds  in  arousing
emotional  complexes  related  to  the  normal  life.

It  seems  impossible  to  draw  any  hard  and  fast  line  between
fugues  and  some  of  the  classical  cases  of  double  personality.
On  the  whole  it  may  be  said  that  the  fugue  is  characterized
by  a  tendency  to  wander,  by  a  certain  unity  of  purpose  which
links  the  dissociated  ideas  together,  and  by  the  persistence
of  this  purpose  as  a  directive  force  in  determining  conduct
while  the  fugue  lasts.  It  is  true  that  in  some  fugues  the
Working  out  of  this  purpose  seems  vague  and  obscure,  and
the  wandering  may  appear  quite  purposeless  to  an  observer ;
but  it  is  probable  that  in  every  fugue  the  conduct  of  the
patient  is  determined  by  a  subconscious  desire  for  some  new
experience  or  by  aversion  to  some  experience  of  his  ordinary
life.  There  is  something  in  his  life  from  which  he  feels  he
must  fly,  or  some  anticipated  good  towards  which  he  must  go.

In  conditions  which  may  more  strictly  be  regarded  as  cases
of  double  personality,  conduct  in  the  secondary  state  seems
to  have  no  such  continuity  of  purpose  running  through  it.
Dissociation  seems  to  bear  upon  a  larger  section  of  the  self,
and  the  mental  activity  displayed  is  of  a  more  varied  character.
In  some  respects  at  least  it  more  closely  resembles  the  activity
of  ordinary  life  and  seems  less  guided  by  any  fixed  idea.  But
we  find  transitional  forms  where  any  such  distinction  seems
to  break  down.  The  well-known  case  of  Ansel  Bourne1  may
perhaps  come  under  this  category.  In  the  first  fortnight  of
his  secondary  state,  Ansel  Bourne's  conduct  conformed  to  that
of  an  ordinary  fugue.  He  forgot  his  personal  identity,  assumed
a  new  name,  and  wandered  about  from  city  to  city.  In  the
remaining  six  weeks  he  led  a  quiet,  respectable  life  as  a  small
shop-keeper.  In  his  second  state  he  had  no  recollection  of
his  former  life,  and  when  he  came  to  himself  he  had  no  recol-
lection of  his  life  during  the  second  state.  The  lost  memories
were,  however,  recovered  during  hypnosis,  and  the  revelation
so  obtained  of  his  frame  of  mind  at  the  beginning  of  his
fugue  probably  indicates  the  nature  of  the  ideas  that  deter-
mined it.  He  said  "  he  wanted  to  get  away  somewhere — he
didn't  know  where — and  have  rest."  When  he  opened  his
1  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VII.,  p.  221.


264


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


little  shop,  the  fugue  proper  came  to  an  end.  The  idea  which
determined  his  flight  was  about  to  be  realized,  and  while  it
was  working  itself  out  he  lived  the  life  of  a  secondary  per-
sonality which  was  conditioned  by  the  breach  in  the  continuity
of  his  memory,  rather  than  by  any  great  change  in  his  char-
acter or  conduct.

So  far  we  have  considered  disintegrations  of  personality  in
which  the  dissociated  elements  comprise  only  a  small  portion
of  the  mental  life.  A  single  idea,  or  a  group  of  ideas  linked
together  into  a  complex  by  some  common  underlying  feeling,
becomes  split  off  more  or  less  completely  from  the  personpi
consciousness.  When  it  is  aroused  to  function,  it  displays
great  independence  and  takes  possession  of  the  whole  organism.
A  new  state  is  entered  upon,  a  new  personality  appears,
whose  actions  are  initiated  and  guided  by  the  dominating
complex.

The  section  of  mental  life  thus  cut  off  is  relatively  so  small
that  its  disappearance  does  not  appreciably  affect  the  integrity
of  the  personal  consciousness,  so  that  both  before  and  after  the
somnambulistic  attack  the  individual  is  regarded  as  being  his
normal  self.  But  it  is  possible  for  the  dissociation  to  bear
upon  such  a  large  section  of  consciousness  that  the  curtailment
of  the  self  which  its  withdrawal  entails  may  amount  to  a
change  of  personality.  And  the  dissociated  portions  of  con-
sciousness may  lack  the  community  of  feeling  or  of  purpose
which  would  enable  them  to  take  possession  of  the  bodily
organism  on  their  own  account.  Dissociation  is  revealed  by
gaps  or  disabilities  in  the  normal  self,  rather  than  by  the
appearance  of  any  new  form  of  activity  simulating  a  second
self.  But  if  the  dissociated  portions  of  consciousness  should
suddenly  become  reinstated  so  as  to  lead  to  the  formation  once
more  of  the  normal  personality,  and  if  again  they  should
gradually  or  suddenly  drop  out  of  consciousness  so  as  again
to  leave  the  normal  self  crippled  and  curtailed  by  their
disappearance,  we  should  have  an  alternation  of  two  selves
whose  relation  to  each  other  might  not  readily  be  recognized.

Some  of  the  best  known  of  the  recorded  examples  of  double
personality  are  to  be  explained  in  this  way,  and  the  misinter-
pretation of  such  cases  has  given  unwarrantable  support  to
the  view  that  a  secondary  self  is  sometimes  an  improvement


lxvi.]  Some  Types  of  Multiple  Personality.


2G5


on  the  primary  personality.  Such  a  view  may  or  may  not  be
true ;  but  these  cases  cannot  be  adduced  in  support  of  it.

The  classical  example  of  this  form  of  double  personality  is
Azam's  Felida  X.1  The  condition  which  Azam  described  as
Felida's  primary  state  was  undoubtedly  the  crippled  or  curtailed
self  produced  by  hysterical  dissociation ;  and  the  condition
which  he  described  as  secondary  was  really  the  normal  self
restored  by  the  synthesis  of  the  dissociated  states.  But  the
real  secondary  personality  in  this  case  was,  in  fact,  the
hysterical  condition  (see  diagrams  on  Plate  II,  p.  285),  which  had
come  on  so  gradually  that  no  distinct  gap  in  the  continuity  of
memory  was  observed.  When  the  two  phases  began  to  alter-
nate, the  curtailed  self  became  amnesic  for  the  restored  self,
while  the  restored  self  had  no  amnesia  for  the  hysterical  phase.
There  is  in  cases  of  the  Felida  type  no  reciprocal  amnesia
such  as  is  observed  in  the  cases  we  have  previously  examined.

Felida's  alternations  occurred  spontaneously  and  for  a  long
time  they  were  misinterpreted.  It  was  only  when  it  was
discovered  that  similar  phenomena  could  be  artificially  produced
that  the  status  of  the  two  phases  and  the  mechanism  of  their
alternation  became  apparent.  Janet's  prolonged  researches  on
Marcelline  I!.2 — an  artificial  Felida,  as  he  has  termed  her —
afford  us  the  clearest  notion  of  the  way  in  which  double
personalities  of  this  kind  come  into  being,  but  we  do  not  seem
justified  in  adopting  Janet's  view  that  this  is  the  type  to  which
all  forms  of  multiple  personality  must  in  the  last  analysis  be
held  to  conform.

In  cases  of  the  Felida  type  I  have  supposed  that  the  split-
off  section  of  consciousness  has  not  the  structural  unity  which
would  permit  it  to  manifest  as  a  secondary  personality,  and
that  the  two  selves  which  are  exhibited  are  merely  the  normal
self  and  the  same  self  shorn  of  some  of  its  faculties  or  powers.
But  it  is  possible  for  a  split-off  section  of  consciousness,  even
when  dissociation  is  extensive,  to  have  so  much  structural  unity
that  it  is  capable  of  utilizing  the  whole  bodily  organism  for  its
expression,  and  of  showing  all  the  features  of  a  second  self.
"We  may  thus  have  the  curtailed  primary  self  alternating  with
a  self  formed  by  the  split-off  portion,  and  a  hypothetical  third

1Bitiet,  Les  Alterations  de  la  Personnalite,  pp.  6-20.

-Revue  Philosophique  :  Avril,  1910,  p.  3'29  ;  Mai,  1910,  p.  483.


2G6


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


self,  the  normal  self,  which  will  appear  if  a  synthesis  of  the
dissociated  states  can  be  effected.

There  are  several  cases  on  record  in  which  this  interpretation
seems  legitimate.  But  before  going  on  to  examine  some
instances  in  which  such  a  third  self  has  appeared  or  in  which
its  possible  formation  could  be  predicted,  we  may  look  for  a
moment  at  an  intermediate  type  in  which  a  third  personality
may  arise.  These  are  cases  in  which  the  stress  causing
the  dissociation  has  been  so  severe  that  everything  that  goes  to
the  formation  of  a  personal  consciousness  disappears,  leaving
seemingly  nothing  but  a  bare  consciousness  without  any
content  to  play  the  part  of  a  secondary  personality.  It
was  to  such  a  condition  that  Mr.  Hanna  was  reduced  as  the
result  of  an  accident.1  All  knowledge  of  his  former  life,  all
his  acquisitions  and  memories,  even  his  acquaintance  with  the
meaning  of  the  organic  sensations  of  his  own  body,  had  com-
pletely disappeared.  But  he  was  capable  of  learning,  and  at
the  end  of  a  few  weeks  he  had  learnt  much.  In  doing  so  he
developed  a  new  personality  which  had  no  knowledge  of  his
former  self.  But  the  old  memories  were  not  destroyed,  they
were  only  dissociated ;  and  in  the  course  of  the  treatment
adopted  by  Dr.  Sidis,  the  old  self  began  to  alternate  with  the
new  self.  The  old  self  when  it  reappeared  was  as  ignorant  of  the
new  self  as  the  new  self  was  of  the  old  self  (see  diagrams  on  Plate
I,  p.  284),  therein  differing  from  what  happens  in  alternations
of  the  Felida  type.  The  only  way  to  ensure  the  stability  and
permanence  of  the  old  self  was  to  get  it  to  synthesize  with  the
new  self,  thus  producing  a  third  self  which  knew  both  the  others.
This  third  self  was,  however,  different  from  the  normal  self
which  emerges  as  a  third  self  in  the  synthesis  of  two  selves
which  are  each  but  fragments  of  an  original  whole  self.  For
in  the  Hanna  case  each  self  was  a  whole  self,  although  one
had  a  much  fuller  content,  a  much  richer  store  of  memories,
than  the  other.  And  the  third  self,  instead  of  being  the
original  self  restored  by  the  union  of  two  halves,  was  the
original  self  with  the  memories  of  the  new  self  superadded.

The  third  self  in  the  Hanna  case  must  not  then  be  confused
with  the  third  self  which  arises  from  the  reintegration  of  two
selves,  each  of  which  is  abnormal  and  fragmentary. The  case

1  Sidis  and  Goodhart,  Multiple  Personality  (New  York,  1905).


LXVI.]  Some  Types  of  Multiple  Personality.  267

of  Mary  Eeynolds,1  described  by  Weir  Mitchell,  may  probably
have  been  of  this  latter  kind,  but  the  restoration  of  the  normal
personality  seemed  to  take  place  gradually  late  in  life,  and
there  is  no  definite  record  of  the  inclusive  memory  which  such
a  third  self  should  imply.  A  far  more  striking  instance  of
the  restoration  of  the  normal  personality  by  the  synthesis  of
two  dissociated  states  is  to  be  found  in  the  history  of  Miss
Beauchamp.2  Dr.  Prince  has  shown  that  by  a  synthesis  of
B  I  and  B  IV  the  original  Miss  Beauchamp  was  reconstructed.
B I  was  the  original  self  curtailed  by  the  dissociation  of  a
portion  of  consciousness  which  six  years  afterwards  reappeared
as  another  personality,  B  IV.  B  I's  memory  was  continuous
for  her  whole  waking  life  up  to  the  appearance  of  B  IV.
B  IV's  memory  was  continuous  and  coextensive  with  B  I's  up
to  the  time  of  the  dissociation,  but  B  IV  had  no  knowledge
of  the  six  years  of  B  I's  existence.  When  B I  and  B  IV
began  to  alternate,  there  was  reciprocal  amnesia.  When  the
real  Miss  Beauchamp  was  reconstructed  she  had  memory  for
the  whole  lives  of  B  I  and  B  IV.  She  was  a  third  self  formed
by  the  synthesis  of  two  dissociated  states,  each  of  which  was
a  portion  of  the  original  self  (see  diagrams  on  Plate  I,  p.  284).

The  kind  of  disintegration  of  personality  which  leads  to
the  formation  of  two  curtailed  selves  may  in  rare  instances
be  carried  much  farther,  and  instead  of  two  selves,  either  of
which  might  be  mistaken  for  a  more  or  less  normal  self — so
many  of  the  characteristics  of  selfhood  do  they  retain — we  may
get  a  large  number  of  incomplete  selves,  some  of  which  are  so
abortive  as  hardly  to  warrant  the  designation  of  selves  at  all.
The  multiple  personalities  of  Louis  V.3  and  of  Mary  Barnes 4
seem  to  belong  to  this  category.  But  however  many  of  these
personalities  appear  in  any  particular  case,  so  long  as  they  are
but  split-off  fragments  of  the  original  self,  restoration  of  the
normal  personality  by  a  reintegration  and  synthesis  of  all  the
parts  is  always  hypothetically  possible.

We  have  thus  constructed  a  series  of  dissociations  of  con-
sciousness, ranging  from  the  split-off  ideas  of  hysterical  som-
nambulisms to  the  most  extreme  forms  of  multiple  personality,

:See  Myers,  Human  Personality,  Vol.  I.,  p.  336.

2  Morton  Prince,  The  Dissociation  of  a  Personality  (New  York,  1906).

3  See  Myers,  Human  Personality,  Vol.  I.,  p.  338.

4  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XVIII.,  p.  352.


268


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


and  we  have  found  the  mechanism  of  dissociation  and  the
resulting  phenomena  to  be  of  the  same  general  type  throughout
the  whole  of  the  series.  A  portion  of  the  self  becomes  split  off
and  excluded  from  the  experience  of  the  remaining  consciousness.
The  split-off  portion  remains,  for  the  most  part,  latent ;  but
when  by  any  means  it  is  aroused,  it  displays  extremely  inde-
pendent functioning.  When  it  is  sufficiently  unified  to  be
able  to  take  possession  of  the  bodily  organism  it  manifests  as
a  somnambulism,  a  fugue,  or  a  secondary  personality ;  it
alternates  with  the  normal  consciousness,  or  rather  with  what
is  left  of  the  normal  consciousness  ;  the  experience  of  the
two  states  is  discontinuous,  and  their  memories  are  mutually
exclusive.  Have  we  then  exhausted  the  possibilities  of  dissocia-
tions of  consciousness  ?  Can  we  find  a  place  in  this  series  for
every  form  of  multiple  personality  ?

In  speaking  of  the  Beauchamp  case  I  said  that  the  real
Miss  Beauchamp  was  reconstructed  by  the  synthesis  of  B  I  and
B  IV.  But  what  about  Sally  1  There  is  hardly  a  vestige  of
Sally  in  the  restored  Miss  Beauchamp.  When  the  real  Miss
Beauchamp  was  found,  Sally  went,  as  she  herself  said,  back
to  where  she  came  from,  and  it  is  there  that  we  must  look
for  her,  if  we  can  find  out  where  it  is.

I  have  said  nothing  of  the  differences  of  character  which
the  various  selves  of  multiple  personalities  may  present,  and
we  may  disregard  the  character  of  Sally  and  confine  our  attention
to  one  special  feature  in  which  she  differs  from  all  the  other
cases  referred  to  so  far.  This  feature  is  that  Sally  not  only
alternated  with  B  I  and  B  IV,  but  also  existed  as  a  co-conscious
personality  when  B  I  or  B  IV  was  present  as  an  alternating  per-
sonality. Thus  when  B  I  was  present  as  an  alternating  person-
ality, Sally  co-consciously  knew  B  Fs  experiences — her  feelings,
thoughts,  and  actions — and  knew  them  as  belonging  to  B  I.
But  she  also  claimed  to  have  at  the  same  time  concomitant
experiences  of  her  own.  And  when  she  appeared  as  an  alter-
nating personality,  she  remembered  not  only  B  I's  experiences
but  also  her  own  co-conscious  experiences.  She  claimed  to
exist  continuously  as  an  independent  personality  throughout  all
the  various  phases  of  Miss  Beauchamp's  life.  A  consciousness
like  this  seems  something  quite  different  from  any  of  the  forms
of  multiple  personality  we  have  examined,  and  if  we  find  other


LXVI.]


Some  Types  of  Multiple  Personality.


269


examples  of  a  similar  kind  we  must  conclude  that  we  have
here  a  new  type  of  secondary  self  which  cannot  be  fitted
into  the  series  of  dissociations  which  we  have  constructed.

The  simplest  examples  of  two  separate  streams  of  thought
coexisting  in  the  same  individual  are  to  be  found  in  certain
hypnotic  experiments.  The  only  satisfactory  explanation  of  the
fulfilment  of  a  post-hypnotic  suggestion  at  a  time  that  the
waking  consciousness  is  fully  occupied  with  other  matters  is
to  suppose  that  some  sort  of  co-conscious  intelligence  is  at  the
same  time  attending  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  suggestion.  When
the  performance  of  the  suggested  act  necessitates  some  definite
mental  process,  such  as  making  an  elaborate  calculation,  the
evidence  for  the  existence  of  two  simultaneously  acting  streams
of  thought  is  still  better.  Although  we  are  not  bound  to
suppose  that  when  waking  life  is  resumed  the  hypnotic  con-
sciousness ordinarily  persists  as  anything  worthy  of  being
called  a  second  self,  yet  the  phenomena  observable  in  trained
hypnotic  subjects  do  point  to  something  of  this  kind  in  these
cases.  Indeed,  it  can  be  shown  that  a  true  secondary  personality
which  is  demonstrably  co-conscious  with  the  waking  self,  may
be  artificially  produced  or  may  develop  spontaneously  during
hypnosis.  A  good  example  of  this  may  be  found  in  Janet's
account  of  his  experiments  with  his  subject  Lucie,  but  perhaps
the  best  instances  on  record  are  the  Leontine  and  Leonore
personalities  which  he  discovered  on  hypnotizing  Leonie  (Madame
B.).1  In  Janet's  description  of  the  origin  of  Adrienne  (Lucie  3)
we  see  the  very  beginning  of  such  a  personality  taking  form
under  the  hands  of  the  experimenter.  In  Leontine  and  Leonore
he  seemed  to  encounter  two  personalities  already  fully  formed,
each  having  definite  characteristics  and  in  some  respects  differ-
ent memories.  Leonie  knew  nothing  of  Leontine  or  of  Leonore.
Leontine  was  co-conscious  with  Leonie  and  knew  her  life,  but
did  not  know  Leonore.  Leonore  was  co-conscious  with  and
knew  the  lives  of  both  Leonie  and  Leontine  (see  diagrams  on
Plate  II,  p.  285).

I  have  been  able  on  several  occasions  to  obtain  similar
stages  of  memory  in  suitable  hypnotic  subjects,  but  only  very
rarely  have  the  different  stages  displayed  any  distinct  differ-
ences in  character.  My  experience  is  that  if  the  experimenter
'See  Myers,  Human  Personality,  Vol.  I.,  pp.  322-330.


270


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


maintains  the  same  attitude  towards  the  subject  in  each  stage,
if  he  speaks  in  the  same  tone  and  about  the  same  topics,
the  stages  do  not  in  respect  of  character  show  any  distinguishing
peculiarities.  But  if  the  experimenter  adopts  a  more  familiar
or  frivolous  attitude  towards  one  stage,  and  a  more  reserved  or
serious  attitude  towards  another,  the  change  of  attitude  in  the
experimenter  is  responded  to  by  the  subject,  and  each  stage
when  it  is  subsequently  induced  exhibits  respectively  the  levity
or  seriousness  which  was  indirectly  suggested  by  the  experi-
menter on  their  first  appearance.  And  although  the  characters
of  Leontine  and  Leonore  seemed  to  exist  ready  made  when
Janet  first  discovered  them,  it  must  be  remembered  that  Leonie
had  frequently  been  hypnotized  by  different  physicians  many
years  before  she  came  under  Janet's  observation.  It  seems
probable  that  the  differences  of  character  exhibited  in  the  three
states,  although  no  doubt  expressions  of  tendencies  potential  in
Leonie's  original  nature,  may  have  had  in  their  development
some  outside  encouragement  of  the  kind  I  have  suggested.

Nevertheless,  we  do  sometimes  find  secondary  personalities  of
this  kind  which  seem  to  exist,  in  an  incipient  form  at  least,  where
no  possibility  of  their  artificial  origin  can  be  entertained.  In  my
own  case  of  Milly  P.  (see  below,  pp.  286  et  seq.)  the  patient
had  not  been  previously  hypnotized  by  any  one,  yet  I  seemed
to  discover  a  hypnotic  personality,  claiming  to  be  co-conscious,
whose  character  differed  in  some  respects  from  that  of  the
waking  personality.  But  I  confess  that  the  extraordinary
rapidity  with  which  Amelia  developed  self-consciousness  and
initiative  after  I  had  given  her  a  name,  tends  to  make  me
suspect  the  genuineness  of  the  spontaneous  formation  of  any
co-conscious  personality  that  may  appear  in  the  course  of
hypnotic  experiment  or  treatment.

There  are,  however,  several  recorded  cases  which  seem  to
indicate  that  a  co-conscious  personality  may  arise  spontaneously,
or  that  it  may  develop  from  some  split-off  fragment  of  con-
sciousness acting  as  a  nucleus  around  which  subconscious
experiences  during  normal  life,  or  experiences  during  spontaneous
states  of  mental  dissociation,  may  accrete.  The  most  notorious
example  of  this  kind  is  the  B  III  personality  (Sally)  of  the
Beauchamp  case.

Whatever  our  final  view  of  Sally's  personality may  be,  we


lxvi.]  Some  Types  of  Multiple  Personality.


271


must  not  minimize  or  forget  the  resemblances  between  Sally
and  the  other  co-conscious  personalities  already  referred  to.
One  feature  in  particular  which  is  common  to  them  all  is  that
it  seems  unnecessary  for  them  to  be  synthesized  with  the
waking  consciousness  in  order  to  form  a  "  normal  "  personality.
These  co-conscious  states  do  not  as  a  rule  seem  ever  to  have
participated  in  the  structure  of  the  waking  self,  and  no  synthesis
of  them  with  the  waking  self  is  necessary  in  the  interests  of
mental  health.  This  is  certainly  true  of  the  co-conscious  per-
sonalities developed  by  hypnotism.  And  even  if  the  nucleus
of  Sally  Beauchamp's  individuality  had  been  derived  from
split-off  elements  of  the  primary  personality,  her  growth  and
development  must  have  taken  place  in  the  subconscious.  So
that  as  a  fully  formed  personality  Sally  was  never  a  part  of
the  original  Miss  Beauchamp  in  the  same  sense  that  B  I  or  B  IV
was,  and  when  the  reconstruction  of  the  disintegrated  self
was  to  be  brought  about,  there  was  no  room  for  Sally  except
"  where  she  came  from."

Are  we  to  conceive  of  her  as  being  still  there  as  an  imprisoned
and  impotent  co-consciousness,  or  may  we  suppose  that  in  Miss
Beauchamp's  reconstruction  those  very  elements  from  which
Sally  evolved  have  become  reintegrated  in  the  complete  Miss
Beauchamp,  and  that  by  the  withdrawal  of  these  elements  from
the  subconscious,  Sally's  personality  has  become  for  the  time
being  totally  disintegrated  ?  There  is  not  much  evidence  in
Dr.  Prince's  book  that  anything  of  this  kind  took  place,  but
writing  at  a  later  date  he  says : 1  "In  Miss  Beauchamp  as  a
whole,  normal,  without  disintegration,  it  was  easy  to  recognize
all  three  dispositions  as  '  sides  of  her  character,'  though  each
was  kept  ordinarily  within  proper  bounds  by  the  correcting
influence  of  the  others.  It  was  only  necessary  to  put  her  in
an  environment  which  encouraged  one  or  the  other  side,  to
associate  her  with  people  who  strongly  suggested  one  or  the
other  of  her  own  characteristics,  whether  religious,  social,
pleasure-loving,  or  intellectual,  to  see  the  characteristics  of  B  I,
Sally,  or  B  IV  stand  out  in  relief  as  the  predominant  personality."

It  is  hard  to  say  just  how  much  or  how  little,  if  any,  of  the
original  self  may  be  necessary  to  form  a  nucleus  around  which
a  co-conscious  personality  may  grow,  or  what  kind  and  extent
1  Journal  of  Abnormal  Psychology,  Vol.  III.,  No.  4,  p.  2S7.


272  T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.J).  [part

of  dissociation  may  be  sufficient  to  afford  the  requisite  mental
material.  Every  normal  self  is  an  ideal  construction,  and  in
its  formation  much  has  to  be  cast  aside  as  being  useless  or
unsuitable.  A  secondary  self  that  arises  as  a  parasitic  growth
around  a  nucleus  of  cast-off  mental  dispositions  may  be  more
excellent  in  some  respects  than  the  primary  self.  Yet  it  may
be  not  only  unsuited  for  the  practical  purposes  of  life,  but
even  positively  detrimental  to  their  realization.  It  may,  indeed,
be  so  incompatible  with  the  practical  self  which  has  to  adjust
itself  to  its  environment  at  all  costs,  that  any  real  synthesis
of  the  two  selves  is  impossible.  We  need  not  be  surprised
that  in  the  reconstruction  of  the  real  Miss  Beauchamp  there
was  no  room  for  Sally.  Sally  may,  indeed,  appear  to  be  a
stronger  and  more  interesting  personality  than  either  B  I  or
B  IV,  but  her  status  is  different.  She  is  no  integral  part
of  the  Miss  Beauchamp  who,  for  years  before  the  final
disintegrating  shock,  had  been  endeavouring  to  construct  a
self  that  would  be  best  suited  to  the  practical  purposes  of
life.  She  represents  rather  a  phase  of  Miss  Beauchamp's  nature
that  had  long  been  subject  to  repression  as  being  incompatible
with  the  system  of  purposes  on  which  the  construction  of  her
true  self  essentially  depended.

In  tracing  the  development  of  co-conscious  processes  from
the  doubling  of  the  stream  of  thought  in  hypnotic  experiments
up  to  the  co-conscious  life  of  such  a  personality  as  Sally
Beauchamp,  we  seem  to  have  constructed  another  series  of
dissociations  whose  differentia  is  this  very  fact  of  co-conscious
activity.  I  do  not  wish  to  suggest  that  in  practice  we  can
draw  a  sharp  line  between  these  two  kinds  of  dissociation  or
that  mixed  forms  may  not  be  met  with,  but  there  are  certain
features  peculiar  to  each  which  seem  to  justify  us  in  regarding
them  as  separate  types.  In  the  first  series  the  split-off  portions
of  the  self  seem  to  remain  latent  until  the  attack  or  alternation
occurs.  During  their  periods  of  latency  they  seem  cut  off
from  all  experience,  and  do  not  grow  or  develop  in  any  way.
There  is  a  division  of  the  self  without  any  true  doubling  of
consciousness.  In  the  second  series  the  dissociated  portion
of  consciousness  may  never  have  formed  a  part  of  the  waking
self,  and  consequently  cannot  properly  be  described  as  a  split-off
part  of  the  mind. When  it  is  not  in  evidence  as  an  alternating


lxvi.]  Some  Types  of  Multiple  Personality.  273

personality,  it  is  not  latent.  It  is  co-conscious,  and  may  have
experience  and  grow  and  develop  in  the  subconscious.  There
is  a  doubling  of  consciousness  without  any  true  division  of
the  normal  self.

A  co-consciousness,  whether  associated  with  hysteria  or  not,
usually,  if  not  always,  manifests  only  in  cases  that  have  been
subjected  to  hypnotic  or  other  artificial  procedures,  and  we
may  regard  it  as  being  essentially  of  the  same  nature  as
other  hypnotic  phenomena,  without  thereby  implying  that
these  procedures  have  produced  it.  Split-off  portions  of  the
self  may  indeed  sometimes  exhibit  proof  of  their  co-conscious
existence,  but  it  is  very  rare  to  have  any  manifestation  of
such  co-consciousness  unless  some  artificial  means  are  taken  to
elicit  it.  It  may  seem  unjustifiable  to  class  Sally  Beauchamp
with  ordinary  hypnotic  phenomena.  And  so  it  may  be,  for
Sally  has  been  a  puzzle  to  many  of  her  commentators.  But
one  cannot  help  feeling  that  if  B  I  had  never  been  hypnotized,
Sally  would  never  have  been  "  born."

Were  it  not  for  our  knowledge  of  the  possibility  of  the
coexistence  in  one  individual  of  two  independent  streams  of
thought  as  revealed  by  hypnotic  experiments,  we  might  be
inclined  to  think  that  the  claim  of  a  secondary  personality  to
continuous  co-conscious  activity  is  an  illusion.  But  when  we
survey  all  the  evidence  for  the  existence  of  co-conscious  states
there  seems  no  good  reason  why  we  should  deny  the  claim
of  such  a  personality  as  Sally  Beauchamp.  There  is,  however,
one  case  on  record  which  seems  greatly  to  increase  the  difficulty
of  forming  any  conception  of  the  relations  which  obtain  between
the  various  personalities  when  co-consciousness  is  claimed  by
one  or  more  of  them.  Dr.  Prince  has  published  the  autobio-
graphy of  a  personality  who  describes  with  great  fullness  and
care  her  own  origin  by  dissociation  from  an  originally  inte-
grated personality  C,  and  her  development  into  a  secondary
personality  B.  who  claimed  to  be  co-conscious  with  another
personality  A.,  formed  by  the  secession  of  B.  from  C.1  The
original  healthy  person  C.  broke  up  into  A.  and  B.,  who  alter-
nated one  with  another.  B.  claimed  to  be  co-conscious  when
A. was  present as an alternating personality,  but  A.  was

1"My  Life  as  a  Dissociated  Personality,"  Journal  of  Abnormal  Psychology,
Vol.  III.,  Nos.  4  and  5.


274  T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.  [part

latent  when  B.  was  present.  Consequently  A.  was  amnesic
for  B.,  but  B.  was  not  amnesic  for  A.  Under  Dr.  Prince's
treatment  the  original  C.  was  obtained  by  the  synthesis  of
A.  and  B.,  and  the  most  puzzling  feature  of  the  case  is  the
claim  of  B.  to  persist  as  a  co-consciousness  after  the  normal
C.  had  been  thus  reconstructed.  Dr.  Prince,  in  a  prefatory
note  to  B.'s  account  of  her  life,  after  referring  to  the  co-
consciousness  when  A.  was  present,  says :  "  The  writer,  B.,
claims  to  have  the  same  co-conscious  life  with  this  apparently
normal  stable  personality."  Now  it  is  very  difficult  to  under-
stand how  B.  could  participate  in  the  synthesis  by  which  C.
was  obtained,  and  at  the  same  time  persist  as  a  personality
distinct  from  and  co-conscious  with  the  personality  thus
reconstructed.

It  is  in  our  second  series,  I  think,  that  we  must  find  a
place  for  many  of  those  more  or  less  fully  formed  personalities
which  are  met  with  in  connexion  with  "  mediumship  "  and  are
usually  referred  to  as  "  trance  personalities."  It  is  true  that
trance  personalities  do  not,  as  a  rule,  alternate  with  the  waking
consciousness  to  the  extent  of  taking  possession  of  the  whole
bodily  organism,  and  in  many  instances  they  afford  no  definite
evidence  of  their  existence  as  co-conscious  activities.  Yet  in
so  far  as  their  origin  cannot  be  traced  to  any  large  splitting
off  or  secession  from  the  waking  self,  they  seem  to  conform
to  the  type  of  secondary  personality  whose  growth  and  develop-
ment take  place  entirely  in  the  subconscious.

I  have  assumed  that  the  evolution  of  these  personalities
must  be  dependent  on  subconscious  experiences  in  relation  to
the  ordinary  environment.  But  if,  as  some  people  think,  man
has  an  environment  which  transcends  sense,  it  may  be  that
this  environment  can  affect  the  subconscious  without  having
any  noticeable  influence  on  the  waking  self.  It  would  then
be  legitimate  to  suppose  that  experiences  related  to  such  an
environment  might  sometimes  take  part  in  the  formation  of
secondary  personalities.

It  would  be  out  of  place  here  to  enter  into  any  consideration
of  the  supernormal  phenomena  which  have  been  claimed  to
be  sometimes  associated  with  trance  or  other  dissociated  states.
These  are  commonly  lightly  dismissed  by  medical  men  as  being
merely  products  of  hysteria  and  mal-observation. But  even


LXVI.]  Some  Types  of  Multiple  Personality.  275

if  every  state  of  dissociation  be  labelled  hysterical,  we  gain
nothing  by  claiming  this,  and  we  lose  nothing  by  admitting  it.
If  there  is  any  transcendental  world,  and  if  it  is  possible  for
us  to  get  into  relation  with  it,  it  may  very  well  be  that  such
intercommunication  is  only  possible  during  states  of  mental
dissociation.  And  in  regard  to  supernormal  phenomena  it  does
not  matter  in  the  least  what  the  term  hysteria  may  connote.
The  supernormality  of  an  automatic  script  has  to  be  determined
by  other  considerations  than  the  psychological  state  of  the
automatist.  If  it  can  be  shown  that  any  hysteric  really  has
the  gift  of  clairvoyance  or  any  other  supernormal  power,  it
will  be  just  as  good  evidence  as  if  he  were  a  normal  person.
If  physical  objects  do  move  without  contact  in  the  presence
of  any  one  who  is  said  to  be  hysterical,  it  is  just  as  wonderful
as  if  they  so  move  in  the  presence  of  some  one  who  is  not.

In  all  these  conditions  which  we  have  examined  there  is  a
division  or  a  doubling  of  personality.  Normally,  we  know  all
our  thoughts,  our  feelings,  and  our  actions,  as  cohering  together
in  our  one  personal  consciousness,  but  in  cases  of  multiple
personality  the  self  may  become  divided  or  curtailed,  and  the
stream  of  consciousness  may  become  discontinuous  or  doubled
or  multiplied.  The  unity  of  the  self  is  broken,  the  parts
may  function  alternately  or  concomitantly,  and  one  part  may
not  know  the  other.

If  we  try  to  put  forward  any  hypothesis  that  will  be
explanatory  of  the  various  forms  of  multiple  personality,  we
are  immediately  confronted  by  a  problem  which  is  in  itself
so  difficult  of  solution  that  no  satisfactory  answer  to  it  has
yet  been  found.  In  order  to  explain  how  consciousness  can
be  split  into  two,  we  must  first  be  able  to  explain  how  it
ever  comes  to  be  one.  If  we  try  to  understand  how  a  dis-
sociation of  personality  can  occur,  we  must  first  understand
how  a  unitary  personality  ever  comes  into  existence.

There  are  two  main  views  as  to  what  constitutes  the  ground
or  basis  of  the  unity  of  consciousness.  All  who  accept  the
doctrine  of  psycho-physical  parallelism  or  any  other  monistic
view  of  mind  and  body  maintain  that  this  ground  must  be
sought  in  the  structural  and  functional  continuity  of  the  nervous
system. The whole neuronic substratum of mental  life  is


270


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


functionally  continuous,  and  the  unity  of  the  conscious  stream
which  is  correlated  with  its  activity  depends  upon  this  continuity.
If  the  total  aggregate  of  inter-related  neurones  becomes  func-
tionally discontinuous,  there  will  be  a  splitting  or  dissociation
of  consciousness.  As  happens  in  our  first  series  of  dissociations,
one  part  of  the  disaggregated  mass  of  neurones  may  continue
to  function  and  to  be  accompanied  by  a  stream  of  consciousness,
while  the  other  becomes  for  a  time  latent.  This  latent  portion
may  afterwards  become  functionally  active  while  the  other  becomes
latent.  Or,  as  in  Dr.  Prince's  case  of  B.  C.  A.  (if  we  can  trust
the  introspection  of  the  personality  B.),  both  portions  of  the  dis-
aggregated mass  may  continue  to  function  so  as  to  give  rise
to  two  coexisting  streams  of  consciousness  in  one  individual.
A  somewhat  similar  explanation  may  with  some  difficulty  be
given  of  the  co-conscious  streams  of  thought  manifested  in
hypnotic  experiments  and  by  hypnotic  personalities.  The
chief  difficulty  consists  in  providing  for  a  duplicating  of  neural
structures  corresponding  to  the  duplicating  of  the  content  of
the  mind  which  these  personalities  show.

The  other  main  view  of  the  unity  of  consciousness  is  that
it  must  have  as  its  ground  some  psychical  subject  or  being,
the  ego,  soul,  or  spirit,  which  alone  can  account  for  the
fusion  of  the  physical  manifold  of  experience  into  one  psychical
unitary  whole.  Those  who  adopt  this  dualistic  hypothesis  find
it  difficult  to  reconcile  cases  of  double  personality  with  that
view  of  the  soul  which  regards  it  as  being  in  itself  the  full
personality  independently  of  the  nervous  system.  If  we
ascribe  to  the  soul  only  the  forms  of  mental  activity,  and
to  the  nervous  system  the  content  of  the  mind,  we  may
suppose  that  in  the  cases  of  divided  personality  described  in
our  first  series  of  dissociations  the  soul  interacts  alternately
with  two  or  more  functionally  discontinuous  systems  of  neurones.
Or  we  may  suppose  that  when  the  split-off  part  functions  as
a  secondary  personality,  a  second  psychic  being  or  soul  enters
into  relation  with  this  portion  of  the  nervous  system,  while
the  original  soul  retains  its  relations  with  the  other  portion.
This  latter  supposition  seems  to  be  unnecessary,  for  if  these
phases  of  the  empirical  self  have  their  original  ground  of
unity  in  the  soul,  they  may  still  be  so  unified  during  their
phenomenally  separate  existence. However  diverse  or  opposed


lxvi.]  Some  Types  of  Multiple  Personality.  277


these  phases  may  appear  when  exhibiting  as  alternating  person-
alities, the  fact  that  they  have  formed  part  of  the  originally
unitary  self  seems  to  get  over  the  difficulty  of  regarding  them
as  manifestations  of  the  activity  of  one  and  the  same  soul.

But  if  such  diversity  of  character  and  of  conduct  as  may
occur  in  secondary  personalities  which  are  alternately  but  not
simultaneously  conscious  can  be  unified  in  one  and  the  same
psychical  subject  or  soul,  there  would  seem  to  be  no  need  to
postulate  any  second  soul  in  cases  of  secondary  personality
which  show  co-conscious  activity.  Yet  we  know  that  some
modern  defenders  of  the  soul  have  felt  bound  to  suggest  some-
thing of  this  kind  in  order  to  explain  the  occurrence  of  such
a  personality  as  Sally  Beauchamp.  Dr.  M'Dougall  thinks  that
the  facts  of  this  case  can  best  be  explained  "  by  assuming
that  a  normally  subordinate  psychic  being  obtains,  through
the  weakening  of  the  control  of  the  normally  dominant  soul,
an  opportunity  for  exercising  and  developing  its  potentialities
in  an  unusual  degree." 1

In  view  of  the  gradations  that  may  be  observed  between
the  simpler  forms  of  co-conscious  activity  and  fully  developed
co-conscious  personalities,  the  acceptance  of  this  hypothesis
is  only  compatible  with  belief  in  a  plurality  of  psychical
beings  or  souls  in  every  bodily  organism.  And  if  belief  in
a  plurality  of  psychical  existents  associated  with  one  bodily
organism  be  accepted  on  general  metaphysical  grounds,  we  must
apply  it  consistently  wherever  such  application  is  logically
demanded.  There  seem  no  good  grounds  for  Dr.  M'Dougall's
contention  that  "  abnormal  conditions  of  two  distinct  types
are  commonly  confused  together  under  the  head  of  co-conscious
or  subconscious  activity," 2  and  that  a  second  soul  or  psyche
is  necessary  in  the  one  type  and  not  in  the  other.  At  the
extremes  of  the  series  of  co-conscious  phenomena  the  conditions
do  indeed  seem  to  be  very  different,  but  it  is  impossible  to
say  at  what  point  secondary  psychical  beings  or  souls  must
be  assumed.

If  we  must  postulate  a  soul  as  the  necessary  ground  of
unity  of  the  normal  consciousness,  it  is  perhaps  more  probable
that  in  even  the  most  pronounced  cases  of  multiple  person-
ality there  is  some  underlying  unity,  rather  than  that  secondary

1  Body  and  Mind,  p.  368,  foot-note.  2 Ibid.,  p.  368.


278


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


personalities  are  manifestations  of  the  activity  of  secondary
and  independent  souls.  One  possible  ground  of  such  under-
lying unity  is  indeed  self-evident  in  the  fact  that  all  the
different  personalities  make  use  of  one  and  the  same  bodily
organism,  and  it  does  not  seem  impossible  to  believe  that
they  are  all  manifestations  of  one  and  the  same  psychical
organism.

This  possibility  will  seem  the  more  easily  conceivable  if
we  adopt  the  view  of  the  relation  between  mind  and  body  out-
lined by  M.  Bergson  in  his  philosophical  writings.  His
conception  of  "  pure  memory "  as  being  entirely  a  spiritual
manifestation  and  totally  unconnected  with  any  brain  traces,
has  the  same  practical  consequences  as  the  conception  of  the
soul  as  bearing  both  the  form  and  the  content  of  the  mind.
But  his  view  of  the  "bodily  memory,"  made  up  of  the  sum
of  the  sensori-motor  systems  organized  by  habit,  as  being  a
necessary  factor  in  the  reappearance  of  any  recollection  in
consciousness,  helps  us  to  understand  how  secondary  person-
alities, even  when  exhibiting  co-consciousness,  may  be  manifesta-
tions of  the  activity  of  a  single  soul.  On  this  view  the  soul
may  be  regarded  as  the  ground  of  the  unity  of  consciousness,
but  the  structural  and  functional  continuity  of  the  higher
nervous  system  is  a  necessary  factor  in  the  phenomenal
manifestation  of  this  unity.  Although  consciousness  may  not
have  its  true  ground  of  unity  in  the  functional  or  structural
continuity  of  the  nervous  system,  its  manifestation  as  a  unity  is
conditioned  by  such  continuity,  and  any  breach  of  continuity  in
the  nervous  system  will  lead  to  a  disruption  of  the  unity  of
the  personal  consciousness.  We  may,  therefore,  suppose  that
all  the  cases  included  in  our  first  series  of  dissociations  may
be  accounted  for  by  a  breach  in  the  functional  continuity  of
the  systems  of  neurones  through  which  the  soul  habitually
manifests.

Can  the  same  principles  be  applied  to  explain  cases  of
multiple  personality  of  the  co-conscious  or  hypnotic  type  ?
Can  these  be  accounted  for  by  any  disruption  of  the  systems
of  neurones,  whose  functioning  is  correlated  with  the  normal
waking  consciousness  ?  I  do  not  think  they  can.  Divisions
of  the  self  dependent  on  a  dissociation  of  neurones  do  not
know  each  other. They  manifest  as  personalities  alternately,


LXVI.]


Some  Types  of  Multiple  Personality.


279


and  the  one  does  not  remember  the  other.  But  in  person-
alities of  the  co-conscious  type — in  the  hypnotic  consciousness
and  in  hypnotic  personalities — one  of  the  phases  or  personalities
does  know  the  other.  It  may  know  it  as  part  of  itself,
or  it  may  know  it  as  something  so  different  from  itself  that
it  will  not  admit  any  identity  or  recognize  any  community
of  interest  with  it.

The  knowledge  of  the  primary  personality  by  the  secondary
seems  totally  opposed  to  the  view  that  these  personalities  are
produced  by  a  breach  in  the  continuity  of  the  systems  of
neurones  subserving  waking  consciousness.  To  say  that  such
knowledge  is  telepathically  acquired,  is  to  invoke  a  precision
and  fullness  of  thought-transference  of  which  we  have  no
experimental  evidence  and  to  which  all  the  evidence  we  have
is  directly  opposed.  A  co-conscious  personality's  experience,  in
so  far  as  it  is  experience  of  the  same  things  as  that  of  the
primary  personality,  must  be  obtained  through  the  same
sensory  channels  and  must  be  subserved  by  the  same  neuronic
systems.  In  so  far  as  the  co-conscious  experience  is  a  different
experience,  or  an  experience  of  different  things,  it  must  be  due
to  the  inclusion  in  the  functioning  aggregate  of  a  wider  system
of  neural  elements.  The  hypnotic  consciousness,  and  the  con-
sciousness of  hypnotic  personalities,  is  invariably  wider  and
more  inclusive  than  that  of  the  waking  person,  and  it  cannot
be  correlated  with  the  functioning  of  a  split-off  portion  or  of
a  curtailed  remnant  of  the  total  neural  substratum  of  con-
sciousness.

In  view  of  the  occurrence  of  co-conscious  personalities,  we
seem  bound  to  look  for  some  other  ground  of  the  felt  unity
of  consciousness  besides  the  spatial  continuity  of  a  nervous
system  through  which  a  unitary  soul  may  manifest.  Such  a
ground  may,  perhaps,  be  found  in  the  conception  of  a  psycho-
physical threshold  which  delimits,  though  it  does  not  con-
stitute, personality.  Fechner  introduced  the  conception  of  a
psycho-physical  threshold  in  order  to  account  for  the  dis-
continuity of  consciousness  in  nature  as  a  whole,  but  it  may
also  be  applied  to  the  discontinuity  which  is  sometimes  met
with  in  the  consciousness  associated  with  one  nervous  system.

If  we  adopt  Fechner's  symbolic  representation  of  a  human
consciousness  as  a  wave  with  its  crest  rising  over  a  certain


280


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


threshold  above  which  only  can  waking  consciousness  occur,1
we  may  regard  this  threshold  as  the  normal  threshold  deter-
mined in  the  course  of  evolution  by  its  being  that  at  which
consciousness  is  most  useful  for  life.  But  the  height  of  the
threshold  may  vary  under  different  circumstances.  If  it  is
considerably  raised,  the  activity  of  large  systems  of  neurones
ceases  to  have  any  conscious  accompaniment  of  which  the
individual  is  aware,  and  the  extent  of  the  field  of  con-
sciousness is  proportionately  curtailed.  A  permanently  raised
threshold  will  produce  a  curtailed  personality.  On  the  other
hand,  if  the  threshold  is  lowered,  we  get  an  expansion  of  the
normal  consciousness.  Neurone  aggregates,  whose  activity  is
not  intense  enough  to  manifest  in  waking  consciousness,  become
functionally  continuous  with  the  general  mass  of  neurones  now
functioning  at  a  lower  threshold  level.  This  low  threshold
activity  is  accompanied  by  a  form  of  consciousness  which  is
not  the  normal  waking  consciousness,  although  it  may  appear
to  be  like  it.  It  may  be  called  the  hypnotic  consciousness,
and  is  a  result  of  a  general  lowering  of  the  threshold.  Any
considerable  lowering  of  the  threshold  will  produce  hypnosis,
and  a  permanently  lowered  threshold  will  lead  to  the  formation
of  a  hypnotic  personality.

Now  it  would  seem  that  functional  activity  at  the  lower
level  may  go  on  concomitantly  with  activity  at  the  normal
threshold,  and  that  each  form  of  activity  may  be  accompanied
by  consciousness.  But  the  only  consciousness  of  which  there
is  awareness  in  the  waking  state  is  that  which  occurs  at  or
above  the  normal  threshold.  Yet  we  know  that  a  concomitant
awareness  at  a  lower  level  occurs  in  hypnotic  subjects  and  is
claimed  by  hypnotic  or  co-conscious  personalities.  This  secon-
dary consciousness  includes  all  that  belongs  to  the  primary
consciousness,  but  it  also  includes  much  of  which  the  primary
consciousness  knows  nothing.  And  so  extensive  may  the
additional  mental  material  be  that  it  may  greatly  modify  or
totally  alter  the  character  pertaining  to  the  primary  personality.
We  may  thus  have  two  coexisting  streams  of  consciousness
manifesting  as  two  distinct  personalities  through  one  bodily
organism.

It  seems  impossible  to  account  for  the  inclusive  knowledge

1  The  diagrams  given  below  are  constructed  on  the  basis  of  this  conception.


lxvl]  Some  Types  of  Multiple  Personality.  281

of  hypnotic  personalities  on  any  hypothesis  which  regards
them  as  being  split-off'  portions  of  the  waking  self.  This
knowledge  seems  more  consistent  with  the  view  that  these
personalities  are  expansions  rather  than  curtailments  of  the
waking  self.  The  form  that  the  expansion  takes  will  depend
on  the  nature  of  the  complexes  that  are  available  for  incor-
poration with  those  of  the  normal  personality  at  the  hypnotic
level,  for  these  complexes  may  dominate  the  whole  aggregate
of  complexes  thus  formed  and  stamp  the  resulting  personality
with  their  own  peculiarities.

On  this  view  co-conscious  personalities  would  be  due  to  a
doubling  of  the  threshold  at  which  consciousness  can  appear.
The  intensity  of  neural  activity  which  is  necessary  for  the
appearance  of  a  consciousness  is  not  sufficient  for  the  appear-
ance of  the  waking  consciousness.  The  threshold  of  waking-
consciousness  has  been  determined  and  fixed  by  natural
selection.  A  rise  in  the  organic  scale  is  accompanied,  and  to
some  extent  conditioned,  by'  a  rise  in  the  threshold  of  waking-
consciousness  ;  but  consciousness  which  is  not  immediately
useful  for  life  may  still  occur  at  the  older  and  lower
thresholds.  It  is  at  the  level  of  these  lower  thresholds  that
co-conscious  personalities  appear.

In  attempting  to  construct  two  series  of  separate  types  of
multiple  personality  I  described  in  each  series  a  form  of
dissociation  which  seemed  to  be  out  of  place  there.  Felida  X.,
although  in  one  of  her  states  she  had  knowledge  of  the  other
state,  was  ranged  along  with  those  splittings  of  the  self  which
show  reciprocal  amnesia.  And,  again,  among  co-conscious  per-
sonalities which  were  shown  to  be  not  due  to  splittings  of
the  self  I  placed  Dr.  Prince's  case  of  B.  C.  A.,  although  the  co-
conscious  personality  B.  describes  her  own  formation  as  being
due  to  a  splitting  off  of  the  B.  complex  from  the  original
whole  personality  C.  Both  of  these  cases  seem  to  be  mixed
types,  and  we  may,  perhaps,  regard  them  as  being  partly  the
result  of  dissociation  of  neurone  aggregates  and  partly  of
changes  of  psycho-physical  thresholds.

In  Felicia's  case  we  may  suppose  that  the  dissociation  was
brought  about  by  a  gradual  rise  of  the  threshold  of  con-
sciousness. As  the  threshold  rose,  groups  of  neurones  would
split  off,  one  after  another,  from  the  main  mass,  and  a  gradual


282


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


curtailment  of  the  personality  would  result.  When  the
threshold  fell  suddenly  to  the  normal  level,  the  dissociated
neurones  became  re-synthesized  and  the  normal  personality
reappeared.  This  normal  personality  had  no  amnesia  for  the
curtailed  self,  but  when  the  threshold  again  became  raised,
the  resulting  curtailed  self  had  amnesia  for  the  normal  per-
sonality. Now  it  is  instructive  to  compare  the  memory
relations  of  these  two  phases  with  what  occurs  in  hypnotic
personalities.  Here  also  the  consciousness  at  the  lower
threshold  has  no  amnesia  for  the  consciousness  at  the  higher
threshold,  while  that  at  the  higher  has  amnesia  for  that  at
the  lower.  In  cases  of  the  Felida  type,  the  normal  self  has
exactly  the  same  relation  to  the  curtailed  self  as  the  hypnotic
self  has  to  the  normal  self  in  other  cases  (see  diagrams  on
Plate  II).  In  fact,  the  normal  self  is  a  hypnotic  phase  of
the  curtailed  self;  it  is  a  self  resulting  from  a  lowering  of  the
threshold.  This  is  well  seen  in  some  other  cases  of  this  type.
When  Blanche  Wittmann,1  in  her  curtailed  phase,  was  hypnotized
by  Jules  Janet  she  became  her  normal  self.  And  this  normal
self — a  hypnotic  phase  of  the  curtailed  self — had,  like  all
hypnotic  phases  of  consciousness,  knowledge  of  the  self  that
had  been  hypnotized.  But  when  Blanche  was  "  awakened "
into  her  former  curtailed  phase  she  had  no  knowledge  of  her
normal  state,  just  as  a  person  awakened  from  deep  hypnosis
has  no  knowledge  of  the  events  of  the  hypnotic  state.  It  was
also  shown  that  the  normal  self  of  Blanche  persisted  as  a
co-consciousness  when  the  curtailed  self  was  present  as  an
alternating  personality.

It  would  seem  then  that  cases  of  the  Felida  type  ought
properly  to  be  included  in  our  second  series  of  dissociations.
A  co-conscious  personality,  as  a  rule,  is  a  hypnotic  self  which
knows,  but  is  not  known  by,  the  normal  self.  Here,  however,
we  have  a  normal  self  which  knows,  but  is  not  known  by,
a  curtailed  self.  But  in  each  case  we  have  two  selves  func-
tioning concomitantly  at  different  threshold  levels,  and  in  each
case  the  lower  knows  the  higher  and  the  higher  does  not
know  the  lower.

The  case  of  B.  C.  A.  was  included  in  the  second  series  of
dissociations because the personality B.  claimed to be  co-

1  See  Myers's  Human  Personality,  Vol.  I. ,  p.  447.


lxvi.]  Some  Types  of  Multiple  Personality.  283

conscious,  although  the  way  iu  which  the  two  personalities
are  said  to  have  been  formed  allies  this  case  to  those  of  the
B  I-B  IV  type  described  in  the  first  series.  In  the  Beauchamp
case  B  I  and  B  IV  had  amnesia  for  each  other,  as  they  might
be  expected  to  have  if  they  resulted  from  a  splitting  of  two
systems  of  neurones,  but  B.  of  the  B.  C.  A.  case  had  no  amnesia
for  A.  and  claimed  co-consciousness.  We  can  only  suppose
that  here  in  addition  to  the  neurone  dissociation  there  was
also  some  dislocation  of  thresholds.  But  as  I  have  already
said,  it  is  difficult  to  bring  this  case  into  line  with  any  of
the  forms  of  multiple  personality  hitherto  recorded.

Although  these  two  types  of  multiple  personality  may  be
difficult  to  classify,  they  raise  no  new  problems  in  regard  to
the  ground  of  the  unity  of  consciousness  or  in  regard  to
the  hypotheses  that  may  be  put  forward  in  explanation  of
dissociation  of  various  kinds.  If  we  have  to  postulate  a  soul
as  the  ground  of  the  unity  of  any  consciousness,  we  must
postulate  a  soul  as  the  ground  of  the  unity  of  each  of  the
consciousnesses  met  with  in  personalities  of  the  co-conscious  or
hypnotic  type.  But  there  seems  no  reason  why  we  should  not
regard  one  and  the  same  soul  as  the  effective  ground  in  each  and
all  of  the  phases  of  consciousness  occurring  in  one  individual.

The  personality  formed  at  the  lowest  threshold  is  the  most
inclusive  and  has  the  fullest  content.  The  soul  as  bearing  this
content  can  project  the  "  pure "  memories  of  this  personality
into  consciousness  at  this  level  only,  because  only  here  are  the
appropriate  sensori-motor  memories  to  be  found.  The  waking
consciousness  cannot  know  these  pure  memories,  because  the
necessary  sensori-motor  memories  cannot  rise  above  the
normal  threshold.  The  soul  as  pure  memory  can  manifest
in  consciousness  only  when  it  finds  the  appropriate  sensori-
motor memories  ready  to  hand.  As  M.  Bergson  says,1  "  l'esprit
humain  presse  sans  cesse  avec  la  totalite  de  sa  memoire  contre
la  porte  cpie  le  corps  va  lui  entr'ouvrir,"  and  where  there  is
more  than  one  threshold,  there  is  more  than  one  door.

We  may,  therefore,  regard  the  unity  of  consciousness  re-
vealed on  introspection  as  being  conditioned  by  the  spatial
continuity  of  neural  elements  and  by  a  psycho-physical  thres-
hold  above  which only  is the  functional  activity  of  these

1  Bergson,  Matiere  et  Memoire,  p.  198.


284


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[PAKT


elements  effective  in  this  respect.  Multiple  personalities  of
the  simply  alternating  type  are  due  to  a  structural  or  func-
tional discontinuity  or  dissociation  of  neurone  systems.  Those
of  the  co-conscious  type  are  due  to  the  existence  of  different
threshold  levels  at  which  conscious  processes  may  arise.  One
unitary  soul  may  persist  behind  all  dissociations  of  conscious-
ness, but  it  will  be  unable  to  appear  as  a  unity,  and  its
manifestations  will  be  fragmentary  and  discordant.  Its  unity
will  be  masked  by  the  imperfections  of  its  instrument.


Explanation  of  the  Plates.

The  horizontal  straight  line  passing  continuously  through  the
diagrams  represents  the  level  of  the  normal  threshold  of  con-
sciousness in  each  case ;  the  shaded  part  below  this  line  represents
the  subliminal,  the  unshaded  part  above  represents  the  supra-
liminal.

In  the  case  of  the  alternating  types  shown  in  Plate  I,  different
parts  of  the  threshold  have  risen,  making  various  portions  of  the
self  subliminal  at  various  times,  and  so  leading  to  the  formation  of
alternating  personalities.

In  the  case  of  the  co-conscious  types  shown  in  Plate  II,  the
threshold  rises  or  falls  as  a  whole,  so  that  some  of  the  personalities
include  the  others.


Plate  I.

Alternating  Types.

(1)  Rou  :  a  case  of  simple  alternation.

(2)  Hanna  : immediately after the  accident  his consciousness  is

almost  completely  submerged;  later  the  "new  self"  and  the
"old  self"  alternate.

(3)  Miss  Beauchamp  :  BI  and  BIV  are  alternating  personalities,

the  synthesis  of  whom  forms  Miss  B.  Sally  is  a  co-conscious
personality,  analogous  to  those  represented  in  Plate  II.


To  face  p.  2S4.


To  face  p.  285.


lxvi.]  Some  Types  of  Multiple  Personality.  285

Plate  II.

Co-conscious  Types.

(1)  Madame  B.  :  below  the  threshold  of  the normal  personality,

Leonie,  are  the  two  thresholds  of  the  two  hypnotic  personalities,
Leontine  and  Leonore.

(2)  Felida  : Azam's  "secondary  state"  is really  the normal,  his

"  primary  state  "  being  the  constricted  hysterical  personality.

(3)  Ordinary  hypnosis  :  here  the  normal  threshold  is  lowered,  so

that  sensations  and  memories,  etc.,  which  are  ordinarily  sub-
liminal become  supraliminal.


286


T.  W.  Mitchell.  M.D.


[part


II.

A  STUDY  IX  HYSTERIA  AND  MULTIPLE  PERSONALITY,
WITH  REPORT  OF  A  CASE.

By  T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.

It  is  with  considerable  hesitation  that  I  venture  to  give  to  the
Society  some  account  of  a  case  of  hysteria  which  I  have  had
under  observation  for  the  past  ten  years.  The  facts  which
I  am  about  to  record  may  seem  to  have  little  bearing  on
Psychical  Research.  It  may  be  said  that  these  are  pathological
phenomena,  and  that  our  Society  is  not  concerned  with  disease.
To  this  I  would  answer  in  the  words  of  Mr.  Myers,  "  These
are  not  pathological  phenomena,  but  pathological  revelations  of
normal  phenomena,  which  is  a  very  different  thing.  The  gearing
of  the  hysteric's  inward  factory  is  disconnected ;  the  couplings
are  shifted  in  all  sorts  of  injurious  ways ;  some  of  the  wheels
are  standing  still,  and  some  are  whizzing  uselessly  round  and
round.  But  the  wheelwork  is  still  all  there ;  and  by  observing
the  various  hitches  and  stoppages  which  are  now  taking  place,
we  can  get  a  better  notion  of  the  way  the  power  is  applied
than  the  smoothly  working,  carefully-boxed  machinery  of  the
healthy  subject  is  likely  to  give  us." 1  If  Mr.  Myers's  defence
of  hysteria  as  a  fit  subject  of  study  for  our  Society  is  accepted,
I  need  make  no  apology  for  recording  this  case  here,  for  it
abounds  in  hitches  and  stoppages  in  the  working  of  the  mental
machinery  which  are  of  a  very  peculiar  character.

Amelia  Geraldine  P.  .  .  .  was  29  years  of  age  when  I  first
attended  her  professionally  in  1901.  She  is  unmarried,  and
lives  at  home  with  her  father  and  two  sisters. Her  father  is

1  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  200.


lxvl] A  Study  in  Hysteria  and  Multiple  Personality.  287


a  retired  tradesman,  and  she  has  had  an  education  suitable  to
her  station  in  life.  Her  family  history  is  good,  there  is  no
discoverable  neurotic  taint,  and  she  enjoyed  good  health  up  to
the  beginning  of  1901.  There  is  an  indefinite  history  of  some
slight  affection  of  a  choreic  nature  when  she  was  about  eleven
years  old.

On  Feb.  3rd,  1901,  a  very  cold  day,  whilst  out  walking,
she  was  suddenly  seized  with  a  paroxysm  of  coughing.  She
went  home,  and  as  the  cough  persisted,  I  was  sent  for.  I
found  her  temperature  just  over  100  F.  and  sent  her  to  bed.
The  cough  was  of  hysterical  type,  and  lasted  for  twenty-four
hours  with  very  little  intermission.

Two  days  afterwards,  the  patient  still  being  in  bed,  a
twitching  of  her  left  hand  was  observed.  I  was  called  in  as
soon  as  it  was  noticed,  and  I  found  the  movements  limited  to
a  rhythmic  extension  of  the  left  wrist.  This  soon  came  to  be
combined  with  supination  of  the  hand.  If  opposed,  the  move-
ments became  more  violent  and  irregular.  In  the  course  of
the  evening,  the  left  elbow  joint  was  included  in  the  movements,
and  next  day  the  whole  of  the  left  arm  was  affected.  The
temperature  ranged  from  99°  F.  to  101°  F.  The  movements
ceased  during  sleep.  The  deep  reflexes  were  much  exaggerated,
especially  on  the  left  side.  The  patient  was  dull  and  apathetic,
and  complained  of  pain  in  the  head.  On  Feb.  7th  the  left
arm  was  still  jerking  vigorously,  and  the  left  leg  became
affected  in  a  similar  manner.  The  leg  movements  began  with
rhythmic  contractions  of  the  muscles  which  produce  inversion
of  the  foot.  Next  day  the  whole  of  the  left  leg  was  included
in  the  movements,  and  the  arm  was  still  in  the  same  condition.
On  Feb.  10th  the  right  foot  began  to  be  affected  in  the  same
way  as  the  left  had  begun,  namely  by  rhythmic  inversion  of
the  foot,  aud  on  Feb.  11th  the  whole  of  the  ris;ht  le"  was
included  in  the  movements,  and  the  right  hand  had  begun
to  be  extended  at  the  wrist  aud  supinated.  On  Feb.  12th
the  whole  of  the  right  arm  was  affected,  while  the  movements
of  the  left  hand  had  somewhat  abated.  The  patient's  speech
became  affected  in  a  peculiar  manner.  There  was  ptosis  and
photophobia  of  the  left  eye.  Pain  in  the  head  was  severe.
The  temperature  was  100*6°  F.

The  speech  defect  was  not  investigated  at  this  time  as  the


288


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


patient  was  too  ill,  but  the  general  impression  it  gave  was
that  there  was  a  great  preponderance  of  sibilants.  She  seemed
to  have  no  difficulty  in  saying  what  she  wanted  to  say,  but
merely  a  faulty  pronunciation,  such  as  "  ses  "  for  "  yes,"  "  sad  "
for  "  bad,"  and  so  on.

From  this  date,  Feb.  12th,  1901,  the  movements  began  to
abate,  and  in  their  disappearance  they  followed  the  exact
order  in  which  they  had  come  on.  First  the  left  hand  and
arm  became  quiescent,  then  the  left  foot  and  leg,  then  the
right  foot  and  leg,  and  lastly  the  right  hand  and  arm.  The
pain  in  the  head  got  better  and  the  temperature  went  down.
By  March  5th,  1901,  all  the  movements  had  ceased.  The
deep  reflexes  were  still  exaggerated,  and  testing  them  tended
to  produce  a  temporary  return  of  the  contractions.

There  was  now  found  to  be  complete  anaesthesia  with  loss
of  muscular  sense  of  the  whole  of  the  right  arm  with  the
exception  of  the  thumb  and  index  finger.  This  had  been
preceded  for  some  time  by  a  loss  of  accuracy  in  localising
impressions.  Some  time  later  it  was  discovered  that  the  whole
of  the  right  half  of  the  body  had  become  totally  anaesthetic
and  analgesic  with  the  exception  of  the  thumb  and  index
finger.  There  was  paresis,  more  or  less  pronounced,  of  all  the
limbs,  and  for  many  weeks  there  was  almost  total  inability  to
walk.  The  left  arm  and  leg  were  at  first  more  paralysed  than
the  right,  but  they  recovered  more  quickly.  There  was  very
marked  concentric  reduction  of  both  visual  fields.

At  various  times  during  her  convalescence  there  was  some
recurrence  of  the  muscular  spasms,  but  as  time  went  on,  the
rhythm  of  the  movements  became  quicker  and  their  extent
more  restricted,  so  that  they  had  in  the  end  rather  the  character
of  a  coarse  tremor  than  of  clonic  contractions.  Sometimes  they
lasted  for  days  in  one  limb  without  any  intermission  except
during  sleep.  All  her  limbs  were  affected  in  this  way  at  some
period  of  her  convalescence,  but  in  no  definite  order.  At
various  times  there  was  a  return  of  coarser  movements  of  the
limbs,  but  they  had  to  a  great  extent  lost  their  rhythmic
character  and  were  of  a  more  choreic  type.  The  left  arm
and  shoulder  were  affected  for  a  long  time  in  this  way,  but
by  July  20th,  1901,  both  the  choreic  movements  and  the
coarse  tremor  had  quite  disappeared. There  was,  however,  still


lxvl] A  Study  in  Hysteria  and  Multiple  Personality.  289

great  loss  of  power  in  the  limbs.  In  the  beginning  of  August
I  sent  her  to  Folkestone  for  a  change.  At  the  end  of  a
fortnight  she  returned  very  much  improved  in  every  way.
She  afterwards  made  a  more  or  less  uninterrupted  recovery,
and  in  the  course  of  some  months  became  practically  well.
By  the  end  of  July,  1902,  the  only  trace  of  her  illness  was
a  total  hemianalgesia  of  the  right  side  of  the  body  with  the
exception  of  the  thumb  and  index  finger.  This  condition  seemed
to  cause  no  inconvenience  whatsoever,  and  it  remained  unaltered
until  Nov.  9th,  1906,  when  it  suddenly  completely  disappeared.

The  patient's  condition  with  regard  to  motor  power,  sensation,
kinaesthesis,  and  the  reception  and  production  of  spoken  and
written  language  was  tested  many  times  during  the  course  of
her  illness.  I  will  only  refer  to  some  of  the  most  striking
peculiarities  observed  in  regard  to  kinaesthesis  and  speech.

It  must  be  remembered  that  the  index  finger  and  thumb
of  the  right  hand  were  at  no  period  of  her  illness  involved
in  the  hemianaesthesia  which  for  so  long  affected  her,  nor  was
she  ever  deprived  of  the  knowledge  to  be  gained  by  kinaesthetic
impressions  from  these  two  members,  even  when  the  loss  of
muscular  sense  was  complete  in  the  rest  of  the  arm.  If  passive
movements  of  the  right  arm  were  made,  the  patient  being  blind-
folded, she  had  no  knowledge  of  the  position  of  the  limb,  except
when  the  forefinger  and  thumb  came  in  contact  with  something
that  she  recognised,  such  as  her  dress  or  her  hair.  When  she
was  blindfolded,  active  movements  of  the  right  arm  were  very
imperfectly  performed.  If  asked  to  raise  her  hand  on  to  her
knees  she  felt  with  her  forefinger  and  thumb  as  she  slowly
slid  her  hand  along  her  dress.  When  the  arm  was  kept  away
from  her  side  she  was  unable  to  perform  the  action,  but  she
kept  moving  the  forefinger  and  thumb  as  if  trying  to  come  in
contact  with  something  that  she  might  recognise.

One  day  in  July,  1901,  she  was  lying  on  a  sofa  when  I
called  to  see  her.  I  asked  her  which  leg  she  could  move  best.
Her  answer  was,  "  The  right  one,  if  I  can  see  it."  I  asked  her
to  bend  the  leg  at  the  knee  without  looking  at  it.  She  said
she  could  not,  but  on  being  urged  to  try  she  made  the  limb
move  slightly,  and  the  foot  slipped  off  the  sofa  on  to  the  floor.
On  asking  her  where  her  foot  was  now,  she  said  she  did  not
know. I  told  her  to  look. She  did  so,  and  said  it  had  slipped


290


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


down.  "  Now,"  I  said,  "  lift  it  up  and  lay  it  beside  the  other
one."  In  order  to  do  so  she  sat  upright,  so  that  she  could  see
exactly  where  her  foot  was,  and  then  quite  easily  and  rapidly
she  replaced  it  on  the  sofa.

The  type  of  paralysis  here  disclosed  is  of  very  rare  occur-
rence, and  is  met  with  only,  I  think,  in  cases  of  most  profound
anaesthesia. Very  few  instances  of  the  kind  have  been  recorded.

The  earliest  indication  of  any  disturbance  of  speech  was  the
sibilant  lalling  which  came  on  at  the  end  of  the  first  week  of
her  illness.  On  analysing  at  a  later  date  the  defects  in  her
speech  production  it  was  found  that  all  the  vowels  were  given
their  proper  value  when  used  in  words.  If  the  vowels  were
pronounced  by  themselves  they  were  always  prefixed  by  a  y
sound,  thus,  ya,  ye,  yi,  yo.  Of  the  voiceless  oral  consonants  p
was  always  given  as  s,  and  the  voiceless  w  as  ?/.  Of  the  voiced
oral  consonants  w,  I,  and  r  were  always  pronounced  as  ■>/,  while
g  was  given  as  d  in  the  earlier  part  of  her  illness  and  later
as  g.  B  was  at  first  given  as  s,  but  later  as  b.  Of  the  voiced
nasal  resonants  n  was  the  only  sound  which  gave  any  trouble.
For  example,  she  always  referred  to  the  letter  in  as  "  am  m."
It  may  be  noticed  that  the  difficulties  were  confined  to  the
labials  and  the  linguo-palatals.

Although  for  more  than  a  year  her  speech  was  characterised
by  these  peculiarities,  her  sisters  assured  me  that  on  several
occasions  during  that  period  they  had  heard  her  saying  her
prayers  with  a  faultless  pronunciation.

When  the  acute  phase  of  her  illness  was  over  it  was  found
that  she  could  not  read.  She  could  still  write,  but  her  writing
reproduced  all  the  peculiarities  of  her  speech,  the  substitution
of  the  letters  y  and  s  for  other  letters  corresponding  to  the
substitution  of  these  sounds  in  her  spoken  language.  She  was
unable  to  read  what  she  wrote,  so  the  peculiarities  which
rendered  her  writing  rather  difficult  to  understand  were  not
noticed  by  her.  The  handwriting  was  good  when  the  tremor
and  paresis  of  the  right  arm  had  passed  off.  The  following  is
a  good  example  of  the  sort  of  letters  she  wrote  at  this  period  :

My  dea  Hayy

I  was  veyy  seaseg  to  hea  you  ayyieg  home  safey
You  will  be  sussised  to  hea  E .  .  .  yode  down  on  Sungay. 0  .  .  .


lxvi.] A  Study  in  Hysteria  and  Multiple  Personality.  291


&  I  went  to  meet  him  &  as  usuay  he  dave  us  a  yost  joyney  tooc

the  yond  tunind  &  came  though  . he  is  yoocind  vey  well  &

is  comind  adain  nex  Sattye  weec. Well  I  cant  yite  any  mo  e  I
am  tyied Love  f  om  everyone.
S.S. Do  you  yice  you  Sotos.

The  translation  is  :
My  dear  Harry,

I  was  very  pleased  to  hear  you  arrived  home
safely.  You  will  be  surprised  to  hear  E  .  .  .  rode  down  on  Sunday.
Ro . . .  and  I  went  to  meet  him  and  as  usual  he  gave  us  a  lost

journey — took  the  wrong  turning  and  came  through . He  is

looking  very  well  and  is  coming  again  next  Saturday  week.  Well
I  can't  write  any  more. I  am  tired. Love  from  everyone.
P.S. Do  you  like  your  photos.

It  may  be  seen  that  the  substitution  of  letters  is  very
similar  to  that  which  was  noticeable  in  her  speech.  There
are,  however,  some  differences.  The  only  constant  similarity
in  her  speech  and  writing  was  the  use  of  y  and  s  for  other
letters.  Yet  it  may  be  noticed  that  the  letter  r  is  sometimes
written  y  and  sometimes  omitted  altogether.  The  letter  I  is
generally  written  as  y,  but  in  short  words  like  "  well "  and
"  will "  it  is  often  written  correctly.  The  phrase  "  love  to  all "
is  in  some  of  her  letters  written  correctly,  in  others  as  "  yove
to  ayy."

In  writing  to  dictation  the  same  mistakes  were  made  as  in
spontaneous  writing.  Thus  the  phrase  "  Let  us  go  out  "  was
written  "  Yet  us  do  out."  She  could  not  do  transfer  copying —
that  is,  copying  from  printed  into  written  characters.  In  copy-
ing from  writing  she  copied  only  such  letters  as  she  recognised  ;
the  others  she  "  drew  "  very  badly.

For  many  months  she  was  almost  totally  word-blind  and  to
a  great  extent  letter-blind.  On  testing  her  with  large  printed
capitals  it  was  found  that  she  could  seldom  recognise  at  sight
the  letters  h,  c,  d,  c,  g,  Je,  I,  n,  p,  q,  r,  x,  y,  z.  D  was  always
called  y  without  any  hesitation,  while  g  was  not  recognised  at
all  or  was  mistaken  for  c.  K,  I,  and  r  were  always  called  y.
P  was  always  called  s.  S  was  recognised  and  named  correctly,
but  she  could  not  distinguish  it  from  p. She  had  the  same


292


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


difficulties  with  written  letters  as  with  printed  ones,  but  when
she  was  allowed  to  trace  over  the  written  letters  with  the
tip  of  her  index  finger  she  could  name  many  of  them  correctly.
This  held  good  of  all  the  letters  which  she  made  use  of  in
spontaneous  writing.

There  were,  however,  certain  letters  of  which  she  seemed
to  have  lost  all  knowledge.  For  many  months  the  letters  k,
I,  p,  and  t  were  not  recognised  by  sight,  by  sound,  or  by
kinaesthetic  impressions.  They  were  not  used  in  writing,  nor
were  their  sounds  used  in  speech.  One  day  after  much  trouble
I  taught  her  to  pronounce  the  letter  p,  and  the  curious  fact
was  observed  that  from  that  day  she  could  use  the  p  sound
in  speech,  could  read  the  letter  in  print  and  in  writing,  and
could  use  it  in  writing  spontaneously  or  from  dictation.

She  could  name  the  numerals  correctly  up  to  20,  after  which
she  said  30,  40,  50,  etc.  She  could  also  write  them,  but  was
unable  to  read  them  after  she  had  written.  Even  when  allowed
to  trace  over  the  figures  with  her  forefinger,  she  rarely  was
able  to  name  them  correctly.  In  consequence  of  her  difficulty
in  reading  figures  she  was  incapable  of  doing  the  simplest
addition  sums  on  paper.  Yet  she  was  still  good  at  mental
arithmetic.  She  was  especially  quick  at  the  multiplication
table,  and  never  made  a  mistake.

The  word-blindness  was  almost  total  for  some  months,  but
she  was  able  to  read  with  understanding  long  before  she  could
recognise  all  the  letters.  Her  power  of  reading,  like  her
recognition  of  letters,  came  back  gradually,  and  so  far  as  could
be  judged,  re-education  had  little  to  do  with  her  recovery,
although  she  had  lessons  every  day.  This  was  especially
noticeable  with  regard  to  those  letters  which  she  had  most
completely  forgotten.  Prolonged  efforts  to  teach  her  to  recog-
nise the  letters  k,  r,  and  I,  having  resulted  in  complete  failure,
the  attempt  was  given  up.  Yet  in  the  course  of  time  these
letters  came  back  to  her.  One  day  she  discovered  she  could
recognise  k;  some  weeks  later  the  same  thing  was  observed
with  regard  to  I ;  and  in  the  end  she  once  more  knew  all
the  letters  of  the  alphabet.  The  most  striking  instance  of  a
good  result  from  trying  to  teach  her  was  the  effect  of  showing
her  how  to  pronounce  the  letter  p,  or  rather  the  p  sound  in
words. Why  regaining  the  power  to  produce  the  sound  should


lxvi.] A  Study  in  Hysteria  and  Multiple  Personality.  293


have  enabled  her  to  recognise  the  letter  may  be  difficult  to
explain,  but  there  is  no  doubt  as  to  the  fact  that  the  one
followed  the  other  almost  immediately.

Since  we  may  get  word-blindness  without  letter-blindness,
and  letter-blindness  without  word-blindness,  it  is  probable  that
her  recovery  of  the  power  of  reading  words  was  not  dependent
on  her  recovery  of  the  power  of  recognising  letters ;  but
it  was  observed  that  improvement  in  both  respects  took  place
at  about  the  same  rate.  The  same  holds  good  in  regard  to
her  speech,  and  the  recovery  of  ability  to  recognise  a  letter
was  generally  accompanied  by  the  reinstatement  of  its  sound
in  her  speech.  Whether  one  invariably  preceded  the  other,
and  if  so  which  returned  first,  I  cannot  say,  as  by  the  time
such  recovery  took  place  her  general  health  had  so  much
improved  that  I  had  stopped  seeing  her  regularly.  Eighteen
months  after  the  onset  of  her  illness  she  had  quite  recovered
in  every  respect,  with  the  exception  of  right  hemianalgesia,
which  persisted  for  nearly  six  years.

During  the  whole  course  of  this  illness  of  eighteen  months,
and  after  recovery  had  taken  place,  the  interpretation  of  the
case  was  exceedingly  difficult.  The  symptoms  pointed  to  serious
organic  disturbance  of  the  brain,  combined,  however,  with  a
large  functional  element  whose  extent  it  was  impossible  to  de-
termine. The  acute  condition  at  the  beginning  corresponded
to  no  known  affection,  and  the  long  duration  of  the  word-
blindness  was  opposed  to  the  view  that  it  was  of  a  purely
functional  nature.  Yet  it  was  almost  impossible  to  understand
how  the  various  peculiarities  of  the  case  could  be  accounted
for  by  any  definite  organic  lesion.  The  fact  that  the  patient
could  write,  although  she  could  not  read,  except  by  kinaesthetic
impressions,  showed  that  her  word-blindness  conformed  to  the
type  of  "  pure "  word-blindness  first  described  by  Dejerine  in
1892,  but  with  regard  to  certain  letters  of  the  alphabet  there
was  not  only  "  blindness "  but  agraphia.

Except  for  the  hemianalgesia,  which  caused  her  no  incon-
venience, the  patient  remained  very  well  until  December,  1904.
On  Dec.  3rd  I  was  called  to  see  her  on  account  of  a  twitching
of  the  mouth  which  had  been  present  for  a  few  days.  I  found
her  lying  on  a  sofa  asleep. Her  face  was  in  repose  until  she


294


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[PART


awoke.  As  soon  as  she  awoke,  choreic  movements  of  the
mouth  began.  The  mouth  twitched  first  to  one  side,  then  to
the  other,  and  continued  to  do  so  without  ceasing.  Next  day,
while  the  movements  of  the  mouth  continued,  the  tongue
became  affected  in  a  similar  manner.  She  was  drowsy  and
disinclined  to  talk. The  temperature  was  101°  F.

On  Dec.  Sth  she  became  very  deaf,  especially  in  the  right
ear,  and  her  speech  became  affected  in  the  old  way.  Asked
to  spell  "  lazy,"  she  said  "  y,  a,  z,  y"  and  pronounced  it  "  yazy."
On  Dec.  19th  the  movements  of  the  mouth  suddenly  stopped,
but  the  tongue-movements  continued.  On  Dec.  20th  severe
headache  came  on  suddenly.  Complaint  of  headache  continued
for  a  month.  On  Dec.  22nd  the  tongue-movements  stopped.
On  this  date  I  found  that  the  right  leg  was  paralysed.  She
was  also  anaesthetic  and  analgesic  on  the  right  half  of  the
body.  She  was  apparently  very  deaf,  and  did  not  understand
what  was  said  to  her  unless  it  was  shouted  into  her  left  ear.
Yet  I  sometimes  got  her  to  answer  questions  spoken  in  a  low
voice  close  to  her  right  ear,  and  on  several  occasions  she  seemed
to  know  what  I  was  saying  to  her  sisters.  At  all  events  she
frequently  made  remarks  very  relevant  to  what  we  were  talking
about.  Her  sister  told  me  that  the  patient  had  written  some
letters,  and  that  her  writing  showed  all  the  peculiarities  which
characterised  it  during  her  former  illness.  On  Jan.  19th,  1905,
rhythmic  movements  of  the  right  hand,  like  those  which
occurred  at  the  beginning  of  her  former  illness,  began.  They
lasted  for  eight  days  and  then  suddenly  stopped.  She  became
duller  and  less  inclined  to  talk,  and  still  complained  of  headache,
earache,  and  deafness.

Her  condition  remained  more  or  less  unaltered  for  many
weeks.  Some  of  her  symptoms  passed  off  and  new  ones  took
their  place.  The  following  note  was  written  by  me  on  March
25th,  1905  :

Some  days  ago  the  paralysis  of  the  right  leg  suddenly  passed
away.  She  said  she  heard  a  voice  within  her  saying,  "You  can
walk."  She  immediately  got  out  of  bed  and  walked  without  difficulty.
There  has  been  a  serous  discharge  from  the  left  ear  for  about  a
week,  and  now  hearing  in  this  ear  is  very  much  better.  The  right
ear  is  still  very  deaf.  For  three  months  the  middle,  ring,  and  little
fingers  of  the  right  hand  have  been  closed  in  contracture  on  the


lxvi.] A  Study  in  Hysteria  and  Multiple  Personality.  295


palm.  It  was  found  necessary  to  place  a  pad  of  cotton  wool  in
the  palm  to  prevent  the  finger  nails  from  cutting  into  the  flesh.
By  using  some  force  I  can  open  the  hand,  but  she  complains  that
doing  so  hurts  her.  She  can  open  the  fingers  quite  easily  by
using  the  other  hand  to  force  them  open.  She  really  uses  no  force
at  all,  but  the  fingers  open  at  once  when  she  uses  the  other  hand
to  open  them.

She  is  now  totally  word-blind  and  letter-blind  except  for  the  letter  o.
She  seems  to  have  lost  all  knowledge  of  written  and  printed  words.
She  cannot  remember  that  she  has  ever  known  anything  about
them.  She  is  absolutely  agraphic  and  cannot  even  write  her  own
name.  She  cannot  read  any  words  or  letters  by  kinaesthetic  im-
pressions. Speech  is  very  imperfect.  There  is  lalling  on  many
consonants.  There  does  not  seem  to  be  any  real  word-deafness,
although  there  seem  to  be  some  words  which  she  does  not  under-
stand. She  does  not  know  the  multiplication  table.  She  cannot
count  up  to  ten.  After  a  little  teaching  she  tries  to  do  so,  but
always  leaves  out  2  and  8.  She  does  not  recognise  any  written
figures.  Although  she  has  forgotten  the  multiplication  table,  she
has  a  good  memory  for  certain  money  tables  learnt  at  school.  She
never  makes  a  mistake  in  turning  pence  into  shillings.  I  ask  her
what  thirty-two  pence  make,  and  she  answers  immediately  "two
and  eight  pence."

Throughout  April,  May,  and  June,  1905,  her  condition  did
not  vary  much.  The  discharge  from  the  left  ear  became  tinged
with  blood.  The  left  eye  became  affected  in  the  same  way,
and  every  day  some  blood  oozed  from  the  lower  eyelid,  although
no  abrasion  or  solution  of  continuity  of  the  skin  or  mucous
membrane  could  be  detected.  This  condition  lasted  until  the
end  of  July,  1905.

In  the  beginning  of  July,  1905,  she  went  to  Folkestone  for
a  fortnight.  She  came  back  improved  in  health,  and  was  now
able  to  open  and  close  all  the  fingers  of  her  right  hand.  Her
eye  and  ear  still  bled  almost  every  morning,  and  she  com-
plained of  great  difficulty  in  seeing.  On  Aug.  16th  she
consulted  an  eye  specialist,  who  found  an  enormous  amount
of  hypermetropia  and  prescribed  Sph. +  3-75  glasses  for  both
eyes.  She  could  not  see  at  all  with  these  glasses,  but  on  the
other  hand  she  could  see  much  better  than  formerly  without
them. On  Aug.  19th,  the  day  before  she  got  her  glasses,  her


296


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.I).


[part


eye  did  not  bleed.  On  Aug.  20th  her  ear  did  not  bleed,  and
she  told  her  father  that  her  eye  and  her  ear  would  not  bleed
any  more.  She  had  frequently  made  such  announcements  with
regard  to  the  disappearance  of  other  symptoms,  and  on  this
as  on  former  occasions  her  prognostication  was  correct.  With
the  cessation  of  the  bleeding  from  the  ear,  the  deafness,  which
had  lasted  for  seven  months,  entirely  disappeared.

She  still  remained  totally  word-  and  letter-blind,  she  was
also  still  completely  agraphic,  and  she  lalled  in  her  speech
almost  as  badly  as  ever.  Yet  her  sisters  informed  me  that
they  had  occasionally  heard  her  pronounce  all  her  words  per-
fectly when  talking  to  children  or  strangers.

On  Oct.  28th,  1905,  the  total  agraphia  stopped,  and  she
wrote  me  a  letter  in  the  style  of  the  letters  she  used  to  write
during  her  illness  in  1901.  The  spelling  in  this  letter  corre-
sponded to  that  which  was  observed  in  the  latter  part  of  her
former  illness,  namely,  the  period  during  which  her  main
trouble  was  with  the  letters  h,  I,  r,  and  p.

On  Dec.  1st,  1905,  there  was  sudden  and  complete  recovery
of  sight,  speech,  and  ability  to  read  and  write  in  a  normal
manner.  The  hemianaesthesia  which  had  persisted  since  De-
cember, 1904,  disappeared,  but  the  hemianalgesia  remained.
I  now  stopped  seeing  her,  but  I  learnt  some  months  later  that
her  sight  became  troublesome  a«ain,  and  that  on  the  advice
of  a  friend  she  consulted  another  eye-specialist.  He  prescribed
Sph.  +  1  glasses,  and  with  these  she  was  able  to  see  much
better  than  with  her  former  ones.

On  Nov.  7th,  1906,  the  right  hemianalgesia  which  had
existed  uninterruptedly  since  June,  1901,  suddenly  and  com-
pletely disappeared.

During  the  course  of  this  second  illness,  which  lasted  from
the  beginning  of  December,  1904,  to  Dec.  1st,  1905,  there
was  hardly  any  doubt  as  to  the  nature  of  the  troubles  from
which  the  patient  was  suffering.  Every  fresh  symptom  helped
to  strengthen  the  conviction  that  all  the  peculiar  phenomena
which  I  have  described  were  of  functional  or  hysterical  origin,
and  were  not  dependent  on  any  organic  lesion  whatsoever.

I  did  not  see  the  patient  again  until  Nov.  5th,  1908.  She
was  then  in  bed  complaining  of  headache  and  general  malaise,


lxvi.] A  Study  in  Hysteria  and  Multiple  Personality.  297

and  had  a  temperature  of  100°  F.  She  had  kept  well  for
nearly  three  years  until  a  few  weeks  prior  to  the  date  of  my
visit.  She  had  then  begun  to  complain  of  her  head,  and  had
been  much  troubled  by  obsessional  thoughts.  These  still  con-
tinued to  trouble  her,  and  when  I  saw  her  on  Nov.  5th,  1908,
they  were  her  chief  complaint.  She  said  she  constantly  heard
voices  telling  her  to  run  away  from  home,  or  to  throw  herself
into  the  water,  and  she  was  greatly  distressed  in  consequence.

I  tried  to  hypnotise  her,  but  with  little  apparent  success.
Every  day  for  a  week  I  went  through  some  brief  hypnotic
process,  but  thinking  there  was  little  probability  of  inducing
a  true  hypnosis,  I  confined  my  attention  almost  entirely  to
making  suggestions  with  regard  to  the  headache  and  obsessions.
During  this  treatment  the  headache  got  well  and  the  obsessions
became  much  less  troublesome  ;  but  she  developed  many  of  her
old  hysterical  symptoms.  The  old  tremor  appeared  in  both
legs  with  occasional  choreic  jerks  of  the  arms.  Her  walking
powers  were  very  defective,  and  she  twice  fell  and  hurt  her-
self. Her  old  balling  speech  returned.  She  became  cpuite
word-blind  and  letter-blind  except  for  the  letter  o,  and  totally
agraphic.  I  persevered  with  suggestions  of  her  speedy  recovery
from  all  these  symptoms,  but  with  no  effect.

On  Nov.  24th,  1908,  I  discovered  that  she  now  went  into
what  seemed  to  be  a  genuine  hypnosis  with  amnesia  on  waking,
and  I  was  disappointed  that  her  speech  affection,  which  I  was
now  convinced  had  no  organic  basis,  did  not  respond  to  my
suggestions  of  recovery.

On  Eov.  25th,  1908,  she  developed  her  old  contracture  of
the  middle,  ring,  and  index  fingers  of  the  right  hand.  She  had
no  recollection  of  having  suffered  from  this  condition  before,
and  its  occurrence  alarmed  and  worried  her.  She  told  her
sisters  that  she  was  sure  I  could  put  it  all  right,  and  when
I  called  next  day  she  asked  me  to  make  her  hand  open.  I
hypnotised  her,  and  told  her  that  she  could  now  open  her
hand  quite  easily,  and  that  it  would  never  again  become  closed
against  her  will.  She  immediately  opened  her  hand,  and  from
that  moment  had  complete  use  of  all  her  fingers.  Suggestions
during  this  hypnosis  as  to  cessation  of  the  coarse  tremors  in
the  legs  had  no  effect.  Later  in  the  day  she  complained  of
pain  in  the  left ear,  and  feared  that  she  was  going  deaf.


298


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.J).


[part


There  was  also  some  blood-stained  discharge  from  the  right
eye.  Her  sisters,  remembering  the  trouble  her  eyes  and  ears
had  been  in  her  illness  in  1906,  were  uneasy  about  this
symptom.  The  patient  told  them  that  she  was  sure  I  could
cure  the  pain  in  tbe  ear,  and  next  morning  she  asked  me  to
do  so.  This  was  easily  effected,  but  suggestions  as  to  cessation
of  the  tremor  in  the  legs  and  ability  to  walk  and  speak
properly  were  of  no  avail.

On  Nov.  29th,  1908,  what  troubled  her  most  was  complete
colour-blindness.  She  asked  me  to  cure  this.  I  hypnotised  her
and  gave  appropriate  suggestions.  At  the  same  time  I  made
a  whispered  suggestion  to  the  effect  that  at  12  o'clock  she
would  suddenly  be  able  to  read.  Before  waking  her  I  said,
"  You  feel  now  that  you  can  see  colours  properly,  don't  you  ? "
"  Yes,"  she  answered  with  great  assurance.  <:  And  what  did  I
say  about  12  o'clock?"  "That  I  should  be  able  to  read."
"  And  you  feel  you  will  ? "  She  assented,  but  not  with  the
same  assurance  as  she  had  shown  with  regard  to  the  colour-
blindness.  I  then  woke  her,  and  showed  her  various  pieces  of
coloured  material.  She  at  once  named  the  colour  of  each  of
them  correctly.  Her  sisters  afterwards  told  me  that  at  or
about  12  o'clock  the  patient  said  she  felt  as  if  she  could  read
a  little.  She  tried  to  do  so,  and  could  understand  most  of  the
words,  but  long  words  still  troubled  her.  In  the  course  of  the
day  this  partial  recovery  regressed,  and  she  could  read  only
small  words.  Two  clays  afterwards  I  succeeded  in  restoring  her
power  of  reading  completely,  and  there  has  been  no  return  of
the  word-blindness.

In  the  course  of  my  attempts  to  dissipate  some  of  her  dis-
abilities by  suggestion,  I  was  struck  by  the  unequal  success
which  attended  my  efforts.  Some  symptoms,  like  the  contrac-
ture of  the  fingers,  which  in  her  former  illnesses  had  remained
unaltered  for  months,  disappeared  instantly  at  the  first  sugges-
tion. Others,  like  the  speech  troubles  and  the  difficulty  in
walking,  seemed  to  be  quite  unaffected,  no  matter  how  often
or  how  impressively  appropriate  suggestions  were  given.  It
soon  became  evident  that  the  symptoms  which  were  easily
relieved  were  those  which  in  her  waking  state  she  asked  me
to  relieve,  or  those  to  the  relief  of  which  I  had  gained  her
free  and  unqualified  assent  during  hypnosis. Without  stopping


lxvi.] A  Study  in  Hysteria  and  Multiple  Personality.  299


here  to  inquire  into  the  meaning  of  this  peculiarity,  I  may
say  that,  rightly  or  wrongly,  I  tried  to  make  use  of  it  for
therapeutic  purposes,  and  I  endeavoured  to  induce  her  to  ask
me  definitely  to  relieve  those  symptoms  which  most  seriously
impaired  her  bodily  and  mental  health.

The  condition  I  was  most  anxious  to  alleviate  was  the
paresis  and  tremor  of  the  legs,  for,  as  she  was  practically
unable  to  walk,  she  was  kept  a  prisoner  in  the  house,  and  her
general  health  was  suffering  in  consequence.  Every  day  for
a  week  I  predicted  to  her  that  on  Wednesday,  Dec.  2nd,  1908,
all  her  trembling  would  cease,  and  that  she  would  be  able  to
walk  as  well  as  ever  she  did.  On  Dec.  1st  I  told  her  in
hypnosis  to  ask  me  to  cure  her  legs  when  I  saw  her  next
day.  This  she  promised  to  do,  but  there  was  a  lack  of  assur-
ance in  her  reply  when  I  asked  her  if  she  felt  sure  that  I
could  make  her  walk  properly.

On  several  occasions  when  I  had  desired  her  to  ask  me  to
relieve  some  particular  symptom,  I  had  found  on  visiting  her
that  some  fresh  trouble  had  arisen,  which  seemed  to  her  more
urgent  than  that  which  I  was  anxious  to  relieve.  I  was  not
surprised  then  to  find  on  the  Wednesday  morning  that  she
had  fallen  downstairs  and  hurt  her  back.  When  I  asked  her
what  she  wanted  me  to  do  for  her,  she  said  I  must  take  away
the  pain  in  her  back ;  but  she  made  no  reference  to  the
trembling  of  the  legs,  or  the  inability  to  walk.  I  led  her  up
to  this  by  saying  that,  besides  taking  away  the  pain  in  her
back,  which  I  said  would  be  quite  easy,  I  wanted  her  to  ask
me  to  do  something  more  for  her.  She  then  said  that  she
wished  me  to  keep  her  from  falling  and  hurting  herself  any
more.  This  gave  me  the  opportunity  to  remark  that  the  best
way  to  do  this  would  be  to  stop  the  trembling  in  her  legs
and  to  make  her  walk  properly.  To  this  she  half  reluctantly
assented.  I  then  hypnotised  her,  and  made  suggestions  that
her  legs  would  stop  trembling.  These  suggestions  I  continued
for  about  fifteen  minutes,  but,  although  the  tremor  seemed  to
subside  a  little,  there  was  no  sign  of  its  stopping.  On  being
asked  if  she  did  not  feel  that  her  legs  were  going  to  become
still  in  a  very  short  time,  she  said  she  was  trying  to  make
them  stop,  but  could  not.  "  Oh,"  I  said,  "  you  need  not  try.
All  you  have  to  do  is  to  sleep  a  little  more  deeply,  and  they


soo


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D:


[part  lxvi.]


will  stop  of  their  own  accord.  Now,  I  am  going  to  stroke
your  face,  and  at  each  stroke  you  will  go  more  and  more
deeply  asleep."  I  then  began  to  stroke  her  face  slowly  from
above  downwards,  and  at  the  fourth  stroke  the  legs  suddenly
became  quite  still.  I  told  her  that  the  trembling  had  stopped
and  would  never  return,  and  that  now  she  could  walk  perfectly
well.  That  evening  she  walked  to  my  house,  a  distance  of
a  mile.

I  would  like  to  dwell  for  a  moment  on  the  nature  of  these
tremors,  which  thus  suddenly  stopped  after  existing  unchanged
for  over  three  weeks.  A  similar  trembling  could  possibly  have
been  produced  by  voluntary  muscular  efforts,  but  this  trembling-
was,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  occasioned  by  a  series  of  inco-ordinate
muscular  contractions,  which  can  by  no  possibility  be  produced
by  the  waking  will.  All  over  both  limbs  could  be  seen  groups
of  muscles  and  even  individual  muscles,  momentarily  standing
out  as  if  stimulated  by  a  Faradic  current.  Each  contraction
was  a  violent  twitch,  which  immediately  passed  off,  or  was
repeated  once  or  twice  in  rapid  succession.  At  the  same  time
other  muscles  in  other  parts  of  the  limb  were  similarly  affected,
and  a  constant  succession  of  such  isolated  and  widely  separated
twitchings  went  on  uninterruptedly.

Why  those  twitchings  stopped  in  response  to  suggestion  I
do  not  know.  I  do  not  think  any  one  knows  why  such  a
result  should  occur,  and  it  seems  to  me  to  be  folly  or  dis-
honesty to  pretend  that  we  do.  I  have  seen  many  strange
things  happen  in  response  to  suggestion  during  hypnosis,  but
I  have  not,  I  think,  ever  seen  anything  which  more  profoundly
impressed  me  than  the  sudden  cessation  of  those  muscular
contractions.

Encouraged  by  the  complete  restoration  of  her  walking
powers,  I  lost  no  time  in  trying  to  get  an  equally  good  result
with  regard  to  her  speech  and  writing.  During  hypnosis  on  the
evening  of  Dec.  2nd,  I  told  her  to  ask  me  next  morning  to  make
her  talk  properly  and  write  correctly.  This  she  said  she
would  like,  but  she  seemed  a  little  doubtful  as  to  the  result.
On  Dec.  3rd  she  asked  me  to  make  her  talk  properly  and
to  be  able  to  write,  but  the  request  did  not  come  without
some  prompting  from  me. During  hypnosis  I  made  her  pro-


Letter  of  Dec.  3rd,  1908.


1/  in  (Cmr^Ajm^A)  A&


/n nji^i (/?  ocas


/ula  <m*»  inu^  -yrun


Letter  of  Dec.  UK  1908.


UM,  £t^vi^J  /£ir-t*,

cL


pt.  lxvi.]  A  Study  in  Hysteria  and  Multiple  Personality.  301

mise  to  write  me  a  letter  in  the  course  of  the  day,  and  to
bring  it  to  me.  After  hypnosis  her  speech  was  better,  but  by
no  means  perfect,  and  I  told  her  that  it  did  not  yet  satisfy
me.  I  said  I  still  had  difficulty  in  understanding  her,  and
that  I  wanted  her  to  talk  properly  and  to  write  nicely.  Both
in  the  waking  state  and  in  hypnosis  I  made  her  promise  to
ask  me  next  morning  to  complete  the  cure.  The  effect  of
the  suggestions  given  on  Dec.  3rd  with  regard  to  writing
may  be  seen  in  the  letter  of  this  date,  which  is  reproduced
above.  It  is  very  difficult  to  read,  and  her  sister,  who  saw
her  writing  it,  told  me  that  each  individual  letter  in  its
composition  was  written  backwards.

On  Dec.  4th  she  asked  me  quite  spontaneously  to  make
her  talk  properly  and  write  nicely.  She  promised  in  hypnosis
to  write  me  another  letter  during  the  clay.  Immediately  after
this  hypnosis  her  speech  was  practically  normal,  and  the  letter
written  in  the  afternoon  was  well  written  and  free  from  mis-
take. This  letter  of  Dec.  4th,  1908,  is  also  reproduced  for
comparison  with  the  other.

Her  chief  disabilities  having  been  removed,  she  very  soon
recovered  her  health,  and  although  for  many  weeks  she  provided
me  with  a  variety  of  hysterical  symptoms  on  which  to  exercise
my  therapeutic  ingenuity,  she  was  during  this  time  a  very
different  person  from  the  helpless  invalid  of  the  years  1902
and  1904.

As  I  have  already  said,  I  was  very  much  struck  by  the
unequal  results  produced  by  suggestion  in  this  case.  Hypnosis
was  apparently  profound ;  post-hypnotic  amnesia  was  complete ;
the  disabilities  I  was  anxious  to  remove  were  obviously  of  a
functional  nature ;  all  the  conditions  favourable  to  the  speedy
removal  of  any  particular  symptom  seemed  to  be  present ;  yet
it  was  clear  that  to  most  of  my  suggestions  there  was  some
resistance  of  a  kind  quite  different  from  the  mere  failure  of
response  to  suggestion  that  may  be  met  with  in  ordinary
psycho-therapeutic  work.  It  is  difficult  to  account  for  such
resistance  to  therapeutic  suggestion  as  was  met  with  in  this
case.  Obstinacy  was  certainly  a  very  marked  characteristic  of
the  hypnotised  patient,  but  we  feel  that  there  must  be  some
good  reason  for  unwillingness  to accept  curative  suggestions.


302


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.J).


[part


It  seems  to  me  probable  that  the  resistance  to  which  I  have
referred  may  be  related  to  the  resistance  met  with  by  Freud
in  the  practice  of  psycho-analysis  in  cases  of  hysteria.

In  Freud's  opinion,  hysterical  symptoms  are  due  to  the
repression  of  painful  ideas,  so  that  they  no  longer  occupy  a
part  of  the  conscious  field,  and  cannot  be  recalled  voluntarily
or  by  association.  Eeliet'  from  the  psychical  pain  caused  by
an  unbearable  idea  is  obtained  by  a  conversion  of  the  repressed
feeling  into  physical  manifestations.  This  transformation  is
described  by  Freud  as  a  defence  reaction  of  the  ego  against
unbearable  ideas,  and  the  "  repugnance  of  the  ego "  is  the
psychic  force  which  determines  the  repression.  The  aim  of
psycho-analysis  is  to  recover  the  repressed  ideas  in  their
entirety,  to  bring  them  back  into  consciousness,  and  to  let  the
feelings  connected  with  them  have  their  proper  emotional  ex-
pression. According  to  Freud,  "  a  patient  can  rid  himself  of
a  hysterical  symptom  only  after  reproducing  and  uttering
under  emotion  its  causal  pathogenic  impressions." 1

In  the  process  of  psycho-analysis,  as  practised  by  Freud,
great  resistance  is  sometimes  encountered  in  trying  to  recover
forgotten  memories  connected  with  the  original  psychic  trauma,
and  Freud  concludes  that  the  resistance  is  due  to  the  same
psychic  force  which  led  to  the  repression,  namely,  "  repugnance
of  the  ego."  When  we  try  to  drag  these  painful  memories
back  into  consciousness,  some  part  of  the  patient's  mind  seems
to  know  that  the  restoration  of  these  lost  memories  will  be
accompanied  by  feelings  that  are  unbearable.

Now  if  Freud's  views  on  the  causation  of  hysterical  symptoms
are  correct,  it  would  seem  that  when  a  hysterical  symptom  is
removed  by  suggestion,  the  disappearance  of  the  symptom  must
be  accompanied  by  its  re-conversion  into  some  other  symptom
or  into  the  original  unbearable  idea.  And  just  as  the  "  re-
pugnance of  the  ego "  to  the  unbearable  idea  may  lead  to
resistance  in  psycho-analysis  undertaken  to  disclose  it,  so  the
same  psychic  force  may  lead  to  the  rejection  of  suggestions
directed  towards  the  removal  of  the  hysterical  symptom.

The  mutual  interchangeableness  of  somatic  and  mental
affections  in  hysteria  was  strikingly  shown  on  several  occasions
in the course of the treatment of A.  G.  P. by  suggestion.

'Freud,  Selected  Papers  on  Hysteria  (English  Trans.),  p.  100.


lxvi.] A  Study  in  Hysteria  and  Multiple  Personality.  303

When  the  obsessions  of  the  early  stage  of  the  last  illness
disappeared,  the  physical  manifestations  began.  When  cessation
of  the  muscular  twitching  and  ability  to  walk  were  obtained,
there  occurred  a  series  of  dreadful  dreams,  which  affected  the
patient  very  strongly  (see  p.  304).  When  the  most  persistent  of
all  the  bodily  symptoms — the  right  hemianalgesia — was  removed
by  suggestion,  she  passed  almost  immediately  from  a  state  of
comparatively  normal  mental  health  into  a  state  of  profound
depression,  accompanied  by  phobias  and  obsessions.  In  the
middle  of  the  night,  some  hours  after  the  disappearance  of
the  hemianalgesia,  she  wrote  a  most  pitiful  letter  to  her  sister,
in  whicii  she  expressed  the  fear  that  she  was  going  out  of
her  mind,  and  begged  her  sister  not  to  send  her  to  an  asylum.
I  received  a  letter  from  her  next  day,  in  which  she  said  that
"  the  awful  thing  in  her  head "  kept  shouting  at  her  and
telling  her  to  do  dreadful  things.  So  great  was  her  distress,
and  so  evident  seemed  the  connection  between  the  disappearance
of  the  hemianalgesia  and  the  appearance  of  the  morbid  mental
symptoms,  that  I  decided  to  bring  back  the  bodily  defect  by
suggestion,  in  the  hope  that  by  so  doing  the  mental  troubles
might  be  ameliorated.  I  was  careful  not  to  give  any  indication
to  the  patient  why  I  wished  the  loss  of  sensibility  to  return,
yet  with  the  recurrence  of  the  hemianalgesia  she  soon  returned
to  her  ordinary  state  and  became  free  from  all  mental  distress.
Now  if  we  can  suppose  that  somewhere  in  her  mind  there
was  some  sort  of  prevision  that  the  removal  of  the  hemianal-
gesia would  be  accompanied  by  such  mental  distress,  there
would  be  good  reason  for  her  prolonged  rejection  of  my
curative  suggestions  in  regard  to  this  symptom,  and  this  rejec-
tion may  be  regarded  as  being  due  to  the  same  cause  as  that
which  leads  to  resistance  in  psycho-analysis.

But  although  the  relations  between  the  resistance  met  with
in  psycho-analysis  and  the  rejection  of  therapeutic  suggestions
are  interesting,  and  may  be  worthy  of  further  consideration,  I
wish  here  rather  to  describe  how  the  resistance  to  suggestion
met  with  in  this  case  appeared  to  me  at  the  time.  In  the
course  of  treatment  it  seemed  to  become  more  and  more
apparent  that  there  was  a  wilful  rejection  of  certain  therapeutic
suggestions  and  an  exercise  of  choice  and  discrimination  as  to
what  suggestions  were  to  be  allowed  to  be  effective. Here  was


304


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


no  passive  state  in  which  every  suggestion  is  readily  accepted,
but  rather  a  very  obstinate  and  capricious  person,  who  seemed
to  have  some  unusual  kind  of  control  over  her  own  bodily
organism.  The  rejection  of  therapeutic  suggestions  appeared  to
be  the  deliberate  act  of  a  second  personality  brought  to  light
by  the  induction  of  hypnosis.  In  order  to  estimate  the  nature
of  this  personality,  there  is  one  circumstance  connected  with
the  patient's  history  to  which  some  reference  must  be  made.

Soon  after  I  began  to  attend  A.  G.  P.  in  1908,  it  became
a  common  occurrence  for  her  to  talk  in  her  sleep  to  her  sisters
before  she  awoke  in  the  mornings.  If  one  of  them  happened
to  be  passing  her  door,  she  would  call  her  by  name,  and  she
was  never  known  to  be  in  error  as  to  which  of  her  sisters  it
was.  Indeed,  they  found  it  difficult  to  explain  how  she  acquired
the  knowledge  she  sometimes  showed  in  regard  to  their  actions
in  various  parts  of  the  house.  She  was  never  known  to  speak
in  her  sleep  unless  she  had  something  definite  to  say  and
some  one  to  say  it  to.  There  was  no  aimless  or  incoherent
sleep-talking,  as  in  dream  or  delirium.  What  she  said  was
always  the  definite  expression  of  a  person  who  knew  what  she
wanted  to  say  and  said  it.  The  subject-matter  of  these  con-
versations was  as  a  rule  confined  to  the  symptoms  or  events
of  her  illness,  and  her  purpose  in  speaking  apparently  was
that  I  should  be  informed  of  certain  matters  which  she  thought
it  important  for  me  to  know.

In  the  morning  of  Dec.  4th,  1908,  her  father  heard  her
crying  out,  and  went  into  her  bedroom.  He  found  her  asleep
and  evidently  dreaming,  as  she  was  struggling  and  crying  as
if  in  terror.  Later  she  called  her  sister  to  her  room,  because
her  right  eye  was  streaming  with  blood  and  blood  was  oozing
from  her  right  ear.  When  I  heard  this  story  next  day,  I
asked  her  if  she  had  dreamt  in  the  night.  She  said  she  did
not  think  so.  In  hypnosis  she  told  me  that  in  the  night  a
nasty  man  had  attacked  her,  and  hit  her  on  the  head  with  a
hammer.  When  I  referred  to  this  episode  as  a  dream,  she
insisted  very  firmly  that  it  was  a  real  experience,  not  a  dream.
In  the  waking  state  she  had  no  knowledge  of  the  matter  at  all.

Soon  after  this  various  articles  of  value  belonging  to  her
disappeared — her  watch,  some  money,  and  her  keys,  for  example,
were  lost,  and  could  not  be  found. In  the  waking  state  she


lxvi.] A  Study  in  Hysteria  and  Multiple  Personality.  305

did  not  know  where  these  things  were,  and  she  sought  for
them  in  vain.  In  hypnosis  she  confessed  that  she  herself  had
hidden  them,  and  told  me  where  they  might  be  found.  She
said  she  had  hidden  them  because  a  nasty  man  had  come  to
her  in  the  night  and  wanted  to  steal  them.-  This  man  who
wanted  to  steal  her  watch  and  money  was  the  same  man  who
had  attacked  her  with  the  hammer.

The  whole  of  this  dream  life,  and  all  the  actions  associated
with  it,  belonged  to  the  stratum  of  consciousness  revealed  in
hypnosis.  The  waking  consciousness  had  no  knowledge  of  any
of  the  events  of  this  phase  of  the  patient's  life.  But  although
in  the  primary  state  there  was  no  knowledge  of  the  events  of
the  second  state,  there  was  in  the  second  state  full  knowledge
of  all  the  events  of  waking  life.  This  is,  of  course,  the
ordinary  type  of  amnesia  observed  in  all  cases  of  deep  hypnosis.
But  in  this  case  there  were  many  indications  that  the  person-
ality of  the  second  state  was  different  from  that  of  a  mere
state  of  hypnosis,  and  it  seemed  to  persist  throughout  waking
life  as  a  co-conscious  personality  capable  of  acting  on  its  own
initiative,  and  also  capable  of  taking  possession  of  the  bodily
organism  at  will.

Very  soon  after  the  sleep-talking  in  bed  began,  it  was  noticed
that  the  patient  often  dropped  into  the  second  state  in  the
day-time,  and  always  on  these  occasions  she  spoke  to  her
sisters  of  events  connected  with  this  phase  of  her  existence,  or
made  remarks  in  regard  to  events  of  her  waking  life  which
she  would  not  have  made  if  she  had  been  awake.  For  example,
in  talking  to  her  father,  a  querulous  old  man  who  was  some-
times very  trying,  she  would  often  make  cutting  or  sarcastic
remarks,  which  she  would  not  have  made  in  her  ordinary  state.
He  was  often  surprised  at  the  things  she  said,  but  excused  her
on  account  of  her  ill-health.  Her  sisters,  however,  knew  that
when  she  said  those  things  she  had  dropped  into  the  second
state,  and  they  found  that  shortly  afterwards  she  knew  nothing
of  having  said  them.  They  said  they  never  had  any  doubt  as
to  which  state  she  was  in.  In  the  second  state  her  voice  was
different,  her  manner  of  speaking  was  more  vivacious,  she  was
more  determined  and  assertive.  She  was  exceedingly  obstinate,
very  petulant,  and  rather  childish.  Her  eyes  were  closed  or
half-closed.

u


306


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


For  a  long  time  I  was  scrupulously  careful  to  avoid  any
suggestion  that  might  increase  the  separateness  of  the  two
personalities.  One  day,  however,  when  trying  to  discover  their
points  of  resemblance  and  difference,  I  .proposed  to  the  hypno-
tised patient  to  speak  of  her  in  the  hypnotic  state  as  Amelia
and  in  the  waking  state  as  Milly — the  name  ordinarily  used
by  her  friends.  Amelia,  on  being  asked  what  was  the  differ-
ence, if  any,  between  herself  and  Milly,  said  she  was  not  very
sure,  but  that  she  knew  more  than  Milly  did,  and  remembered
many  things  that  Milly  had  forgotten.  This  seemed  especially
true  of  many  of  the  events  of  her  illnesses.  Milly,  when  in
good  health,  had  no  recollection  of  her  three  illnesses.  She
knew  she  had  been  ill,  but  she  did  not  remember  much  about
it.  During  the  course  of  these  illnesses  her  memory  was  of
course  very  defective  in  many  ways,  and  in  each  attack  one
curious  loss,  which  proved  very  persistent,  was  observed.  She
forgot  that  her  second  name  was  Geraldine.  Each  time  when
she  got  well,  although  she  forgot  the  events  of  the  illness,
most  of  her  old  memories  came  back  to  her ;  but  she  still
denied  for  many  months  that  Geraldine  was  part  of  her  name.
Now  I  found  that  Amelia  knew  no  more  than  Milly  about
Geraldine  being  her  second  name.

When  I  first  tried  to  get  Amelia  to  write  automatically
through  Milly 's  hand  she  refused,  giving  as  a  reason  that  she
did  not  wish  Milly  to  see  what  she  wrote.  I  therefore  asked
her  to  write  me  a  letter  some  time  when  Milly  was  asleep.
Next  day  her  sister  brought  me  a  letter  which  the  patient,
when  in  the  second  state,  had  asked  her  to  give  to  me.  It
is  interesting  to  notice  how  readily  Amelia  adopted  the  style
of  an  orthodox  second  personality.  The  letter  begins :  "  My
dear  Doctor,  She  does  not  know  I  am  writing  this "— "  she  "
being,  of  course,  Milly.

Amelia  denied  all  responsibility  for  most  of  the  morbid
symptoms  from  which  Milly  suffered,  but  she  confessed  to
having  caused  some  of  them.  She  said  in  a  letter  to  me,  "  I
made  her  hands  shake  and  her  legs  as  well,  and  I  scratched
her  and  made  all  those  nasty  places  on  her  hands  and  legs,
and  made  her  fingers  close  down  and  her  thumbs  so  that  she
could  not  move  them.  ...  I  made  her  fall  downstairs  and  hurt
herself." She  said,  however,  that  she  had  nothing  to  do  with


lxvi.] A  Study  in  Hysteria  and  Multiple  Personality.  307

causing  the  difficulties  of  speech,  reading,  and  writing,  or  the
bleeding  from  the  eyes  and  ears,  or  the  hemianaesthesia.  Although
we  must  be  cautious  in  accepting  these  statements,  there  are
some  grounds  for  thinking  that  they  have  some  foundation  in
fact.  During  the  course  of  the  patient's  illness  it  seemed  evident
to  me  that  those  more  serious  disturbances,  for  the  production
of  which  Amelia  denied  all  responsibility,  were  connected  with
the  functioning  of  dissociated  states  of  consciousness  which
were  not  synthesised  within  the  hypnotic  personality ;  and
when  I  succeeded  in  removing  any  of  the  more  obstinate
symptoms  by  suggestion,  I  generally  found  it  necessary  to  try
to  render  hypnosis  as  deep  as  possible.  The  nature,  or  even
the  existence,  of  such  deeper  hypnotic  states  was  not  experi-
mentally tested  at  the  time  for  fear  of  compromising  the
therapeutic  results,  but  when  the  patient  was  practically  well
I  was  able  to  hypnotise  Amelia  and  so  to  obtain  a  new  state
which  assumed  the  name  of  Amelia  Geraldine — from  the  fact  that
in  it  Amelia  remembered  her  second  name.  Amelia  Geraldine
seemed  to  present  a  more  normal  character  than  Amelia.  The
childishness  of  Amelia  seemed  to  disappear  and  to  give  place
to  a  more  serious  and  womanly  personality.

Both  Amelia  and  Milly  claimed  to  be  amnesic  of  all  that
transpired  when  Amelia  Geraldine  was  present ;  but  although
this  was  no  doubt  true  in  regard  to  Milly,  it  sometimes  appeared
as  if  Amelia  had  some  sort  of  knowledge  of  Amelia  Geraldine.
Both  Amelia  and  Amelia  Geraldine  ascribed  the  more  serious
functional  disabilities  to  something  beyond  or  within  them.
There  seemed  indeed  to  be  in  this  case  some  dissociated  states
which  could  not  be  recovered  in  hypnosis,  dissociated  ideas
which  were  outside  the  mental  content  of  any  discoverable
personality,  dissociated  emotions  deeply  buried  in  the  sub-
conscious which  revealed  their  presence  by  these  bizarre  defects
of  the  psycho-physical  organism.  Amelia,  in  trying  to  excuse
herself  for  her  participation  in  the  production  of  Milly 's  troubles,
says,  "  it  is  that  awjul  thing  in  my  head  that  makes  me  do
those  things  to  her ;  it  is  dreadful  and  makes  me  feel  bad,
and  I  must  do  something  to  hurt  her."

Notwithstanding  the  beneficial  results  that  had  been  obtained
in  this  case  by  the  use  of  suggestion,  a  stage  was  reached
where  it  became  evident  that  something  more  was  necessary


308


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.R


[part


to  restore  the  patient  to  normal  health.  Every  attempt  at
producing  complete  freedom  from  all  physical  manifestations
of  hysteria  was  followed  by  an  increase  of  mental  pain  and
depression.  Although  it  is  no  uncommon  experience  to  be
able  by  suggestion  to  remove  completely  and  permanently  the
disabilities  met  with  in  mild  cases  of  hysteria,  it  is  the  general
opinion  of  those  who  have  had  much  to  do  with  graver  cases
that  complete  restoration  to  health  is  difficult  to  obtain.  Janet,
in  accordance  with  his  view  that  hysterical  symptoms  are  the
result  of  a  narrowing  of  the  field  of  consciousness,  says  that,
so  long  as  the  field  of  consciousness  remains  contracted,  we
can  never  add  one  phenomenon  on  one  side  without  taking
one  away  from  another  side.  Janet's  hysterical  has  been  well
compared  by  Freud  to  a  weak  woman  who  has  been  shopping,
and  is  now  on  her  way  home  laden  with  packages  and  bundles
of  every  description.  She  cannot  manage  the  whole  lot  with
her  two  arms  and  her  ten  fingers,  and  soon  she  drops  one.
When  she  stoops  to  pick  this  up,  another  breaks  loose,  and  so
it  goes  on.  This  view  of  the  nature  of  hysteria  is  hardly  in
keeping  with  the  observation  commonly  made  that  in  hysteria
exaltation  of  faculty  in  some  directions  is  to  be  found  along
with  diminished  power  in  others.  More  in  accord,  on  the
whole,  with  clinical  facts  is  Freud's  view  that  the  somatic
symptoms  of  hysteria  are  due  to  the  conversion  of  repressed
emotions  into  physical  disabilities,  and  that  where  adaptation
for  such  conversion  does  not  exist,  purely  mental  symptoms
such  as  phobies  and  obsessions  may  appear.

In  view  of  the  remarkable  findings  of  Freud  and  his  pupils
in  regard  to  the  pathogenesis  of  hysteria,  I  decided  to  undertake
a  psycho-analysis  of  A.  G.  P.  in  the  hope  that  I  might  be
able  to  achieve  the  complete  restoration  to  health  which  sug-
gestion alone  seemed  unable  to  effect.  For  various  reasons  I
adopted,  to  begin  with,  the  technique  used  by  Freud  in  his
earlier  work,  making  use  of  the  hypnotic  state  as  a  means  of
facilitating  the  analysis.  At  a  later  period  this  was  supple-
mented by  word-association  tests  in  the  waking  state  and
other  measures.

It  soon  became  evident  that  the  memory  of  incidents  forgotten
in  the  waking  state  was  most  readily  resuscitated  in  the  state
known  as  Amelia  Geraldine  (AG). Her  memory  of  such  in-


lxvi.] A  Study  in  Hysteria  and  Multiple  Personality.  309

cidents  of  a  pathogenic  kind  seemed  much  wider  and  more
accessible  than  that  of  Amelia  (A).  But  it  was  soon  found
that  a  still  better  state  for  psycho-analysis  was  one  which
may  be  called  AG2,  produced  by  hypnotising  AG.  When  AG
first  appeared  I  suggested  to  her  that  she  should  open  her
eyes,  and  that  she  should  always  "  come "  with  her  eyes  open.
AG2  had  her  eyes  closed  and  said  she  was  AG  asleep.  Thus
when  Milly  (M)  was  hypnotised,  A  came  with  eyes  closed.
When  A  was  told  to  sleep,  AG  appeared  after  a  little  time  with
eyes  open.  On  continuing  the  hypnotising  process — verbal
suggestions  of  sleep  combined  with  light  passes  with  contact
on  the  face — AG  closed  her  eyes  and  claimed  to  be  AG2.  On
telling  AG.,  to  awake,  she  opened  her  eyes  and  was  AG.
On  telling  AG  to  awake,  she  closed  her  eyes  and  A  appeared.
When  A  was  told  to  awake,  she  opened  her  eyes  and  M
appeared.  M  was  amnesic  for  all  the  stages.  A  was  amnesic
for  AG  and  AG2.  AG  remembered  what  I  said  to  A,  but
"  lost  herself "  when  AG2  appeared.

From  the  very  beginning  A  had  persistently  asserted  that
she  was  not  responsible  for  all  the  things  that  Milly  said  and
did  when  asleep.  I  had  assumed  that  it  was  A  who  spoke
to  her  sisters  and  father  in  what  I  have  described  as  the
second  state ;  but  in  her  first  letter  to  me  A  had  said,  "  I  do
not  make  her  talk."  For  a  long  time  I  took  no  notice  of
this  denial,  accounting  it  merely  a  ruse  on  A's  part  by  which
she  might  escape  a  scolding  from  me.  A,  however,  maintained
very  persistently  that  Milly  in  her  sleep  often  said  and  did
things  for  which  she  (A)  was  not  responsible.  These  things
were  ascribed  by  A  to  "  Milly  asleep "  (Ma).  But  Ma  was
a  phase  of  consciousness  with  which  I  had  no  personal  dealings,
and  in  which  I  did  not  believe  until  A  came  to  my  assistance.
She  told  me  that  the  way  to  find  Ma  was  "  to  put  her
to  sleep — very  sound  sleep — ever  so  much  deeper  than  you
put  me,  and  then  make  her  open  her  eyes."  The  process
here  described  amounted  to  producing  AG2,  or  some  deeper
state,  and  then  getting  her  to  open  her  eyes.  After  Ma  was
discovered,  AG2  appeared  only  as  a  transition  stage  between
AG  and  Ma,  and  this  latter  stage  was  used  in  the  remaining
stages  of  the  psycho-analysis.

I  find  it  very  difficult  to  come  to  any  conclusion  regarding


310


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[PAKT


the  interpretation  which  should  be  put  upon  these  various
phases  of  the  hypnotic  state  in  this  case.  I  believe  they  were
to  a  large  extent  artificial  products,  partly  due  to  direct  or
indirect  suggestion  from  me,  but  to  a  still  greater  degree  to
self-suggestion  on  the  part  of  the  patient.  It  seems  to  me
impossible  to  disentangle  from  the  whole  series  of  phenomena
that  which  might  be  due  to  self-suggestion  and  that  which
occurred  apparently  spontaneously.  The  different  personalities
exhibited  no  very  striking  differences  of  character,  but,  such  as
they  were,  these  differences  were  fairly  consistently  maintained
throughout  the  whole  period  of  investigation.  I  charged  both
A  and  AG  to  take  care  of  Milly,  and  to  keep  her  well  and
free  from  accidents  or  injuries.  A  became  rather  a  fussy
guardian  of  Milly 's  welfare,  and  reported  her  various  misdeeds
to  me  with  an  exaggerated  sense  of  her  own  importance  and
rectitude.  She  was  rather  proud  of  her  disciplinary  methods,
which  consisted  in  biting  and  scratching  Milly  when  the  latter
did  not  act  in  accordance  with  A's  ideas  of  what  was  con-
ducive to  health.  AG,  on  the  other  hand,  generally  spoke
"  more  in  sorrow  than  in  anger  "  of  Milly's  delinquencies.  Ma
was  very  like  Milly  awake,  but  with  a  greatly  extended  memory
as  regards  certain  experiences  which  were  of  hysterogenic
significance.

According  to  Freud,  the  pathogenic  psychic  material  which
has  been  crowded  out  of  the  ordinary  consciousness  in  hysteria
may  be  shown  still  to  exist  in  an  orderly  form ;  and  again
and  again  in  the  course  of  psycho-analysis  undertaken  in  the
waking  state,  Freud  seems  struck  by  the  appearance  of  its
being  in  the  possession  of  a  second  intelligence.  He  says :
"  One  receives  a  delusive  impression  of  a  superior  intelligence,
external  to  the  patient's  consciousness,  which  systematically
holds  a  large  psychic  material  for  definite  purposes.  ...  I
presume,  however,  that  this  unconscious  second  intelligence  is
only  apparent."  1  In  another  place  he  says :  "  The  pathogenic
psychic  material  appears  as  the  property  of  an  intelligence
which  is  not  necessarily  inferior  to  the  normal  ego.  The
semblance  of  a  second  personality  is  often  most  delusively
produced."  2

There  are  some  grounds,  I  think,  for  demurring  to  Freud's

1  Freud,  loc.  cit.,  p.  90.  2 Ibid.,  p.  104.


lxvl] A  Study  in  Hysteria  and  Multiple  Personality.  311

view  that  this  semblance  is  necessarily  delusive.  It  seemed
to  me  that  in  the  case  of  A.  G.  P.  the  induction  of  hypnosis
brought  me  into  touch  with  a  series  of  personalities  who  held
in  their  possession  a  vast  amount  of  psychic  material  of  which
the  waking  consciousness  had  lost  all  knowledge,  and  of  a
kind  which,  on  Freud's  own  showing,  must  be  regarded  as
hysterogenic.

On  trying  to  recover  some  of  the  incidents  of  Milly's  past
from  A,  AG,  or  AG.,,  great  resistance  was  very  often  en-
countered, and  little  progress  was  sometimes  made  for  weeks
at  a  time.  It  was  apparently  in  order  to  help  me  over  these
difficulties  that  A  voluntarily  offered  to  tell  me  how  to  find
"  Milly  asleep."  "  She  knows  everything,"  A  said,  "  and  she
will  tell  you  everything,  if  you  do  as  I  say."  And  A's  pro-
gnostication was  on  the  whole  correct.  Resistances  were  still
met  with,  but  in  the  end  all  the  episodes  of  which  AG.,  could
only  recover  fragments  were  filled  out  in  detail  by  Ma.

Concurrently  with  the  revelation  of  the  emotional  shocks
which  had  led  to  disintegration  of  personality.  Milly's  health
recovered.  But  I  must  add  that,  all  through  the  later  period
of  treatment,  as  at  the  beginning,  suggestion  was  employed.
After  the  psycho-analysis  had  reached  a  certain  point  the
hemianalgesia  was  again  made  to  disappear  by  suggestion  and
no  untoward  results  followed.  Very  likely  from  the  Freudian
point  of  view  the  analysis  was  incomplete,  but  I  had  attained
my  end,  and  Milly  became  to  all  appearance  a  normal  healthy
woman.  And  so  she  remains.  The  phases  A,  AG,  and  Ma
can  still  be  obtained,  but  their  spontaneous  manifestations  have,
so  far  as  I  know,  ceased.


312


Professor  Sigm.  Freud,  31.  D.


[part


III.

A  NOTE  ON  THE  UNCONSCIOUS  IN  PSYCHO-ANALYSIS.
By  Professor  SIGM. FREUD,  M.D., LL.D.  (Vienna).

I  wish  to  expound  in  a  few  words  and  as  plainly  as  possible
what  the  term  "  unconscious "  has  come  to  mean  in  Psycho-
analysis and  in  Psycho-analysis  alone.

A  conception — or  any  other  psychical  element — which  is
now  -present  to  my  consciousness  may  become  absent  the  next
moment,  and  may  become  present  again,  after  an  interval,
unchanged,  and,  as  we  say,  from  memory,  not  as  a  result  of
a  fresh  perception  by  our  senses.  It  is  this  fact  which  we  are
accustomed  to  account  for  by  the  supposition  that  during  the
interval  the  conception  has  been  present  in  our  mind,
although  latent  in  consciousness.  In  what  shape  it  may  have
existed  while  present  in  the  mind  and  latent  in  consciousness
we  have  no  means  of  guessing.

At  this  very  point  we  may  be  prepared  to  meet  with  the
philosophical  objection  that  the  latent  conception  did  not  exist
as  an  object  of  psychology,  but  as  a  physical  disposition  for
the  recurrence  of  the  same  psychical  phenomenon,  i.e.  of  the
said  conception.  But  we  may  reply  that  this  is  a  theory  far
overstepping  the  domain  of  psychology  proper  ;  that  it  simply
begs  the  question  by  asserting  "  conscious "  to  be  an  identical
term  with  "  psychical,"  and  that  it  is  clearly  at  fault  in  denying
psychology  the  right  to  account  for  its  most  common  facts,
such  as  memory,  by  its  own  means.

Now  let  us  call  "  conscious  "  the  conception  which  is  present
to  our  consciousness  and  of  which  we  are  aware,  and  let  this
be  the  only  meaning  of  the  term  "  conscious." As  for  latent


lxvi.] A  Note  on  the  Unconscious  in  Psycho-Analysis.  313


conceptions,  if  we  have  any  reason  to  suppose  that  they  exist
in  the  mind — as  we  had  in  the  case  of  memory, — let  them  be
denoted  by  the  term  "  unconscious."

Thus  an  unconscious  conception  is  one  of  which  we  are  not
aware,  but  the  existence  of  which  we  are  nevertheless  ready
to  admit  on  account  of  other  proofs  or  signs.

This  might  be  considered  an  uninteresting  piece  of  descriptive
or  classificatory  work  if  no  experience  appealed  to  our  judg-
ment other  than  the  facts  of  memory,  or  the  cases  of
association  by  unconscious  links.  The  well-known  experiment,
however,  of  "  the  post-hypnotic  suggestion  "  teaches  us  to  insist
upon  the  importance  of  the  distinction  between  conscious  and
unconscious,  and  seems  to  increase  its  value.

In  this  experiment,  as  performed  by  Bernheim,  a  person  is
put  into  a  hypnotic  state  and  is  subsequently  aroused.  While
he  was  in  the  hypnotic  state,  under  the  influence  of  the
physician,  he  was  ordered  to  execute  a  certain  action  at  a
certain  fixed  moment  after  his  awakening,  say  half-an-hour
later.  He  awakes,  and  seems  fully  conscious  and  in  his
ordinary  condition ;  he  has  no  recollection  of  his  hypnotic
state,  and  yet  at  the  pre-arranged  moment  there  rushes  into
his  mind  the  impulse  to  do  such  and  such  a  thing,  and  he
does  it  consciously,  though  not  knowing  why.  It  seems
impossible  to  give  any  other  description  of  the  phenomenon
than  to  say  that  the  order  had  been  present  in  the  mind  of
the  person  in  a  condition  of  latency,  or  had  been  present
unconsciously,  until  the  given  moment  came,  and  then  had
become  conscious.  But  not  the  whole  of  it  emerged  into
consciousness :  only  the  conception  of  the  act  to  be  executed.
All  the  other  ideas  associated  with  this  conception, — the  order,
the  influence  of  the  physician,  the  recollection  of  the  hypnotic
state,  remained  unconscious  even  then.

But  we  have  more  to  learn  from  such  an  experiment.  We
are  led  from  the  purely  descriptive  to  a  dynamic  view  of  the
phenomenon.  The  idea  of  the  action  ordered  in  hypnosis  not
only  became  an  object  of  consciousness  at  a  certain  moment,
but  the  more  striking  aspect  of  the  fact  is  that  this  idea  grew
active :  it  was  translated  into  action  as  soon  as  consciousness
became  aware  of  its  presence.  The  real  stimulus  to  the  action
being  the order  of  the  physician,  it  is  hard  not  to  concede


314


Professor  Sigm.  Freud,  M.D.


[part


that  the  idea  of  the  physician's  order  became  active  too.
Yet  this  last  idea  did  not  reveal  itself  to  consciousness,  as  did
its  outcome,  the  idea  of  the  action ;  it  remained  unconscious,
and  so  it  was  active  and  'unconscious  at  the  same  time.

A  post-hypnotic  suggestion  is  a  laboratory  production,  an
artificial  fact.  But  if  we  adopt  the  theory  of  hysterical
phenomena  first  put  forward  by  P.  Janet  and  elaborated  by
Breuer  and  myself,  we  shall  not  be  at  a  loss  for  plenty  of
natural  facts  showing  the  psychological  character  of  the  post-
hypnotic suggestion  even  more  clearly  and  distinctly.

The  mind  of  the  hysterical  patient  is  full  of  active  yet
unconscious  ideas ;  all  her  symptoms  proceed  from  such  ideas.
It  is  in  fact  the  most  striking  character  of  the  hysterical
mind  to  be  ruled  by  them.  If  the  hysterical  woman  vomits,
she  may  do  so  from  the  idea  of  being  pregnant.  She  has,
however,  no  knowledge  of  this  idea,  although  it  can  easily  be
detected  in  her  mind,  and  made  conscious  to  her,  by  one  of
the  technical  procedures  of  Psycho-analysis.  If  she  is  executing
the  jerks  and  movements  constituting  her  "fit,"  she  does  not
even  consciously  represent  to  herself  the  intended  actions,  and
she  may  perceive  those  actions  with  the  detached  feelings  of
an  onlooker.  Nevertheless  analysis  will  show  that  she  was
acting  her  part  in  the  dramatic  reproduction  of  some  incident
in  her  life,  the  memory  of  which  was  unconsciously  active
during  the  attack.  The  same  preponderance  of  active  un-
conscious ideas  is  revealed  by  analysis  as  the  essential  fact  in
the  psychology  of  all  other  forms  of  neurosis.

We  learn  therefore  by  the  analysis  of  neurotic  phenomena
that  a  latent  or  unconscious  idea  is  not  necessarily  a  weak
one,  and  that  the  presence  of  such  an  idea  in  the  mind  admits
of  indirect  proofs  of  the  most  cogent  kind,  which  are  equivalent
to  the  direct  proof  furnished  by  consciousness.  We  feel  justified
in  making  our  classification  agree  with  this  addition  to  our
knowledge  by  introducing  a  fundamental  distinction  between
different  kinds  of  latent  or  unconscious  ideas.  We  were
accustomed  to  think  that  every  latent  idea  was  so  because  it
was  weak  and  that  it  grew  conscious  as  soon  as  it  became
strong.  We  have  now  gained  the  conviction  that  there  are
some  latent  ideas  which  do  not  penetrate  into  consciousness,
however  strong  they  may  have  become. Therefore  we  may


lxvi.] A  Note  on  the  Unconscious  in  Psycho- Analysis.  315

call  the  latent  ideas  of  the  first  type  foreconscious,  while  we
reserve  the  term  unconscious  (proper)  for  the  latter  type  which
we  came  to  study  in  the  neuroses.  The  term  unconscious,
which  was  used  in  the  purely  descriptive  sense  before,  now
comes  to  imply  something  more.  It  designates  not  only  latent
ideas  in  general,  but  especially  ideas  with  a  certain  dynamic
character,  ideas  keeping  apart  from  consciousness  in  spite  of
their  intensity  and  activity.

Before  continuing  my  exposition  I  will  refer  to  two  objections
which  are  likely  to  be  raised  at  this  point.  The  first  of  these
may  be  stated  thus :  instead  of  subscribing  to  the  hypothesis
of  unconscious  ideas  of  which  we  know  nothing,  we  had  better
assume  that  consciousness  can  be  split  up,  so  that  certain
ideas  or  other  psychical  acts  may  constitute  a  consciousness
apart,  which  has  become  detached  and  estranged  from  the
bulk  of  conscious  psychical  activity.  Well-known  pathological
cases  like  that  of  Dr.  Azam  seem  to  go  far  to  show  that  the
splitting  up  of  consciousness  is  no  fanciful  imagination.

I  venture  to  urge  against  this  theory  that  it  is  a  gratuitous
assumption,  based  on  the  abuse  of  the  word  "  conscious."  We
have  no  right  to  extend  the  meaning  of  this  word  so  far  as
to  make  it  include  a  consciousness  of  which  its  owner  himself
is  not  aware.  If  philosophers  find  difficulty  in  accepting  the
existence  of  unconscious  ideas,  the  existence  of  an  unconscious
consciousness  seems  to  me  even  more  objectionable.  The  cases
described  as  splitting  of  consciousness,  like  Dr.  Azam's,  might
better  be  denoted  as  shifting  of  consciousness, — that  function — or
whatever  it  be — oscillating  between  two  different  psychical  com-
plexes which  become  conscious  and  unconscious  in  alternation.

The  other  objection  that  may  probably  be  raised  would  be
that  we  apply  to  normal  psychology  conclusions  which  are
drawn  chiefly  from  the  study  of  pathological  conditions.  We
are  enabled  to  answer  it  by  another  fact,  the  knowledge  of
which  we  owe  to  psycho-analysis.  Certain  deficiencies  of  function
of  most  frequent  occurrence  among  healthy  people,  e.g.  lapsus
linguae,  errors  in  memory  and  speech,  forgetting  of  names,  etc.,
may  easily  be  shown  to  depend  on  the  action  of  strong  un-
conscious ideas  in  the  same  way  as  neurotic  symptoms.  We
shall  meet  with  another  still  more  convincing  argument  at  a
later  stage  of  this  discussion.


316


Professor  Sigm.  Freud,  M.D.


[part


By  the  differentiation  of  foreconscious  and  unconscious  ideas,
we  are  led  on  to  leave  the  field  of  classification  and  to  form
an  opinion  about  functional  and  dynamical  relations  in  psychical
action.  We  have  found  a  foreconscious  activity  passing  into
consciousness  with  no  difficulty,  and  an  unconscious  activity
which  remains  so  and  seems  to  be  cut  off  from  conscious-
ness.

Now  we  do  not  know  whether  these  two  modes  of  psychical
activity  are  identical  or  essentially  divergent  from  their
beginning,  but  we  may  ask  why  they  should  become  different
in  the  course  of  psychical  action.  To  this  last  question  psycho-
analysis gives  a  clear  and  unhesitating  answer.  It  is  by  no
means  impossible  for  the  product  of  unconscious  activity  to
pierce  into  consciousness,  but  a  certain  amount  of  exertion
is  needed  for  this  task.  When  we  try  to  do  it  in  ourselves,
we  become  aware  of  a  distinct  feeling  of  repulsion  which
must  be  overcome,  and  when  we  produce  it  in  a  patient  we
get  the  most  unquestionable  signs  of  what  we  call  his  resistance
to  it.  So  we  learn  that  the  unconscious  idea  is  excluded  from
consciousness  by  living  forces  which  oppose  themselves  to  its
reception,  while  they  do  not  object  to  other  ideas,  the  fore-
conscious ones.  Psyche-analysis  leaves  no  room  for  doubt
that  the  repulsion  from  unconscious  ideas  is  only  provoked  by
the  tendencies  embodied  in  their  contents.  The  next  and  most
probable  theory  which  can  be  formulated  at  this  stage  of  our
knowledge  is  the  following.  Unconsciousness  is  a  regular  and
inevitable  phase  in  the  processes  constituting  our  psychical
activity ;  every  psychical  act  begins  as  an  unconscious  one,
and  it  may  either  remain  so  or  go  on  developing  into  con-
sciousness, according  as  it  meets  with  resistance  or  not.  The
distinction  between  foreconscious  and  unconscious  activity  is
not  a  primary  one,  but  comes  to  be  established  after  repulsion
has  sprung  up.  Only  then  the  difference  between  fore-conscious
ideas,  which  can  appear  in  consciousness  and  reappear  at
any  moment,  and  unconscious  ideas  which  cannot  do  so
gains  a  theoretical  as  well  as  a  practical  value.  A  rough  but
not  inadequate  analogy  to  this  supposed  relation  of  conscious
to  unconscious  activity  might  be  drawn  from  the  field  of
ordinary  photography.  The  first  stage  of  the  photograph  is
the  "  negative  " ;  every  photographic  picture  has  to  pass  through


lxvi.] A  Note  on  the  Unconscious  in  Psycho- Analysis.  317


the  "  negative  process,"  and  some  of  these  negatives  which
have  held  good  in  examination  are  admitted  to  the  "  positive
process  "  ending  in  the  picture.

But  the  distinction  between  foreconscious  and  unconscious
activity,  and  the  recognition  of  the  barrier  which  keeps  them
asunder,  is  not  the  last  or  the  most  important  result  of  the
psycho-analytic  investigation  of  psychical  life.  There  is  one
psychical  product  to  be  met  with  in  the  most  normal  persons,
which  yet  presents  a  very  striking  analogy  to  the  wildest  produc-
tions of  insanity,  and  was  no  more  intelligible  to  philosophers  than
insanity  itself.  I  refer  to  dreams.  Psycho-analysis  is  founded
upon  the  analysis  of  dreams  ;  the  interpretation  of  dreams  is  the
most  complete  piece  of  work  the  young  science  has  done  up  to
the  present.  One  of  the  most  common  types  of  dream-forma-
tion may  be  described  as  follows :  a  train  of  thoughts  has
been  aroused  by  the  working  of  the  mind  in  the  daytime,
and  retained  some  of  its  activity,  escaping  from  the  general
inhibition  of  interests  which  introduces  sleep  and  constitutes
the  psychical  preparation  for  sleeping.  During  the  night  this
train  of  thoughts  succeeds  in  finding  connections  with  one  of
the  unconscious  tendencies  present  ever  since  his  childhood  in
the  mind  of  the  dreamer,  but  ordinarily  repressed  and  excluded
from  his  conscious  life.  By  the  borrowed  force  of  this  un-
conscious help,  the  thoughts,  the  residue  of  the  day's  work,
now  become  active  again,  and  emerge  into  consciousness  in
the  shape  of  the  dream. Now  three  things  have  happened :

(1)  The  thoughts  have  undergone  a  change,  a  disguise  and

a  distortion,  which  represents  the  part  of  the  un-
conscious helpmate.

(2)  The thoughts  have occupied  consciousness  at  a  time

when  they  ought  not.

(3)  Some  part  of  the  unconscious,  which  could  not  other-

wise have  done  so,  has  emerged  into  consciousness.
We  have  learnt  the  art  of  finding  out  the  "  residual  thoughts,"
the  latent  thoughts  of  the  dream,  and,  by  comparing  them  with
the  apparent  dream,  we  are  able  to  form  a  judgment  on  the
changes  they  underwent  and  the  manner  in  which  these  were
brought  about.

The  latent  thoughts  of  the  dream  differ  in  no  respect  from
the  products  of  our  regular  conscious  activity  ;  they  deserve


318


Professor  Sigm.  Freud,  M.D.


[part


the  name  of  foreconscious  thoughts,  and  may  indeed  have  been
conscious  at  some  moment  of  waking  life.  But,  by  entering
into  connection  with  the  unconscious  tendencies  during  the
night,  they  have  become  assimilated  to  the  latter,  degraded  as
it  were  to  the  condition  of  unconscious  thoughts,  and  sub-
jected to  the  laws  by  which  unconscious  activity  is  governed.
And  here  is  the  opportunity  to  learn  what  we  could  not  have
guessed  from  speculation,  or  from  another  source  of  empirical
information, — that  the  laws  of  unconscious  activity  differ  widely
from  those  of  the  conscious.  We  gather  in  detail  what  the
peculiarities  of  the  Unconscious  are,  and  we  may  hope  to  learn
still  more  about  them  by  a  profounder  investigation  of  the
processes  of  dream-formation.

This  enquiry  is  not  yet  half  finished,  and  an  exposition  of
the  results  obtained  hitherto  is  scarcely  possible  without  entering
into  the  most  intricate  problems  of  dream-analysis.  But  I
would  not  break  off  this  discussion  without  indicating  the
change  and  progress  in  our  comprehension  of  the  Unconscious
which  are  due  to  our  psycho-analytic  study  of  dreams.

Unconsciousness  seemed  to  us  at  first  only  an  enigmatical
characteristic  of  a  definite  psychical  act.  Now  it  means  more
for  us.  It  is  a  sign  that  this  act  partakes  of  the  nature  of
a  certain  psychical  category  known  to  us  by  other  and  more
important  characters,  and  that  it  belongs  to  a  system  of
psychical  activity  which  is  deserving  of  our  fullest  attention.
The  index-value  of  the  unconscious  has  far  outgrown  its  im-
portance as  a  property.  The  system  revealed  by  the  sign
that  the  single  acts  forming  parts  of  it  are  unconscious  we
designate  by  the  name  "  The  Unconscious,"  for  want  of  a
better  and  less  ambiguous  term.  In  German,  I  propose  to
denote  this  system  by  the  letters  Ubw,  an  abbreviation  of  the
German  word  "  Unbewusst."  And  this  is  the  third  and  most
significant  sense  which  the  term  "  unconscious  "  has  acquired  in
psycho-analysis.


LXVI.]


The  Theory  of  the  Subconscious.


IV.

THE  THEORY  OF  THE  SUBCONSCIOUS.

By  BORIS  SIDIS,  M.A.,  Ph.D.,  M.D.

(Sidis  Psychotherapeutic  Institute,  Portsmouth,  N.H. ).

CHAPTER  I.

THE  SUBCONSCIOUS  AND  UNCONSCIOUS  CEREBRATION.

Plato  put  on  the  portals  of  his  academy  the  inscription,  "  No
one  can  enter  here  without  a  knowledge  of  geometry."  Similarly
no  one  can  gain  access  to  the  facts  of  abnormal  psychology
without  a  thorough  understanding  of  the  subconscious.  The
subconscious  may  be  briefly  defined  as  mental  processes  of
which  the  individual  is  not  directly  conscious.  The  general
drift  of  my  Psychology  of  Suggestion  is  the  description  of  the
subconscious  as  a  diffused  consciousness  below  the  margin  of
personal  consciousness.  I  sometimes  use  the  term  subconscious
self.  I  designate  by  "  self  "  not  personal  consciousness,  but  mere
consciousness.  In  Multiple  Personality,  in  which  I  develop  the
theory  of  thresholds  in  regard  to  the  phenomena  of  normal  and
abnormal  mental  life,  I  define  the  subconscious  as  consciousness
below  the  threshold  of  attentive  personal  consciousness.  I  find
that  my  clinical  and  psychological  investigations  more  and
more  confirm  me  in  the  view  of  the  subconscious  advanced
by  me  in  The  Psychology  of  Suggestion.  I  am  pleased  to  find
that  Prof.  James,  in  a  recent  article,  accepts  the  same  view,
and  advances  the  same  theory  of  threshold  in  regard  to  the
subconscious.  "  Nobody  knows,"  he  writes,  "  how  far  we  are
'  marginally '  conscious  of  these  memories,  concepts  and  cona-
tional  states  at  ordinary  times,  or  how  far  beyond  the  '  margin '


320


Boris  Sidis,  M.D.


[part


of  our  present  thought  trans-marginal  consciousness  of  them
may  exist."

In  my  Psychology  of  Suggestion  I  pointed  out  the  difficulties
of  the  purely  physiological  interpretation  of  the  subconscious.
Since  this  view  still  lingers  among  some  psychologists,  I
cannot  do  better  than  reproduce  the  passage  verbatim  (pp.  118

et  seq.) :

The  facts  of  hypnotic  memory  alone  strongly  indicate  the  intel-
ligent nature  of  the  subconscious.  Can  the  theory  of  unconscious
cerebration  explain,  for  instance,  the  fact  of  suggested  amnesia
during  hypnosis  1  I  hypnotize  Mr.  V.  F.  and  make  him  pass
through  many  lively  scenes  and  actions.  I  give  him  hypnotic  and
posthypnotic  suggestions.  The  subject  is  wakened  and  hypnotized
time  and  again.  At  last  he  is  put  into  a  hypnotic  state,  and  it
is  suggested  that  on  awakening  he  shall  not  remember  anything  of
what  had  happened  in  the  state  of  hypnosis.  The  subject,  on
emerging  from  his  trance,  remembers  nothing  of  what  he  has
passed  through.  I  then  put  my  hand  on  his  forehead  and  tell  him
in  a  commanding  voice,  "You  remember  now  everything."  As  if
touched  by  the  wand  of  a  magician,  the  suppressed  memories
become  endowed  with  life  and  movement,  and  invade  the  con-
sciousness of  the  subject.  Everything  is  now  clearly  remembered,
and  the  subject  is  able  to  relate  the  tale  of  his  adventures  without
the  omission  of  the  least  incident.  So  detailed  is  the  account  that
one  cannot  help  wondering  at  the  extraordinary  memory  displayed
by  the  subject.  How  is  the  theory  of  unconscious  cerebration  to
account  for  this  strange  fact  ?  Prof.  Ziehen,  in  his  Physiological
Psychology,  tells  us  that  "it  is  still  a  matter  of  doubt  whether,
despite  their  complicatedness,  all  the  facts  of  the  hypnotized  individual
are  not  motions  accomplished  without  any  concomitant  psychical
processes,"  and  that  "even  the  recollection  of  the  hypnotic  psychical
processes  do  not  necessarily  argue  in  favour  of  their  existence
during  the  hypnotic  trance."  This  extreme  view  is  certainly  wrong,
for  the  subject  during  hypnosis  not  only  acts,  moves,  but  he  also
speaks,  answers  questions  intelligently,  reasons,  discusses;  and  if
such  an  individual  may  be  regarded  as  a  mere  machine,  on  the
same  grounds  we  may  consider  any  rational  man  as  a  mere
unconscious  automaton.

The  advocates  of  unconscious  cerebration  must  admit  at  least
this  much,  that  hypnosis  is  a  conscious  state. Now,  on  the  theory


LXVI.]


The  Theory  of  the  Subconscious.


321


of  unconscious  cerebration,  it  is  truly  inconceivable  how  psychical
states  can  be  suppressed,  the  accompanying  physiological  processes
alone  being  left,  and  all  that  done  by  a  mere  word  of  the  experi-
menter. The  restoration  of  memory  is  still  more  incomprehensible
than  the  suggested  amnesia.  A  command  by  the  experimenter,
"  Now  you  can  remember,"  brings  into  consciousness  a  flood  of
ideas  and  images.  It  is  not  that  the  experimenter  gives  the  subject
a  clue  which  starts  the  train  of  particular  images  and  ideas ;  but
the  mere  general,  abstract  suggestion,  "You  can  remember,"  is
sufficient  to  restore  memories  which  to  all  appearances  have  com-
pletely vanished  from  the  mind  of  the  subject.  Are  the  unconscious
physiological  nervous  modifications  so  intelligent  as  to  understand
suggestions  and  follow  them  1  Does  unconscious  cerebration  under-
stand the  command  of  the  experimenter,  and  does  it  oblige  him  to
become  conscious  ?  On  closer  examination,  we  find  the  term  uncon-
scious cerebration  to  be  of  so  loose  a  nature  that  under  its  head
are  often  recorded  facts  that  clearly  indicate  the  working  of  an
intelligence.  Thus,  Mr.  Charles  M.  Child  brings  the  following  fact
as  a  specimen  of  unconscious  cerebration :  "  I  had  earnestly  been
trying,"  a  gentleman  writes  to  Mr.  Child,  "to  make  a  trial  balance,
and  at  last  left  off  working,  the  summary  of  the  Dr.  and  Cr.  sides
of  the  account  showing  a  difference  of  £2  10s.,  the  Dr.  side  being
so  much  smaller.  The  error  I  had  not  found  on  Saturday  night
when  I  left  the  counting-house.  On  this  same  Saturday  night  I
retired  feeling  nervous  and  angry  with  myself.  Some  time  in  the
night  I  dreamed  thus :  I  was  seated  at  my  desk  in  the  counting-
house  and  in  a  good  light ;  everything  was  orderly  and  natural,
the  ledger  lying  before  me.  I  was  looking  over  the  balance  of  the
accounts  and  comparing  them  with  the  sums  in  the  trial-balance
sheet.  Soon  I  came  to  a  debit  balance  of  £2  10s.  I  looked  at  it,
called  myself  sundry  names,  spoke  to  myself  in  a  deprecating  manner
of  my  own  eyes,  and  at  last  put  the  £2  10s.  to  its  proper  side  of
the  trial-balance  sheet  and  went  home.  I  arose  at  the  usual  Sunday
time,  dressed  carefully,  breakfasted,  went  to  call  on  some  .  .  .  friends
to  go  to  church.  Suddenly  the  dream  flashed  on  my  memory.  I
went  for  the  keys,  opened  the  office,  also  the  safe,  got  the  ledger,
and  turned  to  the  folio  my  dream  had  indicated.  There  was  the
account  whose  balance  was  the  sum  wanted  which  I  had  omitted
to  put  in  the  balance-sheet,  where  it  was  put  now,  and  my  year's
posting  proved  correct."

The  adherents  of  unconscious  cerebration  tacitly  include  under

x


322


Boris  Sidis,  M.I).


[part


this  term  not  only  unconscious  physiological  processes,  or  nerve
modifications,  but  also  psychical  states.  Keeping  clearly  in  mind
the  real  meaning  of  unconscious  cerebration  as  referring  to  physio-
logical processes,  or  nerve  modifications  with  no  psychical  accom-
paniment, the  difficulties  of  unconscious  cerebration  to  account  for
the  phenomena  of  hypnotic  memory  become  truly  insurmountable.
For  if  the  physiological  processes  subsumed  under  the  category  of
unconscious  cerebration  are  completely  lacking  in  all  psychical  elements
whatever,  how  can  a  general  abstract  negative  jjhrase,  "  You  cannot
remember,"  suppress  particular  psychical  states,  and  how  can  a
similar  positive  phrase,  "  You  can  remember,"  bring  the  forgotten
memories  back  to  consciousness  % It  is  simply  incomprehensible.

Furthermore,  while  the  subject  is  in  a  hypnotic  condition,  we  can
suggest  to  him  that  on  awakening  he  shall  not  remember  anything,
but  when  put  to  the  automatic  recorder  he  shall  be  able  to  write
everything  that  has  taken  place  in  the  state  of  hypnosis.  The
subject  is  then  awakened :  he  remembers  nothing  at  all  of  what
he  has  passed  through  while  in  the  state  of  hypnotic  trance.  As
soon,  however,  as  he  is  put  to  the  automatic  recorder  the  hand
gives  a  full  rational  account  of  all  the  events.  If  now  you  ask
the  subject  what  it  is  he  has  written,  he  stares  at  you  in  confusion;
he  knows  nothing  at  all  of  the  writing.  How  shall  we  account  for
this  fact  on  the  theory  of  unconscious  cerebration  ?  Can  unconscious
physiological  processes  write  rational  discourses  1  It  is  simply
wonderful,  incomprehensible.

These,  however,  are  not  the  only  difficulties  which  the  theory  of
unconscious  cerebration  has  to  encounter.  Take  the  following
experiment :  I  gave  Mr.  V.  F.  the  suggestion  that  on  awakening
he  should  put  my  coat  on  three  times,  take  it  off,  and  put  it  on
again ;  that  he  should  do  it  when  he  heard  a  signal  which  should
be  a  knock ;  amnesia  was  suggested  and  also  the  possibility  of
writing  the  suggestion.  The  subject  was  then  roused  from  his
trance.  There  was  not  the  slightest  recollection  of  what  had  been
suggested,  but  when  he  was  put  to  the  automatic  recorder  the  hand
at  once  proceeded  to  write  everything.  In  the  middle  of  the  writing,
"  when  a  signal  will  be  given  .  .  .,"  I  stopped  the  subject  and  asked
him  what  he  was  writing  about.  "I  do  not  know,"  he  answered.
"  How  is  it,"  I  asked  again,  "  you  write  and  do  not  know  what
you  write  1 "  "I  do  not  know,  I  think  it  was  something  about  a
coat."  "What  was  it  you  were  writing  about  a  coat?"  "I  do  not
know,  maybe  it  was  about  the  make  of  a  coat." Then  when  the  signal


LXVI.]


The  Theory  of  the  Subconscious.


323


came,  he  rose  and  put  on  the  coat  three  times.  To  take  another
experiment  of  the  same  kind :  I  give  the  subject  the  suggestion
that  he  should  bow  to  the  gas  whenever  the  door  should  be  opened  ;
again  amnesia  is  suggested,  with  the  possibility  of  writing.  The
subject  is  stopped  when  he  finished  his  account.  "  What  was  it
you  wrote?"  I  asked.  The  subject  looked  surprised.  I  repeated
my  question.  "  I  do  not  know,  I  think  something  about  a  door."
" What  was  it  about  a  door  1"  "I  do  not  know."  I  have  made
many  similar  experiments,  and  all  of  them  with  the  same  results.
It  is  evident  that  the  writing  is  not  an  unconscious  automatic
process,  for  the  subject  possesses  a  general  knowledge  of  what  he
has  written,  or  even  of  what  he  is  going  to  write.  Now,  on  the
theory  of  unconscious  cerebration  this  general  knowledge  ought  to
be  entirely  lacking,  since  the  physiological  processes  of  the  suppressed
memory  have  no  psychical  accompaniment.  It  would  not  do  to  say
that  the  subject  knows  each  word  as  he  writes  it,  but  becomes
unconscious  of  it,  forgets  it  as  soon  as  it  is  written  down,  because
the  subject  is  able  to  tell  the  central  idea;  that  is,  he  has  a  general
knowledge  of  it,  and,  what  is  more,  he  is  able  to  tell  us  this
general  central  idea  even  before  he  finishes  the  writing, — in  fact,
he  can  do  it  when  stopped  in  the  middle  of  the  phrase.  On  the
theory  of  secondary  consciousness,  however,  the  experiments  could
not  possibly  give  other  results.  The  secondary  consciousness  under-
stands the  suggestions  given  by  the  experimenter,  accepts  them,
obeys  the  commands,  keeps  the  suppressed  memories,  and  sends  up
a  general  knowledge  of  them  to  the  upper  consciousness,  and  if
commanded,  communicates  the  suppressed  particular  suggestions  in
all  their  details.

The  advocates  of  unconscious  cerebration  assume  too  much  :  they
assume  that  normal  memory,  or  recollection  in  the  normal  state,
can  be  fully  accounted  for  by  unconscious  physiological  processes,
and  the  only  thing  required  is  to  apply  this  theory  to  the  phenomena
of  hypnotic  memory.  It  would  be  well  to  examine  this  theory  and
see  how  strong  its  claims  are  in  the  case  of  normal  memory.

Many  a  modern  psycho-physiologist  no  doubt  smiles  at  the  crude,
ancient  psycho-physiological  theory  of  perception.  Images  or  copies
of  objects  emanate  from  objects,  get  deposited  in  the  mind,  hence
perception,  cognition,  memory.  The  modern  psycho-physiological
speculations,  however,  the  speculations  of  Maudsley,  Carpenter,
Ziehen,  Eibot,  etc.,  are  no  less  crude.  Thus,  Ziehen,  for  instance,
conceives  that  each  sensation  deposits  a  copy  of  itself, — an  image,


324


Boris  Sidis,  M.D.


[part


an  idea,  in  some  one  of  the  memory  ganglion  cells,  and  memory-
consists  in  the  reproduction  of  this  copy, — the  hen  lays  an  egg  from
which  another  hen  may  come  out.  Maudsley  expresses  the  same
thing  in  slightly  different  terms;  instead  of  "deposits  of  images  in
memory  ganglion  cells,"  he  uses  "  modifications  of  nerve  elements."
"  It  may  be  supposed,"  says  Maudsley,  "  that  the  first  activity  did
leave  behind  it,  when  it  subsided,  some  after-effect,  some  modification
of  the  nerve  element,  whereby  the  nerve  circuit  was  disposed  to  fall
again  readily  into  the  same  action,  such  disposition  (unconscious)
appearing  in  consciousness  as  recognition  or  memory."  Ribot  and
many  other  psychologists,  with  slight  variations  in  minor  points,
follow  the  same  beaten  track.  All  of  them  agree  that  it  is  the
nerve  modifications  produced  by  the  physiological  processes  of  sensa-
tions, emotions,  etc.,  that  constitute  the  basis,  nay,  the  very  essence,
of  memory  itself.  It  does  not  require  a  close  examination  to  find
the  deficiencies  of  this  theory.  A  mere  modification  left  behind  as
a  trace  cannot  possibly  explain  memory,  recollection,  the  fact  of
referring  a  particular  bit  of  experience  to  an  experience  felt  before.
The  retention  of  a  trace  or  of  a  nervous  modification,  and  the  repro-
duction of  that  trace  or  modification,  cannot  in  the  least  account  for
the  fact  that  a  series  of  sensations,  ideas,  images,  emotions  felt  at
different  times,  should  become  combined,  brought  into  a  unity,  felt  like
being  similar,  like  being  repetitions,  copies  of  an  original  experience.
It  is  not  retention  or  reproduction,  but  it  is  the  recognition  element
that  constitutes  the  essentia  of  memory.  The  rose  of  to-day  reminds  me
of  the  rose  of  yesterday,  of  the  same  rose  seen  the  day  before
yesterday.  Now  the  image  of  the  rose  may  be  retained,  may  even
be  reproduced,  but  if  it  is  not  recognized  as  having  happened  in  the
past,  there  can  be  no  recollection  :  in  short,  without  recognition  there
is  no  memory.  As  Prof.  James  strongly  puts  it,  "the  gutter  is  worn
deeper  by  each  successive  shower,  but  not  for  that  reason  brought
into  contact  with  previous  showers."  Does  the  theory  of  unconscious
physiological  processes,  of  material  brain  traces,  of  nerve  modifica-
tions, does  the  theory  take  into  account  this  element  of  recognition'?
Can  the  theory  of  unconscious  cerebration  offer  the  faintest  suggestion
as  to  how  that  element  of  recognition  is  brought  about  1  What  is
that  something  added  to  the  unconscious  physiological  trace  or  nerve
modification  that  effects  a  conscious  recognition  ]

Furthermore,  first  impressions  can  be  localized  in  the  past,  but
so  can  also  each  subsequent  revival.  How  shall  we  explain  on  the
theory  of  unconscious  physiological  nerve  registration  that  the  original,


LXVI.]


The  Theory  of  the  Subconscious.


325


the  primitive  sense  experience,  as  well  as  each  subsequent  revival,
can  be  referred  to  as  distinct  psychical  facts.  For  if  the  structural
nerve  elements  are  slightly  modified  with  each  revival,  how  shall
we  account  for  this  psychical  distinction  of  the  original  sense  experi-
ence as  well  as  of  the  modified  revivals  1  The  remembered  experience
leaves  its  own  individual  trace,  then  a  trace  of  its  being  a  copy  of
a  former  original  impression,  and  also  a  trace  of  its  being  a  member
in  a  series  of  similar  traces,  each  trace  being  both  a  copy  of  another
and  a  copy  of  the  original  impression.  How  all  that  is  done  is  a
mystery.

These  objections  advanced  by  me  many  years  ago  hold  true
of  recent  theories  which  fall  back  on  the  old  views  of  Mill
and  Carpenter,  namely,  unconscious  cerebration.  The  modern
upholders  of  unconscious  cerebration  think  that  they  have
discovered  new  facts  and  arguments  in  favour  of  unconscious
mental  activity,  and  are  thus  justified  in  denying  subconscious
mental  life.  The  arguments,  as  we  have  pointed  out,  are  not
new,  nor  are  the  facts  advanced  in  support  of  these  arguments
true.  The  same  objections  hold  true  in  the  case  of  the  theory
of  unconscious  cerebration  offered  us  in  the  garb  of  nerve
currents  and  nerve  paths,  well  worn  nerve  tracks,  opening  and
closing  of  nerve  currents  and  tracks,  and  formation  of  all  shapes
and  forms  of  neurograms.  Why  be  misled  by  figments  and  by
sounds  ?  The  subconscious  stands  for  a  number  of  facts,  reactions,
and  behaviour  which  are  accompanied  by  psychic  life,  by  mental
activities,  by  consciousness.

The  physiological  unconscious  registration  theories  of  nerve
currents,  nerve-paths  and  neurograms  are  not  only  figments,
arbitrary  fanciful  weavings  of  the  imagination,  they  cannot  even
hypothetically  explain  the  simplest  act  of  memory  and  especially
of  recognitive  memory.

Since  the  theories  of  unconscious  registration  fail  us  in  the
most  elementary  mental  processes,  how  can  we  possibly  rely
on  cerebration-fancies  in  the  case  of  such  complex  phenomena
as  hypnotic  conditions  and  various  mental  states  of  trance  and
dissociation  ?  The  physiological  theories  such  as  unconscious
cerebration  and  their  modifications  failing,  we  must  use  for  all
those  phenomena  the  psychological  interpretation.  The  sub-
conscious must  be  taken  as  a  necessary  theory  in  Psycho-
pathology,  as atoms,  molecules,  electrons and ether are  in


326


Boris  Sidis,  M.D.


[part


Chemistry  and  Physics.  The  subconscious  is  not  an  "  uncon-
scious," it  is  not  a  physiological  automatism.  The  subconscious
is  a  consciousness,  a  secondary  consciousness,  a  sort  of  secondary
self,  the  self  being  understood  by  me  as  a  diffused  consciousness.


CHAPTER  II.

THE  SUBCONSCIOUS  AND  AUTOMATISM.

The  theory  of  unconscious  cerebration  dies  hard.  Recently  a
few  psychologists  made  an  attempt  to  revive  it.  The  argu-
ments advanced  are  rather  philosophical  than  psychological.
It  may  be  well  to  test  the  validity  of  these  arguments.  If  we
clear  the  ground  of  all  superfluous  speculations,  we  find  two
main  contentions.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  assumed  that  many
hypnotic  and  hysterical  manifestations  are  solely  the  result  of
physiological  activities.  It  is  claimed  by  some,  such  as
Miinsterberg,  that  physiological  processes  without  any  psychic
accompaniments,  may  reach  such  a  high  state  of  complexity
as  to  account  fully  for  all  the  observed  manifestations  in  the
different  forms  of  mental  dissociations.  In  the  second  place,  it
is  claimed,  from  a  purely  philosophical  standpoint,  that  even  in
the  case  of  dissociation  when  consciousness  may  be  granted  to  be
present,  there  is  no  dissociation  in  consciousness  itself,  since
consciousness  is  but  a  passive  onlooker  while  the  active  changes
go  on  in  the  content  of  consciousness ;  in  other  words,  in
states  of  dissociation  it  is  not  consciousness  that  is  changed,
but  only  the  content  of  consciousness.

Let  us  examine  these  contentions  and  see  whether  they
can  stand  the  test  of  critical  analysis.  The  view  of  regarding
mental  activity  from  a  purely  physiological  standpoint  is  not
new,  it  dates  as  far  back  as  Descartes,  who  regards  all  the
animals,  with  the  exception  of  man,  as  mechanical  automata.1

1The  philosopher,  Maiman,  in  his  "Autobiography"  tells  an  anecdote  of
himself.  In  his  youth  Maiman  was  an  ardent  adherent  of  Cartesian  automatism.
During  one  of  his  strolls  with  a  friend  Maiman  struck  a  goat.  The  animal
bleated.  The  friend  rebuked  Maiman  for  his  cruelty.  Maiman  laughed  at  the
simplicity  of  his  friend.  — "  The  goat  is  like  a  drum  which  sounds  when  it  is
beaten."


LXVI.]


The  Theory  of  the  Subconscious.


327


Huxley  carried  the  view  further,  regarding  consciousness  as  an
epiphenonienon.  The  physiological  mechanism  is  the  engine,
consciousness  is  hut  the  whistle  accompanying  it.  Of  course,
it  goes  without  saying  that  all  psychologists  and  physiologists
at  present  take  for  granted  that  all  states  of  consciousness  are
accompanied  by  physiological  processes.  Every  thought,  every
feeling,  even  the  most  complicated  poetical  inspirations,  or  the
most  abstruse  mathematical,  logical  and  metaphysical  specula-
tions, have  physiological  processes  as  their  accompaniments.
We  are,  however,  hardly  justified  in  carrying  this  postulate  to
the  absurdity  of  the  total  denial  of  consciousness,  and  regarding
all  adjustments  and  adaptations  as  so  many  chemical  and
mechanical  reactions — "tropisms,"  as  some  modern  biologists,  such
as  Loeb  and  others,  are  apt  to  put  it  in  the  case  of  many
animals,  a  reversion  to  the  Cartesian  hypothesis  of  mechanical
automatism.  Motor  reactions  can  be  regarded  solely  from  the
physiological  standpoint,  but  consciousness  cannot  be  entirely  ruled
out.  What  probability  is  there  that  a  play  of  atoms  and  electrons
would  produce  the  Iliad,  Hamlet,  the  Principia  of  Newton,  the
Celestial  Mechanics  of  Laplace,  or  Darwin's  Origin  of  Species  ?

Even  if  we  descend  to  such  motor  reactions  as  are  expressed
in  the  compositions  of  a  schoolboy,  we  still  unhesitatingly  assume
a  conscious  activity.  We  cannot  refute  the  philosopher  who
would  regard  all  such  manifestations  as  so  many  physiological
processes  without  any  conscious  accompaniment.  For  though
every  one  is  directly  conscious  of  his  own  mental  life,  no  one
can  experience  directly  the  mental  life  of  another.  We  can-
not inspect  directly  the  psychic  processes  that  go  on  in  other
living  beings,  or  in  our  fellow  men.  Mind  is  inferred  from
action,  from  behaviour.  Eeactions,  adjustments  to  environment,
accompanied  by  consciousness,  by  intelligence  in  us,  are  rightly
judged  to  have  the  same  accompaniment  in  other  beings,  in
our  neighbours.  To  deny  consciousness  to  our  neighbour,  and
to  regard  him  as  a  physiological  automaton,  is  to  put  oneself
in  the  absurd  position  of  denying  the  existence  of  states  which
are  observed  in  ourselves  under  similar  conditions.  In  fact  the
burden  of  proof  falls  on  those  who  make  such  a  denial.

Now,  in  the  case  of  hypnosis  or  various  states  of  dissociation,
we  meet  with  intelligent  adjustments  often  expressed  in  gestures,
writing  and  speech. We  can,  by  means  of  various  methods,  enter


328


Boris  Sidis,  M.D


[part


into  active  relationship  with  those  dissociated  activities  unknown
to  the  individual  himself.  We  can  obtain  intelligent  replies  to
our  questions  either  by  writing  or  by  speaking  or  by  other
arranged  means  of  communication.  What  right  have  we  to
deny  consciousness  in  one  case  while  we  affirm  it  in  another
case  under  similar  circumstances  ?  When  I  receive  a  letter
from  my  friend  I  regard  the  letter  as  having  been  written  by
a  being  who  possesses  consciousness,  but  when  a  similar  letter
is  written  by  a  friend  in  a  hypnotic  or  post-hypnotic  state,  we
regard  it  as  the  result  of  physiological  automatism,  with  no
conscious  accompaniment.  It  is  clear  that  the  denial  of  con-
sciousness to  the  hypnotic  individuality  is  purely  arbitrary.  It
is  certainly  arbitrary  in  the  case  of  double  or  multiple  person-
ality to  regard  one  personality  as  conscious  and  the  other
personalities  as  purely  automatic,  with  no  consciousness  in  them.
It  would  have  been  more  consistent  if  the  psychologist  were  to
take  the  solipsistic  point  of  view  and  deny  consciousness  to  all
else  except  himself.

The  arbitrary  standpoint  of  the  psychologist  who  denies
secondary  and  multiple  consciousness  can  be  still  further
made  clear  in  the  case  of  coexistent,  dissociated  mental
activity.  Thus  one  hand  of  the  subject  or  of  the  patient  may
write  a  letter,  while  the  other  hand  may  be  engaged  in
drawing  or  writing  a  composition,  of  which  the  individual  is
not  cognizant.  Both  hands  enter  independently  of  each  other
into  communication  with  the  external  observer.  The  communi-
cations are  independent  and  equally  intelligent.  In  each  case
we  get  intelligent  replies  and  reactions  to  our  questions  and
stimulations.  Which  of  the  two  is  supposed  to  be  conscious  ?
To  take  a  concrete  experiment.  Mr.  M.  presents  pheno-
mena of  dissociation.  When  in  one  of  those  states  of  dis-
sociation Mr.  M.  is  made  to  write  a  letter  with  one  hand,
while  the  other  hand,  being  anaesthetic,  is  put  under  a  screen
and  made  to  carry  out  a  calculation.  One  hand  replies  to  ques-
tions, while  the  other  solves  problems.  Both  hands  give
intelligent  replies.  To  which  of  them  is  consciousness  to  be
ascribed  ?  If  we  deny  it  in  one  case,  we  should  also  deny  it
in  the  other.  But,  then,  why  not  be  consistent  and  deny  it
in  every  case  of  intelligent  adjustment  ?  We  realize  how
arbitrary  and  illogical  is  the  position  of those  psychologists


LXVI.]


The  Theory  of  the  Subconscious.


329


who  coquet  with  physiology  under  the  delusion  that  they
are  more  scientific.  They  are  led  to  take  arbitrary  positions
wh  ch  lead  into  the  pitfalls  of  solipsism,  with  all  its  contra-
dictions and  absurdities.

Besides,  physiological  processes  are,  after  all,  but  hypothetical
concepts ;  physiological  currents  are  conceived  after  the  model
of  electrical  currents,  and  are  by  no  means  theoretically  proven.
While  they  should  be  used  for  the  sake  of  a  better  elucidation
of  the  facts,  it  is  not  good  scientific  sense  to  sacrifice  to  them
the  very  material  of  the  science  of  psychology.  Sensations,
ideas,  feelings,  emotions,  are  after  all  the  direct  data  of  the
psychologist,  while  physiological  processes  and  currents  are
purely  hypothetical.  Wben,  therefore,  these  hypothetical  exist-
ences lead  not  to  a  better  understanding  of  the  facts  of
mental  life,  but  to  their  denial,  the  very  purpose  of  the
hypothetical  creations  is  completely  defeated.

Physiological  processes  are  framed  to  explain  states  of  con-
sciousness with  their  motor  reactions.  When,  therefore,  these
hypothetical  creations  threaten  to  sweep  away  the  actual  living
facts,  it  is  time  to  halt  and  examine  closely  the  sterile  character
of  the  hypothesis.  The  central  fallacy  lies  in  the  tacit  assump-
tion that  unknown  and  possibly  unknowable,  highly  problematical
brain  currents,  with  their  "  opening  and  closing  valves,"  with
"well  worn  or  blocked  paths,"  all  of  a  purely  conjectural  character,
have,  by  their  ingenious  complexity,  become,  like  marionettes,  so
marvellously  endowed  with  sense-like  activities  as  to  dispense
completely  with  the  mental  states  which  these  conceptional
entities  were  called  in  to  explain.

Clinical  cases  and  experimental  facts  go  further  to  invali-
date the  theory  of  the  purely  physical  interpretation  of  the
subconscious,  or  what  may  be  described  as  automatism-
psychology.  If  anything  is  of  the  utmost  importance  in
mental  life,  it  is  surely  memory.  Memory  forms  a  unity  of
our  life,  brings,  so  to  speak,  to  a  focus  our  life-experiences,
which  would  have  otherwise  been  disconnected,  confused,  and
chaotic.  I  remember  just  now  what  I  did  an  hour  ago,  a
day  ago,  what  I  lived  through  many  years  ago.  I  remember
the  experiences  of  my  childhood,  boyhood,  and  youth.  I
remember  my  struggles  and  disappointments,  my  loves,  my
friendships,  my  enmities,  my  feelings,  sentiments,  emotions,  ideas,


330


Boris  Sidia,  2f.D.


[part


and  sensations.  All  these  inter-connected,  interlocked  links  of
memories  form  the  solid  chain  of  my  conscious  personality.
In  my  memory  of  the  past  experiences  there  is  the  present
consciousness  that  all  that  I  had  "one  through  at  the  time
of  the  experience — any  change,  any  modification,  that  had  taken
place — occurred  in  my  mind,  in  my  consciousness.  Unless  under
delusion  or  illusion  of  memory  we  cannot  remember  what  did
not  occur  in  consciousness.  We  cannot  remember  lohat  we  were
not  conscious  of.  The  past  mental  state  which  the  present
memory  refers  to  is  a  state  of  consciousness ;  otherwise  memory  is
impossible  and  meaningless.  Memory,  recollection,  reminiscence,
can  only  refer  to  a  previous  state  of  consciousness.  Surely  no  one
else  can  have  a  better  and  more  direct  knowledge  than  I
myself  have  of  the  ideas,  emotions,  and  moods  that  I  remember,
as  experienced  by  me.

The  memory  factor  is  all  the  more  important  in  psychology,
since  we  have  to  take  account  of  the  subject's  inner  experi-
ences. In  each  case  of  memory  the  burden  of  proof  falls  on
those  who  deny  the  validity  of  that  memory,  as  referring  to
a  past  state  of  consciousness.  Suppose  I  have  a  memory  in  a
full  state  of  consciousness  that  I  lighted  a  lamp  an  hour  ago,
the  burden  of  proof  would  fall  on  those  who  deny  the  exist-
ence of  such  a  state.  It  would  be  an  arbitrary,  if  not  pre-
posterous, position  for  an  outside  observer  to  claim  that  the
lighting  of  the  lamp  was  carried  out  mechanically,  by  a  physio-
logical automatism,  and  that  the  subsequent  memory  was  but
an  illusion.  The  onus  of  proof  that  the  original  act  had
no  conscious  accompaniment  is  entirely  on  those  who  take
such  a  position  in  opposition  to  the  direct  introspective
account.  Where  such  a  proof  is  not  forthcoming,  the  position
taken  is  arbitrary.  Were  we  to  take  such  a  preposterous
position,  the  very  science  of  psychology  would  become  an
impossibility,  since  all  memory  would  have  to  be  declared  a
snare  and  a  delusion.  All  psychological  studies  based  on  intro-
spection and  memory  would  have  to  be  abandoned,  and  we
should  have  to  follow  Comte,  and  declare  psychology  an
impossibility.  A  psychologist  maintaining  such  a  point  of
view  is,  from  the  very  nature  of  his  position,  disqualified  to
give  his  opinion ;  he  must  fall  back  on  physiology,  and  rule
out  all  psychology.


LXVI.]


The  Theory  of  the  Subconscious.


331


If,  however,  memory  and  introspection  are  not  rejected,  then
the  recollection  of  a  conscious  state  should  not  be  arbitrarily
dismissed,  unless  there  are  good  reasons  for  such  a  dismissal.  Now,
the  hypnotic  subject,  or  the  patient,  in  the  case  of  functional
psychosis,  undergoes  an  experience  of  which  he  is  apparently
unconscious.  In  a  subsequent  state,  in  a  hypnotic  or  trance
state,  he  actually  recollects  that  the  experience  was  a  con-
scious one ;  we  cannot  possibly  reject  this  recollection  as  an
illusion  of  memory.  The  burden  of  proof  that  the  former
state  was  not  a  conscious  one  falls  on  him  who  denies  the
person's  mental  experience.  Such  a  proof  is  all  the  more
requisite  since  it  can  be  demonstrated  that  in  subconscious
states  there  is  really  present  a  subconscious  consciousness.


CHAPTER  III.

THE  SUBCONSCIOUS  AND  THE  PASSIVE  CONSCIOUSNESS.

Driven  out  of  the  psychological  fortress,  some  psychologists  of
the  philosophical  type  (Miinsterberg)  still  take  refuge  in  the
metaphysical  citadel.  It  is  claimed  that  psychologically  mental
life  is  analyzed  into  consciousness  and  its  content.  Now,  it
is  further  assumed  that  all  mental  modifications  occur  in
mental  contents,  but  not  in  consciousness.  Consciousness,
itself,  is  supposed  to  be  a  passive,  immutable  looker-on,  a  sort
of  psychic  deity.  We  thus  have  a  mental  content  which  is
not  conscious  and  a  consciousness  which  has  no  content,  a
sort  of  vacant  entity  resembling  the  blessed  Buddha  in  his
blissful  state  of  Nirvana.  Consciousness  is  regarded  in  the
light  of  a  substance  which  contains  the  mental  content  some-
what after  the  fashion  of  a  material  substance  underlying
physical  qualities.  This  view  of  an  underlying,  immutable
substance,  with  a  changing  qualitative  content,  was  long  ago
criticized  by  Hume,  both  in  the  case  of  mind  and  body.
The  assumption  of  an  entity  underlying  observed  phenomena,
whether  physical  or  mental,  has  since  become  so  weakened
that  it  is  no  longer  regarded  as  a  living  hypothesis  among
thinking  men  of  science.


332


Boris  Sidis,  M.D.


[part


We  can  see  at  a  glance  that  the  substance-consciousness
with  its  changing  qualitative  content  is  but  a  piece  of
metaphysical  speculation,  it  is  a  revival  of  the  old  soul-
hypothesis,  long  ago  buried  by  analytic  and  experimental
psychologists.  The  soul-consciousness  hypothesis  must  be  re-
jected, for  the  simple  reason  that  it  complicates  matters  and
explains  nothing.  In  fact,  the  hypothesis  of  an  imperturbable
soul -consciousness,  from  the  very  nature  of  its  hypothetical
being,  itself  requires  an  explanation,  while  it  does  not  in  the
least  explain  the  mental  content,  which  is  the  material  of  the
psychologist.  Such  a  passive,  changeless  soul-consciousness  is
a  sort  of  box  in  which  the  content  of  soul-consciousness
resides  and  has  its  being.  This  soul-consciousness  is  but  a
survival  from  a  past  metaphysical  period.

In  the  case  of  double  and  multiple  personalities  it  is  claimed
that,  while  the  personalities  are  different,  their  consciousness
is  not  different,  but  one  and  the  same.  In  the  different
personalities  found  in  the  case  of  multiple  personality,  there  is
among  them  but  one  consciousness,  somewhat  like  the  Greek
myth  of  the  three  old  women  with  one  eye  among  them.  By
a  parity  of  reasoning  we  may  say  that  the  minds  of
different  individuals,  such  as  John's  and  Peter's,  are  really
identical.  John  and  Peter  are  different  personalities  with
different  contents,  but  with  the  same  consciousness.  In  fact,
we  may  generalize  further  and  say  that  the  whole  human  race
and  the  beasts  of  the  field  and  the  birds  of  the  air  share
in  one  and  the  same  indivisible,  passive,  immutable  conscious-
ness, a  sort  of  world-soul.  This  may  be  a  grand  metaphysical
speculation,  but  it  is  neither  psychological  nor  scientific.

There  is  another  objection  to  the  subconscious,  an  objection
based  on  an  artificial  fast  and  hard  line  drawn  between  the
purpose  of  science  on  the  one  hand,  and  that  of  will  on  the
other.  Science,  it  is  claimed,  deals  with  artificial  concepts,
while  personal  will  is  concerned  with  the  real  values  of  life.
It  is  claimed  that  the  concept  of  the  subconscious  is  illegitimate,
because  it  involves  a  confusion  of  this  metaphysical  double
bookkeeping.

The  world  of  description  and  the  world  of  appreciation
were  brought  out  and  contrasted  by  Professor  Koyce  in  his
early  works,  and  afterwards  elaborated  by  a  few  psychologists


LXVI.]


The  Theory  of  the  Subconscious.


333


of  the  Schopenhauerian  tinge.  The  division  is  not  new,  and
dates  back  to  the  Middle  Ages,  with  its  split  of  science
and  philosophy  on  the  one  hand,  and  religion  on  the  other.
It  is  the  doctrine  of  the  two-fold  truth  (Die  Lehre  von  der
zweifachen  Wahrheit).  According  to  mediaeval  thought,  there
are  two  realms,  the  realm  of  knowledge  and  the  realm  of
faith ;  the  realm  of  intellect  and  the  realm  of  will.  What
is  true  in  the  one  may  not  be  true  in  the  other.  From
Maimonides,  Ibn  Gabirol,  Albertus  Magnus,  Thomas  Aquinas
to  Duns  Scotus  and  Occam  the  same  doctrine  of  the  two-fold
truth  and  the  two  reals  prevailed.  The  scholastic  could  say
anything  he  wished  provided  he  was  cautious  to  claim  that
what  was  true  secundum  rationem  was  not  true  secundum
Jidem.

This  double  view  still  survives  in  some  philosophical  quarters.
Instead  of  finding  fault  with  the  subconscious  for  ignoring
this  time-honoured  double  truth,  it  should  rather  be  regarded
as  a  special  merit.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  subconscious,
unless  interpreted  in  metaphysical  terms  of  a  cosmic  self,  has
nothing  to  do  with  the  heirloom  of  metaphysical  mediaeval
thought.  The  subconscious  is  based  on  experience  and  facts
to  which  philosophical  and  metaphysical  distinctions  should
adapt  themselves.

We  thus  find  that  the  objections  to  the  subconscious  are
based  on  insufficient  grounds.  We  also  find  that  the  abandon-
ment of  the  subconscious  leads  to  a  tangle  of  difficulties  and
to  the  quagmire  of  mediaeval  metaphysics.  If  the  metaphysical
interpretation  of  the  subconscious  in  the  sense  of  a  cosmic
self  lands  one  in  the  misty  regions  of  religious  mysticism,
the  opposite  view  of  the  total  negation  of  the  subconscious,
apparently  in  the  interests  of  science,  lands  one  in  regions
no  less  shadowy,  regions  of  naturalistic  mysticism.

So  fundamental,  however,  is  the  concept  of  the  subconscious
that  even  its  opponents  have  to  admit  it  under  different
names.  They  admit  the  fact  of  dissociation,  of  dissociated
mental  systems,  and  of  dissociated  personalities.  But  they
put  forth  the  hypothetical  claim  that  it  is  one  and  the  same
consciousness  present  in  all  the  different  forms  of  dissociation.
Now,  if  we  omit  that  speculative  metaphysical  consciousness  which,
being  inactive and  unchangeable,  is of  no  use  in  scientific


334


Boris  Sidis,  M.D.


[part


work,  we  are  really  left  with  the  mutations  and  permutations
of  mental  systems  which,  from  their  very  nature,  must  he
conscious.  The  psychopathologist  must  postulate  the  subcon-
scious just  as  the  geometrician  postulates  space  and  position,
or  as  the  physicist  postulates  matter  and  force.

CHAPTER  IV.

SUBCONSCIOUS  AND  UNCONSCIOUS  IDEAS.

There  is  a  school  which  regards  the  subconscious  as  formed
of  "  suppressed  mental  complexes."  The  views  of  this  school
are  not  psychologically  clear.  It  seems,  however,  that  the
subconscious  is  viewed  in  the  light  of  "  unconscious  ideas."
"  Unconscious  Ideas  "  were  discussed  by  me  in  my  Psychology
of  Suggestion,  and  I  cannot  do  better  than  to  quote  from  that
volume,  "  For  the  mechanism  of  consciousness  is  hidden  deep
down  in  the  depths  of  the  subconscious,  and  it  is  thither  we
have  to  descend  in  order  to  get  a  clear  understanding  of  the
phenomena  that  appear  in  the  broad  daylight  of  consciousness."

The  German  school,  with  Wundt  at  its  head,  at  first  started
out  on  similar  lines,  but  they  could  not  make  any  use  of  the
subconscious,  and  their  speculations  ran  wild  in  the  fancies  of
Hartmann.  The  reason  of  this  failure  is  due  to  the  fact  that
the  concept  of  the  subconscious  as  conceived  by  the  German
school  was  extremely  vague,  and  had  rather  the  character  of
a  mechanical  than  that  of  a  psychical  process.  An  unconscious
consciousness — that  was  their  concept  of  the  subconscious.  In
such  a  form  as  this  the  subconscious  was  certainly  meaningless
— mere  nonsense — and  had  to  be  given  up.  The  German
psychological  investigations  are  now  confined  to  the  content
of  consciousness  in  so  far  as  the  individual  is  immediately
conscious  of  it.  But  as  this  form  of  consciousness  is  extremely
narrow  and  circumscribed,  the  results  arrived  at,  though  re-
markable for  their  thoroughness,  are,  after  all,  of  a  rather
trivial  nature.  It  is  what  Prof.  James  aptly  characterizes
as  "  the  elaboration  of  the  obvious."

This criticism applies  well  to Freud  and his  adherents.


lxvi.]  The  Theory  of  the  Subconscious.  335


Das  Unbevmsstc  is  conceived  as  "  Suppressed  unconscious  idea-
complexes."  Of  course,  the  claims  of  that  school  to  originality
and  to  the  apparent  unveiling  of  the  causation  of  psycho-
neurosis  are  entirely  unjustified.  A  "  suppressed  complex "  is
but  another  term  for  a  dissociated  system,  commonly  accepted
in  Psychopathology.  The  special  theories  developed  by  that
school  in  regard  to  desire,  to  sexuality  and  to  voluntary  sup-
pression of  unpleasant  or  painful  ideas  are  highly  questionable
in  the  light  of  psychology  and  clinical  experience.

This  German  school  of  Psychopathology  has  unfortunately
fallen  back  on  the  Herbartian  psychology  with  its  metaphysical
Eeals  or  ideas  which  by  their  mutual  tension  keep  suppressing
one  another,  thus  determining  the  display  of  the  contents  of
consciousness.  As  Herbart  tells  us :  "  Concepts  become  forces
when  they  resist  one  another.  This  resistance  occurs  when
two  or  more  opposed  concepts  encounter  one  another."  This
proposition  or  principle  proclaimed  by  Herbart  is  at  the  basis
of  Freud's  psychology.  "  A  concept  is  in  consciousness  in  so
far  as  it  is  not  suppressed,"  Herbart  tells  us,  "  but  is  in  actual
representation.  When  it  rises  out  of  complete  suppression,  it
enters  into  consciousness."  According  to  Herbart  and  his  modern
followers,  suppressed  ideas  become  forces  and  impulses.  Con-
cepts which  are  not  opposed  or  contrasted  with  one  another,
so  far  as  they  meet  unhindered,  form  a  "  complex,"  a  favourite
term  used  by  the  German  school  and  their  followers.

It  may  possibly  be  of  interest  to  remark  that  Herbart  is
closely  followed  by  the  German  school  of  Psychopathology  in
regard  to  the  doctrine  of  desire.  Desire  with  Herbart  is
fundamental.  "  The  faculty  of  desire  must  include  wishes,
instincts,  and  every  species  of  longing."  "  The  expression
'  desire '  must  not  be  so  limited  as  to  exclude  those  wishes
which  remain,  though  they  may  be  vain,  or  so-called  pious
wishes,  and  which,  for  the  very  reason  that  they  do  remain,
constantly  incite  men  to  new  efforts,  because  through  them
the  thought  of  a  possibility  is  ever  anew  suggested,  in  spite
of  all  reasons  which  appear  to  prove  the  impossibility  of
attainment.  It  is  very  important  to  give  the  concept  of  the
unattainability  of  the  wished-for  object  strength  enough  so
that  a  peaceful  renunciation  may  take  place  of  the  desire.
A  man  dreams  of  a  desirable  future  for  himself,  even  when


336


Boris  Sidis,  M.D.


[part


he  knows  it  will  never  come."  These  Herbartian  doctrines,
long  ago  abandoned  by  psychology,  are  now  being  revived  by
the  German  school  of  Psychopathology  as  a  new  discovery  in
the  science  of  normal  and  abnormal  psychology.  No  better
criticism  can  be  passed  on  this  revival  of  Herbartian  psychology
in  the  domain  of  Psychopathology  than  the  one  made  by  Prof.
James :  "  I  must  confess  that  to  my  mind  there  is  something
almost  hideous  in  the  glib  Herbartian  jargon  about  Vorstellung-
massen  and  their  Hcmmungcn  (suppressions)  and  sinken  and
erheben  and  schweben  and  Verschmelzungen  and  Complexionen
(complexes)."

It  is  claimed  by  some  of  Freud's  younger  adherents  that
the  mechanism  of  "  unconscious  ideas,"  though  a  contradiction,
is  nevertheless  justified,  because  of  its  being  a  conceptual  con-
struct, as  Karl  Pearson  puts  it,  in  order  to  aid  the  explanation
of  mental  phenomena.  This  is  a  new  epistemological  argument
in  defence  of  a  tottering  system.  It  is  truly  amazing  that
science  has  nowadays  become  so  philosophical  that  when  a
theory  is  unstable,  it  is  unhesitatingly  supported  by  epistemo-
logical considerations.

Perhaps  it  may  be  well  to  point  out  that  self-contra-
dictory hypotheses  are  not  quite  acceptable  in  science.  A
scientific  hypothesis  should  at  least  have  the  merit  of  being
rational,  logical,  and  not  conceived  in  a  wild  harum-scarum
fashion.  A  good  scientific  hypothesis  must  have  restrictions
and  definite  conditions.  I  think  it  is  Huxley  who  says
that  in  the  case  of  stolen  goods  two  hypotheses  are  at
hand :  one  hypothesis  is  that  an  angel  is  responsible  for  it,
and  the  other  that  a  thief  has  carried  off  the  goods.  The  angel-
hypothesis  is  hardly  considered  by  science.  In  other  words,
the  hypothetical  causative  agency  must  be  conceived  in  terms
of  experience.

The  hypothetical  agency  must  either  be  a  fact  directly
observed  in  nature  or  a  fact  which  can  be  verified  later  on.
Thus  the  theory  of  gravitation  is  based  on  the  facts  of  falling
bodies ;  the  theory  of  natural  selection  is  based  on  the  facts
of  the  struggle  for  existence  observed  in  the  organic  world.
In  short,  a  good  scientific  hypothesis  must  take  as  its  causative
agency  a  vera  causa,  a  fact  observable  in  experience  or  a  fact
which  can  be  verified  by  further  experience. Atoms,  electrons,


LXVI.]


The  Theory  of  the  Subconscious.


337


ether,  are  not  haphazard  constructs  ;  they  are  not  regarded  by  the
physicist  as  unreal  fancies,  unreal  abstract  notions  to  explain  the
real  facts ;  but  each  of  these  hypothetical  agents  is  regarded  as
real,  as  a  vera  causa.  We  cannot  help  agreeing  with  J.  S.  Mill  on
the  subject  of  hypothesis  :  "  I  conceive  it  to  be  necessary,  when
the  hypothesis  relates  to  causation,  that  the  supposed  cause  should
not  only  be  a  real  phenomenon,  something  actually  existing  in
nature,  but  should  be  already  known  to  exercise,  or  at  least
to  be  capable  of  exercising,  an  influence  of  some  sort  over  the
effect.  In  any  other  case  it  is  no  sufficient  evidence  of  the
truth  of  the  hypothesis  that  we  are  able  to  deduce  the  real
phenomenon  from  it."  Again,  "  What  is  true  in  [Newton's]
maxim  is  that  the  cause,  though  not  known  previously,  should
be  capable  of  being  known  thereafter ;  that  its  existence  should
be  capable  of  being  detected,  and  its  connection  with  the  effect
ascribed  to  it  should  be  susceptible  of  being  proved  by  indepen-
dent evidence"  (Logic,  p.  53).

If  we  apply  this  very  simple  rule  of  logic  to  the  theory  of
"  unconscious  ideas,"  we  at  once  realize  the  illegitimate  character
of  such  a  hypothesis.  An  idea  is  essentially  of  a  conscious
nature.  To  speak,  therefore,  of  unconscious  ideas,  is  to  intro-
duce into  psychology  the  self-contradictory  impossible  concept
of  unconscious  conscious  ideas.  This  is  equivalent  to  the
assumption  of  an  unconscious  consciousness.  An  unconscious
idea  is  neither  a  vera  causa  nor  a  fact  ultimately  to  be  verified.
The  conception  of  an  unconscious  idea  is  like  the  conception  of
a  round  square.

Moreover  it  is  not  true,  psychologically,  that  ideas
can  be  "  suppressed "  so  that  they  become  dissociated  or
"  unconscious."  It  is  not  true  that  we  suppress  painful  ideas
into  the  "  unconscious."  We  do  not  forget  our  painful  ideas.
On  the  contrary,  painful  ideas  stand  out  all  the  more  pro-
minent in  our  consciousness.  Pain  hammers  experience  into  the
mind.  In  fact  we  may  say  with  more  right  that  it  is  the
pleasurable  ideas  that  are  forgotten,  while  the  painful  ideas  are
remembered.  An  experience  associated  with  pain  is  never  for-
gotten. Like  a  splinter  in  the  flesh,  it  remains  in  conscious-
ness to  trouble  us  all  our  life  long.  It  is  due  to  other  causes
that  a  painful  experience  becomes  subconscious.  Teleologically,
we  can  well  see  the  importance  of  this  fact.

Y


338


Boris  Sidis,  M.D.


[part


It  would  have  been  suicidal  to  the  individual  and  ultimately  to
the  species,  if  painful  experience  were  forgotten.  The  individual
must  learn  to  avoid  harmful  objects  and  hurtful  stimuli.  This
can  only  be  accomplished  by  actually  remembering  painful  experi-
ences. That  individual  would  survive  who  remembered  best  his
painful  experiences.  Were  it  otherwise,  the  individual  would
be  very  much  in  the  condition  of  the  proverbial  silly  bird
that  hides  its  head  at  the  sight  of  the  hunter.  The  subjective
painful  experiences  must  be  remembered  ;  a  painful  experience
fixes  the  attention.  On  this  fact  was  based  the  once  universally
recognized  method  of  training  and  education.  What  is  fixed  by
pain  is  never  forgotten.  What  may  bring  about  forgetfulness
is  either  a  constitutionally  bad  memory  or  a  state  of  indifference,
or  an  intense,  paralyzing  emotion  of  fear,  especially  in  early
childhood.  The  whole  theory  of  "  suppression  "  of  painful  "  com-
plexes "  is  based  on  fcdsc  clinical  and  psychological  assumptions.
Neither  is  there  such  a  process  as  "  suppression  of  complexes,"
nor  is  there  such  a  mental  state  as  an  "  unconscious  idea."

An  "  unconscious  idea "  in  the  sense  that  the  idea  has
no  consciousness  can  have  no  meaning.  If,  however,  by  an
"  unconscious  idea "  is  understood  a  consciousness  of  which  the
individual  or  personal  self  is  not  conscious,  then  we  come
around  to  a  subconscious  consciousness,  as  developed  by  me  in
my  various  works.  A  quotation  from  Hoffding  may  bring
out  my  point  in  a  clearer  and  stronger  light :

The  question  before  us  is,  whether  the  unconscious  can  be  other
than  a  purely  negative  concept.  In  daily  speech  (and  more  than
is  proper  even  in  the  scientific  use  of  the  language)  we  use  such
expressions  as  unconscious  sensations,  unconscious  ideas,  unconscious
feeling.  As,  however,  sensations,  ideas  and  feelings  are  elements,
the  expression  is  in  reality  absurd.  If  by  an  unconscious  idea  is
meant  the  idea  which  I  have,  then  the  predicate  "unconscious"
signifies  only  that  I  do  not  think  of  or  pay  heed  to  the  fact  that  I
have  it.  This  use  of  the  word  unconsciousness  is  connected  with
a  twofold  use  of  the  word  consciousness.  It  is  used  to  denote  not
only  the  inner  presentation  of  our  sensations,  ideas  and  feelings,
but  also  self-consciousness,  the  attention  especially  directed  to  our
sensations,  ideas  and  feelings.  We  have,  of  course,  many  sensations
and  ideas  without  being  conscious  that  we  have  them,  that  is,
without  self-consciousness : many  feelings  and  impulses  stir  within


LXVI.]


The  Theory  of  the  Subconscious.


339


us,  without  our  clearly  apprehending  their  nature  and  direction.
In  this  sense  we  speak,  for  example,  of  unconscious  love.  A  man
who  has  this  feeling  does  not  know  what  is  astir  in  him  ;  perhaps
others  see  it,  or  he  himself  gradually  discovers  it ;  but  he  has  the
feeling  his  conscious  life  is  determined  in  a  particular  way.

In  other  words,  what  Hoffding  practically  claims  here  is  that
there  is  no  such  mental  state,  no  idea  that  is  "  unconscious,"
but  that  there  are  mental  states,  ideas,  feelings,  which,  though
conscious,  do  not  reach  self-consciousness.  In  other  words,
there  are  in  us  mental  processes  which  have  consciousness,  but  no
self-consciousness.  This  is  precisely  what  I  mean  by  the  sub-
conscious,— mental  states  which  have  consciousness,  but  do  not
reach  the  personal  consciousness.  In  short,  the  only  possible
psychological  assumption  is  a  subconscious  consciousness.


CHAPTER  V.

THE  SUBCONSCIOUS,  CONSCIOUS  AND  UNCONSCIOUS.

Those  who  accept  the  division  of  the  subconscious  into  co-existing
consciousness  or  the  co-conscious  and  the  unconscious  really
assume  the  doctrine  of  the  subconscious.  They  claim  that
it  would  be  better  and  more  precise  to  indicate  whenever
possible  the  conscious  or  unconscious,  that  is,  the  strictly
physiological  character  of  the  observed  manifestations.  This,
however,  is  more  easily  said  than  done.  We  know  next  to
nothing  of  the  physiological  brain  processes,  which  are  mainly
hypothetical,  and  we  do  not  know  the  limits  of  the  subconscious
consciousness.  In  many  cases  it  is  not  easy  to  determine
what  the  exact  character  of  the  subconscious  manifestation  is,
how  far  it  is  conscious,  dimly  conscious,  how  far  it  has  gone
toward  the  development  of  an  independent  personality,  and
how  far  it  shades  in  the  direction  of  the  purely  physiological.
In  the  absence  of  any  exact  determination,  the  term  subconscious
indicates  the  character  of  the  mental  state  without  any  definite
committal  to  any  of  the  possible  hypotheses.

The  term  "  unconscious "  is  all  the  more  objectionable,  as
Hoffding has already  pointed out,  as it is essentially  an


340  Boris  Sidis,  M.D.  [part

ambiguous,  negative  concept.  The  "  unconscious "  may  mean
absence  of  self-consciousness,  or  lack  of  consciousness,  that  is,
purely  physiological  processes  with  no  conscious  concomitant.
He  who  uses  the  term  "  unconscious  "  must  in  each  case  indicate
in  what  sense  he  uses  the  term.  Is  the  manifestation  entirely
physiological,  or  is  it  conscious  in  the  sense  of  consciousness
with  no  self-consciousness  ?  The  two  meanings  are  diametrically
opposed  to  each  other.  The  unconscious  in  the  sense  of  the
purely  physiological  assumes  the  theory  of  unconscious  cere-
bration ;  the  other  use  of  the  unconscious  in  the  sense  of  mere
consciousness  with  no  self-consciousness  recognizes  the  view
of  the  subconsciousness  as  advanced  in  my  works.

It  is  claimed  again  that  in  many  cases  of  psychopathic
maladies  there  is  no  need  to  have  recourse  to  subconscious
systems.  It  is  quite  probable  that  the  association  between
the  stimulus  and  the  emotion  called  forth  is  a  direct  one.
The  patient  who  is  afraid  of  dogs  has  the  fear  called  forth  by
the  sight  of  a  dog.  There  is  no  need  to  assume  that  there
are  here  any  intermediate  links  in  the  chain  of  association.
Even  physiological  links  may  be  totally  absent  here.  It  may
be  that  by  investigation  it  can  be  shown  that  this  associa-
tion has  a  history  based  on  some  former  experience.  There
is  no  reason  to  assume  that  the  experience  is  functioning
subconsciously,  whether  consciously  or  "  unconsciously,"  that  is,
physiologically.  The  dog  and  the  fear  have  formed  an  indis-
soluble association,  so  that,  as  soon  as  the  dog  is  perceived
the  fear  is  awakened.

This,  however,  is  rather  a  debatable  subject,  since  it  is
impossible  to  tell  in  the  case  of  purely  physiological  links,
whether  such  are  present  or  not.  Thus,  Hoffding  says,
"  Not  only  may  conscious  results  come  from  unconscious
(subconscious)  working  up,  but  there  may  also  be  uncon-
scious intermediate  links  in  the  midst  of  conscious  work.
Supposing  the  idea  a  to  be  linked  with  the  idea  b,  and  b
again  with  c,  then  a  will  finally  produce  c  directly  without
the  intervention  of  b.  The  intermediate  links  are  often  so
numerous  that  they  cannot  be  recovered  at  all  or  with  great
difficulty.  Many  psychological  paradoxes  and  sudden  sugges-
tions have  their  explanation  in  this  unconscious  determining
of  conscious  ideas."


LXVI.]


The  Theory  of  the  Subconscious.


341


Wundt  seems  to  maintain  the  same  view :  "  The  memory-
process  is  especially  predominant  in  those  cases  where  the
element  of  the  new  impression  that  gave  rise  to  the
assimilation  is  entirely  suppressed  by  the  other  components
of  the  image,  so  that  the  associative  relation  between  the
memory-idea  and  the  impression  may  remain  completely
unnoticed.  Such  cases  have  been  spoken  of  as  '  mediate
memories '  or  '  mediate  associations.'  Still,  just  as  with
'  mediate  recognitions,'  we  are  here,  too,  dealing  with  processes
that  are  fundamentally  the  same  as  ordinary  associations.
Take,  for  example,  the  case  of  a  person  who,  sitting  in  his
room  at  evening,  suddenly  remembers,  without  any  apparent
reason,  a  landscape  that  he  passed  through  many  years  before  ;
examination  shows  that  there  happened  to  be  in  the  room  a
fragrant  flower  which  he  saw  for  the  first  time  in  the  land-
scape. The  difference  between  this  and  an  ordinary
memory-process  in  which  the  connection  of  the  new  im-
pression with  an  earlier  experience  is  clearly  recognized,
obviously  consisted  in  the  fact  that  here  the  elements  which  recall
the  idea  are  pushed  into  the  obscure  background  of  conscious-
ness. The  not  infrequent  experience,  commonly  known  as  the
'  spontaneous  rise '  of  ideas,  in  which  a  memory-image  suddenly
appears  in  our  mind  without  any  assignable  cause,  is  in  all
probability  reducible  in  every  case  to  such  latent  association."
It  appears,  then,  that  both  Hoffding  and  Wundt  acknowledge
the  presence  of  intermediate  links  in  what  appears  to  be  a
case  of  purely  "  mediate "  or  direct  association.

In  cases  where  the  intermediate  links  are  "  unconscious,"  in
the  sense  of  a  purely  physiological  process,  there  is  no  criterion
to  prove  the  presence  of  such  intermediate  physiological  links,
and  one  may  as  well,  from  a  purely  psychological  introspective
standpoint,  deny  their  very  existence.  On  the  other  hand,
if  with  Wundt,  Hoffding  and  others  we  assume  the  presence  of
intermediate  psychic  links,  there  is  no  way  of  disproving  them.
It  is  quite  probable  that  such  intermediate  links  are  present  in
every  single  case.  The  very  fact  that  "  unconscious "  systems
can  be  revived  as  memories  or  hallucinatory  hypnoidic  states
would  indicate  their  functioning  when  one  of  their  components
becomes  awakened  to  activity.

As  an  objection  to  the  presence  of  intermediate  psychic  links,


342  Boris  Sidis,  M.D.  [part

Pavlow's  experiments  are  brought  forward  to  show  that
associations  can  be  formed  between  remote  stimuli  and
glandular  secretions,  for  instance.  Thus,  a  dog  with  a  fistula
in  the  parotid  gland  can  be  made  to  react  with  secretions  to
light  or  sound  stimuli.

This  objection  may  be  easily  obviated  by  the  considera-
tion that  we  do  not  know  whether  there  are  or  are
not  intermediate  mental  links  between  the  artificial  stimuli
and  the  discharge  of  the  glandular  secretion.  This  considera-
tion is  all  the  more  cogent  as  the  remote  stimuli  can  only
give  results,  if  persistently  associated  with  food  stimuli.  If
such  association  with  food  stimuli  is  absent,  and  new  stimuli
are  associated  with  remote  stimuli  which  give  reactions  through
their  associations  with  food  stimuli,  the  result  is  inhibition  of
secretion.  In  other  words,  each  new  stimulus  must  be
directly  associated  with  the  original  food  stimulus.

To  quote  from  Savadsky's  work  carried  out  in  Pavlow's  labora-
tory: "Wasiliev  and  Mishtovt  were  the  first  to  investigate  condi-
tions of  inhibitions.  At  first  the  authors  had  in  mind  to  develop
conditional  reflexes,  not  on  the  basis  of  the  unconditional  reflex
(i.e.  food)  but  on  the  basis  of  another  conditional  reflex  (such
as  a  sound  or  light  stimulus  giving  secretion).  Their  experi-
ments were  as  follows :  from  time  to  time  they  associated
with  the  usual  conditional  stimulus  another  stimulus  which
had  no  relation  whatever  to  salivary  secretion,  and  this
combination  was  not  accompanied  by  the  presence  of  the
unconditional  stimulus  (food).  By  means  of  a  great  number
of  repetitions  of  such  a  combination,  it  was  supposed  to
associate  with  the  quality  of  the  extraneous  stimulus  the
quality  of  bringing  about  salivary  secretion.  It  turned  out,
however,  that  such  an  arrangement  of  experimentation  could
by  no  means  transform  the  extraneous  agent  into  a  con-
ditional stimulus.  In  that  way  it  became  clear  that  the
conditional  stimulus,  contrary  to  the  unconditional,  is  not
capable  of  communicating  its  property  of  bringing  about
salivary  secretion.  The  fact  is  that  the  associative  external
stimulus,  when  accompanied  by  the  unconditional  stimulus
alone,  becomes  after  a  few  repetitions  a  powerful  inhibiting
agent."

This clearly shows that the conditional reflex in  the


LXVI.]


The  Theory  of  the  Subconscious.


343


dog  can  bring  about  salivary  secretions  only  when  associated
with  the  unconditional  reflex.  What  it  means  is,  that  the
dog  on  seeing  a  light  or  hearing  the  sound  expects  food,  and
hence  the  psychic  stimulation  of  his  salivary  glands  resulting
in  secretion.  Pavlow's  experiments  and  also  the  experiments
carried  out  under  his  directions  by  his  pupils  clearly  prove
that  there  is  no  direct  association  between  secretion  and  an
external  stimulus,  such  as  light  or  sound,  but  that  the  secretion
is  brought  about  by  an  intermediate  psychic  link,  namely  the
expectation  of  food.  Thus  we  find  that  the  work  of  Pavlow
and  his  pupils,  far  from  showing  the  possibility  of  formation
of  direct  associations,  really  goes  to  substantiate  the  view  of
the  presence  of  intermediate  mental  links  in  cases  of  mediate
associations.

As  a  matter  of  fact  there  is  no  need  for  us  to  establish
hypothetical,  intermediate,  unconscious  or  physiological  links.
The  "  unconscious "  brain-processes  are  problematic  entities  and
there  is  no  way  of  getting  at  them.  What  we  need  to  discover
in  cases  of  mediate  association,  and  especially  in  cases  of
psychopathic  diseases,  is  whether  the  intermediate  links,  or  the
original  experience  that  brought  about  the  trauma,  or  the  state
of  dissociation  is  present,  consciously  or  subconsciously  or  co-
consciously.  This  is  possible  to  test  by  hypnosis  or  by  means
of  the  hypnoidal  state.  In  many  such  cases  we  actually  find
that  the  patient  lives  through  the  original  experience  either
consciously  in  a  hypnoidal  state,  or  in  a  hypnoidic  state,  thus
undergoing  a  mental  experience  which  is  immediately  forgotten  or
dissociated ;  or  what  is  more  commonly  the  case,  the  patient  lives
through  the  original  experience  subconsciously.  But,  whether
conscious  or  subconscious,  the  mental  state  is  not  "  unconscious,"
but  is  essentially  of  a  conscious  character.  In  short,  we  deal  here
either  with  the  personal  consciousness  or  with  the  subconscious
consciousness.  Thus,  all  the  facts  of  mental  life,  normal  or
abnormal,  substantiate  the  presence  of  a  subconscious  consciotisness.


344


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


SUPPLEMENT.


REVIEWS.

Body  and  Mind:  a  History  and  a  Defence  of  Animism.  By  William
M 'Doug all,  M.B.  (Methuen  &  Co.,  Ltd.  London,  1911.  384
pp. Price  10s.  6d.  net.)

The  scope  and  purpose  of  this  important  contribution  to  modern
Psychology  are  concisely  described  in  its  second  title — a  history  and
a  defence  of  Animism.

The  term  "  Animism  "  as  defined  by  Mr.  M'Dougall  covers  a  very
wide  range  of  meaning.  "The  essential  notion,"  he  says,  "which
forms  the  common  foundation  of  all  varieties  of  Animism,  is  that  all,
or  some,  of  those  manifestations  of  life  and  mind  which  distinguish
the  living  man  from  the  corpse,  and  from  inorganic  bodies,  are  due  to
the  operation  within  him  of  something  which  is  of  a  nature  different
from  that  of  the  body,  an  animating  principle  generally,  but  not
necessarily  or  always,  conceived  as  an  immaterial  and  individual  being
or  soul." 1

In  order  to  make  this  definition  still  clearer,  Mr.  M'Dougall  examines
a  variety  of  other  terms  which  might  have  seemed  to  serve  his  purpose
equally  well  or  better,  and  gives  his  reasons  for  rejecting  them  either
as  being  too  narrow  or  as  otherwise  open  to  objection.  "  No  other
term,"  he  considers,  "indicates  precisely  all  those  theories  of  human
personality  which  have  in  common  the  notion  which,  as  I  believe,
provides  the  only  alternative  to  Materialism.  The  word  'Spiritualism'
as  used  in  philosophy  is  ambiguous,  and  it  has  been  spoilt  for  scientific
purposes  by  its  current  usage  to  denote  that  popular  belief  which  is
more  properly  called  Spiritism.  Nor  is  all  Animism  spiritualistic ;
during  long  ages  the  dominant  form  of  it  was  a  materialistic  Dualism.
The  term  '  psycho-physical  dualism '  accurately  expresses  the  essential
animistic  notion  ;  but  it  is  cumbrous,  and  the  word  dualism  is  apt

1  Trefiice,  p.  viii.


LXVI.]


Reviews.


345


to  be  taken  to  imply  metaphysical  Dualism,  an  implication  I  am
anxious  to  avoid;  for  Animism  does  not  necessarily  imply  metaphysical
Dualism,  or  indeed  any  metaphysical  or  ontological  doctrine,  Solipsism
alone  excepted.  The  expression  '  psycho-physical  interactionism  '  will
not  serve  my  purpose,  because  (as  we  see  in  the  philosophy  of
Leibnitz,  and  in  that  modification  of  the  Cartesian  system  known  as
Occasionalism),  Animism  may  be  combined  with  the  denial  of  psycho-
physical interaction.  Again,  the  term  '  soul-theory '  does  not  cover
all  varieties  of  Animism,  in  illustration  of  which  statement  I  may
remind  the  reader  that  the  late  Prof.  James  advocated  a  distinctly
animistic  view  of  human  personality,  which  he  called  the  '  trans-
mission theory,'  but  explicitly  rejected  the  conception  of  the  soul  as
a  unitary  and  individual  being."

The  very  wide  extension  thus  given  to  the  term  Animism,  and
particularly  the  inclusion  in  it  of  what  Mr.  M'Dougall  calls  "material-
istic dualism,"  make  it  difficult  to  say  definitely  concerning  some  of
the  earlier  phases  of  philosophic  thought  whether  they  should  be
classed  as  animistic  or  non-animistic.  The  difficulty  is  no  doubt  largely
due  to  the  vagueness  of  the  doctrines  themselves.  As  Mr.  M'Dougall
points  out,  "The  doctrine  of  the  Ionian  philosopher  was  not  properly
Materialism,  for  the  distinction  between  matter  and  spirit  had  not
yet  been  clearly  drawn.  It  is  impossible  to  say  that  their  universal
principles  (e.g.  the  air  of  Diogenes  or  the  fire  of  Heraclitus)  were  more
nearly  allied  to  the  spiritual  or  to  the  physical,  as  conceived  by  later
thought.  Nor  did  the  conception  of  the  soul  entertained  by  animistic
philosophers  imply  any  clear  distinction  between  the  material  or
physical  and  the  spiritual  or  mental,  such  as  has  commonly  been
maintained  in  later  ages."  Mr.  M'Dougall,  however,  treats  the  Hylo-
zoism  of  the  Ionians  as  non-animistic,  and  no  doubt  rightly,  if  regard
is  had  to  the  general  tendency  of  their  speculations.  Yet  it  must
be  remembered  that  their  fundamental  Monism  did  not  prevent  the
Ionian  philosophers  from  regarding  soul  as  a  special  kind  or  mode
of  matter,  and  in  this  sense  distinguishing  it  from  the  body ;  and
that  even  Democritus,  whose  system  Mr.  M'Dougall  describes  as  a
thorough-going  Materialism,  held  that  the  soul-atoms  were  distinct
in  kind  from  the  atoms  constituting  the  body,  and  were  that  which
gave  the  body  life  and  consciousness.  To  that  extent  Democritus
might  be  counted  as  a  "materialistic  dualist,"  and  come  within  Mr.
M'DougaH's  definition  of  Animism.  The  difficulty  is  well  illustrated
in  the  case  of  the  Stoic  philosophy.  The  Stoics  held  that  whatever
is  real  is  material,  and  that  the  soul  is  the  warm  breath  within  the


346


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


bod}'.  But  this  did  not  prevent  some  of  them  at  least  from  also
holding  that  the  soul  outlives  the  body.

Of  Aristotle  Mr.  M'Dougall  says  that  his  doctrine  of  the  soul  has
more  affinity  with  the  Hylozoism  of  the  Ionian  philosophers  and
the  Materialism  of  Democritus  than  with  the  materialistic  Animism
of  popular  thought  or  the  spiritualistic  Animism  of  Plato.  Apparently
lie  classes  him  among  the  non-Animistic  thinkers.  No  doubt  there
is  much  ambiguity  in  Aristotle's  teaching  concerning  the  soul,  but
even  if  we  interpret  his  doctrine  of  the  I'oCs  7toi>7tikos  in  the  sense
most  unfavourable  to  the  survival  of  the  individual,  a  definition  of
Animism  which  includes  the  "transmission  theory"  of  William  James
can  hardly  exclude  the  Aristotelian  conception  of  the  psycho-physical
relation.

In  reality  it  is  of  comparatively  small  importance  how  we  classify
particular  thinkers  of  early  and  medieval  times  in  relation  to  terms
which  are  more  applicable  to  modern  than  to  ancient  thought.  The
chief  legacy  bequeathed  by  Greek  philosophy  and  by  Scholasticism
was  a  clearly  drawn  distinction  between  matter  and  spirit ;  and  when
to  this  distinction  was  added  the  conception  of  the  entire  material
universe  as  subject  to  laws  capable  of  definite  mathematical  expression,
modern  philosophy  may  be  said  to  have  begun.

Chapters  IV.  and  V.  of  Mr.  M'Dougall's  book,  which  gives  an
account  of  the  progress  of  psycho-physical  speculation  during  the
seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries,  are  a  good  example  of  skilful
condensation.  The  essential  points  are  sufficiently  brought  out,  while
at  the  same  time  the  danger  of  "  losing  sight  of  the  wood  for  the
trees "  is  successfully  avoided.

As  a  specimen  of  terse  and  striking  historical  characterisation  we
may  quote  the  following  passage  from  the  end  of  the  chapter  on
"Animism  in  the  Seventeenth  Century" :

"  Descartes  had  taught  that  man  is  composed  of  soul  and  body
acting  and  reacting  upon  one  another;  Leibnitz  that,  though  he  is
compounded  of  soul  and  body,  these  do  not  influence  one  another ;
Spinoza  that  mind  and  body  are  equally  real  or  unreal,  because  but
two  aspects  of  one  reality  ;  Hobbes  that  man  consists  of  body  alone,
the  soul  being  a  mere  figment  of  his  imagination.

"Two  possibilities  only  remained,  namely,  first  that  the  soul  alone
is  real,  the  body  being  fictitious  or  appearance  only ;  secondly  that
both  body  and  soul  are  fictitious.  And  the  ingenuity  of  the  eighteenth
century  proved  equal  to  the  task  of  propounding  and  maintaining
these  doctrines  also ;  before  the  century  passed  away  these  two  were


LXVI.]


Reviews.


347


added  to  the  list  of  rival  doctrines  by  philosophers,  namely  Bishop
Berkeley  and  David  Hume,  whose  penetration  and  high  reputation
secured  for  their  views  a  respectful  hearing  and  a  career  whose  end
no  man  can  yet  foresee."

The  immediate  developments  of  the  Cartesian  philosophy  turned
on  the  definition  of  substance.  Although  Descartes  held  that  in  man
the  spiritual  substance,  or  soul,  and  the  material  substance,  or  body,
mutually  interacted,  his  definition  of  substance  made  interaction
impossible.  The  doctrines  of  the  Occasionalists,  of  Leibnitz,  and
of  Spinoza,  were  so  many  attempts  to  overcome  the  logical  difficulty
without  surrendering  the  conception  of  substance.  It  was  the  con-
ception itself  which  was  made  the  subject  of  enquiry  and  question,
first  by  Locke,  who  held  that  spiritual  and  material  substances  were
alike  only  useful  hypotheses  inferred  from  the  facts  of  immediate
experience  ;  next  by  Berkeley,  for  whom  spiritual  substances  alone
were  real,  and  material  substance  a  fiction  ;  and  finally  by  Hume,
who  attacked  the  whole  idea  of  substance,  whether  spiritual  or
material,  and  declared  it  to  be  a  figment  of  the  imagination
without  any  counterpart  in  real  experience.

Both  these  lines  of  speculation  were  in  some  sort  united,  although
with  much  inconsistency  alike  of  statement  and  of  thought,  in  the
philosophy  of  Kant ;  and  it  has  been  in  the  main  through  the
medium  of  that  philosophy  that  they  have  affected  later  psycho-
physical theories.  It  is  interesting,  however,  to  note  that  the
leading  ideas  which  distinguish  the  two  parallelistic  doctrines  most
in  vogue  to-day  are  to  be  found,  in  the  one  case,  in  the  doctrine
of  Leibnitz  that  material  extension  is  only  the  appearance  to  us  of
an  aggregation  of  psychical  existents,  and,  in  the  other  case,  in  the
"double  aspect"  theory  of  Spinoza.  Both  the  modern  forms  of
parallelism,  moreover,  accept  the  notion  of  "psychology  without  a
soul,"  of  which  Hume  must  be  regarded  as  the  originator.

In  the  nineteenth  century,  and  especially  in  the  last  half  of  the
century,  Animism  suffered  a  rapid  decline.  It  can  hardly  be  doubted
that  Mr.  M'Dougall  is  right  in  assigning  as  the  chief  cause  of  this
decline  "  the  astonishing  and  splendid  development  of  the  natural
sciences,  based  in  the  main  upon  the  strictly  mechanistic  view  of
nature."  As  contributing  causes,  but  of  less  importance,  he  mentions
Kant's  destructive  attack  on  the  dogmatic  Metaphysic  of  his  prede-
cessor, and  the  reaction  produced  by  the  attempt  of  his  immediate
successors  to  convert  the  Kantian  epistemology  without  more  ado
into  an  Absolute  Idealism.


84S


The  Rigid  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


That  the  whole  material  universe  constituted  a  system  mechani-
cally ordered  was  already  common  ground  with  Descartes  and  his
successors.  Descartes,  indeed,  taught  that  in  the  case  of  man  the
soul  or  spiritual  substance  interacted  with  the  body :  but  this  he
held  to  be  the  solitary  exception  to  the  universal  sway  of  mechanism
in  the  material  sphere ;  all  other  animals  were  automatons.  Even
this  exception  was  swept  away  by  Spinoza.  But,  as  Mr.  M'Dougall
observes,  the  conclusion  that  the  actions  of  men  are  capable  of  being
fully  explained  in  terms  of  mechanism  was  rather  a  corollary  from
his  philosophical  system  than  a  doctrine  based  on  empirical  observa-
tion. "  Spinoza  .  .  .  could  appeal  only  to  men's  profound  ignorance
of  the  body  and  its  processes  ;  whereas  those  who  make  the  same
assumption  in  the  present  age  appeal  with  confidence  and  good  show
of  reason  to  our  knowledge  of  the  body  and  its  processes,  claiming
that  the  knowledge  which  we  now  have  amply  justifies  the  assump-
tion, and  allows  us  to  understand  in  a  general  way  the  mechanics
of  human  conduct."

In  three  interesting  chapters  Mr  M'Dougall  traces  the  special
modern  developments  of  physical  science,  of  physiology,  and  of
biology,  to  which  he  considers  the  anti-animistic  tendency  of  recent
speculation  is  due.  Chief  among  them  are,  in  physics,  the  trium-
phant establishment  of  the  law  of  conservation  of  energy ;  in
physiology  and  biology  the  discovery  of  the  localisation  of  cerebral
functions  ;  the  development  of  the  doctrine  of  reflex  action,  and
the  apparent  continuity  of  chains  of  physical  causation  even  in  the
brain ;  the  seemingly  unconscious  performance  (e.g.  in  trance)  of
actions  which  are  ordinarily  taken  to  imply  perception,  feeling,
reasoning  and  volition  ;  the  explanation  of  the  association  of  ideas
by  the  analogy  of  habitual  actions  mechanically  performed  ;  and  the
experience,  generally,  of  a  parallelism  of  mental  and  cerebral  develop-
ment, decay,  affection  by  injuries,  drugs,  etc.

The  influence  of  the  Darwinian  theory  must  also  be  counted
among  the  causes  which  have  contributed  to  the  decline  of  Animism,
by  removing  (in  the  opinion  of  many)  any  necessity  for  the  recogni-
tion of  a  teleological  element  in  the  organic  world.  The  conception
of  a  continuity  in  evolution  likewise  raises  difficulties,  whether  it
be  of  man  from  animals,  or  of  organic  from  inorganic  nature.

This  formidable  array  of  anti-animistic  considerations  drawn  from
empirical  science  is  set  forth  by  Mr.  M'Dougall  with  commendable
frankness  and  candour.  Nor  does  he  shrink  from  stating  in  the
most  emphatic  terms  the  effect  they  have  produced  in  the  minds


LXVI.]


Reviews.


349


of  the  majority  of  thinkers  during  the  last  sixty  years  who  have
concerned  themselves  with  the  psycho-physical  problem.  "  Modern
science  and  philosophy,"  he  tells  us,  "have  turned  their  backs  on
Animism  of  every  kind  with  constantly  increasing  decision."  "  Its
few  exponents,"  he  says  in  another  place,  have  been  "generally
regarded  as  survivors  from  an  earlier  age,  actuated  by  some  theo-
logical bias  to  offer  a  futile  opposition  to  the  conquering  march  of
science."

These  are  strong  expressions,  but  probably  they  are  no  inaccurate
representation  of  the  mental  attitude  of  most  of  those  who  approach
the  subject  primarily  from  the  study  of  physiology.  The  very
respectable  list  of  names  which  Mr.  M'Dougall  gives  on  p.  204  of
writers  whom  he  reckons  on  the  side  of  Animism  shows  that  there
is  by  no  means  the  same  degree  of  unanimity  among  philosophers.
His  own  book  may  be  counted  as  one  among  several  indications
that  the  tide  of  opinion  is  perhaps  once  more  beginning  to  turn.

Having  stated  the  principal  scientific  objections  to  Animism,  and
added  a  brief  account  of  current  philosophical  arguments  against  it,
Mr.  M'Dougall  does  not  proceed  at  once  to  answer  them,  but
interposes  instead  a  survey  and  general  examination  of  the  modern
psycho-physical  doctrines  proposed  as  substitutes  for  Animism.  Such
an  arrangement  of  topics  seems  at  first  sight  to  interrupt  and
confuse  the  argument ;  and  it  might  perhaps  have  been  better  to
have  included  his  statement  of  these  doctrines  in  the  historical
sketch  which  occupies  the  earlier  chapters  of  the  book.  This  the
author  might  have  done  without  serious  inconsistency  ;  for  though
he  describes  the  historical  part  of  his  work  as  a  "  history  of
Animism,"  it  is  in  reality,  down  to  the  end  of  the  eighteenth
century,  a  history  of  anti-animistic  theories  as  well,  and  only  ceases
to  be  so  when  the  nineteenth  century  is  reached.

On  the  other  hand,  when  we  come  down  to  our  own  times,  there
are  undoubted  advantages  in  a  systematic  rather  than  a  historical
exposition  ;  and  the  statement  of  the  chief  objections  to  Animism
leads  up  naturally  to  an  account  of  the  systems  which  claim  to
avoid  those  objections.

There  may  be  also  another  reason  for  the  procedure  which  Mr.
M'Dougall  has  adopted.  It  enables  him,  almost  at  the  outset  of  the
discussion,  to  carry  the  war  into  the  enemy's  country  ;  and  so  diffi-
cult is  the  psycho-physical  problem  that  the  advantage  is  in  general
apt  to  be,  or  to  appear  to  be,  with  the  assailants  rather  than  with
the  defenders  of  any  particular  doctrine. Moreover,  Mr.  M'Dougall


350  The  Rigid  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.  [part

believes  that  the  overthrow  of  Parallelism  is  equivalent  to  the  estab-
lishment of  Animism.  "The  main  body  of  this  volume,"  he  tells  us
in  the  preface,  "is  occupied  with  the  presentation  and  examination
of  the  reasonings  which  have  led  the  great  majority  of  philosophers
and  men  of  science  to  reject  Animism,  and  of  the  modern  attempts
to  render  an  intelligible  account  of  the  nature  of  man  which,  in
spite  of  the  rejection  of  Animism,  shall  escape  Materialism.  This
survey  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  these  reasonings  are  inconclusive
and  these  attempts  unsuccessful,  and  that  we  are  therefore  compelled
to  choose  between  Animism  and  Materialism  ;  and  since  the  logical
necessity  of  preferring  the  animistic  horn  of  this  dilemma  cannot
be  in  doubt,  my  survey  constitutes  a  defence  and  justification  of
Animism."

In  the  body  of  the  work  the  argument  is  presented  somewhat
differently,  though  the  difference  is  unimportant.  Materialism  is
curtly  dismissed  as  obviously  untenable  ;  its  modern  representative,
Epiphenomenalism,  is  demolished  in  the  course  of  a  few  pages  ;  and
the  final  dilemma  presented  to  us  is  that  of  Animism  or  Parallelism.
From  this  dilemma  Mr.  M'Dougall  holds  that  no  escape  is  possible:
"We  must  accept  Animism  if  we  find  the  difficulties  involved  in
Parallelism  to  be  fatal  to  it."

In  developing  his  argument,  Mr.  M'Dougall  enumerates  four  principal
type-formulations  of  the  modern  psycho-physical  doctrines  that  reject
Animism  :

(1)  Epiphenomenalism,  which  confines  causality  to  the  physical  series,
and  regards  consciousness  as  the  incidental  accompaniment  of  the  brain
process,  produced  by  that  process,  but  itself  empty  of  all  causal  efficacy
whatsoever.

(2)  Psycho-physical  Parallelism  (or,  as  I  should  prefer  to  call  it,  Dua-
listic  Parallelism1),  which  holds  the  physical  and  the  mental  series

1  It  is  only  as  implying  an  ultimate  metaphysical  dualism  that  "  Psycho-
physical Parallelism''  in  M'Dougall's  sense  can  be  properly  ranked  as  co-ordinate
with  the  doctrines  which  he  calls  "  Phenomenalistic  Parallelism"  and  "Psychical
Monism."  In  this  form  (which  seems  further  to  imply  a  "pre-established  har-
mony" between  the  two  series)  I  should  doubt  whether  it  is  dogmatically
maintained  by  any  one  whose  opinion  is  worth  counting.  Mr.  M'Dougall
observes  that  it  is  generally  held  merely  as  a  working  hypothesis;  but  as
such  it  can  hardly  be  said  to  carry  with  it  any  ontological  implication  con-
cerning the  ultimate  nature  of  reality ;  and  it  would  seem  better  to  apply
the  term  Psycho-physical  Parallelism  not  to  one  among  a  number  of  co-ordinate
varieties  of  Parallelism,  but  rather  to  the  undifferentiated  generic  form  of  which
these  varieties  are  specific  developments.


LXVI.]


Revieivs.


351


to  be  equally  real,  but  the  relation  between  them  to  be  one  of  simple
concomitance  without  interaction.  The  law  of  Causation  holds  good
only  within  each  series.

(3)  Phenomenalistic  Parallelism,  which  holds  that  mind  and  body
are  but  two  aspects  of  one  reality,  whose  true  nature  is  hidden
from  us.  The  physical  and  the  psychical  series  are  alike  appearances  :
there  is  no  causal  action  between  them.  There  is  an  appearance
of  causal  connection  within  each  series  ;  but  this  too  is,  strictly
speaking,  only  the  phenomenal  manifestation  of  one  underlying
reality.

(4)  Psychical  Monism.  The  physical  series  is  the  appearance  of
the  psychical  series  to  another  consciousness.  Consciousness  is  the
only  reality,  and  true  causal  efficiency  is  confined  to  the  psychical
series  :  within  the  physical  series  the  chain  of  causation  is  appear-
ance only.

If  to  these  four  formulations  of  anti-animistic  views  we  add  Crude
Materialism,  "which  asserts  that  consciousness  is  matter  or  the  move-
ment of  matter,"  and  Solipsism,  which  "denies  the  existence  of  the
physical  world  and  of  other  minds  than  my  own  (except  as  ideas  of
my  own),"  Mr.  M'Dougall  holds,  if  I  understand  him  rightly,  that
we  have  a  complete  classification  of  all  anti-animistic  doctrines  :  and
as  all  of  these  save  the  varieties  of  parallelism  may  be  more  or  less
summarily  rejected,  we  are  left  with  the  alternative  already  indicated
of  Parallelism  or  Animism.

Some  objection  may  perhaps  be  taken  to  this  general  line  of  argu-
ment. To  overthrow  a  rival  doctrine  does  of  course  go  some  way
to  establish  one's  own  ;  but  such  reasoning  must  remain  inconclu-
sive unless  it  can  be  shown  that  the  classification  of  the  various
doctrines  concerned  is  sound,  and  that  it  covers  the  entire  field  not
only  of  actual  but  of  possible  speculation  on  the  subject.  Now  fhis
is  a  very  difficult  thing  to  prove ;  and  though  Mr.  M'Dougall  devotes
a  whole  chapter  to  the  defence  of  his  "dilemma,"  his  admission  that
Berkeley's  subjective  Idealism,  and  Professor  Ward's  "Trans-subjec-
tivism "  do  in  a  sense  "  transcend "  the  psycho-physical  problem,  and
his  practically  complete  ignoring  of  the  Post-Kantian  Idealism,  can-
not fail  to  suggest  doubts  even  to  those  who  are  far  from  accepting
these  theories.

It  must  be  remembered,  too,  that  even  if  Mr.  M'Dougall's  reasoning-
is  sound,  the  value  of  the  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  it  must  be
measured  with  due  regard  to  the  very  wide  extension  which  it
necessarily  leaves  to  the  term Animism. The  essential  features


352


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


which  all  modern  anti-animistic  solutions  of  the  psycho-physical  pro-
blem exhibit,  are,  according  to  him,  the  following  :

(1)  Denial  of  all  psycho-physical  interaction.

(2)  Insistence  that  all  the  processes  of  the  organic  world  (includ-
ing all  the  behaviour  of  men  and  animals)  are  capable  in
principle  of  being  fully  explained  in  mechanical  terms.

So  far  as  Animism  is  established  by  the  rejection  of  anti-animistic
doctrines,  Animism  must  be  held  to  include  any  view  of  the  psycho-
physical relation  from  which  these  features,  or  either  of  them,  are
excluded.  Incidentally,  it  may  be  noted,  we  are  thus  provided  with
a  negative  definition  of  Animism  that  may  profitably  be  compared
with  the  positive  definition  already  quoted  at  the  beginning  of  this
review.

Arguments  for  or  against  any  solution  of  the  psycho-physical
problem  fall  broadly  into  two  classes,  the  first  consisting  of  argu-
ments drawn  from  empirical  science,  the  second  of  arguments  of  a
metaphysical  or  epistemological  character.

Mr.  M'Dougall  is  very  anxious  to  impress  upon  his  readers  that
Animism  does  not  involve  any  metaphysical  doctrine  save  the  rejection
of  Solipsism,  and  that  in  this  respect  it  has  a  great  advantage  over
Parallelism. At  the  end  of  the  Preface  he  writes :

"  I  wish  to  state  emphatically  that  my  enquiry  is  not  conceived
as  a  search  for  metaphysical  truth,  but  that  it  is  rather  conducted
by  the  methods  and  with  the  aims  of  all  empirical  science ;  that  is
to  say,  it  aims  at  discovering  the  hypotheses  which  will  enable  us
best  to  co-ordinate  the  chaotic  data  of  immediate  experience  by  means
of  a  conceptual  system  as  consistent  as  may  be,  while  recognising
that  such  conceptions  must  always  be  subject  to  revision  with  the
progress  of  science.  Of  course  if  the  term  metaphysic  be  taken  in
the  older  sense  as  implying  an  enquiry  into  that  which  is  not  physical,
the  theme  of  this  work  is  metaphysical ;  but  that  is  a  usage  which
is  no  longer  accepted ;  metaphysic  is  now  distinguished  from  empirical
science  by  its  aims  and  methods  rather  than  by  its  subject  matter.
I  claim,  then,  for  the  conception  of  soul,  advocated  in  the  last  chapter
of  this  book,  no  more  than  that  it  is  a  hypothesis  which  is  indis-
pensable to  science  at  the  present  time."

Again,  on  page  192,  he  says:

"  It  is,  in  fact,  one  of  the  great  advantages  of  psycho-physical
Dualism  that,  whereas  each  of  the  rival  monistic  doctrines  necessarily
commits  those  who  accept  it  to  some  particular  ontological  doctrine
(Materialism,  Spinozistic  Agnostic  Monism,  or  Psychical  Monism),


LXVI.]


Reviews.


353


we  are  committed  by  Animism  to  no  metaphysical  doctrine.  We
may  accept  it  while  remaining  wholly  on  the  plane  of  empirical
science ;  and  in  view  of  the  strong  dislike  of  metaphysic  expressed
by  so  many  workers  in  the  natural  sciences,  this  fact  should  be  for
them  a  strong  recommendation  of  Animism.  It  is  true  that  Des-
cartes'  psycho-physical  Dualism  was  made  by  him  a  metaphysical
Dualism;  for  he  taught  that  matter  and  soul  are  two  ultimately
different  kinds  of  reality.  But  scientific  Animism  is  under  no  obliga-
tion to  accept  Descartes'  ontological  dogma ;  it  leaves  open  the  ulti-
mate questions,  about  which  it  is  a  mere  piece  of  presumption  for
any  man  to  express  a  decided  opinion  in  the  present  state  of  human
knowledge.  For  the  real  natures  both  of  body  and  soul  remain  open
questions,  the  answers  to  which,  we  may  hope,  will  be  gradually
brought  nearer  to  the  truth  by  the  labours  of  after-coming  genera-
tions. For  the  present  the  Animist  may,  if  he  likes,  suppose  body
to  consist  of  matter  such  as  is  described  by  physical  science,  or,
with  Kant,  he  may  regard  it  as  the  phenomenon  of  an  unknowable
thing-for-itself ;  or,  with  Leibnitz  and  Lotze,  as  a  system  of  real
being  of  like  nature  with  the  Soul ;  or,  with  Berkeley,  as  nothing
but  the  perpetually  renewed  acts  of  God  upon  our  souls.  In  any
case  his  ontological  view,  whatever  it  may  be,  so  long  as  it  is  not
solipsistic,  need  not  affect,  and  is  perfectly  compatible  with,  his  belief
in  psycho-physical  interaction."
Once  more,  on  p.  356 :

"  Though  the  acceptance  of  either  horn  of  the  dilemma  [Parallelism
or  Animism]  involves  the  acceptance  of  a  number  of  strange  conse-
quences and  leaves  on  our  hands  a  number  of  questions  to  which  we
can  return  no  answer,  Animism  has  this  great  advantage  over  its
rival,  namely,  that  it  remains  on  the  plane  of  empirical  science,  and,
while  leaving  the  metaphysical  question  open  for  independent  treat-
ment, can  look  forward  to  obtaining  further  light  on  its  problems
through  further  scientific  research.  It  is  thus  a  doctrine  that  stimu-
lates our  curiosity  and  stirs  us  to  further  efforts,  whereas  Parallelism
necessarily  involves  the  acceptance  of  metaphysical  doctrines  which
claim  to  embody  ultimate  truth,  and  which  set  rigid  limits  to  the
possibilities  of  further  insight  into  the  nature  of  the  world,  and  it
finds  itself  forced  to  regard  certain  of  its  problems  as  ultimately
inexplicable."

These  are  interesting  passages ;  and  the  stress  laid  upon  the  pro-
foundly metaphysical  character  which  the  Parallelistic  doctrines  have
assumed  in  the  hands  of  those  who  have  most  carefully  worked  out

z


354


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


their  implications,  is  certainly  in  a  measure  justified.  At  the  same
time,  although  my  own  sympathies  are  entirely  on  Mr.  M'Dougall's
side  in  the  controversy  hetween  Animism  and  Parallelism,  I  cannot
but  think  that  he  has  somewhat  exaggerated  the  advantage  which
in  this  matter  he  represents  Animism  as  possessing  in  comparison
with  its  rival.

The  term  "metaphysical"  is  not  very  easy  to  define;  but  surely
every  hypothesis  which  deals  with  fundamental  concepts  like  Body
and  Mind  must  ultimately  be  prepared  to  submit  its  claim  to  philo-
sophical and  even  metaphysical  examination  :  and  this  is  as  true  of
Animism  as  of  Parallelism.  Mr.  M'Dougall  himself  practically  admits
that  Animism  cannot  be  held  in  complete  independence  of  meta-
physical considerations.  He  tells  us  in  one  place  that,  while  (p.  355)
"  the  belief  in  the  adequacy  and  the  exclusive  sway  of  mechanical
principles  in  both  the  inorganic  and  organic  realms  has  been  and
remains  the  principal  ground  of  the  rejection  of  Animism  by  the
modern  world,"  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  "the  more  enlightened  of  the
opponents  of  Animism,  recognising  the  uncertain  nature  of  this
ground,  have  rested  their  case  mainly  upon  certain  metaphysical
arguments  that  make  against  the  acceptance  of  the  notion  of  psycho-
physical interaction."  A  whole  chapter,  though  a  short  one,  of  his
book  is  devoted  mainly  to  a  statement  of  these  and  other  meta-
physical objections  to  Animism,  and  another  and  much  longer
chapter  to  a  refutation  of  them.  It  may  be  urged  that  in  these
chapters  the  author  is  only  engaged  in  securing  a  standing-ground
for  a  defence  of  Animism  on  Empirical  lines,  and  that  it  is  possible
to  clear  away  the  imaginary  obstructions  raised  by  an  unsound
metaphysic  without  laying  down  any  positive  metaphysical  doctrine.
But  the  negative  here  implies  a  positive.  The  metaphysical  ques-
tions involved  are  those  which  concern  the  nature  of  causality  and
substantiality,  and  the  legitimacy  of  treating  the  soul  as  a  sub-
stance or  even  as  a  "  thins "  transcendinir  in  some  sense  the
consciousness  in  which  its  essence  is  manifested.  Let  the  reader
consider  for  a  moment  the  main  propositions  in  which  Mr.
M'Dougall  sums  up  the  conception  of  soul  which  he  would  himself
commend  to  our  acceptance.  The  soul,  according  to  this  view,1  is
(1)  immaterial;  (2)  a  thing  or  being  "that  possesses,  or  is,  the  sum
of  definite  capacities  for  psychical  activity  and  psycho-physical  inter-
action ; "  (3)  "a  unitary  being  or  entity  distinct  from  all  others."
The  metaphysical  implications  in  these  propositions  and  the  meta-

^p.  364-366.


LXVI.]


Reviews.


355


physical  questions  suggested  by  them  lie  on  the  surface ;  and  the
more  strenuous  the  attempt  to  give  precision  to  the  Animistic  theory,
the  more  loudly  do  such  implications  and  questions  clamour  for
examination.  There  could  hardly  be  a  more  striking  illustration  of
this  than  the  divergence  of  view  between  Professor  James  and  Mr.
M'Dougall  (both  of  them  Animists  in  Mr.  M'Dougall's  sense)  respect-
ing the  existence  of  the  Soul.  "Souls  have  outworn  both  themselves
and  their  welcome,  that  is  the  plain  truth,"  says  Professor  James.
To  which  Mr.  M'Dougall  replies  (and  I  think  he  has  the  best  of  the
argument)  that,  according  to  James's  own  admission,  "  the  only  alter-
natives to  the  acceptance  of  the  soul-theory  are  either  to  give  up
our  belief  in  logic  or  to  declare  that  life  is  logically  irrational " ;
and  in  this  dilemma  or  trilemma  he  holds  it  best  to  "  retain  a
modest  confidence  in  human  reason,  and  accept  the  hypothesis  of  the
soul ! "

The  claim  which  Mr.  M'Dougall  sets  up  on  behalf  of  Animism,
that  it  can  be  held  without  metaphysical  implications,  seems  to  me
to  depend  very  largely  upon  the  extremely  wide  limits  which  he
gives  to  the  definition  of  Animism.  Animism,  according  to  him,
includes  any  psycho-physical  theory  which  is  not  Epiphenomenalism
or  Parallelism.  But  it  is  impossible  to  rest  in  this  vague  and  quasi-
negative  view  of  Animism.  As  we  proceed,  the  need  for  greater
particularity  becomes  apparent,  though  not  until  the  last  chapter  do
the  wide  distinctions  which  separate  the  various  formulations  of
modern  Animism  stand  fairly  revealed.  In  his  final  chapter  Mr.
M'Dougall  enumerates  four  principal  varieties  of  Animism  :  the
"  animistic  Actuelle-Seele  "  ;  the  "  transmission-theory  "  of  James  and
Bergson  :  the  "  contentless "  soul ;  and  the  soul  conceived  as  "  a
developing  system  of  psychical  dispositions."  Mr.  M'Dougall's  own
view  is  a  sub-variety  of  the  last  of  the  four  ;  and  in  defending  one
view  and  rejecting  others  the  metaphysical  character  of  much  of  the
reasoning  is  patent.  The  plain  fact  is  that  the  moment  any  attempt
is  made  to  give  precision  to  a  psycho-physical  theory,  metaphysical
considerations  force  themselves  into  prominence.  The  metaphysical
conceptions  involved  have  been  lurking  there  all  the  time  in  the
form  of  unquestioned  presuppositions,  and  the  further  thinking  out
of  the  theory  brings  them  inevitably  to  the  surface.

I  suspect  that  a  large  number  of  scientific  men  who  would  describe
themselves  as  opponents  of  Animism,  or  even  as  Parallelists,  feel
quite  as  unencumbered  by  metaphysical  difficulties,  and  quite  as
completely  "  on  the  plane  of  empirical  science "  as  the  Animist,  in


356


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


Mr.  M'Dougall's  view,  is  entitled  to  do.  No  less  a  writer  than
Wundt,  for  instance,  treats  Parallelism  as  "a  heuristic  principle  or
a  necessary  working  hypothesis  for  psychology,"  and  is  attacked
by  Mr.  M'Dougall  for  doing  so.  "The  culminating  absurdity  of
Wundt's  position,"  he  says,  "is  that  after  arguing  at  great  length  to
show  that  psychology  must  accept  psycho-physical  Parallelism  as  a
'  heuristic  principle '  empirically  based,  he  turns  round  and  tells  us
that  in  considering  voluntary  movements  of  the  body  we  must  treat
them  as  being  psychically  originated,  because  we  cannot  ascertain
the  nature  of  the  physiological  process  which  initiates  them,  and
that  we  must  make  use  of  the  conception  of  psycho-physical  inter-
action, so  long  as  we  cannot  complete  our  account  of  the  brain
processes."  1  I  am  far  from  wishing  to  defend  Wundt's  consistency  ;
but  the  position  he  takes  up  is  at  least  evidence  of  his  determina-
tion to  "  remain  on  the  plane  of  empirical  science "  in  spite  of  his
Parallelism.  And  this  attitude  really  is  possible  so  long  as  Parallelism
is  genuinely  treated  as  a  merely  heuristic  principle.  Of  course,
even  as  a  heuristic  principle  it  contains  latent  metaphysical  implica-
tions, just  as  Animism  does.  These  implications  may  be  more
apparent  and  more  difficult  to  overlook  in  the  case  of  Parallelism
than  in  that  of  Animism ;  but  if  this  be  so,  I  think  the  reasons
are,  first,  that  more  attempts  have  been  made  in  recent  years  to  work
out  the  Parallelistic  hypothesis  into  a  philosophical  system,  and,
secondly,  that  the  metaphysic  of  the  ordinary  forms  of  Animism  is
more  in  accordance  with  the  unconscious  metaphysic  of  popular
thought,  and,  therefore,  challenges  examination  in  a  less  degree.

There  is,  perhaps,  a  tendency  among  writers  on  this  subject  to
use  metaphysical  arguments  much  more  freely  in  attacking  an
opponent's  solution  of  the  psycho-physical  problem  than  in  establish-
ing their  own.  Mr.  M'Dougall's  examination  of  the  Anti-animistic
(or  Automaton)  theories  is  an  excellent  specimen  of  vigorous  and
acute  criticism.  But  of  the  four  principal  formulations  of  Anti-
animistic  views,  Epiphenomenalism,  Dualistic  Parallelism,  the  double
aspect  theory,  and  Psychical  Monism,  the  first  three  are  demolished
and  eliminated  by  arguments  which  in  the  main  must  certainly  be
regarded  as  metaphysical,  and  we  practically  hear  little  more  of
them  throughout  the  book.  It  is  in  this  way  that  Mr.  M'Dougall
arrives  at  his  final  dilemma — Psychical  Monism  or  else  Animism.
But  in  the  end  Psychical  Monism  itself  fares  no  better.  It  has  been
preferred  on  metaphysical  grounds  to  every  other  form  of  Anti-

1  P.  155.


LXVI.]


Reviews.


357


animistic  doctrine ;  but  no  sooner  have  its  rivals  been  driven  from  the
field  than  the  metaphysical  batter)'  is  directed  in  turn  against  it.

The  fundamental  propositions  of  Psychical  Monism  are  formulated
by  Mr.  M'Dougall  as  follows  (p.  160):— "(1)  Consciousness  or  con-
scious-process (or  something  of  the  same  nature,  but  so  very  much
simpler  as  to  require  a  different  name,  such  as  mind-stuff  or  infra-
consciousness)  is  the  only  reality,  the  only  mode  of  existence  or  of
real  being.  (2)  By  each  one  of  us  only  one  tiny  fragment  of  reality
is  directly  known,  namely,  the  stream  of  his  own  consciousness ;
although  all  the  rest  of  the  universe  consists  of  other  conscious
processes,  it  can  be  apprehended  by  him  only  under  the  form  of
material  or  physical  phenomena.  (3)  The  appearances  to  us  of
other  real  or  conscious  processes  under  the  forms  of  physical  objects
and  processes  bear  some  constant  and  orderly  relation  to  those  real
processes,  so  that  the  descriptions  and  explanations  of  the  universe
given  by  physical  science  are  valid,  though  they  are  symbolic  only;
that  is  to  say,  all  the  processes  which  constitute  the  universe  pro-
ceed according  to,  or  can  be  fully  explained  in  terms  of,  the  laws  of
mechanical  causation."

These  propositions  are  all  metaphysical,  and  they  are  met  in  the
chapter  we  are  now  considering  by  counter-arguments  which  are
themselves  either  purely  metaphysical,  or  partly  metaphysical  and
partly  drawn  from  that  region  of  introspective  psychology  which  is
often  hard  to  distinguish  from  metaphysic,  and  at  least  cannot  be
described  as  belonging  to  empirical  science.  It  is  the  first  of  them,
however,  which  is  specially  characteristic  of  Psychical  Monism.  As
against  the  rejection  by  Psychical  Monism  of  the  notion  of  sub-
stance or  thing  and  its  replacement  by  that  of  activity  or  process,
Mr.  M'Dougall  insists  that  these  notions  are  essential  to  our  thought,
that  they  are  necessary  alike  to  physical  science  and  to  psychology,
and  that  the  denial  of  existence  to  the  soul,  and  the  assertion  that
the  self  consists  in  the  stream  of  consciousness  alone,  involve  the
consistent  psychical  monist  in  the  strange  conclusion  that  my  self  is
not  my  own  consciousness  but  "  the  streams  of  consciousness  of  other
selves"  (p.  167).  The  unity  and  individuality  of  consciousness  as
we  know  it  is,  says  Mr.  M'Dougall,  "  a  fundamental  fact  which
raises  insuperable  difficulties  for  Psychical  Monism."  The  philoso-
phical expounders  of  the  doctrine  either  make  no  attempt  to  explain
it,  or  else  they  fall  back  on  a  conception  of  a  compounding,  or  flowing
together  into  a  unity,  of  consciousnesses  each  of  which  nevertheless
continues  to  exist  in  and  for  itself — a  conception  which,  it  is  argued,


358


The  Rigid  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


not  only  re-admits  surreptitiously  the  rejected  notion  of  substance,
but  is  in  itself  logically  and  metaphysically  untenable.

"  We  find  then,"  writes  Mr.  M'Dougall  in  conclusion,  "  that  the
fundamental  assumption  of  Psychical  Monism,  namely  that  conscious-
ness is  the  reality  and  the  only  reality,  and  its  attempt  to  abolish
as  illegitimate  the  conception  of  any  mode  of  being  other  than  con-
sciousness, involve  it  in  very  great  difficulties,  not  to  say  absurdities."
I  agree  :  but  holding,  as  he  does,  that  each  and  every  form  of  Anti-
animistic  doctrine  is  open  to  "  insuperable "  objections  from  the
philosophical  standpoint,  and,  further,  that  all  forms  of  Parallelism
(but  particularly  Psychical  Monism)1  involve  the  self-contradictory
idea  of  "unconscious  consciousness,"  and  can  only  achieve  the  seem-
ingly impossible  task  of  making  mechanical  determination  the  counter-
part of  teleological  determination  by  lapsing  into  Solipsism — holding
these  views,  as  he  does,  we  may  be  pardoned  some  mild  surprise  at
finding  him  affirming  in  a  later  chapter  (p.  223)  that  "the  issue
between  Animism  and  Parallelism  is  one  that  must  be  settled  by
the  methods  of  empirical  science,  i.e.  by  an  appeal  to  observation
and  experiment  and  the  weighing  of  the  claims  of  rival  hypotheses."
Surely  in  so  difficult  an  enquiry  as  that  into  the  relation  of  Mind
with  Body  there  is  not  only  room  but  a  pressing  necessity  for  both
philosophic  and  scientific  methods.  The  two  should  be  used  to
supplement  each  other.  And  in  spite  of  Mr.  M'DougalPs  anxiety  to
claim  for  Animism  the  right  to  remain  on  the  plane  of  empirical
science,  this  is,  I  venture  to  think,  the  procedure  which  he  has
himself  followed.

The  author's  defence  of  Animism  on  the  Empirical  side  opens  with
Chapter  XVI.,2  and  occupies  practically  the  whole  of  the  remaining
portion  of  the  book.

First  comes  a  very  interesting  general  reply  to  the  objections  drawn
from Physiology  and  General Biology,  and already  set  forth  in

JI  understand  Mr.  M'Dougall's  argument  to  be  that  an  unconscious  soul  is
a  legitimate  and  (for  Animism)  even  perhaps  necessary  conception,  but  that
unconscious  consciousness  is  a  contradiction  in  terms.  It  is  interesting  to  note
that  Lotze,  perhaps  the  greatest  champion  of  Animism  in  recent  times,  leaned,
in  his  latest  work  (Metaphync,  p.  534  in  the  translation),  to  the  view  that  in
becoming  unconscious  the  soul  ceased  to  exist — an  admission  which  William
James  (wrongly,  I  think)  treated  as  an  abandonment  of  the  "Soul-Theory."

2  The  argument  against  Animism  drawn  from  the  so-called  Law  of  the  Conser-
vation of  Energy  would  seem  to  belong  naturally  to  this  section  of  the  work,
but  Mr.  M'Dougall  has  preferred  to  deal  with  it  in  the  previous  chapter,  in
which  the  philosophical  arguments  against  Animism  are  examined.


LXVI.]


Reviews.


359


Chapters  VIII.  and  IX.  Mr.  M'Dougall  contends  (successfully,  I
think)  that  neither  the  localisation  of  cerebral  functions,  nor  the
absence  of  any  discoverable  gap  in  the  sequence  of  material  causa-
tion which  connects  sense-impression  with  muscular  reaction  upon
it,  nor  the  apparently  automatic  performance  of  highly  complex
actions  of  which  no  normal  memory  afterwards  remains,  nor  the
dependence  of  our  mental  life  upon  brain-conditions,  nor  the  multi-
plicity of  conscious  individualities  within  a  single  organism,  nor  the
assumption  of  continuity  of  evolution  from  the  inorganic  to  the
organic,  nor  the  acceptance  of  Darwinian  views,  justifies  any  final
conclusion  against  the  Animistic  hypothesis.  Even  where  the  facts
are  admitted  an  explanation  consistent  with  Animism  is  always
possible.

In  the  succeeding  chapters  the  argument  passes  from  defence  pure
ami  simple  to  the  "defensive-offensive."  Parallelism  holds  (1)  that
the  universe  in  all  its  features  is  susceptible  of  explanation  in
mechanical  terms  ;  (2)  that  every  psychical  process  has  its  exact
physical  counterpart.  Against  the  first  of  these  dogmas  Mr.
M'Dougall  argues  that,  on  the  contrary,  mechanical  conceptions  are
inadequate  even  in  physiology  and  morphology,  and  that  mechanism
is  wholly  insufficient  to  explain  either  organic  evolution  or  animal
and  human  behaviour.  Against  the  second  he  contends  that  the
unity  of  consciousness  has  no  physical  unity  corresponding  to  it,
and  that  this  can  be  shown  to  be  true  even  if  we  confine  our  atten-
tion to  sensation.  Still  more  demonstrable  is  it  that  consciousness
of  meaning,  to  which  sensations  are  only  the  cues,  as  well  as  the
"  feeling-tone "  of  pleasure  and  displeasure  which  attend  the  whole
content  of  consciousness,  and  the  "  coiiative  processes "  which  are
so  intimately  connected  with  pleasure  and  displeasure,  are  purely
psychical  and  have  no  correlative  analogue  on  the  physical  side.
"  True "  memory,  again  (as  opposed  to  habit),  involves  meaning  as
an  essential  element,  and  cannot  be  explained  in  terms  of  brain-
structure.  Finally,  an  examination  of  the  results  of  "Psychical
Research "  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  telepathy  must  be  accepted
as  a  fact  empirically  proved ;  and  telepathy  is  wholly  inconsistent
with  Parallelism.

Without  detracting  in  any  way  from  the  merits  of  the  earlier
portion  of  the  book,  the  chapters  of  which  a  brief  summary  has  just
been  given  may  fairly  be  regarded  as  the  most  important  and  original
part  of  Mr.  M'Dougall's  work. It  is,  however,  impossible  to  do  justice


360


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


to  them  within  the  narrow  compass  of  a  review,  and  I  must  content
myself  by  calling  attention  to  a  few  points  of  special  interest.

The  centre  of  the  psycho-physical  controversy  is  undoubtedly  to
be  found  in  the  problem  of  the  unity  of  consciousness.  That  con-
sciousness, as  we  know  it,  is  in  some  sense  unitary,  and  runs  in
personal  streams,  is  admitted  by  both  sides  ;  but  the  significance
of  the  fact  thus  admitted  is  very  diversely  regarded.  For  the
majority  of  Animists  it  is  the  chief  ground  for  conceiving  the  soul
as  an  entity  which,  by  whatever  name  it  may  be  called,  is  at  least
a  real  being,  relatively  independent,  capable  of  acting  and  being
acted  on,  and  not  to  be  identified  with  its  fleeting  states.

The  soul-theory  is  generally  sought  to  be  established  by  reason-
ing of  a  metaphysical  character,  of  which  Lotze  has  been  in  modern
times  the  principal  exponent.  Mr.  M'Dougall  does  not  disdain  the
metaphysical  argument.  On  the  contrary,  he  quotes  Lotze's  presen-
tation of  it  at  considerable  length,  and  declares  that  it  cannot  be
refuted.  But  it  is  by  appealing  to  the  facts  of  cerebral  physiology,
he  thinks,  that  the  argument  from  the  unity  of  consciousness  to
the  real  being  of  the  soul  can  be  presented  in  the  most  cogent
form.  Do  these  facts  justify  us  in  treating  either  the  brain  as  a
whole  or  any  portion  of  it  as  the  physical  counterpart  of  that  unity
of  consciousness  which  is  admitted  by  Parallelists  themselves  1  If
not,  then  Parallelism  stands  condemned  by  empirical  science.

The  question  is  one  that  cannot  be  avoided ;  but  only  in  the  region
of  simple  sensation  have  physiologists  made  any  serious  attempt  to
answer  it  in  the  affirmative.  And  even  in  this  region  no  affirmative
answer  can  be  given  which  is  compatible  with  observed  facts.  When
the  effects  of  more  than  one  sensory  stimulus  are  combined  in  the
unity  of  a  single  consciousness,  the  very  least  that  can  be  demanded
of  Parallelism  is  to  show  reason  for  believing  that  there  exists  in
the  brain  a  physical  "  medium  of  composition  "  in  which  the  physical
effects  of  the  stimuli  are  combined  in  a  physical  unit}7  just  as  the
psychical  effects  are  combined  in  the  unity  of  consciousness.  But
this  cannot  be  done.  The  search  for  a  sensorium  commune  has  proved
as  futile  as  the  search  for  a  punctual  seat  of  the  soul.1  "  The  know-
ledge we  now  have  of  the  nervous  system  and  its  functions,"  says
Mr.  M'Dougall,  "enables  us  to  assert  confidently  that  there  exists

1  As  Mr.  M'Dougall  points  out,  the  physiological  considerations  so  often  relied
upon  for  the  rejection  of  Animism,  such  as  the  localisation  of  brain  functions
and  the  failure  to  find  a  punctual  seat  for  the  soul,  tell  in  reality  less  against
Animism  than  against  Parallelism.


LXVI.]


Revieivs.


361


in  the  brain  no  such  physical  medium  of  composition,  and  that  the
processes  of  the  several  sensory  nerves  simultaneously  excited  do
not  affect  any  common  material  medium  to  produce  in  it  a  complex
physical  resultant."  Nor  is  he  content  to  rest  this  statement  upon
any  general  principles  of  cerebral  physiology,  however  well  estab-
lished :  on  the  contrary,  he  appeals  in  support  of  it  to  the  very  case
in  which  the  physical  compounding  of  simultaneous  sense-stimuli  has
been  most  confidently  assumed,  namely,  the  case  of  binocular  vision.
When  we  look  at  any  object  with  both  eyes,  both  retinae  and  both
optic  nerves  are  stimulated,  but  only  one  object  is  seen.  Similarly,
if  we  look  at  a  spot  of  light  with  both  eyes,  interposing  a  red  glass
before  one  eye  and  a  blue  glass  before  the  other,  we  experience  a
colour-sensation  neither  of  red  nor  of  blue,  but  of  purple.  Where
in  either'  case  does  the  compounding  take  place  ?

Mr.  M'DougaU's  answer  to  this  question  is  clear:  "The  fusion  of
effects  of  simultaneous  sensory  stimuli  to  a  unitary  resultant  is  not
a  physiological  or  physical  fusion  or  composition,  but  a  purely  psychical
fusion  ;  the  unitary  resultant  exists  only  in  the  psychical  sphere."  In
other  words,  the  fusion  is  a  psychical  process  to  which  no  physical
process  runs  parallel.  This  conclusion  he  supports  by  a  formidable
array  of  arguments,  which  cannot  be  reproduced  here,  but  which
appear  to  constitute  a  strong  prima  facie  case,  and  certainly  deserve-
the  careful  attention  of  all  students  of  the  subject.

The  difficulties  created  for  Parallelism  by  the  unity  of  conscious-
ness are  of  course  far  greater  in  the  case  of  more  complex  sensations,
and  still  more  so  when  the  higher  mental  functions  are  involved.
The  whole  position  seems  to  be  given  away  by  Fechner  when  he
writes  (in  a  sentence  quoted  by  Mr.  M'Dougall),  "The  psychically
unitary  and  simple  are  resultants  of  a  physical  manifold  :  the  physical
multiplicity  gives  unity  or  simple  resultauts."  For  this  amounts  to
saying  (in  Parallelistic  language)  that  psychical  unity  has  for  its
counterpart  physical  multiplicity.  Even  if  an  attempt  is  made  to
render  this  statement  a  little  more  plausible  by  representing  the
counterpart  of  psychical  unity  to  be  physical  multiplicity  plus  material
continuity,  and  further  to  supplement  this  view,  as  Fechner  does,  by
his  ingenious  theory  of  the  varying  threshold  of  consciousness,  we
are  still  entitled  to  insist  that  multiplicity  cannot  in  any  true  sense
be  the  counterpart  of  unity.

Mr.  M'DougaU's  chapters  on  "Memory"  and  on  "the  Bearing  of
the  Results  of  Psychical  Research  on  the  Psycho-physical  Problem,"


362


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


will  be  read  with  special  interest  by  the  members  of  our  Society — ■
the  latter  for  obvious  reasons,  the  former  because  the  author's
theory  of  memory  has  profoundly  influenced  his  views  on  the  nature
of  the  soul  and  the  question  of  its  possible  survival  after  the  death
of  the  body.

I  will  conclude  this  review  by  briefly  referring  to  each  of  these
topics.

Mr.  M'Dougall  is  among  the  very  few  psychologists  of  high  rank
who  have  had  the  courage  to  declare  not  onhy  that  telepathy  has
been  established,  but  also  that  it  cannot  be  explained  on  mechanistic
principles.  When  we  consider  that  it  is  only  three  or  four  years
ago  since  even  William  James,  in  his  lectures  on  "A  Pluralistic
Universe,"  described  the  field  of  enquiry  with  which  Psychical  Research
is  occupied  as  "perhaps  too  spook-haunted  to  interest  an  academic
audience,"  this  bold  recognition  comes  as  a  very  welcome  sign  of  the
increasing  value  which  is  being  attached  to  the  Society's  work.

In  Mr.  M'Dougall's  opinion  the  evidence  collected  by  the  Society,
while  not  sufficient  to  produce  conviction  of  survival,  is  sufficient  to
force  upon  us  the  alternative  of  accepting  the  fact  of  telepathic  com-
munication of  a  kind  and  at  a  distance  that  puts  the  supposition
of  mechanical  transmission  entirely  out  of  court.  "So  long,"  he  says,
"  as  we  consider  only  the  evidence  of  telepathy  between  persons  at
no  great  distance  from  one  another,  it  is  possible  to  make  the  facts
appear  compatible  with  the  mechanistic  assumption  by  uttering  the
4  blessed '  word  '  brain-waves.'  But  the  strain  upon  the  mechanistic
assumption  becomes  insupportable  by  it  when  we  consider  the  fol-
lowing facts  :  Minute  studies  of  automatic  writings,  and  especially
those  recently  reported  under  the  head  of  'Cross-correspondence,'  have
shown  that  such  writings  frequently  reveal  knowledge  of  facts  which
could  not  have  been  acquired  by  the  writer  by  normal  means,  and
could  not  have  been  telepathically  communicated  by  any  living  person
in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  writer.  In  short,  the  evidence  is  such
that  the  keenest  adverse  critics  of  the  view  which  sees  in  these
writings  the  expression  of  the  surviving  personalities  of  deceased
persons,  are  driven  to  postulate  as  the  only  possible  alternative
explanation  of  some  of  them  the  direct  communication  of  complex
and  subtle  thoughts  between  persons  separated  by  hundreds  and  even
thousands  of  miles.  .  .  .  Unless,  then,  we  are  prepared  to  adopt  the
supposition  of  a  senseless  and  motiveless  conspiracy  of  fraud  among
a  number  of  persons  who  have  shown  themselves  to  be  perfectly
upright  and  earnest  in  every  other  relation,  we  must  recognise  that


LXVI.]


Reviews.


363


we  stand  before  the  dilemma — survival  or  telepathy  of  this  far-reaching
kind.  The  acceptance  of  either  horn  of  the  dilemma  is  fatal  to  the
mechanistic  scheme  of  things."

I  do  not  think  much  exception  will  be  taken  to  this  reasoning
by  those  who  have  devoted  most  time  and  attention  to  the  subject.
Two  observations,  however,  may  perhaps  usefully  be  made.

First,  telepathy  and  survival,  although  presented  in  the  argument
as  alternatives,  do  not  really  exclude  each  other.  On  the  contrary,
to  establish  either  is  to  render  the  other  more  probable  :  and  it  is
plausible  to  assume  that  if  spirits  exist  and  can  communicate  with
human  beings,  the  process  by  which  they  do  so  is  of  like  nature  with
telepathy  between  embodied  minds.

Secondly,  I  do  not  think  the  facts  can  be  said  to  show  that  distance
is  an  entirely  negligible  factor  in  telepathy,  though  there  is  not  a
shred  of  evidence  that  anything  resembling  the  law  of  inverse  squares
is  applicable  to  it.  That  being  the  case,  the  admission  that  "  the
explanation  of  telepathy  at  close  quarters  by  the  hypothesis  of  '  brain-
waves'  transmitted  through  the  ether  cannot  be  absolutely  rejected,"
does  in  some  degree  weaken  the  case  for  assigning  to  it  a  purely
psychical  nature ;  and  undoubtedly  the  analogy  of  wireless  telegraphy
seems  plausible  to  many  people.  It  may  be  as  well  to  point  out,
therefore,  that  wireless  telegraphy  depends  for  its  effectiveness  entirely
on  the  use  of  symbols,  whereas  there  is  good  reason  to  believe  that
in  telepathy  there  is  in  many  cases  a  direct  communication  of  meanings.
The  analogy  with  wireless  telegraphy  would  be  more  to  the  point  if
it  could  be  shown  that  telepathic  communication  always  takes  the
form  of  language,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  that  wireless  telegraphy  could
directly  convey  a  complex  picture  or  an  abstract  idea.

The  analogy  with  wireless  telegraphy  fails  also,  I  believe,  in  another
respect  of  capital  importance.  There  appears  to  be  something  in  tele-
pathy which  I  may  describe  as  selective  action,  and  which  cannot  be
explained  on  mechanistic  principles.  By  the  selective  action  of  tele-
pathy I  do  not  mean  that  some  individuals  seem  to  be  capable  of
being  acted  upon  telepathically,  and  others  not,  or  not  to  any  notice-
able extent.  This  might  be  paralleled  in  wireless  telegraphy  by
appropriate  "tuning"  of  the  receiving  instruments.  The  brain,  it  might
be  said,  requires  to  be  "  tuned "  to  the  proper  pitch  in  order  to
respond.  The  selective  action  I  have  in  mind  is  something  different,
and  seems  rather  to  consist  in  a  power  on  the  part  of  the  agent
so  to  direct  the  telepathic  communication  that  it  reaches  some  par-
ticular person  for  whom  it  is  intended  and  no  other. I  believe  there


364


The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


is  evidence  for  selective  action  in  this  sense,  but  no  doubt  more
evidence  is  required  before  it  can  be  considered  as  firmly  established.

In  dealing  with  the  psycho-physics  of  memory,  Mr.  M'Dougall
follows  Professor  Bergson  in  distinguishing  sharply  between  habit  and
true  memory.  Habit,  it  is  admitted,  has  neural  association  for  its
basis ;  but  true  memory  cannot  be  identified  with  habit.  The  essential
element  in  true  memory  is  meaning;  and  meaning,  Mr.  M'Dougall
holds,  as  we  have  seen,  to  be  a  purely  psychical  product  of  psychical
activity,  and  to  be  without  any  correlate  in  the  brain-process.  Never-
theless, even  in  true  memory,  as  we  know  it,  habit  always  enters  as
a  co-operating  factor ;  and  accordingly,  the  view  of  mental  retention
put  forward  by  the  author  is  "intermediate  between  the  two  extreme
views  that  have  long  been  opposed  to  one  another,  the  view  that
it  is  wholly  conditioned  by  neural  structure  and  the  view  that  it  is
conditioned  wholly  in  some  immaterial  fashion."

Mr.  M'Dougall  proceeds  to  give  what  he  calls  a  "suggestion  towards
a  theory  of  memory."  It  is  too  long  to  be  quoted  verbatim  here,
and  not  easy  to  summarise:  indeed,  I  am  not  sure  that  I  can  fully
grasp  his  thought.  If  I  understand  him  rightly,  the  theory  requires
that  we  should  conceive  of  the  soul  as  having  a  "  psychical  struc-
ture"  consisting  in  persistent  "psychical  dispositions,"  which  are  not
themselves  meanings,  bat  only  persistent  conditions  of  meanings.
From  this  point  of  view  the  soul  may  be  regarded  as  a  kind  of
repository  of  potential  meanings,  which  may  be  added  to  by  experi-
ence. But  in  order  to  be  actualized,  the  potential  meanings  require
a  sensory  content,  and  a  sensory  content  is  essentially  the  expres-
sion of  psycho-physical  interaction.  Consciousness,  therefore,  as  we
know  it,  is  impossible  without  the  interaction  of  soul  and  body.
This  interaction,  however,  "can  be  initiated  either  from  the  neural
side  (in  accordance  with  the  conjunction  of  sense  stimuli  and  pre-
formed habits  or  neural  associations),  when  it  brings  meanings  to
consciousness ;  or  from  the  psychical  side,  by  meanings  which  demand
specific  sensory  complexes  for  the  completion  of  ideas,  and  which  thus
in  turn,  through  the  medium  of  sensation,  bring  neural  dispositions
into  play."

Mr.  M'Dougall  claims  for  his  theory  of  memory  that  it  is  one
"  which  is  consistent  with  all  the  empirical  data,  especially  all  those
which  show  the  dependence  of  sensation  and  imagery  upon  the
integrity  of  the  brain,  and  which  yet  relieves  us  of  the  impossible
task  of  conceiving  a  physical  basis  for  all  memory,  and  allows  us  to


LXVI.]


Reviews.


365


believe  that  true  memory  is  conditioned  by  the  persistence  of  modifi-
cation of  psychical  structure  or  capacities."

I  forbear  to  express  any  opinion  on  this  theory  here.  It  obviously
presents  some  considerable  difficulties.  The  conception  of  the  soul
as  a  being  with  "psychic  dispositions"  seems  to  take  us  straight  into
metaphysics,  and  is  not  likely  to  pass  unchallenged ;  and  if  meanings
cannot  exist  in  consciousness  without  a  sensory  context,  it  is  not
easy  to  see  how  the  initiation  of  ideas  can  come  from  the  psychical
side  at  all.  But  accepting  the  theory  as  it  stands,  readers  will
not  fail  to  perceive  its  possible  bearing  on  the  question  of  survival,
and  if  they  turn  to  the  last  chapter  of  the  book  they  will  see  how
frankly  the  conclusions  to  which  it  seems  to  lead  are  accepted  by  the
author.

Mr.  M'Dougall  criticises  the  Cartesian  description  of  the  soul  as  a
"  thinking  being,"  on  the  ground  that  it  goes  beyond  the  evidence
at  present  available.  "Our  evidence  at  present  allows  us  to  say
only  that  the  soul  thinks  or  is  conscious  (realises  its  capacities  or
potentialities)  when  interacting  with  some  bodily  organism;  psycho-
physical interaction  may  be,  for  all  we  know,  a  necessary  condition
of  all  consciousness.  For  all  the  thinking  or  consciousness  of  which
we  have  positive  knowledge  is  of  embodied  minds  or  souls.  .  .  .
Rather  than  say  that  the  soul  is  a  thinking  being,  we  must  then
say  that  it  is  a  being  capable  of  being  stimulated  to  conscious
activities  through  the  agency  of  the  body  or  brain  with  which  it
stands  in  relations  of  reciprocal  influence."

So  long  as  we  confine  ourselves  to  empirical  data,  and  so  long
as  no  convincing  empirical  evidence  of  survival  is  produced,  this
criticism  is  justified.  Indeed,  it  hardly  goes  far  enough.  For  instead
of  saying  "Our  evidence  at  present  allows  us  to  say  only  that  the
soul  is  conscious  when  interacting  with  some  bodily  organism,"  we
ought  rather  to  put  it,  "Our  evidence  at  present  allows  us  to  say
only  that  the  soul  exists  when  interacting  with  a  bodily  organism."
For  on  the  supposition  mentioned  there  would  clearly  be  no  empirical
evidence  for  the  continued  existence  of  a  disembodied  soul.  But  if,
notwithstanding  this,  we  assume  the  truth  of  survival  as  being,  though
not  supported  by  empirical  data,  yet  not  actually  inconsistent  with
them,  what  kind  of  continued  existence  would  be  left  to  the  soul
by  Mr.  M'Dougall's  theory  of  memory?

I  am  afraid  the  answer  to  this  question  will  be  profoundly  unsatis-
factory to  those  to  whom  the  conception  of  a  survival  of  the
personality  is  dear. It  is  true  that  the  theory  bids  us  regard  the


3C6


The  Rigid  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.


[part


soul  as  a  sum  of  psychical  capacities  which  can  be  built  up  during
bodily  life,  and  which  it  may  be  permissible  to  conceive  as  con-
tinuing to  exist  in  their  more  developed  form  after  bodily  death ;
and  this  is  one  deerree  better  than  the  view  which  treats  the  soul
as  a  system  of  unchanging  potentialities,  actualised  by  interaction
with  the  body,  but  carrying  none  of  its  developed  powers  into
another  state  of  existence,  if  there  be  such  a  state.  But  the  crucial
question  still  remains  :  Is  it  consistent  with  Mr.  M'Dougall's  theory
to  suppose  that  the  surviving  soul  carries  with  it  into  the  other  state
of  existence  such  memories  as  would  enable  it  to  be  conscious  of
itself  as  the  same  enduring  personality  notwithstanding  the  transi-
tion 1.  If  I  understand  him  rightly,  his  answer  would  be  in  the
negative.  This  is  an  essential  element  in  the  popular  view,  and  he
expressly  rejects  the  popular  view.  "The  popular  view,"  he  tells
us,  "though  it  has  been  maintained  in  modern  times  by  Lotze,  a
philosopher  of  the  first  rank,  cannot  be  reconciled  with  the  fact
that  the  make  up  of  human  personality  includes  many  habits  that
are  unquestionably  rooted  in  the  structure  of  the  nervous  system.
It  conflicts  also  with  all  the  large  mass  of  evidence  which  indicates
the  dependence  of  all  the  sensory  content  of  consciousness,  all
sensation  and  all  imagery,  on  the  integrity  of  the  brain."

Concerning  these  speculations,  all  I  would  say  is  that  we  really
have  no  evidence  to  go  upon  that  can  afford  any  ground  for  definite
conclusions.  As  I  have  already  pointed  out,  if  we  rest  upon
empirical  data  only,  and  exclude  or  reject  the  evidence  for  survival
collected  by  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  there  is  no  reason
why  we  should  assume  that  the  soul  exists  at  all  after  the  death
of  the  body.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  do  assume  this,  then  we
ought  to  recognise  that  it  is  very  unsafe  to  infer  the  capacities  or
incapacities  of  the  disembodied  soul  (of  which,  ex  hypothesi,  we  have
no  experience)  from  those  which  belong  to,  or  which  we  attribute
to,  the  embodied  soul.  For  aught  we  know,  the  body  may  inhibit
as  well  as  stimulate  the  capacities  of  the  soul ;  and  in  the  region
of  memory  in  particular,  which  would  seem  to  be  of  the  essence  of
consciousness,  a  very  wide  field  of  conjecture  lies  open.

Mr.  M'Dougall  himself,  I  may  note  in  conclusion,  by  no  means
treats  with  contempt  the  endeavour  of  psychical  researchers  to  obtain
empirical  evidence  on  the  question  of  survival.  On  the  contrary,
he  admits  that  "  a  considerable  mass  of  evidence  pointing  in  the
direction  of  survival  has  been  accumulated,"  and  although  hitherto,


LXVI.]


Revieivs.


367


in  his  opinion,  the  character  of  the  evidence  has  "fallen  just  short"
of  the  perfection  required  to  "  produce  conviction  in  the  mind  of
an  impartial  observer,"  he  clearly  contemplates  the  possibility  that
more  conclusive  results  may  be  attained  in  the  future.  Now  such
results  must  from  the  nature  of  the  case  include  proof  that  the
supposed  surviving  personality  retains  some  of  the  memories  of  its
earthly  life.  Let  us  imagine  for  a  moment  that  convincing  evidence
of  survival  were  to  be  actually  obtained.  It  is  quite  certain  that
in  such  an  event  all  preconceptions  as  to  the  capacity  for  memory
in  disembodied  souls  based  upon  observation  of  life  in  the  body
would  be  swept  away  like  cobwebs.  Probably,  in  the  new  light
thus  cast  back  upon  psychological  problems,  Mr.  M'Dougall  might
have  to  revise  his  theory  of  memory  :  but  we  may  be  sure,  from
the  candour  and  openness  of  mind  shown  in  every  page  of  the  work
now  under  review,  that  no  man  would  be  more  willing  to  modify
even  his  most  cherished  views  the  moment  the  facts  appeared  to
require  it.

Gerald  W.  Balfour.

Die  Psychoanalyse  Freuds.  Verteidigung  und  kritische  Bemerkungen.
Von  Prof.  Dr.  E.  Bleuler.  (Jahrbuch  fur  psychoanalytische  und
psychopathologische  Forschungen,  Band  II.  Franz  Deuticke.
Leipzig  and  Vienna,  1911.)

This  article,  which  is  published  as  a  separate  pamphlet,  consists
largely  of  a  temperate  and  effective  reply  to  the  impassioned  attacks
which  have  been  made  upon  Freud  and  his  methods  of  psycho-
analysis in  German  scientific  and  theological  publications.  These
attacks  are  so  fierce,  and  in  many  cases  so  devoid  of  the  calm
reasoning  which  should  accompany  a  scientific  controversy,  that  in
themselves  they  furnish  a  valuable  illustration  of  the  power  of  a
pre-existing  complex  to  determine  an  attitude  of  mind  and  a  high
degree  of  emotional  feeling  in  subjects  who  believe  that  their  con-
ceptions are  based  solely  upon  facts  and  logic.  The  same  pheno-
menon is  probably  familiar  to  all  those  who  have  at  any  time
discussed  the  problems  of  Psychical  Research  with  persons  who  are
insufficiently  acquainted  with  its  aims  and  methods,  but  who  "feel
strongly  "  that  such  investigations  are  a  waste  of  time.

But,  besides  these  attacks,  there  are  a  few  criticisms  which  are
put  forward  on  more  logical  grounds.  These  are  directed  chiefly
against  the  therapeutic  application  of  Freud's  psychology,  and,  though


368


V.  J.  Woolley,  M.D.


[part


it  is  generally  admitted  that  a  number  of  neuroses  have  been  cured
through  psycho-analysis,  the  critics  would  contend  that  the  cure
might  have  been  as  well  produced  by  other  psycho-therapeutic  methods,
and  especially  by  suggestion,  to  the  operation  of  which  any  psycho-
analytic cure  is  ascribed.1  Professor  Bleuler's  reply  is  that  even  if
the  effects  are  due  to  suggestion,  certain  cases  have  been  cured  which
have  not  proved  amenable  to  suggestion  in  any  other  form,  and
that  the  discovery  of  a  new  method  of  suggestion  is  of  great  thera-
peutic value.  He  considers,  however,  that  the  process  is  essentially
different  from  and  superior  to  suggestion  directed  against  what  he
considers  to  be  merely  symptoms.  Though  the  beneficial  effects  of
facing  boldly  any  disagreeable  emotion  or  memory  are  known  to  all,
without  analysis  the  most  important  factor  may  remain  hidden  from
consciousness  and  so  be  unknown  to  both  patient  and  physician.
Finally,  the  suggestions  of  the  psycho-analyst  are  often  directly
antagonistic  to  the  patient's  own  wishes  instead  of  coinciding  with
them  as  in  the  usual  forms  of  suggestion.

In  the  field  of  psycho-therapy  it  is  clear  that  there  are  two  almost
diametrically  opposed  methods  of  treatment,  and  this  particular
portion  of  Bleuler's  defence  may  well  be  emphasized  as  shewing  the
contrast  between  them.  On  the  one  hand  is  the  older  suggestion,
whether  conveyed  during  hypnosis  or  waking  or  in  some  inter-
mediate condition.  On  the  other  is  the  psycho-analytic  method.
The  former  seeks  to  aid  the  patient  to  dismiss  altogether  from  his
mind  the  disturbing  element  which  both  schools  alike  recognize  as
the  cause  of  his  trouble.  If  he  succeeds  in  banishing  it  completely,
so  completely  that  it  is  no  longer  able  to  affect  his  mental  being  at
all,  clearly  he  will  be  cured.  But  according  to  the  psycho-analyst
that  is  impossible.  Nothing  can  be  forgotten  or  put  away  so  com-
pletely. By  mere  suggestion  the  unwelcome  complex  is  but  driven
deeper  into  the  unconscious,  where  it  can  work  perhaps  more
effectively  than  before.  Thus  the  psycho-analyst  tries  to  bring  it  up
into  the  fullest  consciousness  so  that  it  may  be  faced,  and  thus  lose
its  power  to  produce  those  psycho-physical  results  which  he  has
learnt  to  look  upon  as  the  expression  in  consciousness  of  a  desire
which  is  not  allowed  to  be  present  there  in  a  recognizable  form.
Here  surely  is  the  crux  of  the  whole  dispute :  is  it  or  is  it  not  a
good  thing  to  bring  into  consciousness  ideas  which  each  individual
for  himself  endeavours,  consciously  or  unconsciously,  to  maintain
below  the  threshold  1  The  final  answer  must  depend  on  the  results
1Ct  Dr.  T.  W.  Mitchell,  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXIV.,  p.  68.


LXVI.]


Reviews.


369


obtained  by  the  two  methods,  and  both  claim  startling  successes.
Does  it  not  seem  probable  that  for  the  less  serious  conditions
suggestion  may  suffice,  while  there  are  more  obstinate  neuroses
which  will  not  yield  to  a  conservative  treatment  ?  Metaphors  are
dangerous  and  generally  unsound,  but  the  present  writer  would
suggest  that  if  a  bacterial  infection  is  of  slight  virulence  and  is  taken
early  it  may  yield  to  a  treatment  of  hot  fomentations,  while  under
different  conditions  the  surgeon's  knife  provides  the  only  possible
cure.

The  critical  notes  mentioned  in  the  title  of  the  paper  are  directed
chiefly  against  some  of  the  generalisations  put  forward  by  Freud's
followers,  and  only  to  a  very  slight  extent  against  Freud's  own
conclusions.  The  author  expresses  some  doubts  as  to  the  invariably
sexual  basis  of  neuroses,  and  as  to  the  analyses  which  have  been  put
forward  of  various  historical  personages,  the  latter  on  the  ground
that  a  process  which  is  difficult  enough  in  a  living  patient  becomes
unreliable  when  it  can  only  rest  on  the  scanty  material  of  bio-
graphies. He  also  mistrusts  the  sharp  delimitations  which  some  of
the  psycho-analytic  school  consider  themselves  justified  in  making
between  various  functional  disorders.

The  article  concludes  with  a  demonstration  that  in  his  chief  con-
clusions Freud  has  not  advanced  anything  which  is  contrary  to  or
subversive  of  the  whole  fabric  of  psychology  as  it  has  been  built  up
by  previous  investigators.  On  the  other  hand,  many  of  his  funda-
mental propositions  were  known  long  before  his  time.  Freud  has
only  developed  them  into  a  somewhat  unfamiliar  shape  and  united
them  into  a  system.  As  instances  may  be  taken  the  transference
of  psychical  energy  from  a  repressed  idea  to  another  which  is  allowed
to  come  to  the  surface,  and  the  connection  of  the  sexual  instinct
with  hysteria  and  with  "  Angst  "

The  points  raised  are  illustrated  by  numerous  instances  from
Professor  Bleuler's  own  experience,  both  among  his  patients  and  in
himself,  and  the  article  will  be  very  acceptable  to  those  who  wish
to  read  a  whole-hearted  defence  of  the  psycho-analytic  method,  but
who  are  repelled  by  what  seems  to  them  the  premature  dogmatism
of  the  more  advanced  members  of  the  Vienna  school.


V.  J.  WOOLLEY,  M.D.


370


Ghas.  Lloyd  Tackey,  M.D.


[part


Faith  and  Suggestion. By  Edwin  Ash. (Herbert  &  Daniel,  London,
1912. Pp.  153. Price  3s.  6d.  net.)

Dr.  Edwin  Ash  gives  ns  in  Faith  anal  Suggestion  a  full  and  inter-
esting account  of  the  case  of  Dorothy  Kerin,  and  he  has  made  it
the  centre  from  which  to  develop  his  theories  on  psycho-therapy.

This  case,  it  will  be  remembered,  created  some  sensation  last  spring
from  the  notices  about  it  in  the  newspapers  under  the  title  of  "  The
Herne  Hill  Miracle,"  and  Dr.  Ash  went  down  to  investigate  it.

He  found  the  girl  fairly  well  and  strong  after  having  been  bed-
ridden for  years  and  finally  apparently  moribund.

Eye-witnesses  of  the  last  scene  gave  their  testimony ;  the  patient
herself  described  her  experiences  ;  doctors  and  nurses  who  had  been
in  attendance  over  a  period  of  years  gave  accounts  of  her  various
illnesses;  and,  finally,  Dr.  Ash  got  hospital  physicians  and  Rontgen-
ray  specialists  to  examine  the  girl  and  give  their  reports  of  her
present  condition.

So  we  have  one  of  the  most  complete  histories  which  has  been
published  of  these  puzzling  cases,  and  the  author  is  justified  in
hoping  that  it  will  prove  not  only  of  present  interest  but  of  value
for  future  reference.

Briefly,  the  history  is  as  follows.  The  girl,  aged  24,  was  supposed
to  be  dying  of  phthisis,  with  kidney  and  other  complications,  and
her  family  and  friends  were  collected  round  her  bedside  to  witness
the  end,  which  was  momentarily  expected.  After  lying  in  a  semi-
comatose state  for  some  hours  she  suddenly  murmured  "  I  am
listening.  Who  is  it  1  Yes,  yes ! "  Then  she  sat  up  in  bed,  assured
her  friends  she  was  cured  and  quite  well,  and  insisted  on  getting
out  of  bed  and  walking  into  the  next  room.  From  that  time  she
got  stronger  every  day,  her  natural  functions  became  re-established,
and  she  is  now  quite  strong  and  well.

She  herself  says  she  heard  a  voice  say  distinctly  three  times
"Dorothy!"  then  a  light  came  over  the  bed,  and  behind  it  a
beautiful  angel  appeared,  who  said  "Your  sufferings  are  over!  Get
up  and  walk."

We  frequently  hear  of  such  cures,  and  it  is  easy  to  dismiss  them
as  cases  of  hysteria.  Dr.  Ash  discusses  the  subject  very  fairly,  and
points  out  that,  even  if  by  hysterical  we  mean  imaginary  illness,
this  case  would  be  remarkable ;  but  he  says  the  testimony  of  an
experienced  local  doctor  who  attended  her  for  the  last  two  years  is
that  the  girl  was  really  suffering  from  tuberculosis,  and  had  the


LXVI.]


Reviews.


typical  signs,  not  only  subjective  but  objective,  of  that  disease.  It
was  not,  however,  a  case  of  advanced  phthisis,  as  the  lay  papers
affirmed,  and  subsequent  examination  by  experts  show  no  loss  of
tissue  or  extensive  structural  changes.

Dr.  Ash  points  out  that  the  disease  was  undoubtedly  serious,  and
that  but  for  the  intervention  of  a  psychic  agency  death  would
probably  have  occurred  in  a  few  hours.  Her  sudden  recovery  of
walking  power  after  being  bedridden  for  five  years  is  sufficiently
remarkable,  for  one  would  expect  great  atrophy  and  weakness  of
the  muscles ;  but  Charcot  and  others  give  numerous  instances  of
sudden  accessions  of  strength  from  emotional  causes  apart  from
religious  influences.

The  analogy  of  such  cases  to  that  of  Bernadotte  of  Lourdes  is  of
course  obvious,  and  is  dwelt  upon  by  Dr.  Ash.  He  discusses  at
length  the  action  of  hypnotism  and  suggestion,  and  as  he  objects
to  the  mere  classification  of  a  disease  as  hysteria  being  considered
sufficient  definition  of  a  morbid  state,  so  he  objects  to  the  term
suggestion  alone  being  considered  sufficient  explanation  of  the  mode
of  cure.  He  argues  that  suggestion  may  act  on  the  body  through
the  mind  in  several  different  ways  and  on  different  planes,  e.g.  on
a  low  mental  plane,  as  when  the  patient  is  cured  through  appealing
to  his  imagination  by  a  bread  pill  which  he  takes  for  a  powerful
drug  ;  by  hypnotic  suggestion,  which  enables  the  physician  to  act  on
the  subliminal  consciousness ;  by  appeal  to  a  spiritual  force  outside
ourselves,  as  in  the  pilgrimages  to  Lourdes  and  by  healers  of  the
Salvation  Army  type.  Dr.  Ash  thinks  the  efficacy  of  the  particular
method  of  suggestion  depends  upon  the  temperament  of  the  patient,
and  he  tells  us  that  Dorothy  Kerin  is  a  young  woman  of  strong
religious  feelings,  and  much  given  to  praying  for  the  relief  of  her
friends'  illnesses  and  troubles.  She  was  therefore  accessible  to  the
highest  and  most  spiritual  form  of  influence,  and  he  is  inclined  to
believe  her  cure  was  brought  about  by  an  agency  or  force  outside
herself.  In  support  of  this  view  he  quotes  largely  from  Myers,
William  James,  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  and  other  distinguished  members
of  the  S.P.R.,  as  well  as  from  the  writings  of  Drs.  McComb
and  Worcester,  Mr.  Percy  Dearmer,  and  other  clergymen  who  have
taken  up  the  subject  of  spiritual  healing.

It  appears  that  Dorothy  Kerin  was  once  subjected  to  some  hypnotic
experiments,  but  she  believed  they  were  wrong  and  successfully
resisted  hypnosis.  Charcot  has  told  us  how  he  occasionally  sent
hysterical  patients  to  Lourdes,  thinking  they  would benefit  more


372


Chas.  Lloyd  TucJeey,  M.D.


[part


from  religious  than  from  hypnotic  suggestion  as  practised  at  the
Salpetriere.

This  history  presents  many  features  in  common  with  the  Gilling-
ham  case  reported  in  the  Journal  for  October,  1912,  and  investigated
by  Miss  Verrall.  In  each  case,  for  instance,  there  are  the  appearance
of  a  bright  light  and  the  suggestions  of  a  hallucinatory  voice.  It
will  be  interesting  to  note  the  future  of  these  girls.

Dorothy  Kerin  thinks  she  has  been  restored  to  health  in  order
to  carry  on  good  works,  and  Dr.  Ash  argues  that  her  unselfish  and
spiritual  character  justifies  her  being  selected  for  cure  by  the  Higher
Powers  when  so  many  invalids  are  allowed  to  suffer  and  die  unaided.
Whatever  view  may  be  taken,  Dr.  Ash  has  put  the  subject  before
the  reader  in  a  very  impartial  and  readable  form.

Chas.  Lloyd  Tuckey,  M.D.


l-xvl] The  Liverpool  Psycho-Therapeutic  Clinic.


373


THE  LIVEEPOOL  PSYCHO-THEEAPEUTIC  CLINIC.

Since  the  foundation  of  the  Psycho-Medical  Society  of  Great
Britain  at  London  in  1905,  medical  men  have  been,  and  are  still
being,  enrolled  as  members  from  all  parts  of  the  Kingdom,  and  in
no  city  has  Psycho-Therapy  made  more  progress,  and  attracted
the  attention  of  the  medical  profession  to  a  greater  extent,  than
in  Liverpool,  where  quite  a  number  have  joined  the  Society  and
formed  themselves  into  a  branch,  which  has  received  official
recognition  by  the  parent  organisation.  This  branch  has  been
meeting  from  time  to  time  for  discussion,  and  the  reading  of
papers  bearing  upon  the  subject.  Although  there  is  still  much
prejudice  and  not  a  little  ignorance  to  combat,  the  efficacy  of
treatment  by  hypnotic  suggestion  in  suitable  cases  has  become  so
widely  known  and  appreciated  that  many  physicians  now  send
their  patients  for  treatment,  and  large  numbers  of  the  public  seek
it  themselves.  This  being  the  case,  the  need  of  a  Clinic,  where
the  poorer  classes  can  receive  treatment,  has  become  an  urgent
necessity.  This  matter  has  been  under  the  consideration  of  the
Liverpool  branch  of  the  Society  for  some  time,  and  after  much
effort  among  patients'  friends  and  sympathisers,  a  sufficient  sum
has  been  collected  to  enable  us  to  make  the  venture.  The  ground
floor  of  a  Nursing  Home  has  been  rented  at  8  Maryland  Street  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Eodney  Street.  It  consists  of  three  rooms :
a  small  one  which  will  be  used  as  a  consulting  room  for  the
visiting  physician  of  the  day,  another  larger  room,  which  will  be
used  as  a  waiting-room,  and  a  third,  still  larger  room,  which  will
be  used  for  treating  patients,  three  or  four  at  a  time.  All  these  are
already  furnished,  and  will  only  require  the  addition  of  a  few
easy  chairs,  etc.,  some  needful  stationery,  and  other  details,  which
will  be  supplied  by  the  Society  in  good  time  for  the  opening.
Patients  will  be  expected  to  pay  Is.  for  the  first  sitting,  and


374 The  Liverpool  Psycho-Therapeutic  Clinic, [part  lxvi.

3d.  for  each  subsequent  one  found  necessary ;  absolutely  destitute
patients,  who  have  been  certified  as  such,  will,  of  course,  receive
free  treatment ;  and  those  able  to  pay  more,  but  not  enough  for
private  treatment,  will  be  encouraged  to  do  so,  and  all  money  so
received  will  be  utilised  for  the  support  of  the  Clinic.  A
managing  committee  consisting  of  the  three  medical  officers  and
the  medical  Hon.  Treasurer,  together  with  three  laymen  and  the
lay  Hon.  Secretary,  will  be  selected  to  supervise  the  affairs  of  the
Institution.

Thus,  then,  on  Monday,  November  11th,  1912,  Liverpool  will
have  the  honour  of  founding  the  first  Clinic  of  this  kind  in  Great
Britain  under  the  direction  of  medical  men  for  the  treatment
of  the  sick  poor.

A.  Betts  Taplin,  L.R.C.P.


76  Rodney  Street,  Liverpool.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research.

PART  LXVII.

July,  1913.


I.

A  EEPLY  TO  DR.  JOSEPH  MAXWELL'S  PAPER  ON
"  CROSS-CORRESPONDENCES  AND  THE  EXPERI-
MENTAL METHOD."1

By  MRS.  HENRY  SIDGWICK.

Dr.  Maxwell's  paper,  as  its  title  indicates,  is  partly  occupied
with  criticising  the  general  methods  of  those  who  in  our
Proceedings  have  written  about  the  automatic  scripts  of  Mrs.
and  Miss  Verrall,  Mrs.  Holland,  Mrs.  Willett,  and  Mrs.  Piper,
and  partly  with  detailed  comments  on  particular  cases.  In
my  reply  I  shall  concern  myself  chiefly  with  the  question  of
the  general  methods,  only  going  into  particular  cases  so  far  as
may  be  needed  to  illustrate  my  points.  Incidentally,  a  reply
on  general  methods  meets  a  good  deal  of  what  M.  Maxwell
has  to  say  about  particular  cases,  because  much  of  this  depends,
I  think,  on  misunderstanding  of  the  general  methods ;  and
some  further  reply  dealing  with  particular  cases  is  given  in

1  Proceedings,  Part  LXV.,  pp.  57-145.
2B


370


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


appendices  to  this  paper  by  Mrs.  Verrall,  Miss  Johnson  and
Mr.  Piddington.  But  in  fact  the  general  methods  are  much
more  important  than  the  particular  cases.  The  value  of
most  of  what  has  been  written  in  the  Proceedings  of  late
years  by  Mrs.  Verrall,  Miss  Johnson,  Mr.  Piddington,  Sir  Oliver
Lodge,  and  to  a  minor  extent  myself,  depends  on  these  methods.
If  our  meaning  and  aim,  our  assumptions  and  what  we  think
is  proved,  can  be  so  much  misunderstood  as  they  seem  to
have  been  by  an  able  and  industrious  critic  of  M.  Maxwell's
eminence,  it  is  to  be  feared  that  others  also  may  have  failed
to  grasp  the  points,  and  it  may  well  be  worth  while  to  go
over  them  again  in  the  light  of  M.  Maxwell's  criticisms.

Before  doing  so,  I  should  like  to  thank  M.  Maxwell  for
taking  so  much  trouble  to  put  before  us  the  impression  the
work  on  cross-correspondences  has  made  on  him.  It  is  only
when  those  who  study  the  subject  will  express  their  views
that  we  can  have  the  kind  of  discussion  which  may  help
towards  the  solution  of  the  very  complicated  and  difficult
problems  raised  on  any  hypothesis  by  these  automatic  scripts.
We  are  the  more  indebted  to  him — and  though  I  am  not
going  to  speak  of  the  "  Latin  Message,"  I  should  like  to  say
this  also  of  Mrs.  Hude 1 — because,  not  being  an  Englishman,
he  has  had  the  additional  trouble  of  dealing  with  a  language
not  his  own.  His  knowledge  of  English,  indeed,  is  almost
perfect ;  still,  here  and  there  he  is  led  into  mistakes  which,
I  think,  an  Englishman  would  not  have  made.  For  instance,
I  doubt  whether  an  English-speaking  person  would  have
thought  the  sarcasm  which  M.  Maxwell  applies  on  his  first
page  to  Dr.  Hodgson  fair  comment.  Dr.  Hodgson  thinks  Mrs.
Piper's  trance  personalities  communicate  by  writing  without
being  conscious  of  the  process  of  writing,'2  but  this  is  very
different  from  not  being  conscious  of  what  they  say,  which  is
how  M.  Maxwell  interprets  "  not  conscious  of  writing."  Again,
no  English-speaking  person  would,  I  think,  interpret  "  papers  "
as  newspapers  ("gazettes")  in  the  particular  connexion  in
which  the  word  occurs  in  the  incident  referred  to  on  p.  73

1  Mrs.  Hude's  article  on  this  subject  appeared  in  Proceedings,  Part  LXV.,
pp.  147-170.

"  Whether  we  agree  with  Dr.  Hodgson's  view  or  not  is  another  question.
I  am  myself  disposed  to  think  it  at  any  rate  far  too  sweeping.


lxvii.] A  Reply  to  Br.  Joseph  Maxivell's  Paper.  377

of  M.  Maxwell's  paper  (where  it  obviously  means  documents).
Nor  to  an  Englishman  would  "the  Lawns  of  Lea"  (p.  99)
suggest  the  idea  of  Leah,  Eachel's  sister,  because  he  would
perceive  that  Lea  rhymes  with  Sea.  It  actually  does  so  in
the  script  in  question,  which  is  partly  in  verse.  (Oddly
enough,  M.  Maxwell  attributes  to  Mrs.  Verrall  this  association
of  Lea  and  Leah,  though  without  the  slightest  justification
that  I  can  perceive.)  Such  linguistic  errors  as  I  have  been
speaking  of  are,  however,  very  few.

Let  me,  before  I  proceed  to  my  reply  to  M.  Maxwell,  add
that  there  are  interesting  points  in  his  paper.  For  instance,
the  purely  accidental  coincidence  which  he  has  discovered
between  certain  scripts  and  the  poems  of  Lamartine — though
it  can  only  be  made  to  fit  by  ignoring  the  reference  of  the
scripts  to  Gautier  and  Hugo— is  striking,  and  might  well
have  figured  in  Miss  Johnson's  paper  on  "Chance  Coincidences"
(Proceedings,  Vol.  XIV.,  pp.  158-330).  It  is  a  useful  warning,
if  one  were  needed,  against  attaching  too  much  importance  to
a  single  coincidence,  even  of  a  striking  kind.

Then  again,  he  refers  (pp.  142,  143),  though  with  too  little
detail  and  too  little  confirmation,  to  what  appear  to  be
interesting  telepathic  incidents  observed  by  himself.  The  cases
of  "Clementine"  and  of  the  butterflies  are  full  of  suggestion
as  to  the  working  of  telepathy,  and  may  be  usefully  com-
pared with  some  of  our  experiments  with  percipients  hypnotised
by  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith  {Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  536-596).

Again,  certain  criticisms  made  by  M.  Maxwell  are  just.
Probably  all  readers  agree  with  him  that  scripts  should,  if
possible,  be  exhibited  in  a  less  scrappy  manner,  in  a  manner
showing  better  the  connexion  of  different  parts  of  a  script,
than  was  done  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  first  paper.  It  makes  it  more
difficult  for  the  would-be  critical  reader,  though  often  easier
for  the  more  general  reader,  to  have  the  script  cut  up  into
snippets.  It  was  natural,  in  an  analytical  description  of  her
script,  such  as  Mrs.  Verrall's  is,  to  illustrate  the  different
points  by  the  appropriate  fragments,  or  the  mere  statement
that  some  topic  occurred  in  the  script  at  such  a  date,  other
portions  of  the  same  script  illustrating  other  points  being
sometimes  discussed  in  other  parts  of  the  paper.  With
further  experience  those  who  have  discussed  the  scripts  have


378


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich


[part


learnt  that  there  is  apt  to  be  something  confusing  in  this
way  of  treating  them,  and  that  it  may  tend  to  the  obscur-
ing of  interesting  points,  evidential  and  other.  Accordingly,
in  more  recent  papers,  scripts  have  been  given  in  a  more
complete  form.

The  mention  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  original  paper  on  her  own
script  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XX.)  leads  me  from  details  to  the
fundamental  points  which,  as  I  have  said,  I  propose
mainly  to  discuss  in  this  paper.  M.  Maxwell's  first  criticism
on  our  methods  (p.  130)  is  that  on  our  plan  "we  must
admit  the  automatists'  good  faith " ;  "  The  medium's  good
faith  must  be  implicitly  admitted  as  an  element  in  the
^experiment " ;  and  that  as  a  matter  of  method  this  is
wrong ; the  need  for  her  good  faith  should  be  eliminated.

It  is  of  course  quite  true  that  the  value  of  our  evidence
depends  very  largely  on  the  good  faith  of  the  automatists ;  but
I  should  put  the  matter  somewhat  differently  myself,  and  say
that  the  automatic  writers,  when  the  writing  is  not  produced
in  trance,  are  inevitably  themselves  investigators,  usually  fellow-
investigators  with  others,  but  investigators.  And  no  scientific
observations  or  experiments  are  independent  of  the  good
faith  of  the  investigators.  An  investigator  may  sometimes
produce  objective  evidence  that  he  is  not  self-deceived,  but  his
good  faith  has  to  be  taken  on  trust.  I  believe  that  in  orthodox-
science — biology,  physics,  etc. — bogus  experiments  have  been
put  forward  on  one  or  two  occasions,  though  extremely  rarely.
As  a  rule,  however,  the  known  character  of  the  observers  or
experimenters  concerned  renders  deception  so  improbable  that
the  danger  need  hardly  be  taken  into  account ;  and  the
improbability  is  in  most  cases  rendered  enormously  greater
by  the  fact  that  deception  would  involve  collusion,  as  is  also
of  course  the  case  with  cross-correspondences.  We  must  admit,
however,  that  in  the  orthodox  sciences  few  important  facts
are  fully  accepted  until  the  experiments  or  observations  on
which  they  rest  have  been  repeated  by  others,  and  that  here
psychical  research  is  at  a  disadvantage  in  being  limited  so
much  as  it  is  to  observation.  Progress  is  always  slow  when
knowledge  depends  on  observation  of  phenomena  occurring
spontaneously,  and  neither  on  lines  nor  at  times  selected  by
the  observer ; and  it  is  partly  because  in psychical  research


Lxvii.] A  Reply  to  Dr.  Joseph  Maxivell's  Paper.  379


we  can  as  yet  seldom  repeat  experiments  at  will  that  we
advance  only  slowly  in  our  interpretation.

M.  Maxwell  tries  to  support  his  view  that  automatic  writers
ought  not  to  be  co-investigators,  by  referring  to  some  remarks
by  the  late  Henry  Sidgwick  in  a  Presidential  address  delivered
in  1889.  There  is  confusion  here.  Those  who  will  take  the
trouble  to  turn  to  the  passage  referred  to  (Proceedings,  Vol.
V.,  pp.  401-2) — and  may  I  say  here  that  any  one  reading
M.  Maxwell's  paper  should  in  all  cases  go  back  to  the
original  accounts  to  avoid  misunderstanding — will  see  that
Mr.  Sidgwick  was  speaking  only  of  the  physical  phenomena
of  spiritualism.  His  point  was  that  if  any  one,  one's  best
friend  or  indeed  oneself,  professes,  e.g.,  to  move  an  object
supernormally — say  raise  a  table  without  touching  it — it  is
necessary,  before  accepting  the  phenomenon,  not  only  to  feel
confident  that  there  has  been  no  conscious  deception,  but  that
there  has  been  no  unconscious  deception — no  action  of  the
subliminal  self  tending  to  move  the  table  unknown  to  the
supraliminal  self.  In  cases  like  this  the  medium  may  no
doubt  help  the  investigator,  but  ought  to  be  relieved  of  all
responsibility  as  an  investigator  himself.

Quite  apart  from  cryptonmesia,  with  which  I  shall  deal
presently,  a  similar  difficulty  may  occur  in  the  case  of  automatic
writing.  I  think  it  does  occur  in  some  of  Mr.  Stainton
Moses'  experiences;  those  for  instance  in  which,  he  being
alone,  his  script  by  request  quotes  passages  verbatim  from
books  in  the  room.1  In  such  cases  very  careful  precautions
would  be  needed  to  make  it  quite  certain  that  the  automatist
had  not,  unknown  to  his  normal  consciousness,  looked  into  the
book.

I  should  like  to  know  how  M.  Maxwell  would  propose
to  investigate  automatic  script,  produced  otherwise  than  in
trance,  without  letting  the  automatists  share  in  the  responsibility.
Would  he  keep  them  in  solitary  confinement  ?  Or  does  he,
perhaps,  think  that  automatic  script  is  not  a  proper  subject
for  scientific  investigation  at  all  ?  But  that  would  seem  rather
arbitrary.  And  would  he  equally  exclude  from  investigation
all  introspective  psychology,  all  analysis  of  subjective  sensations,

1  See  Proceeding*,  Vol.  XI.,  pp.  106-7,  and  Human  Personality,  Vol.  II.,
pp.  591-2.


380


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


all  accounts  of  dreams,  visions,  hallucinations,  which  from  the
nature  of  the  case  must  be  given  by  the  percipients  themselves  ?

There  is  one  thing  perhaps  worth  noting  at  this  point
concerning  evidence  in  automatic  writing  for  supernormally
acquired  knowledge — cross-correspondences  and  the  like.  It
is  that,  from  a  purely  evidential  point  of  view,  it  does  not
matter  whether  the  writing  is  automatic  or  not.  Of  course  I
do  not  mean  that  the  fact  that  it  is  automatic  is  not  important.
The  study  of  automatism  is  of  great  psychological  interest,  and
I  think  it  will  be  admitted  that  in  the  various  studies  on  it
that  have  appeared  in  our  Proceedings,  especially  of  recent
years,  we  have  given  to  the  world  much  material  for  such
psychological  study.  Automatism  may,  too,  in  time,  not  only
give  us  evidence  for,  e.g.,  telepathy,  but  give  us  clues  to  the
processes  involved.  A  cross-correspondence,  however,  might  be
just  as  good  evidentially  without  any  automatic  writing  at  all.
For  instance,  if  an  idea  came  into  Mrs.  Verrall's  head  accom-
panied by  an  impression  that  Mrs.  Holland  had  the  same
idea,  and  she  recorded  this  idea  and  this  impression  in
ordinary  writing,  and  if  on  the  same  day  Mrs.  Holland  inde-
pendently recorded  the  same  idea,  we  should  have  prima  facie
evidence  for  telepathy  between  them,  though  no  automatic
writing  had  been  produced  at  all.  For  this  reason  contem-
poraneous impressions  of  the  automatists  about  the  meaning
of  their  scripts  may  have  evidential  value.  For  instance,  if
Mrs.  Verrall  records,  before  she  knows  that  any  cross-corre-
spondence is  involved,  that  the  "  storied  mount "  of  her  script
can  only  be  Dante's  Mount  of  Purgatory,  then  this  interpre-
tation must  be  taken  as  an  integral  part  of  the  evidence  to
be  considered.  It  does  not  matter  that  to  M.  Maxwell,  or
to  any  one  else,  it  may  seem  an  absurd  way  of  describing
that  mount.1

I  suppose  it  is  partly  at  least  because  of  his  view  that
automatic  writers  should  not  be  investigators  of  their  own
writing  that  M.  Maxwell  objects  (p.  58)  to  Mrs.  Verrall's
discussion  of  her  writing  in  Vol.  XX. Mrs.  Verrall,  he  says,

1  Mrs.  Verrall  understood  by  "storied  mount"  the  mount  of  which  Dante
told  the  story  :  "storied"  in  this  sense  being  equivalent  to  the  Latin
"fabulosua."  I,  like  M.  Maxwell,  read  it  as  "la  montagne  etagee,"
although  in  the  latter  sense  the  usual  spelling  would  be  "  storeyed "  mount.
The  point  is  of  course  quite  unimportant.


lxvii.] A  Reply  to  Dr.  Joseph  Maxwell's  Paper.  381


could  not  with  the  utmost  goodwill  be  impartial ;  one  cannot
be  judge  in  one's  own  case.  But  what  is  Mrs.  Verrall's  case  ?
What  is  her  side  and  what  is  the  other  side  ?  In  what  way
do  her  interests  come  in  ?  What  is  the  thesis  she  supports,
and  disagreement  with  which  would  disappoint  her?  M.  Maxwell
apparently  assumes  (p.  61)  very  gratuitously  that  she  starts
with  a  conviction  of  the  supernormal  value  of  her  scripts.  I
believe  the  truth  is  that  we  have  here  in  the  background  an
assumption  which  M.  Maxwell  makes  about  all  the  investigators
— one  which  he  has  not,  I  think,  fully  expressed  anywhere,
unless  it  be  a  propos  of  Dr.  Hodgson  (on  p.  58),  because  it
has  not  occurred  to  him  to  doubt  its  validity,  but  which
nevertheless  is  always  in  his  mind,  and  explains  criticisms
which  otherwise  seem  scarcely  intelligible.  I  take  him  to
assume  that  all  the  writers  whom  he  criticises,  with  whom  I
should  like  to  associate  myself  and  whom  I  may  therefore  for
shortness  call  we,  have  adopted  and  are  defending  the  hypo-
thesis that  the  intelligences  directing  the  automatic  script  are
in  all  cases,  or  at  least  in  all  where  there  is  any  evi-
dence in  the  writing  of  supernormally  acquired  knowledge,
spirits  of  the  dead  ;  and  further  that  those  spirits  are  responsible
for  the  wording  of  the  script.  In  other  words  he  takes  us
to  assume  that  the  scripts  are  verbally  inspired  by  spirits.
Eegarding  this  as  our  view,1  he  then  proceeds  to  argue,  like
the  critics  described  by  Miss  Johnson  in  her  last  report  on
the  Holland  script  {Proceedings,  Vol.  XXV.,  p.  292),  that  the
scripts  are  either  produced  by  the  influence,  say,  of  Mr.  Myers,
or  they  are  not ;  but  there  are  passages  in  them  unlike  Mr.
Myers ;  therefore  Mr.  Myers  cannot  have  produced  them,  and
therefore  our  supposed  contention  falls  to  the  ground.

But  this  would  be  beginning  at  the  wrong  end.  The
problem  does  not  present  itself  to  us  in  this  way  at  all ;  and
after  all  we  have  written,  it  is  disappointing  that  any  of  our
readers  should  imagine  that  it  does.  What  we  do  is  to  start
with  the  undeniable  fact  that  in  automatic  writing  the  intelli-
gence  directing  the  writing  is  not  the  normal  waking  intelli-
gence of  the  automatist.  It  is  an  intelligence  working  simul-
taneously with,  and  to  a  considerable  extent  independently  of,

1  Cf.  p.  58,  2nd  and  3rd  paragraphs;  p.  60,  '2nd  paragraph;  p.  125,  3rd  and
4th  paragraphs  ;  p.  139,  3rd  paragraph.


382


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


the  normal  waking  intelligence.  It  presents  in  its  workings
obvious  resemblances  to  the  intelligence  manifested  in  our
dreams,  and  whatever  other  elements  it  may  possess,  it  is  to
a  large  extent,  as  we  all  agree,  a  dissociated  phase  or  portion
of  the  automatist's  own  personality.

From  the  fact  that  its  thoughts  are  recorded  in  writing  we
have,  however,  permanent  and  stable  data  for  studying  it,  absent
in  the  case  of  rapidly  fading  dreams.  Automatic  writing,  in
fact,  at  least  affords  material  for  studying  dissociated  personality
if  it  does  nothing  more.  And  a  large  part  of  Mrs.  Verrall's
analysis  of  her  own  script  in  Vol.  XX.  is  a  study  of  this  kind;
and  so  is  a  great  deal  of  Miss  Johnson's  account  of  Mrs.
Holland's  script.  So  far  the  matter  might  have  been  left  to
orthodox  psychology,  though  indirectly  it  has,  of  course,  an
important  bearing  on  the  problems  of  psychical  research.  The
questions  with  which  we  are  more  immediately  concerned  begin
when  we  find  that  the  writing  intelligence  somehow  appears
to  have  access  to  information  to  which  the  normal  self  of  the
automatist  has  not  got  access.  We  have  then  first  to  make
up  our  minds  whether  this  really  is  so,  and  secondly,  if  it  is,
to  discover  (a)  what  light,  if  any,  is  thereby  thrown  on  the
nature  of  the  intelligence  directing  the  writing ;  (b)  the  mode
in  which  the  information  reaches  this  intelligence  ;  and  (c)  the
source  of  the  information.

The  first  question  of  course  is, — Are  the  coincidences  between
the  scripts  under  consideration,  and  either  other  scripts  or
external  facts,  beyond  what  we  can  reasonably  attribute  to
chance  ?  The  answer  which  we  each  of  us  make  to  this
question  will  depend  on  individual  judgment.  I  confess  to
feeling  no  doubt  whatever  myself  that  they  are  too  numerous,
and  many  of  them  too  striking,  to  be  attributed  to  chance.
M.  Maxwell  apparently  decides  otherwise,  but,  if  I  may  say  so,
I  think  he  hardly  gives  himself  a  fair  chance  of  judging,
because  he  so  often  confuses  the  issue.  Take  for  instance
the  case  he  begins  with,  the  "sphere-spear"  case  (p.  59  and  cf.
Procccdinr/s,  Vol.  XX.,  pp.  213-217).  In  America  on  January  28,
1902,  Dr.  Hodgson  suggests  to  the  Piper  communicator  (MyersP
at  the  moment)  to  appear  to  Miss  Verrall  with  a  spear  in  his
hand.  Spear  was  at  first  misheard  as  "  sphere,"  but  finally
the  experiment  with  "spear"  was  agreed  on. On  January  31,


lxvii.] A  Reply  to  Dr.  Joseph  Maxwell's  Paper.  383


as  the  result  of  a  strong  impulse  to  write,  Mrs.  Verrall  pro-
duces a  script  in  which  occurs  sphere  in  Greek  and  an
expression  in  Latin  (volatile  ferrum)  which  she  translates
"  spear."  Miss  Verrall  is  left  out,  but  otherwise  the  coincidence
will  seem  to  most  people  striking.  M.  Maxwell  objects  to  it
chiefly  because,  in  his  opinion,  volatile  ferrum,  which  is  an
expression  of  Virgil's,  means  "  arrow,"  and  not  "  spear."  Mrs.
Verrall  can  give  scholarly  reasons  for  attributing  to  Virgil  the
meaning  "spear."  But  what  Virgil  meant  is  really  entirely
irrelevant  from  the  evidential  point  of  view,  for  Mrs.  Verrall
removed  all  ambiguity  from  her  script  by  recording  before  she
heard  anything  about  the  experiment  in  America  that  in  her
opinion  her  script  meant  "  spear."

A  rather  curious  indication  of  the  way  in  which  M.  Maxwell's
estimate  of  coincidences  differs  from  ours  may  be  found  on
p.  86,  where,  in  criticising  Mr.  Piddington's  paper  on  "  Con-
cordant Automatisms  "  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXII.,  he  says  that,
in  order  to  make  the  most  favourable  case  for  the  experimenters,
he  will  analyse  only  their  best  cases,  and  proceeds  to  discuss
as  one  of  these  "  Celestial  Halcyon  Days,"  about  which  Mr.
Piddington  says  (Vol.  XXII.,  p.  103)  that  it  is  one  of  a
number  of  "  rather  vague  coincidences,"  and  that  he  discusses
it  "  chiefly,  if  not  entirely,  on  account  of  its  association  witli
the  important  group  of  phenomena  ...  to  be  dealt  with  in
the  next  section."

A  large  proportion  of  the  coincidences  which  impress  us  are
rejected  by  M.  Maxwell  on  the  ground  that  they  are  concerned
with  such  common  words  that  their  occurrence  in  the  scripts
of  several  automatists,  even  at  approximately  the  same  time,
signifies  nothing.  He  gives  on  p.  86  a  list  of  such  words,
namely,  Steeple,  Hope,  Star,  Arrow,  Giant  and  Dwarf,  Laurel
wreath,  Violets,  Cup,  Spirit  and  Angel,  Mountains  Seas  Lakes
and  Pavers,  Music,  Azure,  Horizon.  Another  list  of  very
common  words  (mots  tres  communs),  given  on  p.  101,  is
Spirit,  Shadow,  Umbrae,  East,  West,  Daffodils.  To  these  he
adds  a  list  of  commonplace  ones  (banals, — the  word  banal
occurs  very  frequently  in  his  paper  as  a  criticism) ;  these
are :  Euripides,  Orion,  Hercules,  Cytherea,  Aphrodite,  etc.  The
cprestion  of  commonness,  from  the  point  of  view  that  now
concerns  us,  is,  of  course,  relative  to  the  scripts. A  rare  word


384


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


in  ordinary  letter  writing  might  be  common  in  the  scripts,
and  vice  versa.  Some  of  the  above  words  occur  relatively  often
and  some  rarely  in  the  scripts.  To  aid  the  readers  judgment
as  to  their  commonness,  Mr.  Piddington  generally  indicates  the
occasions  on  which  they  have  appeared  in  the  scripts  written
during  the  period  covered  by  the  experiments.  But  unless
a  word  is  very  rare  indeed  in  ordinary  usage,  and  the  time
coincidence  is  very  exact,  we  want  more  than  the  mere
occurrence  of  the  word  in  two  scripts.  We  want  it  to  be
ear-marked  in  one  or  both  scripts  as  intended  for  a  cross-
correspondence,  or  in  some  way  strongly  emphasized.1  Or  we
want  it  combined  in  both  scripts  with  some  other  word  or
words.  M.  Maxwell  seems  to  ignore  this  ear-marking  of  words
altogether.  Does  he,  I  wonder,  object  to  experiments  in
thought-transference  with  cards  or  numbers,  because  of  the
undeniable  bancdiU  of  the  ideas  transferred  ?

One  is  sometimes  almost  tempted  to  think  that  M.  Maxwell
describes  a  case  as  banal  when  he  does  not  want  to  take
further  trouble  in  examining  it.  For  instance,  he  disposes  of
the  Sesame  and  Lilies  case  in  the  single  sentence :  "  La
correspondance  sur  Sesame  and  Lilies  est  d'une  grande  banalite  "
(p.  122).  I  suppose  he  means  that  Sesame  and  Lilies  is  the
title  of  a  well-known  book  of  Euskin's.  But  if  that  is  all
he  has  observed  in  the  cross-correspondence  in  question,  he
has  indeed  read  it  hastily.  It  is  in  fact,  whatever  interpre-
tation we  put  on  it,  a  most  curious  case,  which  no  student  of
automatic  writing  can  afford  to  neglect.  The  reader  will
remember  that  in  broad  outline  the  facts  we  have  to  deal
witli  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.  264-318)  are  that
automatists,  quite  unknown  to  and  unconnected  with  Mrs.
Verrall  or  any  of  us,  called  by  us  Mr.  and  Miss  Mac,  produce
script  at  the  end  of  July,  1908,  containing  the  words  "Sesame
and  Lilies,"  and  other  seeming  references  to  the  topic.  In
August,  1908,  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall's  scripts  produce  what,
on  comparing  them,  they  take  to  be  an  attempt  at  a  cross-
correspondence  on  "Sesame  and  Lilies."  In  September,  1908,
in  consequence  of  repeated  urging  through  the  writing  itself
to  send  to  Mrs.  Verrall  certain  of  their  scripts — the  particular

1  See  the  list  of  cross-correspondences  during  the  experiments  of  1906-1907
hus  "ear-marked"  in  the  Journal  for  Jan.,  1909  (Vol.  XIV.)  pp.  24-25.


lxvii.] A  Reply  to  Dr.  Joseph  Maxwell's  Paper.


385


scripts  meant  being  defined — the  Macs  write  to  her,  then  a
total  stranger,  about  their  experiments,  and  so  the  coinci-
dence of  topic  is  discovered.  Eeaders  of  the  Proceedings
will  remember  that  there  are  further  curious  details  about
this  cross-correspondence,  and  that  there  are  other  cross-
correspondences  involved ;  but  the  points  I  have  mentioned
are  enough  to  raise  interesting  questions,  and  to  relieve  the
case — as  I  should  have  thought  every  one  must  agree — from
the  charge  of  banalite.  Indeed,  it  seems  to  me  that  banal
is  the  last  epithet  that  should  be  applied  to  it.

But  I  must  go  on  to  other  matters.  When  we  conclude
that  the  correspondence  with  the  script  or  with  external  facts
appears  to  be  beyond  what  mere  chance  will  account  for,  we
have  next  to  examine  whether  it  can  be  accounted  for  by
knowledge  unconsciously  acquired  from  normal  sources  or
unconsciously  remembered.  Both  these  possibilities  may  for
evidential  purposes  be  described  as  cryptomnesia — hidden  memory
— memory  available  to  the  subliminal  self,  but  not  to  the
supraliminal.  It  is  an  advantage  possessed  by  good  cross-
correspondences,  whether  of  the  simple  or  complex  kind,  that
they  are,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  free  from  this  particular
danger.  An  automatist  cannot  have  learnt  normally  and
forgotten  what  exists  only  in  another  automatist's  mind,  or  in
her  locked-up  script  ;  the  two  automatists  having  neither
conversed  nor  corresponded  in  the  interval,  if  any,  between
the  production  of  the  two  scripts.  I  do  not  know,  by  the
way,  what  M.  Maxwell  means  (p.  139)  by  saying  that  cross-
correspondences  depend  on  negative  facts,  such  as,  that  the
mediums  have  no  knowledge  of  antecedent  publications.  What
antecedent  publications  can  there  be  ?  Nor  can  cryptomnesia
account  for  such  curious  coincidences  as  either  that  between
Mrs.Verrall's  script  and  the  reading  of  Marmontel  under  special
circumstances  by  a  man  who  knew  nothing  of  the  script ;  or
that  about  the  bird  and  the  chalk;  because  in  both  these
cases  the  events  apparently  described  took  place  subsequently
to  the  scripts.

The  possibility  of  cryptomnesia  must,  however,  be  allowed  for
in  cases  like  that  of  Abraham  Florentine,  to  which  M.
Maxwell  refers  with  approval  (p.  139).  Mr.  Stainton  Moses
by  table- tilting  described  with  some  correct  details  the  recent


386  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick  [part

death  of  an  American  named  Abraham  Florentine,  who  had
fought  in  the  war  of  1812,  of  whom  he  believed  he  had
never  heard.  It  is,  however,  impossible  to  feel  sure  that  no
obituary  notice  had  fallen  under  his  eye— perhaps  unnoticed
even  at  the  time  by  his  normal  consciousness;  especially  as  in
certain  other  cases  it  seems  almost  certain  that  such  obituary
notices  were  the  source  of  the  information  given  in  Mr.  Moses'
script.1

Cryptomnesia  is  a  possibility with which long  experience
in  Psychical  Kesearch  has  made  us  familiar. We  have  given
crucial  instances  of  its  occurrence from the scripts  under
discussion themselves (see, e.g.,  Proceedings, Vol. XXL,  pp.
287-9). We  have  stated  more  than  once  in  general  terms
that  its  possibility  must be  allowed  for  even when  all  we
know  goes  against  the  supposition that  some  normal  source
of  information  has  been  open  to  the  automatists. Thus  Miss
Johnson  even  goes  so  far  as  to  say  (Vol.  XXL,  p.  368)  that
"no  statement  in automatic  script that has ever been  in
print,  or  is  of  such  a  nature  as  to  be  known  to a  good
many  people,  can be  regarded  as  really good evidence  of
supernormal  knowledge." Mrs. Verrall says,  speaking  of  a
particular  case  (Vol.  XXIV,  p.  267),  "It  may therefore  be
taken  as  certain  that  no  knowledge  of  Proceedings,  Vol.  XX.,
was  consciously  possessed  by  the  Mac  family. At  the  same
time  it  cannot  be  proved  that  at  some  time  the  Keport,  or
a  notice  of  it,  may  not  have been  within reach  of  one  or
other  of  the  automatists. The  point is of importance  in
connexion  with  some  allusions  in  the  Mac  script,  but  does
not affect  the value of  the greater  part  of  its  contents."
Mr. Piddington takes great pains  to  examine and  to  lay
before  the  reader  all the  information  he  can  collect  as  to
Mrs.  Piper's  possible  sources  of  information  about  Lethe  (Proc.,
Vol. XXIV,  pp. 102-104, etc.)  and so  forth. We  have,
moreover,  to  the  best  of  my  belief,  never  attributed  evidential
importance  to  cases  where  cryptomnesia  is  a  possible  explana-
tion, without  giving  the  reader  all  the  information  available
to  enable  him  to  judge  how  much  it  should  be  allowed  for.
Why, then, does M. Maxwell constantly  attribute  to  us

1  Proceedings,  Vol.  XL,  pp.  82-85. Cf.  Mrs.  Thompson's  "Susanna  Parkes "
case,  Proceedings,  Vol.  XVIII.,  pp.  267-271.


lxvii.] A  Reply  to  Dr.  Joseph  Maxwell's  Paper.  387

ignorance  and  neglect  of  cryptomnesia  ? To  say  the  truth,  I
think  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  explain  how  a  careful  reader
comes to do  so. But one  thing  is plain: the  mistake  is
connected  with  a  fundamental  misunderstanding  which  pervades
his  paper. He  apparently  supposes  that  we  regard  the  frequent
quotations  or  reminiscences  of  passages  in  the  poets  which
occur  in  the  script  as  of  supernormal  origin. Now  in  certain
cases,  as  in  the  answers  to  the  "  Lethe "  question,  the  literary
sources  drawn  on  seem  so  surprisingly  out  of  the  automatist's
range,  that  it  is worth  while putting  before  the  reader  all
the  material  we  can  collect  bearing  on  the  question  of  what
literary  sources  of  information  she  may  have  had  access  to.
These'  cases  remain  remarkable,  in  my  opinion,  even  if  we
decide  on  the  whole  that  cryptomnesia  played  a  part  in  the
phenomenon. That  is  to  say,  the  form  of,  e.g.,  the  answer
given  by  Mrs.  Piper  to  the  Lethe  question  is  very  curious,
is  probably  instructive,  and  is  certainly  suggestive  of  a  super-
normal element,  even  if  we  conclude,  as  M.  Maxwell  does,  that
she  had  at  some  time  read  a  translation  of  Ovid's  Metamorphoses.

But for the most part there is no reason  whatever
for attributing  anything supernormal to the literary  refer-
ences  in the scripts, and it never occurred to us  that
any  one  could  suppose  there  was,  till  M.  Maxwell  sent  us
his  paper. The  automatic  scripts— especially  those  produced
without  trance  and  therefore  in  the  presence,  as  it  were,  of
the  waking  intelligence— are  often  obscure,  allusive,  symbolic,
and  expressed  by  means  of  literary  quotations. (I  will  deal
presently  with  M.  Maxwell's  objections  to  symbolism.)  Unless
we  can  find  the  source  of  these  literary  quotations,  and  thus
their  context,  we  may  often  lose  a  valuable  aid  to  interpreting
the  scripts— and  to  interpret  them  is  important,  if  only  with
a  view  to  "the  study  of  the  psychological  processes  of  auto-
matic messages,"  which  M.  Maxwell,  as  well  as  ourselves,  has
so  much  at  heart  (p.  141). We  have  a  good  instance  in  the
interpretation  of  the  phrase,  "a  knot  of  blue  ribbon,"  which
seems  to  M.  Maxwell  so  preposterous  (p.  137). The  phrase
occurs  at  the  beginning  of  a  script  of  Mrs.  Verrall's. Has  it
a  meaning  or  is  it  pure irrelevant nonsense? From  the
evidential  point  of  view  this  question  is  entirely  unimportant;
its  only  interest  so  far  as  we  can  see is  from  the  point


388


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


of  view  of  the  psychological  processes  of  automatic  writing.
The  name  "John"  occurs  very  shortly  afterwards  in  the  script,
and  this  suggests  to  Mr.  Piddington  a  probable  explanation  for
the  knot  of  blue  ribbon,  namely,  that  it  emerged  on  account
of  its  association  with  the  name  John  in  a  verse  with  part
at  least  of  which  M.  Maxwell  might  have  been  familiar  had
he  been  brought  up  in  an  English  nursery — the  verse :

"  Oh  dear,  what  can  the  matter  be  ?
Johnny's  so  long  at  the  fair ;
He  promised  to  buy  me  a  bunch  of  blue  ribbon
To  tie  up  my  bonny  brown  hair."

Notwithstanding  M.  Maxwell's  scorn,  Mr.  Piddington's  suggestion
will,  I  think,  seem  to  most  English  people  plausible,  if  not
convincing.  Comparing  this  case  with  others  we  may  suppose
the  phrase,  "  a  knot  of  blue  ribbon,"  to  be  symbolic  of  the
name  John,  though  in  this  particular  case  the  symbol  is
superseded  by  the  plain  writing  of  the  name  immediately
afterwards.

Some  quotations  of  course  every  one  recognises  at  once.
For  instance,  Crossing  the  Bar,  of  which  M.  Maxwell  thinks
the  newspaper  Light  may  be  the  source  in  the  scripts,  is,
at  least  so  far  as  the  title  of  the  poem  is  concerned,  almost
as  familiar  to  Englishmen  as  God  save  the  King.  But  there
are  other  quotations  less  easy  to  recognise,  for  Mrs.  and
Miss  Verrall  and  Mrs.  Holland  are  widely  read  in  literature,
and  their  minds  appear  to  be  veritable  storehouses  of  literary
phrases  remembered  or  half  remembered.  If  therefore  the
source  of  a  phrase  is  not  at  once  obvious,  what  seems  to
us  the  first  course  to  adopt  is  to  ask  the  automatist,  or  for
the  automatist  to  ask  herself,  whether  she  knows  where  it
comes  from.  If  she  remembers  it  supraliminally,  then  the
question  is  settled,  for  there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that
the  subliminal  self  must  be  assumed  to  have  access  to  supra-
liminal information.1 This plan of asking the  automatist

1  Whether  this  is  always  completely  true  as  regards  all  supraliminal  knowledge
it  is  difficult  to  say.  Our  dream  selves  do  not  seem  to  be  always  fully  aware  of
our  actual  surroundings,  but  in  this  case  it  may  be  argued  that  the  supraliminal
consciousness  is  in  abeyance  and  itself  also  unaware  of  impressions  it  might  receive
through  the  senses.  Dr.  Hodgson  thought  there  was  some  evidence  that  Mrs.
Piper's  trance  personality  was  not  always  aware  of  recent  experiences  of  her  normal


lxvii.] A  Reply  to  Dr.  Joseph  Maxwell's  Paper.


389


seems  simple,  and  why  M.  Maxwell  should  object  to  it  I
cannot  imagine.  Why  should  we  try  to  find  out  by  laborious
and  devious  methods  what  we  can  so  easily  learn  from  the
automatist  ?

But  the  automatist  cannot  by  any  means  always  tell  us
where  a  quotation  comes  from.  She  often  does  not  supra-
liminally  know.  When  this  is  the  case  it  has  to  be  searched
for,  and  if  found  the  next  point  is  to  ascertain  whether  at
some  time  it  has  or  may  have  been  in  the  mind  or  under
the  eye  of  the  automatist.  So  far,  hardly  any  approximately
exact  quotation  has  been  discovered  in  the  scripts  which
there  is  any  serious  difficulty  in  supposing  to  have  been  at
one  time  or  other  seen  by  the  automatist.  A  very  curious
exception  is  the  Latin  quotation  from  Ovid's  Fasti  given  by
Mrs.  Holland  on  March  2,  1910  (see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXV.,
p.  246),  and  a  few  more  cases  of  the  kind  would  give  cause
for  reflection  :  but  one  swallow  does  not  make  a  summer.1  It
is  not,  then,  in  the  mere  use  of  quotations  that  we  have
hitherto  found  evidence  of  supernormal  knowledge.  Quotations
seem  as  a  rule  to  be  merely  furniture  of  the  mind  which  the
intelligence  responsible  for  the  script  finds  ready  to  hand.

Of  course,  when  a  phrase  in  the  script  resembles  one  occur-
ring in  more  than  one  author,  especially  if  the  author  actually
quoted  is  comparatively  obscure,  we  may  sometimes  ascribe  an
allusion  to  the  wrong  source.  One  or  two  instances  of  this
have  been  discovered  or  suggested,  and  lead  M.  Maxwell  to
accuse  us  of  superficiality  in  our  investigations.  In  some
cases  such  a  mistake  may  lead  to  misinterpretation  of  the
script.  It  possibly  does  so  as  regards  a  subordinate  point —
the  association  with  Persephone  of  Nightingale — in  the  case
referred  to  by  M.  Maxwell  (on  p.  136),  when  what  is  sub-
sequently found  to  be  a  quotation  from  Oscar  Wilde  had
been  taken  as  an  allusion  to  a verse  of  Tennyson's.  In

consciousness.  But  certainly  for  evidential  purposes  it  would  be  very  unsafe
to  suppose  that  the  subliminal  self  had  not  access  to  all  supraliminal  knowledge.

1  There  are  of  course  other  cases  where  literary  sources  apparently  unknown
to  the  automatist  seem  to  have  been  drawn  upon.  For  these  see  Mr.
Piddington's  paper  in  Proceedings,  Part  LXV.  (p.  245)  on  "Two  Tenny-
sonian  Quotations "  and  the  passages  he  refers  to  at  the  end  of  that  paper.
But,  except  in  Mrs.  Holland's  epiotation  from  Ovid,  these  cases  relate  to  remini-
scences of  literary  passages  rather  than  to  quotations.


390


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


other  cases  it  may  be  of  no  importance  at  all.  For  instance,
when  Mrs.  Piper  said  "Clock!  Tick,  Tick,  Tick,  Stairs"
(which  is  not  a  quotation,  by  the  way),  she  may  have  had  in
mind  Longfellow's  poem,  The  Old  Clock  on  the  Stairs;  or
she  may,  as  M.  Maxwell  thinks,  following  Professor  Hyslop's
suggestion,  have  been  alluding  to  the  clock  on  the  stairs  at
the  Tavern  Club.  It  really  does  not  matter  which,  as  the
whole  point  is  in  the  words  she  actually  uses.  As  the
simplest  theory  of  their  source  I  myself  prefer  Longfellow's
poem ;  for  I  think  it  practically  certain  that  at  school  or
since  Mrs.  Piper  has  met  with  so  well  known  a  poem  of
the  famous  American  poet ;  and  it  is  not  equally  probable
that  she  ever  saw  the  clock  in  Mr.  Hodgson's  club  or
heard  of  the  ceremonies  connected  with  it.  Indeed,  Prof.
Hyslop  regards  the  phrase,  if  it  refers  to  the  club,  of  which
he  does  not  feel  sure,  as  an  indication  that  we  have  to  do
with  a  persistent  memory  of  Hodgson's  rather  than  with  Mrs.
Piper's  mind.1

M.  Maxwell,  I  note,  prefers  spiritualistic  literature,  especially
the  newspaper  Light,  as  a  source  of  phrases  used,  to  the  sources
suggested  by  us,  and  refers  to  Light  phrases  which  hardly  seem
to  require  a  literary  source  at  all.  For  example,  "  seven  times
seven,"  uttered  by  Mrs.  Home,  is  a  phrase  too  undistinctive
to  be  regarded  as  a  quotation  (unless  it  be  from  the  multi-
plication table) ;  and  I  do  not  know  that  her  actual  words,
"seven  times  seven  and  seventy- seven "  occur  in  that  com-
bination anywhere  else.  But  if  Mrs.  Home  was  led  to  the
phrase  by  any  literary  reminiscence,  it  was  probably  the  well-
known  text  in  the  New  Testament  (Matt,  xviii.  22),  "I  say
not  unto  thee,  until  seven  times :  but,  until  seventy  times  seven,"
that  she  had  in  mind  rather  than  references  in  Light  to  Mr.
Stainton  Moses'  seven  circles  of  seven  spirits,  though  she  has
very  likely  seen  these  references.  This  is  again  a  case  where
the  source  is  unimportant,  because  all  that  is  of  interest  is
the  emphasis  on  the  idea  seven.  M.  Maxwell,  I  may
remark,  is  a  little  rash  in  his  assumption  that  all  auto-
matists read  Light,  as  indeed  he  is in  some other  assump-

1  This  is  perhaps  more  clearly  seen  in  Prof.  Hyslop's  article  in  the  Journal  of
the  American  Society  of  Psychical  Research  (March,  1911)  than  in  the  paragraph
based  on  it  in  our  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXV.,  p.  298.


lxvii.] A  Reply  to  Dr.  Joseph  Maxwell's  Payer.


391


tions  about  their  habits  and  opportunities.  Probably  Mrs.
Holland  and  Mrs.  Willett  never  see  Light,  and  Mrs.  Piper
very  rarely,  if  at  all.  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall  no  doubt
look  into  it  occasionally,  and  Mrs.  Home,  I  should  imagine,
reads  it  regularly.  These  estimates,  I  ought  to  say,  are
based  on  my  knowledge  of  the  ladies,  not  on  special
inquiries.  If,  therefore,  e.g.  Mrs.  Holland  quotes  from  an
English  poet  a  passage  also  at  some  time  or  other  quoted
in  Light,  it  is  much  more  likely  that  the  source  in  her  case
is  the  poet's  works  than  that  it  is  Light.  If,  again,  Mrs.  Piper
talks  about  "  Pharaoh's  daughter,"  it  is  much  more  likely  that  it
is  because  she  has  in  her  mind  the  Bible  story  of  Moses  saved
by  Pharaoh's  daughter  than  that  she  has  a  reminiscence  of  the
words  as  used  in  Light  some  years  before  (p.  120).

But  I  have  said  enough  about  quotations.  They  lead  on
naturally  to  another  characteristic  of  the  scripts,  with  which
indeed  they  are  closely  connected — I  mean  the  symbolic  char-
acter of  the  language  used,  much  of  which  depends  on  mean-
ings being  expressed  by  means  of  quotations  and  allusions.
M.  Maxwell  objects  strongly  to  this,  but  whether  he  thinks
the  symbolism  exists  only  in  our  imagination,  or  whether  he
thinks  that  automatic  script  in  which  symbolic  language  is
used  is  too  obscure  to  be  worth  studying,  I  am  not  quite
sure.  I  think,  however,  that  a  little  further  examination
would  convince  him  that  the  symbolism  is  really  there  if  he
has  any  doubt  about  it.  For  instance,  is  there  any  possible
doubt  that  Mrs.  Holland's  script  of  March  14,  1906  (Vol.  XXL,
p.  320)  is  symbolic?  That  is  the  script  where  she  gives  a
string  of  numbers  which,  when  interpreted  as  letters  of  the
alphabet  expressed  in  their  numerical  order,  gives  the  name,
Boden  Noel.  These  numbers  are  followed  by  the  words,  "  Not
to  be  taken  as  they  stand,"  and  by  a  reference  to  a  portion
of  a  verse  in  Revelation,  which  when  looked  up  is  found  to
be  "  for  it  is  the  number  of  a  man."  In  this  case  the  sym-
bolic script  itself  gives  the  clue  to  the  symbolism,  besides
telling  us  in  the  phrase,  "  not  to  be  taken  as  they  stand,"
that  it  is  symbolic.  Similarly  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of
February  18,  1907  (Vol.  XXII.  p.  82)  occur  the  words,
"  The  white  hill  and  les  neiges  d'antan  Blanche  de  Lys  or
some  such  name — but  it  is  all  only  symlobic  [sic]."


392


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich


[part


Instances  where  the  symbolism  is  unmistakable  and  where
the  script  itself  says  it  is  symbolic,  or  uses  such  expressions
as  "  so  and  so  is  a  clue,"  implying  that  a  clue  is  wanted  to
find  the  meaning,  might  be  multiplied  indefinitely.  There  is
no  doubt  that  the  symbolism  is  there  and  that  the  meaning
of  the  scripts  is  constantly  wrapped  up  in  a  way  that  prevents
its  being  at  once  obvious,  and  though  it  would  often  be  more
convenient  to  have  the  meaning  stated  more  plainly  and  would
prevent  some  ambiguities — and  ambiguities  in  the  case  of
cross-correspondences  may  sometimes  give  a  double  chance —
we  must,  if  we  wish  to  study  the  scripts  at  all,  accept
them  as  they  are.  Of  course,  however,  we  must  all  admit
that  great  care  should  be  exercised  not  to  let  our  imagina-
tions run  away  with  us,  and  not  to  assume  doubtful  interpre-
tations to  be  certain.

The  question  naturally  arises — why  this  symbolism  and
obscurity  ?  I  think  we  shall  have  to  wait  till  we  know
more  to  answer  fully,  but  some  reasons  may  be  suggested.
Part  of  the  obscurity  may  be  due  to  dream-like  sequences
of  associated  ideas  unregulated  by  a  controlling  intelligence —
like  the  conversation  of  some  chattering  people  who  flow  on
from  one  thing  to  another  till  you  do  not  know  what  they
are  talking  about.  This  would  account  for  the  introduction  of
irrelevant  ideas,  and  it  is  a  possibility  which  the  script  itself
takes  note  of.  For  instance,  a  script  of  Mrs.  Verrall's,  on
Feb.  15,  1910  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XXV.,  p.  214),  cuts  short
some  rhyming  verses  with  the  words  :

no  don't  say  obvious  nonsense — the  rhyme  hinders — but  you  now
have  the  general  sense.  I  can't  think  why  you  will  not  just  put
down  the  words  without  making  up  bad  verses  to  disguise  from
yourself  what  you  are  doing.  Now  write  FOUNT  no  more  than
that — and  off  you  go  to  Fountains  Abbey.1

But  we  cannot  thus  explain  conundrums  which  are  evidently
deliberate,  like  the  one  about  the  name  Roden  Noel,  referred
to  above.  Here  another  explanation  suggests  itself,  namely,
that  obscurity  may  sometimes  be  necessary  to  prevent  inhibition
by  the  supraliminal  self.  The  writing  intelligence  is  writing,
on  sufferance,  as  it  were,  the  normal  intelligence  agreeing  to

!Cf.  also  Proe.,  Vol.  XXII.,  pp.  191  and  228.


lxvii.] A  Reply  to  Dr.  Joseph  Maxwell's  Paper.


393


stand  aside  for  the  moment.  But — at  any  rate  where  there
is  no  trance,  and  to  some  extent,  probably,  where  there  is —
the  normal  intelligence  is  there  in  the  background  all  the
time.  Its  attention  may  be  arrested  at  any  moment  by  what
is  being  written,  and  if  its  interest  is  aroused  it  may  interfere
either  by  inhibiting  or  by  directing  the  script.  The  intelligence
directing  the  automatic  writing  may  therefore  find  itself  less
obstructed  if  it  expresses  itself  so  that  its  meaning  is  not
immediately  obvious.  It  says  so  itself — e.g.,  Mrs.  Holland,
Feb.  23,  1905  (Vol.  XXL,  p.  247):

Names.  Names  and  proofs  are  the  very  things  we  must  withold
[sic]  from  you  because  your  brain  which  you  cannot  or  will  not
will  to  a  proper  state  of  passivity — will  spin  its  own  web  round
whatever  is  presented  to  you — For  truth's  sake  we  must  be  veiled
and  ambiguous.  [Then  comes  what  is  evidently  a  punning  allusion
to  the  names  of  Gurney,  Sidgwick,  and  Myers  :]  A  gurnet  among
the  sedge  which  grew  in  the  mires.  [And  the  script  goes  on]  We
want  to  withold  [sic]  riddles  from  you — your  usefulness  would  depart.

Neither  of  the  explanations  suggested  so  far  involves  anything
supernormal.  They  would  be  equally  applicable  and  equally
needed  if  the  writing  contained  no  supernormal  element  at  all.
For  though  in  the  quotations  I  have  given  there  is  an
assumption  that  a  personality  outside  the  automatist  is
concerned,  we  cannot  of  course  take  it  at  its  own  valuation —
especially  as  we  have  evidence  in  automatic  states  of  what
Prof.  William  James  calls  a  "  will  to  personate."

But  now  we  come  back  to  the  evidence  for  knowledge  super-
normally  acquired — ideas  entering  from  outside  the  automatist,
and  not  by  the  ordinary  channels  of  sense.  Here  we  have
a  new  source  of  obscurity  and  complexity,  because,  as  we  have
every  reason  to  think,  ideas  conveyed  telepathically  are  apt
to  come  in  a  fragmentary  and  imperfect  way,  and  both  to  be
imperfectly  apprehended,  and  to  be  dressed  up  by  the  percipient.
Experiments  in  thought-transference  help  us  here.  For  instance,
when  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith  tried  telepathically  to  make  the
hypnotised  P.  see  a  picture  on  a  blank  card  of  a  choir  boy
dressed  in  a  surplice,  P.  said  :

Edge  of  card's  going  a  dark  colour.  Somebody  dressed  up  in
white,  eh1? Can  see  something  all  white;  edge  all  black  and  like


394


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


a  figure  in  the  middle. There's  his  hands  up  (making  a  gesture
to show the  attitude) like  a  ghost or something — you  couldn't
mistake  it  for  anything  but  a  ghost.  ... It  might  frighten  any  one.
(Proc,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  565. Human  Personality,  Vol.  I.,  p.  552.)

The  same  thing  may  happen  in  the  case  of  a  split  personality
with  ideas  from  outside  brought  in  normally  through  the  senses.
For  instance,  Mr.  Myers  on  another  occasion  told  the  same
subject  P.  while  in  hypnotic  trance,  the  story  of  Robinson
Crusoe  finding  the  footprint  and  fearing  savages :

Awakened  and  set  before  the  glass  of  water  [which  was  being
used  as  a  crystal],  P.  at  once  exclaimed,  "  Why,  there's  Buffalo
Bill !  he's  dressed  in  feathers,  and  skins  round  him,  almost  like  a
savage.  He's  walking  about  in  a  waste  place.  ...  I  can  see  some-
thing else  coming  from  another  part — it's  a  blackie  .  .  .  look  at  them
now,  how  they're  arguing,  Buffalo  Bill  and  his  black  man." 1

{Proc,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  461. Human  Personality,  Vol.  I.,  p.  580.)

In  this  case  it  was  not  in  the  communication  from  Mr.  Myers
to  P.'s  hypnotic  consciousness  that  the  failure  took  place — it
was  rather  between  two  phases  of  the  subliminal  consciousness,
or  else  in  the  transmission  of  the  picture  to  the  supraliminal
consciousness.  We  can  imagine  how  meaningless  the  occurrence
of  these  visions  would  have  seemed  without  the  clue,  though
with  it — with  the  knowledge  of  what  it  was  intended  the
percipient  should  perceive — the  connexion  with  this  of  what
he  did  perceive  is  perfectly  obvious.

And  this  brings  us  to  what  may,  I  think,  be  an  even  more
important  cause  of  the  complexity  of  the  scripts  if  we  suppose
that  an  outside  intelligence  is  influencing  them.  That  outside
intelligence — let  us  call  it  the  communicator — if  it  is  actively
trying  to  convey  a  definite  idea,  may  well  have  difficulty,  if
it  works  telepathically,  in  getting  the  intelligence  directing  the
script  either  to  grasp  the  idea  or  to  write  down  the  words
in  which  the  communicator  would  naturally  express  it.  The
communicator  may  therefore  be  reduced  to  selecting  such  phrases
and  ideas  already  in  the  automatist's  mind  as  will  come  nearest
to  what  it  wishes  to  say,  with  the  further  hampering  condition
that  they  must  be  phrases and  ideas  which the  intelligence

1  Buffalo  Bill  was  the  name  of  the  hero  in  a  show  going  on  in  England  at  that
time  and  representing  life  in  the  Wild  West.


lxvii.] A  Reply  to  Dr.  Joseph  Maxwell's  Paper.  395

directing  the  writing  can  be  induced  to  write  down.  Under
conditions  such  as  these  we  must  suppose  that  the  communi-
cator will  have  constant  difficulty  in  getting  its  message  through
at  all,  that  when  it  succeeds,  the  success  will  often  be  very  partial,
and  that  an  occasion  on  which  it  is  at  all  adequately  suc-
cessful in  getting  the  message  expressed  will  be  something  of
a  red-letter  day  with  it.

But  the  reader  will  say  I  am  going  too  fast  and  assuming
all  sorts  of  things  about  the  intelligences  concerned  without
discussing  them.  Let  us  go  back  then  to  the  questions  I
raised  earlier  in  this  paper :  (a)  What  light,  if  any,  is  thrown
by  the  script  on  the  nature  of  the  intelligence  directing  the
writing ;  (5)  what  is  the  mode  in  which  supernormally  acquired
information  reaches  this  intelligence  ;  and  (c)  what  is  the  source
of  this  information  ?  These  are  difficult  questions,  and  can  at
present  only  be  answered  incompletely.  Nor,  though  I  believe
the  writers  of  the  papers  criticised  by  M.  Maxwell  to  be  in
substantial  agreement  with  me,  do  I  wish  in  what  I  am  about
to  say  to  be  held  to  express  the  opinions  of  any  one  but
myself,  nor  even  any  final  opinion  of  my  own.  The  whole
subject  is  very  -  difficult,  evidence  is  accumulating,  and  further
light  may  be  thrown  on  our  problems  at  any  moment.  And,
in  fact,  what  we  have  all  been  trying  to  do  in  the  papers
concerning  automatic  scripts,  is  to  set  before  readers  of  the
Proceedings  what  material  is  available  for  answering  these
questions  without  attempting  to  force  any  particular  answer
upon  them.

Let  us  begin  with  the  question — What  light  is  thrown  by
the  scripts,  and  especially  by  the  supernormal  elements  in
them,  on  the  nature  of  the  intelligence  directing  the  script  ?
The  reader  will  be  prepared  from  what  I  have  already  said
to  hear  that  in  my  view  this  intelligence,  whether  prompted
or  inspired  from  outside  or  not,  is  a  phase — a  subliminal
self — of  the  automatist.  Several  reasons  may  be  urged  for
this  view.  One  is  that  some  scripts  are  almost  provablv
purely  subliminal.  I  will  give  a  hitherto  unpublished  instance
— a  script  of  Mrs.  Verrall's,  written  on  Nov.  19,  1906.  She
was  trying  an  experiment  with  Mr.  J.  A.  Hill  (a  member  of
the  Society  known  to  her  by  correspondence  only),  he  being
in  another  place  and  she  writing  with  attention  directed  to


396  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

him  to  see  if  anything  connected  with  him  would  come.  This
is  the  script :

Wiiberforce.  The  lamplight  shines  on  the  wet  streets,  and  the
turning  is  to  the  left — the  house  is  on  the  right  hand  side — two
windows  on  the  street.

But  it  seems  a  long  time  back,  not  the  dress  of  to-day.

And  then  Jamaica  seems  written — and  I  think  of  a  place  with
black  people.  Apocryphal.

This  had  no  significance  for  Mr.  Hill,  and  remained
unexplained  for  more  than  five  years.  A  few  months  ago
Mrs.  Verrall  discovered  its  meaning.  She  had  occasion  to
read  a  paper  of  mine  on  "  Phantasms  of  the  Dead,"  including
haunted  houses,  published  in  Vol.  III.  of  the  Proceedings.
On  pp.  137-141  of  this  paper  is  a  story  of  a  haunted  house
in  Spanishtown,  Jamaica,  occupied  by  a  Mr.  Hill,  who  himself,
among  others,  saw  the  ghost.  When  she  came  to  this  story
she  had  no  recollection  of  having  read  it  before,  but  was  at
once  reminded  of  the  above  script,  and  I  think  the  corre-
spondences are  too  close  for  any  one  to  doubt  the  connexion.
"  Wiiberforce "  is  an  approach  to  Emancipation  of  Slaves,
"half-emancipated  negroes"  (p.  139)  being  referred  to  in
the  story.  "  House "  and  "  street "  come  in  naturally,  for  the
haunting  of  the  house  is  the  point  of  the  story,  and  the  ghost
"sometimes  appeared  to  come  from  the  street"  (pp.  140-141).
"  It  seems  a  long  time  back,  not  the  dress  of  to-day,"  corre-
sponds with  the  statement  that  the  haunting  was  traced  back
from  1848  to  180  6,  and  believed  to  have  existed  before,  and
that  Mr.  Hill  "  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  ghost  wore
the  garb  which  was  in  use  in  the  colony  in  the  reign  of
George  the  First."  "  Jamaica "  is  where  the  house  was,  and
"  black  people "  figure  largely  in  the  story  as  percipients.
The  only  inappropriate  remark  is  that  about  lamplight  shining
on  the  wet  streets.  The  word  "  apocryphal,"  Mrs.  Verrall
suggests,  may  represent  the  opinion  of  the  ghost  story  held
by  her  subliminal  self.  Though  Mrs.  Verrall  had  no  conscious
recollection  of  the  story,  she  is  certain  that  she  read  the
article  containing  it  a  long  time  ago — probably  in  1887,  soon
after  she  became  a  member  of  the  Society.  She  remembered
supraliminally the  general  conclusions arrived  at  in  it,  but


lxvii.] A  Reply  to  Dr.  Joseph  Maxwell's  Paper.  397

hardly  any  of  the  particular  stories.  No  doubt,  however,  some
recollection  of  the  story  in  question  was  retained  by  her  sub-
liminal self  and  was  brought  out  by  association  of  ideas — the
name  of  Mr.  Hill  with  whom  Mrs.  Verrall  was  experimenting,
recalling  another  Mr.  Hill  connected  with  Psychical  Research.
The  case  seems  to  me  a  clear  instance  of  purely  subliminal
origin,  altogether  uninfluenced  from  outside.  But  if  some  auto-
matic scripts  are  purely  subliminal  with  no  external  agency  at
all,  is  it  not  gratuitous  to  suppose  that  in  other  cases  which
seem  to  have  nothing  to  distinguish  them  from  the  first,
except  that  part  of  the  contents  of  the  script  appears  to  come
from  some  other  mind,  the  scribe  is  different  ?  Is  it  not
like  supposing  that  it  is  a  different  "I"  who  writes  when  I
write  a  letter  out  of  my  own  head,  and  when  some  one
else  suggests  to  me  what  to  say  ?

Another  reason  for  believing  the  intelligence  directing  the
writing  to  be  a  subliminal  self  of  the  automatist  is  that  there
is  in  my  view  hardly  any  evidence  for  what  I  may  call  the
general  construction  or  machinery  of  the  scripts,  e.g.,  the
language  in  which  they  are  written,  being  beyond  the  possible
range  of  the  automatist's  own  power.  Mrs.  Holland  does  not,
for  instance,  write  Greek,  nor  Mrs.  Piper  Latin,  and  so  forth.

A  third  reason  is  that  the  style  of  the  scripts  of  each  auto-
matist is  individual  and  differs  from  that  of  others.  With  a
little  practice  one  can  generally  tell  from  the  script  itself —
or  at  any  rate  form  a  very  good  guess — which  automatist  is
responsible  for  it.  This  would  not  happen,  I  think,  if  it  were
not  the  work  of  some  phase  of  the  automatist's  subliminal  self.

If  it  be  granted  that  the  intelligence  directing  the  writing
is  a  subliminal  self  of  the  automatist,  it  almost  follows  that
the  answer  to  our  second  question  is  that  the  mode  in  which
supernormally  acquired  knowledge  reaches  that  intelligence  is
telepathic — telepathy  either  from  other  embodied  human  minds  or
from  minds  not  in  the  body.  Unless  indeed  it  be  clairvoyant ;
but  evidence  for  clairvoyance  in  the  sense  of  the  perception
otherwise  than  through  the  senses  of  things  not  in  other
minds,  is  at  present  almost  non-existent.  Telepathy  merely
means  communication  between  mind  and  mind  otherwise  than
through  the  senses,  and  we  know  of  course  very  little  about
it. We  do  not,  for  instance,  know whether  when  an  idea


398


Mrs.  Henry  SidgvAck.


[part


reaches  B  telepathically  from  A  it  is  because  A  has  actively
tried  to  impress  it  on  B,  who  receives  it  passively ;  or
whether,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  B  who  actively  fetches
it  out  of  the  mind  of  the  passive  A ;  or  whether  active
co-operation  is  wanted  on  both  sides ;  or  even  whether  tele-
pathy may  come  about  without  the  active  co-operation  of
either  mind.  Thought-transference  experiments  do  not  help
us  much  in  deciding  any  such  question,  because  we  do  not
know  whether  the  supraliminal  efforts  of  which  we  are
cognisant  have  or  have  not  any  effect  on  the  phenomenon.  It
may  be  a  purely  subliminal  affair.  This  is  one  of  the  things
we  must  look  for  light  on  from  the  evidence  which  is  accumu-
lating, noting  that  if  we  find  purposive  intention  in  the  idea
telepathically  conveyed  we  have  to  assume  an  intelligent  agent.

Well  then  we  come  to  the  third  question,  and  it  is  of
course  by  far  the  most  crucial  and  important  of  all — What  is
the  source  from  which  this  information  comes  telepathically  ?
In  simple  cross -correspondences  like  the  "sphere-spear"  case
we  may  suppose  Mrs.  Piper's  and  Mrs.  Verrall's  minds  alone
to  be  concerned.  Telepathy  between  them  would,  so  far  as  we
know,  sufficiently  account  for  what  occurred,  though  it  may  not
be  the  true  explanation.  But  when  we  come  to  complex  cross-
correspondences,  simple  telepathy  will  not  serve  —  at  least  /
think  not.  M.  Maxwell  thinks  it  will ;  he  thinks  Mr.  Pigou
has  clearly  shown  that  even  cross-correspondences  of  the  "  mosaic
type  " — the  complex  kind,  that  is — may  be  due  to  fragmentary
telepathic  thought-transference  (p.  139).  He  does  not  tell  us
whether  he  has  read  Mr.  Balfour's  reply  to  Mr.  Pigou  (Proc.
Vol.  XXV.,  pp.  38-56),  and,  if  so,  how  he  would  meet  it.  To
me  the  reply  seems  conclusive,  and  until  it  is  met  we  must,
in  my  opinion,  assume  that  a  purposive  element  in  the  dis-
tribution among  different  automatists  of  the  fragments  of  a
complex  cross-correspondence  does  show  the  operation  of  intelli-
gence, and  cannot  be  due  to  the  mere  accidental  fragmentari-
ness  of  telepathically  conveyed  ideas.  A  purposive  element
may  be  shown  either  by  the  selection  and  distribution  of  the
fragments,  or  by  statements  in  the  script  showing  that  there
is  intention,  or  by  both.  I  do  not  propose  to  go  over  all
this  much  discussed  ground  aoain.  What  we  have  each  to
decide  for  ourselves  is  whether  in  the  cross-correspondences  of


lxvii.] A  Reply  to  Dr.  Joseph  Maxwell's  Paper.  399


which  we  know,  there  is  evidence  of  purposive  design  in  the
distribution  of  the  parts.  If  we  think  there  is,  the  next  point
is  to  discover  whose  design  it  is.  Is  it  that  of  the  subliminal
self  of  one  or  more  of  the  automatists  ?  This  hypothesis
should  be  strained  to  the  utmost,  but  if  any  one  will  honestly
try  to  apply  it  in  all  cases,  he  will,  I  think,  find  it  very
difficult.

But  if  it  is  not  the  subliminal  selves  of  the  automatists  that
work  the  cross-correspondences,  what  hypothesis  remains  except
that  they  are  the  work  of  external  intelligences  ?  This  is  a
very  far-reaching  hypothesis,  and  one  which  requires  much
evidence  very  carefully  scrutinised  to  establish  it.1  Further,
if  we  have  to  do  with  external  intelligences,  we  must  ask
what  external  intelligences  they  are.  Are  they,  what  they
claim  to  be,  our  former  fellow-workers  in  psychical  research,
Gurney,  Sidgwick,  and  Myers  ?  It  must  be  admitted  in  favour
of  this  that  the  idea  of  proving  external  agency  by  giving
evidence  of  purposive  design  is  an  ingenious  one,  and  one
which  it  is  natural  to  suppose  might  occur  to  these  former
investigators,  anxious  to  prove  survival,  and  well  aware  of
the  difficulties  of  doing  so,  and  of  the  need  of  new  methods.
Moreover,  the  claim  of  identity  is  to  some  considerable  extent
supported — even  after  full  allowance  for  the  share  in  the
script  of  the  automatist's  own  mind — by  the  characteristic
nature  of  some  communications,  and  by  the  greater  apparent
appropriateness  to  the  supposed  communicators  than  to  the
automatists  of  certain  ideas  and  arrangements  of  ideas — e.g.  in
the  answers  to  the  Lethe  question.  But  more  evidence  is
wanted  before  we  form  a  definite  conclusion.

I  hope,  therefore,  that  readers  of  the  Proceedings  are  not
getting  tired  of  cross-correspondences.  Regarded  merely  as
proof  of  telepathy,  their  importance  can  hardly  be  overrated,
and  much  more  may  ultimately  be  proved  by  them.  As,  by
degrees,  more  publishable  evidence  comes  in,  or  fresh  light
is  thrown  on  what  we  have  already,  we  shall  have  to  trouble

1 1  should  like  here  to  refer  the  reader  who  is  not  already  familiar  with  it
to  the  very  interesting  final  section  of  Miss  Johnson's  "Third  Report  on  Mrs.
Holland's  Script"  (Proceedings,  Vol.  XXV.,  pp.  282-293).  It  covers  more
fully  some  of  the  ground  gone  over  in  the  later  paragraphs  of  the  present
paper.


400


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[paet


members  of  the  Society  with  it,  hoping  that  as  members  of
a  scientific  society  they  will  give  it  dispassionate  consideration
in  the  light  of  experience  already  accumnlated.  The  investiga-
tion is  difficult ;  it  is  comparatively  new ;  it  is  not  likely
that  those  engaged  in  it,  however  careful,  will  avoid  all  errors
of  method  or  interpretation.  We  therefore  greatly  desire  from
readers  of  the  Proceedings  co-operation  and  criticism,  in  con-
sidering both  evidence  already  published  and  any  new
evidence that  may  be  brought  forward.

In  the  meanwhile  I  should  like  to  conclude  by  saying  that
though  we  are  not  yet  justified  in  feeling  any  certainty,  I
myself  think  the  evidence  is  pointing  towards  the  conclusion
that  our  former  fellow-workers  are  still  working  with  us.


lxvk.] A  Reply  to  Dr.  Joseph  Maxwell's  Paper.  401


APPENDIX  L

By  Mrs.  A.  W.  VERRALL.

I  do  not  propose  to  reply  seriatim  or  in  detail  to  the  criticism
in  Proceedings,  Part  LXV.,  by  M.  Joseph  Maxwell  on  my
report  upon  my  own  automatic  writing  (Vol.  XX.).  To
do  so  could  serve  no  useful  purpose.  It  would  weary  the
reader  to  be  taken  again  over  twice-trod  ground,  and  since
in  M.  Maxwell's  opinion  no  medium  should  estimate  the  value
of  her  own  phenomena,  he  can  take  no  interest  in  any  con-
clusions of  mine.  But  some  points  in  his  article  call  for  more
detailed  treatment  than  they  could  receive  in  Mrs.  Sidgwick's
foregoing  paper.  Where  M.  Maxwell's  inferences  from  the
recorded  facts  differ  from  mine,  readers  must  judge  for
themselves  whether  either  of  us,  and  if  so  which,  is  right.
M.  Maxwell  has  reminded  them  that  I  am  not  an  impartial
judge,  and  for  my  part  I  would  refer  them  for  the  facts  to  my
first-hand  and  full  report,  and  not  to  his  abbreviated  summary.

I  confine  my  observations  to  the  two  first  and  the  two  last
of  the  incidents  commented  on  by  M.  Maxwell.  There  is  no
special  reason  for  this  selection ;  in  every  case  M.  Maxwell's
methods  will  be  found  to  be  the  same.

I.

The  first  case  with  which  he  deals  (p.  59)  is  the  supposed
correspondence  between  Mrs.  Piper's  script  and  mine  in
January,  1902,  the  "sphere-spear"  incident.  To  what  Mrs.
Sidgwick  has  said  above  (p.  382)  I  add  the  following  observa-
tions :

(1)  I myself pointed out (Vol. XX.,  p. 215)  that  the


«


402  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verratt.  [part

commentators  were  not  agreed  as  to  what  precise  implement
is  described  as  a  "  flying  weapon  "  or  "  flying  iron  " ;

(2)  My  contemporary  interpretation — or  misinterpretation,  if
M.  Maxwell  prefers — was  based  upon  the  view  that  (a)  the
words  of  the  script  indicated  that  in  the  phrase  volatile  ferrum
— a  Virgilian  phrase — ferrum  had  been  substituted  for  tclum ;
that  (b)  volatile  telum,  in  a  familiar  passage  of  Lucretius  (I.
970),  is  translated  by  Munro,  "winged  javelin";1  (c)  that
in  Virgil,  JEn.,  VIII.,  694  (a  passage  referred  to  but  not
cpioted  by  M.  Maxwell),  the  volatile  ferrum,  the  "  flying  iron,"
whatever  it  may  be — and  of  the  commentators  one  may  say
quot  homines  tot  sententiae — is  not  a  sagitta ;

(3)  I  did  not  claim  that  "Panopticon"  meant  "to,  vue"  or
that  aui'Seyiuu  was  an  extant  Greek  word  ;

(4)  It  is  true,  and  I  drew  attention  to  the  fact,  that  there
was  for  me  an  anterior  subliminal  association  between  the
words  "  Panopticon "  and  "  sphere,"  but  it  is  not  true  that
the  script  in  which  these  words  first  occurred  (March  14,
1901,  quoted  in  Vol.  XX.,  p.  342)  also  contained  three  crosses;
the  first  piece  of  script  written  on  that  day  terminated  with
the  letter  x  repeated  three  times.  This  letter  has  doubtless
been  mistaken  by  M.  Maxwell  for  a  cross,  but  there  is  no
confusion  possible  between  the  small  x  in  the  original  script
and  the  transverse  or  St.  Andrew's  Cross.  As  to  the  words
"  Panopticon  sphaerae,"  to  my  earlier  statements  I  add  the
following :

(a)  The  word  "  Panopticon "  was  used  by  Bentham  to
describe  the  circular  Penitentiary  which  he  was  anxious
to  induce  the  Government  of  his  day  to  adopt.'2  This
use  had  probably  been  known  to  me,  but,  if  so,  I  had
forgotten  it  till,  after  the  issue  of  my  report,  I  was
reminded  of  it  by  a  correspondent.  The  shape  of
Eentham's  Panopticon  may  account  for  the  original  con-
junction in  the  script  of  Panopticon  and  sphere,  and
subliminal  memory  may  have  conduced  to  its  recurrence

1  My  note  of  Feb.  7,  1902,  refers  to  the  two  passages,  Virg.,  JSn.,  VIII.,
694,  and  Lucretius,  I.,  970,  and  Munro's  translation  of  the  Lucretian  volatile
by  the  picturesque  "winged"  is  reflected  in  my  use  of  the  phrase  "the
winged  iron,"  in  the  second  paragraph  on  p.  215  of  Vol.  XX.

2  See  Prof.  Sidgwick's  Miscellaneous  Essays,  p.  145.


lxvii.] A  Reply  to  Dr.  Joseph  Maxwell's  Paper.  403

on  January  31,  1902,  but  does  not  account  for  its
combination  on  that  occasion  with  other  phrases  or
symbols  (volatile  ferricm  and  Rector's  Greek  cross)  which
appear  to  make  a  cross-correspondence  with  Mrs.  Piper's
trance-writing ;

(b)  I  wrote  in  1906  (Vol.  XX.,  p.  216)  that  "it  is
perhaps  worth  noting  that  the  suggestion  of  a  sphere  as
the  object  to  be  shown  came  not  from  Dr.  Hodgson,  but
from  the  '  control.'  "  I  now  add,  what  I  then  intentionally
omitted,  that  the  "  control,"  or  rather  the  "  communicator,"
for  whom  Eector  was  ostensibly  acting  as  amanuensis,
was  MyerSp,  and  that  the  letter  which  I  was  holding  in
my  left  hand  (Vol.  XX.,  p.  342) — one  of  several
experiments  tried  in  the  early  days  of  the  script — when,
on  March  14,  1901,  the  script  contained  the  words,
"  Panopticon  sphaerae,"  was  a  letter  from  Mr.  Myers.
The  anterior  emergence  in  my  script  of  the  phrase  thus
seems  to  me  to  strengthen  rather  than  to  weaken  the
evidence  for  supernormal  connexion  between  the  later
script  and  Mrs.  Piper's  trance-writing  in  January,  1902.

(5)  I  am  disposed  to  assent  to  M.  Maxwell's  ingenious
suggestion  that  phonetic  association  between  eSlSws  and  Dido
is,  at  least  in  part,  responsible  for  the  actual  phrasing  of  my
script.  The  point  is  one  of  psychological  interest,  in  so  far
as  it  throws  light  on  the  mental  process  of  an  automatist,
and  may  be  compared  with  Mr.  Piddington's  note  on  "  a  knot
of  blue  ribbon "  as  likely  to  be  associated  in  the  automatist's
mind  with  "John"  (Vol.  XXII.,  p.  182).  But  to  explain
the  mental  process  of  one  automatist  does  not  account  for
coincidences  in  the  ideas  expressed,  in  their  several  ways,  by
both.

(6)  So  again  M.  Maxwell's  objection  that  my  script  is  in
Latin  and  that  RectorP  knows  no  Latin  goes  to  prove,  if  proof
were  wanted,  that  EectorP  is  not  the  writer  of  my  script,  but
does  not  help  to  decide  whether  the  connexion  between  the
ideas  represented  in  Mrs.  Piper's  script  and  mine,  and
expressed  in  languages  familiar  respectively  to  each  of  us,  is
closer  than  would  be  produced  by  accident.


404


Mrs.  A.  W.  V err  all.


[part


II.

In  the  next  case  discussed,  M.  Maxwell  (p.  60)  thinks  that
my  interpretations  are  coloured  by  my  conviction  of  the  super-
normal character  and  value  of  my  script,  which  leads  me  into
mistranslations,  unconscious  emphasis  of  points  of  agreement
with  Mrs.  Forbes,  and  omission  of  points  of  difference.  In
particular,  he  complains  that  the  words,  "  a  statement  was
made  in  my  script  about  fir  trees  planted  in  a  garden,"  are
not  a  fair  representation  of  the  actual  words  of  the  script,
"  conifera  arbos  in  horto  iam  insita,"  because  conifera  arbos
does  not  mean  fir-trees  (sapins),  but  a  coniferous  or  cone-
bearing  tree  (un  arbre  conifere).  That  is  so,  but  neither  were
the  trees  in  Mrs.  Forbes's  garden  fir-trees,  "  des  sapins,"  if  that
word  is  used  in  a  specific  sense.  I  do  not  know,  nor  does
Mrs.  Forbes,  what  the  exact  species  is  of  the  trees  grown
from  seed  sent  to  her  by  her  son.  They  are,  however,
conifers.  M.  Maxwell  writes  as  though  "  des  sapins "  {fir-
trees)  were  a  specific  and  not  a  generic  botanical  term.  What
is  the  case  with  sapin  I  cannot  say,  but  in  English  the
expression  "  fir-trees "  certainly  covers  several  species  (Scotch,
Spruce,  Silver,  etc.).  So  also  does  the  term  "  conifer,"  and
no  English  reader  would,  I  think,  feel  M.  Maxwell's  objection
to  the  use  of  the  word  "  fir-tree "  to  translate  conifera  arbos.
Nor  does  the  fact  that  there  are  four  or  five  of  them  in
Mrs.  Forbes's  garden  make  the  use  in  the  script  of  the
singular  conifera  arbos  an  inaccuracy.  The  English  equivalents
for  conifera  arbos  are  more  than  one ;  the  words  may  mean
"  a  fir-tree,"  "  the  fir-tree,"  or  "  fir-trees "  ;  what  they  do  not
mean  is  "  one  fir-tree,"  How,  for  instance,  would  M.  Maxwell
translate  the  singular  nouns  in  Pliny's  list  of  mountain-loving
trees :  1  m  onies  cm  ant  cedrus,  larix,  tccla,  et  caetcrae,  et  quibus
rcsina  gignitur  ?  In  English  we  should  write  indifferently  :
"  cedars,  larches,  etc.,  are  mountain-lovers,"  or  "  the  cedar,  etc.,
is  a  mountain-lover."

M.  Maxwell  may  be  right  in  interpreting  as  a  cross  what  I

1  Pliny,  N.H.,  XVI.,  30.  Singular  and  plural  are  combined  in  Pliny's  lists
with  complete  indifference :  "  Non  temere  in  montibus  visae  sunt  prunus,
Punicae,  oleastri,  iuglans,  morus,  sambuei."


lxvii.] A  Reply  to  Br.  Joseph  Maxwell's  Paper.


405


took  for  a  sword,  and,  if  he  is,  the  allusion  to  Talbot  Forbes
is  less  definite  than  I  had  supposed.  There  are,  however,
other  representations  in  the  script  of  a  similar  object,  which
on  the  first  occasion  of  its  appearance  (Aug.  6,  1901)  is
labelled  a  "  sword."  The  modern  sword  is  no  doubt  not  cross-
hilted,  but  the  script  may  here  as  elsewhere  prefer  symbolism
to  realism.1

M.  Maxwell  points  out  that  the  greater  part  of  my  script
of  August  28,  1901,  is  inapplicable  to  Talbot  Forbes,  and  sees
no  "  continuity  de  conscience "  between  my  script  and  that  of
Mrs.  Forbes.  I  have  never  claimed  for  any  individual  portion
of  my  script  that  it  proceeded  as  a  whole  from  some  single
source,  and  was  uninfluenced  by  my  own  subliminal  or  supra-
liminal knowledge  or  association  of  ideas.  In  this  case  I
called  the  attention  of  the  reader  to  a  certain  reciprocity  in
the  scripts  produced  by  Mrs.  Forbes  and  myself  on  August  28,

1901  ;  the  contents  of  her  script,  considered  in  connexion
with  the  conifers  and  the  suspended  bugle  of  mine,  suggest
that  some  other  than  accidental  connexion  exists  between
our  automatic  phenomena.  This  question  cannot  be  decided
by  the  examination  of  one  in  the  long  series  of  similar
incidents  related  in  my  paper.  Readers  who  wish  to  form  a
judgement  on  the  point  must,  I  fear,  read  the  whole  sixty-eight
incidents  (Vol.  XX.,  Chap.  XL).

It  is  true,  as  M.  Maxwell  points  out,  that  my  translation
of  "  omina  sibimet  ostendit "  does  not  give  the  reflexive  sense
of  sibimet ;  a  closer  rendering  would  be  "  gives  a  portent
to  itself."  In  neither  case  do  the  words  appear  applicable
to  the  facts.  I  placed  no  reliance  on  them,  and  did  not
mention  them  in  my  comment  on  the  incident.  I  draw  atten-
tion to  this  point  because  from  M.  Maxwell's  correction,  followed
as  it  is  by  an  encomium  on  my  Latin  scholarship  and  a  complaint

XI  do  not  understand  what  M.  Maxwell  means  by  saying  that  "the  word
Jir-tree  is  unmistakably  associated  with  a  cross  in  the  scripts  of  Aug.  25
and  26,  1902." The  actual  word  fir-tree  occurs  in  neither  script. On  Aug.  25,

1902  (quoted  in  Vol.  XX.,  p.  355),  occur  the  words  "Forest  and  firs — and  a
moss  grown  tree  trunk"  apparently  "in  a  German  speaking  country,"  and
this  script  is  signed  with  an  attempt  at  the  word  Cross  and  a  drawing  of  a
Latiu  cross.  The  script  of  Aug.  26,  1902  (which  is  briefly  referred  to,  p.  77,
but  not  quoted)  contains  the  word  Cross,  but  has  nothing  in  it  suggesting  a
tree  of  any  kind.


406


Mrs.  A.


W.  Verrall.


[part


of  my  errors  in  translation,  the  reader  would  be  led  to  believe
that  this  mistake  of  mine  was  an  illustration  of  his  point
and  that  my  loose  translation  helped  to  establish  my  "  case."

I  pass  from  the  first  two  cases  selected  for  comment  by
M.  Maxwell  to  the  last  two,  the  "Daily  Mail  ghost"  and
"  Marmontel."

III.

The  "Daily  Mail  Ghost"  is  treated  by  M.  Maxwell  (p.  71)
with  more  respect  than  usual,  perhaps  because  he  has  himself
observed  cases  of  the  same  type.  He  does  not  define  the
type  otherwise  than  by  comparison  with  another  case  in  my
report  (Vol.  XX.,  p.  324).  If,  however, — a  point  on  which  judge-
ment may  be  reserved — reliance  is  to  be  placed  on  the  state-
ment of  the  writer  in  the  Daily  Mail  (Vol.  XX.,  p.  329),  the
cases  differ  in  one  important  respect,  namely,  that  one  can
and  the  other  cannot  be  accounted  for  by  telepathy  with  the
newspaper  writer.  The  Daily  Mail  writer  and  his  friend,  when
they  planned  their  investigation  in  the  haunted  room,  did  not
anticipate  that  the  marks,  which  they  hoped  to  obtain  upon
their  scattered  chalk,  would  represent  the  footprints  of  a  bird,
and  the  bird  is  one  of  the  identifying  points  in  the  script.
In  the  other  case,  as  the  journalist's  account  was  apparently
imaginary,  there  is  no  external  subsequent  event  corresponding
with  anything  in  the  script.

It  is  true,  and  was  stated  by  me,  that  calx  is  ambiguous,
meaning  as  it  does  both  "  heel "  and  "  chalk."  But  its  meaning-
seems  to  be  defined  by  the  context,  for  "  chalk "  is  more
suited  than  is  a  "  heel "  to  "  stick  to  the  feet."  M.  Maxwell
further  objects  that  the  bird  of  the  script  is  a  "  caricature."
I  fail  to  see  why  this  is  an  objection.  However  ill  drawn,
it  is  a  bird.

IV.

The  last  case  considered  by  M.  Maxwell — the  Marmontel
incident — specially  illustrates  in  his  view  the  method  employed
in  my  report,  and  to  the  question  of  the  method  used  here
as  well  as  in  other  recent  publications  of  the  Society  he  attaches,
so  he  tells  us  (p.  71),  great  importance.  Of  no  less  import-
ance is  the  method  employed  by  our  critics,  and  M.  Maxwell's


lxvii.] A  Reply  to  Dr.  Joseph  Maxwell's  Paper.  407


examination  of  this  incident  may  serve  as  an  illustration  of
the  method  which  he  employs.  On  that  method  I  offer  the
following  comments :

(1)  M.  Maxwell  counts  the  details  in  the  script  and  classifies
them  as  five  correct,  eight  incorrect,  and  one  doubtful.  He
makes  no  distinction  among  these  details,  treating  them  as
though  they  were  all  equally  important.  It  is  true  that  he
subsequently  applies  to  two  of  those  classed  as  correct  the
epithet  "banal."  But  if  reading  in  bed  ("correct")  is  banal.
is  not  the  substitution  of  two  chairs  for  a  sofa  ("incorrect")
also  banal  ?  Triviality  or  non-triviality  is  a  matter  of  opinion,
but  in  an  analysis  by  enumeration,  which  suggests  that  the
items  are  of  equal  importance,  the  question  of  triviality,  if
introduced  at  all,  should  be  indiscriminately  applied  through-
out.

(2)  A  classified  list  of  this  sort  presented  to  the  reader
should  be  complete.  M.  Maxwell  omits  an  item  which,  had
it  not  been  omitted,  must  have  been  classed  as  "  correct,"
namely  that  the  reading  was  done  with  "  only  a  candle's  light."
This  detail,  though  trivial,  appears  to  me  distinctive :  it  is
not  common  nowadays — not  even,  I  should  think,  in  La  Ville
Lumibre — to  read  by  candle  light.

(3)  The  precision  of  coincidence  between  the  words  of  the
script  and  the  passage  which  Mr.  Marsh  read  on  February  21,
is  not  brought  out  in  M.  Maxwell's  abbreviated  version  of
the  facts.  He  says  that  the  volume  which  Mr.  Marsh  was
reading  contained  the  story  of  the  discovery  of  a  panel,  etc.1
As  a  fact,  Mr.  Marsh  read  "  with  only  a  candle's  light "  the
very  chapter  in  which  Marmontel  tells  that  story  among  other
recollections  of  Passy.

The  inferences  to  be  drawn  from  the  considerations  put  for-
ward by  me  in  this  case,  as  in  others,  are,  as  I  have  said,
matters  of  opinion,  and  I  shall  not  discuss  them  here.  But  I
hope  that  if  the  reader  has  any  desire  to  know  what  my  infer-
ences are,  he  will  take  them  first-hand  from  me  and  not
second-hand  from  M.  Maxwell.  In  his  necessarily  condensed
account  M.  Maxwell  has  left  out  most,  if  not  all,  of  my
frequent  remarks  directing  the  reader's  attention  to  the  obscu-
rities, the  ambiguities,  and  the  errors  which  are  present  even

l"Dans  le  volume  il  etait  question  de  la  decouverte,  etc."

2D


408


Mrs.  A.  W.  V err  all.


[part


in  the  best  cases.  Eeaders  of  M.  Maxwell's  description  of
my  report  as  "  not  an  analysis  but  a  piece  of  special  pleading  "
(p.  58)  will  be  surprised  to  find  for  how  large  a  part  of  the
script  I  make  no  claim  to  the  possession  of  evidential  value.


lxvii.] A  Reply  to  Dr.  Joseph  Maxwell's  Paper.  409


APPENDIX  II.

By  ALICE  JOHNSON.

Reference  has  been  made  above  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  to  the  con-
fusion inherent  in  Dr.  Maxwell's  discussion  between  matters
which  in  the  nature  of  the  case  must  depend  on  the  auto-
matist's  good  faith  and  those  for  which  objective  evidence  is
obtainable.

Whether  or  not  the  writing  is  produced  without  the  volun-
tary and  conscious  participation  of  the  supraliminal  self,  and
whether  or  not  the  facts  stated  in  it  are  consciously  known
to  the  writer,  are  matters  belonging  to  the  former  category.
In  regard  to  them  we  might  conceivably  find  evidence  of
fraud  through  statements  made  at  different  times  being  incon-
sistent with  one  another ;  but  we  could  never  find  evidence  of
genuineness ;  that  must  always  be  a  matter'  of  opinion  based
on  general  considerations.

Now,  Mrs.  Holland — to  whom  in  particular  I  refer,  because
most  of  my  own  reports  have  been  on  her  script — has  in  a
great  many  instances  told  me  that  facts  mentioned  or  alluded
to  in  her  script  were  known  to  her ;  while,  during  a  long
and  intimate  acquaintance  with  her  and  her  script,  I  have
never  found  any  inconsistencies  in  the  information  she
has  given  Tire  about  it.  For  these  reasons,  I  personally
accept  whatever  she  tells  me  as  to  her  conscious  knowledge
or  recollection, — e.g.  her  statement  that  she  had  not  inter-
preted the  script  in  which  she  gave  the  name  "  Eoden  Noel "
by  means  of  numbers  and  the  reference  to  a  text.  Of  this
statement  Dr.  Maxwell  remarks  (p.  75):  "  Cela  est  bien  in-
vraisemblable."  The  insinuation  seems  to  me  uncalled  for.
Mrs.  Holland,  even  before  I  knew  her,  had  been  well  aware


410


Alice


Johnson.


[part


of  the  large  subjective  element  in  her  script,  and  she  knew
that  the  question  in  this  case  was  of  psychological  interest
only.  She  had  answered  many  similar  questions,  sometimes
in  the  affirmative  and  sometimes  in  the  negative.

The  incident  was  given  in  my  first  Eeport  as  an  illustra-
tion of  her  subliminal  ingenuity ;  for  it  is  very  important
that  we  should  know  the  extent  to  which  subliminal  ingenuity
may  go  and  how  far  it  may  account  for  the  complexities  of
the  cross-correspondences  and  various  features  in  them  that
suggest  a  supernormal  origin.  Dr.  Maxwell  thinks  that  the
publication  of  such  incidents  suggests  that  we  are  not  familiar
with  recent  researches  into  the  psychology  of  the  subconscious.
Our  view  is  that  individual  instances  may  often  be  more
instructive  than  general  dissertations  on  this  subject — which
dissertations  ai-e  not  infrequently  based  on  the  study  of
morbid  cases  only.

It  is  curious  to  see  how  Dr.  Maxwell's  preconceptions  lead
him  to  distort  the  simplest  incidents ;  an  instance  is  to  be
found  on  p.  136  of  his  paper:

Mrs.  Holland's  script  had  given  a  description  of  Mr.  Eoden
Noel's  personal  appearance  which  agreed  with  a  portrait  pre-
fixed to  his  Collected  Poems  and  also  with  my  own  recollection
of  the  one  occasion  on  which  I  saw  him.  Miss  Noel  later
sent  me  various  notes  in  confirmation  of  small  details  in
Mrs.  Holland's  script,  but  added  that  she  thought  the
description  of  him  not  very  accurate,  for  "  his  hair  was  very
thin  latterly."  I  printed  her  notes,  partly  to  confirm  and
partly  to  correct  my  earlier  statements,  though,  as  I  implied,
there  was  nothing  incompatible  in  my  recollection  of  his  hair
being  decidedly  thick  when  I  saw  him  some  years  before  his
death  and  Miss  Noel's  statement  that  it  was  very  thin  latterly.
Dr.  Maxwell's  "  unconscious  tendency  to  adapt  the  facts  to
[his]  opinions "  (if  I  may  apply  to  him  a  phrase  which  he
uses  of  us)  suggests  to  him  that  this  only  shows  that  I  had
more  faith  in  my  recollection  than  in  Miss  Noel's !

More  serious  misrepresentations  arise  from  his  habit  of
generalising  from  single  instances.  Thus,  on  p.  82,  he  remarks:
"  Mines.  Verrall  et  Holland  etaient  en  correspondance."  The
reader  would  infer  from  this  that  at  least  several  letters  had
passed  between  them,  from  which  they  might  have  learnt  of


lxvii.] A  Reply  to  Dr.  Joseph  Maxwell's  Paper.  411


each  other's  affairs.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  each  had  written
one  letter  and  one  only  to  the  other,  and  these  letters  are
given  in  my  first  Keport  on  Mrs.  Holland  (Vol.  XXL,  pp.
328-329).  There  is  nothing  changed  or  omitted  except  that
in  Mrs.  Holland's  letter  (which  is  before  me  as  I  write)
some  passages  are  left  out  which  refer  merely  to  the  exchange
of  rings  between  the  automatists,  for  the  purpose  of  the
experiments  described.

Dr.  Maxwell  disposes  of  the  "Ave  Roma  immortalis  "  cross-
correspondence  by  asserting  (p.  79)  that  it  is  a  mere  coincidence,
since  Mr.  Myers  died  at  Rome.  This  is  one  of  several  cases
in  which — no  doubt  unintentionally — he  writes  as  if  he  had
discovered  some  flaw  in  the  evidence  which  we  had  not
noticed.  I  had,  however,  pointed  out  in  my  Keport  that  the
mention  of  Eome  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script  probably  led  her
to  refer  to  the  (well-known)  fact  of  Mr.  Myers's  death  there.
But  this  had  happened  more  than  five  years  before,  and
therefore  seems  hardly  sufficient  to  account  for  allusions  to
Rome  occurring  in  both  Mrs.  Holland's  and  Mrs.  Verrall's
scripts  within  five  days  of  one  another.

Dr.  Maxwell  adds :  "  on  trouve  de  nombreuses  references
a  Rome  dans  les  textes  publies  de  Mine.  Holland."  I  do  not
know  what  he  means  by  "nombreuses";  but  as  a  fact,  the
words  "  Roma,"  "  Rome,"  or  "  Roman "  occur  in  only  6  out  of
218  scripts  by  Mrs.  Holland,  namely,  all  those  produced  by
her  from  July  1903  to  the  end  of  1908,  and  only  3  of
these  6  scripts  have  been  published  up  to  the  present  time.
There  are  further  in  the  218  scripts  7  references  to  places
in  Rome,  of  which  only  one  (relating  to  the  Janiculum)  has
been  published.

Dr.  Maxwell  minimises  the  significance  of  the  cross-corre-
spondence by  ignoring  the  historical  circumstances  and  intention
of  the  picture  to  which  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  were  supposed
by  us  to  refer.  Since  he  wrote  his  criticism,  I  have  discovered
certain  clues  to  a  number  of  hitherto  obscure  points  in  the
scripts,  which  show  that  almost  every  phrase  has  a  definite
and  coherent  meaning,  adding  to  the  force  of  the  whole  case.
To  explain  this  would  take  too  long  here,  but  I  propose  to
include  an  account  of  it  in  a  paper  which  I  am  preparing
for  publication.


412


Alice  Johnson.


[part


Another  statement,  correct  in  itself,  but  misleading  in  its
context,  is  the  following :  In  trying  to  explain  away  the  cross-
correspondence  "Not  in  the  Electra,"  Dr.  Maxwell  says  (p.  85):
"  Les  textes  de  Mine.  Verrall  contiennent  souvent  des  cita-
tions grecques."  They  do,  but  this  was  not  known  to  Mrs.
Holland,  as  none  of  them  had  then  been  published.  Mrs.
Holland  had  at  that  time  seen  copies  of  only  eight  of
Mrs.  Ver rail's  scripts ;  these  were  all  in  English,  except  one,
which  contained  two  sentences  of  Latin.  The  first  time  that
any  Greek  had  appeared  in  any  of  the  scripts  written  by
Mrs.  Verrall  for  purposes  of  experiment  with  Mrs.  Holland
was  on  Feb.  28,  1906;  and  it  was  on  that  day  that  Mrs.
Holland's  script  contained  (among  other  evidential  statements)
the  phrase,  "  No,  not  in  the  Electra — M.  will  know  better,"
which  was  appropriate  to  the  Greek  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script.

Again,  Dr.  Maxwell  says  (p.  77):  "Pourquoi  insister  con-
stamment  sur  l'impossibilite  ou  est  le  sensitif  d'avoir  normale-
ment  connaissance  des  faits  indiques  par  lui  .  .  .  comme  dans
la  correspondance  Eoden  Noel  ? "  My  statement  on  this  case
is  {Proc.  Vol.  XXL,  p.  820):  "It  will  be  seen  that  in  neither
of  the  scripts  does  a  single  statement  occur  that  is  lyroixibly
unknown  to  the  writers,"  and  it  will  be  seen  that  this  is  just
the  opposite  of  what  Dr.  Maxwell  attributes  to  me.

The  possibility  of  Mrs.  Holland's  having  seen  any  published
book  is  fully  admitted  in  my  reports,  but  it  is  surprising  to  see
what  evidence  Dr.  Maxwell  thinks  conclusive  on  this  question.
Evidence  of  her  having  read  any  given  book  may  be  fur-
nished by  finding  coincidences  between  her  scripts  and  the
book,  in  the  same  way  that  evidence  for  telepathy  between  her
and  Mrs.  Verrall  is  furnished  by  coincidences  between  their
scripts.  But  in  both  cases,  of  course,  the  coincidences  must  be
a  good  deal  beyond  what  can  be  attributed  to  chance  before
any  deduction  can  be  drawn  from  them.

The  following  are  two  examples  of  Dr.  Maxwell's  arguments  :
(1)  He  tries  to  prove  that  Mrs.  Holland  had  read  an  article  by
me  on  "Coincidences"  in  the  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIV.,  pp.  158  ct
seq.  This  article  (I  regret  to  say)  extends  to  the  length  of
173  pp.  It  contains  more  than  300  names  of  persons  (not
including  persons  who  are  designated  by  initials  only)  and  a
good  many  of  these  names  occur  more  than  once. Dr.  Maxwell


lxvil] A  Reply  to  Dr.  Joseph  Maxwell's  Paper.  413


does  not  find  that  a  single  one  of  these  names  appears  in  Mrs.
Holland's  script ;  but  he  finds  two  on  one  page,  Brett  and
Shuttleworth,  which,  put  together,  have,  I  admit,  a  strong  resem-
blance to  one  name,  Brittle-worth,  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script.  He
also  observes  that  Mrs.  Holland  particularly  noticed  the  name
Dr.  Hermann  Lorberg,  Professor  of  Physics,  in  a  newspaper  (seen
by  her  on  March  8,  1906),  whereas  my  paper  (published  in
1899)  contains  the  name  G.  Lorberg,  cutler.  On  the  strength
of  these  coincidences,  Dr.  Maxwell  remarks  (p.  76):  "Mme.
Holland,  dans  la  mesure  ou  les  preuves  humaines  out  quelque
valeur,  a  certainement  parcouru  [Particle]  de  Mile.  Johnson  .  .  .
ou  en  a  hi  des  comptes-rendus  et  l'a  oublie."  (To  the  best
of  my  belief,  no  comptes-rendus  of  this  article  have  ever  been
published.)  He  adds  later  another  coincidence.  In  the  same
article,  the  letter  K  is  used,  in  a  mathematical  diagram,  to
denote  the  greatest  deviation  from  the  average  in  a  long
series.  Mrs.  Holland  also  uses  the  letter  K  in  her  script,
followed  by  a  number  and  a  Christian  name '

(2)  For  evidence  that  Mrs.  Holland  had  read  a  certain  article
in  Light:  Her  script  of  Feb.  6,  1906,  contained  these  words:
"This  scribe  .  .  .  this  scribe — Medium  is  not  the  best  word  in
this  connection."  In  Light  of  Oct.  17,  1896,  there  is  an
article  on  "  Automatic  Writing,"  by  a  writer  signing  himself
Scriba.  This  article  criticises  the  S.P.E.  use  of  the  word
"automatic,"  and  proposes  instead  the  word  "  allomatic."  The
word  "  medium "  does  not  occur  at  all  in  the  article.  Mrs.
Holland,  on  the  other  hand,  uses  the  words  "  scribe "  and
"  medium,"  and  does  not  use  either  of  the  words  "  automatic "
or  "  allomatic."  Now  the  latter  is  a  very  unusual  word ;  it
is  one  not  likely  to  be  used  by  persons  of  education,  and  in
all  probability  this  is  its  sole  appearance  in  print.  If,  there-
fore, it  had  occurred  in  Mrs.  Holland's  script,  the  fact  might
well  be  held  to  point  to  her  having  read  Light.  As  things
are,  the  script  seems  to  point  rather  to  her  having,  in  common
with  most  English  people,  read  the  Bible,  in  which  the  word
scribe  occurs  epiite  often.

The  whole  point  of  the  incident,  however,  which  Dr.  Maxwell
seems  to  have  overlooked,  lies  in  the  fact  that  Mrs.  Holland
used  a  common  word  in  a  very  uncommon  sense,  within  less
than  a  month  of  Mr.  Piddington's having,  unknown to  her,


414


Alice  Johnson.


[part


used  it  in  a  similar  very  uncommon  sense,  and  dwelt  on  the
desirability  of  our  adopting  that  sense  of  it  in  our  reports.

Similarly,  as  mentioned  above,  in  a  script  referring  to  Dr.
Hodgson  Mrs.  Holland  used  "K  57"  followed  by  the  Christian
name  of  an  intimate  friend  of  his,  which  emphasised  the  con-
nection with  him ;  and  it  was  found  that  he  had  used  K
followed  by  numerals,  apparently  as  reference  marks  to  his
private  papers  (see  Proc.  Vol.  XXI.,  p.  307).

It  seems  to  me  that  in  both  these  cases  Mrs.  Holland's  scripts
coincide  far  more  closely  with  the  events  with  which  I  con-
nected them  than  with  the  sources  to  which  Dr.  Maxwell
attributes  them.

In  some  other  cases,  I  venture  to  think  that  Dr.  Maxwell  is
not  quite  familiar  enough  with  English  words  and  traditions  to
appreciate  the  point  of  the  cross-correspondences.  Thus  in  his
analysis  (p.  80)  of  "  Eheu  fugaces,"  there  are  several  misappre-
hensions. He  demurs  to  my  saying  that  Mrs.  Verrall's  script
repeated  several  times  the  idea  of  flight.  But  the  English
word  flight  includes  all  the  senses  in  which  I  used  it.  It
means  running  away,  or  fleeing,  and  also  the  Hying  of  birds,
etc.,  or  any  swift  motion ;  and  it  is  also  applied  to  the  flight,  or
swift  passage,  of  time.  It  is  in  fact  equivalent  to  the  Latin
fuga  (adj.  fugax),  which  covers  the  same  meanings.  In  saying
that  one  passage  in  the  script  "  seems  an  imaginary  description
of  an  elopement,"  I  was  referring  to  elopements  to  Gretna
Green,  as  they  used  to  occur  in  the  days  when  marriages  could
be  more  easily  effected  in  Scotland  than  in  England,  as  described,
e.g.,  in  the  entertaining  "  Adventure  of  the  liunaway  Couple  "  in
E.  L.  Stevenson's  St.  Ives :  "  I  was  at  the  same  time  approaching
a  place  of  some  fame  in  Britain — Gretna  Green.  Over  those
same  leagues  of  road  .  .  .  how  many  pairs  of  lovers  had  gone
bowling  northwards  to  the  music  of  sixteen  scampering  horse-
shoes ;  and  how  many  irate  persons,  parents,  uncles,  guardians,
evicted  rivals,  had  come  tearing  after."

Whether  the  episode  of  the  script  is  an  elopement  or  not,
it  is  a  flight  in  one  sense  of  the  word,  i.e.  a  rapid  motion.  And
the  phrase  "  Eheu  fugaces "  (with  which,  of  course,  I  assumed
Mrs.  Holland  to  be  familiar),  refers  to  another  kind  of  flight —
the  rapid  motion  of  time.


Lxvu.] A  Reply  to  Dr.  Joseph  Maxwell's  Paper.  415


APPENDIX  III.

By  J.  G.  PIDDINGTON.

Mrs.  Sidgwick's  reply  in  general  terms  to  M.  Maxwell  is  so
conclusive  that  I  feel  it  would  be  a  work  of  supererogation
were  I  to  attempt  a  detailed  answer  to  most  or  even  to
many  of  the  criticisms  that  he  has  directed  against  me.  I
shall,  therefore,  refer  to  only  one  case  which  seems  to  me  a
typical  sample  of  M.  Maxwell's  method  of  dealing  with  our
presentment  of  the  evidence.

In  my  second  and  third  papers  on  the  Horace  Ode  Question
(Proc.  Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.  150-169,  and  Vol.  XXVI.,  pp.  174-220)
I  took  the  words  "  glebis  adscripta "  and  "  ascripta  glebae "  in
Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  of  March  12  and  April  27,  1901,  to
represent  the  word  eirupovpos,  and  to  involve  a  reference  to  a
passage  in  the  Odyssey  (XL  489-491)  where  alone  this  word
occurs.

M.  Maxwell  (Vol.  XXVI.,  pp.  114-115)  thinks  we  ought  not
to  accept  adscriptus  glebae  as  what  he  once  calls  a  "  translation  "
and  once  a  "  paraphrase  "  of  €7rdpovpo<;. He  says  : —

[Le  mot  grec  eVa'povpos]  est  place  dans  la  bouche  dAchille,
qui  aimerait  mieux  etre  paysan  travaillant  pour  un  modique
salaire  chez  un  homme  pauvre,  que  de  regner  sur  les  ombres.  Or
le  commentateur  applique  une  phrase  latine  employee  pour  definir
un  etat  social  du  moyen  age,  a  un  etat  social  anterieur  de  vingt-
cinq  siecles,  dans  lequel  le  serf  inscrit  a  la  glebe  n'existait  pas,
au  moins  a  ma  connaissance.  II  n'y  avait  pas  de  registres  fonciers
et  les  droits  immobiliers  s'etablissaient  par  teruoignage  (voy.  par
exemple  la  loi  de  Gortyne  1,  2,  14,  17,  18).  L'idee  d'  "adscriptus"
n'est  pas  impliquee  dans  €irapovpo>;  que  les  dictionnaires  traduisent
par  rusiicus. L'esclavage  d'ailleurs,  au  temps  d'Ulysse,  n'etait  pas


416


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


compatible  avec  le  salaire  dont  parle  Achille.  Si  je  ne  me  trompe,
le  commentateur  dont  Mme  Verrall  accepte  la  paraphrase  commet
une  erreur  juridique  et  etymologique.  M.  Myers  n'aurait  pas
com  mis  cette  derniere,  car  il  connaissait  bien  la  langue  grecque.

Now  that  sounds  very  learned :  but  as  a  criticism  of  our
interpretation  of  "  ascripta  glebae "  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  scrip't  it
is  entirely  beside  the  mark.  So  far  as  that  interpretation  is
concerned,  it  is  quite  immaterial  whether  "  adscriptus  glebae "
is  or  is  not  a  correct  rendering  or  paraphrase  of  eirapovpos.
From  our  point  of  view  the  only  thing  to  be  considered  is
this  : — Is  adscript  m  glebae  a  rendering  of  eirapovpo?  so  familiar
to  English  scholars  that  an  autoniatist  like  Mrs.  Verrall  (who
is  an  English  classical  scholar)  might  light  on  it  in  the  process
of  groping  after  the  passage  in  the  Eleventh  Book  of  the
Odyssey  ?

That  this  rendering  is  extremely  likely  to  be  so  familiar  is
hardly  open  to  question.  In  England  19  Greek  scholars  out
of  20,  perhaps  99  out  of  100,  use  the  Greck-Englisli  Lexicon
of  Liddell  and  Scott.  This  Lexicon  (which  Mrs.  Verrall  uses)
s.v.  e7rdpoupo?  has  the  following  : —

en-dpovpos,  ov,  (apovpa)  attached  to  the  soil  as  a  serf,  ascriptus
glebae ;

and  then  quotes  Odyssey,  XL  489.  It  does  not  give  the  alter-
native meaning  "  above  ground,"  but  "  attached  to  the  soil  "  only.

Next,  Dr.  Merry,  whose  annotated  edition  of  the  Odyssey  is
largely  used  in  England,  and  has  been  used  by  Mrs.  Verrall,
says :  "  eirdpovpog,  lit.  '  on  the  soil,'  used  of  a  serf,  who  is
adscriptus  glebae."

Lastly,  Butcher  and  Lang,  whose  prose-translation  of  the
Odyssey  is  the  most  popular  one  in  England,  while  themselves
preferring  the  rendering  "  on  ground,"  append  the  following
footnote  to  their  rendering  of  Od.  XL  489-491  :

iirdpovpos  seems  to  mean  'upon  the  earth,' '  above  ground,' as
opposed  to  the  dead  who  are  below,  rather  than  '  bound  to  the
soil,'  in  which  sense  most  commentators  take  it.1

In  view  of  these  facts  I  maintain  that  our  interpretation
of  "  ascripta  glebae  "  as  a  reference  to  eirapovpos  and  its  context

1  The  italics  are  mine.


lxvii.] A  Reply  to  Dr.  Joseph  Maxwell's  Paper.


is  both  legitimate  and  probable ;  and  I  cannot  help  suspecting
that  M.  Maxwell  would  never  have  demurred  to  it  had  I
expressed  the  opinion  in  my  paper  that  the  appearance  of
"  ascripta  glebae "  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  "  sexplique  par  une
association  onirique."  I  suspect,  too,  that  M.  Maxwell  would
find  "  great  support  in  that  comfortable  word  Mesopotamia"

But  M.  Maxwell  is  not  content  to  expose  the  "  erreur  juri-
dique  et  etymologique "  of  those  who  accept  adscriptus  glebae
as  a  paraphrase  of  eirdpovpo?,  but  goes  further  still  and  expresses
the  opinion  that  Frederic  Myers  was  too  good  a  Greek  scholar
to  have  made  the  same  mistake.  It  is  clear  that  M.  Maxwell
in  expressing  this  opinion  assumes  that  I  have  treated,  or  at
least  that  I  regard,  the  occurrence  of  "  ascripta  glebae  "  in  Mrs.
Verrall's  script  as  a  case  of  syllabic  inspiration  on  the  part  of
Frederic  Myers.  How  he  acquired  this  erroneous  notion  I  do
not  know,  for  nothing  I  have  written  on  the  subject  affords
any  warrant  for  it.  My  own  conception  of  the  phenomenon
was,  and  is,  that  the  surviving  personality  of  Myers  was  think-
ing of  the  passage  in  the  Odyssey  in  which  the  word  t-n-upovpos
occurs,  and  seeking  to  impress  the  idea  contained  in  it  on
Mrs.  Yerrall's  mind  by  hook  or  by  crook.  But  I  did  not,  and
do  not,  suggest  that  Myers  was  responsible  for  the  actual  phrase
"  ascripta  glebae."  He  may  have  been,  for  all  I  know,  but  all
that  I  have  assumed  is  that  behind  the  script  was  Myers
thinking  of  the  Odyssey  passage  and  endeavouring  to  transmit
a  reference  to  it  in  some  way  or  other.  The  form  in  which
the  script  actually  gave  expression  to  Myers's  thought  may  have
been  (I  don't  say,  was)  entirely  determined  by  the  automatist's
own  associations  of  ideas  ;  and  so  far  as  my  interpretation  of
the  script  and  the  arguments  I  found  on  that  interpretation
are  concerned,  it  is  quite  immaterial  how  the  form  was  deter-
mined, provided  that  the  idea  did  obtain  expression  in  some
form  or  other.

But  even  if  I  had  suggested  that  "  ascripta  glebae  "  and
"  glebis  adscripta "  were  the  very  words  of  Myers,  then,  though
so  gratuitous  a  conjecture  would  have  been  open  to  many  objec-
tions, I  do  not  think  it  would  have  been  open  to  the  objection
raised  by  M.  Maxwell :  viz.  that  Myers  was  too  good  a  scholar
to  have  accepted  adscriptus  glebae  as  a  paraphrase  of  e-wdpoupo?.

Myers  was  a  fine  scholar,  but  he  was  not  a  pedant  or  a


418


J.  G.  Pidclington.


[part


German  commentator.  In  fact  he  had  quite  a  lot  of  imagina-
tion. I  take  the  first  book  of  Myers's  that  comes  to  my  hand,
his  Essays  Classical,  open  it  at  random,  turn  a  couple  of  pages
and  pitch  upon  Myers's  version  of  Aen.  VI.  719-721  (p.  172): —

"  O  father,  must  I  deem  that  souls  can  pray
Hence  to  turn  backward  to  the  worldly  day  1
Change  for  that  weight  of  flesh  these  forms  more  fair,
For  that  sun's  sheen  this  paradisal  air  1 "

"  Paradisal  air"!  A  word  significant  of  a  Christian  conception
used  to  denote  a  Pagan  conception  !  Why,  this  is  every  bit
as  bad  as  any  "  erreur  juridique  et  etymologique."  Nor  can  we
plead  in  Myers's  defence  that  he  was  driven  to  write  "  paradisal "
instead  of  "  Elysian  "  by  the  exigencies  of  metre,  for  lie  commits
the  same  unpardonable  blunder  in  prose  (see  Essays  Classical,
p.  141).

As  regards  M.  Maxwell's  criticism  generally,  it  seems  to  me
that  much  of  it  would  have  been  valuable,  had  we  really  said
the  things  that  he  represents  us  as  having  said ;  and  that
much  of  it  may  prove  effective,  because  few  people  take  the
trouble  to  verify  references.


lxvii.] Andrew  Lang  and  Psychical  Research,


419


II.

ANDREW  LANG  AND  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.

By  the  REV.  M.  A.  BAYFIELD.

"  Who  loves  not  knowledge  1 Who  shall  rail
Against  her  beauty  1 May  she  mix
With  men,  and  prosper ! Who  shall  fix
Her  pillars  1 Let  her  work  prevail !  "

In  Memoriam.

"  Of  making  many  books  there  is  no  end,"  wrote  a  dispirited
man  more  than  two  thousand  years  ago,  adding  that  "  much
study  is  a  weariness  of  the  flesh  " — perhaps  an  indiscreet
remark  to  make  to  the  young  man  whom  he  was  addressing.
If  any  have  since  repeated  the  first  words  with  positive
delight,  Andrew  Lang  must  be  one  of  them ;  for  a  man  does
not  write  over  threescore  volumes,  big  and  little,  unless  he
enjoys  the  doing  of  it,  and  such  is  Mr.  Lang's  remarkable
literary  output.  But  not  only  did  he  write  many  books ;  his
ingenious  and  versatile  spirit  found  interest  in  an  extraordinary
variety  of  subjects,  and  it  would  be  difficult  to  name  a  writer
whose  flying  pen  has  ranged  over  a  wider  field.  Anthropology,
mythology,  psychology,  ghosts  and  the  ghostly,  literature  ancient
and  modern  (even  How  to  fail  in  Literature !),  history,  bio-
graphy, charming  poetry — works  on  all  these  he  gave  us,  with
something  on  angling  and  golf,  all  sorts  of  charming  stories,
and  fairy-tales  in  a  series  which  apparently  would  only  end
when  no  new  colour  could  be  found  in  which  to  bind  another
volume.  One  unacquainted  with  his  books  might  perhaps  expect
to  find  them,  from  their  number  and  variety,  superficial ;  but
a  brief  examination  would  show  the  opposite  to  be  the  truth  ;


420


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.  [part


all  his  serious  work,  all  that  was  not  of  the  spontaneous  exuber-
ance of  his  natural  genius,  bears  abundant  evidence  of  solid
study,  and  one  may  judge  that  much  of  it  will  be  of  lasting
value.  Indeed,  his  insatiability  as  a  reader  would  seem  to  be
partly  the  key  to  his  productiveness  as  a  writer.  He  may
have  found,  and  no  doubt  did,  that  "  much  study  is  a  weari-
ness of  the  flesh,"  but  for  him  at  least  it  was  no  less  an
invigoration  of  the  spirit ;  each  new  acquisition  of  knowledge
was  an  inspiration, — he  had  climbed  a  fresh  "  peak  in  Darien."

It  is  beyond  the  scope  of  the  present  article  to  attempt
any  general  review  of  Mr.  Lang's  works,  which  would  indeed
require  a  volume ;  but  one  feature  of  his  style  is  so  all-per-
vading and  characteristic  that  it  demands  at  least  a  passing-
mention.  I  mean  that  buoyant  and  piquant  liveliness  which
gives  his  work  its  unique  flavour.  He  was  never  dull ;  and
if  ever  he  felt  inclined  to  dulness,  one  may  be  sure  he  laid
down  his  pen,  with  a  smile  at  the  humorousness  of  expecting
to  interest  a  reader  in  what  is  not  interesting.  He  brought
to  everything  he  handled  an  elastic  freshness  of  thought  and
fancy  which  is  delightfully  stimulating,  and  with  which  he
would,  I  believe,  have  made  a  treatise  on  drains  attrac-
tive. The  diction  is  of  course  that  of  a  scholar,  choice  and
polished ;  the  thoughts  are  presented  with  instinctive  grace-
fulness ;  and  much  even  of  his  most  serious  work  (too  much,
as  some  unappreciative  critics  have  thought)  is  strewn  with
epigrams,  sudden  turns  of  humour,  and  sallies  of  delicious  wit.
In  this  kind  he  was  an  unrivalled  master.  Who  but  he
would  have  enforced  a  deprecation  of  the  employment  of  paid
mediums  by  declaring  that  "  even  the  most  honourable  amateur
must  make  to  her  commercial  sister  this  sad  confession  :

"Said  Fanny,  tho'  tears  it  may  cost,
I  think  we  must  part,  my  dear  Sue,
For  your  character's  totally  lost,
And  I've  not  sufficient  for  two."

This  prevailing  gaiety  of  manner  was  not  a  symptom  of  inability
to  feel  seriously  about  serious  things;  to  suppose  this  would
be  to  mistake  him, — a  thing  which,  as  Mr.  J.  M.  Barrie  recently
said,  the  sober  Sassenach  has  sometimes  done.  The  spiritual
in  man,  the  evolution  and  limits  of  his  psychical  equipment,


lxvil] Andrew  Lang  and  Psychical  Research.


421


and  all  the  importunate  puzzle  of  human  life,  are  no  trivial
problems,  and  no  man  who  did  not  feel  deeply  about  them
would  devote  to  such  subjects,  as  Mr.  Lang  did,  a  life-long
study ;  but  profoundly  serious  as  was  his  interest,  he  could  not
as  a  rule  speak  or  write  on  them  for  long  without  something-
stirring  his  irrepressible  sense  of  humour.  There  was  indeed
a  vein  of  (Scottish  ?)  whimsicality  running  through  his  nature ;
but  it  was  not  levity,  it  was  not  base  metal, — only  just  a
streak  of  silver  making  a  foil  to  the  gold.  The  habitual  light-
ness of  a  man's  literary  touch  is  not  to  be  taken  as  a  criterion
of  the  whole  nature.  Should  we  have  known  one  side  of
Tom  Hood  if  he  had  not  given  us  One  more  Unfortunate  and
The  Song  of  the  Shirt  ?  And  after  all,  as  was  asked  long
ago,  ridentem  dicerc  veruni  quid  vetat  ? — why  should  not  truth
wear  a  smile  ?

Mr.  Lang,  who  was  President  of  our  Society  for  1911,
became  a  member  only  some  seven  years  ago ;  but  his
interest  in  the  Society's  work  is  of  long  standing.  A  paper
by  him  on  the  Cock  Lane  Ghost  was  read  at  one  of  our
meetings  in  1894,  and  from  that  date  he  made  frequent  and
valuable  contributions  to  the  Journal  and  Proceedings.  One  of
the  earliest  of  these,  Queen  Mary's  Diamonds  (Journal,  Vol.  VII.,  p.
116),  tells  a  story  which  strongly  piques  one's  curiosity,  and
which  would  be,  as  he  says,  a  convincing  case  of  "  retrocogni-
tion,"  if  only  it  were  just  a  little  better !  Earlier  still,
Custom  and  Myth,  published  in  1884,  contains  a  chapter  on
the  Divining  Eod.  In  those  benighted  days  he  regarded  the
rod  as  a  mildly  mischievous  instrument  of  superstition,  but
Professor  Barrett's  laborious  investigations  converted  him  to  a
whole-hearted  belief  in the  dowser's  faculty  fact,  and

a  serviceable  fact"  (Presidentied  Address,  1911).  The  article
on  Psychical  Kesearch  in  the  Pncyclojxtedia  Pritannica  (1902)
was  contributed  by  him,  and  is  a  well-considered  r4sum6  of
the  results  achieved  up  to  that  date.

The  general  result  (he  writes)  is  a  normal  explanation,  not  yet
complete,  of  the  phenomena  hitherto  attributed  to  witch-craft,  in-
spiration, possession,  and  so  forth.  Probably  the  devils,  saints,
angels,  and  spirits  who  have  communicated  with  witches,  living  saints,
demoniacs,  and  visionaries  are  mere  hallucinatory  reflections  from
the  subconscious  self,  endowed  with  its  stores  of  latent  memories


422


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


and  strangely  acute  percipient  faculties.  .  .  .  But  it  would  not  be
candid  to  say  that  the  explanation  is  complete  or  nearly  complete.
The  nature  of  the  hypnotic  trance  itself  remains  matter  of  dispute.
The  knowledge  automatically  revealed  can  by  no  means  always  be
accounted  for,  either  by  latent  memory  or  by  the  sharpening  of
the  normal  powers  of  perception,  while  the  limits  of  telepathy  (if
it  be  accepted)  are  vaguely  conjectured.  Even  the  simple  results
of  "crystal-gazing"  are  often  very  perplexing.  .  .  .  When  the  visions
are  not  mere  fancy  pictures,  but  correctly  represent  remote  persons
and  events,  unknown  to  the  gazer,  and  perhaps  unknown  to  all
present,  but  later  (in  the  case  of  the  events)  verified,  the  explana-
tion is  rather  to  seek.

It  is  not,  I  think,  an  unfair  inference  from  some  of  his
later  utterances,  that  he  found  the  exclusion  of  an  external
agency  from  some  of  the  phenomena  increasingly  difficult.

The  Making  of  Religion,  Magic  and  Religion,  Cock  Lane  and
Common  Sense,  and  The  Book  of  Dreams  and  Ghosts  are  all
stores  of  material  interesting  and  valuable  to  students  in
psychical  research.  All  these  volumes  have,  I  believe,  been
noticed  in  our  Proceedings ;  but  there  is  yet  another,  of  no
less  interest  and  value  in  this  connexion,  which  I  find  has
not  been  reviewed  in  the  Society's  publications,  and  of  this
something  may  appropriately  be  said  here.  I  refer  to  The
Maid  of  France.  This  work  was  published  in  1908,  but  the
subject  had  interested  Mr.  Lang  for  many  years  before.  Vol.
XL  of  Proceedings  (1895)  contains  an  article  on  The  Voices
of  Jeanne  d'Arc  which  shows  a  thorough  acquaintance  with
the  materials  for  her  history,  and  from  which  it  appears  that
he  had  then  formed  the  opinion  on  it  which  thirteen  years
of  further  study  only  served  to  confirm.

It  would  be  impossible  for  Jeanne,  as  it  was  for  Socrates,  to
regard  these  experiences  as  other  than  objective  and  caused  by
external  influences.  Thus  I  should  have  no  hesitation  about  con-
sidering her  experiences  mere  constitutional  externalisations  of  her
ideas.  But  the  evidence  showing  that  the  contents  of  the  messages
received  by  her  were  such  as  she  could  not  have  learned  in  any
normal  way  is  so  strong,  that  I  am  compelled  to  believe  in  some
abnormal  extension  of  faculty,  corresponding  to  her  native  and  un-
paralleled genius.  To  a  certain  extent,  she  was  admitted  within
the  arcana  and  sanctuary  of  the  universe.


LXVII.]


Andrew  Lang  and  Psychical  Research,.


423


"  Come  to  the  Salpetriere,"  said  a  man  of  science  to  an  Abbe,
"and  I  will  show  you  twenty  Jeannes  d'Arc."  "Has  one  of  them
given  us  back  Alsace  and  Lorraine?"  said  the  Abbe.

There  is  the  crux.

The  Maid  of  France  is  in  form  historical,  tracing  the  whole
of  Jeanne's  too  brief  life,  from  the  happy  childhood  days  at
Domremy  to  her  shameful  martyrdom,  but  of  course  the
whole  revolves  around  her  extraordinary  psychic  powers.  It
is  a  book  not  to  be  read,  and  I  venture  to  think,  from  the
tenderness  with  which  the  Maid's  story  is  touched,  not  written,
without  inclination  to  tears  ;  the  severe  reserve  of  the  narrative,
even  in  the  closing  scenes,  betrays  an  emotion  that  needed  to
be  kept  in  check.  Of  all  his  works  it  is  perhaps  the  only  one
throughout  the  writing  of  which  the  author  felt  not  even  a  pass-
ing impulse  to  be  gay.  The  hideous  tragedy  of  the  end  seems
to  have  cast  its  shadow  forward  over  every  page,  and  not  once
is  the  gravity  of  the  recital  broken  even  by  a  smile.  It  is
plain  to  see  that  he  gave  his  heart  to  the  task,  all  his  skill  in
arrangement  and  presentation,  and  an  enormous  amount  of  loving
labour :  every  previous  writer  on  the  subject  was  studied,  every
available  document  examined.  The  result  might  have  been  pre-
dicted :  the  book  is  so  absorbing  that  one  is  loth  to  put  it  down
till  it  is  finished.

Of  the  simple  purity  of  Jeanne's  character,  her  absolute
sanity  and  sincerity,  and  the  genuineness  of  her  Voices  and
visions,  Mr.  Lang  has,  as  we  have  already  seen,  no  least
doubt :

Here  we  may  cast  a  backward  glance  of  wonder  at  the  many-
faceted  character  of  the  Maid.  The  most  notable  features  are  her
perfect  faith  in  her  mission  and  in  her  revelations,  and  her  constant
tenacity  of  purpose.  Rebuffs  and  ridicule  could  not  shake  her  for
a  moment,  though  her  normal  common  sense  was  in  perfect  agreement
with  the  general  opinion.  An  ignorant  girl,  who  could  not  ride  or
fight,  her  mission,  if  deprived  of  its  inspiration,  was  ridiculous.
Nobody  knew  it  better  than  she  ;  but  often  she  met  her  heavenly
visitors,  courteous,  encouraging,  consoling.  She  wept  when  they
departed,  she  kissed  the  ground  where  they  had  stood  ;  she  desired
that  they  should  take  her  with  them.  She  was  sane,  yet  she  had
these  ineffable  experiences.  In  them,  and  in  her  faith  in  them,  was
her  strength  (p.  105).

2  E


424


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


I  now  proceed  to  extract  some  evidences  of  her  extraordinary
psychical  powers.

The  history  shows  that  she  had  vue  a  distance.  While  wait-
ing at  Vaucouleurs,  she  said  to  Baudricourt,  whom  she  had
been  imploring  to  send  her  to  the  Dauphin,  and  who  had  sum-
moned her  to  his  presence,  "  In  God's  name,  you  are  too  slow
in  sending  me :  for  this  clay,  near  Orleans,  a  great  disaster  has
befallen  the  gentle  Dauphin,  and  worse  fortune  he  will  have
unless  you  send  me  to  him."  This  was  on  February  12,  1429,
the  day  of  the  English  victory  in  the  "  Battle  of  the  Herrings  "
at  Bouvray,  near  Orleans,  from  which  she  was  distant  some  six
days'  journey.

As  to  the  famous  mystic  sword  of  the  Maid,  we  really  know  no
more  than  she  told  her  judges  in  1431.  "While  I  was  at  Tours
or  Chinon  I  sent  to  seek  for  a  sword  in  the  church  of  St.  Catherine
of  Fierbois,  behind  the  altar;  and  presently  it  was  found  all  rusty."
Asked  how  she  knew  that  the  sword  was  there,  she  said  "  It  was
a  rusty  sword  in  the  earth,  with  five  crosses  on  it,  and  I  knew  of
it  through  my  Voices.  I  had  never  seen  the  man  who  went  to
look  for  it.  I  wrote  to  the  churchmen  of  Fierbois,  and  asked  them
to  let  me  have  it,  and  they  sent  it.  .  .  .  When  it  was  found,  the
clergy  rubbed  it,  and  the  rust  readily  fell  off"  (p.  108).

Of  her  prophetic  power  also  there  seems  to  be  no  room  for
doubt :  the  evidence  is  indisputable.

Jeanne  .  .  .  was  advancing  towards  the  castle,  when  (as  her  con-
fessor, Pasquerel,  declares  that  she  herself  informed  him)  she  was
insulted  and  sworn  at  by  a  man  on  horseback.  She  answered,  "In
God's  name,  do  you  swear,  and  you  so  near  your  death'?"  Within
the  hour  the  man  fell  into  the  water  (the  moat  1)  and  was  drowned.
The  story  is  alluded  to  by  a  contemporary  Italian  letter-writer
(p.  86).

And  again :

As,  when  at  Vaucouleurs,  she  had  "longed,  as  a  woman  with
child  longs  for  her  delivery,"  to  go  to  Chinon,  so  now  she  prayed
and  wept,  desiring  sorely  to  succour  the  people  of  Orleans.  "  You
hold  so  many  and  such  long  councils,"  she  said  to  the  Dauphin  later.
Her  heart  was  on  fire  to  be  at  work,  not  to  waste  that  "  one
year  and  little  more "  during  which  she  was  to  endure,  as  she  kept


lxvil] Andrew  Lang  and  Psychical  Research.


425


telling  the  Dauphin.  It  is  d'Alencon  who  vouches  for  this  sad  and
absolutely  accurate  repeated  prophecy.  Jeanne  must  have  made  it
from  the  first,  for  in  a  letter  dated  "Bruges,  May  10,  1429,"  the
writer  remarks,  "It  is  said  that  the  maid  is  to  achieve  two  more
great  feats"  (in  addition  to  the  relief  of  Orleans),  "and  then  to
die."  We  must  think  of  her  as  always  foreknowing,  and  always
disregarding,  her  swiftly  approaching  end  (p.  91).

Next  we  have  a  prophecy  of  her  wounding  at  Orleans,
recorded  before  the  event :

At  this  time,  at  least  before  April  22  [1429],  when  the  fact  was
recorded  in  a  letter  by  de  Rotselaer,  a  Flemish  diplomatist  at
Lyons,  Jeanne  told  the  King  that  she  would  be  wounded  at  Orleans
by  an  arrow  or  cross-bow  bolt,  but  not  mortally.  The  prediction
was  fulfilled ;  it  is  more  singular  that  it  was  recorded  in  writing  a
fortnight  before  the  event  (p.  109).

She  prophesied  her  capture  :

And  now  her  Voices  abandoned  her :  not  that  they  were  silent,
but  they  gave  no  warlike  counsel.  She  told  her  judges  the  heart-
breaking story.  It  was  in  Easter  week  (April  17-23  [1430]),  and  it
seems  to  have  been  in  a  moment  of  triumph,  that,  "  as  I  was
on  the  ramparts  of  Melun,  St.  Catherine  and  St.  Margaret  warned
me  that  I  should  be  captured  before  Midsummer  day ;  that  so  it
must  needs  be  :  nor  must  I  be  afraid  and  astounded ;  but  take  all
things  well,  for  God  would  help  me.  So  they  spoke,  almost  every
day.  And  I  prayed  that  when  I  was  taken  I  might  die  in  that
hour,  without  wretchedness  of  long  captivity ;  but  the  Voices  said
that  so  it  must  be.  Often  I  asked  the  hour,  which  they  told  me
not;  had  I  known  the  hour,  I  would  not  have  gone  into  battle."

Her  allotted  year,  she  knew,  was  almost  ended,  but  the  prophecy
of  the  Voices  came  with  the  shock  of  certainty, — the  Voices  that
spoke  not  of  instant  death,  but  a  myriad  times  worse,  of  capture.
Would  not  the  bravest  man,  with  the  prospect  of  the  death  by  fire
in  case  of  his  capture,  would  not  Ney  or  Skobeleff,  Wallace  or
Gordon,  have  blenched  1  But  the  Maid  rode  on,  first  in  the  charge,
last  in  the  retreat.  There  is  no  other  such  tale  in  history.  She
was  the  bravest  of  the  brave  (p.  228).

Two  other  prophecies  will  be  found  on  pp.  265  and  272  ;
and  I  should  have  liked  to  recall  the  story  of  her  knowledge
of  the  Dauphin's  secret,  but  must  forbear. The  extracts  already


426


Rev.  M.  A.  Bay  field,


[part


given  will  suffice  to  show  with  what  a  sympathetic  touch  the
author  has  handled  one  of  the  most  piteous  tales  in  all
history.

As  is  well  known,  Mr.  Lang  preferred  to  study  the  field  of
psychical  phenomena,  with  one  exception,  from  the  historical
and  anthropological  point  of  view,  rather  than  as  an  experi-
menter. The  exception  was  crystal-gazing  ;  although  no  "  scryer  "
himself,  he  assisted  at  a  very  large  numher  of  experiments,  and
it  is  through  him  that  we  have  some  of  our  most  valuable
evidence  on  the  subject.  But  while  in  his  own  chief  work  in
these  matters  he  took  the  wider  range,  he  was  an  untiring  advo-
cate of  research  into  the  phenomena  themselves,  and  for  their
own  sake.  He  held  that  certain  beliefs  and  practices  found
all  over  the  world  in  all  ages  probably  rest  on  some  undis-
covered basis  of  psychic  truth  and  fact ;  he  refused  to  take
them  as  the  mere  outcome  of  savage  man's  playful  fancy  and
fraudulent  proclivities,  or  to  accept  the  "  survival  and  revival "
theory  as  a  sufficient  account  of  modern  instances.  He  main-
tained— and  in  this  he  was  at  one  with  the  founders  of  our
Society — that  since  there  is  so  much  smoke,  there  must  be
some  fire ;  and  he  never  wearied  of  pouring  his  genial  mockery
on  the  "  scientific "  temper  which  protests  it  can  see  no  smoke
and  that  there  is  nothing  to  investigate.  The  slip-shod  reason-
ing and  language  of  his  opponents,  and  their  frequent  inability
to  see  the  real  issue,  made  them  an  easy  prey  to  his  acute
dialectic ;  and  he  came  at  last  to  hold  so  cheap  the  logic  and
verbal  currency  of  scientific  obscurantism,  with  its  ever- recurring
"  presumably "  this  and  "  doubtless "  that,  that  he  calls  this
"  doubtless  "  "  the  '  doubtless  '  of  science,"  which  merely  marks
what  the  writer  "prefers  to  think"!  I  quote  from  Magic  and
Bdvjion  his  impression  of  the  scientific  method  in  connexion
with  the  subjects  of  which  he  treats :

In  the  long  run  magic  and  religion  are  to  die  out,  perhaps,  and
science  is  to  have  the  whole  field  for  herself.

This  may  be  a  glorious  though  a  remote  prospect.  But  surely  it
is  above  all  things  needful  that  our  science  should  be  scientific.
She  must  not  blink  facts,  merely  because  they  do  not  fit  into  her
scheme  or  hypothesis  of  the  nature  of  things,  or  of  religion.  She
really  must  give  as  much  prominence  to  the  evidence  which  contra-
dicts as  to  that  which  supports  her  theory  in  each  instance.  Not


lxvii.] Anclreiv  Lang  and  Psychical  Research.


427


only  must  she  not  shut  her  eyes  to  this  evidence,  but  she  must
diligently  search  for  it,  must  seek  for  what  Bacon  calls  instantiae
contradictor iae,  since,  if  these  exist,  the  theory  which  ignores  them  is
useless.  If  she  advances  a  hypothesis,  it  must  not  be  contrary  to
the  whole  mass  of  human  experience.  .  .  .  Again  science  must  not
pile  one  unverified  hypothesis  upon  another  unverified  hypothesis
till  her  edifice  rivals  the  Tower  of  Babel.  She  must  not  make  a
conjecture  on  p.  35,  and  on  p.  210  treat  the  conjecture  as  a  fact.  .  .  .
It  seems  hardly  necessary,  but  it  is  not  superfluous,  to  add  that  in
her  castle  of  hypotheses,  one  must  not  contradict,  and  therefore
destroy,  another.

This  kind  of  reasoning,  with  its  inferring  of  inferences  from  other
inferences,  themselves  inferred  from  conjectures  as  to  the  existence
of  facts  of  which  no  proof  is  adduced,  must  be  called  superstitious
rather  than  scientific.  The  results  may  be  interesting,  but  they  are
the  reverse  of  science  (p.  4).

It  would  indeed  seem  to  be  no  easy  matter  to

"hold  the  eel  of  science  by  the  tail,"

if  I  may  change  Mr.  Lang's  metaphor  and  slightly  alter  the
application  of  Pope's.  Yet  to  one  scientific  eel  after  another
did  he  address  himself,  with  well-sanded  hands.  In  con-
troversy, which  he  dearly  loved,  as  every  man  loves  what  he
can  engage  in  with  success,  he  was  always  a  courteous  fighter,
but  he  was  a  dangerous  one  to  meet.  If  the  enemy  had  weak  places
in  his  harness,  let  him  beware,  for  not  one  would  escape  a
thrust  from  this  practised  fencing-master  of  debate,  who  knew
every  trick  of  the  game.  In  Cock  Lane  and  Common  Sense
many  pages  are  devoted  to  the  logical  vagaries  of  the  famous
"Dr.  Carpenter,  C.B,  M.D.,  LL.D.,  F.E.S.,  F.G.S.,  V.P.L.S.,
Corresponding  Member  of  the  Institute  of  France,  tout  ce  quit,
y  a  de  plus  official,  dc  plus  cUcore',"  who  more  than  once  in  the
"  seventies "  charged  at  the  windmill  of  psychical  phenomena
(and  other  windmills)  with  more  zeal  than  discretion.  Here
is  a  specimen  of  Andrew  Lang  in  his  lighter  manner :

In  three  pages  Dr.  Carpenter  has  shown  that  "  early  scientific
training "  in  physiology  and  pathology  does  not  necessarily  enable
its  professor  to  state  a  case  fully.  Nor  does  it  prompt  him  to  discrimi-
nate between  rumours  coming,  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  after  the


428


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


date  of  the  alleged  occurrences,  from  a  remote,  credulous,  and
unscientific  age  [the  reference  is  to  the  alleged  levitation  of  Simon
Magus]  :  and  the  statements  of  witnesses  all  living,  all  honourable,
and,  in  one  case,  of  "  high  scientific  attainments."

It  is  this  solemn  belief  in  his  own  infallibility  as  a  judge  of
evidence,  combined  with  his  almost  inevitable  ignorance  of  what
evidence  is,  that  makes  Dr.  Carpenter  such  an  amusing  contro-
versialist. ...  In  matters  wholly  marvellous,  like  Home's  flight  in
the  air,  the  evidence  of  three  living  and  honourable  men  need  not,
of  course,  convince  us  of  the  fact.  But  this  evidence  is  in  itself  a
fact  to  be  considered — "  Why  do  these  three  gentlemen  tell  this
tale  1 "  we  ask  ;  but  Dr.  Carpenter  jmts  the  evidence  on  the  level
of  patristic  tattle  many  centuries  old,  written  down,  on  no  authority,
long  after  the  event.  Yet  the  worthy  doctor  calmly  talks  about
"  want  of  scientific  culture  preventing  people  from  appreciating  the
force  of  scientific  reasoning,"  and  that  after  giving  such  examples  of
"  scientific  reasoning "  as  we  have  examined.  It  is  in  this  way  that
Science  makes  herself  disliked. (Ibid.,  p.  327.)

After  reading  all,  or  nearly  all,  that  Mr.  Lang  has  written
about  levitation,  poltergeistry,  and  telekinesis  in  general,  I  con-
fess to  feeling  a  quite  masculine  curiosity  as  to  whether  he
was  himself  finally  convinced  by  the  evidence  he  had  so  labori-
ously collected.  He  confessed  to  us  in  his  Presidential  Address
that  he  was  "not  certain  this  kind  of  thing  never  occurs";
which  sounds  as  though  he  were  giving  that  little  coup  de
poucc  against  inclination  which  he  wisely  recommended  to  us
all,  and  that,  in  his  heart  of  hearts,  he  believed  "  this  kind  of
thing "  does  occur.  Miss  Johnson  has  shown  (Proceedings,
Vol.  XXI,  pp.  490-496)  that  there  are  serious  gaps  in  the
evidence  for  D.  D.  Home's  levitation,  but  the  evidence  for  the
phenomena  as  a  whole  is  irritatingly  strong,  despite  its  varia-
tions in  quality;  it  seems  to  leave  one  in  the  mental  con-
dition of  Tom  Hood's  Footman  on  Mount  Blank,  who  said
of  the  chamois,  "  its  Springs  in  the  middle  of  Winter  I  believe
as  incredible."

Equally  characteristic  and  equally  good  in  the  controversial
line  is  The  Nineteenth  Century  and  Mr.  Myers  {Proceedings,  Vol.
XVIII.,  p.  62).  This  was  an  answer  to  two  essays  on  Human
Personality,  the  one  by  Mr.  Frederic  Harrison  and  the  other
by  Mr.  W.  H.  Mallock,  published  in The  Nineteenth  Century


lxvii.] Andreiv  Lang  and  Psychical  Research.


429


and  After.  The  essay  by  the  former  called  for  no  serious
reply,  and  its  "  pomptious "  frivolity  (if  I  may  borrow  a  word
from  the  English  vocabulary  of  a  foreign  acquaintance),  is  dis-
missed with  little  more  than  the  following :

The  essay  of  Mr.  Harrison  was  a  sportive  apologue.  Free,  as  he
is,  from  degrading  superstition,  Mr.  Harrison  playfully  informed
the  town  that,  after  "dipping  into"  Mr.  Myers's  book  for  about
ninety  minutes,  he  dreamed  that  he  died,  after  an  apoplectic  seizure.
Absit  omen!  Mr.  Harrison  must  be  cautious  as  to  what  he  reads,
avoiding  what  he  disagrees  with.

The  essay  by  "  one  of  our  most  eminent  scientific  men,
theologians,  and  investigators  of  Mrs.  Gallup,  Mr  W.  H.
Mallock  "  (to  quote  Mr.  Lang's  description),  was  a  quite
grotesque  misrepresentation,  based  on  an  almost  incredible  mis-
conception, of  Myers's  theory  of  the  subliminal  consciousness.
The  exposure  is  formal  and  complete,  and  adds  one  more  to
the  many  demonstrations  the  Society  has  had  to  give  of  the
inaccuracy  which  seizes  the  "  scientific "  like  a  cramp  when
they  wander  out  of  their  depth.  The  concluding  paragraph  is
delicious :

For  the  rest,  I  am  not  defending  Mr.  Myers's  hypotheses — -that
of  "  possession "  I  reject — I  am  only  anxious  that  they  should  be
understood  before  they  are  rejected.  In  history  it  is  well  to  quote
the  exact  words  of  a  document :  in  science  it  appears  to  be  enough
to  write  that  "  Mr.  Myers  says "  this  or  that,  in  the  terms  of  the
scientist  himself,  and  without  references  to  the  text  of  the  author.
Daily  experience  proves  that  profitable  criticisms  cannot  be  produced
in  this  way.'  I  need  hardly  add  that,  though  I  think  Mr.  Mallock
misunderstood,  I  am  sure  he  never  dreamed  of  misrepresenting  Mr.
Myers.

How  delicate  is  the  coup  de  grace  in  the  transparent  sincerity
of  the  last  sentence !  Not  dishonest,  but — what  ?  One  is
reminded  of  the  "soft  answer"  in  Punch:  He.  "Wot  d' yer  mean,
keepin'  me  waitin'  'ere  arf  an  hour,  standin'  about  like  a
fool?"  She.  "I  carn't  'elp  'ow  you  stand,  'Enery."  Mr.
Lang's  essay  was  offered  to  the  editor  of  the  magazine,  but,
for  reasons  not  disclosed  to  us,  was  rejected !  On  which
Mr.  Lang  remarks,  "  The  S.P.E.  will  observe  that  the  labour


430


Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.


[part


of  half  the  lifetime  of  a  learned  and  industrious  man
appears  to  be  less  worthy  of  discussion  than  the  cypher  of
Mrs.  Gallup."

One  needs  not  to  have  known  Andrew  Lang  to  realise
what  a  genial,  tender,  and  richly-gifted  spirit  has  passed  away
from  among  us,  for  few  men's  writings  are  stamped  so  un-
mistakably with  the  marks  of  their  personality.  Nor  will  he
be  missed  only  by  those  who  knew  him.  All  lovers  of  grace-
ful literature  and  the  many  children  whom  his  stories
delighted,  and  for  whom  he  wrote  because  he  loved  them,
have  lost  a  friend  whom  they  would  fain  have  kept.  Our
own  smaller  circle,  bound  together  by  the  interest  of  a
common  study,  has  lost  an  inspiriting  fellow- worker  and  a
valuable  champion.  By  books,  essays,  and  short  papers,  and
by  articles  contributed  to  the  daily  journals,  he  not  only  in-
creased our  store  of  knowledge  with  the  fruits  of  his  own
labour,  but  also  did  much  to  commend  our  undertaking  to
the  public  at  large.  And  in  doing  all  this  he  was,  like  the
Society  itself  (as  I  believe),  inevitably  doing  yet  more,  assist-
ing to  spread  the  light  of  a  great  and  priceless  faith :

"Contemplate  all  this  work  of  Time,
The  giant  labouring  in  his  youth;
Nor  dream  of  human  love  and  truth,
As  dying  Nature's  earth  and  lime ;

But  trust  that  those  we  call  the  dead
Are  breathers  of  an  ampler  day
For  ever  nobler  ends."


LXVII.]


A  Study  of  Dreams.


431


III.

A  STUDY  OF  DEEAMS.

By  DR.  FREDERIK  VAN  EEDEN.

I  think  it  will  be  hardly  necessary  in  this  company1  to  refer
explicitly  to  the  difficulties  of  treating  my  present  subject.

The  most  important  is  the  subtle  and  highly  spiritual  order
of  the  phenomena.  Their  investigation  leads  us  to  the  boundary
of  what  is  called  exact  Science,  and  brings  us  into  the  dangerous
vicinity  of  metaphysical  speculative  systems  and  religious  beliefs.
It  is  well-nigh  impossible  to  discuss  these  ultimate  psychical
phenomena  without  touching  on  different  primary  scientific  or
philosophical  dogmas,  and  in  no  branch  of  science,  I  think,  is
the  inadequacy  and  confusion  of  our  only  instrument  of  orderly
thought — language — more  painfully  brought  before  our  mind.

All  this,  I  believe,  tends  to  justify  my  conviction,  that  for
the  exploration  of  this  mysterious  world  of  dreams  we  want
not  only  the  purely  scientific,  but  also  the  poetical  function.
In  this  field  the  pioneers  have  to  be  either  poetical  men  of
science  or  scientific  poets ;  since  it '  is  the  poet — at  least  when
we  attach  to  this  word  its  highest  and  deepest  meaning — whose
natural  passion  it  is  to  explore  the  ultimate  regions  of  the  human
soul  and  whose  constant  occupation  is  to  create  new  spiritual
values  and  give  them  accurate  expression.

Since  1896  I  have  studied  my  own  dreams,  writing  down  the
most  interesting  in  my  diary.  In  1898  I  began  to  keep  a
separate  account  for  a  particular  kind  of  dream  which  seemed
to  me  the  most  important,  and  I  have  continued  it  up  to  this

1This  paper  was  read  at  a  meeting  of  the  Society  on  April  22,  1913.


432


Dr.  Frederilc  van  Eeden.


[part


day.  Altogether  I  collected  about  500  dreams,  of  which  352
are  of  the  particular  kind  just  mentioned.  This  material  may
form  the  basis  of  what  I  hope  may  become  a  scientific  structure
of  some  value,  if  leisure  aud  strength  to  build  it  up  carefully
do  not  fail  me.

In  the  meantime,  with  a  pardonable  anxiety  lest  the  ideas
should  not  find  expression  in  time,  I  condensed  them  into  a
work  of  art — a  novel  called  The  Bride  of  Breams,  published
a  few  years  ago  in  Holland  and  Germany,  and  an  English
edition  of  which  will  shortly  be  issued  in  ISTew  York.  The
fictitious  form  enabled  me  to  deal  freely  with  delicate
matters,  and  had  also  the  advantage  that  it  expressed  rather
unusual  ideas  in  a  less  aggressive  way — esoterically,  so  to
speak.  Yet  I  want  to  express  these  ideas  also  in  a  form  that
will  appeal  more  directly  to  the  scientific  mind,  and  I  know  I
cannot  find  a  better  audience  for  this  purpose  than  the  members
of  the  S.P.R.,  who  are  accustomed  to  treat  investigations  and
ideas  of  an  unusual  sort  in  a  broad-minded  and  yet  critical  spirit.

It  may  be  said  that  the  poet  is  sometimes  carried  away  by  his
fancy ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  purely  scientific  mind  is  sometimes
handicapped  by  a  tendency  to  disbelieve,  and  I  do  not  see  why
the  poet,  enamoured  of  truth  and  reality  as  he  is,  should  be  less
severely  critical  than  the  man  of  science.

I  may  take  it  then  to  be  clearly  understood  that  this  paper
is  only  a  preliminary  sketch,  a  short  announcement  of  a  greater
work,  which  I  hope  to  be  able  to  complete  in  later  years.

I  will  as  much  as  possible  avoid  speculation,  and  limit  myself
to  facts ;  yet  these  facts,  as  I  have  observed  them,  bring  me
in  a  general  way  to  the  firm  conviction  that  the  theories  on
dream-life,  as  brought  forward  up  to  to-day,  within  my  know-
ledge, are  unable  to  account  for  all  the  phenomena.

Selecting  among  the  most  prominent  and  most  up-to-date
authors,  I  may  mention  Prof.  Sigmund  Freud,  who  is  now
considered  by  many  as  the  highest  authority  on  dreams,  and
whose  key  to  the  mysteries  of  dream-life  may  be  formulated
in  these  words :

The  Dream  is  the  symbolically  expressed  wish  or  desire  of
the  subconscious  part  of  a  human  being,  and  generally  of  an
erotic  character.  This  view  has  been  amply  criticised,  among
others  by  Mr.  Havelock  Ellis  in  his  recent  book,  The  World  of


LXVII.]


A  Study  of  Dreams.


433


Dreams,  which  I  regard  as  one  of  the  best  handbooks  of
recent  years.

Havelock  Ellis,  fully  acknowledging  the  boldness  and  in-
genuity of  Freud's  theory,  endorses  the  comment  of  many  of
Freud's  critics,  that  this  key,  however  fitting  in  many  cases,
does  not  open  all  doors,  and  still  leaves  many  mysteries.

According  to  Havelock  Ellis  the  principal  characteristic  of
the  dream  is  psychical  dissociation,  and  all  dreams  may  be
accounted  for  by  the  natural  and  unceasing  tendency  of  the
human  mind  to  reason  and  to  explain,  even  in  a  condition  of
dissociation.  He  supposes  that  the  brain  in  sleep  continues  to
receive  impressions  from  different  internal  organs,  from  the
involuntary  muscles,  from  the  beating  heart  and  the  breathing-
lungs,  and  in  its  dissociated  state  tries  to  bring  some  reasonable
order  into  these  sensations  by  inventing  all  sorts  of  curious,  and
more  or  less  absurd,  facts,  which  it  regards  as  real  and  as
accounting  for  the  confused  impressions  it  perceives.

My  objection  to  this  theory,  in  spite  of  the  author's  inge-
nious and  plausible  defence  of  it,  is  the  same  as  his  objection
to  the  theory  of  Ereud.  It  does  not  by  any  means  cover  all
the  facts.  I  would  even  go  so  far  as  to  say  that  it  holds
good  in  only  a  few  exceptional  cases.  I  hope  to  make  it  clear
to  you  that  it  is  utterly  inadequate  to  account  in  particular
for  those  cases  which  I  recorded  as  being  the  most  important
and  interesting.

I  wish  to  mention  here  the  name  of  a  great  Englishwoman,
who  died  last  year,  and  whom  I  consider  one  of  the  deepest
thinkers  of  our  age.

Victoria  Lady  Welby  is  the  mother  of  that  new  branch  of
science,  now  officially  acknowledged  by  the  Britannica  Encyclo-
paedia under  the  name  of  Signifies,  corresponding  to  Breal's
term  Semantics.  Her  contention  was  that  at  the  bottom  of
all  our  disputes,  and  even  of  all  our  misery,  is  the  careless
and  inadequate  use  of  language.  According  to  my  own  ex-
perience, this  want  of  "  signifies  " — Lady  Welby's  new  science —
is  felt  in  every  discussion,  and  I  rarely  begin  a  lecture  with-
out a  warning  about  it.

In  the  present  case  we  find  a  good  illustration  of  Lady
Welby's  contention.  Havelock  Ellis,  in  his  explanation  of
dream-phenomena,  says,  quoting  Vaschide  and  Pieron,  that  "the


434


Dr.  Freclerik  van  Eeclen.


[part


internal  sensations  develop  at  the  expense  of  the  peripheral
sensations.  That  indeed  seems  to  be  the  secret  of  the  immense
emotional  turmoil  of  our  dreams."

Now  it  seems  to  me  that  the  word  internal,  by  the  authors
just  mentioned  and  by  many  others,  is  used  in  a  deceptive  way,
without  recognition  of  its  shifting  value,  its  signitical  quality.
It  stands  for  the  contrary  of  peripheral,  yet  when  the  word  is
used  its  significance  imperceptibly  becomes  metaphorical.

In  opposition  to  sensations  derived  from  the  skin,  the  visceral
sensations  might  lie  called  internal.  But  from  the  psychical
point  of  view,  any  bodily  sensation,  whether  it  be  from  the  skin,
from  the  heart,  or  from  the  kidneys,  is  external  in  a  metaphorical
sense.

For  students  of  natural  science,  brought  up  in  the  nineteenth
century,  this  confusion  is  very  difficult  to  avoid.  The  ruling
opinion  of  that  time  looked  upon  the  physical  body  as  the  whole
of  a  human  being.  A  human  being,  it  was  thought,  consisted
entirely  of  things  that  could  be  perceived  in  three-dimensional
space.  The  simple  fact,  now  beginning  to  be  dimly  realised
by  men  of  science,  that  psychical  facts  are  non-spatial,  and
therefore  cannot  be  expressed  otherwise  than  by  metaphor,  was
utterly  disregarded.

For  instance,  Maury,  for  long  the  great  authority  on  dreams,
speaks  repeatedly  of  "  impressions  internes,  intercerebrales,"  as
continuing  during  dream-life,  while  the  outer  impressions,  that
is,  the  peripheral,  are  benumbed.

Now  dreams  are  purely  psychical  phenomena.  They  have,
of  course,  connections  and  associations  with  the  physical  body.
Yet  their  most  characteristic  feature  is  that  they  are  non-spatial,
that  is  to  say,  inner  in  a  metaphorical  sense.  Havelock  Ellis
agrees  that  even  the  visceral  sensations  are  not  perceived  as
such,  but  are  transformed  into  symbols,  i.e.  into  purely  psychical
phenomena.

According  to  my  experience,  not  only  the  peripheral  but  also
the  interned  sensations,  in  so  far  as  they  are  spatial,  are  inhibited
in  dream-life.  Not  only  are  the  senses  of  hearing,  smelling,
seeing,  tasting,  touching,  etc.,  cut  off  from  the  mind  of  the
sleeper,  but  also  the  more  vague  and  ill-defined  bodily  sensa-
tions,— muscle-sensations,  visceral  sensations,  sensations  of  bodily
well-being  or  of  pain  or  discomfort.


LXVII.]


A  Study  of  Dreams.


435


In  a  word,  the  physical  body,  though  it  continues  to  live  and
to  act  in  certain  ways,  does  not  convey  its  sensations  directly
to  the  mind  in  complete  sleep  and  dream.  All  immediate  con-
nection between  the  mind,  with  its  non-spatial  facts,  and  the
body,  with  its  facts  that  can  be  expressed  in  spatial  terms,  stops
during  sleep  and  dream.

I  would  even  go  so  far  as  to  draw  the  line  at  this  point
between  dream  and  waking  life.  So  long  as  a  bodily  sensation,
be  it  internal  or  peripheral,  is  perceived,  there  is  not  yet  com-
plete sleep  or  dream,  and  any  abnormal  perception  that  occurs
must  be  called  a  waking  hallucination.  When  sleep  and  dream
set  in,  all  direct  bodily  rapport  is  cut  off.  This  is  its
essential  and  characteristic  feature.

Let  me  now  give  you  an  attempt  at  classification  of  the
different  forms  of  dreams,  which  I  myself  personally  experi-
enced and  observed  during  a  period  of  sixteen  years.  I  have
been  able  to  distinguish  nine  different  kinds  of  dreams,  each
of  which  presents  a  well-defined  type.  There  are  of  course
intermediate  forms  and  combinations,  but  the  separate  types  can
still  be  recognised  in  their  intermingling.

In  this  scheme  I  wish  to  draw  attention  to  the  type
indicated  by  the  letter  (H),  which  I  call  initial  dreams.  This
kind  of  dream  is  very  rare ;  I  know  of  only  half-a-dozen
instances  occurring  to  myself,  and  have  found  no  clear  indica-
tion of  them  in  other  authors.  Yet  it  is  very  characteristic
and  easily  distinguishable.  It  occurs  only  in  the  very  beginning
of  sleep,  when  the  body  is  in  a  normal  healthy  condition,  but
very  tired.  Then  the  transition  from  waking  to  sleep  takes
place  with  hardly  a  moment  of  what  is  generally  called
unconsciousness,  but  what  I  would  prefer  to  call  discontinuity
of  memory.  It  is  not  what  Maury  calls  a  hypnagogic  halluci-
nation, which  phenomenon  I  know  well  from  my  own  experience,
but  which  I  do  not  consider  to  belong  to  the  world  of  dreams.
In  hypnagogic  hallucinations  we  have  visions,  but  we  have  full
bodily  perception.  In  the  initial  dream  type  (H),  I  see  and
feel  as  in  any  other  dream.  I  have  a  nearly  complete  recol-
lection of  day-life,  I  know  that  I  am  asleep  and  where  I  am
sleeping,  but  all  perceptions  of  the  physical  body,  inner  and
outer,  visceral  or  peripheral,  are  entirely  absent.  Usually  I
have  the  sensation  of  floating  or  flying,  and  I  observe  with


436  Br.  FrederiJc  van  Eeden.  [part

CLASSIFICATION  OF


General
Character.

Time  of
•  Occurrence.

Condition  of
Body.

A.

Ordinary
dreams.

Indifferent  or
varying.

Probably  all
the  time  of
sleep.

Normal.

B.

Very  vivid
dreams.

Unpleasant.

Any  time  of
sleep.

Nervously
disturbed.

C.

Symbolic  or
mocking
dreams.

Unpleasant,  de-
moniacal,
mostly  erotic
or  obscene.

Idem.

Sometimes
disturbed.

D.

General  dream-
sensations.

Indifferent  or
varying,  not

1 1  tipioaoctill  U.

Middle  of  night,
deep  sleep.

Slightly
nervously
disturbed.

E.

Lucid  dreams.

Highly  pleasant,
generally

UUclLJIlg  Ui

flying.

Always
between  5
and  8  a.m.

Excellent.

F.

Demon-
dreams.

Not  unpleasant,
though
demoniacal.

Generally  after
or  before  E.

Good.

G.

Wrong  waking
up  (phan-
tasm).

Demoniacal.

Near  waking
up.

Good.

H.

Initial  dreams.

Pleasant.

Immediately
after  going
to  sleep.

Very  tired.

I.

Pathological
dreams.
(Fever,  poi-
son, indiges-
tion.)

Generally
unpleasant.

Any  time  of
sleep.

Bad.

LXVII.]


A  Study  of  Dreams.
DREAMS.


437


Recollection
of  Day-life  in
Dream.

Recollection
of  Dream  after
Waking  up.

Frequency.

Effect.

Defective,  gener-
ally wrong.

Generally  faint.

Very  frequent,
probably  in  all
sleep.

Indifferent.

Very  defective,
or  entirely
wrong.

Clear.

Rather  rare.

Mostly  unplea-
sant, some-
times premoni-
tory.

Defective.

Not  very  clear.

Unpleasant,  with
shame.

Not  clear.

Rather  clear.

Rare.

Varying,

premonitory.

Nearly  complete.

Clear.

Rather  frequent.

Very  beneficial,
sometimes
premonitory.

Not  quite  com-
plete.

Clear.

Rather  frequent.

Beneficial,
refreshing.

Fairly  complete.

Very  clear.

Rare.

Indifferent.

Fairly  complete.

Clear.

Very  rare.

Indifferent.

Entirely  wrong.

Confused.

In  abnormal
condition,
nearly  always.

Indifferent  or
unpleasant.

438


Dr.  Frederik  van  Eeden.


[part


perfect  clearness  that  the  feeling  of  fatigue,  the  discomfort  of
bodily  overstrain,  has  vanished.  I  feel  fresh  and  vigorous ;  I
can  move  and  float  in  all  directions ;  yet  I  know  that  my
body  is  at  the  same  time  dead  tired  and  fast  asleep.

One  experience  of  this  remarkable  form  of  dream  seems  to
me  sufficient  for  the  careful  observer  to  undo  all  current
theories.  I  know  quite  well,  by  my  own  experience,  that
certain  bodily  conditions  and  sensory  sensations  have  influence
on  dreams.  I  can  give  instances  of  dreams  in  which  sounds
from  the  waking  world,  the  ticking  of  a  clock,  the  noise  of
wind,  or  my  own  difficult  breathing,  or  snoring,  have  pene-
trated into  the  dream-world  and  caused  some  dream-fancy.
In  one  dream,  when  near  waking  up,  I  found  myself  sitting
in  company  with  others,  and  I  heard  the  sound  of  snoring.
I  looked  round  at  the  other  people,  asking,  "  Who  is  it  that
snores  ? "  and  then,  on  waking  up,  I  found  that  I  myself  was
the  only  culprit.

But  I  consider  that  cases  in  which  the  sounds  or  impressions
of  day-life — bodily  sensations — penetrate  into  the  dream-life,  are
exceptional,  whereas  nearly  all  scientific  observers  of  dreams  up
to  the  present  day  start  from  the  supposition  that  these  bodily
sensations  account  for  all  dreams.  And  I  think  you  will
agree  that  the  direction  in  which  the  observer  is  looking
must  make  a  great  difference  in  the  outcome  of  any  investi-
gation.

Most  students  of  dream-life  begin  with  the  supposition  that
dreams  are  more  or  less  abnormal  phenomena  caused  by  some
abnormal  condition  of  the  body,  and  their  experiments  are
mostly  directed  towards  trying  to  provoke  dreams  by  artificial
bodily  conditions.

As  the  outcome  of  careful  observations,  I  maintain  my
conviction  that  the  bodily  conditions  of  the  sleeper  have,  as  a
rule,  no  influence  on  the  character  of  dreams,  with  the  exception
of  a  few  rare  and  abnormal  cases,  near  the  moment  of  waking
up,  or  in  those  dreams  which  I  have  classified  as  pathological,
under  letter  (I),  in  which  fever,  indigestion,  or  some  poison,
plays  a  role,  and  which  form  a  small  minority.  For  myself
as  the  observer,  I  may  state  that  I  have  been  in  good  health
all  the  time  of  observation.  I  had  no  important  complaints  of
any  nervous  or  visceral  kind. My  sleep  and  digestion  both


LXVII.]


A  Study  of  Dreams.


439


are  usually  good.  Yet  I  have  had  the  most  terrible  nightmares,
while  my  body  was  as  fresh  and  healthy  as  usual,  and  I  have
had  delicious  peaceful  dreams  on  board  ship  in  a  heavy  storm,
or  in  a  sleeping-car  on  the  railway.

In  April,  1906,  I  was  suffering  from  violent  tooth-ache.  I
was  in  Italy  and  did  not  wish  to  go  to  a  foreign  dentist.
I  succeeded,  however,  in  falling  asleep,  and  entered  at  once  on  a
dream  of  type  (F),  which  I  call  demon-dreams.  I  had  a  perfect
recollection  of  my  waking  life ;  I  knew  that  I  was  sleeping  and
that  my  tooth  was  still  aching.  Yet  1  did  not  feel  it.  I
realised  that  I  was  in  the  demoniacal  sphere,  which  I  recognise
by  the  weird  uncanny  effect  produced  by  apparently  harmless
objects,  which  are  seen  very  sharply  and  vividly.  I  could
shut  my  eyes,  as  it  seemed  to  me,  and  when  I  opened
them  again,  the  same  objects — a  tea-pot,  a  clothes-brush,  a
triangle,  and  so  on — were  still  there,  and  still  uncanny  and
threatening.  Then  came  what  I  shall  have  to  call  demon-
personalities,  who  do  not  seem  human,  and  yet  seem  to  act
and  speak  like  independent  beings.  Usually  I  am  able  to
drive  them  away  by  a  voluntary  act,  e.g.  by  shouting  and
threatening.  But  this  time  I  felt  powerless,  and  I  debated
in  my  dream  whether  the  tooth-ache  could  be  the  cause  of
this  weakness.  Then  I  asked  one  of  the  demons  what  was
the  reason  of  my  unusual  weakness.  He  answered  :  "  Probably
the  heat,"  and  at  this  answer  I  considered  whether  I  had
left  the  radiator  of  the  hotel-room  open.  But  soon  I  under-
stood that  the  answer  was  a  senseless  mockery,  irony  or
stupidity.  And  I  slept  the  whole  night  without  feeling  any
pain.  Next  morning  the  pain  was  felt  again  and  I  had  the
tooth  extracted.

Now  it  must  be  clear  that  the  theory  which  explains  the
fancies  of  dreams  by  an  attempt  of  the  mind  to  reconstruct
a  false  reality  in  order  to  account  for  subconscious  sensations,
will  never  do  in  such  cases.  For  my  mind  was  perfectly
aware  of  the  state  of  things ;  it  knew  about  the  tooth-ache,
it  knew  that  I  was  sleeping  in  a  hotel-room  with  a  radiator.
Yet  I  felt  no  bodily  sensation  at  all,  not  even  such  a  penetrating
one  as  a  violent  tooth-ache.

I  wish,  therefore,  to  define  the  true  dream  as  that  state
wherein  bodily  sensations,  be  they  visceral,  interned  or  peripheral,


440


Dr.  Frederik  van  Eeden.


[part


cannot  penetrate  to  the  mind  directly,  but  only  in  the  psychical,
non-spatial  form  of  a  symbol  or  an  image.

I  purposely  avoid  as  much  as  possible  the  words  "  con-
sciousness "  and  "  unconsciousness."  They  may  be  convenient
in  colloquial  language,  but  I  am  not  able  to  attach  any  clear
meaning  to  them.  I  have  no  idea  what  "  unconsciousness,"
as  a  substantive,  may  stand  for.  And  I  found  that  I  could
do  with  the  words  memory  and  recollection  and  the  word
personality  or  person,  in  the  primitive  sense  of  persona  (a
mask,  i.e.  the  mask  worn  by  players).  I  do  not  think  it
accurate  to  call  the  body  of  a  sleeper  or  a  narcotised  man
unconscious.  During  my  career  as  a  psycho-therapeutist,  having
by  suggestion  produced  sleep  in  many  people,  I  learnt  that  the
human  body  may  act  like  a  self-conscious  person,  without  any
participation  of  the  recollecting  mind.  We  know  nowadays
that  a  splitting-up  of  human  personality  is  possible,  not  only
into  two.  but  into  three  or  more.  During  my  sittings  with
Mrs.  Thompson  1  we  observed  that  after  a  trance,  in  which
Mrs.  Thompson  had  been  speaking  as  "  Nelly,"  or  as  some  other
control,  she  herself  remembered  dreams,  which  had  nothing
whatever  to  do  with  the  things  of  which  she  had  been
speaking  to  us.  Her  being  could  then  be  said  to  have  been
divided  into  three  entities, — the  body  in  trance,  apparently
asleep ;  the  "  control,"  who  spoke  through  her  mouth  ;  and
Mrs.  Thompson,  who  was  dreaming  in  cprite  different  spheres.
All  these  persons  or  personalities  were  of  course  "  conscious "
in  some  way,  as  everything  is  probably  conscious.  The
cpaestion  is,  where  do  the  threads  of  recollection  run  that
enable  us  to  identify  the  persons.

I  know  that  Mr.  Havelock  Ellis  and  many  other  authors  will
not  accept  my  definition,  because  they  deny  the  possibility
of  complete  recollection  and  free  volition  in  a  dream.  They
would  say  that  what  I  call  a  dream  is  no  dream,  but  a  sort
of  trance,  or  hallucination,  or  ecstasy.  The  observations  of  the
Marquis  d'Herve,  which  were  very  much  like  mine,  as  related
in  Ins  book,  Les  Reves  et  les  rnoyens  de  les  diriger,  were  discarded
in  the  same  way.  These  dreams  could  not  be  dreams,  said
Maury.

Now  this  is  simply  a  question  of  nomenclature. I  can  only
^ee  Proceedings,  Vol.  XVII.,  pp.  75-115.


lxvii.]


A  Study  of  Dreams.


441


say  that  I  made  my  observations  during  normal  deep  and
healthy  sleep,  and  that  in  352  cases  I  had  a  full  recollec-
tion of  my  day-life,  and  could  act  voluntarily,  though  I  was
so  fast  asleep  that  no  bodily  sensations  penetrated  into  my
perception.  If  anybody  refuses  to  call  that  state  of  mind
a  dream,  he  may  suggest  some  other  name.  For  my  part,
it  was  just  this  form  of  dream,  which  I  call  "  lucid  dreams "
(see  E  in  the  table),  which  aroused  my  keenest  interest  and
which  I  noted  down  most  carefully.

I  cmite  agree  with  Mr.  Havelock  Ellis,  that  during  sleep  the
psychical  functions  enter  into  a  condition  of  dissociation.  My
contention,  however,  is  that  it  is  not  dissociation,  but,  on  the
contrary,  reintegration,  after  the  dissociation  of  sleep,  that  is  the
essential  feature  of  dreams.  The  dream  is  a,  more  or  less  complete
reintegration  of  the  psyche,  a  reintegration  in  a  different  sphere,
in  a  psychical,  non-spatial  mode  of  existence.  This  reintegration
may  go  so  far  as  to  effect  full  recollection  of  day-life,  reflection,
and  voluntary  action  on  reflection.

I  will  now  make  a  short  survey  of  the  nine  modes  of
dreaming,  as  indicated  in  my  Table,  giving  an  instance  of  each
of  them,  and  will  then  give  further  details  of  the  more  im-
portant and  interesting  types.

Type  (A)  is  the  usual  well-known  type  to  which  the  large
majority  of  dreams  conform  ;  probably  it  is  the  only  kind  that
occurs  to  many  people.  It  is  not  particularly  pleasant  or  un-
pleasant, though  it  may  vary  according  to  its  contents.  It  may
occur  in  any  moment  of  sleep,  in  daytime  or  in  the  night,
and  it  does  not  need  any  bodily  disturbance  to  produce  it.  Most
people,  however  healthy,  dream  ;  and  if  they  say  they  do  not,
it  must  be  uncertain  whether  there  is  really  an  absence  of
dreams  or  only  a  lack  of  remembrance  of  them.  The  same
doubt  may  be  applied  to  the  view  that  there  is  a  perfectly
dreamless  sleep.  According  to  my  view  the  attempts  of  the
psyche  at  reintegration  begin  almost  immediately  after  sleep  has
set  in  and  continue  during  the  whole  time  of  sleeping.  When
aroused  by  an  alarum -clock  at  different  hours  of  the  night,
unexpectedly,  I  was  always  able  to  remember  some  fragments
of  a  dream.  I  admit,  however,  that  this  is  no  absolute  proof,
because  it  is  possible  that  the  dream  was  inserted,  so  to  speak,
into  the  space  of  time  between  the  bodily  sensation  caused  by


442


Dr.  Frederik  van  Eeden.


[part


the  alarum,  and  the  transmission  of  this  sensation  to  the  dream-
ing mind.  This  space  of  time  may  be  rather  considerable.  It
may  be  compared  to  the  space  of  time  required  by  an  "  absent-
minded  "  person  before  he  realises  the  import  of  a  question
put  to  him ;  it  may  be  not  only  seconds  but  even  minutes
before  he  hears  the  question  psychically,  though  he  heard  it
bodily  quite  distinctly,  and  remembers  it  in  full.  This  space
of  time  is  still  longer  at  the  moment  of  awakening,  and  in  my
opinion  accounts  very  easily  for  the  often  reported  and  apparently
miraculous  phenomenon  of  a  sleeper  being  awakened  by  a  sound
that  fits  in  exactly  with  the  end  of  a  long  dream.  The  classic
instance  of  this  is  Maury's  dream,  in  which  a  piece  of  the
bed-cornice  fell  on  his  neck  when  he  was  dreaming  that  he
was  lying  on  a  scaffold-block  to  be  beheaded.  Most  likely  the
bodily  shock  came  first ;  the  sleeper's  mind  was  then  called,
but  could  not  be  reached  directly;  the  bodily  sensation  had
first  to  be  translated,  so  to  speak,  psychically,  into  the  form
of  a  story,  finishing  with  his  waking  up.

These  dreams  of  type  (A)  show  dissociation,  with  very  imper-
fect reintegration,  and,  as  several  authors  have  pointed  out,  they
have  in  many  respects  a  close  likeness  to  insanity.  The  true
conditions  of  day-life  are  not  remembered ;  false  remembrance —
paramnesia — is  very  common  in  them ;  they  are  absurd  and
confused,  and  leave  very  faint  traces  after  waking  up.

Type  (B)  differs  from  (A)  principally  in  its  vividness  and  the
strong  impression  it  makes,  which  lasts  sometimes  for  hours  and
days  after  waking  up,  with  a  painfully  clear  remembrance  of
every  detail.  These  dreams  are  generally  considered  to  be  the
effect  of  some  abnormal  bodily  condition.  Yet  I  think  they
must  undoubtedly  be  distinguished  from  the  pathological  dreams.
I  have  had  them  during  perfectly  normal  bodily  conditions.  I
do  not  mean  to  say,  however,  that  some  nervous  disturbance,
some  psychical  unrest,  or  some  unknown  influence  from  the
waking  world,  may  not  have  been  present.  It  may  have
been,  but  it  escaped  my  observation  in  most  cases.  Dreams
of  type  (B)  are  generally  extremely  absurd,  or  untrue,  though
explicit  and  well  remembered.  The  mind  is  entirely  dissociated,
and  reintegration  is  very  defective.  A  fine  instance  of  this
sort  of  dream  is  described  by  Dostojefski  in  Crime  and  Punish-
ment, when  Raskolnikoff  sleeps  before  he  commits  the  murder.


LXVII.J


A  Study  of  Dreams.


443


Curiously  enough  I  had  a  dream  of  the  same  type  the  night
after  reading  that  book.  In  that  dream  I  had  committed  a
murder  myself — a  dream-feeling  well  known  to  dream-students.
I  thought  it  remarkable  because  the  psychical  cause  of  it  was
clear  in  this  case  and  my  bodily  condition  was  entirely  normal.

As  a  rule  I  find  dreams  of  this  kind  unpleasant,  because
of  their  absurdity,  their  insane  character,  and  the  strong  lasting
impression  they  make.  Happily  they  are  rare,  at  least  with
me.  Sometimes  they  leave  a  strong  conviction  that  they  "mean
something,"  that  they  have  a  premonitory,  a  prophetic  character,
and  when  we  read  of  instances  of  prophetic  dreams  we  find
generally  that  they  belong  to  the  type  (B).  In  my  case  I  often
found  that  they  really  could  "  mean  "  nothing ;  sometimes,  how-
ever, I  was  not  so  certain.  It  depends  in  what  direction  we
are  looking  for  causes.  One  night,  when  I  was  on  a  lecturing
tour,  I  was  the  guest  of  a  family  in  a  provincial  town,  and  slept
in  what  I  supposed  to  be  the  guest-room.  I  had  a  night  full
of  the  most  horrid  dreams,  one  long  confused  nightmare,  with
a  strong  sentiment  that  it  "  meant  something."  Yet  I  felt  in
perfect  health,  cheerful  and  comfortable.  I  could  not  refrain
from  saying  next  morning  at  the  breakfast  table  what  an  un-
pleasant night  I  had  had.  Then  the  family  told  me  I  had  slept
in  the  room  of  a  daughter  who  was  now  in  a  sanatorium  with
a  severe  nervous  disease,  and  who  used  to  call  that  room  her
"  den  of  torture."

Another  dream  of  the  most  awful  description  occurred  to  me
in  Berlin  in  1906.  In  a  dark  night,  dead  tired  and  forlorn,
I  was  plodding  through  an  endless  black,  stinking  marsh  ;  being
old,  poor,  miserable,  full  of  remorse,  all  night  long.  Yet  I  was
in  perfect  health,  and  even  in  a  hopeful  and  cheerful  state  of
mind.  The  impression  was  so  strong  that  I  packed  my  trunk
next  morning  and  escaped  from  my  hosts  without  explanation.
I  could  not  help  thinking  that  the  room  must  be  haunted  by
the  remembrance  of  some  dreadful  crime.  I  could  never  verify
this  suspicion.  A  month  later  I  received  tidings  of  my  only
brother  in  the  East  Indies — that  he  died  that  very  night  in
very  painful  circumstances.  Whether  there  was  any  connection
between  this  and  my  dream  I  will  not  decide.

It  will  be  remarked  that  such  vivid  dreams  are  some-
times  of  a  very pleasant character,  filling whole days  with


.444


Dr.  Frederik  van  Eeclen.  [part


an  indescribable  joy.  This  is  true,  but,  according  to  my
experience,  my  vividly  pleasant  dreams  are  now  always  of
another  and  higher  type.  As  a  child  I  had  these  delicious
dreams  of  the  type  (B).  Now  they  have  changed  their  char-
acter altogether  and  are  of  type  (E).

In  type  (C),  the  symbolic  or  mocking  dreams,  the  charac-
teristic element  is  one  which  I  call  demoniacal.  I  am  afraid
this  word  will  arouse  some  murmurs  of  disapproval,  or  at
least  some  smiles  or  sneers.  Yet  I  think  I  can  successfully
defend  the  use  of  the  term.  I  will  readily  concede  at  once
that  the  real  existence  of  beings  whom  we  may  call  "  demons  :'
is  problematic.  But  the  real  existence  of  the  interstellar  aether
is  also  problematic,  and  yet  men  of  science  find  the  conception
very  useful  and  convenient.

I  hope  to  satisfy  even  the  most  sceptical  of  my  audience
by  defining  the  expression  "  demoniacal  "  thus :

/  call  demoniacal  those  phenomena  which  piroducc  on  us  the
impression  of  being  invented  or  arranged  by  intelligent  beings  of
a  very  low  moral  order.

To  me  it  seems  that  the  great  majority  of  dreams  reported
by  Freud  and  his  adherents,  and  used  for  the  building  up  of
his  elaborate  theory,  belong  to  type  (C).

It  may  indeed  be  called  a  bold  deed  to  introduce  the
symbolism  of  dreams  into  the  scientific  world.  This  is  Freud's
great  achievement.

But  now  let  us  consider  what  the  word  "  symbol "  implies.
A  symbol  is  an  image  or  an  imaginary  event,  standing  for  a
real  object  or  event  whereto  it  has  some  distant  resemblance.
Now  the  invention  of  a  symbol  can  only  be  an  act  of  thought,
— the  work  of  some  intelligence.  Symbols  cannot  invent  them-
selves ;  they  must  be  thought  out.  And  the  question  arises :
who  performs  this  intelligent  act ;  who  thinks  out  the  symbol  ?
The  answer  given  by  the  Freud  school  is :  the  subconscious.
But  here  we  have  one  of  those  words  which  come  in  "  wo  die
Begriffe  fehlen."  To  me  the  word  "  subconscious,"  indicating
a  thinking  entity,  is  just  as  mysterious,  just  as  unscientific,
just  as  "  occult "  as  the  word  "  demon."  In  my  view  it  is
accurate  to  say  only  that  in  our  dreams  we  see  images  and
experience  events,  for  which  our  own  mind, — our  "  person  "  as
we  remember  it, — cannot  be  held  responsible,  and  which  must


LXVII.]


A  Study  of  Dreams.


445


therefore  come  from  some  unknown  source.  About  the  general
character  of  these  sources,  however,  we  may  form  some  judgment
and  I  feel  justified  in  calling  them  in  the  dreams  of  type  (C)
"  demoniacal," — that  is  of  a  low  moral  order.

It  is  in  class  (C)  also,  that  the  erotic  element,  or  rather
the  obscene  element,  plays  such  an  important  part.  And  it  is
no  wonder  that  some  adherents  of  Freud's  school,  studying
only  this  kind  of  dream,  come  to  the  conclusion  that  all  dreams
have  a  sexual  origin.

Mocking  dreams  can  be  very  amusing,  as  many  instances  in
dream-literature  show.  The  day  before  my  fiftieth  anniversary
I  was  made  the  victim  of  a  funny  dream-joke.  There  was  to
be  a  pageant  in  my  honour,  and  the  town  was  all  full  of  flags.
When  the  pageant  came,  it  consisted  first  of  a  cow,  then  a
horse,  then  a  gentleman  on  foot,  who  fired  blank  shots  from
a  revolver,  then  a  carriage  with  four  gentlemen,  and,  to  wind
up  with,  an  old,  rickety,  wobbling  automobile  that  advanced
very  slowly.1

Type  (D),  which  I  call  general  dream-sensations,  is  very
remarkable  but  not  easy  to  describe.  It  is  not  an  ordinary
dream ;  there  is  no  vision,  no  image,  no  event,  not  even  a
word  or  a  name.  But  during  a  long  time  of  deep  sleep,  the
mind  is  continually  occupied  with  one  person,  one  place,  one
remarkable  event,  or  even  one  abstract  thought.  At  least  that
is  the  recollection  on  waking  up.  One  night  I  was  constantly
occupied  by  the  personality  of  an  American  gentleman,  in  whom
[  am  not  particularly  interested.  I  did  not  see  him,  nor  hear
his  name,  but  on  waking  up  I  felt  as  if  he  had  been  there
the  whole  night.  In  another  instance  it  was  a  rather  deep
thought,  occupying  me  in  the  deepest  sleep,  with  a  clear  recol-
lection of  it  after  waking  up.  The  question  was  :  Why  can  a
period  of  our  life  be  felt  as  very  sad,  and  yet  be  sweet  and
beautiful  in  remembrance  ?  And  the  answer  was :  Because  a
human  being  knows  only  a  very  small  part  of  what  he  is.
Question  and  answer  never  left  me ;  yet  my  sleep  was  very
deep  and  unbroken.  These  dream-sensations  are  not  unpleasant
and  not  absurd,  so  long  as  the  body  is  in  good  health.

They  often  have  an  elevating  or  consoling  effect. In  patho-

1  Professor  Freud  will  see  here  a  fine  instance  of  a  subconscious  wish,  expressed
by  inversion.


446


Br.  Frederik  van  Eeden.


[part


logical  dreams,  however,  type  (I),  they  may  be  extremely  strange
and  harassing.  The  sleeper  may  have  a  feeling  as  if  he  were
a  square  or  a  circle,  or  other  sensations  of  an  utterly  inde-
scribable character.

Class  (E),  the  type  of  dreams  which  I  called  "  lucid  dreams,"
seems  to  me  the  most  interesting  and  worthy  of  the  most
careful  observation  and  study.  Of  this  type  I  experienced  and
wrote  down  852  cases  in  the  period  between  January  20,  1898,
and  December  26,  1912.

In  these  dreams  the  reintegration  of  the  psychic  functions  is
so  complete  that  the  sleeper  remembers  day-life  and  his  own
condition,  reaches  a  state  of  perfect  awareness,  and  is  able
to  direct  his  attention,  and  to  attempt  different  acts  of  free
volition.  Yet  the  sleep,  as  I  am  able  confidently  to  state,  is
undisturbed,  deep  and  refreshing.  I  obtained  my  first  glimpse
of  this  lucidity  during  sleep  in  June,  1897,  in  the  following
way.  I  dreamt  that  I  was  floating  through  a  landscape  with
bare  trees,  knowing  that  it  was  April,  and  I  remarked  that
the  perspective  of  the  branches  and  twigs  changed  quite
naturally.  Then  I  made  the  reflection,  during  sleep,  that  my
fancy  would  never  be  able  to  invent  or  to  make  an  image  as
intricate  as  the  perspective  movement  of  little  twigs  seen  in
floating  by.

Many  years  later,  in  1907,  I  found  a  passage  in  a  work
by  Prof.  Ernst  Mach,  Analyse  der  Fmpfindungen,  p.  164,  in
which  the  same  observation  is  made  with  a  little  difference.
Like  me,  Mach  came  to  the  conclusion  that  he  was  dreaming,
but  it  was  because  he  saw  the  movement  of  the  twigs  to  be
defective,  while  I  had  wondered  at  the  naturalness  which  my
fancy  could  never  invent.  Professor  Mach  has  not  pursued
his  observations  in  this  direction,  probably  because  he  did  not
believe  in  their  importance.  I  made  up  my  mind  to  look  out
carefully  for  another  opportunity.  I  prepared  myself  for
careful  observation,  hoping  to  prolong  and  to  intensify  the
lucidity.

In  January,  1898,  I  was  able  to  repeat  the  observation.
In  the  night  of  January  19-20,  I  dreamt  that  I  was  lying
in  the  garden  before  the  windows  of  my  study,  and  saw  the
eyes  of  my  dog  through  the  glass  pane.  I  was  lying  on  my
chest  and  observing  the  dog  very  keenly. At  the  same  time,


LXVII.]


A  Study  of  Dreams.


447


however,  I  knew  with  perfect  certainty  that  I  was  dreaming
and  lying  on  my  back  in  my  bed.  And  then  I  resolved  to
wake  up  slowly  and  carefully  and  observe  how  my  sensation
of  lying  on  my  chest  would  change  into  the  sensation  of  lying
on  my  back.  And  so  I  did,  slowly  and  deliberately,  and  the
transition — which  I  have  since  undergone  many  times — is  most
wonderful.  It  is  like  the  feeling  of  slipping  from  one  body
into  another,  and  there  is  distinctly  a  double  recollection  of
the  two  bodies.  I  remembered  what  I  felt  in  my  dream,
lying  on  my  chest ;  but  returning  into  the  day-life,  I  remem-
bered also  that  my  physical  body  had  been  quietly  lying  on
its  back  all  the  while.  This  observation  of  a  double  memory
I  have  had  many  times  since.  It  is  so  indubitable  that  it
leads  almost  unavoidably  to  the  conception  of  a  dream-body.

Mr.  Havelock  Ellis  says  with  something  of  a  sneer  that
some  people  "  who  dabble  in  the  occult "  speak  of  an  astral
body.  Yet  if  he  had  had  only  one  of  these  experiences,  he
would  feel  that  we  can  escape  neither  the  dabbling  nor  the
dream-body.  In  a  lucid  dream  the  sensation  of  having  a
body, — having  eyes,  hands,  a  mouth  that  speaks,  and  so  on, —
is  perfectly  distinct ;  yet  I  know  at  the  same  time  that  the
physical  body  is  sleeping  and  has  quite  a  different  position.
In  waking  up  the  two  sensations  blend  together,  so  to  speak,
and  I  remember  as  clearly  the  action  of  the  dream-body  as
the  restfulness  of  the  physical  body.

In  February,  1899,  I  had  a  lucid  dream,  in  which  I  made
the  following  experiment.  I  drew  with  my  finger,  moistened
by  saliva,  a  wet  cross  on  the  palm  of  my  left  hand,  with  the
intention  of  seeing  whether  it  would  be  still  there  after  waking
up.  Then  I  dreamt  that  I  woke  up  and  felt  the  wet  cross
on  my  left  hand  by  applying  the  palm  to  my  cheek.  And
then  a  long  time  afterwards  I  woke  up  really  and  knew  at
once  that  the  hand  of  my  physical  body  had  been  lying  in  a
closed  position  undisturbed  on  my  chest  all  the  while.

The  sensation  of  the  voice  during  a  lucid  dream  is  most
marvellous,  and  after  many  repetitions  still  a  source  of  amaze-
ment. I  use  my  voice  as  loudly  as  I  can,  and  though  I
know  quite  well  that  my  physical  body  is  lying  in  profound
sleep,  I  can  hardly  believe  that  this  loud  voice  is  inaudible  in
the waking world. Yet,  though I have  sung,  shouted,  and


448


Dr.  Frederik  van  Eeden.


[part


spoken  loudly  in  hundreds  of  dreams,  my  wife  has  never  heard
my  voice,  and  in  several  cases  was  able  to  assure  me  that  I
had  slept  quite  peacefully.

I  cannot  in  this  paper  give  even  a  short  and  superficial
account  of  the  many  interesting  details  of  these  dreams.  I
must  reserve  that  for  my  larger  work.  And  I  fear  that  only
a  repeated  personal  acquaintance  with  the  facts  can  convince
one  of  their  significance.  I  will  relate  a  few  more  instances
in  order  to  give  some  idea  of  their  character.

On  Sept.  9,  1904,  I  dreamt  that  1  stood  at  a  table  before
a  window.  On  the  table  were  different  objects.  I  was  per-
fectly well  aware  that  I  was  dreaming  and  I  considered  what
sorts  of  experiments  I  could  make.  I  began  by  trying  to  break
glass,  by  beating  it  with  a  stone.  I  put  a  small  tablet  of
glass  on  two  stones  and  struck  it  with  another  stone.  Yet  it
would  not  break.  Then  I  took  a  tine  claret-glass  from  the
table  and  struck  it  with  my  fist,  with  all  my  might,  at  the
same  time  reflecting  how  daimerous  it  would  be  to  do  this  in
waking  life ;  yet  the  glass  remained  whole.  But  lo !  when  I
looked  at  it  again  after  some  time,  it  was  broken.1

It  broke  all  right,  but  a  little  too  late,  like  an  actor  who
misses  his  cue.  This  gave  me  a  very  curious  impression  of
being  in  a  fake-world,  cleverly  imitated,  but  with  small  failures.
I  took  the  broken  glass  and  threw  it  out  of  the  window,  in
order  to  observe  whether  I  could  hear  the  tinkling.  I  heard
the  noise  all  right  and  I  even  saw  two  dogs  run  away  from
it  quite  naturally.  I  thought  what  a  good  imitation  this
comedy-world  was.  Then  I  saw  a  decanter  with  claret  and
tasted  it,  and  noted  with  perfect  clearness  of  mind:  "Well,  we
can  also  have  voluntary  impressions  of  taste  in  this  dream-
world ;  this  has  quite  the  taste  of  wine."

There  is  a  saying  by  the  German  poet,  Novalis,  that  when
we  dream  that  we  dream,  we  are  near  waking  up.  This  view,
shared  as  it  is  by  the  majority  of  observers,  I  must  decidedly
reject.  Lucid  dreams  occur  in  deep  sleep  and  do  not  as  a
rule  end  in  waking  up,  unless  I  wish  it  and  do  it  by  an  act
of  volition.  I  prefer,  however,  in  most  cases  to  continue
dreaming  as  long  as  possible,  and  then  the  lucidity  vanishes

1  This  corresponds  with  Mach's  observation  about  the  perspective  of  the
twigs.


Lxvir.]


A  Study  of  Dreams.


449


and  gives  place  to  other  forms  of  dream,  and — what  seems
remarkable — the  form  that  follows  is  often  the  "  demon-dream,"
type  (F)  of  which  I  will  speak  presently.

Then  it  often  happens  that  I  dream  that  I  wake  up  and
tell  my  lucid  dream  to  some  other  person.  This  latter  is  then
a  dream  of  the  common  form  (A).  From  this  dream  I  wake
up  in  the  real  waking  world,  very  much  amazed  at  the  curious
wanderings  of  my  mind.  The  impression  is  as  if  I  had  been
rising  through  spheres  of  different  depths,  of  which  the  lucid
dream  was  the  deepest.

I  may  state  that  without  exception  all  my  lucid  dreams
occurred  in  the  hours  between  five  and  eight  in  the  morning.
The  particular  significance  of  these  hours  for  our  dreams  has
often  been  brought  forward, — among  others  by  Dante,  Purg.
IX.,  where  he  speaks  of  the  hour  when  the  swallows  begin
to  warble  and  our  mind  is  least  clogged  by  the  material  body.

Lucid  dreams  are  also  symbolic, — yet  in  quite  a  different
way.  I  never  remarked  anything  sexual  or  erotic  in  them.
Their  symbolism  takes  the  form  of  beautiful  landscapes, —
different  luminous  phenomena,  sunlight,  clouds,  and  especially
a  deep  blue  sky.  In  a  perfect  instance  of  the  lucid  dream  I
float  through  immensely  wide  landscapes,  with  a  clear  blue,
sunny  sky,  and  a  feeling  of  deep  bliss  and  gratitude,  which  I
feel  impelled  to  express  by  eloquent  words  of  thankfulness  and
piety.  Sometimes  these  words  seem  to  me  a  little  rhetorical,
but  I  cannot  help  it,  as  it  is  very  difficult  in  dreams  to  con-
trol emotional  impulses.  Sometimes  I  conceive  of  what  appears
as  a  symbol,  warning,  consoling,  approving.  A  cloud  gathers
or  the  light  brightens.  Only  once  could  I  see  the  disc  of  the
sun.

Flying  or  floating  may  be  observed  in  all  forms  of  dreams,
except  perhaps  class  (D);  yet  it  is  generally  an  indication  that
lucid  dreams  are  coming.

When  I  have  been  flying  in  my  dreams  for  two  or  three
nights,  then  I  know  that  a  lucid  dream  is  at  hand.  And  the
lucid  dream  itself  is  often  initiated  and  accompanied  all  the
time  by  the  sensation  of  flying.  Sometimes  I  feel  myself
floating  swiftly  through  wide  spaces ;  once  I  flew  backwards,
and  once,  dreaming  that  I  was  inside  a  cathedral,  I  flew
upwards, with the immense building  and all in  it,  at  great


450


Dr.  Frederik  van  Eeden.


[part


speed.  I  cannot  believe  that  the  rhythm  of  our  breath  has
anything  to  do  with  this  sensation,  as  Havelock  Ellis  supposes,
because  it  is  generally  continuous  and  very  swift.

Difficult,  spasmodic  floating  belongs  to  dreaming  of  a  lower
class,  and  this  may  depend  on  morbid  conditions  of  the  body ;
but  it  may  also  be  symbolic  of  some  moral  difficulty  or  distress.

On  Christmas-day,  1911,  I  bad  the  following  dream.  It
began  with  flying  and  floating.  I  felt  wonderfully  light  and
strong.  I  saw  immense  and  beautiful  prospects, — first  a  town,
then  country-landscapes,  fantastic  and  brightly  coloured.  Then
I  saw  my  brother  sitting — the  same  who  died  in  1906 — and
I  went  up  to  him  saying :  "  Now  we  are  dreaming,  both  of
us."  He  answered :  "  No,  I  am  not ! "  And  then  I  remem-
bered that  he  was  dead.  We  had  a  long  conversation  about
the  conditions  of  existence  after  death,  and  I  inquired  especially
after  the  aware-ness,  the  clear,  bright  insight.  But  that  he
could  not  answer ;  he  seemed  to  lack  it.

Then  the  lucid  dream  was  interrupted  by  a  common  dream
of  type  (A)  in  which  I  saw  a  lady  standing  on  a  bridge,  who
told  me  she  had  heard  me  talk  in  my  sleep.  And  I  supposed
that  my  voice  had  been  audible  during  the  lucid  dream.

Then  a  second  period  of  lucidity  followed  in  which  I  saw
Prof,  van't  Hoff,  the  famous  Dutch  chemist,  whom  I  had
known  as  a  student,  standing  in  a  sort  of  college-room,  sur-
rounded by  a  number  of  learned  people.  I  went  up  to  him,
knowing  very  well  that  he  was  dead,  and  continued  my  inquiry
about  our  condition  after  death.  It  was  a  long,  quiet  con-
versation, in  which  I  was  perfectly  aware  of  the  situation.

I  asked  first  why  we,  lacking  our  organs  of  sense,  could
arrive  at  any  certainty  that  the  person  to  whom  we  were
talking  was  really  that  person  and  not  a  subjective  illusion.
Then  van't  Hoff  said  :  "  Just  as  in  common  life ;  by  a  general
impression."

"  Yet,"  I  said,  "  in  common  life  there  is  stability  of  observa-
tion and  there  is  consolidation  by  repeated  observation."

"  Here  also,"  said  van't  Hoff,  "  And  the  sensation  of
certainty  is  the  same."  Then  I  had  indeed  a  very  strong
feeling  of  certitude  that  it  was  really  van't  Hoff  with  whom
I  talked  and  no  subjective  illusion.  Then  I  began  to  inquire
again  about  the  clearness,  the  lucidity,  the  stability  of  this  life


LXVII.]


A  Study  of  Dreams.


451


of  shades,  and  then  T  got  the  same  hesitating,  dubious,  unsatis-
factory answer  as  from  my  brother.  The  whole  atmosphere
of  the  dream  was  happy,  bright,  elevated,  and  the  persons
around  van't  Hoff  seemed  sympathetic,  though  I  did  not  know
them.

"It  will  be  some  time  probably  before  I  join  you,"  I  said.
But  I  took  myself  then  for  younger  than  I  was.

After  that  I  had  several  common  dreams  of  type  (A),  and
I  awoke  quite  refreshed,  knowing  my  voice  had  not  been
audible  in  the  waking  world.

In  May,  1903,  I  dreamed  that  I  was  in  a  little  provincial
Dutch  town  and  at  once  encountered  my  brother-in-law,  who
had  died  some  time  before.  I  was  absolutely  sure  that  it
was  he,  and  I  knew  that  he  was  dead.  He  told  me  that
he  had  much  intercourse  with  my  "  controller,"  as  he  expressed
it, — my  guiding  spirit.  I  was  glad,  and  our  conversation  was
very  cordial,  more  intimate  than  ever  in  common  life.  He
told  me  that  a  financial  catastrophe  was  impending  for  me.
Somebody  was  going  to  rob  me  of  a  sum  of  10,000  guilders.
I  said  that  I  understood  him,  though  after  waking  up  I  was
utterly  puzzled  by  it  and  could  make  nothing  of  it.  My
brother-in-law  said  that  my  guiding  spirit  had  told  it  to  him.
I  told  the  story  to  somebody  else  in  my  dream.  Then  I
asked  my  brother-in-law  to  tell  me  more  of  the  after-life,
and  just  as  he  was  going  to  answer  me  I  woke  up, — as  if
somebody  cut  off  the  communication.  I  was  not  then  as  much
used  to  prolonging  my  dreams  as  I  am  now.

I  wish  to  point  out  that  this  was  the  only  prediction
I  ever  received  in  a  lucid  dream  in  such  an  impressive  way.
And  it  came  only  too  true,  with  this  difference,  that  the  sum
I  lost  was  twenty  times  greater.  At  the  time  of  the  dream
there  seemed  not  to  be  the  slightest  probability  of  such  a
catastrophe.  I  was  not  even  in  possession  of  the  money  I
lost  afterwards.  Yet  it  was  just  the  time  when  the  first
events  took  place — the  railway  strikes  of  1903 — that  led  up
to  my  financial  ruin.

Perhaps  some  of  my  audience  will  remember  that  I  men-
tioned in  a  paper  read  to  the  S.P.E.  on  April  19,  1901,  my
dream  experiment  with  "  Nelly,"  the  control  of  Mrs.  Thompson.1
Being  able  to  act  voluntarily  in  my  dreams,  I  had  made  up


452


Dr.  Frederik  van  Eeden.


[part


my  mind  to  call  people  while  dreaming.  And  I  had  succeeded
sometimes  in  seeing  my  call  answered  and  a  figure  appear,
corresponding  to  the  person  whom  I  had  called.  I  had
arranged  with  Mr.  Piddington  that  he  should  independently
of  me  make  notes  during  his  sittings  with  Mrs.  Thompson,  and
inform  me  of  it  when  my  name  was  mentioned.  In  January,
1900,  my  call  was  twice  answered,  as  I  learnt  by  a  letter
from  London,  telling  me  that  the  "  control "  had  heard  it.
And  once  when  I  called  "  Elsie "  instead  of  "  Nelly,"  as  I
thought  by  mistake, — the  name  "  Elsie  "  being  without  meaning
for  me,  this  mistake  was  heard  and  explained  by  Nelly.  Later
experiments  with  Mrs.  Thompson  had  no  success.  The  next
year,  however,  I  came  into  contact,  through  the  introduction  of
W.  T.  Stead,  with  a  very  interesting  medium,  who,  though
quite  ignorant  of  psychical  matters,  had  suddenly  obtained  com-
munications through  automatic  script  from  a  son  who  had
died  not  long  before  as  a  boy  of  ten  years,  and  whom  she
had  loved  passionately.

This  boy,  whose  name  was  Gordon,  I  called  several  times
in  my  dreams,  and  I  saw  him  and  described  him  to  his
mother,  and  I  was  able  to  explain  to  her  several  particulars
which  puzzled  her  very  much.  For  instance,  he  told  her  that
he  took  part  in  her  own  suppers ;  which  did  not  at  all  corre-
spond to  her  idea  of  the  after-life.  To  me  he  appeared  on
a  bicycle,  and  when  his  mother  asked  him  about  that  he
answered :  "  Oh  yes,  I  have  got  a  byke  now."  To  me,  know-
ing how  the  mind  may  experience  all  sorts  of  subjective
sensations  and  illusions,  this  was  not  so  improbable  as  to  her.

Of  course  I  was  constantly  seeking  for  what  psychical
researchers  call  "  evidence,"  objective  evidence.  Therefore  I
asked  the  boy  in  my  dream  on  August  13,  1901,  for  a  pass-
word. He  complied  with  my  wish  and  pronounced  a  word
that  I  understood  as  "  Sin-ga-poor."  I  supposed  he  meant  the
Asiatic  town.  His  mother,  however,  got  the  explanation  of
the  word  through  automatic  writing,  a  little  later,  though  I
cannot  tell  exactly  at  what  date,  but  certainly  after  she  was
informed  of  my  dream.  The  boy  told  his  mother  that  he
had  said  to  me,  "  Pick-a-boo,"  which  was  the  word  used  by
him  and  his  friends  when  they  were  hiding.  This  word  and
1  See  Proceedings,  Vol.  XVII.,  pp.  H'2-115.


Lxvir.]  A  Study  of  Dreams.  453

its  use  were  utterly  unknown  to  me,  and  I  think  the  corre-
spondence of  the  two  words  is  remarkable.  Yet  I  admit  that
we  want  more  evidence,  and  several  other  experiments,  e.g.  with
Frederic  Myers  and  with  W.  T.  Stead,  were  not  successful.

Mr.  Stead  himself  once  gave  me  a  little  ring,  telling  me  to
call  the  owner  of  it,  whose  name  he  gave  me.  I  did  so  in
dream  and  saw  the  person  and  got  a  message  which  I
wrote  to  Stead.  As  I  never  received  any  answer  I  suppose
it  was  a  failure.1

I  have  called  and  seen  several  deceased  persons  in  lucid
dreams.  I  called  and  saw  Myers  very  shortly  after  his  death,
but  it  was  not  convincing  and  the  atmosphere  was  a  little
dismal.  He  seemed  disappointed  and  sad.  In  July,  1908,  I
called  and  saw  him  again,  very  distinctly  and  certainly  this
time.  I  asked  him  to  tell  Piddington  that  he  had  seen  me.
He  tried  to  give  me  a  pass-word,  but  he  could  not,  as  if  he
were  too  weak.  I  have  successfully  called  my  father  and
different  deceased  friends  and  relations.  William  Stead  I
have  so  far  called  in  vain.  Twice  I  saw,  without  having
called  for  him,  a  deceased  man,  for  whom  hitherto  I  had  had
very  little  sympathy :  King  Leopold  of  Belgium.  He  seemed
to  take  great  interest  in  me  and  my  work,  which  seems  to
me  still  very  improbable.

I  hope  it  will  be  clearly  understood  that  I  do  not  at  all
presume  to  pronounce  with  any  certainty  as  to  the  genuine
character  of  these  apparitions.  I  myself  felt  certainty  in  my
dream ;  yet  I  cannot  expect  others  to  accept  it  on  my  word,
and  doubt  conies  to  myself  often  enough.

This  sensation  of  certainty  that  it  is  the  real  person  is
indescribable  and  of  course  not  communicable.  Once  I  saw
the  face  of  my  father,  exactly  as  I  had  known  him,  and  yet
I  knew  it  was  a  deceit  by  a  demon.  I  had  not  for  one
moment  the  feeling  that  it  was  the  real  person.  He  asked
me  :  "  Am  I  not  exactly  like  myself  ? "  and  I  had  to  confess
that  the  likeness  was  perfect ;  yet  I  denied  positively  that
it  was  my  father. This  was  a  demon-dream  of  type  (F).

In  two  cases,  when  I  was  calling  a  deceased  friend  in  vain,
I  saw  the  apparition  of  a  postman coming, — a  letter-carrier,

1  Recent  information  seems  to  show  that  it  was  not  a  failure.  I  hope  to  give
more  particulars  of  this  case  later.


454


Dr.  FrederiJc  van  Eeden.


[part


who  walked  round  me.  As  this  occurred  twice  in  different
years,  it  might  have  some  symbolic  meaning,  though  I  cannot
make  out  what.

Now,  whether  these  apparitions  are  genuine  or  not,  I  think
I  am  scientifically  justified  in  making  experiments  as  if  they
were  so,  accepting  it  for  the  moment  as  a  working  hypothesis.
Only  hundreds  of  observations  will  bring  an  approach  to
certainty.

Just  as  there  was  deceit  in  the  apparition  of  my  father,
so  there  may  be  deceit  in  the  lucid  dream  itself.  In  March,
1912,  I  had  a  very  complicated  dream,  in  which  I  dreamt
that  Theodore  Koosevelt  was  dead,  then  that  I  woke  up  and
told  the  dream,  saying :  "  I  was  not  sure  in  my  dream  whether
he  was  really  dead  or  still  alive ;  now  I  know  that  he  is
really  dead ;  but  I  was  so  struck  by  the  news  that  I  lost
my  memory."  And  then  came  a  false  lucidity  in  which  I
said :  "  Now  I  know  that  I  dream  and  where  I  am."  But
this  was  all  wrong ;  1  had  no  idea  of  my  real  condition,  and
only  slowly,  after  waking  up,  I  realised  that  it  was  all
nonsense.

Tins  sort  of  mockery  I  call  demoniacal.  And  there  is  a
connection,  which  I  observed  so  frecpiently  that  it  must  have
some  significance, — namely,  that  a  lucid  dream  is  immediately
followed  by  a  demon-dream,  of  type  (F).

I  hope  you  allow  me,  if  only  for  convenience'  sake,  to
speak  as  if  these  intelligences  of  a  low  moral  order  exist.
Let  me  call  it  also  a  working  hypothesis.  Then  I  wish  to
point  out  to  you  the  difference  between  the  symbolic  or
mocking  dreams,  of  type  (C),  and  the  demon-dreams  of  type
(F).

In  type  (C)  the  sleeper  is  teased  or  puzzled  or  harassed
by  various  more  or  less  weird,  uncanny,  obscene,  lugubrious  or
diabolical  inventions.  He  has  to  walk  in  slaughter-houses
or  among  corpses ;  he  finds  everything  besmeared  with  blood
or  excrement ;  he  is  drawn  into  obscene,  erotic  or  horrible
scenes,  in  which  he  even  takes  an  active  part.  His  moral
condition  is  utterly  depraved ;  lie  is  a  murderer,  an  adulterer,
etc.  ;  in  a  word,  nothing  is  too  low  or  too  horrible  for  such
dreams.

After  waking  up  the  effect  is,  of  course,  unpleasant ;  he


LXVII.]


A  Study  of  Dreams.


455


is  more  or  less  ashamed  and  shocked ;  he  tries  to  shake  off
the  memory  as  soon  as  possible.

Now  in  type  (F) — the  demon-dreams — which  are  always
very  near,  before  or  after,  the  lucid  dreams,  type  (K) — I
undergo  similar  attacks ;  but  I  see  the  forms,  the  figures,  the
personalities  of  strange  non-human  beings,  who  are  doing  it.
One  night,  for  instance,  I  saw  such  a  being,  going  before  me
and  soiling  everything  he  touched,  such  as  door-handles  and  chairs.
These  beings  are  always  obscene  and  lascivious,  and  try  to
draw  me  into  their  acts  and  doings.  They  have  no  sex
and  appear  alternately  as  a  man,  or  a  woman.  Their
aspect  is  very  various  and  variable,  changing  every  moment,
taking  all  the  fantastic  forms  that  the  old  painters  of
the  Middle  Ages  tried  to  reproduce,  but  with  a  certain
weird  plasticity  and  variability,  that  no  painting  can  express.

I  will  describe  one  instance  of  these  dreams  (March  30,
1907,  in  Berlin),  following  immediately  after  a  lucid  dream.
The  lucidity  had  not  been  very  intense,  and  I  had  some
doubts  about  my  real  condition.  Then  all  at  once  I  was  in  the
middle  of  demons.  Never  before  had  I  seen  them  so  distinct,
so  impertinent,  so  aggressive.  One  was  slippery,  shining,  limp
and  cold;  like  a  living  corpse.  Another  changed  its  face
repeatedly  and  made  the  most  incredible  grimaces.  One  flew
underneath  me  shouting  an  obscenity  with  a  curious  slang-
word.  I  defended  myself  energetically,  but  principally  with
invectives,  which  I  felt  to  be  a  weakness.  I  saw  the  words
written.

The  circle  of  demons  was  close  to  me  and  grinning;  like  a
mob  of  brutal  street-boys.  I  was  not  afraid,  however,  and
said :  "  Even  if  you  conquer  me,  if  God  wills  it  I  do  not
fear."  Then  they  all  cried  together  like  a  rabble,  and  one
said :  "  Let  God  then  speak  first ! "  Then  I  thundered  with
all  my  might :  "  He  hak  spoken  long  since ! "  And  then  I
pointed  at  one  of  them,  saying :  "  You  I  know  for  a  long
time  !  "  and  then  pointing  to  another  :  "  And  you  !  "

Then  I  awoke  at  once,  and  I  believe  I  made  some  audible
sound  in  waking  up  in  the  middle  of  my  apostrophe.

And  then — this  will  astonish  you  most — after  this  dispute  I
felt  thoroughly  refreshed,  cheered  up  and  entirely  serene  and  calm.

This is the principal difference from type (C), that  in

2g


456


J)r.  Frederik  van  Eeden.


[part


type  (F),  when  I  sec  the  demons  and  fight  them,  the  effect
is  thoroughly  pleasing,  refreshing  and  uplifting.

I  may  take  it  for  granted  that  the  majority  of  psychologists,
reading  the  description  of  such  a  vivid  dream,  would  feel
absolutely  sure  that  there  was  something  the  matter  with  my
body, — some  indigestion,  some  oppression  or  the  like.  As  a
matter  of  fact  my  physical  health  was  perfect,  my  doubts
were  only  moral,  and  the  effect  of  this  nightmare,  which  had
none  of  the  real  anguish  of  a  nightmare,  was  pleasant,  beneficial
and  refreshing.

This  is  the  principal  point  in  these  demon-dreams, — that,
whether  these  beings  have  a  real  existence  or  whether  they
are  only  creations  of  my  fancy,  to  see  them  and  to  fight
them  takes  away  all  their  terror,  all  the  uncanniness,  the
weirdness,  of  their  tricks  and  pranks.

I  have  not  yet  spoken  about  type  (G),  which  I  call  "  wrong
waking  up,"  occurring  always  near  awakening.  Of  this  sort
of  dream  I  found  an  excellent  instance  described  by  Mach,  in
his  Analyse  eler  Empfindungen,  p.  130.  He  calls  it  "  Phan-
tasma."  We  have  the  sensation  of  waking  up  in  our  ordinary
sleeping-room  and  then  we  begin  to  realise  that  there  is
something  uncanny  around  us ;  we  see  inexplicable  movements
or  hear  strange  noises,  and  then  we  know  that  we  are  still
asleep.  In  my  first  experience  of  this  dream  I  was  rather
afraid  and  wanted  nervously  to  wake  up  really.  1  think  this
is  the  case  with  most  people  who  have  it.  They  become
frightened  and  nervous,  and  at  last  wake  up  with  palpitations,
a  sweating;  brow  and  so  on.

To  me  now  these  wrong-waking-up-dreains  have  lost  their
terror.  I  consider  them  as  demon-pranks,  and  they  amuse  me;
they  do  not  tell  on  my  nerves  any  more.

In  July,  1906,  sleeping  at  Langen  Schwalbach,  a  deep  sleep
after  a  laborious  day,  I  had  two  or  three  dreams  of  the  type
(G).  I  seemed  to  wake  up  and  heard  a  big  luggage-box  being
Mown  along  the  landing,  with  a  tremendous  bumping.  Then  I
realised  that  I  had  awakened  in  the  demon-sphere.  The  second
time  I  saw  that  my  sleeping-room  had  three  windows,  though
I  knew  there  were  only  two.  Wishing  to  make  sure,  I  woke
up  for  a  moment  voluntarily  and  realised  that  my  room  had  two
windows  and  that  stillness  had  reigned  in  the  house  all  night.


LXVII.]


A  Study  of  Dreams.


457


After  that  I  had  a  succession  of  lucid  dreams,  very  beautiful.
At  the  end  of  them,  while  I  was  still  singing  loudly,  I  was
suddenly  surrounded  by  many  demons,  who  joined  in  my
singing,  like  a  mob  of  vicious  semi-savage  creatures.  Then  I
felt  that  I  was  losing  my  self-control.  I  began  to  act  more
and  more  extravagantly,  to  throw  my  bedclothes  and  my
pillows  about,  and  so  on.  I  drew  myself  up  and  saw  one
demon  who  had  a  less  vicious  look  than  the  others  and  he
looked  as  if  he  were  saying  "  You  are  going  wrong."  "  Yes,"
I  said,  "  but  what  shall  I  do  ? "  Then  he  said,  "  Give  them
the  whip,  on  their  naked  backs."  And  I  thought  of  Dante's
shades,  who  also  feared  the  whip.  I  at  once  made — created — a
whip  of  leathern  strings,  with  leaden  balls  at  the  end.  And
I  threatened  them  with  it  and  also  struck  at  them  a  few
times.  Then  suddenly  all  grew  perfectly  quiet  around  me,
and  I  saw  the  creatures  sneaking  away  with  hypocritical  faces,
as  if  they  knew  nothing  about  it  at  all.

I  had  many  more  adventures  that  night,  lucid  and  common
dreams,  and  I  awoke  fresh  and  cheerful,  better  in  spirits  than
I  had  been  for  a  long  time.

This  wrong-waking-up,  type  (G),  is  not  to  be  confused  with
the  dreams  related  on  p.  449,  in  which  I  dreamt  that  I
woke  after  a  lucid  dream  and  told  that  dream  to  some  listener.
Those  dreams  were  of  the  common  sort  (A).  There  was  nothing
uncanny  about  them.  Dreams  of  Class  (Gr)  are  undoubtedly
demoniacal,  uncanny,  and  very  vivid  and  bright,  with  a  sort
of  ominous  sharpness  and  clearness,  a  strong  diabolical  light.
Moreover  the  mind  of  the  sleeper  is  aware  that  it  is  a  dream,
and  a  bad  one,  and  he  struggles  to  wake  up.  As  I  said  just
now,  however,  the  terror  ends  as  soon  as  the  demons  are
seen—  as  soon  as  the  sleeper  realises  that  he  must  be  the
dupe  of  intelligences  of  a  low  moral  order.  I  am  prepared
to  hear  myself  accused  of  superstition,  of  reviving  the  dark
errors  of  the  Middle  Ages.  Well,  I  only  try  to  tell  the  facts
as  clearly  as  possible  and  I  cannot  do  it  without  using  these
terms  and  ideas.  If  anybody  will  replace  them  by  others,  I
am  open  to  any  suggestion.  Only  I  would  maintain  that  it
is  not  my  mind  that  is  responsible  for  all  the  horrors  and
errors  of  dream-life.  To  say  that  nobody  is  responsible  for
them  will  not  do,  for  there  is  absolute  evidence  in  them  of


458


Dr.  Frederik  van  Eeden.


[part


some  thought  and  intention,  however  depraved  and  low.  A  trick,
a  deceit,  a  symbol,  cannot  be  without  some  sort  of  thought
and  intention.  To  put  it  all  down  to  "  unconsciousness "  is
very  convenient ;  but  then  I  say  that  it  is  just  as  scientific
to  use  the  names  Beelzebub,  or  Belial.  I,  for  one,  do  not
believe  in  "  unconsciousness  "  any  more  than  in  Santa  Claus.

Finally,  I  must  say  a  few  words  about  class  (I),  what  I  call
pathological  dreams.  I  know  that  psychologists  of  a  certain
class  will  call  all  dreams  more  or  less  pathological,  and  those
that  I  have  described  most  emphatically  so.  And  I  should
not  wonder,  knowing  some  of  their  ways  of  argumentation,  if
they  were  to  bring  forward  those  very  dreams  as  evidence
that  my  health  is  by  no  means  so  good  as  I  maintain  it
to  be.

I  can  only  say  that  I  believe,  on  the  contrary,  that  this
dream-life  has  saved  me  from  loss  of  nervous  or  mental
equilibrium  in  periods  of  terrible  strain.  Those  who  know
what  I  have  "one  through  often  wonder  that  I  did  not
become  a  neurasthenic.  I  ascribe  my  freshness  after  severe
labour  and  difficulties  to  a  great  extent  to  the  relaxing  and
refreshing  effect  of  these  lucid  dreams.  As  to  true  pathological
dreams  under  the  influence  of  fever,  indigestion,  morphia,  or
other  drugs,  I  have  very  little  experience.  I  remember,  how-
ever, quite  well  that  they  show  a  strongly  demoniacal
character.  They  may  be  similar  to  several  other  forms
described  in  my  Table,  except  type  (E).  But  all  of  them
are  more  confused,  weird,  vivid  and  vicious.

The  remark  may  be  made  that  in  introducing  intelligent
beings  of  a  low  order  to  explain  these  phenomena,  an  element
of  arbitrariness  is  brought  in,  which  excludes  the  possibility
of  finding  a  scientific  order.  It  is,  for  instance,  convenient
to  ascribe  all  the  phenomena  of  insanity  and  of  pathological
dreams  to  demons,  who  make  use  of  the  weakness  of  the
body  to  play  their  tricks.  This  is,  in  fact,  the  opinion  of
no  less  a  man  than  Alfred  Hussel  Wallace,  as  he  freely  'con-
fessed to  me  in  a  personal  conversation.

I  do  not  think,  however,  that  even  this  idea,  taken  as  a
working  hypothesis,  will  prevent  us  from  trying  to  find  a
scientific  order  even  in  these  apparently  demoniacal  tricks ;
the  fact,  for  instance,  that  certain  drugs  bring  about  halluci-


lxvii.]  A  Study  of  Dreams.  459

nations  of  a  well-defined  kind ;  that  cocaine  produces  delicious
expectations  and  pleasant  dreams,  and  alcohol  causes  visions
of  small  white  animals.  This  suggests  that  there  must  he
some  order  behind  it,  which  is  not  purely  arbitrary.

We  are  here,  however,  on  the  borders  of  a  realm  of
mystery  where  we  have  to  advance  very  carefully.  To  deny
may  be  just  as  dangerous  and  misleading  as  to  accept.

I  should  like  to  close  this  all  too  brief  and  imperfect  sketch
with  a  few  reflections — a  few  philosophical  remarks.

When  we  see  certain  objects,  say  the  blue  sky,  we  have
learned  to  explain  this  phenomenon  by  an  infinitely  complicated
process.  To  bring  about  this  simple  fact,  the  perception  of  a
blue  sky,  we  require  not  less  than  trillions  of  vibrations  of
the  most  subtle  kind,  coming  from  the  sun,  and  striking  an
instrument  so  wonderfully  elaborate  and  fine  as  our  retinas  and
the  optic  nerves.

And  now,  during  sleep,  the  same  phenomenon  is  repeated, —
exactly  repeated.  When  I  see  the  blue  sky  in  a  lucid  dream,
I  see  it  as  clearly,  as  brightly,  as  consciously  as  I  now  see  this
paper.  Pray,  what  is  the  difference  ?  Are  these  trillions  of
vibrations  and  the  wonderful  machinery  of  the  retinas  not
wanted  ? How  is  this  second  image  then  created  ?

Psychologists  speak  of  "  hallucinations,"  of  "  cliche-souvenirs,"
of  "  imaginary  objects,"  and  so  on.  But  these  are  all  empty
words.  We  have  two  phenomena  exactly  alike.  For  one  we
accept  causes  endlessly  subtle,  elaborate  and  complicated.  For
the  other  we  simply  use  a  word :  "  Hallucination."  The  retina
is  not  functioning,  the  light  does  not  penetrate  to  it ;  yet
the  phenomenon  is  repeated  in  a  perfectly  complete  manner.
Who  performs  this  miracle  ?  It  seems  to  me  a  mockery
of  our  physical  science.  After  years  of  painful  study  the
laws  of  light  and  colour,  and  the  mechanics  of  the  nervous
system  were  discovered  to  account  for  the  phenomenon :  the
sight  of  a  blue  sky.  And  yet  there  it  is  again  without  aether-
vibrations,  without  ocular  action  ;  there  it  is,  perfect,  vivid,
clear,  well-observed.  Unstable,  you  will  say,  and  vanishing.
But  so  are  all  phenomena.  Only  the  order  of  changing  is
different ;  the  momentary  fact  is  the  same.  I  will  not  here
attempt  to  deduce  any  conclusion  from  this ;  I  simply  wish  to
point  out  what  so  many  men  of  science  seem  to  forget.  We


460


Dr.  Frederik  van  Eeden.


[part


hear  Freud's  triumphant  assertion  that  all  dream-life  is  now
explained.  Mach  says  :  "  Die  Sonderbarkeiten  des  Traums
lassen  sich  alle  darauf  zuruckfiihren,  dass  manche  Empfindungen
und  Vorstellungen  gar  nicht,  andere  zu  schwer  und  zu  spat  ins
Bewusstsein  treten."

You  hear  it ; — all  mystery  is  now  explained  by  these  few
empty  words.  Did  you  ever  see  such  things  as  "  sensations "
or  "representations"  "walking  into  consciousness"  as  if  they  were
tourists  and  "  consciousness "  a  hotel  ?  These  are  all  words,
words,  words, — bare  verbiage ;  no  concrete  reality  can  be
attached  to  such  an  explanation.  It  is  against  this  scientific
arrogance  that  I  utter  a  warning.  No  theory  has  as  yet
explained  all  about  dreams ;  no  !  not  even  more  than  the
tiniest  part.  We  have  not  yet  crossed  the  threshold  of  that
world,  which  for  us  is  still  "  occult."

And  yet  we  desire  to  know.  We  are  thinking  beings ;  we
are  proud  of  doing  nothing  without  forethought.  We  wish  to
look  before  us.  And  what  is  the  only  absolute  certainty  before
us  ?  Bodily  death ;  complete  material  destruction.  And  if  I
had  to  believe  that  this  meant  destruction  of  my  mind ;  if
to-morrow  should  mean  annihilation  of  myself, — that  is,  every-
thing of  which  I  have  knowledge ; — well,  what  would  to-morrow
be  for  me  ?  Why  should  I,  as  a  reasonable  being,  toil  and
work  and  suffer  any  longer  ?  It  would  be  absurd,  a  foolish-
ness !

The  twentieth  century  has  begun  with  many  an  enlighten-
ment, "  auf  klarung "  in  all  directions.  Men  of  science  have
been  severely  reminded  that  they  had  been  creating  illusions
instead  of  following  truth ;  that  they  had  been  indulging  in
verbiage  and  rhetoric,  where  they  were  pretending  to  build  up
eternal  systems.

The  ideas  of  a  clever  thinker  like  Bergson  are  not  so  very
wonderful  in  themselves ;  but  the  way  he  expresses  them  and
the  fact  that  he  is  gaining  wide  authority  is  remarkable  and
wonderful.  He  reminded  psychologists  that  memory  could  not
be  matter,  and  that  the  brain  could  not  be  a  store-house  of
"cliche-souvenirs."  Psychologists  could  not  contradict  this;  they
know  the  fact  now  ;  but  do  they  grasp  its  significance  ?

If  memory  is  not  brain,  then  brain  can  be  destroyed  without
destroying  memory. If  psychical  facts  and  not  material  facts  are


LXVII.]


A  Study  of  Dreams.


4-61


the  primary  facts,  then  the  psyche  is  more  persistent  than  matter.
And  if  matter  is  indestructible,  then  mind  and  memory  are
still  more  so.  That  is  to  say,  my  memory  and  yours, — not
somebody  else's  memory. /,  myself,  must  persist. But  how  ?

I  have  a  rational  certainty  of  immortality ;  I  know  that  I,
my  own  self,  my  memory,  is  indestructible ;  but  the  tremendous
question  is,  what  am  I  to  expect  ? How  will  it  be  ?

No  existing  religion  can  give  a  satisfactory  answer,  no
philosophy  even.  For  I  know,  as  a  psychologist,  that  there
is  no  religion  that  has  not  been  the  dupe  of  illusions,  and  no
philosophy  that  has  not  been  the  dupe  of  language,  and  of  want
of  significal  insight.

We  want  facts,  certitude,  investigation  along  lines  of  experi-
ence, of  real  concrete  things.  No  premature  theories,  no  verbal
structures,  no  amount  of  scholarly  learning  without  deep  insight
will  satisfy  us.

And  once  more  it  must  be  repeated  that  facts  are  not  the
less  concrete  and  real  because  they  are  purely  psychical  facts,
and  cannot  yet  be  made  to  fit  into  any  existing  orderly  system.


462


Professor  Henri  Bergson.


[part


PRESIDENTIAL  ADDRESS.

Delivered  on  May  28th,  1913.
By  Professor  HENRI  BERGSON.

Mesdambs,  Messieurs,

Laissez-moi  d'abord  vous  dire  combien  je  vous  suis
reconnaissant  du  grand  honneur  que  vous  m'avez  fait  en
m'appelant  a  la  presidence  de  votre  Societe.  Get  honneur,  j'ai
conscience  de  n'avoir  rien  fait  pour  le  m^riter.  Je  ne  connais
que  par  des  lectures  les  phenomenes  dont  la  Societe  s'occupe ;
je  n'ai  rien  vu,  rien  observe  moi-meme.  Comment  alors  avez-
vous  pu  venir  me  prendre,  pour  me  faire  succeder  aux  grands
savants,  aux  penseurs  eminents  qui  ont  occupe  tour  a  tour  le
fauteuil  presidentiel  et  dont  la  plupart  etaient,  en  menie  temps
que  des  homines  auxquels  leur  science  et  leur  talent  avaient
valu  une  notoriete  universelle,  des  esprits  particulierement  pr6-
occupes  de  l'etude  de  ces  phenomenes  mysterieux  ?  Si  j'osais
plaisanter  sur  un  pareil  sujet,  je  dirais  qu'il  y  a  eu  ici  un
effet  de  telepathie  ou  de  clairvoyance,  que  vous  avez  senti
de  loin  l'interet  que  je  prenais  a  vos  recherches,  et  que  vous
m'avez  apergu,  k  travers  les  quatre  cents  kilometres  qui  nous
separaient,  lisant  attentivement  vos  comptes-rendus,  suivant  vos
travaux  avec  une  ardente  curiosite.  Ce  que  vous  avez  depense
d'ingeniosite,  de  penetration,  de  patience,  de  tenacite,  a  l'ex-
ploration  de  la  terra  incognita,  des  phenomenes  psychiques  me
parait  en  effet  admirable.  Mais,  plus  encore  que  cette  ingeniosite
et  plus  que  cette  penetration,  plus  que  l'inlassable  perseverance
avec  laquelle  vous  avez  poursuivi  votre  route,  j'admire  le
courage  qu'il  vous  a  fallu  pendant  les  premieres  annees  surtout,


lxvii.]


Presidential  Address.


463


pour  hitter  contre  les  preventions  d'une  bonne  partie  du
monde  savant  et  pour  braver  la  raillerie,  qui  fait  peur  aux
plus  intrepides.  C'est  pourquoi  je  suis  Her  —  plus  tier  que
je  ne  saurais  le  dire  —  d'avoir  ete  elu  president  de  la  Societe
de  recherche  psychique.  J'ai  lu  quelque  part  l'histoire  d'un
officier  subalterne  que  les  hasards  de  la  bataille,  la  disparition
de  ses  chefs  tues  ou  blesses,  avaient  appele  a  rhonneur  de
commander  le  regiment :  toute  sa  vie  il  y  pensa,  toute  sa  vie
il  en  parla,  et  du  souvenir  de  ces  quelques  heures  son  existence
entiere  restait  impregnee.  Je  suis  cet  officier  subalterne,  et
toujours  je  me  feliciterai  de  la  chance  inattendue  qui  m'aura
mis  —  non  pas  pour  quelques  heures,  mais  pour  quelques  mois
—  a  la  tete  d'un  regiment  de  braves.

D'ou  viennent  les  preventions  qu'on  a  eues  pendant  long-
temps,  et  que  quelques-uns  conservent  encore,  k  legard  des
etudes  psychiques  ?  Comment  expliquer  que  des  savants,  qui
trouvent  tout  naturel  qu'on  poursuive  sous  leur  direction  des
travaux  de  laboratoire  en  apparence  insignifiants,  qui  pensent,
non  sans  raison,  qu'il  n'y  a  rien  d'insignifiant  pour  la  science,
temoignent  une  telle  repugnance  pour  des  recherches  conune  les
vdtres,  hesitent  meme  a  y  voir  des  recherches  scientifiques  ?
C'est  le  point  dont  je  voudrais  dire  un  mot  d'abord.  Loin  de
moi  la  pensee  de  critiquer  leur  critique  pour  le  plaisir  de  faire
de  la  critique  a  mon  tour.  J'estime  que  le  temps  consacre  a
la  refutation,  en  philosophie,  est  generalement  du  temps  perdu.
De  tant  d'attaques  dirigees  par  taut  de  penseurs  les  uns  contre
les  autres,  que  reste-t-il  ?  rien,  ou  peu  de  chose.  Ce  qui
compte  et  ce  qui  demeure,  c'est  ce  qu'on  a  apporte  de  verite
positive :  1'affirmation  vraie  se  substitue  d'elle-meme  a  l'idee
fausse  et  se  trouve  etre,  sans  qu'on  ait  pris  la  peine  de
refuter  personne,  la  meilleure  des  refutations.  Mais  il  s'agit  de
bien  autre  chose  ici  que  de  refuter  ou  de  critiquer.  Je  voudrais
montrer  que  derriere  les  preventions  des  uns,  les  railleries
des  autres,  il  y  a,  invisible  et  presente,  une  certaine  metaphysique
inconsciente  d'elle-meme,  —  inconsciente  et  par  consequent  incon-
sistante,  inconsciente  et  par  consequent  incapable  de  se  remodeler
sans  cesse,  conime  doit  le  faire  une  philosophie  digne  de  ce  nom,
sur  l'observation  et  l'experience,  —  que  d'ailleurs  cette  metaphy-
sique est  naturelle,  qu'elle  tient  a  un  pli  contracte  depuis  long-
temps  par  l'esprit  humain,  et  que  des  lors  nous  avons  tout


464


Professor  Henri  Bergson.


[part


interet  a  aller  la  chercher  derriere  les  critiques  on  les  railleries
qui  la  cachent,  afin  de  nous  mettre  en  garde  contre  elle  :  nous
eviterons  ainsi  quelle  agisse  sur  nous  a  notre  tour  et  quelle
dresse  sur  notre  route  des  obstacles  artiliciels.  Mais,  avant
d'aborder  cette  question,  qui  concerne  Fob  jet  meme  de  vos
etudes,  je  voudrais  dire  un  mot  de  la  methode  que  vous  suivez,
methode  dont  je  comprends  tres  bien  qu'elle  deroute  un  certain
nombre  de  savants.

Eien  n'est  plus  desagreable  au  savant  de  profession  que  de
voir  appliquer  a  une  science  de  meme  ordre  que  la  sienne
une  methode  reservee  d'ordinaire  a  des  objets  tout  differents.
II  tient  a  ses  procedes  comme  l'ouvrier  a  ses  outils :  c'est
William  James,  je  crois,  qui  a  defini  la  difference  entre  le
professionuel  et  1'amateur  en  disant  que  celui-ci  s'interesse
surtout  au  resultat  obtenu,  et  celui-la  a  la  maniere  dont  on
1'obtient.  Or,  les'  phenomenes  dont  vous  vous  occupez  sont
incontestablement  du  meme  genre  que  ceux  qui  font  l'objet
de  la  science  naturelle,  tandis  que  la  methode  que  vous
suivez,  et  que  vous  etes  obliges  de  suivre,  n'a  souvent  aucun
rapport  avec  celle  des  sciences  de  la  nature.

Je  dis  que  ce  sont  des  faits  du  meme  genre.  J'entends  par
la  qu'ils  manifestent  surement  des  lois,  et  qu'ils  sont  sus-
ceptibles,  eux  aussi,  de  se  repeter  indefiniment  dans  le  temps
et  dans  l'espace.  Ce  ne  sont  pas  des  faits  comme  ceux
dont  s'occupe  l'historien,  par  exemple.  L'histoire,  elle,  ne  se
recommence  pas;  la  bataille  d'Austerlitz  s'est  livree  une  fois,
et  ne  se  livrera  jamais  plus.  Les  memes  conditions  historiques
ne  pouvant  se  reproduire,  le  meme  fait  historique  ne  saurait
se  repeter ;  et  comme  une  loi  exprime  necessairement  qua
certaines  causes,  toujours  les  memes,  correspondra  un  effet
toujours  le  meme  aussi,  l'histoire  proprement  dite  ne  porte  pas
sur  des  lois,  mais  sur  des  faits  particuliers  et  sur  les  circon-
stances,  non  moins  particulieres,  oil  ils  se  sont  accomplis.
L'unique  question,  ici,  est  de  savoir  si  levenement  a  bien  eu
lieu  a  tel  moment  determine  du  temps,  en  tel  point  determine
de  l'espace,  et  comment  il  s'est  produit.  Au  contraire,  une
hallucination  veridique,  —  l'apparition,  par  exemple,  d'un  homme
qui  meurt  h  un  parent  ou  a  un  ami  qui  peut  etre  separe
de  lui  par  des  centaines  de  kilometres,  —  est  un  fait  qui,  s'il
est  reel,  est  sans  doute  la  manifestation  d'une  loi  analogue


LXVII.]


Presiden  tia  I  A  ddress.


465


aux  lois  physiques,  chimiques,  biologiques.  Je  suppose,  un
instant,  que  ce  phenomene  soit  dii  a  une  influence  exercee,
a  travers  l'espace,  par  la  conscience  de  l'une  des  deux
personnes  sur  la  conscience  de  l'autre  ;  je  suppose,  en
d'autres  termes,  que  deux  consciences  humaines  puissent  com-
muniquer  ensemble  sans  interme'diaire  visible  et  qu'il  y  ait,
comme  vous  dites,  "  telepathie."  Si  la  telepathie  est  un  fait
reel,  c'est  un  fait  susceptible  de  se  repeter  indefiniment.  Je
vais  plus  loin  :  si  la  telepathie  est  un  fait  reel,  il  est  fort
possible  quelle  opere  a  chaque  instant  et  chez  tout  le  raonde,
mais  avec  trop  peu  d'intensite  pour  se  faire  remarquer,  ou  en
presence  d'obstacles  qui  neutralisent  l'effet  au  moment  meme
ou  il  va  se  manifester.  Nous  produisons  de  l'electricite  a
tout  moment,  l'atmosphere  est  constamment  electrisee,  nous
circulons  parmi  des  courants  magnetiques ;  et  pourtant  des
millions  d'hommes  ont  vecu  pendant  des  milliers  d'annees
sans  soupconner  l'existence  de  l'electricite.  II  pourrait  en  etre
de  meme  de  la  telepathie.  Mais  peu  importe.  Un  point  est
en  tous  cas  incontestable,  c'est  que,  si  la  telepathie  est  reelle,
elle  est  naturelle,  et  que,  le  jour  ou  nous  en  connaitrions  les
conditions,  il  ne  nous  serait  pas  plus  necessaire,  pour  obtenir
un  effet  telepathique,  d'attendre  une  hallucination  vraie,  que
nous  n'avons  besoin  aujourd'hui,  quand  nous  voulons  voir  l'etin-
celle  electrique,  d'attendre  que  le  ciel  veuille  bien  nous  en
donner  le  spectacle  pendant  une  scene  d'orage.

Voila  done  un  phenomene  qui  semblerait,  en  raison  de  sa
nature,  devoir  etre  etudie  a  la  maniere  du  fait  physique,
chimique,  ou  biologique.  Mais  pas  du  tout :  vous  etes
obliges  de  l'aborder  avec  une  methode  toute  differente,  qui
tient  le  milieu  entre  celle  de  l'historien  et  celle  du  juge
d'instruction.  L'hallucination  veridique  remoute-t-elle  au  passe  ?
vous  etudiez  les  documents,  vous  les  critiquez,  vous  ecrivez
une  page  d'histoire.  Le  fait  est-il  d'hier  ?  vous  procedez  a
une  espece  d'enquete  judiciaire ;  vous  vous  mettez  en  rapport
avec  les  temoins,  vous  les  eonfrontez  entre  eux  et  vous  con-
trolez  la  valeur  de  leur  temoignage.  Pour  ma  part,  quand
je  repasse  dans  ma  memoire  les  resultats  de  l'admirable  enquete
poursuivie  continuellement  par  vous  pendant  plus  de  trente
ar.s,  quand  je  pense  a  toutes  les  precautions  que  vous  avez
prises pour eviter  l'erreur,  quand  je  vois comment,  dans  la


466


Professor  Henri  Bergson.


[part


plupart  cles  cas  que  vous  avez  retenus,  le  recit  de  l'halluci-
nation  avait  etc  fait  a  une  ou  plusieurs  personnes,  souvent
meme  note  par  ecrit,  avant  que  l'hallucination  eiit  etc
reconnue  veridique,  quand  je  tiens  corapte  du  nombre  enorrne
des  faits  et  surtout  de  leur  ressemblance  entre  eux,  de  leur
air  de  famille,  de  la  concordance  de  tant  de  temoignages
independants  les  uns  des  autres,  tous  examines,  controles,
soumis  a  la  critique,  —  je  suis  porte  a  croire  a  la  telepathie
de  meme  que  je  crois,  par  exemple,  a  la  defaite  de  l'ln-
vincible  Armada.  Ce  n'est  pas  la  certitude  mathematique
que  me  donne  la  demonstration  du  theoreme  de  Pythagore  ;  ce
n'est  pas  la  certitude  physique  ou  je  suis  de  la  verite  de
la  loi  de  la  chute  des  corps  ;  e'est  du  moins  toute  la  certitude
qu'on  obtient  en  matiere  historique  ou  judiciaire.

Mais  voila  justement  ce  qui  deconcerte  un  assez  grand  nombre
d'esprits.  Us  trouvent  etrange  qu'on  ait  a  traiter  historique-
ment  ou  judiciairement  des  faits  qui,  s'ils  sont  reels,  obeissent
surement  a  des  lois  et  devraient  alors,  semble-t-il,  se  preter
aux  methodes  d'observation  et  d'experimentation  usitees  dans
les  sciences  de  la  nature.  Dressez  le  fait  a  se  produire  dans
un  laboratoire,  on  l'accueillera  volontiers;  jusque-la,  on  le  tiendra
pour  suspect.  De  ce  que  la  "  recherche  psychique "  ne  peut
pas,  pour  le  moment,  proceder  comme  la  physique  et  la  cbimie,
on  conclut  qu'elle  n'est  pas  scientifique ;  et  comme  le  "  fait
psychique  "  n'a  pas  encore  pris  cette  forme  simple  et  abstraite
qui  ouvre  a  un  fait  l'acces  du  laboratoire,  volontiers  on  le
declarerait  irrcel.  Tel  est,  je  crois,  le  raisonnement  "  subcon-
scient "  d'un  certain  nombre  de  savants.

Je  retrouve  le  meme  sentiment,  le  meme  dedain  du  concret,
au  fond  des  objections  qu'on  eleve  contre  telle  ou  telle  de
vos  conclusions.  Je  n'en  citerai  qu'un  exemple.  11  y  a
quelque  temps,  dans  une  reunion  mondaine  a  laquelle  j'assis-
tais,  la  conversation  tomba  sur  les  phenomenes  dont  votre
Societe  s'occupe,  et  plus  particulierement  sur  les  faits  de
telepathie.  Un  de  nos  grands  medecins  etait  la,  qui  est  aussi
un  de  nos  grands  savants.  Apres  avoir  ecoute  attentivement
pendant  quelques  minutes,  il  prit  la  parole,  et  s'exprima  a
peu  pres  en  ces  termes  :  "  Tout  ce  que  vous  dites  la  m'interesse
beaucoup,  mais  je  vous  demande  de  reflechir  avant  de  tirer
une  conclusion. Je  connais,  moi  aussi,  un  fait  extraordinaire.


LXVII.]


Presidential  Address.


467


Et  ce  fait,  j'en  garantis  l'authenticite,  car  il  m'a  ete  raconte
par  une  dame  fort  intelligente,  dont  la  parole  m'inspire  une
confiance  absolue.  Le  mari  de  cette  dame  etait  ofticier.  II
fut  tue  au  cours  d'un  engagement.  Or,  au  moment  raeme
on  le  mari  tombait,  la  femme  eut  la  vision  de  la  scene,  vision
precise,  de  tous  points  conforme  k  la  realite.  Vous  conclurez
peut-etre  de  la,  comme  cette  dame,  qu'il  y  avait  eu  clairvoyance
ou  telepathie  ?  ...  Vous  n'oublierez  qu'une  chose :  c'est  qu'il
est  arrive  bien  des  fois  qu'une  femme  revat  que  son  mari  etait
mort  ou  mourant,  alors  qu'il  se  portait  fort  bien.  On  remarque
les  cas  ou  la  vision  tombe  juste,  on  ne  tient  pas  compte  des
autres.  Si  Ton  faisait  le  releve,  on  verrait  que  la  coincidence
est  l'oeuvre  du  simple  hasard."

La  conversation  devia  dans  je  ne  sais  plus  quelle  direction ;
il  ne  pouvait  d'ailleurs  etre  question  d'entamer  une  discussion
serieuse  ;  ce  n'etait  ni  le  lieu  ni  le  moment.  Mais,  en  sortant
de  table,  une  tres  jeune  fille,  qui  avait  bien  ecoute,  vint  me
dire  :  "  II  me  semble  que  le  docteur  X  . .  .  raisonnait  mal  tout-
a-l'heure.  Je  ne  vois  pas  ou  est  le  vice  de  son  raisonnement ;
mais  il  doit  y  avoir  un  vice."  Eh  oui,  il  y  avait  un  vice !
C'est  la  petite  jeune  fille  qui  avait  raison,  et  c'est  le  grand
savant  qui  avait  tort.  II  fermait  les  yeux  k  ce  que  le  phenomene
avait  de  concret.  II  raisonnait  ainsi :  "  Quand  on  reve  qu'un
parent  est  mort  ou  mourant,  ou  c'est  vrai  ou  c'est  faux,  ou
la  personne  meurt  effectivement  ou  elle  ne  meurt  pas.  Et
par  consequent,  si  le  reve  tombe  juste,  il  faudrait,  pour  etre
sur  qu'il  n'y  a  pas  la  un  effet  du  hasard,  avoir  compare  le
nombre  des  cas  ou  Ton  s'est  trouve  dans  le  vrai  au  nombre
des  cas  ou  Ton  a  ete  dans  le  faux."  II  ne  voyait  pas  que
la  force  apparente  de  son  argumentation  tenait  ;i  ce  qu'il
avait  remplace  la  description  de  la  scene  concrete  et  vivante,
—  de  l'officier  tombant  k  un  moment  determine,  en  un  lieu
determine,  avec  tels  ou  tels  soldats  autour  de  lui,  —  par
cette  formule  abstraite  et  morte :  "  La  dame,  en  revant,  etait
dans  le  vrai,  et  non  pas  dans  le  faux."  Ah,  si  nous  acceptons
cette  transposition  dans  l'abstrait,  il  faudra  en  effet  que  nous
comparions  in  abstracto  le  nombre  des  cas  vrais  au  nombre
des  cas  faux ;  et  nous  trouverons  peut-etre  qu'il  y  en  a  plus
de  faux  que  de  vrais,  et  notre  docteur  aura  eu  raison.  Mais
cette  abstraction  consiste  a  negliger  ce  qu'il  y  a  d'essentiel  —


468


Professor  Henri  Bergson.


[part


le  tableau  apercu  par  la  dame,  et  qui  se  trouve  etre  identique
a  une  scene  tres  eloignee  d'elle.  Concevez-vous  qu'un  peintre,
dessinant  sur  sa  toile  un  coin  de  bataille,  et  se  fiant  pour
cela  a  sa  fantaisie,  puisse  etre  si  bien  servi  par  le  hasard  qu'il
se  trouve  avoir  fait  le  portrait  de  soldats  reels,  reellement
presents  ce  jour-la  a  une  bataille  on  ils  prenaient  les
attitudes  que  le  peintre  leur  prete  ?  Evidemment  non.  La
supputation  des  probabilities,  a  laquelle  on  fait  appel  ici,  nous
montrerait  que  c'est  impossible,  parce  qu'une  scene  on  des
personnes  determinees  prennent  des  attitudes  determiners  est
chose  unique  en  son  genre,  parce  qu'un  visage  humain,  meme
isole\  est  deja  unique  en  son  genre,  et  que  par  consequent  chaque
personnage  —  k  plus  forte  raison  la  scene  qui  les  reunit  —  est
decomposable  en  une  infinite  de  details  independants  les  uns
des  autres :  de  sorte  qu'il  faudrait  un  nombre  de  coincidences
infini  pour  que  le  hasard  fit  de  la  scene  de  fantaisie  la  repro-
duction exacte  d'une  scene  reelle:  en  d'autres  termes,  il  est
mathematiquement  impossible  qu'un  tableau  sorti  de  l'imagina-
tion  du  peintre  dessine  exactement  un  coin  de  bataille  tel
qu'il  est.  Or,  la  dame  qui  avait  la  vision  d'un  coin  de  bataille
etait  dans  la  situation  de  ce  peintre  ;  son  imagination  executait
un  tableau.  Si  le  tableau  etait  la  reproduction  d'une  scene
reelle,  il  fallait,  de  toute  necessite,  quelle  fut  en  communication
avec  cette  scene  ou  avec  une  conscience  qui  en  avait  la  per-
ception. Je  n'ai  que  faire  de  la  comparaison  du  nombre  des
"  cas  vrais "  a  celui  des  "  cas  faux "  ;  la  statistique  n'a  rien  h
voir  ici  ;  le  cas  unique  qu'on  me  presente  me  sufht,  du  moment
que  je  le  retiens  avec  ce  qu'il  a  de  concret.  C'est  pourquoi,
si  c'eut  etc  le  moment  de  discuter  avec  le  docteur,  je  lui  aurais
dit :  "Je  ne  sais  si  le  recit  qu'on  vous  a  fait  etait  ridele ;
j'ignore  si  la  dame  dont  vous  parlez  a  eu  la  vision  exacte  de
la  scene  qui  se  deroulait  loin  d'elle  ;  mais  si  ce  point  m'&tait
demontre,  si  je  pouvais  seulement  etre  sur  que  la  physionomie
d'un  soldat  inconnu  d'elle,  present  a  la  scene,  lui  est  apparue
telle  quelle  etait  en  realite,  —  eh  bien  alors,  quand  meme  il  me
serait  prouve  qu'il  y  a  eu  des  milliers  de  visions  fausses  et
quand  meme  il  n'y  aurait  jamais  eu  d'autre  hallucination  veri-
dique  que  celle-ci,  je  tiendrais  pour  rigoureusement  et  defini-
tivement  etablie  l'existence  de  la  telepathie  ou  d'une  cause,
quelle  quelle  soit,  pouvant  nous  faire  percevoir  des  objets  et


lxvit.]


Presidential  A ddress.


469


des  evenements  situes  hors  de  la  portee  normale  de  nos
sens."

Mais  en  voila  assez  sur  ce  point.  J'arrive  a  la  cause  profonde
qui  a  retarde  jusqu'ici  le  progres  de  la  "  recherche  psychique  "
en  dirigeant  exclusivement  d'un  autre  cote  l'activite  des  savants.

J'ai  entendu  des  personnes  interessees  a.  vos  travaux  setonner
que  la  science  moderne  ait  si  longtemps  neglige  les  faits  dont
vous  vous  occupez,  alors  qu'elle  devrait,  en  vertu  de  son  carac-
tere  experimental,  s'interesser  a  des  recherches  qui  pourront
susciter  plus  tard  une  foule  d'experiences  nouvelles.  Mais  il
faudrait  s'entendre  sur  ce  qu'on  appelle  le  caractere  experi-
mental de  la  science  moderne.  Que  la  science  moderne  ait  cr6e
la  methode  experimentale,  c'est  certain;  mais  cela  ne  veut  pas
dire  qu'elle  ait  elargi  le  champ  d'experiences  qui  existait  avant
elle.  Bien  an  contraire,  elle  l'a  souvent  retreci ;  et  c'est  la,
d'ailleurs,  ce  qui  a  fait  sa  force.  Quand  nous  lisons  les  ecrits  des
anciens,  nous  sommes  frappes  de  voir  combien  ils  avaient  observe
et  meme  experiments.  Mais  ils  observaient  au  hasard,  dans
n'importe  quelle  direction.  En  quoi  consista  la  creation  de  la
"  methode  experimentale  "  ?  Simplement  k  prendre  des  proced£s
d'observation  et  d'experimentation  qui  existaient  deja,  et,  plutot
que  de  les  appliquer  dans  toutes  les  directions  possibles,  a
les  faire  converger  sur  un  seul  point,  la  mesvre,- — la  mesure
de  telle  on  telle  grandeur  variable  dont  on  soupconnait  qu'elle
pouvait  etre  fonction  de  telles  ou  telles  autres  grandeurs  variables,
egalement  k  mesurer.  La  "  loi,"  au  sens  moderne  du  mot,  est
justement  l'expression  d'une  relation  constante  entre  des  gran-
deurs qui  varient.  La  science  moderne  est  done  fille  des  mat  he  -
matiques  ;  elle  est  nee  le  jour  ou  l'algebre  eut  acquis  assez  de
force  et  de  souplesse  pour  pouvoir  enlacer  la  realite,  la  prendre
dans  le  filet  de  ses  calculs.  D'abord  parurent  l'astronomie  et  la
mecanique,  sous  la  forme  essentiellement  mathematique  que  les
modernes  leur  ont  donnee.  Puis  se  developpa  la  physique, —
une  physique  egalement  mathematique.  La  physique  suscita  la
chimie,  elle  aussi  fondee  sur  des  mesures,  sur  des  comparaisons
de  poids  et  de  volumes.  Apres  la  chimie  vint  la  biologie,  qui,
sans  doute,  n'a  pas  encore  pris  la  forme  mathematique  et  n'est
pas  pres  de  la  prendre,  mais  qui  n'en  cherche  pas  moins,  par
l'interm^diaire  de  la  physiologie,  a  ramener  les  lois  de  la  vie  k
celles  de  la  chimie  et  de  la  physique,  e'est-a-dire,  indirectement,


470


Professor  Henri  Bergson.


[part


de  la  mecanique.  De  sorte  qu'en  definitive  notre  science  tend
toujours  a  la  forme  mathematique  conime  a  un  ideal :  elle
vise  essentiellenient  h  mesurer,  et  la  on  le  calcul  n'est  pas
encore  applicable,  la  ou  elle  doit  se  borner  k  une  description
ou  a  une  analyse  de  son  objet,  elle  s'arrange  pour  n'envisager
de  cet  objet  que  le  cote  capable  de  devenir  un  jour  accessible
a  la  mesure.

Or,  il  est  de  l'essence  des  choses  de  l'esprit  de  ne  pas  se
preter  a  la  mesure.  Le  premier  mouvement  de  la  science
moderne  devait  done  etre  de  chercher  si  Ton  ne  pourrait  pas
substituer  aux  phenomenes  de  l'esprit  des  phenomenes  qui  en
fussent  les  equivalents  et  qui  seraient,  eux,  mesurables.  De
fait,  nous  voyons  que  la  conscience  est  liee,  d'une  maniere  ou
d'une  autre,  a  un  cerveau.  On  s'empara  done  du  cerveau,
on  s'attacba  au  fait  cerebral,  —  dont  on  ne  connait  certes  pas
la  nature,  mais  dont  on  sait  qu'il  doit  pouvoir  se  resoudre
finalement  en  mouvements  de  molecules  et  d'atomes,  e'est-a-
dire  en  faits  relevant  de  la  mecanique,  —  et  Ton  convint  de
consieb'rer  le  cerebral  conime  l'equivalent  du  mental.  Toute
notre  science  de  l'esprit,  toute  notre  rnetaphysique,  depuis  le
xvne  siecle  jusqua  nos  jours,  est  penetree  de  l'idee  de
cette  equivalence.  On  parle  indifferemment  de  la  pensee  ou
du  cerveau,  soit  qu'on  fasse  du  mental  un  simple  "  epiphe-
nomene "  du  cerebral,  conime  le  veut  le  materialisme,  soit
qu'on  mette  le  mental  et  le  cerebral  sur  la  meme  ligne  en  les
considerant  comme  deux  traductions,  en  langues  differentes,
du  meme  original.  Bref,  l'hypothese  d'un  paralUlisme  rigoureux
entre  le  cerebral  et  le  mental  parait  eminemment  scientifique.
D'instinct,  la  philosophic  et  la  science  tendent  a  ecarter  ce
qui  contredirait  cette  hypothese  ou  ce  qui  serait  mal  com-
patible avec  elle.  Et  tel  parait  etre,  a  premiere  vue,  le  cas
des  faits  qui  relevent  de  la  "  recherche  psychique,"  —  ou  tout
au  moins  le  cas  de  bon  nonibre  d'entre  eux.

Eh  bien,  le  moment  est  venu  de  considerer  de  pres  cette
hypothese,  et  de  voir  ce  quelle  vaut.  Je  n'insisterai  pas  sur
les  difficultes,  sur  les  absurdites  theoriques  qu'elle  souleve.
J'ai  montre  ailleurs  que,  prise  a  la  lettre,  elle  est  contradictoire
avec  elle-meme.  J'ajoute  que,  primd  facie,  il  est  contraire
a  toute  vraisemblance  que  la  nature  se  donne  le  luxe  de
repeter  purement  et  simplement  en  langage  de  conscience  ce


LXVII.]


Presidential  Address.


471


que  l'ecorce  cerebrale  accoraplit  sous  forme  de  mouvemeut
atomique  ou  moleculaire.  Une  conscience  qui  ne  serait  qu'un
duplicatum,  qui  n'interviendrait  pas  activement,  aurait  sans
doute  disparu  depuis  longtemps  de  l'univers,  a  supposer  qu'elle
se  fut  jamais  produite :  ne  voyons-nons  pas  que  nos  actions
tendent  a  devenir  inconscientes  an  fur  et  a  mesure  que
l'habitude  les  rend  machinales  ?  Mais  je  ne  veux  pas  in-
sister  sur  ces  considerations  theoriques.  Ce  que  je  pretends,
c'est  que  les  faits,  eonsultes  sans  parti  pris,  ne  confirment  ni
raerae  ne  suggerent  l'hypothese  du  parallelisme.

Pour  une  seule  fonction  de  la  pensee,  en  effet,  l'experience
a  pu  faire  croire  qu'elle  etait  localisee  en  un  certain  point  du
cerveau :  je  veux  parler  de  la  memoire,  et  plus  particuliere-
ment  de  la  memoire  des  mots.  Ni  pour  le  jugement,  ni  pour
le  raisonnement,  ni  pour  aucune  autre  faculte  de  la  pensee
propreuient  dite  nous  n'avons  la  moindre  raison  de  supposer
qu'elle  soit  attachee  k  tels  ou  tels  processus  cerebraux  deter-
mines. Au  contraire,  les  maladies  de  la  memoire  des  mots  —
ou,  comme  on  dit,  les  apbasies  —  correspondent  a  des  lesions
determinees  de  certaines  circonvolutions  cerebrales :  de  sorte
qu'on  a  pu  considerer  la  memoire  comme  localisee  dans  le
cerveau,  et  les  souvenirs  visuels,  auditifs,  moteurs  des  mots
comme  deposes  a  l'interieur  de  l'ecorce,  —  veritables  cliches  pho-
tographiques  qui  conserveraient  d'anciennes  impressions  lumi-
neuses,  veritables  disques  phonographiques  qui  enregistreraient
des  vibrations  sonores.  En  somme,  si  Ton  examine  de  pres
tous  les  faits  allegues  en  faveur  d'une  exacte  correspondance  et
d'une  espece  d'adh&rence  de  la  vie  mentale  a  la  vie  cerebrale
(je  laisse  de  cote,  cela  va  sans  dire,  les  sensations  et  les  mouve-
ments,  car  le  cerveau  est  certainement  un  organe  sensori
moteur),  on  voit  que  ces  faits  se  reduisent  aux  phenoinenes
de  memoire,  et  que  c'est  la  localisation  des  aphasies,  et  cette
localisation  seule,  qui  semble  apporter  a  la  doctrine  paralleliste
un  commencement  de  preuve  experimentale.

Or,  une  etude  plus  approfondie  des  diverses  aphasies  mon-
trerait  precisement,  a  mon  avis,  l'impossibilite  de  considerer
les  souvenirs  comme  des  cliches  ou  des  phonogrammes  deposes
dans  le  cerveau,  l'impossibilite  d'admettre  que  ce  soit  reelle-
ment  dans  le  cerveau  que  les  souvenirs  se  conservent.  Je  ne
puis  entrer  ici  dans  les  details  de  la  critique  que  j'ai  faite

2h


472


Professor  Henri  Bergson.


[part


autrefois  de  l'interpretation  courante  des  aphasies,  critique  qui
a  pu  paraitre  paradoxale  a  l'epoque  ou  une  certaine  conception
de  l'aphasie  etait  acceptee  comme  un  dogme,  mais  a  laquelle
l'anatomie  pathologique  elle-meme  est  venue,  dans  ces  dernieres
annees,  apporter  son  concours  (je  fais  allusion  aux  travaux  du
professeur  Pierre  Marie  et  de  ses  eleves).  Je  me  bornerai
done  a  vous  rappeler  mes  conclusions.  Ce  qui  me  parait  se
degager  de  l'etude  attentive  des  faits,  e'est  que  les  lesions  ctke-
brales  caracteristiques  des  diverses  aphasies  n'atteignent  pas  les
souvenirs  eux-memes,  et  que  par  consequent  il  n'y  a  pas,  emmaga-
sines  en  tels  ou  tels  points  de  lecoree  cerebrale,  des  souvenirs
que  la  maladie  detruirait.  Ces  lesions  rendent,  en  reality,
impossible  ou  difficile  revocation  des  souvenirs ;  elles  portent
sur  le  mecanisme  du  rappel,  et  sur  ce  mecanisme  seulement.
Plus  precisement,  le  role  du  cerveau  est  ici  de  faire  que  l'esprit,
quand  il  a  besoin  de  tel  ou  tel  souvenir,  puisse  obtenir  du  corps
une  certaine  attitude  ou  certains  mouvements  naissants,  qui
presentent  au  souvenir  cherche  un  cadre  approprie.  Si  le  cadre
est  la,  le  souvenir  viendra,  de  lui-nieme,  s'y  inserer.  L'organe
cerebral  prepare  le  cadre,  il  ne  fournit  pas  le  souvenir.  Voila,
a  moD  sens,  ce  que  montre  une  £tude  attentive  des  maladies
de  la  metnoire  des  mots,  et  ce  que  fait  d'ailleurs  pressentir
l'analyse  psychologique  de  la  memoire  en  general.

Mais,  si  nous  examinons  maintenant  les  autres  fonctions  de
la  pensee,  l'hypothese  que  les  faits  nous  suggerent  le  plus
naturellement  n'est  pas  du  tout  celle  d'un  paralledisme  rigoureux
entre  la  vie  mentale  et  la  vie  c6r6brale.  Bien  au  contrake,
dans  le  travail  de  la  pensee  en  general,  comme  dans  l'opera-
tion  de  la  memoire,  le  cerveau  nous  apparart  comme  charge
d'imprimer  au  corps  les  mouvements  et  les  attitudes  qui
joumt  ce  que  l'esprit  pense  ou  ce  que  les  circonstances  l'invitent
a  penser.  C'est  ce  que  j'ai  expriine  ailleurs  en  disant  que  le
cerveau  est  un  "  organe  de  pantomime."  Et  c'est  pourquoi,
comme  je  l'ai  dit  ailleurs  aussi,  "  celui  qui  pourrait  regarder  a
l'interieur  d'un  cerveau  en  pleine  activite,  suivre  le  va-et-
vient  des  atomes  et  interpreter  tout  ce  qu'ils  font,  celui-la
saurait  sans  doute  quelque  chose  de  ce  qui  se  passe  dans  l'esprit,
mais  il  n'en  saurait  que  pen  de  chose.  II  en  connaitrait  tout
juste  ce  qui  est  exprimable  en  gestes,  attitudes  et  mouvements
du  corps,  ce  que  l'etat  dame  contient  d'action  en  voie  d'accom-


LXVII.]


Presidential  Address.


473


plissement,  ou  simplement  naissante :  le  reste  lui  echapperait.
II  serait,  vis-a-vis  des  pensees  et  des  sentiments  qui  se  deroulent
a  l'interieur  de  la  conscience,  dans  la  situation  du  spectateur
qui  voit  distinctement  tout  ce  que  les  acteurs  font  sur  la  scene,
mais  n'entend  pas  un  mot  ce  qu'ils  disent."  Ou  bien  encore
il  serait  dans  l'etat  d'une  personne  qui  ne  connaitrait,  d'une
symphonie,  que  les  mouvements  du  baton  du  chef  d'orehestre
qui  la  dirige.  Les  phenomenes  cerebraux  sont  en  effet  a  la  vie
mentale  ce  que  les  gestes  du  chef  d'orehestre  sont  a  la  sym-
phonie :  ils  en  dessinent  les  articulations  motrices,  ils  ne  font
pas  autre  chose.  On  ne  trouverait  done  rien  des  operations
de  l'esprit  proprement  dit  a  l'interieur  du  cerveau.  Le  cerveau,
en  dehors  de  ses  fonctions  sensorielles,  n'a  d'autre  role  que  de
mimer  la  vie  mentale.

Je  reconnais  d'ailleurs  que  cette  mimique  est  d'une  impor-
tance capitale.  C'est  par  elle  que  nous  nous  inserons  dans  la
renlite,  que  nous  nous  y  adaptons,  que  nous  repondons  aux
sollicitations  des  circonstances  par  des  actions  approprie'es.  Si
la  conscience  n'est  pas  une  fonction  du  cerveau,  du  moins  le
cerveau  maintient-il  la  conscience  fixee  sur  le  monde  ou  nous
vivons  ;  c'est  l'organe  de  l'attention  a  la  vie.  Aussi  une  modifi-
cation cer^brale  meme  legere,  une  d'intoxication  passagere  par
l'alcool  ou  l'opium  par  exemple,  —  a  plus  forte  raison  une  in-
toxication durable  comme  celles  qui  causent  sans  doute  le  plus
souvent  l'alienation,  —  peuvent-elles  entrainer  une  perturbation
complete  de  la  vie  mentale.  Ce  n'est  pas  que  l'esprit  soit
atteint  alors  direetement.  II  ne  faut  pas  croire,  comme  on  le
fait  souvent,  que  le  poison  soit  alle  chercher  dans  l'ecorce  cere-
brale  tel  ou  tel  mecanisme  qui  serait  l'aspect  materiel  du
raisonnement,  qu'il  ait  derange  ce  mecanisme  et  epie  ce  soit
pour  cela  que  le  malade  divague.  Mais  l'effet  de  la  lesion  est
de  fausser  l'engrenage  et  de  faire  que  la  pensee  ne  s'insere  plus
exactement  dans  les  choses.  Un  fou,  atteint  du  delire  de  la
persecution,  pourra  encore  raisonner  tres  logiquement :  mais  il
raisonne  a  cote  de  la  realite',  en  dehors  de  la  realite,  comme
nous  raisonnons  en  reve.  Orienter  notre  pensee  vers  Taction,
l'amener  ;i  preparer  l'acte  que  les  circonstances  reclament,  voila
ce  pour  quoi  notre  cerveau  est  fait.

Mais  par  la  il  canalise,  et  par  la  aussi  il  limite,  la  vie  de
l'esprit. II nous  empeche de  jeter les yeux k droite et  h


474


Professor  Henri  Bergson.


[part


gauche  et  meme,  autant  que  possible,  en  arriere ;  il  veut  que
nous  regardions  droit  devant  nous,  dans  la  direction  ou  nous
avons  a  marcher.  N'est-ce  pas  deja  visible  dans  l'operation
de  la  memoire,  dont  nous  parlions  tout-ad'heure  ?  Bien  des
faits  semblent  indiquer  que  le  passe  se  conserve  jusque  dans
ses  moindres  details  et  qu'il  n'y  a  pas  d'oubli  reel.  Vous
vous  rappelez  ce  qu'on  raconte  des  noyes  et  des  pendus  qui,
revenus  ;\  la  vie,  declarent  avoir  en,  en  quelques  secondes,
la  vision  panoramique  de  la  totalite  de  leur  vie  passee.  Je
pourrais  citer  d'autres  exemples,  car  l'asphyxie  n'est  pour  rien
dans  le  phenomene,  quoi  qu'on  en  ait  dit.  Un  alpiniste
glissant  an  fond  d'un  precipice,  un  soldat  autour  duquel  s'abat
tout  a  coup  une  grele  de  balles,  auront  parfois  la  meme  vision.
La  verite  est  que  notre  passe  tout  entier  est  la,  continuelle-
ment,  et  que  nous  n'aurions  qu'a  nous  retourner  pour  l'aper-
cevoir ;  seulement,  nous  ne  pouvons  ni  ne  devons  nous  retourner.
Nous  ne  le  devons  pas,  parce  que  notre  destination  est  de
vivre,  d'agir,  et  que  la  vie  et  Taction  regardent  en  avant.
Nous  ne  le  pouvons  pas,  parce  que  le  mecanisme  cerebral  a
precisement  pour  role  ici  de  nous  masquer  le  passe,  de  n'en
laisser  transparaitre,  a  chaque  instant,  que  ce  qui  pent  eclairer
la  situation  pr6sente  et  favoriser  notre  action :  c'est  meme  en
obscurcissant  la  totalite  de  nos  souvenirs  —  sauf  celui  qui
nous  interesse  et  que  notre  corps  esquisse  deja  par  sa
mimique  —  qu'il  rappelh  ce  souvenir  utile.  Maintenant,
que  l'attention  a,  la  vie  vienne  h  faibler  un  instant,  —  je
ne  parle  pas  de  l'attention  volontaire,  de  celle  qui  depend
de  l'individu,  mais  d'une  attention  qui  s'impose  a  l'homme
normal  et  qu'on  pourrait  appeler  "l'attention  de  l'espece,"  —
alors  l'esprit,  dont  le  regard  dtait  maintenu  de  force  en  avant,
se  detend  et  par  la  meme  se  retourne  en  arriere ;  la  totalite
de  son  passe  lui  apparait.  La  vision  panoramique  du  passe
est  done  due  a  un  brusque  cUsintdrcssemmt  de  la  vie,  produit  dans
certains  cas  par  la  menace  d'une  mort  subite.  Et  e'etait  k
maintenir  l'attention  fixee  sur  la  vie,  a  retrecir  utilement  le
champ  de  la  vision  mentale,  qu'etait  occupe  jusque-la  le  cerveau
en  tant  qu'organe  de  memoire.

Mais  ce  que  je  dis  de  la  memoire  serai t  aussi  vrai  de
la  perception.  Je  ne  puis  entrer  ici  dans  le  ddta.il  d'une
demonstration que  j'ai  faite autrefois : qu'il me suffise  de


LXVIT.]


Presidential  Address.


475


rappeler  que  tout  devient  obscur,  et  ineme  incomprehensible,
si  Ton  eonsidere  les  centres  cerebraux  eomme  des  organes
capables  de  transformer  en  etats  conscients  des  ebranle-
ments  materiels,  que  tout  s'eclaircit  au  contraire  si  Ton  voit
simplement  dans  ces  centres  (et  dans  les  dispositifs  sensoriels
auxquels  ils  sont  lies)  des  instruments  de  selection  charges  de
choisir,  dans  le  champ  immense  de  nos  perceptions  virtuelles,
celles  qui  devront  s'actualiser.  Leibniz  disait  que  chaque  mo-
nade,  et  par  consequent,  a  fortiori,  chacune  de  ces  monades
qu'il  appelle  des  esprits,  porte  en  elle  la  representation  con-
sciente  ou  inconsciente  de  la  totalite  des  choses.  Je  n'irais
pas  aussi  loin ;  mais  j'estime  (pie  nous  percevons  virtuellement
beaucoup  plus  de  choses  que  nous  n'en  percevons  actuellement,
et  qu'ici  encore  le  role  de  notre  corps  est  d'ecarter  du  champ
de  notre  conscience  tout  ce  qui  ne  nous  serait  d'aucun  interet
pratique,  tout  ce  qui  ne  se  prete  pas  a  notre  action.  Les
organes  des  sens,  les  nerfs  sensitifs,  les  centres  cerebraux  cana-
lisent  done  les  influences  du  dehors,  et  marquent  ainsi  les
diverses  directions  ou  notre  propre  influence  pourra  s'exercer.
Mais,  par  la,  ils  retrecissent  le  champ  de  notre  vision  du  pre-
sent, de  meme  que  les  mecanismes  cerebraux  de  la  memoire
limitent  notre  vision  du  passe.  Or,  de  meme  (pie  certains
souvenirs  inutiles,  ou  souvenirs  "  de  reve,"  arrivent  a  se  glisser
dans  le  champ  de  la  conscience,  profitant  d'un  moment
d'inattention  k  la  vie,  ne  pourrait-il  pas  y  avoir,  autour
de  notre  perception  normale,  une  frange  de  perceptions  le
plus  souvent  inconscientes,  mais  toutes  pretes  a  entrer
dans  la  conscience,  et  s'y  introduisant  en  effet  dans  certains
cas  exceptionnels  ou  chez  certains  sujets  predisposes  ?  S'il  y
a  des  perceptions  de  ce  genre,  elles  ne  relevent  pas  seulement
de  la  psyehologie  proprement  dite ;  elles  sont  de  celles  sur
lesquelles  la  "  recherche  psychique  "  pourrait  et  devrait  s'exercer.

N'oublions  pas,  d'ailleurs,  que  l'espace  est  ce  qui  cree  les
divisions  nettes,  les  distinctions  precises.  Nos  corps  sont  ex-
terieurs  les  uns  aux  autres  dans  l'espace ;  et  nos  consciences,
en  tant  qu'attachees  a  ces  corps,  sont  exterieures  les  unes  aux
autres  aussi.  Mais  si  elles  ne  tiennent  au  corps  que  par
une  partie  d'elles-memes,  on  pent  conjecturer  que,  pour  le
reste,  elles  ne  sont  pas  aussi  nettement  separees.  Loin  de
moi  la  pensee  de  considerer  la  personnalite  comme  une  simple


476


Professor  Henri  Bergson.


[part


apparence,  ou  comme  une  realite  ephemere,  ou  comme  une
dependance  de  l'activite  cerebrale !  Mais  il  est  fort  possible
qu'entre  les  diverses  personnalites  s'accomplissent  sans  cesse  des
(•changes  eomparables  aux  phenomenes  d'endosmose.  Si  cette
endosniose  exi.ste,  on  peut  prevoir  que  la  nature  aura  pris  toutes
ses  precautions  pour  en  neutraliser  l'effet,  et  que  certains
mecanismes  devront  etre  specialement  charges  de  rejeter  dans
l'inconscient  les  representations  ainsi  provoquees,  car  elles
seraient  fort  embarrassantes  dans  la  vie  de  tous  les  jours.  Telle
ou  telle  de  ces  representations  pourrait  cependant,  ici  encore,
passer  en  contrebande,  surtout  quand  les  mecanismes  inhibitifs
fonctionnent  mal ;  et  sur  elles  encore  s'exercerait  la  "  recherche
psychique."

Plus  nous  nous  accoutumerons  a  cette  idee  d'une  conscience
qui  deborde  l'organisme,  plus  nous  trouverons  naturelle  et
vraisemblable  l'hypothese  de  la  survivance  de  lame  au  corps.
Certes,  si  le  mental  etait  rigoureusement  caique  sur  le  cerebral,
s'il  n'y  avait  rien  de  plus  dans  une  conscience  humaine  que
ce  qu'il  serait  possible  de  lire  dans  son  cerveau,  nous  pour-
rions  admettre  que  la  conscience  suit  les  destinees  du  corps
et  meurt  avec  lui.  Mais  si  les  faits,  etudies  sans  parti  pris,
nous  amenent  au  contraire  a  considerer  la  vie  mentale  comme
beaucoup  plus  vaste  que  la  vie  cerebrale,  le  survivance  devient
si  probable  que  l'obligation  de  la  preuve  incombera  a  celui  qui
la  nie,  bien  plutot  qu'a  celui  qui  1'afBrme ;  car,  ainsi  que  je
le  disais  ailleurs,  "  l'unique  raison  que  nous  puissions  avoir  de
croire  a  une  extinction  de  la  conscience  apres  la  mort  est  que
nous  voyons  le  corps  se  desorganiser,  et  cette  raison  n'a  plus
de  valour  si  rindependance  au  moins  partielle  de  la  conscience
a  l'e'gard  du  corps  est,  elle  aussi,  un  fait  d'experience."

Telles  sont,  brievement  resumees,  les  conclusions  auxquelles
me  conduit  un  examen  impartial  des  faits  connus.  C'est  dire
que  je  considere  comme  tres  vaste,  et  meme  comme  indefmi,
le  champ  ouvert  a  la  recherche  psychique.  Cette  nouvelle
science  aura  vite  fait  de  rattraper  le  temps  perdu.  Les
mathematiques  remontent  a  l'antiquite  grecque ;  la  physique
a  deja  trois  ou  quatre  cents  ans  d'existence ;  la  chimie  date
du  xvnie  siecle ;  la  biologie  est  presque  aussi  vieille ;  mais
la  psychologic  date  d'hier,  et  la  "recherche  psychique"  en
est  a  pen  pros  contemporaine. Faut-il regretter  ce  retard  ?


LXVII.]


Presidential  Address.


477


Je  me  suis  demande  quelquefois  ce  qui  se  serait  passe  si
la  science  moderne,  au  lieu  de  partir  des  mathematiques  pour
s'orienter  dans  la  direction  de  la  mecanique,  de  l'astronomie,  de
la  physique  et  de  la  chimie,  au  lieu  de  faire  converger  toutes
ses  forces  sur  l'etude  de  la  matiere,  avait  debute  par  la
consideration  de  l'esprit,  —  si  Kepler,  Galilee,  Newton,  par
exemple,  avaient  ete.  des  psychologues.  Nous  aurions  certaine-
nient  eu  une  psychologie  dont  nous  ne  pouvons  nous  faire
aucune  idee  aujourd'hui,  pas  plus  qu'on  n'eut  pu,  avant  Galilee,
imaginer  ce  que  serait  notre  physique  :  cette  psychologie  eut  pro-
bableinent  ete  a  notre  psychologie  actuelle  ce  (pie  notre  physique
est  a  celle  d'Aristote.  Etrangere  a  toute  idee  mecanistique,
ne  concevant  meme  pas  la  possibility  d'une  pareille  explication,
la  science  eut  recherche  alors,  au  lieu  de  les  ecarter  a  priori,
des  faits  comme  ceux  que  vous  etudiez :  peut-etre  meme  la
"  recherche  psychique "  eut-elle  figure  parmi  ses  principales
preoccupations.  Une  fois  decouvertes  les  lois  les  plus  generales
de  l'activite  spirituelle  (comme  le  furent,  en  fait,  les  lois  fonda-
mentales  de  la  mecanique),  on  aurait  passe  de  l'esprit  propre-
ment  dit  a  la  vie :  la  biologie  se  serait  constitute,  mais  une
biologie  vitaliste,  toute  differente  de  la  notre,  qui  serait  allee
chercher,  derriere  les  formes  sensibles  des  etres  vivants,  la  force
interieure,  invisible,  dont  elles  sont  les  manifestations.  Sur  cette
force  nous  n'avons  aucune  prise  aujourd'hui,  justement  parce
que  notre  science  de  l'esprit  est  encore  dans  l'enfance ;  et  c'est
pourquoi  les  savants  n'ont  pas  tort  quand  ils  reprochent  au
vitalisme  d'etre  une  doctrine  sterile  :  il  est  sterile  aujourd'hui,
il  ne  le  sera  peut-etre  pas  toujours,  et  il  ne  l'eut  pas  ete,
probablement,  si  la  science  moderne,  k  l'origine,  avait  pris  les
choses  par  un  autre  bout.  En  meme  temps  que  cette  biologie
vitaliste  aurait  surgi  une  medecine  qui  eut  remedie  directement
aux  insuffisances  de  la  force  vitale,  qui  eut  vise  la  cause  et  non
pas  les  effets,  le  centre  au  lieu  de  la  peripheric :  la  thera-
peutique  par  suggestion  eut  pu  prendre  des  formes  et  des  pro-
portions dont  il  nous  est  impossible  de  nous  faire  la  moindre
idee.  Ainsi  se  serait  fondee,  ainsi  se  serait  developpee  la
science  de  l'activite  spirituelle.  Mais  lorsque,  suivant  de  haut
en  bas  les  manifestations  de  l'esprit,  traversant  la  vie  et  la
matiere  vivante,  elle  fut  arrivee,  de  degre  en  degre,  a  la
matiere  inerte,  la  science  se  serait  arretee  brusquement,  surprise


478


Professor  Henri  Bergson.


[part


et  desorientee.  Elle  aurait  essaye  d'appliquer  a  ce  nouvel
objet  ses  methodes  habituelles,  et  elle  n'aurait  eu  aucune
prise  sur  lui,  pas  plus  que  les  procedes  de  calcul  et  de  mesure
n'ont  de  prise  aujourd'hui  sur  les  choses  de  l'esprit.  O'est  la
matiere,  et  non  plus  l'esprit,  qui  eut  ete  le  royaume  du
mystere.  Je  suppose  alors  que  dans  1111  pays  inconnu, — en
Amerique  par  exemple,  mais  dans  une  Amerique  non  encore
decouverte  par  l'Europe, — se  fut  developpee  une  science  identique
a  notre  science  actuelle,  avec  toutes  ses  applications  meca-
niques.  II  aurait  pu  arriver  de  temps  en  temps  a  des  pecheurs,
s'aventurant  au  large  de  cotes  d'lrlande  on  de  Bretagne,  d'aper-
cevoir  au  loin,  a  l'horizon,  un  navire  americain  filant  a  toute
vitesse  contre  le  vent,  —  ce  que  nous  appelons  un  bateau
a  vapeur.  lis  seraient  venus  raconter  ce  qu'ils  avaient  vu.
Les  aurait-on  crus  ?  Probablement  non.  On  se  serait  d'autant
plus  mefie  d'eux  qu'on  eut  ete  plus  savant,  plus  penetre  d'une
science  qui,  par  ses  tendances  purement  psychologiques,  aurait
ete  orientee  en  sens  inverse  de  la  physique  et  de  la  inecanique.
Et  il  aurait  fallu  alors  que  se  constituat  une  societe  comme  la
votre,  —  mais  cette  fois  une  Societe  de  recherche  physique, —
laquelle  eut  fait  comparaitre  devant  elle  les  temoins,  controle
et  critique  leurs  recits,  etabli  l'authenticite  des  "  apparitions "
de  bateaux  a  vapeur.  Toutefois,  ne  disposant  pour  le  moment
que  de  cette  methode  historique  on  critique,  elle  n'aurait  pas
pu  vaincre  le  scepticisme  de  ceux  qui  l'auraient  mise  en
demeure  —  puisqu'elle  croyait  a  l'existence  de  ces  bateaux
miraculeux  —  d'en  construire  un  et  de  le  faire  marcher.

Voila  ce  que  je  m'amuse  quelquefois  a  rever.  Mais  quand  je
fais  ce  reve,  bien  vite  je  l'interromps  et  jo  me  dis :  Non!  il
n'etait  ni  possible  ni  desirable  que  l'esprit  humain  suivit  cette
marche.  Cela  n'etait  pas  possible,  parce  que,  a  l'aube  des  temps
modernes,  la  science  mathematique  existait  deja,  et  qu'il  fallait
necessairement  commencer  par  tirer  d'elle  tout  ce  qu'elle  pouvait
donner  pour  la  connaissance  du  monde  ou  nous  vivons :  on  ne
lache  pas  le  proie  pour  ce  qui  n'est  peut-etre  qu'une  ombre.  Mais,
a  supposer  que  c'eut  etc  possible,  il  n'etait  pas  desirable,  pour
la  science  psychologique  elle-meme.  que  l'esprit  humain  s'appli-
quat  d'abord  k  elle.  Car,  sans  doute,  si  l'on  eut  depense  de  ce
cote  la  somme  de  travail,  de  talent  et  de  genie  qui  a  ete
consacree  aux  sciences  de  la  matiere,  la  connaissance  de  l'esprit


l.XVIT.]


Presidential  Address.


479


eut  pu  etre  poussee  tres  loin  ;  mais  quelque  chose  lui  eut
toujours  nianque,  qui  est  d'un  prix  inestimable  et  sans  quoi
tout  le  reste  perd  beaucoup  de  sa  valeur :  la  precision,  la
rigueur,  le  souci  de  la  preuve,  l'habitude  de  distingue  r  entre
ce  qui  est  simplement  possible  ou  probable  et  ce  qui  est  certain.
Ne  croyez  pas  que  ce  soient  la  des  qualites  naturelles  k  l'intelli-
gence.  L'humanite  s'est  passee  d'elles  pendant  fort  longtemps  ;
et  elles  n'auraient  peut-etre  jamais  paru  dans  le  monde  s'il  ne
s'etait  rencontre  jadis,  en  un  coin  de  la  Grece,  un  petit  peuple
auquel  I'd  pen  pres  ne  suffisait  pas,  et  qui  inventa  la  precision.
Les  mathematiques  —  cette  creation  du  genie  grec  —  furent-elles
ici  l'effet  ou  la  cause  ?  je  ne  sais ;  mais  incontestablement  c'est
par  les  mathematiques  que  le  besoin  de  la  preuve  s'est  propage
d'intelligence  k  intelligence,  prenant  d'autant  plus  de  place  dans
l'esprit  humain  que  la  science  mathematique,  par  l'intermediaire
de  la  mecanique,  embrassait  un  plus  grand  nombre  de  pheno-
menes  de  la  matiere.  L'habitude  d'apporter  k  l'etude  de  la
realite  concrete  les  memes  exigences  de  precision,  de  rigueur,
de  certitude,  qui  sont  caracteristiques  de  l'esprit  mathematique,
est  done  une  habitude  que  nous  devons  aux  sciences  de  la  matiere,
et  que  nous  n'aurions  jamais  eue  sans  elles.  C'est  pourquoi  une
science  qui  se  fut  appliquee  tout  de  suite  aux  choses  de  l'esprit
serait  probablement  restee  incertaine  et  A'ague,  si  loin  qu'elle
se  fut  avancee :  elle  n'aurait  peut-etre  jamais  distingue  entre
ce  qui  est  simplement  plausible  et  ce  qui  doit  etre  accepte
definitivement.  Mais  aujourd'hui  que,  grace  aux  sciences  de  la
matiere,  nous  savons  faire  cette  distinction  et  possedons  toutes
les  qualites  d'esprit  qu'elle  implique,  nous  pouvons  nous  aven-
turer  sans  crainte  dans  le  domaine  a  peine  explore  des  realites
psychologiques.  Avancons-y  avec  une  hardiesse  prudente,
debarrassons-nous  de  la  mauvaise  metaphysique  qui  gene  nos
mouvements,  et  la  science  de  l'esprit  pourra  donner  des
resultats'  qui  depasseront  toutes  nos  esperances.


FORMER  PRESIDENTS  OF  THE  SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH.


Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,  -  1882-84.
Professor  Balfour  Stewart,

F.R.S., 1885-87.

Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,  -  1888-92.
The  Eight  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,

M.P.,  F.R.S., --- -  1893.
Professor  William  James,  - -  1894-95.
Sir  William  Crookes,  F  U.S., -  1896-99.
Frederic  W.  H.  Myers,  - - -  1900.


Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S., - -  1901-03.
Sir  William  Barrett,  F.R.S., -  1904.
Professor  Charles  Richet,  - -  1905.
The  Bight  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour,-  1906-07.
Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  - - -  1908-09.
H.  Arthur  Smith,  - - - -  1910.

Andrew  Lang,  1911.

Rt.  Rev.  Bishop  W.  Boyd  Car-
penter, D.D., ....  1912.


OFFICERS  AND  COUNCIL  FOE  1913.


president.

Professor  Henri  Bergson.
VICE-PRESIDENTS.


Rt.  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,  F.K.S.
Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.
Sir  William  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.
Rt. Rev.  Bishop  W. Boyd  Car-
penter, D.D.
Sir  William  Crookes,  O.M.,  F.R.S.


George  B.  Dorr.
Professor  J.  H.  Hyslop,  Ph.D.
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.,  D.Sc.
Lord  Rayleigh,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  D.Sc.
Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  D.Litt.,  LL.D.


COUNCIL.


J.  G.  Piddington.
St.  George  Lane  Fox  Pitt.
Lord  Rayleigh,  O.M.,  F.R.S.
F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.
Sydney  C.  Scott.
A.  F.  Shand.

Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  Litt.D.
H.  Arthur  Smith.
Sir  Joseph  J.  Thomson,  O.M.,  F.R.S.


Charles  Lloyd  Tuckey,  M.D,
Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall.
V.  J.  Woolley,  M.D.
M.  B.  Wright,  M.D.


W.  W.  Baggally.
The  Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.
Sir  William  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.
Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.
Ernest  N.  Bennett.
J.  Milne  Bramwell,  M.B.
G.  Lowes  Dickinson.
The  Hon.  Everard  Feilding.
The  Rev.  A.  T.  Fryer.
Sir  Lawrence  J.  Jones,  Bart.
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.
W.  M'Dougall,  F.R.S.,  M.Sc,  M.B.
T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.
Professor  Gilbert  Murray,  LL.D.

HON.  TREASURER.
H.  Arthur  Smith,  7  Queen's  Mansions,  Brook  Green,  London,  W.

HON.  SECRETARIES.
Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  27  Grange  Road,  Cambridge.
The  Hon.  Everard  Feilding,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.
RESEARCH  OFFICER  AND  EDITOR.
Miss  Alice  Johnson,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.
SECRETARY  AND  SUB-EDITOR.
Miss  I.  Newton,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.
ASSISTANT  RESEARCH  OFFICER.
Miss  H.  de  G.  Verrall,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.
HON.  SECRETARY  OF  THE  MEDICAL  SECTION.
T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.,  Hoath  Cottage,  Hadlow,  nr.  Tonbridge.
HON.  SECRETARY  FOR  RUSSIA.
Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo,  5  Panteleiinonovskaia,  St.  Petersburg.

AGENT  FOR  AMERICA.
The  W.  B.  Clarke  Co.,  26-28  Tremont  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.


482


Members  and  Associates.


[part


MEMBERS  AND  ASSOCIATES.

July,  1913.
President — Professor  Henri  Bergson.

Vice-Presidents.

The  Right  Hon.  A.  J.  Balfour,  M.P.,F.R.S.,4  Carlton  Gardens,
London,  S.W.

The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour,  Fishers  Hill,  Woking,  Surrey.
Sir  William  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  6  De  Vesci  Terrace,  Kingstown,
Co.  Dublin.

Rt.  Rev.  Bishop  W.  Boyd  Carpenter,  D.D.,  6  The  Little  Cloisters,

Westminster,  London,  S.W.
Sir  William  Crookes,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  7  Kensington  Park  Gardens,

London,  W.

George  B.  Dorr,  18  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Professor  J.  H.  Hyslop,  519  West  149th  Street,  New  York  City.
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.,  The  University,  Birmingham.
Lord  Rayleigh,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  Terling  Place,  Witham,  Essex.
Mrs.  Henry Sidgwick,  D.Litt.,  LL.D., 27 Grange Road,  Cam-
bridge.

Honorary  Members.

Sir  William  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  6  De  Vesci  Terrace,  Kingstown,
Co.  Dublin.

Sir  William  Crookes,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  7  Kensington  Park  Gardens,
London,  W.

Madame  Curie,  Faculte  des  Sciences  de  Paris,  Laboratoire  de

Physique  Generale,  12  rue  Cuvier,  Paris.
Sir  Joseph  J.  Thomson,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  Holm  Leigh,  West  Road,

Cambridge.

Alfred  Russel  Wallace,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  Broadstone,  Wimborne,  Dorset.


LXVIL]


Members  and  Associates.


483


Corresponding  Members.

Professor  A.  Alexander,  Caixa  906,  Rio  Janeiro.

Professor  H.  Beaunis,  Villa  Printemps,  Le  Cannet  (Alpes  Mari-

times),  France.
Professor  Bernlieim,  Hopital  Civil,  Nancy,  France.
Professor  H.  P.  Bowditcb,  M.D.,  Harvard  Medical  School,  Boston,

Mass.,  U.S.A.

President  Nicholas  M.  Butler,  Columbia  University,  New  York,
U.S.A.

Dr.  Dariex,  6  Rue  du  Bellay,  Paris.

Dr.  Max  Dessoir,  Speyererstrasse  9,  Berlin,  W.

Professor  Th.  Flournoy,  The  University,  Geneva.

Professor  Dr.  Freud,  ix.,  Berggasse  19,  Vienna.

President  Stanley  Hall,  Clark  University,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Mrs.  William  James,  95  Irving  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass,  U.S.A.

Professor  Pierre  Janet,  54  Rue  de  Varenne,  VIP,  Paris.

Dr. Wm. Romaine  Newbold, Ph.D., Univ. of  Pennsylvania,

Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Professor  E.  C.  Pickering,  The  Observatory,  Cambridge,  Mass.,

U.S.A.

Dr.  Morton  Prince,  458  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Professor  Th.  Ribot,  Office  of  the  Revue  P/rilosopJiiqite,  Paris.
Professor  Charles  Richet,  15  Rue  de  l'Universite,  Paris.
Dr.  Freiherr  von  Schrenck-Notzing,  2  Max  Joseph  Strasse,  Munich.

Honorary  Associates.
Alrutz,  Dr.  Sydney,  Upsala,  Sweden.

Bayfield,  Rev.  M.  A.,  The  Rectory,  Hertingfordbury,  Hertford.
Edmunds,  Miss  L.,  Wood  River  Junction,  R.I.,  U.S.A.
Falcomer,  Professor  M.  T.,  Regio  Instituto  Tecnico  e  Nautico,
Venice.

Fryer,  Rev.  A.  T.,  St.  James's  Vicarage,  Walthamstow,  London,  N.E.

Grubb,  Edward,  3  George  Street,  Croydon,  Surrey.

Muirhead,  Professor  J.  H.,  The  Rowans,  Balsall  Common,  nr.

Coventry.
Ochorowicz,  Dr.  J.,  Wista,  Silesia.

Reed,  Miss  E.  M.,  2  Gledhow  Gardens,  S.  Kensington,  London,  W,
Sage,  M.,  33  Rue  de  Coulmiers,  XIVe  Arrt.,  Paris,
van  Eeden,  Frederik,  M.D.,  Walden,  Bussum,  Holland.


484


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Members  and  Associates.

An  asterisk  is  prefixed  to  the  names  of  Members.

Abbott,  E.  J.  W.,  15  Mortlake  Road,  Kew  Gardens,  Surrey.
Abernethy,  Mrs.,  10  St.  Colme  Street,  Edinburgh.
Acland-Hood,  Lady  Helena,  46  Burton  Court,  London,  S.W.
Adair,  Desmond,  Sandhurst,  Farnham,  Surrey.
Adamowska,  Madame  S.,  11  Charming  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Adams,  Mrs.,  4  Brookside,  Cambridge.

Adamson,  Rev.  H.,  P.O.  Box  241,  Christchurch,  New  Zealand.
Adderley,  Hon.  and  Rev.  James,  St.  Gabriel's  Lodge,  Birmingham.
Agelasto,  Michael  A.,  Box  485,  Norfolk,  Va.,  U.S.A.
Albree,  John,  Swampscott,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Alexander,  Professor  S.,  Victoria  University,  Manchester.
Allan,  Percy,  M.D.,  Crogdene,  Croham  Road,  South  Croydon,
Surrey.

Allen,  B.  M.,  14  Gainsborough  Gardens,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.
Allen,  George  B.,  Free  Chase,  Warninglid,  Sussex.
Allen,  Professor  H.  J.,  The  Presidency  College,  Madras,  India.
Allen,  William,  M.B.,  4  Newton  Terrace,  Charing  Cross,  Glasgow.
Alston,  Mrs.  Rowland,  Turvey  Abbey,  Turvey,  Beds.
Anderson,  Mrs.,  Brackenboro',  Bramhall,  Cheshire.
Anderson,  Major  A.  T.,  R.F.A.,  55a  Dilkusha,  U.P.,  India.
Anderson,  F.,  Medical  Director,  U.S.  Naval  Examining  Board,

Navy  Yard,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
Anderson,  Rev.  Francis  M.,  5  Marlborough  Road,  Exeter,  Devon.
Anderson,  Miss  Ruth,  14  Coleherne  Court,  Earl's  Court,  London,

S.W.

*Antrobus,  Miss  Lily,  69  Cadogan  Square,  London,  S.W.
Archer,  Basil,  Highfield,  The  Chase,  Coulsden,  Surrey.
Armitstead,  G.  H.

Armstrong,  Charles  W.,  Caixa  196,  S.  Paulo,  Brazil.

Askew,  Claude,  Botches,  Wivelsfield  Green,  Sussex.

Askew,  Mrs.  Claude,  Botches,  Wivelsfield  Green,  Sussex.
*Assheton-Smith,  Lady,  Vaynol,  Bangor,  N.  Wales.
*Astley,  H.  D.,  Benham-Valence,  Newbury,  Berks.

Astley,  Miss,  Cowrie  Haven,  Poundstock,  nr.  Bude,  N.  Cornwall.
*Astor,  William  Waldorf,  Cliveden,  near  Maidenhead.

Atkinson,  Mrs.,  224  Hereford  Street,  Christchurch,  New  Zealand.

Atwater,  Horace  G.,  Norfolk,  St.  Lawrence  Co.,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.


LXV1I.]


Members  and  Associates.


485


*Auden,  Harold  A.,  13  Broughton  Drive,  Grassendale,  Liverpool.

*  Austen,  Harold  W.  C,  M.D.,  2  Freeland  Road,  Ealing,  London,  W.

*  Austin,  C.  G.,  I.C.S.,  40  Central  Hill,  Upper  Norwood,  London,

S.E.

Bacon,  Mrs.  Sewell,  Highground,  Waterford  Rd.,  Oxton,  Cheshire.
*Baggally,  Wortley  W.,  7  Sillwood  Place,  Brighton.

Baggally,  Mrs.  W.  W.,  7  Sillwood  Place,  Brighton.

Baikie,  W.  S.,  Southend,  Stromness,  Orkney  Islands.
*Bailey,  Cyril,  Balliol  College,  Oxford.

Bailey,  Hon.  Mabel,  Hay  Castle,  Hay,  by  Hereford.

Bailey,  W.  G.,  M.D.,  712  Broadway,  Camden,  New  Jersey,  U.S.A.

Baker,  Alfred  L.,  Lake  Forest,  Illinois,  U.S.A.

Baker,  Mrs.  Charles,  161  Westbourne  Grove,  London,  W.

Baker,  Miss  Mabel,  St.  John's  Schools,  Eton,  Windsor.
*Balfour,  Miss,  4  Carlton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
•Balfour,  Right  Hon.  A.  J.,  M.P.,  F.R.S.,  4  Carlton  Gardens,
London,  S.W.

Balfour,  F.  C.  C,  32  Addison  Road,  Kensington,  London,  W.
*Balfour,  Right  Hon.  G.  W.,  Fishers  Hill,  Woking,  Surrey.
Bandon,  The  Countess  of,  Castle  Bernard,  Bandon,  Co.  Cork,  Ire-
land.

Bannester,  Miss  E.  S.,  Alexandra  College,  Westcliff-on-Sea,  Essex.

Barclay,  Rev.  Charles  W.,  The  Vicarage,  Hertford  Heath,  Hertford.
*Barclay,  Edwyn,  10  Vicarage  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.
*Barker,  Mrs.  C.  F.,  3942  Ellis  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.

Barkley,  Dr.  M.,  Box  162,  Carlyle,  111.,  U.S.A.

Barkworth,  Mrs.,  c/o  Miss  Thomson,  2  Culford  Mansions,  Cadogan
Gardens,  London,  S.W.

Barlow,  Miss  Jane,  D.Litt.,  The  Cottage,  Raheny,  Co.  Dublin.
*Barlow,  Rev.  J.  W.,  The  Cottage,  Raheny,  Co.  Dublin.

Bax-nes, Rev. Walter  W., 92  Warwick  Gardens,  Kensington,
London,  W.

Barnett,  Burgess,  St.  Bartholomew's  Hospital,  London,  E.C.
Barritt,  E.  H.,  J. P.,  Warrior  House,  26  Beaconsfield  Avenue,
Colchester.

Barrows,  Miss,  Hampton  School,  Malvern  P.O.,  Jamaica,  B.W.I.
Barrows,  CM.,  560  West  180th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Barrs, Mrs., Marshlands, Laurel Road, Gotten  ham  Park,

Wimbledon,  London,  S.W.
Baruch,  Edgar,  Rooms  805-6  Wright  &  Callender  Building,  Los

Angeles,  Cal.,  U.S.A.


486


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*Batchelor,  E.,  I.C.S.,  Bilaspur,  Central  Provinces,  India.
*Battersea,  The  Lady,  Aston  Clinton,  Tring,  Herts.
*Bayley,  Weston  D.,  M.D.,  1524  Chestnut  Street,  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  U.S.A.
Baynes,  W.  E.G.,  Assiut,  Upper  Egypt.
Bean,  Rev.  Edwin,  The  School  House,  Brentwood,  Essex.
*Beattie,  Ivor  Hamilton,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.
*Beaumont,  Miss  Annette,  32  St.  George's  Court,  Gloucester  Road,
London,  S.W.

Beaumont-Klein,  Leopold  de,  D.Sc,  6  Gloucester  Terrace,  Regent's

Park,  London,  N.W.
Beaumont-Klein, The Hon. Mrs. de, 6 Gloucester  Terrace,
Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.
*Bedford,  Adeline  Duchess  of,  Chenies,  Rickmansworth.

Beeching,  Miss  Nelly,  The  Priory,  Tonbridge.
*Behrens,  Captain  Clive,  Swinton  Grange,  Malton,  Yorks.
Behrens,  Noel  Edward.

Belaribi,  Mrs.,  Bartlands,  Holt  Heath,  Worcestershire.
*Bell,  Miss  A.  E.,  Sesame  Club,  29  Dover  Street,  London,  W.
Bell,  Miss  Alison  II.,  Exmoor,  Quickley  Lane,  Chorley  Wood,
Herts.

Bennett,  Ernest  N.,  The  Bath  Club,  34  Dover  Street,  London,  W.
Benson,  Miss  A.  M.,  M.D.,  Pedder  Road,  Cumballa  Hill,  Bombay,
India.

*Benson,  Mrs.,  Tremans,  Horsted  Keynes,  Sussex.
Benson,  Arthur  C,  C.V.O.,  The  Old  Lodge,  Magdalene  College,
Cambridge.

Benton,  Dr.  J.  R.,  114  E.  39th  Street,  Norfolk,  Va.,  U.S.A.
*Berens,  Rev.  Randolph,  14  Prince's  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
*Berens,  Mrs.  Richard,  Marlings  Hall,  Chislehurst.

Bergen,  Axel  von,  Abbey  Road,  Darlington,  Durham.

Berrington,  Rev.  Leslie  G.,  29  Beauchamp  Avenue,  Leamington

Spa,  Warwickshire.
*Berry,  Mrs.  F.  M.  Dickinson,  M.D.,  21  Wimpole  Street,  London,  W.

Best,  Robert,  146  Hamstead  Road,  Handsworth,  Birmingham.

Bethell,  Mrs.,  23  Shooters  Hill  Road,  Blackheath,  London,  S.E.

Bevan,  Mrs.  Robert,  131  Gloucester  Road,  London,  S.W.

Bevan,  Hon.  Mrs.  R.  Yorke,  9  Rutland  Gate,  London,  S.W.

Bevan,  Rev.  W.  O.,  Kalutara,  Ceylon.

*Beveridge,  Erskine,  LL.D.,  St.  Leonard's  Hill,  Dunfermline,  N.B.
Beverley,  Mrs.,  Nascot  Lodge,  Watford,  Herts.


LXVII.]


Members  and  Associates.


487


Biach,  Dr.  Rudolf,  Mayerhofgasse  20,  Vienna  IV.,  Austria.

Bicknell,  Clarence,  Villa  Rose,  Bordighera,  Italy.

Bidder,  George  P.,  Cavendish  Corner,  Hills  Road,  Cambridge.
*Bigg,  Miss  Louisa,  2  York  Terrace,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.
*Binney,  Rev.  Maximilian  F.  B.,  The  Vicarage,  Richmond,  Surrey.

Birley,  Miss  Florence  H.,  Goldsmiths'  College,  New  Cross,  London,  S.E.

Blackburn,  E.  M.,  Little  Thakeham,  Pulborough,  Sussex.

Blacklock,  Miss  C,  101  Beaufort  Mansions,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.

Blackman,  J.  F.,  R.N.

Blane,  Miss  Edith  H.,  18  Ashley  Mansions,  London,  S.W.
Blathwayt,  W.,  Eagle  House,  Batheaston,  Bath.
*Bligh,  Stanley  M.,  28  Grosvenor  Road,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.
Bloemfontein,  The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of,  Bishop's  Lodge,

Bloemfontein,  O.R.C.,  S.  Africa.
Bloxsome,  C.  H.,  L.R.C.P.,  The  Croft  House,  Fairford,  Glou-
cestershire.

Bodley,  Mrs.,  41  Gloucester  Place,  Portman  Sqiiare,  London,  W.
Bois,  H.  G.,  c/o  Messrs.  J.  M.  Robertson  &  Co.,  Colombo,  Ceylon.
Boothroyd,  A.  E.,  Warley,  Meadway,  Hampstead  Garden  Suburb,
London,  N.W.

Bosanquet,  Miss  Theodora,  10  Lawrence  Street,  Cheyne.  Walk,
London,  S.W.

Both-Hendriksen, Miss  Louise, 226  Madison  Street,  Brooklyn,
N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Boulding,  R.  H.  S.,  Sunnymead,  15  Turney  Rd.,  Dulwich,  London,  S.E.
Bouwens,  B.  G.,  Amesbury,  Wilts.

Bowden-Smith,  Mrs.,  rue  Maze,  St.  Martin's,  Guernsey.
Bowden-Smith,  Mrs.,  Careys,  Brockenhurst,  Hants.
*Bowditch,  C.  P.,  Ill  Devonshire  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Bowen,  Miss  Anna  C,  210  E.  Main  Street,  Batavia,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Bower,  James  Garton,  Junr.,  Earlham  House,  Norwich.
Bowley,  Miss  S.  M.,  29  Croftdown  Road,  Highgate  Road,  London,  N.W.
Box,  Alfred  Marshall,  Woodlands,  14  Magrath  Avenue,  Cambridge.
Boys,  Major  R.  H.  H.,  D.S.O.,  c/o  Messrs.  Cox  &  Co.,  16  Charing

Cross,  London,  S.W.
Bozzano,  E.,  Salita  Emanuele  Cavallo,  N.  92,  Genoa.
Brabrook, Sir  Edward  W.,  C.B., 178  Bedford Hill,  Balham,

London,  S.W.
*Bradley,  Miss  A.  A.,  Hingham,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Bradley, Professor A. C, 9 Edwardes Square,  Kensington,

London,  W.

2  I


488


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Bradley,  F.  EL,  Merton  College,  Oxford.

Brain,  Ernest,  7  St.  George's  Square,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.

Bramly,  Mrs.  Jennings,  Castel  di  Poggio,  Fiesole,  Italy.
*Bramwell,  J.  Milne,  M.B.,  17  Wimpole  Street,  London,  W.
*Brandt,  Rudolph  E.,  4  Fenchurch  Avenue,  London,  E.G.

Bray,  F.  E.,  17  The  Boltons,  London,  S.W.

Brayshaw,  John  L.,  Settle,  Yorkshire.

Brewster,  Bertram,  59  Madeley  Road,  Ealing,  London,  W.
Briantchaninoff,  Alexandre  N.,  11  Grand  Mouetuaia,  St.  Peters-
burg, Russia.

Bristowe,  The  LEon.  Mr.  Justice,  Supreme  Court,  Pretoria,  South
Africa.

Bromberg,  Frederick  G.,  Mobile,  Alabama,  U.S.A.
Brooke,  Colonel  C.  K.,  Army  and  Navy  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,
S.W.

Brooke,  Miss  Emma  F.

Brooke,  E.  G.  de  C,  Brushford,  Dulverton,  Devonshire.
*Brooke,  Lady,  Colebrooke,  Brookeborough,Co.  Fermanagh,  Ireland.
*Brookes-Smitk,  Mrs.,  The  Lodge,  Hurst  Green,  Sussex.
*Brown,  B.  G.,  46  Regent's  Park  Road,  London,  N.W.

Brown,  Haydn,  L.R.C.P.,  The  Bishams,  Caterham  Valley,  Surrey.

Brown,  Mrs.  IT.  F.,  18  Curzon  Park,  Chester.

Brown,  Miss  May,  62  Carlisle  Mansions,  Westminster,  London, S.W.
Brown,  Mrs.  Robert,  Tankerville,  Boscombe,  Hants.
Browne,  Professor  Edward  G.,  M.B.,  Pembroke  College,  Cam-
bridge.

Browne,  J.  Stark,  Hillcrest,  Castlebar  Hill,  Ealing,  London,  W.
Brownrigg,  Lady,  The  Grange,  Welwyn,  Herts.
Bruce,  James,  Craik,  Sask.,  Canada.

Brunwin,  A.  D.,  M.D.,  Haverings,  Rayne,  Braintree,  Essex.

Brush,  W.  Franklin,  500  5th  Avenue,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Bryan,  C.  A.  Douglas,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Spa  House,  Humber-
stone  Road,  Leicester.

Bryce,  Miss  Kathleen,  15  Campden  Hill  Squa.re,  London,  W.

Bryson,  Archibald,  Nenthorne,  Ayr,  N.B.
*Bubb,  Henry,  J. P.,  Ullenwood,  near  Cheltenham.

Buchanan,  A.  G.,  F.R.C.S.,  75  Warwick  Square,  London,  S.W.

Bullard,  Dr.  W.  N.,  89  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Buller,  Professor  A.  H.  Reginald,  University  of  Manitoba,  Winni-
peg, Canada.
*Bulley,  Mrs.  Arthur,  Ness,  Neston,  Cheshire.


LXVIT.]


Members  and  Associates.


489


*Bullough,  Edward,  6  Huntingdon  Road,  Cambridge.

Bullough,  Mrs.  Edward,  6  Huntingdon  Road,  Cambridge.

Burghard,  Mrs.,  86  Harley  Street,  London,  W.

Burnham,  Mrs.,  Staindrop  Lodge,  Chapeltown,  Sheffield.

Burns,  Nesbitt,  M.B.,  The  Lodge,  Highbridge,  Somerset.

Bury,  Henry,  Mayfield  House,  Farnham,  Surrey.

Bury,  Mrs.  Henry,  Mayfield  House,  Farnham,  Surrey.
*Bushell,  Rev.  W.  D.,  Harrow-on-the-Hill,  Middlesex.

Butcher,  W.  Deane,  M.R.C.S.,  Holyrood,  Cleveland  Road,  Ealing,
London,  W.
*Butler,  Mrs.

Butler,  Mrs.  Charles,  Syon  House,  East  Budleigh,  Devon.
Butt,  Lady,  9  Albeit  Hall  Mansions,  Kensington  Gore,  London,  S.W.
Buttemer,  Robert  Wm.,  St.  Mary's,  Godalming,  Surrey.
Butterworth,  Miss  A.  M.,  The  Bungalow,  West  Kirby,  Cheshire.
Cadell,  Mrs.  Lewis,  Brae  Lodge,  Murrayfield,  Edinburgh.
Cady,  Rev.  Frank  T.,  Port  Alleghany,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
^Campbell,  Lady Archibald, Coombe  Hill  Farm,  Kingston-on-
Thames,  Surrey.
Campbell,  Mrs.  Burnley,  Ormidale,  Colintraive,  Argyllshire.
Campbell,  Mrs.,  Arduaine,  Lochgilphead,  N.B.
Campbell,  Major  N.  D.  H.,  7th  Dragoon  Guards,  Trimulgherry,
Deccan,  India.

Campbell,  Rev.  R.  J.,  King's  Weigh  House  Parsonage,  Thomas

Street,  Grosvenor  Square,  London,  W.
Campbell-Lang,  Miss,  c/o  Professor  Brunton,  LL.B.,  180  Hope

Street,  Glasgow.
Candler,  H.  A.  W.,  37  Commercial  Road,  London,  E.
Capron,  Mrs.  Cynthia  J.,  316  Lincoln  Avenue,  Freeport,  111.,

U.S.A.

Carey,  Mrs.  A.  A.,  50  Fayerweather  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Carnahan,  C.  T.,  951  Logan  Avenue,  Denver,  Colo.,  U.S.A.
x"Carnarvon,  The  Earl  of,  13  Berkeley  Square,  London,  W.
Carpenter, Mrs., Withleigh, 19 Shoot-up-Hill,  Brondesbury,
London,  N.W.

Carr,  H.  Wildon,  D.Litt.,  More's  Garden,  Cheyne  Walk,  London,  S.W.
Carr,  Lucien,  163  Brattle  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Carrington,  Hereward,  504  West  111th  Street,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

Case,  Miss  A.  J.,  35  Elm  Bank  Mansions,  Barnes,  London,  S.W.


490


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Cassatt,  Miss  Mary,  10  Rue  de  Marignan,  Paris.
Cathels,  Rev.  David,  The  Manse,  Hawick,  Scotland.
*Cave,  Charles,  J. P.,  Ditcham  Park,  Petersfield,  Hants.
Cayley,  Hugh  S.,  Room  221,  Loo  Building,  Vancouver,  B.C.,
Canada.

Cecil,  Lady  Francis,  Alford  House,  Alford,  Somerset.
^"Chambers, John, Mokopeka, Hastings, Hawkes Bay,  New
Zealand.

Chance,  Clinton  F.,  12  Arthur  Road,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.
Charlton,  Miss  Frances  M.,  23  Kensington  Square,  London,  W.
Chatterjee,  A.  K.,  Deputy  Magistrate  and  Collector,  P.O.  Comilla,

District  Tippura,  India.
Chattock,  Arthur  P.,  D.Sc,  Heathfield  Cottage,  Crowcombe,  nr.

Taunton,  Somerset.
Cheney,  Dr.  Frederick  E.,  126  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,

Mass.,  U.S.A.

Chichkine,  Mademoiselle  A.  de,  Lyceum  Club,  128  Piccadilly,
London,  W.

Childe-Pemberton, Miss  A. H., 12  Portman  Street,  Portman

Square,  London,  W.
Childers, Miss F. I., Cranbourne Grange, Sutton  Scotney,

Hants.

Chitty,  Hubert,  M.B.,  F.R.C.S.,  etc.,  46  Pembroke  Road,  Clifton,
Bristol.

Chubb,  Mrs.  C.  A.,  Longforgan,  The  Ridgway,  Wimbledon,  Lon-
don, S.W.

Clapham,  Mrs.  H.  H.,  c/o  Mrs.  Babbit,  512  South  J.  Street,

Tacoma,  Wash.,  U.S.A.
Clapham,  J.  H.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Clapp,  James,  Cromwell  Lodge,  Feltham,  Middlesex.
*Clark,  Rev.  F.  H.  H,.,  7  Wyndham  Place,  Bryanston  Square,

London,  W.

Clarke,  Ronald  Stanley,  Trobridge  House,  Crediton,  Devon.
Clarkson,  Mrs.  St.  John,  Belcombe  Farm  House,  Bradford-on-
Avon .

*Clavering,  Miss,  New  County  Club,  21  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.
Clive,  Hon.  Henrietta  Windsor,  Oakly  Park,  Bromfield,  Salop.
Closson,  Miss  Olivia  T.,  1359  Columbia  Road,  Washington,  D.C.,
U.S.A.

Clover,  Martin,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Bay  House,  Veryan,  Gram-
pound  Road,  Cornwall.


lxvil]


Members  and  Associates.


491


Coates,  C.  J.,  The  Thornton  Woollen  Mill  Co.,  St.  Petersburg.
Coates,  Mrs.,  4  Duke's  Avenue,  Muswell  Hill,  London,  N.W.
Cochrane,  Miss  Jessie,  34a  Via  Porta  Pinciana,  Rome.
Cockle, Rev. Francis T., The Rectory, Swinfoid, Co.  Mayo,
Ireland.

Coe,  Miss  M.  A.,  96  Chestnut  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Coggin,  Rev.  F.  E.,  White  Lodge,  Meads,  Eastbourne.

Coghill,  Colonel  Kendal,  C.B.,  Castle  Townshend,  nr.  Skibbereen,
Co.  Cork,  Ireland.
*Coit,  Stanton,  Ph.D.,  30  Hyde  Park  Gate,  London,  S.W.
*Cole,  Arthur,  36  Baldry  Gardens,  Streatham,  London,  S.W.

Coleridge,  Miss  Christabel  R.,  Cheyne,  Torquay.

Colquhoun,  Daniel,  M.D.,  44  High  Street,  Dunedin,  New  Zealand.

Connor,  Rev.  David,  The  Knowe  Manse,  Bewcastle,  East  Cumber-
land.

*Constable,  F.  C,  Wick  Court,  near  Bristol.
Conway,  Lady,  Allington  Castle,  Maidstone,  Kent.
Cook,  Mrs.  Frank  H.,  Barnett  Hill,  Wonersh,  Guildford,  Surrey.
Cooke,  Miss  Mabel,  Dana  Hall  School,  Wellesley,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Cooper,  Rev.  F.  W.,  Prestwich  Rectory,  Manchester.
Cooper,  Miss  Louisa  E.,  Ripponhurst,  Epping,  Essex.
Cooper,  Mrs.  P.  H.,  283  South  Street,  Morristown,  N.J.,  U.S.A.
Cony,  Miss  Lucy,  13  Argyll  Road,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.
Cort  van  der  Linden,  P.  W.  A.,  Councillor  of  State,  Groenhove,
The  Hague.

Costelloe, Miss Karin, 3f Morpeth  Terrace, Victoria  Street,
London,  S.W.

Cotesworth,  Miss  Lilias  E.,  45  Westminster  Mansions,  Great  Smith

Street,  London,  S.W.
*Cotterell,  Mrs.,  Claremont,  Walsall,  Staffs.
Cotterell,  Miss  Alice,  1g  Montagu  Mansions,  Portman  Square,

London,  W.

Coupland,  W.  C,  D.Sc,  33  Pembroke  Crescent,  Hove,  Brighton.
Courtauld, George, Junr., The Waver, Wethersfield,  Braintree,
Essex.

Courtauld,  R.  M.,  M.B.,  Halesowen,  Hills  Road,  Cambridge.
*Cowan,  W.  H.,  The  Crow's  Nest,  Fairwarp,  Uckfield,  Sussex.
Oowell,  Miss  Marion  A.,  3  Brudenell  Terrace,  Aldeburgh,  Suffolk.
Cox,  Mrs.  Rowland,  310  West  7th  Street,  Plainfield,  N.J.,  U.S.A.
Coxe,  The  Hon.  Mr.  Justice  Henry  R.  H.,  c/o  Messrs.  Grindlay
&  Co.,  54  Parliament  Street,  London,  S.W.


492


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Coxon,  Mrs.  George  S.,  Craigleith,  Cheltenham.
Cozens,  J.  C,  Brigus,  Conception  Bay,  Newfoundland.
Craige,  Wm.  C,  409  Chestnut  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Crane,  Rev.  W.  M.,  Ph.D.,  Richmond,  Berkshire  County,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Craufurd,  Commander  Quentin  C.  A.,  R.N.,  H.M.S.  St.  George,
Home  Fleet.

Crawford,  W.  C,  1  Lockharton  Gardens,  Colinton  Road,  Edinburgh.

Critchley,  W.  A.  Paget,  15  Parkside,  Albert  Gate,  London,  S.W.

Crook,  A.  H.,  Queen's  College,  Hong  Kong.
"x"Crookes,  Lady,  7  Kensington  Park  Gardens,  London,  W.
*Crooks,  Miss  Marianne,  Achintorlie,  Norwood,  South  Australia.

Crouch,  H.  N.,  AdditionalJudicial  Commissioner  of  Sind,  Karachi,  '
Sind,  India.

Cunard,  Cyril  G.,  The  Manor  House,  Notgrove,  Gloucestershire.
Cunningham,  Colonel  D.  D.,  F.R.S.,  Tormount,  Torquay,  Devon.
Currie ,  Mrs .

Curtis,  Atherton,  17  rue  Notre  Dame  des  Champs,  Paris,  France.
*Curtois,  Miss  Margaret  A.,  10  Barton  Street,  Westminster,  Lon-
don, S.W.

Curwen,  Mrs.,  Horncop,  Heversham,  Milnthorpe,  Westmoreland.
Dakin,  W.  R.,  M.D.,  F.R.C.P.,  8  Grosvenor  Street,  London,  W.
Dale,  Alan,  Wright  Avenue,  Bayside,  Long  Island,  New  York,
U.S.A.

Dale,  J.  Gilbert,  31  Warwick  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Dallas,  Miss  IT.  A.,  Innisfail,  Crawley,  Sussex.
*Dalton,  J.  H.  C,  M.D.,  The  Plot,  Adams  Road,  Cambridge.
Damant,  Mrs.  H.  C,  Lammas,  Cowes,  Isle  of  Wight.
Daniell,  Mrs.  Averell.

Danzas,  Mile.  Julia,  26  Moika,  St.  Petersburg.
D'Arcy,  Rev.  G.  J.  A.,  The  Vicarage,  Worksop,  Notts.
Darton,  Hugh,  Beninghoe,  Hertford.

Davies,  Benjamin,  Wilford,  Chase  Green  Avenue,  Enfield,  Middle-
sex.

Davies,  Mrs.  G.  R.,  c/o  Miss  E.  M.  Reynolds,  44  Egerton  Crescent,
London,  S.W.

""'Davies,  Valentine  Clements,  59a  Grove  Road,  Eastbourne.
*Davis,  Charles,  29  Gloucester  Place,  Portman  Square,  London,  W.

Davis,  Mrs.,  46  Sussex  Gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Davis,  Thomas  Henry,  Trelinda,  St.  Merryn,  Padstow.

Davison,  Miss  Annie,  Albemarle  Club,  37  Dover  Street,  London,  W.


LXVII.]


Members  and  Associates.


493


Dawson,  Lt. -Colonel  Henry  P.,  Hartlington  Hall,  Skipton.
Day,  Rev.  Dr.  E.  H.,  Newton  House,  Belmont,  Hereford.
Day,  Miss  Mabel  K.,  Gershom,  Reigate,  Surrey.
*Dayton,  Mrs.  Elizabeth,  Box  258,  South  Kaukauna,  Wisconsin,
U.S.A.

Dearmer,  Rev.  Percy,  St.  Mary's  Vicarage,  Primrose  Hill,  London,
N.W.

Delap,  Alfred  D.,  Rosslare  Harbour,  Kilrane,  Wexford.
De  Lissa,  Mrs.  F.,  Bittacy  House,  Mill  Hill,  London,  N.W.
Demming,  Benj.  W.,  1518  State  Street,  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
*Despard,  Mrs.,  2  Currie  Street,  Nine  Elms,  London.  S.W.
Deverell,  Francis,  7  Glendower  Place,  South  Kensington,  London,
S.W.

Devitt,  Mrs.  J.  A.,  Oskaloosa,  Iowa,  U.S.A.
*Dewar,  Rev.  Peter,  The  Manse,  North  Bute,  Rothesay,  Scotland.
Dickie,  H.  Elford,  British  Vice-Consulate,  Kertch,  Crimea,  Russia.
Dickinson,  Miss,  Trebrea  Lodge,  Tintagel,  Cornwall.
Dickinson,  Miss  A.  J.,  3a  Clareville  Grove,  London,  S.W.,  and

Poultry  Court,  Painswick,  Gloucestershire.
Dickinson,  G.  Lowes,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Dicksee,  Frank,  R.A.,  3  Greville  Place,  St.  John's  Wood,  London,

N.W.

Dill,  J.  F.  Gordon,  M.B.,  6  Brunswick  Place,  Brighton.
*Dixon,  Edward  T.,  The  Hard,  Hythe,  Southampton.

Dixon,  Hugh  N.,  17  St.  Matthew's  Parade,  Northampton.

Dixon,  Professor  W.  Macneile,  LL.B.,  Litt.D.,  2  South  Park
Terrace,  Hillhead,  Glasgow,  W.

Doan,  Professor  F.  C,  911  Grove  Street,  Meadville,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

Doane,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  Stockbridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Dodge,  Miss  Mary  H.,  Warwick  House,  St.  James's,  London,  S.W.

Dodge,  Miss  Theodora,  Chipping  Campden,  Gloucestershire.

Donne,  Mrs.,  c/o  Messrs.  Holt  &  Co.,  3  Whitehall  Place,  London,
S.W.

Dorr, George  B., 18 Commonwealth Avenue, Boston,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

*Dougall,  Miss  Lily,  Cutts  End,  Cumnor,  nr.  Oxford.
Douglas,  Mrs.,  4  Campden  House  Road,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Douglas,  Mrs.  Charles,  Auchlochan,  Lesmahagow,  Lanarkshire.
Douglas,  Rev.  Dr.  G.  W.,  Tuxedo  Park,  Orange  County,  New
York,  U.S.A.

*Douglas-Pennant,  Hon.  Violet,  9  Cromwell  Place,  London,  S.W.


494  Members  and  Associates.  [part

Dowson,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  Felixstowe,  The  Park,  Nottingham.
*Doyle,  Sir  A.  Conan,  M.D.,  Windlesham,  Crowborough,  Sussex.
Drake,  Mrs.  A.  J.,  24  Bennington  Street,  Newton,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Drew,  Professor  Eric,  St.  John's  College,  Agra,  India.
Drew,  Ringrose  C,  Seremban,  Negri  Sembelan,  Federated  Malay
States.

Drewry,  Mrs. George, c/o  S.  Hicks,  J. P.,  Rostherne,  Upper

Colwyn  Bay,  N.  Wales.
Duane,  Russell.

Duggin,  Mrs.  Chas.,  25  East  38th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Dulley,  Rev.  B.,  St.  Peter's  Clergy  House,  London  Docks,  E.
*Duncan,  Harold,  43  Fetter  Lane,  London,  E.C.
*Duncan,  Mrs.,  Earlston,  Epsom  Road,  Guildford,  Surrey.

Dunne,  D.  P.,  Yetholme,  Liverpool  Road,  Birkdale,  Southport.
*Dutton,  Miss  A.,  Somerdon,  Sidmouth,  Devon.

Dyce,  Capt.  Cecil,  69  Linden  Gardens,  Bayswater,  London,  W.

Dyson,  Rev.  W.  H.,  Edgerton,  1a  Weld  Road,  Birkdale,  Southport.

Edelsten,  Colonel  John  A.,  Heathercliffe,  Frodsham,  Cheshire.
*Edge,  Selwyn  Francis,  14  New  Burlington  Street,  Regent  Street,
London,  W.

Edie,  H.  S.  Ker,  c/o  Messrs.  Thos.  Cook  &  Son,  Ludgate  Circus,
London,  E.C.

*Edwardes,  Mrs.  Dyer,  5  Hyde  Park  Gate,  Kensington,  London,  W.

Elcho,  Lady,  62  Cadogan  Square,  London,  S.W.
*Elder,  Frederick,  2  Leinster  Place,  London,  W.

Eldred,  Fleet-Paymaster  E.  H.,  R.N.,  c/o  Capital  and  Counties
Bank,  Ltd.,  Southsea,  Hants.

Elliot,  Miss  A.  I.  M.,  Women's  University  Settlement,  44  Nelson
Square,  Blackfriars  Road,  London,  S.E.

Elliot,  Gilbert  C,  Hull  Place,  Deal,  Kent.

Elliot,  Mrs.  Gilbert,  Kasr  el  Nuzha,  Cairo,  Egypt.

Elliott,  Captain  W.  R.,  Sherbrooke,  Quebec.

Ellis,  Herbert,  120  Regent  Road,  Leicester.

Emmerson,  Robert,  M.D.,  Calle  Llave  423,  Chihuahua,  Chih.,
Mexico.

Emmet,  Rev.  C.  W.,  West  Hendred  Vicarage,  Steventon,  Berks.
Engall,  John  S.,  62  Goldsmith  Avenue,  Acton,  London,  W.
Eno,  H.  L.,  Princeton,  New  Jersey,  U.S.A.
*Eno,  J.  C,  Wood  Hall,  Dulwich,  London,  S.E.
Entee,  Professor  B.  A.,  Samaldas  College,  Bhaunagar,  India.
Evans,  Frank  Gwynne,  The  Tower  House,  Woodchester,  Stroud.


lxvii.]  Members  and  Associates.  495

Evans,  W.  A.,  The  Brackley,  Stoneygate  Avenue,  Leicester.
*Fabbri,  Alessandro,  11  East  62nd  Str.,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
*Fabbri,  Ernesto  G.,  11  East  62nd  Str.,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
*Farrer,  The  Dowager  Lady,  Idlerocks,  Stone,  Staffordshire.
*Farrington,  Ernest  A.,  M.D.,  Haddonfield,  N.J.,  U.S.A.

Faulkner,  W.  B.,  52  South  Molton  Street,  London,  W.
*Feilding,  Hon.  Everard,  5  John  Street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.

Ferenczi,  Dr.  Sandor,  VII,  Erzsebet-Korut  54,  Budapest,  Hungary.

Field,  Allan  B.,  P.O.  Box  274,  East  Liberty  Station,  Pittsburg,
Pa.,  U.S.A.

Fillmer,  Horatio  R.,  52  Ship  Street,  Brighton.

Fisk,  Rev.  George,  Tsingchowfu,  Shantung,  China.

Flake,  Mrs.  Albert,  611  Fifth  Avenue,  New  York,  U.S.A.
*Fleetwood-Hesketh, C. H., Stocken  Hall, Stretton,  Oakham,
Rutlandshire.

Fliigel,  J.  C,  Cravenhurst,  Reigate,  Surrey.

Foote,  Geo.  W.,  34  Bull  Street,  Newport,  R.I.,  U.S.A.

Ford,  Miss  Emily  S.,  44  Glebe  Place,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.

Ford,  Mrs.  Hugh,  St.  Regulus,  St.  Andrews,  Scotland.

Forman,  Colonel  R.  H.,  A.M.S.,  c/o  Messrs.  Holt  &  Co.,  3  White-
hall Place,  London,  S.W.

Forrester,  Mrs.,  Tullibody  House,  Cambus,  by  Stirling,  N.B.

Fortescue,  Miss  Frances,  19  Worsley  Road,  Hampstead,  London,
N.W.

*Foster,  Rev.  J.  Edgar,  Lindsey  Vicarage,  Ipswich.

Fotheringham,  W.  B.,  24  Teville  Road,  Worthing.
*Fox,  Mrs.,  Fawe  Park,  Keswick,  Cumberland.

Francis, Arthur,  P.O.  Mazwood, Victoria, Vancouver  Island,
Canada.

*Francis,  Mrs.  Francis,  Palace  House,  Beaulieu,  Hants.
Frankland,  F.  W.,  4  Upper  Bedford  Place,  Russell  Square,  Lon-
don, W.C.

Frankland,  Mrs.  F.  W.,  4  Upper  Bedford  Place,  Russell  Square,

London,  W.C.
Franks,  Mrs.,  51  Dacre  Hill,  Rock  Ferry,  Birkenhead.
Freeman, Miss Adelaide C, Belgrave Mansions,  Grosvenor

Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Freeman,  Rev.  H.  B.,  The  Vicarage,  Burton-on-Trent,  Staffs.
*Frith,  Mrs.,  Swynnerton  Rectory,  Stone,  Staffordshire.
*Frost,  Miss  Annie,  Carnelloe  Cottage,  Zennor,  nr.  St.  Ives,  Corn-
wall.


496


Members  and  Associates.


[taut


Frostick,  J.  A.,  Christchurcli,  New  Zealand.

Fry,  Miss  Agnes,  Failand  House,  Failand,  near  Bristol.
*Fry,  Lewis  George,  Stonycroft,  Limpsfield,  Surrey.

Gabb,  F.  B.,  The  Willows,  Abergavenny,  Wales.

Gaff,  T.  T.,  1520  20th  Street,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.

Gantz,  Mrs.,  The  Rectory,  Norton-in-Hales,  Market  Drayton.

Gardiner,  Professor  H.  N.,  23  Crafts  Avenue,  Northampton,
Mass.,  U.S.A.

Gardner,  Harold  E.,  9  Cook  Street,  Liverpool.
*Gaskell,  Mrs.  J.  B.,  Roseleigh,  Woolton,  Liverpool.
*Gayer,  Gustav  A.,  Ph.D.,  131  West  63rd  Street,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

Gearn,  Dr.  G.  C,  Carnegie  Apartments,  San  Diego,  Cal.,  U.S.A.

Gellert,  J.  W.,  c/o  Box  396,  G.P.O.,  Adelaide,  S.  Australia.
*George,  Mrs.,  Cottage-on-the-Links,  Hindhead,  Haslemere,  Surrey .
*George,  H.  Trevelyan,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  33  Ampthill  Square,
London,  N.W.

Ghose,  Babu  Moti  Lai,  Ananda  Chatterjee's  Lane,  Calcutta,  India.
Gibbes,  C.  S.,  Mojaiskaia  oolitsa,  No.  1,  St.  Petersburg.
Gibson,  Miss  Winifred,  25  Bennett  Park,  Blackheath,  London,
S.E.

Giddings,  Miss  H.  M.,  810-11  New  England  Building,  Cleveland,

Ohio,  U.S.A.
Gloyde,  H.  L.,  Two  Rivers,  Washington,  U.S.A.
*Goldschmidt,  Mrs.  Beni  de,  16  Wilton  Street,  Grosvenor  Place,

London,  S.W.

Goldstein,  Dr.  phil.  J.,  Rossdorferstrasse  81,  Darmstadt,  Germany.
Golejewski,  Lieut. -Colonel  N.,  The  Russian  Embassy,  Washing-
ton, U.S.A.

Golejewski,  Madame,  The  Russian  Embassy,  Washington,  U.S.A.
Gomme,  J.  F.,  196  Oxford  Street,  London,  W.
Gooch,  G.  P.,  South  Villa,  Campden  Hill  Road,  London,  W.
Goodall,  Charles  Henry,  Lucknow  Avenue,  Nottingham.
Goodhart,  Rev.  Charles  A.,  Lambourne  Rectory,  Romford,  Essex.
Gordon,  Mrs.  J.  L.  R.,  c/o  Messrs.  King,  King  &  Co.,  Bombay,
India.

Gough,  A.  B.,  Ph.D.,  Sandcroft,  Uj^per  Bridge  Road,  Redliill,
Surrey.

Gover,  J.  M.,  LL.D.,  5  New  Square,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,  W.C.
Gower, John H., Mus.  Doc. (Oxon.), 1600 Clarkson  Street,
Denver,  Colo.,  U.S.A.


lxvil]


Members  and  Associates.


497


*Grafflin,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  Filston  Manor,  Glencoe,  Baltimore  County,
Md.,  U.S.A.

Graham,  J.  W.,  Dalton  Hall,  Victoria  Park,  Manchester.
Granger,  Professor  Frank,  D.Litt.,  University  College,  Notting-
ham.

*Grant-Suttie,  H.  F.,  Royal  Horse  Artillery,  Rawal  Pindi,  India.
Graveson,  Miss  C,  Goldsmiths'  College,  New  Cross,  London,  S.E.
Gray,  Rev.  Arthur  Romeyn,  Church  Missions  House,  281  Fourth

Avenue,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Gray,  Mrs.  John  C,  176  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Green,  Mrs.  Alan  B.,  Hogarth  House,  Bushey,  Herts.
Greene,  Mrs.  Bertram,  382  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.,

U.S.A.

*Greene,  J.  G.,  34  Stiles  Street,  Elizabeth,  New  Jersey,  U.S.A.

Greet,  Mrs.,  Caens  Wood,  Weybridge,  Surrey.

Greeves,  Rev.  F.  B.,  Cudworth  Vicarage,  Barnsley,  Yorkshire.
*Grenfell,  Mrs.,  c/o  Dr.  Hunt,  Queen's  College,  Oxford.

Grew,  Mrs.  Joseph  Clark,  Rauchstr.  27,  Berlin,  Germany.
*Grey,  R.  C,  Oaklands,  West  Wellow,  Romsey,  Hants.

Gribble,  Miss  F.  M.,  32  Chester  Terrace,  Regent's  Park,  London,
N.W.

Griffith,  Mrs.  R.  W.,  Sherborne  House,  Portishead,  Somerset.
*Grignon,  Miss  A.  E.,  4  Melrose  Avenue,  Cricklewood,  London,  N.W.

Grosvenor,  Hon.  Mrs.  R.  C,  Morrisburne  House,  Woking,  Surrey.

Grottendieck,  W.  G.,  Schenk  Straat  150,  The  Hague.
*Grubbe,  Hubert  H.,  Southwold,  Suffolk.

*Gurbaxani,  Professor  H.  M.,  D.J.  Sind  College,  Karachi,  Sind,
India.

*Guttwoch,  Charles,  7  Kingswood  Avenue,  Queen's  Park,  London,
N.W.

*Gwyn,  W.  J.,  8  Netherhall  Gardens,  South  Hampstead,  London,
N.W.

Hackett,  James  T. ,  Widows'  Fund  Building, Grenfell  Street,
Adelaide,  South  Australia.

Haemmerle,  Madame,  Merdo,  Arendal,  Norway.

Halkett,  Miss  Katherine  E.
*Hall,  Mrs.  Basil,  31  Cadogan  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
*Hall,  J.  P.,  Gorse  Bank,  Werneth,  Oldham.

Hall,  R.  D.,  29  Dryden  Street,  Westcott  Street,  Hull.

Hall,  Wilfred,  9  Priors  Terrace,  Tynemouth,  Northumberland.

Hallett,  Henry  Hiram,  Bridge  House,  Taunton.


498


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*Halsey,  Mrs.,  18  Mount  Street,  Grosvenor  Square,  London,  W.
*Hamar-Nemespann,  La  Baronne  de,  Hoke  Warte  50,  Vienna  XIX,
Austria.

*Hambro,  Mrs.  Eric,  70  Prince's  Gate,  London,  S.W.
Hamilton,  James,  Heversham  School,  Milnthorpe,  Westmoreland.
Hamilton,  J.  J.,  80  Woodland  Rise,  Muswell  Hill,  London,  N.
Hamilton,  W.  Bernard.

Hammond,  Miss  Winifred  B.,  386  East  51st  Street,  Portland,
Oregon,  U.S.A.

Handcock,  Dr.  Charles  L.,  J. P.,  Hornsby,  New  South  Wales,
Australia.

Hankow,  The  Right  Rev.  the  Bishop  of,  Hankow,  China.
Hansard,  Mrs.,  24  Chelsea  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Hanson,  H.  P.,  Box  39,  R.F.D.  Route  No.  5,  Harlan,  Iowa,  U.S.A.
Hanson,  Mrs.,  Pleasaunce  Cottage,  Dormans  Park,  Surrey.
Hardeman,  Miss  Frances  E.,  c/o  G.  T.  Hardeman,  Esq.,  1  Prince's

Park  Terrace,  Liverpool.
Hardie,  Miss  Mabel,  M.B.,  Candello,  577  Finchley  Road,  London,  N.W.
Harding,  Miss  A.  K.,  c/o  Nevett  &  Co.,  21  Park  Road,  Crouch

End,  London,  N.
*Harding,  Wyndham,  19  Bishopsgate,  London,  E.C.
Hare,  Cyril  Lockhart,  Abbotsholme,  Dunstable,  Bedfordshire.
Hargreaves,  Miss,  115  Clarence  Gate  Gardens,  Regent's  Park,

London,  N.W.

Harkness,  Miss  Mary  D.,  Sault  Ste.  Marie,  Ontario,  Canada.
Harradine,  Leslie,  Pepsal  End,  nr.  Luton,  Bedfordshire.
Harris,  Alan  C,  c/o  Messrs.  Morgan,  Harjes  &  Co.,  31  Boulevard
Haussmann,  Paris,  France.
*Harris,  Mrs.  H.  Percy,  98  Gloucester  Terrace,  London,  W.
*Harris,  Hon.  J.,  East  India  United  Service  Club,  16  St.  James's
Square,  London,  S.W.
Harrison,  Rev.  Arthur  S.,  28  Eastgate,  Stafford.
Harrison,  Miss  Jane  E.,  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.
*Hart, Colonel  H.  H.,  R.E.,  c/o  Messrs.  King,  King  &  Co.,
Bombay,  India.

Hart,  Lieut.-General  Sir  Reginald  Clare,  V.C.,  K.C.B.,  K.C.V.O.,
Head-Quarters  House,  Pretoria,  South  Africa.
*Hartness,  James,  Springfield,  Vermont,  U.S.A.

Hartshorn,  Miss  Cornelia,  Milton  P.O.,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Hartshorne, Charles  H., 35 Warren  Place, Montclair,  N.J.,
U.S.A.


lxvil]  Members  and  Associates.  499

Haslehurst,  E.  W.,  72  Burnt  Ash  Hill,  Lee,  London,  S.E.
Hastie,  Miss,  c/o  Messrs.  Street,  30  Cornhill,  London,  E.C.
Hastings,  Rev.  J.  H.,  The  Manor  House,  Halton,  Lancaster.
Hauxhurst,  Mrs.  W.,  c/o  Messrs.  Morgan,  Harjes  &  Co.,  31

Boulevard  Haussmann,  Paris,  France.
Hawarden,  The  Viscountess,  18  Chelsea  Court,  London,  S.W.
Hawkins,  E.  F.,  Villa  des  Troenes,  Livry  (S.  et  O.),  France.
Hayes,  Rev.  Joseph  W.,  West  Thurrock  Vicarage,  Grays,  Essex.
Head,  Miss  Alice  L.,  26  Leinster  Square,  London,  W.
Heard,  G.  H.,  Cheniston,  Highfield  Liane,  Southampton.
Heath,  George  H.,  277  Brockley  Road,  London,  S.E.
Heaton,  Guy,  51  West  Cliff  Road,  Bournemouth.
*Helmsley,  Viscount,  Nawton  Tower,  Nawton,  Yorks.
Henderson,  J.  J.,  Mill  Cottage,  Bonhard,  Perth.
Henderson,  Miss  Lilian,  The  Sesame  Club, 29  Dover  Street,

London,  W.

Henly,  Mrs.  Albert  W.,  Gwydyr  House,  Bromley,  Kent.
Henning,  Mrs.,  4  Upper  Bedford  Place,  Russell  Square,  London,
W.C.

Henrici,  Jacob,  6126  Penn.  Avenue,  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Henry,  Miss  Eva,  1  Argyll  Villas,  Cheltenham.
Herbert-Smith,  Miss  Evelyn  E.,  Raymead,  Park  Road,  Watford,
Herts.

Herschel,  Colonel  John,  F.R.S.,  Royal  Engineers,  Slough,  Bucks.
Heymans,  Prof.  G.,  Ubbo-Emmiussingel  2,  Groningen,  Holland.
Higbee,  Colonel  George  H.,  Burlington,  Iowa,  U.S.A.
Hildyard,  F.  W.,  77a  Lexham  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Hill,  J.  Arthur,  Wensley  Bank,  Thornton,  Bradford.
Hill,  Mrs.  John  Howard,  272  State  Street,  Portland,  Maine,  U.S.A.
*Hillard,  Miss  Mary  R.,  Westover  School,  Middlebury,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
Himes,  Prof.  Charles  F.,  170  W.  Louther  Street,  Carlisle,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

Hinkle,  Beatrice  M.,  M.D.,  110  Madison  Ave.,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

Hoare,  Fred  H.,  37  Fleet  Street,  London,  E.C.

Hoare,  Mrs.  Henry,  20  Montagu  Street,  Portman  Square,  London,  W.
*Hockliffe,  Mrs.  Ernest,  Springdale,  Uppingham.

Hodding,  Miss,  2  The  Avenue,  Bedford  Park,  London,  W.

Hoernle,  Professor  R.  F.  Alfred,  8  Northmoor  Road,  Oxford.
*Hogg,  Sir  Frederick  Russell,  Oriental  Club, Hanover  Square,
London,  W.


500


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*Hogg,  Henry  R.,  23  Hornton  Street,  Kensington,  London,  W.

Holding,  Sam,  Columbia,  Tenn.,  U.S.A.

Holland,  Miss,  1a  Holland  Park,  London,  W.

Hollander,  Bernard,  M.D.,  57  Wimpole  Street,  London,  W.

Hollins,  Mrs.,  24  Sussex  Place,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.

Hollins,  Mrs.  A.  E.,  3  Maid's  Causeway,  Cambridge.

Holme,  Strachan,  Bridgewater  Offices,  Walkden,  Manchester.

Holms,  Mrs.  Douglas,  The  Moorings,  Woodhall  Spa,  Lines.
*Holt,  Henry,  34  West  33rd  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Homan,  C.  H.,  24  Oscarsgade,  Christiania,  Norway.
*Home,  Mrs.  Robert,  b/78  Portsdown  Road,  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.

Hoppin,  J.  C,  310  Sears  Building,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Horn,  W.  J.,  Woldingham,  Surrey.

Horridge,  Miss  J.  G.,  43  Alexandra  Road,  Southport.

Horton,  W.  Claude,  F.R.C.S.,  M.B.,  18  First  Avenue,  Hove,  Sussex.
*Hoskins,  Edmond  J.,  M.D.,  Hammam  Chambers, 76  Jermyn
Street,  London,  S.W.

Houston,  James,  1  Hereford  Mansions,  Hereford  Road,  Bayswater,
London,  W.

Howard,  Miss  Marian,  Dobroyd,  Westgate  Avenue,  Bolton,  Lanes.
Howden,  Mrs.,  11  Eton  Terrace,  Edinburgh.

Howe,  Mrs.  M.  A.  De  Wolfe,  26  Brimmer  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Hubbell,  G.  G.,  3849  Floral  Avenue,  Norwood,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
Hude,  Mrs.  Anna,  Ph.D.,  Anker  Heegaards  Cade  1,  Copenhagen.
Hudson,  Morris,  Aldersey  Croft,  Guildford.

Hughes,  Major  H.  M.,  St.  Elmo,  Victoria  Road,  Worthing,  Sussex.
*Hull,  Mrs.  Carrie  G.,  112  Academy  Street,  Poughkeepsie,  N.Y.,
U.S.A.

Hume-Rothery,  J.  H.,  The  Pines,  Tivoli,  Cheltenham.
Humphreys,  T.  H.  A.,  Survey  Dept.,  Giza  (Mudiria),  Egypt.
*Hunt,  Mrs.  Warwick,  12  Lansdowne  Road,  Holland  Park,  London,
W.

Huntingford,  Miss,  Beverley  Hall,  South  Cliff,  Bournemouth.
Hurwitz,  W.  A.,  Ph.D.,  Cornell  University,  Ithaca,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Hutchinson,  F.  W.  H.,  Grove  Lawns,  St.  Albans,  Herts.
Hutchison,  Mrs.,  c/o  Messrs.  Woodhead  &  Co.,  44  Charing  Cross,
London,  S.W.

Hutton,  E.  Charles  F.,  5  Church  Street,  Cape  Town,  South  Africa.
*Hyslop,  Professor  J.  H.,  519  West  149th  Street,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.


LXVII.]


M embers  and  Associates.


501


Ibbotson,  Miss  Ruth,  8  Trafalgar  Square,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
Imamura,  Prof.  Shinkichi,  Clinic  for  Psychiatry,  Imperial  Uni-
versity, Kioto,  Japan.
Ingalls,  Mrs.  Joseph  A.,  Swampscott,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Ingham,  Charles  B.,  Moira  House,  Eastbourne.
Ingham,  Percy  B.,  Merchant  Taylors'  School,  London,  E.C.
Ingram,  Miss  M.  I.,  The  Priory,  Wimbledon  Common,  London,  S.W.
Innes,  Miss  H.  K.,  Raemoir,  Banchory,  Scotland.
Ionides,  A.  C,  Junr.,  34  Porchester  Terrace,  London,  W.
Ireland,  Gordon,  32  Nassau  Str.,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
*Izod,  C.  H.,  7  Malwood  Road,  Balham  Hill,  Loudon,  S.W.
Jacks,  L.  P.,  28  Holywell,  Oxford.
Jackson,  Mrs.,  44  Park  Street,  Calcutta,  India.
Jackson, Miss  Emily G. A., 40 Hillersdon Avenue,  Barnes,

London,  S.W.
James,  Mrs.,  The  Elms,  Selly  Oak,  Birmingham.

*  Jameson,  David,  New  Castle,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

*Janson,  E.  W.,  11  Eaton  Mansions,  Eaton  Square,  London,  S.W.
Jaye,  William  R.,  Springwood  Lodge,  Oakfield  Road,  Clapton,
London,  N.E.

Jeakes,  Rev.  Prebendary,  4  Cornwall  Terrace,  Regent's  Park,
London,  N.W.

Jenkinson,  W.  E.,  Higkthorn,  King  Cross  Road,  Halifax.
Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.
Johnson,  Charles  R.,  340  Main  Street,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Johnston,  R.  F.,  Weihaiwei,  China.

*  Jones,  Miss  Constance,  Girton  College,  Cambridge.

■■Jones,  Sir  Lawrence  J.,  Bart.,  Cranmer  Hall,  Fakenham,  Norfolk.
Jones,  Miss  Lilian  I.,  120  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.
Josling,  Lieut. -Colonel  C.  L.,  Junior  United  Service  Club,  London,
S.W.

*Judah,  Noble  B.,  2701  Prairie  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
Judd,  Mrs.  Sylvestre  Dwight,  164  Summer  Street,  Maiden,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Karrer,  Enoch,  P.O.  Box  345,  Johns  Hopkins  University,  Balti-
more, Md.,  U.S.A.

Keene,  The  Most  Rev.  J.  B.,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Meath,  Navan,
Co.  Meath.

Keep,  A.  P.  Perceval,  The  Hut,  Holmwood,  Dorking.
*Kelso,  Captain,  R.N.,  Horkesley  Park,  Colchester,  Essex.
Kenneth,  H.,  Lindley,  Bycullah  Park,  Enfield,  Middlesex.


502


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Kenway,  Mrs.,  Mendip  View,  Winscombe,  Somerset.

Ker,  Miss,  1  Windsor  Terrace,  Glasgow,  W.
*Kerr,  George,  M.B.,  6  St.  Colme  Street,  Edinburgh.

Kerr-Clark,  Lady,  Moore  Abbey,  Monasterevan,  Ireland.

Ketkar,  N.  G.,  Amraoti,  Berar,  India.
*Kevill-Davies,  Captain  George,  Cavalry  Barracks,  Abbassia,  Cairo,
Egypt.

*King,  H.  F.  Locke,  J. P.,  Brooklands,  Weybridge,  Surrey.
~x"Kingscote,  Mrs.,  4  Southwick  Crescent,  London,  W.

Kirkwood,  J.  H.  M.,  Poste  Restante,  Nairobi,  British  E.  Africa.
*Kittel,  T.  B.,  Vane  House,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.

Klinckowstroem,  Count  Carl,  Elisabethstrasse  40,  Munich.

Knight,  Charles  N.,  36  Kensington  Park  Road,  London,  W.

Knoller,  Richard,  1  Riemerstrasse  8,  Vienna.

Kothen,  Baron  Axel  von,  27  Mikealsgaten,  Helsingfors,  Finland.
Krebs,  Rev.  Stanley  L.,  Swarthmore,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Lach-Szyrma,  Rev.  W.  S.,  Barkingside  Vicarage,  Ilford,  Essex.
*Laflin,  Mrs.  Louis  E.,  Ellslloyd,  Lake  Forest,  111.,  U.S.A.
Lafone,  A.  W.,  Springfield,  Oatlands  Park,  Walton-on-Thames.
Laing,  R.  M.,  Boys'  High  School,  Christchurch,  New  Zealand.
Lamb,  Charles  George,  77  Glisson  Road,  Cambridge.
Lambert,  Miss  Ada  R.,  c/o  Miss  Lambert,  Ivy  Cottage,  Newick,
Sussex.

Lane-Poole, Professor Stanley, Litt.D., Donganstown  Castle,
Wicklow,  Ireland.

Larken,  E.  P.,  Les  Garennes,  Wimereux,  Pas  de  Calais,  France.

Latham,  Miss  Edith,  3  Avenue  Bugeaud,  Paris.

Latshaw,  Allen,  3414  Sansom  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

Lauritzen,  Severin,  Holte,  Denmark.

Leadam,  Isaac  S.,  21  Cadogan  Gardens,  London,  S.W.

Leaf,  Arthur  H.,  Woodcroft,  Oxted,  Surrey.

Leaf,  Miss  Ellen,  6  Airlie  Gardens,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.

Leaf,  Miss  E.  M.,  4  Barton  Street,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.

Leaf,  Mrs.,  The  Green,  Marlborough,  Wilts.
*Leaf,  Walter,  Litt.D.,  6  SussexPlace,  Regent's  Park,  London, N.W.

Leaf,  Mrs.  Walter,  6  Sussex  Place,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.

Ledyard,  Mrs.  R.  F.  II.,  Cazenovia,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Lee,  Blewett,  1  Park  Row,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.

Lee,  Mrs.  Henry  Thomas,  1143  West  29th  Street,  Los  Angeles,
Cal.,  U.S.A.
*Lees,  Robert  James,  Craigmoi-e,  Ufracombe.


LXVII.]


Members  and  Associates.


503


*Legg,  W.  A.,  18  The  Avenue,  Brondesbury,  London,  N.W.

Leggatt,  Edward  O.  Every,  St.  John's,  St.  Andrews,  Scotland.
*Leigh,  Lord,  Stoneleigh  Abbey,  Kenilworth,  Warwickshire.

Leigh,  W.  Austen,  Hartfield,  Roehampton,  London,  S.W.

Lenon,  J.  W.,  Kiamara  Estate,  Nairobi,  British  East  Africa.

Leon,  Mrs.  Philip,  4m  Montagu  Mansions,  Portman  Square,
London,  W.

Leonard,  Thomas,  223  W.  School  Lane,  Germantown,  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  U.S.A.

Lewin,  Rev.  C.  H.,  The  Hill,  Lower  Bourne,  Farnham,  Surrey.

Lewis,  David  J.,  House  of  Representatives  U.S.,  Washington,
D.C.,  U.S.A.

Lewis,  Francis  B.,  Box  5,  Maraisburg,  Transvaal,  South  Africa.

Librarian,  Public  Library  of  Adelaide,  Australia.

Librarian,  Adelbert  College  of  Western  Reserve  University,  Cleve-
land, Ohio,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Birmingham  Public  Libraries,  Reference  Department,
Ratcliff  Place,  Birmingham.

Librarian,  Bowdoin  College  Library,  Brunswick,  Maine,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Public  Library,  etc.,  Church  Street,  Brighton.

Librarian,  Cambridge  Public  Library,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  City  Library  Association,  Springfield,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Public  Library,  Colorado  Springs,  Colo.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Public  Library  of  the  District  of  Columbia,  Washing-
ton, D.C.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Library  of  Congress,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.

Librarian  (Hon.)  of  the  Constitutional  Club,  Northumberland
Avenue,  London,  W.C.

Librarian,  Enoch  Pratt  Free  Library  of  Baltimore  City,  Baltimore,
Md.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Grosvenor  Public  Library,  c/o  Messrs.  Stevens  &  Brown,

4  Trafalgar  Square,  London,  W.C.

Librarian,  Guildhall  Library,  London,  E.C.

Librarian,  Hackley  Public  Library,  Muskegon,  Mich.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Harvard  College  Library,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Leeds  Library,  Commercial  Street,  Leeds.

Librarian,  Library  Association,  Portland,  Oregon,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Meadville  Theological  School,  Meadville,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Mercantile  Library,  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Minneapolis  Athenaeum,  Minneapolis,  Minn.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Newberry  Library,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.

•2  k


504


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Librarian,  Literary  and  Philosophical  Society,  Newcastle-upon-Tyne.
Librarian,  Public  Library,  New  Bridge  Street,  Newcastle-upon-Tyne.
Librarian,  New  Hampshire  State  Library,  Concord,  N.H.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Public  Library  of  New  South  Wales, c/o  Messrs.

Truslove  &  Hanson,  153  Oxford  Street,  London,  W.
Librarian,  New  York  Public  Library,  c/o  Messrs.  Stevens  &  Brown,

4  Trafalgar  Square,  London,  W.C.
Librarian,  Ohio  State  Library,  Columbus,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
-Librarian,  Omaha  Public  Library  and  Museum,  19  and  Harvey

Streets,  Omaha,  Nebraska,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Pennsylvania  State  Library,  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Peoria  Public  Library,  Peoria,  111.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Seattle  Public  Library,  Seattle,  Washington,  U.S. A
Librarian,  Somerville  Public  Library,  Somerville,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Theological  Seminary,  Rochester,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Theosophical  Society,  19  Tavistock  Square,  London,  W.C.
Librarian,  The  University,  Aberdeen.

Librarian,  Bibliotheque  Victor  Cousin,  L'Universite  de  Paris.
Librarian,  University  of  Minnesota  Library,  Minneapolis,  Minne-
sota, U.S.A.

Librarian,  University  of  Pennsylvania,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  University  of  Sydney,  New  South  Wales,  Australia.
Librarian;  Victoria  Public  Library,  Melbourne,  Australia.
Librarian,  Wellesley  College,  Wellesley,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Dr.  Williams's  Library,  Gordon  Square,  London,  W.C.
Librarian,  Free  Public  Library,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Yale  University  Library,  New  Haven,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
Livingstone,  Rev.  W.  0.,  355  Greenwood  Avenue,  Kankakee,  111.,  U.S.A.
*Llewellin,  Mrs.  W.,  Upton  House,  nr.  Poole,  Dorset.
Lloyd,  Brig. -General  Francis.
Lloyd,  Judge  Frank  T.,  Camden,  N.J.,  U.S.A.

Lloyd,  Rev.  John,  The  Elms,  Forest  Avenue,  Fond-du-Lac,  Wis-
consin, U.S.A.

Lloyd,  Miss  Julia,  Farm,  Sparkbrook,  Birmingham.
*Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  F.R.S.,  Mariemont,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.

Lodge,  Robert,  Compton  Wood,  28  Carlisle  Road,  Eastbourne.

Loewenstein,  Amtsrichter  Dr.,  Heimhuderstrasse  32,  Hamburg,
Germany.

Lomax,  Arthur,  Heilbron,  O.R.C.,  S.  Africa.

Lombardi,  C,  2231  Le  Conte  Avenue,  Berkeley,  Cai.,  U.S.A.,  and
c/o  The  Dallas  News,  Dallas,  Texas,  U.S.A.


LXVII.]


Members  and  Associates.


505


Long,  T.  K.,  4823  Kimbark  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
Low,  Miss  Ursula,  22  Roland  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Lubbock,  Mrs.  Geoffrey,  Greenbill,  Sutton- Veny,  Wiltshire.
Luke,  James,  Box  No.  183,  G.P.O.,  Calcutta.
Lyall,  Sir  Charles  James,  82  Cornwall  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
*Lyall,  Edward,  Barton,  R.S.O.,  Darlington.
Lyell,  D.,  407  Lake  of  the  Woods  Building,  St.  John  Street,

Montreal,  Canada.
*Lyon,  Miss  C. C, Salt  Haven,  French  Creek,  nr.  Nanaimo,
British  Columbia.
Lyttelton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Alfred,  16  Great  College  Street,  Westminster,
London,  S.W.

Macdonald,  Prof.  Duncan  Black,  Hartford  Theological  Seminary,

Hartford,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
Macdonald,  Lieut. -Colonel  F.,  Neemuch,  Central  India.
Macdonald,  Miss  Isabelle  M.,  M.B.,  47  Seymour  Street,  Portman

Square,  London,  W.
Macdonald,  Mrs.,  Dun  Erin,  Chalfont  St.  Peter,  Bucks.
MacGregor,  Arthur  C,  8  Longford  Terrace,  Monkstovvn,  Co.  Dublin.
Mackintosh,  R.  D.,  M.B.,  The  Bungalow,  Mortlake,  Surrey.
Macklin,  Miss  Helen  E.,  141  Inverness  Terrace,  London,  W.
Macnaughtan,  Miss,  1  Norfolk  Street,  Park  Lane,  London,  W.
MacVeagh, Lincoln, 52 Plympton Street, Cambridge,  Mass.,

U.S.A.

Madocks,  Major  H.  J.,  1a  Ovington  Square,  London,  S.W.
Mahler,  Mrs.  John,  Bronygarth,  Oswestry,  Salop.
Mainwaring,  Mrs.,  II  Wilton  Crescent,  London,  S.W.
Mallet,  Miss  A.  V.,  Anlaby  House,  25  Highbury  New  Park,
London,  N.

Mallet,  Sir  Louis,  182  Ebury  Street,  London,  S.W.

Mander,  Charles  A.,  The  Mount,  Wolverhampton,  Staffs.
*Mander,  Geoffrey  Le  Mesurier,  Wightwick  Manor,  Wolverhampton.

Mandeville,  Mrs.  James  I.,  1546  South  6th  Street,  Terre  Haute,
Indiana,  U.S.A.

Mangin,  Marcel,  102  Rue  Erlanger,  Paris.

Mann,  Rev.  Frederic,  Temple  Ewell  Vicarage,  Dover.

Manners-Smith,  J.  A.,  Coniston,  Haslemere,  Surrey.

Mansell,  Andrew  Evans,  Hammerstene,  Bagdad,  Tasmania.
*Mansfield,  Mrs.  Richard,  The  Grange,  New  London,  Conn.,  U.S.A.

Mantell,  Colonel  A.  M.,  Arolla,  Warren  Road,  Guildford,  Surrey.

Marks,  Mrs.  Claude,  15  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Marsh,  Edward  H.,  3  Gray's  Inn  Place,  London,  W.C.
Marshall,  Mrs.  Fred,  29  Dover  Street,  London,  W.
Marshall,  William  Cecil,  Tweenways,  Hindhead,  Haslemere.
Marston,  Charles,  J. P.,  Afcot,  Compton,  nr.  Wolverhampton.
*Marston,  Commander  G.  M.,  R.N.,  Park  Lodge,  Albert  Gate,

Knightsbridge,  London,  S.W.
Marten,  Miss  A.  R.,  78  Vanbrugh  Park,  Blackheath,  London,  S.E.
Marten,  Rev.  G.  H.,  Tatsfield  Rectory,  Westerham,  Kent.
Martin,  Mrs.  J.  Biddulph,  Norton  Park,  Bredon's  Norton,  near

Tewkesbury.

Martin,  Thomas  Beecham,  Wanstead  College,  South  Woodford,

London,  N.E.
Martineau,  Alfred  Edward.

Martinengo-Cesaresco, Countess, Palazzo Martinengo,  Sal6,  Lago

di  Garda,  Italy.
-"Mason,  Frank,  7  Stanley  Crescent,  London,  W.
Mason,  Miss  M.  H.,  5  Vincent  Square  Mansions,  Westminster,

London,  S.W.

Massey,  Hon.  Mary,  80  Royal  Hospital  Road,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.

Matesdorf,  Miss  Sybil,  83  Cadogan  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
'"Mather,  Rev.  Herbert,  13  Grosvenor  Road,  East  Grinstead,  Sussex.
*Mathews,  Mrs.,  15  Stanley  Gardens,  London,  W.

Mattiesen,  Emil,  Ph.D.,  c/o  Frau  Hide,  Zippendorf,  nr.  Schwerin,
Mecklenburg,  Germany.

Mavrogordato,  John  N.,  52  Queen's  Gate  Gardens,  London,  S.W.

Maxim, Sir Hiram S., Sandhurst Lodge, 382 High  Road,
Streatham,  London,  S.W.

Maxwell,  Dr.  Joseph,  6  Rue  Villaret-de-Joyeuse,  Paris.
-Maxwell,  Sir  John  Stirling,  Bart.,  21  Portland  Place,  London,  W.

Mayor,  R.  G.,  11  Campden  Hill  Square,  Kensington,  London,  W.

M'Alpine,  Robert,  Balclutha,  Greenock,  N.B.

M'Clellan,  Mrs.  Clara  D.,  Briarcliff  Manor,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
M'Clure, Henry, M.D., 30  Portland Court, Portland  Place,
London,  W.

M'Connel,  H.  W.,  M.B.,  M.R.C.S.,  Matlaske  Hall,  Norwich;

and  11  Eton  Avenue,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.
M'Connel,  Mrs.,  Matlaske  Hall,  Norwich  ;  and  11  Eton  Avenue,

Hampstead,  London,  N.W.
* M'Dougall,  Isaac  S.,  The  Orchard,  off  Arthog  Road,  Hale,  Cheshire.
M'Dougall,  William,  F.R.S.,  M.Sc,  M.B.,  Woodsend,  Foxcombe

Hill,  nr.  Oxford.


LXVII.]


Members  and  Associates.


507


M'Keever,  Buell,  3900  Lake  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
Mead,  G.  R.  S.,  16  Selwood  Place,  Onslow  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Meek,  Maximilian  de,  5  Rue  Debrousse,  Paris.
Meebold,  Alfred,  Heidenheim,  Wurtemberg,  Germany.
Megson,  Albert,  Fern  Villa,  Headlands,  Ossett,  Yorks.
Mehrji,  Munchershaw  Hormusji,  M.D.,  3  Batlivala  Villa,  Sleater

Road,  Bombay,  India.
Meissner,  Mrs.  de,  c/o  Union  of  London  and  Smith's  Bank,  2  Prince's

Street,  London,  E.G.
Mellone,  Rev.  Sydney  Herbert,  D.Sc,  10  Hartington  Gardens,

Edinburgh.

Menendez-Mena,  Rodolfo,  LL.D.,  D.Sc,  Apartado  24,  Merida,
Yucatan,  Mexico.

Merwin,  Miss  Mary  F.,  668  Hancock  Street,  Brooklyn,  NY.,  U.S.A.

Metcalfe,  Mrs.  G.  R.,  The  Aberdeen,  St.  Paul,  Minnesota,  U.S.A.

Meyer,  Rev.  F.  B.,  Regent's  Park  Chapel,  Park  Square  East,
London,  N.W.
*Micklethwait,  Richard  K.

Milburn,  Rev.  R.  Gordon,  Bishop's  College,  Calcutta,  India.
--Mildmay,  The  Hon.  Mrs.  St.  John,  121  Mount  Street,  London,  W.
*Miles,  Miss,  59  Egerton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
*Millard,  Mrs.  Almira  B.,  2505  Farnam  Str.,  Omaha,  Neb.,  U.S.A.

Millard,  Charles  Killick,  M.D.,  D.Sc,  Gilroes,  Leicester.
*Miller,  Prof.  Dickinson  S.,  Columbia  University,  New  York,  U.S.A.
-Miller,  Miss  Elizabeth  L.,  Greenriver,  Bonchester  Bridge,  Hawick,
N.B.

Milne,  A.  M.  Lees,  Ribbesford  House,  Bewdley,  Worcestershire.
*Mirlees,  W.  J.,  11  Cranmer  Road,  Cambridge.
Mistri,  Jeejeebhoy  P.,  Jamsetjee  Nesserwanjee  Petit  Institute,

Hornby  Road,  Bombay,  India.
Mitchell,  Sidney  J.,  c/o  D.  Mitchell  &  Co.,  Box  77,  G.P.O.,  New-
castle, N.S.W.,  Australia.
♦Mitchell,  T.  W.,  M.D.,  Hoath  Cottage,  Hadlow,  nr.  Tonbridge.
Moggridge,  Miss  Edith,  Stanfield  House,  High  Street,  Hampstead,
London,  N.W.
*Money-Coutts,  Francis  Burdett.
Monteagle, The  Lord,  K.P., Mount  Trenchard, Foynes,  Co.
Limerick.

Montgomery,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  Byways,  Exmouth,  Devon.
Moor,  Lady,  89  Linden  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.,  and
Ladbroke,  Chine  Crescent,  West  Cliff,  Bournemouth.


508


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Moore,  Professor  Franklin,  M.D., 114  West  Commerce  Street,

Bridgeton,  N.J.,  U.S.A.
Moore, Major  H. G. A., East  Yorkshire  Regiment,  Fulford

Barracks,  York.
*Moore,  Admiral  W.  Usborne,  8  Western  Parade,  Southsea.
Morison,  Mrs.  Miller,  4  Randolph  Cliff,  Edinburgh  ;  and  Morison

House,  Hetland,  Ruthwell,  N.B.
Morley,  Edwin  W.,  Andover,  Ashtobula  County,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
Morris,  Mrs.,  Iiorsley  Hall,  Eccleshall,  Staffs.
Morton,  Mrs.  F.  N.,  73  West  La  Crosse  Avenue,  Lansdowne,  Pa.,

U.S.A.

Moses,  E.  J.,  c/o  Messrs.  E.  D.  Sassoon  &  Co.,  2  Rampart  Row,
Bombay.

*Mosscockle,  Mrs.,  26  Hertford  Street,  Mayfair,  London,  W.
Moultrie,  Miss  A.  J.  C.

Mukerjea,  Dr.  M.  M.,  Uttarpara,  Calcutta,  India.

Miiller,  Fraulein  A.,  78  Vanbrugh  Park,  Blackheath,  London,  S.E.

Munro,  Hector,  M.B.,  27  Lower  Seymour  Street,  London,  W.

Murgoci,  Prof.  George,  Str.  Transylvania  13,  Bucarest,  Roumania.
''Murray,  Donald,  Mildmay  Park  Works,  Mildraay  Avenue,  London,  N.
-'Murray,  Professor  Gilbert,  LL.D.,  82  Woodstock  Road,  Oxford.

Murton,  Miss  Josephine,  The  Firs,  Charing,  Kent.

Myers,  Professor  Charles  S.,  M.D.,  Galewood  Tower,  Great  Shel-
ford,  Cambs.

xMyers,  Mrs.  F.  W.  H.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.
*Myers,  L.  H.,  Leckhampton  House,  Cambridge.

Myers,  W.  Wykeham,  M.B.,  H.B.M.'s  Consular  Agency,  Pagoda
Anchorage,  China.

Nash,  Joseph,  The  White  House,  Somerleyton,  Lowestoft.
*Neale,  Edward,  c/o  Mr.  Herbert  Bishop,  29  Ludgate  Hill,  London,  E.C.

Neild,  Miss  Maria,  27  Brompton  Square,  London,  S.W.

Neustadter,  Louis  W.,  4G1  Mission  Street,  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
*Newcastle,  The  Duke  of,  Clumber,  Worksop,  Notts.
*Newmann,  Oscar  P.,  84  Newman  Street,  London,  W.

Newton,  Miss  I.,  20  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.

Newton,  Heber,  Oamaru,  New  Zealand.

Newton,  Rev.  R.  Heber,  D.D.,  183  East  Putnam  Avenue,  Green-
wich, Conn.,  U.S.A.
*Nicoll,  Mrs.  DeLancey,  23  East  39th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Nicolls,  Brig. -General  E.  G.,  United  Service  Club,  Pall  Mall,
London,  S.W.


LXVII.]


Members  and  Associates.


509


Nicolson,  Right  Hon.  Sir  Arthur,  Bart.,  G.C.B.,  etc.,  Foreign
Office,  Downing  Street,  London,  S.W.

*Nisbet,  E.  T.,  13  Beverley  Terrace,  Cullercoats,  Northumberland.

*Niven,  Mrs.  Graham,  The  Golden  Farm,  Cirencester,  Gloucester-
shire.

Noel,  Miss  Frances,  40  Beaufort  Mansions,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
Noel-Cox,  H.  L.,  M.D.,  F.R.A.S.,  11  Clifton  Hill,  Clifton,  Bristol.
*Norris,  Professor  Richard,  M.D.,  F.R.S.E., The  Laboratory,
Yardley  Fields,  Yardley,  Birmingham.
Northcote,  Rev.  H.,  17  Rue  Simoneau,  Boulogne-sur-Mer,  France.
Nutter,  Miss  H.  G.,  Beechcroft,  The  Avenue,  Cambridge.
Oates,  R.  Crosbie,  The  Chalet,  Park  West,  Heswall,  Cheshire.
*Odell,  L.  E.,  Casa  Central  Florida  864,  Buenos  Aires,  Argentine
Republic.

Odell,  S.  W.,  202  Boston  Building,  Pasadena,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
Ogilvie,  Mrs.  Robert,  c/o  R.  G.  Ross,  11  Hill  Street,  Edinburgh.
Ogle,  Captain  N.,  67th  Punjabis,  Quetta,  Baluchistan,  India.
Oldham,  G.  F.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Rostrevor,  Langton  Green,

Tunbridge  Wells.
^Olivier, Sir Sydney, K.C.M.G., Board of Agriculture  and

Fisheries,  4  Whitehall  Place,  London,  S.W.
Oman,  Professor  Charles  W.  C,  Frewin  Hall,  Oxford.
Onslow,  Lady,  Chevin  Bank,  Duffield,  Derbyshire.
*Onslow,  Hon.  H.,  Clandon  Park,  Guildford.
Osborne,  Miss  H.,  2  Northcote  Mansions,  Heath  Street,  Hamp-

stead,  London,  N.W.
Overton,  Mrs.  Winfield  S.,  340  East  31st  Street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.,

U.S.A.

*Owen,  A.  S.,  Keble  College,  Oxford.
Pack  Beresford, Denis  R.,  Fenagh  House, Bagenalstown,  Co.
Carlo  w.

Pagan,  Miss  C,  Marston  Lodge,  Harrow.

Paget,  Sir  Arthur,  9  King's  Bench  Walk,  Temple,  London,  E.C.

Paley,  Mrs.,  Ampton  Hall,  Bury  St.  Edmunds.

Parke,  Roderick  J.,  179  Cottingham  Street,  Toronto,  Canada.

Parker,  Sir  Gilbert,  D.C.L.,  M.P.,  20  Carlton  House  Terrace,
London,  S.W.
*Parkin,  John,  Blaithwaite,  Carlisle.

Parkin,  Mrs.,  The  Mount,  Sheffield.
*Parsons,  A.  J.,  Sycamore  Farm,  Clifton,  York.

Parsons,  N.  M.,  22  Barkston  Gardens,  London,  S.W.


510


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Pask,  A.  F.,  College  House,  Brunswick  Street,  Manchester.
Pass,  Harry  de,  7e  Grove  End  Road,  London,  N.W.
Patel,  F.  J.,  L.R.C.P.,  3  Church  Gate  Street,  Bombay.
Paterson,  Miss  Mary  N.,  3  Devonshire  Terrace,  Ventnor,  Isle  of
Wight.

Paul,  J.  Rodman,  505  Chestnut  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Payne,  Ernest,  10  Wellington  Court,  Knightsbridge,  London,  S.W.
Pease,  Mrs.  J.  R.,  Hesslewood,  Hessle,  Yorks.
Peckham,  Orville,  First  National  Bank,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
Penha,  Paul  de  la.

Pennington,  Mrs.  Henry,  Beaumont,  Camberley,  Surrey.
Penny,  W.  R.,  Office  of  the  Chief  Railway  Storekeeper,  Cape

Town,  South  Africa.
Percival,  Mrs.,  1  Chesham  Street,  Belgrave  Square,  London,  S.W.
*Perdicaris,  Ion,  The  Manor  House,  Chislehurst,  Kent.
*Perez,  Dr.  Jorge,  Puerto  de  Orotava,  Teneriffe,  Canary  Isles.
Perkins,  Miss  S.  R.,  c/oDr.  Perkins,  57  Harley  Street,  London,  W.
*Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo,  The  Count,  5  Panteleimonovskaia,  St.
Petersburg.

Perowne,  Miss  Edith,  11  Harvey  Road,  Cambridge.

Perry, Sir  E. Cooper, M.D., Superintendent's House,  Guy's

Hospital,  London,  S.E.
Perry,  T.  S.,  c/o  Perier  et  Cie,  59  rue  de  Province,  Paris.
Perry,  Mrs.  T.  S.,  c/o  Perier  et  Cie,  59  rue  de  Province,  Paris.
Philijose,  Miss  Margaret  Gouverneur,  142  West  71st  Street,  New

York  City,  U.S.A.
"-Phillimore,  Mrs.,  Battler's  Green,  Letchmore  Heath,  Watford,

Herts .

Pickering,  J.  W.,  D.Sc,  Sundridge,  Russell  Hill,  Purley,  Surrey.
*Piddington,  J.  G.,  Holy  Well,  Hook  Heath,  Woking,  Surrey.
*Piercy,  Major  B.  IT.,  Marchwiel  Hall,  Wrexham;  and  Villa  Piercy,
Sardinia.

Pigou,  Professor  Arthur  Cecil,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
*Pilcher,  Giles  T.,  Treryn,  Frith  Hill,  Godalming,  Surrey.
Pinchot,  Gifford,  1615  R.I.  Avenue,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
Piper, John  E., LL.B., 10  Herondale Avenue,  Wandsworth

Common,  London,  S.W.
Pithapuram,  The  Rajah  of,  Pithapuram,  Godavari  Dist.,  Madras
Presidency,  India.
*Pitt,  St.  George  Lane  Fox,  Travellers'  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,
S.W.


LXVII.]


Members  and  Associates.


511


Plowden,  Mrs.,  Strachur  Park,  Loch  Fyne  Side,  Argyllshire.
Plurner-Willson,  Mrs.  W.,  20  Laurence  Road,  Hove,  Brighton.
Pogson  Smith,  Mrs.  E.,  Bourkes,  Blackhall  Rd.,  Oxford.
Ponsonby,  Hon.  Mrs.  C.  B.,  14  West  Halkin  Street,  London,  S.W.
Pontifex,  Dudley,  73  Alleyn  Park,  West  Dulwich,  London,  S.E.
Pooley,  Mrs.  Thomas  E.,  Fernhill,  Victoria,  B.C.,  Canada.
*Pope,  Miss  Theodate,  Hillstead,  Farmington,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
Popoff,  General  James,  Sosnitza,  Gov.  Tchernigov,  Russia.
Porter,  Miss  Agatha,  M.D.,  18  Kensington  Park  Road,  Notting

Hill,  London,  W.
Portsmouth,  The  Countess  of,  Hurstbourne  Park,  Whitchurch,

Hants.

Post,  Mrs.  Wm,  St.  Lucie,  Fla.  ;  and  Buckhannon,  W.  Va,,  U.S.A.
*Potter,  John  Wilson,  219  Ashley  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Pou,  Hon.  E.  W.,  House  of  Representatives,  Washington,  D.C.,
U.S.A.

Powell,  C.  Berkeley,  J. P.,  283  Metcalfe  Street,  Ottawa,  Canada.
Powles,  Lewis  Charles,  The  Highlands,  Rye,  Sussex.
*Pring,  C.  H.,  278  Old  Kent  Road,  London,  S.E.
Pumphrey,  Mrs.,  Hindley  Hall,  Stocksfield-on-Tyne.
Putnam,  Miss  Irene,  Bennington,  Vt.,  U.S.A.
Pye,  W.  A.,  Priest  Hill,  Limpsfield,  Surrey.

Pym,  Mrs.  Guy,  35  Cranley  Gardens,  South  Kensington,  London,
S.W.

Pym,  Leslie  Ruthven,  Alnwick,  Northumberland.
Quackenbos,  John  D.,  M.D.,  331  West  28th  Street,  New  York
City,  U.S.A.

*Quinby,  Rev.  John  W.,  East  Bridgewater,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Radcliffe-Whitehead,  Ralph,  Woodstock,  Ulster  Co.,  N.Y.,  U.S.  A.

Rae,  James,  Villa  Laurel,  San  Jacopo,  Livorno,  Italy.

Raggett,  Mrs.,  70  Maida  Vale,  London,  W.

Raikes,  E.  B.,  Drayton  Old  Lodge,  Norwich.

Raikes,  Mrs.,  Beomonds,  Chertsey,  Surrey.
*Raines,  Lady,  46  Sussex  Gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Raj,  Des,  Kasur,  Dist.  Lahore,  Punjab,  India.

Ramsden,  Miss,  Bulstrode,  Gerrard's  Cross,  Bucks.

Ransom,  Francis,  Chilterns,  Hitchin,  Herts.

Ransom,  H.  B.,  28  Belsize  Park  Gardens,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.

Raper,  R.  W.,  Trinity  College,  Oxford.
*Rashdall,  Rev.  Hastings,  New  College,  Oxford.
*Rashleigh,  John  C.  S.,  M.D.,  Throwleigh,  Okehampton.


512


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Reacle, Herbert  V., 32  Palace  Gardens  Terrace,  Kensington,
London,  W.

*Reckett,  Miss  Juliet  E.,  20  Dulwich  Wood  Park,  Upper  Norwood,
London,  S.E.

Redgrove,  H.  Stanley,  191  Camden  Road,  London,  N.W.
Regina  Madre,  S.  M.  La,  Palazzo  Margherita,  Rome.
*Reinkardt,  C.  E.,  M.D.,  29  Onslow  Square,  London,  S.W.
Remacle,  Georges,  22  Rue  de  l'Athenee,  Arlon,  Belgium.
Rendall,  Rev.  Dr.  G.  H.,  Dedham  House,  Dedham,  Essex.
Rice,  Mrs.  David  Hall,  2  Wellington  Terrace,  Brookline,  Mass..
U.S.A.

Richardson,  Frederick  W.,  County  Analyst's  Office,  Hustlergate,
Bradford.

*Ridley,  Henry  N.,  F.R.S.,  C.M.G.,  7  Cumberland  Road,  Kew,
Surrey.

*Ridley,  Miss,  Stagshaw,  Dalekam  Gardens,  London,  N.W.
Ridley,  The  Viscountess, 10  Carlton  House  Terrace,  London,
S.W.

Ritchie,  Thomas,  J. P.,  Overstrand  Lodge,  Cromer,  Norfolk.
Ritter,  Miss,  7  Park  Place,  St.  James's,  London,  S.W.
Riviere,  Mrs.  Evelyn,  10  Nottingham  Terrace,  York  Gate,  London,
N.W.

-Robbins,  Miss  A.  M.,  Room  138,  State  House,  Boston,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Robbins,  Rufus  M.,  Titusville,  Brevard  County,  Florida,  U.S.A.

Roberts,  Mrs.  Hugh,  53  F.O.  Quarters,  Europa,  Gibraltar.
*Roberts,  Lady,  Bryngwenallt,  Abergele,  N.  Wales.
♦Roberts,  R.  Nevill,  29  Finchley  Roacl,  London,  N.W.

Roberts,  W.  M.,  Bar  Harbor,  Maine,  U.S.A.

Robertson,  Mrs.  J.  G.,  90  Regent's  Park  Road,  London,  N.W.

Robinson,  George  R.,  31  James  Street,  Liverpool.

Robinson,  Nelson  L.,  381  Central  Park  West,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

Robotham, C.  E., 12  Clapham  Mansions, Clapham  Common,
London,  S.W.

Rogers,  Edmund  J.  A.,  M.D.,  CM.,  222  West  Colfax  Avenue,

Denver,  Colo.,  U.S.A.
*Rogers,  George  F.,  M.D.,  4  King's  Parade,  Cambridge.
Rogers, T. Percival, Henleaze Park,  Westbury-on-Trym,

Gloucestershire.

Rolleston,  Mrs.,  Ballyhenry,  Ashford,  Co.  Wicklow,  Ireland.


LXVII.]


Members  and  Associates.


513


Rolleston,  T.  W.,  Ifield,  16  Prince  Arthur  Road,  Hampstead,
London,  N.W.
*Romanes,  N.  H.,  Christ  Chinch,  Oxford.
Rose,  Mrs.  Guy,  The  Judson,  53  South  Washington  Square,  New

York  City,  U.S.A.
Rosenberger,  James,  Sellersville,  Bucks  Co.,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
*Rothschild,  Mrs.  Leopold  de,  5  Hamilton  Place,  London,  W.
*Riicker,  Sir  A.  W.,  F.R.S.,  19  Gledhow  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Rundle,  Miss  M.  G.,  Varese,  Burghley  Road,  Wimbledon,  London,
S.W.

Ryan, Mrs., The New York Sun, 1 Arundel Street,  Strand,
London,  W.C.

Ryves, Miss  Evangeline,  Damory Cottage,  Walton-on-the-Hill,
Surrey.

Sabine, Mrs. G., Llanteens Lodge, Llanvihangel  Crucorney,

Abergavenny,  Wales.
Sadgrove,  W.  Arthur,  Clonarel,  Foxley  Lane,  Purley,  Surrey.
St.  Davids,  The  Lady,  3  Richmond  Terrace,  Whitehall,  London,  S.W.
St.  Hill,  Mrs.,  Thimble,  Littlewick  Green,  Berks.
Samaldas,  Hon.  Lalubhai,  99  Apollo  Street,  Fort,  Bombay,  India.
Sampson,  Colonel  Dudley,  Buxshalls,  Lindfield,  Hayward's  Heath.
Sanderson,  W.  R.,  Via  Nomentana  58,  Rome,
Saunders,  Miss  E.  R.,  Newnham  College,  Cambridge.
Saunders,  W.  E.,  Riovista,  Torresdale,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
*Savage,  Rev.  M.  J.,  D.D.,  1867  Crawford  Road,  Cleveland,  Ohio,

U.S.A.

Savill,  Mrs.,  M.D.,  66  Harley  Street,  London,  W.

Sayer,  Miss  Ettie,  M.B.,  35  Upper  Brook  Street,  London,  W.
*Scatcherd,  Miss  F.  R.,  Ringmore  House,  Quarry  Road,  Hastings.
*Schiller,  F.  C.  S.,  D.Sc,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.

Schmidt,  Julius,  582  Woolwich  Road,  Charlton,  London,  S.E.

Schofield,  Mrs.,  1  Phillimore  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.

Schreiner,  Miss  Julia,  56  Eaton  Square,  London,  S.W.

Schuster,  Miss,  Cottenham  House,  Wimbledon,  London,  S.W.

Scott,  Rev.  D.  D.,  The  Manse,  Onehunga,  Auckland,  New  Zealand.
*Scott,  Captain  G.  B.,  S.W.  Militia,  Wana,  Waziristan,  India.
*Scott,  Sydney  C,  92  Westbourne  Terrace,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.

Scott,  W.  Sibbald,  M.B.,  The  Lymes,  Ellesmere,  Salop.
*Scott-Gatty,  Sir  Alfred  S.,  K.C.V.O.,  F.S.A.,  Garter  King  of
Arms,  Wendover  Lodge,  Welwyn,  Herts.

Scripps,  Thomas  Cecil,  13  Woronzow  Road,  London,  N.W.


514


Members  and  Associates.


[Part


Sedgwick,  Mrs.  H.  D.,  120  E.  22nd  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Senathi  Raja,  E.  S.  W.,  LL.B.,  The  Grange,  Tiivandrum,  India.
Seymour, Admiral of the Fleet Sir E. H., O.M.,  G.C.B.,

G.C.V.O.,  Queen  Anne's  Mansions,  St.  James's  Park,  London,

S.W.

Shackleford,  Hon.  Thomas  M.,  Tallahassee,  Florida,  U.S.A.
Shaddick,  W.  Harris,  Lynclhurst,  99  Montague  Road,  Leytonstone,
London,  N.E.

Shakespear,  Mrs.,  12  Brunswick  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.

Shand,  Alexander  F.,  1  Edwardes  Place,  Kensington,  London,  W.
*Shaw,  Mrs.  Bernard,  10  Adelphi  Terrace,  Strand,  London,  W.C.
*Shaw,  Rev.  Sir  Charles  J.  Monson,  Bart.,  The  Rectory,  Wrotham,
Kent.

Shaw,  Mrs.  W.  N.,  10  Moreton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.

Sheets,  J.  C,  7  Glenwood  Apartments,  College  Hill  Station,

Cincinnati,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
Sheldon,  A.  F.,  Rockefeller,  111.,  U.S.A.
*Shewan,  R.  G.,  c/o  Shewan,  Tomes  &  Co.,  Hong  Kong,  China.
"Shove,  Miss  E.,  M.B., 30  York  Street  Chambers,  Bryanston

Square,  London,  W.
Shuttleworth,  Miss  C.  J.,  10  Cottesmore  Gardens,  Kensington,
London,  W.  »
*Sidgwick,  Arthur,  LL.D.,  64  Woodstock  Road,  Oxford.

Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Edward,  25  Collingham  Road,  London,  S.W.
*Sidgwick,  Mrs.  H.,  27  Grange  Road,  Cambridge.
Sidgwick,  Miss  Rose,  64  Woodstock  Road,  Oxford.
Siegel,  Mrs.  Henry,  51  Avenue  de  Malakoff,  XVI6,  Paris.
Silver,  Mrs.,  24  Victoria  Square,  London,  S.W.
Simmonds,  Miss  C.  E.,  33  Clarence  Gate  Gardens,  Baker  Street,
London,  N.W.

Simpson,  Commander  H.  V.,  R.N.,  Kylintra,  Portrude  Park,

Weybridge,  Surrey.
Singh,  Amar,  Hoshiarpur,  Punjab,  India.

Sivudu,  R.  Venkata,  The  College,  Guntur,  Madras  Presidency,
India.

Skipwith,  Mrs.,  1  Culford  Gardens,  Sloane  Square,  London,  S.W.
Skipwith,  Mrs.,  13  Montagu  Square,  London,  W.
Sloggett,  Surgeon-General  A.  T.,  C.M.G.,  C.B.,  Closeburn,  Simla,
E.,  India.

Small,  Mrs.  William,  Hotel  Gwalia,  Upper  Woburn  Place,  Lon-
don, W.C.


LXVII.]


Members  and  Associates.


51


Smith,  Adolphe,  12  Crookham  Road,  Fulham,  London,  S.W.

Smith,  Miss  Beatrice  E.,  Lea,  Grange-over-Sands,  Lancashire.
*Smith,  Rev.  Ernest  F.,  153  Banbury  Road,  Oxford.

Smith,  Ernest  S.,  Les  Algues,  Saint- Jean-de-Luz,  France.

Smith,  Ernest  T.,  2  Lausanne  Road,  Hornsey,  London,  N.

Smith,  G.  Albert,  Sunville,  Cromwell  Road,  Hove,  Brighton.

Smith,  George  M.,  Custom  House,  Lowestoft.
*Smith,  Henry  Arthur,  7  Queen's  Mansions,  Brook  Green,  London,  W

Smith,  Sir  H.  Babington,  C.B.,  121  St.  James's  Court,  Bucking-
ham Gate,  London,  S.W.

Smith,  R.  F.  Ruthven,  81  Cadogan  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
*Smith,  Mrs.  Ruthven,  81  Cadogan  Gardens,  London,  S.W.

Smith,  Rev.  Sidney  M.,  Hebden  Bridge  Vicarage,  Yorkshire.
*Smith,  Mrs.  W.  Easton,  132  Grove  Street,  Waterbury,  Conn.,
U.S.A.

Smith,  Wm.  Hawley,  2039  Knoxville  Avenue,  Peoria,  111.,  U.S.A.

Smith,  William  P.,  Crestline,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
*Smithson,  Mrs.,  42  Tilehouse  Street,  Hitchin,  Herts.

Snyder,  Irving  T.,  Willow  Grange,  Littleton,  Colorado,  U.S.A.

Sparrow,  G.  W.  S.,  Albrighton  Hall,  near  Shrewsbury.
*Speer,  Charlton  T.,  Glenhurst,  The  Common,  Sutton,  Surrey.

Spens,  William,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Stanton,  Rev.  Horace  C,  Ph.D.,  D.D.,  148  North  18th  Street,

Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Stapleton,  Mrs.,  11  Sloane  Terrace  Mansions,  London,  S.W.
*Stapley,  Sir  Richard,  33  Bloomsbury  Square,  London,  W.C.
Statkowski,  Miss  Tamara.

Stawell,  Miss  F.  M.,  33  Ladbroke  Square,  Notting  Hill  Gate,
London,  W.

Steedman,  J.  G.  W.,  M.D.,  5394  Waterman  Avenue,  St.  Louis,
Mo.,  U.S.A.

*Steel,  Mrs.,  Talgarth  Hall,  Machynlleth,  Montgomeryshire.
Stephens,  Mrs.,  41  Harrington  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Stephenson,  Guy,  41  Egerton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Stevenson,  Mrs.,  c/o  A.  Wyatt,  25  Park  Place,  Cheltenham.
Stewart,  Miss  M. A.,  Artillery  Mansions, 75  Victoria  Street,

London,  S.W.
Stewart,  Mrs.  C.  A.,  Larghan,  Coupar  Angus,  N.B.
Stewart,  Herbert  L.,  38  Elmwood  Avenue,  Belfast.
Stoehr,  Miss,  Downend,  Hindhead,  Surrey.

Stokes,  Dr.  Henry  N.,  1443  Q.  Street,  N.W.,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.


516


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*Stokes,  J.  N.  P.,  118  East  22nd  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Stout,  Professor  George  F.,  Craigard,  St.  Andrews,  N.B.

Strackan,  W.  M.,  Strood  Park,  Horsham,  Sussex.

Strackey,  Charles,  Colonial  Office,  Downing  Street,  London,  S.W.
*Strachey,  John  St.  Loe,  Spectator  Office,  1  Wellington  Street,
Strand,  London,  W.C.

Stratton,  F.  J.  M.,  Gonville  and  Caius  College,  Cambridge.

Strauss,  E.  A.,  M.P.,  49  Grosvenor  Square,  London,  W.

Strode,  Miss  E.  L.  C,  7  Stafford  Terrace,  Kensington,  London,  W.

Strong,  Rev.  Charles,  D.D.,  67  Avoca  Street,  S.Y.,  Melbourne,
Australia.

*Strutt,  Hon.  Richard,  Rayleigh  House,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
Stuart,  Mrs.

Stubbs,  Arthur,  82  Murdoch  Road,  Handsworth,  Birmingham.
""Sturdy, Edward T., Norburton, Burton Bradstock,  Bridport,
Dorset.

Sturge,  Miss  M.  Carta,  Cranbourne  Grange,  Wonston,  Micheldever,
Hants.

Suffern,  Ernest  S.,  149  Broadway,  New  York,  U.S.A.

Sulman,  H.  L.,  31  The  Avenue,  Brondesbury  Park,  London,  N.W.

Swainson,  Miss  F.  J.,  Stonecross,  Kendal.

Swainson,  Miss  M.,  7e  Oxford  &  Cambridge  Mansions,  London,  W.
*Swayne,  Mrs.  Noah  Haynes,  Junr.,  153  Mill  Creek  Rd.,  Ardmore,
Pa.,  U.S.A.

Sweetland,  Mrs.  Gifford,  1646  O'Farrell  Street,  San  Francisco,
Calif.,  U.S.A.

Szentirmay  de  Darvasto,  B.  M.  J.  de,  Consulate  for  Austria-
Hungary,  Yokohama,  Japan.

Tait,  Mrs.,  10  Ellerdale  Road,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.

Tait,  Mrs.  W.  J.,  Lismullen,  Arthur  Road,  Wimbledon  Park,
Surrey .

Taplin,  A.  Betts,  L.R.C.P.,  Norwood,  Ivanhoe  Road,  Sefton  Park,
Liverpool.

Taylor,  Mrs.,  33  Roland  Gardens,  London,  S.W.
Taylor,  Mrs.  C.  C,  Wood  Cottage,  Cronk's  Hill,  Reigate,  Surrey.
Taylor,  Miss  E.  Waring,  7e  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Mansions,
London,  W.

-Taylor,  H.  Dennis,  Stancliffe,  Mount  Villas,  York.
Taylor,  Z.  S.,  M.D.,  53  West  126th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Tebb,  Mrs.,  Rede  Hall,  nr.  Burstow,  by  Horley,  Surrey.
Temple,  Reginald  W.


LXVII.]


Members  and  Associates.


517


Tennent,  Mrs.,  39  Rutland  Park  Mansions,  Willesden  Green,  Lon-
don, N.W.

♦Thomas,  Rev.  CD.,  South  Hill  Lodge,  Bromley,  Kent.

Thomas,  Miss  Edith  J.,  Mynydd  Ednyfed,  Criccieth,  N.  Wales.

Thomas,  Ernest  Seymour,  Turf  Club,  Cairo,  Egypt.
♦Thomas,  J.  W.,  Overdale,  Shortlands,  Kent.

-"Thomas,  Seymour  P.,  211  Cliveden  Avenue,  Germantown,  Pa.,
U.S.A.

Thompson,  Edwin,  25  Sefton  Drive,  Liverpool.
Thompson,  Matthew  William,  Salters  Hall,  Sudbury,  Suffolk.
Thompson,  Mrs.  Rosalie,  90  Newman  Street,  London,  W.
♦Thompson,  Theodore,  M.D.,  F.R.C.P.,  94  Portland  Place,  Lon-
don, W.

♦Thomson,  Edward  J.,  Western  Club,  Glasgow.
Thomson,  Mrs.  Leslie,  1  Hornton  Street,  Kensington,  London,  W.
Thorburn,  Rev.  T.  J.,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  The  Bungalow,  St.  Helen's

Down,  Hastings.
Thornhill,  Miss  H.,  Sesame  Club,  29  Dover  Street,  London,  W.
Thornley,  Rev.  Alfred,  Hughenden,  Coppice  Road,  Nottingham.
Thornley,  Miss  F.  J.,  36  Downleaze,  Stoke  Bishop,  Bristol.
Thornton,  W.  M.,  D.Sc,  Durham  College  of  Science,  Newcastle-
on-Tyne.

Thorp,  Richard,  Colenso  Hill,  Napier,  New  Zealand.

Thurn  and  Taxis,  H.I.H.  The  Princess  Alexander  of,  Lautschin,

Nimburg,  Bohemia,  Austria.
Trafford,  Mrs.  Galfrid  de,  Queensberry  House,  Richmond.
Trench,  Mrs.  C.  Chenevix,  Broomfielcl,  Camberley,  Surrey.
♦Trotter,  Mrs.,  Standerwick  Court,  Frome,  Somersetshire.
Truell,  Robert  Holt  Stuart,  West  Mount,  Dover  College,  Dover.
Tschistiakoff,  P.  A.,  Arbate  (maison  Tolstoy),  Moscow,  Russia.
♦Tuckey,  C.  Lloyd, M.D., 47  Upper  Brook Street,  Grosvenor
Square,  London,  W.
Tudor,  Owen  S.,  Friday's  Hill,  Haslemere,  Surrey.
Turner, Herbert B., 29 Raymond Street, Cambridge,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Tyler,  Professor  C.  M.,  The  Oaks,  Ithaca,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
♦Tyrone,  The  O'Neill  de,  59  rua  das  Flores,  Lisbon,  Portugal.
Tyrrell,  G.  N.,  The  Lodge,  Alderminster,  Stratford-on-Avon.
Ulman,  Mrs.  Jacob  A.,  Brooklandville,  Baltimore  County,  Md.,
U.S.A.

Unwin,  Mrs.,  Hogarth  House,  Bushey,  Herts.


518


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Urquiola,  Manuel  de,  Calle  de  Genova  12,  Madrid.

Van  Deren,  H.  S.,  Nashville,  Tenn.,  U.S.A.

Van  Hamel,  Professor  J.  A.,  612  Keizersgracht,  Amsterdam.

Van  Nievelt,  Carl,  Adolf sallee  51",  Wiesbaden,  Germany.
*Van  Norden,  Rev.  Charles,  D.D.,  LL.D.,  East  Auburn,  Placer
Co.,  Cal.,  U.S.A.

Van  Renterghem,  A.  W.,  M.D.,  1  Van  Breestraat,  Amsterdam.
* Verney-Cave,  Hon.  Mrs.,  Stanford-on-Avon,  Rugby.
*Verrall,  Mrs.  A.  W.,  5  Selwyn  Gardens,  Cambridge.

Verrall,  Miss  H.  de  G.,  5  Selwyn  Gardens,  Cambridge.

Verrall,  Miss  M.  E.,  The  Lydd,  West  Hoathly,  Sussex.

Vincent,  W.  James,  M.B.,  Wadsley  Asylum,  Sheffield.

Von  der  Heydt,  Baron,  48  Green  Street,  Park  Lane,  London,  W.

Vyvyan,  Mrs.  T.  C,  Poldhu,  Richmond,  Natal,  South  Africa.

Wakeley,  Mrs.  Charles,  6218  Ingleside  Avenue,  Chicago,  111.,
U.S.A.

Walker,  Miss  Madeline  J.,  107  Queen's  Gate,  London,  S.W.

Walker,  Mrs.,  28  St.  Andrew's  Mansions,  Dorset  Street,  London,  W.
*Walker,  P.  L.  E.,  7th  Hussars,  Bangalore,  South  India.
*Walker-Munro,  L.,  R.N.,  Rhinefield,  Brockenhurst,  Hants.

Walker-Munro,  Mrs.,  Rhinefield,  Brockenhurst,  Hants.
*Wallace,  Abraham,  M.D.,  39  Harley  Street,  London,  W.

Walsh,  A.  Digby,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Club,  Pall  Mall,  Lon-
don, S.W.

Walsh,  Correa  M.,  Belleport,  Long  Island,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Wanderley,  F.  M.,  Corumba,  Matto  Grosso,  Brazil.
Ward,  Hon.  Kathleen,  Aughnacloy,  Killiney,  Co.  Dublin,  Ireland.
Warndorfer,  A.,  Giinselsdorf,  Port  Schonau  a.d.  Triesting,  Lower
Austria.

Warner,  Miss  E.,  42  Albany  Villas,  Hove,  Sussex.
Warren,  Mrs.  Fiske,  8  Mount  Vernon  Place,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Warrender,  Miss  Margaret,  50  Wilton  Crescent,  London,  S.W.
^Warwick,  Countess  of,  Warwick  Castle,  Warwick.
Wastell,  Mrs.,  The  Rowans,  Crowborough,  Sussex.
Waterhouse,  Miss,  Glenalua  House,  Killiney,  Co.  Dublin,  Ireland.
Waterhouse,  Miss  E., Glenalua  House,  Killiney, Co.  Dublin,
Ireland.

Watson,  Charles  G.,  Frostburg,  Maryland,  U.S.A.
Watson,  H.  B.  Marriott,  Shere,  Guildford,  Surrey.
Watson,  Mrs.  Milne,  39  Eccleston  Square,  London,  S.W.
Webber,  Mrs.  Felix,  The  Croft,  Shillingstone,  Dorset.


LXVII.]


Members  and  Associates.


519


"-Weinberg,  Harry  J.,  North  Road,  The  Park,  Nottingham.
*  Wells,  E.  P.,  The  Limes,  94  Larkhall  Rise,  Clapham,  London,
S.W.

West,  Arthur  B.,  100  Franklin  Street,  Denver,  Colo.,  U.S.A.
Western,  F.  J.,  Cambridge  Mission,  Delhi,  India.
*Westlake,  Ernest,  Fordingbridge,  Salisbury.
Westropp,  A.  S.  A.,  East  India  United  Service  Club,  16  St.

James's  Square,  London,  S.W.
Wheeler,  C.  Bickersteth,  80  Hamilton  Terrace,  London,  N.W.
*Whetham,  W.  C.  D.,  F.R.S.,  Upwater  Lodge,  Cambridge.
Whinyates,  Miss  Amy  O.,  15  Sloane  Gardens,  Sloane  Square,
London,  S.W.

Whipple,  L.  E.,  10  East  66th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Whishaw,  R.  W.,  North  West  House,  Duntrune  Terrace,  Broughty
Ferry,  N.B.

Whitaker,  Joseph  J.  S.,  Villa  Malfitano,  Palermo,  Sicily.
White,  Dr.  Gordon,  610|  Church  St.,  Nashville,  Term.,  U.S.A.
*Whitehead,  Miss  Mercia  D.,  St.  Mary's,  Trumpington,  Cambridge.
Whitehead,  Rev.  John,  57  Dana  Street,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Whiting, J. Markby, Ashford House, Wimbledon  Common,
London,  S.W.

Whitmore,  Mrs.,  28  Milner  St.,  Cadogan  Square,  London,  S.W.
Whiton,  Rev.  J.  M.,  Ph.D.,  287  Fourth  Avenue,  New  York  City,
U.S.A.

*Whittemore,  Mrs.  Julia  S.,  Naugatuck,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
*Whittingham,  F.  S.,  Rodborough  Rectory,  nr.  Stroud,  Gloucester-
shire.

*Wiener,  Captain  Clarence,  Ewell  Castle,  Surrey.

Wigan,  W.  L.,  Clare  Cottage,  East  Mailing,  Maidstone,  Kent.

Wight,  Edward,  M.R.C.S.,  9  Regency  Square,  Brighton.

Wilkins,  Mrs.,  8  Rostrevor  Terrace,  Rathgar,  nr.  Dublin.
*Wilkins,  C.  F.,  Allahabad,  U.P.,  India.

Wilkinson, Sidney, M.R.C.S., L.R.C.P., 4 Hamilton  Square,
Bix-kenhead .

Willett,  Mrs.,  St.  Andrew's  Lodge,  Seaford,  Sussex.
Williams,  A.  C.  Redshawe,  4  Church  Road,  West  Drayton,  Yiew-
sley,  Middlesex.

Williams,  Mrs.  Glynne,  7  Berkeley  House,  Hay  Hill,  London,  W.
Williams,  Harry  L.,  541  Wood  Street,  Pittsburg,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Williams,  J.  E.,  Plumb  Opera  House,  Streator,  111.,  U.S.A.
Williams,  Mrs.  S.  R.,  12  Lome  Rd.,  Oxton,  Cheshire,


520


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Williamson,  Mrs.,  The  Copse,  Brook,  Godalming,  Surrey.
Willis,  Mrs.,  c/o  Mrs.  Barbar,  New  Street,  Killarney,  Co.  Kerry,
Ireland.

Willis,  Grant  B.,  1103  West  Aultoman  Avenue,  Canton,  Ohio,
U.S.A.

Wilson,  Rev.  Alexander,  The  Manse,  Ythanwells,  Insch,  Aberdeen-
shire.

Wilson,  Mrs.  Arthur,  150  Whitehall  Court,  London,  S.W.
Wilson,  Charles  J.,  Derlamogue,  Ailesbury  Park,  Dublin.
Wilson,  Mrs.  C.  Stuart,  c/o  Major  C.  Stuart  Wilson,  R.E.,  Royal

Engineer  Office,  York.
Wilson,  Miss  E.  M.,  c/o  H.  A.  Higgins,  Ythan,  Woodland  Grove,

Weybridge,  Surrey.
Wilson,  Mrs.  H.  J.,  12  Cheyne  Court,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
Wilson,  Miss  M.  A.,  c/o  H.  A.  Higgins,  Ythan,  Woodland  Grove,

Weybridge,  Surrey.
Wingate,  D.  C.
*Wingfield,  H.  E.,  M.D.,  44  Welbeck  Street,  London,  W.
Winslow,  Mrs.  Forbes,  57  Devonshire  Street,  Portland  Place,

London,  W.

Wise,  Miss  A.  Stewart,  16  West  Kensington  Gardens,  London,  W.
Witherby,  Arthur  George,  Newtown  Grange,  Newbury,  Berks.
*Wolf,  Francisco  Eugene  de,  P.O.  Box  269,  Bristol,  Rhode  Island,
U.S.A.

*Wood,  R.  H.,  c/o  Messrs.  Smith,  Wood  &  Co.,  3  and  4  Lime  Street

Square,  London,  E.C.
Woodhams,  Miss  M.  F.,  Twyford,  Lynwood  Road,  Redhill,  Surrey.
Woodhull,  Miss  Zula  M.,  Norton  Park,  Bredon's  Norton,  near
Tewkesbury,  Gloucestershire.
*Woods,  Miss  Alice,  3  North  Mansions,  Burton  Road,  Kilburn,
London,  N.W.

Woods,  Mrs.,  The  Master's  House,  Temple,  London,  E.C.
*Wooldridge,  H.  B.,  168  Marylebone  Road,  London,  N.W.
Woollett,  Lieut.-Colonel  W.  Charles,  F.S.A.,  4  The  Ridges,  Farn-
boro',  Hants.

Woolley,  V.  J.,  M.D.,  15  Lower  Camden,  Chislehurst,  Kent.
■■Worsfold,  Mrs.  Basil,  Romden  Place,  Smarden,  Kent.

Wrangell,  Baron  Cyrille,  9  Schpalernaia,  St.  Petersburg.

Wriford,  Mrs.,  21  Bullingham  Mansions,  Kensington,  London,  W.
*Wright,  Maurice  B.,  M.D.,  17  Wimpole  Street,  London,  W.

Wyllys,  Miss  R.,  18  Louisburg  Square,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.


lxvil]


Members  and  Associates.


521


Wyndham,  Mrs.,  201  West  54th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Wyndham-Quin,  The  Lady  Emily,  12  William  Street,  Lowndes

Square,  London,  S.W.
Yandell,  Miss  Maud,  c/o  Brown,  Shipley  &  Co.,  123  Pall  Mall,

London,  S.W.
Yaroschenko,  Madame,  La  Cava,  Bordighera,  Italy.
Yeats,  W.  B.,  18  Woburn  Buildings,  Tavistock  Square,  London,

W.C.

Yih,  Z.  L.,  18  Highbury  New  Park,  London,  N.
Young,  G.  P.

Younghusband,  Sir  Francis,  3  Buckingham  Gate,  London,  S.W.
Yssel  de  Schepper,  Mr.  Justice,  Eendrachtstraat  27b,  Rotterdam.
Zagury,  Leon,  12  Emanuel  Avenue,  Acton,  London,  W.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

INDEX  to  VOL.  XXVI
(PARTS  LXV-LXVII)

I913.

A.

"  Abercromby,  Blanche,"  Case  of,  reference  to  -  - - 1 39

Abt Vogler. See  Browning,  Hope  and  Star,  and  The  Horace  Ode


Question.

Achilles  (Horace  Ode  Question),  references  to

114-115,  177,  178,  218,  221,  415
Aeneid  (Book  I.),  Incidents  109,  110

,, (Book  VI.),  Cross-correspondence -  -  123

„ (Book  VIII.),  Script  references  to -  -  32-33

Agamemnon  Incident,  reference  to - -  -  109

Ajax  and  Ulysses  Incident,  reference  to -  109,  113

Alternations  of  Personality. See  Dr.  T.  W.  Mitchell,  and  Personality.
Anehises  (Sibyl  Incident),  reference  to  -  113,205

Androsace,  reference  to -  - 114  (foot-note)

Animism,  Bod  if  and  Mind,  A  History  and  Deft-nee  <>/,  by  W.  M'Dougall,

Review  of -  -  344-367

Aphasia,  Professor  Bergson  011 -  -  -  471

Archdale,  Mrs.,  Cross-correspondences  with,  reference  to -  67
"  Archy  tas  "  Ode. See  Horace  Ode  Question.
Aristophanes  Apology. See  Browning,  and  Euripides.

Arnold,  Matthew,  Requiescat,  Script  references  to -  -  46-48


[parts  lxv.-lxvil]


Index  to  Vol.  XXVI.


523


Arrow,  Cross-correspondence,  references  to  -  -  -  -25,  96,  103,  383
Ash,  Dr.  Edwin,  Faith  and  Suggestion,  by,  Review  of  -  -  -  370
Automatic  Writings —

See  Cross-correspondences,  "Mrs.  Forbes,"  Mrs.  Frith,  "Mrs.

Holland,"  Mrs.  Home,  "Mac"  Script,  Dr.  J.  Maxwell,

Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall,  and  "Mrs.  Willett."
Automatism,  and  the  Subconscious,  Dr.  Boris  Sidis  on -  -  326

Automatisms,  A  Month's  Record  of,  by  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall  24
avros  ovpavos  aKv/j.wu  Incident,  Balfour,  the  Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.,  on

223-24,  238,  239

„  „ Reply  to,  by  J.  G.  Fiddington  -  233-44

„  Maxwell,  Dr.  J.,  on -  ... 87-91,  140

„  Two Tennjjsonian Quotations in Mrs.  Verrall's

Scripts,  relating  to,  by  J.  G.  Piddington  245-50
Ave  Roma  Immortalis,  Cross-correspondence,  Dr.  J.  Maxwell  on  77-80,  84,  95
„  ,,  „ Reply  to,  by  Miss  Alice  Johnson - -  411

Azure  and  Horizon,  Cross-correspondence,  references  to

89,  163  (foot-note),  383

B.

B,  Mme,  Case  of. See  Leonie.

B.  C.  A.,  Case  of,  Dr.  T.  W.  Mitchell  on -  -  273-74,  276,  282

Balfour,  F.  M.  (Communicator),  reference  to  - 70  (foot-note)

Balfour,  The  Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.—

,,  ,,  The  Horace  Ode  Question,  Some  Observations  on

Mr.  Piddington's  Unsuspected  A  nswer  to -  221
i!  ,)  ,,  „  Reply  to,  by  J.  G.  Piddington  -  231

„  „  On  the  Latin  Message  Experiment  - - -  148

„  ,,  On  the  Metaphysical  Aspects  of  Animism  351-59

,,  Reply  to  Prof.  Pigou  on  Cross-correspondences,

reference  to ----- -  398

Rev  iew  of Body  and  Mind,  a History  and

Defence  of  Animism,  by  W.  M'Dougall -  344
Ballard,  Edith,  Case  of,  reference  to ------ -  372

Barlow,  Rev.  J.,  On  delusions,  reference  to  - - - - - -  3.5

"  Barnes,  Mary,"  Case  of,  reference  to  - - - - - - _  267

Bayfield,  Rev.  M.  A.—

„  Andrew  Lang  and  Psychical  Research,  by  419-430
„ On  the  Latin  Message  Experiment -  147;  143

„  Table  Tilting  Experiments  with  Miss  Verrall  -  34-39,  44,  53-56
"Beauchamp,  the  Misses,"  Dr.  T.  W.  Mitchell  on  the  Case  of

267-75,  277,  284

Benson,  Archbishop,  Script  references  to  Cross  and  Ring  of - -  63-65
Bergson,  Professor  Henri,  Philosophy  of,  references  to 278,  283,  355,  364,  461
„  „  Presidential  Address,  191 3 - - -  462

Berkeley,  Philosophy  of,  references  to -  347;  351


524


Index  to  Vol.  XXVI.


[PARTS


Bernadetfce,  Case  of,  reference  to  - -  -  371

Bernheim,  Dr.,  Hypnotic  results  obtained  by,  reference  to  -  -  313

Binetj  Dr.  A.,  Les  Alterations  de  la  Personnalite,  reference  to 265  (foot-note)
Blake,  W.,  Script  reference  to  a  Drawing  by -----  32

Bleuler,  Prof.  Dr.  E.,  Die  Fsychanalyse  Freuds,  by,  Review  of, - -  367
Blue  Flower,  Cross-correspondence,  reference  to  -  -  115

Bonaventura  and  the  Dominicans  Incident  ----- 29,  31,  44

Booz  Endormi  (Victor  Hugo),  Cross-correspondence - - 32-44,  51,  53-56
Bostock,  Dr.,  Case  of,  reference  to------ -  4

Bourne,  Ansel,  Case  of,  reference  to -  -  263-64

Brain,  the,  as  an  organ  of  attention  to  Life,  Professor  Bergson  on -  473
Breuer,  Dr.  J.,  reference  to  -  - -  - -  314

Brittleworth  Incident,  references  to - -  -  76,  413

Browning,  Script  references  to  Aristophanes'  Apology  -  95,  112

,,  „  ,, Evelyn  Hope  -  -  104,  152-55

La  Saisiaz -  105,  162,  163,  166

„  ,,  ,, Fippa  Fusses -----  105

„  „ Rabbi  Ben  Ezra -  - -  105

,,  ,,  ,, Ring  and  the  Book  -  -  104

Browning,  Hope  and  Star,  Cross-correspondence

„  „  „ Mrs.  Hude  on -  147-70

„  „  „ Dr.  J.  Maxwell  on  101-108,  140,  383

„  „  „ J.  G.  Piddington  on -  -  171-73

Butcher  and  Lang,  Translation  of  the  Odyssey,  reference  to-  -  416

C

Carpenter,  Dr.,  Theory  of  Unconscious  Cerebration,  references  to

323,  325,  427-28

Carpenter,  Bishop  W.  Boyd,  Presidential  Address,  1912  -  2
Cartesian  Philosophy,  references  to -  326,  327,  347,  365

Cave  of  Sleep  (Lethe  Incident),  reference  to -  -  113

Celestial  Halcyon  Days,  Cross-correspondence

„  „ Dr.  Maxwell  on -  -  86-94,  111  (foot-note)

„  „  Reply  to,  by  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  -  383

Ceyx,  Story  of  (Lethe  Incident),  reference  to -  - 111  (foot-note)

Chance-coincidence,  and  Telepathic  Hallucinations,  M.  Vaschide  on  254-55

See  also  Cross-correspondences.
Charcot,  Dr.,  reference  to - -  -  371

Child,  C.  M.,  Case  recorded  by -  -  321

Claviger. See  St.  Peter.

"  Clementine,"  Case  of,  recorded  by  Dr.  J.  Maxwell  142-143,  377

Cock  Lane  and  Common  Sense,  by  Andrew  Lang  -  - 421-22,  427-28

Coniet  Incident,  the -----  -  48-52

Comte,  reference  to - -  -  - - •  330

Comus  Incident,  the,  reference  to  - -  109


lxv.-lxvii.]  Index  to  Vol.  XXVI.  525


Consciousness,  Theories  of. See  The  Works  of  Professor  S.  Freud,  W.
M'Dougall,  Dr.  T.  W.  Mitchell,  and  Dr.  Boris  Sidis. See  also
Maxwell,  Dr.  J.  ;  Personality  ;  and  Subliminal  Consciousness.
Constable,  F.  C,  Fuchsia  Experiment  with,  reference  to -  -  68-70

Corneille,  Le  CiJ,  reference  to -  - -  - 39  (foot-note)

Council  and  Officers  for  1913 --------  480

Cross-correspondence,  Experiments  in 24,  57-144,  145,  147,  171,  174,
/  221,  231,  245,  362,  366,  375,  401,  409,  415

,,  Chance-coincidence  and  59,  61-63,  79,  80,  85,  130,

225-30,  232,  382-85,  412

,,  Cryptomuesia  as  a  Factor  in

70,  74-85,  87-94,  108-115,  132-134,

145-146,  379,  385-87,  395-7,  410
,,  Good  Faith  of  the  Autornatists  in,  on  the

130-32,  138-39,  362,  378-379
,,  Identity  of  the  Intelligence,  on  the

59,  82-85,  108-15,  135,  139,  141,  147-170,
174-220,  225-30,  248-50,  362-63,  381,  399,  415-41S
,,  Knowledge  of  the  Subject-matter  on  the  part  of

the  Anton. atists  or  Sitters

25  (foot-note),  27,  28,  39  (foot-note),  50,
55,  56,  58,  61,  74-80,  84,  95,  107-116,
122-130,  132-35,  141,  224,  226-30,  240,
248-50,  378, 380-82?  385-91, 409,  411,  412


11

Maxwell,  Dr.  J.,

on-

57-144

11

is

General  Criticism  of  Methods

130

»

5)

Eeplies

to,  by

J>

>!

Editorial  Note

-  145

11

11

ii

Miss  Alice  Johnson

-  409

11

11

j»

J.  G.  Piddihgton  -

-  415

11

11

ii

Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  -

375

11

11

ii

Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall

-  401

„  Phrases  and  Symbols  indicating

25,  49,  59,  60,  89,  96,  103,  166-68
„  Selection  as  a  Factor  in - - - - 363,  399

,,  Symbolic  Interpretation,  how  far  allowable

137-138,  380,  388,  391-92
,,  Telepathy,  Incidents  suggestive  of

24-56,  139-144,  148,  377,  393-40C
„  ,, Source  of,  on  the  question  of  the  58,  397-99

,,  Third  Intelligence,  Special  Indications  of

174-220,  363,  398-99

Crossing  the  Bar,  Cross-correspondence,  Dr.  Maxwell  on - - 87,  88,  90,
„  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick's  reply  to - - - -  388

Cryptomuesia. See  Cross-correspondence.

Crystal  Vision,  Andrew  Lang  on ------ 422,  426


52U


Index  to  Vol,  XXVI.


[parts


Cup,  Cross-correspondence,  John,  Item  in,  reference  to  -  137-38,  388,  403
Custom  and  Myth,  by  Andrew  Lang,  reference  to  -  421

Cyclops,  Centaurs,  etc.,  allusions  to - -  -  -  113

D

Daffodils,  Cross- correspondence,  reference  to  - 100,  383

Dante,  Script  references  to,  in  earlier  scripts,  Dr.  Maxwell  on

91,  93-100,  116-20,  140,  380
,,  ,, Paradiso  {Dream,  Dawn  and  Diana,  Cross-correspondence)

28-30

,, Purgatorio,  quotation  from  - -  - 13  (foot-note)

Dawn. See  Dream,  Dawn  and  Diana,  Cross-correspondence.
Dead,  Phantasms  of  the,  in  Dreams -  -  450-54

Dearmer,  Rev.  Percy,  D.D.,  reference  to -  -  371

Dejerine,  on  "  Word-Blindness,"  reference  to -  -  293

Demeter  and  Persephone,  Script  reference  to -  - 136,  389

Descartes,  references  to  -  326,  346,  348

D'Herve,  Marquis,  Les  Reves  et  les  moyens  de  les  dinger,  reference  to  -  440
Diana,  Cross-correspondence,  reference  to -  -  96

See  also  Dream,  Dawn  and  Diana,  Cross-correspondeuce.
Dill's  /toman  Society  from  Nero  to  Marcus  Aurelius,  reference  to  - 248,  249
Disinterested  or  unconscious  Deception  in  Psychical  Research,  on

131-32,  138-39,  362,  378-79

"  Doctor." See  Trance  Personalities  (Mrs.  Piper).

Documentary  Evidence,  Contemporary,  Extant  -  - 431,  432

Dominicans  (Golden  Legend),  Script  references  to  -  25  (foot-note),  28-30
Door  (  =  Dorr)  and  Key  and  Lethe-Dorr,  Cross-corres]3ondence,  Dr.

Maxwell  on - -  -  122-125

Dorr,  G.  B.,  Sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper,  references  to

108-115,  177-78,  221,  224,  233
Dostojefski,  Crime  and  Punishment,  by,  reference  to -  -  442

Dowsing,  Phenomena  of,  reference  to -  19,  421

Dream,  Dawn  and  Diana,  Cross-correspondence  -  24-44,  53,  54

Dreams  and  Ghosts,  Book  of,  by  Andrew  Lang,  reference  to  -  422

Dreams,  Extensions  of  Subliminal  Faculty  in  304,  435,  438,  446,  449-50

Freud's  Theory  of  -  - 317,  318,  432,  444-5,  460

of  Flying  -  - 435-38,  446, 449-50

,, Memory,  Revivals  of,  in  -  321

„  Dr.  F.  van  Eeden  on  -  431-461
Drugs,  Hallucinations  caused  by  -  459

Dubois,  Professor,  reference  to -  7

E

Editorial  Note  on  Dr.  Maxwell's  Correxpondances  Croise'es  -  145

Eheu  Fugaces,  Cross-correspondence,  Dr.  Maxwell  on  80,  81,  84,  98

„  „  „  Miss  Alice  Johnson's  reply  to -  414


LXV.-LXVII.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXVI.


527


Electra,  "Not  in  the  Electra,"  Cross-correspondence,  Dr.  Maxwell  on  84,  85
>)  „  Miss  Alice  Johnson's  reply  to - -  412

Ellis,  Havelock,  on  the  Phenomena  of  Dreams  -  -432-434,  441,  447,  450
Encyclopaedia  Britannica  (1902)  —

Psychical  Research,  by  Andrew  Lang,  reference  to  421
Euripides,  Cross-correspondence  - -  -  -95,101,383

F

F.  V.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  with,  reference  to  - - 320,  322

Faith  and  Suggestion,  by  Dr.  E.  Ash,  Review  of  -  - - - -  370

F tilth,  Hope,  Charity  Incident,  reference  to  -  48,  53

Fawcett,  Cross-correspondence,  reference  to  84


Fechner,  references  to- - - - - - - . 22,  279  280

Fiske,  reference  to ----------  [0

Flavicomata  Incident,  reference  to - - - - - - -  125

Florentine,  Abraham,  Case  of,  reference  to  - - - - -  139,385

"  Forbes,  Mrs.,"  Cross-correspondences  with,  references  to


24-44,  53-56,  60,  61,  64,  404-6
»  „ The  "Talbot"  Control  Incident,  Dr.  Maxwell  on

60,  61,  64

>>  „  „ Reply  to,  by  Mrs.  Verrall - - -  404-6

„ Dream,  Dawn  and  Diana,  Cross-correspondence,  connexion  with

24-44,  53-56

"  Forbes,  Talbot/'  Control  -  -  37,60,61,64,404-6

French  Poems  (Hugo-Gautier-Montenaeken),  Cross-correspondence,

references  to  -  35;  36,  125-30,  377

Dr.  Maxwell  on  - - -  125-130

»  „ Mrs.  Sidgwick's  reply  to - -  377

Freud,  Professor  S. —

Dreams,  Theory  of  -  - 317,  318,  432,  444  45,  460

„  ^1  Note  on  the  Unconscious  in  Psycho-Analysis,  by  -  -  -  312
„ Psycho- Analysis  and  Hysteria,  Theory  of

302,  308,  310-312,  334-36,  367-69
»  „  Criticism  of,  by  Dr.  Boris  Sidis - -  334-36

»  Defence  of,  by  Dr.  E.  Bleuler  - - -  367-69

Frith,  Mrs.,  The  Sevens  Cross-correspondence,  reference  to - -  118


G

Gautier,  Theophile. See  French  Poems.

Genius,  Bishop  Boyd  Carpenter  on  15-17,20
Geryon,  Script  references  to - - - - - - - 95,  96,  383

Giant  and  Dwarf,  Cross-correspondence,  references  to - - 86,  90,  383
Gilchrist's  Life  of  Blake,  reference  to ----- .  32

Gillingharu  Case,  The. See  Edith  Ballard.

"  Gleam,"  J.  G.  Piddington  on  New  Evidence  concerning  the

Horace  Ode  Question -------  182-191


528


Index  to  Vol.  XXVI.


[parts


Goldsmith,  Script  reference  to  The  Deserted  Village  -  26
Gurney -Control,  the,  through  "  Mrs.  Forbes,"  reference  to -  61

H

Haggi  Babba. See  Door  (  =  Dorr)  and  Lethe-Dorr,  Cross-correspondence.
Hajji  Babba  of  Ispahan,  by  J.  Morier,  reference  to - -  123
Hallam,  Arthur,  Script  references  to -  90
Hallucinations,  Census  of,  references  to - -  252,  253,  254  (foot-note),  255

Olfactory - -  -  253,  254

„  Subjective -  - -  3,  4,  370,  372

„  Visceral  -  -  253-54  (foot-notes)

Hanna,  Rev.  T.  C,  Case  of,  references  to  -  266,  284

Hare,  Augustus,  Venice,  by,  references  to  -  192-194

Harold,  Item  in  a  Cross-correspondence,  reference  to -  -  100,130

Harrison,  Frederic,  Essay  on  Human  Personality,  reference  to  -  428-29
Hartmann,  Psychology  of,  reference  to -  -  334

"Haunting  Bird,"  Prediction  concerning,  Dr.  Maxwell  on  71
„  „  Reply  to,  by  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall  406

Head,  Henry,  M.D.,  The  Goulstonian  Lectures  for  1901,  reference  to

253-4  (foot-note)

Henry  was  not  Mistaken,  Cross-correspondence,  reference  to  -  84
Herbart,  Theory  of  Consciousness,  reference  to  -  335-336

Hercules  Furens,  references  to  -  - 95,  96,  101,  112

"Heme  Hill  Miracle." See  the  Case  of  Dorothy  Kerin.

Hill,  Dr.  Alexander,  on  Pre-natal  Growth,  reference  to  -  18
Hill,  J.  A.,  Experiment  with  Mrs.  Verrall,  a  Case  of  Subliminal

Memory -  -  -  395-97

Hobbes,  Philosophy  of,  reference  to  -  346
Hodgson,  R.,  Experiments  with  Mrs.  Piper,  reference  to  -  57,  58,  73

,,  „  Dr.  Maxwell's  Criticism  of  the  Experimental

Methods  of  - -  -  57-58

„  „  „  Reply  to,  by  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick

376,  388  (foot-note)

Hodgson-Control,  through  "Mrs.  Holland" -  -  75-77

Mrs.  Piper  -  109,  150,  390

„  Dr. Maxwell on Cryptographic and  Symbolic

Messages  from -  - 75-77,  390

,,  ,, Reply  to,  by  Miss  Alice  Johnson -  413,  414

Hotfding,  Theory  of  Consciousness,  reference  to  -  -  338,  339,  340,  341
"Holland,  Mrs.,"  Automatic  Script  of—

74-130,  140,  142,  146,  375,  382,388-91,  409-14
,,  ,,  Cross-correspondences

(with  the  Mac  Script)  - - 122,  384-85

(  „  Mrs.  Piper)  - - -  85-130

(  „  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall) - -  74-85


LXV.-LXVII.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXVI.


529


"Holland,  Mrs.,'1  Automatic  Script  of —

•  ,  „ Automatist's  Knowledge  of  Facts  and  Allusions  in

her  Script 74-80,  84,  95,  100,  386-91,  409,  411,  412
„ Dr.  Maxwell's  Criticism  of  - - 74-130,  140-142,  146
,,  „  Replies  to,  by

Miss  Alice  Johnson - -  409-14
Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  - - 375,  388-391
,,  „ The  Sesame  and  Lilies  Cross-correspondence 122,  384-85

,,  ,, The  Sevens  Cross-correspondence - - -  118

Home,  D.  D.,  Alleged  Mediumship  of,  reference  to  - -  -  428

Home,  Mrs.  R.,  The  Set-ens  Cross-correspondence,  Dr.  Maxwell  on 119,  121

„ Reply  to,  by  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  390
Homer,  Iliad,  Script  references  to  -------  92-94

„ Odyssey,  connection  with  the  Horace  Ode  Question,  J.  G.

Piddington  on ------ - 188,  245-248

Hope,  Star,  and  Browning,  Cross-correspondence. See  Browning,  Hope
and  Star.

Horace,  Script  reference  to ------- -  31

Horace  Ode  Question -  - 114-15,  124,  165,  174,  221,  231,  415-18

„ A  Hitherto  Unsuspected  Answer  to  the,  by  J.  G.  Piddington  174
„  „ Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour,  Some  Observations  on

the  fore-going  Paper,  hy - - -  221
„  ,,  Reply  to,  by  J.  G.  Piddington  231

Mrs.  Hudeon -  ------  165

„  „ Note  on,  by  J.  G.  Piddington-  -  172,  173

Dr.  Maxwell  on  the  Two  First  Stages  of  114-15,124
„  „ Reply  to,  by  J.  G.  Piddington  -  415-18

Horizon. See  Azure  and  Horizon.

Hude,  Mrs.  Anna,  on  The  Latin  Message  Experiment  -  147,  376

„  „ Note  on,  by  J.  G.  Piddington  -  171

Hugo,  Victor,  La  Le'gende  des  Siecles  {Booz  Endorrni),  Script  references  to

32,  33,  36-42,  53-56
„ „ See  also  French  Poems,  Cross-correspondence.
Hume,  Philosophy  of,  reference  to  ------ -  331,347

Huxley,  Theory  of  Consciousness,  reference  to  327
Hypnagogic  Illusions,  on --------  435

Hypnotism,  Phenomena  of —

„  Amnesia  -  297-300,304,307-11
„ Automatisms  322-23,  328

„ Hypnoidal  State,  the -  -  - 341,  343,  368-69

„ Memory,  Conditions  of  - - 260,  263,  266,  304,  320-22,  343
„ Revivals  of-  260,  263,  266,  320-22,  343

Personality  in  the  light  of  Suggestion  269-74,  277,  278, 280, 282-4
„ Dramatic  Character  of 268-73,  277,  283-4,  303-4,  310
Post-Hypnotic  Suggestion -  269,  276,  313,  314

„ Resistance,  Power  of,  in  the  Subject

297-99,  301-04,  310,  311,  316,  371-2


530


Index  to  Vol.  XXVI.


[parts


Hypnotism,  Phenomena  of —

Telepathy  -  393-94

„ Therapeutic  Aspects  of -  -  296-311, 373

,, See  also  Psycho- Analysis,  and  Suggestion.
Hyslop,  Professor  J.  H.,  Experiments  with  Mrs.  Piper  (Hodgson-
Control),  reference  to  -  - 139,  390  (foot-note)
Hysteria,  Dissociations  of  Consciousness,  and  phenomena  of

132-35,  258-59,  261-62,  265-75,  277-285,  286-311
„ Multiple  Personality,  and,  A  Study  in  (Amelia  G.  P.),  by  Dr.

T.W.Mitchell -------  286-311

,, Predictions  by  the  patient  as  to  the  course  of  the  illness -  295-6
Psycho-Analysis,  Treatment  by 302-304,  308-311,  312-318,  367-69
„ Somnambulism,  Spontaneous -----  258-60

See  also  Hypnotism,  and  Personality,  Problems  of.


I.

Icarus  and  Anchises  (Sibyl  Incident),  reference  to  113,  205

Illusions  and  Lapses  of  Memory. See  Memory.

Immortality. See  Horace  Ode  Question,  and  Myers,  F.  W.  H,  Script

references  to  poems.
"  Imperator." See  Trance  Personalities.

In  valle  reducta,  Script  reference  to -  -  123

Isles  of  the  Blest,  Script  references  to -  - -  180


J.

James,  Prof.  W.,  Philosophy  of,  references  to

9,  16,  319,  324,  336,  355,  358  (foot-note),  362
Janet,  Dr.  Jules,  Case  recorded  by  -  282

Janet,  Professor  Pierre,  The  Major  Symptoms  of  Hysteria,  Cases  re-
corded in -----  258,259,261-2,265,269,308,314

Janiculum,  Cross-correspondence,  reference  to - -  - 115,  411

Janus,  Script  references  to  -  -  95,112,113

Janus  and  Saturn  (Lethe  Incident),  reference  to  -  113

Joan  of  Arc,  Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield  on  The  Maid  of  France,  by  Andrew

Lang -----------  422-26

Johnson,  Miss  Alice,  Horace  Ode  Question,  on  the  Connexion  between

the  "  Archytas  "  Ode  and  the  Ode  to  Nature

208,  209

„  Dr.  Maxwell's  Criticism  of  Cross-correspondences

and  the  Experimental  Methods  of  74-85,

116-121,  146,  376,  381-82,  399  (foot-note)
„  ,, Sevens,  Cross-correspondence - -  116-121

„ Reply  to,  by -  -  409

Journal  of  Abnormal  Psychology,  references  to -  271,273


LXV.-LXVII.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXVI.


531


K.

K.  Cryptograph. See  Hodgson-Control.

Kant,  Philosophy  of,  reference  to  - - 347,  351

Keats,  Script  references  to  -  - - 124,  125

Kerin,  Dorothy,  the  Case  of,  Dr.  E.  Ash's  Report  on  - -  370

„ Analogies  between,  and  the  Case  of  Edith  Ballard -  372

Kingsley,  C,  Script  reference  to  poem  by  - -  - - 25  (foot-note)

Kipling,  Rudyard,  Script  reference  to  poem  by  -  - 42  (foot-note)


Lamartine,  Chance-coincidence  between,  and  the  French  Poems  Cross-


-  128-29,  377


correspondence - -- -- --  -

Lang,  Andrew —

„ Memorial  Article  on,  by  the  Eev.  M.  A.  Bayfield

,, Book  of  Dreams  and  Ghosts,  by,  reference  to

,, Cock  Lane  and  Common  Sense  „

„ Custom  and  Myth  „

,, Encyclopaedia  Britannica,  Article  on  Psychical  Reseai*'

„ Jeanne  D'Arc,  The  Voices  of,  by,  reference  to

„ „ The  Maid  of  France  „

„ Magic  and  Religion  ,,

„ Making  of  Religion  „

,, The  Nineteenth  Century  and  Mr.  Myers

„ Presidential  Address  (S.P.R.),  1911

„ Queen  Mary's  Diamonds  „
Latin  Message  Experiment,  Mrs.  A.  Hude  on  the

,,  „ Note  on,  by  J.  G.  Piddington

„  Dr.  Maxwell  on  -

„  „ Reply  to,  by  J.  G.  Piddington

Laurel  Wreath,  Cross-correspondence,  references  to
Leibnitz,  Philosophy  of,  reference  to  -  -  -

Lelut,  L.  F.,  Le  De'mon  de  Socrate,  reference  to  -
Leonie  (Mme.  B.),  Case  of,  Dr.  T.  W.  Mitchell  on
Lethe  Incident,  Dr.  Maxwell  on  -

„ Reply  to,  by  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick
Liebig,  Prof.,  on  the  power  of  the  Will  over  the  Body,  reference  to
Light,  Dr.  Maxwell  on,  as  a  possible  Source  of  some  Script  phrases  and
references  in  the  Cross-correspondences - 57,  82,  83,  87,  92,

95,  101,  103,  113,  118  (foot-notes),  120,  121,  123
,, „ Replies  to,  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson

388,  390-91,  413

Light  in  the  West,  Cross-correspondence,  references  to  - -  95-101,  112,  383
Literary  and  Classical  Allusions  in  Automatic  Scripts,  Dr.  Maxwell  on 108-1 15
See  also  the  Horace  Ode  Question,  the  Latin  Message,  the
"  Mae  "  Scripts,  and  the  Scripts  of  "  Mrs.  Holland,"  Mrs.
Piper,  and  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall.


-  419

422

421-22,  427-28

-  421
;h  - -  421

-  422
423-426
422,  426

-  422
427-29

421,  428

-  421

-  147

-  171
in  1-108

415

125-26,  129,  383
346,  347
249  (foot-note)
269,  270,  285
98,  99,  110-114
377,  386-7  399
4


532  Index  to  Vol.  XXVI.  [parts

Liverpool  Psycho-Therapeutic  Clinic  -------  373

Lodge,  Sir  Oliver —

Dr.  Maxwell's  cr  iticism  of  the  Experimental  Methods  (in  the

"Willett"  Script)  of  - - - -  122-25,131,142

„  „ Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  on  -  376

Longfellow,  Old  Clock  on  the  Stairs,  Script  references  to  -  -  116,  390
Lorberg,  Dr.  Hermann,  references  to  chance-coincidence  in  Script

concerning -  76,  413

Lotze,  Philosophy  of,  references  to -  - 358  (foot-note),  360,  366

Lourdes  "  Miracles,"  reference  to  -  371

Lucie,  Case  of,  reference  to  -  269


M.

"  Mac  "  Script,  The—

Cross-correspondences  (with  Mrs.  "  Holland,"  Mrs.  Piper,  and
Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall)

36  (foot-note),  122,  125,  126,  384-86
Dr.  Maxwell  on - -  - -  121,122,125-126

Reply  to,  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick -  384-386
Mach,  Prof.  Ernst,  Analyse  der  Empfmdungen,  references  to

446,  448  (foot-note),  456,  460
Magic  and  Religion,  by  Andrew  Lang,  reference  to -  - 422,  426

Maiman,  reference  to  -  ... 326  (foot-note)

Making  of  Religion,  by  Andrew  Lang,  reference  to -  -  422

Mallock,  W.  H.,  Essay  on  Human  Personality  by  F.  W.  H.  M}rers,

reference  to  -  -  428-29

Marie,  Dr.  Pierre,  Works  of,  reference  to - -  -  472

"  Marmontel  "  Prediction,  the,  Dr.  Maxwell  on  -  -  71-74

Reply  to,  by  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  -  385

„ by  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall  -  406-8

Marsh,  Mr. See  "  Marmontel  "  Prediction.

Maudsley,  Dr.,  Psycho-physiological  theories  of  -  - 323,  324

Maury,  on  Dreams  and  Hypnagogic  hallucinations,  reference  to

434-35,  440,  442

Maximus  of  Tyre,  Dissertationes  of,  and  the  aMs  ovpavds  dicifuov  Incident,

J.  G.  Piddington  on -  246-50
Maxwell,  J.,  M.D.,  Cases  recorded  by  142-43
,, Cbrrespondances  Croise'es  et  la  Mc'thode  E.rperimevtale,  by -  57
„  ,,  Editorial  Note  on  -  -  -  145

,,  ,,  General  Criticism  - -  58-130

„ Experiments  of —

Miss  Alice  Johnson  -  74-84

J.  G.  Piddington  -  85-130
Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall  -  58-74


lxv.-lxvil]


Index  to  Vol.  XXVI.


533


Maxwell,  J.,  M.D.,  Cases  recorded  by —

„ Cross-correspondence,  Chance-coincidence  and

59,  61-63,  79,  80,  86,  130
,,  ,,  „  Scope  afforded  by  familiar

Words  and  Names

86,  101,  115,  125,  383

,,  ,,  Consciousness,  Crepuscnlary  States  of  -  131-137

,,  ,,  Cryptomnesia

70,  74-85,  87-94,  108,  115,  132-34,  145,  146
Telepathy  and -  139-144
„  „  Methods,  General  Criticism  of -  130-144

,,  „  „ Cryptomnesin,  on  - - -  132-34

,,  ,,  „ Good  Faith  of  the  Automatists,  on

the  -  130-32,  138-39

,,  ,,  ,, Negative  Character  of  the  Evidence

for  Identity

83-85,  113-115,  135,  139,  140-41
,,  „  ,, Symbolic  Interpretations,  on  137-138

,,  „  Replies  to,  by

Miss  Alice  Johnson -  409
J.  G.  Piddington  -  -  415

Mrs.  H.  Sidgwiek  375
Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall  401
,, Les  Phe'nomenes  P si/ cinques,  by,  reference  to  -  145

M'Dougall,  W.,  F.R.S.,  M.B.—

,, Body  and  Mind:  a  History  and  a  Defence  of  Animism,

by,  Review  of ------- -  344

„ On  the  Personality  of  "Sally  Beanchamp"  -  277

"  Meditation  "  Incident  {French  Poems  Cross-correspondence) -  126-130
Medusa's  Head,  Script  reference  to -  -  113

Meetings  of  the  Society,  General  \
Members  and  Associates,  Honorary,  Corresponding,  and  Ordinary,

List  of  1 ......  4si

Memory,  Professor  Bergson  on ------- -  474

„ Cryptomnesia,  Question  of,  in  Cross-correspondence  Experi-
ments. See  Cross-correspondences.
„ Dr.  J.  Maxwell  on  -  133-135

„ Normal  lapses  of  i33)  134

„ Revivals  of. See  Dreams,  and  Hypnotism.

See  also  Hypnotism  ;  and  Personality,  Alternating  and
Multiple.

Memory  and  Matter,  Professor  Bergson  on -  278,  283,  355,  364

„  W.  M'Dougall  on -  - -  364-66

„  Dr.  Boris  Sidis  on -  -  329-331

See  also  T.  W.  Mitchell  on  Multiple  Personality.

Merry,  Dr.,  Notes  on  the  Odyssey,  reference  to -  -  416


534


Index  to  Vol.  XXVI.


[parts


Mesnetj  Case  recorded  by,  reference  to ----- -  259

Methods  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  Professor  Bergson  on

the ------------  464

Mill,  J.  S.,  Philosophy  of,  reference  to  - - -  337

Mitchell,  Dr.  Weir,  Case  recorded  by,  reference  to  266,  267

Mitchell,  T.  W.,  M.D.,  A  Stud?/  in  Hysteria  and  Midtiple  Personality

(Amelia  G.  P.) -  286-311
Clinical  History  of  the  Case -  286-311
„  Hypnotic  Suggestion,  Treatment  by  297-308,311

„  „ Amnesia -  - 297,  301,  303-6

Resistance  of  the  Subject  to  299-304,  311
,,  Interaction  of  the  Physical  and  Mental  Symptoms

297-300,  303,  307,  31 1

,,  Multiple  Personalities,  the  development  of  306-311

.,  „ Dramatic  Characteristics  of  306-7,  309-11

Psycho- Analysis  -----  308-311
,,  Review  of  Dr.  Morton  Prince's  Psychological  Prin-

ciples and  Field  of  Psychotherapy,  reference
to  -  18  (foot-note)

„  Some  Types  of  Multiple  Personality,  by - -  257

,,  „ Diagrams  illustrating  -  284-85

,,  „ Alternations and Temporary  fugues

257-267

Multiple  -  266-275

,,  ,, Theory  of  the  Co-consciousness  of  275-85

Mons  Albanus,  Script  references  to -  -  -  25,  33,  391

Montenaeken,  Leon  de. See  French  Poems.

Morier,  J.,  Adventures  of  Hajjt '  Babba  of  Ispahan,  reference  to  -  -  123
Moses,  W.  Stainton,  Dr.  Maxwell  on

57,  82-83  (foot-note),  87  (foot-note),  120-21,  139-141
„ Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  on  -  379,  385-86,  390

Mosso,  Prof.,  on  Fatigue,  reference  to  7  (foot-note)

Miinsterberg,  Prof.  Hugo,  Script  reference  to -  76
,,  Theory  of  Passive  Consciousness,  reference  to  -  331

Music,  Notes  of,  Cross-correspondence,  reference  to -  84,  383

Myers,  F.  W.  H,  The  Daemon  of  Socrates,  on,  reference  to - 249,  250
Lang,  Andrew,  on  the  Work  of -  -  428-29

„  Script  References  to  and  Reminiscences  of  the  Writings  of

„  „ Classical  Essays  -  -  249

„  ,, Fragments  of  Prose  and  Poetry

88,  176  (foot-note),  178,  206,  227,  229-30
„  „ Human  Personality

88,  92-95,  157,  160-62,  169,  233-44
„  S.P.R.  Presidential  Address  240-41
„ Renewal  of  Youth  -  212


lxv.-lxvil]


Index  to  Vol.  XXVI.


Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  Script  References  to  and  Reminiscences  of  the  Writing  of
„  „ Special  Poems,  Immortality

176,  178,  200,  201,  206,  207,  208,

210,  218,  221-22,  225-230
„  „  „ Ode  to  Nature

176,  200,  201,  206,  207-210,  219
,,  ,,  „ Spring  Morning  at  Sea

178-186, 187-189, 206, 207,

210,  218,  222,  225-230,  243

„  „  Venice

189-207,  210-211,  212-219,

222-23,  240,  263
„  Sealed  Envelope  (posthumous)  left  by,  references  to

58,  70,  121

„  Theory  of  the  Subliminal  Consciousness,  references  to

14,  58,  267,  269  (foot-note),  282,  286,  429
Myers-Control,  the,  Communications  through  "  Mrs.  Holland  " - -  86-101
„  „  „  Mrs.  Piper  86-115,135,

147-70,172-73,174-77,
200,  202,207,  208,  219-230
„  „  „  Mrs.  Verrall  32,53,56,

69,83,  84,174,177-230,

231-44,  245-50,  415-18


Mrs.  Willett -  -122-25
„  Comparison  of,  through  different  Automatists -  113-115

Dr.  Maxwell  on  the  Identity  of  - - 83,  86-115,  122-125
„  Reply  to,  by  J.  G.  Piddington -  -  -415-18

„  „ Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  -  - 381, 399

N.

N.,  Madame,  Case  recorded  of - 253

Nature,  reference  to  Daniel's  Comet  in  ...  50,  51

Nature,  Ode  to. See  Horace  Ode  Question  ;  and  Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  Script

references  to  Poems.
Neptune  and  Trident,  Cross-correspondence,  reference  to - -  110,113
Newton,  Philosophy  of,  reference  to - -  ....  337

Nicolai,  Dr.,  Case  of,  reference  to  -  - - - - 3,  4

Nightingale,  Cross-correspondence,  leference  to  - - - 124,  136,  389
Nineteenth  Century  and  Mr.  Myers,  by  Andrew  Lang,  reference  to -  428-29
Noel,  Roden,  Cross-correspondence,  Dr.  Maxwell  on - 75,  77,  82,  84,  136
„  Reply  to,  by  Miss  Alice  Johnson -  - 409,  410,  412

„  „ by  Mrs.  Sidgwick -  ... 391,  392

O.

Officers  and  Council  for  1913 -----  -  480

Olympus  Incident,  reference  to  -  113

2M


536


Index  to  Vol,  XXVI.


[parts


Omar  Khayyam. See  Door  (  =  Dorr)  and  Key,  Cross-correspondence.

"  One-Horse-Dawn  "  Experiment. See  Verrall,  Dr.  A.  W.

Orion  (Horace  Ode  Question),  references  to  - - 96,  98,  101,  383

Ovid,  Script  references  to

Fasti -------  - Hi,  112,  389

-Metamorphoses -  - - - - 110,  387

P.

P.,  Experiments  in  Hypnotic  Telepathy  with,  reference  to - 393,  394
P.,  Amelia  G.,  A  Study  in  Hysteria  and  Multiple  Personality,  by  Dr.

T.  W.  Mitchell -  270,  286-311

Paley's  Argument  for  Design,  reference  to -----  9

Panopticon,  Cross-correspondence,  Dr.  Maxwell  on - - - -  59,  60

„  Reply  to,  by  Mrs.  H.  Sidgvvick-  - -  382-3

by  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall -  401-3
Parallelism,  Mr.  M'Dougall  on  the  Doctrine  of  - - - -  350-54,  359

Pavlow,  Laboratory7  Experiments  of,  reference  to  342,  343

Pelham,  George,  Control  (Mrs.  Piper) -  103,  106,  155-59,  161  (foot-note)
"  Pearl,"  Horace  Ode  Question,  List  of  references  in  Mrs.  VerralPs

Script  ------------  213

Persephone,  references  to ------- - 136,  389

Personality,  Problems  of,  General  references  9-23,  74,  131-134,  257-85,

286-311,  312-18,  319-43,  344-67,  367-69,  370-72,  393,  440
Alternations  of  - 260-266,  283-84

„  „  Diagram  Illustrating  - - - - -  284

,,  Amnesia. See  below,  Memory.

Automatisms  - - - - 258-60,  286-90,  297-300,  306

„  Fugues ------  -  -  260-63

Memory,  Conditions  of - 259-60,  263,  266-285,  290-96,

301-311,  312-318,  319-343,  359,  361-62,  364-67
Multiple  -  . . -  266-285,  303-311

„  „ Gradations  leading  up  to  258-66

„  „ Theory  of  Co-consciousness -  - -  268-85

„  „  „ Diagrams  illustrating -  285

„  Secondary,  Mental  and  Moral  Characteristics  of

260,  268-278,  281-85

See  also  Trance  Personalities.
„  Somnambulism,  Spontaneous  ------  258-60

See  also  the  Cases  of  Mme.  B.  (Leonie),  B.  C.  A.,
"  Mary  Barnes,"  The  "  Misses  Beauchamp,"
Ansel  Bourne,  Rev.  T.  C.  Hanna,  Lucie,  Amelia
G.  P.,  Marcelline  B.,  Mary  Reynolds,  Eou,  and
Fulida  X.,  and  the  Phenomena  of  Hypnotism,
Hysteria,  and  Self-suggestion.
Pharaoh's  Daughter,  Cross-correspondence,  reference  to - -  120,391


LXV.-LXVII.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXVI.


537


Phrases  and  Symbols  indicating  Cross-correspondence

25,  49,  59,  60,  89,  96,  103,  166-68
Physical  and  Psychical  Phenomena,  Dr.  Maxwell  on  the  difficulty  of

investigating - 138-39

Physical  Scientists,  attitude  towards  Psychical  Eesearch  5-7,  344,  348-52,  359
Piddington,  J.  G.,  Concordant  Automatisms,  by,  references  to

85-130,  147-70,  171-73
„ The  Series  with  G.  B.  Dorr,  1908,  reference  to

108-115,  177-78,  22],  224,  233
,,  Horace  Ode  Question,  A  Hitherto  unsuspected  Answer  to  the  174,  231
,,  „ ,, Discussion  of  the  New  Evidence  - -  182-186

Plates  illustrating  -  200-201

See  also  Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  Script  refer-
ences to  Poems.

„  „ „ Balfour,  Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.,  Some  Observations

on  the  Foregoing  Paper - -  221
„ „  „ Reply  to,  by  -  231

„  „ „ Maxwell,  Dr.  J.,  Criticism  of  -  114-115

„ Reply  to,  by  -  -415-18

,,  „ ,, Note  on Mrs.  Hude's  Paper  on  the  Latin

Message  Experiment - -  171
,,  „ ,, Dr.  Maxwell's  Criticism  of  Cross-correspond-

ence and the  Experimental
Methods  of  85-130
Eeply  to,  by,  - -  415-418
„ „ Miss  Alice  Johnson  - - -  414
„ Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick - - -  383-84
,,  „ ,, Tivo  Tennysonian  Quotations  in  Mrs.  VerraU's

Script - - - - 245,  389  (foot-note)
Pigou,  Professor  A.  C,  references  to  his  Criticism  of  Cross-correspon-
dences -  -  -  -  -  67,  139,  398
Piper,  Mrs.,  Trance  Phenomena  of  85-130,  132,  134-5,  139,  140,  147-70,

171-3,  176-78,  200-203,  233-243,  375-76,

382,  386-88,  390-91,  401-403,  415-18
„ Dr.  J.  Maxwell  on,  and  replies  to

85-130,  132,  134-5,  139,  140,  375-76,  382,

386-88,  390-91,  401-3,  415-18
„  Cross-correspondences  (with  "  Mrs.  Holland ")  -  -85-130
,,  „  (with  Mrs.  and  Miss  Verrall)

25,  48,  52,  53,  85-130,  147-70,  171-3,
176-78,  200-203,  233-44,  375,  382-

83,  386-88,  390-91,  401-403,  415-18
„  (with  Mrs.  Willett) -  -122-25

„ The  Sevens  Cross-correspondence - - -  116,390
Pitre,  Ecmnesia,  by,  reference  to -  -  135

Plotinns,  references  to  - - 88,  90,  93,  94,  140,  233,  239,  342-43

2M2


538


Index  to  Vol.  XXVI.


[parts


Podmore,  Frank,  Criticism  of  the  Latin  Message  Experiment,  refer-
ences to -------- - 147,  148,  153

Poison  Bottle  Incident,  the,  reference  to - - - - -  -115

Pomona,  Script  reference  to -  -  -  113

Posilipo,  Cross-correspondence,  Dr.  Maxwell  on  - - - - -  81,  84

Predictions,  J.  G.  Piddington  on,  reference  to -  - - 137,  138

See  also  Self-suggestion.
Premonitions,  Dreams -----  - 437,  443-44,  451-52

Presidential  Address  (1912),  by  Bishoja  W.  Boyd  Carpenter - -  2
(1913),  by  Henri  Bergson  -  -  -  462

Prince,  Dr.  Morton,  Cases  recorded  by,  references  to

B.  C.  A. -------- 273-276,  282-83

The  "  Misses  Beauchamp " -  267-75,277,283-84
Prophecies  of  Jeanne  D' Arc -  -  424-25

Psalm  cxxvii,  Script  reference  to - - - '  - - 25  (foot-note)
Pseudo-Hallucinations,  Phenomena  of -  - 252,  253

Psychanalyse  Freuds,  Die,  by  Dr.  E.  Bleuler,  review  of -  -  367

Psychical  Research,  Andrew  Lang  and,  by  the  Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield  -  419
„  Dr.  Boyd  Carpenter  on -----  2-23

„  Mr.  M'Dougall  on  the  results  of  -  361-62

See  also  Dr.  Maxwell  on  Correspondances  Croise'es.

Psycho- Analysis —

,, Prof.  S.  Freud's  methods  of,  on

302,  308,  310-311,  312,  335-39,  367-369
,, „ A  Note  on  the  Unconscious  in,  by  - - - - -  312
„ Dr.  E.  Bleuler  on  -  -  367

Psychology,  Professor  Bergson  on  -  477

Psychometry,  Experiments  in,  reference  to  -  142,  143

Psychomotor  States. See  Somnambulism,  Spontaneous.

Psycho-Therapeutic  Clinic  at  Liverpool - - -  -  -373

Q.

Queen  Mar  if  s  Diamond.s,  by  Andrew  Lang,  reference  to - - -  421

R,

R.,  Marcelline,  Case  of,  reference  to  -  265

Rector. See  Trance  Personalities  (Mrs.  Piper).

Requiescat,  Cross-correspondence,  references  to -  - 46-48,  51,  53

Revelation  of  St.  John  the  Divine  and  The  Horace  Ode  Question

184-85,  187-89,  193,  194  (foot-note),  211,  214,  222,  241-43
Reviews ------  251,  344,  367,  370,  373

Reynolds,  Mary,  Case  of,  reference  to- -  -  266-67

Riviere,  Mrs.,  Table-Tilting  Experiments  with  Miss  Verrall  -  -  44-53
"  Rou,"  Case  of,  reference  to  -  -  -  261,262

Royce,  Professor,  reference  to  -  332

Ruskin,  references  to  works  by  -  - 194  (foot-notes)


lxv.-lxvil]  Index  to  Vol.  XXVI.  539

s.

St.  Dominic. See  Dominican's  Incident.

St.  John,  See  Revelation  of,  and  Horace  Ode  Question.

St.  Paxil,  Cross-correspondence,  reference  to - -  - 91,  92,  94

St.  Peter,  Item  in  Cross-correspondence,  reference  to  - - 95,  96,  111,  112
Sand,  George,  Lettres  aVun  Voyageur,  Comparison  of  passages  with  Mrs.

Verrall's  Script  and  F.  W.  H.  Myers's  Venice - -  191-194
Savonarola,  Cross-correspondence,  reference  to - -  -  115

Scott,  Sir  W.,  Lay  of  the  Last  Minstrel,  Script  reference  to  - - -  128
Scribe  Incident,  Dr.  Maxwell  on  - - - -  76,125

,,  Reply  to,  by  Miss  Alice  Johnson - -  -  413

Selection,  as  a  Factor  in  Cross-correspondences  -  363,  399

Self-suggestion,  Predictions  probably  fulfilled  through -  294-96
Selwyn  Text  Incident,  reference  to -------  84

Servia,  Alleged  Prediction  of  Assassination  of  the  King  of,  Script  refer-
ence to -  137

Sesame  and  Lilies,  Cross-correspondence,  Dr.  Maxwell  on  -  -  122

„  Reply  to,  by  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick - -  -  384

Sevens,  Cross-correspondence,  Dr.  Maxwell  on - -  116-121
,, Reply  to,  by  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick -  -  390

Shakespeare,  Script  references  to

„ Antony  and  Cleopatra -  -  -  184,189,213-14

„ Merchant  of  Venice  -  - 190,  213

Shelley,  Script  references  to

„ Adonais ...  .  - - -  124

,, Sensitive  Plant - -  -  - -  125

Sibyl  Incident,  reference  to  - 113,  125

Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Henry —

„ Experiments  with  Mrs.  Piper,  reference  to 116-68,  175-76,  234
„ Reply  to  Dr.  J.  Maxwell's  Criticism  of  Experimental  Methods

in  Cross-correspondences -----  375-400

„  Discussion  of  General  Methods - -  -  375-400

„  „ of  Particular  Cases -  375-391

„  „ the  Symbolic  Character  as  evidence  of  a

Third  Intelligence  - - - 391-94,  398-400
„ Review  of  Les  Hallucinations  Telepathiqzies,  by  N.  Vaschide  251
Sidgwick,  Professor  H,  on  Canons  of  Evidence  in  Psychical  Re-
search, reference  to - - - - - - - - 131,  379

Sidgwick-Control,  The,  (through  Mrs.  Yerrall),  references  to

53,  56,  70-71  (foot-notes),  399
Sidis,  Dr.  Boris,  Case  recorded  by,  reference  to  - - - - -  266

„ Multiple  Personality,  on  Consciousness  and -  332
„ The  Theory  of  the  Subconscious,  by -  319-343
„  „ Automatism  and  326

„  „ Passive  Consciousness  and -  - - -  331

„  „ Unconscious  Cerebration  and -  ...  319

„  „  „ Ideas  and  -  -  334


540


Index  to  Vol.  XXVI.


[parts


Skeat,  Prof.  W.,  on  Malay  Magic,  reference  to - -  77  (foot-note)

Smith,  G.  A.,  Experiments  in  Telepathic  Hypnotism,  reference  to

377,  393-94

Society  for  Psychical  Research,  the  Experimental  Methods  of,  in

regard  to  Cross-correspondence,  Dr.  Maxwell  on  - - - -  57-144

,, Replies  to,  by  Miss  A.  Johnson,  J.  G.  Piddingtou,  Mrs.  H.

Sidgwick,  and  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall  -  375-418
Socrates,  Script  references  to------ - 92,  93,  94

„ F.  W.  H.  Myers  on  the  Daemon  of,  reference  to  - - -  249
Somnambulism,  Spontaneous,  Cases  of  recurrent -  258-63

See  also  Personality,  Alternations,  and  Multiple.
Spanish  Town  (Jamaica),  Haunted  House  at,  connection  between,  and  a

Script  of  Mrs.  Verrall  --------  396-97

Spear  and  Sphere. See  Panopticon.

Spinoza,  Philosophy  of,  reference  to ------ -  348

Spirit  and  Angel,  Cross-correspondence,  references  to  -  -  86,  95,  105,  383
Spring  Morning. See  The  Horace  Ode  Question  ;  and  Myers,  F.  W.  H.,

Script  references  to  Poems.
Star. See  Browning,  Hope  and  Star.
Steam  Laundry. See  Water  Rights  Incident.

Stevenson,  R.  L.,  Script  reference  to  St.  Ives  -----  414
Sub- Conscious,  The  Theory  of  the,  by  Dr.  Boris  Sidis - - -  319

See  also  S.  Freud,  W.  M'Dougall,  and  T.  W.  Mitchell.
Subliminal  Consciousness,  Bishop  Boyd  Carpenter  on -  13-23
„  Dr.  Maxwell  on- - -  -  130-138

„  F.  W.  H.  Myers  on

14,  267,  269  (foot-notes),  282,  286

See  also  Cross-correspondences.
Subliminal  Self,  Dr.  Boris  Sidis'  defiuition  of -  - 326,  343

F.  W.  H.  Myers  on -  -  -  14

Suggestion,  Faith  and,  by  Dr.  E.  Ash  - -  - -  -  370

„  Hypnotic,  and  Psycho-Analysis,  on  the  difference  between  368
Survival,  Human,  on  the  question  of —

Balfour,  the  Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.  364-67
M'Dougall,  W. -  -  364-67

Van  Eeden,  Dr.  F. -  460-61
•See  also  Cross-correspondences.
Swedenborg,  Script  references  to -  -  -  91-94

Symposium  Incident,  reference  to - -  - 121,  229

Syringa  Incident,  Dr.  Maxwell  on -  - -  73

T.

Taplin,  A.  Betts,  L.R.C.P.,  The  Liverpool  Psycho- Therapeutic  Clinic,  by  373

Tavern  Club  Motto,  reference  to 116,  139,  390

Telekinesis,  Alleged,  Levitations  of  Mediums  (D.  D.  Home)  -  -  428
Tele'pathiques,  Les  Hallucinations,  by  N.  Vaschide,  Review  of - -  251


LXV.-LXVII.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXVI.


541


Telepathy,  Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour  on -  362-64
„ Professor  Bergson  on -------  465

W.  M'Dougall  on  - -  -  359-64

,, Dr.  Maxwell  on. See  Cross-correspondences.
„ Wireless  Telegraphy,  on  the  analogy  of -  - -  363

Telepathy,  Experimental,  Dreams 452-53

,,  ,, Veridical  Statements  in  Automatic  Scripts - -  24-56

Telepathy,  Spontaneous,  Hallucinations - - -  - -  251

Tennyson,  Script  references  to —

,, Demeter  and  Persephone ------  136,  389

„ In  Memoriam  88,  90,  91,  233,  242,  243,  245-50

„ Lucretius  ....... 237,  245-50

„ Maud - -  -  -  26  (foot-note),  97,  98

„ Morte  D 'Arthur -  182,  ]  88,  222-23,  337-38,  242,  245-50

„ Tears,  Idle  Tears - 30,  31

„ Two Tennysonian Quotations  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  Script,

J.  G.  Piddington  on -  - -  245,  389  (foot-note)

Thanatos,  Cross-correspondence,  reference  to  - - -  - -  105

Thompson,  Mrs.,  Trance  Phenomena  of,  reference  to -  -  440,  452

Time,  Subliminal  Consciousness  of,  question  of,  in  Dreams  -  -  441-42
Trance  Phenomena  of  Mrs.  Piper —

85-130,  132,  134-5,  139,  140,  147,  171,  176-78,
200-203,  233-43,  375-76,  382,  386-88,  390-91,

401-403,  415

„ Automatist's  Knowledge  of  Subject-Matter

90,  91,  100,  107,  116,  132-35,  236,  390,  391
„  Conditions  of  Consciousness  during  -  57,  58,  132,  135, 140,  376
„ Reviving  the  Literary  Memories  of  Trance-Personalities

108-115

Trance-Personalities  (of  W.  S.  Moses) -  103  (foot-note)

„  „ (of  Mrs.  Piper)

„  „  „ Doctor -  -  140

„  „  „ Imperator  -  -  -  140

„  „  „ Mentor  -  -  140

„  „  „ Prudens -  -  103  (foot-note),  140

„  „ Rector 59-60,  89,  103  (foot-note),  140,

150,  157,  161  (foot-note),  164
166  (foot-note),  168,  170  (foot-
note), 212,  236,  239,  403


„  „ (of  Mrs.  Thompson)

Nelly  - 440,  452-53

„  Dr.  T.  W.  Mitchell  on  the  relation  of,  to  Multiple

Personality  -  274-75

Triangle  within  a  Circle,  Cross-correspondence,  reference  to  -  89,  103
Tuckey,  C. Lloyd, M.D., Review of Faith  and  Suggestion,  by

Dr.  E.  Ash  - 370


542


Index  to  Vol.  XXVI.


[parts


V.

Ulysses. See  Ajax  and  Ulysses.

Unconscious  Cerebration,  Theory  of,  references  to  -  - 323,  325,  326

Unconscious,  A  Note  on  the,  in  Psycho- Analysis,  by  Prof.  S.  Freud  312-318


Van  Eeden,  Dr.  F.—

„ A  Study  of  Dreams  - -  -  -  431-461

„  „  Argument  for  the  Psychical  and  Non-

Physical  Basis  of 433-35,  438-41,  458-61
,,  ,,  Classification,  and  Description  of  Types

of -  ....  -435-58

,,  „  Experimental ....  440,  452-53

„  ,,  Reintegration,  and  Dissociation,  in -  441

Vaschide,  N.,  Les  Hallucinations  Tele'pathiques  by,  Review  of - -  251
„  and  Pieron,  on  Dreams,  reference  to - - - -  433-34

Venice. See  Horace  Ode  Question  ;  and  Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  Script

references  to  Poems.
Verrall,  Dr.  A.  W.,  Telepathic  Experiments  of  {The  One- Horse-Dawn),

Dr.  J.  Maxwell  on -  ....  61-68

Verrall,  Miss  H.  de  G.—

,,  Cross-correspondences  (with  Mac  Script)

36  (foot-note),  125-130,  384
(  „ Mrs.  Piper)

58,  59,  85,  117,  118,  167,  180,  375,  382
„  „  (  „ Mrs.  Verrall)

24-44,85,117,118,167,180,375,382,384
,,  „  Automatist's  Knowledge  of  Sub-

ject-Matter  of  the  Script  39
(foot-note),43, 44,55, 56,1 25-30, 386-391
,,  The  Sevens  Cross-correspondence - -  117,118

,,  Table-Tilting  Experiments  —

with  the  Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield - -  34-39
„  „  with  Mrs.  Riviere -  -  44-46

Verrall,  Mrs.  A.  W.—

Automatic  Scripts  of 24-56,  58-74,  85-100,  136,  145,

174-220,  221,  231,  245,  375,  377,

378,  380-87,  391-98,  401-8
„  „ A  Month 's  Record  of  Automatisms - -  24-56

„  ,,  „ Summary  and  Analysis -  51-56

„ Cross-correspondences  (with  "Mrs.  Forbes")

60,  61,  69,  70,  121,  401-6
( „ "  Mrs.  Holland  ")  - 74,  101,  380
„  „  ( ,,  the  Mac  Script)  36  (foot-note),

122,  125-130,  384-85


LXV.-LXVII.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXVI.


543


Verrall,  Mrs.  A.  W.—

„ Cross-correspondences  (with  Mrs.  Piper)  25,  48,  52,  53,

59,  85-130,  1-17-70,  171-73,
174-178,  200-203,  375-76,
382-83,  390-91,  401-403,

415-418

„  „  ( „ Miss  Verrall)

24-44,  85,  117,  118,  167,  180,

375,  382,  384

( „ "Mrs.  Willett")  - -  122-23
„  „  Automatist's  Knowledge  of  Subject-

Matter  of  the  Script  25  (foot-note),
27,  28,  38,  44,  50,  55,  56,  70-71
(foot-note),  61,  100, 125-30,  196-97,

227-30,  240,  248-50,  385-91
,,  ,,  The  Sevens  Cross-correspondence 116,  118

„ Horace  Ode  Question,  a  Hitherto  Unsuspected  Answer

to,  in  the  Scripts  of,  J.  G.  Piddington  on 178-220,  231
Et.  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour  on - - - -  221

„ Dr.  Maxwell's  Criticism  of  Cross-correspondences  and  of

the  Experimental  Methods  of 58-74,  138,  142
„  „ Reply  to,  by -  401-408

The  "  Haunting  Bird  "  (Daily  Mail)  Case -  406
„  „ "Marmontel"  Incident  - -  - -  406

,,  ,, Panopticon -------  401

„  „ Talbot-Forbes  Case- - -  - -  404

,, Two  Tennysonian  Quotations  in  the  Script  of,  J.  G.

Piddington  on  - - - - -  245

Volatile  ferrum. See  Panopticon.


W.

Ward,  Professor,  Philosophy  of,  references  to  - -  -  11,  12,  351

Waters  of  Babylon,  Script  references  to -  - -  125

Water  Eights  Incident,  The -  -  44-46

Welby,  Victoria,  Lady,  on  the  science  of  Signifies,  reference  to  -  -  433
Wellington  College  Incident,  reference  to  -  -  63,  64

Wilde,  Oscar,  Theocritus,  Script  references  to, -  - 136,  389

"Willett,  Mrs.,"  Cross-correspondences  (with  "Mrs.  Forbes,"  "Mrs.

Holland," Mac Script, and Mrs. and  Miss
Verrall) -  -  122-125,  391

,,  Boor  {  —  Dorr)  and  Key,  Cross-correspondence,  Dr.

Maxwell  on  122-125
Wittinann,  Blanche,  Case  of,  reference  to -  -  -  282

Woolley,  V.  J.,  M.D.,  Review  of  Die  Psychanalyse  Freuds,  by  Dr.  E.

Bleuler  -  -  - -  367


544 Index  to  Vol.  XXVI.  [parts  lxv.-lxvil]

Wordsworth,  Script  references  to - -  25  (foot-note)

„ Stanzas  suggested  by  Peele  Castle  186-88,  190,  212,  241,  243

(Horace  Ode  Question)

,, /  wandered  lonely  as  a  Cloud  -  - -  100

Wordsworth  Country,  Script  references  to  -  - - -  98,  99,  100

Wundt,  Theory  of  the  Unconscious,  references  to  334,  341,  356

X.

X,  Fislida,  Case  of,  references  to -  -  265,  266,  281,  282,  285-

y.

Yellow,  Cross-correspondence,  reference  to  - -  - - -  115


Z.

Ziehen,  Professor,  on  Unconscious  Cerebration,  reference  to -  320,  323-24
