Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. XXXV (1925)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1925 Glasgow: Robert MacLehose and Co. edition (Parts XCIII-XCVI) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc35soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS


OF  THE


Society  for  Psychical  Research


VOLUME  XXXV

(CONTAINING  PARTS  XCIII,  XCIV,  XCV  &•  XCVI)

192^


Tke  responsibility  for  both  the  facts  and  the  reasonings  in  papers
published  in  the  Proceedings  rests  entirely  zvith  their  authors


PRINTED  FOR  THE  SOCIETY  BY

ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  &  COMPANY  LIMITED

UNIVERSITY  PRESS,  GLASGOW
1926

Agents  jor  the  sale  of  publications  :

LONDON  :  FRANCIS  EDWARDS,  83  High  Street,  Marylebone,  W.  i.
GLASGOW:  JACKSON,  WYLIE  &  CO.,  73  West  George  Street
AMERICA:  THE  F.  W.  FAXON  CO.,  83  Francis  Street,  Boston,  Mass.


All  rights  reserved


PRINTED  IN  GREAl BRITAIN HV ROBFRI MACl.EHOSE AND  CO.  l.TI).
THE UNn  iiRSITY  PRESS,  (;LASGOVV.


CONTENTS.

PART  XCIII.
June,  1924.

PAOE

Experiences  in  Spiritualism  with  D.  D.  Home. By  the  Earl  om


DUNRAVEN :

Introduction. By  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S  1

Author's  Preface  21

Introductory  Remarks.  By  the  late  Earl  of  Dunrave;)!  ,  ,>>^6;
Names  of  Persons  Present  at  the  Seances  . .  ; j,"

R«cord  of  Stances  • . '  . .  48

Classification  of  Phenomena  ,  284

>  ^  "  )

'  J  1 .  3 > '  >

PART  XCIV.  '  ■


May,  1925.

'An  Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena. By  F.  E.


Leaning :

I.  Introductory 289

II.  Data  and  Bibliography .......  290

III.  Diffusion 292

IV.  Frequency 295

V,  Health 300

VI.  Natural  Vision 303

VII.  Subject  Matter 308

VIII.  Features 327

IX.  Companion  Phenomena 343

X.  Hypnopompic  Variety 351

XI.  Memory 357

XIL  Control 362

XIIL  Significance 368

XIV.  Summary 373

XV.  Crystal  Vision : A  Comparison 378

XVI.  Theories  and  Explanations ......  384

XVII.  The  AppUcation  of  Theory 393

XVIII.  Interior  Vision  :  its  Mechanism 396

XIX.  Sources  Discussed 399

XX.  Bibliography 404

Appendix  A.  Cardano 410

„ B.  Lelorgne  de  Savigny 411


iv


Contents.


PART  XCV.
July,  1925.

PAGE

Frontispiece  :  Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.

In  Memory  of  Sir  William  Fletcher  Barrett,  F.R.S.  .  .  413
In  Memory  of  Monsieur  Camillb  Flammarion  .  .  .  .419
Des  Conditions  de  la  Certitude.  By  Professor  Charles  Richet  422
Mrs.  Piper  and  the  Imperator  Band  of  Controls. By  A.  W.

Trethewy  445

Supplement.

Reviews  :  Dr.  Carl  Bruck's  "  Experimentelle  Telepathic  " .  466
Dr.  Christoph  Schroder's  "  Grundversuche  auf  dem  Gebiete
„,:  '  ',  '.  •'- ;  der  psychischen  Grenzwissenschaften  " ....  469

PART  XCVI.
•  •  ■  ■  ;  •  '  December,  1925.

A  Report  on  Some  Communications  Received  through  Mrs.

Blanche  Cooper. By  S.  G.  Soal,  M.A.,  B.Sc. . . .  471

Introduction 471

The  Communicator  of  Section  1 480

Section  1 485

Section  2. The  Study  of  a  Fictitious  Communicator  . .  523

Section  3. The  Case  of  James  Miles 549

Section  4. The  Case  of  Gordon  Davis. A  "  Communica-
tion "  from  a  Living  Person 560

Appendices 590

Index  to  Vol.  XXXV  .595


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

PART  XCIII.
JUNE,  1924

INTRODUCTION TO THE EARL OF  DUNRAVEN'S
RECORD  OF  EXPERIENCES  WITH  D.  D.  HOME.

By  Sik  Oliver  Lodge.
PART  I.

The  so-caUed  "  physical  phenomena  "  of  SpirituaHsm  have
hitherto  attracted  but  httle  scientific  attention  in  this
country  :  and  even  as  regards  popular  attention  they
have  been  less  welcome  than  the  more  purely  mental
or  psychic  communications  which  seem  to  have  a  bearing
on  human  destiny  and  survival.  Physical  phenomena  of
this  peculiar  and  unusual  kind  labour  under  certain  dis-
advantages. They  are  rather  easily  imitated,  for  one
thing,  or  at  least  they  attract  the  attention  and  arouse
the  ingenuity  of  skilled  conjiu-ers  to  see  how  closely  they
can  be  produced  by  normal  means.  And  since  very  few
of  those  who  have  had  an  opportunity  of  observing  them
have  had  a  laboratory  training  or  been  accustomed  to
learn  from  actual  experiments  ;  and  since  most  people,
including  physicists,  are  aware  that  conjurers  under  their
own  conditions  are  able  to  deceive  them  ;  there  has
usually  been  a  doubt  as  to  the  actual  occurrence  of  any
abnormal  physical  phenomenon  apart  from  conscious
human  contrivance.  And  this  uncertainty  has  prevented
a  very  whole-hearted  attempt  to  bring  such  things  to
book  and  ascertain  their  laws.

For  laws,  of  course,  they  must  have  ;  though  inasmuch
as  the  activity  of  live  things  is  involved,  those  laws  are


2


Sir  Oliver  Lodge


bound  to  be  complicated  by  the  general  difficulties  in-
separable from  the  activities  of  hfe.  Live  things  are
usually  excluded  from  a  physical  laboratory.  The  observer
excludes  even  himself  during  extremely  dehcate  weighings
or  temperature  determinations  ;  he  may  have  to  read  a
scale  through  a  telescope  from  the  other  end  of  a  corridor.
And  even  in  ordinary  experiments,  a  buzzing  fly  or  a
spider's  web  would  be  more  than  a  nuisance  in  a  scientific
instrument.  Charwomen  and  mischievous  students  could
play  havoc  with  a  simple  meteorological  observation.  A
physical  experimenter  always  proceeds  on  the  assumption
that  vital  activities  have  been  excluded,  or  he  takes
precautions  to  exclude  them.  Experiments  on  spontaneous
generation  were  for  a  long  time  vitiated  by  the  unwanted
but  overlooked  incursion  of  hving  organisms.  But — in
contrast  with  all  that, — in  the  particular  class  of  observa-
tion with  which  psychical  research  is  concerned,  a  hving
organism  of  some  kind  is  bound  to  be  introduced,  or
nothing  happens.  Everyone  admits  that.  The  question
is,  what  sort  of  a  hve  agency  is  operating  ?  Is  it  an
ingeniously  fraudulent  one,  or  is  it  of  an  unknown  and
unsuspected  kind  ?

We  may  sa3^  that  in  the  p^^rely  physical  world  nothing
supernormal  ever  happens.  And  even  in  the  psychic
world  there  is  no  question  of  superseding  the  laws  of
Physics  and  Chemistry :  we  must  assume  that  they  can
only  be  supplemented.  There  should  be  no  suspicion  or
suggestion  about  suspending  Gravitation,  for  instance,  or
uj)setting  the  Conservation  of  Energy.  It  ought  to  be
assumed  that  aU  well  ascertained  laws  are  rigorously
obeyed,  whether  by  animate  or  inanimate  nature.  But
it  is  a  famihar  fact  that  hve  things  introduce  a  supple-
mentary element,  a  guiding  or  controlhng  element,  an
infusion  of  will  and  of  intelhgence,  something  not  sus-
pending but  supplementing  the  ordinary  processes  of
nature.  Everyone  knows  how  perturbing  a  kitten  or  a
barrel-organ  or  a  mosquito  can  be  :  their  action  is  en-
tirely commonplace,  and  in  the  case  of  the  kitten  may  be
attractive,  but  they  introduce  a  perturbing  element
because  of  the  spontaneous  and  incalculable  character  of


Introduction


3


their  movements.  I  do  not  suppose  that  even  Laplace's
Calculator  could  predict  the  orbit  of  a  fly,  or  predetermine
the  vibrations  of  air  caused  by  an  itinerant  vendor.
So  also  hve  people  can  lift  stones  that  would  not  other-
wise have  been  lifted,  they  can  light  or  extinguish  a  fire,
can  penetrate  mountainous  obstacles,  divert  the  course  of
rivers,  unite  oceans,  amend  unhealthy  climates,  and  do
many  other  things  ;  not  by  suspending  but  by  modifying
and  perturbing  the  direct  incidence  of  the  laws  of  nature.
Moreover,  apart  from  perturbation,  hving  processes  are
well  known  to  produce  curious  results,  such  as  birds'
nests,  honeycombs,  pictures,  and  cathedrals.  Physics  and
Chemistry  are  therefore  insufficient  in  the  examination  of
vital  phenomena  :  they  must  be  supplemented  by  Physio-
logy and  by  Psychology.  Furthermore,  if  it  should  turn
out  that  any  unknown  intelligent  agencies  exist,  even
though  they  be  only  of  the  animal  or  savage  order,  they
might  conceivably  produce  results  akin  to  those  suggested
above ;  but  their  incursion  would  make  scientific  examina-
tion difficult,  and  would  inevitably  have  a  deterrent
influence  on  an  investigator,  so  long  as  the  agencies  were
unknown.

In  Psychical  Research  we  set  out  with  the  intention  of
not  excluding  unknown  activities  ;  we  are  engaged  in
examining  the  behaviour  of  specially  endowed  hving
people.  Even  in  experiments  on  the  purely  mental  side
we  have  to  introduce  "  a  sensitive,"  that  is  someone
with  exceptional  faculties,  often  called  a  "  medium."
And  the  precautions  necessary  to  ensure  the  honesty  of
such  a  person,  though  necessary,  are  inevitably  distasteful.
Nevertheless,  on  the  purely  mental  side,  precautions  are
fairly  easy  ;  accordingly  such  things  as  Telepathy  and
Clairvoyance,  and  the  action  of  the  subconscious  generally,
have  been  seriously  tackled  ;  and  some  progress  has  been
made.  There  are  still  some  die-hards,  but  few  responsible
people  now  doubt  that  there  are  genuine  phenomena  to
be  investigated ;  and  though  we  are  well  aware  that  we
have,  as  yet,  no  adequate  theory  to  cover  the  ground
completely,  we  can  proceed  by  the  method  of  working
hjrpothesis, we feel at hberty to suggest an  experi-


4


Sir  Oliver  Lodge


mental  theory,  to  be  amended  or  modified  as  experience
grows.

On  the  physical  side  of  these  phenomena,  however,  we
in  this  country,  and  presumably  in  America  also,  have
made less  progress.

The  Society  for  Psychical  Research  has  not  ignored
the  subject,  but  its  experience  has  been  in  some  respects
unfortunate  ;  and  accordingly  some  of  its  skilled  investi-
gators, who  are  quite  entitled  to  their  opinion,  do  not
share  my  views,  or  at  least  might  express  their  present
convictions  differently.  It  would  be  safe  to  say  that
several  members  of  Council  are  still  in  a  state  of  doubt
about  the  occurrence  of  psycho-physical  phenomena  in
general ;  hence  nothing  I  say  need  be  taken  as  repre-
senting any  view  held  by  the  Society  as  a  whole.  The
Society  as  a  whole  preserves  an  open  mind  and  would
welcome  good  opportunities  for  investigating  abnormal
physical  phenomena.  Some  of  the  members  imagine  that
the  positive  results  obtained  by  others  are  due  to  a
lack  of  adequate  precaution  against  trickery !  Others
conjecture  that  so-called  precautionary  measures  may  be
pushed  to  such  excess  as  to  frustrate  the  object  in  view
and  to  inhibit  the  occurrence  of  genuine  phenomena.
It  is  better  to  err  on  the  side  of  excessive  caution  than
of  over-credulity,  but  it  is  difficult  to  form  an  opinion
on  purely  negative  results.  The  subject  has  been  seriously
attacked  in  Europe  by  physiologists  and  qualified  medical
men,  as  well  as  by  a  few  others  of  different  or  more
general  training  ;  they  have  endeavoured  to  ascertain
something  of  the  laws  of  the  phenomena,  and  responsible
publications  embody  some  of  their  results.  In  this  country,
— apart  from  some  laborious  and  cautious  reports  by
Officials  and  Members  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Re-
search, e.g.  a  long  report  by  Messrs.  Feilding,  Baggally
and  Carrington,  in  Volume  XXIII.  of  the  Society's  Pro-
ceedings,— that  branch  of  the  subject  has  hitherto  been
left  mainly  to  amateurs,  whose  testimony  to  odd  and
inexplicable  occurrences  is  voluble  and  extensive,  but
has  for  the  most  part  been  recorded  in  such  a  way  as
not  to  attract  the  attention  of  men  of  science,  or  at  any


Introduction


5


rate  not  to  attract  it  in  a  favourable  manner.  And
many  of  the  asserted  phenomena  have  been  more  or  less
closely  imitated,  with  considerable  mgenuity,  on  the
conjuring  stage.

To  this  statement  about  scientific  aloofness  there  have
been  some  exceptions.  Every  now  and  then  a  medium
has  arisen  possessing  abnormal  faculties  to  so  great  an
extent  that  a  few  scientific  men  have  felt  it  their  duty  to
examine  and  report ;  chief  among  them  being  Sir  William
Crookes.  Such  men  have  suffered  for  their  temerity.
Their  testimony  has  not  been  widely  accepted.  Their
efforts  to  mduce  others  of  their  fraternity  to  come  and
verify  the  facts  have  usually  been  unsuccessful.  And
so  the  effort  has  exhausted  itseh  in  a  kind  of  sterility,
leaving  no  group  or  school  of  investigators  to  carry
on  the  work.  In  time  this  recurrent  barrenness  must
terminate,  either  in  the  discovery  that  all  these  observa-
tions are  ill-founded  and  that  no  such  phenomena  occur,
or — as  is  much  more  liliely — in  repeated  confirmation  of
the  fact  that  the  phenomena  are  real,  and  can  gradually
be  subjected  to  the  reign  of  law  and  order.

Scientific  men  on  the  Continent  have  seriously  taken
the  subject  up.  Institutes  have  been  founded  for  the
prosecution  of  the  enquiry,  and  devoted  experimenters  are
sacrificing  their  careers  and  incurring  odium  and  ridicule
in  their  endeavour  to  explore,  verify,  and  enlarge  this
nascent  and  puzzling  branch  of  science.  It  can  only  be
by  the  combination  of  a  number  of  workers  of  different
aptitudes  and  knowledge,  all  possessing  first-hand  acquaint-
ance with  the  disputed  facts,  that  anything  like  a  satis-
factory treatment  can  at  length  be  achieved.  One  of
the  first  things  that  a  would-be  investigator  has  to  do
is  to  make  himself  acquainted  with  the  first-hand  testimony
of  responsible  and  trustworthy  predecessors,  especially
those  who  have  had  an  opportunity  of  examining  the
more  powerful  mediums  who  from  time  to  time  have
arisen  in  the  past.

Assuming  any  of  these  wonder-workers  to  be  genuine,
that  is  to  say  assuming  that  they  are  not  consciously
or  maliciously  prodixcing  their  effects,  it  is  safe  to  say


6


Sir  Oliver  Lodge


that  they  understand  them  as  little  as  anyone  else.  While
they  are  being  produced,  the  ostensible  producers  are
for  the  most  part  unconscious  or  only  semi-conscious  :
their  organism  is  not  wholly  under  thek  own  control.
The  appearance  is  as  if  it  were  utilised  by  other  intelli-
gences,— intelUgences  it  may  be  of  a  low  order,  possibly
not  even  human, — superhuman  or  infra-human.  So,  as
in  cases  of  multiple  personaUty  and  other  pathological
phenomena,  the  investigation  must  be  conducted,  not  by
the  patient,  but  by  the  qualified  practitioner  who  examines
and  reports  on  the  case.  And  inasmuch  as  the  qualified
practitioner  cannot  be  always  present,  and  cannot  himself
observe  all  the  phases  of  the  disorder,  he  must  make
such  use  as  he  can  of  the  testimony  of  friends  and
relations,  or  of  those  who  have  been  most  closely  associ-
ated with  the  individual  durmg  the  access.

The  physical  mediums  who  have  quite  recently  been
examined  and  reported  on  by  trained  observers  are  known
in  this  branch  of  scientific  literature  by  such  names
as  Eusapia  Palladino,  Miss  Goliglier,  Eva  C,  Willy  S.,
Kluski,  Guzik,  etc.  And  although  it  may  be  casually
and  hastily  thought  that  everyone  of  these  has  been
exposed  or  exploded,  that  is  not  really  a  considered  and
reasonable  and  legitimate  view.  We  have  to  be  on  our
guard  against  deception,  but  it  is  not  really  reasonable
gratuitously  to  suppose  that  an  individual  starts  out  on
a  career  of  that  kind,  and  subjects  him  or  herself  to
all  the  minute  and  repulsive  precautions  which  have  to
be  taken,  without  any  kind  of  foundation  in  reality.

To  those  who  resolutely  shut  their  minds  to  evidence,
and  decide  beforehand  that  they  know  what  is  possible
and  what  is  impossible,  neither  this  record  nor  any  other
book  on  the  subject  will  have  any  interest.  But  to
those  who,  preserving  an  open  mind  and  not  coming  to
hasty  conclusions,  are  impressed  with  the  fact  that  these
things  have  been  asserted  for  very  many  years  by  many
different  people, — some  who  have  attained  distinction  in
other  branches  of  knowledge  and  who  have  suffered  for
then'  conscientious  testimony  to  what  they  conceive  to  be
truth, — this  book  will  be  a  useful  compendium  of  direct


Introduction


7


first-hand  observation  witli  an  exceptional  medium,  un-
pretentiously and  contemporaneously  recorded.

It  has  long  been  known  to  psychical  researchers  that
such  a  record,  privately  printed,  was  in  existence.  And
many  of  them  must  have  seen  and  perhaps  read  a  copy.
But  the  copies  were  not  accessible  to  the  public,  nor
indeed  in  any  convenient  way  to  enquirers.  Existing
copies  are  few  m  number,  and  only  to  be  found  in
special  libraries.  Consequently  when  the  present  Earl  of
Dunraven  told  me  some  years  ago  that  he  thought  it  was
perhaps  his  duty  to  make  accessible  the  diary  which  he
wrote  at  the  request  of  his  father,  to  whom  he  reported
daily,  I  heartily  welcomed  the  suggestion.

There  were  difficulties  about  carrying  out  the  proposal  ;
but  Lord  Dunraven  thought  he  owed  it  to  the  memory
of  his  father  that  this  contemporary  record  of  observed
phenomena  should  not  be  lost  to  Science,  especially  now
that  the  subject  was  being  seriously  investigated  and
similar  experiences  testified  to  by  others,  so  that  there
was  some  chance  now  of  taking  it  out  of  the  sporadic
unintelhgible  stage  of  mere  observation,  and  bringing  it
gradually  into  the  realm  of  organised  science.  This  may
be  a  slow  process  ;  but  a  beginning  has  been  made.
Some  of  us  are  beginning  to  think  that  what  "  telepathy  "
has  proved  to  be  to  the  more  psychic  side  of  the  enquiry,
"  ectoplasm  "  may  prove  to  be  on  the  more  physical  or
physiological  side.

A  discussion  of  that,  or  any  of  the  theoretical  aspects,
is  beyond  my  intention  now,  and  beyond  the  scope  of
this  book.  What  we  are  concerned  with  here  is  a  record
of  the  facts  themselves.  And  all  that  I  want  to  do  in
this  Introduction  is  to  state  that  facts  of  a  similar  kind
have  been  observed  both  before  and  since,  and  to  give
brief  references  to  samples  of  those  observations.  This  I
will  do  in  the  Second  Part  of  this  Introduction.  I  will
conclude  this  First  Part  by  briefly  saying,  what  appears
more  fully  elsewhere,  that  the  late  Earl  of  Dunraven  was
at  one  time  keenly  '  interested  in  Home's  phenomena,
and  that  his  son,  the  present  Earl,  then  Viscount  Adare,
filially  shared  in  this  interest,  to  the  extent  of  partially


8


Sir  Oliver  Lodge


living  with  Home,  keeping  a  record  of  the  odd  things
that  happened  in  his  presence,  and  transmitting  them
regularly  to  his  father.  It  is  of  this  calm  and  collected
record,  made  without  decorations  or  exclamations  of
astonishment  or  any  other  perturbing  emotions,  that  the
book  consists.

I  ought  also  to  say  that  the  more  striking  things
occurred  when  Home  was  in  trance,  apparently  under
control  by  some  other  intelligence,  and  speaking  of  him-
seK  in  the  thu-d  person  as  "  Dan."  Whether  the  usual
'  control '  himself  had  any  ostensible  name,  I  do  not  know  ;
nor  does  it  matter.  But,  to  understand  the  record,  it
must  be  known  that  Home  under  control  called  himself
Dan,  his  name  being  Daniel  Dunglas  Home.  In  this
state  he  was  probably  unconscious  of  his  actions  ;  and
it  was  clear  that  his  body  or  physiological  organism  in
the  controlled  state  possessed  unusual  powers  and  pro-
perties. It  could  stand  fire,  for  instance  :  it  could  be
levitated  :  it  could  even  seem  to  be  elongated,  and  be
made  to  do  other  things  which  in  its  normal  state  were
impossible.  It  could  apparently  be  made  to  do  things
which  most  people  only  dream  they  are  able  to  do,  such
as  float  in  space.

One  obvious  quasi  explanation  will  be,  as  it  often  has
been,  suggested, — that  the  observers  were  under  hypnotic
control,  that  they  suffered  from  hallucination,  and,  so  to
speak,  only  dreamed  the  things.  Well,  that  is  one  of  the
hypotheses  that  has  to  be  met.  There  may  be  instances
to  which  it  applies.  But  I  am  convinced  that  to  the
great  bulk  of  the  phenomena  known  to  me  it  does  not
apply.  And  this  opinion  was  shared  by  the  high  authority
of  the  late  Lord  Rayleigli,  who,  in  testifying  to  such
experience  as  he  had  had  of  supernormal  physical  pheno-
mena, condemned  the  hypothesis  of  hallucination  in  his
case  utterly  :  and  I  entirely  confirm  and  support  his
statement.  One  is  no  more  hallucinated  than  when
making  observations  in  a  laboratory.  One  must  be  on
one's  guard  against  seeing  things  because  we  are  told  of
them,  or  would  like  to  see  them,  but  that  is  a  common-
place  of scientific training. In  his Presidential  Address


Introduction


9


to  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  the  late  Lord  Rayleigh
speaks  about  his  old  experience,  in  and  about  the  seventies
of  last  century,  as  follows  :

"  I  was  not  disinclined  to  believe  that  what  was,  or  at
any  rate  had  recently  been,  orthodox  opmiou  might  be
quite  wrong,  and  accordingly  became  mterested  hi  what  I
heard  from  friends  of  the  domgs  of  Home  and  other
so-called  mediums.  Some  of  the  stories  could,  as  it  seemed,
be  explained  away  only  on  the  supposition  of  barefaced
lying,  or  more  charitably  as  the  result  of  hallucination,
whether  self-induced  or  due  to  the  suggestion  and  influ-
ence of  others.  The  possibility  of  the  latter  view  cannot
be  left  out  of  account,  but  I  have  never  seen  anything  to
show  that  it  has  the  remotest  application  to  niy  own
experience  or  that  of  the  friends  with  whom  I  have  co-
operated.

"  The  interest  that  I  felt  was  greatly  stimulated  by  the
appearance  of  Sir  W.  Crookes's  '  Notes  of  an  Enquiry  into
the  Phenomena  called  Spiritual  during  the  years  1870-73.'  ^
I  was  acquainted  with  some  of  the  author's  scientific
work,  and  knew  that  he  was  a  skilful  experimenter  and
likely  to  be  alive  to  the  precautions  required  in  order  to
guard  against  sense  illusions."

After  quoting  a  few  phenomena  testified  to  by  Crookes
in  this  article.  Lord  Rayleigh  continues  :

"  The  two  mediums  whose  names  are  mentioned  in  the
article,  and  with  whom  most  of  the  observations  were
made,  are  Home  and  Miss  Fox,  afterwards  Mrs.  Jencken.
A  highly  desirable  characteristic  of  Home's  mediumship
was  the  unusual  opportunity  allowed  to  the  sense  of  sight.
Home  always  objected  to  darkness  at  his  seances.  '  Indeed,'
says  Sir  Wdham  Crookes,  '  except  on  two  occasions  .  .  .
everything  that  I  have  witnessed  with  him  has  taken
place  in  the  hght.' [And  Lord  Rayleigh  continues  : — ]

"  I  found  (and  indeed  still  find)  it  difficult  to  accept  what
one  may  call  the  '  knave  and  fool  theory  '  of  these  occur-
rences ;  but  failing  that,  it  would  seem  to  follow  that  one

^Quarterly  Journal  of  Science,  Jan.  1874.


10


Sir  Oliver  Lodge.


must  admit  the  possibility  of  much  that  contrasts  strongly
with  ordinary  experience."

He  then  mentions  experiments  of  his  own  with  Mrs.

Jencken,  Home  not  being  available,  and  emphatically
says  :

"  In  common,  I  suppose,  with  most  witnesses  of  such

things,  I  repudiate  altogether  the  idea  of  hallucination  as
an  explanation."

But  the  whole  address  should  be  read,  in  the  Pro-
ceedings of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  Vol.  XXX.,
pp.  275-290.

PART  II.
Summary  of  the  Phenomena.

When,  many  years  ago,  Crookes  lent  me  his  copy  of
the  privately  printed  record  now  about  to  be  published,
he  said  as  he  handed  it  to  me,  "  You  will  get  most  out
of  this  book  if  you  allow  yourself,  for  the  time,  to  imagine
that  things  happened  as  narrated."  I  doubt  if  I  was  able
to  follow  his  advice  then  ;  for  at  that  time  my  experience
of  supernormal  phenomena  was  small,  and  my  faith  in
scientific  orthodoxy  strong.  First-hand  experience  has  now
done  what  second-hand  testimony  could  not  :  it  has
gradually  shaken  my  beliefs  out  of  their  formal  mould
and  enlarged  my  perceptions  of  the  possibilities  and
realities  of  existence.

The  phenomena  testified  to  in  this  book  may  be  classi-
fied roughly  and  incompletely  as  follows  :

(1)  Movements  of  objects  ivithout  contact,  that  is  without
obvious  and  perceptible  or  normal  contact.  This  is  an
extremely  frequent  occurrence  with  practically  all  physical
mediums.  Many  observers,  including  myself,  have  testified
to  the  fact  that  it  truly  happens.  (See,  for  instance,
Journal  S.P.R.  Vol.  VI.  pp.  354-357).

(2)  Luminosities  and  scents.  These  also  are  common
phenomena,  to  the  occurrence  of  which  I  can  personally
testify. Sir  William Crookes  testified  that  he  was  not


Introduction


11


imposed  on  by  phosphorised  oil  or  other  chemical  means,
and  that  nevertheless,  under  the  strictest  test  conditions,
"  I  have  seen  luminous  pomts  of  light  darting  about
and  setthng  on  the  heads  of  different  persons  ;  I  have
had  questions  answered  by  the  flashing  of  a  bright  Mght
a  desired  number  of  times  in  front  of  my  face.  I  have
seen  sparks  of  light  rising  from  the  table  to  the  ceiling,
and  again  falhng  upon  the  table,  strildng  it  with  an
audible  soimd."  {^Researches  in  Spiritualism,,  p.  91.
Reprinted  from  The  Quarterly  Journal  of  Science.)

See  also  his  summary  of  many  other  remarkable  and
typical  phenomena  on  pp.  88-96  of  the  same  book.

(3)  Levitatian.  The  levitation  of  ordinary  objects  is  only
a  special  case  of  movement  of  things  without  contact.  I
have  not  myself  seen  the  levitation  of  a  human  body  ;
but  it  is  no  more  difficult  to  understand  than  the  raising
of  any  other  piece  of  matter.

Most  of  the  levitations  of  untouched  objects  that  I
have  seen  have  been  in  a  dim  light  ;  but  with  D.  D.
Home  they  are  said  to  have  occurred  in  daylight.  And
my  son,  F.  Brodie  Lodge,  whUe  on  a  visit  to  Professor
Richet  at  his  Chateau  de  Carqueiranne,  saw  such  a  levita-
tion in  the  presence  of  Eusapia  Palladtno.  The  object
raised  was  a  heavy  table,  specially  made  for  the  purpose,
without  a  flange,  and  with  sharp  pointed  feet.  The  top
of  the  table  was  continued  vertically  downwards  for  about
six  inches,  so  that  when  hands  were  on  the  top,  there
was  nothing  to  grip  on,  and  it  could  not  be  raised  normally
by  a  standing  person.  It  weighed  48  lbs.  (22  kilos),  and
was  purposely  made  awkward  to  catch  hold  of.  This
table  was  at  the  time  standing  out  of  doors,  in  the  full
blaze  of  sunshine.  And  after  it  had  gone  up  in  the  air,
they  all  stood  away  from  it  ;  and  to  Ricliet's  delight,  it
remained  up.  My  son's  testimony  (from  memory)  is  as
follows  :

"  It  was  only  one  incident  among  many  at  that  time —
August  or  September  1898.  I  Avas  eighteen,  and  next
month  started  in  business  witli  Alfred  Booth  &  Co.  in
Liverpool ;  so  I  am  sure  of  the  date.


12


Sir  Oliver  Lodge


"At  all  the  successful  sittings  with  Eusapia  that  summer,
objects  of  various  sizes  were  moved  about,  sometimes
visible,  sometimes  not,  according  to  the  illumination  that
Eusapia  allowed  at  the  time.  That  day  she  must  have
felt  in  particularly  good  form,  because  it  was  out  in
broad  daylight,  with  nothing  overhead.  But  I  was  getting
pretty  well  used  to  the  idea  of  table-lifting  by  then ;
only  I  was  struck  by  Professor  Richet's  joyous  chuckle
and  triumphant  challenge  '  En  pleine  lumiere  !  '

"  I  used  to  keep  a  diary  during  those  daj^s  on  the  Mediter-
ranean. The  incident  occurred  on  the  drive  in  front  of  the
Chateau  de  Carqueiranne,  just  to  the  left  of  it  as  you
stand  facing  its  front.  We  all  started  as  usual  round
the  table — the  special  heavy  wooden  one  you  Imow  of,
with  sharp  pointed  feet,  which  surely  none  of  us  alone
could  lift,  and  which  had  been  sj)ecially  made  for  tests.
When  it  was  well  up,  about  two  feeb  I  should  judge,
(Eusapia  being  held  as  usual),  Ave  all,  including  Eusapia,
stood  back  and  away  from  it  ;  and  Professor  Richet
passed  his  hand  under  it  and  over  it  and  all  round  it.
Then  we  did  the  same,  some  of  us,  and  we  were  all
quite  satisfied  that  there  was  no  physical  support  of  any
kmd."

(4)  The  jdaying  of  an  accordion,  either  unsupported  or
supported  at  the  keyless  end  (page  193).  This  was  also
observed  later  with  the  same  medium  by  Sir  William
Crookes  and  Sir  William  Huggins,  when  the  accordion
was  surrounded  by  a  wire  cage,  so  as  to  protect  it  from
interference  (see  Researches  in  Sjnritualistn,  pp.  12  to
14,  with  illustrations.  Also  pages  92  and  94).  I  have  myself
heard  notes  from  an  apparently  untouched  piano,  and
have  heard  an  accordion  play  under  conditions  reported
in  Journal  S.P.R.  Vol.  VI.  p.  350.

(5)  Withdrawal  of  scent  from  a  flower  (page  136).  A
rather  similar  effect  was  perhaps  the  one  and  only  physical
phenomenon  achieved  by  Mrs.  Piper,  as  testified  to  by
Dr.  Hodgson.  Mrs.  Piper's  fingers  were  moved  near  the
flower,  as  if  withdrawing  something  from  it ;  and  in  a
few  hours  it  had  withered.


Introduction


13


(6)  Pencil  tvriting  by  itself.  The  phenomenon  of  "  direct
writing,"  that  is  with  no  normal  contact  with  the  pencil,
is  unusual ;  but  I  have  had  experience  of  it  under  good
conditions.  It  is,  after  all,  only  the  intelligent  movement
of  a  piece  of  wood — the  intelligence  having  some  lin-
guistic acquirement,  which  is  an  additional  feature.  The
intelligent  and  responsive  movement  of  various  objects
above  a  dining-table  in  full  light  has  been  forcibly  attested
by  Crookes.  (See  Researches  in  Spiritualism,  pages  90
and  93).

(7)  Direct  voices.  These  also  I  have  heard  with  more
than  one  medium,  and  have  verified  then'  genuine
character.  On  one  occasion  the  tone  of  Raymond's  voice
was  recognised,  though  that  is  unusual.  The  incident
was  subsequently  referred  to  by  him  duruig  a  sitting
with  another  independent  medium  in  an  evidential  manner.
(See  Raymond  Revised,  pp.  173,  174,  177.)

(8)  Elongation  of  the  human  body.  This  I  have  never
seen,  and  am  only  acquainted  with  verbal  testimony  of
Sir  William  and  Lady  Crookes  to  the  same  phenomenon
with  the  same  medium  Home.  Nor  can  I  be  sure  that
there  was  anything  beyond  levitation.

(9)  The  fire  test.  That  is,  the  handling  of  red-hot
coals  or  the  putting  the  face  into  the  fire.  This  I  have
not  had  experience  of.  But  it  is  testified  to  by  Crookes,
Huggins,  and  several  other  people  ;  including  Madame  de
Crespigny.  I  quote  Crookes's  evidence  from  Sir  William
Barrett's  book  On  the  Threshold  of  the  Unseen,  (page  75)  :

"  At  Mr.  Home's  request,  whilst  he  was  entranced,  I
went  with  him  to  the  fireplace  in  the  back  drawing-room.
He  [the  influence  controlling  Home]  said  :  '  We  wane  you
to  notice  particularly  what  Dan  [i.e.  Home]  is  doing.'
Accordingly  I  stood  close  to  the  fire,  and  stooped  down
to  it  when  he  put  his  hands  in  .  .  .  Mr.  Home  then  waved
a  handkerchief  about  in  the  ah  two  or  three  times,
held  it  above  his  head,  and  then  folded  it  up  and  laid
it  on  his  hand  lilce  a  cushion.  Putting  his  otlier  hand
into  the  fire,  he  took  out  a  large  lump  of  cinder,  red-
hot  at  the  loAver  part,  and  placed  the  red  part  on  the


14


Sir  Oliver  Lodge


handkerchief.  Under  ordinary  circumstances  it  would
have  been  in  a  blaze.  In  about  half  a  minute  he  took
it  off  the  handkerchief  with  his  hand,  saying,  '  As  the
power  is  not  strong,  if  we  leave  the  coal  longer  it  will
burn.'  He  then  pub  it  on  his  hand,  and  brought  it  to
the  table  in  the  front  room,  where  all  but  myself  had
remained  seated."

To  this  Sir  William  Barrett  adds  :

"  Not  only  have  we  Sir  W.  Crookes'  evidence,  but  a
former  President  of  the  Royal  Society,  the  late  Su-  W.
Huggins,  O.M.,  witnessed  the  same  feat  with  Home  and
gave  me  a  detailed  account  of  it.  So  also  did  Mr.  S.  C.
Hall  who  was  jDresent  on  another  occasion,  when  a  white
hot  coal  was  put  on  his  head  and  his  white  hair  gathered
over  it,  but  he  told  me  he  felt  no  heat  and  bis  liair
was  wholly  uninjured.

"  Various  other  eye  witnesses  have  informed  me  that
they  have  seen  Mr.  Home  handle  with  impunity  red  hot
coals  ;  among  others  a  shrewd  and  able  solicitor,  the  late
Mr.  W.  M.  Wilkinson,  writing  to  me  from  Lincoln's  Inn
Fields,  London,  states  that  in  the  winter  of  1869 —

"  '  I  saw  Mr.  Home  take  out  of  our  drawing-room  fire
a  red-hot  coal,  a  little  less  in  size  than  a  cricket-ball,
and  carry  it  up  and  down  the  room.  He  said  to  Lord
Adare, — now  Earl  Dunraven, — who  was  present.  Will  you
take  it  from  me  ?  It  will  not  hurt  you.  Lord  Adare  took
it  from  him  and  held  it  in  his  hand  for  about  half  a
mmute,  and  before  he  threw  it  back  in  the  fire  I  put  my
hand  close  to  it  and  felt  the  heat  like  that  of  a  live
coal.'  "

Madame  de  Crespigny's  much  more  recent  experience
was  published  in  The  Daily  Exjjress  (of  date  to  me
unknown).  I  asked  Madame  de  Crespigny  to  send  me  a
statement  ; and  she  says  that  it  was  in  1917.

"We  met  in  an  empty  house  in  St.  John's  Wood,
ten  or  twelve  of  us,  including  a  newspaper  reporter  from
the  Daily  Express.  The  medium  was  Mrs.  Annie  Hunter.
A  large  fire  was  burning  in  the  grate  and  the  reporter


Introduction


15


went  down  into  the  cellar  and  brought  up  a  log  of  wood.
This  was  put  on  the  fire  and  turned  round  until  it  was
red  hot.

"  The  medium  then  went  under  cautrol  il(e£,  tontrol-  was  ,
said  to  be  a  Persian  fire-worshipper).  .She"'-]ifi>ed  the^'fe^'
hot  log  from  the  fire,  after  talking  in  an  excited  way  in,  a
foreign  language,  and  carried  it  about  thsj.  raora,  putting,
it  back  in  the  fire  now  and  then  to  keep  it  at  red  heat.
She  approached  the  reporter,  who  shrank  away,  and  his
hair  was  singed.  She  then  offered  ib  to  me.  I  argued
that  as  physical  law  told  us  flesh  must  burn  if  in  contact
with  a  red  hot  log,  and  her  flesh  was  not  burning,  another
law  must  be  superimposed.  I  had  learnt  of  an  '  occult  '
law  which  was  supposed  to  prevent  contact,  and  con-
cluded it  must  be  in  operation,  and  that  if  the  log  did
not  burn  her,  it  would  not  burn  me.  So  I  put  my  hand
out  without  a  qualm,  and  she  laid  the  red  hot  log  across
it,  leaving  it  there  for  some  seconds.  When  she  removed
it,  there  was  not  a  mark.  I  should  not  have  cared  how
long  it  remained. I  knew  it  would  not  burn  me.

"  The  man  next  me  said  that  if  conditions  had  been
norma]  I  should  never  have  used  my  hand  again.

"  A  man  present,  encouraged  by  what  he  had  seen,
allowed  her  to  put  the  log  near  his  head,  without  any
bad  results.

"  I  believe  that  had  I  had  any  fear,  the  vibrations
would  have broken  up  the  protective  sheath.

Rose  Ch.  de  Crespigny."

(10)  Objects  remaining  on  a  slanting  table.  This  also  is
testified  to  by  others.  (See  page  63  of  Barrett's  On  the
Threshold  of  the  Unseen,  and  also  page  xvi.  of  the
Biographical  Introduction  to  the  Memorial  Edition  of
Stainton  Moses'  Spirit  Teachhigs.)

The  late  W.  Stainton  Moses,  a  master  at  University
College  School,  and  one  well  known  under  his  pen  name
"  M.A.  Oxon,"  was  not  only  a  medium  for  automatic
writing  and  various  intelligent  communications  about
things  in  general  and  for  edifying  teachings  purporting  to
come  from  the  other  side,  but  was  also  a  physical  medium


16


Sir  Oliver  Lodge


of  no  mean  order.  The  phenomena  testified  to  as  fre-
quently occurring  in  his  presence  are, — raps,  some  of  them
of  great  intensity,  lights  and  luminous  vapours  of  various
kmds,  tli,e  produetion  of  scents,  of  musical  sounds,  like
'bells,  -  stiiiiged  instj.'uments,  and  clarionets;  also  direct
,  writmg  without  anyone  touching  the  pencil ;  movements
and  jevitatioiis  :  o|  heavy  objects  ;  the  introduction  of
objects  from'  other  rooms  into  a  closed  and  locked  room
— a  phenomenon  which  is  frequently  testified  to,  but  which
I  have  not  myself  securely  observed ; — the  direct  voice,
that  is  to  say,  a  voice  in  the  air  at  a  distance  from  the
medium,  when  precautions  are  taken  to  prevent  or  to
observe  separately  the  medium's  own  articulation ;  and
other  very  numerous  phenomena.

Remarks  on  the  Attitude  of  Orthodox  Science.

This  brief  summary,  with  these  few  illustrative  examples,
must  suffice  to  show  that  abnormal  phenomena  have  been
testified  to  again  and  again,  and  that  Lord  Dunraven's
experiences  with  Home  are  only  striking  instances  of
things  which  occur  with  less  facility  and  less  frequently
through  mediums  of  smaller  power.  In  the  years  1870,
1871,  a  serious  attempt  was  made  by  Crookes  to  examine
some  of  these  things  in  a  very  simple  form  and  in  a
careful  metrical  manner,  in  the  hope  that  they  might  be
o1:)served  and  testified  to  by  the  very  distinguished  chief
Officers  of  the  Royal  Society.  In  the  attempt  to  interest
those  representatives  of  science  he  did  not  succeed  ;  for
they  objected  that  some  of  the  phenomena  were  impossible
in  any  mechanical  or  l^nown  manner ; — which  of  course
was  Crookes's  own  contention,  and  exactly  what  he  hoped
would  arouse  their  interest  sufficiently  to  cause  them  to
utilise  the  exceptional  opportunity  of  acquiring  new
knowledge  by  coming  to  witness  what  occurred.  One
of  Crookes's  simple  arrangements  for  the  hoped-for  de-
monstration was  a  long  registering  lever,  on  the  fulcrum
of  which  the  medium's  hands  were  placed,  with  the  result
that  the  far  end  was  forcibly  depressed.  The  deprecatory
excuse of  an eminent man  for  not  coming to see  the


Introduction


17


experiment,  was  that  it  appeared  to  him  contrary  to  all
analogy  that  a  force  acting  according  to  physical  laws
should  produce  the  forcible  depression  of  a  lever  by
acting  on  its  fulcrum.  To  which  Crookes  replied  that  he
entirely  agreed  ;  that  was  the  whole  gist  of  the  experiment
and  the  only  reason  he  regarded  it  as  worthy  of  attention.

The  episode  illustrates  one  of  the  difficulties  which  is
bound  to  be  encountered  by  investigators  of  novel  physical
phenomena.  If  a  new  kind  of  force  is  exerted,  the  ex-
periments are  almost  bound  to  be  surprising  and,  so  to
speak,  incredible.  We  are  now  inclined  to  suppose  that
the  force  in  these  cases  is  due  to  the  mechanical  inter-
vention or  employment  of  an  invisible  unknown  material,
probably  emanating  from  the  medium,  in  the  form  of
what  we  now  call  ectoplasm, — a  form  of  substance
which  was  then  not  recognised  by  anyone.  Nothing  but
direct  observation  and  instrumental  confirmation  can
establish  such  things  as  reahties.  A  theory  need  not
jump  into  existence  at  the  same  time  as  new  facts  are
observed  ;  but  until  there  is  some  guiding  theory  or  clue,
the  facts  seem  detached  from  organised  science,  and  are
rebutted  and  disbelieved  on  theoretical  grounds.  Dis-
belief is  only  natural,  and  its  foundation  in  common  sense
is  rather  like  a  modified  version  of  David  Hume's  argu-
ment against  miracles,  viz.  that  it  is  more  likely  that  a
witness  should  lie  than  that  a  miracle  should  happen  ;
because  the  one  is  consonant  with  human  experience,  and
the  other  is  not.  That  is  quite  true  ;  but  if  the  thing
really  does  happen,  and  if  it  can  be  shown  contem-
poraneously to  happen,  the  argument  has  no  force  ;  the
facts,  when  proven,  are  themselves  an  expansion  of
human  experience  ;  and  they  clearly  establish  the  need
for  overhauling  and  enlarging  our  theoretical  foundations.
Things  that  are  unlikely  may  nevertheless  be  true.  Our
knowledge  of  nature  is  not  so  extensive  that  we  are  able
to  say  beforehand  what  is  possible  and  what  is  not
possible  in  a  novel  region  of  enquiry.  The  history  of
science  is  too  much  disfigured  by  the  premature  rejection
and  contempt  with  which  novelties  have  often  been
received. They  are  accepted,  in  the  long  run,  by  some

B


18


Sir  Oliver  Lodge


subsequent  generation ;  but  the  responsible  generation
living  at  the  time  does  not  rise  to  the  height  of  its
opportunities.  Contemporary  men  of  science  unfortunately
write  themselves  down,  as  not  only  ignorant,  which  was
inevitable,  but  as  blind  and  prejudiced  and  sadly  bigoted  :
though  it  is  true  that  in  their  lifetime  their  contemptuous
attitude  gains  them  credit  for  robust  common  sense
and  sanity.  They  are  wise  therefore  in  their  day  and
generation.

It  is  singular,  and  perhaps  depressing,  that  the  obscurantist
attitude  of  Theologians  in  the  past  has  been  so  amply
imitated  by  the  pontiffs  and  high  priests  of  science  in
the  recent  present.  They  still  oppose  their  admirable
theories  and  great  knowledge  of  the  universe  to  resist
the  incursion  of  fresh  information ;  they  oppose  observed
facts  on  a  priori  and  utterly  inadequate  grounds.  No  one
ought  to  consider  his  knowledge  of  the  universe  so  com-
plete and  final  as  to  be  competent  to  negative  careful
testimony  based  on  critical  and  responsible  experiment
and  observation,  especially  if  the  observer  has  already
proved  his  competence  in  more  recognised  branches  of
knowledge.  Explanatory  hypotheses  may  be  criticised
severely,  but  the  facts  demand  attention.

' General  Lines  of  a  Hypothetical  Explanation  of  Abnormal

Phenomena.

Returning  to  the  more  general  aspect  of  the  subject,
I  would  point  out  that  both  on  the  physical  and  on  the
psychical  side — or  in  what  Prof.  Richet  calls  the  objec-
tive and  the  subjective  variety  of  metapsychics, — -the
principal  phenomena  have  a  character  which  could  be
attributed  to  the  action  of  unknown  and  hitherto  un-
suspected Intelhgences,  live  things  or  live  people.  For  they
simulate  a  life-like  interference  with  the  world  of  matter
through  the  agency  of  a  borrowed  human  organism  ;  some
of  the  things  done  being  such  as  we  ourselves  could  do,
and  some  being  beyond  those  powers.  This  is  undoubtedly
their  appearance,  and  I  inchne  to  think  that  it  is  also
their  reality. I  think  that  these  phenomena  are  mainly


Introduction


19


surprising  because  we  do  not  otherwise  know  of  the
agents  who  accomphsh  them.  If  we  did,  they  would
become  comparatively  commonplace.  Their  value  lies  in
the  demonstration  of  the  existence  of  these,  what  we  may
call,  "  other  people."

The  fact  is  we  have  been  living  on  an  island  planet,
apparently  completely  isolated,  and  not  in  touch  with
anything  higher  than  ourselves.  Religious  people  have
always  supposed  otherwise  ;  but  scientific  people,  ex-
cept in  so  far  as  they  were  also  religious,  have  never
had  occasion  to  postulate  anything  of  the  kind.  Con-
sequently they  feel  great  repugnance  to  beginning.  They
would  prefer  to  exhaust  aU  known  categories  before
introducing  any  new  ones  ;  and  in  this  they  are  mani-
festly right.  But  the  time  will  come — has  come  already
in  my  view — when  the  known  part  of  the  Universe  is
insufficient  to  account  for  the  facts.  Wo  shall  find  our-
selves like  a  race  of  Pacific  islanders,  who  have  known
nothing  about  other  people  in  the  world,  and  who  begin
to  be  afflicted  with  indications  of  unaccustomed  pheno-
mena, coming  at  first  from  a  distance, — wireless  waves,
if  any  are  sufficiently  sensitive  to  feel  that  influence,
shot  and  shell  for  those  who  are  insensitive.  Such  islanders,
if  they  were  critical,  would  receive  testimony  to  these
sporadic  occurrences  with  incredulity  and  general  suspicion.
At  length  there  comes  a  shipwrecked  sailor,  who  may  be
seen  by  a  few  before  he  is  rescued,  but  who  is  disbelieved
in  by  most.  Then  others  arrive,  and  inexpHcable  pheno-
mena begin  to  happen.

The  parallel  is  not  very  close,  because  the  visitants
belong  to  the  same  sphere  of  existence  as  the  islanders.
The  chief  analogy  is  that  the  strange  visitors  are  endowed
with  what  seem  to  be  supernormal  powers  and  extensive
knowledge,  which  for  the  most  part  they  are  unable  to
communicate,  or  the  islanders  to  receive.  Even  if  one
of  the  islanders  were  taken  to  a  modern  city,  he  would
not  be  able,  on  his  return,  to  convey  anything  but  the
haziest  idea  of  the  achievements  of  civilisation.  While
another,  who  had  been  taken  to  visit  some  other  city  in
a  different  country,  might  give  a  rather  differing  account ;


20


Sir  Oliver  Lodge


wherefore  both  would  be  disbelieved, — differences  being
emphasised,  and  similarities  overlooked.

The  perception  or  realisation  of  other  Intelligences  in
the  Universe  than  onr  own,  who  are  able  under  certain
conditions  to  communicate  with  us,  may  or  may  not  be
welcome  or  invigorating  ;  and  yet  it  may  be  true.  That
is  the  only  question  for  science.

The  question  of  human  siirvival,  or  persistent  existence —
which  appears  to  be  demonstrated  by  several  of  the  more
psychic  occurrences — is  of  a  higher  order,  and  more
momentous  to  humanity.  Psycho-physical  phenomena
appear  to  be  of  a  lower  grade,  and  seem  to  be  a  con-
tribution from  fairly  low-scale  intelligences,  who  by  long
practice  have  learnt  how  to  manipulate  matter  by  inter-
fering with  accessible  nerve-muscle  mechanism  and  other
organised  material.  It  is  customary  to  attribute  these
odd  powers  to  the  activity  of  the  sub-conscious  ;  that  is
to  a  submerged  modification  or  variety  of  ordinary  human
intelligence  such  as  may  be  evoked  by  hypnotism  ;  and
this  view,  that  the  intelligence  concerned  is  an  emanation
from  the  subconsciousness  of  the  medium,  though  surely
inadequate  as  an  explanation  of  all  that  occiirs,  is  de-
serving of  respect.  Yet  these  phenomena,  in  spite  of
their  presumably  low  grade,  are  not  so  entirely  dis-
sociated from  discarnate  human  activity  that  they  can  be
ignored  or  disregarded,  even  by  those  who  would  prefer
to  limit  their  enquiries  to  the  purely  mental  or  sub-
jective side  ;  nor  can  they  reasonably  be  contemned.
We  are  not  in  a  position  to  contemn  any  fact  in  the
Universe.  We  never  know  what  the  bearing  may  be  of
any  scientific  discovery,  nor  what  applications  it  may
have.  Our  sole  business  as  scientific  men  is  to  explore
and  ascertain  the  truth.  If  the  truth,  when  ascertained,
seems  to  us  and  to  posterity  to  be  commonplace  and
unimportant,  that  will  be  rather  an  unprecedented  occur-
rence. Anyhow  it  would  be  one  for  which  we  are  in  no
way  responsible.  Important  or  unimportant,  welcome  or
unwelcome,  we  are  bound  to  be  loyal  to  what  we  con-
ceive to  be  truth,  be  the  consequences  what  they  may.

March  11,  1924.  OLIVER  LODGE.


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE.


The  occurrences  that  are  recorded  in  the  following  pages
took  place  some  sixty  years  ago.  During  that  period  a
great  deal  of  attention  has  been  paid  to  psychical  matters
in  general ;  and  spirituahsm  in  particular  has  been  criti-
cally investigated  by  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research
and  by  other  Associations.  Many  men  eminent  in  the
sphere  of  science  have  studied  the  subject.  A  vast  number
of  facts  must  have  been  accumulated,  investigated,  sifted
and  tabulated ;  and  phenomena  observed  and  recorded
more  than  half  a  century  ago  are  presumably  out  of  date.
Whether  they  are,  or  are  not,  I  am  not  in  a  position  to
judge,  as  I  have  not  kept  in  touch  with  the  subject
since  those  distant  days  ;  but  I  am  told  by  those  who
have,  and  who  ought  to  know,  that  the  experiences  of
my  father  and  myself  are  in  some  respects  unique  ;  and
that,  in  the  search  after  truth,  they  ought  to  be  made
available  to  those  who  desire  to  study  them.

I  came  across  Mr.  D.  D.  Home  long  ago  in  Paris,  I
forget  under  what  circumstances,  but  they  had  nothing
to  do  with  spiritualism  or  with  his  mediumship.  My
meetmg  him  again  in  1867  was  fortuitous.  Circumstances
in  the  shape  of  rheumatism,  or  rheumatic  gout,  led  me
to  Dr.  Gully's  hydropathic  establishment  at  Malvern  and
there  I  became  acquainted  with  Mr.  Home,  who  was
staying  with  Dr.  Gully  as  a  guest.  I  was  attracted  by
some  phenomena  which  took  place  immediately.  I  liked
]Mr.  Home.  He  had  the  defects  of  an  emotional  character,
with  vanity  highly  developed  (perhaps  wisely  to  enable
him  to  hold  his  own  against  the  ridicule  and  obloquy
that  was  then  poured  out  vipon  spiritualism  and  every
one  connected  with  it). He  was  Uable  to  fits  of  great

21


22


Preface


depression  and  to  nervous  crises  difficult  at  first  to
understand  ;  but  lie  was  withal  of  a  simple,  kindly,
humorous,  lovable  disposition  that  appealed  to  me.  I
struck  up  an  intimate  friendship  with  him,  and  spent
a  great  deal  of  time  during  the  next  two  years  in  his
company,  with  the  result  that  the  phenomena,  wliich
are  here  recorded,  occurred  at  all  times  and  seasons,
under  all  sorts  of  conditions — in  broad  daylight,  in  artificial
light,  in  semi-darkness,  at  regular  seances,  unpremeditatedly
without  any  seance  a.t  all,  indoors,  out  of  doors,  in  private
houses,  in  hotels — at  home  and  abroad,  and  it  is  probable
that  to  that  extent  these  experiences  are  pecuHar.  They
were  printed  by  my  father  in  order  to  preserve  them,  but
for  rigidly  private  circulation  which  was  obviously  neces-
sary at  the  time.  Nearly  all  the  jjersons  mentioned  have
"  joined  the  great  majority."  Those  remainmg  with  us
with  whom  I  have  been  able  to  communicate  have  no
objection  to  publication  ;  neither  have  I,  though  the
records  allude  to  matters  very  persona]  to  myself.  And
as,  in  the  opinion  of  those  who  have  studied  the  subject,
publication  would  be  in  the  interests  of  science,  I  have
agreed  to  it.

I  came  to  certain  conclusions  at  the  time,  but  I  do  not
aUude  to  them  here,  preferring  to  leave  readers  to  form
their  own  conclusions  on  facts  placed  before  them  without
comment.  But  some  little  explanation  is  necessary  on
one  or  two  points.  I  can,  of  course,  speak  only  of  the
period  during  which  I  was  closely  connected  with  Mr.
Home,  but  it  is  perhaps  right  to  say  that  during  that
time  he  never  took  money  for  seances,  and  seances  failed
as  often  as  not.  He  was  proud  of  his  gift,  but  not
happy  in  it.  He  could  not  control  it  and  it  placed  him
sometimes  in  very  unpleasant  positions.  I  think  he  would
have  been  pleased  to  have  been  reheved  of  it,  but  I
beheve  he  was  subject  to  these  manifestations  as  long  as
he  Hved.  It  may  be  asked  why  did  I  abandon  research
after  an  experience  which,  it  will  be  admitted,  was  at
least  interesting  ;  and  it  may  be  assumed  that  something
in  Home's  character  or  in  the  manifestations  themselves
must  have  repelled  me. That  assumption  would  be  quite


Preface


23


erroneous.  My  belief  in  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena
remained  unshaken,  and  my  friendship  with  Mr.  Home
did  not  diminish  or  change.  The  simple  reason  is  that
having  satisfied  myself  that  the  facts  were  not  due  to
trickery  or  fraud,  I  found  that  I  made  little  progress
after  a  certain  point.  Phenomena  were  all  of  the  same
character,  mainly  physical,  designed  apparently  to  prove
that  some  force  or  forces  other  than  physical,  as  we
understand  it,  could  be  made  to  operate  upon  inanimate
objects.  I  had  no  inclination  to  investigate  the  nature
of  these  forces.  Study  of  the  occult  was  not  congenial
to  me.  I  was  only  twenty -four  and  I  had  my  ambitions
and  plans  for  my  life.  I  loved  sport  and  an  active
"  out-of-doors "  life.  All  my  instincts  were  to  deal  with
the  physical  world  and  the  material  aspects  of  life,  and
I  did  not  feel  myself  competent  to  deal  with  anything
else.  I  thought  that  in  some  cases  absorption  in  the
subject  tended  to  weaken  the  sense  of  self-dependence  and
of  the  necessity  of  submitting  everything  to  reason ;
and  I  found  that  seances  for  physical  manifestations  were
physically  very  exhausting  to  me.  So  having  had  my
experience  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  I  was  neither
by  inclination  or  natural  character  designed  to  spend  my
time  in  pursuing  the  subject,  and  I  completely  abandoned  it.

Much  of  the  narrative  in  the  following  pages  appears
inconsequential  and  confused.  It  is  not  really  so.  Many
of  the  communications,  comments,  and  remarks  were  of
too  intimately  private  a  character  to  be  stated  in  full
at  the  time  ;  but  the  allusions  were  perfectly  understood
by  those  concerned.

It  will  be  noted  that  on  one  or  two  occasions  state-
ments of  a  prophetic  character  were  made,  and  opinions
are  expressed,  or  are  alleged  to  be  expressed,  by  a  spidt
on  physical  science  which,  I  take  it,  are  entkely  erroneous.
On  that  I  have  nothing  to  say  except  that  the  narrative
states  that  the  communication  was  very  confused.  But
in  fau'ness  I  must  comment  upon  seance  6,  described  on
pp.  62-63.  That  seance  was  obviously  held  on  the
eve  of  my  departure  to  join  the  Abyssinian  Expedition.  It
is  stated  that  the  spirit  of  an  Abyssinian  chief  was  chosen


24


Preface


to  look  after  me ;  that  lie  would  save  my  life  on  two
occasions,  and  that  though  I  could  not  then  remember
his  name  I  would  later  hear  and  recognise  it.  It  is,  of
course,  impossible  for  ai\y  one  to  say  that  under  such
circumstances,  or,  indeed,  under  any  circumstances,  his
life  was  not  in  imminent  danger  ;  but  it  is  right  I  should
state  that,  so  far  as  I  was  and  am  aware,  my  life  was
not  on  two  occasions,  or  on  one  occasion,  in  special
danger  ;  and  that  though  I  was  much  interested  in  the
Abyssinian  tribes — then-  manners,  customs,  and  history,
and  talked  with  many  chiefs,  I  never  recognised  the  name
mentioned  at  the  seance.

I  regret  that  the  seances  and  occurrences  were  not
more  methodically  arranged  and  that  headings  may  be
erroneous — as,  for  instance,  ui  the  case  of  Seance  No.  41,
and  that  details  concerning  the  localities  in  which  seances
were  held,  and  the  circumstances  attending  them,  were
not  more  specifically  stated  ;  but  it  must  be  remembered
that  my  records  were  embodied  in  private  letters  to  my
father  written  at  a  time  when  no  publication  of  any
kmd  was  contemplated ;  and  that  the  book  was  com-
piled and  printed  for  strictly  private  circulation  among
those  who  knew  all  about  the  circumstances  mentioned.

The  name  of  the  narrator  is  not  always  mentioned.
It  may  be  taken  for  granted  that  the  letters  or  notes
were  written  by  me,  except  in  those  cases  to  which  my
father's  name  is  appended.  One  or  two  accounts  are
mentioned  of  occurrences  of  which  I  was  not  personally
cognisant.  Obviously  they  were  included  because  they
were  explanatory  of,  or  referred  to,  occurrences  at  which
I  was  present.

It  is  also  to  be  noted  that  when  Mr.  Home  spoke  in
the  trance  state  he  aUuded  to  himself  as  "  Daniel "  or
"  Dan,"  and  in  aUudmg  to  others  always  used  the  first
name  except  in  respect  of  my  father  and  myself.  He
mentioned  us  as  "  Dunraven "  and  "  Adare."  It  will  be
remembered  that  in  those  days  I  was  "  Adare,"  and  my
father  "  Dunraven."

It  is  desirable  that  the  supernormal  phenomena  herein
mentioned should be co-orduiated and compared  with


Preface


25


phenomena  of  a  similar  character  which  have  been  recorded
during  the  last  half  century  and  more.  They  should  be
viewed  in  the  light  of  knowledge  acquired  since  they  were
printed.  The  experience  requires  supplementing  in  that
direction,  and  Sir  OUver  Lodge  and  others  have  been  so
good  as  to  undertake  that  work.  But  this  publication
is  not  based  on  recollection  of  events  that  took  place
many  years  ago.  Its  sole  merit  consists  of  the  fact  that
the  phenomena  were  noted  and  recorded  at  the  time,
and  the  original  text  has  not  been  altered  in  any  way.

I  was  very  yoimg  at  the  time.  I  was  devoted  to  out-
door sport  and  was  not  trained  in  scientific  observation.
All  that  I  desire  to  say  is  that,  to  the  best  of  my  ability,
I  scrupulously  examined  certain  strange  phenomena,  which
came  under  my  observation,  and  faithfully  recorded  the
facts.  My  father's  case  was  very  different.  The  whole
bent  of  his  mind  was  towards  science.  He  was  trained
in  science  and  was  an  acute  observer.  He  was  a  devout
Roman  Catholic  and  a  very  Hberal  minded  man.  His
remarks  are  valuable  and  his  preface  is  retained.  My
Uttle  preface,  written  at  the  time,  is  without  value,  and  I
have  omitted  it.

DUNRAVEN.


It  may  be  of  interest  to  reproduce  the  Introduction  ivhich  my
father  wrote  in  1870  to  the  volume  printed  for  private
circulation.

INTRODUCTORY  REMARKS
By  the  late  Earl  of  Duneaven

The  subject  of  Spiritualism  was  first  brought  under  my
notice  about  fifteen  years  ago,  by  reading  two  or  three
accounts  of  the  occurrences  which  were  taking  place  in
America.  To  some  extent  I  was  prepared  for  the  fair
consideration  of  very  strange  and  startling  phenomena,
from  having  previously  examined  fully  into  the  subject  of
mesmerism.  The  result  of  this  enquiry,  carried  on  for
several  months,  under  most  favourable  circumstances,  was
a  thorough  conviction  of  the  reality  of  the  phenomena  of
mesmerism,  from  the  simple  sleep  up  to  clairvoyance.  At
that  time,  scientific  men  in  general,  and  the  medical  pro-
fession in  particular,  were  loud  in  condemnation  of  what
they  considered  sheer  imposture  ;  and  one  of  the  most
eminent  of  the  profession,  the  late  Dr.  Elliotson,  lost  a
considerable  portion  of  his  very  extensive  practice  by  his
bold  and  uncompromising  assertion  of  the  truth  of  mes-
merism and  its  great  importance  as  a  curative  agent.
Since  then  a  great  change  has  taken  place  in  the  opinion
of  the  public  on  this  subject.  Judging  by  the  literature  of
the  day,  as  well  as  by  the  remarks  current  in  society,  the
general  phenomena  of  mesmerism  are  widely  accepted  as
true  ;  and  even  those  who  believe  in  the  higher  pheno-
mena, including  clairvoyance,  are  no  longer  necessarily
considered  to  be  the  victims  of  imposture.


Introductory  Remarks


27


When  table  turning  became  one  of  the  amusements  of
the  day,  I  witnessed  and  tried  various  experiments  which
clearly  demonstrated  the  inadequacy  of  Professor  Faraday's
explanation  of  the  manifestations  by  involuntary  muscular
action.  I  was  also  present  at  a  seance,  where  Mrs.  Hayden
was  the  medium,  and  an  attentive  examination  of  what
took  place  sufficed  to  satisfy  me  that  the  subject  was
worthy  of  careful  examination,  to  be  made  whenever  an
opportunity  should  occur  for  a  full  investigation  into  a
class  of  phenomena,  opening  a  new  field  of  research  of  a
very  strange  and  startling  description.  This  opportunity
has  been  afforded  by  Lord  Adare's  acquaintance  with  Mr.
Home,  which  commenced  in  1867.  I  soon  perceived  from
his  letters,  that  the  manifestations  were  so  remarkable
that  they  deserved  to  be  duly  chronicled  and  preserved.
At  my  request  he  has  carefully  noted,  as  fully  as  could
conveniently  be  done,  the  occurrences  of  each  day,  and
has  permitted  me  to  print  the  whole  series  for  private
circulation.  Publication  is  out  of  the  question,  as  much
that  is  interesting  and  a  valuable  portion  of  the  record,
relates  to  private  domestic  affairs,  and  to  near  relatives  or
intimate  friends.

Even  after  the  unavoidable  suppression  of  some  curious
and  instructive  details,  it  was  not  without  much  reluctance
that  we  made  up  our  minds  to  give  even  a  very  limited
circulation  to  this  series  of  seances  ;  but,  after  full  con-
sideration we  have  deemed  it  best  to  print — as  nearly  as
we  possibly  could  venture  to  do — the  entire  record  ;  not-
withstanding the  pain,  to  ourselves  and  others,  which
necessarily  accompanies  the  mention  of  communications
professing  to  come  from  those  whose  memories  caU  up  the
deepest  and  tenderest  feelings  of  our  nature.  It  is  obvious
that  the  chief  value  of  such  a  record  must  depend  upon
the  trustworthiness  of  the  narrator.  Fidelity  of  description
is  very  rare,  even  where  honesty  of  purpose  is  undoubted.
I  believe  that  in  the  present  case  scrupulous  accuracy,  a
retentive  ^memory,  and  an  unexcitable  temperament  are
combined  in  an  unusual  degree,  forming  just  such  a  com-
bination of  quaUties  as  is  indispensable  for  one  who  under-
takes to  record  phenomena  of  this  exceptional  and  startling


28


Introductory  Remarks


character.  In  several  of  the  latter  seances,  portions  of
them  have  been  written  by  both  Lord  Adare  and  myself,
and  then  carefully  compared  ;  some  were  looked  over  by
more  than  one  of  the  persons  present  :  thus  everything
has  been  done  to  ensure  the  greatest  accuracy.  In
addition,  each  of  those  mentioned  as  present  at  the
seances  (except  a  few  who  are  not  within  reach)  has
received  a  copy  of  the  printed  account,  and  replies  have
been  received  from  all,  affirming  the  accuracy  of  the
reports.  A  list  of  these  names  will  be  given  further  on,
and  thus  the  following  pages,  it  is  hoped,  will  be  found
to  contain  the  fullest  and  best  authenticated  account  of
the  phenomena  of  Spiritualism  which  has  as  yet  appeared
in  this  country.

It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  an  actual  record  of  facts,
and  not  the  adoption  or  refutation  of  any  particular
theory,  is  the  main  object  in  view.  Spiritualism  wiU,
therefore,  in  the  ensuing  remarks,  be  regarded  chiefly  in
its  scientific  or  phenomenal  aspect,  and  I  have  purposely
avoided  expressing  any  decided  opinion  on  questions  so
complicated,  and  about  which  at  present  such  conflicting
opinions  prevail,  as  upon  the  character  of  the  phenomena,
the  source  from  which  they  proceed,  and  the  tendency  of
the  teaching  to  be  derived  from  them.

The  whole  subject  of  Spiritualism  is  one  which  must
soon  command  the  attention  of  thoughtful  men  in  this
country,  as  it  has  very  fully  done  in  America,  and  to
some  extent  in  France  and  other  countries  of  Europe.  In
America,  the  belief  in  Spiritualism  may  be  considered  as  a
fait  acco7npli.  Its  adherents  are  said  to  be  reckoned  by
millions ;  varying  from  three  to  eleven,  according  to
different  accounts  ;  but,  even  should  the  lowest  calculation
be  beyond  the  exact  truth,  as  is  probably  the  case,  there
can  be  no  doubt  that  a  considerable  portion  of  the  people
of  the  United  States,  including  many  men  eminent  in
science,  literature,  politics,  &c.  (among  whom  was  to  be
reckoned  the  late  President  Lincoln),  believe  that  a  means
of  communication  is  now  open  between  the  inhabitants  of
this  world  and  intelligent  beings  belonging  to  a  different
state  of  existence  ; thus  affording  a  new  and  astounding


Introductory  Remarks


29


evidence  for  the  reality  of  another  life,  and  of  a  spirit-
world.  It  is  remarkable  that  this  new  source  of  evidence
should  be  discovered  at  a  time  when  materialism,  and  the
denial  of  a  future  state  are  on  the  increase,  apparently  in
all  parts  of  the  world,  and  are  said  to  prevail  to  an
alarming  extent  in  America,  the  country,  be  it  remarked,
where  first  these  manifestations  occurred  on  a  large  or
striking  scale.  The  timidity  or  apathy  of  men  of  science
in  England  on  this  subject  is  to  be  deplored.  A  remark-
able example  of  the  former  was  seen  in  the  case  of  the
late  Sir  David  Brewster.  He  was  present  at  two  seances
of  Mr.  Home's,  where  he  stated,  as  is  affirmed  on  the
written  testimony  of  persons  present,  his  impression  that
the  phenomena  were  most  striking  and  startling,  and  he
does  not  apjjear  then  to  have  expressed  any  doubt  of  their
genuineness,  but  he  afterwards  did  so  in  an  offensive
manner.  The  whole  discussion  may  be  read  in  Mr.  Home's
book  entitled,  "  Incidents  in  my  Life."  I  mention  this
circumstance,  because,  I  was  so  struck  with  what  Sir
David  Brewster — with  whom  I  was  well  acquainted — had
himself  told  me,  that  it  materially  influenced  me  in  deter-
mining to  examine  thoroughly  into  the  reality  of  the
phenomena.  I  met  him  one  day  on  the  steps  of  the
Athenaeum  ;  we  got  upon  the  subject  of  table-turning,
&c.  ;  he  spoke  most  earnestly,  stating  that  the  impression
left  on  his  mind  from  what  he  had  seen,  was,  that  the
manifestations  were  to  him  quite  inexplicable  by  fraud,  or
by  any  physical  laws  with  which  we  were  acquainted,  and
that  they  ought  to  be  fully  and  carefully  examined  into.
At  present  I  know  of  only  three  eminent  men  of  science
in  England,  who  have  gone  fully  into  the  subject  ;  and
in  their  case  the  enquiry  has  resulted  in  a  conviction
of  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena.  I  allude  to  Mr.
De  Morgan  the  mathematician,  Mr.  Varley  the  electrician,
and  Mr.  Wallace  the  naturalist,  all,  as  is  well  known,
men  of  high  distinction  in  widely  difl'ering  departments  of
science.

In  investigating  this  subject,  the  greatest  patience  is
required.  As  in  the  somewhat  analogous  case  of  clair-
voyance,  the recurrence of similar phenomena is  most


30


Introductory  Remarks


uncertain,  owing  partly  to  the  varying  physical  conditions
of  the  medium,  partly  to  the  physical  state  of  one  or
more  of  those  present,  or  even  to  the  state  of  the  atmo-
sphere ;  partial  or  even  total  failures  must,  therefore,
occasionally  be  expected.  I  remember  at  a  seance  held  to
witness  the  clairvoyant  phenomena  of  Alexis,  how  the
effect  of  the  presence  of  one  lady  sufficed  nearly  to
obliterate  his  power  ;  she,  fortunately  for  us,  left  the  room
in  disgust  at  what  she  designated  as  humbug,  as  Alexis's
power  returned  almost  immediately  after  her  departure,
and  we  had  a  most  interesting  and  beautiful  seance.  A
very  analogous  example  in  the  case  of  Spiritualism  will
be  found  at  p.  192  of  the  following  seances.  Great  caution
must,  therefore,  be  observed,  and  great  allowances  made
wherever  a  hond  fide  desire  to  arrive  at  truth  is  the  real
object  of  the  enquirer.

Taking  a  general  view  of  the  subject,  there  are  five
hypotheses,  three  of  them  widely  accepted,  for  explaining
the  so-caUed  spiritualistic  phenomena.  The  first,  adopted
by  the  world  at  large,  maintains  that  they  are  the  result
of  tricks  or  clever  contrivance  ;  in  other  words,  that  the
mediums  are  impostors,  and  the  whole  exhibition  humbug.
According  to  the  second,  which  is  advocated  by  some
scientific  and  medical  men,  the  persons  assisting  at  a
seance  become,  then  and  there,  the  victims  of  a  sort  of
mania  or  delusion,  and  imagine  phenomena  to  occur,  which
have  no  real  objective  existence.  The  third  maintains  that
the  manifestations  are  referable  to  cerebral  action,  con-
scious or  unconscious.  This  theory  is  evidently  incapable
of  embracing  the  whole  of  the  phenomena,  and  is  not  very
widely  advocated.  The  fourth,  adopted  almost  unani-
mously by  Spiritualists,  is  that  the  manifestations  are
caused  by  the  agency  of  the  spirits  of  departed  human
beings  ;  and,  generally  speaking,  by  those  who  profess  to
be  present.  According  to  the  fifth,  which  is  held  chiefly
by  believers  in  dogmatic  Christianity,  and  also  by  many  of
the  Low  Church  and  Calvinistic  school,  the  phenomena  are
supposed  to  be  duo  to  the  agency  of  evil  spirits  or  devils,
personifying  departed  human  beings,  who  have  obtained
this  new  power  apparently  for  the  purpose  of  undermining


Introd^lCtory  Remarks


31


that  conception  of  Christianity  which  has  hitherto  been
ahnost  universally  received.

No  amount  of  written  or  oral  testimony  seems  to  be
sufficient  to  carry  conviction  on  this  mysterious  subject  to
the  minds  of  the  vast  majority  of  persons  ;  yet  a  candid
enquirer,  reading  a  record  such  as  that  contained  in  the
following  pages,  embracing  so  great  a  variety  of  pheno-
mena, witnessed  under  varying  circumstances  and  con-
ditions, and  attested  by  so  many  persons,  can  hardly
avoid,  without  putting  aside  the  narrator's  testimony  as
utterly  tmtrustworthy,  admitting  the  possibility  that  some
of  the  occurrences  here  recounted  are  the  work  of  an
agency  beyond  that  of  the  persons  present.  The  examples
are  so  numerous  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  make  a
selection  for  illustration  ;  but  the  reader's  attention  may
be  caUed  to  those  instances  where  Mr.  Home  had  never
before  entered  the  room  in  which  the  seance  was  held  ;  as
for  example,  at  No.  5,  Buckingham  Gate,  mentioned  in
p.  57  ;  or  where,  as  in  Seance  No.  1,  and  indeed  many  of
the  others,  he  had  no  possible  opportunity  of  making  any
preparatory  arrangements.  It  is  perhaps  as  well  here  to
mention,  that  we  have  not,  on  a  single  occasion,  during
the  whole  series  of  seances,  seen  any  indication  of  con-
trivance on  the  part  of  the  medium  for  producing  or
facilitating  the  manifestations  which  have  taken  place.
The  larger  has  been  our  experience,  and  the  more  varied
the  phenomena,  the  more  firmly  have  we  been  convinced
that  a  large  portion  of  them  are  but  explicable  on  the
hypothesis  that  they  are  caused  by  intelligent  beings,
other  than  the  persons  in  the  room  ;  the  remainder  being
probably  due  to  the  action  of  physical  laws  as  yet  un-
known.

The  phenomena  may  be  divided  into  two  classes  :
Physical  manifestations  ;  and  communications  or  messages.
The  former  are  divisible  again  into  those  which  are  solely
or  partly  due  to  physical  forces  acting  by  a  law — not  yet
ascertained — and  those  which  imply  a  power  exercised  by
an  invisible  and  intelligent  agent.  To  the  first  division  of
the  physical  manifestations,  certain  movements  and  vibra-
tions of  the  table,  or  other  articles  of  furniture  may  be


32


Introductory  Remarks


referred  ;  and  perhaps  the  cold  currents  of  air  so  often
felt  at  the  commencement  of  seances.  As  an  example  of
the  second  may  be  mentioned  the  case  of  the  table  rising
above  our  heads,  described  in  page  218  ;  but  a  more
decided  illustration  is  afforded  at  page  227,  where  a  table
was  raised  (no  one  touching  it)  and  placed  most  carefully
upon  another  table  ;  also  may  be  cited  those  occasions  on
which  the  accordion  was  played,  when  not  held  or  touched
by  mortal  hands.  One  very  curious  example  of  vibration
of  the  table  will  be  found  at  the  end  of  Seance  No.  51,
p.  179,  where  the  manifestation  can  only  be  referred  to  an
intelligent  agent,  or  to  fraud  on  the  part  of  some  one
present.  I  was  so  struck  by  the  synchronism  of  the
vibration  with  each  stroke  of  the  clock,  as  indicating  an
intelligence  at  work  somewhere,  that  I  examined  closely
but  failed  to  detect  any  indication  that  it  was  caused  by
any  one  of  those  sitting  at  the  table.

The  communications  may  be  divided  into  six  classes  ;
those  which  come  through  the  alphabet ;  through  the
planchette  ;  writing  by  the  influenced  hand  ;  direct  spirit-
writing  ;  audible  spirit-voices  ;  and,  lastly,  by  the  medium
in  a  trance.  The  first  and  last  methods  are  those  em-
ployed in  the  following  seances.  Those  delivered  by  the
medium  in  a  trance  are  obviously  unsuited  to  convince
persons  of  the  existence  of  spirits  ;  generally  they  afford
no  actual  proof  of  the  utterances  being  other  than  the
thoughts  of  the  medium  ;  there  are,  however,  exceptional
cases,  as  where  a  communication  is  made  to  some  person
present,  detailing  circumstances  unknown  to  the  others,  and
of  which  the  medium  is  almost  certainly  ignorant.  Gener-
ally, but  not  always,  these  examples  may  be  referable  to
the  powers  of  mind-reading,  similar  to  that  manifested  by
clairvoyants.  A  genuine  message,  spelled  out  by  the
alphabet,  is  best  suited  to  produce  conviction  that  a
communication  is  really  from  a  spirit,  especially  where  the
raps,  indicative  of  the  letters  which  compose  the  words,
are  made  at  a  distance  from  the  medium,  or  are  of  such
a  nature  as  to  have  rendered  it  impossible  for  him  to  have
caused  them.  The  most  striking  cases  are  those  where  the
mode  of  marking  the  letters  is  unknown  to  the  medium  or


Introductory  BemarJcs


33


to  any  one  present,  except  the  person  addressed.  Examples
will  be  found  at  pp.  193,  194,  and  206,  where  the  letters
were  indicated  by  my  being  touched  on  the  knee.  Not
only  are  the  two  modes  of  communication  of  very  different
value  as  to  their  power  of  producing  conviction  in  the
reality  of  the  phenomena,  but  likewise  as  to  the  reliability
of  the  messages  sent  ;  and  this  must  be  carefully  borne  in
mind  when  judging  of  the  tendency  of  the  communications,
or  teaching  derived  from  them.  When  Mr.  Home  speaks
in  a  trance,  there  is  no  certainty  whether  his  utterances
are  those  of  a  spirit  alone,  or  how  far  they  may  be  mixed
up  with  his  own  ideas  or  principles.  Sometimes  the  com-
munications are  striking,  at  other  times  vague,  sometimes
trivial.  Messages  through  the  alphabet,  on  the  other  hand,
carry  at  least  a  strong  probability  that  they  convey  the
thoughts  of  a  spirit  ;  although  even  they  too  in  some
cases  exhibit  indications  of  being  affected  by  the  medium,
and  are  therefore  not  quite  reliable.

The  foregoing  remarks  will  suffice  to  shew  that  in  my
opinion  the  first  of  the  five  hypotheses  is  utterly  unten-
able. The  second  is  disposed  of  by  such  cases  as  are
detailed  in  pp.  227,  232.  In  the  first  example,  the  table,
lifted  up  and  placed  upon  that  at  which  we  were  sitting,
remained  in  the  same  position  after  the  seance  was  broken
up.  In  the  second,  the  traces  of  the  snuff  which  had
been  poured  out  on  the  shelf  under  the  window  were
visible  after  supper.  The  third  hypothesis  requires  no
particular  comment,  being  held  by  a  very  limited  number
among  those  who  believe  in  the  reality  of  the  phenomena.
Only  two,  therefore,  need  occupy  the  reader's  attention,
namely,  that  by  which  the  manifestations  are  supposed  to
be  caused  by  deceased  human  beings,  or  that  which
affirms  them  to  be  entirely  due  to  the  agency  of  lying
spirits  or  devils.  It  is  worthy  of  notice  how  the  majority
of  the  communications  can  be  pressed  into  the  service  of
either  hypothesis.

The  probabihty  of  the  latter  of  the  two  theories  being
the  correct  one,  extravagant  and  repulsive  as  this  must
appear  to  so  many  in  the  present  day,  results  from  the
difficulty  of  reconciling  the  announcements  of  Spiritualism

c


34


Introductory  Bemarks


with  the  belief  in  certain  doctrines  hitherto  uniformly
maintained  by  all  portions  of  Christendom.  The  necessity
of  a  sacrificial  atonement  through  Christ  to  obtain  our
salvation  ;  the  sejoaration  of  mankind  at  death  into  two
classes,  the  saved  and  the  lost  ;  the  former  destined  to'
live  for  ever  in  union  with  God  and  in  happiness,  the
latter  in  perpetual  separation  from  Him,  in  punishment
and  misery  ;  and  the  existence  of  a  personal  devil,  and  of
fallen  angels,  whose  unceasing  efforts  are  directed  to  pro-
cure the  loss  of  men's  souls,  are  beliefs  or  doctrines  which
have  been  universally  held  by  aU  churches.  Now,  the
first  and  most  important  of  these  doctrines,  one  which  has
been  regarded  almost  as  the  basis  of  Christianity,  is
seldom  if  ever  alluded  to  in  the  following  seances,  while
the  two  others  are  absolutely  denied  by  Spiritualists  in  aU
countries.  Thus,  too,  the  miracles  of  the  Old  and  New
Testament  are  referred  to  natural  laws,  as  exemplified,
p.  144,  in  the  passage  of  the  Israelites  through  the  Red
Sea  ;  and  in  p.  157,  where  the  phenomena  which  occurred
on  the  day  of  Pentecost  are  imitated.  More  might  be
cited  having  the  same  tendency,  as  for  example  the  views
put  forward  in  p.  119  ;  but,  as  has  been  already  stated,
the  principal  object  here  is  to  place  on  record  a  series  of
actual  occurrences  and  communications,  and  then  to
indicate  very  slightly  such  points  as  are  most  worthy  of
the  attention  of  an  enquirer  into  their  bearing  upon  the
prevailing  opinions  of  the  day,  on  questions  of  social  and
religious  importance.  It  should,  however,  be  borne  in
mind  that  the  majority  of  the  statements  here  alluded  to
were  made  by  the  medium  in  a  trance,  and  cannot  be
regarded  as  so  probably  the  sayings  of  spirits,  as  if  they
were  derived  from  messages  through  the  alphabet.  I  must
also  observe  that  I  have  read  many  communications
received  through  writing  and  drawing  mediums  which  are
distinctly  Christian  in  their  teaching,  they  are  full  of  refer-
ence to  our  Lord  and  to  his  office  as  the  Mediator  of
mankind  ;  but  all,  as  far  as  my  knowledge  extends,  have
a  latitudinarian  character  about  them.  Most  fearfiil  pic-
tures are  drawn  of  the  consequences  of  sin,  and  of  the
way  retribution  must  be  made  for  evil  done  in  this  world.


Introductory  Remarks


35


Many  Spiritualists  affirm  that  communications  coming  from
these  sources  are  of  a  higher  kind  than  those  conveyed  through
the  ordinary  physical  means,  such  as  raps,  table  tiltings,  &c.

In  other  important  particulars  there  is  an  apparent  con-
trast between  Christianity  and  the  tendency  of  SpirituaHsm.
In  the  New  Testament,  submission  to  authority  and  child-
like obedience  are  inculcated  as  qualities  pecuUarly  apper-
taining to  the  Christian  believer,  whereas  the  teaching  of
the  spirits,  as  here  recorded,  seems  rather  to  bring  every-
thing to  the  test  of  our  reason.  The  spirit  of  Christianity
has  generally  been  antagonistic  to  the  spirit  of  the  world,
and  frequently  to  what  may  be  called  the  spirit  of  the
age.  Latitudinarianism  ;  opposition  to  ecclesiastical  rule
and  authority  ;  and  dislike  of  forms  as  well  as  dogmas,
are  characteristic  of  the  present  day  ;  and  these  principles
are  in  accordance  with  the  general  teaching  of  Spirituahsm,
which  is  decidedly  latitudinarian,  and  in  harmony  with  the
spirit  of  anti-sacerdotahsm  as  opposed  to  that  of  dogmatic
Christianity.

The  reader  of  the  following  pages  will  not  fail  to  per-
ceive that  a  high  and  pure  morality  is  taught  in  them  ;
that  the  love  of  God,  the  value  of  prayer,  and  the  im-
portance of  cultivating  a  truthful  spirit  are  strongly  incul-
cated ;  the  terrible  effects  of  sin,  and  the  necessity  of
leading  a  good  life  in  this,  in  order  to  occupy  a  high
place  in  the  next  world,  are  forcibly  pointed  out.  But
what  must  perplex  an  orthodox  Christian  reader  of  these
seances  is  the  startling  fact,  that  all  reference  to  our
Lord's  office  and  work,  as  the  sole  passport  to  heaven,  is
practically  omitted,  and  that  He,  whom  all  Catholics  and
most  Protestants  recognize  as  the  sun  of  their  rehgion,
and  the  centre  of  their  worship,  seems  to  form  so  small  a
part  of  the  thoughts  or  teaching  of  the  spirits  that  here
speak  to  us  from  beyond  the  grave.

That  every  variety  of  religious  opinion,  and  all  forms  of
Christianity  are  taught  by  spirits,  is  fuUy  shown  in  an
excellent  book  on  Spirituahsm,  designated  by  rather  an
ill-chosen  title,  "  Planchette ;  or,  the  Despair  of  Science."  i

1  Planchelle ;  or  Uie  De.paa  of  Science.  [By  Epes  Sargent.]  Boston
1869.  6  J


36


Introductory  Remarks


This,  however,  is  quite  in  accordance  with  the  general
belief  of  Spiritualists,  namely,  that  spirits  hold  various
views  because  they  retain  in  the  next  world  their  complete
individuality,  and  to  a  certain  extent  their  ignorance  ;
they  do  not  therefore  know  for  certain  that  one  system  is
better  than  another.  They  teach  immortality ;  a  living
Providence  ;  the  possibility  of  communicating  with  us  ;
that  God  has  condemned  no  one  to  an  eternity  of  punish-
ment ;  and  they  usually  imply  that  a  good  life  in  itself,
rather  than  as  springing  from  our  union  with  Christ's
merits,  is  the  passport  to  a  happy  position  in  the  next
world.  If  what  Spiritualists  affirm  be  true,  that  the
spirits  are  really  those  of  departed  human  beings,  and  not
demons,  no  harm  can  be  done  by  narrowly  scanning  the
tendency  of  some  of  their  announcements  in  an  opposite
direction  ;  and  on  the  contrary,  if  they  are  demons  or
devils,  the  importance  cannot  be  overrated  of  warning
those  who  are  interested  in  the  subject,  lest  they  find
themselves  implicated  in  the  adoption  of  a  system,  which
must  on  that  hypothesis  be  looked  upon  as  a  very  formid-
able conspiracy  against  the  Christian  religion,  as  hitherto
believed  in  all  countries.

It  must,  however,  be  evident  to  a  thoughtful  peruser  of
these  pages,  (and  still  more  should  he  extend  his  reading
to  larger  works  on  Spiritualism  ;  such,  for  example,  as  the
"  Life  of  the  Seeress  of  Prevorst,")  that  the  evil-spirit  or
devil  hypothesis  is  surrounded  by  such  formidable  diffi-
culties, that  hasty  judgments  and  rash  conclusions  cannot
be  too  strongly  deprecated.  Not  to  go  so  far  back  as  the
opposition  made  to  Galileo  and  others,  when  their  dis-
coveries appeared  to  militate  against  the  letter  of  Scrip-
ture ;  how  many  of  us  remember  the  sensation  caused,
and  the  alarms  expressed  by  pious  and  learned  persons,
when  the  discoveries  in  geology  demonstrated  the  impos-
sibility of  the  world  being  created  in  six  days,  a  few
thousand  years  ago,  but  that  it  has  existed  and  been
peopled  with  animals  for  millions  of  years.  Again,  the
universality  of  the  Flood,  so  clearly  declared  in  the  words
of  Scripture,  is  fouud  to  be  incompatible  with  the  results
of  careful  observation  of  the  actual  state  of  the  surface  of


Introductory  EemarJcs


37


the  earth.  Among  the  beHefs  exploded  by  geological
research,  may  be  mentioned  the  doctrine  that  pain  and
death,  not  only  in  man  but  in  animals,  are  the  result  of
Adam's  sin.  The  fact  being  that  the  remains  of  animals,
fitted  to  prey  upon  and  kiU  each  other,  are  found  in  strata
formed  millions  of  years  ago,  and  in  many  cases  the
smaller  creatures  which  were  devoured  are  found  within
the  stomachs  of  those  by  whom  they  were  killed  and
eaten.  Later  still,  the  short  amount  of  time  during  which
man  has  existed  on  the  globe,  as  deduced  from  even  the
longest  Scripture  chronology,  is  irreconcilable  with  recent
researches  in  geology,  in  archaeology,  and  in  philology  ;  the
accuracy  of  which  is  every  year  more  and  more  confirmed
by  additional  observations,  clearly  indicating  that  man  has
inhabited  this  world  for  a  period,  not  to  be  reckoned  by
thousands  but  by  tens  of  thousands  of  years.  This  subject
might  be  pursued  much  further,  and  additional  illustrations
given,  tending  to  inculcate  the  necessity  of  modifying  pre-
conceived opinions  on  questions  of  great  importance.  To
mention  only  one — that  of  miracles  ; — certain  phenomena
which  have  been  universally  considered  as  miraculous,  or,
to  use  the  current  expression,  supernatural,  are  identical
with  those  which  are  manifested  by  clairvoyants.  How  far
this  may  extend  cannot  at  present  be  known,  but  sufficient
is  established  to  render  it  advisable  to  pause  before
denouncing  those  who  deny  that  certain  phenomena  are
miraculous  ;  some  of  which  are,  and  others  may  be,
referable  to  physical  laws  that  have  only  recently  been
included  within  the  domain  of  natural  science,  and  which
are  as  yet  only  partially  understood.  I  would  also  point
to  the  wonderful  healing  powers  of  certain  mediums,  as
affording  a  subject  of  most  serious  consideration  and  re-
flection, but  which  need  not  be  entered  upon  here  as  not
bearing  upon  the  following  seances.

Arguing  by  analogy,  it  need  not  surprise  us  to  find,  as
must  be  the  case  should  the  announcements  of  Spiritualism
be  true,  that  the  conceptions  hitherto  held  by  Christians
of  all  denominations,  of  the  state  of  existence  in  the  next
world,  may  require  considerable  modification.  We  are  in-
formed that  the  spirit-world  is  very analogous  in  some


38


Introductory  Remarks


resj)ects  to  this  ;  that  it  is  one  of  continued  progression  ;
that  we  are  not  suddenly  brought  to  the  full  knowledge  of
religious  truth  ;  that  the  belief  we  hold  here  we  shall  in
all  probability,  at  least  for  a  time,  retain  there,  in  pro-
portion as  we  are  more  bigoted  in  this  life,  and  con-
sequently more  difficult  to  teach  in  the  next.  We  are  told,
p.  95,  "  There  is  a  contest  "  going  on,  "  same  as  on  earth  "  ;
but,  "  pnrity  when  freed  from  the  mortal  is  strongest,  as
truth  overcomes  error.''  At  different  epochs  of  the  world,
the  same  subject  is  regarded  from  very  different  points  of
view.  For  example,  the  idea  of  the  punishment  of  hell
being  a  material  fire  was  for  many  ages  almost  universal  ;
it  certainly  is  not  so  at  present,  even  among  the  most
orthodox  believers  in  the  doctrine  of  eternal  punishment.

A  difficulty  of  another  kind,  one  not  easily  got  over,
stands  in  the  way  of  the  adoption  of  the  evil-spirit  theory,
namely  the  fact  that  conversions  have  been  made  by  the
agency  of  Spiritualism,  from  Atheism  and  from  simple
Deism  to  Christianity.  To  take  one  instance  ;  Dr.  Elliot-
son  was  a  strong  materialist,  and  unbeliever ;  he  was
converted,  through  Mr.  Home's  manifestations,  to  Chris-
tianity. In  accordance  with  this  fact  we  have  a  message
from  a  spirit  purporting  to  be  his,  (vide  seance  No.  10)
"  /  now  hnoio  that  my  Redeemer  liveth,"  &c.  Again  others,
among  whom  are  four  or  five  of  my  own  acquaintance,
have  been  led  by  the  same  means  from  Unitarianism  to  a
belief  in  the  divinity  of  Christ.  Still  more  striking  are  the
cases  where  persons  have  been  brought  into  the  Church  of
Rome,  several  examples  of  which  have  occurred  in  America
and  a  few  in  England.  The  case  of  Dr.  and  Airs.  Nichols
(Americans)  affords  a  most  remarkable  instance  in  point ;
and  it  would  be  strange  could  any  of  these  individuals  be
brought  to  believe  that  their  advance  from  a  lower  to  a
higher  religious  creed  was  due  to  the  agency  of  the  devil ;
nor  can  the  express  testimony  be  overlooked  of  some  pure-
minded,  earnest  persons,  as  to  the  elevating  effect  of  the
belief  in  Spiritualism  upon  their  hearts  and  souls.  Take
for  example  the  interesting  and  striking  account  of  the
closing  years  and  death  of  a  very  beautiful  character,  the
late  Mrs.  Home,  as  described  by  Mrs.  Howitt  and  Mrs.


Introductory  Remarks


39


S.  C.  Hall/  where  the  happiness  and  the  blessings  which
Spiritualism  has  produced,  not  only  in  her  case,  but  in
their  own,  are  portrayed  in  a  tone  strikingly  earnest  and
yet  quite  free  from  anything  like  excitement  or  exaggera-
tion. To  ascribe  such  peace  and  joy  in  believing,  such
love  of  our  Lord,  and  resignation  to  His  will  as  led  the
Bishop  of  Perigueux — who  administered  the  last  sacraments
to  Mrs.  Home — to  remark,  "  Though  he  had  been  present
at  many  a  deathbed  for  heaven,  he  had  never  seen  one
equal  to  hers  ;  "—and  she  a  professed  Spiritualist,  and  the
wife  of  one  ot  the  most  noted  mediums  in  the  world  ! —
To  ascribe,  I  repeat,  such  results  to  the  agency  of  the
father of lies and the arch enemy of mankind,  must
appear  as  impossible  to  many,  as  it  must  be  revolting  to
the  two  gifted  writers  whom  I  have  quoted,  and  who  bear
such strong testimony to the blessed influence  which
Spiritualism  has  exercised  upon  their  own  lives  and  faith.
Attention  should  also  be  called  to  the  seances  at  Homburg,
especially  Nos.  19,  21,  22,  where  the  action  of  the  spirits
was  decidedly  exercised  in  various  ways  to  promote  bodily
health  and  comfort,  and  also  to  inculcate  and  reiterate  the
advantage  of  good  practices,  such  as  examination  of  con-
science at night  ; still more striking was the  evident
anxiety  on  their  part  to  prevent  and  counteract  grievous
sin, as must  be quite clear to those who read  these
accounts  with  attention. Remarks  upon  this  subject  might
be  considerably  amplified  ; but  enough  has  been  pointed
out  to  indicate  some  of  the  difficulties  which  surround  the
adoption of the evil-spirit hypothesis. Indeed the  only
answer  which  can  be  given,  by  those  who  maintain  this
view, is that  Satan  is allowed  an  unlimited  power,  of
which  he  makes  copious  use,  of  transforming  himself  into
an  angel  of  light.

Setting  aside  the  religious  question,  and  admitting  even
that  the  spirits  are  those  of  departed  human  beings,  the
difficulty  of  identification  renders  the  whole  subject  in  its
present  stage  rather  unsatisfactory.  This  opinion,  I  know,
is  to  a  considerable  extent  shared  in  by  persons  who  have
been  for  several  years  believers  in  Spiritualism.  Among

'  Vide  Mr.  Home's  "Incidents  in  my  Life,"  chap.  xii.


40


Introductory  Remarks


those  who  took  part  in  the  following  seances,  some  seem  to
find  little  or  no  difficulty  in  believing  that  the  spirits  in
communication  with  them  are  the  relatives  or  friends  they
professed  to  be.  I  confess  in  this  confidence  I  cannot
share.  To  take  an  extreme  case,  the  idea  that  the  former
possessor  of  Adare  Manor  should  be  present  at  a  seance,
and  yet  only  manifest  that  presence  by  shaking  his  son's
chair  {No.  57,  p.  199),  seems  as  improbable  as  absurd.^

Whatever  view  be  taken  of  the  source  of  the  phenomena,
the  subject  is  one  deserving  serious  treatment,  and  careful
investigation.  The  tone  of  levity  which  prevails  in  some
amateur  seances,  and  the  fashion  now  prevalent  among
3^oung  ladies  of  playing  with  plane hettes,  cannot  be  too
strongly  deprecated.  A  power,  which  practically  may  be
looked  upon  and  treated  of  as  new,  has  almost  suddenly
been  developed  among  men ;  a  power  which  may  be
fraught  in  many  cases  with  serious  consequences.  Are  we
in  a  position  at  present  to  pronounce  from  what  sources
this  power  proceeds  ?  The  veil  which  separates  this  world
from  the  next  is  partially  raised  ;  can  we  say  why  this
partial  unfolding  of  the  future  is  permitted  ;  or  to  what
extent  it  may  be  developed,  or  what  is  the  main  purpose
for  which  this  unexpected  source  of  knowledge,  or  decep-
tion as  the  case  may  be,  is  revealed  ?  A  partial  but
decisive  answer  may  be  given  to  some  of  these  questions.
A  proof,  derived  from  a  physical  and  material  source  is
opened  to  men  of  an  existence  beyond  the  grave.  The
tendency  of  the  present  age  being  materialistic  and
sceptical,  the  evidence  of  the  senses  is  required  as  a
ground  for  belief,  to  a  degree  far  surpassing  what  has
hitherto  been  the  case  ;  that  evidence  is  now  afi^orded  for
the  most  important  of  beliefs,  namely,  that  of  a  future
existence.  The  true  answer  to  those  who  require  the  cui
hono  of  Spiritualism  would  appear,  therefore,  to  be,  that
through its instrumentality an incontrovertible proof  is

1  Since  these  seances  liave  taken  place,  communications  have  been
made  to  Lord  Adare  (vide  -p-  261)  which,  if  genuine,  would  account  for
and  explain  why  none  were  given  at  the  time  from  the  source  men-
tioned ;  the  probability,  however,  of  identity  is  scarcely  strengthened,  in
my  mind,  by  the  tenor  of  these  later  communications.


Introductory  Remarks


41


afforded  to  all  wlio  will  fairly,  fully,  and  patiently  investi-
gate a  world  of  spirits.  This  teaching  stands  out  clear  and
unmistakable  above  any  conflicting  theories  as  to  the  kind
of  spirits  who  are  the  source  of  the  communications.

That  Spiritualism  is  not  unaccompanied  by  danger  is
allowed,  even  by  its  most  earnest  believers.  This  chiefly
springs  from  the  great  power  of  deception  which  may  be
exercised  by  spirits,  while  the  power  of  identification
remains  so  unsatisfactory  as  it  is  at  present.  For  example,
messages  are  sent,  or  communications  in  the  trance  state
given,  purporting  to  come  from  deceased  members  of  a
family,  commenting  on  family  affairs  ;  it  is  obvious  that
this  may  be  a  source  of  serious  mischief.  If,  as  is  allowed
by  all  Spiritualists,  bad  and  lying  spirits  can  and  do  com-
municate, what  is  to  secure  one  from  being  deceived  by
them  in  a  particular  case  ?  A  friend  of  mine  believed  that
a  spirit  present  at  a  seance  was  a  gentleman  who  had  been

lately  poisoned  ; he  asked  if  B  was  concerned  in  the

matter and was answered in the affirmative. This  he

appeared  to  believe,  and  thus  B  ,  who  lives  in  his

parish,  to  some  extent  lies  under  the  imputation  of  being
concerned  in  a  murder  ;  and  this  on  the  declaration  of  a
spirit  whose  identity  seemed  to  me  to  rest  on  no  solid
ground.

One  of  the  most  remarkable  features  in  these  seances  is
the  frequency  of  Mr.  Home's  trances.  This  peculiar  phase
of  his  power  has  become  much  developed  of  late  ;  while
others,  such  as  his  being  raised  in  the  air,  have  compara-
tively diminished.  To  those  who  are  familiar  with  mes-
meric trances,  the  genuineness  of  ]\Ir.  Home's  is  easily
admitted.  To  me  they  are  among  the  most  interesting
portions  of  the  manifestations  which  occur  through  his
mediumship.  The  change  which  takes  place  in  him  is  very
striking  ;  he  becomes,  as  it  were,  a  being  of  a  higher  type.
There  is  a  union  of  sweetness,  tenderness,  and  earnestness
in  his  voice  and  manner  which  is  very  attractive.  At  first
sight  much  might  appear  to  be  skilful  acting  ;  but  after
having  so  frequently  witnessed  these  trance  states,  I  am
fully  convinced  of  their  truthfulness.  Sometimes  his  utter-
ances are  most  impressive  ; the  language  beautiful,  con-


42


Introductory  Remarks


veying  his  thoughts  in  the  most  appropriate  words.  That
he  is  possessed  by  a  power  or  spirit,  not  his  own,  and
superior  to  himself,  a  very  Httle  experience  will  suffice  to
render  manifest.  I  can  most  fully  endorse  the  statement
in  Lord  Adare's  preface — of  the  very  imperfect  conception
of  the  impressiveness  of  some  of  these  seances  as  conveyed
by  our  meagre  reports.  They  are,  as  it  were,  mere
skeletons,  as  for  example.  No.  55  ;  no  one  could  imagine
the  beauty  and  interest  of  that  seance,  from  the  very
inadequate  account  given  there  of  what  occurred.  To  be
appreciated  or  realized  they  must  be  witnessed,  and  that
under  favourable  circumstances.  Those  who  have  been
present  will,  I  am  sure,  agree  with  me  that  some  of  them
are  very  touching  and  beautiful.  A  pure,  lofty,  and
religious  tone  more  or  less  pervades  them.  The  solemnity
which  is  always  manifested  at  the  name  of  God  is  remark-
able. After  reading  Mr.  Chevalier's  pamphlet^  I  was
anxious  to  apply  the  test  of  using  the  invocation  of  the
Trinity.  I  never  mentioned  this  to  Mr.  Home  ;  but  it  was
unexpectedly  suggested  by  him  when  entranced  during  the
seance,  No.  59,  and  with  a  totally  opposite  result,  as  the
reader  wUl  see.*  The  effect  produced  upon  Mr.  Home  by
Pressense's  "  Life  of  Christ "  was  very  striking.  I  have
never  seen  such  reverence  paid  to  the  Bible  in  real  Ufe  ;
it  reminded  one  of  the  devotion  exhibited  by  a  Catholic
to  the  Blessed  Sacrament.

Another  very  remarkable  feature  and  weU  worthy  of
attention,  is  the  account  given  by  the  spirits  of  the  mode
by  which  they  are  able  to  make  manifestations,  as  is
detailed  in  pp.  117,  212,  and  other  places  ;  also  the  ex-
treme difficulty  experienced  in  making  them,  and  the  slight
causes  which  interrupt  the  power.  In  fact,  when  one
considers  the  number  of  favourable  conditions  necessary  in
order  that  manifestations  should  succeed,  the  wonder  is

^  Experiences  in  Spiritualism  ;  or  the  Adjuration  of  Spirits.  .  .  .  By
a  late  member  of  Mr.  Home's  Spiritual  Athenaeum  [i.e.  J.  O.  Chevalier].
London,  1867.

-  Mr.  Chevalier  states  that  when  he  asked  the  spirit  who  it  was,  using
the  names  of  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  the  word  ''Devil''  was
spelled  out.


Introductory  Remarhs


43


that  they  do  not  oftener  fail.  Nothing  can  be  plainer  than
that  the  power  of  spirits  over  matter  is  one  of  degree,
varying  each  night,  and  indeed  almost  every  minute.  This
is  the  answer  to  those  who  are  constantly  remarking  "  If
they  can  do  tliis,  why  cannot  they  do  that  1  If  a  spirit
can  raise  an  object  an  inch,  why  not  a  yard  1  If  Mr.
Home  could  float  in  the  air  last  week,  why  can  he  not
to-day  ?  "  and  so  forth.  The  causes  of  failure  are  weU
exemplified  in  the  last  seayice  at  Garinisli,  No.  63,  when
apparently,  numbers  were  present,  and  evidently  they  had
intended  giving  us  a  series  of  manifestations  as  a  wind  up
to  the  seances  in  Ireland ;  but  this  design  was  partly
frustrated  by  the  state  of  the  weather  and  Mr.  Home's
health,  as  well  as  our  own  rather  unfavourable  condition.

A  very  common  misconception  on  the  general  subject
ought  to  be  here  pointed  out.  The  idea  seems  very  preva-
lent that  Mr.  Home  invokes  or  evokes  spirits.  This  notion
is  totally  destitute  of  foundation.  Neither  Mr.  Home,  nor
any  medium,  as  far  as  I  know  ever  professes  to  call  up
spirits.  Several  persons  sit  round  a  table,  and  Mr.  Home,
while  deprecating  levity,  desires  to  promote  cheerful  and
social  conversation  on  general  matters,  without  any  premedi-
tated design  or  wish  expressed  that  particular  things  should
happen  or  particular  spirits  be  present.  Some  Spiritualists
begin  every  sitting  with  prayer,  and  generally  with  a
chapter  in  the  Bible.  I  was  at  one  lately,  where,  as  soon
as  the  presence  of  spirits  was  announced  by  raps,  they
were  asked,  should  we  begin  by  reading  a  chapter  ;  "  Yes,"
was  the  reply  ;  and  they  were  then  asked,  what  chapter
it  should  be,  and  they  rapped  out,  "  Acts,  xi.  chapter,
verses,  5  to  18."  One  more  appropriate  could  not  readily
be  selected.

Before  concluding  these  introductory  remarks,  I  would
remind  the  reader,  that  the  primary  object  of  this  little
work  is  to  place  on  record  a  series  of  observed  facts  upon
a  very  mysterious  and  startling  subject.  It  is  only  by
such  means,  pursued  under  varying  circumstances,  as  to
time,  place,  and  mediums,  multiplied  by  different  observers,
that  a  conclusive  answer  can  be  hoped  for  to  the  question.
Will  the  result  of  Spiritualism  he  good  or  evil  ? is  the


44


Introductory  Remarks


tendencj^  of  the  movement  as  a  whole  to  the  glory  of  God,
and  the  happiness  of  mankind  in  the  next  world,  or,  is  it
a  great  system  of  deception,  carried  on  by  the  powers  of
darkness,  and  fraught  with  danger  to  our  souls  ?  Setting
aside  the  great  majority  of  the  world,  who  refuse  aU
enquiry  into  a  subject  which  they  consider  to  be  impos-
ture, or  ridiculous  nonsense,  unworthy  of  serious  thought,
many  shrink  from  it  as  the  work  solely  of  evil  spirits ;
others,  from  a  fear  of  the  danger  derived  from  the  difficulty
of  identification,  and  the  consequent  deception  which  may
be  practised  ;  and  others  again  from  an  instinctive  dread  of
communing  with  the  departed,  and  from  an  intense  pain
caused  by  the  idea  that  the  state  of  those  whom  they
have  loved  should  be  so  widely  different  from,  and  appar-
ently so  much  lower  than  what  they  have  fondly  believed
in,  through  the  traditionary  teaching  under  which  they
have  been  brought  up.  Nor  can  we  omit  in  fairness  the
opinion  of  many  of  the  opponents  of  Spiritualism  who
maintain,  that  the  examples  of  its  being  productive  of
good  effects  are  exceptional,  and  that  the  system  must  be
judged  by  its  general  results,  which,  as  developed  in
America,  are,  they  say,  drifting  away  from  anything  like
orthodox  Christianity.  This  statement  I  am  not  in  a
position  to  be  able  to  pronounce  upon  one  way  or  the
other.

Without  attempting  to  conceal  my  own  state  of  doubt
as  to  the  source  from  which  the  phenomena  of  Spiritualism
proceed,  and  my  decided  impression  of  the  danger  which  in
some  respects  seems  possibly  to  accompany  its  pursait  or
adoption,  I  have  been  most  desirous  not  to  bias  unduly
those  who  are  anxious  to  investigate  a  very  interesting  and
most  curious  subject  of  enquiry  ;  especially  as  Lord  Adare
takes  a  more  favourable  view  than  I  can  at  present  con-
scientiously hold,  of  the  points  about  which  such  opposite
opinions  are  entertained  by  men  of  earnest  and  truth-
loving  character.  Why  then,  it  may  be  asked,  take  any
part  in  enquiring  into  a  subject,  the  tendency  of  which
seems  so  difficult  to  determine  ?  The  answer  is  simple  : —
Chiefly,  to  examine  for  my  own  satisfaction ;  next,  to
enable  others,  who  may  consider  a  similar  spirit  of  enquiry


Introductory  Remarks


45


advisable  or  interesting,  to  have  the  benefit  of  the  ex-
perience derived  from  the  following  seances  ;  and  also,  to
shew  to  those  who  are  already  struck  by,  or  much
occupied  in,  the  pursuit  of  this  mysterious  subject,  the
dangers  by  which  it  is  surrounded,  through  the  possible
tendencies  of  its  teachings,  or  the  deceptions  practicable  by
bad  or  mischievous  spirits.  I  maintain  that  we  are  entitled
to  investigate  all  the  physical  phenomena  which  may  come
before  us,  provided  we  do  so  earnestly  and  with  a  desire
to  arrive  at  truth.  Acting  upon  this  principle,  I  enquired
into  the  remarkable  phenomena  of  mesmerism  and  clair-
voyance, when  the  propriety  of  so  doing  was  doubted  by
some  for  whom  I  entertained  the  highest  respect.  Upon
the  same  principle  I  now  avail  myself  of  the  opportunity
which  Lord  Adare's  acquaintance  with  Mr.  Home  has
afforded,  of  investigating  the  still  more  interesting  and
startling  phenomena  of  Spiritualism  ;  content  that  time
will  clear  up  that  which  is  at  present  so  perplexing,  and
enable  honest  enquirers  to  decide  whether  the  subject  is
one  which  they  can  with  propriety  continue  to  pursue,  or
one  which  they  feel  themselves  bound,  as  sincere  followers
of  Christ,  and  for  the  safety  of  their  souls,  to  abandon.


NAMES  OF  PERSONS  PRESENT  AT  THE  SEANCES  ^


[All  the  persons  present  at  the  following  seances,  with  the
exception  of  three  or  four  to  wliom  access  cannot  be  obtained,
have  received  a  copy  of  the  account  of  the  seances  which  they
witnessed,  with  a  request  that  if  the  report  coincided  with
their  own  recollection  of  what  took  place,  they  would  kindly
allow  their  names  to  be  appended,  as  testifying  to  its  accuracy.
Every  answer  has  been  in  the  affirmative  as  to  the  correctness
of  the  accounts  ;  but  a  very  few  have,  for  prudential  reasons,
preferred  that  their  names  should  not  appear.  By  accuracy  is
meant,  that  nothing  has  been  inserted  that  did  not  occur,  or  has
been  exaggerated. A  gi-eat  deal  has  necessarily  been  omitted.]

Mr.  H.  Jencken,  Barrister-at-Law,  Temple.

Mrs.  Hennings,  9,  Thicket  Road,  Norwood.

Mrs.  Scott  Russell,  Norwood.

Miss  Gallwey,  7,  Lower  Belgrave  Street.

Mr.  S.  C.  Hall,  15,  Ashley  Place.

Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall,

Mr.  H.  T.  Humphrey,  1,  Clifford's  Inn.

Mr.  Hamilton,  Sundrum,  Ayr.

Mrs.  Hamilton, ,,  ,,

Miss  Hamilton, ,,  ,,

Mrs.  Cox,  Stockton  House.

Miss  Brooks, ,,  ,,

Mr.  Ion  Perdicaris,  2,  Heathcote  Villas,  Twickenham.
Mrs.  Mainwaring,  Ashley  House,  Victoria  Street.
Countess  De  Medina  De  Pomar,  Grafton  Hotel,  Albemarle
Street.

Mrs.  HONEYWOOD,  52,  Warwick  Square
Dr.  Gully,  Malvern.

1  This  list  has  been  given  exactly  as  it  appeared  in  the  original
(private)  edition,  1870.

4G


Names  of  Persons  Present  at  the  Seances


47


Mr.  Jones,  Enmore  Park,  South  Norwood.
Mrs.  Mackdougall  Gregory,  21,  Green  Street,  Grosvenor
Square.

Lady  Fairfax,  45,  St.  George's  Road.
Major  Drayson,  6,  York  Crescent,  Woolwich.
Mr.  Hart,  30,  Duke  Street,  St.  James's.
Mr.  Sarl,  45,  Cornhill.

Mr.  J.  Collins,  Royal  MiUtary  Academy,  Woolwich.

Miss  Smith,  Adare  Manor,  Ireland.

Miss  Bertolacci,  Vine  Cottage,  Fulham  Road.

Miss  E.  Bertolacci,  ,,  „  ,,

Hon.  F.  Lawless,  Maritimo,  Black  Rock,  Ireland.

Capt.  Chas.  Wynne,  LissadeU,  SUgo.

Mrs.  C.  Wynne,

Mr.  B.  De  C.  Nixon,  1,  Queen's  Gate  Gardens.

Mrs.  B.  De  C.  Nixon,

Mr.  James  Gore  Booth,  R.E.,  Aldershot.

Sir  RoBT.  Gore  Booth,  Bart.,  7,  Buckingham  Gate.

Miss  Gore  Booth,  „ „  „

A.  Smith  Barry,  M.P.,  26,  Chesham  Place.

The  Hon.  The  IMaster  of  Lindsay,  9,  Grosvenor  Square.

Major  Blackburn,  35,  Beaufort  Gardens.

Mrs.  Blackburn,  ,,  ,,

Mrs.  Wynne,  Corris,  Bagnalstown,  Ireland.

Miss  Wynne, ,,  ,,  ,,

Mr.  J.  Bergheim,  34,  Hill  Street,  Knightsbridge.

Mr.  H.  A.  RuDALL,  17,  Langham  Street.

Mr.  F.  Fuller,  12,  St.  James's  Place.

Miss  Douglas,  81,  South  Audley  Street.

Dowager  Duchess  of  St.  Alban's,  4,  Princes  Gate.

Mr.  Chas.  Blackburn,  Park  Field,  Didsbury,  Manchester.

Capt. Gerard Smith, Scots  Fusilier  Guards, 13,  Upper

Belgrave  Street.
Mr.  Stanley  J.  Mackenzie,  32,  Bernard  Street.
IMrs.  Stopford,  7,  Grosvenor  Gardens.


RECORD  OF  SEANCES.


No.  1  Seance.

Malvern,  November  1867.

Yesterday,  Mr.  Earl,  a  total  disbeliever  in  Spiritualism,
Home  and  I,  went  to  spend  the  evening  with  Mrs.  Thayer,
an  American  lady,  a  friend  of  Dr.  Gully's.  We  were
shown  into  the  back  parlour,  a  small  room,  the  furniture
consisting  of  a  heavy  round  mahogany  table,  without  any
cover,  with  one  leg  in  the  centre,  and  of  a  piano  and
several  ordinary  chairs.  The  room  was  lighted  by  a  fire,
a  large  lamp  standing  on  the  piano,  and  two  wax  candles
on  the  table.

After  Mrs.  Thayer  came  in  we  sat  and  talked  for  a
few  minutes  by  the  fireside,  until  at  Home's  suggestion
we  sat  round  the  table,  which  was  in  the  middle  of  the
room.  Home  was  on  my  left,  Mrs.  Thayer  opposite  me,
and  Earl  on  my  right.  The  room  was  perfectly  light.
After  talking  on  ordinary  subjects  for  perhaps  ten  minutes,
raps  were  heard  by  us  all  in  various  parts  of  the  room,  on
the  table  and  on  the  floor  and  walls.  Home  requested
the  raps  to  be  made  in  various  places  and  it  was  done.
He  asked  that  they  would  rap  under  my  feet,  and  I  not
only  heard  the  noise,  but  distinctly  felt  the  jar  while  the
raps  were  taking  place.  I  repeatedly  looked  under  the
table,  as  did  also  Mr.  Earl,  to  satisfy  ourselves  that,
however  they  were  done,  it  was  not  by  any  movement  on
Home's  part.  It  was  quite  impossible  that  Home  could
have  made  them,  for  while  they  were  distinctly  audible,
I  looked  under  the  table  and  could  have  detected  even
the  slightest  movement  of  his  legs  or  feet ;  Mr.  Earl
watched  his  hands  and  arms. Similar  raps  were  occasion-

4S


Record  of  Seances


49


ally  heard  during  the  whole  seance.  At  the  commence-
ment of  the  seance  we  all  felt  cold  cun^ents  of  air  passing
over  our  hands.  The  table  began  to  vibrate  with  the
greatest  rapidity,  and  was  then  moved  about  and  tilted  up
in  various  directions.  Mrs.  Thayer  had  previously  to  this
placed  a  pencil  and  writing  paper  on  the  table.  The
table  was  repeatedly  tilted  up  at  an  angle  I  should  say
greater  than  45°.  The  surface  was  smooth  polished
mahogany,  yet  the  candles,  paper,  and  pencil  did  not
move.  Home  asked  that  the  candles  might  slip  (as  they
naturally  would),  and  they  did  slide  down  the  table  until
near  the  edge,  when  at  his  request  they  remained  station-
ary. While  the  table  was  tilted  up  very  high,  Home  said
to  Earl,  "  Take  a  candle  and  look  under  the  table."
He  took  one  of  the  candles  on  the  table,  and  in  lifting  it
said,  good  gracious,  how  heavy  it  is  !  I  afterwards  tried
the  same  thing,  and  found  that  when  the  table  was  tilted
up  there  was  a  difficulty  in  removing  the  candle  from  the
surface  that  made  it  appear  very  heavy.  The  table  was
moved  up  against  my  chest,  and  as  I  pushed  back  my
chair,  it  followed  me  up  until  the  back  of  my  chair  was
against  the  window,  and  I  could  go  no  further ;  the
table  was  then  pushed  close  up  against  me.  I  now  felt
cold  currents  of  air  passing  across  my  face  and  hands,
and  a  chair  that  was  standing  against  the  wall,  at  a
distance  of  perhaps  five  yards,  came  suddenly  and  quickly
out  from  the  wall,  and  placed  itself  beside  me  at  the  table.
The  effect  was  starthng.  There  was  a  lady's  cloak  on  it,
which  was  pulled  off  under  the  table.  Mrs.  Thayer  said,
"  She  could  see  a  shadowy  form  standing  between  Home
and  me."  I  saw  nothing,  but  I  was  touched  lightly  on
the  head,  and  distinctly  as  with  a  sharp  tap  of  the  finger
on  the  knee.  I  do  not  think  it  possible  that  anybody  at
the  table  could  have  touched  me.  I  could  see  all  their
hands,  and  had  it  been  done  by  a  foot  I  must  have  per-
ceived the  difference  of  touch,  and  have  seen  the  motion.
Some  time  previously  to  this  Mrs.  Thayer  had  sent  out  the
servant  to  ask  a  friend  for  an  accordion,  and  it  had  been
placed  upon  the  table.  The  alphabet  was  called  for  (by
five  raps)  and  the  following  words  were  spelled  out  (I  am

D


50


Experiences  in  Sinritualistn


[seance


not  sure  that  I  remember  the  exact  words  but  they  were
to  this  effect)  : — "  /  could  not  come  the  other  night  because

of H  . Yours ever, Fred.'' Mrs. Thayer  understood

the  meaning  of  this  message  it  having  reference  to  a
previous  seance,  the  first  one,  I  beheve,  at  which  she  had
been  present.  After  a  few  minutes  the  alphabet  was  again
called  for,  and  the  following  words  were  spelled  out  : — •
"  My  hoy  I  am  near  you."  I  naturally  referred  this  to
my  mother.

After  this,  the  accordion  was  moved  about  on  the  table.
Home  took  it,  holding  it  by  the  lower  part,  with  the
keys  hanging  down  over  the  edge  of  the  table.  It  is
manifestly  impossible  for  a  person  so  holding  an  accordion
either  to  touch  the  keys,  to  inflate  the  bellows,  or  to
expel  the  air  from  it.  Almost  immediately  the  keys  were
toitched  in  an  uncertain  manner,  and  then  the  accordion
began  to  play.  It  played  something  resembling  a  voluntary
on  the  organ  :  the  melody  was  perfect,  and  the  expression
beautiful.  I  am  sure  that  if  I  had  heard  it  so  played
anywhere,  under  any  circumstances,  it  would  have  occurred
to  me  how  like  the  music  was  to  what  I  had  often  heard
my  mother  play,  when  running  over  a  few  chords  on  the
piano.  While  the  accordion  was  being  played,  I  looked  at
it  two  or  three  times  under  the  table.  Home  was  on
each  occasion  holding  it  as  I  have  stated,  and  the  instru-
ment was  pulled  out  horizontally  from  his  hand.  I  could
see  the  bellows  drawn  in  and  out,  and  the  keys  move.
At  one  time  it  was  pulled  violently  under  the  chair  at
my  side  towards  me.  Home  asked  me  to  name  some
air.  I  wished  to  think  of  one  that  might  help  me  to
identify  whoever  was  playing  the  accordion,  but  I  could
not.  Earl  asked  for  "  The  Last  Rose  of  Summer."  It
was  beautifully  played  :  first,  the  air  quite  simple,  then
with  chords  and  variations.  After  this  Mrs.  Thayer  took
the  accordion,  and  Mr.  Earl  also,  but  it  did  not  play
again.  During  what  I  have  narrated,  the  table  was
occasionally  moved,  and  raps  were  now  and  then  heard  in
different  parts  of  the  room.  All  manifestations  ceased
when  the  accordion  stopped  playing.  My  hands  during
the  whole  time  were  as  cold  as  ice  ;  when  the  manifes-


NO.  1]


With  D.  D.  Home


51


tations  ceased  they  became  suddenly  warm.  I  said,
"  Dear  me,  my  hands  have  become  quite  warm  !  "  Home
said,  "  Oh,  then  I  am  afraid  there  will  be  nothing  more."
We  waited  perhaps  five  minutes  ;  and,  finding  there  were
no  more  manifestations,  we  got  up  and  moved  the  table
over  to  the  fire.  Home  began  reading  to  us  some  poetry.
The  last  thing  he  read  was  descriptive  of  the  passing
away  of  a  poor  old  widow  ;  and,  after  a  passage  speaking
of  the  love  of  Christ  for  her,  strong  raps  of  approval —
that  is,  three  raps  in  succession — were  heard  on  the  floor
behind  him.  We  then  said  Good-night  to  Mrs.  Thayer,
and  went  back  to  Tudor  House.  I  turned  into  the  dining
room  and  sat  down  by  the  fire  alone.  A  few  minutes
after.  Home  came  in  and  sat  down  by  me,  and  we  talked
about  ordinary  subjects.  We  heard  a  sound  that  I  thought
was  the  door  creaking.  He  said  it  was  not  that,  and
asked  that  the  sound  should  be  repeated,  and  it  was.
He  then  asked  that  it  should  rap  where  I  usually  sat  at
dinner  ;  and  it  did  so  right  at  the  end  of  the  table.
We  were  both  sitting  with  our  backs  to  the  table.  Then
came  a  noise  as  if  furniture  was  moving.  I  turned  but
saw  nothing  move.  Home  looked  and  said  a  chair  had
moved  up  to  the  table.  I  looked  again  at  the  other  side
of  the  table,  and  saw  that  a  chair  was  standing  against
it  ;  aU  the  others  were  against  the  waU.  I  did  not  see
it  move.  We  then  heard  a  sort  of  whistKng  sound  flying
up  and  down  the  room  ;  then  a  sound  as  of  something
rushing  up  and  down,  and  then,  laughter,  unmistakable
but  not  pleasant  sounding  laughter.  After  this  one  of  the
servants  came  in,  and  nothing  more  occurred.  When  in
the  dining  room.  Home  asked  whether  the  spirit  that  was
there  in  the  room  was  one  that  loved  me.  It  answered
"  Yes."  By  "  answered,"  I  mean  that  three  raps  were  given,
which  means  "  Yes."  He  asked  if  the  spirit  would  like
me  to  have  another  seance  with  him  in  London.  "  Yes,"
was  answered.


52  Experiences  in  Spiritualism  [seance


■  No.  2  Seance.

About  a  fortnight  after  this  I  had  occasion  to  go  to
London. I  went  down  to  see  Home  at  Mr.  Jencken's,
at  Norwood. We  had  a  seance  in  the  evening. There  were
present,  Home,  Mr.  Jencken,  Mrs.  Hennings,  and  myself.
Nothing very  remarkable occurred  ; at  least, I do  not
remember  anything. The  usual  manifestations  took  place,
such as the table moving, and raps were heard ;  the
table,  a  light  card  table,  was  lifted  off  the  ground  com-
pletely. During  the  first  part  of  the  seance  the  manifes-
tations seemed all directed to Home, afterwards  the
table  was  in  the  same  way  as  at  the  first  seance  moved
up against me. The accordion was played in  Home's
hand. The  last  thing  that  occurred  was  that  my  chair
began  to  vibrate  rapidly  in  the  most  violent  way ;  it
gave  me  a  curious  tingling  sensation  up  my  arms  to  the
elbow, and  up  my  legs  as  though  I  was  receiving  an
electric shock. Knowing that this vibration almost  in-
variably preceded  any  movement,  or  lifting  of  the  table,
I  thought  that  I  was  going  to  be  raised  into  the  air,
and  most  unwillingly  I  became  very  nervous  and  fright-
ened. If  I  had  not  done  so  I  think  some  phenomenon
would  have  occurred  ; but  as  soon  as  I  became  alarmed,
the  vibration  of  my  chair  ceased. That  was  the  last  thing
that  occurred  that  evening.


No.  3  Seance.

This  day  week  I  again  went  down  to  Mr.  Jencken's
to  see  Home.  After  tea  we  had  a  seance.  There  were
present  : Mr. Jencken, Mrs. Jencken (his mother),  Mrs.

Hennings,  Mrs.  Scott  Russell,  Miss  D R  ,  another

lady  whose  name  I  forget,  Home  and  myself.  We  sat
round  the  card  table,  all  except  Mrs.  Jencken,  who  sat
in  her  arm  chair  in  another  part  of  the  room. We  had

a  very  beautiful  seance. Miss  D R had  never  been

present  at  one  before,  and  was  most  of  the  time  engaged
in  looking  under  the  table,  and  investigating  what  took
place. Very few raps were heard. The  manifestations


NO.  3]


With  D.  D.  Home


53


began  by  the  usual  vibration  of  the  table,  the  floor,  and
our  chairs  ;  and  by  the  cold  currents  of  air  passing  round
the  table  over  our  hands.  The  table  moved,  and  we
followed  it  until  it  was  in  a  corner  close  to  the  wall.
Home  had  his  back  to  the  wall.  On  his  left,  at  a  little
distance,  was  a  small  square  table,  with  a  vase  of  flowers
on  it  ;  and  on  his  right  was  a  small  round  table,  on
which  stood  a  large  vase  containing  a  fern.

The  chief  part  of  the  manifestations  consisted  in  the
movement  of  these  tables.  They  were  brought  close  to
Home,  and  then  were  sometimes  raised  in  the  air  and
inclined  towards  him  ;  sometimes  simply  tilted  on  one  leg,
so  that  the  flowers  touched  his  face.  The  flowers  were
in  like  manner  also,  as  it  were,  presented  to  Mrs.  Hen-
nings  and  Mrs.  Scott  Russell.  Before  moving  the  small
round  table  up  to  us,  it  was  necessary  to  clear  a  space
for  it,  as  the  table  at  which  we  were  sitting  was  close  to
the  window.  Our  table  moved  a  little  back,  and  we
then  saw  the  window  curtains  drawn  on  one  side  out  of
the way. This table was repeatedly raised in the  air

to  the  height  of  4  or  5  inches.  Miss  D R  .  placing

her  hands  between  it  and  the  floor;  and  it  was  also
frequently  inclined  at  such  an  angle  that  the  vase  must
inevitably  have  fallen  off  under  ordinary  circumstances.
The  flowers  on  the  square  table  and  the  fern  on  the
round  table  were  frequently  agitated  and  moved,  but
were  not  broken  ofl^  or  plucked.  On  placing  the  ear
against  the  smaU  table,  it  was  found  to  be  full  of  minute
raps,  like  a  current  of  small  electric  sparks.

The  phenomena  connected  with  the  movement  of  these
two  tables  occupied  some  time,  during  which  we  talked

about  various  matters  and  subjects. Miss D R  .

and  Mi\  Jencken  were  talking  about  Spirituahsm,  and  he
got  rather  excited,  and  was  saying  something  to  the  effect
that  he  lost  his  patience  when  people  said  it  was  ah
trickery  and  conjuring,  and  that  instead  of  that  it  was  a
great  and  real  blessing  and  dispensation  vouchsafed  to  us
by  God  for  our  comfort.  Approving  raps  occurred  at
this,  and  he  said  "Is  it  not  to  shew  us  without  doubt
that  it  is  so,"  or  some  words  of  that  sort. Assent  was


54


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


signified  to  tlitit  remark  so  emphatically  that  it  made  me
laugh.  It  seemed  so  energetic — first,  "  Yes  "  was  rapped
on  the  floor  and  walls,  then  the  small  tables  tilted  them-
selves three  times,  and  then  the  table  we  were  sitting
round  tilted  itself  up  towards  each  corner  in  turn  three
times,  and  lastly,  being  raised  right  off  the  ground,  was
moved  up  and  down  three  times  in  the  air,  and  then
came  down  with  an  emphatic  bang  that  shook  the  floor.
During  this  seance,  it  was  remarkable  how  the  spirits
joined  as  it  were  in  our  conversation,  two  or  three  times
signifying  approval  in  the  most  emphatic  way.  I  noticed
a  remarkable  circumstance  in  connection  with  the  small
round  table.  When  it  was  inclined  at  a  considerable
angle  I  saw  the  vase  move,  but  instead  of  slipping  down
the  slope,  it  moved  up  against  it.

As  I  before  mentioned,  the  small  table  with  the  fern
was  raised  in  the  air,  and  presented  as  if  in  greeting  to
Mrs.  Hennings,  Home,  and  Mrs.  Scott  Russell.  After  this
had  been  done  several  times  the  alphabet  was  called  for,
and  the  following  message  given  (the  exact  words  I
cannot  answer  for)  :  "  We  would  do  more  to  shew  our
love ;  these  (referring  to  the  flowers)  are  emblems  of  God's
love.''  The  letters  were  indicated  sometimes  by  the  small
table  tilting,  sometimes  by  raps  on  the  large  table.  Soon
afterwards  the  alphabet  was  again  called  for,  and  the  follow-
ing message  given  : — "  Sit  alone  in  a  corner  with  Adare."
Accordingly  Home  and  I  left  the  table,  and  sat  in  another
corner  of  the  room  at  the  small  round  table,  having
previously  removed  the  vase  ;  immediately  the  table  was
raised  up  and  tilted  against  my  chest.  The  table  had
one  leg  terminating  in  three  claws,  one  of  them  just
touched  my  toe,  and  the  letters  were  indicated  by  the
claw  tapping  my  toe.  The  following  message  was  thus
given  : — "  My  oivn  boy,  I  go  with  you,  fear  nothing,  God
will  give  a  mother  2^ower  to  protect  her  own  boy.  I  will
yet  speak  to  you  tvhen  alone."  The  table  was  then  raised
off  the  ground,  presented  to  m^e  close  to  my  face,  two
or  three  times,  and  replaced  on  the  floor.  Home  was  not
touching  the  table ;  but  during  aU  this  time  was  sitting
beside  me  in  an  arm  chair,  and  I  distinctly  felt — and  so


NO.  3]


With  D.  D.  Home


55


did  he — some  one  standing  between  us.  We  then  went
back  to  the  large  table  and  Home  took  the  accordion
in  his  hand.  He  asked  some  questions,  which  were
answered  in  the  affirmative  by  three  single  notes  on  the
accordion.  Home  in  asking  these  questions  became  very
much  affected — I  do  not  know  why — and  his  voice  was
quite  broken  ;  he  asked  whether  the  spirit  holding  the
accordion  was  the  same  that  brought  the  chair  to  me  at
Malvern  ?  ^  Whether  it  had  not  stood  between  me  and
him  when  we  were  sitting  in  the  corner  ?  The  accordion
then  played  something  like  a  voluntary  on  the  organ.
The  peculiarity  being  that  the  last  few  notes  were  drawn
out  so  fine  as  to  be  scarcely  audible — the  last  note  dying
away  so  gradually  that  I  could  not  tell  when  it  ceased.
I  do  not  think  it  possible  for  any  human  hand  to  pro-
duce a  note  in  that  way.  Sometime  before  this  we  had
all  heard  a  whistling  over  Home's  head,  similar  to  that
which  I  had  heard  in  the  dining  room  at  Tudor  House.
It  is  a  curious  sound,  something  between  a  bird  chirping
and  the  whistling  produced  by  birds'  wings  rapidly  moving.
After  it  ceased  we  all  heard  sounds  as  of  a  voice,  but
not  articulate.  Home  then  asked  if  a  spirit  was  en-
deavouring to  make  the  voice  heard,  and  was  answered
"  Yes, "  and  he  asked  if  it  would  be  repeated,  and  was
answered  "Perhaps.''  It  was  not  repeated  until  we  left
the  table.  During  the  time  the  sounds  were  heard  Home
was  talking,  which  I  was  glad  of,  as  I  wished  to  feel
sure  the  sounds  were  not  the  result  of  ventriloquism  on
his  part.  I  believe  I  may  also  safely  say  that  we  were
all  engaged  in  conversation  at  the  time,  so  that  the
sounds  could  not  have  been  produced  by  any  accomplice
among  us.  I  did  not,  however,  observe  any  of  the
others  so  closely  as  I  did  Home.

After  the  accordion  had  played  I  took  it  in  my  hand
but  immediately  after  I  had  done  so  the  alphabet  was
called  for  and  the  words  were  spelled  out,  "  We  can  do
no  more  7ioiv."  All  the  manifestations  then  ceased.  We
waited a few minutes, and Home asked if the  spirits

1  There  is  no  answer  recorded  to  Home's  questions,  but  I  believe  the
answer  to  have  been  in  the  affirmative.


50


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


were  gone.  No  answer  was  returned,  so  we  left  the
table. I  had  particularly  noticed  three  things.

1st.  That  the  commencement  of  each  seance  appears
the  same,  namely,  currents  of  cold  air  passing  over  the
hands  of  those  at  the  table  as  if  some  sort  of  chain  was
being  formed.  Any  abrupt  breaking  of  which  by  some
one  suddenly  leaving  the  table  will  stop  the  phenomena.

2nd.  That  if  the  attention  be  too  much  concentrated  it
prevents  the  phenomena.  They  take  place  best  when
those  at  the  table  are  keeping  up  a  general  conversation.
If  anything  occurs,  such  as  a  table  moving,  and  every-
body stops  talking  and  looks  at  it,  it  is  almost  sure  to
stop.  In  the  last  seance,  I  noticed  that  when  anything
of  that  sort  was  being  done,  if  every  one  turned  to  look
at  it  and  stopped  talking,  the  table  or  some  other  piece
of  furniture  moved  as  it  were  to  attract  attention.  I
forgot  to  mention  that  Home  at  the  last  seance  was
thrown  into  a  trance.  He  remained  entranced  two  or
three  minutes,  but  said  nothing.  We  foolishly  all  stopped
talking  to  look  at  him,  and  I  think  that  broke  the  trance,
as  he  awoke,  passed  his  hand  across  his  forehead,  and
remarked  how  quiet  we  all  were.

At  the  commencement  of  a  trance  Home  generally
tells  the  spectators  to  go  on  talking  ;  not  to  fix  their
attention  on  him  too  much  at  first.  I  think  that  as
negative  a  condition  of  mind  as  can  possibly  be  maintained
is  almost  a  necessity  to  ensure  strong  manifestations.
This  is  not  however  the  case,  I  believe,  with  all  mediums.
The  presence  of  dogs  in  the  room,  or  much  tobacco  smoke,
will  entirely  prevent  manifestations  with  Home  as  medium.
The  efi'ect  of  these  things  is,  no  doubt,  upon  the  medium,
not  upon  the  spiritual  influence.

Zrd.  That  the  name  of  God  is  always  treated  with
peculiar  reverence.  In  spelling  out  a  sentence,  if  you
guess  an  ordinary  word,  they  say  "  Yes  "  ;  and  go  on
to  the  next.  But  though  you  may  guess  it,  they  spell
out  each  letter  in  the  name  of  God,  and  instead  of  in-
dicating the  letters  quicldy,  as  usual,  it  is  done  in  a  slow
manner  that  impresses  the  mind  with  an  idea  of  great
reverence.


NO.  4]


With  D.  D.  Home


57


No.  4  Seance — London,  November  2lst — Recorded  by

my  Father.

Mr.  Home  came  to  my  house,  oiily  Miss  Gallwey  and
Adare  being  jDresent. We  sat  round  a  small  table  in  my
study. We talked about different subjects, wiiich  Mr.
Home says is preferable to silence, or to thinking  or
wishing  too  much  on  the  one  subject. Soon  slight  raps
were heard, followed by slight vibrations of the  table.
We all agreed that the noise in the street was  very
disagreeable,  so  we  adjourned  to  the  dining  room,  which
Mr. Home had never been in. I took in the  table,
and, placing it near the fire place, we sat round  it.
Raps  soon  came  again,  and  slight  vibrations. Some  one
remarked that the table was rather creaky, when  Mr.
Home  observed, "  I  have  taken  a  dislike  to  this  table  ;
let  us  sit  at  another. Here,  this  dining  table  will  do."
"  What,"  I  said,  "  surely  that  huge  table  will  not  move  !  "
"Oh,  I  daresay  it  will,"  he  replied. The  table  was  very
large,  above  seven  feet  long  and  five  feet  wide,  and  very
heavy, requiring considerable force to move it at  all.
Under  it  is  a  Turkey  carpet  ;  there  were  also  quantities
of Adare's things upon it. Mr. Home and I  sat
opposite each other at the sides, and  Adare  and  Miss
Gallwey  at  the  ends. Raps  were  heard  at  different  parts
of  the  table,  and  near  the  fire  place,  and  on  the  round
table we had brought in. Presently the table  vibrated
very strongly — this was a most strange  phenomenon,
the vibration was so uniform and  powerful. The  table
then  moved  at  right  angles  to  ]\Ir.  Home. I  may  remark
that there was a  green  cloth on the table, and  when
pressure  was  used, the hand  would  simply  slip on  the
polished mahogany. The table moved towards  Adare
about  a  foot ;  and  it  soon  moved  towards  Miss  Gallwey,
that is, in exactly the opposite direction. She  said.
"  May I stop it  1  " "I dont tliink you can,"  Home
rephed. "  Yes  I  can,"  she  said,  as  she  pressed  her  hands
forcibly  against  the  edge  ;  then  suddenly  withdrawing  them
from the table, it made one move, or rather  spring
forward, of  nearly  one  foot  in  length,  thus  shewing  the


58


Ex})eriences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


great  strength  of  the  pressure  which  must  have  been
exerted  by  some  mysterious  power.  We  heard  sounds
from  the  Httle  table,  and  I  saw  it  moving  by  itself.
It  had  advanced  more  than  a  foot  towards  Mr.  Home ;
and  it  came  still  nearer  afterwards.  He  sat  rather  back
from  the  table,  with  his  hands  laid  lightly  on  it.

I  expressed  a  hope  that  the  power  would  become
stronger.  These  messages  were  given  : — "  We  would  fain
do  more  if  we  could  ;  did  love  give  strength,  tve  should  he  strong
indeed."  And  then  "  God  bless  you  all  !  "  The  indications
for  "  God "  differed  from  the  others,  being  three  strong
vibrations  of  the  table.  After  this  we  heard  or  felt
nothing  more.  As  to  collusion  or  contrivances,  none  such
could  have  taken  place  ;  the  change  of  Toom,  and  our
close  observation,  rendered  this  impossible.  The  idea  of
our  hands  being  able  to  move  such  a  table  is  simply
absurd.  The  table,  too,  moved  at  right  angles  to  where
Home  was  sitting.  The  vibration  was  very  singular ;
the  candles  shook,  and  other  things  trembled  visibly.
Once  the  candles  very  decidedly  diminished  in  brightness
for  a  short  time.


No.  5  Seance — November  23rd. — Recorded  by  my  Father.

A  seance  was  held  at  Norwood.  Present  :  Mr.  Home,
Mrs.  Hennings,  Mr.  Jencken  and  his  mother,  Mrs.  Scott
Russell,  Adare,  and  myself.  We  sat  at  an  ordinary  card
table  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  with  two  candles  on
the  chimney  piece,  and  a  bright  fire.  After  about  ten
minutes,  raps  were  heard  :  the  table  vibrated  a  little,
and  soon  moved  in  the  direction  of  Mr.  Home,  and
towards  the  piano.  We  followed,  and  were  soon  close  to
the  broad  end  of  the  piano.  Raps  were  heard  on  and
about  the  table,  and  on  a  small  table  a  few  feet  distant.
Our  table  gradually  tilted  up,  at  an  angle  of  about
30  degrees  or  more.  This  was  done  more  than  once.
The  narrow  end  of  the  piano  moved  from  the  wall  two
or  three  times,  and  altogether  about  one  foot,  and
pressed  Mrs. Scott  Russell  between  itself  and  the  table.


NO.  5]


With  D.  D.  Home


59


Tlie  floor  vibrated  strongly  ;  this  was  very  striking.  The
five  raps  were  heard  for  the  alphabet,  and  the  following
sentence  was  spelled  out : — "  You  are  over  anxious,  and
not sufficiently jwayerful.''' Different movements of  the
table occurred, and then the following sentence  was
given  : — "  On {?  in) seeking for physical facts you  lose
sight  of  God." It  was  very  remarkable  that  the  indications
for  the  word  "  God  "  were  made,  not  by  common  raps,
but  by  the  table  giving  sudden  movements,  whilst  it  was
either  partially  or  wholly  off  the  ground. At  the  end  it
was  clearly  so  ; and  it  made  the  sign  of  the  cross  by
moving  forward and backward, and  from side to  side.
Before  this  the  little  table  moved  of  itself,  and  I  went
close  to  it,  and  I  saw  it  move  again  slightly. It  vibrated
slightly when Mr. Home did not touch it, but  more
strongly  when  he  did. We  then  got  the  accordion,  and
Mr.  Home  held  it  just  under  the  table. After  a  little
while  it  moved  about  and  at  last  played,  but  apparently
at first with effort, a sort of plaintive melody,  very
pretty, but  nothing  I  had  ever  heard. I  looked  under
the  table  more  than  once  while  ]\Ir.  Home's  hand  held
it,  and  I  saw  it  playing. At  one  time  it  was  held  up
without  his  aid,  for  he  put  both  his  hands  on  the  table,
and I was then watching it. It stretched from  Mr.
Home,  towards  Mrs.  RusseU,  who  took  it,  and  it  played,
but  faintly. Home  took  it  back. Alphabet  then  called
for, and  the  following  message  came: — "It  was  A.  who
touched the keys.'' After this the accordion  stretched
nearly horizontally towards me, and I took it, — and
held  it  a  long  time,  but  it  did  not  play,  though  it  was
moved  about  strangely,  and  distinct  raps  were  made  on
it. Before  this  Mr.  Home  said  he  distinctly  saw  a  spirit
between  Mrs.  Scott  Russell  and  me,  and  before  he  spoke,
she  said  she  was  touched  in  the  side — I  was  conscious
of nothing. The cold currents were very sensible  co-
night. After  this  the manifestations  became  feeble,  and
while remarking this, the alphabet was called  for,  and
the following given  : — "  Daniel is 7iot in a good  state."
We waited longer, but nothing occurred. Mr.  Home
on one occasion said, "  There are curious  influences


00  Ex'periences  in  S'piritucilisni  [seance


to-night "  ;  and  he  then  said  his  feet  were  moved  about  in
a  strange  way,  and  he  was  touched  more  than  once.
Just  before  the  seance  began,  Mr.  Home  was  called
suddenly  away  to  see  a  man  on  business,  and  this  rather
disturbed  him.  When  the  floor  was  vibrating  strongly
some  one  said  it  could  be  felt  in  the  next  house  ;  and
it  was  proposed  that  one  of  us  should  go  in  there,  and
note  the  time.  Raps  of  approval  were  given  twice  ;
but,  somehow,  Mr.  Home  said  nothing,  and  no  one  went.
I  forgot  to  mention  that  when  the  sheet  of  paper  was
on  the  table,  Mr.  Home  touching  one  corner,  the  other
end  was  Jifted  uj)  more  than  an  inch,  just  at  the  time
when  Adare  felt  the  cold  currents  very  strongly,  as
might  happen  if  a  bellows  were  blown  near  it.  The
paper  was  also  rather  curled  up.


No.  6  Seance.

We  had  a  seance  the  other  night  at  Mr.  Jencken's,  at
Norwood.  Home  went  gradually  into  a  trance  ;  his  eyes
were  quite  shut ;  he  got  up,  moved  one  or  two  chairs,
walked  up  and  down  the  room,  then  sat  down  again
and  began  to  speak.  Mr.  Jencken  had  been  telling  us
how  one  of  the  servants,  Mally,  was  ill,  and  had  been
seeing  phosphorescent  balls  of  light  in  her  room  at  night.
Home  being  in  a  trance,  said,  "  It  was  Hans  made  the
lights  in  Mally' s  rooms  ;  if  you  all  go  presently  into  the
next  room,  he  will  show  them  to  you.  MaUy's  mother
will  pass  away  within,  (I  forget  the  exact  time  mentioned),
Mally  must  not  be  told  this."  After  a  pause,  he  turned
to  me  and  said,  "  Do  not  let  Daniel  leave  your  house
on  Saturday,  as  he  wishes  to  do,  because  your  friend  is
coming  ;  we  want  to  let  you  hear  music  in  your  room,
and  we  wish  Daniel  to  stay."  He  then  said,  "  Adare's
mother  and  Caroline  are  here."  After  a  jjause  he  said
again  to  me,  "  Daniel  will  be  able  to  see  you  from  time
to  time  when  you  are  away."  After  sitting  a  little  time
in  his  chair, in  an  attitude  of prayer, he  got  up  and


NO.  6]


With  D.  D.  Home


61


walked  round  the  table  to  me,  and  stood  behind
me  with  his  hand  raised  as  in  prayer,  and  then  pro-
ceeded to  make  passes  over  me  ;  I  felt  nothing.  He
held  his  hand  out,  made  a  hollow  of  it  as  if  to  hold  a
fluid,  and  went  through  the  action  of  pouring  out  some-
thing upon  my  head  ;  he  then  walked  behind  me,  and
apparently  prayed  for  some  time,  then  placing  his
hands  upon  my  shoulders  he  drew  me  back  towards  him
and  pressed  his  head  firmly  against  my  back  ;  I  felt  a
strong  current  of  heat  flow  out  of  his  hands  into  my
shoulders,  and  out  of  his  head  into  my  back.  It  was
very  hot  indeed.  He  then  went  back  to  his  place  and
sat  down,  then  raising  his  hands,  as  if  praying,  he  spoke
as  follows  : — (Mr.  Jencken  took  notes  as  well  as  he  could
of  what  was  said,  but  as  Home  spoke  rapidly  without  any
stop,  it  was  impossible  to  put  down  more  than  the  heads
of  his  address.)

"  Father  of  light,  we,  thy  children,  do  approach  thee
in  all  humble  reverence  and  confidence.  We  do  beseech
thee.  Father  of  love,  to  grant  us  patience,  charity,
love,  that  we  may  love  others  who  are  less  fortunate
than  ourselves.  We  pray  that  thou  mayest  remove  the
veil  that  slirouds  the  eternal  life  from  our  sight,  and
that  knowledge  not  of  earth  be  given  us.  Grant  that
we  may  be  purified  in  heart  and  body  :  that  we  may
lay  aside  our  grosser  earthly  body  and  existence,
and  assume  the  robe  of  our  eternal  being.  Grant
that  hope  be  given  us,  hope  !  that  is  the  star  that
guides  us  ;  guides  us  who  know  so  little  of  the  great
world  of  spirits  beyond  the  grave,  {after  a  pause)  We,
children  of  God,  linger  near  you,  the  spirits,  guardian
angels,  hover  around  jou,  and  guard  and  aid  you  in
your  hour  of  trial  and  suffering.  To  us  the  spirit-land
of  higher  spheres  is  like  a  beautiful  planet,  luminous,
shining  forth  as  our  goal — and  spheres  higher  and  higher
still,  brighten  as  we  advance  in  the  vista  of  everlasting
progress.  We  cannot  tell  you  all  we  know,  for  it  is
the  desire  of  more  and  more  knowledge  that  impels  you
onward  and  upward.  As  men  see  a  star  and  desire  to
know  about  it,  and  know  that  others  are  beyond  it,  and


62


ExjJeriences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


invent  instruments,  and  spend  their  lives  in  scientific
research  and  in  seeking  after  truth,  so  it  is  with  you  ;
it  would  not  be  good  for  you  to  know  aU,  for  there
would  be  no  object  for  improvement  and  research.  We
know  all  your  sufferings  and  shortcomings,  and  what
you  have  to  contend  with,  for  have  we  not  too  been
mortals,  have  we  not  wearied  on  the  roadside,  and  had
our  times  of  agony  and  doubt ;  but  God,  at  the  evening
of  our  day,  brought  us  home,  and  called  in  the  weary
travellers.  God  called  us  into  his  fold  and  brought  us
home,  that  we  may  be  nearer  to  thee,  0  God.  Our
Father  in  creating  beautiful  things  on  earth,  created  them
for  ever  and  ever,  for  all  eternity,  though  they  may  fade
to  our  sight  ;  so  beauty,  poetry,  sunlight,  and  all  that  is
harmonious  are  garnered  up  for  ever.  Even  sound  having
left  the  influence  of  this  earth,  goes  on  for  ever  down  the
everlasting  corridors  of  space.  Thus  summer  is  again  and
again  refined  into  autumn,  toned  and  softened  down,
softening  down  the  wintry  sky  of  the  future,  so  too,
purer  impvilscs,  nobler  aspirations,  leave  their  impress
for  ever  upon  the  waves  of  eternity — like  a  wave  of
sound,  the  impulse  moves  on  for  ever.  All  of  you  have
to  grope  your  way  in  the  dark  paths  of  life,  but  we
hover  near  you,  carry  your  minds  upwards  from  earth,
whisper  to  your  heart  that  it  may  learn  to  aspire  to  God.
Hope  and  love  are  component  parts  of  the  Godhead.
Truth  is  God ;  waves  may  rise  mountains  high,  but  the
great  beacon  truth  shines  forth  over  all  the  waves  to  guide
us,  lighting  us  on  our  way.  From  the  eternal  source
goes  forth  the  eternal  light  to  which  we  aspire.  From
this  great  source  emanates  the  small  particle  of  light  called
our  soul,  dwelling  in  this  body  we  live  in — The  great  God
who  is  light  itself,  for  ever  light  us  through  all  eternity,"

Home  now  spoke  in  a  language  none  of  us  ever  heard,
then  said  "Oh,  how  very  wonderful,  how  extraordinary  !  "
and  turning  to  me,  he  said  "  A  spirit  has  been  approved
to  go  with  you,  sent  by  a  higher  spirit,  one  who  has
charge  of  your  past,  your  present  and  your  future,  your
high  guardian  spirit.  He  knows  the  country  and  has
been  a  chieftain  in  it. On  earth  he  wore  a  large  cross


NO.  6]


With  D.  D.  Ho7ne


63


of  iron  round  his  neck,  it  is  brilliant  and  shines  ;  he
was  a  good  soul  on  earth,  but  was  in  a  bad  soil,  tended
by  bad  gardeners  ;  too  bad  was  the  soil  to  develope  his
soul.  He  speaks  two  languages,  he  is  not  far  from  your.
He  lived  near- — ^Oh,  I  cannot  get  the  name  of  the  place  ;
no  matter,  he  has  been  where  you  are  going,  and  is
charged  to  take  care  of  you.  He  will  save  your  life  on
two  occasions,  you  will  know  his  name."  Here  Home
spoke  two  strange  words.  I  said  to  Mr.  Jencken,  "  Have
you  written  that  down,  for  I  have  already  forgotten  it."
Home  smiled  and  said,  "  You  cannot  write  it  down  and
you  cannot  remember  it,  but  you  will  recognize  it  when
the  time  comes."  "  Guardian  spirits  are  given  to  those
who  go  to  foreign  countries,  to  guide  and  aid  them,
whereby  they  benefit  themselves  ;  charity  brings  good  to
those  that  use  it,  more  charity  is  gained  by  charity.
Nothing  prevents  you  going,  he  has  breathed  on  you
once,  he  will  again,  and  once  again,  when  you  return,
then  never  more  ;  he  will  accompany  you  if  nothing
occurs  to  prevent  your  going  ;  he  is  very  strong."  Home
now  got  up,  walked  round  to  me,  kneeled  beside  me  as
in  prayer,  and  again  drew  me  back  by  the  shoulders,
and  pressed  his  head  against  my  back,  and  I  felt  the
same  current  flow  from  his  forehead  as  before.  Home
stood  up  and  said,  "  He  is  very  strong  and  tall,"  and
standing  there  beside  me.  Home  grew,  I  should  say,  at
least,  six  inches.  Mr.  Jencken,  who  is  a  taller  man  than
Home,  stood  beside  him,  so  there  could  be  no  mistake
about  it.  Home's  natural  height  is,  I  believe,  5  feet
10  inches.  I  should  say  he  grew  to  6  feet  4  inches  or
6  feet  6  inches.  I  placed  my  hands  on  his  feet,  and
felt  that  they  were  fairly  level  on  the  ground.  He  had
slippers  on,  and  he  said,  "  Daniel  will  shew  you  how  it
is,"  and  he  unbuttoned  his  coat.  He  was  elongated  from
his  waist  upwards,  there  was  a  space  of,  I  suppose,
4  inches  between  his  waistcoat  and  the  waistband  of
his  trowsers.  He  appeared  to  grow  also  in  breadth  and
size  all  over,  but  there  was  no  way  of  testing  that.
He  diminished  down  to  his  natural  size,  and  said,  "  Daniel
will  grow  tall  again "  ; he  did  so,  and  said, "  Daniel's


64  Experiences  in  Spiritualism  [seance


feet  are  on  the  ground,"  he  walked  about,  and  stamped
his feet. He returned to his natural size, and  sitting
down,  he  said, "  Daniel  is  coming  back  now,  sit  down,
and  do  not  tell  Daniel  at  once  what  he  has  said." In  a
few  seconds he  awoke. After  sitting  a  few  minutes,  he
said, "  What  can  it  mean,  I  hear  a  voice  saying  '  Go
into the next room, go into the next room  '  1  "  We
all went into the drawing room  ; it was quite  dark.
Home  sat  at  the  piano, and  played  a  few  notes.  Mrs.
Hennings  sat  near  him  ;  Mrs.  Jencken  a  little  way  off  ;
Mr. Jencken and I stood near the piano. Soon  we
observed  the  light  that  we  had  been  told  we  should  see.
A small luminous ball flitting about, sometimes  very
brilliant  ; the chords of the piano were  swept,  but  the
keys were not touched. The piano was lifted off  the
ground  about  2  inches. I  had  my  hand  underneath,  and
it was again lifted about 2 inches, and then  without
any effort, I should say 8 inches higher. It was  not
tilted, but lifted bodily. We now heard loud  raps,
the  alphabet was called, and "  Oood  flight "  spelled  out.
Nothing  more  occurred.


No.  7  Seance.

We had a seance at No. 5, Buckingham Gate,  the
other  night. Soon  after  sitting  down  the  table  began  to
shew  evidence  of  some  powerful  influence  about  it.  Mr.
Jencken  had  unfortunately  to  go  away  by  the  ten  o'clock
train. After  he  left,  we  went  into  the  dining  room,  and
sat  at  the  small  round  table. We  had  paper  and  a  pencil
on  the  table,  and  when  the  table  was  tilted  the  paper
slipped  off,  which  it  does  not  generally  do. I  had  been
mentioning  to  Brinsley  the  fact  that  things  on  the  table
generally remain stationary, though it be raised to  a
great angle  ; and we were all remarking how  curious
it  was  that  it  would  not  do  so  now. The  next  pheno-
mena that occurred were entirely in connection  with
making the pajDer stay  upon  the table. Home said  in
all  his  experience  he  had  never  seen  the  same  sort  of


NO,  7]


With  D.  D.  Home


65


thing.  His  hand  and  arm  were  taken  possession  of,
that  is  to  say,  they  became  perfectly  rigid,  and  were
moved  quite  independently  of  his  will  ;  his  fist  was  so
firmly  closed  that  his  fingers  could  not  be  opened  ;  and
the  muscles  of  his  wrist  and  arm  felt  like  iron.  He  got
up,  and  altered  the  position  of  one  of  the  candles  on  the
large  table  a  few  inches,  and  removed  all  our  hands  from
the  table  ;  he  then  commenced  to  mesmerise  the  paper,
pointing  at  it  with  the  first  and  middle  finger— the
others  being  clenched — making  rapid  passes  over  it,  and
making  circles  round  it  on  the  table  with  great  rapidity.
The  table  was  rapidly  tilted  up  till  its  edge  touched
the  floor.  Being  a  table  with  one  central  support  it
was  nearly,  but  not  quite,  perpendicular — the  paper
remained  without  slipping  for  some  httle  time.  We  requested
that  it  might  be  moved.  His  hand  was  agitated  above  it,
and  the  edges  of  the  paper  were  blown  up,  apparently
by  the  current  caused  by  his  hand.  The  paper  slipped
to  the  ground  ;  he  took  it  and  rubbed  it  round  and
round  on  the  table,  and  then  tried  to  leave  it  on  the  centre
of  the  table.  It  would  not,  however,  remain  quite  fixed,
slipping  a  little.  Getting  rather  tired  of  this.  Home
asked  if  we  might  not  put  the  table  in  its  place  and  all
sit  round  it  again.  We  were  told  "  Yes  "  ;  and  did  so.
The  following  sentences  were  then  spelled  out  :  "  We
did  it  to  gratify  you  "  ;  "  We  have  power  to  make  the  table
heavy:'  We  tried,  asking  it  to  become  heavy  and  fight,
and  it  did  as  we  required. A  number  of  messages  were  then

given,  all  having  reference  to  Miss  D R  .  None

of  us  knew  the  people  they  purported  to  come  from,  or
anything  about  the  circumstances  they  had  reference  to.
She  had  some  difficulty  in  believing  that  an  uncle  of  hers
was  present  as  represented,  and  as  a  test  of  identity  the
following  was  spelt  by  someone  else  : ''He  alivays  signed

his  name ,"  mentioning  a  peculiar  way  in  which

he  signed.  AU  the  rest  of  the  seance  consisted  in  mes-
sages and  answers  to  Miss  D R  , amounting  to

a  conversation,  and  having  some  reference  to  matters  that  we
did  not  understand.  We  were  wished  Good  night  at  the  end.
The  table  was  sometimes  very  violent  in  its  movements.


E


66


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


No.  8  Seance — November,  186'/.

My  dear  Father, — I  went  down  yesterday  to  Norwood,
and  dined  with  Mr.  Jencken.  I  was  very  much  disappointed
to  find  that  Home  had  settled  to  go  up  to  London  after
dinner,  to  hear  a  lecture  by  Miss  Emma  Hardinge.  I
should  much  have  preferred  spending  the  evening  quietly
there.  We  all  tried  to  persuade  him  to  stop,  but  in
vain.  However,  after  dinner  he  recited  us  some  poetry,
and  to  our  great  satisfaction  he  went  on  until  he  missed
the  train.  We  then  talked  for  some  time,  and  had  some
music. Mrs.  Jencken  played  us  some  very  pretty  httle

musical  airs. While  Mrs.  Jencken,  Home,  and  Miss  D

R were  at  the  piano  there  came  raps  upon  it.  Mr.

Jencken  and  I  were  sitting  some  way  off  at  the  table.
Shortly  after,  Home  suggested  that  we  should  sit  round
the  table.  The  room  was  lighted  by  a  bright  fire  and
two  candles.  Almost  immediately  after  sitting  down,  we
heard  raps  ;  and  the  usual  currents  of  cold  air  were
felt,  also  the  vibration  of  the  table  and  floor.  We  had
very  little  of  rapping  or  movement  of  the  table  during
the  seance.  The  table  was,  however,  two  or  three  times
raised  off  the  floor,  and  sustained  in  the  air  for  a  con-
siderable time.  We  were  talking  about  a  gentleman
(a  friend  of  the  others)  ;  abusing  him  a  little  for  being
conceited  and  unpleasant  in  different  ways.  Home  said,
"  Oh,  don't  let  us  talk  about  our  neighbours  now."
However,  they  went  on  talking  about  him,  not  in  what
one  would  usually  call  an  ill-natured  way ;  but  still,
cutting  him  up  a  little.  The  table  was  moving  slightly
all  the  time,  and  at  last  the  alphabet  was  called  for.
The  four  following  sentences  were  spelled  out,  with  short
intervals  between  them  :  "  There  is  one  God,  He  is  the
Father  of  all.''  "  God  is  tolerant — he  hears  with  our
shortcomings.'''  "Love  and  charity — God  gives  the  one  and
expects  the  other."  "  We  are  all  hut  mortals."  After
such  a  beautiful  rebuke  as  that,  I  need  not  say  that  we
did  not  talk  any  more  about  the  shortcomings  of  our
neighbours.

I should say that Mr. Jencken had, soon after  the


NO.  8]


With  D.  D.  Home


67


phenomena  commenced,  put  out  the  candles.  The  fire-
light was,  however,  in  a  small  room,  quite  sufficient  to
show  everything  clearly.  The  name  of  God  was,  in  every
case,  marked  in  a  manner  different  to  that  in  which
the  letters  in  the  other  words  were  indicated  ;  some-
times by  the  table  being  raised  and  waved  about.  Once,
when  the  table  was  in  the  air  during  the  whole  sen-
tence, by  slow  strong  vibrations,  instead  of  raps.  Home
now  said  he  was  touched  for  the  accordion,  and  took  it,
holding  it  in  the  usual  way.  Almost  immediately,  without
any  apparent  effort,  it  began'  to  play  powerful,  clear,
and  beautifully  harmonious  chords.

It  played  for  some  considerable  time  when  the  alphabet
was  called  for  and  this  was  spelled  : — "  You  are  quite
correct,  it  tvas  Augusta."  I  said,  I  did  not  see  exactly  to
what  the  sentence  applied.  The  alphabet  was  called
again,  and  the  words  "  The  other  night "  spelled,  making
the  sentence  complete,  and  referring  to  what  you  and  I
had been speaking of in the train about the  message

on Saturday night, "  It  was A touched the  keys.''

After  this  the  accordion  was  again  played  for  some
little  time  most  beautifully,  the  notes  being  drawn  out
so  fine,  that  it  was  only  by  bending  the  head  and  listening
attentively,  that  the  harmony  could  be  heard  dying
away  and  then  swelling  again.  The  accordion  was  drawn
out  from  under  the table,  Home still holding  it,  lifted

over  his  head,  and  brought  round  to  Miss  D R  ;

it  was  lifted  up  and  presented  towards  her,  the  same
was  done  to  me,  and  it  was  rested  on  my  left  shoulder,
and  while  there,  close  to  my  ear,  it  breathed  out  the
softest  sounds.  There  was  a  noise  as  of  someone  breath-
ing behind  me,  which  the  others  also  heard,  but,  I  think,
that  must  have  been  caused  by  the  instrument.  The
accordion  was  in  like  manner  presented  to  Mr.  and
Mrs.  Jencken,  and  then  went  under  the  table  again.
A  very  remarkable  thing  now  occurred,  the  accordion
was  seized  by  some  influence  that  evidently  could  not
play  it,  and  which  disturbed  that  previously  acting.  It
abruptly  left  off  playing,  then  began  again  quite  dif-
ferently,  playing three or four notes with a  powerful


68


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


loud  touch,  and  then  it  broke  down  altogether.  Home,
before  the  change  said,  "  Ah,  there  is  some  strange
influence  at  work  now."  After  the  discordant  notes,
the  accordion  was  raised  above  the  table.  Home  stiU
holding  it,  he  said  his  arm  felt  quite  paralyzed,  and
that  he  was  obliged  to  follow  it  ; it  drew  him  from  his

chair, and went near to D and remained  there

some  time  oscillating  backwards  and  forwards,  and  waving
itself  about,  the  accordion  then  led  him  back  to  his
chair,  after  which  it  went  under  the  table  and  re-
commenced playing  as  before  the  interruption.  Soon
the  alphabet  was  called,  and  the  following  spelt  : —
"We  do  all  we  can  to  sheiv  you  that  we  do  not  forget" — •
and  then  the  accordion  finished  the  sentence  by  playing
"  Auld  Lang  Syne,"  first  quietly,  then  with  full  loud
chords.  Home  said  suddenly,  "  Oh,  this  is  a  very
poAverful  spirit."  He  stood  up,  or  rather  he  was  raised
up,  and  his  hand  was  violently  agitated  in  the  air ;  he
then  sat  down,  and  his  hand  was  extended  towards  the
flowers  on  the  small  table,  the  fingers  pointing  towards
them.  His  hand  remained  there  a  few  seconds,  and  was
then  brought  round,  and  with  a  motion  like  sprinkling,
cast  the  perfume  of  the  flowers  towards  each  of  us  in
turn  ;  the  perfume  was  so  strong  that  there  could  be
no  mistake  about  it.  This  was  done  twice.  His  hand
was  then  raised  a  little  above  my  head,  the  fingers  point-
ing towards  me,  and  went  through  motions  something
like  mesmeric  passes,  or  as  I  thought  as  though  blessing
me.  His  hand  was  then  placed  upon  mine,  and  stroked
my  fingers  gently,  first  one  then  the  other  ;  it  then  was
carried  to  his  own  face,  and  passed  across  it  two  or
three  times.  His  hand  was  now  swung  violently  to  and
fro,  then  remained  quiet,  and  presently  it  was  extended
to  the  flowers  again.  I  could  distinctly  see  it  with
the  fingers  pointing  towards  the  flowers,  about  six  inches
above  them  ;  I  am  sure  it  never  touched  them.  His
hand  became  quite  luminous,  and  was  brought  slowly
round  and  across  the  table,  until  it  remained  with  the
flngers  still  extended,  over  my  hand.  I  raised  my  hand
towards it, and a leaf of sweet-scented geranium  fell


NO.  8]


With  D.  D.  Home


69


apparently  from  under  liis  hand  into  mine,  tlie  leaf
was  not  held  in  his  fingers,  neither  could  I  see  it  until
it  fell.  (Home  said,  when  his  hand  was  extended  over
the  flowers,  that  it  felt  to  him,  as  though  it  was  resting
on  a  solid  or  semi-solid  substance.)  At  the  same  moment,
the  alphabet  was  called  for  and  this  spelled,  "  Take  it
ivith  you,  my  hoy.''  This  sentence  followed  immediately,
"  We  have  done  %vhat  tve  promised,  look  mider  the  hand-
kerchief." Mrs.  Jencken  had,  on  the  evening  they  had
had  such  beautiful  manifestations,  a  short  time  ago,
asked  that  a  flower  might  also  be  given  to  her.  They
had  announced  that  it  would  be  done,  and  now  imder
her  handkerchief  there  was  a  piece  of  geranium ;  her
handkerchief  had  been  on  the  table  all  the  time,  and  no
one  had  touched  it.

This  sentence  was  now  spelled,  "  Next  for  dear  D  ."

Home's  hand  was  extended  again  to  the  flowers  ;  it
certainly  was  not  nearer  them  than  6  inches  ;  it  became

luminous,  and  a  flower  was  given  to  D in  the  same

way  it  had  been  given  to  me.  The  alphabet  was  again
called,  and  this  spelled,  "  This  is  for  you,"  and  at  the
same  moment,  a  flower  dropped  at  Mr.  Jencken's  hand  ;
none  of  us  heard  it  broken  off,  or  saw  it,  but  it  fell  on
the  table  just  in  front  of  his  hand.  "  Our  joy  "  was  now
spelled,  and  the  accordion  played,  and  then  "  Our  thanks
to  God  "  and  it  played  again.  The  alphabet  was  called,
and  "  Weejj  7iot "  spelled.  Dear  old  Mrs.  Jencken  was
quietly  crying,  not  as  she  said  for  sorrow,  when  the
words  "  Weep  not  "  were  spelled,  her  handkerchief  was
gently  taken  from  her  under  the  table,  and  afterwards
replaced  upon  it.  After  this,  "  Good  night  "  was  spelled,
and  nothing  more  occurred.


V ■ No.  9  Seance— July  26th,  1868.

Present  :  Mrs.  Jencken,  Mrs.  Hennings,  Mr.  Jencken,
Home,  and  myself.  Physical  manifestations  very  slight.
Home  passing  almost  immediately  into  a  trance,  in  which
he delivered the following address, purporting to  come


70  Experiences  in  Spirihialism  [seance


from  the  spirit  of  Dr.  Jenckeu  ;  to  prove  identity  several
tests  were  given.

Dr.  Jencken,  during  the  last  few  years  of  his  life,
had  been  quite  blind,  and  was  in  the  habit,  when  dictating,
of  going  through  the  form  of  writing  with  great  rapidity
on  his  knee  with  his  finger  ;  he  also  had  a  peculiar
habit  of  clasping  his  hands  together,  and  speaking  with
his  head  bent  very  low  down.  Home  imitated  him  in
both  respects  to  the  very  life,  and  also  mentioned  some
circumstances  that  had  occurred  many  years  before  at
Mayence.

The  first  words  Home  spoke  were  in  a  very  low  voice,
telling  us  to  go  on  talking.  He  then  got  up,  threw  away
a  silk  cushion  he  had  been  sitting  on,  and  said,  "  Re-
member, Dan  must  not  sit  on  a  silk  cushion  while  this
very  hot  weather  lasts."  He  remained  silent  for  a  few
minutes,  and  then  commenced  speaking  with  a  clear  voice,
and  in  a  very  impressive  manner.  Part  of  the  discourse
was  in  verse,  but  owing  to  the  partially  darkened  state
of  the  room  and  the  rapidity  of  his  utterance,  it  was
quite  impossible  to  write  it  down.  The  following  notes
taken  by  Mr.  Jencken  are  for  these  reasons  very  im-
perfect.

"  There  are  laws  which  govern  the  approach  of  spiritual
beings  to  earth,  and  their  organic  life,  and  there  are
epochs  of  darkness  when  the  spiritual  spheres  are  far
removed  from  the  earth  ;  when  the  approach  of  spirits
is  all  but  impossible.  These  epochs  have  been  called  by
those  on  earth  the  dark  ages  ;  they  mark  the  absence  of
spiritual  intercourse.  There  are  also  times  of  near  approach,
not  unlike  your  winter  and  summer  seasons.  This  alternate
action  is  a  great  law ;  great  principles  rule  all  things.
There  was  such  an  epoch  of  easy  approach  at  the  time
of  the  Ancient  Egyptians.  They  knew  this  and  under-
stood the  laws  better  than  you  do.  Before  that  time
spirits  had  not  taken  sufficient  pains  to  encourage  the
invention  of  means  for  the  perpetuating  of  knowledge.
There  was  no  printing,  nor  mechanical  contrivance,  in
those  days.  Since  then,  during  the  period  that  their
approach  to  earth  was  more  difficult, they  had  turned


NO.  9]


With  D.  D.  Home


71


their attention more to those matters, so that  now
knowledge  can  never  be  so  lost  again. You  are  now  entering
upon  a  period  of  very  near  approach. It  is  coming  like
the tide in a river — irresistible, overriding the  current,
overcoming  all ;  it  is  coming  grandly  and  Godly. What  has
already been seen is but the smallest wavelet of  the
tide  that  is  coming  upon  the  earth. Some  of  you  here
present  will  see  it  ; others  among  you  will  have  joined
us, and  will  be  helping  on  the  great  work  we  have  in
hand. The echoes of it are coming  ; they sound  like
the notes of the organ rolling up the aisles of  those
grand  old  cathedrals  that  men  have  built — notes  signifying
the  heart-felt  prayer  of  an  earnest  soul  ascending  to  the
throne of God  ; never lost but echoing on for  ever.
Spiritual truth must come  ; truth is a lighthouse,  a
beacon, a speck, a point, leading  onward  to  realms  of
love. We  have  no  power,  we  can  do  so  little,  that  we
often  wonder  that  we  are  able  to  do  anything  for  you.
Language  is  too  imperfect,  we  cannot  convey  to  you  our
meaning  ; you cannot understand us  ; our state is  so
different  from  your  material  state,  that  it  is  with  great
difficulty  that  we  can  work  upon  it  to  make  our  presence
known ; not  that  it  is  painful to us — no, no, it  is  a
labour  of  love. But  still  it  is  an  actual  labour  to  us.
The  earth  is  still  so  imperfect — so  undeveloped — that  we
have much difficulty in dealing with material  objects.
Why,  even such  a  little  thing  as  the  silk  cushion  that
Dan  was  sitting  on,  prevented  us  from  making  physical
manifestations to-night  ; yet we did succeed in  giving
you  each  a  token  of  our  presence,  though  it  was  very
slight. Henry, the floor vibrated under your  chair.
Adare,  your  chair  was  touched. Amelia  and  Mary,  you
both  felt  the  current  of  cold  air  pass  over  your  hands.
You  aU  felt  something.

"  The  earth  is  as  yet  very  immature,  but  progressing.
A  period  of  very  near  approach  is  at  hand  ;  after  that
there  will  be  one,  probably  two  epochs  of  darkness.
We  are  entirely  dependent  upon  atmospherical  conditions.
Now,  to-night,  the  atmosphere  is  so  surcharged  with
electricity,  that  it  appears  to  us  quite  thick,  like  sand.


72


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


It  is  so  unlike  our  own,  that  it  is  almost  impossible
for  us  to  get  near  you.  We  feel  like  men  wading  through
a  quicksand — slipping  back  as  fast  as  we  advance.  At
other  times,  when  your  earthly  atmosphere  is  in  a  natural
state,  it  is  more  like  our  own,  and  we  have  no  difficulty
in  being  near  you.  You  wonder  if  we  wish  you  to  be
better  than  you  are.  You  are  all  good.  The  germs  of
good  are  in  all.  We  can  see  further  than  you  can  ;  and
know  all  your  trials,  all  your  doubts  and  difficulties.
Were  we  not  once  mortals  as  you  are  ?  We  see  the
troubles  and  the  thorns  that  beset  your  path.  Stretch
forth  your  hands — thrust  them  through  the  brambles —
draw  them  not  back  or  the  blood  will  flow — stretch  them
out  and  let  them  remain,  there  shall  they  find  rest.
We  know  not  of  time  ;  to  us,  yesterday,  to-day,  to-morrow
are  all  one.  Had  we  hours,  days,  years,  even  ages,  like
you,  we  should  say  time  passes  slowly,  or  time  passes
fast.  We  never  tire  ;  we  are  eternity.  Happiness  is  not
idleness.  Labour  is  joy,  the  labour  of  love.  Even  on  earth
it  is  not  the  spirit  that  wearies  of  a  labour  of  love  ;  it  is  the
poor  weak  body  that  tires,  that  faints,  that  falls  to  sleep.
We  have  work  to  do,  to  elevate  ourselves,  and  to  draw
you  onward  and  upward.  We  constantly  watch  over  you,
and  sympathize  with  all  your  cares.  We  never  weary  ;
we  do  not  judge  you  ;  we  were  as  you  are.  God  alone
is  the  Judge.  You  ask  why  we  always  speak  of  love  ;
it  is  love  that  brings  us  to  you.  God  is  Love.  Spirit
messages  are  ahvays  breathing  love  for  God.  God  is
Love.  ■,.  .  ■

"  Henry,  your  father  is  pleased  that  you  are  engaged
upon  his  works,  he  too  has  his  work  to  do.  He  was
aided  in  writing,  and  knows  now  that  higher  spirits
aided  him.  Do  you  remember  at  Mayence,  how  he  was
affected  ?  (Here  Home  imitated  his  peculiar  mode  of
writing  upon  his  knee,  and  manner  of  speaking.)  An
inferior  spirit  had  got  influence  over  him.  I  see  him  now,
he  had  great  self-esteem  and  was  very  opinionated,  and
only  wanted  his  own  ideas  to  become  prominent  ;  this  is
very  dangerous,  and  must  be  guarded  against.  Truth,
truth — worship truth  : particle by  particle  build up  the


NO.  9]


With  D.  D.  Home


73


temple  of  truth  ;  be  consistent,  fur  Cod  is  Trutli.  Here
we  have  no  narrowing  creed,  no  four  church  walls,  with  a
cushioned  pew  for  the  rich,  and  a  plain  board  for  the  poor
man,  to  limit  the  worship  of  truth.  The  great  four  walls
of  eternity  ;  the  blue  ether,  set  with  sparkling  stars,  gems
made  by  the  hand  of  God,  ever  lustrous  diamonds  of
the  heavenly  orb,  peep-holes  of  heaven  ;  it  is  there  we
worship,  and  through  them  we  peer  in  our  search  for  truth.

"  One  great  objection  made  to  Spiritualism,  is,  that  we
do  not  disclose  all  the  truth — if  true,  why  not  tell  all  ?
Are  you  capable  of  perceiving  the  truth  ?  The  man
has  not  yet  been  formed  upon  the  earth  fitted  to  know
the  whole  truth.  Immortality  is  before  you  !  Immor-
tality gleams  upon  earth — gleams  like  a  lighthouse,  like
a  beacon  to  you.  The  future  is  not  even  understood
by  all  of  us,^  but  we  draw  nearer  and  nearer  to  God,
for  here  there  is  no  one  to  hold  you  back,  to  say
you  are  mad  ;  peals  of  angel  voices  call  you  onward  and
upward  ; cheer  you  in  your  struggles,  and  aid  you.

"  There  are  great  laws  of  development  that  draw  the
organic  and  the  inorganic  together  ;  you  on  earth  witness
the  onward  course  of  aU  things  in  the  organic  world,
rising  to  higher  conditions,  as,  for  instance,  the  develop-
ment of  the  child  into  manhood.  Onward  is  the  progress  ;
onward  and  upward.  Search, — search  for  truth, — be  true,  be
brave,  be  prayerful ;  ye  are  all  children  of  God  created  by  Him.

The  meaning  is  obscure.  The  words,  '"  The  future  is  not  even  under-
stood by  all  of  us  ;  but  we  draw  nearer  and  nearer  to  God,  for  here
there  is  no  one  to  hold  you  back — to  say  you  are  mad,"  evidently
refer  to  spirits,  and  the  sentence  should  stand  :  "  For  here  there  is  no
one  to  hold  trs  back — to  say  that  we  are  mad."  Substituting  the  words
"  us  "  and  "  we  "  for  "  you,"  which  is  evidently  improperly  used.  It  is
an  open  question  whether  the  remaining  lines  belong  to  the  same
sentence  or  not  ;  the  context  would  rather  lead  me  to  suppose  not.  If
the  lines  constitute  one  sentence  with  the  same  train  of  thought  rimning
all  through  it,  then  the  word  "you"  should  be  altered  to  "us"  in  the
last  two  lines  also,  which  should  read  thus  :  "  Peals  of  angel  voices  call
us  onward  and  upward  ;  cheer  us  in  our  struggles  and  aid  us."  But  it
appears  to  me  more  probable  that  the  reference  to  the  state  of  the  spirits
concludes  with  the  word  "  mad,  "  and  that  the  remaining  lines  are  an
aspiration  or  prayer  that  "peals  of  angel  voices  may  call  you"  (that  is,
mortals)  "onward  aiid  upward  ;  cheer  you  in  your  struggles  and  aid  you."


74  Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


The  time  is  rapidly  coming  for  a  great  change  in  spiritual
life  ;  we  are  nearing  the  cycle,  so  near  that  some  of  you
here  present  will  witness  the  change,  others  will  have  gone
to  their  home,  to  their  rest,  to  the  blessed.  Are  you
weary  of  life  ?  weary  of  the  earth  1  The  soul  tires  not,
it  is  only  the  body.  (In  answer  to  question  by  H.  J.)
You  are  right  ,  Henry  ;  your  father  is  clearer  in  his
views  now,  more  to  the  point,  sees  things  clearer  than  he
did  when  on  earth.  Oh,  how  much  he  wished  to  know
Daniel  ;  had  he  but  known  him !  You  remember  how
anxious  he  was  about  him."


No.  10  Seance.

Last  Monday  I  was  at  a  seance  at  Mr.  Hall's.  There
were  nine  present  :  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hall,  Home,  the  Misses
Bertolacci  (mediums),  a  cousin  of  mine,  two  gentlemen
whose  first  seance  it  was,  and  myself.  Almost  immediately
we  felt  the  sort  of  phenomena  that  usually  take  place
first,  such  as  cold  currents  of  air  passing  over  the  hands,
table  vibrating,  &c.  These  ceased,  and  for  some  time
nothing  occurred.  Some  one  suggested  that  the  young
ladies  should  try  if  anything  would  be  written.  They
did  so  with  the  planchette,  both  placing  one  hand  upon
it  at  the  same  time.  These  words  were  written,  "  By
patience,  and  in  the  name  of  Christ."  We  were  also  told
by  the  same  means  to  sit  down  again  in  the  same  positions
we  had  occupied  before.  After  a  time  very  strong  mani-
festations took  place,  the  table  vibrating,  tilting,  and
being  raised  about  a  foot  off  the  ground ;  raps  were
heard  on  the  table,  on  the  floor,  on  our  chairs,  &c., —
nearly  everyone  was  touched.  I  felt  a  hand  between  my
leg  and  Home's  :  I  was  sitting  next  to  him.  There  was
evidently  some  very  strong  influence  about  Home.  After
a  time  a  message  was  given  by  raps  :  "  /  now  knoiv  that
my  Redeemer  liveth :  have  patience  and  bear  all.  Daniel,
I  owe  you  many  thanks. — John  Elliotson."  After  this,  in
answer  to  some  question  (I  forget  what),  the  table  was
tilted  three  times  in  the  four  opposite  directions,  and  was


NO.  10]


With  D.  D.  Home


75


then  lifted  three  times  in  the  air.  Home's  chair  was  once
drawn  away  a  little  from  the  table,  and  raised  off  the
floor,  but  certainly  not  more  than  one  inch.  His  chair
was  also  turned  completely  round,  so  that  his  back  was
towards  us,  his  feet  during  the  whole  time  the  chair
was  moving  being  off  the  ground.  An  arm  chair  moved
of  itself  a  distance  of  about  a  yard  up  against  the  back
of  my  chair.  Home's  hand  and  arm  became  cataleptic,
and  were  moved  about  quite  independent  of  his  will.
His  hand  was  sometimes  thumped  and  beaten  violently
against  the  table,  but  without  causing  him  any  pain.
His  hand  was  moved  to  the  back  of  my  neck,  and
pushed  me  forward  in  my  chair.  He  then  began  to  thump
me  violently  on  the  back,  and  to  rub  me  across  the  back,
commencing  at  the  right  side.  His  hand  also  stroked  and
patted  my  head,  and  was  also  moved  to  my  cousin
sitting  at  the  opposite  side  of  the  table,  and  stroked  and
patted  her  hands  and  head.

The  following  message  was  written  by  Home's  hand,
his  fingers  being  so  strongly  clenched,  it  was  with  dif-
ficulty that  the  pencil  was  inserted  between  them. "  We

know all your discussion about  A W  • ; we  are

the  best  judges,  it  ivas  a  bad  influence. F — —  and  F  ."

The  paper  was  then  pushed  across  to  my  cousin  to  read,

neither  of  us could  understand  what  F and  F

meant,  although  we  ought  to  have  guessed,  as  the  same
words  had  been  used  about  the  same  subject,  in  a  message
given  us  a  few  days  previously.  Seeing  that  we  could  not
make  it  out  the  words  "forget  and  forgive  "  were  written.
Other  messages  were  written  through  Home  and  one  of
the  ladies  present.  Mr.  Holt,  a  gentleman  whose  first
seance  it  was,  became  much  affected  ;  soon  after  sitting
down,  his  hands  Were  taken  possession  of  and  violently
agitated,  sometimes  on,  and  sometimes  under  the  table  ;
occasionally  his  arms  were  drawn  back  behind  his  chair,
his  hands  being  all  the  time  violently  agitated  ;  a  pencil
and  paper  were  given  him,  but  though  his  hand  moved
over  the  paper  with  the  greatest  rapidity,  nothing  but
scribbling  was  the  result.  So  strong  was  the  influence
over  him,  that  he  went  and  sat  alone  upon  the  sofa  at  some


76


Experieyices  in  Spwih/alism,


[seance


distance  from  iis,  to  try  and  diminish  it  ,  wlien  be  left,
the  power  about  the  table  became  sensibly  lessened  ;
he  continued  to  be  slightly  agitated  the  whole  evening.
We  were  all  anxious  to  know  Avho  was  endeavouring  to
make  him  write  ;  two  Christian  names  with  the  word
"  uncle "  between  them  were  written  through  Home.
Home  at  one  time  said  he  felt  convinced  that  a  spirit
was  near  him  who  had  passed  from  this  life  by  being
drowned.  Some  little  time  after,  Mr.  Hall  was  telling
us  how  one  of  his  brothers  had  been  mysteriously  drowned
at  sea,  he  being  a  very  good  swimmer  ;  Home's  hand  was
taken  possession  of  and  wrote  the  word  "  Shark  "  upon
a  piece  of  paper,  and  then  pushed  it  to  Mr.  Hall.  Home
and  one  of  the  ladies  present  went  into  a  trance  at  the
same  moment  ;  for  some  time  they  sat  in  their  places,
occupying  themselves  with  putting  their  fingers  upon  the
sheets  of  paper  on  the  table,  and  then  waving  their
hands  about,  the  paper  adhering  to  their  fingers  ;  Home
then  got  up  and  walked  about  the  room  ;  he  took  a
large  sheet  of  paper  off  the  table,  doubled  it  up  and
placed  it  on  the  piano  in  the  next  room  ;  the  young
lady  also  got  up,  and  sat  down  upon  the  sofa,  at  the
other  side  of  the  room.

Home  sat  down  in  his  chair,  and  began  to  talk  to
Mrs.  Hall  in  a  whisper.  1  could  not  hear  the  exact
words  he  used,  but  they  were  to  the  effect  that  during
their  occupation  of  that  house,  there  had  been  a  bad
influence  present  during  searices  twice  only.  He  mentioned
who  one  of  the  spirits  was,  and  said  that  the  same
influence  had  that  evening  turned  Home  round  in  his
chair,  and  had  brought  the  arm  chair  up  against  mine.
He  also  told  her  that  in  the  house  to  which  they  were
going,  nothing  but  what  was  good  and  holy  would  come
near  them.  Home  was  elongated  to  the  extent  of,  I
should  say,  6  inches,  four  times  ;  he  walked  about,
stamped,  and  shuffled  his  feet,  to  shew  that  he  was
standing  fairly  upon  them.  He  went  round  to  Mr.  Holt,
one  of  the  gentlemen  present,  and  made  him  place  his
hand  upon  his  waist  that  he  might  feel  how  he  became
elongated and contracted. Mr. Holt said that he  held


NO.  10]


With  D.  D.  Home


11


his  hand  flat  against  Home's  side  ;  that  the  lower  edge
of  his  hand  was  resting  on  his  hip  bone  ;  that  he  felt
Home's  lower  rib  pass  under  his  hand,  until  it  was
some  inches  above  it  ;  the  whole  flesh  and  muscle
apparently  moving  and  stretching.  On  the  contraction
taking  place,  he  felt  the  lower  rib  come  down  until  it
pressed  against  the  upper  edge  of  his  hand  and  moved
into  its  proper  position.  Home  said  that  the  young
lady  had  also  been  elongated,  and  would  be  again.  She
was  then  standing  near  the  table  in  a  trance,  and  began
swaying  herself  from  side  to  side  ;  she  was  palpably
elongated  to  the  extent  of,  perhaps,  three  inches.  About
this  time  a  loud  knock  came  at  the  outside  door.  Home
said,  "  He  must  come  in — it  is  the  Master  of  Lindsay."
Home  then  opened  the  room  door,  went  out  into  the  entry,
and  took  the  gentleman  by  the  hand  ;  he  led  him  into
the  room ;  made  him  shake  hands  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Hall,  with  the  young  lady  who  was  in  the  trance,  and
with  me,  we  being  all  perfect  strangers  to  him.  Home
then  said  to  him,  "  You  must  go  out  of  the  room  until
Daniel  awakes,  for  if  he  was  to  awake  and  find  you  here,
he  would  be  frightened."  Shortly  after  this  they  both
awoke,  and  the  party  broke  up.


I  arrived  at  home  about  half  an  hour  before  Home.
Soon  after  we  had  gone  to  bed  we  both  heard  the  hall
door  loudly  slammed.  I  said,  "  Oh,  Dan,  you  have  left
the  door  open,  and  some  one  has  come  in  !  "  He  declared
he  had  locked  it,  and  put  the  chain  up  ;  however,  we
both  got  up  and  went  down  to  see  what  was  the  matter.
I  found  the  hall  door  locked  and  the  chain  up,  and  the
study  and  dining  room  doors  both  wide  open.  I  went
into  the  study  and  heard  raps,  I  then  went  out  to  where
Home  was  standing  in  the  entry,  and  we  heard  raps  on
the  floor.  He  said,  "  Oh,  I  am  sure  it  is  dear  old  Dr.
Elliotson,"  "  Yes,"  was  rapped.  I  then  said,  "  In  that
case  I  suppose  no  burglars  came  in  and  we  may  go  to
bed  again  ?  "  "  Yes,"  was  rapped.  We  went  up  stairs.
Dr. Elliotson  following  us  rapping  on  the  banisters  and


78


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


stairs.  After  we  had  got  into  bed  again  we  heard  heavy
footsteps  walldng  about  the  room,  and  raps  in  various
places.  Home  carried  on  a  conversation  with  Dr.  Elliot-
son  for  a  little  time,  asking  questions  and  receiving
answers  to  them  by  raps.

He  (Dr.  EUiotson)  told  us  that  he  had  not  suffered
pain  in  passing  away,  and  that  he  had  found  the  other
world  very  much  what  he  had  expected  it  to  be  ;  that
he  had  not  intended  to  frighten  us  by  making  a  sound
as  of  slamming  the  door,  and  that  he  would  be  more
careful  not  to  make  so  much  noise  in  future  ;  but  that
as  yet  he  had  only  imperfect  control  over  physical  mani-
festations ;  that  he  had  followed  Home  to  the  house,
and  was  glad  to  be  near  him,  &c.  Home  and  I  talked
about  him  for  some  little  time,  he  joining  in  our  conversa-
tion, assenting  or  dissenting  by  means  of  raps.


Two  days  after  this  as  we  were  getting  up,  about
10  o'clock,  a  bright  sun  shining  into  the  room,  loud
raps  came  upon  the  floor,  &c.,  and  a  long  message  of
a  private  character  was  given  to  Home.


No.  11  Seance — July,  1868.

Having  missed  the  last  train  to  London  I  was  very
glad  to  accept  Mr.  Jones's  kind  offer  to  remain  a]l  night
at  his  house.  Home  and  I  carried  a  sofa  upstairs  to  his
(Home's)  room  for  me  to  sleep  on.  I  did  not  leave  the
room  after  bringing  in  the  sofa.  My  clothes  I  placed
upon  a  small  round  table  near  the  foot  of  the  bed.
On  a  chair  by  the  sofa  I  placed  a  pocket  handkerchief,
two  eye  glasses,  and  a  snuff  box.

During  the  seance  in  the  evening  it  was  said  that  I
should  hear  music  without  any  instrument  that  night.
Home  turned  off  the  gas  previous  to  going  to  bed.  A
certain  amount  of  light  entered  the  room  from  the  street,
so  that  it  was  not  perfectly  dark.  I  could  easily  distin-
guish Home  when  he  sat  up  in  bed  ;  and  could  have
seen  anybody  moving  about  the  room.


NO.  11]


With  D.  D.  Home


79


We  had  not  been  in  bed  more  than  three  minutes
when  both  Home  and  myself  simultaneously  heard  the
music  ;  it  sounded  like  a  harmonium  ;  sometimes,  as  if
played  loudly  at  a  great  distance  ;  at  other  times,  as  if
very  gently,  close  by.  The  music  continued  for  some
minutes,  when  Home  got  up  to  ask  Mr.  Jones  if  any  one
was  playing  the  accordion.  Mr.  Jones  returned  with  him,
and  we  all  three  then  heard  the  music.  The  usual
phenomena  of  rajDS  and  vibrations  of  the  floor,  sofa,
&c.,  occurred  very  frequently  and  with  great  power  ;
the  raps  sounded  all  over  the  room ;  on  the  floor,  walls,
even  on  Home's  bed  ;  on,  under,  and  in  my  sofa.  My
sofa  occasionally  vibrated  very  strongly ;  the  bed  clothes
on  Home's  bed  and  on  the  sofa  were  frequently  pulled
and  moved  about.  We  both  several  times  heard  sounds
such  as  would  be  caused  by  some  one  in  a  muslin  dress
moving  about  the  room,  although  we  could  see  nothing.

After  a  short  time  I  heard  the  chair  close  to  my  sofa
moving,  and  a  finger  touched  one  of  my  hands  that  was
hanging  over  the  side  of  the  sofa,  the  next  moment  I
felt the snuff  box on  the chair touch me, and  found
that  the  chair  was  moving,  I  said  that  I  thought  some
one  had  touched  me,  but  that  probably  I  had  been  mis-
taken, and  that  it  was  only  the  box  ; the  spirits  said  by
the  alphabet  that  I  had  been  touched. The  chair  then
moved  to  the  foot  of  the  bed,  and  we  heard  the  various
articles  upon  it  being  stirred  about. I  was  sitting  upon
the  sofa, with  one  hand  resting  on  the  edge,  suddenly
I  felt  something  brush  across  my  hand  ;  this  was  repeated,
and  I  became  aware  of  something  swinging  in  the  air.
I  then  heard  some  object  brushing  backwards and  for-
wards against  the  back  of  the sofa,  inside  ; on  putting
my  hand  to  the  spot, my  eye  glass  was  placed  in  it.
I  took  the  glass,  and  in  drawing  it  away  I  felt,  by  the
resistance  offered,  that  the  cord  was  attached  to  some-
thing ; while feeling the resistance a hand and  arm
holding  the  end  of  the  cord  became  visible. This  I  saw
distinctly  for  a  second  or  two,  it  then  disappeared.

I  now  heard  a  sound  near  the  foot  of  the  bed  as  if
my  double  glasses  were  being  opened  and  shut,  and  I


80


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


distinctly  saw  a  figure,  apparently  draped,  standing  over
the  foot  of  the  bed  ;  it  held  something,  I  believe  the
double  glasses,  and  I  could  see  the  hand  and  arm  waving
backwards  and  forwards ;  I  could  hear  the  eye-glass
swinging  in  the  air,  but  could  not  see  it  ;  the  figure
stooped  down  towards  Mr.  Jones,  and  disappeared.  A
message  was  then  given  :  "  The  figure  is  not  the  same  as
the  one  that  touched  you."

About  half  a  minute  after,  I  distinctly  heard  something
moving  along  the  side  of  the  sofa,  and  immediately  my
double  eye-glass  was  placed  upon  the  back  of  my  hand  ;
I  felt  the  hand  that  held  it  push  it  on,  and  then  stroke
and  pat  my  fingers  ;  I  took  three  fingers  of  the  hand  in
mine,  and  held  them  for  some  seconds  ;  as  I  increased  the
pressure  upon  them,  they  appeared  to  withdraw  them-
selves from  me  ;  I  was  again  touched,  and  my  hand
stroked  and  patted,  the  fingers  were  like  a  delicately
formed  human  hand,  the  skin  feeling  perfectly  natural  to
the  touch.

A  message  was  now  given  :  "We  place  it  there  to  shew
you  that  we  do  not  tvish  you  to  contract  a  habit,  pernicious,
and  that  can  he  of  no  possible  use  to  you."  While  wondering
what  this  could  mean,  my  snuff  box  came  right  across
the  room  through  the  air,  falling  against  my  leg,  where  it
remained.  Home  saw  it  pass  through  the  air  in  front  of
him.  I  asked  who  had  thrown  it  ;  and  was  told  "  Grand-
father Goold."  Mr.  Jones  asked  if  the  snuff  had  been
taken  out,  "  No,"  was  immediately  rapped  in  various
parts  of  the  room.

Mr.  Jones  wished  that  something  might  be  done  for
him,  and  he  was  slightly  touched.  He  asked  also  that  the
chair  might  be  moved  round  to  him.  The  chair  began
again  to  move,  but  there  was  not  room  for  it  to  pass
between  the  foot  of  the  bed  and  the  round  table.  The
table  was  raised  off  the  floor  and  moved  out  of  the  way,
the  top  becoming  slightly  luminous.  While  moving,  it
suddenly  fell  to  the  floor  and  rolled  over.  My  clothes
tumbled  off,  the  money  in  the  pockets  rolling  about  the
room.  I  said,  "  I  wonder  how  it  happened  ;  it  is  so  unusual
for them to let anything fall." They answered, "  It


NO.  11]


With  D.  D.  Home


81


happened  by  7nistake."  I  observed,  "  How  kind  it  is  of  them
to  answer  questions  like  this."  They  answered,  "  Would
you  not  do  the  same  for  us.''  Mr.  Jones  said  that  he
supposed  the  spirits  in  the  room  were  friends  of  mine.
They  answered  "  YesJ'  I  asked  how  many  of  my  own
family  were  present.  They  answered  "  Six."  I  asked  if
they  had  not  come  to  welcome  me  home  from  abroad.
They  answered  "  Yes,"  by  rapping  three  times  all  over
the  room.

A  message  was  now  given  :  "  We  ivish  to  give  you
the ."  Here  it  broke  off  ;  and  though  Home  re-
peated the  alphabet  three  or  four  times,  nothing  more
would  come.  While  we  were  wondering  at  this  unfinished
sentence  my  pocket  handkerchief  dropped  through  the  air
into  my  lap.  I  took  it  up  and  found  there  was  something
hard  in  it.  It  turned  out  to  be  my  latch  key  that  I
had  left  in  my  trowsers  pocket,  knotted  into  one  corner
of  the  handkerchief.  The  remainder  of  tlie  unfinished
message  was  then  spelled  out  :  "  Key  to  the  mystery,"  making
altogether,  "We  ivish  to  give  you  the  key  to  the  mystery."
Mr.  Jones  had  been  telling  me  that  the  spirits  were
anxious  to  prove  to  me  that  there  was  an  actual  intel-
ligence at  work,  and  that  the  phenomena  were  not  the
result  of  mere  animal  magnetism.

After  this,  "  Good  night "  was  spelled  out.  The  last
sound  I  heard  was  that  of  the  jingling  of  the  money
while  being  picked  up  about  the  room.  I  put  my  eye-
glass, handkerchief,  and  snuff-box  on  the  floor.  Mr.  Jones
left  the  room,  and  I  very  soon  went  to  sleep.  In  the
morning  I  found  the  things  on  the  floor  in  the  same
position  that  I  had  left  them  in,  the  key  being  still
knotted  to  the  handkerchief.  The  chair  was  near  the
foot  of  the  bed,  a  blanket  that  I  had  thrown  off  my
sofa  entangled  round  it.  The  table  was  lying  on  the
ground — my  clothes  on  the  floor.  All  my  silver  I  found  in
the  pocket  I  had  left  it  in  ;  the  gold,  consisting  of  four
pieces,  I  found  on  Home's  counterpane.

These  phenomena  could  not  have  been  caused  by  any
mechanical  contrivances.  In  order  to  produce  the  violent
vibrations  and  the  raps  on  the  sofa,  it  would  have  been

F


82


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


necessary  to  attach  some  complicated  machinery  to  it  ;
that  was  impossible,  as  I  assisted  to  carry  it  up  from  the
drawing  room,  never  left  the  room  after  we  had  brought  it  up,
and  was  lying  down  upon  it  within  three  or  four  minutes
after  we  had  placed  it  in  the  room.  It  would  have  been  also
necessary  to  attach  machinery  to  the  chair  and  table.
Articles  were  taken  from  the  chair,  and  conveyed  to  me
without  any  human  agency,  for  I  must  have  seen  anyone
moving  in  the  room,  and  the  chair  was  too  far  removed
from  Mr.  Jones  and  Home  to  have  been  reached  by  them
by  any  means.


No.  12  Seance — 5,  Buckingham  Gate,  August  Srd,  1868.

One  day  last  week  Home  complained  of  not  feeling  at
all  well,  and  of  being  in  very  low  spirits.  I  did  not  feel
well  myself,  and  lay  down  on  the  sofa,  where  I  presently
went  to  sleep.  When  I  awoke,  Home  told  me  that  there
had  been  raps  on  the  tables,  &c.,  but  that  instead  of
cheering  him  they  made  him  feel  more  uncomfortable.
They  had  given  him  answers  to  several  questions.  He
asked  why  it  was  that  he  felt  so  low  and  ill.  The  answer
was,  "  There  is  nothing  Spiritualistic  in  it ;  it  is  rather
a  tinge  from  the  thoughts  of  Adare.''  This  puzzled  me  very
much,  as  I  was  quite  unaware  of  anything  having
taken  place  that  could  give  rise  to  unpleasant  thoughts.
I  sat  down  at  the  writing  table  and  heard  raps  on  various
parts  of  it.  They  again  said  that  they  showed  their
presence  to  "  cheer  Dan."  Home  had  said  that  he  felt
a  desire  to  smoke  a  cigarette,  a  thing  I  have  never  known
him  do  before.  He  smoked  one,  owing  to  which,  I  think,
a  fit  of  coughing  was  brought  on.  Home  coughed  up  a
quantity  of  blood  and  seemed  relieved  by  it  ;  he  then
lay  down  on  the  sofa.  The  raps  continued  for  a  short
time,  and  I  asked  if  Home's  indisposition  was  anything
serious.  They  answered,  "  No."  I  asked  if  he  would  be
all  right  soon.  They  answered,  "  Yes."  This  occurred
about  3  p.m.  in  broad  daylight.


NO.  13]


With  D.  D.  Home


83


No.  13  Seance — 5,  Buckingham  Gate.

Two  or  three  days  subsequently,  Home  and  I  having
gone  to  bed  after  a  seance  here,  at  which  we  felt  a  few
movements  of  the  table,  we  had  manifestations  in  the  bed
room,  consisting  of  our  beds  vibrating  strongly  and  of
raps  on  the  furniture,  doors,  and  all  about  the  room.
Home's  bed  was  slightly  moved  out  from  the  wall.  We  both
heard  something  on  the  dressing  table  being  moved  about,
and  at  the  same  moment  we  both  saw  in  exactly  the  same  spot,
a  perfectly  white  column,  it  can  scarcely  be  called  a  figure,
as  the  shape  was  indistinct.  It  moved  from  the  dressing
table  towards  Home's  bed.  Home  said  he  saw  a  white
object  about  the  size  of  a  child  floating  near  the  ceiling
above  his  head.  I  saw  it  also,  but  it  appeared  to  me  to
be  in  mid  air,  half  way  between  the  bed  and  the  ceiling  :
it  was  floating  about  in  a  horizontal  position  ;  it  was  like
a  small  white  cloud  without  any  well-defined  shape.  I
saw  it  descend  close  to  Home,  who  then  lost  sight  of  it,
but  I  perceived  it  come  within  about  two  feet  of  his  head.
It  then  slowly  floated  to  the  foot  of  his  bed  and  dis-
appeared. I  afterwards  saw  the  same  appearance  near  the
door.  Home  saw  it  intercept  the  light  coming  in  from  the
window  against  the  opposite  wall  ;  I  did  not.  We  had
three  messages  given  us :  First,  "  We  love  God  best  by
loving  you  and  seeking  to  influence  you  for  good.''  Second,
"  Seeing  that  you  have  been  troubled  to  knoiv  what  we
meant  by  its  being  rather  a  tinge  from  the  thoughts  of  Adare,
we  wish  to  tell  you  it  was  oiving  to  something  in  a  letter
received  from  his  father."  The  manifestations  continued  for
some  time  when  the  third  message  was  given  :  "  Noio
sleep."  After  this  we  heard  and  saw  nothing  more.
There  was  sufficient  light  in  the  room  to  distinguish
candles,  books,  &c.,  on  the  table.


No.  14  Seance — August  6th,  1868.

Present  :  Mrs.  Jencken,  Mrs.  Hennings,  Mr.  Jencken,
Home,  and  mj^self.  Very  few  physical  manifestations.
Home's  hands  were  taken  possession  of,  and  were  strongly


84  Experiences  in  Spiritualism  [seance


agitated,^  he  took  the  accordion  and  played  with  consider-
able feeling,  his  hands  moving  and  touching  the  keys
independent  of  his  will,  during  this  he  went  into  a  trance,
got  up,  walked  to  the  piano  and  played  a  piece  of  music
with  considerable  execution  ;  he  then  sat  down  and  spoke
as  follows  :  (Dr.  Elliotson  speaking  through  him  the
greater  part  of  the  time).^

"  Henry,  do  you  know  that  your  father  met  Dr.  Elliot-
son  to-day,  and  for  the  first  time,  and  much  pleased  him  ;
they  are  charmed  with  each  other,  he  (Dr.  Elliotson)  is
very  enthusiastic.  Those  that  are  longer  away  from
earth  lose  their  intense  interest  in  it,  they  have  other
calls  upon  them.  He,  like  your  father,  sought  for  develop-
ment and  truth,  though  often  wrongly  guided  ;  he  did
not  look  up  to  the  great  sunhght,  but  doubted  and  erred.
These  two  have,  as  I  said,  met  to-day,  just  now,  according
to  your  mode  of  computing  time.  Dr.  ElUotson  is  so
delighted  to  meet  your  father.  '  Why  have  we  not  met
before  ?  '  he  says,  '  we  ought.'  '  That  was  your  fault.
Dr.  Elliotson  ;  not  mine.'  Then  he  turns  back,  shakes
your  father  by  the  hand  and  tells  him  he  is  so  glad  to
know  him.  In  the  state  that  we  live  in  there  are  no
restrictions  ;  men  are  drawn  together  by  mutual  sym-
pathies. Here  is  no  deception,  no  saying  '  I  am  glad  to
see  you,  my  dear  fellow,'  when  the  heart  does  not  mean
it.  Thoughts  are  seen  and  read,  and  those  suited  to
each  other  are  naturally  drawn  together.

"  Dr.  Elhotson  is  full  of  plans  how  to  operate  better,
he  wants  to  invent  some  sort  of  mechanism  to  act  with
the  brain,  some  more  powerful  battery,  he  wants  to
convince  the  whole  world  ;  he  is  very  enthusiastic.  There
are  some  Physicists  with  large  brains  who  strain  and  wear

1  I  have  frequently  seen  peoples  hands  taken  possession  of  and
agitated  during  seances  in  a  somewhat  similar  way.  The  same  thing  has
occurred  to  myself.  In  my  case,  my  hands  were  moved  about  some-
times violently,  sometimes  gently,  without  any  act  of  volition  on  my
part ;  and  yet  in  a  manner  not  entirely  beyond  my  control.  In  Mr.
Home's  case  the  muscles  became  perfectly  hard  and  rigid  ;  and  I  fancy
he  can  neither  direct  nor  prevent  the  movements.

"  The  following  account  of  what  occurred  during  Home's  trance  is
compiled  from  the  notes  taken  by  Mr.  Jencken.


NO.  14]  With  D.  D.  Home  85

themselves  out  with  over  work.  The  brain  becomes
weary,  loses  its  elasticity,  disease  sets  in,  preponderosis.
This  was  the  case  with  Elhotson,  but  it  was  particularly
painful  for  him,  as  every  morning  on  awaking  he  knew
what  he  was,  and  was  aware  of  the  state  into  which  he
had  fallen,  but  afterwards  his  brain  failed  him  and  could
not  act.  He  is  now  so  delighted, — delighted  in  studying
nature  ;  he  is  particularly  engaged  in  studying  how  illness
is  generated  by  mere  presence  without  actual  contact  ;
he  has  a  theory  also  of  winds  carrying  diseases,  and  has
found  that  the  south  wind  carries  disease  further  than
any  other  :  he  finds  that  the  winds  have  curative  powers,
and  that  the  geographical  position  of  winds  is  important,
the  currents  having  different  effects  at  different  altitudes.

"  We  can  see  all  physical  changes,  and  from  out  of
them,  the  moral  changes  resulting  from  them,  for  instance,
the  heat  and  abnormal  condition  of  the  atmosphere  will
in  a  short  time  produce  a  fermentation  in  the  human
mind  and  changes  will  follow.  It  affects  the  human  race
and  must  find  a  vent,  in  the  same  way  as  a  heated
condition  of  body  will  result  and  find  rehef  in  boils  and
eruptions."

Home  here  threw  himself  back  in  his  chair,  rubbed  his
hands  together  as  if  very  much  pleased,  and  said,  "  Now,  if
you  wish  to  ask  any  questions  I  am  ready  to  answer  them."

Question  (Henry  Jencken). — How  do  you  make  us  see
spirit  forms  ?

Answer. — At  times  we  make  passes  over  the  individual
to  cause  him  to  see  us,  sometimes  we  make  the  actual
resemblance  of  our  former  clothing,  and  of  what  we  were,
so  that  we  appear  exactly  as  we  were  known  to  you  on
earth  ;  sometimes  we  project  an  image  that  you  see,
sometimes  we  cause  it  to  be  produced  upon  your  brain,
sometimes  you  see  us  as  we  are,  with  a  cloudhke  aura  of
hght  around  us.

Question  (H.  J.). — Do  you  use  actual  garments  ?

Answer. — Purity  is  our  clothing.  We  have  no  need  of
garments  ;  but  are  enveloped  in  a  sort  of  aura,  or  cloud
of  hght.  Other  spirits,  more  impure  and  gross,  dwelling
nearer  earth,  have  need  of  garments.


86


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


Question  (H.  J.). — How  do  we  appear  to  you  ?
Answer. — Mostly  in  pure  light.
Question. — Can  you  see  our  light  ?

Ansiver. — We  can  see  all  hghts  ;  sunUght,  and  every
colour  that  it  is  composed  of.  We  see  the  most  beautiful
combinations  of  hght.  Everything  has  its  Mght.  We  see
the  progress  either  of  growth  or  decay  that  is  taking  place
in  everything.  The  table  that  you  are  sitting  at  was  once
growing.  We  could  see  every  particle  expanding  and
increasing  ;  now  it  is  decaying  ;  and  though  it  is  so
gradual  that  to  you  it  is  not  apparent,  yet  we  can  see
the  change  taking  place  in  every  particle  of  it.

Question. — In  moving  among  us,  do  we  present  an
obstacle  to  you  ? Do  you  avoid  us  ?

Answer. — We  do,  and  must  avoid  you.  For  your  ether
bodies  and  the  atmosphere  that  surrounds  you  is,  in
many  cases,  as  sohd  and  impenetrable  to  us  as  granite
is  to  you.  We  can  see  both  the  light-  of  your  spiritual
bodies  and  of  your  material  bodies.

Question. — Are  not  the  sun's  rays  composed  of  some-
thing more  than  light  ?

Answer. — Of  light  only,  and  an  elastic  wave  of  elec-
tricity that  precedes  the  light.

Question. — I  suppose  it  is  not  possible  for  you  to  visit
the  sun  ?

Answer. — Most  certainly  we  can. Why  should  we  not  ?
Question. — Does  it  take  time  for  you  to  travel  ?
Answer. — Yes.

Question. — I  suppose  you  move  in  the  same  ratio  as  light  ?

Answer. — We  can  travel  faster  than  light.

Question. — What  is  the  appearance  of  your  form  or  body  ?

Ansiver. — Exactly  hke  your  material  body,  only  slightly
smaller  in  every  respect.

Question. — How  do  you  produce  material  forms  ?

Ayiswer. — You  produce  them  with  and  through  us.

Question. — But  have  you  no  field  for  action  1

Ansiver. — You  cannot  understand  us  ;  the  material  is
to  us  as  it  were  spiritual.  Suppose  I  want  a  fruit,  I
cannot  create  it  by  thinking  of  it  ;  I  must  go  and  fetch
it  from  where  it  is  : so  if  I  want  an  idea  I  must  travel


NO.  14]


With  D.  D.  Home


87


into  higher  spheres,  and  seek  and  find  it  as  an  actual
created  thing.  Many  things  are  more  real  than  you  sup-
pose ;  thoughts,  are  they  not  almost  reahties  ?  Try  and
think  of  a  house  you  knew  long  ago  ;  you  will  invariably
enter  it  by  the  door  ;  you  go  in  by  the  door  in  your
imagination  ;  were  you  to  enter  by  the  windows  or  the
walls,  you  would  not  understand  or  recognize  it.  That
will  tell  you  that  there  is  something  of  material  reality
in  the  idea  of  a  house  in  your  mind.

Question. — Are  then  your  flowers  and  fruits  as  actual
and  real  to  you  as  those  growing  upon  earth  are  to  us  ?

Answer. — They  are  as  real  to  us  as  an  apple  or  pome-
granate is  to  you.

Question. — Have  you  animals  in  your  spheres  ?

Answer. — There  are  animals  that  give  pleasure  such  as
horses  and  dogs  ;  nearer  earth  are  baser  animals,  and
those  that  cause  pain  ;  some  saints  and  holy  men,  being
in  an  ecstatic  state  have  at  times  caught  ghmpses  of
what  is  going  on  near  them,  animals  and  men,  strange
and  curious  forms  all  mixed  up  together.  The  only  way
I  can  at  all  describe  it  to  you  is  to  look  at  a  drop  of
muddy  water  under  the  microscope,  and  observe  the
strange  forms  ;  you  will  see  the  tail  of  one  protruding
from  another,  and  so  on,  hence  the  old  ideas  of  satyrs  and
creatures  half  man,  half  beast,  hence  the  notion  of  devils
with  horns  and  tails,  and  of  a  material  hell.  Other  men
have  seen  higher  and  brighter  spheres.  All  this  is  but
the  imperfect  imagining  of  those  who  see  visions  :  as  in
Dante's  Frozen  Hell,  he  saw  the  frozen  zone  and  spiritual
forms  moving  about,  and  mixed  them  up  all  together.
Bodily  suffering  produces  mental  suffering  ;  and  mental
suffering  afflicts  the  body  ;  need  you  be  told  this  ?
Instance,  a  case  where  fright  may  produce  paralysis  ;  or
where  pain,  insensibility.

In  answer  to  some  question. — The  spirit  is  always  sane  ;
the  body  makes  insane.  We  can  see  the  spirit  Uke —
what  shall  I  say — well — hke,  to  use  a  very  homely  simile,
a  jack-in-the-box  ;  we  see  the  empty,  useless  casket,  and
the  spirit  hovering  above  it,  the  spirit  bounds  forth  as
soon  as  hberated  by  death — by  sleep.


88


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


In  answer  to  some  questian. — 8ome  spirits  are  removed  to
other  planets,  in  the  course  of  formation,  not  necessarily
as  a  punishment,  but  that  by  trial  they  may  develope
and  return  again  at  some  future  time  purified.  Spirits
very  often  go  voluntarily  to  other  planets,  until  they
can  fit  themselves  to  be  of  use  to  those  on  earth,  or
to  dwell  with  other  spirits  in  higher  spheres  ;  tell  this  to
Dan  when  he  awakes,  as  he  has  often  wondered  why  some
of  his  friends  have  not  returned  to  visit  him  ?

hi  answer  to  a  question. — Actual  substances  are  thrown
off  from  the  earth  and  get  entirely  beyond  its  attraction  ;
and  actual  substances  are  brought  from  the  sun  to  the
earth  by  means  of  the  rays  of  light,  substances  that
can  be  weighed — aye,  and  that  will  be  weighed  some
day.

In  answer  to  a  question  as  to  punishments. — -Why  and
how  are  you  punished  ?  You  punish  yourselves  if  you
have  broken  a  law  of  nature  ;  for  no  natural  law  can  be
broken  without  amends  being  made  for  its  violation.
Cut  a  vein  and  the  blood  flows,  because  you  have  violated
a  natural  law.

Question. — Do  you  like  making  manifestations  ?

Answer. — It  pleases  us  to  come  to  you,  and  to  make
manifestations.  We  get  so  charged  by  remaining  any  time
in  the  earth's  atmosphere,  that  it  is  a  positive  relief  to
make  sounds.  There  is  a  spirit  now  come  into  the  room  ;
he  is  what  we  call  naturally  charged.  (Quantities  of  raps
heard  on  the  table.)  Now  he  cannot  help  doing  that,
and  it  is  a  positive  pleasure  to  him.  (Speaking  to  me)
Elliotson  did  not  want  to  frighten  you  the  other  evening
at  your  house  ;  he  does  not  know  yet  how  to  manage
manifestations,  hence  the  noise  he  made  the  other  night.
He  wanted  to  see  Daniel  and  you  too,  but  he  did  not
intend  to  frighten  either  of  yovi.-^

Question (H.  J.). — As  to  a  law  of  predestination  1

Ansiver. — Yes,  there  is  a  law  of  predestination  which
is  quite  true,  only  you  could  not  understand  it.

Question. — Infinite  possibility  gives  freedom  of  action  ?

^  Tliis  sentence  has  reference  to  certain  things  that  occurred  at  No.  5,
Buckingham  Gate — mentioned  in  pp.  77,  78.


NO.  14]


With  D.  D.  Home


89


Ansiver. — Yes,  infinite  possibility,  harmonizing  with  pre-
destination is  the  law.  Oh,  I  wish  so  much  some  spirits
from  other  planets  could  come  to  you,  but  that  is  very
rarely  allowed.  When  Malle  (Mrs.  Jencken's  servant)
passed  away,  a  spirit  from  another  planet  passed  by  the
open  window,  that  was  all,  and  yet  the  room  was  filled  with
perfume  for  days  ;  if  you  had  thought  of  it,  and  had  gone
out  into  the  garden,  you  would  have  found  the  perfume
stronger  there  than  in  the  room.

"  Henry,  your  father  was  inspired  when  he  wrote  his
works,  remember  this  (grasping  H.  Jencken's  hand).
Act !  Do  something !  it  is  so  very  glorious  to  assist  in
the  search  for  truth.  There  are  so  many  stubborn  men
to  be  convinced.  It  is  your  duty  to  say  that  which  you
know  to  be  true,  to  utter  it.  (Taking  my  hand)  Oh,
my  lord,  do  something  !  Act  !  Aid  the  many  beings  yet
in  darkness.  There  is  the  truth,  it  is  only  hid,  it  is
there  nevertheless  shining  forth  in  all  its  splendour."

Dr.  Elliotson,  through  Mr.  Home,  now  spoke  at  some
length  on  the  subject  of  mental  and  bodily  disease  and
imperfections,  insanity  and  crime.  He  said,  "  It's  very
wrong  to  allow  persons  to  marry  who  are  not  properly
fitted  to  perpetuate  their  race.  By  allowing  perfect
freedom  of  marriage,  crime  and  disease  become  perpetuated,
and  the  lower  and  imperfect  form  becomes  too  permanent.
Such  as  are  imperfect  should  be  put  aside,  cared  for,
pitied,  but  not  allowed  to  perpetuate  by  marriage.  Angels
standing  by  at  very  many  weddings,  where  all  is  rejoicing,
weep  and  mourn — for  they  see  the  poor  form  that  must
go  out  and  suffer, — the  outcast,  the  criminal,  and  the
murderer.  But,  when  the  soul  is  released,  then  a  shout  of
joy  goes  up  to  heaven  that  a  spirit  has  been  set  free."
He  then  addressed  us  about  the  universal  justice  of  God,
saying,  "  You  hold  up  one  book,  the  Bible,  and  you  say
that  all  those  who  differ  from  you  shall  be  damned,  yet
other  nations  have  other  books  and  scrolls,  and  in  their
turn  say  that  all  those  who  believe  not  in  them,  must
equally  be  damned.  There  is  no  damnation  in  that  sense — •
man  is  his  own  damnation  ;  it  is  the  evil  that  lies  in  the
little troubled  heart of ambitious man, whose acts  are


90


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


after  all  but  as  the  gurglings  from  the  neck  of  a  bottle,
signifying  naught."

He  then  spoke  of  the  great  mistake  parents  make  in
teaching  their  children  religion  without  appeaUng  to  their
reasoning  powers,  and  giving  them  something  they  could
hold  on  to.  "  Therefore  is  it  that  men  are  driven  to
take  refuge  in  a  cold  barren  philosophy.  I  doubted  and
told  myself  that  all  was  not  so,  that  there  was  no
future — no  God,  then  there  came  this  (rapping  with  his
fingers  on  the  table,  and  being  answered  by  some  spirit  on
the  other  side  of  the  table),  one,  two,  three  four,  nothing
more — and  all  was  changed,  and  the  scales  fell  from
my  eyes,  and  the  broad  light  of  immortality  shone  upon
me.  I  felt  that  I  was  immortal  ;  by  a  few  gentle  raps
only  was  all  my  scepticism  dispelled."  Towards  the
close  of  this  sentence  "Home  got  greatly  excited.
Suddenl}^  throwing  his  hand  up  to  his  forehead  he  said,
"  Oh,  Dannie  !  "  in  quite  a  different  tone  of  voioe,
and  fell  back  in  his  chair  ;  he  presently  added,  "  Do  not
be  frightened,  Dan  will  be  all  right  presently,  but  we
have  made  too  much  use  of  him  ;  take  his  hands  but
do  not  touch  his  feet,  and  let  him  stretch  himself  out."
We  held  his  hands  and  he  became  perfectly  rigid  all  over,
stretching  his  legs  out  to  their  full  length.  After  a
minute  he  fell  back  in  his  chair,  then  started  up  and
taking  Mrs.  Hennings'  hands  said  (Dr.  Elhotson  speaking
through  him),  "  They  tell  me  I  have  been  too  violent  with
Dan,  but  my  dear  lady,  I  must  just  tell  you  this.  You  re-
member many  many  years  ago  you  brought  me  a  little
girl,  a  clairvoyant,  and  I  was  not  good,  and  would  not
be  satisfied  with  the  tests.  I  was  influenced  by  the
other  two  girls  ;  they  were  very  jealous.  You  are  not  angry
now,  are  you  ?  You  know  I  meant  no  harm.  I  mention
this  to  satisfy  you  of  my  identity.  You  have  had  many
such  tests and  are  now  satisfied."

'  This  scene  occurred  some  30  years  ago  at  Dr.  Elliotson's  studio,
where  Mrs.  Hennings  attended  with  a  remarkable  clairvoyant  named
Ellen  Dawson.  Dr.  Elliotson  behaved  very  abruptly  on  this  occasion,
and  pmietured  and  injured  the  child,  whilst  in  the  mesmeric  state  ;  no
one  present  knew  of  this  mcident,  and  it  had  even  escaped  Mrs.  Hen-
ning's  memory  until  reminded  of  it.


NO.  15]


With  D.  D.  Home


91


After  this,  Home  threw  himself  back  in  his  cliair  and
awoke,  he  said,  "  I  am  wide  awake,  but  I  cannot  move  at
all."  In  a  few  minutes  he  recovered,  and  said  that  he  was
quite  well  ;  that  he  did  not  know  what  he  had  been
doing ;  but  that  he  felt  as  though  he  had  been  very
happy.


No.  15  Seance — 5,  Buckinghmn  Gate,  August,  1868.

My  dear  Father, — While  staying  at  Dunraven  the  other
day  I  saw  announced  in  the  paper  the  death  of  Adah
Menken,  the  American  actress  with  whom  both  Home  and
I  were  shghtly  acquainted.  On  the  following  morning  I
got  a  letter  from  Home,  saying  that  she  had  been  to
visit  him,  that  she  appeared  very  restless,  and  that  she
was  very  anxious  to  come  when  he  and  I  were  together.
On  returning  to  London,  Home,  at  my  request,  came  to
stay  at  No.  5.  All  the  evening  he  complained  of  being-
very  nervous  and  in  an  unpleasant  state,  which  he
attributed  a  great  deal  to  her  influence.  I  felt  just  the
same,  but  put  it  down  to  having  been  out  at  two  fires
and  not  home  till  six  o'clock  the  previous  morning.
Almost  immediately  after  we  had  gone  to  bed  and  put
the  hghts  out,  we  both  heard  music  much  the  same  as  at
Norwood  but  more  powerful  and  distinct.  Home  said  that
the  music  formed  words  ;  that,  in  fact,  it  was  a  voice
speaking  and  not  instrumental  music.  I  could  hear  nothing
but  the  chords  hke  an  organ  or  harmonium  played  at  a
distance.  Home  became  quite  excited  because  I  could  not
distinguish  the  words,  thinking  that  if  I  could  not  hear
them,  it  must  have  been  his  imagination.  He  asked  the
spirits  if  possible  to  make  the  words  sufficiently  clear  for
me  also  to  hear  them.  They  said  "  Yes  "  (by  raps)  ;
and  the  music  became  louder  and  louder  until  I  dis-
tinctly heard  the  words,  "  Hallelujah,  praise  the  Lord  ;
praise  the  Lord  God  Almight3^"  It  was  no  imagination,
or  the  result  of  anxiety  on  my  part  to  hear  the  same  as
Home  did.  Every  now  and  then  I  could  not  distinguish
words,  although  he  said  he  could  ; but  I  repeatedly  heard


92


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


the  words  above  mentioned  as  plainly  as  possible.  I  cannot
in  the  least  explain  to  you  how  the  voice  articulated  ;
the  words  were  not  separately  spoken,  neither  did  it
resemble  a  human  voice.  The  sound  was  slightly  reedy
and  metallic,  not  very  unhke  the  Vox  humana  on  an
organ.  If  you  can  imagine  an  organ  pipe  of  some  rather
reedy  stop  speaking  to  you,  it  will  be  as  near  it  as
anything  I  can  describe.  Home  said  he  heard  the  words,
"  Adah  Isaaks  Menken "  pronounced ;  I  did  not.  The
music  or  voice  gradually  died  away.  We  asked  if  it  was
Menken's  voice,  and  they  said  not  hers  alone.  There
were  loud  raps  at  different  times  upon  the  floor  and  walls,
and  some  article  of  furniture  was  moved :  I  heard  the
movement,  but  could  not  see  what  it  was.

The  room  was  dark,  the  bhnd  being  nearly  down  over
the  window.  We  both  saw  as  it  were  a  luminous  claud
about  the  middle  of  the  room  over  the  table,  and  another
luminous  cloud-like  body  floating  in  the  air.  Occasionally,
I  saw  a  luminous  form  standing  at  the  foot  of  Home's
bed  which  he  did  not  see,  and  he  at  one  time  saw  a
similar  appearance  at  the  foot  of  mine  which  I  failed  to
perceive  ;  we  distinctly  heard  the  rustUng  of  a  silk  dress
moving  about  the  room.  Home  and  I  had  called  on
Menken  at  her  hotel  one  day  last  year,  and  she  then  had
on  a  very  heavy  silk  dress,  it  appeared  as  though  she
caused  the  rustling  of  this  dress  to  be  heard  by  us.  At
one  time  I  heard  some  one  moving,  and  looking  over  on
towards  Home's  bed,  I  saw  her  quite  plain  (as  did  also
Home)  as  a  white  slightly  luminous  body,  I  could  clearly
see  the  folds  of  the  drapery.  In  passing  between  him  and
the  window  Home  said  she  obstructed  the  light.  She
moved  up  from  near  the  foot  of  his  bed  where  I  first
saw  her,  making  as  loud  a  rusthng  noise  as  a  living
woman  in  a  heavy  silk  dress  would  do,  to  the  head  of
his  bed,  bent  over,  put  her  hands  upon  his  head,  and
disappeared.

Presently  Home  said  that  she  was  slightly  taking
possession  of  him,  and  I  heard  his  hands  moving  about
on  the  bed  clothes  in  the  curious  way  that  they  do  under
those  circumstances. He  then  sat  up  in  bed  involuntarily.


KO.  15]


With  D.  D.  Home


93


and  said  she  was  taking  possession  of  hira,  and  asked
me  not  to  be  frightened  at  anything  he  might  do.
I  felt  rather  nervous  at  this  ;  and  asked  him,  if
possible,  to  tell  me  before  he  did  anything.  He  said
nothing,  but  lay  down  in  bed  again.  In  about  a  minute,
he  said  in  quite  an  altered  voice,  "  I  am  coming  over  to
you  now,"  and  I  saw  him  get  out  of  bed.  I  did  not  feel
sure  whether  he  was  asleep  or  awake,  and  I  said,  "  Can
you  see  your  way  ?  "  He  said,  "  Ah,  I  want  no  hght  to
guide  my  steps."  I  then  perceived  that  he  was  in  a
trance,  and  that  Menken  was  speaking  through  him.  He
walked  slowly  over  to  my  bed,  knelt  down  beside  it,
took  both  my  hands  in  his,  and  began  speaking.

I  shall  never  forget  the  awfully  thrilhng  way  in  which
she  spoke  ;  the  desolation  of  the  picture  she  drew  of  her
feeUngs  at  first.  The  words  I  do  not  recollect — the  effect
of  them  I  shall  always  remember.  She  went  on  to  speak
of  the  wonderful  mercy  and  goodness  of  God  ;  of  the
hopeful  state  she  was  then  in  ;  of  the  very  little  we  know
of  the  next  world,  sapng  that  she  had  thought  she  knew
something  of  it.  She  spoke  a  great  deal  about  Home,  of
his  character,  &c.,_  &c.,  and  a  good  deal  about  herself,
and  mentioned  a  curious  fact.  She  said  that  at  the  time
Home  and  I  called  upon  her  together,  she  felt  then  what
she  was.  "  Yes,"  she  said,  "  what  was  I  but  an  animal  ?
Yet  I  felt  and  knew  that  I  ought  to  aspire  to  higher
things,  and  I  longed  sometimes  for  it."  It  appears  as  if  our
having  called  together  upon  her,  had  some  curious  effect,
as  she  said  she  could  not  well  say  what  she  wanted,  till
we  were  together  again.  She  spoke  of  the  intense  desire
of  the  spirit  sometimes  to  communicate  with,  and  do
good  to,  those  on  earth.  She  spoke  in  such  an  humble
yet  happy  manner,  of  her  having  been  permitted  to  come
that  night  into  a  house  where  so  many  pure  and  holy
beings  had  been.  She  spoke  with  the  greatest  pleasure
of  having  been  allowed  to  go  into  my  mother's  boudoir,
and  said  that  her  greatest  happiness,  since  she  passed
away,  had  been  that  evening — in  being  permitted  to  make
her  voice  audible  to  iis  in  praising  God.  She  went  on  to
say,  how  much  she  wished  to  be  sometimes  near  me  and


94


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


near  Home  to  watch  over  us  ;  and  assured  me  again
and  again  that  she  would  do  me  no  harm  or  hurt.  She
then  kissed  my  hand  and  said,  "  I  must  go  now  ;  I
must  not  make  too  much  use  of  Dan."  Home  then  got
up  and  walked  slowly  away,  turning  round  twice,  and
raising  his  hands  above  his  head  in  an  attitude  of  prayer
or  of  blessing.  As  he  went  away  from  me,  his  clothes
became  slightly  luminous.

He  got  into  bed  and  I  could  hear  him  breathing
regularly  as  in  ordinary  sleep  ;  in  about  five  minutes  he
awoke  and  asked  me  if  I  was  asleep,  he  said  he  had  been
asleep  and  wanted  to  know  whether  we  had  been  hearing
beautiful  music,  or  whether  we  had  been  dreaming.  I
told  him  nothing  about  his  having  been  in  a  trance
untd  next  day.  Home  said  he  felt  remarkably  happy  and
calm, — probably  some  reflection  of  the  more  calm  and
soothed  condition  of  Menken  when  she  left  ns.  I  was  in
a  queer  state,  my  fingers  and  feet  tingled  as  if  I  had
pins  and  needles.  Every  time  I  dropped  off  to  sleep  I
heard,  or  fancied  I  heard,  the  same  strains  of  music.
However  I  slept  very  soundly.

Now  all  this  is  to  me  far  more  wonderful  than  what
took  place  at  Norwood.  I  was,  to  all  intents  and  pur-
poses, actually  conversing  ^vith  the  dead ;  listening,
talking,  answering,  and  receiving  answers  from  Menken.
Home's  individuality  was  quite  gone  :  he  spoke  as  Menken,
and  we  both  spoke  of  him  as  a  third  person  at  a  distance
from  us.  Menken  said  something  (what  I  cannot  remember)
about  her  having  been  a  Jewess,  and  that  events  were
tending  gradually  towards  a  greater  unity  of  different
creeds.


No.  16  Seance — Homhurg,  August,  1868.

At  Cologne  we  slept  in  a  double-bedded  room.  As
Home  was  going  to  sleep,  he  said,  "  How  odd."  I  asked
him  what  he  meant  ;  and  he  said  he  had  heard  Menken's
voice  say,  "  That  is  right,  Dan,"  in  reference  to  an
observation  he  had  just  made  to  me. She  also  told  him


NO.  16]


With  D.  D.  Home


95


that  she  was  with  us  that  morning  when  we  were  talking
about  the  probabihty  of  dogs  being  able  to  understand
each  other  ;  that  they  could  communicate  with  each
other  by  magnetism,  by  touch,  and  through  the  eye  ;
but  not  at  all  by  sound.  She  added  that  she  was  going
with  us.  and  that  we  should  hear  her  voice.

At  Frankfort,  Home  came  into  my  room  in  the  morn-
ing ;  and  on  my  asking  him  some  question  as  to  how  he
had  passed  the  night,  said  that  after  he  had  gone  to
bed  he  heard  Menken's  voice  say  that  his  sheets  were
damp,  that  he  had  found  that  they  were  so,  and  had
slept  in  a  railway  rug.

On  Thursday  night,  at  Homburg,  we  both  heard  strange
raps  about  the  room.  I  then  felt  and  heard  Uttle  gentle
taps  upon  the  foot  of  my  bed,  by  which  I  recognized
the  presence  of  my  mother.  I  asked  if  it  was  so,  and
was  answered  "  Yes."  I  said  to  Home  that  I  was  glad
my  mother  was  there,  because  I  thought  that  she  had
not  been  near  me  for  some  time.  This  message  came  :
"  Yoii  must  at  times  he  aUoived  foreign  influences ;  hut
I  do  not  leave  you — /  love  yoxi  too  much  for  that.'''  We
were  taUdng  about  this  sentence  ;  and  Home  was  saying
it  was  unselfishness  that  induced  my  mother  to  give  way
to  other  spirits  sometimes,  who  were  very  anxious  to
communicate,  w^hen  this  message  was  given  :  "  The  love
of  our  great  Creator  is  unselfish.''  We  then  began  specu-
lating as  to  whether  there  was  a  continual  contest  going
on  in  the  next  world  between  good  and  bad,  and  I  was
answered  by  a  message  sajdng  that  "  there  is  a  contest
the  same  as  on  earth.''  I  made  some  remark  that  on
earth  it  was  a  great  deal  a  matter  of  physical  force,
and  that  a  good  weak  man  could  not  turn  a  bad  strong
one  out  of  his  house,  when  this  message  was  given  :
"  Purity,  when  freed  from  the  mortal,  is  strongest,  as  truth
overcomes  error."  Home  presently  said,  "  There  is  a
spirit  standing  in  the  corner,  can  you  not  see  it  ?  I
can  see  it  as  a  faint  light  increasing  and  decreasing  in
brightness."  I  looked,  but  could  not  make  it  out  ;  but
I  saw  a  faint  light  on  the  other  side  of  the  room,  and
called Home's attention to it. As we looked in  that


96


Experiences  in  S'lnritualitsm


[seance


direction,  the  light  in  the  corner  shone  out  suddenly,
like  a  flash  of  lightning.  It  was  an  instantaneous  per-
fectly bright  flash  of  light,  lasting  perhaps  nearly  a
second.


No.  17.  Seance.

On  the  30th  of  August  we  had  a  seance  at  Mrs.  Hamil-
ton's. Present  :  Mr.  Home,  myself,  Mrs.  Hamilton,  her
daughter,  Lady  Fairfax,  and  Mrs.  Gregory.

Very  soon  after  sitting  down,  a  strong  influence  became
apparent,  and  raps  were  heard  vipon  the  table.  My
hands  were  a  good  deal  agitated  ;  I  felt  the  cold  air
very  plainly.  Home's  hands  were  taken  possession  of,
and  he  was  caused  to  get  up.  He  went  behind  Mrs.
Hamilton  and  began  tapping  her  very  rapidly  with  both
hands  on  the  ears  and  back  ;  while  doing  so,  he  went
into  a  trance.  He  continued  to  tap  her  ears  and  to
make  passes  over  her.  He  then  walked  up  and  down  the
room,  leaning  his  head  upon  his  hand  as  though  thinking
deeply,  and  making  gestures  quite  strange  to  him  in  his
natural  state.  He  went  behind  Lady  Fairfax,  stooped
down,  and  holding  her  shoulders  with  both  hands  pressed
his  head  against  her  back.  He  then  stood  behind  her,
pressed  his  hand  to  his  side  on  the  region  of  the  liver,
and  looked  as  though  he  was  suffering  great  pain  or
inconvenience  ;  he  then  opened  the  door  and  went  into
the  other  room.  From  there  he  said,  "  Mary  (Miss
Hamilton)  and  Adare,  come  in  here."  We  went  in  and
foxmd  Home  on  the  sofa,  leaning  his  head  upon  his
hand.  He  said,  "  Adare,  take  a  pencil  and  paper."  I
did  so,  and  wrote  down  what  he  said.  Home  said,
"  Mary,  the  drum  of  your  mother's  ear  is  surrounded  by
wax  ;  the  nerve  is  not  paralyzed.  Take  some  plain
sweet  oil  in  a  phial,  place  it  in  hot  water  until  the  oil
is  warm,  and  drop  one  drop  into  the  ear  every  night.
After  some  time  a  discharge  will  take  place,  that  is,  the
wax  will  become  softened  and  come  away.  It  is  untrue
that  the  nerve  is  paralyzed  ;  there  is  nothing  wrong
with  that, or  it  would  have  been  ciired  at  once.  You


NO.  17]


With  D.  D.  Home


97


may  remember  once  that  the  hearing  came  back  ;  that
was  because  the  wax  broke  away  shghtly.  Lady  Fairfax
has  an  over  secretion  of  bile — the  hver  is  inactive  ;  this
causes  irritation  of  the  nerves,  great  loss  of  appetite — in
fact,  a  complete  loathing  of  food.  Take  in  the  morning,
every  other  day,  one  drop  of  tincture  of  digitahs."  Home
then  came  to  my  chair,  sat  down  beside  me,  and  pressed
me  close  against  him.  He  sat  down  again  upon  the
sofa,  and  said,  "  You  must  prepare  some  little  powders
composed  of  as  much  cayenne  pepper  as  will  he  upon
the  point  of  a  penknife,  the  same  quantity  of  ipeca-
cuanha, and  twice  that  quantity  of  carbonate  of  soda  :
take  it  immediately  after  meals.  You  could  have  it
made  up  into  pills  if  you  like,  but  the  powders  are  best.
You  suffer  from  indigestion — the  bile  is  faulty  ;  that
causes  nervous  irritability,  which  extends  to  the  brain,
and  causes  sleeplessness  and  other  results.  You  should
avoid  heavy  suppers  and  strong  drink  late  at  night  ;
but  this,  of  course,  must  be  left  to  yoiir  own  good
sense.  We  have  no  remedy  for  that  :  lead  a  plain
natural  life."

Home  then  got  up,  told  us  to  go  back  to  the  other
room,  and  not  to  tell  him  when  he  awoke  what  he  had
been  doing.  We  sat  down  again,  and  he  placed  himself
in  exactly  the  same  position  behind  Mrs.  Hamilton  as
he  had  occupied  when  he  became  entranced.  He  then
awoke  and  said,  "Is  it  not  funny,  all  the  power  has
left  my  hands !  "  and  sat  down.  We  then  had  some
physical  manifestations  ;  the  table  was  moved,  tilted,
and  raised  oli  the  ground  ;  my  chair  was  a  httle  moved,
as  was  also  Home's.  "  Good  night "  was  then  said.
While  he  was  in  the  trance,  some  one  asked  whether  he
could  see.  I  said  "  No  "'  ;  but,  as  if  to  prove  he  did  not
use  his  eyes,  he  took  out  his  handkerchief  and  bhnd-
folded  himself,  and  did  not  remove  it  until  just  before  he
awoke. He  was  also  elongated  while  in  the  trance.

Mrs.  Hamilton  has  been  deaf  for  some  time  ;  the
doctors  have  declared  that  the  nerve  is  injured.  Mrs.
Hamilton  told  me  that  Mrs.  Weldon,  of  London,  being
in  a  clairvoyant  state, told  her  that  her  deafness  was

G


98


Experiences  in  Sfiritualism


[seance


owing  to  a  secretion  of  wax,  and  recommended  oil.  Lady
Fairfax  is  very  unwell,  and  I  had  been  suffering  from
sleeplessness,  unpleasant  dreams,  and  nervous  uncom-
fortable nights.


No.  18  Seance — Homhurg,  Monday,  Sejitemher  1th,  1868.^

Last  Tuesday,  the  1st,  we  had  a  seance  at  Mrs.  Hamil-
ton's, but  nothing  whatever  occurred.  Home  was  not
well.  On  Wednesday  morning  Home  picked  up  a  won-
derful specimen  of  the  death's-head  moth,  and  brought
it  home,  put  it  in  a  drawer  and  thought  nothing  more
about  it.  That  night  I  suddenly  awoke,  Home  said  to
me,  "  A  very  curious  thing  has  just  occurred.  I  was  fast
asleep,  and  so  were  you,  all  at  once  I  turned  round,  awoke,
and  saw  a  spirit — a  man,  standing  by  my  bedside.  He  said
'  You  are  on  no  account  to  part  with  that  death's-head  moth,
it  is  your  good  genius,  you  are  to  give  him  two  louis
to-morrow,  and  he  will  play  with  them  according  to  his
impressions  at  a  quarter-past  twelve,  and  with  the  money
he  wins  you  will  get  a  medallion  to  put  the  moth  in.
That  window  must  be  shut.'  The  spirit  also  said  some-
thing to  me  about  Mrs.  Lyon,  but  I  cannot  remember
what.  When  the  spirit  had  finished  speaking,  he  moved
a  step  towards  your  bed,  stretched  out  his  hand,  and
immediately  you  awoke."  Home  having  a  bad  cold  on
his  chest,  I  got  up  and  shut  the  window.  (The  night
before  this — Home  being  much  oppressed  by  difficulty
of  breathing — a  spirit  told  him  through  the  alphabet,
to  lie  on  his  right  side,  he  did  so,  and  found  relief.)
Neither  of  us  could  go  to  sleep  after  this,  and  after  some
time  I  said  "  I  wish  as  the  spirit  awoke  us,  that  he
would  send  us  to  sleep  again."  Soon  after  I  felt  a  most
curious influence, my eyes kept shutting  involuntarily,

^  The  date  of  this  heading  refers  to  the  date  on  which  the  record
was  made,  not  to  the  date  of  the  seance.  This  will  be  found  to  be
the  case  with  many  other  of  the  headings,  and  attention  is  called  to  the
point  because  in  one  instance  (see  below,  p.  151)  the  system  followed
has  led  to  some  confusion  as  to  the  time  and  place  at  which  an  im-
portant seance  was  held.  [Ed.]


NO.  18]


With  D.  D.  Home


99


and  squeezing  themselves  together  so  tightly  that  I  could
not  open  them.  My  right  leg  and  arms  became  occasion-
ally quite  rigid  ;  the  sensation  was  not  the  least  uncom-
fortable. I  was  quite  conscious  and  heard  Home  go  to
sleep,  but  could  not  sleep  myself  for  a  long  time.


On  Thursday,  the  3rd,  I  had  fever,  jjalpitation  of  the
heart,  and  felt  very  ill.  Soon  after  we  had  gone  to
bed,  we  heard  raps,  and  a  spirit  said,  "  You  have  both
caught  cold  in  that  gambling  room,  sitting  at  the  table  in
the  large  room  near  the  door,  there  is  a  strong  current  of
cold  air  there.'"  I  asked  if  it  had  not  something  to  do
with  Count  Ronicker,  they  said,  "  Yes,  his  influence  is
too  strong,  let  hiin  make  a  few  passes  over  you  and  you
ivill  conquer  it.''  I  asked,  should  he  mesmerise  me  and
send  me  to  sleep,  they  said,  "  No."  They  then  said,
"  We  have  already  calmed  you,"  which  was  the  case.
Home  then  went  into  a  trance  ;  he  got  up  and  came
over  to  me  and  sat  down  on  my  bed ;  he  sat  for  some
httle  time  holding  one  of  my  hands  in  his  and  pressing
the  other  against  my  heart.  I  felt  very  calm  and  quiet  ;
he  then  joined  his  hands  in  prayer  and  began  praying,
but  I  could  not  hear  the  words.  I  said,  more  to  myself
than  him,  "  I  will  unite  my  prayer  to  yours."  He  took
my  two  hands,  joined  them  within  his  and  we  prayed
together ;  something  affected  me  so  much  that  I  burst
out  crying,  and  the  tears  ran  down  my  cheeks.  After
a  minute  or  two,  he  passed  his  hand  across  my  throat,
and  stopped  the  crying  immediately  ;  he  than  made
passes  over  my  head  and  down  my  side,  took  my  hand
and  kissed  it,  kissed  my  forehead  and  said,  "  Good
night  ;  sleep,  sleep — when  you  fall  asleep  you  will  not
awake."  He  then  got  quietly  into  bed  again  ;  in  about
half  a  minute  the  clock  (a  very  noisy  disagreeable  one)
struck  eleven.  He  got  out  of  bed  and  went  into  the
next  room  where  he  awoke  and  nearly  fell  down ;  he
was  so  much  astonished  at  finding  himself  standing
opposite  the  clock. The  clock  stopped  at  that  moment.


100


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


though  I  do  not  believe  he  had  touched  it  ;  in  fact  he
could  not  have  reached  it  without  getting  on  a  chair.
In  a  short  time  I  fell  into  a  sound  sleep.


The  next  morning  Home  gave  me  two  louis  to  play  for
a  medalhon  for  the  moth  ;  I  went  in  at  a  quarter-past
twelve  and  put  one  on  red — red  won  ;  I  then  put  the
other  also  on  red — red  won  again  ;  making  therefore
six  louis.  Something  seemed  to  say  to  me  six  is  enough,
and  I  put  out  my  hand  to  the  rake  to  take  the  money  ;
however,  when  I  had  my  hand  almost  on  the  rake,
I  felt  a  disinclination  to  take  it.  I  allowed  the  money  to
remain  on  red,  and  so  lost.  I  left  the  table  to  look  for
Home  to  tell  him  the  money  was  gone  ;  when  half  way
down  the  corridor  I  involuntarily  stopped,  turned  round,
and  walked  back  again.  Something  seemed  to  say,  you
must  use  two  louis  of  your  own,  and  take  them  back
afterwards.  I  did  so,  and  won  a  small  sum.  I  took
back  my  two  louis  and  handed  the  remainder  to  Home.


No.  19  Seance.

On  Friday,  the  4th  [September,  1868],  we  had  some
raps  in  the  room,  and  a  spirit  said,  "  Are  you  good  ?  "
We  both  thought,  but  could  not  discover  that  we  had
done  anything  particularly  wrong  that  day.  I  asked,
"  Is  the  question  for  me  1  "  No  answer.  "  Or  for  Dan  ?  "
No  answer.  "  Or  for  both  ?  "  No  answer.  I  said,  "  Is
it  not  for  me  ?  "  Two  raps  came,  meaning  "  Partly,"  or
"Perhaps."  After  a  pause,  they  said,  "We  do  not  wish
to  reproach  you,  but  at  the  close  of  the  day  it  is  always
well  to  review  all  that  you  have  dmie,  so  as  to  be  able  to
avoid  rep)eating  the  same  things,  if  wrong,  another  day."
The  same  night  we  both  saw  a  luminous  hand  waving  in
the  air  at  the  foot  of  Home's  bed.


On  Saturday,  the  5th  [September,  1868],  Home  was  not
well, and  a  certain  circumstance  annoyed  him. In  the


NO.  19]


With  D.  D.  Home


101


evening,  I  took  him  up  rather  sharply  about  it  ;  telling
him  it  was  absurd  letting  liis  imagination  run  wild,  and
supposing  all  sorts  of  nonsense.  At  night  Home  was
very  ill  ;  it  was  about  eleven  o'clock,  I  was  undi'essing,
he  was  in  bed.  Count  Ronicker  came  in  and  sat  down.
Home  became  cataleptic  or  something  having  that  appear-
ance ;  his  fingers  were  turned  back,  his  arms  and  his  neck
twisted  round,  and  his  whole  body  became  as  rigid  as
iron — ^for  about  five  minutes  he  did  not  appear  to  breathe.
Count  Ronicker  magnetized  him,  and  did  him  a  great
deal  of  good.  Home  completely  forgot  English,  and  said
he  could  only  speak  Russian  to  the  Count.  He  spoke
about  me,  but  I  do  not  know  what  he  said.

After  a  time  he  got  better,  and  went  into  a  trance
and  spoke  Enghsh  ;  but  so  low  that  I  could  scarcely
hear.  I  asked  him  to  speak  louder,  he  said,  "  We  cannot
— oh,  do  try  to  hear,  we  cannot  keep  Dan  long  in
a  trance  as  we  would  wish,  he  is  so  ill."  He  said,  "  When
Dan  told  you  to-day  that  he  felt  a  disagreeable  influence,
as  it  were,  trying  to  separate  you,  he  did  not  tell  you
all ;  he  ought  to  have  done  so  ;  you  were  too  sharp
with  him  ;  you  were  too  hard  upon  him  also  about
playing  ;  remember  he  is  very  differently  situated  to  you  ;
remember  always  that  his  nature  is  very  sensitive,  very
different  from  yours.  You  must  arrange  your  worldly
affairs  together."  He  then  sat  up  in  bed,  and  began  to
talk  in  French,  still  in  a  trance  ;  he  smiled  and  beckoned
to  some  one  at  the  other  side  of  the  room.  "  Ah,"  he
said,  "  there  is  such  a  sweet  gentle  spirit  here  ;  1  will
tell  you  her  name  directly."  He  described  her,  and  said
she  had  most  beautiful  eyes  ;  that  when  she  smiled,  she
smiled  with  her  eyes  also.  He  described  the  colour  of
her  hair,  eyes,  &c.,  minutely.  "  There  is  a  httle  child
with  her — ah,  there  are  two  !  One  passed  away  at  its
birth  ;  the  other  is  older."  He  than  shuddered  and
said,  "  There  is  a  spirit  here  who  committed  suicide.
Oh!"  he  said,  and  began  making  passes  before  him,
and  drawing  himself  back  as  i£  in  horror.  Soon  he  went
on  in  French,  and  said,  "  Daniel  is  very  ill  :  his  brain
is  very  bad  ; the  influence  about  him  is  mixed  to-night.


102


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


At  four  in  the  afternoon  lie  began  to  be  ill,  and  his
friend  did  not  talk  to  him  or  understand  it,  and  after-
wards his  friend  was  a  little  cold  and  hard  upon  him  ;
he  has  also  undergone  a  very  great  trial  lately,  we  cannot
cure  him  of  the  effects  at  once.  We  tell  you  that  you
may  understand  the  state  he  is  in."  He  then  lay  down,
and  said  to  the  Count,  "  It  was  Sophy  who  made  the
raps  on  the  wall  of  your  room  last  night.  She  is  your
guardian  spirit,  and  is  always  about  you  and  caring
for  you."  The  Count  asked  "  Which  Sophy  ?  "  He  said,
"  Both  the  younger  and  the  elder."  After  a  minute  he
sat  up  again,  turned  to  the  Count,  and  said,  "  Where
then  was  your  faith  when  you  prayed  to  God  on  your
knees  for  death  ?  Where  was  your  faith  ? — you  should
then  rather  have  wished  to  live."  He  talked  for  some
little  time  in  French  to  the  Count,  and  told  him  some
facts  which  he  (the  Count)  swore  positively  to  me  could
be  known  only  to  himself  and  the  spirit  that  Home  had
been  describing  ;  he  then  said,  "  When  Daniel  awakes  we
will  try  and  make  some  manifestations  for  you  ;  but
Daniel  is  so  ill  we  cannot  do  much.  You  will  take  a
chair  ;  but  not  too  near  Daniel,  your  influence  is  too
strong.  Adare  will  put  the  candle  out."  After  he  awoke
I  put  the  candle  out,  and  we  heard  distinct  raps  on  the
floor,  walls,  door,  &c.,  and  the  Count  felt  his  head  touched.
The  Count  then  went  away.  Soon  after  he  had  gone,
the  same  spirit  that  had  told  us  the  night  before  to
review  our  actions  said,  through  the  alphabet,  "  How
about' to-day  ? Soon  after,  he  said,  Are  you  happy?'"
I  then  heard  that  Home  was  getting  some  message ;
but  I  do  not  know  what  it  was.  I  heard  him  say,
"  I  cannot  do  it — oh  !  please  don't  ;  you  know  I  am  so
ill  ?  "  Directly  after  he  turned  his  head  round  towards
me,  and  said  that  when  he  had  told  me  he  felt  an  un-
pleasant influence  as  though  trying  to  separate  us,  he  had
not  told  me  all,  and  he  went  on  to  explain  about  a
very  extraordinary  case  of  second  sight  that  had  occurred
to  him  that  day.

After  he  had  done  so,  he  said  that  he  felt  quite  com-
fortable and happy. We talked for some time  about


NO.  19]


With  D.  D.  Home


103


second  sight,  and  he  was  explaining  how  one  could  tell
by  the  appearance  of  his  eyes  when  it  was  lil^ely  to  occur
to  him.  Suddenly  he  said  to  me,  "  I  am  in  the  Kursaal,
in  the  playing  room  ;  I  will  tell  you  what  I  see."  All
the  time  he  talked  quite  naturally,  and  knew  that  he
was  in  bed  ;  at  the  same  time  he  declared  he  was  actually
standing  on  the  floor  of  the  room,  and  could  observe  all
that  was  going  on  there.  "  Oh  !  "  he  said,  "  it  is  horrible  !
Oh,  it  is  dreadful !  My  God,  it  is  so  horrible  that,  if
it  lasts  long,  I  can  never  go  into  that  room  again !  I
see  the  table,  and  I  see  crowds  of  hands  all  about  it,
flying  about  all  over  it, — young  hands,  old  hands, — hands
of  men  and  women, — they  are  dashing  about  over  the
table,  sometimes  catching  hold  of  each  other,  and  then
throwing  each  other  off.  Oh,  there  is  a  hand  with  blood
upon  it !  There  is  an  old  man's  hand,  and  a  woman's
hand  that  seizes  his,  but  he  dashes  hers  away  from  him  !
Oh,  it  is  too  terrible  It  is  changed  now.  I  will  tell
you  what  I  see  directly.  There  are  a  number  of  young
people  sitting  round  the  table,  all  young,  pretty  and
pleasant  looking  ;  nearly  all  of  them  are  women  ;  they
are  playing,  but  laughing,  talking  and  thinking  of  other
things  also,  not  intent  upon  the  game  ;  the  others  are
all  driven  back  from  the  table  ;  they  are  in  a  varied
confused  sort  of  crowd,  there  is  a  regular  sohd  barrier
that  I  can  see  before  them.  Some  are  leaning  over
and  trying  to  get  across,  but  they  cannot ;  now  the
table  is  covered  with  roses  :  I  see  that  they  are  playing
with  roses.  A  sort  of  leader  among  them,  a  woman,  is
getting  up  and  says,  '  Well,  I  suppose  we  must  take  away
these  lovely  roses  with  us  ;  it  is  a  pity,  but  if  these
j)oor  people  prefer  money  to  them,  why  we  must  take
them  away.'  Now  it  has  again  changed.  The  table  is
covered  with  httle  children,  they  are  sitting  on  the  table,
and  most  of  them  look  thoughtful  ;  they  are  such  pretty,
sweet  little  children.  The  crowd  is  still  kej)t  back  by  the
barrier,  but  some  of  them  look  as  if  they  wanted  to
caress  the  children.  There  is  one  man  who  is  stretching-
out  his  hands  so  eagerly  towards  such  a  rosy,  pretty
little  fellow,  and  wants  to  shake  hands  with  him,  but  the


104


Ex2}eriences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


child  is  saying,  '  I  cannot  shake  your  hand,  because  we
have  all  just  been  washed  and  dressed,  and  your  hands  are
so  dirty  from  the  money  that  I  must  not  touch  them.'  "
After  this  he  saw  nothing  more  and  went  to  sleep,  and
awoke  the  next  day  wonderfully  well,  considering  how
ill  he  had  been.


On  Sunday,  the  6th  [SejDtember,  1868],  we  had  a  seance
at  Mrs.  Hamilton's.  There  was  a  strong  influence  ;  there
were  raps  on  the  table,  chairs,  &c.  ;  our  chairs  were
violently  vibrated ;  Home's  chair  moved,  and  there  were
no  messages.  The  table  was  tilted,  not  lifted.  Count
Ronicker  was  present,  and  his  magnetic  influence  was  so
strong  that  it  made  us  all  more  or  less  ill,  and  I  think
stopped  the  seance.


No.  20  Seance — Friday,  the  11th  [September,  1868].

Last  Wednesday  night,  soon  after  the  lights  were  put
out,  a  spirit  asked  if  our  actions  during  the  day  had  been
as  they  should  be  ?  Soon  after,  he  said,  "  The  atmo-
sphere of  this  house  is  not  good  for  either  of  you ;  it  is
very  damp.'"  I  said,  "  Is  that  the  reason  I  always  awake
in  the  morning  with  a  sore  throat  1  "  The  spirit  rephed,
"  Yes.''  We  asked  where  we  should  go  ;  the  answer
was,  "  The  Hesse  is  the  highest.''  We  accordingly  moved
'into  the  Hotel  de  Hesse.  The  house  in  which  we  lodged
was,  as  the  spirit  said,  in  a  very  low  and  damp  situation.


No.  21  Seance — Sunday,  13th  [September,  1868].

Last  Friday,  we  had  a  seance  at  Mrs.  Hamilton's.
Present :  Mr.,  Mrs.,  and  Miss  Hamilton,  the  Baron  de
Veh  and  his  wife,  the  Princess  Karoh,  Mrs.  Watkins,
Mrs.  Gregory,  the  Count  de  Mons,  General  Brevern,
Home,  and  myself.  We  had  physical  manifestations,
currents  of  cold  air,  vibration  of  our  chairs  and  the  table,
table-tilting,  &c.  Home's  chair  was  moved  shghtly  ;
Mrs.  Watkins,  who  was  sitting  near  him,  was  moved  also.


NO.  21]


With  D.  D.  Home


105


Mi's.  Watkins  had  suffered  severely  from  rheumatism,
and  was  quite  bent  double  by  it.  Home's  hands  were
taken  possession  of,  and  he  was  moved  to  get  up.  He
placed  himself  behind  her  chair  and  began  tapping  her
on  the  back  and  grasping  her  shoulders  ;  he  then  sat
down  and  presently  went  into  a  trance.  We  recognized
by  his  manner  the  same  spirit  that  had  prescribed  for
Mrs.  Hamilton,  and  Lady  Fairfax,  and  myself,  on  a
previous  occasion.  He  walked  up  and  down  the  room
two  or  three  times  ;  then  placed  his  head  against  Mrs.
Watkins's  back,  and  held  it  firmly  there  for  a  minute  or
two.  He  then  walked  into  the  next  room  ;  beckoned  to
me  and  made  a  sign  as  of  writing.  I  got  a  pencil  and
paper,  and  went  in.  He  was  sitting  down,  and  said,
"  We  wish  you  to  have  a  compress  made — a  sort  of
plaster  of  tar  spread  upon  a  cloth,  and  covered  with
muslin,  to  be  placed  upon  the  back  ;  it  will  give  strength
to  the  spine.  There  is  want  of  action,  and  no  proper
re-action  ;  the  blood  is  very  acid — that  is  the  cause  of
the  rheumatism  ;  that  will  do  now."  I  went  back  to
my  place  ;  he  came  in  and  sat  down,  and  began  to
speak  of  the  different  spirits  present,  telling  their  names,
and  describing  them,  so  that  their  relations  present
recognized  them.  He  said  that  with  one  lady  there  was
a  sweet  little  girl  who  wanted  to  play  with  him,  and  he
went  through  the  form  as  if  playing  with  a  child.  He
then  stood  behind  the  Count  de  Mons  ;  addressed  him  as
his  father  ;  lent  his  head  against  his,  and  spoke  to  him
for  a  long  time  in  a  most  affectionate  and  touching
manner.  He  said  he  could  become  a  medium  and  be
able  to  draw.  Mrs.  Gregory  had  been  very  sleepy  for
some  time.  Home  turned  to  her  and  said,  "  We  wish
to  take  this  influence  away  from  you  ;  it  is  purely
physical — nothing  spiritual  about  it  ;  you  live  very  much
with  Lady  Fairfax  ;  she  is  very  ill  ;  that  is  what  affects
you  ;  you  must  not  be  too  much  with  her  ;  you  are  not
strong  enough  to  bear  it."  He  then  made  passes  over
her  hands  for  a  few  minutes.  Home  then  began  talking
to  Madame  de  Veh,  and  spoke  to  her  for  some  time  in
a most kindly manner  ; the words I forget, but  they


106


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance  ■


were  to  the  effect  that  she  was  on  no  account  to  let
her  heart  grow  faint  ;  that  the  future  would  be  brighter
than  the  past  ;  and  that  there  was  a  new  development
coming  to  her  (she  is  a  writing  medium)  ;  what  it  was
they  would  not  tell  her,  but  it  would  cause  her  great
happiness.  Home  spoke  to  several  others  and  then  said,
"  Daniel  must  now  come  back,  as  we  want  to  make
some  manifestations."

Soon  after,  he  awoke.  Although  we  sat  for  some  time
longer,  we  had  only  slight  manifestations.  Two  or  three
people  got  up  soon  after  he  awoke,  which  perhaps  was
the  reason  of  it.  During  his  trance.  Home  spoke  some-
times in  English,  sometimes  in  French.  When  he  was
describing  the  spirits  present,  he  seemed  not  to  be  quite
certain  about  the  name  and  relationship  of  one  of  them,
and  said  he  must  go  and  find  out.  He  rose  up,  went
into  the  next  room,  and  stood  there  a  short  time  by  him-
self, and  then  came  back  and  told  us  about  the  spirit
in  question.


September  15th  [1868].

Last  Saturday  night  I  was  very  wakeful.  Late  at
night.  Home  being  asleep,  I  heard  raps  on  some  part  of
the  floor  near  his  bed.  They  were  tolerably  loud  and
monotonous,  going  on  with  a  regular  beat,  like  the
ticking  of  a  clock,  until  I  fell  asleep.

At  dinner  last  Saturday,  Home  pointed  out  to  me  a
young  man  sitting  at  the  end  of  the  table,  and  said
"  I  feel  impelled  towards  him — I  have  something,  I  know
not  what,  to  say  to  him,  or  to  do  for  him."  After
dinner  Home  went  up  and  spoke  to  him,  and  asked  him
to  come  the  following  evening  to  Mrs.  Hamilton's.


No.  22  Seance.

Last  Sunday  we  had  a  seance  at  Mrs.  Hamilton's.
Present  :  Mr.,  Mrs.  and  Miss  Hamilton ;  Mrs.  Main-
waring, Mrs. Spearman, Mr. A-  , Home,  and  myself.


NO.  22]  With  D.  D.  Home


107


Soon  after  we  sat  down,  there  were  vibrations  of  the
table,  the  chairs,  the  floor  of  the  room,  &c.,  and  we  felt
cold  currents  of  air.  However,  it  soon  ceased,  and  we
sat  for  some  time  without  anything  occurring.  Some  one
suggested  that  we  should  have  tea,  and  try  again  after-
wards. We  accordingly  did  so  ;  and  after  the  things
were  cleared  away,  sat  round  the  table  again.  We  felt
the  cold  air  and  vibrations  of  the  table.  Home  suddenly
said  that  he  had  distinctly  seen  a  figure  pass  before  the

window  outside. Before  coming  to  the  seance,  Mr.  A

had  told  us  a  curious  occurrence  that  happened  to  him
the  previous  night.  He  was  waiting  in  a  garden  to  meet
a  friend  of  his,  a  lady  ;  and  he  saw  her,  as  he  supposed,
walking  towards  him.  He  got  up  and  went  to  meet  her ;
but  when  quite  close,  he  looked  on  the  ground  for  a
second,  and  on  raising  his  eyes  the  figure  had  disappeared.
He  was  very  anxious  to  know  whether  what  he  had  seen
was  a  delusion  ;  and  if  not,  whether  the  figure  that
passed  the  window  was  the  same  or  not.

Soon  after,  Home  went  into  a  trance,  and  sat  for  a
httle  time  making  passes over  his own  eyes  and  head.

He  then  went  and  stood  behind  ]\Ir.  A  ,  and  looked

at  him  for  some  time.  "  Ah,"  he  said,  "  you  are  like
the  simoon — like  a  wild  wind  of  the  Desert."  He  talked
to  him  for  some  httle  time  ;  I  cannot  remember  his
words.  He  then  said,  "  You  have  many  spirits  about
you  who  love  you,  and  many  who  do  not.  Your  atmo-
sphere is  very  varied  ;  it  is  Hke  your  character,  change-
able, wild,  uncertain.  You  are  pursuing  a  phantom."
Home  also  said  something  about  marriage, but  I  forget

what. He  then  sat  down. ]Mr.  A. had  been  wishing

to  hear  something  about  the  apparition  he  had  seen  the
previous  night,  but  had  said  nothing  aloud.  Home
turned  to  him,  and  said,  "  Yes,  it  had  to  do  with  what
you  have  in  your  mind.  You  understand  very  well  what
I  mean.  When  I  said  you  were  pursuing  a  j)hantom
that  ought  to  have  been  sufficient  answer  to  you.  You
will  have  a  vision  at  a  moment  when  you  least  expect  :
it  will  be  a  pleasant  one.  Take  care  that  you  profit
by it, or you will  see  one  other  vision  which  shall  be


108


Experiences  in  Spirihialism


[seance


terrible." Home  then  got  up,  went  close  to  Mr.  A  ,

clasped  his  hands  together,  and  said,  "  Ah,  do  think
of  what  you  are  doing  ;  do  reason  about  it."  He  then
walked  up  and  down  the  room,  raising  his  hands  and
letting  them  fall  again,  as  a  man  would  who  had  done  all
in  his  power  and  could  do  no  more,  and  saying,  "  The
ways  of  God  are  inscrutable — the  ways  of  God  are  in-
scrutable." He  then  sat  down  and  began  explaining  to
us  how  God's  creatures  could  only  act  according  to  His
will ;  and  how  spirits,  though  they  could  frequently  see
events  coming  on  in  the  future,  yet  could  not  avert
them.  "  We  can  see,"  he  said,  "  the  rocks  in  your  path,
and  can  sometimes  strew  them  and  cover  them  with
flowers,  but  we  cannot  remove  them  ;  so,  though  we  may
see  misfortune — though  we  may  see  blood  will  be
shed  about  it — we  cannot  prevent  it  :  we  can  only
influence, and sometimes warn." Turning and  pointing

solemnly  to  Mr.  A  ,  he  said  twice,  "  There  is  danger

in  it — there  is  danger  in  it."  He  then  turned  to  Mrs.
Mainwaring,  and  spoke  to  her  to  the  effect  that  she  was
never  to  allow  her  mind  to  dwell  on  a  certain  subject
that  had  occupied  her  three  times  during  her  life,  once
for  a  whole  day.  "  You  have  got  rather  a  low  influence
about  you,"  he  said,  "  because  you  are  always  expecting
and  wishing  for  spiritual  interference  in  the  every-day
affairs  of  life.  You  should  take  a  higher  view  of  it  than
that.  You  wonder  why  the  spirits  do  not  help  you.  Are  you
not  a  spirit  ?  You  are  all  spirits,  only  you  have  the
earthly  envelope  about  you.  Rouse  yourself,  do  all  you
can  to  rouse  yourself,  and  help  yourself  ;  do  not  expect
others  to  help  you  if  you  do  not  act  yourself.  It  is  a
common  thing  for  people  to  say,  '  If  spirits  are  about  us,  why
don't  they  manifest  themselves  ? '  Is  not  God  everywhere  ?
Is  He  not  about  you  ?  Why  then  does  He  not  mani-
fest Himself  ?  Yet  do  spirits  interfere  in  a  thousand
ways  that  you  little  dream  of,  and  never  notice.  God
has  so  ordained,  that  though  many  of  you  spend  your
lives  looking  for  evidence  of  His  existence,  yet  every  day
you  pass  by  unnoticed  the  most  wonderful  and  beautiful
evidences.


NO.  22J


With  D.  D.  Home


109


"  Do  not  suppose  for  a  moment  that  you  can  do  any-
thing in  secret  ;  have  no  false  modesty  or  false  shame,
and  think  not  to  do  that  in  private  which  you  would  not
do  before  the  world.  If  it  be  not  enough  for  man  to
know  that  God  is  everywhere,  and  sees  all  his  actions,
then  let  him  remember  also,  that  his  father,  mother,
brothers,  sisters  and  all  those  most  dear  to  him,  are  con-
tinually about  him  ;  do  nothing  therefore  in  private  that
you  would  be  ashamed  of  doing  openly."  Turning  to
Mrs.  Spearman,  he  said,  "  Louisa,  when  your  mother
suffers  from  those  acute  pains  in  her  limbs,  she  should
foment  them  with  an  infusion  of  hops,  just  pour  boihng
water  on  the  hops,  and  use  it  as  hot  as  she  can  bear.
Hops  are  very  good  ;  they  not  only  act  as  a  sedative,
calm  the  nerves  and  mitigate  the  pain,  but  they  also
strengthen  and  act  as  a  tonic."  He  then,  after  hstening
apparently  at  J\Irs.  Hamilton's  ear,  said,  "  The  oil  is  too
heavy  against  the  drum  of  the  ear,  that  is  why  your
deafness  was  increased."  Turning  to  Miss  Hamilton,  he
said,  "  Mary,  yovi  have  used  more  than  we  ordered ;  we
prescribed  one  drop  only,  you  ought  not  to  have  used
more  ;  for  the  future,  drop  the  oil  on  a  bit  of  cotton
and  use  a  httle  ether  with  it."

Home  then  got  up,  walked  round  the  table,  taking
our  hands  one  after  the  other.  He  was  then  twice
elongated  and  shortened  to  less  than  his  natural  height.

He  made  Mr.  A put  his  foot  on  his  feet,  and  place

his  hands,  one  on  his  chest,  the  other  just  above  his  hips,
in  order  that  he  might  be  sure  that  he  was  standing
fairly  on  the  ground,  and  that  he  might  also  feel  the
elongation  and  contraction  taking  place.  He  then  sat
down  and  turned  to  me,  laughed,  and  speaking  in  quite

a  different  tone  of  voice,  said,  "  A.  M says  she  will

come  to  you  to-night.  She  says  she  was  with  you  last
night,  and  made  those  monotonous  taps  that  you  heard ;
she  wanted  you  to  sleep  and  thought  that  might  send
you  to  sleep.  She  says  she  made  those  slow  regular
sounds,  Uke  as  it  were  the  rocking  of  a  cradle,  as  a
sort  of  lullaby  to  soothe  you.  She  says  she  will  be  able
now  sometimes  to  make  sounds  like  that,  even  when  you


110


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


are  alone.  When  Dan  said  last  night  something  about
having  been  praying  for  you,  it  was  she  who  spoke
through  him  ;  it  was  not  Dan  who  spoke  at  all  himself.
You  had  better  tell  him  this  as  he  has  been  rather
worrying  himself,  thinking  that  his  mind  must  have  been
wandering  in  his  sleep.  Dan  will  come  back  now  ;  sit
for  five  or  ten  minutes,  and  we  will  try  and  make  some
manifestations-;  we  want  John  to  see  some."  Home
then  awoke,  and  we  sat  for  a  little  time,  but  had  scarcely
anything  more.  We  then  broke  up  and  a  most  extra-
ordinary thing  occurred.  I  was  standing  in  the  balcony,
the  rest  were  about  the  table  ;  all  of  a  sudden  the  gas
went  out  and  the  room  was  in  darkness  ;  the  gas  was
not  turned  off,  but  went  out.  They  all  declared  that  no
one  was .  near  the  burner ;  three  people,  ]Mr.  Home,
Miss  Hamilton,  and  Mrs.  Mainwaring,  said  that  they
distinctly  saw  a  hand  and  arm  stretched  out  over  their
heads  upon  the  jet  of  gas  and  that  at  that  moment  it
went  out.  They  said  it  was  so  distinct  that  their  first
idea  was  that  some  one  had  gone  suddenly  crazy  and
must  have  burned  themselves.

Mr.  Hamilton  told  me  next  morning  that  he  had
investigated  it,  and  found  that  at  the  same  moment
eight  jets  of  gas  went  out  in  the  house,  namely  one  in
the  room  in  which  we  were  ;  two  in  the  next  ;  three,
I  think,  on  the  landing  and  stairs,  and  two  in  the  kitchen.
The  meter  had  not  been  turned  off,  the  meter  does  not
communicate  with  the  street  gas,  but  has  a  separate  pipe
leading  to  the  gasometer.

That  night  we  heard  raps  announcing,  I  suppose,  the
presence  of  Adah  Menken  ;  they  did  not  last  however.
Just  as  I  was  going  to  sleep.  Home  who  was  asleep,
turned  in  his  bed,  and  said,  "  I  have  been  trying  but  I
cannot."  He  said  it  in  a  different  tone  of  voice  to  his
own,  and  as  if  he  was  rather  vexed  at  having  failed.  I
said,  "  Never  mind,"  which  awoke  him,  and  he  asked  me
if  he  had  been  talking  in  his  sleep.


NO.  23]


With  D.  D.  Home


111


No.  23  Seance — Sunday,  September  20th  [1868],
5,  Buckingham  Oate.

Last  Friday  night,  after  we  had  gone  to  bed,  we  were
talking,  and  I  was  saying  something  about  how  small
and  trivial  our  hves  on  earth  must  appear  after  we  have
passed  away.  A  spirit  joined  our  conversation  by  saying
"  Yes,"  by  three  very  emphatic  loud  raps.  Home  pre-
sently had  a  sort  of  vision ;  being  quite  awake,  and
knowing  where  he  was,  and  describing  to  me  what  he
saw,  he  said,  "  I  am  in  a  desert,  that  is  Just  at  the
edge  of  a  great  desert — there  is  a  sort  of  barrier  between
me  and  it.  The  desert  is  perfectly  barren,  there  is  no
light  of  the  sun,  but  a  great  cross  at  the  far  side  of  it,
and  the  light  flowing  from  the  cross  is  lighting  it  all  up,
the  cross  means  truth  ;  there  are  a  number  of  pigmies
all  about  the  cross.  Oh,  it  is  so  strange,  they  are  all
working  away  as  hard  as  they  can,  and  trying  to  build
up  blocks  of  stone  and  rubbish  and  stuff  before  the  cross,
but  as  they  build  them  up,  the  blocks  become  trans-
parent, and  the  light  from  the  cross  still  shines  through
them.  The  pigmies  are  digging  away  and  working  so
hard  about  it,  they  seem  to  have  made  a  desert  of  the
place  by  digging  out  earth  and  stufi^  to  hide  out  the
cross."  Home  suddenly  stopped  talking,  and  when  he
spoke  again,  was  in  a  trance,  he  said,  "  Now  that  you  are
quietly  at  home,  we  wish  to  explain  to  you  how  it  was
that  Dan  was  so  nervous  at  Homburg."  He  then  ex-
plained some  circumstances  that  had  puzzled  me  a  good
deal.  He  went  on  to  say,  "  After  that  Dan  caught  a
cold,  you  also  felt  the  same  influence  and  you  caught
a  chill,  then  the  magnetic  atmosphere  of  that  man  Roniker
was  so  strong,  that  it  irritated  your  nerves  intensely,
and  on  that  night  you  were  on  the  point  of  having
brain  fever,  but  by  the  foot  bath  that  we  influenced
Dan  to  insist  upon  your  having,  and  by  magnetizing  you
through  Dan,  it  was  prevented.  It  was  Adah  Menken  that
influenced  Dan  in  that  matter."  I  remarked  how  thankful
I  was.  Home  said,  "  Oh,  it  was  .not  Adah  Menken  that
magnetized  you. She  made  Dan  see  that  vision  he  told


112  Experiences  in  Spiritualism  [seance

■you  of,  she  is  very  often  about  you."  I  said  that  it  was
very  good  of  her  to  endeavour  to  do  us  good.  Ah,  he
said,  "  It  does  her  good !  Ah,  if  bitter  tears  could  wipe
away  the  recollection  of  what  has  been,  and  the  know-
ledge of  what  might  have  been  ;  well,  it  was  not  to  be.
It  was  not,  therefore,  it  was  not  to  be.  Adah  Menken
was  the  most  suited  of  all  the  spirits  about  you  to
interfere  in  that  matter  at  Homburg  that  you  know  of  ;
her  hfe  had  made  her  more  capable  of  it,  in  fact — as
she  laughingly  says  herself — '  You  must  set  a  thief  to
catch  a  thief.'  She  says  that  the  wish  you  expressed  at
Homburg  shall  be  gratified.  Get  her  book.  She  says,
'  If  I  could  send  it  to  you  or  write  an  order  for  it  I
would,  you  know ;  but  then  I  cannot.'  However,  it  is
very  small  and  not  expensive,  and  you  can  very  well
afford  to  buy  it,  so  if  you  will  get  it,  she  says  she  will
this  winter  write  her  name  in  it  for  you.  You  remember
saying  that  you  wished  to  see  an  instance  of  direct
spirit  writing,  she  thinks  that  will  be  a  nice  way  to  do
it  for  you  ;  she  will  do  the  same  for  Dan."  I  said,
"  Shall  I  tell  Dan  ?  "  "  By  all  means.  Dan  is  now
coming  back  to  his  desert,  he  will  not  know  anything
about  this  httle  episode."  Having  a  matter  on  my  mind,
I  said,  "  May  I  ask  a  question  ?  "  He  said,  "  Yes,"
before  I  spoke,  having  read  my  thoughts  and  said,  "  Yes,"
again,  when  I  asked.  I  accordingly  asked  about  what  I
wanted  to  know,  and  received  an  answer  and  explanation  ;
while  he  was  speaking  he  laughed,  and  said,  "  Some
spirits  say  we  should  not  tell  you  too  much,  since  this
is  in  the  future."  Home  then  awoke  and  took  up  the
thread  of  his  description  of  the  desert,  directly  after  he
said,  "It  is  beginning  to  fade,"  the  vision  then  melted
away  gradually.


No.  24  Seance.

On  Saturday  we  had  a  seance  at  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall's.
Present  :  Mr.  and  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall,  Mr.  Humphreys,  the
Comtesse  Medina  de  Poniare, her  son, a  boy  of  about


NO.  24]


With  D.  D.  Home


113


14  years  of  age,  the  two  Misses  Bertolacci,  Home  and
myself.  Before  we  sat  down  there  were  raps  all  about
the  room  ;  immediately  after  we  were  seated  strong
physical  manifestations  took  place,  violent  trembhng  of
chairs,  table,  floor,  &c.,  &c.  ;  currents  of  cold  air,  very
loud  raps  in  various  directions  ;  the  table  tilted,  moved,
and  was  raised  from  the  ground ;  some  questions  were
answered.  Home  was  in  a  very  nervous  state,  presently
he  went  into  a  trance  and  said,  "  We  are  doing  this  to
calm  Dan ;  talk."  He  then  got  up,  walked  about  the
room,  sat  down  and  played  the  piano  for  a  little  time  ;
he  then  arose,  went  to  the  boy  and  placed  his  hands
upon  his  head,  patting  and  stroking  it  ;  he  then  went  to
the  Comtesse  de  Pomare,  but  when  he  came  near  her
he  drew  back,  shuddered,  and  looked  distressed,  "  Ah,"
he  said,  "  there  is  something  here  the  spirits  do  not  hke."
Some  one  said,  "It  is  because  you  are  in  mourning,  and
have  crape  on  your  dress."  "  Yes,"  he  said,  "  We  do  not
like  that  at  all.  He  (her  husband)  has  pulled  your
dress  two  or  three  times,  as  you  are  aware  of,  he  will
try  presently  and  tear  a  bit  of  the  black  crape  off  to
shew  you  that  he  does  not  like  it."

We  began  to  talk  about  the  custom  of  wearing  mourn-
ing, and  the  difficulty  there  would  be  in  breaking  through
it.  Home  walked  about  the  room  ;  then  sat  down  and
said  something  to  this  effect  :  "If  you  like  to  put  on
some  outward  sign  of  woe  while  those  you  love  are  in
gloom  before  dissolution,  do  so  ;  but  to  put  on  mourning
after  that,  when  a  soul  has  been  set  free,  and  has  risen
nearer  to  God — yes,  nearer  to  God — oh,  no ;  rather  put
on  all  that  is  pleasant — all  that  is  pleasing  to  the  eye,
and  cheerful ;  but,  if  you  think  that  soul  is  not
worthy  of  approaching  nearer  to  God,  but  must  be  in
darkness  and  tears,  then,  if  you  will,  put  on  mourning  ;
but  wear  it  longer  than  six  months  or  a  year."  "  Yes,"
the  Comtesse  remarked,  "  but  we  do  not  wear  mourning
because  we  think  that  a  soul  is  unhappy  ;  but  because
we  ourselves  are  unhappy."  Home  said,  "  Have  you  so
httle  confidence  in  God,  that  you  cannot  trust  Him  to
do  all  for  the  best  ?  " He  then  spoke  of  some  of  the

H


114


Experiences  in  Spirihialism


[seance


spirits  present,  chiefly  addressing  the  Comtesse.  He  then
turned  to  Mr.  Hall,  and  told  him  his  sister  was  present ;
he  smiled  and  said,  "  She  is  standing  just  there  behind
you- — she  has  a  communication  to  make  to  you,  but  she
cannot  make  it  now  ;  she  seems  so  gentle  and  timid."
Then  he  laughed,  and  said,  "  She  has  such  a  funny  habit
of  shading  her  eyes  with  her  hand,  as  if  she  was  afraid
the  light  would  hurt  them.  Of  course,  it  does  not  ;  but
she  cannot  get  rid  of  the  habit  now  and  then,  and  the
others  are  smiling  at  her  for  it.  She  is  doing  hke  this
now,"  and  he  shaded  his  eyes  with  one  hand,  and  went
feeling  about  before  him  with  the  other  (Mr.  Hall's  sister
had  been  quite  blind,  and  had  had  the  habit  of  shading
her  eyes  and  feeling  before  her,  so  that  was  a  good
test  of  identity).  Home  then  turned  to  me,  and  said,
"  There  is  a  spirit  standing  near  you  that  went  through
a  great  deal  of  sufliering  before  passing  away,  her  name

is V  ; she and  the other spirit (Mr. Hall's  sister)

seem  so  much  drawn  to  each  other.  They  both  under-
went a  great  deal  of  suffering,  and  that  appears  to  draw
them  to  each  other.  They  are  talking  about  it  now,  and
they  are  speaking  of  their  suffering,  as  if  it  had  somehow
purified  them,  and  as  if  they  were  so  thankful  for  it,
and  considered  it  to  have  been  the  greatest  blessing."
He  told  me  that  we  should  see  lights  that  night,  and
then  said  "  Daniel  is  now  coming  back."  He  then  awoke.
We  had  some  more  physical  manifestations,  and  the
accordion  was  played  under  the  table.  Home  holding  it
in  his  hand.  It  was  then  suggested  to  put  out  the  lights,
and  try  if  we  could  see  anything  ;  the  candles  were
accordingly  put  out,  and  we  should,  I  think,  have  had  a
wonderful  seance,  but  that  the  son  of  the  Comtesse  de
Pomare  got  so  frightened  and  nervous  we  were  obliged
to  stop.  We  had  strong  physical  manifestations,  the
table  being  lifted  high  in  the  air ;  the  window  curtains
were  moved,  one  being  carried  right  across  the  table,
and  twined  round  Mrs.  Hall  ;  the  other  was  drawn
between  Home  and  me,  laid  over  my  shoulder,  and  across
my  knee.  I  had  hold  of  the  curtain  while  it  was  moving,
and  felt  that  there  was  a  hand  moving  it,  but  when  I


NO.  24]


With  D.  D.  Home


115


tried  to  touch  the  hand  it  shd  away.  I  and  several
others  saw  a  form  moving  about  behind  me  and  Home,
and  another  form  at  the  opposite  side  of  the  room,  and
we  were  touched  at  different  times  ;  however  the  boy
got  so  frightened  we  had  to  light  the  candles,  and  put
an  end  to  the  seance.


The  same  night  Home  had  to  drop  some  lotion  into
his  eyes.  I  dropped  it  in  for  him,  and  then  put  the
lights  out.  Almost  immediately  he  said,  "  What  a  curious
effect  that  stuff  has  had,  I  see  the  most  beautiful  little
Hghts  before  me."  I  said,  "  That  is  not  the  effect  of
the  drops  ;  you  said  when  in  a  trance  that  we  should
see  Ughts."  "  That  may  be,"  he  replied,  "  but,  what  I
see  is  in  my  eye,"  and  so  positive  was  he  that  he  came
over  to  me  and  asked  me  to  look  into  his  eye,  and  try
if  I  could  not  see  them  ;  of  course  I  could  not.  He  went
back  to  bed,  and  then  I  began  to  see  the  lights,  and  he
was  satisfied  that  they  were  not  in  his  eye.  I  saw  the
most  beautiful  httle  phosphorescent  hghts  moving.  I  saw
as  many  as  three  at  a  time  ;  sometimes  there  were  two
together  hke  eyes,  sometimes  two  would  come  together,
and  then  dart  away  again  from  each  other.  We  had  no
other  manifestations.


No.  25  Seance — at  Ashley  House,  October  20t.h  [1868].

Present  :  Captain  Wynne  (Charhe)  and  his  wife,  Brinsley
Nixon  and  his  wife,  Home  and  myself.  We  sat  at  a
small  card  table.  There  were  shght  manifestations,  currents
of  cold  air,  vibration  of  the  table  and  chairs,  and  raps.
The  alphabet  was  called,  and  the  sentence  was  given  :
"  Sit  at  the  other  table."  As  soon  as  the  influence  became
pretty  strong,  the  table  was  moved  towards  the  card
table.  After  a  while  we  got  up,  and  as  they  evidently
wished  to  alter  the  position  of  the  table,  we  moved  it
ourselves  into  the  centre  of  the  room,  and  sat  down
again.  We  soon  felt  violent  vibration  of  the  floor,  chairs,
and table — so violent that the glass pendants of  the


116


Ex'periences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


chandelier  struck  together,  and  the  windows  and  doors
shook  and  rattled  in  their  frames,  not  only  in  the  room
in  which  we  were  sitting,  but  also  in  the  next.  The
card  table  was  moved  (no  one  touching  it)  up  to  our
table,  and  the  two  were  pressed  hard  together.  The  sofa
was,  under  the  same  conditions,  moved  up  to  our  table.
A  sentence  was  soon  after  given  :  "  We  had  to  overcome  the
influence  of  the  little  table,  and  we  have  accomplished  it."
Shortly  after  we  were  told  to  move  the  table  and  sofa
back  to  their  places.  We  had  raps  on  both  the  tables
and  on  the  floor,  and  the  spirits  joined  in  our  conversa-
tion two  or  three  times  by  rapping  "  Yes  "  or  "  iVo."  The
following  message  was  then  given  :  "  We  have  fnade
these  external  manifestations  to  convince  7jou  all ;  Charlie,
ask  questiofis,  we  have  a  ivork  to  do  -with  you."

Charlie  asked  if  Augusta  would  recover  ;  they  rapped
"  Yes  "  emphatically.  He  asked  if  his  sister  would,  and
after  a  pause  they  answered  "  Perhaps,"  by  touching  him
twice  upon  the  knee.  He  asked  if  they  could  bring  us
word  what  Augusta  was  then  doing  ;  and  afterwards
asked  for  the  name  of  the  spirit  who  had  touched  him.
"  Will "  was  spelled,  and  a  "  W  "  ;  but  the  power  then
appeared  to  cease,  as  we  could  get  nothing  more.  After
a  pause,  they  spelled  "  Father,"  but  the  power  again
failed.  After  an  interval  they  said,  "  We  have  not  power
to  do  more  noiv ;  find  violin  near,"  referring  to  the  fact,
I  suppose,  that  Augusta  had  her  viohn  near  her.  We  had
no  further  manifestations  after  this.  Both  Emmy's  and
Cadly's  dresses  were  pulled  during  the  evening.

After  they  had  all  gone,  Home  went  into  a  trance.
"  Ah,"  he  said,  "  there  was  nothing  wrong  ;  no  evil
influence  to  overcome  about  that  little  table.  It  was
rather  this  way  ;  you  had  been  accustomed  to  sit  at  the
other  table  ;  you  had  eaten  off  it,  and  always  sat  at  it,
and  it  had  therefore  become  as  it  were  partially  magnetized
by  you.  We  were  obliged  to  equalize  the  power  over  the
room  and  furniture  ;  and  we  therefore  brought  the  two
tables  in  contact,  and  moved  up  the  sofa  to  inoculate
them,  as  we  might  say.  There  was  nothing  evil  about  the
card  table. There  is  no  such  thing  as  evil  in  your  sense


NO.  25]


With  D.  D.  Home


117


of  the  word.  Evil  is  but  good  perverted  and  distorted,
gnarled  and  twisted  out  of  shape.  As  a  blade  springing
up  through  the  ground  if  it  meets  with  a  stone  that
obstructs  it,  is  forced  out  of  its  course,  stunted  and
thwarted,  so  is  good  changed  by  circumstances  into  what
you  call  evil.  If  evil  was  as  you  think,  you  would  have
to  say  that  the  devil  had  made  the  world  to  answer
his  purpose,  but  it  is  not  so  ;  God  has  made  the  world  to
answer  his  ends.  You  may  not  be  able  to  see  how  all
this  evil  can  ever  harmonize  and  resolve  into  good  ;
but  it  is  nevertheless  so.  Because  the  sun  rises  in  the
midst  of  clouds  in  the  morning  you  do  not  know  that  it
will  be  cloudy  all  day  ;  no  ;  so  it  is  that  though  all
may  be  dark  and  cloudy  now,  it  will  end  in  brightness.

"  It  is  wonderful  to  stand  as  it  were  above  and  outside
the  world,  and  to  watch  the  great  wheels  revolving  ;  the
cogs  look  all  black  and  broken,  covered  sometimes  with
blood,  and  disfigured  ;  but  yet  they  all  fit  in  and  work
on  smoothly,  though  to  you.  it  appears  otherwise.  Yet
a  time  will  come  when  there  will  be  peace  and  knowledge
on  the  earth  about  all  those  matters  that  so  much  distract
it  now.  The  world  revolves  in  its  sphere,  turning  on  its
axis,  and  will  enter  upon  a  region  of  greater  peace  and
knowledge.

"  You  do  not  know  the  difficulties  that  have  to  be  over-
come in  communicating  with  you.  Supposing  now  we
want  to  make  manifestations,  four  spirits  would  perhaps
take  possession  of  the  four  corners  of  the  room,  and
would  begin,  as  it  were,  to  throw  across  to  each  other,
and  weave  together  their  harmonizing  influence,  so  as  to
get  everything  equahzed  and  prepared  for  the  adoption
of  whatever  they  want  to  do.  One  spirit  will  remain
in  the  midst  who  will  manage  and  direct  all  that  is  to
be  said — of  course,  if  one  of  the  other  spirits  wish  to
communicate  he  would  let  him  do  so,  they  are  not
selfish,  but  one  must  have  the  direction  of  the  mani-
festations to  ensure  unity  of  purpose.  That  is  why  it
is  so  bad  to  wish  for  the  presence  of  any  particular
spirit  ;  that  spirit  might  come,  and  the  others  not  being
selfish  would  admit  him  into  the  circle,  and  he  not  being


118


Experiences  in  Sjnrihialism


[seance


in  harmony  with  the  others,  would  destroy  the  whole
thing.  You  may  often  notice,  especially  at  the  commence-
ment of  a  seance,  a  whole  volley  of  taps  let  off,  that
is  a  spirit  discharging  the  electricity,  to  equahze  the
current  ;  often  until  the  whole  is  harmonized  we  cannot
stop  ourselves  from  making  raps  and  cannot  control  them  ;
so  that  a  spirit  might  at  first,  if  you  wanted  them  to
communicate  before  they  were  ready  themselves,  answer
"Yes"  for  "No,"  and  "No"  for  "Yes."  If  you  put
your  ear  also  against  the  table  while  communications
are  being  given  by  raps,  you  will  generally  hear  a  number
of  little  ticks  going  on ;  that  is,  some  spirits  are  dis-
charging the  electricity  to  keep  the  current  in  equili-
brium, while  the  others  communicate.

"If  we  did  not  take  all  these  careful  precautions  there
could  be  no  conversation,  nothing  but  a  chaos  of  sounds
and  raps.  It  is  this  same  difficulty — the  difficulty  of
encountering  the  materiahsm  of  all  about  you,  that  is
the  cause  of  a  great  deal  that  you  call  bad  and  evil
influence.  A  spirit  might  be  standing  near  you  that  loved
you  very  much,  that  was  not  the  least  impure,  and  that
wished  to  soothe  and  comfort  you ;  and  yet  he  might
only  serve  to  irritate  you,  and  the  more  anxious  he  was
to  soothe,  the  more  he  might  irritate  and  distress,  because
he  was  not  in  harmony  with  you.  You  can  feel  that
yourselves  ;  you  are  not  always  in  harmony  with  your
best  friends,  and  sometimes  you  do  not  feel  as  much  at
ease  with  them,  as  you  would  among  strangers,  and  would
have  more  difficulty  in  showing  off  any  accomplishment,
such  as  playing,  singing,  &c.,  &c.,  to  them  than  you  would
to  strangers.  Now,  this  case  of  the  lady  who  is  said
to  have  had  her  hair  pulled  out  by  the  roots  ;  it  might
happen  that  a  spirit  that  loved  her  very  much  was
standing  near,  perhaps  even  her  own  father  wished  to
soothe  her  and  caress  her  hair,  and  it  might  have  the
effect  of  irritating  intensely  ;  he  could  not  stop  himself,
he  could  not  withdraw  in  a  moment  the  electric  current
that  was  set  going,  and  the  consequences  might  be
painful  ;  of  course  all  this  applies  chiefly  to  undeveloped
and  partially  developed  medivims."


NO.  25]


With  D.  D.  Home


119


Question. — As  it  is  so  difficult  to  influence  men  are  you
not  constantly  endeavouring  to  do  certain  things  and
failing  1

Answer. — To  a  certain  extent, — yes.  But  spiritual  in-
fluence has  much  more  to  do  with  the  affairs  of  the
world  than  what  you  dream  of.  All  inspiration,  poetry,
improvising  as  in  the  case  of  the  old  Troubadours, — all
that  is  owing  to  it — everything  in  fact,  is  set  in  motion
by  spiritual  interference.  To  those  who  pray  earnestly
for  and  seek  for  hght  and  truth,  hght  will  certainly  be
given  ;  our  greatest  difficulty  is  the  folly  of  men's  hearts,
and  their  blindness.  There  are  thousands  of  men  who
pray  that  rather  than  that  SpirituaHsm  should  be  under-
stood, men  should  beheve  it  to  be  the  work  of  the
devil ;  to  advance  themselves  one  day  only,  they  would
retard  the  progress  of  the  world  for  ages.  Every  prayer
has  its  effect,  and  every  aspiration  and  wish  is  a  prayer  ;
it  is  not  necessary  to  go  down  on  your  bended  knees  to
pray.  Would  that  you  could  see  as  we  do  the  great
black  cloud  (to  speak  figuratively)  of  prayers  and  aspira-
tions that  is  for  ever  rising  up  from  a  populous  haunt  of
mankind  like  this  great  city  of  London.  Aspiration  for
truth  and  knowledge  will  surely  bring  its  answer,  and  as
surely  does  every  prayer  to  the  contrary  distort  and
retard  true  progress.

Question. — I  had  a  question  put  to  me  the  other  day
as  regards  the  comparative  truth  of  different  sects,  which
I  answered  according  to  my  abihty.  I  should  be  glad  to
know  if  I  answered  with  anything  hke  truth.

A7iswer. — There  is  truth  in  every  rehgion  ;  even  the
poor  Pagan,  who  bows  down  before  his  idol,  possesses
the  germ  of  truth,  inasmuch  as  he  worships  something
outside  and  beyond  himself.  It  is  very  wrong — oh,  very
wrong  indeed,  to  say  there  is  only  one  portal  to  heaven  ;
were  that  the  case,  there  would  be  few  indeed  who  would
arrive  there.  You  are  right  in  supposing  that  the  form  of
rehgion  which  is  best  suited  to  a  man,  though  it  may
contain  a  smaller  proportion  of  truth  than  another  form,
is  yet  the  best  for  him  ;  being  the  most  adapted  to  his
character  and  mind,  it  is  that  in  which  he  can  expand


120  Experiences  in  Spiritualism  [seance


and  improve  himself  to  the  best  advantage.  A  good
answer  for  you  to  have  given  would  be  :  '  Spirits  teach
individuality  of  spirit.'  As  you  leave  this  world  you  are
apt — oh,  very  apt  indeed — to  continue  for  a  long  time.
Those  who  seek  not  to  raise  themselves,  and  look  not
for  truth,  must  continue  as  they  were  until  they — to
use  a  common  expression — find  it  does  not  pay  ;  then  they
will  try  to  improve  and  will  do  so.  There  is  this  in-
dividuality ;  and  a  man  is  apt  to  get  around  him  an
influence  agreeing  with  himself.  Like  seeks  like  every-
where— it  is  a  universal  law.  The  crow  cannot  consort
with  the  eagle,  or  the  magpie  with  the  dove."

Question. — "  Have  we  not  better  opportunities  here
than  we  shall  ever  have  hereafter  of  forming  ourselves  ?  "
"  Most  certainly,  this  is  your  time.  If  you  strive  earnestly
and  prayerfully  here,  you  enter  your  true  hfe  in  a  state
fitted  for  it. Seek  for  truth  and  you  shall  find  it."


Account  of  Manifestations  at  Stockton.

Little  Dannie  Cox  died  in  London  last  Sunday,  the
11th  October,  1868  ;  Home,  who  was  his  godfather,  and
very  much  attached  to  him,  was  extremely  cut  up  about
it  at  first.  On  the  Monday  morning.  Home  breakfasted
with  me  at  No.  5.  I  was  reading  the  Daily  Telegraph
over  the  fire,  waiting  for  breakfast,  and  he  was  sitting
at  the  writing  table,  we  heard  loud  raps  on  the  floor
between  us  ;  and  the  following  message  was  given  ^  : —
"  We  wish  you  to  take  the  body  to  Stockton  (Mr.  Cox's
place  in  the  country)  to-morrow ;  you  ivill  place  the  coffin
in  the  draivi^ig-room ;  and.  at  half-past  eight  we  will  show
you  a  spiritual  funeral.  You  will  take  care  that  all  the
family  are  there,  and  no  one  else ;  if  I  ivant  Mr.  Bat
(family  lawyer)  /  will  send  for  him.  I  invite  your  friend
to  be  present."  After  this  we  went  to  breakfast,  and
the  same  spirit  rapped  repeatedly  on  the  table  during
breakfast,  and  answered  some  questions.

1  Believed  to  be  by  the  spirit  of  the  late  Mr.  Cox.


NO.  26]


With  D.  D.  Home


121


No.  26  Seance.

^  The  next  morning  the  body  was  sent  down  ;  I  accom-
panied Home  and  Mrs.  Cox.  The  drawing-room  was
most  prettily  arranged,  everything  being  covered  with
white  drapery,  and  quantities  of  flowers  and  ferns  taste-
fuUy  placed.  The  coffin  was  open,  and  the  httle  body
entirely  covered  with  flowers, all but the face  ;  which

} looked  very  calm  and  peaceful.

At  half-past  eight  o'clock  we  all  entered  the  room,
and  sat  down,  forming  a  sort  of  circle,  but  having  no
table.  Home  went  into  a  trance,  got  up  and  fetching  a
chair  sat  down  close  to  the  coffin  ;  he  then  took  Mrs.
Cox's  hands  in  his  and  dehvered  a  most  wonderful  dis-
course, taking  as  it  were  for  his  text,  the  words,  "  The
Lord  gave  and  the  Lord  hath  not  taken  away,  blessed  be
the  name  of  the  Lord."  He  went  through  the  greater
part of the burial service, explaining and expounding  ;

I he then spake in the most consoling manner to  Mrs.

I-  Cox,  bidding  her  have  confidence  in  God  and  in  His
goodness,  and  not  to  look  upon  (hat  as  a  separation
which  was  not  so  in  reahty  ;  told  her  the  little  boy
would  be  continually  with  her,  was  there  even  now ;
spoke  of  his  purity  and  happiness,  told  her  to  be  strong
and  not  to  give  way  to  sorrow  ;  but  now  that  her
husband  and  other  relatives  had  undertaken  the  develop-
ment of  little  Dannie,  she  was  to  devote  herself  all  the
more  to  the  education  of  the  two  remaining  children.
He  then  took  Gerrie,  the  other  son,  by  the  hand,  and  spoke
to  him  for  some  time  in  the  most  impressive  manner
about  his  future  conduct  through  life,  bidding  him  be  an
honest  God-fearing  man,  and  to  remember  that  his  brother
would  be  cognizant  of  all  his  actions  and  therefore  not
to  do  that  which  he  knew  would  offend  or  grieve  him.
He  then  took  the  httle  girl's  hand,  petting  and  comforting

'  her,  and  giving  her  messages  from  Dannie  about  his  pet
rabbits  and  things  of  that  sort,  and  telling  her  that
Dannie  would  often  be  in  communion  with  her  in  her
sleep,  and  that  she  would  dream  of  going  about  with  him.
He  then  walked  round  the  circle,  taking  each  one's  hand


122


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[SEAKCE


and  saying  a  kind  word  or  two,  and  standing  up  in  the
centre,  and  pointing  to  each  of  us,  enumerated  the  spirits
present,  saying,  "  Your  mother,  your  brother,  and  so  on."
He  then  made  a  sign  to  signify  that  they  were  all  stand-
ing round  him,  and  raising  his  hands,  prayed  in  the  most
beautiful  and  earnest  way  for  some  little  time,  and  then
sat  down  again  in  his  place  ;  he  said  that  little  Dannie
would  make  raps,  and  we  heard  three  distinct  little  ticks,
hke  electric  sparks  going  off  ;  he  said  we  should  recognize
Dannie  by  the  pecuharity  of  his  raps.  He  then  said,
"  We  wished  to  have  made  physical  manifestations,  but
Dan  is  spiritually  weak  and  we  cannot,  but  something
will  occur  to-night."  After  Home  awoke,  we  went  into
the  conservatory,  and  again  heard  httle  Dannie  rapping
on  the  floor  and  on  the  glass.

At  supper,  at  about  ten  o'clock,  there  came  suddenly
very  loud  raps  all  around  on  the  table,  walls,  floor,
&c.,  &c.  I  never  heard  them  so  loud  before.  Home  was
entranced,  and  taking  Mrs.  Cox  by  the  hand  led  her
into  the  drawing-room.  When  there,  she  heard  something
rusthng  near  the  coffin,  and  immediately  felt  a  little
hand  touch  her,  and  place  between  her  fingers  a  sprig  of
lauristinus.  Home  then  brought  her  back  into  the  supper
room  ;  and  somebody  remarked  that  lauristinus  meant  in
the  language  of  flowers — "  If  neglected,  I  die."  Home
awoke  immediately.

He  and  I  slept  in  the  same  room.  Soon  after  he  had
gone  to  bed,  he  went  into  a  trance  ;  and  began  discours-
ing about  moral  principles,  &c.  He  then  said,  "  You
tell  his  mother  in  the  morning  that  Dannie  gave  her  that
sprig  of  lauristinus,  which  means,  '  If  neglected,  I  die '  ;
because  he  wanted  to  show  her  that  if  she  did  anything
unworthy  of  him  it  would  give  him  pain.  Your  greatest
idea  of  pain  is  death  ;  you  are  wrong  there  ;  but  that
is  your  idea,  and  therefore  he  put  it  in  that  way."  I  made
some  remark  about  its  being  a  very  wonderful  thing
his  giving  her  the  flower.  He  said,  "  We  are  going  to
do  something  still  more  wonderful  for  you.  A  little  later,
when  the  house  is  quite  still,  you  and  Dan  are  to  get
up  ; you  will  take  the  slippers  ; we  will  take  care  Dan


NO.  26]


With  D.  D.  Home


123


does  not  catch  cold.  You  are  to  go  downstairs,  and
into  the  drawing-room  ;  Dan  will  stand  at  the  door  ;
and  you  are  to  go  alone  up  to  that  little  box  you  call
a  coffin,  and  hft  the  lid  a  httle  ;  and  then  return  to
Dan — that  is  all.  Little  Dannie's  colours  are  purple  and
white — signs  of  the  greatest  purity  ;  purple  and  white
are  the  most  perfect  colours  ;  remember  that  ;  and  after
them  blue,  and  so  on  down  to  black,  which  is  the  lowest."
Home  then  awoke,  and  presently  said,  "  I  feel  impressed
to  open  the  door."  "  Well,"  I  said,  "  do  so  if  you  hke  ;
it  can  do  no  harm."  He  got  up  and  did  so  ;  and,  on
his  way  back  to  bed,  I  heard  some  spirit  tap  him  on  the
shoulder.  He  said  something  in  answer,  and  went  into
a  trance  ;  he  picked  up  the  shppers,  put  them  on  my
feet,  and  told  me  to  get  up.  "  Do  not  be  afraid,"  he
said,  "  I  require  no  light  to  guide  my  footsteps."  He
took  both  my  hands  in  his,  and  then  led  me  rapidly,
without  hesitation,  out  of  the  room,  down  the  stairs,
and  across  the  hall,  the  place  being  perfectly  dark.  He
conducted  me  into  the  drawing-room,  and  then  stood
still,  saying,  "  Now  walk  straight  before  you  to  the  coffin,
and  do  as  you  have  been  told."  I  did  so,  raising  the
drapery,  and  Lifting  the  lid  at  the  head  about  an  inch.
Home  said  "  Raise  it  a  httle  higher,  about  as  high  as
would  permit  a  hand  entering."  I  did  so,  and  heard  some-
thing rustle  inside.  Home  said,  "  That  is  sufficient."
I  replaced  the  lid,  and  returned  to  where  Home  was
standing.  He,  as  before,  took  both  my  hands  in  his,
led  me  upstairs,  and  into  the  bedroom,  closed  the  door,
and  put  me  down  in  a  chair  by  the  window,  still  retaining
my  hands  in  the  same  position.  He  said,  "  Little  Dannie
is  here  between  you  and  the  light  ;  can  you  not  see
him  ?  "  "  No,"  I  said,  "  I  cannot."  He  laughed  and
said,  "  Dannie  would  make  himself  appear  as  white  ;
but  he  cannot  just  yet ;  he  has  so  recently  come  to  us.
He  will  try  and  make  himself  visible  as  a  dark  shadow  to
you."  I  still  said  that  I  could  see  nothing.  "  Ah,  never
mind !  "  Home  said ;  and  holding  one  of  my  hands  in
his  he  stretched  it  out  in  the  dark,  and  said,  "  Dannie
will let you play  with it first." I  perceived  a  strong


124


Experiences  in  S-piritualism


[seance


scent,  as  it  were,  blown  over  me,  and  felt  a  flower
touch  my  fingers  and  then  withdraw  itself.  Presently,  I
felt  a  little  soft  hand  touch  mine,  and  a  flower  was  given
me.  I  then  felt  a  strong  tremor  run  through  Home's
hands,  and  he  spoke  as  little  Dannie,  and  said,  "  You
must  get  into  bed  quickly  ;  Dan  is  going  to  awake  ;
if  you  would  like  very  much  to  see  what  you  have  got
you  can  make  an  excuse  to  light  a  candle  presently."
Accordingly,  after  Home  had  awoke,  I  lit  a  candle,  and
found  I  had  been  given  a  purple  and  white  petunia  that
had  been  placed  in  one  of  the  little  hands  in  the  coffin.


No.  21.-~Seance.

The  next  evening  we  had  another  seance,  this  time
sitting  round  a  table  placed  against  the  head  of  the
coffin.  The  coffin  had  been  fastened  down  and  covered
with  white  drapery,  most  prettily  arranged  with  flowers
and  ferns.  We  had  physical  manifestations  and  some
messages  from  little  Dannie,  the  table  on  which  the  coffin
was  placed  was  moved  about,  the  drapery  agitated,  &c.
We  then  heard  pieces  of  fern  being  plucked,  we  could
distinctly  hear  the  branches  broken  ;  a  piece  of  fern  was
given  to  each  person  present,  their  attention  being  called
to  it  by  being  touched  on  the  knee,  and  the  hand  being
then  placed  beneath  the  table  the  fern  was  put  into  it.
With  the  fern  presented  to  me,  the  following  message  was
given  : — "  Birth  has  given  you  distinction,  let  your  life  he
the  more  distinguished  for  a  prayerful  and  earnest  search
after  truth  ;  it  is  kind  of  you  to  have  come  to  the  house
of  joy  ;  truth  seekers  are  brothers  and  sisters  and  should
share  each  other  s  sorroivs  and  joys."  Home  then  went
into  a  trance,  and  took  the  lamp  out  of  the  room,  saying
we  were  to  see  a  manifestation  that  could  only  take
place  in  the  dark.  We  presently  saw  a  brilliant  httle
star,  it  flitted  about  with  an  uncertain-like  motion — some-
times approaching,  sometimes  receding  from  us.  We
heard  raps  come  from  the  star  which  flashed  like  an
electric spark at each detonation. Mrs. Cox  suddenly


NO.  27]


With  D.  D.  Home


125


said  that  a  quantity  of  Eau  de  Cologne  had  been  thrown
over  her  from  the  ceihng.  Home  carried  a  small  flask
containing  some  which  the  spii'its  probably  made  use
of.  Home,  who  was  standing  at  some  distance  from
us,  said,  we  should  have  the  odour  changed  four  times
and  in  effect  a  totally  different  scent  was  blown  over  us
four  times  on  a  palpable  strong  current  of  air.  Home
then  fetched  the  lamp  back.  We  heard  a  knocking  at
the  door,  he  opened  it  and  appeared  to  invite  some  one
to  come  in,  but  did  not  succeed  ;  he  shut  the  door,
when  the  knocking  re-commenced  he  oj^ened  it  again,
but  was  unsuccessful  ;  this  was  repeated  three  or  four
times,  at  last  he  went  and  gathering  some  ferns  and
.  flowers  from  off  the  coffin  opened  the  door  and  held
them  out  ;  still  it  was  in  vain,  the  knocking  again
occurred  at  the  door,  and  this  time  he  took  little  Ada
and  led  her  to  the  door,  when  he  appeared  to  succeed
in inducing the person to come in. He said, "  It

is ■ " (a  little  servant  girl  who  had  died  two  days

previously).  "  How  very  curious,  she  seems  scarcely  to
know  that  she  has  passed  away,  and  says,  she  does  not
like  to  come  into  the  room  where  there  is  anybody  dead.
Every  time  I  opened  the  door  she  said,  '  No  thank  you,
I  would  sooner  not  !  "  But  little  Dannie  wanted  her  to
come  in  and  rapped,  or  rather  got  another  spirit  to  rap
for  him  at  the  door,  every  time  I  shut  it.  I  took  the
flowers  and  ferns  to  show  her  there  was  nothing  dis-
agreeable about  the  room,  and  then  I  took  little  Ada  with
me,  and  she  has  come  in  now  and  is  standing  there  in
the  corner.  She  will  move  this  fern  that  I  have  placed
here  on  the  table  near  her."  Home  placed  a  fern  on  the
table,  and  presently  we  saw  it  taken  up  and  put  down
again. He  then  awoke.


The  next  afternoon  the  httle  body  was  placed  in  the
ground.  During  the  service  a  shght  shower  came  on  ;
but  just  at  the  conclusion,  when  we  had  lowered  the
coffin  to  its  place,  a  bright  beam  of  sunshine  broke  out,
flooding  us  with  hght ; and  a  beautiful  rainbow  appeared


126  Experiences  in  Spiritualism  [seance


in  the  heavens.  On  our  way  home,  every  one  remarked
that  the  burial  service,  which  is  in  general  so  impressive,
had  that  day  while  in  church  sounded  strangely  flat  and
unprofitable.  Mrs.  Cox  asked  how  it  was  that  the  clergy-
man had  not  used  the  words  dust  to  dust,  ashes  to  ashes,
earth  to  earth.  We  assured  her  he  had  ;  but  she  declared
she  had  not  heard  them,  although  standing  as  near  to
him  as  any  of  us.


No.  28. — Seance.

The  same  evening  we  had  a  seance,  and  Home  was
entranced — Mr.  Cox  speaking  through  him.  He  turned  to
Mrs.  Cox  and  said,  "  I  was  there  with  httle  Dannie  to-day,
but  I  did  not  like  to  take  him  into  the  church  ;  we
waited  outside.  The  reason  why  the  service  did  not
impress  any  of  you  is,  that  there  was  no  spiritual  presence
inside  the  building — nothing  but  the  bare  rafters.  We
magnetized  you  to  prevent  your  hearing  the  words —
dust  to  dust,  ashes  to  ashes,  earth  to  earth.  Now,  if
you  had  been  consigning  to  the  earth  this  day  the  body
of  some  celebrated  mediaeval  ecclesiastic  or  great  saint,
those  circumstances  of  the  shower  of  rain,  the  bright
gleam  of  sun,  and  the  rainbow,  would  have  been  considered
miraculous.  Of  course  they  were  not  so  ;  it  is  unreasonable
to  think  that  God's  great  laws  should  be  interfered  with
to  give  you  a  rainbow.  Yet  was  it  the  result  of  inter-
ference in  this  way.  We  knew  by  our  superior  knowledge
of  meteorology,  and  the  laws  that  govern  those  things,
that  at  that  hour  on  Thursday,  there  would  pro-
bably be  a  combination  of  circumstances  that  would
produce  those  effects.  We  therefore  very  strongly  impressed
Dan  to  insist  upon  having  the  funeral  on  Thursday  instead
of  Friday,  which  was  the  day  you  had  fixed  upon  ;  and
we  impressed  him  to  make  you  all  hurry.  You  remember
how  he  did  hurry  you  all  on  your  way  to  church.  As
it  happened,  you  arrived  at  the  right  time,  and  every-
thing occurred  just  as  we  expected.  That  is  all  the
interference  there  was." He  then  spoke  for some  time


KO.  28]


With  D.  D.  Home


127


to  Mrs.  Cox,  exhorting  her  to  have  patience  and  courage,
and  to  trust  in  God.  Tlie  "  Nameless  Doctor  "  then  took
possession  of  Home  ;  who  after  walking  about  the  room
thinking,  took  httle  Ada's  hand  in  his,  and  said  to  Mrs.
Cox,  "  This  child's  stomach  is  of  more  importance  now  than
her  brain  ;  do  not  push  her  too  much  in  her  studies."
Dr.  Elliotson  then  took  possession  of  him,  and  he  spoke
for  some  time  to  Mrs.  Cox.  Then  turning  to  me  he
said,  "  I  suppose  you  have  found  out,  if  not  you  will —
I  know  I  did  when  on  earth — that  if  you  try  and  climb
up  one  rung  higher  on  the  ladder  of  knowledge  than
others,  the  world  will  scream  and  say  you  are  going  to
tumble  down  and  break  your  neck  ;  but  when  they  find
you  stick  there  pretty  safely,  they  will  try  and  scramble
up  after  you,  and  endeavour  to  get  ahead  of  you.  Pro-
vided your  own  conscience  does  not  reprove  you,  never
mind  what  the  world  says.  As  my  friend,  Mr.  Cox  said
to  you  yesterday,  '  Be  constant  in  a  prayerful  and  earnest
search  for  truth  ;  seek  truth,  and  you  will  find  it.'  "  He
went  on  speaking  for  some  time,  describing  different
phases  of  worldly  ambition,  and  warning  us  against  them.


No.  29. — Seance,  November  3rd,  1868.

In  the  account  of  the  phenomena  that  occurred  at
Homburg,  mention  is  made  of  Home  finding  a  death's-
head  moth  ;  of  my  being  told  to  play  with  two  louis,  and
with  the  proceeds  to  buy  a  locket  with  it.  I  took  the
moth  to  Tessier's,  and  ordered  a  crystal  medalhon  to  be
made  for  it.  In  due  course  it  was  sent  home.  While
Home  was  sitting  with  httle  Dannie  Cox,  during  his  last
illness,  the  locket  in  his  pocket  was  broken  by  a  blow
from  some  invisible  hand,  or  other  agency.  We  speculated
as  to  the  reason  for  this,  but  came  to  no  satisfactory
result.  The  day  before  yesterday  I  asked  for  the  locket,
in  order  to  get  it  mended.  When  I  saw  it,  I  thought
that  the  material  was  glass  and  not  crystal.  I  took  it
to  my  optician,  and  found  I  was  correct. I  then  took  it


128  Experiences  in  Spiritualism  [seance


to  Tessier's  to  have  a  proper  crystal  made.  Yesterday,
while  washing  my  hands  before  dinner,  I  said  to  Home,
"  I  now  know  why  the  locket  was  broken  ;  it  was  to  call
attention  to  the  fact  that  glass  had  been  substituted  for
crystal."  Immediately  a  spirit  rapped  "  Yes,"  very  loudly,
on  the  dressing  table.  About  nine  o'clock  I  was  reading  ;
Home  lying  on  the  sofa.  He  said,  "  There  is  a  strong
spirit  standing  near  you  ;  he  is  nicely  made,  and  appears
to  have  nice  features,  but  I  cannot  see  them  clearly.
His  hair  is  cut  very  short  indeed,  and  [he]  has  a  sort  of
mark  not  amounting  to  a  scar,  upon  his  cheek  bone."  I
could  not  think  who  it  was,  when  it  seemed  to  flash  upon

me  that  it  was  A B  ,  though  I  could  not  recognize

him  the  least  by  the  description.  Home  said,  "  His
name  begins  with  an  A."  I  said,  "  No  ;  with  a  B,  if  it
is  the  person  I  imagine."  "  His  name  begins  with  an  A,"
he  said,  "  that  is,  of  course,  his  Christian  name.  "  Well,"
I  said,  "  that  would  be  right." "  Yes,"  Home  said,  "  his

name is  A  ; he  says he will  come  to  us  to-night."

Home  said  it  was  a  case  of  second  sight,  and  asked  me  to
look  at  his  eyes  to  try  and  discover  the  film  that  is  said  to
cover  the  eyes  of  a  person  during  second  sight.  I  could
see  nothing  abnormal  about  them,  except  that  the  pupils
were  much  dilated  ;  on  applying  light  near  them  they
contracted  naturally.  The  vision  had  nearly  faded  when  I
examined  his  eyes.


Later  in  the  evening  we  had  a  seance.  Present  :  C.  and
E.  Wynne,  C.  and  B.  Nixon,  James  Gore-Booth,  Home  and
myself.  We  sat  for  about  an  hour,  and  scarcely  anything
occurred.  We  then  went  into  the  dining-room  to  have
a  cup  of  tea,  and  raps  came  on  the  table.  We  returned
to  the  other  room  and  sat  down,  but  had  only  very
faint-  indications  of  spiritual  presence.  Home  said  to  me,
"  Let  you  and  I  and  Charlie  Wynne  go  into  the  bed-
room by  ourselves  for  a  minute,  perhaps  they  would  tell
us  the  reason  why  we  have  no  manifestations."  We  did
so,  and  put  our  hands  upon  a  small  table.  The  table
tilted itself into Charlie's lap  ; and we had  messages


NO.  29]


With  D.  D.  Home


129


given  by  tilts  of  the  table,  by  raps  on  the  table,  and  on
the  floor.

Message  to  CharUe. — "  We  are  developing  you.  You
heard  sowids  like  drops  of  rain  upon  your  pillow ;  you
will  soon  he  able  to  have  raps ;  persevere  in  sitting  as  you
have  done  at  home  :  you  will  be  rewarded  by  rnanifestatiotis."
CharUe  asked,  "  Was  that  shaking  of  my  bed  anything
spiritual  ?  "  "  Yes,  like  this  table  is  shaken."  Charhe  :
"  Yes,  that  is  hke  it  exactly ;  but  I  do  not  Hke  to  be
shaken  in  bed."  The  table  was  shaken  more  violently,
as  if  to  say  that  perhaps  he  would  be  shaken  again.
Charlie:  "Who  shook  me?"  "Grandfather  William.
We  took  away  the  pain  from  Emmy  the  other  night.''  In
answer  to  a  question,  they  said  there  was  nothing  anta-
gonistic in  any  of  the  party,  but  that  Dan  was  not  in  a
good  condition.  We  joined  the  rest  again,  but  had  no
further  manifestations.


After  we  had  gone  to  bed.  Home  went  into  a
trance  ;  for  some  time  he  spoke  with  difficulty.  He  asked
me  who  certain  people  were.  "  Who  is  WUloughby
Wjmne  ?  Who  is  Emily  ?  "  he  then  said  something  about
a  pretty  Uttle  child  and  two  Amys  ;  and  also  there  was
an  uncle  of  mine  there  who  used  to  give  me  apples  out
of  his  pocket.  I  asked  "  Wyndham  ?  "  he  said  "  No,
Goold."  "  Francis  ?  "  I  asked  ;  "  Yes,"  he  said,  "  Francis."
He  then  began  to  speak  quite  clearly,  and  said  "  We
would  often  hke  to  tell  you  who  we  are,  but  our  oppor-
tunities of  communicating  are  so  rare  and  so  short,  that
we  cannot  generally  do  so.  There  are  so  many  difficulties
in  the  way,  it  is  hke  sending  messages  along  wires  that
are  continually  breaking  and  getting  out  of  order.  We
could  scarcely  do  anything  to-night.  Dan  ought  not  to
have  drunli  a  second  cup  of  tea,  or  that  second  glass  of
sherry  at  dinner  ;  the  slightest  thing  is  sufiicient  to  pre-
vent anything  occurring. Ah, A has  just  come  in ;

he  has  come  busthng  into  the  room  ;  you  heard  him."
I  said,  "  Well,  I  heard  a  noise  as  if  the  door  had  been
opened." "  Yes,"  he  said,  "that  was  him  ;  you  will  always

I


130  Experiences  in  Spiritvalism  [seance


know  Avlien  A comes  ;  he  will  make  a  sound  like  that

at  the  door.  He  is  standing  close  to  yoix  now,  looking
straight  at  you.  He  does  not  quite  understand  his
position  yet,  poor  fellow.  He  cannot  disabuse  himself
of  the  idea  that  he  is  going  to  be  punished.  He  does  not
think  that  according  to  the  life  that  he  led  on  earth
he  ought  to  be  in  the  company  of  those  who  are  here  in
the  same  room.  He  says,  '  I  am  going  to  help  you  out
of  a  scrape,  old  fellow.'  He  has  a  strange  regret  at
having  left  the  earth  ;  he  was  in  love  ;  he  will  of  course
soon  cease  to  regret  it ;  but  he  does  not  quite  understand
himself  as  yet.  He  asked  us  why  you  had  put  your
glasses  there  close  to  you ;  and  when  we  told  him  in
case  he  or  any  of  us  made  ourselves  visible  to  you,  you
wished  to  be  able  to  use  them,  he  coidd  not  understand
that  he  could  possibly  make  himself  apparent  to  you.
He  was  a  bit  of  a  fop  ;  fond  of  being  neat  and  tidy,  and
very  careful  of  his  hands  ;  he  had  very  nice  hands."

{hi  answer  to  a  remarh  of  mine.)  "  He  says  he  has
nothing  to  forgive.  He  has  been  a  good  deal  with  your
mother  ;  she  is  fond  of  him  ;  he  is  very  truthful.  He
is  very  fond  of  his  father ;  he  says  that  his  father  is
honest  in  his  belief,  and  that  is  more  than  he  can  say
for  most  people.  Your  mother  and  he,  and  all  of  us
have  been  consulting  about  you,  as  regards  a  question
yovi  promised  your  father  that  you  would  ask.  Yow  had
better  absolve  yoiirself  from  that  obUgation,  for  your
mother  would  not  like  you  to  ask  her  about  any  single
or  jaarticular  dogma.

"  That  religion  in  which  God's  created  creatures  worship
him  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  forgetful  of  self,  and  casting
aside  worldly  amliition,  is  a  true  religion,  nor  does  it
matter  by  what  title  you  choose  to  call  it.  There  is
too  much  of  worldly  ambition  and  love  of  power  mixed
up  in  rehgion."  Home  then  spoke  to  me  about  some
purely  personal  matters,  and  then  for  some  time  on  the
subject  that  atonement  mvist  be  made  for  all  wrong  done
on  earth.  "Ah,"  he  said,  "Many  that  are  very  high
and  mighty  when  with  you,  must  become  very  humble
indeed  when  they  come  to  us  ;  you  would  scarcely  think


NO.  29]


With  D.  D.  Home


131


that  Alexander  the  Great  is  yet,  as  it  were,  in  the  posi-
tion of  the  lowest  servant  ;  he  did  certain  things  on  earth
that  he  knew  to  be  very  wrong,  and  he  was  a  very  powerful
man — powerful,  I  mean  magnetically.  Every  great  general,
statesman,  or  orator,  is  full  of  magnetism.  The  power  of
an  orator,  the  way  he  draws  his  audience  to  him,  is
mainly  due  to  his  magnetic  attraction.  We  sometimes
magnetise  you,  and  you  are  not  aware  of  it.  You  were
magnetised  just  now,  and  you  heard  a  spirit  shout."'
I  said,  "  I  am  not  aware  that  I  did."  "  You  did  not
notice  it ;  you  did  not  know  what  it  was,  and  you  did
not  pay  any  attention  to  it  ;  but  you  heard  it.  The
spirit  wanted  to  come  into  the  room,  but  he  knew  he
could  not.  He  was  not  worthy  to  come  into  the  pre-
sence of  those  who  are  in  the  room,  no  one  said  any-
thing to  him — no  one  rebuked  him  ;  but  he  felt  his  own
unworthiness,  and  rushed  away  screaming,  as  you  would
if  suffering  pain ;  as  you,  if  some  one  were  telling  you
some  dreadful  harrowing  story,  would  cry  out  to  stop
them,  thus  he  felt  what  he  was,  and  fled  away.  Now
some  men  would  call  him  a  devil,  but  he  is  not  ;  he  will
try  and  make  amends,  and  eventually  all  will  come  right.
God  could  not  create  what  you  call  a  devil.''

Home  then  began  talking  about  dreams.  He  said,
"  You  may  think  it  a  very  curiovis  theory,  but  it  is
true,  that  we  are  sometimes  in  communion  witli
your  spirits  when  we  cannot  even  see  your  bodies.
In  sleep,  sometimes,  your  spirits  are,  as  it  were,  nearer
to  us,  more  open  to  impression.  Of  course,  as  you  all
know,  it  is  the  mortal  body  only  that  requu'es  sleep  ;
the  spirit  is  always  awake.  Now,  with  you,  your  stomach
is  so  much  out  of  order,  your  digestion  so  hard,  and  in
such  a  bad  state,  that  any  impression  upon  you  in
sleep  takes  a  fleeting  and  painful  nature."

{In  answer  to  a  question.)  "  Yes,  you  can  take  it  with
other  medicine.  Take  it  for  a  fortnight,  then  leave  o
for  a  fortnight,  then  take  it  again,  and  in  two  months
or  so  we  can  judge  of  the  effect.  We  can  only  tell
these  things  by  watching  the  effect."  Home  was  then
silent  for  a  short  time. When  he  next  spoke,  he  spoke


132


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


as  little  Dannie  Cox.  He  said,  "  Oh !  I  say !  now
look  here  (two  expressions  Dannie  habitually  used  when
on  earth).  I  Uke  you  to  pray,  it  does  good,  and  I  am
fond  of  you.  Never  you  mind  about  that  fern,  you  shall
have  another  one.  Perhaps  you  will  find  it  yet,  for  I
am  not  sure  that  it  is  destroyed  ;  at  any  rate,  never  you
mind  about  it  ;  if  it  is,  you  shall  have  another.  Dan  is
going  to  awake  now.  When  he  has  awoke,  if  you  will  go
and  sit  down  on  his  bed  for  a  minute  I  will  come."
I  did  so,  telling  Home  that  I  wanted  to  see  if  we  should
have  any  manifestations.  We  heard  a  spirit  come  in  and
walk  about  the  room  ;  and  perceived  a  hght  near  the
ceiUng.  Little  Dannie  Cox  then  came  and  moved  away
a  pillow  that  Home  had  over  his  feet.  He  stroked  and
pulled  my  feet,  and  sat  on  them ;  and  when  Home
asked  him  if  his  mother  was  asleep,  he  bounced  up  and
down  on  my  feet,  feehng  just  as  heavy  as  a  child  of  his
age  would  if  in  the  flesh.  We  also  saw  the  same  sort
of  Httle  star  we  had  seen  at  Stockton.  He  then  said,
"  Now,  good  night,"  and  stood  upon  the  foot  of  the  bed.
I  saw  him  distinctly  as  a  shadowy  figure,  of  the  same
size  as  his  mortal  body,  with  apj)arently  some  loose
drapery  on.  His  hand  was  stretched  out  towards  us
waving  about.  The  hand  and  arm  were  directly  between
me  and  the  window,  and  interrupted  the  light  as  palpably
as  if  made  of  sohd  flesh  and  bone.


No.  30. — Seance  held  at  Mrs.  Hennings'  House,  at  Norwood.

Present :  Mr.  Home,  Mrs.  Hennings,  Mrs.  Jencken,
Mr.  Jencken,  Mr.  Saal,  Mr.  Hurt,  and  myself.  The
peculiarity  of  this  seance  was  that  the  manifestations  appear
to  have  been  conducted  with  a  view  rather  to  convince
the  spirits  present,  than  the  mortals.

Mr.  Saal  is  a  medium,  but  has  been  accustomed  to  make
a  joke  of  the  whole  thing  ;  and  has  latterly  been  a  good
deal  troubled  and  annoyed  by  the  spirits.  We  had
physical  manifestations — tilting  and  raising  of  the  table,
movements  of  the  piano,  currents  of  air,  raps,  &c.,  &c.


NO.  30]


With  D.  D.  Home


133


A  series  of  messages  were  then  delivered  to  Mr.  Saal.
He  was  told  that  he  should  not  treat  spirits  in  a  manner
that  he  would  not  dare  to  exercise  towards  mortals.
Good  advice  was  given  him,  and  he  was  told  to  submit
all  to  his  reason,  for  it  was  given  him  for  that  purpose.
Suppose,  they  said,  a  spirit  were  to  tell  you  to  put
your  finger  in  the  candle,  you  would  be  very  foohsh  to
do  so  ;  you  would  be  burnt  ;  but  if  a  spirit  was  to  tell
you  to  do  this,  and  then  magnetize  you,  causing  you  to
feel  that  some  substance,  as  it  were,  had  been  placed
over  your  skin,  you  might  reasonably  think  means  had
been  taken  to  prevent  your  being  burned,  and  then  you
would  be  right  to  try.  Home  then  went  into  a  trance.
He  walked  about  the  room,  opened  the  door,  and  appeared
to  welcome  a  number  of  people.  He  then  seemed  to  be
explaining  to  them  the  different  phenomena  that  had
occurred  in  that  room.  He  showed  how  the  table  had
been  raised,  the  piano  and  the  furniture  moved,  &c. ;
and  apparently  explained  the  process  of  elongation,  point-
ing to  certain  marks  on  the  wall  that  had  been  made  on
a  previous  occasion  to  record  the  height  to  which  he
had  attained.  He  then  went  to  the  fire-place  ;  stirred
the  coals  into  ,a  blaze,  and  seemed  to  recount  how  he
had  handled  hot  embers.  He  sat  for  some  time  on  the
hearth,  and  then  got  up  and  walked  about  a  little  while,
and  taking  up  from  the  other  table  Glanvill's  book  on
Witchcraft,  he  appeared  distressed.  He  brought  the  book
to  me,  and  placed  my  right  hand  flat  upon  the  cover,
supporting  it  himself  underneath  ;  raps  came  upon  the
book.  He  gradually  withdrew  his  hand  until  the  book
was  supported  by  one  finger  only  ;  lastly,  he  withdrew
that  also,  and  the  book  was  suspended  in  the  air,  or
rather  adhered  to  my  open  hand.  My  fingers  were  not
near  the  edges,  my  hand  was  extended  flat  upon  the  cover  ;
I  could  not  have  grasped  and  retained  the  book  in  any
way ;  it  simply  adhered  to  my  hand.  Home  seemed
pleased  at  this,  and  laughed,  and  turned  round  to  the
(to  us)  invisible  spectators,  as  much  as  to  say,  "  Do  you
see  that  ?  "  He  repeated  this  experiment,  making  me
place  my  left  hand  upon  his,  which  he  placed  underneath


134  Experiences  in  Spiritualism  [seance


the  book,  in  order,  as  he  said,  that  I  might  feel  that  his
hand  left  the  book.  When  he  withdrew  his  hand,  there
was  a  space  between  it  and  the  book  of,  I  should  say,
three  inches.  The  book  felt  to  me  as  though  supported
from  beneath  by  a  cushion  or  column  of  air.  He  then
placed  Glanvill  on  Witchcraft  on  the  table,  and,  leaving
the  room,  brought  back  with  him  a  large  volume  on
Mythology,  which  he  had  taken  from  a  perfectly  dark
library ;  he  also  brought  his  own  book.  Reminiscences  in
my  Life,  and  laid  them  both  upon  the  table.  He  then
walked  about  the  room,  and  appeared  to  be  expostulating
with  the  spirits,  then  sitting  down  he  placed  the  three
books  before  him,  in  the  form  of  a  cross,  and  began
speaking  about  them.  "  This,"  he  said,  placing  his  hand
on  the  mythological  book,  "  is  pure  Materialism  ;  this,"
touching  Glanvill,  "  Religion  materiaUzed ;  and  this,"
taking  his  own  book,  "  Materialism  spiritualized.  The
first,  blood  to  appease  a  God ;  the  second,  blood  to
appease  mankind  ;  the  third,  the  blood  of  the  soul  to
appease  mankind.  Though  you  boast  of  your  civilisation,
and  though  there  are  no  longer  persecutions  of  fire  and
blood  :  yet  is  there  a  moral  persecution,  and,  in  many
respects,  your  age  is  as  dark  as  any.  Who  will  dispel
this  darkness  ?  Who  is  bold  enough  to  take  the  broom
and  clear  away  the  cobwebs  ?  It  must  come  from  the
material  side — from  your  side — we  cannot  do  it."  He
spoke  for  a  long  time,  more  than  half  an  hour  I  should
think.  He  likened  different  men's  ideas  of  God  to  the
different  attempts  we  would  all  make  to  delineate  the
highest  peak  of  the  Himalayas.  "  None  of  you,"  he  said,
"  have  seen  it  ;  you  would  all  draw  a  different  form  and
none  of  you  would  be  right."

He  was  very  sarcastic  about  the  wise  men  of  the  day,
who,  he  said,  were  afraid  to  investigate  for  fear  of  dis-
covering something  beyond  their  own  philosophy,  and
which  they  could  not  account  for ;  and  yet,  not  one  of
them  could  tell  you  why  one  man's  hair  is  hght  and
another's  dark.  "You  are  much  puzzled,"  he  said,  "about
many  things.  Know  that  the  highest  angels  also  are
lost  in  wonder  and  awe  at  many  things." While  talking.


NO.  30]


With  D.  D.  Home


135


he  appeared  to  become  uneasy  and  getting  up,  said,
"  There  is  a  spirit  here  who  will  go  on  arguing  with
Dr.  Elhotson,  so  that  he  cannot  attend  to  anything  ;
I  must  really  interfere,"  and  he  walked  to  the  other  end
of  the  room,  where  he  seemed  to  expostulate  with  some  one.
Coming  back  he  said,  "  Dr.  Elhotson  and  Dr.  Jencken  have
invited  a  number  of  spirits  here,  they  did  not  know
the  nature  of  manifestations,  and  were  anxious  to  see
them.  Owing  to  circumstances  not  being  favourable  at
first  we  failed  to  do  what  we  wished  and  they  are  not
satisfied,  we  will  try  again  now."  He  went  to  the  fire,
poked  up  the  coals,  and  putting  his  hand  in,  drew  out
a  hot  burning  ember,  about  twice  the  size  of  an  orange  ;
this  he  carried  about  the  room,  as  if  to  shew  it  to  the
spirits,  and  then  brought  it  to  us  ;  we  all  examined  it.
He  then  put  it  back  in  the  fire  and  showed  us  his  hands  ;
they  were  not  in  the  least  blackened  or  scorched,  neither
did  they  smell  of  fire,  but  on  the  contrary  of  a  sweet
scent  which  he  threw  off  from  his  fingers  at  us  across  the
table.  Having  apparently  spoken  to  some  spirit,  he  went
back  to  the  fire,  and  with  his  hand  stirred  the  embers
into  a  flame  ;  then  kneehng  down,  he  placed  his  face  right
among  the  burning  coals,  moving  it  about  as  though
bathing  it  in  water.  Then,  getting  up,  he  held  his  finger
for  some  time  in  the  flame  of  the  candle.  Presently,  he
took  the  same  lump  of  coal  he  had  previously  handled  and
came  over  to  us,  blowing  upon  it  to  make  it  brighter.  He
then  waUied  slowly  round  the  table,  and  said,  "  I  want
to  see  whicli  of  you  will  be  the  best  subject.  All !
Adare  will  be  the  easiest,  because  he  has  been  most
with  Dan."  ]Mr.  Jencken  held  out  his  hand,  saying,
"  Put  it  in  mine,"  Home  said,  "  No  no,  touch  it  and  see,"
he  touched  it  with  the  tip  of  liis  finger  and  burnt  himself.
Home  then  held  it  within  four  or  five  inches  of  ]\Ir.
Saal's  and  ]\Ir.  Hurt's  hands,  and  they  could  not  endure
the  heat.  He  came  to  me  and  said,  "  Now,  if  you  are
not  afraid,  hold  out  your  hand  ;  "  I  did  so,  and  having
made  two  rapid  passes  over  my  hand,  he  placed  the  coal
in  it.  I  must  have  held  it  for  half  a  minute,  long  enough
to  have  burned  my  hand  fearfully  ;  the  coal  felt  scarcely


136  Experiences  in  Spiritualism  [seance

warm.  Home  then  took  it  away,  laughed,  and  seemed
much  pleased.  As  he  was  going  back  to  the  fire-place,
he  suddenly  turned  round  and  said,  "  Why,  just  fancy,
some  of  them  think  that  only  one  side  of  the  ember  was
hot."  He  told  me  to  make  a  hollow  of  both  my  hands  ;
I  did  so,  and  he  placed  the  coal  in  them,  and  then  put
both  his  on  the  top  of  the  coal,  so  that  it  was  completely
covered  by  our  four  hands,  and  we  held  it  there  for  some
time.  Upon  this  occasion  scarcely  any  heat  at  all  could  be
perceived.  After  having  replaced  the  coal  in  the  fire,  he
went  and  held  his  hand — the  fingers  being  extended  down-
wards— about  nine  inches  above  a  vase  of  flowers,  "  You
will  see,"  he  said,  "  That  I  can  withdraw  the  moisture
and  scent  from  the  flowers."  He  came  over  to  me  and
rubbed  my  hands,  imparting  the  odour  of  the  flowers  to
them  ;  his  fingers  were  quite  moist  as  with  dew  ;  he  also
flipped  the  moisture,  and  with  it  the  scent  from  his
fingers  to  each  person.  He  now  appeared  quite  satisfied,
and  after  speaking  a  little  to  the  spirits  in  the  room,
opened  the  door  and  bowed  them  out,  and  then  resumed
his  seat.  "  Now,"  he  said,  "  Do  you  all  realise  that  you
have  seen  what  is  called  a  miracle,  yet  in  reaHty  it  is
no  such  thing.  All  these  phenomena  only  shew  our
superior  acquaintance  with  natural  laws,  and  our  power
over  material  substances.  Mankind  ought  to  have  the
same  power  over  the  material  world  in  which  he  fives  ;
you  little  know  the  power  that  is  in  you  ;  had  you  faith,
you  could  do  things  you  fittle  dream  of."  He  spoke
some  time  in  this  strain,  and  then  said,  "  Dan  is  going
to  awake  now,  do  not  tell  him  what  has  occurred,  but
let  him  wash  liis  hands."  When  he  awoke,  he  was  much
exhausted,  but  after  washing,  appeared  quite  refreshed.
We  examined  him  closely  ;  there  was  no  sign — not  even
the  smell — of  fire  about  him,  neither  was  a  hair  of  his
head  singed.


No.  dl-— Seance.

The  other  night,  having  been  unwell  for  some  days,
I  went  to  bed  very  uncomfortable,  and  agueish  ; I  could


NO.  31]


With  D.  D.  Home


137


not  get  warm.  Home's  bed  was  rocked  about,  and  he
said,  "I  do  not  know  who  you  are,  but  unless  there  is
some  object  in  it,  I  wish  you  would  leave  off  rocking
my  bed,  for  it  makes  me  dizzy.  The  bed  left  off  shaking
and  a  spirit  spelt  out  "  Adah."  She  said,  "  /  am  here
and  seek  to  do  you  good  ;  can  you  imagine  my  inexpressible
joy,  your  angel  mother  has  taken  my  hand  in  hers."  Home
went  into  a  trance,  got  out  of  bed,  wrapped  a  fur  rug
round  his  middle,  then  warmed  his  hands  at  the  fire,
and  commenced  shampooing  me  over  my  chest,  stomach,
legs  and  feet.  He  then  took  off  my  fur  rug,  warmed  it
at  the  fire,  and  put  it  on  again,  and  made  passes  over
my  head,  retreating  as  he  did  so  to  the  further  side  of
the  room.  He  then  got  into  bed  and  awoke.  I  fell
asleep  soon  and  slept  soundly.


No.  32.

Last  night,  the  11th  [November,  1868],  I  had  gone  to
bed  about  nine  o'clock,  and  Home  an  hour  later.  Charlie
Wynne  happening  to  look  in,  he  sat  down  in  the  bedroom
and  smoked.  We  were  talking  on  serious  subjects,  and  a
spirit  joined  in  our  conversation.  Home  went  into  a  sort
of  half  trance  and  spoke  for  a  short  time.  After  Charhe
had  gone.  Home  had  a  second-sight  vision.  He  said  that
he  saw  a  wonderfully  beautiful  flower,  the  stem  purple,  the
leaves  the  purest  white,  the  flower  the  deepest  crimson,
turning  to  purple,  each  colour  emitting  a  light  of  the  same
tint.  As  he  looked  it  changed  and  he  said  it  had  reference
to  what  we  had  been  talking  about,  namely,  whether  there
was  change  in  the  next  world.  It  was  to  shew  that  there
is.  "  You  were  speculating,"  he  said,  "as  to  whether
spirits  could  visit  planets.  They  can  visit  them,  planet
after  planet,  star  after  star,  world  after  world,  through
infinity,  through  space.  Without  change  and  progression
they  would  not  be  happy."  He  then  said,  "  The  tobacco
smoke  is  very  bad,  I  was  going  into  a  deep  trance,  but
that  prevented  it ;  I  see  it,  not  as  a  cloud  of  smoke,
but  as  material  particles."


138


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


Ad  ARE  :  "  But  it  could  not  be  helped,  I  could  not
have  stopped  him."

Home  :  "  You  might,  it  was  only  false  modesty,  Charhe
would  not  have  minded."

Ad  ARE  :  "  But  if  I  had  stopped  him  when  I  saw  you
were  going  into  a  trance  it  would  have  been  too  late."

Home  :  "  Yes,  but  you  might  have  prevented  it  at
first,  it  was  at  any  rate  very  bad  for  you."  Home
was  at  this  time  only  as  it  were  half  entranced,  be  became
quite  entranced  and  said,  "  Tell  Dan  in  the  morning  that
a  Turkish  bath  will  be  good  for  him."  He  then  got  up
and  began  blowing  as  if  to  dispel  the  smoke,  and
agitated  the  window  blinds  also,  for  the  same  purpose.
He  said,  "  You  have  a  stiffness  about  the  head  yet."
He  got  out  of  bed,  came  to  me,  and  began  rubbing  and
kneading  the  back  of  my  head,  and  the  upper  part
of  my  spine,  occasionally  extending  his  hand  behind  him,
and  obtaining  some  moisture  upon  his  fingers.  I  thought
at  the  time  that  he  was  using  a  phial  of  spirits  of
camphor,  that  had  been  on  the  dressing  table,  but  I
discovered  afterwards  that  I  had  been  mistaken.  He
finished  by  vigorously  rubbing  my  feet  and  legs  ;  he  then
got  into  bed,  rubbed  his  own  chest,  legs  and  arms,  and
soon  after  awoke.


No.  33. — Sea7ice.

Last  Sunday  we  had  a  seance  at  Norwood.  Present  :
Major  Drayson,  Mr.  Collins,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Jencken,  Mrs.
Hennings,  myself.  Home,  Charhe  Wynne,  and  a  Prussian.
We  had  strong  physical  manifestations,  but  none  of  the
higher  sort,  as  two  of  the  party  were  occupied  in  investi-
gations. Charlie  happened  to  mention  to  some  one  a
rather  curious  reason  that  a  lady  of  his  acquaintance
had  given  for  not  believing  in  Spiritualism,  namely,
that  she  had  hved  50  years  in  the  world  without  hearing
of  it,  and  that  therefore  it  could  not  be  true.  A  spirit
said,  "  Sht  forgot  that  people  had  lived  before  her,  and  would
in  all  probability  live  after  her.  Fmiunately  all  have  7iot
her  organism."  .


NO.  34]


With  D.  D.  Home


139


About  ten  days  ago  we  had  a  smnce  at  Ashley  House
with  Henry  and  James  Gore  Booth.  We  had  good
physical  manifestations,  which  I  think  satisfied  James.


No.  M.— October  21th  [1868].i

Last  night  I  was  saying  to  Home,  that  it  was  curious
my  meeting  him  in  such  an  unexpected  manner  at  Malvern,
and  wondering  why  it  was  that  after  having  known  each
other  in  Paris,  we  should  have  remained  entirely  separated
for  so  many  years.  I  said  that  there  must  of  course  be
a  reason  for  it.  "  Perhaps,"  I  said,  "  my  mother  might
not  have  liked  my  investigation  of  Spiritualism."  Immed-
iately a  spirit  rapped  on  a  table  by  my  bedside,  "  Yes,"
meaning  that  she  would  not  have  approved  of  it.  Recog-
nizing the  raps,  I  asked  if  my  mother  was  there,  and
was  told,  "  Yes."  Home  asked,  "  But  do  you  now
object  to  it  1  "  Answer,  "  No,  it  adds  greatly  to  7)ty
Jiajypiness."  After  a  pause,  "  My  hoy ;  now  more  than
ever,  7ny  own  boy."  We  then  heard  one  of  the  ornaments
upon  the  wall  being  moved,  and  judged  by  the  position
of  the  sound  that  it  proceeded  from  a  benitier  that  was
suspended  over  Home's  head  ;  the  benitier  consisted  of
a  flat  slab  of  marble,  with  two  guardian  angels  repre-
sented on  it,  and  a  vessel  for  holy  water.  We  heard  the
benitier  removed  from  the  wall.  My  mother  spelled  out,
"/  bless  you  not  with  water,  but  by  the  'ptire  2)7'esence  of  a
spirit ;  "  and  I  then  saw  a  hand  and  arm  extended  over
me,  between  me  and  the  hght  of  the  window.  The
fingers  were  stretched  out,  and  the  hand  descended
towards  me,  waving  in  an  attitude  of  blessing  until  close
to  my  face,  when  it  disappeared.  Home  then  said,
"  I  see  my  Sacha  (his  wife)  ;  she  is  standing  near  the
foot  of  the  bed,  and  has  got  the  benitier  in  her  hand."
I  could  see  neither  the  spirit  not  the  benitier.  He  said,
"  She  is  bringing  it  over  to  me  ;  it  is  pressed  against
my  forehead  ; she  is  making  the  sign  of  the  cross  with

1  If  this  record  is  correctly  dated,  it  is  given  out  of  place,  for  the
preceding  seances  took  place  early  in  November,  1868.  [Ed.]


140  Experiences  in  Spiritualism  [seanoE

it  on  my  face."  Directly  after  I  saw  the  benitier  in  the
air,  near  me  ;  it  came  quite  close,  pressed  against  my
face,  and  made  the  sign  of  the  cross.  I  could  see  no
figure  or  anything  supporting  it.  Sacha  then  said,  "  /
bless  you  both.''  The  benitier  was  placed  on  Home's  bed,
near  the  foot,  and  left  there.  Home  said,  "  Do  tell  me,
Sacha,  for  otherwise  I  would  not  feel  comfortable  about
it  ;  did  you  take  down  the  benitier  because  you  do  not
like  it  to  be  there  ?  "  Answer,  "  No.''  "  Do  you  then
hke  it  ?  "  "  Yes,  because  it  is  a  symbol  of  guardian
spirits  "  (referring  to  the  figures  upon  it).  She  then  said,
"And  now  a  fond  good  night ; "  and  my  mother  added,
"  God  bless  you  both."


No.  35. — Seance.

We  had  a  very  pretty  seance  at  Mr.  S.  C.  HalFs,  the
beginning  of  last  week.  They  had  just  come  into  their
new  house  at  Ashley  Place.  There  were  only  Mr.  and
Mrs.  Hall,  Home,  myself  and  one  friend  present.  Home
went  into  a  trance,  and  as  it  were,  consecrated  the  house.
He  prayed  most  earnestly  and  beautifully  at  the  threshold,
at  the  hearth,  at  the  dining  table,  and  at  Mr.  Hall's
writing  table.  It  was  very  striking.  Dr.  Elhotson  then
spoke  for  some  time  through  Home,  and  said,  "  I  am
waiting  for  Dr.  Ashburner,  it  will  not  be  long  before  he
joins  us,  and  right  glad  I  shall  be  when  he  does."


No.  36.

Last  night  Home  went  into  a  trance,  and  spoke  about
two  strange  sj^irits  that  were  present.  "  Oh,  there  are  a
number  of  men  here,  they  are  standing  in  a  ring,  and  are
writing  in  little  books  :  every  now  and  then  they  dash
them  down ;  but  they  are  compelled  to  take  them  up
and  go  on  ;  they  are  very  angry  with  each  other,  for
each  one  thinks  that  he  has  found  out  something  much  to
his  advantage,  and  then  he  is  disgusted  to  find  that  the


NO.  36]


With  D.  D.  Home


141


others  know  it.  There  is  Fred  Goodwin  and  a  man
called  Campbell  among  them,  and  there  is  one  who  seems
in  a  sort  of  mist,  he  says,  '  You  may  put  me  down  for
what  you  please.'  "

Ad  ARE  : "  Why  they  must  be  betting."

Home  :  "  Yes,  they  are  betting,  and  they  must  go  on
although  they  hate  it.  There  is  a  regular  barrier  between
you  and  them,  they  would  be  disagreeable  to  you  if  they
came  too  close.  It  seems  as  though  your  mother  had  by
her  love  woven  a  sort  of  net  between  you,  so  that  you
may  see  how  horrible  it  is ;  but  still  may  not  be  hurt
by  them."

I  now  heard  a  sound  as  of  a  horse  galloping  in  the  air.

Home  : "  Do  you  hear  that  horse  ? You  will  always

know  that  C D is  near  when  you  hear  that  noise.

He  did  not  now  make  it  himseK ;  he  cannot ;  other
spirits  made  it  for  him."

Ad  ARE  : "  Will  C D  have  to  keep  the  company

of  these  betting  men  ?  "

Home  :  "  Yes,  he  will  for  a  time,  and  it  will  be
painful  to  him,  for  he  was  not  by  nature  coarse ;  all
his  coarseness  was  put  on  for  bravado."

Ad  ARE  : "  Will  he  have  to  attend  races  ?  "

Home  :  "  Yes,  he  will ;  and  will  see  all  the  evil,  all
the  rascality  and  misery  resulting  from  them.  He  will
not  wish  to  go  there  ;  but  he  will  be  compelled  by  an
irresistible  impulse  to  do  so  until  he  becomes  puriiied,
and  fitted  for  better  things."

Ad  ARE  : "I  hope  that  may  not  be  long."

Home  :  "It  does  not  appear  to  me  that  it  will  be
long  ;  his  nature  is  good  ;  he  was  very  kind  and  did
many  good  actions.  Many  old  and  poor  people  to  whom
he  was  kind,  and  some  of  his  friends  also  who  went  before
him,  are  very  anxious  about  him,  and  pray  earnestly  for
him. Altogether  it  does  not  seem  that  it  will  be  long.

C D does  not  quite  understand  himself  yet ;  he

is  conscious,  but  he  does  not  know  whether  he  is  dead
or  not.  His  mother  is  near  him,  and  will  be  of  use  to
him.  She  > was  a  very  worldly  woman;  she  would  be
higher  than she is were it not  for that." Home  was


142


Ex'periences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


then  silent  for  a  short  time,  he  became  much  agitated,
and  said,  "  Oh  yes,  I  am  sure  we  are  very  much  obHged
to  you  indeed,  are  we  not,  Adare  1  We  mortals  are
very  much  obliged  to  you.  Oh,  please  don't ;  Oh,
don't  strike  him !  Oh — (and  there  came  a  noise  in  the
corner  of  the  room  like  a  blow  struck) — did  you  hear  that  ?
he  hit  him.  Ah,  they  have  all  gone.  Our  mothers  would
not  let  them  come  any  nearer — they  have  gone  now —
they  would  have  been  disagreeable  if  they  had  been  nearer
— they  were  so  very  rude  and  coarse — they  were  boxers —
they  made  the  noise  hke  of  a  horse  galloping,  and  then
they  said  they  had  made  a  cursed  row  for  us,  and  that
we  were  not  thankful  enough ;  and  they  were  angry.
One  of  them  said,  '  Come  away,  and  let  the  chaps  go  to
sleep  ;  '  but  another  got  very  angry,  and  got  him  in  a
corner  and  hit  him  ;  you  heard  the  blow."  Home  after-
wards said,  "  Of  course  he  could  not  hurt  him  ;  all  these
things  are  done  to  shew  you  that  perfect  individuality
exists  in  the  other  world." Home  soon  after  awoke.


No.  37. — Seance  at  Ashley  House,  November  20th  [1868].

Last  night  the  Master  of  Lindsay  dined  here.  About
an  hour  after  dinner,  the  drawing-room  being  very  full
of  tobacco  smoke,  we  went  and  sat  down  at  the  table
in  the  dining-room.  Immediately  we  had  decided  mani-
festations. The  table  was  strongly  moved ;  my  chair
was  rocked  about ;  Lindsay  and  Home  heard  a  voice  ;
and  we  all  heard  a  spirit  moving  about  the  room.  We
were  told  to  go  back  into  the  other  room.  Nothing
occurred  at  the  table.  Home  got  very  drowsy — half
unconscious.  He  said  he  could  see  the  table  covered  with
light,  and  light  coming  from  my  hands.  He  said,  "  How
very  curious,  I  can  see  these  words  quite  plain  :  '  Some
one  in  a  high  position  will  commit  suicide.  He  said  he
had  taken  an  overdose  of  medicine  and  drugged  himself.'  "
After  a  short  time  he  roused  himself,  and  got  better,  and
presently  went  into  a  trance.  He  said  to  me,  "  There
are  a  great  numlier  of  Roman  Catholic  spirits  about  you."


NO.  37]


With  D.  D.  Home


143


I  asked  if  I  knew  any  of  them.  "  Yes,  there  is  one  you
knew,  a  priest,  a  very  tall  man.  There  are  a  great  many
of  them.  It  is  curious,  they  seem  to  be  going  through
some  sort  of  ceremony."  He  began  speaking  of  the
strange  and  horrible  influences  about  the  Tower  (Lindsay
is  quartered  at  the  Tower).  He  said,  "  They  are  very
dreadful,  but  can  do  no  harm  ;  they  are  obUged  to  re-
main at  the  Tower ;  they  could  not  even  make  mani-
festations, were  a  seance  to  be  held  there.  There  is  one
among  them,  could  he  manifest  himself,  it  would  be  by
a  most  horrible  stench,  as  of  corrupt  flesh."  He  described
him  as  having  elevated  eyebrows,  pointed  beard,  and
wearing  a  ruffle.  We  asked  if  he  had  been  a  torturer,
or  anything  of  that  sort.  "  No,"  he  said,  "  but  an
instigator  of  those  things.  His  tools  and  accomplices
have  all  gone.  He  is  left  alone — quite  alone — walking
always  round  and  round."  "  How  unhappy,"  I  said,
"he  must  be."  "Unhappy,"  he  replied,  "Oh,  he  bears
a  weight  of  misery  upon  him  that  would  crush  mountains.
Oh,  those  who  perhaps  here  have  worn  upon  their  heads
a  crown,  when  they  appear  before  God  and  before  His
throne,  have  to  exchange  it  for  a  weight  of  woe  upon
their  brows  that  would  seem  insupportable."  He  described
several  spirits  at  the  Tower  in  most  graphic  language.
At  last  he  appeared  to  see  some  spirit  that  he  could  not
endiire.  "  Oh  !  go  away  !  Go  away  !  "  he  said,  "  You
must  go  away !  "  He  sobbed  convulsively  ;  tore  open
his  coat  and  waistcoat  ;  took  ofl:  his  cravat  and  collar,  and
appeared  to  be  sufl^ering  very  much.  Presently  he  got
better,  and  we  enquired  who  the  spirit  was  ;  he  shuddered,
and  told  us  not  to  seek  to  know.  I  asked  why  these
influences  were  suffered  to  come  about  us.  He  said,
"it  is  good  you  should  know  that  there  are  two  sides
to  the  picture,  for  fear  that  you  might  bring  upon  your-
selves such  suftering  as  these  feel."  He  then  got  up  ;
pulled  off  his  boots  ;  took  a  rose  from  a  vase,  and  walked
into  the  centre  of  the  room.  Presently  he  came  close  to
me,  and  apparently  spoke  to  a  spirit.  "  Yes,"  he  said
"  Thank  you."  Then  turning  to  me,  said,  "  When
Dan  went  into  the  middle  of  the  room,  they  took  him


144  Experiences  in  Spiritualism  [seance


by  the  throat,  and  tore  this  button  off  his  shirt ;  they
threw  it  at  you,  and  you  heard  it  drop  ;  and  then
they  tried  to  throw  it  in  the  fire,  but  they  had  to  bring
it  back  to  him."  I  asked,  "  Why  did  he  take  off  his
boots  ?  "  "  Just  to  typify  his  defencelessness ;  that  is
why  he  took  the  rose,  to  shew  his  goodwill.  It  is  thus
that  right  overcomes  wrong.  Why,  even  if  a  beast  were
suffering  pain,  and  you  went  up  and  threatened  it,  you
could  do  no  good  ;  but  if  you  went  soothingly  and  gently,
though  at  first  it  might  resist,  not  knowing  you,  yet  it
would  soon  become  passive.  Ah,  the  influence  is  all
changed."  Turning  to  Lindsay,  he  said,  "  You  wiU  have
a  curious  manifestation  at  the  Tower,  quite  alone."
Lindsay  asked  him  about  it.  "I  must  not  tell  you
anything  about  it.  Adare,  perhaps,  may  be  informed ;
but  if  you  were,  your  mind  would  become  too  positive,
and  that  would  surely  stop  it."  He  got  up  ;  walked  about;
patted  me  on  the  shoulder,  saying,  "  You  are  all  right,
you  are  going  to  get  quite  well  soon."  He  sat  down  and
said,  "  I  see  an  old  man  with  silver  locks  ;  he  has  on  a
mantle,  covered  with  stars."  "  Who  is  he  ?  "  I  asked.
"  Pythagoras.  He  is  much  interested  about  winds  and
tides  ;  he  has  been  studying  the  passage  of  the  Red  Sea.
He  says  it  was  quite  a  natural  phenomenon,  and  has
occurred  three  or  four  times  before  the  Jews  crossed,
and  once  since.  It  is  a  curious  circumstance,  owing  to
a  combination  of  wind  and  of  tide."  I  said,  "  Was  it
observed  when  it  occurred  since  ?  "  "  He  says.  No,  he
thinks  not,"  Home  replied,  "  But  when  it  occurs  again,
men  wiU  observe  it."  "  Are  we  about  correct  as  to  the
spot  where  the  Jews  crossed  ?  "  "  Oh,  yes,  tolerably  correct.
He  (Pythagoras)  was  correct  in  his  theory,  that  man  should
never  wear  the  skins  of  beasts  ;  there  is  an  influence
in  them  that  is  never  lost.  He  was  right  ;  but  he
exaggerated.  You  must,  for  instance,  wear  leather  for
your  feet,  the  influence  is  so  shght  and  so  easily  counter-
acted by  other  influences  that  it  does  you  no  harm.
Caghostro  is  often  with  Lindsay,  because  he  takes  an
interest  in  freemasonry.  You  may  tell  Dan  that  he
has  not  been  to  liim  for  a  long  time  ; but  he  will  come


NO.  37]


With  D.  D.  Home


145


again  to  him. C D is  very  anxious  to  come  to

you,  but  he  cannot  to-night.  I  see  a  woman,  she  repre-
sents Fate,  she  has  in  her  hand  a  rosebud,  it  contains
a  worm  that  has  eaten  it  to  the  core,  she  is  fastening  it
to  a  horse — the  horse  is  galloping  off — oh,  he  looks  as  if
he  must  break  his  neck.  Ah,  the  rosebud  has  fallen  off
now.  Everybody  was  anxious,  before  it  was  fastened  to
the  horse,  to  get  at  it,  see  it,  and  sniff  at  it ;  but  now
there  are  only  two  or  three  who  have  a  good  word  to

say for it." "Is this emblematic of C— D  ?  "

"  Yes  it  is.  The  same  spirit  is  here  that  foretold  all
those  earthquakes  and  convulsions  of  nature,  he  is  standing
a  long  way  off  ;  but  he  seems  anxious  to  say  that  there
will  be  a  great  war,  or  plague,  or  some  national  disaster
of  that  sort  before  long."  "  In  Europe  ?  "  "  Yes."  "  In
England  ?  "  "  No  ;  it  seems  rather  that  it  is  to  be  in
France."  "Is  it  a  war  between  France  and  Prussia  ?  "
"  No ;  it  does  not  seem  to  be."  Home  got  up,  walked
about,  sat  down  again,  and  turning  to  me,  said — "  The
doctor  is  pleased  with  you,  boy."  "  What  doctor  ?  "
I  said,  "  Why,  Dan's  silent  doctor ;  he  says  you  will
get  all  right,  the  sooner  you  go  away  for  a  httle  change
the  better ;  but  you  must  not  take  a  long  journey,
or  cross  the  sea,  it  would  be  very  foolish  to  do  so,  a
chill  might  strike  in  again  upon  your  stomach.  He  says
that  the  other  night,  when  he  rubbed  the  back  of  your
neck,  he  did  not  make  use  of  any  hquid,  as  you  thought.
If  Dan's  fingers  had  been  wet,  they  would  have  felt
rough  to  the  skin ;  but  they  did  not."  I  said  "  No  ;
they  felt  oily."  "  Exactly ;  like  oleaginous  matter ;  still
it  was  in  reality  nothing  but  very  strong  influence.  I
cannot  explain  this  to  you,  you  would  not  understand  it.
He  saved  you  from  very  acute  suffering,  from  violent
pain  in  your  head ;  he  cut  it  off  from  your  head,  and
confined  the  disease  to  your  stomach."  Home  laughed
and  said,  "  Some  of  your  relatives  think  that  you  have
made  yourself  ill  by  being  at  so  many  seances.''  "  What
am  I  to  do  to  dispel  that  idea  ?  "  "  Why,  do  just  what
you  are  doing ;  get  well  to  be  sure,  that  is  the  best
thing." Home  then  awoke.


146


Experiences  in  Spiritualism.


[seance


No.  38. — Seance.

Last  Monday  we  had  a  seance  at  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall's — •
which  was  a  failure.  We  had  scarcely  any  manifestations.
At  the  close,  the  spirits  asked  for  a  decanter  of  water,
they  directed  Home  and  the  two  Misses  Bertolacci  to
stand  up  and  hold  their  hands  in  a  certain  position  above
and  below  it ;  and  we  were  directed  to  stand  round.
They  held  the  decanter  for  some  time,  magnetizing  it,
and  were  then  told  by  the  spirits  to  place  it  upon  the
table.  The  spirits  said,  "  Adare  is  to  take  a  wiyie  glass
full  night  and  morning,  and  with  the  blessing  of  Christ,  he
will  he  cured  in  six  days."


No.  39. — Seance  at  Ashley  House,  Tuesday,  November  24th

[1868].

Last  Sunday  Home  went  to  Norwood  ;  Lindsay  accom-
panied him.  They  had  a  seance,  but  scarcely  any  mani-
festations. Lindsay  came  back  here  with  Home  about
eleven  o'clock.  We  three  sat  round  the  table  and  had  a
very  curious  seance,  the  room  being  nearly  dark.  Lindsay
and  Home  saw  spirit  forms.  I  did  not ;  but  I  saw,  as  did
also  the  others,  phosphorescent  lights  about  the  room ;  balls
of  Hght  would  move  along  the  floor  and  touch  us,  feeling
like  a  .material  substance  and  highly  electrical.  Adah
Menken  was  there,  and  spoke  to  us  a  good  deal.  She
removed  her  book  from  the  table,  turned  a  leaf  down,
and  brought  it  back,  putting  it  in  my  hand,  and
telling  me  that  she  had  marked  a  certain  place.  Little
Dannie  Cox's  spirit  came  and  moved  a  small  chair  from
the  wall,  and  placed  it  near  the  table.  He  Ufted  the
chair  (no  one  touching  it),  up  in  the  air,  brought  it  to
me,  then  carried  it  over  the  table  to  Home  who  was
sitting  at  the  other  side.  He  tried  to  materiahse  his  voice
so  that  we  might  hear  it.  We  heard  the  voice  distinctly,
and  he  articulated  the  words  "  Uncle  Dan."  The  spirits
gave  one  message  in  a  curious  way.  Lindsay  was  anxious
to be toiiched. They  said, "  All  in  good — • "  and  then


NO.  40]


With  D.  D.  Home


147


turning  the  hands  of  a  clock  that  was  not  going,  so  as
to  make  it  tick  and  strike,  hnislied  the  sentence,  "  All
in  good  lime."  The  table  we  were  sitting  at  was  twice
raised  in  the  air  so  high  that  we  could  see  under  it  without
stooping.  It  was  altogether  a  wonderful  seance.  We  had  a
number  of  messages,  but  I  forget  them.


No.  40. — Seance.

Last  week  Lindsay  called :  he  said  that  he  had  had
strong  manifestations  that  evening  when  alone,  and  had
been  told  to  go  to  Ashley  Place.  About  11  o'clock  Home
came  in.  We  sat  round  the  table  and  had  a  most  wonder-
ful seance.  The  room  was  nearly  dark.  We  had  physical
manifestations.  Home  went  into  a  trance  ;  he  walked
about  the  room  for  some  time,  arranging  the  hght,  and
talking  to  himself  ;  he  then  opened  the  window,  drawing
the  curtains,  so  that  we  could  see  nothing  but  his  head  ;
and  got  outside  the  window.  This  frightened  us,  and
Lindsay  wanted  to  stop  him,  but  did  not.  Presently,
he  came  back  and  told  us  that  we  had  no  faith  whatever,
or  we  would  not  have  been  alarmed  for  his  safety.
He  went  into  the  next  room,  and  we  saw  him  pour  out
from  a  bottle  on  the  table  about  half  a  large  wine  glass
of  brandy.  He  brought  the  glass  back  with  him  ;  then
partially  covering  himself  with  the  window  curtains,  but
holding  the  glass  with  the  brandy  in  it  above  his  head,
between  us  and  the  window,  so  that  we  could  see  it,
he  was  lifted  off  the  floor  about  four  or  five  feet.  While
in  the  air,  we  saw  a  bright  hght  in  the  glass  ;  presently,
he  came  down  and  showed  us  that  the  glass  was  empty,
by  turning  it  upside  down  ;  he  also  came  to  us  and
turned  it  upside  down  upon  our  hands  ;  then  going  back
to  the  window,  he  held  the  glass  up,  and  we  heard  the
liquid  drop  into  it.  He  began  talking  about  the  brandy,
and  said  "It  is  under  certain  circumstances  a  demon,  and
real  devil ;  but  if  properly  used,  it  is  most  beneficial."
As  he  said  this  the  light  became  visible  in  the  glass,
and  he  was  again  raised  in  the  air ; "  But," he  said,


148


Experiences  in  Spiritualism,


[seance


"  if.  improperly  used,  it  becomes  so,"  (the  light  disappeared)
"  and  drags  you  down,  down,  lower  and  lower  ;  "  and  as
he  spoke  he  sank  gradually  down  till  he  touched  the  floor
with  the  glass.  He  again  raised  the  glass  above  his  head
and  the  liquor  was  withdrawn.  He  then  told  me  to  come
and  hold  my  hand  above  the  glass ;  I  did  so,  and  the
liquor  fell  over  and  through  my  fingers  into  the  glass,
dropping  from  the  air  above  me.  I  sat  down  and  asked
him  where  on  earth  the  liquor  went  to.  "  Oh,"  he  said,
"  the  spirit  that  is  making  the  experiment  is  obliged  to
form  a  material  substance  to  retain  the  fluid.  He  might
drink  it,  or  hold  it  in  his  mouth  ;  in  this  case  he  held  it  in
his  hand."

Ad  ARE  :  "When  you  say  his  hand,  do  you  mean  his
own  hand,  or  that  he  created  a  substance  like  a  hand  to
hold  it ;  was  he  obliged  to  be  there  to  hold  it,  or  could
he  have  been  at  the  other  side  of  the  room  ?  "

Home  :  "Of  course  he  must  be  there  ;  it  was  his  own
hand  made  material  for  the  moment  to  hold  the  hquid,
as  a  hand  is  made  material  when  you  touch  or  feel  it."

Ad  ARE  :  "  Then  that  story  in  Howitt's  book  of  a  spirit
drinking  a  glass  of  beer  may  be  true  ?  "

Home  : "  Oh,  yes  ; certainly  it  may."

Ad  ARE  : "  But  could  he  swallow  and  retain  it  1  "

Home  :  (laughing)  "  No,  he  could  not  retain  it  long,
he  must  have  held  the  beer  for  a  time,  but  it  must  have
been  spilled  outside.  If  the  doors  and  windows  had  been
shut,  so  that  he  could  not  carry  it  out  of  the  room,  it
must  have  fallen  upon  the  floor."

Ad  ARE  :  "  He  could  not  then  transport  it  through  a
solid  substance  ?  "

Home  :  "  Oh  dear  no,  certainly  not !  If,  when  the
liquid  in  that  glass  was  retained  in  the  air,  you  had  put
your  hand  there,  it  would  have  fallen  to  the  ground."
He  then  said,  "  I  am  going  to  take  the  strength  from  the
brandy,"  and  he  began  making  passes  over  the  glass  and
flipping  his  fingers,  sending  a  strong  smell  of  spirit
through  the  room  ;  in  about  five  minutes  he  had  made
the  brandy  as  weak  [as  very  weak  brandy  and  water  ;  it
scarcely tasted at all of spirit ; both Lindsay and  I


NO.  40]


With  D.  D.  Home


149


tasted  it,  at  the  moment,  and  also  some  time  after  the
seance  was  over.  Home  then  began  to  walk  about  and
talked,  or  rather  some  spirit  talked  through  him ;  he
turned  and  said  to  some  spirit,  "  Well,  really  I  think
you  had  better  not,  we  don't  know  you,  or  know  any-
thing about  you  ;  thank  you,  yes,  that  will  do  quite
well."  A  chair  then  moved  up  to  the  table  between
Lindsay  and  me,  and  Home  said  that  the  spirit  who  had
tried  the  experiments  with  the  brandy  was  sitting  there  ;
Lindsay  could  see  him,  I  could  not.  Home,  or  rather  a
spirit  talking  through  him,  then  began  speaking  about
manifestations  to  this  spirit,  but  in  such  a  low  tone,  I
could  only  now  and  then  catch  what  he  said.  This  spirit
appeared  ignorant  of  how  to  raise  a  substance  in  the  air,
and  the  spirit  who  was  talking  through  Home  seemed
much  amused  at  what  he  said.  He  tried  experiments
with  my  chair,  but  could  not  succeed,  and  Home  laughed.
He  then  began  talking  about  lifting  him  (Home)  up,  and
after  speaking  for  some  time  in  a  low  tone,  apparently
suggesting  different  ways,  he  said,  "  Well,  then,  I  will
lift  him  on  to  the  table  and  sling  him  right  off  into  the
air."  "  Oh,  yes,"  said  the  other ,^  "  and  perhaps  break
his  leg,  that  will  never  do."  They  then  arranged  that
he  was  to  try  by  lifting  him  first  on  to  the  back  of  my
chair.  Accordingly,  in  about  a  minute.  Home  was  hfted
up  on  to  the  back  of  my  chair.  "  Now,"  he  said,  "  take
hold  of  Dan's  feet."  I  took  both  his  feet  in  my  hands,
and  away  he  went  up  into  the  air  so  high  that  I  was
obliged  to  let  go  his  feet ;  he  was  carried  along  the  wall,
brushing  past  the  pictures,  to  the  opposite  side  of  the
room  ;  he  then  called  me  over  to  him.  I  took  his  hand,
and  felt  him  aUght  upon  the  floor ;  he  sat  down  upon
the  sofa  and  laughed,  saying,  "  That  was  very  badly  done,
you  knocked  Dan  up  against  the  pictures."  Home  got
up,  opened  the  door,  pulled  up  the  bhnd  and  made  the
room  much  hghter  ;  then  sitting  down,  said,  "  We  will
lift  Dan  up  again  better  presently,  and  in  a  clearer  hght

1  Apparently  two  spirits  were  at  this  time  spealviiig  alternately,
through  Mr.  Home,  so  as  to  let  us  know  the  meaning  of  what  they  were
•doing  with  him,  and  what  the  subject  of  their  conversation  was.  :


150


ExjJeriences  in,  Sjnritualism


[seance


so  that  you  can  sec  better.  Always  examine  well,  never
forget  to  use  your  reason  in  these  matters."  He  was  not
however  raised  again,  for  some  other  spirits  anxious  to
communicate  came,  and  those  who  were  experimentahzing
gave  way.  "  Ah  !  "  Home  said,  "  There  is  an  unadvanced
spirit  here  ;  you  perceive  the  earthy  smell  1  "  We  both
noticed  it,  and  asked  if  he  had  long  left  this  world.
"  No,  only  a  short  time." We  then  heard  the  noise  like

of  a  horse  galloping,  and  I  knew  C D was  there.

I  said,  "  Is  C D here  ?" "  Yes,"  he  said  "  he

is." Home  got  up  and  said  (C  D speaking  through

him),  "  I  suppose  you  would  think  me  a  brute  because
I  ask  for  brandy."  He  took  the  glass  of  brandy,  walked
about  with  it,  and  then  put  it  down  and  sat  down,  and
in  answer  to  Lindsay  said,  "  For  some  years,  with  what-
ever medium  it  may  be,  you  will  always  know  him  by
the  sound  of  the  horse."  Turning  to  me,  "  You  did  not
do  as  much  as  you  might  for  him.  You  might  have
advised  him  and  spoken  to  him."  I  said  I  was  truly
sorry  ;  I  had  not  thought  I  could  have  done  him  any
good.  "  Well,  he  thinks  perhaps  you  might,  but  he  is
not  sure  that  you  could ;  but  you  might  have  tried ;
he  was  really  attached  to  you,  and  is  so  still.  He  says
as  regards  all  this  (Spirituahsm),  if  you  had  spoken  about
it,  he  would  have  called  it  all  damned  nonsense  ;  that  is
what  he  would  have  said  then.  He  wanted  to  see  if
he  could  taste  brandy,  but  the  others  would  not  let  him."
I  said,  "  Has  he  any  desire  for  those  things  now  ?  "
"  Well,  he  never  did  care  for  brandy  ;  he  was  fonder  of
champagne.  He  does  sometimes  think  about  those  things,
but  he  will  soon  cease  to  do  so  ;  his  desire  for  them  was
produced  by  bodily  weakness,  and  when  he  finds  himself
suffering  no  longer  from  that  feeling,  he  will  not  want
them.  Ah,  poor  fellow,  poor  fellow,  he  is  crying ;  he
says  he  was  not  what  he  ought  to  have  been,  but  he
was  not  as  bad  as  he  has  been  painted.  He  is  unhappy  ;
something  is  weighing  on  his  mind."  I  asked  questions
and  received  answers,  giving  me  much  information  as  to
the  cause  of  this  spirit  being  unhappy.  He  mentioned
facts  that  I  knew  to  be  accurate,  thus  affording  a  satis-


NO.  41]


With  D.  D.  Home


151


factory  test  of  identity  ;  but,  it  being  undesirable  that
the  identity  should  in  this  case  be  Imown,  I  refrain  from
mentioning  what  passed.  I  then  asked,  "  Can  I  be  of
any  use  about  it  ?  "  "  He  says  if  the  real  person  is  not
found  out,  he  will  try  and  manage  to  impress  you — to
give  you  some  clue  ;  so  that  without  your  name  coming
forward,  you  might  be  of  use."  [After  a  pause)  "  Adare,  He
says,  that  he  would  not  come  back  to  earth  if  he  could  ;
he  feels  that  he  has  a  better  chance  of  improvement  as
he  is.  All  will  come  right,  he  says,  in  time ;  he  feels
as  if  he  had  been  ploughed  and  harrowed,  and  torn  to
bits,  and  may  now  bring  forth  fruits.  Ah,  he  is  off ;
restless,  very  restless.  He  turns  back  to  say,  '  Adare,  I
would  not  come  back  if  I  could  ;  I  know  that  aU  is  for
the  best.'  "  We  waited  in  hopes  of  Home  being  hfted  in
the  air  again  ;  but  the  power  was  expended,  and  he
presently  awoke,  and  we  went  into  the  next  room.  After
Lindsay  had  gone.  Home  went  into  a  trance  for  a  minute

or  two,  and  spoke  to  me. He  said  that  C — ■ — ■  D  's

coming  had  prevented  them  doing  what  they  had  wanted.
He  said,  "  We  were  in  the  room  when  Dr.  Hawkesley  was
talking  to  you  yesterday,  and  we  much  approve  of  his
suggestions.  It  is  the  quinine  that  caused  those  un-
pleasant feehngs  in  your  head ;  there  was  nothing  spiritual
about  it."'


No.  41. — Seance  at  5,  Btickinghant  Gate,  Wednesday,

December  IQth}

On  Sunday  last,  Charhe  Wynne  and  I  went  over  to
Ashley  House  after  dinner. There  we  found  Home  and  the

1  We  reprint  this  heading  just  as  it  appears  in  the  original  edition,
but  it  has  evidently  been  misprinted,  as  reference  to  the  first  two  lines
of  Lord  Dunraven's  report  of  the  sitting  will  show.  The  heading  should
run  thus :  No.  41  Seance — Wednesday,  December  16th,  5,  Buckingham
Gate.  The  date  and  place  of  the  heading  refer  to  the  date  and  place
at  which  Lord  Dunraven's  account  was  written  (compare  e.g.  the  heading
to  Seance  No.  23,  p  111)  The  sitting  itself  took  place  on  Sunday,
December  13,  1868,  at  Ashley  House,  Victoria  Street.  This  is  borne
out  by  the  Master  of  Lindsay's  statement  to  the  Committee  of  the
Dialectical  Society  in  1869,  in  which  he  speaks  of  "  the  limitations  in


152


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


Master  of  Lindsay.  Home  proposed  a  sitting.  We  accord-
ingly sat  round  a  table  in  the  small  room.  There  was  no
light  in  the  room  ;  but  the  hght  from  the  window  was
sufficient  to  enable  us  to  distinguish  each  other,  and  to  see
the  different  articles  of  furniture. Immediately  on  sitting

Victoria  Street,"  and  by  Lord  Dunraven's  present  recollection,  which
on  this  point  is  perfectly  clear.  It  seems  worth  while  to  call  attention
to  this  mistake,  for  both  the  time  and  place  of  the  sitting  are  of
evidential  importance  in  relation  to  the  famous  incident  which  occurred
on  this  occasion  of  Home  passing  from  one  window  to  another.

The  mistake  is  reproduced  in  Podmore's  account  of  the  incident
(see  Modern  Spiritualism,  vol.  ii.  p.  255),  where  he  refers  to  the  sitting
as  having  taken  place  on  "  December  16th,  1868,  at  5,  Buckingham
Gate,"  having  doubtless  been  misled  by  the  wrongly  printed  heading.
In  connexion  with  this  mis-statement  of  Podmore's  concerning  the  date
of  the  sitting  a  further  point  is  worth  noting.  In  discussing  the  credi-
bility of  the  witnesses  to  this  incident  Podmore  points  out  that  in  a
statement  written  on  July  14,  1871  (two  and  a  half  years  after  the
sitting)  the  Master  of  Lindsay  referred  to  "  the  moon  shining  full  into
the  room,"  whereas  there  could  only  have  been  "  faint  moonlight,"  the
moon  being  on  December  16th  only  "  two  days  old."  But,  as  noted
above,  the  sitting  took  place  on  December  13th,  on  which  day,  accord-
ing to  a  Nautical  Almanack  of  1868,  the  moon  was  new  at  13  h.  33.2  m.,
and  could  not  therefore  light  the  room  however  faintly  !

The  Master  of  Lindsay's  account  of  the  incident,  written  in  1871,
does  not  seem  consistent  with  his  account  given  to  the  Committee
of  the  Dialectical  Society  in  1869  (in  which,  incidentallj^  he  does  not
seem  to  have  mentioned  the  moon),  but,  as  Podmore  points  out  {op.
cit.  p.  256),  this  may  be  due  to  inaccurate  reporting.  The  chief  point
of  interest  to  note  here  is  that  in  Lord  Dunraven's  almost  contem-
porary report  there  is  no  mention  of  the  moon.  He  only  says  that
"  the  light  from  the  window  was  sufficient  to  enable  us  to  distinguish
each  other,"  a  circumstance  not  difficult  to  account  for  when  one
remembers  that  there  must  have  been  some  light  coming  in  from  the
street  outside,  the  curtains  having  been  apparently  undrawn.

The  above  footnote  was  submitted  to  Lord  Dunraven  and  in  reply
the  Editor,  Mrs.  Salter,  received  from  him  the  following  letter  : —

22,  NoBFOLK  Street,

Park  Lane,  W.I.,

Gth  May,  1924.

Dear  Mes.  Salter,

...  I  have  seen  a  note  from  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  and  your
footnote  relating  to  the  discrepancies  connected  with  Seance  41,  and
I  have  also  looked  at  my  copy  of  the  "  Experiences."  The  discrepancy
is  unfortunate,  but  it  is,  I  think,  easily  explained. I  frequently  stayed


NO.  41]


With  D.  D.  Home


153


down  we  had  physical  manifestations  and  messages,  chiefly
from  Adah  Menken.  Lindsay  saw  two  spirits  on  the  sofa,
and  others  in  different  places.  Home  went  into  a  trance.
Adah  Menken  spoke  through  him,  to  what  effect  I  do
not  remember  ;  also  httle  Dannie  Cox.  The  latter  having
in  speaking  to  Charlie  Wynne  called  him  Charlie,  turned
to  me  and  said,  "  Please  tell  him  that  we  always  call
people  by  their  Christian  names."  Home  suddenly  break-
ing off  in  the  middle  of  a  sentence  said, "  Who  is  this

man,  E  ? What  does  he  want  ? Do  you  know  him  ?  "

Charlie  :  "  Yes,  I  knew  him,  he  came  to  me  at
Lissadell,  and  told  me  a  variety  of  circumstances  connected
with  his  death."

at  my  father's  house — 5,  Buckingham  Gate — and  Mr.  Home  often  stayed
there  with  me.  In  my  father's  and  mother's  absence  the  house  was,
of  course,  shut  up,  and  my  recollection  is  that  I  and  Mr.  Home  just
had  bedrooms  there  and  lived  out.

It  is  plain  from  the  context  of  the  book  that  we  frequently  went
from  Buckingham  Gate  to  attend  seances  at  other  places^  I  take  it
that  the  heading  in  the  "  Experiences  "  is  copied  from  the  letter  which
I  wi'ote  to  my  father  from  Buckingham  Gate,  and  probably  on  Bucking-
ham Gate  notepaper,  relating  to  the  seance  which  took  place  at  Ashley
House  on  the  previous  Sunday.  The  correct  title  should  have  been,
"  No.  41  Seance  at  Ashley  House,  Sunday,  December  13th."  The
discrepancy  applies  to  the  date  as  well  as  the  address,  as  the  title
states  Wednesday  the  16th  and  the  context  commences  "  On  Sunday
last."

There  can  be  no  doubt  whatever  but  that  the  seance  was  held  at
Ashley  House  on  Sunday,  December  13th,  and  that  the  notes  con-
cerning it  were  posted  by  me  from  5,  Buckingham  Gate  on  Wednesday,
December  16th.  .  .  .

As  to  Mr.  Podmore's  account  of  the  incidents,  at  this  long  distance
of  time  I  am  unable  to  give  any  information.  The  Master  of  Lindsay,
afterwards  Lord  Crawford,  seems  to  have  given  his  account  of  the
incident  two  and  a  half  years  after  it  had  happened,  and  states  that
there  was  moonlight.  As  you  have  examined  the  phases  of  the  moon
at  that  date,  it  is  obvious  that  he  must  have  been  mistaken  as  to
the  moonlight.  In  my  account,  written  immediately  after  the  occur-
I'ences,  I  only  stated  that  the  light  from  the  window  was  sufficient
for  us  to  chstinguish  each  other.  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  Master
of  Lindsay,  writing  some  time  after,  attributed  the  light  erroneously
to  moonlight.

Yours  very  truly,

DUNBAVEN


154


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[SEANOE


Home  :  "  He  is  come  about  that.  Do  you  object  to
his  doing  so  ?  "

Charlie  : "  Certainly  not ;  I  am  glad  of  it."

Home  : "  Then  he  will  sit  down  beside  you."

A  chair  moved  of  itself  from  the  wall  up  to  the  table
between  Home  and  Charlie.  Charlie  said  he  could  feel
that  there  was  some  one  there,  but  he  saw  nothing.
Lindsay  perceived  the  figure  in  the  chair,  and  said  he
was  leaning  his  arm  on  Charhe's  shoulder.  The  upstart
of  a  long  conversation  between  Charlie  and  E — — ,  speaking

through  Home,  was  that  he,  E  ,  would  on  no  account

give  any  information  that  would  lead  to  the  prosecution

of  That Charlie had  been told at  Lissadell

to  let  the  matter  alone  ;  that  he  had  not  given  the
information  at  Lissadell ;  that  other  spirits  very  anxious
on  the  subject  had  done  so  ;  that  they  had  made  some
mistakes,  and  that  owing  also  to  the  imperfect  develop-
ment of  the  medium  other  mistakes  had  occurred.  That
some  of  the  information  was  incorrect  he  said  could  be
proved  by  his  writing  to  certain  places,  when  he  would
find  that  no  person  of  the  name  given  had  been  there.
He  had  not  been  allowed  to  discover  what  became  of  a

certain man after his, E  's, death. God's  justice

was  very  different  from  man's  ;  and  God's  justice  would
find  him  out.  He  could  not  and  would  not  have  anything
to  do  in  the  matter.

Ad  ARE  :  "  But  you  do  not  object  to  human  justice
taking  its  course  ?  "

Home  :  "  Oh  dear  no ;  it  is  necessary  for  the  well-
being  of  society  that  it  should  do  so  ;  in  human  afiairs
let  human  justice  proceed ;  but  we  cannot  interfere ;
God's  justice  is  so  difi^erent  from  man's.  It  is  obvious
also  that  were  we  permitted  to  continually  interfere  in
these  matters,  the  result  would  be  extremely  bad."

Home  became  much  agitated ;  "  Ah,"  he  said,  "  he
has  something  weighing  on  his  mind  ;  poor,  poor  fellow  !  "
He  laid  his  head  upon  my  hand  on  the  table  and  sobbed
violently  ; two  or  three  tears  fell  upon  my  hand.

Home  : "  Do  you  feel  how  hot  his  tears  are  ?  "

Adare: "Yes,  I  do."


NO.  41]


With  D.  D.  Home


155


Home  :  "  They  will  leave  a  mark  of  blood  upon  your
hand."

Charlie  :  "  But  at  Lissadell  he  told  me  he  Avas  quite
happy."

Home  :  "80  he  thought  perhaps  at  the  time  ;  but  do
you  think  that  a  man  can  be  cut  off  in  a  moment  in
that  way,  leaving  his  family,  Avho  were  dependent  on  him
for  daily  bread,  almost  totally  unprovided  for,  without  a
pang  of  regret  and  sorrow  ?  Poor  fellow,  he  seems  to
want  to  speak  about  something  that  has  been  lost."

Charlie  : "  Is  it  about  some  missing  papers  ?  "

Home  : "  Yes,  that  is  it."

Charlie  : "  Can  he  tell  me  where  they  are  ?  "

Home  :  "  He  says  that  unfortimately  most  of  them
were  destroyed,  but  some  were  sent  to  his  lawyer.  He
does  not  tell  me  the  name  of  his  lawyer,  but  the  family
will  know  ;  he  says  you  wiU  find  several  among  some
receipts  and  other  papers  in  a  small  box  over  the  door
of  his  study  ; there  are  two  or  three  small  boxes  there.

'  Oh  ! I  wish.  R M^as  here. I  could  tell  him  things

about  my  affairs  that  I  cannot  tell  you,  Charhe.'  "

Ad  ARE  : "If  R comes  to  London  would  you  hke

him  to  meet  Home  ?  "

Home  (excited)  :  "  Oh,  yes  ;  oh,  dear  yes.  Ah  !  he  has
gone,  poor  fellow  ;  he  is  rather  abrupt  in  his  manner,  is
he  not  ?  He  does  not  brook  much  delay."  Home  told  me
to  go  into  the  next  room  and  look  if  the  tears  had  left
any  mark  upon  my  hand.  I  perceived  a  very  sUght  red
mark.  When  I  returned  he  told  me  to  stretch  out  my
hand.  I  did  so,  and  Dannie  Cox  touched  it  with  the
tip  of  his  finger  and  said,  through  Mr.  Home,  "  You  will
see  the  marks  plainer  in  the  morning."  They  were  rather
plainer,  but  stiU  indistinct,  when  I  awoke  the  next  day.
Home  then  got  up  and  walked  about  the  room.  He  was
both  elongated  and  raised  in  the  air.  He  spoke  in  a
whisper,  as  though  the  spirits  were  arranging  something.
He  then  said  to  us,  "  Do  not  be  afraid,  and  on  no
account  leave  your  places  ;  "  and  he  went  out  into  the
passage.  Lindsay  suddenly  said,  "  Oh,  good  heavens !
I  know  what  he  is  going  to  do  ; it  is  too  fearful."


156


Ex'periences  in  Sjnritualism


[seance


Adare  : "  What  is  it  ?  "

Lindsay  :  "I  cannot  tell  you,  it  is  too  horrible !
Adah  says  that  I  must  tell  you ;  he  is  going  out  of
the  window  in  the  other  room,  and  coming  in  at  this
window."  We  heard  Home  go  into  the  next  room,  heard
the  window  thrown  up,  and  presently  Home  appeared
standing  upright  outside  our  window ;  he  opened  the
window  and  walked  in  quite  coolly.  "  Ah,"  he  said,
"  You  were  good  this  time,"  referring  to  our  having  sat
still  and  not  wished  to  prevent  him.  He  sat  down  and
laughed.

Charlie  : "  What  are  you  laughing  at  ?  "

Home  :  "  We  are  thinking  that  if  a  pohceman  had  been
passing,  and  had  looked  up  and  seen  a  man  turning
round  and  round  along  the  wall  in  the  air  he  would  have
been  much  astonished.  Adare,  shut  the  window  in  the
next  room."  I  got  up,  shut  the  window,  and  in  coming
back  remarked  that  the  window  was  not  raised  a  foot,
and  that  I  could  not  think  how  he  had  managed  to
squeeze  through.  He  arose  and  said,  "  Come  and  see."
I  went  with  him ;  he  told  me  to  open  the  window  as
it  was  before,  I  did  so :  he  told  me  to  stand  a  little
distance  off  ;  he  then  went  through  the  open  space,  head
first,  quite  rapidly,  his  body  being  nearly  horizontal  and
apparently  rigid.  He  came  in  again,  feet  foremost,  and
we  returned  to  the  other  room.  It  was  so  dark  I  could
not  see  clearly  how  he  was  supported  outside.  He  did
not  appear  to  grasp,  or  rest  upon,  the  balustrade,  but
rather  to  be  swung  out  and  in.  Outside  each  window
is  a  small  balcony  or  ledge,  19  inches  deep,  bounded  by
stone  balustrades,  18  inches  high.  The  balustrades  of
the  two  windows  are  7  feet  4  inches  apart,  measuring
from  the  nearest  points.  A  string-course,  4  inches  wide,
runs  between  the  windows  at  the  level  of  the  bottom  of
the  balustrade  ;  and  another  3  inches  wide  at  the  level  of
the  top.  Between  the  window  at  which  Home  went  out,
and  that  at  which  he  came  in,  the  wall  recedes  6  inches.
The  rooms  are  on  the  third  floor.  Home  presently  got
up  again,  told  us  not  to  be  frightened  or  to  move,  and
left  the  room. Adah  Menken  told  Lindsay  that  they  were


NO.  41]


With  D.  D.  Home


157


going  to  shew  iis  the  water  test ;  but  for  some  reason
or  other  I  suppose  they  were  unable  to  do  so,  for  Home
came  in  again  directly,  sat  down  and  said  "  Dan  must
awake  now,  he  will  be  very  nervous  ;  but  you  must
bear  with  him,  it  will  pass  off."  I  asked  Lindsay  how
Adah  had  spoken  to  him  on  the  three  occasions.  He
could  scarcely  explain  ;  but  said  it  did  not  sound  hke
an  audible  human  voice ;  but  rather  as  if  the  tones
were  whispered  or  impressed  inside  his  ear.  When  Home
awoke,  he  was  much  agitated ;  he  said  he  felt  as  if  he
had  gone  through  some  fearful  peril,  and  that  he  had
a  most  horrible  desire  to  throw  himself  out  of  the
window ;  he  remained  in  a  very  nervous  condition  for
a  short  time,  then  gradually  became  quiet.  Having
been  ordered  not  to  tell  him,  we  said  nothing  of
what  had  happened.  We  now  had  a  series  of  very
curious  mam'festations.  Lindsay  and  Charlie  saw  tongues
or  jets  of  flame  proceeding  from  Home's  head.  We  then
all  distinctly  heard,  as  it  were,  a  bird  flying  round  the
room,  whisthng  and  chirping,  but  saw  nothing,  except
Lindsay,  who  perceived  an  indistinct  form  resembling  a
bird.  There  then  came  a  sound  as  of  a  great  wind
rushing  through  the  room,  we  also  felt  the  wind  strongly  ;
the  moaning  rushing  sound  was  the  most  weird  thing  I
ever  heard.  Home  then  got  up,  being  in  a  trance,  and
spoke  something  in  a  language  that  none  of  us  under-
stood ;  it  may  have  been  nonsense,  but  it  sounded  like  a
sentence  in  a  foreign  tongue.  Lindsay  thought  he  recog-
nized some  words  of  Russian.  He  then  quoted  the  text
about  the  different  gifts  of  the  spirit,  and  gave  us  a  transla-
tion in  English  of  what  he  had  said  in  the  unknown  tongue.
He  told  us  that  CharUe  had  that  day  been  discussing
the  miracles  that  took  place  at  Pentecost  ;  and  that  the
spirits  made  the  sound  of  the  wind  ;  of  the  bird  de-
scending ;  of  the  unknown  tongue,  and  interpretation
thereof,  and  the  tongues  of  fire  :  to  show  that  the  same
phenomenon  could  occur  again.  He  spoke  at  length  on
the  folly  of  supposing  that  God  had  long  ago  written,  as
it  were,  one  little  page  of  revelation,  and  then  for  ever
shut  the  book,  and  turned  away  his  face  from  mankind.


158


Experiences  in  Spirihialism,


[seance


Charlie  asked  questions  relative  to  the  nature  of  God  ;
the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  ;  and  God's  having  once  been
on  earth.  Home  spoke  at  great  length,  and  with  much
eloquence.  I  cannot  remember  the  exact  words  ;  but  the
substance  of  it  was,  that  it  was  impossible  for  us  to
comprehend  it  ;  that  nearly  every  man  had  really  in  his
mind  a  different  idea  of  God  ;  that  whether  our  concep-
tion of  Him  was  as  a  unity,  duahty,  or  a  trinity,  it
could  not  be  of  much  consequence,  provided  that  we
recognized  Him  and  obeyed  His  laws.  He  spoke  much
of  the  immensity  of  God,  and  our  almost  utter  ignorance
of  Him  and  His  works.  He  described  the  geometrical
forms  and  attributes  of  a  grain  of  sand,  and  asked  us  if
we  understood  "^y thing  of  that ;  and  then  pointing  to  a
star,  he  asked  us  what  we  knew  of  that.  He  commented
upon  the  very  shght  knowledge  that  the  most  scientific
men  had ;  mentioning  that  not  long  ago  the  spots  on
the  sun  had  been  considered  to  be  mountains ;  then
water ;  then  faculae  :  but  that  now  they  knew  them  to
be  great  chasms.  "  But  what  they  do  not  know,"  he
said,  "  is,  that  the  sun  is  covered  with  a  beautiful  vege-
tation, and  full  of  organic  hfe."
Ad  ARE  : "  Is  not  the  sun  hot  ?  "

Home  :  "  No,  the  sun  is  cold ;  the  heat  is  produced
and  transmitted  to  the  earth  by  the  rays  of  hght  passing
through  various  atmospheres.  As  to  God's  having  been
once  on  the  earth,  He  has  never  left  it,  but  is  every-
where."

Charhe  also  asked  about  the  divinity  of  Christ,  and  said
he  wanted  to  know  the  truth  about  all  those  matters.

Home  spoke  to  the  effect  that  even  if  they  could  tell
us  the  whole  truth,  our  minds  could  not  understand  or
bear  it.  He  said  that  spirits  had  different  views  on  these
subjects,  and  that  they  could  not  and  might  not  unfold
the  truth.  "  You  are  taught,"  he  continued,  "  as  much
as  you  can  bear.  A  common  theory,  speaking  figuratively,
is  that  the  heavens  and  earth  are  two  cones  ;  and  that
Christ  is,  as  it  were,  the  two  apexes,  joining  and  con-
necting both."  He  recommended  Charhe,  if  he  did  or
could,  to  hold  the  doctrine  of  the  divinity  of  Christ,  in


NO.  41]


With  D.  D.  Home


159


its  usually  accepted  form,  saying  that  it  was  better  for
him  to  do  so,  if  it  led  him  to  a  more  religious  frame  of
mind ;  but  added,  "  Follow  His  teaching  and  carry  out
His  mission.  His  mission  was  one  of  Peace  ;  do  not  then
cut  your  neighbour's  throat  because  he  differs  from  you."
Home  then  launched  out  into  a  tirade  against  intolerance
and  persecution,  lamenting  over  the  wickedness  of  man-
kind in  supposing  that  bloodshed  and  persecution  could  be
pleasing  to  God. He  spoke  at  great  length  on  this  subject.

Ad  ARE  :  "  But  if,  for  a  time  at  least  the  whole  truth
about  such  important  doctrines  as  the  divinity  of  Christ  is
not  perceived,  do  not  the  differences  of  opinion  among
spirits  who  are  much  together,  lead  to  bad  results  ?  For
instance,  my  mother  was  very  rehgious ;  .  ?nd  especially
upon  that  subject  of  the  divinity  of  Christ.  She  may  be
frequently  with  spirits  who  do  not  hold  the  same  views,
or  hold  them  in  a  modified  form.  Do  they  still  differ  1
Do  they  talk  about  it  ?  "

Home  :  "It  cannot  lead  to  dissension  ;  they  know  that
they  are  not  perfect,  and  that  they  have  much  to  learn.
The  sort  of  conversation  you  have  imagined  to  yourself
has  actually  taken  place.  A  spirit  has  asked  certain
questions  such  as  :  '  Can  you  shew  me  that  there  was  a
necessity  for  it  1  '  '  Can  you  actually  prove  it  ?  '  &c.,
&c.  And  your  mother  always,  as  you  know,  kind  and
gentle,  only  says,  '  No  ;  perhaps  not  ;  but  I  do  not  see
any  reason  why  I  should  change  the  behef  I  always  held
about  it.'"

Home  then  turned  to  me  saying,  "  You  have  been
much  troubled  and  disturbed ;  you  have  a  difficult  and
tortuous  path  before  you,  and  you  have  thought  that  if
there  was  anything  in  Spirituahsm  it  ought  to  be  of  use
and  comfort  to  you.  We  know  all  your  doubts  and
difficulties,  and  sympathize  with  you.  Be  patient  and
prayerful,  and  all  will  be  well. Have  you  had  a  dream  ?  "

Adaee  :  "I  beheve  I  have  dreamt  something  curious  ;
but  I  am  unable  to  remember  what  it  was."

Home  :  "  Adah  has  been  trying  to  impress  you  in  your
sleep.  Your  mother  allowed  her  to  do  so  ;  but  she  has
not  quite  succeeded ;  she  will  try  again. What  you  dreamt,


160


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[SEAKCE


you  could  not  remember,  it  was  this  :  You  thought  you
were  journeying  along  a  tortuous  difficult  path  full  of
obstacles  ;  at  the  foot  of  a  mountain  you  saw  two  angels  ;
the  one  very  bright  and  pure,,  the  other  rather  darker
and  more  earthly.  You  were  in  doubt  which  to  choose ;
but  thought  the  darker  one,  being  most  material,  would
be  of  most  use.  You  trusted  yourseH  to  him ;  but  as
you  ascended  the  mountain,  the  path  became  more  and
more  difficult,  and  the  angel  that  guided  you  became
himself  weary  and  confused  ;  could  not  conduct  you  any
further,  and  at  last  you  were  obliged  to  stop.  You  found
then  still  greater  difficulty  in  retracing  your  steps  than
you  had  experienced  in  going  up  ;  but  at  length,  you
arrived  again  at  the  foot  of  the  ascent ;  and  you  then
trusted  yourself  to  the  other  and  brighter  angel,  when
the  road  became  at  once  easy,  and  he  led  you  up  with-
out doubt  or  difficulty."


No.  42. — Seance  at  No.  5,  Buckingliam  Gate,  December  20i^.^

My  dear  Father, — Last  Tuesday  we  had  a  seance  at
No.  7.  Present  :  Home,  Charhe  Wynne  and  his  wife,
Augusta  Gore,  the  Master  of  Lindsay,  Arthur  Smith
Barry,  and  myseK.  There  appeared  to  be  great  difficulty
in  making  manifestations  ;  indeed,  the  spirits  said  that
Home  was  ill  and  therefore  that  they  had  no  power.
We  felt  strong  vibrations  of  the  table,  which  was  moved
about.  Augusta's  couch  was  moved,  (no  one  touching  it)
as  was  the  screen,  at  the  head  of  her  couch,  (no  one
toucliing  it).  The  spirits  also  answered,  and  gave  messages
by  rapping  on  the  couch  ;  altogether  it  was  not  a  bad
seance  for  convincing  sceptics.  Arthur  was  touched,  as
was  also  Augusta,  and  the  latter  told  me  afterwards,  that
she  had  seen  spirit-forms  in  the  room.  Home  was  taken
possession  of,  his  hands  and  arms  became  partially  cata-
leptic, and  he  made  passes  in  this  condition  over  Augusta

1  The  same  mistake  in  the  printing  of  tlie  heading  has  evidently
been  made  in  this  case  as  in  the  case  of  Stance  No.  41  (see  above,
p.  151 ).  Seance  No.  42  appears  to  have  been,  held  on  Tuesday^  December
15,.  18.68,.  at  7  Buckingham  Gate.  [Ed.^


NO.  42]


With  D.  D.  Home


161


for  some  time,  then  stooping  down  he  made  passes  under
the  couch  ; which  Augusta  said  she  felt  distinctly.

Charhe  Wynne,  Lindsay,  Arthur  and  I,  adjourned  to
Ashley  House  to  smoke  a  cigar.  We  sat  for  a  short
time  in  the  httle  room,  and  had  manifestations,  but  Home
was  too  weak  for  anything  very  wonderful.  He  was
elongated  slightly  (I  think),  and  raised  in  the  air  ;  his
head  became  quite  luminous  at  the  top,  giving  him  the
appearance  of  having  a  halo  round  it.  When  he  was
raised  in  the  air,  he  waved  his  arms  about,  and  in  each
hand,  there  came  a  httle  globe  of  fire  (to  my  eyes,  blue)  ;
the  effect  was  very  pretty  ;  Adah  Menken  and  Dannie
Cox  were  the  only  two  spirits  that  I  recognized  by  Home's
manner.


No.  43. — Seance.

Last Friday, I went to a seance at  Mrs. E  's.

Present  :  Home,  H.  Jencken,  Mrs.  E  ,  Mrs.  Honey-
wood, Captain S  , General , and myself.  This

seance  was  in  many  respects  the  most  wonderful  that  I
have  ever  witnessed.  Home  was  in  a  trance  the  greater
part  of  the  time  ; the  information  that  he  gave  was  of

a  very  private  character  to  Captain  S  ; it  was  given

in  pantomime,  not  a  word  being  spoken,  in  order  that
some of the party should not understand.  Captain

S  ,  for  whom it  was  intended, understood  it, and  I

fancy  so  did  I ;  but  as  it  was  quite  private,  and  for  some
reasons  very  fearful,  I  do  not  feel  at  hberty  to  mention
about  it.  I  have  since  found  I  was  mistaken.  Home,
before  he  went  into  the  trance,  said  that  there  was  a
very  strange  influence  about  me.  He  partly  made  him
out,  but  by  degrees,  and  said  that  his  name  (surname)  was
Thomas.  Thomas  of  some  place.  That  he  had  been  a
friend  of  my  father's  and  of  my  grandfather,  in  fact  a
greater  friend  of  the  latter  than  of  the  former ;  that  I
also  had  known  him,  that  he  used  to  have  conversations
about  rehgion  with  my  father.  He  said  that  lie  was  a
very  strange  spirit,  abrupt  and  yet  undecided  in  his
manner  ; "He  wants  to  say  something  to  you,  but  when

L


162


Ex'perieMces  in  Spiritualism


[seance


I  am  going  to  speak  he  stops  me."  "  Ah !  "  he  said,
"  He  is  going,  he  says  he  will  come  again  to-night."
Besides  the  strange  story  that  Home  in  a  trance  acted  for

the  benefit  of  Captain  S  ,  he  also  took  Captain  S  •

and  Mrs.  E (brother  and  sister) into  another  room,

and  sj)oke  to  them  in  private  for  some  time.  We  had  at
diiferent  times,  pretty  strong  physical  manifestations,
table  hfted,  &c.,  &c.  When  Home  was  acting  the  story,
it  being  most  necessary  that  not  a  word  should  be
spoken,  his  jaws  were  locked  and  as  rigid  as  steel ;  I
felt  them,  as  did  others.


No.  44.

That  night  I  slept  in  Home's  room  at  Ashley  House  ;
we  had  a  very  beautiful  manifestation.  Home  had  been
giving  a  public  reading  the  day  before  at  Croydon,  which
had  been  a  failure,  and  he  was  much  dispirited  about  it.
A  spirit  (his  mother  I  think),  said,  "  Do  not  he  cast  down,
Dan ;  serve  God  truly,  and  his  holy  spirits  will  guard  and
protect  you ;  fulfil  your  mission  in  life,  and  He  will  not
forsake  you, — be  not  cast  down."  We  then  both  heard,
as  it  were,  a  bird  chirping  about  the  room,  and  the
spirit  added,  "  For  He  careth  even  for  the  sparrows.''  The
spirits  conversed  with  us  for  some  httle  time  by  raps.
My  mother  spoke  more  to  me  than  she  has  ever  done
before ;  Home  being  in  a  trance.  He  made  use  of  the
same  expressions  my  mother  would  have  done,  in  a  most
affectionate  manner.  He  talked  of  her  happiness,  partly
on  account  of  an  immunity  from  physical  pain  and
weakness,  partly  owing  to  the  blessed  calm  and  peace  of
her  existence,  and  her  knowledge  that  the  hearts  of  those
she  had  loved  still  beat  with  love  for  her,  and  that  soon
they  would  all  be  united  again  together.  He  told  me
not  to  think  that  it  was  through  want  of  affection  that
she  so  seldom  communicated  with  me,  and  gave  me
certain  reasons  for  it,  and  recited  two  verses  of  beautiful
poetry  relative  to  a  mother's  love.  He  mentioned  a
painful  peculiarity  of  a  spirit  who  had  taken  part  at  the


NO.  44]


With  D.  D.  Home


163


seance  that  evening  ;  a  peculiarity  that  I  also  have,  and
told  me  to  take  warning,  and  try  and  break  myself  of
it.  He  said  that  her  great  wish  was  to  see  me  lead  so
pure  and  elevated  a  life,  that  I  might  make  my  existence
here  a  stepping  stone  to  a  far  higher  state  of  existence
in  the  next  hfe.  He  told  me  not  to  be  discouraged  by
failure,  but  to  strive  to  do  what  I  knew  was  right.
The  spirit  calling  himseH  Thomas  of  (name  of  place
unknown),  came  and  began  to  talk  about  himseK.  He
said  that  since  he  had  entered  the  spirit-life,  he  had  very
much  changed  his  views  on  rehgion.  He  broke  off
suddenly  and  said  he  would  tell  me  all  about  it  another
time.  It  was  then  late,  past  three  a.m.,  and  my  mother
said,  "  I  will  request  the  other  influences  to  leave  you ;
you  should  sleep  now."


No.  45.

Last  night  I  slept  in  Home's  room  at  Ashley  House.
I  did  not  go  to  bed  till  past  three.  Soon  after  I  was  in
bed,  there  were  evidences  of  a  very  strong  influence  in
the  room ;  and  we  saw  hghts  and  heard  sounds,  as  if
some  one  was  endeavouring  to  make  their  voice  audible
to  us ;  and  we  heard  a  sound  like  footsteps.  We  then
had  a  very  beautiful  manifestation.  There  is  a  plaster  of
Paris  crucifix,  about  one  foot  in  length,  hanging  on  the
wall  over  Home's  bed.  We  heard  something  being  moved
on  the  wall,  and  presently  saw  this  crucifix  waving  in  the
air  between  us  and  the  window.  I  could  see  nothing
holding  it ;  it  appeared  to  move  of  itself.  A  spirit  then
said,  by  raps  on  the  cross,  "  It  is  to  shew  you  that  ive  do
not  fear  the  symbol  of  the  cross ;  ive  should  like  you  to
kiss  it."  The  crucifix  was  then  brought,  or,  as  it  appeared
to  me,  moved  of  itself,  close  to  my  face  and  was  placed
upon  my  lips.  I  kissed  it,  and  it  was  then  taken  away
to  Home's  bed  and  placed  upon  his  hps.  He  did  the  same.
They  then  said,  "  We  also  will  now  kiss  it."  The  crucifix
was  moved  away  some  distance,  and  we  heard  a  sound
of some one kissing it three times, but saw  nothing.


164  Experiences  in  Spiritualisfrh  [seance

They  then  said,  through  the  alphabet,  that  they  had
something  to  tell  me  next  Sunday  ;  and  that  the  same
spirit  that  had  spoken  to  us,  through  Home,  the  Sunday
before,  would  come  again  ;  that  we  were  not  to  interrupt
him  by  asking  questions,  but  just  to  listen  to  what  he
said,  as  he  had  something  of  importance  to  tell  us.


No.  46  Seance. — Saturday,  December  2^th  [1868].

Last  Sunday,  Home  and  Lindsay  went  down  to  Norwood
to  have  a  seance.  They  returned  about  11  o'clock.  Charhe
Wynne  and  Captain  Smith  came  also  to  Ashley  House.  After
Home  and  Lindsay  arrived,  we  went  into  the  small  room
and  sat  round  the  table  ;  the  room  was  dark.  We  had
strong  physical  manifestations  ;  we  were  all  repeatedly
touched  by  hands  coming  from  imder  the  table.  Our
hands  when  touched  were  on  the  table.  A  hand  took
Charlie's  hand,  and  the  moment  he  felt  it  he  exclaimed,

"  This is F  "s  hand  ; I  could  swear  to  her  peculiar

touch."'  The  same  hand  also  touched  me  ;  plajrfully
pinching  and  patting  the  back  of  my  hand  ; it  felt  old

and  wrinkled. A  spirit  said  by  raps,  "  Yes,  it  is  F  ."

The  hand  again  toviched  Charlie  ;  he  also  remarked  the
wrinkled  feeling  of  the  skin.  A  spirit  then  said,  "  Yes,
it  feels  to  you  as  it  once  -was  ;  now  it  is  7io  longer  aged  ;  "
and  a  hand  feeling  young  and  soft  placed  itself  in  Charlie's
hand,  taking  his  in  the  same  peculiar  manner,  but  patting

him  briskly  as  if  to  shew  that  it  was  full  of  hfe.  G

H  ,  an  uncle  of  Smith,  and  H J  ,  told  us  by

raps  that  they  were  present.  I  asked  if  it  were  true  that
uncle  Robert  was  conscious  of  their  presence  near  him  at
night,  and  if  he  had  real  manifestations.  They  replied,
"  Yes,  it  is  true,  and  not  imagination  on  his  part.''  I
asked  them  if  Emmy  had  been  touched  on  the  shoulder
the  morning  before,  or  whether  it  was  as  I  had  declared,
her  imagination.  They  replied,  "  She  ivas  touched.'"  Charlie
asked  if  what  had  happened  to  him  in  clnirch  was
spiritual  ? They said, "  Yes, certainly, it was."  They


NO.  46]


With  D.  D.  Home


165


entered  a  good  deal  into  our  conversation. Lindsay  fell
into  a  trance  ; at  first  he  could  not  speak,  but  after  a
time in answer to a question, they said through  him,
"  Yes, he can see sometimes  ; he will not  remember
anything  of  it,  we  cannot  talk  through  him  much  yet,  he
is  not  fully  developed,  but  he  will  be  in  time."  Lindsay
when awake saw  spirit-forms, I saw lights  occasionally,
faint flashes and sparks. Home went into a trance  ;
he  walked  about  the  room  apparently  settling  what  was
to  be  done,  then  sat  down,  and  turning  to  me,  told  me
to  go  into  the  next  room,  and  place  outside  the  window
a certain vase of flowers. I did so, putting the  vase
outside on the ledge, and shuttino- the window.  Home
opened  the  window  of  the  room  in  which  we  were  sitting.
The  flowers  were  carried  through  the  air  from  the  window
of  the  next  room  in  at  our  open  window. We  could  all
hear the rusthng, and see the curtains moved by  the
spirit  standing  there, who was  bringing  in  the flowers  ;
Lindsay saw the spirit distinctly. A flower and  sprig
of  fern,  or  something  of  that  sort,  was  now  given  to  each
of  us  ; in  some  cases  it  was  placed  upon  the  hand  on
the table  ; others were touched, and on putting  down
their  hand,  the  flower  was  placed  in  it. I  was  touched
strongly  on  the  knee,  and  a  s^Drig  of  box  was  given  me.
Afterwards,  little  Dannie  said, "  /  will  give  you  another
piece  of  fern  in  place  of  the  one  you  lost ; hat  you  must
take  great  care  of  this ; it  is  only  a  very  little  hit."  In
answer apparently to some question. Home said, "  Oh
yes,  certainly,  give  it  to  him  yourself." Home told  me
to  hold  out  my  hand — I  did  so,  rather  behind  me  ;  and
I  felt  Dannie's  soft  httle  fingers  touch  mine,  and  pat  my
hand,  and  place  a  httle  bit  of  maiden  hair  fern  in  it.
Home then made some very curious experiments  with
flowers  : he  separated  the  scent  into  two  portions — one
odour  smelhng  exactly  like  earth  ; the  other  being  very
sweet. He  explained  what  he  was  doing  ; and  how  there
cam©  to  be  the  two  j)rinciples,  as  it  were,  in  the  flower.
I  did  not  clearly  understand  his  meaning  when  he  spoke  ;
and  I  forget  now  what  he  said. While  the  flowers  were
being  given  to  us,  Home  said, "  Listen  ;  " we  did,  and


166


Ex'periences  in  iSpiritualism


SEANCE


all  heard  the  sprigs  being  broken  in  the  next  room.
While  we  hstened,  the  sound  ceased.  Home  said,  "  You
see  the  effect  of  the  concentration  of  your  thoughts.
It  is  hard  for  you  to  understand  ;  but  I  assure  you  that
the  fact  of  your  all  directing  your  thoughts  to  a  certain
object  there,  sent  a  sohd  column  of  polarized  light  right
through  into  the  other  room,  and  completely  changed  the
condition  of  the  atmosphere  there  for  a  time,  so  that
they  could  not  continue  to  do  what  they  were  about."
As  soon  as  we  had  all  been  given  our  httle  bunches  of
leaves  or  flowers,  Home  told  me  to  go  into  the  next  room,
and  examine  the  vase.  I  did  so,  and  found  the  window
closed  as  I  had  left  it  ;  I  opened  it  and  found  that
all  the  tall  sprigs  of  fern,  &c.,  &c.,  had  been  taken  away.
Home  never  left  the  room  we  sat  in  after  I  had  placed  the
vase  outside  the  window,  so  that  even  supposing  that  the
branches  we  received  had  been  concealed  by  Home  on
his  person,  still  the  sprigs  in  the  vase  must  have  been
broken  off  and  removed  somehow  outside  the  window.
Home  now  left  the  room,  saying,  "  Do  not  be  frightened  ;
Dan  is  not  going  out  of  the  window  or  anything  of  that
sort."  He  returned,  holding  in  his  hand  haff  a  lemon,
freshly  cut ;  he  handed  it  to  each  of  us  to  taste.  He
laughed  and  said,  "  Yes,  it  is  very  good,  is  it  not  ?  so
refreshing."  He  then  held  it  up  above  his  head,  and
said,  "  We  will  withdraw  all  the  acid  flavour  from  it."
A  yellowish  light  came  over  the  lemon  ;  he  held  it  up
for  some  little  time,  and  said,  "  Now  taste  again."  He
held  it  out  to  me  ;  but  the  room  being  rather  dark,  I
bobbed  my  nose  against  it,  and  therefore  tasted  nothing.
All  the  others  tasted  it,  and  described  it  as  most  disagree-
able, having  no  odour,  and  the  flavour  being  a  sort  of
mawkish  alkali  ;  some  described  it  as  Uke  magnesia  ;
others,  as  hke  washing  soda.  Home  laughed  and  said,
"  We  will  take  the  nasty  taste  away  presently."  He  then
described  what  had  taken  place,  I  cannot  recollect  what
he  said,  but  the  substance  of  it  was  that  a  purely  natural
process  had  been  gone  through.  "  li  you  were  to  eat  the
lemon,"  he  said,  "  or  swallow  the  juice,  the  same  thing
exactly  would  occur  by  natural  decomposition,  all  the  acid


NO.  46]


With  D.  D.  Home


167


flavoxir  would  be  freed,  and  would  pass  through  the  pores
of  your  skin  into  all  sorts  of  forms,  &c.,  &c.,  while  the
residuum  would  be  a  substance,  such  as  you  now  tasted.
It  resembled  soda  ;  it  is  of  that  nature,  and  that  is  why
lemon  juice  is  so  good  for  acidity  of  the  stomach  and
blood.  We  have  done  nothing  miraculous  ;  by  our  know-
ledge of  natural  substances  and  laws,  we  were  able  to
hasten  as  it  were,  a  natural  process,  and  withdraw  at  once
the  acid,  instead  of  its  being  diffused  into  various  forms  :
we  have  retained  it  in  the  air,  and  will  now  restore  it  to
the  lemon."  He  held  the  lemon  up  and  a  rose-coloured
flame,  or  rather  light,  came  over  it.  After  a  little,  he
gave  it  to  those  who  had  tasted  it  the  second  time  ;  they
said  that  it  was  quite  good  and  fresh,  and  that  all  the
natural  scent  and  flavour  was  restored  to  it.^

Home  sat  down  and  said,  "  It  would  be  very  nice  if
the  same  party  that  are  here  to-night,  could  sit  occasion-
ally together.  You  are  all  sympathetic,  and  in  a  very
short  time  you  would  all  of  you  see  not  only  sparks  and
flashes  of  hght,  but  the  whole  forms  distinctly  of  the
spirits  in  the  room.  I  want  also  some  time  or  other  to
talk  to  you  on  a  very  interesting  subject,  namely,  when
it  is  that  the  soul  enters  the  body  of  an  infant  ;  at  what
period  of  its  existence  it  becomes  a  hving  soul.  It  aj)pears
a  difficult  subject  to  you  ;  it  is  really  as  simple  as  the
scent  of  a  flower  or  its  colour."  Charhe  then  said  some-
thing to  him  about  the  origin  of  man.  "  Oh,  yes,"  said
Home,  "  that  is  a  subject  I  want  to  speak  to  you  about  ;
some  day  I  will,  and  of  the  difference  in  the  existences
of  different  creatures.  No  creature  that  crawls — that  is
unable,  as  it  were,  to  do  anything  to  preserve  its  life  here
— has  immortahty."  "  Do  you  mean,"  I  said,  that  they
have  no  future  ?  "  "  Oh,  yes,  they  have  indeed  a  very
important  future  before  them  ;  I  mean  they  differ  from
you  as  regards  their  individuality."  I  said,  "  Can  you
teU  me  where  the  hne  is  drawn  ?  "  "  There  is  no  exact
hne  ;  some  creatures  are  endowed  with  a  greater  amount

^  I  believe  I  am  correct  in  this  account  of  the  lemon,  but  I  cannot
swear  that  Home  did  not  leave  the  room  after,  as  he  said,  restoring  the
acid  principle  to  the  lemon,  and  before  he  gave  it  to  them  to  taste.


168


Experiences  in  S^nrituaUsm


[seance


of  what  you  call  instinct  than  others  that  are  apparently
much  above  them  in  the  scale  of  creation  :  like,  for  in-
stance, ants  and  bees.  I  cannot  tell  you  about  it  now.
We  have  not  been  able  to  do  at  all  what  we  intended
this  evening.  Dan  must  awake  now,  and  you  must  not
sit  any  longer."  Home  awoke,  and  we  went  into  the
other  room.


No.  47. — Seance  at  No.  7,  Buckingham  Gate,  Monday,
December  2lst  [1868].

Present  :  Emmy  Wynne,  Charlie  Wynne,  Augusta  Gore
Booth,  Home,  and  myself.  We  sat  at  a  large  square  tea
table,  one  side  of  it  being  placed  against  Augusta's  couch.
Almost  immediately  on  sitting  down,  we  felt  a  strong
vibration  of  the  table.  The  alphabet  w^as  called  for,  and
the  following  long  message  given  ;  the  first  part  having
reference  to  me  and  something  that  had  occupied  my
mind  ;  the  latter  part  intended  for  all  of  us  :  "A  perfect
submission  to  the  crosses  of  earth  life  only  worhs  out  for  you
a  purer  and  higher  life,  ivhen  freed  from  the  mortal  and
nearer  the  divine.  You,  my  darling  boy,  did  not  observe  that
the  little  branch  we  gave  you  last  night  ivas  in  form  a  cross.
It  has  a  deep  significance.  There  are  six  leaves  at  every
point ;  these,  too,  have  a  meaning,  tohich  you  ivill  one  day
understand.  Meanwhile,  hear  all ;  God's  truth  ^vill  overcome
error.  Be  patient,  my  darlings ;  I  am  indeed  happy  that
you  have  been  led  to  investigate.''

We  had  all  the  usual  physical  phenomena,  though  not
very  strongly  ;  the  chief  feature  of  the  seance  being  the
amount  of  conversation  carried  on  through  the  alphabet ;
and  by  spirits  assenting  or  differing  from  what  we  said  by
rapping  "  Yes  "  or  "  No  "  upon  the  table,  furniture,  &c.
Raps  came  on  Augusta's  couch,  and  it  was  moved  about,
and  the  head  part  raised  a  little.  After  these  manifesta-
tions a  message  was  given  :  "Darling,  this  is  G  H  ;"

and  immediately  afterwards  :  "  We  all  wish  to  see  you  thus,"
and  her  couch  was  again  raised  at  the  head,  completing
the  sentence  : "  We  all  ivish  to  see  you  thus  raised  up."


NO.  47]


With  D.  D.  Home


109


The  table  moved  about,  and  was  tilted  up  sometimes  to
one  side,  and  sometimes  to  another.  A  whistle  that  was
on  the  table  did  not  move  when  the  table  was  tilted  in
any  direction,  except  towards  Augusta  ;  when  it  was  tilted
towards  her  the  whistle  rolled.  In  answer  to  a  question
as  to  the  cause  of  this,  they  said,  "  From  a  loant  of
injluence  on  that  side."  They  told  us  they  did  not  with-
draw any  influence  from  Augusta,  as  it  would  weaken  her.
They  afterwards  turned  the  table  round,  so  as  to  have  the
side  at  which  Emmy  had  been  sitting  next  Augusta  ;  the
side  which  had  been  next  to  Augusta  came  opposite  to
Home.  This  equalized  the  magnetic  influence  round  the
table.  At  the  same  time  we  were  told  that  they  were
desirous  of  showing  their  presence  by  messages  rather  than
by  physical  manifestations.  The  table  was  raised  in  the
air  about  18  inches,  and  remained  poised  for  some  little
time.  Emmy's  dress  was  pulled  and  shaken  ;  Home's
chair  was  moved.  Having  been  told,  through  the  alpha-
bet, to  put  the  white  cloth  on  the  table,  we  did  so.  We
saw,  and  were  touched  by  hands  moving  under  the  cloth.
A  flower  in  Home's  button-hole  was  taken  away,  and
carried  underneath  the  table  ;  I  heard  it  moving  there.
Presently  the  same  iiower  was  thrown  from  behind  Aug-
usta's couch  ;  it  touched  her  face,  and  then  fell  upon  the
floor.  It  was  taken  up,  and  a  hand  and  arm  came  from
behind  her  couch,  and  placed  it  gently  against  her  cheek,
and  gave  it  to  her.  Emmy  said,  "  I  saw  the  hand  and
arm." A  message was  given "  A hand, ivith  the  flower

from  K  ." Home  also  saw  the  arm  ;  I  did  not.  Some

other  manifestations  were  made  about  Augusta's  couch,  and

the  words,  "  It  was  G H  ,"  given. We  then  heard

a  sharp  noise  that  we  took  to  be  the  chirping  of  a  bird
under  the  table,  and  we  heard  something  moving  under-
neath the  table.  The  message  was  given — "  We  hope  soon
you  toill  not  require  *  *  *  ;  "  and  at  the  same  moment  a
heavy  handle,  used  for  winding  up  the  couch,  was  raised
from  under  the  table,  and  placed  in  Augusta's  hand,  im-
plying that  they  hoped  soon  she  would  be  able  to  raise

herseK. The  name "  G H  " was  given  to  show

who had made the manifestation. We found that  the


170


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


chirping  sound  we  had  heard  was  caused  by  the  handle  of
the  lever  turning  while  being  moved  under  the  table.  This
chirping  was  imitated  exactly  by  a  spirit  at  some  distance
behind  us  in  the  centre  of  the  room.  We  now  had  a  very
wonderful  manifestation.  We  were  merry  about  something
or  other,  and  we  all  distinctly  heard  a  spirit  voice  joining
in  our  laughter  ;  it  sounded  quite  clear  and  loud.  Home
asked  if  it  was  to  shew  that  they  hked  to  see  us  happy
and  were  happy  themselves  ;  the  answer  was  "  Yes ;  God
is  so  good."  Soon  after  this  the  message  was  given —
"  Daniel  is  exhausted ;  "  and  all  manifestations  ceased.
During  the  seance  Emmy  and  Augusta  saw  shadowy  forms,
hands,  and  arms.

After  talking  a  short  time  we  went  into  the  next  room
(Uncle  Robert's  study).  We  were  at  supper  eating,  drink-
ing, and  chatting  very  merrily,  not  talking  of,  or  I  beheve
thinking  about.  Spiritualism,  when  there  came  a  knock  at
the  door.  Charlie  turned  his  head,  and  said,  "  Come  in."
The  door  did  not  open  ;  but  the  next  moment  there  came
knocks  upon  the  table  and  a  chair  gUded  out  from  the
wall  to  the  table  (no  one  touching  it),  and  placed  itself  in
the  most  natural  manner  between  Emmy  and  Home  ;  it
then  moved  up  close  to  Home,  and  the  alphabet  was  called
for  by  the  chair  tilting  (no  one  touching  it).  The  follow-
ing message  was  given — "  /  like  you  because  you  do  good
to  those  I  love." Home  asked  who  the  spirit  was  ;  "(7— — -

H—  " was answered. Emmy's dress was pulled,  and

dragged  strongly  under  the  table,  and  a  hand  was  twice
put  into  hers  beneath  the  table.  Charhe  was  touched  on
the  knee.  Several  questions  were  answered  and  another
message,  which  I  forget,  was  given  by  raps  on  the  table,
as  loud  as  if  some  one  had  struck  it  underneath  with  a
hammer.  The  table  was  moved  and  tilted,  and  once  raised
completely  off  the  ground  for  a  second  or  two,  so  slightly
that  I  did  not  perceive  it,  but  the  others  did,  and  the
spirits  afterwards  said  that  it  had  been  off  the  ground.  It
must  have  required  great  power  even  to  move  and  tilt  it,
for  the  table  was  a  heavy  dining-room  table  covered  with
plates,  dishes,  and  decanters.  Home  was  told  that  Aug-
usta had  also  had  manifestations  ;  and  when  we  returned


NO.  48]


With  D.  D.  Home


171


to  the  other  room,  we  found  that  she  had  heard  raps  in
her  room,  while  we  were  at  supper  in  the  other.  She  also
heard  the  raps  and  the  movement  of  the  table  in  the
study.


No.  4:8.~Fehruary  8th,  1869.

Last  night  I  slept  at  Ashley  House.  Home  was  at  a
party,  and  did  not  come  in  until  very  late.  Soon  after
he  had  gone  to  bed  he  went  into  a  trance  for  a  short
time.  He  was  far  from  well,  and  the  spirits  said  they
could  not  make  any  use  of  him.  In  the  morning,  about
11  o'clock,  Sacha,  Home's  wife,  said  to  me,  through  the
alphabet,  "  Will  you  from  my  part  give  to  Florence  some-
thing ?  "  I  said  I  should  be  deUghted.  She  said  to  Home,
"  Dannie,  my  broad  gold  Bussian  bracelet.''


No.  49  Seance.— February  9th  [1869].

In  the  evening  of  the  8th,  Dr.  Gully  came  in.  As  we
were  sitting  by  the  fire  talking,  Home  went  gradually  into
a  trance.  He  examined  Dr.  Gully's  heart,  gave  him  some
directions  as  to  treatment,  and  told  him  that  his  head  and
brain  were  all  working  beautifully  ;  that  his  head  had  not
been  so  clear  and  in  such  good  order  for  some  time.  He
walked  about  the  room  conversing,  sometimes  with  us,
sometimes  with  the  spirits  in  the  room.  He  asked  me  to
fetch  an  accordion  from  IVIr.  S.  C.  Hall's  rooms  ;  I  did  so.
He  then  said  that  Captain  Smith  was  coming,  and  that  he
had  just  then  left  his  house.  He  became  rather  impatient
at  his  not  coming  quicker  ;  he  was  aware  when  he  did
arrive,  and  told  me  to  go  out  and  meet  him,  which  I  did,
informing  him  that  Home  was  in  a  trance.  When  Smith
entered.  Home  introduced  him  in  a  quaint  style.  Taking
Dr.  Gully's  hand,  he  said,  "  This  is  James — James  Gully  ;
and  this  is  Wilham — Wilham  Smith.  You  are  to  shake
hands.  They  call  him  a  doctor  — there  is  some  sense  in
that  ;  and  they  call  you  a  captain,  which  means  nothing
at  all.".


172


Experiences  in  Sjnritualism


[seance


Home  aaid  to  me,  "  Turn  off  some  of  the  gas,  it  is  too
heavy  on  Dan's  brain — hght  is  a  regular  weight  upon  the
brain,  that  is  why  a  strong  Hght  prevents  our  making
manifestations  ;  the  brain  of  the  medium  cannot  act.  .  It
is  through  your  brains  that  the  atmosphere  we  make  use
of  is  thrown  off.  For  the  same  reason,  manifestations
occur  more  readily  at  night,  when  there  is  an  absence  of
sunhght,  than  in  the  daytime.  From  a  similar  cause,  a
strong  hght  upon  the  platform,  as  at  Miss  Hardinge's
lectures  that  you  were  speaking  of  this  afternoon  is  very
bad.  Light  is  a  ponderable  substance.  There  is  much
that  scientific  men  do  not  yet  know  about  the  nature  of
hght  ;  there  is  a  material  natural  hght,  and  a  spiritual
light.  When  men  know  all  about  material  hght,  they  will
then  turn  their  attention  to  the  much  greater  subject  of
spiritual  light.  Everything  has  its  light."  We  now,  at
Home's  recjuest,  went  into  the  next  room  and  sat  round
the  table  ;  the  room  was  dark  with  the  exception  of  the
hght  from  the  window.  Home  had  that  morning  given
me  the  bracelet  as  a  present  from  his  wife  to  Florence  ; —
I  had  left  it  in  the  drawing  room.

After  we  were  seated  in  the  small  room,  the  attention
of  the  spirits  appeared  principally  directed  to  Dr.  Gully.
Home  explained  something  to  him  about  the  muscles  of
his  left  side,  and  they  gave  him  several  strong  electric
shocks.  Home  seemed  much  pleased  at  this.  "  Oh,"  he
said,  "  that  was  so  beautifully  done,  they  managed  it  so
well,  and  it  has  answered  admirably,  and  done  you  a  great
deal  of  good."  Dr.  Gully  had  also  some  messages  from
his  daughter.  I  then  felt  that  some  one  was  standing
near  me,  and  I  heard  something  moving  about  my  head,
and  presently  felt  a  substance  brushed  across  my  hair,  and
then  placed  upon  my  head.  I  asked  if  I  might  put  up
my  hand  and  take  it.  Home  said,  "  Wait  a  moment."
The  substance  was  then  taken  from  ofi  my  head  and
passed  across  my  hands  on  the  table  ;  and  finally  I  dis-
tinctly felt  a  hand  place  the  bracelet  given  to  Florence
by  Sacha  into  my  fingers.  The  hand  pressed  and  patted
my  fingers.  Sacha,  speaking  through  Home,  then  addressed
a  few  most  touching  and  approjoriate  words  to  me,  on  the


NO.  49]


With  D.  D.  Hwne


173


subject  of  marriage  ;  after  which  we  all  heard  a  spirit
move  from  beside  me  over  to  the  window.  Home  got  up,
placed  himself  close  to  the  window  and  said,  "  Sacha  will
try  and  make  herself  visible  to  you."  Her  form  gradually
became  apparent  to  us  ;  she  moved  close  to  Home  and
kissed  him.  She  stood  beside  him  against  the  window
intercepting  the  light  as  a  solid  body,  and  appeared  fully
as  material  as  Home  himself,  no  one  could  have  told  which
was  the  mortal  body  and  which  was  the  spirit.  It  was
too  dark,  however,  to  distinguish  features  ;  I  could  see  that
she  had  her  full  face  turned  towards  us,  and  that  either
her  hair  was  parted  in  the  middle,  and  flowed  down  over
her  shoulders,  or  that  she  had  on  what  appeared  to  be  a
veil.  She  said,  through  Home,  that  she  would  try  and
appear  to  us  as  white  light,  and  she  did  so,  but  the  form
was  not  nearly  so  distinct  as  when  she  stood  as  a  dark
substance  against  the  window.  Captain  Smith  asked  me
had  I  not  intended  to  have  been  travelhng  that  night  ;
I  told  him  that  such  was  my  original  intention,  but  that
I  had  changed  my  plans  some  days  ago.  He  said,  "  I
know  that,  but  it  was  not  intended  that  you  should  travel
to-night.  I  have  no  idea  why  you  were  prevented,  but
some  day  probably  you  will  know.  I  was  obliged  (by  his
hand  being  taken  possession  of)  the  other  day,  to  write
down  some  questions  ;  I  sealed  them  up  and  sent  them  to
Dan  ;  some  day  you  are  to  open  and  answer  them,  I  think
you  will  find  something  in  them  about  it ;  I  have  no  idea
what  I  wrote."  Home  also  told  me  later  that  the  spirits
had  not  wished  me  to  travel  that  night.  Smith  began
talking  to  me  about  the  seance  in  which  the  lemon  was
used,  and  said  that  he  had  been  thinking  deeply  over  it,
and  beheved  that  there  was  an  allegorical  meaning  attached
to  it.  Home  said,  "  Yes,  there  is,  and  in  many  things
that  we  do,  we  frequently  symbolise  ;  and  are  content  to
know  that  you  will,  by  thinking  for  yourselves,  find  out
the  meaning  :  it  is  better  so.  We  sometimes  also  do  things
the  meaning  or  object  of  which  we  ourselves  do  not  know  ;
we  have  our  impulses  the  same  as  you.  What  meaning
do  you  attach  to  the  story  of  the  lemon  ?  "

Smith  :  "I consider the lemon to have  represented


174


Experiences  in  Spiritualism  [seance


human  nature,  and  the  yellow  flame  that  surrounded  it
our  evil  passions.  The  yellow  flame  devoured  and  des-
troyed all  that  was  good  in  the  lemon — the  juice  and  the
fragrance,  representing  all  that  is  good  in  human  nature  ;
and  it  left  the  lemon  vile  and  worthless.  The  red  flame
that  then  covered  the  lemon  and  restored  it  to  its  former
excellence  represented  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  by  which
alone  our  human  nature,  debased  and  destroyed  by  evil
passions,  can  be  restored  to  its  natural  purity  and  beauty."

Home  appeared  much  pleased,  and  said,  "  Yes,  you  have
read  the  parable  aright  :  the  yellow  flame  was  the  fire  of
evil  passions,  and  the  pure  bright  red  flame  was  the  Spirit
of  God."  He  then  talked  about  the  various  colours  in,
and  virtues  of,  different  crystals,  diamonds,  rubies,  sap-
phires, emeralds,  &c.,  and  what  they  symbohzed.  Adah
Menken  came  and  said  through  Home,  "  Many  would  think
it  horrible  of  such  a  one  as  I  am  to  come  to  you  now ;
but  you,  I  know,  think  otherwise  about  me,  and  I  must
speak  a  word  to  you  relative  to  the  very  important  step
you  are  about  to  take."  She  spoke  a  little  about  my
marriage,  and  said,  "  I  will  come  again  to-night  ;  I  want
to  have  a  long  chat  with  you,  and  tell  you  some  curious
things  that  occurred  at  Adare."  When  Home  awoke  he
was  rather  astonished  to  find  himself  sitting  in  the  small
room,  and  Smith  one  of  the  part3^  He  was  entranced  for
nearly  two  hours,  and  was  much  exhausted.  After  the
others  had  gone,  my  mother  spoke  to  me  through  the
alphabet  about  my  intended  marriage.  She  also  spoke
about  Home  going  to  Adare,  one  message  I  remember
being  :  "  Mortals  seek  for  knoivledge  ;  but  when  we  give  them
the  fruit  of  our  studies,  if  it  does  not  coincide  with  their
preconceived  ideas,  we  are  classed  as  devils."  Home  was  so
weak  that  she  could  not  make  much  use  of  him,  and  Adah
Menken  could  not  say  anything  that  she  had  intended.  The
last  message  was  :  "  Dan,  you  are  very  weak  ;  you  must  not
sit  for  at  least  a  week.  We  take  away  all  power  from  you
for  that  time."  I  forgot  to  say  that  on  Monday  night
Home  spoke  in  a  trance  to  me  about  the  difficulties  in  the
way  of  mediumship  and  communicating.  As  well  as  I  can
remember,  he  said  :  "  Very  strange  occurrences  often  take


NO.  49]


With  D.  D.  Home


175


place  with  undeveloped  mediums  ;  and  you  are  naturally
much  puzzled  by  them.  These  things  are  allowed  some-
times as  wholesome  trials,  in  order  that  the  person  may
see  how  necessary  it  is  to  use  judgment  and  reason,  and
to  approach  the  subject  with  the  greatest  care.  Medium-
ship  is  of  very  slow  growth  ;  people  are  too  hasty,  and
expect  to  get  everything  at  once.  They  are  often  also
told  things  to  make  them  persevere,  spirits  are  so  anxious
to  communicate,  and  it  is  such  a  joy  to  find  people  to
communicate  through,  that  they  rush  in,  as  it  were,  and
try  to  encourage  the  medium  by  promises  that  apply
rather  to  mediums  in  general,  than  to  any  one  individ-
ually ;  promises  also  which  may  take  years  in  their  fulfil-
ment, instead  of  days,  as  mortals  in  their  impatience
suppose.  You  think  too  much  of  the  individuality  of
mediumship.  Supposing  a  person  is  told  that  he  is  to  be
a  great  healer,  that  he  is  to  go  forth  teaching  the  nations,
and  to  be  as  a  king  among  men  ;  that  person  would  con-
sider it  all  as  applying  solely  to  himself  :  it  apphes  rather
to  the  whole  subject,  to  all  mecUums.  Mediums  should
be  as  kings,  in  the  true  sense  of  the  word  ;  they  have  a
wonderful  gift,  a  weighty  responsibihty,  and  they  should,
if  possible,  set  themselves  apart,  and  lead  pure,  simple,
unworldly  fives,  that  they  may  use  their  gift  to  the  best
advantage.  This  mistake  as  regards  promises,  viz.  :  sup-
posing them  to  apply  to  a  single  individual  instead  of  to
mediums  in  general,  is  an  important  fact,  bear  it  in  mind.
The  discerning  of  spirits  is  important.  Now  if  a  dark,
cold,  low  spirit  came  into  the  room  Dan  would  know  him
and  he  could  not  stay  ;  he  would  feel  mean  and  out  of
place,  and  would  have  to  go.  Another  person  might  not
perceive  what  he  was — to  use  a  homely  simile,  it  is  some-
thing fike  a  man  making  faces  at  you  belund  your  back  ;
he  would  not  do  so  if  he  knew  there  was  a  mirror  in
winch  you  could  see  him  ;  when  St.  Paul  spoke  of  dis-
cerning spirits,  he  did  not  mean  seeing  them  only,  but
discerning  the  differences  between  them,  judging  between
the  pure  and  the  impure.  Living  in  any  way  in  an
atmosphere  of  deceit,  holding  seances  on  the  sly,  and
having  anything  whatever  underhand  about  it,  is  very  bad


176


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


and  is  certain  to  produce  a  bad  influence.  Mediums  while
being  developed  must  be  yqxj  cautious,  very  prayerful,
very  guarded  against  deceit  ;  very  patient,  humble,  and
quietly  receptive  of  what  may  come  to  them  ;  very  careful
and  pure  in  life,  for  a  calm  and  prayerful  state  of  mind
is  necessary  for  the  influx  of  a  high  spiritual  influence,
while  lower  influences  can  more  easily  impress  themselves
— are  more  in  their  element,  as  it  were,  with  natures  more
disturbed,  and  less  exalted  and  pure  in  mind  and  body.
If  those  who  are  being  developed  as  mediums  will  remem-
ber and  act  up  to  this,  they  will  arrive  at  a  state  in
which  the}^  will  know  at  once  the  pure  from  the  impure,
and  be  able  to  judge  of  the  influences  about  them."


[The  following  seances  occurred  at  Adare  Manor,  and  at
Garinish,  a  cottage  of  my  father's,  on  the  coast  of  Kerry.
For  the  sake  of  uniformity,  I  think  it  best  to  follow  the
same  famihar  style,  using  the  first  person,  as  in  the  pre-
vious communications.  The  seances  recorded  by  my  father
are  signed  "  D."  ;  those  by  me,  "  A."^]

No.  50. — Seance  at  Adare  Manor,  February  21th,  1869.

Mr.  Home  arrived  yesterday,  and  this  evening  our  first
seance  took  place.  We  sat  in  the  gallery  ;  the  party  con-
sisting of  my  sister-in-law  Mrs.  Wynne,  and  her  daughter,
Major  and  Mrs.  Blackburn,  Hon.  F.  Lawless,  Captain
Wynne  (Charlie),  Mr.  Home,  Adare,  and  myself.  During
the  seance  there  was  a  strong  gale  of  wind,  with  heavy
hail  showers,  and  flashes  of  lightning.  After  a  short  time,
vibrations  and  slight  movements  of  the  table  occurred.
Presently  Mr.  Home  and  Adare  went  to  the  end  of  the
room,  and  sat  at  a  small  table  and  asked  what  had  best
be  done.  They  received  the  following  answer  :  "  The  ex-
ternal atmosphere  is  not  good.  We  are  not  sure  that  this
room  ivill  he  conducive. We  wish  all  who  remain  in  this

1  The  seances  recorded  by  the  late  Lord  Dunraven  are  Nos.  50,  51,
.55,  59  and  a  part  of  Nos.  56  and  57.  [Ed.]


NO.  50]


With  D.  D.  Home


177


room  to  be  in  the  circle.  Go  ivith  your  father  and  Fred
Lawless  to  try  another  room."'  As  Mr.  Home  and  Adare
were  walking  up  the  gallery  to  tell  us,  Adare  said  "  I
wonder  if  Charlie  (Wynne)  may  come  with  us  ?  "  "  Yes,"
was  rapped  on  a  table  which  they  were  passing  at  the
moment.

We  went  to  my  study,  and  sat  at  a  small  table.  Raps
were  heard,  and  JMr.  Home  soon  went  into  a  trance,  and
immediately  rose  up  and  walked  about  the  room,  seemingly
in  an  uncomfortable  state  ;  his  e3^es  were  shut.  He  took
the  green  shade  off  my  reading  lamp,  and  then  bandaged
his  eyes  ;  and  after  a  few  turns  about  the  room,  he  came
back  to  the  table.  He  seemed  attracted  to  Lawless.  He
placed  his  hand  against  the  back  of  Lawless's  neck,  and
pressed  it.  Lawless  felt  a  sensation  as  if  a  hot  stream
flowed  into  him.  Mr.  Home  then  sat  down  ;  and,  pointing
emphatically  at  Lawless,  said  :  '•'  You  have  considerable
powers  ;  you  have  (or  ought  to  have)  large  healing  powers."
He  again  walked  about,  and  seemed  very  uncomfortable,
conveying  the  impression  that  there  was  something  un-
satisfactory about  the  state  of  the  room.  He  said  :  '■'  The
gallery  is  too  large,  and  full  of  different  influences,  the
chairs  even  have  different  influences  ;  and  then  this  room
is  too  full  of  business  and  of  figures."  He  went  out  into
the  hall  ;  came  back,  and  then  went  into  the  vestibule.
On  returning  he  took  Adare  out,  and  asked  him  to  come
and  try  the  dining  room.  Adare  said  :  "  Why  not  try  the
room  at  the  end  of  the  passage  ?  "  (his  mother's  sitting
room).  They  went  down  in  the  dark,  Mr.  Home  finding
the  door,  which  Adare  missed.  They  entered  the  room,
and  immediately  INIr.  Home  said:  "This  is  the  room."
He  then  quitted  it,  returned  to  where  we  were  sitting,  and
taking  me  by  the  hand,  he  led  the  way  rapidly  back  to
the  other  room,  and  walked  into  the  middle  of  it,  Adare
coming  with  us.  It  was  pitch  dark.  '•  This,"  he  said,
•'  this  is  the  room."  We  heard  raps  in  different  places.
He  then  took  my  hand,  returned  to  my  study,  and  sat
down.  He  addressed  me  in  a  loud  whisper  :  "  That  is  the
room  ;  you  will  put  some  flowers  there  in  the  morning,
and  have  a  fire  in  the  afternoon. There  will  be  a  remark-


178


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


able  manifestation  up  stairs  ;  you  will  not  know  when  it
will  happen.  You  may  go  to  that  old  ruin  on  Wednesday
night,  or  not  later  than  Thursday.  The  men  only  are  to
go,  the  ladies  would  be  frightened. ^  When  Daniel  comes
back,  go  and  sit  up  stairs."  Mr.  Home  soon  after  awoke.
At  one  time  during  his  trance  he  was  either  elongated  or
raised  off  the  ground,  for,  while  standing  close  to  the
table,  opposite  to  me,  his  head  and  the  upper  part  of  his
figure  were  rapidly  elevated  several  inches  ;  the  lower  part
was  concealed  by  the  table ;  this  lasted  only  a  few
seconds.

As  directed  we  went  up  stairs,  and  sat  at  the  large
table  in  the  middle  of  the  gallery.  Miss  Smith  joined  the
circle  ;  she  became  slightly  hysterical  and  left  the  table,
but  soon  returned.  Fred  Lawless  became  nearly  similarly
affected.  Vibrations  of  the  tables  and  chairs  occurred,  and
the  usual  cold  currents  of  air  w^ere  perceived.  Mr.  Home
and  Adare  felt  some  strong  influence  between  them  ;  the
chair  of  the  former  was  pulled  back  from  one  to  two  feet,
and  Mrs.  Wynne's  was  half  turned  round.  The  table  was
tilted  in  different  directions,  and  was  at  last  raised  about
one  foot  off  the  ground. After  this  nothing  more  occurred.

D.


No.  51  Seance.— February  28th  [1869].

As  directed  last  night,  we  sat  in  Lady  Dunraven's  sitting
room.  Present  :  Mrs.  Wynne,  C.  Wynne,  Lawless,  Adare,
Mr.  Home  and  myseff.  The  table  was  unsteady  and  creaky ;
we  had  very  shght  manifestations.  After  some  time  Mr.
Home  went  into  a  trance  ;  he  seemed  uncomfortable,  and
walked  about,  altering  the  position  of  the  different  chairs
and  articles  of  furniture  ;  he  objected  to  the  large  stuffed
chairs  on  which  we  were  sitting,  and  changed  them  :
saying,  that  the  springs  in  them  had  a  bad  effect.  He
drew  down  the  blinds,  and  made  movements  with  his
hands  and  arms  as  if  magnetizing  about  the  room.  He
sat  down  near  the  fire,  then  taking  out  a  coal,  partly  red

1  We  had  been  previously  talking  about  going  to  the  Abbey.


NO.  51]


With  D.  D.  Home


179


and  partly  black,  he  brought  it  and  held  it  between  Mrs.
Wynne  and  me,  as  if  showing  it  to  us  ;  then,  without
making  any  remark,  he  put  it  back  in  the  fire.  He  held
the  coal  by  the  black  part,  which,  doubtless,  was  tolerably
hot  ;  yet,  still  the  experiment  could  hardly  be  called  an
example  of  the  fire  test,  such  as  was  exhibited  at  Nor-
wood, and  is  mentioned  in  No.  30.  After  this  he  rubbed
and  patted  several  of  us  on  the  back,  and  he  pressed  his
head  against  me  between  the  shoulders  ;  I  felt  a  warm
current  flowing  from  it.  He  then  sat  down,  and  said  that
the  room  was  now  in  a  much  better  state.  After  making
a  few  observations  he  awoke.  Raps  were  heard,  and  we
were  told  to  go  and  look  for  another  table  ;  Mr.  Home,
in  order  to  know  who  should  go  with  him,  pointed  to
each  in  turn,  and  Adare  and  I  were  chosen.  We  went  to
the  hall  and  the  library,  trying  different  tables  without
any  result  ;  on  our  return  through  the  hall,  we  heard  raps
on  a  table  as  we  were  touching  it,  as  we  passed  ;  so  we
took  it  with  us.  We  sat  at  this  table  ;  but  had  only
sUght  manifestations.  We  received  this  message,  "  We  are
doing  our  best ;  we  hope  you  will  be  patient.'''  We  asked,
"  How  many  spirits  present  ?  "  and  were  told  "  Nine.'"
"How  many  that  we  have  known?"'  "Two."  I  ex-
pressed a  hope  that  Dr.  EUiotson  would  come,  and  we
were  talking  about  him  when  the  following  was  given,
"  He  will  visit  the  Abbey.'"  After  a  short  pause  we  re-
ceived this  message  :  "  The  influence  is  against  us ;  we
mean  the  external  atmosphere."  And  soon  after  the  follow-
ing :  "  We  think  you  had  better  try  the  same  table  you  had
last  night."  Upon  this  we  adjourned  to  the  gallery.  We
were  joined  by  Miss  Wjrmie,  Miss  Smith  and  Major  Black-
burn. The  table  vibrated,  and  raps  were  heard ;  but
nothing  remarkable  took  place.

During  one  of  the  periods  when  the  table  was  vibrating,
the  manor  clock  struck  twelve  ;  the  continuity  of  the
vibration  ceased,  but  at  each  stroke  of  the  bell  a  vibration
took  place.  When  the  last  stroke  had  sounded,  the  con-
tinuity of  the  vibrations  recommenced.  Soon  after  this,
the  following  message  was  given  :  "  We  have  done  our  best ;
but  find  it  is  impossible. May  God  bless  you all."  The


180  Ex'periences  in  Spiritualism  [seanoe

word  God  was  spelled  by  strong  vibrations  of  the  table  ;
we  then  adjourned.  D.


No.  52.— Seance,  March  1st  [1869].

We  had  a  seance  at  five  p.m.  Present  :  Major  and  Mrs.
Blackburn,  Mrs.  Wynne,  Miss  Wynne,  Miss  Smith,  Captain
Wynne,  Mr.  Lawless,  Home,  and  myself.  Tolerably  strong
physical  manifestations  occurred.  No  messages  were  given,
but  the  spirits  present  occasionally  joined  in  our  conver-
sation by  rapping  "  Yes  "  or  "  No  ;  "  and  they  answered
a  few  questions  as  to  the  number  of  spirits  in  the  room,
whose  relatives  they  were,  &c.,  &c..  The  table  at  which
we  were  seated  was  moved,  and  raised  in  the  air.  A
good-sized  table  standing  at  some  little  distance  behind
Home  moved  of  itself  ;  and  a  chair  behind  me  moved  up
to  me  of  itself.  Some  one  asked,  "  How  many  spirits  are
there  present  ?  "  Twenty  raps  were  given.  Miss  Smith,
having  been  requested  to  do  so,  asked  if  any  of  her  re-
lations were  in  the  room.  ''Yes;''  was  answered.  "But,"
she  said,  "  there  are  no  relations  of  mine  alive  here  ;  no
one  is  related  to  me."  The  answer  was  "  We  are  the
living."  When  leaving  the  room,  Home  told  me  he  had
a  strong  impression  that  Mrs.  Wynne  and  myself  were  to
sit  with  him  alone  sometime  in  the  evening  ;  after  dinner,
accordingly,  we  three  went  and  sat  in  my  room  round  a
large  and  tolerably  heavy  table.  Immediately  the  in-
fluence became  apparent  by  strong  vibrations  and  raps  on
the  table  and  floor.  The  room  was  at  this  time  lighted
by  a  bright  fire  and  one  candle.  The  following  sentences
were  given  with  short  intervals  between  them,  there  not
being  apparently  sufficient  power  to  enable  the  spirits  to
spell  out  by  raps  many  words  in  succession  :  "We  are
pleased  to  have  you  thus.''  "  Alone  ?  "  I  asked.*  "  Yes."
"  Emily  ivelcome."  Home's  hands  were  influenced,  and  he
patted  and  stroked  his  chest.

The  names  were  then  given:  "Richard,"  "James,"
"  John,"  "  Robert."  "  Is  it  Gore  Booth  ?  "  I  asked.  "  No."
We  were  speculating  as  to  who  these  spirits  could  be,  as


NO.  52]


With  D.  D.  Home


181


only  one  name  was  recognized  by  Mrs.  Wynne,  and  none
by  me,  Home  began  describing  them  ;  but  Mrs.  Wynne,
not  knowing  that  it  was  of  any  consequence,  interrupted
him,  and  he  could  not  tell  us  who  they  were  ;  he  said
however  that  we  should  know  later.  We  now  heard
persons  moving  in  different  parts  of  the  room.  In  order
to  be  certain  that  we  were  not  deceived,  we  asked  that
the  sounds  might  be  repeated  three  times  ;  it  was  done  as
we  requested.  Home  also  said  he  saw  various  figures,  but
not  with  sufficient  distinctness  to  be  able  to  describe  them.
Raps  were  constantly  heard  on  the  table,  floor,  and  furni-
ture, and  the  spirits  occasionally  answered  our  questions.
The  table  was  moved  about  shghtly,  and  raised  off  the
ground.  Home  went  into  a  trance,  got  up  and  walked
about  without  speaking  for  some  httle  time  ;  by  the  atti-
tude he  assumed  I  perceived  that  "  the  Doctor  "  was
influencing  him.  He  came  up  to  me  and  whispered,  "  Tell
Dan  not  to  eat  so  much  sweet."  Another  influence  then
came  over  him  ;  he  walked  about  briskly,  and  seemed
happy  and  pleased  ;  he  spoke  in  a  loud  voice  somewhat
to  this  effect  :  "As  regards  the  seances  you  have  been
holding,  it  is  most  difficult  for  us  to  succeed.  In  the
first  place  the  external  atmosphere  is  most  unpropitious,
neither  have  you  approached  the  subject  in  a  proper  spirit
and  frame  of  mind.  In  whatever  way  you  regard  the
subject,  it  is  a  most  important  one,  and  should  not  be
treated  with  levity,  but  should  be  approached  quietly  and
with  earnest  prayer.  You  are  not  sufficiently  serious.
Some  are  actuated  by  curiosity,  some  are  wishing  for  one
thing,  others  for  something  quite  different  ;  the  aspirations
are  so  various,  it  is  almost  as  though  you  were  praying
to  different  gods  :  the  influences  are  consequently  all
opposed  to  each  other.  You  should  come  prayerfully,
earnestly,  not  hoping  for,  or  expecting,  anything  in  par-
ticular ;  above  all  without  levity.  It  is  a  solemn  subject
if  you  consider  it  to  be  a  great  discovery,  calculated  to
throw  light  on  hitherto  hidden  subjects,  to  overthrow
many  errors,  and  to  be  of  great  benefit  to  the  human
race.  If  you  do  not  believe  that  we  are  what  we  pretend
to  be,  and  even  consider  us  to  be  evil,  still  it  is  a  subject


182


Experiences  in  S'piritualism


[seance


to  be  treated  with  solemnity,  for  you  are  communicating
with  beings  or  intelhgences  external  to  yourselves,  difierent
from  you,  and  beyond  your  knowledge  or  control.  The
external  influences  also  are  very  numerous  and  strange,
and  are  all,  as  it  were,  touching  and  fingering  Dan —
wondering  at  him.  It  is  quite  new  to  them  ;  they  have
never  seen  anything  like  it  before,  and  they  do  not  under-
stand it.  Some  of  them  are  so  intensely  anxious  to
communicate,  to  say  something,  others  again  do  not  at  all
approve  of  it,  and  would  wish  to  prevent  anything  of  the
sort."

Ad  ARE  :  "  That  is  curious  !  "

Mrs.  Wynne  :  "  Surely  it  would  be  more  curious  if  they
were  all  agreed."

Home  :  (laughing)  "  Why,  Adare,  your  aunt's  notions
are  more  correct  than  yours,  although  you  have  been  at
it  so  long  ;  but  then  you  spoke  without  thinking.  Oh
yes,  indeed,  some  of  them  are  very  much  opposed  to  it."

Adare  :  "  Will  you  give  us  any  directions  about  our
seances  ?  "

Home  :  "  That  is  what  we  have  been  trying  to  find  out,
but  it  is  difficult.  You  see  if  we  pick  out  a  few,  then
those  who  are  left  out  are  annoyed,  and  those  who  are
chosen  are  sorry  for  the  others  who  are  disappointed,  and
are  affected  by  their  influence.  It  would  be  much  better
if  you  would  settle  among  yourselves  for  some  to  sit  one
night  and  the  others  the  next ;  we  can  tell  you  what
combination  answers  best  ;  we  would  sooner  you  settled  it
among  yourselves,  then  there  will  be  no  unpleasant  feehng."
Home  then  put  out  the  candle,  and  told  me  to  help  him
to  move  the  table  ;  we  placed  it  near  the  window  and
sat  down.  Soon  after  he  awoke.  There  was  a  strong
influence  about  the  table,  it  vibrated  and  was  hfted  in
the  air,  the  cloth  was  raised  apparently  by  hands  moving
under  it,  and  I  was  touched  on  the  knee  by  a  hand ;
Home  said  he  saw  hands  and  figures.  A  hand  came  out
from  under  the  table,  covered  by  the  cloth  and  touched
my  left  side,  it  remained  there  a  few  seconds  and  was
then  withdrawn.  This  message  was  given,  "  /  took  it  from
7ny  oivn  dear  boy  to  give  to  you  my  dear  sister,  take  it."


NO.  52]


With  D.  D.  Home


183


We  none  of  us  understood  to  what  this  referred,  till  I
noticed  that  a  rose  bud  had  been  taken  from  my  button-
hole, however  I  made  no  remark.  We  heard  something-
moving  under  the  table,  and  the  cloth  was  raised,  as  if
by  a  hand,  near  ]\'Irs.  Wynne.  At  Home's  suggestion,  she
put  her  hand  down,  and  the  rose  was  placed  in  it.  A
flower  in  Home's  button-hole  was  then  jerked  out  across
the  table,  and  fell  by  me.  I  asked  who  it  was  for,  the
answer  was,  "  For  you  to  give  to  your  father  with  love."
This  message  was  then  given,  "  Your  happiness  is  ours.''
Then  this,  "  We  ivould  fain  manifest  ourselves  more  power-
fully."

While  this  last  message  was  being  given,  the  table  was
raised  gently  off  the  floor  and  moved  up  and  down  three
times  in  the  air,  then  raised  again  a  Httle  higher,  and
again  moved  up  and  down  ;  in  this  mamier  it  was,  without
ever  touching  the  floor,  raised  six  or  seven  times,  a  little
higher  on  each  occasion,  until  it  was  about  three  feet
above  the  floor.  I  have  never  seen  a  table  sustained  in
the  air  for  so  long  a  time.  Mrs.  Wynne  remarked  that
it  was  dehghtful  to  have  no  bad  influence  present,  when
we  had  this  message  :  "  Prayer  to  God  will  protect."  The
table  then  began  moving  on  the  floor  in  a  circle,  and  the
following  was  given  :  "  The  love  of  God  encircling  you  round
and  about."  Subsequently  this  was  spelled  out  :  "  We  love
the  symbol  of  faith  ;  "  and  the  table  was  raised  in  the  air,
and  twice  made  the  sign  of  the  cross.  A  perfume,  as  of
dried  rose  leaves  and  some  aromatic  substance,  was  wafted
across  us  and  the  message  given  :  "  We  must  now  go."
Nothing  more  occurred.  A.


No.  5^.— Tuesday,  March  2nd  [1869].

On  the  afternoon  of  the  2nd  I  was  seated  by  the  fire
in  my  room  reading,  Home  was  writing  at  the  long  table.
Suddenly  the  round  table,  starting  from  the  window,  moved
a  distance  of  six  or  eight  feet,  and  placed  itself  against
the  end  of  the  long  table.  We  both  heard  a  sound  as  of
a  bell  tinkUng. Home  began  speaking  about  the  spirit


184  Experiences  in  Spiritualism  [seance

present,  and  while  doing  so  went  into  a  trance. He  said,
"  Oh, he  is very strange  and  restless, he  is a  monk."
I  asked,  "  Is  that  sound  of  the  bell  the  same  as  I  heard
last  night  ?  " "  Yes  ;  he  was  here  last  night,  and  says  you
ought  to  have  heard  him. He  has  never  been  here  before,
that  is,  not  since  this  house  has  been  built. The  sound
of  the  bell  is  the  same  also  as  you  heard  outside  the
house  to-day  with  Dan,  only  it  is  more  concentrated  now."
I  asked  what  the  meaning  of  the  sound  was, "  Ah,  he
was  a  monk. He  seems  to  have  committed  some  crime
and  then  to  have  said  mass,  and  the  crime  weighed  heavier
on  his  conscience  in  consequence." A  dagger  was  then
violently  knocked  off  the  table  to  the  other  side  of  the
room. I  was  not  looking  at  Home  at  the  moment  and
cannot  say  whether  he  struck  it  or  not. "  Oh,"  he  said,
"  he  cannot  bear  the  sight of  that." A  large  pair  of
scissors  were  then  dashed  on  to  the  floor  from  off  the
round  table,  no  one  being  near  it. Home  said,  "  He  can-
not bear  anything  sharp  and  pointed  ;  Ah,  he  is  trying  to
pick  up  the  scissors,  but  he  cannot  touch  them  because
they  have, as  you see,  fallen  in  the  shape  of  a  cross.
Ah,  poor  fellow,  he  says  he  will  not  hurt  you.  he  would
not  stop  a  minute  here,  but  that  he  sees  you  do  not  hate
and  despise  him  ;  he  will  do  you  no  harm,  but  you  must
not  mind  his  being  rough  and  abrupt  in  his  manner.  He
does  not  wish  you  to  speak  about  this  to  the  others,  but  he
wants  you,  Charlie,  and  Dan,  to  come  here  to-night  ;  he
has  something  to  say  ;  he  does  not  like  those  seances  down
stairs,  he  is  not  pleased. He  cannot  speak  to  you  him-
self,  he  can  scarcely  make  manifestations  ; he  talks  old
Irish. He is the same spirit that Fred saw,i  he  was
stripped  of  his  gown  and  appeared  to  have  on  a  blanket."


On  the  same  afternoon,  or  the  day  before,  I  forget  which,
Mr.  Lawless,  Home,  and  myself  were  seated  on  the  bed  in

^  This  alluded  to  Mr.  Lawless,  having  told  us,  while  on  a  visit  here
last  winter,  tliat  he  had  seen  a  ghost  or  spirit  in  the  castle.  I  did  not
pay  much  attention  to  his  statements,  supposing  it  to  have  been  some
illusion  on  his  part.


NO.  54]


With  D.  D.  Home


185


my  room  ;  Charlie  Wynne  was  sitting  by  the  fire.  We
heard  raps  on  the  table,  and  a  sound  as  of  a  hand  brush-
ing on  the  wall,  and  the  bed  vibrated.  A.


No.  54:.~Seance,  March  2nd  [1869].

Present :— Mrs.  and  Miss  Wynne,  Mrs.  and  Major  Black-
burn, Miss  Smith,  Captain  Wynne,  Mr.  Lawless.  Home,
and  myself.  This  evening  we  sat  at  a  table  in  the
gallery  ;  very  slight  physical  manifestations  occurred,  which
soon  ceased,  and  after  waiting  some  time,  the  party  broke
up.  Mrs.  Blackburn,  Miss  Wynne,  Captain  Wynne,  Mr.
Lawless,  and  Home  went  up  to  my  room  to  try  there.
I  followed  them  in  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  Before
I  arrived  they  had  a  message  to  the  effect  that  the  spirits
would  do  more  if  they  could  ;  afterwards  we  had  the  usual
manifestations,  currents  of  air,  vibrations,  raps,  tilting  of
the  table,  which  was  on  two  occasions  also  raised  in  the
air.  At  one  time,  Miss  Wynne,  Home,  and  I  heard  a
very  singular  rumbling  and  rolhng  sort  of  sound  in  the
air  behind  us,  which  was  repeated  three  times.  We  saw
hands  (apparently)  moving  under  the  table  cloth  ;  and  Mrs.
Blackburn,  Home,  and  I  were  touched.  Mrs.  Blackburn's
dress  was  sharply  pulled  two  or  three  times,  as  was  also
Miss  Wynne's  ;  we  all  saw  and  heard  it.  Mrs.  Blackburn
was  slightly  under  influence,  and  became  a  good  deal
agitated.  Home  went  into  a  trance  ;  walked  about,  and
described  to  Mrs.  Blackburn  two  spirits  that  were  standing
behind  her  magnetizing  her  and  causing  the  agitation  she
felt.  He  said,  "  They  will  do  you  no  harm,  but  on  the
contrary  what  they  are  about  is  for  a  good  object  ;  one
of  them  magnetized  you  in  the  same  way  this  afternoon,
but  there  are  now  two,  and  it  is  consequently  stronger.
The  influence  about  you  is  very  good,  but  very  strong,
you  could  hear  raps  at  night  now."  Mrs.  Blackburn  said,
"  Oh,  please  don't !  "  Mr.  Home  rephed,  "  Oh,  no  ;  don't
be  nervous,  they  will  not  do  it  ;  they  know  it  would
frighten  you,  and  they  will  never  do  that;  but  the  time
will  come  when  you  will  not  be  frightened  at  it."  Going


186  Experiences  in  Spiritualism  [seance

to  Mr.  Lawless,  he  said,  "  You  really  must  have  more
command  over  your  nerves,  if  you  cannot  control  them
you  must  not  come  to  seances ;  you  will  get  more  and
more  hysterical,  and  it  will  do  you  physical  harm ;  you
had  better  go  away  for  a  few  minutes."  Then  turning
to  me,  he  said,  "  You  did  not  do  what  you  promised  last
night.  He  is  here  ;  you  know  who  I  mean."  I  repHed,
"  Yes,  I  know  ;  but  Dan  said  last  night  that  he  had  an
impression  that  Mrs.  Wynne  and  I  were  to  sit  with  him  ;
and  I  could  not  do  what  I  promised."  Home  said,  "  You
might  have  done  so  afterwards  ;  however  it  is  perhaps  as
well  that  you  did  not,  for  you  might  have  attributed  Dan's
illness  to  that.  He  is  still  here  ;  he  is  not  pleased."  I
asked,  "  Would  it  do  as  well  to-night,  or  to-morrow  1  "
Home  replied,  "  No  ;  he  says  he  will  come  unexpectedly
again  as  he  did  the  first  time.  Oh  yes,  he  knows  that
you  did  not  forget,  he  does  not  blame  you,  but  he  is  not
pleased  ;  he  is  very  much  annoyed  at  these  sittings  down
stairs."  Home  then  opened  the  window,  and  appeared  to
be  debating  as  to  whether  he  should  go  out  or  not.  He
shut  the  window  and  said,  "  You  will  not  let  us  do  it  ;
you  have  not  sufficient  faith."  He  then  sat  down  and
awoke.  We  had  a  few  more  physical  manifestations,  the
last  being  that  Home's  chair  was  drawn  away  from  the
table.  -A..


No.  55.— Seance,  March  3rd  [1869].

This  seance  was  held  in  Adare's  room.  Present : — Mrs.
Wynne,  Adare,  Mr.  Home,  and  myself.  Soon  after  we
were  seated,  Mr.  Home  went  into  a  trance.  He  got  up
and  walked  about,  remarking  that  the  influence  was  good,
and  that  Mrs.  Wynne's  influence  was  very  pleasant.  He
went  to  the  door,  opened  it,  and  said,  "  Ah,  here  is  that
strange  spirit  that  came  to  Ashley  House — Thomas,  your
father's  friend — he  is  very  eccentric  ;  he  says  he  wants  to
recall  some  conversation  to  your  father."  I  said,  "  I  hope
he  will  do  so."  Adare  observed  that  if  he  exhibited  the
same  curiously  abrupt  and  undecided  manner  that  he  did


NO.  55]


With  D.  D.  Home


187


at  Ashley  House  {vide  No.  44,  p.  163),  he  would  probably
say  nothing,  at  any  rate  this  night."  Home  said,  "  Oh,
that  was  his  manner ;  he  is  very  eccentric."  He  then
walked  up  to  Mrs.  Wynne,  and  made  passes  over  her  head,
and  held  it  between  his  hands,  and  told  her  that  her  cir-
culation was  bad  (which  it  is),  and  that  her  liver  was  out
of  order.

He  pointed  to  me  saying,  "  Your  influence  is  very  good
for  physical  manifestations  ;  you  must  not  think  that  you
are  any  impediment  to  their  occurrence."  I  had  been
fancying  that  probably  my  presence  was  rather  adverse,
and  consequently  I  was  unwiUing  to  attend  the  seance ;
but  I  had  not  mentioned  this  to  Home.  He  then  gave
Adare  directions  about  the  table.  "  You  will  place  it  near
the  window ;  your  father  will  sit  next  to  Daniel,  you  on
his  other  side,  then  Mrs.  Wynne,  leaving  a  vacant  space
next  to  the  window."  We  then  commenced  talking  about
his  having  had  apparently  some  idea  of  going  out  of  the
window  last  night  [vide  No.  54),  and  were  discussing  as  to
whether  there  was  any  real  danger  in  his  doing  so  ;  some
saying  they  would  be  nervous,  while  others,  myseK  among
them,  said  we  should  feel  no  anxiety  whatever  as  to  his
safety ;  upon  which  he  remarked,  "  They  will  take  care
and  see  when  the  conditions  are  right ;  there  need  be  no
fear."  He  then  spoke  about  one  of  the  semices  which  had
been  held  when  he  was  not  present,  and  said,  "  We  do
not  approve  of  it  at  all ;  it  is  all  wrong  ;  the  whole  thing

is  in  confusion. That  sentence  about  B  and  the  wicked

devil  is  not  right ;  there  is  no  wicked  devil  in  that  sense.
We  do  not  wish  to  enter  into  any  explanation,  we  only
tell  you  that  it  is  all  wrong."  Turning  to  Mrs.  Wynne,
Mr.  Home  said,  "  John  says  he  is  coming  to  you  to-night,
and  that  he  wants  to  try  and  put  his  hand  in  yours."
Soon  after  this  he  sat  down  and  awoke.  He  spoke  during
his  trance  in  a  loud  whisper.

We  took  the  table  over  to  the  window  and  seated  our-
selves as  we  had  been  directed.  We  soon  heard  a  number
of  very  delicate  raps,  like  a  continuous  stream  of  httle
electrical  sparks,  which  lasted  for  a  short  time  ;  they  were
barely  audible  without  placing  the  ear  close  to  the  cloth


188


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


which  covered  the  table.  We  then  felt  vibrations,  and
heard  raps  of  different  kinds,  chiefly  on  the  table,  but
some  dull  sounds  like  knocks,  occurred  elsewhere.  We
had  extinguished  the  candles,  but  the  fire  gave  sufficient
light  to  see  near  objects  well,  and  distant  ones  faintly.
In  the  recess  of  the  window  was  a  large  box  or  chest
with  papers  and  other  things  lying  upon  it  ;  one  could
see  them,  without  being  able  clearly  to  distinguish  what
they  were.  The  alphabet  being  called  for,  the  following
messages  were  given,  with  short  intervals  between  them,
during  which  there  were  frequent  raps  :  "  God  be  ivith  you.
Your  father  Thomas  Goold.  You  must  not  think  ive  fear  the
cross,  ive  love  it,  loe  also  love  God.''  "  We  are  allowed  to
2iray  for  you  and  watch  over  you.''  Soon  after  several  loud
raps  or  knocks  were  heard,  and  the  name  "  John  Wynne  "
was  spelled  out.  About  this  time  there  were  movements
and  sounds  about  the  papers  on  the  box,  and  Mrs.  Wynne's
dress  was  touched.  Presently  we  had  the  following  message  :
"  Could  you  hut  know  the  reality  of  my  identity,  and  the
unaltered  and  unalterable  love  I  hear  you,  I  well  know  it
ivould  he  a  source  of  joy  to  you.  I  have  not  sent  you
messages,  for  the  reason  that  you  could  have  no  means  of
distinguishing  the  certainty  of  my  personality.''  ^  I  then
said,  "  To  whom  is  this  message  sent,"  and  the  answer
was,  "  You,  my  own."  I  added,  "  I  should  like  to  know
the  name  of  the  sj^irit,"  and  was  answered,  "  Augusta."
At  this  point  some  interruption  seemed  to  occur.  Mrs.
Wynne's  dress  was  visibly  and  audibly  moved  about,  and
Mr.  Home  several  times  saw  a  hand  ;  the  slight  sounds
about  the  papers  on  the  box  recurred.  Presently,  Mr.
Home's  feet  were  moved  and  placed  upon  mine  ;  strong
movements  of  his  arms  and  legs  took  place  ;  his  hands
appeared  to  be  drawn  about  in  different  directions,  and
rather violently agitated. After these movements  had

^  This  message  clearly  referred  to  my  having  several  times  lately
remarked  upon  the  fact,  that  no  message  had,  I  believe,  been  sent  to
me  on  any  occasion  during  the  previous  seances  in  London  or  elsewhere,
by  the  spirit  who  would  most  naturally  under  the  circumstances  have
done  so — which  fact  I  had  used  as  an  argument  bearing  upon  a  par-
ticular view  of  the  whole  subject.


NO.  55]


With  D.  D.  Home


189


ceased,  he  said,  "  I  feel  a  hand  on  me,  pressing  against
my  chest  ;  and  now  it  has,  I  think,  taken  the  flowers  from
my  button-hole."  The  idea  came  into  my  mind  that  per-
haps these  flowers  were  intended  for  me  ;  I  quietly  laid
one  hand  open  upon  my  knee.  Almost  immediately  a
flower  was  placed  very  delicately  in  it.  I  then  felt  another
flower,  and  tried  to  grasp  the  hand  holding  it,  but  did  not
succeed  ;  it  seemed  to  vanish,  leaving  the  flower  in  my
hand.  Some  curious  manifestations  now  took  place.  The
cloth  on  the  table  was  lifted  up,  fully  six  inches,  as  by
a  hand.  This  occurred  along  the  side  next  the  window
several  times.  Mr.  Home  saw  the  hand.  Mrs.  Wynne
became  nervous,  which  was  to  be  regretted,  as  she  might
probably  have  felt  the  hand  as  had  been  told  her  at  the
commencement  of  the  seance.  There  were  vibrations  and
tiltings  of  the  table,  and  various  kinds  of  raps.  Presently,
the  alphabet  was  called  for,  and  the  following  given  :
■■  Even  should  we  he  taken  to  a  distant  heaven,  ivoidd  it  not

he  our  greatest  joy  to  fly  as  the  " Here  the  message

stopped  ;  and  we  heard  a  rustling  sound  about  the  box  in
the  window,  which  lasted  two  or  three  minutes.  Adare
said,  "  I  am  sure  I  know  what  this  means."  My  hand
was  on  my  knee.  I  suddenly  felt  something  touch  it,
which  I  laid  hold  of,  and  drew  out  from  under  the  table  ;
it  was  an  arrow.  We  then  re-commenced  the  alphabet  ;
and  the  word  "  descends  "  was  given,  thus  flnishing  the
sentence  :  ''as  the  arrow  descends.''  During  this  mani-
festation, as  also  when  the  flowers  were  being  placed  in
my  hand,  Mr.  Home  was  sitting  quite  still,  with  both  his
hands  on  the  table.  A  sheet  of  paper  was  lying  on  the
edge  of  the  table  next  the  window,  on  which  a  pencil  was
placed.  We  presently  saw  the  pencil  moving  about  on  the
paper.  Mr.  Home  saw  the  fingers  holding  it.  Adare
noticed  it  also,  more  than  once,  but  of  an  undefined  form.

We  now  heard  something  moving  upon  the  box  by  the
window,  and  a  heavy  substance  fell  near  Adare's  feet.
Some  of  us  at  the  same  moment  perceived  a  decided  smell
of  brandy.  Adare  said,  "  I  know  what  it  is."  The
following  message  was  then  given  :  "  You  must  not  take  for
your  cold  stimulants." Adare  asked  if  he  was to  take


190


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


none  at  all.  The  answer  was  by  two  raps,  meaning,
"  perhaps,'"  or  "a  little.''  We  afterwards  found  that  it
was  Adare's  flask  which  had  been  thrown  under  the  table.
On  examining  it  no  brandy  appeared  to  have  escaped.
Soon  after  this  a  curious  manifestation  occurred  about  the
table,  just  hke  the  sound  and  motion  of  the  vibration  on
board  a  steamer.  This  was  succeeded  by  the  following
message  :  "We  deeply  regret,  hut  tve  have  no  more  power.
God  abide  ivith  you."  During  this  beautiful  seance,  which
lasted  nearly  two  hours,  the  table  was  twice  raised  up
from  a  foot  to  eighteen  inches.  The  messages  were  spelled
partly  by  raps  and  partly  by  tilts  of  the  table.  I  was
touched  on  two  occasions,  rather  delicately,  on  the  knee.
The  whole  seance  was  quiet,  soothing,  and  very  impressive.

D.


No.  5Q.— Seance,  March  Uh  [1869].

Present : — Major  and  Mrs.  Blackburn,  Miss  Wynne,  Law-
less, Charlie  Wynne,  Home,  my  father,  and  myself.  We
sat  in  my  room,  which  was  hghted  by  one  candle  and  the
fire.  After  sitting  for  some  time  without  any  movement
of  the  table  or  other  indication  of  influence.  Home  went
into  a  trance.  He  got  up,  said  in  a  low  voice  to  me
"  We  have  put  Dan  into  a  trance  to  try  and  equalize  the
atmosphere,  we  wish  to  make  manifestations,"  and  after
walking  about  the  room  magnetizing  it  commenced  speak-
ing in  a  singularly  soothing  tone  of  voice,  his  conversation
being  principally  addressed  to  Mrs.  Blackburn.  "  There
are  two  Ehzabeths — who  are  they  ?  And  Isabella — she
seems  to  have  taken  care  of  you,  John,  when  you  were
young.  There  is  a  spirit  present  with  whom  you  were
acquainted,  he  is  lame  ;  you  do  not  remember  the  name
now,  but  you  probably  will  hereafter.  Who  was  Margaret
Henderson  ?  (no  one  answered).  Ah,  your  mother  would
know,  ask  her  ;  she  will  remember  about  her.  Talk,  go
on  talking  to  each  other,  your  minds  are  much  too  positive  ;
the  human  mind  is  like  a  barrier  to  us.  Your  minds  now
are  all  intent,  and  it  makes  such  a  confusion  that  I  can-


NO.  56]


With  D.  D.  Home


191


not  see  and  find  out  what  I  want  ;  it  is  like  looking
through  a  shrubbery  with  all  the  branches  in  motion  :  I
cannot  make  out  clearly  what  there  is  on  the  other  side."
Mrs.  Blackburn  becoming  shghtly  under  influence  and
agitated,  he  stood  behind  her  and  calmed  her,  saying,
"  You  must  not  mind  it,  they  will  do  you  no  harm  ;  when
on  earth  they  would  not  have  hurt  you,  why  should  they
now  ?  You  must  have  trust  ;  but  even  if  you  have  not
confidence  in  them,  you  know  that  God  protects  you  from
all  evil — have  trust  in  him.  Should  it  seem  unpleasant
and  even  evil  to  you,  remember  that  God's  ways  are  not
our  ways  ;  and  out  of  what  is  apparently  evil,  much  good
may  come  ;  that  which  you  might  at  first  consider  bad,
may  turn  out  to  be  the  greatest  good  to  you.  It  is  the
influence  that  came  over  Dan  when  we  put  him  into  a
trance  that  affected  you  ;  it  was  so  strong — that  is  all."
Standing  near  Miss  Wynne  he  said,  "  There  are  two  Wind-
hams  here,  two  young  men,  Windham  Goold  and  Windham
Quin."  Touching  Charlie  Wynne  on  the  shoulder  he  said,
"  Charhe,  Robert  says  he  has  not  forgotten  his  promise,
he  will  keep  it,  but  he  has  not  been  able  to  do  so  yet  ;
he  is  going  to  Emmy."  Home  then  walked  about  the
room  and  said,  "  When  Maria  has  sufficient  faith  and  is
willing  to  be  developed  for  the  good  of  others,  she  will
go  into  trances."  IVIrs.  Blackburn  requested  my  father  to
ask  Home  if  it  was  necessary  that  she  should  be  wilUng.
Home  said,  "  Do  not  be  frightened,  nothing  will  be  done
to  harm  you,  when  you  have  sufficient  faith  in  God's
protecting  power,— when  you  can  say,  '  Thy  will  not  mine
be  done,' — when  you  are  anxious  for  it  for  the  benefit  of
others,  and  to  advance  the  truth,  then  it  will  come  to
you  ;  until  then  the  fact  of  your  being  unwilUng,  of  your
mind  being  opposed,  would  prevent  it.  Oh,  there  is  a
Mary  (or  Maria)  here,  I  like  her  so  much.  Dear  me  !  she
has  such  a  curious  way  of  smihng — she  smiles  with  her
mouth  only,  she  is  very  timid.  There  is  also  a  man  who
appears  to  have  been  shot ;  who  can  he  be  1  Was  he
your  grandmother's  uncle  ?  He  seems  to  have  been  in  a
naval  engagement.  Although  Mary  is  so  timid,  Maria,  she
is  your  principal  guardian  spirit ;  there  is  a  miniature  or


192


Experiences  m  Spiritualism


[seance


portrait  of  her,  with  sonie  peculiarity  in  the  dress,  do  you
know  it  ?  "  Mrs.  Blackburn  replied,  "  No."  Home  said,
"  Ah,  well  there  is  one,  at  any  rate  there  is  a  black  cut
profile  of  her.  There  is  an  Alexander  present."  Home
went  on  for  some  time  speaking  about  the  spirits  in  the
room,  and  then  stood  behind  my  father  and  told  us  all
to  talk  ;  while  we  were  talking,  he  whispered  to  him,  "  You
should  not  fast  much."  He  said,  "I  do  not  really  fast
at  all."  Home  added,  "  Your  brain  is  very  active  and  is
wearing  the  vital  powers,  and  you  should  take  nourishing
food — fasting  materially  would  be  bad,  but  spiritually  would
be  good  for  you." Home  soon  after  awoke.  A.

After  this  we  remained  sitting  for  an  hour  and  a  quarter
without  any  manifestations  whatever.  Mr.  Home  said
several  times,  "  I  feel  a  strong  influence  all  about  me  ;  it
is  strange  that  there  are  no  physical  manifestations."  At
last  I  proposed  that  some  of  the  party  should  leave  the
room,  being  certain  that  something  must  be  wrong.
Blackburn  and  I  went  away.  Mr.  Home  remarked,  "  A
few  moments  will  shew  whether  their  presence  was  the
obstruction."  Still  no  manifestations.  He  then  said,
"  Charlie,  do  you  and  Lawless  go,  and  send  the  others
back."  Lawless  went  with  the  greatest  reluctance.  The
door  had  hardly  closed  when  there  were  cold  currents,
vibrations,  and  raps.  I  returned,  and  was  scarcely  seated,
when  the  alphabet  was  called  for,  and  this  message  given  :
"  We  love  Freddy,  but  he  is  not  in  a  state  of  mind  or  tody
conducive  to  manifestations ^  Wynne  fetched  the  accordion.
Mrs.  Blackburn  was  very  soon  after  touched  on  the  dress,
and  something  became  plainly  visible  moving  under  the
table  cloth,  along  the  edge  of  the  table,  raising  up  the
cloth  several  inches,  as  would  be  done  were  a  hand  and
arm  [underneath  it].^  The  hand  was  visible  on  the  cloth
to  Mr.  Home,  and  I  once  faintly  perceived  it.  It  touched  Mrs.
Blackburn's  hand.  This  manifestation  was  repeated  different
times.  I  was  touched  on  the  ankle,  and  several  times  on
the  knee. Miss  Wynne's  dress  was  strongly  pulled.  The

^  This  sentence  is  incomplete  in  the  original  edition.  The  general
meaning  is  however  clear.  [Ed:]


NO.  56]


With  D.  D.  Howe


193


table  was  beautifully  raised  in  the  air,  by  three  successive
lifts,  to  the  height  of  eighteen  inches  or  two  feet.  Mr.
Home  then  took  the  accordion,  holding  it  under  the  edge
of  the  table  with  one  hand,  the  other  resting  on  the  table  ;
soon  after  it  began  to  sound,  it  played  with  considerable
power  as  well  as  great  delicacy,  something  like  a  voluntary,
with  airs  introduced.  Then  there  were  sounds  like  echoes,
so  fine,  as  to  be  scarcely  audible.  The  accordion  was
drawn  out  towards  Mrs.  Blackburn,  but  not  put  into  her
hand.  I  expressed  a  wish  that  it  might  be  played  with-
out being  held  by  Mr.  Home,  upon  which  he  withdrew
his  hand,  placing  it  on  the  table  ;  the  instrument  was  just
touching  the  under  edge  of  the  table,  where  it  remained,
as  it  were,  suspended.  It  began  playing  very  gently.  He
clapped  his  hands  several  times  to  shew  that  he  was  not
touching  it.  The  playing  soon  ceased,  and  he  took  it
again.  Some  notes  sounded  out  of  tune,  and  I  said,
"  either  wrong  notes  are  played  in  the  chord,  or  the
accordion  is  out  of  tune."  "  Out  of  time  "  was  rapped  out
on  the  instrument.  It  played  again  very  finely,  and  with
the  tremolo  efi^ect,  which  struck  me  exceedingly.  I  asked,
"  Will  you  tell  us  who  is  playing  "  ;  two  raps  were  given,
implying  doubt.  Presently  the  alphabet  was  called  for,
and  the  following  given  :  "  Remember  that ;  "  and  then  "  Oft
in  the  stilly  night  "  was  softly  played.  When  one  recalls
the  words  : —

Oft  in  the  stilly  night,  ere  slumber's  chain  hath  bound  me,
Fond  memory  brings  the  light  of  other  days  around  me,  &c.

how  touching  the  message  becomes,  and  how  beautiful  the
mode  of  representing  it.'^  I  then  again  asked,  "  Will  you
not  tell  us  the  name  of  the  spirit  who  has  been  playing."
The  letters  "  a-u-g  "  were  rapped  out  by  my  being  touched
delicately  on  the  knee.  I  guessed  the  completion  of  the
word,  saying,  "  Is  it  Augusta  ?  "  and  I  was  touched,  "  Yes."
I  then  asked  whether  it  would  be  possible  for  the  organ
to  be  played  if  the  bellows  were  filled,  and  the  reply
"  Perhaps,"  was  given. I  said,  "  I  can  identify  the  player

^  This  air  was,  long  ago,  one  of  my  greatest  favourites.


194


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


from  a  particular  circumstance."  Some  one  remarked,  "  Is
it  from  AA'hat  was  played,  or  by  the  expression  ?  "  "  No,"
I  replied,  when  Adare  said,  "Is  it  from  the  imitation  of
the  tremolo  1  "  "  Yes,"  I  replied,  "  that  reminded  me
immediately  of  the  organ  ;  "  upon  which  the  following  was
instantly  rapped  out,  by  my  being  again  touched  on  the
knee  :  "  You  are  right  my  own.''  Soon  after  this  we  all
heard  strong  sounds  which  proceeded  seemingly  from  a
large  oblong  writing  table,  which  stood  several  feet  from
us  ;  we  could  perceive  it  moving  ;  it  stopped  within  a  foot
of  our  table,  which  then  moved  up  to  it.  We  heard  first
one  and  then  another  drawer  opened,  on  the  side  of  the
table  farthest  from  us,  and  a  rusthng  sound  as  if  stirring
papers.  After  a  short  pause,  the  following  sentence  was
given,  partly,  if  not  wholly,  (I  forget  which)  by  tilting  the
table  :  "  We  must  cease,  hut  7iot  before  praying  God  to  bless
you.''  We  then  adjourned.  During  the  sitting  the  table
was  again  lifted  in  the  beautiful  manner  before  mentioned,
reminding  me  very  much  of  the  action  of  the  bellows  of
the  organ  while  being  filled  ;  and  it  is  very  remarkable
that  this  occurred,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  foregoing  de-
scription, just  before  the  playing  commenced.  D.

Having  left  my  room,  Home  and  I  went  down  to  the
smoking  room.  While  he  was  speaking  to  me  he  broke
off  suddenly  in  the  middle  of  a  word  with  a  violent  start
and  went  into  a  trance.  Major  Blackburn  at  that  moment
came  into  the  room,  and  witnessed  what  occurred.  Home
jumped  up,  caught  me  by  the  hand,  beckoned  to  Major
Blackburn  to  follow,  and  led  us  up  to  my  room  in  a
great  hurry.  On  opening  the  door,  he  said  (apparently  to
some  spirit  in  the  room),  "  Oh,  please  do  not  do  that !  "
He  then  drew  out  the  long  writing  table,  placed  it  near
the  window,  put  two  chairs  in  front  of  the  fire,  and  hung
a  blanket  over  them  to  exclude  the  light  ;  then  placed  a
chair  at  each  end  of  the  table  for  us,  and  one  for  himseK
at  the  side  of  the  table  opposite  the  window  and  the
drawers.  He  drew  out  one  of  the  drawers  and  placed  a
piece  of  paper  and  a  pencil  in  it  ;  tlien  sitting  down,  he
said,  "  Listen !  " I  listened,  and  distinctly  heard  the  sound


NO.  56]


With  D.  D.  Home


195


of  a  pencil  writing  on  a  piece  of  paper  in  the  open  drawer  ;
the  word  written  was  finished  by  three  dots.  Home  then
threw  himself  back  in  his  chair  and  said,  "  Oh,  she  is  so
thankful  that  your  father  has  seen  what  he  has !  "  He
began  to  sob  violently,  and  calhng  me  over  to  him,  he
grasped  my  hand,  and  said,  "  Oh,  my  darling  I  am  so
glad  that  he  has  seen  something  ;  I  wish  he  could  have
been  here  now,  but  the  conditions  happened  to  be  favour-
able at  this  moment,  and  we  could  not  wait.  You  \vill
give  him  the  paper  on  which  I  have  written,  and  the
pencil  ;  the  pencil  must  be  kept  ;  it  may  be  used  again,
but  only  at  Adare.  There  was  a  spirit  here  when  you
came  in,  who  damaged  the  conditions  a  little,  and  the
writing  is  in  consequence  not  very  firm  ;  the  pencil  point
also  broke,  and  the  last  letters  are  not  quite  distinct  ;  the
colour  of  the  pencil  is  typical  of  my  love — pure,  deep,  and
everlasting."  The  pencil  was  a  red  one,  and  the  word
written  was  "  Augusta."  Home,  on  being  asked  afterwards
about  his  going  so  suddenly  into  a  trance,  said,  "  I  can
remember  being  in  the  smoking  room,  and  seeing  two
spirits  enter  by  the  door  ;  rapidly  approaching,  one  of
them  stretched  out  his  hand  towards  me,  and  I  immedi-
ately lost  consciousness."  A.


No.  57.

It  was  now  nearly  10  p.m.,  and  my  father,  Charlie
Wynne,  Home  and  I  went  to  the  Abbey  ;  we  walked  up
the  church,  and  stood  near  the  altar.  Home  shortly  went
into  a  trance.  He  took  o&.  a  white  comforter  that  he
wore  round  his  neck,  and  tied  it  over  his  head,  and  began
walking  with  rapid  measured  strides  up  and  down  the
church.  By  the  expression  of  his  face,  by  his  gestures,
and  by  his  moaning,  he  appeared  to  be  in  great  agony  of
mind.  As  he  walked  he  made  (with  his  mouth,  I  think)
a  sound  that  appeared  to  us  closely  to  resemble  that  of
a  man  walking  in  sandals  or  wooden  shoes,  upon  a  tiled
or  stone  floor.  His  head  became  luminous,  as  did  also  his
hands. This  occurred  twice  ;  the  second  time  more  faintly.


196


Experiences  in  Sjnritualism


[seance


An  owl  flew  round  the  church  screeching  ;  I  attributed  the
noise  to  Home,  but  as  he  passed  me  he  said  in  a  most
awful  voice,  "  No,  it  is  not  so  ;  "  and  as  he  repassed,  he
added,  "  You  were  mistaken."  He  kneeled  upon  the  ground
occasionally,  waved  his  arms  above  his  head,  and  appeared
in  great  distress.  He  came  up  to  us  and,  in  a  frightened
tone  of  voice,  said,  "  Oh,  come  away — come  away  !  "  and
led  us  down  to  the  other  end  of  the  church.  He  walked
about  a  little  longer,  then,  taking  my  father's  arm,  he
said,  "  Do  you  see  that  tomb-stone  with  the  light  shining
upon  it  ?  It  would  be  better,  aye,  ten  million  times
better,  to  lie  there  in  the  cold  dark  clay,  than  to  spend
years  upon  years,  every  moment  of  which  is  an  eternity,
in  wandering  here."  Raising  his  hands  above  his  head,  he
added,  "  oh,  I  am  so  weary — so  weary  !  "  Soon  after  this
he  awoke.  He  was  rather  nervous,  and  said  to  me,  "  Who
is  that  man  standing  by  the  window  1  Is  it  Lord  Dun-
raven  ■?  "  He  seemed  quite  astonished  when  he  found  we
were  all  near  him,  and  that  none  of  us  could  see  the  figure.

During  the  rest  of  the  time  we  remained  in  the  Abbey,
Home  was  entranced,  I  suppose,  four  or  five  times,  and
even  in  the  intervals,  when  he  was  awake  and  knew  where
he  was  and  what  he  was  doing,  he  was  under  a  very  strong
influence.  He  stood  talking  to  us  for  a  few  minutes,  and
then  said,  "  The  figure  is  beckoning  to  me.  I  am  quite
awake  and  not  the  least  nervous  ;  I  must  go."  He  accord-
ingly moved  towards  the  window  and  we  followed  him  at
a  short  distance.  He  left  the  church  by  the  choir  door,
and  went  beyond  the  low  broken  wall,  saying  that  he  saw
the  figure  standing  against  a  portion  of  the  ruins,  at  some
little  distance  from  where  we  were  standing.  I  saw  a
dark  shadow  against  the  wall,  and  I  saw  a  light  flash  from
it  as  distinctly  as  if  some  one  had  struck  a  match  there  ;
Charlie  Wynne  said  he  saw  the  light  flash  at  the  same
moment  that  I  did  ;  my  father  saw  the  Hght  also,  but
faintly.  Home  walked  towards  the  spot  where  he  said  the
figure  was  standing,  he  went  behind  the  wall,  and  remained
out  of  sight  for  some  minutes  ;  when  he  reappeared  there
was  somebody,  or  something  with  him,  that  is  to  say,  I
could  clearly  perceive  some  substance  moving  alongside  of


NO.  57]


With  D.  D.  Home


197


him  as  he  walked.  Presently  we  all  saw  him  approaching,
and  evidently  raised  off  the  ground,  for  he  floated  by,  in
front  of  US  at  a  height  which  carried  him  over  the  broken
wall,  which  was  about  two  feet  high.  There  could  not  be
a  better  test  of  his  being  off  the  ground,  for  as  he  crossed
the  wall,  his  form  was  not  in  the  least  raised,  but  the
movement  was  quite  horizontal  and  uniform.  The  distance
that  we  saw  him  thus  carried,  must  have  been  at  least
10  or  12  yards.

He  then  came  back  to  us  and  we  found  he  was  in  a
trance.  He  directed  our  attention  to  an  old  doorway  near
us,  saying,  "  He  is  there  ;  he  is  laying  a  stone  ;  you  will
hear  the  sound  of  a  trowel."  We  listened  and  heard  in-
distinct sounds  ;  I  cannot  say  that  they  resembled  the
sound  of  laying  a  stone.  Home  then  awoke,  and  said
that  he  remembered  that,  before  he  went  into  the  trance,
he  had  been  walking  about  with  a  man  dressed  like  a
friar  in  a  brown  gown  ;  that  they  had  been  talking  to-
gether, but  that  he  did  not  know  what  he  had  said  to
him  ;  that  this  spirit  (the  friar)  was  unable  to  leave  the
earth  ;  that  he  and  the  spirit  had  both  been  raised  in
the  air  by  some  other  strong  influence.  He  described  the
spirit  as  leaning  on  his  shoulder.  He  soon  left  us,  and
apparently  was  again  engaged  in  conversation  with  this
spirit.  He  then  returned,  and  spoke  to  us.  This  he
repeated  two  or  three  times,  being  sometimes  in  a  trance
and  sometimes  awake  when  he  addressed  us.  Finally,
while  in  the  trance,  he  led  us  back  into  the  church,  kneeled
on  the  ground,  apparently  in  prayer,  two  or  three  times,
and  then  began  walking  up  and  down  the  church,  raising
his  hands  above  his  head,  and  saying,  "  Oh,  how  good  !
Oh,  how  good !  "  He  then  came  up  to  us,  and  told  us
that  the  spirit  would  be  better  and  happier  for  something
that  he  had  said  or  done  that  night,  after  which  he  awoke.
He  said  that  he  saw  a  figure  in  the  air  between  us  and
the  window.  Charhe  Wynne  and  I  both  saw  a  shadow
move  across  the  window. We  then  returned  home.

It  is  a  fact  worthy  of  notice  that  although  the  night
was  perfectly  calm,  the  birds  appeared  to  be  in  a  singu-
larly disturbed  state  ;  owls  were  flitting  about,  and  some


198


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


other  bird  flew  several  times  round  the  church,  screaming
harshly.  Besides  night  birds,  ordinary  birds  (judging  by
the  sounds)  were  flying  about  ;  and  at  one  time,  just  as
Home  said  he  saw  the  figure  enter  a  clump  of  trees  at
some  distance  from  us,  a  bird  seemed  to  fly  out,  chirping.
We  heard  in  the  church  a  sound  as  of  a  bird  flying  round
whistling,  and  Home,  being  then  in  a  trance,  appeared  as
if  following  it  about,  and  endeavouring  to  catch  it.  I
could  see  nothing,  and  do  not  know  whether  it  was  a  real
bird  or  not.  A.


Accurate  as  is  the  foregoing  account  of  this  strange
scene,  it  would  be  difiicult,  indeed  impossible,  to  convey
by  any  description,  a  just  idea  of  its  solemnity.  When
we  entered  the  ruins  the  night  was  quite  dark  and  very
still.  We  walked  quietly  up  the  nave  and  choir,  and
stood  for  some  little  time  near  the  east  window.  Scarce
a  word  was  spoken.  We  had  not  the  least  idea  what  sort
of  manifestations  were  likely  to  occur.  While  Mr.  Home
was  walking  a]>out,  what  with  the  deep  tones  of  the  voice
so  utterly  unlike  his  own — the  occasional  moans  and  utter-
ances of  sounds  of  pain  or  distress — his  disappearing  in  the
gloom  and  reappearing  again^ — the  light  shining  around  his
head  and  upon  his  hands,  which  were  occasionally  lifted
as  if  in  prayer,  and  were  thus  visible  when  the  rest  of
the  figure  was  lost  in  darkness  ;  his  attitudes,  sometimes
kneeling,  at  others  as  if  searching  for  something  near  the
ground — the  strange  sounds  which  we  heard,  particularly  a
sort  of  chirping  or  unearthly  whistling,  which  seemed  to
proceed  from  him,  and  the  startling  screams  made  by  some
bird,  but  what  bird  we  had  not  light  enough  to  identify  ;
the  effect  produced  upon  us  was  most  thrilling,  and  one
which  we  are  not  hkely  soon  to  forget.  Before  leaving
the  Abbey  the  light  from  the  moon,  just  about  to  rise,
enabled  us  to  see  objects  ;  the  sky  too  had  become  clear,
and  the  stars  shone  out,  while  an  air  of  calmness  and
peace  pervaded  the  scene,  producing  a  most  soothing  effect
upon  our  minds.  D.


NO.  57]


With  D.  D.  Home


19U


We  had  supper  in  the  hall  upon  our  return.  While
talking,  a  curious  rushing  or  rumbUng  noise  was  heard
that  we  could  not  account  for,  and  my  father  felt  his
chair  vibrating.  Home  went  into  a  trance,  and  told  us
to  follow  him  into  the  gallery.  We  did  so,  and  at  his
request  stood  near  the  piano,  while  he  sat  down  at  the
instrument.  The  piano  vibrated  strongly.  Home  played
a  powerful  and  impressive  chant,  and  then  commenced
speaking  of  the  joys  and  sorrows  of  our  hfe,  telling  us
how  they  (the  spirits)  sympathized  with  us.  He  described
what  he  was  speaking  of  on  the  piano,  playing  discords
for  the  sorrows  and  trials  of  hfe,^  and  harmony  for  the
joys.  He  said,  "  There  is  a  merry  spirit  here  who  rejoices
that  you  have  done  good,"  and  he  played  a  lively  air.  He
added,  "  They  made  that  rushing  noise  you  all  heard  down
stairs,  to  testify  their  happiness  that  you  have  all  done  a
good  action  in  going  to  the  Abbey  to-night,"  (turning  to
my  father),  "  It  was  your  father  and  your  brother  who
shook  your  chair  in  the  hall."  He  then  began  speaking
about  the  immeasurable  goodness  and  greatness  of  God,
and  finally  rose  up,  stood  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  and
delivered  a  very  beautiful  prayer  in  the  most  impressive
and  earnest  manner.  He  then  awoke.  It  was  past  three
o'clock.  A.


No.  5S.—Sea7ice,  March  5th  [1869].

This  evening,  one  of  the  ladies  who  had  previously  been
much  interested  in  the  subject  of  Spirituahsm,  was  seized
with  a  sudden  and  unaccountable  idea  that  the  whole
thing  was  either  demoniacal  in  its  origin  or  imposture,
and  that  it  was  her  duty  to  denounce  it.  She  did  so  in
such  unmeasured  terms  that  she  succeeded  in  thoroughly
disquieting  the  minds  of  more  than  one  of  our  party.
After  dinner  we  had  a  seance  in  my  room  :  present,  INIrs.
and  Miss  Wynne,  Major  and  Mrs.  Blackburn,  Charlie
Wynne,  my  father,  Home  and  myself.  We  had  scarcely
any  physical  manifestations,  but  shortly  after  sitting  down
we  received  the  following  message  : — "  The  conditions  are


200  •  Experiences  in  Spiritualism  [seance


not  so  favourable  this  evening  ;  "  my  father  asked  if  the
conditions  were  affected  by  any  one  in  the  circle,  the
answer  was,  "  iVo."  We  soon  after  obtained  the  following
communication,  having  reference  probably  to  a  conversation
that  had  taken  place  that  afternoon  on  Spirituahsm,  and
its  elfect  upon  religion  : — "  We  do  not  hid,  or  even  wish,
you  to  have  faith  in  us,  we  mily  come  to  proclaim  immor-
tality, and  the  reality  and  nearness  of  the  spiritual  world.'''  ^
Home  soon  went  into  a  trance,  and  walked  about  the
room,  magnetizing  it  ;  he  stood  by  Mrs.  Wynne,  and  said,
"  Your  brother  Windham  is  near  you  and  wishes  to  kiss
you,  his  mouth  is  close  to  your  forehead,  but  you  are
nervous  and  that  prevents  it  ;  he  will  come  again  presently
and  will  do  it  if  he  can."  Home  now  sat  down  and
spoke  somewhat  as  follows  : — "  The  conditions  are  not
affected  by  any  one  in  particular  in  the  circle,  but  by  the
disturbed  and  agitated  state  of  your  minds  ;  a  good  many
unpleasant  things  have  occurred  to-day  and  have  caused
this.  The  possibility  of  our  communicating  with  you  is
much  affected  by  the  condition  of  your  minds  ;  a  calm
and  prayerful  state  is  absolutely  necessary  for  the  approach
of  a  high  spiritual  influence,  while  in  an  unsettled  and
irritated  condition  you  become  easy  of  access  to  the  lower
and  less  pure  influences.

"  The  human  mind  in  its  natural  beauty  is  calm,  and
casts  a  holy  and  peaceful  influence  on  all  near  it  ;  it  is
then  like  a  lovely  flower,  not  only  beautiful  to  the  eye,
but  affecting  all  around  with  its  delicious  fragrance.  But,
when  disturbed  and  terrified  by  fears  and  doubts,  the
beauty  of  the  mind  and  its  fragrance  are  destroyed,  re-
sembling the  same  flower  crushed  and  unable  any  longer
to  shed  abroad  its  sweet  and  natural  odours.  The  present
disturbed  condition  of  some  among  you  has  a  much  wider
effect  than  you  would  suppose  ;  as,  if  you  drop  a  stone
into  the  placid  waters  of  a  lake,  the  ripples  will  spread
out  gradually  widening  and  widening  until  they  have  passed
over  a  large  portion  of  its  surface  ; so,  in  like  manner,

1  Some  interruption  occurred,  which  prevented  the  words  after  "  t'w-
morUility ,  and,''  being  written  down  ;  the  remainder  is  supplied  from
memory,  and  is  believed  to  be  correct.


NO.  58]


With  D.  D.  Home


201


the  waves  emanating  from  your  minds  have  a  wide-spread
influence  upon  the  atmosphere  around  you."  Home  spoke
to  us  for  some  time  very  beautifully  in  a  soothing  tone
of  voice  ;  he  deprecated  the  idea  that  spirits  wished  to
interfere  in  matters  of  reUgion.  "  Do  we,"  he  said,
"  set  ourselves  up  as  teachers,  or  tell  you  to  love  God
less,  or  to  be  uncharitable  1  Do  we  interfere  with  the
every-day  walk  of  hfe  ?  "  He  spoke  in  this  strain  for
some  httle  time,  then  saying,  "  the  conditions  are  getting
a  little  more  favourable,"  he  arose,  went  to  the  door,
opened  it,  and  appearing  to  invite  some  one  to  enter,  led
the  person  up  to  Mrs.  Blackburn,  saying  to  her  as  he  did
so,  "  He  cannot  come  fast."  During  the  address  Mrs.
Blackburn  had  become  shghtly  under  influence  ;  Home  took
no  notice  of  it  at  the  time,  but  he  now  stood  by  her
making  passes,  and  calmed  her.  He  spoke  to  her  very
beautifully  and  earnestly  on  the  subject  of  the  power  she
possessed  of  being  developed  as  a  medium.  He  entreated
her  to  have  trust,  not  in  them  (the  spirits)  but  in  God  ;
he  begged  her  to  repeat  after  him  "  Thy  will  be  done,"
and  he  seemed  much  pleased  when  she  did  so.  He  said,
"  Do  you  remember  to  whom  these  words  apply  ?  '  And
he  did  not  many  mighty  works  there  because  of  their
unbehef  !  '  "  "  Yes,"  she  said,  "  they  refer  to  Christ."
"  Then,  if  the  highest  and  mightiest  power  had  this  difli-
culty  to  contend  with,  namely,  their  unbehef,  how  much
more  must  it  affect  us.  Oh,  have  faith  and  trust."  Home
then  sat  down  and  addressed  us  on  the  same  subject  of
mediumship,  drawing  a  simile  from  an  account  my  father
had  been  giving  us  of  a  fortnight  he  had  spent  in  Quar-
antine, in  a  place  just  like  a  prison.  He  spoke  somewhat
as  follows  :  "  Dunraven  has  been  telling  you  how  he  spent
some  time  shut  up,  deprived  of  the  society  of  his  friends.
Now  if  you  were  in  prison,  knowing  that  your  friends  were
without,  separated  from  you  only  by  a  great  impassable
wall,  would  you  not  yearn — oh,  so  earnestly — to  send  them
a  few  words  of  love  ;  then  if  you  found  some  one  who
was  capable  of  carrying  a  message  for  you,  would  you  not
think  it  a  little  hard  if  that  person  refused.  Although
you  might  know  that  your  message  would  be  distorted  and


I


202


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


confused  by  passing  through  the  hands  of  a  third  person,
that  you  could  not  possibly  say  all  that  you  would  wish  ;
still  would  you  not  be  intensely  anxious  to  send — if  only
one  word — to  testify  of  your  existence  to  your  sorrowing
and  weeping  friends.  It  is  so  with  us  ;  there  is  between
us  and  you  a  great  barrier,  through  the  portals  of  which
we  have  passed  ;  we  yearn  to  send  a  few  words  of  love
to  the  dear  ones  we  have  left  beyond  it,  and  when  we
find  some  one  who  could  carry  that  message,  is  it  not
just  a  little  hard  that  they  should  be  unwilling  to  do  so."
(Turning  to  Mrs.  Blackburn),  "  Do  you  not  love  your
children  ?  Will  you  not  ever  love  them,  even  when  you
have  passed  away  ?  Think  then  of  others — be  not  selfish
— God  is  not  selfish  in  his  love  for  us,  trust  in  Him."
Home  got  up  and  whispered  to  my  father,  "  You  ought
to  have  taken  some  nourishing  food  to-day,"  (the  day  was
Friday).  He  then  came  to  me  and  said,  "Go  to  the
Castle  to-night,  we  may  not  be  able  to  make  any  mani-
festations, but  it  will  do  good  ;  you  will  go  to  the  Abbey
to-morrow  night — ah,  but  it  will  rain  !  "  he  went  to  the
window,  looked  out  and  said,  "  No,  it  will  do,  you  will
go  after  twelve  o'clock,  do  not  have  any  seance  Ijefore  you
go  ;  the  external  influence  is  not  very  good  for  your
nerves."  Home  now  walked  about  the  room  making  a
sound  as  of  kissing  some  one,  he  then  sat  down  and
awoke.  Suljsequently  the  manifestations  were  slight,  and
we  got  the  message  :  "  We  think  it  better  to  reserve  the
power  till  later.'' We  then  adjourned.

Soon  after,  we  proceeded  to  the  Castle,  Home  and  I
walking  a  little  in  advance  of  the  others.  On  the  way
he  became  under  influence.  As  we  neared  the  Abbey  I
saw  a  whitish  shadow  pass  from  the  ruin  into  a  clump  of
trees.  Home  said,  "  That  is  the  same  spirit  you  saw  there
the  other  night,  you  observe  that  he  is  much  whiter."
Home  ran  forward  on  the  road  jumping  apparently  with
delight,  and  when  he  came  back  said,  "  I  was  made  to  do
that  to  shew  you  that  he  is  much  happier."  When  we
were  about  haK-way  between  the  Abbey  and  the  Castle,
Home  said,  "  It  all  looks  peopled,  they  are  more  real  to
me  than  those,"  turning  and  pointing  to  the  rest  of  the


NO.  58]


With  D.  D.  Home


203


party,  who  were  a  few  yards  behind. He  now  became
completely entranced, and said, "  Spirits are  sometimes
compelled  to  revisit  places  that  they  were  much  connected
with  when  on  earth. It  may  not  be  exactly  a  punish-
ment ; they  may  be  occupied  about  many  other  things,
but  at  certain  seasons  they  are  drawn  by  an  irresistible
impulse  to  revisit  such  places. Now,  supposing  you  had
an  estate,  and  the  people  on  the  neighbouring  property
differed  from  you  in  opinions  or  behef,  and  you  gathered
your  people  together  and  fought  against  them,  destroying
property  and  even  life  ;  that  would  be  all  very  well  for
a  time,  but  then  you  know  there  comes  the  passing  away,
and  you  see  clearly  all  the  evil  you  have  done,  and  the
misery  you  have  caused. Such  a  man  was  Oliver  Crom-
well. Of  course,  where  a  man  errs  through  ignorance,  and
acts  up  to  the  best  of  his  knowledge  and  abihty,  it  is  a
different  thing,  but  so  many  men  are  actuated  by  a  desire
for  renoM^n  and  singularity  ; there  is  as  much  pride  in
wishing  to  appear  different  from  other  men  as there  is
in  being  over  anxious  to  conform  exactly  to  them,  the
Quaker,  who  puts  on  that  pecuUar  costume  is  in  reality
as  vain  as  the  fop  who  dresses  himself  in  the  height  of
fashion." We  now  entered  the  Castle,  and  Home  led  us
over  the  drawbridge  into  the  inner  court,  being  still  in  a
trance. He  bandaged  his  eyes  with  a  handkerchief,  saying,
"  There  is  too  much  hght." My  father  observed,  "  Yes,
it  is  brighter  than  it  was  at  the  Abbey." Home  replied,
in  rather  a  sharp  tone  of  voice, "  Oh,  not  that  sort  of
hght  ; but there is too much for Daniel's eyes."  He
walked  about,  and  up  and  down  the  steep  slope  leading
to  the  vaults  without  any  difficulty,  and  then  went  into
the  vault,  where  it  was  quite  dark. We  heard  a  noise  ;
I  was  at  some  distance  from  him,  but  my  father,  thinking
that  he  had  tumbled  down  the steps, and  hearing  the
splash  of  something  in  the  well,  went  forward  to  the  door
feehng  for  him,  and  touched  his  hand. Home  said,  "You
think  that  Daniel  fell  and  was  hurt,  oh,  no  ; he  would
not  be  hurt  even  were  he  to  fall  from  the  top  of  the
tower  ;  they  are  here,  and  want  to  make  themselves  visible."
My  father  heard  raps  under  his  feet  which  I  could  not


204  Experiences  in  Spiritualism  [seance

hear,  as  I  was  several  yards  distant ;  he  also  heard  a
sound  like  drops  of  water  falUng,  and  on  two  occasions
observing  that  three  consecutive  drops  fell,  sounding  like
three  raps,  he  said,  "  That  is  water."  Home  repUed,  in
rather  a  contemptuous  tone  of  voice,  "  No  ;  does  water
answer  questions."  Charlie  Wynne  asked  if  Dr.  ElUotson
was  present ;  and  three  heavy  thumps  were  heard  above,
as  if  on  the  ground  over  the  vault.  Home  then  came
out,  climbed  up  on  the  parapet  wall,  and  remained  there
some  time,  being  generally  concealed  from  us  by  the  ivy  ;
when  he  returned,  he  led  my  father  a  little  in  advance  of
us,  saying,  "  He  is  trying  to  speak  to  you."  My  father
could  neither  see  nor  hear  anything  ;  but  I  saw  a  faint
light  against  the  wall,  and  heard  indistinct  sounds  as  of
some  one  trying  to  articulate.  Charlie  Wynne  also  saw
the  light.  Mrs.  Blackburn  asked  Home  if  the  spirit  was
happy.  "  No,"  he  said  ;  "  but  unhappy  in  a  way  you
cannot  understand,  he  is  in  a  kind  of  way,  happy  in  his
unhappiness  ;  he  is  not  exactly  going  through  a  punish-
ment, but  he  has  a  great  work  to  do — a  work  that  he
can — (drawing  himself  up,  and  speaking  in  a  proud  deter-
mined tone  of  voice) — aye,  and  that  he  ivill  accomplish  ;
he  says  he  wishes  to  like  you,  Dunraven,  and  to  be  of
service  to  you  ;  but  he  does  not  quite  feel  as  if  he  was
worthy  enough."  Home  now  walked  about  the  inner  yard
and  stamped  upon  the  ground  all  about  a  particular  spot,
then  calling  me  and  my  father,  he  said,  "  There  must  be
a  well  here  ;  I  sa.w  a  blueish  light  over  it."  We  stamped
upon  the  place,  and  it  had  a  hollow  sound.  Home  having
awoke  we  left  the  Castle,  he  and  I  walking  on  before  the
others  ;  we  passed  through  the  Abbey,  but  saw  nothing.
Home  went  into  a  trance,  and  said,  "  You  have  been
thinking  about  the  hchens  on  the  trees,  and  you  may  draw
a  parallel  between  the  condition  of  those  trees  and  that
of  the  human  race.  Those  lichens  resemble  the  pernicious
influences  that  check  and  retard  the  race  from  its  natural
progress  towards  perfection,  as  a  time  comes  when  the
trees  are  thus  afl^ected,  so  arc  there  ages  of  advance  and
ages  of  retrogression  among  men.  It  does  as  you  say
seem  hard  for  those  who  live  in  a  period  of  retrogression.


NO.  58]


With  D.  D.  Home


205


but  God's  ways  are  not  our  ways,  and  the  progress  though
it  may  be  slow  and  checked,  is  yet  inevitable,  and  sure
to  prevail  in  time  ;  nations  may  pass,  and  their  civihzation
fade  away,  but  it  will  be  taken  up  elsewhere  ;  the  creation
is  but  in  its  infancy,  man  is  very  far  removed  from  the
perfection  to  which  he  ought — aye,  and  to  which  he  will
—arrive.  These  hchens  do  not  appear  to  have  been
caused  by  the  excessive  dampness  of  the  seasons,  they
seem  to  be  a  deep-rooted  bhght  that  has  not  originated
even,  on  the  earth,  but  has  come  over  it  in  some  sort  of
cloud  ;  it  is  like  a  contagious  disease  :  thinning,  and  giving
them  air  would  do  good.  We  think  that  in  about  two
years  they  will  get  long,  and  the  wind  will  blow  them
away  to  a  great  extent — we  mean  the  white  ones  ;  the
green  ones  are  flatter,  and  their  roots  sink  deeper ;  some
of  us  seem  to  think  that  a  belt  of  tar  round  the  trees
might  do  good, — the  experiment  would  be  worth  trying."
Home  now  awoke.

We  had  a  httle  supper  after  we  got  home,  and  then
Home  proposed  that  we  should  go  up  to  the  gallery.  We
all  did  so  and  sat  at  the  large  centre  table,  the  room
being  Ughted  only  by  a  ghmmer  from  the  fire.  Vibrations
commenced  immediately.  Home  went  into  a  trance,  walked
to  the  piano,  and  played  the  same  fine  chant  as  on  a
previous  occasion.  He  called  my  father  over,  made  him
stand  near  him,  and  said,  "  I  wish  one  of  you  could  note
down  this  chant  ;  do  you  hear  the  harp  V  We  all  heard
the  chords  very  delicately  and  faintly  swept,  the  harp
being  covered  at  the  time  ;  Home  then  removed  the  cover
and  my  father  heard  some  noise  or  movement  about  the
harp  and  Home  added,  "  They  are  trying  to  tune  it  ;  "
they  then  returned  to  the  table,  and  Home  awoke.  We
had  strong  vibrations  and  raps,  and  Charhe  Wynne  asked
whether  Dr.  Elhotson  was  present.  This  was  answered  by
three  very  loud  raps.  Miss  Wynne  said  to  my  father,
"  Did  you  know  him  1  "  "  Yes,''  was  answered  in  the
same  manner.  The  alphabet  was  then  called  for,  and  the
following  message,  evidently  referring  to  my  father's  mes-
meric experiences,  was  given.  "Be  as  true  in  this  cause
as  you  were  in  bye-gone  days  for  another  great  truth,  John


206


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


EUiotson.'"  After  this,  raps  of  different  kinds  were  heard,
and  soon  the  following  message  was  given  by  very  loud
ones.  "  /  do  not  ask  you  to  promise,  but  expect  you
to  be  earnest  in  toorking  for  God."  Some  one  remarked,
"  Who  is  this  message  for  ?  "  "  /  speak  to  you,''  was
answered.  "  But,  who  do  you  mean  by  '  you  '  1  "  was
asked.  "  They  mean  me,"  my  father  said,  "  for  I  was
touched  three  times  on  the  knee."  Charlie  Wynne  having
brought  the  accordion,  it  was  played  in  Home's  hand  in
a  different  style  from  the  previous  evening.  My  father
held  the  accordion,  and  it  was  pulled  about  and  played
faintly.  Home  again  took  it,  and  the  alphabet  being  asked
for  by  five  notes,  the  following  was  given — the  letters
being  indicated  by  notes  :  "  We  will  give  you  a  hymn  of
praised  A  slow  measured  sort  of  air  was  played.  My
father  was  talking  about  Dr.  Elliotson,  and  observed  that
he  had  been  very  kind  to  him.  This  message  was  im-
mediately given  :  "  You  mean  you  tvere  kind  to  me."  A
sofa  was  now  moved  near  the  table,  the  table  also  moving
towards  it,  but  evidently  with  much  difficulty  ;  which  is
not  to  be  wondered  at  as  it  was  very  heavy  and  standing
on  a  thick  Turkey  carpet.  My  father's  chair  was  moved
nearer  to  Home,  who  said,  "  I  can  see  Dr.  Elliotson  stand-
ing behind  your  chair,  he  has  both  his  hands  upon  the
back  of  it,  and  is  causing  it  to  vibrate."  My  father's
chair  was  in  effect  vibrating  at  the  time  ;  he  inquired  if
Dr.  Elhotson  had  been  at  the  Castle.  "  Yes "  was  ans-
wered by  three  raps  or  rather  thuds  exactly  similar  to
those  he  had  heard  at  the  Castle.  Soon  after  this  message
came,  "  We  must  go  soon."  My  father  asked,  "  Will  Mes-
merism make  progress  1  it  appears  to  be  rather  in  abey-
ance at  present."  "  Yes  "  was  loudly  answered  ;  he  added
"  I  should  like  to  ask  Elhotson  some  questions  about  Mes-
merism," and  this  message  was  given,  "  By  the  sea  I  will
come,"  alluding  I  suppose  to  our  projected  visit  to  Gar-
inish,  on  the  coast  of  Kerry.  In  one  of  these  messages
the  letters  were  indicated  by  touching  my  father  strongly
on  the  knee.  Mrs.  Blackburn  was  also  touched  on  the
knee.  Soon,  "  Noiv,  God.  bless  you  all,"  was  given,  the
letters  being  indicated  by  most  beautiful  chords  upon  the


NO.  58]


With  D.  D.  Home


207


accordion — the  name  of  God  being,  as  it  always  is,  spelled
most  softly  and  reverently.  This  sentence  was  then  given,
"  You  will  sleep  all  the  ftiore  peacefully  for  hiowing  that  you
have  done  good.''  The  raps  were  much  gentler  and  fainter,
apparently  made  by  quite  a  different  spirit.  My  father
said  "What  does  this  message  refer  to?"  Mrs.  Black-
burn remarked,  "  I  suppose  to  what  happened  at  the
Castle."  "  yes  "  was  answered.  Nothing  more  occurring
we  left  the  room.  The  raps  made  by  Dr.  ElUotson
sounded  as  loud  as  if  they  had  been  caused  by  some  one
under  the  table  striking  it  with  a  hammer.  A.


No.  5^.— March  6th  [1869].

Adare  dined  in  Limerick  :  after  the  ladies  left  the  room
Major  Blackburn,  JMr.  Home  and  I  commenced  talking  of
the seances which had been held here last winter.  I

remarked  that  probably L was connected with  the

unsatisfactory  occurrences  that  happened,  and  that  I  should
be  very  glad  if  the  matter  could  in  any  way  be  cleared
up.  We  heard  raps  at  the  north  side  of  the  room,  and
Mr.  Home  went  over  to  a  side  table  near  where  the  raps
had  sounded,  and  sitting  down  said,  "  I  wish,  dear  spirit,
you  would  tell  us  about  it."  "  iVo,"  was  answered.  He
added,  ''  Lord  Dunraven  would  be  gratified  if  you  would
tell."  The  alphabet  was  called  for,  and  this  message  was
given,  "  Don't  ask."  Raps  were  then  heard  near  the  table
in  the  bay  window ;  Mr.  Home  sat  down  at  this  table,
calUng  us  to  join  him,  which  we  did.  On  the  table  were
three  flower  pots  or  vases  with  flowers,  in  one  was  a  good-
sized  azalea  ;  the  table  vibrated  so  strongly  that  the  azalea
shook  most  visibly.  We  soon  received  this  message  :
"  Place  the  flowers  under  the  table,  near  John.''  We  put
down,  as  directed,  one  of  the  flower  pots  which  contained
cyclamens.  Raps  were  heard  upon  the  table.  I  said  to
Blackburn,  "  Get  under  the  table  and  hold  Mi\  Home  s
feet."  He  did  so,  and  we  heard  the  raps  distinctly  over
his  head. Mr. Home  suddenly  said, "Oh, look  at  the


208


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


hand  near  me  holding  a  flower  !  "  Twice  he  said  that  he
saw  the  hand.  I,  somehow,  instinctively,  put  my  hand
under  the  table,  and  immediately  felt  a  flower  placed  very
gently  in  it.  The  following  was  then  given  : — "  The  flower
is  from  Augusta,  ivith  fond  love.'"  Then  another  sentence
was  begun,  which  I  could  not  well  make  out,  and  then
"a.  (Z."  No  more  raps  occurring  after  this  we  left  the
table.  On  bringing  the  paper  to  the  candles  on  the  dining
table  I  found  that  the  word  I  had  not  recognized  was
(as  written)  "  Augutsta."  I  had  made  a  mistake,  inserting
a  t. The  a.  d.  were,  I  presume,  initials.

In  accordance  with  what  we  were  told  last  night,  we
had  no  seance  this  evening,  but,  as  directed,  we  went  to
the  Abbey.  Soon  after  arriving  there,  Adare  joined  us  on
his  return  from  Limerick.  Mr.  Home  was  very  lively,  and
not  at  all  impressed.  He  remarked  that  the  influence  was
qviite  different  to-night.  He  shortly  took  Adare  and  me
to  the  kitchen,  and  after  a  few  turns  up  and  down,  he
went  into  a  trance.  I  walked  with  him,  holding  his  hands.
He  said  he  was  being  touched,  and  so  was  I  several  times,
very  palpably  on  the  back.  He  said  that  there  were  no
spirits  belonging  to  the  place  present,  only  those  connected
with  us  ;  we  soon  turned  our  steps  homewards.  Mr.  Home
and  Adare  walked  together,  and  before  awaking,  Mr.  Home
spoke  something  to  this  effect,  "  You  remarked  how  different
everything  felt  in  the  Abbey  to-night,  to  what  it  did  the
last  time  we  were  there.  To-night,  although  the  elements
were  disturbed,  and  the  wind  blowing,  everything  was
quiet  ;  no  birds  were  flying  about ;  the  whole  place  seemed
peaceful,  whereas  the  other  night,  although  it  was  per-
fectly calm  and  still,  yet  the  birds,  not  night  birds  only,
but  seemingly  others,  were  flitting  about,  and  the  whole
place  seemed  filled  with  an  unquiet  influence.  It  is
changed  now  ;  he  (referring  to  the  monk)  is  in  a  happier
state,  he  can  speak  to  those  about  you  ;  he  has  no  ob-
jection to  your  mentioning  what  occurred  in  your  room
when  he  first  came.  Oh,  he  does  not  the  least  mind
now."

We  were  sitting  in  the  hall  after  taking  a  little  supper,
when  Mr.  Home  went  to  the  piano  and  played,  and  asked


NO.  59]


With  D.  D.  Home


209


Adare  to  come  and  sit  by  him.  Adare  now  called  me  to
join  them.  Mr.  Home  remarked  that  the  piano  had  been
off  the  ground,  which  Adare  affirmed,  stating  that  he  had
passed  his  hand  under  the  castors  ;  I  felt  it  vibrating  very
strongly.  His  playing  became  fainter  and  fainter,  and  he
went  into  a  trance.  He  got  up,  said  to  Adare,  "  Bring
Emily,"  and  taking  me  by  the  hand  led  me  quickly  down
the  dark  passage  to  Lady  D's.  sitting  room,  the  others
following.  He  placed  chairs  for  us  all,  drew  over  a  little
table,  and  sat  down.  It  was  pitch  dark.  Immediately  a
hand  was  laid  on  the  back  of  my  head.  He  said,  "  They
will  touch  you  with  flowers."  Both  Mrs.  Wynne  and  I
felt  them.  He  said  to  Mrs.  Wynne,  "  It  was  John  who
touched  you."  We  heard  at  a  little  distance  the  soimd
of  flowers  being  stirred  and  broken,  and  immediately  some
were  placed  in  our  hands.  Mr.  Home  said,  "  Take  Daniel's
hands,  dear  Emily,  we  want  you  to  be  able  to  tell  others
that  you  held  his  hands,  and  felt  his  feet."  While  Mr.
Home's  hands  and  feet  were  thus  in  contact  with  Mrs.
Wynne's,  we  all  simultaneously  felt  flowers  waved  across
our  faces,  heads,  and  hands.  Mrs.  Wynne  put  up  her
hand  to  try  and  grasp  them,  but  failed.  Mr.  Home
laughed,  and  said,  "  No,  Emily,  you  cannot  catch  it — we
do  not  wish  you  to  yet."  Flowers  were  then  given  to
us  all  ;  Adare  received  a  white  azalea  with  this  message,
through  Mr.  Home,  "  For  Florence."  Then  another  flower
was  given  us,  with  the  message,  "  This  for  Augusta,  and
leaves  or  a  flower  for  all  the  dear  ones — for  all  the
children.  We  wish  to  say  one  word  if  you  will  call  the
alphabet,  Adare."  He  did  so,  and  "  Love  "  was  given,  by
a  flower  placed  in  my  hand,  the  stalk  being  pulled  for
each  letter.  I  tried  to  feel  the  hand,  but  the  flower  was
drawn  back  by  the  stem,  till  my  arm  was  stretched  out.
We  all  then  observed  a  light,  resembling  a  httle  star,  near
the  chimney  piece,  moving  to  and  fro  ;  it  then  disappeared.
Mr.  Home  said,  "  Ask  them  in  the  name  of  the  Father,
the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  if  this  is  the  work  of  God."
I  repeated  the  words  very  earnestly  ;  the  light  shone  out,
making  three  little  flashes,  each  one  about  a  foot  higher
above the floor than the preceding. Mr. Home  said,

Q


210


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


"  We  are  able  to  make  it  brighter  and  stronger,  because
you  asked  solemnly,  and  in  the  name  of  God."  We  then
heard  a  sound  of  something  moving,  and  a  shower  of
flowers  fell  upon  us.  Loud  raps  announced  the  presence,
as  we  supposed,  of  Dr.  Elliotson.  Mr.  Home  (or  Dr.  Elliot-
son  speaking  through  him),  uttered  a  short  and  beautiful
address,  which,  unfortunately  we  cannot  recall  ;  but  he
made  use  of  a  simile  ending  with  the  words, — "  As  the
sand  on  the  shore."  I  felt  a  little  heap  of  sand  laid
upon  the  back  of  my  hand.  In  his  address  he  said,  "You
have  been  baptized  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  the  Son,
and  the  Holy  Ghost  ;  be  now  baptized  as  a  truth  seeker."
I  then  felt  a  drop  of  some  liquid  fall  on  my  head.  Mr.
Home  then  said,  "  Emily,  would  you  like  to  feel  the  sand  1  "
Mrs.  Wynne  rephed,  "  Yes ;  "  and  a  small  quantity  was
placed  on  the  back  of  her  hand.  He  then  said,  "  Emily,
you  will  feel  a  kiss  on  the  brow,  and  also  on  the  lips."
She  felt  something,  which  she  afterwards  described  as  more
resembling  two  moist  fingers  than  an  ordinary  kiss.  I  asked,
"  What  spirits  are  here  ?  "  Mr.  Home  answered,  "  Augusta,
Emily's  father,  mother,  and  brother  ;  also  others."  Mrs.
Wynne  seemed  grieved  at  the  absence  of  one  very  dear  to
her  :  Mr.  Home  in  a  subsequent  seance,  at  Garinish,  (p.  212)
alluded  to  this.  He  then  addressed  us  and  those  dearest
to  us  in  very  afi^ectionate  terms,  and  seemed  very  happy  ;
he  ended  by  saying,  "  We  have  been  so  pleased  at  being
able  to  make  these  manifestations.  You  did  not  witness
much  at  the  Abbey,  nor  did  we  promise  that  you  would  ;
what  we  wanted  was  to  keep  you  up  late  enough  for
this,  and  it  has  happened  as  we  wished.  And  now,  dar-
lings, you  will  return  to  the  hall,  and  sit  by  Daniel  at
the  piano ;  Daniel's  power  is  becoming  exhausted ;  there
will  probably  be  no  manifestations  to-morrow  evening,  but
we  will  let  him  know  ;  he  is  not  very  well,  but  he  does
not  like  saying  so."  We  then  got  up,  went  back  to  the
hall,  and  sat  down  as  directed  at  the  piano  ;  Mr.  Home
awoke  almost  immediately.  It  was  half-past  three  o'clock.
I  took  a  candle  and  returned  to  the  room  we  had  been
in  ;  I  found  the  little  table  and  the  ground  about  it
strewed  with  flowers. The  table  on  which  the  flower  pots


NO.  59]


With  D.  D.  Home


211


stood  was  about  eight  feet  distant  from  the  other  ;  there
was  a  good  deal  of  sand  in  the  flower  pots.  Adare  and
I  went  up  to  Mr.  Home's  room,  and  smoked  a  cigarette  ;
Mr.  Home  was  in  bed.  We  began  talking  about  Spirit-
ualism,  and  I  said, "  I  am  quite  sure  that  L was

concerned  in  what  went  on  last  winter  here."  ^  "  Yes "
was  suddenly  said  by  three  distinct  raps  in  a  distant  part
of  the  room.  I  made  other  remarks,  which  were  similarly
joined  in  by  raps ;  but  I  was  very  tired,  and  cannot
sufficiently  recall  them  to  insert  them  here.  D.


No.  m.—QarinisJi,  March  9th  [1869].

While  my  father.  Home,  and  I  were  at  dinner,  we  all
felt  a  current  of  cold  air,  and  the  table  vibrated.  This
occurred  two  or  three  times,  and  seemed  to  be  interrupted
by  the  servants  coming  in  and  out.  At  about  ten  o'clock.
Home  joined  me  m  the  dining  room,  where  I  was  writing
alone,  lie  seemed  uneasy  and  I  asked  him  if  he  was  not
feehng  well.  "Oh,  yes,"  he  said,  "I  am  quite  well ;  but  there
is  a  strange  influence  about  that  I  do  not  know."  Shortly
after,  raps  came  upon  the  table,  and  the  following  messages
were  given.  "  Oiving  to  conditions,  ive  fear  ive  shall  not  be
able  before  Thursday  ;  but  we  will  try  to-morroiv.  Humphrey
May:'  "  Use  this  table."  "  Tell  Uncle  (word  confused)
not  to  be  over  anxious.''  I  took  the  messages  to  my  father,
and  he  joined  us  in  the  dining  room,  observing  how  curious
it  was  that  Humphrey  May  should  come,  that  he  had
never  been  with  us  before,  that  he  had  never  been  at
Garinish,  and  that  he  could  not  understand  why  he  came.
"  There  is  one,"  he  said,  "  that  I  should  have  supposed
would  have  come  here  before  all  others,  and  I  should  also
have  thought  Dr.  Elhotson  would  have  made  some  com-
munication, because  he  told  us  the  other  night  at  Adare
that  he  would  do  so."  We  began  talldng  about  some
seances  that  were  held  at  Adare,  without  Home,  alluding
particularly  to  one,  the  written  account  of  which  Home

1  I  subseqviently  found  that  the  occurrences  to  whicli  I  alhided,  chiefly
took  place  before  L arrived  at  Adare.


212


Experiences  in  S'piritualism


[seance


happened  to  be  holding  in  his  hand.  The  alphabet  was
called  for,  and  this  message  given  :  "  The  wriiing  that  you
hold  in  your  hand  is  all  nonsense."  Soon  after,  Home
went  into  a  trance  ;  he  got  up  and  said,  "  The  light  is
too  strong  for  Dan."  I  blew  the  candles  out,  leaving  a
good  fire-light  m  the  room,  and  began  searching  for  a
pencil  to  take  notes.  He  said,  "  The  hght  will  do  nicely
now,  never  mind  about  taking  notes,  you  will  be  able  to
record  what  Dan  says  better  without  doing  so ;  we  will
endeavour  to  impress  you  with  it  to-morrow,  and  you  will
remember  the  substance,  if  not  the  exact  words  ;  by  trusting
entirely  to  us,  we  shall  be  able  to  assist  you  more  than
if  you  took  notes,  and  trusted  to  them  ;  what  I  am  going
to  say  now  is  important,  you  must  try  and  remember  it.
Certain  conditions  are  necessary  for  us  to  be  able  to  make
any  manifestations  ;  by  conditions,  I  mean  not  only  the
state  of  the  external  atmosphere,  but  also  the  state  of
your  minds  and  bodies  ;  certain  electrical  conditions  are
necessary.  Now,  it  often  happens  that  some  spirit — though
possibly  a  perfect  stranger  to  all  of  yow — is  possessed  of
the  particular  quahty  that  is  necessary  to  supply  a  de-
ficiency and  make  the  conditions  favourable,  he  would  then
be  called  in.  Sometimes  three  or  four  of  them  club
together,  and  by  that  means  supply  something  that  is
wanting,  or  take  away  some  quality  that  is  in  -excess,
and  equahze  the  atmosphere  so  as  to  be  able  to  make
manifestations.  Those  spirits  that  love  you  best,  that  are
most  anxious  to  communicate,  that  would  naturally  be
nearest  and  dearest  to  you,  may  not  have  the  peculiar
quahty  that  is  necessary  to  harmonize  with  the  condition
of  yourselves,  and  of  the  external  atmosphere  on  any  par-
ticular day,  and  they  cannot  then  make  communications  ;
it  is  impossible,  for  it  is  all  a  matter  of  physical  conditions  ;
they  are  then  obliged  to  comrniinicate  through  other  spirits
who  harmonize  with  the  existing  conditions.  That  is  one
reason  why  Humphrey  May  came  to-night.  You  often
wonder  why  those  you  love  best  do  not  come  to  you,  it
is  simply  because  the  conditions  are  such  that  they  cannot
make  themselves  known.  Now  the  other  night  the  spirit
that  Emily  was  anxious  about  was  standing  outside  the


NO.  60]


With  D.  D.  Home


213


circle,  Emily  thought  it  most  strange  that  she  did  not  say
anything  to  her,  but  if  she  had  entered  the  circle  it  would
have  entirely  destroyed  the  arrangements,  and  there  could
have  been  no  more  manifestations  ;  it  is  svxrely  better  to
have  any  communications  than  none  at  all. This  explains
also  why  it  is  generally  a  bad  plan  to  ask  questions  ;
after  things  have  been  arranged,  some  spirit  steps  into  the
cu'cle  to  answer  a  question,  and  not  being  in  harmony,
the  whole  thing  is  thrown  out  of  gear. It  is  hke  making
dehcate  experiments  in  electricity  ; or  like  photography —
to  go  no  further  than  that,  if,  when  you  are  mixing  your
chemicals  in  a  dark  room,  one  single  ray  of  hght  enters,
all  is  destroyed  ; so  it  is  where  a  spirit  enters  the  circle
whose physical condition does not harmonize with  the
state  of  the  atmosphere,  and  of  your  minds  and  bodies.
The conditions are very bad to-night  ; you saw  what
difficulty  we  had  in  giving  those  messages,  the  raps  were
feeble and uncertain (we had observed this), the  word
'  Uncle  '  ought  to  have  been  '  Dunraven  '  ;  we  spelled  out
'  dun,'  and  then  the  letters  became  all  confused,  we  could
not  indicate  the  right  ones. You  heard  those  raps  that
came afterwards — you would scarcely believe that  they
were  made  by  Dr.  Elhotson,  so  different  were  they  from
those  he  usually  makes  ; yet  so  it  was. Oh !  there  has
been  a  curious  influence  here  all  the afternoon — an  old
man,  his  name  is  Thomas — Thomas  Trench  ; he  has  a
bald  head — a  large  bald  head." My  father  asked  if  he
had  come  with  Towny  Trench. "  Yes,  he  came  with  him  ;
he  belongs  to  him. Dr.  Elhotson  says,  that  if  the  con-
ditions are  favourable,  he  wants  to  make  some  experiments
on Thursday  ; he  is  so  anxious  about  it, he  wants  to
invent  some  more  perfect  means  of  keeping  up  a  constant
communication  ;  it  is  very  doubtful  if  he  will  ever  succeed.
He  knows  your  mind,  Dunraven,  and  he  would  like  to
make his experiments with you  ; he is very  much
interested  in  the  matter, and  so  will  you  be also  when
you  join  us  ; you  will  take  a  great  pleasure  in  experi-
mentahzing." Home  then  went  to  the  door  of  the  drawing
room,  made  a  gesture  of  disapproval,  and  said,  pushing
the  door  open  as  he  spoke,  "  No,  you  must  not  do  that,


214


Experiences  vit,  Spiritualism,


[seance


please."  We  heard  a  dull  sound  in  the  drawing  room.
Home  laughed  and  said,  "  That  is  Thomas,  he  does  not
approve  of  your  investigations,  and  he  thought  he  would
make  a  very  terrible  noise  in  there,  that  would  frighten
you  and  put  a  stop  to  it  all  and  destroy  the  conditions  ;
but  he  cannot  do  so."  I  said,  "  Why  on  earth  does  he
disapprove  ;  do  you  not  mean  Henry  Thomas  ?  "  "  Oh
dear  no,  he  is  a  great  experimentalizer  in  electricity  ;  no,
I  mean  the  Thomas  I  told  you  of,  Thomas  Trench."
I  said,  "  Why  does  he  object  ?  "  "  Oh,  it  is  entirely
against  his  principles,  and  ho  thought  he  would  make  a
very  weird  horrible  noise  and  frighten  you,  and  stop  it."
My  father  said,  "  Will  he  then  seek  to  influence  Towny
against  Spirituahsm  ?  "  "  Most  decidedly  he  will ;  oh,
most  decidedly.  There  is  another  reason  besides  that
which  I  have  already  mentioned,  why  Humphrey  May
came  to  us  to-night.  It  is  true  that  he  was  never  here  ;
but  his  brother  Arthur  has  been,  and  will  be  here  again.
Arthur  has,  or  rather  had,  no  real  reUgious  opinions  ;  he
was  not  accustomed  to  pray  ;  his  heart  was  not  softened
and  lifted  to  God  in  prayer.  When  he  hears  what
occurred  to-night,  it  will  have  an  effect  upon  him.  He
knows  that  Dan,  I  mean  Dan  Home,  could  never  have
heard  of  Humphrey,  that  Humphrey  was  never  here,  and
was  probably  the  last  person  in  the  world  that  any  of
you  were  thinlsing  of  ;  and  the  fact  of  his  coming  will
strike  Arthur  the  more  forcibly  ;  it  will  be  hke  a  little
test  to  him.  Besides  this,  he  was  very  fond  of  you,
Duiu-aven,  and  also  of  Adare."  After  this,  Home  sat  by
the  fire  making  passes,  and  magnetizing  his  wrist.  He
said,  "  Daniel's  wrist  is  swelling,  and  hurts  him."  He
then  walked  over  towards  the  window,  and  stretching  out
his  arm,  we  heard  a  sound  as  of  some  one's  fingers  snap-
ping near  it.  He  said,  "  That  is  Dr.  Elhotson  magnetizing
Dan's  hand."  Home  placed  his  hand  upon  my  head,
but  immediately  said,  "  No,  your  father  will  do  better,"
and  placed  it  on  his  head.  He  said,  "  Listen  "  ;  and  my
father  heard  rajis  upon  the  hand.  Home  took  the  sheet
on  which  the  seance  before  mentioned  was  written,  and
asked  us  to  hold  it  by  the  corners  with  him  ; we  did  so.


NO.  60]


With  D.  D.  Home


215


and  raps  came  upon  it  ;  then  lifting  up  the  sheet  of
paper,  he  said,  "It  is  all  black  now  ;  there  is  a  good
deal  that  is  not  right  here,  there  is  more  in  it  than  you
see.  Now,  do  you  thinly  that  if  a  person  were  to  parti-
cipate and  help  in  doing  something  wi'ong,  and,  when  the
others  were  suspected,  were  to  keep  silence,  and  let  them
bear  all  the  blame,  do  you  think  that  person  would  be
right  ?  "  My  father  rephed,  "  No,  I  think  they  would  be
very  wrong."  "  And  so  do  we,"  Home  said,  and  throwing
the  paper  down,  added,  "  You  see  where  we  have  thrown
it  1  "  "  On  the  floor,"  I  said.  "  Yes,  just  in  front  of
the  fu'e."  I  was  going  to  put  the  paper  in  the  fire,
but  my  father  thought  we  had  better  keep  it.  Home
said,  "  Oh,  certainly,  keep  it  ;  it  is  interesting  if  only  as
a  psychological  study  ;  you  will,  however,  lose  it  some
day."  Soon  after  this.  Home  awoke.  Although  I  had
blown  out  the  candles  when  Home  went  into  the  trance  ;
the  room  was  well  lighted  all  the  time  by  the  fire.

A.


No.  Ql.— Seance,  March  Uth  [1869j.

This  evening  while  Mrs.  Blackburn,  Home,  and  myself
were  sitting  reading  in  the  drawing  room,  raps  came  upon
the  table.  Soon  after,  we,  that  is  Major  and  Mi's.  Black-
burn, my  father,  Home,  and  myself,  at  Home's  suggestion
sat  round  the  table  that  we  had  been  told  on  Tuesday
night  to  use.  We  had  slight  physical  manifestations,  the
table  was  made  hght  and  heavy  at  request,  and  was
tilted  three  times  towards  each  of  us.  The  spirits  occa-
sionally answered  our  remarks  as  to  what  they  were  doing,
whether  they  were  endeavouring  to  concentrate  the  power,
&c.,  &c.,  by  affirmative  or  negative  tilts.  Mrs.  Blackburn
beconung  slightly  under  influence,  and  a  good  deal  agitated.
Home  asked  if  the  spirits  would  take  it  from  her  ?  The
answer  was  by  two  raps  meaning  "  perhaps  "  or  presently.'''
He  afterwards  placed  his  hands  upon  hers,  and  the
shaking  left  her,  and  was  communicated  to  him.  Home
now  went  into  one  of  those  strange  trances  in  which  he


216


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


is  unable  to  speak  ;  he  bandaged  his  eyes  with  a  hand-
kerchief, walked  about  the  room  a  little,  tlien  brought  the
candle,  two  sheets  of  paper  and  a  pencil,  and  placing
them  on  our  table,  sat  down  ;  then  spreading  open  one
of  the  sheets  he  commenced  writing  the  alphabet  on  it
in  large  capital  letters.  He  proceeded  with  a  firm  bold
touch  as  far  as  the  letter  F,  when  his  hand  became
violently  tremulous,  he  went  on  to  the  letter  L,  the  shak-
ing of  his  fingers  gradually  increasing,  when  he  made  a
gesture  as  if  he  could  not  proceed,  and  handed  the  paper
and  pencil  to  me.  I  finished  the  alphabet.  He  then,
following  the  lines  that  I  had  made,  traced  over  the
letters  R,  S,  T,  U,  V,  W,  with  the  same  tremulous  motion
of  his  hand,  and  proceeded  to  decorate  with  leaves  and
flowers  the  letters  A,  G,  S,  T,  U.  He  drew  a  cross  in
the  letter  U,  a  heart  pendant  on  T,  a  star  or  double
cross  in  8,  an  anchor  in  G,  sometlung  resembling  a  bird
in  A,  and  marked  the  letters  A  and  U  with  the  figure  2.
He  then  got  up  and  fetched  a  pen,  handed  me  a  fresh
sheet  of  paper  and  the  pencil,  turned  the  alphabet  towards
my  father,  sat  down  and  gave  us  the  following  messages,
by  indicating  the  letters  with  the  pen.  "We  hope  to  have
great  power,  God  being  our  helper."  "  You  see  ivhat  ones
they  are."  None  of  us  could  understand  what  the  last
sentence  "  You  see  ivhat  ones  they  are  "  referred  to.
Home  spelled  out  "  The  ones  ive  have  decorated."  We
then,  on  looking  at  the  alphabet,  found  that  the  decorated
letters  spelled  "  Augusta,"  the  letters  A  and  U,  which
occur  twice  in  the  word,  being  marked  twice  in  the  word,
being  marked  on  the  alphabet  by  the  numeral  2.  Home
got  up  and  went  into  the  dining  room,  where  we  had
been  smoking  after  dinner,  but  returned  immediately,
much  affected — as  we  supposed,  by  the  tobacco  smoke  ;
he  appeared  to  have  difficulty  in  breathing,  was  much
distressed,  and  groped  about  as  if  he  could  not  see  :  ^  he
caught  hold  of  my  hand  and  sat  dow^n.  I  observed  that
he  was  affected  by  something,  and  consequently  the
spirits  had  lost  perfect  control  over  him  ; Home  nodded,

^  The  effect  of  the  tobacco  smoke  m  partially  obstructing  the  clair-
voyant power  was  very  curious  to  witness. — D.


NO.  61]


With  D.  D.  Home


217


as  much  as  to  say,  that  is  the  case.  He  got  up,  went
into  the  open  air  for  a  few  minutes  and  returned  quite
right.  He  then  made  us  leave  our  places,  moved  the
table  close  to  the  -window,  placed  the  accordion  on  the
window  shelf,  and  spelt  out  by  the  written  alphabet,
"  Bring  in  the  doth.''  I  accordingly  brought  the  cloth
from  the  dining  room,  covered  our  table  with  it,  and  sat
down.  On  my  father  remarking  that  he  had  not  spoken
in  the  trance,  Home  made  him  and  Mrs.  Blackburn  feel
his  jaws  :  they  were  locked  and  perfectly  rigid  ;  he  then
sat  down,  and  shortly  after  awoke.  We  had  a  series  of
curious  but  not  very  powerful  manifestations  ;  the  window
curtains  were  drawn  partially  across  the  window,  and  in
answer  to  the  suggestion  of  one  of  us  that  perhaps  the
spirits  did  this  to  cover  the  accordion  on  which  possibly
they  might  be  about  to  try  and  play,  "  Yes  "  was  rapped
out.  Home  saw  on  tliree  or  four  occasions,  and  my
father  saw  once,  httle  flashes  of  light  plajdng  over  the
keys  of  the  accordion.  We  heard  that  a  small  table
behind  Home  was  moving,  and  after  the  semice,  we  found
it  had  been  lifted  on  to  the  sofa.  The  table  was  now
raised  in  that  peculiar  manner  which  we  had  remarked  at
Adare,  by  successive  lifts  (five  or  six  of  them),  to  the
height  of  about  two  feet,  and  then  gently  set  down  ;
after  which,  "  Take  the  instrnment "  was  spelled.  My
father  remarked  that  we  might  expect  music,  as  this
action  of  the  table — imitating  so  curiously  that  of  the
bellows  of  the  organ  when  being  filled,  usually  preceded
it.i  Home  took  the  accordion,  and  it  played  for  a  short
time,  chiefly  harmonies.  He  then  placed  it  on  the  ground,
when  a  few  chords  and  notes  were  played.  We  heard
raps  on  the  table,  floor,  walls,  and  outside  the  window  ;
and  the  spirits  occasionally  joined  in  our  conversation  by
rapping,  "  Yes "  or  "  No."  At  one  time  we  were  specu-
lating as  to  how  Mr.  Mahony  would  treat  the  subject  of
SpirituaUsm,  and  some  one  said  that  he  would  not  judge
of  it  fairly,  for  that  he  would  condemn  it  at  once  with-
out an}'  investigation  ; the  following  message  was  immedi-

1  That  this  was  the  object  aimed  at  by  this  peculiar  motion  of  the
table  was  afterwards  told  us.


218


Experienced  in  Spiritualimi.


[seance


ately  given  :  "  Jndge  not  lest  ye  be  judged."  I  observed
that  the  manifestations  were  weak  ;  and  that  there
appeared  to  be  some  obstruction,  when  this  was  given  :
"  Be  pray  erf  id."  We  recognized  Dr.  Elhotson's  presence
by  his  pecuhar  raps.  Mrs.  Blackburn  remarked  that  they
were  not  so  loud  as  they  had  been  in  the  gallery  at
Adare.  He  spelled  out  the  word,  "  servants,"  implying
probably  that  if  he  were  to  rap  as  forcibly  here  as  he
had  done  at  Adare,  the  servants  might  hear  him,  being
in  a  room  nearly  under  us.  Home  again  became  en-
tranced ;  he  got  up,  and  put  out  the  candle,  so  that
the  room  was  lighted  only  by  a  bright  tire.  My  father
said  to  me,  "It  is  curious  that  we  have  not  had  stronger
manifestations,  because  the  first  message  we  received  was
to  the  effect  that  they  would  have  great  power."  Home
said,  "  You  are  mistaken,  we  said  '  we  hope  to  have  great
power '  ;  we  have  to  harmonize  and  arrange  the  room,
we  shall  ])e  able  to  do  more  another  night.  Dunraven,
you  were  remarking  that  when  Dan  ,was  in  a  trance  no
physical  manifestations  ever  occurred  ;  do  you  and  Maria
(Mrs.  Blackburn)  come  here."  He  made  them  stand  by
a  small  heavy  table  in  the  centre  of  the  room.  My
father  said,  "  I  thought  Dr.  Elliotson  wished  to  try  some
experiments  with  me."  Home  answered,  "  Yes,  this  is
one  of  the  experiments  ;  he  is  very  anxious  also  to  be
able  to  communicate  with  you  when  you  are  quite  alone,
he  does  not  know  whether  he  can,  but  he  will  try  and
develop  you  sufficiently  for  that."  They  then  had  a
series  of  the  usual  manifestations,  raps,  and  vibrations,
the  table  tilting  in  different  directions,  and  being  twice
raised  shghtly  off  the  ground.  Home  was  very  particular
in  making  them  observe  closely  the  position  of  his  hands
and  feet,  in  order,  as  he  said,  "  That  you  may  be  able
to  assure  others  that  Dan  could  not  possibly  have  done
all  this."  Suddenly  the  small  table  rose  quickly  into  the
air  to  such  a  height,  that  Mi's.  Blackburn  and  my  father
could  no  longer  keep  their  hands  upon  it  ;  it  rose  so
suddenly  that  Mrs.  Blackburn  gave  a  start.  The  table
beginning  to  fall.  Home  said,  "  Take  it,  or  it  will  fall."
When  they  had  placed  it  on  the  ground,  Home  observed,


KO.  61]


With  D.  D.  Home


219


"  That  was  badly  managed,  it  is  a  great  pity  but  it  is
our  fault ;  Dr.  ElUotson  says  he  ought  to  have  told  you
what  he  was  going  to  do,  Maria  was  startled  and  you
both  let  go,  and  therefore  the  table  fell  ;  if  he  had
warned  you,  and  you  had  allowed  your  hands  to  shp
down  the  legs  as  it  rose,  so  as  not  to  break  the  con-
tinuity suddenly,  it  would  probably  have  left  your  hands,
and  risen  without  contact  with  you  until  it  touched  the
ceihng.^  We  will  try  and  do  it  again  ;  Adare  and  John,
come  here."  We  joined  them,  and  Home  told  us  all  to
place  our  fingers  lightly  under  the  edge  of  the  table  in
order  that  we  might  let  them  shde  down  the  legs  with-
out ever  quite  taking  them  off  it.  The  table  rose  to  a
height  of  about  three  feet,  but  came  to  the  ground  again
directly,  and  fell  over  on  its  side  ;  Home  told  us  not  to
move  it,  but  presently  he  said  "  Yes,  put  it  on  its  legs,
we  have  not  power  now ;  the  influence  has  returned  to
the  large  table,  go  back  to  your  places."  We  did  so,
and  the  Major  not  finding  a  chair  near  him,  and  the
Hght  being  by  this  time  faint,  Home  put  one  into  his
hand.  The  Major  was  going  to  sit  down  upon  nothing,
as  he  had  by  mistake  placed  the  chair  with  the  seat
turned  away  from  him  ;  Home  stopped  him  saying,  "  No,
no.  Major,  you  are  going  to  sit  on  the  wrong  side  of  the
chair."  We  all  laughed  and  Home  joined  in,  "  That
was  very  funny,  was  it  not  ?  very  funny  to  see  John
trjdng  to  sit  down  at  the  back  of  the  chair."  Home
then  took  his  seat,  and  said,  "Dr.  EEiotson  was  anxious
to  try  the  experiment,  and  to  see  whether  he  could  make
manifestations  when  Dan  was  in  a  trance,  and  he  suc-
ceeded ;  you  had  all  the  usual  phenomena,  the  levitation
of  the  table,  raps,  tiltings,  and  vibrations,  but  it  required
a  great  effort  to  do  it  ;  it  is  much  more  difficult,  because
the  greater  part  of  the  influence  is  centred  upon  Dan
while  he  is  mesmerised.  We  are  just  as  anxious  as  you
are,  Dumraven,  to  pass  through  the  present  phase  of
manifestations,  but  we  must  do  our  appointed  work,  and
you  will  find  that  ultimately  it  is  all  for  the  best.  It
would be much pleasanter to converse with you  and

^  The  room  is  about  ten  or  eleven  feet  high.


220


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


answer  yovir  questions  ;  but  then,  however  well  we  might
answer  them,  people  would  account  for  that,  by  all  sorts
of  theories,  such  as  mind-reading,  &c.,  &.c.  Now,  no
amount  of  clairvoyance  or  mind-reading  would  suffice  to
raise  a  table  in  the  air  higher  than  your  heads.  We
must  fulfil  our  appointed  duties  and  you  will  know  some
day  that  it  is  all  for  the  best."  Home  began  to  laugh
and  said,  "  It  was  very  funny  John's  turning  the  chair
the  wrong  way  ;  your  godmother  (speaking  to  Mrs.
Blackburn)  is  laughing  so  about  it,  it  recalls  another
incident.  You  know  John's  mother  has  answered  his
letter,  but  she  has  not  answered  his  question  about
Isabella ;  she  and  John's  sist«r  purposely  would  not  do
so,  because  they  said,  "  it  will  never  do  to  have  John
turning  everything  upside  down  in  this  sort  of  way."  It
amused  Dr.  Elliotson  very  much,  that  did  ;  he  was  there
when  thej  said  so.  Dr.  Elhotson  is  fond  of  you.  Major
(taking  the  Major's  hand  and  shaking  it  cordially)  ;  he
hkes  you  very  much  ;  he  says  you  are  so  steadfast,  and
an  honest,  brave  man.  Dan  is  going  to  awake  now."
After  Home  awoke,  we  had  some  slight  manifestations,
which  gradually  died  away.  Home  said  he  felt  that  the
influence  had  entirely  gone,  and  that  he  was  fatigued.
In  speaking  about  the  answer  to  the  letter.  Home  referred
to  his  having  at  Adare,  when  in  a  trance,  told  Major
Blackburn  to  ask  his  mother  about  Isabella,  and  about
Margaret  Henderson  {vide  p.  190).  No  one  had  told  Home
that  an  answer  had  been  received,  or  even  that  the  Major
had  written.  A.


No.  G2.— Seance,  March  12th  [1869].

About  half -past  nine  o'clock,  Home  proposed  a  seance.
We  placed  the  table  by  the  window,  in  the  position  to
which  it  had  been  moved  the  previous  night,  and  covered
it  with  a  cloth.  The  party  consisted  of  Major  and  IMrs.
Blackburn,  my  father.  Home,  and  myself.  We  had  no
manifestations  whatever  ;  and  after  sitting  for  half-an-
hour xny father said he thought there was no use  in


NO.  62]


With  D.  D.  Home


221


waiting  any  longer,  having  for  a  certain  reason  a  strong
feeling  that  nothing  would  occur.  Home  said  that
although  he  had  often  known  seances  to  fail  as  regards
manifestations,  yet  in  all  his  experience  he  never  remembered
a  room  to  feel  so  entirely  devoid  of  any  spiritual  presence.
At  his  suggestion,  we  all,  with  the  exception  of  Mrs.
Blackburn,  took  a  walk  out  of  doors  for  about  a  quarter
of  an  hour.  On  our  return  we  again  sat  round  the  table,
but  Mrs.  Blackburn,  not  feeling  very  well,  did  not  join
us.  We  had  no  manifestations  whatever ;  and  after
waiting  a  short  time  gave  it  up  in  despair.  My  father
and  Mrs.  Blackburn  went  into  the  dining  room  ;  the
Major,  Home,  and  I  remained  and  sat  at  a  small  table,
to  see  if  we  could  get  any  message.  Almost  immediately
faint  raps  came  ujDon  the  table,  and  the  word  "  Impossible  "
was  spelled  out.  We  joined  the  others,  and  told  them
what  had  occurred.  Mrs.  Blackburn  went  to  bed,  and
we  were  sitting  round  the  supper  table  talking,  when
I  suddenly  felt  a  current  of  cold  air.  Home  also  per-
ceived it,  and  said,  "  There  is  a  strong  influence  about
me."  We  heard  raps  on  the  table  and  fvu'niture.  Presently,
at  Home's  suggestion,  we  returned  to  the  next  room,  and
again  sat  round  the  small  table.  We  had  faint  physical
manifestations  ;  Home  became  under  influence,  and  his
hands  were  much  agitated.  He  had  been  complaining
during  the  evening  of  a  feehng  of  great  depression  ;  he
now  said  that  he  felt  all  right.  He  got  up,  and  acting
imder  an  uncontrollable  impulse,  walked  about  the  room,
his  hands  and  arms  being  strangely  waved  about  and
agitated  ;  he  made  mesmeric  passes  over  us  all,  and  said
(referring  more  especially  to  my  father),  Your  brains  are
overworked,  you  have  had  your  thoughts  too  much  con-
centrated on  one  subject,  and  have  been  writing  too
much.  (We  had  been  engaged  in  recording  the  seances
at  Adare.)  The  atmosphere  that  sijirits  utiUze  in  making
manifestations  emanates  from  the  head,  and  in  consequence
of  your  brains  being  overworked,  there  is  absolutely  none
flowing  from  you."  He  made  passes  for  some  time  over
my  father's  forehead,  the  back  of  his  head,  and  behind
his  ears,  occasionally  going  to  the  table  at  which  we  had


222


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


previously  been  seated,  and  extending  his  fingers  over  it
as  though  withdrawing  some  influence  from  it.  While
walking  about  he  suddenly  stopped  in  the  middle  of  a
sentence  with  a  violent  gasp,  and  sinking  on  his  knees
went  into  a  trance.  He  got  up,  walked  about,  apparently
conversing  with  some  one,  and  then,  taking  each  of  us  in
turn  by  the  hand,  led  us  to  the  other  table,  placed  chairs
for  us,  and  signed  to  us  to  sit  down.  My  father  requested
me  to  bring  paper  and  a  pencil ;  but  Home  shook  his
head,  and  afterwards  brought  them  himseK.  He  then
commenced  arranging  the  furniture  in  the  most  minute
detail,  consulting  apparently  all  the  time  with  some  one.
He  placed  the  small  round  table  near  us  and  behind  my
father,  and  moved  a  chair  up  to  it ;  he  altered  the
position  of  several  of  the  chairs  in  different  parts  of
the  room,  placed  the  miniature  portrait  of  his  wife  on
the  small  round  table,  and  the  case  containing  little
Dannie  Cox's  photograph  on  the  large  table  behind  me,
then  going  to  the  bookcase  he  took  out  several  books,
looked  into  them  and  replaced  them ;  at  length  he
appeared  to  find  what  he  wanted,  for  he  took  out  a
volume,  folded  his  hands  across  it  on  his  breast,  and
after  standing  for  a  few  seconds  in  a  most  reverential
attitude,  sank  down  upon  his  knees  and  appeared  to
pray  earnestly  ;  then  rising  to  his  full  height  he  held  the
book  as  high  as  he  could  above  his  head  and  placed  it
upon  our  table.  On  looking  at  the  volume  afterwards  we
found  it  to  be,  "  Jesus  Christ  ;  His  Times,  Life,  and
Work,"  by  E.  de  Pressense.  He  again  commenced  mak-
ing mesmeric  passes  about  the  room.  Coming  to  me  he
passed  his  hand  sharply  across  my  shoulders  from  left  to
right,  did  the  same  to  Major  Blackburn,  then  to  my
father,  and  finally  to  himself  ;  then  reversing  the  action,
he  commenced  with  himself  making  the  pass  from  right
to  left,  and  went  over  us  all  in  the  same  way  ;  this
curious  movement  he  repeated  three  times.  He  now  put
out  the  candle,  leaving  us  with  no  other  fight  but  that
of  the  fire,  rubbed  his  hands,  smiled,  and  nodded  when
I  remarked  that  I  thought  we  should  have  some  mani-
festations as  he  seemed  to  be  contented. Having  taken


NO.  62]


With  D.  D.  Home


223


his  seat  he  altered  the  position  of  two  vases  of  flowers
on  the  table  in  such  a  way  as  to  make,  with  the  book,
which  he  placed  back  upwards  transversely  between  them,
the  form  of  a  cross.  The  accompanying  diagram  shews
the  arrangement  of  the  various  articles.  They  are  marked
by  capital  letters  in  their  original  jjositions,  while  the
altered  places  of  those  that  were  moved,  are  indicated  by
small  letters.

Home  awoke,  and  we  had  all  the  usual  physical  pheno-
mena ;  very  strong  currents  of  cold  air,  vibrations  of  the
table,  &c.,  &c.  On  two  occasions  during  the  seance,  the
table  was  raised  about  a  foot  in  the  air  and  remained
there  poised  for  some  time,  oscillating  gently  from  side  to
side.  We  now  all  heard  a  movement  about  vase  N,  and
Home  and  I  both  saw  a  hand  upon  it  ;  I  said  that  the
vase  was  moving ;  Home  insisted  that  it  was  not,  and
requested  me  to  place  my  hand  upon  it  ;  I  did  so,  and
found  that  it  was  moving  slowty  round,  but  the  sound
we  heard  was  caused  by  the  hand  rubljing  against  the
side  of  the  vase  ;  I  saw  the  hand  all  the  time.  We
now  heard  a  rusthng  among  the  flowers,  and  Home  said,
"  The  fingers  have  closed  over  a  flower  and  taken  it
away."  I  did  not  see  the  flower  taken,  but  the  hand  at
that  moment  disappeared.  Home  and  I  both  observed  a
hand  rise  above  the  edge  of  the  table  near  the  window,
and  place  a  flower  upon  it  ;  I  then  lost  sight  of  the  hand,
but  Home  said  he  saw  it  carry  the  flower  across  the
table,  and  place  it  near  my  father ;  my  father  saw  the
flower  all  the  time  moving  as  it  were  of  itself,  for  he
could  not  distinguish  the  hand  that  conveyed  it.  He
took  the  flower,  and  asked  if  it  was  for  him.  The
following  was  speUed  out  :  "  Yes  and  tve  ivill  give  you
another  soon.'"  My  father  remarking  that  he  was  very
anxious  to  see  a  hand,  the  following  messages  were  given  :
"  Place  your  hand  over  the  floivers.''  He  did  so  over
vase  N,  and  we  all  heard — and  my  father,  Home,  and  I,
saw,  a  hand  moving  among  the  flowers.  "  Noio  an  them."
He  did  so,  and  the  hand  became  much  more  distinctly
visible  to  him.  I  said  to  my  father,  "  I  su^jpose  you
were  told  to  place  your  hand  there  in  order  that  they


224


Exjyeriences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


might  draw  some  power  from  you  to  enable  them  to  make
the  hand  sufficiently  material  for  you  to  see  it  distinctly."
"  Yes,''  was  answered  by  three  loud  raps.  Sacha's
(Home's  wife's)  miniature  was  now  carried  from  table  B,
and  placed  upon  our  table  ;  none  of  us  saw  anything
supporting  it,  but  we  observed  it  placed  quietly  upon
Home's  hands,  and  then  gliding  off  them  it  moved  across
the  table  vmtil  it  remained  stationary  on  the  corner  near
the  wdndow.  The  case  was  closed  when  Home  put  it
upon  table  B,  at  the  commencement  of  the  seance ;  it
was  open  when  laid  upon  our  table.  Home  and  I  now
distinctly  saw  a  hand  place  little  Dannie  Cox's  photo-
graph (I)  on  the  edge  of  our  table  next  the  window,  and
then  push  it  a  little  further  on  to  the  table.  It  will  be
remembered  that  this  photograph  was  placed  by  Home  at
the  commencement  of  the  seance  on  table  D.  Home
and  I  perceived  a  whole  arm  and  hand  between  our
table  and  the  window,  it  was  slightly  lummous,  and
appeared  whiter  than  the  white  tablecloth.  The  hand
pushed  the  accordion,  F,  along  the  shelf  S,  and  then
grasping  it,  took  it  off  ;  the  accordion  fell,  but  not
heavily,  to  the  ground.  All  saw  and  heard  the  accordion
moved.  Home  said,  "  I  am  sure  that  was  little  Dannie,
because  I  saw  a  small  figure  ;  his  shoulders  were  plainly
visible  ;  apparently  he  had  not  power  sufficient  to  enable
him  to  carry  the  mstrument  gently  to  the  ground."  This
was  spelled  out,  "  Yes,  it  was  Dannie.'"  Previous  to  the
accordion  moving,  the  muslin  curtains  were  drawn  out  so
as  partially  to  hide  it  ;  this  required  some  force  to  effect,
as  the  curtain  rings  did  not  run  easily  on  the  hne.  A
very  pretty  manifestation  now  occurred  ;  Home  called  my
father's  attention  to  the  fact,  that  the  reflection  of  a
hand  was  visible  on  the  glass,  covering  his  wife's  minia-
ture. My  father  also  saw  it,  but  was  not  sure  whether  it
was  the  reflection  or  the  actual  hand  ;  he  placed  his  own
hand  just  above  the  glass,  and  still  saw  in  it  the  reflection
of  a  small  hand,  moving  backwards  and  forwards.  He
said,  "I  see  it  distinctly,  the  fingers  are  small  and
delicate."  He  asked  whose  hand  it  was,  and  the  follow-
ing was  spelled  out,  "The  fingers  are  those  of  Caroline."


226


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


The  accordion  was  carried  under  the  table  to  Home ;  he
took  it,  and  a  short,  but  very  beautiful  harmony  was
played.  Home  replaced  it  on  the  floor,  and  chords  were
heard,  when  no  one  was  touching  it.  In  some  of  the
messages  also  the  letters  were  indicated,  by  notes  played
on  the  accordion.  The  following  was  now  given.  "  Seek
rather  to  know  tlie  qyresent  condition  of  the  immortal  soul  (the

word  soul  being  emphasized)  than,"  here  the  message

broke  off  abruptl}^  Home  repeated  the  alphabet  twice,
and  nothing  occurred  ;  but  while  saying  it  over  the  third
time,  a  hand  placed  a  book  on  the  table  ;  the  message
then  continued,  "  In  good  time,  and  with  God's  j:)ermission,
the  one  loill  elucidate  the  other."  On  looking  at  the  book,
we  found  it  to  be  "  Primeval  Man,"  by  the  Duke  of
Argyle.  The  message  would  therefore  appear  to  mean,
"  Seek  rather  to  know  the  present  condition  of  the  immortal
soul,  tliayi  to  specvilate  about  that  of  primeval  man  ;  in
good  time,  and.  with  God's  permission,  the  one  will  elucidate
the  other."  The  book,  "  Primeval  Man "  was  at  the
commencement  of  the  seance  lying  on  a  table  in  the  centre
of  the  room,  at  a  distance  of  six  or  eight  feet  from  us.
The  second  flower  that  was  promised  to  my  father  was
now  placed  on  the  table  near  his  hand  ;  none  of  us  saw
anything  supporting  it,  bvit  Home  perceived  the  flower
moving  in  the  air.  A  flower  came  from  the  direction  of
where  Home  was  sitting  towards  me  ;  it  dropped  on  the
edge  of  the  table  close  to  me,  and  fell  on  the  floor :  I
saw  it  in  the  air.  Home  and  I  perceived  a  hand  place
something  on  the  shelf  under  the  window,  and  we  saw  a
hand  with  a  flower  raised  above  the  side  of  the  table
next  the  window  ;  Home  stretched  out  his  hand  towards
it,  and  the  flower  dropped  on  the  floor.  Both  my  father
and  Home  were  repeatedly  touched  ;  I  also,  on  four
occasions,  was  most  palpably  touched  by  a  hand  patting
my  knee.  Some  one  remarked  that  Major  Blackburn  had
not  been  touched,  soon  after  he  declared  that  he  felt  a
hand  touch  his  knee ;  he  asked  who  it  was,  and  the
name  "  John "  was  spelled.  I  said,  "  Do  you  know  who
John  is?"  he  rephed,  "My  father's  name  was  John,  but
I  do  not  know  whether  it  was  he  that  touched  me."


NO.  62]


With  D.  D.  Home


227


The  words,  "  Yes,  your  father,''''  were  spelled  ;  and  then,
"  We  ivish  John  also  to  see  the  hand ;  place  your  hand
above,  and  then  on,  the  floivers."  Major  Blackburn  did  so  ;
we  all  heard  the  flowers  rustling,  and  Home  and  I  saw
the  hand  doing  it.  The  Major  saw  nothing  while  his
hand  was  over  the  flowers  ;  but  when  he  touched  them,  he
also  saw  the  hand,  though  indistinctly.  We  now  heard
loud  raps  upon  the  small  table  C,  and  looking  round,
found  that  it  had  been  hfted  up  and  placed  upon  the
sofa  E  at  c  ;  so  quietly  was  it  done  that  we  should  not
have  noticed  it,  had  the  spirits  not  called  our  attention
by  rapping  upon  it.  My  father  asked  if  they  had  moved
it  in  the  same  way  last  night  ;  the  answer  was,  "  Yes."
The  chair  G  was  moved  up  to  g,  and  the  table  B  was
moved  close  to  it.  The  table  B  was  then  raised  in  the
air  (no  one  touching  it),  and  placed  gently,  but  without
hesitation,  upon  our  table  A.  The  table  B  has  four
legs,  like  a  camp  stool  ;  they  rested  where  the  four  dots
are  marked,  close  to  the  vases,  books  and  portraits,  -with-
out touching  any  of  them.  We  now  felt  very  strong
vibrations  in  our  table  ;  it  was  tilted  from  side  to  side,
and  so  strongly  towards  my  father's  side,  that  he  put  out
his  hand  expecting  the  small  table  B  to  fall  over  upon
him  ;  but  nothing  moved.  About  this  time  we  heard
curious  sounds  in  the  air  ;  Home  said,  Do  you  hear
their  voices  ?  I  will  talk,  never  mind  what  I  say  ;  the
more  I  talk  the  plainer  you  will  hear  them."  He  went
on  speaking  for  two  or  three  minutes,  during  which  time
we  heard  strange  noises  Uke  high-pitched  voices  at  a  little
distance,  the  louder  he  spoke  the  louder  the  sounds
became,  they  were  most  peculiar  ;  we  could  not  hear
any  articulate  words.  Mrs.  Blackburn,  who  had  retired
to  bed  in  the  room  under  that  in  which  we  were  sitting,
told  us  next  day  that  she  had  heard  strange  sounds  ;  and
she  imitated  them  so  well,  that  we  at  once  recognized
that  she  really  had  heard  the  voices.  Home  then  went
into  a  trance,  and  said,  "  We  are  so  very  glad  to  have
been  able  to  effect  what  has  been  done  for  you  ;  hut  the
state  of  the  external  atmosphere,  and  the  fact  of  Dan
being  ill,  are  very  mucli  against  us  , we  have  not  been


228


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


able  to  do  by  any  means  all  that  we  intended.  Dr.
Elliotson  was  most  anxious  that  you  should  have  some
manifestations  to-night,  he  hopes  circumstances  may  be
more  favourable  to-morrow  ;  he  would  hke  to  come  to
you  Dunraven,  and  talk  to  you,  and  enter  upon  serious
subjects.  Dan  will  awake  now  ;  when  he  does  you  will
stay  where  you  are,  and  Adare  will  get  a  candle,  that
you  may  note  down  accurately  the  position  of  every-
thing. We  must  now  go.  May  God  Almighty,  in  His
infinite  goodness,  for  ever  lead  and  guide  you  nearer  and
nearer  to  Him."  Home  having  awoke,  I  brought  in  a
candle,  and  we  noted  down  the  position  in  which  we
found  the  different  articles  that  had  been  moved.  Some
doubt  was  expressed  as  to  whether  a  chair  in  the  middle
of  the  room  had  been  stirred  ;  a  spirit  rapped  three  times
to  say  "  Yes,''  that  it  had.  A.


No.  GS.Sea7ice,  March  ISth  [1869.]

Present  :  My  father,  Home,  and  myself.  Home  and
I  had  been  a  good  deal  affected  and  depressed  to-day  by
the  weather — a  strong,  drying  east  wind  had  been  blowing
for  two  or  three  days.  After  dinner  when  seated  in  the
drawing  room  wo  heard  raps  upon  the  furniture,  and
Home  soon  suggested  that  we  should  sit  round  the  table.
I  went  to  my  bed  room  to  put  on  a  dressing  gown,
placing  my  snuff  box  (the  same  heavy  silver  one  men-
tioned at  page  80  in  the  account  of  some  v^onderful
manifestations  at  Mr.  Jones's  house,  at  Norwood)  in  my
waistcoat  pocket.  On  returmng  to  the  drawing  room,
I  laid  the  snuff  box  (why,  I  do  not  know)  on  a  bookcase
standing  against  the  wall  at  the  side  of  the  room  opposite
to  the  window  where  stood  the  table  at  which  my  father
and  Home  were  already  seated.  We  had  shght  physical
manifestations,  and  then  Home  went  into  a  trance.  As
usual,  he  began  by  arranging  the  furniture  ;  he  placed
the  small  round  table  between  his  chair  and  my  father's,


NO.  63]


With  D.  D.  Home


229


and  about  a  foot  from  our  table,  laid  his  wife's  miniature
upon  it,  and  arranged  the  two  vases  of  flowers  in  the
same  positions  they  had  occupied  the  previous  evening.
He  went  over  to  the  bookcase,  sat  down  on  the  ground,
and  ojjened  several  books,  as  if  looking  for  one  in  par-
ticular. He  brought  over  a  small  prayer  book  with  a
cross  on  it,  which  he  placed  on  the  flowers  in  the  vase
near  me.  He  then  sat  down  on  the  sofa,  {vide  diagram
of  the  room,  in  last  night's  seance),  and  almost  immedi-
ately put  his  hand  on  the  window  shelf,  touching  a  book
which  was  lying  there.  He  gave  a  shght  start,  grasped
the  book,  felt  it  all  over,  and  then  with  great  reverence
kneeled  down,  placed  the  book  against  his  forehead  and
on  the  top  of  his  head,  apparently  praying  earnestly  ;  he
then  slowly  rose  up,  and  holding  the  book  he  extended
his  arm  at  full  length,  and  appeared  to  be  raised  in  the
air  several  inches.  The  table  hid  his  legs  and  feet,  but
I  think  it  was  a  case  of  elevation  not  elongation,  for  he
appeared  to  be  moved  a  httle  forwards,  and  in  becoming
shorter,  he  seemed  to  alight  on  the  floor.  He  then  placed
the  book  on  the  table  in  exactly  the  same  position  as  on
the  previous  evening.  I  guessed,  by  the  effect  the  book
produced — so  similar  to  what  happened  last  night,  that  it
was  the  same,  viz.  Pressense's  "  Life  of  Clurist,"  which
turned  out  to  be  the  case.  He  now  took  a  large  railway
plaid  of  mine,  and  placing  it  over  his  head  and  gatlieruig
it  in  at  the  waist  so  as  to  resemble  a  monk's  cowl  or
habit,  he  commenced  walking  about  the  room.  He  stood
betvi^een  us  and  the  bookcase  with  his  back  to  us,  and
was  apparently  elongated,  but  only  slightly.  He  then
bowed  himself  repeatedly  to  the  ground  ;  and  was  occupied
for  a  Uttle  while  about  his  dress,  and  doing  something
with  his  hands  which  we  could  not  well  see  as  he  had
his  back  turned  to  us  ;  it  appeared  as  if  he  were  going
through  some  religious  ceremony.  The  plaid  began  slip-
ping gradually  off  him,  but  was  replaced  upon  his
shoulders.  (Home  said  afterwards  before  he  awoke  that
the  plaid  had  been  replaced  by  spirits,  I  did  not  notice
at  the  time  whether  he  touched  it  himself  or  not,  and  can-
not therefore  vouch  for  the  fact.) A  second  time  it  began


230  Experiences  in  Spiritualism  [seance


to  slij),  and  fell  to  tlie  gi'ound  ;  Home  appeared  to  be
very  unhappy,  and  taking  the  plaid,  he  placed  it  on  the
floor,  and  seating  himself  at  the  end  of  the  sofa,  he
retreated  along  the  edge  by  starts,  his  countenance  show-
ing indications  of  great  pain,  his  look  being  fixed  all  the
time  upon  the  plaid  ;  then  leaning  his  head  upon  his
hand,  he  rocked  himself  from  side  to  side.  His  distress
was  most  painful  to  witness  ;  he  groaned  and  sobbed  as
it  in  despair.  After  a  while  he  took  the  "  Life  of  Christ,"
and  kneeling  down  appeared  to  pray  fervently,  pressing
the  book  to  his  forehead.  He  then  sat  down  and  began
to  speak  somewhat  as  follows :  "  The  same  spirit  is  here
that  visited  Adare  in  his  room,  and  that  was  in  the
Abbey  ;  he  was  very  anxious  to  come  to  you  once  more,
and  took  this  opportunity  because  you  are  alone.  What
Dan  has  been  doing  is  intended  as  an  allegory,  he  (the
spirit)  wished  to  shew  you  that  when  he  first  took  the
monkish  habit,  it  raised  and  elevated  him,  and  the  grace
of  God  was  in  him  ;  then,  if  you  remember,  Dan  was
elevated  in  the  air  ;  afterwards  he  became  less  worthy  of
it,  and  the  habit  nearly  fell  off  Dan,  but  was  replaced  by
the  spirits  ;  Dan  did  not  do  it  himself.  But  he  com-
mitted a  great  crime — a  grievous  sin  against  God  and
man— and  he  became  altogether  unworthy  of  the  habit,
and  it  fell  from  him  ;  then  you  saw  the  misery  and
remorse  he  felt  in  thinking  of  what  he  had  done,  and
how  he  had  fallen  from  his  former  position,  and  had  lost
all  the  blessings  he  ought  to  have  gained  ;  you  saw  also
the  comfort  that  prayer  and  the  contemplation  of  the
"  Life  of  Christ "  were  to  him.  He  was  so  anxious  to
come  to  you  again,  for  he  wishes  to  thank  you  ;  he  is
not  happy,  but  he  is  very  different  to  what  he  was  ;  then
all  was  dark,  now  he  sees  a  httle  gUmnier  of  the  hght  of
hope  like  a  star  leading  him  on.  You  have  prayed  for
him,  you  have  prayed  for  all  unhappy  spirits  in  the  like
condition  as  himself,  and  it  is  a  comfort  to  him  ;  he  is
very  thankful  and  declares  that  he  will  do  all  he  can  to
be  of  service  to  you.  He  says,  '  I  pray  you,  thanks  '  ;
he  does  not  talk  hke  the  others,  he  does  not  speak  Enghsh
as  they  do. He  is  going  now  and  says  again,  '  I  pray


NO.  63]


With  D.  D.  Home


231


you,  thanks'."  Home  repeated  the  words,  'I  pray  you,
thanks,'  two  or  three  times,  his  voice  becoming  gradually
fainter  and  fainter,  as  if  to  signify  that  the  spirit  was
slowly  leaving  us.  He  then  spoke  about  our  last  visit
to  the  Abbey  at  Adare,  and  our  going  to  Desmond  Castle.
He  said  something  of  this  sort  :  "  You  made  a  mistake
in  taking  the  females  to  the  ruins ;  we  told  you  not  to
take  them  {vide  p.  178)  ;  and  you  would  have  had  more
manifestations  had  you  not  done  so.  It  did  not  so  much
signify  at  the  Castle,  where  the  influence  is  quite  different
from  that  at  the  Abbey.  The  influence  of  rehgion  does
not  exist  there,  it  was  a  place  of  warfare,  blood  was  shed
upon  the  ground,  but  the  blooi  has  long  since  passed  by
chemical  operations  into  various  forms,  and  has  dis-
appeared ;  all  the  associations  are  gone,  there  was  no
abiding  influence  about  that  place  ;  even  the  chapel  was
not  the  same  as  the  Abbey,  for  it  was  only  in  times  of
danger  that  rehgious  services  were  conducted  there.  The
Abbey  is  very  different,  there  the  ground  is  hallowed  and
consecrated  by  rehgion  and  prayer,  and  it  will  for  ever
bear  their  impress  ;  that  influence  can  never  be  lost,  it
appeals  to  your  souls  and  deeply  affects  you  ;  you  all
felt  the  difference  because  in  the  Abbey,  in  the  con-
secrated ground,  there  is  an  indestructible  influence  whereas
in  the  Castle  all  is  passed,  changed,  and  gone."  Soon
after  this,  Home  awoke.  We  had  shght  physical  mani-
festations, which  gave  me  the  impression  that  owing  to
adverse  circumstances,  the  spirits  were  unable  to  do  what
they  intended.  Home  suddenly  said,  "  I  saw  something
bright  move  across  the  floor  this  minute."  My  father
said  he  also  saw  it.  Directly  after,  we  all  heard  sounds,
as  if  some  metalhc  substance  was  being  lifted  up  and
thrown  down  again  on  the  floor  under  the  table,  and  the
following  message  was  given  :  "  This  is  the  last  tiine  that
we  will  rejyrove  you  about  a  habit  that  can  do  you  no
possible  good.'"  Neither  my  father  nor  Mr.  Home  could
at  all  understand  this ;  but  the  meaning  struck  me  at
once,  and  I  said,  "  The  message  is  for  me,  and  it  refers
to  my  taking  snuff."  "  Yes,"  was  the  reply.  I  said,
"  Do  you  wish  me  to  give  it  up  entirely." "  Don't  take


232


Experiences  in  Sjnritualism


[seance


too  much,"  was  rapped  out.  I  said,  "  I  think  they  have
brought  my  snuff-box  across  the  room  from  where  I  left
it,  and  that  is  what  we  heard  under  the  table."  "  Yes,"
was  again  rapped.  I  asked  if  they  wished  to  give  me  the
box,  the  answer  was,  "  Yes."  I  said,  "  Shall  I  put  my
hand  down  for  it  ?  "  "  No,"  was  answered.  Shortly
after  I  saw  quite  distinctly  an  arm  and  hand  holding  the
snuff-box  open,  rise  from  under  the  table,  and  movirjg  to
the  shelf  under  the  window,  tilt  the  box  over  slightly,
and  then  shake  out  a  quantity  of  snuff  upon  some  papers
that  happened  to  be  there  ;  the  arm  and  hand  then  with-
drew, still  retaining  the  box.  The  hand  was  more  distinct
than  the  arm,  and  appeared  very  white,  and  slightly
luminous.  I  could  see  the  fingers  quite  plainly,  and  also
the  manner  in  which  they  grasped  the  box  ;  Home  also
saw  the  hand,  arm,  and  box,  my  father  could  not,  owing
to  the  position  in  which  he  was  sitting,  but  on  standing
up  he  saw  a  dark  heap  lying  on  the  paper.  I  felt  the
box  touch  my  knee,  and  asked  if  I  should  put  my  hand
down  for  it.  "  Yes,"  was  answered,  by  tapping  my  knee
three  times  with  it.  I  put  my  hand  under  the  table,
and  the  box  was  placed  in  it  by  a  hand  ;  I  felt  the  tips
of  the  fingers,  and  the  inside  part  of  the  thumb  quite
distinctly  ;  the  skin  felt  quite  natural,  but  somewhat
wrinkled,  conveying  the  idea  of  an  aged  hand.  I  said
"  Are  the  snuff-box  and  the  message  given  me  by  my
grandfather  ?  "  The  following  message  was  given  :  "  Your
father  saio  it  'passing,  so  did  Dan.  It  is  from  your  grand-
father." I  asked,  "  Grandfather  Goold  ?  "  "  Yes,  Goold."
My  father  then  expressed  a  desire  to  know  what  spirit
had  written  out  the  ornamental  alphabet  last  night.  The
following  was  given  :  "It  was  directed  by  the  same  one
that  directed  the  music ;  the  name  was  indicated  by  the
decorated  letters."  After  a  pause,  the  words  "  Take  instru-
ment "  were  spelled  out.  Home  took  the  accordion,  and
it  was  beautifully  played  with  tremolo  effects.  My  father
said  something  about  wishing  that  it  could  be  played  in
his  hand.  Home  said  he  thought  they  would  do  so,  and
shortly  after  his  chair  was  pushed  back  from  the  table,
which  I  supposed  was  done  in  order  to  pass  the  accordion


NO.  63]


With  D.  D.  Home


233


to  my  father ;  it  was  not  however  given  to  him.  We
now  saw  a  hand  approach  the  vase  nearest  me,  and  take
a  flower  from  it,  and  presently  the  flower  was  placed
upon  the  edge  of  the  table,  and  moved  across  it  in  little
jerks,  as  though  it  were  flipped  by  a  finger ;  we  could
see  no  hand  or  anything  supporting  it.  The  flower  was
taken  off  the  table,  and  the  following  message  was  given  :
"  We  will  give  you  the  leaf  you  saw  leave  the  table."
Directly  after  my  father  was  touched  on  the  Imee,  and
putting  his  hand  down,  he  felt  first  the  flower  and  then
the  fingers  touch  him  ;  he  then  expressed  a  wish  to  feel
the  whole  hand.  Home  said.  "  I  am  sure  they  will  try,
they  generally  are  able  at  first  to  make  only  the  fingers
apparent  to  you."  A  spirit  assented.  He  kept  liis  hand
down  for  some  little  time,  but  at  length  took  the  leaf,
not  succeeding  in  feeling  more  than  the  fingers  ;  this
however  occurred  two  or  three  times.  The  small  table
then  moved  of  itself,  close  up  between  my  father  and
Home,  and  Sacha's  portrait  was  taken  from  it,  and  placed
upon  OUT  table.  On  two  or  three  different  occasions
during  the  evening,  we  heard  curious  sounds  ;  once  my
father  and  Home  heard,  as  it  were,  some  one  whisthng  ;
I  could  not  perceive  it  at  all.  At  another  time,  we  all
heard  a  sound  as  of  some  one  tr;ying  to  articulate  near
the  door  ;  this  also  ended  in  a  w^histhng.  On  another
occasion,  we  heard  some  one  trying  to  make  their  voice
audible  to  us,  apparently  outside  the  window.  Home
now  went  into  a  trance  ;  wlule  waiting  for  him  to  com-
mence speaking,  my  father  and  I  were  talking  about  the
absence  of  tests  ;  he  appeared  rather  pamoyed,  saying,
that  there  had  been  in  fact  no  real  tests  of  identity  given,
and  that  everybody  was  remarking  the  same  thing.  I
mentioned  the  great  difficulty  of  giving  really  satisfactory
tests,  and  reminded  him  that  one  striking  effect  had  been
given  ;  (referring  to  the  imitation  of  the  organ  bellows
and  tremolo)  and  asked  why  he  did  not  try  and  question
them  in  some  way  that  would  serve  as  a  test,  it  being  as
easy  for  him  to  recollect  some  past  event  or  conversation,
as  it  was  for  them  to  recall  one,  that  he  also  remembered.
Home  began  speaking  about  the  extreme difficulty  they


234


Experietices  in  Spiritualism


[seance


liad  experienced  in  making  any  manifestations.  "  The
state  of  the  external  atmosphere  is  such,"'  he  said,  "  as
to  render  it  all  but  impossible.  We  act  by  using  certain
emanations  from  you,  floAving  through  your  brains  ;  now,
the  state  of  the  weather,  this  east  wind,  has  dried  all
that  up,  we  have  next  to  nothing  to  work  with.  It
affects  you  all,  more  especially  Dan,  but  you  can  all  feel
it,  and  complained  to-day  of  being  depressed  and  irritated  ;
under  better  circumstances  you  would  have  seen  the  hand
that  carried  Sacha's  portrait,  and  the  hand  that  held  the
flower.  You  observed  also  that  we  could  not  carry  the
flower  over  the  table  steadily,  but  were  obhged  to  push
it  along  the  surface."  He  then  changed  the  subject  to
that  of  tests  ;  speaking  to  my  father,  he  said,  "  Do  not
be  impatient,  all  will  come  right  in  time,  you  shall  have
tests  given  you,  you  have  aheady  had  some  ;  remember
that  what  you  might  think  an  excellent  test  to-day,  on
reflection,  you  might  consider  to  be  worth  nothing.  Would
you  have  us  recall  a  past  conversation  ?  That  might  be
done  by  mind-reading,  and  would  not  be  at  all  a  good
test.  We  are  the  best  judges  of  what  we  do  ;  we  work
for  others  as  well  as  for  you  who  are  here.  We  have  a
certain  appointed  work,  and  it  must  be  done  ;  we  have
not  really  been  able  to  do  half  enough  yet  in  the  way  of
physical  manifestations  ;  circumstances  have  been  so  much
against  us,  that  we  have  failed  in  nearly  all  we  wished  to
effect.  We  know  all  the  difficulties  and  trials  that  sur-
round you  ;  but  you  do  not  see  the  cUfficulties  that  we
have  to  contend  against.  Physical  manifestations  are  very
necessary ;  be  patient  and  some  day  you  may  arrive  at
other  things.  We  do  not  ask  you  to  have  faith  in  us  ;
we  only  ask  that  you  will  be  jiJ^tient  and  prayerful  in
investigating."  Home  had  apparently  great  difficulty  in
speaking  ;  he  now  called  me  over  to  him,  and  bidding
me  sit  down,  said,  "  You  understand  all  about  this,  we
cannot  impress  Dan  properly  with  what  we  want  him  to
say  ;  circumstances  are  so  adverse  that  we  have  scarcely
any  control  over  him.  Ah,  I  see  the  entrance  at  Adare  ;
your  mother  is  standing  there,  she  appears  to  be  giving
directions about  planning the garden and walks."  My


NO.  63]


With  D.  D.  Home


235


father  said,  "  Do  you  mean  the  lodge  gate  ?  " "  No,  no  ;
I  mean  the  httle  gate  where  the  notice  is  put  up,  '  These
grounds  are  strictly  private  '  ;  she  is  standing  there  between
the  two  clumps  of  shrubs  ; ah,  it  is  all  confused,  I  can-
not make  it  out. Your  father  intends  going  to  the  Abbey
some  night  by  himself,  he  wants  to  find  out  about  those
birds  ; he  will  see  a  sort  of  bright  luminous  cloud  ;  your
mother  will  be  there." My  father  said, "  But  I  never
had any intention of going to the Abbey."  Home
appeared  much  astonished ; "  Are  you  sure  ?  "  he  said.
"Yes," said my father, "quite sure." "Well,"  said
Home,  "  that  is  very  strange,  the  idea  must  have  been
in  your  mind,  and  you  have  forgotten  it,  for  some  of  us
had  arranged  what  to  do  the  night  that  you  went  ;  one
spirit  was  going  to  make  the  same  whisthng  sound  hke
a  bird, and  you  were to see the  luminous cloud."  I
asked, "  Were they then not real birds that  we
heard  whisthng?" "No,  they  were  not  birds."  Home
then  threw  himself  back,  and  taking  my  hand,  said,  "  We
cannot  influence  Dan  properly,  your  father  had  better  ask
questions." My  father said, "  I  thought Elhotson  was
going  to  have  made  some  experiments." "  Yes,  he  was
anxious to, and tried, but he could not succeed  ;  he
attempted  to  make  his  voice  heard  by  the door,  and
instead  of  being  hke  a  voice,  it  sounded  to  you  hke  a
whistle  ; the  conditions  are  very  bad,  we  have  been  able
to  do  scarcely  anything  to-night,  besides  your  minds  are
not  favourable — they  are  disturbed,  and  out  of  harmony."
My  father  dechned  to  put  any  questions,  so  I  asked  about
a  certain  disputed  answer  of  Dr.  ElUotson's  that  had  been
given  us  in  the  gallery  at  Adare. Home said, "  Your
father  was  right  : he  did  say  '  Yes  '  ; afterwards  he  said
he  would  come  by  the  sea  ; you  were  mistaken."  After
a pause, he said "  Your grandfather is really  anxious
about  your  taking  so  much  snuff  ; he  did  not  hke  to  put
it  any  stronger  than  he  did  in  saying  that  it  could  do  you
no  possible  good  ; but  he  is  anxious  about  it,  because  he
thinks  it  will  harm  your  nervous  system. He  says,  if
you  Hke  to  take  an  occasional  pinch,  that  will  not  hurt
you  ; but  he  does  not  like  to  see  you  take  as  much  as


236  Experiences  in  Spiritualism  [seance


you  do  at  present.  (Turning  to  my  lather)  Dr.  Elliotson
is  here  and  has  brought  a  girl  with  him  :  her  name  is
Dawson,  she  is  short  and  appears  so  stooping  as  to  be
ahnost  deformed  ;  I  cannot  make  out  lier  Christian  name.
Harriet, — Harriet ;  no,  that  is  not  it  :  she  will  not  tell
me — how  very  odd  !  "  My  father  said  :  "I  have  a  very
vague  recollection  of  a  mesmeric  patient  of  the  name  of
Dawson  ;  but  I  don't  think  her  name  was  Harriet."  ^
Home  now  said,  "  Dan  must  awake,  Adare,  go  back  to
your  place."  Home  being  exhausted,  we  went  at  once
into  the  dining  room  to  supper.  During  the  whole  time
that  I  was  sitting  by  Home,  I  could  see  the  shadowy
form  of  a  figure  appearing  white  and  shghtly  luminous,
standing  close  to  my  father.  He  perceived  nothing.  In
moving  to  my  place,  I  could  not  avoid  passing  right
through  the  figure,  but  as  I  approached  it,  it  disappeared.
Soon  after  we  had  gone  into  the  dining  room,  my  father
being  at  the  table,  and  Home  sitting  on  the  floor,  near
the  fireplace,  with  his  hand  resting  against  the  wall,  he
suddenly  said  : "  Adare,  I  hear  raps  for  the  alphabet  "  ;

and  the  following  was  given  : "  Elleji  Daw  " "  Oh,

Dawson,"  my  father  said.  "  Yes,"  was  rajjped  out.  Home
said,  "  Ellen  Dawson,  Ellen  Dawson ;  Who  on  earth  is
she  ?  I  never  heard  of  such  a  person."  "  Oh,"  my
father  replied,  "It  is  the  Christian  name  of  a  mesmeric
patient  which  you  could  not  make  out  in  your  trance."
Now  this  is  a  curious  fact.  The  name  Ellen  having  been
in  my  father's  mind  for  a  moment,  had  Home  mentioned
it  in  his  trance,  it  might  have  been  attributed  to  ordinary
clairvoyance  or  mind-reading  on  his  part ;  but  coming  as
it  did  through  raps,  it  could  not  be  accounted  for  in  that
way.  My  father  had  said  to  me  in  the  course  of  the
evening,  "  I  have  not  the  same  confidence  in  what  is  said
in  a  trance  ;  it  may  be  accounted  for  by  mind-reading  or
clairvoyance  ;  but  if  a  name  or  a  message  be  given
through  raps,  even  if  it  be  read  from  my  mind,  it  must
be  attributed  to  some  intelligence  other  than  that  of  the


^  My  fatlier  says  that  he  had  a  notion  Ellen  was  the  name  ;  however,
he  did  not  mention  this  aloud.


KO.  63]


With  D.  D.  Home


237


medium,  or  any  one  in  the  room.^  Directly  after  the
seance,  I  poured  the  snuff  back  into  my  box,  from  the
paper  on  the  ledge  under  the  window  where  we  had  seen
it  deposited.  After  supper,  my  father  said,  "  Let  us  go
and  see  if  the  snuff  is  there."  I  said  that  I  had  already
removed  it  ;  but  we  went  and  found  remnants  of  snuff
still  on  and  among  the  papers,  quite  sufficient  to  prove
that  it  had  been  there. — A.


[The  following  occurrences  were  witnessed  and  recorded  by
me  after  Mr.  Home's  return  to  London.]

No.  64. — Seance,  Ashletj  House,  March  29th,  1869.

Present  : — Mr.  Rudall,  IVIr.  McKenzie,  Mr.  Jencken,
Home,  and  myself.  After  a  short  time  we  experienced
sMght  physical  manifestations,  raps,  vibrations,  &c.,  &c.
The  table  was  raised  about  one  foot  off  the  ground  ;  it
was  raised  a  second  time  about  two  feet,  and  after
remaining  stationary  in  the  air  for  some  seconds,  it  rose
to  the  height  of  at  least  five  feet,  rolhng  and  swaying
with  a  movement  like  that  of  a  ship  at  sea  ;  it  descended
slowly  with  a  strong  vibratory  motion,  accompanied  by  a
sound  resembhng  that  of  a  railway  train.  I  asked  if
these  pecuhar  movements  had  any  definite  meaning  ;  the
answer  was  "  Yes."  By  asking  several  questions
which  were  answered  "  Yes "  or  "  No,"  it  appeared  that
the  movements  had  reference  to  me,  and  that  I  ought  to
understand  the  meaning.  Flowers  and  fern  leaves  were
brought  from  the  chimney  piece  and  given  to  us.  We
now,  at  Mr.  RudaU's  suggestion,  shut  the  folding  doors,
thereby  excluding  all  fight  save  that  entering  by  the
window.  Home  went  into  a  trance.  He  clapped  his
hands  (the  sign  adopted  by  Adah  Menken  to  signify  her
presence),  and  going  to  the  window,  folded  the  curtains

^  On  reference  to  the  Zoist,  Ellen  Dawson  appears  as  a  patient  of
Mr.  Hind's,  and  a  clairvoyant.  My  father  recollects  her  at  Dr.  Elliot -
son's.  She  is  mentioned  in  seance  No.  14,  p.  90,  in  connection  with
Mrs.  Hennings  and  Dr.  Elliotson.


238  Experie7ices  in  Spiritualism  [seance

round  him,  leaving  only  his  head  clear.  We  all  saw  a
very  curious  appearance  form  itself  above  his  head ;  it
looked  at  first  like  a  lace  handkerchief,  held  out  by  a
stick  or  support  of  some  sort ;  soon  however  it  became
more  distinct  and  appeared  to  be  a  shadowy  human  form
enveloped  in  drapery  ;  it  was  about  two  feet  in  length.
Some  one  present  remarked  that  it  exceedingly  resembled
a  "  vignette "  heading  one  of  Adah  Menken's  poems.
Home  said  (speaking  as  Menken)  "  Yes,  that  is  it,  that  is
what  I  wish  to  imitate  ;  I  will  try  and  make  my  form
visible  to  you."  The  surface  of  the  waU  to  Home's  right
became  illuminated  three  or  four  times  ;  the  light  appar-
ently radiating  from  a  bright  spot  in  the  centre.  Across
the  portion  of  wall  thus  illuminated  we  repeatedly  saw  a
dark  shadow  pass  ;  it  appeared  to  me  to  be  rather  the
shadow  cast  by  a  sohd  substance  than  the  actual  form
itself.  Home's  collar  stud  dropped  on  the  floor,  and  a
spirit  brought  it  and  placed  it  on  my  head,  touching  my
brow  while  doing  so  ;  Home  remarked  that  it  was  shining
like  a  little  star  upon  my  forehead,  he  told  me  to  take
care  of  it  until  Dan  should  awake.  After  Home  awoke
we  had  some  more  physical  manifestations,  flowers  were
again  brought  to  us,  we  were  all  touched,  Mr.  Rudall
received  several  messages,  apparently  from  his  father,  the
clock  was  made  to  strike  in  answer  to  some  question,  we
heard  a  heavy  step  in  the  passage  and  the  folding  doors
were  opened  and  shut,  a  sofa  was  moved  from  the  wall
to  our  table,  and  a  chair  was  carried  across  the  room.


No.  65. — Seance,  Ashley  House,  April  3rd  [1869].

Present  : — Mrs.  Gregory,  Miss  Douglas,  Mr.  Charles
Blackburn,  Mr.  Fuller,  the  Master  of  Lindsay,  Home,  and
myself.  We  had  tolerably  strong  physical  manifestations,
lasting  for  a  short  time,  after  which  Home  went  into  a
trance.  He  walked  about  and  was  elongated  in  the
usual  manner.  He  then  stood  still  before  us,  and  stretch-
ing out  his  arms  to  their  full  length,  a  palpable  elongation
took  place  in  them. I  said,  "  Can  you  manage  that  we


NO.  65]  With  D.  D.  Home


239


may  test  that  in  some  way  ; may  I  stand  just  in  front
of  you, or  will  you  place yourself  against  the wall  ?  "
Home replied, "  Yes, certainly, we will do both."  I
accordingly  placed  myself  just  in  front  of  him,  with  my
arms  extended  along  and  touching  his  ; his  arms  were
elongated  four  or  five  inches,  the  others  could  judge  of
the  extent  pretty  well  by  comparison  with  mine.  While
his  arms  appeared  to  be  increasing  in  length,  his  chest
became  greatly  expanded,  and  he  said  to  me,  "  You  see
how  it  is, the  extension  is  from  the  chest." He  then
placed  himself  against  the  wall,  and  extended  his  arms  to
their  full  natural  length  ; I  made  a  pencil  mark  at  the
tips  of  his  fingers. His  left  arm  was  then  elongated,  I
held  the  pencil  against  the  wall,  suffering  it  to  be  pushed
along  by  his  fingers,  until  he  told  me  to  make  another
mark. His  right  arm  was  then  elongated,  and  I  marked
the  movement  in  the  same  manner. The  total  elongation
as ascertained by this means, amounted to 9J  inches.
Home  now  stood  by  Miss  Douglas,  and  talked  to  her  for
a considerable time, mentioning the spirits who  were
about  her, recalhng  past  circumstances  of  her  life,  and
impressing  upon  her,  that  it  was  in  her  power  to  be  of
very  great  service  to  the  cause  of  Spiritualism  ; he  spoke
also  a  good  deal  to  Mrs.  Gregory. Walking  over  to  the
fire-place,  he  took  from  thence,  with  his  hand,  a  red-hot
glowing  ember,  about  the  size  of  a  small  orange.  Mrs.
Gregory  became  nervous,  fearing  that  he  would  request
her  to  take  it,  he  however  went  to  Miss  Douglas  and
said,  "  Now  if  you  have  sufificient  faith,  let  me  place  this
coal  in  your  hand "  ; she  replied,  "  I  have  faith,  but  I
cannot  overcome  the  physical  dread,  pray  do  not  ask  me
to  take  it." Upon  this,  Home  said,  "  If  you  would  only
allow  me  to  place  it  in  your  hand  it  would  not  burn
you  ; it  does  not  burn  Dan  ; it  would  not  harm  him  "
(pointing  to Lindsay). He then  placed  the coal  which
had  by  this  time  become  black,  on  Lindsay's  head,  but
almost  immediately  took  it  off,  and  saying,  "  That  is  not
•of  much  use  as  an  experiment,  for  the  natural  heat  has
almost  left  the  coal,"  he  crumbled  it  in  his  hand  and  then
threw  it  in  the  fireplace. Presently  he  took  another  red-


240  Experie7ices  in  Spiritualism  [seance


hot  ember  from  the  fire,  and  holding  it  in  his  hand,  spoke
a  few  words  to  Miss  Douglas  on  the  subject  of  faith.
She  held  out  her  hand,  and  he  placed  the  coal  in  it.
Miss  Douglas  was  not  in  the  least  burned,  and  said  that
it  felt  rather  cold,  like  marble.  After  allowing  it  to
remain  there  a  few  seconds,  Home  took  the  coal  and
requested  Miss  Douglas  to  touch  it ;  she  placed  her  fingers
near  it,  but  withdrew  them  immediately,  saying  that  it
burned  her.^  He  then  placed  it  in  Mr.  Blackburn's
hand,  previously  asking  if  he  had  any  faith,  who  replied
that  he  had.  After  he  had  held  it  for  a  short  time  he
said  it  became  hotter.  Home  then  took  the  ember,
threw  it  away,  smiled,  and  seemed  pleased  at  the  success
of  the  experiment.  He  now  sat  down  and  turning  to
Lindsay,  said,  "  Ah,  what  a  pity  it  was  that  those  httle
seances  that  you  held  here  in  the  winter  were  broken  up
(referring  to  two  or  three  occasions  on  which  Lindsay,
Captain  Smith,  Home,  and  I  had  sat  together).  We
told  you  that  we  wished  to  speak  on  some  very  interest-
ing subjects,  and  we  would  have  done  so  ;  we  were
anxious  also  to  have  entered  upon  the  subject  of  the
origin  of  certain  of  the  ceremonies  of  your  Church.  We
have  such  difficulties  to  contend  with  ;  we  had  got  the
conditions  so  very  favourable  at  that  time,  the  party  was
harmonious  and  we  could  have  done  so  much  ;  but  then,
you  see,  when  we  had  arranged  everything  on  the  spiritual
side,  it  is  all  broken  up  on  the  material, — on  your  side."
Turning  to  one  of  those  present,  he  said,  "  That  arrange-
ment of  seven  with  which  we  impressed  Fred  (Fuller).
Oh  !  if  that  could  have  been  managed  it  would  have  been
of  such  use.  We  could  and  would  have  conducted  a
series  of  experiments  so  wonderful,  so  clearly  proved,  and
so  easy  to  record,  that  it  would  have  been  impossible  to
doubt  them."  (This  had  reference  to  an  impression  that
seven  were  to  form  themselves  into  a  society  for  the
study of occult science.) In  reply to Fuller,  he  said,

1  I  am  informed  by  Miss  Douglas  and  the  Master  of  Lindsay  that
Lord  Adare  has  omitted  to  state  that  Mr.  Home  put  this  coal  between
his  coat  and  shirt  under  the  arm,  and  that  no  mark  of  singeing  or
burning  was  visible  on  the  shirt. — D.


NO.  65]


With  D.  D,  Home


241


"  We  still  have  hopes  about  that  arrangement  ; we  think
there  may  possibly  be  a  future  for  it." Home  now  spoke
in  a  totally  different  tone  of  voice,  addressing  us  in  the
same style and dehvery as in the portions of  seances
recorded  in  pages  158,  159,  and  167. He  said  something  to
this  effect  : "  You  think  that  baptism  is  a  thing  of  to-day,
a  ceremony  instituted  but  1,800  years  ago  ! Come  with
me  away  to  the  banks  of  the  distant  Ganges,  travel  with
me  far  back  in  the  annals  of  time,  and  I  will  shew  you.
races of men dwelling there who worshipped  senseless
gods  of  wood  and  stone — and  yet  not  much  more  sense-
less than  the  god  that  some  among  you  worship  now —
and  who  had  the  same  ceremony  of  baptism,  which  was
obhgatory  for  them  before  an  infant  could  be  admitted
to  the  benefits  of  their  church  and  rehgion. Will  you
travel  still  further  back  with  me  into  ages  long  anterior
to  this,  and  see  the  altars  dripping  with  blood — aye,  with
human  blood — and  the  priest  decked  with  flowers  standing
in  his  place,  and  the  people  bowing  down,  and  the  sacri-
fices offered. Blood  I  see  on  every  page — -blood  !  blood  !
blood  ! True  it  is, that  in  later  years  it  was  that  of
bulls  and  of  goats,  of  doves  and  pigeons. And  what  is
your  religion  now  to  many  of  you  but  blood  ; still  the
same — blood  to  appease  a  God  ! Ah,  it  is  fearful — it  is
too  horrible,  blood  and  sacrifice  to  propitiate  your  God,
your  Maker,  your  Father,  the  infinitely  perfect  and  loving
Creator  of  all  things." Home  spoke  at  great  length  on
these  subjects  ; but  I  cannot  recall  to  mind  the  exact
language  he  made  use  of. After  he  awoke  we  had  some
curious manifestations. A  small camp chair was  raised
off  the  floor  and  carried  round  the  table,  touching  each
of  us  in  turn,  and  finally  was  placed  on  the  centre  of  the
table,  where  it  remained. The  sofa  was  moved  up  to  us.
We  received  no  messages  during  the  seance.


No.  66. — Ashley  House.

On  the  4th  or  5th  of  the  month  [April,  1869],  in  the
evening,  I  was  seated  at  the  table  in  Home's  room  at

Q


242  Experiences  in  Spiritualism  [seance

Ashley  House  writing ;  he  was  seated  at  the  opposite
side,  reading  ;  we  heard  raps  upon  the  door  ;  Home
said  "  Your  grandfather  has  come  in,  do  you  not  see
him  sitting  in  that  chair  yonder  ?  "  "I  see  no  one,"
I  answered  ;  "  Which  grandfather  do  you  mean  ?  "  "  Your
father's  father;  you  will  at  any  rate  hear  him."  I
heard  a  sovmd  as  if  some  one  sitting  on  the  chair  he
had  mentioned  had  put  his  foot  on  the  ground.  Home,
while  speaking,  went  into  a  trance.  The  chair  moved
very  slowly  up  to  the  table  (no  one  touching  it)  a  distance
of  eight  feet  eleven  inches.  "  He  is  moving  the  chair,"
Home  said.  "  He  is  pleased  to  be  able  to  do  that,  he
says  you  never  saw  a  much  prettier  manifestation  than
that ;  Ah  !  he  has  gone  over  there  now."  Another  chair
moved  close  up  to  me,  a  distance  of  about  a  foot.  Home
said  "  He  is  sitting  in  that  chair  near  you  ;  he  has
come  because  he  wishes  to  speak  to  you  ;  you  are  rather
in  difficulties  he  thinks."  He  then  spoke  to  me  about
certain  private  matters.  Presently  Home  said :  "  Your
mother  does  not  wish  you  to  think  that  she  forgot  you
because  she  said  so  little  about  your  marriage  ;  she  could
not  say  more  then,  and  after  all,  what  could  she  do
more  than  pray  God's  blessing  upon  you  in  this  as  she
would  in  everything  that  you  undertake,  honestly,  and
with  a  desire  to  do  that  which  is  right.  She  has  much
more  to  say  on  the  subject,  but  not  now."


No.  67. — Ashley  House.

On  the  night  of  the  6th  [April,  1869]  I  got  home
about  eleven  o'clock.  I  found  Home  aheady  in  bed.
He  told  me  that  he  was  very  unwell ;  that  he  had
left  the  house  on  his  way  to  Gower  Street ;  that  he
had  suddenly  lost  consciousness  on  turning  out  of  Ashley
Place,  and  that  he  remembered  nothing  more  until  he
found  himself  in  bed.  Home  soon  went  to  sleep  and
began  to  talk  and  mutter ;  after  what  he  had  said  I
attributed  it  to  bodily  illness,  and  did  not  pay  much
attention,  however  I  soon  found  that  he  was  in  a  trance.


NO.  67]


With  D.  D.  Home


243


The  first  distinct  words  he  uttered  were  "  But  I  am
not  an  Hindoo."  The  room  shook  for  some  minutes
very  violently  as  if  people  were  dancing  on  the  floor
below.  Home  said,  "  Oh,  do  stop  that  dancing,  they
must  not  do  it,  it  is  not  kind."  The  shaking  of  the
floor  almost  immediately  ceased ;  I  asked  if  people  had
been  dancing  below,  but  received  no  answer.  Home
turned  to  me  and  speaking  in  a  firm  loud  voice,  said,
"  Ah,  dear  me,  the  poor  Httle  dog  has  gone  !  "  "  What
dog  ?  "  I  asked.  "  Why,  little  white-  sister  ^ — she  has
gone  just  now.  Are  you  not  sorry,  Adare  1  They  will
be  so  grieved  about  it.  She  has  passed  from  earth  ;
but  she  is  not  destroyed,  she  is  like  a  httle  spark  of
electricity,  now  a  small  globe  of  fight,  it  is  moving  on,
in  time  it  will  come  m  contact  with  some  other  substance
and  be  absorbed."  "  Absorbed  into  what  ?  "  I  asked.
"  Oh,  into  some  higher  form  of  animal  hfe.  Some  spirits
could  catch  it,  for  although  I  said  it  was  fike  a  little
globe  of  light,  still  you  know  on  leaving  the  body  it  had
the  appearance  of  the  fittle  dog,  and  some  spirits  might
capture  it  and  keep  it  for  a  time,  but  eventually  it  would
be  absorbed,  for  that  is  the  law  of  nature,  and  they  could
not  overrule  it.  It  has  no  sensation  or  consciousness
now  ;  its  condition  of  being,  its  organization,  was  not
sufliciently  high  to  permit  of  its  retaining  its  individuafity."
"  But,"  I  said,  "  are  there  not  animals  in  the  other
world  ?  "  "  Oh  dear  yes,  God  in  his  goodness  has  made
variety  in  the  spirit  world,  as  he  has  in  your  world ;
there  would  be  no  beauty  without  variety  ;  there  are
dogs  and  horses  and  many  animals.  The  Red  Indians
were  not  wrong  in  their  ideas  of  the  '  happy  hunting
ground,'  their  Seers  saw  these  things  in  visions,  and  they
really  exist."  "  But,"  I  observed,  "  although  they  might
hunt  they  could  never  kill  the  animals."  "  Oh  no,  of
course  they  could  not  shed  their  blood,  but  they  could
conquer  them  ; it  is  difficult  for  you  to  understand,  but

'  A  little  dog  belonging  to  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall.  Home,  I  believe,  knew
that  the  dog  was  ill  ;  but  could  not  have  heard  of  its  death,  which  took
place  between  10  and  11  o'clock.  I  had  no  idea  that  the  dog  was
even  ill.


244  Experiences  in  Spiritualism  [seance

you  know  yourself  that  the  real  charm  of  all  hunting
consists  rather  in  shoAving  your  superiority  over  the
animal,  in  overcoming  it,  than  in  the  mere  shedding  of
blood  and  killing."  "  But,"  I  asked,  "  if  some  animals
retain  their  individuality,  and  continue  to  exist  in  the
next  world  under  the  same  form  that  they  had  here,  and
others  are  as  you  say  absorbed,  where  is  the  line  drawn  1
What  is  it  that  causes  one  to  be  absorbed,  while  another
retains  its  individuahty  ?  "  "  Oh,  I  do  not  say  that  the
animals  in  the  next  world  ever  existed  on  earth,  it  does
not  seem  to  me  that  they  did,  I  only  know  that  they  are
there,  and  I  see  that  the  life  of  animals  upon  earth  is
eventually  absorbed  into  other  forms.  I  do  not  know  that
your  animals  ever  continue  to  exist  in  the  spirit- world."

"  You  heard  those  Hindoos  dancing  just  now  ?  "
"Yes,"  I  answered,  "I  heard  what  I  thought  were  people
dancing  on  the  floor  below  us."  "  Oh,  it  was  not  caused
by  mortals,  there  is  no  one  living  on  that  floor  now  ;
they  were  spirits — Hindoos."  "  What  on  earth  do  they
want  here,"  I  asked.  "  Well,  they  are  very  anxious  about
their  Trinity."  "  But  why  should  that  bring  them  here  ?  "
"  They  do  not  seem  to  have  any  special  object  in  being
here,  but  they  are  occupied  with  that  subject,  and  that
is  why  they  are  on  earth  ;  they  are  very  advanced
Hindoos,  and  they  want  to  prove  that  their  Trinity  is
not  different  from  your  Trinity  as  you  suppose  ;  there  is
a  good  deal  going  on  now  in  the  world  in  the  way  of
investigating  these  subjects.  These  Hindoos  are  anxious
about  this  ;  they  say  there  is  not  so  much  difference  as
you  think  ;  for  instance,  they  assert  that  their  second
person  Christna  was  incarnated  as  your  second  person
Christ  was."  Question  :  "  Had  they  a  personal  devil  ?  "
"  Yes  ;  and  they  say  that  Christna  was  tempted  of  the
devil  in  the  same  way  as  Christ."  The  substance  of
Home's  conversation  after  this  I  forget ;  it  led  somehow
to  his  saying,  "  When  this  zone  shall  have  become  torrid,
of  course  the  forms  of  animals  and  vegetable  life  will
be  much  changed."  Question  :  "  Do  you  mean  that  the
temperature  is  changing  ?  "  "  Oh,  yes,  these  will  be  the
torrid zones, and the torrid zones will become cooler ;


NO.  67]


With  D.  D.  Home


245


there  is  a  very  marked  change  taking  pkice  now."
Question  :  "I  suppose  the  change  will  be  so  gradual,  that
life  will  not  be  affected  ?  "  "  Life  will  not  be  affected,
the  change  is  gradual,  but  it  is  quite  apparent  to  us."
Question  :  "  Has  the  heat  of  the  two  last  seasons  any-
thing to  do  with  this,  or  was  it  quite  abnormal  ?  "
"  No,  it  was  not  entirely  abnormal,  it  had  to  do  with
the  great  change  that  is  taking  place."  Question  :
"  Then  will  the  frigid  zones  round  the  poles  become
warmer  1  "  "  Oh  yes,  certainly  ;  do  you  know  it  is  true
that  there  is  land  to  the  North  beyond  where  explorers
have  yet  penetrated,  and  there  are  tribes  of  men  hving
there,  and  they  yet  retain  the  traces  of  a  by-gone  civiliza-
tion. They  are  of  the  old  Semitic  or  original  Hebrew
race."  Question  :  "  But  how  could  they  ever  get  there  ;
it  could  not  have  been  in  historic  times  ?  "  In  answer
to  this  question,  I  distinctly  heard  a  voice  quite  different
to  Home's  say,  "  Oh  dear,  no.''  Home  said,  "  Did  you
hear  him  !  "  "  Yes,"  I  answered,  "  I  heard  him  quite
plain."  "  I  am  glad  you  did ;  he  said  '  Oh  dear,  no.'
He  is  rather  difficult  to  understand,  this  spirit  ;  he  seems
a  little  confused,  but  he  declares  he  has  seen  these  people,
and  that  he  could  bring  the  spirit  of  one  of  them  with
him.  He  says  there  are  distinct  traces  of  Hebrew  to  be
found  in  their  language.  You  know  there  are  traces  of
the  old  original  Hebrew  in  the  language  of  the  Brahmins.
The  ancient  Hebraic  tribes  were  a  most  migratory  people,
always  wandering  and  fighting  ;  their  idea  even  of  God
was  a  warlike,  bloodthirsty  being,  and  they  were  always
fighting  and  quarrelling  among  themselves  and  their  neigh-
bours, and  doing  so  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  They
have  wandered  all  over  the  earth,  and  have  left  their
marks  in  many  places.  There  are  signs  of  a  civilization
that  you  know  nothing  of,  in  North  America  ;  it  was
derived  from  the  same  source.  Historians  have  con-
jectured that  they  crossed  the  narrow  channel  of  a  few
miles  in  breadth  ;  and  they  are  correct.  As  to  those
people  I  spoke  of  in  the  North,  they  penetrated  there
long  before  history  ;  oh,  there  were  hons  and  tigers  in
these latitudes  at  that  time. The  Hebrews  were  very


246  Experiences  in  Spiritnalism  [seance

bad  historians  ;  they  kept  no  records  ;  tradition  served
as  history  for  them,  even  in  very  mucli  later  times  ;  they
were  very  careless,  and  kept  their  records  very  badly."
I  remarked,  "  What  an  interesting  thing  it  would  be  to
reach  these  people  if  they  exist."  "  This  spirit  declares
that  it  will  be  done  ;  he  says  there  is  an  expedition
fitting  out  now,  and  he  thinks  it  will  be  successful."
"  Fitting  out  in  England  ?  "  I  asked.  "  No  in  America  ;
it  seems  that  this  spirit  is  interested  in  it,  and  that  is
the  reason  why  he  is  on  earth."  "  Have  I  ever  known
him  1  "  I  enquired.  "  Oh  dear  no,  he  has  left  the  earth
long  ago."  "  How  interesting  it  would  be,"  I  remarked,
"to  go  on  such  an  expedition."  Home  laughed  at  me
and  said,  "  Yes,  you  look  very  hke  going  on  that  sort  of
an  expedition  just  now  ;  look  and  feel  very  strong  don't
you,  just  at  present  ;  quite  fit  to  go  through  that  awful
bitter  cold  ?  "  Home  reverted  to  the  Hindoos,  and  then
began  speaking  about  Spiritualism  in  general.  "  Oh  !  "  he
said,  "  what  a  blessing  it  is  to  know  that  the  world  will
one  day  be  spiritualised,  that  mortal  man  in  the  flesh
will  walk  and  talk  face  to  face  with  his  brother,  who
has  left  the  body."  "  Well,"  I  observed,  "  I  do  not  see
much  hkeliliood  of  that  time  coming  soon  ;  if  it  were  so,
death  would  no  longer  have  any  terrors,  it  would  not  be
even  a  separation."  "  Yovi  cannot  see  it,  but  I  can  ;
what  I  say  will  inevitably  come  true.  Death  ought  not
to  be  considered  a  separation,  death  is  a  development,
and  should  have  no  terrors  ;  was  it  not  part  of  Christ's
mission  to  take  away  the  sting  and  terror  of  death  ?  "

I  began  speculating  as  to  the  probability  of  the  popula-
tion ever  becoming  excessive  over  the  whole  earth.
Home  said,  "  No,  that  will  not  be  the  case  ;  when
countries  become  much  over  populated,  the  people  are
carried  off  by  epidemics,  by  emigration  and  other  causes."
"  But  emigration,"  I  said,  "  only  relieves  one  country  at
the  expense  of  another.  If  population  increases  as  it
does  at  present,  the  time  must  come  when  there  will  be
no  outlet  for  emigrants  ;  and  surely  it  cannot  be  natural
or  right  that  people  should  be  carried  off  by  plagues  and
famines," "  Epidemics and famines are quite in  the


NO.  67]


With  D.  D.  Home


247


natural  order  of  things  ;  and.  the  misery  resulting  from
them  may  seem  much  greater  to  you  than  it  in  reahty
is."  "  But  still,"  I  insisted,  "  such  things  do  cause  great
distress."  "  Yes,  to  a  certain  extent  you  are  of  course
right  ;  and  there  are  other  causes  that  will  eventually
act  to  check  the  increase  of  the  human  race.  Cannot
you  understand  that  men,  by  cultivating  the  intellectual
quahties,  the  higher  organs  contained  in  the  upper  portion
of  the  brain  will  arrive  at  such  a  condition,  that  their
sole  gratification  and  pleasure  will  be  in  the  pursuit  of  all
that  is  beautiful,  harmonious,  and  good  ? — the  upper  por-
tions of  the  brain  will  become  more  fully  developed,  the
lower  parts  being  neglected  will  become  less  and  less,  the
animal  nature  weaker,  and  man  will  no  longer  find  the
same  pleasure  in  the  gratification  of  his  lusts  and
passions  ;  man  will  become  spirituahsed,  and  will  be  very
different  to  what  he  is  now."  Soon  after  this.  Home
awoke.  He  spoke  for  such  a  length  of  time,  that  a  great
deal  of  what  he  said  has  entirely  escaped  my  memory.


Allan  Kardec  died  on  Sunday  the  4th.  On  the  Wednes-
day or  Thursday  following,  as  Home  and  I  were  in  the
dressing  room,  at  about  11  o'clock  in  the  morning,  we
heard  loud  raps  on  the  floor  between  us.  The  alphabet
was  asked  for  and  the  following  message  given  :  "  Bon
jour,  mon  ami  Daniel,  je  crois  que  je  me  suis  trompe  un  peu
la  has  en  fait  d'identite.  Allan  Kardec.''''  Home  asked  a
few  questions  which  were  answered  by  raps.


No.  68.— Ashley  House,  April  lOth  [18G9].

Last  night  JVIr.  J — ■ —  and  I  walked  to  Ashley  House
with  Home  from  Fitzroy  Square.  Home  complained  of
feehng  nervous,  as  is  usually  the  case  after  an  unsuc-
cessful seance.  He  sat  down  at  the  piano,  and  com-
menced playing  ; while  so  engaged  he  went  into  a  trance.


248


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


I  extinguished  one  of  the  candles,  and  placed  the  other
on  the  floor.  We  heard  sounds  as  of  some  one  walking
up  and  down  the  passage,  and  raps  upon  the  door  and

walls. Mr.  J felt,  during  the  whole  evening,  a  strong

current  of  very  cold  air  blowing  about  him.  Home
walked  about  the  room  apparently  in  great  distress  ;  he
moaned  and  sat  down  on  the  floor  and  seemed  to  mourn
over  something.  Suddenly  the  character  of  the  influence
changed.  Home  came  over  to  where  I  was  sitting  on  the
sofa,  and  made  me  lie  at  full  length  upon  it  ;  by  the
attitude  he  assumed  I  recognized  the  spirit  he  calls  "  the
nameless  doctor."  He  stood  beside  me  apparently  lost
in  thought  for  a  minute  or  two,  then  kneeling  down,
made  me  unbutton  my  waistcoat,  began  sounding  my
chest  as  doctors  do  ;  he  then  rubbed  and  patted  over
the  chest,  loins,  and  legs,  occasionally  turning  round  as  if
to  ask  advice  from  some  one  ;  his  efforts  were  principally
directed  to  my  right  side,  he  frequently  pointed  to  it  and
turned  his  head  as  if  to  call  some  one's  attention  to  that
particular  spot.  He  placed  his  mouth  to  my  right  side
and  exhaled  a  deep  breath  ;  the  heat  I  felt  was  something
extraordinary.  When  he  had  finished.  Home  seemed
pleased  with  what  he  had  done,  smiled  and  rubbed  his
hands  as  if  delighted.  The  first  influence  now  seemed  to
return  ;  he  sat  down  on  the  floor  evidently  in  great  dis-
tress ;  then  lay  flat  on  his  back  and  extended  his  arms
in  the  form  of  a  cross.  His  body  became  rigid  and  he
was  palpably  elongated,  and  was  almost  raised  off  the
ground  ;  he  may  have  been  completely  off,  but  I  think
not  ;  it  was  evident,  however,  by  the  swaying  vibratory
motion  of  his  body  that  it  was  not  resting  naturally  on
the  ground.  While  this  was  taking  place  two  chairs
moved  slightly  of  themselves.  Home  got  up,  knelt  upon
one  knee,  and  simulated  a  man  endeavouring  to  raise  a
heavy  body.  He  appeared  to  fail  once  or  twice  ;  at  last
he  raised  it,  and  supporting  it  on  his  knee,  carried  it
with  great  difficulty  to  a  chair  near  at  hand,  where  he
placed  it  and  sat  down  on  the  floor,  apparently  much
exhausted.  He  beckoned  to  me,  and  when  I  approached
told  me  in  French  to  bring  a  chair,  and  sit  near  him  ;


NO.  68]


With  D.  D.  Home


249


I  did  so,  and  lie  spoke  in  French  somewhat  to  the  follow-
ing effect.  "  What  we  have  been  trying  to  represent  to
you  by  acting,  is  the  condition  of  Allan  Kardec.  The
body  that  was  extended  on  the  ground  in  the  form  of  a
cross,  and  that  was  elongated,  was  his  ;  he  suffered  a
good  deal  for  truth  ;  and  in  symbolism  as  you  know,
the  cross  signifies  truth  ;  but  then  he  was  not  enlightened  ;
he  refused  the  light,  he  was  obstinate,  and  would  not
enlighten  himself  upon  it,  and  that  makes  him  unhappy
now  ;  it  seems  to  weigh  upon  him,  he  cannot  raise  him-
self above  his  former  ideas  and  prejudices.  We  tried  to
represent  that  by  the  difficulty  of  raising  the  heavy  body.
He  is  sitting  here  in  this  chair  ;  he  does  not  move  ;  he
would  not  come  into  the  room  at  first,  you  heard  him
walking  in  the  passage.  There  are  many  spirits  here  of
his  '  entourage.'  Of  his  followers,  and  he  had  many  of
them,  some  of  the  spirits  will  not  come  into  the  room,
I  know  not  why  ;  you  hear  them  in  the  passage  ;  there
are  two  just  behind  here  that  I  do  not  like  at  all."'
Presently  Home  gave  a  cry  almost  amounting  to  a  scream,
and  shuddering  pointed  to  the  opposite  side  of  the  room
and  said  in  English,  "  Who  are  those  fearful  looking  men  ?
Oh,  what  are  they  doing  ?  They  are  eastern,  their  feet
are  bare,  as  also  their  legs  up  to  the  knees,  they  will  not
show  their  faces,  they  cover  them  with  a  sort  of  cloak ;
oh  this  is  horrible,  they  are  hiding  and  lying  in  wait  for
something.  They  are  so  totally  undeveloped,  so  earthy
and  material,  they  could  shed  blood,  they  could  take
man's  life."  "  Do  you  mean,"  I  said,  "  to  tell  me  that
these  spirits  could  kill  a  man  1  "  "  Oh  yes,"  he  answered,
"  they  could,  but  they  can  do  no  harm  here  at  all ;  it
was  in  a  city  where  the  sun  cast  broad  alternate  bands
of  light  and  shadow  ;  I  can  see  them  among  the  ohve
trees  gUding  in  and  out  ;  they  are  so  fearfully  undeveloped,
so  material  ;  they  could  harm  a  man  if  he  had  not  power
over  them  ; that  must  come  by  prayer." I  asked  Mr.

J if he had any idea what all this meant.  He

rephed,  "  Yes,  I  think  I  know."  Home  got  up,  took  a
striped  rug  off  the  sofa,  and  covering  his  shoulders,  head,
and  face  with  it, began  walking  about  the  room in  a


250


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


stealthy  manner,  hiding  behind  the  furniture,  and  crawl-
ing about  flat  upon  the  ground,  apparently  lying  in  wait
for  some  one.  Suddenly  he  put  his  hand  upon  the
candle,  and  left  us  in  almost  total  darkness.  I  could
just  distinguish  him  gliding  about  the  room,  and  crawUng
on  the  floor.  At  one  time  he  stood  up  and  was  elongated ;
he  came  close  to  me  and  said,  "  What  did  they  do  to

his brother  ?  " "  Whose brother  ?  " said Mr. J  .

"  Why,  yours." "  Oh,  good  gracious,"  cried  Mr.  J  ;

"  How  strange  "  ;  and  so  saying  he  sank  back  into  his
chair. Home  added,  "  He  is  not  dead  ;  he  is  quite  safe."

I  spoke  two  or  three  times  to  Mr.  J after  this,  but

received  no  answer.  Home  said,  "  He  is  under  influence."
Presently,  Home  sat  down  on  the  floor  beside  me  and
said,  "He  is  under  influence;  the  tall  strong  man  who
is  influencing  him  will  move  something."  A  chair  behind
me  moved  of  itself.  Home  leaned  his  head  against  my
knee  ;  it  appeared  most  extraordinarily  heavy.  I  placed
my  hand  upon  it,  and  the  weight  was  removed.  "  Did
you  feel,"  he  said,  "  the  weight  on  Dan's  head  ?  That
was  the  influence  of  only  one  of  those  men  ; they  are  so

strong, so very material." Mr. J became  much

affected ;  he  sobbed  violently,  seemed  in  great  distress,
spoke in Arabic with great rapidity, and said, "  Oh,

S S "  (his  brother's  name),  and  then  "  Chahni !

chalini  !  "  which  means  "  Leave  me  !  leave  me  !  "  I  began
asking  Home  about  what  had  puzzled  me  very  much,
namely,  his  having  asserted  that  spirits  could  do  bodily
harm  to  man. He  said,  "  Yes,  they  can  ; I  will  tell  you

later. Dan  must  awake  to  take  the  influence  off  J  ."

Home suddenly awoke, and asked what was going  on.

I told him that Mr. J was under influence,  upon

which  he  took  his  hands,  and  he  immediately  awoke,  and
was  much  astonished  at  finding  that  he  had  been  crying
violently.

I  slept  in  Home's  room  ;  after  we  had  gone  to  bed  he
went  into  a  trance  and  said  "  Of  course  not  ;  why  of
course  they  could  not,  Adare."  "  Could  not  do  what  ?  "
I  asked.  "  Why,  could  not  do  harm  here."  "  You  are
referring to those spirits," I said. "  I never  thought


NO.  68]


With  D.  D.  Home


251


they  could  do  harm  here  ;  but  could  they  hurt  a  man
under  any  circumstances  ?  "  "  Yes,  they  could  ;  you  see
his  brother  had  been  mixed  up  in  some  magical  incanta-
tions, where  sacrifices  were  offered.  Now,  if  a  man  sold
himself  to  such  spirits  as  those,  if  he  gave  himself  to  them
for  any  purpose,  they  could  do  as  they  hked  with  him."
"  But,"  I  asked,  "  could  they  take  his  life  ?  Could  they
for  instance  strike  him  with  a  knife  ?  "  "  Certainly,  why
not  ?  you  have  seen  tables,  chairs  and  heavy  objects  moved
by  a  spirit,  why  not  a  knife  also."  "  But  that  would
not  be  fair  play,  he  could  not  strike  them  back,"  I  said.
"  No,  he  could  not  ;  but  they  could  not  touch  him  unless
he  was  wilUng.  You  see  it  would  be  necessary  that  he
should  have  allowed  them  to  gain  power  over  him,  if  for
any  purpose  he  did  that,  they  could  then  so  use  their
influence  as  to  make  him  do  whatever  they  chose.  They
did  not  hurt  his  brother,  they  carried  him  off,  it  was  as
if  he  had  fallen  among  bandits.^  There  is  more  truth
than  you  suppose  in  the  stories  of  the  old  magicians,  and
the  precautions  they  adopted  to  protect  themselves  from
the  undeveloped  and  material  influences  with  which  they
surrounded  themselves.  Your  mother  stood  just  behind
you  when  Dan's  head  became  so  heavy  against  your
knee  ;  she  influenced  you  to  put  your  hand  on  his  head,
she  was  anxious  a  little  about  Dan,  a  httle  fearful  that
he  might  be  hurt.  Of  course  you  know  no  harm  could
come  to  him."  Home  now  awoke,  he  had  a  distinct
impression  of  the  sort  of  influence  that  had  been  about
him,  and  said  "  I  feel  very  strange,  so  dreadfully  crafty
and  sly,  if  I  were  to  give  way  to  my  feelings  I  should
do  all  sorts  of  curious  things,  I  should  hide  behind  the

curtains,  and  go  to  Mr.  J  's  room  and  try  to  frighten

him."  I  told  Home  a  little  of  what  had  occurred  so  as
to  account  for  these  strange  feehngs.


^  I  am  not  certain  whether  this  sentence  conveys  Home's  meanLns;
quite  correctly.


252


Experie^ices  in  Spiritualism


[seance


No.  (id.

[The  following  account  of  what  occurred  to  Mr.  J

during  the  night,  was  related  to  me  by  him  two  or
three  days  afterwards. He  said]  : —

"  I  went  to  bed  in  the  spare  room,  but  did  not  immedi-
ately put  out  the  candle.  I  was  lying  with  my  face
turned  towards  the  wall,  when  suddenly  the  bed-clothes
were  pulled  so  violently  as  nearly  to  uncover  me.  I
jumped  up  in  bed,  and  the  movement  ceased.  After
watching  a  few  minutes  I  lay  down  and  the  clothes  were
again  sharply  pulled.  This  was  repeated  three  times  ;
I  could  not  detect  anything  touching  the  clothes,  in  fact
the  moment  I  sat  up  to  watch  all  movement  ceased.
While  this  was  going  on  I  heard  distinct  raps  all  about
the  room.  I  now  turned  round  and  saw  a  number  of
figures  near  the  window,  moving  about,  apparently  con-
versing ;  they  were  of  a  grey  or  whitish  colour,  the
features  in  profile  were  very  distinct,  and  the  hands
especially  so  ;  but  I  could  not  see  how  they  rested  on
the  floor,  as  the  lower  extremities  finished  in  vapour  or
cloud.  I  used  every  means  in  my  power  to  induce  them
to  look  at  me  and  answer  my  questions,  by  raps  or  other-
wise, but  in  vain.  I  begged  them  to  speak,  and  exercised
my  will  as  forcibly  as  I  could  to  make  them  do  so,  but
they  would  not  take  the  shghtest  notice  of  me  ;  I  accord-
ingly got  out  of  bed  and  slowly  approached  them.  When
I  was  within  about  three  paces  of  them  they  divided  in
two  rows  on  each  side  of  the  window,  as  if  to  allow  me
to  pass,  and  turning  round,  bent  their  heads  and  looked
down  towards  me  ;  at  the  next  step  they  all  separated,
and  I  experienced  a  feeling  of  intense  cold  ;  when  close
upon  them  they  disappeared.  I  walked  slowly  back-
wards, and  when  I  had  retreated  three  or  four  yards,
the  forms  became  visible.  I  went  to  bed  but  never
closed  my  eyes  ;  the  figures  remained  near  the  window
moving  about  as  if  in  conversation,  until  a  quarter  to
seven  when  they  disappeared.  After  going  towards  them
the  first  time,  in  order  to  make  sure  that  I  was  thoroughly


KO.  69]


With  D.  D.  Home


253


awake,  I  went  to  a  cupboard,  opened  it,  and  found  a  box
of  brown  biscuits  of  which  I  ate  two  ;  I  also  found  a
Highland  sporran,  and  read  the  monogram  on  the  hilts
of  the  knives.  After  dressing  in  the  morning,  I  examined
the  cupboard,  found  the  box  of  biscuits,  and  ascertained
that  I  had  read  the  monograms  correctly  ;  I  also  walked
all  over  the  house  during  the  night  in  search  of  Home's
room,  but  could  not  find  it.  I  spoke  to  the  figures
repeatedly  in  Enghsh,  not  in  Arabic."


No.  70.

[The  following  strange  story  was  also  related  to  me  on

the  same  occasion  by  Mr.  J  . As  it  evidently  bears

upon  the  occurrences  related  in  p.  249,  I  have  deter-
mined to  break  through  the  rule  hitherto  adhered  to  of
relating only what took place in my own  presence.

I  had  the  story  direct  from  Mr.  J  ,  who  received  it

from  his  brother. Mr.  J at  my  request  wrote  to

his  brother  in  the  East,  to  enquire  if  anything  had
happened  to  him  on  the  Friday  when  the  strange  occur-
rences mentioned  in  pp.  249,  250,  took  place,  but  no
answer  has  as  yet  been  received.]

"  About  three  years  ago,  my  brother  S.  was  residing  in

my  father's  house,  in  the  town  of ,  in  the  East,

studying  '  Nahawi,'  that  is  the  grammatical  Arabic,  the
language  of  the  '  Koran ' — quite  a  different  tongue  from
the  vernacular.  One  day  he  was  much  astonished  at
receiving  an  answer  in  '  Nahawi '  from  a  poor  labouring
man,  to  whom  he  had  addressed  some  question  ;  he
entered  into  conversation,  and  found  that  this  man  was
well  educated,  and  he  also  noticed  that  in  the  evening  he
was  dressed  in  a  style  quite  incompatible  with  his  rank
of  life  ;  in  fact  he  appeared  much  superior  to  the  class
to  which  he  belonged.  One  day,  soon  after  their  first
meeting,  this  labourer,  whom  I  will  call  '  the  native  '  as
I  cannot  mention  his  name,  told  my  brother  that  lie  had


254  Experiences  in  Spiritualism  [seance

something  of  importance  to  communicate  if  he  would
promise  secrecy.  He  then  informed  him  that  in  a  field
outside  the  town,  belonging  to  his  father,  there  was  some-
thing buried  that  he  was  determined  to  obtain  by  means
of  what  in  the  East  is  called  '  magic  '  ;  he  said  that  he
had  already  tried  but  had  failed,  that  he  was  determined
to  succeed  even  at  the  risk  of  his  life,  but  that  it  was
necessary  for  him  to  obtain  the  co-operation  of  some
member  of  the  family  ;  if  my  brother  would  assist  him,
he  promised  to  give  up  anything  of  value  that  might  be
found,  bargaining  only  to  be  allowed  to  keep  a  certain
scroll  or  parchment.  My  brother  agreed,  and  on  the
following  Friday  they  commenced  operations.  I  may  men-
tion here  that  in  Mahomedan  countries  it  is  supposed  that
Friday  is  the  only  day  on  which  magic  can  be  successfully
practised.  S.  and  the  native  left  the  town  just  before
the  gates  were  shut,  at  sunset,  and  proceeded  to  the  field
in  question  ;  arrived  there  they  sat  down  cross-legged  on
the  ground,  at  right  angles  to  each  other,  and  about  four
or  five  yards  apart,  the  native  warning  S.  not  to  mind
him,  and  on  no  account  to  scream,  as  that  would  involve
considerable  danger  to  both.  The  native  commenced
burning  incense  and  repeating  invocations  or  prayers,
bowing  his  head  to  the  ground  ;  very  soon  loud  thrusts
or  blows  were  heard  on  the  ground  and  several  forms
became  visible,  issuing  apparently  out  of  the  earth.  These
figures  commenced  walking  round  the  two  men.  On
passing  S.  each  figure  stooped  down  and  threw  a  handful
of  dust  into  his  face  ;  his  clothes  were  covered  with  dust
afterwards.  On  passing  the  native,  each  figure  struck
him  on  the  head  ;  he,  however,  took  no  notice  whatever
of  them,  merely  bowing  his  head  down,  adding  fresh
incense,  and  mumbhng  something  to  himself.  After  a
time  the  figures  disappeared  into  the  ground,  and  the
native  said  that  all  was  over  for  that  night.

"  On  the  second  Friday  the  same  ceremonies  were  gone
through,  except  that  the  incense  was  of  a  different  kind,
with  hke  results  ;  the  forms  appeared,  but  suddenly  a
tremendous  shower  of  dry  bones  fell  over  them.  S.  could
not  tell  where  they  came  from,  but  they  appeared  to  come


NO.  70]


With  D.  D.  Home


255


from  behind  him  so  as  to  be  directed  against  the  native.
The  native  jumped  up  and  said  that  something  had
occurred  to  interrupt  the  arrangements,  and  that  they
must  immediately  go.

"  On  the  third  Friday  the  usual  invocations  and  incense
burning  were  gone  through,  and  the  figures  appeared  and
commenced  walking  round,  and  throwing  dust  as  on  the
first  occasion.  Suddenly  the  figure  of  a-  gigantic  black
man  appeared  out  of  the  ground,  armed  with  a  great
stick  or  club,  with  which  he  belaboured  the  native  in  the
most  fearful  manner  ;  while  a  great  commotion  took
place  among  the  other  figures — instead  of  moving  slowly
round,  they  were  all  rushing  about  as  if  in  a  state  of
great  agitation.  The  native  took  no  notice  at  first  of
the  black  man,  merely  crouching  himself  closer  to  the
ground,  increasing  the  ardour  of  his  incantations,  and
adding  fresh  incense.  At  length,  however,  he  said  in
Arabic,  '  Well,  well,  be  it  so  ;  if  you  must  have  it,  you
shall.' After  this,  all  was  quiet.

"  On  the  following  Friday  they  again  went  out  ;  but
this  time  the  native  carried  with  him  a  five  lamb  con-
cealed under  his  burnous  which,  after  they  were  seated
on  the  ground,  he  proceeded  to  kill  and  skin.  They  went
through  the  usual  incense  burning,  &c.,  &c.  ;  and  first  the
figures  appeared,  and  then  the  black  man  rose  from  out
of  the  ground,  and  advanced  in  a  menacing  attitude
towards  the  native,  preparing  to  strike  him  with  his  club.
The  native  held  up  the  lamb  to  him,  and  the  figure  took  it
and  disappeared  again  into  the  earth.  S.  declares  that  the
earth  hterally  opened,  and  that  the  black  figure  descended,
bearing  the  lamb  through  the  aperture.  In  a  few  minutes
the  black  figure  reappeared,  and  a  conversation  ensued
between  him  and  the  native  ;  the  latter  seemed  very
angry,  declared  that  he  had  compHed  with  all  their
requests,  that  the  black  man  was  not  the  spirit  that  he
wanted  at  all,  and  that  he  had  been  duped.  The  alterca-
tion was  suddenly  interrupted  by  a  shower  of  dry  bones
upon  which  the  figure  disappeared  ;  and  the  native  jumped
up,  seized  S.'s  arm  and  hurried  him  away,  saying  that
they  were  watched.


256  Experiences  in  Spiritualism  [seance

"  It  appears  that  my  father  noticed  that  S.  absented
himself  from  home  every  Friday,  and  becoming  uneasy  he
set  some  one  to  watch  him.  He  was  seen  to  leave  the
city  at  smiset  in  company  with  this  native  ;  but  none
would  follow  them,  as  they  did  not  like  the  idea  of
spending  the  night  outside.  On  the  last  Friday,  however,
one  bolder  than  the  rest  followed  them,  and  concealing
himself  behind  a  rock,  witnessed  their  proceedings.  On
the  Saturday  following  a  formal  complaint  was  laid  before
the  Governor  of  the  town,  the  native  was  banished  for
life,  and  S.  came  over  to  England.  After  an  absence  of
two  years,  my  brother  returned  to  the  town,  and  a  few
weeks  afterwards  I  received  a  letter  from  him,  saying :
'  Imagine  my  intense  surprise,  the  same  native  is  here,  but
no  one  recognizes  him,  he  says  he  is  determined  to  go  on
with  his  project  if  I  will  assist  him  ;  I  can  see  no  dif-
ference whatever  in  his  appearance,  he  is  not  disguised  in
any  way,  and  yet  not  a  soul  in  the  town  has  the  slightest
notion  that  he  is  the  man  who  was  banished  three  years
ago.'  "


No.  71. — Ashley  House.

On  the  10th  [April,  1869],  Home  went  into  a  trance,
and  said,  "  Allan  Kardec, — apoplexy."  "  Did  he  die
suddenly  ?  "  I  asked.  "  Of  apoplexy — fell  down  stairs.
You  must  not  sleep  in  the  same  room  with  Dan  at
present,  it  is  not  good  for  either  of  you,  your  magnetism
is  mutually  injurious,  you  take  strength  from  each  other  ;
your  nerves  are  in  an  excited  state,  I  can  see  them
emitting  a  phosphorescent  light,  they  are  stretched  to
the  extreme  verge  of  tension."  "  They  are  then  in  an
unhealthy  state,"  I  said.  "  Yes,  in  a  condition  that
must  be  checked,  it  is  exactly  as  if  you  had  taken  too
much  stimulant.  In  the  daytime  it  does  not  matter
how  much  you  are  together,  it  is  at  night  when
you  are  asleep  that  the  injury  is  done  ;  you  are  not
well  ;  if  you  slept  in  the  same  room  with  a  healthy
man  it  would  do  you  good."  "  I  have  been  thinking,"
I said, "  that mesmerism might be of service to  me,


NO.  71]


With  D.  D.  Home


257


what  is  your  opinion  ?  "  "  The  magnetism  of  a  strong
healthy  man  would  do  you  much  good,  the  mesmeriser
should  be  a  fair  man,  a  few  passes  every  day  not  sufficient
to  induce  sleep  would  be  of  use  to  you,  it  would  be
good  for  Dan  also."  "  I  think  change  would  do  me
good,"  I  remarked.  "  Travelling  is  very  good  for  you."
I  asked,  after  a  long  pause,  "  Do  you  think  it  would
also  suit  Florence's  constitution  1  "  Home  said,  "  Oh
yes  it  would  not  hurt  her,  but  she  has  a  talent  that
must  not  be  neglected."  "  What  is  that — music  1  "  I
enquired.  "  Composition,  the  composition  of  music."  I
said,  "  You  would  not  like  that  to  be  neglected  ?  "  "It
must  not  be  neglected."  "  That  is  rather  awkward,"
I  added.  "  No,  it  need  not  be  ;  she  would  have  great
facihty  in  learning  stringed  instruments  ;  for  instance  the
viohn  ;  of  course  they  would  all  laugh  at  first,  but  you
need  not  mind  that. Dear  me,  how  curious  ! Oh  no

certainly  not,  L — ■ —  ought  not  to  pass  away." "  L

M do  you  mean  1  " I  asked. "  No, L  N  ,

she  had  more  influence almost  than  any  of  them  over

0  ; her  magnetism  kept  him  in  check,  she  has  lost

it  in  a  great  measure  now  ;  he  is  all  hoity  toity  fly-away.
What  a  curious  habit  he  has  got  into  of  tossing  his  head
back  in  that  way  ;  dear  me,  he  is  very  excited,  there  is
something  all  wrong  about  it,  when  I  go  there  it  all
seems  confused,  I  cannot  make  it  out  well  !

"  Allan  Kardec  says  that  spirits  very  soon  forget  events
that  happened  on  earth,  they  have  no  way  of  computing
time  ;  they  even  forget  their  birthdays  ;  if  they  want  to
get  a  date  they  often  have  to  go  and  look  for  it."  "  But
why,"  I  said,  "  should  they  take  the  trouble  to  look  for
dates  ?  what  can  it  matter  to  them."  "  Oh,  they  are
obhged  to  do  so  sometimes  for  tests  and  things  of  that
sort." Home  then  awoke.


No.  72. — Ashley  House.

On,  I  think,  the  15th  [April,  1869],  IVIr.  Ward  Cheeney
and  Mr.  Arnold,  two  Americans,  friends  of  Home  came

R


258


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


to  see  him.  Soon  after  they  had  gone,  I  heard  raps
upon  the  table  at  which  I  was  seated.  Home  was  walk-
ing about  the  room  at  the  time.  I  called  his  attention
to  the  raps,  and  he  came  and  sat  down  near  me.  The
alphabet  was  called  for,  and  the  name  "  Carry  "  was
spelled  out.  Home  said  to  me  "  That  is  Mrs.  Cheeney  "  ;
then  addressing  her  : —

"  I  am  so  glad,  dear,  that  you  have  come  to  me  again,
is  Julia  with  you  often  ?  "

"  Yes,"  was  answered.

"  Why  does  she  not  speak  to  me  ?  Does  she  not  like
me  ?  "

"  Oh  yes,  she  is  the  same  as  ever,  but  your  missio7i  does
not  always  consist  of  love  messages  being  given  you.  When
tve  U'O'uld  do  so,  we  are  sometimes  unable  by  reason  of  your
exhaustion  ;  but  you,  knoiv,  so  long  as  you  are  true  to  God,
your  mission,  and,  yourself,  that  we  love  you."

Home,  pointing  to  me,  said,  "  He  is  going  to  America."
Two  raps  were  made  signifying  uncertainty  ;  Home  added,
"I  hope  you  will  like  him."

"  Yes,"  was  said,  and  then,  "  /  hope  that  you  may  be
my  earthly  habitatio7i  uhen  yoii  are  there,  in  order  that  I
may  welcoine  you."

Home  continued,  "  He  is  going  to  be  married  ;  I  hope
you  will  hke  his  wife."

"  I  don't  know  her. What  is  her  name  ?  "

"  Miss  Florence  Kerr. Will  you  go  and  see  her  ?  "

Two  raps  were  given,  signifying  perhaps.  "  Adare  will
be  dining  there  to-night  ; will  you  go  with  him  ?  "

"  Yes  ;  I  shall  call  her  Florence.  Do  you  not  find  this
to  be  a  subject  fraught  with  very  vast  iynportance  ?  "

"  Is  that  message  to  me  ?  "  I  asked.

"  Yes."

"  Certainly,  I  consider  it  is  a  subject  of  great  impor-
tance."

"  Standing  on  the  threshold,  peering  through  the  chinks."
"  Of  the  other  world  ?  "  I  asked.
"  Yes."

Home  observed  "  That  is  just  like  her,  there  was  a  good
deal  of  poetry  in  her  nature  ; I  have  some  very  pretty


NO.  72]


With  D.  D.  Home


259


lines  of  hers."  He  was  interrupted  by  the  words  "  Such
doggerel,"  being  spelled  out  ;  after  this  the  sounds  became
gradually  fainter,  and  we  had  no  more  messages.


No.  73. — Ashley  House.

On  Friday,  the  16th  [April,  1869],  I  was  present  at
a  meeting  of  one  of  the  sub -committees  of  the  Dia-
lectical Society.  The  seance  was  not  satisfactory.  The
Master  of  Lindsay,  Mr.  Bergheim,  Home,  and  myself,
afterwards  adjourned  to  Lindsay's  room,  in  Grosvenor
Square.  We  sat  round  a  small  table,  and  had  some
physical  manifestations.  Home  was  in  an  excessively
nervous  state.  Presently  he  went  into  a  trance,  and
began to laugh  ; he spoke to me for some time  as

A B  . Home then said "  That same spirit  is

here about W B  . It is too late now to  do

all  he wanted  ; he wished to have prevented all  this

business about X  ." "  Oh," said Lindsay, "  He

could have done nothing, for W could have  no

influence  over  X  ."  "  He  says  he  could  have  suc-
ceeded." "  I  am  sure  he  could  not,"  continued  Lindsay,
"for  they  are  not  even  on  speaking  terms."  "Well,  he
says  that  W — ■ — ■  being susceptible, he would  have  got

such  influence  over  him,  that  X^  •  would  have  noticed

it,  and  it  would  have  had  a  good  effect  upon  him  ;  how-
ever, it  is  too  late  now,  still  he  wants  W to  meet

Dan. He will pass away before his natural  time."

"  Who  1  " said Lindsay, "  W  ?  " "  Yes." "  Is  he

then  ill  ?  "  I  asked.  "  Oh,  no  ;  not  in  that  way  ;  it  will
probably  be  in  some  wild  frohc  or  row,  or  something  of

that  sort. This  spirit  used  to  howl  at  W  when  he

was  at  school."  Lindsay  remarked,  "  That  is  very
curious,  I  had  not  thought  of  it  before,  but  now  I  re-
member that  W told  me of  that. Did  it  frighten

him  ?  "  "  Oh,  yes  ;  he  used  to  howl  at  him  and  frighten
him  a  good  deal,  so  much  so  that  one  night  he  got  up
and  slept  with  one  of  the  other  fellows  ; he  was  afraid


260


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


to  be  alone."  Home  turned  to  me  and  said,  "  You  must
look  out,  boy,  there  seems  to  be  a  storm  brewing  for
you.''  "  If  you  would  tell  me  what  it  is,"  I  said,  "  per-
haps I  might  avoid  it."  "It  is  of  no  great  consequence  ;
it  will  be  but  a  storm  in  a  coffee  pot.  Oh,  Dan  is  very
weak,  very  weak  indeed."  Home  sank  back  in  his  chair,
he  was  seized  with  a  violent  spasm  in  the  chest,  and  was
in  great  pain.  Presently  he  said,  They  are  magnetizing
me."  He  fell  into  a  natural  sleep,  and  awoke  in  a  short
time  much  better.  Home  went  home,  I  remained  some
time  longer.  Lindsay  asked  IVIr.  Bergheim  to  mesmerise
him  ;  he  did  so,  and  soon  put  him  to  sleep.  After  he
had  awoke  him,  Mr.  Bergheim  asked  Lindsay  to  try  upon
him,  no  one  having  as  yet  succeeded  in  mesmerising  him.
After  a  few  passes,  he  went  off  ;  he  became  very  uneasy,
placed  his  hand  on  his  forehead  and  said,  "  It  is  all
wrong."  Lindsay  asked  him  whether  there  was  too  much
weight  on  his  head  ;  whether  he  should  take  some  off,  or
put  more  on.  He  replied,  "  No,  it  is  not  that,  but  it  is
all  wrong,  I  am  being  cross-mesmerised."  (This  is  curious,
as  no  one  else  was  attempting  to  influence  him.)  As  he
seemed  so  uneasy,  Lindsay  awoke  him.  He  told  us  he
did  not  remember  saying  anything  about  cross-mesmerising,
but  that  the  last  thing  he  recollected  was  seeing  a  figure
or  form  of  some  sort  standing  beside  Lindsay.  He  also
saw  the  figure.  After  some  time,  Lindsay  mesmerised
him  again  ;  as  on  the  first  occasion,  be  became  very
restless  and  excited  ;  he  extended  his  right  arm,  and  kept
it  in  that  position  for  fully  half  an  hour  ;  Lindsay  could
not  induce  him  to  alter  it.  He  spoke  Arabic  with  great
rapidity  in  long  sentences,  and  occasionally  repeated
single  words  which  I  wrote  down  as  well  as  I  could.  He
appeared  to  be,  or  to  think  himself  to  be,  under  some
influence  more  powerful  than  Lindsay.  He  said  among
other  things,  "  Mabidah  ('she  won't').  Oh,  dear,  she
won't  come.  Ta-aU,  ta-ali  ('  come,  come  !  ' — word  feminine
and  applicable  to  a  woman  only).  Rabat  !  ('  she  is
gone  ').  Allah  !  (God)  Bedosh,  or  Behash  (he  won't,  or
she  won't),  Haldl  Inglese  or  Hekil  Inglese,  or  Yikkil  Inglese,
or Hakal, Inglese (EngUsh talk, or speak Enghsh,  or


NO.  73]


With  D.  D.  Home


261


he  speaks  English,  or  he  spoke  Enghsh)."  Lindsay
repeatedly  tried  to  make  him  speak  Enghsh,  but  he  said,
"  he  won't  let  me."  Lindsay  endeavoured  to  influence
him  to  move,  but  he  always  replied,  "  he  won't  let  me,
I  would  if  I  could,  but  he  won't  let  me,  he  is  so  strong."
Presently  he  said,  "  Chahni  !  chalini  !  (leave  me,  leave  me),
don't  let  him  come  near  me."  Lindsay  walked  round  in
a  circle,  making  passes,  and  said,  "  there,  he  cannot  come
inside  that."  Mr.  Bergheim  said,  "  Ah,  she  has  come,"
and  appeared  to  stroke  and  caress  some  one's  head  and
hair.  "  He  cannot  speak  Enghsh  and  won't  let  me."
"  Ah,  Ta-ah  (oh,  come)  Chahni !  chahni  !  (leave  me,  leave
me)  Rah,  (he  is  gone).  Oh,  he  has  gone,  and  she  has
gone  with  him."  He  appeared  so  distressed  that  Lindsay
said,  "  I  will  awake  him."  He  sat  up  and  said,  "  You
cannot,  he  has  gone,  and  you  cannot  awake  me."
Lindsay  began  making  upward  passes,  saying,  "  nonsense,
of  course  I  can  awake  you."  JMr.  Bergheim  shouted  at
him,  "  You  cannot,  you  cannot,  he  must  come  back  or
I  shall  die,  you  cannot  awake  me  ;  oh,  bring  him  back."
Lindsay  said,  "  All  right,  he  shall  come."  I  opened  the
door  and  Lindsay  added,  "  There,  he  has  come."  Mr.
Bergheim  heaved  a  deep  sigh,  and  said,  "  Oh,  yes,  he
has  come  back,"  he  became  quite  quiet  and  soon  awoke,
but  was  in  a  nervous  state  for  some  time.^


No.  14:.— Ashley  House,  April  [1869].

Last  night  soon  after  we  had  gone  to  bed,  we  both
heard  raps  upon  the  wall.  The  alphabet  was  called  for
and  the  following  messages  given,  "  Come  come,  Dan,
cheer  up !  You  have  been  overdoing  it  lately,  ive  intend
giving  you  a  rest  from  the  day  after  to-morrow  till  the  29th  ;
your  power  will  he  taken  from  you.''  Home  said,  "  I  am
sorry  for  it."  "  We  think  it  best,'"  was  answered.  Home
went  into  a  trance  ; he  said,  "  Your  grandfather  is  here,

1  I  mention  the  occurrences  of  this  evening,  as  although  outside  the
present  limits  of  "Spiritualism,"  they  seem  to  bear  a  strong  resemblance
to  what  took  place  at  Ashley  House,  mentioned  in  pp.  249,  250.


262


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


he  is  not  pleased."  He  spoke  to  me  for  a  long  time,
representing  my  grandfather,  saying  at  the  close  of  the
conversation,  "  You  must  be  prepared,  boy,  for  some
change  ;  it  seems  that  something  will  soon  occur  to  alter
your  prospects."  "  Can  you  not  tell  what  it  is,"  I  asked.
"  No  we  cannot  tell  you.  Oh  !  it  is  nothing  to  do  with
your  marriage  ;  no,  it  just  seems  that  something  will
occur  to  alter  your  plans,  that  is  all."  "  I  wish  to  ask
a  cpiestion,"  I  said.  "  Do  so,"  he  replied.  "  Dan  sud-
denly asked  me  yesterday,  shuddering,  to  take  my  hand
off  the  table  where  we  were  both  writing  ;  when  I  asked
him  some  time  after  what  his  motive  had  been  for  doing
so,  he  told  me  that  my  thumb  was  all  covered  with
blood.  Now,  there  was  really  no  blood  upon  my  thumb  ;
was  that  merely  a  defect  in  Dan's  vision,  or  the  result  of
his  imagination,  or  was  there  anything  more  in  it  ?  "
After  a  pause  Home  answered,  "  We  do  not  know  what
that  could  have  meant,  it  might  have  been  a  foreshadow-
ing of  something,  or  merely  the  reflection  of  the  red
table  cloth,  or  some  purely  physical  effect  of  Dan's  brain,
or  vision  ;  we  do  not  remember  the  occurrence — Stop !
wait  a  minute  "  (after  a  pause),  "  Ah  !  Sacha  says  it  was
not  imagination  or  deception  on  Dan's  part,  he  was  in  one
of  those  very  curious  conditions  into  which  he  sometimes
falls,  and  it  was  a  foreshadowing  of  something  that  will
occur,  blood  will  flow,  you  may  perhaps  cut  your  finger
or  something  of  that  sort,  it  does  not  follow  that  it  will
be  your  thumb.  Sacha  sends  all  manner  of  love  to  Dan,
and  wishes  you  to  tell  him  that  he  must  not  be  low-
spirited,  more  than  he  can  help  ;  it  is  not  right,  he  has
never  wanted  as  yet,  she  says  it  is  extremely  unlikely
that  he  will  be  permitted  to  want  now."  I  said,  "  I
want  to  ask  your  opinion  about  what  occurred  in  Lind-
say's room."  "  We  do  not  know  exactly  to  what  you
refer  ;  but  we  will  tell  you  about  it  some  time  or  other.
Dan  is  very  weak  and  ill,  we  have  been  having  a  regular
council  about  him."  "  I  hope  you  will  be  able  to  do  him
good,"  I  said.  "  Oh  yes,  we  hope  so,  he  is  overworked  ;
and  he  worries  himself  about  leaving  the  house,  and  is
distressed  about  a  lot  of  jewels  and  precious  stones.  It


NO.  74]


With  D.  D.  Home


263


is  not  I'iglit  of  him  to  give  way  so,  lie  sliould  have  more

faith. Poor  httle  L will  we  fear  have  a  relapse,  but

she  must  not  be  cast  down  ;  she  will  get  better  again  ;
she  ought  to  be  very  careful  not  to  do  too  much  this
summer."  "  You  mean  in  the  way  of  society,"  I  observed,
"  seeing  too  many  people  ?  "  "  Yes,  certainly.  Your
mother  seems  anxious  about  you ;  she  says  your  position
is  not  a  very  easy  one  ;  you  have  a  difficult  path  to
follow,  and  must  be  careful."  I  said,  "  It  seems  hard
that  if  I  am  in  difficult  circumstances  I  should  have
lost  the  advantage  of  her  advice  ;  there  are  so  few  people
with  whom  I  can  take  counsel."  "  Ah,  but  that  is  just
what  she  does  not  want  you  to  feel.  She  says  you  have
not  lost  the  benefit  of  her  advice  ;  she  can  influence  you.
If  you  will,  when  in  doubt  as  to  what  course  to  pursue,
pray  earnestly  to  God  for  guidance,  and  sit  down  quietly
to  think  the  matter  over,  she  says  you  may  be  sure  she
will  be  there,  and  will  be  enabled  to  help  you  to  form  a
right  judgment.  She  smiles,  and  says,  '  You  may  even
smoke  your  cigar  you  know,  my  boy,  if  you  like  ;  just
sit  down  quietly  by  yourself,  desiring  earnestly  and
prayerfully  to  do  what  is  right,  and  I  am  certain  to  be
with  you,  and  will  endeavovir  to  influence  your  mind  so
that  you  may  come  to  a  right  conclusion  about  Bergheim.'
You  need  never  be  nervous  at  anything  of  that  sort  ;
no  harm  could  have  come  of  it  ;  no  spiritual  influence
could  or  would  hurt  him.  You  might  have  known  that  ;
you  know  how  sensitive  Dan  is,  and  that  he  is  con-
tinually subjected  to  all  sorts  of  influences,  at  all  times,
even  when  walking  in  the  streets  ;  and  yet  you  know
they  cannot  harm  him."  "  But,"  I  said,  "  you  spoke  the
other  night  of  spirits  having  power  even  to  kill  a  man  :
how  do  you  mean  then  that  no  danger  could  ensue  from
a  man  becoming  under  a  strong  influence  as  Bergheim
was,  or  as  Dan  often  is."  "  Insomuch  as  the  man  is
willing,  harm  might  come.  As  I  told  you  the  other
night,  if  anyone  were  voluntarily  to  agree  to  certain  con-
ditions, were  to  submit  themselves  to  a  spiritual  influence,
to  obtain  a  certain  end,  harm  might  ensue  from  that,
but in no other way  ; Bergheim could  not have  been


264


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


hurt,  he  would  have  awoke  all  right,  he  is  of  a  very
nervous  excitable  temperament,  that  was  the  cause  of  it.
Danger  might  arise  in  another  way,  a  person  might  throw
himself  into  a  deep  trance.  If  Dan  in  his  present  very
weak  condition  were  to  will  himself  to  go  into  a  trance,
he  might  do  so,  and  the  result  might  be  disastrous,  we
are  obliged  to  watch  over  him  very  closely.  Dan  wiU
not  awake,  he  will  fall  into  a  natural  sleep  now."


TVo.  75. — Seance,  Orafton  Hotel,  Albemarle  Street,  May  26fh

[1869].

At  about  10  o'clock  I  went  to  the  Comtesse  de  Pomar,
and  found  aheady  assembled  and  seated  round  the  table
the  Comtesse  de  Pomar,  Mrs.  Crawford,  Madame  de  Galiano,
Mrs.  H.  Senior,  Mr.  Bergheim,  and  Home  ;  they  had  had
slight  physical  manifestations.  One  of  the  ladies  was  not
very  well,  and  another  was  expecting  to  be  obliged  to
leave  every  minute — two  circumstances  which  no  doubt
acted  unfavourably  upon  the  harmony  of  the  party.
Soon  after  my  arrival  Home  went  into  a  trance  ;  he  was
apparently  much  distressed  by  the  black  crepe  on  Madame
de  Pomar  s  dress.  Getting  up,  he  took  a  black  shawl
that  she  had  laid  on  a  chair,  and  expressing  by  his  coun-
tenance the  greatest  disgust,  he  opened  the  door  of  an
inner  room  and  threw  the  shawl  down.  On  coming  back
he  whispered  as  he  passed  me,  "  We  do  not  like  it  at  all
■ — there  is  too  much  black.  You  see  there  are  four  what
you  call  widows  here  ;  we  cannot  bear  mourning."  He
stroked and  patted my  forehead  ; and  going  round  to

Mrs. "s  son,  he  bent  over  him,  looked  into  his  face

and  caressed  his  hair.  He  took  a  small  round  table
that  was  standing  in  the  corner  of  the  room,  and  said,
still  in  a  whisper,  "  Paula  and  Marie  must  not  have  too
much  confidence  in  this,  it  is  an  undeveloped  influence
that  communicates  with  them,  and  they  are  not  fully
developed  as  mediums,  they  must  not  place  implicit
rehance  on  what  is  told  them,  but  use  their  own  sense


NO.  75]


With  D.  D.  Home


265


about  it."  Oil  returning  to  his  chair — as  he  passed  me —
he  clapped  liis  hands  (Adah  Menken's  sign),  and
whispered,  "  I  hope  you  are  very  happy.  It  was  not  far
from  here  that  I  met  you."  iVIr.  Bergheim  and  I  were
talking  in  a  very  low  tone,  about  crystals,  mirrors,  and
eastern  magic  in  general,  and  the  strange  things  that  had

occurred  at  Ashley  House  in  connection  with  Mr.  J  's

brother.  Home  became  much  agitated,  gasped  occa-
sionally for  breath,  had  difficulty  in  speaking,  and  made
passes  before  him  as  if  waving  something  off.  "  Oh,"
he  said,  "  you  must  not  talk  of  that,  you  bring  such  a
fearful  influence  about  you  ;  the  moment  your  minds  are
turned  in  that  direction,  the  influence  comes  as  it  were
pouring  in,  I  wish  you  could  understand  this,  you  would
see  how  necessary  is  prayer  to  bring  a  good  influence
about  you  ;  and  if  you  wish  for  that  which  is  bad,  it
will  inevitably  come.  Oh,  it  is  very  dangerous,  we  can-
not bear  you  to  have  anything  with  magic,  that  incense
of  blood  is  fearful."  I  interrupted  him  saying,  "  I  have
not  used  any  incense."  Home  continued,  "  Oh,  yes  ;
I  know,  I  know.  You  must  not  have  anything  to  do  with
it  ;  you  do  not  know  how  dangerous  it  is.  Pray  leave
that  magic  alone  ;  what  is  the  use  of  it  ?  it  is  but
curiosity  and  can  do  you  no  good.  Would  you  place
yourself  in  the  power  of  the  lowest  men  on  earth  ?
Would  you  bring  the  worst  and  most  degraded  of  mortal
influence  about  you  ?  You  would  not  ;  then  why  do  so
among  spirits  ?  I  tell  you  you  do  not  know  the  danger  ;
they  are  so  fearfully  low,  the  very  lowest  and  most
material  of  all  ;  you  might  almost  call  them  '  accursed.'
They  will  get  a  power  over  you  that  you  cannot  break
through.  Have  nothing  to  do  with  it.  Try  and  get  a
good  influence  about  you,  one  that  will  raise  and  elevate
you,  not  one  to  drag  you  down  lower  and  lower.  You
would  be  afraid  of  the  worst  and  most  brutal  of  your
fellow-men.  You  have  more  cause  to  fear  those  spirits
who  correspond  to  them  if  you  encourage  and  let  them
gain  power  over  you.  No,  he  has  not  found  it  yet."
Bergheim  said  to  me,  "  Have  you  told  him  the  story  ?
how  does  he  know  anything  about  this  ?  " Home  laughed,


266


Ex'periences  in  SjnriiuaUsm


[seance


and  speaking  to  Madame  de  Pomar  said,  "  They  are
wondering  at  Dan  speaking  about  subjects  with  which  he
is  not  acquainted,  as  if  we  did  not  know  all  about  it."
Turning  to  us  he  continued,  "  No,  he  has  not  found  it,
he  has  got  your  letter  ;  yes  I  think  he  will  answer  it  in
a  little  time,  he  does  not  quite  know  what  to  do.  I  say
again,  have  nothing  to  do  with  magic.  Mind !  there  is
a  storm  coming,  if  that  box  arrives,  if  the  house  is  not
burned  or  smashed  to  pieces  it  wiU  be  a  wonder.  Seek
by  prayer  to  repel  evil  influences,  do  not  encourage  them."
Soon  after,  Home  awoke.  We  had  tolerably  strong
physical  manifestations,  but  nothing  remarkable  occurred,
and  afterwards  the  three  following  messages  were  given
through  the  alphabet,  with  short  intervals  between  them  :
"  We  find  material  hindrances  impeding  our  manifestations.''
"  The  infliiences  are  too  various."  "  We  must,  though
reluctantly,  say  '  good  night.''  "


[The  three  following  Seances  are  recorded  by  Lord
Dunraven].

No.  76. — Seance,  No.  7,  Buckingham  Gate,  June  25th  [1869].

Present  : — Sir  Robert  Gore  Booth,  Augusta  Gore  Booth,

]\Irs.  Honywood,  Arthur  Smith  Barry,  Miss  A P  ,

Miss  C R  ;  Ml'.  Home,  and  myself. In  a  very

short  time  vibrations  and  slight  movements  of  the  table
occurred.  These  were  followed  by  raps  on  and  about  the
table.  Augusta  was  Ij^ng  on  a  low  couch  close  to  the
ground.  The  five  raps  for  the  alphabet  being  given,  we
received  the  following  message  :  "  The  position  of  Augusta
absorbs  our  atmosphere ;  raise  her."  We  placed  her  couch
on  a  sofa,  and  brought  it  up  to  the  table.  The  sofa
presently  moved  a  few  inches  from  the  table,  which  was
shortly  moved  up  to  it.  She  mentioned  that  the  couch
was  shaken,  and  also  that  she  was  touched  several  times.
Being  just  then  strongly  touched  on  the  knee,  I  asked,
"  Has  any  one  else  been  touched  1  "  "  You,"  was  immedi-
ately rapped  out. Mr.  Home  remarking  that  the  influence


NO.  76]


With  D.  D.  Home


267


seemed  chiefly  on  one  side,  we  received  the  following
message:  "We  are  obliged  to  keep  to  this  side  of  the
table."  This  was  on  Augusta's  side,  opposite  to  that  at
which  the  two  young  ladies  sat.  Mx.  Home  remarking,
that,  if  the  white  tablecloth  was  put  on  the  table,  hands
might  visibly  move  under  the  cloth,  we  accordingly  put
one  on.  He  asked  if  there  was  an  accordion  in  the
room.  Arthur  Barry  fetched  one  from  the  side-board,
and  placed  it  on  the  table.  Some  movements  under  the
cloth  were  seen  about  the  edge  of  the  table  near  Augusta,
and  in  other  places.  As  no  intimation  was  given  about
the  instrument,  Mr.  Home  took  it,  holding  it  with  one
hand  as  usual,  at  the  under  edge  of  the  table.  A  sort
of  prelude  was  played  with  slight  tremolo  effect.  We
then  had  the  following  message,  the  letters  being  chiefly
indicated  by  notes  on  the  instrument  :  "  There  is  spiritual
discord — we  pray  for  harrno7iy."  The  word  discord  was
given  by  a  horrid  discord  being  played  ;  while  harmony
was  expressed  by  beautiful  soft  chords.  While  the  play-
ing was  going  on,  Arthur  Barry  and  the  two  young  ladies
were  requested  to  look  under  the  table  to  see  how  the
instrument  was  held  and  moved.  Just  after  the  last
message, we received the following  : "  An  undeveloped

influence prevents our  "  here some shglit  break

occurred,  and  then  it  went  on,  "  but  ivith  prayer — earnest
prayer — we  will  dispel  it.''  This  was  shortly  followed  by  :
"  We  must  dispel  the  discord ;  Arthur,  sit  opposite.''''  He
removed  to  the  chair  opposite  Mr.  Home,  changing  places
with  Sir  Robert.  Mrs.  Honywood  was  next  to  Mr.  Home,
and  Sir  Robert  was  next  to  her.  Mi.  Home's  chair  was
partly  turned  round,  and  shght  movements  of  the  table
and  of  Augusta's  sofa  took  place.  The  alphabet  being
called  for,  the  following  message,  addressed  to  IMr.  Home,
was  given  :  "  You  were  surprised,  Dan,  that  you  ivere
turned  round ;  we  wish  to  convince  an  undeveloped  spirit
that  you  could  7wt  trick,  even  if  you  wished  to  do  so."
Mr.  Home  expressed  the  greatest  wonder  what  this  could
mean.  "  Convince  a  spirit,"  he  said,  "  how  very  odd  ;
an  undeveloped  spirit  ;  I  cannot  understand  it  at  all."'
He  then  reminded  me  of  the  seance  in  which  he  employed


268


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


the  fire  test  to  satisfy  spirits  {No.  30). I  said,  "  Ask  if
any one else understands what this message  signifies."
He pointed to each of us  ; and when his hand  was
directed  to  me  and  to  Mrs.  Honywood,  three  raps  were
given. Some rather undecided indications were  heard
when  opposite  one  of  the  young  ladies. Soon  after,  this
message  was  sent  : "  Robert,  change  with  Barbara "  (Mrs.
Honywood). Slight  movements  were  now  seen  under  the
cloth  near  Augusta,  and  near  Sir  Robert. Augusta  was
touched several times  ; Mr. Home remarking that  this
might  be  for  some  good  purpose. We  received  the  follow-
ing : "  It  is  with  intent  to  heal,  and  with  God's  aid  we
iviliy This  was  nearly  all  spelled  out  by  notes  on  the
accordion  ; each  of  the  letters  of  the  word  "  God  "  being
indicated  by  very  soft  chords,  and  the  last  two  words  by
very loud notes. This was followed by, "  Patience,
darling." The accordion was now played with  great
power,  like  a  sort  of  jubilant  hymn. It  was  pulled  with
such  force  that  Mr.  Home  was  obhged  to  hold  it  with
both  hands. At  one  time  it  was  drawn  away  till  Mr.
Home's arm was stretched out  ; the instrument  being
quite  horizontal  ; the  arm  and  accordion  bending  round
the  head  of  Augusta's  couch. It  also  rested  on  the  edge
of  the  couch,  and  was  played  there. Then  it  was  brought
round  across  the  table  back  to  Mr.  Home's  body,  and
carried  under  the  table. This  was  a  curious  manifesta-
tion. He  placed  it  on  the  ground,  and  it  moved  about
under  the  table,  touching  me  and  others. Soon  after  this,
as  Mr.  Home  was  talking,  he  was  arrested  in  the  middle
of  a  sentence — his  words  died  away — his  half  outstretched
arm seemed  to become rigid, and he passed into  the
trance. He got up and walked about the room,  ap-
parently in  a  very  uncomfortable  state. Going  over  to
the  piano  he  played  a  few  chords,  but  quickly  left  ofE,
seeming  cold  and  distressed. He  again  walked  about  for
a  little  while,  when,  coming  over  to  Augusta's sofa,  he
knelt  down  as  if  in  prayer  ; then  taking  her  hands  he
patted  them,  and  made  passes  down  her  arm. After  this
he  went  behind  Arthur  Barry,  and  putting  his  hands  on
his  head  he  exclaimed,  "It  is  much  too  cold  here  !  "  He


NO.  76]


With  D.  D.  Home


269


next  came  and  stood  behind  me  for  a  few  seconds,  and
then  nearly  behind  Miss  C.  R's.  chair,  when  he  dehvered
a  short  address,  beautifully  expressed  ;  but  of  which
unfortunately  I  retain  but  a  slight  recollection.  Every
word  was  admirablj^  chosen,  referring  chiefly  to  this  un-
developed spirit.  He  began  something  to  this  efiect  :
That  a  home  was  once  opened  for  the  souls  of  men  ;  but
through  sin  it  was  closed  and  sealed.  From  the  moment
a  man  is  born,  the  door  of  heaven  is  closed  against  him  ;
but  he  is  given  a  golden  key  which  unlocks  the  golden
gate  by  which  he  may  enter  in,  and  let  out  the  golden
waters  of  the  lake.  That  key  is  prayer,  through  which
our  spirits  force  their  way  before  the  seat  of  God.  That
SpirituaUsm  is  not  a  subject  for  idle  curiosity,  but  for
steadfast  pursuit.  Then  speaking  of  occupations,  he  said,
that  even  such  amusements  as  music,  drawing,  &c.,  if
carried  on  too  much,  would  lead  you  away  from  higher
pursuits,  and  ought  to  be  resisted.  He  ended  by  saying,
"  There  is  much  we  would  see  altered  ;  you  must  pray  ;
do  not  doubt  ;  it  will  be  done  ;  only  pray,  all  will  come
right."  This  was  obviously  addressed  to  the  lady  behind
whose  chair  he  stood.  Turning  to  Arthur  Barry  he  said,
"  You  don't  understand  this  now,  but  you  will  by-and-
bye  "  ;  alluding  no  doubt  to  what  will  be  explained
further  on.  Approaching  Mrs.  Honywood,  he  said,
"  Barbara,  your  father  is  here  ;  you  have  been  uneasy  in
your  mind  lately,  but  never  mind,  all  shall  be  made
smooth."  Then  putting  his  hand  on  Sir  Robert's  shoulder,
he  said,  "  You  were  touched  by  two  hands,  belonging  to
two  very  dear  to  you,  one  large,  the  other .  smaller  and
more  delicate.  Augusta,  you  felt  a  hand  touching  you,
and  a  small  pointed  finger  put  into  your  hand  (which  she
did)  ;  this  was  your  grandmother  ;  she  is  very  much
pleased  ;  they  would  like  to  have  done  more,  but  they
could  not."  Rapidly  approaching  me,  he  said  with
emphasis,  "  You  knew  well  who  was  playing."  After
this  he  sat  down  and  awoke,  remarking  how  very  silent
we  all  were.  No  more  manifestations  occurred  of  any
interest  ;  one  of  the  ladies  left  the  room,  and  Mr.  Home
soon  after  said  he  felt  tired,  and  we  broke  up  the  seance.


270


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


[seance


At  supper  one  remarked  that  a  chair  was  being  moved
to  the  table  ;  while  our  attention  was  called  to  this,
another  chair  moved  rather  quickly  five  or  six  feet  to
within  a  foot  of  the  table,  near  Mr.  Home.  This  was
seen  by  all  present.  His  chair  was  turned  half  round,
and  he  took  his  feet  off  the  ground  while  being  moved.
There  were  no  further  manifestations.

The  occurrences  which  form  the  remarkable  feature  of
this seance  require explanation. Some days ago I  had

the  opportunity  of  seeing  Miss  C R write,  under

supposed  spirit-influence,  in  my  presence.  I  obtained
permission  to  put  a  few  questions. Among  them  I  asked,

"  What do you think of Mr. Home  ?  " Miss R  ■

wrote  instantly,  "  He  has  a  certain  degree  of  power,  but
a  vast  amount  of  trickery."  In  answer  to  another  ques-
tion was  written,  "  He  (Home)  deceives  people  by  pretend-
ing that  he  can  call  up  the  spirits  of  their  friends,  &c."
These  and  other  answers  made  me  think  that  this  was
probably  a  deceitful  spirit.  The  young  lady  being  very
anxious  to  be  present  at  a  seance,  I  invited  her  to  this
one,  expecting  that  something  curious  would  probably
occur.  I  mentioned  the  circumstances  to  Mrs.  Honyvs^ood,
but  neither  she  nor  I  had  any  communication  with  Mr.
Home  on  the  subject.  At  the  seance  he  had  no  idea
who  she  was.  The  reader  will  now  perceive  the  remark-
able drift  of  what  took  place.  The  first  message  bearing
on  the  case  was,  "  We  are  obhged  to  keep  to  this  side  of

the  table,"  that  is,  the  side  opposite  Miss  C R  .

The  next  was,  "  There  is  spiritual  discord,  &c."  Then
followed  that  about  the  undeveloped  influence  ;  and  after-
wards in  addition,  the  remarkable  one  addressed  to
"  Dan " (Mr. Home) where the very word "  trick "  is

employed  which  was  written  by  Miss  C R with

reference  to  Mr.  Home.  These  messages  were,  so  to  say,
supplemented  by  the  beautiful  and  pointed  address  uttered
by  Mr.  Home,  when  in  a  trance,  standing  behind  Miss  R's.
chair.  Some  days  previous,  I  had  mentioned  to  two
friends,  very  conversant  with  spirituahstic  manifestations,
the  character  of  several  of  the  answers  written  through
Miss  C R  ,  and  they  both  pronounced  them  to


NO.  76]


With  D.  D.  Home


271


proceed  from  an  undeveloped  or  low  spirit  ;  one  of  a
class  which  appears  to  be  by  no  means  uncommon,  par-
ticularly with  young  or  incipient  mediums.  These  friends
were  ignorant  of  ]\Iiss  R.'s  name,  or  that  she  was  to  be
at  a  seance  with  Mr.  Home.  They,  it  will  be  observed,
used  the  word  "  undeveloped,''  the  same  as  was  employed
in  the  messages  this  evening ;  and  they  both  recom-
mended the  same  remedy,  as  was  iirged  by  Mr.  Home  in
the  trance,  namely  earnest  prayer.  The  table  was  lifted
off  the  ground,  but  only  a  few  inches.  The  drawer  of
the  table  on  Augusta's  side  was  suddenly  opened.


No.  11. — Seance,  No.  1,  Buckingham  Gate,  July  1st  [1869].

Present  : — The Dowager Duchess  of St. Albans,  Lady

■  , Mrs. Honywood, Mrs. Stopford, the  Honourable

Mrs. , Arthur Smith Barry, Sir R. Gore  Booth,

Augusta  Gore  Booth,  Mr.  Home,  and  myself.  We  sat
round  the  same  table  which  we  used  on  the  last  occasion,
the  room  being  hghted  as  before  by  one  lamp,  with  the
shade  over  it.  We  quickly  had  strong  vibrations,  and
raps  of  various  kinds,  some  of  them  very  loud.  I  said,
"  I  wonder  if  it  is  Dr.  Elhotson  ?  "  "  Yes,''  was  answered
by  three  loud  raps.  The  table  was  slightly  moved  in
different  directions,  and  strongly  tilted  ;  but  I  observed
that  when  inclined,  objects  sUpped  down  it.  The  Duchess
of  St.  Albans  was  touched,  both  audibly  and  visibly  to
others.  The  Duchess's  scarf  was  pulled  so  strongly  that
she  said  had  it  not  been  for  the  brooch  it  would  have

been  pulled  off. Mrs. ,  Mr.  Home,  and  I  were  also

touched.  The  accordion  was  taken  by  Mr.  Home,  and
it  commenced  playing  in  the  usual  manner.  Mr.  Home
said,  "  If  you  will  ask  for  some  air  they  will  perhaps  play
it."  The  Duchess  asked  for  "  Home,  sweet  Home,"  which
was  given  at  first  by  single  notes  and  afterwards  by
chords.  The  Duchess  and  Mrs.  Stopford  looked  under  the
table  while  the  instrument  was  being  played.  It  Avas
drawn  about  outside  the  table  and  back  again. It  was


272  Experiefices  in  Spiritualism  [seance


placed  in  the  Duchess's  hands,  and  played  when  she  alone
held  it.  It  was  then  put  down  under  the  table,  where  it
moved  about,  touching  different  persons'  feet.  It  came
up  on  my  legs,  and  I  took  hold  of  it.  I  asked  was  it
the  same  spirit  that  played  the  other  night,  and  was
answered  by  the  alphabet,  "  A  rude  imitation  only.'"
After  a  httle  while  we  got  the  following  :  "All  present
are  loving  frieyids  and  messengers  from  God."  Part  of  this
message  was  given  by  the  accordion  ;  the  word  God  being
indicated  by  soft  chords.  I  asked  if  they  would  play  the
same  air  as  they  did  at  Adare.  No  reply  was  given.
Mrs.  Honywood's  handkerchief  was  taken  from  her.  Mrs.

 felt  a  hand  placed  in  hers.

Some  time  after  this,  a  little  pencil  with  which  I  had
been  writing  dropped  out  of  my  hand,  much  to  my  sur-
prise, and  fell  at  my  feet.  I  tried  to  find  it,  but  could
not.  Shortly  after,  Mr.  Home  said,  "  I  see  a  hand
moving  about  the  Duchess's  shoulder."  She  felt  some-
thing coming  down  over  her  shoulder,  and  we  then
perceived  a  slight  object  on  the  edge  of  the  table  cloth
in  front  of  her.  I  saw  it  come  down,  or  placed  there.
Some  one  said,  "It  is  a  little  pencil."  "  Oh,"  I  said,
"  I  dare  say  it  is  mine,"  which  on  examination  it  proved
to  be.  We  then  got  this  message  :  "  We  took  it  from
Dunraven  for  you  ;  take  it."  I  gave  the  pencil  to  the
Duchess. A drawer that was exactly opposite  Lady

D  ,  shot  out  quite  suddenly,  so  as  to  startle  her  ;  this

happened  several  times.  It  was  also  shut.  Once  it  was
opened  so  far,  that  althovigh  they  tried  they  could  not
shut  it. The  cloth  was  moved  as  if  by  hands  under  it.

Mr.  Home  saw  hands,  as  did  Mrs. . She  also  saw

dark  forms  behind  the  screen  and  near  the  door.
Presently  we  received  the  following  message,  partly  on
the  accordion  :  "  God  bless  you.  One  ivho  watches  over
you "  ;  and  then  "  Oft  in  the  stilly  night  "  was  softly
played.  This  was  the  air  I  alluded  to  when  I  asked  if
they  would  play  the  air  they  had  played  at  Adare  ;  but
I  was  not  the  least  thinking  of  it  at  this  time.  Soon
after,  Mr.  Home  went  gradually  into  a  trance.  He  got
up,  bandaged  his  eyes  and  walked  about. He  knelt  down


NO.  77]


With  D.  D.  Hoyne


273


beside  Augusta,  and  patted  her  arms  sharply,  and  made
passes  down  them.  He  came  round,  and  stood  behind
several  of  us. When  between  Arthur  Barry  and  me,  he

spoke  in  a  loud  whisper,  saying  that  Lady  D might

become  a  medium  if  she  wished  it  ;  that  she  had  decided
mediumistic  powers.  I  said,  "  Will  she  succeed  ?  "  "  That
depends,"  he  rephed,  "entirely  on  herself,  not  upon  us."
He  said  that  a  beautiful  spirit  was  standing  near  her,
and  that  her  power  would  be  good,  and  the  manifesta-
tions dehcate  in  accordance  with  her  nature,  which  is
pure  ;  he  added  more  to  the  same  effect.  He  also  said
to Smith Barry, "Arthur, the spirit that touched  you

was from D  's influence." Then in a sort of  side

whisper,  he  said  to  me,  "You  will  explain  to  them  that
Dan  always  calls  people  by  their  Christian  names.  A
spirit,  Arthur,  pressed  on  your  knee  with  one  hand,  while
picking  up  the  pencil  with  the  other." He  also  said  to

^I's. , "I  see  the  spirit  of  Arthur  (her  husband?).

standing  behind  you."  And  he  said  something  about
George,  which  was,  I  beheve,  addressed  to  Mrs.  Hony-
wood.  He  then  returned  to  his  chair,  and  soon  awoke.
Scarcely  the  shghtest  manifestation  occurred  after  this,
and  we  left  the  table.  At  supper  nothing  took  place.
I  omitted  to  state  that  the  table  was  raised  on  one  occa-
sion at  least  18  inches  from  the  floor  ;  also  that  a  very
curious  manifestation  occurred — an  extraordinary  rattling
inside  the  drawer,  very  strong  and  loud.  Our  chairs  also
vibrated,  and  so  did,  once  or  twice,  the  floor.  The
variety  of  raps,  and  the  strength  and  frequency  of  the
vibrations  at  this  seance  were  remarkable.  The  principal
object  aimed  at  appeared  to  be  to  convince  the  Duchess

and  Lady  D  ,  by  the  physical  manifestations,  of  the

reaUty  of  some  invisible  power.


No.  78.~Sea7ice,  7,  Buckingham  Gate,  July  1th  [1869]

Present  (in  the  order  in  which  we  sat)  : — The  Dowager
Duchess  of  St.  Albans,  Mr.  Home,  Mrs.  Stopford,  Sir  R.


274  Experiences  in  Spiritualism  [seance

Gore Booth, Lady , Capt. G. Smith, myself,  Miss

Gore  Booth,  and  Mrs.  Honywood.  We  sat  at  the  same
table,  and  with  the  same  light  as  before,  but  without  the
tablecloth.  For  some  time  we  had  but  shght  manifesta-
tions :  they  were  merely  vibrations  and  faint  cold  currents.
I  was  touched  twice,  and  hearing  some  one  making  a  remark
about  being  touched,  I  said,  "  Who  was  touched  ?  "  The
alphabet  was  called  for,  and  the  word  "  Dunraven  "  was
spelled  out.  Mr.  Home  then  went  into  a  trance  ;  he
bandaged  his  ej^es  ;  then  walked  about  a  httle.  After-
wards he  appeared  as  if  talking  to  a  spirit,  making  a
good  deal  of  pantomime,  occasionally  placing  his  hands
round  the  glass  of  the  lamp,  apparently  to  diminish  the
light  ;  he  then  put  it  on  the  table.  He  sat  down  and
began  forming  an  alphabet,  as  he  did  at  Garinish  ;  after
making  a  few  letters  he  pushed  the  paper  over  to  Captain
Smith  who  completed  it.  He  then  gave  us  the  following
message  by  pointing  at  the  letters  :  "  We  will  do  the  best
we  can,  hut  the  conditions  are  not  favorable."  Then,
"  Elizabeth "  was  spelled,  which  no  one  seemed  to  under-
stand. Mr.  Home  then  put  the  Duchess's  scarf  over  his
head  and  face,  but^  soon  removed  it.  He  took  her  hand
and  placed  it  to  his  jaws  to  shew  that  they  were  locked,
so  that  he  could  not  speak.  He  then  spelled  out,  "  You
are  too  positive "  ;  and  soon  afterwards,  "  There  is  a
strange  mixture  of  unbelief,  not  existing  the  last  time  we
met."  I  remarked,  "  I  think  I  know  what  may  account
for  this  difference  "  ;  alluding  to  my  having  in  my  pocket
a  relic  which  a  friend  had  particularly  requested  me  to
wear.  He  pointed  out  this  message  :  "  It  matters  but
little  to  us ;  believe  in  God  and  love  each  other."  Then
underhning  some  of  the  letters,  he  put  numbers,  1,  2,  3,
&c.,  to  several  of  them.  He  showed  this  to  the  Duchess,
not  wishing,  apparently,  that  we  should  see  what  he  was
about ;  however,  she  did  not  seem  to  understand  the
meaning  of  what  he  did.  It  occurred  to  me  to  try  the
effect  of  putting  away  the  rehc,  so  I  got  up,  and  walking
across  the  room,  quietly  placed  it  among  some  books  on
the  sideboard.  Mr.  Home  then  pointed  out  the  word
''Talk."


NO.  78]


With  D.  D.  Home


275


Soon  after  he  got  up  ;  walked  over  to  the  sideboard,
and  returned  and  sat  down.  Then  taking  a  piece  of
paper,  he  wrote  in  large  letters,  "  Where  did  you  put  it  ?  "
I  rephed,  "  Can't  you  find  it  ?  "  He  went  over  again  to
the  sideboard  and  came  back,  and,  sitting  down,  showed
me  a  cross  which  he  wore,  and  which  he  partly  drew  out
from  his  shirt  collar.  After  this  he  took  the  lamp  and
placed  it  on  the  sideboard,  and  while  there  two  of  the
party  saw  something  in,  or  rather  on  one  of  his  hands,
when  the  hand  was  open.  This  must  have  been  the
reUc.  He  afterwards  returned  to  the  chair  and  sat  down.
Captain  Smith  saw  the  rehc  on  the  table  before  Mr.  Home
sat  down.  We  saw  it  become  visible  just  before  he
placed  his  hands  on  each  side  of  it.  He  then  pushed  it
across  the  table  to  me.  The  rehc  is  contained  in  a  httle
circular  box,  about  inches  diameter.  Soon  after  this
Mr.  Home  awoke.

We  had  vibrations  of  the  table  and  raps.  Mr.  Home's
chair  was  turned  round  ;  he  took  his  feet  off  the  ground,
and  was  either  hfted  up  bodily  several  inches,  or  elongated ;
but  subsided  almost  immediately.  Mr.  Home  asked  for
the  accordion.  He  took  it ;  and  some  chords  were  played,
with  a  discord  among  them.  We  then  received  the  follow-
ing :  "  Slight  want  of  harmony.'''  Mr.  Home  asked  if  any
of  us  should  change  places ;  "  Yes/'  was  rephed.  Mr.
Home,  by  pointing  to  us  consecutively,  made  out  that  the
Duchess  was  to  change  with  him.  The  accordion  was
moved  all  round  Mr.  Home,  and  played  some  notes,  when
his  arm  was  stretched  out ;  it  was  placed  at  the  Duchess's
back,  resting  on  her,  and  was  played  in  that  position.
It  was  then  drawn  under  the  table,  Mr.  Home  holding  it,

and  was  given  to  Lady ,  who  took  it,  and  held  it

for  a  short  time.  Very  faint  sounds  were  heard  ;  after
which  we  got  the  message,  "  Dan,  take  it."  It  played
for  a  httle  time,  and  he  then  placed  it  under  the  table.
Presently  I  felt  a  very  sharp  blow  on  the  shin,  and  found
the  accordion  had  struck  me.  Mrs.  Stopford  being  obhged
to  go,  left  the  room.  Mr.  Home  remarked  that  he  was
sure  we  should  have  better  manifestations  now.  We
almost  directly  received  the  following  message  by  raps  :


276


Experiences  in  Spirihialism


[seance


"  We  told  you  that  the  infliiences  were  contending  ;  there  is
a  change  for  the  better.'"  Mrs.  Stopford's  chair  now  moved
up  to  the  table.  Captain  Smith  said  he  saw  a  form
move  it,  and  then  sit  in  it.  Three  notes,  for  "  Fes,"
were  sounded  on  the  accordion.  The  table  was  then
slowly  tilted  to  one  side,  and  then  the  other,  as  if  they
were  trying  to  Mft  it  ;  it  then  ascended  more  than  a  foot,
and  with  two  or  more  lifts,  something  hke  what  was  done
at  Adare.  After  this  the  accordion  was  beautifully  played
with  tremolo  effect  at  the  end.  It  was  then  put  under
the  table.  Sir  Robert  was  touched  by  a  hand  that  came
from  under  the  table  cloth.  Captain  Smith  saw  a  spirit
form  and  hand  coming  from  under  the  table.  Mr.  Home
also  saw  hands.  Captain  Smith  asked  who  was  sitting
at  the  other  end  of  the  room.  The  word  "  Father "  was
spelled  out ; also  "  William." This  word  was  given  by

Lady 's dress being pulled. Captain Smith  said,

"  There  is  a  reason  why  the  chair  moved  up  to  the  table  ;
will  you  tell  us  ?  "  No  answer.  "Do  I  know  it  ?  "
"  Yes  "  was  rapped  out.  Then,  "  Sit  at  a  small  table  four."
Mr.  Home  then  pointed  to  us  all  to  know  who  should

go, and  the Duchess, Lady , Sir Robert, and  he

were  chosen  by  raps.  The  small  table  was  tilted  into
Mr.  Home's  lap.  They  then  were  told  by  raps,  "  Put  a
bit  of  paper  on  the  table."  This  they  did.  They  took
the  cloth  off,  and  the  table  was  raised  above  45°  on  one
side,  when  the  paper  slipped.  It  was  replaced.  The
table  was  again  inclined  and  the  paper  was  slowly  moved,
rather  up,  then  in  different  directions.  After  this  the
paper  became  luminous  ;  it  was  probably  the  hand  hold-
ing it.  The  table  was  then  inclined  almost  vertically,
but  the  paper  did  not  move.  The  table  was  also  made
to  feel  Ught  or  heavy  according  to  the  wish  of  the  persons
present.  This  was  done  very  strongly.  They  now  sent
the  following  message  by  raps  : — "  They  do  this  to  let  you
see  (a  pause),  now  return  to  the  large  table."  Very  soon
we  had  the  following  : — "  We  are  called  away  nearer  God,
good  night."  We  then  left  the  table,  at  which  we  had
been  sitting  for  two  hours  and  a  half.  At  supper  we
were talking about Lady 's glove being lost  last


NO.  78]


With  D.  D.  Home


277


evening,  and  upon  some  one  asking  whether  it  had  been
found,  some  one  else  said,  "  I  wish  the  spirits  would  tell
us  what  became  of  it."  Then  we  began  talking  about
Mr.  Home  looking  for  the  relic,  and  how  it  was  brought  to
the  table,  whether  by  him  or  by  a  spirit.  The  subject
continuing  we  were  sent  the  following  : — "  He  had  it  in
his  hand  at  the  side-hoard,  hut  ive  placed  it  on  the  tahle."
These  messages  corroborated  Captain  Smith's  opinion  that
Home  did  not  place  it  there.  Raps  were  heard  all  about,
on  the  table,  hear  the  ceihng,  and  in  different  places.  We
received  the  following  : — "  The  reason  he  could  not  find  it
was  that  another  spirit  had  taken  it  and  hrought  it  to  the
table."  Then  immediately  followed,  "  A^id  we  are  very
good,  are  we  not,  Dan  ?  "  Upon  which  Mr.  Home  laughed
immoderately,  as  did  also  Mrs.  Honywood.  It  was  all  a
mystery  to  us,  but  afterwards  he  told  us  the  meaning  of
the  message.  It  was  about  the  prettiest  manifestation  of
the  evening,  but  unfortunately  I  am  precluded  from  giv-
ing any  explanation.  Mrs.  Honywood  knew  the  circum-
stances of  the  case,  and  what  the  spirits  meant  by  their
forbearance  in  Dan's  favour.

The  cross  which  Mr.  Home  wore  round  his  neck,  and
which  he  exhibited  to  me  when  he  gave  me  the  relic,
was  a  Russian  one,  bearing  this  inscription,  "  In  Thee
0  Lord  have  I  placed  my  trust,  hell  and  the  powers
thereof  may  strive,  but  Thou  art  mighty  and  slialt
prevail."  The  relic  is  said  to  contain  a  portion  of  the
true  cross.


The  following  interesting  details  were  furnished  to  me
by  Captain  G.  Smith.  "  It  was  quite  at  the  beginning
of  the  seance  that  I  saw  an  object  without  apparent  form
move  near  you  under  the  table,  and  approach  Miss  Gore
Booth.  Home  said,  '  I  think  they  are  trying  to  form
hands.'  The  answer,  '  Yes,'  was  faintly  rapped  out.
Previous  to  ]VIrs.  Stopford  leaving  the  room,  indeed  almost
from  the  commencement,  I  had  seen  a  tall  spirit  some-
times standing  against  the  window  nearest  the  door,  some-
times sitting  in  an  arm  chair  between  the  window  and


278 Experiences  in  Spiritualism  with  D.  D.  Home

the  door.  When  Mrs.  Stopford  arose  to  go,  he  arose
from  his  arm  chair,  and  swept  forward  to  the  door.  I
fancied  he  was  going  out  with  her,  but  he  returned  to
the  chair.  The  impression  made  on  my  mind  was  that,
for  some  good  reason,  he  was  prevented  from  entering
the  circle.  When  Mrs.  Stopford  left  the  room,  the  large
table  in  the  centre  covered  with  flowers  and  books  moved
twice,  each  time  nearer  Mr.  Home  and  the  Duchess,  and
on  each  occasion  he  moved  his  arm  chair  too  ;  I  think
no  one  saw  this  latter  movement  but  myself.  It  was
then  as  if  to  frustrate  any  further  attempts  on  his  part
to  enter  the  circle,  that  Mrs.  Stopford' s  chair  was  taken
by  a  spirit  (in  appearance  hke  a  pillar  of  cloud),  and
moved  up  to  the  table.  When  the  door  was  opened  for
supper,  the  spirit  in  the  arm  chair  passed  out  in  front
of  me."


ADDENDA.


No.  1.

Captain  Gerard  Smith  has  kindly  furnished  me  with  the
following  notes  relative  to  the  seances  at  which  he  was
present  : — ■

On  p.  165,  the  hand  which  brought  the  sprig  of  box
was  distinctly  visible  as  it  pushed  the  curtains  aside,
which  partially  overhung  the  window,  and  at  our  request
it  was  again  subsequently  shown  on  the  table,  close  to
where  Home  was  sitting.

P.  167,  with  regard  to  the  footnote,  I  am  able  dis-
tinctly to  state,  that  the  only  occasions  upon  which  Home
left  the  room  were  to  fetch  the  lemon,  and  at  the  con-
clusion of  this  particular  manifestation,  to  replace  it  in
the  spot  he  had  taken  it  from.

No.  49,  p.  171.  When  I  entered  the  room  Home  was
walking  about  with  the  accordion  held  in  his  left  hand
only,  and  it  was  playing  ;  not  a  distinct  air,  but  a
plaintive  kind  of  dirge,  now  loud,  and  then  dying  away
till  it  became  inaudible.  When  the  spirit  moved  from
Lord  Adare's  side  it  seemed  to  pass  over  the  table  with
a  sound  hke  the  rusthng  of  silver  paper ;  Home  then
rose  and  stood  at  the  window  with  his  right  arm  extended,
and  the  spirit  seemed  to  sweep  down  until  it  rested  with
both  hands  on  his  outstretched  arm,  looking  up  into  his
face.  From  the  position  in  which  I  sat,  the  profile  of
the  face  was  perfectly  visible  to  me,  and  when  the  two
faces  approached  each  other  to  kiss,  there  was  no  apparent
difference  in  the  degree  of  density  of  the  two  figures.


280


Experiences  in  Spiritualism


I  have  nothing  further  to  add.  The  remainder  of  the
manifestations  which  occurred  when  I  was  present,  have
been  most  accurately  and  truthfully  described.

Gerard  Smith,
Captain,  Scots  Fusilier  Guards.


No.  2.

I  have  collected  a  few  cases,  illustrating  some  of  the
most  extraordinary  of  the  phenomena,  mentioned  in  the
preceding  seances.

The  following  remarkable  case  of  the  fire  test  has  been
kindly  furnished  me  by  Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall  :■ —

"  15,  Ashley  Place,  '

"July  the  5th,  1869.

"  Dear  Lord  Dunraven, — You  have  requested  me  to
recall  the  circumstances  of  a  seance  that  took  place  here
several  weeks  ago.  I  have  much  pleasure  in  doing  so,
but  I  never  take  notes.  I  am,  however,  certain  of  the
facts  ;  though  I  shall  not  be  able  to  place  them  in  the
order  in  which  they  occurred.

"  We  were  nine  (a  greater  number  than  Mr.  Home
likes)  ;  we  were  seated  round  the  table  as  usual,  in  the
small  drawing  room,  which  communicates  with  a  much
larger  room  ;  the  folding  doors  were  pushed  back  into
the  wall,  and  the  portiers  unclosed.  I  think  there  was
one  lamp  burning  over  the  table,  but  a  very  large  fire
was  blazing  away  in  the  large  room — I  know  there  was  a
great  deal  of  light.  The  Master  of  Lindsay,  the  Rev.
Mr.  Y — — ,  and  his  wife,  Mr.  Hall  and  myself,  Mr.  Home,
and  the  Msses  Bertolacci  were  present.  We  sat  for  some
little  time  before  the  tremulous  motion  that  so  frequently
indicates  stronger  manifestations  commenced,  but  it  was
quickly  followed  by  raps,  not  only  on  the  table,  but  in


With  D.  D.  Home


281


different  parts  of  the  room  ;  the  table  was  moved  up
and  down, — lifted  perfectly  off  the  ground — made  '  light  '
and  '  heavy  '  at  the  request  of  one  or  two  of  the  gentle-
men present  ;  and  after  the  lapse  of,  I  suppose,  nearly
an  hour,  Mr.  Home  went  into  a  trance.  Presently  he
pushed  his  chair,  or  his  chair  was  pushed  away — quite
away  from  the  table.  He  got  up  ;  walked  about  the
room  in  his  usual  manner  ;  went  to  the  fire-place  ;  half
knelt  on  the  fender  stool  ;  took  up  the  poker  and  poked
the  fire,  which  was  like  a  red-hot  furnace,  so  as  to  increase
the  heat  ;  held  his  hands  over  the  fire  for  some  time,
and  finally  drew  out  of  the  fire,  with  his  hand,  a  huge
lump  of  live  burning  coal,  so  large  that  he  held  it  in
both  hands,  as  he  came  from  the  fire-place  in  the  large
room  into  the  small  room  ;  where,  seated  round  the  table,
we  were  all  watching  his  movements.  Mr.  Hall  was
seated  nearly  opposite  to  where  I  sat  ;  and  I  saw  Mr.
Home,  after  standing  for  about  half  a  minute  at  the  back
of  Mr.  Hall's  chair,  dehberately  place  the  lump  of  burning
coal  on  his  head !  I  have  often  since  wondered  that
I  was  not  frightened  ;  but  I  was  not  ;  I  had  perfect
faith  that  he  would  not  be  injured.  Some  one  said —
'  Is  it  not  hot  ?  '  Mr.  Hall  answered — '  Warm,  but  not
hot  !  '  Mr.  Home  had  moved  a  little  away,  but  returned,
still  in  a  trance  ;  he  smiled  and  seemed  quite  pleased  ;
and  then  proceeded  to  draw  up  Mr.  Hall's  white  hair
over  the  red  coal.  The  white  hair  had  the  appearance
of  silver  threads,  over  the  red  coal.  Mr.  Home  drew  the
hair  into  a  sort  of  pyramid,  the  coal  still  red,  showing
beneath  the  hair  ;  then,  after,  I  think,  four  or  five
minutes,  Mr.  Home  pushed  the  hair  back,  and,  taking
the  coal  off  Mr.  Hall's  head,  he  said  (in  the  peculiar  low
voice in which, when in a trance, he always  speaks),

addressing  Mrs.  Y  , '  Will  you  have  it  ?  ' She  drew

back ;  and  I  heard  him  murmur,  '  Little  faith — little
faith.'  Two  or  three  attempted  to  touch  it,  but  it  burnt
their  fingers.  I  said,  '  Daniel,  bring  it  to  me  ;  I  do  not
fear  to  take  it.'  It  was  not  red  all  over,  as  when  Mr
Home  put  it  on  Mr.  Hall's  head,  but  it  was  still  red  in
parts. ]\Ir.  Home  came  and  knelt  by  my  side  ; I  put


282  Experiences  in  Spiritualism

out  my  right  hand,  but  he  murmured,  ',No,  not  that  ;
the  other  hand.'  He  then  placed  it  in  my  left  hand,
where  it  remained  more  than  a  minute.  I  felt  it,  as  my
husband  had  said,  '  warm  '  ;  yet  when  I  stooped  down  to
examine  the  coal,  my  face  felt  the  heat  so  much  that  I

was  obliged  to  withdraw  it. After  that  Mrs.  Y took

it,  and  said  she  felt  no  inconvenience.  When  Mr.  Hall
brushed  his  hair  at  night  he  found  a  quantity  of  cinder
dust.  Mr.  Home  was  elongated,  and  all  the  manifesta-
tions that  evening  were  very  remarkable  ;  but  I  beheve
your  Lordship  requested  me  to  relate  only  what  I  remember
of  the  coal  test.

"  Dear  Lord  Dunraven,  sincerely  yours,

"  Anna  Maria  Hall."

(Mrs.  S.  C.  Hall.)


No.  3.  '

The following is an additional case of the fire  test

witnessed  at  a seance held at Lady  Louisa 's,  at

Brighton,  furnished  me  by  the  Countess  M.  de  Pomar,
Lady  Gomni  has  permitted  me  to  make  use  of  her  name
in  corroboration  of  the  statement  about  the  red-hot  coal
being  placed  in  her  hand.

"  Mr.  Home  went  into  a  trance  ;  he  walked  about  the
room  ;  played  the  piano  ;  stood  behind  Mr.  Douglas's
chair,  who  also  went  into  a  sleep  or  trance  ;  and  Mr.
Home  appeared  to  be  speaking  with  some  one  about  him,
and  to  magnetize  him  ;  he  said  it  was  for  his  good,  and
would  remove  his  headache  finally.  Mr.  Home  went  to
the  fire  and  took  out  a  large  red-hot  mass  of  coal,  which
he  held  in  his  extended  hands,  and  blew  up  to  keep  it
ahght.  He  walked  up  and  down  the  room  with  it,  then
went  to  Lady  Louisa  and  wanted  to  put  it  in  her  hands,
but  she  drew  back.  He  then  said,  'No,  you  must  not
have it,  for  if you  have  no  faith, it  will  burn  you.'


With  D.  D.  Home


283


Lady  Gomm  extended  her  hands,  saying,  '  I  will  take  it
without  fear,  for  I  have  faith.'  Mr.  Home  then  placed
the  burning  mass  in  her  hands,  and  she  did  not  feel  it  at
all,  although  she  held  it  for  at  least  one  minute.  It  was
afterwards  put  on  a  sheet  of  paper  which  directly  began
to  blaze  and  had  a  great  hole  burned  in  it."


CLASSIFICATION  OF  PHENOMENA  i


Animals,  future  state  of,  167.

Accordion  played,  no  one  touching  it,  193,  226.

 supported,  without  human  hands,  59,  193.

Arrow  brought  through  the  air,  189.
Abbey,  Adare,  strange  scene  at,  195-99.
Alphabet,  drawn  and  decorated,  216.

Brandy,  glass  of,  emptied  and  filled,  147.

■ essence  extracted  from,  148.

(See  also  below,  Flowers  and  Lemon.)

Elongation  of  Home,  63,  76,  97,  109, 155, 161, 178,  238,

248,  249.

Fire  test,  133,  135,  239,  280-83.
Flowers,  scent  withdrawn  from,  136,  165.

  brought  through  the  air  and  given  to  persons,  69,

123,  124,  165,  166,  169,  183,  189,  207-9,  223,

226,  237,  238.

Harp,  chords  of,  played,  205.
Identity  tests,  90,  193,  236.

Levitation  of  Home,  147, 149, 155, 161.178,  197,  275.

 passing  from  one  window  to  another,  155.

Lights,  visible,  64,  95,  115,  124,  132,  146,  157,  163,  165,  196,  209.
Lemon,  taste,  essence,  &c.,  extracted  from,  166,  173.
Luminosity  of  objects,  94, 100,  276.
 of  Home's  head  or  hands,  68,  161,  195.


^  So  far  as  poss'ble  the  Classification  of  Phenomena  given  in  the  original
edition  has  been  kept,  but  for  convenience  of  reference  a  few  changes  have
been  made .


Classification  of  Phenomena


285


Musio  heard,  79,  91.

Objects  moving  by  themselves,  54,  92,  99,  276.

Pentecost,  phenomena  of,  imitated,  157.
Piano  raised  off  the  ground,  64,  209.

Raps,  stream  of,  like  electric  sparks,  53,  187.

Second  sight,  case  of,  102.

Sign  of  the  Cross  made  by  table,  59,  183.

Sounds,  51,  55,  162,  195,  198,  233,  235.

Spirit  forms  visible,  49,  79,  83,  92,  107,  115,  132,  146,  153,
154,  157,  165,  170,  173,  196,  198,  202,  238,  252,  272,

276,  277,  278.

Spirit  hands  visible,  79,  100,  139,  169,  170,  192,  223,  224,  226,

233,  272,  276,  278.

 persons  touched  by,  74,  79,  122,  124,  132,  164,  165,

169,  170,  182,  185,  190,  193,  194,  206,  226,  266,  268,  274.
Spirit-laughter,  51,  170.

Spirit-voices,  55,  91,  94,  146,  163,  176,  204,  227,  233.

Table  raised  in  the  air,  53,  74,  80,  169,  181,183,  185,  190,  193,

194,  217,  218,  227,  237,  271,  276.

Theological  views,  allusions  to,  72,  89,  95,  116-20,  126,  130,  141,

143,  151,  158,  173,  200,  204,  209

Window,  Home  passes  from  one  to  another,  155


PRINTED  IN  GREAT  BRITAIN  BV ROBEKT  MACl.EHOSE  AND  00.  LTD.
THE  UNIVERSITY PRESS,  OI.ASrJOW


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE  ■  ,

Society  for  Psychical  Research

PART  XCIV.


AN  INTRODUCTORY  STUDY  OF  HYPNAGOGIC

PHENOMENA.

By  F.  E.  Leaning.

■'■ la  le  muet  Silence  un  efcadron  conduit

De  fantofmes  ballans  dellous  Faueugle  nuict.

PONTUS DE  TyABD.

I.  Introductory.

In  F.  W.  H.  Myers'  Glossary  of  technical  terms  he  defines  as
"  hypnagogic  "  "the  vivid  illusions  of  sight  or  sound  which
sometimes  accompany  the  oncoming  of  sleep,"  and  similarly
as  "  hypnopompic "  those  which  accompany  its  departure.
These  phenomena  variously  named  "  Phantasmata,"  "  Ealhi-
cinations  Hypnagogiques"  and  "Faces  in  the  Dark,"  are
a^  variety  properly  included  by  Dr.  Wm.  McDougall  in
his  table  of  hallucinations  as  among  those  observed  by
the  sane  and  the  healthy  under  more  or  less  abnormal
conditions.  The  abnormality  is  so  shght  as  to  amount  to
no  more  than  a  certain  degree  of  drowsiness,  a  twilight
condition  of  consciousness  in  which  pseudo-hallucinations,
which  are  neither  waking  visions  nor  dreams,  can  occur.
Both  the  latter  have  received  a  full  measure  of  attention
from  psychic  researchers,  but  the  hypnagogic  variety  has
to  some  extent  fallen  between  two  stools.  They  were  ex-
cluded from  the  census  of  hallucinations  taken  by  the
Society for Psychical Research  i  and from Dr.  Head's


1  Proc.  S.P.B.,  Vol.  X.  p.  78.


290


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


enquiry  in  1901,^  and  in  none  of  the  International  In-
quiries following  on  Psychological  Congresses  have  they
had  any  place. ^  Yet  the  fact  of  their  being  entitled  hal-
lucinations implies  that  they  do  not  belong  to  the  fully
recognised  and  normal  subject  matter  of  psychology  ;  they
belong  to  the  middle  ground  between  it  and  physiology,
which  is  largely  the  proper  field  of  psychic  research.

It  is  v/ith  a  view  to  calling  attention  to  this  little-
cultivated  area,  which  is  yet  rich  in  interest  and  illumina-
tion for  psychic  science,  that  the  following  notes  have
been  put  together,  and  in  the  hope  of  paving  the  way,  by
a  careful  collection  and  comparison  of  the  evidence  up  to
the  present,  for  further  advance.

It  is  necessary,  to  begin  with,  to  know  what  the  facts
are,  and  secondly,  what  interpretations  of  them  have  been
proposed,  and  how  far  those  proposed  theories  fit  into  the
four  corners  of  the  facts.  We  want  to  know,  before
theory  can  be  entered  upon  at  all,  as  much  as  is  possible
of  the  conditions  of  occurrence,  the  relation  to  health,
temperament,  the  conscious  and  the  unconscious  make-up
of  the  persons  concerned,  their  sex,  age,  peculiarities,
powers  of  sight,  will,  imagination,  and  so  on  ;  and  Avhat
the  characteristics  of  the  visions  comprise  which  may
relate  them  instructively  to  other  departments  of  which
we  have  fuller  knowledge.

II.  The  Data  and  Bibliography.

It  is  proper  at  this  point  to  state  as  nearly  as  circum-
stances allow,  the  extent  of  our  resources  for  dealing  with
all  these  points.  Briefly,  the  result  of  stocktaking  is  that
we  have  on  the  one  side  some  seventy  to  eighty  published
accounts,  including  a  few  at  second-hand,  by  the  seers  of  the
visions,  and  on  the  other  the  reports  of  a  small  number  of
scientists  and  scholars  who  have  collected  and  discussed  the
descriptions,  many  having  added  their  own  experiences  to
the  rest.  The  actual  descriptions  range  from  the  bare
statement  that  the  writer  has  had  the  experience  in  ques-

1  Proc.  ^.P.B.,  Vol.  XIX.  p.  268.

2  Parish,  E.  Hallucinations  and  Illusions  (1897).


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena


291


tion,  up  to  a  sufficiency  of  detail  for  us  to  judge  of  it  on
the  ten  or  twelve  counts  which  are  involved  in  a  typical
vision,  and  among  them  are  a  surprisingly  large  proportion
of  people  of  eminence.  It  is  evident,  of  course,  that  even
with  this  number  of  accounts,  we  have  far  too  few  to
generahze  upon,  and  although  it  is  probable  that  a  more
widely  extended  search  through  literature  and  biography
would  yield  a  number  of  others,  and  that  they  would
follow  broadly  the  same  lines  as  those  already  in  hand,
yet  we  should  still  be  in  a  position  to  do  no  more  than
outline  the  laws  of  their  production.  Such  totally  different
conclusions  are  arrived  at  by  minds  envisaging  exactly  the
same  facts,  that  only  the  accumulation  of  greater  masses
of  observation  can  effect  a  final  result.

Putting  aside  the  earliest  descriptions  by  Cardano,  a
reference  by  the  Bishop  of  Chalons-sur-Saone,  Pontus  de
Tyard,^  and  by  Vairo,  Bishop  of  Pozzuolo,^  all  three  of  the
sixteenth  century ;  Simon  Forman,  astrologer,^  and  Hobbes,  ^
who  could  find  "  no  particular  name  "  for  this  "  kind  of
fancy  "  in  the  seventeenth,  we  come  to  the  group  of
eighteenth  century  physiologists,  of  whom  the  greatest  was
Johann  Miiller,  friend  and  contemporary  of  Goethe.  His
great  work,  filling  over  seventeen  hundred  pages  in  its
Enghsh  translation,  contains  the  first  scientific  treatment,
apart  from  descriptions  only,  until  Baillarger  ^  and  later,
Maury,  also  gave  the  matter  their  distinguished  attention.
The  latter  was  writing  on  the  subject  under  the  name  we
now  know  it  by  as  early  as  1848,^  though  it  was  thirty
years  later  before  his  observations  were  complete.''  In
England  Galton's  Enquiry  into  Human  Faculty  (1881),
Gurney's  discussion  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  (1886),
James'  Principles  of  Psychology  (1890),  and  De  Manaceine's

1  Marty-La veaux,  Pl^iade  rran9oise.  Sonnets  d' Amour,  vi.  (1573).
^  De  Fascino  Libn  Tres,  Venice  (1589),  lib.  ii.

3  Autobiography  (1600),  from  MS.  Ashmol.  208,  fol.  136-142.  Printed
1849.

*  Leviathan,  pt.  i.  ch.  ii.  (1651).
^  Ann.  Med-Psychol.,  t.  vi.  pp.  1,  168  (1845).
«  Ann.  Med-Psychol.  t.  xi.  p.  26  (1848).
'  Le  Sommeil  et  les  Bives,  ed.  iv.  (1878).


292


F.  E.  Leaning


[part


Sleep  (1897)  were  the  chief  landmarks  ;  and  the  present
century  has  seen  no  more  scientific  treatment  than  that  in
Prof.  Hartley  Burr  Alexander's  fine  analysis  in  the  Pro-
ceedings of  the  American  S.P.R.,  Vol.  III.  (1909),  and  the
much  briefer  contribution  in  Havelock  EUis's  World  of
Dreams  (1910).  The  scanty  notice  given  by  Walsh  in  the
Psychology  of  Dreams  (1920),  and  the  more  sympathetic
treatment  in  Mrs.  Arnold-Forster's  charming  Studies  in  Dreams
(1921)  bring  the  roll  down  to  the  present  day.  With  the  ex-
ception of  Maury  and  Frederick  Greenwood  in  the  last  century,
and  recently  Monsieur  R.  Warcollier,  who,  however,  have  dealt
at  length  solely  with  their  own  visions,  only  one  or  two
of  these  writers  have  given  more  than  a  niche  to  their
consideration,  and  not  one  has  referred  to  the  fine  series
of  descriptions  contributed  from  time  to  time  to  the
Journal  of  the  S.P.R.,  or  made  a  comparative  study  of  all
the  available  material.

III.  Diffusion.

This  and  other  circumstances  naturally  make  it  ex-
tremely difficult  to  find  out,  even  approximately,  what
proportion  of  people  are  affected.  We  can  be  quite  sure
of  the  one  negative  fact  that  the  visions  are  not  universal,
as  sleep  is,  and  as  dreams  almost  are.  Maury,  for
instance,  a  life-long  and  inveterate  subject,  tells  us  that
his  mother  never  saw  anything  of  the  kind  ;  ^  and  Mrs.  de
Morgan  never  did,  although  her  father  had  only  to  shut
his  eyes  to  see  a  stream  of  "  houses,  trees,  temples,
and  other  objects  "  passing  under  his  eyelids. ^  Miiller  ^
attempted  to  get  some  definite  results  by  questioning  the
students  who  came  up  annually  in  fresh  batches  to  attend
his  classes  at  the  University  of  Berlin.  His  conclusion  was
that  the  visions  were  a  phenomenon  known  to  compara-
tively few,  for  he  sometimes  found  among  one  hundred
only  two  or  three,  and  occasionally  only  one.  In  spite  of
this  he  considers  the  rarity  "  more  apparent  than  real,"

lie  Sommeil  et  lea  Reves,  p.  68  (1878).
^  Three  score  Years  and  Ten,  p.  66.

^  Eletnenta  of  Physiology,  vol.  ii.  p.  1394  (trans,  by  Wm.  Baly,  1837).


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  293

and  was  himself  a  subject.  Andrew  Lang  remarks  in
his  Introduction  to  Thomas's  Crystal  Gazing  (p.  xxix.)  :
"  Hypnagogic  illusions  appear  to  be  matters  of  less  common
experience  than  a  person  familiar  with  them,  like  myself,
might  suppose."  Galton  ^  again,  a  pioneer  of  the  "  ques-
tionnaire "  method,  though  extending  his  enquiries  in
several  directions  and  obtaining  a  very  interesting  collec-
tion thereby,  says  nothing  about  the  actual  numbers  whom
he  reached.  Yet  most  of  the  writers  on  the  subject  agree
that  the  experience  is  "  common."  The  correspondence  in
the  St.  James's  Gazette,^  produced  by  Galton's  article  in
the  Fortnightly  ^  of  the  previous  summer,  shows  that  the
writers  considered  the  matter  so  usual  as  to  be  surprised
at  its  being  the  subject  of  enquiry  by  a  scientific  man.

Aristotle,*  to  take  the  most  ancient  witness  we  have,
says  "  anyone  may  convince  himself  if  he  attends  to  and
tries  to  remember  the  affections  we  experience  when  sink-
ing into  slumber."  Taine  ^  speaks  of  it  as  "  no  rare  ex-
perience," "  many  cases  "  having  been  reported  to  him
directly.  Sir  John  Herschel  ^  says  "  no  very  uncommon
thing,"  and  Walsh  refers  to  "  most  adults."  Against  all
this  must  be  set  the  fact  that  only  four  out  of  the  many
hundreds  of  answers  sent  in  under  the  S.P.R.  census  had
to  be  rejected  ^  as  being  of  this  class  of  hallucination,  and
although  to  those  who  experience  and  those  who  investi-
gate, the  occurrence  seems  natural  and  therefore  common
and  familiar,  yet  outside  these  two  classes  it  is  so  Uttle
recognised  as  to  cause  alarm  and  speculation  when  it
unexpectedly  arises.  The  only  point  on  which  definite
knowledge  seems  to  have  been  arrived  at  on  all  hands  is
that  children  are  much  more  frequent  seers  of  the  pictures

''■Enquiries  into  Human  Faculty,  pp.  158-166  (1883).  He  gives  five  cases
in  full,  but  refers  to  eight  others  knowTi  to  huii.

2  Feb.  10,  15,  20  (1882).

3  Vol.  35,  p.  729  (1881).

*  Parva  Naturalia  (trans,  by  J.  I.  Beare,  Oxford,  1908),  p.  462.  De
Somniis,  ch.  iii.

^  De  V Intelligence,  i.  58;  cited  by  James,  Princ.  of  Psychol.,  ii.  126.
'^Familiar  Lectures  on  Scientific  Subjects  (1866),  lect.  ix.
'  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  X.  pp.  36,  78.


294


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


than  the  grown-up  world.  Here  we  have,  beside  many
general  statements  ^  such  as  those  quoted  above,  a  basis
of  statistical  worth  at  last,  in  the  valuable  enquiry  carried
out  and  reported  in  the  Pedagogical  Seyninary,  April,  1898
(vol.  V.  p.  473),  in  which  826  children  ranging  from  3  to
16  years  of  age  were  canvassed,  results  rising  at  the  age  of
10  to  65%,  and  falling  between  the  years  of  13  and  16
to  58-5.  Taking  into  account  the  statements  of  many
adults  who  have  continued  to  see  the  visions  from  child-
hood onward,  but  also  allowing  for  many  who  do  not,  we
may  perhaps  surmise  that  "  most  adults "  number  reaUy
one-third  of  the  total.  The  respective  sexes  of  the  children
are  not  stated  ;  but  in  the  whole  list  of  witnesses  available
to  the  writer,  the  men  outnumber  the  women  by  almost
2  to  1.  This  may  be,  of  course,  because  men  have  written
more  largely  than  women, ^  both  in  books  and  scientific
periodicals,  and  so  would  be  quite  misleading  as  an  indi-
cation of  their  actual  predominance.

The  census  above  alluded  to  showed  the  proportion  of
women  seeing  hallucinations  as,  generally,  three  to  two  of
the  men  ;  but  if  we  should  turn  out  to  be  dealing  with  a
different  faculty — creative  imagination,  for  instance — we
must  not  too  readily  transfer  conclusions  drawn  from
another  class  of  experience.  It  may  be  of  interest  here  to
state  that  at  a  lecture  on  the  subject  to  an  audience  of
about  150  members  of  the  London  Spiritualist  Alhance,  a
show  of  hands  at  the  close  gave  about  30  per  cent,  as
seers  of  the  visions.  At  the  private  meeting  of  the  Society
for  Psychical  Research  the  proportion  was  found  to  be  27
out  of  65,  or  nearly  40  per  cent.  Allowing  for  the  pre-
dominance of  a  certain  type,  in  the  circumstances,  this
would  bring  us  to  the  33  per  cent,  surmised  above.

The  point  in  itself  may  not  be  considered  of  great  im-

'^E.g.,  H.  Ellis,  "nearly  all  jjersons,  when  children";  De  Quincey,
"  Many  children,  perhaps  most  "  ;  de  Manac^ine,  "  very  common  among
children  "  ;  Miiller,  "  frequently  to  children,"  etc.,  etc.  See  also  Proc.
S.P.R.,  Vol.  X.  149,  remarks  on  the  relative  frequency  of  hallucinations
among  children.

^  The  only  two  outstanding  women  writers  are  Marie  de  Manac^ine
and  Mrs.  H.  O.  Arnold -Forster.


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  295

portance,  but  it  becomes  so  when  we  wish  to  find  out
what  faculty  it  is  that  separates  off  a  certain  proportion
of  mankind  by  such  a  characteristic,  and  why  it  should
not  be  a  yet  more  common  heritage  than  it  apparently
seems  to  be.

IV.  Frequency  of  the  Visions.

This  varies  within  the  widest  possible  range,  from  a
single  occurrence  in  a  lifetime  up  to  the  habitual  seeing
by  day,  whenever  the  eyes  are  closed,  and  by  night  with
the  eyes  open  or  shut.  Thus  in  the  collection  as  a  whole
there  are  a  few  cases  where  the  visions  occurred  once  only.
The  following  description  is  given  by  an  Associate  of  the
S.P.R.i

"  I  had  gone  to  bed  after  a  long  journey,  but  was
too  tired  to  sleep,  when  suddenly  the  j)ortion  of  the  room
opposite  my  bed  seemed  to  be  flooded  with  light.  This  light
gradually  assumed  the  form  of  a  circle  about  two  or  three
yards  in  diameter,  and  then  I  saw  distinctly  a  colotired
landscape  with  a  cottage  and  some  trees.  I  was  wide
awake  at  the  time  and  very  much  surprised  and  interested.
I  had  often  heard  of  hypnagogic  illusions  and  had  read  of
an  instance  in  the  Daily  Graphic  not  long  before,  but  I
imagined  that  they  were  only  seen  by  persons  who  were
habitually  subject  to  halliicmations.  I  had  heard  that
these  visions  were  generally  a  reproduction  of  something
previously  seen,  but  I  could  not  remember  having  seen
any  landscape  exactly  like  this  one,  although  it  is  quite
possible  that  I  might  have  done  so  and  forgotten  it.
When  the  vision  gradually  faded  away  I  tried  to  produce
another  by  an  effort  of  will,  and  succeeded,  but  the  result
was  very  feeble  compared  with  the  first."

Another  instance  of  a  \inique  occurrence  is  related  by
the  late  W.  T.  Stead  in  More  Ghost  Stories,^  the  sequel  of
the  Christmas  Number  of  the  Review  of  Reviews,  1891.

"  There  was  no  light  in  the  room,  and  it  was  perfectly
dark  ;  I  had  my  eyes  shut  also. But  notwithstanding  the

^Jour.  S.P.B.,  Vol.  VIII.  171  (1897).  ^  p.  26.


296


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


darkness,  I  was  suddenly  conscious  of  looking  at  a  scene
of  singular  beauty.  It  was  as  if  I  saw  a  living  miniature
about  the  size  of  a  magic  lantern  slide.  At  this  moment
I  can  recall  the  scene  as  if  I  saw  it  again.  It  was  a  sea-
side piece.  The  moon  was  shining  upon  the  water,  which
rippled  slowly  on  to  the  beach.  Right  before  me  a  long
mole  ran  out  into  the  water.  On  either  side  of  the  mole
iiTegular  rocks  stood  up  above  the  sea  level.  On  the
shore  stood  several  houses,  square  and  rude,  which  re-
sembled nothing  that  I  had  ever  seen  in  house  architecture.
No  one  was  stirring,  but  the  moon  was  there,  and  the  sea
and  the  gleam  of  the  moonlight  on  the  rijjpiing  waters  was
just  as  if  I  had  been  looking  out  upon  the  actual  scene.
It  was  so  beautiful  that  I  remembered  thinking  that  if  it
continued  I  should  be  so  interested  in  looking  at  it  that
I  should  never  go  to  sleep.

I  was  wide  awake,  and  at  the  same  time  that  I  saw  the
scene  I  distinctly  heard  the  dripping  of  the  rain  outside
the  window.  Then  suddenly,  without  any  apparent  object
or  reason,  the  scene  changed.  The  moonlit  sea  vanished,
and  in  its  place  I  was  looking  right  into  the  interior  of  a
reading-room.  It  seemed  as  if  it  had  been  used  as  a
school-room  in  the  daytime,  and  was  employed  as  a  read-
ing-room in  the  evening.  I  remember  seeing  one  reader,
who  had  a  curious  resemblance  to  Tim  Harrington,  although
it  was  not  he,  hold  up  a  magazine  or  book  in  his  hand
and  laugh.  It  was  not  a  picture  ...  it  was  there.  The
scene  was  just  as  if  you  M'ere  looking  through  an  opera
glass  ;  you  saw  the  play  of  the  muscles,  the  gleaming  of
the  eye,  every  movement  of  the  unknown  persons  in  the
unnamed  place  into  which  you  were  gazing."

These,  and  a  few  other  examples,  are  given  in  full  here,
partly  to  facilitate  reference  in  discussing  them  later,  and
partly  by  way  of  relieving  the  subject  by  actual  illustra-
tion. Next  to  these  cases  come  two  which  are  probably
representative  of  a  much  larger  number,  in  which  the
visions  occur  over  a  very  short  period,  about  two  or  three
nights  in  each  case  It  is  amusing  to  note  the  vigour  of
expression,  as  of  a  man  rather  surprised  and  indignant.


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  297

with  which  the  old  Scotsman,  Dr.  Robert  McNish  de-
scribes ^  how  in  March  1829,  during  an  attack  of  fever,
he  experienced  "  illusions  of  a  very  peculiar  kind."  The
fact  that  they  only  appeared  in  darkness  was  one  of  the
most  distressing  accompaniments,  since  he  could  not  bear
much  Hght.  "  I  had  the  consciousness,"  he  says,  "  of
shining  and  hideous  faces  grinnmg  at  me  in  the  midst  of
profound  darkness,  from  which  they  glared  forth  in  horrid
and  diabohcal  relief.  They  were  never  stationary,  but
kept  moving  in  the  gloomy  background.  .  .  .  They  would
frequently  break  into  fragments,  which  after  floating  about
would  unite — portions  of  one  face  coalescing  with  those  of
another,  and  thus  forming  still  more  uncouth  and  abom-
inable images."  On  the  night  on  which  his  illness  cul-
minated, durmg  five  hours  of  severe  headache,  another
typical  phase  superseded  that  of  the  faces.  To  the
accompaniment  of  a  grand  orchestral  march,  executed
with  tremendous  energy  and  more  loudly  than  he  had  ever
heard  it  before,  "  I  had  a  splendid  vision  of  a  theatre,  in
the  arena  of  which  Ducrow,  the  celebrated  equestrian  was
performing.  On  this  occasion  I  had  no  consciousness  of
a  dark  background  hke  that  on  which  the  monstrous
images  floated  ;  but  everything  was  gay,  bright  and  beauti-
ful. I  was  broad  awake,  my  eyes  were  closed,  and  yet
I  saw  with  perfect  distinctness  the  whole  scene  going  on  m
the  theatre — Ducrow  performing  his  wonders  of  horseman-
ship— and  the  assembled  multitude,  among  whom  I  recog-
nised several  intimate  friends."

Bostock  ^  describes  a  similar  short  period  during  fever,
but  free  from  delirium,  and  a  more  modern  and  very
picturesque  account  is  given  by  an  Associate  of  the
American  S.P.R.^  Next  to  these  come  the  cases  of  which
the  standard  example  is  Nicolai  of  Berhn,  though  he
barely  comes  within  our  range,  since  his  visions  of  busy
men  and  women,  people  on  horseback,  dogs,  and  birds,
were  seen  with  open  eyes  and  only  sometimes  with  them

1  The  Philosophy  of  Sleep,  ed.  iii.  p.  274  (1836).
^Elementary  System  of  Physiology,  vol.  iii.  p.  204  (1824).
^Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  270.


298


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


closed.^  In  his  case  they  lasted  two  months,  and  yielded
to  purely  physical  treatment.  It  will  be  observed  that
this  is  a  feature  of  the  short-period  class.  Scanty  or
infrequent  experience  of  the  visions  divides  the  percipients
into  three  groups.  The  first  is  constituted  of  several
cases  in  which  some  scene  has  been  vividly  impressed  on
the  senses,  or  some  object  has  engaged  concentrated  atten-
tion during  the  day,  and  an  absolute  reproduction  takes
place  spontaneously  against  the  background  of  darkness.
Examples  of  this  kind  are  Flournoy's  vision  of  the  chess-
board, the  anatomical  dissection  on  the  first  day  of  his
introduction  to  the  study,  and  so  on.  He  calls  these
hypnagogic,  and  speaks  of  having  seen  ten  or  twelve. ^
Hobbes'  geometrical  figures,  Miiller's  microscopical  prepara-
tion,^  Ferriar's  interesting  sights  such  as  "a  romantic
ruin,  a  fine  seat,  or  a  review  of  a  body  of  troops  "  which
he  would  see  at  once  on  going  into  a  dark  room  in  the
evening,*  are  all  of  this  class.  Further  cases  are  given  by
Dr.  D.  G.  Stoney,^  Prof.  Vignoli,"  and  others.

In  Volume  XI.  of  Proceedings  S.P.R.  p.  360,  a  good
typical  vision  of  this  kind  is  described,  received  by  Dr.
Hyslop  from  a  student  in  New  York.  He  had  left  college
early  on  the  afternoon  of  March  17th,  1893,  and  on  reach-
ing Fifth  Avenue  he  says,  "  I  saw  part  of  the  parade  of
the  loyal  sons  of  St.  Patrick,  with  their  green  sashes,
banners  with  harps  surmounted  by  fools'  caps,  and  all  the
other  paraphernaha."  After  attending  to  his  afiCairs  and
on  returning  home,  "as  I  was  going  up  my  front  stairs,
which  are  quite  dark,  I  got  a  distinct  picture  of  the
paraders,  green  sashes,  banners  and  all — seemingly  projected

*  The  fiill  account  was  given  by  Nicolai  in  a  Memoir  read  before  the
Royal  Society  of  Berlin,  Feb.  28,  1799.  Translations  may  be  found  in
Hibbert  ;  Jung-Stilling's  Theory  of  Pneuniatology,  note  4  ;  Ferriar's  Theory
oj  Apparitions,  p.  45  ;  Clarke's  Visions,  p.  32,  etc.

-  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  463. Communicated  to  Myers.

^Op.  cit.,  p.  1393.

^  Ferriar,  Theory  of  Apparitions,  p.  17  (1813).

5  Phil.  Mag.  March  1894,  quoted  in  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  X.  141.

6  Nature,  Oct. 5, 1893,  quoted  in  Proc.  S.P.R. Vol.  X.  141.


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena


299


on  the  dark  wall-paper  with  which  the  hall  is  covered."
Myers  classes  this  as  a  cerebral  after-image.  It  is  placed
here  because  the  narrator,  although  not  drowsy,  was  in
darkness  when  the  scene  reproduced  itself.  Warcollier
also  had  visions  of  a  test-tube, ^  and  of  a  mineral  substance
which  he  had  been  studying  in  his  laboratory,  the  latter
on  his  pillow,  and  strongly  lighted.

The  subjects  in  all  of  these  instances  except  the  last
either  have  them  only  occasiona^Uy,  or  they  belong  to  the
second  group,  where  the  faculty  ceases  with  childhood  or
adolescence.  Thus  Havelock  Ellis  ^  remembers  only  his
visions  at  seven  years  shared  with  a  little  cousin  of  the
same  age  ;  Mrs.  Haweis  ^  in  describing  the  drift  of  great
pink  fragrant  roses  which  she  saw  as  a  child  of  nine,  says
that  they  became  "  annually  smaller,  swifter,  farther  off,"
until  by  the  time  she  was  grown  up  they  had  become  a
mere  speck.  Dr.  Stoney,  referred  to  above,  says  "  often,
as  a  lad,"  and  various  others  give  testimony  to  the  same
effect.  Between  these  two  groups,  in  which  the  visions
are  either  few  enough  to  be  counted,  or  ceased  altogether
with  maturity,  come  those  where  apparently  they  begin  in
later  life  and  their  development  can  be  given  a  definite  date.
When  they  have  once  begun,  it  is  evident  that  the  expres-
sions "  the  last  six  years,"  "  eighteen  months  ago  "  and
so  on,  are  of  very  relative  value  in  a  table  of  "  Fre-
quency "  except  as  affording  a  starting  point  for  further
enquiry  as  to  the  probable  cause.  It  would  be  of  interest
to  know  whether  there  is  in  such  cases  a  recrudescence  of
youthful  faculty,  which  became  submerged  at  the  thres-
hold of  adult  life,  or  an  actual  birth  of  it,  and  if  so,  why
the  hour  for  it  arrived  when  it  did.  It  is  to  be  noted
that  in  cases  of  late  development  the  visions  are  inter-
mittent and  not  continuous.  Periods  of  vacant  weeks  or
months  will  elapse,  and  then  "  rushes  "  will  occur.

We  now  reach  a  line  of  demarcation  after  which  the
accounts  all  refer  to,  or  imply,  long  periods  of  years  and
such  expressions  as  "  generally," "  usually," "  for  a  long

^  La  Telepathie,  pp.  53,  58.  ^  World  of  Dreams,  p.  30  (1911).

^  Galton,  op.  cit.,  p.  165.


300


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


time,"  "  frequently,"  are  found.  There  is  a  great  increase
in  numbers,  and  the  class  merges  into  that  in  which  per-
cipients say  "  all  my  life,"  or  "  as  long  as  I  can  remem-
ber." These  form  quite  the  majority  of  the  total  avail-
able for  study,  and  it  is  fortunate  that  this  is  so,  for  it
enables  us  to  go  a  little  more  into  types  and  tempera-
ments, and  many  other  matters  bearing  on  the  subject,
which  the  scantier  records  do  not  admit  of.  Maury  is
perhaps  the  example  par  excellence  of  the  extreme  type,
since  he  could  not  close  his  eyes  even  for  an  inappreciable
second  during  reading  aloud  without  having  a  vision.^
It  may  be  in  place  here  also  to  note  that  a  tendency  for
the  visions  to  decrease  either  in  size  or  in  frequency  some-
times occurs,  and  that  changes  in  the  subject-matter  are
observed,  as  for  instance,  when  Sir  John  Herschel  told
Mrs.  de  Morgan  that  late  in  hie  he  saw  "  more  faces  and
fewer  landscapes  than  previously,"  ^  but  Maury,  on  the  con-
trary, saw  fewer  faces  and  figures,  and  more  of  natural
scenery.^  It  is  possible  that  just  as  in  childhood  there
are  certain  ages  which  mark  culminating  points,  so  adult
life  also  may  have  its  periodical  summits,  but  since  to
estabhsh  this  it  would  be  necessary  to  know  the  ages  of
the  percipients  in  all  the  cases  examined,  that  is  at
present  unattainable.

V.  Health.

The  very  first  question  which  common  sense  puts  upon
discovering  the  existence  of  the  phenomena,  is  as  to  the
physical  conditions  under  which  they  are  observed.  Already
we  have  noticed  several  mentions  of  fever,  as  in  the  cases
of  McNish  and  Bostock.  To  these  can  be  added  that  of
the  American  Associate  referred  to,  who  notes  that  he  had
never  seen  the  visions  at  any  other  time,  that  they  ex-
hibited great  rapidity,  remarkable  variety  in  colour,  scenery
and  movement,  were  sharply  defined,  but  became  fainter
and  less  frequent  as  the  temperature  came  down  in  the
course  of  three  or  four  days. Another  contributor  to  the


1  Maury,  op.  cit.,  p.  61.
3  Op.  cit.,  p.  91.


2  De  Morgan,  op.  cit.,  p.  70.


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  301

same  volume  ^  who  says  he  sees  constantly,  but  in  good
health  ignores  the  visions  unless  he  turns  his  attention  to
them,  yet  "  when  feverish  cannot  but  see  the  kaleidoscopic
views."  In  another  case  ^  a  lady,  who  with  her  mother
had  always  seen  the  "  dream  faces,"  found  when  in  fever
that  a  painful  degeneration  took  place.  The  faces  became
horrible  and  grotesque,  and  a  blood-red  veil  seemed  over
them.  Nicolai's  phantoms  also  faded,  and  became  at  last
invisible  as  the  day  of  his  treatment  wore  on.  Maury,
who  had  a  chronic  tendency  to  cephalagia,  cerebral  con-
gestion, and  all  manner  of  "  douleurs,"  bears  witness  to
his  hallucinations  being  more  numerous,  and  above  all
more  vivid,  whenever  he  had  especially  taxed  his  powers,
as  in  the  notable  instance  of  his  two-days'  struggle  with  a
long  and  difficult  Greek  passage.  The  visions  came  then
with  such  intolerable  rapidity  that  he  was  obliged  to  sit
up  in  bed  to  dissipate  them.^  Baillarger  also  quotes
Marc  as  referring  to  indigestion,  nervous  disturbance,  or
shock,  as  commonly  productive  of  "figures  les  plus  gro-
tesques, souvent  les  plus  effrayantes  "  at  bed-time.  His
collection  of  thirty  cases,  mostly  patients  at  the  Salpet-
riere,  naturally  illustrates  this  point  of  view.  Hyslop
again  speaks  of  his  having  the  experience  "  quite  frequently
during  my  tendencies  to  nervous  prostration."  *  Walsh  ^
considers  the  hypnagogic  condition  favourable  to  nightmare,
especially  to  persons  over-fatigued  or  in  poor  general
health,  and  remarks  (p.  222)  that  children  in  good  health
are  not  generally  troubled  by  them.  To  him  the  visions
are  evidently  a  correlate  of  a  nervous,  impressionable
temperament,  or  of  eyestrain  and  fatigue.  The  latter
cause  is  in  evidence  in  the  first  instance  used  in  illustra-
tion, where  the  subject  was  "  too  tired  to  sleep."  In
W.  T.  Stead's  case  following  that,  he  was  in  a  similar
condition,  having  been  working  late  for  several  nights  over
the  Review  of  Reviews,  and  in  two  or  three  other  instances
the  fact  of  being  "  very  tired  "  is  mentioned.

iJowr.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  158.  ^  Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  IV.  p.  276.
=  Maury,  op.  cit.,  p.  58.  *  Proc.  Amer.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  II.  p.  389.

5  Walsh,  op.  cit.,  p.  197.


302


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


From  all  this  it  would  appear  that  the  condition  of  the
body  generaJly,  and  the  brain  and  optic  nerve  in  par-
ticular, have  a  definite  bearing  on  the  phenomena,  seeming
to  be  directly  responsible  in  some  cases  and  a  strongly
modifying  factor  in  others  in  their  production.  But  that
this  is  not  the  only  conclusion  may  be  seen  from  a  com-
parison of  many  other  witnesses.  It  is  by  no  means  only
the  nervous,  the  weary,  and  the  sick  who  see  the  visions.
On  the  contrary,  the  great  majority,  who  do  not  mention
their  physical  condition  at  all,  may  thereby  be  considered
to  be  normal,  and  Galton  remarks,^  in  his  discussion  of
"  visionaries,"  on  the  surprisingly  large  number  of  sane
and  healthy  people  whom  his  enquiries  brought  to  light  as
belonging  to  that  class.  The  constant  seer  and  gifted
literary  man,  James  Greenwood,  who  was  no  doubt  one  of
those  "  five  editors  of  influential  newspapers  "  to  whom
Galton  refers,  expressly  speaks  ^  of  tired  or  disordered
eyesight  as  "  the  most  natural  explanation  "  and  then
adds :  "  yet  on  no  occasion,  for  my  part,  has  there  been
any  consciousness  of  either."  He  is  quite  definite  that
they  do  not  vary  with  the  health.  A  lady  of  Gurney's
acquaintance  also  denies  any  connection  with  health  ;  ^  a
young  man  of  twenty-two  states  that  his  health  was
always  good;''  Sir  John  Herschel  speaks  of  his  impressions
"  in  health  and  under  no  kind  of  excitement "  ;  ^  and
another  lady  sees  them  "  when  at  my  best  physically."  ^
Among  the  writer's  correspondents  delicate  health  is  only
mentioned  once  ;  a  lady  who  sees  habitually  replies  that
she  cannot  trace  any  connection  with  health,  and  that  she
sees  when  tired  and  at  other  times  when  exhilarated,  while
another  refers  to  a  break  of  several  months  caused  by  a
long  illness.  Burdach  expressly  states  that  the  visions
are  not  morbid,  but  occur  to  those  in  full  health  and

^  Galton,  Of.  cit.,  p.  91.

^  Greenwood,  Imagination  in  Dreams,  p.  24.

^Phantasms,  i.  p.  492.  *  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  X.  p.  82.

«  Herschel,  op.  cit.,  p.  404.  «  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  X.  p.  76.

'  Die  Physiologic, bd. iii. s.  490  : "  sie  sind endlich nichts  Krank-

haftes,  sondem  erscheinen  bei  Vollkomraer  Gesundheit  und  ganzlicher
Nuchtemheit."


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  303

quite  calm.^  It  may  also  be  added  that  the  Surgeon-
General's  Index  Catalogue  to  Medical  Periodicals,  filhng
thirty-three  vohimes  to  the  present  date,  contains  no  other
references  than  are  to  be  found  in  the  present  paper.

It  is  logical  to  conclude  that  hypnagogic  hallucinations,
though  affected  in  some  circumstances  by  ill-health,  are  in
most  cases  perfectly  compatible  with,  and  found  in,  per-
sons enjoying  normal  and  wholesome  conditions  of  life.
That  the  older  writers — Abercrombie,  Hibbert,  Ferriar,
Wigan,  etc. — prepossessed  with  the  idea  that  aU  seeing  of
visions  was  in  itself  a  symptom  of  existing  or  oncoming
illness,  should  characterise  them  as  e.g.  Ferriar  does,  as
"  this  disease,"  is  nothing  to  the  point.  Doctors  naturally
know  more  of  their  patients  than  of  the  far  greater  multi-
tude who  are  not  patients.

VI.  Natural  Vision  and  Hypnagogic  Visions.

The  next  question  that  arises  is  whether  any  connection
is  traceable  between  the  quahty  of  the  physical  sight,  the
powers  of  observation,  and  that  power  of  reproducing
clear  mental  images  of  things  seen,  which  we  term  visual-
isation, and  the  seeing  of  visions.  As  far  as  the  merely
physical  equipment  goes,  it  does  not  appear  that  short,
poor,  or  weak  sight  is  any  hindrance.  Thus  the  lady
above  referred  to  as  seeing  "  dream-faces "  when  awake,
says  that  all  are  distinct  "as  no  real  face  ever  is  to  my
short-sighted  eyes."  ^  Another  refers  to  weak  sight,  pre-
venting further  study  of  painting,^  but  not  preventing
either  crystal  visions  or  the  coming  of  faces  whenever  the
eyes  were  closed,  by  day  or  night.  Maury  also  suffered
with  his  eyes  the  greater  part  of  his  Life.*  A  correspondent
of  the  Occult  Review^  says:  "I  see  these  things  much  more
clearly  and  delicately  than  I  could  in  the  ordinary  way,
though  I  have  very  good  sight."  Both  observation  and
visualising  power  must  be  to  some  extent  dependent  on

iSee  table,  p.  375  infra.  ^  Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  IV.  p.  276

'Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  170. ■'Maury,  op.  cit.,  p.  51.

s  "  S.  M.  B."  Vol.  XV.,  p.  229  Ap.  (1912).

u


304


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


the  physical  sight,  but  here  also  natural  deficiencies  appar-
ently have  no  effect.

When  Galton  made  his  special  visualisation  canvass  of
one  hundred  persons,  all  of  them  more  or  less  eminent  in
Art,  Letters,  or  Science,  he  arranged  the  results  in  a
table  showing  good,  moderate,  and  poor  powers.  And
we  find  nearly  as  many  of  the  last  as  of  the  first  class  in
our  own  data,  always  bearing  in  mind  that  we  are  not
only  severely  restricted  in  number,  but  further  restricted
to  that  small  proportion  of  our  total  in  which  information
on  the  point  happens  to  be  volunteered.  Galton  himself
says  "  I  visualise  with  effort,"  and  in  another  place  ^
cites  two  very  poor  visuahsers.  Lang  ^  remarks  that  "  bad
visuahsers,  like  the  writer,  who  think  in  words,  not  in
pictures,  see  bright  and  distinct  hypnagogic  illusions."
Myers  ^  speaks  of  "  other  bad  visuahsers  besides  myself
derivmg  from  hypnagogic  illusions  some  notion  of  the  good
visuahser's  habitual  capacity."  Flournoy,*  again,  describes
himself  as  a  "  very  bad  visuahser,"  whose  memory  images
are  "  weak,  fragmentary,  indistinct,"  and  in  sharp  contrast
therefore  to  the  vivid,  concrete,  and  precise  characters  of
the  others.  Maury  ^  makes  the  same  comparison  when  he
saw  a  visionary  view  of  Rotterdam  with  a  clearness
which  he  says  he  could  never  have  attained  by  any  volun-
tary inward  representation.  Taine,^  whose  internal  images
were  feeble  and  rapid  while  awake,  found  them  become
"  intense,  distinct,  coloured,  steady  and  lasting "  as  sleep
approached.  Margaret  Deland,'  who  "  does  not  visualise
easily,"  says  the  images  are  "  strikingly  different  from  any
deliberate  visualisation."  So  also  a  writer  in  the  American
Proceedings  ^  :  "  My  visual  images  are  so  indistinct  or  weak
that  I  used  to  think  I  had  none,"  but  "  when  I  am  half
asleep,  I  often  see  visual  images,  clear  and  vivid."

1  Galton,  op.  cit.,  pp.  91,  158.

^  Lang,  A.,  Cock-Lane  and  Common  Sense,  p.  214  (1894).

3  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VII.  p.  315.  «  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  453.

^  Maviry,  op.  cit.,  p.  91.  *  De  V Intelligence,  bk.  ii.  chap.  i.

'  Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  269.

» Proe.  Amer.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VII.  p.  359.


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  305

But  if  the  bad  visualiser  is  not  thereby  handicapped,  it
may  be  thought  that,  a  fortiori,  one  who  can  describe
herseK  as  "a  very  keen  visualiser,"  ^  and  who  can  say
"  The  faces  I  see  are  usually  more  vivid  than  nature,"
must  still  have  some  advantage.  And  all  the  more  must
this  be  so  when  the  seer  is,  as  Miss  Goodrich-Freer  was,
a  good  crystal-gazer.  But  the  advantage  is  not  evident
in  the  descriptions.  There  is  a  marked  uniformity  in  them
in  respect  of  the  point  of  distinctness,  and  some  hypna-
gogic subjects  labour  this  in  a  way  that  suggests  a  super-
distinctness,  as  it  were,  a  microscopic  clearness  of  detail,
which  is  characteristic  of  the  visions  and  independent  of
the  native  equipment  for  seeing.  Thus  S.  M.  B.  says  :  "I
see  into  the  material  without  its  being  made  coarser,  as  it
would  appear  through  a  magnifying  glass  "  ;  and  a  corres-
pondent says  of  the  definition  of  the  faces  :  "so  sharp  I
could  see  the  grain  of  the  skin."  There  is  also  no  neces-
sary connection  between  these  and  crystal  visions,  for  some
subjects  say  that  they  have  tried  hard,  or  have  frequently
tried  to  see  in  the  crystal  without  effect,  and  another
percipient  who  is  "  traiaed  in  minute  observation  "  "  never
sees  visions  "  other  than  the  hypnagogic  variety.^  Prof.
James  remarks^  that  the  "pseudo-hallucinations"  "differ
from  ordinary  images  of  memory  and  fancy  in  being
much  more  vivid,  minute,  detailed  ..."  But  if  the  good
visuahser  is  not  better  off  as  respects  the  quahty  of  his
seeing,  he  is  in  another  way,  and  that  is  by  his  ability  to
compare  and  distinguish  between  the  (apparently)  different
kinds  of  vision  brought  into  play.  A  writer  in  the
Journal  *  previously  referred  to,  for  instance,  can  place  his
images  of  remembered  known  faces  side  by  side  with  the
strange  unknown  ones,  and  says  that  the  latter  kind,
which  he  calls  his  "  inward  vision,"  is  something  quite
different.  He  sees  both  at  the  same  time — one  in  the
brain,  the  other  in  the  eye.  Another  writer,  in  the
St.  James's  Gazette  ^  distinguishes  two  effects  as  "in  the

iJowr.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  295. -Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XX.  p.  256.
»  James,  op.  cit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  117. *  Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  158.
6  Feb.  15  (1882).


306


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


brain,"  that  of  voluntary  visualisation,  and  that  which
results  from  prolonged  attention  (which  we  may  call  the
Flournoy  type),  but  he  maintains  that  the  hypnagogic
effects  are  distinctly  neither  of  these.

A  certain  confusion  has  arisen  in  the  discussion  of  this
subject  by  the  use  of  "  after-image "  in  two  different
senses.  The  true  after-image  is  the  sensation  produced  on
the  retina  by  gazing  at  any  brightly  coloured  object,
which  will  then  reproduce  itself  against  a  dull  background
in  the  natural,  or  complementary,  colour,  or  both  alter-
nately, and  is  known  as  a  "  positive "  or  "  negative "
after-image  as  the  case  may  be.  It  is  the  unavoidable
result  of  all  such  seeing.  But  the  spontaneous  (not  volun-
tary) re-seeing  of  a  scene,  such  as  the  student's  Irish  pro-
cession on  St.  Patrick's  Day,  or  Flournoy's  chess-board,  is
not  the  same  thing.  It  may  or  may  not  be  due  to  what
Prof.  Alexander  calls  "  the  hypnagogic  agent,"  but  it  is
not  due  merely  to  such  partial  fatigue  of  the  retina,  as
is  universally  experienced  under  given  conditions.  Myers'
"  cerebral  after-image  "  is  the  more  appropriate  name  for
these  reproduced  scenes,  leaving  the  use  of  the  positive  and
negative  after-image  for  the  well-defined  optical  effect  only.
Prof.  Alexander  does  in  fact  distinguish  them  thus  when  he
says  :  "  they  {i.e.  hypnagogic  visions)  can  be  introspectively
distinguished  in  spatial  quality  from  after-images,  positive
and  negative,  a  fact  which  argues  against  their  retinal
locus."  1

In  Margaret  Deland's  account  ^  she  also  remarks  that
the  hypnagogic  images  are  not  only  "  strikingly  different
from  any  dehberate  visuahsation "  but  also  from  remem-
bered things,  which  are  as  a  rule  motionless  and  complete,
whereas  her  visions  display  movement  and  are  largely
fragmentary,  such  as  two  fingers  of  a  hand,  half  a  face,  a
foot  moving  across  a  threshold,  and  so  on.

The  question  of  visualisation  connects  with  that  extreme
form  of  it  which  has  been  called  projection.  It  is  referred
to  as  rare,  but  it  is  the  ability  to  control  which  is  so

^Proc.  Amer.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  III.  p.  622.  .  ;

^Jow.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  269.  • '  •


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenmnena  307

rather  than  the  power  itself,  and  hence  the  same  few
examples  are  constantly  cited.  They  are  Jerome  Cardan/
Goethe,^  Blake,  the  artist  known  to  Wigan,'^  and  to  these
may  be  added  another  patient  of  Wigan's,  "  a  very  in-
telligent and  amiable  man  who  had  the  power  of  thus
placing  before  his  eyes  himself.^''  There  are  besides  a  case
given  by  Dr.  E.  H.  Clarke  *  of  a  man  of  scientific  attain-
ments and  careful  intellectual  training,  who  could  produce
visions  of  statues  by  fixing  his  imagination  strongly  upon
the  memory  of  what  he  had  seen,  or  what  had  occurred
to  him  as  a  good  subject  for  groups  ;  a  lady  of  Gurney's
acquaintance  who  could  "  evoke  figures  at  any  time  by
looking  intently  before  her  "  ;  ^  and  a  group  of  cases  given
by  Dr.  Daniel  Hack  Tuke,^  of  which  the  first  is  of  Dr.
Lombard  of  Norwood.  Baillarger  contributes  one  example,
Martia,'  and  Dr.  Michea  another.^

We  note  that  in  this  group  several  reproduce  only  such
things  as  they  have  actually  seen,  and  these  are  therefore
in  the  nature  of  positive  after-images.  Thus  Goethe  sees
again  the  pictures  which  he  had  greatly  admired ;  Wigan's
artist  sees  the  sitter  whom  he  had  attentively  studied ;
Dr.  Lombard  sees  the  girl's  face  and  head  which  he  had
been  gazing  at,  but  transferred  to  a  background  of  summer
sea.  All  see  with  open  eyes,  and  some  in  broad  day  fight,
and  all  are  broad  awake.  They  resemble  hypnagogic  visions,
but  differ  from  them  in  several  sahent  particulars,  of
which  the  chief  are  the  absence  of  drowsiness  and  darkness
(except  in  Goethe's  case),  and  the  part  played  by  conscious
memory  and  imagination.  In  this  respect  they  more
closely  approach  our  normal  powers,  and  form  a  link  for

1  De  Varietate  Rerum,  p.  314  (Basle  1557);  lib.  viii.  c.  43,  p.  410  (Ludg.).
^  Goethe,  Dichiung  und  Wahrheit,  bk.  viii.

2  Wigan,  Duality  of  the  Mind,  pp.  123-26.

*  Clarke,  Visions,  p.  216.

^  Phantasms,  vol.  i.  p.  492.

^  Brain,  vol.  xi.  p.  449,  article  on  "  Hallucinations  and  the  Subjective
Sensations  of  the  Sane."

'  Mem.  de  I'Acad.  Roy.  de  Midecine,  t.  xii.  p.  332.

*  Mem.  de  I'Acad.  Roy.  de  Midecine,  t.  xii.  p.  250.  For  further  references
see  Phantasms  oj  the  Living,  i.  p.  479.


308


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


examination  between  ordinary  inward  visualisation  and  the
hjrpiiagogic  images  proper.

The  investigation  should  not  be  very  difficult,  for  though
Miiller  speaks  of  the  rare  power  of  projection  of  images  at
will/  and  Dr.  Clarke  says  "  few  possess  "  any  such  power, ^
yet  Wigan  says  "  I  have  known  numerous  examples,"  ^
and  Dr.  Lombard  not  only  discovered  his  own  powers  but
found  that  they  were  equally  possessed  by  the  other  persons
with  whom  he  was  in  converse  at  the  time.  A  correspon-
dent of  my  own  tells  me  that  he  had  met  at  intervals  three
other  men  who  could  do  the  same  thing,  and  the  mention
of  it  had  arisen  casually,  none  being  particularly  interested
in  the  question.  It  may  not  be  so  uncommon,  therefore,
and  affords  some  support  to  the  tendency  rather  freely  to
attribute  it  to  all  who  see  apparitions,  and  are  assumed  to
"  conjure  up  "  what  they  see,  under  some  telepathic  or
other  stimulus  (as,  for  example,  in  Phantasms,  i.  p.  469,
footnote).

The  evidence  adduced  in  this  division  of  the  subject
leads  to  the  conclusion  that  hypnagogic  visions  are  un-
affected by  either  bad  physical  sight  or  poor  visualisation,
and  that  in  those  who  suffer  from  neither  deficiency  there
is  agreement  as  to  a  certain  difference  of  quality,  inclining
to  marked  superiority  over  the  natural  product  of  the
brain.  -  .  .

VII.  Subject-Matter  of  the  Visions.  '

It  is  desirable  at  this  point  to  attempt  a  closer  study  of
the  visions  themselves,  in  order  to  have  ample  data  before
reviewing  the  different  theories  brought  forward  to  account
for  them.  At  first  sight  they  present  in  tlie  mass  a  feast
for  the  imagination,  in  their  almost  endless  variety,  which
makes  systematic  examination  difficult,  but  there  is  no
department  of  nature  which  does  not  offer  this  confusing
and  ramifying  element,  until  by  patiently  pulling  out  strand
by  strand  we  get  something  like  order  into  our  ideas  of  it.
There  seems  in  this  case  a  kind  of  rough  cleavage  into

1  Miiller,  op.  cit.,  p.  1397.  =  Clarke,  op.  cit.,  p.  216.

^  Wigan,  op.  cit.,  p.  126.


xciv.] Introductory  Studij  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  309

species,  beginning  with  the  formless,  continuing  with  faces,
then  geometrical  designs,  objects,  landscapes,  and  moving
scenes,  though  there  is  no  logical  reason  why  we  should
not  take  them  in  the  opposite  order  and  begin  with  those
that  show  the  highest  degree  of  reality  and  fullness  of
definition  first.  After  the  actual  subject-matter  comes  the
consideration  of  shape,  size,  spatial  relationship  and  peculi-
arities of  view  in  various  ways  ;  colour  and  illumination  ;
multiphcity  and  internal  movement  ;  recognition  or  the
absence  of  it,  in  connection  with  the  part  that  memory
plays  ;  and  finally  the  question  of  control,  or  relation  to  the
will.  When  all  this  has  been  considered,  we  are  fairly
at  the  threshold  of  the  problem.

(1)  Formless. — Most  people,  as  has  been  remarked  by
several  writers,  suppose  that  when  their  eyes  are  closed,
and  particularly  in  the  dark,  they  see  nothing,  but
this  impression  is  due  to  the  habitual  and  inconspicuous
nature  of  the  phenomena,  and  is  an  error.  When  pressed
to-  pay  attention  to  it,  they  will  find,  according  to  Ladd,
for  instance,  that  the  darkness  is  a  black  wall  with  a
multitude  of  yellow  spots. ^  Galton  says  that  before  he
thought  of  carefully  trying  "  I  should  have  emphatically
declared  that  my  field  of  vision  in  the  dark  was  essentially
of  a  uniform  black,  subject  to  an  occasional  Mght-purple
cloudiness  and  other  small  variations.  Now,  however,  .  .  .
I  have  found  out  that  this  is  by  no  means  the  case,  but
that  a  kaleidoscopic  change  of  patterns  and  forms  is  con-
tinually going  on."  ^  Miiller  refers  to  the  "  fight  which
sometimes  appears  to  the  closed  eyes  at  that  time."  ^
Meyer,  whose  experiments  on  himself  will  be  referred  to
later,  also  speaks  of  pure  colours  without  objects  filling  the
entire  field  of  vision.*  Greenwood  remarks  that  "  perhaps
many  persons  have  noticed  that  when  they  lie  with  closed
eyes  at  night  in  a  dark  room,  fight-charged  clouds  seem  to
float  between  eye  and  eyefid,"  and  that  the  darkness  in

^  Ladd,  G.  T.,  "  Contribution  to  the  Psychology  of  Visual  Dreams." —
Mind,  vol.  i.,  n.s.  p.  299  (1892).

2  Galton,  F.,  op.  cit.,  p.  158.  ^  ]y[uUei.^  ^  p  1394

*  Quoted  by  James,  op.  cit.,  p.  67.


310


F.  E.  Leaning.


[PABT


the  dome  of  the  lid  is  much  less  black  than  the  darkness
without.^  This  is  borne  out  by  the  chief  writer  on  entoptic
research,  Sir  W.  F.  Barrett,  who  refers  to  the  "  streams
and  patches  of  what  seems  to  be  a  light  flocculent  matter  "
which  can  be  seen  quickly  moving  on  a  dark  purple  back-
ground for  half  a  minute  or  so,  if  a  candle  be  suddenly
lighted  at  night,  and  adds  :  "  It  is  possible  that  this  pheno-
menon, which  does  not  appear  to  be  mentioned  by  any
writer  on  physiological  optics,  may  be  connected  with  the
presence  of  the  visual  purple  on  the  retina."  ^  One  of  my
correspondents  also  says  :  "  Once  or  twice,  when  wakened
suddenly,  clouds  of  brilhant  light  seemed  to  roll  and  fade
away  before  my  closed  eyes."  Vairo  ^  describes  how,
lying  in  bed  with  liis  head  and  whole  body  covered,  and
every  sensation  removed,  he  saw  "  colores  coeruleos,  virides,
rubros,  albos,  nigros,  et  quoscunque  ..."  The  seeing  of
"  wave  after  wave  of  purple  "  and  "  always  seeing  purple  "
as  well  as  the  cloud  and  mist  effects,  and  the  "  dim  mosaic
of  the  dark,"  all  mentioned  by  correspondents,  shoM^  that
we  have  here  the  zero,  so  to  speak,  from  which  to  start.

The  cloud-effect  is  so  constantly  spoken  of  as  preceding
some  more  definite  picture  that  it  seems  to  bear  the  sort
of  relation  to  it  that  the  calyx  does  to  the  flower.  Like
the  visions  in  the  crystal,  which  form  a  very  instructive
parallel  study,  the  clouds  roll  off  and  disclose  a  view,  or
in  the  case  of  the  faces,  the  clouds  form  the  stuff  out  of
which  they  define  themselves.

(2)  Faces. — -The  proportion  which  faces  bear  to  other
subjects  of  the  visions,  and  the  readmg  of  many  descrip-
tions, almost  suggest  that  there  is  a  special  face-seeing
propensitj^  in  the  mind.  We  know  how  artists  can  pro-
vide faces  to  all  sorts  of  inanimate  things — furniture,  trees,
gate-posts,  and  so  on,  how  simple  an  outUne  can  convey

1  Greenwood,  op.  c't ,  p.  21.

^  Scientific  Proc.  of  the  Royal  Dublin  Society,  vol.  xi.  p.  129.  "  On
Entoptic  Vision"  (1906).  But  "even  in  optic  atrophy  and  after  the  ex-
tirpation of  the  eye,  the  so-called  intrinsic  light  [of  the  retina]  remains."
— C.  S.  Myers,  Textbook  of  Experimental  Psychol.,  p.  100  (1911).  And
compare  note  on  the  seeing  by  the  blind,  sec.  xviii.  p.  398  infra.

^  De  Fascino,  lib.  ii.  p.  112.


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  311

a  profile  and  almost  any  three  points  a  fnll-face  in  wall-
paper, an  open  fire,  or  a  child's  slate.  In  one  of  the
illustrations  to  Prof.  Alexander's  paper  the  flowers  have
faces  and  expressions,  and  are  putting  out  their  tongues
at  the  Puritan  beside  them.  In  Hawthorne's  Journal  for
October  1851,  he  writes  :  "  Going  to  the  village  yesterday
afternoon,  I  saw  the  face  of  a  beautiful  woman  gazing  at
me  from  a  cloud.  It  was  the  fuU  face,  not  the  bust.  It
had  a  sort  of  mantle  on  the  head,  and  a  pleasant  expres-
sion of  countenance.  The  vision  lasted  while  I  took  a
few  steps,  and  then  vanished.  I  never  before  saw  nearly
so  distinct  a  cloud-picture,  or  rather  sculpture,  for  it  came
out  in  alto-relievo  on  the  body  of  the  cloud."

A  similar  and  marked  tendency  is  described  of  himself
by  Dr.  C.  C.  Carter  in  the  Journal  of  the  American  S.P.R.,
Vol.  XV.  p.  351  (July  1921),  and  Mr.  Stamton  Moses'
hand  "  left  to  itself  "  drew  an  extraordinary  mass  of  faces
once,  shown  in  Plate  X.  of  A.  W.  Trethewy's  Controls  of
Stainton  Moses,  p.  170.

One  of  Baillarger's  "  alienes "  had  only  to  look  fixedly
at  any  object,  when  it  seemed  to  develop  a  head,  the
eyes  gazing  at  her.  Poor  Lelorgne  de  Savigny  ^  used  to
waken  under  a  vast  vault  of  contemptuous  and  spiteful
faces  ;  others  have  seen  the  stairs  and  the  walls  paved
with  them.  It  is  not  surprising  that  considermg  how
great  a  part  faces  play  in  life,  they  should  come  into  the
hypnagogic  gallery  early  and  in  large  numbers.  In  the
children's  census,  however,  nearly  twice  as  many  speak  of
stars  and  colours  as  of  people  and  faces.

We  may  note  three  characteristics  of  the  faces  as  a
whole  :  the  formation,  the  aesthetic  quality,  and  the
behaviour.

[a)  As  to  the  first,  it  has  already  been  noted  that  they
are  the  result  of  a  process.  In  two  of  the  best  printed
descriptions,  that  by  Greenwood  and  one  by  Mrs.  Mac-
donald  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  the  former  says :  ^
"  something  which  for  one  moment  looks  like  a  smoke-
wreath or cloud-wreath takes form the next  .  .  .  there

^  Ann.  Med.  Psy.,  t.  iv.  p.  314  (1844).  ^  Greenwood,  op.  cit.,  p.  21.


312


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


before  you  is  a  face  in  the  dark."  The  second  narrator
says  :  ^  "  They  seem  to  come  up  out  of  the  darkness,  as  a
mist,  and  rapidly  develop  into  sharp  delineation,  assuming
roundness,  vividness,  and  living  reality."  Another  ^  has
not  unfrequently  observed  them  "  forming  in  the  vague
light  impressions  which  float  before  one's  closed  eyelids
and  mass  together  and  turn  into  a  face."  Compare  also
Maury's  account  of  his  watching  the  passage  of  a  luminous
image  into  a  definite  face  of  which  it  was  possible  to
follow  the  formation,  during  several  seconds, ^  and  Lang's  :
"  I  can,  when  half  asleep,  watch  one  of  these  specks  or
blotches  growing  in  an  infinitesimal  space  of  time  into  a
face,  or  other  recognisable  form  of  any  sort."  The  frag-
mentary nature  of  the  faces  has  been  noticed  by  several,
not  only  in  fever  as  McNish's  (p.  297),  previously  described,
but  by  such  observers  as  Prof.  Alexander  and  Margaret
Deland.  A  correspondent  speaks  of  one  face  forming
through  another,  giving  the  effect  of  four  eyes,  on  one
occasion,  although  it  seems  a  more  usual  experience  for
one  to  fade  away  before  another  begins  to  come.

This  is  not  the  only  way  in  which  "  faces  "  begin.
There  is  a  second  method,  which  might  better  be  described
as  dehneation,  and  possibly  it  is  more  native  to  people  of
artistic  gifts.  Mrs.  Alaric  Watts  in  giving  an  account  of
the  beginning  of  her  automatic  drawing  *  refers  to  the
visions  seen  of  human  figures  in  outlines  of  white  or  grey
on  a  dark  background.  It  is  interesting  and  instructive
to  compare  this  with  two  other  descriptions.  One  is
Greenwood's  :  "  Though  they  seem  living  enough  and  not
mere  pictures  or  reflections,  they  look  through  the  dark-
ness as  though  traced  in  chalks  on  a  black  ground  .  .  .
the  fines  waver,  fade,  and  return  as  if  drawn  with  a  pencil
of  phosphorus  .  .  .  but  there  is  no  phosphoric  appearance
about them." We turn to Meyer's account of  his

1  Phantasms,  i.  p.  474.  ^  Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  295.

^  Maury,  op.  cit.,  p.  79 ; Thomas,  Crystal  Gazing,  Introd.  p.  xxx,
*  Light, vol. ix. pp. 176, 203 (1889). Compare also  Griinbaum's
"  spectre  " in  Proc. S.P.R., Vol. XXVII. p. 402 : "  it  was only  the
flat  drawing  of  a  spectre. It was  drawn in blue smoky outlines,  all
vibrating."


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  313

own  self -induced  visions/  fifty  years  earlier :  "In  later
experiments  I  saw  the  objects  dark  with  bright  outlines,
or  rather  I  saw  outline  drawings  of  them,  bright  on  a
dark  ground.  I  can  compare  these  drawings  less  to  chalk
drawings  on  a  blackboard  than  to  drawings  made  with
phosphorus  on  a  dark  wall  at  night."  Miiller  also  speaks
of  the  faces  seen  by  children  as  "in  outline  and  devoid  of
colour  and  light,"  ^  and  a  friend  of  the  writer  describes
the  faces  as  always  in  intense  black  and  white,  with  the
variation  that  the  whole  surface  and  not  only  the  outhne
y  is  bright ;  that  is,  the  face  is  white,  the  eyes  and  han
being  black.  Thus  also  "  S.  M.  B."  writes  of  some  of  her
visions  that  they  were  "  never  coloured  but  in  shadowy
black  and  white."  Lang  and  others  have  mentioned  cases
of  this  "  blackboard "  type  of  hallucination.  He  speaks
of  printed  letters  black  on  white,  and  legible,  so  arising.

Apart  from  these  two  types,  correspondents  mention  a
variety  of  other  modes  in  which  they  have  observed  the
inception  of  the  faces.  One  of  them,  using  the  initials
"A.  G.  A.,"  whose  account  is  to  be  found  at  length  in
Lights  says  :  "A  dim  disc  of  light  would  suddenly  appear
and  as  suddenly  brighten.  There  would  be  a  whirUng
motion  in  the  light  which,  with  astonishing  rapidity  de-
veloped into  moving  figures,  which  invariably  came  towards
me."  Another :  "  They  appear  gradually,  and  are  quite
silvery.  .  .  .  An  eye  will  appear,  then  part  of  a  face."
A  third  says  :  "  They  evolve  out  of  a  circle  of  either  blue
or  green,  which  unfolds  itself  in  a  lovely  golden  centre,  and
pass  very  rapidly.  .  .  .  Sometimes  they  are  fragmentary,
only  the  teeth,  eyes,  chin  or  nose  being  seen."  A  fourth
says  :  "  The  faces  both  come  and  go  gradually,  the  eyes
being  generally  the  first  to  be  observed,  coming  dimly  as
in  a  mist,  till  the  whole  face  is  clear  and  ahve,  then  will
fade,  the  eyes  watching  to  the  last."  A  fifth :  "I  can
actually  see  the  faces  in  process  of  forming.  If  I  am  too
keen  (so  it  seems)  there  is  a  silent  explosion."

^  Quoted  by  James,  Princ.  of  Psychol.,  ii.  66,  from  Meyer,  G.  H.,
Untersuchungen  ub.  d.  Physiol,  d.  Nervenfaser,  pp.  238-241  (1843).

''Miiller,  op.  cit.,  p.  1393.  ^  Feb.  24,  1923,  p.  117.


314


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


This  formative  process  is  not  invariably  a  matter  of
conscious  observation,  for  sometimes  the  faces  are  said  to
be  "  flashed  on  and  flashed  out  again  "  suddenly,  but  it  is
evident  that  growth  is  a  much  more  frequent  experience.
And  it  is  confined  to  the  "  faces "  ;  we  do  not  hear
of  any  other  objects  or  scenes  appearing  in  a  fragmen-
tary way  or  building  themselves  up.  A  house,  for
example,  is  a  complete  house,  and  does  not  show  its
chimneys  or  its  windows  first,  and  then  add  on  the
rest,  forming  itself  out  of  cloud  or  showing  in  phos-
phorescent lines.

(&)  Aesthetic  Quality  of  the  Faces. — Perhaps  this  fact
emphasises  (if  such  an  expression  can  be  used  of  anything
so  obvious)  the  difference  between  the  organic  nature  of
the  faces  and  the  "  still  life  "  of  other  things.  A  face  is
alwaj^s,  in  symbol,  a  person  ;  an  expression  of  a  thmking
or  feeling  being.  And  the  faces  having  "  come,"  by
whatever  means,  we  now  turn  to  ask  what  sort  of  faces
are  they  ?  The  adjectives  used,  gathered  from  many
sources,  can  be  arranged  in  a  sort  of  aesthetic  spectrum.
But  one  quahty  is  common  to  the  whole,  and  accompanies
almost  all  the  others.  That  is  the  sense  of  reality,
of  life-likeness.  We  shall  return  to  this  in  considering
what  I  have  called  (for  lack  of  a  better  word)  their
behaviour.

The  impression  that  prevails  of  predominant  ughness  in
the  faces  is  not  more  correct  than  it  would  be  to  ascribe
moral  goodness  or  badness  to  people  in  general.  If  we
take  as  a  median  fine  or  average,  the  expression  used  by
a  correspondent,  "  never  very  ugly  or  very  beautiful,"  we
shall  find  as  many  degrees  above  it  as  below  it.  This
refers  to  constant  seers  ;  but  if  we  include  the  general
statements  about  children  who  are  hable  to  fears  and
persons  in  ill-health,  whose  visions  are  subject  to  degener-
acy or  otherwise  obviously  affected  by  it,  there  would  then
be  a  majority  for  ugly  faces.

Here  follow,  then,  a  score  of  delineations  which  show
the  range,  those  taken  from  published  accounts  being
mingled  with  others  privately  received.  It  should  be
understood  that  none  of  them  are  of  recognised  persons.


xciv.] Introdvctory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  315


"  A  face  more  lovely  than  any  painting  I  have  ever  seen."  ^

"  Out  there  came  on  the  darkness  a  grand  face — worth
anyone's  toil  to  transfer  to  canvas."  (After  reading  and
thinking  of  Brynhilda.)^

"  Often  very  beautiful,  and  gave  me  a  sense  of  serene  joy."

"  I  have  seen  faces  in  the  dark  for  years,  but  never  an
ugly  one  .  .  ,  lovely  female  faces,  some  asleep,  others  bright
and  happy,  but  all  are  beautiful."

"  Begins  in  transcendent  beauty."  ^

"  More  often  than  not  beautiful  or  of  strong  character."

"  Beautiful,  smiling."

"  Very  sweet  and  cameo -like  in  size."

"  Always  pleasing,  never  strikingly  beautiful."  *

"  Never  very  ugly  or  very  beautiful."

"  None  are  ugly,  none  very  old,  all  have  kindly  looks,
seemingly  well  pleased  with  themselves."

"  Unpleasing,  though  not  hideous,  expressive  of  no
violent  emotions."  ^

"  Often  look  very  ugly."  ^

"  As  a  child,  and  up  to  twenty  years,  I  frequently  saw
large  hideous  faces  a  foot  long,  mouthing."

"  May  be  grotesque,  but  always  possess  vividness  of
expression."  '

"  Some  odd,  grotesque  fragments  of  faces  .  .  .  half  faces,
whole  faces,  heads,  figures  .  .  .  not  necessarily  of  human
beings,  nor  indeed  of  any  recognisable  creature."  ^

"  Some  grotesque,  others  beautiful."  ^

"  Hideous  and  terrifying."

"  Weirdly  grotesque  animals,  faces  and  figures."
"  Tortured  with  horrid  faces  glaring  at  her."

1  Galton,  op.  cit.,  p.  164.  ^  p^oc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  X.  p.  80.

^  St.  James's  Gazette,  Feb.  15,  1882.

*  Galton,  op.  cit.,  p.  166.  '  Herschel,  op.  cit.

«Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  170. '  Jowr.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  295.

s  Proc.  Amer.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  III.  p.  624.

»Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  IX.  p.  121.

1"  Burdach,  cited  by  de  Manaceine,  p.  239.

"  Occult  Review  (April  1912),  p.  229.

^^Phren.  Jour.,  v.  319,  cited  by  McNish,  p.  267.


316


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


To  these  must  be  added  some  outstanding  descriptions,
such  as  that  of  Mrs.  Macdonald,  akeady  referred  to,^  in
which  the  feature  of  transition  from  the  one  extreme  of
the  scale  to  the  other  is  more  marked  than  in  any  other
case  known  to  me. She  says  :

Formerly  the  faces  were  wonderfully  ugly.  They  were
human,  but  resembling  animals,  yet  such  animals  as  have
no  fellows  in  the  creation,  diabolical-looking  things.  So
ciiriously  and  monstrously  frightful  were  they  that  I  cannot
conceive  whence  they  could  have  come  if  not  from  the
infernal  world.  I  could  not,  certainly,  at  other  times,  by
any  voluntary  effort  of  imagination,  conjure  up  anything
even  remotely  approaching  their  f rightfulness.  Latterly  the
faces  have  become  exquisitely  beautiful.  Forms  and  fea-
tures of  faultless  perfection  now  succeed  each  other  in
infinite  variety  and  number.

Beside  this  should  be  placed  Greenwood's  masterly
description,  almost  unequalled  in  the  Uterature  of  the
subject,  of  those  "  strikingly  distinctive "  faces  in  which
he  discerned  so  much  morally  impressive  significance.  His
comparison  of  his  visions  of  the  "  awful  family "  which
visited  him,  with  Blake's  "  wonderful,  dreadful  drawing,
'  The  Ghost  of  a  Flea '  " — an  embodiment  of  blood-lust
which  none  who  have  seen  it  will  forget — includes  nothing
to  relieve  their  sombre  sternness  except  a  "  few,  expressive
of  nobility  and  serenity,"  which  were  quite  a  minority.

It  is  difficult  not  to  feel,  as  one  studies  this  aspect,
that  possibly  the  character  of  the  faces  has  some  relation
to  the  dominant  thought-tone  of  the  persons  seeing  them,
and  may  be  a  transcription  in  symbol  of  the  unconscious
morality  and  instinctive  emotional  reaction  to  life  which
lies  under  the  surface  of  the  conscious  and  the  controlled.
This  is  suggested  also  by  the  fact  that  in  the  children's
census,  where  "  being  pleased "  and  "  being  frightened "
were  the  categories  corresponding  to  our  "  beautiful  "  and
"  hideous,"  146  were  "  pleased  "  by  "  people,"  of  whom  17
were  "  angels  "  ;  and  of  the  156  who  were  "  frightened  "  hke-

^  Phantasms,  i.  474  (footnote).


xciv.] Introductory  Stvdy  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  317

wise,  the  number  includes  27  "  ghosts  " — whatever  we  are
to  understand  by  that.  If  we  take  visions  of  animals
alone,  only  18  children  were  pleased,  as  against  75  who
were  frightened.  Probably  this  large  number  represents
and  includes  the  frequently-mentioned  "grotesque"  animal-
human  or  human-animal  visions  of  the  adult,  who  has  more
language  at  command  with  which  to  distinguish  his  species.

(c)  The  Behaviour  of  the  Faces. — Quite  apart  from  the
beauty  or  ugliness  of  the  faces,  which  is  practically  a  fixed
quahty  which  we  need  not  stop  to  analyse  now,  is  that
which  is  strikingly  often  characterised  as  life-likeness.  The
faces  are  sometimes  only  faintly  coloured  and  would  seem
then  to  approximate  more  to  pictures  ;  but  even  in  such
cases  the  percipients  specify  that  they  have  this  living
effect  and  are  "  not  mere  pictures  "  ;  they  have  as  a  rule
solidity  and  colour.  Even  when  the  whole  process  is
visible,  the  "  fleecy  white  cloud  "  or  "  smoke- wreath  "  of
the  beginning  ends  in  a  result  "  vivid  and  intense."  ^  So
also  the  seer  of  the  Brynhilda  face  previously  referred  to
says,  "generally  extremely  vivid";  Margaret  Deland  says,
"  always  the  feeling  of  life  about  them  "  ;  ^  another  goes
even  further,  testifying  that  "  The  faces  I  see  are  usually
more  vivid  than  nature  .  .  .  absolutely  full  of  life  and  move-
ment .  .  .  always  possess  vividness  of  expression."  It  is  a
quality  so  frequently  mentioned  as  to  be  evidently  the
normal  one  ;  only  one  other  witness  therefore  need  be
cited  here — Prof.  Alexander's  "  life-likeness  and  vividness
of  the  visions,"  and  their  "  peculiarly  vivid  sensational
feel."  3  Where  the  face  is  "  flashed  on  and  flashed  off,"
and  neither  comes  nor  goes,  this  vital  quality  is  naturally
signahsed,  but  in  the  case  of  growth  there  is  the  hint  of
an  instant  at  which  it  begins  to  he.  Thus  Mrs.  Macdonald,
as  quoted  already  (p.  312),  says  "  they  .  .  .  come  up  as  a
mist,  and  rapidly  develop  .  .  .  assuming  roundness,  vividness
and  living  reaUty."  * In  one  other  instance  only  is  there

^  St.  James's  Gazette,  Feb.  15 D  "  /82).
^Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  269.
■  ,  ■ ^Proc.  Amer.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  III.  pp.  625,  630.
"  Phantasms,  vol.  i.  p.  474.


318


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


a  remark  bearing  on  this  "  moment,"  made  by  a  careful
observer.^  "  It  has  been  curious,"  he  says,  "  to  watch  the
moment  at  which  they  became  definite  impressions  on  my
retina,  instead  of  mere  suggestions  of  my  conscious
imagination,"  and  speaks  further  on  of  "  the  fact  of
their  thus  quickening."

When  this  "  quickening  "  has  taken  place,  it  is  evident
that  the  face  will  depend  largely  for  its  force  on  the  eyes,
for  the  eyes,  as  sculptors  have  found,  make  the  difference
between  a  dead,  sleeping,  or  sightless  face  and  a  living
one.  Mr.  Northcote  Thomas,  who  saw  the  visions  on  one
occasion  only,  saw  nothing  but  eyes,  "  a  long  procession
of  eyes — lions'  eyes,  crocodiles'  eyes,  snakes'  eyes,  all
sorts  of  eyes — and  that  in  a  state  of  perfect  health,  so  far
as  I  could  judge."  ^  And  another  peculiarity  of  the  faces
under  consideration  is  that  they  are  so  often  looking  at
the  percipient,  as  well  as  being  looked  at  themselves.  One
witness  remarks  that  they  not  only  "  seem  very  much
alive "  but  "  make  '  faces '  at  me "  !  ^  Among  the
accounts  given  by  correspondents  such  phrases  occur  as :
"  often  seem  to  be  looking  closely  at  me,"  "  a  bearded
man  appears,  looks  at  me  intently,  grins  horribly,  and
explodes,"  "  a  beautiful  girl  with  large  dark  eyes  peering
at  me  most  intently,"  "  looking  directly  at  me,"  and  so
on.  This  point  has  already  been  mentioned  incidentally
in  other  examples.  In  addition  the  lips  sometimes  move,
or  a  hand  is  waved  ;  and  one  lady  who  invited  the  face,
if  it  were  real,  to  come  nearer  her,  found  that  it  did  so,
"  with  an  earnest  expression,"  and  adds  the  significant
remark,  "  the  curious  part  is  that  since  that  night  all  the
faces  float  towards  me  and  don't  wait  to  be  asked."

A  point  remarked  on  by  Prof.  Alexander  also  receives
frequent  illustration,  and  that  is  the  tendency  of  the  faces
to  express  violent  emotion.  Greenwood's  discussion  of  his
"  faces  "  as  embodiments  of  moods  or  passions  accords
with  this,  but  his  Hst,  astonishing  as  it  is  in  its  range,
does  not  include  two  which  seem  fairly  common — laughter

1  Jour.  S.P.R.  Vol.  IV.  p.  263.  =  Crystal  Gazing,  pp.  17,  18  (1905).

^Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  170.


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena.


319


and  anger.  Take,  for  an  example  of  the  latter,  these  two
little  scenes,  the  percipients  being  men.  The  first  is  from
a  correspondent.

Another — same  night.  A  man  appeared  and  hastened
to  the  end  of  a  long,  white  heavily-constructed  table,  and
slammed  his  fist  down  on  the  top  thereof,  as  if  in  anger,
and  disappeared.  He  was  dressed  in  a  sort  of  red  jerkin.
Time — incredible  speed,  but  most  vivid.

The  other  is  taken  from  A.  G.  A.'s  interesting  account  in
Light.^

Out  of  the  whirl  of  uncouth  figures  to  which  I  was  ac-
customed, a  big  stout  man,  in  a  grey  suit  and  Homburg
hat,  emerged,  and  came  up  (apparently)  so  close  to  me,
staring  pointedly  at  me,  that  I  expected  him  to  touch  me.
The  movement  and  the  figure  were  both  so  aggressive  that
I  mentioned  it  to  my  family  the  next  morning.

The  following  is  a  woman's  vision  :  —

Two  faces  that  stand  out  particularly  in  my  memory
were  two  jolly-looking  middle-aged  men  in  deep  converse
(profile  to  me).  They  suddenly  became  convulsed  with
laughter.  I  could  almost  hear  them.  One  of  them,  a  grey-
haired  man  with  grey  moustache,  opened  his  mouth  so
wide  that  I  could  see  his  teeth  sideways,  and  his  eyes  went
to  slits  with  merriment.

"  The  last  face  I  saw,"  writes  Mr.  rielding-Ould,^  "  was
strongly  lighted  and  highly  coloured,  that  of  a  laughing
young  man,  turned  half  or  three-quarters  towards  me."

"  A  delightful  hob -goblin,  swinging  his  legs  and  laughing
outrageously,"  is  a  third,  contributed  by  a  correspondent.

It  is  evident  that  we  cannot,  nor  need  we  try  to,  draw
any  hard  and  fast  line  between  faces  and  figures,  where
gestures  and  actions  carry  out  the  same  idea.  The  figures,
as  such,  present  themselves  "in  all  the  changing  scenes  of
life,"  but  in  the  examples  now  being  dealt  with  their
business  is  more  the  expression  of  an  emotion  than  any-
thing else.


iFeb.  24th,  1923,  p.  117.  Light,  Feb.  24th,  1923,  p.  122.

X


320


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


Faces  do  not  form  an  invariable  element  in  the  visions.
Some  who  see  nearly  every  other  variety,  including  figures,
make  an  exception  of  the  faces  even  of  these ;  e.g.  Mrs.
Willert  in  Phantasms  says  :  ^  "I  can  never  distinguish  the
faces."  Mrs.  Arnold-Forster  says :  "  The  pictures  that  I
see  are  seldom  faces."  ^  Prof.  Herrick  says  :  ^  "  Sometimes
the  images  were  of  faces."  And  a  lady  who  had  deliber-
ately cultivated  the  seeing  faculty  for  several  years  *  testifies
that  "  Faces  do  not  come  so  easily,  and  vanish  quickly."
The  complete  absence  of  faces,  however,  is  not  a  common
idiosyncrasy.  Towards  the  latter  part  of  his  life  Sir
John  Herschel,  as  already  referred  to,  said  ^  that  he  saw
"  more  faces  and  fewer  landscapes,"  but  "  the  faces,  which
appeared  in  quick  succession,  were  grey  and  colourless."
Warcollier,  though  he  places  the  faces  of  friends  and
strangers  first  in  his  list,  gives  only  instances  of  articles  of
furniture,  objects,  plants,  and  flowers,  which  were  especially
frequent  with  him,  in  actual  illustration.^

(3)  Designs  and  Objects. — If  faces  are  the  most  frequent
and  living,  geometrical  designs  are  the  most  infrequent
and  the  most  completely  antithetical  to  them  of  the
visions.  The  best  account  is  that  of  Sir  John  Herschel,''
who  has  described  the  patterns  "  of  perfect  symmetry  and
geometrical  regularity,"  both  latticed,  rhomboidal,  and
circular,  which  he  saw.  Occasionally,  but  rarely,  they  were
complex  and  coloured  patterns  like  those  of  a  carpet,  but
not  of  any  he  remembered,  and  changing  from  instant  to
instant.  Another  seer,  a  lady  in  whose  family  decorative
engraving  had  been  practised  for  several  generations,  gives
the  following  account  of  visions  seen  on  awaking,  but  with
the  eyes  still  closed.^  "In  a  brilliant  yellow  light  will
appear  the  most  beautiful  decorative  patterns,  finials,
curves,  spirals,  leaves,  blossoms,  but  aU  black." Only  two

^  Vol.  i.  p.  474  (footnote).  ^  Studies  in  Dreams,  p.  162.

^  Jour.  Comp.  Neur.,  July  1895,  quoted  in  De  Manac6ine,  p.  240.
*Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  269.  ,;

Mrs.  de  Morgan,  Three  Score  Years  and  Ten,  p.  70.
8  La  TdUpathie,  p.  67.  '  Op.  cit.,  p.  408.

8  Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  269.


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  321

other  contributors  to  the  Journal  speak  of  seeing  geomet-
rical forms  or  lines/  so  that  the  class  is  evidently  a  small
one.  Lang  once  saw  "  a  very  remarkable  wall  pattern  in
crimson,  which  I  could  not,  when  wide  awake,  invent  or
design."  The  following  are  taken  from  the  letters  of
correspondents.  The  first  premises  that  her  bedroom  wall-
paper is  quite  plain,  the  window  screened  with  a  green
blind  and  heavily  curtained,  no  patterned  surface  being
present  even  in  the  light.  She  sees  with  open  eyes,
usually  on  waking  in  the  night,  and  writes  in  answer  to  an
enquiry  :  "  Then  the  designs.  Personally  I  should  call
them  conventional  designs.  You  know  the  designs  of
fancy  work,  dress  braiding,  etc.  Well,  these  designs  appear
like  a  thin  gauzy  pattern  hung  through  the  room.
Beautiful  scrolls  and  twists.  Two  designs  I  remember
quite  well.  One  was  a  big  wheel  pattern,  with  scrolls
between,  and  the  wheels  appeared  as  if  they  were  studded
with  coloured  jewels.  Another  had  a  conventional  rose
design."

A  second  correspondent  writes  :  "  Another  night  ...  I
saw  my  window  outlined  with  a  decoration  of  amber  and
blue  stones,  with  blue  nuggets  swinging  to  and  fro.  This
lasted  about  five  minutes."  On  another  occasion  she  saw,
also  over  the  window,  "  a  swathe  of  red  and  yellow  flowers
in  large  round  bud."  My  correspondent  Lady  Berkeley,
who  kindly  allows  me  to  use  her  name,  has  favoured  me
with  an  interesting  collection  of  drawings  in  colour,  made
as  soon  as  possible  after  the  vanishing  of  the  figures.
They  are  complex  and  brilliant  in  colouring,  and  most
difficult  to  describe  in  words.  Many  have  spoken  of  then-
attempts  at  reproducing  their  visions,  so  as  to  preserve  a
record  of  them,  but  I  know  at  present  of  no  one  else  who
has  actually  done  so,  and  in  colour.  They  possess,  there-
fore, a  quite  special  interest  in  this  connection.

The  writer  in  the  Occult  Review,  previously  referred  to,
gives  a  very  interesting  description  of  patterned  visions,
which  evidently  constitute  in  this  case  a  larger  proportion
than is usual  in the varied  assortment. "  I  see,"  she

1  See  Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  IV.  p.  278,  and  Vol.  VIII.  p.  158.


322


F.  E.  Leaning


[part


writes  (I  conclude  the  writer  to  be  a  woman,  from  the
nature  of  the  things  seen),  "  gorgeously  coloured  and
woven  patterns  or  sometimes  a  plain  material  such  as
corded  silk,  gathered  and  tucked  and  stitched  in  all  sorts
of  ornamental  devices.  ...  I  saw  some  lovely  lace  a  short
time  ago  of  most  elaborate  pattern.  As  I  watched  it,  it
changed  gradually  into  a  case  full  of  pierced  silver  spoons
and  forks  and  other  things  of  that  kind.  These  in  turn
slowly  became  silver  needlework,  which  then  faded  away."
This  little  series,  of  only  nine  cases  in  all,  may  be  con-
cluded by  "  Goethe's  rose,"  which  he  could  see  at  pleasure
upon  closing  his  eyes.  It  was  not,  to  be  accurate,  a  rose
so  much  as  a  conventional  rosette,  which  continually  put
forth  welUng  petals  from  the  centre.  "  The  same  thing
occurred,"  he  says,^  "  when  I  figured  to  myself  a  varie-
gated disk.  The  coloured  figures  upon  it  underwent  con-
stant changes  .  .  .  from  the  centre  to  the  periphery,  exactly
like  the  changes  in  the  modern  kaleidoscope."  Miiller,
comparing  notes  with  Goethe,  decides  that  the  differences
in  their  respective  seeing  were  proper  to  their  respective
mental  endowments.

The  lace,  and  silver  needlework,  of  the  vision  quoted
above,  form  a  natural  transition  to  the  seeing  of  objects,
either  singly  or  in  multitude.  But  two  points  are  to  be
noticed  about  them  :  first,  they  appear  as  complete  and
not  fragmentary  ;  and  secondly,  there  is  no  instance  known
to  me  of  any  distinct  object  being  seen  which  was  incom-
prehensible in  itself.  They  are  things  which  can  be  named
always  ;  and  to  the  best  of  my  belief  the  same  can  be
said  of  crystal  visions.  Not  that  there  is  a  complete
dearth  of  evidence  that  clairvoyants  have  occasionally
seen  objects  which  they  could  describe,  but  could  not
name  or  understand  the  use  of,  but  it  is  rare.^  And  it
does  not  seem  to  occur  in  the  hypnagogic  visions,  unless
we  except  those  animals  described  as  grotesque,  so  often.

1  Goethe,  Zur  Morphologic  und  Wissenechaft,  quoted  by  Miiller,  op.
cit.,  p.  1397.

^  See  on  this  point  Dr.  Wiltse'a  sensitive  and  the  piano,  Proo.  S.P.R.,
Vol.  VII.  p.  74 ;  and  the  Welsh  medium  Olwen  and  the  Thibetan  mar-
mots. Spirit  Psychometry,  p.  58.


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  323

As  images  of  living  things,  animals  should  hold  the  first
place  among  single  objects.  They  rarely  act  or  move
or  express  emotion.  Sometimes  only  the  head  is  seen,
especially  if  of  a  dog.  One  correspondent  speaks  of  seeing
three  heads  of  white  Pomeranians  withm  a  ckcle,  two  of
which  she  recognised  as  friends.  Another  saw  a  shaggy
chestnut  pony  with  a  white  blaze  advancing  along  a  lane
towards  her  in  a  friendly  way  (the  only  vision  of  this  sort
she  ever  had).  A  third  writes  of  seeing  a  large  black  cat
with  yeUow  eyes,  which  she  describes  as  "  a  prussian,"  and
the  same  also  saw  a  snake  and  a  tiger  at  other  times.
Maury  once  saw  a  hon  which  he  had  travelled  with  in  the
East  many  years  before,^  and  Dr.  Clarke  recalls  with
pleasure  the  racing  horses  of  his  childhood,  and  that  last
remnant  of  the  visionary  power  in  manhood,  when  after
an  unusual  dose  of  laudanum  "  I  have  seen  a  horse's  head,
with  ears  erect,  peering  at  me  through  the  darkness."  ^
One  who  sees  animals  "  very  often  "  says  they  are  "  more
like  the  monsters  of  fairy  tales  "  ^ ;  a  few  others  merely
mention  animals  without  further  specifying  them  ;  and  Ladd
quotes  Miiller  as  seeing  "  fantastic  figures  of  men,  animals,
and  what  not,  such  as  he  never  saw  before."  *  Prof.
Alexander  has  a  gorilla's  head  in  his  list.

A  correspondent  in  South  Africa,  however,  sends  me
the  following  interesting  example,  partly  to  illustrate  his
impression  that  "  in  some  mysterious  way  these  so-caUed
illusions  possess  an  awareness  of  our  presence,  especially  so
in  the  case  of  animals. A  short  time  ago,"  he  continues,

I  was  resting  on  the  sofa  after  dinner,  with  my  eyes
shut  in  the  full  glare  of  the  electric  Hght,  when  a  picture
was  presented  to  me  of  a  young  cow,  chestnut  coloured,
with  white  points  and  wonderfully  fine  and  symmetrical
horns.  She  seemed  to  be  grazing  in  the  full  sunlight,  on
the  very  luxm'iant  grass  growing  on  the  bank  of  a  railway
cutting.  At  the  top  of  the  bank  was  a  row  of  young
horse-chestnut  trees. Behind  the  cow  a  small  calf  was

1  Maury,  op.  cit.,  p.  68.  2  Clarke,  E.  H., Visions,  p.  19.

^Jour.  S.P.B.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  170.

^Miiller,  PJiantastische  Oesichtserscheinungen,  1826.


324


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


standing.  The  cow  seemed  to  sense  my  presence,  and  un-
mistakably adopted  a  protective  attitude.  Though  I  have
been  associated  with  cattle  nearly  all  my  life,  I  am  quite
positive  I  had  never  seen  that  cow  before.

Another  vision  I  had  was  that  of  a  small  species  of
duck  unknown  to  me.  The  sun  was  shining  on  the  green
sheen  of  its  neck,  and  it  seemed  to  turn  its  head  up
towards  me  with  an  intelligent  expression  of  enquiry  and
interest  in  its  little  black  eye.  By  the  power  of  will  I  was
able  to  retain  the  picture  for  approximately  two  minutes,
and  all  the  time  it  appeared  to  me  as  though  I  might  by
stretching  out  grasp  the  duck  in  my  hand.

A  better  description  than  this  is  not  to  be  found.

Besides  animals,  there  is  a  large  majority  of  other
objects,  houses,  temples,  rooms,  interiors,  furniture,  trees,  and
so  on,  which  would  be  tedious  to  enumerate.  They  are
mingled  with  more  complex  scenes,  and  occasionally  follow
in  classes  or  groups  of  simihar  things,  such  as  flowers, ^  or
as  in  the  case  of  the  Rev.  George  Henslow,  illustrated  by
Galton,2  they  may  follow  a  "  cycle."  Here  single  objects,
the  arrow,  star,  and  snowflake,  led  up  to  the  "  weU-known
rectory,  fish-ponds,  walls,  etc.,  all  covered  with  snow,"  the
bed  of  red  tulips  in  the  brilliant  sun  of  a  spring  morning,
and  so  back  to  a  single  tulip,  and  finally  the  rather  non-
descript other  single  objects  of  this  set.  A  succession  of
units,  however,  is  far  from  being  the  rule,  for  the  "  hyp-
nagogic agent  "  dehghts  in  an  endless  and  multitudinous
variety.  The  main  interest  here  does  not  He  in  the  things
seen,  but  in  the  conditions  and  quaUty  of  the  seeing,
which  will  be  dealt  with  in  the  next  section.

(4)  Landscapes. — These  form  a  very  large  class  of  the
visions  of  adults,  and  come  midway  between  the  inanimate
and  the  much  livelier  scenes  peopled  with  moving  figures
which  will  conclude  the  outline  survey  of  the  subject-
matter.  Landscapes  do  not  figure  at  all  in  the  children's
census.  Next  to  people  come  "  things,"  then  animals,
colours,  and  scenes,  the  latter  quite  in  a  minority.  The

^  See,  for  instance.  Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  IV.  p.  277  (Solovoy).
2  Galton,  op.  cil.,  p.  160.


xciv.] Introdiictory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  325

power  to  enjoy  landscape  and  natural  beauty  is  not  one
which  develops  early,  and  many  years  pass  before  the
distant  and  the  extended  claims  nearly  as  much  attention
as  the  near  at  hand.

In  the  study  of  landscape  visions  there  are  very  few
detailed  descriptions  of  what  is  actually  seen  ;  but  it  is
clear  that  they  contrast  with  the  "  faces  "  in  being  com-
plete and  entire  from  the  first,  and  that  they  agree  with
them  in  having  a  cloud-accompaniment.  There  is  this
difference,  however,  that  in  the  case  of  landscapes  the
clouds  roll  aside  and  have  the  effect  of  reveahng  some-
thing already  there,  as  in  the  following  description
by  a  correspondent  :  "I  also  see  places,  houses,  moun-
tains, and  very  often  cloud  formations,  which  break  and
give  a  view  of  distant  valleys  or  scenery  in  great  bright-
ness." Compare  also  Mrs.  Arnold-Forster  :  "  always  as
though  it  were  seen  through  a  gap  in  a  curtain  of  misty
cloud,  which  is  partly  drawn  aside  "  (p.  163,  op.  cit.).
Almost  the  same  description  is  given  by  a  writer  in  Light  :
"  The  last  one  {i.e.  a  scene)  I  remember  was  a  bird's-eye
view  of  a  large  city,  viewed  fi'om  a  higher  point,  seen  as
lying  in  a  slack  or  a  dip  in  the  surface  area,  with  out-
standing buildings  of  unusual  construction  in  the  centre.
On  these  buildings  a  bright  light  was  moving  hke  a  search-
light, causing  them  to  be  more  illuminated  than  the  others."

The  landscapes  are  usually  spoken  of  in  terms  of  admira-
tion :  "  fine  landscapes,"  ^  "  vivid  and  charming  landscapes
in  natural  colours,"  ^  "  highly  picturesque  and  pleasing  "  ^
"  glorious,"  *  "  architecture,  landscapes,  moving  figures,
pass  slowly  by  and  sometimes  remain,  with  incomparable
clearness  of  form  and  fullness  of  being."  ^  Stead's  moonlit
sea,  and  the  cottage  in  the  circle  might  be  added  {v.  p.
295  supra).

(5)  Scenes. — If  beauty  characterises  the  landscapes,  Hfe
and  movement  in  every  variety  are  the  chief  features
which  distinguish  the  "  scenes  "  from  them.  Sometimes  we
have  a  Httle  scene  with  a  single  figure  :  as  of  "a  stout

^  Galton,  op.  cit.,  p.  164.  ^  Herrick.  ^  Herschel.

*Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  IV.  p.  276. ^  Taine.


326  F.  E.  Leaning.  [part

old  woman  in  a  blue  dress,  hanging  some  clothes  out  on  a
hne,  on  a  flat  roof-top  apparently,  who  turned  her  head
and  laughed."  In  another  there  are  two  figures,  a  girl
and  a  young  man,  with  a  bicycle,  she  leaning  on  it,  he
kneeling  at  her  feet.  At  the  moment  he  is  putting  on
his  cap.^  Or  there  is  a  high  stone  wall  ;  at  the  foot  of  it
two  or  three  men  in  knee-breeches  and  lounge  coats
"  playing  about,"  when  one  of  them  disappears  at  full
speed  down  the  road.  Neither  the  beginning  nor  the  end
of  these  tiny  dramas  is  given.  Scenes  involving  many
people,  engaged  in  different  activities,  predominate.  In
some  the  idea  of  the  scene  as  a  picture  seems  apparent,
as  in  a  lady's  vision  of  a  number  of  roofs  and  turrets  of
buildings  enclosed  by  a  high  wall.  From  a  great  gateway
in  this  wall  issued  a  throng  of  happy  people,  clad  in  gay
clothes,  and  on  the  left  was  a  long  shady  sun-flecked  avenue
of  green  trees.  Or  take  this,  from  the  correspondent  who
saw  the  cow  and  the  duck  :  "  Another  pretty  scene  im-
pressed upon  my  memory  was  that  of  three  young  Kaffir
women  dressed  in  native  costume.  They  were  sitting  on
the  slope  of  a  grassy  hill  rising  out  of  a  deep  valley,
talking  interestedly  to  one  another  whilst  engaged  in  mak-
ing bead  ornaments  ;  the  glow  of  the  setting  sun  was
reflected  by  the  dark  bronze  of  their  bodies.  Below,  in
the  valley,  now  in  the  shade,  the  smoke  from  several
kraals  was  rising  through  the  mimosa  trees,  the  whole  forming
a  delightful  and  natural  picture,  perfect  in  every  detail."

But  in  many  of  the  visions  an  ordinary  but  busy  street-
scene  is  sufficient,  as  in  the  following  :  ^

"  Another  scene  represented  a  street-scene  in  winter,  the
ground  covered  with  snow,  a  street-car  with  men  standing
on  the  rear  platform  in  heavy  ulsters,  the  conductor
assisting  a  lady  to  alight,  pedestrians  passing  back  and
forth."

It  is  to  be  remarked  that  the  scenes  almost  invainably
portray  the  lighter  and  pleasanter  aspects  of  life.  They
are  hardly  ever — one  might  almost  say  never,  of  tragic  or

iProc.  Amer.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  III.  p.  625.  •
^Jour.  S.P.R  ,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  271.


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  327

painful  import  ^ ;  there  are  no  funerals,  fights,  torture-scenes,
or  terrible  accidents,  though  they  may  be  serious  and
interesting,  as  in  the  following  from  a  correspondent.
"  Facing  me  there  suddenly  appeared  a  brilhantly  lighted
panel  through  which  (or  in  which)  I  saw  a  room  with
three  Enghsh  officers  bending  over  a  map  spread  out  on  a
table,  and  evidently  planning  an  attack  or  movement  of
troops.  The  officers  were  moving  as  they  conversed  and
pointed  out  places  on  the  map  ;  they  had  their  backs  to
me,  and  I  was  panic-stricken  lest  they  should  turn  and
see  me.  .  .  .  This  vision  lasted  for  quite  five  minutes.  I
could  see  it  with  my  eyes  open  or  closed.  The  room  was
a  large  one  with  bosses  of  plasterwork  at  intervals  on  the
walls,  and  large  windows  down  to  the  ground.  I  believed
it  to  be  a  room  in  an  old  chateau  in  France."

The  unity  and  intelligibihty  of  such  scenes  distinguish
them  from  those  of  delirium  and  insanity,  and  from  the
hallucinations  of  hysteria  in  which  "  visions  of  animals,
pictures  of  corpses,  phantastic  processions  in  which  dead
persons,  devils,  and  ghosts  swarm."  ^  Nicolai's  Httle  figures
acted  as  in  a  marketing  scene,  and  a  similar  and  interest-
ing modern  account  exists  which,  though  taking  place  in
the  daytime  and  seen  with  open  eyes,  yet  belongs  to  the
same  order  as  the  true  hypnagogic  visions.  In  this  the
percipient,  an  aged  patient  of  the  doctor  reporting  the
case, 2  though  mentally  exceedingly  clear  in  every  other
respect,  would  describe  to  him  most  vividly  pictures  of
hosts  of  very  Httle  people,  employing  miniature  wagons
and  horses  about  the  work  of  hauhng  timber  and  stone  for
building  operations.  There  were  hundreds  of  them,  and  she
would  enter  into  details  about  their  dress  and  harnessing.

VIII.  Features  of  the  Visions.

A  general  view  of  the  subject-matter  of  the  hypnagogic
hallucinations has rendered obvious the first and  most

^  An  exception  is  referred  to  on  p.  336.

2  Jung,  C.  G.,  Analytical  Psychology,  p.  7  (1916);  trans,  by  Dr.  C.  E.
Long.

3  Brit.  Med.  Jour.,  Nov.  18,  1922,  p.  999. ,  ' .  .


328


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


constantly  mentioned  point  about  them — that  is,  their
almost  boundless  variety.  It  is  unnecessary  to  emphasise
this  point,  for  the  study  itself  makes  it  quite  unavoidable.
This  variety  varies  very  much  in  the  proportion  of  its
elements,  some  seeing  many  of  one  kind,  others  of  another,
and  so  on.  Thus  WarcoUier  often  sees  flowers  and  objects,
but  his  friend,  Mme.  C,  never  sees  either  ;  he  never  sees
anything  dramatic  or  sensational,  but  she  sees  pictures  of
miniature  size  of  httle  mediaeval  personages,  of  beautiful
babies,  young  girls,  and  so  on  {op.  cit.,  pp.  57,  67).
But  while  a  comparison  of  many  hsts  will  show,  perhaps,
individual  idiosyncrasies  such  as  those  mentioned,  yet  so
large  a  body  of  common  material  also  exists  that  the
visions  admit,  as  we  have  seen,  of  being  roughly  classified
into  groups.

(1)  Variety  and  Change. — The  fact  of  this  variety  has
the  closest  possible  connection  with  the  second  point  most
frequently  mentioned,  and  indeed  depends  on  it.  This
is  change,  without  which  obviously  there  could  be  no
variety.  This  is  such  a  "  constant  "  of  the  visions  that
its  absence  marks,  probably,  a  particular  experience  as  of
another  tj^pe.  In  the  first  example,  given  above  p.  295,  the
cottage  in  the  circle,  there  was  no  change  ;  but  in  Stead's  two
visions  which  follow  it,  there  was  as  much  contrast  as  was
possible  in  so  limited  a  number.  Here  and  there  are  signs  of
some  underlying  principle,  such  as  is  seen  in  a  succession  of
designs,  or  of  faces  producing  faces,  or  a  following  of  a  line  of
association,  such  as  the  Rev.  George  Henslow  thought  he
traced  in  his  arrow,  snowflake,  snow  scene  and  so  on.  Prof.
Alexander  has  remarked :  "  There  is  frequently  a  limited
sequence  of  forms  in  what  I  may  term  the  '  hfe-history '
of  an  individual  image  ;  it  undergoes  transformation  before
the  eyes  and  in  spite  of  any  efforts  I  may  make  to  pre-
serve it  unchanged."  ^  Meyer  gives  a  similar  testimony  :
"  Some  time  after  the  pictures  have  arisen  they  vanish
or  change  into  others  without  my  being  able  to  prevent
it."  ^ Two  frequently-quoted  illustrations  of  this  kind  of

1  Proc.  Amer.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  III.  p.  624.

^  Meyer,  G.,  quoted  by  James,  op.  cit.,  p.  67.


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  329


sequential  recurring  vision  are  Greenwood's  "  spangles  and
sheep "  case  and  Mrs.  Haweis's  roses  and  gold  blocks.
"  As  I  lay  abed  in  the  dark"  says  the  former,^  "I  used  to
see  a  little  cloud  of  bright  golden  sparks,  which  first
became  larger  and  more  scintillating  and  then  turned  into
a  flock  of  sheep  rapidly  running  downhill  into  the  general
darkness  below.  A  few  moments  after  the  sheep  had
disappeared  the  spangles  would  come  forth  again,  and
again  the  transformation  would  ensue,  and  this  would  be
repeated  a  dozen  times  perhaps."  Mrs.  Haweis's  experi-
ence was  as  follows.  Both  were  the  visions  of  childhood,
hers  being  life -long,  but  diminishmg  with  years  :  "It  is  a
flight  of  pink  roses  floating  in  a  mass  from  left  to  right,
and  this  cloud  or  mass  of  roses  is  presently  effaced  by  a
flight  of  '  sparks  '  or  gold  speckles  across  them.  The
sparks  are  Kke  tiny  blocks,  half  gold,  half  black,  rather
symmetrically  placed  behind  each  other.  .  .  .  The  roses  .  .  .
would  stay  a  long  time  before  the  sparks  came,  and  they
occupied  a  large  area  in  black  space.  Then  the  sparks
came  slowly  flying,  and  generally,  not  always,  effaced  the
roses  at  once,  and  every  effort  to  retain  the  roses  failed."  -

These  instances  are  hints  of  what  may  occur  (Uke  the
recurring  dreams  some  people  have),  though  recurrence  is
not  habitual  and  normal.  In  fact,  Alexander  says :  "if
there  be  such  a  thing  as  irrelevance,  these  images  show  it."
But  this  is  a  point  on  which  there  is  but  a  very  small
group  of  studies  or  records  to  help  us  ;  the  general  im-
pression one  gets  is  that  incoherence  and  the  absence  of
association  rather  prevails.  This  will  be  considered  further
under  experiments  in  control  (Sec.  XII.).

(2)  Duration  and  Speed. — The  rate  of  change  and  the
length  of  time  for  which  a  picture  wiU  remain  to  please
the  beholder  are  matters  on  which  we  have  a  little  more
evidence.  Change  there  must  be  :  no  picture  can  be
"  held  "  indeflnitely,  and  as  a  rule  no  picture  ever  appears
twice.  The  exceptions  are  the  result  of  effort  and  inten-
tion ;  and  occasionally,  as  we  have  just  seen,  the  result  of
some  cause  still  obscure  to  us,  but  are  not  in  the  nature

1  Greenwood,  op.  cit.,  p.  16.  "  Galton,  op.  cit.,  p.  165.


330


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


of  the  visions  themselves.  There  is  a  diversity  of  experi-
ence as  to  their  duration.  The  drowsy-time  for  normal
people  is  itself  brief  ;  they  are  courting  sleep  and  not
taking  note  of  the  time,  and  the  time  itself  is  "  rounded
by  a  sleep "  ;  only  in  the  case  of  conditions  prevailing
that  prevent  sleep  is  there  any  prolongation  of  this  period.
The  visions  do  not  begin  immediately  on  the  closing  of
the  eyes,  but,  when  a  certain  half-consciousness  is  reached,
soon  after.  But  there  is  undeniably  a  connection  between
the  rate  of  change  and  the  condition  of  the  circulation  in
the  brain.  Fatigue,  anxiety,  excitement,  cerebral  agitation,
reflect  themselves  readily  in  the  speed  with  which  the
visions  come  and  go.  A  case  which  may  be  regarded  as
a  maximum,  though  produced  by  a  drug,  is  given  by
Prof.  James. ^  The  experimenter,  mth  a  pulse  at  135  beats
a  minute,  saw  a  vast  variety  of  whirling  images,  "  a  thou-
sand different  objects  in  ten  minutes " — hands,  spoons,
wheels,  tin  soldiers,  lamp-posts,  etc.  Maury's  crowding
images,  after  his  two  days  at  Greek,  have  already  been
referred  to.  Miiller  refers  to  the  "  rapidly  changing
forms "  ;  Henslow  says  the  "  extreme  restlessness  "  of  his
visual  objects,  oscillating  and  rotating,  and  changing
character  made  examination  almost  impossible  ;  Mrs.  Mac-
donald  speaks  of  the  "  surprising  rapidity "  and  infinite
variety  and  number  of  her  images.  Whether  all  these
percipients  were  m  a  state  of  excitement  all  the  time  we
can  only  surmise  :  it  does  not  seem  Hkely.  But  the  few
whose  seeing  was  confined  to  a  few  days  in  a  lifetime  were
feverish  or  over-tired  at  the  time,  and  yet  the  number  of  visions
seen  by  these  people  was  as  great  as  the  number  seen  by
other  percipients  during  much  more  prolonged  periods.
If  we  find  these  at  one  end  of  the  scale,  we  find  at  the
other  those  whose  pictures  do  not  hasten  away.  Mrs.
Haweis  says  that  her  gold  blocks  came  slowly  flying,  after
the  roses  had  floated  by  for  some  time.  The  lady  of  the
lace  and  silver  needlework  also  says  they  change  slowly.
It  is  noticeable  that  Taine  ^  speaks  of  the  images  becoming
steady  and  lasting,  passing  slowly  by  and  sometimes  re-


1  James,  Princ.  oj  Psychol.,  ii.  121.


On  InieUtigence,  i.  60.


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  331

maining.  This  curious  movement  across  the  field  of  vision
seems  an  alternative  to  the  fading  out  and  re-manifesting,
or  the  actual  change  of  form  while  being  looked  at.  It
takes  place  sometimes  from  left  to  right,  as  with  Mrs.
Haweis  and  Herschel,  but  sometimes  in  the  opposite  direc-
tion, as  with  Cardan,  "  moving  in  a  circular  direction,
upwards,  from  right  to  left,  slowly  "  ;  ^  and  in  a  case  given
by  Hyslop  ^  where  the  subject,  waking  in  the  night,  sees
on  his  bedroom  wall  "  wonderful  moving  sceneries,  valleys,
lakes,  mountains,  etc.  What  impresses  me  so,  "  he  adds,
"  is  the  great  quickness  of  movement ;  but  I  can  take  in
all  details,  and  the  movement  is  from  right  to  left,
goes  away  from  me."

It  may  be  mentioned  that  of  these  four  examples  only
the  first  is  hypnagogic  ;  Herschel's  was  a  day-vision  (at  the
breakfast  table), ^  and  the  other  two  are  hypnopompic.  So
is  the  following,  in  which  "  Invariably  the  pictures  are  a
moving  landscape  .  .  .  exactly  as  if  seen  from  a  train,  etc.,
foreground  swiftly,  background  slowly.  The  swift  left  to
right  moving  panorama  of  ordinary  agricultural  land,  with
cottages,  etc.,  the  motion  stopping  gradually  as  it  faded."
This  instance,  communicated  first  in  1922  ^  by  M.  Gheury
de  Bray,  has  since  been  followed  up  by  a  very  curious
modification  in  which  two  architectural  series  moving  with
extreme  rapidity  in  converging  directions  were  seen,  an
obfique  line  of  division  separating  them.

(3)  Shape  and  Scale.— TlievQ  is  a  peculiarity  connected
with  the  visions  which  is  to  be  noticed  here,  and  that  is
the  tendency  to  take  a  circular  form.  The  majority  of
them  are  seen  as  things  in  the  natural  world  are,  where
the  hmits  of  the  field  of  vision  alone  prevent  us  seeing
more  at  once  than  we  do. But  several  instances  have

1  Cardano,  see  App.  A.  2  p.^g^  Amer.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XIII.  p.  487.

^  Of  a  fortification.  Dr.  Mary  Scharlieb  in  Change  of  Life,  p.  28,  says
that  women  may  see  "  the  battlements  of  a  fortress  "  as  an  hallucination
accompanying  attacks  of  headache  ;  and  it  is  significant  that  a  lady
friend  of  Herschel's  often  saw  this  appearance  and  suffered  from  head-
ache, neither  of  them  evidently  knowing  that  it  was  a  symptom  of  dis-
turbance at  the  menopause.

*  See  Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XX.  p.  250,  and  Vol.  XXI.  p.  71.


332


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


already  been  given,  in  which  the  picture  is  seen  within  a
circle.  In  the  case  of  the  "  cottage  in  a  circle "  first
quoted/  the  spectator  says  the  light  "  assumed  the  form
of  a  circle  two  or  three  yards  in  diameter,"  but  in  Stead's
"  moonlit  sea  "  it  was  "  a  living  miniature  about  the  size
of  a  magic  lantern  slide."  So  also  Mrs.  Willert  says  "  they
seem  to  be  very  much  like  the  constantly  changing  slides
of  a  magic  lantern,  and  I  should  say  of  the  same  size."  ^
When  Bostock  speaks  of  the  human  faces  or  figures  on  a
small  scale  which  he  saw  during  his  attack  of  fever,  he
notes  that  "  they  were  all  of  the  same  size  and  appeared  to
be  all  situated  at  the  same  distance  from  the  face."  They
"  were  gradually  removed  like  a  succession  of  medaUions."
This  expression  is  not  used  by  chance,  for  such  words  as
"  cameo  "  and  "  medalhon "  often  occur  in  verbal  and
other  accounts  of  the  present  day.  An  analogous  example
is  that  of  Dr.  Gibotteau's  vision  in  the  night  of  a  round
luminous  tract  on  the  wall  of  his  bedroom,  in  the  midst
of  which  appeared  a  brilliant  object  which  he  did  not
recognise,  but  which  was  a  lantern.  This  was  the  result
of  Nurse  Berthe's  experiment  in  impressing  him  from  a
distance,  but  he  remarks  that  "  that  part  of  the  room  was
illuminated  as  it  would  have  been  by  a  powerful  lamp."  ^
Prof.  Gruber's  subject,  who  illustrates  coloured  audition,
or  "  chromatisms  "  for  certain  words  in  the  form  of
patches  of  light,  also  had  them  as  circles  capable  of
definite  measurement  ;  and  Mr.  F.  Gottschalk  saw  the
vision  of  two  hands  opening  an  envelope  within  a  circle
{Phantasms,  ii.  31  and  34,  where  other  instances  are
given).  "  C.  B.  M."  *  gives  a  graphic  description  of  the
"  globe  pictures  "  which  she  saw,  of  busy  scenes,  both  by
night  and  day.  The  wheels,  stars,  and  various  curvilinear
designs  illustrate  the  same  tendency.  We  rarely  meet
with  a  square-enclosed  vision  unless  the  expression  "  like  a

1  See  p.  295  supra.  ^  Phantasms,  i.  474.

3  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  pp.  466,  457.

^  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  X.  p.  76.  Unless  Cardano's  visions  were  also  of  this
sort,  as  the  rather  obscure  Latin  seems  to  imply,  this  ease  is  unique.
The  scenes  seem  to  be  within  a  sphere,  but  transparent,  like  a  soap-
bubble.


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  333

framed  picture  "  used  by  one  or  two  percipients,  and  re-
ported of  Nicolai  also,  is  to  be  taken  as  implying  definite
enclosing  lines  and  angles,  and  that  of  the  panel  scene  of
the  three  officers  given  on  p.  327  is  unusual  in  this  respect.
Goethe's  pictures  were  projected  memories  of  things  actu-
ally seen,  but  his  visionary  flower,  often  called  a  rose
because  of  its  red  petals  and  green  leaves,  was  round.  In
the  series  of  coloured  sketches  made  by  Lady  Berkeley,
already  referred  to  (seep.  321)  of  her  own  visions,  there  is
a  great  variety  of  designs,  but  except  the  well-known
symbol  of  the  double  triangles,  few  rectangular  ones.
"  Curved  is  the  line  of  beauty."

It  is  in  variations  of  size  that  another  peculiarity  is
met  with.  McNish  draws  attention  to  it,  giving  examples
from  various  sources,  of  how  one  saw  "  entire  human
figures,  but  they  were  always  as  minute  as  pins  or  even
pin  heads  "  ;  and  with  another,  "  Colossal  figures  are  her
frequent  visiters  (sic)."  ^  These  are  from  cases  of  illness,  but
they  can  be  matched  among  the  hypnagogic  images  of  the
healthy.  And  it  is  a  more  frequent  feature  to  meet  with
miniature  pictures  than  with  those  of  a  larger  scale  than
nature.  Nicolai's  phantoms  were  half  the  natural  size  ;
Maury's  were  at  first  always  "  petites,''  but  as  years
passed  on  they  became  larger,  and  nearly  life-size,  while
landscapes  were  reduced  almost  to  miniatures.^  Prof.
Alexander  remarks  that  "  all  such  images  seem  small "  ;
the  writer  in  the  Occult  Review  says  :  "At  other  times  I  see
beautiful  little  clear  living  pictures,  with  tiny  people
generally  occupied  about  the  most  ordinary  incidents  of
everyday  life."  A  correspondent  describes  among  her
visions  "  tiny  gardens,  complete  with  terraces,  vases,
stone  walls,  etc."  Another  says  "  mostly  small,  very  vivid
pictures,  like  those  seen  in  the  '  finder  '  of  a  camera."

1  McNish,  op.  cit.,  p.  267.  Compare  also  "  C.  C.  O."  in  St.  James's
Gazette,  of  a  woman  seeing  crowds  of  "  grotesquely  colossal  and  writhing
figures."

2  Mauiy,  op.  cit.,  p.  88  and  footnote.  See  on  this  point  an  able  article
by  Raoul  Leroy  on  "  The  Syndrome  of  Lilliputian  Hallucinations  "  in  Jour,
of  Nervous  and  Mental  Diseases,  October  1922,  pp.  325-333  ;  epitomised
in  Brit.  Med.  Jour.,  Nov.  4,  1922,  p.  61  (Epitome).


334


F.  E.  Leaning.


[PABT


Several  observers  have  come  to  the  conchision  that  there
is  a  radical  difference  between  these  perfect  "  ready-made  "
little  scenes  and  some  other  of  their  visions,  particularly
faces.  It  is  therefore  in  place  here  to  consider  next  what
might  be  called

(4)  The  Point  of  View. — -The  spectator  is  conscious  of  a
considerable  range  in  the  apparent  distance  of  his  visions,
and  this  does  not  seem  to  be  entirely  based  on  the  un-
conscious mental  interpretation  which  we  give  to  objects
of  known  size,  when  they  appear  larger  or  smaller  accord-
ing to  their  distance  from  us.  The  miniatures  spoken  of
are  not  taken  to  be  very  far  off  because  they  are  small ;
they  are  sometimes  stated  to  be  at  a  distance  of  only  a
foot  or  two.  They  lose  nothing  in  distinctness,  however
small  the  scale,  but  seem  like  a  landscape  close  at  hand
seen  through  an  artist's  "  diminishing  glass."  With  figures
also,  one  narrator  speaks  of  them  as  carte-de-visite  size,
full-length,  and  faces  only  as  cabinet  vignette,  but
now  and  then  life-size.^  Another  says  (of  faces),
"  life-size  and  very  close  to  my  eyes."  ^  Galton's  friend
speaks  of  the  waking  visions  as  "  quite  close,  filling,  as  it
were,  the  whole  head."  ^  They  appear  and  vanish  in  an
instant.  His  relative  also,  especially  when  not  well,
found  them  "  almost  suffocatingly  close."  Greenwood's
wonderful  faces,  however,  were  five  or  six  feet  off,  but  his
sheep  and  spangles  within  his  closed  eyehds.  A  corres-
pondent also  says  something  illuminating  about  his  images,
which  I  do  not  find  so  clearly  expressed  anywhere  else.
After  describing  a  "  perfectly  round,  intensely  bright  yellow
light,  precisely  (so  I  thought)  the  same  diameter  as  the
iris "  which  "  floated  within  my  closed  vision  exactly  as
some  of  the  vague  '  faces  in  the  dark,'  "  he  adds  "  the
mere  faces  apparently  float  withui  the  scope  of  the  eye
itself.  The  eye  is  not  looking  out  at  them — they  are  within
it.  But  the  '  scenic  elusions  '  appear  to  be  of  a  higher
type,  for  these  are  clear,  real  and  without  boundary.  The
eye  is  looking  out  at  them." But  when,  as  in  Mr.  Field-

1  Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  295.  ^  jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  269.

2  Galton,  op.  cit.,  pp.  164,  166.  •..  ^


xciv.] Introductory  Stvdy  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  335

ing-Ould's  description,^  he  speaks  of  the  faces  being  "  ap-
parently about  two  feet  away  from  the  eye  "  and  bursting
into  view,  complete  in  every  way,  we  have  an  example  of
something  which  the  eye  does  "  look  out  at  "  ;  if  it  be  the
eye  which  is  concerned.  This  is  getting  into  the  region  of
theory,  which  is  pi'emature,  but  if  differing  theories  are  to
be  fairly  dealt  with,  all  the  data  alike  miist  be  considered,
and  the  impressions  of  those  whose  evidence  is  at  first
hand  are  entitled  to  be  heard.

The  last-named  witness,  in  his  account,  draws  attention
to  yet  another  peculiar  feature  of  the  "  point  of  view."  It
is  not  only  the  detail,  in  itself,  but  the  kind  of  detail
which  would  not  normally  be  observed  at  all.  "  The
'  landscapes,'  "  he  remarks,  "  may  be  merely  a  stretch  of
road  on  which  every  pebble  is  distinct  even  to  obtrusive-
ness."  A  correspondent  further  illustrates  this,  and  en-
larges on  it  :  "  One  such  picture  was  the  edge  of  a  stretch
of  turf  bordering  a  gravel  walk.  The  turf  edge,  about  four
inches  deep,  was  exactly  on  the  level  of  the  vision,
every  rootlet  and  grain  of  soil  sharply  defined.  To  see  it
actually  so,  one  would  have  had  to  lie  very  flat  on  the
gravel  walk,  with  one's  face  close  to  the  turf.  Again,  I
have  seen,  at  very  close  range,  stone  mouldings  and
crockets  of  some  church  tower,  high  up  on  that  church
tower,  and  noted  the  design  and  sharp  lights  and
shadows  before  the  whole  picture  was  gone."  Again,  I
have  had  described  to  me  as  a  thing  seen  a  section
through  earth,  sea,  and  air,  the  sm-face  of  the  sea  with
ships  on  it,  then  a  wall  of  waters,  and  then  the  earth's
globe,  like  an  orange  cut  down.  M.  Gheury  de  Bray's
experience  of  seeing  the  landscape  as  from  an  aeroplane,
though  not  a  reminiscence  of  any  such  actual  event,
is  somewhat  similar  to  this.  And  Warcolher  has  a
variant  of  his  own,  for  he  says :  "I  have  observed  that
they  frequently  have  the  appearance  of  being  localised  in
one  of  the  two  eyes."  In  an  instance  of  a  vision  (of  his
dining-room  table  with  the  cloth  thrown  back,  a  cup  and
saucer,  etc.)  he  saw  it  small  but  very  clear  with  the  left

1  Ught,  Feb.  24,  1923,  p.  122.
y


336


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


eye,  whilst  an  image  (he  does  not  say  whether  the  same
or  not)  dimly  ("  sans  nettete  ")  appeared  in  the  right  eye
(p.  58).

There  is  finally  an  experience,  exceedingly  rare  in  the
annals  of  Psychical  Research,  which  has  twice  been  men-
tioned to  me  by  correspondents.  It  is  that  of  seeing  with,
or  from,  the  back  of  the  head.  Thus  one  says  :  "  One
or  two  have  been  at  the  back  of  my  head,  but  I  see  them
quite  distinctly  "  ;  the  other  uses  almost  the  same  words  :
"  as  if  my  eyes  were  at  the  back  of  my  head."

(5)  Illumination. — One  of  the  very  commonest  features  of
the  visions,  which,  in  fact,  cannot  be  missed  by  anyone
who  reads  or  hears  of  even  a  few,  is  the  diffusion  of
bright  light  in  which  everything  is  seen.  Mr.  Henslow's
bed  of  red  tulips  in  a  "  spring  morning,  briUiant  sun,"  for
instance,  or  Myers'  "  wet  hedge  in  the  sun,"  ^  the  sohtary
example  he  has  given  us,  are  illustrations.  It  is  almost
always  sunlight  that  is  mentioned ;  Stead's  is  the  only
moonlight  picture  I  have  met  with,  and  that  possesses  a
feature  which  in  itself  gives  its  kinship  to  the  rest.  (Ex-
amples of  scenes  in  evening  Hght  are  to  be  found  on  pp.
326  and  338,  the  Kaffir  women  and  the  Indian  soldier
visions.)

An  extraordinarily  sombre  vision  is  given  in  Light,^  in
which  a  scene  of  a  darkly-garbed  woman  in  a  dimly
lighted  room,  stabbed  by  a  man  also  in  antique  dress,
forms  an  exception  to  the  rule.  Even  in  this  the  woman's
white  stomacher,  and  the  flash  of  the  man's  weapon,
brings  out  the  "  bright  point "  ;  but  see  the  companion
vision  (the  desert  scene)  as  quoted  on  p.  340  infra,  which
is  a  complete  contrast.  It  is  possible  that  the  vividness
and  the  clearness,  which  most  narrators  lay  so  much  stress
on,  are  due  to  this  diffusion  of  light,  though  careful  reading
shows  them  not  to  be  wholly  so  ;  the  distinctness  is  the  result
of  a  penetrative  quality  in  the  seeing,  apparently,  which
the  strongest  light  would  not  quite  account  for.

Next  to  the  prevalence  of  an  illuminated  field  of  view
comes  that  of  objects  which  are  of  native  brilliance,  such

^  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  370.  ^  Light,  1920,  p.  112.


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  337

as  gold,  silver,  diamonds,  all  things  that  sparkle  and
gleam.  If  Myers'  hedge  had  not  been  ivet,  with  dew  or
rain-drops,  it  would  have  lost  the  suggestion  of  a  glittering
greenness.  Mr.  Henslow's  dynasty  of  bright  objects,
"  frequently  of  great  beauty  and  highly  brilliant,"  included
cut  glass,  and  highly  chased  gold  and  silver  fihgree  orna-
ments ;  Meyer's  silver  stirrup  was  so  vivid  as  to  leave  an
after-image  ;  ^  the  gold  blocks  that  effaced  the  roses,  and
the  spangles  that  turned  to  sheep,  are  the  least  "  of  that
bright  band,"  unless  the  sparkhng  and  rippluag  of  waves
should  be  given  that  place.  Where  the  brilliancy  fails
of  actual  flame  or  flash,  it  is  there  as  some  element  of
whiteness — a  white  patch  of  snow  on  the  emerald  moor-
land,^  the  white  collar  of  an  Eton  boy  gazing  across  his
desk,  the  gleaming  of  the  eye  in  Stead's  second  vision,  the
clothes  hanging  on  the  line,  the  man  advancing  to  a  white
table,  and  so  on.  According  to  C.  S.  Myers, ^  "  Any  colour
stimulus,  if  sufficiently  intense,  is  seen  as  white.  In-
tense spectral  reds  and  orange,  and  greens  up  to  a  wave-
length of  517  mUKonth  parts  of  a  millimetre,  acquire  a
yellow  hue  before  they  in  this  way  become  colourless."
But  this  would  not  account  for  the  white  patches  being
always  in  the  right  place.

(6)  Colour. — If  the  hjrpnagogic  agent  is  an  artist,  whose
first  law  is  "  Let  there  be  Kght,"  the  second  is  that  in
that  hght  there  shall  be  living  coloiir.  If  we  begin  with
those  outlines  of  white  on  black,  and  the  sometimes  very
faintly  coloured  faces,  such  as  Greenwood's,  which  depend
on  form  primarily  for  their  significance,  there  would  appear
to  be  a  strange  gap  between  them  and  the  completely
coloured  visions.  It  is  not  nature's  way  to  omit  grada-
tions, and  yet  evidence  was  lacking  of  an  intermediate
class  until  a  lady  in  Edinburgh  supphed  an  interesting
example.  The  "  illusions  "  visited  her  for  the  first  time
in  February  1923,  during  a  brief  attack  of  ilhiess,  and  the
account  is  based  on  notes  made  at  once. "  During  the

^  James,  Princ.  of  Psychol.,  ii.  67.
'^St.  James's  Gazette,  Feb.  15,  1882.
'.  ^Experimental  Psychology,  p.  73  (1911).


338  F.  E.  Leaning.  ' v>  [part


night  3rd  to  4th  February,"  she  writes,  "  I  had  the  first
clear  photographic  scenes  hke  snap-shots  from  good  nega-
tives. They  were  nearly  all  of  lofty  stone  walls  with
httle  windows  and  loop-holes  ;  the  outer  side  of  dock-sheds  ;
a  stone  face  of  a  woman  lying  in  waste  ground  ;  ruined
churches,  chiefly  doors  ;  and  one,  the  only  recognisable
one,  of  the  outside  of  the  smaller  caves  of  Ellora,  those
wonderful  cave  temples  of  the  Deccan,  India.  I  had
often  visited  the  larger  ones,  but  only  seen  these  at  a
distance.  All  these  were  clear,  without  colour.  The  last
I  can  remember  was  on  a  larger  scale,  as  though  taken
from  the  top  of  an  Eastern  Fort  gateway — a  group  of
mounted  soldiers  in  tin  helmets  waiting  admittance,  while
down  a  slope  at  the  foot  of  which  a  pool,  shaped  like  a
star  full  of  reflected  light  as  of  sunset,  lay,  and  up  on  an
eminence  was  another  group  of  similar  soldiers  waiting."
In  a  second  letter,  in  reply  to  enquiries,  she  says  again
that  the  pictures  were  as  "  little  photo  prints,  good  prints
from  perfect  negatives,  except  in  the  case  of  the  soldiers,
when  it  appeared  as  if  the  light  had  been  bad  for  the
exposure — evening  light,  I  should  say,  after  a  wet  day.  .  .  .
None  was  of  the  nature  of  a  sketch  at  aU."  On  the
second  night,  Feb.  4-5,  she  again  saw  small  distinct
pictures,  but  coloured  this  time,  "  soft  in  outhne,  exquisite
in  colour,  and  also  miniature  in  size."  Among  them  were
"  beautiful  caverns,  snow-white,  opening  to  a  sky  with
stars  ;  sometimes  the  cavern  would  be  dark,  opening  to  a
lovely  calm  sea,  with  an  island  or  land  beyond.  Bands
of  coloured  patterns  as  on  chma,  brilliant  colours  mostly,
a  curved  band."  I  have,  since  writing  this,  found  a
parallel  case  described  in  much  detail  by  "  Mrs.  W."  in
the  Spiritual  Magazine  (1861),  p.  165.  The  comparison  is
very  interesting.  The  uncoloured  visions  lasted  for  six
months.

We  find  in  the  "  brilliant  colours  "  the  characteristic  note
of  the  awakening  to  colour  in  every  variety,  which  we
expect  to  find  in  the  visions.  So  many  have  remarked  on
this  that  there  is  no  doubt  it  is  the  normal  thing,  not
only  to  see  all  things  in  their  natural  colours,  but  to  see
them  in  the  highest  degree  of  vividness,  and  in  fact  sur-


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  339


passing  in  their  richness  and  glow  the  facts  of  visual
experience.  Thus  Henslow  sees  "  elaborate  coloured  pat-
terns of  carpets  in  brilliant  tints";  S.  M.  B.  sees  '"gorge-
ously coloured  and  woven  patterns  "  ;  ^  so  Miiller,  "  highly
illumined  and  coloured  images  "  ;  Lelorgne's  visions  are
"  vivement  colorees  "  ;  Taine's  are  "  intense  .  .  .  coloured  "  ;
Herrick's  landscapes  are  "  vivid  "  ;  again,  "  colours  especi-
ally in  endless  variety  "  ;  ^  and  the  words  vivid,  intense,
and  brilhant  are  constantly  met  with  in  the  descriptions.
In  fact,  Brewster  speaks  of  theu'  vividness  as  their  only
characteristic,^  and  Galton's  friend  speaks  of  it  as  "  start-
ling."

Such  a  consensus  as  this  shows  that  Prof.  Ladd  was  not
speaking  for  himself  alone  when  he  stated  that  "  By  far
the  purest,  most  brilliant,  and  most  beautiful  colours  I
have  ever  seen,  and  the  most  astonishing  artistic  combina-
tions of  such  colours,  have  appeared  with  closed  eyes  in  a
dark  room."  *  "  The  yellow  colour  in  my  drawings,"  says
Lady  Berkeley,  "  is  really  not  yellow,  but  hquid  fire,"  ^
and  elsewhere  she  refers  to  the  "  strange  luminosity  quite
impossible  to  reproduce."  But  if  the  artist's  brush  cannot
do  justice  to  the  visions,  the  medium  of  language  is  still
more  strained.  Yet  those  who  have  enjoyed  Dr.  Weir
Mitchell's  magnificent  description  of  his  visions  under
mescal  will  remember  the  splendour  of  the  colour,  and  the
"  miles  on  miles  of  rippled  purple  of  ineffable  beauty "
with  which — too  soon  ! — one  of  them  ended. ^

One  of  the  colours  specifically  mentioned,  purple,  as  has
been  previously  remarked,  is  one  most  often  met  with.
It  is  seen  as  covering  the  field,  but  sometimes  as  "a
purple  star,"  and  a  correspondent  speaks  of  "  a  purple  bar
against  sunset  clouds."  In  the  former  case  the  seeing  of
"  wave  on  wave  of  purple  "  brought  a  great  sense  of  rest,

^Occult  Review,  xv.  227.  -Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  270.

'Brewster,  Sir  D.,  Letters  on  Nat.  Magic,  p.  51  (1832).
^Mind,  vol.  i.  n.s.  p.  299  (1892).

^  "  Yellow  is  the  region  of  maximal  '  brightness  value.'  Brightness  is
a  psychical  character  which  is  distinct  from  intensity  and  saturation."
C.  S.  Myers,  op.  cit.

"Brit.  Med.  Jour.,  Dec.  5, 189G. Also  in  De  Manaeeine,  p.  247.


340


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


"  like  an  elixir."  ^  But  every  element  in  the  rainbow
conies  into  play,  although  perhaps  with  certain  individuals
certain  colours  predominate.  Maury  seems  to  have  fre-
quently seen  a  blue  or  bluish  light,  and  on  one  occasion  it
developed  into  the  vista  of  a  lighted  street  in  a  town  under
the  shadowy  blue  of  night  skies. ^  He  even  saw  blue  in  the
cheeks  of  his  figures,  and  the  women  of  his  later  years
wore  sombre  garments.  But  occasionally,  as  on  the
journey  into  Switzerland  by  coach,  he  saw  a  crowd  of
brilhant  Httle  personages  in  scarlet,  chattering  and  moving
incessantly.  It  is  obvious  that  since  colour  plays  so  large
a  part  in  the  visions,  and  they  are  not  confined  to  such
things  as  can  be  any  colour  at  choice,  such  as  carpets  and
clothes,  that  the  subjects  of  them  must  be  often  the  result  of
selection  on  the  part  of  the  producing  agency.  That  is,
they  must  consist  of  articles  or  scenes  in  which  colour  is
an  inevitable  and  prominent  feature.  Prof.  Alexander
mentions,  for  instance,  among  a  list  of  over  a  dozen,  a
bunch  of  red  berries  amid  green  leaves,  a  striped  necktie,
and  so  on.  Warcolher,  during  an  experiment  with  phos-
phorescent glasses,  saw  a  flame-coloured  nasturtium  with
green  leaves.  A  correspondent  sends  me  the  following,
which  well  illustrates  the  pomt  :  "a  cock  in  brilhant
plumage  in  full  sunshine,  flapped  his  wings,  neck  out-
stretched and  curved,  as  in  crowing."  It  may  be  noted
in  connection  with  this  that  cerebral  after-images  of
scenes  witnessed  during  the  day,  such  as  the  manoeuvres
of  scarlet-coated  soldiers  in  a  park,  or  the  student's  pro-
cession of  St.  Patrick,  are  also  of  a  highly-coloured  kind
and  seen  in  the  sunshine.

By  permission  of  the  editor  of  Light  I  take  the  follow-
ing beautiful  scene  ^  which,  except  for  the  absence  of
change,  is  typical  of  the  sun-hghted  visions.  The  narrative
says  that  rarely  more  than  one  presents  itself  in  the  same
evening  ;  that  they  are  vivid,  of  too  short  duration  to  be
minutely  inspected,  and  occur  only  at  the  moment  when
sleep  is  coming  on. "  A  desert  scene  :  a  ghmpse  of  yeUow-


iJottr.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  243.
^  Light  (1920),  Ap.  3,  p.  112.


"Maury,  op.  cit.,  pp.  81,  88.


xciv.] Introductory  Stvdy  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  341

brown  sand  beneath  a  bui-ning  sun.  There  is  a  structure
consisting  of  a  long,  peaked  roof,  supported  by  several
tall  columns.  Underneath  each  of  the  arches  so  formed
is  standing  a  horse.  They  are  beautiful  creatures,  with
flowing  manes  and  tails  ;  then  trappings  give  the  impres-
sion of  gorgeousness.  In  each  saddle  is  seated  the  mag-
nificent upright  figure  of  a  Spahi,  clad  in  rich  raiment  and
wearing  a  turban.  In  front  of  the  structure,  whose  ia-
terior  is  in  deep  shadow,  rises  a  small  pyramid,  gleaming
white  in  the  rays  of  the  sun."

(7)  Emotional  Reaction. — It  is  in  place  here  to  say  a  few
words  as  to  the  effect  which  the  seeing  of  the  visions  has
on  the  different  percipients.  All  are  not  affected  to  the
same  degree,  and  still  less  in  the  same  way ;  and  it  is
difficult  to  determine  whether  the  diversity  lies  in  indi-
vidual tastes  or  in  the  quality  of  the  visions  themselves.
It  would  seem  rather  as  though  there  were  a  more  or  less
constant  element  at  work  in  the  presentation,  and  a  more
or  less  capricious  temper  in  the  audience.  According  to
Dr.  Walsh,  ui  most  adults  the  little  stage  displays  "  are
unnoticed  or  excite  no  particular  interest  "  ;  ^  and  in  sup-
port of  this  may  be  cited  Prof.  Alexander,  who  says  :  "  my
own  state  at  the  time  is  almost  untinged  by  feehng —
perhaps  a  languid  interest  in  watching  the  images,  or
amusement  at  their  absurdities.  Doubtless  the  interest
tends  to  prolong  the  hypnagogic  period  and  so  multiply
the  number  of  the  images,  but  it  does  not  affect  their
character."  ^  Even  Mrs.  Arnold-Forster,  who  begins  by
sajdng  "Of  all  our  borderland  experiences  perhaps  none
are  more  attractive,"  ends  by  saying  that  "  no  special
interest  attaches  to  them,  and  apart  from  moments  of
pleasure  that  they  give  us,  they  might  not  be  worth  even
a  passing  reference."

As  an  intellectual  verdict  pronounced  by  these  authori-
ties, two  of  whom  at  least  speak  with  first-hand  knowledge,
this  would  seem  to  dispose  of  the  matter  at  a  low  rating.
But  yet  it  is  not  one  in  which  the  majority  of  our  wit-
nesses agree. There are at least three effects  which

1  Walsh,  op.  oit.,  p.  16.  ^  p^oc.  Arner.  S.P.B.,  Vol.  III.  p.  624.


342


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


differ  widely  from  mere  indifierence.  As  lias  been  pre-
viously remarked,  children  are  often  frightened  as  well  as
pleased,  in  almost  equal  proportions  as  regards  their
numbers,  judging  by  the  children's  census,  though  the
popular  idea  is  that  they  are  much  more  frequently
frightened.  Havelock  Ellis,  citing  the  French  author  E.
Guyon,^  says  "  he  believes  that  childi'en  always  find  them
terrifjdng,"  and  comments  "  That,  however,  is  far  from
being  the  case."  When  we  consider  what  various  authors
have  told  us  about  their  sufferings  as  children,  even
without  any  hypnagogic  visions,  it  is  surprising  that  fear
is  not  more  universal  than  it  is.  See,  for  example,  the
young  Richter's  story  of  the  terrible  two  hours  that
always  elapsed  between  his  own  bedtime  and  the  coming
of  his  father  ^  ;  Charles  Lamb's  Witches  and  Other  Night
Fears ;  and  J.  A.  Symonds'  really  pitiable  ordeals  of  the
same  sort,^  as  he  feelingly  relates  them.  Nor  is  fear
confined  to  children.  Maury's  old  servant  kept  her  light
burning  as  a  preventive  of  "  les  vilaines  figures,"  and  the
patient  cited  by  McNish  was  "  tortured "  by  her  visions.
All  who  describe  their  images  in  such  forcible  terms  as
"  hideous,"  "  monstrous,"  etc.,  if  not  frightened,  are  dis-
tressed and  disturbed  by  them.  This,  then,  is  one  of  the
emotional  effects  produced.

Another  which  is  less  frequently  mentioned,  but  evi-
dently does  occur,  is  that  of  surprise,  a  remarkable  thing
if  we  consider  it.  The  appearance  of  the  pictures,  accord-
ing to  Mrs.  Arnold-Forster,  "  is  always  rather  a  surprise,
and  I  am  totally  unable  to  guess  when  or  in  what  form
they  will  come,  or  what  the  '  picture  on  the  screen '  will
change  into."  ^  So  also  the  lady  who  saw  the  "  cottage
in  the  circle  "  was  "  very  much  surprised  and  interested  "
(see  p.  295  supra).  Galton  was  "  astonished  at  their
variety,"  ^  his  friend's  "  often  appear  with  startling  vivid-

1  Ellis,  The  World  of  Dreams,  p.  29  ;  and  Guyon,  Sur  les  Hallucinations
Hypnagogiques,  Paris  (1903).

^Autobiography,  in  the  Life  by  Eliza  Lee  (1849).
^  Horatio  Brovv-n,  Biog.  of  J.  A.  Symonds,  i.  6-9.
Arnold-Forster,  op.  cit.,  p. 163.  ^  Galton,  op.  cit.,  p.  159.


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  343

ness."  The  element  of  the  unexpected  seems  answerable
tor  this,  combined  with  the  sense  of  complete  detachment.
James  refers  to  the  "  abrupt  and  spontaneous  "  character
of  the  pseudo-hallucmations,  "  in  the  sense  that  all  feehng
of  our  own  activity  in  producing  them  is  lacking."  ^

Surprise,  however,  in  the  nature  of  the  case  cannot
be  continuous  ;  it  must  yield  to  something  else.  And  it
is  on  the  succeeding  interest  that  the  greater  number  of
persons  dwell.  Thus  Mrs.  Deland  mentions  "  much  interest
and  amusement "  derived  from  the  faces  and  scenes ;  ^
a  doctor  is  "  much  interested  and  entertained "  by  the
panorama,  "  entirely  outside  of  (his)  mental  action "  ;  ^
Greenwood  after  many  years  stUl  found  the  faces  "  very
interestmg  indeed  "  ;  Herrick  received  "  great  pleasure  "
in  his  childhood  (as  did  Dr.  Clarke),  and  in  later  years
rehef  from  insomnia  ;  *  and  if  we  add  to  these  the  enjoy-
ment and  admiration  imphed  in  the  terms  used  in  speaking
of  landscapes,  etc.,  (see  Section  VII.),  the  fact  that  such  men
as  Greenwood  could  say  "  no  words  and  no  skill  in  using
them  can  describe  an  intensity  of  meaning  which  is
sometimes  too  vivid,  too  invading,  too  terribly  convincing
to  be  borne "  ;  or  again,  Dr.  Weir  Mitchell :  "  I  find  it
hopeless  to  describe  in  language,  the  beauty  and  splendour
of  what  I  saw,"  it  is  evident  that  the  experience  runs  up
far  beyond  what  we  can  call  interesting,  even  at  its  highest.
In  the  case  of  the  last  writer  referred  to,  he  says  that  he
was  "  critically  attentive,  interested,  and  curious,"  and  it
may  be  noted  that  curiosity  is  another  emotion  produced
by  the  visions.  It  leads  often  to  attempts  to  control,
which  wiU  be  considered  in  the  proper  place  (see
Section  XII.).

IX.  Companion  Phenomena.

Although  hitherto  only  visual  hypnagogic  hallucinations
have  been  considered,  the  study  is  not  complete  without
taking  into  account  those  other  sensory  forms  which  occur

1  James,  op.  cit.,  ii.  117.  'Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  269.

3  Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  IX.  p.  121.

*  Quoted  in  De  Manaceine,  op.  cit.,  p.  240.


344


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


alternatively,  or  as  accompaniments  of  them.  These  are
impressions  of  hearing,  smell,  and  sensation,  in  the  order
of  their  frequency,  or  perhaps  it  would  be  safer  to  say,
in  the  order  of  their  frequency  of  mention.  There  is  a
much  smaller  mass  of  data  available  for  this  further
study,  but  enough  to  show  that  a  parallelism  exists.  An
analysis  of  Baillarger's  thirty  cases, ^  which  formed  his
own  origmal  contribution  to  the  study  of  the  then  un-
named "  etat  intermediaire  a  la  veille  et  au  sommeil,"
shows  that  ten  subjects  both  saw  and  heard,  while  fifteen
in  all  saw  and  twenty-two  heard,  two  smelt,  and  five
experienced  hallucinations  of  touch.  The  sexes  were  ten
men,  eighteen  women,  and  two  not  specified.  If  this
table  were  any  indication,  it  would  certainly  point  to
cases  of  hearing,  either  alone  or  in  conjunction  with  other
sensory  hallucinations,  being  quite  in  the  majority.  But
it  cannot  be  altogether  considered  as  on  the  same  footing
with  the  experiences  of  the  sane ;  for  persons  who  were
sane  all  their  lives  never  became  patients  for  a  longer
or  shorter  time  at  the  Salpetriere.  Those  who  were
temporarily  there,  owing  to  shock  (as  of  a  workwoman,  who
witnessed  a  murder)  and  others  who  began  by  having
hypnagogic  visions  for  two  or  three  years,  and  then
suddenly  developed  continuous  or  periodical  hallucinations,
are  instructive,  because  they  form  the  link  between  the
quite  sane  typical  hypnagogist  and  the  quite  insane
"  hallucine."  One  old  employe,  who  was  not  a  patient,
gives  his  own  account,  and  it  resembles  the  ordinary
experiences  in  every  point.  It  included  voices  as  weU
as  visions.

(1)  Hypnagogic  Sounds. — The  question  of  auditory  pheno-
mena has  been  discussed  by  Prof.  Alexander,  ^  and  by
another  author  ^  who  says  his  imagination  is  of  the
auditory  type.  "  Last  night,"  he  relates,  under  date
November  3,  1914,  "I  saw  several  persons  standing
close together and heard them talking. The  persons,

^  Mini,  de  VAcad.  Roy.  de  MHecine,  t.  xii.  pp.  476-516  (1846);  pre-
viously in  Ann.  Mid.-Psy.,  t.  vi.  pp.  1,  168  (1845).
^Proc.  Amer.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  III.  p.  632.
3  Jolui  Watson,  Proc.  Amer.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VII.  p.  359.


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  345

especially  the  faces,  were  indistinct,  and  probably  the
words."  Most  of  his  experiences  were  after  sleep.  Have-
lock  Ellis  relates  that  "  It  has  occasionally  happened  to
me  that  as  I  have  begun  to  lose  waking  consciousness,
a  procession  of  images  has  drifted  before  my  vision,  and
suddenly  one  of  the  figures  I  see  has  spoken,"  and  he
was  thereby  startled  into  complete  wakefulness.^  It  is
not  proposed  to  attempt  anything  like  a  complete  outline
of  this  part  of  the  subject,  partly  because  it  is  too  large
and  merges  into  the  general  study  of  auditory  hallucina-
tions as  a  whole.  IVIr.  J.  Barker  Smith  has  given  ample
material  out  of  his  own  experience  for  an  analytical  study
of  voices, 2  though  it  would  be  necessary  to  distinguish
the  hypnagogic  from  his  other  instances.  The  impression
conveyed  is  that  there  is  something  about  them  which
corresponds  to  the  colour,  perspective,  etc.,  of  the  visual
images,  and  probably  with  sufficient  data  we  might  find
every  point  paralleled.  In  the  meantime  I  will  only  add
here  two  examples  from  correspondents,  which  are  more
clear-cut  and  mteresting  than  the  foregoing,  as  com-
bining vision  and  voice.  The  first  is  from  a  professional
man,  who,  though  often  seeing,  found  this  a  "  unique  "
vision.  He  writes  :  "  There  was  quite  a  company  of
people  about  me,  young  women  I  beheve,  who  looked
towards  me  and  passed  on.  One  of  them  spoke.  I  heard
the  voice  distinctly,  soft  and  clear.  It  said  '  He  isn't
asleep.'  That  is  aU  .  .  .  I  am  certain  I  am  not  confusing
this  with  a  dream."  He  had  previously  said  that  he
was  prompted  to  turn  up  the  fight  and  make  a  note  of
this,  but  as  the  night  was  cold,  and  a  keen  wind  blowing
through  the  open  window,  he  did  not.  The  account  was
written  a  few  days  later.  The  second  is  from  a  lady
who  sent  me  the  description  within  a  few  hours  of  the
occurrence.  It  took  place  after  a  period  of  wakefulness
in  the  night,  when  she  had  just  closed  her  eyes  with
the  desire  to  sleep.

1  Ellis,  op.  cit.,  p.  33.

*  See  his  series  of  17  articles  on  Clairaudience  in  the  General  Prac-
titioner, May  26-Sept.  22,  1900,  and  Medical  Times,  1920-1923  (April).


346


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


Immediately  on  doing  so  the  bows  of  a  ship  appeared
on  the  left  hand  side  of  the  bed.  A  rather  blurred  light
fastened  on  the  extreme  point  in  front,  under  the  ])ow-
sprit,  lit  the  vessel  up  and  made  her  look  white,  though  I
thought  she  might  not  liave  been.  It  was  like  moonlight.
She  cut  through  the  water,  making  little  waves  that  broke
into  foam.  Twice  the  picture  came,  but  only  for  a  second
or  two,  and  only  the  fore-part  of  the  ship.  I  said  it  was
not  so  strange,  as  a  friend  had  left  a  few  days  before  for
a  long  voyage,  and  others  were  arriving,  when  quite  clearly
and  authoritatively  a  voice  spoke  on  my  right  a  little  be-
hind my  pillows  :  "  There's  no  occasion  to  warn  her.
We've  got  one  ship  olf  already."  It  was  the  voice  of  a
working  man  of  the  better  class.  •

These  cases  are  in  interesting  contrast  with  a  small
number  which  powerfully  suggest  sound,  though  sound
there  comes  none.  For  example,  the  lips  that  move  as
though  forming  a  word,  the  crowing  cock,  Cardano's
trumpeters  marching  with  trumpets,  as  it  were,  in  full
blast  but  soundlessly,  the  laughing  men,  and  so  on.
A  curious  but  marked  limitation  of  some  sort  is  manifested
here.  Those  who  combine  the  auditory  power  with  the  visual
have  a  richer  content  in  their  experiences,  though  Lelorgne
could  have  well  dispensed  with  the  vast  chanting  choruses
which  tormented  him.

With  .  regard  to  music  being  heard  in  the  hypnagogic
period,  this  is  rarer  than  voices.  Lady  Berkeley  mentions
the  hearing  of  splendid  organ  music  occasionally.  Her
account  is  as  follows,  and  presents  several  points  of
interest  :

I  not  infrequently  hear  bells  (or  something  like  bells)
mostly  at  night,  and  have  often  got  out  of  bed,  opened  all
windows,  etc.,  to  ascertain  whether  they  really  were  ring-
ing, only  to  be  met  by  complete  silence  outside.  (We  live
on  a  hill,  in  extensive  grounds  and  dominate  the  town  of
Nice,  having  no  near  neighbours.)  On  returning  to  bed,
putting  balls  of  wax  in  the  ears  and  shutting  all  sounds
out  with  pillows,  I  hear  again  these  grand  organ-hke  vi-
brations, which  then  often  end  by  rocking  me  to  sleep  (so


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  347

to  speak).  In  the  same  way  I  have  at  times  heard  musical
harmonies  which  I  was  able  (if  I  hurried)  to  play,  and
then  write  down.  These  harmonies  always  come  in  frag-
ments, and  hitherto  the  missing  bit  has  not  been  supplied
from  "  beyond,"  though  a  lady  I  know — and  to  whom  I
played  them — declares  they  are  the  same  as  have  been
played  to  her  complete  by  a  musical  medium  she  knows.
This  medium  (a  man)  doesn't  know  one  note  from  the
other  in  his  normal  state,  and  can  only  play  when  under
the  influence  of  one  of  his  "  guides."  I  have  not  heard
him,  however,  and  shall  not  be  sure  the  music  is  the  same
till  I  have  done  so.  One  must  make  sure  in  all  these
things. {Letter  of  March  29th,  1923.)

Apart  from  this  interesting  case  the  published  instances
are  of  an  exact  auditory  parallel  to  the  cerebral  after-
images of  the  eye.  McMsh,  for  instance,  heard  a  well-
known  march  ;  Maury  has  two  cases  of  a  similar  sort.^
In  the  first,  he  had  been  visiting  Paul  Delaroche,  an
artist  at  whose  house  Ambroise  Thomas  had  given  an
improvisation.  Lying  long  sleepless  that  night,  he  dozed
and  heard  as  in  the  distance  several  long  and  beautiful
passages,  which  he  says  his  poor  musical  memory  would
never  have  permitted  of  his  recalling  in  the  waking  state.
On  a  second  occasion,  lying  on  the  deck  of  a  steamer
bound  for  Staffa,  his  eyes  closed,  he  re-heard  the  air
which  the  blind  piper  had  performed  on  the  bagpipes
on  the  previous  evening.  There  is  possibly  here  some
connection  with  the  fact  that  most  people  are  famiKar
with,  of  the  tyranny  of  a  rhythm  or  tune  over  the
mental  machinery,  with  the  difference  that  the  one  is
re-heard,  while  the  other  is,  though  involuntarily,  recalled.
This  division,  though  very  slight,  would  not  be  complete
without  a  mention  of  Dr.  Hodgson's  case,  given  by
Myers, ^  and  illustrating  in  his  work  "  the  heightening
of  sensory  faculty  in  dream."  The  dream-music,  however,
persisted  into  the  waking  consciousness  for  as  long  as
a  quarter  of  an  hour,  and  was  therefore  truly  hypno-
pompic. It  was  "  very  rich,  very  sweet,"  coming  in  the

1  Maury,  op.  cit.,  p.  90.  ■ ^  Human  Personality,  i.  369.


348


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


auroral  hour,  and  dying  away  as  the  hght  grew.  "  No
pleasure  that  I  have  ever  had  in  hearing  music  before
or  since,"  says  Hodgson,  "  was  at  all  comparable  with
the  exquisite  peaceful  joy  which  flooded  me  as  I  listened
to  that  music  then."

(2)  Hypnagogic  Smells. — Mrs.  Haweis's  flight  of  great
pink  roses  was  accompanied  by  a  scent  which  was  "  over-
powering "  ;  and  in  the  extreme  rarity  of  this  hallucination
her  case  is  unfortunately  all  but  unique.  There  is  only
one  other  (on  record  at  present)  of  a  nice  scent.  This
occurs  among  ]\Irs.  Tweedale's  beautiful  little  series  of
complex  hjrpnagogic  experiences,  as  they  evidently  are,
though  not  apparently  recognised  as  such  by  her.  Speak-
ing of  her  childhood  she  says  :  ^

On  hot  velvety  nights  in  Jmie  a  curious  scent  of  smoke
would  come  to  me,  the  measured  hollow  beating  of  bells,
and  a  tremulous  far-away  piping.  Years  after,  I  stood
alone  one  evening  on  the  slopes  of  Etna,  amid  the  pale
asphodels  and  the  desolation  of  tumbling  lava-fields,  and  I
heard  the  pipes  of  Pan,  the  reed  pipe  of  the  herd  boy,  and
linked  the  past  with  the  present.  Again,  passing  through
a  region  where  the  smoke  rose  from  the  charcoal  burners'
fires,  the  scent  of  an  ancient  memory  came  vapouring  up,
the  unfamihar  scent  that  puzzled  my  childhood.  .  .  .

The  bells  she  explains  as  the  ring  of  camel  bells  when  a
caravan  broke  camp  at  dawn.  These  two  kinds  of  sensory
hallucination,  though  separate,  are  given  together  here
for  the  sake  of  unity.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  memory
of  a  scent  should  have  endured  for  so  many  years,  but
it  conforms  to  the  greater  strength  of  impressions  in
childhood,  frequently  implied  in  adult  accounts.

Maury's  old  servant  who  often  smelt  burning  ^  (of  which
she  had  a  dread),  his  old  countryman  who  smelt  a  horrible
stench  which  he  said  might  be  the  smell  of  the  Devil,
considering  the  kind  of  faces  that  it  accompanied,  and
Lelorgne's  "  odeur  fetide,"  make  up  a  group  which  would
be  the  better  of  some  sweetening. Several  of  Baillarger's

^Ghosts  I  hMve  Seen,  p.  14  (1920).  ^  Maury,  op.  cit.,  pp.  66,  98.


xoiv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena.  349

cases  included  smelling,  but  none  were  agreeable.  In
Mr.  Griinbaum's  auto-suggested  phenomena  ^  when  he  had
asked  for  the  perfume  as  well  as  the  sight  of  flowers,
it  win  be  remembered  that  the  flowers  were  in  coloured
cotton  wool,  on  the  toes  of  sUppers,  and  "  then  all  at
once  I  get  the  most  fearful  stink  in  my  nose,  as  I  never
had  before.  I  puU  myself  out  of  it  with  a  start."  But
eleven  days  later,  when  a  hand  holding  a  rose  on  a  long
stem  is  shown,  he  says :  "I  smell  during  the  time  of
one  inhalation  a  very  intense  smell  of  beautiful  roses.
It  smelt  much  nicer  than  ever  a  real  rose  could  smeU."
And  he  adds  in  a  note  :  "  Still  a  while  afterwards  I  had
that  dehcious  smell  in  my  nose."  Yet  another  possible
example  is  that  of  the  late  Vincent  Turvey,  the  author
of  Beginniyigs  of  Seership  (p.  86).  He  had  had  a  theo-
logical contretemps  with  a  seller  of  Christian  Evidence
literature  in  the  morning,  who  had  left  some  unpleasant
impressions  behind,  for  "  On  lying  down  in  the  after-
noon," says  Mr.  Turvey,  "  I  suddenly  saw  three  or  four
'  devils  '  in  the  room — typical  orthodox  fiends.  Men  with
goats'  legs,  cloven  hoofs,  little  horns  just  over  their  ears,
tails,  and  claw-hke  hands.  In  colour  they  were  entirely
brown,  like  ordinary  brown  paper.  I  sat  up  to  see  if
I  were  dreaming  ..."  When  a  few  minutes  afterwards
they  disintegrated  or  dissolved,  "  the  reader  must  imagine,"
he  adds,  "  a  cloud  of  steam,  laden  with  fine  dust  made
from  cardboard,  for  that  was  the  colour  and  the  smell,
as  nearly  as  I  can  describe  them,  of  these  creations  of  a
mind  which  believed  (etc.)."

(3)  Sensations. — Logically  this  subsection  should  present
examples  of  tactile  hallucinations  which  would  compare
with  those  of  seeing,  hearing,  and  smelling ;  but  this  is
not  proposed  for  the  reason  that  no  such  examples  can
be  found.  The  only  approach  to  them  is  in  INIr.  Griin-
baum's self-induced  sensations,  as  of  his  bed  tilting  and
rocking,  2  and  some  of  Baillarger's  cases  already  referred
to. 3 Five  of  these  experienced  touch,  it  is  true,  either  as

iProc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXVII.  pp.  395-6.

2  Proc.  S.P.B.,  Vol.  XXVII.  p.  404.  See  Section  IX.  (p.  344).


350  ' F.  E.  Leaning.  [part

a  feeling  of  being  slowly  immersed  in  water,  dragged
round  the  neck,  etc.  (Case  XXI.,  from  Casauvielh),  or  a
painful  torment,  on  lying  down,  of  pricks,  cuts,  pinches
(Case  XXVI.),  or  a  sense  of  cold  water  poured  over  the
head  (Case  IV.),  or  the  Devil  holding  a  woman  by  the
feet  (Case  XVII.),  and  so  on.  But  none  of  these  people
was  in  the  normal  condition  which  our  hypnagogic  subjects
have  been  in  so  far,  without  exception.  And  though  it
is  true,  as  Dr.  Michea  pithily  remarks  ^  that  "  L'hallucine
n'est  pas  fou  "  (and  he  had  made  a  study  of  123  cases),
yet  it  is  well  to  keep  quite  on  the  far  side  of  the  line
that  separates  the  hallucinations  of  the  insane,  even  if
only  partially  and  temporarily  so,  from  those  of  the
undoubtedly  healthy-minded.  :

For  this  reason  "  sensations  "  are  here  limited  to  those
physical  feelings  which  accompany  the  exercise  of  seeing
or  hearing  hypnagogic  phenomena,  and  which  are  internal,
not  simulating  any  such  as  would  be  caused  by  an
objective  stimulus.  One  of  these  was  the  result
(apparently)  of  exercising  indirect  control  over  the  subject
of  the  pictures  seen.  The  experiment  is  given  in  full
in  the  Section  on  Control  (see  p.  367  infra).

But  next  morning  I  was  very  tired,  and  had  an  odd
feeling  in  the  very  middle  of  my  head,  as  of  coldness,  that
extended  down  the  forehead  to  between  the  eyes.  I  have
not  been  able  to  induce  these  conditions  again.  Thought
forms  were  moulded  and  produced  by  the  act  of  wishing
them  to  be.  It  was  a  curious  experience,  and  an  ex-
hausting one,  for  some  reason.

This  instance  has  the  merit  of  being  entirely  spon-
taneous ;  the  following  is  in  contrast  with  it,  being  the
account  given  me  by  a  lady  following  the  spirituaHstic
advice  to  "  sit  for  development." She  writes  :

My  sensations  as  I  sit  may  interest  you.  They  are  alto-
gether very  remarkable,  and  I  attribute  them  to  spirit
agency  as  developing  my  psychic  power.  Sometimes  I  get
very  hot,  hands  and  face,  and  my  cheeks  feel  as  if  being

1  Mem.  de  VAcad.  Roy.  de  Mddecine,  t.  xii.  p,  267.


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  351

kneaded  like  dough.  Then  I  am  conscious  of  a  working
in  my  brain,  and  sometimes  I  am  left  with  a  kind  of  ner-
vous headache,  which  quickly  dissipates.  Another  time  I
get  deadly  cold.  I  feel  the  cold  creep  upwards  until  my
internal  organs  seem  like  ice,  and  my  arms  and  back  feel
as  if  a  breeze  is  blowing  over  them.  Then  ...  I  get  a
sensation  of  plunging  upwards.  .  .  .  My  lips  keep  twitching,
but  I  am  fully  conscious,  and  it  is  not  altogether  unpleas-
ant. I  have  the  same  leaping  in  my  brain,  and  as  I  am
writing  have  felt  it  three  or  four  times.

No  such  sensations  are  described  as  accompaniments
by  the  observers  of  the  "  faces  in  the  dark  "  generally,
however,  nor  by  clairvoyants,  although  it  is  interesting
to  find  Dr.  Barker  Smith  speaking  of  "  surging  pressures,
benumbing  sensations  of  metallic  coldness  at  the  forehead,
pressures  sufficient  to  cause  cerebral  haemorrhage,"  as
the  accompaniments  of  auditory  hallucinations.^  All  these
"  sensations  "  should  be  taken  in  conjunction  with  the
data  alluded  to  in  Sec.  XVIII.  (Interior  Vision).

X.  The  Hypnopompic  Vabiety.  ;

The  use  of  this  term  has  been  criticised  by  two  of
our  authorities,  in  ways  which  are  in  opposition  to  each
other,  and  which  more  or  less  ignore  the  source  and
meaning  of  the  name.  Havelock  Ellis, ^  considering  only
that  the  state  of  semi-consciousness  is  similar,  whether
before  or  after  sleep,  says  that  it  is  "  pedantic  and  not
necessary  "  to  use  two  terms  for  it  ;  and  if  the  aim
were  merely  to  characterise  a  condition  of  consciousness,
that  might  be  true.  Prof.  Alexander,^  however,  says  that
in  his  own  case  he  detects  no  similarity  between  the
phenomena  of  the  hypnagogic  and  hypnopompic  periods,
implying  that  they  are  supposed  to  be  identical  in  type,
but  that  he  does  not  find  them  so  ;  and  we  shall  see
on  examining  them  in  bulk  that  this  is  true  of  a  certain

^Medical  Times,  April  1923,  p.  61.  1
2  "  A  Note on Hypnagogic Paramnesia," in Mind, vol.  vi. p.  284
(footnote  2)  (1897).

^  Proo.  Amer.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  III.  p.  032.  .v. n ■  r.  -j  \-  i  ;

z


352


F.  E.  Leaning


[part


group.  There  are  certain  broad  differences,  which  are
easily  distinguishable.

But  Myers,  when  originating  the  term,^  practically
limited  it  to  "  pictures  consisting  generally  in  the  per-
sistence of  some  dream-image  into  the  first  moments  of
waldng,"  and  emphasised  the  fact  that  these  "  originate
in  sleep,  while  in  illusions  hypnagogiques  the  vividness
belongs  to  an  intermediate  phase."  This  distinction  has
been  lost  sight  of,  or  rather  "  hypnopompic  "  has  been
used  to  characterise  all  after-sleep  or  half-waking  hallucina-
tions, and  cvistom  has  confused  them  with  the  distinct
species  of  the  "  intermediate  phase."  A  separate  word
was  certainly  w^anted  to  stand  for  the  persisting  dream-
imagery,  as  the  number  of  examples  shows.  Thus  Taine,
for  instance,  on  waking  up  :  "I  have  often  seen,  for  a
passing  moment,  the  image  grow  pale  ...  a  fragment  of
landscape  or  the  skirt  of  a  dress  appear  still  to  float
over  the  fire-irons."  ^  Taine  considered  this  a  frequent
experience.  Gurney,  on  the  contrary,  had  come  to  the
conclusion  that  less  than  one  per  cent,  of  the  population
will  be  found  to  exemplify  it.^

After-Images  Again. — Before  passing  to  the  consideration
of  true  hypnopompic  images,  within  the  Umits  of  Myers'
definition,  we  may  notice  that  one  of  the  features  common
to  the  before-  and  after-sleep  states  is  the  seeing  of
cerebral  after-images.  A  number  of  such  cases  have
already  been  referred  to  in  a  previous  section  (see  p.  307
supra).  Prof.  Vignoli's  vision  in  the  very  early  morning,
on  the  ceiling,  of  a  trelhsed  balcony  with  ivy  and  creepers
adorning  the  pillars  and  a  swinging  bird-cage  in  the
middle,  which  he  had  actually  seen  two  days  before,
may  be  added  here.  It  could  not  be  seen  with  closed
eyes,  and  it  appeared  in  its  natural  colours.  But  almost
all  the  other  cases  are  not  of  scenes  in  picture  form,

1  Human  Personality,  vol.  i.  p.  125.

^  Taine,  cited  by  James,  op.  cil.,  ii.  120.  Cp.  also  Mtiller,  p.  1394:
"  on  waking  too,  in  a  dark  room,  it  sometimes  happens  that  images
of  landscapes  and  similar  objects  still  float  before  the  eyes."

3  Phantasms  of  the  Livimj,  i.  391  (footnote).  He  gives  four  cases
from  his  own  collection.


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  353

but  of  figures.  Thus  the  narrator  of  one,^  dozing  on  a
hot  summer  afternoon,  sees  on  waking  (witliout  a  previous
dream)  a  fleeting  view  of  a  man  on  the  opposite  side
of  the  warehouse  floor,  a  straw  hat  worn  towards  the
back  of  his  head,  standing  regarding  some  papers  in  his
hand.  He  found  that  the  man  was  accustomed  to  stand
so,  in  that  place.  The  vision  is  regarded  as  "  the  clothing
of  an  emergent  memory."  Thus  Dr.  Bastian  told  Dr.
Hack  Tuke  of  his  waking  after  the  first  sleep  and  seeing,
as  though  he  were  still  in  his  study,  the  figure  of  his
landlady's  little  fair-haired  child  standing  by  the  door.^
Dr.  Hack  Tuke's  own  relative,  who  on  three  occasions
saw  a  recognised  dream-figure  after  awaking,  Burdach's
vision  of  his  dead  daughter  in  a  similar  way,^  Maurj^'s
of  his  maid-servant  in  her  white  apron,*  the  Rev.  E.  H.
Sugden's  of  a  man  whom  he  knew  well  and  tried  to
kick  on  awaking,^  all  exemplify  this  point,  and  all  have
the  common  feature  of  the  figure  being  seen  in  normal
spatial  connection  with  the  surroundings.  The  fact  of
recognition,  whether  begun  in  dream  or  not,  also  marks
them  as  belonging  to  the  "  cerebral  after-image  "  group.

It  will  be  convenient  now  to  deal  with  hypnopompic
visions  in  two  groups,  the  first  being  confined  to  per-
sisting dream-images,  strictly  according  to  Myers'  rule,
and  the  second  not  having  any  marked  connection  with
dream,  but  resembling  more  the  hypnagogic  type.  In  this
way  the  distinction  between  the  two  will  come  out  broadly.

(1)  The  Strict  Type. — ^The  classical  example  of  a  hypno-
pompic hallucination  is  Spinoza's,  given  by  himself  in  a
letter  to  Peter  Balling,  the  translator  of  Spinoza's  Prin-
ciples of  Descartes'  Philosophy.  The  translation  is  that
of  his  biographer,  Sir  Fredk.  Pollock.®

One  morning,  as  I  woke  oiit  of  a  very  heavy  dream  (it
being  already  day)  the  images  which  had  come  before  me
in  my  dream  remained  before  my  eyes  as  livelj''  as  if  they

^  Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  X.  p.  183.  ^  Brain,  xi.  449.

^  Die  Physiologic,  iii.  504  ;  cited  by  de  Manaceiine,  p.  278.
*  Maury,  op.  eil.,  p.  81  (footnote).  ^  Phantasms,  i.  390.

^Spinoza,  His  Life  and  Philosophy,  ed.  ii.  p.  56  (1912).


354


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


had  been  the  very  things,  and  especially  that  of  a  scurvy
black  Brazilian,  whom  I  had  never  seen  before.  This  image
vanished  for  the  most  part  when,  in  order  to  divert  my-
self with  somewhat  else,  I  cast  my  eyes  on  a  book  or  any
other  thing  ;  but  so  soon  as  I  removed  my  eyes  from
their  object  withoiit  looking  with  attention  any^vhere  the
image  of  this  same  negro  appeared  as  lively  as  before,  and
that  again  and  again,  until  it  vanished  even  to  the  head.

To  this  category  belong  also  de  Manaceine's  visions
of  the  image  of  Christ,  crowned  wdth  thorns,  of  which
the  change  of  expression,  from  profound  sadness  to  "a
mild  and  joyous  smile,"  continued  when  awake,  in  morning
light  ;  and  her  other  vision  of  the  Imperial  Russian
Standard  in  the  national  colours,  of  which  the  details
(the  eagle,  two  large  golden  tassels,  etc.)  were  visible  to
her  in  absolute  darkness,  but  with  open  eyes,i  on  waking.
Striinipell's  dream  by  a  lady  of  a  coffin  with  a  mass
of  blue  flowers,2  Gruithuisen's  of  lightning,  and  the  books
in  a  library,  seen  moving  from  left  to  right,^  both  given
by  this  author,  may  be  added  to  Gurney's  examples  *
of  the  undergraduate's  green  figure,  the  lady's  blue  watch-
face.  Miss  Bidder's  nightmare  demon,  and  Abercrombie's
baboon.^  In  several  of  these  it  is  explicitly  stated  that
they  were  seen  with  the  eyes  open,  and  this  seems  true
of  hypnopompic  visions  as  a  class.  In  particular  it
characterises  that  little  group  which  is  singled  out  by
the  presentation  of  the  image  in  its  complementary  colour.
Of  such  occurrences  as  spontaneous,  in  the  dream  and
after-dream,  there  are  three  good  examples  :

(a)  Meyer's  little  yellow  dog,  which  was  light  when
biting  him  in  the  dream,  but  dark  in  the  waking  state  ;  ^

1  Op.  cit.,  p.  280.

2  Die  Natur.  u.  Entstehung  d.  Traimic,  pp.  125  et  eeq. ;  de  Manaceine,
p.  329  (bib.); Si.illy,  Illusions,  p.  144.  ...  _  -,.

i  Beit.  z.  Phys.,  p.  232.

«  Phantasms,  vol.  i.  pp.  390,  391  (footnote).

i  Intellectual  Poivers,  ed.  xxi.  p.  278  (1882);  quoted  in  De  Boismont,
On  Hallucinations,  p.  170  (1859).

» Phys.  d.  Nerv.,  pp.  239  et  seq.  ■  '  '•


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  355

(6)  Gruithuisen's  often-quoted  "  beautiful  violet  colour
produced  by  laying  fluorspar  on  glowing  coal,"  ^  from
which  he  woke  "blinded  as  though  by  a  ray  of  sun-
light," and  which  became  gradually  violet-black  and
remained  after  opening  his  eyes  ;  and

(c)  Drummond's  "two-handled  vase  of  a  beautiful

and  classical  pattern,"  which  was  green  in  the  dream
drawmg-room  where  she  saw  it,  but  showed  red  on  re-
closing  her  eyes  after  wakmg.^  Meyer  (H.  G.)  and
Fere  are  often  mentioned  as  the  only  examples  of  the
experimental  production  of  this  effect,  Meyer  obtaming
the  negative  of  his  silver  stirrup,  and  Fere,  with  pro-
longed efiort  and  .  difficulty,  the  figure  of  a  red  cross,
becoming  green. ^  This  seems  to  be  the  work  of  the  same
faculty,  only  evoked  and  trauied  laboriously,  which  dwells
easUy  and  naturally  in  a  far  higher  degree  in  those  who
can  perform  the  "voluntary  projection"  of  images,
previously  referred  to  (see  p.  307  swpra).

(2)  The  Hypnagogic  Type.— In  the  preceding  group,
with  perhaps  the  exception  of  the  Hbrary  books,  none
of  the  twelve  instances  shows  change,  multipHcity  of  con-
tent, processional  movement,  miniature  size,  or  picture-form,
as  such;  and  for  the  rest,  they  contrast,  as  before  men-
tioned, in  being  seen  with  open  eyes,  as  spatially  related
to  the  spectator's  actual  surroundings,  and  very  commonly
in  Ught.  They  are  truly  single  persisting  elements  from
the  dream  state,  and  authorities  differ  as  to  the  relation-
ship of  the  other  visions  to  those  of  dreams.  Dr.  William
McDougall,  for  instance,  in  his  classification  of  hallucina-
tions," admits  the  hypnagogic,  but  is  doubtful  if  dreams
should  have  a  place  in  the  table  at  all,  while  Dr.  van
Eeden  definitely  disallows  the  identity  of  the  two,  of
both  of  which  he  had  ample  personal  experience  (see
his  "  Study  of  Dreams,"  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXVI.  p.  435).
Perhaps  a  criterion  may  roughly  be  found  in  the  fact

iQp.  cit.,  p.  256;  quoted  in  Parish,  Hallucinations  and  Illusions,  p.  128.
Also  in  Ann.  Mid.-Psy.,  vii.  9;  and  Maury,  op.  cit.,  p.  76,  etc.
2  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  X.  p.  146.
"  Animal  Magnetism,  p.  254  (Int.  Sci.  Ser.).
*  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  ed.  xi.,  art.  "Hallucinations."


356


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


tliat  in  dreams  the  dreamer  is  part  of  all  the  scenes  and
doings,  but  in  the  hypnagogic  state  he  is  always  a  beholder
only,  and  knows  that  he  is  not  in  the  scenery  or  the
view.  As  soon  as  he  seems  to  be  elsewhere  than  in  Ms
own  chaii'  or  bed,  we  may  suspect  that  the  border-Une
has  been  passed  and  actual  dreaming  has  begun.

The  second  group,  then,  consists  of  a  species  of  visions
approximating  much  more  closely  to  those  of  the  pre-
sleep  stage  than  to  those  we  have  just  been  surveying.
A  few  have  already  been  referred  to  in  connection  with
other  points.  Mrs.  Alaric  Watts  (see  p.  312  supra)  often
saw  on  wakuig  suddenly  the  strange  symbohc  figures,
with  explanations  of  their  meaning  on  scrolls  or  shields.
The  second  example  given  under  the  sub-division  "  Designs
and  Objects  "  (p.  320  swpra),^  as  well  as  three  given  to
illustrate  movement  (p.  331  supra),  consisting  of  a  panorama
of  objects  or  landscapes,  belong  here.  The  young  gentle-
man whose  experience  was  as  follows  ^  had  it  frequently
from  the  age  of  twelve.  "  I  have  often,"  he  says,  "  when
waking  in  middle  of  the  night,  found  the  room  apparently
blazing  with  light,  heard  loud  music,  generally  of  a  band,
and  seen  a  number  of  men  and  women,  generally  dancing
or  in  rapid  motion."  This  lasted  some  five  to  ten  seconds,
and  the  room  seen  was  a  strange  one,  not  his  own,  nor
could  he  ever  recognise  the  dancers.  Baillarger's  thir-
teenth case  is  of  a  wine  merchant  who  was  wakened
towards  midnight  by  black  devils,  large  and  small,  and
by  visionary  men  and  women  dancing  in  his  cellar,
which  lasted  till  nearly  six  in  the  morning  and  prevented
him  from  sleep.  A  pretty  and  typical  instance  is  that
of  a  little  boy  who  saw  on  the  ceiling,  as  he  lay  in  his
cot  in  his  parents'  bedroom,  a  procession  of  white  cocks
with  red  wattles,  which  "  glided  backwards  in  single  file
along  the  roof  before  my  eyes,  and  disappeared  one  after
another,  behind  the  curtain  of  my  mother's  bed  without
making  any  motion,  except  that  each  cock,  just  before
it  disappeared,  went  through  all  the  motions  of  crowing,

1  This  lady  says  she  saw  with  closed  eyes,  but  most  frequently  afier
sleep.

"Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  X.  p.  82.


xciv.] Introductory  Stvdy  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  357

but  emitted  no  sound."  He  considers  that  they  were
suggested  by  the  toy  cocks  in  stucco  which  he  had  seen
in  a  crockery  shop  ;  some  days  afterwards,  however,  his  visions
were  of  other  toys,  soldiers,  horses,  etc.,  but  they  were
"  perfect  in  form,  coloured  hke  nature,  and  moved  natur-
ally. The  horses  trotted,  the  wheels  turned  round,  the
men  walked,  and  so  on.  These  I  contmued  to  see  in
great  numbers  many  days."  ^

It  is  possible  that  the  recognition  of  the  source  of
the  last  processions  has  been  supphed  by  the  elderly
narrator,  rather  than  that  it  was  a  matter  of  experience
to  him  at  the  early  age  at  which  they  appeared.

This  sub-division  may  be  completed  by  a  reference  to
Cardano's  fine  miscellany  of  hypnopompic  pictures,  which
included  castles,  houses,  animals,  horsemen,  men  in  varied
garb,  soldiers,  crowds,  groves,  forests  and  many  other
things,  passing  swiftly  in  circular  form  (see  Appendix  A
for  original  Latin).  He  was  aged  from  four  to  seven  years
when  this  occurred.

,  j .  .  • XI.  Memory.

AU  attempts  at  accounting  for  the  existence  of  hypna-
gogic phenomena  must  begin  by  a  consideration  of  any
normal  and  obvious  causes  ;  and  the  most  simple  and
primary  question  that  suggests  itself  is  as  to  the  familiarity
or  otherwise  of  the  subject-matter.  As  memory  is  the
most  fundamental  and  constantly  exercised  faculty  of
conscious  being  that  we  possess  (since  without  it  the
sense  of  personal  identity  itself  becomes  uncertain),  we
naturally  turn  to  it  for  an  explanation,  in  part  at  least,
of  the  phenomena  under  consideration.

But  one  of  the  most  striking  and  surprising  facts
about  our  witnesses  is  the  absence  of  what  we  should
expect  to  be  most  in  evidence,  the  abihty  to  recognise
and  "  place  "  them  in  relation  to  the  vast  host  of  visual
recollections  which  even  the  most  unobservant  adult  must
have  accumulated.  They  not  only  are  not  placed,  but
many expressly state that they have certainly  never

^Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  X.  p.  151. By  the  Rev.  A.  H.


358


F.  E.  Leaning,  '■'


[part


seen  the  things  presented  at  all,  as  the  following  collection

shows.  .  - ' .  ■  •  -.  :.;

Sir  John  Herschel  :  "  No  reference  or  resemblance  to
any  objects  recently  seen  or  even  recently  thought  of."

Greenwood  :  "  strikingly  distinctive,  but  never  remem-
bered."

Bostock  :  "Not  in  a  single  instance  any  object  with
which  he  had  been  previously  acquainted."

Gurney's  correspondent  :  "  always  unknown  faces."

Gurney's  acquaintance  :  "on  no  single  occasion  ...  a
known  face."  ^

"  D  "  :  "  like  nothing  I  have  ever  seen  in  life  or  art."  ^

Mrs.  Willert  :  "  never  recognised  any  place  in  many."  ^

Galton's  friend  :  "  no  resemblance  to  any  scenery  I  have
ever  looked  upon."

Stead:  "houses  .  .  .that  resembled  nothing  that  I  had
ever  seen  in  house  architecture." (See  in  fidl,  p.  296  supra.)

Galton's  relative  :  "  no  face  ever  resembled  any  ac-
quaintance."

Mrs.  Haweis  :  (of  the  Rose  vision)  was  never  in  the
country  but  once  (during  childhood)  and  might  almost  say
that  she  "  had  never  seen  a  rose."  * .  >j

Herrick  ;  "  These  views  rarely  or  never  contained  recog-
nisable elements,  nor  could  there  be  traced  any  association
with  real  or  imaginary  places."  ^

Alexander  :  "no  discoverable  connection  between  the
images  and  my  concurrent  reading,  interests,  or  activities  "
(p.  624)  ;  "  not  memories  .  .  .  not  things  seen  or  previously
imagined  "  (p.  630).6

Mrs.  Arnold-Forster  :  "  they  represent  places  that  I  have
never  seen,  although  they  are  sometimes  more  or  less  like
places  that  are  known  to  me."

Spinoza  :  "  whom  I  had  never  before  seen."

'  He  refers  also  to  the  writers  in  tlie  St.  James's  Gazette,  one  of  them
Greenwood,  then  writing  anonymously.

^  St.  James's  Gazette,  Feb.  15,  1882.  ^Phantasms,  i.  474.

^  Galton,  op.  cit.,  p.  166.  .  .•  ■ .  •

^  Jour.  Com.p.  Near.,  July  1895; quoted  by  de  Manac6itne,  p.  240.

0  Proc.  Amer.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  III.


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena


359


From  the  narratives  given  in  the  Journal  of  the  S.P.R.,

I  take  the  following  : —

"Never  the  faces  of  friends  or  well-known  people."^

"  Cannot remember ever to have seen them  (the

pictures)  in  reahty."

"  Always  faces  of  people  miknown  to  me."  ^

"  Could  not  remember  having  seen  any  scenes  exactly

like  this." (See  in  full,  p.  295  su-pra — -the  Cottage  in  Circle

case.)

"  Faces always those of  persons  unknown  to  me  ;  the
scenes  are  unfamiliar  but  commonplace."  ^

"  Cannot  say  that  I  recognised  any  of  the  pictures  or
persons."  *

"  Faces  always  new,  never  those  of  friends."  ^

Next  to  these  examples,  given  in  full  tale  to  emphasise
the  majority  which  they  form,  come  the  far  scantier
ones  in  which  perhaps  a  single  exception  vitiates  the
unqualified  "  never  "  or  "  always  "  which  predominates  in
the  type  as  a  whole.  Thus  Miiller  says  :  "  They  rarely
take  the  shape  of  recognisable  realities."  ^  A  writer  in
the  Journal  S.P.R.  speaks  of  having  only  twice  recognised
the  faces  as  those  of  living  friends,  and  says  "  memory
has  nothing  to  do  with  it  "  {i.e.  the  seeing  in  general).'
Lang  gives  a  single  exception  in  his  own  list  of  seers.  "  I  had
visited  Carlisle  Castle,  and  remarked  the  heraldic  bearings
carved  in  miniature  on  the  door  lintels  by  prisoners  of  old.
Not  long  afterwards  I  saw  them  distinctly  in  a  hypnagogic
illusion."  ^

Among  my  correspondents  several  use  such  expressions
as  "  faces,  known  and  unknown,"  "  some  recognised,  some
not,"  "  sometimes  recognised,"  "  sometimes  friends,"  but
these  are  either  professed  spiritualists  or  persons  who
have  seen  "  the  faces  "  since  beginning  the  process  called
"  sitting  for  development  "  or  sitting  in  a  circle  ;  those

1  Vol.  IV.  p.  276.  2  Vol.  VIII.  p.  158.

■^Yo\.  VIII.  p.  269.  *Vol.  VIII.  p.  271.

=^  Vol.  VIII.  p.  295.  ^  Phant.  Gesicht.,  quoted  by  Ladd.

^  Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  170.

*  Thomas,  Crystal  Oazinij,  Intiod.  p.  xxx.  -


360


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


who  have  always  seen  or  do  so  without  any  exterior
suggestion  or  stimulus,  like  others,  say  they  "  never
recognise,"  or,  as  in  the  case  of  my  Edinburgh  corres-
pondent and  the  caves  of  Ellora,  a  solitary  exception
may  occur.  This  deviation  from  the  normal  rule  in  the
case  of  spiritualists  is  instructive  as  showing  the  influence
of  expectation  and  belief,  for  it  is  the  faces  of  the  dead
whom  they  recognise,  and  not  the  living.  In  this  con-
nection, however,  even  Maury  belongs  to  "  cette  galere,"
for  he  says  (p.  86)  :  "  Ainsi  je  vis  naguere  assez  souvent
la  figure  de  mon  pere,  que  j'ai  pourtant  perdu  depuis
bien  des  annees  puisqu'il  est  mort  en  1831.^  Ses  traits
se  presentaient  a  mon  oeil  clos  avec  cette  meme  vivacite
qu'ils  ont  to  a  jours  eu  dans  les  nombreux  reves  ou  il
m'est  apparu."

In  spite  of  the  fact  that  Maury  must  head  the  hst
of  exceptions,  since  he  claims  so  often  to  have  recognised
the  objects  and  places  which  he  saw,  yet  he  is  obUged
to  admit  that  he  was  also  visited  by  crowds  of  "  pure
fantaisie "  and  "  figures  fantastiques,"  and  saw  pictures
of  things  which  he  had  seen  unconsciously,  —  "a  mon
insu " — and  very  strange  altered  reproductions  of  things
seen  (p.  69).  So  that  even  with  him,  in  spite  of  Ms
theory  to  the  contrary,  recollections  were  not  "  le  cas  le
plus  habituel."  I  find,  indeed,  only  one  other  witness,  a
writer  in  the  Journal  S.P.R.,^  who  was  in  the  habit  of
seeing  at  night  things  that  had  made  an  impression  on
him  during  the  day,  such  as  dead  leaves,  after  a  long
day  in  the  forest,  strawberries,  etc.,  and  the  faces  of
friends  and  relatives  very  distinctly,  but  he  tells  of  having
once  seen,  at  the  age  of  seven  or  eight,  "  an  ugly  old
woman  "  whom  he  connected  with  some  childish  mis-
behaviour ;  and  at  the  time  of  writing  he  had  almost
ceased  to  see  any  visions.

The  cases  of  cerebral  after-images,  already  given  in
previous  sections  (see  supra,  pp.  306  and  352),  are  of
course  very  definitely  memory-images  ;  they  contrast  with
all  the  rest  by  the  exactitude  of  detail  which  they  display

1  This  was  written  at  the  earliest  in 1848.  ^  Vol.  IV.  p.  277.


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  361

and  which  can  be  consciously  corroborated.  That  they
occur  during  the  hypnagogic  period,  and  possibly  by  means
of  the  same  mechanism,  may  be  due  to  some  other  cause
than  that  which  produces  those  phenomena  themselves.
Because  the  general  conclusion  which  we  are  invited  by
the  foregoing  body  of  evidence  to  deduce,  seems  to  be
that  the  known  or  the  expected  shall  not  form  any  part
of  the  visions ;  and  that,  whatever  their  source,  it  is  not
from  the  reserves  of  the  conscious  mind  that  they  are
drawn.  There  seems,  indeed,  beyond  tliis  even,  to  be
some  sort  of  recalcitrancy  that  meets  us  whenever  a
particular  desire  is  in  question.  For  example  :  A.  G.  A.
describes  how  he  had  for  many  years  cultivated  a  "  picture
memory,"  training  himself  to  make  mental  observation
of  scenes  to  such  an  extent  as  to  be  able,  with  the
help  of  brief  memoranda,  to  paint  them  from  memory.
But  the  act  of  concentrating  on  such  scenes  at  night
had  the  effect  of  bringing  up  the  other  kind.  "  The
remarkable  thing  was,"  he  says,  "  that  these  pictures  not
only  never  resembled  the  scenes  I  would  have  liked  to
see,  but  they  never  resembled  any  people  or  faces  that  I
had  ever  seen."  Again,  a  correspondent  tells  me  that
she  was  undergoing  "  magnetic  "  treatment  for  insomnia,
and  the  practitioner  would  "  suggest  "  various  objects,
but  she  "  invariably  sees  things  that  are  entirely  different
from  what  he  suggests,"  and  which  it  interests  and
surprises  him  to  hear  about  !  IMr.  Griinbaum,  also,  in  his
numerous  auto-suggestions  had  bat  a  minimum  of  success.
Dr.  Woolley  summarizes  the  case  thus  :  "  With  the  rarest
exceptions,  the  vision  which  Mr.  Griinbaum  actually
experienced  was  not  the  one  that  he  wished  for  and
expected  "  (and  frequently  was  helping  by  his  own  visual-
isation) and  "  sometimes,  as  in  the  smell  of  the  carpet
shppers,  it  was  just  the  reverse."  ^  Again,  when  Prof.
Alexander  was  trying  to  form  a  distinct  memory  image
of  an  Academy  picture  by  Henner,  of  a  girl  in  a  red  hood,
the  vision  that  came  was  the  bicycle  scene  with  two
young  people  (see  supra,  p.  326,  Scenes). Lang  offers  yet


^Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXVII.  p.  399.


362


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


a  further  example  in  his  own  experience  of  hypnagogic
images.  "  Sometimes  when  they  occur,"  lie  says,  "  I  try
to  call  up  '  the  face  I  shall  not  see,'  or  rather  the  faces,
now  so  many,  of  those  whom  we  have  lost  awhile.  But
this  proves  impossible.  The  unknown,  the  uncalled  for,
the  unexpected  strange  faces,  fair  or  hideous,  sweep  past  ;
never,  never  once,  the  faces  of  our  desire."  ^  This  is
not  the  work  of  the  "  law  of  reversed  effort "  but  what
one  might  almost  call  a  "  law  of  perversity,"  the  first
cousin  to  that  trick  of  memory  which  makes  one  forget
a  well-known  name  or  address  upon  being  suddenly  asked
for  it.  The  angry  exclamation  of  the  Procktophantasmist  ^
to  Faust  and  the  phantom  crowd  on  Walpurgis  Night,
who  persist  in  ignoring  him  :

"That  devil's  crew,  they  pay  no  attention  to  rules,"

is  very  often  appropriate  to  hypnagogic  hallucinations.

XII.  Control.  .  .  ,-

The  point  just  considered,  of  the  response  or  absence
of  response  to  the  wish  of  the  perceiver,  connects  very
closely  with  the  question  of  control.  We  should  review
here  all  that  has  been  said  about  the  suddenness,  the
spontaneity,  and  independence  of  the  visions,  and  how
they  sometimes  waken  the  drowsing  consciousness  with
a  shock,  as  INIr.  Fielding-Ould  says.  Many  have  testified
to  the  wilfulness  which  makes  the  phenomena  entirely
unamenable.  A  correspondent,  wishing  to  supply  me  with
the  very  latest  and  most  recent  data  about  his  own
experience,  writes  in  despair  that  the  "  furtive  beings  "
which  lurk  in  his  brain-cells  (as  he  dramatically  puts  it)
refuse  to  come  out  and  play.  "  I  have  insisted  and  com-
manded, begged  and  pleaded,"  but  without  result.  A
well-known  author  and  member  of  the  S.P.R.,  however,
told  me  recently  that  he  had  only  to  say  to  himself
that  he  would  hke  to  see  "  the  pictures  "  and  they  come  ;
but  this  is  exceptional. As  a  rule  they  will  neither  be

1  Thomas,  Crystal  Gazing,  Introd.  p.  xxix.

^i.e.  Nicolai  ;  see  MiXller,  op.  cit.,  p. 1397. - ■  ■  :


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  363

commanded  nor  invited  ;  if  watched,  they  "  go  out  instant-
ly "  ^  or  whirl  about  so  rapidly  as  to  make  observation
very  hard.^  Observers  learn  a  certain  cunning.  "  Warned
by  frequent  experience,"  says  Taine,  "  I  know  that  sleep
is  coming  on,  and  that  I  must  not  disturb  the  rising
vision  :  I  remain  passive,  and  in  a  few  minutes  it  is
complete."

Some  writers  speak  of  children  as  having  an  advantage  ;
Dr.  Clarke,  for  instance,  goes  as  far  as  to  write  ^  "  Many
children,  especially  very  young  children,  possess  the  power,
when  they  have  closed  their  eyes  in  the  dark,  of  surround-
ing themselves,  by  a  simple  act  of  volition,  with  a  pano-
rama of  odd  sights.  .  .  .  Most  children  who  possess  this
power  like  to  exercise  it  and  see  the  show  which  they
can  call  up  in  the  darkness."  He  mentions  a  case  known
to  him  where  the  (then  elderly)  man  had  done  this  "  by
an  act  of  vohtion,"  but  as  manhood  approached,  he  adds,
"  he  lost  the  power,  and  although  he  has  frequently  tried
since  childhood,  to  people  the  darkness  in  the  old  way,
he  has  never  been  able  to  do  so."  He  himself  speaks
of  having  "  possessed  the  power  of  voluntarily  summoning
such  companions  about  me,"  but  says  again,  "  it  was
only  on  rare  occasions  that  I  could  do  so  by  an  act  of
volition."  He  generally  had  to  wait  for  the  phantoms
to  come  of  themselves,  and  after  childhood  had  passed
never  succeeded,  even  with  frequent  endeavours,  in  obtain-
ing any  results.  Perhaps  here  the  fact  that  children  are
more  liable  to  the  visions,  as  is  known,  has  caused  them
to  be  credited  with  powers  which  are  really  far  more
hmited.  De  Quincey's  child,  for  instance,  could  get  them
to  go  when  he  told  them,  "  but  sometimes  they  come
when  I  don't  tell  them  to  come."  Dr.  Clarke's  old  lady
had  suffered  their  coming  when  it  was  no  pleasure  to
her,  and  she  was,  unhke  the  boy,  not  able  to  "  tell  them
to  go  and  they  go."  Whenever  children  are  frightened
by  their  seeing,  they  would  certainly  use  their  volition
to protect  themselves, if  they  could. Mrs. Haweis  who

^  S.  M.  B.  in  Occult  Review.  ^  Prof.  Henslow.

3  Visions  :  a  Study  of  False  Sight,  p.  212.  .  -  "


364


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


was  not  frightened,  but  pleased,  could  not  prevent  the
smothering  of  her  roses  by  the  blocks,  or  the  diminishing
of  the  vision  as  she  grew  older.

Other  adult  testimony  is  in  line  with  this.  Thus
Margaret  Deland  says  she  has  no  power  to  call  up  the
scenes,  and  Galton's  friend's  words  are  very  emphatic  :
"  So  far  from  depending  on  any  voluntary  effort  of  the
mind,"  he  says,  "  they  remain  when  I  often  wish  them
very  much  to  depart,  and  no  effort  of  the  imagination
can  call  them  up."  A  doctor  of  Harvard  says :  "As  I
nearly  approach  the  condition  of  ordinary  sleep,  I  reahse
that  I  have  given  up  all  voluntary  control  over  the  action
of  my  mind."  ^  The  lady  of  the  "globe  pictures,"  ^
testifies  that  she  has  never,  by  an  effort  of  will,  been
successful  in  summoning  any  apparition.  "  They  come
a.nd  go  in  their  own  way."  "It  is  the  essential  nature
of  these  '  visions,'  "  says  Mrs.  Arnold-Forster,^  "  that  no
exertion  of  will  can  summon  them  at  our  pleasure,  and
that,  as  far  as  we  can  tell,  they  are  wholly  independent
of  our  control."  "  They  cannot,"  says  Fielding- Ould,  "  be
conjured  up  at  will  .  .  .  the  thing  vanishes,  and  refuses
to  be  reconstructed  by  the  working  mind  for  further
scrutiny."  "  I  never  could  command  them,"  says  A.  G.  A.
"  Cannot  be  controlled,"  says  Dr.  Weir  Mitchell.  Prof.
Henslow,  who  made  the  most  determined  efforts,  says
that  visual  objects  in  the  full  career  of  the  change  "  are
imperative  in  their  refusal  to  be  interfered  with."  Green-
wood concurs.  Lang  says,  "  I  cannot  command  or  modify
the  forms."

These  dozen  or  so  of  hypnagogists  represent  the  entirely
negative  aspect  of  the  connection  of  the  conscious  will
with  the  visions.  It  is  proper  to  see  what  can  be  said
on  the  other  side,  and  to  turn  to  such  examples  as  we  have
of  control  :  for  they  do  exist,  though  not  in  large  numbers.
The  simplest  form  is  the  repetition  of  a  picture  already
seen.  This  is  difficult,  but  the  seer  of  the  "  Cottage  in
the Circle  " (see supra  p. 295) succeeded, though  she

iJowr.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  IX.  p.  121.  ^  p^^c.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  X.  p.  76.

^  Op.  cit.,  p.  164.


xciv.] Introductory  Stvdy  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  365

says,  "  the  result  was  very  feeble  compared  to  the  first."
A.  G.  A.  speaks  of  never  being  able  to  get  them  to
recur  "  more  than  three  or  four  times  at  most  " — which
is  exceptionally  often,  considering  that  the  usual  experience
is  like  that  of  Mrs.  Willert  :  ^  ("  can  never  recall  the
same  picture  however  much  I  try ").  Another  attempted
form  of  control  is  in  the  change  of  subject-matter;  Burdach
is  reported  to  have  been  able  to  change  "  hideous  and
terrifying  faces  "  to  figures  of  kaleidoscopic  character
by  concentrating  liis  attention  on  architectural  views. ^
Prof.  M.  relates  ^  that  after  the  first  spontaneous  appear-
ances (produced  by  the  impression  made  by  the  Great
Exhibition  of  1851)  his  will "  used  often  to  help  them
on,"  although  he  could  not  always  get  them  when  he
wanted  to.  Sir  John  Herschel's  landscapes  were  seen
"  within  Mmits  variable  at  wUl,"  while  one  of  the  writers
in  the  Journal'^  says  also,  "I  can  dismiss  these  images
or  change  to  a  new  series  with  a  shght  effort  of  will."
We  may  compare  with  this  Mr.  Deering's  account,  given
in  full  in  the  earlier  edition  of  Phantasms  of  the  Living,^
of  his  vision,  while  resting  in  the  afternoon,  of  a  scene
in  a  novel  which  his  daughter  was  reading  beside  him.
He  says  that  the  "  gardens,  slopes,  rivulets,  and  vai'ious
httle  vistas,"  which  he  was  accustomed  to  see  in  the
haK-waking  stage  could  be  dismissed  at  his  bidding,  and
immediately  replaced  by  others,  and  remarks  that  his
control  was  "  more  immediate  and  more  absolute  "  over
a  change  of  figures  than  of  scenes.  On  the  occasion  in
question  after  twice  bidding  the  scene  to  go  (as  it  con-
tained a  coffin)  and  finding  it  persist,  he  decided  to  wake
fuUy,  and  so  ended  it.

The  method  of  ending  the  vision  by  opening  the  eyes,
or  by  an  involuntary  return  to  full  wakefulness,  is  a
form  of  "  control,"  if  it  can  be  termed  so,  which  is
more  common  than  any  other.

So  far  as  direct  voHtion  goes,  it  evidently  acts  within

^Phantasms,  i.  474.  -De  Manaceine,  p.  239.

^Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  X.  p.  81.  ^  Vol.  VIII.  p.  170.

5  Vol.  i.  p.  400.  Not  in  the  abridged  edition,  and  inaccurately  given
in  Harrison's  Spirits  Before  our  Eyes,  p.  84.


366


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


very  circumscribed  limits,  if  at  all,  with  the  majority.
The  few  persons  who  have  deliberately  induced  the  power
of  seeing  are  in  rather  a  different  category.  The  artist
who  saw  decorative  designs  ^  carried  on  an  educative
process  for  several  years,  beginning  by  willing  to  see  letters
one  by  one,  as  if  written  in  gold  on  a  black  ground  ;
but  this  induced  the  true  hjrpnagogic  faculty,  for  she  also
came  to  see  faces,  and  frequently  entire  figures  moving
in  a  landscape.  Just  the  same  thing  happened  with
Meyer,  who  after  reaching  the  point  at  which  he  could
call  before  his  eyes  almost  any  object  which  he  pleased,
and  in  its  own  natural  colour  and  illumination,  says
that  some  time  after  the  pictures  have  arisen  they  vanish
or  change  into  others  "  without  my  being  able  to  prevent
it."  ^  He  also  failed  to  see  fancy  objects  "  but  familiar
ones  came  instead."

So  far,  all  the  examples  adduced  have  been  of  direct
efforts  made  to  affect  the  visions  ;  but  we  come  now  to
a  little  group  in  which  more  success  is  attained  by  the
indirect  method  of  influencing  the  thoughts.  The  con-
clusion that  this  was  the  better  way  was  arrived  at  by
Marie  de  Manaceine,  who  also  illustrates  it  by  the  case
of  a  girl  known  to  her,  who  by  looking  at  a  beautiful
picture  before  she  went  to  bed  managed  to  "  drive  away
the  ugly  faces  "  that  otherwise  would  come.^  Maury
also  has  an  example  of  the  method  of  impressing  a  du'ec-
tion  on  the  mind,  when  he  saw  a  picture  of  Ingres'
"  Odahsque "  after  thinking  of  the  Marquis  d'Hervey's
book  (which  occupied  much  of  his  attention)  in  which
odalisques  are  mentioned.*  Prof.  Alexander,  who  makes
the  third  salient  feature  of  the  visions  the  fact  that  they
are  extraordinarily  independent  and  unpredictable,  and
that  they  come  and  go  of  themselves  without  apparent
interconnection, remarks  :  ^ "  On occasion I have  been

iJowr.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  Vm.  p.  269.

-  See  his  owii  account  quoted  by  James,  Principles  of  Psychology,  vol.
ii,  p.  66.

3  Op.  cit.,  p.  243.  ^  Op.  ci'.,  p.  81.  ■

Proc.  Amer.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  HI.  p.  022.


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  367

able,  not  to  influence  wittingly,  but  to  observe  the  in-
fluence of  my  thoughts  upon  the  images  :  e.g.  an  image
appears,  and  I  say  to  myself  curiously  '  That  resembles
a  frog  (an  alligator,  or  what  not).'  Forthwith  the  image
transforms  itself  into  a  frog."  A  very  similar  report  is
given  by  Mr.  Gheurj^  de  Bray  in  his  account,^  where  he
also  speaks  of  the  things  pictured  as  entirely  beyond  his
volition,  as  to  the  state  that  produces  them,  but  partially
amenable  to  his  volition  when  once  begun.  His  type  is
that  of  the  continuous  panoramic  landscape,  and  this
could  be  modified,  as  from  flat  country  to  hilly,  or  adorned
with  the  blossoms  of  springtide  fruit-trees,  but  the  changes
were  a  natural  development  of  what  was  already  in
process.  "  If  I  '  willed  '  an  unUkely  thing,"  he  says,  "  it
did  not  come."  But  on  the  other  hand,  when  he  willed
to  see  a  "  crashed "  aeroplane  he  did  see  it.  Warcollier,
who  tried  an  exactly  similar  experiment,  f  ailed.  ^  Was
this  because  the  one  seemed  to  be  in  the  air,  and  the
other,  as  normally,  on  the  solid  earth  ?

A  correspondent  sends  me  a  good  illustration  in  detail
of  just  this  "  indirect "  method,  drawn  from  immediate
experience  and  unaffected  by  theory  or  the  knowledge  of
other  people's  methods.  The  type  is  different  from  the
panoramic,  but  resembles  it  in  being  of  nature  or  still-
life,  and  occurring  after  the  first  sleep,  but  clearly  not
a  continuation  of  dream.  One  may  note  that  the  stopping
is  as  definite  and  unexpected  as  the  beginning.  In  Mr.
de  Bray's  case  the  movement  simply  slows  down  and
so  goes  "pianissimo";  with  this  case  it  "vanishes"
and  nothing  further  comes  at  all.

"  The  cnrious  experience  to  which  I  alluded  previously,
in  which  the  will  (or  wish)  was  potent,  I  will  now  de-
scribe. It  began  by  my  being  awakened  suddenly  from
sleep  in  the  small  hours  by  the  barking  of  a  neighbour's
dog  ;  when  this  happens,  and  not  infrequently — the  dog's
happiness  and  freedom  being  more  considered  than  the
neighbours' — my night's sleep is shattered hke a  pane

iJowr.  S.P.R..  Vol.  XX.  p.  256,  and  Vol.  XXI.  p.  71.
2  La  Telepathie,  p. 191  (1921).

2  a


368  F.  E.  Leaning.  [part

of  glass,  with  no  more  hope  of  mendage,  and  nerves
go  very  much  to  pieces.  This  time  I  took  myself  severely
in  hand,  resolving  to  be  calm,  quite  calm,  and  lay  passive.
Presently  I  saw  the  big  trunk  of  a  tree,  with  mossy
roots,  at  the  foot  of  the  trees  even  several  small  indistinct
white  objects.  I  wasn't  sure  what  they  were — '  Mush-
rooms, perhaps  \  '  I  thought — and  they  clearly  became
mushrooms  !  Then  they  shifted  again — and  '  No  '  I  thought
'  they  are  not  mushrooms,  they're  Playing  Caeds.'  And
in  a  trice  they  became  playing  cards.  I  saw  the  black
and  red  pijjs  on  them  ;  then  all  gone.  This  was  becoming
interesting  and  I  waited  for  the  next  picture.  It  came
as  a  bank  of  dense  plants,  clumps  like  very  large  forget-
me-not  plants — nothing  else,  only  the  leaves.  I  thought,
'  Now  can  I  get  these  plants  to  blossom.'  I  had  no  sooner
formed  the  wish  than  I  saw  flowering  stems  and  buds
pushing  out  from  among  the  leaves  ;  they  grew  by  degree,
and  unfolded.  I  was  so  thrilled  I  hardly  dared  to  breathe.
A  flower  iinfolded  of  a  kind  quite  unknown  to  me,  yellow,
with  some  brown  spots  in  the  throat.  About  half  a  dozen
were  in  bloom  and  others  in  all  stages,  when  it  was
gone  !  Most  certainly  I  was  not  asleep.  My  mentality
was  most  keenly  awake  and  absorbed  in  this  quite  new
development.  '  If  another  comes,'  I  said  to  myself,  '  I'll
try  to  get  something  alive.'  Now  this  I  think  the  most
interesting  and  inexplicable  of  all.  There  came  a  sort  of
confusion  and  shaking  in  the  darkness — indistinct  bunches
that  moved — then  I  saw  hanging  down  several  legs  and
feet  of  game  birds,  the  claws  and  scales  on  the  legs
lifelike  ;  below  them  rose  the  head  and  forepart  of  a
little  animal  that  looked  like  a  rat,  its  head  was  turned
over,  and  the  mouth  open.  I  saw  the  pink  tongue  and
lips. Then  all  vanished. And  I  saw  no  more  at  all."

XIII.  Significance.

This  is  to  be  taken  as  strictly  limited  to  the  inter-
pretation placed  on  the  phenomena  by  the  observers,
and  not  to  the  value  of  them  in  the  abstract.  The
significance  is,  in  individual  cases,  of  an  entirely  different
nature  according  as  it  is  seen  from  the  point  of  view  of


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  369

personal  relationships,  or  from  that  which  it  holds  in
the  estimation  of  the  student,  and  quite  possibly  from
what  it  is  in  the  natural  order.  Nothing  more  can  be
claimed  for  it,  than  that  the  observer  beheves  or  feels
or  thinks  that  there  is  such  and  such  a  meaning  in
the  visions,  and  however  valueless  his  or  her  opinion
may  be,  it  is  not  a  complete  study  that  would  ignore
or  omit  it  altogether.  For  this  reason,  though  there  is
little  to  be  said  and  that  little  is  obscure  owing  to
the  highly  personal  nature  of  the  facts,  yet  it  has  its
place.

Thus  one  of  my  correspondents  is  convinced  that  the
scenes  she  sees  are  those  of  her  own  previous  lives.
Where  the  belief  in  reincarnation  already  exists  this  is
very  natural,  and  probably  others  share  the  idea,  since
this  is  an  age  in  which  the  ancient  doctrine  is  not  with-
out its  followers.  But  the  interest  of  the  case  lies  in
the  fact  that  a  connected  series  of  visions  should  occur,
since  from  all  we  have  hitherto  seen  the  opposite  is
the  rule.  Upon  enquiring  how  the  subject  knew  the  scenes
to  have  the  connection  ascribed  to  them,  and  whether
any  sort  of  corroboration  had  been  obtained,  my  in-
formant wrote  that  she  was  informed  by  her  "  guide "
that  the  scenes  were  of  her  previous  hves,  that  she
recognised  the  figure  as  herself  in  each  picture  in  spite
of  changes  of  dress,  age,  and  surroundings,  and  that
no  verification  so  far  had  been  forthcoming.  It  is  open
to  debate  whether  this  is  a  case  of  directive  influence,
acting  broadly,  or  not.  Considering  the  countless  series  of
connected  scenes  which  modern  fiction,  plays  and  films
provide,  it  is  surprising  that  we  do  not  get  more  of
such  instances  ;  but  it  does  not  seem  to  be  so.

Of  a  totally  opposite  sort  is  the  conviction,  of  which
Mrs.  Tweedale's  is  an  example,  that  the  scenes  are  pre-
monitory, and  due  to  fall  in  the  future  at  some  time
If  people  7nust  somehow  relate  the  visions  to  themselves
as  having  some  kind  of  personal  significance  always,
and  they  cannot  place  them  in  their  own  previous  ex-
perience, this  is  also  a  natural  and  reasonable  point  of
view. And the  phenomena of  premonitory dreams  and


370  F.  E.  Leaning.  '  [part

premonitory  clairvoyance  go  so  far  to  support  the
possibility  of  visions  of  fut^^re  surroundings  taking  place,
that  no  dogmatic  negative  can  be  pronounced  on  the
theory.  At  the  same  time  common  sense  emphasises
the  fact  that  as  all  such  visions  cannot  reasonably  be
brought  under  this  explanation,  and  there  is  no  test
but  fulfilment  to  distinguish  the  true  premonitory  from
any  others ;  the  belief  ends  where  it  begins,  in  private
personal  opinion,  and  makes  no  contribution  to  our  actual
knowledge.

Between  the  acceptance  of  hypnagogic  visions  as  of
a  possible  past  and  a  possible  future,  comes  the  third,
that  of  the  actual  present,  and  the  extraordinary  distinct-
ness and  the  living  movement  and  detail  of  many  of
the  pictures  give  a  reasonable  basis  for  this  idea,  especially
in  those  who  have  heard  more  or  less  of  clairvoyance
and  have  not  made  much  study  of  hallucinations.  Thus
Stead  felt  that  what  he  saw  "  was  not  a  picture — it  was
there."  The  two  scenes  "  simply  came  as  if  I  had  been
able  to  look  through  a  glass  at  what  was  occurring
somewhere  else  in  the  v/orld.  I  had  my  peep  and  then
it  passed."  This  would  describe  the  impressions  of  many,
but  the  fleeting  nature  of  the  scenes,  the  impossibility
of  proving  definitely  that  what  was  seen  was  really
taking  place,  perhaps  in  some  distant  covmtry,  makes
the  obtaining  of  evidence  insuperably  hard.  Since  the
visions  are  usually  at  night,  the  day-time  life  of  the  globe
is  removed  many  degrees  from  us,  but  as  it  never  ceases,
that  is  no  barrier  to  ghmpses  of  it  reaching  the  minds
of  those  who  are  at  the  ultra-sensitive  epoch  of  the
hypnagogic  time.

The  fact  that  this  period  is  one  of  high  suggestibility
is  well  estabhshed.  Hudson  ^  gives  it  a  high  place  in  his
method  of  mental  therapeutics  ;  de  Manaceine's  experi-
ments, ^  and  Baudouin's  work  on  the  principles  of  M.
Coue,^ illustrate it by practical examples. And  visions

^  The  Law  o/  Psychic  Phenomena,  chap.  xiv.  (1893).
^  Sleep,  pp.  199-218  (1897).

'  Suggestion  et  Auto-suggestion,  pt.  ii.  chap.  ii.  p.  106  et  seq.  (1921).


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  371

of  recognised  persons,  in  unknown  conditions,  also  occur,
which,  though  they  differ  in  this  very  particular  (of
recognition)  from  the  tjrpical  hypnagogic  hallucinations,
yet  are  thereby  possible  to  prove  as  veridical.  Three
such  cases  have  been  communicated  to  me ;  in  one  a
lady  says  :  "  Since  writing  to  you  last,  one  of  my
sisters  has  been  ill.  I  woke  a  few  nights  ago  and  saw
her  and  her  bed,  a  facsimile,  in  my  own  room."  In  another
a  mother  saw  her  son,  his  eyes  closed,  leaning  back  in
a  railway  carriage,  wearing  a  cap,  all  of  which  points
were  contrary  to  his  use  and  habit.  But  they  turned
out  to  have  been  true  of  him  at  the  time.  A  third  case
I  wiU  give  in  full,  by  the  kindness  of  my  correspondent
in  Edinburgh,  whose  uncoloured  miniatures  have  already
been  referred  to  (p.  338  supra).  After  the  description  of
these  she  continues  :

"  AU next day, Sunday 4th February, I saw  two
roads,  one  behind  a  leafless  beech-hedge,  and  great  beech
trees  beyond ; the  other  with  snow  everywhere,  strange
trees and queer feathery bushes continually  blowing
about,  instead  of  the  hedge. Into  this  latter  scene  came
a  figure  very  Hke  my  husband,  but  the  face  was  always
blurred. Also  three  men  occasionally  stood  together,  as
if to be photographed, but their faces were  blurred.
There  seemed  often  to  be  a  vehicle  moving  along,  but
I  sensed  it  more  than  saw  it.  .  .  . I  have  written  tliis
from  my  notes,  but  a  curious  thing  has  happened  since.
My  husband,  who  is  in  a  lonely  part  of  Northern  British
Columbia, wrote  and  said  he  had a  long  and  tedious
drive  on  a  very  rough  sticky  road  on  the  Sunday,  4th
Feby." In reply to inquiries she wrote further : "  I
am  glad  to  be  able  to  teU  you  I  can  absolutely  verify
that  it was in the snowy  road I saw my  husband's
figure coming towards me, also the three men.  Tlu-ee
five  in  the  next  place  to  him,  but  their  faces  were  blurred,
and  though  I  know  two  of  them,  I  had  no  feehng  who
they  were. I  can  also  verify  it  was  about  three  weeks
after  that  I  heard  from  my  husband  that  he  drove  home
that  day. The  roads  being  difficult,  it  took  him  a  long
time. He has never mentioned driving to this  place


372


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


before,  but  always  going  by  train.  The  next  letter  men-
tioned willows,  which  I  had  never  connected  with  the
place  before,  and  the  waving  bushes  might  have  been
willows."  That  the  state  of  consciousness  immediately
after  sleep  is  one  very  favourable  to  telepathic  impressions
received  much  illustration  from  the  series  of  experiences
of  this  sort  reported  by  Mr.  Hubert  Wales  (in  Proc.  8.P.R.
XXXI.  124  sq.).  These  scenes  were  strange  to  the
percipient,  but  recognised  by  Mr.  Wales,  e.g.  his  wood-
shed, garden,  cat  in  the  larder,  etc.,  and  many  little
home  intimacies  quite  unknown  to  Miss  Samuels,  who
saw  and  made  notes  of  them  "  at  all  manner  of  un-
earthly hours,  whenever  she  happened  to  wake."  Note,
however,  that  attempts  at  definite  thought-transference
failed  (p.  127).

It  would  appear  from  such  instances  as  these  that
in  the  hypnagogic  state  pictures  sometimes  are  those  of
actual  circumstances,  though  the  proportion  of  such  is
perhaps  very  small,  and  except  by  actual  recognition
they  cannot  be  distinguished  from  the  melee  which  present
themselves.

A  fourth  pomt  in  the  significance  of  the  visions  is
that  they  sometimes  have  a  moral  value  for  the  percipient.
They  might  say,  if  they  had  a  collective  voice,  "  AU
for  your  dehght  we  are  not  here,"  but  sometimes  for
edification.  Thus  Mrs.  Haweis  connected  the  vision  of
the  roses  with  an  "  elevated  spiritual  state "  ;  Mrs.
Tweedale  says  of  her  childhood  experiences,  "  Childish
days  but  sacred  nights."  Greenwood  learned  weighty
lessons  from  his  "faces."  Maury,  as  one  might  expect,
and  others  who  think  with  him,  attributes  many  visions
of  the  saints  to  this  class.  It  is  certainly  the  fact  that
intimate  spiritual  lessons  are  conveyed  to  some  in  this
way ;  but  in  the  nature  of  the  case  they  cannot  be
made  use  of  hke  the  rest.  Sometimes  a  scene  is  allegorical
or  a  symbol ;  such  as  (perhaps)  the  late  Miss  E.  K.
Bates'  vision  of  the  swallows  which  she  took  to  represent
a  protective  band  of  spirits,^  or  Amanda  Jones's  of  the

^  Seen  and  Unseen,  pp.  45,  46,  Pop.  Ed.  (1908).  .


xciv.] Introductory  Stvdy  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  373

handsome  cow  with  a  foaming  pail  of  milk,  which  typified
a  cheque  then  on  its  way  to  her  with  needed  financial
provision.^

In  another  instance,^  in  which  the  appearance  of  a
black  curtain  sprinkled  with  minute  red  dots  was  seen
on  five  occasions,  it  served  as  a  death  omen  for  persons
(not  relatives)  in  the  neighbourhood  or  surroundings  of
the  beholder.^

XIV.  Summary.

Out  of  the  120  instances  described  or  referred  to  in
the  foregoing,  we  may  now  place  on  one  side,  as  of
subsidiary  value,  those  few  (ten  at  the  most)  which
illustrate  the  voluntary  projection  of  mental  images.  They
are  subsidiary  because  they  employ  definite  volition
and  the  conscious  use  of  imagination,  and  take  place
usually  in  daylight  and  in  full  consciousness.  AU  these
points  place  them  in  contrast  with  the  seeing  of  hypna-
gogic images.  Next  to  these  we  may  place  on  one  side
a  larger  group  of  those  who  see  (positive)  cerebral  after-
images of  scenes  or  objects.  The  characteristics  which
also  separate  these  from  hypnagogic  visions  are  that,
first,  they  present  exact  and  recognised  details  of  some
recently-seen  subject.  In  almost  all  the  cases  (17  in  all)
the  vision  is  of  something  that  has  made  a  marked
impression  by  means  of  its  novelty  or  its  requirement
of  prolonged  attention  during  the  previous  day.  Secondly,
they  are  seen  with  open  eyes,  and  in  a  few  cases*
(Vignoli,  Dr.  Lombard)  in  daylight.  Of  these.  Dr.  Lombard
and  the  three  persons  with  him  were  able  to  produce
the  reproduction  at  will,  and  were  certainly  fully  awake.

Psychic  Autobiography,  p.  221. The  visions  of  Mrs.  Alaric  Watts
and  "  Mrs.  W."  (see  pp.  356  and  338)  were  notably  of  this  type.
^Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  244.

^  For  an  example  of  the  readiness  of  some  people  to  find  "  meanings  "
for  other  people's  visions,  see  Occult  Review  XI.,  334  ("  Dreamer  ")  and  Ibid
XII.,  51  (R.  B.  Span).

*That  of  Prof.  Vignoli  is  quoted  in  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  X.  p.  141,  and  Dr.
Lombard's  is  referred  to  on  p.  307


374


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


The  approximation  to  the  hypnagogic  pictures  is  chiefly
in  those  cases  where  the  beholder  was  not  only  in  the
dark  but  m  bed,  and  therefore,  in  the  nature  of  the
case,  courting  sleep  ;  but  it  has  been  remarked  that
even  then  the  subject-matter  did  not  repeat  itself  on
subsequent  nights,  but  only  on  the  one  occasion  on  which
the  deepest,  because  the  newest,  impression,  had  been
made.  ; ;  .

Next  to  the  seeing  (automatically)  of  after-images
should  be  reckoned  all  those  cases  which  I  have  called
hypnopompic  of  the  strict  type.  A  person  who  has
once,  or  only  on  a  few  occasions,  seen  a  dream -figure
prolong  itself  into  the  waking  state,  is  not  a  subject
for  studying  hypnagogic  phenomena  from.  These  single,
usually  motionless  residua  of  dream,  are  seen  with  open
eyes,  by  daylight,  and  do  not  otherwise  display  the
marks  of  the  other  type,  notably  that  of  continual  change,
and  they  are  far  briefer  in  duration.

Of  the  mass  of  typical  cases  which  remain,  an  analysis
gives  the  following  results  as  regards  frequency.

Table  of  Frequency.


Per  cent.

Once  only  ......

6

A  few  nights  ------

5

Short  period  (weeks  or  months)  -

3

Recently  (since  1920) - . -  .

5

In  youth  only  (up  to  20  years)

12

Occasionally  ------

5

Over  a  span  of  years - - .  .

9

Frequently  ------

36

Life-long

16

At  any  time,  on  closing  the  eyes  -

3

100

In  this  table  none  of  Baillarger's  cases  have  been  in-
cluded, for  reasons  previously  given,  but  the  number
for  "  Short  period "  would  then  have  been  considerably
increased.  Neither  have  the  results  of  the  children's
census  been  taken  into  account,  because  we  cannot  tell
what proportion of those children would cease to  see


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  375


on  reaching  maturity.  The  distinction  between  "  Fre-
quently "  and  "  Life-long  "  is  based  on  the  statement
of  each  of  the  latter  subjects  that  this  was  the  case.

An  analysis  of  the  health  conditions  obtaining  is  given
below.  In  the  majority  of  the  cases  no  statement  is
made,  and  the  presumption  is,  therefore,  that  there  was
no  occasion  for  it.  In  eleven  cases  the  witnesses  have
mentioned  that  their  health  was  good  ;  Gurney's  relative
was  "  very  good "  ;  and  several  of  my  correspondents,
when  not  personally  known  to  me,  have  yet  given  enough
internal  evidence  in  their  letters  to  enable  them  to  be
placed  with  assurance.  The  small  "  delicate  "  class,  who
are  not  ill  and  yet  not  robust,  consists  of  Prof.  M.
("in  delicate  health  for  a  year  ")  ;  Herrick,  who  suffered
from  insomnia ;  Maury,  who  suffered  many  iUs  ;  Dr.  Clarke,
who  gives  enough  internal  evidence  in  his  book  to  judge
by,  and  died  of  a  luigering  illness  at  the  age  of  fifty-six  ;
De  Quincey  and  Lamb,  who  are  both  known  to  the
public  fairly  intimately.  It  will  be  noticed  that  they
are  aU  brain- workers  of  distinction.


Increased  by  Uluess ......  1

Stopped  by  illness  1

When  tired  (3  "  very  tired  ") - - - -  7

When  "  Not  too  tired  " 1

When  excited  1

In  good  health - - - - - - -  11

No  coimection  with  health -----  2

No  statement :  i.e.  in  good  health - - -  62


As  regards  both  physical  sight  and  visuahsing  power,
we  are  worse  off  for  the  purposes  of  enquiry  than  for
either  frequency  or  health,  since  only  40  per  cent,  of  our
cases  give  information  on  either  point  ;  and  it  is  less
permissible  to  take  visuahsing  abihty  for  granted  in  the


■"  Health  Table.

Condition.

Delicate

Synchronising  with  illness


Per  cent.
6
8


100


376  F.  E.  Leaning. ■  [part

general  average  than  to  take  health.  So  far  as  we  have
data,  however,  the  case  stands  as  follows  :

Sight  and  Visualisation.

Per  cent.


Eyesight,  good 27-5

,, bad  (short,  weak,  almost  gone)  - -  12-5

Visualising  power,  good .....  37-5

„ „ poor 22-5


100

If  the  proportions  here  indicated  are  any  guide  to  the
remaining  60  per  cent.,  both  good  sight  and  visualisation
predominate  but  are  not  indispensable.

The  visions  themselves  form  five  main  classes,  beginning
with  those  of  colour  only,  or  a  sense  of  diffused  light,
and  embracing  all  possible  visual  images.  Those  con-
sisting of  scenes  are  often  highly  coloured,  brilliantly
hghted,  very  distinct,  miniature  in  size,  and  contain
numerous  details,  frequently  of  persons  in  movement,
especially  towards  the  end  of  the  hypnagogic  period
when  actual  sleep  supervenes.  In  the  case  of  faces
alone,  and  fragments  of  the  person,  the  process  of  form-
ing can  be  watched ;  either  as  building  up  from  cloudy
masses  and  bright  spots,  or  as  drawn  in  fiery  or  phos-
phorescent lines.  In  this  they  contrast  with  patterns,
landscapes,  objects  and  complete  figures,  which  are  usually
presented  entire.  Change,  with  more  or  less  rapidity,  is
a  mark  of  these  pseudo -hallucinations.  It  is  effected
either  by  transition  from  one  figure  to  another,  by  fading
out  and  substitution,  or  by  panoramic  movement.  They
are  affected  by  any  euttempt  at  conscious  observation,
and  then  either  disappear  or  become  "  impossible."

A  small  proportion,  12  per  cent.,  have  auditory  hallu-
cinations, either  accompanying  the  visual  or  predominating
over  them  ;  still  fewer  have  olfactory  and  tactile  sensa-
tions. About  3  per  cent,  report  internal  sensations  which
coincide  with  the  seeing  of  the  pictures.

The  two  points  which  offer  the  widest  problem,  and
on  which  there  is  most  ground  for  at  least  stating  the
case  as  to  the  significance  and  play  of  causes,  are  memory


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  311


and  volition.  The  subject  of  memory,  though  22  per
cent,  of  the  accounts  give  no  clue  as  to  the  recognition
or  otherwise  of  the  subject-matter,  yet  leaves  a  sufficiently
large  number  of  those  who  do,  to  form  some  conclusions
upon. They  admit  of  being  analysed  as  follows  :

Memory.

Per  cent.

All  matter  quite  unrecognised - - -  60-5
Unrecognised, with  one, two  or  three  ex-
ceptions -------  5-215

Usually,  or  often  recognised  - - - -  20-25

Partially  recognised  and  unrecognised - -  14-035

100

The  above  figures  refer  to  the  seers,  and  not  to  the
visions  themselves.  That  is,  only  one-fifth,  for  instance,  of
all  who  have  described  their  visions  have  stated  them  to
be  of  recognised  persons,  places,  or  things,  while  three  times
that  number  say  that  they  never  see  the  known  or  famiUar.

In  respect  of  any  command  exercised  by  the  wiU,  it
is  much  more  difficult  to  analyse  the  data  than  when
we  are  deahng  with  memory.  A  large  number  of  people
(52  per  cent.)  do  not  indicate  that  they  have  ever
attempted  in  any  way  to  control  the  hypnagogic  visions  ;
it  has  no  more  occurred  to  them  than  to  try  and  alter
the  course  of  a  play  on  the  stage  or  to  rule  their  dreams.
And  of  the  remainder,  less  than  half  have  done  so,  either
with  experimental  intentions  or  otherwise.  Those  who  have
tried  must  be  divided  into  two  classes  :  those  in  whom
the  minimum  of  control  is  achieved,  either  by  holding
the  vision  (usually  only  two  minutes  or  so)  or  by  getting
it  repeated,  which  I  call  "  shght  control "  ;  and  those  who  by
self-training  or  temperamental  facility  can  change  the
subject-matter  or  "  see  "  what  they  wish.  A  difficulty
arises  by  the  casual  use  of  "  wiUing  "  where  one  suspects
wishing  would  be  a  more  correct  term.  It  may  be  very
difficult  to  draw  the  fine  between  the  two,  but  nature
seems  to  do  so  when  she  grants  success  to  the  wish
and  withholds  it  from  the  command.  And  with  the  majority
of  those  who  have  tried,  neither  is  of  any  avail.  Some


378  F.  E.  Leaning.  [part

cases,  too,  are  complex,  beginning  like  De  Quincey  or
Meyer  in  a  deliberate  purpose  but  not  being  able  to
check  the  mechanism  when  desired  later  on  ;  or,  as  in
the  case  of  McNish,  being  able  by  opening  the  eyes  to
banish  Ducrow  and  the  whole  audience,  but  not  able  by
any  effort  to  change  the  music  or  soften  it.

These  things  make  any  attempt  at  classification  very
imperfect,  and  the  smaUness  of  the  number  concerned
perhaps  makes  it  futile,  but  for  the  sake  of  completeness
the  proportions  may  be  stated.

Per  cent.


Persons  with  no  control  - - - - -  54-65

Control  by  will  (shght) 20-8

„ (much) 14-45

,, ,, wish,  or  indirectly  - - - -  10-1


100

XV.  Crystal  Vision  :  A  Comparison.

Several  authorities  have  observed  that  hypnagogic
visions  and  visions  m  the  crystal  have  certain  points
of  resemblance  ;  and  are  so  far  cognate  that  the  examina-
tion of  the  less  known  phenomena  may  make  a  comparison
of  profit.  Crystal  visions  have  received  a  far  larger  share
of  attention,  and  much  has  already  been  done  towards
preparing  the  field  for  their  study.  There  are  at  least
five  good  standard  series,  presented  by  observers  of  the
first  class,  apart  from  others  as  good  in  quahty  but
fewer  in  number.  These  are  Miss  Goodrich-Freer's  own
visions,^  those  of  Mrs.  Verrall  ^  and  Miss  A.^  given  by
Myers,  those  of  Miss  Angus  *  given  by  Lang, and  Mrs.

iln  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  V.  pp.  486-621  (1889);  Vol.  VIII.  pp.  484-
492  (1892)  ;  and  see  Vol.  X.  p.  108.  Also  Essays  in  Psychical  Research,
"On  the  Faculty  of  Crystal-Gazing"  (1899);  and  Borderland,  vol.  i.
pp.  117,  529  (1894).

^  Myers,  Human  Personality,  i.  586  ;  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  pp.
473-482  (1892).

^  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  pp.  498-516.

*  Lang,  Andrew,  The  Making  of  Religion,  chap.  v.  (1897)  ;  Introd.  to
Thomas's  Crystal  Gazing,  p.  xxxv  (1905).


xciv.] Introdtictory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena.  379

Peppier 's  ^  given  by  Hereward  Carrington.  A  bibliography
of  the  subject  may  be  found  in  Mr.  Theodore  Besterman's
work,  Crystal  Gazing  [1924].

A  careful  examination  of  these  along  the  same  lines
as  have  already  been  followed  as  regards  hypnagogic  pheno-
mena shows  no  striking  discrepancies  between  the  two  classes.
Taken  in  order,  and  omitting  illustrative  detail,  the  con-
clusions are  as  follow  :

(1)  Diffusion. — -The  mtmber  of  persons  able  to  see  in
the  crystal  has  been  variously  estimated  as  from  5  per
cent,  at  "  a  high  estimate  "  (Thomas)  to  20  per  cent.
(Myers),  while  both  Miss  Goodrich-Freer  and  Lang  certainly
suggest  a  higher  proportion  still  by  their  references  to
the  numbers  of  cases  personally  known  to  them.  These
differing  opinions  throw  us  back  on  a  comparison  of
units,  and  it  then  becomes  clear  that  the  two  activities
are  not  always,  or  even  often,  found  combined  in  the
same  -subject.  Two  persons  only  report  themselves  as
belonging  to  both  classes  (Miss  Goodrich-Freer  and  Miss
N.  de  Gernet,  both  life-long  clairvoyants)  ;  while  seven
hypnagogists  tell  us  that  they  have  tried  without  result
to  get  visions  in  the  crystal.  They  include  M.  Gheury
de  Bray,  Andrew  Lang,  Prof.  Ladd,  and  M.  WarcoUier,
who  attributes  the  greater  diffusion  of  hypnagogic  pheno-
mena among  the  English  to  the  national  habits  of  drink-
ing champagne,  tea  and  coffee. ^  In  his  case  the  attempt
to  use  the  crystal  induced  the  hjrpnagogic  visions  ;  but
such  scanty  evidence  as  we  have  does  not  show,  as  we
might  expect  it  to,  axij  essential  connection.

(2)  Frequency  and  Health. — As  regards  both  these  character-
istics, the  two  classes  of  phenomena  are  analogous  ;  that  is  to  say,
the  gazing  faculty  is  not  constant,  even  in  the  best  "  scryers,"
but  subject  to  longer  or  shorter  periods  of  intermission  ;  and  in
both,  good  health  is  conducive  to  its  activity,  while  illness  or
weariness  interferes. The  evidence  on  this  point  is  good.^

''■Modern  Psychical  Phenomena,  pt.  iii.  pp.  301-327  (1919).
^  Op.  cit.,  p.  79.

'  See,  for  instance,  Miss  Goodrich-Freer  in  Borderland,  vol.  i.  p.  127  ;
Thomas,  Crystal  Gazing,  p.  xlix  (Lang's  subjects)  ;  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.
p.  472  (Myers'  subjects)  ;  Miss  A.,  etc.


380


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


(3)  Physical  Sight  and  Visualising  Power. — There  is  the
same  admixture  of  good  and  poor  quality  as  among
hj^nagogists,  though  it  is  perhaps  less  often  in  evidence.
The  powerful  visuahser  like  Miss  Goodrich-Freer,  the  very
shortsighted  Miss  A.,  a  very  bad  visualiser,  and  Mrs.
Verrall  with  unlike  sight,  preventing  the  simultaneous  use
of  both  eyes  at  any  time — all  ahke  saw  well  in  the  crystal,
while  some  use  a  dark  "  speculum,"  or  see  in  the  dark,
or  use  the  crystal  with  the  eyes  shut  (Miss  N.  de  Gernet).^
This  abihty  seems  to  indicate  a  link  between  the  visions
seen  only  in  darkness  and  those  seen  only  in  Hght,  by
the  majority  of  seers  of  either  kind.

(4)  Subject- Matter  and  Features. — The  pictures  in  the
crystal  match  in  kind  at  every  point  with  those  under
study.  The  preliminary  clouding  is  well  known,  though
it  does  not  invariably  take  place  ;  faces  are  a  less  constant
feature  in  the  descriptions  as  a  whole,  and  figures  more
so.  "  Fancy "  pictures  occur,  perhaps,  in  less  abundance,
and  geometrical  designs  more  seldom  still.  Other  points
of  similarity  are  (a)  the  building  up  of  objects  ^  as
well  as  their  appearance  "  suddenly  and  completely "  ;
(6)  the  coming  of  a  number  of  pictures  without  inter-
connection ;  3  (c)  the  miniature  scale,  all  usually  being
seen  within  the  limits  of  the  field  provided.*  In
the  case  of  crystals  perhaps  the  circularity  of  form
invites  the  faculty  into  play,  as  some  people  see  in  this
way  who  do  not  see  (or  we  do  not  hear  of  their  doing
so)  in  other  surfaces.  Sometimes,  however,  the  crystal
seems  to  disappear. ^  {d)  The  pictures  are  usually  seen
in  colour,  although  there  is  nothing  like  the  prominence

1  See  Thomas,  p.  xvi  ;  Warcollier,  p.  76  ;  Proc.  S.P.B.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  500.
"Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  487.

^  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  601;  and  compare  Mrs.  Verrall,  p.  476.

^Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  476  (Mrs.  Verrall),  p.  487  (Miss  G.-F.).
But  see  WarcoUier,  p.  56.

6  Ibn  Kaldoun,  quoted  by  Thomas,  p.  24  ;  Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.
p.  222  ;  Warcollier's  subject,  Mile.  T.,  "  la  boule  disparait  par  instants,"
"  la  boule  n'est  plus  petite,  mais  sans  limite,"  pp.  69,  70  ;  Mr.  Keule-
mans,  "  picture  and  surroimdings  go  in  a  mist,"  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.
p.  519,  etc.


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  381

given  to  brilliancy  of  colour  such  as  the  hypnagogic
accounts  abound  in ;  and  they  occasionally  lack  colour,
"  like  photographs,  showing  Hght  and  shade  only,"  ^  or
"sometimes  black  and  white  as  in  a  pen-and-ink  sketch."  ^
(e)  Multiphcity  and  interior  movement  are  found,  com-
biaed  with  the  sense  of  reahty.  Thus  Miss  A.  "  describes
things  not  as  if  she  saw  them  in  a  picture,  but  as  if
she  were  actually  there."  ^  (/)  Crystal  visions  do  not  present
the  uniformly  high  degree  of  illumination  which  the
other  type  seem  to,  but  there  is  apparent  a  tendency
to  select  objects  which  are  bright  or  striking.  The  dark
wall  covered  with  white  jasmine,  seen  by  Miss  Goodrich-
Freer,  the  lake  landscape  with  two  snowy  peaks  and
one  sharply  defined  dark  hill,  seen  by  Mrs.  Verrall,  are
examples,  (g)  There  is  a  more  frequent  mention  of  objects
not  being  very  distinct  in  the  crystal,  in  contrast  to  the
emphasis  laid  on  distinctness  in  the  other  visions,  (h)  The
duration  varies  with  individual  circumstances,  and  lasts
from  a  few  seconds  to  a  few  minutes,  and  from  a  few
minutes  to  over  half  an  hour.*  And  whereas  some  gazers
lose  the  picture  if  the  eyes  are  turned  away,  or  the
attention  wanders,  others  (Mrs.  Peppier  is  the  case  in
point)  can  come  and  go,  and  find  the  scene  unchanged
on  their  return,  (i)  There  is  an  element  of  "  perversity,"
as  in  the  hypnagogic  cases.  Thus  Miss  A.  says  :  "  If  I
wish  to  see  a  particular  person,  I  cannot  do  so,  but
I  probably  see  something  quite  different."  ^  Mss  Goodrich-
Freer,  however,  often  saw  what  she  wished  to,  or  saw
her  visuahsed  mental  image  transferred  to  the  crystal.^
Mrs.  Verrall's  experience  was  that  often  she  saw  nothing
in  the  crystal,  but  got  a  mental  picture  suggesting  some-
thing she  had  forgotten  to  do.  '  This  last  variation  is  not
one  that  is  reported  by  hypnagogists.

1  Fr.  V.  Vay,  "  Visionen  in  Wasserglasse,"  see  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  V.  p.  504.
^Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  474.

3  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  pp.  474,  500.  See  also  The  Dissociation  of  a
Personality,  p.  79.

*  Carrington,  Mod.  Psy.  Phenomena,  p.  316.

Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  500.  «  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  491.

'  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  473.


382


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


In  these  nine  respects  we  see  that  such  differences
as  exist  are  in  degree  only,  and  not  in  liind.  The  actual
sources  of  crystal-visions  have  been  far  more  closely
scrutinised  than  is  possible  with  the  hypnagogic  variety,
and  the  definite  knowledge  that  certain  distinct  classes
exist,  following  on  the  other  points  of  resemblance,  goes
some  way  towards  giving  a  clue  by  analogy,  if  nothing
more,  to  the  real  character  of  the  latter.

The  three  most  prominent  elements  reflected  by  crystal
visions  are,  next  to  scenes  consciously  recognised  :

(1)  Scenes and objects either quite forgotten, or  un-
consciously observed  ;

(2)  Scenes  in  the  mind,  or  having  at  some  time  been

so,  of  some  person  or  persons  present ;

(3)  Actual  scenes  not  known  at  the  time  to  anyone  in

the  immediate  entourage  of  the  gazer,  but  verifiable.
The  proportion  which  pictures  of  the  first  class,  sub-
conscious memories,  bears  to  the  whole,  not  only  differs
with  individuals  but  depends  on  the  pains  taken  by
the  observer  to  ascertain  their  source.  The  best  and
longest  study  of  this  kind  is  Miss  Goodrich-Freer's.  Out
of  a  total  of  seventy  items  she  could  account  for  all  but
two  or  three.

The  best  example  of  the  second  class  of  crystal  visions
is  given  us  in  Miss  Angus.  Lang  made  a  special  point
of  persuading  her,  and  other  "  scryers  "  when  he  came
across  them  to  try  and  see  in  the  crystal  some  scene
in  the  mind  of  himself  or  a  third  person  present.  Many
successes  are  recorded  of  her  powers,  and  several  of
her  seeing  something  which  was  verified  by  those  who
had  no  intention  at  all  of  so  affecting  her.  They  were
not  only  unconscious  agents  at  the  time,  but  the  subject-
matter  occasionally  was  unknown  even  to  the  living  hnk
which  made  it  possible.  This  forms  the  very  furthest
limit  to  which  telepathy  can  be  assumed.

The  third  class  of  crystal  visions,  of  veridical  occur-
rences, either  in  the  past  (historical)  or  the  present,  is
exemplified  in  Miss  A.  The  observers  referred  to,  and
others,  all  speak  of  the  "  fancy  pictures,"  not  coming
under  any  of  the  three  main  heads  just  given,  but  there


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  383

seems  no  means  of  discovering  in  what  general  propor-
tions they  occur.  Mrs.  Verrall,  out  of  her  thirty-three
cases,  finds  some  raison  d'etre  for  nine,  but  this  leaves
twenty-four,  or  72  per  cent,  unaccounted  for.  Mrs.  Pep-
pier, whose  memoranda  must  run  to  something  between
100  and  200,  has  a  small  number  which  may  be  ascribed
to  thought-transference  from  her  husband,  many  which
have  verisimihtude  and  might  be  happening  somewhere,
and  many  "  quite  crazy."  Even  all  of  these,  she  says,
are  "  like  a  drop  in  the  ocean "  of  the  sum  total  seen.
Her  contribution  is  concerned  more  with  the  mechanism
of  the  seeing  than  with  the  significance  of  the  things
seen.

It  is  to  be  observed  as  a  point  of  essential  importance
that  in  all  these  classes  alike,  the  sub-conscious  memory,
the  telepathic,  the  clairvoyant,  and  the  imaginative,  the
subject  is  at  first  sight  strange  and  unrecognised,  exactly
as  the  hypnagogic  visions  are  so  often  reported  to  be.
The  absence  of  any  connection  with  the  gazer's  own
interests  or  thoughts  is  therefore  marked,  and  the  part
which  conscious  memory  plays  is  reduced  to  as  small
a  section  in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other.

Finally,  the  exercise  of  control  over  the  visions  in  the
crystal  is  perhaps  rather  greater,  with  practised  gazers,
than  it  is  found  to  be  with  hypnagogists  ;  but  possibly
they  are  on  a  level.  The  power,  whatever  it  is,  exists
more  strongly  in  some  than  in  others  :  therefore  they
can  count  on  its  coming  into  play  more  often.  But
that  is  almost  the  hmit.

Regarding  the  Ukeness  of  crystal  visions  as  a  whole
to  the  hypnagogic,  one  would  be  inclined  to  see  in  the
latter  a  more  elementary  form  of  the  former,  and  to
say  that  the  chief  difference  is  that  while  the  hypnagogist
is  dependent  upon  the  spontaneous  exercise  of  his  faculty
in  the  dark  or  with  closed  eyes,  and  in  a  twilight  state
of  consciousness,  the  other  can  do  so  in  full  consciousness,
with  open  eyes,  under  the  stimulus  supplied  by  the  crystal-
line or  reflecting  surface.  And  we  might  go  on  to  reason
that  since  the  subconscious  contents  of  the  mind  con-
tribute memory-images,  telepathic  impacts,  and  clairvoyant

28


384  F.  E.  Leaning.  • ,  ,  [part

impressions  to  the  crystal,  these  may  also  be  reckoned
among  the  hypnagogic  material,  only  allowing  a  somewhat
larger  part  to  imagination  in  the  last.

This  conchision  can  only  be  adopted  with  caution  and
provisionally,  however,  for  the  reason  that  both  the
classes  of  seers  concerned  speak  of  differences  now  and
then  between  their  experiences,  and  although  it  is  very
difficult  to  understand  in  what  the  differences  consist,
for  us  who  know  none  of  them  except  by  hearsay,  it
is  evident  that  this  corresponds  to  something  which  we
cannot  ignore  in  trying  to  understand  the  phenomena.
Thus  when  a  normal  clairvoyant  says  that  the  hypnagogic
visions  are  different  from  what  he  sees  otherwise  but
yet  not  normally ;  or  when  Mrs.  Verrail  describes  a  vision
which  came  while  looking  into  the  crystal  but  "  not  in  any
way  resembling  a  crystal- vision "  ;  and  Myers  speaks  of
the  pictures  which  came  in  a  Cambridge  undergraduate's
crystal  but  which  "  almost  at  once  followed  quite  another
analogy — they  became  like  very  brilliant  illusions  hypna-
gogiques,"  it  is  clear  that  there  is  some  distinctive
element  at  work.  Whether  that  element  concerns  the
mechanism  used  in  seeing,  or  some  actual  quality  in
the  nature  of  the  thing  seen  itseK,  is  impossible  to
discriminate  without  a  much  deeper  scrutiny  ;  and  it
can  only  be  effected  by  a  comparison  of  many  witnesses,
and  not  on  the  strength  of  any  one  person's  experience.

XVI.  Theories  and  Explanations.

The  general  survey  of  the  data  has  now  been  carried
far  enough  to  give  place  to  a  view  of  the  various  theories
put  forward  to  account  for  them.  These  range  from  a
modest  and  total  denial  of  any  kind  of  explanation,  ^
through  many  speculative  and  questioning  suggestions,  up
to  the  most  definite  and  dogmatic  pronouncements.  These
last,  perhaps  it  is  needless  to  say,  do  not  agree  with
each other, and are mutually exclusive often  ; yet  all

iPjoc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  pp.  477,  478.  ■

^  E.g.  Galton  :  "  cannot  guess  in  the  remotest  degree  the  cause  of
them,"  .,


xciv.] Jntrodiictory  Shidy  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  385

of  them  come  into  touch  with  the  facts  at  certain  points,
and  so  justify  themselves.  Where  weakness  arises  is  from
assuming  that  all  the  effects  are  of  a  uniform  order,
and  therefore  open  to  a  like  uniformity  of  cause.  We
can  admit  that  some  of  the  effects  have  a  physical
causation,  some  a  mental,  both  arising  from  our  own
unconscious  activities ;  that  others  come  originally  from
other  minds  than  our  own,  either  incarnate  or  discarnate  ;
and  yet  others  from  no  mediating  mind,  but  simply  as
the  result  of  accepting  the  universe  as  our  five  senses
accept  it.  These  five  heads  divide  the  whole  field  between
them  without  conflict  ;  the  actual  problems  arise  from
the  difficulty  of  discriminating  results,  and  the  nature
of  the  faculty  involved.  If,  as  one  result,  the  expression
we  are  famiUar  with  of  "  seeing  with  the  mind's  eye "
should  be  proved  less  figurative  than  literal,  and  some
advance  made  in  the  comprehension  of  mental,  or  psychic,
sight,  the  study  will  be  well  justified.

Of  the  five  solutions  of  hypnagogic  perplexities  given
above,  the  two  first,  or  purely  subjective,  have  received
most  attention ;  and  of  these  two,  that  of  physical
causation  in  the  eye  itself  has  the  largest  number  of
supporters.

We  will  consider  first  then  what  is  to  be  said  on  this  point.

(1)  The  Apparatus  of  Physical  Sight. — Entoptic  Pheno-
mena.^— A  description  of  the  intricate  structures  with
which  Nature  has  furnished  the  exterior  end  of  the  optic
nerve  is  to  be  found  in  any  text-book  of  elementary
physiology,  and  it  is  not  therefore  necessary  to  go  into
further  detail  here  than  to  remind  ourselves  that  the
retinal  surface  is  formed  to  receive  etheric  (light)  vibra-
tions of  from  450  million  million  per  second  (red  light)
to  750  milhon  milHon  (violet  light). ^  Behind  the  trans-
parent window  of  the  cornea,  and  the  regulating  curtain
of  the  iris,  we  find  it  furnished  with  an  aqueous  and
a  vitreous humour  at  the front and back  respectively

*  Entoptic,  lying  within  the  eye  itself.

^Crookes,  Sir  W.,  Rep.  Brit.  Assoc.  (1898)  ;  also  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol,  XII,
p.  350  ;  but  Ganot  gives  496  to  728  million  million,


386  F.  E.  Leaning,  y  -y^^^'t  ^  . s  [part

of  the  crystalline  lens, and  the fluid  circulating  in  all
contains various bodies which can themselves  become
visible  under  certain  conditions.^ An  exhaustive  treatise,
embodying his own researches and the bibliography  of
the subject, was produced by Sir W. F. Barrett,  in
which the actual measurements of some of these  are
given, ^  that  is,  of  the  white  corpuscles  (one  two-hundred-
and  fifty-thousandth  of  an  inch  in  diameter),  their  numbers
as  is  known,  being  one  to  the  thousand  of  red  corpuscles
(fasting)  or  one  to  four  hundred  after  food. Beside  these
there  are  "  scintillating  particles." Dr.  Lindsay  Johnson,*
watching  them  closely,  found  that  they  invariably  followed
the  same  direction,  always  going  towards  or  forming  the
macula  lutea  (the  central  point  of  vision),  turning  round
at a sharp curve, and receding from it. Mr.  Barker
Smith  *  calculates  that  the  lens  of  the  eye  must  have
a  magnifying  power  of  400  to  500  diameters,  by  a  com-
parison of  his  own  "  scintUlating  particles  "  (seen  "  at  any
time  on  a dark  background ") with  certain  newly  dis-
covered ^  bodies  in  the  blood  under  a  microscope.  Among
these  bodies  are  some  seen  in  the  "  clear  plasma  spaces
between  the  red-cell  masses,  as,  for  the  most  part,  brUliant
needle-points  of  light,  carried  along  by  the  moving  plasma
streams,  but  independently  motile  also." He  cites  several
other  authors  ^  on  the  existence in all  animal  cells  of

1  Hyslop,  T.  B.,  Mental  Physiology,  p.  267  ;  Cane,  Francis  E.,  "  The
Physiology  of  Dreams,"  Lancet  (1889),  p.  1330.  Both  of  these  quoted
at  length,  with  reference  to  many  older  authors,  in  Manac6me,  Sleep,
pp.  235,  238.

2  Scientific  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Dublin  Soc,  vol.  xi.  (N.S.),  Nos.
7,  8,  12,  "  On  Entoptic  Vision  ;  or,  The  Self-Examination  of  Objects
Within  the  Eye"  (1906).  Also  published  separately.  A  summary  was
contributed  to  Light  (1922)  (Ap.  1).

^  Light  (1922),  p.  181.  '^Medical  Times  (Mar.  1923),  p.  37.

*  CoUings,  C.  H.,  "  On  Certain  Pathological  Elements  in  Human  Blood,"
Med.  Times  (Dec.  1922),  p.  168.  He  describes  nine  kinds,  none  mentioned
in  text-books,  six  of  which  he  claims  to  be  the  discoverer  of.

*  Russo.  Dr.  Ph.,  "La  Matiere  Vivante,"  in  Revue  des  Idies  (1910).
Lumiere,  Aug.,  R6le  des  Colloides  chez  lea  Etres  Vivants,  p.  14  (1921).
Koppe,  Leonard,  Die  Mikroskopie  des  Lebenden  Augea,  bd.  i.  (1920);
bd.  ii.  (1922).  Sprenger,  Berlin,  UUra-und  Polarisations — Mikroskopische
Erforachung  des  Lebenden  Augea  und  ihre  Ergebniase  (1921),  Leipzig.


XCiv.] Introductory  Stvdy  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  387

granules  and  granulins,  scintillating  and  offering  very
intense  movements,  proportionate  to  the  molecular  energy
of  the  surrounding  fluid  ;  and  in  concluding  refers  to
the  colloid  clouds  accompanying  the  bright  particles,
and  ruled  or  dispersed  by  them,  "  much  as  the  wind
does  the  fleecy  clouds  of  the  sky."

It  is  here  to  be  noted  that  all  the  foregoing  information
depends  on  experiment  and  observation  carried  out  in
hght,  if  not  broad  daylight  or  against  a  bright  sky,
then  with  some  strong  illuminant.  I  find  only  one  in-
vestigator who  speaks  of  any  entoptic  phenomena  as
visible  also  in  the  dark.  Miss  Beatrice  Lindsay,  after
three  years  work  on  the  subject,  at  Girton,  put  her
conclusions  into  a  paper  read  before  the  British  Associa-
tion.^ Her  first  and  second  classes  are  differentiated  partly  by
this  very  question  of  darkness,  the  first  dealing  with  pheno-
mena absent  in  complete  darkness,  the  second  with  the  en-
toptic images  resulting  from  pressure,  automatically  (by  closing
the  Uds)  or  artificially  appHed.  These  are  distinguished  by
their  metallic  lustre,  by  their  colour,  varying  from  pale
yellow  through  pale  green  to  electric  blue  or  purple,  and
by  their  visibility  in  the  dark.  They  comprise  among
other  things  discs,  dots,  occasionally  rings,  and  a  grating
composed  of  sets  of  bright  bars  at  right  angles  with
one  another,  indicating  structure  of  some  kind  in  the
fovea  centralis.  In  a  following  paper, ^  she  speaks  of  a
constant  current  of  minimal  points  of  light  "  invariably
present  to  the  normal  eye  when  trained  to  such
observations."

If  in  addition  to  all  this  we  take  into  consideration
all  that  has  been  established  concerning  the  self-luminous
qualities  of  organic  matter  and  the  eyes  in  particular,
it  is  evident  that  we  are  furnished  forth  with  an  abund-
ance of  "  intra-organic  stimuH "  which  will  account  for
a  certain  proportion  of  the  hypnagogic  phenomena.  Con-
sequently, writer  after  writer  has  dismissed  them  en  bloc
as  having  no  other  source. Prof. Ladd  may  be  taken

^  Rep.  Brit.  Assoc.  (1887),  p.  779.  •  ■  •

^  On  "Optical  Illusions  of  Motion."


388 .  .-W F.  M.  Leaning,  o  v  v ^  [parT

as  the  spokesman  of  many,  having  by  his  own  experience
caught  them  in  the  act,  as  he  considers — lines  of  printed
matter  visibly  changing  into  mere  light  and  dark  spots
as  he  passed  into  clear  consciousness.  He  cites  Miiller,
Gruithuisen,  Purkinje,  Radestock,  Wundt,  and  Maury,  as
supporters  of  this  view,  and  others  could  be  added,
including  those  who  would  identify  dream  phenomena  with
them,  and  apply  an  entirely  physiological  explanation  to
both.  Thus  we  may  take  Cane's  dogmatic  statement  as
representative  when  he  says  :  "  All  the  phenomena  of
dreams  are  fully  accounted  for  by  the  auto-sensations
physiologically  developed  within  the  body  .  .  .  sometimes  in-
creased .  .  .  and  modified  by  external  impressions  and  stimuli."

These  facts,  of  matter  presenting  the  features  of
brilliancy,  rapidity  of  movement,  various  colours,  cloudi-
ness, and  a  variety  of  shapes  and  sizes  all  dwelling  in
the  eye  itself,  and  coming  into  prominence  when  all  other
visual  stimulation  is  withdrawn,  do  logicallj^  account  for
those  characteristics  in  the  hypnagogic  visions.  The
circularity  of  form,  produced  perhaps  by  the  iris  or  by
the  discs,  the  impossibility  of  retaining  a  given  com-
bination of  elements  (particularly  if  the  circulation  be
rapid)  or  of  repeating  it  exactly,  the  frequency  of  bright
or  fight  points,  and  the  multitudinous  quality  and  incessant
change  in  the  pictures,  added  to  the  occasionally  frag-
mentary nature  (as  of  a  mouth,  nose,  or  eye  only)  of
some,  and  the  fact  of  a  process  of  formation  being  some-
times observed,  all  point  in  this  direction.  And  as  to
the  conditions  of  health,  there  is  a  common  factor  to
a  state  of  over-fatigue,  of  exhilaration,  and  of  fever,  in
the  velocity  of  the  blood  currents.  So  far  as  this  ex-
planation agrees  with  the  facts,  its  exponents  have  a
very  strong  case,  and  if  it  covered  the  whole  field,  we
should  have  to  admit  Sir  David  Brewster's  dictum,  that
"  the  mind's  eye  is  the  body's  eye."  An  animal,  then,
would  bo  just  as  liable  to  hypnagogic  visions  as  a  man,
since  its  eye  is  constructed  in  the  same  way  ;  the  only
difference  lying  in  the  contents  of  the  aforesaid  minds
respectively.  And  everyone  possessed  of  a  normal  eye
at all, that is, the vast  majority of  the  race,  should


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hyptiagogic  Phenomena  389

be  as  familiar  -ndth  hjrpnagogic  pictures  and  "  faces  in
the  dark  "  as  they  are  with  the  sights  of  the  external  world.

(2)  The  Mind's  Eye. — It  is  not  pretended,  even  by  the
most  convinced  holders  of  the  retinal  genesis  of  the  pheno-
mena, that  the  eye  alone  is  sufficient,  however  richly  provided
with  picture-forming  material,  to  account  for  the  visions.
The  foundation  may  be  furnished  by  phosphenes  and
corpuscles  and  so  on,  but  the  buUding  requires  another
factor  for  its  construction  :  imagination.  The  materials
for  this  do  not  He  in  the  eye-ball,  which  is  only  the
outer  terminus  of  the  optic  nerve,  but  must  come  down
to  it  from  some  inner  region.  Thus  Havelock  Ellis  says  :  ^
"  The  eye  suppHes  entoptic  glimmerings,  and  the  brain,
acting  on  the  suggestions  thus  received,  superposes  mental
pictures  to  those  ghmmermgs."  Bergson  has  elaborated
this  theory  with  respect  to  dream  imagery,  and  Parish
was  typical  of  the  whole  school  in  accepting  such  an
explanation  on  the  ground  that  it  was  simpler  than
any  other,  and  conformed  to  the  law  of  parsimony.  "  All
false  perception,"  he  saj^s  {op.  cit.  pp.  144,  148),  "  is  an
anomalous  reaction  of  the  brain  to  sensory  stimuli."
What  we  popularly  term  imagination  is  in  this  view  a
re-presentation  of  images,  the  mental  concomitant  of  the
impulse  affecting  a  cell-group,  or  groups.  Each  might  in
this  way  give  rise  to  another,  following  the  usual  laws
of  association,  and  so  bringing  about  a  series  of  logically
connected  pictures,  though  the  Hnks  between  them  might
not  be  apparent  without  a  good  deal  of  introspective
analysis.  We  should  also  expect  in  this  case  that  memory
would  be  active  and  the  scenes  recognised,  since  they
would  all  be  the  calhng  out  of  what  had  been  actual
perceptions  at  some  time.  Both  these  characteristics  are
markedly  absent in  the typical  hypnagogic  series.

But  evidently  the  physiology  of  the  brain  ^  and  of  the

^  The  World  of  Dreams,  p.  31.  .  : . .  :■

^  Writers  who  may  be  consulted  on  this  subject  are  :  Dr.  E.  H.  Clarke,
Visions,  pp.  52-135 ;  Luys,  The  Brain  and  its  Functions,  pt.  i.  with
plates  (Int.  Sci.  Ser.)  ;  Annals  of  Psychical  Science,  vol.  viii.  p.  534
("  The  Physiological  Limits  of  Visual  Hallucination,"  by  Dennis  Taylor)  ;
and  Parish,  Halbicinations  and  Illusions,  an  indispensable  guide  to  the
literature  of  the  subject  (Cont.  Sci.  Ser.  1897).


390


F.  E.  Leaning.


optic  nerve  in  particular  here  comes  into  contact  with
the  findings  of  psychology,  and  the  simpler  theories  have
had  to  yield  to  more  complicated  ones  under  the  pressure
of advancing research. It  is not for an amateur  like
myself  to  attempt  an  exposition  of  this  intricate  subject,
but Dr. C. S. Myers, whose Textbook of  Experimental
Psychology has been referred to before, sums up  the
present  position  clearly.^ "  Evidence  is  gradually  accumu-
lating that  before  a  sensation  reaches  its  full  development,
it  undergoes  a  process  of  compUcated  elaboration,  of  the
details  of  which,  however,  we  are  as  yet  totally  ignorant.
This  elaboration  doubtless  takes  place  at  different  stages
and  at  different  nervous  levels  in  the  cerebro-spinal  system.
As  psychologists  we  are  by  now  far  removed  from  the
crudities  of  the  earlier  physicists,  who  supposed  that  a
wave  of  given  length  on  reaching  the  retina  immediately
becomes  transformed  into  a  sensation  of  colour  and  that
psychical  effects  are  identifiable  with  their  external  physical
causes. Nothing  is more  certain  than  that  in  addition
to the more peripheral processes, central processes  are
also involved in elaborating visual sensations. But  at
present  we  are  powerless  to  separate  the  one  from  the
other  ; we  can  only  speak  of  changes  in  one  vast  un-
ravelled complex— the  cerebro-spinal  apparatus." Such  an
admission  as  this,  in  relation  to  normal  seeing,  is  signifi-
cant, and  in  strong  contrast  with  the  assurance  of  older
writers. It leads, by its mention of psychical  effects,
directly  into  a  field  where  the  mind  is  more  and  more
and  the  body  less. It  is  true  that  in  the  newly-recognised
"  sub-conscious  " there is a popular tendency to  find
that as "  simple " a way of accounting for  things  as
ever  ; but  the  limit  between  definite  knowledge  and  large
assumption  has  still  to  be  mai'ked  out.

(3)  Another  Vieiv.— The  counter  theory  to  the  retinal
causation,  not  only  of  hypnagogic  but  of  all  hallucinations,
is  one  put  forward  by  the  leaders  of  psychical  research,
few  in  number  but  cogent  in  presentation.  It  is  that
of  central  initiation, the  impulse  coming  primarily  from


1  Pp.  99,  100.


Xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Pheriomena  391

within  rather  than  from  without,  and  Uable  to  originate
in  the  penumbra  of  being  which  surrounds  the  Hmited
field  of  consciousness.  The  material  may  still  have  been,
perhaps  must  have  been,  provided  by  the  consciousness,
whether  known  or  unknown  to  itself,  but  the  finished
product,  in  its  novelty,  its  inexhaustible  numbers,  its
caprice,  its  oddity,  its  refractoriness  to  control,  its  qualities
of  various  unexpectedness,  its  beauty  and  its  unforeseen
reactions  on  the  spectator,  all  point  to  the  brain  as  the
last  term,  and  to  somewhat  else  as  the  "  only  begetter  "
of  the  visions.  It  is  these  quahties  which  lead  one
person  to  say  "  an  imaginative  mind,  working  subcon-
sciously "  makes  the  vision  ^  while  another  says  "  no
possible  approximation  by  imagination," — that  is,  by  the
conscious  imagination  as  exercised  voluntarily  by  the
beholder.  2

It  was,  as  Myers  has  pointed  out,  greatly  to  the  credit
of  Sir  John  Herschel's  penetrating  mind  that  long  before  ^
any  theory  of  a  subliminal  or  subconscious  stratum  had
been  formulated  he  should  have  felt  his  way,  by  means
of  his  hjrpnagogic  experience  alone,  to  this  solution.
"  What  are  these  geometrical  spectra  ?  "  he  asks,  and
replies,  not  dreams,  for  the  mind  is  active  ;  not  retinal
impressions,  or  memory  images,  for  "  memory  does  not
produce  its  effect  by  creating  before  the  eyes  a  visible
picture  of  the  object  remembered  "  ;  and  goes  on  to
reason  that  since  the  conception  of  a  regular  geometrical
pattern  implies  the  exercise  of  thought  and  intelligence,
we  have  evidence  here  of  "a  thought,  an  intelligence,
working  within  our  own  organisation  distinct  from  that
of  our  own  personality."  Nearly  thirty  years  on  *  Gurney
referred  to  the  same  experiences  as  showing  "  an  immense
amount  of  high  creative  work — of  what  in  psychical  terms

1  S.  M.  B.  in  Occult  Review.

'Mrs.  Macdonald.  Cp.  also  Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  IX.  p.  121:  "not  im-
agination at  all,  but  entirely  outside  my  mental  action  "  ;  Mr.  Fielding-
Ould,  "  not  images  conceived  by  the  imagination  "  ;  Mrs.  Amold-Forster,
"  independent  of  any  effort  of  imagination,"  etc.

^  In  1858,  addressing  the  Philosophical  Society  of  Leeds.

*Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  III.  p.  185  (1886);  and  Phantasms,  vol.  i.  492.


392


J^.  E.  Leaning.


we  should  call  paf  excellence  the  work  of  the  imagination."
In  considering  the  theory  of  retinal  causation  he  remarks
that  where  points,  streaks  and  spangles  occur,  there  is  no
doubt  about  their  source  in  the  retina,  but  adds  "it  is
not  equally  safe  to  conclude  that  the  process  must  be  the
same  for  cases  where  the  points,  streaks,  and  spangles  are
absent."  ^  Myers  attributes  the  specific  quahties  to  the
general  heightening  of  faculty  which  he  finds  evidence  for
in  dream-phenomena,  of  which  the  hypnagogic  condition  is,
so  to  speak,  the  broad  threshold.  In  the  passing  over
there  is  an  increase  of  susceptibility  to  those  elements
which  we  possess  but  which  do  not  find  their  way  to  con-
sciousness in  the  waking  state  ;  elements  of  "  high  creative
work "  which  can  be  relatively  compared  to  the  inspired
moments  of  genius.-  Greenwood's  experience  supports  this
in  a  very  high  degree,  and  illustrates  the  theory  he  him-
self deduced  from  it,  that  all  the  mental  faculties  are
"  lifted  into  a  higher  range  of  freedom,"  and  that  among
them  imagination  is  the  teaching  and  revealing  power.
In  his  case  it  was  exceptionally  so,  for  no  one  else  has
written  of  the  countenances  so  forcibly,  or  has  told  us
that  "  no  human  face  that  ever  was  seen,  I  am  sure,
displayed  these  emotions  with  a  comparable  fullness  and
intensity."  More  than  one  other  writer  has  felt  impressed
with  the  importance  of  the  "  borderland  "  visions  in  con-
nection wdth  studies  of  the  secondary  consciousness.'
Hyslop  notes  that  he  discovered  by  their  disappearing
abruptly  instead  of  through  real  sleep  that  various  func-
tions of  the  mind  may  be  associated  and  dissociated
in  different  degrees,  self -consciousness  remaining  "  when
other  senses  and  centres  were  evidently  asleep."  *

H.  B.  Alexander,  after  a  careful  analysis  of  much  self-
observed  data,  reaches  three  conclusions  of  value,  which
agree  with,  biit  extend  beyond,  the  foregoing  authorities.
The  first  is  that  though  retinal  stimulus  may  be  a  fur-

'  Phantasms,  vol.  i.  390,  473.

-  See  Human  Personality,  cli.  iii.  (Cenius)  and  ch.  iv.  §  405  (vol.  i.).
3  See  Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  271  ; Mre.  Arnold -Forster,  chaps,  xi.
and  xii.  op.  cit.

*Proc.  Amer.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  II.  p.  389.  ;• ' , '. '  V . ,  »


XCIV.] introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  393


thering  condition,  the  images  are  not  of  peripheral  origin,
since  "  there  is  no  discoverable,  nor  indeed  conceivable,
relation  between  such  stimulation  and  the  objects  per-
ceived," and  when  they  are  of  auditory  form,  still  less
does  the  eye  arouse  them.  Secondly,  that  it  is  self-evident
that  not  being  memories,  nor  things  seen  or  previously
imagined,  they  are  mental  constructs ;  and  thirdly,  that
they  are  the  work  of  a  highly  differentiated  mental  com-
partment, without  any  apparent  connection,  emotional  or
voMtional,  with  the  aims,  interests  or  feelings  of  the
person  concerned. ^ ,.  ,,....  „

XVII.  The  Application  of  Theory.

With  this  conclusion  we  evidently  reach  the  opposite
extreme  to  the  theory  of  entoptic  causation.  What
becomes  obvious,  on  a  consideration  of  the  whole  range  of
hypnagogic  phenomena  is  that  they  also  present  every
gradation  between  the  two  interpretations.  As  conscious-
ness passes  from  the  fully  waking  to  the  fully  sleeping
state,  every  step,  every  change  in  the  accompanying
phenomena  has  been  noted,  some  by  one  observer,  some
by  another,  and  placing  them  in  series  we  can  get  an  idea
of  the  process  as  a  whole.  In  his  analysis  of  visual
activities  Myers  ^  places  upon  the  outward  going  line
(terminating  in  physical  sight)  the  "  entoptic  glimmerings,"
and  upon  the  inward  going  line  (terminating  in  clairvoy-
ance) the  hypnagogic  visions,  which  he  assigns  as  a
"  marked  and  peculiar  development  "  of  imagination-
images,  placing  below  them  only  the  simplest  type  of
internal  vision,  memory-images,  and  above  them  sublmiinal
visualisations  such  as  the  crystal  makes  objective.  The
emphatic  way  m  which  many  hypnagogists  distinguish
between  memory-images  (which  may  be  taken  as  the
base-line  familiar  to  us  all)  between  imagination-images
or  visualisations  (in  which  some  of  them  are  weak),
and  again  between  entoptic  glimmerings  as  such  ("  ideo-

»Proc.  Anier.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  III.  p.  G2'J.

*Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  pp.  528-533.  Section  xx.  of  the  chapter  -
on  Sensory  Automatism.


394  F.  E.  Leaning.  '  [part

retinal  lights,"  sparks,  flashes,  etc.)  and  the  hypnagogic
pictures,  well  support  the  place  which  Myers  gives  them,
as  does  also  the  comparison  with  crystal- visions.

There  is  a  second  series  of  distinctions  which  observers
note.  Mrs.  Amold-Forster  has  drawn  attention  to  the
ear  her  and  later  features  of  "  borderland  "  sensations.  It
is  clear  that  some  people  only  know  (or  remember)  the
earlier,  while  others  either  pass  too  rapidly  over  them  or
are  too  much  impressed  by  the  later,  to  refer  to  them.
To  this  earlier  stage  we  may  attribute  some  of  the
"  process  "  pictures  which  can  be  watched  forming,  which
reproduce  objects  or  scenes  seen  during  the  day,  which
are  incomplete,  lack  movement,  are  less  iUumined,  in  some
cases  not  very  distinct,  and  in  particular  have  not  the
feeling  of  reahty.  People  who  say  that  they  always  knew
the  pictures  were  subjective,^  or  never  mistook  them  for
reality,"  or  who  refer  to  suggestions  of  the  conscious  im-
agination hi  connection  with  them,^  have  to  be  taken  as
speaking  of  this  earlier  stage  only.  So  long  as  conscious-
ness is  sufficiently  in  the  ascendant  to  permit  of  the
beholder  describing  aloud  what  is  passing,  or  actively
visualising  known  faces  for  purposes  of  comparison,  and
he  is  able  to  say  that  hundreds  of  times  he  has
succeeded  in  seeing  both  at  the  same  time,  one  in  his  eye,
the  conjured-up  one  in  his  head,*  it  is  clear  from  the
descriptions  themselves  that  they  are  nearer  the  beginning
of  the  hypnagogic  period,  and  are  likely  therefore  to  owe
botli  form  and  quality  more  to  the  entoptic  gUmmerings
and  recent  visual  impressions  than  otherwise.  The  lowest
degree  of  internal  sight,  which  precedes  this  and  is  over
the  borderhne  but  only  just  over  it,  seems  to  be  indicated
by  a  writer^  who  says:  "I  have  sometimes  had  the  sen-
sation of  imaginary  faces,  etc.,  visualised  before  me  without
any  corresponding  impression  on  my  eyes."  That  is,  it  is
still  within  the  mind,  unrelated  to  the  eye  or  to  space,

^Jour.  <S'.P.i?.,  Vol.  IV.  p.  277  (No.  2).  '  "

^  Galton's  relative,  Maury,  and  many  others.

5  Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  IV.  p.  263.  *  Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  159.
^Jour.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  295.


xciv,] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  395

and  yet  carrying  something  with  it  which  indefinably
separates  it  from  the  memory  and  imagination  images
which  lie  adjacent  to  it.

When  the  point  has  been  insensibly  reached  which
divides  the  earher  from  the  later  stage,  subliminal  visuaHsa-
tion  comes  into  full  play.  Memory  still  registers  freely,
but  too  much  attention  is  fatal ;  watching,  we  are  often
told,  makes  the  picture  disappear,  perhaps  because  it  is
unconsciously  productive  of  a  slight  muscular  strain  on  the
eye  which  interferes  with  the  necessary  passivity.  The
pictures  are  now  markedly  different  and  superior,  so  that
the  various  observers  ^  have  commented  on  the  two  kinds
that  occur.  They  are  seen  as  instantaneously  complete,
vivid  in  light  and  colour,  more  abundant  in  detail,  and
displaying  movement  within  themselves  (as  distinct  from
change  of  subject-matter,  which  goes  on  all  the  time).
One  hypnagogist  has  remarked  that  movement  never  takes
place  while  he  is  sufficiently  awake  to  remember  it  ;  and
another,  that  the  nearer  to  sleep  the  more  vivid  and
living  the  picture  becomes.  Most  significant  of  all  is  a
difference  of  quahty  in  the  seeing.  It  is  possible  that  the
high  illumination,  the  richness  of  colouring,  and  the  life-
movement  are  inherent  in  the  pictures  themselves  ;  but
the  extreme  distinctness,  coupled  with  the  miniature  scale
so  often  prevalent,''  lead  by  more  than  inference  to  the
conclusion  that  internal  sight  is  superior  to  either  the
physical  or  mental  as  known  to  ordinary  consciousness.
The  "  highly  differentiated  mental  compartment "  whence
the  pictures  proceed  is  furnished  with  an  eye  of  its  own,
an  eye  which  sees  behind  as  well  as  before,  and  is  other-
wise the  fitting  instrument  for  the  enjoyment  of  that
"immense  amount  of  high  creative  work"  which  Gurney
considered  the  hypnagogic  experiences  to  bear  witness  to.

iMr.  Fielding-Ould,  Mr.  J.  W.  Macdonald,  Miss  Ida  Wild,  S.  M.  B.,
and  see  footnote  (5)  supra,  p.  394.

^  When  this  paper  was  read  at  a  private  meeting  of  the  S.P.R.,  on
Oct.  24,  1923,  a  member  present  spoke  of  having  seen  whole  regiments
of  soldiers  no  larger  than  pins'  heads,  but  that  every  button  and  detail
was  distinct.  For  the  pinhead  comparison  cf.  Phrenological  Journal,  vol,
V,  p.  319  ;  quoted  by  McNish,  p.  267,  see  p.  333,


396


7^.  E.  Leaning.


[part


And  whether  we  regard  them  as  incipient  materialisations,
as  face-formation  would  suggest,  or  as  clairvoyant  faculty
in  some  degree,  as  the  comparison  with  crystal  visions
would  suggest,  we  have  in  either  case  evidence  of  "a
thought,  an  intelligence,  working  within  our  own  organisa-
tion, distinct  from  our  own  personality,"  but  presenting  us
with  a  means  of  studying  it  not  to  be  despised.

XVIII.  The  Interior  Vision  :  Its  Mechanism.

We  locate  the  sight  of  the  eye  in  the  retina,  its  trans-
lation into  intelligible  units  of  perception  in  the  various
centres  of  the  brain,  visual  concepts  and  their  manipulation
in  the  highest  cerebral  areas,  but  where  can  we  locate  the
organ  of  vision  beyond  either  of  these  ?  It  is  of  a  third
order  which  is  even  less  related  to  the  physical  than  that
is  to  the  mental,  but  the  most  the  observer  can  do  is
often  only  to  state  that  he  is  using  neither  of  these,  but
that  his  inward  vision  "  is  quite  different "  from  both.
Stead,  for  instance,  after  his  two  visions  adds  :  "I  saw  all
that  without  opening  my  eyes,  nor  did  my  eyes  have
anything  to  do  with  it.  You  see  such  things  as  these,  as
it  were,  with  another  sense  which  is  more  inside  your  head
than  in  your  eyes.  This  experience  enabled  me  to  under-
stand better  how  it  was  that  clairvoyants  see  than  any
amount  of  disquisition.  The  pictures  .  .  .  simply  came  as
if  I  had  been  able  to  look  through  a  glass  at  what  was
occurring  somewhere  else  in  the  world."  Another  hypna-
gogist,!  who  had  frequent  but  not  regular  experience,
after  contrasting  the  results  of  voluntary  imaginings  and
prolonged  attention,  says  that  both  these  are  in  the  brain,
but  the  others  distinctly  not  so.  Where  people  speak  of
seeing  under  their  eyelids,  or  in  the  closed  eye,  it  is  some-
times obviously  a  figure  of  speech,  because  they  will  at
the  same  time  assign  a  given  distance  to  the  objects  seen.
Greenwood,  for  example,  uses  the  former  expression,  but
also  says  the  faces  were  usually  five  or  six  feet  away.
Another  speaks  of  two  feet  of  distance,  or  of  their  being
"  suffocatingly  close,"  or  "  Life-size  and  close  to  the  eyes,"

I  St.  James  s  Gazette,  Feb,  15,  1882,


xciv.] Introductory  StwJy  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  397

and  so  on,  which  can  only  mean  that  if  they  were  seen  as
objects  in  the  external  world  they  would  occupy  relatively
that  space  or  position.  Where  -this  is  appUed  to  faces,
we  may  have  an  external  objective  basis  for  it,  but  other-
wise we  have  here  the  interpretation  by  the  conscious  mind
of  a  product  of  the  subconscious,  which,  as  far  as  given
in  immediate  experience,  must  be  out  of  relation  to  any
spatial  conditions  ;  an  interpretation  such  as  is  continuously
apphed  to  the  minute  record  by  the  retinae  of  the  outer
world  round  us.  Thus  a  careful  hj^Dnagogic  recorder  ^
says  that  the  landscapes  she  sees  apparentlj^  mside  her
head  are  not  on  the  closed  eyehds,  and  are  "  perceived  by
something  within,"  just  as  Stead  says.  And  it  seems  that
this  "  something  within "  is  not  only  to  be  taken  as
"more  inside  your  head,"  but  within  as  related  to  con-
sciousness. J

The  existence  of  a  function  impUes,  if  it  does  not
create,  the  organ  whicli  it  uses,  and  the  conception  of
evolution  implies  a  successive  development  of  organs  to
serve  the  widening  response  of  the  creature  to  its  environ-
ment. Professor  Arthur  Keith  has  said  recently  ^  that
new  human  characters  are  foreshadowed  in  developmental
stages  passed  through  by  the  yoang  of  anthropoid  apes.
Whether  young  apes  have  hypnagogic  visions  we  cannot
teU,  but  we  see  that  our  own  young  have  them  ;  that
they  are  transitional,  passing  away  with  youth  ;  and  that
in  the  smaU  proportion  who  preserve  the  power,  it  acts
intermittentlj'.  AU  this  is  in  accordance  -^vith  the  gradual
development  of  a  new  characteristic.  Evidence  that  some
such  thing  exists,  some  specifically  visual  form  of  crypt-
sesthesia,  say,  is  recognised  in  all  clairvoyant  experience  ;  and
though  this  is  not  the  place  to  enlarge  upon  that,  it  may
be  permitted  to  indicate  the  directions  in  which  a  nucleus
of  facts  exists  that  bear  upon  the  point.

We  have  then  :  (a)  The  physiological  fact  of  a  pineal
gland.  '■  the  function  of  which,  if  it  have  any,  is  whoUy
unknown,  but  which,  as  the  remains  of  a  Cyclopean  eye

iJowr.  S.P.B.,  Vol.  XXI.  p.  74  (Apr.  1923).

2  On  June  27th,  1923,  in  the  Huxley  Lecture,  delivered  at  Charing
Cross  Medical  School. See  Nature,  Aug. 18, 1923  (Supplement).


398


F.  E.  Leaning.  ' ^  • ^  [pakt


possessed  by  some  remote  ancestor  of  the  Vertebrata,  has
lost  none  of  its  interest  "  says  Huxley.^  {b)  The  fact  that
certain  persons  born  bhnd,  or  becoming  so  accidentally,
or  blindfolded,  can  yet  exercise  some  form  of  perceptivity,
and  that  both  veridically  and  by  way  of  vivid  hallucina-
tions. ^  (c)  The  fact  that  in  certain  instances  the  seeing  of
hallucinations  by  people  not  blind  is  accompanied  by  pain,
and  that  the  pain  is  locaUsed  in  the  frontal  region,  be-
tween the  eyes,  and  over  the  brows. ^  The  local  sensations
of  persons  of  psychic  temperament  are  deserving  of  a
study  in  themselves.  (d)  To  these  may  be  added  a  few
instances  of  distressing  sensations  occasioned  by  crystal-
gazing,  which  although  spontaneous  is  also  partly  experi-
mental. The  cases  are  few,  but  their  existence  is  signi-
ficant,* and  we  find  the  same  region  of  the  head  affected.

(e)  Lastly,  for  what  it  may  be  worth,  I  will  give  three
statements  made  by  psychics,  one  the  subject  of  an  early
investigator  of  "  Animal  Magnetism,"  quoted  by  Du  Prel,
one a correspondent  of  my  own,  and  one  a  writer  on

^Method  and  Results,  pp.  189,  213  (1898);  see  also  Huxley's  Elemen-
tary Biology,  p.  35  (1888).

2  McNish,  op.  cit.,  p.  255 ;  Miiller,  vol.  ii.  p.  1396 ;  James,  W.,  Prin-
ciples of  Psychology,  vol.  ii.  p.  323  ;  Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  Proc.  S.P.R.,
Vol.  VII.  pp.  126-128;  Honeyman,  J.,  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XVIII.  p.  308
(ease  in  full)  ;  Villey,  P.,  Le  Monde  des  Aveugles ;  Prof.  Farigoule  [i.e.
Jules  Romains],  Eyeless  Sight  (Putnams,  1923).  See  also  Psyche,  vol.  iv.
pp. 191,  371  (criticism).

Myers,  in  Human  Personality,  vol.  ii.  p.  563  (934  A)  gives  the  case
of  the  Rev.  C.  B.  Sanders'  clairvoyance  attended  by  "  excruciating
pain  "  and  opening  of  the  central  sviture  ;  McNish,  op.  cit.,  p.  267,  gives
a  group  of  cases,  and  cf.  his  own  violent  headache  during  the  whole  of
the  theatre  vision.

*  Mrs.  de  Morgan,  From  Matter  to  Spirit,  p.  110,  finds  a  resemblance
to  the  effects  which  would  be  produced  by  a  powerful  mesmeriser,  who
makes  the  area  between  the  eyes  a  point  of  concentration  ;  Miss  A's
eyes  would  stream  with  tears  {Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  VIII.  p.  500)  ;  Mr.  E.
Dawson  Rogers's  percipient  gave  up  the  attempt  because  of  the  "  painful
sensation  of  pressure  on  the  forehead  "  {Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  V.  p.  520,
footnote)  ;  Warcollier's  subject  had  only  a  strong  inclination  to  sleep.
These  are,  however,  the  only  cases  of  the  kind  I  can  find.  WarcoUier
himself  {La  Telipathie,  p.  79)  localises  his  illusions  in  the  prefrontal
region,  at  the  root  of  the  nose,  and  the  optjc  thalamus  ("  a  I'entrecroise-.
ment  des  nerfs  opticjues  "),


xciv.] Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  399

occultism,  showing  the  agreement  between  widely  separated
witnesses.  "  A  somnambule,"  says  the  first  of  these/  "  on
being  asked  what  she  saw  (i.e.  of  the  internal  parts  of  the
body)  answered  '  All  that  I  will,  except  the  stomach,  and
part  of  the  forehead  above  the  nose,  with  which  the  ray  of
perception  proceeding  from  the  stomach  is  in  connection.'  "
My  correspondent  declares  that  she  has  "  twice  seen  in
living  human  beings  a  third  eye  in  the  centre  of  the  fore-
head "  ;  and  Mr.  Cyril  Scott  writes  2  that  "  Trained  clair-
voyants are  conscious  of  a  certain  activity  .  .  .  between  the
eyes,  just  above  the  bridge  of  the  nose."

These  items  may  seem  to  form  a  somewhat  miscellaneous
and  bizarre  group,  but  they  admit  of  being  synthesized,
in  the  direction  of  an  organ  of  clairvoyance  situated  on
the  median  line,^  capricious  in  its  action,  not  taking  kindly
to  the  simultaneous  activity  of  the  physical  eye  (hence
tears,  sense  of  pressure,  etc.)  perhaps  on  account  of  the
draw  on  nervous  energy,  less  disturbed  by  mental  visual-
isation, but  at  its  best  when  brain  and  eye  and  mind  are
most  quiescent,  and  capable  of  being  excited  or  developed
by  conscious  practices  directed  towards  that  end.  So  far,
its  appearance  in  the  hypnagogic  state  ;  but  if  a  wider
view,  embracing  mesmeric  and  hypnotic  phenomena,  natural
somnambuHsm,  and  vision-producing  drugs,  were  taken  into
consideration,  possibly  much  more  could  be  adduced.

XIX.  Sources  Discussed.

We  have  considered  so  far  two  of  the  main  aspects
presented  by  hypnagogic  phenomena  :  that  is,  what  people
see,  which  is  easy  and  for  which  we  have  a  fair  amount
of  data,  and  how  they  see,  which  is  more  problematical
and  for  which  we  have  conflicting  and  scanty  data  only.
A  third  question  is,  whence  come  the  things  they  see  ?  and

^  Du Prel,  Dr.  C, Philosophy of  Mysticism,  vol.  i.  p. 227,  quoting
Kieser  in  Archiv  fur  den  Thierischen  Magnetismus,  vol.  iv.  pp.  2,  272.
2  Occult  Review  (May  1916),  p.  269.

^  See  Baraduc,  H.,  Les  Vibrations  de  la  Vitalite  Hmnaine  (Paris,  1904),
Plates  VII.,  XIII.,  XXI.,  etc.,  and  Prof.  Alrutz's  experiments  in  Proc,
S^^P.fi.,  Vol,  XXXII.  p.  159.


400  F.  E.  Leaning:  ' v.  -'  -  [part

this  is  but  little  more  satisfactory  than  the  second.  Almost
the  only  light  we  have  on  the  subject  is  by  the  analogous
but  more  developed  phenomena  of  the  crystal  visions,
which  have  a  probably  wider  range  than  the  personal  life
of  the  scryer  alone  would  provide.  That  range  includes
the  mental  images  in  other  minds,  and  the  only  corres-
ponding hj^nagogic  experiences  (which  are  the  result  of
experimental  methods)  have  been  contributed  by  M.  War-
collier.  All  other  experiments  had  been  in  the  direction
of  volitional  control,  or  else  auto-suggestion,  the  percipient
acting  practically  as  his  own  agent.  But  it  occurred  to
M.  WarcoUier  to  enlist  someone  else  as  agent,  when  he
himself  was  in  the  suggestible  hypnagogic  condition.  There
were  difficulties  and  drawbacks,  such  as,  in  some  cases,  an
ill-chosen  hour,  or  a  pressure  of  affairs,  or  the  weariness
and  even  illness  of  one  or  other  of  the  persons  concerned.
Yet  with  praiseworthy  perseverance  he  continued  over  a
period  of  some  three  years,  not  always  with  the  same
agent,  and  tabulated  and  analysed  the  results.  Obviously
this  was  a  species  of  thought-transference  ;  and  it  had  the
disadvantages  which  always  accompany  such  experiments  ;
that  is,  it  involved  dehberate  action  at  a  fixed  hour  and
corresponding  expectation.  Wherever  conscious  direction
of  the  mental  faculties  takes  place  there  is  a  gain  in
precision  and  a  loss  in  richness  of  content  ;  the  "  high
creative  work "  in  which  the  unshackled  subliminal
imagination  freely  indulges  suffers  serious  limitation  and
impoverishment.  But  true  telepathy,  in  the  form  of  spon-
taneous impressions,  sometimes  managed  to  mingle  with
the  intended  messages  ;  its  presence  was  proved  in  the
form  of  that  "  perversity  "  which  has  previously  been
referred  to.  Thus  M.  B.,  acting  as  agent,  had  the  curious
idea  of  trying  to  transmit  attitudes  simultaneously  with
ideas,  and  on  a  Sunday  morning  ^  placed  himself  at  the
appointed  time,  7.0  a.m.,  in  a  position  of  devotion  in  an
arm  chair,  concentrating  his  mind  on  the  word  prayer.
But  what  his  friend  received  was  the  picture  of  a  curtain

^  La  Telepathie,  p.  222.  The  whole  of  chap,  vii.,  as  well  as  part  of
chap,  iii.,  deals  expressly  with  the  hypnagogic  period,  but  the  author
admits  that  the  results  of  his  experience  are  mediocre  (p.  191).


xciv.] Iniroduciory  Study  of  Hypnagogic  Phenomena  401

in  heavy  dark  material,  red  predominating,  and  caught
back  by  a  tie  ;  also  the  number  14,  as  though  written  on
a  blackboard.  Now  there  was  just  such  a  curtain  in  a
doorway  in  M.  B.'s  room,  and  the  number  of  the  room
was  14.  M.  B.  was  certainly  not  thinldng  of  this  at  the
time,  nor  regarding  the  curtain,  for  his  eyes  were  cast  up
"  au  del.'"  In  the  series  in  which  this  took  place  (the
fifth)  there  were  twelve  trials,  and  the  proportion  of  suc-
cesses was  twenty  per  cent.  ;  in  the  second  series  there
were  twenty-two  trials  and  no  results  at  all.  This  in-
equality with  different  agents  makes  a  general  percentage
on  the  whole  very  misleading  ;  and,  in  any  case,  however
large  a  proportion  of  successes  or  coincidences  might  occur,
it  does  not  prove  that  where  there  is  a  vision  there  is  an
unknown  agent  producing  it.  On  the  other  hand,  we
know  that  the  susceptible  subconscious  mind  can  pick  up
visual  images  of  all  sorts  from  the  mental  atmosphere  of
its  neighbours,  and  that  the  remotest  link  is  sometimes
sufficient  to  enable  it  to  do  so.  Thus  some  of  the  unre-
cognised scenes,  at  least,  may  have  such  a  source  ;  al-
though the  amount  of  detail  and  the  supreme  distinctness
with  which  they  are  seen  seem  less  likely  to  admit  of
their  being  merely  derived  from  some  one  else's  mental
images  than  of  their  being  derived  from  the  actual
scenes  themselves.  And  the  panoramic  type  of  moving
picture  is  most  of  all  like  reahty.  IVIr.  de  Bray  has
propoimded  the  idea  that  everyone's  brain  is  producing
a  stream  of  pictures  all  the  time,  which  become  visible  in
the  hypnagogic  state  ;  but  this  reasoning  rests  on  the
rather  slender  ground  that  some  people — one  in  three,  if
our  calculation  be  correct — sometimes  see  the  pictures,  and
that  only  at  undefined  periods  and  not  continuously  ;  and
yet  all  men  everywhere  are  certainly  drowsy  at  least  once
a  day.  A  very  large  number  of  visions,  either  of  this
sort  or  as  a  series  of  detached  objects,  must  certainly  be
put  down  to  subconscious  memory,  partly  in  view  of  the
fact  that  at  every  waking  hour  since  our  birth  scenes  of
some  sort  have  been  in  progress  before  us,  and  with  the
power  to  comprehend  pictures  (in  books  and  elsewhere)
^nd  later  on,  to  visualise  the  thousand  descriptive  scenes


402  F.  E.  Leaning.  [part

in  fiction,  travels,  and  so  on,  the  number  is  increased
possibly  to  millions.  Where  these  records  are — whether  as
older  physiologists  think  they  are  somehow  packed  up  in
the  cells  of  the  brain,  or  whether  that  is  not,  on  any
computation,  an  inadequate  hypothesis,  as  some  think  ^ —
we  cannot  prove.  But  wherever  the  mental  workshop  is,
there  the  mental  warehouse  must  be  from  which  the
materials  are  drawn,  and  there  also  is  the  unknown  work-
man who  selects  the  brilliant,  the  pleasing,  or  the  surpris-
ing elements  which  entertain  the  every-day  consciousness
of  the  owner.  • ^  .-.

It  is  surely  the  same  source  whence  proceed  the  artistic,
or  literary,  or  intellectual  inspirations  which  are  reported
to  have  occurred  in  dreams  occasionally.  The  only  instance
which  can  fairly  be  ranked  with  these  as  definitely  hypna-
gogic is  that  of  Kekule's  vision  of  the  dance  of  the  atoms, ^
as  he  rode  home  late  at  night  from  Islington  to  Clapham
on  the  top  of  an  omnibus.  He  says  that  he  fell  into  a
reverie  and  saw  the  atoms  gambolling  before  his  eyes.
On  a  second  occasion  he  was  sitting  dozing  by  his  study
fire  and  tells  iis  that  his  mental  eye,  rendered  more  acute
by  repeated  visions  of  the  kind,  could  now  distinguish
larger  structures  ;  and  in  this  condition  he  beheld  further
and  more  elaborate  combinations,  long  rows  turning  and
twisting  Avith  snake-like  motion,  and  the  comprehension  of
a  further  theory  of  molecular  construction  struck  him  so
forcibly  that  he  says  "  as  if  by  a  flash  of  lightning  I
awoke."  It  is  the  hypnagogic  rather  than  the  actual
dream  state  that  is  indicated  by  this  sudden  return  to
consciousness  under  the  impact  of  an  idea.  But  it  must
be  admitted  that  in  the  case  of  a  scientist  whose  mind  was
continually  occupied  with  the  problems  proper  to  it,  as  in
this  instance  we  know  it  to  have  been,  a  good  deal  of
subconscious  incubation  inust  have  taken  place,  and  the
recognition  of  the  residts  is  rather  to  be  attributed  to  that
than  to  anything  in  the  nature  of  clairvoyance.

*  See  on  this  subject  a  penetrating  article  by  H.  F.  Saltmarsh,  "  Neuro-
grams  and  Specific  Response,"  in  Psyche,  vol.  iii.  (n.s.),  p.  .328  (April  1923).

^  Kekiile  Memorial  Lecture,  Jour.  Chem..  Soc,  Feb.  1898  ;  but  the  inci-
dent is  quoted  in  Proc.  Amer.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  III.  p.  672  (footnote).


xciv.  I Inlrodudory  Study  uf  Hypmigogic  PheiioUiena  4o3

In  all  discussiona  uf  these  phenomena  by  persons  who
examme  and  illustrate  them  from  their  own  experience,
the  theory  held  by  them  must  be  taken  into  account.
They  will  inevitably  tend  to  remember  and  emphasise
those  elements  which  support  the  theorj^  and  to  accept
such  in  the  experience  of  others,  while  passively  ignoring
others  which  do  not  lend  themselves  to  a  certain  inter-
pretation. And  for  this  reason  it  is  better  to  make  a  study
of  all  those  accounts  provided  by  people  who  have  no
theory  at  all,  but  merely  describe  carefully  what  they  see.
If,  as  I  conclude,  there  is  in  hypnagogic  experiences  a
complex  interplay  of  physical,  psychological,  and  psychic
factors  combined,  their  study  is  an  open  door  to  all  of
these  alike,  but  more  particularly  the  last,  as  having
received  so  much  less  attention  hitherto.


My  acknowledgements  are  due  to  the  Council  of  the
S.P.R.  for  permission  to  quote  certain  passages  from  the
Journal,  and  to  all  those  members  of  the  Society  who  have
given  me  assistance  and  advice ;  also  to  the  Editor  of
Light,  to  numerous  readers  and  private  correspondents,  and
to  Miss  Estelle  Stead.


XX.  A  BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF  HYPNAGOGIC  PHENOMENA.

A.  E.  [i.e.  George  Russell]. The  Candle  of  Vision,  p.  28.  1919

A. G. A. "  Faces  in  the  Dark." A  Case of  Picture
Memory. Light,  Feb.  24, 1923,  p.  117.

Aberceombie,  J.,  M.D.  Enquiries  Concerning  the  Intel-
lectual Powers,  pt.  iii.  final  section.  Spectral  Il-
lusions. 1830
Alexander,  H.  B.  The  Subconscious  in  the  Light  of
Dream  Imagery  and  Imaginative  Expression.  Proc.
Amer.  S.P.E.,  III.  623-634.  1909
Aristotle. De  Somniis,  c.  iii. Trans,  by  J.  I.  Beare,

Parva  Naturalia,  p.  462  (Oxford).  1908
Arnold-Forster,  Mrs.  H.  O. Studies  in  Dreams,  ch.  xii.  1921
Baillarger,  M.  J. De  I'lnfluence  de  I'etat  intermediaire
a  la  veille  et  au  Sommeil  sur  la  Production  et  la
Marche  des  Hallucinations. Ann.  Med-Psych.  du  Syst.
New., t.  vi. pp. 1-29, 168-195  ; included  in  Mem.
de r  Acad.- Roy. de Medecine, t. xii. pp.  476-516,
Des  Hallucinations.  1846
Binet,  a. La  Psychologic  du  Raisonnement,  p.  48.  1886

 AND Fjj;re, Charles. Animal Magnetism, p.  254

(Voluntary  Projection).  Ed.  iii.  1891
Bltjmroder. Ueber Einschlafen, Traum, Schlaf,  etc.

Friedrich's  Magazin,  iii.  p.  87.  1830
BosTOCK, J. An Elementary System of  Physiology,

vol.  iii.  p.  204.  1824-27
Brewster, Sir  D. Letters  on  Natural  Magic,  ii.,  iii.

pp. 19,  20,  21,  50,  51.  1832
Burdach, K. F. Die Physiologic, b. ix. §  600  in
bd.  iii.  p.  489  (Leipzig). In  Jourdan's  trans,  t.  v.
p.  205  (Paris).  1839
Cane,  Dr.  Francis  E. The  Physiology  of  Dreams.  The

Lancet  (Dec.  28,  1889),  p.  1330.
Cardano, H. De Vita Propria,  c. 37. Written  1576

(Paris).  1643

 De Varictate  Rerum,  lib.  viii. c.  43  (Basle).  1557

404


XCIV.]


Bibliography.


405


"■Clakke,  E.  H.,  M.D. Visions  :  A  Studv  of  False  Sight,

pp.  212-216. Ed.  V.  (Boston). "  1885

Delagb,  Yves.  Sur  le  Siege  et  la  Nature  des  images
hjrpnagogiques.  Comj^tes  Rendus  de  VAcad.  des
Sciences,  vol.  cxxxvi.  p.  731.  1903

De  Morgan,  Mrs.  E.  S.,  wife  of  Augustus  de  Morgan.

Three  Score  Years  and  Ten,  p.  65.  1895

De  Quince y,  Thoivias. Confessions  of  an  English  Opium- •  '  •
Eater. The  Pains  of  Opium,  Mem.  3,  p.  258  (Edin-
burgh edition),  1862.  (Original),  1821

Ellis,  Havelock. The  World  of  Dreams,  pp.  29-31.  1911

■  A  Note  on  Hypnagogic  Paramnesia. Mind,  n.s.  vi.

p.  284,  footnote  (2).  1897

 On  the  Phenomena  of  Mescal  Intoxication.  Lancet

(June  5,  1897),  p.  1541.  .  ^ :  '  -m.-.

Febriab, J., M.D. An Essay towards a Theory  of

Apparitions,  p.  16  (London).  1813

Fielding-Ould,  Rev.  F. Light.  (Feb.  24,  1923),  p.  122.

Flournoy,  Th. Des  Indes  a  la  Planete  Mars,  pp.  18,  19.

From  India  to  the  Planet  Mars,  p.  21.  1900

FoRMAN,  Dr.  Simon.  The  Autobiography  and  Personal
Diary  of,  p.  3.  Ed.  by  J.  0.  Halliwell  from  MS.
Ashm.  208  (Orig.  1600). (London).  1849

Galton, Francis. Inquiries into Human Faculty,  pp.

158-166.  1883

Goethe,  J.  W.  Wahrheit,  und  Dichtung,  Bk.  viii.  (Orig.)
1812-1831.

 Beitrage zur Morphologic und  Naturwissenschaft,

bd.  xiv.  p.  427. (Orig.)  1817-1824.

Goodbich-Freeb,  Miss  A. Proc.  S.P.K.,  VIII.  488.  1892

Greenwood, F. Imaguiation in Dreams, pp. 14-20.  1894
Orig.  in  St.  James's  Gazette,  Feb.  10,  1882; and  see
refs.  to  in  Proc.  S.P.R.,  III.  174;  Phantasms,  i.  473,
479  ;  De  Manaceine  241.

Griesinger,.  Wilhelm.  Die  Pathologie  und  Therapie  der
Psychischen  Krankheiten,  p.  78  (Stuttgart).  1845.  Trans.
by  Robertson  and  Rutherford,  1867,  Mental  Pathology
and  Therapeutics,  p.  94.

Grondahl,  I.  C. [Auditory  phen.,  meanmgless]  Psychic

Science,  vol.  iii.  p.  60,  61.  Apr.  1924

Gruithuisen,  F.  p.  Beitrage  zur  Physiognosie,  pp.  232,
256,  etc.  (Miinchen),  1812.  Quoted  in  Parish,  p.  128;
de  Man.  p.  279  ;  also  given  in  Ami.  Med.-Psy.,  vii.  9.  .


406


F.  E.  Leaning.


[PAET


GuRNEY,  E.,  Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  and  Podmore,  F.,  Phan-
tasms of  the  Living,  i.  390,  400  (Deering  case),  473,
474  (Willert  and  Macdonald  cases),  476,  479,  492
(1886)  ;  abridged  edition,  p.  300  (1918).

GuYON,  E. Sur  les  Hallucinations  Hypnagogiques  (Paris),  1903

Had  DON,  John. Scintillating  Particles. Med,  Times,  pp.

81-83.  June  1924

Hall,  Stanley. A  Study  of  Fears. Amer.  Jour,  of

Psychol,  p.  186.  1897

Heeeick, C. L. Hallucinations of Vision  in  Children.

Jour,  of  Comp.  Neurology.  July  1895

Herschel, Sib  John. Familiar Lectures on  Scientitic

Subjects,  p.  400. (On  Sensorial  Vision).  1866

HiBBERT,  Dr.  Samuel. Sketches  on  the  Philosophy  of

Apparitions. Ed.  ii.  pp.  8,  89  (Nicolai).  1825

HoBBES,  T. Leviathan,  pt.  i.  ch.  ii.  1651

Holland,  Sir  H. Chapters  on  Mental  Physiology,  p.  47

(Voluntary  projection).  1852

Holt,  Henry. Hypnagogic  Dreams. Unpartizan  Review,

XV.  p.  203.  '  1921

Hyslop,  Jas.  H.  Introduction  to  "  A  Further  Record  of
Experiments."  Proc.  Amer.  S.P.R.,  II.  389 ;  and  see
Ibid.  XIII.  487  (case). 1919.  1908

James, Prof. Wm. Principles  of Psychology, vol.  ii.

pp.  66,  84,  126.  1890

Jung,  C.  G. Papers  on  Analytical  Psychology,  pp.  61-64.  1916

Kekule,  F.  a.  Memorial  Lecture  on,  by  Prof.  Japp.
Jour.  Chem.  Soc,  Feb.  1898.

Ladd, G. T. a Contribution to the Psychology  of

Visual  Dreams. Mind,  n.s.  vol.  i.  p.  299.  1892

Lamb, Charles. Essays of Elia : Witches  and  Other

Night  Fears.  1823

Lang,  A.  Introduction  to  Thomas's  Crystal-Gazing,
p.  xxix.  (1905),  and  Cock  lane  and  Common  Sense,
p.  213.  1894

Leroy,  Raoul.  The  Syndi'ome  of  Lilliputian  Hallucina-
tions. Jour,  of  Nerv.  and  Ment.  Disea,ses,  Oct.  1922,
p.  235  ;  summarised  in  B.M.J.  (Epitome)  Nov.  4,
1922,  p.  61.

M.  M. Vision  Pictures. Light,  Ap.  3,  1920,  p.  112.
MacDonald.  J.  W. Light,  Feb.  24,  1923,  p.  122.
MacDougall,  Dr.  Wm. Art.  Hallucinations,  Encyclopcedia
Britannica,  ed.  xi.


XCIV.]


Bibliography.


407


MacNish, R., M.D. The  Philosophy  of  Sleep,  ed.  iii.

ch.  xiv.  1836

Manaceine,  Marie de. Sleep  :  its  .  .  .  Psychology,  pp.

195-223,  233-247  (Cont.  Sci.  Series,  vol.  xxxiv.).  1897

Maury,  Alfred.  Le  Sommeil  et  les  Reves,  ch.  iii  (1861),
ed.  iv.  (1878).  Includes  Les  Hallucinations  Hypnago-
giques,  Ann.  Med.-Psy.,  xi.  26-40  (Jan.  1848),  and  De
Certains  Faits  observes  entre  la  veille  et  le  Sommeil,
ihid.  (Apr.  1857).

Mee,  Arthur. Light,  Mar.  10,  1923,  p.  149.

Meyer,  G.  H. Untersuchungen  iiber  d.  Physiol,  d.  Nerv.,

pp.  238-241,  309.  1843

MiCHEA,  M. Des  Hallucinations. Mem.  Acad.  Roy.,  t.  xii.

pp.  250-267.  1846

Mitchell,  Dr.  S.  Weir.  Remarks  on  the  Effect  of  An-
helonium  Lewinii  (The  Mescal  Button).  Brit.  Med.
Jour.,  Dec.  5,  1896,  p.  1625.

Morrison,  Mrs.  M. Little  Incidents  Along  the  Way  of

Development. International  Psychic  Gazette,  p.  91. Mar.  1924

Myers,  F.  W.  H. Proc.  S.P.R.,  VIII.  369,  528.  Human

Personality,  i.  124,  125.  1901

MuLLEB,  J. Ueber  die  Phantastische  Gesichtserscheinungen,

p.  21  (Coblentz/.  1826

 Elements  of  Physiology,  2  vols. Trans,  by  W.  Baly.

Pp.  945,  1392-1397  (London).  1857

NicoLAi,  Friedbich.  Berliner  Monatschrift,  May,  1799  ;
Beispiel  einer  Erscheinung  mehrerer  Phantasmen
(Berhn).  1799

Occult  Review,  xiv.  282  ;  xv.  227  (S.  M.  B.)  Apr.  1912

Partridge,  G.  E. "  Reverie." Pedagogical  Seminary.

Apr.  1898

Parish,  E. Hallucinations  and  Illusions. See  Index  of

Subjects  (Cont.  Sci.  Series,  xxxii.).  1897

Pollock,  Sir  F. Spinoza,  p.  56,  Ed.  ii.  (London).  1912

Rowland,  Dr.  R.  Lilliputian  Hallucinations.  Brit.  Med.
Jour.,  Nov.  18,  1922,  p.  999.

Sanctis,  Sante  di. I  Sogni  e  il  Sonno,  p.  337.  1899

St.  James's  Gazette,  Feb.  10,  15,  20  (4  contributors).  1882

Savigny,  Lelorgne  de. Ann.  Med.-Psy.  iv.  314.  (See

App.  B.).  1844

SiDis,  Boris.  Normal  and  Abnormal  Psychology,  p.  153.  1914
Slight,  David,  M.B.,  Ch.B.  Hypnagogic  Phenomena.  Jour.

Abnormal  Psychol.  >  Oct. -Dec.  1924


408


F.  E.  Leaning.


[part


Smith,  J.  Barker,  L.R.C.P. General  Practitioner  (1900).
Med.  Times,  Aug.  1920-Ap.  1923  (Auditory).

Soc.  FOR  Psychical  Research.  Journal,  iv.  263,  276,
277,  278  ;  viii.  158,  170,  171,  243,  244,  269,  270,
295 ;  ix.  121  ;  x.  183 ;  xi.  95 ;  xx.  256 ;  xxi.  71-75,  95.

 Proceedings,  iii.  171,  174, 185  ;  vii.  315  ;  viii.  346,

369,  370,  453  (Flournoy),  479  (Wundt),  488  ;  x.  76,
80,  81,  82,  140,  141  ;  xi.  360  ;  xii.  281  ;  xviii.  308  ;
xxvi.  435.

Spiritual  Magazine. "  Sensorial  Vision  " and  Vision

through  the  Spiritual  Eye. Two  cases. Vol.  ii.  p.  163.  1861

Stead,  W.  T. More  Ghost  Stories,  p.  26.  1891

Stockinger,  Anna. Incidents. Jour.  Amer.  S.P.E.,  X.

p.  287.  1916

Stone^,  Dr.  D.  G. Phil.  Mag.  ■■■ • March  1894

Sully,  J. Illusions,  pp.  143,  184.  1881

Taine,  H.  a. De  I'lntelligence,  t.  i.  pp.  101-103  ;  hk.

ii.  ch.  i.  (Paris),  1870

Thomas,  Northcote  W. Crystal  Gazmg,  pp.  17,  18.  1905
TuKE,  Dr.  Daniel  Hack. Hallucinations  and  the  Sub-
jective Sensations  of  the  Sane. Brain,  vol.  xi.  p.  449.
Tweedale,  Violet. Ghosts  I  have  Seen,  pp.  14,  15.  1921
TuRVEY,  Vincent. Beginnings  of  Seership,  pp.  86.  1909
Vairus,  Leonardus. De  Fascino,  lib.  i.  cap.  ii.  p.  112

(Venice).  1589
Van  Eeden,  F. A  Study  of  Dreams. Proc.  S.P.R.,  XXVI.

435.  1912-13
Valentin, G. Lehrbuch  der  Phys.  d.  Menschens,  bd.

ii.  pt.  ii.  p.  584  (Brunswick).  1848
ViGNOLi,  Prof. Remarkable  Case  of  Resuscitation  of  an
Optical  Image. Nature,  October  5,  1893,  p.  545.

Walsh,  W.  S. The  Psychology  of  Dreams,  pp.  16,  173,

222,  etc.  1920

Warcollier,  R. La  Telepathic,  ch.  iii.  p.  56 ;  ch.  vii.

entire  (Paris).  1921

Watson, J. An Analysis of Some Personal  DreamS;

Proc.  Amer.  S.P.E.,  VII.  359,  361.  1913
Watts,  Mrs.  A. (Mrs.  Howitt  Watts).  Light,  vol.  ix.

176,  203  (1889);  Jour.  S.P.E.,  XI.  95  (1904).
■  Pioneers  of  the  Spiritual  Reformation  (Case  of  William

Howitt,  1824),  p.  196.  ,,,,  1883

Weygandt,  W.  Entstehung  d.  Traume,  p.  43.  1893
WiGAN,  Dr.  a.  L. The  Duality  of  the  Mind,  pp.  123-126.  1844


XCIV.]


bibliographij .


409


WooLLEY,  Dr.  v.  J.  Some  Auto^Suggested  Visions  as
Illustrating  Dream-Formation.  Proc.  XXVII.  390  ;  see
also  p.  401,  Miss  A.  Johnson's  study  of  the  same
case.

WuNDT,  W.  Grundziige  der  Phys.  Psych.,  ed.  iii.  bd.
ii.  p  432.  Trans,  by  E.  B.  Titchener  (1904),  Prin-
ciples of  Physiological  Psychology.


APPENDIX  A. r i-  ,r

Illcronymi  C'ardani  Mediolanensis  de  Propria  Vita  liber. Paris  :
MDCXLIII  (1643). Cap.  XXXVII. P.  160.

"  Videbam  ergo  imagines  diversas  quasi  corporum  aereorum.
(Constare  enim  videbantur  ex  annulis  minimis,  quales  sunt
loricarum,  cum  tamen  loricas  nunquam  eousque  vidissem)  ab
imo  lecti  angulo  dextro  ascendentes  per  semicirculum,  lente  &
in  sinistrum  occidentes,  ut  prorsus  non  apparerent  :  Arcium
domorum,  animalium,  equorum  cum  equitibus,  herbarum,  arborum,
instrumentorum  miisicorinu,  Theatrorum,  hominura  diversorum
habituum,  vestiumque  variarum,  tubicines  praecipue  cum  tubis
quasi  sonantibus,  nulla  tamen  vox  aut  sonus  exaudiebatur  :
praeterea  milites,  populos,  arva,  formasque  corporum,  usque  ad
banc  diem  mihi  invisas  :  lucos,  &  sylvas,  aliaque  quorum  non
memini,  quandoque  multarum  rerum  congeriem  simul  irruen-
tium,  non  tamen  ut  se  confunderent,  sed  ut  properarent.  Erant
autem  perspicua  ilia,  sed  non  ita  ut  proinde  esset,  ac  si  non
adessent,  nec  densa  ut  oculo  pervia  non  essent.  Sed  ipsi
circuli  opaci  erant  spatia  prorsus  perspicua.  Delectabar  autem
non  parum,  &  spectabam  intentus  haec  miraoula,  unde  mater-
tera  mea  semel  me  interrogavit  an  aliquid  viderem  1  Ego
quamvis  adeo  puer,  mecum  cogitabam,  si  satebor  indignabitur
quicquid  causam  praebet  hujus  ponpae,  subtrahetque  hoc  fes-
trum  :  aderant  enim  etiam  flores  varii,  &  quadrupedia,  &  volu-
cres  cujuscunque  generis,  sed  omnibus  tam  belle  fabricatis
deerat  color,  nam  erant  aerea :  itaque  ego  qui  nec  juvenis,
nec  senex  mentiri  solitus  sum,  diu  steti  antequam  dicerem  :
Tum  ilia,  quid  ergo  fill  tam  intente  respicis  ?  Non  memini  quid
responderim  ipsi,  existimo  autem  nihil  respondisse."


410


APPENDIX  B.


M.  Lelorgne  de  Savigny,  Member  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences,
wrote  the  following  during  the  last  period  of  the  "  fatal  neu-
rosis "  which  had  shown  its  first  signs  in  1817.  It  was  Avritten
in  1824,  printed  in  the  Journal  des  Debuts,  June  14,  1844,  and
reprinted  in  Ann.  Med. -Psychol,  t.  iv.,  1844,  p.  314.  He  was
unable  to  endure  the  light,  but  expressed  the  pathetic  hope
that  a  record  of  his  suffering  might  be  of  value  to  medical
science.

"  Dans  I'obscurite  toujours  plus  profonde  ou  elle  me  forgait  de
me  tenir,  elle  faisait  briUer  une  foule  d'images  vivement  colorees,
dont  les  emissions  successives,  reiterees  a  I'infini,  me  fatiguaient,
m'obsedaient  sans  cesse.  Bientot  des  phenomenes  impetueux,
lumineux,  ardents,  immenses,  remplissant  nuit  et  jour  tout
Fe.space  sous  mille  aspects  divers,  provoquerent  les  crises  les
plus  intenses.  D'autres  phenomenes,  distingues  des  precedents
moins  par  leur  formes  et  leurs  couleurs  que  par  leur  redoutable
influence,  vinrent  periodiquement  en  accroitre,  en  aggraver  les
effets.  Aux  sensations  propres  a  la  vue  s'unirent  un  entraine-
ment  rapide  en  haut,  en  bas,  en  tons  sens  ;  une  odeur  fetide  ;
des  sifflements  aigus,  des  sons  harmonieux  ou  discordants  ;  des
voix  humaines  chantant  ou  parlant,  declamant,  et  d'autres
bruits  [non  moins  otrange.  Le  sommeil  suspendait  rarement
ces  detestables  illusions,  sans  qu'ils  se  produisit  au  reveil  des
visions  mena9antes,  bizarres,  incomprehensibles.  Je  eiterai,
comme  une  des  plus  frequentes,  la  voiite  spacieuse,  formee
d'innombrables  faces  humaines,  toutes  egalement  expressives,
prenant  je  ne  sais  quel  air  inflexible,  et  fixant  sur  moi  des
regards  sinistres,"


i


■■■f^i'!i-;i  :■:

Mi:  .


■  ■  .  ;  .


SIR  W. F.  BARRETT,  F.R.S.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

PART  XCV.

IN  MEMORY  OF
SIR  WILLIAM  FLETCHER  BARRETT,  F.R.S.

In  the  death  of  Sir  WiEiam  Barrett,  which  occurred
quite  suddenly  on  May  26th,  at  the  age  of  81,  our  Society
has  to  mourn  the  loss  of  one  of  its  past  presidents  and
the  last  remaining  member  of  its  original  Council.  He  was,
moreover,  not  only  a  member  of  the  first  Council  but
very  definitely  a  founder  of  the  Society — ^one  may  say  the
founder,  for  I  believe  the  first  idea  of  founding  a  Society
at  aU  was  his.  It  was  the  stimulating  efi^ect  of  his  zeal
and  energy  that  largely  influenced  Sidgwick,  Myers  and
Gumey  to  renewed  interest  in  investigations  in  which
they,  like  himself,  had  done  a  considerable  amount  of
work  in  previous  years,  though  often  with  disappointing
results.  I  remember  his  coming  to  Cambridge  and  reading
to  us  a  large  budget  of  cases,  experimental  and  spontan-
eous, collected  by  himself  (largely  by  means  of  appeals
through  the  press)  and  pointing  to  what  we  now  call
telepathy.^  This  must,  I  think,  have  been  in  the  autumn
of  1881  and  the  visit  was,  I  suspect,  the  occasion  of
Sidgwick's  writing  to  a  friend  on  Sept.  4th,  1881,  "  The
great  event  that  has  occurred  to  me  is  that  my  interest
in Spiritualism has been  revived." The  formation  of  a

^  He  had  appealed  for  "trustworthy  evidence ...  of  cases  of  the  direct
action  of  one  mind  upon  another  giving  rise  to  an  apparent  transfusion
of  thought  or  feeling  ...  or  of  cases  where  .  .  .  perception  may  seeiu
to  occur  independent  of  the  ordinary  channels  of  sensation,"


414


Eleanor  Mildred  Sidgwick.


[part


Society  was  under  consideration  that  autumn  and  winter,
and  Professor  Barrett,  as  he  then  was,  was  engaged  in
stirring  up  interest  in  the  idea  in  various  quarters.  It
was  he  who  enhsted  in  its  favour  Professor  Balfour
Stewart  and,  directly  or  indirectly,  other  distinguished
early  members,  as  well  as  some  of  the  leading  Spiritualists
of  the  time.  As  Professor  Balfour  Stewart  said  in  his
Presidential  address  m  1885  when  givmg  a  brief  survey
of  the  growth  of  the  Society,  "  A  prelimmary  conference
was  convened  by  Professor  Barrett  (whom  we  honour  as
our  founder)  on  the  5th  and  6th  of  January  1882  .  .  .
The  Society  was  next  formally  constituted  on  the  20th  of
February."  Though  it  was  decided  that  Professor  Sidg-
wick should  be  the  first  President,  Sir  William  Barrett
was  naturally  made  a  Vice-President,  and  it  was  he  who,
in  the  capacity  of  honorary  secretary  to  the  committee
on  Thought  Readmg,  read  at  the  first  general  meeting
the  first  paper  contributed  to  the  Society  and  published
in  its  Proceedings.

His  interest  has  continued  unabated  ever  since.  He
has  been  a  diligent  attendant  at  meetings  of  the  Council,
notwithstanding  the  distance  he  had  to  travel  when
Professor  of  Physics  at  the  Royal  College  of  Science  for
Dublin — a  position  he  held  from  1873  to  1910 — and
notwithstandmg  the  strain  which  his  increasing  deafness
must  of  late  years  have  put  on  him  in  discussions  ;  and
he  has  been  the  moving  spirit  m  various  developments  of
the  Society's  work  and  organisation.  Thus  in  February
1884,  the  Journal  was  started  on  his  proposal  as  a  means
of  communication  between  the  Council  and  the  members
and  associates  of  the  Society,  as  well  as  of  members  with
each  other  ;  and  for  the  first  year  of  its  existence  he
acted  as  editor.

In  the  same  year  Professor  Barrett,  drawn  to  America
by  the  meeting  of  the  British  Association  at  Montreal,
was  able  to  interest  important  men  of  science  m  the
United  States  in  psychical  research  and  to  give  the  im-
petus required  for  the  foundation  of  a  Society  for  Psychical
Research  there.  It  was  estabhshed  in  January  1885  with
Professor Simon Newcomb as its first President.  Sir


xcv.]


Sir  William  Fletcher  Barrett.


415


William  Barrett's  own  account  of  the  work  he  did  so
successfully  in  actively  interesting  people  sufficiently  to
bring  about  this  result  may  be  found  in  the  first  volume
of  our  Journal  (pp.  172-6).  He  mamtamed  his  interest
in  the  work  on  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic  to  the
end  of  his  life,  corresponding  on  the  subject  with  friends
and  fellow  workers  both  in  the  United  States  and  in
Canada.  Recently  he  has  taken  a  keen  personal  interest
in  the  foundation  and  prospects  of  the  new  Boston
Society.

His  never-failing  desire  to  stimulate  interest  in  psychical
research  and  promote  associations  for  collective  inquiry
was  manifested  on  the  very  day  he  died  by  his  taking
the  chair  at  a  group  meeting  in  the  Society's  rooms,
arranged  by  Mr.  Trethewy,  with  a  view  to  "  collecting
information  about  the  practice  of  Spiritualism  in  foreign
countries."

In  earlier  days,  before  the  foundation  of  the  Society,
it  was  this  same  desire  to  interest  the  world  in  the
subject  of  our  inquiry  and  to  draw  other  workers  into
this  field  of  investigation,  which  prompted  him  to  read  a
paper  about  it  before  the  British  Association  at  Glasgow
in  1876,  in  which  he  urged  the  formation  of  a  committee
of  the  Association  to  examine  the  evidence  for  the  reality
of  the  alleged  phenomena.  It  annoyed  some  men  of
science  a  good  deal  at  the  time,  and  excited  somewhat
violent  controversy  in  the  Press.  But  it  undoubtedly  had
a  considerable  effect  in  promoting  the  interest  in  psychical
research  which  its  author  desired  to  create.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Sir  William  Barrett  had
in  a  remarkable  degree  a  power  of  stirring  up  in  others
interest  in  subjects  which  interested  himself.  Both  in
conversation  and  as  a  lecturer  he  was  very  successful
in  this,  not  only  in  psychical  research,  but  also,  I
believe,  in  experimental  physics,  the  subject  with  which
he  was  professionally  engaged  during  the  greater  part  of
his  life.  He  had  considerable  power  of  exposition,  both
as  a  lecturer  and  as  a  writer.  His  style  in  writing  is
lucid  and  pleasant,  and  his  arrangement  of  his  matter
clear and instructive. His little book on  Psychical


416


Eleanor  Mildred  Sidgivick.


[part


Research,  in  the  Home  University  Library,  though  neces-
sarily somewhat  out  of  date  now,  is  a  model  for  brief
but  clear  and  popular  treatment  of  a  complicated  subject,
and  he  produced  several  other  books  connected  with  our
work.^

But  I  think  what  most  gave  him  force  as  a  kind  of
prophet  was  his  great  eagerness  to  stimulate  enquiry  and
to  interest  people,  with  an  instinctive  perception  of  what
would  generally  interest  them.  Eagerness  such  as  his  had,
of  course,  its  drawbacks,  and  may  have  sometimes  caused
him  to  bring  forward  interesting  cases  before  they  had
been  fully  investigated  and  made  as  complete  evidentially
as  possible.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  his  keenness  brought
him  into  touch  with  cases  which  we  might  not  otherwise
have  heard  of,  and  enabled  him  to  stimulate  and  en-
courage friends  to  carry  out  experiments  which  might  not
otherwise  have  taken  place.  It  was,  for  instance,  partly
due  to  his  encouragement  that  Miss  Ramsden  and  Miss
Miles  carried  out  their  valuable  experiments  in  telepathy
at  a  distance.

I  am  not  attempting  to  give  any  history  of  Sir  William's
interest  in  Psychical  Research  or  of  the  work  in  it  done
by  him,  for  he  himself  told  us  about  it  in  the  paper  he
read  to  the  Society  less  than  a  year  ago — ia  June  1924 —
on  "  Some  Reminiscences  of  Fifty  Years  of  Psychical
Research,"  ^  and  what  I  should  have  to  say  would  be
largely  repetition.  But  a  few  words  should  be  said  of
his  scientific  work  unconnected  with  psychical  research.
He  was,  as  he  in  fact  tells  us  in  the  paper  just  referred
to,  Tyndall's  assistant  for  several  years  (1862-1867),  and
it  was  in  Tjudall's  laboratory  at  the  Royal  Institution
that  his  well-known  observations  on  sensitive  flames  were
first  made.  Later  in  his  own  laboratory  at  Dublin  he
made  other  investigations  and  discoveries.  Among  them
were  discoveries  of  alloys  of  iron,  at  least  one  of  which
has  proved  of  great  value.  He  also  made  observations
on  the  curious  behaviour  of  iron  near  the  critical  magnetic

1  On  the  Threshold  of  a  New  World  of  Thought,  1908  ;  On  Creative
Thought,  1910  ;  A  Study  of  Swedenhorg,  1912.

^  Proceeding n ,  vol.  xxxiv.  p.  275


xcv.]  Sir  William  Fletcher  Barrett.  417

point  and  investigations  into  entoptic  vision.  He  was
elected  a  Fellow  of  the  Royal  Society  in  1899.

Sir  William's  contributions  to  our  Proceedings  and
Journal  have  been  numerous,  and  deal  with  many,  indeed
most,  departments  of  psychical  research.  Hypnotism,
Telepathy  and  Telergy,  the  physical  phenomena  of  Spirit-
ualism, Poltergeists,  "  Reichenbach  phenomena "  with  the
possibility  of  a  magnetic  sense,  supernormal  communication
through  motor  automatism,  all  claimed  his  attention.
His  longest  and  probably  most  important  papers  in  Pro-
ceedings are  the  two  On  the  so  called  Divining  Bod,
published  in  Volumes  XIII.  and  XV.  They  constitute  a
treatise  on  the  subject  and  have  made  him  an  authority
on  it.  In  1900  his  provisional  conclusion  from  these  in-
vestigations (expressed  in  Vol.  XV.,  p.  311)  was  that  the
dowser's  success  arises  "  from  some  kind  of  transcendental
discernment  possessed  by  his  subconscious  self  " — from
clairvoyance  in  fact — which  through  subliminal  suggestion
causes  the  automatic  muscular  contractions  that  move  the
dowsing  rod.  This  provisional  conclusion  seems  to  have
developed  through  further  reflection  into  a  firm  conviction  ;
and  last  year,  in  the  "  Reminiscences  "  already  referred
to,  he  says  "  I  believe  that  it  [i.e.  dowsing]  affords  the
easiest  and  most  conclusive  evidence  that  a  supernormal
perceptive  power — akin  to  clairvoyance — exists."  We  under-
stand, however,  that  search  is  still  bemg  made  in  Germany
for  normal  physical  or  physiological  explanations  of  the
phenomena  of  dowsing.

On  May  6th,  at  the  last  meeting  of  the  Society  before
his  death,  Sir  WiUiam  was  the  reader  of  a  paper  "  On
an  Enquiry  into  a  Remarkable  Case,"  and  the  Journal
for  May  which  appeared  almost  on  the  day  of  his  death
contains  an  obituary  notice  of  Dr.  Sydney  Alrutz  of  Upsala,
in  whose  work  in  hypnotism  he  took  great  interest.  He
died,  therefore,  as  he  would  have  wished,  very  much  in
harness — working  for  psychical  research  to  the  last.

In  his  private  life  Sir  William  Barrett  was  a  man  of
warm  and  enduring  friendships.  He  had  a  devoted  sister
who  kept  house  for  him  for  many  years,  and  his  latest
years  were  rendered  very  happy  by  his  marriage  in  1916


418


Eleanor  Mildred  Sidgwich.


[part


to  Mrs.  Florence  Willie,  M.D.,  the  distinguished  surgeon
and  gynecologist.

In  conclusion,  it  only  remains  to  say,  that  those  of  us
who,  like  myself,  believe  that  our  Society  has  been  and
is  a  valuable  instrument  in  promoting  investigation  in
fields  neglected  by  orthodox  science  cannot  but  feel  much
gratitude  to  Sir  WiUiam  Barrett  to  whom  its  existence
is  so  largelj^  due,  and  who  also  began  "  the  accumula-
tion of  evidence  which  bids  fair  sooner  or  later  to  place
telepathy  among  the  established  truths  of  science."  When
that  forecast,  quoted  from  his  Presidential  address  to  the
Society  in  1904,'^  comes  true,  as  I  cannot  doubt  it  will,
Sir  William  Barrett  will  undoubtedly  and  deservedly  be
regarded  as  a  courageous  pioneer  in  jDerhaps  the  most  im-
portant branch  of  human  discovery.

Eleanor  Mildred  Sidgwick.  '

Proceeding f!,  vol.  xviii.,  pp.  241-2.


xcv.]


Monsieur  Camille  Flammanon.


419


IN  MEMORY  OF
MONSIEUR  CAMILLE  FLAMMARION.

We  have  to  record  with  great  regret  the  loss  of  another
former  President  of  the  Society,  also  a  well-known  man
of  science,  in  the  death  of  Monsieiir  Camille  Flammarion,
which  occurred  at  Juvisy  on  June  4,  1925,  at  the  age  of
eighty-three.  In  the  forty-three  years  of  its  existence
the  Society  has  had  four  Presidents  who  were  distinguished
citizens  of  foreign  countries  ;  one  American,  William  James,
and  three  Frenchmen,  Professor  Charles  Richet,  Professor
Henri  Bergson,  and  lastly  Camille  Flammarion,  whom  we
welcomed  not  only  for  his  own  sake,  but  as  strengthening
the  ties  that  already  bound  us  to  our  fellow-workers  in
France.

Monsieur  Flammarion  has  already  described  in  his
Presidential  Address  {Proc,  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXXIV.,  p.  1)
how  it  was  in  1861,  sixty-four  years  ago,  that  his  interest
in  psychical  research  was  first  stimulated  by  seeing  on
a  Paris  book-stall  Alan  Kardec's  Le  Livre  des  Esprits.
From  that  time  till  the  end  of  his  life  Ms  interest  never
flagged  and  he  became  the  author  of  several  widely-read
books  on  the  subject.  It  was,  however,  to  the  study  of
astronomy  that  his  life  was  mainly  devoted.  He  excelled
especially  in  setting  forth  the  results  of  astronomical
research  in  a  lucid  and  attractive  style,  intelligible  to
those  who  have  little  or  no  technical  knowledge  of  the
subject.  The  writer  of  the  Obituary  Notice  in  the
Times  said  of  him  :  "  He  was  indeed  aptly  named  '  The
Poet  of  the  Heavens,'  and  was  regarded  with  real  affection
by  immense  numbers  of  readers,  both  in  France  and
England,  who  owed  to  him  aU  their  knowledge  of  the
wonders  of  astronomy."  Something  of  his  power  of
bringing within the vision of the ordinary man  the


420  Monsieur  Camille  Flammarion.  [pabT

immense  vistas  which  astronomy  opens  out  may  be  felt  in
his  Presidential  Address  to  this  Society.  An  English
translation  of  the  Address  was,  as  many  of  our  members
will  recollect,  read  at  a  General  Meeting  of  the  Society
on  June  26,  1923,  by  Sir  William  Barrett,  who  had  been
for  many  years  on  terms  of  personal  friendship  with
Monsieur  Flammarion.

To  the  Society's  Journal  for  March,  1923  (Vol.  XXI.,
p.  45),  shortly  after  the  election  of  Monsieur  Flammarion
as  President,  Sir  William  Barrett  contributed  an  account
of  his  work,  from  which  the  following  passages  may  be
quoted  here  :

In  spite  of  his  great  age,  he  will  be  82  years  old  in  a
few  weeks,  his  intellectual  activity  is  undiminished.  Few,
if  an}',  scientific  men  have  written  so  many  books,  each
characterised  by  great  and  wide  learning  and  that  wonder-
ful lucidity  in  which  French  savants  excel.  His  last
treatise,  now  in  course  of  publication,  is  on  psychical
research,  and  entitled  La  Mort  et  son  Mystere,  and  is
divided  into  three  volumes,  viz.  1.  Avant  la  Mort ;  2.
Atitour  de  la  Mort  ;  and  3.  Apres  la  Mort  .  .  .

On  the  fly-leaf  of  Apres  la  Mort  is  given  a  list  of  some
of  the  many  psychical  works  M.  Flammarion  has  published.
His  best-known  book  is  Ulnconnu  et  les  problemes  psychi-
ques,  .  .  .  But  although  M.  Flammarion  has  been  studying
psychical  phenomena  for  fifty  years  his  life  work  has  been
astronomy,  and  his  papers  and  books  on  this  subject  have
had  an  immense  circulation  ;  e.g.  his  small  volume  entitled
Lumen  has  reached  a  circulation  of  70,000,  and  his  Reves
£toiles  no  less  than  142,000.  Besides  these  he  has  pub-
lished at  least  twenty  works  on  astronomy,  most  of  which
are  intended  to  bring  the  wonders  of  the  heavens  and  the
results  of  modern  astronomical  research  within  the  com-
prehension of  the  general  public.  In  addition  he  has
published  sixteen  books  on  general  science,  of  which  his
U Atmosphere ,  a  popular  treatise  on  meteorology,  is  the
best  laiown.  Then  he  has  written  at  least  half-a-dozen
books  on  speculative  science  and  philosophy,  such  as  La
pluralite  des  mondes  habites,  La  fin  du  monde,  etc.


xcv.]  Monsieur  Camille  Flarufnarion.  421

But  all  this  monumental  labour  has  been  subsidiary  to
his  work  at  the  Observatory  of  Juvisy,  which  he  founded
in  1883  and  still  superintends.  The  resume  of  his  astrono-
mical observations  and  papers  fills  two  pages  of  the
memorial  to  him  in  the  Bulletin  de  la  SociSte  Astronomique
de  France,  and  to  these  labours  must  be  added  the  editing
of  a  monthly  astronomical  review  which  M.  Flammarion
founded  in  1882.  With  such  a  wonderful  record  of
scientific  work  there  is  little  wonder  that  last  year  the
Council  of  the  French  Astronomical  Society  held  a  public
meeting  to  celebrate  the  80th  anniversary  of  M.  Flam-
marion's  birth.  At  this  meeting  the  great  amphitheatre
of  the  Sorbonne,  Avhich  holds  3000  persons,  was  found
too  small  for  the  multitude  who  wished  to  join  in  this
magnificent  celebration.  ...

Owing  to  his  great  age  and  to  his  other  pre -occupations
Monsieur  Flammarion  was  not  able  to  attend  any  meetings
of  the  Society  during  his  year  of  Office  as  President,  and  but
few  of  our  Members  can  have  had  any  personal  acquaint-
ance with  him.  But  an  impression  of  his  vigorous  and
alert  personality  can  be  gathered  from  the  photograph
which  was  reproduced  as  a  frontispiece  to  Vol.  XXXIV.
of  the  Proceedings.


422


Professor  Charles  Richet.


[PAET


DES  CONDITIONS  DE  LA  CERTITUDE.

Par  M.  Charles  Richet,  Propesseur  a
L'Universite  de  Paris.

En  vous  parlant  des  conditions  de  la  certitude,  il  semble
tout  d'abord  que  je  sois  bien  loin  de  I'objet  de  vos  etudes.
Pourtant  je  vous  connais.  Je  sais  quelles  sont  vos  actives
preoccupations.  Je  me  soQviens  encore  avec  emotion  de
I'accueil  favorable  que  vous  m'avez  accorde  quand,  il  y  a
deja  vingt  ans,  j'eus,  grace  a  votre  bienveillance,  I'honneur
d'etre  nomme  votre  President.  Alors — vous  vous  le  rap-
pelez  peut-etre — en  mon  adresse  presidentielle,  je  n'hesitai
pas  a  jeter  dans  le  monde  ce  mot  de  metapsychique  qui  a
fait  depuis  quelque  fortune.  Aussi  bien  restais-je  ce  jour
la  tout  a  fait  au  coeur  de  vos  anxietes  scientifiques
speciales.

Or,  aujourd'liui,  en  parlant  des  conditions  psychologiques
de  la  certitude,  il  parait  a  premiere  vue  que  je  m'ecarte
des  sujets  que  vous  abordez  d'ordinaire.  Cependant  il  n'en
est  rien.  Meme,  plus  je  reflechis,  plus  je  me  persuade  que
ce  qui  domine  notre  science — car  nous  avons  tous  ici  la
pretention  d'appeler  la  metapsychique  une  science — c'est
de  posseder  la  notion  precise  de  ce  qu'il  convient  d'appeler
la  certitude.

Je  n'aurai  garde  d'ailleurs  de  traiter  la  question  autre-
ment  qu'a  notre  point  de  vue  particulier.  Je  n'ignore  pas
en  effet  que  de  grands  philosophes  ont  ecrit  sur  la  certitude
des  livres  profonds,  et  imagine  de  savantes  theories,  depuis
Socrate  jusqu'a  Descartes,  depuis  Berkeley  jusqu'a  Kant,
depuis  Auguste  Comte  jusqu'a  Bergson,  mon  illustre  ami,
un  de  vos  anciens  presidents.

Je  me  proposerai  seulement  d'etudier  comment  et  dans
quelles  conditions  nous  pouvons  arriver  en  science  meta-
psychique a  acquerir  la  certitude.


xcv.]  I)es  Conditioyis  de  la  Certitude.  423

§  I. Il  est  des  Degbbs  dans  la  Certitude.

Tout  de  suite,  une  premiere  proposition  est  a  etablir,
qui  parait  paradoxale,  mais  qui  cependant,  j'espere,  ne
vous  paraitra  pas  contestable  ;  c'est  qu'il  n'y  a  pas  une
certitude,  mais  des  certitudes  tres  diverses.  Autrement  dit,
la  certitude  comporte  des  degres.  Maintes  verites  que
nous  regardons  comme  certaines,  et  meme  absolument
certaines,  se  presentent  a  nous  avec  quelque  hierarchie
dans  cette  certitude  meme.

Bien  entendu  la  certitude  ne  peut^pasj  porter  sur  les
jugements,  et  les  appreciations,  mais  sur  les  faits.  Notre
opinion  sur  les  bienfaits  ou  les  mefaits  de  Napoleon,  de
Louis  XIV,  de  Frederic  II,  est  sujette  a  de  teUes  con-
troverses  qu'il  n'y  a  pas  de  certitude.  De  meme  pour
les  arts.  Quoique  Rembrandt  me  paraisse  bien  superieur
a  Guido  Reni,  la  superiorite  de  Rembrandt  n'est  pas  une
certitude  ;  pas  plus  que  la  superiorite  de  Shakespeare  sur
Walter  Scott.

II  ne  peut  y  avoir  de  certitude  ni  dans  les  arts,  ni  dans
la  politique  ;  ni  meme,  helas  !  dans  nos  jugements  sur  les
hommes.

II  s'agit  seulement  de  la  certitude  des  faits.  Pour
prendre  un  exemple  simple,  j'examinerai  les  verites  elemen-
taires  du  calcul  des  probabiiites.  Mathematiquement,  ane
probabilite  tres  faible  n'est  jamais  une  certitude,  mais
rnoralement  il  n'en  est  pas  ainsi.  La  certitude  morale,
comme  on  dit,  ne  correspond  pas  du  tout  a  la  certitude
mathematique.  Quand  la  probabiUte  est  extremement
faible,  la  certitude  du  cas  contraire  devient  extremement
forte,  et  rnoralement  presque  absolue.  Au  jeu  de  la
roulette,  par  exemple,  la  probabilite  que  la  rouge  va  sortir
cinquante  fois  de  suite  est  tres  faible (^)^°,  c'est-a-dire  a

P^®^ ioo.oou!"ouo.ouo- J®  ^^^^  ^  P®^  P^®^  certain,

et  meme  tout  a  fait  certain,  que  la  rouge  ne  va  pas
sortir  50  fois  de  suite.  On  ne  I'a  jamais  vu.  On  n'a
meme  quelque  chance  de  voir  cette  extraordinaire  serie  que
si  Ton  joue  100  milliards  de  parties.  Et  cependant  la
certitude  n'est  pas  absolue.  D'abord  parce  q\ie  je  peux
tomber  sur  cette  faible  chance,  mais  surtout  parce  qu'il


424


Professor  Charles  Richet.


[part


s'agit  d'une  machine  humaine,  machine  qui  est  mise  en
mouvement  par  des  hommes,  machine  qui  n'est  pas  ideale-
ment  parfaite,  et  qui  par  consequent  comporte  un  defaut
tel  qu'elle  va  surtout  donner  des  boules  rouges.

D'ailleurs  il  est  evident  qu'avant  le  cinquantieme  coup,
quand  il  y  a  deja  49  rouges,  j'ai  exactement  autant  de
chances  d' avoir  49  rouges,  plus  une  noire,  que  50  rouges.
C'est  au  commencement  de  la  partie  qu'on  peut  affirmer
en  presque  absolue  certitude  qu'on  n'obtiendra  pas  50
boules  rouges  consecutives.

Et  tout  de  suite  nous  voyons  qu'U  y  a  des  degres  dans
la  certitude.  Car  si,  au  lieu  de  dire  50  boules  rouges,  j' avals
dit  500  boules  rouges,  la  certitude  que  je  ne  rencontrerai
pas  une  serie  de  500  boules  rouges  deviendrait  enormement
plus  forte  que  la  certitude  de  n'avoir  pas  une  s^rie  de  50
rouges.  On  est  moralement  certain  qu'on  n'aura  pas  50
rouges  consecutives,  mais  plus  certain  encore  qu'on  n'en
aura  pas  500.  On  n'aura  d'ailleurs  jamais  la  certitude
mathematique,  mais  seulement  la  certitude  morale.

De  fait,  dans  toutes  les  sciences,  math^matiques  ou
autres,  et  dans  la  pratique  habituelle  de  la  vie,  nous  nous
contentons  pour  notre  certitude  de  probabilites  bien  moins
faibles  que  ou  meme  {\f'',  ou  meme  (-|)^".

Mais  je  ne  veux  pas  prolonger  cette  discussion  qui  nous
entrainerait  trop  loin.  Je  reviendrai  d'aUleurs  sur  I'appU-
cation  du  calcul  des  probabilites  a  nos  recherches.  Pour  le
moment,  je  donnerai  d'autres  exemples,  afin  d'etablir  que,
meme  lorsqu'il  n'est  pas  question  de  hasard,  il  y  a  des
degres  dans  la  certitude,  et  je  chercherai  a  savoir  pourquoi.

Je  viens  de  Paris  et  je  suis  a  Londres.  J'ai  la  certitude
absolue  que  Paris  et  Londres  sont  des  vUles  reelles.
Quoique  je  n'aie  vu  ni  Calcutta,  ni  Sumatra,  ni  Valparaiso,
je  suis  tout  aussi  certain  que  ces  viUes  lointaines  existent.
Des  vaisseaux  en  arrivent  chaque  jour,  avec  des  lettres,  des
passagers,  des  marchandises.  On  peut  y  envoyer  ou  en
recevoir  des  telegrammes. La  certitude  est  complete.

Je  ne  suis  pas  moins  certain  que  Carthage  a  existe.  Car
on  en  voit  les  ruines,  et  tons  les  temoignages  des  his-
toriens  sont  la  pour  etabhr  qu'il  y  a  vingt  trois  siecles
existait  sur  la  rive  africaine  septentrionale  de  la,  Mediter-


xcv.]  Des  Conditions  de  la  Certitude.  4-25

ranee  une  grande  ville  appel6e  Carthage.  C'est  un  fait
d'absolue  certitude,  et  le  revoquer  en  doute  ce  serait  nier
toute  I'histoire  ancienne.  Cependant,  quelque  certaine  que
soit  la  realite  de  I'ancienne  Carthage,  ma  certitude  relative
a  Carthage  est  un  peu  moindre  que  ma  certitude  relative  a
Calcutta,  car  pour  Carthage  je  suis  force  de  m'en  rapporter
a  des  temoignages  historiques  ou  a  des  debris  de  pierres.

Remontons  a  des  temps  plus  anciens.  II  n'est  pas
douteux  qu'il  y  a  eu  en  Asie  Mineure  une  ville  de  Troie,
autour  de  laquelle  se  sont  Uvres  de  furieux  combats,
chantes  par  le  plus  grand  des  poetes.  Mais  les  ruines  en
ont  presque  entierement  disparu,  il  n'en  demeure  plus  que
de  vagues  vestiges.  Etiam  periere  ruinae.  De  Troie  il  ne
reste  plus  guere  que  I'lhade.  Or  on  peut  pretendre,  a
I'extreme  rigueur,  que  toute  la  poesie  d'Homere  n'est
qu'une  fiction.

Toutefois  ce  serait  faire  preuve  d'un  scepticisme  peu
pardonnable  que  de  nier  la  reahte  de  I'ancieime  Troie.
Comment  exphquer  non  seulement  Homere,  mais  Eschyle,
Euripide,  Sophocle,  Herodote,  et  toute  la  Htterature
grecque  ?  La  reahte  de  I'ancienne  Troie  est  une  certitude,
mais  une  certitude  d'ordre  inferieur  a  la  certitude  de
Carthage,  a  plus  forte  raison  a  la  certitude  de  Calcutta  ou
de  Paris.

Done,  il  eat  dans  les  certitudes  une  sorte  de  hierarchic.
Pourquoi  ? Faisons  cette  analyse.

Des  que  je  puis,  a  chaque  minute  de  mon  existence,
controler,  verifier  un  fait,  U  n'y  a  plus  d'hesitation  pos-
sible. Nul  doute  n'est  permis.  Qu'un  individu  lunatique
vienne  me  dire  :  "  Calcutta  n'existe  pas,"  je  pourrai  lui
rire  au  nez,  car  je  n'aurai  qu'a  entrer  dans  un  bureau
telegraphique :  au  bout  d'vme  heure  j'aurai  la  reponse  de
Calcutta.  S'U  me  dit  :  "  Carthage  n'a  jamais  existe,"  je
pourrai  le  renvoyer  a  Polybe,  a  Plaute,  a  Tite-Live,  a
Plutarque  et  a  quarante  auteurs  latins,  qui  en  parlent
comme  d'une  reahte  incontestable.  Je  pourrai  meme
I'engager  a  aUer  sur  la  rive  africaine  jusqu'a  Tunis,  et  il
verra  pres  de  Tunis  des  ruines  qui  temoignent  qu'il  y  eut
la  une  grande  vUle.  Mais  s'il  me  dit :  "la  vUle  de  Troie
n'a  jamais  existe,"  la  demonstration  du  contraire  sera  plus


426


Professor  Charles  Bichet.


[part


difficile,  et  une  discussion  sera  presque  possible,  malgre  les
decouvertes  de  Schliemann  ;  car  I'lliade  d'Homere  est  un
poeme  et  non  un  document  historique.  Qui  sait  si  les
Grecs,  poetes  et  historiens,  n'ont  pas  pris  cette  fiction  pour
une  realit6  !

Pourtant  je  suis  bien  certain  que  Troie  a  existe.  C'est
une  certitude  historique,  traditionnelle.  Mais,  comme  elle
ne  comporte  pas  une  verification  immediate  qui  entraine  la
certitude  absolue,  c'est  une  certitude  de  second  ordre.

De  \k  cette  proposition  peu  contestable  que  la  certitude  est
d'autant  plus  grande  que  la  verification  pent  se  faire,  facile
et  prompte.

Cependant,  en  I'absence  de  tout  controle  immediat,  il  y
a  dans  le  domaine  des  sciences  historiques  maintes  certi-
tudes qui  sont  absolues.  Mais,  pour  qu'elles  aient  ce
caractere,  il  faut  la  multiplicite  et  I'authenticite  des
temoignages.  Quand  on  possede  20,  30  documents  authen-
tiques,  on  arrive  a  pouvoir  affirmer  les  choses.  Aussi  toutes
les  questions  de  certitude  historique  traditionnelle  sont-elles
difficiles  a  etablir.  II  faut  beaucoup  de  sagacity  et  im  esprit
de  critique  penetrant  pour  distinguer  ce  qui  est  tres  prob-
able et  ce  qui  est  absolument  certain.

Charles  I*^"^  est  mort  sur  I'echafaud.  Brutus  a  tue  Cesar.
Cain  a  tue  Abel.  Voila  trois  faits  certains.  Mais  quelle
difference  dans  la  certitude  !  Pour  le  crime  de  Charles  I'^'',
nous  avons  tons  les  ecrits  du  temps,  les  lettres,  les
memoires  des  contemporains,  les  archives  du  proces.  Alors
certitude  absolue.  Pour  la  mort  de  Cesar,  nous  avons  les
livres  de  Ciceron,  de  Su^tone,  de  Tacite,  de  Plutarque  et
de  tous  les  auteurs  latins,  mais  enfin  ils  ont  pu  se  tromper
en  repetant  la  meme  erreur.  Pour  le  meurtre  d'Abel,
nous  n'avons  que  le  temoignage  de  la  Bible.  L'histoire
devient  presque  de  la  legende.

Ainsi  la  certitude  va  en  se  degradant  a  mesure  que  les
temoignages  sont  plus  clairsemes.  La  certitude  est  d'autant
phis  grande  que  les  temoignages  sont  plus  abondants.

II  va  de  soi  que  la  qualite  de  ces  temoignages  a  un  role
essentiel  ;  un  seul  temoignage  authentique  pesera  plus  dans
la  balance  quel  vingt  affirmations  hasardeuses.  Mais  qui
fera cette pesee  ? II s'agit de nuances,  d'appreciations


xcv.]  Des  Conditions  de  la  Certitude.  427

personnelles.  La  certitude  historique  n'a  jamais  le  carac-
tere  absolu  et  dominateur  d'une  certitude  scientifique  laquelle
peut  tou jours  se  verifier  immediatement.

Pour  prendre  un  exemple,  je  citerai  un  livre  tres  curieux
et  tres  savant  de  M.  Conchond.  Get  auteur  conclut  que
Jesus-Christ  n'a  pas  existe,  que  tout  est  mythe  et  legende.
Bien  entendu  je  lui  laisse  la  responsabilite  de  cette  auda-
cieuse  assertion.  Je  I'indique  seulement  pour  montrer  a
quel  point  la  certitude  historique  est  tou  jours  fragile.

La  certitude  se  transforme  en  efiet  quand  des  assertions
contradictoires  sont  opposees,  quelle  que  soit  la  valeur  des
preuves  affirmatives.  Les  magistrats,  cj^uand  ils  ont  a
juger,  sont  souvent  tres  embarrasses,  car  il  se  produit  des
temoignages  contradictoires  et  confus  au  milieu  desquels  il
est  permis  d'hesiter.

Anatole  France  conte  quelque  part  I'histoire  d'un  jeune
magistrat  qui,  par  la  logique  de  son  argumentation  et  par
r  accumulation  de  preuves  formelles,  avait  fait  condamner
un  individu  a  mort.  Ce  miserable  6tait  certainement  un
assassin,  mais  cependant  il  s'obstinait  a  se  dire  innocent.
Or  le  magistrat  en  toute  conscience  n'avait  pas  la  moindre
incertitude,  et  il  etait  bien  convaincu  que  I'homme
qu'U  avait  fait  condamner  avait  reellement  assassine.
•  Cependant,  la  veille  de  I'execution,  ce  jeune  magistrat,  qui
etait  au  debut  de  sa  carriere  et  un  peu  inquiet  de  sa
responsabilite,  alia  trouver  le  condamne  dans  sa  cellule  et
lui  dit :  "  Rien  ne  peut  vous  sauver  :  avouez  que  vous  avez
tue."  "  Eh  bien  !  oui,"  dit  le  malheureux,  "  oui,  j'ai  tue."  Et
ce  fut  un  grand  soulagement  pour  le  magistrat.  II  avait
deja  la  certitude,  mais  I'aveu  dix  coupable  augmentait  la
certitude,  car  la  certitvide  a  des  degres.

Si  j'insiste  sur  ces  conditions  de  la  certitude  historique
ou  judiciaire,  c'est  que  souvent  nous  ne  pouvons  juger  des
faits  metapsychiques  que  d'apres  des  temoignages.  Pour
toute  une  serie  de  phenomenes  qui  ne  relevent  pas  de  I'ex-
perimentation,  mais  de  I'observation,  et  d'une  observation
prise  par  des  temoins,  souvent  peu  competents,  ou  effrayes,
ou  inattentifs,  ou  de  memoire  infidele,  alors  il  faut  une
documentation  severe  qui  ne  peut  jamais  etre  trop  minu-
tieuse. L'admirable  recueil  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  qu'aucun


428


Professor  Charles  Richet.


[part


livre  n'a  pu  meme  de  loin  egaler,  nous  donne  des  exemples
de  cette  critique  judicieuse.  Les  faits  d'obeervation  en-
trainent  la  certitude  tout  autant  que  les  faits  historiques,
niais  c'est  une  certitude  inferieure  a  la  certitude  scientifique
experimentale,  car  les  evenements,  qui  sont  passagers  et
fugaces,  ne  peuvent  se  repeter,  et  nous  sommes  contraints
de  nous  en  rapporter  aux  temoignages  des  temoins  dignes
de  foi.

Voila  pourquoi,  lorsqu'un  de  nos  correspondants  nous
signale  un  fait  d'hallucination  veridique,  nous  y  croyons
assurement,  mais  nous  en  sommes  beaucoup  moins  con-
vaincus  que  lui,  car  il  sait  mieux  que  nous  a  quoi  s'en
tenir  sur  la  veracite  et  la  sagacite  du  temoin.

II  se  produit  meme  fort  souvent  un  fait  bien  singuHer  et
assez  comique.  Nous  racontons  un  phenomene  remar-
quable,  excellemment  demonstratif,  mais  notre  interlocuteur
en  est  a  peine  emu.  II  hoche  la  tete,  un  peu  sceptique,
et  il  ajoute  :  "  je  ne  crois  pas  beaucoup  a  votre  r6cit.
Pourtant  je  connais  un  fait  du  meme  genre,  mais  bien  plus
remarquable,  que  je  vais  vous  citer."  Helas  !  le  plus  souvent
ce  fait  si  remarquable  est  entache  de  maintes  defectuosites.

La  certitude  des  faits  metapsychiques  est  un  peu  celle
des  aerobthes.  Un  meteore  lumineux  a  ete  vaguement
entrevu,  diverses  personnes  ont  cru  entendre  un  grand
fracas,  et  au  bout  de  quelques  heures  on  decouvre  une
pierre  bizarre  qui  n'etait  pas  la  la  veille.  Mais  vraiment
n'etait-elle  pas  la  ?  Est-ce  possible  qu'elle  soit  descendue
du  ciel  ?  Lavoisier,  notre  grand  Lavoisier,  le  plus  grand
des  savants  de  tous  les  pays  et  de  tous  les  temps,  a  ose
dire  :  "  il  n'y  a  pas  de  pierres  tombant  du  ciel,  parce  qu'il
n'y  a  pas  de  pierres  dans  le  ciel."

II  faut  done  excuser  les  personnes  (de  moindre  envergure
intellectuelle  que  Lavoisier  sans  doute)  qui,  lorsqu'on  leur
fait  des  recits  de  fantomes  appuyes  de  constatations  mul-
tiples et  concordantes,  n'ont  qu'un  sourire  dedaigneux.

Tout  depend  pour  une  grande  part  du  nombre  et  de  la
qualite  des  temoignages.  Mais  que  le  temoignage  humain
est  faillible  ! C'est  effrayant  !

Mon  regrette  ami  Tli.  Flournoy,  de  Geneve,  raconte
qu'un  jour,  a  un  de  see  cours,  brusquement  un  individu,


xcv.]  Des  Conditions  cle  la  Certitude.  429

qui  sembLait  prive  de  raison,  est  entre  dans  la  salle,  sur
les  hauts  gradins,  a  prononce  des  paroles  incoherentes  avec
gestes  desordonnes  et  compliques,  et  est  sorti  precipitam-
ment.  A  peine  etait-il  sorti  que  Flournoy  a  dit  a  ses
eleves  :  "  jevines  gens,  faites  attention,  relatez-moi  par  ecrit
exactement  tout  ce  qui  s'est  produit  :  I'algarade  et  sa
duree,  I'heure  de  I'entree  et  de  la  sortie,  les  gestes,  les
paroles,  la  description  de  cet  individu,  car  ce  fut  une
comedie  par  avance  arrangee  dans  toutes  ses  minuscules
phases.  Je  veux  savoir  jusqu'a  quel  point  vous  etes  de
bons  obaervateurs."  Eh  bien !  ces  jeunes  gens,  distingues
philosophes,  ont  donne  sur  ces  deux  minutes  de  tumulte
des  relations  tres  differentes,  incompletes  et  inexactes.

Nous  avons  pubhe  jadis,  avec  mon  ami  Dariex,  le  cas  du
heutenant  Escourrou,  qui  eut  Toeil  gauche  blesse  par  une
balle  mortelle  a  I'assaut  de  La  Puebla.  Or  sa  mere,  le
matin  de  ce  meme  jour,  avait  vu,  sur  un  tableau  repre-
sentant  le  portrait  de  son  fils,  le  meme  oeil  gauche  saignant,
dechire  et  elle  en  avait  parle.  Nous  avons  fait  sur  cette
remarquable  hallucination  veridique  une  enquete  appro-
fondie.  Dariex  a  ete  chez  M.  et  Me.  Escourrou  a  deux
reprises  dilierentes.  M.  Escourrou  pere  etait  un  officier
superieur,  de  bonne  foi  absolue.  Voila  done  un  fait  bien
autlientique  dont  la  documentation  est  irreprochable.  Or
voici  qui  est  bien  smgulier.  Mon  eminent  ami  Camille
Flammarion  raconte  une  histoire  tout  a  fait  analogue  avec
d'autres  noms.  Un  officier  fran^ais,  M.  de  Boisleve,  est
blesse  a  I'oeil  gauche  lors  de  I'assaut  de  La  Puebla.  Madame
de  Boisleve,  sa  mere,  I'aurait  vu  dans  son  salon  le  jour  de
sa  blessure  avec  I'oeil  gauche  creve.  Meme  il  parait  qu'un
proces-verbal  de  cette  constatation  a  ete  dresse.  Mais  oil
est-il,  ce  proces-verbal  1  Nous  n'en  avons  micune  trace,  et
j'incline  a  penser  qu'il  s'agit  la  d'une  histoire  racontee
apres  le  deces  du  heutenant  Escourrou  et  inexactement
attribuee  a  d'autres  personnes.

Je  ne  veux  pas  refarre  le  hvre  qu'ecrivait,  il  y  a  trois
siecles,  Cornehus  Agrippa  sur  I'incertitude  des  sciences.
Agrippa  croyait  que  la  theologie  etait  superieure  a  toutes  les
sciences,  ce  que  je  n'ai  garde  d'admettre.  Mais  je  croirais
volontiers  a  I'inexactitude  (relative)  du  temoignage  humain.

2e


430


Professor  Charles  Richet.


[part


Heureiisement,  quand  il  s'agit  des  hallucinations  veri-
diqnes,  il  y  a  des  recits  tellement  nombreux,  tellement
incontestables,  que,  sous  peine  d'un  scepticisme  ridicule,  il
faut  accepter  beaucoup  de  ces  recits  comme  authentiques.
Et  la  multiplicite  des  preuves  pese  d'un  grand  poids  dans
la  balance.  S'il  n'y  avait  qix'un  seul  fait,  absolument
exact  cependant,  entoure  de  tous  les  temoignages  et  de
toutes  les  authenticites  desirables,  possedant  toutes  les
garanties  de  bonne  observation  et  de  veracite  que  vows
pourriez  imaginer,  ce  fait,  s'il  etait  unique,  ne  pourrait
suffire  a  nous  convaincre  qu'il  n'y  a  pas  eu  erreur.

De  la  cette  proposition  qui  n'est  pas  plus  contestable
que  les  deux  autres  et  qui  est  tellement  simple  qu'elle  est
presque  une  naivete  :  la  certitude  croit  non  seulement  avec  le
nomhre,  mats  avec  la  qualite  des  temoignages.

II

Je  prendrai  pour  exemple  des  faits  de  science.  Tout
d'abord,  quand  on  parle  d'un  fait  scientifique,  il  semble
qu'il  n'y  ait  plus  de  place  a  I'incertitude. Et  cependant  .  .  .

II  est  certain  qu'il  y  a  du  fer  dans  I'eau  de  mer.  Ce
fer  est  en  mininie  quantite,  mais  enfin  il  y  en  a  ;  les
poissons  ont  du  fer  dans  le  sang,  les  cendres  de  certains
mollusques  {Suberites  dormmcula)  sont  extremement  riches
en  fer,  et  cependant  les  reactifs  chimiques  ne  permettent
de  deceler  le  fer  dans  I'eau  de  mer  que  lorsqu'on  a  evapore
d'enormes  quantites  de  liquide.  Qui  sait  si  pendant  cette
laborieuse  evaporation  des  parcelles  de  fer  n'ont  pas  pu
etre  introduites  ?  Nous  sommes  parfaitement  certains  qu'il
y  a  du  fer  clans  I'eau  de  mer,  mais  nous  sommes  beaucoup
plus  certains  qu'il  y  a  du  chlore,  car  pour  le  chlore  la
verification  pent  se  faire  tout  de  suite.  II  suffira  d'une
goutte  d'eau  de  mer.  Un  etudiant  chimiste  qui  commence
sa  premiere  annee  pourra  en  faire  immediatement  la  preuve,
sans  manutention  prealable,  sans  longues  evaporations,  alors
que  la  constatation  du  fer  est  longue,  dehcate  et  exige
des  connaissances  chimiques  approfondies.

Les  astronomes  ont  mesure  la  distance  qui  separe  la
Terre  de  la  Lune. A  quelques  kilometres  pres,  ils  sont


xcv.]


Des  Conditions  de  la  Cerfihide.


431


d'accorcl.  Mais  ils  ont  essaye  aussi  de  mesurer  la  distance
qui  nous  separe  de  Sirius  par  exemple,  en  prenant  comme
base  du  triangle,  non  plus  deux  points  de  la  terre,  mais
la  terre  aux  deux  points  extremes  de  sa  course  annuelle.
L'angle  parallactique  est,  meme  alors,  extremement  petit.
Mais.  quelqiTe  confiance  que  j'aie  en  ces  mesures  et  ces
calculs,  lorsqu'on  me  dit  cj^ue  I'etoile  polaire  est  a  mille
annees  de  lumiere  et  que  d'autres  etoiles  (c^u'on  peut
photographier)  sont  a  300,000  annees  de  lumiere,  j'en  suis
beaucoup  moins  certain,  quoique  ma  confiance  en  ces  donnees
de  la  science  soit  absolue.

En  astronomic,  comme  en  chimie,  les  faits  certains  sont
d'une  certitude  diSerente.

Parlerai-je  de  la  zoologie  1  Je  suis  certain  cj^u'il  y  a
des  elephants,  car  j'en  ai  vu,  et  je  peux  en  voir  quand  je
voudrai.  Je  suis  certain  d'autre  part  qu'il  y  a  eu  des
mammouths.  II  n'est  pas  permis  d'en  douter.  Tout  de
meme,  malgre  les  preuves  zoologiques.  malgre  les  exem-
plaires  trouves  en  Siberie.  presque  intacts  encore,  la  certi-
tude est  moindre  pour  I'ancienne  existence  des  mammouths
que  pour  I'actuelle  existence  des  elephants.

En  physiologie.  je  pourrais  a  ce  propos  mentionner
quantite  de  faits  certains,  mais  d'hierarchie  differente  dans  la
certitude.  Je  me  contenterai  d'un  seul  exemple  (qui  m'est
d'ailleurs  guere  plus  demonstratif  que  beaucoup  d'autres).

Eloiu:ens  a  montre  que  I'ablation  du  cervelet  entraine
des  troubles  de  I'equihbre.  L'experience  a  ete  faite  des
milliers  de  fois  sur  des  pigeons  (surtout)  et  aussi  eur  des
mammiferes  :  en  outre,  les  medecins  savent  que  toute
lesion  du  cervelet  entraine  le  vertige  et  I'incoordination
musculaire.  Ce  sont  faits  d'absolue  certitude.  Mais  le
physiologiste  itahen  Luigi  Luciani  a  prouve,  en  outre,  qu'il
y  avait,  en  meme  temps  que  des  troubles  de  I'equilibre,
deficience  musculaire.  Les  experiences  sont  bien  demon-
stratives :  elles  entrainent  la  certitude.  Mais  elles  sont
difficiles  a  faire,  1' observation  est  dehcate,  il  faut  une
grande  habilete  operatoire  et  une  observation  attentive
pour  constater  la  deficience  muscidaire  apres  I'ablation  du
cervelet.  La  deficience  est  certaine,  mais  moins  certaine  que
I'incoordination.


432


Professor  Charles  Richet.


[PAET


Ainsi  nous  voyons  que,  dans  les  sciences  comma  dans
notre  opinion  sur  les  choses,  la  certitude,  tout  en  restant
certitude,  est  differente  selon  que  les  faits  peuvent  etre
repetes  avec  plus  ou  moins  de  frequence  ou  de  facilite,  a
I'aide  d'appareUs  plus  ou  moins  compliques,  avec  un  con-
trole  plus  ou  moins  rigoureux.

La  Certitude  est  surtout  un  Fait  d'habitude.

Je  vous  ai  expose  des  verites  tres  elementaires,  tres
naives,  presque  des  truismes,  et  je  serais  tente  de  m'en
excuser.  Pourtant  ce  qui  justifie  mon  insistance,  c'est  que
cette  variabilite  de  la  certitude  est  souvent  meconnue.  Et
j 'arrive  alors  graduellement  a  ce  qui  est  le  principal  objet
de  ce  bref  discours,  et  j'espere  que  ma  proposition  ne  vous
paraitra  pas  trop  paradoxale.

Je  vous  la  formulerai  ainsi  pour  que  vous  puissiez  bien
la  retenir  !  on  n'a  de  certitude  absolue  que  'pour  les  faits
liabituels.

Plus  un  fait  est  inhabituel,  rare,  exceptionnel,  en  appa-
rente  contradiction  avec  ce  que  nous  voyons  autour  de
nous  a  chaque  instant,  plus  la  certitude  est  difficile  a
acquerir.  En  depit  de  toutes  les  demonstrations,  experi-
mentales  ou  autres,  on  n'est  jamais  completement  certain
que  des  faits  habituels.  Et  cela  semble  assez  etrange.
Pourtant,  lielas  !  notre  intelligence  est  assez  mal  faite  pour
qu'il  en  soit  ainsi.  C'est  assurement  un  defaut  de  notre
intelligence,  mais  nous  n'y  pouvons  rien.

Voici  un  petit  fait  qui  etablit  a  quel  point  des  raisonne-
ments,  meme  de  la  plus  severe  mathematique,  sont  parfois
impuissants  a  entrainer  la  conviction.  On  demontre  en
geometric  elementaire  que,  quelle  que  soit  I'inclinaison  de
la  section  sur  I'axe,  la  section  d'un  tronc  de  cone  donne
toujours  une  ellipse  reguliere.  M.  Thiers,  le  grand  homme
d'fitat,  ayant  voulu,  sur  ses  vieux  jours,  s'initier  aux
mathematiques,  se  rebiffa  devant  cette  demonstration
rigoureuse.  "  Non,  non,"  disait-il,  "  il  est  impossible  qu'en
coupant  obliquement  un  pain  de  sucre  on  n'ait  pas  une
ellipse  oil  il  y  a  un  gros  bout  d'un  cote,  et  un  petit  bout
de  I'autre." II  fallut  alors,  pour  le  convaincre,  la  preuve


xcv.]


Des  Conditions  de  la  Certitude.


433


experimentale.  On  fit  scier  obliquement  un  pain  de  sucre,
et  on  vit  alors,  a  la  grande  surprise  du  President  de  la
Republique,  que  I'ellipse  etait  bien  reguliere.

De  meme  que  pour  les  demonstrations  geometriques,  la
certitude  n'existe  complete,  radicale,  absolue,  que  pour  les
faits  facilement  accessibles  a  nos  sens  c'est-a-dire  a  des
observations  quotidiennes,  repetees,  et  repetables.

On  raconte  qu'un  des  academiciens  du  XVIII^™"  siecle,

I'abbe d'O  etait fort  avare. Un jour,  a  I'Academie,

on  fit  une  collecte,  chacun  devant  apporter  sa  petite  somme.
Mais  quand  on  fit  le  compte  des  oiTrandes  remises,  il  en

manquait  une. "J'ai  donne,"  dit  I'abbe  d'O  . Un  de

ses  confreres  obligeamment  dit  :  "  je  ne  I'ai  pas  vu,  mais
je  vous  crois."  Fontenelle  ajoata  :  "  moi,  je  I'ai  vu,  mais  je
ne  le  crois  pas."

Quand  un  fait  est  invraisemblable,  on  a  beau  I'avoir  vu,
on  ne  se  resigne  pas  tout  de  suite  a  y  a j  outer  foi,  la
verite  ne  consent  a  etre  acceptee  que  lorsqu'elle  a  pour
elle  la  vraisemblance,  c'est-a-dire  I'habitude.

C'est  la  le  grand  malheur  de  nos  experiences  et  de  nos
observations  scientifiques.  Vainement  nous  avons  ete
temoins,  et  temoins  rigoureux,  vainement  nous  en  avons
r irrefragable  certitude,  eUes  ne  font  pas  partie  integrante
de  nos  convictions.

Pour  le  demontrer,  je  citerai  deux  exemples  personnels,
I'un  de  metapsychique  subjective,  1' autre  de  metapsychique
objective,  qui  tous  deux  ont  entraine  ma  conviction  absohie,
et  que  cependant, — ce  qui  est  presque  contradictoire  avec
ma  certitude, — je  voudrais  repeter,  et  meme  repeter  plusieurs
fois,  afin  de  m'y  habituer.

A.  Metapsychique  Subjective. — Pour  le  phenomene  sub-
jectif,  il  s'agit  d'une  des  plus  belles  experiences  de  Stephane
Ossovietzki.  Avant  que  je  ne  partisse  pour  Varsovie,  mon
illustre  amie,  la  comtesse  de  Noailles,  m'avait  remis  trois
enveloppes,  soigneusement  cachetees,  et  dont  j'ignorais  abso-
lument  le  contenu.  Je  les  montrai  a  Stephane  en  lui
disant  d'en  choisir  une.  II  en  prit  une  au  hasard.  Nous
etions,  Geley  et  moi,  en  pleine  lumiere,  a  cote  de  lui,
surveillant  I'un  et  1' autre  ses  moindres  gestes,  notant  toutee
ses  paroles. Or  c'est  a  peine  s'il  a  regarde  I'enveloppe.


434


Professor  Charles  Richet.


[part


II  la  palpait,  la  mettait  derriere  son  dos,  la  froissait  \
legerement  en  tous  sens  et  parlait  de  choses  tres  difiEerentes.  ^
Au  bout  d'une  demi-heure  environ  il  nous  dit :  "  il  y  a  '
quelque  cliose  de  la  Nature.  C'est  I'inspiration  d'un  grand  I
poete  fran9ais.  On  dirait  Rostand.  Je  vols  beaucoup  de  \
lumieres  pendant  la  nuit.  C'est  un  vers  de  Chantecler  dit
par  le  Coq,  et  au-dessous  il  y  a  la  signature,  Edmond  ,
Rostand."

En  realite  I'enveloppe  que  nous  decachetames  contenait
ces  mots  ecrits  par  Mme.  de  Noailles  :  "  c'est  la  nuit  qu'il  est  ;
beau  de  croire  d  la  lumiere. •  Edmond  Rostand.' Ce  vers  de
Chantecler  est  dit  par  le  Coq."  :

Voila une experience irreprocliable. EUe me  suf&t.
Nulle  erreur  n'est  possible.

En  effet  : 1°.  Supposer  une  collusion  entre  Stephane  0.  •
et  Mme.  de  Noailles,  c'est  monstrueusement  idiot.  Madame
de  Noailles  ne  connaissait  absolument  pas  Stephane.

2°.  L'opacite  de  I'enveloppe  etait  complete,  elle  n'a  ete
decachetee  qu'apres  que  Stephane  nous  eut  tout  dit,  la
nuit,  la  lumiere,  Chantecler,  Rostand.  D'ailleurs,  pendant
tout  le  temps  de  I'experience,  c'est-a-dke  j)endant  environ  :|
une  demi-heure,  nous  avons,  Geley  et  moi,  surveille  .
scrupuleusement  tous  les  gestes  de  Stephane,  sans  nous
relacher  dans  notre  surveillance.

Puisque  je  parle  ici  de  cette  experience  faite  en  commun,  |
avec  mon  excellent  ami  Geley,  qu'il  me  soit  permis  de  lui
adresser  du  haut  de  cette  tribune  un  souvenir  emu.  Je
n'ai  pas  connu  d'observateur  plus  sagace,  d'experimentateur
plus  penetrant,  attentif  aux  moindres  details,  en  meme
temps  qu'apte  aux  plus  puissantes  generalisations.  Helas  !
un  cruel  evenement  I'a  enleve  a  notre  amitie  et  a  notre
admiration  ;  ce  fut  une  grande  perte  pour  la  science.

3°.  Supposer  le  hasard,  c'est  egalement  absurde,  comme
le  bons  sens  lindique.  Si  nous  apphquons  le  calcul  des
probabihtes,  la  citation  d'un  auteur,  au  heu  d'une  phrase
quelconque,  n'est  que  de  1/50  environ  ;  que  ce  soit  un
vers  plutot  que  de  la  prose,  c"est  1/100,  que  ce  vers  soit
de  Rostand,  c'est  de  1/10,000,  que  ce  vers  soit  de  Chan-
tecler, c'est  de  1/100,000,  que  ce  soit  un  vers  oil  il  est
question de nuit et de lumiere, c'est de  1/10,000,000.


xcv.]


Des  Conditions  de  la  Certitude.


435


Ainsi  le  hasard  ne  peut  etre  mis  en  cause.  Peu  importe
le  nombre  de  zeros.  A  partir  d'une  probabilite  tres  faible,
la  certitude  morale  est  a  peu  pres  la  meme.

Done  cette  experience  est  demonstrative.  NuUe  fraude,
nulle  illusion,  nulle  collusion,  nul  hasard  ne  suffisant  a
I'expliquer.  II  faut  admettre  cette  verite  invraisemblable,
surprenante,  que  I'intelligence  a  des  moyens  de  connais-
sance  autres  que  nos  sens  ordinaires.

I^Ce  fait,  quoique  inliabituel,  et  etrangement  inhabituel,
n'est  pas  unique.  On  en  a  rapporte  de  tres  nombreux
exemples  bien  authentiques  dans  tous  les  temps  et  dans
tons  les  pays.  Moi-meme  je  I'avais  deja  constate  sur
divers  sujets  et  j'ai  public  la-dessus  il  y  a  longtemps  dans
les  Proceedings  de  votre  Societe  un  volumineux  memoire.
A  vrai  dire,  je  ne  crois  pas  qu'il  y  ait  jamais  eu  de  plus
belles  experiences  que  celles  d'Ossovietzki.  Recemment,  a
Copenliague,  il  en  a  fourni  encore  un  exemple  remarquable,
lequel,  venant  apres  les  trente  experiences  environ  que  nous
avons  faites,  Geley  et  moi,  entrainait  la  certitude.

L'experience  du  vers  de  Rostand  n'est  ni  plus,  ni  moins
irreprochable  que  mes  precedentes  experiences  avec  Stepliane.
Ce  n'etait  done  que  le  controle  des  experiences  anterieures.
Or  ce  rigoureux  controle  a  apporte  un  resultat  d'une
nettete  eclatante.  Ainsi  done  je  tenais  la  certitude,  certi-
tude experimentale,  absolue.  II  semblait  que  tout  fut
fini,  puisque  vraiment  je  ne  pouvais  rien  supposer  de  plus
convaincant  et  de  plus  decisif  que  cette  longue  serie
d'experiences  sur  la  lucidite.

He  bien  !  c'est  ici  que  va  intervenir  ce  curieux  sentiment
psychologique,  a  moi  persoimel,  mais  que  je  m'imagine
beaucoup  de  personnes  ressentent  comme  moi,  et  sur  lequel
j'insiste.  Quand  il  s'agit  d'un  phenomene  iiahabituel,  in-
connu,  qui  est  en  contradiction  apparente  avec  tout  ce
que  nous  avons  vu  depuis  notre  eniance,  avec  tout  ce  que
les  liommes,  vulgaires  ou  savants,  nous  ont  dit  depuis  un
temps  immemorial,  alors  une  experience,  si  parfaite  qu'elle
soit,  ne  suffit  pas  a  entrainer  une  de  ces  certitudes  ab-
solues  qui  defient  le  temps  et  les  critiques.  Une  experience,
ce  n'est  pas  vraiment  assez  :  il  en  faut  dix,  il  en  faut  vingt,
il  eu  faut  cent,  il  en  faut  toujours,  pour  que  nous  ayions


436


Professor  Charles  Richet.


[part


pris  le  parti  d'accepter  dans  son  integrite  un  phenomene
anormal.  Tant  que  le  phenomene  n'aura  point  passe  dans
nos  habitudes,  nous  n'y  poitrrons  croire  profondement,
c'est-a-dire  jusqu'aux  racines  memes  de  notre  croyance.
Car  ce  qui  determine  I'absolue  et  irremediable  certitude
d'un  phenomene,  c'est  la  frequence  et  la  Constance  de  ce
phenomene  meme.

Je  lance  en  Fair  une  pierre,  je  suis  certain  qu'elle  va
retomber.  Nul  doute  ne  m'assiege.  C'est  la  certitude
dans  toute  sa  puissance.  D' autre  part,  Ossovietzki  lit
dans  une  enveloppe  opaque  une  lettre  cachetee.  II  n'a
pas  pu  la  decacheter.  II  n'a  pu  savoir  ce  qu'elle  contenait.
La  lecture  de  cette  lettre,  sans  le  concours  de  la  vue,
est  un  fait  aussi  certain  que  la  chute  d'une  pierre.  Et
pourtant,  sans  avoir  de  doutes,  je  resiste  dans  mon  for
interieur  a  admettre  qu'  il  y  a  quelque  connaissance  des
clioses  exterieures  sans  le  concours  des  sens,  car  ce  serait
la  une  faculte  prodigieuse  differant  de  tout  ce  qui  est
connu,  de  tout  ce  qui  a  dirige  les  hommes,  depuis  des
siecles,  de  tout  ce  que  j'ai  vu  depuis  mon  enfance,  a
chaque  seconde  de  ma  vie.

II  y  a  plusieurs  annees,  j'ai  decouvert  en  physiologic  un
phenomene  fondamental  et  paradoxal,  que  j'ai  appele
Vanaphylaxie.  L'anaphylaxie  a  ete  repetee  et  verifiee  dea
centaines  et  des  milliers  de  fois,  tant  par  moi  que  par  un
nombre  immense  cl'auteurs  differents.  La  certitude  en  est
done  absolue.  Tout  de  meme,  chaque  fois  que  je  le  con-
state de  nouveau,  c'est  toujours  avec  plaisir,  et  presque
avec  surprise,  car  c'est  un  fait  bien  singuher,  et  je  me  dis
alors  avec  une  vraie  satisfaction  :  "  decidement  je  ne  m'etais
pas  trompe."

A  plus  forte  raison  quand  il  s'agit  d'une  experience  de
cryptestliesie  (ou  de  lucidite),  phenomene  beaucoup  plus
mysterieux,  et  plus  stup^fiant,  et  plus  etrange,  que  l'anaphy-
laxie. On  veut  toujours  recommencer.  Apres  la  lettre  de
Mme.  de  Noailles,  j'en  ai  donne  a  Ossovietzki  une  autre  de
Sarah  Bernhardt,  et  une  autre,  et  une  autre  encore,  et
toujours  dans  des  conditions  de  rigueur  irreprochable,  et
toujours  avec  le  meme  succes.

II semble que je  ii'avais pas besoin de fortifier  ma


xcv.]  Des  Conditions  de  la  Certitnde.  437

certitude,  et  cependant  je  demandais  to u jours  a  recom-
mencer.

A  mesure  que  le  temps  passe,  notre  certitude  des  faits
inhabituels,  faits  que  nous  avons  cependant  dument  con-
states, va  en  s'affaiblissant.  Les  raisonnements  les  plus
solides,  les  experiences  les  plus  decisives,  n'ont  pas  la  force
de  compenser  I'inhabitude  des  faits.

Surtout  ne  pretendez  pas  que,  si  vous  doutez  vaguement
de  tel  ou  tel  phenomene  inhabituel,  c'est  que  vous  ne
I'avez  pas  compris.  Quelle  erreur  !  Nous  n'avons  a  vrai
dire  rien  compris  a  I'univers  mysterieux  qui  nous  entoure,
nous  sommes  environnes  d'un  Kosmos  oil  tout  est  a  la  fois
habituel  et  incomprehensible.  Mais  I'habitude  en  masque  I'in-
comprehension.  Oil  est  le  fil  qui  attire  a  la  terra  la  pomme
de  Newton,  quand  elle  se  detache  de  I'arbre  ?  Nous  disons  :
"  c'est  I'attraction."  Mais  quoi  !  I'attraction  est-elle  com-
prise malgre  ses  belles  formules  matliematiques  ?  Ces
formules  expriment  elegamment  un  phenomene  mysterieux,
mais  elles  ne  Fexpliquent  nuUement.

Nous  frottons  du  phosphore.  Une  flamme  apparait  avec
des  vapeurs  blanches.  Avons-nous  mieux  compris  parce
que  nous  disons  :  1°,  le  mouvement  se  transforme  en
chaleur  (?)  ;  2°,  la  chaleur  determine  la  combustion  du
phosphore  (?)  ;  3°,  le  phosphore  sohde  se  combine  avec
I'oxygene  de  Fair  pour  donner  de  I'acide  phosphorique,
,  corps  aussi  different  du  phosphore  que  de  I'oxygdne,  et  qui
cependant  est  a  la  fois  du  phosphore  et  de  I'oxygene.

Je  parle  :  vous  m'6coutez.  Mais  c'est  la  un  vrai  miracle
incomprehensible,  que  les  evolutions  de  mon  moi,  ce
mystere,  puissent  se  communiquer  aux  autres  moi,  mysteres
plus  profonds  encore.

Et  cependant,  ni  la  chute  de  la  pomme,  ni  la  combus-
tion du  phosphore,  ni  le  retentissement  de  la  pensee
humaine  ne  nous  etonnent.  Ce  n'est  pas  parce  que  nous
comprenons,  c'est  parce  que  nous  sommes  habitues.

II  y  a  la,  il  faut  bien  I'avouer,  quelque  chose  d'assez
desesperant.  Nous  ne  pourrons  gueres  faire  passer  des
verites  dans  Fesprit  des  hommes  tant  que  de  ces  verites
les  hommes  n'auront  pas  pris  I'habitude.  Comment  pour-
rais-je trouver mauvais que I'on  accueUlit  avec  quelque


438


Professor  Charles  Richet.


[part


scepticisme  les  experiences  de  Stephane,  par  example,  quand
j'ai  eu  tant  de  peine,  malgre  la  repetition  et  la  precision
de  mes  recherches,  a  en  admettre  la  certitude.

Entendons-nous  bien  cependant  sur  le  mot  certitude,  car
c'est  la  le  point  delicat  du  probleme  psychologiqne  que  j'essaie
de  resoudre.  Je  suis  absolument  certain  que  Stephane  n'a
pas  pu  connaitre,  par  le  secours  des  sens  normaux  (com-
muns  a  tous  les  hommes)  les  mots  et  les  idees  que  contenait
cette  lettre.  J'en  suis  aussi  certain  que  de  ma  propre
existence.  J'y  crois  comma  ja  crois  qu'il  y  a  eu  la  Ville
de  Cartilage,  comma  je  crois  qu'il  y  a  du  far  dans  I'aau
de  mer,  comma  je  crois  qu'il  y  a  eu  des  mammoutlis.
Je  n'hesiterais  pas  a  condamner  un  homme  a  mort  la-
dessus,  mais,  comme  je  n'assiste  jamais  que  dans  des
occasions  excaptionnalles  a  da  tels  phenomenes,  et  mema
comme  ces  phenomenas  paraissant  an  contradiction  avac  ca
qua  je  vols  chaque  jour,  avec  tout  ce  que  pensent,  disent
et  ensaignent  mes  contemporains,  mes  compatriotes,  mas
amis,  mas  collegues,  j'ai  constamment  basoin  da  renforcar
ma  certitude  par  da  nouvalles  axperiances.

B.  Metajjsychique  objective. — Si  da  la  metapsychiqua  sub-
jective nous  passons  a  la  metapsychiqua  objective,  las
difficultes  deviennent  plus  grandes  encore.  Je  pourrais  citer
beaucoup  d'axperiences.  Ja  me  contenterai  d'en  signaler
une  seula,  parca  qu'alle  a  ce  double  caractere  d'avoir  ate
reahsee  dans  des  conditions  irreprochables  et,  d'autra  part,
d'avok  ete  unique,  en  ce  sens  que  je  n'ai  pas  pu  la
retrouvar  una  seconde  fois.

A  I'lla  Ribaud,  un  soir,  apres  une  seance  plus  ou  moins
interessante,  en  presence  d'Ochorowitz,  de  Fred.  Myers,  et
de  sir  OHver  Lodge,  Eusapia  a  presante  le  phenomena
suivant.  Et  je  crois  bien  qua  parsonne  na  pourra  contestar
la  competence  de  cas  obsarvateurs.

Je  prends  dans  ma  main  droite  la  main  d' Eusapia  et  ja  tiens
abaisse  mon  index  de  maniere  qu'il  depassa  notablamant  la
touta  petite  main  d' Eusapia.  Alors  elle  dirige  ma  main  at
ma  fait  promener  mon  index  sur  du  papier  blanc.  A  masura
qua  mon  index  se  promene  sur  le  papier,  una  marque
apparait  sur  ce  papier,  an  bleu,  comme  un  trait  bleu.  Avec
sa  main  gauche  levee  tres  haut  en  I'air  Eusapia  tenait  un


xcv.]  Des  Conditions  de  la  Certitude.  439

crayon  bleu  qu'elle  serrait  convulsivement.  Le  phenomene
se  passait  a  la  Ivimiere  d'une  bougie  qui  etait  presque  au
contact  du  papier,  tant  elle  etait  proche.

Tons  les  souvenir's  de  ce  fait  remarquable  sont  minutieuse-
ment  graves  dans  ma  memoire,  et  je  m'en  souviens
comme  si  c'etait  hier.  Je  vois  encore  Myers,  avec  son
lorgnon,  penche  sur  le  papier,  et  regardant  attentiveinent,
scrupuleusement,  le  phenomene.  Quatre  a  cinq  fois  sur  des
feuilles  de  papier  blanc  (des  enveloppes  blanches  neuves),
la  meme  trace  bleue  a  apparu.  Je  suis  absolument  siar
que  la  main  d'Eusapia  ne  touchait  pas  le  papier  qui
n'etait  en  toute  certitude  touche  que  par  men  mdex,  lequel
n'avait  pas  la  plus  petite  trace  de  bleu.  Pendant  pres  de
dix  minutes,  toujours  a  la  lumiere  d'une  bougie,  I'experience
s'est  repetee,  soit  sur  du  papier,  soit  sur  le  plastron  blanc
de  nos  chemises.

Je  n'ai  pas  le  plus  leger  doute  sur  la  realite  du  pheno-
mene ainsi  constate.

Nulle  hallucination  possible.  Nous  etions  tous  les  quatre
en  notre  etat  parfaitement  normal,  et  tres  sceptiques,  tres
incredules.  Le  controle  de  quatre  investigateurs  attentifs
et  avertis  est  un  controle  a  la  quatrieme  puissance.  La
lumiere  de  la  bougie  nous  permettait  de  tres  bien  voir  tout.
Sur  du  papier  parfaitement  blanc,  tous  les  quatre,  nous
voyions  sous  mon  doigt,  et  sous  man  doigt  seul,  au  fur  et
a  mesure  que  je  le  promenais  sur  le  papier,  apparaitre  une
hgne  bleue. 1

Or,  c"est  la  un  phenomene  si  etrange,  si  inhabituel,  qui
fait  une  telle  rupture  avec  nos  habitudes  quotidiennes,  avec
toutes  les  donnees  scientifiques  ou  vulgaires,  que  malgre
ma  certitude  sur  son  authenticite,  je  suis  amene  a  dire  que
c'est  une  certitude  de  second  ordre,  parce  que  les  phenomenes
ne  peuvent  pas  etre  repetes  et  parce  qu'ils  font  violence  a
toutes  les  donnees  usuelles.

Je  pourrais  citer  encore  bon  nombre  de  phenomenes
objectifs  qui  me  paraissent  avoir  la  meme  force  probatoire,
mais  je  ne  peux  pas  faire  ici  un  cours  de  metapsychique  ;

^  Arnaud  de  Gramont  m'assura  avoir  vu  le  meme  phenomene  avec
Eusapia.  A.  de  Rochas  en  parle  sommairement  {Vexteriorisation  de  la
motricite,  page  140).


440


Professor  Charles  Richet.


[part


et  je  me  contenterai  de  dire  encore  que  nous  aurions
maiivaise  grace  a  reprocher  aux  sceptiques  leur  scepticisme.
lis  n'ont  rien  vu  et  ils  doutent.  C'est  bien  explicable,
piusque  nous  avons  vu  et  que  nous  avons  tant  de  peine
a  accepter  ce  que  nous  avons  vu.  Cela  justifie  ma  formule
precedente,  a  savoir  qu'on  ne  manie  pas  la  conviction  par
des  demonstrations  experimentales,  logiques  ou  mathe-
matiques.  La  conviction  resulte  de  I'habitude  et  non  de
la  demonstration.  Faire  assister  a  ces  experiences  d'ecto-
plasmie  des  personnes  qui  n'ont  encore  rien  vu  de  tel,
c'est,  selon  toute  probabilite,  ne  pas  les  convaincre.  II  m'a
fallu  pres  de  vingt  cinq  ans  d'etudes  perseverantes,  parfois
dans  des  conditions  extremement  favorables,  pour  me
rendre.  J'ai  fait  une  defense  desesperee  avant  d'etre
convaincu  de  la  r6alite  de  la  metapsychique  objective.
Comment  demander  aux  autres  hommes  cette  longue  et
prolongee  patience  ?

Voila  poxxrquoi  je  n'ai  aucune  sympathie  pour  les  com-
missions d'enquete,  les  controles  auxquels  sont  convoques
des  hommes  loyaux  et  intelligents,  certes,  mais  inhabiles  a
ces  etudes,  et  surtout  non  habitues  aux  ph6nomenes
bizarres  (et,  dans  le  sens  vulgaire  du  mot,  enormement
absurdes)  de  la  metapsychique.

D'ailleurs,  presque  jamais  la  science  ne  progresse  que  par
le  travail  d'xm  individu  isole.  Elle  n'est  pas  un  fruit
coUectif,  plus  que  ne  peuvent  I'etre  un  drame  ou  une
statue.

Cette  necessite  de  repeter  les  experiences,  meme  quand
on  en  a  obtenu  de  tout  a  fait  certaines,  exphque  pourquoi,
quand  il  s'agit  du  phenomene  tant  conteste,  mais  a  mon
avis  nuUement  contestable,  de  I'ectoplasmie,  nous  recom-
menQons  I'exp^rience  sans  nous  lasser,  alors  cependant,  que,
selon  toute  vraisemblance,  rien  de  nouveau  ne  va  se
produire.  Les  experiences  innomb rabies  que  je  fis  avec
Eusapia  et  avec  Gouzik  sont  d'une  monotonie  effarante.
Des  contacts,  des  impressions  de  mains  ou  de  moignons,
de  ridicules  mouvements  d'objets,  tous  phenomenes  qui  se
repetent  sans  se  perfectionner,  et  qui  ne  paraissent  guere
capables  d'un  progres  quelconque.

Et cependant,  chaque fois qu'on  a  assiste  a  une  tele-


xcv.]  Des  Conditions  de  la  Certitude.  441

kinesie  indiscutable,  quand  il  y  a  eu  une  ectoplasmie  dont
la  realite  n'est  pas  douteuse,  on  est  tres  satisfait.  On  se
confirme  dans  son  opinion,  et  la  certitude  deviant  de  plus
en  plus  imperieuse.

Mais — chose  singuHere — cette  certitude  s'envole  avec  le
temps.  En  sortant  d'une  belle  et  decisive  seance,  on  n'a
pas  I'ombre  d'un  doute.  Mais,  a  niesure  que  le  temps
passe,  le  doute  arrive.  On  est  pris  de  scrupules  retro -
spectifs,  car  tout  ce  qu'on  voit  autour  de  soi  est  contraire
a  cette  etrange  ectoplasmie,  qu'on  na'  pu  entrevoir  que
pendant  quelques  secondes.  Au  bout  d'mi  an,  on  est
devenu  tout  a  fait  hesitant,  et,  pour  peu  qu'on  reste
quelques  annees  sans  nouvelles  experiences,  on  est  envahi
par  un  scepticisme  plus  dangereux  encore  que  celui  des
individus  qui  n'ont  rien  vu.

Je  le  repete  de  nouveau,  car  c'est  le  point  fondamental
que  je  veux  etablir  :  pour  croire  completement  d  un  pheno-
mene,  il  faut  y  etre  habitue.

Aussi  me  parait-il  tres  important,  apres  qu'on  a  note
tous  les  details  d'une  experience,  de  ne  pas  se  contenter
de  cette  notation,  mais  d'y  ajouter  quelque  chose  d'essen-
tiel,  la  conviction  qu'on  avail  immediatement  apres  Vex-
perience.  II  faut  ecrire  resolument  sur  ses  notes  :  "  je  suis
absolument  convaincu  que  nuUe  fraude  n'etait  possible."
C'est  cela  qui  compte,  et  non  les  doutes  retrospectifs  qui
peuvent,  a  tout  moment,  et  parfois  sans  raison,  s'emparer
de  notre  esprit.

Conclusions.

Et  mauitenant,  il  faut  conclure,  car  sans  etre  des
apotres,  nous  avons  malgre  nous,  tous,  plus  ou  moins
I'ardent  desir  de  faire  passer  notre  conviction  dans  I'esprit
des  hommes.  Ce  que  nous  croyons  etre  la  verite,  ce  qui  nous
parait  etre  la  certitude,  malgre  notre  rebellion  instinctive
pour  tout  fait  inhabituel,  si  cela  n'est  accepte  ni  par  le
pubhc,  ni  par  les  savants,  alors  nous  en  ressentons  une
vraie  douleur  intellectuelle.  C'est  meme  un  sentiment
assez  noble  que  cette  tendance  a  faire  partager  notre
opinion aux autres hommes. Car, en reaUte, le  vrai


442


Professor  Charles  Richet.


[part


savant  est  celui-la,  qui,  sans  aucun  interet  de  vanite  ou
de  lucre,  veut  repandre  des  faits  qu'il  regards,  en  toute
conscience, comme  certains.

Done  il  faut  d'abord  commencer  par  acquerir  notre
certitude  personnelle.  Elle  ne  pourra  etre  obtenue  que
par  de  repetees  experiences.  Ne  craignons  pas  de  les
multiplier,  meme  quand  elles  ne  nous  doivent  donner  que
du  clejd  vu,  car  chaque  nouvelle  experience  justifie  notre
croyance,  et,  sans  doute,  chaque  fois  qu'on  la  repete,  on  a
elimine  un  doute,  un  scrupule,  qui  nous  empechait  de  croire
sans  reserve.

Notre  conviction  personnelle  ne  pent  pas,  pour  les  choses
raetapsychiques,  etre  livresque,  due  a  la  lecture  de  tels  ou
tels  ouvrages,  aux  recits  qui  nous  sont  apportes  par  des
temoins,  meme  dignes  de  foi,  ou  par  des  savants,  meme
tres  habiles.  Toutefois,  pour  appuyer  notre  certitude,  il
est  bon  de  relire  et  de  mediter  ce  qu'ont  dit  les  maitres.  lis
ont  eu  les  memes  doutes  qiie  nous,  et  ils  ont  obtenu  la
certitude  par  les  memes  voies.

Alors  ce  n'est  pas  seulement  pour  le  public  que  I'appui
d'autres  temoignages  autorises  est  important,  essentiel :  c'est
encore  pour  nous.  Vae  soli.  Malheur  a  celui  qui  est  seul
a  soutenir  une  opinion,  car,  malgre  toute  sa  confiance  en
son  jugement,  il  va  se  sentir  affaibli  dans  sa  certitude,
s'il  est  tout  seul  a  I'avoir.

Ainsi  done,  pour  notre  propre  certitude,  voir  beaucoup
d'experiences,  les  repeter  sans  se  lasser,  lire  et  relire  ce
qui  a  ete  ecrit  par  d'excellents  observateurs,  je  ne  vols
pas  d'autre  moyen  efficace  pour  combattre  notre  neophobie
naturelle,  notre  aversion  pour  les  idees  nouvelles  qui  ne
cadrent  pas  avec  1 'ensemble  dogmatique  de  la  science
contemporaine .

Une  fois  que  nous  serons  arrives  a  la  certitude  absolue,
irrefragable,  il  s'agira  de  la  faire  partager  au  public.  Mais
cela,  c'est  tres  difficile,  et  peut-etre  meme  assez  sterile,  car
nos  observations  et  nos  experiences,  malgre  leur  precision,
n'entraineront  pas  la  conviction  de  nos  lecteurs  ou  de  nos
auditeurs.  La  encore  il  faudra  la  repetition.  II  faudra
rendre  les  phenomenes  metapsychiques  habituels,  car  les
hommes (et les savants peut-etre plus que les  autres


xcv.]


Des  Conditions  de  la  Certitude.


443


hommes)  n'acceptent  pas  ce  qui  ne  leur  est  pas  repete  a
satiete.

Et,  po^^^  justifier  mon  opinion,  je  prendrai  un  exemple
recent,  celui  de  I'aviation.

Jtisque  aux  premieres  annees  de  ce  siecle,  personne  ne
croyait  qu'il  fut  possible  de  voler  avec  des  appareils  plus
lourds  que  Fair.  On  ridiculisait  les  constructeurs  de  ces
aeroplanes.  lis  passaient  pour  des  fous,  des  illumines.  En
1894  j 'avals  construit  et  essaye  une  machine  volante  (plus
lourde  que  Fair,  naturellement).  Alors  on  m'a  montre,  dans
une  caricature  repandue  a  profusion,  tenant  grotesquement
a  la  main  une  de  ces  stupides  machines.

Quand  je  dis  que  personne  n'y  croyait,  J'exagere.  II  y
avait  bien,  de  par  le  monde  entier,  une  trentaine  de
personnes  persuadees  que  les  oiseaux  ne  volent  pas  par
des  moyens  surnaturels,  et  que  le  probleme  de  I'aviation
par  des  machines  lourdes,  etait  un  probleme  soluble.  Et
pourtant  la  neophobie  generale  etait  telle  que  les  quelque
trente  individus  croyant  au  plus  lourd  que  Fair  etaient
consideres  comme  des  demi-alienes.

Mais,  une  fois  que  la  demonstration  a  ete  faite — et  je  ne
parle  pas  de  la  demonstration  scientifique  qui  ne  touche
pas  le  public,  mais  de  la  demonstration  industrielle,  qui
seule  a  de  I'effet — alors  aussitot  un  phenoniene  psycho-
logique  des  plus  singuliers  s'est  produit.

Ces  machines  volantes,  auxquelles  personne  ne  croyait,
tout  le  monde  y  a  cru,  et  non  seulement  on  y  a  cru,
mais  encore,  ce  qui  est  profondement  comique,  on  a
affirme  y  avoir  cru  toujours.  En  1910,  on  n'aurait  pas
trouve  une  seule  personne  disant  :  "  je  n'ai  jamais  cru  au
plus  lovird  cj^ue  I'air."  Tous  les  hommes  ont  pense,  en  toute
bonne  foi,  je  suppose,  qu'ils  n'avaient  jamais  mis  en  doute
la  possibilite  de  cette  invention.

Eh  bien,  pour  les  phenomenes  metapsychiques,  au  jour,
prochain  peut-etre,  oii  les  experiences  jjourront  se  rejecter
facilement,  tout  le  monde  sera  avec  nous,  et  on  dira  "  j'y
ai  toujours  crvi  !  "

Attendons  done  ce  jour  et  ayons  confiance.

Ne  vous  lassez  pas,  mes  chers  collegues,  dans  votre
labeur.


444


Professor  Charles  Richet.


[part


Et  surtout  soyez  convaincus  que  les  verites  de  la  meta-
psychique  sont  plus  importantes  que  toutes  autres  verites
scientifiques.  C'est  un  monde  nouveau,  aux  horizons  im-
prevus  et  splendides,  qui  s'offre  a  Fintelligence  de
I'homme,  avide  de  connaitre,  ne  fut-ce  que  par  fragments,
la  destinee  qui  I'attend.  -^^i,/^  -


xcv.]


3Irs.  Piper  and  the  Imperator  Band.


445


MRS.  PIPER  AND  THE  IMPERATOR  BAND  OF
"  CONTROLS."

By  a.  W.  Trethewy.

(1)  This  paper  is  based  on  the  articles  about  Mrs.  Piper's
mediumship  which  have  appeared  in  the  8.P.R.  Proceedings,
and  on  the  typed  records  of  Hodgson's  sittings  with  her
from  1896  to  1905  in  the  S.P.R.  library.  The  Stainton
Moses,  Imperator,  Rector,  etc.,  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance  are
designated  as  S.  M.p,  Imperatorp,  Rector p,  etc.  The  refer-
ences to  volumes  and  pages  are  to  the  S.P.R.  Proceedhigs,
and  those  to  dates  and  pages  with  the  word  "  Records  "
are  to  the  books  of  typed  records.

(2)  So  much  has  been  written  about  Mrs.  Piper's  medium-
ship  by  experts  in  psychical  research,  that  it  may  seem
presumptuous  on  the  part  of  a  tyro  to  add  to  the  litera-
ture. My  excuse  is  that  I  shall  restrict  myself  to  a
single  problem — namely,  the  question  of  the  identity  of  the
Intelligences  who  communicated  through  her  under  the
names  of  Stainton  Moses  and  his  controls  Imperator,
Rector,  Doctor,  Prudens  and  Mentor — and  this  point
is  one  on  which  I  may  claim  to  have  some  special  know-
ledge, as  far  as  the  internal  evidence  goes,  owing  to  my
study  of  the  work  of  Stainton  Moses.

(3)  There  seem  to  be  two  main  difficulties  in  the  dis-
cussion. The  first  is  the  difference  in  the  kind  of  com-
munication ordinarily  received  through  the  two  mediums
respectively,  which  suggests  a  difference  in  their  methods
and  therefore  makes  it  unsafe  to  argue  from  one  to  the
other  on  the  basis  of  analogy.  For  instance,  much  of  the
information  which  came  through  Stainton  Moses  is  traceable
to  a  printed  source,  with  which  it  is  probably  connected,
even  if  it  did  not  originate  therein.  The  unconscious
exercise  of  clairvoyance may  reasonably  be  regarded  in


446


A.  W.  Trethewy.


[PABT


his  case  as  an  alternative  to  the  spiritualistic  theory.
With  Mrs.  Piper,  on  the  other  hand,  the  alternative  appears
to  be  rather  a  form  of  telepathy.  Another  instance  of
the  difference  between  them  is  the  occurrence  of  physical
phenomena  at  seances  with  Stainton  Moses,  which,  by  their
connection  with  the  automatic  writing,  tend  to  support  the
spiritualistic  theory,  whereas  there  were  no  physical  pheno-
mena with  Mrs.  Piper  except  the  withering  of  flowers
attributed  to  supernormal  agency.

(4)  The  second  difficulty  is  inherent  in  the  spiritualistic
theory,  and  consists  in  the  uncertainty  of  estimating  the  |
degree  in  which  the  medium's  mind  may  colour  or  distort
the  message.  The  apphcation  of  this  factor  should  not
be  strained  to  cover  every  contradiction  or  inaccuracy,
but  the  only  check  on  its  use  is  a  priori  speculation,  an
unsatisfactory  guide.

(6)  For  the  present  purposes  I  assume  that  the  "  Con-
trols "  or  "  Guides  "  of  Stainton  Moses  were  spirits  with
existence  independent  of  his,  and  not  merely  the  creations
of  his  subliminal  mind.  I  make  a  similar  assumption  in
Mrs.  Piper's  case,  to  facilitate  the  comparison  of  the  two
groups,  except  in  so  far  as  the  consideration  of  a  specific
alternative  theory  may  clear  the  ground  in  some  par-
ticular situation.  The  question  to  be  discussed  is  whether
her  "  Controls "  were  identical  with  his,  and  not  who  or
what  they  were  if  the  answer  is  in  the  negative.

(6)  As  the  spirit  of  Stainton  Moses  professed  to  com-
municate through  Mrs.  Piper  and  to  introduce  the  spirits
who  had  controlled  him  on  earth,  it  will  be  convenient  to
deal  with  his  case  first.  He  did  not  come  without  an
invitation.  Hodgson  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XIIL
page  408,  gave  a  short  account  of  the  sitting  at  which
the  subject  was  broached,  and  stated  in  a  footnote  that  a
more  detailed  account  would  be  given  in  Part  II.  of  his
report.  Part  II.  was  never  written  by  him,  but  the  inci-
dent seems  to  be  the  same  as  narrated  by  Professor
R^omaine  Newbold  (W.  R.  N.)  in  Vol.  XIV.  ppl  36  et  seq.
On  June  19th,  1895,  the  sitter  (W.  R.  N.)  quoted  the  writ-
ings of  Stainton  Moses  Jin  the  course  of  an  argument  with
George  Pelhamp,  and  at  the  next  two  sittings  asked  that


xcv.]  Mrs.  Piper  and  the  Imperafor  Band.  447

his  attendance  should  be  procured  if  possible.  On  the
22nd  and  24th  Stainton  Moses  p  came  and  gave  some  in-
formation about  the  opinions  expressed  in  Spirit  Teachings
and  about  the  identity  of  his  "  Controls."  He  said  that
some  teachings  given  through  him  in  his  earth  hfe  about
the  condition  and  practices  of  the  spirit  after  the  physical
death  of  the  body  were  wrong  in  certain  respects.  He
accounted  for  these  errors  (Vol.  XIV.  page  40)  as  having '
been  due  to  his  misunderstanding  the  communications  from
his  Guides  in  his  earth  life.  This  explanation  is  hardly
credible,  for  the  subjects  were  essential  parts  of  their
teaching.  The  only  other  theory  that  seems  to  me  at
all  plausible,  while  consistent  with  his  identity,  is  that
owing  to  conflict  with  the  views  of  Mrs.  Piper  or  the
sitter  his  rephes  to  the  questions  did  not  come  through
properly.  If  either  of  these  persons  did  hold  strong
opinions  about  the  subjects  discussed,  a  point  on  which  I
can  find  no  information,  this  aspect  is  worthy  of  con-
sideration, though  the  assumed  distortion  of  the  message
exceeds  the  Hmits  of  probabihty.

(7)  The  information  given  by  S.  M.p  at  these  sittings
about  the  names  of  the  "  Controls  "  had  not  "  the  least
semblance  of  truth  "  (page  41  id.),  but  the  names  which
he  gave  are  not  quoted  in  the  Proceedings,  and  lilank
spaces  have  been  left  where  the  names  should  be  in  the
typed  records  of  these  seances.  The  original  manuscript
records  are  not  in  the  S.P.R.  office,  but  Mrs.  Sidgwick
has  recently  obtained  the  information  from  Professor  New-
bold  and  has  kindly  passed  it  on  to  me.  On  June  22nd,
1895,  S.  M.p  said  that  Rector  was  Dr.  Wallace.,  and  that
Doctor  was  his  (S.  M.'s)  father.  On  June  24th  he  cor-
rected himself,  stating  that  Rector  (not  Doctor)  was  his
father,  and  that  Doctor  was  not  Wallace  but  Walton,  a
"  Dr.  Walton  "  whom  he  had  known  at  college.  Then  on
being  questioned  as  to  who  Imperator  was,  he  gave  the
name  of  David,  and  on  being  asked  whether  he  meant
King  David  he  assented,  adding  that  he  had  written  it
("David")  in  his  script  without  divulging  it  to  anybody.
The  names  which  these  Guides  gave  to  Stainton  Moses  are
mentioned  in  paragraph  26  below. Stainton  Moses'  father


448


A.  W.  Trethewy.


[part


was  alive  while  his  son  was  doing  the  greater  part  of  his
automatic  writing  under  the  influence  of  these  "  Controls  "  ;
he  took  no  interest  in,  and  apparently  displayed  no  knowledge
of,  his  son's  mediumistic  experiences.

On  a  later  occasion,  October  14th,  1896,  S.  M.p  stated
through  G.  P.p  that  Imperator  had  been  St.  Joseph,  the
father  of  Christ  (Vol.  XXVIII.  page  90).  When  G.  P.p
was  told  that  this  statement  was  wrong,  a  soi-disant  Dr.
Arthur  Myers  p  intervened  with  the  unsatisfactory  allegation
that  Stainton  Moses'  father  and  not  Stain  ton  Moses  in
person  had  been  responsible  for  it  (pp.  91,  459  id.).  S.  M.p
certainly  was  correct  in  stating  on  November  9th,  1896,
"  Records  "  page  a.  165,  that  Plato  had  been  one  of  his
Guides.  The  inclusion  of  so  weU  known  a  person  may
have  been  due  to  guess  work,  and  this  presumption  is
strengthened  by  the  fact  that  he  mentioned  Demetrius  also
on  the  same  date,  though  no  such  name  is  to  be  found  in
Stainton  Moses'  books  of  automatic  script  or  seance  records.

(8)  On  February  17th,  1897,  "Records"  page  193,  S.  M.p
said  that  for  the  automatic  writing  of  his  earth  life  he
used  to  give  each  of  his  Guides  a  separate  pencil.  This
statement  was  untrue.  A  pen,  and  not  a  pencU,  was  used
in  the  books  of  automatic  script,  and  the  same  pen  was
kept  in  use  in  spite  of  a  change  of  writer.  On  page  273
of  The  Controls  of  Stainton  Moses  is  an  illustration  of  the
pen  being  adapted  to  a  remarkable  alteration  in  the  hand-
writing. In  reply  to  Mr.  F.  W.  Percival's  questions,  he
made  other  mistakes  about  features  of  his  mediumship.
He  wrongly  mentioned  hyacinth  and  lily  of  the  vaUey  as
scents  frequently  produced  at  seances,  and  an  opal  instead
of  a  turquoise  as  the  stone  especially  brought  for  Mr.
Percival,  to  whom  I  am  indebted  for  these  corrections.

(9)  In  matters  not  connected  with  his  mediumship  S.  M.p
was  often  in  error.  On  April  2nd,  1897,  "  Records  "  page
15,  Hodgson  told  him  that  Massey  said  that  aU  his  answers
to  Massey's  questions  were  wrong.  In  Vol.  XXVIII.  page
97,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  quotes  what  seems  to  have  been  a  pure
invention.  He  referred  to  an  evening  spent  at  Professor
Sidgwick's  house,  though  in  fact  he  had  never  been  inside
the  house.


xcv,]  Mrs.  Piper  and  the  Imperator  Band.  449


(10)  On  a  slightly  different  footing  but  equally  unsatisfac-
tory was  his  conduct  in  connection  with  his  mother's  death.
She  survived  him,  and  died  at  the  end  of  1896  or  early
in  1897,  while  he  was  frequently  attending  Hodgson's
seances  with  Mrs.  Piper.  He  said  nothing  about  her  death,
and  thus  missed  a  capital  opportunity  of  giving  a  good
test,  as  Hodgson  told  George  Pelhamp  on  January  19th,
1897,  "Records"  page  119.  In  reply  to  Mr.  F.  W.
Percival,  he  said  that  he  had  gone  to  the  funeral,  but  he
could  not  give  the  name  of  the  officiating  priest,  and  he
described  wrongly  the  position  of  the  grave,  as  I  have
ascertained  from  Mr.  Percival,  whose  help  I  acknowledge
with  gratitude.

(11)  The  most  important  point  in  his  favour  is  that  he
does  appear  to  have  furnished  on  one  occasion  "  some
private  information  unknown  to  the  sitters,  and  afterwards
verified  in  England,  and  well  adapted  so  far  as  it  went  as
an  indication  of  identity  "  (Vol.  XIII.  page  408).  Hodgson,
who  was  responsible  for  this  statement,  gave  no  particulars,
and  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  who  referred  to  it  (Vol.  XXVIII.  page
98),  could  not  discuss  its  evidential  value  for  want  of  the
information.  She  gathers  "  from  the  way  Hodgson  speaks
of  it  that  it  does  not  go  far  to  outweigh  the  many  irre-
levant, unplausible,  and  false  statements  which  have  to  be
explained  away." This  conclusion  seems  quite  fair.

(12)  The  communications  of  S.  M.p  make  a  favourable
impression  on  me  only  when  he  laments  in  a  general  way
his  inability  to  remember  the  events  of  his  earth  Hfe,  and
describes  in  touching  words  the  confusion  of  mind  pro-
duced by  renewing  contact  with  the  plane  from  which  he
has  passed.  His  manner  is  then  plausible,  almost  con-
vincing indeed,  and  I  feel  that  perhaps  he  may  be  the
real  Stainton  Moses  struggling  vainly  with  elusive  memories
and  incapable  of  expressing  himself.  This  impression  is
obUterated  as  soon  as  he  commits  himself  to  details.
Sympathy  then  gives  place  to  distrust.  On  page  98  of
Vol.  XXVIII.  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  opinion  is  recorded — "  We
must  regard  W.  Stainton  Moses  as  having  failed  to  estabhsh
his  identity."  I  would  go  even  further  and  say  that  we
are  justified  in  regardmg  his  claim  as  false,  for  in  my


450


A.  W.  Trethewy.


[part


opinion  if  a  person  still  in  the  flesh  made  such  a  claim  and
gave  such  evidence  in  a  court  of  law  he  would  not  only
lose  his  suit,  but  would  probably  be  prosecuted  for  perjury.

(13)  Of  course  the  failure  of  S.  M.p  reacts  on  the  claims
of  his  "  Controls,"  Imperatorp,  Rectorp,  etc.,  to  be  iden-
tical with  the  "  Controls  "  of  Stainton  Moses  who  used  the
same  pseudonyms.  In  fairness  to  them,  however,  their
cases  may  be  considered  on  their  merits  without  being
prejudiced  by  the  collapse  of  their  sponsor,  S.  M.p.  Mrs.
Sidgwick,  in  rejecting  their  claims  (see  page  98  of  Vol.
XXVIII.),  seems  to  have  based  her  decision  mainly  on  the
communications  made  by  S.  M.p  and  by  them  in  1896  and
1897,  several  of  which  have  been  reproduced  in  that  volume.
The  statements  which  they  made  about  the  names  which
they  had  borne  in  earth  life,  and  the  accounts  which  they
gave  about  the  characters  of  the  Bible,  seem  to  me  too
preposterous  to  deserve  serious  discussion.  At  any  rate,  if
the  latter  cannot  be  proved  to  be  false,  though  contrary
to  the  contents  of  the  Bible,  they  are  certainly  quite  out
of  keeping  with  the  teachings  given  to  Stainton  Moses  by
the  origmal  Imperator.^  In  this  respect,  however,  there  is
one  excuse  to  be  made  for  them,  as  put  forward  by  G.  P.p
on  April  3rd,  1900,  "  Records "  page  376,  who  said  that
they  ought  to  reaHse  that  they  had  not  developed  pro-
perly when  they  talked  this  nonsense  in  the  early  days  of
their  association  with  Mrs.  Piper.  There  is  really  some-
thing in  this  plea.  Whatever  view  is  taken  of  their
personahties,  it  is  undeniable  that  the  coherence,  the  thought
and  the  diction  of  their  communications  at  Hodgson's
seances  improved  a  great  deal  after  the  first  haK  of  1897.
Too  much  stress  should  not  be  laid  on  the  early  absur-
dities. Other  aspects  of  the  case  should  also  be  considered.

(14)  There  certainly  is  in  some  respects  a  similarity  be-
tween their  attitude  towards  Mrs.  Piper  and  the  attitude
of  Stainton  Moses'  "  Controls  "  towards  him,  but  perhaps

^  One  point  not  exjDressly  noticed  in  Vol.  XXVIII.  may  be  mentioned.
On  March  10th,  1897  (p.  480  id.),  Imperatoi- expressed  a  Iiigh  opinion
of  Abraham,  but  Stainton  Moses'  Imperator  on  more  than  one  occasion
distinctly  expressed  a  rather  low  estimate  of  the  qualities  of  that
personage.


xcv.]  Mrs.  Piper  and  the  Imperator  Band.  451


no  greater  than  we  should  expect  to  find  between  all  good
"  Controls."  In  both  cases  they  were  very  careful  of  the
medium's  condition ;  they  insisted  on  the  maintenance  of  a
good  state  of  health  for  the  exercise  of  psychic  powers,  and
they  restricted  admission  to  sitters  in  whom  they  felt
confidence.  Hodgson,  in  Vol.  XIII.  pp.  408,  409,  expresses
a  very  decided  opmion  of  the  success  of  then'  management ;
see  also  his  letter  to  Dr.  HaU,  page  286  of  Vol.  IX.  of
the  Journal  of  the  S.P.R.  At  a  later  stage  in  1910,  1911,
they  gave  several  warnings  of  the  expediency  of  stoppuag
sittings,  declared  their  intention  of  withdrawing,  and  sub-
sequently carried  it  out.  This  was  on  a  par  with  the
later  stages  of  Stainton  Moses'  mediumship.

(15)  To  some  extent  the  objects  of  the  "  Controls  "  of
the  two  mediums  were  identical.  In  the  case  of  Stainton
Moses  they  professed  to  have  a  mission  for  the  enlighten-
ment of  the  world  through  him,  and  used  his  powers
grudgingly  for  other  purposes.  Mrs.  Piper's  controls,  to
do  them  justice,  may  have  had  a  similar  object  in  view
when  they  undertook  to  repair  her  organism.  They  cer-
tainly preferred  teaching  to  tests,  but  in  order  to  provide
funds  for  the  support  of  the  medium  they  had  to  admit
on  payment  sitters  who  wished  to  converse  with  deceased
relations  and  friends.  Keepmg  in  view  their  favourite
purpose,  they  insisted  on  sittings  being  allotted  to  a  particular
sitter,  ]\Ir.  Z.,  on  whose  mission  they  laid  stress.  They  seemed
to  take  great  pleasure  in  giving  him  instruction  and  preparing
him  for  his  duty.  It  seems  unlikely,  however,  that  Stainton
Moses'  band  would  have  returned  to  earth  again,  or,  having
returned,  would  have  remained,  to  be  in  charge  of  a  medium
who  could  be  used  so  little  for  their  mam  purpose.  It  is
to  me  quite  incredible  that  they  would  ever  have  conde-
scended to  give  advice  about  investments  after  the  manner
of  Mrs.  Piper's  "Controls"  (see  Vol.  XXVIII.  page  111;
and  "  Records,"  June  27th,  1899,  pp.  351  et  seq. ;  June
29th,  1899,  pp.  364  to  368).

(16)  The  teaching  given  to  this  sitter  is  sufficiently
important  to  deserve  notice  m  detail.  On  February  1st,
1899,  "  Records "  pp.  75  et  seq.,  he  was  encouraged  to
consider  that  he  had  a  mission  m  connection  with  the


452


A.  W.  Treihewy.


[PABT


Band,  that  he  would  be  in  rapport  with  them  and  inspked
by  them.  On  AprU  17th,  1899,  pp.  141,  142,  he  was  told
— "  a  new  light  is  opening  through  thy  hfe  whereby  divine
truth  can  be  revealed  to  the  world  .  .  .  but,  friend,  we
see  thee  often  lapse  back  into  a  state  of  questioning  .  .  .
We  act  with  such  as  thee  directly,  with  others  remotely."
On  January  22nd,  1900,  "  Records  "  page  82,  and  on
February  12th,  1900,  "  Records "  page  153,  it  was  said
that,  inspired  by  the  Band,  he  would  write  for  the
benefit  of  mankind.  He  was  not  always  responsive.  For
instance,  on  June  17th,  1902,  "  Records "  pp.  693,  695,  he
abruptly  changed  the  svibject,  interrupting  the  teaching  by
asking  for  advice  about  his  own  immediate  needs.  Appar-
ently the  Band  were  not  always  satisfied  with  him,  for  on
July  1st,  1902,  "  Records "  page  725,  they  said :  "  We
love  thee  but  not  thy  moods,  they  are  not  of  the  highest."

(17)  The  following  extracts  from  the  typed  records  will
show  the  tenor  of  these  teachings  :

April  10th,  1899,  page  137  :  "Thou  art  a  part  of  God,  the
Spirit  of  God  is  within  thee,  we  will  bring  thee  into  a
higher  condition  than  thou  hast  ever  known."  Page  138  :
"  Cease  to  regret  the  past,  pray  to  the  spirit  of  calm  and
peace  for  power  to  control  thy  body."  Page  139  :  "  God
hath  promised  us  that  we  may  remain  untU  we  have  satis-
fied Him  with  our  work."  Page  139  :  "  Thoughts  cannot
injure  others,  but  acts  can."  •

December  26th,  1899,  page  600  :  "  Findmg  God  is  finding
a  better  side  of  one's  self  and  livmg  by  it,  listening  to  its
promptmgs  ;  it  is  being  guided  by  the  higher  thought,
which  does  come  from  the  mfinite  and  all-wise  Spirit ;  the
true  Ego,  the  higher,  better  self,  is  a  part  of  God."

February  20th,  1900,  page  177  :  "  God  is  spirit,  we  do
not  say  a  spirit,  but  sjnrit  .  .  .  All  life  is  spirit."

March  12th,  1900,  page  286  :  '  Struggling  '  in  pursuit  of
knowledge  is  deprecated.  "  Work  for  it,  but  do  not
struggle.  We  do  not  know  strugglmg  here."  Page  286  :
"  Canst  thou  not  beheve  that  there  is  a  power  above  thee,
surrouiidmg  thee,  workmg  for  thy  development  .  .  .  Our
power,  and  God's  power,  and  our  power  is  God's  power."


.]  3irs.  Piper  and  the  Imperator  Band.  453

April  2nd,  1900,  page  357  :  "  So  long  as  thou  dost  put
thy  trust  m  the  higher  power  thou  wilt  be  reheved  from
physical  distress  :  thine  own  mind  has  developed  sufficiently
to  hold  thee  from  doing  aught  but  what  is  w"ise  in  this
regard."  Page  359  :  "  This  we  state  from  absolute  know-
ledge, as  in  communion  with  the  all-wise  God ;  He  has
sent  us  as  His  prophets."

April  IQih,  1900,  page  401  :  When  Paul  prayed  for  those
in  prison  he  meant  "  those  in  the  imprisoning  body."

Marj  22nd,  1900,  page  428  :  "  God  doth  prompt  the
spirit  and  if  the  spirit  doth  listen  and  wait  for  this
prom^oting  it  will  never  be  misled."

April  3rd,  1901,  pp.  251,  252,  an  example  of  prayer ;
"  Oh  God,  I  am  conscious  that  I  am  of  Thee  a  part  .  .  .
Give  me  light  through  my  spirit,  which  is  a  part  of  Thee."
Page  252  :  "  Become  perfectly  passive  and  calm,  holding
thy  spirit  in  communion  with  God."

June  nth,  1902,  page  692  :  "  If  thou  dost  ask  for  help
in  thy  work,  thy  writing,  I  should  be  conscious  of  that
the  instant  thou  dost  wish  it ;  therefore  my  power  is  of
God  and  far-reaching,  and  the  thought  which  we  convey
to  thee  spiritually  is  a  part  of  the  one  great  thought  in
the  universe,  God-like  thought  and  the  thought  of  God."
Page  693  :  "  What  doth  seem  to  thee  wise  and  reasonable
to  pray  for,  pray  for  it  in  perfect  faith  that  it  is  for  thee,
and  thou  wilt  surely  receive  some  recognition  of  thy
prayer."

July  \st,  1902,  page  723  :  "  Relax  mto  a  state  of  peace
with  thyself."  Page  723  :  "  Live  out  of  self  more,  and
receive  the  great  peace  of  the  great  spirit  friend.  Do  this
by  relaxation  and  not  by  fighting.  .  .  .  Seek  within  thy-
self for  greater  peace."

January  5th,  1903,  page  3 :  "  We  do  not  speak  of  the
Infinite  as  a  spirit  but  as  spirit."  Page  4  :  "  The  Infinite
in  His  own  wise  way  doth  work  many  miracles  on  the
earthly  side  of  life.  And  He  hath  sent  His  messengers."
Page  6  :  "  Thou  shalt  know  thyseK  and  to  know  thyself  is
to  be  free."  Page  8  :  "  Have  faith  and  patience  to  place
thyseK  in  God's  hands  and  in  ours  also,  as  we  are  a  part
oi  Him."


454


A.  W.  Trethewy.


[part


January  \%th,  1904,  page  73 :  "  Relaxing  and  leaving  it
to  the  Great  Thought,"  is  commended  as  better  than  auto-
suggestion.

March  8th,  1904,  page  392  :  "  He  [God]  is  the  life  from
which  life  comes,  the  One,  the  Whole,  the  Life  of  man.
The  body  is  nothing,  it  is  the  suit  of  clothes,  keep  it  clean,
keep  it  whole,  m  the  thought  that  the  spii-it  is  the  man
and  the  reflection  of  God."

April  5th,  1904,  page  560a  :  "  God  is  the  intelligence
that  is  not  personal."

(18)  It  is  a  pity  that  there  is  no  such  complete  record
of  this  teaching  as  there  is  for  Stainton  Moses'  automatic
writing.  For  almost  all  the  sittings,  owing  to  Hodgson's
absence,  Mr.  Z.'s  notes  are  the  only  record.  Sometimes
there  is  no  record,  either  because  the  communications  were
treated  as  private  and  confidential,  or  because  they  were
made  by  word  of  mouth  instead  of  being  written,  and  were
spoken  too  quickly  to  be  taken  down.  The  notes  seem
rarely  to  be  more  than  fragmentary.  Perhaps  if  there
were  a  complete  record  the  instructions  would  be  more
satisfying  than  what  is  embodied  m  the  notes,  and  there
would  not  be  so  many  gaps  and  unfulfilled  promises  of
imparting  knowledge.

(19)  It  is  noticeable  that  two  ideas  of  God  run  through
the  discourses.  One  is  that  God  is  the  all -pervading
spirit  of  wliich  man's  spirit  is  a  part.  The  other  is  the
anthropomorphic  conception  of  a  supreme  personahty  who
has  commissioned  the  Band  as  his  agents.  Illustrations  of
both  conceptions  are  to  be  found  in  the  extracts  quoted
above.  The  following  passages,  taken  from  communications
addressed  to  Mr.  Z.  and  other  sitters,  are  quoted  below  to
bring  out  the  anthropomorphic  conception  more  fuUy  :

April  SOth,  1900,  page  408  :  "He  [Imperator]  is  next  to
the  All- wise."

March  4:th,  1901,  page  175  :  "  God  hath  most  profoundly
stated  that  under  our  guidance  aU  wiU  end  well."

April  18th,  1901,  page  331  :  "  Per  order  from  the  Most
High  through  His  Messenger  f  Imperator."


xcv.]  Mrs.  Piper  and  the  Imperator  Band.  455

January  23rd,  1905,  page  153  :  "  We  do  know  and  God
hath  promised  us  greater  knowledge  of  the  conditions  sui'-
rounding  him  [S]."

April  mil,  1905,  page  742  :  "  We  do  not  see  Him  [God],
but  we  feel  Hun."

(20)  The  inconsistency  between  the  two  conceptions  of
God  is  hard  to  understand,  but  speculation  about  the
origins  of  the  two  conflicting  ideas  is  outside  the  scope  of
the  present  article.  It  is  sufficient  to  say  that  neither
conception  is  suggestive  of  the  attitude  of  Stainton  Moses'
Guides.  The  level  of  their  teaching  may  not  have  been
above  the  best  productions  of  Mrs.  Piper's  "  Controls,"  but
it  was  on  different  lines — the  truth  to  be  found  in  all
religions,  the  consequences  entailed  by  actions,  the  fallacy
of  the  popular  doctriae  of  the  Atonement,  the  discussion
of  Reincarnation  and  the  "  Occult."  Imperatorp  is  prac-
tically sUent  on  the  subject  of  Biblical  history  during  this
phase  of  teaching,  and  does  not  refer  to  his  own  dependence
on  EUjah  when  he  mentions  his  mission,  two  points  which
were  very  prominent  in  the  messages  of  Stainton  Moses'
principal  Guide.  It  is  true  that  the  original  Imperator
did  claim  that  his  mission  was  part  of  a  movement  under
the  leadership  of  Jesus,  but  he  never  ventured  to  claim
the  close  connection  with  God  which  Imperatorp  asserts.

(21)  Miss  Newton,  the  Secretary  of  the  Society  for  Psy-
chical Research,  to  whom  I  mentioned  the  principal  Hues
of  the  teaching  given  by  Imperatorp,  suggested  that  the
ideas  might  be  found  in  Dresser's  The  Power  of  Silence,
London,  1898,  which  in  her  opinion  Mrs.  Piper  had  prob-
ably read.  A  perusal  of  that  book  shows  considerable
similarity  between  its  contents  and  the  thoughts  expressed
by  Mrs.  Piper's  Band.  Ideas  of  this  kind  were  much  in
the  air  at  that  period,  and  there  is  nothing  improbable  in
the  theory  that  the  subject-matter  of  the  teaching  may  have
come  from  the  mind  of  the  medium  or  the  sitter.  Rector p
said  on  March  20th,  1905,  "  Records  "  page  492,  that  the
Band  took  their  words  but  not  their  thoughts  from  the
sitters'  minds,  a  statement  which  may  point  to  their  de-
pendence on  the  sitters'  knowledge  for  the  subject  matter


456


A.  W.  Trethewy.


[part


of  their  messages,  though  they  Hmit  thek  obHgation  to
verbal  expression.

(22)  This  is  a  convenient  place  to  mention  some  repKes
given^,by  Mrs.  Piper's  "  Controls  "  to  Dr.  Savage's  questions
about  the  nature  of  Jesus.  On  January  14th,  1903,  page
36,  Dr.  Savage  was  told  by  the  communicating  spirit,  his
deceased  son  "  Phil,"  that  Jesus  was  the  son  of  Joseph
and  Mary.  Rector  corrected  Phil  immediately,  stating  that
Jesus  was  the  "  Son  of  God  "  .  .  .  "  born  of  Mary  in  the
body  but  not  as  other  mortals."  Rector  went  on  to  say
that  Jesus  was  not  God  or  to  be  worshipped  as  God,  but
was  the  son  of  Joseph,  that  He  existed  before  birth  and
was  reincarnated.  Rector  then  declared  that  God  was
never  visible  in  the  spirit  world,  and  was  spirit,  not  a
spirit,  thus  returning  to  what  had  been  told  to  Mr.  Z.  on
January  5th,  1903.  He  went  on  to  say  that  Christ  was
the  only  mortal  or  spirit  who  was  reincarnated,  but  ad-
mitted, when  reminded  of  the  Band's  earher  teaching  about
Melchizedek,  that  Melchizedek  had  also  been  reincarnated.
Then,  apparently  to  explain  the  contradiction,  he  added
that  Christ  (Jesus)  was  the  only  Christ  who  had  been
reincarnated.  These  statements  will  be  found  in  pp.  37
to  40  of  the  typed  records  for  January  14th,  1903.  The
denial  of  the  divinity  of  Jesus  corresponds  with  the  teach-
ing of  Stainton  Moses'  Guides  ;  but  the  agreement  on  this
point  is  not  a  striking  coincidence,  for  it  is  an  opinion
held  by  many  people,  and  the  confusion  and  contradiction,
as  contrasted  with  the  reasoned  arguments  of  Stainton
Moses'  Imperator,  deprive  the  incident  of  any  weight  as  a
proof  of  identity.  On  May  5th,  1903,  "  Records  "  page
514,  Mr.  Z.  was  again  told  that  Christ  as  well  as  Melchi-
zedek was  a  reincarnation.

(23)  There  are  some  minor  points  which  deserve  notice  as
bearing  on  the  question  of  the  identity  of  the  "  Controls  "
of  the  two  mediums.  Those  which  are  favourable  to  the
claim  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Band  will  first  be  discussed.

(a)  There  is  some  resemblance  in  the  rehgious  atmosphere
which  surrounds  each  band,  especially  marked  in  their
frequent  prayers.  It  is  possible,  however,  that  in  Mrs.
Piper's  case  this  trait  may  have  been  imitated,  for  Hodgson


xcv.]  Mrs.  Piper  and  the  Imperator  Band.  457


explained  to  her  Imperator* s  relation  vnih  Stainton  Moses,
and  gave  her  a  copj'  of  Spirit  Teachings  to  read  (Vol.
XX^7III.  page  100).  The  style  of  the  prayers  in  her
script  may  have  been  borrowed  from  that  source ;  the
expression  "  All-wise  "  used  by  her  occurs  there  too.  That
book  was  also  famihar  to  Hodgson,  no  doubt.

(b)  The  serious  characters  of  Imperator p  and  Rector p,
and  the  deference  paid  to  the  former  by  the  latter  as
described  by  Hyslop  in  Vol.  XVI.  page  181,  agree  with
the  traits  of  the  "  Controls  "  of  Stainton  Moses  bearing  the
same  names.  It  is  possible,  of  course,  that  the  dramati-
sation or  personation  was  based  on  the  contents  of  Spirit
Teachings,  or  even  on  Myers'  articles  in  Vols.  IX.  and  XI.
of  the  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.,  with  which  the  sitter  was
probably  famihar.

(c)  Mr.  Z.  was  told  on  January  15th,  1900,  "  Records  "
pp.  62,  63  :  "  Neither  do  we  pretend  to  see  aU  that  goes
on  in  the  material  .  .  .  but  on  aU  the  points  on  which
we  speak,  we  are  cognisant  of  the  truth,  .  .  .  our  knowledge
is  knowledge  and  not  conjecture."  A  similar  claim  was
made  by  Stainton  Moses'  Guides.

{d)  What  Doctorp  said  to  Hodgson  on  February  8th,
1899,  about  having  been  with  him  as  a  silent  helper  (Vol.
XVI.  pp.  376,  377)  his  predecessor  with  the  same  name
asserted  to  Stainton  Moses.

(e)  ]Mrs.  Piper's  Band  commended  the  character  of  Mr.
Z.'s  mother  in  terms  which  remind  one  of  the  high  apprecia-
tion of  ]Mrs.  Speer's  attitude  expressed  by  Stainton  Moses'
Guides. See  January  15th,  1900,  "  Records  "  page  64.

(/)  The  admonitions  given  to  Hodgson  about  his  failings
recall  the  tendency  of  Stainton  Moses'  "  Controls  "  to  take
him  to  task  for  similar  infirmities  of  temperament.  See
"  Records,"  February  20th,  1899,  pp.  93,  94,  and  November
3rd,  1902,  pp.  861  to  863.i

ig)  On  February  19th,  1902,  "  Records "  pp.  208,  209,

^  Hodgson  was  much  impressed  by  the  advice  which  he  received  from
the  "  Controls."  On  January  30th,  1901,  "  Records  "  p.  30,  he  told  them  :
"  I  believe  that  I  feel  that  what  you  have  already  done  for  my  spirit
is  worth  more  than  all,  even  should  God's  guidance  stop  this  communi-
cation and  I  should  never  hear  from  you  again."


458


A.  W.  Trethewy.


[part


Rector p  told  Hodgson  that  Mrs.  Piper  harmed  herself  by
teaching  too  much,  and  on  Hodgson's  expressing  surprise
admitted  that  he  might  be  confusing  her  with  Stainton
Moses,  who  had  injured  his  health  in  this  way.^  This  state-
ment may  have  originated  from  confusion  of  ideas  produced
by  the  sitter's  knowledge  of  the  case  of  Stainton  Moses,

(24)  The  minor  points  unfavourable  to  the  claim  of
identity  are  stated  below  :

(a)  The  style  of  conversation  adopted  by  Mrs.  Piper's
"  Controls  "  with  sitters  is  sometimes  quite  out  of  keeping
with  the  manner  observed  by  Stainton  Moses'  Guides  in
addressing  him.  Perhaps  such  practices  as  the  use  of  the
second  person  singular  and  of  "  Sabbath  "  for  Sunday  with
her,  but  not  with  him,  may  be  attributed  plausibly  to  the
influence  of  the  medium's  mind.  The  same  explanation  will
hardly  fit  such  a  contrast  as  is  brought  out  in  the  con-
versation quoted  in  Vol.  XXVIII.  page  93,  where  Imperatorp
repeatedly  addresses  Hodgson  as  "  Sir,"  using  the  word
apparently  in  the  obsequious  and  not  the  American  sense.
One  cannot  imagine  Stainton  Moses'  Imperator  talking  in
this  way.  For  the  strange  use  of  "Sir"  byjRectorp,  see
also  page  147  id.  See  also  February  2nd,  1897,  "  Records  "
page  17,  where  Rector p  uses  the  inappropriate  expression,
"  Very  truly  yours."

(b)  In  1897  "  Records,"  on  March  19th,  page  172,  and
April  1st,  page V  2,  Rectorp  excused  himself  for  confused
writing  by  alleging  that  it  was  difficult  for  him  to  express
Imperator 'sp  words.  This  attitude  was  quite  different  from
that  of  Stainton  Moses'  Rector,  who  professed  to  be  in
perfect  rapport  with  Imperator  and  to  act  with  facihty  as
his  amanuensis,  but  to  experience  difficulty  in  understand-
ing and  expressing  the  thoughts  of  some  other  spirits  who
constituted  "  the  Mystic  Band." Perhaps  some  allowance

^  This  is  the  last  of  the  references  of  the  "  Controls  "  to  their  associ-
ation with  Stainton  Moses  that  I  have  noticed  in  looking  through  the
records  of  Hodgson's  period.  In  Vol.  XXIII.  page  235,  Sir  Oliver  Lodge
states:  "Whatever  relationship  may  exist  between  these  personages  and
the  corresponding  ones  of  Stainton  Moses,  there  is  little  or  no  identity
.  .  .  it  would  appear  as  if  they  did  •  not  very  seriously  pretend  to  be
identical."  It  seems,  therefore,  probable  that  after  Hodgson's  time  their
claim  to  identity  was  dropped,  or  at  any  rate  not  asserted.


xcv.]  Mrs.  Piper  and  the  Itnperator  Band.


459


should  be  made  for  him  in  this  matter,  because  the  state-
ment was  made  before  he  and  Imperatorp  had  developed
properly  ; see  paragraph  13.

(c)  On  June  29th,  1898,  "  Records  "  for  May,  page  358,
Mrs.  Piper  gave  a  clairvoyant  description  of  Imperatorp:
"  Tall,  looking  like  a  priest,  with  no  hair  on  his  face.  He
was  dressed  in  long  flowing  garments  looking  like  soft  white
silk,  and  had  a  silver  cross  on  his  breast,  hung  by  a  cord
.  .  .  and  had  a  halo  about  his  head."  This  does  not
correspond  with  the  description  given  of  the  prophet
Malachi,  who  Stainton  Moses'  Imperator  professed  to  be.
See  Controls  of  Stainton  Moses.

{d)  On  January  11th,  1900,  "Records  "  page  52,  Hodgson
was  told  :  "In  Moses'  case  we  were  unable  to  use  the  voice
at  all,  or  very  vaguely  "  ;  and  a  similar  statement  was  made
to  him  on  March  4th,  1901,  page  174.  As  a  matter  of
fact,  Stainton  Moses  used  to  give  trance  addresses  at
seances,  and  his  voice  was  freely  used  in  this  way  by
Imperator  and  other  personages.  This  inaccuracy  seems
to  me  very  important.  The  only  explanations  consistent
with  the  claim  of  identity  that  occur  to  me  as  possible  are
either  that  the  subliminal  mind  of  Mrs.  Piper  distorted  the
statement,  or  that,  as  has  sometimes  been  alleged  in  spirit
communications,  spirits  using  one  medium  are  unable  to
recall  their  former  experiences  with  another.  Neither  ex-
planation seems  satisfactory.

(e)  In  Vol.  XXVIII.  page  95,  it  is  stated  that  Doctor p
wrote  a  large  and  heavy  script.  Now  the  script  used  by
Stainton  Moses'  "  Doctor  "  was  remarkably  smaU  and  fine,
requiring  the  use  of  a  magnifying  glass  sometimes  for
facility  in  reading  it.  Perhaps  this  difference  may  be  due
to  the  difference  of  the  medium,  but  the  omission  to  refer
to  it  and  explain  it  is  unsatisfactory.

(25)  In  my  opinion  a  comparison  of  paragraphs  23  and
24  shows  a  balance  against  the  claim  to  identity.  The
similarities  noticed  in  paragraph  23  can  be  accounted  for
rather  easily  as  due  to  coincidence  or  to  the  knowledge  in
the  minds  of  the  medium  and  the  sitter.  Even  without
these  deductions  their  value  is  not  high.  It  is  more  diffi-
cult to  find  satisfactory  excuses  for  the  inaccuracies  set


460


A.  W.  Trethewy.


[part


forth  in  paragraph  24,  and  the  points  at  issue  are  more
definite  as  tests.

(26)  The  five  "  Controls  "  of  Mrs.  Piper  who  profess
to  have  been  Stainton  Moses'  Guides  were  Imperatorp,
Rector  p,  Doctor  p,  Prudensp,  and  Mentor  p.  His  Guides
bearing  the  same  pseudonyms  alleged  to  him  that  they
had  been  the  following  persons  in  their  lives  on  earth  :
Imperator,  the  Prophet  Malachi ;  Rector,  Hippolytus,  Bishop
of  Portus  near  Rome  ;  Doctor,  the  Stoic  Philosopher  Atheno-
dorus  ;  Prudens,  the  Neo-Platonist  Plotinus  ;  Mentor,  the
Arabian  Ghazali  or  Algazzali.  Mrs.  Piper's  "  Controls "
did  not  give  the  same  account  of  themselves.  From  what
Hyslop  wrote  in  Vol.  XVI.  pp.  262  et  seq.,  they  do  not
seem  to  have  been  much  pressed  on  the  subject  of  their
past  history,  but  to  have  been  accepted  as  helpers  on
account  of  their  successful  management  of  the  medium,  a
more  important  matter  than  their  personality.  To  the  few
questions  that  were  put  to  them  about  their  earthly  names,
they  gave  answers  that  did  not  agree  with  the  claims
of  Stainton  Moses'  Guides.  Without  laying  too  much
stress  on  the  statements  made  at  an  early  stage  of  their
development  (see  paragraph  13),  I  will  merely  say  that  the
substitution  of  other  names  with  IMi's.  Piper  for  those
which  they  had  claimed  with  Stainton  Moses  can  hardly
be  explained  by  forgetfulness  of  earth  life  or  diSerence  of
mediums.  If  the  personahties  were  really  identical,  the
failure  to  get  the  right  names  through  the  medium  might
perhaps  be  inteUigible,  but  no  plausible  excuse  occurs  to
me  for  the  invention  of  such  wrong  names  as  Dante,
"  Lidgates,"  Homer,  and  Ulysses.  To  pass  on  to  later
statements,  Rector  said  in  1907  that  his  name  had  been
Francis  (see  Vol.  XXVIII.  page  110).  His  ignorance  of
Latin  (see  page  110  id.  and  Vol.  XXII.  page  314,  and
Vol.  XXVI.  page  150)  seems  incompatible  with  the  role
of  Hippolytus,  who  lived  in  Italy  in  the  third  century  a.d.
There  is  frequent  reference  to  Plotinus  in  Vol.  XXII.  in
connection  with  a  cross-correspondence  about  a  passage  in
his  writings,  and  to  Prudens  as  a  trance  personaUty  of  Mrs.
Piper,  but  there  is  no  recognition  of  any  relation  between
the  two,  a  significant  omission.


xcv.]  Mrs.  Pij)er  and  the  Imperator  Band.  461

(27)  In  paragraph  5  it  has  been  stated  that  for  the
purpose  of  this  article  it  is  assumed  that  the  "  Controls  "
of  Stainton  Moses  and  Mrs.  Piper  respectively  were  spirits
with  independent  existence,  and  not  merely  creations  of  the
medium's  subUminal  mind.  Summing  up  the  case  on  this
basis,  I  find  that  the  mternal  evidence  points  to  the  two
groups  not  having  been  identical.  There  are,  it  is  true,
slight  resemblances,  but  they  are  either  so  vague  as  to  be
well  within  the  sphere  of  coincidence  where  two  good
bands  of  controls  are  concerned,  or  they  are  of  a  nature
to  suggest  an  origin  from  the  mind  of  Mrs.  Piper  or  her
sitter.  On  the  other  hand,  the  ignorance  and  the  errors  of
her  "  Controls  "  concerning  the  earth-lives  of  the  Guides  of
Stainton  Moses  whose  names  they  bore,  and  concerning
important  features  of  his  mediumship,  are  altogether  in-
consistent with  their  claim  to  identity.  A  considerable
degree  of  oblivion  might  be  excused,  but  the  mistakes  do
more  than  weaken  the  case,  they  justify  a  finding  that  the
claim  is  false.  The  force  of  this  argument  does  not  seem
to  be  diminished  if  it  is  conceded  that  Stainton  Moses'
Guides  may  not  have  told  him  their  right  names  of  earthly
life ;  for  even  so,  if  they  had  become  attached  to  Mrs.
Piper  and  claimed  to  have  been  associated  with  him,  they
would  surely  have  adhered  to  their  former  stories  and
given  correct  accounts  of  his  mediumship.  There  is  only
one  difficulty  which  occurs  to  me  in  rejecting  the  claim.
It  is  hard  to  see  why  spirits  whose  objects  are  good  should
teU  lies  about  their  antecedents.  One  conceivable  expla-
nation, of  course,  is  that  the  "  Controls  "  of  Mrs.  Piper
had  not  independent  existences,  but  were  creations  of  her
subliminal  mind.  Another  is  that  they  were  separate
spirits,  and  that  they  personated  Stainton  Moses'  Guides,
wishing  to  do  good  to  the  medium  and  sitters  and  feeling
that  this  was  the  easiest  way  to  obtain  siiccess,  the  end
justifying  the  means.  The  doubt  about  this  point  is
similar  to  the  failure  to  discover  a  plausible  motive  for  a
crime,  a  failure  which  is  not  necessarily  a  bar  to  conviction.

(28)  Hyslop's  position,  as  far  as  I  can  understand  it,
may  be  noticed  briefly.  From  his  article  in  Vol.  XVI.,
dated  October  1901,  he  seems  to  have  reserved  his  opinion

2a


462


A.  W.  Trethewy.


[part


as  to  the  personalities  of  Mrs.  Piper's  "  Controls,"  but  to
have  favoured  the  view  that  they  were  independent  spirits,
though  there  was  no  proof  of  identity  (pp.  177  et  seq.,
262-267).  This  seems  to  have  been  still  his  view  in  1910
(see  Vol.  IV.  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  American  S.P.R.,
pp.  189,  196).  In  the  American  Journal,  Vol.  X.  page
265  (May  1916),  he  quoted  Imperator's  name  as  Malachi.
There,  and  in  Vol.  XI.  id.  page  76  (1917),  he  argued  that
"  Malachi,"  according  to  a  certain  Hebrew  scholar,  was
not  the  name  of  a  prophet  at  aU,  but  a  word  for  "  mes-
sengers," a  term  by  which  Imperatorp  described  Mmself  and
his  Band,  and  that  therefore  it  might  be  said  that  the
same  name  was  given  through  both  mediums.  In  Vol.
XI.  page  76,  however,  he  dropped  this  point,  and  con-
tinued :  "  The  proper  name  that  I  have  obtained  for  him
through  Mrs.  iSmead  and  Mrs.  Chenoweth,  and  which  also
came  through  Mrs.  Piper  and  Stainton  Moses,  is  of  a  well-
known  historical  character  m  the  Christian  Church  of  early
times."  I  think  that  by  Stainton  Moses  he  must  here
mean  Stainton  Moses  p,  because  the  real  Stainton  Moses  in
his  life-time  left  no  record  of  any  other  name  than
Malachi  for  Imperator.  He  does  not  seem  to  have  changed
greatly  his  opmions  of  1901,  but  to  have  become  slightly
more  inclined  to  the  theory  of  the  identity  of  the  two
groups  of  "  Controls,"  and  not  to  have  discussed  the  pos-
sibihty  of  the  Piper  group  being  spirits  external  to  her
and  falsely  personating  Stainton  Moses'  Guides.

In  Vol.  XI.  of  the  Journal  of  the  American  S.P.R.  is
an  article  by  Raynes  supporting  Hyslop's  views  against  the
opinions  of  Mrs.  Sidgwick  expressed  in  Vol.  XXVIII.  of
the  Proceedings  of  the  English  S.P.R.  He  apparently
considers  Juhus  Caesar p  to  be  a  "mischievous  fool  of  a
spirit "  impersonating  Juhus  Caesar  (page  139).  He  criti-
cizes Mrs.  Sidgwick  because  she  "  nowhere  entertains  the
possibihty  of  spirit  personation  except  in  the  vaguest
possible  way"  (page  142).  Hyslop,  as  I  have  stated  above,
has  not  dealt  with  this  question  in  any  of  his  writings
that  I  have  read.  As  Hyslop  had  so  much  experience  of
Mrs.  Piper's  mediumship,  his  views  are  of  interest ;  but  as
he  seems  to  have  come  to  no  conclusion  on  the  question


xcv.]  Mrs.  Piper  and  the  Imperator  Band.


463


of  identity,  I  do  not  think  it  necessary  to  discuss  them
further.

(29)  In  paragraph  5  I  have  said  that  the  question  to  be
discussed  is  whether  Mrs.  Piper's  "  Controls  "  were  identical
with  those  of  Stainton  Moses,  and  not  who  or  what  they
were  if  the  answer  to  the  question  is  in  the  negative.
Perhaps,  however,  a  few  remarks  on  the  light  thrown  by
Hodgson's  records  on  the  nature  and  origin  of  the  Band
may  be  interesting  to  the  readers  of  this  article.  There  is
at  least  a  superficial  appearance  of  personalities  external  to
Mrs.  Piper.

(a)  The  dialogue  between  the  "  Controls  "  and  the  spirits
communicating  through  them  with  the  sitter  may,  of  course,
be  the  result  of  dramatisation  on  the  part  of  the  medium's
subliminal  mind,  but  on  some  occasions  it  seems  to  offer
convincing  evidence  of  the  presence  of  independent  external
personalities,  e.g.  on  June  17th,  "  Records "  pp.  691  et
seq.,  and  November  10th,  1902,  "  Records "  pp.  869  et
seq.  Two  of  Miss  Pope's  (Theodate)  seances  furnish  sup-
port on  other  lines  to  this  theory.  On  May  18th,  1904,
"  Records  "  page  786,  she  told  G.  P.p  that  Miss  Porter's
spirit  had  given  much  more  evidential  information  than  had
John's  spirit.  This  remark  gives  some  reason  for  supposing
that  these  two  communicating  spirits  were  different  entities.
On  May  24th,  1905,  "  Records  "  pp.  22  et  seq.,  Miss  Pope
had  a  conversation  with  Rector  p  as  to  whether  he  got
names  from  her  mind  by  telepathy  and  whether  he  really
had  an  existence  separate  from  Mrs.  Piper.  To  prove  that
he  had  powers  of  his  own  and  was  an  independent  spirit,  he
quoted  some  of  her  conversations  with  Hodgson  about  the
sittings,  and  referred  to  the  knowledge  about  absent  persons
which  he  was  able  to  obtain  by  the  use  of  "  influences  "
(psychometry). He  made  out  a  plausible  case.

(6)  In  pp.  264  to  266  of  Vol.  XXVIII.  Mrs.  Sidgwick
has  discussed  the  ignorance  of  Mrs.  Piper's  normal  state
professed  by  her  "  Controls."  If  they  were  really  crea-
tions of  her  mind,  their  ignorance  of  the  following  matters
is  very  difficult  to  understand  :  her  correspondence  about
them  in  a  newspaper,  October  21st,  1901,  "Records"  pp.
347  et  seq.  ;  her  mental  attitude  towards  them,  April  28th,

3g2


464


A.  W.  Tretheivy.


[part


29tli,  1902,  "  Records  "  pp.  460,  467  ;  the  death  of  her
brother  and  the  ilhiess  of  her  husband,  October  26th,  1903,
"  Records  "  pp.  742  to  745  ;  the  interruption  in  the  series
of  sittings  due  to  her  ilhiess,  January  6th,  1904,  page  1  ;
the  death  of  her  husband,  June  27th,  1904,  "  Records  "
page  61  ;  her  physical  condition  (they  had  to  have  a
sitting  with  her  daughter  Alta  in  order  to  get  the  infor-
mation for  the  diagnosis  of  Mrs.  Piper's  case),  November
1st,  3rd,  8th,  1904,  pp.  273,  274,  319  to  320  (6),  332.

It  is  conceivable,  no  doubt,  that  in  these  cases  the
ignorance  was  not  real,  but  was  falsely  alleged  m  order  to
support  the  claim  to  an  independent  existence.  I  do  not
see,  however,  why  the  "  Controls  "  should  wrongly  disclaim
the  ability  to  exercise  on  Mrs.  Piper  the  same  powers
which  they  professed  to  use  on  her  sitters.  Their  Imow-
ledge  of  her  condition,  thoughts,  and  affairs  would  be
regarded  as  the  natural  consequence  of  their  association  with
her,  and  would  not  be  considered  inconsistent  with  their
claim  to  be  separate  spirits.

(c)  The  "  Controls "  frequently  prescribed  for  sitters
present  at  the  seances  and  for  absent  persons  whose  in-
fluences were  psychometrised  by  them  (see  pp.  305  et  seq.
of  Vol.  XXVIII.).  Doctor p,  who  made  the  diagnosis,  did
not  profess  to  be  Stainton  Moses'  "  Doctor,"  but  a  de-
ceased medical  practitioner  of  modern  date.  How  far  his
medical  knowledge  exceeded  that  possessed  by  the  medium
and  the  sitter,  and  whether  the  degree  varied  according  to
the  sitter,  are  points  on  which  I  can  give  no  opinion.
The  investigation  might  lead  to  valuable  results  if  made
by  somebody  sufficiently  conversant  with  the  quahfications
of  those  concerned.  There  is  one  curious  point,  a  sort  of
development  of  the  theory  of  influences.  On  April  8th,
1904,  "  Records  "  page  587,  Doctorp,  after  feehng  Hodg-
son's chest,  predicted  that  an  absent  person  would  die
during  the  current  season  ;  pneumonia  had  been  prophesied
as  the  cause  of  her  death,  January  14th,  1903,  "  Records  "
page  41.  On  other  occasions  Hodgson's  body  was  touched
in  the  appropriate  spot  prior  to  the  diagnosis  of  the  case
of  an  absent  person.

(30)  It  may  be  that  in  both  cases  (Stainton  Moses  and


xcv.]  3Irs.  Piper  and  the  Imperator  Band.


465


Mrs.  Piper)  the  "  Controls  "  had  an  element  of  external
influence  outside  the  scope  of  subliminal  dramatisation,  and
depending  on  states  of  personaMty  beyond  the  range  of
mundane  experience.  If  this  theory  is  correct,  there  may
have  been  some  connection  between  the  two  bands  in
links  which  cannot  be  appreciated  by  our  intelligence.
Except  for  the  uncertainties  entailed  by  such  reflections,  I
cannot  see  in  the  material  before  me  sufficient  evidence  of
any  closer  connection  than  one  would  expect  to  find  be-
tween any  two  groups  of  good  "  Controls,"  where  the
medium  and  a  sitter  with  one  group  had  the  supraliminal
knowledge  about  the  other  which  Mrs.  Piper  and  Hodgson
had  about  the  mediumship  of  Stainton  Moses.


466  Ueviews.  [part


REVIEWS
I

Experimentelle  Telepathic.  Neue  Versuche  zur  telepathischen
Ubertrag  von  Zeichmmgen.  By  Db.  Med.  Carl  Bbuck  of
Berlin.  80  pages  and  22  illustrative  plates,  published  at
Stuttgart,  1925,  with  a  short  preface  by  Mrs  Sidgwick
(who,  however,  was  not  present  at  any  of  the  experiments),
and  an  interesting  introduction  by  Dr.  Arthur  Kronfeld
who  was  present  at  a  considerable  number  and  is  able
to  testify  to  the  care  with  which  they  were  conducted.

This  book  is  chiefly  a  detailed  account  and  discussion  of  114
experiments  in  the  transference  of  drawings  and  diagrams
(including  a  few  prints)  carried  out  by  Dr.  Bruck,  he  being
himself  the  "  agent "  throughout,  and  it  is  an  important  and
valuable  contribution  to  the  evidence  for  telepathy.  Dr.
Bruck  prefers  to  speak  of  "  Versuchsleiter "  and  "  Versuchs-
person "  (which  we  may  perhaps  translate  "  experimenter "
and  "  experimentee  ")  rather  than  agent  and  percipient  on  the
ground  that  in  telepathic  experiments  we  do  not  know  which
of  the  two  persons  concerned  plays  the  active  part.  This  is
true  and  has  been  pointed  out  at  various  times  in  our  Pro-
ceedings, but  it  is  an  objection  to  Dr.  Brack's  alternative
names,  that  they  are  not  applicable  in  spontaneous  cases
nor  even  in  all  experimental  ones.  Of  the  experiments  111
were  carried  out  systematically  between  July  1922  and  Feb-
ruary 1923  with  four  young  men  as  percipients  who  were  all
easily  hypnotisable.  The  remaining  three  experiments  were
made  separately  with  other  percipients.  The  degree  of  success,
which  was  clearly  beyond  what  chance  might  produce,  can
best  be  judged  by  inspection  of  the  illustrative  plates,  which
give  the  originals  and  reproductions  in  most  of  the  distinctly
successful  cases,  besides  giving  some  others  to  illustrate
points  discussed  m.  the  text.


xcv.]


Reviews.


467


Dr.  Brack's  reason  for  experimenting  with  easily  hypnotis-
able  persons  was  that  he  wished  to  form  an  opinion  on  the
question  whether  telepathic  percipience  is  assisted  by  hypnoti-
sation  or  not.  He  generally  woke  the  hypnotised  percipient
after  each  experiment,  and  frequently  tried  alternate  experi-
ments with  the  percipient  awake  and  hypnotised.  On  the
whole  he  concluded  that  the  hypnotised  state  appeared  to  be
advantageous  by  faciUtating  concentration.  But  it  seemed  to
have  disadvantages  also,  leading,  for  example,  in  some  cases
to  repetition  of  an  impression  when  a  new  one  should  have
come.

Dr.  Bruck  devoted  much  care  to  the  method  of  experi-
menting, especially  with  a  view  to  excluding  the  possibility
of  normal  seeing  of  the  drawing  to  be  transferred.  As  a
general  rule  he  went  into  another  room  and  either  selected
one  out  of  a  large  number  of  previously  prepared  drawings,
etc.  (which  he  kept  entirely  in  his  own  control  unseen  by
others)  or  occasionally  used  one  drawn  on  the  spur  of  the
moment  by  himself — or  by  a  friend  assisting  in  the  experi-
ment. After  looking  at  the  selected  drawing  and  fixing  it
in  his  mind,  he  placed  it  in  a  portfolio  (Mappe)  held  in  his
hand  and  took  it  into  the  room  where  the  percipient  was.
In  many  of  the  experiments  it  remained  in  the  portfolio
throughout  and  was  therefore  obviously  invisible  to  either  the
percipient  or  any  other  persons  who  might  be  present.  But
Dr.  Bruck  thought  at  first,  though  he  seems  to  have  modified
this  view  later,  that  he  could  help  the  telepathic  process  by
continuous  concentration  of  his  own  mind  on  the  object  to  be
transferred,  and  being  a  bad  visualiser,  and  the  time  occupied
by  an  experiment  being  often  long,  he  found  such  concentration
difficult  without  constant  re-inspection  of  the  object.  He
therefore  in  many  of  his  experiments  took  his  drawing  from
inside  the  portfolio  and  placed  it  on  the  top  so  as  to  be  able
to  look  at  it.  These  he  called  open  {off en)  experiments,  the
others  bemg  described  as  portfolio  {Mappen)  experiments.  It
is,  we  think,  a  pit}-  that  he  does  not  describe  any  general
method  of  screening  the  drawing  from  observation  by  others
in  "  open  "  experiments.  He  gives,  however,  in  detail  the
precautions  in  some  cases  and  is  obviously  so  careful  that
one  cannot  doubt  that  the  precautions  were  adequate  in  all.


468


Reviews.


[part


Moreover,  the  results  do  not  seem  to  indicate  any  compara-
tively greater  success  in  "  open "  experiments  than  ia  "  port-
folio "  ones.  We  may  remark  that  Dr.  Bruck  devotes  par-
ticular attention  to  the  danger  of  reflection  from  any  shining
surface  and  particularly  from  eye  glasses  and  even  the  cornea.
We  cannot  in  a  short  review  examine  the  variations  in  his
experiments  introduced  by  Dr.  Bruck  in  hopes  of  throwing
some  Ught  on  the  process  of  telepathic  perception.  The
number  of  experiments  was  not  sufficient  to  establish  much
except  the  general  fact  of  success  beyond  chance,  but  he  made
observations  of  a  useful  and  suggestive  kind.  One  thing
that  interested  him  was  the  occasional  deferment  of  the
percipient's  impression,  and  rather  curiously  he  classes  with
deferment  a  case  of  apparent  anticipation.  It  was  an
"  open "  experiment,  but  he  had  put  into  his  portfolio
three  drawings  which  he  intended  to  use  in  succession
in  the  same  series.  The  drawing  selected  for  immediate
experiment  represented  a  medicine  bottle.  The  percipient
got  as  far  as  what  looked  like  the  cork  and  the  rim  of  the
neck  of  the  bottle^  and  then  stopped,  putting  down  his  pencil.
Contrary  to  his  usual  practice,  Dr.  Bruck  urged  him  to  go  on,
whereupon  he  started  afresh  and  drew  a  street  lamp  which
was  a  remarkably  good  reproduction  of  the  second  of  the  three
drawings  in  the  portfolio.  This  can  be  regarded  as  in  a
sense  an  anticipation  of  an  intended  experiment,  but  to  us  it
seems  rather  a  confirmation  of  the  view  that  great  concentra-
tion by  the  agent  on  the  subject  to  be  transferred  was  not  a
necessity  or  even  imj)ortant.  He  had  just  selected  the  drawing
of  the  street  lamp  for  experiment  in  the  series  begun  with  the
medicine  bottle.  It  was  therefore  in  his  mind,  and  from  his
mind  the  percipient  probably  got  it.

Dr.  Bruck  has  the  advantage  of  being  not  only  a  good
experimenter,  but  hunself  a  good  agent.  He  does  not  dwell
on  this,  and  Ave  are  not  sure  whether  he  accepts  the  view
that  it  is  not  everyone  Avho  can  transfer  thoughts  and  impres-  •
sions  to  a  percipient,  or — to  put  it  otherwise — whose  mind  lies
open  to a  percipient trying to get an  impression  from it.  ,]

^  As  will  be  perceived,  it  also  resembled  a  top  hat,  and  as  the  percipient
could  not  always  interpret  correctly  his  own  drawings,  he  may  have  regarded
it  as  a  competent  drawing  of  a  hat.


xcv.]


Reviews.


469


As  he  has  this  power,  we  are  glad  to  note  that  he  hopes  to
fmd  opportunities  of  further  experimenting,  and  that  he  will
thus  add  to  our  knowledge  of  telepathy  as  well  as  to  the
evidence  for  it — as  the  experinients  published  iii  this  book
certaiuly  do.

II

I.  Grundversuche  auf  dem  Gebiete  der  fsycMschen  Grenzwissenscliaften.
By  Prof.  Dr.  Christoph  Schroder.  Berlin,  1924,  Pyramiden-
verlag. Dr.  Schwarz  &  Co. Pp.  66.

It  would  seem  that  among  the  results  of  the  War  and  the  Revo-
lution in  Germany  has  been  an  effective  breaking  down  of  the
official  tabus  formerly  imposed  on  psychical  research  or  "  occultism,"
as  the  Germans  prefer  to  call  it,  in  that  country.  At  any  rate
there  now  appear  to  be  a  number  of  competent  inquirers  and
investigating  societies  in  Germany,  who  do  not  find  it  impossible
to  engage  the  attention  of  scientific  people  and  to  get  their  re-
searches pubhshed  by  several  new  pubHshers.  They  have  already
produced  a  considerable  hterature,  which  is  in  the  main  a  record  of
careful  experiments  in  "telepathy,"  "clairvoyance,"  and  "  psychom-
etry,"  as  well  as  in  the  more  spiritistic  tjrpe  of  phenomena,  and
is  decidedly  impressive.  Among  these  researches  Prof.  Schroder's
book  deserves  to  rank  high.  It  forms  the  first  pubUcation  of  the
German  Society  for  Scientific  Occultism,  and  is  composed  for  the
most  part  of  the  (very  concisely  written)  original  notes  of  a  syste-
matic series  of  the  experiments  at  68  sittings  with  6  sensitives  (two
men  and  four  women,  and  all  apparently  unpaid)  in  Berlin,  from
February  1920  to  September  1921.  Prof.  Schroder  set  himself  to
test  whether  the  supernormal  knowledge  shown  by  his  sensitives
could  possibly  be  ascribed  either  to  hyperaesthesia,  or  to  telepathy  ;
but  though  he  started  with  a  prepossession  in  favour  of  the  former,
and  at  first  seemed  to  get  corroboration  for  it,  finally  arrived  at
results  which  he  (not  unreasonably)  claims,  entirely  exclude  both
these  hypotheses,  as  weU  as  merely  fortuitous  success.  Towards
the  end  he  had  so  trained  his  sensitives,  who  were  generally  in  a
state  of  light  hypnosis,  that  they  could  in  total  darkness  pick  out
correctly  (in  about  three  cases  out  of  four)  one  out  of  five  or  six
objects,  such  as  visiting  cards  on  one  of  which  an  imaginary
picture  or  coin  had  been  impressed  (for  them)  by  suggestion,  or
such  as  empty  bottles  of  which  one  was  supposed  to  be  filled  with


470


Reviews.


[part  xcv.


otto  of  roses,  after  these  objects  had  been  so  shuffled  by  various
people  that  no  one  present  knew  which  was  the  marked  object,
and  this  moreover  without  the  object  being  even  touched  by  the
sensitive  !  What  renders  his  record  peculiarly  instructive  is  that
he  shows  us  how  he  gradually  developed  his  technique,  and  found
out  the  sort  of  tests  that  were  practicable,  and  then  tried  them,
with  approximately  equal  success,  upon  his  various  sensitives.  It
must  be  admitted  that  Prof.  Schroder's  methods  do  not  appear  to
be  open  to  any  very  obvious  objection,  and  that  none  of  the  ex-
planations ordinarily  suggested  seem  to  apply  to  his  results,  though
it  seems  decidedly  sanguine  on  his  part  to  suppose  (p.  65)  that
they  cannot  possibly,  in  view  of  their  impersonal  character,  be
ascribed  to  inspiration  by  "  spirits."  It  certainly  appears  an  odd
occupation  for  a  dead  man  (or  a  devil)  supranormally  to  observe
on  which  of  a  number  of  visiting  cards  a  hallucinatory  image  had
been  suggested  to  a  sensitive  in  order  supranormally  to  prompt  the
latter  in  identifying  this  card  ;  but  then  this  oddity  is  in  no  way
removed  by  Prof.  Schroder's  only  theoretic  suggestion  (p.  63),
which  postulates  a  potential  omniscience  to  be  drawn  on  in  an
emergency.  Perhaps  it  is  wisest  to  admit  that  for  the  moment,
in  psychical  research  as  in  physics,  experimental  observation  has
outstripped  theory  ;  we  shall  be  all  the  readier  to  appreciate  the
ingenuity  and  tact  which  have  enabled  Prof.  Schroder  to  obtain
his  remarkable  results.

F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

PART  XCVI

A  REPORT  ON  SOME  COMMUNICATIONS  RECEIVED
THROUGH  MRS.  BLANCHE  COOPER.

By  S.  G.  SOAL,  M.A.,  B.Sc.

Introduction.  .  ,

The  object  of  the  present  paper  is  to  discuss  a  series  of
experiments  and  observations  carried  out  during  the  years
1921-1922  with  a  direct  voice  medium,  Mrs.  Blanche
Cooper,  who  practises  at  the  British  College  of  Psychic
Science.  The  sittings,  which  began  on  September  1,
1921,  were  with  occasional  lapses  held  once  a  week  until
the  following  June.  I  will  say  at  the  outset  that  my
studies  of  IVIrs.  Cooper  were  concerned  entirely  with  mental
phenomena  and  do  not  touch  at  all  upon  the  physical
aspects  of  the  case.  If  one  sets  out  to  investigate  mental
phenomena  one  is  perhaps  justified  in  ignoring  those
physical  concomitants  which  belong  properly  to  the  pro-
vince of  the  expert  physicist  or  the  expert  physiologist.
I  am  not,  therefore,  interested  in  the  question  as  to
whether  the  voices  heard  at  Mi's.  Cooper's  seances  are
truly  independent  or  are  produced  by  the  exercise  of  her
ordinary  vocal  apparatus.  It  does  not  matter  from  my
point  of  view  if  Mrs.  Cooper  holds  the  trumpet  to  her
mouth  and  speaks  into  it  in  the  ordinary  way,  since  I  am
not  concerned  at  all  mth  how  the  voice  is  produced  but
simply  with  what  the  voice  says  and  with  any  charac-
teristic intonations  which  it  may  possess.  But  whatever
may  be  the  physiological  explanation  of  the  voices  it  is


472


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


certain  that  they  involve  a  degree  of  mental  dissociation
and  present  many  of  the  usual  stigmata  of  unconscious
mental  phenomena.  The  medium  does  not  go  into  trance
and  in  the  intervals  when  the  voice  is  not  speaking  she
is  apparently  normal  and  able  to  converse  with  the  sitters,
and  sometimes  even  able  to  repeat  words  which  the  voice
has  just  said.  There  is,  however,  right  through  the
sitting  a  certain  degree  of  absent  mindedness  and  the
medium  is  sometimes  slow  to  respond  to  questions  ad-
dressed to  her  by  the  sitter.  While  the  voice  ^  is  not
speaking  she  keeps  up  a  continuous  humming  noise  with
her  lips,  and  this  humming  ceases  when  the  voice  comes
into  play.  Throughout  the  period  of  my  own  experiments
the  medium  seemed  unable  to  sustam  the  voice  for  more
than  a  minute  or  two  at  a  time,  and  the  information
was  given  for  the  most  part  in  rapid  snatches,  punctuated
by  periods  of  silence  lasting  from  a  minute  up  to  a
quarter  of  an  hour.  ■

Moreover,  it  appeared  that  the  voice  could  only  be
produced  while  the  musical  box  was  playing,  and  only
on  one  or  two  occasions  were  words  spoken  a  second  or
two  after  the  music  had  ceased.  Objective  lights  were
seen  at  every  sitting,  but  these  appeared  in  the  silent
intervals  and  were  never  simultaneous  with  the  voices.
These  lights  varied  in  appearance  from  dim  amorphous  ,
patches  to  bright  bluish  discs  about  the  size  of  a  half  ;
crown.  When  one  attempted  to  touch  them,  even  without
Avarning  the  medium,  the  hghts  invariably  receded  in  the
direction  of  the  cabinet.  In  the  light  there  often  appeared
the  dark  outlines  of  the  upper  half  of  the  four  fingers
of  a  hand  which  may  well  have  been  the  right  hand  of
the  medium  which  was  free.

Methods  of  Transmission.  j

The  mechanism  by  which  ideas  are  transmitted  through  )

the  mediumship  of  Mrs.  Cooper  seems  to  be  somewhat  dif-  ]

ferent  from  that  used  by  a  trance  personality  like  Feda  '
in  the  seances  of  Mrs.  Leonard. My  own  experience  of

^  I have no  record of any  occasion on  which  two  or  more  voices
appeared  to  speak  at  the  same  time.


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  473

Mrs.  Leonard  is  limited,  but  judging  from  the  few  sittings
I  have  had  and  from  reading  the  long  series  of  reports  of
Lady  Troubridge  and  Miss  Radclyffe-Hall,  it  would  appear
that  the  method  by  which  ideas  are  presented  to  Feda  is
in  the  main  ^  a  pictographic  one.  Feda  sees  pictures  and
from  these  pictures  she  has  to  try  to  build  up  a  story
that  will  be  intelligible  to  the  sitter.  Now  my  experience
with  Mrs.  Cooper  rather  strongly  suggests  that  her  uncon-
scious mind  and  the  co-conscious  personalities  which  exist
within  it  are  concerned  very  little  if  at  all  with  the
receiving  and  interpretation  of  visual  impressions.  On
the  contrary  the  function  of  her  automatism  seems  to
be  the  transmission  of  aiulitory  impressions.^  Mrs.  Cooper
gives  names  and  phrases  which  I  am  convinced  could
awaken  in  her  subconscious  mind  nothing  beyond
the  mere  sound  of  the  words  themselves.  At  Sitting
No.  31,  for  instance,  the  control  Nada  pronounced  the
name  "  Shagoian  "  quite  clearly  and  almost  perfectly.
In  giving  this  name  Nada  simply  said  "  Something  from
your  brother  which  you  will  understand."  Asked  what  it
meant  she  said  she  did  not  know.  It  was  the  name  of
a  student  of  mine,  Mr.  Armenag  Shagoian,  whom  I  had
been  coaching  in  mathematics  for  several  weeks  previous
to  the  sitting.  This  apparent  direct  transmission  of  word-
sounds  seems  to  extend  not  only  to  individual  words  like
"  Starbobs  "  [Sitting  No.  6,  p.  499],  but  sometimes  to  whole
phrases,  which  give  the  impression  that  they  have  been
heard  and  faithfully  reproduced  in  some  mysterious  manner.
Thus  in  Sitting  No.  13  [p.  506]  there  is  the  phrase  "grove
gate  "  used  to  describe  a  certain  gate  near  our  old  home
at  Stambridge. It  was  the  expression  invariably  used  by

^  Feda,  of  course,  does  on  occasion  get  auditory  impressions  and  even
olfactory  sensations,  but  I  think  most  students  will  agree  with  me  that
her  method  is  in  the  main  a  method  of  visual  pictures.  The  expression
"  She's  showing  Feda  something  "  constantly  occurs  in  the  various  reports
of  her  utterances.

*  The  writer  has  since  learned  from  a  reliable  soiu'ce  that  on  one  occasion
at  which  Mrs.  Cooper's  sitters  were  Dutch  people  some  fragments  of
Dutch — a  language  with  which  Mrs.  Cooper  is  quite  imfamiliar — were
communicated.  This  fact  rather  supports  the  theory  of  the  transmission
of  audile  verbal  imagery.


474


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


the  members  of  our  family  when  they  wished  to  refer  to
this  particular  gate,  and  probably  by  no  one  else  in  the  neigh-
bourhood except  perhaps  a  few  boys  like  Walter  Valentine
and  Percy  Paternoster  who  had  learnt  the  phrase  from  us.  ;

Had  Feda  been  aiming  at  a  reference  to  this  same  gate
she  would  probably  have  seen  a  field  with  a  path  leading
from  it  to  a  wood  and  then  perhaps  have  noticed  that
the  wood  consisted  mostly  of  tiny  trees  with  some  bigger
ones  and  that  there  was  a  gate  near  the  bigger  ones.
Both  methods  doubtless  have  their  own  peculiar  advan-
tages. For  while  Mrs.  Cooper's  terse  phrase  "  grove
gate  "  has  a  definiteness  that  no  general  pictorial  descrip-
tion could  ever  attain,  Feda,  on  the  other  hand,  while
taking  longer  to  arrive  at  her  destination,  would  perhaps
have  given  many  more  collateral  facts  in  the  process  of
getting  there.

The  direct  voice  seldom  speaks  in  complete  sentences.
Short  condensed  phrases  are  the  rule  and  by  this  means  a
great deal of ground is covered in a short  time.
Questions  asked by  the  sitter  are  seldom  answered  im-
mediately in  the  case  when  the  sitter  is  holding  the  correct  ■
anstver  in his  conscious  mind. In such cases  ^ it was  ;
usually  found  that  the  idea  had  to  pass  back  into  the
unconscious mind of the sitter before  it could  emerge
from the automatism of the medium. The  communi-
cator, when  asked  for  an answer,  would  usually  reply,  ■
"  I  cannot  give  it  now,  but  will  try  to  give  it  later."  ;
Then  at  a  later  period  of  the  sitting  when  the  sitter  had  ;
quite  forgotten  the  matter  in  question  the  correct  answer .  \
would  be  forthcoming. In  cases  when  the  correct  answer  ]
was  not  known  to  the  sitter  a  direct  question  would  often
result  in  immediate  success  ;  such  instances  are  to  be  found
on  p.  542,  Sitting  No.  18,  J.  F.'s  answers  ; Sitting  No.  20  \
Item  No.  17  [p.  563] ;  Sitting  No.  21  Item  No.  47  [p.  565].
In  considering  the  output  of  the  present  series  of  sittings
it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  we  are  dealing  with  the
results  obtained  through a  combination  of  two  psychic
personalities. The  sitter  is  himself an automatic  writer
and is therefore — at least to some extent  —  subject  to

iCf.  p.  496,  1.  14.


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  475

dissociation,  although  he  did  not  develop  automatic  writing
until  a  year  after  the  direct  voice  sittings  were  finished.
It  is,  I  think,  now  generally  admitted  that  a  degree  of
mental  dissociation  in  the  mind  of  the  sitter  is  one  of  the
determining  factors  in  the  production  of  supernormal  infor-
mation. That  is  to  say,  a  sitter  who  is  himself  medium-
istic  will  in  general  be  more  successful  with  mediums
than  another  sitter  will  be  who  is  quite  undissociated.
This  fact  of  mental  dissociation  on  the  part  of  a  sitter
does  not,  however,  seem  to  account  for  the  variations  of
success  which  are  encountered  by  the  same  sitter  in  experi-
ments with  different  mediums.  Personal  sympathy  between
medium  and  sitter,  though  a  most  helpful  factor,  does  not
seem  in  itself  always  sufficient  to  ensure  results.  The
present  writer  found  for  instance  that  while  he  "  got  on  "
very  well  indeed  with  a  certain  well-lmown  clairvoyant,  yet
the  output  of  supernormal  knowledge  was  extremely  meagre.
One  may  suggest  that  success  will  depend  at  least  to
some  extent  on  the  fact  of  the  medium  and  sitter  pos-
sessing the  same  predominant  types  of  mental  representation.
If  the  transmission  of  ideas  and  images  from  the  mind  of
the  subject  to  that  of  the  medium  plays  any  important
part  in  the  mental  process,  we  should  expect  such  simi-
larity as  I  have  mentioned  to  be  a  vital  factor.  The
writer  himself  is  a  good  "  visual "  and  an  indifferent
"  audile,"  but  he  possesses  in  addition  an  exceptional
tendency  to  visualise  words  and  to  articulate  them
inaudibly.  Thus,  if  someone  suggests  to  him  the  idea  of
a  mountain,  he  will  see  in  his  mind  first  a  picture  of
a  mountain  and  next  he  will  usually  see  the  word
"  mountain "  spell  itself  out  in  white  letters.  Then,
as  often  as  not,  he  will  find  himself  saying  the  word
"  mountain  "  inaudibly  to  himself.  This  predominance  of
verbal  imagery  in  the  mind  of  the  sitter  may  possibly
account  for  his  success  with  a  direct  voice  medium  in
comparison  with  the  interesting  though  less  striking  results
he  obtained  with  mediums  whose  method  is  largely  picto-
graphic.

It  is  hoped  in  the  near  future  to  secure  the  co-operation
of the large number of people who have had  sittings


476


8.  G.  Soal.


[part


with  Mrs.  Cooper  in  order  to  ascertain  if  any  correlation
exists  between  types  of  mental  imagery  in  the  sitter  and
success  with  the  medium.

The  Medium's  Subject  Matter.

As  is  the  case  with  most  professional  mediums  the
communications  obtained  through  Mrs.  Cooper  are  of
psychological  rather  than  of  intrinsic  interest.  Her  super-
normal faculties  exercise  themselves  almost  entirely  on
certain  trivial  aspects  of  the  lives  of  deceased  personalities.
In  rare  cases,  however,  the  subject  which  the  medium
describes  may  be  a  living  person  whom  the  medium  has
mistaken  for  a  dead  person.  In  the  important  case  of
"  Gordon  Davis,''  it  will  appear  that  except  for  the
mysterious  prevision  of  the  future  house  the  same  kind  of
facts  are  given  about  a  living  personality  as  are  given
about  a  personality  that  has  once  lived.  In  no  case  did
the  medium's  trance-consciousness  occupy  itself  with
subjects  of  intellectual  or  artistic  interest.

Characteristic  Qualities  of  the  Voices.

The  voices  produced  at  Mrs.  Cooper's  seances  show
variations  in  pitch  and  timbre  to  correspond  with  the
different  personalities  which  are  supposed  to  be  communi-
cating. Thus,  when  a  young  boy  communicates,  the  voice
takes  on  a  boyish  intonation  and  alters  somewhat  in
pitch,  and  similarly  in  the  case  of  a  j^'oung  girl.  Some
fiindamental  quality  of  Mrs.  Cooper's  own  normal  voice  is,
I  think,  to  be  observed  in  all  the  voices.  In  the  case
of  my  deceased  brother  who  was  the  most  frequent
communicator,  I  could  not  recognise  the  voice  produced
at  the  seance  as  the  normal  earthly  voice  I  had  known.
The  general  pitch  was  perhaps  the  same,  but  the  voice
itself  I  could  not  identify.  It  is  of  interest,  however,
to  note  that  in  the  case  of  my  brother  a  "  seance  voice  "
was  developed  which  preserved  certain  marked  character-
istics so  that  immediately  this  particular  voice  spoke  I  was
able  to  recognise  it  as  the  voice  intended  for  my  brother.


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  4:l'i

Even  in  the  ease  of  a  purely  fictitious  communicator  like
"  John  Ferguson  "  the  voice  conserved  the  same  individual
quahties  from  seance  to  seance.  Only  in  the  case  of  the
living  communicator  "  Gordon  Davis  "  did  the  voice  really
remind  me  of  the  living  person.  I  am  unable  to  say
whether  the  voices  of  "  James  Miles  "  and  of  "  Benson  "  ^
resembled  those  of  the  real  persons  for  the  simple  reason
that  I  was  never  acquainted  with  them.  There  was
certainly  an  asthmatic  hoarseness  to  be  noticed  in
the  voice  of  the  old  man  in  the  "  Benson  "  case,  and  it
transpired,  in  fact,  that  he  had  suffered  before  his  death
from  a  chest  complaint.  There  has  to  be  considered,
however,  the  possibility  of  certain  qualities  such  as  the
asthmatic  hoarseness  in  the  "  Benson  "  case  and  the  very
precisely  articulated  utterance  of  "  Gordon  Davis  "  being-
introduced  for  the  express  purpose  of  conveying  dramatically
certain  facts  about  these  'particular  personalities.  That  is,
we  may  suppose,  that  what  was  intended  was  not  to  give
a  faithful  reproduction  of  the  voice  of  "  Gordon  Davis  "
in  all  its  almost  inimitable  qualities,  but  merely  to  convey
in  this  way  certain  facts  about  the  man — such  as  the  fact
that  he  had  cultivated  a  very  precise  accent,  etc.  Here  is
another  point  to  be  noted.  My  brother  during  life  spoke
with  a  rather  marked  North  Country  accent.  No  attempt
was  ever  made  to  reproduce  this  at  the  Cooper  seances. ^


Nada  and  Afid.

There  are  two  voices  which  manifest  at  all  of  Mrs.
Cooper's  seances.  These  call  themselves  "  Nada "  and
"  Afid''  and  purport  to  be  Mrs.  Cooper's  guides  and  say
that  their  function  is  to  look  after  the  medium  and  to
help  the  other  communicators  to  manifest  themselves.
The  voice  of  "  Nada "  is  a  rapid  girlish  whisper  ;  the
voice  of  "  Afid "  is  gruff  and  sepulchral,  and  was  seldom
heard  until  the  very  close  of  the  seance,  when  he  would

^  The  case  of  "  Benson  "  is  not  discussed  in  the  present  paper.

*  The  north  country  accent  (Yorkshire)  was,  however,  noticed  at  a
trance  sitting  with  Mrs.  Brittain  on  July  22,  1919,  when  my  brother
purported  to  communicate.


478


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


announce  in  nearly  always  the  same  formula  that  "power
is  going."  The  voice  of  Nada  was  heard  frequently
during  the  seance  and  often  though  not  always  spoke  at
the  commencement  before  the  other  direct  communicators.
"  Nada  "  like  "  Feda  "  sometimes  spoke  in  asides  to  the
direct  communicators,  giving  them  instructions  not  to  forget
certain  details,  etc.  She  seems  aware  of  things  which
happen  in  the  immediate  environment  of  Mrs.  Cooper,  as
when,  for  instance,  she  remarked  that  one  of  the  medium's
pet  mice  had  died.  On  one  occasion  "  Nada  "  opened  the
seance  by  saying,  "  what  dreadful  weather  we  are  having."

Like  many  other  secondary  personalities  both  "  Nada  "
and  "  Afid "  are  under  certain  delusions  concerning  their
pasts  and  have  come  to  beheve  certain  stories  about
themselves  which  I  do  not  think  it  necessary  to  repeat
here.  Of  the  two  controls  "  Nada "  seemed  the  more
developed  as  an  independent  personality,  and  it  is  possible
that  she  may  be  a  sort  of  resuscitation  of  Mrs.  Cooper's
girlhood.  "  Afid,"  on  the  other  hand,  with  the  sole
exception  of  one  occasion  on  which  he  advised  me  on  my
health  and  offered  to  send  a  "  spirit  doctor "  to  see
me,  whom  he  called  "  Doctor  Alder,"  remained  silent
during  the  seances,  only  coming  in  at  the  end  with  his
invariable  reminder  that  "  power  is  going."  Supernormal
information  was  sometimes  volunteered  by  "  Nada,"  who
professed  to  get  it  from  the  purporting  communicator,  but
I  found  on  the  whole  that  information  given  by  "  Nada  "
was  slightly  less  reliable  than  when  it  came  direct  from  the
communicator  himself.  [In  the  "  Gordon  Davis  "  case,
"  Nada  "  is  as  rehable  as  "  G.  D.  "  himself.]

General  Abstract  of  Experiments.

Section  1  of  my  paper  is  devoted  to  a  series  of  sittings
at  which  the  sole  communicator  was  a  deceased  brother.
In  addition  to  recording  and  analysing  a  large  number  of
spontaneous  communications  I  consider  in  this  Section
certain  experiments  whose  object  was  the  obtaining  of
facts  that  were  unknown  to  the  sitter.

Section  2  is the study  of  what  is perhaps  the  most


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  479

interesting  of  a  number  of  fictitious  communications.  This
case  of  "John  Ferguson"  is  very  interesting  as  showing
the  interplay  between  the  minds  of  medium  and  sitter.
The  study  of  such  purely  imaginary  communicators  affords,
we  believe,  a  valuable  method  for  observing  the  trans-
ference of  ideas  between  sitter  and  psychic.

In  Section  3  we  discuss  the  case  of  "  James  Miles,'"  a
fictitious  commxmicator  of  an  entirely  different  tj^pe.  This
case  appears  to  emphasise  the  necessity  of  the  existence
of  a  physical  link  relating  the  sitter  to  the  deceased  per-
sonality, and  argues  the  impossibility  of  obtaining  in  the
absence  of  such  a  link  information  about  a  deceased
personality  which  is  not  already  present  in  the  mind  of
the  sitter.

Section  4  deals  with  what  is  perhaps  the  most  inter-
esting case  of  the  whole  series.  It  is  a  case  in  which
a  person  believed  by  the  sitter  to  be  dead,  communicates
spontaneously  through  the  direct  voice.  He  reproduces
more  or  less  accurately  the  tone  of  his  voice,  its  accent
and  his  characteristic  mannerisms  of  speech.  He  describes
incidents  of  his  boyhood  known  to  the  sitter  and  speaks
of  one  or  two  matters  unknown  to  the  sitter.  Most
interesting  of  all  he  gives  an  accurate  description  of  the
environment  and  interior  arrangements  of  a  house  ivhich
he  did  not  occupy  until  a  year  later.  Going  back  into  the
past  he  is  able  to  reproduce  accurately  the  place  of  his
last  meeting  with  the  sitter  and  the  substance  of  the
conversation.  Further,  he  is  dramatised  as  if  he  were
a  deceased  personality,  desiring  to  send  messages  of
comfort  to  his  wife  and  child.  In  the  end  we  discover
that  he  is  still  hving.  By  means  of  a  diary  kept  by  him,
we  are  able  to  discover  accurately  just  what  he  was  doing
at  the  times  of  the  first  two  sittings.

Method  of  Taking  Notes.

One  difficulty  presented  itself  at  the  outset  of  my
experiments.  This  was  the  difficulty  of  taking  accurate
verbatim  notes  of  what  was  said  both  by  mj^self  and  by
the  voices  at  sittings  which  were  held  in  total  darkness,


480


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


while  the  right  hand  of  the  sitter  was  held  by  the  left
hand  of  the  medium  the  whole  time. In  the  case  when
a friend was introduced it was quite impossible  to
take any  notes  at  all  while the sitting  was  in  progress
since  on  these  occasions  neither  of  my  hands  was  free.
I soon found, however, that the difficulty was  not
insuperable. The voices seldom  spoke  more  than  a  few
phrases at a time,  and there  were  considerable pauses  j
during  which  by  means  of  a  hard  pad  balanced  on  my  •
knee,  and  using  my  left  hand,  I  was  able  to  take what  I
were  practically  verbatim  notes. But  even  had  I been  '
entirely  unable to  take any  notes  while  the sitting  was
in progress,  the amount  of matter which is given at  ■
a sitting is always so very small that, for a person  j
who is fortunate enough to possess as good a  '
memory as my own, exact memorisation would be no  1
very  difficult feat, especially if  the sitter were keenly  |
interested. In  every  case  in  which  it  was  impossible  to  |
make exact notes during the sitting, memorised notes  ]
were  written  out  in  pencil  before  leaving  the  seance  room,  i
It was not until the third sitting that I made any  ;
attempt  to  take  notes  with  my  left  hand,  but  after  this  '
sitting,  unless  a  friend  happened  to  be  present,  I  invari-
ably  used  this  method. Before  the  war  I  had  the  mis-  i
fortune  to  injure  my  right  arm,  and  for  a  period  of  three  i
or  four  months  I  cultivated  ambidexterity,  writing  letters  1
and even lecture notes with considerable facility. I  ;
found  it,  thex'efore,  no  very  difficult  feat  to  maintain  a  j
stiff  pad  on  my  knees  while  writing  with  my  left  hand.  ^
I  found  that  the  darkness  itseLf  presented  no  real  difficulty
whatever. I  could  write  as  legibly  in  the  dark  as  in  the
light. Nothing  in  the  way  of  rapid  writing  was  needed
as  is  the  case  with  "  Feda  "  talk.

The  Communicator  of  Section  1.

The communicator of Section 1 purports to  be  the

writer's  deceased  brother,  and  a  few  words  about  his  hfe

history  and  subsequent  psychic  history  may  not  be  out
of  place.


V


xcvi.] Communications  Th'ough  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  481

My  youngest  brother,  Pte.  Frank  Soal,  6th  Leicester
Regiment,  died  in  France  at  the  age  of  nineteen,  from
wounds  received  in  action  on  September  5,  1918.  Of
the  nature  of  his  wounds,  or  how  he  received  them,  we
know  httle,  save  that  he  appears  to  have  been  wounded
on  September  1st,  to  have  died  four  days  later  at  a
Casualty  Clearing  Station,  and  to  have  been  buried  in
Bagneux  British  Cemetery.

Born  at  Little  Stambridge,  near  Rochford,  Essex,  on
March  9,  1899,  the  earher  part  of  his  life  up  to  his
sixteenth  year  was  associated  almost  entirely  with  the
fields  and  trees  of  the  Essex  countryside.  Until  1914  he
lived  at  the  old  Rectory,  Little  Stambridge,  two  miles
from  the  Railway  Station  at  Rochford,  but  in  the  winter,
1914-5,  the  family  moved  from  these  purely  rural  sur-
roundings to  Prittlewell,  which  is  five  miles  away  and  a
suburb  of  Southend-on-Sea.  In  that  same  year,  1915,
my  brother  was  apprenticed  to  a  large  firm  of  electrical
engineers.  Of  a  strongly  scientific  and  constructive  bent
of  mind  he  soon  developed  the  keenest  interest  in  electrical
work,  and  made  excellent  progress.  He  was  essentially
of  a  practical  experimental  type  of  mind,  and  not  of  the
type  that  could  appreciate  abstract  symbohsm.  Hence
he  was  never  able  to  make  much  progress  in  mathematics.
In  the  last  years  of  his  life  he  developed  in  a  remarkable
way,  showing  unexpected  interests  and  enthusiasms.  At
eighteen  years  of  age,  in  March,  1917,  he  joined  the
Army,  was  a  keen  young  soldier,  and  entered  into  his
training  with  zest  at  Colchester,  Sevenoaks,  and  Westport,
Ireland.  He  was  sent  to  France  in  April,  1918.  A
month  later  he  was  slightly  gassed,  sent  to  the  base  for
a  few  weeks,  returned  to  the  Front  and  was  killed  in
September.  I  missed  him  keenly.  About  a  year  before
his  death  I  had  become  interested  in  psychic  research,
but  being  in  the  Army  I  had  no  opportunities  for  sittings,
until  I  was  demobilised  in  1919.  In  April  of  that  year
I  became  a  member  of  the  London  Spiritualist  Alliance,
and  it  was  at  one  of  the  public  meetings  of  this  body
that  I  obtained  my  first  personal  experience  of  super-
normal faculty. This  occurred  on  May  20,  1919,  at  an  L.S.A.


482


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


meeting  when  IMrs.  Annie  Brittain  was  giving  clairvoyant
impressions  from  the  platform.  I  had  never  seen  her
before,  and  was  sitting  in  the  front  row,  when,  towards
the  end  of  the  meeting,  she  turned  to  me  and  said,  "  Do
you  know  Canuter  ?  or  it  might  be  Ganuder  ?  "  She  did
not  know  if  it  were  a  place  or  a  person.  I  replied,
"  I  think  it  is  a  Httle  village  I  know  well."  She  said,
"  Well,  there  seems  to  be  someone  from  there  v/ho  wishes
to  speak  to  you."  Nothing  more  was  forthcoming  then.
Now  "  Ganeivdon  "  is  a  little  village  situated  about  three
miles  from  Stambridge  on  a  low  hill  overlooking  the
marshes  of  the  Crouch.  It  is  about  two  miles  away  from
our  old  home,  and  we  Uved  within  sight  of  the  ancient
flint  church  tower,  which  is  a  landmark  for  many  miles
around.  Canewdon  is,  in  fact,  the  next  parish  to  Stam-
bridge. M}^  own  associations  with  this  place  are  stronger
than  in  the  case  of  my  deceased  brother,  for  when  I  was
six  years  old  I  walked  there  every  day  to  a  Kindergarten
School  held  at  the  Rectory.  My  brother  might  have  been
there  once  or  twice  in  his  life.

I  was  so  impressed  with  the  medium  getting  this  name
that  I  arranged  with  her  by  letter  for  a  private  sitting
which  took  place  twelve  days  later  at  her  house  at
50  Westbourne  Park  Road.  At  this  sitting,  during  which
the  medium  did  not  go  into  a  trance,  a  very  good  des-
cription of  Frank's  personal  appearance  was  given  together
with  his  name  "  Frank."  At  the  end  of  the  sitting
I  recalled  to  Mrs.  Brittain  the  "  Canuter "  incident  and
asked  her  how  she  came  to  give  this  word.  She  replied,
"  Oh,  that  funny  word !  I  remember !  I  will  tell  you.
I  saw  a  boy  in  an  oak  tree,  or  it  might  have  been  an
apple  tree.  He  peeped  over  a  branch  and  I  heard  him
say,  '  this  is  Canuter,'  but  I  could  not  tell  that  before
all  those  people.  They  would  have  laughed  at  me.  So
I  just  said,  '  do  you  know  Ganuter  ?  '  "  It  is  rather
curious  that  the  name  Ganeivdon  has  often  been  given  at
sittings.  It  appeared  for  instance  at  my  first  sitting  with
Mrs.  Leonard  on  March  28,  1922.  I  was  accompanied
to  this  sitting  by  Mr.  B.  E.  C.  Davis,  M.A.,  Lecturer  in
English  Literature  in  the  University  of  London,  who  made


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  483


shorthand  notes.  During  the  train  journey  to  Oakleigh
Park,  Mx.  Davis,  in  a  conversation  about  historical  Essex,
mentioned  the  fact  that  he  had  once  visited  Canewdon.
I  then  related  to  him  the  above  psj^chic  incident.  Towards
the  end  of  the  sitting  with  Mrs.  Leonard,  whom  I  had
never  seen  before  that  day,  and  who  did  not  know  my
name,  "  Feda,"  who  had  been  describing  a  bridge,  spoke
as  foUows  :

Feda.  "  He  (my  brother)  says  the  name  "  C  "  is  connected
with  it — rather  a  long  name — its  more  than  one
syllable — (what's  that)  Canterbury  no  it  can't  be
Canterbury — Can — Can — Cana — Cana — Can — Canadon.
(I  was  careful  to  refrain  from  giving  any  assistance.
S.  G.  S.)

S.  G.  S. Just  say  that  word  again,  Feda.

F.  Cana — Canadon (  I  speU as pronounced by  Feda,
S.  G.  S.).

F.  The  people  call  it  that. He  says  they  are  a  funny

people  there — They  keep  together — they're  clinging
— "  conservative  "  he  calls  them— looking  upon
themselves  as  a  class  apart  from  the  rest.

S.  G.  S. Try  to  describe  the  place,  Feda.

F.  It  seem  as  if  it's  away  from  London. Feda  don't  feel

it's  a  toAvn — a  sort  of  place  with  wide  spaces  as
if  there  were  no  shops  or  trams.

[Note. — This  particular  way  of  pronouncing  the
word  by  Feda  is  interesting.  Throughout  history
there  have  been  many  variations  in  the  pronuncia-
tion of  the  name  of  this  vUlage  ranging  from
"Canweedon"  to  "Canudon"  and  "  Cannadon."
The  modem  pronunciation  is  "  Can-u-don,"  the  u
being  pronounced  as  in  "  tube."  Among  the  native
peasantry  of  the  place  it  is  often  spoken  of  as
"  Cannadon  "  exactly  as  given  by  Feda.  Through
my  early  associations  with  the  place  I  was  perfectly
■  familiar  with  this  latter  pronunciation,  but  I  feel
certain  that  Frank  would  have  said  "  Can-u-don."
' ■  The description  of  the  place  by  Feda  is  rather

vague,  but  the  expressions  "funny  people,"
"conservative,"  "looking  upon  themselves  as  a  class


484


S.  0.  Soal.


[part


apart,"  are  all  appropriate  in  a  general  way  and
suggest  an  isolated  community,  a  rather  out-of-the-
world  place.  Canewdon  is  in  fact  four  miles  from
a  railway  station,  and  until  recently  there  was  at
least  one  inhabitant  who  had  never  been  in  a  train.

The  name  "  Canewdon  "  was  again  spelled  out
at  an  Ouija  sitting  with  Mrs.  Travers-Smith,  held
in  May,  1923.  At  the  time  my  hand  was  not
resting  on  the  slider.]

At  a  second  sitting  with  Mrs.  Brittain  on  July  22,
1919,  at  which  the  medium  went  into  a  trance  my  brother
again  purported  to  communicate,  speaking  a  few  words
in  the  North  Country  accent  we  used  at  home.  The
sitting,  however,  was  not  very  evidential.  Fairly  good
personal  descriptions  of  my  brother  were  given  by  Mrs.
Cannock  and  other  platform  clairvoyants,  but  no  very
remarkable  evidence  was  secured  until  the  present  series
of  sittings  with  Mrs.  Cooper.

On  August  28,  1921,  I  received  a  letter  from  Mrs.  B.
M'Kenzie,  Hon.  Secretary  of  the  British  Psychic  College,
informing  me  that  a  sitting  with  Mrs.  Cooper  had  been
arranged  for  September  1st,  and  that  I  was  at  liberty  to
bring  a  friend.  The  question  arises — ^How  much  could
the  ofRcials  of  the  Psychic  College  be  expected  to  know
of  my  private  affairs  ?  At  that  time  I  had  been  a
member  of  the  College  for  a  little  over  a  year,  but  with
the  exception  of  one  experiment  with  the  Crewe  Circle
in  August,  1920,  and  a  Bessinet  seance  in  July,  1921,
I  had  had  sittings  Mdth  no  other  medium  at  the  College.
The  following  would  be  a  fairly  exact  summary  of  the
facts  which,  without  elaborate  enquiry  and  special  detective
work,  the  College  officials  could  be  expected  to  know  :

1.  My  name  and  the  address  "  Scratton  Lodge,"  Brook

Road,  Prittlewell,  Essex.

2.  That  I  was  a  recognised  teacher  in  the  Faculty  of

Science  in  the  University  of  London.

3.  That  I was  very  interested  in  psychic  science  and

that  I  knew  the  medium  Mrs.  A.  Brittain  and  her
husband  who  introcluced  me  to  the  College.


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  485

4.  That  I  had  lost  a  brother  in  the  war. From  the

report  of  the  Bessinet  seance  at  the  end  of  July,
which  I  sent  to  Mrs.  M'Kenzie,  she  might  have
learnt  that  my  brother's  name  was  Frank,  but
nothing  else  respecting  him.

5.  That  in  May, 1920, I  had  pubUshed  an  article  in

Light  on  Einstein  :  the  Mathematician  as  a
Mystic.

I  have  no  reason  to  beheve  that  any  of  these  facts
were  communicated  to  Mrs.  Cooper,  whom  I  met  on
September  1st  as  a  complete  stranger.

Section  1.

My  first  two  sittings  with  Mrs.  Cooper  were  not  very
evidential,  and  the  supernormal  information  obtained  was
not  of  that  clear-cut  and  conclusive  character  which  is
apparent  in  the  later  sittings.  I  have  thought  it  ad-
visable, however,  to  give  a  detailed  account  of  Sittings  1
and  2 — first,  in  order  to  give  some  general  impression  of
what  Mrs.  Cooper's  sittings  are  hke,  and  next,  as  an
illustration  of  the  way  in  which  a  communicator  comes
upon  the  scene.  The  notes  of  these  two  sittings  were
written  from  memory  at  the  end  of  the  seance  before
leaving  the  room.

Sitting  No.  1.

2.25  p.m.  September  1,  1921.

Present :  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper  (medium).
S.  G.  SOAL.

I  arrived  at  the  British  Psychic  College  at  2.25  p.m.
and  was  met  by  Mrs.  M'Kenzie,  who  welcomed  me  and

f;  informed  me  that  I  should  find  Mrs.  Cooper  waiting  in  a
seance  room  at  the  top  of  the  building.  I  found  this
room,  in  which  a  musical  box  was  playing,  and  knocked

''■  at  the  door,  which  was  opened  by  Mrs.  Cooper  whom  I
did  not  remember  having  seen  before.  She  said  she  was
expecting  a  sitter,  but  did  not  know  whether  it  would
be  a  lady  or  a  gentleman. Mrs.  Cooper  shut  the  door


486


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


and  turned  the  key  in  the  lock  and  then  pulled  a  heavy
curtain  across  the  door.  The  window  of  the  room  was
closely  shuttered,  so  that  no  light  could  enter  from  the
street.  Above  the  fireplace  a  shaded  electric  light  was
burning  controlled  by  a  switch  near  the  door.  A  cup-
board in  the  corner  of  the  room  contained  some  old
clothes.  The  furniture  of  the  room  consisted  of  three
plain  wooden  chairs,  a  musical  box,  and  a  "  cabinet,"
about  five  feet  high,  and  of  rectangular  cross-section
2'  by  r.  The  front  face  of  this  cabinet  was  formed  of
a  pair  of  wooden  folding  doors  opened  so  as  to  leave
down  the  centre  a  long  vertical  slit  of  about  2"  aperture.
Resting  on  the  floor  in  a  corner  at  the  bottom  of  the
cabinet  was  a  small  metal  cross  about  a  foot  long,  illumi-
nated with  jjliosphorescent  paste.  The  medium  informed  me
that  this  cross  had  been  used  while  she  was  developing
her  mediumship  with  Mrs.  Leonard,  hwt  was  not  in  use
at  present.  The  medium  arranged  the  musical  box  and
chau's  as  shown  in  the  plan,  and  told  me  I  should  have
to  keep  the  musical  box  wound  up  with  my  left  hand.
She  also  explained  how  to  start  and  stop  the  box.
Standing  immediately  in  front  of  the  cabinet  aperture  and
about  a  foot  away  was  a  large  hght  hollow  cardboard
cone  called  the  "  trumpet  "  which  rested  on  a  broad
end,  diameter  eight  inches.

CABINET

CRO

MUSICAL  BOX

o

I 1

sitter's  chair  '

The above plan is not  drawn  to  scale,  but  is  only
, intended  to  give  a  general  idea  of  the  arrangement  of  the
seance  room. The  measurements  given  in  the  text  are
fairly  accurate.


O

TR  UM  PET


\


<
I
u

z>
5

UJ

2


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  487

The  medium  explained  that  during  the  sitting  this
trumpet  was  levitated  in  the  air  and  that  the  "  spirits  "
spoke  through  it.  Having  arranged  the  chairs  as  shown
in  the  plan  the  medium  left  her  own  chair  a  moment  to
switch  off  the  hght.  In  total  darkness  she  groped  her
way  back  to  her  chair  and  asked  me  to  take  hold  of  her
left  hand  with  my  right.  This  attitude  was  maintained
throughout  the  whole  sitting.  With  my  left  hand  I  had
at  intervals  of  about  ten  minutes  to  wind  up  the  musical
box,  which  kept  repeating  the  same  record.

After  we  had  been  sitting  in  the  dark  for  perhaps  three
minutes  Mrs.  Cooper  asked  me  if  I  could  see  a  light.
I  looked  round  and  said  I  could  see  nothmg.  She  rephed,
"  You  will  see  the  light  presently."  At  the  end  of  about
another  two  minutes  I  noticed  a  very  dim  amorphous
patch  of  light  moving  slowly  about  in  front  of  my  face.
It  seemed  at  a  distance  of  about  nine  inches  away.  The
musical  box  played  loudly  all  the  time.  This  hght  soon
grew  fairly  bright  and  took  the  form  of  a  disc  of  the
size  of  a  crown  piece.  It  was  never  stiU,  but  dodged
about  in  the  circle  space,  disappearing  and  after  a  minute
or  so  reappearing  again.  When  I  reached  out  stealthily
with  my  left  hand  to  touch  it  the  light  would  always
recede  in  the  direction  of  the  cabinet.  Mrs.  Cooper  said
that  the  Hght  was  produced  by  a  spirit  and  that  I  had
better  speak  to  this  spirit  and  ask  it  its  name.  I  there-
fore said,  "  Are  you  a  relative  of  mme  ?  "  Thereupon
the  disc  of  light  made  three  complete  vertical  oscillations,
which  in  the  spirituahst  code  signifies  "  Yes."  Just  then
the  medium  said  she  could  see  clairvoyantly  a  letter  "  J  "
upside  down,  and  she  asked  me  if  that  meant  anything
to  me.  I  said  "  No."  I  then  addressed  the  hght  again,
saying,  "  If  you  are  a  relative  of  mine  speU  out  your
name  by  moving  the  light."  Deliberately  and  slowly  the
patch  of  light  made  six  complete  vertical  oscillations.  I
asked  for  this  to  be  repeated,  and  called  out  A  B  C  D  E  F
at  each  movement  of  the  hght.  This  I  understood  to  be
the  first  letter  of  the  word  intended,  i.e.  the  letter  "  F."
I  asked  the  spirit  to  try  to  give  the  next  letter,  but
nothing  more  was  attempted. The  medium  asked  if  this

2 1


488


S.  0.  Soal.


[part


letter  was  correct,  but  I  merely  said  "  I  think  perhaps  it
might  be."  The  medium  then  asked  me  to  turn  ofi  the
box  and  to  join  her  in  singing  a  few  verses  of  "  Abide
Mdth  Me."  I  did  my  best,  but  could  not  remember  the
words.  During  the  singing  no  hghts  or  other  phenomena
were  observed.  When  the  hymn  was  finished  I  was  asked
to  turn  on  the  music  again.  Immediately  the  box  had
started  to  play,  I  heard,  apparently  close  to  my  ear,  a
rather  deep  toned  but  not  very  strong  voice  saying,
"  I  am  so  glad  to  see  you — so  glad  you  have  come —
Sam,  I  want  you  to  know  that  it  is  really  me."
S.  Try  to  tell  me  your  name.
Voice.  Sam,  it's  really  me,  FranJc.

S. Frank,  I  wonder  if  you  remember  the  old  house  where

we  used  to  live.
F. Yes,  yes,  dear  old  place.

S.  I  am  glad  you  remember.  Try  to  imagine  yourself  in
the  garden  and  tell  me  where  you  would  come  to
if  you  crossed  over  the  bridge.

F. Into  the  field  where  we  used  to  play.

[Note. — I  had  not  expected  this  answer,  but  it  is
perfectly  correct  and  really  apt.  I  had  actually
expected  him  to  say  "  If  you  keep  on  you  will  come
into  the  grove  (a  copse  where  we  used  to  roam).
This  copse,  however,  is  separated  from  the  bridge
over  the  moat  by  a  pasture  field  some  two  hundred  I
yards  wide  which  was  a  favourite  playground  when
we  were  boys.  I  had  expected  that  the  communi-
cator's mind  would  leap  over  this  field  to  the  copse
beyond.]
(Pause.)

After  an  interval.
F. Nineteen eighteen. Nineteen eighteen. The year  of
my  passing.

S. That  is  almost  exactly  three  years  ago,  isn't  it  ?

[Note. — My  brother  was  killed  in  September,  1918.]
S. Frank,  I  wonder  if  you  would  remember  the  names  of

any  of  the  boys  who  used  to  play  with  you  when

we  lived  at  the  old  house.
F. The  answer  was  inarticulate.


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  489


S. Well  never  mind. Can  you  remember  anything  at  all

about  the  old  house  ?
F. Pond  there.

S. Yes  there  was  a  pond. Have  you  anything  to  say
about  it  ?

F. Dooks,  ducks.

[Note. — Pond  is  correct.  There  is  a  conspicuous
pond  at  the  old  Rectory,  but  the  answer  may  well
have  been  a  guess.  At  one  time  there  were  ducks
on  the  pond,  but  the  answer  might  easily  have  been
a  reaction  by  association  to  the  word  "  pond."]

S. Frank,  can  you  remember  the  day  you  and  I  rode  to
Chelmsford  1

F. Yes,  yes. Father  was  very  angry.

[Note. — I  did  not  expect  this  answer,  but  it  happens
to  be  relevant.  My  brother  and  I  rode  to  Chelms-
ford only  on  one  occasion  in  the  summer  of  1911.
I  was  at  that  time  about  twenty-one  years  of  age  and
I  had  cause  to  remember  that  on  the  day  following
this  excursion  my  father  was  extremely  angry  with
me,  although  the  matter  had  no  connection  with  our
visit  to  Chelmsford.  In  my  memory  I  have  always
associated  the  ride  to  Chelmsford  with  my  father's
displeasure  on  the  following  day.]

S. Frank, can you  remember the village school at  all.
What  was  there  near  the  school  ?

F. Church,  church.

[Note. — ^The  playground  of  the  village  school  was
separated  from  the  church  by  a  brick  wall.  At  the
time  I  was  not  thinking  of  the  church  but  of  a
steam  flour  mOls  at  the  head  of  a  creek  nearby.]

S. Frank,  can  you  remember  anything  about  that  church-
yard wall  in  reference  to  yourself  1

F. FeU  off. (Natural  answer  to  such  a  question.)

S. Yes,  you  fell  off,  but  what  did  you  do  to  yourself  ?

F. The  word "  head "  was  heard, but the  rest was  in-
articulate.

[Note. — I  asked  this  question  to  see  if  he  would  men-
tion breaking  his  two  upper  front  teeth.  An  accident
whose  results  were  ever  afterwards  slightly  noticeable.]


490


S.  G.  Soal.


[PABT


S. Tell  me  anything  else  you  remember.
F. Ernest,  Ernest.

[Note.- — I  do  not  know  whom  this  name  refers  to.]
S. Who  was  Ernest  ?
F  (Inarticulate.)

S. Frank,  have  you  met  Uncle  since  you  passed  over  ?
F. Seemed  some  attempt  to  make  a  "G"  sound,  but  the

name  of  the  Uncle  which  was  George  was  not  given.
(At  this  point  a  voice whispered "  I am  Nada.

This  spirit  must  have  a  rest. He  has  been  working

very  hard.")

The  light  now  reappeared  floating  in  the  air.  The
medium  called  to  my  brother,  "  Try  to  show  yourself
to  us."  I  do  not  attempt  to  explain  the  appearances
which  followed,  but  for  the  sake  of  completeness  I  merely
record  them.  What  seemed  to  be  the  rough  outline  of  a
human  ear  showed  on  the  disc  of  floating  light.  This
appeared  and  disappeared  and  then  reappeared.  There
followed  what  seemed  to  be  the  outline  of  part  of  a  hand
showing  four  fingers  from  the  knuckle  to  the  finger  tips.
These  "  fingers  "  made  the  motion  of  opening  and  closing
and  appeared  as  dark  outlines  in  the  centre  of  the  patch
of  light.  No  "  thumb  "  could  be  seen.  Then  something
was  shown  in  the  light  which  looked  rather  like  a  pair
of  lips.  I  called  out  "  Open  your  mouth,"  and  the  lips
made  a  definite  motion,  as  of  parting,  and  when  I  cried
"  Shut  your  mouth,"  the  lips  closed.  I  tried  this  several
times.  Then  something  was  shown  which  looked  like  a
hooked  nose  seen  in  profile.  Considerable  time  was  spent
over  these  appearances,  and  when  the  light  had  dis-
appeared the  voice  of  Frank  was  heard  again.  It
appeared  excited.

F. Sam,  did  you  see  my  ear,  my  hand,  and  my  mouth  ?
S. Yes,  I  saw  something  which  looked  like  a  hand  and  ear

and  mouth,  but  what  was  that  last  thing  you  were

trying  to  show  ?
F. It  was  part  of  my  forehead.

[Note. — Frank's  nose  was straight, but his  forehead

was  decidedly  arched.]


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  491

A  rather  deep  voice  was  now  heard  to  say  "  Power  is
going."

The medium explained that the voice which had  just
spoken  was  that  of  "  Afid  "  her  Eastern  guide.

The  voice  of  Frank  was  heard  again.
F. Sam,  I  won't  say  "  Goodbye  "  because  you  will  be  coming
again.

S. I  hope  so,  goodbye.

The  medium  then  said,  "  Turn  off  the  box,"  and  when
this  was  done  we  concluded  the  sitting  by  singing  the  last
verse  of  "  Abide  with  Me."

On  consideration  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  while
there  was  no  very  strong  evidence  of  supernormal  infor-
mation at  this  sitting,  yet  the  results  were  sufficiently
interesting  to  warrant  a  further  trial.  I  therefore  arranged
with  Mrs.  Ford,  the  Assistant  Secretary  of  the  Psycliic
College,  for  another  sitting  to  be  held  on  Thursday,  Sep-
tember 8,  at  2.30  p.m.

Sitting  No.  2.
Thursday,  September  8,  1921,  2.30  p.m,.

Present:  Mrs.  Cooper  (medium).

S.  G.  SOAL.

The  conditions  were  the  same  as  at  the  first  sitting.

The  patch  of  light  soon  made  its  appearance  and  I
observed  in  quick  succession  what  seemed  to  be  the  dark
outlines  of  a  hand  and  an  ear.  I  was  also  touched
lightly  on  the  knee  by  what  might  have  been  the  trumpet.
We  sang  a  few  verses  of  the  hymn,  and  when  the  box
was  restarted,  the  voice  which  I  recognised  as  the  one
which  I  had  heard  at  the  previous  sitting  commenced  to
speak.

F. Sam,  I  am  so  glad  to  see  you  again. Sam,  I  was  with

you  yesterday.
S. Yes,  and  where  did  I  go  yesterday  ?
F. Dogg — Dogger — Dog — Dogget.


492


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


S. Doggets  1 That's  right.

[Note. — On  the  previous  afternoon  Wednesday,  Sep-
tember 7,  I  paid  a  visit  to  a  friend  who  lives  close  to
our  old  home,  Little  Stambridge  Rectory.  To  reach  this
friend's  house  I  took  the  2  o'clock  bus  from  Southend-on-
Sea  to  the  little  market  town  of  Rochford  and  then
walked  the  remaining  distance  of  two  miles  across  the
fields  of  a  large  farm  called  "  Doggets  Farm."  This
farm,  adjoining  as  it  does  the  rectory  fields,  was  a
familiar  haunt  of  our  boyhood  days,  and  on  this  par-
ticular afternoon  I  strayed  from  the  footpath  and  spent
an  hour  or  so  wandering  round  the  plantations,  etc.,  for
old  times  sake.  I  then  proceeded  to  my  friend's  house.
My  present  address  is  5|  miles  away  from  Doggets
Farm  and  my  visits  to  this  place  are  not  more  frequent
than  once  in  three  months.  On  Sept.  7  I  did  not
decide  to  pay  this  visit  untU  1  o'clock  in  the  afternoon
and  even  the  people  at  home  did  not  know  where  I  was
going  when  I  set  out  after  lunch.  Moreover,  on  reaching  |
Southend-on-Sea  I  first  took  a  tram  towards  Thorpe
Bay  which  lies  in  quite  another  direction,  as  I  had
some  business  to  do  there.  I  then  returned  by  tram
and  walked  down  High  Street  to  Victoria  Corner,  where
I  caught  the  Rochford  bus.  Had  I  been  followed  by
strangers  I  fancy  I  should  have  noticed  them  if  they
had  tried  to  follow  me  over  the  deserted  fields  of
Doggets  Farm.  Southend-on-Sea  is  forty  mUes  from
London,  and  assuming  private  detectives  to  have  been
employed  by  the  medium  or  College,  the  one  word
"  Dogget  "  would  be  a  somewhat  meagre  "  bag  "  after
such  an  exciting  chase.

It  may  of  course  be  suggested  that  what  the  medium
actually  said  w^as  "  Dog  "  and  that  an  uncertain  second
syllable  was  added  when  she  divined  that  "  Dog  "  was
not  effective.  Against  this  explanation  it  must  be
urged  that  "  Dog  "  was  not  a  rational  answer  to  the
question  I  asked.  The  actual  answer  I  anticipated  was
"  Reeves  "  (the  name  of  the  people  I  went  to  see)  or
"  Rochford  "  or  "  Stambridge."  Doggets,  however,  was  an
excellent  answer. I  have  given  this  detailed  discussion


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  493

not  because  the  incident  itself  is  important,  but  merely  be-
cause I  made  such  an  analysis  at  the  time  of  the  sitting.]

S.  Now  Frank,  do  you  remember  the  hut  we  had  at  the  top
of  the  big  field  ?

F. Yes,  Sam,  1  remember.

S. Well,  can  you  tell  me  what  we  used  to  do  at  the  hut  ?
F. We  buUt  a  fire  and  sat  telling  stories.

S. Quite  right. That's  very  good. Tell  me  who  used  to

be  with  us.
F.  Charley.

S.  Not  very  often.  Charley  sat  once  or  twice  in  the  hut.
Can't  you  remember  who  was  most  often  with  us  ?

F.  W — War— Warra — (not  very  distmct  but  the  first  syllable
certainly  sounded  like  War).

S.  (After  some  unsuccessful  attempts  to  get  the  word) —
All  right,  never  mind  that  now.  Can  you  remember
anything  about  the  inside  of  the  hut  ?

F. Twelve  bricks.

[Note. — In  the  autumn  of  1910,  when  I  was  twenty
years  of  age,  my  brother  Frank  and  myself  with  the
assistance  of  two  other  boys  named  Walter  Valentine
and  Percy  Paternoster  cleared  out  a  hollow  in  a  thick
hedge  on  the  borders  of  a  copse  (called  the  grove)  near
Little  Stambridge  Rectory.  With  ivy  and  interlacing
branches  we  formed  a  roof  and  in  the  centre  of  the
floor  space  we  stuik  a  brick  fireplace.  During  the  whole
of  September  and  part  of  October  we  spent  many  of
our  evenings  in  this  hut  in  which  we  had  constructed
rough  seats.  Within  the  brick  fireplace  a  large  wood
fire  was  always  burning  and  round  this  fire  we  sat
telling  stories  or  reading  stories  aloud  from  books  until
"  the  evening  star  washes  the  dusk  with  silver,"  and
the  mists  rose  in  the  meadows.

.  It  will  be  seen  therefore  that  the  answer  "  buUt  a  fire

.■  and  sat  telling  stories  "  together  with  the  mention  of
the  bricks  ^  was  as  good  an  answer  as  could  have  been
devised  in  this  limited  number  of  words.  At  the  time
of  the  sitting  I  was  interested  to  see  how  nearly  an
answer  of  equal  correctness  could  have  been  approximated
^  The  actual  number  of  bricks  would  not  exceed  four  or  five.


494


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


to  by  guesswork.  I  therefore  intervieA^ed  about  a  dozen
persons  to  whom  the  existence  of  the  hut  was  quite
unknown  and  questioned  them  as  follows :  "  Imagine
yourself  to  be  a  fraudulent  medium  who  is  impersonatmg
my  dead  brother.  I  say  to  you  '  Do  you  remember
the  hut  we  had  at  the  top  of  the  big  field  ?  Tell  me
what  we  used  to  do  there.  Now  you  must  make  a
guess  in  not  more  than  eight  or  nine  words.'"

Judging  by  the  results  of  the  little  questionnaire  given
below,  guessing  is  by  no  means  a  good  method  for  the
fraudulent  medium.]

S. Now  we  will  leave  the  hut. Do  you  remember  the  first
time  I  took  j'^ou  to  London  ?

F. Yes,  Sam,  it  seemed  very  wonderful. I  saw  the  River
Thames  for  first  time.

[Note. — This  visit  took  place  when  Frank  was  about  12
years  old  in  the  summer  of  1912.  It  would  undoubtedly
have  left  a  strong  impression  on  his  mind.  The  reference
to  the  Thames  is  interesting.  On  reaching  Liverpool  St.
from  Rochford  we  took  the  Underground  to  Mark  Lane
with  the  intention  of  visiting  the  Tower.  On  leaving
the  station  we  walked  down  to  the  river  and  stood  for
some  time  watching  the  shipping  and  I  remember  pointing
out  St.  Paul's  to  Frank.  Thus  the  first  real  glimpse  my
brother  had  of  London  was  the  view  from  the  River  Thames
and  therefore  this  reference  to  the  Thames  seems  very  apt.]

S. Then  where  did  we  go  ?

F. Tuss — Two — swords. (If  this  is  intended  for  Tussaud's  it
is  quite  mcorrect  as  we  never  visited  the  place  at  all.)
S. Where  did  we  go  in  the  afternoon  ?
F. Wild — wild  animals. Z — z — zoo.

[Note. — We  spent  the  afternoon  at  the  Zoo,  but  the
answer  might  easily  have  been  a  guess.]
S. Frank,  I  have  in  my  pocket  a  photo  of  a  group  of  boys
taken  at  your  school. Could  you  tell  me  whereabouts
you  are  on  the  photo.
F. Yes,  remember  very  well. 1  am  fourth  from  left.

[Note. — Fourth  from  left  is  correct,  but  the  photo  was
very  familiar  to  me.]
(Interval  of  silence.)


xcvr.]


Communications  ThrougJi  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.


495


6


n

03

o

o


CO

-to

f=i  2


Eh

^ ^  .

P-l-r-j

^  03

■-+3  a;  cs


a;


a^

o

CD  t3


©.a


4J
-to


a;
3


C3
t5


o  _,

■rH  rr-j

o  P

a;  a

^1


W


-to


•I— I


-to
O

•  rH

;h

o


O
O


05

O


CO


o
o

ai
-to

!h

O
<D


O

o


o


-to

0)
-(O


3d  ^.2


a^  3

H  PQ


n3
t3

O

o

CO

3  5£
O

r-H  ''^


a

02
CD

O
>5


CO

0)
03

03
-to
c6
;h

ft

CO

<»


■  Ti

03  Oj


0^  3

S'bbS


03
O!

w

0
0


-|o"  O

a  2

o


a;

O  >
ce  rH

pq  t>i-to


o

a

o
o
u

m


t3

o

o
o

P5

w  a

o
o


03 .  (D

>  ce  >

O  ^

-to  rrj  -to

^  a  a

03  ^  -Jf  5


03


03 O  03


(M


.  03

*  >

9  ^

:3  a

O  03


ce

03
CO


o
o

rH  Tjj

'  -to  ~i
to  -to

o  CZ3  ce
o


03

-|0
-to

•  rH


03
03

rH

-to
(Z2
-to

03


o

-|0

to


03


-to-le  W

03

-to fH  tH

C/2  O  O


o
o


-|0

<1


05

r^

-to

cc

-to
Ph

ce
O


,  Rankin

Ranldn

Sloman

.  Sloman

M

M

W

W

Mrs.

Mrs.

CO

-to


'Se

•  rH

O


O
m
bO

03

—  ^
bO  O


ce

CO


-to

-(O

03

d

(H

ce

xn

ce

a

o


03

o

O
CO

ce


ce

a
ft

ce
O


00


05  O  r-*


496


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


F. Bicycles,  bicycles.

S. Are  you  referring  to  what  we  were  speaking  about  last
time  ?

F. No,  Sam,  two  bicycles.

S. Do  you  mean  the  ride  to  Chelmsford  ?

F. No. Two  bicycles. Sam,  I  am  afraid  I  can't  get  it.

S. Never  miiid. Perhaj)s  it  will  come  to  you  presently.

(At  this  stage  Nada  interposed  saying  "  This  spirit  is
very  powerful.  You  bring  a  great  deal  of  power.  .  .  .
He  must  have  a  rest  now."

The  voice  ceased  and  lights  appeared  for  a  short  time.
A  hand  appeared  outlined  in  the  light.)
(After  an  interval.)

F. Sam,  I've  got  it  now. Pat  was  with  us  at  the  hut.  Pat.

S. That's  very  good. You've  got  it  at  last.

F. Yes,  Sam,  3'ou  see  how  we  can  get  things  through  when  you
don't  worry  us.

[Note.- — It  will  be  recalled  that  earlier  in  the  Sitting  in
connection  with  the  hut  I  had  asked  the  question  "  who
was  with  us  in  the  hut  1  "  and  the  answer  had  been
"  Charley,"  succeeded  by  something  which  sounded
like  "  War."  Now  the  two  boys  who  helped  us  to
build  the  hut  and  who  were  constantly  with  us  were
Walter  Valentine  sometimes  called  "  Waller  "  and  Percy
Paternoster  whom  we  invariably  called  "  Pat."  Charley
is  my  livmg  brother  who  seldom  came  to  sit  in  the  hut.
It  will  be  noticed  that  at  the  time  when  the  question
was  asked  and  the  name  "  Pat  "  was  in  the  field  of  the
sitter's  consciousness  the  answer  was  not  forthcoming.
The  present  records  are  full  of  similar  cases.]

F, Sam,  soon  I  shall  be  able  to  speak  to  you  as  I  used  to.
(Interval.)

F. Friday,  Friday.

S. What  about  Friday  ?

F. The  birthday  into  a  new  life. The  day  of  passing  into  a
new  life.

[Note. — The  only  information  we  possess  with  regard  to
the  exact  date  of  my  brother's  death  is  a  letter  from
an  Army  Chaplain  addressed  from  3rd  Casualty  Clearing
Station  and  dated  September  6,  1918  (no  day  of  week


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  497


mentioned).  The  letter  contains  the  phrase  "  we  buried
him  to-day."  A  probable  inference  would  be  that  Frank
died  either  on  September  6,  or  on  the  preceding  day,
September  5.  Now  I  find  that  September  6,  1918,  is
on  a  Friday.  I  had  of  course  seen  the  Chaplain's
letter  when  it  arrived,  but  had  never  thought  about  the
day  of  the  week.  The  result,  if  not  a  chance  coinci-
dence, might  have  been  derived  by  sub-conscious  com-
putation from  the  date  September  6.]

[Additional  Note. — We  have  records  now  to  show  that
Frank  died  on  September  5,  1918,  which  day  is  Thursday.
He  was  therefore  buried  on  a  Friday.]

Nad  A. The  power  is  nearly  gone.

F. Goodbye,  Sam.

S.  Goodbye.

AviT). Power  is  going.

(Sitting  concludes.)

I  shall  next  relate  a  series  of  spontaneous  incidents  in
which  the  evidence  for  supernormality  is  particularly
strong.  These  are  scattered  throughout  the  whole  series
of  sittings  and  are  arranged  here  under  separate  heads.
In  each  case  the  record  is  copied  direct  from  my  case  book.

No.  1 — Incident  of  the  Two  Bicycles.

i

Sitting  No.  5.

Monday,  September  19,  1921,  8  p.m.
t.  This  was  a  group  sittmg  at  which  seven  persons  were

present  including  Mrs.  Ford.  At  such  a  sitting  all  the
persons  were  linked  up  by  holding  hands,  the  left  hand  of
the  person  on  the  extreme  left  havmg  to  manipulate  the
musical  box,  while  the  medium  sat  on  the  extreme  right.
The  trumpet  would  come  to  one  person  and  then  to
another  givmg  short  messages  to  each.  The  sitters  in  the
immediate  vicinity  of  the  person  to  whom  the  voice  was
speaking  could  generally  hear  the  words,  but  those  who
were  farther  off  could  not.  Quite  early  in  the  sittmg  the
voice  of  Frank  spoke  to  me.


498


S.  G.  Soal.


[PABT


F. Sam,  I'm  glad  to  see  yoii  again. I  want  to  give  you
that  test.

S. I'm  pleased  to  see  you. What  test  is  it  ?
F, Two  bicycles. Two  bicycles.

S. Is  it  what  you  were  speakmg  about  last  time  ?
F. No,  Sam,  it  was  two  bicycles. Sam,  I  can't  get  it.
F. Will  come  again  a  little  later.

The  voice  then  moved  away  to  someone  else.  Towards
the  end  of  the  seance  it  came  again  to  me.
F. Two  bicycles,  two  bicycles.
S. Yes,  what  about  them  ?

F. One  went  so  fast  it  ran  away  from  the  other.

S. Now  I  think  I  know  what  you're  driving  at. Can  you
remember  the  place  where  it  happened  ?

F. Yes,  Sam,  it  begins  with  "  D." Long  hill  and  sandy
road. D  ^ — D — many  ferns.

S. Try  to  get  the  name.

F. D — D — difficult,  try  another  time.

The  trumpet  passed  away  again.

[Note. — When  I  heard  the  phrase  "  one  ran  away
from  the  other,"  I  recalled  at  once  the  incident  to
which  the  communicator  was  referring.  One  after-
noon m  August,  1914,  my  brother  and  I  rode
together  on  bicycles  to  Danbury  Common,  which  is
about  eighteen  miles  from  Southend-on-Sea  and  is  one
of  the  highest  pomts  in  Essex.  The  return  journey  from
Danbury  is  a  long  downhUl  for  about  a  couple  of
mUes.  We  mounted  our  machines  and  let  them  rip.
Frank  soon  took  the  lead  and,  outpacing  me,  dis-
appeared from  sight  round  a  bend.  When  I  reached
level  ground  to  my  dismay  I  could  see  nothing  of
him  and  feared  that  he  had  taken  the  wrong  turning.
I  dismounted  and  waited  for  some  time  by  the  side
of  the  road,  but  when  he  did  not  appear  I  was
disturbed  and  imagined  he  might  have  met  with  some
serious  accident  and  was  perhaps,  even  then,  lying
unconscious  somewhere  on  the  road.  However,  I
decided  to  ride  on  and  to  my  relief  I  overtook  hhn

^Throughout  this  record  D —  P — ,  etc.  (with  a  dash),  mean  that  the  sounds
of  these  letters  were  articulated,  i.e.  the  D  sound  not  letter  D.


xovi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  499


some  two  miles  farther  on  near  Woodham  Ferris.
He  had  dismounted  there  and  was  waiting  for  me.
To  the  best  of  my  knowledge  neither  of  us  ever
mentioned  this  incident  to  a  living  soul.  The
mention  of  the  "long  hill"  and  the  "ferns"  (really
bracken)  and  the  "  sandy  road  "  are  truly  excellent
bits  of  description.  As  one  enters  the  Danbury
district  the  roads  become  bordered  with  bracken ;
mdeed,  there  are  acres  of  bracken  on  each  side  of
the  road,  which  is  of  yellow  sand.  When  we  also
add  the  letter  "  D,"  it  will  be  seen  that  Ave  have
a  remarkable  incident  in  which  the  psychic  showed
knowledge  that  probably  belonged  to  only  one  living
person.]

No.  2 — Incident  of  the  "  Stakbobs."

Sitting  No.  0.

September  20,  1921,  3.30  p.m. Present :  Mrs.  Cooper  (medium).

S.  G.  SOAL.

(After  an  interval  Frank  speaks  as  follows:)
Fj In the barn. Set fire alight. Starbobs flew  out.

Sam,  this  is  important.  Starbobs.
S. What  sort  of  a  fire  was  it  ?
I*. With  bricks.

S. Was  it  outside  the  bam  or  uiside  ?

F. Outside — near  the — (inarticulate).

S. : Were  the  starbobs  burnt  ?

F. None  of  them  were  hurt.

S. Was  I  there  ?

F. No  you  could  not  come.

Si Who  was  with  you  that  day  ?

F,  Percy.

S. Were  the  starbobs  old  or  young  ?
F. Some  old  and  some  young.

Nothing  more  was  forthcoming  about  this  matter.
"  [Note. — The scene of the above happenings  was

Little  Stambridge  Rectory,  and  the  time  was  the
summer  of  1909.  The  old  Rectory  at  which  we  lived
for  12 years  is  situated  two  miles  from  Rochford


500


S.  O.  Soal.


[part


Railway  Station.  A  lonely  place,  it  has  attached  to
it  34  acres  of  glebe  land,  and  about  40  yards  from  the
house  is  a  large  dilapidated  outbuilding,  weather
boarded  and  thatched,  and  known  to  the  family  as
"  The  Barn."  The  Barn  was  divided  into  two
compartments  of  which  the  smaller  was  called  "  The
Stable."  Hence  M^hen  I  heard  the  phrase  "  the
barn,"  this  building  was  at  once  pictured  on  my
mental  retina.  I  found  by  enquiries  after  the  sitting
had  concluded  that  the  word  "  Starbobs  "  conveyed
nothing  to  the  mind  of  the  medium,  but  immediately
I  heard  it  I  recognised  at  once  a  local  nickname
used  by  boys  in  this  particular  district  for  the
starlings  which  in  the  winter  settle  in  their  thousands
in  the  copses  and  groves.  In  the  evening  they  make
the  air  clamorous  with  their  cries,  and  the  immense
flocks  as  they  fly  to  their  roosting  places  pass  over-
head like  a  darkening  scarf.  At  the  tinae  of  which
I  write  my  brother  was  about  ten  years  of  age  and
spent  most  of  his  time  out  of  doors  clinibmg  trees
after  eggs  and  young  birds.  I  have  made  enquiries
about  the  word  "  Starbobs  "  and  find  that  it  is  in
fairly  common  use  among  boys  in  the  Rochford
district.  It  was  certainly  used  by  Frank  and  his
companions.  (See  Walter  Valentine's  statement
(p.  591)  in  Appendix.)  These  boys  would  organise
massacres  of  the  starlings  on  winter  evenmgs.  Frank's
old  companions  are,  however,  now  widely  sejDarated,
and  I  would  hazard  an  opinion  that  "  Starbobs  "  is
about  the  last  word  that  a  fraudulent  medium  would
be  expected  to  get  by  enquiries  in  the  district.

But  to  continue  with  the  incident.  When  I  heard
the  words  "  in  the  barn.  Set  fire  alight.  Starbobs
flew  out,"  I  conjured  up  in  my  mind  an  imagi-
nary picture  of  boys  lighting  a  fire  inside  the  barn
and  the  half-burned  birds  crawling  across  the  floor.
But  immediately the words, "  a fire with  bricks.

Outside — near  the  •  "  were  said  I  vaguely  recalled

having  seen  such  a  fire  in  bricks.  On  the  following
Saturday  I  rode  across  to  Stambridge  to  interview


xc^a.]  Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  501

Walter  Valentine,  who  was  perhaps  the  most  regular
companion  of  my  brother  at  this  period.  I  asked
him  if  he  could  remember  any  fire  that  he  and
Frank  made  outside  the  barn.  He  answered  at  once,
"  We  had  a  fire  ia  some  bricks  just  in  front  of  the
Stable."

He  said  he  thought  it  would  be  "  just  under  the
eaves  of  the  thatch  "  and  he  seemed  quite  clear
that  the  fire  was  "  in  the  summertime,  when  the
thatch  would  be  full  of  nesting  starlings."  He  could
not  actually  remember  the  smoke  driving  the  starlings
out  of  the  thatch,  but  thought  "  it  very  likely
happened,"  and  that  "  he  was  certain  the  thatch  was
full  of  j'oung  starlings  at  that  time."  My  sister,
Miss  Lottie  Soal,  corroborates  "  the  fire  in  bricks
outside  the  bam,"  and  she  says  that  "  Walter  and
Frank  had  it  burning  every  day  for  more  than  a
week."  It  is  quite  certain  that  I  must  have  seen  this
fire  myself  and  I  have  an  indistinct  recollection  of
seeing  the  brick  fireplace  in  front  of  the  barn.  The
statement  "  you  could  not  come  "  would  possibly
mean  that  I  was  busy  with  my  studies  aU  day  in  the
house  and  was  unable  to  join  the  boys  in  their  play.
All  members  of  the  family  corroborate  the  fact  that
there  were  scores  of  starlings'  nests  in  the  thatch  of
the  barn.  That  picture  of  the  upward-curling  smoke
rising  into  the  thatch  and  disturbing  the  birds  never
entered  my  conscious  mind  until  Valentine  showed
me  the  position  of  the  fire.  I  should  add  that
Valentine,  though  uneducated,  is  intelligent  and  has
a  reliable  memory.  On  the  same  day  on  which  I
saw  Valentine  I  also  interviewed  Percy  Paternoster,
•  •  who  was  mentioned  in  the  account  of  the  seance.

He  was  unable  to  recollect  any  fixe  outside  the  barn,
but  reminded  me  that  at  about  that  period  he  only
saw  Frank  on  ver\^  rare  occasions,  and  it  was  not
imtil  1910  that  he  became  a  regular  companion.
Since  "  Pat  "  lived  a  mile  away  from  us,  I  think  it
improbable  that  he  ever  saw  this  fire.  It  is  practi-
cally certain  that  to-day  Valentine  would  not  use


502


S.  G.  Soal.


[PAilT


the  childish  word  "  Starbobs  "  ;  he  would  probably
say  "  starlings."  There  is,  however,  no  reason  to
suppose  that  he  has  been  interviewed  by  any  agent
of  the  Psychic  College.  It  would  be  quite  charac-
teristic for  my  brother  to  relate  an  incident  connected
with  starlings  since  during  his  lifetime  he  was
intensely  interested  in  birds  and  their  ways,  collecting
eggs,  bringing  up  young  birds,  etc.,  while  I  had
scarcely  any  interest  in  them  at  all.  It  is  just
possible  that  the  incident  is  a  fabrication  of  my
own  unconscious  mind  founded  on  the  memory  of
the  fire  which  I  had  seen.  That  is,  the  incident  may
be  a  mixture  of  truth  and  fabrication.]


No.  3  Incident. "  Father  M'Kenna."

Sitting  No.  4.

Tuesday,  September  13,  1921,  2.30  p.m.

Present :  Mrs.  Cooper  (medium).
S.  G.  Soal.

(Towards  the  middle  of  the  seance,  after  a  pause,
my  brother  begins  to  speak  again.)
F. Father  Father  M'Ken.
S. Father  what  ?

F. Father  M'Ken— Kenna— Father  M'Kenna.
S. Yes,  what  about  Father  M'Kenna  ?
Nada. I  hear  him  say  church,  church.
F. Father's  M'Kenna's  church.

S. What  did  you  do  at  Father  M'Kenna's  church  ?
F. Helped  him  with  his  lights.

S. That's  very  good. Can  you  remember  the  name  of  the
church  1

[Note. — I  do  not  think  I  ever  knew the  name  of
the  church  (S.  G.  S.)].
F. Electric. It  was  his  lights.
S. Yes,  but  I  asked  the  name  of  the  church.
F. St. — St.  (marticulate).
S. I  couldn't  hear  that. Try  again.


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  503


F.  It  was  the  Sacred — can't  get  it,  Sam.  The  Sacred —
can't  get  any  more.

[Note. — It  was  well  known  to  the  family  that  in
the  year  1915  Frank  was  sHghtly  acquainted  with
Father  M'Kemia  and  sometimes  used  to  visit  him  at
his  "  Church  of  the  Sacred  Heart,"  which  was  situated
off  the  London  Road,  Southend-on-Sea.  On  one
occasion  he  helped  Father  M'Kenna  to  adjust  his
electric  lights.  At  home  Frank  often  spoke  of
Father  M'Kenna,  who  appears  to  have  amused  him.
I  remember  him  relating  how  on  his  first  visit  he
addressed  Father  M'Kenna  as  JVIr.  M'Kenna  and  that
gentleman  replied  "  Father  M'Kenna,  my  boy,  Father
M'Kenna."  The  word  "  Sacred,"  which  was  recorded
before  leaving  the  seance  room,  is  certainly  part  of
the  name  of  the  church,  and  I  cannot  remember  ever
having  heard  it,  or  ever  having  seen  the  church.
It  is  interesting  to  note  that  this  reference  to  electric
lights  is  the  first  m  the  whole  series  of  sittings  to
the  subject  of  electricity  which  was  a  predominant
interest  m  my  brother's  life.

Since  the  incident  occurred  six  years  previous  to
the  sitting  and  in  a  town  40  mUes  from  London,  and
was  known  to  perhaps  only  two  or  three  people  in
Southend,  a  fraudulent  medium  would  have  ex-
perienced some  difficulty  in  ferreting  it  out.]


No.  4  Incident. "  The  Christmas  Present."

Sitting  No.  7.

Wednesday,  October  5,  1921,  3.30  p.m.

Present :  Mrs.  Cooper  (medium).

S.  G.  SOAL.

(Toft'ards  the  middle  of  the  sitting  Frank  speaks
again.)

F. A  Christmas  Present. Christmas  present  you  gave  me.
S. Yes,  I  remember. What  was  it  I  gave  you  ?
F. Electric  thing,  with  two  handles.

S. That's  very  good. Remember  anything  else  about  it  ?

■2  k


504  S.  G.  Soal.  [pabt

F. Shock,  shocks.

S. That's  right.

[Note. — At  Xmas,  1912,  I  bought  Frank  a  small
induction  coil  as  a  present.  This  was  the  only
Christmas  present  that  I  can  remember  ever  having
given  him.  It  pleased  him  immensely  and  he  amused
himself  by  connecting  the  coil  to  a  dry  battery  and
giving  people  shocks.  The  mention  of  "  two  handles"
is  a  most  definite  piece  of  description,  since  the
machine  had  two  bright  metal  handles  which  people
held  for  the  purpose  of  getting  shocks.  Two  or
three  people  outside  our  family  may  have  seen  the
coil,  but  I  do  not  think  that  anyone  except  ourselves
would  know  that  it  was  given  to  Frank  as  a
Christmas  present.  The  coil  is  still  in  my  possession.]
(Frank  speaking  again.)

F. It  was  green. Sam,  I  would  like  to  connect  it  up  to
a  battery.

S. I  put  it  away  with  your  other  things,  but  you  won't

ever  connect  it  to  a  battery  again,  Frank.
Nada interposing. "  You  don't  know  what  he'U  do."
F. Try  to  connect  it  up,  Sam.

S. I  will. Have  they  any  electricity  where  you  are,  Frank  ?

F.  Inarticulate.

[Note. — The  colour  of  the  coil  was  a  bright  green.
Altogether  the  incident  provides  excellent  evidence
of  supernormal  power  on  the  part  of  the  medium,
but  does  not  go  beyond  the  content  of  my  own
mind.]


No.  5  Incident. "  The  Scalded  Hand."
Sitting  No.  8.

Thursday,  October  13,  1921,  3.30  p.m. Present :  Mrs.  Cooper.

S.  G.  Soal.

(At  the  beginning  of  the  sitting  after  Nada  had
spoken  Frank  begins  :)
F. Sam,  a  test — what  you  did  to  your  hand.
S, What  did  I  do  to  my  hand  ?


xcvi.]  Communications  Throvxjh  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  505


F. Burnt  with  water. It  was  very  upsetting  time.

S. Tell  me  what  you  remember  about  it.

F. Mother was very upset. SpoUt exam — examination.

It  was  Sunday,  Sam. You  upset  the  (marticulate).
S. I  understand. Can  you  remember  anythmg  else  1
F. Yes,  Sam. Went  to  Doctor  about  it.
S. Quite  right,  what  else. What  was  the  name  of  the

Doctor  ?

F. (Inarticulate) Can't  get  it,  Sam.

S. Well  never  mind  the  name. See  if  you  can  remember

anything  else.
F. Remember  the  day  before.
S. The  day  before  what  ?
F. Day  before  hand  was  done.
S. Well,  what  do  you  remember  ?

F. It  was  wet  and  C — cl — cla — Claude — Claude  came  with
gun.

S. Why,  Frank,  I had quite forgotten  that. What  did

Claude  do  ?
F. Round  field  for  hares.
S. That's  very  good.

F. You  see,  Sam,  I  remember  things  better  than  you  do.
Pause.

[Note. — This  is  one  of  the  best  incidents,  although
none  of  the  information  given  was  unknown  to  me.
The  facts  are  as  follows.  On  Sunday  evening  the
first  week  in  June,  1913,  I  upset  by  accident  a  large

.  pan  of  water  (almost  boiling)  over  my  right  hand.

I  had  good  cause  to  remember  the  event  for  it
happened  on  the  eve  of  my  M.A.  examination  and
on  account  of  the  injury  to  my  right  hand  I  had
to  postpone  taking  the  examination  until  the  following
June.  On  Monday  morning  I  saw  Doctor  A.  C.
Lewis  of  Rochford  who  bandaged  my  hand  and  put
it  in  a  sling.  My  mother  was  natiirally  much  upset
about  the  affair  more  on  account  of  the  examination
than  anything  else.  When  my  brother  mentioned
about  "  Claude  and  the  gun,"  I  at  once  remembered

.;  .-  that  on  the  Saturday  evening  before  the  accident
:  .  . Frank and myself accompanied Claude Butcher,  a


506


S.  0.  Soal.


[part


friend  of  ours,  round  the  Rectory  fields  on  the  chance
of  starting  a  hare  or  rabbit.  About  that  period
Claude  Butcher  used  to  come  with  his  rifle  almost
every  Saturday  afternoon  or  evening,  Saturday  being
his  only  free  day.  Frank  and  I  invariably  accom-
panied him  on  these  occasions.

We  have  in  this  incident  very  clear  evidence  of
information  being  acquired  by  Mrs.  Cooper  in  a
supernormal  way.]

No.  6  Incident. "  The  Big  Tkee."
Sitting  No.  13.

Thursday,  November  10,  1921,  3.30  p.m. Present :  Mks.  Cooper.

S.  G.  Soal.

(At  the  beginning  of  the  sitting  Frank  speaks  as
follows  :)

F. So  glad  you've  come  again,  Sam. I've  thought  of  a

good  test.
S. Then  let  us  have  it,  Frank.

F. It's  about  the  big  tree,  Sam. Do  you  understand  ?
S, I  linow  what  you  used  to  call  the  big  tree.
F. Built  hut  right  at  the  top. Do  you  know  what  I
mean  ?

S. I  know  very  well,  Frank. Can  you  tell  me  where  the
big  tree  was  ?

.F. Near  Grove  gate,  Sam. Where  M^ood-cock  used  to  be.
S. That's  excellent.  The  woodcock  is  not  there  now,  is  it  ?
F. Gone  long  ago.

S. Tell  me  what  you  could  see  from  the  top  of  the  big
tree.

F. Could  see  River — riv — Couch.

S. Are  you sure  you could  see the  River  Crouch  from

the  top  of  that  tree  ?
F. Quite  sure,  Sam. We  often  saw  it.
S. What  else  could  you  see  1

F. Inarticulate. (The  voice  ceases  to  speak  here.)

[Note. — ^There was a particularly tall elm  which
stood  close  by  a  gate  leading  into  a  copse  about  two


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Coojier.  507

hundred  yards  from  the  Rectory.  This  copse  was
christened  by  the  family  "  The  grove,"  and  the
wooden  gate  the  "  The  grove  gate."  At  the  top  of
this  tall  tree  Frank  and  another  boy,  Walter  Valentine,
in  the  summer  of  1914  constructed  a  kind  of  nest  or
eyrie  in  which  they  would  sit  for  hours.  My  mother
,  remembers  this  hut  very  well.  She  was  in  fear  that
the  boys  would  break  their  necks.  The  reference  to
■  the  woodcock  is  very  remarkable.  The  bole  of  this
elm  which  Frank  always  called  the  "  big  tree  "  was
somewhat  hoUow  and  rotten  at  the  base  and  had
projecting  from  it  a  curious  piece  of  timber  which  bore
a  rough  semblance  to  a  large  bird  or  cock.  Seen
from  a  distance  it  certainly  did  resemble  a  cock  and
for  several  years  Charley — my  eldest  brother — always
spoke  of  it  as  the  "wooden  cock."  This  piece  of
rotten  wood  disappeared  somewhere  about  the  year
1907  or  1908.  Frank  must  have  heard  us  talk  about
it  often  and  have  seen  it  himself  when  a  small  boy.

But  perhaps  the  most  interestmg  feature  is  Frank's
statement  that  "  you  could  see  the  River  Crouch"
from  the  top  of  the  big  tree.  I  had  never  myself
climbed  to  the  nest  or  eyrie  and  at  the  time  of  the
sitting  I  had  no  idea  that  the  Crouch  would  be
■  visible  from  such  a  comparatively  low  altitude.
When  I  asked  the  question  at  the  seance  I  expected
him  to  reply,  "  you  can  see  Prittlewell  Church,"  or
"  you  look  down  on  the  grove."  On  a  Saturday,
in  October,  1921,  to  satisfy  my  curiosity  on  this  point
I  actually  climbed  to  the  topmost  branches  of  this
elm — no  easy  feat  owing  to  the  slenderness  of  the
higher  boughs.  To  my  surprise  I  could  plainly  see
the  silver  streak  of  the  Crouch  over  the  top  of  a
gentle  rise  to  the  north.  It  is,  of  course,  just  pos-
sible that  the  boys  might  have  mentioned  seemg  the
Crouch  and  that  I  had  heard  them  at  the  time  and
forgotten  it.  The  incident,  however,  is  certainly
interesting  in  its  unexpectedness.]
[Note  added  April  23,  1925.]

Yesterday  (April  22)  I  saw  Walter  Valentine  and


508


8.  G.  Socd.


[PABT


made  a  little  experiment.  I  had  not  previously
mentioned  to  him  anything  about  the  "  Big  Tree
Incident  "  and  "  the  view  of  the  Crouch  "  as  I  felt
at  the  time  that  the  matter  could  be  best  tested  by
chmbing  the  tree  myself.  Yesterday,  however,  it
occurred  to  me  to  put  to  Walter  Valentine  without
any  warning  the  same  question  that  I  had  previously
asked  Frank  at  the  seance.  I  asked  suddenly
"  Do  you  remember  the  hut  at  the  top  of  the  big
tree  ?  "  He  answered  "  Yes,  very  well."  I  then
asked  "  What  could  you  see  from  the  top  ?  "  With-
out the  sKghtest  hesitation  Valentine  rephed,  "  The
white  sails  of  the  yachts  on  the  River  Crouch."

The  purporting  communicator  and  the  living  person
therefore  in  this  case  agree  that  it  was  the  view  of
the  Crouch  that  impressed  them  most  from  "  The
Big  Tree."  For  Valentine's  corroboration  see
Appendix  [A].

No.  7  Incident. "  The  Conan  Doyle  Story."
Sitting  No.  14.

Thursday,  November  17,  1921,  3.30  p.m. Present :  Mrs.  Cooper.

S.  G.  SOAL.

(After  John  Ferguson  had  finished,  Frank  communi-
cated the  following  mcident  :)
F. Sam,  we  sat  on  the  grass. You  read  to  us. Do  you
remember  ?

S. Do  you  mean  when  we  were  in  the  hut  ?  '
F. No,  Sam,  before  hut.
S. You  mean  before  we  made  the  hut  1
F. Long  time  before.
S. What  is  it  you  want  to  teU  me  ?
F. We  sat  on  the  grass  and  you  read  a  book.
S. I  can't  remember  the  time  you  mean.
F. It  was  more  than  once,  Sam. .  . i ■  .
S. What  do  you  mean  more  than  once  ?
F. I  mean  it  wasn't  finished  all  at  once — sounded  like
"  next  week."


XCVT.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  509


S. Well,  what  did  I  read  to  you  about  ?

F.  About — about  big  animals  and  birds  with  teeth.

S. I  think  I  know  now  what  you  mean,  Frank. Tell  me

something  else  about  it.
Nada  interposing. He's  laughmg  about  it. He  whispers  "  yes

young  fel — my  lad."
S. That  settles  it. I  understand  perfectly  now. It's  a

good  test. Frank  do  you  remember  who  was  with

us  ?

F. Pat  was  with  us.
S. No,  that's  wrong.
F. Thmk  it's  W— W—
S. Try  to  get  it.

F. W — — there  isn't  much  power,  Sam.
S. Well  never  mind.

(A  pause.)

S. Don't  forget  to  bring  John  Ferguson  next  time,  Nada.

Nada. He'U  be  there.

F. Goodbye,  Sam.

S. Goodbye,  Frank.

Afid. Power  is  going.

[Note. — The  incident  is  a  very  good  one,  but  it
does  not  go  outside  my  own  conscious  knowledge.
In  the  summer  of  1912,  Sir  Arthur  Conan  Doyle's
story,  "The  Lost  World,"  was  appearing  in  monthly
instahnents  in  the  Strand  Magazine.  Frank  and  I
eagerly  looked  forward  to  the  successive  instalments
of  this  fascinating  story,  and  when  the  magazine
arrived  we  would  take  it  into  the  field  where,  sitting
on  the  grass,  I  would  read  it  aloud  to  the  others.
It  was,  in  fact,  the  only  magazine  serial  that  I  ever
did  read  aloud  to  the  boys.  "  Birds  with  teeth  "
refers  obviously  to  the  pterodactyl  with  which
Professor  Challenger  and  his  companions  had  such
perilous  encounters  ;  "  big  animals  "  would  refer  to
the  dinosaurs  and  other  extinct  monsters.  The  phrase
"  young  fel — my  lad  "  (young  fellow  my  lad)  was
always  on  the  lips  of  Lord  John  Roxton.  W — W —
is  perhaps  an  abortive  attempt  to  give  the  name  of
the  boy  (Walter  Valentine),  who  with  Frank  listened


510


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


to  the  story  being  read.  On  enquiry  I  found  that
Mrs.  Cooper  had  not  read  "  The  Lost  World."]

There  is,  I  notice,  an  incorrect  statement  in  Frank's
account  which  I  overlooked  at  the  time  of  the
sitting.  Franlt  is  Avrong  in  saying  that  the  incident
took  place  "  before  "  the  building  of  the  hut.  In
fact,  as  the  hut  was  made  in  1910,  this  incident
occurred  a  coujjle  of  years  later.

No.  8  Incident. "  The  Big  Eel."
Sitting  No.  14.

Thursday,  November  17,  1921,  3.30p.m. Present:  Mrs.  Cooper.

S.  G.  Soal.

(Frank  was  the  first  voice  that  spoke  in  this  sitting.

He communicated the following mcident and  then

withdrew  in  favour  of  John  Ferguson.)
F. Good  afternoon,  Sam. I  want  to  tell  you  something

before  Ferg  comes.
F. A  big  eel. We  caught  it,  Sam,  in  the  Moat. Such  a

big  eel.

S. Say  again  where  you  caught  it.
F. M — M — moat. It  was  near  the  house.
S. I  remember  very  well,  Frank. Tell  me  something  else
about  it.

F. Set  lines  at  night.  (Inarticulate)

S. That's quite  right  about setting  the lines at  night.

Can  you  remember  anythmg  else  about  the  moat  ?
F. R — R — rats — bow  and  arrow.

S. I  know  what  you  mean,  but  what  about  the  bow  and
arrow  ?

F. For  rats. Do  you  know  now,  Sam  1

S. Yes,  I  understand. Can  you  remember  anything  else  ?

F. Funny birds on moat. Dashed down — dashed  down

the  water.
S. What  did  we  call  those  birds  ?
F.  Inarticulate.
S. Tell  me  more  about  the  birds.
F. Dashed  with  a  big  fluster.


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  511


S. That's  right,  but  what  is  the  name  of  the  birds  1
F. Can't  get  it. They  were  wUd,  Sam,  not  tame.
S. I  quite  understand.

(Pause.  Interval  after  which  John  Ferguson  appears.)
[Note. — During  the  year  1914,  Frank  and  Walter
Valentine  set  lines  overnight  to  try  to  catch  eels  in
the  moat.  To  everybody's  surprise  they  found  one
afternoon  a  huge  eel  at  the  end  of  the  Ime.  The
same  week  they  cauglit  another  as  large  as  the  first.
The  family  had  not  expected  that  eels  of  such  size
lived  in  the  moat.  My  mother  remembers  cooking
the  eels  which  no  one  except  Frank  really  liked,  as
they  had  a  muddy  flavour.  The  getting  of  the
word  "  moat  "  is  in  itself  very  interesting.  What  we
called  the  "  moat  "  was  in  reality  a  very  wide  ditch
which  surrounded  the  Rectory  on  three  sides.  Water-
rats  abounded  in  its  banks  and  it  is  remembered
by  the  whole  famUy  that  on  one  occasion  Frank
made  a  bow  and  arrow  and  succeeded  in  shooting
one  or  two  of  these  rats.  The  mention  of  the  birds
which  "  dashed  down  the  water  "  vividly  recalls  the
moor  hens  or  water  hens  which  made  their  homes
there.  Very  frequently  if  one  walked  unperceived
to  the  edge  of  the  moat  one  of  these  birds  would
scuttle  away  down  the  water  in  a  great  flurry.  We
have,  therefore,  in  this  incident  very  definite  evidence
of  supernormal  information,  although  the  facts  given
were  in  my  mind.] [See  Appendix  A.]

No.  9  Incident. "  The  Bxjeied  Medal."
Sitting  No.  8.

Thursday,  October  13,  1921,  3.30  p.m. Present:  ]\Irs.  Cooper.

S.  G.  SOAL.

[This  incident  has  a  special  significance  since  there
is  at  least  a  possibility  of  some  of  the  facts  given
being  known  only  to  the  communicator  himself.
I  AvUl  first  give  the  record  of  the  sitting  and  then
my  brother's  account  of  the  developments  which  took


512


S.  0.  Soal.


[part


place  afterwards.  The  incidents  given  below  occurred
just  before  the  "  Benson  "  case  opened  a  little  latei
in  the  same  sitting.]

(Frank,  who  has  been  speaking,  continues,  after  a
pause,  as  follows  :)

F.  Sam,  I  buried  it. In  the —

S.  What  was  it  you  buried  ?  . '  ,

F.  I  buried  it  in  the  hut  one  day.

S.  Which  hut  do  you  mean  1

F.  Top  of  big  field. It  was  a  medal,  Sam.

S.  What  sort  of  a  medal  ?

F.  (Sounded  like)  "  metal  "  (but  uncertain).

S.  Where  did  you  get  the  medal  ?

F.  Given  to  me  by  a  boy.

S.  What  was  the  name  of  the  boy  ?

F.  Inarticulate — sounded  something  like  "  school."

S.  Was  it  a  boy  at  school  ?

F.  Boy  at  school. It  had  a  piece  of  chain  on  it.

S.  Where  did  you  bury  this  ?

F.  In  the  hut. You  weren't  there,  Sam.

S.  Was  anyone  there  ?

F.  Only  me,  Sam. It  was  near  the  fireplace.

S.  Do  you  mean  where  the  bricks  were  1

F.  Near  the  bricks — left  hand.

S.  On  the  left  hand  of  the  fireplace  1

F.  Left  hand  of  bricks.

S.  How  far  away  was  this  from  the  fireplace  ?

F.  Close  to. Not  far  away.

S.  Did  you  tell  anyone  you  buried  it  ?

F.  Told  no  one,  Sam.

S.  Why  did  you  bury  it  ?

F.  (Sounded  like)  "amuse" — it  wasn't  worth  anything,

S.  Did  you  have  a  spade  ? Was  it  very  deep  ?

F.  Not  deep,  Sam. May  have  sunk  a  bit  now.

After  a  pause  I  again  qiiestioned  him.

S.  Frank,  did  you  bury  the  medal  with  a  spade  ?

F.  No,  Sam,  just  poked  it  in  with  sticks.

S.  Did  I  Imow  anything  about  it  ?

F.  You  never  saw  it,  Sam.

S.  What  was  there  on  this  medal  ?


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  513


F.  Can't  remember,  Sam,  it  had  a  piece  of  chain  I  carried
it  by.

S.  Was  it  very  large  ?

F.  (Sounded  like)  "  inches  "  (but  not  clear).

S.  Try  to  tell  me  some  more  about  it.

F.  Not  much  to  tell,  Sam — heavy  (inarticulate).

S.  Where  did  you  say  you  got  it  from  ?

F.  Someone  gave  it  me.

S.  Someone  at  school  ?

F.  W — Perhaps  at  school.

S.  Did  Pat  or  Walter  know  anj^thing  about  it.

F.  No,  I  was  by  myself — when  I — school.

S.  Do  you  mean  when  you  came  back  from  school  ?

F.  Yes,  Sam,  think  it  would  be  then.

(No  more  was  forthcoming  about  the  medal.)

Statement  by  Mr.  C.  W.  Soal.

ScRATTON  Lodge,

Brook  Road,

Prittlewell,  Essex,
October  24,  1921.
On  Thursday  evening  of  October  13,  my  brother,  Mr.
S.  G.  Soal,  showed  me  the  records  of  a  sitting  which  he
.  had  had  that  day  with  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper  at  the  British
Psychic  CoUege.  These  notes  purported  to  be  a  communi-
cation from  my  deceased  brother  Frank  and  indicated  the
possibility  of  the  finding  of  a  medal  under  the  earthen
floor  of  a  hut  made  by  us  some  years  ago  m  a  double
hedge  near  Little  Stambridge  Rectory.  No  description
was  given  of  this  medal  except  the  statements  that  it  was
heavy,  and  had  a  piece  of  cham  attached.  The  position
of  the  buried  object  was  indicated  fairly  exactly  by  the
phrase,  "near  the  brick  fireplace."  I  did  not  remember
my  brother  possessmg  any  such  objects,  but  he  may  have
done.  I  remember  that  the  hut  was  used  in  the  year
1910,  and  understood  that  it  had  fallen  to  decay  since.

On  Saturday,  October  15,  my  brother  suggested  that
we  should  ride  over  to  Stambridge  and  have  a  look  at
the  place. Neither  of  us  had  any  real  hopes  of  finding


14


S.  G.  Soal.


[PAET


anything  and  I  consented  to  accompany  my  brother  merely
for  the  sake  of  the  ride.  We  set  out  at  about  2  o'clock
in  the  afternoon  and  reached  the  Rectory  fields  sometime
after  three.  We  found  the  hut  had  fallen  in  and  its
floor  was  overgrown  with  brambles  and  undergrowth  of
various  kinds.  I  stayed  near  the  hut  whUe  my  brother
walked  over  to  the  Rectory  to  borrow  a  spade  and  pick
from  Mr.  Williams,  the  present  occupier.  It  was  Mrs.
Williams  who  lent  him  the  spade  and  pick.  On  his  return
we  cleared  away  the  brambles  and  roots  and  soon  found
the  remains  of  the  old  brick  fireplace.  We  delved  around
this  with  the  pick  as  the  ground  was  iron  hard.  Presently
we  were  able  to  remove  some  clods  with  the  spade,  but
at  first  found  nothmg.  On  prising  out  a  large  clod  on
the  left-hand  side  of  the  fireplace,  I  detected  something
metallic  sticking  out  of  the  underside  of  the  piece  of  earth.
The  object  was  firmly  bedded  in  and  from  the  state  of
the  ground  it  could  not  have  been  put  there  at  all  recently,
i.e.  not  during  the  present  hard  condition  of  the  earth.  It
was  found  at  about  the  depth  of  three  quarters  of  a  spade
depth.  When  extracted  it  proved  to  be  a  disc  of  lead
of  about  two  inches  in  diameter  and  nearly  a  quarter  of
an  inch  in  thickness.  At  about  half  an  inch  from  the
circumference  a  hole  had  been  bored  through  the  disc,
probably  for  the  purpose  of  inserting  a  chain  or  string.
No  chain  was  however  found.  The  edge  of  the  disc
looked  as  if  it  had  been  cut  by  a  chisel  from  a  sheet  of
lead.  There  was  no  inscription  or  any  sign  of  machine
work  on  the  disc,  and  I  cannot  conceive  for  what  purpose
it  could  have  been  used  unless  as  a  lad's  plaything  to  be
whirled  about  at  the  end  of  a  chain  or  piece  of  string.
The  hut  was  buUt  on  virgin  soU,  and  therefore  if  any
object  was  found  buried  it  was  most  probably  buried  by
one  of  the  boys  who  inhabited  the  hut.  Neither  my
brother  nor  myself  can  recall  ever  having  seen  the  object
before.  The  other  two  boys,  Percy  Paternoster  and  Walter
Valentine,  who  used  to  sit  in  the  hut,  can  remember  nothing
about  it.  There  seems,  therefore,  at  least  a  possibility
that  it  was  put  there  by  Frank  as  stated  in  the  seance.
The  surface  of  the  lead  showed  evidence  of  severe  oxidiza-


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  515

tion,  but  I  could  see  no  signs  of  iron  rust  near  the  hole
where  a  chain  might  once  have  been  and  have  rusted  away.
The  disc  could  not  properly  be  described  as  a  medal,  but
might  perhaps  be  called  a  medallion.

C.  W.  SOAL.

A  consideration  of  the  statement  of  my  brother,  Mx.
C.  W.  Seal,  argues  at  least  a  fair  possibility  that  my
brother  Frank  buried  something  in  the  hut,  and  that  this
interment  was  known  only  to  himself.  It  is  important
to  note  that  the  object  was  found  in  the  position  indicated
at  the  seance.  In  addition,  we  have  the  important  state-
ment that  it  was  "  heavy,"  while  the  object  found  was
made  of  lead.  Although  no  chain  was  found  yet  the  hole
in  the  disc  seems  to  suggest  the  possibility  of  there  having
been  a  chain  at  some  time.  I  have  since  made  enquiries
of  several  boys  who  knew  Frank  at  school,  but  not  one  of
them  can  remember  having  given  him  the  medallion,  or
ever  having  seen  it  before.  This  lack  of  corroborative
evidence  that  the  medal  was  ever  in  Frank's  possession
is  perhaps  the  chief  flaw  in  the  case.


Attempts  to  Obtain  Information  About  Matters
Unknown  to  the  Sitter.

Towards  the  end  of  September  I  interviewed  Walter
Valentine,  one  of  the  boys  who  had  known  my  brother
intimately  during  the  Rectory  period,  and  asked  him  to
think  over  a  few  striking  incidents  connected  with  my
brother's  life  at  Stambridge,  of  which  I  should  be  entirely
ignorant.  These  incidents  I  asked  him  to  put  in  the
form  of  questions  so  framed  that  I  could  not  myself
easily  guess  the  answer,  but  which  nevertheless  admitted
of  fairly  definite  rephes.  Valentine,  who  thoroughly  under-
stood the  object  of  the  experiment,  said  he  thought  it
would  be  difficult  to  frame  such  questions  for  the  reason
that  I  myseK  knew  most  of  what  Frank  had  done  at
Stambridge.  He  promised,  however,  to  think  the  matter
over  in  his  spare  time,  and  when  I  visited  him  in  about
a  week's  time  he  had  made  three  or  four  such  questions.


516


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


I  regret  to  say  that  I  did  not  ask  him  to  enclose  them
in  an  envelope  to  be  opened  only  at  the  seance,  but
copied  them  at  his  dictation  into  my  pocket  book.  There
was  therefore  the  possibihty  of  rapport  being  estabUshed
in  the  interval  preceding  the  seance  between  Valentine's
mind  and  my  own.  Very  little  is,  I  think,  known  about
the  conditions  under  which  spontaneous  telepathy  operates
from  A  to  B  via  a  third  person  C.  One  or  two  cases,
however,  have  I  believe  been  recorded  which  seem  to
indicate  that  this  kind  of  transference  may  sometimes
occur.  The  questions  propounded  by  Valentine  read  as
follows  :

1.  What  did  we  have  to  eat  on  the  day  when  you  and

me  and  Pat  walked  from  Fambridge  Ferry  to
Creeksea  Ferry  ?

2.  When  you  and  I  went  to  bathe  at  the  Mill  one  day

what  happened  to  our  boots  ?

3.  One  day  when  you  and  me  and  Pat  were  sitting  in

the  hut  I  did  something  that  made  Pat  very  angry,
what  was  it  ?

I  put  the  first  and  last  of  these  questions  at  Sitting
No.  7  on  October  5,  after  the  incident  of  the  "  Christmas
Present." I  said  to  Frank  :

S.  Frank,  Walter  has  made  some  test  questions  of  which
I  don't  know  the  answer.  I  want  you  to  do  your  best
to  get  the  answer  through.

F. All  right  Sam,  fire  ahead.

S.  The  first  question  is  this,  "  When  you  and  Walter  and
Pat  walked  from  Fambridge  Ferry  to  Creeksea  Ferry,
what  did  you  have  to  eat  on  that  day  ?  "  Take  your
time  to  answer.  Do  you  know  the  time  I  am  talking
about  ?

F. Remember  it  very  well,  Sam. Were  tired  to  death.
S. Now  do  you  remember  what  you  had  to  eat  ?
F. Sam — Samfer — samfer — samphire.
S. Samphire  is  that  the  answer  to  the  question  ?
F. Think  that's  the  right  answer,  Sam,  but  there  was  some-
thing else.
S. Something  that  you  h^yd  to  eat  ?


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  517

F. Something  to  eat — it  was  in  a  field — iaarticulate.

[Note. — At the words "in a field  " I  immediately
thought  of  turnips. S.  G.  S.]
F. In  a  field — s — s — sw — sweet — sweet — swede.
S. Say  that  word  again,  Frank.
F. Think  it  was  swedes,  Sam.
S. Then  samphire  and  swedes  are  the  answers  ?
F. Try  samphire  and  swedes.

(Pause.)

S. Now,  Frank,  I  am  going  to  put  you  another  question.
S. You  and  Pat  and  Walter  were  sitting  in  the  hut  one  day

and  Walter  did  something  that  made  Pat  very  angry.

What  was  it  ?
F. Walter  ran  away — marticulate.
S. What  did  Walter  do  to  make  Pat  angry  ?
F. It's  very  difficult  Sam,  I  can't  get  it.
(Pause.)

F. It  might  be  when  Pat  was  sitting  over  the  fire  and —
(Pause.)

S. Yes,  Pat  was  sitting  over  the  fire  and  what  then  ?

F. Walter  knocked  the  tin  of  water  on  the  fire.

F. Pat  was  mad.

S. Is  that  the  answer  ?

F. That  may  be  what  he  means.

On  the  evening  of  Friday,  October  28,  1921,  I  rode  over
to  Great  Stambridge  to  interview  Valentine  with  regard
to  the  tests.  To  avoid  the  risk  of  his  memory  being
influenced  by  my  answers  I  asked  him  to  go  into  his
cottage  and  write  the  correct  answers  on  separate  pieces
of  paper,  while  I  wrote  the  answers  obtained  at  the
sitting  on  other  pieces  of  paper.  I  was  first  to  show  my
answers  to  Valentine,  and  if  they  were  reasonably  correct
he  was  to  show  me  his  corresponding  answers.  If,  how-
ever, my  answer  was  hopelessly  wrong  or  inadequate,  he
was  to  keep  his  own  answer  so  as  not  to  spoil  the  test
for  a  second  sitting.  I  first  showed  Valentine  the  paper
on  which  I  had  written  "  samphire  and  swedes."  Valen-
tine produced  his  piece  of  paper  on  which  was  written,

\ve  ate  swedes." I  asked  him  about  the  samphire,  but


518


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


he  said  he  was  quite  sure  that  none  of  them  ate  samphire
on  that  day.

I  then  showed  Valentine  the  second  answer  which  read
"  Walter  ran  away — Pat  was  sitting  over  the  fire  and
Walter  knocked  the  tin  of  water  on  the  fire.  Pat  was
mad."

Walter  Valentine  said  that  the  phrase,  "  Walter  ran
away,"  was  quite  relevant,  but  that  the  rest  of  the  answer
about  the  tin  of  water  was  altogether  wrong.  He  did  not
show  me  his  paper  in  this  case,  but  suggested  that  I
should  try  again.  I  did  try  at  a  subsequent  sitting,  but
no  intelligent  answer  was  obtained. ^

[Note. — It  will  be  seen  that  a  success  was  scored  with
the  word  "  swedes."  Had  I  not  heard  Frank  say,  "  in
a  field,"  my  conscious  mind  I  feel  sure  would  not  have
suggested  "  turnips,"  in  fact,  what  I  was  thinking  of  was
"  winkles,"  or  some  sort  of  shell  fish,  since  I  knew  this
walk  was  on  the  sea  wall.  The  answer  "  samphire  "
although  definitely  wrong  is  very  interesting.  From  the
way  in  which  the  question  was  put  Mrs.  Cooper  or  her
subconscious  mind  could  scarcely  have  guessed  that  the
walk  was  by  the  side  of  a  tidal  river  on  whose  saltings
the  glasswort  (locally  called  samphire)  blooms  in  profusion
during  the  month  of  September.  I,  however,  was  quite
familiar  with  the  plant  from  which  a  sort  of  pickle  can
be  made  and  the  stems  of  which  even  in  the  raw  state
are  not  unpalatable.  I  had  sometimes  during  my  rambles
on  the  Essex  marshes  nibbled  at  the  green  stems  ;  they
were  salty  but  not  disagreeable.  Samphire,  however,  does
not  suggest  edibihty  to  the  majority  of  people,  and  I  very
much  doubt  if  IMrs.  Cooper  even  knew  that  it  grew  in
Essex.]

The  question  as  to  whether  the  boys  could  have  eaten
glasswort  on  this  journey,  I  have  settled  definitely  in  the
negative.  The  excursion  took  place  on  a  Good  Friday
(this  is  confirmed  by  several  people,  including  my  mother),
and  at  this  time  of  year  the  glasswort  has  not  begun  to
thrust  its  shoots  through  the  mud  ; at  an3rrate  they  are

1  For  the  real  answer  to  Valentine's  question  and  additional  notes  see
Appendix  [A].


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  519

just  beginning  to  appear  and  could  not  be  eaten.  The
getting  of  the  word  "  samphire  "  suggests  therefore  either
transference  from  my  own  mind  or  the  emergence  of  an
associated  memory  in  the  mind  of  the  communicator.

The  answer  given  to  the  second  question  even  although
it  may  be  wrong  as  a  reply  to  the  question  certainly
suggests  supernormal  knowledge — possibly  of  a  telepathic
nature.  Mrs.  Cooper  could  not  possibly  know  by  any  normal
means  that  a  tin  of  water  was  always  kept  in  the  hut
for  the  express  purpose  of  extinguishing  the  fire  when  we
left  at  night.  The  incident  described  was  just  the  sort
of  prank  that  a  mischievous  boy  like  Walter  would  be
likely  to  play  on  another  boy  seated  over  the  fire.
Having  emptied  the  tin  he  Avould  then  naturally  run  away
to  escape  the  wrath  of  his  victim.  The  incident  may
actually  have  happened,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  it  may  have
been  a  pure  mvention  of  my  own  subconscious  mind.
It  is  not  the  sort  of  thing  that  Mrs.  Cooper  herself  could
have  invented ;  it  reveals  too  intimate  a  knowledge  of
conditions  at  the  hut.

For  Valentine's  corroboration  of  these  tests  see  Appen-
dix A.

The  third  test  about  the  boots  when  put  at  a  subse-
quent sitting  ehcited  no  intelligent  answer.  It  will  be
seen  therefore  that  one  definite  success  was  scored  in  the
series  of  tests.

Unverified  Incidents  which  show  Supernormal

Knowledge.

It  will  be  observed  that  almost  all  the  preceding  inci-
dents refer  to  a  particular  period  of  my  brother's  life,
namely  the  years  when  we  hved  at  Little  Stambridge
Rectory,  and  during  which  I  was  most  closely  associated
with  him.  From  the  year  1915  onwards  I  saw  much  less
of  him  for  I  was  away  on  my  Army  service.  After  the
thirteenth  sitting  I  encouraged  him  to  speak  of  things
connected  with  this  later  period  of  his  Me,  as  I  thought
that  such  incidents  would  afford  a  greater  chance  for
the  exclusion  of  direct  telepathy  from  myself. From  time

21.


520


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


to  time  Frank  attempted  to  speak  of  matters  comiected
with  his  Mfe  in  the  Army,  but  unfortunately  the  incidents
he  selected  were  such  as  were  almost  impossible  to  verify.
But  though  it  seemed  absolutely  impossible  to  prove  his
statements  they  were  from  a  psychological  standpoint  very
interesting  as  the  setting  of  the  incidents  invariably
showed  supernormal  knowledge.  The  statements  made
were  true  as  far  as  the  sitter  knew  anything  about  them,
but  the  main  incidents  although  plausible  could  not  be
checked.

A  typical  example  occurs  in  Sitting  No.  16,  held  on
Thursday,  December  1.  At  this  sitting  Mr.  A.  L.  Gregson
was  present.

(Franlt  spoke  first  and  related  the  following  story  :)

F.  Sam,  I'm  trying  to  give  you  something  about  when  I  was

in  the  Army.

S.  Good,  that's  just  what  I  want.

F.  Sam,  it  was  when  we  were  in  Kent. We  all  had  bicycles.

F.  Two  of  us  went — inarticulate.

S.  Two  of  you  went — I  didn't  get  that,  Frank.

F.  Two  rode  ahead  for  scouts.

S.  I  think  I've  got  that. Two  of  you  rode  ahead  for  scouts.

F.  I  was  one  of  them,  Sam.

S.  Then  what  happened  ?

F.  We  stopped  near  a — inarticulate.

S.  Try  and  get  that,  Frank. You  say  you  stopped  somewhere.

F.  Stopped  near  a  thatched  house.

S.  What  then  ?

F.  There  was  an  old  woman — gave  us  apples.

S.  Yes  I've  got  that. Go  on.

F.  Gave  us  lots  of  apples — filled  our  pockets — it  was  hard  to

ride,  Sam — I  mean  for  the  apples.

S.  Would  you  remember  the  name  of  this  village  ?

F.  Didn't  notice,  Sam. Wasn't  a  village.

S.  Well  would  you  remember  whereabouts  in  Kent  it  was  ?

F.  Mid — middle — orchards — pause.

(After  a  pause  Frank  refers  agam  to  the  matter.)

F.  The  old  woman  said  something,  Sam.

S.  Yes,  what  did  she  say  ?


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  521

F. About  "  I  have  a  boy —
S. Yes,  I  have  a  boy —
F. I  have  a  boy  just  like  you.
S. Is  that  what  she  said  ?

F. Yes,  Sam. If  you  could  find  out  about  it.
S. It  would  be  very  hard  unless  we  knew  the  name  of  the
place.

F. In  Kent,  Sam — when  we  were —
S. Where  were  you  going  then  1
F. A  great  time,  Sam.

S. But  where  were  you  going  ?  >
F. Right  to  the  C— C—
S.  Where.

F. Right  through  to  the — we  saw  the  sea  at  the  end — it  was

over  the  d— downs.
S. Did  you  get  right  to  the  sea  ?
F. Right  there,  Sam.

(The  voice  ceases  and  lights  appear. At  the  end  of

the  sittmg  when  John  Ferguson  had  gone  I  questioned

Frank again about it, but could get no  additional

information.)

Now  the  medium  could  hardly  have  known  that  my
brother  had  belonged  to  a  Bicycle  Section  whose  Head-
quarters were  at  Sevenoaks  in  Kent.  The  fact  that
Frank's  Battalion  rode  on  manoeuvres  through  Kent  to
the  Sussex  Coast  was  known  to  me  since  it  was  mentioned
in  one  of  his  letters  to  my  mother.  These  manoeuvres
appear  to  have  lasted  a  week  or  two,  and  my  brother  in
his  letter  mentions  such  things  as  "  passing  through
Groombridge,"  "  fighting  all  the  way,"  carrying  "  pack
90  lbs."  with  bicycle  60  lbs.  up  a  three  miles'  hill  on
the  first  day's  journey  from  Sevenoaks.  As  the  letter
is  dated  September  8,  1917,  the  time  certainly  corres-
ponds with  "  apple  time."  There  is,  however,  in  this  letter
no  mention  of  his  being  sent  on  scouting  operations  or
of  any  old  woman  who  gave  him  apples.  Nor  is  there
any  definite  mention  of  a  sight  of  the  sea  in  this  letter
although  I  have  some  hazy  recollection  that  when  my
brother  visited  me  in  Maida  Vale  hospital  one  day  at  the


522


S.  O.  Soal.


[part


end  of  September  1917,  he  mentioned  catching  a  glimpse
of  the  sea  from  the  Downs.  I  have  also  a  distinct  recol-
lection that  he  told  me  on  that  occasion  that  they  had
ridden  80  miles  and  that  he  mentioned  Lewes.  It  is  one
of  those  tantalising  problems  which  we  shall  probably
never  solve.  Have  we  here  a  superstructure  of  fabrication
reared  upon  fragments  of  knowledge  obtained  supernormally
from  the  mind  of  the  sitter  1  Or  was  my  brother  detail-
ing an  incident  which  actually  occurred  ?  The  next
section  of  our  paper  will  perhaps  throw  some  light  on  this
question  of  fabrication.  A  similar  series  of  unverifiable
incidents  were  given  by  my  brother  in  connection  with  his
electrical  career,  but  it  is  perhaps  scarcely  necessary  to
describe  them.  The  best  that  can  be  said  for  them  is
that  they  appear  plausible  and  show  a  knowledge  of
matters  which  the  medium  could  not  possibly  have
obtained  in  any  fraudulent  way.

Other  cases  similar  to  this  in  connection  with  electricity
were  obtained,  but  the  one  described  above  should  suffice.

I  have  been  asked  the  question,  "Did  your  brother
ever  profess  to  remember  an  incident  which  turned  out
to  be  definitely  false — not  merely  unverifiable  1  "  I  would
reply  that  in  the  case  of  incidents  spontaneously  volun-
teered by  Frank  I  can  find  no  intelligible  story  which
proved  to  be  definitely  false.  There  is,  it  is  true,  one
case  in  which  Frank  talked  about  "  a  letter  "  "  sent
to  the  old  Jiouse  "  "  after  you  left  " — "  you  did  not  get
it."  But  the  wording  is  so  very  vague  that  some  doubt
might  be  felt  about  the  meaning.  Though  I  tried  to  clear
the  matter  up  by  questions  the  story  still  remained  inco-
herent. If,  as  I  suppose,  it  refers  to  a  letter  being
addressed  to  us  at  Little  Stambridge  Rectory  after  we
had  moved  to  Prittlewell,  I  think  it  highly  improbable
that  we  should  not  have  received  it  since  the  P.O.  would
certainly  forward  it.

He  also  stated  in  a  sitting  that  "  a  great  friend  of  his,

M  ,  had  put  a  green  wTeath  on  his  grave." It  seems

highly  improbable  that  he  ever  had  such  a  friend  who
would  put  a  wreath  on  his  grave.  We  cannot  imagine
who  it  can  be.  •  •  -


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  523


I  have  records  of  two  or  three  questions  I  put  to  hhn
to  which  he  returned  definitely  false  answers.^  Often  it
seemed  as  if  he  (or  the  medium)  were  merel}^  guessing.
Thus  on  one  occasion  I  asked  the  question,  "  Where  did
Pat  hide  his  money  ?  "  This  referred  to  an  incident  that
Frank,  if  living,  would  certainly  not  have  forgotten.  The
answer  I  hoped  for  was  "In  a  hollow  willow  tree  where
we  found  his  hoard  one  day."  Frank,  however,  merely
muttered,  "  In  Drawer — Drawer,"  and  then  lapsed  into
silence  when  told  that  the  answer  was  wrong.  It  is  safe
to  say  that  no  spontaneous  incident  of  the  same  importance
as  say  "  The  Starbobs "  incident  was  ever  given  which
proved  to  be  false.

On  three  occasions  Frank  gave  book-tests,  but  only
one  of  these  appeared  to  be  a  success.  The  successful
one  (if  not  due  to  chance  coincidence)  is  rather  remarkable
and  is  recorded  in  Psychic  Science  [April  1923].

Frank  gave  no  descriptions  of  his  life  in  the  other
world — perhaps  for  the  reason  that  I  never  encouraged
this  kind  of  message.'  On  one  occasion  he  uttered  a  few
sentences  about  "  the  beautiful  summerland,"  but  I  must
confess  I  thought  at  the  time  that  both  the  voice  and
the  views  sounded  very  like  Mrs.  Cooper.  Frank  once
purported  to  give  a  description  of  how  he  was  wounded
on  the  battlefield.

"  Such  a  big  flash,  Sam — such  a  big  flash.  They  found  me
lying — I  saw  a  beautiful  mist  all  round  me — the  first  thmg
I  thought  of  was  '  Mother.' We  were  going  over  the  top — "

There  is  nothing  in  this  description  that  I  have  been
able  either  to  verify  or  to  disprove,  but  I  well  remember
that  at  this  particular  sitting  the  atmosphere  seemed
charged  with  emotion  and  I  had  a  strong  impression  at
that  moment  that  I  was  really  in  touch  with  my  brother.

.  '  Section  2.

The  Study  of  a  Fictitious  Communicator .

The  chief  interest  in  the  following  case  Hes  in  the  fact,
that by  means of a quasi-experimental  method  we  are


524


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


able  to  watch  the  mental  interplay  which  goes  on  between
the  minds  of  the  sitter  and  the  medium.  I  do  not  mean
to  suggest  that  there  is  anything  transferred  from  the  mind
of  the  sitter  to  the  mind  of  the  medium,  but  merely  state
that  there  is  a  causal  nexus  between  the  working  of  the
two  minds  ;  of  the  fundamental  nature  of  the  process
I  know  nothing.  I  use  the  term  "  transference  "  merely
on  account  of  its  convenience  and  not  as  implying  any
theory  of  what  is  observed  to  happen.  The  case  of  John
Ferguson  seems,  however,  to  suggest  some  of  the  con-
ditions to  be  observed  when  carrying  out  similar  experi-
ments. The  stories  about  the  communicator  which  the
sitter  suggests  to  his  subconscious  mind  should  in  the  first
instance  be  plausible  and  not  such  as  would  conflict  with
the  statements  given  by  the  communicator  at  the  previous
sittmgs.  The  arguments  on  which  the  sitter  bases  his
conjectures  of  what  is  to  transpire  may  be  quite  unsound
from  a  logical  point  of  view  ;  what  seems  important  is
that  they  should  be  psychologically  suggestive.  In  other
words  the  sitter  must  be  able  to  convince  the  irrational
side  of  his  mind  that  the  arguments  he  employs  for
arriving  at  his  conclusions  are  plausible,  and  that  his
absurd  conjectures  have  at  least  a  sporting  chance  of
coming  true.  It  is  necessary,  in  fact,  that  the  ideas
which  he  wishes  to  transfer  to  the  medium  should  in  the
first  place  have  become  active  in  his  own  subconsciousness,
for  there  is  some  evidence  to  show  that  it  is  those  ideas
which  are  coloured  by  an  emotional  tone  which  have  the
best  chance  of  becoming  externalised  by  automatism.  In
my  own  case  I  actually  came  to  half  beheve  the  things
I  had  supposed  about  John  Ferguson,  and  had  a  sort  of
desperate  hope  that  they  might  turn  out  to  be  facts  after
all.  At  the  same  time  the  logical,  reasoning  part  of  my
mind  told  me  that  my  arguments  were  childish  and
absurd.  I  was  able  to  establish  beyond  reasonable  doubt
that  John  Ferguson  was  a  pure  fiction — a  personality
built  around  certain  scenes  and  events  comiected  with  my
own  thoughts  and  environments.

The  case  of  John  Ferguson,  which  extended  over  ten
sittings, shows throughout a curious consistency,  not


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  525

uncommon  in  such  fictitious  cases,  which  was  kept  up  till
the  fiction  was  finally  exploded  at  the  end.  Thus  it  will
be  observed  that  John  Ferguson  never  got  mixed  in  his
dates,  age,  etc.,  but  would  repeat  in  Sitting  19  what  he
had  said  in  Sitting  11.  He  would  invent  new  scenes  and
happenings  to  cope  with  new  facts  discovered  by  the  sitter.

The  case  may  be  said  to  have  opened  at  Sitting  No.  11,
when  the  mention  of  Brentwood  first  occurs.  John
Ferguson  himself,  however,  did  not  communicate  directly
until  the  next  sitting.  I  will  first  quote  the  record  of
Sitting  No.  11.

Sitting  No.  11.

Thursday,  November  3,  6  p.m. Present :  Mrs.  Cooper.

Dr.  a.  C.  Dunstan.

S.  G.  SOAL.

(This  was  a  very  poor  sitting. Both  the  sitters  and
'  ' the  medium  complained  of  being  cold. UntU  the  end
of  the  sitting  the  voices  were  feeble  and  indistinct,  little
of  any  iaterest  being  said. ToAvards  the  close  of  the
sittmg  Nada  speaks  :)
Nada. There's  someone  wishes  to  speak — ^Wescot  Road — Brent

— Brentwood.
S. What  was  the  name  of  the  road  ?
Nada. Wescot  Road,  Brentwood.

[Note. — -Dr.  Dunstan  said,  "  I  think  it  said  Wesgate
Road." I  however  distinctly  noticed  that  the  last
syllable  was  "  cot,"  and  said  so  at  the  time. S.  G.  S.]
S, Who  is  it  speaking  ?
Nada. Think  it's  a  man  and  a  child.
S. Can  you  give  their  names  ?

Nada. Difficult because he's not strong enough to  speak.

Think  it's  a  father  and  daughter.
S. Are  you  sure  of  Wescot  Road  ?
Nada. Quite  sure — Wescot  Road,  Brentwood.

(Pause.)
AriD. Power  is  going.


I  arranged  to  have  the  next  sitting  on  the  following
Saturday  morning  as  I  did  not  think  it  would  be  advisable


526


8.  O.  Soal.


[part


to  wait  so  long  as  a  week.  No  enquiries  were  made
about  Brentwood  or  Wescot  Road.  I  should  mention
here  that  Brentwood  is  an  old  world  market  town  about
18  miles  from  London  on  the  Great  Eastern  Railway,  and
enjoys  the  distinction  of  possessing  both  a  Grammar
School  and  a  Lunatic  Asylum.  In  my  journeys  to  town
I  had  passed  through  the  station  for  many  years,  but  had
never  visited  the  town.  Nor  to  the  best  of  my  know-
ledge had  I  ever  consulted  a  directory  of  Brentwood.
We  will  now  proceed  to  the  next  sitting.

Sitting  No.  12.

Saturday,  November  5,  11  a.m.  Present:  Mks.  Coopek.

S.  G.  SOAL.

(Nada  sjioke  first.)
Nada. Pleased  to  see  you,  Mr.  Soal.

S.  Pleased  to  see  you,  Nada.  Are  you  going  to  bring  the
man  from  Brentwood.

Nada. He's  going  to  try  to  give  his  name.

(Pause,  during  which  Nada  was  heard  to  whisper
aside as if addressing an unseen communicator —
"  Now don't  forget. There are two houses.  Two
quite  different  houses.")
A  rather  deep,  but  not  unpleasant  voice  said  briskly  :

Voice.  I  am  John  Ferguson — brother's  name  is  Juu — Brent-
wood— I  want  to  describe  a  house — in  an  avenue —
trees  on  each  side  all  big  houses  with  gates  painted
dark  red — quite  large  houses.

S. Where  is  this  avenue  ?  •  . •  '

J.  F. Brent.  ,  •

S.  Brentwood  ?

J.  F. Yes,  m  Brentwood.

S. What  is  the  name  of  the  avenue  ?

J.  F.  H- — H — can't  get  it,  but  it  begms  with  H.  It's  a
large  house.  People  there  very  musical.  Keep
foAvls.  I  was  33  Avhen  I  passed  over — Jim  is  my
brother.

S. Does  your  brother  Jim  live  at  this  house  ?
J.  F. Must  enquire  there — find  out  about  Jim.


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  527

S. Can't  you  give  the  name  of  the  street  ?
J.  F. Not  now  it's  gone  from  me.

Nada. You  mustn't  press  him  so. You  must  give  him  time
to  breathe.

S. Very  well,  Nada. But  has  this  house  anjrthing  to  do

with  Wescot  Road  ?
Nada. Yes,  there's  a  connection  between  the  two  families.
S. What  is  the  connection  ?

Nada. Can't  say. He  isn't  strong  enough  to  tell  much  yet.
(Pause.)

(Frank  spealdng)  Sam,  I'm  glad  to  see  you.

S. Frank,  do  you  know  anything  about  this  man  Ferguson  1
F. Only  what  I  heard  Nada  say.
S. What  did  you  hear  Nada  say  ?

F. About  a  large  house  at  Brentwood  and  red  gates.  I

was  interested,  Sam,  because  I  remember  Brent.
S  What  can  you  remember  about  Brentwood  ?

F. First  time — first  I  ever  slept  from  home.
S  Quite  right. When  was  that  ?

F. The  Army — joined  there.

S. Good,  do  you  remember  anything  else  about  it  ?

F. Only  that  I  didn't  like  it, Sam — not  there  long.

[Note. — Frank  joined  the  Essex  Yeomanry  at  Brent-
wood (Warley  Barracks)  m  1916.  Stayed  there  a
night  or  two  and  was  sent  on  to  Colchester.]

Nada. There  isn't  much  power  left. He'll  try  to  tell  more
next  time.

F. Must  say  goodbye,  Sam.

S. Goodbye,  Frank.

Afid. Power  is  going.

Sitting  No.  U.

Thursday,  November  10,  3.30  p.m.  Present:  Mrs.  Cooper.

S.  G.  SOAL.

(For  the  first  part  of  the  sitting  Frank  communi-
cated incidents  of  his  own  life  and  after  he  had
finished  Nada  spoke  :)  •  -

Nada. John  Ferguson's  here. He'll  try  to  speak,  but  he  isn't
very  strong.


528  S.  G.  Soal.  ' ■  [part

S. Let  him  do  his  best.

(I  now  heard  the  same  voice  as  at  the  previous  sittmg.)
J.  F. John  Ferguson  sends  his  love  to  brother  Jim  and  his

wife. Give  my  message.
S. I  will  gladly  do  that  if  you  will  tell  me  where  your

brother  Jim  lives.
J.  F. You  must  enquire  at  the  avenue  H — H — it  won't  come

to  me.

S. That  doesn't  help  me  much.

J.  F.  Wish  I  could  get  it — it's  a  large  house — stands  in
grounds  not  joined  up — all  large  houses  just  there.

Nada  whispers.  Think  there's  trellis  work  at  the  back  in  the
garden.

S. Never  mmd  about  that. When  did  John  Ferguson  die  ?
Nada  whispers. Surely  you  can  tell  him  that. When  did  you
pass  over  ?

J.  F. Thmk  it  was  in  1912  about  March.
S. Are  you  sure  of  that  date  ?

J.  F. Yes,  pretty  sure.  .

S. How  old  were  you  when  you  passed  over  ?  .

J.  F. I  was  33  years.

S. Where  did  you  die  ?

J.  F. My  mind  is  confused. It  was  in  a  very  large  town.
S. In  Brentwood  ?

J.  F. No  not  Brent,  quite  another  place.
S, What  was  your  occupation  ?

J.  F. Machmes — engin — engineer — a  room  with  big  machines —

several  men  worked  under  me.
Nada. He  makes  me  hear  soimd  of  whirring  wheels.
S. Was  this  ui  London  ?
J.  F. It  might  be  London.
S. Were  you  married  ?

J.  F. Yes,  married, but  she passed over before me.  One

daughter  Amy  and  she's  dead. ■  ,  '  '

S. How  old  was  Amy  ?

J.  F.  Amy  was  just  a  child — Amy  buried — ^same  grave  as
her  father.

Nada. Think  there's  a  large  cross  at  the  head  of  the  grave.
S. How  do  you  know  that?  .  .'

Nada. Because  he  makes  me  see  it.


xc^^:.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  529


S. Well,  can  you  see  what  it  says  on  the  cross  ?

Nada. I'll  try  to  see. It's  John  Ferguson,  died  3rd  March,

1912, aged  33  years. There's something  else,  but

I  can't  see  it.
S. Where  is  this  grave  ?

Nada. Don't know — I  just  see  the  grave. Trying  to  make
him  tell  me — it's  a  very  large  cemetery.  Thousands
of  white  stones.
(Pause.)

(After  this  Frank  communicates  upon  a  different
subject.)

Sitting  No.  14.

Thursday,  November  17,  3.40  p.m.  Present :  Mrs.  Cooper.

S.  G.  SOAL.

(Frank communicates for a  Avhile and during  a
pause  I  ask  :)
S. Nada,  is  John  Ferguson  coming  to-day  ?
Nada. We're  waiting  for  him  to  come.
(Short  interval.)

J.  F.  Good  afternoon,  it's  John  Ferguson  speaking — I  wasn't
iU  long,  it  was  pneumonia  after  falling  mto  the  water
— ^whUe  we  were  fishing — boat  upset.

S. What  happened  then  ?

J.  F Jim and I got ashore and Jim took  no harm.  I

caught  my  death.
S. Where  did  this  happen  ?

J.  F.  The  boat  was  not  far  from  the — not  far  from  the  shore.
S. Was  it  at  the  seaside  ?

J.  F. No,  not  at  seaside  but  near  the  sea — a  large  river — we

went  on  a  week-end.
S. Can't  you  tell  me  the  name  of  the  place  ?
J.  F. Sorrj^,  names  have  aU  gone.
S. Is  Jim  younger  than  you  or  older  ?
J.  F. Much  younger  by  ten  years.
S. What  is  Jim's  occupation  ?
J.  F. Jim  was — inarticulate.

S. Can't  hear. What  was  Jim's  occupation  ?
J.  F. Jim  was  a  bit  of  a  scholar — but  he  gave  it  up  and
joined  me.


530  S.  G.  Soal.  ■  [part

S. What  did  he  join  you  in  ?

J.  F. With  the  machines — mo — mo — motors.

S. Where  is  brother  Jim  living  now  ?

J.  F. Sorry  I  can't  get  that. I  only  remember  an  avenue

and  the  big  house. ,
Nada. Believe  there's  a  large  picture in  the  drawing  room

with  eyes  that  seem  to  look  all  roimd  the  room — lots

of  cats  at  this  house.
S. Do  you  mean  the  house  at  Brentwood  ?
Nada. Yes,  Brent.

S. Had  this  house  at  Brentwood  any  name  or  had  it  a
number  ?

J.  F. It  had  a  name,  but  forget  it.
S. Try  to  think  of  the  name.

J.  F. Makes  many  efforts  to  pronounce  words  but  nothing
articulate  is  given.

Nada. It's  no  use  pressing  him  any  more  to-day. He  isn't
clear. Perhaps  he'll  be  clearer  next  time.

(No  more  from  John  Ferguson  at  this  sitting.)
[Note. — It  was  between  this  sitting  and  the  next
that  I  recalled  havmg  loiown  a  boy  named  James
Ferguson  who  had  once  attended  the  Southend-on-
Sea  High  School  at  the  same  time  as  myself.  I
made  his  acquamtance  in  the  year  1902,  at  a  time
when  we  should  be  both  about  12  or  13  years  old.
I  distinctly  recoUect  his  telling  me  that  his  father
was  an  Army  Listructor  or  kmd  of  schoolmaster  at
the  R.G.A.  Station  at  Shoeburyness.  He  also
mentioned  havmg  been  at  Gibraltar  when  his  father
was  serving  there.  Our  acquamtance  was  slight  and
confined  entirely  to  school  hours.  I  never  visited
his  home,  and  knew  really  very  little  about  him.
I  have  a  hazy  recollection  that  he  intended  to  follow
in  his  father's  footsteps  and  become  an  Army  School-
master. He  must  have  left  the  school  in  about  1904,
possibly  on  account  of  his  father  being  transferred
to  another  garrison.  Be  that  as  it  may,  I  lost  sight
of  him  after  my  first  year  at  Southend  High  School
and  have  heard  nothmg  of  him  since.  I  did  not
know  he  had  a  brother — at  least  I  cannot  remember  his


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  531


ever  having  mentioned  it.  At  this  stage  I  formed
in  my  mind  the  first  of  a  series  of  purely  fanciful
conjectures  about  the  communicator  John  Ferguson.
I  amused  myself  with  the  follomng  absurd  arguments.

1.  J.  F.  said  he  died  in  1912  at  the  age  of  33.  His
brother  Jim  would  therefore  be  about  13  in  the  year
1902,  since  J.  F.  had  said  that  Jim  was  ten  years
younger  than  himself.  In  1902  the  James  Ferguson
I  knew  would  be  about  13.

2.  J.  F.  said  his  brother  was  a  bit  of  a  scholar.  This
would  probably  mean  that  Jim  attended  the  High
School  while  John  had  had  no  such  advantages.
Quite possibly, therefore, Jim went in for  Army

-  •  ■  teaching  but  finding  something  more  lucrative  gave
it  up  for  engineering.  Of  course,  needless  to  say,
■  •  -  ■■  I  knew  these  arguments  to  be  absurd,  but  I  hoped
vaguely  that  "  there  might  be  something  in  it."
I  was,  however,  very  surprised  to  see  the  effect  of
these  imaginings  upon  the  next  sitting,  No.  15.}

Sitting  No.  15.

Thursday,  November  24,  3.30  p.m.  Present :  Mrs.  Cooper.

S.  G.  SOAL.

(John  Ferguson  appeared  quite  early  in  the  sitting.

It  was  Nada  who  spoke  first.)
Nada. Good  afternoon. John  is  so  anxious  his  brother  should

know  he  is  still  alive.
S;  ' •  ■ I  shall  be  able  to  teU  him  if  I  knew  where  Jim  lived.
Nada. He's  going  to  try  to  tell  you,  but  he  finds  names  so

difficult. He's awfully worried because he  can't

remember  things.
S. Well  you  must  try  to  help  him,  Nada.
Nada. We're  doing  all  we  can.
(Pause.)

J.  F. speaks. Good afternoon. I want to tell you  this.
■  ■ ■ My  father — my  father —
S,  What  about  your  father. Is  he  still  alive  ?

J  F. No,  has  passed  over. I  want  to  tell you  this.  He
had  to  do  with  the  Army.


532


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


S. Was  he  a  soldier  ?

J.  F.  Not  exactly  a  soldier — was  with  soldiers  a  lot — he  used
to  help  them.

Nada  interposing.  He  makes  Nada  frightened  Boom — -Boom —
he  makes  a  noise  like  big  guns — the  noise  would
break  all  the  windows — Nada  wouldn't  like  it.  Big
guns  in  the  sea.

S. I  quite  understand  all  that,  Nada,  but  what  had  John's

father  to  do  with  soldiers  ?
J.  F.  speaking. Used  to — -to — inarticulate. — Maps  lots  of  maps —

he  read  the  maps  with  the  prism  compass — he  used

to — inarticulate. Can't  get  it,  perhaps  you  will  guess

what  I  mean — helping  the  soldiers.
S. Never  mind,  you've  said  enough  about  it. Had  Jim

anything  to  do  with  the  Army  ?
J.  F. A  bit — he  helped  father  with  the  maps  and  compass. —

Soon  gave  it  up — not  enough  go  for  him.
S. What  did  Jim  do  then  ?
J.  F. I  got  him  work  with  me.
S. Is  Jim  still  in  the  same  place  ?
J.  F. Same  work — not  same  firm.
S. What  sort  of  work  ?
J.  F. Mo — m — motors.
(Pause.)

S. Ask  John  Ferguson,  Nada,  if  Jim  ever  knew  me.

Nada. I'll  ask  him  that. (Nada  is  heard  to  whisper  aside).

Nada.  He's  not  strong  now,  but  he  says  "  school."  He
means  Jim,  not  himself.  Says  Jim  mentioned  you
at  home — somethmg  about  "  always  top  of  the  year —
aU  the  prizes" — I  don't  know  what  he  means.

S. Does  he  tell  you  anythmg  else  ?

J.  F. Think  that's  all  I  know  about  you.

(Pause,  after  which  Frank  communicates.)
[Note. — This  sitting  is  a  remarkable  illustration  of
spontaneous  telepathy  from  sitter  to  medium.  The
mention  of  the  guns  breaking  the  windows  most
clearly  recalls  Shoeburyness,  where  many  windows  are
broken  every  year.  Then  again  the  mention  of  the
maps  and  prism  compass  vividly  recalls  the  duties
of an Army schoolmaster in an Artillery  School.


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  533


The  prism  compass  is,  of  course,  the  prismatic  com-
pass used  for  finding  bearings  of  distant  objects.
As  a  person  who  once  instructed  cadets  in  Artillery
work  I  was  quite  familiar  with  the  prismatic  compass,
but  could  Mrs.  Cooper  even  have  heard  of  it  ?  We
see  the  idea  which  I  had  formed  before  the  sitting
clothing  itself  in  imagery.  Again  the  phrases  "  always
top  of  year  "  and  "  all  the  prizes,"  are  clear  evidence
of  telepathy  from  myself.  At  Southend  High  School
we  did  not  speak  of  forms  in  those  days,  but  of
"  years."  James  Ferguson  and  I  were  at  school
together  in  our  first  year.  I  was  the  top  of  this
year  and  top  of  every  terminal  examination  also.
The  phrase  "  all  the  prizes  "  also  obviously  refers  to
myself,  since  at  the  end  of  my  first  year  at  Southend
I  took  first  prizes  for  mathematics,  English,  physics
and  chemistry.  Clearly  what  was  intended  to  be
conveyed  was  the  fact  (obtained  telepathically  from
myself)  that  Jmi  Ferguson  had  brought  home  to  his
brother  news  of  my  successes.]

FiKST  Visit  to  Brentwood.

On  Monday,  November  28,  I  visited  Brentwood  for  the
first  time  in  my  life,  although  I  had  frequently  passed
through  it  on  the  railway.  My  object  was  not  to  settle
the  question  of  John  Ferguson's  identity  but  to  glean
a  few  facts  about  the  locality  and  watch  what  effect  it
would  have  on  the  next  sitting.  I  alighted  at  the  railway
station,  walked  down  the  High  Street,  and  presently  met
some  Grammar  School  boys  in  their  red  caps.  Entering
into  conversation  with  the  boys  I  asked  if  there  was  a
street  in  Brentwood  called  "  Wescot  Road."  "  Oh  yes,
sir,"  one  answered,  "  there  is  a  Warescott  Road.  It  is
a  good  walk  from  here  and  lies  off  the  Ongar  Road."
"  How  do  you  spell  it  ?  "  I  asked.  "It  is  speUed
Warescott,  but  we  say  it  like  Waiscoat  or  Wescut."
"  I  will  give  you  a  riddle,"  said  I,  "it  is  to  find  a  street
in  Brentwood  consisting  only  of  large  houses  with  red
gates which  has an avenue of  trees and whose  name


534


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


begins  with  H."  The  boys  thought  a  while  and  at  last
one  of  then  answered,  "It  could  only  be  Highland  Avenue."
And  checking  off  the  points  one  by  one  they  all  presently
agreed  that  Highland  Avenue  was  the  only  street  that
would  fit  the  description.  "  And  where  does  Highland
Avenue  lay,"  I  asked.  "It  is  off  the  Ongar  Road  a
good  mile  from  here,  and  Warescott  Road  is  not  far  from
Highland  Avenue."  Bidding  the  boys  adieu,  I  set  out
for  Highland  Avenue,  which  I  reached  after  a  quarter  of
an  hour's  hard  walking.  It  is  a  comparatively  new  road
running  at  right  angles  to  the  Ongar  Road  and  contains
perhaps  not  more  than  a  dozen  large  houses  each  standing
majestically  in  its  own  grounds.  The  gates  were  all
nicely  painted  of  a  dark  red  colour,  and  on  each  side  of
the  street  was  a  row  of  young  trees.  It  certainly  seemed
to  answer  John  Ferguson's  description.  I  did  not,  how-
ever, enquire  whether  anyone  lived  there  of  the  name  of
Ferguson,  but  walked  a  few  hundred  yards  down  the  hill
to  view  Warescott  Road.  I  found  a  short  street  of  about
thirty-two  houses,  obviously  the  homes  of  the  artisan
classes  of  the  town.  The  houses  were  not  detached,  but
built  into  two  long  blocks  on  each  side  of  the  street.
"  What  a  contrast,"  thought  I,  "  this  street  presents  in
comparison  with  the  spacious  opulence  of  Highland  Avenue."
What  conceivable  connection  could  there  be  between
families  living  in  such  different  environments  ?  So  musing
I  made  my  way  back  to  the  railway  station.

Sitting  No.  16.

December  1.  Present :  Mrs.  Cooper.

Mr.  A.  L.  Gregson,  B.Sc.
S.  G.  Soal.

(During  the  first  part  of  the  sitting  Frank  communi-
cates and  then  after  a  pause  John  Ferguson  began
to  speak.)

J.  F. It's  all  coming  back  to  me  about  Brentwood.

Nada. He's  so  excited  because  his  memory  is  coming  back.

J.  F. The  house  is  near  the —

Nada. Now  don't  get  out  of  breath.


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  535


J.  F. The  house  is  near — near  the  Ong— Ong — Onget  Road.

S.  Say  that  name  agam.

J.  F. The  Onget  Road.

S. What  is  the  name  of  the  avenue  ?

J.  F.  H — H — H — I  nearly  got  it.  It's  near  the  Onget  Road.
S. Well,  never  mind. Perhaps  it  "wUl  come  to  you  presently.

Try  to  tell  me  the  name  of  the  house.
J.  F.  Inarticulate.

Nada. He  says  there's  two  funny  gas  lamps  at  top  of  Wescot
Road.

[Note. — I  had  noticed  two  rather  curious  globes  on
my  visit.]

S. Never  mind  that,  Nada. Don't  give  me  gas,  give  me

the  name  of  the  street.
Nada. Don't  be  so  impatient. He's  doing  the  best  he  can,

it's  very  difficult.
J.  F. High — High — Highlands — I've  got  it  at  last.
S. Is  that  the  name  of  the  house  ?
J.  F. Name  of  Avenue.
S. Where  is  the  house  ?
J.  F. House  is  Onget  end  of  Avenue.
S. Good,  in  which  side  of  the  Avenue  is  it  ?
J.  F.  Left — left  side  from  Onget  end.

S. How  many  houses  from  the  end,  one,  two,  three,  four  ?

J.  F.  (Inarticulate.)

S. Is  it  the  very  end  house  ?

J.  F. Not  the  end  house — not  more  than  four  or  five  from
the  end.

S. Well,  tell  me  what  connection  there  is  between  the  family
in  Highland  Avenue  and  the  family  in  Warescott  Road.
J.  F. Enquire  for  Ethel — Ethel  is  the  luik.
Nada. He  says  Ethel  connects  it  up.
S. Ethel  who  ?
J.  F. Ethel  (inarticulate).
S. Was  Ethel  a  relative  ?

J.  F. No. Ethel  is  a  young  person  in  Warescott  Road.
Nada. There  isn't  much  power  left.

(Frank  comes  to  say  goodbye.)

[Note. — At  the  end  of  sittmg  Mr.  A.  L.  Gregson,  B.Sc,
corroborated  the  word  "  Highland  "  given  by  the  voice.]

2  m


536


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


[Note. — The  day  after  the  previous  sitting  1  made
another  imaginative  conjecture.  I  asked  myself
"  What  connection  can  there  be  between  Ethel  who
lives  in  Warescott  Road  and  the  well-to-do -people
who  live  in  Highland  Avenue.  They  could  hardly
be  poor  relatives.  "  I  have  it,"  I  said,  "  Ethel  is
a  trusted  servant  of  the  house  in  Highland  Avenue.
Her  people,  however,  live  in  Warescott  Road."
We  shall  see  how  this  idea  is  worked  out  in  Sitting
No.  17.]

Sitting  No.  11.

December  8,  1921,  d. 30  p.m.  Present:  Mrs.  Cooper.

S.  G.  Soal.

(Frank communicates for the first part of  the
sitting  and  after  this  came  an  interval  during  which
lights  M'ere  sho^vn. After  the  interval  J.  F.  speaks  :)
J.  F. Pleased  to  see  you.

S. Good  afternoon,  are  you  John  Ferguson  ?
J.  F. John  Ferguson.

S. Can  you  tell  me  an}i}hing  more  about  Ethel  ?
J.  F. Ethel  Lloyd,  she  was  the  young  person  in  Warescott
Road.

S. But  who  was  she  ?

J.  F. Maid  to  the  family  in  Highlands — went  there  to  help

every  day. She  didn't  live  at  Highlands.
S. Why  did  you  mention  Ethel  at  all  ?
J.  F. Someone  here  wanted  to  send  message  to  her.
S. Who  was  this  1  .
J.  F. Think  it's  her  mother,  but  she  is  hard  to  get  at.
S. Can't  she  come  to  speak  herself  ?
J.  F. Not  strong  enough.

Nad  A  (interposing). Think  she  died  of  cancer.
S. Is  she  Ethel's  mother  ?  '  ;

Nad  A. We  think  so,  but  we're  not  sure.
(Pause.)

S. John  Ferguson,  can  you  tell  me  the  name  of  the  house

in  Highland  Avenue  ?
J.  F. Inarticulate — It's  quite  near  the  Onget  Road,  on  the  left

hand.


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  537

Is  Ethel  Lloyd  living  in  Brentwood  now  ?
Waa  before  War,
But  is  she  there  now  ?
Can't  say — out  of  touch.

What  was  the  number  of  the  house  in  Warescott  Road

where  Ethel  Lloyd  lived  ?
Have  forgotten — Ethel  was  well  lilced  at  Highlands.
There  isn't  much  power  to-day. Perhaps  he'll  teU  you
more  next  time.

(Frank  speaks  for  a  few  moments  and  the  sitting
concludes.)

Second  Visit  to  Brentwood.

On  the  evening  of  Monday,  December  12,  1921,  I  visited
Brentwood for the second time and interviewed  Mr.
Symonds  the  Postmaster, who  at  my  request  consulted
the  directories  and  informed  me  that  there  was  no  person
of  the  name  of  Ferguson  at  present  on  the  Postal  Register.
He  further  informed  me  that  he  himself  lived  in  Highland
Avenue,  and  had  lived  there  since  before  1913. He  had
never  heard  of  the  name  of  Ferguson  in  connection  with
anyone  in  Highland  Avenue. With  the  exception  of  one
house called "  Paglesham," all  the houses had  retained
their  original  owners  since  1913. A  certain  Captain  Shoe-
smith,^  who  had  been  living  in  "  Paglesham  "  in  the  year
1913,  had  quite  recently  left  the  district  and  the  house
was  now  empty. Mr.  Symonds  did  not  inform  me  where
. Captain  Shoesmith  had  gone. On  this  point  I  am  positive
I since  I  made  notes  in  my  pocket-book  at  the  time.  While
f I  was  conversing  with  Mr.  Symonds,  there  came  into  the
Post  Office  a  postman  whose  round  had  included  Ware-
^ scott  Road  for  a  great  many  years. This  man  told  me
that  no  people  of  the  name  of  Lloyd  lived  in  Warescott
Road  at  the present time. Some seventeen years  ago,
however, he remembered a "  very dirty old  woman,"
J called  Mrs.  Lloyd,  who  had  lived  in  one  of  the  houses,
but this woman had left some sixteen years ago.  He
could  not  recall  her  initials,  but  thought  the  number  of

^Pseudonym.


S.

J.  F.
S.

J.  F.
S.

J.  F.
Nada.

\  ■


538


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


the  house  at  which  she  hved  was  16.  As  the  communi-
cator had  described  "  Ethel  "  as  a  "  young  person,"  who
presumedly  lived  in  Warescott  Road  somewhere  about
the  year  1912,  this  clue  seemed  scarcely  worth  following
up.  I  next  visited  Warescott  Road  and  learned  from  a
resident  that  no  "  young  person  called  Ethel "  was  living
there  at  present.

I  next  visited  Mr.  Cottee  of  11  Rose  Valley,  the
Registrar  of  Births  and  Deaths,  and  was  informed  by  him
that  no  directory  of  Brentwood  had  been  published  since
1913,  owmg  to  the  War.  On  consulting  a  1913  Directory,
I  verified  that  no  Ferguson  was  living  in  Highland  Avenue
in  1913,  and  no  Lloyd  in  Warescott  Road  at  that  time.
Captain  Shoesmith,  R.N.R.,  was,  however,  hvhig  at
"  Paglesham,"  as  stated  by  ]\Ir.  Symonds.  Reference  to
old  directories  showed  that  no  Ferguson  had  lived  in
Brentwood  for  many  years  before  1912.  On  leaving
Mr.  Cottee,  I  walked  over  to  Highland  Avenue  and  noted
that  "  Paglesham  "  was  the  third  house  on  the  left  from
the  Ongar  Road. I  then  returned  home.

[Note. — Between  the  date  of  the  above  visit  and  the
next  sitting,  which  was  held  two  days  later,  I  invented
more  theories  around  the  enigmatical  personality  of  John
Ferguson.  I  thought  of  Captain  Shoesmith,  R.N.R.,  who
had  just  left  Highland  Avenue  for  a  destination  unknown.
The  tenor  of  my  argument  ran  as  foUows  :

1.  Caj)taui  Shoesmith  was  a  naval  man.

2.  The  Navy  is  in  close  co-operation  with  the  Coast
Defence  Artillery.  What  more  natural  then  than  the  idea
that  John  Ferguson's  father  should  have  met  Captain
Shoesmith  at  Shoeburjmess.  The  fathers  became  friends
and  consequently  the  sons  of  Ferguson  became  friends
with  the  sons  of  Shoesmith.  Hence  we  have  an  ex-
planation of  John  Ferguson's  request  for  us  to  "  enquire
at  Highlands  about  Jim."  These  conjectures  the  communi-
cator most  obliguigly  confirmed  at  the  next  sitting.]


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  539


Sitting  No.  18.

December  14,  3.30  p.m.  Present :  Mrs.  Cooper.

S.  G.  SOAL.

(Nada  spoke  first  :)
Nada. Pleased  to  see  you,  Mr.  Soal.

S. Good afternoon, Nada. I want most especially  to
speak  to  John  Ferguson  to-day. It's  very  important.
Nada. I'm  going  off  to  bring  him.

(Interval  of  a  few  minutes.)
Voice  of  J.  F. Glad  to  see  you  again.
S. Good  afternoon. Are  you  John  Ferguson  ?
J.  F, Yes,  John  Ferguson  speaking.

S. Then  listen,  John  Ferguson. I've  just  been  to  Brent.

wood  and  have  found  out  that  neither  you  nor  your
brother  ever  Hved  there. What  do  you  say  to  that  ?

J.  F.  Pardon  me,  I  did  not  say  we  lived  there.  We  had
friends  there.

S. I  understood  that  your  brother  Jim  lived  there.

J.  F. Oh  no,  we  motored  to  Highlands  weekends  from  town —

they  were  very  musical. Jim  played  the  violin  and

I  the  'cello.
S. What  year  was  that  ?
J.  F. About  1911  or  so.

S.  Then  why  on  earth  did  you  spend  all  this  time  talking
about  a  place  where  you  never  lived  ?

J.  F.  We  had  to  do  it.  Brent  was  the  link  with  yourself.
Jim  was  another  link.

S. But  I  had  never  been  to  Brentwood.

J.  F.  No,  but  you  had  some  connection  with  it.  Often  went
through  it.

[Note. — At  the  end  of  the  first  sitting  I  mentioned
to  Mrs.  Cooper  that  I  often  travelled  through  Brent-
wood.]

S.  Well,  try  to  teU  me  the  house  of  j'our  friends  in  High-
land Avenue.

J.  F. Can  tell  you  now — you've  made  fresh  links.
J.  F. Think  it  was  third  house  from  Onget  Road.
S. And  what  was  the  name  of  your  friends  ?
J.  F. They  were  friends  of  my  father's — N — N —


540  S.  0.  Soal.  [part

S. Does  the  name  begin  with  N  ?

3.  F. Na — Na — Naval — friend  of  my  father.

S. Say  that  again.

J.  F.  He  was  Naval  man — Sh — [Shoeshine]^ — think  that  was  his
name.

S. You're  nearly  right — say  it  again.
J.  F. Sh — Slioeshine.

Nada. Shoeshine  ; it  sounds  a  funny  name.

S. It's  near  enough.  '

S, Now  tell  me  the  name  of  Shoeshme's  house.

J.  F. It's  where  cowslips  grow  in  cock —

S. What  was  that  last  word  ?

Nada. Cowslips  grow  in  cockle  beds— think  it's  something  you

would  know.
S. That's  very  good  indeed.
J.  F. Do  you  beUeve  m  me  now  1
S. You  seem  to  know  a  great  deal.
Nada. Frank's  laughing  about  this.

F. Sam,  I  heard  that. We've  been  where  they  are.
S. What  do  you  mean  Frank  ?

[Note. — I  had  guessed  his  meaning.]
F. There  were  cockles  but  no  cowslips,  Sam.
S. Quite  right,  Frank,  I  understand.

F. Not  even  cockles, Sam, only  empty  shells. Do  you

miderstand.
S. I  guess  what  you  mean.

F.  We  saw  them,  Sam,  and  on  the  way  we  passed  a  mon —
monk — it  was  a  tree,  you  know — riddle  of  a  tree —
do  you  know  now  1

S. That's  very  good  indeed. I  Imow  perfectly.


Nada. He  must  have  a  rest  after  giving  these  splendid  tests.

(There  is  a  pause  during  which  lights  appear.)

[Note.- — This  complicated  series  of  allusions  merits
a  special  study.  In  the  first  place  the  phrase  "where
cowslips  grow  in  cockle  beds  "  is  a  most  ingenious
method  of  introducing  the  name  "  Paglesham,"  which
it  will  be  remembered  was  the  name  of  Captain
Shoesmith's  residence  at  Brentwood. Now  Paglesham


^  It  has  been  necessary  to  alter  the  name  given  at  the  sitting  to  correspond
with  the  pseudonym  given  above  on  p.  537.


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  541


is  the  name  of  a  small  hamlet  on  the  Essex  coast
situated  about  four  miles  from  Little  Stambridge
Rectory.  Frank  and  I  visited  this  place  several
times.  It  is  noted  for  its  cockle  and  oyster  beds.
Moreover  the  word  '  Paglesham  "  (Ham  of  the
Paigles)  is  Anglo-Saxon  for  "  cowslip  meadow.'''  ^  This
derivation  was,  of  course,  known  to  both  Frank  and
myself,  but  I  could  hardly  imagine  that  Mrs.  Cooper
could  have  loiown  even  the  place,  let  alone  the
derivation.  The  next  phrase  "  cockles  but  no  cow-
slips "  clearly  refers  to  our  own  visits  to  Paglesham,
on  which  occasions  we  could  always  discover  the
cockles  but  never  the  cowslips.  The  succeeding
statement  "  not  even  cocldes,  Sam,  only  empty
shells,"  is  once  more  an  allusion  to  the  visits  which
my  brother  and  I  made  to  Paglesham.  Walking
along  the  sea  wall  by  the  side  of  the  creeks,  we  often
came  across  shallow  rectangular  tanks  of  concrete  full
of  sea  water,  and  the  bottoms  of  these  tanks  were
inches  deep  in  cockle  shells.  But  all  the  shells  were
empty  and  never  a  cockle  could  be  seen.  The
reference  to  "a  riddle  of  a  tree  "  and  "  mon  "  also
clearly  shows  supernormal  knowledge.  On  our  walks
to  Paglesham  we  passed  a  house  which  had  on  its
lawn  a  well  grown  "  Monkey  Puzzle,"  and  I  dis-
tinctly recall  that  we  always  stopped  to  admire  this
tree,2  which  was  the  only  specimen  in  the  neighbour-
hood visible  from  the  high  road.  The  whole  incident
is  probably  a  curious  and  mvolved  example  of  spon-
taneous telepathy  from  the  sitter.]
(To  continue  with  )Sitting  No.  18.)

Nad  A. After  the  interval. John  Ferguson  is  here  again.

S. Are  you  there,  John  Ferguson  ?

J.  F. What  else  do  you  wish  to  ask.

S. Your  friend  [Shoeshine]  has  left  Brentwood  now.  How
can  I  find  out  where  he  lives  '\

^  The  etyrnology  of  the  word  '  paigle  '  is  doubtful,  but  it  is  still  in  common
use  in  the  Eastern  counties  to  denote  cowslip.

^This  tree,  which  is  fifty  years  old,  still  stands  in  front  of  the  house  of
Mr.  Wiseman,  of  Buckland  House,  East  End,  Paglesham.


542

8.  G.  Soal.

[part

J.  F.

Think  he  has  gone  to  seaside.

S.

To  Southend-on-Sea  1

J.  F.

Not  Southend. P— P—

S.

Do  you  mean  Portsmouth  ?

J.  F.

Not  that. P— P— Plym—

S.

Plymouth,  is  that  the  name  i

J.  F.

Try  Plym—

Nada.

There  isn't  much  power  left.

(Pause.)

F,

I've  come  to  say  goodbye,  Sam. So  glad

you  knew

about  the  cockles. It  was  a  good  test.

S.

Very  good. Goodbye,  Frank.

Afid.

Power  is  going.

Sitting  No.  19.

Tuesday,  December  20,  1921,  3.40  p.m. Present :  Mrs.  Cooper.

S.  G.  Soal.

(Frank communicates for the first part of  the

sitting. After  him  John  Ferguson  speaks.)
J.  F. Good  afternoon. Have  you  found  [Shine  shoe]  yet  ?
S. Not  yet. I  haven't  tried. I  wish  you  could  tell  me

your  brother  Jim's  address.
J.  F. It's  difficult. Think  he  lives  m  London  now.
Nada. Believe  his  house  has  two  white  pillars — six  steps  to  it.
S. That  won't  help  me  very  much.
Nada. Don't  be  so  rude. I  give  you  what  I  can  get.
J.  F. Sorry can't  get  Jim's address. I  worked  in Glas —

Glasgow  for  some  years. Father  comes  from  Glasgow.

He  was  educated  at  Union  University,  Glasgow.
S.  Union  University  ?  I  never  heard  of  such  a  place.
J.  F. You  will  find  it's  right. Union  University.

[Note. — Union  University  is  quite  absurd,  but  there

is a buildmg connected with Glasgow  University

called  the  "  Union."]
S. Were  you  educated  at  Union  University  ?
0.  F. Not  me. Father  was.
S. How  did  he  come  to  get  into  the  Army  ?
J.  F. He  left  the  University  quite  young. Didn't  pass  his

exammations. Then  got  job  with  the  Army.
S. Were  you  ever  at  Gibraltar  ?


xc^t:.] Comviunications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  543


J.  F.  Faintly  remember  it. Very  small  then. Father  often
talked  of  it.

S.  You  say  you  worked  at  Glasgow  for  some  years.  What

part  of  Glasgow  ?

J.  F.  Pollok  Shields.

S.  Say  that  again.

J.  F.  PoUok  Shields.

S.  Where  did  you  die  ?

J.  F.  Don't  use  that  word. I've  only  passed  to  another  life.

S  Well,  where  did  you  pass  from  1

J.  F.  Glasgow  Pollok  Shields.

S.  Then  were  you  buried  at  Glasgow  ?

J.  F.  Yes,  that's  right,  Glasgow.

S.  Was  your  wife  buried  at  Glasgow  1

J.  F.  No,  London— Kensal  Rise.

J.  F.  Amj'  buried  with  me.

S.  How  old  were  you  when  you  died  ?

J.  F.  Just  33.

S.  What  was  the  date  of  your  death  ?

J.  F.  3rd  March.

S.  What  was  the  year  ?

J.  F.  1912.

S.  You  say  the  same  things  as  you  said  before.

J.  F.  Why  shouldn't  I  if  they  are  true.

S.  How  did  you  die  ?

J.  F.  Caught  cold  in  water.

S.  Where  was  that  ?

J.  F.  River  near  Glasgow.

S.  Can  you  give  the  names  of  any  streets  in  Glasgow  1

J.  F.  Union  Street — difficult. Remember  two  friends  of  my

father who lived near there. — Robert Lecky  and

James  Fraser — like  two  old  brothers.

S.  Did  they  live  in  Union  Street  ?

J.  F.  Xot  far  away.

S.  Is  Robert  Lecky  alive  now  ?

J.  F.  Xot  sure. Must  be  old  man.

S.  Are  you  sure  you  were  buried  at  Glasgow  1

J.  F.  Quite  sure.

(Pause.)

AriD.  Power  is  going.


544


8.  O.  Soal.


[part


[Note.— On  December  26,  1921,  I  addressed  a
letter  of  enquiry  to  Captain  Shoesmith,  R.N.R.,
"  Paglesham,"  Highland  Avenue,  Brentwood,  Essex,
and  marked  the  envelope  "To  be  forwarded."  In
this  letter  I  mentioned  all  the  facts  of  the  case,
describing  the  object  of  my  experiments  and  including
a  brief  list  of  the  statements  of  the  communicator.
To  this  I  added  a  request  that  Captain  Shoesmith
•  •  would  be  so  kind  as  to  throw  any  light  possible  on

the  subject,  with  the  assurance  that  the  matter  would
be  treated  as  confidential.  Captain  Shoesmith's
reply  to  my  letter  did  not  arrive  tUl  the  morning
of  January  9,  so  that  I  remained  in  suspense
durmg  the  next  sitting  which  was  held  on  January  4.
Previous  to  this  sitting  I  procured  a  plan  of  Glasgow
and  spent  a  couple  of  hours  on  the  evening  of
January  3  poring  over  the  names  of  the  plan.  I
noted  the  names  of  all  the  cemeteries  both  large  and
small,  and  observed  in  particular  that  the  two  large
cemeteries  which  seemed  to  be  nearest  to  the  PoUok
Shields  district  were  called  "  the  South  Necropolis  "
and  "  Janefield  Street."  I  took  this  map  with  me
to  Sitting  No.  20  the  next  morning,  and  when  the
light  had  been  switched  off  unfolded  it  and  spread
it  on  the  floor  in  the  dark.  In  my  own  mind  I
had  decided  that  the  name  of  the  cemetery  in
which  John  Ferguson  was  buried  was  a  toss  up
between  South  Necropolis  and  Janefield  Street,  smce
these  seemed  nearest  to  the  district  in  which  he
resided. Here  follows  the  record  of  the  sitting.]

Sitting  No.  20.

Wednesday,  January  4,  1922,  11.10  a.m.  Present:  Mrs.  Cooper.
[Postponed  from  December  28,  1921]  S.  G.  Soal.

(I  did  not  mention  to  Mrs.  Cooper  that  I  had
brought  a  map  with  me  and  when  the  light  was
extinguished  I  unfolded  it  and  spread  it  on  the
floor  as  stated  above.

Nada spoke first, and then  Frank, but to  my


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper  545


surprise  John  Ferguson  did  not  appear,  but  instead
a  most  remarkable  communicator,  called  "  Gordon
Davis  "  appeared,  whose  case  is  considered  in  the
last  section  of  my  paper.  When  Gordon  Davis  had
lost  control  there  was  an  interval  and  at  the  end
of  this  interval  John  Ferguson  spoke.)

J.  F. Pollok  Shields — PoUok — is  where  I  lived.

S. Could  you  teU  me  the  name  of  the  street  ?

J.  F. It's  difficult.

S. I've  laid  a  map  of  Glasgow  on  the  floor. Won't  that

help  you  ?
Nad  A. He's  gone  away  to  study  it.

[Note. — A  scratching  sound  was  heard  on  the  floor.]
J.  F. Now  it  comes  back  to  me. I  worked  for  a  time  in

India  Street  not  far  from  Charing  Cross.
S. But  Charing  Cross  is  in  London,  isn't  it  ?
J.  F. No,  Charing  Cross,  Glasgow — George  Street  was  not  far

away.

S. What  were  you  working  at  ?
J.  F. Oh,  motors.

S. What  was  the  name  of  the  firm  ?
J.  F.  Inarticulate.

S. Now  try  to  tell  me  where  you  were  buried.

J.  F. It  was  a  large  cemetery — South — ^South  Necrop —

S. Say  that  again.

J.  F. South  Necrop—

[Note. — Clearly  an  attempt  to  give  South  Necro-
polis, one  of  the  names  I  had  chosen.  At  the
moment  of  the  sitting,  however,  I  had  forgotten  it.]

S. Would  you  remember  anything  about  the  grave  ?

J.  F. A  double  grave — Amy  my  daughter — a  large  cross — one
grave  for  two.

S. How  old  was  your  daughter  Amy  ?

J.  F. Four years. {Note. — Consistent with previous  state-
ment.)

S. What  were  you  doing  with  motors  ?

J.  F. Sounded  something  like "  design  " but  uncertain.

S. When  did  you  come  to  London  ?

J.  F. About  1903.

S. What  made  you  come  to  London  ?


546


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


J.  F. Firm  had  a  branch  there. Was  sent — then  got  Jim

into  London  branch.
S. Did  Jim  go  into  the  firm  about  1903  1
J.  F. No,  about  1908.
S. What  was  Jim  doing  before  then  1

J.  F. Helping  father — instruct — inarticulate — sounded  like  maps.

S. Where  was  Jim  workmg  ?

J.  F. At  seaside  place.

S. Can  you  tell  me  the  name?

J.  F. Can't  get  it.

(Pause.)

F. Glad  Gordon  was  able  to  come.

S. Do  you  know  anything  about  him  ?

P. Think  he  was  shot,  poor  fellow — I  never  knew  him,
Sam.

S. Well,  don't  forget  to  bring  him  next  time  first  thing.

F. Shan't  forget — there's  no  power,  Sam^ — Goodbye.

Afid. Power  is  going.

[Note. — On  the  mornmg  of  January  9,  which  was
the  date  arranged  for  my  next  sitting,  I  received
before  leaving  home  a  brief  note  from  Captain
Shoesmith,  R.N.R.,  stating  that  he  was  sorry  he  was
unable  to  throw  any  light  on  the  questions  contained
in  my  letter.  Further,  "  he  had  no  recollections  of
pictures  or  cats  "  in  cormection  with  the  residence
"  Paglesham,"  which  he  did  not  occupy  prior  to
1913.  All  the  statements  of  John  Ferguson  with
regard  to  Highland  Avenue  are  therefore  definitely  |
proved  to  be  false.  There  is,  however,  one  curious
point  to  be  noticed.  Captain  Shoesmith 's  letter  bore
as  its  address  the  single  word  "  Pl3rmouth,"  and  is
dated  January  7,  1922.  In  Sittmg  No.  18  it  will
be  remembered  that  in  reply  to  a  question  of  the
sitter,  John  Ferguson  stated  that  "  Shoeshuae  "  had
gone  to  the  seaside  and  mentioned  "  Plym  "  as  the
name  of  the  place.  This  new  residence  of  Captain
Shoesmith  was  quite  unknown  to  myself  and  my
letter  of  enquiry  was  addressed  to  Brentwood.  At
my  interview  with  Mr.  Symonds,  the  Postmaster,
I merely  learned that  Captain Shoesmith  had  left


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  547


Brentwood.  Had  Mr.  Symonds  mentioned  Plymouth
I  should  most  certainly  have  taken  a  note  of  it  at
the  time.  Quite  possibly,  therefore,  we  have  in  this
case  telepathy  from  Mr.  Symonds  to  Mrs.  Cooper  via
'  myself.  I  will  give  now  the  record  of  part  of  Sitting
No.  21  which  contains  the  denouement  of  the  Ferguson
case.]

Sitting  No.  21.

January  9,  1922,  3.40  p.m. Weather  fair.

Present :  Mrs.  Cooper.

S.  G.  SOAL.

(The  first  part  of  this  Sitting  was  occupied  by
attempts  to  induce  Gordon  Davis  to  communicate
directly  and  to  the  statements  which  Nada  purported
to  be  getting  from  him.  But  towards  the  end  of
the  sitting  and  before  James  Miles  appeared,  I
enquired  after  John  Ferguson  in  whom  I  had  now
lost  interest.)

S. After  a  pause. Nada,  I  would  like  to  have  a  chat

with  John  Ferguson.
Nada. Is  not  coming  any  more — Says  he's  fed  up — no  use —

he  only  gets  worse  and  worse.
S. Couldn't  you  bring  him  for  the  last  time  ?
Nada. He  says  it's  no  good — no  more.
S. Was  he  really  a  spirit  1
Nada. Yes,  but  he  was  muddled.

S.- [Shoeshine]  said  he  never  heard  of  him. What  do  you
say  to  that  ?

Nada. Suited  [Shoeshine]  not  to  own  him  perhajDS.

S. You  still  stick  up  for  him  ?

Nada. Yes. It's  wicked  trying  to  confuse  spirits.

S. I  didn't  try  to  confuse  him.

Nada. I  think  you  did.

S. No,  I  tried  to  help  him.

Nada. We  won't  discuss  it.

(Pause.)

(Frank  speaks.)
F. Sam,  you  shouldn't  let  this  worry  you.
S. What  do  you  think  of  John  Ferguson  ?


S.  G.  Soal.


[PABT


Thiiik  he  got  mixed  up,  Sam. Mistook  your  thoughts

for  his  own.
How  do  you  mean  ?

His  mind  was  blank.  He  caught  at  any  thoughts
flying  round — he'd  have  believed  he  was  Jonah  if
you  had  told  him  so.

But  I  didn't  tell  him  he  was  anjrthing.

You  thought  it — no  difference.

How  did  he  get  hold  of  that  address  Warescott  Road,
Brentwood  ?

Bit  doubtful — might  really  have  been  someone  from  there.
Do  you  mean  a  spirit  from  there  ?

Yes,  spirit  (inarticulate).  You  see,  John  had  forgot  all
about  himself — clutched  at  any  straw  in  the  wind —
couldn't  bear  to  think  he  was  nobody.

Could  I  make  you  think  you  were  somebody  else  1

Inarticulate.

Could  I  make  you  think  you  were  John  Ferguson  ?
No,  Sam. Should  see  through  it.
Why  would  you  see  through  it.

Things  would  come  back  to  me — you  know  too  much.
What  do  you  mean  ?  •  ■

ICnow  too  much  about  me.  Could  always  find  myself
in  you.

(Voice  becomes  faint  and  ceases.  After  an  interval
a  new  communicator,  James  Miles,  appears,  whose
case  is  considered  separately  in  Section  3.)

[Note. — At  this  stage  the  statements  of  John
Ferguson  were  virtually  disproved.  It  only  remained
to  disprove  his  assertions  about  his  burial  in  the  year
1912  at  the  South  Necropolis,  Glasgow.  On  January  5
I  addressed  a  letter  to  the  Keeper  of  the  Cemetery,
asking  him  to  make  a  list  for  me  of  all  the  Fergusons,
male  and  female,  who  had  been  interred  in  the  South
Necropolis  since  the  year  1890.  An  examination  of
this  list  show  conclusively  that  no  John  and  Amy
Ferguson  were  buried  in  the  same  grave,  and  further
that  no  John  Ferguson  was  buried  on  March  3,  1912.

A  communication  from  James  Anderson,  Keeper  of  the
South  Necropolis,  Glasgow,  is  printed  in  Appendix  C.


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  549

On  examining  the  map  after  Sitting  20,  I  found
that  the  streets  mentioned — namely,  George  Street,
Charing  Cross,  and  India  Street, — were  all  quite  close
together.  India  Street  was  in  very  small  type
indeed.  It  would  seem  as  though  a  little  area  of
this  map  had  been  visualised  by  myself  unconsciously
and  transferred  to  the  medium.]

It  would  appear  from  the  study  of  "  John  Ferguson "
that  the  case  for  spontaneous  telepathy  between  medium
and  sitter  is  far  stronger  than  the  average  psychic  re-
searcher usually  admits.  Indeed,  it  would  seem  to  be  so
extensive  that  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge  we
are  not  justified  in  putting  any  limits  to  it.  A  large
number  of  the  incidents  described  in  Section  1  purporting
to  come  from  the  mind  of  my  deceased  brother  may  be
so  many  examples  of  spontaneous  telepathy  from  myself.
And  it  would  even  appear  that  a  purely  fictitious  communi-
cator like  John  Ferguson  can  sometimes  give  supernormal
information  about  facts  unknown  to  the  sitter,  e.g.  his
knowledge  of  Captaia  Shoesmith's  removal  to  Plymouth.

The  hypothesis  of  conscious  fraud  on  the  part  of  the
medium  in  this  case  may  obviously  be  lightly  dismissed.  No
intelligent  person  who  cares  to  study  the  evidence  could
entertain  it  for  a  moment.  If  there  was  fraud  we  should
clearly  have  to  assume  that  the  sitter  was  also  a  party
to  it.  In  the  end,  therefore,  the  case  rests  largely  on
my  o-\vn  honesty,  and  there  I  must  leave  it.

Section  3.
The  Case  of  James  Miles.

Although  the  evidence  is  mainly  of  a  negative  character,
I  have  thought  it  worth  while  for  purposes  of  comparison
to  give  some  account  of  this  case.

The  case  of  "  James  MUes  "  would  appear  to  be  one  of
cryptomnesia  rather  than  of  conscious  fraud.  The  cases
discussed  elsewhere  in  our  paper  do  not  support  the  theory
of  conscious  fraud  on  the  part  of  the  medium,  and  there
seems  jio  reason  to  assume  it  here. To suppose  that


550


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


Mrs.  Cooper  had  read  the  account  of  James  Miles'  death  in
the  Daily  Express  and  unconsciously  dramatised  it  is,  on
the  whole,  the  most  rational  explanation.  There  is  in
the  later  sittings  a  certain  amount  of  evidence  for  tele-
pathy from  the  sitter's  mind  but  practically  no  evidence
for  any  independent  exercise  of  the  medium's  supernormal
faculty  on  the  life  of  James  Miles.

It  may  be  suggested  that  the  reason  why  real  super-
normal information  was  not  forthcoming  in  this  case  is
possibly  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  no  link  of  any  kind
existed  between  James  Miles  and  the  sitter.  Exactly
what  constitutes  a  link  is  at  present  a  very  difficult
matter  to  determine.  Osty  seems  to  look  upon  a  link
as  consisting  of  some  object,  living  or  inanimate,  which  has
had  physical  associations  with  the  subject  upon  whom  the
psychic  desires  to  exercise  her  powers.  But,  however
this  may  be,  it  is  certain  that  the  sitter  neither  possessed
any  object  connected  with  James  Miles  nor  was  acquainted
with  any  of  his  friends  or  relatives.  Nor  had  he  ever
been  to  Bath,  the  place  where  James  Miles  lived,  or  pre-
vious to  the  sittings  to  the  best  of  his  knowledge  known
any  people  who  hailed  from  there.

Abstract  of  first  two  "  Miles  "  Sittings.

In  lieu  of  quoting  the  full  records  which  have  been
filed  for  purposes  of  reference,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  give
a  summary  of  the  various  statements  made  by  the  com-
municator.

Sitting  No.  21.

Monday,  January  9,  1922,  3.40  p.m. Present :  Mrs.  Cooper.

S.  G.  Soal.

Towards  the  end  of  the  sitting  there  spoke  a  boyish
voice  saying  in  rather  pathetic  accents,  "  Oh  !  where  am
I  ? I  don't  know  where  I  am."

This  communicator  then  said  that  his  name  was  James,
and  that  he  had  fallen  into  the  water,  "  while  trying  to
catch  "  something.  At  this  sitting  he  was  unable  to  give
his  surname  but  said  that  he  was  only  thirteen  years  old


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  551


and  had  lived  at  Bath.  He  had  fallen  into  the  River
Avon.  At  home  they  called  him  "  Jimmy,"  and  he  was
very  anxious  that  his  father  should  hear  from  him.  In
■  reply  to  a  question  by  the  sitter  he  stated  that  he  had
"passed  over,"  only  a  few  days  ago.

Between  this  sitting  and  the  next  no  enquiries  were
made  by  the  sitter  relating  to  the  matter.

Sitting  No.  22.

Monday,  January  16,  1922,  3.40  p.m. Present :  Mrs.  Coopeb.

S.  G.  SOAL.

"  James  "  appeared  again.  The  voice  and  style  of
address  were  reminiscent  of  the  last  sitting.  The  boy
said  that  his  father  was  a  painter,  who  lived  at  "  Clarence
Place."  He  next  spelt  out  his  surname  as  M — I — L — -E — S,
giving  James  Miles  as  his  full  name.  In  reply  to  a  ques-
tion he  said  that  his  father  did  not  live  at  Bath,  but  in
a  town  not  very  far  away.  This  place  was  ultimately
spelt  out  as  W— E— S— T— 0— N.  The  medium  (who
comes  from  Bristol)  suggested  that  Weston  might  be
Weston-super-Mare,  a  jalace  with  which  she  was  acquainted.

James  told  us  that  "  He  had  lots  of  brothers  and
sisters,"  and  mentioned,  "  Little  Sid  "  or  "  Little  Sis."
He  said  that  he  was  on  a  visit  to  Bath,  and  was  playing
with  some  other  boys.  Asked  what  it  was  he  was  "  trying
to  catch,"  he  said  it  was  "nothing  alive,"  but  something
"  I  had  given  me."

He  then  attempted  to  give  the  name  of  a  street  where
he  hved  as  LOCK — ^foUowed  by  another  syllable  having
the  PR  or  BR  sound  and  a  D  at  the  end.  The  last
half  of  the  word  "  had  to  do  with  water."  Asked  if  the
day  was  warm  and  sunny  when  he  fell  into  the  water,
he  replied,  "  No,  it  was  very  cold."  In  reply  to  the  ques-
tion "  Did  no  one  try  to  save  you  ?  he  gave  the  answer,
"  It  was  too  deep."

As  a  result  of  the  information  obtained  at  the  two  pre-
vious sittings,  I  consulted  the  English  directory  on  Janu-
ary 17  and  discovered  that  UPPER  WESTON  and
LOWER  WESTON  are  parts  of  BATH,  and  that  further


552


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


there  is  a  LOCKSBROOK  ROAD  in  LOWER  WESTON.
The  statement  that  the  second  part  of  the  name  "  had
to  do  with  water  "  made  it  practically  certain  that  I
was  on  the  right  track.  I  accordingly  selected  the
name  of  a  responsible  resident,  "J.  T.  Fryer,  Esq.,
Builder's  Merchant,"  living  in  LOCKSBROOK  ROAD,
and  wrote  to  him  asking  if  he  would  kindly  confirm  the
facts  given  at  the  sittings.  I  addressed  a  similar  letter
to  the  "  Registrar  of  Births  and  Deaths,"  Bath.

On  January  19  I  received  a  reply  from  the  Rev.  A.  T.
Fryer,  63  Newbridge  Road,  Bath.  The  following  is  an
abbreviation  of  Mr.  Fryer's  letter  :

63  Newbridge  Road,
Bath,

„  18.1.1922.

Dear  Sib,

Your  letter  addressed  to  my  brother  J.  T.  Fryer,
(who  died  six  years  ago)  came  into  my  hands  this  morning.
As  an  hon.  associate  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  ^
I  am  naturally  interested  in  your  enquiry,  and  shall  be
pleased  to  aid  you  in  this  case  as  far  as  possible.  James
Miles  was  drowned  a  short  time  since  near  here.  I  will
try  to  get  the  newspaper  rej)ort  of  the  inquest  and  for-
ward to  you  (rest  of  letter  omitted),

Yours  faithfully,
A.  T.  Fryer.

On  Friday,  January  20,  1922,  I  received  from  the  Rev.
A.  T.  Fryer  a  cutting  from  the  Bath  Herald  of  Friday,
December  30,  1921.

THE  ''BATH  HERALD;'  FRIDAY,  DECEMBER  30,  1921.

BOY'S  LIFE  FOR  A  TOY

SLIPS  INTO  THE  AVON  AND  IS  DROWNED

CORONER  SAYS  ALL  BOYS  SHOULD  SWI3I

Inquest  on  Weston  Victim

That  all  boys  should  learn  to  swim  is  tragically  empha-
sised by  the  death  of  James  Alymer  Miles, 13, son  of

1  It  will  be  remembered  that  the  Rev.  A.  T.  Fryer  was  a  member  of  the
Coimcil  of  the  S.P.R.  for  several  years.


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  553

Charles  Miles,  of  5  Clarence  Place,  Lower  Weston,  wh'j ,
in  trying  to  recover  a  toy  balloon  from  the  Avon  yesterday
slipped  in  and  was  drowned  in  the  presence  of  his  three
chums.  The  inquest  was  held  at  the  Guildhall  to-day  by
the  City  Coroner  (Mr.  F.  E.  Shum).

"  JIMMY  IS  IN  THE  WATER."

Charles  Miles,  the  father,  Avho  is  a  painter  by  trade,
said  he  last  saw  his  boy  alive  at  9  o'clock  on  Thursday
morning.  He  was  at  West  Twerton  School.  He  was  a
very  strong  healthy  lad,  but  could  not  swim.  He  was  at
home  about  1.30,  mid-day,  when  three  boys  came  to
inform  him  of  the  tragedy.  They  said  that  "  Jimmy  was
in  the  water  drowned."  He  asked  where  it  was  and  at
once  hastened  to  the  spot,  between  the  Midland  Railway
bridge  and  the  Weston  toll  bridge,  but  he  could  see
nothing  of  him  in  the  water.  There  was  no  one  there
at  the  time.  Witness  went  to  the  Twerton  Police  Station,
where  he  was  informed  that  a  boat  was  being  procured
to  drag  the  river.  He  himself  returned  to  the  river
.  bank.  He  was  present  when  the  body  was  recovered  by
the  police,  between  3  o'clock  and  half  past.  It  was  taken
to  the  mortuary.

Leonard  Pitt,  aged  12,  a  schoolboy,  in  giving  evidence,
said  James  Miles  was  a  friend  of  his.  They  went  straight
from  home  to  the  river  bank.  The  day  before  a  boat
had  been  pulled  out  and  they  went  to  see  it,  but  it  had
been  removed.  .  .  .  Then  "  Jimmy  "  saw  what  appeared
to  be  a  toy  balloon  in  the  water  near  the  bank.  "  Jimmy  "
said  he  was  going  after  it.  The  bank  was  not  very  steep
there,  the  deceased  put  his  foot  on  a  loose  piece  of  turf
and  slipped  in.  .  .  .  Witness  and  some  other  boys  ran  up
for  a  drag  pole  near  the  bridge,  but  there  was  none  there.
(Rest  of  account  omitted).

On  Saturday,  January  21,  1922,  in  reply  to  my  letter
addressed  to  the  "  Registrar  of  Births  and  Deaths,"  I
received  from  Mr.  W.  E.  Winckworth,  Superintendent
Registrar  of  12  Charlotte  Street,  Bath,  a  cutting  from  the
Bath  Weekly  Chronicle,  published  before  the  date  of  the
inquest  on  "  James  Miles."


554


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


From  this  account  of  the  tragedy  I  shall  quote  only

such  items  as  are  important  in  view  of  developments  at

subsequent  sittings.  Under  a  sub-heading  "  A  FATAL
SLIP  "  we  read  :

Miles,  it  appears,  noticed  a  toy  balloon  floating  down
the  river  near  the  bank.  He  at  once  exclaimed,  "  That's
my  balloon,"  and  endeavoured  to  secure  it.  His  two
companions  appear  to  have  taken  little  interest  in  his
find,  and  were  possibly  engrossed  in  a  game  of  their  own.
At  all  events.  Miles  appears  to  have  attempted  to  secure
the  balloon  without  the  assistance  of  his  companions.
He  scrambled  down  the  bank,  which  is  rather  steep  at
this  point,  and  presumably  encountered  some  insecure
foothold.  At  all  events,  his  horror-stricken  companions
told  a  Bath  Chronicle  representative  that  they  watched
him  "  roll "  into  the  water.  .  .  .  No  cry  was  heard  and
the  tragedy  seems  to  have  ended  before  help  was  forth-
coming. .

Further  on  in  the  report  occurs  the  statement :  "  The
boy,  James  Miles,  was  a  member  of  '  Uncle  Fred's '
League,  which  is  conducted  in  cormection  with  the  Bath
Weekly  Chronicle,  and  was  one  of  the  recipients  of  a
'  Joy  Parcel  '  in  the  recent  Christmas  distribution.  His
mother  is  in  somewhat  poor  health,  and  recently  under-
went an  operation  in  hospital.  Thursday's  tragic  hap-
pening has  naturally  distressed  her  extremely."

I  had  arranged  to  have  my  next  sitting  on  Monday,
January  23,  but  unfortunately  an  attack  of  influenza
obliged  me  to  postpone  it  until  Monday,  January  30.

In  the  meantime  on  Friday,  January  27,  I  visited  the
offices  of  various  London  newspapers  and  copied  from  the
files  the  accounts  of  the  fatality  published  on  December
30,  1921,  and  December  31.  I  found  that  accounts  of
the  tragedy  had  appeared  in  three  London  Newspapers —
the  Daily  Mail,  the  Daily  Chronicle,  and  the  Daily  Express.
Of  these  accounts  only  that  given  in  the  Daily  Express
tallied  exactly  with  the  statements  made  at  the  two  pre-
vious sittings. This  report  read  as  follows  :


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  555

''DAILY  EXPRESS"  DECEMBER  30,  1921.
Boy's  Life  for  a  toy
Drowned  in  rescuing  his  Balloon

A  toy  balloon  received  as  a  Christmas  present  caused
the  death  of  a  thirteen  year  old  school  boy  named  James
Miles  at  Bath  yesterday.  The  balloon  was  blown  into
the  Avon  and  Miles  and  two  other  boys  tried  to  rescue
it.  MUes  slipped  while  scrambling  down  a  steep  bank
and  fell  into  deep  water.  Meanwhile  the  balloon  had
drifted  out  of  sight.

Miles  was  one  of  a  family  of  eleven.

His  father  is  a  painter  at  Clarence  Place,  Locksbrook
Road,  Weston.

The  Daily  Chronicle  mentioned  all  the  facts  given  by
the  communicator  with  the  exception  of  the  address
"  Clarence  Place."  The  Daily  Mail  gave  much  less  infor-
mation than  did  "  James  Miles  "  at  the  sittings.

I  will  now  give  a  brief  summary  of  certain  additional
statements  made  by  James  Miles  at  sittings  No.  23  and  24.

Sitting  No.  23.

Monday,  January  30,  1922,  3.40  p.m. Present :  Mrs.  Cooper.

S.  G.  SOAL.

At  this  sitting  the  voices  were  rather  indistinct.  Nada
appeared  and  gave  the  word  LOCKSBROOK  correctly.
She  then  mentioned  "  a  pink  thing  "  which  she  thought  "  was
on  Jimmy's  bed."  A  little  later  "  James  "  himself  pur-
ported to  speak,  and  I  asked  him  to  give  me  details  about
his  home  and  family.  He  mentioned  a  baby  "  named
George  that  died  when  it  was  a  year  old." "  Bobby,"

"Willie"  and  "J  "  were  mentioned  as  the  names  of

his  brothers.  Thei'e  was  a  reference  to  "  Little  Sid  "  (or
possibly  "  Little  Sis  ") — ■"  a  sweet  little  thing,"  and  also  a
mention  of  an  "  Uncle  Frank  "  (possibly  an  attempt  to
give  the  "  Uncle  Fred  "  of  the  Bath  Chronicle's  report
which  I  had  read).  A  date  June  20,  was  given  as  being
that  of  someone's  birthday,  possibly  "  Willie's  birthday."


556


S.  0.  Soal.


[part


A  little  later  came  a  statement  which  seemed  to  refer  to
some  insurance  money.  "  It  wasn't  much  money.  Father
took  it — paid  to  him — a  big  building — "  (sounded  like
"  £2  "  ).

Sittiyig  No.  24:.

Monday,  February  6,  1922,  3.30  p.m. Present :  Mrs.  Coopek.

S.  G.  Soal.

"James"  appeared  again,  but  said  "he  was  all  mixed
up,  and  didn't  know  what  he  was  saying."  He  repeated
the  names  "  Bobbie  "  and  "  Willie  "  of  the  previous
sitting,  and  gave  an  additional  name,  "  Mary."  He  also
mentioned  a  boy  named  "  Seymour,"  aged  11.  He  went
on  to  speak  about  "  Two  gates  not  far  from  where  he
lived,"  ..."  Two  gates  we  used  to  go  through  .  .  .  one
broken  ...  I  scratched  my  name  on  it."  "  Scratched
'  J.M.'  and  '  Oily.'  "  Towards  the  end  of  the  sitting  Nada
made  the  statement,  "  The  mother  is  very  ill.  That's  a
good  test."

[Note. — I  had  read  that  the  mother  was  very  ill  in  the
Bath  Weekly  Chronicle,  but  was  not  thinking  of  the  fact
at  the  moment. S.  G.  S.]

There  was  also  a  reference  to  "A  man  putting  out  a
big  stick  "  (possibly  some  confused  attempt  to  bring  in
"  the  drag  poles  "  of  which  I  had  read  in  the  inquest
report. S.  G.  S.).

On  February  7  I  sent  a  list  of  the  statements  made  at
Sittings  23  and  24  to  the  Rev.  A.  T.  Fryer  for  investiga-
tion, and  on  February  10  received  a  report  from  him.
Mr.  Fryer  stated  that  he  had  had  an  interview  with  Mr.
Miles  at  his  home  at  5  Clarence  Place  on  Wednesday
evening,  February  8.  It  appears  from  Mr.  Fryer's  long
and  detailed  report  that  practically  all  the  information
given  at  these  last  two  sittings  was  incorrect.  The  names
"Bobbie,"  "Willie,"  and  "Sid,"  for  instance,  were  not
the  names  of  the  lad's  brothers  as  stated.  The  "  impor-
tant date  (June  20)  "  seemed  to  have  no  connection  with
the  family.  The  bed  coverlet  was  not  pink,  and  although
there-  was  "  a  broken  gate  "  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  557

boy's  home  it  appeared  that  "  James  "  had  not  carved
his  initials  on  it.  Mr.  Miles  had  received  some  insurance
money  in  respect  to  the  dead  boy,  but  states  that  he  did
not  thmk  "  James  "  knew  he  was  msured.  Certainly
the  amount  was  more  than  "  £2."  The  statement  con-
cerning the  mother's  illness  was  correct,  but  the  sitter
had  read  it  previously  in  the  Bath  Chronicle.

At  Sitting  No.  25  held  on  February  13,  1922,  when
there  was  present,  besides  myself,  Mr.  Harold  Rankui,  of
"  Broomhills,"  Rochford,  Essex,  the  name  "  Helen,"  or
"  NelHe,"  was  given  as  the  name  of  the  mother  of  James
IMiles.  This  proved  to  be  incorrect.  "  Jimmy "  also
mentioned  that  his  father's  name  was  "  Charles,"  a  fact
which  the  sitter  had  previously  read  in  the  "  Bath  "
newspapers.  "  James  Miles  "  did  not  appear  at  any
subsequent  sittuigs.

It  should  be  added  that  ui  a  letter  dated  16.11.1922,
Mr.  Fryer  states  that  "  James,  so  his  brother  says,  was
not  given  to  cutting  his  name  on  any  gate."  "As  to
the  mention  of  the  lad  named  '  Seymour,'  the  children
at  home  have  made  inquiries  amongst  the  school  children
and  the  lads  of  the  Boys'  Brigade,  but  there  is  no
'  Seymour  '  amongst  them."

Observations  and  Deductions.

A  careful  inspection  of  the  London  press  reports  and
comparison  with  the  records  of  Sittings  21  and  22  shows
that  all  the  verified  facts  given  at  the  first  two  sittuigs
were  published  in  at  least  one  London  newspaper,  the
Daily  Express.  Further  we  see  that  there  is  no  correct
statement  obtained  at  these  two  sittings  that  could  not
have  been  deduced  from  the  account  in  the  Daily  Express
of  December  30.  An  interesting  feature  of  this  case  is
the  remarkable  way  in  which  every  scrap  of  information
given  in  the  London  press  is  utihsed  to  support  the
impersonation  of  the  deceased  lad.  Thus,  when  I  ask
"  James  "  the  question,  "  Did  no  one  try  to  save  you  ?  "
he  replies,  "  It  was  too  deep."

In  the  Daily  Express  we  read  "  He  fell  uito  deep  water."


558


*S'.  G.  Soal.


[part


Again  "James"  says,  "I've  such  a  lot  of  brothers  and
sisters,"  while  the  Daily  Express  states,  "  Miles  was  one
of  a  family  of  11."

It  is  when  we  come  to  compare  the  wealth  of  accurate
detail  given  at  the  first  two  sittings  with  the  press  account
and  then  contrast  this  with  the  poverty  and  inaccuracy
of  the  later  "  communications  "  that  no  doubt  is  left  in
our  minds  that  the  newspapers  were  the  source  of  the
information.  "  Jimmy,"  who  was  able  to  "  get  through  "
such  complicated  names  as  "  LOCKSBROOK  "  and
"  CLARENCE  PLACE  "  fails  to  give  correctly  the  name
of  a  single  brother  or  sister  or  school  mate.  As  the
"  spirit  "  of  "  James  Miles  "  he  falls  obviously  to  the
ground.

But  in  what  sense  is  the  newspaper  the  source  of  the
information  ?  I  have  satisfied  myself  that  during  the
days  December  30  and  31  I  saw  no  newspaper  except
the  Daily  Chronicle.  I  was  staying  in  the  country  at  the
time,  and  spent  the  days  in  long  walks.  During  those
two  days  the  Daily  Chronicle  was  the  only  paper  available
to  me,  but  as  the  report  of  the  fatality  was  printed  on
the  first  page  I  must  almost  certainly  have  read  it.  This
paper,  however,  could  hardly  have  been  the  source  of  the
communications  since  the  important  name  "  Clarence
Place  "  is  omitted  from  the  account.

There  is  good  reason  for  believing  that  the  London
Daily  Express  and  not  the  "  Bath  "  or  West  Country
newspapers  was  the  true  source.  In  the  first  place,  while
the  correct  information  given  at  Sittings  21  and  22  just
covers  the  Daily  Express  account  it  does  not  nearly
exhaust  the  store  contained  in  the  Bath  Herald  or  the
Bath  Chronicle.  But  there  is  another  more  conclusive
argument.  In  Sitting  No.  22  "  James  "  makes  concerning
the  toy  balloon  the  statement  "  It  was  something  I  had
given  me."  Now  all  the  London  Papers  state  definitely
that  the  balloon  was  a  Christmas  present  to  the  boy
James.  In  the  "  Bath  "  papers,  on  the  contrary,  there  is
nothing  to  lead  one  to  believe  that  this  balloon  belonged
to  James  Miles.  In  fact,  the  general  impression  made  by
reading  the  reports  is  to  the  effect  that  the  boy  found


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Coojjer.  559

the  balloon  in  the  water.  Thus  Leonard  Pitt  in  his
evidence  at  the  inquest  says  :  "  Jimmy  saw  what
appeared  to  be  a  toy  balloon  in  the  water  near  the
bank."  It  is  true  that  in  the  Bath  C'hro7iicle  we
read  that  the  boy  was  the  recipient  of  a  "  Joy  Parcel,"
but  we  are  not  told  that  the  balloon  was  part  of  the
contents  of  this  parcel.

One  other  interesting  point  calls  for  note.  The  "  Direct
Voice  "  gave  correctly  (a)  the  fact  that  the  mother  was
very  ill  and  (6)  the  father's  name  "  Charles."  Neither
of  these  facts  were  given  in  the  London  newspapers,  but
they  were  not  given  at  the  sittings  until  the  sitter  had
read  them  in  the  "  Bath "  papers.  We  have  here  some
evidence  for  "  transference  "  from  the  unconscious  mind
of  the  sitter  to  the  automatism  of  the  medium.  It  is
the  kind  of  transference  which  we  have  studied  in  greater
detail  in  the  case  of  "  John  Ferguson."  By  the  study  of
such  cases  as  these  we  learn  that  the  mere  dramatisation
of  a  communicator  by  tricks  of  intonation,  peculiar  and
consistent  style  of  address  and  the  like,  affords  no  guaran-
tee that  we  are  in  touch  with  discarnate  agency.  The
tendency  to  impersonate  seems  to  be  a  native  tendency
of  the  unconscious  mind.  It  is  by  the  quality  of  the
information  they  communicate  and  by  that  alone  that
we  must  test  the  claims  of  so-called  "  spirits."  Judged
by  this  test  the  "  spirit  "  of  James  Miles  certainly
falls  to  the  ground.  Nor  need  it  be  imagined  that  we
are  putting  forward  such  cases  as  this  as  an  argument
against  the  possibility  that  so7ne  of  the  mental  phenomena
exhibited  by  mediums  are  the  result  of  discarnate  agency.
It  is  almost  certain  that  the  mental  phenomena  of  auto-
matism have  their  origin  in  many  sources.  Sometimes
the  source  (as  in  this  case)  is  the  acquired  knowledge  of
the  psychic,  sometimes  it  ii^  the  acquired  knowledge  of
the  sitter  transferred  to  the  medium's  automatism.  The
important  duty  of  the  investigator  is  to  track  each  piece
of  information  to  its  most  probable  source.  In  this  spirit
we  hope  to  continue  our  observations.

To  sum  up  then,  we  are  bound  to  assume  that  the
present  case  is  one  of  cryptomnesia  on  the  part  of  the


560


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


medium.  The  medium  states  tiiat  she  does  not  read
the  Daily  Express,  and  in  view  of  this  statement  there  is
just  the  bare  possibiHty  that  the  medium  clairvoyantly  read
the  contents  of  the  newspaj)er  paragraph  or  that  she
obtained  the  information  from  the  unconscious  minds  of
the  thousands  who  must  have  read  and  assimilated  the
accounts  of  the  tragedy  of  James  Miles.  It  is  "  in  the
air,"  so  to  speak.  But  if  such  clairvoyance  there  be,  it
scarcely  seems  to  extend  in  this  case  beyond  the  limits  of
a  London  newspaper.  -  '

It  is  curious  that  Mr.  Fryer  in  the  course  of  his  investi-
gations should  have  come  across  a  gate  inscribed  with
initials.  But  this  is  probably  a  coincidence.  Indeed  it
would  have  applied  equally  well,  in  fact  far  better  if  it
had  been  given  as  a  piece  of  information  to  support  the
impersonation  of  my  brother  Frank.  Frank  actually  did
carve  his  name  on  the  gates  near  home,  whereas  "  James  "
we  are  told  "  was  not  in  the  habit  of  scratching  his  name
on  gates."  Again,  there  is  the  question  of  the  insurance
money  paid  to  Mr.  Miles,  and  not  mentioned  in  any  news-
paper. That  is  curious,  but  it  may  be  nothing  more
than  a  lucky  guess  by  the  unconscious  mind  of  the
medium.  There  is  a,  lack  of  definite  and  clear  evidence
for  any  independent  clairvoyance  in  this  case  and  we
cannot,  therefore,  assume  it.

In  conclusion,  our  thanks  are  due  to  the  Rev.  A.  T.
Fryer  for  his  co-operation  •  in  investigating  the  facts  given
at  the  sittings  ;  but  for  his  help  we  might  never  have
reached  our  present  conclusions.  '~


Section  4.

The  Case  of  Vordon  Davis.

A  "  Communication  "  from  a  Living  Person.

In  discussing  this  remarkable  case  it  would  be  perhaps
entirely  illogical,  although  practically  convenient  to  des-
cribe the  case  as  one  of  "  communication  "  by  a  living  person.
There  is  not  a  great  deal  of  real  evidence  to  justify  us  in


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  561

saying  that  the  living  Giordoii  Davis  took  any  active  part
in  the  affair.  We  Imow  tliat  his  conscioxis  mind  was
busy  interviewing  clients  on  both  occasions  on  which  he
was  supposed  to  communicate.  All  that  we  are  entitled
to  say  is  that  a  communication  was  received  concerning
Gordon  Davis  ;  that  is  to  say,  certain  facts  were  com-
municated about  his  life  history,  past  and  future.  Some
of  these  facts  were  given  in  the  form  of  verbal  statements
describing  incidents  which  had  happened  or  which  were
to  happen  ;  other  facts  such  as  his  vocal  characteristics
were  expressed  in  a  purely  physical  way.

For  mediums  to  obtain  knowledge  supernormally  about
a  living  person  is  not  an  infrequent  occurrence,  but  cases
in  which  the  hving  person  appears  to  "  control "  the
psychic  and  is  dramatised  and  made  to  speak  in  the  first
person  are,  I  believe,  extremely  rare,  although  not  un-
known.

In  the  case  under  consideration  the  supernormal  know-
ledge shown  is  of  a  high  order.  Not  only  is  there  pene-
tration into  the  past  of  the  "  communicator,"  but  there
are  considerable  indications  that  the  future  was  also
anticipated.

There  is  further  (I  think)  some  grounds  for  the  assump-
tion that  this  prevision  was  of  the  purely  psychic  kind
rather  than  of  the  kind  that  is  built  up  upon  inferences
drawn  from  present  data.  Granting  this  assumption,  the
case  has  special  interest  in  relation  to  those  theories  in
which  the  material  universe  is  regarded  as  a  four-
dimensional  complex,  with  time  as  the  fourth  dimension.
Looked  at  from  this  point  of  view,  human  beings  have
an  extension  in  time  as  well  as  in  the  other  three  dimen-
sions. They  exist  in  their  totality  independently  of  the
particular  moment  at  which  we  choose  to  view  them.
The  personahty  of  Gordon  Davis  was  arrested,  as  it  were,
at  a  particular  point  of  the  time  stream — i.e.  a  special
three-dimensional  section  was  taken  of  his  four-dimensional
complex.  He  was  dramatised  in  1922  to  appear  as  he
would  be  in  his  new  environment  of  1923.

One  very  interesting  point  arises.  This  dramatised
personality,  so  accurate  in  its  other  statements,  apparently


562


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


believes  itself  to  be  a  deceased  person.  We  might,  of
course,  assume  that  this  idea  was  suggested  to  it  by  the
spiritistic  mind  of  the  medium,  who  in  turn  obtained  false
information  from  the  mind  of  the  sitter.  But  is  this  the
true  explanation  ?

It  is  to  be  noted  that  Gordon  Davis  does  not  give  any
details  about  the  circumstances  of  his  death.  It  is  true
that  "  Frank  "  expresses  some  "  belief  "  that  G.  D.  was
killed  in  the  war,  but  it  must  be  remembered  that  Frank
could  not  tell  anything  else  about  him,  and  the  possibility
is  that  he  was  merely  "  guessing."

Record  of  Gordon  Davis  Sittings.
Sitiing  No.  20.

Wednesday,  J  am(ary  4:,  1922,  11.10  a.tn.  Present:  Mrs.  Cooper.
[Postponed  froin  Wednesday,  December  28,  1921.] S.  G.  Soal.

(At  the  commencement  of  the  sitting  Nada
remarked,  "  think  there's  someone  wants  to  speak
to  you.")

(Frank  speaks.)
1.'  F.  Sam,  I've  brought  someone  who  knows  you.

2.  S.  All  right,  let  him  speak.

(Pause.)

(A  voice  well  articulated  and  extraordinarily  clear
and  strong  began  to  speak.  From  the  first
moment  I  had  a  lightning  impression  that  the
tone  was  quite  familiar  to  me,  but  I  could  not
immediately  place  it.  It  was  a  surprisingly  weU
modulated  voice  with  a  most  fastidious  accent.
I  knew  at  once  that  IVIrs.  Coojaer  had  never
produced  anything  so  good  at  my  sittings  before.)

3.  Voice, Well,  Soal,  I  never  expected  to  speak  to  you  in

this  fashion.

[Note. — This  sentence  was  delivered  with  an
extraordinary  variety  of  tone,  and  also  with
great  energy.]

4.  S.  Who  are  you  then  ?

1  These  numbers  refer  to  Mr.  Davis'  statement,  see  below  p  573.


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  563


5.  Voice. Remember Davis — Gordon from R — R — Roch —

Roch —

[Note. — This  word  was  not  completed, but  I
- -  easily understood it was an attempt to  say

"  Rochford."]

6.  S.  By  Jove,  and  it's  like  Gordon  Davis,  too.

7.  Voice. The  dead  to  the  living. Queer  world,  what  ? — My

poor  wife  is  my  only  worry  now — and  kiddie.

8.  S.  Can  you  really  be  Gordon  Davis  1 I  had  heard

you  were  killed.

9.  Voice. The  same — what's  left  of  me.

10.  S.  But  what  proof  could  you  give  me  that  you  are

Davis  1

11.  Voice. Here,  I  must  hold  on — not  used  to  this.

12.  Nada. He's  a  very  strong  spirit — may  hurt  the  medium.

(Short  interval  of  silence.)

13.  Voice.  Remember  the  old  school  ?  How  I  always  argued
13a.  with  H — H — Hs — Hs — oh  confound  these  names
136.  • — was for brighter geog — brighter geography —

harpoons  and  things.

14.  S.  I  remember  about  your  arguing  with  Histed  but

nothing  about  harpoons.  Try  to  tell  me  where
you  lived. That's  something  I  don't  know.

15.  Voice. At  Roch — you  mean  ?

16.  S.  That  will  do.

17.  Voice. (Not  so  strong)— Near  the  M— Ma— Malt.

18.  Nada. He  must  rest  for  a  bit.

(Another  silent  interval. Then  voice  is  heard
quite  strong  again.)

19.  Voice. Remember  our  last  little  talk  ?

20.  S.  Yes,  I  do  quite  well. Where  was  it  ?

21.  Voice.  In  the  train — about  guards — not  train  guards
21a.  though. A  little  confab  on  the  work  of  guards.

That  help  you  ?

22.  S.  I  can  recall  it  excellently.

23.  Voice. Seems  ages  since  to  me — remember  Playle  and  O — ■

Over — Over —

24.  S.  I  thmk  I  know  who  you  mean,  but  tell  me  where

your  wife  lives.

25.  Voice. Old  chap,  I  can't  hold  on — not  a  second  longer.


564


S.  Q.  Soal.


[part


26.  Nada.  He's  losing  control,  but  he's  showing  me  the
26a.  letter  "  E  "  and  some figures, but I can't  see

what they are. Two  E's.

27.  S.  What  would  the  letter  "  E  "  mean,  Nada  ?

28.  Nada.  Feel  sure  it  has  to  do  with  the  address  of  his
28a.  wife. He's  very  anxious  to  send  news  to  her,

poor  thing. It  was  a  great  shock  to  her.

29.  S.  Can't  you  bring  him  again  ?

30.  Nada.  Not  this  time— the  medium  could  not  stand  it.—
30a.  She  went  right  out  of  her  body.

(Pause.)

[Note. — I  thought  at  this  point  the  sitting  had
finished,  but  in  a  few  minutes  John  Ferguson
began  to  speak.  All  during  the  time  Gordon
Davis  had  been  talking  and  during  the  mtervals
Mrs.  Cooper  had  remained  quite  silent.  At  the
end  of  the  sitting  she  seemed  quite  confused  and
unable  to  recall  either  what  John  Ferguson  or
Gordon  Davis  had  been  talking  about.  She
said  her  head  was  achmg  badly.  I  had  not
heard  her  complain  of  this  before.  Between  this
sitting  and  the  next  I  did  not  make  any  enquiries
about  Gordon  Davis.]

Sitting  No.  21.  '  '  \  ,

January  9,  1922,  3.40  ^3.m. Weather  fair.

Present :  Mks.  Cooper.
S.  G.  Soal.

(Nada  spoke  first.)

31.  Nada. Pleased  to  see  you  again.

32.  S.  Pleased  to  see  you,  Nada. Can  you  bring  Gordon

Davis  to  speak  again.

33.  Nada. Doubtful — it's  very  bad  for  her — too  strong.

34.  S.  Who  is  too  strong  ?

35.  Nada.  Gordon.

36.  S.  Well  I  hope  you'll  try  to  bring  him.

37.  Nada. He  mustn't  come  again  like  that. But  I  wUl  try

to  make  him  whisper  things  to  me.

(A  short  pause,  during  which  Nada  is  heard  to
whisper  somethmg  indistinctly.)


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  565


38.  Nada.
38a.

39.  S.

40.  Nada.


11.  Nada.

12.  S.

13.  Nada.
t4.  S.


45.  Nada.

46.  Nada.
46a.

466.

47.  S.

48.  Nada.
48a.

49.  S.

50.  Nada.
50a.

51.  Nada.
51a.

516.

52.  S.

53.  Nada.

54.  Nada.

55.  S.

56.  Nada.
56a.

566.


He's  trying  to  tell  me  about  his  house.  He  says
something  about  a  funny  dark  tunnel — it's  to
do  with  his  house.

Is  this  at  Rochford  ?

Don't  thmk  it's  there.

(Nada  is  heard  to  whisper  again,  but  I  cannot
catch  a  word.)

He  says  there's  five  or  six  steps  and  a  half.

Is  that  at  the  front  or  the  back  of  the  house.

Think  it's  the  front.

Could  you  ask  him  to  tell  you  what  is  inside  the
house.

[Note. — I  asked  this  question  out  of  idleness.
I  did  not  expect  there  would  be  any  truth  in
the  answer.]

I'll  speak  to  him  (whispers  agam).  (I  catch  the
word  '  house.')

He  says  there's  a  very  large  mirror  and  lots  of
pictures.  Oh,  these  are  not  like  the  pictures  in
John  Ferguson's. These  pictures  are  all  scenes.

What  are  they  scenes  of  ?

Glorious  mountains  and  the  sea — there's  one  picture
where  a  road  or  something  seems  to  go  between
two  hUls.

Anj^thing  else.

Some  vases — very  big  ones  with  such  funny  tops
and  saucers,  but  not  to  drink  out  of.

He  says  there's  a  woman  there  now  and  a  little
boy.  Believe  it's  a  woman  very  fond  of  the
country  and  country  thmgs. — Fond  of  flowers —
think  it's  his  wife.

Could  you  describe  her  or  give  her  name  ?

I  can't  see  her.  He's  telling  me  something,  but
I  can't  hear. He's  getting  farther  away.

Oh,  do^vnstai^s  there's  two  funny  brass  candlesticks.

Where  are  they  ?

Think  they  are  on  a  shelf.  He's  so  far  away
I  can't  hear  hun,  but  there's  somethmg  right  in
front  of  his  house — not  a  verandah — something
that's  not  in  front  of  the  other  houses.


566


S.  6.  Soal.


[part


57.  S.  Is  the  house  in  a  street  ?

58.  Nada.  Joined  up  to  others — don't  think  it's  a  proper
58a.  street — like  half  a  street.

59.  S.  Could  you  give  the  name  of  the  street.

60.  Nada. Get  the  letter  "  E's."

61.  S.  Would that be East Street  ?  (Thinkmg  of  East

Street,  Prittlewell. S.  G.  S.)

62.  Nada. Don't  think  so,  but  he's  gone  right  away.  '

(Voice  ceases  and  there  is  an  interval  in  which
lights  appear.  Afterwards  John  Ferguson  com-
municates.)

In  the  record  of  my  sittings  I  have  found  one  and  only
one  more  slight  reference  to  Gordon  Davis.  It  was
during  Sitting  No.  23,  held  on  Monday,  January  30,  1922,
3.40  p.m.  This  reference  occurred  during  a  pause  in  the
middle  of  the  sitting.  James  Miles  had  been  communi-
cating and  was  apparently  resting.  I  asked  Nada  if
Gordon  Davis  could  come  again.

Nada. Is  not  coming  any  more.

S.  Can't  he  come  and  talk  to you. He  need  not

use  the  voice  directly.
Nada. He  can't  because  he's  too  far  away  now.
S.  Try  to  get  him.

63.  Nada. Only  see  his  house,  but  it's  not  clear — can't  get

an3rt.hmg.  There's  somethnag  about  black  dickie
bird — think  it's  on  piano — not  sure  about  it.

S.  Would  this  be  in  Gordon  Davis'  house  ?

Nada. Think  it  would  be  his  house — it's  very  uncertain
because  he  isn't  here.

(Frank  then  speaks  and  tries  to  give  a  book
test,  which  is  unsuccessful.  Afterwards  James
Miles  is  mentioned  again  and  sitting  concludes.)


Sitter's  Previous  Knowledge  of  the  Communicator.

Gordon  Davis  and  I  were  at  school  together  during  the
years  1898  to  1901.  At  school  I  knew  of  him  rather  than
knew  him,  for  he  was  in  a  higher  form  than  myseK.  I
have  a  distinct  recollection  that  he  was  a  very  intelligent


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  567

boy,  disposed  to  ask  disconcerting  questions  during  our
lessons  in  science  and  geography,  which  subjects  I  took
with  him  in  the  same  class.  He  was,  even  at  school,
something  of  a  dandy,  and  somewhat  more  refined  in  his
speech  than  the  rest  of  us.  Of  his  people  I  knew  nothing,
except  that  they  lived  at  Rochford.  while  I  lived  '2\  miles
away.  I  feel  fairly  certain  that  I  never  knew  in  what
part  of  Rochford,  Gordon  Davis  lived.  Doubtless  we  must
have  spoken  to  each  other  at  school,  but  I  cannot  recall
a  single  conversation.  Prolmbly  I  really  saw  very  little
of  him,  owing  to  the  fact  tliat  I  was  a  younger  boy  than
himself,  and  in  a  lower  class.  I  fancy  he  left  school
somewhere  about  the  year  1901,  and  for  many  years  after
that  I  lost  siglit  of  him.  I  may  have  had  some  vague
idea  that  he  liad  started  business  in  Southend,  and  I  may
possibly  have  seen  him  walking  in  the  street,  but  I  cannot
remember  ever  speaking  to  him  until  one  day  in  May,
1916,  I  met  him  on  the  platform  of  Shenfield  Station,
where  we  were  both  waiting  for  the  London  train.  We
were  at  that  time  both  cadets,  he  in  the  infantry  and  I
in  the  artillery,  and  we  -^ere  botli  returning  from  week-end
leave.  I  was.  I  remember,  going  to  Bexhill,  but  I  do
not  remember  his  destination.  As  boys  who  had  been  to
school  together  we  recognised  each  other,  but  he  seemed
to  know  me  better  than  I  knew  him,  for  he  it  was  who
spoke  first.  We  entered  the  same  compartment  and
travelled  together  as  far  as  Liverpool  Street,  which  is
about  half  an  hour's  journey  from  Shenfield.  During  the
ride  I  am  quite  certain  -ne  did  not  discuss  family  matters
at  all  ;  he  did  not  even  tell  me  whether  he  was  married  or
not.  We  spent  all  the  time  comparing  the  routine  of  artillery
with  that  of  infantry  cadets,  and  I  remember  very  vividly
how  lie  mentioned  to  me  that  lie  had  been  detailed  to
give  a  lecture  to  the  other  cadets  on  the  duties,  of  the  guard.'"
Gordon  Davis  seemed  full  of  the  Army,  and  I  noticed
especially  that  he  had  cultivated  a  rather  nice  accent.
We  parted  at  Liverpool  Street,  and  I  heard  no  more  of
him  for  a  long  time.  I  knew,  of  course,  that  as  an
Infantry  Officer  he  would  be  sent  to  the  Front  very  soon.
In  August  of  the  same  year  I  was  myself  sent  to  France,

2o


568


S.  G.  Soal


[part


and  did  not  return  nntil  I  was  A\ounded  in  June,  1917.

spent  a  year  in  the  Isle  of
Wight  as  Instructor  of  Cadets,  was  sent  to  Oxford  as
chief  instructor  in  mathematics  at  the  Army  School  of
Education,  and  was  finally  demobilised  in  the  spring  of
1919. It  would  be  some  time  in  the  autumn  of  1920,  that

I  received  a  false  impression  that  Gordon  Davis  had  been
killed in the War. On my way  to visit a friend  at
Rochford  one  day,  I  met  a  man  with  Avhom  I  was  very
slightly  acquainted, and  with  this  man  I  walked  for  a
mile, our  paths  being  in  the  same  direction. He  began
to  speak  of  the  men  belonging  to  Rochford  who  had  died
in  the  War,  and  I  feel  almost  certain  that  he  told  me  ^
"  Gordon  Davis  has  gone  west  too."" This  news  made  a
considerable  impression  on  me  at  the  time,  and  I  men-
tioned at  home  that  Gordon  Davis  had  been  killed.  My
remarks  did  not  excite much  comment,  because  no  one
at  home  knew  Gordon  Davis,  and  I  did  not  personally
make  any  enquiries, because our  acquaintance  had  only
been  of  the  slightest. I  often,  however,  thought  of  him
and of  our  last  meeting  in  the  train,  and  how  tragically
things  had  ended  for  him. It  never,  indeed,  occurred  to
me to doubt that he had been killed. I took  it  for
granted  that  the  news  I  had  received  was  correct.  Had
I  made  the  least  enqukies  I  should  certainly  have  had
my impression corrected quickly enough, for he  had
started  business  in  Southend  as  an  Estate  Agent,  and  was
becoming  very  well  known  in  the  district. I  live,  how-
ever, in  Prittlewell  and  do  not  very  frequently  visit  either
Southend  or  Rochford,  and  in  this  fact  is  to  be  found  an
explanation of my continued belief that Gordon  Davis
was dead. When I received my first  communication
from  Gordon  Davis  on  January  4.  1922.  I  was  considerably
impressed, particularly by the lifelike reproduction  of
mannerisms  of  speech,  tone  of  voice,  and  accent,  but  I  did
not  attach  any  very  great  weight  to  the  subject  matter
of  the  communication  which  did  not  (at  the  time)  appear

II  have  heard  independentl,y  from  botli  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Davis  that  after
the  armistice  there  was  a  widespread  rumour  in  tlie  district  that  Mr.  Davis
h:iil  lieen  killed.


xcvi.] Communications  Tlnough  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  569

to  iiie  to  go  much  beyond  what  I  had  known  of  Gordon
Davis.  I  was  certainly  impressed  by  the  giving  of  the
word  "  Malty  because  I  knew  that  there  is  a  large
building  at  Rochford  called  "  The  Malting,'"  now  used  as
a  storehouse  for  flour,  etc.  At  this  particular  period  of
my  psychic  researches  I  had  just  conehided  the  long  study
of  telepathy  in  the  case  of  John  Ferguson,  and  I  formed
the  idea  that  the  case  of  Gordon  Davis  could  probably  be
explained  in  a  similar  manner,  i.e.  by  transference  of
fragments  of  knowledge  from  the  sitter's  mind  to  that  of
the  medium.  I  paid  still  less  attention  to  the  description
of  the  house  by  Nada  at  the  sitting  of  January  9.  I
thought  it  was  all  the  purest  fiction.  Very  fortunately
at  Ijoth  sittings  I  had  taken  verbatim  notes  of  every
detail,  and  my  brother,  Mr.  C.  W.  Soal,  corroborates
readino-  these  notes  in  the  Christmas  holidays  of  1921.
when  he  was  home  on  vacation.  It  was  in  rebruar}^
1925.  that  I  first  learned  indirectly  that  Gordon  Davis
was  alive  and  practising  as  an  Estate  Agent  in  Southend-
on-8ea.  I  heard  also  that  he  had  only  been  livhig  in
Southend-on-8ea  for  a  year  or  two.  and  I  therefore  con-
jectured that  the  verification  of  the  details  given  by  Nada
about  his  house  would  be  an  extremely  difficult  matter.  I
learned,  moreover,  about  the  end  of  February  that  Gordon
Davis  was  living  at  No.  54  Eastern  Esplanade,  and  I  was  at
once  struck  by  the  fact  that  the  two  "  E's  "  mentioned
by  Nada  as  giving  the  address  would  be  applicable  to  this
street.  Pressure  of  work  prevented  me  from  paying  a  visit
to  Gordon  Davis  until  the  evening  of  April  8,  1925.

Record  of  My  Visit  to  Gordox  Dams.

I  arrived  at  Mi'.  Davis'  house  No.  54  Eastern  Esplanade,
at  8.30  p.m.  on  Wednesday,  April  8.  I  noticed  at  once
that  to  reach  the  front  door  one  had  to  ascend  a  flight
of  six  steps,  and  that  the  lowest  of  these  steps  was  an
extremely  thin  slab  of  stone  in  comparison  with  the  other
five  steps.  I  noticed  also  that  the  house  was  part  of  a
single  long  block  of  houses  facing  the  sea.  There  were
no  houses  on  the  other  side  of  the  street. I  noticed  also


570


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


before ringing  the bell, a kind  of  curious tunnel  which
leads  from  the  street  into  the  back  gardens  of  the  block.
There  were  several  such  tunnels — one between  each  two
doors. The door was opened by Mrs.  Davis, who  ad-
mitted me  into  the  drawing  room  on  the  ground  floor,  and
asked  me  to  wait  for  a  few  moments,  while  she  informed
her  husl)and  of  my  visit. At  the  time  of  my  arrival  the
drawing  room  was  in  darkness  but  there  was  a  light  in
the  dining  room  which is  in  the basement. When  the
electric light was switched on in the drawing room.  I
immediately  noticed  that  there  were  many  pictures  hung
on  the  walls,  and  that  all  these  pictures  contained  either
mountains or seascapes. I also noticed several  fairly
large  vases,  and  two  objects  on  one  of  the  walls  Avhich
I should have unhesitatingly described as "  saucers."
There  was  also  a  very  large  mirror  above  the  mantelpiece
which arrested my attention. In a short time  Mr.
Gordon  Davis entered  the  room, and  after  we  had  ex-
changed greetings  I  began  to  broach  to  him  the  object
of  my  visit. Before,  however,  I  had  showed  him  any  of
my  papers I noticed that he had used the  expression
"  Old  man  "  twice,  and  "  Old  chap  "  once,  which  affords
an independent verification of (25). When I  explained
somewhat  hesitatingly  that  I  had  come  to  talk  to  him
about  psychic  matters,  he  remarked,  "  Old  man,  I've  tried
all  my  life  to  steer  clear  of  these  things  and  I  will  tell
you why. A man like myself whose mind is  always
running  on  his  business  has  no  time  for  this  sort  of  thing.
It's all very well for people who have leisure.  I've
noticed  another  thing. I've  noticed  that  people  who  go
in for this kind of thing are nearly always  dannied
unlucky. I  suppose  I'm  a  bit  superstitious  myself  ;  would
never  walk  under  a  ladder  or  use  the  third  match."  I
then  explained  briefly  about  my  direct  voice  sittings  and
communicated  to  him  the  somewhat astounding  news  that
he himself had been a communicator at one of  these
sittings. I  then  handed  him  a  typewritten  record  of  the
sitting  on  January  4. He  was  very  much  amused,  and
kept exclaiming, "Just the very words I should  use."
When he came to the word "^Malt  " he  said,  "Why,


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  571


that  is  the  name  of  the  house  where  I  lived  at  Rochford,
twenty-five  years  ago."  It  was  always  called  "  The  Mal-
ting.'" if  anyone  wanted  specially  to  refer  to  it.  When
lie  came  to  the  j^hrase  "  harpoons — was  for  brighter
geography,"  he  cried  "  Well,  that's  damned  fmmy."  I
next  handed  him  the  record  ^  of  tlie  sitting  on  J anuary  9
(also  typewritten).

AVhen  Mr.  Davis  had  finished  reading  the  records,  we
set  about  the  business  of  discussing  them  point  by  point,
and  AA'hen  we  had  carefully  examined  the  room  and  the
room  downstairs,  and  also  the  outside  of  the  house  and
its  surroundings,  we  repaired  to  Mr.  Davis'  office  on  the
Midland  Railway  approach,  where  Mr.  Davis  keeps  his
personal  diaries.  It  was  obviously  important  for  us  to
find  out,  if  possible,  what  Mi-.  Davis  was  doing  at  the
exact  hours  when  his  spMt  was  supposed  to  be  communi-
cating. With  regard  to  this  matter  we  were  extremely
fortunate.  For  several  years  Mr.  Davis  has  kept  a  detailed
record  of  his  daily  doings,  the  precise  hours  at  which  he
gives  interviews  to  clients,  etc.  We  were,  therefore,  able
to  learn  exactly  what  Mr.  Davis  was  doing  at  the  time  of
both  sittings.  I  questioned  Mr.  Davis  (who  was  keenly
interested)  on  every  aspect  of  the  case  that  occurred  to
me.  taking  notes  of  everything  he  said.  I  next  propose
to  exhibit  in  a  tabular  form  Mr.  Davis'  statements  together
with  any  corresponding  data  obtained  at  the  sittings  in
1922.  Each  statement  has  been  carefully  scrutinised  by
Mr.  Davis  and  its  accuracy  endorsed.

Tabular  Analysis  of  the  Evidence.

Extracts  from  Mr.  Davis'  Diary.

January  4,  1922. Arrived  at  the  office  in  Southend  at
9.30  a.m.  by train from London. (Mr.  and Mrs.  Davis

^At  his  interview  with  Mr.  Salter  on  September  19,  1925  (see  Appendix
B),  Mr.  Davis  in  my  presence  confirmed  the  fact  that  all  the  information
concerning  the  description  of  the  house,  besides  that  which  related  to  him-
self and  family,  was  read  by  hira  from  type-scripts  on  the  evening  of  April
8th,  and  further,  that  these  type-scripts  contained  no  written  matter  what-
ever.— S.  G.  S.


572


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


were  liviiig  in  London  at  the  time  of  the  sitting,  but  Mr.
Davis  had  an  Estate  Office  in  Southend,  and  travelled  to
business  every  day.)  11  to  11.45  a.m..  interview  with  Mr.
Short  at  jMarine  Parade  (^Maime  Parade  is  an  extension
of  the  Eastern  Esplanade  which  was  to  be  Mr.  Davis'
future  home).

January  6,  1922.  Inspected  for  the  first  time  the  house
at  54  Eastern  Esplanade — interview  with  Mr.  Sidney
Playle  (an  old  friend  of  JNIr.  Davis).

January  9,  1922,  3.30  jj.m.  Interviewed  (a  client)  Mrs.
Browning.

November  23,  1922.  ^"isited  the  house  on  the  Eastern
Esplanade  to  make  an  estimate  for  repairs.

.Dece?nber  13,  1922.  Moved  into  the  house  on  the
Eastern  Esplanade.

[Note. — The  above  record  sho^^•s,  that  at  the  time
(January  6)  of  the  interval  bet^^een  sittings  on  January  4
and  January  9,  Mr.  Davis  was  occupying  his  thoughts  witli
his  future  house  in  the  Eastern  Esplanade.  It  is  inter-
esting to  note  that  at  the  sitting  on  January  4,  before
Mr.  Davis  had  visited  the  house,  the  letter  "  E  "  indicating
the  name  of  the  street  was  given,  but  that  the  detailed
description  of  the  interior  of  the  house  was  not  forth-
coming until  the  sitting  on  January  9,  i.e.  untH  Mr.  Davis
had  seriously  begun  to  direct  his  thoughts  towards  the
house.  It  is  also  rather  curious  that  at  the  time  of  the
first  sittmg  on  January  4,  Mr.  Davis  should  have  been  in
the  Marine  Parade  ivhich  is  quite  close  to  the  house  in  the
Esplanade.

We  should  also  note  the  coincidence  of  Mr.  Davis'  inter-
view with  his  friend  Playle  on  January  6,  and  the  mention
of Playle as a school friend on January  4.]


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs',  Blanche  Cooj^er.  573


The  Personnel  of  Mr.  Davis'  Family.


Refer-
ence No.  1

Remarks  by  S.  C^.  S.

7  a,nd  In

The  sitter  did  not

1  Q9n TTp Vinci nnp pliilrl  a

Xv^Z^V. XXvj lido Ulio v,/llin_l,  cif

^1

O  L

1^^  n  n  \v  f iVi  af, A'l  r

xVllVJ  VV UlXtXU J.TXX  .

boy  aged  five  vears.

Davis  was  mar-

ried or  anything

of  his  children.'^

At  the  time  of  the

TCirlrlip Qnrl np"\7'P'p ncip  "(".lip

XVH_IHJC CLlH-l lie  V  Iw'l Uo*^  UllC

fi  rst  vi  sit  T  did  not

XXX  IJ  1/  V  XOJ  U  -X_  VXXV.*.  XX\_/  U

pviiTptj^iinnt: iii^/" '^nn '  or

C  A  [71  CoolUilo  J Illy 'T-vjll V '1

la

see  the  little  bov

» J  x-.-^^ UXX  V.^ XXwL.'xv. y./  \J  y

iii_y uuy  .

as  he  Avas  in  bed.

My  wife  is  passionately  fond  of

51o

Flowers  were  very

flowers. There never  passes

516

much hi  evi-

a  week but I bring  her

dence in  the

flowers.  She  is  fairly  fond  of

'  drawing room  ;

the  country.

more  so  than  in

most  houses.

Mannerisms  of  Speech.


People  have  often  remarked
that  my  accent  is  very
marked.  They  think  it  is  a
little  pedantic,  but  it  is  really
quite  natural.

The  phrases  "  the  dead  to  the
livmg,  queer  world — A\'hat  "'
followed  by  an  expression  of
concern  for  my  wife  and
kiddie  are  quite  character-
istic. I  should  first  see  the
humorous  aspect  and  then
revert  to  seriousness.


la


This  is  noted  in
record  of  sitting
on  January  4.


1  See  above,  p.  562.

-  At  the  time  of  my  meeting  with  Mr.  Davis  in  the  train  he  was  not
married,  and  he  informs  me  that  at  that  time  he  had  no  prospects  or
thoughts  of  marriage. — S.  S.


574


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


Me.  Davis'  Statement.


Refeb-

EXCE  Xo.


I  am  constantly  using  the  ex-
pressions, "  Old  chap  "  and
"  Old  man.'"


The  word  "  coniab  "  is  fre-
quently used  by  me.  I  often
say  "  we'U  have  a  little  con-
fab "  on  something  or  other.


The  expression  '"  confound  the
names  '  "  I  should  use  in  the
company  of  women.  Other-
wise I  should  more  likely  say,
"  Damn  the  names."  I  have
a  very  bad  memory  for  names
but  a  very  good  one  for  faces.


21a


13a


Remarks  by  S.  G.  S.

Before  I  showed
Mr.  Davis  my
record  he  had
used  the  phrase
"  Old  man
twice  and  "  Old
chap  once.

Such  phrases  as
"That  help  you,"
"  Remember  our
last  little  talli,"
are  characteristic
of  Mr.  Davis.  He
says  it's  his  way
to  omit  the  open-
ing ■'  Do  you  "
or  "  Does  that."


[Note. — It  is  important  to  notice  that  the  Gordon  Davis
who  purports  to  speak  at  this  sitting  does  not  seem  to
be  the  Gordon  Davis  Avhom  I  kne^^•  as  a  boy  at  school^
but  the  Gordon  Davis  of  1916.  The  accent,  mannerisms,
etc.,  reproduced  at  the  sitting  do  not  remind  me  of  the
Gordon  Davis  I  knew  at  school,  but  of  the  later  Gordon
Davis  whom  I  met  as  a  cadet.  It  is  rather  curious  that
even  while  Davis  "  is  reverting  to  his  past  life  as  a  boy,
he  uses  expressions  of  quite  modern  currency  like  Brighter
GeogTap)hy."  I  doubt  if  this  particular  phrase  was  in  use
even  in  1916,  the  time  of  my  meeting  with  Gordon  Davis.

S.  G.  S.]


xcvi.] Co7nmunications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Coojjer.  575
Incidents  connected  with  Rochford.


Mr.  Davis'  Statement.


I  Refer-
ence No.


I  much  impressed  by  the

remark  " '  How  I  always  argued
with  Histed."  I  was  keenly
mterested  at  school  in  every-
thing connected  with  geo-
graphy. I  often  remember
raising  discussions  in  class
with.  ^ic.  Histed.

The  reference  to  harpoons  is
connected  with  my  great
hobby.  All  my  life  smce  I
was  a  small  boy,  I  have  col-
lected weapons  of  various
kmds — especially  spears,  boo-
merangs, etc.

I  fully  understand  the  remark
that  I  was  "  for  brighter  geo-
graphy." I  well  remember
how  the  master,  Mr.  Histed,
when  about  to  give  a  lesson
on  Australia  asked  me  to
bring  a  boomerang.  On
another  occasion  he  said,
'"  bring  along  that  poisoned
spear  of  yours  from  the  Sand-
wich Islands.""  I  gave  a
lecture  to  the  class  on  this
and  I  remember  being  a  little
'■  funkjr  "  because  I  knew  the
spear  was  poisoned.

I  recognised  at  once  the  word
"  Malt  ""  as  the  name  of  the
house  ui  which  I  lived  as  a
boy  in  Rochford  25  years  ago.
This house has the  malting


13
13a
136


136


13a
136


17


Remarks  by  S.  G.  S.


I  remembered  that
Gordon  Davis
used  to  argue
durmg  geography
lessons.


In  the  hall  of  Mr-
Davis'  house
there  is  a  large
collection  of
spears  and  other
savage  weapons.

I  cannot  remember
him  bringmg  the
spears  to  school
but  it  is  a  thing
I  have  probably
forgotten .


To  the  best  of
my  knowledge  I
never  knew  where
Gordon  Davis
lived  at  Rochford .


576


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


Mr.  Davis'  Statement.


at  its  back  and  was  often
called  "  The  Malting."
It  has  a  little  porch  in  front
whicli  we  called  the  "  ver-
andah,"" but  the  description
in  the  sitting  does  not  apply
to  this  house  or  to  any  house
in  which  I  have  lived  excejot
the  house  in  Eastern  Es-
planade.


I  do  not  think  I  should  have
forgotten  the  name  of  my
master  Histecl,  but  note  that
in  the  sitting  I  got  the  syl-
lable "Hs,"


Playle  is  a  name  of  an  old
friend  of  mme  at  Rochford.
It  is  a  family  name  at  Roch-
ford and  there  were  Playles
went  to  school  Avhen  I  did.
I  recognise  the  A\'ord  "  Over  '"
immediately  as  an  attempt  to
give  the  name  "  Overell,"  the
name  of  a  boy  who  attended
school  with  myself.^  He  was
not  a  friend  of  mine,  but  he


Refee-

ENCE  No.


Remarks  by  S.  G.  S.


13


I  had  no  occa.sion
ever  to  visit  his
house  and  only
had  the  slightest
a  c  q  u  a  i  ntanc  e
with  him.  It  is,
of  course,  in  the
case  of  an  isolated
factlike  this,  diffi-
cult to  be  certain
that  I  had  not
learnt  it  in  some
normal  way  as  a
boy  and  forgot-
ten it.

]Mr.  Davis  has  liad
no  experience  of
psychic  research
and  knoAA's  noth-
ing of  the  diffi-
culties in  trans-
mitting names.

I  did  not  hnoiv
that  "  Playle  "
Avas  a  special
friend  of  Gordon
Davis,  but  kncAv
the  name.


Cliff  Overell  was
a  great  friend
of  mine  at  school


^  r  have  since  learned  iVom  Mrs.  Overell  that  the  eldest  Overell  boy
(Leonard  Overell)  often  spoke  at  home  of  Gordon  Davis.  In  the  above
statement  G.  D.  is  probably  thinking  of  "Cliff'"  Overell.  who  was  certainly
not  a  friend  of  his. — S.  G.  S.


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  ."377


Mr  Davis'  Statejient.

Refer-
ence No.

Remarks  by  S.  G.  S.

came  from  the  same  j^art  as
Mr.  Soal,  namely  Doggets,  and
I would naturally  associate
him  Avith  Mr.  Soal  since  they
came to school  together.
Moreover, the Wo  families
Overell and Playle  were
friends.

23

and we  lived
quite close  to-
gether.
Playle  was not  a
friend of  mine
and  /(ZiVZ  not  know
he  was  a  friend
of  Gordon  Davis.

The  Incideyit  of  a  Meeting  in  the  Train.

I can recall my last  meeting
with Mr. Soal. It  M'as  on
Shenfield  Station  when  I  A\'as
returning  to  my  Cadet  Corps
at  Berkhampstead  from  leave.
I  weU  remember  talking  about
guard  duties. In  our  Corps,
they  were  mad  on  the  subject,
and paid more attention  to
it  than  to  anything  else,  for
\\Q were told  that the  effi-
ciency of  a  battalion  depends
on  its  guards. The  expres-
sion  "  confab is  one  which
I  should  use.

I remember lecturing to  my
brother cadets on  guard
duties.

21
21a  22

I  remember  tliat
Mr  Davis  told
me  on  the  train
that  he  had  been
detailed  to  give
a  lecture  on  the
duties  of  the
guard.

Description  of  the  House  at  No.  54  Eastern  Esplanade.


The  house is  part  of  a  large

58

Verified  by  S.  C4.  S.

block.

Statement  at  Sit-

ting is '■'  joined

up  to  others

578


S.  Q.  Soal.


[part


Mr.  Davis'  Statement.


The  liouses  are  all  on  one  side
of  the  street.  The  other  side
is  open  to  the  sea.


Name  of  the  street  is  Eastern
Esplanade.


The  curious  passage-way  be-
t^^•een  the  doors  of  Nos.  54
and  55  in  this  street  could  be
accurately  described  as  "'a
funny  dark  tunnel,"'  "  it's  to
do  with  his  house."  This
passage-way,  which  is  very
dark,  is  from  15  to  20  feet
long,  and  leads  from  the
street  to  the  back  of  the
premises.  There  are  two  or
three  similar  tunnels  at  in-
tervals in  the  same  block.

Opposite  the  house  on  the  other
side  of  the  street  is  a  seaside
shelter  with  seats  all  round,
Avhich  would  give  the  idea  of
a  verandah.  It  is  situated
exactly  opposite  the  gate  of
No.  54.

No.  54  has  six  steps,  the
bottom  one  bemg  very  thin.


Refer-
ence No.


58^/


26

26a

60


38


38a


photo)


56a


56b


41


Remarks  by  S.  G.  S.


This  therefore
would  answer
the  description
of  "  half  a
street  "

In  26a  Nada  men-
tions two  ''  E's"
as  givmg  the
address  of  the
wife.  In  60  the
two  "E's  '"  are
definitely  stated
to  be  the  nam©
of  the  street.

I  was  much  im-
pressed by  the
appearance  of
this  passage-Avay.
I  do  not  re-
member having
seen  a  similar
tunnel  in  South-
end.


have  noticed
that  this  shelter
is  precisely  op-
posite the  gate-
way to  No.  54
and  the  state-
ment "something
that  is  not  in
front of  the


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper. 57  9


Mb.  Davis'  Statzmext.  '  exck  No  '  Remarks  by  S.  G.  S.

other  houses  "
would  be  appli-
cable.

Verified  by  S.  G.  S.

Mr.  Davis  points
out  that  there
is  actually  a
"  V  e  r  a  n  d  a  h  "
round  the  roof
;  of  this  structure.


steps. Tunnel  through  house.

PHOTOGRAPH  OF  Mk.  GORDON  DAVIS'  HOU.SE
showing  front  door  with  steps  and  passage  to  back-garden.


The  Interior  of  Xo.  54,  Eastern  Esplanade.


The cbaA^ing room is on  the

I myself was  de-

ground floor slightly  raised

ceived by  the

above  the  level  of  the  street.

two  desert  scenes

There  are  seven  pictures  hang-

I said,  "  Surely

ing on the walls.  Every

46

that  is  sea."

580


S.  G.  SoaJ.


[part


Me.  Davis'  Statement.


picture  is  a  picture  of  scenery.
Witli  the  exception  of  Uvo
desert  scenes  every  picture
contains  niountain.s,  or  is  a
seascape.  In  Uvo  or  three
pictures,  mountains  and  sea
are  combined.  The  mouii-
tains  are  in  the  foreground
in  every  case  and  not  in  the
background.  One  of  the
pictures  and  only  one  is  quite
definitely  a  large  picture  of  a
road  and  a  stream  between  two
high  hills  or  mountains.  This  is
the  sole  subject  of  the  pic-
ture. The  two  desert  scenes
could  easily  be  mistaken  for
seascapes  owing  to  the  bluish
colouring  of  the  empty  ex-
]3anses.

T«o  of  the  scenes  were  painted
for  Mr.  Davis  by  the  Artist
Fred  Whistock  in  the  smnmer
of  1924.


In  the  drawing  room  there  is
one  and  only  one  large
mirror  above  the  mantelpiece.
This  mirror  extends  from  the
ceilmg  right  down  to  the
mantelpiece.

There  are  five  faii'ly  large
vases  in  the  drawhig  room.
One  is  a  Japanese  vase  A\ith
a  curious  lid.


46


50


ENCE  No.

Remarks  by  S.  G.  S.

46a

46b

4  /

48

48a

Mr.  Davis  showed
me  the  receipt
for  the  pay-
ment for  these
pictures  dated
August  27,  1924.

Inspected  by  S.G.S.


Inspected  b}-  S.G.S.
The  Japanese
vase  did  appear
to  me  to  have  a
curious  top.


xcvi.] Communications  Through


Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.


581


Mr.  Davis'  Statement.


On  the  north  wall  of  the  draw-
ing room  are  t^^'o  saucer-
shaped  china  plaques,  about
the  size  of  large  saucers.


The  dining  room  is  down  a
flight  of  steps  in  the  base-
ment below  the  level  of  the
street.  On  the  mantelshelf
of  this  room  one  at  each  end
are  two  brass  candlesticks —
ornaments,  since  the  house  is
lighted  by  electricity.  They
are  the  only  t-wo  brass  candle-
sticks in  tlie  house.


So  far  as  the  pictures  and
candlesticks  are  concerned,
none  of  these  objects  have
been  removed  suice  summer
of  1924.


Refer-
ence No.


50
50a


54


Remarks  by  S.  G.  S.

I  should  have  un-
hesitatuigiy  de-
scribed these
plaques  as
saucers.  They
resemble  nothing
so  much.

I  inspected  these
candlesticks
which  are  of
brass.  Nada's  re-
ference to '  ■  down-
stairs is  per-
fectly correct.

The  candlesticks
•\\ere  specimens
of  Elizabethan
work  and  Mr.
Davis  thinks  the
'  'Drawing  Room
would  perhaps
have  been  a  better
place  for  them
than  the  room
downstairs.  jNIr.
Davis  also  told
me  that  he  had
bought  the  U\o
candlesticks  at  an
auction  sale  in
Soutliend  before
the  war.  In  his
London  flat  the}'
stood  on  the
mantelpiece  in  ti
bedroom.


582


S.  G.  Soal.


[part


Mr.  Davis'  Statement.


All  the  seascapes  were  obtained
by  me  after  the  dates  of  the
sittings.  The  jiicture  showing
the  road  between  the  moun-
tains, I  obtained  in  Ireland
in  the  year  1920.  The
candlesticks  were  in  my  posses-
sion before  the  sittmgs.


Previous  to  the  evening  of
April  8,  Mr.  Soal  had  never
been  in  my  house.  He  had
never  met  my  wife  and  child
until  the  same  evening.  No
letters  have  ever  been  ex-
changed betAveen  Mr.  Soal
and  myself.

The  description  of  the  house  and
its  interior  would  not  apply
to  any  house  in  which  I  have
ever  lived  except  the  house
in  the  Eastern  Esplanade,
but  this  house  fits  the  de-
scription admirably.


Refer-
ence No.


63


Remarks  by  S.  G.  S.


On  my  first  visit
to  Mr.  Davis'
house  on  April
8,  by  a  curious
oversight  I  en-
tirely overlooked
the  statement
concerning
"  black  dicky
bird  on  piano,"
and  it  A\  as  not
luitil  I  reached
his  office  later
in  the  evening
that  I  remem-
bered to  men-
tion it.  Mr.
Davis  then  in-
formed me  that
he  had  in  his
possession  a
small  ornament
in  the  form  of  a
kingfisher  A\hich
stood  on  a  black
cliina  pedestal.
At  the  time  of
my  visit  it  w&s
actually  stand-
ing in  a  plant-
pot  on  the
l^iano  and,  owing
to  its  l:)eing
almost  liidden
inside  the  plant -
pot,  had  escctped
my  notice.  The


xcvi.] Co)nmu)iicatio7is  Throiigh  3Irs.  Blanche  Cooper  583


Mr.  Davis'  Statement.


Refer-
ence No.


the

stood

centre


Remarks  by  S.  G.  S.

clima  pedestal
on  which  the
bu'd  stood  was
pro^Tided  with
holes  for  hold-
ing flowers,  and
\\hen  in  use
ornament
in  the
of  a
'>owl  of  flowers
on  the  window-
sill.  When  not
required  for
holding  flowers
the  bird  and
pedestal  were
removed  from
the  bowl  and
stood  sometimes
in  the  plant-
pot  on  the
piano.  Thebii-d,
Mr.  Davis  says,
has  been  on
and  off  the
Ijiano  ever  since
he  moved  into
the  Southend
house.  The
l)ird  itself  is
not  more  than
3  or
high  ;  it
black  but  might
seem  black  from
a  distance.  The


i  inches
is  not


2p


584


S.  G.  Soal.


[PAKT


Me.  Davis'  Statement.


Refer-
ence No.


Remarks  by  S.  G.  S.


pedestal  is  quite
black.
A  week  or  so
later  Mr.  Davis
informed  me
that  he  had
bought  the  bii'd
at  Upton  Park
in  the  year
1921  when  he
was  living  in
London.  In  the
London  flat  it
did  not  stand
on  the  piano
but  was  packed
away  with  other
ornaments  as
there  was  no
room  for  it.
S.  G.  Soal.


I  have  carefully  read  the  foregoing  record,  and  checked
off  the  various  statements  and  descriptions  therein  con-
tained, and  made  any  alterations  necessary.

This  matter  is  extremely  surprising  to  me,  as  I  have
never  dabbled  in  anything  to  do  with  psychic  science.
However,  as  this  affair  is  particularly  interestmg  to  those
who  study  these  matters,  I  shall  be  pleased  to  answer  any
query  or  question  that  may  be  put  to  me.

Gordon  C.  Daat:s.
Avril  9,  1925.


xcvi.] Gommmiications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  585


Statement  by  Mr.  C.  W.  Soal.

ScRATTON  Lodge,
Brook  Road,
Prittlewell,
Essex.

April  9,  1925.

I  followed  the  records  of  my  brother's  sittings  with
Mrs.  Cooper  during  the  years  1921-22  with  great  interest,
and  remember  reading  week  by  week  the  instalments  of
the  cases  of  Ferguson  and  James  Miles,  copies  of  which
my  brother  sent  me  to  Cambridge.  The  case  of  Gordon
Davis  I  remember  reading  in  the  vacation  of  Christmas,
1921.  This  I  read  from  the  green  books  in  which  my
brother  wrote  his  original  records.  I  have  this  morning
compared  his  typescript  with  the  records  in  those
books  and  find  them  accurate  and  in  order.  I  can
recall  most  of  the  details  of  the  description  of  Gordon
Davis'  house  and  liave  a  distinct  recollection  that  some-
time during  the  summer  of  1920  my  brother  told  me  that
he  had  heard  that  Gordon  Davis  was  dead.  I  never  knew
Gordon  Davis  personally.  I  have  also,  as  far  as  possible,
compared  the  typescript  of  Section  1  with  the  records  in
the  green  books  and  find  them  accurate.

C.  W.  Soal.

Analysis  or  the  Evidence.

A  study  of  the  foregoing  records  would  appear  to
establish  with  reasonable  certainty  the  following  facts  :

1.  The  communicator  was  able  to  give  accurately,  facts
about  the  past  life  of  Gordon  Davis.  Some  of  these  facts
were  known  to  the  sitter ;  others  were  not,  e.g.  the  name
of  the  old  house  in  Rochford.

2.  The  communicator  reproduced  the  characteristic
mannerisms,  accent,  etc.,  of  the  Hving  person.  These  we
must  consider  to  be,  in  a  certain  sense,  also  facts  about
the  life  of  Gordon  Davis,  even  although  they  are  expressed
in  a  dramatic  form.  We  must  beware  of  supposing  that
such  facts  are  essentially  different  from  the  other  class  of

2p2


586


S.  G.  Soal


[part


facts  represented  hy  incidents  in  the  life  of  the  deceased
person.

3.  Tlie  communicator  gave  accurate  descriptions  of  the
environment  and  interior  of  the  house  whicli  he  and  his
wife  and  child  were  to  occupy  a  _year  later.  The  question
arises,  however,  coidd  the  living  Gorrlon  Davis  on  the
day  when  he  first  visited  the  house  have  formed  in  his
mind,  consciously  or  subconsciously,  an  idea  of  what  its
interior  arrangement  was  to  be  like  1  The  evidence  seems
to  show  that  he  could  not  by  any  normal  process  of
thought.  Though  the  kingfisher  was  in  his  possession  he
coukl  scarcely  have  known  that  it  was  to  stand  on  the
piano.  He  informs  me  that  his  wife  did  not  visit  the
house  with  him  on  January  6,  and  that  when  she  did  visit
the  house  some  months  later  she  was  for  some  time  unde-
cided whether  the  living  room  should  be  in  the  basement
or  on  the  ground  floor.  It  is,  therefore,  liighly  improbable
that  CTOi'don  Davis  or  his  wife  could  have  come  to  any
decision  by  January  0.  \9'22,  conscioiis  or  unconscious,
that  the  two  brass  candlesticks  in  their  jDossession  were  to
stand  "  on  a  shelf  downstairs  "  (.34).  Mr.  Davis  told  me
further  that  when  he  visited  the  house  on  January  6,
1922,  he  was  not  thinking  at  all  about  how  it  would  look
when  his  furniture  was  transferred  into  it.  He  says  his
chief  preoccupation  at  the  time  was  in  planning  how  to
get  it  clean.  At  that  time  the  house  was  not  empty,  but
occupied  by  tenants  and  in  a  dirty  condition.  Moreover,
the  pictures  on  the  walls  were  as  different  as  possible
from  the  present  selection  and  consisted  mainly  of  cheap
prints.  Mr.  Davis  also  said  that  at  the  time  of  taking
over  the  house  he  had  no  particular  predilection  for  "  sea-
scapes "  but  that  he  had  always  liked  water-colours.  He
acquired  the  sea-scapes  fortuitously  and  not  through  any
special  love  for  this  kind  of  picture.  These  facts  are
important  in  helping  us  to  a  conclusion  as  to  whether  or
not  there  was  true  pre-vision  in  this  case  or  not.  If  I
make  the  statement  that  there  will  be  an  eclipse  of  the
sun  on  January  14,  1926,  that  is  in  a  certain  sense  an  act
of  pre-vision.  In  the  last  analysis  this  kind  of  scientific
pre-vision  is  not  more  explicable  than  the  kind  of  pre-


xcvi.] Coniiainiicaiiom  TkroiKjIi  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  587


vision  which  one  meets  ^\ith  in  psychic  research.  There  is,
however,  this  essential  difference.  When  I  predict  an
echpse  of  the  sun.  1  base  my  prediction  on  hypotheses
which  have  been  tested  and  found  to  work  again  and
again.  I  have,  therefore,  a  certain  degree  of  intellectual
control  over  the  phenomena  which  I  predict,  although
I  have  no  practical  control.  In  the  case  when  a
l)sychic  predicts  the  death  of  a  certain  person,  he  does
not  consciously  follow  any  well-tested  rationale  and  he
does  not  know  how  his  unconscious  mind  arrives  at  its
results.  It  does  not  follow,  however,  that  the  unconscious
mind  does  not  follo\\'  a  definite  rationale  in  arriving  at
its  conclusions.  If  \\e  kne^^•  the  nature  of  tlie  hypotheses
upon  which  the  subconscious  mind  works,  it  might  perhaps
be  possible  to  predict  events  in  the  lives  of  human
beings  with  as  much  certainty  as  the  astronomer  shows
when  he  predicts  the  return  of  Halley's  comet.  The  two
kinds  of  pre-vision  may,  therefore,  not  really  differ  in  the
last  analysis.  What  we  have  to  make  sure  of  in  this  case,
however,  is  whether  the  kind  of  pre-vision  employed  is
of  the  scientific  or  of  the  psychic  variety.  We  know  that
just  two  days  before  the  house  was  described  by  the
psychic  the  living  Gordon  Davis  was  occupying  his
conscious  mind  with  it.  He  had  visited  it  and  gained
knowledge  of  its  environment  and  interior.  Certain
articles,  such  as  the  brass  candlesticks  and  the  picture  of
the  mountain  road,  the  saucers  and  the  vases,  were  already
in  his  possession.  Certain  tastes,  such  as  a  taste  for
water-colours,  were  in  his  possession.  The  bird  also
l)elonged  to  him.  But  could  he  have  arrived  at  the
knowledge  that  the  bird  would  most  probably  stand  on
the  piano  and  that  no  single  portrait  picture  would  be
hanging  on  his  walls  in  the  next  few  years  i  Could  he
have  known  that  the  two  brass  candlesticks  were  to  stand
in  the  downstairs  room  and  not  in  the  upstairs  room  ?  If
these  questions  are  answered  in  the  affirmative  then  we
have  a  case  of  ordinary  or  scientific  pre-vision  :  if  in  the
negative,  it  is  a  case  of  pure  psychic  pre-vision.

In  a  discussion  after  the  present  paper  was  read  before
the  Society  it  was  suggested  by  Dr.  V.  J.  Woolley  that


588


S.  G.  Soal


[PABT


the  case  of  "  Gordon  Davis  "  might  be  somewhat  simpHfied
by  assuming  that  the  pre-vising  agenl  ims  the  sitter  and
nol  the  mind  of  Gordon  Davis.  Dr.  WooUey  suggests,  in
fact,  that  telepathy  from  Gordon  Davis  did  not  play  any
real  part  in  the  affair,  biit  that  when  the  future  house
was  described  the  sitter  was  unconsciously  pre-vising,  not
an  event  in  the  life  of  Gordon  Davis,  but  an  event  in  his
own  life,  i.e.  his  visit  to  the  house  on  April  8.  1925.
The  sitter,  therefore,  saw  the  objects  at  the  sitting  as  they
appeared  on  the  day  of  his  future  visit.  This  theory
Avould  clearly  require  us  to  assume  that  all  the  information
given  at  the  sittings  about  the  past  of  Gordon  Davis  was
the  sitter's  own  normally  acquired  knowledge  and  not
derived  by  any  telepathy  from  Gordon  Davis.  Incidents
like  the  address  at  the  "  Malting  "  we  should  have  to
assiune  were  scraps  of  information  once  normally  acquired
by  the  sitter  and  now  forgotten.  Further,  it  would  be
necessary  to  suppose  that  the  fairly  close  coincidence  in
time  between  the  date  of  the  sittings  and  the  date,
January  6,  on  which  Mr.  Davis  first  visited  the  house  was
due  purely  to  chance.  Again,  the  mention  of  "  Playle "
at  the  sitting  and  Mr.  Davis'  visit  to  his  friend  Playle
two  days  later  must  also  be  attributed  to  chance.  It
will  be  remembered  that  on  my  visit  to  the  house  on
April  8  I  saw  Mrs.  Davis  but  not  the  little  boy,  who
was  in  bed  at  the  time.  It  would  therefore  be  necessary
to  suppose  that  the  pre-vision  of  the  tilings  in  the  house
not  only  extended  to  the  things  which  the  sitter  saw  but
also  to  the  substance  of  his  conversation  with  Mr.  Davis.
Again,  the  expression  "kiddie"  applied  to  the  little  boy —
an  expression  which  was  mvariably  used  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Davis — must  have  been  either  the  result  of  a  lucky  guess
or  of  a  pre-vision  of  the  future  conversation  of  Gordon
Davis  with  the  sitter.  Mr.  Davis  himself  has  expressed
the  opinion  that  the  rej^roduction  of  mannerisms,  mental
attitudes,  etc.,  are  far  too  accurate  to  be  attributed  to
the  single  half-hour's  conversation  which  the  sitter  had
with  him  in  the  train.

It  may  be  added  that  if  we  care  to  push  such  theories
of  pre-vision to their ultimate  conclusion  they  may  be


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  589


called  upon  to  "  explain  "  almost  any  psychic  fact.
Almost  any  piece  of  information  given  by  a  medium  and
afterwards  verified  by  the  sitter  might  be  thought  of  as
a  pre-vision  by  the  sitter  of  the  moment  in  his  life  when
he  comes  to  verify  the  fact  !  I  do  not,  however,  suppose
that  Dr.  Woolley  or  any  other  student  would  be  prepared
to  go  as  far  as  that.  But  if  pre-vision  is  to  be  accepted
as  a  fact  in  .jjsychic  research,  it  does  not  seem  possible  in
the  present  stage  of  our  knowledge  to  set  any  very  precise
limits  to  its  scope.


590


/S'.  G.  iSoat.


[I'ART


APPENDIX  A.

In  my  presence  on  April  22,  l!t2r).  Walter  Valentine
at  my  request  \Arote  out  the  following  corroborative
statements.  The  words  are  his  own  but  now  and  then
I  helped  him  to  spell  a  word  and  to  express  a  sentence
more  grammatically.  But  in  no  case  did  I  suggest  any
alteration  of  the  sense  of  what  he  intended  to  say.

S.  G.  SOAL.
L\t.  8TAMBRIDGE,

Nr.  Rochford,
Essex.

April  22,  1925.

1.  Mr.  Seal  came  to  see  me  to-day  to  ask  questions  about
his  brother  Frank.  He  asked  me  "  Do  you  remember
tlie  hut  at  the  top  of  the  big  tree  '?  "  I  said  Yes,  very
well."  He  asked  "  What  could  you  see  from  the  top  ?  "
I  said  at  once  "  The  white  sails  of  the  yachts  on  the  river
Crouch  ;  we  could  see  them  quite  jilain."  Only  a  few
weeks  ago  when  walking  M'ith  my  wife  I  showed  her  the
tree  where  we  had  the  hut  and  told  her  you  could  see
the  sails  from  the  top.

2.  I  remember  giving  Mr.  Soal  the  question  about
"  What  did  we  have  to  eat  on  the  day  M'hen  we  walked
from  Fambridge  Ferry  to  Creeksea  Ferry  ?  "  Mr.  Soal
wrote  on  his  paper  "  Samphire  and  Swedes."  I  wrote  on
my  paper  "  We  ate  Swedes."  We  took  nothing  Avith  us
and  Avere  out  all  day.  We  were  so  tired  we  could  hardly
drag  ourselves  home.  I  can't  reuiember  eating  any  Sam-
]}hire.  I  remember  the  Swedes  were  in  a  field  near  Lion's
Creek. We  had  nothing  else  to  eat  till  we  got  home.

3.  I  remember  Frank  and  me  catching  a  big  eel  in  the
moat.  We  set  the  line  at  night  and  when  we  found  the
eel  at  the  end  of  it  Ave  got  very  excited.


xcvi,] Conwmnicationfi  Through  Mrs.  Blanche.  Cooper.  591


4.  I  can  remember  making  the  questions  for  Mr.  Soal
4  years  ago  and  the  one  abont  "  Wliat  did  I  (Walter
Valentine)  do  when  Pat  was  sitting  in  the  hut  when  I  did
something  and  made  him  angry  l  "  What  I  did  was  to
tlirow  a  sharp  hemlock  stallc  Avith  an  ekler  head  on  the
end  through  the  hedge  and  it  hit  Pat  on  the  cheek  and
Pat  was  very  angry.  It  made  Pat's  face  bleed.  I  often
used  to  kick  the  water  tin  on  to  the  fire  foi-  fun,  but  I
can't  remember  doing  it  when  Pat  was  sitting  over  the
fire,  though  I  may  have  done.

5.  I  remember  the  fire  we  had  just  outside  the  stable
door.  It  was  in  a  brick  fireplace  and  just  about  nesting
time.  ■'  Starbobs  is  a  common  word  for  starlings  round
here  among  boys.  There  were  a  lot  of  starlings  in
the  thatch  of  the  barn.  We  sometimes  caught  them.  I
can't  remember  the  fire  driving  the  starlings  out  of  the
thatch  but  the  fire  was  only  a  yard  or  two  from  the  barn
and  imder  the  eaves. Only  Pi-ank  and  me  were  there.

fi.  I  remember  Frank  shooting  rats  with  a  bow  and
arrow  on  the  moat.  I  can  remember  tlie  l)ow  was  made
of  nut  wood  and  the  arrow  had  a  six-inch  ^\'ire  nail  tied
tightly  on  the  end.

I  remember  once  how  the  head  of  the  arrow  passed
through  a  rat's  back  and  pinned  it  to  the  banii,  holding
it  there.

[Signed] Walter  Valentine.


592


>S'.  G.  Soal.


[part


APPENDIX  B.

Statement  by  Mr.  W.  H.  Salter.

By  arrangement  with  Mr.  S.  G.  Soal  I  visited  Mr.  Gordon
Davis'  iiouse,  No.  54  Eastern  Esplanade,  Southend,  on
September  19,  1925,  and  was  kindly  shown  by  Mrs.  Davis
the  room  apparently  described  in  the  sittings  and  also  the
downstairs  room  where  the  brass  candlesticks  are.  The
row  of  houses,  of  which  No.  54  is  one,  is  of  a  very  unusual
construction,  quite  unlike  the  general  type  prevalent  at
Southend  or,  as  far  as  I  know,  elsewhere,  owing  to  the
peculiar  eifect  of  the  "tunnel"  between  each  pair  of  houses,
flanked  on  each  side  l)y  five  full  steps  and  a  half  ste])
lead.ing  to  the  front  door.

T  als(j  ohsei'ved  that  the  sea-side  shelter  to  which  Mr.
Davis  refers  is  directly  in  front  of  his  house,  and  that
tlie  only  other  one  of  the  kind  on  this  part  of  the  sea-
front  was  at  some  distance  away.

I  confirm  Mr.  Soal's  and  Mr.  Davis'  description  of  the
j)ictures  and  other  ornaments  in  the  house,  except  that
the  two  desert  scenes  mentioned  appear  to  have  been
moved  to  another  room.

Mr.  Soal  and  I  then  called  on  Mr.  Davis  a.t  his  office,
and  he  showed  me  tlie  entries  in  his  diary,  and  fully
confirmed  Mr.  Soal's  statements  as  to  their  previous
acquaintanceship,  his  lack  of  interest  in  psychical  matters,
and  the  circumstances  lender  which  he  became  interested
in  No.  54  Eastern  Esplanade.  I  confirm  the  statement  in
the  footnote  on  p.  571.

Mr.  Soal  also  showed  me  the  old  Rectory  where  he
formerly  lived,  and  pointed  out  the  scenes  of  various
incidents  mentioned  in  the  earlier  parts  of  his  paper.


xcvi.] Communications  Through  Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper.  593


APPENDIX  C.

[Letter  from  the  Keeper  of  the  Soutpi  Necropolis,

Glasgow.]

Southern  Necropolis  (Central  and  Eastern  Divisions).

316  Caledonia  Road,  Glasgow,

I'dth  January,  1922.

S.  G.  SoAL,  Esq.  •
Sir,

At  your  request.  I  have  gone  through  the  book  from
year  1890  till  1920,  and  enclosed  please  find  list  of  all
the  John  Fergusons  therem  noted.  There  is  no  trace  of
Amy  Ferguson  during  these  years  as  far  as  I  can  trace.

This  is  all  the  mforniation  I  can  supply  you  with  as
far  as  my  books  are  concerned.

Yours  truly,

James  Anderson,
Supt.

The  detailed  list  enclosed  with  this  letter  can  be  con-
sulted at  the  S.P.R.  Rooms,  should  any  one  wish  to
examine  it.


594


S.  G.  Soal.


[part  xcvi.


APPENDIX  D.

It  has  been  suggested  by  Miss  Gertrude  Tubby  iu  a
letter  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick  that  an  inmate  of  the  Brentwood
Mental  Institution  might  have  been  responsible  for  the
communications  in  the  "  John  Ferguson  "  case.  Miss
Tubby  suggested  (a)  that  there  might  at  the  time  of  the
sitting  have  been  an  inmate,  living  or  dead,  whose  real
name  was  or  had  been  John  Ferguson,  or  (6)  an  inmate,
living  or  dead,  who  imagined  or  had  imagined  his  name  to
be  John  Ferguson  (which  is  the  name  of  a  character  in  a
well-known  play).

I  wrote  therefore  to  the  Medical  Superintendent  of  the
Brentwood  Mental  Institution  and  received  the  following
reply  which  effectively  disposes  of  Miss  Tubby's  suggestions.

Brentwood  Mental  Hospital,
Brentwood,  Essex,
Juhj  18,  1925.

Mr.  S.  G.  SoAL,

Scratton  Lodge,

Brook  Boad,  Prittlewell,
Essex.

Dear  Sir,

I  have  to  acknowledge  receipt  of  your  letter  of  the
16th  instant,  and  to  inform  you  that  there  has  never  been
a  patient  of  the  name  of  John  Ferguson  in  this  Mental
Hospital.  As  far  as  I  can  ascertain,  there  has  not  been
a  patient  with  a  false  idea  that  his  name  was  "  John
Ferguson."

Yours  faithfully,

[Signed] M.  Robinson,
Medical  Su]}erintendent


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

INDEX  TO  VOL.  XXXV.

(PARTS  XCIII-XCVI)


A.

A.,  A.  G.,  Hypnagogic  experiences  -  -  313,  319,  .S61,  .364,  365
A.,  Miss,  Crystal  visions  of  378,  379  (footnote),  380,  381,  382-383

A.,  Mr.,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home  106-109

Abercrombie,  J.,  M.D.,  Hypnopompic  experience  related  by  -  354
Accordion,  Communications  by  notes  played  on  206,  226,

267,  268,  272,  276
„ played 50,  52,  55,  59,  67-68,  69,  84,  114,  206,  232,

267,  268,  271,  272,  275,  276,  279
„  „ no  one  touching  it - -  12,  193,  217,  226

,,  supported,  without  himian  contact  -  -  -  59,  193
Adare  Abbey,  Occurrences  at  ...  -  195-199,202,208
Adare,  Lord. See  the  Earl  of  Dumaven's  Experiences  in

Spiritualism  with  D.  D.  Home.
After-images  and  hypnagogic  visions  307-308,  352-353,

360-361,  373-374
Alexander,  Professor  H.  B.,  On  Hypnagogic  and  allied  pheno-
mena 292,  306,  311,  312,  317,  318,  323,  328,  329,  333,

340,  341,  344,  351,  358,  361,  366-367,  392-393
Alphabet  drawn,  and  decorated  ...  -  216,232,274
American  S.P.R.,  Foundation  of  the  first  - - -  414-415

American  S.P.R. Proceedings, Articles  on  and  references  to

hypnagogic  phenomena  .  -  .  -  292,  301,  304,  331
Angus,  Miss,  Crystal  visiorLS  of  . . . . . .378,  382

A


596


Index  to  Vol.  XXXV.


[parts


Animals,  Trance  theories  on  the  future  state  of  87,  167,  243-244

Aristotle,  on  Hypnagogic  Illusions  293

Arnold,  Mr.,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home  257

Arnold-Foi'ster,  Mrs.,  On  HyiDnagogic  and  allied  phenomena
292,  294  (footnote),  320,  325,  341,  342,  358,  364,  391  (footnote)

392  (footnote),  394

Arrow  brought  through  the  air  at  a  sitting - - - -  189

Ashley  House,  Discrepancies  in  the  record  of  a  sitting  with  D.  D.

Home  at - - - - - - - 151-153  (footnote)

Attention,  Influence  of,  on  phenomena -----  56

Automatic  writings  by  D.  D.  Home  .....  75,  7fi

B.

B.,  S.M.,  Hypnagogic  experiences. See  "  Occult  Review."
Baillai'ger,  M.  .J.,  On  hypnagogic  and  allied  phenomena  291,

301,  307,  311,  344,  348-349,  350,  356,  374

Barrett,  Sir  W.  F.,  In  Memory  of  413

„ On  Entoptic  Vision  310, 386

„  the  "  fire-test  "  with  D.  D.  Home - - - -  14
,, „  the  work  of  Camille  Flammarion - - -  420-421
Barry,  Arthur  Smith,  Sittings  with  D.  D.  Home  160-161,

266-269,  271-273

Bastian,  Dr.  H.  Charlton,  Hypnopompic  experience  - - ■■-  ■  353
Bates,  Miss  E.  K.,  Hypnagogic  experience ....  372
Bergheim,  J.,  Sittings  with  D.  D.  Home - - - 259,  264,  265
„  Experience  of,  under  hypnotism,  - - 260-261,  263

Bergson,  Henri,  On  dream  imagery.  Reference  to  -  -  -  389
Berkeley,  Lady,  Hypnagogic  and  allied  experiences 321,  333,

.  339,  346-347

Bertolacci,  The  Misses,  Sittings  with  D.  D.  Home 74,  113,  146,  280
Besterman,  Theodore,  Bibliography  on  Crystal-gazing - -  379
Blackburn,  Charles,  Sitting  with  D.  D,  Home - - - 238,  240
„  Major,  Sittings  with  D.  D.  Home 176,  179,  180,

185,  190,  192,  194,  199,  207,  215,  219-222,  226-227
„  Mrs.,  Sittings>ith^D.5;D.*Home  176,  180,«185,

190-193,  199,"201-202,  204,  206-207,  215,  2'*17-221,  227
Blake,  Projection  experiences  .307
Book-tests  through  other  mediums  than  Mrs.  Leonard  -  523,  566
l^ooth,  James  Gore,  Sittings  with  D.  D.  Home  - - 128,  139

,, Henry  Gore,  Sittings  with  D.  D.  Home  - -  •139

,, Miss  Augusta  Gore,  Sittings  with  D.  D.  Home  160,

168-170,  266-269,  271,  273-274
„ Sir  Robert  Gore,  Sittings  witli  D.  D.  Home  266-269,

271,  273-274,  276

Bostock,  J.,  On  Hypnagogic  phenomena - - 297,  300,  332,  358


XCIII.-XCVl.]


Index  to  Vol  XXXV.


597


Brain,  Hypnagogic  and  allied  experiences  recorded  in

307  (footnote),  353

Brain,  Physiology  of  the,  writers  on  - - - - 389  (footnote)

Brandy,  essence  extracted  from ......  148

„ glass  of ,  emptied  and  filled .....  147-148

Breeze,  cold 49,  53,  56,  59,  63,  71,  74,  96,  104,  107,  113,  115,

132,  178,  185,  192,  211,  221,  223,  248,  274
„ ,, paper  lifted  by--...-.  60,  65
Brevern,  General,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home - - - -  104

Brewster,  Su-  David,  and  D.  D.  Home's  phenomena  - - -  29
„ Hypnagogic  experiences ..... 339,  388

British  Medical  Journal,  Hypnagogic  and  allied  phenomena

recorded  in 327,  333  (footnote),  339

Brittain,  Mrs.,  Medimnsliip  of  -  -  -  477  (footnote),  482,  484
Bruck,  Dr.  Carl,  Experimentelle  Telepathie,  Review  of  -  -  466
Bm'dach,  K.  F.,  Hypnagogic  and  allied  experiences  302-303,

315,  353,  365


C.

Candles,  light  from,  dimiiiished  during  sitting - - -  -  58

Cane,  Dr.  F.  E.,  On  dream  phenomena . . . .  .  388

Canewdon  incidents  --------  482-484


Cardano,  H.,  On  Hypnagogic  and  allied  phenomena 291,  307,

331,  332  (footnote),  346,  357,  410
Carrington,  Hereward,  Mrs.  Peppler's  crystal  visions  -  -  379
Carter,  Dr.  C.  C,  Tendency  to  see  visionary  faces  -  -  -  311
Census  of  Hallucinations  and  hypnagogic  and  allied  phenomena

289,  293,  294  (footnote),  302,  315,  332,  355,  357,  365,  373,  378
Childi"en  and  Hypnagogic  and  allied  phenomena 293-294,  299,
301,  311,  313,  314,  315,  316-317,  .324-325,  .342,  356-357,  363,

374-375,  397

Cheeny,  Ward,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home  257

Clairaudience,  Articles  on.  Reference  to - - - 345  (footnote)
Clau'voyance,  Expermiental  469
Medimnistic  102-104,  111,  128,  137,  140-141,

145,  249-250

„  Objects  seen  but  mirecognised ....  322

,,  Question  of  an  organ  of - - - -  397-399

Clarke,  Dr.  E.  H.,  Hypnagogic  experiences - - 323,  363,  375

„ Projection,  Case  of 307,  308

Collins,  J.,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home  138

Communicating,  Methods  of,  and  conditions,  trance  theories  of

42-43,  85,  117-118,  174-175,  190-191,  200,  212-213,  221,  234
Coimnunications,  Medimnistic —

Cryptomnesia,  Case  of  549-560

A  2


598


Index  to  Vol.  XA'XV.


[parts


CJommunications,  Mediumistic —

Fictitious  communicator ------  523-549

Living  person,  a  communicator  -----  560-589

Methods  of  transmission  472-476
Auditory  impressions  - - - - - -  473

Pictographic  impressions - - - • - 473,  474
Communications,  Report  on  Some,  received  through  Mrs.  Blanche

Cooper - - - - • - - - -  -471

Conditions  at  Seances  with  D.  D.  Home -----  56

in  the  other  world.  Trance  theories  on - 140-142,  257
Controls,  Mediumistic. "  Imperator  "  group.  On  the  question

of  the  identity  of  445-465

Teaching  of  452-456
Cooper,  Mrs.  Blanche,  Communications  received  through  -  -  471
Cox,  Dannie,  Reported  manifestations  on  the  death  of -  120-127

„ of  and  by 132,  146,  153,  155,  161,  165

Crape,  Effect  of,  at  Seances  113,264

Crawford,  Mrs.,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home  264

Crookes,  Sir  William,  Early  enquiries  and  evidence  contributed

by ----- - 5,  9,  10-11,  12,  13-14,  16-17

CryjDtomnesia,  Apparent  case  of  -  -  .  .  .  549-560
Crystal  visions,  compared  with  hypnagogic  visions - -  378-384

Control 383

Diffusion 379

Frequency  and  health  379
Physical  sight  and  visualing  power  ...  -  305,  380
Sources  -  400

Subject-matter  and  Features 380-383

Prominent  elements  382

D.

D.,  Lady,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home 271-273

Dawson,  Ellen,  Incident  with  reference  to  -  -  236,  237  (footnote)
Death's-head  moth  incident  .  -  -  .  98,100,127-128
De  Boisleve,  Madame,  Alleged  experience  of  -  -  -  -  429
De  Bray,  M.  Ghevuy,  Hypnopompic  visions  331,  335,  367,  379,  401
De  Crespigny,  Mrs.,  Account  of  a  "  fire-test  "  with  a  medimn  -  14-15
Deering,  Mr.,  Hypnagogic  experiences  .....  365
De  Galiano,  Madame,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home  .  -  -  264
De  Gernet,  Miss  N.,  Crystal  and  hypnagogic  visions  of  -  379,  380
Deland,  Mrs.,  Hypnagogic  experiences  304,  306,  312,  317,  343,  364
De  Manaceine,  Marie,  On  Hypnagogic  phenomena  291-292,
294  (footnotes),  315,  320,  339  (footnote),  343,  353,  354,  358,

365,  366

De  Mons,  Count,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home - - -  104-105


xcnr.-xcvi.]  Index  to  Vol.  XXXV.  599


De  Morgan,  Mrs.  E.  S.,  Hypnagogic  experiences  -  292,  300,  320

De  Pomare,  Comtesse  Medina,  Sittings  with  D.  D.  Home

112-115,  264,  266,  282-283
De  Quincey,  On  Hypnagogic  phenomena  294  (footnote),  363,  375

De  Savigny,  Lelorgne,  Hypnagogic  phenomena  311,  339,

346,  348,  411

Des  Conditions  de  la  Certitude,  by  Professor  Charles  Richet  -  422
Desmond  Castle,  Occmrences  at -  202,  203-204,  206,  207,  231

De  Tyard,  Bishop  Pontus,  On  Hypnagogic  phenomena  -  -  291
De  Veh,  Baron  and  Baroness,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home  -  104-106
Diagnoses  and  prescriptions,  trance  96-98,  105,  109,  127,

131,  145,  146,  171,  187

Direct  voice  phenomena  13,  16,  55,  91-92,  142,  146,  163,  227,  233

See  also  Soal,  S.  G.  : Report  on  Conmimiications  through
Mrs.  Cooper.

Dii-ect  writing  - -  13,16,189,195


Douglas,  Miss,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home - - - -  238-240

Dowsing,  On  417

Drayson,  Major,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home - - -  -  138

Dreams,  and  hypnagogic  phenomena,  difference  between -  355-356

,, ,,  hypnopompic  phenomena . . . .  352-355

,, Imagery  in  --------  -  389

„ Physiology  of,  reference  to - -  386  (footnote),  388

Physiological  explanation  of  - - - -  -  388

Drummond,  Mrs.,  Hypnopompic  experience . . .  .  355


Dunraven,  Earl  of.  Experiences  in  Spiritualistn  ivith  D.  D.  Hoyne  1


E.

E.,  Mrs.,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home -----  161-162

Earl,  Mr.,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home  48-51

EUiotson,  John,  Alleged  conmiimications  from  74,  77-78,

84-85,  89-90,  127,  135,  140,  204-207,  210,  213,  214,  218,  220,

228,  235,  236,  271
EUis,  Havelock,  On  hypnagogic  and  allied  phenomena  292,

294  (footnote),  299,  342,  345,  351,  389
Elongation  of  the  hmnan  body  13,  63-64,  76-77.  97,  109,

155,  161,  178,  238-239,  248,  250,  282
Entoptic  phenomena  and  hypnagogic  visions - - -  385-389
Escourrou,  Madame,  Experience  of - - - - - -  429

Essence  extracted  from  flowers,  fruit,  etc.  12,  68,  136,  148,

165,  166,  279

Experiences  in  Spiritualism  with  D.  D.  Home,  by  the  Earl  of

Dtmraven ---------  1

Author's  Preface - - - - - - - -  21

Classification  of  Phenomena - - - - - -  284


600


Index  to  Vol.  XXXV.


[parts


Experiences  in  Spintualism —

Introduction. By  Sir  Oliver  Lodge -----  1
Introductory  Remarks. By  the  late  Earl  of  Dunraven -  26
Record  of  Seances  48
„ On  the  accuracy  of  - - - -  24,  25,  27-28,  46

„ On  a  discrepancy  in  place  and  date  of  Seance  No.  41

152-153  (footnote)

Sitters  46

Experimentelle  Telepathic,  by  Dr.  Carl  Bruck. Review  of  -  466

F.

"  Faces  in  the  Dark." See  Hypnagogic  phenomena.

Fairfax,  Lady,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home  96-98

Fere,  Ch.,  Self -induced  hypnopompic  experiences - - -  355
"  Fergusson,  Johir." See  Study  of  a  Fictitious  Commmiicator,

in  Mr.  Seal's  Report  on  Conxmimications  through  Mrs.  Cooiser.
Ferriar,  J.,  M.D.,  On  hypnagogic  phenomena - - - 298,  303
Fielding -Ould,  Rev.  F.,  Hypnagogic  experiences 319,  334-335,

362,  364,  391  (footnote),  395  (footnote)
"  Fire-test " - - -  13-15,  133,  135-136,  239-240,  280-283

Flammarion,  Camille,  I)i  Memory  of  - - - - - -  419

FloTirnoy,  Th.,  Hyjsnagogic  experiences - -  298,  304,  306

Flowers,  brought  tlirough  the  air  and  given  to  sitters  68-69,
122,  124,  165,  166,  169,  183,  189,  207-209,  223,  226,

237,  238

scent  withdrawn  from - - -  68.136.165-166
,, showers  of  -------- -  210

Forman,  Simon,  On  hypnagogic  phenomena - - - -  291

Fortnightly  Revieiv,  Article  by  Galton  in,  on  hypnagogic  pheno-
mena 293

Fryer,  Rev.  A.  T.,  Assistance  rendered  by,  in  the  investigation  of

the  Case  of  James  Miles - - - . 552,  556-557,  560

Fuller,  F.,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home  - - - - 238,  240-241

G.

Gallwey,  Miss,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home -----  57
Galton,  Francis,  On  hypnagogic  and  allied  phenomena  291,  293,
302,  304,  315,  .324,  325,  329,  334,  339,  .342,  358,  364,  384

(footnote),  394

Geley,  Gustav,  Reference  to ------ -  434

Germany,  Psychical  research  in ------  459

Society  for  Scientific  Occultism ... -  469
Gibotteau,  Dr.  A.,  Experunents  in  Thought-transference,  refer-
ence to  332

Glossolaly,  Alleged 62,  157,  260-261


XCIII.-XCVI.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXXV.


GOl


Goethe,  Projection  experiences  -----  307,  322,  333
Gonmi,  Lady,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home  -  -  -  .  282-283
Goodrich-Freer,  ]Miss,  Crystal  and  hyjDnagogic  visions  of  378,

379,  380,  381,  382
Gottschalk,  F.,  Fragmentary  hallucinatory  appearance  in  disc

of  light -  332

Greenwood,  Frederick,  On  hypnagogic  phenomena 292,  302,
309-310,  311,  312,  316,  318,  329,  334,  337,  343,  358,  364,

372,  392,  396

Gregory,  Mrs.,  Sittings  with  D.  D.  Home -  96,  104-105,  238,  239

Gruber,  Professor,  Case  of  coloured  audition,  references  to  -  332
Gruithuisen,  F.  P.,  Hypnopompic  experience  - 354,  355,  388

"  Griinbamn,  Mr.",  Auto -suggested  vision  of  "  spectre,"  com-
pared with  hypnagogic  phenomena - 312  (footnote),  349,  361
Gnindversuche  anf  dem Gebiete  der  psychischen  Grenzwissen-

schaften,  by  Dr.  C.  Schroder. Review  of - - - -  469

Gully,  Dr.,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home  171,  172

Gmney,  Edinixnd,  On  hypnagogic  and  allied  phenomena  291,

302,  307,  352,  354,  358,  391-392,  395
Guyon,  E.,  On  hypnagogic  illusions  342


H.

Hall,  S.  C,  and  Mrs.,  Sittings  with  D.  D.  Home 74,  76,  77,  112,

114,  140,  146,  280-282
Hallucination  as  a  possible  explanation  of  Physical  and  Tele-
kinetic  Phenomena - - - - - - -  -8-10

„ Visual,  A  case  of .......  429

Hallucinations, Dr. William ZM'Dougairs Classification  of,

references  to  • 289,  355

„ Lilliputian - - - - - - 333  (footnote)

Hamilton,  Miss  Mar>',  Sittings  with  D.  D.  Home  96,  104,  106,  109,  110
Mr.,  Sittings  with  D.  D.  Home  - -  104,106,110

Mrs., 96-97,  98,  104,  106,  109

Hands,  materialised. See  ^Materialisations.

,, of  sitters  cold  during  Seance  -  50-51

Harp,  Chords  of,  played  (D.  D.  Home)  205

Haweis,  Mrs.,  Hypnagogic  experiences  299,  329,  330,  331,

348,  358,  363-364,  372
Hawthorne,  Xathaniel,  Vision  of  a  face  in  a  cloud  described  by.

Reference  to - - - - - - - - -  311

Heat,  current  of,  felt  from  tlie  medium  (D.  D.  Home) 61,  63,

177,  179,  248

Hennings,  Mrs.,  Sittings  with  D.  D.  Home 52-54,  58,  64,  69,

83,  90  (footnote),  132,  138


602


Index  to  Vol.  XXXV.


[parts


Henslow,  Rev.  George,  Hypnagogic  experiences 324,  328,  330,

336,  337,  339,  363,  364
Herrick,  Professor  C.  L.,  Hypnagogic  experiences  320,  325,

339,  343,  358,  375
Herschel,  Sir  John,  Hypnagogic  experiences 293,  300,  302,  315,

320,  325,  331,  358,  365,  391
Hobbes,  T.,  On  Hypnagogic  phenomena  .  -  -  -  291,  298
Hodgson,  Dr.  R.,  Hypnopompic  experience - - -  347-348

Holt,  Mr.,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home  74-77

Home,  D.  D.,  Medimnship  of ------ -  1

Honeywood,  Mrs.,  Sittings  with  D.  D.  Home - - 161,  266-277
Huggins,  Sir  William,  References  to  testimony  of,  on  D.  D.

Home's  phenomena ......  12,  13,  14

Hiunan  testimony.  On  the  inexactitude  of  .  -  -  428-429
Humphrey,  H.  T.,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home - - - -  112

Himter,  Mrs.  Annie,  "  Fire-test  "  with  14-15

Hurt,  Mr.,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home  132,  135

Hypnagogic  Phenomena,  An  Introductory  Study  of,  by  F.  E.

Leaning  289

Application  of  Theory 292,  393

Bibliography  and  Data 290,  404-409

Companion  Phenomena  343

Sensations 349-351,  376

Smells 348-349,  376

Sounds 344-348,  376

Control 362-368,  377-378

Crystal  Vision  :  a  Comparison - ... -  378-384

Data  290

Definition  - -  289

Diffusion 292

Drawings  of  Visions - - - - - - - -  321

Features  - - -  327

Colour 337-341,  388

Duration  and  Speed 329-331,  388

Emotional  Reaction ------  341-343

Illmiiination 336-337,  388

Point  of  View 334-336

Shape  and  Scale 331-334,  388

Similarity  with  subject-matter  in  crystal  Visions

380-382,  383

Variety  and  Change 328-329,  388

Frequency 295-300,  374

Among  Children 293-294

Health 300-303,  375,  388

Hypnopompic  Variety - - - - - - -  351


xciii.-xcvi.]  Index  to  Vol.  XXXV.  603


Hypnagogic  Phenomena —

Hypnopompic  Variety —

Hypnagogic  Type 355-357

Strict  Type 353-355

Introductory  289

Interior  Vision  :  its  Mechanism 396-399

Memory 357-362,  376-377

Natural  Vision - - - - - -  303-308,375-376

Significance .........  368

Sources  discussed  399

Subject  Matter  308

Designs  and  Objects  .....  320-324

Faces  - - - - - - - 310-320,  376

Aesthetic  QuaHty -. - - - -  314-317

Behaviom-  317-320

Formation  310-314

Formless 309-310

Landscapes  324-325,  376

Scenes 325-327,  376

Similarity  with  subject-matter  in  crystal  visions 380-382,  383

Svimmary 373-378

Theories  and  Explanations .....  384-393
Central  initiation ......  390-393

Mind's  Eye  - 385,  389-390

Physical ;  Entoptic 385-389,  393

Hypnopompic  Visions. See  imder  Hypnagogic.

Hypnotised  subjects,  experimental  telepathy  with - - -  466
Hypothetical  explanations  of  abnormal  phenomena - 18-20,  30,  31
Jlyslop,  Professor  J.  H.,  Hypnagogic  experiences - 301,  331,  392
„ On  the  identity  of  the  "  Imperator  "  group  of  controls  461-463

T.

Identity,  Tests  of  90,  193,  233,  236

He  Roubaud. See  Palladino,  Eusapia.
Jmperator  Band. See  "  Controls."


J.

J.,  Mr.,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home,  and  subsequent  experience

247-251,  252-253

„  Story  of  Eastern  magic  related  by  -  -  253-256,  265
.James,  Professor  William,  On  hypnagogic  and  allied  phenomena

291,  305,  328,  330,  337,  343,  366
Jencken,  Dr.,  AUeged  communications  from  -  -  -  70,  135
Jencken,  H.,  Sittings  with  D.  D.  Home 52-53,  58,  60,  61,  63,

64,  66-67,  69,  70,  83,  84  (footnote), 89,  132,  135,  138,  161,  237


604


Index  to  Vol.  XXXV.


[parts


Jencken,  Mrs.,  Sittings  with  D.  D.  Home  52.  58,  64,  66-67,

69,  83,  132,  138

Johnson,  Dr.  Lindsay,  On  entoptic  vision  -----  386
Jones,  Miss  Amanda,  Hypnagogic  vision - - - -  372-373

Jones,  Mr.,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home 79-82:

Journal  of  the  S.P.R.,  Cases  of  hypnagogic  experiences  in  292,
295,  297,  301,  304,  305,  315,  318,  321,  324,  331,  340,  353,  373.

380  (footnote),  394
Journal  of  Nervous  and  Mental  Diseases,  reference  to  article  in

333  (footnote)

Jung,  C.  G.,  Hallucinations  of  hysteria . . - . -  327

K.

Kaldoun,  Ibn,  On  crystal  gazing . . - . 380  (footnote)
Kardec,  Allan,  Alleged  commimications  from,  and  trance  refer-
ences to 247,  249,  256,  257

Karoli,  Princess,  Sittmg  with  D.  D.  Home  ...  -  104
Kekule,  F.  A.,  Hypnagogic  experiences  -----  402
Keulemans,  J.  G.,  Claii'voyant  and  other  experiences,  reference  to

380  (footnote)

L.

Ladd,  Professor  G.  T.,  On  entoptic  and  hypnagogic  plienomena

309,  323,  339,  359.  379,  387-388.
Lamb's  Witches  and  Other  Night  Fears,  reference  to - - -  342
Lang,  Andrew,  On  crystal-gazing  378  (footnote),  379,  382

,, ■  On  hypnagogic  i^henomena  293,304,312,

313,  321,  359.  361-362,  364
Lawless,  Hon.  F.,  Sittings  with  D.  D.  Home  176,  178.  180.

184-186,  190,  192
Leaning,  Mrs.  F.  E.,  An  Introductory  Study  of  Hypnagogic

Phenomena ---------  287

Lemon,  Taste,  essence,  etc.,  extracted  from,  and  restored  (D.D.

Home) 166,  173-174,  279

Leonard,  Sirs.  Osborne,  trance  phenomena  of. General  refer-
ences to - - - - 478,  482-483

Methods  of  transmission  in  communications - 472-473,  474
Leroy,  Raoul,  "  The  Syndrome  of  Lilliputian  Hallucinations,  "

reference  to ------- 333  (footnote)'

Levitation  of  D.  D.  Home  147,  149,  155,  161,  178,  197,  229,  275.

,,  Passing  from  one  window  to  another

152  (footnote),  156

accordion ------- 59,  193

„  book - - - - - - - - -  133

chair - 146,  241


XCIII.-XCVI.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXXV.


605


Levitation  of  piano  -------- 64,  209

table  11-12,  32,  52-54,  59,  66,  67,  74-75,  80,

97,  113,  114,  132,  147,  162,  169,  170,  178,  180,  181,  182,  183,
185,  190,  193,  194,  217,  218-219,  223,  227,  237,  271,  273,

276,  281

Light.  Effect  of,  on  the  medinm - - - - - -  172

Light,  HyxDnagogic  phenomena  reported  in,  References  to  312,

313,  319,  325,  336,  340-341
Lights  at  Seances. See  Liuninous  appearances.

Lindsay,  Miss  Beatrice,  on  entoptic  phenomena  -  -  -  387
Lindsay,  Master  of,  Sittings  with  D.  D.  Home 142,  146-149,

151-153,  156,  157,  160,  161,  164-165,  238-240,  259-261,  280
Living  person,  A  "  communication  '  (medimnistic)  from  a.  See

Soal,  S.  G.,  Comimmications  through  Mrs.  Cooper  :  Case  of

Gordon  Davis.

Lodge,  F.  Brodie,  Levitation  witnessed  by,  m  the  presence  of

Eusapia  Palladino - - - - - - -  -11-12

Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  Introduction  to  the  Eai'l  of  Dmuaven's  Record

of  Experiences  with  D.  D.  Home  -----  1
Hypothetical  explanation  of  Abnormal  Phenomena  -  -  18-20
On  the  physical  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism  -  -  -  1-10
Remarks  on  the  Attitude  of  Orthodox  Science  -  -  -  16-18
Summary  of  the  Phenomena - - - - - -  10

Lombard,  Dr.,  Experiences  in  image-projection.  References  to

307,  308,  373

Luminous  appearances  comiected  with  Mediumistic  and  tele-
kinetic  phenomena - - - - - - -  10-11

Forms 92,  236

Hands 100,  224,  232

Lights 64,  95-96,  115,  124,  132,  146,  161,  163,  165,  204,

209,  217,  238,  472,  487,  490,  491,  536,  540,  566
Medium's  head  or  hands,  luminosity  of  68,  69,  161,  195,  198

Objects  becoming  hmiinous - . - -  80,  94,  276

Tongues  of  flame - - - - - - - 34,  157

M.

M.,  Miss  C.  B.,  Reference  to  case  contributed  by  -  -  -  332
Macdonald,  Mrs.,  Hypnagogic  phenomena  311,  312,  316,  317,  330,  391
Mainwaring,  Mrs.,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home  -  -  106,  108,  110
Mackenzie,  Stanley  J.,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home*  -  -  -  237
Materialisations —

Fingers - - 189,  269

Hand,  or  hand  and  arm 80,  114-115,  122,  124,  164,  170,

172,  182,  189,  208,  209,  272
„  ,.  moving  curtains  - -  114-115


606


Index  to  Vol.  XXXV.


[parts


Materiali  sations —

Hand,  or  hand  and  arm  reflected  in  glass - - - -  224

visible 79,  100,  110,  139,  169,  192,
223,  224,  226,  227,  232,

233,  272,  276,  279

„  ,,  „  ,, holding  cord  of  eye-glass -  79

„  ,,  . „  ,, holding  snuff-box,  and  shak-

ing out  snuff - -  232
„  „  „  ,, turning  light  off  - - -  110

See  also  Phantoms  ;  and  Touches.
May,  Humphrey,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home - -  211,212,214
Mairry,  M.,  On  Hypnagogic  phenomena  291,  292,  300,  301,

303,  304,  312,  323,  330,  333,  340,  342,  347,  348,  353,  360,

366,  372,  375,  388,  394  (footnote)
M'Dougall,  Dr.  Wilham,  Classification  of  hallucinations - 289,  355
M'Nish,  Dr.  Robert,  Hypnagogic  experiences 296-297,  300,

312,  315,  333,  342,  347,  395  (footnote),  398  (footnote)
Medical  Times,  Articles  on  auditory  hallucinations.  Reference  to  351
Mediumship,  Trance  utterances  on  the  subject  of - 174-176,  201
Menken,  Adah,  Alleged  communications  from,  and  physical
phenomena  connected  with 91-95,  109,  110,  111-112,  137,

146,  153,  156-157,  159-160,  161,  174,  237-238,  265
Meyer,  G.  H.,  Self-induced  visions 309,  312-313,  328,  337,  354,  355,  366
Michea,  Dr.  M.,  Case  of  projection  given  by - - - 307,  350
Miles,  James. See  under  Soal,  S.  C,  Report  on  Communications

through  Mrs.  Cooper.
Mind,  References  to  articles  in, on  hypnagogic  and  dream

phenomena ........ 339,  351

Mind's  eye. See  Hypnagogic  phenomena.  Theories.

Mitchell,  Dr.  Weir,  Visions  under  mescal,  reference  to 339,  343,  364

Moses,  W.  Stainton,  Automatic  drawings  by - - - -  311

On  the  mediiimship  of - - - - -  445-446

„ physical -----  15-16

Movements  of  objects  without  contact - - - - -  10

Accordion 268,  272,  275

Arrow  igg

Bed  . . - 83,  129,  137

Bed-clothes 79,  252

Benitier  139-140

Book 146,  226

Bracelet 172

Chairs 49,  75,  79,  80,  97,  104,  142,  146,  149,  154,  169,
170,  178,  180,  186,  206,  238,  242,  248,  250,  267,  270,  275.  276,  278

Clock,  hands  of  147

,, made  to  strike  238


xciii.-xcvi.]  Index  to  Vol.  XXXV.  607


Movement  of  objects  without  contact —

Couch - - -  116,160,168,206,238,241,266,267

Crucifix  163

Ciu'tains,  and  drapery . . - . 53,  124,  217,  224

Dagger  184

Doors  opened  and  shut - - - - - - -  238

Drawers  opened 194,  271,  272

Eye-glass 79-80

Flask  of  brandy  189-190

Flowers . - - - 68-69,  125,  165,  183,  223,  226,  233
Handkerchief - - - - - - -  69,  81,  272

Handle,  heavy ---------  169

Latch-key  in  handkerchief  - - - - - -  81

Muiiature  224,  233

Money  80,  81

Objects  moving  by  themselves  or  remaining  on  a  slanting

table  - - - 15-16,  49,  53,  54,  64-65,  92,  169,  276

Papers  188

Pencil  - -  272

Piano  58,  132

Relic  -------- 274-275,  277

Sand  210

Scissors ----------  184

Screen  160

Snuff-box - 79,  80,  231-232

Stud  238

Table 49,  50,  53,  57-59,  80,  116,  124,  180,  183,  194,  206,

217,  227,  233,  266,  267,  276,  278
Table-cloth -  182,  183,  185,  189,  192,  267,  268,  272

Vase  - - - 223

See  also,  Levitations  ;  Materialisations  ;  and  Touches.

Miiller,  J.,  On  Hypnagogic  and  allied  phenomena 291,  292-293,
294  (footnote),  298,  308,  309,  313,  322,  323,  330,  339,  352

(footnote),  359,  362,  388,  398  (footnote)

Myers,  C.  S.,  On  Visual  sensations,  references  to 310  (footnote),

337,  339  (footnote),  390

Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  On  crystal  gazmg - - 378,  379  (footnote),  384
,, On  hypnagogic  and  allied  phenomena 289,  304,  336,  337,

347,  352,  353,  391,  392,  393
Music  heard  at  sittings - - - - - - -  79,  91

N.

TSTicolai,  F.,  Hypnagogic  experiences  -  -  297-298,301,327,333,362
INixon,  Brinsley,  and  Mrs.,  Sittings  with  D.  D.  Home - 115,  128


608


Ivdex  to  Vol.  XXXV.


[parts


o.

Occult  Review,  References  to  S.  M.  B.'s  hyiinagogic  experiences
recorded  in  303,  305,  313,  315,  321-322,  333,  339,  363,

391,  395  (footnote)

Ossowiecki,  Stephan,  Experiences  with - - 433-435,  436,  438

P.

P.,  Miss  A.,  Sitting  with  D,  D.  Home  266

Palladino,  Eusapia,  Phenomena  with - - 11-12,  438-439,  440
Parish,  Edmund,  On  the  physiological  process  in  visual  halluci-
nations  389

Paternoster,  Percy. See  Soal,  S.  G.,  Report  on  Communications

through  Mrs.  Cooper.
Pedagogical  Seminary,  Report  on  Hypnagogic  phenomena  among

children  294

Pencil  writing  by  itself  189,  195

Pentecost,  Phenomena  of,  imitated  (D.  D.  Home)  -  -  -  157
Peppier,  Mrs.,  Crystal  vision  of  - . - . 379,  381,  383

Phantasmata. See  Hypnagogic  Phenomena.

Phantasms  of  the  Living,  by  Gurney,  Myers  and  Podmore  427-428
„  „  ,, Hypnagogic  and  allied  phenomena  re-

corded in  302,  307,  308,  311,  312,
316,  317,  320,  332,  352,  353,  354,
358,  365,  391,  392

Phantoms,  Alleged 49,  59,  80.  83,  92,  115,  132,  146,  153,  160,  165,

170,  173,  196,  197,  202,  236,  238,  277-278,  279

„  „ bouncing  up  and  down  on  sitter's  feet -  132

Physical  Phenomena,  Dubious  aspects  of,  and  the  difficulty  of

investigating - - - - 1-6,  17

„  „  Hallucination  as  a  possible  explanation  of  8-10

,,  Scientific  attitude  to - -  4-5,  16-18,26,  29

„  „  Smiimary  of,  with  D.  D.  Home  and  others  10-16

Piano  played,  no  one  touching  it ------  64

,, raised  off  the  ground  64,  209

Piper,  Mrs.,  and  the  Imperator  Band  of  "  Coyitrols,"  by  A.  W.

Trethewy  - -  445

Piper,  Mrs.,  Physical  phenomenon  in  the  mediumship  of - -  12

Planchette,  Communications  by,  at  a  sitting  with  D.  D.  Home  74

Prevision,  Case  of  Mediimiistic. See  Case  of  Gordon  Davies,

under  Soal,  S.  G.,  Communications  through  Rlrs.  Cooper.

,, On  the  phenomenon  of - - - - 561,  586-589

Projection  of  mental  images.  Voluntary - - 306-308,  355,  373

Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.,  Hypnagogic  and  allied  experiences

recorded  in  298,  332,  336,  349.  361,  378,  379.  385,  391,  393

Psychical  Research.  Difficulties  in - • - - - -  17


XCIII.-XCVI.]


Index  to  Vol  XXXV.


00!J


Psychical  Research. Early  interest  in - - - 413-415,  419
„  „  Hypothetical exiolanation of  Abnormal

Phenomena  18-20

,,  in  Gennany  469

Psj-chometiy,  Experimental  469

R.  «

R.,  Miss  C,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home - - - 266,  270-271
R.,  Miss  D.,  Sittmgs  with  D.  D.  Home - - -  52,  53,  65,  66-69
Raps  57,  58,  79,  83,  95,  106,  113,  118,  122,  125,  171,  179,

181,  188,  203-204,  206,  207,  214-215,  217,  227,  271,  273,  277,  280
,, Conmimiications  thi-ough  - - - - - -  1-277

,, location  of,  controlled  47,  51

„ stream  of,  like  electric  sparks - - - - 53,  122,  187

Rayleigh,  Lord  (The  late).  On  physical  phenomena  and  the  hypo-
thesis of  hallucination - - - - - - -  8-10

Report  on  Some  Communications  Received  through  Mrs.  Blanche

Cooper - - - - - - - - - -  471

•Re%aews —

Experimentelle  Telepathic,  by  Dr.  Carl  Bruck  -  -  -  466
Grundversuche  auf  dem  Gebiete  der  psychischen  Grenzwissen-

schaften,  by  Professor  Dr.  C.  Schroder  - - -  469

Richet,  Professor  Charles,  Des  Conditions  de  la  Certitude - -  422
„  „ Levitation  witnessed  by,  in  the  pres-

ence of  Eusapia  Palladino  -  11-12

Rigidity  of  medimn"s  body  (D.  D.  Home) 65,  75,  101,  160,  162,

216,  217,  248,  274,  281

Ronicker,  Count,  Sittmgs  with  D.  D.  Home  -  -  101-102,  104
Rudall,  H.  A.,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home  -  -  -  -  237-238
Russell,  Mrs.  Scott,  Sittings  with  D.  D.  Home  52-54,  58,  59,  146

S.

S.,  Captam,  Sittmg  with  D.  D.  Home . . . .  161-162

Saal,  :Mr.,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home  132,  135

Salter,  W.  H.,  Statement  by,  on  the  Case  of  Gordon  Davis  -  592
Scent  withdrawn  from  flowers  - - - 12,  68,  136,  165-166

Schiller,  Dr.  F.  C.  S.,  Review  of  Dr.  Schroder's  Grundversuche

auf  dem  Gebiete  der  psychischen  Grenzwissenschqften  -  -  469
Schroder,  Professor  Dr.  C,  Grundversuche  auf  dem  Gebiete  der

psychischen  Grenzwissenschaften.  Review  of  -  -  -  469
Scientific  attitude  to  the  physical  phenomena  of  spiritualism

4-5,  16-18.  26,  29

Senior,  3Hrs.  H.,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home  - - - -  264

Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Henry —

In  Memory  of  Sir  William  Barrett  413

Preface  to  Experimentelle  Telepathic -----  466


610


Index  to  Vol.  XXXV.


[parts


Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Henry —

Psychology  of  Mrs.  Piper's  Trance  Phenomena,  references  to.
See  Mr.  Trethewy's  Mrs.  Piper  and  the  Imperator  Band
of  "  Controls."

Sight,  The  apparatus  of 385-389

Sign  of  the  Cross  made  by  table  at  sittings  with  D.  D.  Home 59,  183

Silk,  Influence  of,  on  the  medium  70,  71

Sitters,  Effect  of  seances  on,  with  D.  D.  Home 75-76,  77,  165,

178,  185-186,  191,  201,  215,  250
Slanting  table.  Objects  remaining  on  a  15-16,  49,  53,  54,

64-65,  92,  169,  276

Smells,  Hallucinatory 348-349

Smith,  Captain  Gerard,  Sittings  with  D.  D.  Home 164,  171,

173-174,  240,  274-280

Smith,  Dr.  J.  Barker,  Clairaudient  experiences  - - - 345,  351
,, ,, ,, Entoptic  vision . . . -  386-387
Smith,  Miss,  Sittings  with  D.  D.  Home - - 178,  179,  180,  185
Soal,  C.  W.,  Evidence  contributed  by - - - 513-515,  585
Soal,  S.  G.,  A  Report  on  Some  Communications  received  through

Mrs.  Blanche  Cooper - - - - - - -  471

Communicator  of  Section  I.  (Frank  Soal) 476,  477,  478,

480-523,  527,  542,  546,  547-548,  562,  566,  590-591
Attempts  by  the  sitter  to  obtain  information  about

matters  imknown  to  him . . . .  515-519

Canewdon  Incidents - - - - - -  482-484

Fabrications 522-523

Incidents —

Big  Eel  - - 510,  590

„  Tree ------- 506,  590

Buried  medal - - - - - - -  511

Statement  by  C.  W.  Soal - - -  513-515
Christmas  present ------  503

Conan  Doyle  story ------  508

Father  M'Kemia  ------  502

Scalded  hand - -  504

Starbobs 499,  591

Two  Bicycles -  497

Life  and  subsequent  psychic  history  of  communicator  480-485
Paternoster,  Percy,  Interviewed  -  -  -  -  501,  514
References  to  -  -  474,  493,  496
Questionnaire  on  "  what  we  used  to  do  in  the  hut  "  494,  495
Records  of  Sittings  488-499,  502-506,  508-513,

516-517,  520-521
Unverified  incidents  which  show  supernormal  know-

ledo-e - - - - - - - -  519-523


XCIII.-XCVI.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXXV.


611


Soal,  S.  G.—

Valentine,  Walter,  Interviewed 501,  507-508,  514,  515-519
„  ,, General  references  to 474,  493,  496,

501-502,  507,  509-510,  511
,, Statements  by - - -  590-591
Fictitious  Communicator  ("  John  Ferguson  ")  478-479,

523-549,  585,  593,  594
Records  of  Sittings - -  525-532,  534-537,  539-548

Visits  to  Brentwood ------ 533,  537

Gordon  Davis,  Case  of  476,  477,  478,  479,  545,  560-589

Analysis  of  the  evidence  -  -  -  571-584,585-589
Extracts  from  Mr.  Gordon  Davis's  diary - -  571-572

Record  of  sittings 562-566

,, visit  to  Gordon  Davis  - - -  569-571
. Sitter's  previous  loiowledge  of  the  Commmiicator  566-569

Statement  by  W.  H.  Salter  592

„ C.  W.  Soal 585

Statements  by  Gordon  Davis - - - -  573-584
James  Miles,  Case  of  - - -  479,  548,  549-560,  566,  585

Observations  and  Deductions  -  .  .  -  557-560
Records  of  Sittings . - - -  550-551,  555-556

Telepathy  between  sitter  and  medium 523-524,  532-533,

547,  549,  550,  559,  569

Society  for  Psychical  Research  and  physical  phenomena - -  4
,,  ,,  ,,  Sir  WUKam  Barrett  and  the  foun-

dation^f - - -  413-414
Sounds  at  Seances  with  D.  D.  Home —

As  of  bell  tinkling --------  183

,, blow  struck --------  142

,, breathing  ---------  67

,, chirping,  flying,  and  whistling  of  a  bird 51,  55,  157,

162,  169-170,  198

,, echoes  193

„ footsteps 78,  132,  163,  238,  248

,, furniture  moving ------  51,  92

,, galloping  of  a  horse  ----- 141,  150

,,  hand  brushing  on  the  wall  -  .  -  -  .  185
,, kissing ---------  163

,, laughter  51,  170

„  metaUic  substance  being  lifted  and  thrown  down  -  231
,, movements  of  persons  or  things 79,  92,  132,  142,

173,  181,  210,  242

„ music  79,  91-92

,, railway  train --------  237

,, rattling  273


612


Index  to  Vol.  XXXV.


[parts


Sounds  at  Seances —

As  of  rinnbling  and  rolling - - - - - -  185

„ „ „ rushing  199

I'ushing  up  and  down - - - - - -  51

„ rustling 92,  122,  123,  279

„ voices - - 55,  91,  142,  146,  163,  170,  204,  227,  233
,, water  dropping .......  204

,,  whistling  233
,, wind  rushing  and  moaning - - - - -  157

See  also,  Raps.

Spearman,  Mrs.,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home - - - 106,  109
Spinoza,  Hypnoiaompic  hallucination - - - 353-354,  358
Spirit  world,  Trance  theories  of  conditions  in - -  84-89,  137

Spiritual  Magazine,  Reference  to  "  Mrs.  W.'s  "  hjq^nagogic  ex-
periences related  in------- -  338

Spiritualism,  Experiences  in,  with  D.  D.  Home. By  the  Earl  of

Dunraven  1
St.  Albans,  The  Dowager  Duchess  of.  Sittings  with  D.  D.  Home  271-278
St.  James's  Gazette,  On  hypnagogic  experiences.  Reference  to

293,  305-306,  315,  317,  333  (footnote),  337,  358,  396
Stead,  W.  T.,  Hypnagogic  experience 295-296,  301,  325,  328,

332,  336,  337,  358,  370,  396
Stockton,  Manifestations  at  (D.  D.  Home) ...  120-127
Stoney,  Dr.  D.  G.,  Hypnagogic  phenomena ... 298,  299
Stopford,  Mrs.,  Sittings  with  D.  D.  Home 271,  273,  275,  276,  277-278
Striimpell,  L.,  Hypnopompic  experience - - - - -  354

Sugden,  Rev.  E.  H.,  Hj'pnopompic  experience  - - -  353

Symonds,  J.  A.,  Hypnagogic  experiences,  reference  to - -  342

T.

Table  raised  in  the  air. See  Levitations.

,, varying  weights  of  .... 49,  65,  215,  276,  281

Taine,  H.  A.,  On  hypnagogic  and  allied  phenomena 293,  304,

325,  330-331,  339,  352,  363
Telekinesis. See  Movements  of  objects  without  contact.
Telepathy,  Plienomena  of—

Activity  and  voluntary  effort  on  the  part  of  the  Agent  not


necessary  468

Experimental 400,  466,  469

Favourable  condition  for  transmission  ....  372
Hypnotic  466
Medium  and  sitter,  between 523-524,  532-533,  547,  549,

550,  559,  569

Sir  William  Barrett  on  418

Tests,  Trance  remarks  on  - - - - - - - -  234


XCIII.-XCVI.]


Index  to  Vol.  XXXV.


618


Thayer,  Mrs.,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home  48-51

Thomas,  Northcote,  Crystal  gazing - 379  (footnote),  380  (footnotes)
Hypnagogic  experiences - -  318,359,362
Tobacco  smoke.  Effect  of,  on  trance  - - . .  137-138,216
Touches,  Light  49,59,74,102,115,160,165,185,190,192,

193,  194,  206,  208,  226,  238,  266,  268,  271,  274
„ Clothes  pulled  116,169,170,185,188,

192,  271,  276

By  materialised  fingers,  or  hands 79,  80,  122,  124,
132,  155,  164,  169,  170,  182,  209,  210,  226,

232,  233,  269,  271

Trance  Phenomena —

Communications,  Helpful  factors  in - - - -  474-476
methods  of  transmission  - -  472-476

D.  D.  Home  56,  60-64,  69-74,  76-77,  84-94,  96-97,

101-102,  105-106,  107-114,  116-125,  126-127,  129-138,
140-145,  147-151,  153-163,  165-168,  171-174,  177-179,
181-182,  184-187,  190-192,  194-199,  200-205,  208-210,
212-217,  218-220,  222-223,  227-231,  233-251,  256-257,

259-260,  261-266,  268-269,  272-275,  281-283

Movements 84  (footnote),  188

See  also  :  Mr.  Trethewy's  Mrs.  Piper  and  the  hnperator
Band  of  "  Controls.''
Trench,  Thomas,  Alleged  communications  from - -  213-214
Trethewy,  A.  W.,  Controls  of  Stainton  Moses,  Reference  to -  311
„ Mrs.  Piper  and  the  Imperator  Band  of  "  Con-
trols " 445

Tubby,  Miss  Gertrude,  Suggestions  by,  regarding  the  "  John

Ferguson  "  case  ^C)^
Tuke,  Dr.  Daniel  Hack,  Cases  of  projection  recorded  by,  Refer-
ence to 307,  353

Turvey,  Vincent,  Hypnagogic  experience  -  ■  -  -  -  -  349
Tweedale,  Mrs.,  Hypnagogic  experiences - - - 348,  369,  372


V.

Vairus,  Leonardus,  On  hypnagogic  phenomena  - - - 291,  310
Valentine,  Walter. See  Soal,  S.  G.,  "Communications  through
Mrs.  Cooper."

Van  Eeden,  Dr.  F.,  On  hypnagogic  phenomena  - - -  355

Verrall,  Mrs.,  Crystal  visions  of  -  -  -  378,  380,  381,  383,  384
Vibrations  of  furniture,  floor,  etc.,  chief  references  to

52,  57,  58,  59,  60,  67,  79,  81-82,  115-116,  179,  207,  243
Vignoli,  Professor,  After-image  hallucination - - 298,  352,  373


614


Index  to  Vol.  XXXV. [parts  xciii.-xcvi.


w.

Wales,  Hubert,  Series  of  cases  of  Thought-transference  without

conscious  agency,  reference  to ----- -  372

Walsh,  W.  S.,  On  hypnagogic  phenomena  - 202,  293,  301,  341

Wareollier,  R.,  Crystal  gazing ... - 379,  380  (footnotes)
Hypnagogic  experiences  292,  299,  320,  328,

.  335-336,  340,  367,  379

,,  ,,  Experimental  ....  400

Watkins,  Mrs. 104-105

Watson,  John,  Hypnagogic  experiences  -  -  .  .  344-345
Watts,  Mrs.  Alaric,  Visions  seen  by,  when  beginning  her  auto-
matic drawings  -  -  312,  373  (footnote)
,,  ,,  ,,  Hypnopompic  experience  ....  356
Wild,  Miss  Ida,  Hypnagogic  experiences  -  -  -  395  (footnote)
Wilkinson,  W.  M.,  On  the  "  fire-test  "  with  D.  D.  Home  -  -  14
Willert,  Mrs.,  Hypnagogic  experiences  -  -  320,  332,  358,  365
Wiltse,  Dr.  A.  S.,  Experiments  in  hypnotism,  reference  to

322  (footnote)

Woolley,  Dr.  V.  J.,  On  Mr.  "  Griinbaum's  " auto -suggested

visions  - - - - - -  361

,,  ,,  Suggestion  regarding  the  Gordon  Davis  case  587-589

Wundt,  W.,  Hypnagogic  phenomena  388
Wynne,  Captain  C,  and  Mrs.,  Sittings  with  D.  D,  Home

115-116,  128,  138,  151-161,  164,  168-170,  176,  178,
180,  185,  186-189,  190-192,  195-197,  199,  204,  205,

206,  209-210

Miss,  Sittings  with  D.  D.  Home  176.  179,  180,  185,

190-192,  199

Y.

Y.,  Mrs.,  and  the  Rev.  Mr.,  Sitting  with  D.  D.  Home -  280-282

Z.
