Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research, Vol. XXXIII (1923)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1923 Glasgow: Robert MacLehose and Co. edition (Parts LXXXV-LXXXVIII) (https://archive.org/details/proceedingsofsoc33soci). The Society for Psychical Research's journal of record — the central archive of the 1882-1930 evidential debate on telepathy, apparitions, and mediumship.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research


VOLUME  XXXIII

(CONTAINING  PARTS  LXXXV,  LXXXVI,  LXXXMI  6-  LXXXVIII)

1923


The  I'esponsibility  for  both  the  facts  and  the  reasonings  in  papers
published  in  the  Proceedings  rests  entirely  with  their  authors


PRINTED  FOR  THE  SOCIETY  BY

ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  &  COMPANY  LIMITED

UNIVERSITY  PRESS,  GLASGOW
1923

Agents  for  the  sale  of  publications  :

LONDON  :  FRANCIS  EDWARDS,  83  High  Street,  Maeylebone,  W.
GLASGOW  :  MACLEHOSE,  JACKSON  &  CO.,  73  West  George  Street
AMERICA:  THE  F.  W.  FAXON  CO.,  83  Francis  Street,  Boston,  Mass.


All  rights  reserved


i-RlNTED  IN  GREAT  BRIIAIN  BV  ROBERT  MACLEHOSE  AND  CO.  LTD.
THE  UNIVERSITY  PRESS,  GLASGOW


CONTENTS.


PAET  LXXXV.
June,  1922.

PAGE

Presidential  Address. By  T.  W,  Mitchell,  M.D., . . . .  1

fPART  LXXXV  I.
October,  1922,

Phantasms  of  the  Living.  An  Examination  and  Analysis  of  Cases  of
Telepathy  between  Living  Persons  printed  in  the  "  Journal "  of  the
Society  since  the  publication  of  the  book  "  Phantasms  of  the  Living,"
by  Gurney,  Myers  and  Podmore,  in  1886. By  Mrs.  Henry  Sidg-

wick,

Supplement  :  Reviews  :

I. Dr.  T.  W.  Mitchell's  "  The  Psychology  of  Medicine."  By

J.  C.  Flugel 430

II. Prof.  Sigm.  Freud's Introductory  Lectures  on  Psycho-
Analysis  "  (Authorised  English  Translation). By  J.  C.
^  Flugel  432

III.  Prof.  T.  K.  Oesterreich's  "  Die  Besessenheit." By  F.  C.  S.

Schiller,  D.Sc,  434

IV.  Dr.  R.  Tischner's Einfiihrung  in  den  Okkultismus  und

Spiritismus." By  F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc, . . .  435
V. Dr.  R.  Tischner's  "  Ueber  Telepathic  und  Hellsehen,  ex-
perimentell-theoretische  Untersuchungen." By  F.  C.  S.
Schiller,  D.Sc,  437

PART  LXXXVII.
March,  1923.

I. Forecasts  in  Scripts  concerning  the  War. By  J.  G.  Piddington —

Introduction, .  439

War  References  in  pre- War  King  Scripts,  461

Note  on  "  Lusitania,"  '•  Fenchurch  Street,"  and  "  Pathfinder,"  .  499
Comparison  of  pre-War  King  Scripts  with  the  Scripts  of  other

Automatists,  504


212830


?,iS'^'<'  \  Z  '..'■->'*'"■"  Contents.


J-^ WbU,"';.  .: :'■ 506

We  Band  of  Brothers," 508

Behemoth  and  Leviathan,  ........  510

"  The  Crossed  Swords," 513

"  Lay  not  up  for  yourselves  tret  sures  upon  earth," . . .  514

"  Had  Zimri  peace,  who  slew  Ids  master  ?  " . . . .  523

"  Mercy  and  Truth," 528

The  Pool  of  Bethesda, 534

"  The  Violet  Crown," 639

"  The  Music  of  the  Spheres," . . . . . .  .550

"  Vengeance  is  Mine," .  554

Some  Scripts  of  July  and  August,  1914 577

Concluding  Remarks, .........  599

II. On  the  Elements  of  Chance  in  Book  Tests, . . . . .  606

PART  LXXXVIII.
July,  1923.

I. An  Experimental  Study  of  the  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnam-

bules. By  Sydney  E.  Hooper,  M.A., 621

II. Concerning  the  Possibility  of  Deception  in  Sittings  with  Eva  C.

By  Dr.  Feeihere  von  Sheenck-N'^'Tzing, ....  665
Supplement  :  Review  :

Dr.  T.  W.  Mitchell's  "  Medical  Psychology  and  Psychical  Research."

By  F.  C.  S.  ScHiLLEE,  D.Sc., 673

APPENDIX  TO  PART  LXXXVIII.

Officers  and  Council  for  1923, 677

List  of  Members  and  Associates, ........  678

Index  to  Vol.  XXXIII., .719


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

PART  LXXXV.
June,  1922.

PRESIDENTIAL  ADDRESS.

Deliveked  at  a  Genebal  Meeting  op  the  Society
ON  May  10th,  1922.

By  T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.

As  I  looked  over  the  names  of  former  Presidents  of  The
Society  for  Psychical  Research,  I  could  not  help  wondering
what  considerations  had  induced  the  Council  to  ask  me
to  fill  this  important  office,  and  I  could  not  help  fearing
that  I  possessed  no  qualifications  which  would  justify  my
acceptance  of  so  great  an  honour.  Along  with  these
thoughts  there  came  to  my  mind  the  recollection  of  a
scene  in  one  of  Marion  Crawford's  novels  which  I  had
read  many  years  ago.  In  this  scene  Ram  Lai,  a  Brahmin
by  birth,  a  Buddhist  by  adopted  religion  and  an  adept
by  profession,  is  asked  if  he  thinks  the  heroine  will  recover
from  the  jungle  fever  which  threatens  her  life.  He
replies  :  "  No.  She  will  die  at  sundown."  "  But  how  do
you  know,  since  you  are  no  prophet  ?  "  "  Because  I  am
a  doctor  of  medicine,  M.D.  of  Edinburgh."

In  the  fact  that  I,  also,  am  "  a  doctor  of  medicine,
M.D.  of  Edinburgh  "  I  thought  I  had  found  one  reason
why  our  Council's  choice  had  fallen  upon  me,  and  I  was

A


8


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


also  bold  enough  to  think  that  I  had  found  some  justifi-
cation for  my  temerity  in  accepting  their  decision.  For
this  is  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  the  Society  that  its
Presidentship  has  been  conferred  on  a  practising  member
of  the  medical  profession.  It  is^  true  that  some  of  my
predecessors  in  this  chair  have  held  medical  degrees,  and
that  at  least  one  of  them — Professor  M"^Dougall — was  for
some  years  actively  engaged  in  the  treatment  of  the  war
neuroses ;  but  the  lifework  of  these  distinguished  men
lay  in  other  paths,  and  their  appointment  as  Presidents
of  this  Society  was  based  upon  qualifications  other  than
those  related  to  their  knowledge  of  the  science  and  art
of  medicine.

But  although  the  medical  profession  has  not  hitherto
been  represented  in  the  list  of  Presidents  there  have
always  been  some  medical  men  among  our  Members  and
Associates,  and  from  the  earliest  days  of  the  Society's
work  there  have  been  medical  members  on  the  Council.
It  would,  indeed,  have  been  strange  if  in  our  own  time
the  profession  of  medicine  had  lost  all  interest  in  the
investigation  of  so-called  occtdt  phenomena,  for  from  the
beginnings  of  history  the  exponents  of  the  art  of  heahng
have,  perhaps  more  than  any  other  class  of  men,  been  in
closest  contact  with  all  that  is  dark  and  mysterious  in
the  life  of  humanity.

Before  any  distinction  had  arisen  between  priest  and
physician  the  "  medicine  man "  was  healer,  sorcerer  and
seer,  soothsayer,  interpreter^  of  dreams  and  caster-out  of
devils.  In  North  America,  we  are  told,  the  medicine
men  "  are  valued  as  dignitaries  in  the  tribe,  and  the
greatest  respect  is  paid  to  them  by  the  whole  community  ;
not  only  for  their  skill  in  their  materia  medica,  but  more
expecially  for  their  tact  in  magic  and  mysteries  in  which
they  all  deal  to  a  very  great  extent."  The  savage
cozisiders  ill-health  to  be  due  to  some  supernatural  agency
— "  to  sorcery,  to  the  violation  of  a  taboo,  to  the  wrath
of  an  offended  ghost  "  ;  and  the  medicine  man  is  one
who,  in  virtue  of  his  knowledge  of  the  supernatural  and
his  possession  of  magical  powers,  is  able  to  combat  the
occult  influences  which  cause  disease.


LXXXV.]


Presidential  Address.


3


The  medicine  man  of  primitive  peoples  was  thus  an
observer  of  those  occult  happenings  and  a  possessor  of
those  supernormal  powers,  belief  in  which,  though  disjoined
from  the  practice  of  medicine  since  medicine  aspired  to
be  a  science,  has  persisted  through  the  ages  in  folk-lore
and  tradition,  until,  in"  the  end,  the  validity  of  such
beliefs  has  become  a  subject  of  investigation  by  the
methods  of  science— that  very  discipline  whose  beginnings
became  possible  only  when  occult  causes  of  natural  pheno-
mena were  denied  and  rejected.

If  we  try  to  tell  how  modern  medicine  has  arisen  from
the  therapeutic  practices  of  primitive  peoples,  a  great  gap
in  our  knowledge  must  be  admitted.  The  scientific
medicine  of  to-day  has  a  more  or  less  uninterrupted
history  which  we  can  trace  back  to  Greek  medicine  in
the  fifth  century  B.C.  ;  but  beyond  that  all  is  darkness.
The  transition  from  the  highest  development  of  thought
in  savage  races  to  the  beginnings  of  Greek  culture  forms
an  almost  blank  page  in  the  history  of  mental  evolution  ;
but  it  is  probable  that  progress  from  the  practice  of  the
Magic  Art  to  the  practice  of  scientific  medicine  has  taken
place  by  way  of  religion,  and  the  priest-physician  of  early
Egyptian  and  European  civilizaMon  may  be  regarded  as
the  connecting  link  between  the  medicine  man  as  magician
and  the  physician  of  to-day.

When  primitive  man  came  to  reahze  that  his  power
over  the  forces  of  nature  was  limited  and  that  magical
practices  had  not  the  infallible  success  which  their  earliest
votaries  had  claimed  for  them,  his  tendency  was^  to  ascribe
to  supernatural  beings  those  powers  *  against  .^Vhich  the
magic  art  waa  of  no  avail  ;  and  so,  instead  of  com-
manding the  elements  to  obey  his  behests,  instead  of
fighting  the  evil  spirits  in  his  own  unaided  strength,  he
now,  by  prayer  and  sacrifice,  endeavoured  to  propitiate  the
gods  and  constrain  them  to  assist  him  in  repelling  the
powers  that  were  inimical  to  the  well-being  of  his  tribe.
Religious  ritual  thus  came  to  take  the  place  of  magi,  al
devices,  and  in  the  treatment  of  disease  the  role  of  the
medicine  man  became  merged  in  that  of  the  priest.  But
not  all  the  magicians  submitted  to  the  domination  of  the


4


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[PART


gods  and,  although  the  pious  or  enlightened  may  have
inclined  that  way,  the  evilly  disposed  continued  their
magical  practices  for  their  own  ends  so  that,  as  the  "  black
art,"  magic  persisted  alongside  of  religion  up  to  the  dawn
of  the  scientific  era.

Science,  in  medicine,  is  sometimes  supposed  to  have
been  the  offspring  of  common-sense  and  to  have  developed
apart  from,  and  in  opposition  to,  the  mysticism  of  magic
and  the  ritual  of  religion  ;  but  it  is  not  difficult  to  trace
the  influence  of  religion  in  the  art  of  medicine  as  it  is
practised  to-day,  or  to  recognize  its  science  as  a  lineal
descendant  of  the  beliefs  of  the  magicians,  the  alchemists,
and  the  astrologers  of  mediaeval  times.

There  are  some  grounds  for  believing  that  the  birth  of
scientific  thought  took  place  among  the  Greeks  in  the
seventh  century  B.C.  ;  and,  in  so  far  as  the  history  of
medicine  is  concerned,  the  thought  tendencies  of  this  age
are  revealed  in  writings  attributed  to  Hippocrates  which
belong  to  a  period  two  hundred  years  later.  In  his
treatise  on  The  Sacred  or  Mysterious  Disease,  Hippocrates
discussed  the  relations  between  magic  and  medicine  and
deprecated  the  seeking  of  occult  causes  and  the  use  of
magical  practices  in  the  diagnosis  and  treatment  of  disease.
He  recognized  that  disease  is  a  process  which  has  a  natural
history,  that  its  cause  is  to  be  fovmd  in  the  natural  world,
and  that  its  course  can  be  ascertained  by  careful  observa-
tion of  the  phenomena  which  it  presents.

The  Hippocratic  method  of  studying  disease  has  always
been  the  ideal  towards  which  medicine,  as  a  science,  has
aspired  ;  but  for  a  long  period  in  the  history  of  the  art
it  was  lost  sight  of  and  no  real  progress  was  made.
Throughout  the  Middle  Ages,  when  the  monasteries  were
the  sole  custodians  of  learning,  a  mass  of  dogma  and
superstition  became  superimposed  upon  the  Hippocratic
teaching,  and  not  until  the  Renaissance  was  there  a  return
to  the  fountain-head  whence  all  medical  knowledge  had
come,  and  a  consequent  return  to  the  beginnings  of
scientific  method.

Throughout  the  course  of  medical  history  the  tendency
has  ever  been  to  produce  some  complete  system,  based


LXXXV.]


Presidential  Address.


5


on  fundamental  theoretical  principles,  under  which  all  the
multifarious  phenomena  of  disease  can  be  subsumed.
Metaphysics,  chemistry,  mechanics,  and  mathematics,  each
in  turn,  have  been  made  the  basis  of  such  systems  of
medicine  ;  and  throughout  the  ages  the  constant  need  has
been  that  men  should  get  back  from  their  formal  systems
and  theoretical  explanations  to  the  study  of  nature — that
they  should  become  emancipated  from  the  trammels  of
dogma  as  well  as  from  the  errors  of  superstition  and  bring
themselves  to  study  the  phenomena  of  disease,  its  causes,
its  course  and  its  cure,  as  these  present  themselves  to
observation  in  the  actual  practice  of  the  healing  art.
This  was  the  lesson  of  Hippocrates  ;  this  was  the  lesson
of  Sydenham  ;  this  is  the  lesson  of  every  great  clinical
teacher  of  to-day.

In  the  practice  of  medicine  this  lesson  has  been  surely,
if  slowlj',  learnt  ;  but  many  of  those  who  are  most
insistent  on  the  apj)lication  of  scientific  method  to  the
study  of  disease  are  still  in  bondage  to  old  dogmas  and
superstitions  when  they  approach  such  problems  as  those
with  which  this  Society  has  to  deal.  This  is  true,  even
in  regard  to  the  study  of  disease,  whenever  the  modes  of
investigation  or  the  means  of  treatment  have  any  semblance
to  the  ancient  practices  of  the  magician  or  the  priest.
The  history  of  psychotherapeutics  affords  plentiful  illus-
trations in  siipport  of  this  statement.  The  laboratory
W'Orkers  in  the  mechcal  sciences  are  perhaps  more  in
thrall  to  materialistic  dogma  than  are  those  who  are
engaged  in  the  actual  practice  of  medicine  ;  for  these
latter,  by  keeping  closer  contact  Avith  human  life  and  its
problems,  are  less  prone  to  rest  satisfied  in  the  belief  that
the  findings  of  a  purely  mechanistic  science  are  adequate
to  the  explanation  of  man's  whole  being,  or  that  there
are  no  forces  in  the  universe  that  cannot  be  fitted  into
the  scheme  of  things  which  such  a  science  portxays.

Every  great  advance  in  knowledge,  every  successful
effort  to  get  away  from  the  paralysing  influence  of  tradi-
tion, has  been  due  to  some  outstanding  personality,  bold
enough  to  flout  authority  or  vain  enough  to  treat  the
criticism  of  contemporaries  with  scorn  or  with  indifference.

a2


6


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


Many  examples  from  the  history  of  science  might  be  cited
in  support  of  this  statement  ;  but  here  it  will  suffice  if
we  call  to  mind  the  names  of  some  of  those  men  whose
work  forms  links  in  the  chain  which  connects  the  practice-
of  medicine  with  the  investigations  of  Psychical  Research.

In  tracing  the  history  of  the  relations  between  medicine
and  occultism  in  Europe  since  the  revival  of  learning,  we
meet  with  the  names  of  three  men  whose  views  have  had
a  noteworthy  influence  on  the  course  of  certain  branches
of  medical  theory  and  practice  : — Paracelsus,  Van  Helmont
and  Mesmer  ;  and,  in  more  recent  times,  we  find  some
of  the  mystical  conceptions  of  these  writers  subjected  to
the  critical  methods  of  modern  science  by  Braid  and
Liebeault,  Pierre  Janet  and  Sigmund  Freud.  All  these
men  were  innovators,  apostates  from  the  orthodoxy  of
their  times,  and  they  suffered  the  discredit  and  abuse
which  are  always  incurred  by  those  who  break  away  from
the  worship  of  the  idols  of  the  tribe.

At  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century,  when  Para-
celsus— a  man  half  mountebank  and  half  genius — delivered
a  course  of  lectures  at  the  University  of  Basel,  the  energies
of  the  medical  world  were  being  spent  in  fierce  disputes
concerning  the  relative  merits  of  Arabian  and  Greek
medicine,  and  the  injunction  of  Hippocrates  to  study
disease  at  first  hand,  by  actual  observation  of  its  pheno-
mena, was  largely  forgotten.  Paracelsus  scorned  all
scholastic  disputation  ;  he  said  that  his  shoe -buckles
were  more  learned  than  either  Avicenna  or  Galen  ;  he
re-affirmed  the  teaching  of  Hippocrates  that  the  physician
must  get  back  to  the  study  of  nature  :  and  he  declared
that  the  life  of  man  cannot  be  divorced  from  that  of  the
universe  as  a  whole.  But  he  was  so  much  imbued  with
the  importance  of  the  influence  of  the  greater  world
without  upon  the  lesser  world  within,  that  he  gave  up
the  study  of  anatomy  for  the  study  of  the  stars.

He  believed  that  all  things  in  the  universe  act  upon;
one  another  by  means  of  some  indwelling  essence  which
forms  an  invisible  link  between  them,  and  that,  conse-
quently, the  life  and  mind  of  man  may  be  influenced  by
the course of the stars, as well as by his  immediate


LXXXV.]


Presidenfial  Address.


7


surroundings  and  the  thoughts  and  desires  of  his  fellows.
This  is  the  notion  which  lies  at  the  back  of  all  sympa-
thetic magic,  of  the  sympathetic  system  of  medicine,  of
Animal  Magnetism  and  of  spiritistic  phenomena.

The  sympathetic  or  magnetic  system  implicit  in  the
teaching  of  Paracelsus  was  given  more  formal  expression
in  the  writings  of  Van  Helmont  in  the  seventeenth  century.
Van  Helmont  was  one  of  those  men  whose  work,  though
discredited  in  their  own  time,  proves  later  to  have  been
of  great  significance  in  the  history  of  thought.  Holding
on  with  one  hand  to  the  mysticism  of  the  middle  ages,,
reaching  forward  with  the  other  to  the  new  learning  and
the  new  methods  which  had  already  borne  fruit  in  the
works  of  Bacon,  Harvey  and  Galileo,  Van  Helmont  holds
a  unique  place  in  the  evolution  of  modern  medicine  and
of  those  phases  of  thought  which  have  led  up  to  present-
day  psychotherapeutics  on  the  one  hand  and  to  Psychical
Research  on  the  other.

Both  Paracelsus  and  Van  Helmont  believed  that  all  the
vital  activities  of  the  body  are  controlled  by  an  indwelling
spirit  or  Archeus,  and  for  them  the  sympathetic  system  of
healing  was  essentially  a  spiritual  affair  ;  but  when  Mesmer,
more  than  a  century  later,  sought  to  re-establish  the
magnetic  philosophy  of  his  predecessors,  he  attributed
sympathetic  healing  to  the  action  of  a  purely  physical
force  which  he  termed  Animal  Magnetism.  This  force,  he
said,  became  effective  in  the  treatment  of  disease  through
the  medium  of  some  fluid  emanation  which  passed  from
the  magnetist  to  the  patient  in  the  process  of  magnetizing.

However  unwarranted  Mesmer's  insistence  on  the  truth
of  his  theory  may  have  been,  his  demonstration  of  the
actuality  of  the  phenomena  on  which  it  was  based,  and
to  explain  which  it  was  put  forward,  had  the  noteworthy
effect  of  compelling  medical  men  to  examine  the  part
played  in  the  treatment  of  disease  by  those  so-called
occult  causes — charms,  amulets,  incantations  and  such
devices — whose  use  had  been  proscribed  by  the  Father  of
Medicine  and  denounced  by  his  faithful  followers  through-
out the  centuries.

The  conclusions  arrived  at  by  the  various  commissions


8


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


appointed  to  investigate  the  claims  of  the  Animal  Magne-
tists  afford  striking  proof  of  the  power  of  preconceptions
and  prejudice  to  banish  reason  from  men's  minds  and  to
render  them  incapable  of  making  exact  observations,  or
of  forming  sound  judgments  concerning  what  they  have
observed.  In  the  matter,  for  instance,  of  the  profound
insensibility  to  pain  which  the  magnetists  were  sometimes
able  to  produce,  sceptics  and  believers  alike  were  obsessed
by  the  notion  that  there  were  but  two  possible  explana-
tions of  the  phenomenon — it  must  have  been  due  either
to  fraud  or  to  the  magnetic  fluid.  The  sceptics  main-
tained that  there  was  no  siach  fluid  and  that  the  declara-
tion of  insensibility  hy  the  patient  must  therefore  have
been  false  and  the  absence  of  all  signs  of  pain  a  fraudu-
lent pretence.  The  believers  pointed  to  the  facts  which
showed  the  insensibility  to  be  genuine  and  concluded  that
it  miist  therefore  have  been  due  to  the  fluid.  A  similar
tendency  may  be  found  to-day  in  the  attitude  of  many
people  towards  the  problems  of  Psychical  Research.  The
phenomena  of  mediumistic  trance,  for  example,  are  some-
times ascribed  to  fraud,  sometimes  to  spirits  ;  and  it
seems  difficult  for  some  people  to  realize  that  here,  just
as  in  the  case  of  Animal  Magnetism,  the  phenomena  may
be  genuine  although  neither  of  the  proposed  explanations
be  the  true  one.

In  thus  comparing  the  investigation  of  Animal  Magne-
tism with  that  of  mediumistic  trance,  we  have  something
more  than  a  mere  analogy  or  historical  parallel  ;  there  is
also  historical  continuity.  For  the  peculiar  characteristics
of  mediumistic  trance — for  example,  the  apparently  super-
normal acquisition  of  knowledge — were  frequently  noticed
in  the  trance  which  sometimes  occurred  in  the  practice
of  Animal  Magnetism.  Indeed,  the  extravagance  of  the
claims  put  forward  by  the  Magnetists,  respecting  the
supernormal  powers  exhibited  by  their  entranced  patients,
was  one  of  the  main  reasons  why  men  of  science  were  so
eager  to  repudiate  all  interest  or  belief  in  the  doctrines
or  the  practice  of  Animal  Magnetism.  And  when,  through
the  work  oi  Braid,  doubt  of  the  reality  of  the  so-called
magnetic  trance  could  no  longer  honestly  be  maintained,


LXXXV.J


Presidential  Address.


9


those  less  well  authenticated  manifestations — the  so-called
"higher  phenomena"  of  Mesmerism — ^to  which  the  findings  of
the  hypnotists  lent  little  or  no  support  were  taken  over  by  the
new  sect  of  Spiritualists  which  arose  in  Europe  in  the  middle
of  the  nineteenth  century,  and  they  played  no  further  part
in  the  development  of  the  scientific  aspects  of  psycho-
therapeutics and  psychopathology.

Along  this  latter  line  erf  investigation  we  can  trace
direct  continuity  between  the  mystical  doctrines  of  the
Middle  Ages  and  the  most  modern  conceptions  in  mental
science.  There  is  no  real  break  in  the  history  of  psycho-
therapeutics from  Paracelsus  to  Mesmer,  or  from  Mesmer
to  Freud.  The  magnetic  trance  is  identical  with  hypnotic
trance  ;  hypnotic  trance  is  indistinguishable  from  hysterical
trance  ;  hysterical  trance,  in  all  its  main  features,  is  the
same  as  mediumistic  trance.  Medical  psychology  has  its
roots  in  the  study  of  trance  states,  and  by  employing  its
conceptions  in  the  investigation  of  mediumistic  trance  we
rescue  the  higher  phenomena  of  Mesmerism  from  exploita-
tion in  the  service  of  reHgious  beliefs,  and  bring  them
under  the  scrutiny  of  science  by  making  all  examination
of  them  conform  to  the  principles  of  scientific  method.

The  most  characteristic  feature  of  mediumistic  trance —
a  feature  which  provides,  as  I  believe,  the  most  important
problem  in  the  field  of  Psychical  Research — is  the
occasional  display  by  the  medium  of  knowledge  which,
so  far  as  we  can  see,  must  have  been  acquired  in  some
supernormal  manner.  Few  people  who  have  carefully
studied  the  records  of  our  Society,  and  perhaps  no  one
who  has  had  "  good  sittings  "  with  such  a  medium  as
Mrs.  Piper  or  Mrs.  Leonard,  can  remain  long  in  doubt
concerning  the  occasional  occurrence  of  happenings  which,
whatever  be  their  true  explanation,  must  assuredly  be
described  as  supernormal.  I  cannot  speak  of  what  are
known  as  the  physical  phenomena  of  spiritism,  for  of  these
I  have  no  experience  and  little  knowledge  ;  but  on  the
purely  psychological  side  it  seems  to  me  indubitable  that
acquisition  of  knowledge,  otherwise  than  through  the
ordinary  channels  of  sense,  has  been  demonstrated  over
and  over  again  in  mediumistic  trance.


10


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[PART


If  SO  much  be  admitted,  three  main  problems  present
themselves  for  consideration  :  (1)  Under  what  conditions
and  in  what  ways  is  knowledge  supemormally  acquired  ?
(2)  In  what  circumstances  and  through  Avhat  mechanisms
is  such  knowledge  displayed  ?  (3)  What  is  the  source  from
which  such  knowledge  comes  1

(1)  We  do  not  know  what  the  conditions  may  be  under
which  the  supernormal  acquisition  of  knowledge  takes
place  ;  that  is  to  say,  we  do  not  know  when,  or  in  what
circumstances,  such  knowledge  enters  the  mind  which  is
found  to  possess  it.  Two  main  hypotheses  have  been  put
forward  in  explanation  of  the  ways  in  which  knowledge
may  be  acquired  in  a  supernormal  manner,  namely,
telepathy  and  clairvoyance.  The  former  term  is  applied
to  the  supernormal  acquisition  of  knowledge  from  other
minds  ;  the  latter  to  knowledge  of  things  or  events  in
the  physical  world  not  acquired  telepathically,  but  never-
theless acquired  otherwise  than  through  the  ordinary
channels  of  sense.

The  evidence  in  support  of  the  telepathic  hypothesis
is,  taken  as  a  whole,  great  in  amount  and  of  good  quality  ;
but  it  cannot  be  denied  that  purely  experimental  proof
■of  the  occurrence  of  telepathy  is  regrettably  scanty.  In
view  of  the  paramount  importance  of  establishing  irre-
futably the  occurrence  of  telepathy  as  a  fact  of  nature,
if  fact  of  nature  it  be,  it  must  be  maintained  that  there
is  no  form  of  investigation  open  to  all  students  of
Psychical  Research  which  is  more  urgently  needed,  and
none  which,  if  positive  results  are  obtained,  will  better
repay  the  labour  expended  on  it,  than  experiments  on
thought  transference.  This  need  is,  I  am  aware,  not
felt  by  many  who  regard  telepathy  as  already  an  estab-
lished truth  ;  but  the  widespread  and  persistent  denial
of  its  occurreiKje  by  men  of  science  would  seem  to  indicate
that  the  experimental  evidence  is  not  yet  sufficient,  in
quantity  or  in  quality,  to  overcome  their  doubts.

It  seems  to  me  that  the  exhibition  of  knowledge  which
must  have  been  acquired  in  some  supernormal  manner  is
the  distinctive  characteristic  of  those  mediumistic  pheno-
mena which  challenge  the  criticism  of  materialistic  science.


IXXXV.]


Presidential  Address.


11


The  question  of  the  source  of  such  knowledge  is  here
irrelevant.  Whether  or  not  human  knowledge  is  ever
acquired  otherwise  than  through  some  kind  of  physical
medium,  such  as  the  ordinary  channels  of  sense,  is  the
real  frontier  line  on  which  the  battle  between  dogmatic
materialism  and  Psychical  Research  must  be  fought  ;  for
an  irrefutable  demonstration  that  the  mind  can  obtain
knowledge  of  events  in  the  outside  world,  or  of  thoughts
and  feelings  in  other  minds,  in  ways  unmediated  by
physical  things,  must  shatter  for  ever  the  pretensions  of
those  who  are  contemptuous  of  Psychical  Research,  and
would  open  to  their  vision  the  infinite  possibilities  attend-
ing further  inquiry  concerning  man's  true  nature  and  being.
And  science  could  no  longer  be  denied  the  right  of
•overstepping  the  bounds  beyond  which  physical  laws  may
appear  to  be  inoperable,  but  would  rather  be  constrained
to  bring  its  principles  and  its  methods  to  the  investigation
■of  those  phenomena  whose  occurrence  it  has  hitherto  so
persistently  denied.

The  evidence  for  clairvoyance  is  far  less  convincing  than
that  which  may  be  adduced  in  support  of  telepathy,  and
much  of  it  belongs  to  the  past.  Good  contemporary
•evidence  is  very  scanty,  although  certain  recent  investi-
gations do  point  to  the  possibility  that  supernormal
faculty  of  this  kind  may  sometimes  be  at  work.  But
since  the  far-reaching  possibilities  of  telepathy  have  come
to  be  realized  it  has  been  more  and  more  difficult  to  feel
sure  that  any  instance  of  supernormal  acquisition  of
knowledge  necessitates  the  hypothesis  of  clairvoyance  ;
for  of  whatever  nature  the  thing  known  may  be,  it  is
almost  impossible  to  ensure  that  knowledge  of  it  is  not
possessed  by  some  other  mind,  and,  if  such  knowledge
does  exist  in  any  other  mind,  whether  incarnate  or  dis-
carnate,  telepathy  may  be  the  means  through  which  the
medium  becomes  aware  of  it.

(2)  The  display  of  supernormally  acquired  knowledge  is
most  commonly  observed  in  states  of  mental  dissociation
which  lead  to  the  production  of  automatic  writing  or
other  forms  of  motor  or  sensory  automatism,  and  pre-
eminently in  the  state  known  as  mediumistic  trance.  We


12


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


know  a  good  deal  about  the  mechanisiiLS  through  which
supernormal  knowledge  is  displayed,  and  it  is  here,  perhaps,
that  medical  psychology  has  made  its  chief  contribution
to  Psychical  Research.  In  the  phenomena  of  mediumistie
trance  the  student  of  medicine  finds  that  the  mechanisms
through  which  supernormally  acquired  knowledge  is  most
commonly  manifested  are  identical  with  those  met  with
in  psychopathic  states.

(3)  To  many  people  the  all-absorbing  question  concerning
knowledge  that  has  been  supernormallj^  acquired  centres
in  the  problem  of  the  source  from  which  such  knowledge
comes.  In  clairvoyance,  if  it  be  true  clairvoyance  (and
if  clairvoyance  be  true),  the  source  is  the  external  world,
and  the  mechanism  of  acquisition  is  a  supernormal  faculty
of  the  human  organism  ;  but  when  knowledge  is  acquired
telepathically  (if  it  ever  is  so  acquired),  the  question  often
arises  whether  the  mind  from  which  the  knowledge  is
obtained  is  incarnate  or  discarnate.  Such  a  question  can
occur  only  to  those  who  are  disposed  to  believe,  or  who
have  been  forced  \>\  the  evidence  to  believe,  in  the
existence  of  discarnate  minds  or  spirits  ;  and,  in  order  tO'
discuss  the  spirit  hypothesis  at  all,  we  must,  for  the
moment,  be  willing  to  assume  that  discarnate  minds  or
spirits  do  really  exist.

If  we  further  assume  that  in  mediumistie  trance  com-
munications from  discarnate  minds  may  be  received,  we
must  suppose  that  when  the  communicating  spirit  purports
to  be  that  of  someone  well  known  to  us  during  his  life
in  the  bodj',  it  should  be  possible  to  obtain  some  proof
of  the  identity  thus  claimed.  And,  indeed,  the  search
for  proofs  of  spirit  identity  has  become  the  all-important
question  for  those  who  are  engaged  in  the  more  advanced
investigations  of  Psychical  Research.

Putting  on  one  side,  for  the  moment,  this  question  of
the  identity  of  the  communicating  spirit,  we  may  call
to  mind  that  this  is  not  the  only  way  in  which  the
spirit  hypothesis  enters  into  the  phenomena  of  medium-
istie trance.  The  secondary  personality — commonly  called
the  "  control  "' — which,  during  the  trance,  takes  possession
of  the  medium's  body,  declares that  it  is  itself  a  spirit


LXXXV.J


Presidential  Address.


13


which  acts  as  an  intermediary  or  interpreter  between  the
sitter  and  the  communicator  proper  ;  and  many  who  accept
the  spirit  hypothesis,  in  explanation  of  the  source  of
mediumistio  communications,  maintain  that  tlie  "  control  '
of  mediumistic  trance  is  no  mere  dissociated  portion  of
the  medium's  mind,  but  an  alien  spirit  which,  in  the  course
of  mediumistic  development,  has  attained  the  power  of  in-
vading and  controlling  the  medium's  body  during  the  trance-
Finally,  it  may  be  recalled  that  in  some  rare  cases  it
is  alleged  that  during  the  trance  the  ordinary  '  control  '
of  the  medium  is  ousted  or  retires  and  is  supplanted  by
the  communicating  spirit.  This  is  the  phenomenon  of
so-called Personal  Control."

I  have  referred  to  these  commonplaces  of  Psychical
Research  for  the  purpose  of  drawing  j'our  attention  to
some  considerations  respecting  them  which  are  suggested
by  investigations  carried  out  in  the  field  of  medical
psychology — a  field  which,  up  till  now,  has  been  all  too
little  cultivated,  but  which  has  already  made  important
contributions  to  general  psychology  and  to  Psychical
Research.

There  are  three  main  sources  of  the  knowledge,  derived
from  medical  psychology,  which  throws  light  on  the
phenomena  of  mediumistic  trance  :  hypnosis,  hysterical
somnambulism,  and  multiple  personality.  The  importance
of  what  can  be  learned  from  hypnotic  trance,  i.e.  ordinary
deep  hypnosis  or  hypnotic  somnambulism,  must  not  be
underestimated.  It  is  in  some  respects  the  most  important
of  all,  because  it  lends  itseH  so  readily  to  experimental
investigation.  Hypnotic  somnambulism  is  an  artificially
induced  mental  dissociation  of  the  same  kind  as  that
which  occurs  spontaneously  in  hysterical  somnambulism,
in  co-conscious  multiple  personality,  and  in  mediumistic
trance.  It  is  a  form  or  level  of  consciousness  which  may
be  made  to  alternate  with  the  waking  state  and  has  this
peculiarity  :  that  in  the  hypnotic  state  there  is  recollection,
actual  or  potential,  of  all  the  events  of  waking  life,  whilst
in  the  waking  state  there  is  no  recollection  of  the  hypnotic
phase.

There  is  a  considerable  amount  of  evidence  in  support


14


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


of  the  belief  that  hypnotic  states  are  sometimes  accom-
panied by  a  display  of  what  appear  to  be  supernormal
powers,  such  as  thought  transference  and  clairvoyance  ;
but  most  of  this  evidence  dates  back  to  the  days  of  the
Mesmerists  and  its  value  is  not  now  easily  appraised.
Yet  something  suggestive  of  supernormal  powers  may  be
■discerned,  even  in  the  work  of  modern  hypnotists,  many
of  whom  have  perhaps  been  prevented  from  looking  for
the  higher  phenomena "  of  Mesmerism  by  a  priori  dis-
belief in  the  possibility  of  their  occurrence.  Perhaps  the
most  striking  examples  of  this  are  to  be  foiuid  in  those
experiments  on  "  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules,"
carried  ovit  by  Gurney,  Delboeuf,  Milne  BramAvell  and
myself,  which  have  been  recorded  in  our  Proceedings.
Quite  apart  from  such  phenomena  as  clairvoyance,  tele-
pathy, or  post-hypnotic  appreciation  of  time,  it  may  be
lield  that  the  effects  of  hj^notic  suggestion  on  the  vital
functions  have,  in  themselves,  something  of  a  supernormal
character,  inasmuch  as  we  have  no  knowledge  whatsoever
of  how  these  effects  are  brought  about.

Hysterical  somnambulism  has  little  to  distinguish  it
from  hypnotic  somnambulism  except  its  spontaneous  onset  ;
and  here  also  the  beginnings  of  supernormal  powers  may
sometimes  be  discerned.  Traces  of  what  appears  to  be
telepathic  or  clairvoyant  faculty  are  not  infrequently  met
with  in  grave  hysteria  ;  but  here,  as  in  the  study  of
hypnotism,  medical  men  seem  reluctant  to  show  much
interest  in  so  unorthodox  a  symptom.  In  hysterical
somnambulism,  as  in  hypnotic  somnambulism,  something
akin  to  supernormal  faculty  is  commonly  displayed.  The
perfection  of  acting,  in  carrying  out  the  somnambulic
dream,  has  something  of  a  supernormal  quality  and  it
may  be  compared  with  the  heightened  power  of  dramatic
impersonation  shown  by  the  hypnotized  subject  when  it
is  suggested  to  him  that  he  is  some  well-known  con-
temporary or  historical  character.  In  the  increased
capacity  for  dramatic  impersonation  which  is  found  in
these  states  of  mental  dissociation  I  am  inclined  to  look
for  the  explanation  of  the  mediumistic  phenomenon  of
"  Personal  Control."


txxxv.J


PresidAntiail'  Address.  ■ :  -  >  v ' ; ;  /  ■  15


Evidence  pointing  to  ■  the  possession  ;  'o? -.-Superiiormal
powers  becomes  more  prominent  wlieu  hysterical  c!dsi-;oci-
ation  assumes  the  form  of  well-marked  double  or  multiple
personahty.  In  almost  all  the  recorded  cases  some  confir-
mation of  this  statement  may  be  found.  It  is  true  that
the  evidence  is  hardly  ever  complete  enough  to  be  quite
■convincing  ;  but  the  regular  appearance  of  evidence  of
some  kind  in  these  cases  is  highly  suggestive,  and
prompts  us  to  believe  that  there  may  be  some  true  and
necessary  connection  between  mental  dissociation  and  the
exhibition  of  supernormal  powers.

To  the  medical  psychologist  it  would  seem  that  what
little  can  be  said  about  the  supernormal  acquisition  of
knowledge  must  be  brought  into  relation  with  that  mental
•dissociation  Avhich  is  the  most  general  cause  or  accompani-
ment of  abnormal  mental  states.  The  mental  chssociation
in  hypnotic  or  hysterical  somnambulism  is  of  the  same
nature,  and  due  to  the  same  causes,  as  that  of  the  auto-
matic writer  or  the  trance  medium  ;  and  whatever  further
■quahfications  or  gifts  such  automatists  or  mediums  may
possess,  they  at  least  show  mental  dissociation  and  the
autonomous  activity  of  dissociated  or  secondary  mental
states.  The  physiological  and  psychological  processes
involved  in  the  production  of  automatic  script  are  the
same  in  kind,  whether  the  content  of  the  writing  reveals
merely  the  subliminal  phantasies  of  the  waiter,  or  conveys
precise  information  about  matters  of  which  the  writer
has  no  normally  acquired  knowledge.  So,  also,  the
controls  of  mediumistic  trance  display  the  same  peculiar-
ities as  do  the  secondary  personalities  of  hypnotic  or
hysterical  dissociation.

In  view  of  the  fact  that  the  more  ordinary  cases  of
mental  dissociation  not  infrequently  show  traces  of  super-
normal faculty,  it  may  be  suspected  that  mental  dis-
sociation is  an  indispensable  prerequisite  for  the  exhibition
of  supemormally  acquired  knowledge  ;  and  it  may  also
be  that  some  degree  of  mental  dissociation  is  necessary
for  any  knowledge  to  be  so  acquired.  This  conception
is  equally  applicable  whether  we  regard  all  display  of
supernormal faculty as being merely a revelation  of


16  .  •. :  <  ?  ^'-^  V  ->..i  T:-W:  ■  MitclieU,  M.D.


[part


unguspocte4' .  potentialities  in  the  human  organism,  or  as
manifestations  of  some  influence  emanating  from  a  trans-
cendental world.

It  may  be  pointed  out  that  some  instinctive  activities
of  the  lower  animals,  such  as  the  homing  instinct  of
pigeons  or  the  migration  of  birds,  would  seem  to  us
supernormal  if  they  were  exhibited  by  a  human  being  ;:
but,  although  in  the  course  of  evolution  such  instincts  in
man  have  become  atrophied  or  overgrown,  it  is  possible
that  when  a  fault  occurs  in  the  structure  of  the  human
mind  these  older  mental  strata  may  be  vmcovered  and
their  functional  activity  released.  Supernormal  faculty
would  then  appear  as  a  regression  to  phylogenetically
older  functions,  and  telepathy  or  clairvoyance  would  be
but  a  human  exploitation  of  means  employed  by  our
lowly  progenitors  in  the  conduct  of  their  everyday  life.

On  the  other  hand,  if  supernormal  acquisition  of  know-
ledge is  ever  due,  as  some  people  think,  to  the  direct  or
indirect  influence  of  discarnate  minds,  here  also  it  may  be
supposed  that  when  a  break  occurs  in  the  mental  structure
which  has  proved  most  fitted  for  survival  in  this  world,
such  a  break  might  offer  the  most  likely  condition  for
getting  into  touch  with  another  world,  if  another  world
there  be.

Such  speculations  are,  however,  far  removed  from  the
questions  which  present  themselves  to  the  medical  psy-
chologist who  has  not  yet  subscribed  to  the  scientific
heresies  of  Psychical  Research.  He  will  doubt  the  actuality
of  any  supernormal  acquisition  of  knowledge  whatsoever^
and  will  endeavour  to  discover  a  natural  explanation  of
the  existence  in  the  medium's  mind  of  any  item  of  know-
ledge for  which  a  supernormal  origin  may  be  claimed.
This  is  assuredly  a  legitimate  ambition  and  is  indeed  the
only  attitude  which,  to  begin  with,  the  psychologist  can
adopt  ;  and  although  hitherto  little  success  has  been
achieved  in  this  direction,  the  clinical  psychologist  of  to-day
may  feel  that  he  is  now  better  equipped  for  such  an
inquiry  than  were  his  predecessors.

It  seems  to  me  that  Psychical  Research  must  accept  the
pathological nature of mediumistic manifestations, or  at


xxxxv.]


Presidential  Address.


17


least  their  complete  parallelism  with  phenomena  which  are
admittedly  psychopathic.  Dreams,  phantasies,  illusions,
automatic  writing,  automatic  speech,  trance,  secondary
personalities  and  self-styled  spirit  controls,  are  all  familiar
to  students  of  psychopathology  ;  and,  generally  speaking,
there  is  found  to  be  no  need  to  call  to  our  aid  any
hypothesis  of  supernormal  agencies  or  powers  in  order  to
account  for  the  occurrence  of  these  states,  or  the  nature
of  the  mental  contents  which  they  reveal.  It  is  difficult
to  say  how  far  this  statement  might  have  to  be  modified
if  a  sharper  look  out  were  kept  for  those  traces  of
apparently  supernormal  phenomena  which  I  believe  to
be  a  not  infrequent  accompaniment  of  mental  dissociation.
But  the  fact  remains  that,  apart  from  the  display  of
more  or  less  pronounced  supernormal  faculty,  the  mechan-
isms of  mediumistic  trance  and  the  mechanisms  of  certain
psychopathic states are  indistinguishable.

The  most  noteworthy  addition  in  recent  j^ears  to  the
means  of  investigation  open  to  psychologists  has  been  the
psycho-analytical  technique  devised  by  Professor  Freud.
The  profound  change  in  our  outlook  on  many  problems
of  psychology,  which  has  resulted  from  the  discoveries  of
psycho-analysis,  may  lead  us  to  hope  that  the  application
of  this  method  to  some  of  the  jDroblems  of  Psychical
Research  may  have  equally  far-reaching  consequences  ;
but,  unless  psycho-analysis  can  solve  the  question  of  the
supernormal  acquisition  of  knowledge,  the  problems  peculiar
to  Psychical  Research  as  distinguished  from  the  problems
in  psychopathology  which  the  mechanism  of  mediumistic
communications  may  present,  will  remain  as  insistent,  and
their  solutions  as  doubtful,  as  they  are  at  the  present
time.

Taking  psycho-analysis  at  its  own  vahiation  as  a  method
of  investigating  the  mind  and  as  a  therapeutic  measure,
we  may  ask :  What  would  be  the  probable  results  of
submitting  a  medium  to  a  full  psycho -analj'sis  ?  If  this
were  possible — there  are  good  grounds  for  believing  it
would  not  be  possible — several  consequences  might  be
anticipated.  If  the  naturahstic  explanation  of  all  trance
phenomena  be  true, we  should  expect that  the  thorough


18  T.  W.  Mitchell,  31. D.  [part

examination  of  a  medium's  mind  which  psycho-analysis
entails  would  reveal  the  natural  origin  of  all  knowledge
which  may  seem  to  have  been  supernormally  acquired  ;
and  further,  we  should  expect  a  re-association  of  the
dissociated  mental  states,  a  redintegration  of  the  medium's
mind,  which  would  preclude  the  possibility  of  his  ever
again  going  into  trance.  The  medium  would  be  "  cured  "
of  his  mediumship.  If,  however,  as  I  am  inclined  to
believe,  the  knowledge  sometimes  displayed  in  mediumistic
trance  is  knowledge  acquired  in  some  truly  supernormal
fashion,  then,  although  the  medium  might  be  "  cured,"
and  thereby  lose  the  power  of  going  into  trance  or  of
acquiring  knowledge  in  a  supernormal  way,  analysis  would
fail  to  find  any  trace  of  the  source  from  which  such
knowledge  had  been  derived,  or  of  the  ways  in  which  it
had  been  obtained.

It  is  useless,  however,  to  speculate  on  these  matters
at  the  present  time.  These  are  problems  for  the  future,,
and  in  the  future  they  may  receive  the  solutions  which
are  hidden  from  us  now.  I  refer  to  them  because  they
form  the  latest  phase  of  that  conjunction  of  occultism  and
medical  science  whose  beginnings  I  have  briefly  sketched
in  the  earlier  part  of  this  address.  Psychical  ResearcK
has  always  welcomed  every  form  of  investigation  that
promised  to  throw  any  light  on  human  personality — on
its  nature,  its  origin,  its  powers  or  its  destinies, — and  in
the  future  this  Society  will  be  as  eager  to  encourage  the
work  of  psycho-analysts  in  its  bearings  on  Psychical
Research,  as  in  the  past  it  was  ready  to  examine  the
obscure  phenomena  described  by  the  Mesmerists  and
hypnotists  of  former  times.  No  doubts  or  fears  of  the
conclusions  towards  which  such  investigation  may  lead
should  deter  us  from  this  task  ;  nor  should  we  be  induced
to  abandon  our  efforts  because  of  results  arrived  at  in
any  field  of  inquiry  other  than  that  of  Psychical  Researck
itself.

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  weight  of  authority
still  inclines  strongly  against  the  inclusion  of  Psychical
Research  among  the  legitimate  avocations  of  men  of
science. Professor  JM'^Dougall,  in  his  presidential  address


LXXXV.]


Presidential  Address.


19


to  us  two  years  ago,  felt  the  need  to  excuse  or  justify
the  aloofness  of  so  many  men  of  science,  and  especially
of  psychologists,  from  the  work  of  our  Society  ;  and  he
ascribed  this  aloofness  to  the  feeling  of  responsibility
towards  the  public  which  actuates  the  conduct  of  psy-
chologists in  this  matter.  For  they  fear  that  if  they
give  an  inch  the  public  will  take  an  ell  or  more,  and
fortii-Rdth  relapse  into  superstition  and  barbarism.

If  I  were  to  try  to  justify  the  aloofness  of  so  many
members  of  the  medical  profession  from  the  work  of  our
Society,  I  fear  I  could  not  ascribe  their  aloofness  to  any
such  altruistic  motives  as  Professor  M*^Dougall  claimed
for  the  psychologists.  I  once  asked  a  colleague  to  assist
me  in  an  interesting  piece  of  Psychical  Research  and  he^
refused.  When  asked  the  reason  for  his  refusal  he  said  :
"  I  have  a  wife  and  four  children."  The  connection
between  his  refusal  to  assist  me  and  his  reason  for  refusal
is  not  so  obscure  as  at  first  sight  it  may  appear  to  be.

In  the  medical  profession,  even  those  who  have  the
inchnation  to  undertake  the  work  of  Psychical  Research
and  the  leisure  to  pursue  it,  are  discouraged  from  doing
so  by  the  disapproval  of  the  leaders  in  the  world  of
medicine,  by  the  scorn  of  their  fellow-practitioners,  and
by  the  suspicion  of  the  public  on  whom  their  livelihood
depends.  Not  only  independence  of  character,  but  some
degree  of  economic  independence  is  necessary,  if  one  is
to  break  away  from  the  herd  and  show  interest  in  any-
thing reminiscent  of  the  old  associations  between  occultism
and  medicine  ;  for  not  all  of  us  have  had  the  felicity  of
being  able  to  say  with  Descartes  :  "I  was  not,  thank
Heaven,  in  a  condition  which  compelled  me  to  make
merchandise  of  science  for  the  bettering  of  my  fortune."

But  over  and  above  the  social  and  economic  considera-
tions which  may  prevent  medical  men  from  exhibiting  too
great  interest  in  Psychical  Research,  we  must  recognize
that  they,  like  other  men  of  science,  are  not  in  this
matter  free  in  their  own  minds,  but  are  weighed  down
by  the  incubus  of  authority  and  tradition.  We  know  how
the  progress  of  medical  science  became  arrested  and
stagnated  for  centuries, because  men  attached  too  much


20


T.  IF.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part


importance  to  the  opinious  of  Hippocrates  or  Galen  or
Celsus.  They  remembered  the  conclusions  to  which
Hippocrates  had  come,  but  they  forgot  to  make  use  of
the  method  which  he  had  enjoined — namely,  to  stvidy
the  observed  plienomena  at  first  hand.

A  similar  danger  threatens  us  to-day  in  our  relation  to
Psychical  Research.  We  are  apt  to  remember  the  con-
clusions of  science  while  we  forget  its  principles  and  its
methods.  And  yet  the  conclusions  of  science  are  often
ephemeral,  whilst  its  principles  and  its  methods  are
permanent  and  perhaps  inviolable.  We  cannot  admit  that
any  phenomenon  presented  by  nature  is  unworthy  of,  or
unsuited  to,  examination  by  the  methods  of  science,  and
we  must  not  abandon  our  privilege  or  forgo  our  right  to
inquire  into  the  phenomena  of  Psychical  Research  merely
because  the  tradition  of  science  declares  these  phenomena
to  be  invariably  due  to  coincidence,  illusion,  or  fraud.
We  must  rather  adopt  the  advice  which  Socrates  gave  to
Phaedrus,  when  he  said  :  "  We  ought  not  to  be  content
-with  the  name  of  Hippocrates,  but  to  examine  and  see
whether  he  has  reason  on  his  side  .  .  .  consider  what  right
reason,  as  well  as  Hippocrates,  says  about  this  or  any
other  nature."

Forty  years  ago  this  Society  set  out  to  examine  all
the  problems  of  Psychical  Research  "  without  prejudice
or  prepossessions  of  any  kind,  and  in  the  same  spirit  of
exact  and  imimpassioned  inquiry  which  has  enabled  science
to  solve  so  many  problems,  once  not  less  obscure  nor  less
hotly  debated."  The  same  spirit  must  animate  us  still  ;
and  however  much  those  who  have  spent  long  years  in
the  observation  of  psychical  phenomena  and  in  the  critical
sifting  of  the  evidence,  may  be  entitled  to  convictions
which  to  the  outside  world  appear  due  to  prejudice  or
prepossession,  it  would  perhaps  be  Avell  if  for  many  years
to  come  each  new  recruit  to  our  ranks  were  to  begin
at  the  beginning,  and  approach  the  problems  of  Psychical
Research  with  a  mind  tmfettered  by  any  preconceptions
imposed  by  mere  tradition  or  authority.  The  more
sceptical  and  critical  he  may  be,  the  more  gladly  shall  we
welcome  him  ; but  we  would  remind  him,  in  the  words


LXXXV.]


Presidential  Address.


21


of  our  revered  first  President,  Henry  Sidgmck,  that  "  it
is  not  a  scientific  way  of  dealing  with  a  mass  of  testimony
to  explain  what  you  can,  and  say  that  the  rest  is  untrue.
It  may  be  common  sense  ; but  it  is  not  science."

There  are,  however,  many  to  whom  the  cold  scientific
attitude  towards  problems  which  are  for  them  suffused
with  so  much  feeling  must  seem  unbearable  ;  and  they
may  be  tempted  to  adopt  Spiritualism  as  a  religious  faith
rather  than  patiently  to  await  the  harvest  from  the  scanty
reapings  and  laborious  winnowings  by  which  alone  truth
is  gleaned  in  the  field  of  Psychical  Research.  And,
indeed,  an  ardent  longing  for  assurance  that  human
personality  survives  the  death  of  the  body,  carries  with
it  an  affective  mental  state  which  is  ill-suited  for  the
examining  of  evidence  or  the  forming  of  unbiassed  judg-
ments. Those  whose  minds  are  so  constituted,  those  to
whom  it  matters  too  much  which  way  the  balance  of
evidence  inclines,  would  perhaps  do  well  to  leave  the
active  pursuit  of  Psychical  Research  to  others  whose  faith
is  more  robust  or  who,  for  other  reasons,  are  more  in-
different to  the  issue  ; — to  those  whose  faith  is  more
robust,  since  there  are  some  who  have  a  belief  in  immor-
tality so  serene  that  they  are  able  to  take  up  an  objective
attitude  towards  empirical  evidence  which  favours  or
opposes  the  view  that  man  may,  for  a  time  at  least,
survive  the  death  of  his  body  ; — to  those  who  are  more
indifferent  to  the  issue,  for  there  are  many  who  by
nature  or  by  nurture  do  feel  thus,  and  because  such
relative  absence  of  feeling  is  the  chief  requirement  in  the
forming  of  purely  objective  judgments.

In  Psychical  Research,  as  in  other  fields  of  scientific
inquiry,  we  must  endeavour  so  to  work  that  we  do  not
care  what  the  goal  may  be  towards  which  our  quest  may
lead  us  ;  but  this  indifference  is  hardly  to  be  won  if
love  of  life  or  fear  of  death  hold  too  great  sway  within
our  minds.  And  even  the  most  "  tough  minded "  of  us
aU  can  scarce  withhold  the  instinctive  response  of  all
things  living  to  whatsoever  threatens  their  destruction  ;
nor  can  we  always  meet  with  tranquil  minds  the  first
rude  shatterings  of  life  and  love  that  fate,  through  death,


22


T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.


[part  LXXXV.l


may  bring.  The  human  heart  rebels  against  the  transient -
ness  of  life,  when  love  beats  helpless  wings  upon  love's
prison-house,  the  tomb  ;  and  so,  through  all  his  days,  man
shall  not  fail  to  form  fair  visions  of  a  life  hereafter  nor
shall  he  cease  to  ponder,  while  life  lasts,  the  dark  abiding
mystery  of  death.

"  He  that  hath  found  some  fledg'd  bird's  nest  may  know,
At  first  sight,  if  the  bird  be  flown  ;
But  what  fair  well  or  grove  he  sings  in  now.
That  is  to  him  unknown.

And  yet,  as  Angels  in  some  brighter  dreams

Call  to  the  soul,  when  man  doth  sleep  :
So  some  strange  thoughts  transcend  our  wonted  themes,

And  into  glory  peep."


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

PART  LXXXVI.
October,  1922.


PHANTASMS  OF  THE  LIVING.

An  Examination  and  Analysis  of  Cases  of  Telepathy
BETWEEN  Living  Persons  printed  in  the  "Journal"
OF  THE  Society  for  Psychical  Research  since
THE  Publication  of  the  Book  "  Phantasms  of
THE  Living,"  by  Gurney,  Myers,  and  Podmore,
IN  1886.1

By  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.
Introduction.

Those  who  have  read  what  we  may  call  for  short  Gurney's
book — and  aU  who  are  interested  in  psychical  research
should  read  it — will  reahse  that  under  the  title  "  Phan-
tasms of  the  Living  "  are  included  aU  experiences  where
there  is  reason  to  suppose  that  the  mind  of  one  living
person  has  aiiected  the  mind  of  another  otherwise  than
through  the  recognised  channels  of  sense.  The  experiences
may  be  spontaneous,  or  the  result  of  experiment.  They
range  from  apparitions  to  purely  ideational  and  emotional
impressions and motor impulses, and they may  occur

1  The  period  covered  is  from  June  1886  to  the  end  of  1920,  included
in  Volumes  III.  to  XIX.  of  the  Journal.  Part  of  this  paper  was  read
at  a  meeting  of  the  Society  on  June  1,  1920.


24


Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.


[part


in  waking  life,  or,  as  dreams,  in  sleep.  The  person
receiving  the  impression  is  called  the  percipient,  and
the  person  from  whom  it  is  presumed  to  come,  the
agent.  It  is  assumed  that  an  experience  occurring  to
the  percipient  as  much  as  twelve  hours  after  the  death
of  the  agent  may  be  a  phantasm  of  the  living,  as  we
have  to  allow  both  for  the  possibility  of  delay  in  the
emergence  of  the  telepathic  impression  received,  and
of  bodily  life  not  absolutely  ceasing  at  the  apparent
moment  of  death.  The  above  definitions  and  explanations
are  hardly  necessary  for  the  majority  of  readers,  but  it  '
is  as  well  to  make  clear  what  this  paper  is  to  be
about.  ^

Since  Gurney's  book  was  published  thirty-six  years
have  elapsed,  and  many  fresh  cases  have  naturally  been
received  by  the  Society.  These  have  for  the  most
part  been  printed  in  the  Journal,  but  some  of  them
have,  without  first  appearing  in  the  Journal,  been
published  either  in  various  papers  in  Proceedings,  or
in  Podmore's  book  Apparitions  and  Thought-transference,
published  in  1894,  or  in  Myers'  book  Human  Personality
and  its  Survival  of  Bodily  Death,  published  posthumously
in  1903.  Also  some  fifty-four  cases  printed  in  the  Journal
have  since  been  published  in  Proceedings  or  in  one  of
these  books,  and  being,  therefore,  already  before  the
public,  are  excluded  from  this  paper. ^  Those  cases  printed,
by  the  Society,  in  the  Journal  only  are  not  readily
accessible  to  the  general  public,  as  the  Joimial  is  printed
for  private  circulation.  Moreover,  what  is  more  important,
they  are  only  to  a  very  slight  extent  classified,  and
cases  unclassified  and  scattered  through  many  volumes
are  not  in  a  convenient  form  for  study.

1  There  are,  of  course,  cases  printed  in  the  Journal  which  cannot
by  any  stretch  be  regarded  as  phantasms  of  the  Hving — cases  such
as  premonitions,  apparent  communications  from  the  dead,  some  accounts
of  haunted  houses,  and  others.  But  tliese  are  outside  the  present
discussion.  Taken  all  together,  they  are  far  less  numerous  than  the
eases  which  may  be  regarded  as  phantasms  of  the  living.

2  The  following  is  a  list  of  these  fifty-four  cases  with  their  place  of
publication.  "  Podmore  "  stands  for  his  Apparitions  and  Thought-
Transference,  H.P.  stands  for  Myers'  Hmvan  Personality  and  its  Survival


LXXXVI.]


Introduction


25


I  have  therefore  for  some  time  felt,  and  was  glad  to
hear  the  same  view  expressed  by  Mr.  G.  E.  Wright  in
a  paper  read  to  the  Society  in  1919,  and  printed  in
the  Journal  for  June,  1920,  that  the  time  has  come
when  these  cases  should  be  collected  together,  analysed
and  discussed,  and  at  any  rate  a  good  many  of  them
published  in  the  Proceedings.  The  present  paper  is
an  attempt  to  do  this.  But  I  am  making  further  restric-
tions. I  propose  to  omit  all  cases  in  which  the  interval
between  experience  and  record  exceeds  five  years.  This
time  limit  is  arbitrary,  and,  as  would  be  the  case  with
any  other  limit  chosen,  does  not  discriminate  infallibly
between  the  evidential  value  of  the  cases  it  includes
and  excludes.  It  is  probably  partly  for  this  reason
that  no  time  limit  was  fixed  in  the  books  and  articles
I  have  referred  to  above. But  early  record  of  cases  is

of  Bodily  Death.  When  a  case  has  been  published  in  two  placeis,  this
is  not  always  stated.


Number  of
Case.


?±322

L.  324

i

^325


L.  829
M.  CI.  670
G.  184
L.  1071
P.  CI.  129
L.  837
L.  841
L.  8.50
L.  860
L.  863
L.  864
L.  874
L.  87.5
L.  876
L.  877
L.  884
L.  892
L.  938
L.  939


Place  in
Journal.

III.  252

III.  254
III.  267


III.  268

III.  295

III.  307

IV.  88
IV.  91
IV.  140
IV.  191
IV.  223
IV.  239
IV.  271
IV.  321

IV.  344

V.  21
V.  35
V.  61
V.  63
V.  68
V.  69
V.  134
V.  147
V.  252
V.  253


Where
Published.

Podmore.


H.P.

Podmore.


Proc.  VII.
Proc.  XI.
Podmore.

Proc.  XI.
Podmore.
Proc.  VIII.
Proc.  X.
Podmore.
Proc.  X.
Podmore.
H.P.

Podmore.
H.P.

Proc.  &  H.P.

Podmore.

H.P.

Podmore.
H.P.


Number  ot
Ca.se.

L.  940

M.  41
L.  945
L.  944
L.  946
L.  955
M.  56
L.  958
G.  242
L.  961
L.  969
G.  245
L.  976
M.CI.  90
I..  982
M.  CI.  92
G.  248
G.  249
L.  995
G.  250

L.  998
L.  1000
L.  1075

L.  1095
L.  1099
L.  1100
M.  CI.  103


Place  in
Journal.

V.  258

V.  299
V.  318

V.  322

VI.  4
VI.  104
VI.  112
VI.  129
VI.  146
VI.  163
VI.  185
VI.  230
VI.  284

VI.  294
VIT.  25

VII.  103
VII.  173
VII.  175
VII.  176
VII.  188
VII.  234
VII.  238
VII.  243
VIT.  243

VII.  323

VIII.  140
VIII.  192
VIII.  193
XII.  17


Where
Published.

Podmore  &
Proc.  XIV.
Proc.  IX.
H.P.

Podmore.

Proc.  XIV.
H.P.


Podmore.
Proc.  XI.
H.P.

Proc.  XL
H.P.


Proc.  XIV.
H.P.

Proc.  XIV.
Proc.  XIV.
&  H.P.

H.P.
H.P.

Proc.  XIV.
Proc.  XXI.


26


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


now  more  important  than  it  was.  We  have  arrived
at  a  stage  when,  if  our  knowledge  of  telepathy  is  to
grow,  we  want  not  only  evidence  of  the  broad  fact  that
there  was  a  coincidence  between  the  phantasm  and
some  external  event  suggesting  a  causal  connection  between
them,  but  light  on  the  process  of  telepathy  and  the
conditions  under  which  evidence  of  it  can  be  obtained.
For  this  details  become  more  and  more  important,  and
it  will,  I  think,  be  readily  admitted  that  five  years  is
a  long  time  through  which  to  trust  to  memory  for  details.
I  am  glad  to  say  that  the  interval  between  experience
and record  matter of fact, usually much  less

than  five  years  in  the  cases  before  us.  Indeed,  for
a  good  many  years  past  cases  not  recorded  till  five  years
after  their  occurrence  have  not  been  printed.

I  am  further  ignoring  a  few  cases  where  the  evidence
seems  to  me  to  be  in  some  way  or  other  too  defective
to  be  worth  discussing.  I  do  not  mean  to  imply  that
the  evidence  for  telepathy  in  all  the  cases  retained  is
strong,  or  that  they  are  all  well  recorded  or  corroborated.
This  is  not  so,  and  it  may  well  be  that  some  readers
will  think  some  of  the  cases  retained  might  with  advantage
have  been  omitted.  It  is  a  question  of  degree,  and  it
is  only  a  few  of  the  weakest  that  I  have  ignored.  We
might  perhaps  put  it  that  some  of  the  cases  retained
do  not  add  to  the  evidence  for  telepathy,  but  granting
telepathy  it  seems  likely  that  it  operated.  {

After  eliminating  cases  for  these  three  reasons — namely
(a)  that  they  have  been  already  published  in  the  Pro-
ceedings or  in  the  books  named  above  ;  (6)  that  they
were  not  recorded  sufficiently  near  the  time  of  occurrence  ;
(c)  that  the  evidence  is  too  weak — we  are  left  with  about
200,  which  I  shall  call  the  present  collection,  or  our
collection.  It  consists  of  some  30  experimental  or  semi-
experimental  cases,  and  170  spontaneous  experiences,  in
about  one  third  of  which  the  percipient  was  admittedly
dreaming.

The  exclusion  from  our  collection  of  the  54  cases
already  published  somewhat  reduces  its  value,  for  these
cases  were  of  course  selected  as  for  some  reason  important


LXXXVI.]


Introduction.


27


or  interesting.  It  also  somewhat  alters  the  proportion
in  which  different  kinds  of  experiences  are  represented.
Especially  is  this  so  with  dreams,  of  which  there  are
comparatively  few  among  the  published  cases.  In  experi-
mental cases  the  proportion  is  affected  the  other  way,
the  number  previously  published  being  proportionately
large  and  including  a  good  many  of  the  best.^

In  arranging  our  collection  I  begin,  as  Gurney  did
in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  with  experimental  and  semi-
experimental  cases,  to  which  Chapter  I.  is  devoted,  and
proceed  in  Chapter  II.  to  cases  where  the  experiences
of  the  percipients  consist  of  ideas  or  mental  pictures,
or  emotions  or  motor  effects — cases  that  is  where  the
phantasms  are  not  externalised  as  waking  sensory  halluci-
nations nor  as  dreams  with  the  same  quaUties.  From
this  point  on,  however,  my  classification  differs  from
Gurney's.  He  has  treated  separately  dreams,  "  border-
land "  cases  (that  is  experiences  occurring  when  the
percipient  was  in  bed  but  believed  himself  to  be  awake),
and  hallucinations  when  the  percipient  was  up  and  about  ;
while  I  have  treated  these  three  classes  together.

This  departure  from  precedent  needs  some  explanation
and  justification.  In  the  first  place,  treating  dreams  and
hallucinations  together  assumes  that  they  can  be  regarded
as  in  important  respects  experiences  of  the  same  kind,
and  in  particular  that,  e.g.,  the  figures  seen  in  our  dreams,
the  characters  that  act  in  them  and  seem  external  to
ourselves,  are  of  the  same  nature  as  apparitions  seen
by  waking  percipients.  That  this  is  so  is  shown  and
strongly  insisted  on  in  Gurney's  book,  and,  as  he  points
out,  cases  are  not  infrequent  where  a  dream  figure  is
continued  for  an  appreciable  time  after  waking  as  a
waking  hallucination.  It  was  not  mainly  the  difference
in  their  psychical  nature  that  led  Gurney  to  treat  dreams
and  waking  hallucinations  separately,  but  the  difference
in  their  evidential  value.

Though  incidentally  it  did  much  else,  his  book  chiefly

^  The  great  majority  of  cases  printed  in  the  Journal,  and  afterwards
pubhshed  in  Proceedings  or  in  the  boolis  mentioned,  were  in  early
volumes  of  the  Journal. There  is  only  one  after  Vol.  VIII.


28


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part  S


aimed  at  producing  a  cumulative,  quasi-statistical  proof
of  telepathy  by  showing  that  a  rare  psychical  event  in
the  percipient's  life,  such  as  an  apparition  of  the  agent,
coincided  with  a  marked  crisis  in  the  latter's  life  much
more  often  than  any  theory  of  probability  warranted  us
in  expecting.  Now  a  dream  is  seldom  a  rare  psychical
event.  Some  dreams  are  more  impressive  than  others,  but,
on  the  whole,  dreaming  is  such  a  frequent  experience,  and
the  range  of  the  possible  contents  of  dreams  so  wide,  j
that  they  seldom  surprise  us  as  a  vivid  sensory  hallucina-
tion does.  The  probability  of  something  in  a  dream
corresponding  with  a  crisis  in  the  agent's  life  by  pure
chance  is  much  greater  than  the  probability  that  a
waking  hallucination  will  do  so.  And  we  have  to  consider
in  addition  the  ease  with  which  dreams  elude  memory
and  the  consequent  danger  of  their  being  altered  in
recollection  (if  not  noted  at  the  time)  to  correspond  with
the  subsequently  learnt  facts  of  the  agent's  experience.

But  we  may  now,  for  the  sake  of  argument  at  least,
assume  that  Gurney's  book  has  accomplished  its  object,
and  that  telepathy  is  proved,  and  starting  from  that
point  may  devote  ourselves  primarily  to  seeking  for
light  on  the  occasions  and  mode  of  its  operation.^  From
this  point  of  view  dreams  have  an  advantage  over  most
sensory  hallucinations,  for  they  have  a  chance  of  coinciding
in  a  larger  number  of  items  with  the  agent's  contemporary
experience.  In  a  realistic  hallucination,  the  seeing  for
instance  of  an  apparition  of  a  dying  agent  standing  in
the  room,  the  idea  of  the  agent's  personality  is  as  a
rule  all  that  is  conveyed  to  the  percipient  ;  the  accessories,
clothes,  etc.,  seldom  affording  any  evidence  of  being  de-
rived otherwise  than  from  the  percipient's  own  mind.
If  the  agent  and  percipient  have  been  in  telepathic
touch subliminally more completely than apj)ears, it  is

^  In  speaking  of  telepathy  as  proved,  I  do  not  of  course  mean  that
it  is  yet  accepted  by  the  scientific  world.  Much  more  accumulation
of  well  evidenced  instances  will  be  required  before  this  can  be  claimed.
But  we  want  more  than  the  mere  piling  up  of  facts.  Our  facts  will
be  the  more  readily  accepted,  the  more  we  can  compare  them,  and,
provisionally  assuming  telepathy,  show  when  and  how  it  occurs.


LXXXVI.]


Introduction.


29


subliniinally  only.^  This  meagreness  in  the  content  of
sensory  haUucinations  is  equally  characteristic  of  veridical
and  non- veridical  ones.  But  with  dreams  it  is  very
different.  In  dreams,  instead  of  being  merely  a  spectator,
the  percipient  is  usually  an  actor,  his  own  part  in  what
seems  to  occur  being  part  of  the  illusory  impression.  The
dream  represents  dramatically  an  incident  or  little  story
in  which  the  percipient  is  concerned.  The  details  of
the  little  drama  may  be  in  part  veridical,  and  may  thus
amplify  the  communication  from  the  agent.  They  may,
on  the  other  hand,  even  in  veridical  dreams  {e.g.  L.  1147,
p.  196,  and  L.  1179,  p.  195),  be  pure  embroidery  by  the
dream  consciousness  on  the  veridical  basis,  confusing
the  latter.  The  tendency  to  embroidery  in  dreams  may
be  compared  with  the  same  tendency  in  automatic  script
and  in  trance  speech,  making  discrimination  between
the  true  and  the  false  difficult.  Still,  on  the  whole,  we
do  in  veridical  dreams  generally  get  more  than  the
mere  fact  that  the  agent  has  appeared  or  his  voice  has
been  heard.

The  principle  of  classification  adopted  will  appear
clearly  as  we  proceed,  and  I  need  not  describe  it  here
more  than  I  have  already  done.  I  ought  to  say,  how-
ever, that  I  have  not  adhered  to  it  quite  strictly.  In
a  few  instances  it  has  seemed  better  to  take  a  case  out
of  its  proper  order,  so  as  to  place  it  with  another  that
resembles  it  in  a  way  that  seems  interesting  or  instructive.

I  have  not  quoted  all  the  cases  in  full.  Some  I  have
so  quoted.  Others  I  have  abbreviated,  either  by  giving
only  the  percipient's  account  without  quoting  corroborative
statements or other evidence given in the Journal,  or

There  are  some  hallucinations  that  reveal  more.  The  rather  rare
type  among  spontaneous  cases,  which  I  have  called  visions — pictorial
representations  of  the  agent  or  others  not  forming  part  of  the  percipient's
normal  surroundings — may  convey  more  information.  (For  an  example
see  L.  1207,  p.  243  below.)  So  of  course  may  crystal  visions.  There
are  also  some  apparitions  that  seem  to  speak,  and  thus  to  convey
information.  In  a  very  odd  case,  apparently  well  evidenced,  in  the
Journal,  Vol.  V.,  p.  147  (not  reproduced  here,  because  it  has  been
published  in  Human  Personality,  Vol.  I.,  pp.  675-8),  a  conversation  with
the  apparition  is  reported,  quite  as  might  happen  in  a  dream.


30


Mrs.  Heyiry  Sidgivick.


[part


otherwise.  A  good  many  I  have  merely  described.  The
reason  for  this  is  chiefly  to  save  space  ;  this  paper  being,
I  fear,  almost  intolerably  long  as  it  is.

The  numbers  attached  to  cases  (such  as  M.  CI.  97
or  L.  1215  ^)  are  those  they  bear  in  the  Journal,  and
which  are  also  attached  to  the  original  documents  kept
at  the  Society's  rooms.  At  the  end  of  this  paper  I  give
a  classified  list  of  cases  quoted  or  described  in  it,  which
will  serve  as  a  table  of  contents.

The  original  meaning  of  the  letters  L,  G,  M,  etc.  need  not  be  con-
sidered. In  this  paper  they  are  merely  part  of  the  index  number.


Lxxxvi.] Exferimental  and  Semi-Experimental  Cases  31


CHAPTER  I.

EXPEEIMENTAL  AND  SeMI-EXPERIMENTAL  CaSES.

§  1  Experimental  Cases.

By  experimental  cases  I  mean  those  in  which  the  agent,  or  a
group  of  agents,  is  deliberately  trying  to  impress  tele-
pat  hically  a  particular  percipient,  and  that  percipient
deliberately  trying  to  receive  an  impression,  as  a  rule
from  that  particular  agent  or  group  of  agents.  In  most
of  the  cases  of  this  sort  recorded  in  the  Journal  the
agent  was  endeavouring  to  impress  the  percipient  with
the  idea  of  some  object  or  action.  These  I  do  not
propose  to  reprint  here,  as  they  would  take  considerable
space  and  are  in  some  sense  a  residuum,  since  the  best
cases  of  the  same  kind  have  been  published  in  Proceedings
or  in  the  books  mentioned  above.  Nevertheless,  they
have  their  value  and  ought  not  to  be  lost  sight  of,  and
it  may  therefore  be  useful  to  give  the  following  list  :

In  the  Journal,  Vol.  III.,  pp.  179-191,  is  a  collection  of
experiments,  consisting  of  series  by  different  investigators,
with  agent  and  percipient  in  the  same  room.  One  of
the  contributors  to  this  collection — Mrs.  Shield,  a  careful
and  painstaking  investigator  much  interested  in  our
work — later  sent  some  further  series  which  are  printed
in  the  Journal,  Vol.  V.,  p.  189  and  p.  296.  Some  similar
series  of  experiments  by  Mr.  Edmund  Selous  are  printed  in
Vol.  v.,  p.  184.  Experiments  of  the  same  kind  by
Miss  Campbell  and  Miss  Despard  will  be  found  in  Vol.  VI.,
p.  4.  The  experiments  at  a  distance  by  the  same  ladies
have  been  published.  Some  similar  experiments  with
agent  and  percipient  in  the  same  room,  contributed  by
Professor  Chattock,  are  printed  in  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  302.
From Dr.  A.  S.  Wiltse — who, it will be recalled,  has


32


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


contributed  several  important  items  of  different  kinds
to  our  published  records — there  are  three  sets  of  similar
experiments  with  agent  and  percipient  in  the  same  room,
interspersed  with  a  few  in  which  facts  at  a  distance
seem  to  have  been  supernormally  perceived.  The  records
of  these  experiments  are  printed  in  the  Journal,  Vol.  VII.,
pp.  197-206  and  240-242.  There  is  also  a  short  series
furnished  by  Miss  B.  H.  Grieve  (see  below,  pp.  48,  etc.)
printed  in  the  Journal,  Vol.  X.,  pp.  260-263.  In  this
series  some  experiments  were  carried  out  when  agent
and  percipient  were  apart,  and  some  when  they  were
together  ;  and  the  series  includes  one  veridical  spon-
taneous impression  derived  by  one  of  the  ladies  from
(apparently)  one  of  the  two  she  had  experimented  with.

Experiments  with  agent  and  percipient  in  the  same
room  having  an  obvious  drawback  in  the  difficulty  of
absolutely  excluding  the  possibility  of  unconscious  indica-
tions on  the  part  of  the  agent,  it  is  highly  desirable
that  in  serious  experiments  agent  and  percipient  should,
if  possible,  be  in  different  rooms  or  separated  by  still
greater  distances  ;  and  the  experiments  more  recently
published  in  Proceedings  have  been  so  arranged.  There
were  earlier  also  valuable  experiments  at  a  distance
printed  in  the  Journal,  but  these  have  all,  I  think,  been
subsequently  published  except  one  series  by  M.  Glardon
in  the  Journal,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  98.  This  is  referred  to  in
Human  Personality,  but  only  a  later  and  more  strikingly
successful  series  by  the  same  agent  and  jDercipient  {Journal,
Vol.  VI.,  p.  325)  is  published  there  in  full.

There  are  two  experiments  in  thought-transference
witli  agent  and  percipient  in  the  same  room,  which  I
will  quote  because  the  method  was  different — the  percipient
looking  in  a  crystal  with  a  view  to  seeing  what  the
agent  was  trying  to  make  her  see.  The  percipient  in
the  first  case  (M.  CI.  97,  Journal,  Vol.  IX.,  p.  78),  Miss
Angus  (pseudonym),  is  a  remarkably  successful  crystal
gazer,  or  "  scryer,"  and  some  of  her  crystal  vision  ex-
periences, l)ut  not,  I  think,  this  particular  one,  have  been
described  in  Huvian  Personality,  Andrew  Lang's  Making
of  Religion,  and  other  books.


Lxxxvi.] Experimental  and  Semi-Experimental  Cases.  33

(M.  CI.  97.)

IVDss  Aiigus  writes  (January  4th,  1898)  :

I had another successful scry on Tuesday  evenmg,

21st December, 1897, when Mr. Mac asked me  to

look  in  the  ball.  He  had  never  seen  crystal  gazing,
so  I  told  him  to  fix  his  mind  on  some  scene,  which  I
would  endeavour  to  describe.  Almost  at  once  I  saw
a  large  room  with  a  pohshed  tloor  reflected,  the  hghts
being very bright and all  round ; but the room  was

empty,  which  I  thought  very  uninteresting  ! Mr.  Mac

said  how  strange  that  was,  as  he  had  not,  so  far,  been
able  to  fix  his  mind  on  any  particular  face  in  the  ballroom.
However,  he  asked  me  to  look  agam,  and  this  time  I
saw  a  smaller  room,  very  comfortably  furnished,  and
at  a  small  table  under  a  bright  light  with  a  glass  globe
(no  shade  on  the  globe)  sat  a  young  girl,  in  a  high-necked
white  blouse,  apparently  writing  or  readmg.  I  could
not  see  her  face  distinctly,  but  she  was  pale,  with  her
hair  drawn  softly  off  her  forehead  (no  fringe),  and  seemed
to  have  rather  small  features.

Mr.  Mac said my description quite talUed  with

the  lady  he  was  thinking  of,  a  Miss  ,  whom  he  had

met  for  the  first  time  at  a  ball  a  few  nights  before,  but
he  had  meant  me  to  see  her  dressed  as  he  met  her  m
the  balk'oom.

We consulted our watches, and fomid that it  was
between 10.15 and 10.30 when we were scrying,  and

Mr.  Mac said  he  would  try  to  find  out  what  IVIiss

was  doing  at  that  hour.  Fortmiately  I  had  not  long
to  wait  for  his  report,  as  he  met  her  the  next  evening,
and  told  her  of  my  experiment.  She  was  very  much
mterested,  I  believe,  and  said  it  was  all  qiiite  true  !
She  had  been  wearmg  a  white  blouse,  and,  as  far  as
she  remembers,  she  was  still  readmg  at  10.30  under  a
bright  incandescent  fight,  with  a  glass  globe  on  it.

Mr.  Mac writes  (December  30th,  1897)  :

I was at Miss Angus's house on Tuesday,  December
21st, 1897. Miss  Angus  said  that  if  I  thought  of  some-


34


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivich.


[part


body  she  would  look  in  her  crystal  ball  and  find  out  the  j
personal  ajjpearance  of  the  person  of  whom  I  was  thmking,
and  what  he  or  she  was  domg  at  that  moment  (10.25
p.m.).  She  told  me  to  thhik  of  the  surroundings  and
the  place  in  which  I  had  last  seen  the  person  of  whom
I  was thinking. I  thought of somebody that she  did

not  Imow — Miss ,  whom  I  had  met  at  a  dance  on

December  20th.  I  thought  of  the  ballroom  where  1  \
had  been  introduced  to  her,  but  at  first  I  could  not
centre  my  mind  on  her  face.  Then  Miss  A.  said  that
she  saw  a  big  room  with  a  pohshed  floor,  and  which
was  brilliantly  ht  up,  but  that  at  present  she  could  not
make  out  any  people  there. Then  I  succeeded  in  fixing

my  mind  on  Miss 's  face,  when  Miss  A. said  that

she  saw  a  girl  with  fair  wavy  hair  either  writing  a  letter
or  reading,  but  probably  the  former,  under  a  lamj)  with
a  glass  globe,  and  that  she  had  a  high-necked  white
blouse  on. All  this  took  about  five  mmutes.

I  saw  Miss agam  at  a  dance  on  December  22nd —  j

the  next  night.  I  told  her  what  had  happened,  and  she
said  that,  as  far  as  she  remembered,  at  10.25  the  night
before  she  had  been  either  writing  a  letter  or  reading,  I
but  probably  writmg,  under  an  mcandescent  gas-light
with  a  glass  globe,  and  that  she  had  been  wearing  a
high-necked  white  blouse.

I  had  only  known  Miss  Angus  for  a  very  short  time,  so

she did  not know what  friends I had iir . I do  \

not  think  that  Miss  Angus  Imows  Miss . There  were

three  other  people  in  the  room  all  the  time,  one  of  whom
was  playing  the  piano.  This  is  exactly  what  happened,
as  far  as  I  can  remember.

Although  agent  and  percipient  were  apparently  close
together  in  this  case,  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  how  un-
conscious indications  can  have  suggested  the  vision  to
the  percipient,  and  it  will  be  observed  that  in  the  second
vision,  a  third  mind,  that  of  the  lady  of  the  vision,
seems  to  have  been  more  or  less  involved.

This  perhaps  happened  also  in  the  case  to  be  next  .
quoted  (from  the  Journal,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  71). The  agent


Lxxxvi.] Experimental  and  Semi-Experimental  Cases.  35


in  the  case  was  again  present  with  the  percipient,  and
was  trying  to  make  her  see  a  particular  person  in  a
glass  of  water.i  The  result  seems  to  have  been  as  in
the  last  case,  some  perception  of  that  person's  dress
and  surroundings  bej^ond  the  knowledge  of  the  percipient,
though  perhaps  not  beyond  her  possible  guessing.

The  percipient,  Miss  N.  Gemet,  a  Russian  lady  and  Associate
of  the  Society,  writes  :

St.  Petersburg,  Basseynaya,  33,  Lodg.  4,

October  mh/25th,  1896.

Friday  last,  the  4th/ 16th  of  October,  we  had  our  first
sitting  this  year  ; — we,  that  is.  Miss  Marie  Klado,  an
elderly  lady,  author  of  good  stories  for  children,  and  a
still  better  medium  ;  Miss  S.  T.,  an  Enghsh  girl  (bom
here),  my  friend, — she  is  rather  gifted  psychically  and
wants  to  improve  still  more,  but  does  not  quite  beheve
in  spiritual  powers  ;  myself.

At  8  in  the  evening  we  began.  Miss  Klado  and  Miss  T.
sat  down  near  me,  but  not  touching  me.  They  were
on  a  sofa  in  a  corner  of  my  study,  and  I  was  seated
on  a  chair  (or  rather  a  low  oriental  seat)  m  front  of
them  at  a  small  table  of  black  wood,  uncovered,  with
a  glass  of  water  before  me  and  two  high  candles  Hghted,
giving  the  necessary  brilliant  spot  to  gaze  at  in  the
glass.  Miss  Klado  never  hypnotised  me  or  even  tried
to,  and  I  remain  in  my  clairvoyant  experience  always
perfectly  awake  and  in  my  natural  state,  neither  tired
nor  troubled  anj'how.  But  her  presence  always  helps
me  to  see  quicker  and  better,  and  I  feel  my  own  power
"  electrise  "  through  hers  -without  any  contact  with  her.

That  evening  her  only  role  was  then  that  of  a  "  sym-
pathetic current."  She  sat  and  concentrated  her  thoughts
as  far  as  possible  on  the  same  subject  as  me.

Miss  T.  was  nearer  to  me  and,  looking  at  me  and  at
the  glass,  tried  to  suggest  to  me  to  see  what  she  wanted,
— that  is, a certain person I  never  had seen or  even

^  Vision  in  a  glass  of  water  or  other  reflecting  surface  is,  of  course,
of  the  same  character  as  Crystal-vision.


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgiviclc.


[part


heard  of  (she  only  told  me  it  was  a  lady,  but  not  who,
and  even  had  she  done  so,  the  name  was  unknown  to
me),  whose  surroundings  and  even  the  town  or  country
she  lived  m  were  a  mystery  to  me,  as  well  as  to  Miss
Klado.  I  had  no  clue  whatever  to  what  I  could  possibly
see  about  this  lady.

Now  Miss  T.  did  not  know  herself  much  about  the
lady  ;  she  has  never  been  to  her  house  and  has  heard
httle  about  her  way  of  hving,  so  that  she  could  suggest
to  me  the  image  of  the  person,  but  not  of  her  pastime,
dress,  or  rooms.

We  looked  what  time  it  was  (a  httle  over  eight),  and
proceeded  to  pry  in  the  unlaioOTi  lady's  doings.  As
before,  I  always  need  some  time  to  see  anythmg  when
I  have  not  practised  for  some  months.  After  ten  or
twelve  minutes  gradually  the  usual  very  small  picture
was  formed  in  the  brilliant  circle  thrown  by  the  hghts
in  the  glass  (standing  on  a  smooth  white  paper  laid  on
the  table).  I  seldom  see  any  colour  but  black,  white,
and  spots  of  light  when  there  is  a  lamp,  candles,  or
something  of  the  sort  (faces,  when  they  are  larger, —
only  the  head  seen,  for  instance — sometimes  have  their
natural  flesh  colouring).

First  I  saw  a  slender  woman  with  very  fair  hair  and
ill  a  costume  which  puzzled  me  as  well  as  her  doings.
I  described  a  rnesure  all  that  went  on  in  the  glass,  Miss  T.
saying  nothing  as  yet.  The  figure  began  to  move  and
I  could  then  make  out  that  she  was  dressing  ;  she  walked
down  the  room,  lifted  her  arms,  took  something  from  a
board,  then  stayed  in  front  of  what  was  probably  a
mirror  (I  saw  only  the  dark  side),  and  dressed  her  hair
on  the  forehead.  Then  she  washed  her  hands,  and  the
moving  to  and  from  me  of  her  arms  and  of  the  essuie-main
she  held  was  perfectly  distinct.  She  had  a  tea-gown
of  light  colour  with  long  (Greek)  sleeves.

The  scene  changed  all  at  once.  I  saw  her  in  another
room,  better  lighted,  and  a  gentleman  stood  beside  her,
to  whom  she  seemed  to  talk  in  an  animated  way.  The
gentleman  was  inclined  to  be  stout,  with  a  light  beard
and  the  hair  a shade darker. When  I  came  to  this,


Lxxxvi.] Experimental  mid  Seyni-Experimental  Cases.  37


Miss  T.  burst  out  laughing  and  said,  "  Now  I  believe
in  it."

The  description  of  the  lady  fitted  to  an  astonishing
degree,  and  in  the  gentleman  Miss  T.  recognised  one  of
her  relatives,  who  was  reported  to  be  a  devoted  admirer
of  the  lady.  I  broke  off  looking,  the  thought  striking
me  for  the  first  time  that  in  such  a  way  we  may  really
intrude  on  our  neighbours  private  life  and  hberty.  The
lady  hving  here,  the  next  day  my  friend,  meetmg  another
of  her  own  relatives,  enquired  whether  any  one  of  them  had
been  at  this  lady's  house.  Then  she  came  to  me  trium-
phant ;  the  cousin  I  had  seen  had  been  there.  The
lady  received  him  in  a  hght  gown  with  long  sleeves.

Now  her  and  his  outward  appearance  could  have  been
suggested  to  me  by  Miss  T.,  as  she  knew  both  of  them.
But  the  visit  at  this  very  hour  and  the  dress  of  the
lady  this  none  of  us  loiew  or  could  loiow.

So  I  think  my  experience  was  a  success.  Both  [those
present]  and  the  family  of  Miss  T.  were  witnesses  to
the  facts  being  true  and  accurate,  and  told  before  asserting
their  reahty.  N.  Gernet.

Miss  Klado  writes  :

St.  Peteksbtjrg,  November  I4ih/26ih,  1896.
Je  confirme  que  tout  ce  que  M"''  Gernet  vous  a  raconte
par  rapport  a  sa  vision  de  Tamie  de  M"''  T.,  s'est  trouve  verifie
le  lendemam  de  notre  seance,  et  que  M'''^  Gernet  n'avait
aucune  connaissance  de  la  personne  et  des  circonstances
qu'elle  voyait.  A  mesure  qu'elle  voyait,  elle  nous  racontait
ce  qu'elle  avait  vu.  Marie  Klado.

Miss  S.  T.,  who  prefers  that  her  name  should  not  be  given,
sent  IVIiss  Gernet  the  foUowing  account,  which  was  forwarded
to  us,  of  her  recollections  of  the  sittmg.

Some  time  ago,  a  friend  of  mine,  Miss  Gernet,  asked
me  to  try  water-gazmg,  and  as  I  always  felt  a  great
interest  m  such  subjects,  I  very  willingly  complied  with
her  request.


38


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


A  few  days  later  we  met,  and  for  my  part  I  cannot
deny  that  our  experiment  was  a  complete  success,  as
will  be  seen  from  the  following  account.

The  person  chosen  by  me,  and  of  whom  I  was  to  think
on  that  occasion,  was  unknown  to  my  friend,  nor  was
I  ever  m  her  house  myself.

After  gazing  for  some  time  into  the  Avater,  my  friend
said  that  she  saw  a  room,  and  described  it  to  me  and
how  it  was  furnished.  Then  further  on  she  said  that  a
human  figure  appeared,  that  of  a  shght  fair-haired  woman,
dressed  m  a  mornmg  gown  with  wide  sleeves,  and  which
seemed  to  be  either  white  or  a  pale  blue  ;  then  my  friend
told  me  that  she  saw  the  door  open  and  a  gentleman
enter  the  room  ;  and  on  my  friend  describing  his  person,
I  recognised  him  at  once.

The  very  next  day  I  hastened  to  that  lady's  house,
and  questioned  her  as  to  where  she  was  on  the  preceding
evening,  and  how  she  was  dressed.  She  told  me  that,
feehng  rather  unwell,  she  remained  the  whole  evening
at  home  m  her  dressmg  room,  and  that  she  wore  a  pale
blue  dressing-gown  that  had  wide  sleeves  !  On  examining
her  dressmg  room,  I  was  astonished  beyond  words  to
find  how  very  accurate  the  vision  was,  every  detail
of  it.

Miss  Gernet  writes,  when  sending  the  above  account :

[December,  1896.]

You  will  notice  two  differences  with  my  version.  (1)
Miss  T.  says  I  told  the  lady  was  dressed  in  white  or
light  blue.  I  said  in  reality  only  "  light,"  as  I  do  not
see  colours  generally,  and  the  whole  dress  seemed  indeed
whitish.

(2)  The  lady  [is]  reported  to  have  stayed  in  her  "  dress-
ing "  room.  Now  there  are  no  dressing-rooms  (in  the
English  sense  of  the  word)  as  a  rule  in  Russian  houses,
but  boudoirs.  When  I  saw  her  dressing,  the  room  seemed
half-hghted,  rather  dark  ;  afterwards  it  was  lighted  well
and  the  walls  looked  brighter,  so  I  took  it  to  be  another
room.


Lxxxvi.] Exqjerimental  and  Semi-Experimental  Cases.  39


You  may  notice  too  that  between  my  and  Miss  Klado's
account  and  this  one  nearly  a  month  elapsed,  so  that
details  are  now,  of  course,  less  distinctly  remembered.
You  are  quite  right  that  one  should  write  it  down  im-
mediately. .  .  .

N.  Gernet.

If  the  mind  of  the  person  seen  in  the  crystal  or  glass
of  water  did  in  these  two  cases  contribute  to  the  vision,
it  was  certainly  unconsciously,  so  that  to  that  extent
they  resemble  the  semi-experimental  cases  to  be  next
considered.

§  2. Semi-experimental  Cases. Percipient  Experimenting.

By  a  semi -experimental  case  I  mean  one  in  wfiich
either  the  percipient  is  trying  to  get  an  impression,
or  the  agent  is  trying  to  produce  one,  while  the  other
party  to  the  experience  is  quite  unaware  that  any  attempt
is  being  made,  and  unconscious  of  contributing  to  it
in  any  way.  Semi-experimental  cases  are  dealt  with
by  Gurney  in  his  book  as — what  they  of  course  are
— transitional  between  experimental  and  spontaneous  cases,
but  he  only  considers  those  where  the  agent  was  the
experimenter.  I  think  those  where  the  percipient,  with
the  hope  of  obtaining  impressions  supernormally,  puts
himself  deliberately  under  conditions  which  he  believes
conducive  to  this  result,  as  in  scrying,  automatic  writing,
etc.,  may  well  be  regarded  as  semi-experimental  too.
And  as  throwing  light  on  the  telepathic  process,  such
cases  may  be  of  considerable  importance,  for  they  show
that  sometimes  at  least  the  percipient  is  not  like  a
blank  sheet  of  paper,  or  a  lantern  screen,  ready  to
receive  impressions  which  the  agent  throws  on  it,  but
is  himself  the  active  party,  and  is  like  an  explorer  going
out  to  see  what  he  can  find.  The  word  "  agent  "  is
from  this  point  of  view  not  very  happily  chosen.  It
does  not  fit  well  where  the  active  part  is  played  by
the  percipient.  Moreover,  if  success  is  possible  without
conscious activity on the part of the  agent, it  seems

c


40


Mrs.  Henry  Siclgwick.


[part


to  follow  that  we  cannot  tell  either  in  fully  experimental
or  in  spontaneous  cases  how  much  of  the  successful
transference  is  due  to  the  agent  and  how  mvxch  to  the
percipient.  The  share  due  respectively  to  one  or  the
other  may  very  likely  differ  in  different  cases.  The
agent  in  joint  experiments  generally  concentrates  his
mind  on  the  idea  to  be  transferred  if  only  for  the  sake
of  ear-marking  it  and  distinguishing  it  from  other  ideas
in  his  mind,  but  it  does  not  follow  that  concentration
is  a  necessary  part  of  the  process,  or  even  contributes
to  the  success.  We  are  not  justified  in  assuming  from
such  experiments  that  the  idea  could  not  be  transferred
to  the  percipient  unless  the  agent  were  consciously  thinking
of  it.i

In  the  majority  of  semi-experimental  cases  in  our
collection  the  percipient  is  the  experimenter.  They  are
of  various  kinds,  and  we  may  take  first  three  which  are
crystal  visions,  and  in  that  respect  like  the  two  cases
already  quoted.

The  first  (M.  CI.  93,  Journal,  Vol.  VII.,  p.  124)  was  sent  to
us  by  Mr.  Andrew  Lang.  He  was  well  acquainted  with  all
the  witnesses,  whose  names  were  given  us  in  confidence.

(M.  CI.  93.)

The  following  is  the  account  of  the  seer  :

St.  Andrews,  February  10th,  1895.
On Sunday, January 20th, 1895, at about  5.30  p.m.,
I  was  crystal  gazitig  and  saw  Miss  M.  L.  in  her  drawing-
room  in ,  sitting  on  a  sofa,  pouring  out  tea  for  a

man  in  a  blue  serge  suit,  whose  back  was  towards  me.
I  noticed  he  had  a  brown  moustache.  Miss  L.  was
dressed  in  a  dark-coloured  blouse  with  a  lace  covering
over the shoulders. There was a lamp at Miss  L.'s

1  For  experiments  when  the  activity  seems  to  have  been  mainly  on
the  side  of  tlie  jDercipient,  see  Mr.  Hubert  Wales'  paper  in  Proceedings,
Vol.  XXX.,  p.  124  et  seq.  Perhaps  in  such  cases  there  is  some  quality
in  the  passive  agent  which  makes  it  possible  for  the  percipient  to  get
at  certain  parts  of  the  contents  of  his  mind.


Lxxxvi.] Experimental  and  Semi- Experimental  Oases.  41

left  hand.  I  described  what  I  had  seen  to  her,  and
she  said  what  I  had  seen  was  quite  correct. R.  T.  B.

Miss  M.  L.  writes  :

Mr.  B.,  without  explaining  why,  asked  me  at  a  ball
if  I  had  been  giving  tea  to  a  man  on  the  previous  Sunday
afternoon.  Such  a  thing  is  possible  any  Sunday  ;  but
he  then  proceeded  to  describe  my  dress  and  also  exactly
where  I  was  sitting,  so  much  so,  that  I  at  once  said
that  one  of  the  bUnds  must  have  been  up  and  that
he  had  seen  me  from  the  other  side  of  the  road,  which,
however,  proves  impossible,  as  Mr.  B.  was  in  St.  Andrews
at  the  time.

He  also  described  where  the  other  man  was  sitting,  with
his  back  to  the  window,  and  I  was  on  the  sofa  giving
out  tea,  all  of  which  I  answered  iinwittingly  in  the
affirmative. This  is  all  I  can  remember.  M.  L.

Mr.  B.'s  sister  writes  to  Mr.  Lang:

Februanj  \2th,  1895.

I  enclose  the  separate  accounts.  T.  wrote  his  in
St.  Andrews  on  Sunday,  and  Miss  L.'s  was  written  yester-
day in  answer  to  my  letter  and  without  her  liavmg
seen  T.  agam.  I  am  quite  confident  that  he  did  see
the  picture,  though  he  msists  that  it  must  have  been
a  mere  coincidence.

The  next  two  cases  (L.  1215,  1216,  Journal,  Vol.  XVIII.,
pp.  191-193)  we  owe  to  Sir  William  Barrett,  who  knows
Mrs.  Sails  from  whom  he  received  them. Mrs.  Sails  writes  :

(L.  1215.)

March  10,  1918.
My  friend.  Miss  Taylor,  has  been  able  for  some  years
to  see  visions  in  the  crystal,  which  are  often  veridical.
She  always  regretted  not  being  able  to  hear  what  the
"  vision  people  "  were  saying,  and  I  decided  to  try  an
experiment  suggested  by  a  French  writer  and  induce
clairaudience  by  usmg  a  shell.  I  first  induced  a  sKght
hypnotic  trance and suggested verbally  that  she  would


42


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgioiclc.


[part


be  able  to  hear.  I  then  woke  her  and  told  her  to  look
in  the  crystal.

The  first  vision  that  appeared  was  the  sitting-room  in
the  house  of  Mr.  T.  B.,  a  friend  of  hers  who  I  have
never  seen.  He  was  there  with  his  brother  and  sister-m-
law,  and  the  room  was  minutely  described.  It  was
evening,  and  the  gas  lighted,  and  she  saw  the  door  open
and  a  man  come  in.  At  this  moment  I  said,  "  Place
the  shell  to  your  ear."  She  did  so,  and  to  her  dehght
she  heard  the  newcomer  exclaim,  "  There  is  good  news
to-night,  we  have  taken  another  village."  They  then
proceeded  to  talk  about  Mr.  T.  B.  being  called  up  and
what  arrangements  he  would  make.  Afterwards  a  maid
came  in  with  a  tray  of  sandwiches  and  whisky  and
soda,  and  the  vision  then  faded.

Four  days  after,  Miss  Taylor  went  to  see  the  B.'s  and
said  "  I  can  tell  you  what  you  were  doing  on  Saturday
evenmg,"  and  to  their  great  astonishment  did  so,  every
detail  being  correct.

I  may  add  that  the  expression  "  we  have  taken  another
village  "  appeared  as  a  headline  in  the  evening  paper,
but  neither  I  nor  Miss  Taylor  had  seen  it.  I  have  never
seen  the  B.'s  nor  the  house  in  question.

This  was  in  the  early  spring  of  1917.  Mary  Salts.

I  append  a  signed  statement  [from  the  crystal  gazer].

The  above  accoimt  is  exactly  what  occurred.  The
vision  was  most  distinct,  and  the  voices  quite  clear.
I  have  never  before  heard  any  voices,  though  I  have
always  wished  to  do  so.  When  I  sjDoke  to  the  B.'s
they  were  extremely  surprised,  as  it  was  all  correct  in
every  detail.  E.  M.  Taylor.

March  11//;,  1918.


Mrs.  SaHs  writes  :  "I  have  been  trying  to  get  Mr.  and
Mrs.  B.  (the  people  described)  to  sign  a  statement,  but  cannot
induce  them  to  do  so."  She  adds  :  "I  have  never  used
hypnotism  except  to  mduce  '  clairaudience.'  Miss  Taylor  sees
the  visions  in  a  perfectly  normal  condition."


Lxxxvi.] Experimental  and  Semi-Experimental  Cases.  43


(L.  1216.)  .

Copy  of  notes  made  on  Tuesday,  February  12,  1918.

Last  night  at  9.45  E.  T.  looked  in  the  crystal  and  saw
Geoffrey  sitting  m  a  small  room.  It  was  very  simply
furnished,  but  there  were  a  couple  of  armchairs,  and
some  pruats  on  the  walls  and  a  bright  tire  was  burning.
G.  was  alone  and  was  readmg  a  paper  by  the  light  of  a
lamp  placed  on  a  table  by  him.  I  asked  about  the  situa-
tion of  the  house,  and  she  said  it  appeared  to  have  many
trees  near  it,  but  it  was  quite  dark  outside.  (It  was
just  as  if  she  went  outside  to  look  !)  After  a  moment
or  two,  she  saw  G.  get  up,  put  down  the  paper  and
take  up  a  book.  He  then  opened  the  door,  turned  out
the  lamp  and  went  out,  leaving  the  room  m  darkness.

M.  Salis.

Note.  I  wrote  at  once  to  my  son  and  received  a  reply
that  all  was  correct.  At  the  time  I  had  no  idea  what
kmd  of  a  buildmg  he  was  sleeping  m  nor  where  it  was
placed,  but  thought  it  belonged  to  Lord  Tankerville.

April  17,  1918.  M.  Salis.

Mr.  G.  Sahs  writes  :

Whittingham,  Northumbekland,
April  13,  1918.

The  account  my  mother  wrote  me  of  Miss  Ehsa  Taylor's
vision  in  a  crystal  is  remarkably  accurate.  I  turned
down  the  lamp  before  opening  the  door,  and  the  sliootmg
box  in  which  I  am  livmg  was  built  as  the  officer's  mess
of  the  Canadian  Forestry  Co.  and  belongs  to  Lord  Ravens-
worth  not  Lord  Tankerville.  It  is  warmed  by  a  huge
log  fire,  and  I  am  naturally  saving  of  paraffin  oil  !  A
letter  was  written  to  me  describing  the  vision  a  day  or
two  after  it  occurred.  G.  Salis.

In  answer  to  further  enquiries  Mr.  G.  Sahs  writes  on  April
22,  1918  :

(1)  There  are two green  armchairs lent me by  the

Navy and  Army Canteen  Board — they are the  most


44


Mrs.  Heyiry  Sidgwich.


[part


striking  furniture  in  an  otherwise  barely  furnished  room.
There  are  2  or  3  prints.

(2)  The  house  is  m  a  birch  wood — trees  growing  right
up  to  it.  A  larch  and  two  birches  also  are  in  front
and  their  branches  sweep  it.

(3)  I  get  the  Tmes  every  afternoon,  by  tram,

(4)  but  do  not  have  time  to  read  it  until  the  evening.
I  usually  get  finished  about  half-past  nme  and  then  pick
up  a  book,  which  I  read  a  little  before  the  fire  and  then
take  to  bed  Avith  me  .  .  .

(Signed) Geoffrey  Salis,

OlRcer  m  charge  of  attached  Labour  Board  of  Trade
Timber  Supply  Dej)artment  with  112th  Canadian
Forestry  Corps,  Whittuigham,  Northumberland.

The  following  day  Mr.  Sahs  wrote  :

Li  my  statement  of  yesterday  I  forgot  to  say  that
there  are  four  coloured  prmts  "  liuntuag  types  "  on  the
wall. They  are  the  sole  decoration  (?)  of  the  room.

It  is  of  course  very  unfortunate  that  Mrs.  Salis's
efforts  to  get  the  testimony  of  the  passive  agents  in
Case  (L.  1215)  were  unsuccessful,  as  it  leaves  the  evid-
ence for  the  veridicality  of  the  vision  somewhat  weak.
The  auditory  element — an  induced  auditory  hallucination
corresponding  with  the  simultaneously  induced  visual
hallvicination — is,  however,  of  great  interest,  and  it  is
much  to  be  desired  that  more  experiments  should  be
tried  on  this  line.

The  second  case  (L.  1216)  is  as  complete  as  immediate
record  and  subsequent  verification  can  make  it.  The
only  difficulty  is  in  judging  how  far  the  details  of  the
vision  might  be  the  result  of  subconscious  guessing — •
the  facts  of  Mr.  G.  Salis  being  engaged  in  forestry  work,
and  living  in  a  shooting  box,  being  known.

While  on  the  subject  of  crystal- visions  it  may  be
convenient  to  compare  with  these  semi-experimental  ones
an  entirely  spontaneous  and  more  or  less  veridical  vision
in  a  glass  of  water  (L.  1134,  Journal,  Vol.  XI.,  p.  157).


LXxxvi.] Experimental  and  Semi-Experimental  Cases.  45
(L.  1134.)

The  case  was  kindly  obtained  for  us  by  an  Associate  of  the
Society,  the  Rev.  A.  H.  E.  Lee,  of  3  Cambrian  Terrace,
Holbeck  Moor,  Leeds.  The  full  names  and  addresses  of  the
witnesses  were  given  to  us,  with  a  request  not  to  print
them.

The  percipient,  IVIrs.  H.,  wTites  :

Leeds,  May  mii,  1902.

On  the  night  of  AjDril  16th  I  retired  to  bed  feeling
unusually  depressed,  placing  a  glass  of  water  on  the  table
for  drmkmg  durmg  the  night.  My  husband  was  on  night
duty  at  the  time  on  the  L.N.W.  line.  I  awoke  with
a  start  about  three  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  feelmg
thirsty,  reached  out  of  bed  for  the  water  ;  when  about
to  partake  of  it,  I  saw,  to  my  surprise,  a  moving  picture
in  the  glass,  comprising  waggons,  and  in  the  rear  a  guard's
van  ;  as  I  looked  they  all  appeared  to  smash  into  each
other,  and  I  noticed  the  van  in  particular  was  the  most
damaged.  My  husband  came  home  about  two  hours
later  and  told  me  that  he  passed  the  scene  of  the  acci-
dent, and  that  the  guard  was  seriously  injured.  I  regard
the  above  as  somethmg  more  than  a  mere  coincidence.

Mr.  H.  writes  :

I  am  a  Goods  Inspector  on  the  L.N.W.  Railway,  and
was  travelling  with  a  goods  train  to  Manchester  on  the
night  of  April  IGtli,  1902,  and,  after  passing  Ashton
at  3.10  a.m.  on  the  17th,  I  passed  the  scene  of  an  acci-
dent, which  had  occurred  to  our  Leeds  to  London  express
goods  train  on  the  Micklehurst  New  Line,  near  Staley
and  Millbrook  Station.  It  was  distinctly  visible  to  me
and  the  goods  guard  I  \\as  traveUmg  with,  as  the  break-
down gang  was  out  and  large  fires  burning.  On  my
returning  from  Manchester,  I  passed  over  the  scene  of
the  accident,  and  saw  the  waggons  and  guard's  van,  the
latter  being  very  badly  damaged  ;  that  was  about  7.50
a.m.  April  17th.  On  my  reaclung  home,  my  wife  told
me  of  the  vision  she  had  seen  .


46  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

The  following  are  questions  addressed  by  Mr.  Lee  to  Mrs.  H.,
with  her  answers  appended,  I'eceived  by  us  on  June  30th,
1902  :

(1)  Why  were  you  depressed  ?  Did  you  connect  your
dejiression  with  your  husband  ?

Ans.  I  was  dejwessed  on  account  of  the  childs  illness,
and  worried  owing  to  my  husband's  absence  from  home
at  such  a  time  ;  upon  seeing  the  vision,  I  at  once  thought
of  my  husband  and  wondered  if  he  was  safe.

(2)  Did  you  see  the  time,  or  how  did  you  know  ?

A)is.  At  that  time  I  lifted  the  clock  off  the  mantel
and  placed  it  on  the  table,  where  I  could  see  it  without
rising.

(3)  Do  you  generally  have  water  at  your  side  1

Ans.  Every  night,  as  the  little  girl  generally  asks  for
water  during  the  night.

(4)  Was  the  room  lighted,  or  how  did  you  see  the
picture  'I

Ans.  The  gas  was  left  burning,  turned  low,  and  there
was  a  bright  tire,  as  o\\ing  to  the  siclaiess  it  was  always
kept  in.

(5)  Did  the  whole  train  seem  to  smash  up  1

Ans.  When  I  saw  the  jiicture,  there  appeared  to  be
a  few  waggons  and  a  guard's  van  ;  they  all  seemed  to
smash  into  each  other.

(6)  What  time  did  your  husband  come  home  ?
Ans. About  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning.

(7)  Had  you  connected  the  vision  with  him,  and  felt
anxious  on  that  account  ?

A71S.  Yes.

(8)  Did  he  tell  you  fii-st,  or  you  him  1

Ans.  I  told  him  first,  and  to  my  surprise  he  knew
of  the  accident.

(9)  Do  you  often  have  similar  experiences  and  warnings  ?
Ans. Very  often,  especially  before  siclaress.

(10)  Have  you  ever  heard  of  crystal-gazing  ?
Ans. Yes,  but  I  have  never  looked  through  one.


Lxxxvi.] Experimental  and  Semi-Experimental  Cases.  47


In  answer  to  further  questions  from  us,  Mr.  H.  wrote  on
August  13th,  1902  :

In  answer  to  your  letter  of  IGth  ulto.,  I  have  been
unavoidably  busy  or  would  have  rephed  sooner.

(1)  I  was  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  the  scene
of  the  accident  when  I  passed  at  3  a.m.,  and  saw  the
men  working  on  the  hne,  there  being  great  fires  burning
and  numerous  lanterns,  but  could  not  distmguish  anything
else  distinctly.

(2)  The  accident  occurred  at  about  10  p.m.

(3)  I  passed  the  scene  a  second  time  at  7.50  the  next
mornmg,  and  saw  the  brake  van  and  one  or  two  waggons
which  had  been  m  the  collision,  and  aU  very  much  broken
up.

Thus  it  appears  that  at  the  time  when  ]\irs.  H.  saw  the
vision,  her  husband  had  only  seen  that  there  was  an  accident,
the  details  of  A\"hich  A\ere  indistinguishable  to  him,  and  it  "was
not  until  about  five  hours  later  that  he  actually  witnessed
the  details,  which  corresjjonded  fairly  closely  to  JVIi's.  H.'s
vision.  His  connection  with  railway  aliairs  would  be  likely
to  make  his  recollection  of  the  times  especially  accurate ;
so  that  at  first  sight  there  might  seem  to  be  some  difficulty
in  explaining  the  case  by  telepathy  from  him  to  his  wife.
We  have  to  consider,  however,  that  the  mere  Icnowledge  that
an  accident  had  taken  place  Avould  inevitably  call  up  m  the
mind — especially  of  a  railway  man — some  impression  of  the
details  of  the  scene,  wliich  would  be  more  or  less  m  accord-
ance with  the  facts  ;  and  it  is  not  clear  that  Mrs.  H.'s  vision
accorded  with  them  more  closely  than  would  such  an  impres-
sion. Thus  the  details  of  her  vision  might  \\'ell  have  been
derived  from  the  imjDression  produced  in  his  mmd  on  first
passing  the  scene.

There  is  only  one  other  crystal-vision  case  in  our
collection,  and  that  was  a  vision  shared  by  two  percipients
both  consciously  experimenting.  They  were  casually  trying
whether,  looking  into  the  same  crystal,  they  would  both


48


Mrs.  He7iry  8 id g wick.


[part


see  the  same  vision,  and  the_y  at  least  approximately  did
so^  (L.  1126,  Journal,  Vol.  X.,  p.  134).

(L.  1126.)

The  account  was  sent  to  us  through  the  kmdness  of  Mr.
Andrew  Lang,  one  of  the  percipients,  Miss  Grieve,  being  a
niece  of  his  ; '"^ it  was  received  on  October  11th,  1901.

Miss  Grieve  writes  :

The  Leaseowes,  Halesowen,  Worcestershire.

On  June  24th  C.  and  myself  were  reading  anatomy
together.  C.  took  the  crystal  ball  and  I  looked  over
her  shoulder — both  of  us  merely  wondermg  if  we  should
see  the  same  thing.  At  the  same  moment  the  ball
darkened,  a  white  cloud  came  over  the  whole,  and  three
pjrramids  appeared,  a  large  one  m  front,  the  other  two
behind.  Then  a  tram  of  camels,  some  with  riders,  others
being  led,  passed  from  left  to  right  and  disappeared
behind  the  large  pyramid.  The  vision  lasted  about  one
mmute,  and  vanished  simultaneously  for  both  of  us.  We
each  wrote  down  as  the  things  appeared,  so  as  to  be
accurate  ;  and  I  had  no  thoughts  of  pyramids  m  my
mind.  B.  H.  Grieve.

Miss  Grieve 's  friend  gives  her  own  recollections  of  the
vision  as  follows  :

On  the  24th  day  of  June,  1901,  B.  G.  and  myself  were
looldng  up  muscles  for  an  exam.,  and  we  had  the  crystal
ball  on  the  table.

We  both  looked  into  it  casually,  and  I  at  least  had
no  definite  thoughts  in  my  mmd,  when  simultaneously
we saw some pyramids appear,  one  large one in  front

^  It  may  be  worth  comparing  an  experiment  described  in  Proceedings,
Vol.  VI.,  p.  434,  in  which  a  hallucinatory  picture  on  a  blank  card
which  had  been  suggested  to  one  hypnotised  percipient  was  apparently
transferred  telepathically  to  another  when  she  was  shown  the  card.
Compare  also  a  collective  vision  in  a  mirror.  Journal,  Vol.  XII.,  p.  17,
and  Proceedings,  Vol  XXI.,  p.  463.

^  Foi  other  experiences  of  Miss  Grieve  see  p.  32  and  340.


Lxxxvi.] Experimental  and  Semi-Experimental  Cases.  49


and  others  behind,  seemmgly  m  a  row,  and  coming  round
from  the  left  to  right  a  train  of  camels  appeared.  On
the  first  one  was  a  man,  whose  features  I  could  not
distinguish,  as  he  was  muffled  up.  Most  of  the  other
camels  had  large  packages  on  their  backs  and  were  led.
The  procession  passed  slowly  round  the  pyramid  and
then  all  vanished.

Another  day  I  was  looking  into  the  ball  by  firehght
hoping  to  see  a  favourite  colhe  dog  that  had  died  a  year
previously.

The  ball  turned  all  black  at  first,  then  a  light  spot
appeared  in  the  centre  and  gradually  spread  nearly  ;iU
over  the  ball.  In  the  centre  of  this  was  a  true  portrait
of  the  dog, — perfectly  hfe-hke.  The  vision  only  remained
a  few  seconds.  Catherine  Coad.

The  second  vision  described  by  IVIiss  Coad  seems  to  show
a  special  faculty  on  her  part  of  vivid  visuahsation  ;  it  was,
therefore,  especially  important  to  ascertam  whether  any  con-
versation took  place  between  her  and  Miss  Grieve  durmg
the  course  of  the  vision,  which  might  have  suggested  to  her
the  same  scene.  In  reply  to  questions  on  this  pomt,  and
as  to  the  notes  made  at  the  time.  Miss  Grieve  wites  to  us  :

October  llth,  1901.

...  I  am  sorry  to  say  I  cannot  send  you  the  rough
notes  we  made  at  the  time  ;  we  left  them  here  (at  the
college)  last  term  and  cannot  find  them  anywhere  now.  .  .  .
The  descriptions  were  written  immediately  after  seeing
the  vision,  but  before  either  of  us  said  anything,  and  we
did  not  speak  while  the  vision  lasted.  .  .  .

Bertha  H.  Grieve.

This  scene  does  not  seem  to  have  been  derived  from
anything  external  to  the  scryer's  minds,  nor  could  they
trace  any  associations  of  ideas  which  might  have  suggested
it.  As  moreover  they  did  not  speak  till  they  had  both
written  down  what  they  saw,  thus  avoiding  verbal  sugges-
tion, the  concordance  in  their  visions  was  apparently
due  to  telepathy  between  them.  With  which  of  the
ladies the vision started we cannot tell. Both  have


50


Mrs.  Henry  Siclgivich.


[part


on  other  occasions  had  telepathic  experiences,  sometimes
as  agent  and  sometimes  as  percipient. ^  Perhaps  the
most  probable  explanation  of  their  collective  crystal
vision  is  that  they  both  on  this  occasion  acted  in  both
capacities.  Both  Avere  obviously  percipients  and  both
may  have  been  agents — one  starting  the  idea,  but  its
development  depending  on  action  and  reaction  between
their  minds,  operating  as  verbal  suggestion  might  have
done  had  they  commented  on  what  they  saw  as  the
vision  proceeded.

In  the  case  I  will  next  quote  (L.  1208,  Journal,  Vol.
XVII.,  p.  235)  there  is,  as  in  some  crystal  visions,  a
deliberate  attempt  to  see  something  in  connexion  with
a  particular  person,  and  apparently  to  see  it  in  a  definite
position  in  space  though  without  the  use  of  artificial
aid  such  as  a  crystal.

(L.  1208.)

We  received  the  case  from  Mr.  L.  C.  Powles,  a  member
of  the  Society.  The  percipient  was  Mr.  James  W.  Sharpe,
late  Fellow  of  Gonville  and  Cains  CoUege,  Cambridge.

Mr.  Powles'  statement  of  the  case  is  as  follows  :

The  Highlands,  Rye,  Sussex,  July  2,  1916.

Ou  Aug.  4,  1913,  I  had  been  invited  by  a  friend,
Miss  B.,  living  m  the  neighbouring  town,  some  three
miles  off,  to  meet  Mr.  James  W.  Sharpe.  On  the  after-
noon of  that  day,  therefore,  I  rode  over  to  her  house,
leaving  my  Avife,  who  was  not  well  enough  to  accompany
me,  resting  by  herself.

At  tea-time  we  talked,  I  think,  entirely  upon  psychical
matters,  and  I  remember  askmg  Mr.  Sharpe  if  he  saw
"  auras  "  round  people,  and,  if  so,  what  he  saw  round  me.
At  first  he  saw  nothing,  but  later  he  said  :  "  You  asked
me  to  tell  you  ;  I  do  now  see  something."  He  saw  two
thmgs behind me. (I now refer to my notes  made

^  Miss  Coad  was  one  of  the  three  experimenters  concerned  in  the
short  series  of  thought-transference  experiments  mentioned  above  as
sent  by  Miss  Grieve  and  recorded  in  the  Journal,  Vol.  X.,  pp.  260-263.


Lxxxvi.] Exioerimental  and  Semi-Experimental  Cases.  51


the  same  evening  on  my  return.)  "  One,  a  dark,  not
inimical,!  half-human  creature,  with  Imotted  hands  placed
upon  my  shoulders."  This  he  said  was  "  symbohcal  of
ilhiess  near  at  hand — a  warnmg."

Then  appeared  the  "  faint  sUght  figure  of  a  young
woman  with  oval  face,  etc."  (here  follow  some  details
Avhich  very  well  apply  to  my  wife's  appearance).  She
"  tried  to  avert  the  illness."

When  I  came  home  towards  six  o'clock  my  wife  told
me  she  had  been  very  anxious  about  my  being  out  in
the  cold  wind  ;  also — and  this  is  the  important  part
of  the  case — she  had  been  quite  obsessed  by  a  somewhat
grotesque  story  of  a  man  dressed  up  as  a  gorilla  who
comes  up  behind  the  master  of  the  house  and  strangles
him  with  his  hands.  L.  C.  Powles.

We  have  also  received  a  statement  from  Mrs.  Powles,  as
follows  :

July  2,  191G.

I  remember  perfectly  my  husband  going  over  to  tea
on  Aug.  4,  1913,  at  our  friend's  house.  Miss  B.'s,  and
my  being  unable  to  go  with  him  that  day.

I  was  anxious  about  him,  as  he  had  only  recently
recovered  from  pneumonia,  and  there  was  a  very  cold
wind.  To  pass  the  time  and  divert  my  thoughts  I
took  up  the  Strand  Magazine,  and  became  absorbed  in
a  very  horrible  story  of  a  man  disguised  as  a  gorilla
who  came  behind  his  enemy  and  broke  his  neck  with  his
powerful  hands.

I  have  always  had  a  great  horror  of  gorillas  from
childhood,  and  far-fetched  as  it  was,  I  was  made  very
nervous  and  oppressed  by  the  story  and  longed  for  my
husband's  return.  Immediately  he  came,  I  told  him
of  the  story  and  the  absurdly  nervous  state  it  had  left
me  in.  This  interested  him  extremely,  and  he  then
told  me  something  of  Mr.  Sharpe's  vision.  He  did  not
at  the  time  describe  it  quite  fully  for  fear  of  alarming  me,
and  particularly  did  not  mention  that  Mr.  Sharpe  thought
it  might  be  a  Health-wammg.  Isabel  G.  Powles.

1  For  comment  on  this  word,  see  below,


52


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


It  will  be  observed  that  these  two  statements  were  written
on  July  2,  1916,  nearly  three  years  after  the  occurrence  of
the  incident  to  which  they  refer  Mr.  PoMdes'  statement,
however,  is  based  on  notes  made  within  a  few  hours  of  this
incident,  and  we  have  been  able  to  obtam  further  corroborative
evidence  in  the  form  of  a  statement  by  Miss  B.^  who  was
present  when  the  percipient,  Mr.  Sharpe,  described  his  impres-
sions, and  also  a  letter  written  by  Mr.  Powles  to  Miss  B.
on  the  day  after  the  incident  occurred.

Miss  B.'s  statement,  contained  in  a  letter  to  Mr.  Powles,
which  was  written  in  reply  to  his  enquiry  whether  she  reme  m-
bered Mr.  Sharpe 's  "  vision," — is  as  follows  :

July  27,  1916.

Certainly  I  remember  Mr.  Sharpe 's  "  vision  "  on  the
4th  of  August,  1913,  and  that  you  wrote  to  me  on  the
following  day  giving  me  what  you  felt  to  be  an  explanation
of  it.

I  remember  that  Mr.  Sharpe  said  he  seemed  to  see
a  non-human  creature  with  his  Imotted  hands  on  your
shoulders,  and  that  is  the  expression  you  used  in  your
letter  of  the  5th  of  August,  1913,  .  .  .  I  remember  that
Mr.  Sharpe  said  it  might  be  a  health -warning,  and  that
he  also  said  he  saw  a  young,  oval-faced  woman  trying —
as  you  say — to  avert  this  monster's  apparently  evil  intent.
I  enclose  your  letter  to  me  of  the  5th  of  August,  1913
(which  I  happened  to  keep),  which  gives  the  account
of  how  Mrs.  Powles  read  the  story  m  the  Strand  Magazine.

M.  B.

Letter  from  Mr.  Powles  to  Miss  B.

The  Highlands,  Rye,  Sussex,  Atigust  5,  1913.

With  regard  to  the  visions  Mr.  Sharp[e]  saw  behind
me  yesterday  .  .  .

My  wife  tvas  thinking  much  about  my  health — hoiking
I  was  not  getting  tired  or  sittuig  in  draughts,  but — and
this  is  still  more  curious — she  was  also  reading  in  the

^  This  lady's  name  and  address  are  known  to  us,  but  are  withheld  here
at  her  request.


Lxxxvi.] Experimental  and  Semi-Experimental  Cases  53

"  Strand  "  for  July  a  horrible  story  about  a  man  dressed
as  a  gorilla  who  comes  behmd  the  master  of  the  house
and  breaks  his  neck  with  his  hands  in  the  dark.  This
story  quite  oppressed  her  and  might  easily  account  for
the  "  dark,  non-human,  creature  behind  me  with  his
knotted  hands  on  my  shoulder."  ...  L.  C.  Powles.

jVIr.  Powles  has  informed  us  that  m  replj^  to  an  enquiry
addressed  to  Mr.  Sharpe,  asking  whether  he  remembered  the
incident  described  above,  Mr.  Sharpe  wrote  that

he does  not remember the actual  vision, but that  by

"  mimical  "  (see  above,  p.  51)  he  meant  a  symboHcal
Health-wammg  or  warning  of  trouble  to  come,  but  not
actively  hostile.

The "  health-warning  " — Mr. Powles  tells us — "  has  not

proved  to  be  veridical,  as  I  have  not  been  ill  at  all  since,
and  no  disaster  has  hapjaened."

The  percipient,  Mr.  Sharpe,  apparently  interpreted,
his  vision  as  a  symbolic  representation  of  his  own  impres-
sion concerning  Mr.  Powles'  health.  But  the  corre-
spondence of  the  vision  with  what  was  in  the  mind  of
Mrs.  Powles  at  a  distance  is  very  remarkable,  and  the
element  of  oddness  in  it  seems  to  remove  any  probability
of  its  being  accidental,  or  the  result  of  fortunate  sub-
liminal guessing.  If  it  was  due  to  telepathy,  Mr.  Powles'
mind  must  apparently  have  been  concerned  as  well  as
that  of  Mrs.  Powles,  for  it  is  improbable  that  Mr.  Sharpe
would  have  got  into  touch  with  her  had  her  husband
not  been  present.

There  are  in  the  collection  two  cases  of  visions  at
seances,  experimental  in  the  sense  that  the  percipients
had  put  themselves  in  the  circumstances  in  which  they
knew  themselves  to  be  liable  to  experience  such  visions.
In  neither  case  was  the  vision  recognised  at  the  time,
but  in  both  it  corresponded  more  or  less  with  true  events.
It  must  be  observed,  however,  that  in  neither  case  was
there  apparently  any  effort  to  get  an  impression  about


54


Mrs.  Henry  SidgivicJc.


[part


particular  events  or  connected  with  particular  agents,
and  tliat  in  both  we  are  told  that  the  percipient  frequently
had  visions  of  the  kind,  while  we  have  not  the  material
for  judging  how  far  and  how  often  these  visions  were
veridical.  The  experiences  therefore  share  the  evidential
weakness  of  dreams,  and  our  estimate  of  their  value
will  depend  on  how  far  the  amount  of  correspondence
between  vision  and  fact  seems  beyond  what  is  hkely
to  occur  occasionally  by  chance.  In  the  first  (G.  267,
Journal,  Vol.  X.,  p.  170)  the  percipient  has  a  vision,
repeated  after  a  short  interval,  of  a  small  child  setting
fire  to  its  clothes,  some  nine  hours  after  the  death,
unknown  to  the  percipient,  of  a  little  nephew  from  that
cause,  though  the  details  of  the  accident  and  vision
did  not  exactly  correspond.

(G.  267.)

For  the  evidence  in  the  case  we  are  indebted  to  Mr.  W.  W.
Baggally,  who  was  acquainted  with  the  principal  witnesses
in  the  case  and  has  full  confidence  in  their  integrity.  The
percipient,  Mr.  John  Polley,  writes  :

At  a  seance  hekl  witliin  the  soinid  of  Big  Ben  on
May  8th,  1901,  there  were  present  Mrs.  E.  V.  M.,  Mr.
Thomas  Atwood,  and  myself.  As  Mr.  Atwood  resumed
his  seat  after  dehvering  an  invocation  (about  8.30  p.m.),
I  became  aware  of  a  vision,  which  presented  itself  on
the  left  of  where  I  was  seated.  The  scene  appeared  as
being  some  5  feet  distant  from  me,  and  displayed  part
of  the  interior  of  a  room,  viz.,  that  part  where  the
stove  stood.  The  fire  in  the  stove  was  small  and  dull,
and  close  beside  it  was  an  overturned  chair.  In  front
of  the  fire  Avas  somethmg  that  looked  Hke  a  fire-guard
or  clothes-horse,  but  this  was  not  quite  clear  to  me.
Playing  or  climbmg  over  this  article  was  a  child,  who
fell  forward,  and,  when  it  regamed  its  feet,  I  noticed  that
its  dress  was  on  fire.

I  made  no  reference  to  the  matter  at  the  time,  as  I
had  an  impression  that  the  vision  might  be  connected
with  some  occurrence  in  the  family  of  Mrs.  M.,  and  I  was
averse  to  mentioning  it  for  fear  of  awaking  sad  memories.


Lxxxvi.] Experimental  and  Semi-Experimental  Cases.  55


After  some  manifestations  of  movements  of  the  table
round  which  we  were  seated  the  whole  vision  was  repeated,
and  this  time  I  had  an  uncontrollable  impulse  to  speak.
Uj)on  my  describing  what  I  had  just  seen  for  the  second
time,  I  was  much  relieved  to  hear  that  the  matter  was
not  recognised  as  being  connected  in  any  way  with  the
sitters.  I  may  mention  here  that  the  child  appeared
to  be  about  three  years  old,  and,  judging  from  the  style
of  dress,  I  described  it  as  a  girl,  although  the  vision
would  apply  equally  well  to  a  boy,  as,  at  that  early  a.i;e,
the  short  clothes  worn  by  both  sexes  would  be  very  simiLar.

Next  Thursday  morning.  May  9th,  1901,  upon  awakening,
I  described  to  my  wife  the  events  of  the  previous  evening's
seance.  On  the  evening  of  the  same  day,  viz.,  Thursday,
May  9th,  I  was  out  with  a  friend,  and  upon  my  return
home  at  11.5  p.m.  my  sister,  Mary  Louisa  Policy  (who  resided
with  me  at  that  time),  made  the  remark,  "  I  have  a
piece  of  bad  news  for  you.  Jack."  "Well,"  I  replied,
"  what  is  it  ?  let  me  know,"  and  she  answered,  "  Brother
George's  little  son  Jackie  has  been  burned  to  death."  Like
a  flash  I  reahsed  the  connection  of  the  sad  event  with
my  vision  of  the  previous  night.  I  then  asked  her  (my
sister),  "  How  did  you  loiow  this,  and  when  ?  "  She
replied,  "  Mr.  Fred  Sinnett  told  me  when  he  came  over
to  see  us  this  evening."  John  Polley.

The  other  two  sitters  confirmed  Mr.  Policy's  statement  in
writing,  and  both  Mrs.  Polley  and  Mr.  Policy's  sister  furnished
written  accounts  of  their  Imowledge  of  the  matter  as  described
in  Mr.  Policy's  statement.

A  local  paper,  which  Mr.  Baggally  has  sent  us,  containing
an  account  of  the  inquest,  gives  the  date  of  the  accident
as  Tuesday,  May  7th.  The  child  was  taken  to  a  hospital
immediately  and  there  died.  His  father,  Mr.  F.  G.  Polley,  a
decorative  jjainter,  writes  to  Mr.  Baggally  in  reply  to  his
inquiries  as  follows  :

6  Adpar  Stbeet,  Hall  Park,  Paddington,
Jwne  mh,  1901.
Dear  Sir, — In  reply  to  your  mquiry  respecting  my  late
son, John Frederick, I beg  to say that on  Tuesday,

D


56


3Irs.


Henry  Sid g wick.


[part


May  7th,  my  wife  went  out  to  do  some  shopping,  leaving
my  son,  aged  2  years  and  2  months,  in  a  bed  sitting-room
with  another  brother,  aged  7.  Whilst  the  elder  brother
was  getting  some  toys  for  them  to  play  with,  the  deceased
thrust  some  paper  in  the  fire,  pulled  it  out  again,  and
set  fire  to  his  clothes.  Some  neighbours  took  him  to
the  Children's  Hospital,  Padduigton  Green,  where  he
passed  away  on  Wednesday,  May  8th,  at  11.45  a.m.  No
intimation  of  this  was  given  by  myself  or  any  member
of  our  family  to  my  brother,  Mr.  John  PoUey,  until  a
friend  of  the  family  called  at  my  address  on  Thursday,
May  the  9th,  between  1  and  2  p.m.,  when  we  mformed
him  of  the  sad  loss  we  had  sustained,  and  he  told  us
he  intended  calling  on  my  brother  that  eveniag,  and
we  asked  him  if  he  would  communicate  the  news  to
my  brother  and  sister,  who  reside  at  Church  Street,
Stoke-Newmgton.  Of  course  you  loiow,  sir,  I  am  anta-
gonistic to  your  views,  but  my  brother  has  told  me  it
is  for  the  interests  of  science  ;  if  that  is  so,  I  take  great
pleasure  in  its  furtherance. — Yours  sincerely,

Frederick  George  Polley.

In  a  later  letter  to  Mr.  Baggally,  Mr.  F.  G.  Polley  states
that  there  was  a  fire-guard  in  the  room  ;  the  httle  boy  did
not  fall  into  the  fire,  but  set  himself  on  fire  as  described
above.

Mr.  Baggally  himself  writes  further  with  regard  to  the  case
as  follows  :

December  4:th,  1901.

.  .  .  Mrs.  M.  is  not  a  medium  and  does  not  profess
to  have  any  mediumistic  powers.  Mr.  John  Polley  is
accustomed  to  have  impressions  of  a  so-caUed  clairvoyant
and  clairaudient  nature,  so  is  Mr.  Thomas  Atwood,  but
they  are  not  public  mediums.  The  vision  referred  to  is
not  unique  in  the  experience  of  Mr.  J.  PoUey.  ...  If  I
recollect  rightly  I  saw  the  father  of  the  child,  Mr.  G.  F.
Polley,  on  May  22nd,  who  handed  to  me  the  newspaper
with  the  account  of  the  accident.  A  few  days  after
he  sent  me  his  written  statement.  I  obtained  the  written
statements  of  Mi".  J. PoUey,  Mr.  Atwood  and  Mrs.  M.,


Lxxxvi.] Experimental  and  Semi-Exiieriniental  Cases.  57


and  ]\Irs.  Elizabeth  Pollej''  in  June.  The  statement  of
Miss  Mary  Louisa  Polley  I  did  not  obtain  till  November,
hence  the  delay  in  sendmg  the  account  to  the  S.P.R.  .  .  .

W.  W.  Baggally.

The  other  case  of  the  same  sort  (M.Cl.  22,  Journal,
Vol.  v.,  p.  73)  was  unfortunately  not  recorded  till  more
than  two  and  a  half  years  after  the  event,  and  there
are  considerable  differences  in  the  accounts  of  the  different
witnesses,  though  they  agree  on  the  main  point.  More-
over the  vision  as  remembered  is  less  detailed  than  one
could  wish.  As  the  whole  account  is  long  it  will  perhaps
suffice  if  I  only  give  an  abstract  of  it.

In  May  1888  four  ladies  at  Denver,  Colorada,  were
in  the  habit  of  meeting  once  a  week  to  sit  round  a
table  "  to  see  what  would  happen,"  one  of  them,  Mrs.
Logue,  being  a  "  medium  so-called,"  though  not  a  pro-
fessional one,  and  frequently  having  impressions  and
visions.  At  one  of  these  meetings  Mrs.  Logue  had  a
vision  of  a  man  lying  very  ill  and  a  tall  pale  lady  writing —
which  vision  she  distinctly  connected  with  one  of  the
ladies  present,  Mrs.  T.  Mrs.  T.  did  not  at  the  time
recognise  it  ;  but  the  next  day  she  received  a  letter
from  a  daughter  in  Indiana  saying  her  husband  was
seriously  iU,  and  the  following  day  a  telegram  announced
his  death.  He  had  died  of  pneumomia  after  a  very
short  ilhaess.  Mrs.  T.'s  daughter  had  been  writing  a
post-card  to  her  mother  at,  or  very  near,  the  time  of
the  seance.  The  description  of  her  personal  appearance
was  correct  as  far  as  it  went.  If  the  vision  was  telepathic
the  rapport  between  Mrs.  Logue  and  Mrs.  T.,  due  to  their
sitting  together,  and  between  Mrs.  T.  and  her  daughter
who  was  actvially  writing  to  her  at  about  the  time  of
the  vision,  may  well  have  furnished  a  telepathic  con-
nexion such  as  would  produce  the  vision.

There  is  a  case  (L.  1152,  Journal,  Vol.  XII.,  p.  307)
which  may,  I  think,  be  conveniently  considered  with
semi-experimental  telepathic  visions,  though  the  percipient
was  not  trying  or  expecting  to  see  anything,  but  merely


58


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


talking  of  the  friend  she  saw  and  looking  at  her  photo-
graph, and  though  the  vision  was  apparently  merely  a
mind's-eye  vision  not  externalised.  The  actions  and
surroundings  seen  were  not  in  themselves  very  striking,
but  the  amount  of  correspondence  between  impressions
and  fact  seems  more  than  would  be  likely  to  occur  by
chance.  With  this  case  is  given  another,  entirely  spon-
taneous, in  which  the  percipient  in  the  first  was  apparently
the  agent,  the  percipient  being  her  sister.  This  is  inter-
esting as  apparently  showing  a  family  capacity  to  become
conscious  of  telepathic  impressions,  and  that  capacity
as  agent  and  as  percipient  may  be  combined.

The  two  cases  were  obtained  from  Mrs.  D.  by  Mr.
J.  G.  Piddingiion,  who  saw  the  original  letters  referred
to  and  himself  copied  them  and  talked  over  the  incidents
with  Mrs.  D.  The  full  names  and  addresses  of  all  the
persons  concerned  were  given  to  us  with  the  request  to
print  only  initials.

(L.  1152.)

Verbatifn  copy  by  J.  G.  P.  of  note  ivritten  by  Mrs.  D.  on
Saturday,  January  27th,  1900.

"  Saturday,  January  27th,  1900.  This  afternoon  while
I  was  sitting  near  the  fire  talking  to  L.,  I  was  holding  a
small  photo,  of  Mrs.  H.  and  describing  her.  '  Where  is
she  now  ?  '  asked  L.  '  In  Rome,'  I  answered,  '  settled  for
the  winter.'  And  as  I  spoke,  suddenly  I  felt  conscious  of
what  she  might  be  doing  at  the  time.  '  Do  you  know,'
I  went  on,  'I  thmk  she  must  be  just  coming  out  of  her
room  on  to  a  high  terrace  such  as  we  have  here,  only  that
there  is  green  over  it.'  L.  did  not  say  'nonsense,'  but  just
asked  quietly  :  '  What  is  she  wearing  ?  '  'A  black  skirt,'
I  answered,  '  and  a  mauve  blouse — she  is  lookmg  out  over
many  roofs  and  spires — and  now  she  has  gone  back  into
the  room  and  a  maid  is  closing  the  shutters.'  '  Can  you
see  her  room  ?  '  asked  L.  '  I  think  it  is  small  ;  '  I  said,
'  there  is  a  cottage-piano  and  a  writmg-table  near  it.
I  think  the  large  head  of  Hermes  stands  on  it  and  some-
thmg  silver.'  And  then  I  felt  nothmg  more  and  added,
'  What  nonsense  I  have  been  talkmg.' L.  thinks  there


Lxxxvi.] Experimental  and  Se^ni-Exjjerirnental  Cases.  59

may  be  some  truth  in  the  impression  and  wants  me  to
write  and  ask  Mrs.  H.  what  she  remembers  of  this  after-
noon. It  Avas  about  six  o'clock.

"  I  cannot  say  I  saw  anythmg  ;  somehow  I  seemed  to
feel  her  surroundings  were  just  so.  I  have  never  been  to
Rome,  nor  has  she  told  me  anything  of  where  she  lives
beyond  the  address."

Copy  of  extracts,  selected  by  J.  G.  P.  from  a  letter  addressed
by  Mrs.  H.  to  Mrs.  D.  Postmark  of  envelope  :
"  6  2  00  Boma."

February  Mi,  1900.

"  Two  days  ago,  as  I  was  dressmg  m  the  morning,  I  was
thinldng  of  you.  You  had  been  so  much  in  my  thoughts
for  some  days  that  I  had  really  worried,  A\'onderuig  if  you
were  still  ill,  or  E.  agaiii.  That  morning  as  I  awoke,
thoughts  of  you  came,  and  I  determmed  to  write  you  as
soon  as  I  had  had  my  coffee.  Imagine  my  surprise  and
dehght,  therefore,  to  receiA^e  your  letter,  a  letter  so  full  of
interest  to  me,  that  I  have  had  no  rest  since  its  arrival,
in  my  great  desire  to  answer  it.  I  have  really  had  no
moment  to  call  my  oaaii.  The  two  days  smce  it  came
seem  hke  two  weeks  to  me,  for  when  one  desires  to  do
anything  very  much,  the  time  seems  long,  doesn't  it  ?
[The  writer  then  explains  at  length  Avhy  she  had  been
prevented  from  writing  for  tv/o  days.]  .  .  .

"  You  have  certamly,  however,  filled  much  of  my
thoughts  these  day[s], — and  I  have  felt  you  m  an  extra-
ordinary manner.  You  certainly  have  a  power  to  visit
your  friends,  and  to  see  them,  and  to  make  them  feel  you.
Your  letter  is  absolutely  startling  and  mysterious.  And
now  I  can  answer  it  detail  for  detail,  and  item  for  item.
[The  writer  then  avows  her  behef  in  telepathy  and  clair-
voyance.] .  .  .  That  you  have  peejDed  at  me  in  my  small
Roman  house  is  certainly  a  fact.  As  you  state  the  facts,
every  small  detail  is  not  altogether  exact,  but  the  facts  as
a  whole  are  true  and  exact  and  perfect,  as  you  shall  see.
Your  vision  (if  I  may  call  it  so)  is  so  true  and  marvellous
that  on  Sunday  last,  the  4th,  about  3  p.m.  (that  was
yesterday)  as  I  was  lookmg  from  my  window  in  the  salon


60


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


with  Mr.  S.,  watching  a  great  funeral  of  one  of  Rome's
best-loved  Cardinals,  I  related  your  ghmpse  into  my  house,
and  I  could  not  help  exclaimuig  :  '  perhaps  Madame  D.
sees  us  now  ...  as  we  are  standing  here  in  our  window.'

"  Let  me  begin  by  answering  bit  by  bit  all  you  say.
I  have  a  dear  httle  vme-covered  terrace,  lookmg  out  into
the  Piazza  di  Spagna,  and  lookmg  also  right  up  to  the
spires  or  rather  towers  of  S.  Truaita  dei  Monti,  with  the
great  obelisk  m  front.  The  afternoon  of  Jan.  27th  I
returned  to  my  home,  after  a  walk  and  [after]  making  a
few  purchases,  at  5  p.m.  I  took  off  my  fur  jacquette,
and  went  at  once  into  my  dming-room  to  see  about  the
dimier-table,  as  three  friends  came  [or,  '  come  ']  at  7  p.m.
to  dine.  I  busied  myself  about  the  table  for  some  time,
then  stepped  on  to  the  terrace  (which  is  so  pretty,  but
opens,  unfortunately,  from  the  kitchen).  I  went  into  the
terrace  at  that  time  to  see  about  our  dessert  for  dinner,
which  I  had  put  there  to  become  cool.  Then  I  went  back
into  the  dining-room,  and  as  the  hanging-lamjD  had  just
been  hghted,  I  ordered  the  maid  to  drop  the  outside
curtams.  She  did  so.  I  remember  that  I  looked  just
then  at  the  clock,  and  it  was  5.35  p.m.  I  had  on  a  black
skirt,  a  black  silk  blouse,  and  a  mauve  tie,  which  twisted
about  my  neck  and  hung  in  two  ends  to  my  waist.  It
looked  to  you  hke  a  mauve  blouse.  Then  I  went  into  our
small  salon  and  took  something  from  the  table.  I  re-
member it  distuactly.  Our  salon  is  very  small ;  there  is
an  upright  j^iano  and  a  writing-table,  on  which  are  j)hotos
and  books  too,  and  a  lot  of  httle  silver  thmgs.  Hermes
(your  photo  to  me)  stands  very  near,  on  another  Httle
table,  quite  near  m  fact.  It  is  all  quite  mysterious.
I  believe  you  have  really  peeped  into  my  house."  .  .  .

[The  letter  concludes  with  a  detailed  description  of  how  the
writer  spends  her  day  ;  the  description  bemg  given  in  response
to  a  request  from  Mrs.  D.  In  the  course  of  it  occur  the
following  phrases]  :

"  You  fairly  startled  me  when  you  tell  me  that  our
acquaintance  was  made  m  just  five  days  !  I  had  never
comited  it,  and  yet  you  are  perfectly  right,  it  was  just


LxxxvT.] Exi)erimental  and  Semi-Experimental  Cases.  61


five  days,  and  made  up  of  bits  of  time  together  and  a
few  conversations.  As  I  remember,  you  and  I  really  never
had  one  moment  actually  by  ourselves.  .  .  .  You  say  truly
that  our  intellectual  friendship  will  have  gone  far  ahead
of  the  personal.  Then  Frencli-readmg  and  my  piano  and
zither  I  brmg  in  when  a  rainy  day  or  spare  moments
offer. Tell  me  of  your  day,  do.  ..."

[At  an  interview  on  \st  May,  1905,  Mrs.  D.  gave  J.  Q.  P.  the
following  information,  mostly  in  ansiver  to  his  questions]  :

At  the  time  of  the  incident  m  question  Mrs.  H.  was  httle
more  than  a  hotel  acquamtance.  They  had  spent  only  6  days
together  at  an  hotel,  and  had  since  corresponded.  ]Mis.  D.
knew  ]\Irs.  H.  Avas  a  widow.  When  she  had  last  seen  her,
Mrs.  H.  was  in  '  sUght  mournmg,'  white  and  black,  Mrs.  D.
thinks.  She  does  not  remember  to  have  seen  her  wearing
mauve  and  black,  or  mauve  at  all.  From  a  subsequent  letter
addressed  to  Mrs.  D.  by  Mrs.  H.  it  appears  that  the  terrace
was  on  a  3rd  or  4th  storey.

The  head  of  Hermes  was  a  gift  to  Mrs.  H.  from  Mrs.  D.

Mrs.  D.'s  note  was  made  on  the  same  evening  as  she  received
the  impression,  and  on  Miss  T.'s  advice.  The  name  of  the
friend — L. — was  Miss  T. Miss  T.  is  now  dead.

Mrs.  D.  told  J.  G.  P.  that  so  far  as  she  was  aware,  Mrs.  H.
did  not  play  the  piano,  and  at  any  rate  she  (Mrs.  D.)  had  no
notion  she  was  musical.  [See,  however,  the  reference  in  Mrs.
H.'s  letter  to  piano  and  zither.]

The  above,  written  on  3rd  May,  1905,  is  an  expanded  version
of  notes  made  at  interview  on  1st  May,  1905.

J.  G.  P.

[Copy  of  letter  addressed  by  Mrs.  C,  then  living  at  Liverpool,
to  her  sister,  Mrs.  D.,  living  at  Athens.  The  English  postmark
shows  the  date  of  year  " — 84,"  and  the  Greek  postmark  the  day
of  month,  viz.  Dec.  10,  i.e.  Dec.  22,  N.S.]  :

Dec.  im  [1884].

"... You  may  imagine  with  what  delight  we  received
your  telegram  [i.e. announcing  birth  of  first  baby].  .  .  .


62


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


You  must  know  a  very  funny  thing  happened  to  me,  and
never  agam  pooh-pooh  presentiments. I  told  C.  and  Miss

  and  H.  the  very  next  day,  so  that  they  would  not

say  it  was  my  idea.  On  Thursday  last,  after  having  gone
to  sleep,  I  awoke  suddenly  with  a  sensation  of  some  one
being  in  my  room.  I  sat  up  in  bed  and  I  saw  you
distmctly  on  a  rocking-chair  m  a  flannel  loose  blue
dressing-gown.  You  were  sitting  up  on  the  chair  :  I  mean
not  leaning  back,  but  stoojDmg  and  rocking  yourself  as  if
in  pam.  It  was  so  distinct  that  I  forgot  I  was  not  there,
and  bemg,  I  suppose,  myself  half-asleep,  said,  '  Oh,  J.  has
begun,'  and  was  not  frightened.  Then  you  got  up  and
went  to  the  sofa,  lay  down,  and  then  again  to  the  chair.
I  then  got  so  nervous,  I  got  out  of  bed,  went  and  washed
my  face  Avith  cold  water,  and  got  to  bed  and  went
to  sleep.  But  again  I  awoke  and  da  caiw  the  same  thing.
That  morning  I  told  them  that  I  was  sure  you  had  had
the  baby,  and  was  disappointed  at  not  havmg  any  news.
I  after[wards]  forgot  all  about  it,  but  when  I  heard  you
had  had  labour  pams  on  that  identical  night,  I  am  sure
everything  happened  just  as  I  saw  it,  and  that  when
I  went  to  sleep,  so  did  you.  Is  it  so  ?  Tell  me  exactly
what  you  did  :  if  you  were  up,  and  if  you  sat  on  a
rocking-chair  and  lay  on  the  sofa,  and  if  you  slept  at
intervals.  Lately,  too,  I  have  been  very  very  nervous,
and  that  may  account  for  it,  but  see  you  I  did  as  dis-
tmctly as  possible.

...  I  hope  we  shall  soon  have  news  about  you,  as
I  am  very  anxious  to  hear  particulars.  .  .  ."

[On  May  1,  1905,  Mrs.  D.  told  J.  G.  P.  her  sister  Imew  of
her  aj^proaching  confinement.  The  blue  dressing-gown  had  been
made  a  few  days  before  sj)ecially  for  the  confinement,  and  her
sister  could  not  have  known  about  it.  In  all  resjDects  Mrs.  C.'s
hallucination  corresponded  with  the  real  facts.]

Mr.  Piddington  adds  :

Mrs.  D.  is  a  quite  first-class  witness  ;  a  sensible,  clear-
headed woman,  and  )nost  careful  not  to  overstate  things.
She  has  "  clear  "  dreams  like  those  described  by  Dr.  van


LXXXVI.] Experimental  and  Semi-Experimental  Cases.

Eeden,^  of  which  she  has  for  many  years  kept  a  careful
record,  made  iii  nearly  every,  if  not  in  every,  iiistance  the
day  after  the  dream.  These  records  I  have  read,  and  they
give  one  the  same  favourable  impression  of  her  smcerity
and  honesty  and  exactness  as  does  her  conversation  The
dreams  are  remarkable  rather  for  their  lifehke  character,  in
which  they  are  quite  distinct  from  her  ordinary  dreams,
than  for  their  veridicahty,  but  some  are  veridical,  though
not  evidentially  strong.  In  these  dreams  she  has  long  and
perfectly  rational  conversations  with  dead  friends  and
relations,  whom  in  her  dream  she  knows  to  be  dead.

Mrs.  D.  afterwards  sent  Mr.  Piddington  the  following  state-
ment :

May  26fh,  1905.

According  to  your  expressed  desire  I  write  to  tell  you
that  the  details  of  my  sister's  dream  or  vision,  contained
in  her  letter  of  the  14th  December,  1884,  corresponded
exactly  with  the  facts,  my  daughter  having  been  bom  on
the  30th  of  November  of  the  same  year,  just  as  my  sister
saw  it  happenmg.

From  visual  impressions  we  may  pass  to  cases  of  true
impressions  of  fact  not  externalised  as  hallucinations
received  by  a  percipient  who  was  experimenting.  In  one
of  these  (L.  1164,  Journal,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  130)  the  per-
cipient has  through  a  number  of  years  sought  for  impres-
sions concerning  persons  in  her  company,  usually  with
contact.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  fuller  records  have
not  been  preserved.  Several  of  the  instances  mentioned
were,  however,  recorded  within  the  prescribed  five  years
of  their  occurrence,  and  some  are  corroborated.  One
reason  for  giving  the  case  in  full  is  the  percipient's
interesting  remarks  about  the  way  she  gets  the  impressions
— partly  by  observation  and  inference  and  partly  appa-
rently by  telepathy,  while  in  the  latter  case  seemingly
irrelevant  association  of  ideas  appears  sometimes  to  play
a  curious  part.  The  case  was  sent  to  Dr.  Hodgson,  and
came  to  us  from  the  American  Branch  of  the  Society.

1  See  Proceeding.-;,  .S.P.i?.,  Vol.  X\'II.,  pp.  8(j  and  112.


64  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivich.  .  [part

(L.  1164.)

Letter  from.  Mr.  G.  V.  Chase.

Neosho,  Mo.,  Mar.  Ith,  1900.
My  dear  Dr.  Hodgson, — Anent  my  letter  of  yesterday  let
me  giA^e  you  a  Little  experience — my  first — with  telepathy
of  the  hving.

Some  seven  or  eight  years  ago  my  wife's  sister,  who  is
the  wife  of  one  of  the  editors  of  the  ' '  San  Francisco  Call  ' '
(newspaper)  had  an  attack  of  La  Grippe.  Soon  after  her
recovery  she  spontaneously  developed  this  faculty  in  a
wonderful  degree,  and  in  nearly  every  letter  to  her  sister
(my  wife)  she  recounted  some  of  her  experiences.  We  were
all  avowed  Agnostics.  In  August  of  1895  I  had  occasion
to  visit  San  Francisco,  and  was  of  course  the  guest  of
Mrs.  Adam,  my  sister-in-law,  and  her  husband.  Soon  after
my  arrival  I  alluded  to  the  subject  and  asked  her  to  try
to  read  7ny  mind.  She  consented,  and,  taking  my  left
hand  m  her  left,  she  explained  that  under  these  conditions
she  had  the  best  success,  making  her  mmd  as  complete  a
blank  as  it  was  possible.  To  this  latter  end  she  toyed
aimlessly  with  a  pack  of  cards  lying  in  her  lap — and  waited
for  "impressions."  After  some  time  she  announced  that
she  got  absolutely  nothing,  and  said  that  with  some  she
never  had  any  success.  I  remarked  that  perha])s  it  was
because  I  was  not  thinking  of  anything  persistently  or
deeply.  She  replied  by  telling  me  to  thmk  of  some
occurrence  of  recent  date — say  some  man  I  had  met — his
name  and  features.  I  thought  of  a  gentleman  I  had  met
the  morning  before  on  the  platform  at  Bakersfield  as  the
train  was  changing  engines.  He  stepped  up  to  me,
accosting  me  by  name  and  said  :  "  You  don't  remember
me,  do  you  ?  "  I  confessed  that  I  did  not.  He  said,
"  My  name  is  Harris,"  and  reminded  me  that  some  years
ago  when  I  was  Aide-de-Camp  to  Gen.  Howard,  he  came
to  our  Headquarters  in  S.  F.  with  a  letter  of  introduction
from  my  brother — and  that  I  gave  him  a  pass  on  the
Government  steamer  "  M'Dowall  "  for  a  trip  about  the  bay.
Even  then  I  could  nob  recall  him.  He  told  me  he  was
going  up  to  Grass  Valley  to  look  after  some  mining
interests  in  a  few  days  and  hoped  to  see  me  in  S.  F.


Lxxxvi.] ExjMrimental  and  Semi- Experimental  Cases.  65

Well,  I  thought  of  this  man.  Presently  Mrs.  A.  said,
"  His  name  is  of  two  syllables — accented  on  the  first  " —
and  then  she  asked  me  to  signify  assent  if  it  was  true —
as  it  seemed  to  help  her.  I  therefore  said  "Yes."  After
perhaps  ten  seconds  she  said,  "  It  is  a  name  that  sounds
hke  '  Parish,'  "  but,  she  added  quickly,  "  That's  not  it  " —
a  sUght  pause — "  It  is  Harris."  I,  much  astonished,  said
it  was — when  she  added,  "  And  his  initials  are  '  C.  H.,'  "
or  whatever  they  were  (I  have  now  forgotten).  I  said
that  I  did  not  loiow  what  his  mitials  were.  Then  she
began  to  describe  the  appearance  of  Mr.  Harris,  I  assenting
as  she  went  on,  and  her  description  was  as  accurate  as
I  could  have  given.  A  day  or  so  afterwards  she  and
I  were  going  across  the  Bay  to  Berkeley  to  make  a  call,
and  arrived  at  the  ferry  depot  just  too  late  to  catch  the
boat,  and  had  to  wait  for  the  next  one.  As  Ave  sat  in
the  waitmg-room  I  saw  this  ]\Ii\  Harris  enter,  and  at  once
went  to  him,  shook  hands,  and  brought  him  over  and
introduced  him  to  my  sister.  I  told  him  of  the  matter
wherem  his  name  figured  ;  and  before  relathig  that  peivt
concemmg  his  initials,  I  suddenly  said,  By  the  way,
Mr.  Harris,  what  are  your  initials  ?  "  He  said  "  C.  H.,"
or  whatever  they  were,  but  the  same  ones  given  by  Mi's.  A.
It  is  of  course  possible  and  probable  that  his  initials  were
upon  the  letter  of  mtroduction,  but  they  were  certamly
gone  from  my  conscious  memory. Another  instance  :

Mr.  Adam  is  an  Englishman,  and  generally  meets  most  of
his  countrjmien  of  note  who  pass  through  S[an]  F[rancisco],
and  sometimes  brings  them  home.  One  (not  sure  which)
evenmg  at  Mrs.  A.'s  "  At  Home  "  quite  a  number  filled  her
parlour,  and  among  them  a  young  Enghshman — a  stranger
Mr.  A.  had  picked  up  somewhere.  The  conversation
turned  upon  the  subject  of  telepathy,  and  this  yomig  man
expressed  much  doubt  of  its  reality,  but  begged  Mrs.  A.  to
"  see  if  she  could  get  anything  "  for  him.  His  hostess
good-naturedly  assented,  prefacing  the  attempt  with  the
remark  that  she  often  failed.  Takmg  his  hand — many  of
the  company  gathermg  about — after  a  moment  she  said,
"  I  get  the  impression  that  you  sold  a  lot  to-day  to  a
man,  by  the  name  of  O'Brien,  for  8000  doUars." "  Oh,"


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


he  laughed,  "  you  are  away  off,  for  I.  never  owned  a  lot,
not  even  one  in  a  graveyard  ;  if  I  did,  I  think  sometimes
I'd  go  and  occupy  it."  "Well,"  she  said,  "that's  the
impression  I  get."  A  lady  who  was  sitting  some  eight
feet  from  Mrs.  Adam  arose  quickly  and  said,  "  That's  the
queerest  thing  that  ever  happened  to  me.  /  sold  a  lot
to-day  to  a  man  by  the  name  of  O'Brien  for  eight
thousand  dollars."  The  faculty,  whatever  it  is,  apparently
hke  other  forces,  acts  or  proceeds  along  the  line  of  least
resistance,"  and  must  therefore  be  hke  them,  natural,  and
probably  vibratory  in  its  nature.  This  did  not  occur  in
my  presence,  but  several  others  have.  Mrs.  Adam  no
doubt  could  furnish  corroboration  if  addressed  at  1449  Clay
Street,  S.  F.,  Cal.

She  possesses  the  faculty  of  pre-cognition  to  a  wonderful
degree.  She  is  not  a  spiritualist,  quite  the  reverse  ;  is
intensely  prejudiced  against  the  theory,  or  used  to  be  ;
I  have  not  seen  her  for  two  years.

G.  V.  Chase.

From  Mrs.  Adam  to  Dr.  Hodgson.
CoLASi,  Philippine  Islands,  August  I5th,  1902.

Dear  Doctor, — As  you  desire  some  record  of  my  tele-
pathic experiences  and  my  own  views  as  to  their  source,
I  take  pleasure  in  sending  you  the  following  account  which
I  gathered  from  old  diaries.  I  greatly  regret  that  more
complete  records  have  not  been  kept.

In  February,  1893,  the  Olympic  Athletic  Club  of  San
Francisco  gave  a  fete  for  the  benefit  of  its  treasury,  and
I  was  asked  to  take  charge  of  Sybil's  booth.  I  had  often
read  character  from  physiognomy  and  tricks  of  manner
common  to  certain  types,  but  prior  to  this  I  had  never
tried  telepathy.

After  the  first  evening  in  the  booth  I  was  walking  home
with  a  Britisher  named  Gadsden  (now  dead).  As  we
walked  along  he  said,  "  You  don't  really  think  you  can
tell  anything,  do  you  ?  "  I  rephed  that  I  claimed  to  have
no  occult  gift  whatever.  He  said,  "  No  one  in  this  city
or  m America, for  that  matter, Itnows my  birth-iDlace.


LXXXVI.] Experimental  and  Semi-Experimental  Cases.  67


Could  you  tell  me  that,  I  would  believe  in  telepathic
communication. "

After  a  short  silence  (during  which  I  was  holding  his
arm)  I  said,  "  Bon  church  in  the  Isle  of  Wight  comes  to
me."  My  companion  seemed  much  agitated,  and  said
with  surprise,  "  You  are  right,  and  now  I  am  convinced
that  you  have  some  peculiar  power."

"'Well,"  I  rephed,  "I  thought  of  Ventnor  first,  so  you
see  I  was  only  guessing."

"  Still  more  wonderful,"  said  Gadsden,  "  for  I  was  born
ten  miles  ^  from  the  coast  midway  between  Bonchurch
and  Ventnor.  I  chose  the  question  as  being  one  impossible
for  you  to  answer  miless  you  could  read  my  mind."

Now,  I  look  on  that  as  a  good  case  of  pure  mmd-
reading.  I  took  courage  from  this  experience,  and  durmg
the  rest  of  the  fete  I  mtrepidly  read  the  past  and  future  of
those  who  came  to  my  booth,  and  often  with  startlmg
success,  which  I  attribute,  in  part,  to  my  own  self-assur-
ance.

Since  1893  I  have  told  thousands  of  "  fortmies  "  by
impressions,  and  probably  been  successful  Avith  seventy-five
out  of  a  hundred.  The  greater  number  of  trials  have  been
wdth  contact,  though  trials  mthout  contact,  while  on  the
whole  not  so  successful,  have  sometimes  given  strildng
results.

Two  years  ago,  at  an  evenmg  at  home,  I  was  trying  to
get  telepathic  results  for  one  of  my  guests.  A  strange
lady,  whom  one  of  my  friends  had  brought  Avith  her,  was
sitting  behmd  me.  I  told  the  gentlenian  whose  mmd  I
was  trying  to  read,  that  he  had  that  day  sold  a  piece  of
land  to  a  man  named  O'Brien.  He  rephed  that  I  was
wrong,  as  he  had  no  land  to  sell.  The  stranger  (a  lady
from  Chicago  whom  I  had  never  met  before)  said,  "  That
is  very  strange,  for  I  sold  a  piece  of  land  to-day  to  a  man
named  O'Brien."

There  was  m  this  case  no  personal  contact.

One  day  during  the  Spanish-American  war,  my  nephew,
Mr.  Chase,  and  I  were  watching  the  departure  of  some

[There  must,  I  think,  be  some  mistake  here  as  Bonchurch  and
Ventnor  are  within  a  mile  or  two  of  each  other,  E.M.S.]


68


Mrs.  Heyiry  Sidgwick.


[part


troops  for  the  front  from  the  steps  of  a  private  residence.
Just  below  us  sat  a  Httle  woman  with  a  faded  shawl  over
her  shoulders.  I  had  a  strong  impression  about  her,  and
told  my  nephew  to  ask  her  if  her  name  was  not  Smith,
and  if  she  was  not  born  m  Dumfries,  Scotland.  Mr.  Chase
asked  her  name  and  the  place  of  her  birth,  to  which  she
answered,  "Mary  Smith,  and  I  was  bom  in  Dumfries."

There  was  no  contact  in  this  case,  but  in  the  following
the  young  woman  was  brushing  my  hair  at  the  time.

I  was  once  visitmg  a  family  named  Randall,  at  Hustis-
ford,  Wis.,  and  was  rather  attracted  to  a  pretty  servant
girl  who  used  to  help  me  with  my  hair.  One  day  while  '
she  was  with  me  I  had  a  strong  impression  concerning  her,
and  asked  her  if  her  grandfather  was  not  killed  M'hile
crossing  a  river.  She  said  she  thought  not,  at  least  she
had  never  heard  of  it.  That  night  she  went  home  to  her
mother  (the  daughter  of  a  German  pioneer),  returning  the
next  day  very  much  excited,  and  saying  that  her  mother
had  told  her  it  was  true  ;  that  her  grandfather  had  been
lulled  by  the  Indians  while  crossing  the  river  with  a
boat-load  of  skins.  The  girl  had  no  doubt  heard  the
story  in  her  childhood,  but  had  forgotten  it.

I  have  often  turned  to  travelling  companions  and  told
them  the  month  and  place  of  their  birth  and  have  gener-
ally succeeded  in  gettmg  their  names.  But  in  getting
names  I  usually  begin  with  the  number  of  syllables,  place
the  accent,  get  the  initials,  and  then  the  M'hole  name.
This  mode  of  procedure  would  lay  me  open  to  the  charge
of  "  fishing,"  and  my  owix  experience  has  shown  me  that
where  the  "  subject  "  was  naturally  very  secretive,  I  have
depended  upon  clues  received  m  this  way.  With  a  good
"  subject  "  however  this  is  not  necessary,  and  the  name
generally  comes  to  me  immediately.

In  1897  I  was  introduced  to  a  gentleman  at  the  Savoy
Hotel  in  San  Francisco.  His  wife  wished  me  to  try  and
get  his  middle  name.  Upon  taking  his  hand  and  closing
my  eyes  I  saw  a  large  P  and  thought  of  an  old  friend
whose  name  was  Pettigrew.  I  told  the  gentleman  that
his  middle  name  was  Pettigrew,  and  was  not  surprised  to
have  my  guess  confirmed. It  is  an  interesting  fact  that


Lxxxvi.] Experimental  and  Semi-Experimental  Cases.  69

the  names  of  friends  often  helj)  me  to  get  the  names  of
strangers.

A  few  weeks  ago  the  local  telegraph  operator  asked  me
to  tell  him  the  names  of  his  father  and  mother.  The
operator's  name  is  Patteson.  I  took  his  hand,  and
immediately  thought  of  a  family  of  Pattersons  whom  I  had
known  in  girlhood.  The  head  of  the  house  was  named
WilUam  and  his  wife  was  named  Jane.  I  accordingly  told
the  operator  that  his  father's  name  was  William  and  his
mother's  name  was  either  Jane  or  Jenney,  to  which  he
assented.  (I  add  his  testimony  below.)  These  coin-
cidences are  of  so  frequent  an  occurrence  that  they  have
ceased  to  astonish  me.

As  to  the  sources  of  my  impressions,  I  will  say  that
I  fully  believe  telepathy  accounts  for  many  but  not  all.
I  find  that  so  constant  a  practice  has  developed  my  powers
of  observation  and  induction  so  that  I  have  grown  to
depend  upon  them  more  and  more.  Reading  of  mdividual
character  dra^vn  from  a  general  Itnowledge  of  the  type
represented  has  always  been  a  great  aid  to  me.  Moreover
I  beheve  that  the  "  fishing  "  process  may  become  so
subtile  and  so  habitual,  that,  coupled  mth  a  good  observa-
tion and  powers  of  rapid  induction,  it  may  be  used
unconsciously.  And  I  have  found  that  the  majority  of
people  are  obhvious  of  those  slight  clues  which  they
invariably  give  me.

A  middle-aged  woman,  having  a  South  German  accent,
came  to  me  at  a  Church  Fair  where  I  had  a  booth.
I  noticed  that  she  looked  like  a  Luxemberg  woman  I  had
kno^vn  in  Europe,  that  she  smelled  sUghtly  of  carbohc  acid,
and  that  she  had  the  assured  air  of  one  who  earns  her
Uving.  I  also  noted  the  mevitable  marks  of  worry  on  her
comitenance.

I  told  her  that  she  was  born  m  Luxemberg,  was  a
widow,  a  professional  supportmg  two  daughters,  one  an
invalid,  and  that  she  had  been  brought  up  in  the  Catholic
faith,  to  all  of  which  she  gave  a  wondering  assent.  Why
she  should  have  had  two  children  instead  of  three  I  don't
know,  but  all  the  rest  was  arrived  at  by  observation  and
induction.


70


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


A  short  time  prior  to  Feb.  1893  I  had  some  heart
trouble,  but  with  that  exception  I  have  always  had  the
best  of  health.  When  a  girl  I  was  often  followed  on  the
street  by  both  men  and  women  who  later  told  me  that
they  could  not  help  it.  And  once  at  a  theatre  I  was
admiring  a  lady's  gown  through  my  opera  glasses.  A  few
moments  later  the  lady  in  question  came  to  where  I  was
seated  and  said  that  she  was  dominated  by  an  impulse
that  she  could  not  exislain.

Medora  C.  Adam.

Messrs.  J.  C.  Chase  and  Patteson  corroborate  ]\Irs.  Adam's
account  :

I  remember  the  episode  related  above  by  Mrs.  Adam.
During  the  war  with  Spain  we  were  watching  the  troops
from  a  neighbor's  steps.  My  aunt  told  me  that  she  had
an  impression  regarding  a  woman  just  below  her,  and
thought  her  name  was  Smith  and  that  she  was  born  in
Dumfries.  I  asked  the  woman  referred  to  and  verified  my
aunt's  impression.  I  do  not  thmk  it  possible  that  Mrs.
Adam  could  have  been  acquainted  with  these  facts.

J.  C.  Chase.

Mrs.  Adam  told  me  that  my  father's  name  was  William
and  my  mother's  name  was  Jenney,  which  was  true.  As
Mrs.  Adam  is  a  stranger  to  me  it  would  have  been  im-
possible for  her  to  have  learned  these  facts  in  any  way.

Lewis  W.  Patteson.

The  next  case  (M.Cl.  96,  Journal,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  227),  from
a  member  of  the  Society,  was  experimental,  for  the  perci-
pient tried  to  get  an  impression  about  a  particular  fact,
but  whether  it  was  telepathic  is  doubtful.  That  the
impression  may  have  been  derived  from  knowledge
possessed  subconsciously  by  the  housekeeper,  is  not,
however,  I  think  a  strained  hypothesis.  We  have  several
cases  of  emergence  of  the  whereabouts  of  a  lost  object —
its  position  having  probably  been  subconsciously  noticed
by  the  dreamer  at  the  time  of  the  loss,  but  never  con-
sciously known. (See  Proceedings,  Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  362-404  ;


Lxxxvi.] Experimental  and  Semi-Experimental  Cases.  71


also  Journal,  Vol.  X.,  p.  30,  and  Vol.  IX.  p.  14.)  For  a
case  parallel  to  the  present  one,  in  that  the  finder  was
not  the  loser  of  the  object,  but  one  who  had  helped
hi  a  futile  search  for  it,  see  Proceedings,  Vol.  XI.,  p.  397.
But  though  telepathy  from  the  housekeeper  seems  to  me
a  plausible  hypothesis,  others  may  prefer  to  suppose
either  subconscious  memory  or  clairvoyance  in  the  perci-
pient himself.  Unlike  the  cases  of  finding  lost  objects
just  referred  to,  this  experience  appears  to  have  been  a
waking  one  like  that  recounted.  Proceedings,  Vol.  XL,
p.  116,  which  suggested  the  exj)eriment.

(M.  CI.  96.)

The  Editor  of  the  S.P.R.  Journal.

8,  Jasper  Road,  S.E.,  January  \lth,  1898.

Dear  Sir, — On  the  15th  of  this  month  my  housekeeper
lost  my  latch  key.  She  used  it  m  the  forenoon  of  that
day  for  coming  mto  the  house,  and  missed  it  before  she
had  occasion  to  go  out  again.  Havmg  searched  for  it  in
vain  the  best  part  of  yesterday,  she  came  to  the  conclusion
tliat  when  she  entered  the  house  she  must  have  left  it  in
the  lock  and  that  it  had  been  carried  off  by  a  tramp.
I  looked  myself  for  the  key  in  every  likely  place,  and  in
its  absence  thought  my  housekeeper's  conclusion  was
probably  the  right  one.  Last  night  I  read  the  account  in
Vol.  XI.  Proceedings  S.P.R. ,  of  the  lady  who  lost  a  book
which  was  afterwards  fomid  on  "  the  blue  room  bed."
I  said  to  myseK  "I  wish  I  could  find  that  key."  "Where
is  it  ?  "  I  asked  my  sublimmal  self,  and  the  good
Anthony,  the  patron  saint  of  the  Lost  Property  Office —
put  these  words  mto  my  head  :  "  It's  in  the  kitchen  table
drawer."  At  breakfast  this  mornmg  my  housekeeper  said
she  had  not  slept  all  night  from  worrymg  about  that  latch
key.  I  remarked  that  I  had  dreamt  it  was  in  the  kitchen
table  drawer.  Oh  no,  sir,"  she  replied.  "  I've  looked
there  and  everywhere."  I  then  went  mto  the  kitchen  with
her  and  opened  the  table  drawer — and  there  found  the  key.
My  housekeeper  was  certainly  as  astonished  as  myself,  and
admitted  that  she  hadn't  looked  in  that  particular  drawer


72


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


for  it  as  she  had  never  j^ut  it  there  before.  She  supposes
that  in  the  present  mstance  the  drawer  must  have  been  a
Httle  open  when  she  put  her  parcels  on  the  table,  and  that
the  key  at  the  same  moment  fell  from  her  hand  into  it. —
Yours  faithfully,

D.  H.  Wilson.

We  wrote  to  Mr.  Wilson  for  additional  information  ;  he
replies  as  follows  : —

8,  Jasper  Road,  S.E.,  January  2'ird,  1898.

Dear  Sir, — In  reply  to  your  inquiries  about  the  lost
latch  key  incident  :

1.  I  have  never  put  the  key  m  the  kitchen  table  drawer.

2.  The  key  is  practically  for  the  use  of  the  housekeeper.
There  is  but  one  latch  key,  and  she  keeps  it.  She  is
alone  in  the  house  all  day,  and  requires  it  to  let  herself
in  when  she  goes  shopping.  She  goes  to  her  home  at
night  and  takes  the  key  with  her.  Very  rarely  I  ask  her
to  leave  the  key  with  me  when  she  is  leaving.  On
Saturday  last  she  missed  the  key  when  she  was  on  the
point  of  going  home  at  night.  She  at  once  told  me  of  it.
I  said  "  When  did  you  have  it  last  ?  "  and  she  rephed
"  To  let  myself  in  at  about  midday,  and  haven't  been  out
since,  and  no  one  has  been  into  the  house."  I  said  "It
must  be  m  the  house,  have  a  good  look  for  it  to-morrow."
The  next  day  she  looked  for  it  "  everywhere," — excejiting
of  course  the  right  place.  She  says  she  never  jDuts  it  in
any  drawer.  She  usually  puts  it  m.  her  pocket  ;  occasion-
ally she  puts  it  on  the  kitchen  table  or  dresser  whilst  she
is  disposing  of  her  parcels.  When  she  told  me  on  Sunday
that  she  couldn't  find  the  key,  I  went  mto  the  kitchen  to
look  for  it.  I  cast  my  eyes  over  the  two  dressers,  on  the
hooks  on  theni,  and  on  nails  in  the  walls,  and  on  the
mats  ;  but  I  did  not  look  into  any  drawer.  It  is  very
probable  that  the  housekeeper  had  rested  the  key  on  the
table,  intending  to  place  it  at  once  in  her  j)ocket.  For-
gettmg  it,  she  may  have  later  on  swept  it  uito  the  open
drawer. I  had  httle  doubt  on  Sunday  night  that  the  key


Lxxxvi.] ExjJerimental  and  Semi-Experimental  Cases.  73


had  been  left  in  the  door  at  midday  on  Saturday,  and  had
been  carried  off  by  some  tramp  or  mischievous  boy,  and
so  thought  my  housekeeper. — Yours  faithfully,

D.  H.  Wilson.

I  have  read  Mr.  Wilson's  accomit  of  the  key  and  say  it
is  quite  correct.

(Signed) Jane  Bkiggs.

There  are  two  cases  which  have  not,  I  think,  been
published,  in  which  the  impression  emerges  through  motor
automatism — in  one  of  them  through  table  tilting  and  in
the  other  through  an  ouija  board.  In  the  first  (M.  Aut.
104,  Journal,  Vol.  XIII.,  35)  the  experimenters  were  Mrs.
Salter  (then  Miss  Verrall)  and  the  Rev.  M.  A.  Bayfield.
Other  table  tiltings  of  theirs  have  been  published  in  an
article  by  Mrs.  Verrall  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXVI.,  and  else-
where. In  this  case  a  message  was  tilted  out  apparently
intended  to  announce  the  death  of  Sir  Michael  Foster,
which,  unknown  to  the  experimenters,  had  occurred  some
seventeen  hours  earlier.

(M.  Aut.  104.)
Miss  Verrall  writes  :

5  Selwyn  Gardens,  Cambridge,
February  5th,  1907.

On  Tuesday,  January  29th,  1907,  at  6  p.m.,  Mr.  Bay-
field and  I  endeavoured  to  obtain  automatic  "  messages  "
by  means  of  table-tiltmg,  as  we  have  done  on  several
previous  occasions.  Since  there  was  no  other  person  m
the  room,  we  were  compelled  to  record  the  messages
ourselves,  and  consequently  to  follow  them  word  by  word  ;
we  were  not,  however,  able  for  the  most  jDart  to  form  any
expectation  of  what  the  next  word  was  likely  to  be,  and
our  expectations,  when  we  did  form  any,  proved  as  often
as  not  incorrect.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  the  general
tenour  of  the  messages  can  have  been  little  affected  by  our
conscious  thoughts.  The  following  statement  was  obtamed  ;
the  questions  asked  by  us  are  in  brackets.


llrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[PAET


Fellow  of  lioyal  Society.  (What  was  his  name  ?)  Potter.
(What  about  him  ?)  Died  this  afternoon.  (What  time  ?
4.-JfK  (Can  you  tell  us  more  about  him  ?)  Edditor  (sic)
of  Physiological  Revieio.  (Where  did  he  hve  ?)  London.
(What  address  1)  Belsize  Gardens,  Kensington.  (Was  he
married  ?) Yes. (Had  he  any  children  ?) Yes,  five.

At  the  time  this  message  conveyed  nothing  either  to
Mr.  Bayfield  and  me  or  to  my  father,  Dr.  Verrall,  to  whom
it  was  showi  on  Tuesday  evening  ;  we  considered  it
indeed  of  so  little  value  that  we  discouraged  any  further
communications  on  the  subject,  and  tried  to  direct  the
phenomena  mto  what  we  considered  more  "  evidential  "
channels.

We  thought  no  more  of  the  matter  until  we  heard  on
Wecbxesday  afternoon  of  the  death  of  Sir  Michael  Foster,
which  took  place,  as  we  learnt  by  subsequent  enquiry,
early  in  the  morning  of  Tuesday,  January  29th.  It  was
not,  however,  publicly  announced  until  Wechiesday,  and
on  Tuesday  was  knoAvn  in  Canibridge  only  to  a  very
small  number  of  people,  apparently  four.  That  the  news
did  not  spread  is  clearly  shown  by  the  fact  that  it  did
not  appear  h\  any  paj^er  until  Wednesday  afternoon.  The
names  of  those  who  are  known  to  have  received  the  news
on  Tuesday  have  been  told  to  us,  and  it  apj)ears  certain  I
that  neither  Mr.  Bayfield  nor  I  can  have  come  into  any
sort  of  contact  with  them  in  the  course  of  that  day.  If
that  be  so,  the  "message"  obtained  by  us,  unless  it  is
to  be  regarded  as  a  mere  coincidence,  must  have  been
obtamed  by  some  other  than  the  normally  recognised
means  of  communication.

With  regard  to  the  question  of  coincidence,  it  may  be
noted  that — settuig  aside  for  the  moment  details  given
in  reply  to  leaditig  questions,  which  will  be  considered
later — our  message  can  be  stated  thus  :  A  Fellow  of  the
Royal  Society  (a),  by  name  Potter  (6),  and  Editor  of
the  Physiological  llenieio  (c),  has  died  this  afternoon  (d).
Of  these  statements,  as  applied  to  Sir  Michael  Foster,
(a)  is  correct  ;  (c)  is  also  correct,  except  for  the  discre-
pancyj .  between ;^ri?eyie?«  and  Journal.  "Sir  M.  Foster
founded and edited the Journal of Physiology.''  (See


Lxxxvi.] Experimental  and  Semi-Experimental  Cases  75

obituary  notice  iii  the  Times  of  -Jan.  31.)  (6)  is  not
correct,  but  tliere  is  a  close  resemblance  between  the
two  names,  four  out  of  the  whole  six  letters  bemg  right
and  m  the  right  place.  The  description  (c)  is  distuictive  ;
there  are  only  two  people  to  whom  it  could  up  to  the
present  ever  have  been  apjihed.  Sir  M.  Foster  and  the
present  editor,  Professor  J.  N.  Langley,  whose  name,  it
will  be  seen,  does  not  bear  the  least  resemblance  to
"Potter."  {a),  (6),  and  (c)  combuied  would  appear  there-
fore to  pomt  to  one  man  only.  Sir  M.  Foster,  who  is
stated  to  have  died  on  Tuesday  afternoon  {d),  and  died
as  a  fact  on  Tuesday  morning.

The  further  details  given,  such  as  the  hour  and  place
of  death,  are  almost  all  mcorrect,  but  it  should  be  noticed
that  they  were  given  in  reply  to  leadmg  questions,  and
it  is  my  impression,  based  on  previous  experience,  that
m  the  case  of  automatic  messages  statements  so  obtained
are  seldom  trustworthy.  For  instance,  43  Belsize  Eoad,
Hampstead,  is,  as  I  afterwards  remembered,  an  address
Avith  which  I  was  once  famihar  •  the  address  given  m  the
message  of  January  29th  is  evidently  a  variation  on
this.  On  the  other  hand,  the  three  statements  numbered
above  (a),  (c),  {d),  were  given  either  spontaneously  or  in
answer  to  questions  so  vague  as  to  alford  practically  no
guidance  or  restriction  to  the  answers,  [b) — a  partially
correct  answer — was,  I  thmk,  given  in  reply  to  a  definite
question  ;  but  on  this  point  IVIr.  Bayfield's  recollections
dilfer  from  muie  ;  he  thmks  that  the  first  question  asked
was  "  What  about  him  1  "

Mr.  Bayfield  and  I  have  sat  for  automatic  phenomena
of  this  kuad  on  17  occasions.  This  is  the  only  time  that
we  have  produced  a  statement  that  some  one  had  recently
died.  Helen  de  G.  Vereall.

Statements  follow  in  the  Journal  as  to  what  Miss
Verrall  and  Mr.  Bayfield  were  doing  during  the  earlier
part  of  the  day  when  tlie  message  was  received,  showing
that  they  had  had  no  opportunity  of  hearing  the  news
by  normal  means.  Also  particulars  about  the  death  and
when it was known at Cambridge and a transcript  of


76


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


the  note  made  at  the  time  of  the  whole  message  tilted
by  the  table,  are  given. I  omit  these  for  brevity.

It  is  to  be  noted  that  in  this  case  the  "  message  "
was  received  by  persons  who  had  no  special  personal
interest  in  it,  beyond  that  of  any  one  connected  with
the  University  in  which  Sir  Michael  Foster  had  for  some
thirty-five  years  played  so  prominent  a  part.  It  belongs
therefore  to  a  class  of  cases  of  which  other  instances
will  be  found  below  among  spontaneous  cases,  where
it  is  diificult  to  point  to  a  particular  agent  (see  below
pp.  344  et  seq.).

In  the  Ouija  board  case,  the  communicator  apparently
purported  to  be  the  dead  son  of  one  of  the  three  experi-  1
menters,  and  the  "  message  "  conveyed  a  trivial  fact
about  a  living  son  which  was  both  unknown  to,  and
unlikely  to  be  guessed  by,  the  sitters  (M.  Aut.  105,
Journal,  Vol.  XIII.,  pp.  211-217).  The  case  came  to  us
from  the  late  American  Branch  of  the  Society,  having
been  left  among  Dr.  Hodgson's  papers.  I  abbreviate
the  narrative  considerably.

(M.  Aut.  105.)

Mrs.  Booth  writing  on  SejDtember  11,  1896,  recounts  how
she  and  a  friend,  Miss  Loop,  left  Gi'eat  Barrmgton  on  June  16
of  that  year  to  stay  -with  a  friend,  Mrs.  Orcutt,  at  a  place
about  seven  hours'  journey  away.  Mrs.  Orcutt  had  been
very  kind  to  Mrs.  Booth's  dead  son  Le  Roy  in  his  last  ilhicss,
but  tlie  ladies  had  apparently  no  conscious  thought  of  com-
niunication  from  him  wlicn  on  the  evening  of  June  18  they
sat  tlown  to  amuse  themselves  with  the  Ouija  board.  Mrs.
Orcutt  and  Miss  Loop  had  their  hands  on  the  board,  which
at  once  moved  rapidly,  pointing  to  letters,  but  apparently
at  random  and  so  fast  that  they  could  not  follow  it.  How-
ever, Mrs.  Booth  got  a  pencil  and  paper  and  put  down  the
letters  indicated  as  well  as  she  could,  but  without  deciphering
what  was  said  till  the  end  of  the  first  paragraph.  At  that
pomt  Miss  Loop  wished  to  stop,  but  Mrs.  Orcutt  caught
her  name  and  thought  somethmg  might  be  coming. So  they


Lxxxvi.] Experimental  and  Semi-Experimental  Cases.  11


started  again,  and  then  caught  the  words  of  the  last  paragraph
as  they  came  out.  The  following  is  a  copy  of  what  Mrs.
Booth  noted  :

Yes -  GUIDE  - u-s-e-jw  i-fc-h|-e-f-e-r-e-
y  I  e-f-w-l-i  -  (m)  -  s-  f-  h-  a-  r-  l-  e-  s-  c-  bo-o
-t-h-i-s-j-ii-s-t-gi-v-e-n-p-i-tt-s-f-i
-e-l-d-a-i-s-i-t-d-i-d-y-o-u-k-n-o-w
-i  -  t - o  r -n-o-t -i-f -y-o-u-w-a-n-t-t-o-
y  -  (to)  -r-o-y-a-m-p-u-t-o-rrc-u-t-t

Roy  I  i-s  I  -  d-  e-  a-  d |  -h-e  |  -  i-  s  |-g-l-a-d |
-y-o-u|-a-r-e|-li-e-r-e|-w-i-t-h|-M-r-s
-o-r-c-u-t-t|-l|-wi-s~h|-i- | c-o-u-l-d|
b-e|-t-h-e-r-e|-t-oo-|w-i-t-h-|y-o-u-

She  tells  us  that  a  letter  in  brackets  means  that  it  was
doubtful.  If  we  adopt  her  suggestion  that  "  in  the  word
Charles,  the  c,  which  should  come  first,  is  placed  after  the
harles — as  if  it  were  a  correction  "  we  fiiid  m  the  middle  of
the  first  incoherent  paragraph,

"  Charles  Booth  is  just  given  Pittsfield  a  [v]isit,  did  you
know  it  or  not."

None  of  the  ladies  had  any  reason  to  think  that  Mrs.  Booth's
son  Charles,  who  had  remained  at  home  at  Great  Barrington,
would  have  \'isited  Pittsfield,  and  they  thought  it  "  not  at
all  hkely  to  be  true."  However,  on  returning  home  a  few
days  later  Mrs.  Booth  foimd  that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  Mr.
Charles  Booth  had  been  over  to  Pittsfield  on  business  on  the
afternoon  of  Monday,  Jmie  16,  after  she  left  home.

In  reply  to  Dr.  Hodgson's  request,  the  written  corroboration
of  Mrs.  Orcutt,  Miss  Loop,  and  Mr.  Booth  was  given.

This  concludes  the  semi-experimental  telepathic  cases  in
which  the  percipient  is  the  experimenter.

§  3. Semi-experimental  Cases. Agent  Experimenting.

Of  cases  in  which  the  agent  experiments  we  have  in
the  collection  six — two  in  which  the  agent  appears
to  the  percipient,  and  four  in  which  the  agent  influences
the  percipient  from  a  distance.  Of  the  four  latter,  one
is  a  case  of  hypnotisation  at  a  distance,  described  in  the


78


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


coiirse  of  an  article  by  Professor  Alexander  of  Rio  de
Janeiro,  entitled  "  Supernormal  Phenomena  observed  during
Hypnotic  Treatment  by  Dr.  Alfredo  Barcellos  of  Rio
de  Janeiro."  Dr.  Barcellos  was  in  the  habit  of  vising
hypnotism  for  curative  purposes,  and  besides  the  hypno-
tisation  of  his  patient  E.  from  a  distance,  the  article
includes  instances  of  telepathic  clairvoyance  and  pre-
monition exhibited  by  another  patient.  I  will  here
content  myself  with  referring  to  the  article,  which  is
printed  in  the  Journal,  Vol.  VIII.,  pp.  88-95  and  99-116.
The  case  of  hypnotisation  at  a  distance  will  be  found
in  the  first  part  of  the  article,  with  some  confirmatory
evidence  in  the  second  part.

I  will  quote  next  two  experiments  in  which  a  lady
succeeded  in  telepathically  inducing  a  friend  to  come
to  her.  They  are  included  under  L.  996,  Journal,  Vol.
VII.,  p.  193,  and  came  to  us  through  the  late  American
Branch  of  tlic  Society.  It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that
no  note  was  made  of  either  experiment  before  its  success
was  known.

(L.  996.)
The  agent,  Mrs.  Lee,  Asrites  :

Shrewsbury,  Mass.,  December  lih,  1891.

An  interesting  exjoeriment  I  tried  last  winter.  A  friend
of  sensitive  temperament  occupied  a  room  (in  a  foreign
country)  next  my  own.  The  connecting  door  between  the
two  was  closed.  The  lady  was  witing  (as  she  afterwards
told  me).  Wishing  to  see  her,  I  intended  to  go  to  her,
but  as  I  was  comfortably  resting  on  the  lounge,  I  met
the  recalcitrant  disposition  to  move  with  the  mental
question,  "  How  long  will  we  be  slaves  to  matter,  time
and  space  ?  "  Whereupon  it  occurred  to  me  to  exert  a
strong  mental  effort  instead  of  a  sUght  physical  one.  In
about  five  minutes  it  proved  successful !  I  heard  steps
approaching  the  door.  To  my  summons  in  response  to
her  rap,  she  opened  the  door,  "  Did  you  call  me  ?  I  was
mider the impression that you did, but was not  sure


ixxxvi.J Experimental  and  Semi-Experimental  Cases.  79


I  heard  you."  I  explained.  My  friend  replied  that  she
was  conscious  of  me  a  moment  or  two  before  she  put
down  her  pen  to  come  to  me.

Mary  Holland  Lee.

Li  answer  to  Dr.  Hodgson's  request  for  a  corroborative
statement  from  the  lady  on  whom  the  experiment  was  tried,
Mrs.  Lee  wrote  :

August  22nd,  1893.

The  answer  to  your  letter  I  delayed  until  I  heard  from
IVIiss  S.  I  wrote  to  her  to  make  a  statement  of  the
telepathic  experiment  between  us  when  at  Mentone,  France.
I  enclose  her  letter.

The  letter  enclosed  was  as  follows  :

Dear  Mrs.  Lee, — I  do  remember  the  time  of  which
you  speak,  when  we  were  in  Mentone,  and  you  drew  me
to  you  by  a  httle  mental  telepathy.  I  think  I  was
writing  to  E.  D.  in  my  room,  which  adjoined  yours.
Suddenly  my  train  of  thought  was  broken  into  by  a
feeling  that  I  must  go  to  you.  I  felt  that  you  needed
me  for  something,  without  stopping  to  think  what  that
something  might  be.  But  I  Imew  that  some  mvisible
power  had  hold  of  me,  callmg  me.  I  then  stepped  to
your  door,  and  asked  you  if  you  had  spoken  or  if  you
wanted  anything,  and  you  immediately  told  me  that  it
was  but  an  experiment  on  your  part  to  prove  the  power
of  mmd  over  matter.  It  was  certainly  successfid  that
time  and  has  been  at  other  times,  when  we  have  been
separated  by  miles  of  distance.

(Signed) E S  ,  [full  name  given].

No  details  were  given  as  to  the  other  experiments  referred
to  by  Miss  S.,  but  a  similar  experiment  tried  by  Mrs.  Lee
in  the  case  of  another  friend,  Mrs.  Chenoweth,  was  related
by  the  latter  in  the  Medico-Legal  Journal,  Vol.  L,  No.  3,
Jmie,  1893,  as  follows  :

A  lady  whom  I  shall  call  Mrs.  L.,  my  friend  since  my
own  girlhood,  and,  with  myself,  a  member  of  the  American


80


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


Branch  of  the  London  Society  for  Psychical  Research,
had  a  trifimg  experiment  in  telepathy  with  me  in  the
month  of  August,  1892,  which  was  so  simple  and  successful
that  it  seems  worth  telhng.

We  spent  the  summer  in  a  charming  New  England
village  ;  I  living  near  the  top  of  a  long  hill,  and  she  half
way  down,  the  houses  of  both  facing  ujion  the  one  broad
avenue  which  makes  the  main  street  of  the  village.

We  saw  one  another  daily,  but  on  the  day  in  August
above  referred  to,  the  date  of  which  is  mislaid,  we  had
passed  hours  together,  and  parted  near  six  o'clock  iii  the
afternoon,  when  I  went  home  to  tea,  averring  laughmgly
at  parting  that  it  could  not  be  promised  when  T  should
come  again,  since  we  could  surely  think  of  nothing  more
to  say  to  one  another  for  days.

At  nine  o'clock  that  evenmg  I  found  my  thoughts  turn-
ing \\ith  strange  persistence  toward  Mrs.  L.  It  seemed
to  me  that  she  was  in  need  of  me,  and  I  felt  impelled  to
go  to  her.  In  vain  I  argued  that  if  it  were  a  matter
of  importance  she  would  come  to  me,  or  send  for  me.
The  silent  call  continued.

After  the  laj^se  of  haH-an-hour  I  turned  to  a  friend,
and  asked  if  she  felt  able  to  waUt  down  to  Mrs.  L.'s
with  me,  reluctantly  askuig,  as  she  Avas  suffering  somewhat
from  a  lame  foot.  She  was  mcredulous,  and  rejjeated
to  me  my  own  assertion  that  I  probably  should  not  go
do\\'n  there  agam  withm  a  week.  At  last  I  said  emphati-
call3^  "  It  is,  indeed,  very  strange,  but  I  can  no  longer
resist  the  mcLuiation  to  go  and  see  if  anything  is  wrong
with  m-s.  L."

My  friend  accompanied  me,  with  some  effort.  It  was
now  half-past  nine  o'clock.  We  found  Mrs.  L.  sitting
on  the  piazza  alone,  in  the  moonlight.

She  cried  out  to  me  delightedly  upon  hearing  my
footsteps  ;  "I  have  spent  full  half-an-hour  callmg  to  you
to  come."  C.  Van  D.  Chenoweth.

Mrs.  Lee  adds  :


This  uistance  occurred  as  herein  stated,  verbatim  et
lilemiini.  Mrs.  Mary  Holland  Lee.


Lxxxvi.] Experimental  and  Semi-Experimental  Cases.  81


The  lady  who  accompanied  Mrs. Chenoweth  to  ]\'Ii-s.  Lee's
house  on  this  occasion,  writes  to  Dr.  Hodgson  :

July  25th,  1894.

I  perfectly  recall  the  cii-cumstance  referred  to  in  the
httle  sketches  sent  you  by  IVIi's.  Chenoweth  and  Mrs.  Lee.
I  Avalked  down  A\dth  Mrs.  Chenoweth  to  IVIrs.  Lee's  house
and  heard  Mrs.  Lee  say  that  she  had  spent  half-an-hour
in  "  wiUing  "  the  visit.

In  connexion  with  these  experiments  of  Mrs.  Lee's  must
be mentioned a "  Diary of Telepathic Impressions  "
printed  in  the  Journal,  Vol.  VII.,  pp.  299-306  and  311-319.
It  is  the  telepathic  diary  for  the  year  1894  of  a  certain
Mrs.  S. It came to us through Dr. Thomas Duke  of
Rugby,  who  was  her  medical  attendant,  and  who  assured
us  that  every  word  she has written  may  be  depended
on. A good many of the impressions are  spontaneous
ones, received  by  Mrs.  S.,  about  what other  people  are
thinking or doing — generally in comiexion with  herself.
But  a  great  many  attempts  by  herself  to  influence  other
people at a distance — especially Dr. Duke — to come  to
her,  or  send  things,  or  do  something,  are  recorded.  These
attempts sometimes failed, as appears from the  diary,
but much more often succeeded. The incidents  are
almost all of a trivial character, and almost any  one
of  the  coincidences,  taken  alone,  might  be  explained  as
the result of chance, or lucky guessing, or  common
associations  of  ideas. The  weight  of  the  record  lies  in
the  great  number  of  coincidences — a  number  which  cer-
tainly seems  far  beyond  what  is  probable  unless  telepathy
was  at  work. One  could  wish  that  more  corroboration
had  been  possilile,  but  there  is  some. I  do  not  reproduce
the  diary  here  because  of  its  length,  but  it  is,  I  think,
a  record  of  very  considerable  importance.

Experiments  in  which  the  agent  appears  to  the  per-
cipient are  of  course  of  great  interest  on  account  of  their
analogy  to  spontaneous  apparitions  at  the  time  of  the  death,
or of a crisis in the liie, of the agent. Accounts  of


82


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


a  few  such  cases  were  printed  in  the  Journal  in  the
'eighties  and  'nineties  (since  then  none  have  been  received
by  the  Society),  bnt  the  best  of  them  are  pubhshed
in  Proceedings  or  the  books  named  above.  The  two
that  remain  are  neither  of  them  very  satisfactorily  re-
corded, while  the  first  also  suffers  from  the  wealmess
that  agent  and  j)ercipient  were  in  the  same  room.  Never-
theless they  are  both  of  considerable  interest  and  worth
quoting.

It  will  be  observed  that  in  the  first  case  (L.  851,
Journal,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  323)  the  agent  did  not  try  to  appear
to  the  percipient  ;  the  aj)parition  was  the  result  of  his
trying  to  make  her  think  of  him.  In  this  it  resembles
the  case  of  Baron  von  Schrenck  Notzing  (see  Journal,
Vol.  III.,  J).  307,  and  Podniore's  book).  The  account  of
the  case  comes  to  us  through  the  late  American  Branch.
I  abbreviate  it  somewhat.

(L.  851.)

The  a;jent,  Mr.  Warner,  wites  :

242  W.  4th  Street,  Cincinnati,
Ohio,  November  14,  1887.

About  three  years  ago,  or  less,  my  brother,  in  his
letter  to  me,  endeavoured  to  interest  me  in  some  pheno-
mena which  had  come  under  his  observation.  .  .  .  My
emjjloymeut  is  that  of  "  book  pressman,"  running  two  large
book  presses  (Adams)  pruitiug  school  books.  The  lady
[Miss  Mallou]  is  one  of  tAvo  female  "feeders"  directly
under  my  charge,  one  feeder  for  each  press.  She  has
held  that  position  for  the  last  four  or  five  years.  She
is  about  forty -five  years  old  and  intelHgent,  right-minded,
and  Idnd-hearted,  morally  above  suspicion.

One  of  the  experiments  which  my  brother  had  suggested
for  me  to  try  to  satisfy  myself  was  to  try  what  the
effect  might  be  of  looking  at  and  thinldng  of  a  person
at  the  same  time.  This  is  the  history  of  the  first  experi.
ment.

Date,  early  March,  1886  ;  time  of  day,  middle  of  fore-
noon : place, press room. Both of my presses  stopped


Lxxxvi.] Experimental  and  Semi-Experimental  Cases.


at  the  time and the  lady  sifctmg  with her  back  turned
toward  me,  at  a  distance  of  15  feet,  myself  engaged  on
the  second  press,  in  inspecting  and  carrying  away  a  heap
of  printed  paper, she  reading  the  fashion column of  a
newspaper (as I afterwards learned). Suddenly  the
idea occurred to me, "Why not try that  experiment
now  ■?  " Instantly I turned toward her,  concentrating
my  look  upon  the  centre  of  the  back  of  her  head  and
mentally calling her first name. I remained in  that
position  for  five  or  six  seconds,  then  turned  to  my  work,
thmking that experiment a failure, as I saw  no  signs
otherwise. Between 25 and 30 minutes (by the  clock)
afterwards, she arose, and coming toward me with  a
hesitating  step  and  a  perplexed  half  smile  on  her  face,
said, "  Warner, were you trying to make me look  at
you a while ago?" "Well, how long ago?" said  I.
"About  half  an  hour  ago,"  said  she. "Perhaps  I  Avas,"
said I. "How did I appear to you?" "  Well,"  said
she,  "  I  wasn't much interested in what I was  reading,
and  all  at  once  the  letters  seemed  to  rmi  togetiier,  and
your form and face appeared in a A\avering,  unsteady
way,  just  to  the  left,  in  front  of  me. You  had  a  smile
on  your  face,  a  piece  of  waste  paper  in  each  hand,  and
your  arm  seemed  to  be  resting  on  a  table  or  somethmg."
This  was  an  equal  surprise  to  both  of  us  at  the  time,
although since then I have verified it Avith  somewhat
similar experiments upon other ladies and  repeatedly
Avith  this  one.

Later  Mr.  Warner  adds  :

The  description  Avhich  Miss  Mallou  gave  of  my  attitude
.  .  Avas  in  most  exact  accord  Avith  the  actual  facts.
Very  many  times  since  then  she  has  actually  seen  me
without  use  of  the  eyes,  while  in  her  vicinity,  and  when
my  attention  Avas  not  specially  turned  toAvards  her  ;  at
other  times,  at  my  will,  she  would  "  sense  "  me  that
I  was  looking  at  her  by  a  perception  as  of  a  flood  of
light  coming  over  her  eyes  ....

In  making  this  experiment  I  only  hoped  to  call  her
attention, by causing her to feel  me or my  iirfluence,


84


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


The  projection  of  my  personal  ap])earance  was  an  equal
astonishment  to  us  both.  ...  In  reply  to  your  question
....  I  have  .  .  .  not,  so  far,  to  my  Imowledge,  succeeded
in  projecting  my  personal  appearance  on  any  other  subject
than  Miss  Mallou.

Miss  Mallou,  having  seen  Mr.  Warner's  account,  writes  on
November  30,  1887  :

I  do  not  think  it  necessary  to  write  more,  only  to  say
that  Avhat  he  has  written  is  correct,  and  I  could  not
explain  more  fully  than  he  has  done.  .  .  .

She  adds  on  December  16,  1887  :

Li  answer  to  your  questions  of  the  8th,  I  can  only
say  I  have  always  tliought  what  I  have  seen  has  been
clairvoyantly.  ...  I  have  alwaj's  (it  seems  to  me)  had
this  ]iower  of  seeing  [hallucinatory  figures],  but  when
I  have  told  things  I  have  seen,  I  have  been  laughed
at  and  told  it  was  my  imagination.  ...  I  think  the
reason  I  did  not  turn  and  look  at  IVIr.  Warner  was,  I
was  annoyed,  I  felt  he  was  looking  at  me,  and  when
I  saw  the  form  come  roimd  from  my  left  side  (I  was
leaning  with  left  arm  on  window  sill)  I  did  not  know
Avliat  to  think  or  do,  so  I  said  to  myself,  "  I  won't  turn,
or  let  him  know  anythuag  about  this,"  but  the  more
I  thought,  I  was  annoyed,  and  to  satisfy  myself  (or,  as
he  says,  woman's  curiosity)  I  asked  him  if  he  had  been
trying  any  experiments  on  me,  and  told  him  why  I
thought  he  had  been.

Lizzie  A.  Mallou.

The  other  similar  case  (L.  1076,  Journal,  Vol.  VII.,
p.  250)  would  probably  have  been  as  good  as  any  we
have  if  only  a  record  had  been  made  of  the  experiences
at  the  time.  As  it  is,  we  depend  on  memory  after
several  years.  We  owe  the  case  to  the  same  Mr.  L.  C.
Powlcs  who  sent  las  the  gorilla  case  (L.  1208)  described
above,  p.  50.  He  was  personally  acquainted  with  all
the  persons  concerned. I  partly  abbreviate  the  account.


Lxxxvi.] Experimental  and  Semi- Experimental  Cases.  85


(L.  1076,)

The  percipient,  Mrs.  E.,  wrote  on  February  12,  1896  :

Though  unable  to  give  the  date  of  these  strange  incidents
which  I  have  experienced,  yet  I  will  try  and  be  as  exact
as  possible  in  my  relation.  I  have  not,  I  think,  forgotten
any  detail,  for  all  is  still  impressed  very  vividly  upon
my  memory.

Mrs.  E.  then  describes  a  disturbed  night  experienced  by
herseK  and  her  daughter  Mrs.  A.,  and  unexplamed  bell  ringing
heard  by  a  maid,  and  continues  :

On  the  Sunday  evening  after  this,  some  friends  were
I  supping  with  me  (my  daughter  had  returned  home),  and
before  we  had  finished  Mr.  Rose  came  in.  He  drew
a  chair  to  the  table  and  my  son  said,  "  Well,  Rose,  what
have  you  been  doing  lately  ?  "  His  reply  startled  me,
for  he  answered,  "  My  last  effort  has  been  trying  to  send
my  '  spook '  here."  I  asked  him  to  explain  what  he
meant  and  then  he  told  me  about  it.  It  was  the  first
time  I  had  lieard  that  such  a  thmg  was  possible,  and
I  then  told  him  of  the  rmging  of  the  bell  on  that  same
evening.

This  subject  was  not  discussed  again  by  us  as  far  as
I  can  recollect,  nor  did  it  impress  me  particularly  ;  and
some  weeks  passed,  when  I  was  struck  down  with  a  bad
attack  of  influenza,  and  again  my  daughter  came  to  nurse  me.

I  had  quite  recovered,  but  had  not  yet  been  out  of
my  room,  but  was  to  go  into  the  drawing-room  next
day.  On  this  particular  night,  my  daughter  had  gone
to  the  theatre  and  my  son  remained  with  me.  He  had
bid  me  good  night  about  half-past  ten  and  gone  to  his
room,  and  I  lay  reading,  when  suddenly  a  strange  creepy
sensation  came  over  me,  and  I  felt  my  eyes  drawn  towards
the  left  hand  side  of  the  room.  I  felt  I  must  look,  and
there  distinct  against  the  curtain  was  a  blue  luminous  mist.

I  could  not  for  some  time  move  my  eyes  away,  and
all  the  time  I  was  really  teiTified,  for  I  thought  it  was
somethmg  uncanny.  I  wished  to  call  my  son,  but  fought
dowii  the  feeling,  knowing  I  should  only  ujiset  him  if
he  thought  I  was  nervous,  and  possibly  they  would  think


86


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwiclc.


[part


I  was  going  to  be  ill  again.  So  I  battled  down  my  fears,
and  making  up  ni}'  mind  it  was  all  imagination,  turned
round  with  my  back  to  this  misty  light  and  continued
my  book.  Soon  the  feehng  of  fear  passed  away ;  but
all  desire  for  sleep  had  also  gone,  and  for  a  long  time  I  lay
reading, — when  again  quite  suddenly  came  the  dread  and
the  feeling  of  awe.

This  time  I  was  impelled  to  cast  my  eyes  doAvnward  to
the  side  of  my  bed,  and  there,  creeping  upwards  towards
me,  was  the  same  blue  lummous  mist.  I  was  too  terrified
to  move,  and  remember  keeping  my  book  straight  up
before  my  face  as  though  to  ward  off  a  blow,  at  the
same  time  exerting  all  my  strength  of  will  and  determina-
tion not  to  be  afraid, — when  suddenly,  as  if  with  a  jerk,
above  the  top  of  my  book  came  the  brow  and  eyes
of  Mr.  Rose.  In  an  mstant  all  fear  left  me.  I  dropped
my  book  with  an  exclamation  not  complimentary,  for
then  I  laiew  that  Mr.  Rose  had  been  trjdng  the  same
thing  again. Li  one  moment  mist  and  face  were  gone.

Next  morning  I  told  my  daughter,  and  she  said  she
had  had  the  same  restless  night  (though  sleeping  in
another  room)  as  when  the  bells  rang  and  we  had  both
felt  as  if  something  uncanny  were  in  the  room.

That  day  Mr.  Rose  came  to  see  me,  and  before  telling
him  anything  of  my  experience,  I  asked  him  what  he
had  been  doing  the  night  before.  His  answer  was,
"  I  went  to  my  room  early  and  concentrated  all  my
thoughts  in  trying  to  send  my  astral  body  here."

I  then  repeated  to  him  what  I  have  written  here,  and
Mr.  Rose  promised  he  would  not  experiment  on  me
again,  as  it  made  me  nervous.

An  independent  account  by  Mrs.  A.  Avritten  about  a  week
earlier  corroborates  the  main  points  in  this  narrative.  Mrs.  A.
thought  the  events  had  occurred  two  or  three  years  ago.

The  agent's  account  of  his  side  of  the  incident  is  contained
in  a  letter  to  Mr.  Powles,  as  follows  :

4  Cromwell  Crescent,  S.W. January  I8th,  1896.

Dear  Mr. Powles, — The evidence I  have to give  in
the case of "  spirit jirojection  " is A^ery little by  itself  ;


Lxxxvi.] Experimental  and  Semi- Experimental  Cases.  87


but  as  you  have  heard  the  story  and  will  have  the
evidence  of  Mrs.  E.  and  Mrs.  A.,  I  shall  confine  myself
to  that  which  comes  withiii  my  own  Imowledge.  As  an
author  (having  written  several  novels)  I  am,  of  course,
somewhat  imaginative,  though  I  inchne  rather  to  the
reahstic  than  to  the  romantic  school.  I  have  also  read
and  taken  much  uiterest  in  so-called  occult  phenomena.
I  should  also  mention  that  I  had  mesmerised  Mjs.  E.
\vith  more  or  less  success  on  several  occasions  before
makmg  the  experiment  I  am  gomg  to  relate.

Having  read  of  cases  of  spirit  projection,  I  resolved,
Avithout  mentioning  the  fact  to  any  one,  to  endeavour
to  send  my  astral  body  to  Mrs.  E.  It  was  about  1891
or  1892,  though  my  memory  for  dates  is  so  bad  that
I  can't  be  certain  as  to  the  time.  This  will  no  doubt
be  fixed  by  others.  I  sat  in  my  bedroom  about  half  past
twelve  or  one  o'clock  and  fixed  my  will  upon  the  enter-
prise I  had  been  considering.  I  carefully  imagmed  myself
gomg  down  the  steps  of  this  house,  walldiig  along  the
streets,  arriving  at  S. -street,  mounting  to  Mrs.  E.'s  flat
and  going  to  her  drawing-room  and  bedroom.  I  then
went  to  bed  \\ith  my  mmd  fixed  upon  the  visit  I  wished
to  make,  and  soon  fell  asleep.

The  next  evening  I  called  on  Mrs.  E.,  and  found  her
with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  A.  and  some  other  persons  just  finishmg
dinner.  I  asked  her  if  anything  unusual  had  occurred
on  the  previous  night.  She  and  Mrs.  A.  told  me  they
had  been  disturbed,  that  the  servant  had  heard  a  bell
rmg  and  had  come  to  them  in  the  night,  etc.,  etc.  ;  but
I  here  leave  the  narrative  to  them,  only  mentioning  that
I  believe  it  was  an  electric  bell  which  the  servant  heard.

The  next  night  I  repeated  the  experiment,  and  when
I  saw  them  agam,  they  told  me  of  its  success  and  begged
me  never  to  repeat  it,  as  both  Mrs.  A.  and  Mrs.  E.  had
been  very  much  frightened, — the  former  by  the  feehng
that  some  one  was  in  the  rooni,  and  the  latter  by  actually
seemg  the  upx^er  ])art  of  my  face  over  the  top  of  a  book
which  she  was  readmg.  I  personally  was  not  m  any  way
conscious  of  the  success  of  my  attempt,  for,  so  far  as  I
remember,  I  did  not  even  dream  about  any  of  the  family.


88


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwicl'.


[part


I  have  since  tried  this  experiment  with  other  i^eople,  but
without  success.  I  have  never  again  tried  it  with  Mxs.  E.
nor  with  her  daughter.

I  am  afraid  this  is  a  very  inconclusive  narrative  when
taken  by  itself,  but  it  is  all  that  is  absolutely  within
my  own  loiowledge.  When,  however,  it  is  taken  in
connection  with  what  the  two  ladies  felt  and  saw,  it  is
not  without  interest. — Yours  suic(^re]y,

Fred.  W.  Rose.

In  answer  to  some  questions  from  Mi'.  Powles,  Mx.  Rose
wrote  :

January  2lst,  1896.

In  reply  to  your  note,  I  did  not  after  my  first  experi-
ment give  notice  that  I  intended  to  make  another.  I
had  tried  to  mesmerise  Mrs.  A.  when  she  suffered  from
neuralgia,  but  without  success.  I  feel  sure  I  did  not
try  lier  more  than  twice,  and  I  had  not  done  so  for  a
long  time  before  the  experiments.  I  did  not  try  hyp-
notism upon  any  other  occupant  of  the  house.

In  answer  to  our  further  enquiries  about  the  interval  between
the  two  experiments,  Mr.  Rose  explained  that  by  the  phrase —
"  The  next  night  I  repeated  the  experiment  " — he  did  not  mean
that  the  two  experiments  occurred  on  coiisecutive  nights.  He
says,  "  I  can't  now  rememl)er  what  time  elapsed  between  the
two  experiments,  but  I  think  it  was  some  two  or  three
weeks."

Siiice  writing  his  account,  Mr.  Rose  made  two  more  attempts
to  appear  to  Mrs.  E.,  who  was  in  the  south  of  France  at  the
time.  Mrs.  E.  tells  us  that  on  two  nights  during  this  period
she  was  wakened  suddenly  by  the  feehng  that  some  one
Avas  in  the  room,  and  was  much  alarmed.  On  the  second
occasion  it  occurred  to  her  that  Mr.  Rose  was  jjerhaps  trying
an  exjieriment  on  her.  She  wrote  shortly  after  to  ask  him
if  this  was  the  case  ;  but  unfortunately  neither  of  them  had
noted  the  dates,  Mr.  Rose  feeling  sure  that  when  Mrs.  E.
was  in  a  part  of  France  that  was  imlaiown  to  him,  he  would
not  succeed.  It  is  obvious,  therefore,  that  no  stress  can  be
laid  on  these  later  experiments,  and  Mr.  Rose  tells  us  that  a


Lxxxvi.] Experimental  and  Serm-Exjyerimental  Cases.  89


third  trial,  made  on  February  8th,  1896,  was  a  complete
failure.

For  tlie  mode  of  development  of  the  hallucination  here
— a  luminous  mist  seen  first  and  then  the  figure — compare
Proceedings,  Vol.  X.,  p.  116  (No.  495-6)  and  other  cases
in  Gurney's  book  and  elsewhere.

This  concludes  the  experimental  and  semi-experimental
cases  in  our  collection.  Though  they  can  hardly  be
regarded  as  a  representative  group,  because  of  the  number
of  telepathic  experiments,  especially  series  of  experiments,
excluded  as  already  published  in  Proceedings  or  in  the
books  mentioned,  still  those  here  put  together  exhibit
an  interesting  variety  of  experiment,  and  it  is  much  to
be  desired  that  their  perusal  may  lead  to  more  people
trying  whetheii  they  cannot  develop  telepathic  capacity
in  one  way  or  another.  More  experiments  carefully
conducted,  and  well  recorded,  are  greatly  needed.


90


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


CHAPTER  II.

Spontaneous  Cases  in  which  the  Percipient's
Impression  is  not  externalised.

Oe  cases  Avliere  the  percijjient  receives,  spontaneously  and
apparently  through  telepathy,  a  sensation,  an  idea,  an
emotion,  an  impulse  to  action,  even  a  vision  in  the
mind's-eye  of  a  scene,  l)ut  where  the  impression  does
not  externalise  itself  as  a  hallucination  of  sight,  hear-
ing or  toucli,  there  are  some  thirty-five  in  our
collection,  of  which  five  are  dreams.^  As  a  whole  the
class  is  not  a  strong  one  as  evidence  of  telepathy,  because
in  it  there  is,  as  Gurney  points  out,  a  special  danger
that  (a)  after  the  coincidence  is  realised  the  impression
may  assvime  in  recollection  a  definiteness  which  it  did
not  possess  in  fact,  and  that  (h)  it  may  be  less  unusual
in  the  percipient's  experience  than  he  supposes,  owing  to
his  forgetting  cases  where  no  coincidence  was  discovered.
The  triviality  or  vagueness  of  the  impressions  in  many
cases  makes  such  tricks  of  memory  more  likely  to  occur
than  they  are  in  connexion  with  sensory  hallucinations.
Nevertheless  some  at  least  of  these  non -hallucinatory
cases  are  interesting  and  suggestive.

§  1. Paiu,  Transferred.

I  will  begin  with  cases  where  in  a  way  the  impression
may  be  said  to  be  externalised — cases  of  transference
of a sensation of pain, resembling some  experimental

^  Dreams  in  wliich  tliere  is  not  an  element  of  sensory  hallucination —
in  wliich  tlie  dreamer  does  not  seem  to  himself  to  see,  hear',  or  feel
something  outside  himself,  are  rare,  at  least  in  this  collection.


Lxxxvi.]  Spontanediifs  Cases  :  Iriipfession  not  Externalised.  91

cases  (cf.  Gurney's  book,  Ch.  II.,  §  10).  There  are  three
such  cases.  The  first  (L.  1157,  Journal,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  79)
was  sent  to  us  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  who  remarks  that  it
comes  "  from  a  trained  experimenter  and  observer,  my
assistant,  Mr.  E.  E.  Robinson."

(L.  1157.)
The  percipient  writes  :

Feenlea,  Willow  Avenue,

Edgbaston,  December  16,  1905.

On  Sunday  morning,  December  10,  1905,  I  was  in  bed
thinlfing  of  nothing  iii  particular.  Mrs.  R.  was  dressing.
I  experienced  an  aching  pam  ui  my  tliundj,  the  kind  of
paui  that  would  be  produced  by  a  hole  (made  by  some-
thmg  runnmg  m).

The  paia  was  so  distinct,  and  the  sensation  of  having
a  hole  in  the  thumb  so  real,  that  I  held  up  my  thumb
to  look  for  it.  I  fomid  there  Avas  no  such  hole,  and  the
moment  I  realized  this  the  pain  went.  Almost  at  the
same  mstant  Mrs.  R.  said  to  me  :  "I  have  a  great  diffi-
culty m  dressing,  my  thumb  is  so  pamful."

Two  days  before  she  had  hurt  her  thumb  by  runnuig
a  nail  uito  it.  She  mentioned  the  fact  to  me  at  the
time  ;  as  she  did  not  mention  it  again,  the  circumstance
had  been  completely  forg(^tten  by  me.  I  certamly  had
no  idea  of  it  at  the  time  mentioned  above.

E.  E.  ROBINSOK.

It  is  perhaps  an  evidential  weakness  in  this  case  that
Mr.  Robinson  knew  of  Mrs.  Robinson  having  hurt  her
thumb,  though  there  seems  to  have  been  nothing  to
bring  the  circumstance  to  his  mind  at  that  particular
moment,  except  her  sense  at  the  moment  of  pain  and
inconvenience,  of  which  he  had  as  he  believes  no  normal
knowledge.  This  particular  source  of  weakness  is  absent
in  the  following  case  so  far  as  conscious  knowledge  is
concerned.  It  is  an  experience  on  the  border-line  between
sleeping  and  waking,  and  may  have  been  a  persistent
dream  sensation. (L.  1172,  Journal,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  284.)


92


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


(L.  1172.)

The  lirsfc  account  of  this  case  was  sent  by  the  jiercipient,
Mrs.  Williams,  to  Mr.  G.  Lowes  Dickinson,  who  for\\arded
it  to  us  in  a  letter  bearmg  the  postmark,  Jmie  25th,  1908.
It  was  as  follows  :

Villa  Bethell,  Garmlsch,  Bavaria.

You  will  be  uitercsted  in  a  rather  curious  coincidence  (?)
which  occurred  yesterday.

Arthur  and  I  had  been  travellmg  nearly  all  day  and
were  tired  at  night  and  slept  soundly.  The  moment  I
M^oke  I  found  myseli  impressed  with  a  singularly  vivid
dream — not  detailed,  but  very  distinct.  I  thought  I  had
torn  my  finger  nail  across,  and  was  so  certain  of  it  that
I  examined  it  critically  and  was  almost  surprised  to  find
it  as  usual.  While  I  was  looliing  at  it  Arthur  said — "  I
tore  my  nail  last  night  :  got  out  of  bed  to  see  if  I  could
shut  out  the  comuig  light,  and  damaged  my  nail  on  the
shutter  :  it  is  so  pamful."

I  said — "  Did  you  speak,  or  say  a  word  about  it  ?  "
He  said  "  No,  I  was  most  anxious  to  make  no  noise,  as
you  were  so  tired  (one  reason  why  I  was  shutting  out
the  light)  and  I  know  I  did  not  wake  you."

I  had  no  recollection  of  anything  of  any  kind,  but
fancied  he  might  have  let  slip  a  suggestive  word  or  two,
which  ]3enctrated  my  consciousness  without  waking  me,
but  he  declares  he  did  not.


In  re]ily  to  a  request  for  further  details  and  confirmatory
evidence  Mrs.  Williams  wrote  to  us  :

July  13/7;.,  1908.

Last  month  my  husband  and  I  A\'ere  travelling  in
Bavaria,  and  I  was  very  tired  on  reaching  Garmisch,  in
the  Highlands.

I  fell  asleep  directly  we  got  into  bed,  and  was  conscious
of  nothing  until  about  7  in  the  morning,  when  I  found
myself  earnestly  examming  my  finger  nail  under  the
conviction  that  I  had  hurt  it. I  was  so  sure  of  this  that


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  not  Externalised .  93


I  was  intensely  surpri  ed  that  I  could  see  no  mark  of
injury.

I  said  to  my  husband  I  have  had  such  an  extra-
ordiiiary  impression  that  I  had  torn  my  finger  nail,  but
nothmg  is  wrong  with  it."  To  which  he  replied — "Why,  I
did  hurt  my  nail  in  the  night.  I  woke  at  about  4.30,  and
seeing  signs  of  daylight  got  up  to  try  to  close  the  outside
shutters,  damaging  my  finger  nail  in  the  attempt."  He
then  showed  me  his  nail  which  was  torn  in  ratlier  a
painful  way.

I  asked  if  he  had  called  out,  or  spoken  when  he  did  it,
for  though  I  remembered  nothing,  I  thought  it  possible
a  cry,  or  an  exclamation  might  have  penetrated  to  my
brain  through  my  sleep.  He  was  certain  he  made  no
somid,  being  anxious  not  to  wake  me,  and  returned
to  bed  perfectly  satisfied  that  he  had  not  done  so.

E.  Baumer  Williams.

Mr.  Wilhams  adds  :

I  confirm  the  above  statement  of  facts.  In  tryhig  to
close  the  shutters  I  was  most  careful  to  be  verj'^^  quiet
in  order  not  to  disturb  my  wife.  I  even  abstained  from
lookmg  for  scissors  to  trim  the  broken  nail  lest  I  should
make  a  noise.  Thoenton  Aethitr  Williams.

36  DoAvnsliire  Hill,  Hampstead.

The  above  two  cases  were  recorded,  one  a  few  hovirs
and  the  other  a  few  days  after  the  experience,  butYthe
evidence  for  telepathy  would  have  been  stronger  if  the
agent  and  percipient  had  been  in  different  rooms  and
the  percipient  thus  cut  off  from  possible  normal  indications
of  the  agent's  sensations.  In  the  next  case  (L.  1102,
Journal,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  298)  this  condition  is  fulfilled,  but,
on  the  other  hand,  nearly  a  year  elapsed  between  experi-
ence and  record.  The  case  came  to  us  through  Professor
Harlow  Gale  of  the  University  of  Minnesota,  who  discussed
it  with  the  percipient  and  the  agent.  I  give  it  briefly.
Further  details  and  additional  evidence  will  be  found
in  the  Journal.


94


Mrs.  Henry  Siclgwick.


(L.  1102.)

Mrs.  Castle  of  Minneapolis,  \^Titing  in  May,  1S96,  says:

On  the  first  day  of  last  July  (1895)  while  resting,  late
in  the  afternooii,  I  suddenly  expeiienced  a  constrictive
sensation  in  my  throat,  accompanied  by  a  numbness,
which  increased  for  some  time,  and  finally  becam-e  so
distressing  that  I  bathed  and  rubbed  my  throat  several
times  while  dressing,  soon  after  it  began — usiiTg  also
a  mental  treatment  (in  which  I  am  a  firm  believer).
I  could  discover  no  cause  within  myself  for  such  a  sensa-
tion, A\hich  was  unlike  anything  T  had  ever  experienced
before.  It  occurred  to  me  that  it  might  he  due  to  some
influence  outside  of  niyself,  and  I  thought  of  my  husband
.  .  .  also  of  a  fi'iend  who  was  stopping  with  me  at  the
time.

Mr.  (Jastle  states  :

On  the  afternoon  of  the  first  day  of  July,  1895,  1
unexj)ectedly  had  a-n  o]jeratioji  performed  on  my  throat
by  Dr.  Bell.  To  allow  fo)'  the  passing  off  of  the  effects  of
the  anaesthetic  used  in  my  throat  he  told  me  to  remain
quiet  a  while  after  the  oiJeration.  But  I  thought  I  could
save  time  by  sitting  in  the  barber's  chair,  and  so  walked

about yards  to  a  barber  sho\i. There  I  was  soon

seized  with  a  terrible  choking  sensation  which  frightened
the  barber  and  myself  very  greatly.  I  remained  sittmg
there  nearly  an  hour  beft)re  I  coidd  go  on.

The  two  experiences  appear  to  have  coincided  in  time  as
far  as  could  be  made  out,  and  there  certainly  nuist  have  been
considerable  points  of  resemblance  between  the  two  sensations  ;
while  the  percipient's  was  sufficiently  vivid  to  cause  her  to
apply  remedial  treatment.

These  cases  of  transferred  sensation  should  be  compared
with  a  perhaps  more  striking  spontaneous  case  in  Gurney's
book.  Chap.  V.,  Case  (17).  And  also  with  experiments  in
transference  of  pains.


LXXXVi.J  Spontaneoua  Cases  :  lnhpression  not  Externalised.  95

§  2. Phrases  Transferred.

The  cases  to  be  next  mentioned  also  resemble  some
experimental  cases — phrases  or  words  being  apparently
caught  verbatim  from  the  mind  of  a  person  who  is  in
the  company  of  the  percipient,  and  in  most  of  the  cases
in  communication  with  him  at  the  moment.  The  first
is  L.  1163,  Journal,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  120.

(L.  1163.)

The  percipient,  Mr.  F.  W.  Caulfeild,  writes  :

Sydmonton,  Haywards  Heath,  July  7,  1905.

In  the  autumn  of  1903  my  daughter  and  myself  went
to  visit  an  old  friend  of  mine,  a  clergyman,  who  had
lately  been  appointed  to  a  country  hving  on  the  banks
of  the  Thames,  and  whom  I  had  not  seen  for  many  years.
My  friend  met  us  at  the  station  in  his  pony  carriage,  and
while  drivuig  us  to  his  house  told  us  of  an  attempt
he  had  made  to  organise  the  charities  of  his  own  and
the  neighbouring  jjarishes.  He  said  he  had  written  to
a  friend  in  an  adjoining  parish  on  the  subject,  and  tluit
he,  i.e.  my  friend,  particularly  objected  to  the  practice,
when  a  poor  man  had  met  witli  some  loss,  of  sendmg
him  round  the  neighbourhood  with  a  signed  ])etition  to
collect  money.

Suddenly  an  idea  flashed  on  my  mind  A\'hich  I  remember
appeared  to  me  rather  smart  and  ^\'itty,  and  I  said  :
"  After  all,  pigs  are  not  immortal,"'  meaning  of  course  that
a  poor  man  with  a  pig  must  expect  that  it  may  die
some  time,  and  should  lay  his  accoimt  for  that  beforehand.
My  friend  said  :  Why  tliat's  just  what  I  said  in  my
letter  ; I  said,  '  Bveii  pig^  are  not  immortal.'

Judging  from  the  very  unusual  character  of  the  phrase,
and  from  my  own  sensations  at  tlie  time  I  used  it,  I
think  it  must  have  been  directly  suggested  to  my  mmd.

Francis  W.  CIaulfeild.

P.8. — I  ought  to  add  that  to  the  best  of  my  memory
piigs  had  not  been  ]ireviously  mentioned  in  our  conversa-
tion ; my  thoughts  had  naturally  turned  to  horses  or  coavs.


96


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


In  answer  to  a  request  for  corroboration,  Miss  Caulfeild
writes  :

Sydmonton,  Haywards  Heath,  July  Wlk  [1905J.

Li  reply  to  your  letter  of  July  10,  which  my  father
has  given  me,  it  is  difficult,  after  more  than  a  year  and
a  half,  to  recall  the  incident  clearly.

I  reniember  sitting  beside  our  host  who  was  driving,
and  at  the  same  time  looking  back  every  now  and  then
over  his  shoulder  to  speak  to  my  father,  who  was  sitting
on  the  back  seat.

Our  host  was  describing  what  a  pitch  the  sendmg  round
of  begging  petitions  had  come  to  m  his  parish,  and  my
father  said  quickly,  "  After  all,  even  pigs  are  mortal."

Our  host  laughed,  and,  looking  back  at  my  father,  said  :
"  How strange  ; those were the very words I used  in

my letter to . I said: 'Even 'pigs are  mortal.""

I  underline  pigs,  because  I  remember  he  laid  stress  on  the
word.  Dorothy  Caitlfeild.

P.S. — I  remember  feeling  a  little  injured  that  our  host
did  not  laugh  more  heartily  at  my  father's  bon  mot,  which
of  course  was  explained,  as  he  had  made  it  himseK  before.

A  little  group  of  three  cases  is  given  in  tiie  Journal,
Vol.  IV.,  pp.  341,  342  (L.  857,  L.  858,  L.  859).  The  first  is
from  Mrs.  Barber,  whose  account  of  a  similar  incident
in  which  the  same  child  was  percipient  was  included  in
Gurney's  book,  Chap.  VI.  (No.  39). She  writes  :

(L.  857.)

December  26,  1886.
Last  week  E.  came  to  see  me  before  I  was  u]),  and  I
Ijegan  to  speak  to  her  about  Avhat  her  Christmas  money
should  be  spent  ui,  and  when  I  said,  "  I'll  tell  you  what
I've  been  thinking  you'd  like  to  do  with  your  money  .  .  ."
she  burst  m  excitedly  with,  "  /  Ivnow  !  I  know  what  you're
going  to  say  !  "  "  Do  you,"  I  said,  amused.  "  What
makes  you  so  sure?"  "I.  knoiv,''  she  said,  "it  came
uito  my  mmd  just  now.  You're  going  to  say  that  I
mightj^spend  it  in  buying  toys  to  teach  a  class  of  Miss
Headdon's  !  " (Precisely  what  I  was  gomg  to  say.)


Lxxxvi.]  Sponianeous  Cases  :  hnpression  not  Externalised.  97


N.B. — The  child  had  keenly  shared  my  interest  in  Miss
Headdon's  work,  but  as  the  thought  with  respect  to  the
money  had  been  an  entirely  new  one  to  me,  which  I  -was
taking  the  first  ojjportunity  of  commmiicatuig  to  her,  it
was  impossible  that  she  could  have  heard  of  it  in  any
way.  .  .  .  Caboline  Barber.

The  second  case  was  received  from  Mrs.  H.  through
the  American  Branch  of.  the  Society.  Dr.  Hodgson  was
well  acquainted  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  H. She  writes  :

(L.  858.)

March  30th,  1889.
Mr.  H.  came  home  one  afternoon  [recently],  and  said
to  me,  "  I  saw  MulHken  to-day  (I  do  not  loiow  him  and
his  name  meant  nothing),  and  whom  do  you  think  he
has  seen?  "  I  replied  instantly,  ''Edward  S.  R."'  Mr.  H.
looked  astonished  and  asked  me  how  I  knew  ? — if  I  knew
Mulhken  ? — if  I  knew  he  had  been  in  Brazil  ?  I  said,
"No,"  that  I  did  not  know  why  I  said  it,  the  name
came  to  my  lips  without  conscious  thought.  He  said  it
was  very  strange,  but  Mi".  Mulliken  had  been  in  Brazil ;
had  been  telling  him  of  his  travels,  and  of  meetmg  Mr.  R.

E.  S.  H.

G.  S.  H.

The  third  case  also  came  through  the  American  Branch,
and  the  narrator,  Mrs.  D.,  thought  it  had  liapjjened  "  about
three  years  ago."  She  was  talking  with  a  friend  who
had  passed  the  winter  in  a  very  lonely  ranche  :

(L.  859.)

I  asked  her  if  anything  strange  or  startling  had  happened
to  her  in  that  wild  place.  "  Yes,"  she  said,  "  I  kiUed  a
big  rattlesnake  with  twelve  rattles,  and  you  can't  guess
what  I  did  it  with."  "A  flat,  iron"  was  my  instant
answer,  and  my  surprise  was  as  great  as  hers  Avhen  she
told  me  I  was  right.  The  snake  was  near  the  house,  and
she  caught  up  a  flat-iron  which  was  placed  against  the
door  to  keep  it  open,  and  throwing  it  at  the  snake  nearly
cut  his  head  off.


98


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwkk.


[part


Mi-s.  D.  adds  on  January  3rcl,  1889  :

You  ask  if  I  had  ever  previously  thought  of  a  flat-iron
as  an  instrument  of  attack  upon  anytliiiig  obnoxious.
When  a  j^oung  girl — at  least  fifty  years  ago — I  had  a
great  fear  of  burglars,  and  often  threatened  to  kee]3  a
flat-iron  in  my  room,  a  string  attached  to  it,  that

could  be  dro])ped  upon  the  head  of  any  burglar  who
should  pass  through  the  front  entry  of  the  house  and
be  accommodating  enough  to  stand  still  in  the  right  spot
and  let  me  carry  out  my  pet  jalan  of  defence.  I  did  not
consciously  remember  this  when  I  answered  my  friend's
question  so  promptly,  but  shortly  after  it  all  came  back
to  me,  and  my  brother  reminded  nie  of  it  the  other
day.  .  .  .  M.  C!.  D.

It  seems  iJrobable  here  that  the  subconscious  association
of  ideas  at  least  facilitated  the  true  impression,  whether
telepathy  operated  or  not.  But  it  is  unlikely  that  there
was  any  such  association  of  ideas  in  the  following  case
(L.  898,  Journal,  Vol.  V.,  p.  191)  when  a  boy  appeared  to
catch  an  uniisnal  translation  of  a  Greek  word  from  his
teacher's  mind.  An  account  of  the  incident  first  appeared
in  the  Boston,  Evening  Transcript  aboixt  May,  1890,  on
the  day  after  it  occurred,  so  the  correspondent  stated.
This  account  is  printed  in  the  Journal.  In  reply  to  Dr.
Hodgson's  encpiiries,  the  teacher,  Mr.  Wm.  Nichols,  wrote
on  April  9th,  1891  :

(L.  898.)

A boy  who was only  fair  in Greek, but  who had  a
good  command  of  English,  was translating  ; as  he  came
to  "  jierieidon  "  [in  the  passage  before  him,  viz.  Herodotus
VI.  1081  it  occurred  to  me  that  "  stand  by  idle  "  would
here  be  a  good  rendering  of  the  ^vord  ;  I  had  never  known
of  its  being  so  rendered  before. The  boy  hesitated  for  an
instant at  the word, and I loolced at him and  he  at
once  went  on, "did  not  stand  by  idle."' It  seemed  to
me  a  singular  coincidence.
With these cases may  be  compared the  following,  in
which words the agent had read a few hours  before
eiaerge  in  sleep  (L.  1196,  Journal,  Vol.  XVI.,  p.  70).  The


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  not  Externalised.  99


case  was  sent  through  an  Associate  of  the  Society,  with
names  and  addresses,  but  these  are  by  request  withheld
from  pubUcation.  The  first  account  dated  February  3rd,
1913,  came  to  us  from  the  agent's  mother — Mrs.  Rooke
(pseudonym). This  I  omit. The  agent  writes  :

(L.  1196.)

February  10,  1913.

On  the  afternoon  of  Sunday,  January  19th,  1913,  I  was
reading  Tristram  of  Blent.  My  wife  was  in  and  out
of  the  room  a  good  deal,  but  I  did  not  caU  her  attention
to  any  passage  in  the  book.  I  was  specially  struck  by
the  followmg  passage,  and  read  it  over  more  than  once,
pausing  for  a  time  in  my  reading,  bub  saying  nothing  :
"If  we  chvide  humanity  mto  those  who  do  thmgs  and
those  who  have  to  get  out  of  the  way  when  they  are
being  done,  Gainsborough  belonged  to  the  latter  class."
I  remember  that  my  w\ie  came  mto  the  room  while  my
attention  was  fixed  on  this  passage.

Some  hours  later,  in  the  evening,  we  were  both  readmg,
when  my  wife  said,  suddenly,  that  she  felt  very  sleejiy,
speaking  m  a  drowsy  tone,  and  almost  immediately  she
dropped  off  mto  a  deep  sleep.  She  did  not  wake  up  for
about  two  hours.  After  she  had  been  asleep  for  some
time,  she  began  to  speak  with  the  subdued  eagerness
ordinary  in  such  cases,  saying,  "  they  are  trying  .  .  .  they
are  trymg,"  but  apparently  being  unable  to  say  more.
I  leaned  forward  (I  was  sitting  about  10  feet  away)
and  said,  in  an  ordmary  tone,  "  Yes  ?  What  are  they
trying  to  do  ?  "  She  answered  at  once,  m  the  tone  of
a  person  answering  such  a  question  :  "  I'he  people  that
have  to  be  got  out  of  the  way  of."  She  then  nuittered
a  few  syllables,  and  was  silent  until  she  awoke,  I  think
not  less  than  an  hour  after.  While  she  Avas  speaking,
and  just  before  and  after,  she  was  lying  perfectly  still
with  her  eyes  closed  and  was  certainly  asleep.

The  percipient  writes  :

February  10,  1913.
On  Sunday, Jan.  19th, 1913, my  husband  and I  were
reading. I  was  quite  mterested  in  my  book  ; suckle, dy


100


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


I  felt  a  strong  desire  for  sleep.  I  had  some  difficulty
to  keep  awake  long  enough  to  explain  to  my  husband
that  I  was  obUged  to  go  to  sleep  immediately — an  unusual
thing  for  me  to  do.

I  curled  up  on  a  sofa  and  knew  nothing  more  until
about  two  hours  later.

When  I  awoke  my  husband  asked  if  I  had  read  the
book  he  was  reading.  (He  felt  sure  I  could  not  have
done  so,  as  it  had  only  just  been  sent  to  the  house.)
I  had  not  read,  or  even  heard  of  it.

He  then  told  me  that  he  had  been  struck  by  a  certain
passage  in  his  book  and  that  in  my  sleep  I  repeated  a
part  of  it,  using  almost  the  same  words.

In  reply  to  a  further  question,  Mrs.  Rooke  writes  :

February  Uth,  1913.
In  regard  to  the  question  you  ask,  as  to  whether  my
son  ever  unconsciously  reads  or  repeats  aloud  sentences
that  he  is  particularly  interested  in,  I  can  answer  without
any  hesitation  that  I  have  never  Imown  him  to  do  so,
and  I  feel  quite  sure  that  he  never  does.  My  daughters
say  the  same,  and  that  they  could  not  imagine  him  doing
so  ;  it  would  be  so  mihke  himself.

Compare  also  with  the  above  cases  one  (L.  1192,  Journal,
Vol.  XV.,  p.  339)  where  Miss  L.  "Jones"  (pseudonym),
suffering  from  concussion  of  the  brain,  seemed  during
her  illness  to  have  constantly  correct  impressions  of
thoughts  in  her  sister's  mind.  .  -

§  3. Emotion  Transferred.

There  are  two  cases  where,  not  an  idea,  but  an  emotion
appears  to  have  been  transferred.  In  the  first  a  child
of  six  shared  an  entirely  baseless  anxiety  felt  by  his
father.  Most  of  us  would  probably  be  ready  to  admit
that  emotions  such  as  fear  are  easily  caught  by  children
and  animals,  but  generally,  if  telepathy  has  anything  to
do  with  this,  the  fact  is  veiled  by  the  presence  of  sensory
indications. The interest of the present case  (L,  1186,


lxxx"st:.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  not  Externalised.  101

Journal,  Vol.  XV.,  p.  188)  lies  in  the  apparent  impossi-
bility of  any  sensory  indications  having  operated.^  The
case  was  sent  to  us  by  Mr.  F.  M.  J.  Stratton  of  Gonville
and  Gains  College,  Cambridge,  who  writes  in  sending  it  :

(L.  1186.)

Nov.  20th,  1911.

Professor  and  Mrs.  Newall,  from  whom  I  heard  the
story,  both  assured  me  that  the  A\'ritten  accomit  (dated
November  10)  agreed  entirely  with  the  story  told  them
when  Dr.  Hutchmson  was  visiting  them  on  Oct.  14.

]VIr.  Hutchinson  writes  :

St.  Anke's,  Lowestoft,
Nov.  10th,  1911.

Dear  Mrs.  Newall,

I  forward  you  the  few  notes  you  Avish  for,  but  I  trust
you  will  forgive  me  for  havmg  been  so  long  ui  sendmg
them. I  plead  the  usual  excuse  of  overwork.  |^

On  the  Idnd  mvitation  of  Professor  Newall  to  see  the
Observatory  at  Cambridge,  I  decided  to  motor  over  from
Lowestoft  on  Saturday,  14th  October.

On  Friday — the  day  previous  to  the  trip — I  had  an
unaccountable  restless  feelmg  that  some  disaster  would
take  place  on  the  journey.  So  strong  did  this  feelmg
become  that  I  decided  to  msure  myself  and  car  agamst
all  risk  before  vmdertaking  the  trij).  I  had  some  difficulty
in  effectmg  this  insurance,  as  the  time  was  short  ;  ho\\  ever,
the  agents  were  able  to  put  the  matter  through  for  me,
and  I  had  my  pohcy  complete  by  8.30  p.m.  the  same
evening.

As  I  only  had  a  very  short  time  to  spend  in  Cambridge,
I  decided  to  start  from  my  house  at  5  o'clock  m  the
morning.

I  awoke  at  4.15  a.m.,  and  immediately  started  to  dress,
but  before  completmg  my  toilet  I  heard  my  son  (a  little
feUow  of  six  years  old)  crying  for  me  m  a  most  piteous
manner.


1  It  may  be  observed  incidentally  that  the  case  is  one  of  unfulfilled
premonition.


102


Mrs.  Henry  SidgiLncl-.


[part


I  went  upstairs  to  see  \\m\ — as  he  sleeps  m  a  room  by
himself  at  the  top  of  the  house — and  he  immediately
threw  his  arms  round  my  neck,  hugging  me  tightly  and
begging  me  not  to  undertake  the  journey.  I  told  him
not  to  be  foolish,  as  I  should  be  back  with  him  the  next
day.  I  was  unable  to  comfort  him,  so  I  brought  him
down  to  his  mother,  and  I  imderstand  from  her  that  soon
after  my  dej^arture  he  Avent  off  to  sleep.

I  might  state  here  that  it  was  a  most  unusual  thing
for  the  boy  to  wake  up  at  that  hour  of  the  mornuig,  nor
had  he  been  told  anything  very  much  about  my  intended
trip.

As  regards  my  journey  to  Cambridge  and  back,  it  was
entirely  uneventful,  and  I  am  unable  to  account  in  any
way  for  the  curious  and  ]5ersistent  feehng  I  had  that  a
calamity  of  some  kind  would  take  place  during  my  absence
from  home.

I  might  ponit  out  that  I  have  driven  a  motor-car  for
over  ten  years  and  have  never  taken  out  an  insurance
policy  before,  and  would  not  have  done  so  now  except
for  the  above  related  facts.

During  the  past  ten  years  I  have  driven  all  over  England
and  Scotland,  and  have  never  met  with  an  accident,  nor
had  the  same  jieculiar  apprehension  before  undertaldng
a  journey. — Yours  very  sincerely,

Donald  Hutchinson.

In  reply  to  Mr.  iStratton's  enipiiries  Mr.  Hutchinson  wrote
to  him  :

Nov.  mil,  1911.

.  .  .  With  regard  to  your  query  re  my  son,  I  can  say
xmhesitatmgly  that  he  knew  nothing  whatever  regarding
my  forebodings,  as  I  had  been  particularly  careful  not
even  to  mention  them  to  my  wife.  .  .  .

Donald  Hutchinson.

In  the  second  case  of  what  looks  like  transferred  emotion
(L.  899,  Journal,  Vol.  V.,  p.  192)  the  correspondence  be-
tween  the  feelings  of  agent  and  percipient  is  less  definite,
and  can  indeed  hardly  be  said  to  amount  to  more  than
mental  disturbance  in  both,  that  of  the  percipient  being


Lxxxvi.]  Spoutcnieoiis  Cases  :  Impression  vot  Externalised .  103


possibly  caused  hy  normal  observation  of  symptoms
of  it  in  the  agent.  At  the  same  time  the  ease  suggests
that  there  may  well  be  something  more  than  observation
through  the  senses  in  producing  our  impressions  of  each
other.  The  record  was  sent  to  us  by  the  percipient,
Mrs.  Joseph  Pfirshing  of  C^hicago.  It  is  undated,  but
was  printed  in  the  Journal  about  two  years  after  the
occurrence. I  will  describe  the  case  briefly.

(L.  899.)

The  supposed  agent,  a  stranger  to  the  percipient,  accom-
panied his  family  to  an  evening  party  at  the  percipient's
house  on  the  evening  on  which  he  (the  agent)  knew  that  his
employers  had  discovered  he  was  an  embezzler.  A  week  later
he  committed  suicide.  His  feehngs  that  evening  can  only
be  conjectured.  Hers  (tlie  percipient's)  appear  to  have  been
feehngs  of  miaccoimtable  cUstress  and  rejiulsion  m  connexion
with  the  young  man,  and  her  mental  distress  continued  more
or  less  till  the  suicide.  Evidentially  in  this  case  everythmg
turns  on  tlie  uniqueness  of  the  percipient's  sensations,  and
of  this  it  is  ahnost  impossible  to  judge.  She  says  herself  m
answer  to  enquiries  :

"  I  have  never  had  such  a  vivid  sensation  about  a
person  before.  .  .  .  Its  reaUty  Avas  so  quickly  carried
out  in  the  denouement — perhaj^s  that  is  the  reason  it  was
so  strongly  impressed  upon  me.  I  have  all  my  life  been
strongly  attracted  or  strongly  repelled  by  people."

With  this  case  may  be  compared  an  experience  described
by  Miss  Alice  MacLellan  of  Bridgeport,  Conn.,  U.S.A.,  in
the  Journal,  Vol.  XIX.,  p.  173.  It  is  Number  VI.  of
a  series  of  experiences  consisting  of  premonitory  dreams
and  others,  recorded  apparently  in  1919.  In  this  par-
ticular case  she  attempted  in  1915  to  read  by  palmistry
the  hand  of  an  old  friend.  It  puzzled  her,  but  finally
she  said,  "  It's  not  like  you  at  all  !  Why  you've  got
the  hand  of  a  crook."  A  few  years  later  he  committed
suicide  when  he  could  no  longer  conceal  his  embezzle-
ments from  estates of which he was  trustee,  embezzle-


104


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


ments  which  had  been  going  on  in  1915.  She  asks,  "  Did
I  see  into  his  mind,  or  did  I  read  it  in  his  hand  ?  "

§  4. Idea  from  Distant  Agent.

In  the  cases  so  far  dealt  with  in  this  chapter,  the
agent  and  percipient  have  generally  been  together.  In
the  remaining  cases  they  were  separated.  In  the  first
two,  a  definite  thought  in  the  agent's  mind  is  reflected
in  the  percipient's  and  connected  with  the  distant  agent.
We  received  the  first  (L.  831,  Journal,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  179)
from  the  Rev.  A.  T.  Fryer,  who  wrote  on  April  19th,  1889  :

(L.  831.)

I  know  the  two  persons  who  have  written  the  enclosed.
I  have  seen  the  envelopes  and  they  bear  the  dates,
February  13th  and  February  15tli,  1889,  posted  January
31st  and  February  4th  respectively,  as  shown  by  post
marks.  I  can  voucli  for  the  truth-telling  capacities  of
the  percipient  and  her  mother.

E.  M.'s  Narrative.

Very  early  on  Simday  morning,  February  3rd,  when
half  asleep,  half  awake,  I  became  vaguely  conscious  that
a  gentleman  I  laaow  Hving  in  America  was  trying  to
influence  me  in  some  way. This  feeling  at  once  thoroughly

woke  me  up,  and  I  seemed  to  know  that  Mr. was

thhiking  of  me  at  that  time,  and  that  he  was  sending
me  a  proposal.

Various  circumstances  made  this  most  unlikely,  one
bemg  tlie  fact  that  I  believed  him  cither  to  be  engaged,
or  on  the  point  of  being  engaged  to  an  American  lady.
So  I  tried  to  go  to  sleep  again,  and  did  all  I  could  not
to  think  of  the  impression  I  had  received.  But  it  was
no  use,  a  stronger  will  than  mine  ke23t  forcuig  my  thoughts
to  America,  and  I  felt  certain  a  letter  was  coming.

For  13  days  and  niglits  tliis  conviction  seemed  ever
present  with  me — try  as  I  \vould  not  to  dwell  upon  it.

Not  even  receiving  on  the  13th  a  letter  from  this  very
gentleman,  tellmg  me  that  as  I  had  refused  to  marry  him


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  not  Externalised.  105

the  previous  autumn  he  had-  at  last  fully  made  up  his
mind  to  propose  to  an  American  girl,  and  to  be  married
very  shortly — altered  my  conviction.

On  February  15th  I  received  the  letter  of  proposal,
saying  that  at  the  last  moment  he  could  not  propose
to  the  American,  and  would  ask  me  once  more.  The
letter  was  Avritten  late  on  Saturday  evening,  February  2nd
(allowing  for  difference  m  time  between  America  and
England  at  the  very  time  I  had  the  impression  that  a
letter  was  being  written). It  was  posted  on  the  4th.

My  mother  remembers  my  telling  her  of  my  impression
before  I  received  the  letter.

Statement  fkom  E.  M.'s  Mother.

I  remember  "  E.  M."  showmg  me  a  letter  on  February
13tli  from  a  friend  of  hers  (who  is  abroad),  stating  that
he  was  likely  to  x^ropose  marriage  to  a  young  lady.
"  E.  M."  then  told  me  that  previously,  in  the  night  of
February  3rd,  whilst  lying  half  asleep,  she  had  a  strong
impression  that  he  was  going  to  propose  to  her,  though
from  what  he  had  before  '\\ritten  this  seemed  most  unhkely,
but  a  letter  received  two  days  later  proved  that  her
impression  was  right.

Answers  from  E.  M.  to  Mr.  Fryer's  Questions.

1.  Corroborative  statement  ? — I  enclose  my  mother's.
I  mentioned  my  presentiment  to  no  one  else  excej^t  to
you.  I  told  my  mother  on  February  13th,  when  I
received  the  first  letter  (which  I  showed  her),  that  I  had
a  presentiment  that  a  letter  of  proposal  was  on  its  way
to  me  from  Mr. .

2.  May  I  see  the  two  envelojies  ? — Envelopes  enclosed.
The  first  letter  was  written  January  31st,  the  second  A^as
dated  February  2nd,  11  p.m.

3.  Have  you  ever  had  any  similar  experience  ? — Yes,  on
three  occasions,  but  I  cannot  get  them  corroborated,  as
my  brother  and  the  friends  concerned  object  to  answermg
questions  on  the  subject.  The  first  time  was  during
August,  1879.  I  was  away  from  home,  and  was  just
recovering from an illness. I awoke one night  feeling


106  Mrs.  Henry  SidgivicJc.  [part

certain  that  my  only  brother  A\'as  in  a  railway  accident.
I  immediately  lighted  a  candle  and  looked  at  my  watch
— eight  minutes  to  12 — as  I  did  so  I  felt  that  he  was
unhurt,  and  that  all  danger  was  over.  The  next  day
my  brother  unexpectedly  arrived,  and  I  found  that  he
had  been  in  a  slight  railway  accident  the  night  before.
The  accident  took  place  a  few  minutes  before  midnight,
as  he  also  had  looked  at  his  watch.  The  second  time,
February  27th,  1885.  A  strong  conviction  that  something
(I  linew  not  what)  utterly  unexpected  would  arise  on  or
before  May  21st  that  would  cause  unhappiness  to  two
people  and  entirely  alter  the  course  of  their  Uves.  I
mentioned  this  a  day  or  two  after  to  the  person  chiefly
concerned,  in  the  hope  that  Avhatever  it  was  it  might  be
avei-ted.  This  person  only  laughed  at  it,  and  as  late  as
May  20t]i  declared  it  could  not  come  true — it  was  pure
imaghiation  on  my  part.  It  came  true  on  the  21st.
The  third  time,  September,  188.5,  that  a  great  friend  of
mine,  of  A\hom  I  liad  not  heard  for  some  time,  was
staying  in  a  certain  place  in  lodgings,  and  ^\-as  at  the
time  very  unhappy  and  worried.  This  also  proved  to
be  true.

4.  Can  you  say  how  long  before  February  3rd  you  had
heard  from  or  of  him  |  tlie  gentleman  in  America]  ? — No
one  had  mentioned  his  name  to  me  for  ^^■eeks,  but  I  had
had  a  few  lines  from  him  during  January.

5.  Had  you  talked  about  him  or  read  any  letters  from
or  about  him  on  or  about  the  1st  or  2nd  of  February,
1889  ?— No.

6.  Were  you  m  ordinary  health  ? — Yes.  I  always  have
more  or  less  constant  headache,  and  my  headaches  had
been  very  severe  just  before — but  were  better  at  the
time.

7.  What  initials  ?~E.  M.  will  do.

Li  answer  to  an  inquiry  whether  .she  had  ever  had  hallu-
cinations or  impressions  which  were  not  veridical,  "  E.  M."
writes  :

I  have  never  had  any  strong  impression,  hallucination,  or
dream that  has vnf come true — beyond one dream  that


r,xxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Ivipression  not  ExternaUsed.  107


repeats  itself  about  every  year  at  macertain  intervals.
I  have  had  it  five  or  six  times.

I  wake  up  dreaming  that  a  man  with  red  hair^^^and
a  red  beard  is  leaning  over  my  bed  A^ith  a  knife  in  his
hand.  Sonnetimes  he  has  hold  of  my  shoulder.  For
some  minutes  after  I  am  awake  I  still  seem  to  see  and
feel  him,  his  hot  breath  commg  on  my  face.  I  try  and
laiock  his  arm  on  one  side,  and  it  goes  through  him.
After  about  two  minutes  he  gradually  fades  away.  It  is
always  the  same  face,  and  I  cannot — suice  I  first  had  the
dream  about  six  years  ago — concj^uer  my  horror  of  red-
headed men,  though  I  have  never  seen  any  man  hke  the
man  I  see  ;  I  have  tried  movmg  my  bed  to  another
part  of  the  room,  but  the  dream  still  comes.

The  other  case  (L.  1213,  Journal,  Vol.  XVIII.,  p.  56)  of
a  thought  or  wish  api^arently  transferred  from  a  distant
agent  comes  to  us  through  Mr.  G.  Lowes  Dickinson,  whose
sister  was  the  percipient. Miss  Dickinson  writes  :

(L.  1213.)

11  Edwaedes  Square,  W.  8.
{April  3,  1917.]  ^

On  Thursday,  March  29th,  1917,  I  was  upstairs  at  8.30
a.m.,  and  the  front-door  bell  rang.  I  said  to  myself
that  it  nuist  be  my  cousm,  Harry  Dicldnson,  come  to
tell  me  his  mother  ^^•as  ill.  When  the  maid  came  up  a
few  minutes  later,  I  asked  her  A^hat  the  rmg  at  the
bell  was.  vShe  replied  that  it  was  a  telegram  for  Mi'.  G.
I  said  to  her,  I  thought  it  was  Mr.  Harry  Dickmson
come  to  tell  me  his  mother  was  ill."  1  went  out  at  8.45
for  the  rest  of  the  morning,  retumuig  about  12.30.  When
I  came  in,  the  maid  said  to  me,  "  Mr.  Harry  Dicldnson
has  been  to  ask  you  to  go  and  see  his  mother,  who  is
iU."  I  said  "What  time  did  he  come?"  E.  F.  rephed,
"About  11  o'clock."

I  had  not  been  thinking  of  my  amit,  nor  do  I  often

^  In  reply  to  a  question  as  to  the  date  of  this  account,  Miss  Dickinson
saj's,  "  I  wrote  out  ray  account  a  few  days  after  [the  incident]  happened,
but  I  do  not  remember  the  exact  date. I  should  think  April  3rd."


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.  [part

see  her,  but  March  or  April,  1916,  my  cousin  came  round
about  8.30  a.m.  to  ask  me  the  same  tliiiif>\

Janet  Lowes  Dickinson.

We  have  also  obtained  the  following  statement  from  Miss
Dickinson's  maid  :

11  Edwardes  Square,  W.  8  [A'pril  14,  1917].
On  Thursday,  March  29th,  1917,  1  went  upstairs  soon
after  8.30  a.m.  and  Mss  Janet  asked  me  what  the  ring
at  the  bell  was.  I  said  it  was  a  telegram  for  Mr.  G.
She  said,  "  I  thought  it  was  J\Ir.  Harry  Dickinson  come
to  tell  me  his  mother  was  ill."  Miss  Janet  went  out
soon  after,  and  when  she  came  in  about  12.30,  I  said,
"  Mr.  Harry  Dickuison  came  this  mommg  to  ask  you
to  go  and  see  his  mother,  who  is  ill."  Miss  Janet  said,
"What  time  did  he  come?"  and  I  said,  "About  11
o'clock."  Ethel  Fawkes.

Miss  Dickinson  has  also  sent  us  the  following  letter  from
Mr.  Harry  Dickinson,  who  appears  to  have  been  the  agent  in
the  case  :

222  GoLDHAWK  Road,  Shepherd's  Bush,
London,  W.,  Ajml  8,  1917.
With  reference  to  our  conversation  of  to-day's  date,
when  you  told  nu^  that  you  had  a  strong  impression  of
my  mother's  illness  on  the  morning  of  29th  ult.,  I  can
say  that  some  time  between  8  a.m.  and  9  a.m.  on  that
day  I  was  in  great  anxiety  of  muid  and  ^vas  considermg
callmg  romid  and  asking  you  to  sit  with  her.  As  you
will  remember  I  called  round  the  same  mornmg  at  about
11  a.m.  with  that  mtention  and  found  that  you  had  crone
out.  My  anxiety  (apart  from  her  ilhiess)  was  based  on
the  fact  that  I  Avas  obhged  to  hnish  certain  work  at
once,  and  that  I  could  not  leave  her  alone  all  day  m  the
condition  she  was  in  at  the  time.  My  mother  also  wished
me  to  call  for  you.  Harry  Dickinson.

Miss  Dickmson  mentions  in  her  original  statement  that  about
a  year  before  her  cousin  had  come  to  her  early  in  the  mornmg  '
to  ask  her  to  go  to  his  mother  who  was  ill,  and  we,  therefore,
asked  whether  Mr.  H.  Dickmson  had  done  this  on  more  than


LXXXVI.]  Spontaneous  Cases:  Impression  not  Externalised.  109

one  previous  occasion,  and  whether,  on  March  29,  1917,  Miss
Dicldnson  had  any  reason  to  think  that  her  aunt  was  ill.
Miss  Dickinson  replied  to  these  questions  as  follows  :

April  23  [1917].

1.  I  did  not  Imow  my  aunt  was  ill; she  was  only  taken
ill  the  night  before.

2.  My cousin had not sent for me sijice March  or
April,  1916.

Janet  L.  Dickinson.

It,  therefore,  appears  that  (a)  on  the  mommg  of  March  29,
1917,  Miss  Dickinson  had  no  special  reason  for  expectmg  that
]VIr.  H.  Dickinson  would  send  for  her  to  sit  with  his  mother  ;
(6)  at  about  the  time,  8.30  a.m.,  when  she  had  the  impression
that  he  had  come,  he  was  thinking  of  coming  and  actually
came  a  few  hours  later.

§  5.  Motor  Impulse.

There  are  in  our  collection  three  cases  in  which  the
percipient  receives  a  motor  impulse — an  impulse  to  do
something.  Unfortunately  in  the  first  two  of  these  the
interval  between  event  and  record  is  just  at  our  limit
of  five  years,  though  there  is  some  contemporary  evidence
in  the  second  case.

In  the  first  of  the  three  cases  (L.  893,  Journal,  Vol.  V.,
p.  172)  the  percipient  writes  :

(L.  893.)

Friday,  March  iWi  [1891].
I  am  at  present  an  undergraduate  of  Trinity  College,
Cambridge.  At  the  time  the  incident  occurred  I  was  a
Rugby  boy.  I  was  at  home  for  the  hohdays  during  the
summer  of  1886.  I  thmk  the  month  was  August.  I  was
employed  m  reading  for  an  Indian  prize  given  at  school  ;
consequently,  on  the  occasion  of  a  tennis  party  given  at
our  house,  the  Rectory  of  Great  RoUright,  Chippmg  Norton,
Oxfordshire,  I  did  not  go  out  with  the  rest  when  they
went  down  to  our  tennis  court,  which  is  about  200  yards
off,  but  stayed  inside  the  house  reading  Holmes'  Indian
Mutiny. My  mother  had  gone  out  with  the  rest  to  the


ilO  3Irs.  Henry  Sidgioick.  [part

tennis  ground.  Feeling  it  cold,  she  sent  my  youngest
brother,  H.,  for  her  white  shawl.  I  met  him  halfway
between  the  tennis  ground  and  the  house  carrying  the
aforesaid  sha^\'l  [myself].  The  reasons  for  this  were  :
at  the  time  that  my  mother  asked  my  brother  to  get  her
the  shawl,  I  felt  an  impression  that  I  nuist  do  something.
This  graduall}^  increased  in  intensity  till  1  Imew  that
my  mother  wanted  a  shawl  ;  then,  as  if  by  another  stage
of  completer  intuition,  I  knew  it  ^^^as  a  white  shawl,
and  I  knew  that  I  had  to  go  to  the  drawing-room  to
fetch  it  (though  I  did  not  previously  Imow  it  was  there).
So  I  went  and  fetched  it  and  brought  it  to  my  mother,
as  I  felt  ol)Hged  to  do.  She  and  my  brother  were,  of
course,  greatly  surprised,  and  I  remember  asking  her
whether  she  had  thought  of  me  in  connection  with  the
shawl,  or  wished  me  in  any  way  especially  to  fetch  it.
She  responded  in  the  negative,  which  makes  the  matter
more  curious.  The  call  Avas  distmct  and  imperative,  and
altogether  unlike  anything  else  I  have  ever  experienced.
I  have  never  seen  phantasmagoria,  &c.,  or  had  any  other
strange  exjDeriences  of  the  sort  before  or  since.

Vernon  H.  Kendall.

I  corroborate  all  the  details  in  the  mcident  liere  related.

Ellen  H.  Rendall.

Great  Rollright  Rectory,  Chipping  Norton.

The  second  case  (L.  1131,  Journal,  Vol.  XI.,  p.  80)  was
sent  to  Mr.  N.  W.  Thomas  by  a  friend  of  his,  Mr.  A.  B.
Gough,  who  collected  the  evidence  for  it.  We  are
requested  not  to  publish  the  names  of  the  persons  con-
cerned.

(L.  1131.)

The  account  is  contauied  in  a  letter  written  in  German
by  Frau  U.,  of  which  the  following  is  a  translation  :

February  2lst,  1902.

On  the  evening  of  February  25th, 1897,  I  was  sitting
alone, as  I  almost  mvariably  did, and  reading,  when  I


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  noi  Exfenialised .  Ill


suddenly  thought  of  the  Beethoven  Trio  Op.  1  No.  1  ^  so
vividly  that  I  got  uj)  to  look  for  the  music,  which  I  had
not  touched  for  nearly  20  years.  It  was  just  as  if  I
could  hear  the  "cello  and  violm  parts,  and  the  bowing
and  exjDression  seemed  to  be  that  of  two  gentlemen  Avho

had  played  with  me  often  in  C so  many  years  before.

One  of  them,  Kammermusiker  L  ,  first  'cellist  of  the

Residence Theatre in C  , had been my eldest  son's

master, but had been called to H in 1878.  The

other, who  was  employed  by  my  husband  at  that  time

as clerk of the works, had subsequently quitted  C

also,  and  removed  m  the  middle  of  the  nineties  to  H  .

I  had  often  seen  him  since  he  left  C  ,  and  had  also

! played  duets  with  him,  but  never  again  in  a  trio.

'  I  got  out  the  piano  part  and  began  to  play  ; — I  must

J here adniit that I had played Avith Z  and  L

t  principally  the  Trio  m  B  sharp,  Op.  97,  and  the  one  in
C  flat.  Op.  1  No.  3,  and  was  myself  surprised  that  this
Op.  1  No.  1,  which  we  had  hardly  ever  played,  was
rmging  ui  my  ears.  At  any  rate  1  heai'd  with  my
mental  ear  this  melody  so  exactly  that  I  played  the  piece
right  through  to  the  end.

About  10  o'clock  the  bell  rang  and  my  housemate,  the

daughter of Lieutenant-Col. G  ,  who lived over  me,

came  m.  She  apologised  for  her  late  visit  and  assured
me  that  she  could  not  sleep  until  she  had  found  out  what
I  had  been  playing.  I  supphed  the  mformation,  and  she
remarked,  "  Well,  what  brought  that  into  your  head  ?  "
"  I  don't laiow, I  haven't  oiDened  the book  for  t^Aenty

years, but before I began I heard Z and  1.^

playmg  and  I  felt  I  must  recall  the  full  harmony."

The  next  day  but  one  the  enclosed  card  came  ;  it  had
been  written,  as  we  estabUshed  by  subsequent  correspond-
ence, on the same evenmg and  at  the  same  hour,  and

as  the  post-mark  shows,  deUvered  (in  K  )  the  foUowmg

[should  be  "the  next  but  one"]  morning.

(Signed) Frau  M U  .


1  This  accoimt  does  not  strirtly  agree  with  Mr.  Z
Fran  U  's  contemporary  postcard,  see  below  p.  113


i  "s  account  of


112


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


The  following  is  a  translation  of  the  postcard:

H  ,  25  Febr.  97.

After  playmg  Beethoven  0]).  1  No.  1  we  send  you
hearty  greetings  in  remembrance  of  happy  hours  spent
togetlier  m  the  past.  Z  ,  R L  .

The  postcard  bears  the  post-marks—"  H  .  .  .  26/2/97.
8-9  V."  ("V."  =  A.M.)  and  "  K.  .  .  .  26/2/97  10-11."  The
mark  after  "  10-11  "  is  very  indistinct,  resembling  both  V.
and  N.  ;  but  apparently  it  must  be  "N."  (  =P.M.),  since  it
takes  at  least  six  or  seven  hours  for  a  letter  to  go  from
H.  to  K.  The  postcard  woukl  then  not  have  been  delivered
in  K.  before  the  following  morning.

Mr.  Gough  obtamed  the  foUowuig  corroborative  statement
from  Fraulein  G.  :

On  Feb.  25th,  1897,  I  heard  some  one  playing  the  jjiano

at  Frau  U  's  below  us  between  9  and  10. I  could  not

remember  what  it  Avas,  though  I  Itnew  the  music  ; so  I

went  down  and  asked. I learnt  that Frau U had

been  playing  Beethoven  Op.  1  No.  1,  a  piece  which  she
had  not  played  for  many  years.  U G  .

Miss  G.  writes  as  follows  in  answer  to  further  questions  :

I  noticed  that  Frau  U was  playing  only  one  part.

She  explamed  to  me  that  she  was  playing  it  because  she
felt  she  must  (der  Gedanke  an  das  Stiick  sie  dazu  trieb).
I saw  the  postcard  after  it arrived. The  date  was,  as

I  satisfied  myself,  the  same  as  that  on  which  Frau  U

liad  played  the  piece.  U G  .

Mr.  Gough  in  sending  the  case,  writes  as  follows  to  Mr.
Thomas  :

Fehruanj  23rd,  1902.

I enclose Frau U  's accomit of her  experience,

together  with  the  postcard  and  a  short  note  by  Frl.  G  ,

written  without  any  previous  consultation  with  Frau  U  .

The  latter  however  had  described  the  occurrence  to  me
last  Smaday  m  the  presence  of  Frl.  G  ,  and  mentioned


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  not  Externalised .  113

the  date,  which  can  therefore  hardly  be  regarded  as
corroborated  by  the  latter.  .  .  .

Frau  U is  writing,  or  has  written,  to  Mr.  Z  to

ask  him  to  write  down  his  version,  but  she  does  not
think  he  will  remember  much,  as  he  is  very  forgetful.  .  .  .
She  has  related  the  experience  twice  to  me,  without
any  divergence  from  the  written  account.  She  added
that  as  she  only  played  her  part  in  the  trio,  the  pecuhar

effect attracted the curiosity of Frl.  G (at least  I

think  so).  .  .  .  Whether  the  statement  that  the  two
men  played  the  piece  at  exactly  the  same  time  can  be

confirmed,  I  don't  Imow. Frau  U says  it  was  their

habit  to  play  music  after  a  late  dimier.  One  might  guess
that  this  was  the  case  when  the  postcard  Avas  written.
As you will observe, it was not posted till the  next

morning. It passed through the K P.O. on  the

evening of the 26th and Avas dehvered at the  house

the next morning.  .  .  . Fi'au U had only  made

the  acquaintance  of Frl.  G shortly  before  the  event,

and  they  were  not  on  such  intimate  terms  as  they  are
now.

The  following  is  a  translation  of  a  letter  from  Mr.  Z.  to
Mr.  Thomas  :

27/4/1902.

After  the  event  in  question  on  Feb.  25,  1897,  Frau  U

wi'ote  me  a  postcard  containing  the  following  words
amongst  others  :  "I  must  mention  also  the  remarkable
coincidence  ;  I  had  not  played  for  months,  but  on  the
evening  of  the  25tli  I  had  such  an  unconquerable  desire
to  play  that  I  executed  first  a  piece  of  Schumann  (from
the  Kreisleriana)  and  then,  Avithout  knowing  Avhy  I  did  so,
the  first  and  second  movements  of  the  Trio  Op.  1."

We  plajred  immediately  after  dinner,  about  9  in  the
evening.  The  performances  may  therefore  have  been
simultaneous.  The  Kreisleriana  was  a  souvenir  of  our
former musical companionship. I gave the book  to

Frau  U and  she  frequently  played  me  pieces  from  it.

I  had  sjjoken  several  times  to  Mr.  L on  the  evening

in  question  (before  Ave  began)  about  the  Trio-evenings  in


114


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgnnck.


[part


C  . It seems possible therefore that a  telepathic

influence  was  at  work.

Z  .

In  answer  to  further  questions,  Mr.  Z.  writes  :

Maij  dth,  1902.

With  the  exception  of  this  single  evening  I  have  only

met'  Herr  L in  the  street (i.e. after  leaving  C  )  ;

on  such  occasions  he  occasionally  asked  after  the  U

family.  With  the  exception  of  the  j^ostcarcl  in  c^uestion
we  never  sent  a  common  greeting  to  Frau  U  .

Ml'.  L.  was  also  asked  to  confirm  the  account,  but  no
answer  to  this  request  was  received.

Mr.  Gough  wites  furtlier  as  follows  :

31  arch  lih,  1902.

Re  Frau  U  : The  first  time  she  told  me  the  story

was  one  day  this  semester,  before  Xmas,  probably  in
December.  She  believes  she  had  been  reading,  but  she
has  quite  forgotten  what.  She  is  certain  she  had  not
been  playing  the  piano.  She  hardly  ever  plays.  She
has  no  knowledge  of  having  been  thinking  of  the  men.
The  date  was  not  in  any  way  associated  with  them.

She  knew  that  Z was  in  H  ,  and  she  believes

she  had  sent  him  greetings  on  his  birthday,  the  20th  of
January,  l)ut  she  had  not  received  or  expected  a  reply.
It  is  her  habit  to  exchange  bu'thday  greetings  with  cer-
tain friends to whom she  writes on no other  occasions.

She  always  sends  Z a  card  on  his  birthday,  and  he

sends  one  on  hers  (in  November),  but  they  do  not  cor-
respond except  for  this.  Tliere  was  no  communication
between  them  between  his  birthday  and  the  occurrence.
She  had  no  idea  that  the  two  men  played  together,  nor

indeed  that  they  had  met  in  H  , although  she  had

heard a  good  while before that L had obtained  a

post  there.  She  did  not  know,  however,  whether  he  was
still  there. She  had  no  communications  with  him.

There  was  certainly  no  piano  or  other  instrument  in
the house, or in either of the adjoining houses  that


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  not  Exiernalised.  115


could  have  been  heard  on  the  evenmg  in  question.  Fiau

U told nie who her neighbours above, below,  right

and  left  were,  and  assures  me  that  they  none  of  them
played  music. She  is  qviite  positive  about  this.

She  has  never  been  to  a  concert  at  K  .

The  trio  used  to  play  some  other  pieces  very  often,
but  this  piece  was  only  played  about  twice.

Unfortunately I have not seen Frl. G again,  but

Frau  U tells  me  she  (l^'rl.  G  )  knew  the  date  (as

I  supposed)  from  hearing  it  talked  about  when  I  was
there  in  February,  when  the  post-card  was  produced.  Frau

U also says she showed her  the post-card when  it

came  ; also  that  Frl. G did  notice  it  was  only  one

part that was being played. Frl. G is sa.id  (l)y

Frau U  ) to have a remarkable memory for  tunes

and  sounds.

May  9th,  1902.

Z had  given  her  several  books  of  music,  including

B.'s  Sonatas,  but  not  his  trios.

She had played Schumann's Kreisleriana x-mal  "  to

Z  . He  had  given  her  a  copy  in  1S75. Shown  me,

with  dedication.

Frau  U  has  found  in  an  old  memorandum  book  a

note to effect that she wrote to Z  on March  1st,

1897,  [which  was]  shown  me.

The  third  case  of  the  group  (L.  8S6,  Journal,  Vol.  V.,
p.  137)  also  describes  the  playing  of  a  particular  inece
of  music  in  response  to  an  unusual  impulse.  I  do  not
quote  it  in  fiill,  as  I  understand  it  was  communicated
to  us  not  for  publication.  It  is  a  death  coincidence.
The  piece  was  a  favourite  of  a  friend  of  the  percipient's
who  had  made  her  promise  that  if  possible  she  would
play  it  to  her  on  her  death-bed.  The  percipient  did
not  often  play  it,  and  on  the  evening  when,  as  she  says,
"  Suddenly  and  unconsciously  to  myself  I  found  myself
playing  "  it,  and  consequently  thinking  of  her  friend,  she
was  not  even  aware  that  the  friend,  Avho  died  that
evening,  was  ill. We  do  not  know  that  the  dying  agent


IKi


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


had  the  music  or  the  percipieiat  in  mind,  but  for  the
latter  the  association  of  the  music  with  the  idea  of  the
agent's  death  was  close.  The  case  was  sent  to  Mr.
Myers,  who  knew  the  percipient,  about  eight  months  after
the  occurrence.

§  6. Imiwessimis  of  Danger.

The  two  experiences  to  be  next  described  are  of  a
vaguer  kind — impressions  of  calamity  or  impending  danger
not  connected  by  the  percipient  at  the  time  with  any
particular  agent.  In  the  first  (L.  990,  Journal,  Vol.  VIL,
p.  120)  the  percipient  describes  an  "indefinable  dread
amounting  to  positive  terror  "  on  the  day  on  which,  as
it  proved,  her  brother  was  taken  seriously  ill  as  the
result  of  an  accident.  Unfortunately  the  narrative,
though  the  record  was  made  only  a  few  months  after
the  experience,  is  not  very  complete,  and  does  not  tell
us  when  the  accident  occurred  and  whether  the  impression
began  before  it  and  was  thus  premonitory  or  not.

The  second  case  (L.  1142,  Journal,  Vol.  XL,  p.  323)  de-
scribing a  feeling  of  impending  danger,  which  was  possibly
the  result  of  telejiathy  from  a  dog,  and  certainly  led
to  the  discovery  of  its  perilous  condition,  is  of  interest
as  bearing  on  the  question  whether  animals  can  be  in
telepathic  communication  with  men.^

(L.  1142.)

The  case  was  sent  to  us  by  Mr.  J.  F.  Young,  of  New  Road,
Llanelly,  South  Wales.

New  Road,  Llanelly,  Nov.  IWi,  1904.

I  own  a  rough  terrier,  about  5  years  old,  which  I  have
brought  up  from  a  pup.  I  have  always  been  a  great
lover  of  animals,  dogs  especially.  This  dog  returns  my
affection  so  much  that  I  never  go  anywhere,  not  even
leave the room, but he nuist follow me. He is  death


1  Foui'  other  possible  cases  of  animal  agency  will  be  found  in  tliis
chapter  and  the  next.  A  case  of  possible  animal  percipieney  is  L.  1156,
p.  .-$40.


IjXXXVi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  not  Externalised.  117

on  rats,  and  the  scullery  being  visited  occasionally  by  these
rodents,  I  have  a  comfortable  bed  for  Fido  to  sleep  on.
In  this  room  there  is  a  fire-place  with  an  oven  suitable
for  baking,  and  a  boiler  for  washing,  with  a  flue  running
back  into  the  chimney  (as  sketch)  [not  reproduced  here].
It  was  my  custom  to  take  him  to  his  bed  the  last  thing
before  retiring  for  the  night.  I  had  undressed  and  was
about  getting  into  bed,  when  an  unaccountable  feeling
came  over  me  of  impending  danger.  I  could  think  of
nothing  possible  but  Fire,  and  the  impression  was  so
strong  that  I  yielded  to  it  and  actually  dressed  again,
and  went  downstairs  and  examined  each  room  to  satisfy
myself  that  all  was  right.  When  I  got  to  the  scullery
I  missed  Fido,  and  thinking  he  had  slipped  by  me  un-
observed to  go  upstairs,  I  immediately  began  to  call
him,  but  getting  no  response,  I  called  to  my  sister-in-law
to  know  if  she  had  heard  him,  and  getting  an  answer  in
the  negative,  I  began  to  feel  excited,  and  rushed  back
to  the  scullery  again,  and  called  repeatedly,  but  not  a
sound  could  be  heard.  What  to  do  I  did  not  know.
It  then  occurred  to  me  that  if  anything  will  get  him  to
respond  it  will  be  the  sentence,  "  Come  for  a  walk,  Fido,"
which  always  gave  him  delight.  As  soon  as  I  had  re-
peated this  sentence,  I  heard  a  faint  cry,  muftied  as  if
distant  ;  calling  again,  the  cry  of  a  dog  in  distress  came
plainly.  I  eventually  traced  it  to  the  tlue  [at  a  point
marked  in  the  sketch],  where  the  flue  uniting  the  boiler
with  chimney  runs.  For  the  moment  I  could  not  think
how  I  could  get  him  out  ;  moments  were  precious,  life
was  in  danger.  I  took  a  pickaxe  and  soon  tore  down
a  portion  of  the  wall,  when  with  some  difficulty  I  drew
him  out  half-dead,  panting,  vomiting,  tongue  and  body
black  with  soot  ;  my  pet  would  soon  have  been  dead,  and
as  the  boiler  is  only  used  occasionally,  I  should  never
have  known  Avhat  had  become  of  him.  Hearing  the
noise  my  sister-in-law  came  to  the  scene.  We  found  a
rat-hole  in  the  fireplace  which  led  to  the  flue.  Fido  had
evidently  chased  the  rat  into  the  flue  and  could  not  turn
or  retreat.  ...  This  occurred  a  few  months  ago  and  was
reported at the time in our local  paper, but I  never


118


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwiclc.


[part


thought  of  sending  it  to  you  until  I  read  the  Rider
Haggard  story. (See  below,  p.  219.)

J.  F.  Young.

Mr.  Young's  sister-in-law  writes  :

The  above  is  a  correct  account  of  the  incident.

E.  Bennett.

Mr.  Young  tells  us  that  his  sister-in-law  was  the  only  person
besides  himself  in  the  house  at  the  time  and  therefore  the
only  other  possible  Avitness.  In  reply  to  questions  as  to
the  possibility  of  his  having  heard  any  sounds  made  by  the
dog  before  he  went  downstairs,  he  writes  :

November  I9th,  1904.

.  .  .  Be  Dog.  As  suggested  by  you  1  will  give  you  a
few  more  particulars  relating  to  this.  I  think  you  will
at  once  see  the  utter  impossibility  of  any  sounds  reaching
me,  unless  they  had  been  veri/  loud,  and  even  then  my
sister-in-law,  who  sleej^s  nearer  the  dog  than  I  do,  would
have  noticed  it.  Tn  fact  she  enquired  as  I  was  crossing
the  landing  to  go  down,  where  I  was  going  ;  when  I
replied  that  "  I  felt  as  if  something  was  going  to  happen,
and  feared  it  might  be  fire."  I  may  here  remark  that  as
I  passed  from  room  to  room,  I  began  to  accuse  myself
for  being  so  silly  as  to  imagine  any  danger.  However,
I  went  on  looking  for  something,  not  having  the  slightest
idea  of  what  to  expect.  From  that  time,  until  I  read
Rider  Haggard's  dream,  I  put  it  down  to  an  intelligence
outside  myself  that  had  prompted  me  to  go  down.  The
telepathic  theory  now  takes  its  place,  especially  taking
into  consideration  the  devotion  of  the  dog,  for,  if  possible,
he  will  not  allow  me  out  of  his  sight,  and  in  my  absence
is  qiiite  a  different  dog.  .  .  .

In  reply  to  query  (1),  Yes.  I  took  him,  as  I  always
do,  to  his  bed  the  last  thing  [before  going]  the  round  of
the  rooms  and  tloors  to  see  that  all  is  safe.  I  (2)  also
enclose  a  sketch,  in  section,  which  will  give  you  an  idea
as  to  our  positions.  (3)  I  never  heard  any  sounds,  and
neither  could  I  get  any  after  repeated  whistling  and
calling, until I called him to go for a walk, and  that


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cas^s  :  Impression  not  Externalised.  119

was  so  faint  I  could  not  at  first  localise  it.  You  will
observe  the  position  of  the  dog  was  actually  the  furthest
[from  me]  that  could  be  in  the  house.  .  .  .

J.  F.  Young.

In  this  letter  and  a  later  one,  Mi".  Young  enclosed  rough
plans  of  his  house,  showing  his  bedroom  at  the  front,  and  on
the  opposite  side  of  the  house  from  the  scullery,  which  is  at
the  back.  The  bedroom  is  on  the  first  floor  and  the  scullery
in  the  basement,  the  ground  floor  intervening  between  them.
There  were  also  three  doors,  all  shut  and  locked,  between
the  interiors  of  the  two  rooms,  namely,  the  doors  of  the  rooms
themselves  and  a  third  door  at  the  top  of  the  lowest  flight
of  stairs  leading  down  to  the  basement.  Under  these  ckcum-
stances,  it  is  very  difficult  to  suppose  that  Mr.  Young  could
have  heard  any  sounds  from  the  dog  imprisoned  in  the  flue.

We  may  take  next  a  case  where  misfortune  was  averted
by  acting  on  the  impression  which  was  quite  definite,
but  where  we  cannot  point  with  any  certainty  to  a
particular  agent  (P.  285,  Journal,  Vol.  XVI.,  p.  29).  The
percipient  had,  however,  been  in  the  company  of  several
men  who  may  have  anticipated  danger.

(P.  285.)

The  account  was  sent  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  by  Mr.  John
A.  A.  Williams,  of  Aberglaslyn  Hall,  Beddgelert,  North  Wales,
in  a  letter  dated  October  31st,  1912  :

I  have  often  thought  of  writing  to  tell  you  the  following
facts.  The  story  got  into  some  of  the  papers,  and  I
saw  an  account  of  it  in  the  Liverpool  Courier  which  was
not quite correct. Until  last  year  I was  the  jDrincipal

proprietor of one of the largest slate quarries m .

I  used  to  go  up  there  occasionally  to  look  round  with
the  Manager,  who  had  the  charge  of  them.  On  Nov.
25th,  1910,  I  went  up  with  my  brother,  and  we  both  went
round  with  the  Manager.  On  our  rettun  in  the  motor,
my  brother  was  telling  me  about  a  "  shoot  "  he  had
been  to,  and  I  was  listening  attentively,  as  it  was  about


120  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.  ■  [part

a  mutual  friend.  In  the  middle  of  his  telling  me,  I  had
a  sort  of  message,  and  seemed  to  see  a  certain  portion
of  the  quarry  and  the  men  in  great  danger.  I  interrupted
my  brother  and  said,  "  Excuse  me  interrupting  you,  but
I  have  had  the  most  extraordinary  message,  that  those
eight  men  we  saw  working  are  in  danger."  He  said,
"  But  what  do  you  know  about  it  ?  The  men  have
worked  in  the  quarry  for  many  years,  and  they  would
know  if  it  were  dangerous  ;  also  the  Manager  and  sub-
agents  have  been  there  many  years  and  know  the  ground

well." I  said,  "  I  don't  care. I  shall  stop  at Post

Office  (after  dropping  my  brother)  and  will  wire  to  the
Manager  to  stop  them  working."  My  brother  said,  "  He
will  think  you  have  gone  perfectly  mad,"  and  that  I
had  never  interfered  with  the  working,  etc.,  etc.  ;  how-
ever, I  did  stop  and  I  sent  the  wire.  The  Manager  went
to  the  eight  (or  ten)  men  and  said  to  the  men,  "It  is
an  extraordinary  thing,  I  have  received  a  wire,  etc.,  from
Mr.  Williams.  I  cannot  understand  it,  but  you  must
stop  working  at  once,"  and  the  men  were  equally  surprised
and  took  up  their  tools  and  left  the  ground.  About  half
an  hour  to  three-quarters  of  an  hour  [later],  the  whole
of  that  ground  fell  to  the  bottom  of  the  quarry,  about
120  yards,  and  all  the  debris  from  above  fell  on  top  ;
nothing  could  have  saved  them — no  warnmg.  In  the
morning  I  had  several  telegrams,  one  from  the  agent,
saying,  "  good  thing  you  sent  wire,  as  all  the  ground  gave
way  shortly  after  the  men  left,"  and  I  had  others  to  the
same  effect.  When  I  received  them  I  lay  on  the  sofa
for  a  long  time  in  a  highly  nervous  state,  quite  overcome.
When  I  went  up  to  the  quarry  the  next  day  to  see  the
ground,  one  of  the  men  came  to  me  on  behalf  of  the
others,  to  thank  me  for  saving  their  lives.

John  A.  A.  Williams.

Through  the  efforts  of  Mr.  J.  Ai'thur  HiU,  who  kindly
undertook  to  collect  the  evidence  for  this  case,  the  original
letters  written  to  Mr.  Williams  next  day  by  his  brother,  and
by  the  agent  and  manager  of  the  quarry,  were  put  into  our
hands,  and  we  give  below  copies  of  them  :


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Gases  :  Impression  not  Externalised.  121

(1)  From  the  Agent.
. .  Nov.  26,  1910.

I  I  cannot  tell  you  how  glad  I  am  that  you  sent  that

telegram  yesterday  to  the  Manager,  because  all  that  ground
came  down  in  about  an  hour  after  the  men  cleared
away.

I  went  up  to-day  by  the  12.40  tram  and  saw  a  con-
siderable change  there.  For  a  length  of  about  20  yards
the  ground  where  we  and  the  men  stood  had  all  shpped
away,  so  that  it  is  now  not  possible  to  walk  the  whole
length  of  that  side  as  we  did  yesterday.  We  had  to
descend  from  close  to  the  eating  shed.  Part  of  the  wall
has  also  gone,  exposing  the  piles  :  still  there  is  no  leakage
of  water  from  the  lake.  The  men  are  clearing  right  well
from  both  ends.  We  can  only  hope  that  the  water  will
keep  away  for  a  little  while, until  a  temporary  bit  of

I  dam  can  be  made  there.  Somehow  I  feel  much  calmer
to-day, seeing  how  near  we  were  to a  great disaster —

Y  the  killing  of  7  to  10  men.  We  must  still  hope  for  the
best.

[P.<S'.] — I  have  dropped  further  note  to  Mr.  D.  saying
that  a  further  lot  fell  last  night.

f  .

\  (2)  From  the  Manager.

Nov.  26,  1910.

I  was  very  glad  to  have  your  wire  last  night,  as  I  was
so  anxious  about  the  safety  of  the  men.  They  also
were  aU  very  glad  to  hear  your  order  not  to  work  in  the
;  dark.  And,  no  doubt,  it  was  very  fortunate  that  you
;  •  did  wire,  because  about  an  hour  later  the  whole  of  the
i  place  where  they  were  working  upon  went  down.
I  I  wired  you  this  morning  to  inform  you  that  [a]  great

[deal]  more  of  the  rubbish  as  well  as  a  part  of  the  piles
and  a  part  of  the  big  wall  went  down  last  night  ;  fortu-
nately the  water  still  keeps  back,  there  are  a  few  very
small  streams  running'^down  the  clay  side,  it  is  impossible
to  say  whether  these  come ;  from  the  actual  ake  or  not,
we  are  setting  small  troughs  to  carry  it  over  the  clay.  .  .  .


122


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


(3)  From  Mr.  Williams's  brother.

Monday  [Nov.  28,  1910],
This  morning  I  drove  to  the  quarry.  Tlie  position  now
seems  to  me  to  be  much  more  favourable  than  it  was  on
Saturday.  There  are  no  cracks  known  to  exist  in  the
face  of  the  rocks.  The  gravel  will  keep  dropping  until
a  natural  face  is  formed.  I  certainly  feel  to-night  that,
barring  a  big  flood  in  the  next  fortnight,  water  will  not

flood  the  quarry. G and  all  the  men  are  doing  their

very  best  to  clear  down  to  the  virgin  soil  in  the  lowest
water  level  part,  and  I  am  sure  if  you  could  motor  up
again  they  would  all  be  very  glad  to  see  you,  and  I  am
sure  your  mind  would  be  as  much  relieved  as  mine  is
this  evening.  It  is  well  you  sent  that  wire.  I  forgot
to  ask  how  much  warnmg  that  part  gave — probably  not
much.

In  reply  to  a  question  from  Mr.  HiU  as  to  whether  there
was  any  apparent  danger  of  such  an  accident  happening,  Mr.
Williams  wrote  :

Nov.  3,  1912.

There  is  always  danger  [in]  working  in  those  quarries
where  the  sides  are  perpendicular  for  over  100  yards.
There  were  no  indications  of  any  unusual  danger,  as  my
brother  could  bear  me  out.  I  both  spoke  to  the  agent
that  day  and  also  to  the  sub-agent,  that  on  no  account
was  any  risk  to  be  run,  if  the  place  showed  any  indica-
tions of  danger,  and  they  both  said  they  would  not  run
the  risk,  neither  would  the  men.  .  .  .  The  Manager  and
men  knew  the  ground  well  and  they  would  not  run  any
risk  (unnecessary).

You  will  notice  my  Manager  says  in  his  letter,  "  I  was
very  glad  to  have  your  wire,  as  I  was  anxious  about  the
safety  of  the  men."  Why  did  he  say  that  in  his  letter
when  he  told  us  both  that  it  was  quite  safe  and  when  I
told  him  not  to  run  any  risk  ?  .  .  .

The  discrepancy  pointed  out  by  Mr.  Williams  is  perhaps  to
be  explained  by  supposing  that  the  Manager,  after  the  cata-
strophe, blamed himself for not  foreseeing it and  imagined


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases:  Impression  not  Externalised.  123

that  he  had  felt  an  anxiety  beforehand,  for  which  there  seems
to  have  been  no  adequate  ground.  In  situations  of  tliis  kind,
there  may  often  be  subconscious  anxiety  in  the  minds  of  the
persons  concerned.  It  is  conceivable  that  some  such  feeling
in  the  Manager  impressed  Mi-.  Williams  telepathically,  and
caused  him  to  send  the  telegram.  It  is  also  conceivable  that
Ml".  Williams  subconsciously  noticed  some  indications  of  danger
when  he  visited  the  quarry,  and  that  this  gave  rise  later  to
his  sudden  imj)ulse  to  send  the  telegram.

In  the  letter  just  quoted,  Mr.  Williams  gives  two  rough
drawings  of  a  section  through  the  quarry,  showing  the  jDosition
of  the  ground  before  and  after  the  accident.  The  height  of
the  gallery  on  wliicli  the  men  were  working  is  given  as  340
feet  from  the  bottom  of  the  quarry.

With  a  view  to  obtaining  further  evidence  as  to  Avhether
there  was  any  reasonable  ground  for  exjjecting  an  accident,
IVIi-.  Williams,  who  has  taken  a  great  deal  of  trouble  to  pro-
vide us  with  all  the  information  possible,  m-ote  to  his  brother
to  ask  for  his  present  recollections  of  the  incident,  and  sent
us  his  reply,  which  seems  to  sliow  that  at  least  neither  of
the  brothers  was  at  all  anxious  about  the  condition  of  the
quarry.

The  letter  is  as  folIoAvs  ;

Dec.  31,  1912.

My  recollection  of  what  occurred  on  Nov.  24th,  1910,
when  you and I were returnuig  from the quarry in  a

motor  is  that  when  passing about  nine  miles  from

the  quarry,  and  I  was  telling  you  about  a  shoot  that  I
had  been  to,  you  suddenly  interrupted  me  and  said  some-
thing to  the  following  effect  :  "  Whilst  you  v/ere  talking
I  had  a  curious  sort  of  message  that  those  men  are  in
danger,  and  that  I  shall  send  a  whe  to  stop  them  working

when  I  get  to ,"  and  you  went  to  the  Post  Office

there  and  sent  the  telegram  to  G instructing  him  to

immediately  stop  the  men.

The  date  Nov.  24,  1910,  here  given,  is  obviously  a  slip,  as
the  contemporary  letters  show  that  it  was  on  Nov.  25,  1910,
that  the  accident  occurred.


124


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


§  7. Vague  hut  insistent  thought  of  Agent.

In  the  last-mentioned  three  cases  it  has  been  the  idea
of  the  event  and  not  that  of  the  agent  that  has  been
apparently  transferred,  however  vaguely.  In  the  next
two,  what  reaches  the  percipient  is  nothing  but  the
idea  of  the  agent.  The  first  of  the  two  (L.  972,  Journal,
Vol.  VI.,  p.  212) — if  not  a  mere  coincidence,  which  is
perhaps  the  most  probable  hypothesis — has  the  interest
of  a  sort  of  semi-reciprocality  about  it,  the  proximity,
unknown  to  either,  of  agent  and  percipient  being  the
only  cause  suggested  for  the  percipient's  thought  of
the  agent,  and  this  thought  leading  possibly  to  the
agent's  thinking  of  the  percipient  some  hours  later.

(L.  972.)

The  account  comes  from  Mi's.  WaUier,  319,  Hagley-road,
Edgbastou,  Birmingham.  It  was  eiiclosed  in  a  letter  dated
November  15th,  1893,  but  Mrs.  Walker  tells  us  that  it  was
written  some  time  earlier.

On  September  10th,  1892,  I  was  waUdng  by  myself
along  a  road  near  our  home,  hastening  to  join  my  husband,
to  look  over  a  new  house  which  we  thought  might  suit
us.  My  mind  was  completely  absorbed  in  mental  measure-
ments and  arrangement  of  rooms — weighing  questions  of
rent,  exjoenses,  and  sleeping  accommodation,  etc.,  etc.,
so  that  I  scarcely  noticed  anything  by  the  way.  Sud-
denly the  whole  train  of  thought  vanished  from  my  mind,
and  was  replaced  by  a  mental  picture  of  a  little  boy
about  12,  whom  formerly  I  used  occasionally  to  notice
about  in  our  parish  at  various  meetings,  but  whom  I
[had]  not  seen  for  more  than  a  year,  and  certainly  (as
far  as  I  could  remember)  had  never  thought  of,  or  in-
quired about,  since.  I  did  not  know  him  well,  but  had
merely  spoken  to  him  once  or  twice,  as  one  amongst
hundreds  of  our  school  children,  though  he  had  so  far
impressed  me  that  I  should  have  described  him  as  a
rather  original  little  fellow,  and  better  educated  than  most.

However,  busy  and  preoccuj^ied  as  I  was  that  morning
Joey  Fisher  suddenly,  without  the  slightest  cause  or  outside


LXXxvi.]  Spontaneous  Gases  :  Impression  7iot  Externalised.  125

suggestion,  obtruded  himself  upon  my  mind,  so  that  I
began  to  wonder  what  had  become  of  the  lad,  as  I  had
neither  seen  nor  heard  anything  of  him  for  about  a  year.
His  face  seemed  to  rise  up  before  me,  and  the  thought
of  him  occupied  my  mind  for  a  minute  or  two.  I  was
then  passing  along  a  road  separated  by  a  high  hedge
from  the  Rotton  Park  Reservoir,  and  can  remember  the
very  place  where  I  began  to  think  of  the  boy,  and  where,
on  coming  in  sight  of  the  turn  in  the  road  that  led  to  the
new  house,  my  thoughts  seemed  to  jump  back  to  the
absorbing  subject  of  interest  with  regard  to  the  decision
we  had  to  make  at  once  about  the  house.  I  thought  no
more  about  it  until,  early  in  the  evening,  a  parcel  con-
taining a  large  pilie  was  brought  in  to  me  from  Joey
Fisher.  I  was  still  more  surprised  when,  coming  back
from  a  parish  meeting  later  the  same  evening,  I  happened
to  meet  the  boy  in  the  street,  and  learned  that  he  had
caught  the  pike  himself  that  day  in  our  Reservoir,  and
had  been  standing  fishing  down  below  the  road  at  the
exact  time  I  had  passed  (but  quite  out  of  sight  of  the
road).  I  asked,  "  What  made  him  thinlc  of  sending  it
to  me  ?  "  He  rephed,  "  I  don't  know  ;  it  seemed  to
come  into  my  mind  all  at  once,  '  I  wonder  if  Mrs.  Walker
would  like  this  fish  ?  '  So  I  asked  at  home  if  I  might
take  it  you,  and  went  up  with  it  in  the  evening."

Afterwards  I  thought  it,  at  any  rate,  such  a  curious
coincidence  that  I  asked  the  boy  to  write  it  down,  which
he  did,  and  I  enclose  his  short  account.

I  may  add  that  I  had  never  imagined  in  any  way  either
that  he  could  fish  or  would  be  likely  to  be  at  the  Reser-
voir. In  fact,  the  boy  had  scarcely  ever  entered  into  my
consciousness,  until  he  suddenly  that  morning  seemed  to
spring  up  before  my  mental  vision,  displacing  an  absorbing
train  of  thought,  just  when,  unknown  to  each  other,  we
were  very  near  together.  Jessie  E.  Walker.

P.S. — You  will  notice,  the  boy  did  not,  apparently,
think  of  sending  the  fish  to  me  until  he  returned  to  the
same  spot  in  the  afternoon  ;  so,  although  he  had  come  into
my  mind  when  passing  (unseen)  in  the  morning,  it  was  not
for  some  hours  later  that  /  seem  to  have  occurred  to  him.


126


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


The  account  enclosed  by  Mrs.  Walker  is  as  follows  :

I  was  fishing  for  pike  at  the  Reservoir,  Edgbaston,  on
Saturday,  September  10th.  I  caught  one  in  the  morning,
and  before  going  home  to  dinner  I  threw  in  several  lines,
and  when  I  returned  in  the  afternoon  I  stood  for  a  time
on  the  feeder  bridge,  watching  the  smaller  fish,  when  I
noticed  an  unusual  flutter  in  the  water  just  about  the
spot  where  in  the  morning  I  had  put  in  the  lines  ;  I  got
my  drag  and  was  very  surprised  to  find  I  had  caught
another  pike.  I  was  very  pleased  and  wondered  what  I
should  do  Avith  it,  and  suddenly  I  thought,  how  would
i\'Ii's.  Walker  like  it.  When  I  got  home  my  sister  made  it
into  a  j)arcel  and  I  took  it  to  Mi-s.  WaU^er  in  the  evening  ;
the  same  night  I  hapj^ened  to  meet  Mrs.  Walker  in  the
Crescent  ;  she  said  she  was  very  pleased  with  it  and
thanked  me  [and  said]  how  singular  it  was  that  at  the
very  time  I  was  thinking  what  to  do  with  the  pike,  she
was  the  other  side  of  the  Reservoir  thinking  of  me,  and
wondering  where  I  was,  as  she  had  not  seen  me  for  so  long.

Berea,  Gillot-road.  J-  ^-  Fisher.

March  18th,  1893.

In  the  second  case  (L.  1199,  Journal,  Vol.  XVI.,  p.  203)
the  tragical  nature  of  the  agent's  or  agents'  experience
presents  a  strong  contrast  to  the  triviality  of  the  last,
but  does  not  help  to  explain  why  the  imj)ression  should
have  come  to  the  particular  percipient  on  that  day.  The
case  was  sent  to  us  by  the  late  Mr.  F.  E.  Kitchener  of
Stone,  Staffordshire.

(L.  1199.)

The  names  and  addresses  of  all  the  persons  concerned  have
been  communicated  to  us,  but  by  request  pseudonyms  or
initials  are  here  substituted.  The  percipient,  Mr.  "  Parker,"
who  is  a  clergyman,  describes  his  experience  as  follows  in  a
letter,  a  copy  of  which  was  received  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  from
Mr.  Kitchener  on  December  16th,  1913  :

On  Sunday  evening,  Dec.  7th,  1913,  I  explained  to  my
niece  and  companion,  M.  W.,  that  thoughts  of  two  friends


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Gases  :  Lmpression  not  Externalised.  127

in  whose  house  I  had  hved  for  12  months,  44  years  ago,
for  the  purposes  of  completing  my  education  after  leaving
school,  had  occupied  my  mind  during  the  day  in  a  most
unaccountable  manner.  I  had  not  seen  Mr.  and  Mi's.  C.
for  28  years,  and  had  long  since  ceased  to  correspond  with
them. The  last  time I  had  heard  of  them they  were

hving  m  retirement  at  D  . I  added  that  I  was  so  much

impressed-  by  the  frequent  recurrence  of  these  thoughts
that,  had  there  been  any  tendency  to  superstition  about
me,  I  should  probably  have  expected  to  hear  that  some-
thing had  happened  to  one  or  both  of  them.  My  niece
and  I  smiled  at  the  very  suggestion  !

On  the  following  Friday,  to  my  surprise,  I  received  a  copy

of  the D Daily  Telegraph  in  which  was  the  account

of  the  tragic  death  of  Mrs.  C.  from  burning,  which  occurred
early  in  the  mornmg  of  Suiiday,  Dec.  7th.  Her  nightdress
caught  fire  as  she  was  lighting  a  candle  to  ascertain  the
time  by  her  watch.  The  doctor  at  the  inquest  reported
that  death  had  ensued  very  shortly  after  the  accident,
and  was  mainly  due  to  shock.

Mr.  and  Mrs.  C.  were  86  years  of  age.

Miss  W.  corroborates  Mr.  Parker's  statement  as  follows  in
a  letter  received  by  Mr.  Ivitchener  on  January  5th,  1914  :

On  Sunday,  Dec.  7th,  [1913],  at  lunch  time,  my  uncle
spoke  to  me  about  a  Mr.  and  Mrs.  C,  saying  he  had
been  thinliing  all  the  morning  about  them.  I  had  never
heard  him  mention  them  before,  and  did  not  know  of
their  existence.

Then  again  at  supper  time  he  spoke  of  them  and  said
that,  if  he  had  been  of  at  aU  a  superstitious  nature,  he
supposed  he  should  have  expected  to  hear  something  about
them  within  the  next  few  days.

On  the  following  Friday  he  received  a  cutting  from  a

D newspaper  with  an  account  of  Mrs.  C.'s  accident

and  death.

Before  telling  me  that  he  had  received  the  paper,  he
asked  me  on  which  day  it  was  that  he  had  spoken  to  me
about  Mr.  and  Mi-s.  C.  This  he  did  to  make  sure  that
it  was  the  day  of  the  accident. [Signed]  M.  W.


128  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.  [part

Ml'. Parker sent us the cutting from the D Daily

Telegraj)li  above  referred  to.  It  is  dated  Monday,  December

8, 1913, and describes the  death as having occurred  soon
after  6  a.m.

Mr.  Kitchener  whites  : —

To  the  facts  as  stated  by  Mi-.  [Parker]  I  may  add  the
following  :

(1)  Mr.  [Parker]  is  a  man  I  have  known  for  years,
accurate  and  businesslilse.  He  has  hitherto  had  no
sympathy  with  any  investigation  of  such  cases,  as  I
know  from  his  recejition  of  one  or  two  personal  experiences
of  my  own  communicated  by  me  to  him.  I

(2)  I  never  heard  him  mention  Mr.  and  Mrs.  C,  though
he  has  told  me  many  details  of  his  boyhood  and  young-
manliood.  I  understand  his  niece  had  never  heard  him
mention  them  either.

(3)  [Mr.  Parker]  performed  three  full  services  on  Sunday,  [
Dec. 7 [1913], so that  there  was much to divert  him
throughout  the  day  from  the  thought  of  Mr. and  Mrs.
C,  which,  he  says — nevertheless — occupied  his  mind  during
the  day.  [Signed] F.  E.  Kitchener.

Compare  with  this  an  experience  reported  by  Miss
MacLellau,  who  has  been  already  referred  to  above,  p.  103.
The  one  in  question  is  No.  VII.,  Journal,  Vol.  XIX.,
p.  175.  A  persistent  impression  of  a  friend  about  the
time  she  was  killed  in  Paris  by  a  German  shell  is  de-
scribed.

§  8. Thovght  of  Agent  and  his  condition.

The  reader  will  probably  turn  with  relief  from  these
rather  vague  cases  to  seven  in  which  the  idea  of  the  event
and  of  the  person  concerned  in  it  (the  presumed  agent)
are  combined  in  the  percipient's  mind.  The  first  two
are  death  coincidences.

The  first  (L.  1125),  Journal,  Vol.  X.,  p.  79,  is  from
Mr.  J.  F.  You.ng,  Llanelly,  who  was  the  percipient  in
the  case  concerning  a  dog  (see  above,  p.  116).  The
present case is one of many similar impressions  which


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases :  tm/pression  not  Externalised.  129

Mr.  Young  has  had.  The  interest  of  this  particular  one
consists  in  the  fact  that  Mr.  Young  at  once  acted  upon
the  suggestion  made  to  him  some  time  previously  by
Sir  Wilham  Barrett,  and  at  the  moment  of  its  occurrence
wrote  down  the  intimation  with  the  date  and  hour.

(L.  1125.)

New  Road,  Llanelly,  March  9/01.

The  following  account  of  a  presentiment  I  recently  had
may  be  interesting  to  you.

I  was  havmg  my  supper  on  the  evening  of  February
15th  last,  when  a  message  came  from  a  customer  requiring
my  services.  I  sent  back  a  reply  that  I  would  come
immediately  I  had  my  supper.  It  has  always  been  a
strong  point  with  me  to  keep  my  appointments,  and
therefore,  having  hastily  finished  my  meal,  I  was  in  the
act  of  leaving  the  table  when  I  suddenly  exclaimed,
"  There  !  !  !  I  have  just  had  an  intimation  that  Robert
is  dead "  :  the  Robert  referred  to  is  a  Robert  HaUett
(a  brother-in-law)  who  was  residing  near  my  sister  (Mrs.
Pouting)  at  Sturminster  Newton,  Dorset.  He  had  been
bed-ridden  from  paralysis  for  this  last  two  years,  but  had
recently  been  much  Avorse.

I  at  once  entered  fuU  particulars  in  my  diary.  Date,
Feb.  15.  Message,  and  time  of  message,  9.40  p.m.  My
sister-in-law  was  present  the  Avhole  time,  and  can  vouch
for  the  circumstances.  On  the  17th  I  received  a  post-
card from  my  sister  at  Sturminster  Newton,  bearing  date
Feb.  16th,  stating,  that  "  Robert  had  passed  away,  will
write  to-morrow."

In  the  meantime  I  had  written  to  my  sister  Mrs.  Pout-
ing, mentioning  my  presentiment,  and  our  letters  crossed,
for  the  following  morning  a  letter  came  from  her  (I  must
mention  here  she  had  been  assisting  m  nursing  my  brother-
in-law),  saymg,  "  I  was  glad  you  had  a  presentiment  of
poor  Robert's  release,  he  passed  away  at  7.45  p.m.,  then
Lottie  [my  niece  Lottie  HaUett]  and  I  came  home  till
9.!f0,  and  that  was  the  time  you  had  the  impression."

I  wish  to  state  two  facts  in  connection  mth  the  fore-
going case. (1)  I  was  not  thinking  of  him  at  the  time,


130


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


my  mind  being  engrossed  in  my  appointment,  and  the
impression  came  so  startlingly  sudden,  which  caused  me  to
hastily  say.  There  !!!...  as  before  stated ;  and  (2)  at
the  same  moment,  I  had  a  sense  of  a  presence  at  my
left,  so  much  so,  that  I  looked  sharply  round,  but  found
no  one  there.

This  was  my  first  and  only  impression  during  his  long
illness.

It  will  be  observed  that  there  is  a  difference  of  nearly
two  hours  from  the  time  of  his  death  to  the  premonition.
Had  his  spirit  only  then  recovered  consciousness,  or  was
it  a  case  of  telejjathy  from  my  sister  on  her  arrival  to  the
quiet  of  her  home,  when  her  thoughts  roamed  to  me  1
I  may  say  we  are  devotedly  attached  to  each  other,  and
her  jjsychical  faculties  are  similar  to  my  own.  I  have
sent  you  post-card,  envelope,  and  part  of  letter  as  evidence,
and  Mxs.  Pouting  (my  sister)  will  give  you  every  facility
to  corroborate  what  I  have  written.  J.  F.  YouisiG.

The  sister-in-law  referred  to,  Miss  E.  Bennett,  has  read  the
above  statement  and  appends  the  following :

m  March,  1901.
The  foregoing  is  quite  correct. (Signed) E.  Bennett.

The  note  in  the  diary  occurs  amongst  some  memoranda  on
blank  sheets  at  the  end  of  a  small  pocket  diary.  The  previous
entry  is  dated  February  12th,  and  the  two  following  entries
are  dated,  in  that  order,  February  28  and  February  19.  The
entry  contains,  therefore,  no  internal  evidence  of  having  been
written  at  the  time. It  is  as  follows  :

Feb.  15.  As  I  rose  from  supjDer,  a  message  came,  as
if  by  spirit  influence,  to  say,  "  Robert  has  passed  away."
Miss  Bennett  present.  I  said,  "  There,  I  have  just  had
an  intimation  Robert  is  dead.  Time,  9.40  p.m.  Noted
full  particulars  on  my  return  :  was  called  away.  Had  to
see  a  customer  on  business."


Mr.  Young's  original  letter  to  his  sister,  Mrs.  Pouting,  has,
unfortunately,  not  been  preserved. But  Ave  have  seen  a  post-


LXXXVi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  not  Externalised.  131

card  from  Mi'S.  Ponting,  dated  Febrviary  16,  containing  the
simple  announcement  :  "  Passed  away  quietly  last  evening  "  ;
also  two  letters  in  which  Mrs.  Ponting  refers  to  Mr.  Young's
letter. In  the  first,  dated  February  19th,  she  writes  :

I  was  glad  to  hear  you  had  a  presentiment  of  poor
Robert's  release.  He  passed  away  at  a  quarter  to  eight.
Then  Lottie  [HaUett]  and  I  came  home  till  9.40,  so  that
was  the  time  you  had  the  impression.

In  the  second  letter  IVIrs.  Ponting  announces  her  unsuccessful
search  for  the  missing  letter  from  Mr.  Young.  It  had  probably
been,  as  she  explained,  torn  up  for  pipe-lights.

Miss  Lottie  Young,  another  niece,  to  whom  Mr.  Young
related  his  impression  on  the  morning  after  its  occurrence,
sends  us  the  following  corroboration :

7  New  Road,  Llanelly,  April  11.
Accidentally  meeting  my  uncle,  Mr.  Young,  on  the
morning  of  Feb.  16th,  he  informed  me  that  he  had  had
an  intimation  the  previous  evening  that  IVIr.  Hallett  was
dead.  On  Feb.  17th  he  showed  me  a  post-card  (received
that  day),  which  stated  that  Mr.  Hallett  died  on  Feb.
15th,  thus  confirming  the  intimation.  L.  Young.

In  the  next  case  (P.  262,  Journal,  Vol.  IX.,  p.  79),  the
impression  occurred  about  twelve  hours  before  the  death
of  the  person  it  concerned.

(P.  262.)

The  Hon.  Mrs.  Leir-Carleton,  Greywell  Hill,  Winchfield,
writes  as  follows  :

Mrs.  Hoptroff  (resident  in  this  village  and  mother  of  my
maid,  TiUey  Hoptroff)  underwent  an  operation  on  August
20th  [1898],  in  the  Victoria  Hospital,  Bournemouth.  Her
daughter  remained  with  her  until  August  23rd,  when  she
was  progressing  satisfactorily,  and  insisted  upon  the  girl
returnmg  to  "  keep  house  for  the  boys,"  her  brothers.
On  August  26th,  about  9  a.m.,  I  was  sitting  at  my
dressing-table,  trying  to  brush  my  hair,  in  despite  of
hindrance from a pet cat (that would play with  my


132


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivich.


[part


sleeve-ruffles,  and  was  getting  scolded,  yet  encouraged),
when  I  suddenly  became  aware  of  this  assertion :  "  Mrs.
Hoptroff  will  pass,  to-day."  There  was  no  sound,  but  I
felt  as  clearly  impressed  with  those  five  words  as  if  they
had  been  uttered  close  to  me.  I  may  remark  that  '
"  pass  "  is  not  an  expression  I  should  be  likely  to  use,
but  this  is  the  second  time  it  has  been  used  to  impress
me.  I  sprang  to  my  feet  and  stared  around.  My  gaze
lit  upon  the  writing-table,  and  (recollecting  a  similar
experience  that  I  had  unluckily  supposed  illusory  and
neglected  to  note)  I  at  once  scribbled  the  above  sentence,
dated,  and  shut  it  away.  Then  I  admitted  two  old
servants,  (Mrs.  Tilley  and  Mrs.  Bolton),  and  as  they
entered  I  asked,  "  What  news  of  Mrs.  Hoptroff  ?  "  The
answer  was,  "  Oh,  much  better  !  The  sickness  has  left
her,  and  the  doctor  ordered  fish  for  her  dinner."  I  said,
"  Well  ...  I  must  say  I  did  not  expect  such  good
news.  Somehow  I  have  had  a  feeling  she  might  die
after  all,  and  perhaps  to-day."  I  did  not  mention  what
had  made  me  think  this,  because  their  information  made
me  distrust  mine,  which  indeed  soon  ceased  to  occupy
my  thoughts.

That  night,  at  dinner,  shortly  after  8  o'clock,  there  was
brought  to  me  a  telegram,  that  Tilley  Hoptroff  had  just
received from Bournemouth, announcing "  a change  for
the  worse." I  directed  my  son  where  to  find  my  memor-  i
andum,  which  he  brought,  and  everyone  present  read  it.

On  Sunday,  August  28th,  we  learnt  that  Mrs.  H.  died
on  the  evening  of  the  26th.

Mrs.  Leir-Carleton's  account  is  confirmed  by  the  signed  |
statements  (bearing  date  Aug.  28th,  1898)  of  her  son,  Mr.
Dudley  Carleton,  who  went  to  fetch  the  pajier  inscribed,
"Mrs.  Hoptroff  will  pass  to-day,  Friday,  August  26th,  1898,"
and  of  several  of  the  guests  present  at  dinner  on  the  evening
in  question.  Further  confirmation  is  afforded  by  the  testimony
of  the  servants,  in  whose  presence  Mrs.  Carleton  had  hinted
at  her  misgivings  on  the  morning  of  the  26th  :  |

When I came into Mrs. Carleton's room on Friday,  ^
August  26th,  she  asked  me  if  there  was  any  news  of  Mrs,

■I


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases :  Im'pression  not  Externalised.  133


Hoptroff.  I  answered,  "  much  better,  the  sickness  has
stopped,  and  she  was  to  have  fish  for  her  dinner."  Mrs.
Carleton  looked  very  serious,  and  said  that  she  did  not
expect  good  news,  and  said,  "  somehow  I  have  had  a
feeling  that  she  may  die,  to-day."  Mrs.  Bolton  was  also
present  and  wiU  sign  her  name  below  mine.  This  is
written  down  by  Lucy  Day  (housemaid),  to  whom  Mrs.
Bolton  repeated  Mrs.  Carleton's  remark  a  few  minutes
later,  after  Mrs.  Carleton  had  gone  downstairs  to  breakfast.

Elisabeth  Tilley.
Emily  Bolton.
Lucy  Day.

We  owe  the  following  case  (L.  1217,  Jotirnal,  Vol.  XVIII.,
p.  193)  to  the  kindness  of  Mrs.  E.  S.  Russell.  There  is  no
doubt  that  the  impression  was  veridical,  but  I  include
it  here  with  some  hesitation  because  we  have  no  evidence
that  the  telepathic  agent  was  any  one  living,  and  it  may
have  been  a  message  from  the  dead.

(L.  1217.)

Mrs.  Russell  wites  :

Bryans  Ground,  Presteign,

Radnorshire,  March  12,  1918.

My  sister,  Mrs.  W-  ,  has  asked  me  to  write  you  an

account  of  the  story  she  told  you  about  my  small  boy.

Unfortunately  I  did  not  write  it  down  at  the  time,  so
I  am  not  sure  as  to  the  date,  but  it  was  after  November
4th  [1917],  perhaps  several  days  after,  though  before  the
news  of  my  husband's  death  came  to  us  on  November
16th.  I  think  it  was  most  likely  on  November  8th  or
9th,  and  my  husband  was  killed  on  November  6tli.

Dicky,  the  small  boy,  was  resting  on  my  bed  after  lunch
and  I  was  sitting  by  his  side  sewing,  and  we  were  not
talking,  when  he  sat  up  rather  suddenly  and  said,  "  Daddy
is  dead."  I  said,  "  Oh  no,  dear,  he's  not  and  I  expect
he'U  come  back  to  us  some  day  "  ;  but  Dicky  looked  very
upset  and  became  flushed  and  almost  wept  and  said  again,
"  No he won't, Dick knows he's dead." I just  said,


134


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[PAET


"  No,  dear,  I  don"t  think  he  is,"  but  Dicky  seemed  so
distressed  and  repeated,  "  No,  no,  Dick  knows  it  "  so
emphatically  that  I  thought  best  to  leave  the  subject
alone.  He  never  referred  to  it  again  and  had  never  said
anything  of  the  sort  before.  When  we  did  say  anything
about  his  father  it  was  always  as  to  when  he  would  come
back  and  Dick's  usual  remark  was  that  he  would  run
and  open  the  gate  for  him.  It  was  so  queer  of  Dick
that  I  went  almost  at  once  and  told  my  sister  here  of  it,
but  I  had  no  impression  at  aU  that  my  husband  was
dead,  and  only  thought  of  it  as  odd  of  Dicky.  Indeed
we  had  got  to  look  upon  my  husband's  safety  as  a
foregone  conclusion,  for  he  had  been  through  Gallipoh,
El  Arish  and  the  first  battle  of  Gaza  without  a  scratch.

[Signed] Elizabeth  D.  Russell.

In  reply  to  questions  Mrs.  Russell  writes  on  March  16,
1918  :

(1)  Dicky  was  born  on  August  3rd,  1914  [and  was
therefore  aged  3j  years  at  the  date  of  his  impression].

(2)  I  thinli  "  dead  "  does  convey  some  meaning  to  him  ;
he  sees  hedgehogs,  worms,  mice  and  such  like  animals
dead,  and  always  asks  about  them,  "  Why  dead,  Dick
wants  them  ahve  again  " — and  he  screws  up  his  face  into
a  half  tearful  state,  much  as  he  did  when  he  made  the
remark  about  his  father  ;  only  that  time  he  got  very
flushed  and  was  much  distressed.

(3)  No,  I  don't  think  it  was  a  dream  in  the  sense  of  a
sleeping  dream  ;  he  was  quiet,  but  awake.  It  gave  me
the  idea  of  an  odd  freak.  I  thinlc  he  is  a  child  with
an  acute  imagination  and  sensitive  ;  but  he's  essentially
healthy  and  full  of  the  joy  of  life,  about  the  happiest
child  we  have  ever  come  across.

(4)  Enclosed  is  my  sister's  account  of  the  incident.

(5)  I  can't  veraciously  give  an  exact  date  ;  but  we  d  d
go  back  on  it  after  we  heard  of  my  husband's  death  and
fixed  it  at  somewhere  between  November  8th  and  12tli.

The  account  of  Mrs.  Russell's  sister,  Miss  M.  D.  Holt,  written


Lxxxvi.]  S iwntan eons  Cases  :  Impression  not  Externalised.  135

from  the  same  address  and  dated  March  17,  1918,  is  as
follows  :

I  clearly  recollect  my  sister  telling  me  the  following
incident.

She  had  taken  Dicky,  her  small  son,  upstairs  for  his
after  dinner  rest — the  child  had  been  lying  quietly  on  the
bed  while  she  was  sewing  when  suddenly  he  sat  up  and
said,  "  Daddy's  dead,"  My  sister  said,  "  Oh  no,  he's
not,  some  day  he  will  come  back  again  "  ;  but  Dicky
repeated,  "  Daddy's  dead,  Dick  knows  it,"  and  the  child
appeared  very  distressed,  so  much  so  that  my  sister
thought  it  best  to  humour  him  and  turn  his  thoughts
to  something  else.

When  he  had  finished  his  rest,  she  almost  at  once  found
me  and  told  me  about  it,  but  even  then  it  never  occurred
to  us  that  the  child's  words  were  true.

My  brother-in-law  was  killed  on  November  6th,  1917,
and  I  feel  almost  sure  that  it  was  a  few  days  after  that
date  that  this  incident  happened.  Unfortunately  neither
of  us  made  a  note  of  the  exact  date  at  the  time.

[Signed] Mary  D.  Holt.

The  death  of  Captain  Edward  Stanley  Russell  on  November
6th,  1917,  was  announced  in  the  Times  of  November  20.

It  will  be  observed  that  in  this  case  evidence  of  any  exact
coincidence  is  wanting  ;  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  little
boy's  experience  occurred  some  time  before  the  news  of  his
father's  death  was  received,  and  it  is  almost  if  not  quite
certain  that  it  did  not  occur  before  the  death  itself.

The  following  case  (L.  1176,  Journal,  Vol.  XIV.,  p.  99)
— an  impression  concerning  illness — was  sent  to  us  by
Lady  Rayleigii,  the  account  being  given  in  a  letter  from
the  Countess  of  Leitrim  to  Lady  Rayleigh  :

(L.  1176.)

Government  House,  Natae,  Jayiuary  28th,  1909.

Either on Sunday, December 20th, Monday, 21st,  or
Tuesday,  22nd,  1908,  I  was  conscious  of  a  very  definite


136


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgioick.


[part


knowledge  that  Lord  Rayleigh  was  seriously  ill.  I  had
no  dream  about  him,  but  so  certain  was  I  of  the  fact
that,  on  coming  on  deck  directly  after  breakfast,  I  told
my  mother,  Mrs.  Henderson.  We  were  then  at  sea,
somewhere  near  the  Equator,  on  our  way  to  Cape  Town.

I  had  never  had  a  definite  impression  in  that  way
before,  and  was  therefore  particularly  careful  to  tell  my
mother  at  once,

Violet  Leitrim.

Mrs.  Henderson  writes  to  Lady  Rayleigh  :

Government  House,  Natal,  January  28ih,  1909.

One  morning,  in  the  early  part  of  the  week  beginning
the  20th  of  December,  1908,  my  daughter,  Lady  Leitrim,
tokl  me  she  had  a  very  strong  impression  that  Lord
Rayleigh  was  ill.  She  said  she  could  not  understand  why
it  was,  as  she  had  had  no  dream,  but  she  felt  certain
that  he  was  very  ill.

Emma  C.  Henderson.

Lady  Rayleigh  writes  :

March  23rd,  1909.

Lord  Rayleigh  and  I  went  out  to  Cape  Town  in  Novem-
ber, 1908.  We  travelled  about  a  good  deal,  and  on
December  15th  Lord  Rayleigh  was  taken  suddenly  and
violently  ill  of  dysentery,  on  his  way  by  Cape  cart  from
Mafeking  to  Zeerust.  He  managed  to  make  the  journey
to  Pretoria  next  day,  and  was  laid  up  at  Government
House,  Pretoria.  He  was  sufficiently  recovered  to  leave
his  room  for  a  few  hours  on  December  22nd,  and  to  go
downstairs  on  the  25th.  He  was  able  to  travel  to
Johannesburg  in  a  sleeping  carriage  on  December  28th.

It  was  quite  impossible  for  Lady  Leitrim  to  have  heard
of  his  illness,  as  she  was  on  the  sea  between  Madeira  and
Cape  Town  at  the  time.

She  knew  he  was  in  S.  Africa,  and  was  looking  forward
to  possibly  meeting  him  there.

Evelyn  Rayleigh,


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Im-pression  not  Exiernalised.  137


The  next  case  (L.  1103,  Journal,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  308)
concerns  an  alarm  of  fire.

(L.  1103.)

Mr.  Myers  writes  :  The  following  case  was  written  dowii
next  day  and  sent  to  me  in  French  by  a  scientific  friend,
who  prefers  that  the  narrative  should  be  anonymous.^  He
has  had  other  experiences  pointmg  to  thought-transference.
The  value  of  the  coincidence  is  more  than  doubled  by  the
fact  that  the  apprehension  was  felt  also — independently  so  far
as  any  ordinary  communication  went — by  the  percipient's
sister.  F.  W.  H.  M.

On  Friday,  December  10th,  1897,  at  about  10.35  p.m.,
being  alone  and  at  work  in  my  library,  I  began  to  think,
without  any  reason,  that  there  had  been  a  fire  at  the
Opera.  My  wife  and  daughter  had  gone  off  to  the  Opera
at  8  ;  I  had  not  been  able  to  accompany  them.  The
impression  was  so  strong  that  I  m'ote  +  F  [Feu  !]  on  the
cover  of  a  book  which  lay  near  me.  A  few  iiistants
later,  wishing  to  emphasise  this  presentiment,  I  wote
"  Att  "  (for  attention),  "  Fire  !  ".  I  enclose  what  I  wote.
[Fragment  of  book- cover  sent  herewith  with  the  Avords
mentioned.]  I  did  not,  however,  feel  anxious  ;  but  said
to  myself,  "  There  has  been  no  great  fire  at  the  Opera,
only  an  alarm  of  fire."

At  the  same  time,  or  rather  10  or  1.5  minutes  later,
at  10.55,  my  sister,  Mme.  B.,  who  lives  in  the  same
house,  and  whose  bedroom  is  on  the  same  floor  with  my
study,  had  an  idea  that  my  study  was  on  fire.  She  was
at  the  moment  on  the  point  of  getting  into  bed,  but  she
came  in  deshabille  to  my  study  door  and  put  her  hand
on  the  handle  to  come  in  ;  but  then,  telling  herself  that
her  fear  was  absurd,  she  went  back  to  bed.  She  tells
me,  however,  that  she  would  nevertheless  have  come  in,
but  that  she  was  afraid  that  I  had  someone  with  me  in
the  room.

^  There  can  be  no  harm  now  in  mentioning  that  Myers'  scientific
friend  was  Professor  Charles  Richet,  as  the  latter  has  recently  published
the  incident  in  ]iis  book  Traite  de  Metapsychique,  p.  352,  as  his  own
experience,


138


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


At  12.10,  my  wife  and  daughter  came  back  from  the
theatre.  They  instantly  told  me  that  there  had  been  a
sort  of  beginning  of  a  conflagration.  I  said  nothing,
and  they  told  me  as  follows  : — Between  8.45  and  9,  at
the  end  of  the  first  act  of  the  Maitres  Chanteurs,  a  smell
of  l)urning  and  a  light  smoke  were  perceived  in  the
auditorium.  My  wife  said  to  my  daughter  :  "I  will  i
go  out  and  see  what  is  the  matter  ;  if  I  make  a  sign  to
you,  follow  me  at  once,  without  saying  a  word  or  even  ,
waiting  to  put  your  cloak  on."'  The  attendant  whom  she
asked  said  that  nothing  was  wrong.  Nevertheless,  there
was  some  emotion  among  the  audience,  and  five  or  six
persons  in  the  stalls  got  up  and  went  away.  The  smoke
came,  no  doubt,  from  a  stove.

Note  that  this  is  the  first  time  that  my  wife  ever  left  j
her  seat  in  a  theatre  from  alarm  of  fire.  It  is  the  first
time  that  I  have  ever  been  anxious  about  fire  in  her
absence  ;  and  I  do  not  suppose  that  I  jot  down  my
possible  presentiments  more  than  five  or  six  times  in  a
year.  i

My  sister  has  never  before  been  anxious  about  fire  in  i
my  room.

With  these  may  be  compared  two  cases  in  which  the
impression  was  connected  with  the  distress  of  an  animal
identified  at  the  time  by  the  percipient.  One  was  a
vague  waking  impression  of  something  wrong  with  the
animal  ;  the  other  was  a  more  definite  impression  in  a
dream,  but  whether  there  was  in  the  dream  any  visual
or  auditory  impression  we  do  not  know.

The  first  of  the  two  cases  (L.  1144,^  Jotirnal,  Vol.  XII.,
p.  21)  was  received  through  the  kindness  of  Sir  Rider
Haggard.

Lady  Carbery  had  sent  it  in  consequence  of  the  some-
what similar  case  which  he  had  contributed  to  The  Times
of  July  21st,  1904,  and  which  was  reprinted  in  full,  with
additional  evidence,  in  the  Journal  for  October,  1904
(see  below,  p.  219). Lady  Carbery  wrote  to  Mr.  Haggard  :


1  This  case  is  mimbered  1143  in  tho  Journal  by  mistake,


Lxxxvi.]  spontaneous  Cases :  Impression  not  Externalised.  139
(L.  1144.)

Castle  Feekb,  Co.  Cork,  July  25th,  1904.

Lady  Carbery  presents  her  compliments  to  Mi'.  Rider
Haggard,  and  thinks  he  may  be  interested  in  the  enclosed
account  of  how  she  was  summoned  to  the  help  of  a
favourite  mare.  The  statement  could  be  confirmed  by  the
coachman  and  others.  "  Kitty  "  is  still  alive,  ending
her  days  in  the  fields  among  her  foals,  and  doing  no
work.

The  account  enclosed  was  as  follows  :

On  one  hot  Sunday  afternoon  in  the  summer  of  1900,
I  went  after  luncheon  to  pay  my  customary  visit  to  the
stables,  to  give  sugar  and  carrots  to  the  horses,  among
the  number  bemg  a  favourite  mare  named  Kitty.  She
was  a  shy,  nervous,  well-bred  animal,  and  there  existed
between  us  a  great  and  unusual  sympathy.  I  used  to
ride  her  every  morning  before  brealifast,  whatever  the
weather  might  be — quiet  sohtary  rides  on  tlie  cliffs  which
overhang  the  sea  at  Castle  Freke — and  it  always  seemed
to  me  that  Kitty  enjoyed  that  hour  in  the  freshness  of
the  day  as  much  as  I  did.  On  this  particular  afternoon
I  left  the  stables  and  walked  alone  to  the  garden,  a
distance  of  a  quarter  of  a  mile,  and  estabhshed  myself
under  a  tree  with  an  interesting  book,  fully  intending  to
remain  there  for  a  couple  of  houi's.  After  about  twenty
minutes  an  uncomfortable  sensation  came  between  me  and
my  reading,  and  at  once  I  felt  sure  that  there  was  some-
thing the  matter  with  Kitty.  I  tried  to  put  the  feeling
from  me  and  to  go  on  with  my  book,  but  the  impression
grew  stronger,  and  I  felt  compelled  to  hasten  back  to  the
stables.  I  went  straight  to  Kitty's  box,  and  found  her
"  cast  "  and  in  urgent  need  of  help.  The  stablemen  were
in  a  distant  part  of  the  stables,  whence  I  fetched  them
to  help  the  mare  up.  Then-  surprise  v/as  great  to  find
me  in  the  stables  for  the  second  time  that  afternoon.  .  .  .


This  account  was  sent  to  us  by  Sir  Rider  Haggard,  and
Mr.  Baggally  undertook  to  make  further  enquiries  into  the
case. In  reply  to  his  first  letter,  Lady  Carbery  wrote  :


140


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[PABT


Frankfielb  House,  Co.  Cokk,  Dec.  21  th,  1904.

Lady  Carbery  .  .  .  would  he  glad  indeed  to  have  the
case  investigated,  as  it  has  always  seemed  to  her  to  be
of  the  greatest  possible  interest.  At  the  same  time  it
may  be  difficult  at  this  date  to  get  a  statement  from  the
stablemen,  one  of  whom  is  somewhere  in  England,  but
Lady  Carbery  wUl  try  to  do  so.  She  is  absolutely  con-
vinced that  no  one  entered  the  stable.  Had  the  stable-
men done  so  they  would  at  once  have  helped  the  mare  to
get  up,  and  any  one  else  would  have  given  the  alarm.
It  seems  a  direct  case  of  telepathy  from  animal  mind  to
human.  .  .  .

Lady  Carbery  afterwards  sent  Mr.  Baggally  a  statement
from  her  former  coachman,  Edward  Nobbs,  as  follow  :

NosELEY  Hael  iStables,  Near  Leicester,
December  ^Ist,  1904.

I  was  coachman  at  Castle  Freke  at  the  time,  and  Lady
Carbery  came  to  the  stables  after  luncheon  as  usual  on  a
Sunday  afternoon  with  carrots  and  sugar  for  the  horses.
Kitty  was  then  loose  in  her  box  and  (juite  well.  I  then
went  to  my  rooms  over  the  stables,  the  other  stablemen
being  also  upstairs,  and  to  my  surprise  about  half  an  hour
or  three  quarters  later  her  Ladyship,  who  had  been  to
the  garden,  called  me  and  the  other  men  to  come  and
help  Kitty  up,  as  she  was  lying  cast  in  her  box.  No
one  had  gone  into  the  stable  in  the  interval.

(Signed) Edward  Nobbs.

In  a  letter  to  Lady  Carbery  of  the  same  date,  enclosing  this
account,  Edward  Nobbs  writes  : — "  I  remember  the  Sunday
afternoon  quite  well.  Your  Ladyship  called  me  from  the
bottom  of  the  stairs.  Jerome  McCarthy  helped  me  with  the
aid  of  one  of  the  clothing  rollers.  At  that  time  Kitty  was
in  the  centre  box.  .  .  ."  Lady  Carbery  tells  us  that  Jerome
McCarthy  is  now  in  America.

The  second  case (L.  1158,  Journal,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  80)


LXXXVi.J  jSpotikmeouti  Cases :  I^npression  not  Externalised.  141

comes  from  an  Associate  of  the  Society,  Colonel  Coghill,
who  writes  :

(L.  1158.)

CosHEEN,  Castle  Towkshend,

Co.  Cork,  April  lOth  [1906].
The  enclosed  case  of  clream  premonition  may  interest
tlie  S.P.R.  in  adding  one  more  instance  for  the  accumula-
tion of  cases  for  investigation.  My  nephew,  Mi-.  Penrose,
having  mentioned  the  case  to  me,  I  wrote  for  a  little
more  information,  which,  having  been  added  m  tlie  form
of  a  statement  from  the  groom,  I  now  beg  to  forward.

Kendal  Coghill.

The  narrative  written  by  Mr.  Pem-osc  and  signed  by  the
groom  is  as  foUows  :

LiSMORE,  Ireland.

On  April  2nd  [1906],  between  4  a.m.  and  5  a.m.,  Robert
Glynn,  coachman  to  J.  Pem'ose,  Esq.,  woke  suddenly,
having  ch'eamed  that  a  mare  under  his  charge  had  foaled
and  that  he  was  badly  wanted.  He  immediately  di'essed
and  went  to  the  stable,  which  was  about  20  or  30  yards
distant  from  his  house,  and  found  the  mare  had  just
foaled.  The  foal  was  extremely  weak,  and  would  un-
doubtedly have  died  if  he  liad  not  come  when  he  did
to  give  it  assistance.

The  mare  was  17  days  before  her  time,  being  due  to
foal  on  April  19th.  He  had  not  looked  at  her  for  two
or  three  days  previously,  and  there  were  no  symptoms  of
prematurity  nor  was  he  in  any  anxiety  about  the  foaling.
She  had  had  several  foals  before  and  had  never  mis-
carried before.  He  did  not  say  anything  to  his  wife
before  going  out  to  the  mare,  as  she  was  asleep.  He  had
been  in  the  habit  for  some  days  back  of  getting  up  early
to  look  at  a  cow  that  was  exjjected  to  calve  ;  but  on  this
occasion  the  dream  was  so  vivid  he  went  straight  to  the
mare's  stable  as  soon  as  he  was  dressed.  He  heard  no
sounds  of  distress  from  the  mare.

The  above  is  exactly  according  to  the  facts  stated.

(Signed) Robert  Glynn.


142  Mrs.  Hennj  Sidgwick.  [pabt

§  9. True  Impressions. Doubtful  Agents.

We  may  conveniently  take  next  three  cases  of  mental  or
emotional  impressions  in  dreams.  In  none  can  we  point
to  a  particular  agent,  though  in  all  the  fact  suggested
by  the  dream  was  known  to  some  living  people.  The
first  (G.  237,  Journal,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  105)  may  have  been
due  to  telepathy  from  the  dead  brother,  though  if  so  it  is
not  explained  why  the  impression  should  have  occurred
just  when  it  did — a  few  hours  before  the  cablegram  which
had  "  been  advisedly  kept  over  "  reached  the  percipient.
From  this  point  of  view  this  case  belongs  to  a  small
class,  which  we  shall  have  to  discuss  later,  where  the  time
at  which  the  impression  is  received  seems  oddly  to  depend
on  the  fact  that  news  of  the  event  corresponding  to  the
impression  was  approaching  the  percipient.  It  is  possible  in
the  present  case  that  the  telepathic  impression  came  from
the  i^erson  responsible  for  keeping  over  the  cablegram.  .f

t

(G.  237.)

The  case  was  received  through  the  American  Branch  from
Miss  E.  H.  Kitching.  Both  witnesses  were  known  to  Dr.
Hodgson.

Miss  Kitching  writes  :  i;

141,  WiiST  60th  Street,  New  York,  i
April  29th,  1890.

The  following  is  full  information  as  to  this  experience,
which,  by  the  way,  is  the  only  one  I  ever  had.  '

I  will  say,  in  the  first  place,  that  I  am  unusually
strong  and  robust,  and  have  always  been  in  perfect  health,
and  also  that  I  have  always  had  a  secret  belief  that  only
unliealthy  and  morbid  people  are  subject  to  psychical
experiences.  '

My  brother,  J.  Howard  Kitching,  who  from  his  birth
suffered  from  heart  disease,  was  obliged,  on  account  of
his  ill  health,  to  leave  this  country  in  February,  1887.
He  was  appointed  U.S.  Consular  Agent  to  Bone,  Algeria,
where  he  remained  until  his  death,  which  occurred  August
20th, 1888. He grew steadily better in that  climate,


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  not  Externalised.  US

and  my  motlier  and  I  had  reason  to  hope  he  would
ultimately  become  strong.  In  August,  however,  he  became
ill  again,  and  cUed,  havkig  carefully  kept  from  us  the  fact
of  his  illness.  At  the  time  of  his  death  we  were  at
Saratoga,  N.Y.  The  cablegram  announcing  his  death,
havmg  been  advisedly  kept  over  in  New  York,  did  not
reach  us  till  noon  on  the  23rd  of  August.  Early  in  the
morning  of  the  23rd  (it  may  have  been  at  four  or  five
o'clock,  but  I  do  not  know  the  exact  hour)  I  experienced,
while  lymg  asleep  in  bed,  a  distressing  mental  impression,
as  though  somethmg  dreadful  were  taking  place  in  con-
nection Avith  my  brother,  and  I  awoke  with  the  conviction
that  he  was  dead.  The  mental  stress  was  very  painful
while  it  lasted,  but  as  soon  as  I  was  completely  awake
I  thought  no  more  about  it,  until  the  cablegram  came
at  noon  informing  us  that  my  brother  had  died  on  the
20th.

Even  if  the  impression  had  weighed  on  my  mmd  durmg
the  morning  (which  it  did  not),  I  should  not  have  spoken
of  it  to  my  mother,  for  fear  of  causmg  her  anxiety.

My  brother  was  always  extremely  mterested  in  psychical
research,  and  had  some  very  mterestmg  experiences  in
hypnotism,  which  power  he  developed  while  at  Bone.  I,
however,  as  I  said  before,  have  had  no  psychical  experience
except  this  one.

Edith  Howard  Kitching.

In  reply  to  Mr. Hodgson's  request  for  corroboration,  Mi-s.
Kitching  A\Tote  as  follows  :

141,  West  60th  Street,  May  8th,  1890.
Dear  Sir,— As  to  the  statement  sent  to  you  by  my
daughter,  Edith  Kitching,  I  wish  to  say  that  she  did  not
mention  to  me  the  fact  that  she  had  received  a  mental
communication  before  the  receipt  of  the  cablegram,  an-
noimcing  the  death  of  her  brother,  but  some  hours  after-
wards, after  receiving  and  reading  it,  she  instantly  said,
"I  knew  it,"  and  then  told  me  of  her  experience  as
written  to  you.  Harriet  B.  Kitching.


144


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


In  the  next  case  (P.  269,  Journal,  Vol.  X.,  p.  28)  there
is  no  one  hving  or  dead  who  is  marked  out  as  direct
agent,  since  the  persons  who  possessed  the  information
received  by  the  percipient  were  entirely  unknown  to  her,
and  probably  did  not  know  of  her  existence.  It  would
seem  that  if  the  information  reached  her  telepathically  it
was  probably  in  some  way  through  her  brother.

(P.  269.)

The  following  account  came  from  Miss  Agnes  E.  Walker,  of
13,  Stafford  Mansions,  Albert  Bridge  Road,  London,  S.W.
Both  Miss  Walker  and  the  brother  (Mr.  Bernard  Walker),
who  was  the  subject  of  her  dream,  are  known  to  Mr.  J.  G.
Piddington,  to  whom  the  letters  relating  to  the  dream  were
addressed.

Miss  Walker  writes  :

13,  Staffobd  Mansions,  Albert  Bridge  Road,
London,  S.W.,  April  26th,  1900.

Dear  Mr.  Piddington, — You  asked  me  to  send  you  a
written  statement  about  a  dream,  and  I  do  so  with  much
pleasure.

Li  June,  1897,  my  youngest  brother,  B.,  having  passed
the  examination  for  a  clerkship  in  Somerset  House,  but
being  miable  to  obtain  the  actual  appointment  until  a
vacancy  occurred,  threw  up  work  he  was  then  doing  in
London  and  went  home  to  Devonshire,  intending  to  take
a  month  or  two  of  lioKday  before  entermg  Somerset  House.

He  was  not  able  to  get  any  information  as  to  when  a
vacancy  would  occur,  as  there  are  no  age  retirements,
and  could  only  learn  that  the  vacancies  averaged  three  a
year.

I  remained  in  London.  My  brother  waited  at  home  a
whole  year  and  no  vacancies  occurred.

One  night  in  June,  1898 — I  cannot  give  the  exact  date,
but  I  think  it  was  about  the  20th  or  23rd — I  dreamt
that  my  brother  received  his  appointment  on  the  19th  of
July.  There  was  nothing  else  in  the  dream — merely  the
one  perfectly  vivid  fact  of  the  date.  I  thought  very
Uttle  of  it,  but  in  writing  to  my  brother  in  a  day  or  two,


LXxxvi.]  Spantaneous  Cases  :  Impression  not  Externalised.  145

I  mentioned  that  I  had  had  this  dream,  and  that  I
hoped  it  was  a  good  omen.

Naturally  no  one  attached  any  importance  to  it,  and
the  letter  was  m  due  course  destroyed  ;  though  my  brother
did  not  forget  it,  and  kejit  the  date  in  his  head.

On  the  19th  of  July  he  received  an  official  notice  from
Somerset  House  that  he  was  appointed  to  a  clerkship
there,  and  telegraphed  to  me  to  that  effect.

We  have  much  regretted  since  that  the  letter  was
destroyed,  but  the  fact  of  the  dream  and  the  date  was
known  to  all  my  family  before  its  fulfilment ;  and  I  send
you  the  signature  of  the  brother  concerned,  and  of  other
members  of  the  family  who  can  testify  to  the  accuracy
of  this  statement. — Yours  faithfully,

Agnes  E.  Walker.

The  signatures  of  other  members  of  Miss  Walker's  family
folloAv  her  o"\vn,  as  below  :

Bebnabd  S.  Walker.
Charles  H.  Walker.
J.  B.  Walker.
Ethel  A.  Walker.
E.  I.  Walker.
N.  Walker.

In  reply  to  enquiries,  Miss  Walker  writes  again  to  Mr.
Piddington  :

June  25 fh  [1900].

.  .  .  My  brother's  name  was  first  m  the  Mst  for  a
whole  year,  for  the  next  appointment,  which  could  only
be  given  in  case  of  a  death  or  retirement.  Jxi  his  case
a  vacancy  occurred  by  the  retirement  of  some  one  in  one
of  the  provincial  branches,  which  was  filled  up — as  I
beheve  they  always  are — from  Somerset  House,  and  caused
a  general  move  up.  It  seems  most  probable  that  a  few
weeks  before  my  brother  received  his  appointment  these
coming  changes  must  have  been  known  to  the  Registrar,
and  he  would,  I  should  think,  be  most  hkely  to  note
the  next  name  on  the  fist.


146


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgunck.


[part


I  find  that  the  official  letter,  informing  my  brother  of
his  appointment,  is  dated  July  18th,  and  is  signed  by  Mr.
David  Owen,  the  head  registrar.  .  .  .

Agnes  E.  Walker.

Mr.  Piddmgton  writes  :

November  Uth,  1900.
In  an  interview  A\hich  I  liad  with  the  Head  Registrar
at  Somerset  House  this  morning,  he  informed  me  that  the
fact of a vacancy having occurred would certainly  be
known  either  to  himself  or  to  some  otlier  of  the  officials
some  weeks  before  the  next  appointment  would  be  made,
and  the first  name on the hst  of  successful  candidates
would  be  noted. Consequently,  if  the  case  be  not  regarded
as one of pure comcidence, we can suppose that  Miss
A.  E.  Walker  in  her  dream  state  acquired  her  information
telepathically  from one of  the Somerset  House officials  ;
for, although  the Head  Registrar  did  not  say  that  the
precise  date of  a  new appomtment  would be  settled  as
soon  as  a  vacancy  was  known  to  have  occurred,  still  it
is  permissible  to  assume  that  the  apjyrox'miate  date  would
or  could  then  be Imown to  the  official or  officials  in-
terested.

As  to  the  evidence  of  the  actual  date  of  Mr.  Walker's  ap-
pomtment, Mr.  Piddmgton  writes  later  :

November  20fh,  1900.
Miss  A.  E.  Wallcer  has  sent  me  the  official  letter  signed
by  the  Senior  Registrar,  D.  N.  (or  D.  W.)  Owen. It  is
dated  July  18th,  1898,  and  is  addressed  to  B.  S.  Walker,
Esq. The  envelope, an official one, bearing  the  stamp
of  the  "  High  Court  of  Justice,  Probate  Registry,"  bears
also the following post-mark  : "  London. 6.30  p.m.
Official paid. 16. 18 Jy. 98." (16 is presumably  a
post-office mark which signifies the mail by which  the
letter  was  dispatched.) The  letter  is  addressed  to  Bernard
S. Wallcer, Esq., Walldiampton, Horrabridge, S.  Devon.
But  the  Horrabridge  post-mark  is  not  on  the  envelope.
Doubtless, though, a letter dispatched from London  at


LXXXVI.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  not  Externalised.  147

6.30  p.m.  on  July  IStli  would  reach  Horrabridge  on  July
19th.

Another  case  (L.  1127,  Journal,  Vol.  X.,  p.  140)  ex-
tremely like  this,  except  that  there  was  apparently  a
visual  element  in  the  dream  (the  percipient  says,  "  As
to  how  I  dreamt  ...  I  only  knew  I  had  had  the  list
in  my  hand  with  R.'s  name  6th  "),  was  sent  to  us  by
Dr.  H.  W.  M'Connel  of  Matlaske  Hall,  Normch,  an
Associate  of  the  Society,  to  whom  the  principal  witnesses
in  the  case  were  well  known,  and  who  carefully  collected
the  evidence.

(L.  1127.)

Dr.  M'Connel  drew  up  the  following  statement  as  the  result
of  a  conversation  with  Miss  F.  (the  dreamer),  and  afterwards
showed  it  to  her  to  make  sure  of  its  correctness  :

On  February  26th,  1900,  I  dreamt  that  my  brother
passed  sixth  in  an  examination  for  the  Naval  Medical.
The  letter  with  result  came  from  the  Admiralty  on  the
28th,  and  the  dream  was  found  correct.  The  examination
was  from  February  19th-23rd,  and  I  knew  that  my  brother
was  up  in  London  at  it.  I  was  in  Edinburgh,  and  I
had  no  reason  for  supposing  that  he  might  come  out  any
special  place.  The  dream  was  between  2  a.m.  and  8  a.m.
on  the  night  of  the  26th,  and  my  brother  only  returned
from  London  on  March  1st.  I  attached  no  importance
at  the  time  to  the  number  in  the  dream,  only  feeling
depressed  at  having  dreamt  he  had  passed  at  all,  as
dreams  go  very  contrary  ;  but  fortunately  I  told  the
dream  that  same  morning  to  my  brother  and  sister  and
a  friend.  A.  C.  F.

This  is  undated,  but  Mss  F.  answered  further  questions
on  January  10,  1901,  and  corroboration  of  her  having  told
the  dream  before  its  veridicality  was  known  was  sent  by
the  brother  and  sister  mentioned  on  January  21,  1901.
It  was  ascertained  from  one  of  the  examiners  that  the
meeting at which the results of the examination  were


148


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


determined  took  place  in  the  evening  of  February  26 —
that  is,  a  few  hours  before  the  dream,  and  the  letter
from  the  Admiralty  announcing  the  result  was  posted  to
the  candidate's  home  address  on  the  27th.  He  did  not
himself  learn  it  till  the  28th.  According  to  the  Times  of
March  5,  1900,  there  were  twenty  names  in  the  list,  that
of  the  candidate  in  question  being  sixth.  The  full  evidence
will  be  found  set  out  in  the  Journal.  I

A  very  similar  incident — a  mother's  veridical  dream  that
her  son  passed  out  8th  before  she  could  have  heard  of
it — is  mentioned  in  the  course  of  an  account  of  a  series
of  veridical  dreams  and  impressions  of  a  Mrs.  B.,  also
sent  to  us  by  Dr.  M'Connel,  to  whom  Mrs.  B.  was  well
known  ;  hut  this  particular  incident  was  recorded  nearly  |
twelve  years  after  the  event.  See  L.  1128,  Journal,  Vol.
X.,  pp."  161-170.

§  10. Mental  Vision  of  complicated  event.

I  will  conclude  this  chapter  with  a  case  (L.  1160,  Journal,  ;
Vol.  XIII.,  p.  110)  in  which  the  percipient  has  a  vision — ■  i
apparently  not  externahsed,  a  vision  in  the  mind's  eye —  |
of  the  condition  and  surroundings  of  the  agent. I  have  \
already  quoted  one  such  case  (L.  1152,  see  above,  p.  58)
among  semi-experimental  cases,  though  it  might  quite  well
have been  placed  in  the present  section. Both  in  that
case  and  in  the  one  to  be  quoted  the  percipient's  mind
was  normally  directed  to  the  agent. Without  this  we  can
hardly  suppose  that  in  the  first  case  the  impression  would
have  occurred,  and  it  is  at  least  highly  probable  that  this
preoccupation  facilitated  the  impression  in  the  second  case.
The  case  has  the  advantage  from  an  evidential  point  of
view that the vision represented a very definite  and
presumably unusual incident. The case comes  from
America, and Dr. Hodgson first received a second  or
third hand account written ten days earlier than  the
one we print, but substantially agreeing with it,  from
Mrs. Ward, a sister of the percipient, Mrs.  Robinson.
Both  ladies  were  Associates  of  the  American  Branch,  1


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  not  Externalised.  149
(L.  1160.)

The  percipient  Mrs.  Robinson  writes  to  Dr.  Hodgson  :

BoNNYcoT,  Anchorage,
Kentucky,  June  1th,  1903.

In  compliance  with  my  sister's  request  and  yours  as  well
as  with  my  own  interest  in  psychic  phenomena,  I  shall
write  you  of  this  last  experience  that  came  to  me  on  the
night  of  May  17th.

My  son  and  a  friend  had  driven  across  the  country  to
dine  and  spend  the  evening  with  friends.  The  rest  of
the  household  had  retired  for  the  night.  I  was  awakened
by  the  telephone  and  looked  at  the  clock,  findmg  it  11.30
p.m.  I  knew  my  son  would  soon  be  in  and  thought  of
a  window  dowiistairs  which  I  felt  might  not  have  been
locked,  and  determined  to  remain  awake  and  ask  my  son
to  make  sure  that  it  was  secure.  As  I  lay  waiting  and
hstening  for  him  I  suddenly  saw  their  vehicle,  a  hght
break-cart,  turn  over,  my  son  jump  out,  land  on  his  feet,
run  to  the  struggling  horse's  head,  his  friend  hold  to  the
lines,  and  m  a  moment  it  was  gone  and  I  knew  it  was
right  and  felt  no  disturbance.

I  met  my  son  as  he  came  in  and  spoke  of  the  wuidow.
He  said:  "We  tipped  over,  mother."  I  replied  "Yes.
I  know  it,  I  saw  you,"  and  described  what  I  saw  as  I
have  to  you,  which  he  said  was  just  as  it  happened.
He  also  said  :  "I  thought  for  a  moment  the  horse  would
go  up  over  the  railroad  tracks,"  and  then  I  remembered
that  the  horse,  as  I  saw  him,  was  thrown  up  an  embank-
ment. I  said:  "This  happened  about  half-an-hour  ago."
He  looked  at  his  watch,  it  was  12.15,  and  said  "Yes."
I  did  not  see  them  before  they  started  out,  as  his  friend
called  for  him  with  his  horse  and  vehicle,  and  I  did  not
know  m  what  style  they  went.  .  .  .

Helen  Avery  Robinson.

Mrs.  Robinson's  son  confirms  the  account  as  foUoAvs  :

June  23rd,  1903.
On  Sunday  night.  May  17th,  I  was  driving  with  a  friend
from  Glenview  to  Anchorage,  Kentucky. We  left  Glenview


150


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


at  about  eleven  o'clock.  We  were  in  a  break-cart,  and  my
friend  was  driving  a  young  and  spirited  horse.  There
was  no  moon,  and  we  could  see  indistinctly  by  star-Ught.
About  twelve  o'clock,  when  about  two  miles  from  home,
we  were  driving  along  the  edge  of  a  wood  with  a  deep
railroaxl  cut  on  our  right.  The  top  of  this  embankment
had  lately  been  levelled  off  and  my  friend  mistook  it
for  the  road,  which  was  just  beside  the  embankment  and,
in  the  faint  light,  seemed  to  be  about  level  with  it.
When  I  called  his  attention  to  his  mistake  he  turned
dowii  into  the  road  and  overturned  the  cart.  We  were
both  thrown  out.  The  horse  was  startled  and  began
rearing.  I  ran  around  the  cart  after  him  and  took  him
by  the  bridle,  although  my  friend  had  not  lost  his  hold
on  the  rems.  We  righted  the  cart  and  got  home  with-
out further  accident.  The  family  had  been  in  bed  for
some  time,  but  my  mother  had  been  aroused  at  eleven-
thirty  by  the  telephone.  As  I  came  in  she  gave  me  the
message.  I  told  her  that  we  had  overturned  the  cart.
She  then  told  me  that  she  had  seen  the  accident  at  twelve
o'clock  and,  without  suggestion  from  me,  described  it
accurately.  She  had  seen  me  thrown  out  backward  and
Imew  how  I  had  rmi  around  after  the  frightened  horse  to
catch  his  bridle,  which  I  did  only  after  he  had  turned
completely  around.

Avery  Robinson,


Lxxxvi.]  S'pontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised  151


CHAPTER  III.

Spontaneous  Cases  in  which  the  Percipient's  Impres-
sion IS  externalised  as  a  Waking  Hallucination.
Also  Dreams  of  the  same  Character.

§  1. Death  Coincidences.

Waking  hallucinations  of  the  senses  corresponding
with  an  external  event  unknown  to  the  percipient  afford
on  the  whole  the  most  striking  evidence  of  telepathic
communication  between  agent  and  percipient,  chiefly
because  such  waking  hallucinations  are  themselves  rare.
Most  of  us  go  through  life  without  having  experienced
one.  At  the  same  time,  rare  as  they  are,  their  occur-
rence is  most  often  not  veridical — it  is  only  in  a  minority
of  cases  that  there  is  ground  for  supposing  them  to
have  a  telepathic  origin.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to
examine  carefuUy  not  only  the  evidence  for  the  hal-
lucinatory nature  of  the  percipient's  experience,  but  that
for  the  definite  character  of  the  agent's,  as  well  as  the
degree  of  correspondence  in  time  and  otherwise  between
the  two.  One  of  the  most  definite  possible  events  on  the
side  of  the  agent,  and  one  concerning  which  there  can
seldom  be  any  mistake,  is  his  death.  I  will  therefore  take
first  the  class  of  death  coincidences — meaning  by  a  death
coincidence  an  apparition  or  other  hallucinatory  experience
or  dream  occurring  within  twelve  hours  of  the  death,
before  or  after  it.

Death  Coincidences — (a)  Realistic  Apparitions.

By  a  realistic  apparition  I  mean  one  that  appears  like
a  real  person  in  the  percipient's  surroundings.


152  Mrs.  Henry  S id g wick.  [pakt

Perhaps  the  best  evidenced  death  comcidence  in  the
present  collection  is  the  realistic  apparition  of  Lieutenant
M'Connel  (L.  1226,  Journal,  Vol.  XIX.,  p.  76).  It  was
spoken  of  by  the  percipient  to  another  person,  who  corro-
borates, before  it  was  realised  that  it  was  not  the  living
man,  and  it  was  recorded  in  writing  within  fifteen  days  of
the  event.  The  case  reached  us  through  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,
to  whom  a  report  was  sent  in  the  first  instance.  The
apparition  was  that  of  Lieut.  David  E.  M'Connel,  R.A.F.,
who  was  killed  in  a  flying  accident  on  December  7,  1918,
and  the  percipient  was  one  of  his  fellow-officers,  Lieut.
J.  J.  Larkin,  R.A.F.  The  earliest  report  of  the  occurrence
was  contained  in  a  letter  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  from  Lieut.
M'Connel's  father,  Mr.  D.  R.  M'Connel,  who  writes  thus  :

(L.  1226.)

January  16,  1919.

Knowing  your  interest  in  psychical  affairs,  I  take  the
Hberty  of  giving  you  the  particulars  of  the  reported
appearance  of  my  son  at  the  time  of  his  death  through
an  accident  while  flying.  I  enclose  the  copy  of  the
written  statement  of  Lieut.  Jas.  J.  Larkin  of  Scampton
Aerodrome,  to  whom  the  appearance  was  made.  I  heard
of  the  occurrence  at  my  son's  funeral  on  the  11th  December
(he  was  killed  on  the  7th  December)  and  wrote  as  soon
as  I  could  to  Lieut.  Larkin,  who  replied  on  the  22nd
December.  The  statement  made  to  me  on  the  11th  by
Lieut.  Hillman,  who  has  attested  the  correctness  of  the
account  given,  corresponds  accurately  with  the  account
itself.  Lieut.  Hillman  had  not  been  back  to  Scampton,
or  seen  Lieut.  Larkin,  between  the  time  of  the  funeral
and  the  writing  of  the  account.  Lieut.  Hillman  wrote
his  attestation  on  reading  the  account  in  my  house.  The
event  seems  to  have  made  a  very  vivid  impression  on  the
two  or  three  of  my  son's  friends  who  heard  of  it.  .  .  .
One  other  matter  of  fact  I  may  mention.  My  son  was
fully  dressed  for  fl3dng,  with  helmet,  when  he  started.  We
happen  to  have  a  snapshot  of  him  taken  by  a  feUow-
officer  just  before  he  climbed  into  the  "  camel  "  which  he
flew. The  account  states  that  he  "  appeared "  with  his


Lxxxvi.] Spontaneous  Cases :  Impression  Externalised.  153

naval  cap  on.  My  son  began  his  flying  career  in  March
last,  entering  through  the  R.N.A.S.  before  the  amalgama-
tion of  the  R.N.A.S.  with  the  R.F.C.  His  elder  brother
had  entered  the  R.N.A.S.  and  my  son  David  was  proud
of  his  connection  with  the  earUer  service.  Havmg  a
complete  kit  of  the  naval  fljnng  service,  he  always  wore
the  naval  flying  xmtform  about  the  aerodrome,  and  was
one  of  only  three  at  the  drome  who  had  followed  the
same  course  in  entermg.  His  naval  uniform  was  there-
fore weU  known.  It  would  not  be  at  aU  an  unusual  thing
that  he  should  have  taken  off  his  uncomfortable  helmet
on  arriving  back  at  the  hangar,  and  exchanged  it  for  his
naval  cap.  Under  the  circumstances,  however,  it  is  to
be  remarked  that  he  wore  his  helmet  at  the  time  of  the
accident  ;  and  in  the  appearance  to  Lieut.  Larkin  wore
the  naval  cap.  His  mother  informs  me  that  he  was
dressed,  as  usual,  in  his  naval  miform  below  his  flymg
things,  and  that  he  had  his  naval  cap  with  him  in  the
fusilage  to  wear  on  reaching  Tadcaster — the  usual  action.
The  O.C.  states  that  my  son  left  Scampton  for  Tadcaster
at  11.35  a.m.  December  7,  '18.

The  circumstances  of  the  flight  were  as  follows.  My
son,  with  other  officers,  had  been  to  a  dance  at  Lincoln
on  the  night  of  the  6th  December.  He  got  up  rather
late  on  the  morning  of  the  7th,  missed  parade,  and  also
had  no  breakfast.  The  formal  completion  of  all  his  tests
for  "  getting  his  wings  "  were  to  take  place  on  the  7th.
As  the  account  states,  he  was  on  his  way  to  start  for
the  Aerial  Range  to  shoot  off  those  final  tests  when  he
was  asked  by  the  O.C.  to  take  one  of  two  "  camels  "
to  Tadcaster.  He  went  therefore  unexpectedly,  rather
fatigued,  and  without  food.  I  may  say  here  that  his
O.C.  considered  him  a  "  bom  flyer,"  and  that  he  was  a
very  cautious  and  careful  flyer,  though  not  shirldng  neces-
sary risks.  By  most  unusual  favour,  he  had  been  accepted
for  permanent  service  before  he  had  won  his  "  wings  " —
had  been  nommated  for  an  mstructorship  in  flying,  and
was  to  have  left  for  the  Camp  of  Instructors  on  the
Monday  following  Saturday,  7th  December.  The  weather
was  fair  when  he  left  Scampton  to  fly  to  Tadcaster  a


154


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


distance  of  60  miles.  He  was  accompanied  by  another
"  Avro  "  plane — a  2-seater — which  was  to  have  brought
him  back  to  Scampton  after  dehvery  of  the  "  camel."
You  are  probably  aware  that  a  "  camel  "  scout  plane  is  a
notoriously  difficult  and  sensitive  one,  and  requires  con-
tinued strain  and  effort  to  keep  it  dovm.  At  Doncaster
the  two  planes  ran  mto  fog.  My  son  and  his  Avro
companion  descended,  and  my  son  described  the  situation
to  his  flight  commander  and  asked  for  instructions  by
telephone.  The  reply  was  "Use  your  own  discretion."
We  suppose  that  my  son's  anxiety  to  finish  his  tests
prompted  him  to  continue.  His  companion  states  that
neither  of  them  lunched  at  Doncaster.  Between  Don-
caster  and  Tadcaster  the  fog  became  very  thick.  The
Avro  man  had  to  come  down,  and  made  a  forced  landing,
successfully.  My  son  circled  round  him  to  see  that  he
was  all  right  and  continued  his  flight  to  Tadcaster.  Sixty
miles  is  not  a  long  flight.  But  the  fog  was  very  dense.
In  order  to  keep  touch  with  the  sohd  a  flyer  has  to  keep
his  plane  mader  such  circumstances  about  150  ft.  above
the  surface  of  the  ground — a  feat  in  a  camel  of  considerable
difficulty.  My  son  must  have  encountered  difficulty,  as
he  did  not  approach  Tadcaster  till  nearly  3.30.  Allowing
for  1^  or  I  hour  for  the  descent  at  Doncaster,  he  must
have  been  flying  for  about  3|  to  3|  hours  on  this  occasion.
I  am  told  that  it  is  as  much  as  an  ordinary  flyer  can  do
to  fly  a  camel  for  2  hours.  The  strain  on  the  arms  is
intense.  In  fact,  his  mother,  who  saw  his  body  on
Monday  the  9th  at  midday,  observed  that  his  hands  were
tightly  clenched  and  his  forearms  swollen.  As  he  at  last
approached  the  Tadcaster  Aerodrome,  the  machme  was
seen  approaching  by  a  man  on  the  road  about  \  mile
distant  from  the  camp,  who  reported  the  fog  to  be  ex-
tremely dense.  During  the  evidence  at  the  inquest  a
girl,  or  yoimg  woman,  said  she  was  watching  the  plane,
and  saw  it  apparently  "  side-shp,"  then  right  itself.  It
flew  steadily  for  a  minute  or  two,  then  moimted  suddenly
and  immediately  "  nose-dived  "  and  crashed.  The  engine
was  full  on  when  the  crash  occurred.  My  son  was  thrown
violently  forward — his  head  striking  the  gun  before  him,


LXxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases:  Impression  Externalised.  155

which  was  not  hooded.  One  arm  was  broken,  one  leg
was  torn.  The  girl  ran  to  the  spot  and  "  found  the  officer
dead."  The  violence  of  contact  seems  to  have  stopped  his
watch,  which  registered  3.25  p.m.  His  cigarette  case
was  almost  doubled  up.  These  are  the  circumstances  of
the  accident,  so  far  as  I  am  aware  of  them.  I  am
informed  by  flying  men  that  the  reaction  on  reaching
safety  after  a  difficult  flight  is  so  "  terrible,"  that  fainting
is  not  unknown.  My  son,  it  is  thought,  may  have  fainted  ;
hence  the  crash,  and  his  inabihty  to  save  himself.  Or
there  was  possibly  engine  trouble.  I  am  told  also  that
when  shot,  or  in  danger,  the  immediate  thought  of  the
flyer  is  usually  a  quite  trivial  one,  such  as  the  sudden
desire  for  a  cup  of  cocoa,  or  to  get  undressed  at  camp,
etc.  I  mention  this  because  the  "  appearance  "  was  not
made  at  my  son's  home,  or  to  his  mother,  who  was  there
at  the  time,  but  in  his  own  camp-room,  and  to  a  person
who  was  a  comparative  stranger.  However,  his  mother
did  have  a  strange  impression  at  the  hour  of  his  death,
of  which  she  is  writing  an  account  herewith  enclosed.^
My  son  had  a  happy,  even  joyous  disposition.  He  had
a  brisk  step  and  manner  which  would  account  for  the
"  noise  and  clatter,"  which  Lieut.  Larkin  remarked  and
reports  in  his  account.  My  son  was  18  on  the  15th
April,  1918,  having  left  Bedales  School,  Hants,  before
mihtary  age,  to  enter  the  R.N.A.S.  He  had  been  head-
boy  at  Bedales  during  that  winter  term.  He  was  the
youngest  headboy  Bedales  had  had.  ...  At  Scampton,
as  at  school,  his  conduct,  character,  and  disposition  made
him  as  much  loved  as  respected.  His  friends  and  his
0.0.  report  that,  though  they  are  aU  accustomed  to  the
sudden  deaths  which  repeatedly  occur,  when  the  news
of  David's  death  reached  camp,  the  camp  was  completely
"  broken  up."

I  write  these  words  to  you  that  you  may  see  what  bear-
ing his  character  may  have  had  on  the  "  appearance,"
if  indeed  character  has  any  influence  in  such  things.

David  R.  M'Connel.

iThis  account  was  sent  to  the  Society,  but  not  printed  in  the  Journal.


156


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgtvick.


Enclosed  with  Mr.  M'Connel's  letter  was  an  account  by
Lieut.  Larldn  of  his  experience,  together  with  two  corroborative
statements  from  fellow-officers,  thus  :  '  '

34  T.D.S.,  Royal  Air  Force,
ScAMPTON,  Lincoln,  December  22,  1918.

David  [M'Connel],  in  his  flying  clothes,  about  11  a.m.
went  to  the  hangars  intending  to  take  a  machine  to  the
"  Aerial  Range  "  for  machine  gun  practice.  He  came
into  the  room  again  at  11.30  and  told  me  that  he  did
not  go  to  the  range,  but  that  he  was  taking  a  "  camel  "
to  Tadcaster  drome.  He  said,  "  I  expect  to  get  back  in
time  for  tea.  Cheero."  He  wallied  out  and  half  a
minute  later,  knocked  at  the  window  and  asked  me  to
hand  him  out  his  map,  which  he  had  forgotten.  After
I  had  Imich,  I  spent  the  afternoon  writing  letters  and
reading,  sitting  in  front  of  the  stove  fire.  What  I  am
about  to  say  now  is  extraordinary  to  say  the  least,  but
it  happened  so  naturally  that  at  the  time  I  did  not  give
it  a  second  thought.  I  have  heard  and  read  of  similar
happenings  and  I  must  say  that  I  always  disbeheved
them  absolutely.  My  opinion  had  always  been  that  the
persons  to  whom  these  appearances  were  given  were  people
of  a  nervous,  highly-strung,  imagmative  temperament,  but  I
had  always  been  among  the  incredulous  ones  and  had  been
only  too  ready  to  pooh-pooh  the  idea.  I  was  certainly
awake  at  the  time,  reading  and  smoking.  I  was  sitting,
as  I  have  said,  in  front  of  the  fire,  the  door  of  the  room
being  about  eight  feet  away  at  my  back.  I  heard  some-
one walldng  up  the  passage  ;  the  door  opened  with  the
usual  noise  and  clatter  which  David  always  made  ;  I
heard  his  "  Hello  boy  !  "  and  I  turned  half  round  in  my
chair  and  saw  him  standing  in  the  doorway,  half  in  and
half  out  of  the  room,  holding  the  door  knob  in  his  hand.
He  was  dressed  in  his  full  flying  clothes  but  wearing  his
naval  cap,  there  being  nothing  imusual  in  his  appearance.
His  cap  was  pushed  back  on  his  head  and  he  was  smihng,
as  he  always  was  when  he  came  into  the  rooms  and
greeted  us.  In  reply  to  his  "  HeUo  boy  !  "  I  remarked,
"  Hello  !  back  akeady  ?  " He  repUed, "  Yes. Got  there


:LXxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases:  Impression  Externalised.  157

all  right, had  a  good  trip." I  am  not  positively  sure
of  the  exact  words  he  used,  but  he  said,  "  Had  a  good
trip,"  or  '■  Had  a  fine  trip,"  or  words  to  that  effect.  I
was  looking  at  him  the  whole  time  he  was  speaking.  He
said,  "  Well,  cheero  !  "  closed  the  door  noisily  and  went  out.
I  went  on  with  my  reading  and  thought  he  had  gone  to
\asit  some  friends  in  one  of  the  other  rooms,  or  perhaps
had  gone  back  to  the  hangars  for  some  of  his  flying  gear,
helmet, goggles, etc., which he may  ha\e  forgotten.  I
did  not  have  a  watch,  so  could  not  be  sure  of  the  time,
but  was  certain  it  was  between  a  quarter  and  half-past
three, because shortly afterwards Lieut.  Gamer-Smith
came  into  the  room  and  it  was  a  quarter  to  four.  He
said,  '■  I  hope  Mac  (David)  gets  back  early,  we  are  going
to  Lincohi  this  evening." I  repUed,  "  He  is  back,  he  was
in  the  room  a  few  minutes  ago  !  "  He  said,  "Is  he  having
tea  ?  "  and  I  rei^hed  that  I  did  not  think  so,  as  he  (Mac)
had  not  changed  his  clothes, but  that  he  was  probably
in  some  other  room. Gamer-Smith  said, "  I'U  try  and
find  him  !  " I  then  went  into  the  mess,  had  tea,  and
afterwards  dressed  and  went  to  Lincoln. Li  the  smoking
room of  the Albion Hotel I  heard a  group of  officers
talking, and  overheard  their  conversation  and  the  words
"crashed,"  "  Tadcaster  "  and  "  M'Connel." I  joined  them
and  they  told  me  that  just  before  they  had  left  Scampton,
word had come through that M'Connel  had "  crashed "
and  had  been  killed  taking  the "  Camel "  to  Tadcaster.
At  that  moment  I  did  not  beheve  it,  that  he  had  been
killed  on  the  Tadcaster  joumey. My  impression  was  that
he  had  gone  up  again  after  I  had  seen  him,  as  I  felt
positive  that  I  had  at  3.30. Naturally  I  was  eager  to
>■ hear  something  more  definite,  and  later  in  the  evening  I
heard  that  he  had  been  killed  on  the  Tadcaster  joumey.
Next  moming,  Gamer-Smith  and  I  had  a  long  discussion
about  my  experience. He  tried  to  persuade  me  that  I
must  have  been  mistaken,  that  I  had  not  actually  seen
Mac  on  the  previous  afternoon  about  3.30,  but  I  insisted
that I had seen him. As you can understand,  Mr.
M'Connel,  I  was  at  a  loss  to  solve  the  problem.  There
was  no  disputing  the  fact  that  he  had  been  killed  whilst


•58  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.  '  [paM

flying  to  Tadcaster,  presumably  at  3.25,  as  we  ascertained
afterwards  that  his  watch  had  stopped  at  that  time.  I
tried  to  persuade  myself  that  I  had  not  seen  him  or
spoken  to  him  in  this  room,  but  I  could  not  make  myself
beUeve  otherwise,  as  I  was  mideniably  awake  and  his
appearance,  voice,  manner  had  all  been  so  natural.  I
am  of  such  a  sceptical  nature  regarding  things  of  this
kmd  that  even  now  I  wish  to  think  otherwise,  that  I
did  not  see  him,  but  I  am  unable  to  do  so.

The  foregoing  are  just  the  plain  facts  of  the  case.
Would  you  please  give  me  your  opinion  ?  I  have  given
you  every  detail  and  described  easily  and  naturally  just
as  it  happened.  I  must  thank  you  very  much  for  David's
photograph.  I  shall  always  treasure  it.  We  had  been
very  good  friends  though  not  intimate  friends  in  the  true
sense  of  the  word,  as  though  I  had  known  him  for  about
four  months,  we  had  been  room-mates  for  about  six
weeks  only.  We  had  lots  of  discussions,  political,  social,
and  educational,  but  not  once  did  we  discuss  anything
bordering  on  the  occult  or  spiritual.  Had  we  done  so,
I  would  perhaps  have  been  able  to  account,  in  a  measure,
for  his  appearance  in  this  room  at  the  time  of  his  death.
As  it  is,  I  have  no  explanation  whatever  to  offer.

Jas.  J.  Larkin,  2nd  Lt.  E.A.F.

CORROBOKATIVE  STATEMENTS.

Mr.  Larldn  has  related  almost  word  for  word  what  he
told  me  on  the  afternoon  of  the  7th  [December,  1918],
at  about  a  quarter  to  four.  Knowing  the  type  of  man
he  is,  I  most  certamly  beUeve  this  strange  occurrence,  but
am  at  a  loss  to  explam  it.

Gerard  Garner-Smith,  Lt.  E.A.F.

On  Sunday  mornmg,  December  8th  [1918],  Mr.  Larkin
told  me  the  story  exactly  as  he  has  written  it  down  here.
I  have  known  Larldn  rather  intimately  for  some  time,
and  although  at  any  other  time  I  would  have  been  in-
clined to  disbelieve  a  story  of  this  nature,  knowmg  Larkin
as  I  do  and  as  he  is,  I  am  convinced  of  his  story  as  he
has  told  it.  R.  Mowat  Hillman,  Lt.  R.A.F.


LXXXVi.]  Spontaneotis  Cases  : Impression  Externalised.  159

In  reply  to  a  further  enquiry,  the  following  letter  was
received  from  Lieut.  Larkin  giving  additional  details  concerning
the  circumstances  in  which  his  experience  took  place ;

Repatriation  Depot,  R.A.F.,
Blandeord,  Dorset,  June  27,  1919.

The  Society  already  has  my  detailed  description  of
the  occurrence — regarding  the  time,  it  was  about  3.25,
or  rather  between  3.20  and  3.30  p.m.  The  room  was
quite  small,  about  12  feet  square,  and  at  the  time  the
electric  hght  was  on  and  also  a  good  fire  burning  in  an
open  stove.  I  may  mention  that  the  Ught  was  particularly
good  and  bright,  and  there  were  no  shadows  or  half
shadows  in  the  room.  Outside  it  was  still  quite  hght,
but  being  a  foggy,  cold  day,  I  had  my  door  closed  and
the  light  on  and  the  fixe  going.  I  thmk  that  is  aU  the
additional  information  you  require,  as  I  understand  from
Mr.  M'Connel's  letter. Jas.  J.  Larkin,  2nd  Lt.  R.A.F.

Lieut.  Gamer-Smith's  corroborative  statement  supphes  evi-
dence that  Lieut.  Larkin  had  identified  the  man  who  entered
his  room  on  December  7,  1918,  as  Lieut.  M'Connel  before  he
could  have  had  any  normal  knowledge  of  the  accident  which
had  only  just  occurred.  The  identification  cannot  therefore
be  due  to  any  trick  of  memory  consequent  on  the  news  of
the  accident.  That  being  so,  the  only  normal  explanation
which  could  be  made  to  cover  the  facts  would  be  one  of
mistaken  identity.  It  was  with  this  possibihty  in  mind  that
we  questioned  Lieut.  Larkin  concerning  the  fighting  of
the  room.  Obviously  such  a  mistake  would  be  far  more
likely  to  occur  in  a  dim  hght.  Lieut.  Larkin 's  reply  on  this
point  is  satisfactory.  The  fight,  he  teUs  us,  was  good,  and
under  these  circumstances  it  is  very  difiicult  to  suppose  that
Lieut.  Larkin  could  mistake  a  man,  with  whom  he  actuaUy
had  conversation  at  a  distance  of  only  a  few  feet,  for  another
man  with  whose  voice  and  appearance  he  was  perfectly  familiar.
A  further  argument  against  the  theory  of  mistaken  identity
is  that  Lieut.  Larkin  observed  that  the  man  who  entered  his
room  was  wearing  a  naval  cap.  This  was  worn  by  only  two
other  men  at  the  aerodrome  besides  Lieut.  M'Connel,  neither


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [vAWt

of  whom,  as  we  are  assured  by  Mr.  M'Connel  who  is  person-
ally acquainted  with  them,  "could  either  in  height,  or  build,
or  manner,  or  voice,  have  been  mistaken  for  my  son."

I  may  add  to  these  observations  of  the  Editor,  that,
apart  from  other  reasons  given,  the  hypothesis  of  mistaken
identity  seems  very  difficult  to  maintain  in  face  of  the
recognition,  not  only  of  appearance,  but  of  voice  and  of
manner  of  entering  the  room.  Indeed,  it  would  almost
seem  as  if  the  person  mistaken  for  Lieutenant  M'Connel,
if  there  was  one,  must  have  taken  on  his  semblance  to  an
extent  amounting  to  a  monstrous  illusion,  approaching  so
nearly  to  hallucination  that  its  occurrence  at  the  very
time,  or  within  a  few  minutes  of  Lieutenant  M'Connel's
death,  would  itself  suggest  the  operation  of  telepathy.

It  will  be  observed  that  we  know  the  apparition  to
have  been  seen  within  a  few  minutes  of  the  death,  but
not  whether  it  occurred  before  or  after  or  at  the  actual
moment.  If  it  preceded  the  death.  Lieutenant  M'Connel
dreaming  in  a  fainting  condition  may  have  imagined  his
expedition  successfully  accomplished  and  himself  returned
to  his  quarters.  In  this  case  the  details  of  the  apparition
may  have  been  due  to  the  agent.  They  are,  however,
also  what  might  naturally  be  supplied  by  the  percipient^
given  the  time  and  place.  A  case  in  which  the  appari-
tion occurred  during  a  period  of  unconsciousness  of  the
agent,  and  undoubtedly  before  his  actual  death  is  L.977
(see  below,  p.  203).

We  may  take  next  the  only  other  death  coincidence  in
our  collection  in  which  the  apparition  speaks  (L.  1146,
Journal,  Vol.  XII.,  p.  59).

(L.  1146.)

The  case  was  sent  to  us  by  Professor  A.  Alexander  of  Rio,
who  writes  regarding  it  as  follows  :

Caixa  906,  Rio  DE  Janeiro,  February  4dh,  1905.
.  .  .  You  will  see  that  it  is  one  of  deferred  visual  and
auditory hallucination announcing  the death of the  ap-


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  161

parent  agent.  The  deposition  of  the  percipieAt  and  of  her
husband  and  daughter  is  contained  in  that  part  of  my
narrative  which  begins  mth  the  words,  "  Now  before  his
death  Cavalcante— "  and  ends  with  "—normal  cause
be  found  to  account  for  the  noise."  The  Riekens,  so
far  as  I  could  make  out,  have  never  troubled  them-
selves about  spirituahstic  matters,  but  they  gave  their
evidence  frankly  and  without  reserve.  The  thing  happened
and  they  told  me  how  it  happened.  The  gu-l  looked  upon
the  hallucination  merely  as  a  jjroof  that  her  mother  was
superstitious.  Superstition  alone  does  not  explain  away
the  coincidence.  Telepathic  agency  is  all  the  more  prob-
able for  the  reason  that  between  Frau  Rieken  and  her
intended  son-in-law  there  existed  much  sympathy  and
affection.  On  my  first  visit  to  Copacabana  I  examined
the  room  where  the  apparition  was  seen.  .  .  .

The  account  written  by  Professor  Alexander  is  as  follows  :

In  the  first  half  of  November, 1904,  popular  disorders
in  Rio  de  Janeiro,  which  were  ostensibly  a  protest  against
the  government  project  of  obligatory  vaccination,  culmin-
ated in the revolt of the Military School.  Marching
from  their  quarters  on  the  evening  of  the  14th  of  that
month, imder the command of General Travassos,  the
students  met  and  scattered  the  police  force  sent  to  inter-
cept them. The  firing  took  place  about  11  o'clock  p.m.
at  the  spot  where  the  Rua  da  Passagem  opens  on  to  the
Botafogo shore. The neighbouring gas-lamps had  been
extinguished  and  the  night  was  very  dark,  so  that  it  is
impossible  to  loiow  the  exact  details  of  all  that  occurred.
It  is  certain,  however,  that  one  of  the  first  victims  of  this
encomater  was the  alf eres-alum.no, ^  Joao Sylvestre  Caval-
cante,  who  was, it  seems,  wounded  in  the  back  as  he
retired  from  a  parley  with  the  general  in  command  of  the
pohce  and  then  killed  outright  by  a  second  shot  through
the  head. This  occurrence  was  partly  witnessed  by  his
comrade. Ensign  Potyguara,  who  led  a  company  in  the

1  A  military  student  who  in  the  course  of  his  studies  has  attained  to
the  rank  of  ensign.


162


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick. '■ •  ^  [part


vanguard.  The  written  deposition  of  the  latter  is  here
S^^*^^  •  ^  "  S.  Christovam,  January  2Uh,  1905.

"  I  declare  that  on  the  night  between  the  14th  and  15th
of  November,  about  11  o'clock  in  the  evening,  the  MiUtary
School,  under  the  command  of  General  Travassos,  having
halted  in  the  Rua  da  Passagem,  the  alferes-alumno  Joao
Sylvestre  Cavalcante  was  sent  by  the  said  general  to
parley  with  General  Piragibe,  who  was  in  command  of
the  poUce  brigade.  Immediately  after  the  parley,  as
the  said  alferes-alumno  was  returning,  he  was  shot  in  the
back  by  a  bullet  that  came  from  the  police  brigade.  On
passing  by  me  he  told  me  he  was  woimded,  and  riding
(by  my  advice)  to  the  rear  of  the  School,  he  fell  im-
mediately afterwards,  and  was  dragged  for  a  short  distance
by  the  horse  which  he  was  riding.

"  N.B. — When  the  alferes-ahimno  Joao  Sylvestre  Caval-
cante was  crossing  the  Rua  da  Passagem,  he  was  wounded
by  a  Mauser  bullet  in  the  right  parietal  [bone],  and  this
shot  killed  him.  "Ensign  Tertuliano  Potyguara."

This  account  of  the  death  is  said  to  be  current  among  the
mihtary  students  who  are  now  detained  in  the  different  barracks
awaiting  their  trial  by  court-martial.^  One  of  these,  Mario
Clementino  de  Carvalho,  declares  that  they  left  their  quarters
shortly  after  10  o'clock  and  exchanged  shots  with  the  poUce
about  11— certainly  not  later  than  11.15.  He  struck  a  match,
and  looked  at  Cavalcante  after  he  had  fallen.  The  poor  lad
lay  in  a  muddy  gutter,  his  horse  dead  on  the  pavement
beside  him.  The  evidence  of  this  witness  and  others  deter-
mines within  narrow  Umits  the  time  of  the  death.  It  must
have  taken  place  between  a  quarter  to  eleven  and  a  quarter
past,  and  most  probably  just  about  the  hour  itself.

Now  before  his  death  Cavalcante  had  become  engaged  to  a
certain Fraulein Maria Luiza Rieken, the daughter  of  Herr

1  Professor  Alexander  sends  us  tlie  original  Portuguese  statement  of
this  witness,  as  well  as  his  translation  of  it. — Editoe.

^  One  of  the  officers  who  was  with  General  Piragibe  thinks  that
Cavalcante  fell  at  the  first  shot.  Probably  the  account  of  the  students
is  the  correct  one.


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.


Rieken,  a  thriving  military  tailor  established  in  this  city,  and
of  Frau  Louise  Rieken.  This  family  hves  at  No.  20a  Rua
Barata  Ribeiro,  Copacabana,  and,  as  the  fiance  of  the  daughter,
Cavalcante,  who  hved  close  by,  was  of  course  a  constant  visitor
at  the  house,  and  was  accustomed  to  take  his  early  coffee
there  before  proceediiig  to  the  School.  On  the  mommg  of
the  14th  he  had  returned  at  9  o'clock  to  breakfast,  which  he
shared  with  'Miml,'  as  the  young  lady  was  famiharly  called.
He  was  in  good  spirits,  and  although  there  was  some  pecuh-
arity  in  his  manner  of  taking  leave,  it  is  not  hkely  that  he
had  any  presentiment  of  his  approaching  fate.  Shortly  before,
indeed,  he  had  made  the  hypothesis  of  his  own.  death  a  subject
I  for  jest. He  left  Copacabana  never  to  return  there  ahve.

No  reports  whatever  respecting  the  adhesion  of  the  School
to  the  insurrectionary  movement  reached  the  family  that  day.
About  11  p.m.  by  their  house  clock  (which  was,  however,
too  slow)  a  sound  of  firing  was  heard  from  over  the  hill,
i  But  when,  in  spite  of  the  advanced  hour,  Cavalcante  did  not
i  return,  Frau  Rieken  felt  very  anxious,  and  for  some  time
after  she  had  rethed  to  bed  this  state  of  uneasiness  kept  her
awake.  The  room  occupied  by  her  and  her  husband  is  in
the  upper  part  of  the  house,  but  as  it  is  a  small  one  and
fiUed  with  large-sized  furniture,  the  door  is  left  wide  open
for  the  sake  of  ventilation.  She  had  already  heard  the  clock
strike  two  ;  it  was  therefore  between  2  and  3  o'clock  in  the
morning  when  she  suddenly  saw  Cavalcante  standing  at  the
entrance  looking  in  upon  her.  He  leant  against  the  side  of
the  door,  his  right  hand  raised  and  holding  to  the  jamb  and
his  left  arm  behind  his  back.  He  did  not  wear  the  regulation
uniform  in  which  he  had  been  killed,  but  presented  himself
in  the  khaki  undress  he  usually  wore  at  home — on  his  head
a  felt  hat  with  the  brim  turned  down  and  a  rose-coloured
neckerchief  round  his  neck.  He  seemed  to  be  covered  with  mud
and  his  face  was  overcast  with  sadness.  "  Guarda  3Iimt,"
he  said.  ("Take  care  of  Mimi.")  Frau  Rieken 's  first  surprise
was  succeeded  by  a  sense  of  the  impropriety  of  his  being  in
that  part  of  the  house  at  such  an  hour,  and  she  was  about
to  awake  her  husband.  But  on  looking  again  the  doorway
was  a  blank — Cavalcante  had  vanished — it  was  but  a  vision.
Next  morning,  before  any  news  had  reached  them,  she  told


164


Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.


[part


Herr  Rieken  and  her  daughter  of  her  strange  nocturnal  ex-
perience. Neither  of  them  was  willing  to  beheve  that  the
vision  had  any  significance.  On  walking  down  to  the  electric-
car  station  at  8  o'clock  Herr  Rieken  was  informed  of  the
occurrence  of  the  revolt  and  of  Cavalcante's  death  by  some
young  men  who  were  there  reading  the  papers.  At  first  he
gave  absolutely  no  credit  to  the  report,  and  was  convinced
of  its  truth  only  after  it  had  been  confirmed  by  two  naval
officers  of  his  acquauitance.  He  proceeded  at  once  to  the
Military  School,  whither  the  body  had  been  transported.  In
preparing  it  for  burial  he  cut  away  the  miiform,  which,  al-
though not  the  same  as  that  seen  in  the  vision,  was  indeed
etauaed  with  the  mud  of  the  street.  The  shirt  underneath
was  soaked  with  blood,  and  a  buUet  had  passed  through  the
head  from  one  side  to  the  other.  Herr  Rieken  was  also
told  that  the  lad  had  been  dragged  by  his  horse  after  he  had
fallen.

About  a  month  later  the  same  percipient  had  another
visual  hallucination,  to  which,  however,  there  seems  to  have
been  no  comcidence  in  objective  events.  She  saw  the  young
man  seated  in  his  usual  careless  attitude  on  one  of  the  chairs
in  her  sitting-room.

Cavalcante  had  nearly  completed  his  course  of  mihtary
studies.  He  was  noted  for  his  application  and  iiiteUigence,
and  recommended  himself  to  all  who  knew  him  by  a  most
insinuating  address.  He  was  nearly  27  years  old  at  the  date
of  his  death.

The  loss  of  their  intended  son-in-law  has  not  been  the  only
misfortune  which  the  Riekens  have  had  to  bear  in  recent
times.  One  of  their  children,  a  boy  nine  years  of  age,  had
been  previously  killed  by  a  passing  car.  Some  three  hours
before  this  accident  a  crash  as  of  breaking  crockery  or  bottles
had  been  heard  in  their  store-room.  On  going  thither  they
found  everything  in  perfect  order,  nor  could  any  normal
cause  be  found  to  account  for  the  noise.

From  this  accoimt,  which  has  been  carefuUy  drawn  up  and
corrected  in  accordance  with  the  statements  of  the  various
witnesses,  it  appears  that  the  lapse  of  time  between  Caval-
cante's death  at  Botafogo  and  its  nunciation  at  Copacabana


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  165

was  roughly  three  hours— probably  a  Uttle  more.  For  some
days  there  had  been  disorders  m  town,  and  both  by  day  and
night  there  had  been  firing  in  the  streets.  Of  this  nobody
was  ignorant.  But  the  news  of  the  revolt  of  the  Military
School  spread  very  late  and  evidently  did  not  reach  the
Riekens  in  the  retired  spot  where  they  hved.  It  is  an  im-
portant point  in  the  evidence  that  Frau  Rieken  told  her
husband  and  daughter  of  her  hallucination  before  any  of  them
had  the  shghtest  mkling  of  the  events  of  the  night.  The
family  formally  certify  to  the  correctness  of  that  part  of  the
above  narrative  that  contams  their  own  oral  deposition  :

"  CoPACABANA,  January  28th,  1905.

"  We,  the  undersigned,  herewith  declare  that  everything
happened  exactly  as  it  has  been  described  by  Mr.  Alex-
ander. "  Friedbich  Rieken.

"  Louise  Rieken.
*  "Maria  Luiza  Rieken."

The  original  of  the  above  note,  written  in  German,  was
sent  to  us  by  Professor  Alexander.

The  next  case  (L.  980,  Journal,  Vol.  VII.,  p.  8)  is
interesting  on  account  of  its  peculiarity.  The  percipient
was  a  child  too  young  to  realise  the  circumstances,  but
there  can  be  little  doubt  that  she  had  a  definitely  ex-
ternalised waking  hallucination  of  sight  about  two  hours
after  the  death  of  "  little  Jack."  At  the  same  time,  it
is  rather  difficult  to  suppose  agency  of  the  dying  infant
specially  directed  to  the  percipient.  It  seems  more  natural
to  imagine  a  kind  of  diffused  telepathy  in  which  the  dying
child's  mother,  the  anxious  mother  of  the  percipient,  and
the  clerk  through  whom  the  news  of  the  death  was
normally  communicated  (and  whose  knowledge  seems  to
have  timed  the  hallucination),  may  all  have  been  more  or
less  concerned  as  well  as  the  child  who  saw  the  apparition,
though  it  was  only  in  the  case  of  the  latter  that  the
telepathic  impact  produced  any  conscious  effect.  If  this
conjecture  is  right,  it  may  help  to  explain  other  cases.
E.g.  where  there  seems  to  be  something  arbitrary  in  the


166


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


choice  of  the  percipient,  some  special  condition  in  himself
may  account  for  his  being  the  only  person  in  whom  a
more  widely  diffused  telepathic  impulse  makes  itself
manifest.  The  case  was  sent  to  us  by  the  Rev.  J.  A.
Macdonald,  who  has  obtained  for  us  at  different  times
other  important  spontaneous  cases.  He  writes  in  sending
this  one  :

(L.  980.)

2  QuAERY  Bank,  Heswall,  Cheshire,  May  11,  1894.
The  accompanying  case  has  the  merit  of  recent  occur-
rence. "Little  Jack"  died  from  convulsions  with  teething.
The  Michells  are  proprietors  of  lead  works  at  St.  Helens,
Lancashire.  J.  A.  Macdonald.

The  account  is  given  by  the  percipient's  mother.  She
writes  :

The  Hollies,  St.  Helens,  Lancaster,  May  8,  1894.
On  the  25th  of  last  month  I  was  sitting  in  the  nursery,
and  my  httle  daughter  Gwendoline  was  playing  with  her
doUs,  and  she  suddenly  laughed  so  as  to  attract  my
attention,  and  I  asked  her  what  she  was  laughing  at.
She  said,  "  0  mother,  I  thought  I  saw  httle  Jack  in
that  chair  " — a  vacant  chair  in  the  room — and  iiadicating
her  little  cousin.  About  five  minutes  after  this  the
clerk  telephoned  from  the  office  saying  he  had  just  received
a  telegram  from  Penzance  announcing  the  death  of  httle
Jack.  It  was  about  half -past  nine  in  the  morning  when
the  incident  occurred  in  the  nursery  at  St.  Helens.  The
death  in  Penzance  took  place  about  half-past  seven  on
the  same  morning.  E.  Michell.

In  reply  to  our  further  inquiries  Mr.  Michell  wrote  :

May  28,  1894.

Gwendoline  is  five  years  and  four  months  old.  I  am
not  aware  that  she  has  had  any  previous  experience  of
the  kind  related  to  Mr.  Macdonald,  but  that  the  one  in
question  is  a  fact  I  have  not  the  shghtest  doubt.


LXXXVI.]  Sqjontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  167


She  knows  the  head  clerk  at  our  office,  and  he  has
often  conversed  with  her,  and  occasionally  plaj^ed  with
her  in  an  ordinary  way.

The  impression  she  had  was  just  prior  to  the  clerk's
telephoning  to  my  Avife,  and  although  the  clerk  did  not
think  about  my  daughter  missing  Jack  at  all,  yet  Mrs.
MicheU  herself  was  anxiously  wondering  what  the  news
resi^ectrng  Jack  would  be.

There  was  no  one  else  in  the  nursery  besides  my  wife
and  daughter,  but  Mrs.  MicheU  was  very  deeply  impressed
with  the  matter,  and  then  to  receive  the  message  very
shortly  after  forced  the  matter  upon  her  mind  still  deeper,
and  she  told  me  immediately  I  arrived  home.

JaS.  J.  MiCHBLL.

An  apparition  to  a  young  child  is  also  an  element  in
the  following  case  (L.  1223,  Journal,  Vol.  XIX.,  p.  39),  and
we  apparently  have  in  it  a  telepathic  impulse  not  only
widely  diffused  but  widely  manifested.  Three  persons  in
three  different  places  seem  to  have  received  some  intima-
tion of  the  death  of  the  agent,  Captain  Bowyer-Bower,  at
about  the  time  of  his  death  or  very  shortly  afterwards,
before  any  normal  knowledge  of  what  had  occurred  could
have  reached  those  concerned.  We  owe  the  case  in  the
first  instance  to  Mr.  Hubert  Wales,  who  has  collected  the
necessary  evidence.

(L.  1223.)

The  following  notice  of  the  death  of  the  agent  appeared  in
the  Court  Journal  of  June  I,  1917  :

BowyER-BowER. — Previously  reported  missing,  now  re-
ported killed  in  action  on  March  19th,  Eldred  Wolferstan
Bowyer-Bower,  Captain  the  East  Surrey  Regiment  and
R.F.C.,  son  of  Captain  and  Mrs.  T.  Bowyer-Bower,  of
30,  Bramham  Gardens,  S.W.,  and  of  Ashanti,  and  grandson
of  the  late  Major-General  Henry  Bower,  aged  twenty-two
years.  (Captain  Bower's  body,  beside  his  beriddled  plane,
was  fomid  and  recovered  by  his  own  father  on  May  10th.)
No  mourning.


168


Mrs.  Henry  bidgivick.


[part


It  appears  from  information  received  by  Captain  Bowyer-
Bower's  mother  (see  below)  that  his  death  occurred  in  the
early  morning.

1.  The  most  remarkable  of  the  experiences  which  have
been  reported  to  us  was  an  apparition  of  Captain  Bowyer-
Bower  which  was  seen  by  his  half-sister  Mrs.  Spearman  in
India,  within  a  few  hours  of  his  death.  Mrs.  Spearman's
original  report  of  her  experience  was  obtained  under  the
following  circumstances.

Shortly  after  Captain  Bowyer-Bower's  death,  his  fiancee.
Miss  Highett,  had  a  sitting  with  a  professional  medium,  Mrs.
Brittain,  at  Avhich  a  statement  was  made  which  Miss  Highett
reports  thus  in  a  letter  to  Mr.  Wales  :

Wed.  \2th  June  [1918].

I  wish  to  tell  you  that  Mrs.  Brittain  was  quite  a  stranger
to  Captain  and  Mrs.  Bower  and  me.  My  interview
with  her  took  place  on  September  29th,  1917.  After
telling  me  many  things  about  Mrs.  Bower's  son  she  said,
"He  has  a  sister."  I  said,  "Yes,  Cicely."  She  said,
"No,  that's  not  the  name."  She  waited  a  few  seconds
and  then  said  :  "  Joan.  She  has  a  little  girl  called  Joan,
now  I  get  Dorothy."  I  said,  "Yes."  He  says,  "  TeU
Dorothy  she  has  the  power  to  communicate."  He  also
said, "She  is  not  in  this  country." Mta.  Highett.

Mrs.  Bowyer-Bower  wrote  to  her  step -daughter,  Mrs.  Dorothy
Spearman  (Captain  Bower's  half-sister)  in  India,  with  reference
to  the  statements  made  to  Miss  Highett  at  this  sitting.  The
following  passage  is  extracted  from  Mrs.  Spearman's  reply  :

Calcutta,  2  Jan.,  1918.

.  .  .  Now  I  have  never  told  you  this  before  because  I
was  afraid  you  would  not  understand.  Eldred  was  greatly
on  my  mind  when  baby  was  bom,  and  I  could  only
thmk  of  him.  On  March  19th,  m  the  late  part  of  the
mommg,  I  was  sewing  and  talking  to  baby,  Joan  was  in
the  sitting-room  and  did  not  see  anything.  I  had  a
great  feeling  I  must  turn  round  and  did,  to  see  Eldred ;
be  looked  so  happy  and  that  dear  mischievous  look.  I


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases :  Impression  Externalised.  169


was  so  glad  to  see  him,  and  told  him  I  would  just  put
baby  in  a  safer  place,  then  we  could  talk.  "  Fancy
coming  out  here,"  I  said,  turning  round  agaiii,  and  was
just  putting  my  hands  out  to  give  him  a  hug  and  a  kiss,
but  Eldred  had  gone.  I  called  and  looked  for  him.  I
never  saw  him  again.  At  first  [I]  thought  it  was  simply
my  brain.  Then  I  did  thinli  for  a  second  something
must  have  happened  to  him  and  a  terrible  fear  came
over  me.  Then  again  I  thought  how  stupid  I  was,  and
it  must  be  my  brain  playing  tricks.  But  now  I  know  it
was  Eldred,  and  all  the  time  in  Church  at  baby's  christen-
ing he  was  there,  because  I  felt  he  was  and  Imow  he  was,
only  I  could  not  see  him. All  the  time  I  thought  why

do  I  feel  hke  this  when  Eldred  is  safe. And  Mrs.  K

kept  on  telling  me  to  look  more  cheerful  .  .  .

Mrs.  Bowyer-Bower  states  that  Mrs.  Spearman  was  at  a
hotel  in  Calcutta  at  the  time  referred  to  in  the  above  extract,
and  in  a  letter  to  Mr.  Wales  she  says  :

26th  May,  1918.
.  .  The  httle  boy  whose  Christening  is  mentioned  was
to  have  been  his  godson  and  the  day  he  was  baptized
Eldred  feU.  Dolly  [Mrs.  Spearman]  did  not  of  course
know  of  Eldred's  death  or  even  that  he  was  out  in  France
again,  as  he  had  been  home  several  months  and  [had]
only  returned  there  three  weeks  when  kiUed  .  .  .

In  reply  to  a  question  addressed  to  her  by  Mrs.  Bowyer-
Bower  as  to  whether  she  had  informed  any  one  of  her  ex-
perience before  she  knew  of  Captain  Bowyer-Bower's  death,
Mrs.  Spearman  wrote  thus  :

Dabjbeling,  Augtist  '^rd  [1918].

...  I  can  only  teU  him  [Mr.  Wales]  I  saw  Eldred,  and,
Peggy,  I  shall  never  forget  the  joy  that  went  through  me
or  the  horror  when  I  looked  and  called  and  could  not
find  him  or  make  him  hear.  No,  I  did  not  teU  any  one
before  I  heard  of  his  death  and  have  not  up  to  now.  I
did  not  tell  Alec^  because  I  knew  he  did  not  beheve  as  I
^  Mrs,  Spearman's  husband.


170


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


did. When  I  told  him  how  Mrs.  B~ —  saw  the  W

boy,  Alec  said  it  must  have  been  a  dream.  One  day-
Alec  said,  I  wonder  if  any  one  has  seen  Eldred,  and  I
said  yes  I  have,  and  I  explained  what  I  saw  and  how  I
felt,  and  when  I  went  to  the  Grand  we  took  the  same
rooms  and  I  showed  him  where  Alley  stood.  He  now
beheves  we  can  see  those  who  have  gone.  His  belief  is
the  same  as  my  own.  If  Alec  had  been  with  me  at  the
time,  I  would  have  called  out  to  him  and  asked  if  he  had
seen  Eldred, was  he  in the  sitting-room. I  only  knew

the  K  s  in  Calcutta,  and  often  when  I  spoke  to  them

they  would  laugh.  So  I  never  said  a  word  about  Alley.
In  fact  I  thought  it  might  be  my  own  madness.  I
started  a  letter  to  you  the  same  day  and  tore  it  up  as
I  thought  you  would  only  say  it  was  cracked.  .  .  .

Subsequently  a  further  statement  concerning  her  experience
was  obtained  from  Mrs.  Spearman  in  a  letter  to  Mr.  Wales,
as  follows  :

12  Jan.,  1919.

My  step-mother  Mrs.  Bowyer-Bower  asked  me  to  write
to  you  about  the  vision  I  had  of  my  brother.

My  brother  appeared  to  me  on  the  19th  March,  1917.
At  the  time  I  was  either  sewing  or  talking  to  my  baby,
I  cannot  remember  quite  what  I  was  domg  at  that
moment. The  baby  was  on  the  bed.

I  had  a  very  strong  feeUng  I  must  turn  round  ;  on
domg  so,  I  saw  my  brother  Eldred  W.  Bowyer-Bower.
Thinking  he  was  ahve  and  had  been  sent  out  to  India,
I  was  simply  deUghted  to  see  him,  and  turned  round
quickly  to  put  baby  in  a  safe  place  on  the  bed,  so  that
I  could  go  on  talldng  to  my  brother;  then  turned  again
and  put  my  hand  out  to  him,  when  I  found  he  was  not
there.  I  thought  he  is  only  jokmg,  so  I  called  him
and  looked  everywhere  I  could  think  of  looking.  It  was
only  when  I  could  not  find  him  I  became  very  frightened
and  the  awful  fear  that  he  might  be  dead.  I  felt  very
sick  and  giddy.  I  think  it  was  2  o'clock  the  baby  was
christened,  and  in  the  church  I  felt  he  was  there,  but  I


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  l7l

could  not  see  him.  Two  weeks  later  I  saw  in  the  paper
he  was  missmg.  Yet  I  could  not  brmg  myself  to  believe
he  had  passed  away.  I  did  fancy  once  I  saw  my  grand-
mother, but  she  seemed  very  misty,  so  it  may  have  been
fancy.

I  did  not  tell  any  one  of  the  vision  I  saw  of  my  brother
for  quite  1  or  2  months  after  I  heard  of  his  death,  as  I
was  staying  in  the  Grand  Hotel,  Calcutta,  and  did  not
know  anyone  there  very  well.  My  husband  was  not  with
me  and  I  did  not  write  to  him  about  it,  because  he  did
not  believe  in  these  sort  of  things.  However,  I  finally
told  him  before  writing  to  Mi's.  Bowyer-Bower.  The
only  reason  I  did  not  mention  it  was,  I  felt  nervous  people
would  only  say  I  had  imagmed  it,  so  decided  to  keep
quiet  on  the  subject.  Dorothy  C.  Speabman.

It  is  mafortunate  that  Mrs.  Spearman  should  not  have
mentioned  her  experience  to  anyone  before  she  knew  of  her
brother's  death,  but  this  weak  point  in  the  evidence  is  to
some  extent  comiteracted,  because  the  date  of  the  experience
is  established  by  the  circumstance  (clearly  recollected  by  Mrs.
Spearman)  that  it  occurred  on  the  day  upon  which  her  baby
was  christened.  The  christening  of  the  child,  as  we  are
informed  by  Mrs.  Bowyer-Bower,  took  place  on  March  19,
1917,  the  day  of  Captain  Bowyer-Bower's  death.  It  is  very
unUkely  that  Mrs.  vSpearinan's  memory  would  deceive  her  on
such  a  point  as  that,  and  it  is  evident  from  her  statements
that  the  experience  was  of  a  strikmg  and  unusual  character,
the  apparition  being  so  completely  developed  as  to  make  her
think  momentarily  that  her  brother  was  actually  present  in
the  flesh.  She  states  that  the  experience  took  place  "in
the  latter  part  of  the  morning,"  which  means  that  allowing
for  the  difference  of  longitude  it  occurred  at  about  the  time
of  Captain  Bowyer-Bower's  death,  seemg  that,  so  far  as  can  be
ascertained,  he  died  in  France  in  the  early  morning  of  the
same  day.

2.  Some  visual  impression  of  Captain  Bowyer-Bower  would
also  appear  to  have  been  received  at  about  the  time  of  his
death  by  his  niece,  a  child  of  not  quite  three  years  old.
This incident  was reported to Mr. Wales in a  letter  from


172


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


the  child's  mother,  Mrs.  Chater,  Captain  Bowyer-Bower's
sister,  thus  :

June  5th  [1918].

My  mother  Mi-s.  Bowyer-Bower  tells  me  you  wish  me
to  write  and  tell  you  about  my  little  girl  sajdng  she  had
seen  my  brother  after  he  was  killed.

One  morning  while  I  was  still  in  bed,  about  9.15,  she
came  to  my  room  and  said,  "  Uncle  Alley  Boy  is  down-
stairs," and  although  I  told  her  he  was  in  France,  she
insisted  that  she  had  seen  him.  Later  in  the  day  I
happened  to  be  writing  to  my  mother  and  mentioned
this,  not  because  I  thought  much  about  it,  but  to  show
that  Betty  still  thought  and  spoke  of  her  imcle  of  whom
she  was  very  fond.  A  few  days  afterwards  we  found
that  the  date  my  brother  was  missing  was  the  date  on
my  letter. This  letter  has  since  been  destroyed.

The  child  was  a  httle  under  three  years  old  at  the
time.  ...  I  have  never  attached  much  importance  to
this  incident  as  it  may  be  just  only  a  childish  lie.

Cecily  Chater.

Concerning  the  above  letter  Mrs.  Bowyer-Bower  wrote  to
Mr.  Wales  as  follows  :

8  St.  Paul's  Road,  Bournemouth,  \2th  June,  1918.

.  .  .  '  Alley  Boy  '  was  Eldred's  pet  name  since  he  was
a  baby.  .  .  .

I  could  not  positively  declare  the  date  of  Mrs.  Chater's
letter  to  me  telling  me  what  Betty  saw.  It  might  have
been  the  19th,  20th  or  21st,  but  anyhow  I  received  it
down  here  before  I  got  the  War  Office  telegram  announcing
he  was  missing.  Eldred  fell  on  the  Monday.  The  War
Office  telegram  was  received  by  me  by  post  sent  on  from
Bramham  Gardens,  South  Kensington,  my  home,  on
Friday  morning,  March  23rd.  ...  I  believe  I  received
Mrs.  Chater's  letter  on  the  Wed.  21st.  It  was  positively
a  day  or  two  before  I  got  the  other  news.  In  any  case
she  told  me  it  was  on  Monday  ^  Betty  tried  to  get  her
out  of  bed  to  come  down  and  see '  Uncle  Alley  Boy.'

1  March  10,  1917,  was  a  Monday.


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  173


It  proved  to  be  about  the  time  the  boy  fell.  His  Colonel's
accoiint  said  he  went  out  at  dawn  and  after  "recon-
noitring just  over  an  hour  over  German  lines  he  was
pounced  on  from  the  clouds  by  an  overwhelming  number
of  enemy  machmes,"  etc.,  etc.  He  received  the  news
from  a  Cavahy  Patrol  between  10-11  a.m.  the  same  day.

3.  Concerning  the  third  impression  received  at  about  the
time  of  Captain  Bowyer-Bower's  death,  Mrs.  Bowyer-Bower
wrote  to  Mr.  Wales,  thus  :

June  12th,  1918.
.  .  .  Mrs.  Watson,  an  elderly  lady  I  have  known  many
years,  wrote  to  me  on  the  afternoon  of  March  19th
[1917]  after  not  corresponding  with  me  for  quite  18
months,  and  said  she  felt  she  must  write  because  she
felt  I  was  in  great  anxiety  over  Eldred.  (I  have  her  two
letters  in  store  in  London,  fortunately.)  I  wrote  back
and  said  Eldred  was  fit  and  happy,  and  I  simply  took
her  waiting  thus  [as  an]  excuse  for  writing  again  after  so
long.  T  asked  her  in  my  reply  what  she  felt  about
Eldred,  and  she  rephed  to  this  effect— on  the  afternoon
of  the  day  she  wrote,  about  tea  time,  a  certain  and
awful  feehng  came  over  her  that  he  was  killed,  etc.,  etc.
It  was  the  day  .  .  ,

Subsequently  m  November,  1918,  Mrs.  Bowyer-Bower  sent
to  Mr.  Wales  the  first  of  the  two  letters  MTitten  to  her  by
Mrs.  Watson,  which  runs  as  follows  :

3iarch  19,  1917.
Something  tells  me  you  are  having  great  anxiety  about
Eldred. WiU  you  let  me  know  ? Also  have  you  good
news  of  Tom  ?  .  .  .

The  second  of  JNIrs.  Watson's  letters  Mrs.  Bowyer-Bower  was
not  able  to  find,  but  her  statement  is  sufBciently  corroborated
by  the  first  letter,  given  above,  which  is  dated  March  19,
1917,  the  day  of  Captain  Bowyer-Bower's  death.

The  last  two  experiences,  that  of  the  child  and  that  of  Mrs.
Watson,  are  not  in  themselves  very  striking,  and  if  either
stood  alone,  it  might  be  put  down  to  chance-coincidence.  But


l"^"^  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [parT

taken  together,  and  especially  taken  in  conjunction  with  Mrs.
Spearman's  remarkable  experience,  they  are  not  without
interest,  and  if  the  agency  of  Captain  Bowyer-Bower  be
assumed,  they  suggest  that  this  agency  was  unusually  power-
ful and  was  felt  by  more  than  one  person.

Two^  later  experiences,  occurring  after  Captain  Bowyer-
Bower's  death  was  known,  are  also  worth  recording.  They
do  not  fall  mto  the  same  category  as  the  three  experiences
related  above,  as  indicating  laiowledge  supemormally  acquired,
but  they  were  such  as  greatly  to  impress  the  percipients,  and
agani  if  Captain  Bowyer-Bower's  agency  be  assumed  in  the
case  of  the  former  experiences,  they  suggest  that  this  agency
has  continued  to  make  itself  felt  since  Captain  Bowyer-Bower's
death.

4.  The  percipient  in  one  case  was  Mrs.  Bowyer-Bower,  who
describes  her  experience  thus  :

June  12,  1918.

Durmg  the  night,  either  m  the  late  part  of  Nov.  or
early  part  of  Dec.  1917,  I  came  over  very  hot  indeed  and
turned  dowi  the  eiderdown,  etc.  Some  few  moments
later  I  became  extraordinarily  cold  with  a  most  unnatural
coldness.  ...  I  doubled  the  eiderdo^^Ti  over  myself  and
tried  to  sleep  and  the  feehng  left  me  slightly,  but  came
back  again  stronger  than  ever  and  far  more  intense.
While  I  wondered  what  I  could  do  a  yellow-blue  ray
came  right  across  the  room  and  I  at  once  blamed  the
housemaid  (to  myself)  for  not  drawing  the  '  Raid  '  curtains
together,  thinkmg  it  was  a  light  from  the  garage  outside.
I  looked  to  make  sure,  but  the  curtains  were  aU  weU
together,  and  as  I  looked  the  ray  moved  right  across
the  foot  of  my  bed  and  then  came  round  right  across
in  front  of  where  I  lay.  I  watched,  not  at  all  nervously,
and  something  hke  a  crumpled  filmy  piece  of  chififon
unfolded  and  the  beautiful  wavy  top  of  Eldred's  head
appeared,  a  few  seconds  and  his  forehead  and  broad,
beautiful  brow  appeared,  still  it  waited  and  his  lovely
blue  eyes  came,  but  no  mischievous  twinkle,  but  a  great
intensity.  It  all  shook  and  quivered,  then  his  nose  came.
More waiting and quivering and then his tiny  httle


LXXxvi.]  Sponianeotts  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  116

moustache  and  mouth.  At  this  point  he  turned  his  head
very  shghtly  and  looked  right  into  my  face,  and  moistened
his  hps  shghtly  with  his  tongue.  I  kept  quite  quiet,
but  it  quivered  and  shook  so  much  and  no  chin  came,
and  in  my  anxiety  I  put  out  my  hands  and  said  :  "  Eldred,
I  see  you,"  and  it  all  flickered  quite  out,  light  and  all.
It  is  possible  it  might  have  been  a  dream,  one  never  can
be  certain  at  night,  but  in  my  own  mind  I  am  satisfied
it  was  not.  The  eiderdown  was  doubled  over  me  in
the  morning  when  I  was  called,  and  it  is  not  one  of  my
habits  to  do  things  in  my  sleep.  I  certainly  never  slept
after  this,  and  I  got  shghtly  this  cold  feehng  once  or
twice  after  and  continued  small  rays  several  times  during
that  night.  Eldred  referred  to  it  through  Mrs.  Leonard
in  Jan.  1918.  F.  M.  B.  B.

5.  The  percipient  in  the  other  case  was  Miss  ^ta  Highett
(Captain  Bowyer-Bower's  fiancee),  who  describes  it  to  Mrs.
Bowyer-Bower  thus  :

The  Lodge,  Hythe,  January  ith  [1918].

...  I  thmk  I  wiU  tell  you  something  that  happened  to
me  a  short  time  ago.  I  certainly  did  not  dream  it,  or
imagine  it,  but  of  course  it  may  be  something  to  do  with
my  brain.  I  was  going  to  tell  you  before,  only  I  thought
you  would  think  me  mad.  I  heard  a  number  of  raps
when  I  was  m  bed  and  I  began  to  talk  to  Eldred,  and
asked  him  to  rap  twice  if  he  was  ever  going  to  show
himself  to  me.  Almost  immediately  two  raps  came  ;
I  waited  a  long  time  but  saw  nothitig.  Then  I  went
to  sleep.  Afterwards  I  woke  up  and  looked  romid  and
saw  Eldred  on  the  bed  beside  me,  he  was  wearing  his
blue  suit.  I  sat  up  and  started  talking  to  him,  [Miss
Highett  records  what  she  said,  and  that  "  his  hps  started
to  move"  and  made  a  reply  "just  above  a  whisper"].
I  then  tried  to  touch  him,  but  my  hand  went  through
him,  and  like  a  fool  I  started  to  cry,  and  he  disappeared.

A  letter  from  Mrs.  Bowyer-Bower  to  Mr.  Wales,  written
on  May  30, 1918,  states  that  "Miss  Highett  had  her  vision


176


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


in  Dec.  [1917]  ..."  In  a  subsequent  letter,  written  in  reply
to  questions  put  to  her  by  Mr.  Wales,  IMiss  Highett  writes  :

Saturday  \5th  [June,  1918].
...  At  the  time  of  my  vision  I  knew  of  the  experiences
of  Mrs.  Bower  and  Mrs.  Watson  and  Mrs.  Chafer's  child.
[Miss  Highett  did  not,  however,  know  of  the  experience
of  Mrs.  Spearman.  See  date  of  Mrs.  Spearman's  letter.]
You  wish  to  loiow  what  I  did  between  my  waking  and
seeing  the  vision.  As  a  matter  of  fact  I  saw  Mrs.
Bower's  son  as  soon  as  I  woke  up.  After  having  seen
the  vision  I  switched  on  the  electric  light,  which  is  by
my  bed,  to  look  at  the  time  and  found  it  was  four  o'clock
in  the  morning.  I  think  you  wiU  know  by  this  that  I
was  perfectly  awake.  ...

Li  a  further  letter  to  Mr.  Wales  Miss  Highett  says  that
when  she  had  this  vision  "  Captain  Bower  seemed  to  have  a
light  all  romid  him  that  made  him  perfectly  visible."

The  last  two  appearances  in  this  case  were  not  of
course  phantasms  of  the  living,  but  it  is  important  to
consider  them  in  connexion  with  the  others,  for  taken  all
together  the  set  of  experiences  cannot  but  suggest  some
special  capacity  in  the  agent  to  manifest  himself  which
could  operate  through  various  percipients  and  which
continued  after  his  bodily  death.

The  case  suggests  questions  about  percipiency  as  well  as
about  agency,  for  it  is  curious  that  the  two  persons,  his
mother  and  his  fiancee,  with  whom  one  would  have
supposed  the  dying  agent  would  most  have  wished  to
communicate,  appear  to  have  received  no  impressions  at
that  time,  while  yet  their  later  experiences  suggest  a
capacity  for  such  impressions.  Do  we  here  find  support
for  a  hypothesis,  which  other  evidence  renders  plausible,
that  even  with  persons  who  have  a  capacity  for  receiving
telepathic  impressions  and  externahsing  them  for  their
normal  consciousness  in  the  form  of  hallucinations  or
otherwise,  that  cajDacity  is  not  always  available  ?

With  regard  to  two  or  more  percipients  in  different
places  being  affected  by  telepathic  experiences  concerning


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  177

the  same  agent,  see  below,  p.  265  (L.  820),  a  case  in
which  a  lady  attacked  by  serious  illness  appears  to  a
sister  and  a  niece  in  different  rooms.  Compare  also
L.  1210  (p.  268).  We  may  also  refer  to  a  case  (L.  1130,
Journal,  Vol.  XI.,  p.  58)  sent  by  Professor  Alexander  of
Rio  de  Janeiro,  in  which  a  young  man  dying  of  bubonic
plague  appears  twice  in  a  dream  to  a  friend  of  his  boy-
hood, while  a  young  lady  to  whom  he  was  attached  hears
footsteps  and  feels  a  hand-shake,  which  she  took  at  the
time  to  be  his  leave-taking,  almost  at  the  moment  of  his
death.  I  do  not  quote  the  case,  which  is  long,  because
it  is  not  a  strong  one.  The  young  lady  Imew  of  the
agent's  serious  illness  when  she  had  her  experience,  and
it  is  not  quite  clear  whether  the  dreams  took  place  within
twelve  hours  of  the  death  or  earher.  In  the  Journal,
Vol.  XII.,  pp.  302-307,  will  be  found  a  case  (G.  280)  of
dreams  and  impressions  concerning  the  same  deceased
person  (known  to  be  deceased)  experienced  by  four  persons
within  the  same  twelve  hours  or  thereabouts.  This  is
interesting  in  the  present  connexion  if  we  may  assume
postmortem  agency,  though  in  that  case  of  course  it  is  not
a  case  of  phantasms  of  the  living.  The  alternative  hypo-
thesis, that  the  percipients  influenced  each  other,  seems
on  the  whole  rather  strained  in  this  case.

The  next  case  (L.  834,  Journal,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  213)  may
be  said  to  be  a  typical  case  of  a  simple  apparition  of
the  dying  seen  when  the  percipient  was  in  bed  but  awake.
The  percipient  did  not  allow  her  name  to  be  printed,  for
fear  of  paining  the  relations  of  the  friend  who  appeared.

(L.  834.)

July  4:th,  1889.
I  have  noted  down  the  remarkable  incident  I  mentioned.
The  time  of  its  occurrence  was  in  the  early  part  of  July,
1885,  between  1  and  2  in  the  morning.  I  was  wide
awake,  not  having  slept  at  aU,  when  all  of  a  sudden
I  was  startled  by  a  bright  light,  and  I  saw  at  my  bedside
a  taU  figure,  and  distinctly  recognised  the  face  of  a
valued  old  friend  who  resided  many  miles  from  my  home.


*78  Mrs.  Henrij  Sidgwick.  [pARf

He  was  earnestly  gazing  at  me,  and  on  vanishing  from
my  sight  the  room  became  dark  as  before.  My  sister,
who  occupied  the  next  room,  on  hearing  me  make  an
exclamation,  came  in  and  fomid  me  strildng  a  Ught,  when
I  told  her  whom  I  had  seen.  Strange  to  say  we  received
an  early  communication  from  a  member  of  his  family
acquaintuig  us  that  our  dear  old  friend  had  passed  away
at  the  very  time  he  appeared  to  me.

The  narrator's  sister  confirms  the  above  statement  as  far
as  her  part  in  it  is  concerned.

What  follows  is  from  notes  made  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  im-
mediately after  talking  over  the  above  circumstances  with  the
two  ladies  :

The  gentleman  who  appeared  was  an  old  and  intimate
friend  of  both  sisters,  and  corresponded  constantly  with
them.  They  had  not  heard  from  him  for  a  httle  while
before  his  death,  and  though  they  knew  that  he  was
ailing  they  were  not  at  all  anxious,  knew  of  no  cause  for
special  anxiety,  and  had  not  had  their  thoughts  turned
to  him  in  any  special  way.

The  lady  who  saw  the  apparition  had  not  been  to
sleep— she  is  a  bad  sleeper— but  was  lying  with  her  eyes
shut  trying  to  sleep.  Suddenly  she  became  aware  of  a
bright  light  in  the  room  and  opening  her  eyes  saw  by  her
bedside  the  tall  figure  of  her  friend.  The  light,  she  told
me,  was  hke  day-light  and  was  at  the  side  of  the  bed
where  she  saw  the  figure.  She  had  time  to  see  the
figure  gazing  earnestly  at  her  and  to  notice  that  it  was
wraiDped  m  a  cloak  or  dressing-gown.  She  saw  half  the
figure— as  far  down,  I  suppose,  as  the  bed  would  let  her.
Apparition  and  light  vanished  together.  She  was  startled
and  agitated,  got  out  of  bed  and  had  some  difficulty  in
finding  the  matches  and  striking  a  fight,  owing  to  her
agitated  condition.

I  do  not  think  that  either  sister  has  now  an  independent
recollection— apart from their knowledge of the day of  i
the  death— of  the  day  on  which  this  strange  experience
occurred, but  it  made  a  deep  impression on both,  and
when the letter announcing the death reached  them,


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases:  Impression  Externalised.  179


which  must  have  been  within  two  days,  they  were  satisfied
that  appearance  and  death  were  comcident.  Their  recol-
lection that  the  appearance  occurred  not  long  after  mid-
night is,  I  thiixk,  independent  of  subsequent  information,
though  they  are  not  quite  sure  whether  it  occurred
between  12  and  1,  or  between  1  and  2.

A  search  for  the  letter  annoimcing  the  death,  which
the  percipient  kindly  undertook,  proved  fruitless,  but  the
time  of  its  occurrence,  mentioned  in  the  letter,  "  quite
agreed,"  she  writes,  "  with  the  very  time  I  noted  down
of  his  appearance  to  me.  This  coincidence  surprised  and
greatly  impressed  myself  and  sister."

I  was  shown  various  newspaper  cuttings  relating  to  the
death  and  funeral,  from  which  I  copied  extracts.  The
death  is  announced  as  having  occurred  on  July  5th,  and
an  obituary  notice  stated  that  the  cause  was  general
break  up  rather  than  any  specific  ailment.  In  an  account
of  the  fimeral  it  was  stated  that  on  the  coffin  plate  was
the  inscription  :  "  Died  July  6th,  1885,  age  75  years."
As  the  ladies  pointed  out  to  me,  the  fact  that  the  death
was  announced  in  the  newspapers  as  having  occurred  on
the  5th,  and  on  the  coffin  plate  as  on  the  6th,  tends
strongly  to  show  that  it  occurred  very  soon  after  mid-
night, and,  therefore,  confirms  their  recollection  of  its
coinciding  in  time  with  the  apparition.

I  was  told  many  things  which  showed  that  they  were
intimate  friends  of  the  gentleman  who  died,  and  that  his
thoughts  might  naturally  turn  to  them.

The  percipient  assured  me  emphatically  that  she  had
had  no  other  experiences  of  the  same  kind.

For  the  accompanying  hallucinatory  illumination  in  this
case,  compare  the  collective  case  (G.  241)  below,  p.  363.

A  case  which  was  probably  a  clear  one  of  an  apparition
of  a  dying  person  to  a  waking  percipient  is  L.  1121,
Journal,  Vol.  IX.,  p.  306.  I  will  only  describe  it,  because
we  have  not  the  account  of  the  percipient,  Mr.  Phillips,
who  was  dead  when  the  case  was  sent  to  us  by  Mr.
Fotheringham,  an  Associate  of  the  Society, The  account


180  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part


we  have  is  that  of  Mrs.  PhiUips  who  was  cognisant  of
her  husband's  experience  at  the  time,  and  is  at  first  hand
for  tlie  fact  that  the  apparition  was  seen  and  recognised
before  anything  was  knoMTi  of  the  death.  Briefly,  Mr.
Phillips  was  at  work  in  his  shop  when  he  saw  a  former
lodger,  Mrs.  Robotham,  look  ro^^nd  the  door.  He  was
surprised  not  to  find  her  outside,  but  felt  sure  at  the
time  that  he  had  seen  Mrs.  Robotham,  whom  he  and  his
wife  knew  extremely  well.  A  week  later  they  learnt  that
she  had  died  about  that  time.  The  account  was  written
about  three  years  after  the  event.

The  following  case  (L.  1224,  Journal,  Vol.  XIX.,  p.  47)
was  brought  to  our  notice  by  Mrs.  Willett,  an  Associate
of  the  Society,  who  wrote  to  us  concerning  it  thus  :

(L.  1224.)

Fir  Tree  End,  Hayward's  Heath,
Sussex,  November  7,  1918.

I  inclose  an  account  written  from  dictation  by  the
Percipient  of  an  appearance  to  her  of  a  friend  who  was
dying  at  the  time.  Ada  Orr,  who  is  a  single  woman
between  50  and  60,  has  been  known  to  me  nearly  all  her
life.  She  is  an  absolutely  truthful  and  straightforward
person.  She  is  quite  ready  to  answer  any  questions,
but  particularly  begs  that  the  names  of  her  friends  shall

not be made public. Mrs. B is a very  nervous

woman,  and  the  subject  of  Mrs. S  's  appearance  has

not  been  mentioned  to  her.  Mary  Willett.

The  statement  by  the  percipient  enclosed  with  this  letter
was  as  follows  :

November  6,  1918.

I  went  to  see  Mrs. B in Road,  on  October

4, 1918,1 [but]  did  not  find  her  at  home. As  I  came

away  from  the  house, I  distinctly  saw  Mrs. S who

formerly  lodged  with  Mrs.  B standing  by  the  comer

of  the  house.  Just  hke  a  puff  of  cold  air  seemed  to  go
over  me. I  saw  exactly  how  she  was  dressed. I  noticed


1  By  an  error  this  date  was  first  given  as  October  3,  see  below, — Bp,


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  181


she  was  wearing  her  black  hat  with  a  ribbon  bow  at  the
side.  Her  face  was  quite  distinct.  Having  seen  her  so
distinctly  as  I  came  round  the  comer  of  the  house,  the
next  moment  she  had  disappeared.  I  felt  ^uite  a  creepy
feeling all over  me. At  this  time, I afterwards  fomad

Mrs. S was dying at  the Cuckfield Infirmary — Mrs.

B having  gone  to  see  her. She  passed  away  at  2

a.m.  the  next  morning. When  I  saw  Mrs.  B a  few

days  later  she  told  me  about  Mrs.  S and  how  she  had

longed  to  go  "  home  to  die."  She  said  this  many  times,
but  the  doctor  would  not  agree  to  her  beii^g  removed.

Before  her  death  Mrs.  S had  told  her  daughter  how

much  she  wished  to  see  me.

[Signed] Ada  Orr.

A  further  statement  was  obtained  from  Miss  Orr,  partly
in  reply  to  questions  put  by  us,  and  partly  by  Mrs.  WiUett,
who  kindly  saw  Miss  Orr  on  our  behalf.  According  to  the
information  thus  received.  Miss  Orr  did  not  mention  her
experience  to  anyone  before  she  heard  of  Mrs.  S — — 's  death,

except "to an unloiown woman passing by  " Mrs. B  's

house  at  the  time. The  date  of  her  visit  to  Mrs.  B and

of  her  seeing  the  apparition  is,  however,  clearly  fixed  in  her
muad,  as  she  told  Mrs.  WiUett,  by  the  circumstance  that  these
events  occurred  on  the  day  on  which  she  heard  of  the  birth
of  a  great-niece.  Mrs.  WiUett  informs  us  that  the  child  was
bom  on  October  3,  1918,  and  the  postcard  announcing  the
birth  was  received  by  IMiss  Orr  on  October  4,  1918.  The
mistake  in  Miss  Orr's  original  statement,  m  which  the  date

of  her  visit  to  Mrs. B was  given as October  3,  arose

doubtless  through  that  being  the  date  of  the  child's  birth
by  means  of  which  she  had  fixed  the  date  of  her  experience.

A  written  statement  was  obtained  from  Miss  Orr  on  this
point,  thus  :

December  17  [1918].
I  remember  the  date  by  hearing  of  the  birth  of  my
niece's  Baby  which  I  heard  of  by  P.O.  on  the  day  that
I  saw  Mrs.  S  .  A.  M.  Orr.


In  reply  to  a  question  as  to  how  recently  she  had  seen


182


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


Mrs.  S—  and  what  she  knew  about  her  state  of  health,
Miss  Orr  wrote  on  November  13,  1918,  thus :

[I]  had  not  seen  her  for  at  least  three  months  when

she  was  taken  away  from  Mrs.  B  's  to  the  Infirmary.

I  had  no  idea  her  end  was  near.  At  the  time  I  saw  her
I  had  had  a  long  walk  and  was  tired,  thought  I  would

call at Mrs. B  's for a rest, and heard  afterwards

she  was  with  Mrs.  S who  was  dying,  which  I  knew

nothing  about.  Ada  Obr.

In  regard  to  the  date  of  Mrs. S  's  death,  independent

testimony  was  obtahied  through  the  Curate  of  the  Parish,
who  wrote  thus  :

December  13,  1918.
I have just found  out — quite  indirectly — from  Mrs.

B that Mrs. S died at Cuckfield  Infirmary  on

Saturday,  October  5th,  at  2  a.m.  H.  E.  W.

It  will  be  seen  that  it  was  not  possible  in  this  case  to  obtain
corroborative  evidence  from  any  one  to  whom  Miss  Orr  had

related  her  experience  prior  to  her  knowledge  of  Mrs.  S  's

death  ;  but  her  original  statement  was  made  only  a  month
after  the  experience  occurred,  when  it  was  still  fresh  in  her
mind,  and  there  appears  to  have  been  nothing  m  the  circum-
stances,  as known to Miss Orr at the time, which  would

lead  her  to  imagine  that  she  saw  Mrs.  S  . Miss  Orr  teUs

us  that  she  has  never  had  any  similar  experience  before,  but
her  sister  had  one  many  years  ago.

In  the  case  just  quoted  the  circumstances  suggest  the
possibility  that  the  locality  had  something  to  do  with  the
experience — that  it  formed  some  sort  of  link  between
agent  and  percipient,  and  that  the  latter  might  not  have
seen  the  apparition  had  she  not  been  close  to  the  house
where  the  agent  had  lived.  The  next  case  (L.  1087,
Journal,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  41)  suggests  the  same  thing,  for
there  seems  to  have  been  practically  no  link  between
agent  and  percipient  except  that  the  latter  knew  the
former  well by  sight  and  was accustomed  to  see  him


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  183

walking  where  his  phantasm  appeared — ^the  place  towards
which  she  happened  to  be  looking  at  the  moment.  A
similar  local  connexion  appears  in  Madame  Brousiloff's
experience  described  below,  p.  210.  And  there  is  a  case
(L.  322,  Journal,  Vol.  III.,  p.  254)  which  does  not  belong
to  our  collection,  as  it  is  pubhshed  in  Podmore's  book,
where  Captain  Campbell  is  awakened  from  sleep  by  a
"  vivid  and  remarkable  dream  or  vision  "  of  Major  Hub-
bersty  falling  forward  as  if  dying  on  the  night  on  which
he  actually  died.  The  two  gentlemen  had  not  seen  much
of  each  other  and  were  not  particularly  friendly  ;  but
Captain  Campbell  was  sleeping  in  a  room  which  Major
Hubbersty  used  to  occupy  when  stationed  at  the  sam_e
barracks  several  years  previously.

(L.  1087.)

We  are  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  Mrs.  Benecke  for  the
following  account  of  the  apparition  of  her  son  who  was  killed
while  cUmbing  in  the  Alps.

Her  son,  Mr.  E.  F.  M.  Benecke,  was  an  Exhibitioner  of
Balliol  College,  Oxford,  and,  as  his  posthumous  work  on
"  The  Position  of  Women  in  Greek  Poetry  "  shows,  a  classical
scholar  of  the  highest  promise.  He  was  a  good  Alpine  climber,
and  was  collaborating  in  a  guide  to  the  Swiss  Alps  at  the
time  of  his  death.  On  the  day  on  which  it  occurred,  he  was
seen  in  Mrs.  Benecke's  garden  by  the  daughter  of  her  laundress.

The  percipient  writes  to  Mrs.  Benecke  :

80,  Mayes-road,  Wood  Green,
February  1st,  1897.

Madam, — Mother  has  this  morning  brought  your  letter
to  Emma  over  to  me,  as  I  could  better  write  what
happened  on  July  16th,  1895,  as  it  was  me  that  saw
Mr.  Edward  with  another  gentleman  in  the  garden  (as
I  thought).  I  remember  it  all  so  well  that  I  have  been
able  to  write  it  just  as  it  happened. — Yours  respectfully,

E.  Nichols.

[P.S.] — I  have  signed  the  other  paper  with  my  name  as
it  was  then.

M


184  Mrs.  He7iry  Sidgwick.  [part  ^  i

On  Tuesday,  July  16th,  1895,  between  the  hours  of  1  ;
and  2  o'clock,  I  was  doing  some  work  in  our  bedroom
and,  looking  out  of  the  window,  saw  (as  I  thought)  Mr.
Edward  Benecke  with  another  young  gentleman  walking
in  the  garden,  and  I  went  at  once  to  mother  and  told
her  Mr.  Edward  had  come  home,  and  she  said  something
must  have  prevented  him  from  starting,  as  we  knew  he
was  going  to  Switzerland  for  his  holiday,  for  I  was  positive
it  was  him  I  saw.  When  nurse  came  in  on  the  Thursday,
mother  asked  her  if  Mr.  Edward  had  come  home,  and  she
said  "  No  "  and  then  we  only  said  "  I  thought  I  saw
him,"  and  we  thought  no  more  about  it  until  the  ■  sad
news  reached  us.  Ellen  Cakter.

In  answer  to  some  questions  from  Mrs.  Benecke,  Mrs.  Nichols
writes  further  :

80,  Mayes-road,  Wood  Green,
February  4th,  1897.

Madam, — I  am  glad  to  be  able  to  answer  the  questions
you  have  asked  me.  I  did  see  another  young  man  with
Mr.  Edward  (as  I  thought  it  was)  and  the  look  was  not
momentary,  for  I  was  so  surprised  to  see  him  that  I
watched  him  until  he  turned  round  the  path  ;  he  was
coming,  as  he  sometimes  did  after  luncheon,  from  the
stable  yard,  along  the  path  and  turned  towards  the
house.  He  was  smiling  and  talking  to  his  friend,  and  I
particularly  noticed  his  hair,  which  was  wavy  as  it  always
was  ;  he  had  nothing  on  his  head.  It  was  all  that  that
made  me  feel  so  sure  it  was  him,  and  I  felt  that  I  could
not  have  been  mistaken,  knowing  him  so  well.  I  cannot
tell  you  anything  [about]  what  the  other  yoimg  gentleman
was  like,  as  he  was  walking  the  other  side  ;  also  I  hardly
noticed  him  at  all,  being  so  surprised  to  see  Mr.  Edward.
Mother  was  doubtful  when  I  told  her  about  it  and  said
I  must  be  mistaken  ;  but  I  said  I  was  sure  I  was  not,  j|
and  I  was  positive  I  had  seen  him,  and  I  felt  sure  he
had  come  home  until  nurse  came  in  and  said  he  had  not
been  home,  and  then  I  thought  how  strange  it  was,  and
even  then  I  could  not  think  I  was  so  mistaken,  and
often  have  I  thought  about  it  and  feel  even  now  that  it


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  185

was  him  I  saw.  Mother  did  say  perhajas  some  accident
had  happened  to  his  friend  that  he  was  to  travel  with
and  so  was  prevented  from  going ;  that  was  the  only
remark  that  was  made  about  an  accident.

If  there  is  any  other  question  I  can  answer,  I  shall  be
only  too  glad  to  do  it  for  you.  E.  Nichols.

Mrs.  Benecke  gives  the  foUowing  particulars  :

Teddy  was  in  the  habit  of  walking  regularly  in  the
garden,  from  10  minutes  past  12  till  1  o'clock,  and  again
directly  after  limcheon,  varying,  according  to  the  time  this
meal  took  us,  from  1.30  or  1.45  till  2.30.  He  was  so
regular  that  I  could  teU  the  time  by  his  footfall  on  the
stairs.  He  never,  except  in  the  very  coldest  weather —
to  please  me — ^wore  a  hat  or  cap  in  the  garden.  The
lamidress  often  watched  him  walking  up  and  do\TO  the
garden  paths,  noticing  the  wind  playing  with  his  wavy
hair.  She  even,  at  times,  would  get  up  on  a  stool  to
watch  him,  especially  when  Margaret  was  with  him.
She  says  they  looked  so  bright  and  happy  together.
She  has  left  us  owing  to  her  health,  and  her  daughter
married  quite  lately.

Teddy  was  devoted  to  his  "  dear  mountains,"  they
were  a  "  second  home  "  to  him  ;  but  aU  his  letters  prove
that  his  thoughts  were  very  much  with  us  on  the  cUmbs.
He  wrote  to  me  in  1892  that  when  bivouacking  out  even
in  his  Bietschhom,  "  it  felt  strange  to  be  so  far  away,
so  high  up,  and  as  I  wrapped  myseK  in  my  rug,  I  thought
of  you  all,  sitting  roimd  the  lamp,  etc."  In  1895  he
wrote,  after  his  successful  crossing  the  Wetterliicke,  (a
chmb  he  was  quite  delighted  with)  "  at  8.30, — just  as  you
■  '  were  coming  down  to  breakfast,  I  was  thinking — we  were
through."  The  last  chmb  he  wrote  about  to  both  Mar-
garet and  myself  he  said  :  "  The  last  half -hour  was  not
pleasant ;  it  Avas  the  only  time  during  the  chmb  that  I
was  not  sorry  you  (Margaret)  were  not  with  us."  With
a  heart  so  fuU  of  thought  and  love  of  us  at  home,  even
when  intensely  interested  and  occupied  in  his  dearest
pursuit,  it  seems  natural  that  when  called  to  leave  us  once
more,  he  should  have  turned  towards  us  and  sent  his


86  Mrs.  Henry  SidgivicJc.  [part

loving  thoughts  home.  That  they  took  his  shape  and
were  seen  once  more  on  his  famihar  path  seems  very-
wonderful  and  of  course  inexphcable,  but  to  me  seems  a
fact.  I  beheve  that  he  was  taken  when  his  form  appeared
here.  It  makes  it  somewhat  more  difficult  to  conjecture
where  it  happened,  as  he  intended  to  be  back  by  4  and
this  time — between  1  and  2 — gives  therefore  only  3  hours
from  Ried.  i

I  wrote  to  our  former  laimdress  Avith  respect  to  her
having  seen  Teddy  on  July  16th,  1895.  Our  old  nurse
told  me  that  it  was  the  younger  daughter,  Emma,  who
had  seen  him.  I  could  not,  at  the  time  Mrs.  Carter  left
our  service,  November,  1895,  trust  myself  to  speak  to  her
about  it  ;  therefore  I  was  rather  uncertain  as  to  what
really  had  been  said,  and  when  I  received  the  first  letter,
I  wrote  for  a  few  more  particulars.

It  was  through  this  letter  that  I  heard,  for  the  first
time,  that  EUen  Carter  saw  two  forms,  which  seems  all
the  more  remarkable  to  me.  I  therefore  wondered  if
she  could  remember  the  face  of  the  friend.  I  had  under-
stood she  had  seen  him  "  about  one  o'clock  "  and  had
thought  it  was  m  his  morning  walk,  but  EUen  is  positive
that  it  was  later.  His  coming  out  of  the  stable  yard
is  quite  Ukely ;  he  often  fetched  the  dog.  I  asked  her
if  it  was  a  "  momentary  passing  view  "  she  had,  as  in
the  first  letter  she  writes  almost  as  if  she  had  merely
looked  out  and  then  gone  to  her  mother.

When  I  heard  this  talked  about,  I  remembered  the
word  "  accident "  and  asked  her  if  it  was  mentioned.
Her  answer  in  [the  second]  letter  refers  to  this  question.

In  answer  to  our  further  enquiries,  IVIrs.  Benecke  wrote  :
Norfolk  Lodge,  Basnet,  February  15th,  1897.

I  will  do  my  best  to  answer  your  questions  and  to  do
it  clearly  and  systematically.

Ellen  Carter  lived  with  her  mother  and  sister  in  a
cottage  in  our  garden.  I  have  tried  to  give  you  an  idea  of
the  cottage  by  [a  sketch  not  reproduced  i].  I  took  this  sketch
from  our  dining-room  window,  past  which  the  broad  path
[^But  see  plan  on  opposite  page.]


LXXXVi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  187

leads,  which  I  called  A.-  Along  this  path  my  son  went
daily  and  often  have  I  watched  his  hght  swingmg  steps
tiU  he  had  gone  through  the  httle  gate  I  called  B.  jThis
leads  into  our  kitchen  garden.  I  had  mderstood  that
when  Ellen  saw  him  on  July  16th,  1895,  he  was  coming
back  from  his  first  walk  through  the  gate  B  and  had
turned  towards  our  house  down  the  path  A.  You  will
easily  imderstand  that  during  the  first  months,  I  could
not  ask  questions  about  the  events  of  that  day, — nor,  in
fact,  can  I  now. But  I  was  told  of  EUen  having  seen


I. Window  in  cottage.

C. Path  leading  to  stables.

my  son  almost  directly  after  my  return,  and  J\'Ir.  Benecke
heard  of  it  at  once.  I  will  return  to  this  directly.  EUen
was  in  her  mother's  house  tidying  their  bedroom  (which
has  the  window  I  have  marked  I),  when,  looking  up,
she  saw  my  son.  She  tells  about  that  herself  and  that
he  "was  coming  out  of  the  stable  yard."  That  would
not  be  quite  his  usual  direction,  because  he  mostly  jumped
out  of  the  window  after  luncheon,  but  still  it  did  happen
that  he  would  fetch  the  dog,  or  put  him  aAvay,  in  the
yard.  The  door  leading  into  the  yard  is  behind  bushes
and  he  would,  according  to  Ellen's  account,  have  come
from  there  and  out  where  the  path  D  comes  out  towards


188


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


our  house.  You  will,  I  hope,  understand  from  this  about
the  distance  from  the  cottage  to  the  path,  and  that  it
would  be  quite  easy  for  EUen,  who  seems  to  have  quite
good  sight,  to  have  seen  him  distinctly  and  for  a  minute
at  least.

Mrs.  Carter  cannot  write,  so  it  would  only  be  what
EUen  wrote  for  her  which  we  should  get  by  asking  for  her
version.  Our  old  nurse,  who  can  write,  is  very  confused
about  what  and  when  she  first  heard  of  it,  and  therefore
she  can  write  down  nothing.  I  have  asked  her  several
times  about  it  all,  but  she  varies  each  time  in  her  state-
ments, except  that  she  remembers  Mrs.  Carter  asking  her
if  "  Mr.  Teddy  had  come  home,"  and  then  her  saying
"  Oh,  I  told  NeUie  she  was  mistaken,  when  she  thought
she  saw  him."  She  could  not  have  spoken  hke  that  if
the  conversation  had  taken  place  after  we  heard  the
terrible  news.  Mr.  Benecke  remembers  that  the  gardeners
told  him,  after  the  news,  that  EUen  had  said  she  had
seen  Mr.  Teddy,  and  the  general  impression  has  certainly
been  that  she  had  said  so,  and  therefore  had  believed
it,  that  she  had  seen  him  in  the  garden,  on  that  day.
[She  is  convinced]  that  it  was  "  Mr.  Teddy,  no  one  else  "
she  saw,  for  she  said  that  she  knew  his  pretty  wavy  hair
too  weU  to  make  a  mistake,  and  she  quite  sulked  when
it  was  proved  to  her  that  she  was  mistaken.

We  heard  the  terrible  news  on  Saturday  morning,  July
20th,  and  I  started  five  minutes  later  to  catch  the  traia
and  go  over  to  Switzerland.  Of  course  the  servants
heard  of  it  at  once,  and  NeUie  then  is  said  to  have  been
very  much  startled  when  she  heard  it.  There  has  never
been  any  doubt  in  our  minds  here  that  she  had  all  along
said  she  had  seen  him  on  the  Tuesday.

There  have  been  printed  notices  of  my  dear  boy's  loss
in  many  papers.  We  have  no  means  of  fixing  the  hour
of  it.  AU  we  loiow  of  his  plans  for  July  16th  was  that
he  started  with  Mr.  Cohen  at  3  a.m.  from  Ried,  and  was
seen  at  3.30  a.m.  at  Blatten,  and  that  he  had  arranged
with  the  guides  of  Ried  to  meet  him  there  at  4  p.m.
o'clock  on  the  Tuesday,  16th,  to  settle  details  for  a  tour
on the 17th. My son was very accurate and  always


Lxxxvi.] Spontaneous  Cases:  Impression  Externalised.  180


planned  his  tours  exactly  before  starting.  The  guides
told  me  that  he  knew  every  inch  of  ground  in  the  neigh-
bourhood. He  was  working  for  Mr.  Coohdge  and  there
was  but  one  ridge  of  rock  not  yet  explored  in  the  district
assigned  to  him.  I  feel  certain  that  the  two  friends
started  for  that  ridge  "  Feenkiindl "  and  that  there  they
are  now  resting.  This  conviction  has  gradually  become
clear  to  me,  but  since  I  have  understood  the  whole
question,  the  weather  has  made  all  search  impossible.  .  .  .

Mabie  Benecke.

Mrs.  Benecke  also  sent  us  the  accompanying  ground  plan
(not  drawn  to  scale)  lettered  as  in  her  sketch,  showing  the
position  of  the  percipient  in  relation  to  the  place  where  the
apparition  was  seen.

The  seeing  of  a  second  figure  with  a  realistic  recognised
apparition  is  rare,  but  there  are  other  examples.  The
subject  is  discussed  in  Gurney's  book,  Chapter  XII.,  §  6,
in  connexion  with  the  case  he  numbers  202.

There  is  an  old  case,  qviite  typical  (L.  947,  Journal,
Vol.  VI.,  p.  9),  namely,  the  appearance  of  Sir  T.  F.
Buxton's  gamekeeper,  Curtis,  to  his  brother  at  the  time
of  his  death  through  an  accident  in  1834.  It  was  looked
into  at  the  time,  and  recorded  by  Sir  T.  F.  Buxton  the
day  after  it  happened.  The  account  in  the  Jo7irnal  is
printed  from  what  purports  to  be  a  copy  of  the  original
record. I  think  it  is  unnecessary  to  quote  it  here.

The  next  case  (L.  1204,  Journal,  Vol.  XVII.,  p.  204)  is
peculiar  in  that  the  percipient  was  ill,  had  been  at  times
delirious,  and  may  have  been  so  at  the  moment  of  the
apparition.  The  dream-like  character  of  the  earlier  part
of  her  experience  does  not  look  as  if  she  was  in  an
ordinary  waking  condition,  though  the  later  part  seems
to  have  been  like  a  waking  hallucination  and  unlike  her
delirious  imaginings.  There  is,  of  course,  no  reason  why
a  telepathic  hallucination  should  not  occur  during  illness
or  delirium,  and  coincidence  in  time  between  this  ex-
perience and  the  death  seems  to  have  been  very  close.


190


Mrs.  He7ify  Sidgwich.  '\  [part


(L.  1204.)

The  case  was  first  brought  to  our  notice  by  a  paragraph
in  the  daily  press  on  June  6,  1916,  in  which  it  was  stated
that :

The  sister  of  Seaman  George  WiUiam  Malpress,  of
Peterborough,  one  of  the  men  who  went  down  with  the
Queen  Mary,  had  a  reahstic  dream  last  Wednesday
[the  day  the  Queen  Mary  was  lost].  She  was  lying
ill  hi  bed  when  she  thought  that  her  brother  came  to  her
bedside,  and  altliough  she  spoke  to  him  repeatedly  he
would  not  answer. He  appeared  quite  well  and  happy.

Subsequently,  m  reply  to  enquiries,  we  received  the  following
account  from  the  percipient,  Mrs.  Baxter :

56,  New  Rd.,  Peterboeo',  June  19,  1916.
...  in  reference  to  my  dream — as  it  was  published  in
the  papers,  but  it  was  not  a  dream,  it  was  a  vision.  I
was  very  ill  at  the  time.  It  was  the  afternoon  of  the
day  of  the  battle  that  I  saw  my  brother.  I  was  taken
worse  and  thought  I  was  gomg  to  die.  I  was  with  my
brother  on  his  ship  and  he  was  so  happy  and  smging,  and
then  it  changed  and  he  was  at  home  on  leave.  I  thought
I  repeatedly  spoke  to  him  each  time  but  he  did  not  speak
to  me.  I  loiew  I  was  iU,  and  thought  he  would  not
speak  because  I  was  disfigured.  I  asked  my  mother  if
he  had  gone  back  and  she  said  he  had  not  been  home.
I  said  I  knew  he  had,  it  seemed  so  real.  I  was  very
much  upset  because  he  would  not  speak  to  me.  I  did
not  hear  of  the  sinking  of  the  Queen  Mary  ujitil  a
week  after,  as  I  was  too  ill  for  my  mother  to  tell  me.  .  .  .
It  would  be  just  about  the  time  when  the  ship  went  down
that  I  saw  my  brother,  as  it  was  late  in  the  afternoon
on  Wednesday,  May  31.  F.  Baxter.

On  June  29,  1916,  the  Secretary  of  the  Society,  Miss  Newton,
went  to  Peterborough  and  called  upon  Mrs.  Baxter  and  her
mother,  Mrs.  Malpress,  who  kindly  answered  all  the  questions
she  put  to  them. Theu-  evidence,  as  noted  and  summarised  by


LXxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  191

Miss  Newton  at  the  time,  and  confirmed  by  their  signatures,
was  as  follows  :

On  May  31  Mrs.  Baxter  was  suffering  from  erysipelas,
and  had  been  ill  from  the  previous  Friday.  About  5
o'clock  in  the  afternoon  she  "felt  something  snap  inside
her,  and  part  of  herself  seemed  to  have  gone  out  of  her  ;
she  thought  she  was  dying."  Then  she  seemed  to  be  on
a  ship,  or  verj^  near  it  ;  she  could  see  the  sailors  moving
about,  and  heard  them  singing ;  they  were  very  happy.
She  spoke  to  her  brother  on  the  ship  ;  he  wouldn't  answer.
She  called  for  a  scarf  he  had  given  her,  so  that  she  could
hide  her  face,  as  she  was  disfigured.  Then  the  scene
changed,  she  was  at  home,  her  brother  was  at  home,  she
spoke  to  him,  but  he  wouldn't  answer.  She  cried,  thinkmg
it  was  because  she  was  disfigured.  The  vision  went.  She
was  stiU  very  upset  because  he  wouldn't  speak  to  her.
She  asked  her  mother  if  her  brother  had  gone  back.

She  had  never  had  a  vision,  or  a  dream,  of  this  kind
before.  (Signed) Florence  Ethel  Baxter.

June  29,  1916.

Mrs.  Malpress  said  that  her  daughter  had  been  "  lightheaded
on  and  off  "  during  her  iUness,  but  that  at  the  time  of  the
vision  she  seemed  "  listless  and  blank." She  continued :

•  When  she  had  this  kind  of  blank  feeling  come  over
:  her,  I  went  down  to  find  some  one  to  fetch  the  doctor
as  I  thought  she  was  dying.  When  I  went  up  again
she  was  crying,  and  seemed  very  upset.  I  asked  her
what  was  the  matter.  She  said  WiU  had  been  to  see
her,  and  he  wouldn't  speak  to  her.  The  following  morning
I  said,  "  How  did  WiU  look  ?  "  "  Just  as  usual,"  she
said  ;  "I  thought  he  was  here  home  on  leave.  He  was
in  his  uniform,  and  very  bright  and  happy."

(Signed) Hannah  Malpress.

June  29,  1916.

The  news  of  the  Battle  of  Jutland,  mcluding  the  announcement
of  the  loss  of  H.M.S.  Queen  Mary  was  pubUshed  on  Saturday
morning,  June  3,  1916. In  the  casualty  hst,  which  appeared


192  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwic'k.  [par*

a  few  days  later  (our  reference  is  the  Daily  Telegraph,  June  8)
the  name  of  G.  W.  Malpress,  A.B.,  was  included  in  the  crew
of  the  Queen  Mary.

It  is  stated  in  Admiral  Sir  John  Jeh/coe's  despatch  on  the
battle,  pubhshed  in  the  press,  July  7,  1916,  that  the  action
began  at  3.48  p.m.  (Greenwich  mean  time)  on  May  31  ;  and
in  the  various  reports  by  observers,  that  the  Queen  Mary
sank  soon  afterwards.  In  an  article  ia  the  Daily  Telegraph  on
June  6,  Mr.  Hurd,  indicating  approximately,  the  course  which
the  battle  took,  says  :

Quite  early  in  the  action  the  Queen  Mary,  by  an
unfortunate  mischance,  or  good  German  gunnery,  was  hit,
and  sank  in  a  few  minutes.  ...  It  should  be  emphasised
that  this  misfortune  occurred  almost  immediately  after
the  action  opened.

Thus,  it  will  be  observed  that  the  coincidence  in  time
between  the  hallucination,  which  occurred  about  5  p.m.,
summer  time,  and  the  death  of  Seaman  G.  W.  Malpress,
which  occurred  soon  after  4.48,  summer  time,  was  very  close.

It  is  chiefly  owing  to  this  coincidence  in  time  that  we  print
the  case,  contrary  to  our  practice  of  excluding  hallucinations
occurring  during  iUness  where  deUrium  is  present.  The  evi-
dence is  further  strengthened  by  the  following  considerations :
(1)  the  hallucination  seems  to  have  been  the  only  one  which
assumed  definite  form  during  the  illness  ;  (2)  it  was  certainly
the  only  one  described  by  the  percipient  during  this  time ;
and  (3)  it  was  miique  in  her  experience.

These  points  will  be  apparent  from  the  evidence  on  the
medical  aspect  of  the  case,  kindly  contributed,  in  answer  to
our  enquiries,  by  Dr.  H.  Latham,  of  Peterborough,  who  was
attending  the  percipient.  The  questions  which  were  put  to  him
are  given  below  in  square  brackets  :

July  3,  1916.

[How  long was the percipient dehrious, and  was  the
delirium  intermittent  ?]

From  Monday  night,  May  29,  mitil  the  end  of  the  week.
Yes  ;  she  appeared  to  ramble  and  say  "  queer  things  "
(the  mother's  report  to  me)  only  at  night. In  the  morning


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  193

or  afternoon  when  I  saw  her  she  seemed  clear  in  her
mind.

[Was  this  particular  hallucination  described  to  you
before  the  news  of  the  Naval  Battle  on  May  31  was  known
to  the  pubUc  ?]

I  cannot  fix  the  day,  but  I  can  say  positively  that  I
was  told  of  it,  both  by  Mrs.  Malpress  and  Mrs.  Baxter,
long  before  the  latter  had  any  information  of  the  Naval
Battle  or  the  death  of  young  Malpress.  Mrs.  Baxter  did
not  know  anjrthing  about  the  Naval  Battle,  etc.,  until
a  fuU  week  after  it  had  occurred,  as  I  gave  strict  orders
that  she  was  not  to  be  told.  About  a  week  after  the
Battle,  say  Wednesday,  June  7,  she  picked  up  a  paper
within  her  reach  and  saw  the  hst  of  officers  or  men  on
the  Queen  Mary.  It  was  many  days  before  this  that
I  was  mformed  of  the  vision,  both  by  the  mother  and
Mrs.  Baxter.

Later,  Dr.  Latham  wrote  as  follows  :

Juhj  15,  1916.

My  distinct  impression  is  that  the  hallucination  was
mentioned  to  Mrs.  Malpress  before  the  Naval  Battle  was
known  of.  But  I  really  cannot  fix  the  date  when  it  was
told  to  me.  All  I  can  say  is  that,  when  I  was  told  of
the  hallucination,  I  questioned  ]\Irs.  Baxter,  and  she  told
me  quite  simply  that  she  had  seen  her  brother  on  the
deck  of  his  ship,  that  he  looked  quite  as  usual,  but  never
spoke  a  word.  She  told  me  this  many  days  before  she
knew  of  the  Battle,  but  I  cannot  fix  the  date.

[Were  any  other  hallucinations  described  to  you  during
the  illness  ?  And  have  you  heard  of  any  experiences  of
the  same  kind  that  Mrs.  Baxter  ever  had  ?]

No,  only  that  she  said  such  "  queer  things."

I  am  quite  sure  that  neither  Mrs.  Malpress  nor  Mrs.
Baxter  have  ever  had  any  other  previous  experience  of
the  kind.  They  took  no  interest  in  the  subject  when  I
was  first  informed  of  it,  which  was  early,  and  long  before
anything  appeared  in  the  papers.

(Signed) H.  Latham,  M.B.  (Edin.),  etc.


i94


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwicic.


[part


Another  unusual  case  is  (L.  1159,  Journal,  Vol.  XIII.,
p.  103)  one  peculiarity  being  that  the  experience  was  in
part  collective.  The  apparition,  if  it  was  one,  was  seen  out
of  doors  and  among  other  people  first  by  one  percipient,
and  again,  a  few  minutes  later  and  in  another  position,
by  him  and  a  friend  together.  There  was  nothing  at  the
time  to  suggest  to  them  that  they  had  not  seen  a  real
man — ^no  disappearance  for  instance.  They  saw  him
among  other  people  in  places  where  he  might  naturally
have  been  and  left  him  there,  and  only  suspected  any-
thing mysterious  when  they  learnt  some  hours  later  that
the  man  they  thoiight  they  had  seen  had  not  been  there,  he
having  in  fact  been  drowned  the  night  before.  In  this
case  the  collectivity  alone  would  have  been  interesting,
but  there  are  so  many  other  unusual  features — the  repeti-
tion of  the  apparition  and  in  a  different  form  after  the
percipient  had  gone  away  and  returned  ;  the  persistence
of  the  second  appearance  to  both  percipients  ;  the  total
absence  of  anything  suggesting  a  hallucination — that  in
spite  of  difficulties  I  feel  almost  certain  that  there  was
either  a  mistake  of  identity  or  a  confusion  of  dates  ;
therefore, as  it  is  a  long  case,  I do  not  quote  it  here.

So  far  the  apparitions  occurring  at  the  time  of  the
death  of  the  person  seen  which  have  been  quoted  have
all  been  realistic  ;  in  appearance,  position,  and  movement,
when  movement  occurred,  they  have  been  like  real  people,
and  in  most  instances  have  at  the  moment  been  mistaken
for  such.  The  dress  and  aspect  of  the  apparition  have,
moreover,  been  appropriate  to  the  situation  in  which  it
was  seen,  and,  with  the  possible  exception  of  L.  1146
(p.  160),  have  conveyed  no  information  as  to  that  in  which
the  agent  actually  was.  I  will  now  quote  two  dreams
which  have  the  same  characteristics,  though  with  the
addition  of  the  dramatisation,  which,  as  remarked  above
(p.  29),  is  so  common  in  dreams.

The  first  of  the  two  dreams  (L.  1179,  Journal,  Vol.
XIV.,  p.  295)  was  sent  to  us  by  Major-General  Carey,
who  carefully  examined  the  witnesses  and  obtained  their
statements.


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  195
(L.  1179.)

The  dreamer's  account  is  as  follows  :

30  AncHEKS  Road,
Southampton,  April  I4,th,  1910.

I,  Charlotte  Cox,  am  in  the  service  of  ]\Iiss  Lydia  Le
Cocq,  who  resides  at  No  30  Archers  Road,  Southampton.
(I  have  been  upwards  of  38  years  in  her  service  and  in
that  of  her  cousin,  Mrs.  Laurence,  who  died  in  1889.)
My  mistress  being  in  poor  health,  I  am  accustomed  to
sleep  in  her  room.

On  Sunday,  19th  December,  1909,  at  about  7  a.m.,  I
had  a  vivid  dream.  I  thought  I  saw  an  old  friend  of
mine  standing  in  the  doorway  (half-open)  between  the
bed-room  and  the  landing.  I  said  in  my  dream,  "  0
here  is  Susan."  She  appeared  to  be  dressed  in  her
bonnet  and  mantle,  looking  quite  natural,  hke  herself  as  I
recollect  her,  though  I  had  not  seen  her  for  some  years.
IVIiss  Le  Cocq,  I  thought,  turned  round  with  a  smile  to
welcome  her,  she  being  an  old  acquaintance,  having  hved
for  upwards  of  50  years  in  the  family,  with  Dr.  Le  Cocq,
Miss  Le  Cocq's  uncle,  and  Mrs.  Barnes,  his  daughter,
both  now  deceased.  She  had  married  a  Mr.  Thomas
Brailey  about  20  years  ago,  being  then  upwards  of  60
years  of  age,  and  hved  with  him  in  Guernsey  tiU  his
death  about  three  years  ago,  afterwards  in  Jersey.

The  dream  was  a  short  one,  and  I  awoke  at  about  my
usual  hour  in  the  winter,  7  a.m.

I  mentioned  the  fact  of  having  had  the  dream  that
morning,  both  to  Miss  Le  Cocq,  and  also  to  my  feUow-
servant,  Lihan  Alhneritter,  who  too  has  been  17|  years
with  Miss  Le  Cocq.

On  the  next  evening,  Monday,  20th  December,  1909,
I  received  a  notice  from  Messrs.  Croad  &  Sons,  Under-
takers in  Jersey  (attached  hereto),  dated  19th  December,
1909  (Post-mark  Jersey,  11.45  p.m.  Dec.  19,  '09)  to  the
effect  that  Mrs.  Thomas  Brailey  had  died  on  that  day  at
The  Birches,  St.  Saviour's,  Jersey.

A  few  days  after  I  also  received  a  letter  from  a  friend
in Jersey, who mentioned the hour of the death,  viz.


196


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


7  a.m. — thus  coinciding  with  the  time  when  I  awoke  from
my  dream  here.  I  was  not  aware  at  that  time  of  Mrs.
Brailey  being  ill,  nor  had  any  reason  before  my  dream  for
being  anxious  about  her.  I  had  never  dreamt  of  her
before,  nor  have  I  had  any  other  experience  of  a  similar
character  at  the  time  of  the  death  of  any  other  friend  of
mine.  Charlotte  Cox.

Miss  AUmeritter  writes  :

April  Uth,  1910.
I  am  in  Miss  Le  Cocq's  service.  I  recollect  Charlotte
Cox,  at  brealvfast  on  the  19th  December,  1909,  teUing  me
of  her  dream  about  her  old  friend,  Mrs.  Brailey,  as
described  above.  The  notice  from  the  Jersey  imdertakers
came  by  post  the  next  evening.

Lilian  Allmeritter.

The  second  dream  is  the  following  (L.  1147,  Journal,
Vol.  XII.,  p.  99).  It  was  obtained  for  us  by  Mr.
F.  J.  M.  Stratton,  of  Gonville  and  Caius  College,  Cam-
bridge, and  most  of  the  confirmatory  evidence  was  col-
lected by  his  efforts.  The  percipient,  Mrs.  Mann,  writes
as  foUows  :

(L.  1147.)

King's  Field,  Cambridge,  February  11th,  1904.

On  the  night  of  Friday,  January  22nd,  1904,  I  had  a
vivid  dream.

I  saw  my  old  friend.  Dr.  X.,  who  left  Cambridge  about
10  years  ago,  and  I  had  not  seen  him  since,  sitting  by
my  side.  He  took  hold  of  my  hand  saying,  "  Why  have
you  not  been  to  see  me  ?  "  I  said,  "  Oh  !  I've  been  so
busy  that  I've  not  been  able  to  get  away.  You  are  so
altered  since  I  saw  you  last."  "  Yes,"  he  said,  "  but
that  is  so  long  ago."  He  then  disappeared.  The  dream
so  impressed  me  that  I  told  it  to  my  husband  at  break-
fast the  next  morning,  Saturday  23rd,  and  also  to  a  friend
who  knew  the  doctor  on  the  25th.

On  Saturday  morning,  the  30th,  my  husband  at  break-
fast said  he  had  received  a  memorial notice  of  Dr,  X.'s


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  197


death,  which  took  place  on  the  23rd  instant,  the  day-
after  my  dream.  g_  Mann.

A,  H.  Mann.

Mrs.  Sidgwick  writes  :

February  mh,  1904.

I  called  on  Mrs.  Mann  this  afternoon  and  she  kindly
talked  very  fully  about  her  experience.  It  was  distinctly
a  dream,  but  a  very  vivid  and  reahstic  one.  It  was
brought  to  an  end  by  her  awaldng.  In  the  dream  she
and  Dr.  X.  seemed  to  be  sittmg  on  a  sofa — it  might  have
been  the  one  in  her  drawing  room — and  they  talked
just  as  they  used  to  do,  his  voice  and  maimer  imchanged.
He  had  been  her  medical  attendant  .  .  .  ;  but  he  gave  up
his  practice  and  retired  some  10  years  ago,  leaving  Cam-
bridge, and  she  had  not  seen  him  since,  though  her
husband  had.  ...  In  the  dream  his  hair  and  whiskers,
which  had  been  dark  iron  grey  when  Mrs.  Mann  last  saw
him,  were  white.  There  had  been  no  mention  of  Dr.
X.  in  conversation,  nor  had  Mrs.  Mama  been  thmldng  of
him,  and  she  knows  of  nothmg  which  would  have  been
likely  to  suggest  the  dream.  She  is  quite  sure  that  the
dream  occurred  on  the  night  of  Friday,  January  22nd,
and  I  think  her  recollection  of  this  is  mdependent  of
her  knowledge  of  the  date  of  the  death,  though  she  has
nothing  very  definite  to  remember  it  by.  She  told  it  on
Saturday  morning  to  Dr.  Mann  and  in  the  course  of  the

day  to  Miss  C  . It  was  Miss  C who  on  February

11th  wrote  out  the  account  of  it,  which  Dr.  and  JVIrs.
Mann signed. On Monday, January 25th, Mrs.  Mann

told  the  dream  to  Miss  T  ,  and  she  has  promised  to

ask  her  to  write  an  independent  account.  She  showed
me  the  memorial  notice  of  Dr.  X.'s  death  on  January
23rd.  This  reached  Dr.  Mann  on  January  30th,  as  is
shown  by  the  post-mark.  Mrs.  Mann  does  not  remember
having  had  any  other  vivid  and  reahstic  dream  that
impressed  her  as  this  one  did,  nor  any  that  made  an
impression  which  she  felt  it  worth  while  to  mention  next
day.  She  has,  however,  had  presentiments  ;  one  of  them
was  of  her  father's  illness  and  death  a  few  days  before  he


198


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


died  suddenly.  She  once  saw  what  seemed  to  be  an
apparition — late  one  evening  last  summer  [of  a  relative
who  had  latety  died].  Eleanor  Mildred  Sidgwick.

The  above  account  was  sent  to  Mrs.  Mann  and  returned
by  her  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick  with  the  statement  that  she  thought
everything  in  it  correct.

Mr.  Stratton  writes  :

December  Uh,  1904.

The  friend  [Miss  T  ]  to  whom  Mrs.  Mann  mentioned

her  dream,  was  unfortimately,  through  absence  from
England,  not  approached  for  her  account  of  the  case
until  a  considerable  interval  had  elapsed.  As  she  was
then  unwilling  to  make  any  statement  on  the  matter,
I  may  perhaps  be  allowed  to  mention  that  I  had  a  short
conversation  with  her  several  weeks  after  the  event  ;  and
that  she  then  spoke  of  Mrs.  Mann's  dream  as  curious,  and
showed  that  she  was  at  that  time  ignorant  of  the  doctor's
death.  Unfortunately  the  conversation  was  interrupted
before  I  had  an  opportunity  of  asking  for  her  corroborative
evidence.

I  have  also  seen  a  pencil  note  that  Dr.  Mann  made
in  his  diary  under  the  date  Saturday,  "  January  23rd  ;
X.  [fuU  surname  given]  Dream."

I  heard  of  this  note  at  the  first,  but  could  not  manage
to  see  it  tiU  some  six  months  later  the  old  monthly
diary,  in  which  it  was  written,  was  looked  out  for  me  to
see.  F.  J.  M.  Stratton.

Dr.  X.'s  son  wrote  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick  as  follows:

Janvxiry  13th,  1905.
.  .  .  My  father  died  on  January  23rd,  1904,  at  about
4.30  a.m.  Though  he  had  been  an  invahd  for  some
years,  his  death  was  not  expected  till  a  seizure  5  days
before  his  death.  During  most  of  those  5  days  he  was
unconscious,  and  was  quite  so  for  the  last  36  hours  or
so  before  he  passed  away.  His  hair  was  by  no  means
white,  though  tinged  with  white — his  whiskers  were  very
considerably  white,  though  not  quite.  .  .  .


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  199

To  these  we  may  add  the  following  interesting  and
vivid  dream  (L.  1220,  Journal,  Vol.  XIX.,  p.  3),  since  in
the  absence  of  proof  that  the  costume  seen  was  that
actually  worn,  we  cannot  claim  this  as  a  "  veridical
adjunct "  (see  below).  The  case  was  first  brought  to
our  notice  by  Miss  H.  E.  Macklin,  who  had  been  an
Associate  of  the  Society  for  some  years,  in  the  following
letter  :

(L.  1220.)

June  26,  1918.

My  nephew,  2nd  Lieut.  David  Macklin,  was  killed  near
Albert,  March  27th  [1918],  his  mother  receiving  the  news
from  the  War  Office  on  April  3.  On  the  night  March
27-28  (within  a  few  hours  of  his  death),  she  saw  him
(whether  in  sleep  or  not  is  doubtful),  and  believed  it  to
be  an  intimation  of  his  death.  She  made  no  written
record  at  the  time,  but  sjDoke  of  it  that  day  to  lier
sister  and  her  servant.

It  is  an  interesting  point  that  she  saw  him  dressed  in
a  way  which  surprised  and  puzzled  her,  but  which  seems
to  have  been  correct. We  could  probably  make  certain.

Helen  E.  Macklin.

On  July  2,  1918,  Miss  Macklin  called  at  the  S.P.R.  Rooms
and  gave  the  Secretary  further  particulars  in  regard  to  the
case  and  kindly  expressed  her  wilhngness  to  collect  the  neces-
sary evidence.

A  statement  from  the  percipient,  Mrs.  Macklin,  was  received
a  few  days  later,  as  follows  :

White  Wood  Cokner,  Sandy.
July  5,  1918.

My  sister-in-law  has  asked  me  to  write  to  you  about
an  impression  I  had  of  my  son  coming  to  me  about  the
time  of  his  death.

I  did  not  make  any  note  of  it  at  the  time,  but  I  know
the  date,  because  I  spoke  of  my  impression  next  day  to  a
sister  who  came  to  visit  me  that  day  and  to  a  servant
who  came  home  the  same  afternoon,  March  28th,


200


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


When  the  German  offensive  began  on  March  21st,  I  was
anxious  about  my  son,  because  he  was  (2nd  Lieut,  in  the
4th  Bedfordshire),  as  I  beheved,  somewhere  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Arras.

On  the  night  of  the  27th  March  or  in  the  early  hours
of  the  28th  (I  don't  know  the  time),  I  had  what  I  can
only  describe  as  a  waking  dream.  I  mean  that  it  did
not  seem  just  an  ordinary  dream  to  me.

When  I  got  up  on  the  Thursday  morning  it  was  so
vivid  that  it  haunted  me,  and  I  spoke  of  it,  as  I  said,
on  that  day.

It  seemed  that  I  felt  or  heard  footsteps  along  the
verandah  outside  my  bedroom  wmdow  (I  hve  in  a  bunga-
low), and  that  I  rushed  out  Imowing  the  steps  were  my
boy's. (Bodily  I  did  not  leave  my  bed.)

I  seemed  to  see  him  with  a  "  tin  hat  "  and  his  pack
with  webbing  equipment,  and  my  general  feeling  was  great
dismay  that  he  should  be  in  "Tommy's  kit,"  and  I
exclaimed,  "  Oh,  David  boy,  you  have  never  disgraced
your  officer's  tmiform  and  had  to  go  back  to  Tommy's
clothes."

(I  am  rather  troubled  at  repeating  this,  because  it  almost
seems  to  imply  that  I  had  doubts  of  my  boy,  which  I
certainly  had  not.  He  was  a  very  dear  son  and  brother,
and  had  got  on  splendidly  as  Intelligence  officer ;  he
was  a  most  happy  and  very  keen  soldier,  and  letters
from  his  senior  officers  and  men  testify  to  his  efficiency
and  courage,  as  well  as  to  his  thoroughly  good  and  useful
work.)

He  passed  as  in  a  flash  and  I  can't  say  that  he  looked
at  me,  it  was  more  a  feeling  of  knowing  he  was  there.
From  that  time  I  expected  bad  news  of  him  and  I  was
not  surprised  to  get  a  telegram  from  the  W.O.  on  the
3rd  April,  to  tell  me  that  my  son  had  been  killed  in
action  on  March  the  27th.

I  think  that  the  dream  or  impression,  whichever  it  was,
haunted  me  all  the  more,  because  on  the  last  evening  of
my  son's  leave  before  he  returned  to  France  on  Jan.  31,
I  was  helping  him  to  pack,  and  naturally  there  was  one
thought  uppermost,  though  we  were  both  quite  cheerful.


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  201

I  said  to  him,  "If  what  we  can't  help  thinking  about
should  happen,  will  you  try  to  come  to  me  1  "

He  did  not  say  anything,  but  he  would  always  try  to
do  anything  he  could  that  I  asked  him,  and  I  beheve
if  it  were  in  his  power  that  he  would  have  willed  to
come  to  me  at  the  time  of  his  death.

On  Friday,  April  5th,  two  of  my  other  sons  came  home.
I  was  talking  to  them  about  my  impression  of  their
brother's  coming  to  me  and  my  trouble  that  he  should
be  wearing  Tommy's  clothes.  And  they  both  said,  "  That
is  how  he  would  have  seemed  to  you."

I  think  that  is  all  I  can  teU  you,  and  it  does  not  seem
very  much,  but  my  sister-in-law  asked  me  to  write.

Mabian  M.  Mackxin.

After  maldng  this  statement  Mrs.  Mackhn  wrote  to  her
sister  and  to  the  servant  to  whom  she  had  mentioned  her

■  experience  before  it  was  verified  to  obtain  their  corroboration.

i  We  quote  her  letters  below  to  show  that  her  enquiries  were
couched  in  quite  general  terms.

Letter  from  Mrs.  MacUin  to  Lizzie  Reynolds.

Do  you  remember  when  you  came  home  for  Easter,
my  telling  you  about  a  sort  of  dream  I  had  had  about
Master  David  ?  I  have  been  asked  if  yon  would  mind
writing  down  what  you  remember  of  what  I  told  you.

If  you  don't  remember,  never  mind,  but  if  you  do
remember  anything,  just  state  what  you  can.  Give  your
reason  for  remembering  the  date.

To  this  letter  Mrs.  Mackhn  received  the  following  reply  :

August  13,  1918.

Mrs.  Macklin  has  asked  me  to  write  what  I  remember
concerning  the  dream  she  had  of  her  son,  Mr.  David
Macklin.  On  March  28th  Mrs.  Macklin  related  to  me,
how  during  some  period  of  the  night  of  March  27th  she
saw  in  a  dream  Mr.  David  running  along  the  verandah
in  his  tin  helmet  and  private's  uniform,  when  she  ex-
claimed : "  Oh,  David,  what  have  you  done  to  disgrace


02  Mrs.  Hennj  Sidgwick.  [part

yourself  ?  "  The  foUowing  Wednesday  [April  3]  Mra.
Macklin  received  a  telegram  stating  her  son  had  been  killed
in  action  on  Wed.,  March  27th.  L.  Reynolds.

P.S.~1  am  quite  certam  it  was  March  28th  Mrs.
Mackhn  spoke  to  me  of  her  dream,  as  I  had  been  away
several  weeks,  and  returned  home  on  that  date  to  spend
Easter.

Letter  from  Mrs.  Macklin  to  Miss  Bridgman.

I  have  been  asked  if  you  would  write  an  account  of
what  you  remember  of  my  telhng  you  about  my  im-
pression or  dream,  or  whatever  it  may  have  been,  of
dear  David  on  the  day  that  you  ca,me  to  White  Wood
Comer  m  March.  Possibly  you  may  not  remember
anythmg.  I  don't  want  to  remind  you  of  any  details
or  give  you  leads.  But  if  you  can  write  anything  clearly,
I  want  to  send  it  to  the  S.P.R.

Miss  Bridgman  rephed  to  this  letter  as  follows  :  i

4,  St.  Stephen's  Road,  Bayswater,  W.  2.

"I  have  been  asked  by  my  sister,  Mrs.  Mackhn,  to
write  what  I  can  remember  of  what  she  told  me  of  her
dream  or  vision  on  the  27th-28th  March  this  year.

I  can  state  that  these  were  her  words  as  nearly  as
possible  :

'I  have  a  queer  feeling  about  my  David  this  morning.
Last  night  I  saw  him  so  clearly,  he  seemed  to  come
suddenly  round  the  comer  of  the  verandah,  rushing,  and
in  a  great  hurry  dashed  past  me.  He  seemed  to  be
dressed  m  an  ordinary  Tommy's  uniform,  with  "tin
helmet."  I  said,  "Oh,  David,  you  have  done  nothing
to  disgrace  your  uniform  as  an  officer."  He  did  not
reply,  but  disappeared  to  the  right  of  the  front  of  the
bungalow.'

I  went  to  visit  my  sister  on  Thursday,  March  28th.
and  it  was  the  day  I  arrived  that  she  told  me  of  her

H.  M.  Bridgman.

Miss  Bridgman's  statement,  which  is  not  dated,  was  written  in  August,
8,  but  hy  an  oversight  was  not  sent  to  the  S.P.R.  until  November.  "


I  Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases:  Impression  Externalised.  203

In reply  to a further enquiry ]\Irs. Macklin informed  us
i  that  she  had  never  had  a  similar  impression or  any  other
experience  of  psychical  interest  that  she  could  recall.

With  regard  to  IVIrs.  Macklin 's  impression  that  her  son  was
Jin  a  private  soldier's  uniform,  Lieut.  Macklin's  body  was  never
I  recovered,  and  since  many  of  those  Avith  him  have  been  killed
it  has  not  been  possible  to  obtain  definite  information  on  the
point. But  it  is  [we  understand]  a  common  thing  for  officers
when  they  go  into  action  to  be  so  equipped  as  to  be  almost
.  indistinguishable  from  private  soldiers.

We  are  indebted  to  Mrs.  and  Mss  Mackhii  for  permission
,  to  use  names.

Death  Coincidences — (&)  not  realistic.

In  the  case  just  quoted  there  had  been  a  request  to
the  agent  by  the  percipient  to  appear  if  possible.  In  the
two  I  will  next  give  there  had  apparently  been  a  promise
to  try  to  communicate.  In  these  two  and  also  in  the
two  that  follow  them  apparitions  were  seen  by  waking
percipients,  but  they  were  not  realistic.  Though  fully
recognised  they  were  not,  and  hardly  could  have  been,
mistaken  even  momentarily  for  real  men.  In  the  first
(L.  977,  Journal,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  368),  from  Prince  Victor
Duleep  Singh,  the  experience  seems  to  have  been  almost
on  the  line  between  illusion  and  hallucination.

(L.  977.)

HiGHCLERE  Castle,  Newbury,  November  8th,  1894.

On  Saturday,  October,  1893,  I  was  in  Berlin  with  Lord
Carnarvon.  We  went  to  a  theatre  together  and  returned
before  midnight.  I  went  to  bed,  leaving,  as  I  always
do,  a  bright  hght  in  the  room  (electric  hght).  As  I  lay
in  bed  I  found  myself  looking  at  an  oleograph  which
himg  on  the  wall  opposite  my  bed.  I  saw  distinctly
the  face  of  my  father,  the  Maharajah  Duleep  Singh,
looking  at  me,  as  it  were  out  of  this  picture  ;  not  like  a
portrait  of  him,  but  his  real  head.  The  head  about
filled  the  picture  frame.  I  continued  looking  and  still
saw  my  father  looking  at  me  with  an  intent  expression.


204


Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.


[part


Though  not  in  the  least  alarmed,  I  was  so  puzzled  that
I  got  out  of  bed  to  see  what  the  picture  reaUy  was.  It
was  an  oleograph  common-place  picture  of  a  girl  holding
a  rose  and  leaning  out  of  a  balcony,  an  arch  forming  a
background.  The  girl's  face  was  quite  smaU,  whereas
my  father's  head  was  the  size  of  life  and  filled  the  frame.

I  was  in  no  special  anxiety  about  my  father  at the  i
time,  and  had  for  some  years  known  him  to  be  seriously
out  of  health  ; but  there  had been  no  news  to  alarm
me  about  him.

Next  morning  (Sunday)  I  told  the  incident  to  Lord
Carnarvon.  .it

That  evening  (Smiday)  late  on  returning  home.  Lord
Carnarvon  brought  two  telegrams  into  my  room  and
handed  them  to  me.  I  said  at  once,  "  My  father  is
dead."  That  was  the  fact.  He  had  had  an  apoplectic
seizure  on  the  Saturday  evening  at  about  nine  o'clock,  j
from  which  he  never  recovered,  but  contmued  unconscious
and  died  on  the  Stmday,  early  in  the  afternoon.  My
father  had  often  said  to  me  that  if  I  was  not  with  him
when  he  died  he  would  try  and  come  to  me.

I  am  not  subject  to  hallucinations,  and  have  only  once
had  any  similar  experience,  when,  as  a  schoolboy,  I
fancied  I  saw  the  figure  of  a  dead  schoolboy  who  had
died  in  the  room  which  I  slept  in  with  my  brother ;  but
I  attach  no  importance  to  this.

Victor  Duleep  Singh.

Lord  Carnarvon  writes  :

I  can  confirm  Prince  V.  Duleep  Singh's  account.  I
heard  the  incident  from  him  on  the  Sunday  morning.
The  same  evening,  at  about  12  p.m.,  he  received  a  tele-
gram notifying  him  of  his  father's  sudden  illness  and
death.  We  had  no  loiowledge  of  his  father's  iUness.
He  has  never  told  me  of  any  similar  previous  occurrence.

Carnarvon.

We  have  ascertained  that  the  Maharajah  Duleep  Singh  died
on  Suiiday,  October  22nd,  1893.  t


4


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  205

The  next  case  (L.  974,  Journal,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  280)  was
sent  to  us  by  Mrs.  Scott,  The  Elms,  Acton  Hill,  London,
W  in  a  letter  dated  November  25,  1893.  Of  the  two
apparitions  described,  the  first  is  beyond  our  time-hmit
of  five  years  between  event  and  record,  and  the  exactness
of  the  coincidence  is  doubtful,  but  it  is  interesting  that
the  percipient  should  have  had  two  experiences  of  the  kind.
Mrs.  Scott  writes :

(L.  974.)

A  sister  of  mine  went  to  South  America,  and  married
there. One morning I was in bed about 11  o'clock,
when  there  was  a  knock  at  my  door  ; thinking  it  was  the
house-maid  with  hot  water,  I  said  "Come  in." No  one
came  in. There  was  another  knock; again  I  said  "Come
in,"  and  turned  towards  the  door. My  sister  was  standing
there. I, thinking she had returned unexpectedly,  said
"  What,  yoti,  Elsie  r ' She  then  vanished. When  I  went
downstairs  I  told  my  husband,  who  said,  "  Don't  teU  your
mother,  or  she  wiU  think  something  has  happened  to  her."
We  heard  a  month  later  that  she  had  died,  after  a  few
•> hours'  iUness,  about  that  time.

On December the 6th, 1892, I  returned  home  about
11.30,  after  spending  the  evening  with  some  friends.  On
going  upstairs,  I  saw  a  taU  man  so  close  to  me  that  I
put  out  my  hand  to  push  him  back,  but  my  hand  went
into  space. I  again  moved  forward,  when  he  was  close
in  front  of  me,  and,  though  I  couldn't  see  his  face,  I
recognised  the  figure  of  a  great  friend  of  mine  in  India.
I  went  into my sitting-room, ahnost expecting to  find
hun  there. A  week  later  I  got  the  news  of  his  death  at
Bombay, on the evening of the 6th. He had  always
said  that  if  anything  happened  to  him,  he  would  let  me
know. I  may  add  I  wrote  to  an  old  ship-mate  of ^  his,
and  told  him  of  my  experience,  on  the  morning  of  the  7th.
In  reply  to  our  request  for  corroborative  testimony,  Mrs.  Scott
wrote :

November  2Qth,  1893.
I  enclose  a  few  fines  from  my  sister  and  my  husband.
The  man  I  wrote  to  about  having  seen  Percy  Faulkner,


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.  [part

was  Lieut.  Edward  Reeves,  R.N.,  of  H.M.S.  Royalist,
at  present  on  the  Austrahan  station.  I  can,  if  you  wish
it,  write  and  ask  if  he  still  has  my  letter,  or  ask  him  to
write  you  a  few  Ihies,  but  it  will  be  three  months  before
an  answer  can  be  received.

I  cannot  be  sure  of  the  date  m  March  1887,  that  I
saw  my  sister,  but  I  believe  it  to  have  been  at  the  actual
time  of  her  death,  which  was  on  the  15th  of  March.
We  did  not  receive  the  news  till  more  than  a  month
after.

The  notes  enclosed  were  the  followmg  :

The  Elms,  Acton  Hill,  W.,  November  29,  1893.
I  weU  remember, m  March 1887, my  A.dfe  telling  me
she  had  seen  her  sister,  who  was  then  m  South  America
I  advised  her  not  to  tell  her  mother,  in  case  it  should
upset  her.

Ronald  A.  Scott,
M.R.I.,  F.R.G.S.,  M.I.E.E.,  &c.

Woodland  Cottage,  Acton  Hill,  London,  W.,
November  29th,  1893.
I  remember  my  sister, Mi-s. Scott, tellmg  me on  the
mornmg of December 7th that she had seen a  friend
of ours, Percy FauUaier, at that time m Bombay,  on
the staircase the night before, and wondermg what  it

Florence  Farquharson.

Mrs.  Scott  v^rrote  later  in  answer  to  further  enquiries  :

December  28th,  1893.

I  am  doubtful  of  Mr.  Reeves  havmg  kept  my  letter
about  Percy  Faullmer,  but  of  course  he  would  remember
about  It.  It  was  to  my  sister.  Miss  Farquharson,  that
I  mentioned  what  I  had  seen,  not  to  Mr.  Scott.  In
the  case  of  seemg  my  sister,  I  mentioned  it  to  him.

I  had  not  any  idea  of  Mr.  Faulkner  being  iU  ;  m  fact
he  was  not,  for  he  died  from  an  overdose  of  chloral,
which  he  was  takmg  for  insomnia.  He  always  said  that
if  anythmg  happened  to  him,  he  would  let  me  know.


LXxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  impression  Externalised.  201


\  I enclose extracts from a letter I received from  a

' shipmate of ]\'Ir. FauUaier's about his death. I  am
imable  to  send  the  letter,  as  there  are  some  private  details.

The  letter  was  written,  Mrs.  Scott  informs  us,  by  J.  Ham,
Esq.,  R.N.,  H.M.S.  Cossack,  and  the  extracts  sent  us  were  as
follows  :

Bombay,  January  I5th,  1893.

The  ship  was  placed  in  dock  on  the  5th  and  we  were
quartered  at  the  Great  Western  Hotel,  Percy's  room  being
on  the  same  flat  as  mine,  and  but  four  or  five  rooms
removed.  .  .  .  On  the  evening  of  the  5th,  we  went  for
a  walk  and  to  hear  the  band,  and  talked  a  great  deal
on  home  affairs  ;  he  was  in  the  best  of  spirits.  We
afterwards  met  friends,  and  I  learnt  afterwards  that  he
went  to  the  club.  I  went  to  his  room  the  morning  of
the  6th  and  tapped  at  the  door.  He  answered,  and  I
asked  him  how  he  felt.  His  reply  was  "  Not  much,
old  chap."  That  was  the  last  I  saw  of  the  poor  chap
aUve.  .  .  .  About  10,  a  servant  came  and  told  me  that  a
doctor  wanted  to  see  me.  I  followed  the  boy,  and
imagine  my  grief  when  I  saw  two  doctors  attempting  to
restore  Hfe  to  him  who  has  so  lately  been  a  source  of
life  to  us  all.  .  .  .  Your  seeing  Percy,  as  you  relate,
was  very  strange  and  most  remarkable,  and  yet  un-
doubtedly the  same  thing  has  happened  before  with  those
who  have  had  dear  friends  dying  in  distant  lands.

We  wrote  to  Lieutenant  Reeves,  asking  if  he  still  possessed
the  letter  in  which  Mrs.  Scott  had  informed  him  of  her  ex-
perience  before  she heard of  Mr. Faulkner's  death, and  he
irepUed  :

H.M.S.  Boyalist,  Albany,  Western  Australia,
February  8th,  1894.
Dear  Sir, — Your  letter  of  January  3rd  to  hand.  With
regard  to  any  documentary  evidence  with  reference  to
Mrs.  Scott's  writing  and  teUirg  me  she  had  seen  the
apparition  of  Mr.  Percy  Faulkner  at  the  time  of  his  death,
I  am  afraid  I  have  none,  as  the  letter  was  destroyed,
and  at  the  same  time,  I  at  this  moment  don't  recollect


208


M^'s.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


the  date,  having  imfortunately  no  diary  or  anything  to'
refer  back  to.  But  at  the  time  I  was  quite  convinced
in  my  mind  that  Mrs.  Scott  had  seen  him ;  for,  as  she'
tells  you,  she  wrote  to  me  the  next  morning,  and  I  was
up  at  Acton  very  shortly  afterwards  and  questioned  her
most  closely  about  it,  and  from  what  we  afterwards  heard
about  Mr.  Faulloier  s  death,  there  was  no  flaw  as  regards
the  time.  I  am  afraid  this  cannot  help  you  at  all,  but
it  would  be  useless  my  sayitig  more  than  [that],  having
satisfied  my  own  mind  as  to  what  Mrs.  Scott  had  seen,
I  let  the  matter  drop. Yours  very  truly,

Edwabd  Reeves.

In  the  next  case  (L.  979,  Jourtial,  Vol.  VII.,  p.  7),  the
triple  form  of  the  apparition  is  a  curious  feature,  and  one
which  it  would  be  difficult  to  explain  by  a  mistake  of
identity.  Mr.  R.  W.  Raper,  through  whom  the  case
reached  us,  writes  to  Mr.  Myers  :

(L.  979.)

Trinity  College,  Oxford,  3Iay  5th,  1892.  i
The  enclosed  narrative  was  written  down  at  my  request.
I  heard  it  from  the  lips  of  the  narrator,  very  soon  after
the  event  occurred  last  Christmas  vacation.  He  has  put
the  tale  on  paper  for  me,  almost  exactly  as  he  told  it
me  first.  I  know  him  well,  and  can  guarantee  his  perfect
good  faith.

The  account  enclosed  was  as  follows :

New  College,  Oxford.
Just  before  last  Christmas  I  went  over  to  Liverpool
with  one  of  my  brothers  and  my  sister.  It  was  a  very
fine,  clear  day,  and  there  was  a  great  crowd  of  people
shopping  in  the  streets.  We  were  walking  down  Lord-
street,  one  of  the  principal  streets,  when,  passing  me,  I
saw  an  old  uncle  of  mine  whom  I  knew  very  httle,  and
had  not  seen  for  a  very  long  time,  although  he  lived
near  me.  I  saw  three  distinct  shapes  hobbling  past
(he  was  lame)  one  after  the  other  in  a  line. It  didn't


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  209

seem  to  strike  me  at  the  moment  as  being  in  the  least
curious,  not  even  there  bemg  three  shapes  ia  a  hne.  I
said  to  my  sister, "  I  have  just  seen  Uncle  E., and  I
am  sure  he  is  dead." I  said  this  as  it  were  mechanically,
and  not  feeling  at  all  impressed. Of  course  my  brother
and  sister  laughed. We  thought  nothiag  more  about  it
while  in  Liverpool. The  first  thing  my  mother  said  to
us  on  getting  home  was, "  I  have  some  news  "  ;  then
she told us that this uncle had died very early  that
morning. I  don't  know  the  particular  hour. I  saw  the
three  shapes  at  about  12  in  the  morning. I  felt  perfectly
fit  and  well,  and  was  not  thinking  of  my  micle  in  the
least,  nor  did  I  know  he  was  Ul. Both  my  brother  and
my  sister  heard  me  say  that  I  had  seen  him,  and  believed
he  was  dead,  and  they  were  equally  astonished  at  hearing
of his death on our return home. My imcle and  I
knew  each  other  very  Uttle. In  fact,  he  hardly  knew  me
by  sight,  although  he  knew  me  well  when  I  was  a  small
child.  J-  ^ovE.

In reply to our request for corroborative evidence,  Mr.
Dove  writes  :

May  20th  [1892].

I  enclose  letters  from  my  mother  and  my  sister.  Ap-
parently my  micle  had  died  in  his  sleep  in  the  early
morning,  as  he  was  fomid  dead  in  the  mommg.  I
beheve  he  was  not  iU  before.  I  am  afraid  I  can't  re-
member the  date  of  our  excursion  to  Liverpool,  but  believe
it  to  have  been  about  two  or  three  days  before  Christmas.

The  following  are  the  letters  enclosed  :

(1)  From  Mrs.  Dove.

21,  Devonshirb  Place,  Clatjghton,  Birkenhead,
May  mh,  1892.
I am sorry I have not been able to find out  any
particulars about Uncle Edward's death. I sent  the
letter  you enclosed  with yours  for Granny  to read,  so
that  she  might  be  able  to  give  me  particulars  ; but  she


210


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


says  no  one  knows  the  hour  of  his  death,  for  he  was
found  dead  in  bed  and  had  died  in  his  sleep.  .  .  .

A.  G.  Dove.

(2)  From  Miss  Dove.

May  11th  [1892].
Mother  said  you  wanted  me  to  write  to  you  about  the
Uncle  Edwards  episode.  I  do  remember  distinctly  your
saying  to  me  in  Liverpool,  "  three  men  have  passed  me
exactly  hke  Uncle  E.  :  he  must  be  dead  !  "  and  then
we  heard  afterwards  that  he  had  died  that  day,  but  I
do  not  remember  the  date.

In  the  next  case  (L.  991,  Journal,  Vol.  VII.,  p.  121)  the
apparition  seems  to  have  been  of  a  shadowy  description,
though  it  conveyed  to  the  percipient  the  idea  of  a  par-
ticular person.

(L.  991.)

The  case  came  to  us  through  Mr.  A.  Aksakoff,  who  received
it  from  Mrs.  Broussiloff. She  writes  :

St.  Petersburg,  April  I9th,  1895.

On  the  16th  (28th)  of  February  of  this  year  (1895)
between  9  and  10  o'clock  in  the  evening,  I,  the  under-
signed, was  sitting  in.  our  drawing-room — the  smaU  one —
facing  the  large  drawing-room  which  I  could  see  in  its
entire  length.  My  husband,  his  brother  with  his  wife,
and  my  mother  wei'e  also  sittuag  in  the  same  room  with
me  round  a  large  round  table.  I  was  writing  down  my
household  accounts  for  the  day,  whilst  the  others  were
carrying  on  some  gay  conversation.  Having  accidentally
raised  my  head  and  looked  into  the  large  drawing-room,
I  noticed,  with  astonishment,  that  a  large  gray  shadow
had  passed  from  the  door  of  the  dining-room  to  that  of
the  ante-chamber  ;  and  it  came  into  my  head  that  the
figure  I  had  seen  bore  a  striking  resemblance  in  stature
to  Colonel  Av^-Meinander, an  acquaintance  of ours,  who

^  Particle  equivalent  to  tlie  German  "  von "  (the  name  is  a  Swedish
one).


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases:  Impression  Externalised.  211

had  lived  in  this  very  lodging  for  a  long  time.  At  the
first  moment  I  wished  to  say  at  once  that  a  ghost  had
just  flashed  before  me,  but  stopped,  as  I  was  afraid  of
being  laughed  at  by  my  husband's  brother  and  his  wife,
and  also  of  being  scolded  by  my  husband,  who,  in  view
of  the  excitement  which  I  showed  when  such  phenomena
were  taking  place,  tried  to  convince  me  that  they  were
the  fruit  of  my  fancy.  As  I  knew  that  Meinander  was
ahve  and  well,  and  was  commander  of  the  "  Maloros-
siisky "  40th  regiment  of  dragoons,  I  did  not  say  any-
thing then  ;  but  when  I  was  going  to  bed,  I  related  to
my  mother  what  I  had  seen,  and  the  next  morning  could
not  refrain  from  mentioning  it  to  my  husband.

Our  astonishment  was  extreme  when  on  the  18th  of
February  (2nd  of  March)  we  learned  that  Nicholas  Otto-
vitch  Av-Meinander  had  actually  died  after  a  short  illness
on  the  16th  (28th)  of  February  at  9  o'clock  in  the  evenmg,
in  the  to-\vn  of  Stashovo,^  where  his  regiment  is  stationed.

Anna  Nicolaievna  Broussiloff.

Mrs.  Broussiloff 's  mother  writes  :

My  daughter  did  actually  relate  to  me  on  February
16th  (28th),  about  midnight,  when  I  was  going  to  bed,
about  the  phantom  she  had  seen,  precisely  as  she  has
described  it  above.  Marie  von  Hagemeister.

Colonel  BroussilofE  writes  :

Araktcheieff  Barracks,  St.  Petersburg,
April  mh,  1895.

Colonel  Nicholas  Ottovitch  Av-Meinander  and  his  family
had  formerly  Uved  for  about  nine  years  at  a  time  in  the
lodgitag  where  we  hve  now.  Both  he  and  the  members
of  his  household  hked  this  lodging  very  much,  and  parted
with  it  with  regret  about  four  years  ago,  in  consequence
of  his  appointment  as  commander  of  the  "  Malorossusky  "
40th  regiment  of  dragoons,  stationed  in  the  town  of
Stashovo.

1  GovernrQent  of  Radom,  Poland,  1,200  versts  from  Petersburg.


212


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


From  time  to  time  my  wife  had  already  seen  ghosts
before,  which  threw  her  into  a  great  state  of  excitement.
I  consequently  did  my  utmost  to  persuade  her  not  to  pay
any  attention  to  such  phenomena  and  to  consider  them
as  the  fruit  of  imagination.  My  wife  had  never  seen
anything  supernatural  for  the  last  two  years,  and  was
inexpressibly  glad  of  it.  She  is  a  woman  of  a  quiet
and  equable  character,  and  is  not  nervous  generally.  On
the  16th  (28th)  of  February,  no  one  of  us  had  any  reason
to  be  excited  or  to  thuik  about  Meinander,  as,  according
to  information  that  was  to  hand,  both  he  and  his  family
were  in  excellent  health.  When  my  wife  related  to  me
her  vision  in  the  morning  of  February  17th,  I  laughed
at  her  and  requested  her  not  to  think  about  this  case,
which  I  considered  to  be  a  hallucination.  The  first  news
of  Meinander's  unexpected  demise  was  received  by  us  on
February  18th,  when  we  read  in  the  [mihtary]  "  order  of
the  day  "  [appended  to  the  original  narrative  in  Russian]
that  Meinander  was  dead  and  that  a  fimeral  service  for
the  rest  of  his  soul  was  to  be  celebrated  ;  and  the  next
morning  we  read  in  the  [obituary  notices  of  the]  Novoie
Vremia,  No.  6,816,  that  he  had  died  on  February  16th
(28th),  at  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening.

Colonel  Alexis-Alexeievitoh  Bboussilofe.

In  connexion  with  this  may  be  mentioned  a  case  (L.  839,
Journal,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  268)  where  a  dark  shadowy  figure
was  seen  moving  across  the  room  by  Miss  M.  Thelemann.
It  was  unrecognised,  but  some  hours  later  the  thought  of
a  dear  friend  came  suddenly  into  her  mind  and  she
afterwards  learnt  that  the  friend  died  at  that  time.  As
the  experience  was  unrecorded  till  nearly  four  years  after
its  occurrence  and  is  uncorroborated,  I  do  not  quote  it
in  full.  Such  undeveloped  veridical  hallucinations  are,
however,  quite  conceivable,  and  indeed  there  is  reason  to
think  that  they  occur.  Compare  Gurney's  book,  Chap.
XII.,  especially  case  No.  196.

This  concludes  the  cases  in  our  collection  of  apparitions
of  dying  persons  seen by  waking  percipients. In  none


Lxxxvi.] Spontaneous  Cases:  Impression  Externalised.  213

of  them,  with  the  doubtful  exceptions  of  L.  1146,  p.  160,
and  L.  1220,  p.  199,  was  any  indication  given  of  the
circumstances  or  surroundings  of  the  agents.

Death  Coincidences — -(c)  Visual  with  veridical  or  symbolic

adjuncts.

There  are,  however,  five  dreams  in  which  the  dying
agent  is  seen  and  some  correct  information  is  received.
The  first  of  these  (L.  978,  Journal,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  368)
occurred  a  few  hours  before  the  death.  It  was  received
through  Miss  E.  Sturge  of  Chilliswood,  Tyndall's  Park,
Bristol.  The  percipient,  here  called  Miss  G.,  gave  her
real  name  in  confidence. She  wrote  :

(L.  978.)

April  \st,  1891.

I  saw  my  brother,  who  was  ill  at  the  time,  lying  in  his
berth,  dressed  in  his  clothes.  The  ship  was  moving  slowly
along — it  was  a  bright  moonUght  night  and  everything
was  exceedingly  quiet  and  peaceful.  At  first  he  appeared
asleep,  but  at  length  opened  his  eyes,  gave  me  a  bright
smile  and  one  long  look  and  then  closed  them  again.
Apparently  I  saw  him  just  a  few  hours  before  he  died.
As  far  as  I  can  remember,  it  was  after  midnight  on  the
29th  of  December,  1886.  I  was  in  bed,  and  very  tired,
after  the  exertions  of  a  children's  Christmas  party.  Of
course  I  was  anxious  about  my  brother,  but  from  that
time  all  anxiety  seemed  to  cease.  When  anyone  con-
gratulated me  upon  the  safe  arrival  of  the  vessel,  it  seemed
to  make  no  cheerful  impression,  and  I  ceased  from  that
time  writing  the  weekly  letters  which  I  had  been  in  the
habit  of  sending,  although  we  did  not  hear  of  his  death
until  February  7th,  1887.  I  was  22  years  old  at  the
time.  I  had  not  seen  my  brother  since  the  22nd  of
September,  1886,  the  date  when  the  vessel  left  the  docks.

Miss  Sturge  adds  :

Miss  G.'s  brother  had  not  been  in  good  health,  and  had
travelled  a  good  deal  on  account  of  it,  but  the  family


214


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part'


were  not  especially  anxious  about  him  at  the  time  of  his
death.  He  was  going  alone  to  Austraha  and  died  very
shortly  before  arrival,  and  it  was  almost  by  accident;
that  the  family  heard  of  his  death.

Miss  Sturge  writes  later  :

July  27th,  1891.
I  find  from  a  letter  I  have  received  from  [Miss  G.]
that  she  does  not  quite  know  whether  she  was  asleep  or
awake  at  the  time  of  her  vision,  but  says  she  is  certain
she  was  awake  immediately  after.  She  sends  me  the
printed  invitation  to  the  children's  party  on  the  28th
December,  1886,  and  she  sends  also  a  copy  of  the  letter
from  the  wife  of  the  captain  of  the  ship  on  which  her
brother  was  at  the  time  of  his  death,  by  which  I  see  that
he  died  at  10  p.m.  on  the  29th  Deceniber,  the  dream  or
vision  thus  preceding  the  death.  Mss  G.  repeats  that
she  was  so  certain  that  her  brother  was  dead  that  she
refused  to  write  to  him  or  send  him  anything.  She  made
no  written  memorandum  at  the  time,  but  spoke  of  it  to
Mr.  and  Mrs.  M.  with  whom  she  was  then  and  is  now
hvmg  [as  their  governess].

She  seems  to  have  been  in  the  habit  of  dreaming  of
her  brother,  as  she  was  very  fond  of  him.

Mr.  Myers  called  on  Miss  G.,  on  December  18th,  1891,  and
writes  :

I  saw  Miss  G.  yesterday.  She  thinks  that  her  experience
ought  to  be  classed  as  a  dream,  although  it  was  more
vivid  than  any  other  dream  she  remembers,  and  woke
her  up  so  thoroughly  that  she  got  up  and  did  not  sleep
agam  for  some  hours.

This  dream  alone  of  all  that  she  has  had  showed  her
brother  ill  and  altered,  as  he  in  fact  was  altered  before
death.

She  did  not  tell  Mr.  and  Mrs.  M.  until  the  news  had
arrived.  She  intentionally  kept  the  invitation  card  (which
I  saw),  as  a  memento  of  the  date,  not  wishing  to  put
on  paper  what  she  regarded  as  so  private  a  matter.


,xxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Im-pression  Externalised.  215


The  best  proof  of  the  importance  of  this  dream  in  her
eyes  is  that  she  never  once  wrote  to  her  brother  again,
although  she  was  devotedly  attached  to  him,  and  used
to  write  by  every,  or  almost  every,  mail.  Had  he  been
alive,  he  would  have  missed  her  letters  with  surprise  and
pain.  I  have  seen  the  captain's  wife's  letter.  The
brother  died  at  Port  Adelaide  between  7  and  10  p.m.
on  the  29th,  which  would  be  in  England  from  9.40  to
12.40  a.m.  on  the  '  29th.  The  vision  therefore  preceded
the  death  by  less  than  12  hours.

The  brother  had  in  fact  been  mainly  lying  dressed  in
his  berth  towards  the  last,  not  being  strong  enough  to
be  much  on  deck.

F.  W.  H.  Myers.
Miss  G.  writes  to  Mr.  Myers  on  December  23rd,  1891  :

Deae  Sm, — Enclosed  with  this  you  will  find  the  written
statement  of  Mr.  M.,  which  j^ou  desired  me  to  send  you.
I  fear  you  will  not  find  it  very  satisfactory — as,  of  course,
to  be  really  valuable  to  yon,  I  ought  to  have  mentioned
my  dream  before  the  news  of  my  brother's  death  reached
England.  As  it  is,  it  was  quite  by  accident  that  Mr.  M.
found  out  about  it.  We  were  on  the  station,  and  he
was  seeing  me  off  on  my  way  home,  and  was  expressing
sympathy  with  me  and  saying  how  sorry  he  was,  etc.,
when  I  remarked  "  it  was  stupid  of  me  to  feel  it  so
much,  as  I'd  known  for  a  long  time  how  it  would  be."
Then  he  pressed  me  to  tell  him  how  I  knew,  and  I  told
him  the  facts  with  which  you  are  already  acquainted,  and
he  told  Mrs.  M.  Before  giving  my  account  to  Miss  Sturge,
I  got  both  Mr.  and  Mrs.  M.  to  read  it  through,  not
liking  to  trust  entirely  to  my  own  memory,  and  they
both  thought  it  correct.

Mr.  M.  corroborates  as  follows  :

December  2\st,  1891.

With  reference  to  the  particulars  which  have  been
given  by  Miss  G.  respecting  the  dream  she  had  on  the
night  of  her  brother's  departure  from  this  life,  I  perfectly
recollect  her  telling  me  when  the  news  arrived  that  she


216


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgtvich.


[pari


had  known  for  a  long  time  that  he  had  gone.  She  then
described  minutely  to  me  the  surroundings  of  the  room,
etc.,  on  the  ship  where  he  died,  and  named  other  par-
ticulars which  the  witten  accounts  I  subsequently  read
from  the  wife  of  the  captain  of  the  vessel  markedly
confirmed.

I  should  perhaps  say  Miss  G.  is,  and  always  has  been,
very  averse  to  conversing  on  the  subject,  and  I  have
always  abstained  from  pressing  her  to  do  so,  and  from
troubling  her  by  anything  hke  cross  questions  on  the
subject.  Miss  G.  was  deeply  attached  to  her  brother,
and  had  seen  him  off  on  his  leaving  England.

The  next  case  (L.  973,  Journal,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  249)  was
received  through  the  American  Branch.  In  the  first
instance  a  second-hand  account  of  the  case  was  sent
to  Dr.  Hodgson  by  Miss  Lilian  Whiting,  in  May,  1891.
The  percipient  prefers  that  her  name  should  not  be
printed.

(L.  973.)
Miss  Whiting  writes  :

Hotel  Brunswick,  May  21th,  1891.

Deah  Dr. Hodgson,— Miss tells  me  the  following,

and  gives  her  permission  to  my  relating  it  to  you.  I
enclose  her  card.  >  ' ■  ■

In  February  last,  her  mother,  living  in  N.  H.,  died
suddenly  one  night  between  nine  and  ten,  of  heart-disease.
Her  last  words  to  a  daughter-iti-law  present  were  :  "  Don't
cry,  don't  feel  badly,  you  have  done  everything  you
could  for  me."

That  same  night.  Miss was  here  at  the  Brunswick,

the  guest  of  the ,  and  they  were  out  at  some  enter-
tainment in  the  evening. They  returned,  and  Miss

retired  about  eleven  and  immediately  had  a  vivid  dream
that  her  mother  came  to  her,  embraced  her  fervently,
and  said:  "Don't  cry,  don't  feel  badly,  you  have  done
everything  you  could  for  me."  The  impression  was  so
vivid— she  felt  the  touch— heard  the  tones— that  she  slept
Uttle,  and  the  next  momiiig  told  Mrs. that  she  nmst


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  217


go  and  visit  her  mother — that  she  was  sure  she  was  ill
and  wanted  her,  and  almost  while  they  were  talking  of  it,
the  telegram  annoimcing  her  mother's  death  came.  When

Miss reached the place, she told her  sister-in-law

the  words  of  the  dream  before  the  sister-in-law  had  told
her  what  their  mother  actually  said,  and  the  lady  who
was  present  with  the  dying  woman  was  startled  at  the
coincidence  of  the  actual  last  words  of  the  dream.

Miss wiU  reply  to  any  question  if  you  wish.

Lilian  Whiting.

Some  time  later.  Dr.  Hodgson  obtained  an  account  of  the
incident  from  the  percipient  herself,  who  writes  as  follows  :

March  30th,  1892.

Deak  Sik, — Your  letter  dated  March  25th,  has  just
reached  me,  and  I  hasten  to  say  that  this  is  the  first
communication  that  I  have  received  from  you.  Miss
Whiting's  account  of  my  dream  must  in  some  way  have
been  lost  in  the  mail.  I  have  no  doubt  but  that  it  was
quite  accurate.  However,  to  avoid  giving  you  more
trouble,  I  will  just  write  it  out  briefly.  I  was  visiting
friends  fifty  miles  away  from  my  mother's  home.  I  had
not  seen  her  for  some  weeks,  and  I  did  not  know  that
she  had  been  having  attacks  of  a  heart  trouble,  which
caused  her  death.  She  had  always  been  strong  and  well,
with  the  exception  of  rheumatism,  and  the  thought  of  her
dying  had  never  entered  my  mind.  I  retired  at  eleven
o'clock,  and  feU  asleep  immediately,  and  as  soon  as  I
slept,  my  mother  came  to  me  in  a  dream  ;  she  was
dressed  in  black  and  looked  very  young.  She  put  her
arms  around  me  and  said  :  "  Do  not  cry,  you  have  done
everything  that  you  could  for  me."  This  she  repeated
several  times  ;  then  I  awoke,  disturbed  and  troubled,  with
tears  on  my  face.

In  the  morning  I  told  my  friends  that  I  was  troubled
about  my  mother  because  of  a  vivid  dream.  In  two
hours  the  telegram  came,  saying  that  she  was  dead.  I
went  immediately,  and  before  I  was  told  anything  about
the  manner  of  her  death,  I  told  my  dream. My  sister-


220


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


On  the  night  of  Saturday,  July  9,  I  went  to  bed  about
12.30,  and  suffered  from  what  I  took  to  be  a  nightmare.
I  was  awakened  by  my  wife's  voice  calling  to  me  from
her  own  bed  upon  the  other  side  of  the  room.  As  I
awoke,  the  nightmare  itself,  which  had  been  long  and
vivid,  faded  from  my  brain.  AU  I  could  remember  of  it
was  a  sense  of  awful  oppression  and  of  desperate  and
terrified  struggling  for  life  such  as  the  act  of  drowning
would  probably  involve.  But  between  the  time  that  I
heard  my  wife's  voice  and  the  time  that  my  consciousness
answered  to  it,  or  so  it  seemed  to  me,  I  had  another
dream.  I  dreamed  that  a  black  retriever  dog,  a  most
amiable  and  inteUigent  beast  named  Bob,  which  was  the
property  of  my  eldest  daughter,  was  lying  on  its  side  among
brushwood,  or  rough  growth  of  some  sort,  by  water.
My  own  personahty  in  some  mysterious  way  seemed  to  me
to  be  arising  from  the  body  of  the  dog,  which  I  knew
quite  surely  to  be  Bob  and  no  other,  so  much  so  that  my
head  was  against  its  head,  which  was  lifted  up  at  an
imnatural  angle.  In  my  vision  the  dog  was  trying  to
speak  to  me  in  words,  and,  failing,  transmitted  to  my
mind  in  an  undefined  fashion  the  knowledge  that  it  was
dying.  Then  everything  vanished,  and  I  woke  to  hear
my  wife  asking  me  why  on  earth  I  was  making  those
horrible  and  weird  noises.  I  replied  that  I  had  had  a
nightmare  about  a  fearful  struggle,  and  that  I  had  dreamed
that  old  Bob  was  in  a  dreadful  way,  and  was  trying  to
talk  to  me  and  to  teU  me  about  it.  Finally,  seeing  that
it  was  still  quite  dark,  I  asked  what  the  time  was.  She
said  she  did  not  know,  and  shortly  afterwards  I  went  to
sleep  again  and  was  disturbed  no  more.

On  the  Sunday  morning  Mrs.  Rider  Haggard  told  the
tale  at  breakfast,  and  I  repeated  my  story  in  a  few
words.  This  I  need  not  do  here,  as  the  annexed  state-
ments  set out  what  occurred  quite  clearly.

Thinldng  that  the  whole  thing  was  nothing  more  than  a
disagreeable  dream,  I  made  no  enquiries  about  the  dog
and  never  learned  even  that  it  was  missing  until  that
Sunday  night,  when  my  Uttle  girl,  who  was  in  the  habit
of feeding it, told me so. At breakfast time, I  may


Lxxxvi.]  Sp07itaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  221

add,  nobody  knew  that  it  was  gone,  as  it  had  been  seen
late  on  the  previous  evening.  Then  I  remembered  my
dream,  and  the  following  day  enquiries  were  set  on  foot.

To  be  brief,  on  the  morning  of  Thursday,  the  14th,
my  servant,  Charles  Bedingfield,  and  I  discovered  the  body
of  the  dog  floating  in  the  Waveney  against  a  weir  about
a  mile  and  a  quarter  away.  The  two  certificates  of  the
veterinary  surgeon,  Mr.  MuUane,  are  enclosed  herewith.
They  sufficiently  describe  its  condition.

On  Friday,  the  15th,  I  was  going  into  Bungay  to  offer
a  reward  for  the  discovery  of  the  persons  who  were
supposed  to  have  destroyed  the  dog  in  the  fashion  sug-
gested in  Mr.  Mullane's  first  certificate,  when  at  the  level
crossing  on  the  Bungay  road  I  was  hailed  by  two  plate-
layers, who  are  named  respectively  George  Arterton  and
Harry  Alger.  These  men  informed  me  that  the  dog  had
been  killed  by  a  train,  and  took  me  on  a  trolly  down  to
a  certain  open-work  bridge  which  crosses  the  water  between
Ditchingham  and  Bungay,  where  they  showed  me  evidence
of  its  death. This  is  the  sum  of  their  evidence  :

It  appears  that  about  7  o'clock  upon  the  Monday
morning,  very  shortly  after  the  first  train  had  passed,  in
the  course  of  his  duties  Harry  Alger  was  on  the  bridge,
where  he  found  a  dog's  coUar  torn  off  and  broken  by  the
engine  (smce  produced  and  positively  identified  as  that
worn  by  Bob),  coagulated  blood,  and  bits  of  flesh,  of
I  which  remnants  he  cleaned  the  rails.  On  search  also  I
personaUy  found  portions  of  black  hair  from  the  coat  of  a
dog.  On  the  Monday  afternoon  and  subsequently  his
mate  saw  the  body  of  the  dog  floating  in  the  water
beneath  the  bridge,  whence  it  drifted  down  to  the  weir,
it  having  risen  with  the  natural  expansion  of  gases,  such
as,  in  this  hot  weather,  might  be  expected  to  occur  within
about  40  hours  of  death.  It  would  seem  that  the  animal
must  have  been  killed  by  an  excursion  train  that  left
Ditchingham  at  10.25  on  Saturday  night,  returning  empty
from  Harleston  a  Uttle  after  11.  This  was  the  last  train
which  ran  that  night.  No  trains  run  on  Sunday,  and
it  is  practically  certain  that  it  cannot  have  been  killed
on  the  Monday  morning,  for  then  the  blood  would  have


22  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.  [paeI

been  still  fluid.  Also  men  who  were  working  arounc
when  the  6.30  train  passed  must  have  seen  the  dog  or
the  line  (they  were  questioned  by  Alger  at  the  time  anc
had  seen  nothing),  and  the  engine-driver  in  broad  daylighl
would  also  have  witnessed  and  made  a  report  of  tht
accident,  of  which  in  a  dark  night  he  would  probablj
Imow  nothmg.  Further,  if  it  was  living,  the  dog  would
almost  certainly  have  come  home  during  Simday,  and  its
body  would  not  have  risen  so  quickly  from  the  bottom
of  the  river,  or  presented  the  appearance  it  did  on  Thurs-
day mommg.  From  traces  left  upon  the  piers  of  the
bridge  it  appears  that  the  animal  was  knocked  or  carried
along  some  yards  by  the  tram  and  fell  mto  the  brmk  oi
the  water  where  reeds  grow.  Here,  if  it  were  still  hving, —
and,  although  the  veterinary  thinks  that  death  was
practically  mstantaneous,  its  life  may  perhaps  have  hngered
for  a  few  minutes, — it  must  have  suffocated  and  sunk,
undergomg,  I  imagme,  much  the  same  sensations  as  I
did  in  my  dream,  and  in  very  similar  surroundings  to
those  that  I  saw  therein — namely,  amongst  a  scrubby
growth  at  the  edge  of  water.

Both  in  a  judicial  and  a  private  capacity  I  have  been^
accustomed  all  my  life  to  the  investigation  of  evidence,
and,  if  we  may  put  aside  our  familiar  friend  "  the  long
arm  of  coincidence,"  which  m  this  case  would  surely  be
strained  to  dislocation,  I  confess  that  that  available  upon
this  matter  forces  me  to  the  following  conclusions  :

The  dog  Bob,  between  whom  and  myself  there  existed
a  mutual  attachment,  either  at  the  moment  of  his  death,
if  his  existence  can  conceivably  have  been  prolonged  till
after  1  in  the  morning,  or,  as  seems  more  probable,  about
three  hours  after  that  event,  did  succeed  in  calling  my
attention  to  its  actual  or  recent  plight  by  placing  what-
ever portion  of  my  being  is  capable  of  receiving  such
impulses  when  enchained  by  sleep,  into  its  own  terrible
position.  That  subsequently,  as  that  chain  of  sleep  was
being  broken  by  the  voice  of  my  wife  calling  me  back
to  a  normal  condition  of  our  human  existence,  with  some
last  despairing  efl'ort,  while  that  uidefinable  part  of  me  was
being  slowly  withdrawn  from  it (it  will be  remembered


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  223


that  in  my  dream  I  seemed  to  rise  from  the  dog),  it  spoke
to  me,  first  trying  to  make  use  of  my  own  tongue,  and,  failing
therein,  by  some  subtle  means  of  communication  whereof  I
have  no  knowledge  telling  me  that  it  was  dying,  for  I  saw
no  blood  or  woiuids  which  would  suggest  this  to  my  mind.

I  recognise,  further,  that,  if  its  dissolution  took  place
at  the  moment  when  I  dreamt,  this  communication  must
have  been  a  form  of  that  telepathy  which  is  now  very
generally  aclmowledged  to  occur  between  human  beiiigs
from  time  to  time  and  under  special  circumstances,  but
which  I  have  never  heard  of  as  occurring  between  a
human  being  and  one  of  the  lower  animals.  If,  on  the
other  hand,  that  dissolution  happened,  as  I  beheve,  over

:  three  hours  previously — what  am  I  to  say?  Then  it
would  seem  that  it  must  have  been  some  non-bodily  but
surviving  part  of  the  life  or  of  the  spirit  of  the  dog  which,
so  soon  as  my  deep  sleep  gave  it  an  opportunity,  repro-
duced those  things  m  my  mind,  as  they  had  aheady
'  occurred,  I  presume,  to  advise  me  of  the  mamier  of  its
end  or  to  bid  me  farewell.

..  '  There  is  a  third  possibihty  which  I  will  quote,  although
the  evidence  seems  to  me  to  be  overwhelmingly  against
it,  and,  for  the  reasons  aheady  given,  it  is  mherently
most  improbable — namely,  that  the  dog  was  really  killed

,  / ' about  half -past  6  on  the  Monday  morning,  in  which  case
my  dream  was  nothing  but  a  shadow  of  its  forthcoming  fate.
Personally, however, I do not for a moment  beheve
i.  :  this  to  have  been  the  case,  especially  as  the  vetermary's
certificate  states  that  the  animal's  body  must  have  been
"over  three  days"  in  the  water  at  the  time  of  its  discovery.^

1  Sir  Rider  Haggard  omits  here  (but  sec  the  end  of  his  letter  of  2.3rd
July  below)  a  fourth  possibihty,  namely,  that  a  telepathic  impression
may  have  reached  his  mind  at  the  actual  time  of  the  dog's  death,  but
remained  latent,  only  emerging  into  consciousness  when  a  favourable
moment  arrived.  The  possibility  of  such  deferment  in  the  emergence
of  an  impression  is  difficult  to  prove  except  in  some  experimental  cases,
but  it  is  generally  assumed  and  is  one  reason  for  allowing  a  margin  of
twelve  hours  after  the  apparent  moment  of  death  in  coimting  the
apparition  of  a  dying  person  as  a  phantasm  of  the  living.  References  to
the  subject  will  be  fovuid  in  several  places  in  Cxurney's  book  (see  ui  the
index  imder  "  Defennent  or  latency  in  telepathic  impressions").  It  is  also
discussed  in  Myers'  Human  Personality,  ch.  vii.,  §  107,  Vol.  II.,  pp.  12-13,  etc.


224


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


On  the  remarkable  issues  opened  up  by  this  occurrence
I  cannot  venture  to  speak  further  than  to  say  that, —
although  it  is  dangerous  to  generahse  from  a  particular
instance,  however  striking  and  well  supported  by  evidence,
which  is  so  rarely  obtamable  in  such  obscure  cases, — it
does  seem  to  suggest  that  there  is  a  more  mtimate  ghostly
connection  between  aU  members  of  the  animal  world,  in-
cluding man,  than  has  hitherto  been  beheved,  at  any  rate
by  Western  peoples  ;  that  they  may  be,  in  short,  aU  of
them  diiferent  manifestations  of  some  central,  informing
life,  though  inhabiting  the  universe  in  such  various  shapes.
The  matter,  however,  is  one  for  the  consideration  of
learned  people  who  have  made  a  study  of  these  mysterious
questions.  I  will  only  add  that  I  ask  you  to  pubhsh
the  annexed  documents  with  this  letter,  as  they  constitute
the  written  testimony  at  present  available  to  the  accuracy
of  what  I  state.  Further,  I  may  say  that  I  shall  welcome
any  uivestigation  by  competent  persons.

H.  Rider  Haggard.

The  veterinary  surgeon  who  examined  the  body  of  the  dog
wrote  to  Mr.  Rider  Haggard  as  follows  :  : ;

Bungay,  July  Mth,  1904.

Dear  Sir, — In  pursuance  of  your  instructions  I  have
inspected  the  dog  found  in  the  water  at  the  Falcon
Bridge,  Bungay.

It  was  in  a  very  decomposed  and  tympanitic  condition.

In  answer  to  your  inquiries,

(1)  I  beheve  it  is  your  dog  Bob,  which  I  have  frequently
attended  and  which  was  at  my  house  for  one  week  under
treatment.  .  >

(2)  Cause  of  death.

Fracture  of  skull  in  three  places,  the  skull  being  smashed
almost  to  a  pulp  by  some  heavy,  blunt  instrument.  The
womids  are  not  caused  by  gim  shot.

(3)  The  body  must  have  been  in  the  water  over  three
days,  and  very  probably  the  dog  was  killed  on  the  night
of  July  9th  (Saturday),  after  which  it  was  missing.

Both  forelegs  were  fractured  just  below  the  knees.  I


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  225

should  say  this  was  done  by  a  large  trap,  probably  an
otter  trap,  as  the  injuries  are  too  severe  and  high  up  the
legs  to  be  caused  by  a  rabbit  trap.  It  seems  probable
that  the  dog  went  to  the  water  to  drink  and  stood  upon
the  table  of  the  trap,  his  body  being  afterwards  thrown
into  the  river.  P.  J.  Mullane,  M.R.C.V.S.

Mr.  Mullane  wrote  later  :

BrnsTGAY,  July  15th,  1904.

To  H.  Rider  Haggard,  Esq., — Having  heard  the  story
of  the  destruction  of  the  dog  "  Bob  "  by  a  train  on
Saturday  night,  I  am  of  opinion  that  his  injuries  are
compatible  with  that  method  of  death.  The  guard  of
the  engine  might  have  shattered  his  head  and  the  wheels
of  the  engine  severed  the  bones  of  the  fore  legs.

P.  J.  Mtillane,  M.R.C.V.S.

Mrs.  Haggard  wrote  :

DiTCHINGHAM  HOTJSE,  BtTNGAY,  J 2dy  I5th,  1904.
On  the  night  [of]  July  9th  I  was  awakened  by  most
distressing  somids  proceeding  from  my  husband,  resembhng
the  moans  of  an  animal,  no  distinct  words.  After  listening
for  a  few  moments,  I  woke  him  up,  whereupon  he  said
that  he  had  had  a  nightmare,  m  which  he  was  engaged
in  some  struggle  comiected  with  our  retriever  dog  "  Bob,"
and  that  "  Bob  "  was  trying  to  tallt  to  him  and  explain
that  he  wanted  help.  It  was  quite  dark  at  the  time,  so
I  conclude  it  must  have  been  about  2  a.m.

M.  L.  Haggard.

Miss  Haggard  wrote  :

July  Uth,  1904.

On  Sunday  morning,  July  10th,  my  father  mentioned
at  the  breakfast  table  that  he  had  had  a  horrid  night-
mare about  my  black  retriever  dog  "  Bob."

He  said  that  he  dreamt  the  dog  was  dying  in  a  wood
and  trying  to  make  some  communication  to  him.  My
mother  corroborated  this  statement,  saying  he  had  made
such  a  noise  that  he  had  even  awakened  her,  and  she
aroused  him  as  he  seemed  so  disturbed.


226


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgtoich.


Of  course  we  all  laughed  at
not  know  then  that  anything
for  I  had  seen  him  myself  at
evening.


it  at  the  time,  for  we  did
had  happened  to  the  dog,
8  o'clock  on  the  preceding
Angela  Rider  Haggard.


Miss  L.  R.  Haggard  wrote  :

July  Uth,  1904.

On  the  evening  of  Smiday,  July  10th,  I,  who  am  in
the  habit  of  feeding  the  dogs,  told  Daddy  that  "  Bob  "
had  not  come  to  his  breakfast  or  his  supper  that  day,
so  I  thought  he  must  be  lost.

Daddy  had  said  at  breakfast  on  Simday  that  he  had
dreamt  that  "  Bob  "  was  dymg  in  a  wood,  and  that  he,
Daddy,  was  trying  to  extract  something  from  "  Bob,"
and  that  "  Bob  "  was  trying  to  speak.

LiLiAS  R.  Haggard.

A  lady  relative  who  hves  at  Ditchingham  House  wrote  :

J'idy  Uth,  1904.

On  Sunday  morning  at  breakfast  Louie  [Mrs,  Rider
Haggard]  said  "  Rider  "  []V'Ii-  Rider  Haggard]  "  had  a
nightmare  last  night,  and  made  such  noises  that  he  woke
me  up,  and  I  had  to  wake  him."

When  Rider  came  down  we  talked  about  his  nightmare,
and  he  said  with  a  laugh,  "  Yes,  it  was  old  '  Bob,'  he
was  being  killed,  and  he  was  calling  out  to  me  to  save
him."  L.  R.  Hildyakd.

Mr.  Haggard's  secretary  wrote  :

Ditchingham  House,  July  I5th,  1904.
At  breakfast  on  Sunday,  the  10th,  Mrs.  Haggard  laugh-
ingly complamed  of  haviiig  been  disturbed  in  the  night
by  the  noise  Mr.  Haggard  made  in  his  sleep,  so  much  so
that  she  had  been  obliged  to  wake  him  up.  Mr.  Haggard
explained  that  he  had  had  a  nightmare,  in  which  he  had
been  strugghng  violently,  and  also  dreamt  that  he  had
been  trying  to  understand  something  that  the  dog  "Bob,"
who  was  dying,  was  saying  to  him.  Ida  Hector.


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  227


The  above  letters  were  published  in  The  Times  with  IVIr.
Rider  Haggard's  account.  In  reply  to  our  request  to  be
allowed  to  see  the  original  documents,  Mr.  Haggard  kindly  lent
them  to  us  for  comparison  with  the  printed  copies  and  also
sent  us  the  originals  of  three  other  statements  relating  to  the
case,  which  we  print  here.

(1)  From  Mr.  Mullane.

Bungay,  July  15th,  1904.

To  H.  Rider  Hagg.ard,  Esq.

Dear  Sir, — It  is  my  opmion,  from  the  condition  of  the
dog's  head,  that  he  was  lulled  instantaneously  by  a  very
violent  blow  over the skull.  P.  J.  Mullane.

.  (2)  From  H.  Alger.

I  was  at  my  business  on  the  line  between  Bungay  and
\ Ditchingham at 7 o'clock on the morning of  Monday,
J the nth July, when only one train had passed  about
I 6.30,  and  found  the  broken  collar  of  a  dog  lying  there,
which  I  produce,  and  had  to  scrape  off  the  dried  blood
and  some  bits  of  flesh  from  the  line. I  asked  several
people  who  were  working  about  and  were  there  when  the
6.30  train  passed,  including  Mr.  Rimnicles  and  Mr.  Riches,
if  they  had  seen  a  dog  on  the  bridge,  as  one  had  been
killed  there. They  said  that  they  had  not.

If  the  engine-driver  had  seen  a  dog  run  over,  he  would
have  reported  it.  Under  all  the  circumstances,  I  think
;  that  the  dog  must  have  been  Idlled  by  the  late  excursion
train  on  Saturday  night  which  left  Ditchingham  for
;  Harleston  at  10.25.  From  the  way  in  which  the  flesh
was  carried,  it  was  evidently  killed  by  a  train  going
towards  Bungay.^

The  marks  of  blood  upon  the  piles  showed  where  the
dog  had  fallen  from  the  bridge  into  the  reeds.  These
reeds  grow  in  deepish  water.
■  ■  I  did  not  myself  see  the  dog  in  the  water;  my  mate,
Arterton,  saw  the  body  of  the  dog  after  it  had  risen  to
the  surface.

1  The  train  that  passes  Ditchingham  abovit  6.30  on  Monday  morning
is  also  one  that  goes  towards  Bimgay. — Editoe.


228


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


It  was  I  who  cut  the  collar  as  you  see  it  now.  I
did  so  that  it  might  be  sewn  together  and  used  again
for  some  other  dog.  [Signed] Harry  Algee.

(3)  From  C.  Bedingfield.

DiTCHiNGHAM,  July  I4:th,  1904.
My  master  and  I  fotmd  the  dog  in  the  Waveney  near
the  Falcon  Bridge  on  the  morning  of  July  14th. It  is
the  retriever  dog,  Bob,  which  I  have  known  ever  since
it  has  been  at  Ditchingham  House.

[Signed]  C.  Bedingfield

(Groom  at  Ditchingham  House).

In  reply  to  further  questions  as  to  the  possibility  of  the  dog
having  been  killed  on  the  Monday  morning  instead  of  Saturday
night,  Mr.  Haggard  wrote  to  us  :

Ditchingham  House,  Norfolk,
July  23rd,  1904.

I  beUeve  that  I  am  right  in  saying  that  if  the  dog
had  been  killed  on  the  Monday  morning,  it  certainly
would  not  have  floated  by  the  Monday  midday  or  after-
noon when  it  was  seen  by  Arterton.

No,  I  think  the  water  is  too  deep  for  the  body  to  have
been  seen  lying  at  the  bottom  and  been  mistaken  for  a
floating  dog.  Further,  Harry  Alger,  when  he  foimd  the
traces  of  the  accident,  looked  m  the  water  on  the  Monday
morning  and  could  find  no  dog.  It  must  therefore  have
risen  to  the  surface  between  the  Monday  morning  and
Monday  afternoon,  as  I  beheve  it  would  naturally  do,
had  it  met  its  end  on  the  Saturday  night.  Li  short,  I
am  absolutely  convinced  that  when  I  had  my  dream  the
dog  had  been  dead  for  at  least  three  hours.  Further,
this  appears  to  be  evident  :  the  injuries  to  the  dog's  head
were  such  that  death  must  have  been  instantaneous  ;
and  even  though  life  lingered  in  the  tissues,  as  a  doctor
to  whom  I  was  talking  this  morning  told  me  it  might
do  for  a  httle  while,  from  the  moment  that  engine  struck
the  dog's  head,  it  must  have  been  utterly  incapable  of
thought  or  voUtion  as  we  understand  it — that  is,  its  brain


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  229


was  destroyed  ;  it  was  physically  dead.  It  seems  to
result  therefore  that  in  order  to  produce  the  long  subse-
quent impressions  upon  myself,  it  must  have  been  spiritually
alive.  In  short,  even  supposmg  that  I  received  those
impressions  at  the  moment  of  the  death  of  the  dog  and
stored  them  up  for  future  use,  or  that  those  impressions
were  flying  about  in  the  air  hke  a  wheeling  hawk  waitmg
for  an  opportunity  to  settle  on  my  head,  they  must  still
have  been  emitted  by  the  personality  of  an  animal  that
was  already  dead,  doubly  dead  from  fatal  injury  followed
instantly  by  drowning.

I  seem  therefore  to  come  to  this  conclusion.  Either
the  whole  thing  is  a  mere  coincidence  and  just  means
nothmg  more  than  indigestion  and  a  nightmare,  or  it
was  the  spirit  of  the  dog  on  its  passage  to  its  own  place
or  into  another  form,  that  moved  my  spirit,  thereby
causing  this  revelation,  for  it  seems  to  be  nothing  less.  .  .  .

H.  Rider  Haggakd.

From  an  interview  in  The  Daily  Chronicle  of  July  22nd,
1904,  to  which  ftlr.  Haggard  referred  us,  saying  that  it  was
"  fairly  accurate,"  we  extract  the  following  :

Bob,  although  he  belonged  to  my  daughter,  who  bought
him  three  years  ago,  was  a  great  friend  of  mine,  but  I
cannot  say  that  my  soul  was  boimd  up  in  him.

He  was  a  very  intelhgent  animal,  and  generally  accom-
panied me  in  my  walks  about  the  farm,  and  almost
invariably  came  to  say  good  morning  to  me.  He  was
rather  rheumatic,  as  he  was  getting  into  years — seven
perhaps — but  that  did  not  prevent  him  going  after  rabbits,
generally  in  company  with  Bustle,  my  spaniel.

Another  letter  from  Mr.  Haggard  appeared  in  The  Times  of
August  9th,  1904,  discussing  the  issues  involved,  and  giving
further  details  of  the  probable  mode  and  circumstances  of  the
dog's  death,  as  follows  :

...  I  am  satisfied  that  the  dog  was  destroyed  about
10.27  on  the  night  of  July  9th.  It  had,  I  think,  been
rabbit-hunting  or  following  some  other  canine  attraction,


230


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


and  being  hot  and  tired,  lay  down  upon  a  sleeper  of  the
open  bridge  above  the  cool  water,  and  resting  its  head
upon  its  paws,  placed  them  on  the  rail,  thus  lifting  them
a  few  inches  above  the  gromid.  This  was  its  mvariable
custom  when  a  turf  edgmg  or  anythmg  of  the  sort  was
available.  Thus  it  went  to  sleep.  But  whether  asleep
or  awake,  the  blow  which  it  received  from  the  wheel
guard  of  the  engine  must,  I  presume,  if  it  did  not  cause
instant  death,  at  any  rate  have  utterly  destroyed  its
mind-powers,  miless  dogs  can  think  with  some  portion  of
then-  organism  other  than  the  brain,  of  which  in  this
instance  the  case  was  utterly  smashed.  ...

[As  to  the  suggestion  that  the  telepathic  information
may  have  come  from  a  human  being  who  witnessed  the
death  of  the  dog  :]

My  answer  is  that  no  human  being  would  have  been
wanderuig  about  on  a  dark  night  in  a  place  so  dangerous
as  an  open  timber-Avork  railway  bridge  over  a  river.  I
am  convinced  that  the  only  creature  which  can  have  seen
the  dog's  death  was  another  smaller  dog  which  may  or
may  not  have  been  with  it  at  the  time.  .  .  .

As  to  the  question  whether  he  had  had  any  other  experi-
ences of  the  kuid,  and  in  regard  to  some  of  the  pecuUar
psychological  features  of  this  case,  Mr.  Haggard  writes  to  us
later  :

...  I  never  remember  any  other  telepathic  dream.
From  time  to  time  I  have  had  uneasy  dreads  which  have
proved  baseless,  but  the  only  tangible  mysterious  event
which  I  can  recall  was  a  fore -knowledge  of  future  sorrow,
which  some  months  later  proved  itself  to  be  fearfully
accurate.

.  .  .  Was  the  nightmare  or  first  dream  the  whole  story
of  what  happened  ?  I  am  inclined  to  thmk  so  from  what
I  remember  of  it  and  the  animal  noises  that  I  made
(see  my  wife's  evidence).  To  what  can  be  attributed  the
hallucination  that  I  seemed  to  rise  from  the  body  of
the  dog  ?  This  was  one  of  the  most  curious  parts  of  the
manifestation — hke  the  separation  of  soul  and  body,  as
one might  imagme it. Another curious pomt  was  the


Lxxxvi.]  Sfontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalissd.  231


fashion  in  which,  abandoning  its  attempt  to  talk  (I  thought
because  it  was  too  slow)  as  I  departed  from  it,  the  dog
seemed  to  flash  the  inteUigence  of  its  dying  state  upon
my  mmd.  In  an  instant  I  laiew  all  about  it, — through
the  inteUigence,  not  through  the  senses.

This  case  is  one  of  very  unusual  interest  from  several
points  of  view.  It  is,  therefore,  specially  satisfactory  to  have
it  so  well  authenticated,  and  Mr.  Rider  Haggard  deserves  the
gratitude  of  psychical  researchers  for  havmg  collected  all  the
available  evidence  so  promptly  and  completely,  and  put  it  at
the  disposal  of  the  scientific  world.

For  other  cases  of  possible  animal  agents,  see  above,
L.  1142,  L.  1144,  L.  1158,  pp.  116,  139  and  141.  Also  perhaps
a  case  mentioned  below,  L.  844,  p.  342.  There  is  also  a
case  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XIV.,  p.  285,  of  a  dog  being
seen  running  across  the  room  at  Mentone  about  the  time
of  its  death  in  Norfolk,  but  the  agency  of  those  in  charge
of  the  dog  is  here  possible.

Two  dreams  may  be  briefly  mentioned  in  which  the
dying  agent  was  seen  with  symbolical  adjuncts.  In  one
(L.  1166,  Journal,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  140)  which  came  to  us
through  the  American  Branch,  Mrs.  Pool  dreamt  she
saw  her  brother  carried  into  her  house  in  an  open  coffin,
on  the  night  he  died  suddenly,  at  a  distance.  In  the
other  (L.  1175,  Journal,  Vol.  XIV.,  p.  75)  Mrs.  Comyn,
on  the  night  her  mother  died  unexpectedly,  dreamt  she
saw  her  looking  very  young  and  gay.  She  disappeared  in
the  midst  of  a  crowd  of  singing  voices.

Death  Coincidences — (d)  appearance  of  a  relative  of  the

dying  person.

I  turn  next  to  cases  in  which  the  person  seen  was  not
the  dying  person  but  one  closely  connected  with  and  in
the  company  of  the  dying  person  at  the  time.  .  In  the  first
of  these  (L.  1153,  Journal,  Vol.  XII.,  p.  317)  the  per-
cipient "  Miss  R."  sitting  up  in  bed  saw  the  face  of  the
widow  of  the  person  who  died  about  an  hour  and  a  half


232


Mrs.  Henri)  Sidgivick.


[part


after  his  death.  She  saw  and  recognised  the  face,  and
saw  it  as  it  were  in  dupHcate — either  two  images  of  it
at  the  same  time  or  one  immediately  after  the  other
(cf.  L.  979,  above,  p.  208).  The  widow  is  known  to  have
talked  of  the  percipient  that  night  and  about  the  time
of  the  experience.  The  case  is  recorded  by  a  good
observer  who  has  had  no  other  experience  of  the  kind,
and  it  is  well  evidenced  except  that  unfortunately  Miss  R.
did  not  speak  of  it  or  make  a  written  note  of  it  till
after  the  news  of  the  death  came.  She  had  in  fact  not
thought  of  it  in  the  two  days'  interval.  It  is  this,  and
the  fact  that  ]Miss  R.  prefers  to  remain  anonymous,  that
prevents  my  lengthening  this  paper  by  quoting  the  case
in  full  ;  though  my  knowledge  of  the  accuracy  and  care-
fulness of  the  percipient  makes  me  think  it  rather  an
important  one.

A  dream  case  of  the  same  kind  (L.  1211,  Journal,
Vol.  XVIIL,  p.  35)  reached  us  through  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,
to  whom  it  was  reported  in  the  first  instance.  The
dreamer  is  Mrs.  Walter  Browett,  of  Westfield,  Coventry,
and  the  first  account  of  her  experience  which  we  received
was  as  follows  :

(L.  1211.)

Statement  by  Walter  Browett  of  Westfield,  Coventry,  Solicitor.

January  30,  1917.

This  morning  at  8  a.m.  my  wife  told  me  that  she  had
had  a  vivid  dream  about  an  aunt,  always  referred  to  as
"Auntie  Maude."  She  said  she  met  her  dressed  in
black  with  widow's  weeds,  and  she  told  my  wife  that  her
husband  was  dead.

My  wife  had  not  seen  her  for  some  years,  but  they
exchanged  letters  occasionally,  the  last  letter  being  about
a  week  ago  on  an  entirely  trivial  matter.  My  wife  had
never  seen  Amitie  Maude's  husband  to  whom  she  was  only
married  last  October.

When  we  came  down  to  breakfast  we  found  a  letter  from
Auntie  Maude,  the  contents  of  which  are  of  no  importance.
It was written and posted yesterday at a place  near


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  233


Shrewsbury.  I  naturally  remarked  to  my  wife  that  that
was  the  end  of  her  dream.

At  1.30  p.m.  we  received  a  telegram  as  follows:  "My
husband  passed  away  last  night.  Auntie  Maude."  So
far  as  we  can  remember  we  had  neither  of  us  either  spoken
or  thought  of  Auntie  Maude  or  her  husband  smce  last
^yeek.  Walter  Browett.

In  reply  to  our  request  for  a  first-hand  report  of  her  dream
from  Mrs.  Browett,  we  received  the  followmg  statement  :

Westfield,  Coventry,  February  19,  1917.
At  the  end  of  October,  1916,  my  late  mother's  only
sister,  Mrs.  Short,  to  whom  I  always  refer  as  "  Auntie
Maude,"  was  married  to  a  Mr.  G.  M.  Meire,  Eyton-on-Sevem,
Shrewsbury.  I  have  not  seen  her  for  several  years,  and
I  never  saw  hun.  On  the  night  of  Monday-Tuesday,
January  29th-30th,  1917,  I  dreamt  that  I  saw  Auntie
Maude  in  widow's  weeds,  and  felt  that  her  husband  was
dead.  I  told  my  husband  about  it  directly  I  awoke
and  described  her  dress.  At  brealdast  we  fomid  a  letter
from  her,  from  which  apparently  all  was  well.  About
1.30  we  received  a  telegram  from  her  as  follows  :  "  My
husband  passed  away  last  night. Auntie  Maude."

F.  M.  Browett.

We  also  wrote  to  Mr.  Browett  pointing  out  the  importance
from  an  evidential  standpoint  of  makmg  it  clear  that  Mr.
Meire 's  death  was  sudden  and  that  neither  he  nor  JVIi-s.  Browett
had  any  reason  to  anticipate  it.  Jn  this  connection  Ave  asked
Mr.  Meu-e's  age  and  we  also  asked  whether  the  telegram  an-
nouncing his  death  had  been  preserved.  INIi".  Browett  replied
as  follows  :

Westfield,  Coventry,  February  19,  1917.

In  reply  to  your  letter  of  the  16th  inst.  I  now  enclose
a  statement  written  and  signed  by  my  wife  [see  above].

I  also  enclose  the  letter  therem  referred  to  and  a  letter
from  Mrs.  Meire  dated  the  14th  inst.,  m  which  she  describes
the  manner  of  her  husband's  death  on  the  29th  ult.

You  will  see  that  there  was  nothing  in  the  first  letter


234


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


to  suggest  that  Mr.  Meire's  health  was  affected.  As  a
matter  of  fact,  we  knew  that  he  used  to  rise  at  6.30  to
go  round  his  farm,  and  when  I  saw  him— for  the  first
and  last  time — at  the  wedding  in  London  he  appeared
to  be  a  healthy  man — shm  and  wiry.  I  went  to  his
funeral  and  then  learnt  that  his  age  was  67.  He  had  been
very  active  during  the  afternoon  of  the  29th  and  had  said
how  well  he  felt.  .  .  .

The  telegram  was  not  kept,  but  it  was  only  a  "  con-
firmation "  one,  the  original  message  having  been  teleiDhoned
ujD  here  from  the  Coventry  G.P.O.  I  saw  Mrs.  Meire
after  the  fimeral  and  she  told  me  that  she  did  not  know
that  her  husband  had  any  heart  trouble.

Before  mentioning  my  wife's  dream  to  her,  I  asked  her
whether  her  thoughts  turned  to  any  one  in  particular
when  her  husband  died.  She  said  :  "To  you,  of  course.
I  said  to  myself  I  wish  Walter  were  here  to  help  me."
She  said  that  she  did  not  remember  thinking  of  my  wife
further  than  she  would  of  necessitj'  do  when  thinking  of
me.  My  wife  is  her  god-daughter  and  the  only  one  of
the  family  with  whom  she  is  really  intimate.

WAI.TEK  BrOWETT.

Of  the  two  letters  from  Mrs.  Meire  to  which  Mr.  Browett
refers  above,  the  earher,  dated  January  29,  1917,  and  received
by  Mrs.  Browett  on  January  30  after  she  had  told  Mr.  Browett
of  her  dream,  makes  only  one  reference  to  Mr.  Meire,  and
says  nothmg  of  his  health.  The  second  letter,  dated  February
14,  1917,  which  is  too  personal  to  print  here,  makes  it  evident
that  Mr.  Meire's  death  was  quite  unexpected.  He  died  of
heart-failure  about  11.30  p.m.  on  January  29,  1917,  having
been  to  aU  appearances  in  good,  normal  health  a  few  minutes
before.

The  fact  that  the  telegram  amiouncing  his  death  to  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Browett  has  not  been  preserved  is  of  little  moment.
The  hour  and  day  of  the  death  are  sufficiently  estabhshed  by
Mrs.  Meire's  letter  of  February  14,  1917,  confirmed  by  the
announcement  ui  the  Tim.es  of  Feb.  2,  1917,  as  follows  :

Meire. — -On  the  29th  Jan.,  at  Eyton-on-Sevem,  near
Shrewsbury, George Haughton Meire, aged  67.


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  235

A  dream  (L.  1115,  Journal,  Vol.  IX.,  p.  127)  coinciding
with  a  death,  but  in  which  the  wrong  person  was  dreamt
of,  may  perhaps  be  mentioned  here.  It  was  sent  to  Mr.
Myers  by  Mr.  G.  R.  Sims,  who  ckeamt  that  his  sister
came  to  him  and  told  him  his  father  had  died.  He  told
the  dream  to  his  housekeeper  in  the  morning.  About
twenty  minutes  later  his  sister  did  come  round  to  tell  him
of  the  death  during  the  night  of  a  brother-in-law.  If
we  knew  more  of  the  circumstances,  we  might  be  able  to
explain  the  distortion  of  the  telepathic  communication  if
there  was  one.

Death  Coincidences — (e)  symholic.

Three  symboUc  experiences,  to  which  not  much  im-
portance can  be  attached,  conclude  the  visual  death
coincidences.  In  L.  966  (Journal,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  181)  Miss
Williams  saw  a  lovely  round  light  over  her  head  as  she
passed  through  a  dark  room  "  just  about  the  time  "  of
the  death  of  a  woman  whom  she  knew  to  be  dying,  and
with  whom  she  at  the  time  connected  the  light.  In
L.  1093  {Journal,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  130)  Mrs.  Knight  had
impressions  of  being  raised  up  in  bed,  of  a  shimmering
light,  and  of  raps  on  the  bed-head,  all  of  which,  as  well
as  a  subsequent  dream  of  death  symbols,  she  took  at  the
time  to  indicate  that  some  friend  was  dying.  She  did
not,  however,  think  of  the  death  of  the  friend  who
actually  died  that  night.  In  L.  1094  {Journal,  Vol.  VIII.,
p.  134),  a  dream  case  which  came  through  the  American
Branch,  Mr.  Morse  dreamed  on  the  night  of  his  wife's
unexpected  death  at  a  distance  that  he  was  dressed  in
mourning  and  taking  a  long  journey.  He  mentioned  his
interpretation  of  the  dream  before  he  heard  of  the  death.

Death  Coincidences — (/)  auditory.

Next  must  be  considered  a  few  auditory  death  coin-
cidences. There  has  been  an  auditory  element  combined
with  the  visual  in  two  of  the  waldng  experiences  and
some  of  the  dreams  already  discussed,  but  in  those  that
follow  the  auditory  element  is  either  the  only  element  or


236


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgtvick.


the  only  veridical  one.  There  is  one  waking  experience —
it  was  at  the  moment  of  waking — in  Avhich  words  were
heard  (L.  929,  Jotirnal,  Vol.  V.,  p.  204).  The  percipient
was  a  girl  of  thirteen,  but  the  case  was  not  recorded  till
four  years  and  three  months  after  it  happened.  I  quote
part  only  of  the  record.  The  case  was  looked  into  by
Mr.  Myers,  who  writes  :

(L.  929.)

I  heard  the  following  case  from  Miss  Elsie  Spears,  the
percipient,  and  also,  separately,  from  her  elder  sister.  Miss
Spears,  at  thek  home,  48,  Godwin -street,  Birmingham,  Decem-
ber 18th  and  17th,  1891.  I  took  down  the  statement  of  each,
which  they  revised  and  signed.  I  also  saw  a  card  announcing
that  the  girl  here  called  Clara  "  Died  September  15th,  1887,
aged  13."  The  two  brothers  sent  me  their  written  corrobora-
tions  on December 22nd.  F.  W.  H.  M.

The  Percipient's  Account.

My  greatest  friend  was  a  girl  whom  I  will  call  Clara,
of  the  same  age  as  myself. We  had  always  been  together
and  were  as  intimate  as  girls  can  be. Clara  had  a  httle
sister  of  four  years  old,  whom  I  will  caU  Maggie.  This
httle Maggie  was very  iU, and Clara  and I  were  very
anxious about  her. I went away  from Birmingham  to
Sutton  for  my  health. I  was  to  stay  some  time  longer.
On  Wednesday,  September  14th,  1887,  I  was  very  anxious
to  write  to  Clara, but  I  had  rheumatism  in  my  hands
and  could  not  do  so. I  had  been  thmldng  much  about
Maggie on the night of September 14/15th. In  the
morning  I  suddenly  found  myself  wide  awake,  the  room
being  aheady  hght. A voice was saying, close  to  me,
"  Don't fret, Elsie  ; Maggie is living, but it is  Clara
that's dead." I looked round, but there was no  one
there. Almost at that moment the clock struck  six.
The  voice  was  sad. Next  day  I  felt  certain  that  Clara
was  gone,  and,  although  my  hands  were  better,  I  could
not  bring  myself  to  write  to  her.  ... On  the  Saturday
I  went  out  to  do  an  errand  for  the  lady  with  whom  I


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  237

was  staying.  But  suddenly  I  felt  that  I  could  not  turn
that  way  but  must  go  towards  the  station.  As  I  did
so,  I  met  my  brother,  who  had  been  sent  to  bring  me
home.  .  .  .

The  next  case  (L.  1180,  Journal,  Vol.  XIV.,  p.  327),  a
dream,  is  interesting  from  several  points  of  view.  There
was  undoubtedly  a  dream  of  a  death  somehow  connected
with  Sir  R.  H.  a  few  hours  after  his  brother.  General
H.-S.,  died.  But  if  it  was  telejDathic,  the  communication
was  incompletely  developed  both  in  its  manifestation  (the
name  being  incomplete)  and  in  the  percipient's  appre-
hension of  it.  Again  it  is  difficult  to  see  why  the  com-
munication came  to  Miss  F.  at  all.  May  we  suppose  that
it  was  intended  for  Sir  R.  H.  but  failing  to  reach  his
normal  consciousness  was  as  it  were  reflected  on  to  Miss
F.  who  knew  him  well  ?  Or  was  it  an  instance  of  a
piece  of  information  interesting  to  the  percipient  being
accidentally  picked  up  by  her  during  sleep  from  those
who  knew  it  ?  The  case  seems  comparable  to  P.  269
and  L.  1127  (pp.  147  and  144  above),  where  a  sister  learns
a  brother's  place  in  examination,  etc.,  having  no  connection
with  any  possible  agents  unless  it  was  through  him.

(L.  1180.)

The  case  was  communicated  to  us  by  General  Sir  R.  H.,
who,  while  informing  us  of  the  full  names  of  all  the  persons
concerned,  requested  us  to  print  their  initials  only.  He  gives
a  prehminary  statement  of  the  circumstances,  as  follows  :

Li  order  to  understand  the  dream,  1  should  mention
that  my  elder  brother  some  years  ago  took  on  an  additional
surname,  so  that  from  General  H.  he  changed  to  General
H.-S.  I  am  correctly  referred  to  as  General  H.,  or
Su-  R.

My  brother  decided  to  have  a  shght  operation,  and
the  doctors  and  surgeons  considered  there  was  no  risk.
The  operation  took  place  in  a  Nursing  Home  in  London
on  April  the  25th  [1910],  and  was  considered  a  success.
On  the  26th  he  was  found  to  be  suffering  severely  from


2^8  Mrs.  Henry  Sictgivick.  [pARl"

shock,  but  this  nearly  all  passed  away  on  the  27th.  On
the  28th  he  was  not  so  well,  and  by  night  time  the  case
was  very  serious.  On  the  morning  of  the  29th  the
doctors  decided  that  the  only  hope  lay  in  sleep.  Morphia
was  given  every  4  hours.  Before  the  first  injection,
about  7  a.m.,  he  was  quite  collected  and  calm,  and
agreed  to  sleep.  His  son,  E.,  had  been  with  him  aU
the  time,  and  his  daughter,  B.,  arrived  in  the  early
morning,  and  she  exchanged  a  few  words  with  her  father.
For  the  rest  of  the  day  he  was  drowsy  mider  morphia.
About  6.30  p.m.  he  began  to  collapse,  and  breathed  his
last  at  7  p.m.,  in  the  presence  of  his  son  and  daughter
and  the  doctors.

Before  the  operation  he  was  in  excellent  health,  and
very  strong  for  his  age,  66.

Miss  F.  [the  dreamer]  met  my  brother  once,  a  year  or
two  ago.  She  had  met  his  daughter  some  years  ago,
and  she  met  his  son  on  the  13th  April  last  for  the  first
and  only  time,  and  she  Imew  shghtly  one  of  my  sons,
who  received  a  telegram  from  his  cousin  at  about  8  p.m.
on  the  29th,  announcing  the  death.  I  have  ascertained
that  not  one  of  these  three  persons  had  given  a  thought
to  Miss  F.,  and  it  Avould  have  been  strange  if  they  had.

At  my  request  the  lady  referred  to  by  Miss  F.  has
signed  as  correct  the  statement  made  to  her  on  April
30th.

Miss  F.  is  devoted  to  my  wife  and  myself  ;  she  saw  us  and
our  daughter  off  from  Victoria  Station  for  the  Continent
on  April  16th  ;  and  just  in  fun  I  gave  her  our  accident
insurance  tickets  for  the  journey,  requesting  her  to  hand
them  over  to  my  son  in  case  of  a  tragedy.  Before  she
had  heard  of  my  brother's  death,  she  Avrote  to  my  wife
and  said  she  was  anxious  to  hear  nev^s  of  us,  as  we  had
promised  to  send  a  postcard  on  arrival,  and  she  made
some  joking  reference  to  the  insurance  tickets,  but  no
mention  of  the  dream  she  had  had.  We  do  not  remember
having  promised  to  send  the  postcard.  Miss  F.  is  middle-
aged,  absolutely  reliable,  clever,  very  exact  and  methodical.

It  will  be  observed  that  Miss  F.  dreamed  of  my  brother's
death  a  few  hours  afterwards,  on  the  night  of  April  29-30,


LXxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  239

but she did not know of his death till the  night  of
May  7th.

At  about  6  p.m.  on  April  30th  I  received  at  Aix-les-
Bains  a  telegram  from  my  son  to  say  my  brother  had
died  on  the  29th.  R-  C.  H.

Miss  F.'s  accoimt,  dated  May  8th,  1910,  is  as  follows,  the
second  signature  being  that  of  the  lady  to  whom  she  told  her
dream  on  the  morning  after  its  occurrence  :

An  Account  of  my  Dream  of  the  night  of  April  2dth-S0th.
In  my  dream I  somehow  became aware of  the  fact,
"General H. is dead." There was a shght  hesitation
after  H.,  as  if  an  instrument  at  work  had  gone  wrong,
and  made  a  hissmg  sound. There  did  not  seem  any  one
about  to  explam,  but  I  queried  m  my  own  mmd,  "If
they mean Sir  E., Avhy is  his title omitted  ?  "  Agaui
the  fact  was  repeated,  and  again  with  the  shght  hesitation,
and  the  sound  of  an  "  s,"  as  m  hissing,  and  that  and  the
omission made me  feel (m my dream) that there  was
something inaccurate about it, though I felt  convinced
it  had  to  do  with  Sir  R.'s  family,  and  that  it  was  because
I  knew  him  the  information  was  given  to  me. The  next
mommg (Saturday,  April  30th) about  11 a.m. I  met  a
friend,  to  whom  I  told  my  dream,  and  I  said, "I  do
wish  I  could  hear  from  Aix,  as  I  kiaow  my  dream  has
something to do with Sir R.  ; he is mixed up ui  it
somehow, I am quite sure." So as I  was anxious,  I
despatched  a  letter  to  Lady  H. But  neither  asleep  nor
awake  did  I  once  think  of  the  H.-S.'s.  E  H  F

A.  H.  C.

On  receivmg  this  account  Sir  R.  H.  sent  a  number  of
questions  to  Miss  F.,  the  answers  to  which  she  embodied  in  a
second  version,  written  on  May  19th,  1910.  The  first  part
of  this  is  an  ahnost  verbatim  repetition  of  what  she  had  written
before  ;  she  then  adds  :

About  11  a.m.,  Saturday,  April  30th,  I  met  a  friend  in
' the Edgware Road, to whom I told my dream,  and


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.  [pakt

stated  my  anxiety  in  consequence  of  it,  adding  "I  wish
Lady  H.  had  sent  me  a  hne,  as  she  kindly  promised  to
do  when  we  parted  a  fortnight  previously."  My  friend,
Miss  C,  remarked,  "But  Sir  R.  did  not  go  abroad  iU.''
"No,"  I  rephed,  "but  a  good  deal  can  happen  in  a
fortnight;  all  three  of  them  could  be  dead  and  buried
m  that  time;  however,  do  not  go  away  with  the  idea
that  it  is  Sir  R.,  for  I  am  sure  it  is  not,  as  there  was  no
title,  though  at  the  same  time  I  laiow  he  is  mixed  up
in  it,  so  I  wish  they  would  wite."

Being  stiU  anxious,  I  wrote  to  Lady  H.,  either  that
night  or  Smiday  afternoon,  May  1st,  but  did  not  mention
my  dream,  though  I  stated  I  was  anxious  for  news  I
began  my  letter  with  a  small  joke,  though  feeling  in
anythmg  but  a  jokmg  mood.

Lady  H.'s  letter  of  May  5th  reached  me  on  the  night
of  May  7th.  ^  From  it  I  learnt,  for  the  hrst  time,  of
General  H.-S.'s  death  havhag  occurred  on  April  29th,
and  the  thought  flashed  through  my  mind,  that  accounts
for  all  those  "  S  s  "  m  my  dream.

Strange  to  say,  I  never  once  thought  of  the  H.-S.'s
until  I  received  Lady  H.'s  letter,  and  yet  1  had  met
General  H.-S.,  his  son,  and  daughter.

E.  H.  F.
A.  H.  C.

In reply to a further question. Miss F. writes on  June
30th,  1910  :

I write to say positively that I had not heard  of
General  H.-S.'s  illness  or  operation  previous  to  my  dream.

To  the  above  case  the  following  dream  (M.Cl  88
Journal,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  293)  has  a  certain  analogy,  though
the  veridical  point  relates  to  an  event  of  public  not
private  interest.  A  few  instances  of  a  similar  kind  were
published  m  the  supplement  to  Phantasms  of  the  Living
Vol.  II.,  pp.  365-370.  There  are  also  two  cases  in  the
Journal,  Vol.  V.,  which  are  described  in  Podmore's  book.
Compare  also  M.  Aut.  104,  p.  73  above.


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.


(M.  CI.  88.)

The  case  was  contained  in  a  letter  from  Mrs.  T.  A.  WiUiams
to  her  nephew,  Mr.  G.  Lowes  Dicldiison,  of  King's  CoUege,
Cambridge,  through  whom  we  received  it.

RossLYN  Cottage,  Pilgedvi's  Lane,  Hampstead,
July  25th,  1894.
On  Monday  morning  [June  25,  1894],  at  about  8  o'clock,
Arthur  got  up  and  went  to  call  Philip,  whom  he  woke
out  of  a  somid  sleep.  Philip's  door  is  nearly  opposite
ours,  and  I  heard  them  laughing,  and  called  out  to  lm©w
what  the  joke  was.  Arthur  came  back  and  told  me  PhiUp
had  had  an  absurd  dream  that  the  President  Camot  had
been  assassinated.  I  said  I  saw  nothing  "fimny"  in  that,
and  he  answered,  "Oh!  the  joke  was  that  he  dreamed
that  M R (a  young  Frenchman  who  lives  in  Hamp-
stead) had  announced  the  news,  addiiig  that  he  expected
to  be  elected  President,"  at  which  we  all  three  laughed
again.

Arthur  dressed  and  in  about  hah-an-hour  went  do^\^l-
stairs,  rushing  up  again  almost  immediately,  shouting  to
Phil  (whose  door  was  then  locked)  "He  is  assassinated,"
and  pointing  out  the  announcement  in  large  print  in  the
Daily  News.

A  strange  part  of  it  is  that  Philip  takes  httle  or  no
mterest  m  pohtics  of  any  kmd,  and  declares  that,  to
the  best  of  his  recollection,  Camot's  name  has  not  been
mentioned  in  his  hearing.  Carnot  was  stabbed  at  9.30
on  Sunday  night,  and  died  about  4  hours  afterwards.

E.  B.  Williams.

Thornton  A.  Williajvis.

Philip  H.  Williams.

The  two  last  signatures  are  those  of  IVIrs.  Williams'  husband
and  the  percipient,  her  son.

The date of the assassination of President Camot  was

Sunday,  Jmie  24th,  1894.

To complete  the death  coincidences  in  the  collection,
two cases remain to be described, both auditory.  In


Mrs.  Henry  jSidgivich.  [part

both the sounds heard were non-vocal and were  heard
apparently  by  all  within  earshot. This  makes  it  plausible
to  suppose  that  they  were  real  sounds  unexplained,  and
but  little  importance  would  have  been  attached  to  'them
were  it  not  that  in  each  case  they  occurred  exactly  at
the  time  of  the  death— almost  to  the  minute  apparently—
of  a  person  interested  in  one  of  the  percipients. I  will
describe the cases briefly. The first (L.  1141,  Jour^ial,
Vol.  XL,  p.  320)  was  sent  by  Mr.  J.  F.  Young,  some  of
whose own  experiences have been given above (see  pp.
116  and 129). He  knew  the  percipient  Mrs.  Page  well.
Further  evidence,  completing  the  case,  was  collected  by
the Rev. A. T. Fryer. The experience, which  was
recorded  on  October  22, 1904,  occurred  on  December  21,
1903. At  three  o'clock  in  the  morning  Mrs.  Page  in  one
room  and  her  three  daughters  in  another  heard  footsteps
comnig  up  the  stairs  and  three  knocks  on  Mrs.  Page's
door. She  and  one  of  her  daughters  got  up  and  went
nito  the  passage,  but  found  no  one. The  next  morning
a  message  was  brought  to  them  that  a  Mr.  Morgan,  to
whom Mrs. Page had been very kind during his  long
illness,  had  died  at  that  hour. The  percipients  had  not
m  the  night  associated  the  sounds  with  him

The  second  case  (L.  1151,  Journal,  Vol.  XII  p  196)
was  sent  to  us  by  I\Ir.  E.  R.  Pease,  who  wrote  as  follows  :

(L.  1151.)

November  1st,  1905.
...  a  working  woman  was  dying  of  cancer  and  was
visited  daily  by  Mrs.  Rix  of  Headland  Cottage,  Limps-
field.  She  died  at  5.20  a.m.  on  Tuesday  [reaUy  Monday]
last,  Oct.  30th.  At  the  same  hour  both  Mr.'^  and  Mrs.
Rix  heard  a  knocking  at  their  door.  .  .  .  Mrs.  Rix  went
down  to  see  what  was  there  and  fomid  nothing.  It  is
stated  that  the  servant  also  heard  the  loiocking,  but  this
may  be  inaccurate.  It  is  stated  that  the  night  was
wmdy,  but  even  on  the  windiest  of  nights,  one  does  not
get  up  at  5.20  to  go  to  the  front  door.  At  any  rate
I  never  did.  .  .  .


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  243

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Rix  kindly  sent  first-hand  accounts  of
the  incident,  rather  fuller,  dated  November  10,  1905.
These  substantiaUy  agree  with  the  above  statement.
They  supposed  the  knocks  at  the  time  to  be  made  by
one  of  the  d>ang  woman's  children  come  to  fetch  Mrs.
Rix.

§  2. Coincidences  ivith  Illness  or  Accident.

In  this  section  I  have  put  together  cases  of  waking
haUucinations  and  dramatic  dreams  corresponding  with
illness  or  accident  occurring  to  the  presumed  agent,  or  to
some  one  closely  connected  with  him.  In  such  cases  the
correspondence  is  apt  to  be  less  definite  than  in  death
coincidences,  and  therefore  the  evidence  for  telepathy  less
clear.  There  are,  however,  some  remarkable  cases  where
the  correspondence  is  clearly,  I  think,  beyond  chance.

I  will  take  first  a  case  (L.  1207,  Journal,  Vol.  XVII.,
p.  230)  which  seems  to  me  one  of  the  most  remarkable
in  our  coUection.  The  coincidence  is  with  an  attack  of
fatal  illness  and  the  coincident  phantasm  was  a  waking
vision— a  scene  represented  as  it  were  pictorially,  but
externalised  in  the  actual  space  in  which  the  percipient
found  herself.

We  received  it  through  Sir  George  Beilby,  to  whom  we
are  much  indebted  for  the  care  with  which  all  available
evidence  has  been  collected.

(L.  1207.)

The  percipient's  experience  took  place  on  April  4,  1913,
and  her  account  of  it,  which  we  print  below,  was  given  in  a
letter  to  Sir  George  Beilby,  written  three  years  and  a  half
later,  as  follows  :

October  4,  1916.

I  Avill  write  out  the  incident  which,  if  you  remember,
I  told  you  by  word  of  mouth  in  Glasgow  last  June—
the  incident  of  my  "sight"  or  vision  of  my  brother  in
AustraUa  shortly  after  he  must  have  fallen  into  the
unconsciousness  which  lasted  tih  his  death  some  days
later.


244


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


It  was  if  I  remember  rightly  on  the  Friday  evening
[April  4,  1913],  and— which  will  fix  the  date— -I  had
been  attending  a  Committee  Meeting  called  on  that  evening
to  help  the  election  of  the  Rev.  Joseph  Johnson,  minister
of  the  Park  Avenue  Congregational  Church,  Ashton-on-
Mersey,  to  the  Knutsford  Board  of  Guardians.  The
election  was  to  take  place  on  the  following  day.  We
had  an  animated  meeting,  and  with  my  thoughts  full
of  this  I  left  before  its  close,  and  (alone)  turned  out  into
the  brightly  hghted  and  bustling  thoroughfare  of  School
Road,  Sale.

I  had  wallced  but  a  few  paces  when  I  was  staggered
by  seeing,  as  in  a  cinema  show,  reflected  in  the  air  in
front  of  me  a  clear-cut  picture  of  my  brother  in  Austraha,
lying  with  the  unmistakeably  helpless  look  of  a  dead  or
unconscious  man  who  had  just  fallen.  I  saw  his  pose,
his  clothes,  and  even  his  thick  curlmg  hair  as  if  in  Ufe
before  me.

Mechanically  I  must  have  continued  walking  as  no  one
appeared  to  notice  me  ;  but  I  felt  my  brother  was  dying
or  dead,  or  that  something  tragic  was  happening  to  him,
and  I  began  at  once  praying  for  him  in  an  agony  of
supplication.  The  picture  faded,  and  I  hurried  on  out
of  the  light  of  the  shops  and  mto  the  darkness  of  Wash-
way  Road.

Suddenly,  when  halfway  along  the  road,  the  picture
shone  out  agaua  before  my  eyes,  this  time  against  the  dark
sky.  Again  I  saw  the  prone  helpless  figure,  the  colouring
of  clothes  and  hair,  then  as  before  it  faded  quickly  away,
and  I  did  not  see  it  again.  I  think  it  was  between  8
and  9.30  p.m.,  or  about  then,  that  I  left  the  meeting.  I
remember  that  my  sister  had  not  been  very  well,  and  that
she  was  in  bed.  When  I  reached  home  I  ran  up  to  her
room  and  broke  down  m  telling  her  what  I  had  just
seen,  saymg  I  was  "sure  somethuig  had  happened  to
Edgar."  I  remember  she  tried  to  soothe  me  by  saying  I
was  simply  overtired— that  I  should  get  away  to  bed  and
"would  see  things  would  be  all  right  m  the  morning."
I  tried  to  believe  this  would  be  so,  but  all  the  Saturday
and  Sunday  followmg  I  kept  thinking  of  my  brother  and


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  245


praying  constantly  for  him.  On  the  Monday  morning
the  post  brought  a  nice  kind  letter  from  him  writteu  from
Hobart  from  our  cousin's  home  there,  enclosing  a  belated
birthday  gift  for  our  small  nephew,  dated  4th  March.
We  were  so  glad  to  have  the  letter,  and  my  sister  said  :
"Now  you  see  Edgar  is  all  right."

On  the  Thursday  morning  {i.e.  April  10,  1913),  my
sister  being  still  confined  to  bed,  I  sent  up  the  letters  to
her,  then  suddenly  I  heard  her  cry  out,  and  I  rushed
upstairs  to  find  her  sitting  up  with  a  scared  look  holding
out  the  (enclosed)  letter  from  Mr.  Huie,  C.A.,  from  Edm-
burgh,  stating  that  he  had  just  received  a  cablegram
from  Melbourne  announcing  the  death  on  April  7th  of  our
brother  Mr.  J.  Edgar  Paterson.

The  next  news  we  had  was  when  our  sister-m-law"s
letter  (enclosed)  arrived  telhng  us  how  Edgar,  when
travelling  home  from  New  Zealand  to  Melbourne,  had
suddenly  fallen  down  unconscious  on  the  ship  when
nearing  Melbourne,  had  been  carried  ashore  at  Melbourne
unconscious,  and  placed  in  Hospital  there  (on  the
Saturday,  April  5th,  1913),  where  he  had  lingered  without
regaining  consciousness  till  the  Monday,  April  7th,  when
he  slipped  quietly  away.  Mary  M.  Patbeson.

We  have  received  the  foUowmg  corroborative  statement
from  Miss  Paterson 's  sister,  Mrs.  George  Francis,  to  whom,
as  related  above,  she  described  her  experience  on  the  evenmg
of  April  4,  1913,  before  she  knew  anything  of  her  brother's
illness  :

October  29i/i,  1916.
This  is  to  certify  that  what  my  sister,  Mary  M.  Paterson,
has  written  re  Friday,  April  4th,  1913,  and  her  experience
then  regarding  her  sight  of  our  brother,  is  just  what  she
told  me  on  her  return  from  the  Election  Meeting.

I  perfectly  remember  the  occurrences  she  describes  in
her  accompanymg  letter  to  Sir  George  Beilby.

Emily  Fkancis.


According  to  Miss  Paterson's  clear  recollection,  confirmed  by
Mrs,  Francis,  her  experience  took  place  when  she  was  on  her


246


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgioich.


[part


way  home  from  an  election  meeting  held  on  behalf  of  the
Rev.  Joseph  Johnson.  As  to  the  date  of  this  meeting  Mr.
Johnson  wrote  to  Miss  Paterson  as  follows:

August  23,  1916.
We were glad to have your letter. Mrs.  Johnson,

R  ,  and  myself  remember  the  account  of  your  brother's

vision  ;  and  when  we  get  back  I  think  I  can  verify  that
date  about  the  Election  Committee.  I  Imow  it  was  in
April.  .  .  .

J.  Johnson.

{Note  by  Mr.  Johnson,  received  by  Miss  Paterson,
October  28,  1916.)

Election,  April  5,  1913.  J.  Johnson.

The  meeting  which  Miss  Paterson  had  attended  took  place
on  the  day  preceding  the  election,  and  we  have  therefore
good  evidence  for  the  conclusion  that  Miss  Paterson  saw  the
apparition  of  her  brother,  as  described  by  her,  on  Friday,
April  4,  1913,  between  8  p.m.  and  9.30  p.m.

With  regard  to  the  time  and  circumstances  of  Mr.  Edgar
Paterson 's  death,  we  have  received  the  following  evidence  :

[Letter  to  Mrs.  Francis  from  Messrs.  Huie  and  Ramage,

C.A.)

Edinbtjrgh,  April  9,  1913.

I  greatly  regret  to  intimate  to  you  that  I  have  been
informed  by  cable  from  Melbourne  that  Mr.  Edgar  Paterson
died  suddenly  there  on  7th  inst.  I  annex  a  copy  of  the
cable.

Perhaps  you  will  be  so  good  as  to  inform  Miss  Paterson.

  David  Hxjie.

{Copy  of  Cablegram.)

Melbourne  on  8th  12.30  p.m.
Huie  Edin.gh.

J.  Edgar  Paterson  died  suddenly  Melbourne  seventh,
Notify  sisters.  .  .  ,


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  247


{Extracts  from  Letters  written  by  Mr.  Pater.son's  widow  in
Australia  to  Mrs.  Francis  and  Miss  Paterson.)

1.  April  15  [1913].

.  .  .  Since  I  wrote  you  last  week  a  friend  of  mme  has
called  who  was  on  the  steamer  with  Edgar.  He  says  he
was  the  Ufe  of  the  boat,  as  he  always  was,  and  on
Thursday  night  [April  3,  1913]  he  was  quite  bright  and
seemed  quite  weU,  but  on  Friday  morning  when  he  was
getting  up  he  broke  a  blood-vessel,  caused  by  a  comphca-
tion  of  liver  and  kidney  troubles.  .  .  .  Two  doctors
stayed  with  him  constantly  from  when  he  took  ill  on
Friday,  4th  inst.,  imtil  he  was  removed  to  the  Hospital,
5th  inst.  .  .  .

2.  Marj  14  [1913].

.  .  .  How  funny  Mary  for  you  to  have  had  that  experi-
ence or  presentiment  about  Edgar  on  the  Friday  night,
for  that  was  the  day  he  took  ill.  .  .  .  Lily  says  he  must
have  been  thinking  of  you  at  the  time.  .  .  .

3.  June  24,  1913.

.  .  .  One  of  my  brothers-in-law  saw  the  Captain  of  the
steamer  Edgar  was  on.  He  took  iU  between  10  and  11
on  Friday  morning  and  was  up  and  dressed.  He  went
unconscious  at  once.  Two  doctors,  who  were  on  the
steamer  as  passengers,  stayed  with  him  constantly  then  a
speciaUst  was  called  on  the  steamer  when  it  arrived  in  Mel-
bourne on  Ajjril  5th,  and  an  ambulance  took  him  to  the

Hospital  and  they  Avired  me.  ... ^  ^

Georgie  Paterson.

It  is  estabUshed  by  the  evidence  given  above  that  Mr.
J.  Edgar  Paterson  was  taken  HI  quite  suddenly  on  board  ship,
when  on  his  way  to  Melboiime,  between  10  and  11  a.m.  on
Friday,  April  4,  1913  (Victoria  time),  that  he  became  uncon-
scious at  once  and  died  in  hospital  in  Melbourne  on  April  7,
1913.  By  Greenwich  mean  time,  therefore,  he  was  taken  ill
between  midnight  and  1  a.m.  (approximately)  on  April  4,
1913,^  and  he  had  been  imconscious  about  twenty  hours  when

1  "  Standard  time  "  in  Victoria  is  ten  hours  in  advance  of  Green'svich
mean  time.

Q


248  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.  [par'.

Miss  Paterson  saw  the  apparition  of  him  between  7  p.m
and  9.30  p.m.  on  that  day.

There  are  several  points  of  interest  about  the  form  o:|
this  experience.  First,  the  pictorial  form  of  sensorj
hallucination  which  I  have  called  a  vision — externalised
but  not  realistic,  not  forming  an  apparently  natural  pari
of  the  surroundings — is  unusual  among  spontaneous  cases,
An  experience  resembling  it  has  been  given  among  semi-
experimental  cases  (G.  267,  p.  54  above),  and  a  spon-
taneous one,  which  the  percipient  decided  was  a  dream,
has  been  quoted  among  death  coincidences  (L.  978,  p.  213
above).  Another  waking  vision  will  be  found  below
(L.  1193,  p.  278).  Crystal  visions  are  generally  of  this
kind,  and  a  spontaneous  vision  in  a  glass  of  water  is
given  above  (L.  1134,  p.  45).  Probably  L.  1198  (see
p.  339  below)  was  a  vision.  Other  cases  have  been
published — see  e.g.  Proceedings,  Vol.  X.,  p.  217.  For  a
waking  vision  which  was  apparently  entirely  mental,  not
externalised  in  space,  see  L.  1160  (p.  149  above).  Com-
pare also  M.Cl.  22  (p.  57  above)  and  L.  1152  (p.  58
above).

Secondly,  the  repetition  of  the  phantasm  after  an
interval  is  unusual.  It  occurs  in  one  or  two  dreams  in
this  collection,  but  not,  I  think,  in  any  other  waking
experience  except  the  semi-experimental  vision,  G.  267,
just  referred  to.

Thirdly,  it  was  not  a  mere  apparition  of  the  dying  man,
but  had  other  veridical  elements. The  brother  was  seen
lying  unconscious  with  his  clothes  on,  which  must  have
corresponded to what happened at the onset of  thei
attack  of  fatal  illness  some  twenty  hours  before  the  vision.'
Whether the  vision  represented contemporaneous fact —
the  costume,  for  instance,  at  the  moment  of  its  occur-
rence— we  do  not  know  ;  nor,  of  course,  do  we  know  when
the telepathic communication took place, and whether  '
or  not  it  remained  latent  in  the  percipient's  subconscious
mind  to  emerge  at  a  suitable  moment. i !  '  it

In  the  next  case  (L.  1209,  Journal,  Vol.  XVIII.,  p.  19) '
we  have  similarly  a  veridical  element  in  the  appearance


Lxxxvi.] Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  249

of  the  bandages  as  actually  worn  by  the  agent.  There  is
also  the  same  impossibility  of  fixing  the  exact  time
coincidence.  The  apparition  was  seen  before  any  of  the
family  knew  the  agent  had  been  wounded,  but  not  till
some  thirty  hours  after  the  wound  occurred,  though  much
less  time  after  he  was  admitted  to  the  hospital  at  Bou-
logne. The  misrecognition  of  the  phantasm  at  first,  and
its  failure  even  when  recognised  to  appear  in  the  semblance
of  the  agent  familiar  to  the  percipient  is  very  curious.
It  suggests  some  faulty  transmission  between  the  sub-
liminal and  supraliminal  consciousness.  An  undeveloped
figure  in  the  darkness  first  suggested  the  little  boy  in  the
flesh,  and  the  idea  of  a  child  having  entered  the  per-
cipient's mind  perhaps  could  not  be  shaken  off  again.
The  bandage  may  have  then  produced  the  association  of
ideas  with  the  youthful  portrait  of  the  agent.

(L.  1209.)

Our  earliest  information  about  the  case  was  contained  in  a
letter  from  Lieut.  Bridge,  as  foUows :

Enfield,  Gateshead,
November  2,  1916.

The  following  presents  an  unusual  feature  to  me — but
possibly  you  can  explain  it.

My  age  is  34.

I  was  wounded  in  France  July  24th,  1916,  3.30  p.m.

Between  1  and  2  a.m.  July  26th,  1916,  I  appeared  to
Mrs.  S.  Jones  (my  wife's  mother)  at  this  address,  waking
her  from  sleep.

The  physical  appearance  corresponded  with  that  of  a
photo  taken  when  I  was  about  3  years  old — the  head
was  bandaged  shewing  only  forehead — eyes — nose — mouth,
and  a  Httle  of  the  chin.

Except  for  the  age  and  apparent  height  (only  head
was  seen  clearly) — this  was  the  condition  I  was  in,  and  I
was  in  hospital  at  Boulogne — to  the  best  of  my  recollection
asleep,  and  of  course  with  2  days'  growth  of  beard.

The  apparition  was  taken  for  my  son  "  in  the  flesh  "


250


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgioiclc.


[part


at  first  and  was  asked  what  was  the  matter.  Mrs.  Jones
then  recognized  me — I  smiled  and  vanished.

The  War  Office  telegram  announcing  the  casualty  was
received  at  9  p.m.,  July  26th.

Mrs.  Jones  did  not  laiow  me  till  I  was  about  19 — at
which  time  and  ever  since  I  have  had  a  small  moustache
— and  she  always  thmks  of  me  as  grown  up — never  as  a
child.  h\  these  circumstances,  can  you  explain  why  I
should  appear  as  a  child  and  not  in  my  most  easily
recognizable  form  ?

That  I  appeared  to  Mrs.  Jones  I  can  understand  as  she
is  more  psychic  than  my  wife.

G.  E.  W.  Bkidge,  Lt.  Durh.  L.I.

The  above  is  substantially  correct.  I  might  add  that  I
had  not  looked  at  the  photograph  mentioned  for  at  least

4  E.  M.  Jones.

In  reply  to  this  letter  we  wrote  to  Lieut.  Bridge  asking
for  a  detailed  report  by  Mrs.  Jones  herself  and  a  corroborative
statement,  if  obtainable,  from  some  person  to  whom  she  had
related  her  experience  before  the  news  came  that  Lieut.  Bridge
was  wounded.  We  received  an  answer  from  Mrs.  Bridge  as
foUows  :

Enfield,  Gateshead,
November  5,  1916.

My  husband  has  just  returned  to  duty.  ...  I  enclose
a  full  account  written  by  Mrs.  Jones,  of  her  experience
of  July  26th.  This  corresponds  with  her  description  to
me  on  August  5th.

I  see  that  it  is  unfortunate,  from  the  point  of  view  of
'  evidence,'  that  she  told  no  one  before  this  date.  I
can  only  say  that  as  far  as  we  ourselves  are  concerned,
this  makes  no  difference,  as  we  do  not  admit  the  possi-
bility of  her  altering  the  facts,  even  involuntarily.  She
is  particularly  clear-headed  and  well-balanced,  and  when
relating  one  or  two  rather  similar  experiences,  I  have
never  known  her  vary  in  the  accomits  in  the  shghtest
degree.


j


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  251

I  am  not  surprised  that  my  husband  should  appear  to
her— they  have  often  discussed  such  things,  and  are
much  in  sympathy— though  the  '  least-famihar  '  form  has
puzzled  us  all.  .  .  .  Majbgabet  E.  Bridge.

{Statement  by  Mrs.  Jones,  enclosed  in  Mrs.  Bridge's  letter  of

November  5,  1916.)

Enfield,  Gateshead.

During  the  early  momuig  of  Wed.,  July  26th,  1916,  I
woke  from  sleep,  Avith  the  idea  that  someone  was  in  my
room.  I  opened  my  eyes  to  absolute  darkness,  but  at
the  right  side  of  my  bed  stood  a  misty  figure,  Avhich  I
at  first  took  for  my  httle  grandson,  and  I  asked  him
why  he  was  there.  No  answer  came,  but  the  face  became
more  distinct,  and  I  saw  it  resembled  a  photograph  of
my  son-in-law,  taken  when  he  was  about  three  years  old.
In  the  photograph  one  can  see  short'  curls,  but  in  my
vision  the  lower  part  of  forehead,  eyebrows,  eyes,  nose,
mouth  and  part  of  chin  were  clearly  visible,  but  hair,
ears,  lower  part  of  chin  and  neck  were  hidden  by  white
wrappings.  As  I  looked  and  wondered,  the  mouth  ex-
panded into  a  smile,  and  the  appearance  vanished,  the
room  being  still  iii  darkness.  My  grandson  had  not
been  quite  well  the  previous  day,  and  my  first  thought
was  to  go  and  see  if  he  were  worse,  but  as  I  knew  his
mother  had  settled  to  sleep  in  his  room,  I  decided  not
to  risk  alarmmg  her.

I  did  not  mention  the  occurrence  to  anyone,  as  we
only  had  servants  in  the  house,  and  naturally  I  did  not
want  to  say  anj-thing  to  my  daughter  at  once.  I  made
up  my  mmd  to  wait  until  she  had  had  a  letter  from  her
husband  of  later  date  than  July  26th,  and  then  tell  her
how  anxious  I  had  felt.

The  W.O.  wire  came  on  the  evening  of  July  26th,
and  in  the  rush  and  hurry  of  her  departure  I  had  no
chance  to  tell  her  until  she  came  home  on  Aug.  5th  for
a  couple  of  nights,  leaving  her  husband  in.  hospital.
When  I  described  what  I  had  seen,  she  told  me  that  his
head  and  neck  were  bandaged  in  that  way.


252


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[PAET


I  could  understand  his  appearing  to  me  as  he  looks
normally,  as  we  have  been  great  friends,  and  I  have  made
my  home  with  them  for  some  years.  The  puzzle  is  why
he  should  appear  to  me  as  a  young  child.

Ellen  M.  Jones.

We  then  wrote  to  Mrs.  Bridge,  putting  the  following  ques-
tions :

(a)  Is  it  possible  to  get  any  evidence  corroborating  Mrs.
Jones's  recollection  that  her  experience  took  place  in  the  early
morning  of  July  26,  1916  :  e.g.  Mrs.  Jones  mentions  that  your
son  had  been  unwell  on  the  previous  day  ;  have  you  any
evidence  as  to  when  he  was  unwell  ?

(6)  When  did  you  first  know  the  nature  of  the  wound
from  which  Lieut.  Bridge  was  suffering  1  Were  any  details
on  this  point  given  in  the  War  Ofifice  telegram  ?

(c)  Has  this  telegram  been  preserved,  and  can  we  see  it  ?

(d)  How  old  is  your  son  now,  and  is  he  noticeably  hke
the  photograph  of  his  father  to  which  Mrs.  Jones  refers  ?

(e)  Is  there  any  reason  to  suppose  that  when  Lieut.  Bridge
was  a  yoimg  child,  i.e.  at  about  the  time  when  this  j)hoto-
graph  was  taken,  he  had  an  accident  which  necessitated  the
bandagmg  of  his  head  ?

The  object  of  these  last  questions,  {d)  and  (e),  was  to  see
whether  any  association  of  ideas  could  be  fomid  in  the  mind
of  Mrs.  Jones  which  would  accomit  for  the  circumstance  that
she  saw  the  apparition  of  Lieut.  Bridge  in  the  shape  of  a
photograph  of  him  taken  as  a  child  many  years  before  she
knew  him.  The  fact  that  Mrs.  Jones  had  been  concerned
about  her  grandson's  health  on  the  previous  day  might  accoimt
for  her  momentarily  identifying  the  apparition  with  this  boy
as  she  did  (see  above),  but  there  was  no  apparent  link  with
the  photogra])h  of  Lieut.  Bridge.

To  these  questions  Mrs.  Bridge  replied  as  follows  :

Enfield,  Gateshead,
November  18,  1916.

{a)  My boy used to suffer very much from  asthma.
Last  July  he  had  a  very  slight  return  of  this,  following


[vXxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  253

an  attack  of  hay-fever.  I  noted  in  my  diary  that  I  kept
him  in  bed  on  Smiday,  July  23rd.  On  the  25th  he  Avas
"  decidedly  better "  but  still  in  bed,  and  I  continued  to
sleep  in  his  room.  On  tbe  morning  of  the  26th  he  was
"practically  aU  right,"  and  on  the  27th  was  out  of  doors
again.

(6)  My  husband  was  wounded  by  shrapnel,  all  dowii  the
left  side.  I  first  Imew  the  locahty  of  the  womids  on  the
morning  of  July  28th,  when  I  received  by  the  first  post
(1)  a  few  hnes  scribbled  by  my  husband  in  the  trenches,
at  4.30  p.m.,  on  the  24th:  "I'm  hit  slightly  in  the  face
and  arm.  Shell.  Merely  skin  wounds.  Don't  worry."
And  (2)  a  letter  from  his  Coy.  Commander  of  same  date  :
"  He  was  hit  by  httle  bits  of  a  4-2  shell— shghtly  in
face,  arm  and  leg."  I  knew  no  further  particulars  until  I
saw  him  in  hospital  in  London  on  July  29th.  The  W.O.
telegram  does  not  say  anything  about  the  locahty  of  the
womads.

(c)  I  have  this  telegram  before  me  now.  ...  I  quote
it  in  fuU  :

"York  O.H.M.S.  8.15  p.m.  Received  Newcastle  July  26.
8.26  p.m.

"  Mrs.  Bridge. Enfield.  Gateshead.

"Regret  Capt.^  G.  E.  W.  Bridge  admitted  7  Stationary
Hospital  Boulogne  July  25  gimshot  woimds  multiple  Con-
! dition  satisfactory  Territorial  Records."

I  received  it  here  at  "Enfield"  at  9.15  p.m.  Time
noted  in  my  diary.  A  taxi  arrived  at  almost  the  same
moment  to  take  a  visitor  to  the  station  and  I  sent  a
maid  with  her,  to  despatch  a  telegram  from  Newcastle
to  the  Hospital  at  Boulogne.

{d)  My  boy  was  10  years  old  on  July  27th,  and  was
never  particularly  hke  the  photo  in  question.  But  Mrs.
Jones  used  to  remark  on  my  girl's  resemblance  to  the
photo,  when  she  was  about  3  years  old.  She  is  now
7|,  but  when  a  baby,  9  months  old,  she  had  an  operation

1  Lieut.  Bridge  had  held  a  temporary  captaincy  in  a  reserve  battalion
before  proceeding  to  the  front.  Hence  the  use  of  this  title  in  the
telegram.  •


252


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick. .  [part


I  could  understand  his  appearing  to  me  as  he  looks
normally,  as  we  have  been  great  friends,  and  I  have  made
my  home  with  them  for  some  years.  The  puzzle  is  why
he  should  appear  to  me  as  a  yoimg  child.

Ellen  M.  Jones.

We  then  wrote  to  Mrs.  Bridge,  putting  the  following  ques-
tions :

(a)  Is  it  possible  to  get  any  evidence  corroborating  Mrs.
Jones's  recollection  that  her  experience  took  place  in  the  early
morning  of  July  26,  1916  :  e.g.  Mrs.  Jones  mentions  that  your
son  had  been  unwell  on  the  previous  day  ;  have  you  any
evidence  as  to  when  he  was  unwell  ?

(6)  When  did  you  first  know  the  nature  of  the  woimd
from  which  Lieut.  Bridge  was  suffering  ?  Were  any  details
on  this  point  given  in  the  War  Office  telegram  ?

(c)  Has  this  telegram  been  preserved,  and  can  we  see  it  ?

{d)  How  old  is  your  son  now,  and  is  he  noticeably  like
the  photograph  of  his  father  to  which  Mrs.  Jones  refers  ?

(e)  Is  there  any  reason  to  suppose  that  when  Lieut.  Bridge
was  a  yoimg  child,  i.e.  at  about  the  time  when  this  photo-
graph was  taken,  he  had  an  accident  which  necessitated  the
bandaging  of  his  head  ?

The  object  of  these  last  questions,  [d)  and  (e),  was  to  see
whether  any  association  of  ideas  could  be  found  in  the  mind
of  Mrs.  Jones  which  would  accomit  for  the  circumstance  that
she  saw  the  apijarition  of  Lieut.  Bridge  in  the  shape  of  a
photograph  of  him  taken  as  a  child  many  years  before  she
knew  him.  The  fact  that  Mrs.  Jones  had  been  concerned
about  her  grandson's  health  on  the  previous  day  might  accoimt
for  her  momentarily  identifying  the  apjjarition  with  this  boy
as  she  did  (see  above),  but  there  was  no  apparent  link  with
the  photogra]3h  of  Lieut.  Bridge.

To  these  questions  Mrs.  Bridge  replied  as  follows:  ;

Enfield,  Gateshead,
November  18,  1916.

(a)  My boy used to suffer very much from  asthma.
Last  July  he  had  a  very  slight  return  of  this,  foUowing


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  25S

an,  attack  of  hay-fever.  I  noted  in  my  diary  that  I  kept
him  in  bed  on  Simday,  July  23rd.  On  the  25th  he  Avas
"  decidedly  better "  but  still  in  bed,  and  I  continued  to
sleep  ua  his  room.  On  the  morning  of  the  26th  he  was
"  practically  all  right,"  and  on  the  27th  was  out  of  doors
again.

(6)  My  husband  was  wounded  by  shrapnel,  all  down  the
left  side.  I  first  knew  the  locality  of  the  womids  on  the
morning  of  July  28th,  when  I  received  by  the  first  j)ost
(1)  a  few  lines  scribbled  by  my  husband  in  the  trenches,
at  4.30  p.m.,  on  the  24th  :  "  I'm  hit  slightly  in  the  face
and  arm.  Shell.  Merely  skin  wounds.  Don't  worry."
And  (2)  a  letter  from  his  Coy.  Commander  of  same  date  :
"  He  was  hit  by  httle  bits  of  a  4*2  shell — shghtly  in
face,  arm  and  leg."  I  knew  no  further  particulars  until  I
saw  him  in  hospital  in  London  on  July  29th.  The  W.O.
telegram  does  not  say  anything  about  the  locahty  of  the
wounds.

(c)  I  have  this  telegi'am  before  me  now.  ...  I  quote
it  in  fuU  :

"York  O.H.M.S.  8.15  p.m.  Received  Newcastle  July  26.
8.26  p.m.

"Mrs.  Bridge. Enfield.  Gateshead.

"Regret  Capt.^  G.  E.  W.  Bridge  admitted  7  Stationary
Hospital  Boulogne  July  25  gunshot  woimds  multiple  Con-
dition satisfactory  Territorial  Records."

I  received  it  here  at  "  Enfield  "  at  9.15  p.m.  Time
noted  in  my  diary.  A  taxi  arrived  at  almost  the  same
moment  to  take  a  visitor  to  the  station  and  I  sent  a
maid  with  her,  to  despatch  a  telegram  from  Newcastle
to  the  Hospital  at  Boulogne.

{d)  My  boy  was  10  years  old  on  July  27th,  and  was
never  particularly  like  the  photo  in  question.  But  Mrs.
Jones  used  to  remark  on  my  girl's  resemblance  to  the
photo,  when  she  was  about  3  years  old.  She  is  now
7|,  but  when  a  baby,  9  months  old,  she  had  an  operation

Lieut.  Bridge  had  held  a  temporary  captaincy  in  a  reserve  battalion
before  proceeding  to  the  front.  Hence  the  use  of  this  title  in  the
telegram.


254


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivich.


[part


which  necessitated  a  head-bandage.  Mrs.  Jones  saw  the
child,  on  one  occasion  only,  and  for  a  few  minutes,  with
this  bandage.  We  none  of  ns  loiow  of  any  accident  to
my  husband  which  would  have  made  it  necessary  for  him
to  have  his  head  bound  ujd.  Makgaeet  E.  Bridge.

To  this  letter  Mrs.  Jones  added  a  note,  thus  :

When  the  telegram  came  telling  us  of  my  son-in-law's
wound,  I  at  once  concluded  he  had  been  wounded  on  the
Tuesday  night  (July  25,  1916),  and  was  surprised  when  we
heard  later  that  it  was  on  the  Monday  afternoon.

E.  M.  Jones.

We  have  also  received  an  additional  communication  from
Lieut.  Bridge,  as  follows:

November  9,  1916.

.  .  .  From  a  purely  evidential  point  of  view,  it  is  a
weak  point  that  Mrs.  Jones  did  not  mention  her  experience
till  the  first  opportunity  after  the  news,  but  a  comment
of  my  wife's  when  telling  me  of  it  is  to  a  certain  extent
corroborative  :  "I  thought  she  had  something  on  her
mind  that  day — she  was  so  restless  and  fidgetty — and
seemed  reUeved  when  the  telegram  came."

Usually  Mrs.  Jones  is  particularly  self-controlled  and
possessed.

I  think  you  have  hit  upon  the  solution  of  the  form  of
the  phantasm.

My  daughter  Avhen  about  the  same  age  looked  very  hke
the  photo,  and  when  young  had  an  operation  which
necessitated  a  head  bandage  very  similar  to  the  one  I
had.  This  in  conjmiction  with  the  keen  sympathy  existing
in  the  family  suggests  a  very  feasible  train  of  thought —
especially  on  just  awakening  from  sleep.

This  explanation  to  my  mind  counteracts  the  other
defect  shghtly,  as  in  the  case  of  moulding  an  indistinct
presentiment  or  an  intelligent  anticipation  upon  a  known
faii  accompli,  the  comphcation  of  the  child-like  appearance
would  not  have  been  added.

Another  factor  is  that  Mrs.  Jones  (lier  daughter,  and  I


Lxxxvi.J  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  255


to  a  less  extent)  is  so  accustomed  to  this  type  of  experi-
ence that  there  is  no  question  of  fear  confusiiig  the
impression  received.^  G.  E.  W.  Bridge,  Lt.

It  is  difficult  to  judge  in  the  next  case  (L.  1088,  Journal,
Vol.  VIII.,  p.  78)  whether  the  illness  was  sufficiently
definite  to  constitute  a  striking  coincidence  with  the
percipient's  hallucination,  which  occurred  on  the  line
between  sleeping  and  waking  ;  but  it  is  interesting  that
telepathic  communication  seems  to  have  taken  place
between  the  agent  and  percipient  on  other  occasions.  I
give  two  of  these  which  occurred  within  our  five-year  limit.

(L.  1088.)
The  Hon.  Miss  K.  Ward  writes  :

84,  Sloane  Street,  S.W.,  April  22nd,,  1897.

• -  ■  (I)

Two  years  ago,  on  awaking  one  morning  at  8  o'clock,
I  saw  a  distinct  appearance  of  my  sister  Emily,  seated
at  the  foot  of  my  bed  in  her  night-gown.  She  was
rocking  herself  backwards  and  forwards  as  if  in  pain.
Putting  out  my  hand  to  touch  her,  the  phantasm  vanished.
Going  into  my  sister's  room  half  an  hour  later,  I  related
to  her  my  experience,  and  she  (being  still  in  much  pain)
informed  me  that  at  8  o'clock  she  had  actually  been  in
the  position  above  described,  on  her  oivn  bed,  and  had
meditated  coming  into  my  room, but  had  not  liked  to

- disturb me  ; (she had been perfectly well the  night
before). My  sister's  room  is  at  some  distance  from  mine,
being  divided  therefrom  by  a  corridor  and  cross-door.
" "  -  Kathleen  Ward.

' :  '  Emily  G.  Ward.

1  An  account  of  several  of  these  earlier  experiences  has  been  sent  to  us
by  Mrs.  Jones  "  not  for  publication."  They  are  all  of  an  hallucinatory
character,  and  include  (i)  two  visual  hallucinations,  apparently  pre-
monitory ;  (ii)  a  visual  hallucination  (of  a  fully  developed  figure)  for
which  Mrs.  Jones  cannot  account  in  any  way.  So  far  as  she  is  aware
it  was  subjective  and  not  veridical  ;  (iii)  an  auditory  hallucination,
contemporaneous  with  the  sudden  illness  (a  fainting-fit)  of  the  person
whose  voice  was  heard.


256


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


(II)

On  the  12th  of  Febniary,  this  year,  my  sister  and  I
were  driving  together.  In  the  course  of  conversation,  I
mentioned  an  absurd  dream  I  had  had  the  preceding  night,
in  which  I  appeared  to  have  been  in  possession  of  a
bicycle  made  of  pure  gold,  studded  with  rubies  and
diamonds.  "  That  is  most  extraordinary  !  "  exclaimed  my
sister  ;  "for  in  bed  last  night  I  was  reading  a  silly  story
which  came  out  in  this  month's  Cyclists'  Touring  Club
Gazette,  about  a  rider  who  owned  a  bicycle  as  dazzling
as  the  one  in  your  dream  !  "  I  must  mention  that  I
had  not  seen  that  particular  number  of  the  Gazette,  or
indeed  any  other,  as  I  do  not  belong  to  the  club  in
question.

Kathleen  Ward.

(Ill)

On  the  20th  of  last  month,  my  sister  Emily  was  lunching
with  Mrs.  Maude.  In  conversation  they  got  upon  psychical
subjects,  and  my  sister  related  some  of  the  experiences
given  above.  After  Imich  Mrs.  Maude  suggested  a  game
of  "  Patience,"  the  particular  one  fixed  upon  being  known
to  us  as  "Demon  Thirteen."  In  wishing  my  sister
good-bye,  Mrs.  Maude  said,  "Now  ask  your  sister  what
we  did  directly  after  lunch,  and  see  whether  she  can
tell  us."  Later  on  my  sister  met  me  at  another  house.
She  at  once  asked  me  Mrs.  Maude's  question.  In  a
moment  the  vision  of  these  two  bending  over  the  cards,
came  before  me,  and  I  said,  "Playing  Patience."  "And
which  game  ?  "  pursued  my  sister.  (We  loiow  and  play
at  least  twenty  varieties.)  "Demon  Thirteen,"  was  my
answer.  I  should  add,  that  my  sister  had  never  happened
before  to  play  "  Patience  "  at  that  particular  hour.  I
shall  send  this  to  Mrs.  Maude,  asking  her  kindly  to
append  her  signature,  stating  that  above  is  correct.

Kathleen  Wabd.

The  following  note  is  appended:  ,

I  can  vouch  for  the  correctness  of  above.

Jenny  Maude.


LXXXVT.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  257

The  next  case  (L.  1129,  Journal,  Vol.  X.,  p.  263)  is
again  one  of  not  very  serious  illness,  and  again  one  on
the  line  between  sleeping  and  waking.  It  is  interesting
that  it  should  be  followed  by  a  more  or  less  veridical
dream.

I  (L.  1129.)

The  following  letter  was  addressed  to  Mr.  Piddington.  We
were  asked  not  to  print  the  writer's  name  and  address  :

Dear  Sm,  Oct.  6th,  1901.

On  reading  your  letter  to  the  Spectator  of  Oct.  5th,
I  thought  you  might  possibly  be  interested  in  a  coincid-
ence which  took  place  at  the  end  of  August  last.  I  am
attached  to  a  certain  young  lady.  At  the  time  I  refer
to  I  was  staying  near  Peterboro'  and  the  lady  in  question
was  at  her  home,  a  seaside  town  in  Yorkshire.  One
very  close  and  thimdery  night  I  found  some  difficulty
in  getting  to  sleep.  When  finally  I  fell  asleep,  or  rather
dozed,  the  face  of  IVIiss  D.  rose  up  before  me,  and  to  my
surprise  one  side  of  her  face  was  very  much  swollen  and
I  she  looked  very  unhappy.  I  sat  up  in  bed  and  spoke
'  to  her,  only  to  find  that  I  had  been  dreaming.  Again
I  feU  asleep  and  dreamt  that  I  was  walking  along  a  street,
when  I  heard  a  cry  above  me,  and  looking  up  saw  IVIiss
D.'s  face  at  a  window  from  which  smoke  and  flames
were  issuing.  I  rushed  upstairs,  only  to  see  her  face
floating  in  the  smoke,  very  much  swollen.  I  tried  to
grasp  her,  and  woke  up  with  a  cry.  Somehow  the  dream
depressed  me,  and  next  day  in  writing  to  JMiss  D.  I  told
her  the  whole  thing,  much  as  I  have  told  you.  Imagine
my  surprise  a  day  after,  when  I  heard  from  her  that  on
the  night  in  question  she  had  gone  out  to  see  a  house  on
fire — Mrs.  K.'s  seaside  residence  ;  had  contracted  a  chill,
and  gone  to  bed  with  her  face  enormously  swollen  up,
and  had  suffered  severe  toothache  aU  night.  Our  letters
on  the  subject  wUl  confirm  dates,  etc.  ...  H.  B.


Mr.  H.  B.  was  an  undergraduate  of College,  Cambridge.

He  was  asked  to  caU  on  Mrs.  VerraU  and  give  her  further


258


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgtvick.


[part


particulars,  and  he  did  so  on  October  16th,  1901.  Mrs.
Verrall  reported  as  follows  :

5,  Selwyn  Gakdens,  Cambridge,  Oct.  16th,  1901.

I  have  just  seen  Mr.  H.  B.,  and  have  no  doubt  at  aU
that  the  case  is  genuine.  At  the  same  time  the  evidence
is  not  quite  so  complete  as  I  had  hoped  from  his  letter,
but  these  are  the  facts  as  given  me  by  him  :  On  a  certain
Sunday  in  August  (subsequently  ascertained  to  be  the  25th)
H.  B.  dreamt,  as  he  told  Mr.  Piddimgton,  that  he  saw
Miss  D.  with  a  swollen  face,  and  later  on  the  same  night,
that  he  saw  her  at  a  window  from  which  smoke  and  fire
were  coming.  On  Monday  he  wrote  to  Miss  D.  to  ask
if  she  had  had  a  toothache,  but  on  second  thoughts
decided  that  it  would  make  him  feel  fooUsh  if  nothing
had  occurred,  and  so  tore  up  the  letter.  On  a  later  day
in  the  week  he  was  writing  to  her  about  other  things,
and  then  mentioned  his  vivid  dream  about  the  swollen
face  (this  part  of  the  business  evidently  impressed  him
much  more  than  the  fire).  But  before  he  sent  this  letter
he  received  one  from  her  mentioning  that  she  had  been
suffermg  from  a  severe  toothache  and  swollen  face  since
Sunday  night.  This  letter  I  have  seen  ;  it  is  dated  from
Filey,  on  "  Wednesday  "  (obviously  August  28th),  and
begms  by  saying  that  she  is  sorry  not  to  have  written
before,  but  has  been  "  seedy  ever  since  Sunday.  I  think
I  must  have  got  a  chill  ;  anyhow,  I  had  raging  toothache
from  Sunday  night  till  "  the  day  before,  when  she  had
the  tooth  out  with  gas.  The  letter  went  on  to  give  a
graphic  description,  with  a  sketch,  of  her  appearance
during  the  time  that  her  face  was  swollen.

On  the  receipt  of  this  letter,  H.  B.  was  so  much  aston-
ished to  find  that  his  dream  about  the  swollen  face  was
true  that  he  added  a  postscript  to  his  letter  (which  had
not  yet  gone)  to  say  that  he  had  seen  her  with  a  swollen
face  at  a  window  from  which  smoke  was  coming,  and  to
ask  if  that  part  of  the  dream  was  also  true.

Her  letter  in  answer  to  that  I  have  also  seen.  It  is
dated  from  Filey  on  August  31st,  1901,  and  I  copy  the
important part  : — "  I was awfully interested in  your


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  259

dream  ;  it  is  the  queerest  thing  I  have  heard  of  for  ages.
The  funny  part  of  it  is  that  I  got  the  cold  which  made
my  toothache  so  bad  by  going  out  on  Sunday  evening,
hearing  that  there  was  a  fire  on  the  Crescent.  It  was
Mrs.  K.'s  house  ;  one  of  the  bedrooms  got  on  fire.  It
was  nothing  much,  and  was  put  out  before  the  Fire
Brigade  arrived.  .  .  .  Auntie  M.  first  noticed  smoke
coming  out  of  the  wmdow."  The  writer  goes  on  to  say
(and  this  seems  to  me  very  interesting)  "  M.  gave  me  a
sleeping  powder  on  Simday  night,  so  I  slept  heavily,  m
spite  of  the  pain."  She  also  says  that  she  thought  about
him  a  good  deal  on  Monday  night  when  she  had  seen
what  a  sight  she  was,  but  not  on  Sunday.

Of  course  it  is  unfortunate,  evidentially,  that  nothing
was  posted  from  him  to  her  till  after  her  letter  mentioning
the  swoUen  face.  At  the  same  time  I  think  the  two
letters  of  hers  which  I  have  seen  estabhsh  the  truth  of
his  statement  that  he  mentioned  the  fire  to  her  before
hearing  of  it  from  her.  His  whole  account  of  the  matter
impressed  me  as  frank  and  accurate ;  he  showed  me  the  whole
of  the  letters,  which  were  in  their  envelopes,  so  that  the
postmarks  confirmed  the  contents  of  the  letters  as  to  dates.

He  does  not  think  that  the  lady  will  have  kept  his
letters,  nor  that  it  would  be  of  any  use  to  write  to  her
, for  corroboration.

He  tells  me  that  he  has  never  had  any  similar  experience
before ;  he  dreams  constantly,  but  he  dwelt  emphatically
on  the  very  vivid  nature  of  the  earlier  part  of  this  dream.
The  impression  was  so  strong  that  he  sat  up  and  spoke
to  the  lady  before  he  realised  that  he  was  dreammg.  He
has  several  times  guessed  the  thoughts,  after  an  interval
of  silence,  both  of  this  lady  and  of  one  of  his  three
sisters  ;  he  has  had  no  success  with  his  other  sisters,
,  ,  nor  has  he  ever  had  any  impression  unless  he  and  the
sister  (or  Miss  D.)  were  in  the  same  room.  Since  this
episode  he  dreamt  that  Miss  D.  was  angry  with  him,
and  encouraged  by  the  August  exj^erience,  he  wrote  to
her  to  ask  if  it  were  true.  She  rephed  that  it  was  not,
but  that  on  the  same  night  she  had  dreamt  that  he  was
angry  with  her.  M.  de  G.  Vebball.


260


Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc. ■  '  [part


A  simple  dream  of  illness  (L.  964,  Journal,  Vol.  V.,
p.  168)  came  through  the  American  Branch.  Mr.
M'Culloch,  writing  in  January,  1892,  reports  that  while
away  from  home  in  the  autumn  of  1889  he  dreamt  that
his  wife  was  beside  him  and  that  he  heard  her  say
"I  am  so  sick."  He  told  the  dream  to  two  friends  who
corroborate,  and  on  returning  home  a  few  days  later
found  that  his  wife  had  been  taken  ill  that  night  and
sent  for  the  doctor.

In  the  following  case  (L.  1195,  Journal,  Vol.  XVI.,
p.  41)  it  is  perhaps  more  natural  to  suppose  that  the
person  intending  to  telegraph  was  the  agent  rather  than
the  sick  person,  but  the  coincidence  is  undoubted  :

(L.  1195.)

The  dream  was  reported  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  by  the  per-
cipient, Mr.  W.  E.  Perry,  as  foUows  :

18,  Palmeeston  Rd.,  Spaekbkook,
Feb.  3rd,  1913.

On  Thursday  morning  last  at  about  8.0  I  was  on  the
point  of  getting  up  when  I  suddenly  dropped  asleep
again  and  dreamt  that  my  father  (deceased  10  years)
came  to  me  and,  immediately  after,  I  saw  a  telegram
which  contained  the  words  "Come  Grannie."  I  at  once
seemed  to  look  for  the  sender's  name  but  could  not  make
out  the  name.

My  father  seemed  connected  somehow  with  the  message,
and  yet  the  telegram  was  not  in  any  one's  hands  but
simply  lay  against  the  surrounding  dark.

On  awaking  I  told  my  wife  that  her  grandmother  was
worse  and  related  the  dream.  I  enclose  the  telegram
[which  fulfilled  the  dream].  I  had  a  similar  experience
at  the  death  of  my  father,  but  then  I  heard  my  name
distinctly  called  three  times,  and  so  distinctly  the  third
time  that  I  was  awake  when  I  heard  it. W.  E.  Perry.

The  telegram,  now  in  our  possession,  is  worded  Come  Grannie
nnkiny rapidly unconscious. It is stamped "  Sparkbrook,


Lxxxvi.]  Sfontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  261


Birmingham,  Jan.  30,  '13,"  and  is  timed  as  having  been
handed  in  at  Derby  Rd.,  Longeaton,  at  8.50  a.m.,  and  received
at  Sparkbrook  at  9.15  a.m.

In  reply  to  an  enquiry  from  Sir  Ohver  Lodge  as  to  the
time  when  he  told  his  wife  of  the  dream,  Mr.  Perry  writes  :

18,  Pai,merston  Rd.,  Sparkbrook,
- ■  Birmingham,  Feb.  Uh,  1913.

.  .  .  The  time  at  which  I  told  her  was  between  8.30
and  8.40.  I  could  not  tell  to  a  minute  or  two,  as  while
I  quite  expected  the  dream  to  be  fulfilled,  I  was  not
thinking  of  it  as  a  case  for  the  Psychical  Research  Society.
It  was  only  after  I  had  seen  my  wife  off  at  the  station
that  I  remembered  some  of  the  cases  in  your  "  Survival
of  Man,"  and  decided  to  communicate  with  you.

W.  E.  Perry.

Mrs.  Perry  corroborates  as  follows  :

Feb.  mh,  1913.
On  the  morning  of  Jan.  30th  my  husband  told  me  that
he  had  dreamt  that  Grannie  was  worse  and  he  had  seen  a
telegram  which  asked  for  me  to  come.  This  was  soon
after  8.30  a.m.,  and  the  telegram  came  about  three-
quarters  of  an  hour  later,  while  we  were  at  brealifast.
At  the  time  he  told  me  of  the  dream  I  attached  no
special  importance  to  it,  but  thought  the  coincidence
strange  when  the  telegram  came.

I -i  -: '  WmiFRED  A.  Perry.

We  asked  Mr.  Perry  whether  his  grandmother's  condition
was  causing  him  any  anxiety  at  the  time  of  his  experience,
and  his  reply  is  as  follows  :

■ - .  18,  Paijmerston  Rd.,  Sparkbrook,

Birmingham,  Feb.  19th,  1913.
I  may  say  that  we  knew  Grandmother  was  brealdng
up,  her  age  being  87,  and  should  not  have  been  surprised
to  hear  of  her  death,  but  we  were  not  anticipating  the
end  to  be  so  near.  Grandmother  had  been  able  to  get
about  well  up  till  about  a  week  prior  to  Jan.  30th,  and
both  my  wife  and  I  thought  that  a  few  days in  bed


262


Mrs.  He7iry  Sidgivick.


[part


would  enable  her  to  recover  strength  as  previously.  The
death  took  place  on  Friday  morning  at  4.10,  Feb.  7th.

W.  E.  Perky.

Tlie  following  symbolic  dream  (L.  937,  Journal,  Vol.  V.,
p.  251)  is  narrated  by  Professor  Charles  Richet's  cousin,
Mme.  Vavin,  originally  in  French,  here  translated.  The
account  is  midated,  but  as  it  was  printed  in  the  Journal
for  May  1892,  the  interval  between  the  experience  in
December  1891  and  the  report  of  it  cannot  have  been
very  long.  It  is  an  interesting  case  of  gradual  emergence
of  the  veridical  idea.  The  dream  coincided  with  the
beginning  of  the  fatal  illness  of  Professor  Richet's  father,
the  facts  concerning  which  are  as  follows  :

(L.  937.)

On  Saturday,  December  26th,  1891,  [in  the  south  of  France],
M.  A.  Richet,  aged  76,  [the  father  of  Professor  Ch.  Richet],
was  seized  with  a  violent  bronchitis,  which  during  the  night  of
December  26th-27th  led  to  violent  agitation  and  some  dehrium.
Next  morning  telegrams  were  sent  to  M.  Charles  Richet  and
his  other  children  in  Paris,  saying  that  their  father's  illness,
although  not  precisely  dangerous,  was,  at  his  age,  a  serious
one.  .  .  .  During  the  Sunday  the  patient's  state  grew  worse  ;
and  he  expired  at  1  p.m.,  December  30th.

Madame  Vavin  writes  :

I  was  very  anxious  and  troubled  as  to  the  health  of
an  Aunt  who  is  very  dear  to  me  ;  and  on  the  evening
of  December  26th-27th,  1891,  I  had  received  a  letter
giving  me  very  alarming  news  of  this  Aunt.  I  anticipated
her  immediate  death,  and  went  to  sleep  in  this  state  of
mind.  I  then  dreamt  as  follows.  I  was  present  at  a
funeral,  which  seemed  to  belong  to  my  family.  I  saw
my  brother  in  uniform  and  all  my  relations  in  mourning.
I  at  first  thought  that  this  must  be  my  Aunt's  funeral ;
— yet  my  grief  did  not  seem  to  me  to  be  as  great  as  I
should  have  felt  in  such  a  case  ;  and  I  saw  in  the  group
before  me  my  cousin,  the  grandchild  and  nearest  relative
of  this  Aunt,  in  very  slight  mourning. Suddenly  a  voice


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  263

seemed  to  whisper  these  words  in  my  ear,  "  This  is  not
your  Atmt's  funeral, — but  the  funeral  of  M.  Richet,  who
is  about  to  die." At  this  moment  I  awoke.

Next  day  my  brother  told  me  that  M.  Richet  was  ill,
— a  fact  of  which  I  was  quite  unaware.  I  then  told  my
dream  to  him  and  to  several  other  persons.

Mahguekite  Vavin.

Madame  Vavin's  brother, above  referred  to,  corroborates,
(G.  234.)

Another  symbolic  dream  of  a  funeral  (G.  234,  Journal,
Vol.  VI.,  p.  83)  recorded  before  the  dreamer  knew  of  the
death  may  be  mentioned  here,  though  it  did  not  coincide
definitely  with  illness  or  with  death.  It  occurred  to
Mr.  J.  V.  Owen  in  America  between  the  death  and  funeral
of  his  mother  in  England.  She  was  very  old,  but  he
knew  of  no  special  reason  for  anxiety.  He  wrote  to  his
sister  before  he  knew  of  the  death,  in  answer  to  her
letter  announcing  their  mother's  serious  illness,  as  follows  :

I  dreamed  I  was  in  a  house  where  there  was  a  funeral
going  on.  Everybody  was  dressed  in  black,  and  I  saw
you  all  there  except  mother,  and  father  [dead  16  years]
told  me  that  she  was  dead,  and  that  it  was  her  funeral
that  was  then  in  process  of  being  carried  out  ;  and  I
have  not  been  able  to  shake  off  the  sad  feeling  it  caused
me  since. If  dear  mother  is  still  ahve,  tell  her,  etc.  .  .  .

Another  dream  connected  with  a  funeral  (L.  994,  Journal,
Vol.  VII.,  p.  176)  may  be  naturally  classed  with  the  one
just  described.  Again  there  is  a  want  of  very  exact
coincidence,  but  it  was  related  before  any  coincidence  was
suspected,  and  it  was  recorded  sixteen  days  after  its
occurrence.  Mrs.  Peebles  dreamt  that  the  baby  of  a
friend  of  her  daughter  and  acquaintance  of  her  own  was
dead  and  preparations  were  being  made  for  the  burial.
She  dreamt  this  on  the  night  of  the  day  on  which  the
funeral,  which  her  daughter  attended,  had  taken  place,
and  told  her  husband  of  it  in  the  morning,  as  he  testifies,
before  they  had  heard  of  illness  or  death.


264  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part!  i

There  are  two  experiences  coinciding  with  the  oncoming
of  fatal  illness  which  the  percipient  did  not  at  the  time  (
connect  with  the  sick  person. In  the  first  (L.  967,  Journal,  ,
Vol. VI., p. 183) — a waking auditory hallucination — no  ]
idea  at  all  of  illness  or  death  seems  to  have  been  sug-  f
gested. It  is  perhaps  most  reasonable  to  suppose  in  this
case that the coincidence between the illness and the  ]
unrecognised  call  was  accidental,  especially  as,  if  there  was
telepathy, the link between agent and percipient  was
apparently local only (cf. L.  1087 above, p. 183).  To
describe  the  case  briefly,  a  nursery  maid  named  Margaret  -
heard  herself  called  one  night  as  she  was  preparing  for  i
bed. Supposing  it  was  her  mistress,  Mrs. "  Thompson,"  [
she went out  into the passage but  found  no one, and  j
while  listening  thought  she  heard  a  deep  sigh. She  spoke  s
of  the  experience  to  the  governess  next day. Later  it  [
was learnt that Mrs. Thompson's brother-in-law, Mr.  ^
Edward  Thompson,  had  been  taken  ill  that  evening  and  t
died  two  days  later. His  much-loved  sister,  also  named  j
Margaret,  had  till  lately  occupied  the  room  in  which  the  !  (
nursery  maid  and  children  now  slept  and  in  which  she
heard  the  call,  and  Edward  Thompson's  mind  is  said  to  !
have  been  dwelling  on  his  sister  during  his  illness. It  will
be  observed,  however,  that  the  call  "Margaret"  heard  by
the  percipient  suggested  to  her  a  female,  not  a  male,  voice.

In  the  other  unrecognised  case  (L.  987,  Journal,  Vol.
VII.,  p.  106)  which  came  through  the  American  Branch
of  the  Society,  Mrs.  Krekel,  in  a  dream  or  in  a  state
between  sleeping  and  waking,  heard  a  loud  rap  on  her
bed-head  and  afterwards  saw  an  arm  thrust  over  her
shoulder  handing  her  a  large  envelope  with  mourning
border  and  the  word  death  upon  it.  She  told  the  dream
to  a  friend,  who  corroborates.  She  afterwards  learnt  that
her  mother,  500  miles  away,  had  been  taken  ill  that  night
and  died  two  days  later.  The  accoimt  was  written
within  a  week  of  the  experience.  It  appears  that  the
mother  had  rapped  on  the  furniture  to  call  attention  to
her  need  of  assistance,  and  Mrs.  Krekel  is  inclined  to
attribute  the  auditory  part  of  her  experience  to  this  fact  ;
but  this  seems  pressing  the  coincidence  too  far.


Lxxxvi.J  Spontaneous  Gases  :  hripression  Externalised.  265

There  are  three  cases — one  of  apparitions  and  two  of
dreams — in  which  two  percipients  are  concerned,  and
which  for  this  reason  it  is  convenient  to  take  together.
In  the  first  two  the  agent's  experience  is  illness,  as  in
the  cases  just  dealt  with.

In  the  first  (L.  820,  Journal,  Vol.  III.,  p.  356)  the  two
percipients  in  different  rooms,  but  on  the  same  evening,  see
apparitions  of  the  sick  person.  It  has  been  described  in
Proceedings,  Vol.  V.,  p.  309,  but  I  do  think  it  has  been
printed  in  full  except  in  the  Journal,  perhaps  because,  as
■Roll  be  seen,  the  accounts  given  by  the  two  percipients
are  not  completely  consistent  in  detail.  This  is  not  sur-
prising in  records  made  more  than  two  and  a  half  years
after  the  experience.  It  will  be  noticed  that  there  was
something  a  little  grotesque — unhke  a  real  person — in  the
behaviour  or  appearance  of  both  apparitions,  and  a
symbolic  suggestion  of  mourning,  and  therefore  death,  in
the  second. One  of  the  percipients,  Mrs.  Treloar,  writes  :

(L.  820.)

On  August  26th,  1885,  Mr.  Treloar  and  I,  then  Hving
at  The  Firs,  Bromyard,  dined  with  my  brother,  the  Rev.
W.  Cowpland.  Mr.  Treloar 's  letter  of  March  3rd,  1888,
will  describe  what  happened.

"  My  wife  and  I  were  dining  with  my  brother-in-law,
and  there  met  my  wife's  sister,  who  lived  a  short  distance
from  the  rectory.  It  was  a  very  lively  party,  and  this
lady  was  in  the  best  of  health  and  spirits.  It  was  on  a
Wednesday.  .  .  .  On  the  Tuesday  following,  in  the  evening,
about  eight  o'clock,  my  wife,  who  had  been  in  the  nursery
during  the  half-hour  the  nurse  was  having  her  supper,
went  into  our  bedroom,  where  there  was  a  lamp  burning
on  the  dressing-table  ;  and  as  she  passed  the  bed,  in
going  roimd  to  the  other  end  of  the  room,  she  saw,  as
she  thought,  a  black  dress  on  the  other  side  of  the  bed,
but  on  looldng  again,  a  figure  slowly  rose  up  from  what
appeared  a  bent  position,  and  looked  straight  at  her  for
the  space  of  three  or  four  seconds  ;  and  she  then  recog-
nised her  sister.  Her  face  was  very  pale,  and  had  a  look
of  anguish  on  it, My  wife  came  downstairs,  and  I  noticed


266


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


that  she  seemed  troubled,  and  on  askmg  her  what  had
upset  her,  she  told  me.  I,  of  course,  thought  it  must
have  been  a  delusion.  Next  evening  (Wednesday,  Sep-
tember 2nd),  just  as  Ave  were  sitting  down  to  dinner,  the
groom  of  our  doctor  came  to  the  house  and  said  his
master  wished  to  see  me.  I  went  down  and  fomid  him
just  about  to  start  for  my  sister-in-law's  residence,  as  he
told  me  that  she  had  sent  for  him,  and  from  what  he
could  learn  she  was  in  a  most  dangerous  state  from
diphtheria.  She  died  two  days  afterwards,  and  my  wife
never  saw  her,  as  it  was,  in  the  doctor's  opinion,  running
too  great  a  risk."

This  account  is  correct,  but  does  not  state  that  just
as  I  had  told  him  of  the  apparition,  my  niece.  Miss  Maud
Cowpland,  who  was  staying  with  us,  came  rushing  down-
stairs from  her  bedroom,  whither  she  had  gone  a  few
minutes  before — and  simultaneously  I  began  to  tell  her
what  I  had  seen,  and  she,  scarcely  heeding  me,  burst  out,
"I've  seen  Auntie  Annie  !  I've  seen  Aimtie  Annie  !  "
[Mr.  Treloar  confirms  this.]  I  did  not  question  her
further  then,  but  her  letter  appended  shows  what  she  saw.
She  left  the  house  next  day,  I  believe  partly  on  account
of  the  fright.  I  had  never  before  seen,  nor  have  I
since  seen,  any  apparition  whatever,  nor  have  I  had  any
other  experience  at  all  resembling  those  which  I  here
recount.  After  the  first  moment,  I  was  not  alarmed
by  the  vision  of  my  sister  Anne.  She  was  so  remarkably
vigorous  and  full  of  life  that  the  idea  of  her  death  never
occurred  to  me.  In  fact,  what  happened  was  this  :
there  was  diphtheria  m  the  parish,  and  she  most  impru-
dently kissed  a  school-child  suffering  from  that  disease.
On  the  Tuesday  evening  (when  the  figure  was  seen)  she
had  retired  early  to  her  room,  saying  to  her  servants
that  she  had  a  bad  cold.  They  were  young,  and  there
was  no  one  in  her  house  to  whom  she  would  have  spoken
confidentially  as  to  her  state.  All  that  can  be  known,
then,  of  her  condition  at  this  moment  is  that  she  was
alone  in  her  room — whether  asleep  or  awake  we  do  not
l<mow — and  that  next  day  she  sent  for  the  doctor,  and  was
fatally  ill.  There  was  a  strong  affection  between  her  and  myself.


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  267

I  may  add  that  the  figure  which  I  saw  had  a  boimet
and  veil  on,  the  veil  beuig  tied  back  round  her  bonnet,
as  was  my  sister's  wont.  The  lamp  was  bright,  and  so
clearly  did  I  see  the  figure  that  I  observed  the  freckles
on  the  nose.  My  sister  had  fine,  expressive  eyes,  and
their  look  m  the  apparition  was  full  of  anxiety  and  pam.
The  figure  did  not  disappear  instantaneously,  but  seemed
to  thin  away  into  air.

Miss  Maud  Cowpland  describes  her  experience  as  follows  :

April  Uth,  1888.

The  year  my  father  died  I  went  to  spend  a  few  days
with  my  aunt,  Mi's.  Treloar.  The  second  night,  after
wishing  her  good-night,  about  a  quarter-past  ten,  I  retired
to  my  room,  and  while  having  my  bath  I  felt  an  unseen
power  compel  me  to  turn  towards  a  couch  which  stood
at  the  foot  of  the  bed,  at  the  head  of  which  (I  mean
the  couch)  stood  a  figure  dressed  in  crape,  whom  I  im-
mediately recognised  as  Miss  Cowpland,  and  exclaimed  :
"  Why,  Amit  Annie,  how  is  it  you  are  here  ?  "  Then
the  figure  gradually  disappeared.

In  answer  to  questions  Miss  Cowpland  adds  :

1.  I  have  never  seen  anythmg  before  IMiss  Cowpland's
appearance,  but  often  before  and  afterwards,  when  alone,
have  felt  people,  or,  I  think  I  should  say  spirits,  around
and  near  me.  One  afternoon  last  summer,  a  feehng
came  over  me  as  of  a  hand,  with  long,  soft  fingers,
stroking  my  face.

2.  The  crape  seemed  to  faU  in  thick  folds  from  the
crown  of  the  head  to  the  gromid,  but  those  folds  over
the  face,  instead  of  hiding,  threw  the  features  out  most
distinctly.  I  cannot  say  exactly  how  long  it  stayed ;
perhaps  half  a  minute  ; not  longer.

3.  I  am  ashamed  to  say  I  felt  most  horribly  afraid.  .  .  .
I  mentioned  it  to  three  people,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Treloar,

and  the  servant,  whom  I  asked  to  sleep  with  me,  as  I
was  too  much  of  a  coward  to  do  so  alone  after  that,
in  that  particular  room. Yes,  I  remember  IMrs.  Treloar


268


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


telling  me  what  she  had  seen  ;  it  was  after  that  that  I
told  her  my  experience.

The  second  case  (L.  1210,  Joimial,  Vol.  XVIII.,  p.  25)
was  sent  to  us  through  Mr.  George  Tyrrell,  an  Associate
of  the  Society,  who  is  personally  acquainted  with  the
dreamers.  The  names  and  addresses  of  all  the  persons
concerned  have  been  sent  to  us,  but  we  have  been  re-
quested not  to  print  them ;  we  therefore  give  pseudonyms.

(L.  1210.)

Mr.  "  Lawson's  "  statement  [Enclosed  in  a  letter  from  Mr.
Tyrrell,  dated  November  21,  1916.^]  is  as  follows  :

Last  Jaly,  when  my  daughter  and  I  were  staying  in
Somersetshire,  I  had  a  very  vivid  dream.  I  dreamed
that  I  was  in  a  bedroom,  and  saw  lying  on  the  floor  my
brother-in-law  [Mr.  R.  Stephen  (pseudonym)]  ;  he  was
unconscious  and  looked  perfectly  ghastly.  With  some
difficulty  I  hf ted  him  on  to  the  bed  ;  as  far  as  I  could
see,  he  was  not  breathing  and  I  could  feel  no  motion  of
his  heart.  I  sprinkled  some  water  on  his  face,  but  this
having  no  effect,  I  ran  to  the  door  and  called  for  assist-
ance. No  one  came,  so  I  ran  out  into  the  road  where  I
saw  two  men  and  a  woman.  I  told  them  that  some  one
was  very  iU  and  asked  them  to  go  to  the  nearest  pubhc-
house  and  bring  some  brandy  ;  both  the  men  refused,
saying  that  the  public-houses  were  closed,  but  the  woman
seeing  my  distress  said  she  would  try  and  get  some,  and
I  gave  her  Is.  for  the  purpose.  She,  however,  did  not
come  back  again.  On  returning  to  the  bedroom  I  found
my  brother-in-law  lying  just  as  1  had  left  him.  I  then
hunted  over  the  house,  but  could  find  no  one.  I  was
in  a  terrible  state  of  anxiety  and  distress  not  knowing
what  to  do,  and  being  pretty  sure  in  my  mind  that  he
was  dead.  I  then,  just  as  I  was  giving  all  up  in  despair,
awoke  and  rejoiced  to  know  that  it  was  only  a  dream.

Next  monaing  I  told  my  daughter  of  my  dream  while
we  were  at  breakfast,  and  she  said,  "  How  very  curious.

1  Mr.  Lawson  cannot  remember  on  what  day  he  wrote  this  account.


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Oases  :  Impression  Externalised.  269

I,  too,  have  had  a  very  similar  dream."  These  dreams
occurred  on  July  3rd  [1916],  and  on  the  5th,  when  we
returned  home,  I  went  to  see  my  brother-in-law,  and
found  him  looking  very  bad.  He  told  me  that  on  Monday
night,  the  3rd  July,  he  found  himself  lying  on  the  floor
and  feelmg  very  ill ;  he  was  utterly  unable  to  move  or
to  call  for  help.  He  thinks  he  must  have  been  uncon-
scious for  a  long  time.  Early  in  the  morning,  he  managed
to  call  the  cook,  and  then  remembers  nothing  more  till
7  o'clock,  when  he  sent  for  the  doctor.  He  told  me  he
had  never  felt  so  ill  before,  and  quite  thought  it  was  all
over  for  him  ;  he  said  he  felt  such  a  longmg  for  some
one  to  come  while  lying  on  the  floor,  and  a  feelmg  of
great  distress  at  not  being  able  to  call  for  aid.

I  may  state  that  before  leaving  home,  we  had  seen  him
in  quite  good  health  and  had  [heard]  nothing  of  him  while
we were m  Somerset.

[C.  W.  Lawson.]

Mr.  Lawson's  daughter  corroborates  his  statement,  and  adds
an  account  of  her  own  dream,  as  foUows  :  This  also  was
enclosed  in  Mr.  Tyrrell's  letter  of  November  21,  1916.

On  Monday  night,  July  3rd  [1916],  I  had  a  most  vivid
dream  about  my  uncle  [R.  Stephen].

I  dreamt  that  he  came  running  up  to  me  looking  very
iU ;  he  handed  me  a  book  which  he  asked  me  to  take
down  in  the  town.  I  asked  him  what  was  the  matter,
and  he  said  :  "I  am  very  ill,"  and  he  then  left  the
room  where  I  and  two  or  three  other  peoj^le  were.  The
'  next  thing  I  remember  was  that  he  was  lymg  unconscious,
and  that  none  of  us  seemed  able  to  go  to  his  help.  When
I  came  do^vn  to  breakfast  the  next  morning,  my  father
told  me  he  had  had  a  dream  about  Uncle  [Bob]  being
ill  ;  after  hearing  this,  I  was  so  impressed  that  I  wanted
to  write  and  ask  him  how  he  was,  as  we  were  staying
away  at  the  time  ;  but  we  did  not  write,  as  we  were
afraid  of  upsetting  him.  We  returned  home  on  the
following  Wednesday  [July  5,  1916],  and  on  Thursday
momuag  my  uncle  came  up  stiU  looking  very  ill  and  with


270


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


a  nasty  cut  on  his  nose  which  he  had  got  through  his
fall  on  the  same  night  that  I  had  dreamt  about  him.

[E.  Lawson.]

It  has  not  been  possible  to  obtain  any  statement  from  Mr.
Stephen,  since  he  greatly  dislikes  making  any  reference  to
his  experience,  but  evidence  as  to  the  date  and  nature  of  his
illness  has  been  obtained  from  his  cook  and  from  the  doctor
who  attended  him.


[Statement  by  Mr.  Stephen's  cook  concerning  his  illness,  enclosed
in  Mr.  TyrreWs  letter  of  November  21,  1916.]

At  1  a.m.  on  July  4th,  1916,  I  was  aroused  by  hearing
a  thud  which  seemed  to  come  from  Mr.  [Stephen's]  room.
I  sat  up  and  hstened,  but  hearing  no  further  sound,  I
went  to  sleep.  At  3.45  I  heard  Mr.  [Stephen]  knocking
at  my  door  and  saying:  "Come  quickly,  I  am  very  ill."
I  roused  the  housemaid  and  went  to  Mr.  [Stephen's]
room  ;  we  found  him  lying  on  the  floor  unconscious  and
looliing  very  ill.  I  sent  the  housemaid  for  some  whisky,
and  we  managed  to  pour  a  httle  into  his  mouth,  and
then  with  difficulty  lifted  him  into  bed  ;  he  was  icy
cold,  and  I  should  think  had  been  Ijnng  for  hours  on  the
floor ;  he  then  revived  a  little,  and  said  :  "  I  am  feeling
very  ill.  I  think  I  am  dying."  I  wanted  to  send  for
the  doctor,  but  he  would  not  let  me.  After  a  bit  he
seemed  to  get  better,  so  we  went  back  to  bed ;  at  7
o'clock  I  went  to  his  room  and  found  him  still  very  ill,
and  he  agreed  to  my  sending  for  the  doctor.  On  clearing
out  his  room  the  next  day,  I  found  clots  of  blood  under
the  washing-stand,  so  the  thud  I  heard  at  1  o'clock  must
have  been  caused  by  his  falliiig  against  the  washing-stand,
as  his  nose  and  face  were  cut  about.

(Signed) [F.  Williams]  (pseudonym).

The  doctor's  statement,  verified  by  reference  to  his  pro-
fessional diary,  is  as  follows  :

November  26,  1916.

I  was  called  at  3.45  a.m.  on  July  4th,  1916,  to  see  Mr.
[R. Stephen] at  Cottage,  — — . He had then  re-


Lxxxvi.] Spontaneous  Cases  :  tmiyressio7i  Externalised.  27l

covered  consciousness  (he  had  been  unconscious  for  some
considerable  time),  and  was  sufferuag  from  the  effects  of
rather  severe  haemorrhage  due  to  a  womid  caused  by  a
fall.  [C.  Barker]  (pseudonym).

It  will  be  observed  that  Dr.  Barker  differs  from  the  cook
as  to  the  hour  at  Avhich  he  was  called  in.  He  is  more  likely
to  be  accurate  in  such  a  matter,  but  the  point  is  not  im-
portant for  our  present  enquiry.  There  seems  httle  doubt
that  Mr.  Stephen  was  first  taken  iU  at  about  1  a.m.  on  July
4,  1916,  and  that  he  remained  wholly  or  partially  unconscious
for  some  hours.

In  the  dreams  the  veridical  points,  namely,  the  IjHing  on
the  floor  unconscious  and  the  difficulty  in  getting  help,
are  wrapped  up  in  imaginary  incidents  of  a  dramatic
character  in  which  the  dreamer  plays  a  part.

In  both  these  last  two  cases  the  two  percipients  were
in  different  rooms,  and  we  do  not  know  that  their  ex-
periences were  simultaneous.  They  should  be  compared
with  L.  1223,  p.  167  above.  In  the  very  striking  dream
case  which  follows  (L.  1138,  Journal,  Vol.  XI.,  p.  269),  the
two  dreamers  were  together  and  apparently  dreamt  simul-
taneously and  almost  exactly  at  the  time  of  the  accident.
The  dreams  were  supplementary  to  each  other  rather  than
identical.  The  case  was  sent  to  us  by  the  kindness  of
JMiss  K.  Raleigh,  of  Beechwood,  Loudwater,  Bucks.

L.  1138.)

The  accomits  were  enclosed  in  a  letter  from  Miss  Raleigh,
dated  Aprh.  28th,  1904,  and  were,  she  says,  written  by  the
witnesses  independently  of  each  other.  They  gave  their  full
names  and  addresses,  but  wished  mitiaLs  only  to  be  printed.

Miss  M.  L.  B.  wrote  as  follows  :

In  compliance  to  the  request  of  Miss  K.  Raleigh  I  have
written  thus  :

On  the  evening  of  November  18th,  1903,  I,  M.  L.  B.,
retired about half-past nine o'clock and fell asleep.  I


72


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


had  a  most  peculiar  vision  or  dream.  I  thought  I  was
wall<ing  through  streets  in  a  strange  place  ;  it  was  arti-
ficially lighted  ;  there  Avere  a  number  of  people  walking
to  and  fro  on  either  side  of  the  streets.  I  heard  a
pecuhar  noise,  and  turned  partly  round  to  see  what  was
the  cause  of  it.  A  vehicle  was  coming  rushing  across
the  top  of  the  street  ;  I  was  a  few  paces  down  ;  it  looked
somethmg  like  a  train,  but  not  a  train,  it  was  running
on  metals  ;  something  was  coming  down  where  I  had
crossed ;  there  was  an  awful  crash  as  if  my  (so-called)
train  had  rma  upon  something,  and  in  a  moment  some-
thing heavy  fell  with  a  sickenitag  thud  on  the  pavement,
at  my  feet.  I  tried  to  cry  out,  but  could  not.  In  a
moment  a  crowd  had  collected,  and  several  people  picked
up  the  body  which  had  fallen  at  my  feet.  I  could  see
it  was  a  man.  I  could  not  see  the  face,  only  a  large
gash  on  the  baclv  of  the  head,  and  near  the  lips,  from
which  the  blood  was  flowing.  As  the  drops  fell  they
splashed  ui.to  a  puddle  of  blood  on  the  groimd  and
sprinkled  on  to  me.  Some  one  said,  "  Take  him  away."
I  tried  to  cry  out,  "What  shall  I  do?"  and  awoke
trembhng  and  perspiring,  and  crying  bitterly.

I  could  not  think  where  I  was,  [but]  found  I  was  in
bed,  and  had  been  dreaming,  as  I  supposed.  I  lay  quite
still  for  fear  of  disturbing  my  sister.  In  a  short  time  my
sister  ht  a  match  and  looked  at  her  watch,  and  said,
"It  is  past  eleven  o'clock."  I  did  not  teU  her  of  my
dream,  as  I  did  not  wish  her  to  worry.  I  thought  it
strange  for  her  to  get  a  light  and  tell  me  the  time.  I
was  fearfully  worried  for  some  days.

On  the  Monday  morning  followmg,  I  had  another  dream.
I  dreamed  my  brother,  H.  B.,  (I  had  not  seen  since  the
previous  January,  or  even  heard  from  him)  was  lyhig  ill
in  a  strange  room,  and  a  man  was  putting  him  in  an
ambulance.  I  thought  he  said,  "  Take  my  sister  away,
I  am  not  fit  to  be  where  she  is."  He  looked  so  strange,
I  awoke  again  in  great  agitation.

On  the  same  evening  a  young  friend.  Miss  P.,  came  to
call,  and  my  sister  left  us  alone.  After  she  had  gone  I
said, "  R., have  you  heard  if  my  nephew, or  any  one


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases :  Impression  Externalised.  273

belonging  to  me,  has  met  with  an  accident,  and  they  will
not  tell  me,  as  I  have  had  such  strange  dreams  and  feel  I
don't  know  what  to  do  with  myself.  I  feel  haunted.
I  have  not  felt  hke  this  since  just  before  Mother  died."
I  told  my  dreams  and  cried  very  much.  She  said,  "  Don't
fret,"  and  assured  me  she  had  heard  nothing  concerning
any  one  belonging  to  me. I  stiU  felt  miserable.

On  the  26th  of  November  we  received  the  news  that

our  brother,  H.,  was  lying  iU  in  F Infirmary,  in  a

precarious  condition  ;  on  the  27th  we  received  the  news
that  he  was  dead,  died  the  previous  day  after  the  letter
was  posted  to  us.  On  the  paper  enclosed  you  will  find
all  the  main  information  we  received  regarding  our  brother's
accident  and  death.  If  you  compare  the  dates  you  will
find  the  accident  happened  at  the  time  I  was  dreaming
about  it.  I  had  better  state  here  I  have  never  seen  an
electric  tramcar.  What  I  have  written  here  is  perfectly
true.

I  have  not  seen  my  brother  either  hving  or  dead  since
a  year  last  January,  as  I  was  much  too  iU  to  go  to  his
funeral.

The  other  sister,  Miss  H.  M.  B.,  wrote  :

November  18th,  1903,  I  went  to  bed  at  10  p.m.  and
was  going  to  sleep  when  a  loud  crashing  soimd  roused  me,
and  the  voice  of  my  brother  followed  saying,  "  Oh  Duck,
I  am  done  for."  I  covered  my  eyes  and  said,  "  Oh
H.,  is  it  your  face  that  is  hurt?"  He  said  "No."
The  horror  of  it  was  extremely  depressing.  It  was  about
11.15  and  I  could  get  no  sleep  through  the  night,  it
worried  me  so.  I  had  not  seen  my  brother  since  the
previous  January,  and  he  had  not  written  to  me  since.
Duck  was  his  pet  name  for  me.

Miss  P.,  the  friend  referred  to  in  the  first  account,  wrote  :

On  the  23rd  of  November,  1903,  I,  R.  P.,  went  to

to  see  my  friend  Miss  M.  B.  On  the  23rd  of  November
my  friend  told  me  of  her  distressing  dream  that  she  had
dreamed  on  the  18th  of  November, 1903  ; it  seemed  as


274


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


if  she  could  not  forget  it,  she  said  that  it  seemed  to
worry  her  so.  The  time  that  my  friend  told  me  about
her  dream  was  between  the  hours  of  seven  and  eight
o'clock  in  the  evening,  and  my  friend  said  it  was  some
one  had  met  with  an  accident,  and  the  face  was  hurt,
but  [she]  could  not  see  who  it  was,  and  my  friend  said
that  it  looked  like  a  train,  and  yet  not  so,  as  it  had  no
engine  on,  and  my  friend  has  never  seen  an  electric  car
at  all,  and  she  could  not  forget  her  dream  ;  and  then
on  the  26th  of  November  my  friend  had  news  about  her
brother's  accident.  R.  P.

Miss  H.  M.  B.  wrote  later  :

I  did  not  mention  my  dream  to  any  one  until  after
my  brother's  accident.  .  .  .  He  died  on  November  26th,
1903,  and  then  my  sister  told  me  about  her  dream,  and  I
said,  how  very  strange  [it  was]  we  should  each  have
such  a  strange  experience  and  at  the  same  time ;  I
then  told  her  all  about  it.

It  thus  happens  that  no  further  corroboration  was  obtainable
of  Miss  H.  M.  B.'s  experience  ;  but  the  statement  in  her
sister's  accomit  that  she  ht  a  match,  looked  at  her  watch,
and  told  her  what  time  it  was,  affords  some  indirect  evidence
ii:i  confirmation  of  her  own.

The  following  paragraph  describing  the  accident  is  taken
from  Lloyd's  Weekly  News,  of  November  29th,  1903.

ELECTBIC  TRAMCAB  FATALITY.

At  F.  yesterday  Mr.  D held  an  inquiry  on  H.  B.,

47,  a  horse  dealer,  of . Mr.  H.  W.  T  ,  an  official

at  the  Bank  of  England,  hving  at ,  stated  that  at  a

quarter  to  eleven  on  the  night  of  Wednesday  week  [Nov-
ember 18th]  he  was  on  an  electric  tramcar  goitig  westward.
They  had  just  restarted  from  the  Pack  Horse  when  the
deceased  drove  out  of  the  Devonshire  Road  into  the  High
Road  right  across  the  track  of  the  car.  He  did  not
appear  to  see  the  car.  The  car  was  pulled  up  at  once,
but  it  caught  the  trap  and  overturned  it,  and  deceased
was  thrown out  and  struck  his  head  on the  kerb.  It


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases :  Impression  Externalised.  275


was an unavoidable accident. It appeared that  the

deceased was surgically attended at the Hospital,

and  then  removed  home.  On  Monday  [November  23rd]
he  was  admitted  to  the  infirmary,  where  he  died  from  the
effects  of  concussion  and  laceration  of  the  brain  and
fracture  of  the  skull.  The  jury  returned  a  verdict  of
"Accidental  death."

Miss  Raleigh  writes  :  ■

.{May  3rd,  1904.]

i  To  the  best  of  my  behef  Miss  H.  M.  B.  and  Miss  M.  B.

are  truthful,  accurate,  and  careful  in  their  statements.  I
have  always  found  them  so,  and  they  have  worked  for
me  for  about  two  years.  They  related  their  dreams  to
me  about  a  fortnight  after  the  death  of  their  brother,
but  in  less  detail  than  in  their  written  account.  The
main  features  in  the  written  account  correspond  with
what  they  told  me.

Miss  M.  B.  told  me  that  she  has  had  various  similar
experiences.  Katherine  Ann  Raleigh.

It  is  an  interesting  question  in  a  case  like  this  whether
both  percipients  received  simultaneously  telepathic  impacts
from  the  external  agent,  or  whether  one  received  it  and
passed  it  on  to  the  other,  as  presumably  happens  when
similar  and  simultaneous  hallucinations  or  dreams  occur
without  any  known  corresponding  external  event  to  which
they  can  be  referred.  (For  instances,  see  Chapter  IV.
below.)  A  possible  conjecture  is  that  both  things  hajj-
pen  and  perhaps  fortify  each  other.  If  in  this  particular
case,  for  instance,  there  had  not  been  a  three-cornered
telepathic  connection  between  the  two  percipients  and
the  external  agent,  it  is  conceivable  that  the  impressions
received  might  have  been  less  vivid,  and  perhaps  have
failed  to  reach  the  normal  consciousness  through  the
dreams.  This  is  in  effect  the  hypothesis  proposed  by
Gurney  in  relation  to  veridical  collective  hallucinations —
see  Phayitasms  of  the  Living,  Chap.  XVIII.,  §  7.  But  for
the  theory  of  collective  percipience — a  most  important
subject — I  may  refer  the  reader  to  that  chapter,  and  to


276


Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.


[part


Proceedings,  Vol.  X.,  Chap.  XV.,  pp.  319-326  ;  also  to
Myers'  Human  Personality,  especially  section  648,  etc.

The  last  case  has  taken  us  from  cases  of  illness  of  the
agent  to  one  of  sudden  accident.  The  next  (L.  1221,
Journal,  Vol.  XIX.,  p.  7)  is  a  simple  case  of  a  mother
having  an  auditory  hallucination  of  her  son  calling  at  the
time  he  received  a  severe  injury.  We  received  it  through
Mr.  F.  C.  Constable  of  Wick  Court,  near  Bristol,  a  Mem-
ber of  the  Society. He  wrote  :

(L.  1221.)

The  two  statements  and  letter  given  below  speak  for
themselves.  Dr.  Beavis,  Mrs.  S.  Ashley  and  Miss  Dodd, —
a  daughter  of  the  late  Major  Dodd, — -are  all  well  known
to  me  personally.  Miss  Dodd's  statement  was  sent  me
by  post.  At  the  time  of  the  accident  she  was  in  residence
with  Mrs.  S.  Ashley.  Mrs.  S.  Ashley's  statement  was
made  by  her  in  my  absence.  Her  endorsement  on  Miss
Dodd's  letter  was  made  in  my  presence.

23r^  Oct.  1918.  ^-  Nonstable.

Statement  of  Miss  Dodd.

Parsonage  House,

LiDDINGTON,  NR.  SwiNDON,  Oct.  YltTl.

Dear  1Mb.  Constable, — In  reply  to  your  note  this  is  as
nearly  as  I  remember  what  ^aassed  between  Mrs.  Ashley
and  myself  on  the  day  Arthur  met  with  his  accident.  I
missed  him  at  his  usual  dinner  hour,  but  his  mother  then
told  me  that  he  did  not  always  come  home  at  that  time.
After  dimier  I  retired  as  usual  to  my  httle  sitting-room
and  Mrs.  Ashley  to  her  duties  at  the  back  of  the  house.
In  about  an  hour's  time  I  was  surprised  to  hear  her  call
out,  "  Is  that  you  Arty  ?  "  and  getting  no  reply  she
came  into  my  room  saying  "  Have  you  seen  anything  of
Ai-thur  ?  "  I  said  "No,  I  have  not."  She  then  seemed
very  smprised,  saying,  "Well,  I  heard  him  caU  out  'Ma'
(a  pet  name  for  Iiis  mother)  as  plainly  as  I  have  ever
heard  him,  and  if  that  was  not  his  voice  I  have  never


Lxxxvi.] Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  277

heard  it."  I  remarked  that  it  was  very  curious,  and  she
then  added,  "  I  hope  there's  nothing  the  matter  with
him."  Seeitig  that  she  was  much  agitated  I  tried  to
soothe  her  and  said,  "  Oh  !  he  will  be  home  all  right
presently."  This  was  all  we  said  to  each  other  and  Mrs.
Ashley  then  went  away,  but  soon  after  I  heard  a  knock
at  the  door  and  some  one  said,  "  No  answer,"  then  I
heard  Mrs.  Ashley  cry  out  and  on  going  to  her  to  see
what  had  happened  she  put  a  letter  in  my  hand  Avhich
she  had  just  received  from  the  works  telling  her  of  her
son's  accident.  I  think  this  is  all  you  will  want  to  Imow,
and  hope  I  have  made  it  plain  enough.  I  may  add
that  I  have  been  much  impressed  by  such  a  clear  pre-
monition ^  of  the  sad  event.  C.  A.  Dodd.

Endorsement  on  the  above  by  Mrs.  Ashley.

I  have  read  this  letter  and  all  therein  stated  is  correct.
I  never  heard  my  son's  voice  clearer  in  my  life.

M.  Ashley.

Croft  Cottage,  Wick,
Bristol,  Oct.  22nd.,  1918.

Mrs.  Ashley's  own  Statement.

At  the  hour  of  the  accident  I  distinctly  heard  the  boy
call  me.  I  said  "  Arthur,  is  that  you  '?  "  Having  no
answer  I  said,  "  Is  that  Arthur,  Miss  Dodd  ?  "  She  said,
"  What,  is  Arthur  come  home  ?  "  I  said,  "  I  distinctly
heard  him  call  me.  I  do  hope  nothing  has  happened
to  him." She  said, "  I  hope  not."

On  Friday  afternoon,  Sept.  6th,  at  3.30,  I  was  in  the
back kitchen wiping my hands. Both back and  front
• doors  were  open  ;  it  was  about  3.30  the  accident  happened,
and  the  distance  is  about  1  mile  from  the  house.

M.  Ashley.

Croft  Cottage,  Wick,
Bristol,  Oct.  nth,  1918.

1  Mr.  Constable  informs  us,  in  reply  to  enquiries,  that  he  has  "not
the  slightest  doubt  [Miss  Dodd]  used  the  term  '  premonition  '  merely
for  '  abnormal  occurrence.'  " — that  is  not  as  implying  that  Mrs.  Ashley's
experience  preceded  the  accident.


278


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


II


Statement  by  Dr.  Beavis,  Manager  of  the  works  where  the
accident  occurred.

Wick,  neab  Bristol,  Oct.  2Zrd,  1918.
The  accident  happened  at  about  4  p.m.  on  Sept.  6th.
I  my.self  took  the  lad,  whose  right  arm  was  crushed,  to
the  hospital  at  Cosham,  and  he  remained  conscious  from
the  time  of  the  accident  up  to  the  time  of  my  handing
him  over  to  the  hospital  authorities.

Charles  Beavis.

The  following  case  (L.  1193,  Journal,  Vol.  XV.,  p.  342)
connected  with  the  loss  of  the  Titanic  was  sent  to  us  by
Miss  Alice  L.  Head,  an  Associate  of  the  Society,  who
requested  that,  in  printing  it,  the  names  and  addresses
of  the  persons  concerned,  except  her  own,  should  be
omitted.  Pseudonyms  have  therefore  been  substituted.
The  experience  seems  to  have  been  a  "  vision  "  somewhat
resembling  that  of  Miss  Paterson  (L.  1207,  see  above,
p.  243). Miss  Head  wrote  :

(L.  1193.)

26,  Leinster  Square,
Bayswater,  W.,  J^dy  4,  1912.

I  have  lately  heard  of  a  well  authenticated  case  of
telepathy.

A  friend  who  is  at  present  hving  with  us,  Miss  Margaret
Simpson,  lost  her  brother  in  the  wreck  of  the  Titanic.
This  brother  had  had  for  some  time  past  a  post  on
board  one  of  the  other  vessels  of  the  White  Star  line,
but  he  had  been  compelled  to  resign  it  on  accoimt  of
iUness.

Just  before  the  Titanic  sailed  lie  had  the  offer  of  a
similar  post  on  board  the  fated  ship,  which  he  accepted
at  the  last  moment.

The  fact  of  his  having  done  so  was  known  to  Miss
Margaret  Simpson,  but  not  to  a  married  sister,  Mrs.
Henderson,  who  lives  in  Vancouver.

On  April  19  [1912]  Mrs,  Henderson  wrote  m,  a  letter  to


&XXXVI.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  279


Miss  Emma  Simpson  (another  sister  living  at  Clifton)  the
following  account :

"  I  was  busy  in  the  afternoon  after  lunch  on  Tuesday,
April  16,  and  I  saw  Bessie  and  Nina  crying  and  clinging
to  one  another.  I  seemed  to  be  in  a  kind  of  dream
and  yet  I  was  wide  awake  and  had  not  even  been  thinking
of  them."

Bessie  and  Nina  are  the  wife  and  child  of  Mr.  Simpson
who  was  drowned.

In  reply  to  questions  by  Miss  Margaret  Simpson,  Mrs.
Henderson  wrote  again  on  Jime  13  :

"  You  asked  me  about  seeing  Bessie  and  Nina  ;  I  was
alone  in  the  house,  and  they  seemed  to  appear  to  me  in
a  sort  of  mist ;  I  could  not  see  their  faces.  Had  I  been
thinking  of  them  at  the  time,  I  could  understand  it,  but
I  was  busy  after  lunch.

"  I  did  not  know  anythiiig  about  Wilhe's  ilhiess  then,
or  that  he  was  on  the  Titanic,  but  I  had  no  doubt
that  it  was  Bessie  and  Nina  that  I  saw.  I  told  Cissy
and  Daisy  about  it  that  evening  (April  16th,  1912)."

I  have  myself  seen  the  letters  from  which  these  extracts
are  copied.

The  news  of  the  wreck,  which  took  place  on  [the  night
of  Ajsril  14-15,  1912],  was  known  in  England  on  Tuesday
16th,  and  also  in  Vancouver.  Alice  L.  Head.

To  this  account  the  signature  of  Miss  Margaret  Simpson
was  added  in  corroboration.

From  the  account  given  it  seems  probable  that  at  the
time  of  her  vision  Mrs.  Henderson  had  just  heard  of  the
vi^reok  of  the  Titanic,  as  the  news  of  it  reached  Vancouver
that  day.  But  she  did  not  know  her  brother  was  on
board,  and  therefore  had  no  reason  to  associate  his  wife
and  daughter  wdth  the  loss.

There  is  a  curious  case  (L.  989,  Journal,  Vol.  VII.,
p.  108)  in  which,  apparently  between  sleeping  and  waking,
Mr.  Shrubsole  in  England  sees  his  son  twice  over  in
positions  more  or  less  veridical  at  the  actual  time  (as  he

s


280 ,  /  Mrs.  Henry  Siclgivich.  [part

believed)  when  the  son  met  with  a  serious  accident  on
board  ship  in  the  Pacific  Ocean.  I  do  not  quote  it
because  the  evidence  for  the  time  coincidence  is  defective.
It  was  some  weeks  before  news  was  received  of  the
accident,  and  no  note  of  the  date  of  the  apparition  or
dream  had  been  made.  Moreover,  the  fullest  account  of
the  experience  (we  have  two)  was  not  written  within  our
limit  of  five  years.  The  earlier  account  seems  to  have
been  written  about  seven  months  after  the  event.

The  remaining  experiences  corresponding  to  accidents
happening  to  the  agent  are  undoubtedly  dreams.  The
first  I  will  quote  (L.  992,  Journal,  Vol.  VII.,  p.  125)
occurred  on  the  night  after  the  accident,  and  is  a  good
example  of  dream  dramatisation,  with  the  dreamer  playing
an  important  part.  There  is  too  much  correspondence
with  fact  to  be  easily  attributed  to  chaiice,  but,  as  will
be  seen,  the  accident  was  in  the  dream  connected  with
the  wrong  sister,  and  the  dream  representation  of  it  was
otherwise  incorrect.

(L.  992.)

Miss  C.  Clarkson  writes  :  .  t

Alverthobpe  Hall,  Wakefield,  May  8th,  1894.

On  Sunday,  May  5th,  1894, ^  my  sister  and  I  were
boating  on  the  river  Derwent,  in  Yorkshire  (near  Kirkham
Abbey)  with  a  party  of  friends  in  a  small  steam  launch.
Between  three  and  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  we  had
all  landed  to  gather  cowsHps  in  the  fields,  and  on  returning
to  the  boat,  for  some  reason  the  usual  plank  for  landing
was  not  in  position,  and  we  jumped  in  turn  from  the
bank  on  to  the  flat  end  of  the  boat.  I  was  the  last,
and  in  jumping  missed  my  footing  and  slipped  into  the
water,  catching  the  edge  of  the  boat  however  with  my
hands  as  I  went,  and  supporting  myself — so  that  I  was
not  totally  immersed,  though  the  water  was  a  good  depth
where  we  were.  Two  of  the  gentlemen  rushed  forward
and  pulled  me  out  by  my  arms. I  said  as  I  was  being

^  The  first  Sunday  in  May  1894  was  really  the  6th,


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  281


hauled  up,  "It  is  no  use  puUing  so  hard,  you  hurt  me."
One  of  them  said  "  We  must  puU,  if  we  are  to  get  you
out."  I  was  got  on  to  the  boat  in  a  very  short  time,
and  was  never  in  any  danger.

We  returned  to  our  own  home  the  next  day,  and  never
mentioned  in  the  sUghtest  way  the  Little  accident  to
any  one,  lest  my  father,  who  is  a  very  old  man,  should
be  alarmed  or  worried  at  what  had  happened.  Shortly
after  we  returned,  my  step-mother  said  to  my  sister,
"  Have  you  had  an  accident  on  the  river  ?  "  "  I  ?
No,"  said  my  sister.  "'Because,"  continued  my  step-
mother, "  I  had  a  very  distressing  dream  about  you  last
night — I  dreamt  you  feU  into  the  river,  and  I  was  in
the  boat  and  got  hold  of  your  hair,  and  tried  to  puU
you  out.  You  said,  '  Don't  puU  so  hard,  you  hurt  me.'
I  said,  '  You  had  better  be  hurt  than  drowned.'  "

Then,  and  not  tUl  then,  did  we  tell  her  that  one  of  us
reaUy  had  had  an  accident  precisely  as  she  had  dreamed,
but  that  her  dream  had  made  a  mistake  in  the  identity
of  the  sisters.

According  to  my  step-mother's  accoimt,  my  father  also
seemed  to  have  been  a  httle  anxious  and  uneasy  in  'his
sleep  that  night,  and  in  the  morning  rather  pointedly '
asked  her  if  she  had  dreamt  anything,  but  said  nothing
further  ;  and  nothiiig  was  afterwards  said  to  him  to  make
him  aware  of  what  had  happened.  My  step-mother's
dream  was  during  the  night  after  the  accident  occurred.

Christabel  Clarkson.

Miss  Clarkson  adds  :

I  have  asked  Mrs.  Clarkson  if  she  ever  had  any  other
dreams  of  the  kind,  but  she  says  not.

She  enclosed  the  following  accounts  from  Mrs.  Clarkson  and
her  sister.

May  Uth,  1894.
On Sunday night, May 6th, 1894, [I had] a  dream
which appeared remarkable  ; in effect, was this, — that
Louisa Clarkson was in the water apparently  drowned,
and  I  said,  "  Take  care,  or  you  wiU  go,"  and  pulled  her


282  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

in  by  her  hair.  Her  answer  was,  "  Do  not  pull  so  hard,
you  hurt  me."  I  still  pulled,  saying,  "You  had  better
be  hurt  than  dro\\iied."  The  following  day,  on  her
return  home,  I  enquired  of  her  if  she  had  an  accident
during  her  visit.  She  said,  "  WeU,  something  hke  one  ;
my  sister  got  into  the  water  and  used  just  the  same
words,  'Don't  pull  so  hard,  you  hurt  me.'"  Her  answer
to  me  was,  "Well,  it  is  strange."

Annie  Pilkington  Clarkson.

P.S. — I  enquired  of  Louisa  before  heariiig  a  word  of  the
accident.

May  Uth,  1894.
Very  soon  after  my  sister  and  I  returned  from  our
river  exijedition  on  the  7th  of  May,  my  step-mother
came  to  me  and  said,  "  Have  you  had  any  accident
while  you  have  been  away  V  I  replied,  "  I  ?  No."
She  then  said,  "  Because  I  had  such  a  strange  dream
about you last night," relating the circumstances,  and

\  repeatmg  the  very  words  my  sister  had  used  and  those
used  to  her  by  the  gentleman  who  got  her  out  of  the
water. I then said it was very strange, because  my

y  sister  had  had  exactly  such  an  accident  as  she  had  dreamt.
No  one  except  those  who  had  been  with  us  in  the  boat
knew  a  word  of  the  accident.  Louisa  Clarkson.

The  next  case  (L.  1165,  Journal,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  136)  was
sent  ])y  Mr.  Marshall  Wait  of  Chicago,  an  Associate  of  the
American  Branch,  who  collected  the  evidence.  He  was
acquainted  with  the  agent,  Dr.  W.  G.  Porter,  and  two  of
the  witnesses,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Millner.

(L.  1165.)

He  wrote  on  January  28,  1901  :

Mr.  Millner  told  me  of  the  dreams  very  soon  after
their  occurrence,  and  intended  to  procure  the  statements
for  me  at  once,  but  Mrs.  Porter's  husband  died  very
suddenly  a  short  time  after,  and  as  she  was  already  in  a
nervous  condition  from  recent  ilhiess,  Mr.  Millner  was
unwilling  to  trouble  her  about  the  matter  until  recently.


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases :  Impression  Externalised.  283
Mrs.  Porter  writes  :

No.  299,  Ceylon  Ave.,  Chicago,  Jany.  19,  1901.

On  the  evening  of  October  7,  1899,  my  daughter,  Mi's.
Millner,  and  her  husband  went  down  town  to  see  the
bicycle  parade,  leaving  me  at  home  with  the  children.
WhUe  they  were  gone  I  dreamed  a  very  distressing  dream
about  my  son  Guy  [Dr.  W.  G.  Porter]  (who  was  hving
in  Kalamazoo),  in  which  I  saw  him  hurt  in  some  way.
When  I  woke  the  details  of  the  dream  were  indistinct
in  my  memory,  but  the  painful  impression  was  very
strong,  although  I  am  not  a  behever  in  dreams,  and  am
accustomed  to  pay  no  attention  to  them.

When  Mr.  and  Mrs.  MiUner  returned  about  11  o'clock,
I  mentioned  to  Mrs.  Millner  that  I  had  had  "  such  a
miserable  dream  about  Guy,"  teUing  her  the  particulars
as  far  as  I  remembered  them.  A  few  nights  after  I
again  dreamed  of  my  son,  and  this  time  I  distinctly  saw
him  drawn  out  of  a  crowd  of  people  and  badly  cut.
This  dream  I  also  told  to  Mrs.  Millner  before  its  veri-
fication. The  next  morning  I  received  a  letter  from  my
son,  by  which  I  learned  that  he  had  come  to  Chicago
on  the  day  of  the  bicycle  parade  and  had  met  with  a
painful  accident,  being  badly  cut  about  the  head ;  that
he  had  gone  to  the  house  of  a  physician  of  his  acquaint-
ance, where  his  wounds  were  dressed,  and  that  as  his
head  was  covered  with  bandages,  he  had  returned  to
Kalamazoo  without  coming  to  see  me,  fearing  to  shock
me,  as  I  had  recently  been  in  poor  health.

Mrs.  MiUner  signs  this  with  me  in  attestation  of  the
fact  that  I  told  her  of  my  dreams  before  their  verification.

k.  b.  pobtek.

•  Myra  B.  Millnek.

Mr.  Marshall  Wait  wi'ote  on  Feb.  20,  1901.

The  letters  which  passed  between  Dr.  Porter  and  his
mother  have  been  destroyed,  but  I  have  succeeded  in
establishing  a  little  closer  time  relation  between  the  accident
and  the  first  dream. IVIrs. Porter  authorises  me  to  say


284


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


that  she  remembers  that  Mr.  and  Mrs.  IMilkier  came
home  that  evenmg  a  httle  after  eleven,  and  that  she
had  been  in  bed  but  a  short  time  when  they  came,  so
that  the  dream  occurred  between  ten  and  eleven  o'clock,
and  certainly  not  before  ten.  You  will  see  by  the  en-
closed letter  of  Dr.  Porter  that  he  fixes  the  accident  at
very  near  ten  o'clock.  ...  ■ :  •  >

Marshall  Wait.

I)r.  Porter's  statement  was  as  follows  :

2057,  Wilcox  Ave.,  Chicago,  III.,  Feb.  6th,  1901.

To  whom  it  may  concern  :

On  October  7th,  1899,  I  left  Kalamazoo,  Michigan,
about  4.30  p.m.  over  the  Michigan  Central  R.  R.,  arriving
in  Chicago,  111.,  at  8  o'clock.  I  took  a  hack  from  the
depot,  intending  to  drive  to  the  Briggs  Hotel.  Our
progress  was  stopped  near  State  and  Madison  Streets,
by  the  crowd  attending  the  bicycle  parade  of  the  Street
Carnival  then  m  progress.  Owing  to  the  intense  jam  I
was  forced  to  remain  at  the  comer  of  State  and  Madison
Streets  until  after  the  parade  had  passed.  When  the
crowd  broke  up  there  was  a  severe  crush,  during  which
I  lost  my  footing  and  was  trampled,  sustaining  severe
injuries  about  the  head.  I  wandered  about  the  city  in  a
dazed  condition  a  considerable  portion  of  the  night,  and
at  five  o'clock  the  following  morning  found  myself  on  the
north  side,  several  miles  from  where  I  was  hurt.  I
inquired  for  and  was  directed  to  the  residence  of  Dr.
Nicholas  Senn,  the  surgeon,  who  sent  me  to  St.  Joseph's
Hospital,  where  my  wounds  were  dressed  at  9  o'clock.
I  passed  the  next  day  at  a  hotel  (the  Briggs  House)
and  did  not  communicate  with  my  relatives,  fearing  lest
my  bad  appearance  and  bandaged  head  might  prove  a
shock  to  my  mother,  who  was  in  a  very  low  physical
condition  at  the  time.  I  returned  to  Kalamazoo  on  the
following  afternoon,  and  was  in  bed  about  two  weeks.
On  my  partial  recovery  I  wrote  my  mother  of  the  accident
in  response  to  a  letter  from  her,  in  which  she  stated  that
she  had  a  dream  on  the  night  of  the 7th  of  October,


Lxxxvi.]  Sfontaneo^is  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  285


to  the  effect  that  I  was  hurt  and  in  trouble.  This
letter  to  my  mother  was  the  first  actual  knowledge  she
had  either  of  my  trip  to  Chicago  or  my  injury.  I  also
imderstand  from  her  that  she  had  another  dream  the
night  before  she  received  my  letter,  m  which  she  saw  me
drawn  from  a  crowd  womided  and  bleed  mg.

My  injuries  consisted  of  severe  cuts  and  bruises  on  the
face  and  neck,  which  bled  freely.  I  sustained  a  shght
concussion  of  the  brain,  which  was  overcome  by  two
weeks  of  quiet.

My  trip  to  Chicago  was  made  suddenly  and  without
notification  to  any  of  my  relatives  or  friends.  My  mother's
first  dream  coincided  with  the  date  on  which  I  was  hurt,
and  her  second  dream  coincided  with  the  day  on  which
my  letter  to  her  was  mailed.  She  received  it,  I  beheve,
the  following  day.  Wm.  G.  Porter,  M.D.

Mr.  Wait  also  obtained  corroboration  from  Mr.  Millner  as
follows  :

Chicago,  III.

I  heard  of  both  of  Mrs.  Porter's  dreams  of  her  son's
accident  before  their  verification  from  my  wife,  but  not
from Mrs. Porter  herself.

Le  Roy  Millner.

Dr.  Porter  wrote  to  Mr.  Wait  on  Feb.  19,  1901.

Dear  Sir, — Answering  your  letter  of  yesterday  as  to
time  of  the  accident,  it  is  a  fact  that  the  end  of  the
parade  had  passed  me  by  10  o'clock.  The  crowd  im-
mediately broke  up,  and  it  was  then  I  was  hurt.  Of
course,  I  did  not  pay  any  attention  to  details  at  the
time,  but  it  is  safe  to  assert  that  the  accident  to  me
occurred  within  a  few  minutes  of  10  p.m. — Yours  resjoect-
fully,  W.  G.  Porter.

Three  other  cases  of  dreams  corresponding  with  accidents
I  will  describe  briefly.

In  the  first  (L.  1113,  Journal,  Vol.  IX.,  p.  104)  a  child,
Lily Spruit,  dreamt of the sinking  of  the  Atacama,  of


286


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


which  her  father  was  eaptam,  and  of  his  being  saved,  he
and  the  crew  having  taken  to  the  boats.  The  coincidence
was  striking,  the  ship  having  gone  down  that  night,  but
the  value  of  the  evidence  is  weakened  by  the  fact,  which
came  out  in  a  trial  later,  that  the  ship  was  known  to  be
unseaworthy  by  the  owners  and  by  the  captain  (who  had
been  promised  a  bonus  on  his  salary),  and  therefore  pos-
sibly by  his  family.  The  dream  was  told  to  the  child's
mother  immechately  after  its  occurrence,  but  was  not
recorded  till  a  week  later,  after  Captain  Spruit  had
returned  home.

The  second  case  (L.  1118,  Journal,  Vol.  IX.,  p.  151)
comes  from  Professor  Alexander  of  Rio  de  Janeiro.  Dona
Marie  do  Carmo  Blum  had  a  confused  dream  on  the
night  (as  she  beheves)  of  April  27,  1899,  that  Dr.  Garnier,
who  was  her  medical  attendant  when  she  lived  at  a  dis-
tant town,  had  fallen  in  alighting  from  a  carriage  and
been  much  hurt.  This  dream,  which  disturbed  her  a
good  deal,  she  related  to  her  husband,  but  it  was  not
recorded  till  about  six  weeks  later,  when  it  had  been
learnt  that  Dr.  Garnier  had  had  such  an  accident  on
April  27  in  jumping  from  his  carriage  to  try  to  stop  some
runaway  horses,  and  had  suffered  from  concussion  of  the
brain.  There  was  some  doubt  whether  the  date  of  the
dream  was  remembered  independently.

In  the  third  case  (L.  1178,  Journal,  Vol.  XIV.,  p.  155)
the  dream  coincided  not  with  an  accident,  but  with  a
friend's  great  anxiety  lest  there  had  been  one.  Miss  G.
dreamt  of  her  friend  Mrs.  L.  coming  to  her  in  motor
costume  and  in  great  distress,  and  then,  confusedly,  of
her  being  distressed  because  her  husband  had  gone  away.
Mr.  L.  and  two  friends  had  gone  out  motoring  that
evening  ;  the  motor  had  broken  down  a  long  way  from
home  ;  it  was  impossible  to  communicate  with  Mrs.  L.,
and  they  did  not  get  home  till  two  o'clock  in  the  morning.
Mrs.  L.  had  been  in  great  distress  and  anxiety,  and  had
wished  for  Miss  G.  to  help  her.  The  record  is  dated
about  a  year  after  the  event.  It  is  doubtful  whether
this  case  is  best  classed  here  or  with  those  to  which
I  now  pass.


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  tm'pression  Externalised. 28 "7

§  3. Coincidence  tvith  ideas  or  wishes  connected  by  the
agent  with  the  j^&^cipi^nt.

In  this  section  are  put  together  hallucinations  and
dramatic  dreams  which  seem  to  be  causally  connected
with  a  mental  condition  or  idea  in  the  agent,  associated
by  the  latter  with  the  percipient — either  a  desire  for  the
percipient's  presence  or  information  to  be  conveyed  to
him.  It  must  be  admitted,  however,  that  in  some  of
the  cases  to  be  quoted  the  agent's  part  is  somewhat
conjectural.

One  of  the  most  striking  instances  of  this  kind  in  the
coUection  is  L.  1227  {Journal,  Vol.  XIX.,  p.  83).  It
appeared  in  the  Westminster  Cathedral  Chronicle  for  March
1919,  and  we  are  indebted  to  the  Editor  for  permission  to
print  it.  The  names  and  addresses  of  all  those  concerned
have  been  given  to  us,  but  are  withheld  by  request.  The
case  may  be  best  classed  as  one  of  telepathic  transference
to  the  percipient  of  the  agent's  great  desire  that  he  should
visit  her.  The  percipient's  experience  took  the  form  that
an  actual  sick  call  might  have  done,  and  was  taken  by
him  at  the  time  to  be  a  waking  experience.  But  whether
it  really  was  so  is  doubtful.  It  was  on  the  Ime  between
sleeping  and  waking,  and  it  is  impossible  to  say  whether  it
was  a  vivid  dream  that  woke  the  percipient  or  whether
he  woke  to  see  and  hear  an  apparition.  It  is  perhaps
most  probable  that  it  was  both,  and  that  the  dream
which  woke  him  persisted  for  some  seconds  as  a  waking
haUucination.

The  report  in  the  Westminster  Cathedral  Chronicle,
slightly  abbreviated,  ran  as  follows  :

(L.  1227.)

One  afternoon  a  short  time  back  Fr.  Brompton  (to  give
the  priest  a  fictitious  name)  was  requested  to  visit  a  lady
who  was  ill.  When  he  arrived  at  her  house  he  met
the  doctor,  who  very  urgently  requested  him  not  to  ad-
minister the  last  rites  at  that  particular  moment,  but  to
be  satisfied  with  giving  the  patient  a  few  cheering  words.
He very  reluctantly  consented, but, when he saw  the


288


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgioich.


[part


lady,  greatly  regretted  his  promise  and  the  fact  that  the
doctor  should  have  made  such  a  request,  as  he  feared
that  the  patient  was  very  much  worse  than  he  had  been
made  to  miderstand.  However,  his  promise  had  been
given ;  so  he  arranged  that  he  would  come  again  in  the
morning  and  admmister  the  Last  Sacraments.  Before  he
left  the  house,  however,  he  gave  the  nurse  his  telephone
number  and  asked  her  to  telephone  should  the  patient
become  suddenly  worse  before  the  morning.

As  usual,  that  night  the  telephone  was  switched  on  to
one  of  the  Fathers'  rooms,  as  is  the  custom  at  the
Oratory,  with  a  view  to  any  possible  sick-calls.  Fr.
Brompton  retired  to  bed  at  his  usual  hour  after  reciting
his  rosary,  in  which  he  did  not  forget  to  include  his
patient  of  the  afternoon.  In  the  early  morning  he  was
startled  out  of  a  deep  sleep  by  his  bedroom  door  opening,
and  saw,  by  the  hght  of  the  moon  through  his  open,
xmcovered  window,  a  medium-sized,  dark-robed  figure
standing  by  it,  and  understood  the  person  to  say  some-
thing about  a  sick-call.

"  For  heaven's  sake,  man,"  he  hastily  answered,  sitting
up  m  bed  and  rubbing  his  eyes,  not  quite  sure  if  it  was
the  Father  on  duty,  or  the  lodge  porter,  "  speak  clearly."

"  Be  quick  !  "  came  the  reply  in  clearer  tones.  "  There
is  no  time  to  lose. There  is  a  telephone  message."

"Right — right  you  are  !  "  at  once  answered  Fr.  Brompton.
The  word  "  telephone  "  brought  back  in  a  moment  to  his
mind  the  sick-caU  of  the  previous  afternoon,  and  it  did
not  therefore  occur  to  him  to  ask  for  the  address.  He
sprang  out  of  bed — the  door  closed  as  he  did  so.  Turning
on  the  hght,  he  observed  that  it  was  just  on  the  quarter
to  four.  He  quickly  dressed,  and  went  to  the  chapel  for
the  Holy  Oils  and  the  Blessed  Sacrament,  remarking,  by
the  way,  on  the  forge tfuhaess  of  his  caller  to  turn  on  the
hght  for  him.  Making  his  way  swiftly  across  the  space
between  the  house  and  the  gates  that  shut  it  off  from  the
main  road,  he  found  them  locked  as  they  should  be,
and  had  to  knock  up  the  lodge  porter  to  let  him  out.
Within  a  minute  or  two  he  was  well  on  his  way  to  the
house  he  had  visited  the  previous  afternoon,  and  as  he


Lxxxvi.] Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  289


waited  after  his  first  ring  at  the  bell  and  congratulated
himself  on  his  smart  arrival,  he  looked  at  his  watch  and
saw  that  it  still  wanted  five  minixtes  to  four.  He  rang
again — -and  again.  ...  A  clock  in  the  vicinity  chimed
the  hour.  He  rang  and  knocked.  "  Strange  that  there
is  no  one  ready  to  answer  the  door  after  telephoning,"
he  thought.  In  the  stillness  of  the  moonhght  night  he
thought  he  was  makhig  enough  noise  to  wake  the  dead.
The  dead  !  Could  the  worst  have  happened  ?  His  regret
of  yesterday  came  upon  him  with  sudden  force,  so  that
he  became  alarmed.  He  banged  at  the  door.  The
electric  Ught  was  on  in  the  hall  and  on  the  stairs,  as  he
could  see.  He  knew  that  there  were  only  six  people  m
the  house — the  sick  lady  in  one  room,  her  husband,  given
up  as  hopeless,  in  another,  two  day  nurses  (now  evidently
in  a  sound  sleep),  and  the  two  night  nurses  in  attendance
on  the  patients.  The  children  had  all  safely  recovered,
from  influenza  and  had  been  taken  elsewhere.  ...  A
clock  chimed  the  quarter  past.  At  last,  to  the  priest's
great  reUef,  the  door  opened.

"  Come  in,  doctor,"  said  a  nurse  ;  I  fear  you  have
been  kept  waiting."

"  I  am  not  the  doctor  ; I'm  a  priest."

"  Oh,  I  suppose  they  telephoned  for  you  ?  That's  bad
news. WiU  you  go  up  ?  "

Fr.  Brompton  made  his  way  up  to  the  sick-room,  and
as  he  quietly  entered  he  saw  the  nurse  kneeling  by  the
bedside  and  noticed  that  she  was  very  startled  as  he
entered.  He  also  heard  the  sick  person  saying  :  "  I  do
wish  Fr.  Brompton  would  come."  Afterwards  he  learned
that  for  the  space  of  about  half  an  hour  before  his  arrival
the  lady  had  been  expressing  a  wish  to  see  him.  The
nurse,  not  bemg  a  Cathohc,  and  not  reahsing  that  a
priest  would  come  outside  the  ordinary  hours,  suggested
that  she  should  recite  some  prayers  from  a  Cathohc
prayer-book.  Fr.  Brompton  arrived  while  she  was  doing
this.  He  at  once  gave  the  lady  the  Last  Sacraments,
much  to  her  rehef  and  peace  of  mmd.  Within  an  hour
or  two  she  became  imconscioiis.  After  reciting  the  prayers
for  the  dying,  the  priest  prepared  to  leave  the  house.


290  Mrs.  Henry  Sklgivicic.  [par!

"Thank  you  so  niucli  for  coming  so  opportunely,"  said
the  nurse,  "but  you  quite  startled  me."

"  On  the  contrary,  thanks  are  due  to  you  for  tele-i
phoning."

"  Oh,  but  I  dichi't !  "

"  Well, someone did. I expect it was Mrs. 's

sister."

As  the  nurses  were  not  Cathohcs,  the  priest  took  it
that  one  of  the  lady's  relations  had  telephoned  in  her
anxiety  about  her  sister.  Fr.  Brompton  heard  that  she
died  a  few  hours  later.  She  became  a  Cathohc  at  the
age  of  eighteen,  and  had  been  an  exceUent  one  up  to  her
pious  death  at  the  age  of  thirty-two.

In  the  evening  of  the  same  day,  Fr.  Brompton  had
occasion  to  speak  to  the  Father  whose  duty  it  had  been
to  answer  the  telephone,  and  in  the  course  of  conversation
said  :

"By  the  way,  I'm  sorry  I  spoke  to  you  so  sharply  last
night."

"  Why,  when  do  you  mean  ?  "
"  When  you  came  to  call  me."
"  But  /  never  called  you.  last  night  !  "

"My  dear  Father,  you  came  to  my  room  at  a  quarter
to  four  this  morning  and  told  me  there  was  a  telephone
sick-call."

"I  never  left  my  room  last  night.  I  had  a  sleepless
night  and  happened  to  note  that  I  was  awake  at  that
very  time,  as  I  had  my  light  on.  And  what  is  more,
there  was  no  telephone  call  last  night  !  "

Li  the  above  story  it  should  bo  borne  in  mind  that  Fr.
Brompton  had  had  no  reason,  up  to  the  moment  he  spoke  to
the  Father  responsible  for  the  night  telephone,  to  suppose
that  anything  unusual  had  happened.  He  had  had  a  sick-call
m  the  afternoon  and  would  return  the  following  morning  in  the
ordinary  way.  He  mentioned  the  sick  person  in  his  prayers  |
as  was  his  wont  in  such  cases.  He  made  no  special  prepara-
tions  before  gomg  to  bed.  He  was  awakened  by  his  door
being  suddenly  opened.  He  took  the  caller  to  be  the  Father  i
on  duty,  and  were  it  not  that  he  knew  it  could  not  have  been


Lxxxvi,]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  291


the  lodge  porter,  would  not  have  spoken  to  the  Father  at  all.
It  was  only  because  he  considered  he  had  sjjoken  roughly
to  him  when,  as  he  presumed,  he  had  called  him,  that  he
referred  to  the  matter  at  all  when  speaking  to  him  on  other

J  business.  On  enquiry  at  the  telephone  exchange  it  was
'stated  that  there  was  no  record  of  any  call  for  the  Oratory

jf  'on  the  night  in  question.

,f[  In  reply  to  our  request  Father  Brompton  and  Father  X.
ij  \  (the  priest  in  charge  of  the  telephone)  kindly  corroborated
g !  the  above  report  thus  :

fj  1.  The  above  narrative  correctly  states  my  being  called

by  Father  [X.]  in  the  early  morning  of  November  22nd,
1918.  [Father  Brompton.]

2.  I  neither  had  a  telephone  call,  nor  did  I  visit  Father
[Brom]3ton's]  room  m  the  early  mommg  of  November
22nd,  1918.  [Father  X.]

We  were  also  able  to  get  ui  touch  with  the  nurse  who
was  on  duty  in  the  sick  woman's  room  on  the  night  in
question,  and  obtamed  from  her  the  following  corroborative
statement :

I  did  not  telephone  or  send  for  Father  [Brompton],
,.,,.,„-.. .  .  M.  A.  W.

In  reply  to  a  further  question  concerning  the  nature  of  his
experience  Father  Brompton  wrote  :

March  2\st,  1919.

You  ask  me  whether  the  mamaer  of  my  being  called
was  a  unique  experience.  There  was  nothing  unique  to
me  in  the  manner  of  the  call,  it  came  hke  dozens  of
other  sick-calls  ;  bat  what  was,  and  is  a  unique  experience
to  me  is  the  denial  of  the  person  who  called  me.

[Father  Brompton.]

It  is  of  some  interest  in  connexion  with  this  case  that
about  a  fortnight  after  the  death  of  the  agent  she  pur-
ported to  communicate  through  Mrs.  Leonard,  the  sitter
being  a  lady  who  was  not  acquainted  with  her  and  did
not  know  of  her  death.  Particulars  are  given  in  the
Journal,  Vol.  XIX.,  p.  226.


292  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

There  are  two  cases  in  which  the  agent's  desire  to  call
the  percipient  is  translated  into  an  aixditory  hallucination.
The  first  (L.  1143,  Journal,  Vol.  XII.,  p.  "l4)  came  from
an  Associate  of  the  Society,  Mr.  Clissold,  and  was  sent  to
us,  enclosed  in  a  letter  dated  September  20,  1904,  by  the
late  Colonel  Taylor,  then  a  Member  of  the  S.P.R.  Council,
to  whom  Mr.  Clissold  and  his  daughter  had  been  known
for  some  years.

(L.  1143.)
Mr.  Chssold  writes  :

Ravensworth,  Cheltenham,
September  I4th,  1904.

On  Saturday,  September  10th,  I  was  in  my  daughter's
garden  pruning  some  trees.  I  had  just  completed  my
work  about  7  p.m.  when  I  distinctly  heard  my  daughter's

voice  calling  me,  " when  are  you  coming  down  ?  "

using  a  familiar  name  by  which  no  one  but  she  addresses
me.  I  looked  aU  romid  me  and  could  see  no  one,  so  I
called  to  her  several  times,  but  receiving  no  answer
supposed  that  she  had  called  me  and  then  gone  home.

However,  when  I  got  to  the  bottom  of  the  garder,  a
distance  of  about  40  yards  from  where  I  was  pruning,  I
found  her  at  work  among  her  flowers,  and  on  asking  her
why  she  had  called  me,  she  said,  "  I  never  caUed  you  at
all,  but  I  was  thinking  of  you  very  much  a  short  time
ago  and  thought  I  must  caU  you,  but  I  did  not."  It  is
perfectly  certain  that  I  heard  her  voice  distinctly,  and  it
is  equally  certain  that  my  daughter  did  not  call  me.  I
write  this  simple  account  as  it  may  be  possible  that  other
people  may  have  met  with  occurrences  of  a  similar  nature.
Is  it  within  the  bounds  of  probabihty  that  thought  can,
under  certain  conditions,  be  transferred  into  audible  sound  1

E.  M.  Clissold.

Mr.  Chssold's  daughter  writes  :

Rock  House,  Fownhope,  Hereeord.
On  Saturday, September 10th, I  was tying up  chry-
santhemums near  our  house  and  father  was  pruning  trees
about  40  yards  from  where  I  was  working, but  out  of


Lxxxvi.]  Sfontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  293

sight.  I  kept  on  thinking  I  would  call  him  to  come
down,  as  he  had  not  been  weU  in  the  morning,  and  I
was  afraid  he  would  be  over  tired,  but  I  knew  he  hated  to
be  worried.  For  about  half  an  hour  I  thought  of  nothing
else  but  whether  I  should  call  him  or  not,  and  suddenly
I  saw  him  just  above  me,  and  he  said,  "  Why  did  you
call  me  ?  "  I  said,  "  I  did  not  call  you,  but  for  some
time  I  have  been  thinking  of  doing  so."  If  I  had  called
him,  I  should  not  have  made  use  of  the  famihar  name
he  said  I  used,  as  I  knew  the  gardener  was  working
close  by.  My  husband  went  up  since,  and  stood  hstening
at  the  exact  spot  where  my  father  stood.  I  called  as
loud  as  I  could  to  him  from  the  spot  where  I  was  working
when  my  father  heard  me  caU  him,  and  he  could  only
hear  me  faintly ;  he  was  expecting  it  and  hstening  for
the  call.  My  father  was  prmiing  at  the  time  and  not
expecting  to  be  called,  and  he  is  also  a  little  deaf.  I
enclose  a  section  of  the  ground  showing  our  positions  and
the  intervening  features  of  the  ground. Alice  Pubdon.

The  section  referred  to  shows  a  number  of  terraces,  rising
one  above  another,  terminated  by  walls  covered  with  ivy,
between  Mr.  CUssold  and  his  daughter.  Mr.  CUssold  was  at
the  far  end  of  the  highest  terrace,  and  his  daughter  on  the
lowest,  at  a  level  of  38  feet  below  where  he  was  standing,
and  at  a  distance  of  124  feet  measured  horizontally  from  a
pomt  38  feet  vertically  below  him.  Supposing,  therefore,  that
she  had  miconsciously  uttered  her  thought  aloud,  it  seems
quite  impossible  that  he  should  have  heard  it.

.  The  second  case  of  the  kind  (L.  1177,  Journal,  Vol.  XIV.,
p.  143)  also  came  from  an  Associate,  now  a  Corresponding
Member,  of  the  Society,  Mr.  Severin  Lauritzen.

(L.  1177.)
He  writes  :

HoLTE,  Denmark,  May  5,  1909.
I  live  in  a  viUa  in  the  country,  and  in  a  neighbouring
villa hves  my  married  daughter,  who is  named  Evelyn.
There  is  only  a  distance  of  33  steps, or  say  some  22


294


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


yards,  in  a  straight  line,  between  the  houses.  I  have  a
telephone  from  a  central  station  in  my  house,  and  also
a  short  private  telephone  that  connects  the  two  houses.  I
commence  writing  this  1.20  p.m.,  May  5th.  The  same
day  about  1  o'clock  my  son-iii-law,  K.,  telephoned  from
his  place  of  business  in  the  town  to  my  house  to  say
that  he  wanted  to  speak  with  Evelyn.  It  was  my  wife
who  answered  the  telephone  when  K.  called,  and  when
she  heard  what  he  wanted  she  immediately  pressed  the
button  of  the  private  telephone  to  summon  E.  Just
before  this  moment  E.  heard  her  mother's  very  clear
and  distinct  voice  call  "  Evelyn,  Evelyn."  She  arose
from  her  writing  desk  where  she  sat  absorbed  in  house-
hold accounts,  opened  the  door  to  the  hall  in  her
house,  and  asked  Miss  N.,  who  was  working  there,
"Did  mother  caU  ?  "  "No,"  said  Miss  N.,  "Nobody
called."  E.  said:  "Yes,  she  did  call."  Then  she  turned
to  go  back  to  an  open  window  in  the  room  where  she
had  been  writing,  to  see  if  her  mother  was  outside
there  ;  but  she  did  not  reach  the  window  before  she
heard  the  private  telephone  bell  sounding,  so  she  turned
again  and  went  straight  to  my  house  without  answering
the  call  per  telephone.  Passing  the  telephone  and  Miss  N.,
she  said,  "  There,  you  see,  mother  called."  Arrived  at
my  house,  she  found  that  her  husband  wanted  to  speak
with  her.  Just  as  she  had  finished  her  conversation  with
her  husband  I  came  out  from  an  adjacent  room  to
speak  with  her,  but  she  interrupted  me  and  said,  "  Now
we  have  a  clear  case  of  telepathy."

The  account  is  countersigned  by  Mr.  Lauritzen's  wife
and  daughter,  and  Miss  N.  Mr.  Lauritzen  proceeds  to  give
at  some  length  the  reasons,  including  experiments,  for
certainty  that  his  daughter  could  not  have  heard  her
name  called  even  if  her  mother  had  called  her,  which  she
did  not,  and  that  the  call  she  heard  preceded  the  tele-
phone bell.  This  evidence,  important  though  it  is,  I
omit  for  the  sake  of  shortness.

There  is  another  case  resembling  these,  though  the
sound  heard  was  not  vocal  but  a  bell,  and  the  agent's


LxxxvT.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  295

desire  was  not  directed  to  any  particular  percipient
(L.  993,  Journal,  Vol.  VII.,  p. 162). A  lady  fainting  in

I  her  bedroom  when  staying  with  friends  had  a  strong
desire  to  ring  for  assistance,  but  was  unable  to  do  so.
Nevertheless the bell was heard and assistance  came.

■She  cannot  have  unknowingly  rung,  for  there  was,  it
appeared,  no  beU  pull  in  her  room.  I  only  describe  the
case  thus briefly  because  unfortunately  the accounts  we

I  have  from  agent  and  percipient  were  not  written  till  four
years  after  the  event,  and  some  discrepancies  between  them
in  details  show  that  there  is  haziness  of  memory  somewhere.

There  are  two  cases  in  which  the  apparent  agent  is
approaching  the  percipient  who  has  an  experience — in  one
case  an  auditory  hallucination  and  in  the  other  a  dream —
suggesting  the  agent's  approach.

The  first  (L.  1222,  Journal,  Vol.  XIX.,  p.  30)  we  heard
of  from  Miss  E.  Arkwright,  in  whose  family  the  percipient,
Mr.  Saunders,  had  been  gardener.  In  reply  to  questions
a  substantially  similar  account  was  afterwards  sent  by
]VIr.  Saunders  himself,  enclosed  with  a  corroborative
account  by  his  granddaughter,  Maud,  dated  October  14,
1918. Mr.  Saunders's  account  is  as  follows  :

(L.  1222.)

"  On  the  8th  of  January  [1918]  about  7  a.m.  I  heard
four  words  distinctly  as  I  lay  in  bed  :  '  Tom's  coming
to-day.'  I  asked  Maud  and  her  mother  if  either  had
been  in  the  room.  They  answered  in  the  negative.  I
told  them  what  I  had  heard.  They  thought  I  must  have
been  dreaming.  There  it  ended  till  the  miexpected  Tom
turned  up  between  9  and  10  a.m.  on  the  same  day.

My  health  was  good  at  the  time,  before  and  after.
Age  84.  James  Satjndeks."

Mr.  Saxmders's  grandson  Tom  was  serving  with  the  army  in
France  and  obtained  leave  quite  unexpectedly.  No  evidence
from  him  as  to  his  feelings  at  the  time  has  been  obtained.

The  second  case  (L.  1225,  Journal,  Vol.  XIX.,  p.  56)
was  sent  by  the  dreamer,  IMrs.  Hanson,  an  Associate  of


296  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.  '  [part

the  Society.  She  dreamt  the  dream  at  least  twice  in  the
same  night,  which  is  an  unusual  experience. She  writes  :


(L.  1225.)  -  "

Pleasaunce  Cottage,  Dorman's  Park,
Nr.  East  Grinstead,  January  7,  1919.

Since  the  summer  of  1915  I  have,  first  personally  and
later  through  the  Prisoners  of  War  Care  Committee,  been

sending regular parcels to Lance-Corporal W. D  ■.,

Pvoyal  Scots  Fusihers  Regiment,  prisoner  first  at  Doberitz
and  later  at  Guben,  Brandenburg.

I  do  not  laiow  the  man  or  his  family  personaUy,  and
heard  of  him  through  a  friend  who  was  interesting  herself
in  the  British  Prisoners.  Apart  from  occasional  postcards
thanking  me  for  the  parcels,  and  two  photographs  and  a
group  taken  at  the  Prison,  I  have  had  no  other  correspond-
ence with  the  man.  Since  the  Armistice  I  have  naturally
awaited  with  interest  any  news  that  I  might  receive  from
him.  I  was  away  for  Xmas,  and  as  I  had  heard  nothing
from  him  I  began  to  wonder  ii  he  was  all  right,  and
determined  on  my  return  to  write  to  his  wife  and  ask  her
if  she  had  received  any  news.

I  had  a  good  deal  of  correspondence  to  get  through,
and  put  off  writing  until  Sunday,  Jan.  5th.  The  i^revious
night  (Sat.  Jan.  4th)  I  had  a  very  vivid  dream  twice
repeated,  in  fact  I  could  be  almost  sure  it  came  three
times,  but  of  twice  I  am  certain.  Li  the  dream  I  was
with my husband in some strange place talking  to

L.-C. D  . We shook  hands  with  him, and  he  said

he  was  safe  home.  He  was  dressed  in  a  dark  uniform
similar  to  that  of  one  of  the  photographs  he  sent  me.
In  the  morning  (Jan.  5th)  when  I  woke  up  I  told  my
husband,  and  also  the  maid  when  she  came  to  wake  us.
I  enclose  both  their  statements  to  this  effect.  The  im-
pression left  by  the  dream  was  so  vivid  that  I  did  not

write  to  Mrs.  D  ,  thinking  I  would  wait  a  day  or  two

longer  in  case  I  might  hear  of  her  husband's  arrival.
This  morning  (Jan.  7th)  I  received  a  p.c.  which  I  also
enclose,  dated  by  postmark  Jan. 5th,  from  L./C.  D


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  297


saying  he  had  just  arrived  at  Leith.  Therefore  when  I
was  dreaming  that  he  was  safely  home  he  must  have
nearly  reached  Leith.  .  .  .

I  am  not  in  the  habit  of  dreaming  much,  and  seldom
remember  my  dreams,  and  only  once  before,  a  good  many
years  ago,  have  I  ever  had  anything  of  interest  in  this
way.  M.  R.  Hanson.

Corroborative  statements  were  enclosed  from  Mrs.  Han-
son's husband  and  from  her  maid.  These  are  printed  in
the  Journal.

The  postcard  to  which  Mrs.  Hanson  refers  h\  her  statement
has  an  Edinburgh  postmark,  dated  4  p.m.,  January  5,  1919.
It  reads  :

T  have  just  landed  at  Leith,  and  am  going  on  to
Prisoners  of  War  Reception  Camp,
South  Camp,

Ripon.

[Signed]  L./C.  W.  D.

R.S.F.

It  appears,  therefore,  as  IVIrs.  Hanson  says,  that  at  the
time  of  her  dream,  the  night  of  January  4-5,  1919,  Lance-
Corporal  D — —  was  approaching  Leith.  The  intention  of
sending  a  postcard  to  Mrs.  Hanson  may  well  have  been
in  his  mind  at  the  time,  since  he  despatched  it  im-
mediately on  his  arrival.  It  may  even  have  been  already
written.  And  similarly  Tom  Saunders  may  well  have
been  thinking  of  his  grandfather  about  the  time  of  the
latter's  hallucination,  since  he  was  within  about  two  hours
of  reaching  his  home.  But  in  neither  case  have  we  direct
evidence  on  the  matter.

In  the  next  case  (L.  1135,  Journal,  Vol.  XL,  p.  177)  the
percipient  dreamt  what  the  agent  had  in  mind  and  was
about  to  communicate  to  her,  only  in  the  dream  there
were  as  usual  dramatic  additions.  It  is  another  case
which  we  owe  to  Mr,  F.  C.  Constable,


298


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivich.


[part


(L.  1135.)

The  first  letter  was  written  to  Mr.  Constable's  cook,  Miss
Julia  Cox,  by  her  sister,  Mrs.  Hope,  as  foUows  :

49,  Maybrick  Road,
[Postmark,  "  Bath,  10  p.m.,  April  1.03."]

My  Dear  Sister, — I  am  sending  you  the  copy  from  the
Bible  which  I  hope  will  be  all  right.  I  hope  you  will
not  mind  my  not  coming  down,  but  if  this  is  not  satis-
f  actor}'  let  me  know  and  I  will  come  and  bring  the
Bible  with  me.  I  shall  come  down  after  Easter  without
fail  if  aU  is  well.  It  was  very  strange,  but  I  dreamt
Monday  night  [api^arently  the  night  of  March  30th]  that
you  came  here  and  wanted  the  Bible,  as  you  thought  you
would  take  greater  care  of  it  than  I.  I  had  told  Bob
about  my  dream  before  I  had  your  letter.  .  .  .

[Signed] F.  Hope.

In  answer  to  Mr.  Constable's  request  for  corroboratiol^,
Mr.  Hope  wrote  to  him  :

49,  Maybrick  Road,  Old  field  Park.

[Postmark,  "  Bath,"]  April  6  [1903].

Dear  Sm, — In  answer  to  your  request  with  reference
to  my  wife's  dream,  I  hereby  state  that  my  wife  had
gone  to  the  theatre  with  a  friend.  On  going  to  the  front
door  I  looked  behind  as  I  sometimes  do,  to  see  if  there
were  any  letters.  I  found  one  from  my  wife's  sister,
Julia.  As  we  had  received  one  from  her  only  a  day
or  two  before,  I  thought  something  must  be  the  matter,
so  I  opened  it  and  found  it  was  a  request  from  her  for
particulars  of  her  birth  entry  in  a  family  Bible.  I  hmited
about  and  fomid  it  in  a  box  of  old  books  that  had  come
from  the  old  home.  When  my  wife  came  in  she  saw  the
Bible,  and  said  as  soon  as  she  got  inside  the  door,
' '  What  have  you  got  that  old  Bible  for  ?  I  was  dreaming
about  it  last  night.  I  dreamed  that  Julia  wanted  it  to
get  her  birth  entry  from  it."  I  had  not  had  even  a
chance  to  speak  to  her  before  she  got  that  out,  nor  had


LXXXVi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Exteryialised.  299


she  seen  the  letter,  because  I  had  put  it  behind  the
tea-box  on  the  mantel-shelf  where  we  usually  put  our
letters  after  reading  them.

I  was  so  much  struck  with  the  remarkable  comcidence
that  I  told  my  fellow-workmen  about  it  in  the  morning.

[Signed] R.  H.  Hope.

P.S. — I  forgot  to  say  that  Julia's  letter  got  destroyed
by  accident.  ...  R.  H.  H.

Mr.  Constable  writes,  enclosing  this  letter :

Wick  Coubt,  near  Bristol,  1th  April,  1903.

.  .  .  I  think  (from  w"hat  I  hear,  not  what  I  know)
that  Mr.  Hope's  statement  is  accurate,  and  his  wife's  not
so  accurate — if,  as  I  think,  there  is  contradiction.  But
these  letters  show  how  utterly  untrustworthy  human
memory  is  in  detail.  But  memory  as  to  general  truth  I
would  suggest  is  trustworthy.  For  instance,  in  this  case
something  did  occur  which  stinjck  those  concerned  as
exceptional.  F.  C.  Constable.

The  following  statement  was  written  by  Mrs.  Constable,
from  Miss  Cox's  dictation,  and  signed  as  correct  by  the  latter  :

Wick  Court,  near  Bristol.

I  went  to  Bath  on  a  Saturday  and  returned  on  a
Tuesday  in  March.  I  do  not  remember  the  exact  day.  I
did  not  know  then  that  I  should  want  the  register  of
my  birth,  and  did  not  talk  about  the  entry  in  the  Bible
at  all.

I  have  read  what  is  stated  here  and  it  is  quite  true.

JiiLiA  Cox.

Mrs.  Constable  adds  :

10^;^  April,  1903.

From  notes  in,  my  possession  I  Imow  that  Miss  Cox
(my  cook)  went  to  Bath  on  Saturday,  March  14th,  and
returned  on  the  following  Tuesday,  March  17th,  1903.

Louisa  Constable.


300


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[PAKT


Mr.  Constable  writes,  enclosing  the  above,  and  explaining
the  circumstances  further  :

A2m.l  loth,  1903.

JuUa  Cox  invested  through  me  some  money  in  an
annuity.  I  thought  she  had  better  get  at  once  an
acknowledgment  from  the  office  that  her  birth  was  rightly
declared  and  so,  after  her  visit  to  Bath  on  the  14th
March,  told  her  to  get  a  copy  of  the  entry  in  the  Bible.

Mr.  Constable  writes  later:

April  ISth,  1903.

Mrs.  Hope  is  here  to  spend  the  day  with  Julia  Cox.
She  has  just  now  told  me  :

"  I  dreamt  on  the  Monday  night  Julia  came  to  me  for
the  Bible.  She  said  she  wanted  a  copy  of  her  register.
What  amazed  me  was  she  said  she  could  take  better
care  of  the  Bible  than  I  could.  On  Tuesday  I  went  to
the  theatre  and  when  I  came  back  about  half-past  ten
there  was  my  husband  and  the  Bible  on  the  table.  I.
told  him  of  my  dream  and  he  said  he  had  a  letter  from
Julia  asking  for  her  register.  It  was  very  fmmy.  Oh,
j'es  ! It  seemed  just  a  dream."

Her  statement  that  it  was  "just  a  dream"  was  in
answer  to  my  question.  I  thought  the  imjjression  might
have  been  stronger  than  an  ordinary  dream.

To  a  further  question  Mrs.  Hope  adds  : — "  I  have  had
dreams  before  of  little  matters  that  have  come  true,  but
none  so  real  as  that  one." .  F.  C.  Constable.

We  cannot  tell  in  this  case  whether  the  letter  from  Miss
Cox  to  her  sister  had  been  written  before  Mrs.  Hope
dreamt  of  its  contents.  And  the  same  is  true  of  the
following  case  (L.  1189,  Journal,  Vol.  XV.,  p.  263),  where
the  dream  of  facts,  unknown  and  unlikely,  was  confirmed
some  days  later  by  a  letter  describing  them.  Here,
however,  the  writer  of  the  letter  does  not  appear  to  have
figured  in  the  dream,  and  it  is  not  very  probable  that  he
wrote  it  earlier  than  two  days  after  the  dream.  The
assumption that he was the agent is, therefore,  highly


Lxxxvi.] Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  301

conjectural,  depending  on  his  having  had  the  letter  in
mind  some  days  before  he  wrote,  or  at  least  posted,  it.
The  dreamer,  here  called  Mrs.  "  Barnard "  (pseudonym),
had  five  days  earlier  had  an  interesting  reciprocal  dream
(see  below,  L.  1188,  p.  415)  at  a  time  of  considerable
anxiety  and  trouble  about  illness  of  her  children.

In  the  letter  of  February  21,  1912,  quoted  below  with
L.  1188,  JMrs.  Barnard  also  writes  :

(L.  1189.)

Another  curious  dream  happened  last  Friday  [Feb.  16].
I  dreamed  my  aunt  Miss  R.  was  being  piilled  up  and
down  in  a  lift ;  the  hft  was  not  painted  and  looked  like
zinc.  IVIiss  W.  was  pulling  her  up  and  down.  My
mother  told  me  it  was  silly  of  Miss  W.  to  try  to  do  it,
she  nearly  had  an  accident  the  week  before  ;  she  hoped
neither  I  nor  Uncle  J.  would  ever  pull  her  up.

I  have  not  seen  this  aimt  for  fourteen  years  ;  I  never
hear  from  her.  She  is  living  in  a  hut  in  the  New  Forest,
which  is  built  on  the  ground  floor.  Miss  W.  ...  I
have  not  seen  for  twenty  years.  Now  I  told  D.  [Mr.
Barnard]  about  it  and  he  made  great  fim  of  a  lift  being
wanted  on  a  ground  floor  house.  Monday  [Feb.  19]
Uncle  J.  writes  :  "  Your  aunt  has  had  built  a  sky  parlor
and  has  a  hft  to  pull  her  up  and  do\TO.  Miss  W.  is
now  livitig  with  her  and  can  manage  the  lift,  which  went
quite  wrong  last  week."

The  letter  from  the  uncle,  Mr.  R.,  was  not  preserved,  but
Mr.  Barnard  corroborates  Mi's.  Barnard's  statement  in  a
commmiication  received  by  us  on  April  2,  1912. He  writes  :

L.  [Mrs.  Barnard]  told  me  of  the  dream  of  the  lift  two
days  before  Mr.  R.'s  letter  came.  I  chaffed  her  about
requiring  a  lift  on  a .  ground  floor.  Two  days  afterwards
Mr.  R.'s  letter  came,  which  she  showed  me  with  great
triumph.

Owing  to  various  circumstances  it  has  not  been  possible  to
obtain  any  information  as  to  whether  Mrs.  Barnard's  impression
in  regard  to  the  appearance  of  the  hft  was  correct.


302


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


Whether  or  not  the  letter  in  the  last  two  cases  had
anything  to  do  with  the  percipient's  experience,  there  is  a
curious  Uttle  group  of  cases  in  which  the  letter  itself  does
seem,  at  least  at  first  sight,  to  affect  the  dream  in  some
way.  The  dream  not  only  conveys  information  contained
in  the  letter,  but  is  apparently  timed  by  its  arrival  or
approach.  A  striking  case  is  L.  1133,  Journal,  Vol.  XI.,
p.  138.  It  was  sent  to  us  by  Mr.  A.  H.  Atkins  of
3  Clarendon  Park,  Torquay,  with  some  other  apparently
telepathic  experiences  that  had  occurred  in  his  family.  The
first  document  I  shall  quote  was  written  by  the  dreamer,
Miss  Edith  Atkins,  to  her  parents  on  October  27th,  1902.

(L.  11.33.)  I

October  21th,  1902.
.  .  .  Talking  about  dreams,  Sophie  [Niederhauser's]  letter
adds  one  to  the  very  curious  list  of  coincidences  in  this
respect,  to  wit :— I  had  not  thought  or  heard  anything
of  AHce  Birniau  or  Smith  as  she  is  now  since  her  marriage  ;
I  only  knew  she  was  married  to  a  man  named  Smith
about  two  years  ago.  Well,  Friday  night  I  dreamt  I  met
her  with  her  husband,  and  she  seemed  to  be  in  a  flourish-
ing condition,  both  exceedingly  well  dressed  ;  they  were
staying  at  a  hotel  in  the  place  where  we  met  them,
where  it  was  I  don't  Imow,  and  they  were  going  to
some  exhibition  or  other.  I  remarked  to  Ma  in  my
dream,  she  being  with  me,  "AHce  seems  to  have  done  i
well,  she  has  just  the  same  ideas  as  before."  There
endeth  my  dream  ;  I  woke  up,  dressed,  and  went  dowTa-
stairs  Saturday  morning,  where  I  found  a  letter  from
Sophie  awaiting  me,  and  almost  at  the  outset  of  her  letter
she  informs  me  that  Ahce  and  her  husband  called  on
them  suddenly  last  Saturday  week.  [Here  follows  a
description  of  the  letter,  for  a  copy  of  which  see  the
next  document.]  While  reading  this  epistle  it  seemed
to  me  that  I  was  reading  something  I  already  knew
quite  well.  Rather  a  remarkable  coincidence,  that !
I  am  going  to  give  Sophie  a  description  of  her  husband
as  I  saw  him  in  the  dream,  and  I  quite  expect  it  will
tally  with  that  of  the  real  man.


lXxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  tm-pression  Externalised.  303


The  next  document  is  a  translation  (from  the  French)  of  an
extract  (of  which  a  copy  was  sent  us)  from  Miss  Nieder-
hauser's  letter  dated  from  Aarau,  Switzerland,  October  23rd,
1902.

On  Simday  I  had  visitors  from  England — can  you  guess
whom  ?  Alice  Birman — ^now  IVli-s.  Smith — with  her  hus-
band. They  came  here  quite  imexpectedly  and  as  we
have  only  one  bed  for  visitors,  they  were  obhged  to  go
to  the  hotel.  They  took  tea  with  us  at  four  o'clock
but  dined  at  the  hotel.  They  came  at  ten  o'clock  on
Saturday  evening  and  went  away  at  nine  on  Monday
morning. For  a  long  time  I  had  heard  nothing  of  Alice.

Alice  has  three  servants  in  her  household— a  cook,  a
housemaid,  and  a  nurse.  Mr.  Smith  does  not  speak
German  ;  lie  is  an  agreeable  man,  so  gentle  and  amiable.
They  seem  to  hve  like  children,  happy  and  affectionate.
They  had  decided  to  come  to  Switzerland  suddenly,  one
evening.  Mr.  Smith  brought  home  the  tickets  and  they
set  ofF  the  same  night.  Alice's  chUd  is  ten  weeks  old ;
he  is  called  O.  F.  Alice  is  just  as  she  always  was  ;
she  is  quite  different  from  our  other  friends.  She  went
on  to  Zurich,  Liiceme,  Bale,  and  Paris,  from  whence  she
is  going  home  this  morning.  On  Friday  moniing  she  is
to  go  to  a  dog  show  in  London  Avith  one  of  her  three
dogs.  I  have  her  photograph  in  which  she  has  on  one
side  her  baby,  a  beautiful  child,  and  on  the  other  a  very
fine  dog.  She  seemed  a  little  older  than  before.  .  .  .
The  visit  was  over  so  quickly  that  I  almost  feel  as  if  I
had  dreamt  it.

After  receiving  Miss  Niederhauser's  reply  to  her  letter  about
Mr.  Smith's  appearance,  Miss  Atkins  wrote  on  January  13th,
1903:

.  .  .  Ahce  Birman  Smith's  husband  corresponded  with
my  dream  in  that  he  is  very  fair,  with  dehcate  features
and  a  gentle  demeanour  and  smaller  than  Ahce  ;  only  in
my  dream  he  was  only  shghtly  smaller  than  Alice,  whereas
he  would  appear  to  be  a  good  deal  smaller,  and  Sophie


304


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


says  he  is  clean-shaved,  and  I  dreamt  he  had  a  fair
moustache.  Of  course,  if  I  were  to  see  the  man  I  could
tell  \\x  an  instant  if  he  resembled  my  dream,  and  at  all
events,  considering  I  had  not  the  slightest  idea  of  what
he  was  hke,  my  dream  was  fairly  accurate,  and  besides
that  the  incidents  resembled  very  much  the  way  that
Sophie  saAv  Ahce  ;  to  wit,  they  were  staying  at  a  hotel,
called  on  Soiahie  quite  unexpectedly,  both  together,  and
were  going  to  an  exhibition  to  show  a  dog ;  the  only
difference  in  my  dream  was  that  I  met  them  in  the
road  ;  all  the  other  particulars  were  correct.  What
strikes  me  as  more  wonderful,  though,  was  the  feeling
when  I  read  Sophie's  letter  that  I  already  Icnew  what
she  was  teUing  me,  a  feelhig  perfectly  clear  and  strong  ;
that  I  thmk  is  the  strongest  proof  of  bram  communica-
tion, far  more  importcant  than  the  exact  accuracy  of  the
details.

In  this  case  the  letter  must  either  have  just  arrived  or
have  been  on  the  verge  of  arriving  when  the  dream
corresponding  to  it  occurred.  We  may  further  observe
that  if  we  may  regard  the  dream  Mr.  Smith  as  sufficiently
like  the  real  one  to  justify  the  supposition  that  a  super-
normal impression  of  him  had  been  received,  it  follows
that  the  veridical  parts  of  the  dream  were  at  any  rate
not  entirely  derived  from  the  letter,  but  partly  at  least
direct  from  the  writer.  This  is  an  important  considera-
tion when  we  attempt  to  trace  the  supernormal  process —
assuming  there  was  one  ;  and  the  number  of  points  in
the  dream  corresponding  with  fact  make  chance  coincidence
improbable.

In  the  next  case  (L.  954,  Journal,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  103)  the
time -coincidence  between  the  dream  and  the  arrival  of
the  letter  is  very  clear.  On  the  other  hand,  the  corre-
spondence in  the  content  of  the  two  is  practically  limited
to  both  being  almost  entirely  occupied  with  the  same
unlikely  individual.  But  again,  as  in  the  last  case,  we
have  an  element  in  the  dream — the  interruption  of  the
speaker  by  noise  outside — which  was  not  in  the  letter,
but  was  in  the  mind  of  the  writer.


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  305
(L.  954.)

The  case  comes  from  the  Rev.  W.  M.  Lewis,  who  wrote
from  Tyllwyd  Penycwm,  R.  S.  0.,  Pemb.

October  lOth,  1891.

My  residence,  where  I  have  hved  for  thirty  years,  is
within  half  a  dozen  mUes  of  St.  Da-\dd's  Head,  Pem-
brokeshire, occupying  a  farm  and  having  the  pastorate
of  a  small  country  Welsh  Nonconformist  church.  I
spent,  however,  the  greater  part  of  May,  1890,  in  London,
W.  One  morning  during  my  stay  there,  I  was  awoke
by  the  postman's  knock,  who,  as  usual,  threw  his  letters
[on]  to  the  door  mat  within  and  passed  on.  Not  wishing
to  get  up  just  then,  I  again  slept  for  a  short  time,  all
of  which  time  became  apparently  occupied  with  a  dream,
in  which  I  found  myself  in  a  crowded  hall  listening  to  a

lecture  by  the  Rev.  D. C. D  ,  M.A. (London),  then

Principal of T College, Breconshire. The  lecturer's

voice,  always  weak,  was  quite  inaudible  from  where  I
was  seated  ;  I  strained  to  catch  some  remarks,  but  in
vain.  Some  noises  also  outside  the  hall  helped  to  drown
his  voice,  and  among  the  noises  were  the  sounds  of  a
band  of  music,  which  grew  so  loud  eventually  that  the
lecturer  sat  doAvn.  I  got  up  from  where  I  was  seated
and  went  and  sat  beside  him,  and  told  him  I  was  anxious

to  attend  his  lectures  at  T College, and  wished  to

laiow  what  were  his  present  subjects.  He  attempted  to
tell  me,  but  the  noises  outside  were  still  so  loud,  that  I
was  unable  to  mi der stand  what  he  said.  After  repeated
attempts  on  his  part,  I  was  able  to  catch  the  words
"Heaven"'  and  "Hell."  He,  however,  used  a  word  in
connection  with  each,  which  I  was  still  unable  to  detect
owing  to  the  uproar  still  continuing.  At  last  I  discovered
that  this  word  was  "  crises,"  and  that  the  subjects  he
wished  to  inform  me  of  were  "  Crises  in  Heaven,"  "  Crises
in  Hell."  Ail  the  circumstances  of  this  dream  were  so
vivid  and  strange  that  when  I  awoke,  and  while  I  was
dressing,  it  entirely  occupied  my  thoughts,  and  I  was
endeavouring  to  imagine  what  could  have  suggested  such
a dream. On going  downstairs I  found that  the  only


306


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivich.


[part


letter  delivered  that  momiiig  was  for  me,  and  was  from
my  youngest  son,  then  at  Aberystwyth  College,  on  opening
which,  to  my  great  astonishment,  I  found  it  wholly
occupied  with  the  name  that  had  filled  my  dream  and  was
then  filhng  my  thoughts,  relating,  after  just  a  remark
that  he  was  glad  I  was  enjoying  my  stay  in  London,
that  on  the  previous  Smaday  the  Aberystwyth  people  and
himself  had  had  a  great  treat  m  having  the  Rev.  D.  C.

D to  occupy  the  pulpit  of  the  chapel  he  was  attending,

and  how  he,  being  such  a  stranger  to  the  place,  had
attracted  immense  congregations,  preached  powerful  ser-
mons, and  made  the  Sunday  quite  an  event  in  the  place.
I  did  not  Imow  that  the  Rev.  Pruicijjal  had  any  intention
of  visitmg  Aberystwyth,  nor  had  I  any  means  of  knowing.
The  comcidence  appeared  to  me  very  remarkable,  that
from the moment  that  the  letter  wholly occupied  with

the  name  of  the  Rev.  D.  C.  D was  thrown  on  the

mat,  and  during  the  whole  of  the  time  that  it  lay  there
unopened,  he  should  also  have  filled  my  dream,  and
should  comiect,  through  letter  and  dream  combined,
places  so  far  distant  and  unconnected  as  London,  Brecon,
and  Aberystw3'th.  '*  '

The  strangest  and  most  remarkable  coincidence  remains
to  be  told. I  mentioned  above  that  m  my  dream  Mr.

D  -'s  voice  in  the  lecture  Avhich  I  was  endeavouring  to

hear,  was  inaudible  owmg  to  noises  and  music  outside
the  hall.  Now,  I  returned  from  London  here  the  end  of
May,  and  in  course  of  a  couple  of  months — at  the  begm-
ning  of  August — my  son  came  home  from  Aberystwyth
for  midsummer  hohdays.  One  day  at  table,  I  related
this  dream  ui  his  hearing,  and  mentioned  the  strange
comcidence  between  it  and  the  letter.  When  I  had
finished  my  son  said,  "  Father,  it  is  very  strange  that  on

the  Sunday  night  when  Mr.  D  was  preaching  at  the

Tabernacle,  Aberystwyth,  soon  after  the  service  began,
there  was  a  circus  passing  into  town,  along  the  back  road
on  which  abuts  the  chapel  wall,  and  so  great  was  the
noise  and  uproar  of  carriages,  horse,s  and  crowd  that  for

a  long  time  Mr.  D could  not  be  heard  ; and  much

blame  was thrown on the town authorities that  they


Lxxxvi.] Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  307


allowed  a  procession  of  that  character  to  disturb  the  Sunday-
services."  It  is  but  fair  I  should  add  that,  though  I
have  been  once  or  twice  at  this  chapel  of  Tabernacle  at
Aberystwyth,  the  lecture  hall  of  my  dream  did  not
correspond  to  it,  but  the  disturbing  uproar  of  my  London
dream  corresponded  to  that  which  appears  to  have  occurred
at  the  chapel  in  that  it  proceeded  from  behind  the  lecturer
or  preacher  and  not  from  behind  the  audience.

Mr.  Lewis  Avrites  later  :

I  have  shown  the  account  to  my  son,  who  is  now  here
— who  corroborates  all  that  relates  to  him.

Another  case  which  appeared  at  the  same  time  as
Mr.  Lewis's  in  the  Journal  has  been  published  in  Pro-
ceedings, Vol.  XIV.,  p.  279.  It  was  a  dream  of  Sir
Lawrence  Jones's  concerning  a  cheque  having  to  be  filled
up  and  signed,  which  occurred  while  an  unexpected  letter
containing  a  cheque  the  dreamer  had  to  sign  lay  outside
his  bedroom  door.

In  the  next  case  (L.  936,  Journal,  Vol.  V.,  p.  246),  if
the  sequence  of  events  is  correctly  remembered  (there  was
an  interval  of  over  two  years  between  dream  and  record),
the  arrival  of  a  newspaper  seems  to  have  been  the  occasion
of  the  dream.  We  first  received  a  second-hand  accoimt
from  a  lady  cognisant  of  the  circumstances  at  the  time,
from  which  it  appears  that  the  dream  occurred  in  the
winter  of  1888-9.  The  dreamer,  Mrs.  E.  F.,  wrote  the
following  account  on  March  18,  1891  :

(L.  936.)

The  son  of  an  old  friend  came  West  for  his  health,
and,  apparently  much  helped,  returned  home  some  time
before  my  own  son's  health  began  to  fail.  Building  our
hopes  on  doctor's  advice,  and  what  we  thought  Colorado
chmate  had  done  for  that  young  man,  we  came  out  here.
About  six  weeks  after,  I  dreamed  one  night  that  young
G.  had  suddenly  had  a  severe  hemorrhage,  ran  right
down  and  died  in three  or  four  days [in  Connecticut].


308


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


So  vivid  was  the  dream  that  the  grief  of  parents  and
only  sister  was  deeply  impressed  on  my  mind  for  a  long
time,  even  to  pecuhar  expressions  they  used  in  speaking
of  his  death.  I  wondered  about  it  in  the  morning  as  I
had  not  corresponded  with  the  family  or  heard  about
them  from  others  since  leaving  home,  but  I  was  greatly
startled,  on  getting  my  daily  home  papers  [from  Connecti-
cut] in  that  morning's  mail,  to  find  a  notice  of  the  young
man's  death  under  circumstances  very  similar  to  those
of  my  dream.  The  mother's  rebeUion  at  her  son's  death
was  afterwards  voiced  to  me  in  a  letter,  in  language  very
like  that  I  dreamed  of  her  using.

There  are  two  other  cases  which  might  be  called  "  News-
paper "  cases,  both  sent  by  Mr.  Andrew  Lang,  but  I  think
if  the  newspaper  had  anything  to  do  with  the  matter  at
all,  it  was  probably  as  the  source  of  the  unknown  agent's
information.  I  will  describe  them  briefly.  The  first
(G.  268,  Journal,  Vol.  X.,  p.  232)  was  a  vivid  dream  of
the  death  of  G.  Lohmann,  the  cricketer,  two  days  after
he  died  in  South  Africa,  but  shortly  before  seven  o'clock
on  the  morning  of  the  day  on  which  the  news  appeared
in  the  morning  papers.  There  was  no  normal  association
of  ideas  to  suggest  the  dream,  but  the  dreamer,  Mr.
Brierley,  was  on  the  reporting  staff  of  the  Sheffield  Daily
Telegraph  and  mainly  concerned  with  cricket  and  football.
The  news  of  the  death  only  reached  the  office  after  he
had  left  it  the  previous  evening,  but  it  seems  likely  that
some  of  his  colleagues  when  they  heard  of  it  would  think
of  him  in  connection  with  it,  and  a  telepathic  com-
munication might  be  the  result.

The  other  case  (L.  1174,  Journal,  Vol.  XIV.,  p.  72)  was
a  vivid  dream  of  being  in  an  earthquake  which  occurred
in  the  early  morning  of  December  29,  1908,  about  twenty-
four  hours  after  the  great  Messina  earthquake.  The
dreamer's  first  normal  knowledge  of  the  earthquake  she
derived  from  the  Scotsman  newspaper  of  the  morning  of
her  dream,  December  29.  It  had,  however,  been  men-
tioned in  the  evening  papers  of  December  28,  and  friends
at  a  distance  may  have  seen  these  and  transmitted  the


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  309

idea  to  the  dreamer  telepathically.  This,  however,  is
highly  conjectural,  for  no  particular  agent  can  be  sug-
gested nor  any  reason  why  the  dreamer  should  be  selected
as  percipient.  The  case  may  be  classed  with  veridical
dreams  of  public  events  with  which  the  dreamer  is  uncon-
cerned, like  that  of  President  Carnot's  murder  (see  above
among  death  coincidences,  M.Cl.  88,  p.  241).

To  go  back  to  letters — the  following  is  an  odd  case
(L.  1137,  Journal,  Vol.  XI.,  p.  227)  in  which  the  contents
of  a  post-card  seem  to  have  been  telepathically  com-
municated to  a  person  other  than  the  one  to  whom  it
was  addressed — involving  apparently,  if  telepathic,  a  kind
of  three-cornered  telepathy  like  L.  1180,  p.  237  above.  The
case  was  sent  to  us  by  an  Associate  of  the  Society,
Mr.  Wilfred  Hall,  in  a  letter  dated  January  4,  1904.  He
had  received  the  accounts  from  a  friend  of  his  who  was
acquainted  with  the  ladies  concerned.  All  give  their  names
and  addresses. The  dreamer,  Miss  M.  Robson,  writes :

(L.  1137.)

On  Monday,  September  28th,  [1903]  Miss  Elliott  casually
said  to  me  that  she  intended  going  to  Sunderland  on  the
following  Saturday,  to  see  a  friend.

That  night  I  had  a  vivid  dream  :  Miss  Elliott  came  to
me  to  show  a  letter  which  she  had  received  from  her
Sunderland  friend,  askiiig  her  to  postpone  her  visit,  as
bad  news — some  family  trouble — necessitated  her  immediate
departure.

I  was  much  surprised  when  on  the  next  day  I  told
this  dream  to  hear  that  a  letter  in  actually  the  same
words  had  been  that  morning  received  by  Miss  Elliott.

I  may  add  T  do  not  profess  to  attach  any  importance
to  dreams,  and  it  is  quite  an  unusual  thing  for  me  to
relate  one.  M.  Robson.

E.  M.  Elliott.

Miss  ElUott's  own  accoimt  is  as  follows  :

Gateshead,  November  25th,  1903.
Some time ago I mentioned to Miss Robson that  I
had  to  go  to  Sunderland  on  a  certain  day  to  see  a  friend.


310


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


On  the  morning  of  the  day  on  which  I  had  arranged
to  go,  I  received  a  post-card  asldng  me  to  postpone  my
visit,  as  my  friend  had  had  some  very  bad  news  about  a
sister  hving  at  some  distance.  This  news  was  totally
mexpected,  and  was  a  great  shook  to  me,  as  I  loiow  aU
the  family  well.

When  I  saw  Miss  Robson  an  hour  or  so  afterwards,
almost  her  first  words  to  me  were  :  "  Oh,  I  had  such  a
strange  and  vivid  dream  last  night,"  and  then  she  pro-
ceeded to  tell  me  her  dream,  which  was  in  all  respects
what  had  really  happened,  even  to  the  wording  of  the
post-card.

I  may  say  Miss  Robson  knows  my  friend  Miss  Smith,
but  has  never  met  her  sister.

E.  M.  Elliott.

Another  dream  in  which  the  percipient  dreamt  the
substance  of  a  postal  communication  is  L.  895,  Journal,
Vol.  v.,  p.  173.  The  dreamer  was  Professor  Thomas
Davidson,  the  philosopher,  a  friend  of  William  James.
He  writes  :

(L.  895.)

Keene,  Essex  Co.,  N.Y.,  [Tuesday]  J^lne  9th,  1891.

Dear  Mr.  Hodgson, — Last  night,  toward  morning,  I
dreamt  in  a  vivid  way  that  my  friend,  Mr.  S.  F.  Weston,
whom  you  know,  had  sent  me  a  postal  card  saying  that
he  was  "  coming  on  Wednesday."  I  mentioned  my
dream  to  two  friends.  Miss  Kent  and  Mrs.  John  Dewey
(of  Ann  Arbor),  at  the  breakfast-table.  At  ten  we  started
for  Upper  Jay,  some  nme  miles  off.  On  our  way  home
we  called  at  the  post-office,  and  there  I  received  from  Mr.
Weston  the  enclosed  letter,  the  miscored  part  of  which
you  are  free  to  pubhsh.  This  was  about  four  o'clock  in
the  afternoon.

You  will  see  from  the  letter  that  I  had  no  reason  to
suppose  Mr.  Weston  was  coming  before  the  end  of  the
month.  Note  that  the  words  which  I  saw  on  the  card
are  not  in  the  letter. The  "Wednesday"  made  a  very


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases:  Impression  Externalised.  311"


distinct  impression  on  my  mind.  The  letter,  as  you-
will  see,  was  written  on  Smiday.

I  enclose  the  independent  testimonies  of  the  two  ladies.

*  *  *  *  *  *  ■

Thomas  Davidson.

P.S. — You  will  understand  that,  leaving  New  York
to-day,  Mr.  W.  will  get  here  to-morrow  (Wednesday),
— T.  D.

In  his  letter  Mx.  Weston  says  :

36,  Lee  Ave.,  Brooklyn,  June  1th,  1891.
My  deab  Mk.  Davidson, — I  have  delayed  answering
your  letter  for  several  days  as  I  have  not  been  quite
sure  where  I  should  spend  the  month  of  June.  .  .  .
Am  sorry  I  shall  not  be  able  to  get  the  things  you
wanted  as  I  shall  take  the  boat  Tuesday  night.  Wish
you  had  mentioned  them  in  your  letter.  ...

S.  F.  Weston.

I  omit  the  corroboration  by  the  two  ladies,  which  la
printed  in  the  Journal.

There  is,  it  wdll  be  observed,  no  exact  time-coincidence
here.  The  dream  occurred  more  than  twenty-four  hours
after  the  letter  was  written,  and  apparently  some  time
before  it  arrived,  while  the  journey  of  which  the  letter
spoke  commenced  some  twelve  hours  after  the  dream.
In  the  case  to  be  next  quoted  (L.  1218)  there  is  the  same
absence  of  time -coincidence  combined  with  communication
corresponding  with  a  letter  or  parts  of  it.  The  letter  was
dated  and  therefore  presumably  at  least  begun  more  than
two  days  before  the  dream,  but  was  not  posted  till  some
twenty-four  hours  after  it.  In  both  these  cases  it  seems
certain  that,  so  far  as  there  was  supernormal  communica-
tion, it  was  the  agent's  intention  to  convey  the  informa-
tion that  operated  and  not  the  letter  itself.  This  makes
it  probable  that  the  exact  time-coincidence  between  the
dream  and  the  arrival  of  the  letter  in  other  cases  was
accidental  except  so  far  as  the  emergence  of  the  impres-
sion just  then  may  have  been  stimulated  either  by  the

0


312  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

writer's  knowledge  of  when  the  letter  was  likely  to  arrive
or  the  dreamer's  consciousness  of  the  postman's  knock. ^

The  case  in  question  (L.  1218,  Journal,  Vol.  XVIII.,
p.  225)  was  sent  to  us  by  an  Associate  of  the  Society^
Mrs.  C,  on  March  11,  1918,  the  dreamer  being  her
daughter.  For  shortness  I  omit  Mrs.  C.'s  narrative  and
other  corroborative  evidence  including  a  note  made  before
the  letter  was  received  (all  of  which  are  printed  in  the
Journal),  and  give  only  the  dreamer's  account,  which  we
received  on  April  6,  1918. She  writes  :

(L.  1218.)

On  the  morning  of  Jan.  13th,  I  awoke  from  a  vivid
dream  in  which  I  saw  Arthur  S.  standing  in  front  of  me,
in  khaki.  He  looked  pleased  and  said  he  had  some
important  news  to  tell  me— giving  no  details,  but  I  heard
him  say,  "I  can  never  forget  my  old  friend  [G]."—
Then  I  awoke.

At  brealdast  I  mentioned  my  dream  without  going  into
details,  in  fact  I  wanted  the  others  to  guess  of  whom  I
had  dreamt  as  it  was  a  very  out  of  the  way  person.
Mother  asked  me  not  to  give  any  details  until  the  same
evening,  which  I  did  in  the  presence  of  my  sister.

Three  days  later,  by  the  very  last  post,  I  received  a
letter  from  Arthur  S.,  dated  the  10th,  though  bearing  the
postmark  of  the  14th  from  Seaford.  We  were  aU  very
surprised  to  hear  that  he  was  in  England,  that  he  had
joined  up  and  had  just  got  married.  Almost  the  last
sentence  in  his  letter  contaiiied  these  words  re  my  brother,
"I  often  think  of  my  old  friend  [G.].  ...  I  have  met
a  lot  of  people,  but  I  never  forget  [G.]."

[Signed  with  full  name.]

It  should  be  explained  that  the  dreamer's  brother  [G.]
had  been  killed  in  the  war  about  two  years  before,  and  that

1  That  it  is  the  ideas  of  the  writer  of  the  letter  in  "  letter  arrival  "
cases,  and  not  the  letter  itself  or  the  actual  time  of  its  arrival  that
influences  the  percipient  is  supported  by  a  case  (M.  41)  quoted  by  Myers
in  Proceedings,  Vol.  IX.,  pp.  68-70.  In  this  case  the  information
emerged  through  automatic  writing.


LxxxvT.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  313

Arthur  S.  was  a  friend  of  his  whom  the  dreamer  and  her
family  believed  to  be  permanently  in  Canada.  Nothing  had
occurred  to  make  the  dreamer  think  of  him.

§  4. Coincidence  with  ideas  not  connected  by  agent  loith
percipient. Unconscious  telepathic  leakage.

I  now  pass  on  to  cases  where  the  contents  of  the
dream  or  hallucination  appear  to  be  due,  as  in  the  last
section,  to  an  idea  or  thought  in  the  agent's  mind,  but
one  entirely  unconnected  by  him  with  the  percipient.
And  not  only,  had  the  agent  no  intention  of  communicat-
ing the  idea  to  the  percipient,  but,  so  far  as  is  known,  no
thought  at  all  of  the  percipient  in  connection  with  it.  If
there  was  telepathic  communication,  the  agent's  share  in  it
might  be  described  as  unconscious  telepathic  leakage.

f-  I  wiU  give  first  a  dream  (L.  1219,  Journal,  Vol.  XVIIl.,
p.  227)  dreamt  by  the  same  lady  who  sent  us  the  one
last  quoted.  To  put  it  shortly  :  on  January  16th,  1918,
Mrs.  C,  the  mother  of  the  dreamer,  spent  the  afternoon
with  Madme.  R.,  who  lived  at  the  top  of  a  high  block  of
flats.  In  the  course  of  conversation  on  many  topics,
Madme.  R.  related  how  Mrs.  X.  in  a  delicate  state  of
health  greatly  dreaded  air-raids.  One  took  place.  Mrs.
X.  was  taken  ill  and  twins  were  born  prematurely.  Mrs.
C,  who  did  not  know  Mrs.  X.,  is  certain  that  she  did
not  repeat  this  tale  to  her  family.  Next  morning,  how-
ever, her  daughter  related  a  dream  which  she,  the  dreamer,
afterwards  wrote  down  as  follows  :

(L.  1219.)

On  Wednesday,  the  1 6th  Jan.,  I  dreamt  as  follows  :

There  was  a  dreadful  air-raid  in  progress.  Mother  and
1  were  in  a  lofty  building  watching  it  and  at  the  same
time  attending  to  a  very  tiny  baby,  which  I  was  holding
in  my  arms,-  wrapped  in  a  blanket.

There  waf  also  another  woman  in  the  room  carrying
a  tiny  baby  and  she  seemed  very  agitated  as  she  walked
up  and  down  with  it.

In  my  dream  the  raid  was  very  bad,  and  I  could  see


314


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


flashes  of  light  on  the  windows  and  was  nearly  deafened
with  the  noise  of  guns  and  the  humming  of  the  aeroplanes.
I  remember  feeling  terrified  at  the  time,  as  it  was  quite
the  worst  raid  I  had  ever  been  in.  I  told  mother  this
the  next  morning,  when  she  at  once  said,  "  Oh,  but  this
is  what  Mme.  R.  told  me  when  I  was  with  her  yesterday."

[Signed  with  full  name.]

For  shortness  I  omit  the  agent's  account  and  corro-
borative evidence.  A  bad  air  raid  combined  with  two
little  babies  seems  too  complicated  a  coincidence  to
attribute  to  chance.

In  the  next  case  (L.  836,  Journal,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  221)  the
idea  transferred  is  simple  but  very  definite,  and  the  dream
evidently  made  an  unusual  impression.  It  comes  from  a
gentleman  who  does  not  wish  his  name  to  be  printed.
His  wife  has  sent  us  a  similar,  though  somewhat  less  full
account  of  what  occurred.

(L.  836.)

December  9th,  1889.

On  Sunday  morning,  November  24th  [1889],  I  was  at
home,  reading  carefully  Sir  Wilham  Hamilton's  Lectures
on  Metaphysics.  After  finishmg  Lecture  xx.,  I  felt  some-
what drowsy,  and  very  soon  fell  asleep.  This  was  at
about  12  o'clock.  I  slept  for  about  10  mmutes,  and
during  that  time  I  dreamt  that  a  friend  of  mine  ap-
peared before  me  and  said,  "  I  say,  you  owe  me  twopence
for  postage  in  connection  with  that  mortgage."  "All
right,"  I  repUed,  "  business  is  business,"  and  saying  this
I  put  my  hand  in  my  pocket,  and  drawing  it  out  gave
him  the  twopence  he  required. With  this  I  woke.

My  friend  has  been  managing  some  mortgage  business
for  me  during  the  last  two  months.

My  wife  had  gone  out  about  10.15  a.m.,  intending  to
visit  a  church  she  had  not  been  to  before.  Finding  it
rather  farther  than  she  expected,  she  thought  she  would
like  to  take  the  tram  back.  But  she  had  left  her  purse
at home. However, being near a friend's house  (the


Lxxxvi.] Spontaneous  Cases  :  Im'pression  Externalised.  315

friend  I  saw  in  my  dream),  she  called  in  and  asked  for
the  loan  of  twopence.  His  wife  lent  my  wife  sixpence,
and  he  himself  accompanied  my  wife  to  the  church,  which
was  very  near.  It  was  just  before  11  o'clock.  After
the  service  my  wife  took  the  tram,  and  arrived  home  at
about  1  o'clock.  My  dream  had  made  so  great  an  im-
pression on  my  mind  that  I  immediately  told  her  about
it,  and  to  my  utter  astonishment  she  related  the  story  of
borrowing  twopence,  which  she  said  she  would  not  have
thought  it  worth  while  mentioning  otherwise.

A  dream  case  printed  in  the  Journal  for  January  1920
(L.  1228,  Journal,  Vol.  XIX.,  p.  138)  resembles  the  last
in  triviality  and  contemporaneousness,  and  eminently
suggests  unconscious  telepathic  leakage,  or,  as  the  agent
calls  it,  "  telepathy  without  conscious  effort."  It  was
sent  to  us  by  Mr.  B.  Jordan-Smith,  an  Associate  of  the
Society,  who  wrote  :

(L.  1228.)

Orchaudlea,  Grosvenor  Road,  Caversham,  Reading,
November  27,  1919.

Miss  E.  M.  Thomas  [the  percipient]  is  a  Birmingham
friend  of  ours  and  staying  at  the  above  address  for  a
few  days.  So  far  I  have  never  tried  any  telepathic
experiments  with  the  lady.

After  relating  what  she  said  was  her  dream,  she  modified
it  by  saying  that  she  was  more  or  less  in  the  stage  of
waking  (half  awake).

Mrs.  Jordan-Smith  confirms  these  statements  as  she  was
present  at  the  time.

B.  Jordan-Smith.

The  following  statements  were  enclosed  with  this  letter  :

I.

November  2Gth,  1919  (written  10  a.m.)

At  8.30  a.m. this  morning  at  breaMast  at  the  above
address,  Miss  Ethel  Thomas,  a  visitor,  related  what  she


316


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


said  at  the  time  was  a  dream,  just  on  the  point  of  waking
up,  as  follows  :

"  I  was  counting  the  number  of  men  and  women
going  on  board  ship  at  Southampton,  and  the  number
was  fifteen. I  could  almost  tell  who  they  were."

I  mentioned  that  I  thought  that  this  was  a  case  of
"  telepathy  without  conscious  effort,"  and  related  that  at
8.15  a.m.  I  was  shavmg  in  an  adjoinmg  room,  and  count-
ing up  in  my  mind  the  number  of  people  going  on  board
ship  on  Thursday,  and  on  a  ship  at  Southampton,  the
same  time. The  total  number  was  15.

Mrs.  Jordan -Smith  just  after  I  had  shaved  went  into
Miss  Thomas's  room  to  rouse  her. B.  Jordan-Smith.

II.

November  26,  1919.

[I  was]  just  dreammg  when  Mrs.  B.  Jordan-Smith
called  me  this  morning,  or  rather  she  came  mto  my
room  and  touched  me  and  said  :  "  Breakfast  will  soon  be
ready,  but  no  hurry."

I  got  up,  without  hurry,  and  came  down  and  fomad  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Jordan-Smith  havmg  breakfast.  I  said  to  Mrs.
Jordan-Smith  :  "I  was  dreammg  about  a  ship  when  you
came  and  woke  me."  Mr.  Jordan-Smith  then  took  it
up  :  "  What  about  a  ship  ?  "  he  asked.  "  Oh,"  I  rephed,
"  it  was  just  going  from  Southampton,  and  I  stood  by
counting  the  people  gomg  aboard."  "  How  many  1  "
he  asked.

"  Fifteen,"  I  replied.

He  then  told  me  that  just  before,  and  at  the  time
Mrs.  Jordan-Smith  broke  into  my  dream,  he  was  shaving
in  bath-room,  and  was  thmking  over  a  ship  sailing  from
Southampton  next  day,  on  which  he  had  fifteen  passengers.

Ethel  Marlbr  Thomas.
(witness) Annie  Jordan-Smith.

In  answer  to  enquiries,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Jordan-Smith
and  Miss  Thomas  make  it  clear  that  none  of  them  re-
membered anything  having  been  said,  or  having  happened,


LXxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases:  Impression  Externalised.  317


that  could  have  suggested  to  Miss  Thomas  ships  saiUng
from  Southampton  or  the  number  of  passengers.

Another  case  in  which  unconscious  leakage  seems  to
have  occurred  is  L.  1191  [Journal,  Vol.  XV.,  p.  337),  the
agent  being  either  Mrs.  or  Miss  Verrall — probably
the  former — and  the  percipient  Miss  "  Ann  Jones  "
(pseudonym)  mentioned  below  (pp.  330  and  352)  who  was
staying  with  them.  As  regards  the  agent's  side  Mrs.
Verrall  writes  :
(L.  1191.)

On  October  22,  1912,  my  daughter's  script  contained
the  phrases,  in  juxtaposition  :

"  The Lombard poplar — the Florentine's fierce love — "

This  script  was|^-  seen  by  me  on  Nov.  2,  and  suggested
to  me  that  the  -  combination  of  Lombardy  with  Dante
might  refer  to  Dante's  stay  at  Verona.  Dante  at  Verona
is  the  title  and  subject  of  a  poem  by  D.  G.  Rossetti.

On  November  7  I  began  annotating  this  H.  V.  script,
but  left  my  notes  incomplete  for  further  investigation  of
its  hterary  or  classical  allusions.

Further  investigation,  after  the  hint  given  by  the
dream,  makes  it  clear  that  the  allusion  in  the  script  is  to
Dante  at  Verona.  .  .  .

Miss  Jones  knew  that  my  daughter  and  I  were  auto-
matic -writers,  but  had  no  knowledge  of  the  H.  V.  script
of  Oct.  22,  1912.  M.  DE  G.  Verrall.

At  breakfast  on  November  10th  Miss  Jones  described
spontaneously  to  Mss  Verrall,  and  afterwards  to  Mrs.
Verrall,  her  dream  of  the  night  before,  and  their  accounts
are  given  in  the  Journal,  but  omitted  here  for  shortness.

Miss  Jones's  own  account  is  as  follows  :

Nov.  21,  1912.

On  the  night  between  Saturday  and  Simday,  November
9  and  10  (1912),  I  was  awakened  from  a  rather  confused
dream,  in  which  I  was  either  writing  script  myself  or
watching  people  write,  by  a  voice  which  gave  me  a  very
urgent  message  to  the  effect  that "They"  were  to  be


318  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivich.  [part

told  to  look  at  Verona,  or  to  go  to  Verona,  as  "  They  "
were  now  on  the  wrong  tack.  I  was  sufficiently  awake
to  know  where  I  was,  and  I  asked,  "  Whom  shall  I  tell
—Helen  ?  "  "  Tell  H.  to  tell  her  mother,"  was  the  reply.
It  seemed  to  me  that  the  mask  of  Dante,  which  I  may
have  seen  that  afternoon  in  Newnham  Library,  was
floating  in  the  darkness.  There  was  more  of  this  message,
and  1  was  urged  to  write  it  down  there  and  then,  but,
feehng  disinclined  to  get  up  for  a  light  and  writing
materials,  I  satisfied  myself  by  repeating  the  whole  mes-
sage. In  the  morning,  however,  I  had  forgotten  all
but  what  I  told  Miss  Verrall,  and  have  here  set  down.
I  am  not  quite  sure  that  I  was  myself  writing  script
in  the  dream.

[Signed Ann  Jones.]

Miss  Verrall  adds  :

Miss  Jones  told  me  to-day,  Nov.  21,  1912,  that  what
she  saw  in  her  dream  was  the  death  mask  of  Dante,
with  which  she  is  famihar,  not  the  bust  of  which  there
is  a  copy  ha  the  Newnham  Library ;  but  she  thought
the  one  might  have  reminded  her  of  the  other.

Helen  de  G.  Vekrall.

P.S.—(Dec.  2,  1912.)  Although  I  have  often  discussed
questions  of  psychical  research  with  Miss  Jones,  I  am
absolutely  certain  that  I  never  told  her  anything  of  the
contents  of  my  unpublished  scripts  (except  that  I  once
quoted  to  her  an  automatic  poem  which  I  wrote  some
years  ago)  until  after  she  had  told  me  of  her  dream  on
Nov.  10,  1912.  I  then  said  that  I  had  recently  had  a
script  containing  references  to  Dante  and  Verona.

H.  DE  G.  V.

There  is  a  curious  case  (L.  1182,  Journal,  Vol.  XIV.,
p.  382)  of  a  dream  during  a  few  minutes'  afternoon  sleep
reproducing  a  scene  foretold  in  planchette  writing,  of  which
the  dreamer  knew  nothing ;  but  as  the  dream  was  not
mentioned  till  the  planchette  prophecy  had  been  described
to  the  dreamer,  and  as  the  dreamer  seems  both  un-
interested in the incident and distrustful of his  own


LXXxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  3i§

memory  after  a  few  weeks,  I  will  not  describe  it  further
here.  There  was  certainly  no  intentional  telepathic
transference.

In  two  other  instances  of  unconscious  leakage  (if  there
was  telepathy),  both  collected  for  us  by  Mr.  F.  J.  M.
Stratton  of  Gonville  and  Caius  College,  Cambridge,  and
carefully  gone  into  in  detail  by  him,  the  dreams  occurred
apparently  two  or  three  days  after  the  incidents,  to  which
they  respectively  seem  to  refer,  had  become  known  to
the  supposed  agents.  There  was  therefore  no  traceable
time-coincidence  between  the  impressions  of  agent  and
percipient,  and  though  this  does  not  exclude  telepathy
as  the  source  of  the  ideas  in  the  percipient's  mind,  it
leaves  a  wider  scope  for  chance.  In  both  cases  the
agent  and  percipient  were  in  correspondence,  though  in
the  first  only  about  a  visit  the  percipient  was  to  pay  to
the  agent. I  will  describe  both  cases  briefly.

(L.  1184.)

In  the  first  (L.  1184,  Journal,  Vol.  XV.,  p.  87)  Mrs.
WooUacott  had  been  staying  with  a  sister-in-law  who  had
two  sons  aged  eleven  and  seventeen.  A  few  days  after
she  left,  namely,  on  August  23,  1910,  the  younger  nephew
had  an  accident  in  the  swimming  bath,  alarming  at  the
moment  but  leading  to  no  serious  consequences.  Of  this
Mrs.  WooUacott  heard  from  her  sister-in-law  on  August  30th
or  3l8t.  During  the  first  week  in  September  her  friend
Miss  Poupard  had  a  dream  which  impressed  her  much  at  the
time,  and  which  she  describes  on  November  11th,  1910,  as
follows  :

In  my  dream  I  was  reading  a  newspaper,  when  the
stop-press  news  attracted  my  attention  ;  I  read  that  an
accident  had  happened  to  one  of  Mrs.  WooUacott's  nephews.
As  I  read  I  seemed  to  see  the  occurrence — the  boy  ap-
peared to  fall  from  a  bridge  or  other  structure  into  some
water,  being  either  killed  in  the  fall,  or  drowned.  The
strange  part  of  it  was  that  I  had  no  idea  my  friend
Mrs.  WooUacott  had  any  nephews,  yet  in  my  dream
there  were  distinctly  two,  their  ages  being  about  twelve
and  seventeen.


S20  Mrs.  Benry  Sidgwick.  [paet

Miss  Poupard  related  this  dream  to  Mrs.  WooUacott
when  she  went  to  stay  with  her  on  September  11th — before
she  could  by  any  possibility  have  heard  about  the  nephews
or  the  accident.

In  the  other  case  (L.  1185,  Journal,  Vol.  XV.,  p.  107)
the  dreamer.  Dr.  R.  G.  Markham,  describes  what  occurred
as  follows  on  April  30th,  1911  :

(L.  1185.)

April  mil,  1911.

During  the  night  of  Dec.  5th,  1909,  I  had  a  dream
which  was  so  peculiar  as  to  impress  itself  on  my  memory,
and  the  next  morning  I  mentioned  it  to  the  people  with
whom  I  was  staying  at  the  time,  and  also  the  same  day
wrote  to  my  fiancee,  and  told  her  to  remind  me,  on  the
following  day,  to  narrate  it  to  her,  but  gave  her  no
particulars.

As  far  as  I  can  now  remember,  the  dream  was  as
foUows  :

A  physician.  Dr.  L.,  and  I  were  standing  at  a  bedside.
I  recognised  the  patient  to  be  a  certain  Nurse  W.  who
was  at  that  [time]  a  nurse  at  the  Prince  of  Wales's
General  Hospital,  Tottenham.  The  Doctor,  after  examin-
ing her  chest,  asked  me  to  do  so  as  well,  and  then  asked
my  opinion  about  the  disease  present,  stating  that  he
himself  thought  that  she  was  suffering  from  heart  disease,
but  certain  other  signs  suggested  more  serious  mischief.

During  my  residence  at  this  hospital,  this  particular
nurse  had  always  been  considered  as  one  of  the  strongest,
and  it  was  this  fact  that  impressed  the  dream  on  my
memory.  The  next  day,  Dec.  7th,  I  met  my  fiancee
and  narrated  the  dream  to  her,  and  to  my  astonishment
fomad  that  the  nurse  about  whom  I  had  dreamt  had
actually  been  examined  and  advised  to  leave  the  hospital.

R.  G.  Markhabi.

Miss  Wilson,  afterwards  Mrs.  Markham,  gave  a  sub-
stantially similar  account  almost  a  year  earlier.  This  is
printed  in  the  Journal. It  appears  that  Nurse  W.  had


LXXXVT.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  321

been  examined  by  Dr.  L.  on  December  3rd,  1909,  and
ithat  she  finally  left  the  hospital  about  December  12th,
1909.  Presumably  Miss  Wilson  was  the  agent  in  this
case.

As  more  or  less  analogous  to  these  latter  dreams  may
be  mentioned  L.  1096  and  L.  1098  {Journal,  Vol.  VIII.,
pp.  141  and  145),  which  came  to  us  from  the  former
American  Branch  of  the  Society.  The  dreamer.  Miss
Luke,  was  in  the  habit  of  having  veridical  dreams  and
also  impressions  about  people  somewhat  as  Mrs.  Adam
did  (see  above,  L.  1164,  p.  64).  In  the  Journal,  Vol.
VIII.,  four  of  Miss  Luke"s  dreams  are  recorded,  three  of
:them  collected  and  arranged,  with,  in  two  cases,  corro-
borative evidence,  by  Dr.  Osgood  Mason,  who  knew  her
weU.  Of  the  four  dreams,  however,  the  most  striking
was  recorded  too  long  after  the  event  for  our  collection,
and  the  most  important  evidentially  is  quoted  in  Myers'
Human  Personality.  In  the  two  that  remain,  the  coin-
cidences are  perhaps  hardly  remarkable  enough  to  merit
discussion  here,  though  interesting  regarded  as  items  in  a
series.

In  the  dreams  apparently  showing  telepathic  leakage  so
far  considered  in  the  present  section  there  is  no  reason,
except  possibly  in  L.  1185  (p.  320),  to  suspect  the  presence
jof  emotional  disturbance  in  the  agent's  mind.  In  the
[next  four  cases  the  idea  transferred  was  to  the  agent  a
'cause  of  mental  agitation  or  emotion.  Whether  this
helped  to  give  it  what  we  may  caU  telepathic  energy,  we
do  not  know,  but  at  any  rate  that  energy  was  not  in-
tentionally directed  to  the  percipient.  I  will  take  the
cases  in  the  order  in  which  they  appeared  in  the  Journal.
The  first  (L.  1168,  Journal,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  153)  came
through  the  American  Branch  of  the  Society.  It  was
sent  to  Dr.  Hodgson  by  an  acquaintance — a  Member  of
the  Society — whose  name  as  well  as  those  of  agent  and
percipient  are  suppressed  for  reasons  that  will  be  obvious.
He  says  of  Mr.  A.,  the  husband  of  the  agent,  that  he  is
a  gentleman  of  unquestioned  character  and  standing  whom
he  has  known  well  for  twenty  years. Mr.  A.  writes  :


1


322  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.  [part,

(L.  1168.)

New  York,  March  24,  1893.  !

On  the  9th  of  March,  1893,  I  received  from  Mr.  B.
a  letter  dated  March  8th,  1893,  asking  for  a  loan  of  a
considerable  sum  of  money.  The  circumstances  in  the  '
case  called  for  very  careful  consideration,  and  certain  ^
pecuUar  personal  relations  to  Mr.  B.  and  his  family
connections  made  it  important  to  have  the  advice  and
opinion  of  my  wife.  I  therefore  showed  Mr.  B.'s  letter
to  her,  and  asked  her  to  think  about  it  for  a  day  or
two,  which  she  did,  and  talked  with  me  on  the  subject
on  the  evening  of  March  9th,  and  also  from  time  to
time  on  the  10th,  11th,  12th,  and  13th  of  March.

On  the  14th  of  March  she  received  from  a  friend — Mrs.
C. — living  in  a  Western  town  about  2000  miles  from
New  York,  a  letter  dated  and  posted  March  11th,  1893,
as  follows  :

"My  dear  Mrs.  A.,— Although  still  confined  to  my  bed  tl
as  I  wrote  you,  and  finding  it  a  physical  difficulty  to  si
write,  a  dream  of  you,  which  has  come  to  me  two  sue-  I
cessive  nights,  is  so  real  I  must  transcribe  it  to  you,  c
however  lightly  you  may  choose  to  consider  it,  and  I  i
beg  your  generous  heart  to  pardon  any  presumption  \
which  may  appear  in  my  making  sufficient  of  it  to  send  (
you  a  description.  c
"  I  saw  you  walking  meditatively  up  and  down  a  path  s
in  your  home,  with  a  lace  scarf  about  your  head,  con-  t
sidering  a  loan  of  which  you  were  contemplating  the  (
making.  You  were  quite  inclined  to  the  transaction,  !
but  a  voice  kept  saying  to  me,  '  She  will  regret  it— tell  i
her  not  to.  It  will  lead  to  grief  for  her,  and  for  many  1
reasons  be  a  mistake.'  i

"  My  dear  friend  of  the  olden and  the  present  time,  i
laugh  if  you  will, but  accept  the  interest  and  affection
which  prompt  my  writing,  and  with  love  to  your  house-
hold, believe  me  ever  your  faithful  friend, "[Mrs.]  C."

Mrs.  C.  has  not  been  East  within  the  past  six  months.

I  have  the  best  reason  to  beheve  that  she  has  never
seen  Mr.  B.  nor  any  of  his  family  relatives  or  connections.
My  wife  is  quite  positive  that  she  never  mentioned  him


LXXXVT.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  323

nor  any  of  his  connections  to  Mrs.  C,  and  that  Mrs.  C.
does  not  know  of  his  existence.

Dr.  Hodgson's  informant  tells  him  that  he  himself
carefully  compared  the  copy  of  Mrs.  C.'s  letter,  incor-
porated in  air.  A.'s  statement,  with  the  original.  He
adds  :

"You  wiU  note  that  in  Mrs.  C.'s  dream  ]S'Irs.  A.  was
'  quite  inclined  towards  the  transaction.'  JVIr.  A.  says
this  is  correct.  It  is  probably  also  correct  that  Mrs.
A.  wore  a  lace  scarf  about  her  head,  though  of  this  she
cannot  be  certain.  INIrs.  C.  had  seen  INIrs.  A.  wearing
such  a  scarf  a  year  or  so  ago."

The  repetition  of  the  dream,  as  here  described,  is  an
interesting  and  unusual  feature.

In  the  next  case  (L.  1173,  Journal,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  328)
the  dreamer  was  Mss  Lucy  Edmunds,  for  a  long  time
secretary  to  Dr.  Hodgson,  and  until  recently  an
Honorary  Associate  of  the  Society.  It  is  an  interesting
case,  but  as  affording  evidence  of  telepathy  somewhat
dubious  because  the  dream  might  quite  weU  have  occurred
without  stimulus  from  without.  It  is,  in  fact,  w^hat
Gurney  would  have  called  an  ambiguous  case — a  class  of
cases  dealt  with  below.  The  likelihood,  however,  is  con-
siderable that  the  dream  was  influenced  by  Mr.  Brown's
desire  to  see  a  vision  of  his  dead  son  and  his  effort  to
do  so  at  apparently  the  very  time  of  the  dream  ;  especi-

'aUy  as  his  mind  and  J\Iiss  Edmunds'  were  both  occupied
with  the  same  scene — the  view^  from  the  window. It  has

,  been  suggested  above  (pp.  182-3)  that  common  interest  in
a  locality  may  have  facilitated  telepathic  impressions  in
certain  cases.

]\Iiss  Edmunds  writes  on  June  5,  1896  :

(L.  1173.)

On  Wednesday,  June  3rd,  Dorothy  showed  me  a  minia-
ture of  her  brother  Stuart,  who  died  last  February  5th,
and  whom  I  have  never  seen.

On Thursday, Juue 4, I went upstairs at nine  and


324


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


undressed  in  the  dark  so  as  to  enjoy  the  Hghts  in  the
distance  through  the  open  windows.  I  loitered,  and
several  times  sat  on  the  sofa  by  the  window  looking
towards  the  Town  Hall.  It  was  9.30  before  I  was  in
bed,  when  I  fell  asleep  almost  immediately.  I  awoke
from  a  dream  soon  after  ten.  (I  judged  the  time,  not
from  my  watch,  but  from  hearing  the  clock  strike  eleven
(what  seemed  to  be)  nearly  an  hour  after  awaking.)

I  dreamed  that  I  was  awake  and  sitting  on  the  sofa
looldng  down  the  hill  towards  the  hghts  among  the  trees,
just  as  I  had  sat  before  going  to  bed,  when  suddenly
one  of  the  hghts  took  the  form  of  a  human  face  among
the  trees.  I  was  so  surprised  that  I  rose  up  and  went
nearer  to  the  window  and  exclaimed  aloud:

"  What  an  astonishing  thing,  that  looks  exactly  like
the  face  of  Stuart  BroAvn  !  "

The  face  immediately  smiled  ;  the  eyes  lit  up  and
looked  right  into  mine,  and  the  face  came  swiftly  towards
me  through  the  trees,  when,  just  as  it  got  near  the
window,  it  vanished,  and  I  awoke  and  heard  footsteps  in
a  closet  which  is  next  to  the  room  I  occupied.

The  dream  was  so  vivid  that  I  could,  on  awaking,
mentally  recall  the  face  and  compare  it  with  the  mmia-
ture  which  I  had  seen  the  day  before.  It  was  like  the
miniature,  but  life  size  and  radiant  with  hght  and  exijres-
sion,  commg  out  of  the  hght  at  which  I  had  been  looking.

The  dream  wakened  me  so  thoroughly  that  I  did  not
sleep  again  until  after  twelve,

I  related  the  dream  to  Mrs.  Brown  at  breakfast  time
after  Mr.  Brown  had  gone,  and  asked  her  if  she  went  to
the  closet  and  whether  she  thought  of  Stuart  at  the
time.  I  thought  in  the  night  that  such  might  be  the
case.

Before  mentioning  the  dream  to  Mr.  Brown  in  the
evening,  Mrs.  Brown  asked  him  what  he  was  thinking  of
when  he  went  to  the  closet  the  night  before.  He  could
not  remember  thmking  of  anything  special  excepting  in
connection  with  fsome  boots  which  he  placed  on  a  shelf,
and  which  he  had  not  worn  since  in  camp  last  summer ;
but  he  interrupted  me,  or  tried  to,  when  I  began  to  tell


Lxxxvi.]  Spmitaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  325


him  my  dream  and  spoke  of  sitting  at  the  window  and  look-
ing at  the  hghts.  After  I  had  finished  telling  my  dream
he  related  the  following,  which  he  wrote  immediately  after.

Mr.  Brown's  accomit  is  as  follows  :

On  the  evening  of  Jxme  4,  1896,  about  10.10  p.m.,  I
was  sitting  in  the  parlor  facing  the  bay-window  looking
south-west,  ["  where,"  he  says  later,  "  the  outlook  is
almost  precisely  the  same "  as  from  Miss  Edmunds'  win-
dow] reading  the  paper.  My  mind  wandered  from  the
reading  to  thoughts  of  Myers'  articles  on  Crystal- Visions,
which  I  had  read  a  day  or  two  before.

Looking  out  of  the  window  I  thought  of  Stuart,  wonder-
ing if  it  were  possible  for  his  face  to  appear  to  me  and
with  a  great  longing  that  I  might  see  him.  I  wondered
if  I  could  be  susceptible  to  such  visions,  but  as  I  had
never  experienced  anything  of  the  Idnd,  in  a  few  moments
gave  it  up.

After  attending  to  one  or  two  household  duties,  I  went
upstairs  at  10.20  as  I  noticed'  by  the  clock.  On  reaching
my  room  the  first  thing  done  was  to  put  away  a  new-
pair  of  shoes,  moving  at  the  time  an  old  pair  which  I  had
not  worn  smce  I  was  in  camp  with  Stuart  last  August.

This  accounts  for  the  footsteps  Miss  Edmunds  heard  in
the  closet  wdien  she  awoke,  and  times  the  dream  as  having
occurred  within  a  very'  few^  minutes  of  Mr.  Brown's
longing  to  see  the  vision.

There  follows  evidence  to  show  that  Mr.  Brown's  recol-
lection of  his  experience  and  Miss  Edmunds'  of  hers  were
independent.

The  following  carefully  recorded  case  (L.  1183,  Journal,
Vol.  XV.,  p.  17)  speaks  for  itself.

The  account  was  sent  to  us  by  Major  Nelson  :

(L.  1183.)

The  Mange,  House,  Stoke  D'Abernon,
Surrey,  August  29th,  1910.
Playing  golf  last  week  I  happened  to  mention  to  my
opponent,  a  member  of  the  Psychical  Research  Society


326


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[part


a  strange  incident  that  occurred  to  me  last  Xmas  Eve,
or  rather  in  the  early  hours  of  Xmas  Day.

I  ought  to  tell  you  that  I  never  dream.  I  believe  as  a
child  I  had  nightmares  like  other  children,  but  since  then
a  dream  has  been  to  me  an  unlaiown  quantity.

With  this  laiowledge  you  will  understand  why  what
occurred  last  Xmas  made  so  deep  an  impression.  The
whole  of  that  day  and  the  next  my  mind  was  obsessed
by  the  incident,  but  I  kept  it  entirely  to  myself.

On  the  momuig  of  the  27th  I  dreamed  again,  and  at
dinner  the  same  night  the  conversation  turned  upon
dreams.  Then  for  the  first  time  I  communicated  my
strange  experiences  to  two  ladies  sitting  on  either  side  of
me,  IVIrs.  Rowan  Hamilton,  of  Killyleagh  Castle,  Co.  Down,
and  her  niece  by  marriage,  Mrs.  Sidney  Rowan  Hamilton.

On  the  28th  I  wrote  to  Mr.  Sandwith,  the  Rector  of
St.  Bartholomew's,  Smithfield,  whom  I  had  not  seen  for
some  considerable  time,  and  asked  him  if  he  had  been
worried  about  some  child.  He  replied  by  coming  down  to
Stoke,  and  was  amazed  when  I  told  him  what  had  oc-
curred, and  proceeded  to  tell  me  what  had  been  going
on  in  his  parish.

There  is  no  possible  explanation  of  how  I  could  have
been  cognisant  of  the  fact  that  Mr.  Sandwith  had  been
worried,  for  I  had  never  heard  of  the  child  or  of  the  German.

His  letter  was  written  after  his  visit  in  reply  to  my
question,  and  at  my  request  he  wrote  setting  forth  the
particulars. I enclose the original  documents.

A.  Nelson,  Major.

P. 8. — I  am,  or  rather  was,  by  no  means  well  acquainted
with  the  passage  from  Scripture  ;  yet  it  is  verbatim  correct.

Major  Nelson  sent  us  with  this  letter  the  original  records
he  had  made  of  his  two  dreams  at  the  time,  which  were  as
follows  :

The  Manor  House,  Stoke  D'Abernon,
Surrey,  Xmas  Day,  '09.
Last  night I  dreamed  a  dream so strange and  vivid
that  I  wish  to  record the occurrence  while I can  re-
member the  details.


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  327

I  dreamed  that  I  was  in  the  drawing-room  of  12a,
Charterhouse  Square,  alone.  Suddenly  the  door  opened
and  Sandwith  came  in  and  said  :  "  Look  here,  Nelson,
you  can  help  me — I  wish  you  would  come — I  am  terribly
distressed  about  this  poor  child,  a  soldier's  child  too."
I  got  up  and  followed  him  to  the  dining-room.  He
knelt  down  at  the  table  and  motioned  me  to  kneel  beside
him.  Then  he  said,  "  Now,  I  want  you  to  repeat  every
word  I  say  after  me."  I  cannot  remember  the  exact
words,  but  the  gist  was  that  God  would  intervene  to
save  some  child — whether  from  danger  or  death  I  know
not — for  I  cannot  recall  the  words.

Suddenly  Sandwith  stopped  speaking  English,  and  began
to  pray  in  German.  I  was  unable  then  to  repeat  his
words,  for  I  know  no  German,  and  as  I  was  telling  him
so,  I  awoke.  A.  Nelson.

Dec.  21th,  '09.

I  have  had  another  dream  of  startling  significance,  and
record  it  at  once.

I  dreamed  that  I  asked  myself  what  could  jaossibly
be  the  meaning  of  so  extraordinary  a  request  on  Sand-
with's  part.  Immediately  there  came  into  my  mind  or
fell  upon  my  ear — I  know  not  which — these  words  :  "If
two  of  you  shall  agree  upon  earth  as  touching  anything
they  shall  ask,  it  shall  be  done  for  them  of  my  Father
which  is  in  Heaven."

Mr.  Sandwith,  after  visiting  Major  Nelson  and  hearing  of
his  dream,  sent  him  the  following  statement  of  the  circum-
stances, which  he  forwarded  to  us  :

12a,  Chaeterhouse  Square,  E.G.,
Dec.  30,  '09.

Here  are  the  particulars.  I  have  for  a  fortnight  or  so
before  Christmas  been  considerably  worried  over  the
marriage  of  a  German,  not  a  naturahzed  Englishman,  to
a  girl  in  this  Parish.

I  spoke  to  the  girl's  father  about  it,  and  wrote  to  the
Bishop of London asking whether the production of  a

X


328


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[PABT


licence  would  guarantee  the  validity  of  the  marriage,  if
the  contracting  parties  eventually  resided  in  Germany.

The  Bishop  said  he  thought  so,  but  that  I  had  better
go  to  Doctors'  Commons  and  state  the  facts,  in  case  they
had  overlooked  the  point  of  the  man  not  being  a  natural-
ized Englishman.

I  asked  the  father  of  the  girl  to  accompany  me,  but
he  said  he  felt  satisfied.  This  added  considerably  to  my
worry,  as  I  felt  he  was  the  proper  person  to  safeguard
his  daughter's  future,  and  any  interference  on  my  part
was  a  delicate  matter.  As  the  Bishop's  letter  was
addressed  to  me  personally  through  his  Chaplain,  "  you
had  better  go  to  Doctors'  Commons,"  I  regarded  it  as  a
personal  direction  from  my  Bishop  and  went,  and  asked
for  a  written  statement  from  the  Chancellor  of  the  Diocese
that  all  was  in  order.  This  I  duly  received,  and  the
marriage  was  solenmized  on  Christmas  Day  at  10.20  a.m.

W.  F.  G.  Sandwith.

We  have  also  received  from  Mrs.  Rowan  Hamilton,  of
Killyleagh  Castle,  County  Down,  the  following  statement :

Nov.  9,  1910.

With  reference  to  your  letter  dated  29th  Oct.,  1910,
to  Major  A.  Nelson  regardmg  the  dream  described  by  him,
I  wish  to  corroborate  his  statement  to  you  dated  29th
August,  1910.  LiNA  Rowan  Hamilton.

A  similar  statement  has  been  received  from  Mrs.  Sidney
Rowan  Hamilton,  to  whom  Major  Nelson  also  si^oke  of  his
dream.

In  reply  to  questions  tending  to  ehcit  what  normal  causes
might  have  i^roduced  the  dream.  Major  Nelson  states  that  he
had  never  helped  Mr.  Sandwith  in  any  way  iia  his  parochial
work.  He  also  says  that  Mr.  Sandwith  assured  him  that  he
had  not  thought  of  him  in  connection  with  his  difficulty.
He  adds  :

Nov.  4,  '10.

The  only  connection  that  I  can  conceive  between  the
fact  of  Mr.  Sandwith's  being  worried  and  my  dream  is


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Extenialised.  329

the  existence  of  some  lines  on  the  subject  of  prayer  written
m.  a  friend's  Prayer  Book,  which  I  sent  to  Mr.  Sand  with,
before  writing  them  in  the  book,  to  ask  whether  the
theology  was  sound,  in  Sejjtember,  1909.

This  statement  of  Major  Nelson's  is  of  psychological  interest
as  possibly  throwing  light  on  the  mechanism  of  the  dream.
It  seems  as  if  the  telejsathic  impulse  had  been  the  primary
cause  of  the  dream  ;  that  the  thought  of  the  German  and
Mr.  Sandwith  thus  telepathically  aroused  had  called  up,  through
a  normal  process  of  association  of  ideas  with  the  latter,  the
additional  notion  of  prayer,  and  that  the  three  conceptions
were  combined  into  the  dream  idea  of  Mr.  Sandwith  recitiiig  a
prayer  in  German.

The  remaining  case  (L.  1J97,  Journal,  Vol.  XVI.,  p.  118)
of  this  class — unconscious  leakage  with  emotion  on  the
part  of  the  agent — is  a  curious  one.  It  came  to  us  from
Dr.  Emil  Mattiesen  of  Berlin,  who  evidently  took  much
trouble  in  collecting  the  evidence — all  the  more  difficult
to  do  because  it  comes  largely  from  unediicated  persons.
It  is  long  and  somewhat  complicated,  so  I  will  give  only
the  main  points  here.  The  percipient,  Mr.  Joseph  Zohrer,
was  a  shoemaker  in  Berlin.  On  May  5th,  1913,  he  gave
an  account  of  what  he  regarded  as  a  waking  vision,
and  of  the  events  connected  with  it,  orally  to  Dr.  Mattie-
sen, who  took  it  down  from  his  dictation.  He  was,  it
appears,  in  the  habit  of  occasionally  seeing  visions  and
hearing  voices.  In  this  vision,  which  occurred  on  March
16th,  or  possibly  15th,  1912,  angelic  beings  and  other
"  spirits  "  took  part,  and  the  angelic  beings  told  him  his
sister,  Mrs.  Agnes  Sommer,  was  in  need,  and  that  it  was
his  duty  to  help  her  ;  while  a  voice  said  he  was  to  send
her  60  kronen.  This  he  did  by  postal  order,  the  post
office  receipt  being  dated  March  19th,  1912.  This  is  the
only  contemporary  document,  for  the  sister's  post-card
acknowledging  the  money  is  lost.  According  to  her
brother  [translated  by  Dr.  Mattiesen]  it  ran  :  "  Dear
brother.  The  money  you  sent  me,  was  a  great  divine
miracle. I  was in great need and have prayed  God


330


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[PAET


fervently  for  help.  Then  I  was  told  help  would  come,
whereupon  I  thanked  God.  But  of  you  I  had  no
thought."

Mrs.  Sommer  has  written  to  Dr.  Mattiesen  to  the  same
effect.  She  kept  a  shop  at  Graz  in  Styria,  and  her
brother  believed  her  to  be  in  fairly  flourishing  circum-
stances. She  was,  however,  in  great  difficulty  for  want
of  about  60  kronen  to  meet  an  urgent  account.  According
to  a  letter  to  her  brother  dated  July  19th,  1912,  seen  by
Dr.  Mattiesen,  and  confirmed  by  the  one  to  himself  on
May  23rd,  1913,  she  had  prayed  earnestly  for  help  on
March  17th,  1912,  and  received  assurance  that  her  prayer
would  be  answered.  Also  on  March  18th,  the  eve  of
her  brother's  name  day,  she  had  prayed  for  "  bliss  for  her
brother."  Both  these  dates  were  apparently  after  her
brother's  vision,  but  her  anxiety  and  need  of  assistance
probably  began  considerably  earlier.

There  is  a  case  difficult  to  classify  (P.  286,  Journal,
Vol.  XVI.,  p.  51)  which  should  perhaps  be  placed  in  this
section — unconscious  leakage.  On  the  other  hand,  how-
ever, the  more  important  part  of  it  may  be  interpreted
as  a  premonition  not  involving  telepathy.  It  is  recorded
very  fully  in  the  Journal,  and  I  feel  tempted  to  leave
it  at  that  lest  I  should  be  accused  of  dragging  evidence
for  premonition  unfairly  into  a  discussion  of  telepathy.
I  will,  however,  compromise  by  mentioning  the  chief
points.  Miss  "  Ann  Jones,"  another  of  whose  experiences
is  described  on  p.  317  and  others  on  p.  352,  dreamt
on  the  night  of  July  15th,  1912,  that  a  lady  with  whom
she  had  recently  been  staying  and  a  party  of  friends
came  in  very  late  from  an  after-dinner  motor  drive.
This  was  veridical  as  far  as  it  went,  and  happened  on
the  night  of  the  dream  and  probably  almost  exactly
contemporaneously  with  it,  though  it  is  unlikely  that
Miss  Jones'  friends  thought  of  her  in  connexion  with
their  excursion.  But  mixed  up  with  this  in  the  dream
was  a  Mr.  M.  who  had  nothing  to  do  in  fact  with  the
motor  party,  but  whose  poems  Miss  Jones  had  been
arranging  for  publication. In  the  dream  he  showed  her  a


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Gases  :  Impression  Extei'nalised. 33 1

portfolio  of  drawings  illustrating  the  poems.  Now  Mr.  M.
had  recently  made  the  acquaintance  of  an  artist,  Mr.  F.,
who  was  not  known  to  Miss  Jones.  He  first  saw  him
I  on  the  day  (July  11th)  on  which  Miss  Jones  was  arranging
i  the  poems,  which  she  despatched  to  Mr.  M.  on  the  12th.
There  was  no  conscious  idea  of  their  being  illustrated  at
that  time,  nor  till  July  18th,  when  Mr.  M.  visited  Mr.  F.
at  his  studio  and  a  sketch  for  one  poem  was  made,  and
when  ]\'Ir.  F.  asked  to  see  the  whole  collection.  The
illustrations  were  drawn  in  the  following  week  and  Miss
Jones  saw  them  on  the  29th,  when  she  found  they
resembled  the  portfolio  of  her  dream.  If  this  was  pre-
monition pure  and  simple,  we  have  nothing  to  do  with  it
here.  But  if  the  coincidence  was  brought  about  by
telepathy,  then  we  must  suppose  either  that  Miss  Jones
first  had  the  idea,  which  emerged  in  her  dream,  of  the
poems  being  illustrated,  and  as  agent  telepathicaUy  sug-
gested it  to  Mr.  M.  and  through  him  to  Mr.  F.,  or  that
Mr.  M.  himself  had  subconsciously  the  idea  of  illustrations,
owing  perhaps  to  making  Mr.  F.'s  acquaintance,  and  tele-
pathicaUy transferred  it  to  Miss  Jones.  Mr.  M.  may  have
known  the  probable  style  and  appearance  that  illustrations
by  Mr.  F.  would  assume.  I  do  not  think  some  such
chain  of  psychical  events  at  aU  impossible,  nor  even
strained,  with  the  extended  idea  of  the  operation  of
telepathy  which  is,  I  think,  gradually  being  forced  on  us.
At  the  same  time  there  is  in  this  case  by  itself  nothing
that  can  be  called  evidence  of  it.

It  will  have  struck  the  reader  in  perusing  the  cases  so
far  recorded  in  this  chapter  that  after  §  1,  which  contains
the  death  coincidences,  a  very  large  proportion  of  the
experiences  of  percipients  are  dreams.  This  is  especially
so  in  §  3  and  §  4,  dealing  with  apparent  transference  of
ideas.  And  this  might  have  been  expected,  because,
except  in  cases  of  very  definite  crisis  in  the  agent's  life,
or  of  very  definite  desire  to  communicate  with  the  per-
cipient, some  correspondence  in  detail  is  usually  required
before  we  begin  to  think  the  coincidence  between  the
agent's  and  the  percipient's  experiences  remarkable  ;  and


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.  [part

details  we  are  much  more  likely  to  get  in  dreams  than  in
apparitions.  As  said  before,  apparitions  of  the  realistic
kind,  which  are  the  commonest,  seldom  convey  anything
more  to  the  percipient  than  the  idea  of  the  agent's
personality.  If  they  suggest,  e.g.  his  death,  it  is  usually
by  inference  only — the  inference  that  so  unusual  an
experience  must  portend  something  serious.  An  inter-
esting exception,  if  it  was  telepathic,  is  the  case  (L.  1109)
with  which  I  begin  the  next  section.

§  5. Ambiguous  Cases.

By  ambiguous  cases  I  mean  (1)  cases  in  which  the
percipient's  experience  is  clear  and  interesting,  but  in
which  either  the  agent's  corresponding  experience  is  not
distinctive  or  unusual  enough  for  us  to  claim  the  coin-
cidence between  the  two  as  evidence  of  telepathy,  or
the  correspondence  in  time  is  doubtful.  There  is  a
coincidence  of  a  kind,  and  telepathy  may  account  for  it,
but  the  cases  would  hardly  be  worth  quoting  from  that
point  of  view  alone.  (2)  Cases  may  also  be  called
ambiguous  when  the  coincidence  is  remarkable,  but  we
cannot  point  to  a  particular  agent.  The  fact  conveyed
to  the  percipient  by  his  experience  was  true  and  was
doubtless  known  to  some  person  or  persons,  but  there
was  no  obvious  reason  why  the  percipient  should  have
been  in  touch  with  them,  so  that  if  the  knowledge  was
obtained  telepathicallj^,  an  extended  view  of  the  operation
of  telepathy  seems  to  be  involved.

There  is,  of  course,  no  hard  and  fast  line  marking  off
ambiguous  cases,  and  the  line  would  probably  be  drawn
differently  by  different  people.  Moreover,  it  will  at  once
occur  to  the  reader  that  ambiguous  cases  have  already
been  quoted  or  mentioned  in  this  paper.  In  particular
I  have  not  attempted  to  exclude  them  in  Chapter  II.,
dealing  with  non-externalised  impressions,  and  there  are
several  examples  there.  In  the  present  chapter  we  have
also  had  ambiguous  cases,  included  generally  because  they
seemed  analogous  to  some  other  case.  As  examples  may
be  mentioned  the  dreams  of  President  Camot's  murder
(M.  CI.  88,  p.  241),  of  General  H.'s  death  (L.  1180,  p.  237),


tlXxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  333

and  the  dream  of  an  earthquake  (L.  1174,  p.  308),  because
in  these  we  cannot  point  to  a  particular  agent  ;  and,
again,  Miss  Edmunds'  dream  (L.  1173,  p.  323)  and
two  "  arrival  "  cases  (L.  1222,  p.  295,  and  L.  1225,  p.  296),
because  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  agent's  side  of  the
coincidence  is  sufficiently  marked.  What  I  am  really
doing  now,  therefore,  is  to  put  together  in  this  section  a
residuum  of  cases,  ambiguous  in  one  of  the  two  ways
mentioned,  which  belong  to  this  chapter  because  the  per-
cipient's experience  is  either  a  sensory  hallucination  or  a
dream  of  the  same  character,  but  which  do  not  con-
veniently fit  into  any  of  the  groups  into  which  the  cases
in  the  chapter  have  been  divided.

The  first  case  (L.  1109,  Journal,  Vol.  VIII.,  p.  329)
I  place  here  with  some  hesitation.  There  is  some  evidence
for  telepathy,  but  it  depends  on  details  of  the  agent's
costume  at  the  moment  being  apprehended  by  the  per-
cipient, and  it  is  difficult  to  know  how  distinctive  that
apprehension  was,  especially  as  the  case  did  not  reach  us
tUl  the  agent  and  percipient  had  talked  the  matter  over.
The  case  is  interesting  whatever  way  we  look  at  it,  for
if  the  percipient  was,  as  he  believed,  awake  at  the  time,
it  is  exceptional  in  our  collection  in  two  respects.  It  is
the  only  reahstic  apparition  affecting  three  senses — hearing,
sight  and  touch — and  it  is  the  only  realistic  apparition
conveying  any  information  as  to  the  agent's  actual  con-
dition at  the  moment.  The  percipient,  at  the  time  a
schoolboy  at  a  boarding  school,  wrote  in  August  1898  :

(L.  1109.)

On  Sunday  night,  March  20th,  1898,  I  had  gone  to  bed
as  usual  (about  9.30  or  10).  I  could  not  sleep  and  began
thinking  of  home  and  especially  of  mother.  My  bed
was  so  placed  that  I  could  see  the  staircase,  and,  after
a  bit,  to  my  surprise,  I  heard  someone  coming  up  the
stairs.  It  flashed  into  my  mind  that  it  was  mother,
and  so  it  proved  to  be.  She  was  dressed  in  a  black
dress  that  I  had  never  seen  before,  and  had  on  her  pink
shawl  and  gold  chain,  and  as  she  came  into  the  room  her


334  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivich.  [paet

shoes  creaked ;  in  fact,  they  did  so  all  the  time.  I  did
not  feel  at  all  frightened  but  tried  to  get  out  of  bed
to  go  to  her,  but  something  held  me  back.  She  went
to  the  bed  before  mine,  where  my  chum  sleeps,  and  bent
over  him  and  looked  at  him.  Then  she  came  to  me  and
kissed  me  ;  I  tried  to  kiss  her  but  could  not.  Then  she
disappeared  and  .seemed  to  vanish  in  a  mist ;  the  face
was  the  last  thing  I  saw.  I  am  quite  sure  that  I  was
awake,  and  saw  every  object  in  the  room  when  she  was
<^here.  (Signed) J.  P.  Challacombe.

The  next  statement,  with  which  the  above  was  enclosed,  is
from  Mrs.  Challacombe,  the  lad's  mother.

42,  Richmond  Road,  Montpelier,  Bristol.
This  is  Jack's  statement.

Now  the  queer  part  is  that,  at  the  time,  I  was  visiting
a  cousin  in  Wales,  and  Jack  knew  nothing  about  it.
The  evening  he  speaks  of  I  had  returned  home,  and  had
removed  all  my  walking  things  with  the  exception  of  my
boots,  dress  and  watch-chain.  My  dress  Jack  had  never
seen,  and  I  am  not  in  the  habit  of  wearing  my  chain
outside  my  dress.  As  for  the  boots  they  were  a  pair  I
had  not  worn  for  years,  because  they  were  m  the  habit
of  creaking.

I  went  to  the  door  to  wait  for  my  cousin,  who  was  a
long  time  saying  ''good  night"  to  a  friend,  and  while
there  I  was  thinking  deeply  of  Jack  as  I  had  not  received
his  morning  letter.  We  made  an  agreement  when  he
wert  to  boarding  school  that  we  would  think  of  one
another  every  night  and  also  say  "good  night."

(Signed) Annie  E.  Challacombe.

August,  1898.

In reply to further enquiries, Master Challacombe  writes
thus  :

August  27th,  1898.
I  had  never  had  any  psychical  experience  before,  and
mother  has  never  experienced  anything  of  the  kind  either.
As  to the  door  of  the  bedroom being  open, I  do  not


LXXXVI.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  335

know  anything  about  that.  It  is  situated  at  the  bottom
of  the  stairs,  so  practically  there  is  no  door  to  the  bed-
room. Most  probably  it  was  shut,  but  I  did  not  hear
it  open.  As  to  the  date,  I  remember  it  was  a  Smiday
evening.  I  wrote  home  to  mother  the  following  Saturday,
and  she  thought  it  was  a  strange  coincidence,  as  she  was
away,  and  the  date  was  March  20th.  When  I  was  home  at
Easter  she  questioned  me  about  it. J.  P.  Challacombe.

The  points  of  coincidence  here  are,  first,  that  the  sup-
posed agent  was  specially  thinking  of  her  son,  but  this
she  tried  to  do  every  evening.  Secondly,  she  was  in  fact,
as  in  the  apparition,  wearing  a  dress  her  son  had  never
seen,  her  gold  watch-chain  outside  her  dress,  which  was
unusual,  and  a  pair  of  creaking  boots.  Are  these  points
sufficient  to  show  that  the  mother's  mind  was  concerned
in  the  son's  experience  ?

The  next  case  (L.  1200,  Journal,  Vol.  XVI.,  p.  205)—
a  waking  hallucination  affecting  two  senses,  sight  and
hearing — came  to  us  from  Mr.  H.  Arthur  Smith,  to  whom
all  the  witnesses  concerned  were  intimately  known.  The
percipient,  Mr.  Laurence  Orchard,  was  in  London  on
Christmas  Day,  1913.  His  mother,  whose  phantasm  he
saw,  was  away  from  home,  staying  with  another  son
in  Canada. The  percipient  writes  :

(1200.)

December  29th,  1913.

On  Christmas  Day  at  12.50  p.m.  I  was  in  the  bathroom,
when  I  heard  footsteps  and  doors  being  opened  and
closed  quite  distinctly,  and  as  I  was  the  only  one  in  the
house  it  surprised  me,  so  [I]  opened  the  door  and  looked
out,  and  to  my  astonishment  I  saw  Mother  (or  thought  I
did)  in  a  black  dress  at  her  bedroom  door  and  her  arms
full  of  parcels.  I  made  an  exclamation — "  Mother,"  I
think — and  I  think  there  was  some  sort  of  response,  but
I  forget  now,  and  then  all  disappeared  suddenly.  T
then  left  the  house,  and  told  Gerty  what  a  vision  I  had
had,  when  I  saw  her  at  E  's.


336


Mrs.  He7iry  Sidgwick.


I  suppose  Mother  having  been  so  much  in  all  our
minds,  and  no  doubt  we  in  hers,  made  me  see  "  things,"
but  it  was  the  noise  that  attracted  my  notice  first.

"E."  was  a  married  sister,  whose  family  gathermg,  in
another  part  of  London,  they  joined  on  Christmas  Day.

Miss  Gertrude  Orchard  gives  a  very  full  account  of  her
brother's  report  of  his  experience  to  her  on  the  same
afternoon,  which  I  do  not  reproduce  here. She  adds  :

"  It  was  a  wonderful  experience,  and  startled  him  very

much,  as  it  did  me  when  he  told  me  ; in  fact,  I  can't

get  it  out  of  my  mind. It  haunts  me  night  and  day ;

but each day, now, I feel happier about it, as  [my

brother] G would surely have cabled by this  time

if  anything  serious  had  happened.  ..."

Enquiries  were  made  of  Mrs.  Orchard,  the  percipient's
mother,  as  to  her  doings  on  that  day.  It  is  clear  from
her  replies  printed  in  the  Journal  that  she  was  thinking
very  much  and  in  a  special  manner  of  the  members
of  her  family  in  England,  and  there  may  have  been
a  telepathic  impulse  from  her  in  consequence.  But,
on  the  other  hand,  sensory  hallucinations  can  occur
without  any  discoverable  external  impulse,  and  there  was
apparently  nothing  significant  in  the  appearance,  and
nothing  which  the  percipient  could  not  have  contributed
from  his  own  mind.

A  somewhat  similar  case  is  the  following  (L.  896,  Jonr-
nal,  Vol.  v.,  p.  174),  but  the  impression  was  tactile.  It
was  sent  by  the  same  Professor  Thomas  Davidson,  who
contributed  one  of  the  letter  cases  (see  above,  p.  310).
The  percipient,  Mr.  Alfred  Hicks,  an  Englishman  living
at  New  York,  writes  on  March  31st,  1889  :

(L.  896.)

There  has  always  been  a  keen  sympathy,  and  a  great
deal  of  affection  existing  between  my  mother  and  myself,


LXXXvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  337


and  early  in  February  I  sent  over  a  letter  to  England  to
be  given  to  her  on  her  birthday,  the  22nd  of  February.

I  was  staying  at  the  time  at  64,  East  llth-street,
N.Y.  city.  Very  early  in  the  morning  of  that  day  I
was  awakened  from  my  sleep,  and  seemed  to  feel  quite
distinctly  my  mother's  arms  folded  romid  me.  I,  too,
seemed  to  have  clasped  her  in  my  arms,  and  her  head
was  resting  on  my  shoulder.  I  seemed  to  be  saying
something  to  her  in  what  I  should  judge  was  Itahan,
but  as  I  do  not  know  that  language  I  can  only  give  it
phonetically.  [There  is  no  explanation  of  this  imitation
ItaUan.]

I  was  so  impressed  with  the  whole  occurrence  that  I
arose  and  looked  at  the  time.  It  was  just  3.30  a.m.
I  was  quite  awake  when  this  seemed  to  occur,  and  did  not
sleep  agaia  that  morning,  but  lay  awake  thinking  it  over.

]\Ir.  Hicks  calculated  that  his  dream  in  America  occurred
just  about  the  time  his  mother  would  receive  his  birthday
letter,  at  which  moment  she  would  of  course  think  vividly
of  him.  The  approach  of  the  birthday  would  also,  how-
ever, make  him  think  specially  of  her  and  perhaps  dream
of  her.  His  experience  was  very  likely  the  continuation
of  a  dream,

A  case  of  the  comparatively  rare  phenomenon  of  an
apparition  speaking  is  L.  1073,  Journal,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  253.
It  was  carefully  recorded  within  two  days  of  its  occurrence
by  the  percipient,  Mr.  E.  White,  an  old  gentleman  of
eighty-seven.  He  saw  by  his  bed  his  landlady,  with
whom  he  had  lodged  for  twelve  years,  and  who  habitually
called  him  in  the  morning  ;  but  instead  of  her  usual
remark  she  said,  "  This  is  a  bad  day  for  you."  She  then
moved  towards  the  door,  and  he  did  not  stop  her  to  ask
what  she  meant.  By  his  watch,  which  he  looked  at,  it
was  2.10  a.m.  He  found  afterwards  that  his  landlady
was  seriously  iU  during  the  night  with  influenza  and  had
even  thought  she  was  going  to  die.  It  seems  quite
certain  that  she  had  not  left  her  bed  during  the  night,
and  she  was  confined  to  bed  for  several  days.  Neither


338


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


he  nor  she  can  suggest  any  cause  for  the  appearance,  and
she  is  not  aware  of  having  thought  of  him  specially.
The  coincidence  here  is  with  the  first  night  of  acute
illness,  but  the  illness  had  been  coming  on  for  some  days.
No  idea  of  illness  seems  to  have  been  suggested  by  the
apparition.

The  next  case  (L.  950,  Journal,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  29)  from
the  Rev.  Soren  Pederson,  Pastor  of  the  Scandinavian
Church  of  Melbourne,  Austraha,  presents  a  rather  unusual
type  of  hallucination. He  writes  :

(L.  950.)

January  12th,  1892.

I  saw  a  very  dear  friend,  about  70  years  old,  living
in  Christiania,  at  7  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  when  walking
about  a  year  ago  with  some  Austrahan  friends  in  one  of
the  streets  of  Melbourne.  I  saw  his  face  as  in  prayer,
and  quite  suddenly  and  near,  so  I  did  almost  touch  him.
I  was  talking  of  singing  with  my  friends,  as  we  were
going  to  practice  at  the  time.  I  was  quite  well  and  have
never  had  hallucinations  or  anything  lilie  this  before  or
later.  It  was  daylight  and  quite  full  of  passers-by  and
vehicles,  etc.,  in  the  street.

I  had  not  seen  him  since  a  year  before,  but  it  struck
me  so  vividly  that  I  wrote  home  to  Christiania,  Norway,
asking  what  did  friend  G.  at  that  hour  (subtracting  the
9  hours  we  are  before  here  in  Melbourne)  and  got  the
answer  :  "  Praying  very  intensely  for  you  and  your  mission
in  Melbourne."

Two  [other  persons  were  present]  who  saw  nothing  and
were  quite  outside  the  whole  incident.

I  put  this  among  ambiguous  cases  because  I  do  not
think  the  evidence  for  the  coincidence,  which  is  given
in  the  Journal,  quite  conclusive.  Mr.  Pederson's  letter
to  his  parents  had  been  lost,  and  so  had  Mr.  G.'s  notes
fixing  the  date  of  what  seems  to  have  been  a  kind  of
prayer  meeting  among  a  few  friends.  Still  some  pains
were taken at the time to estabhsh the fact of  the


Lxxxvi.] Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  339

coincidence  ;  and  the  praying  seems  to  have  been  some-
thing special,  not  an  everyday  occurrence.  The  pro-
babihty  is,  I  think,  that  this  was  a  genuine  case  of
telepathy.

In  another  case  (L.  962,  Journal,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  165)  the
coincidence  does  not  seem,  on  the  face  of  it,  to  be  so
marked.  A  gentleman,  Mr.  L.  S.  M.  Munro,  sitting  at
his  writing  table  in  a  room  looking  out  on  a  public
thoroughfare,  saw  the  face  of  a  child  friend  looking  in  at
the  window.  No  real  person  was  there,  nor  apparently
could  have  been.  He  wrote  at  once  to  the  child,  and
heard  from  her  and  her  mother  that  just  about  the  time
of  the  apparition  they  had  been  having  a  conversation
about  him,  which  was  unusual.  First-hand  evidence  from
them  is  not  forthcoming.

In  another  case  (L.  1198,  Journal,  Vol.  XVI.,  p.  149),
which  must,  I  think,  be  regarded  as  ambiguous,  the
percipient's  experience  seems  to  have  been  of  the  nature
of  a  vision  (see  above,  pp.  243,  248),  though  it  is  not  quite
easy  to  understand  from  the  description  what  it  exactly
was,  or  what  was  the  relation  of  the  phantasm  to  sur-
rounding objects.  The  percipient  says  :  "I  foimd  myself
sitting  up  in  bed  and  lighting  the  candle.  And  then
I  saw  an  old  woman  in  bed  and  I  was  quite  conscious
that  she  was  dying."  The  face  was  clearly  seen  but  not
recognised.  It  was  afterwards  learnt  that  an  old  friend
of  the  percipient's  hostess,  not  known  to  the  percipient,
was  very  ill  at  the  time.  Sickness  and  pain  had  set  in
that  night  and  she  died  less  than  thirty-six  hours  later.
When  the  vision  occurred  her  illness  was  unknown  to
anyone  in  the  house  where  the  percipient  was,  and  if
there  was  telepathy  it  must,  it  would  seem,  have  been  of
an  indirect  kind,  coming  through  the  non-perceptive
hostess  to  the  percipient.

The  next  case  (L.  1156,  Journal,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  27)  is
interesting  as  an  apparition,  but  ambiguous  from  the
telepathic  point  of  view,  for  the  supposed  agent's  contem-
porary appearance and  occupation  was ordinary  enough


340


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwiclc.


[part


for  the  correspondence  with  the  apparition  to  be  plausibly
attributed  to  chance,  and  there  is  no  evidence  that  her
mind  was  at  the  time  in  any  way  directed  to  the  per-
cipient. The  interest  of  the  case  lies  in  the  movement,
the  persistence,  and  the  mode  of  disappearance  of  the
apparition,  and  in  the  fact  that  the  dog  may  have  been
a  co-percipient.  He  certainly  either  simultaneously  saw
something  or  was  affected  as  if  he  had  by  the  emotion
and  behaviour  of  the  percipient.  The  case  was  received
through  Mr.  Andrew  Lang,  the  percipient,  Miss  B.  H.
Grieve,  being  his  niece.  She  wrote  the  following  account
in  a  letter  to  her  uncle  :

(L.  1156.)

Skelfhill,  Hawick,  N.B.,  August  8th,  1906.

...  I  have  been  staying  here  since  August  4th.  On
Monday,  6th,  I  went  up  the  Pen  and  for  the  first  time  in
my  life  saw  a  '  ghost  !  '  Turk,  the  old  Dandie  Dinmont,
was  with  me  ;  and  Mrs.  R.,  a  Swiss  lady  also  staying
here,  had  said  she  would  go  too,  but  it  was  hot,  and  in
the  end  she  stayed  at  home.  Turk  and  I  went  very
slowly,  taking  many  rests  on  account  of  his  short  legs
and  shorter  breath,  and  the  grass  and  brackens  were  long
and  strong.  Our  last  stop  was  where  the  Pen  suddenly
takes  up  for  its  rocky  top  very  steeply.  I  sat  with  my
back  against  the  dyke  facing  the  steep  part,  and  Turk
lay  panting  beside  me.  I  was  thinking  of  a  beautiful
cleckitig  of  grouse  we  had  just  disturbed — the  two  parent
birds  and  five  yoang  ones  clapped  about  four  yards  from
us.  Turk  did  not  see  them  at  first  and  I  stood  perfectly
still  watching,  they  were  so  pretty.  Then  Turk  winded
them  and  threw  up  his  head,  and  of  course  with  the
movement  the  birds  were  off  like  a  whirlwind.  This
just  to  show  you  my  train  of  thought.  Quite  suddenly
I  saw  coming  along  at  right  angles  to  me,  a  friend.  Dr.
H.,  who  crossed  with  me  May,  1905,  from  America.  She
was  in  a  rather  short  dark  blue  skirt,  white  cotton  blouse,
no  hat,  and  a  stick  in  her  hand — and  later,  I  noticed  a
tail  of  hair  beginning  to  '  come  down.'  I  had  heard
about  fortnight  ago  that  she  had  landed  in  England  from


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  341

America  and  was  to  sail  back  Sept.  12,  and  that  she  was
going  to  her  home  in  Cornwall  for  part  of  the  time-
but  when  I  did  not  know.  I  was  so  surprised  I  did  not
say  anything  for  a  second  or  two  till  Turk  began  to  growl.
Then  I  jumped  up  exclaiming  '  Dr.  H.  !  '  She  looked
straight  at  me,  but  when  I  spoke,  turned  and  went  on
down  the  hill — following  her  own  direction  and  the  one
from  which  I  had  come.  I  followed  quickly  to  catch
her  up,  feeling  rather  queer  because  she  did  not  speak,
and  /  knew  she  had  seen  me  !  Turk  barked  and  growled
the  whole  time,  but  kept  close  in  to  my  heels  and  would
not  run  out  as  he  usually  does  at  strange  people  or
strange  dogs.  His  hair  was  all  on  end  and  his  taU
hooked  over  his  back,  as  stiff  as  a  poker.  I  almost
caught  up  Dr.  H.,  and  was  just  going  to  put  out  my
hand  to  touch  her  shoulder,  vs^hen  a  big  bumble  bee
whirled  between  us  and  flew  right  through  Dr.  H.  and  she
disappeared.

I  certainly  did  feel  queer  after  that — I  was  so  very  sure
it  was  she  and  it  was  such  a  shock  to  find  there  was
nothing.  Had  it  not  been  for  Turk  I  should  have  doubted
my  senses ;  but  he  was  so  immistakably  disturbed  and
angry.  I  swear  I  am  well — never  was  better,  and  have
had  nothing  stronger  to  drink  than  water  for  over  a  year.
The  exact  moment  of  the  apparition  I  cannot  quite  give
you,  but  it  was  6.5  p.m.  when  I  sat  down,  and  6.15  per-
haps a  minute  or  even  two  minutes  after  it  had  disappeared.

I  had  a  pencil  and  envelope  in  my  pocket  and  made  a
rough  note  of  it  there  on  the  top  of  the  Pen,  and  wrote
it  out  in  detail  when  I  got  down  here  to  the  house.  Of
course  I  have  written  (yesterday)  to  Dr.  H.  to  know
whatever  she  was  doing  at  that  date  and  hour,  and  will  let
you  know  her  reply — probably  bathing  at  Tmtagel !  .  .  .

Miss  Grieve  -wTote  later  :

September  23rd,  1906.

I  was  sitting  when  I  first  saw  the  figure,  so  also  was
Turk,  though  he  collected  his  wits  quicker  than  I,  for  he
barked  before  I  spoke.  Truly  I  am  certain  I  was  not
asleep,  though  one  cannot  deny  the  possibiUty. Dr.  H.


342


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


has  since  stayed  with  me  here,  and  should  by  now  have

landed  in  America. She  said  on  that  day  and  hour  she

was  coming  down  their  hill  at  Tintagel  in  the  clothes  I

described,  but  with  a  wet  bathing  gown  on  her  arm,
which  I  did  not  see.

The  statement  in  the  last  sentence  is  confirmed  by
Dr.  H.'s  sister.

The  percipient  in  this  case  was  the  same  Miss  Grieve
who  shared  in  the  collective  crystal  vision  described  above,
p.  48.  She  afterwards,  in  1908,  had  a  curious  experience
of  seeing  a  ghostly  pointing  hand  in  a  church  at  Stavanger,
her  account  of  which  is  given  in  an  article  by  Mr.  Andrew
Lang  in  the  Journal,  Vol.  XIV.,  p.  65.i  The  experience
tallied  curiously  with  a  story  of  a  pointing  ghost  in  the
same  church  which  she  subsequently  found  in  Norwegian
Byways  by  C.  W.  Wood,  but  she  had  no  recollection
whatever  of  ever  having  seen  or  heard  the  story  before.

There  are  three  cases  which  on  the  face  of  them  may
have  been  collective  hallucinations  caused  telepathically
from  outside,  but  in  which  there  is  evidential  weakness
both  concerning  the  agency  and  the  percipiency.  In  the
first  (L.  844,  Jowrnal,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  289),  if  there  was  an
agent,  it  was  a  dog. Mrs.  Beauchamp  writes  to  a  friend  :

(L.  844.)

Last  night — Megatherium  [a  small  Indian  dog]  sleeping
with  [my  daughter]— I  woke,  hearing  him  run  roimd  my
bedroom.  I  Imow  his  step  so  well.  [My  husband]  woke
too.  I  said  "Listen."  He  said,  "It  is  Meg."  We
lighted  a  candle,  looked  well,  there  was  nothing  and  the
door  was  shut.  Then  I  had  a  feeling  something  was
wrong  with  the  dog— it  came  into  my  head  he  had  died
at  this  minute,  and  I  looked  for  my  watch  to  see  the
time,  and  then  I  thought  I  mxLst  go  up  and  see  about
him.  It  was  so  cold,  and  it  seemed  so  silly,  and  while
I  was  thinking  I  fell  asleep. It  must  have  been  some

1  In  tliis  article  Mr.  Lang  discusses  the  dog's  share  in  the  above
case,  and  gives  another  account  of  a  dog  sharing  in  a  hallucination,
but  it  had  happened  six  years  previously,


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  343

little  time  after,  someone  laiocked  at  the  door,  and  it
was  [my  daughter]  in  agony.  "  Oh  !  mamma,  Meg  is
dying."  We  flew  upstairs.  He  was  lying  on  his  side
hke  dead — his  legs  stretched  straight  out  hke  a  dead
thing's.  [My  husband]  picked  him  up,  and  for  a  while
couldn't  see  what  was  wrong,  for  he  was  not  dead.  Then
we  foimd  he  had  nearly  strangled  himself — got  the  strap
of  his  coat  somewhat  from  imder  his  stomach  and  round
his  neck.  He  sorr  revived  and  recovered  when  we  got
it  off,  and  he  could  breathe  freely.

Asked  some  months  later,  Colonel  Beauchamp  said  he
had  paid  so  little  attention  to  the  circumstance  at  the
time  that  he  could  not  undertake  to  write  an  independent
account.  It  is  not  possible  to  ascertain  whether  the
dog's  distress  had  begun  at  the  time  of  Mrs.  Beauchamp's
experience.  Even  therefore,  if  it  is  certain  that  no  real
sound  was  mistaken  for  the  patter  of  the  dog,  the  coin-
cidence must  remain  doubtful.

In  another  auditory  case  (G.  277,  Journal,  Vol.  XII.,
p.  54)  a  strong  impression  was  evidently  made  on  the
two  percipients,  but  the  hallucinatory  nature  of  the
sound — "  a  tremendous  bang  "  of  an  alarming  character
on  the  door  of  the  room — is  from  the  nature  of  the  case
somewhat  open  to  doubt  ;  and  the  relation  between  it
and  an  external  event — ^the  unknown  and  unexpected  death
some  twenty -four  hours  ^  before  of  the  father  of  a  boy  in
the  house,  but  not  in  the  room — is  highly  conjectural.

The  third  case  (L.  1190,  Journal,  Vol.  XV.,  p.  289)  was
visual.  A  hospital  patient  told  the  nurse  in  the  morning
that  he  had  seen  the  matron  come  into  the  ward  in  the
night,  look  at  the  fire  and  go  out  again,  and,  when
appealed  to,  a  second  patient  confirmed  this.  There  could
hardly  be  a  mistake  of  identity,  as  the  matron's  uniform
was  markedly  unlike  that  of  the  nurses. The  matron  was

^  The  death  occurred  in  India,  and  the  time  correction  seems  to  have
been  made  the  wrong  way  in  the  Journal,  where  it  is  stated  that  the
interval  between  death  and  the  percipient's  experience  was  about
thirteen  hours.


344


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


in  bed  at  the  time.  It  was  during  the  coal  strike  of
1912,  and  the  account  came  to  us  through  the  matron,
who  was  interested  in  it  because  it  seemed  to  reflect  the
anxious  thought  about  how  to  save  fuel  with  which  .  her
mind  was  occupied  when  she  went  to  bed.  The  coin-
cidence cannot  be  regarded  as  a  well-marked  one,  and
moreover  the  percipients  had  been  lost  sight  of  and  the
account  of  their  experience  comes  from  the  nurse  to  whom
they  spoke,  and  is  not  therefore  at  first  hand.

I  come  now  to  ambiguous  cases  where  the  difficulty  is
to  find  the  agent.  The  first  case  I  will  give  (L.  1212,
Journal,  Vol.  XVIII.,  p.  51)  seems  to  me  a  very  in-
teresting one.  The  experience  of  the  percipient,  Dr.
George  Johnston,  was  a  dream  or  vision  between  waking
and  sleeping.  For  the  reasons  he  gives  it  is,  I  think,
difficult  to  doubt  that  the  certainty  of  his  son  being  dead
which  came  to  him  through  his  experience  was  due  to  a
supernormal  communication.  If  this  communication  came
from  his  son,  the  case  does  not  properly  belong  to  this
paper,  as  the  interval  between  death  and  phantasm
exceeds  the  twelve  hours'  limit  adopted.  On  this  hypo-
thesis, however,  it  is  difficult  to  explain  the  complicated
symbolism,  without  any  suggestion  of  direct  communication
from  the  son,  through  which  the  fact  of  his  death  was
expressed.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  suppose  the  persons
looking  over  the  kit  to  be  the  agents,  how  was  the
telepathic  link  with  the  percipient,  whose  very  existence
was  probably  unknown  to  them,  brought  about  ?  Is  it
possible  that  there  was  some  land  of  combined  agency
involving  the  dead  man  and  others  ?  There  is  no  means
of  knowing,  and  we  can  only  record  the  case  as  part  of
the  whole  evidence  to  be  considered. Dr.  Johnston  writes  :

(L.  1212.)

23,  Seymour  Street,  Portman  Square,  W.,
March  15,  1917.
My  son,  Lieut.  Alec  Leith  Johnston,  of  the  1st  King's
Shropshire L.I., was kiUed at daybreak on  Saturday,
April  22nd,  1916.


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases :  Impression  Externalised.  345

At  daybreak  on  the  next  morning,  Easter  Sunday,
aboiit  24  hours  after  his  death  took  place,  when  I  was
lying  half  awake  and  half  asleep,  I  had  the  vision  or
dream,  an  account  of  which  follows.

I  saw  two  soldiers  in  Idiaki  standing  beside  a  pile  of
clothing  and  accoutrements  which,  in  some  way,  I  knew
to  be  Alec's,  and  my  first  feehng  was  one  of  anger  and
annoj^ance  that  they  should  be  meddlitag  with  his  things,
for  they  were  apparently  looking  through  them  and
arranging  them.  Then  one  of  them  took  up  a  khaki
shirt  which  was  wrapped  round  something  so  as  to  form
a  Idnd  of  roll.  He  took  hold  of  one  end  of  it  and  let
the  rest  drop  so  that  it  miroUed  itself  and  a  pair  of
heavy,  extremely  muddy  boots  fell  out  and  banged  heavily
on  the  floor,  and  something  else  fell  which  made  a  metaUic
jingle.  I  thought  "  That  is  his  revolver,"  but  im-
mediately afterwards  thought  "  No,  it  is  too  light  to  be
his  revolver, which  would  have  made  more  of  a  clang."

As  these  things  fell  out  on  to  the  floor  the  two  men
laughed,  but  a  sad  wistful  kind  of  laugh  with  no  semblance
of  mirth  in  it.  And  then  the  words  ' '  Alec  is  dead  and
they  are  going  through  his  kit,"  were  most  clearly  borne
in  upon  my  mind.  They  were  not  spoken  and  I  heard
no  voice,  but  they  were  just  as  clear  as  if  I  had  done  so.
And  then  I  became  fully  awake  with  these  words  repeating
themselves  in  my  mind  and  with  the  fullest  conviction
of  their  truth  which  I  never  lost.  I  suppose  I  still  tried
to  persuade  myself  that  it  might  not  be  true,  but  it  was
useless  and  when  the  official  telegram  arrived  it  only
confirmed  what  I  already  knew.

Geoege  Johnston.

In  a  letter  of  the  same  date,  March  15,  1917,  Dr.  Johnston
adds  the  following  comments  on  his  statement :

.  .  .  Two  points  have  to  be  borne  in  mind  in  estimating
the  importance  of  the  dream  as  an  intimation  of  my
son's  death  and  not  as  a  mere  coincidence.

(1)  He  went  out  to  the  front  in  October,  1914,  and  was
there continuously (with three short leaves) until  his


346


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


death  on  April  22nd,  1916 — Easter  Saturday.  During
these  eighteen  months  I  never  had  any  dream  or  any
impression  of  his  being  in  serious  danger,  although  I
often  knew  that  he  was  in  the  midst  of  hard  fighting
and  he  was  wounded  in  three  places  in  August,  1915,
at  Hooge.

(2)  At  the  time  when  I  had  the  dream  I  was  under
the  impression  that  his  battalion  was  resting  and  that  they
would  not  be  in  the  fighting  hne  until  the  middle  of  the
week.  Hence  my  mind  was  quite  easy  about  him  and  I
was  not  feeUng  at  aU  anxious.  In  the  ordinary  course  of
events  they  were  not  due  in  the  trenches  mi  til  the  Wednes-
day, but  they  were  unexpectedly  called  upon  on  the
evening  of  Good  Friday  to  move  up  at  once  to  recapture
a  trench  which  had  been  taken  by  the  Germans  some
days  before.  It  was  after  having  accomplished  this,  and
whilst  the  position  was  being  consolidated,  that  he  was
kiUed.

I  have  never  in  my  hfe  had  any  dream  so  vivid  as
this  one  was,  and  when  I  saw  in  the  Sunday  papers
that  his  battahon  had  accomphshed  this  "  fine  feat,"  as
they  caUed  it,  I  had  no  doubt  whatever  that  my  boy
was  dead.  When  the  official  telegram  came  on  the
Wednesday  I  felt  that  it  was  hardly  necessary  to  open
it.  .  .  .

I  shall  always  think  (as  a  nephew  does  to  whom  I
told  my  dream  on  the  Simday  afternoon),  that  this  vision
was  Alec's  way  of  letting  me  know  what  had  happened.

A  minor  point  that  may  be  worth  noticing  is  that
when  I  heard  the  metalhc  clink  when  the  shirt  unrolled
and  let  its  contents  faU  on  the  floor,  I  at  first  thought
"  That  is  his  revolver,"  but  then  immediately  thought  the
noise  was  too  "  jingly  "  to  be  made  by  the  fall  of  a
heavy  service  Colt  such  as  he  had.  When  his  things
came  home,  however,  I  found  that  instead  of  having  a
Colt  he  had  a  hght  French  automatic  pistol  which,  in
falling,  would  have  made  exactly  such  a  sound  as  I
heard.

I  do  not  suppose  that  his  kit  was  actually  being  gone
through  at  the  time  of  my  dream,  nor  do  I  think  that


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  347

it  makes  much  difference  whether  it  were  so  or  not.
But  the  regimental  surgeon  (since  killed  hunself)  who
came  to  see  me  early  in  June  told  me  that  he  beheved
that  they  really  were  going  through  Alec's  things  about
the  time  of  my  dream.  George  Johnston.

In  a  subsequent  letter  he  writes  :

March  25th,  1917.

.  .  .  The  only  person  whom  I  told  the  dream  to,  before
the  arrival  of  the  War  Office  telegram,  was  my  nephew
who  was  here  on  Sunday,  the  23rd  April  [1916].

I  enclose  the  letter  which  he  sent  me  when  he  had
definite  news  of  Alec's  death.

I  also  enclose  a  copy  of  part  of  a  letter  which  the
regimental  surgeon  (since  killed)  wrote  to  his  father.  I
do  this  m  order  to  show  the  conditions  under  which  the
attack  was  made,  especially  as  to  mud.

One  does  not  want  to  read  too  much  into  such  an
experience,  but  I  have  often  thought  that  what  I  saw
had  a  certain  amount  of  symbohsm  in  it.  The  fact
that  the  boots  which  feU  out  of  the  roUed-up  shirt  were
so  exceedingly  muddy,  and  that  the  other  thmg  which
dropped  out  was,  as  I  at  first  thought,  his  revolver,
pomt  to  the  terribly  muddy  conditions  of  the  attack  and
to  the  fact  that  it  was  an  attack,  for  otherwise  the  revolver
Avould  not  have  been  carried. But  this  is  a  minor  point.

George  Johnston.

The  letter  from  Dr.  Johnston's  nephew,  Mr.  N.  C.  Reid,
[to  which  reference  is  made  above,  began  as  foUows  :

3Iay  4,  1916.

I  hear  that  Alec  has  died  at  Ypres.  Your  dream  has
come  true.  Alec  appears  to  have  been  trying  to  let
you  loiow.  ...  N.  C.  Reid.

The  reference  in  the  above  letter  to  Dr.  Johnston's  dream
imphes  that  Mr.  Reid  had  heard  of  it  before  he  heard  of
Lieut.  Johnston's  death,  but  we  asked  also  for  an  independent
statement  from  Mr.  Reid  that  Dr.  Johnston  had  related  his
dream  to  him  on  the  day  on  which  it  occurred,  April  23,


348  Mrs.  Heyiry  Sidgwick.  [part  l

1916, before Dr. Johnston himself Imew of its  verification.
In  reply  Sir.  Reid  wrote  as  follows  :  i

2/7  Essex  Rbgt.,  Harrogate,  Yorks.,
April  3,  1917.

I  have  been  asked  by  my  uncle,  Dr.  George  Johnston,
to  send  you  a  statement  to  the  efi'ect  that  he  told  me  of
the  dream  or  vision  which  he  had  of  his  son's  death
before  actual  confirmation.

This  I  can  do.

I  was  spending  the  afternoon  of  Easter  Sunday  last
year  (Ajml  23,  1916)  at  his  house,  and  while  at  tea  he
came  in  from  paying  a  professional  visit  somewhere.

After  tea  he  spoke  to  me  of  his  dream. I  regret  to
say  I  cannot  remember  all  he  said, but  I  do  recollect
his  saying  he  saw  two  officers  looking  over  and  packing
his  son's  kit. He  was  angry  at  theii'  meddhng, but  it  |,
suddenly dawned upon him that his son was dead.  (
Whether  Alec  Johnston  appeared  in  the  dream  I  forget.

Some  days  afterwards  I  heard  that  Alec  Johnston  was
dead,  confirmation  having  reached  him,  Dr.  Johnston,
on  a  date  after  the  23rd  April.  N.  C.  Reid.

As  regards  the  circumstances  under  which  Lieut.  Johnston
lost  his  life,  Ave  print  below  extracts  from  the  letter  to  which  i
Dr.  Johnston  refers  on  March  25,  written  by  the  regimental
surgeon  :  i

April  mth,  1916.
.  .  .  You  will  have  seen  by  the  papers  about  the
gallant  attack  the  Btn.  made  the  other  night  to  retake
some  trenches  lost  by  another  Btn.  It  was  as  the  Army
Commander  said,  "  A  magnificent  feat  of  arms,"  and  you
can  guess  what  the  higher  command  thought  of  it  when
they  honoured  the  regiment  by  mentioning  them  by
name — an  honour  which  has  only  been  paid  twice  aU
the  time  out  here.  Unless  one  is  on  the  spot  though  one
could  not  realise  the  conditions  imder  which  the  attack
was  made  or  the  apparently  hopeless  job  it  seemed.  I
don't  think  any  other  Btn.  could  have  done  it.  The
mud,  to  take  one  point  only,  was  so  deep  that  the  men


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  349


had  to  throw  themselves  down  and  crawl — putting  their
rifles  and  bombs  ahead  a  few  feet  and  then  struggling
up  to  them.  Of  course  the  rifles  were  so  covered  with
mud  that  they  could  not  shoot,  so  the  men  just  struggled
on  till  they  could  use  the  bayonet.  We  had  men  utterly
engulfed  in  the  mud  and  suffocated.  It  was  a  glorious
achievement,  and  the  cost  was  heavy.  .  .  .  Johnston — •
who  used  to  write  "At  the  Front"  in  Punch — was  shot
through  the  heart  gallantly  superintendiiag  his  company
consolidating  the  captured  position.  As  dawn  broke  he
was  so  busy  with  so  much  to  see  to  that  he  would  not
take  cover,  but  kept  on  walking  from  end  to  end  of  the
trench  over  the  top  to  save  time.  He  was  picked  off  by
a  sniper.  T.  I.

La  a  letter  to  Dr.  Johnston  from  one  of  Lieut.  Johnston's
fellow -officers,  giving  an  account  of  his  death,  the  muddy
condition  of  the  ground  is  agam  emphasised. He  writes  :

May  7,  1916.

...  As  you  know  the  conditions  were  simply  a-wdul.
Pitch  dark,  and  wading  up  to  our  waists  in  mud.  .  .  .

The  next  case  (L.  1206,  Journal,  Vol.  XVII.,  p.  212)  is
again  an  experience  at  the  moment  of  waking.  Mrs.
Fuller-Maitland  wrote  to  her  brother,  Sir  Lawrence  Jones,
on  April  25,  1916  :

(L.  1206.)

On  Friday  afternoon  [April  21,  1916]  I  was  very  tired
and  went  to  he  down  about  3.30.  I  fell  asleep  for  a
few  minutes,  and  as  I  woke  up  I  had  a  distinct  vision
of  the  big  room  in  the  R.A.  and  Edward's  [Mr.  Fuller
Maitland]  picture  hanging  on  the  left  of  the  door  as  you
go  in  from  the  second  room.  I  came  domi  and  said  to
E.,  "Your  picture  is  in  and  is  hung  in  the  big  room  high
up  on  the  left  of  the  door."  The  next  morning  he  got
his  in-notice,  and  yesterday  he  went  up  for  varnishing  day
and  fomid  his  picture  in  the  big  room  on  the  left  of  the
door  high  up  ! I  saw  the  room  as  plainly  as  possible,


350


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


and  it  was  quite  empty,  two  or  three  men  in  it  and
no  red  velvet  sofas.  Mx.  Powles  says  they  judge  the
pictures  in  that  room  and  that  probably  the  sofas  are
removed.  [It  has  been  ascertained  that  this  conjecture
is  right.]

Sir  Lawrence  Jones  corroborates  Mrs.  Fuller-Maitland's
statement,  as  follows  :

39,  Harrington  Gardens,  S.W.,  June  2,  1916.
The  i^icture  is  hung  on  the  right  of  the  door  from
Room  No.  2,  as  you  enter,  but  on  the  left  as  you  look
at  [it]  from  the  big  room  itself.  My  sister  says  that
she  seemed  to  be  standing  at  the  end  of  the  room  and
that  the  picture  seemed  to  her  about  a  third  of  the  Avay
down  the  wall. This  is  about  correct.

Lawrence  J.  Jones.

Li  reply  to  a  request  for  a  corroborative  statement,  Mr.
Fuller-Maitland  wrote  :

Wood  Rising,  Rye,  Sussex,  June  10,  1916.

I  am  sending,  as  you  request,  an  independent  accoimt
of  my  wife's  veridical  dream.  On  Good  Friday  after-
noon [April  21,  1916]  my  wife  told  me  that  she  had  just
had  a  vision  of  my  larger  picture  (I  sent  another  which
was  also  kept  back  but  not  hung)  hung  on  the  right  of
the  door  of  the  large  room,  as  you  enter,  and  rather
high  u]).  I  asked  her  to  put  her  impressions  down  in
writing,  which  unfortunately  she  did  not  do,  but  she  told
Mr.  Powles  in  my  presence.  It  was,  as  I  told  her  at
the  time,  extremely  unlikely  that  I  should  be  hung  in  the
coveted  large  room,  if  Inmg  at  all,  especially  as  the
picture  is  relatively  small.

The  following  morning  I  received  my  varnishing  ticket,
and  on  Monday  went  straight  to  the  place  she  mentioned,
where  I  saw  my  picture. Edward  Fuller-Maitland.

Mr.  Powles  also  corroborates.

It  is  unfortunate  that  Mrs.  Fuller-Maitland's  original
letter  leaves  it  doubtful  whether  she meant  to  the  left


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  351

of  the  door  as  you  pass  through  it  from  the  second  room
to  the  big  room  or  as  you  face  it  from  the  big  room.
But  her  subsequent  account  to  her  brother  seems  to  make
it  clear  that  in  the  dream  she  looked  at  the  door  from
the  large  room.  In  any  case  she  was  right  as  to  which
of  two  pictures  was  hung,  in  which  room,  and  which  wall
of  that  room.  But  from  whom  did  the  impression  come  1
The  case  somewhat  resembles  the  dreams  about  the  date
of  a  brother's  appointment  and  place  in  examination
given  in  Chapter  II.  (P.  269,  p.  144,  and  L.  1127,  p.  147).

A  very  odd  case  of  this  clairvoyant  kind  (L.  1119,
Journal,  Vol.  IX.,  p.  227)  I  will  describe  briefly.  It
came  to  us  from  Mrs.  E.  Thompson,  who,  however,  only
knew  the  percipient,  a  Mrs.  Hodgson  of  Shepherd's  Bush,
slightly.  The  account,  written  by  Mrs.  Thompson  and
signed  by  Mrs.  Hodgson  and  her  daughter,  is  dated
June  12th,  1899,  and  relates  to  a  dream  in  October,  1897.
A  burglary  had  occurred  at  Mrs.  Hodgson's  house  on
September  30tli,  1897,  and  among  other  things  a  smaU
papier-mache  box  which  she  valued  had  been  taken.
About  a  week  later  she  dreamed  she  went  into  the  coal
ceUar  and  found  it  hidden  amongst  the  fine  coal.  She
told  her  daughter  of  the  dream  the  next  morning,  but  it
seemed  so  absurd  that  no  search  was  made.  In  August,
1898,  Mr.  Hodgson  went  into  the  cellar  to  see  how  much
coal  there  was,  and  found  amongst  the  fine  coal  the  lost
box  wrapped  in  a  newspaper  of  the  date  of  the  burglary.
Had  somebody  played  a  trick  ?  Or  had  Mrs.  Hodgson
subconsciously  noticed  the  box  in  its  hiding  place  before
her  dream  ?  Or  what  had  happened  ?  We  know  too
little  of  the  circumstances  to  judge.

The  following  case  (M.Cl.  87,  Journal;  Vol.  VI.,  p.  264)
which  came  to  us  through  the  American  Branch,  if  it  was
not  merely  a  remarkable  coincidence,  takes  us  from
matters  of  purely  private  concern  to  an  event  which  was
also,  one  may  say,  one  of  public  interest.  But  this  does
not  seem  to  help  us  to  find  the  agent,  or  to  explain  the
nature  of  the  supernormal  perception. The  account  to  be


352


Mrs.  Henry  Siclgioich,.


[part


quoted  was  first  published  in  a  newspaper  and  afterwards
signed  by  the  percipient.  Later  Dr.  Hodgson  obtained  the
corroboration  of  members  of  the  percipient's  family  to  his
having  told  them  of  his  experience  before  the  news  of
the  explosion  came.

(M.  CI.  87.)  : ,  ,

The  bank  at  Coldwater,  Michigan,  was  robbed  about  the
middle  of  February,  1892,  of  $20,000  by  the  blowing  up
of  the  safe  with  dynamite.  The  following  statement
appeared  in  a  Coldwater  newspaper  of  March  16,  1892,
and  was  afterwards  signed  as  correct  by  Mr.  S.  P.
Williams  :

S.  P.  Williams,  a  large  stockholder  in  the  Coldwater  National
Bank,  lives  at  Lima,  Lid.  [thirty  miles  distant  from  Cold-
water].  While  asleep  at  his  home  during  the  night  upon
which  the  bank  was  robbed,  he  awoke  under  the  impression
that  he  had  been  startled  by  a  heavy  explosion.  So  vivid
was  the  impression  left  that  he  got  up,  dressed  himself,  and
wallced  all  through  the  business  portion  of  Lima  lookiiig  for
evidences  of  a  big  explosion.  Of  course  he  fomid  none,  and
later  ascertained  that  he  awoke  at  the  same  time  at  which
the  vault  in  the  Coldwater  bank  was  blown  open.

Members  of  Mr.  Williams's  family  testify  that  he  told
them  of  his  impression  before  the  news  of  the  explosion
came.

There  remain  cases  under  this  head  furnished  by  two
percipients — each  of  whom  had  on  two  occasions  dreams
concerning  public  events  in  the  war  without  apparently
any  traceable  private  reason.  First  (L.  1201,  Journal,
Vol.  XVI.,  p.  306)  Miss  "  Ann  Jones  "  (pseudonym),  who
has  sent  us  other  telepathic  experiences  (see  above,
pp.  317,  330),  on  August  6th,  1914,  from  8.30  p.m.  to  9,
and  again  on  Sept.  5th,  1914,  from  2.30  p.m.  to  7,  fell
into  a  heavy  swoon -like  state  between  sleeping  and  waking
unlike  anything  she  had  experienced  before.  During  this
she  had  each  time  a  dream  or  impression  of  a  sinking


Lxxxvi.]  Spontaneous  Cases  :  Impression  Externalised.  353

ship.  The  notes  in  her  diary  run  "  Had  a  bad  dream  of
a  ship  sunk,"  "  Had  a  dreadful  drowning  sleep,"  for  the
two  dates  respectively  ;  and  friends  testify  that  she  told
them  she  had  dreamt  of  a  sinking  ship.  On  August  6th
H.M.S.  Amphion  struck  a  mine  and  foundered  at  7.30
a.m. — that  is,  about  thirteen  hours  before  Miss  Jones'
dream.  This  was  announced  by  the  Admiralty  that
evening,  but  not  known  to  Miss  Jones  or  her  friends.
On  September  5th,  at  4.30  p.m.,  H.M.S.  Pathfinder  struck
a  mine  and  foundered  very  rapidly.  This  was  probably
before  or  about  the  time  of  Miss  Jones'  dream.  These
two  disasters  were,  I  understand,  the  only  two  which  had
befallen  the  British  fleet  in  the  war  up  to  that  date.
The  heavy  sleep  seems  rather  to  have  been  the  oppor-
tunity for  the  impression  to  emerge  than  itself  caused  by
the  impression,  for  it  began  long  after  the  disaster  on
August  6th  and  two  hours  before  it  on  Sept.  5th.  At  the
same  time  it  is  odd  that  this  peculiar  physical  condition
should,  so  far  as  we  know,  have  occurred  on  these
occasions  only.

In  the  other  case  (L  1214,  Journal,  Vol.  XVIII.,  p.  92)
Miss  M.  S.  Wilkinson  on  two  occasions  (Aug.  21-22/17  and
Sept.  2-3/17)  dreamt  vividly  of  an  air-raid  on  a  night
when  oiae  actually  took  place  at  a  distance,  but  when
there  was  no  special  reason  to  expect  one.  At  the  same
time,  air-raids  were  fairly  frequent,  so  that  the  coincidence
does  not  seem  very  striking,  and  I  only  mention  this  case
for  completeness.


354


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


CHAPTER  IV.

Collective  and  Reciprocal  Cases  without  Evidence
OF  ANY  Agency  external  to  the  Percipient.

§  1. Similar  and  Simultaneous  Dreams.

In  this  final  chapter  I  have  put  together  cases  in  which
two  or  more  persons  have  at  the  same  time  spontaneous
psychical  experiences — either  hallucinations  or  dreams —
which  seem  to  be  related  to  one  another,  but  where  no
evidence  of  any  agency  outside  the  two  percipients  exists.^
When  this  happens — when  two  persons  have  nearly  similar
dreams  or  hallucinations  without  traceable  external  cause,
normal  or  supernormal — it  can  hardly  be  attributed  to
chance,  and  we  seem  driven  to  suppose  that  they  have
influenced  each  other  either  by  suggestion  through  the
senses,  or  telepathically — one  being  agent  and  the  other
percipient  ;  or  both  acting  in  both  capacities  so  that  the
telepathic  influence  is  mutual.

In  most  of  the  cases  we  have  to  examine,  the  two
persons  concerned  were  in  the  same  room,  or  otherwise
near  each  other,  which  makes  it  specially  important  to
consider  whether  they  can  have  influenced  each  other
through  the  senses.  In  similar  and  simultaneous  dreams,
for  instance — which  I  propose  to  take  flrst — it  does  not

1  There  are  collective  cases,  it  will  be  remembered,  not  fulfilling
these  conditions.  A  collective  crystal  vision,  not  spontaneous,  has
been  given  in  Chapter  I.  (L.  1126,  p.  48).  And  collective  cases  where
more  or  less  evidence  of  external  agency  is  adduced  have  been  discussed
under  their  appropriate  heads.  They  are  :  Simultaneous  dreams,
L.  1210,  p.  268,  L.  1138,  p.  271  ;  Collective  apparitions,  L.  1159,  p.  194,
L.  1190,  p.  343  ;  Non-vocal  sounds  collectively  heard,  L.  1141,  p.  242,
L  1151,  p.  242,  L.  844,  p.  342,  G.  277,  p.  343.


Lxxxvi.]  Collective  and  Reciprocal  Cases.  355


seem  impossible  that  in  some  cases  where  the  dreamers
are  sleeping  together  and  the  element  common  to  the  two
dreams  is  sufficiently  simple,  a  sound  or  movement  made
by  one  dreamer  might  suggest  the  dream  to  the  other.
And,  of  course,  in  any  case  where  suggestion  through
the  senses  can  be  regarded  as  an  adequate  cause  for  the
similaritj^  of  two  dreams  or  hallucinations,  no  room  is  left
for  evidence  of  telepathy,  even  if  telepathy  has  occurred.
Whether  suggestion  through  the  senses  seems  a  likely
cause  in  any  of  the  dreams  that  follow  I  must  leave  the
reader  to  judge.

The  first  case  (L.  835,  Journal,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  220)  came
from  Mr.  and  Mrs.  H.,  who  do  not  wish  their  names  to
be  published.  The  dreams  took  place  in  July,  1887,  and
the  account  was  sent  to  us  in  August.

(L.  835.) '  ■

I  dreamt  that  I  was  walking  in  Richmond  Park  with
my  husband  and  Mr.  J.  I  saw  notices  put  on  several
trees  to  the  effect  that  "  In  consequence  of  the  Jubilee
Lady  R.  wUl  give  a  garden  party  on  the  24th  of  Jime."
I  remarked  to  my  husband  that  I  hoped  she  would  invite
us.  My  husband  said  that  he  hoped  she  would  not  do
so,  as  it  would  be  extremely  difficult  to  get  back  to  town.
Mr.  J.  then  said,  "  Oh,  I  wUl  manage  that  for  you,"
and  struck  a  blade  of  grass  with  his  stick,  upon  which
a  carriage  drove  ujd.  I  then  awoke  and  my  husband
said,  "  I  have  had  such  a  vivid  dream.  I  dreamt  we
were  walking  in  Richmond  Park,  and  I  was  told  that
Lady  R.  was  going  to  have  a  party.  We  were  invited,
and  I  was  very  much  troubled  in  my  mind  as  to  how  we
should  get  home,  as  the  party  was  at  10,  and  the  last
train  went  at  11,  when  my  friend  J.,  who  was  walking
with  us,  said,  '  Oh,  I  will  manage  that  for  yoi^.'  "

(Signed)  M.  H.  and  J.  B.  H.

In  the  next  case  (L.  965,  Journal,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  169),
which  came  through  the  American  Branch,  the  coincidence
is  less  striking,  because  the  main  subject  of  the  dreams


356


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgioick.


[part


was  a  likely  one  to  arise  in  the  minds  of  both  dreamers.
Moreover,  the  records  were  made  about  two  years  after
the  dreams.  I  wiU  give  the  case  briefly,  omitting  corro-
boration and  the  second  dreamer's  account.

(L.  965.)

Mr.  Armstrong  Avrites  to  Dr.  Hodgson  :

Lehma^tn's,  La.,  March  20th,  1893.

I  was  staying  at  the  house  of  a  young  friend  of  mine,
who  at  the  time  was  infatuated  with  a  young  lady  in
the  neighbourhood.  His  joarents,  as  well  as  myself,  were
opposed  to  the  alliance,  and  our  conversation  would  often
centre  on  the  subject.  One  night  I  dreamed  that  he  was
determined  to  marry  the  girl.  Everything  was  prepared,
and  I  remember  hurrying  off  to  the  place  where  the
ceremony  was  to  take  place.  I  even  forgot  to  jiut  on
my  coat.  I  found  him  in  a  back  room  of  the  house,
where  I  also  saw  his  father,  vainly  trying  to  change  his
mind.  I  caUed  my  young  friend  to  the  side,  and  talked
to  him  hke  a  Dutch  imcle,  trying  to  persuade  him  out
of  the  notion.  Then  I  left  the  scene,  and  went  home  in
disgust.  Now,  we  were  sleepmg  in  the  same  room  and
in  the  same  bed,  and  after  awaking  ua  the  morning,  and
before  telling  him  of  my  dream,  I  asked  what  he  had
been  dreaming  about.  He,  half  smilingly,  answered,
"  Why,  I  dreamt  that  I  was  about  to  get  married,  when
you  came  rushmg  in  the  house,  in  shirt-sleeves,  and
insisted  that  the  ceremony  must  not  go  on."

The  unlikely  item  of  the  shirt-sleeves  in  both  dreams
makes  it  probable  that  they  were  not  independent.  Other-
wise they  were  not  quite  identical.

The  next  two  cases  also  came  to  us  through  the  Ameri-
can Branch.  In  the  first  (L.  1162,  Journal,  Vol.  XIII.,
p.  119)  we  have  again  different  dreams,  with  an  important
common  element,  which  in  this  case  is  the  central  point
of  the  dreams,  namely,  the  drowning  and  rescue.


LXXXVI.]


Collective  and  Recijn'ocal  Cases.


357


(L.  1162.)

June  I8lh,  1899.

Noticing  your  address  in  the  N.Y.  Sunday  Journal  of
even  date,  I  write  to  tell  you  of  an  instance  of  telepathy
in  which,  as  an  additional  straw,  your  Society  may  find
interest.

Li  the  summer  of  '97,  one  night  while  sleeping  I
dreamed  that  I  was  in  an  old,  abandoned  and  ruined
saw-mill,  which  was  built  on  timbers  out  over  a  river.
The  plank  floor  was  gone  except  for  now  and  then  a
plank,  and  the  water,  about  eight  feet  below,  looked
black,  stagnant  and  slimy.  There  were  just  enough
planks  and  timbers  left  to  cause  a  "  creepy,"  shadowy
darkness  to  prevail  below.  There  were  two  ladies  came
to  look  at  the  place,  and  being  afraid  to  trust  the  planks
for  footing,  I  took  one  on  each  arm,  and  was  proceeding
out  to  the  further  end  of  the  ruin,  over  the  water  to
where  the  old  saw  was,  when  something  white  glimmering
in  the  water  below  through  the  dusk  attracted  my  atten-
tion, and  I  saw  it  to  be  the  face  of  my  wife,  Mrs.  D.,
just  showing  above  the  water,  with  her  large  eyes  looking
into  mine,  but  without  a  motion  or  sound.  I  immediately
jumped  into  the  water  and  caught  her  round  the  shoulders
and  neck  to  support  her,  and  at  that  instant  was  roused
from  sleep  by  a  smothered  cry  from  Mrs.  D.  at  my  side.
Intuitivelj'^  I  knew  how  matters  were  and  asked  her
(after  shaking  her  to  awaken  her)  what  she  had  dreamed
to  frighten  her.

She  said  that  she  was  dreaming  that  she  was  in  the
water  drowning  and  was  trying  to  reach  up  her  arms  to
help  herself,  and  cried  out  as  I  heard  her.  .  .  .

Mrs.  D.  wrote  to  Dr.  Hodgson  :

June  22nd,  1899.

In  reply  to  your  letter  of  the  20th  to  Mr.  Davis,  relating
to  our  "  dreams,"  I  will  relate  my  exj^erience  as  perfectly
as  possible.

The  first  sensation  I  remember  in  my  dream  was  of
finding  m3^self  sinking  in  a  pool,  a  large  pool,  or  pond


358


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


of  water  by  the  roadside,  and  of  throwing  up  my  arms
above  the  water  and  trying  to  scream  for  help,  and  just
as  I  felt  my  hand  grasped  by  some  one,  I  could  not
tell  by  whom,  to  help  me,  Mr.  Davis  spoke  and  I  awoke.

T  sometimes  have  unpleasant  dreams  and  make  a  sUght
sound,  when  he  always  wakens  me,  but  we  both  thought
it  remarkable  when  on  this  occasion  we  found  that  there
was  perfect  coincidence  in  the  time,  even  to  a  second,
and  almost  perfect  coincidence  in  the  subject  matter  of
our  dreams.

Mr.  D.  sent  to  Dr.  Hodgson  on  July  3rd,  1899,  an  account
of  an  apparently  telepathic  impression  that  had  occurred  to
him  a  few  weeks  before  in  regard  to  the  death  of  a  friend.
He  had  had  a  strong  impression  of  her  presence,  and  that
she  told  him  she  was  dead.  He  informed  his  wife  of  this
at  the  time,  and  they  heard  later  the  same  day  that  the
lady  had  died  about  24  hours  before  the  impression  occurred.
They  knew,  however,  that  she  had  been  seriously  ill,  though
it  was  believed  that  she  was  then  recovering.

In  the  next  case  (L.  1161,  Journal,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  118),
sent  to  Dr.  Hodgson  by  Dr.  M.  L.  Holbrook,  the  dreams
seem  to  have  been  identical  as  far  as  they  both  went.
The  following  account  of  them  was  given  by  Mr.  E.  J.  to
his  brother,  Mr.  G.  J.,  an  Associate  of  the  American
Branch  :

(L.  1161.)

January  6,  1907.

My  bed  stands  Avith  the  head  against  the  west  waU  of
the  room,  head  next  the  door.  Annie's  bed  stands
directly  opposite,  head  against  the  east  wall,  with  a
space  of  about  six  feet  between  them.

I  dreamed  on  Friday  night  [January  4th]  that  mother
came  into  the  room,  passed  beside  my  bed,  looked  at  me
and  went  to  the  foot  of  Annie's  bed.  The  impression
was  so  strong  that  it  awoke  me.

I  told  my  dream  at  breakfast  and  Annie  remarked,
"  How  queer  that  is  ; for  I  dreamed  last  night  that  your


Lxxxvi.]  Collective  and  Reciprocal  Cases.


359


mother  came  into  the  room,  leant  over  the  foot  of  my
bed,  with  her  arms  crossed  just  as  she  always  used  to
stand  and  talk  when  I  was  sick.  She  said  that  Fred
told  her  that  I  did  not  realise  how  sick  my  mother  was,
and  that  she  would  not  live  three  months,  and  that
startled  me  so  that  I  woke  up."

About  six  weeks  later  Mr.  E.  J.  sent  a  substantially  similar
account  direct  to  Dr.  Hodgson,  and  about  this  Mrs.  J.'s
secretary  wrote  on  March  1,  1901  :

In  reply  to  your  letter  of  Feb.  25,  Mrs.  J.  directs  me
to  say  that  she  has  nothing  to  add  to  or  change  to
make  in  the  statement  made  by  Mr.  J.

As  regards  the  content  of  the  dreams  Mr.  J.'s  mother  had
died  in  1883  and  his  brother  Fred,  whom  his  wife  had  never
known,  in  1858.  Mrs.  J.'s  mother  was  aged  83  aivd  had
been  expected  to  die  at  almost  any  time  during  the  previous
year,  though  at  the  moment  she  was  better.  She  did  actually
die  six  months  later  on  June  12th,  1901.

There  is  in  our  collection  one  case  which  may  con-
veniently come  in  here  (L.  1181,  Journal,  Vol.  XIV.,  p.  380),
in  which  one  percipient  sees  an  apparition,  while  the  other,
a  child  of  2|  sleeping  in  the  same  room,  has  a  vivid
dream  about  the  same  person.  It  was  sent  to  us  by
Mr.  J.  H.  Clapham  of  King's  College,  Cambridge,  who,  in
sending  us  Mrs.  Clapham's  account  of  the  incident,  says  :

(L.  1181.)

Its  maiii  interest  is  that  my  appearance  had  no
significance.  I  was  comfortably  asleep  in  a  Swiss  inn.
Fortunately  my  diary  has  a  note  of  the  excellent  night
that  I  spent.  .  .  .

Mrs.  Clapham  wrote  to  her  husband  :

65,  Bateman  Street,
Cambridge,  Wednesday,  Aug.  3,  1910.
What  were  you  doing  this  morning  between  5  a.m.  and
5,15  ? Such  a  strange  thing  happened. To  the  best  of


360


Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.


[part


my  belief  I  was  awake,  for  I  had  just  been  putting  some
lotion  on  the  restless  [Alison]  and  heard  5  o'clock  strike.
I  turned  round  to  face  the  wuidow,  to  try  and  get  off
to  sleep,  and  there  were  you  standing  by  the  bed  looking
down  on  me.  I  said,  "  Jolm,  what  are  you  doing  here  ?  "
but  you  said  nothing,  and  walldng  round  the  bed  you
bent  over  Alison's  cot  and  looked  at  her,  and  she  stirred
restlessly  in  her  sleep  and  said,  "  Daddy,  Daddy,  I  can't
'member."  Then  you  came  round  and  looked  at  me
again,  and  by  that  time  I  was  terrified,  for  I  thought
something  must  have  happened  to  you.  I  said,  "  What
have  you  come  for  ?  "  and  tried  to  touch  you,  but  you
retreated  towards  the  window  and  disappeared.  At  that
moment  AUson  woke  and  popped  her  head  over  her  cot.
I  gave  her  her  biscuit  and  looked  at  the  clock ;  it  was
5.15.  I  comforted  myseK  by  reflecting  that  you  could
hardly  have  begim  to  climb  yet,  but  I  haven't  felt  com-
fortable aU  day.  When  Ahson  came  into  my  bed,  she
said,  "  Daddy  was  mowing  the  grass  when  I  waked  up."  |
I  told  her  you  were  away  in  Switzerland  and  not  mowing  I
the  grass,  but  she  said,  "  I  k7iow  he  was  mowing  the
grass,  'cause  I  seed  him."  And  again  at  brealdast,  in
the  middle  of  demanding  sugar,  she  suddenly  said,  "  I
know  Daddy  was  mowing,  I  seed  him  doing  it  when  I
waked  up."  So  if  I  was  dreaming,  she  must  also  have  j
been  dreaming  of  you  at  the  same  time.  ...  , -  ■

If  there  was  telepathy  here,  it  was  apparently  between
Mrs.  Clapham  and  her  little  girl.  But  there  is  no  evidence
that  their  experiences  were  alike  except  in  relating  to  the
same  person.

§  2. Collective  Visual  Hallucinations  unrecognised.

Coming  now  to  simultaneous  waking  experiences,  there
are  in  our  collection  a  good  many  cases  of  apparently
sensory  hallucinations  shared  by  two  (or  more)  percipients
who  are  together,  but  where  there  is  no  evidence  pointing
to  agency  external  to  both.  From  one  point  of  view  sug-
gestion by  word  or  gesture  may  seem  a  more  likely
explanation of the coincidence in the case of  waking


Lxxxvi.]  Collective  and  Beciprocal  Cases.  361

hallucinations  than  of  dreams,  for,  as  already  remarked
in  another  connexion,  the  content  of  a  waking  hallucina-
tion is  usually  simpler — less  elaborate — than  that  of  a
dream.  If,  for  instance,  A  sees  an  apparition  of  C  in
his  usual  garb  and  exclaims  "  there  is  C,"  the  remark
would  probably  at  once  call  up  in  B's  mind  a  more  or
less  distinct  and  similar  mental  image  of  their  common
friend  C,  and  it  is  conceivable  that  this  mental  image
might  externalise  itself  in  space.  This  possibility  must  be
kept  in  mind  in  the  case  of  collective  hallucinations,  and
especially  of  recognised  apparitions.  But,  on  the  other
hand,  we  are  less  suggestible  awake  than  asleep,  and  to
quote  Gurney's  words,  which  are  I  think  as  true  now  as
when  they  were  written,  "I  do  not  know  of  any  instance
where  the  sane  and  healthy  A,  simply  by  saying  at  a
casual  moment  to  the  sane  and  healthy  B,  '  There  is  such
and  such  an  object  '  (not  really  present  and  not  capable
of  being  imposed  as  an  illusion  on  some  object  really
present),  has  at  once  caused  the  object  to  be  conjured  up
in  space  before  B's  eyes.  In  the  most  extreme  case  that
has  come  to  my  knowledge,  where  something  like  this  has
proved  possible,  very  strong  insistence  and  repetition  on
A's  part,  of  the  sort  that  a  mesmerist  employs  when
seeking  to  dominate  a  subject's  mind,  are  needed  before
the  impression  develops  into  sensory  form.  In  cases,
therefore,  where  A  has  liimseK  had  a  hallucination  of
which  he  has  spoken  at  the  moment,  and  B  has  shared
it,  it  is  too  much  to  assume  at  once  that  B's  experience
must  have  been  exclusively  due  to  the  verbal  suggestion  ;
for  if  A's  mere  suggestion  can  produce  such  an  effect  on
B  at  that  particular  moment,  why  not  at  other  moments
when  he  suggests  the  imaginary  object,  without  having
himseH  seen  it  ?  ^  None  the  less,  of  course,  ought  the
hypothesis  of  verbal  suggestion  to  be  most  carefully  con-
sidered, in  relation  to  the  special  circumstances  of  each
case, before any other hypothesis is even  provisionally

^  It  seems  possible,  though  I  thmk  Gurney  does  not  mention  it,  that
verbal  suggestion  by  A  when  startled  by  seeing  an  apparition  might
have  a  stronger  hallucination-producing  effect  than  the  same  suggestion
from  A  unstartled  and  merely  experimenting.


362


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgioick.


[part


admitted "  (see  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Chap.  XVIII.,
§3).

But  there  is  a  source  of  error  (also  discussed  by  Gurney,
and  referred  to  by  him  in  the  passage  just  quoted)  to
which  dreams  are  not  hable,  for  which  each  case  of
collective  waking  sensorj^  hallucination  has  to  be  carefully
examined  ;  namely,  the  possibility  that  what  is  seen  or
heard  is  some  real  object  misinterpreted,  or  some  real
person  mistaken  for  another.  This  is  a  danger  which,
while  it  to  some  extent  attaches  to  waking  hallucinations
generally,  is  of  special  importance  in  the  case  of  collective
hallucinations  such  as  we  have  now  to  consider,  because
the  interest  of  them  depends  entirely  on  their  being
really  hallucinatory,  and  at  the  same  time  the  fact  that
the  experience  is  shared  is  itself  a  reason  for  suspecting
that  it  has  a  real  basis  in  some  external  object.

For  this  reason  appearances  seen  in  a  bad  light,  or  at
a  considerable  distance,  are  apt  to  be  of  little  evidential
value,  and  I  am  disposed  at  once  to  dismiss  two  cases
on  this  ground — the  ground  namely  that  though  something
odd  happened  we  have  not  enough  information  to  enable
us  to  judge  what  its  nature  was.

In  the  first  (G.  200,  Journal,  Vol.  V.,  p.  221),  when  "  it
was  rapidly  getting  dusk"  (7.15  p.m.  on  Sept.  22),  a  father
and  daughter  riding  together  in  a  lane  crossed  at  right
angles  by  another  lane  saw  pass  across  in  front  of  them,
as  it  might  be  along  the  other  lane,  a  man  with  a  slouch
hat  and  "  an  old-fashioned  shepherd's  frock."  He  dis-
appeared as  they  thought  behind  the  corner  of,  or  possibly
through,  the  hedge,  but  though  they  rode  on  quickly  to
the  corner  they  saw  nothing  more  of  him  and  nothing  to
account  for  the  appearance.  There  was  a  vague  tradition
that  the  place  was  haunted.  The  case  quoted  in  Pro-
ceedirigs.  Vol.  X.,  p.  100,  may  advantageously  be  compared
with  this.

In  the  other  case  (L.  1148,  Journal,  Vol.  XII.,  p  121)
on  a  "  very  misty  "  evening  in  the  middle  of  May  in  the
north  of  England  two  ladies  saw  as  they  thought  a  cyclist


Lxxxvi.]  Collective  and  Beciprocal  Cases.  363


coming  towards  them  on  a  moorland  road.  He  suddenly
disappeared,  and  they  thought  he  might  have  got  into
the  ditch  or  have  fallen,  but  no  man  or  machine  was  to
be  found.

Another  case  (G.  241,  Journal,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  145)  which
also  occurred  in  a  very  poor  light  is,  I  think,  more
curious  and  important,  and  deserves  a  fuller  mention.  The
experience  took  place  about  a  year  and  a  half  before  it  was
recorded.  The  account  of  it  was  sent  to  us  by  Mr.  T.
Barkworth,  now  dead,  who  was  at  the  time  a  Member  of
the  Society  and  of  its  Council.  He  took  down  the
evidence  of  the  percipients,  whom  he  calls  Lady  and
Miss  B.,  from  word  of  mouth,  and  they  attested  the
account  with  their  signatures.  The  house  where  the
occurrence  took  place  was  in  a  London  square,  and  as
to  light  he  says,  "  There  is  only  a  gas  lamp  opposite  the
house,  and  the  windows  are  provided  with  blinds  of  some
thick  stufE  material,  so  that  it  seems  difficult  to  under-
stand how  the  figure  was  seen  so  clearly,  unless  it  was  to
some  extent  self-luminous."  Sounds  (unaccounted  for)  as
of  footsteps  and  other  noises  had  frequently  been  heard
in  the  house,  but  I  omit  the  account  of  these  as  it  is
stated  that  "  no  importance  was  attached  to  them  till
after  the  visual  experience." This  is  described  as  follows  :

(G.  241.)

Lady  B.  was  sleeping  in  her  own  room  .  .  .  and  IMiss
B.  was  sleeping  in  another  bed  at  her  side.  In  the
middle  of  the  night  both  ladies  suddenly  started  up  wide
awake  without  any  apparent  cause,  and  saw  a  figure
in  a  white  garment,  which  might  have  been  a  night  dress,
with  dark  curly  hair.  The  room  was  not  quite  dark,
although  there  was  no  artificial  hght  except  from  the
gas  lamp  in  the  square.  No  fear  nor  any  physical
sensation  was  experienced.  The  figure  was  standing  in
front  of  the  fireplace,  over  which  was  a  mirror.  The
position  was  such  as  to  show  the  face  in  quarter  profile
and  to  intercept  its  own  reflection  from  the  mirror.  It
was a female figure, with hair down the back.  The


364


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


face,  so  far  as  shown,  was  clearly  visible.  The  two
ladies  both  spoke  and  sprang  out  of  bed  to  the  doors,
which  they  found  locked.  On  turning  round  again  the
figure  had  disappeared.

Mss  B.  .  .  .  saw  the  back  of  the  figure  and  its  long
dark  hair,  but  not  the  face.  The  face  was,  however,
clearly  reflected  in  the  mirror,  and  Miss  B.  saw  it  there
distinctly.  Like  Lady  B.  she  woke  up  suddenly,  without
assignable cause. The room seemed hghted  up.

It  would  be  natural  to  regard  such  an  apparition  on
suddenly  awaking  from  sleep,  if  it  occurred  to  a  single
percipient,  as  probably  the  continuation  of  a  dream  image.
But  this  seems  less  probable  in  a  collective  experience.
For  a  case  resembling  this,  see  Proceedings,  Vol.  X.,
p.  312,  and  for  one  in  which  one  of  the  percipients
awakes  suddenly  to  share  in  a  waking  hallucination  of  the
other,  see  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Vol.  II.  (1st  ed.).
Chap.  XVIII.,  p.  204,  case  No.  323.

One  characteristic  which,  when  it  occurs,  is  conclusive
as  to  an  appearance  being  hallucinatory  is  its  vanishing
before  the  eyes  of  a  percipient.  I  mean  by  vanishing
that  it  disappears,  either  gradually  or  suddenly,  while  the
percipient  is  actually  looking  at  it.  I  do  not  mean  what,
I  think,  happens  more  often,  that  it  disappears  behind
some  object,  or  that  the  percipient  having,  as  in  the  last
case,  turned  his  eyes  away  sees  nothing  when  he  looks
back.  There  are  three  cases  of  collectively  seen  appari-
tions which  resemble  the  last  in  having  occurred  indoors
in  a  poor  light  and  in  not  having  been  i^ecognised,  but
which  differ  from  it  in  having  apparently  vanished  at  j|
least  for  one  percipient.  |

In  the first of these (L.  842, Journal, Vol. IV.,  p.
286)  :

(L.  842.)  '

The  percipients  were  sons  of  Mr.  EUwood,  a  chemist  residing
at Leominster. From an account previously sent by  Mr.


lxxx\t:.]  Collective  mid  Reciffocal  Cases.


365


Ellwood,  sen.,  it  appeared  that  the  percipients  were  respectively
19  and  23  years  of  age.  The  brothers  Avere  sleeping  together,
and  the  elder  of  the  two  was  the  writer  of  the  following
account.  The  first  experience  occurred  on  December  20th,
1889.

LEOMrNSTEB,  February  I2fh,  1890.

The  following  is  just  a  short  account  of  what  I  saw
on  the  first  occasion  mentioned.  It  was,  I  think,  about
6  a.m.,  just  getting  Hght.  I  had  been  awake  a  short
time  and  I  suddenly  heard  the  door  open  (the  door  was
on  the  jar  aU  night),  and  saw  a  short  figure  in  a  night-
shirt walk  in  and  stand  looking  at  me  by  the  side  of
the  bed.  I  distinctly  heard  a  sound  of  breathing  or
rusthng  of  the  nightshii-t,  and  I  thought  at  fii'st  that  it
was  my  father  walking  in  his  sleep.  Then  I  thought  it
might  be  a  burglar  (although  why  a  burglar  should  be
dressed  in  a  nightshirt  I  don't  know),  so  I  said,  "  What
is  it  ■?  "  then  I  jumped  out  of  bed  and  rushed  to  catch
hold  of  the  figure,  when  it  vanished.  My  brother  also
saw  the  figure  standing  at  the  bedside,  and  after  I  jumped
out  of  bed  he  saw  the  figure  ghde  round  towards  the
foot  of  the  bed  and  then  vanish.  I  did  not  see  it  after
I  jumped  out  of  bed.  We  both  searched  well  but  could
find  nothing.

On  the  second  occasion  it  was  about  the  same  hour
in  the  morning  and  on  the  same  day  of  the  week.  The
bedroom  door  A\^as  shut  all  night  on  this  occasion,  and  I
was  Ijdng  awake  when  I  saw  the  door  open  and  some  one
peep  round.  I  thought  it  was  one  of  our  assistants  come
for  a  lark  to  puU  me  out  of  bed  (as  we  do  those  kind
of  tricks  sometimes)  ;  however,  I  lay  stiU,  and  then  the
door  seemed  to  open  wide,  so  I  leaned  out  of  bed  to
give  it  a  hard  push  and  everything  vanished,  and  I
nearly  fell  out  of  bed,  for  the  door  was  shut  as  when  I
went  to  bed.  My  brother  was  asleep  this  time  and  saw
nothing.

I  can  positively  swear  that  this  is  as  correct  an  account
as  I  can  give,  and  I  distinctly  saw  what  I  have  mentioned.
I  was  awake  both  times  (not  dozing,  but  distinctly  awake).


366


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[PAET


I  was  also  in  good  health  and  had  not  been  up  late,
etc.,  the  night  before.  I  may  add  that  before  this
occasion  I  did  not  beheve  in  ghosts,  or  anything  in  that
way.  I  really  and  truly  thought  a  man  was  in  the
room,  and  I  intended  collaring  him  when  I  rushed  at
him.

W.  M.  Ellwood.

P.S. — I  only  saw  the head  of  the  second  figure,  but
it  was,  as  near  as  I  could  tell,  hke  the  first  figure. — W.  E.

To  this  account  the  younger  Mr.  Ellwood  adds  :

I  also  saw  and  heard  all  my  brother  did.

(Signed) M.  J.  Ellwood,  Jun.

It  occurred  to  Mr.  Ellwood,  senior,  that  the  figure  might  be
connected  with  his  landlord,  who  was  Ijdng  ill  at  the  time  and
has  since  died.  This  gentleman  was  an  intimate  friend  and
had  a  special  affection  for  Mr.  Ellwood 's  younger  son.  He
is  also  known  to  have  interested  himself  in  the  place  during
his  last  iUness. But  no  definite  coincidence  can  be  made  out.

Mr.  Ellwood  also  informed  us  that  his  house  had  the  reputa-
tion of  being  haunted,  but  the  only  phenomena  observed
appear  to  have  been  unexplained  noises  before  the  deaths  of
several  of  Mrs.  Ellwood's  relatives.

Only  one  of  the  percipients  in  this  case  saw  the  phan-
tasm vanish,  but  the  hallucinatory  character  of  the
apparition  seems  pretty  clear,  and  is  confirmed  by  the
second  (non-collective)  experience  of  one  of  the  per-
cipients, especially  by  the  effort  to  shut  the  ai^parently
open  door  resulting  in  reaching  out  into  vacancy.

In  the  next  case  (G.  201,  Journal,  Vol.  V.,  p.  223)  the
figure  was  seen  by  three  percipients  and  appears  to  have
vanished  before  the  eyes  of  at  least  two  of  the  three.
Mr.  Podmore  refers  briefly  to  this  case  in  his  Apparitions
and  Thought  Transference  but  scarcely  describes  it,  and
both  this  and  the  two  previously  quoted  cases  are
similarly  referred  to  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  X.,  p.  320.


LXXXVI.]


Collective  and  Reciprocal  Cases.


367


(G.  201.)

The  place  where  the  following  incident  occurred  is  a  very-
modern  London  house.  Dr.  Kingston,  who  obtained  the
narrative  for  us,  tells  us  that  "  the  young  ladies  looked  out
for  the  apparition  on  the  same  night  of  the  following  year,
but  saw  nothing."  We  may  assume,  therefore,  that  at  any
rate  mere  expectation  was  not  sufficient  to  produce  the  im-
pression.

Juhj  31s^,  1891.

On  the  night  of  November  1st,  1889,  between  9.30
and  10  jj.m.,  my  three  sisters  and  myseK  left  our  library,
where  we  had  spent  the  evening,  and  proceeded  upstairs
to  our  bedrooms.  On  reaching  my  room,  which  is  on
the  second  floor,  I  and  a  sister  went  to  the  mantelpiece
in  search  of  the  matchbox,  in  order  to  hght  the  gas.
I  must  here  explain  that  my  bedroom  opens  into  my
mother's,  and  the  door  between  the  two  rooms  was
open.

There  was  no  light  beyond  that  which  glimmered  through
the  Venetian  bhnds  in  each  room.  As  I  stood  by  the
mantelpiece  I  was  awe-struck  by  the  sudden  appearance
of  a  figure  ghding  noiselessly  towards  me  from  the  outer
room.  The  appearance  was  that  of  a  young  man,  of
middle  height,  dressed  in  dark  clothes,  and  wearing  a
peaked  cap.  His  face  was  very  pale,  and  his  eyes  down-
cast as  though  deep  in  thought.  His  mouth  was  shaded
by  a  dark  moustache.  The  face  was  slightly  luminous,
which  enabled  us  to  distinguish  the  features  distinctly,
although  we  were  without  a  light  of  any  Idnd  at  the
time.

The  apparition  gUded  onwards  towards  my  sisters,  who
were  standing  inside  the  room,  quite  close  to  the  outer
door,  and  who  had  first  caught  sight  of  it,  reflected  in
the  mirror.  When  within  a  few  inches  from  them  it
vanished  as  suddenly  as  it  appeared.  As  the  figure
passed  we  distinctly  felt  a  cold  air  which  seemed  to
accompany  it.  We  have  never  seen  it  again,  and  cannot
account  in  any  way  for  the  phenomenon.


368


Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.


[part


One  of  my  sisters  did  not  see  the  apparition,  as  she  was
looldng  the  other  way  at  the  moment,  but  felt  a  cold
air ;  the  other  two,  however,  were  eye-witnesses  with
myself  to  the  fact.


There  was  no  hght  of  any  kind  in  passage  outside  the
rooms.

We  had  not  been  talldng  or  thinking  of  ghosts  during
the  evening,  or  reading  anything  exciting ;  neither  were
\ve  the  least  nervous.

None  of  us  had  ever  before  been  startled  by  anything
unexpected  in  the  dark  or  twilight.

It  was  not  hght  enough  to  see  each  other's  faces,  as
the  only  illumination  there  was  came  through  the  Venetian
blinds,  which  were  drawn  down.

It  was  myself,  Louisa  Du  Cane,  who  first  saw  the
apparition.

We  three  sisters  who  saw  it  exclaimed  at  the  same
moment,  and  found  we  had  seen  the  same  thing.

My  sister  Mary  did  not  see  the  figure,  as  she  was  looking
the  other  way  at  the  time  but  felt  distmctly,  as  did
the  rest  of  us,  a  sensation  of  cold  when  the  figure
jDassed  us.

We  did  not  recognise  the  figure  as  anybody  we  had
ever  seen.

We  did  not  afterwards  hear  of  any  event  that  we  could
connect  with  the  appearance.


Signed  by


Louisa  F.  Du  Cane.
P.  A.  Du  Cane.


August  4dh,  1891.

Answers  to  questions  [asked  by  Dr.  Kingston]  resincting

apparition.


Louisa  F.  Du  Cane.


Mrs.  Sidgwick  Avrites  :


The  Misses  Du  Cane  kindly  allowed  me  to  call  on  them
on  December  2nd,  1891,  and  showed  me  the  rooms  where


LXXXVI.]


Collective  and  Reciprocal  Gases.


369


their  experience  occurred.  The  following  is  a  rough  plan
of  them,  the  dotted  hne  showing  the  course  apparently-
taken  by  the  figure.

C D

 1 I  —  >  I


B

I


A,  A,  A,  windows.  B,  B,  B,  doors.  C,  mantelpiece  by  which  Miss
Louisa  Du  Cane  stood,  D,  mantelpiece  with  mirror  over  it,  in  which
Misses  F.  and  C.  Du  Cane  first  saw  the  figure.  E,  place  where  I  was
told  a  bookcase  stood  at  the  time  of  the  incident.  F,  approximate
position  of  Misses  F.  and  C.  Du  Cane.

Miss  Louisa  Du  Cane,  standing  by  the  mantelpiece  of
her  room,  would  have  a  direct  view  of  anyone  standing
by  the  window  of  her  mother's  room,  where  the  figure
first  appeared.  Her  sisters,  standing  at  F,  or  there-
abouts, Avould  have  a  reflected  view,  and  no  direct  view
tiU  the  figure  got  nearly  opposite  the  glass.

I  saw  the  room  in  dayhght,  but  was  told  that  at  night
it  was  to  some  extent  hghted  ("  hke  moonhght ")  by  the
street  lamp  opposite.  Miss  L.  Du  Cane  saw  the  face
better  than  the  natural  hght  would  have  enabled  her
to  do.  Her  sisters,  I  gathered,  saw  the  figure  clearly
but  not  the  face.  The  dress,  so  far  as  seen,  might  have
been  that  of,  say,  a  purser  on  board  a  merchant  steamer.
The  figure  did  not  suggest  to  them  any  person  they  had
ever  seen,  and  its  dress  and  appearance  had  no  associations
for  them.  Its  arms  were  held  away  from  the  body,  so
that  they  saw  the  Hght  between — about  as  a  man's  arms
would  be  if  his  hands  were  in  his  pockets.  They  did  not
see the hands. I third?; it is doubtful how much  of


370


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


detail  each  lady  observed  independently  at  the  time,
especially  as  they  were  a  good  deal  startled  and  agitated,
or  how  much  the  several  impressions  may  have  got  defined
and  harmonised  in  recollection  afterwards.  The  figure
seems  to  have  moved  quietly  towards  them  from  the
window.

There  were  no  curtains,  except  a  white  mushn  one,  nor
other  objects  making  explanation  by  illusion  plausible.
It  can  hardly  have  been  a  real  man,  because  a  real  man,
having  no  business  there,  would  not  have  come  towards
them.  They  beheve,  too,  that  they  would  have  heard  a
real  man  going  up  or  down  the  stairs,  which  were  at  the
time  uncarpeted,  they  having  only  recently  come  to  the
house.  Moreover,  had  he  gone  downstairs  he  would  have
been  met  by  Mrs.  Du  Cane,  who  came  up  from  the
drawing-room  at  once  on  hearing  her  daughters  call  out.
There  Avas  no  man  hving  in  the  house.

It  seems  to  me  to  have  been  a  genuine  and  interesting
case  of  collective  visual  hallucination,  but  a  case  where
the  circumstances  admit  of  the  hypothesis  that  the  words
or  gestures  of  the  first  percipient  may  have  produced  the
hallucination  in  the  others  by  "suggestion."  We  have,
however,  no  direct  evidence  of  their  being  "  suggestible  "
in  this  way,  and  subsequent  attempts  to  see  the  ghost —
sitting  in  the  room  in  the  dark,  etc. — produced  no  result.

Miss  M.  Du  Cane,  who  did  not  see  the  figure,  appears  to
have  been  deterred  by  alarm  from  looldng  in  its  direction.

In  the  following  case  (G.  239,  Journal,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  135)
the percipients were under the impression that  the
grotesque figure they saw, and one of them  touched,
vanished through the floor. It is, however,  perhaps
possible  that  the  vanishing  as  well  as  the  figure  was  in
this  case  an  illusion,  and  that  the  appearance  was  due  to  i
a  combination  of  moonlight  and  a  light-coloured  cat  aided
by  imagination. The  cat  is  suggested  by  the  green  eyes
and  the tactile impression, and the noiselessness of  the  ■
moving  figure  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  idea. At  the  :,
same  time  we  have  no  evidence  whatever  that  there  was
such  a  cat  about.


Lxxxvi.]  Collective  and  Reciprocal  Cases.


371


The  account  I  give  is  that  of  one  of  the  percipients,
Miss  McCaskill,  and  was  enclosed  in  a  letter  dated  July  25,
1892.  We  have  also  an  account  from  the  other  per-
cipient, and,  further,  one  written  in  February,  1893,  by
Miss  Alice  Johnson  immediately  after  talking  over  the
experience  with  Miss  McCaskill,  and  confirmed  by  the
latter.  These  I  do  not  reproduce  ;  they  will  be  found
in  the  Journal.  The  three  accounts  are  in  very  fair,
though  not  absolutely  complete,  agreement.

(G.  239.)

4,  Shakespeare-road,  Bedford.

Last  summer  [August,  1891]  I  was  paying  a  visit
to  some  cousins,  who  were  en  pension  with  a  German
family,  at  Cassel.  My  cousin  L.  V.  [assumed  initials]
and  I  shared  a  room,  known,  from  the  stained  window,
as  the  '  Ritterzimmer. '  Out  beds  occupied  almost  all  one
side  of  the  room,  of  which  I  send  a  rough  plaii  [not  repro-
duced]. One  night  we  were  late  going  to  bed,  and  were
not  in  bed  till  after  11.30.  We  went  on  talking  for  some
time.  We  were  neither  of  us  the  least  nervous,  nor  was  our
conversation  such  as  to  make  us  so.  I  remember  we  were
talking  about  the  opera  Robert  der  Teufel,  to  which  we
were  going  next  day.  We  had  stopped  talldng  for  a  few
minutes,  and  I  was  lying  with  my  face  to  the  wall,  when
I  was  startled  by  a  scream  from  my  cousin,  and,  turning
round,  saw  a  tall  white  figure  standing  in  the  room,
near  L.'s  bed.  I  cbd  not  at  the  time  feel  frightened  ;
my  one  idea  was  to  find  out  what  strange  thing  it  was.
It  turned  and  came  towards  my  bed,  and  I  distinctly
remember  noticing  that  it  made  no  sound  on  the  polished
wood  floor.  Its  ej^es  were  green  and  glistening,  but  the
rest  of  the  face  seemed  muffled  up.  As  soon  as  it  was
close  to  my  bed,  I  seized  it,  and  seemed  to  take  hold  of

■>>  something  soft,  like  flims}'  drapery,  but  whatever  it  was
seemed  dragged  from  me  by  some  invisible  power,  and
the  thing  hteraUy  sank  into  the  fioor  by  my  bedside.
L.  was  in  a  perfect  terror,  and  her  mother,  and  G.  von

i,  T.,  and  another  friend  were  startled  by  the  noise,  and
came  to  see  what  was  the  matter. We  searched  every-


372


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


where,  but  nothing  was  to  be  seen.  I  cannot  account
for  not  feeling  afraid  of  it,  especially  as  afterwards  I
heartily  wished  the  night  were  over.  L.  knew  there  was
a  legend  about  our  room,  and  that  this  ajDparition  was
said  to  come  that  day  once  in  ten  years,  but  she  did
not  beheve  in  it,  and  I  knew  nothing  at  all  of  the  story.
The  people  who  had  hved  in  the  house  before  told  Frau
von  T.  that  they  had  seen  something  twice  in  that  room.
They  had  lived  there  over  20  years  ;  but  Frau  von  T.
had  not  been  there  long  enough  to  test  it  before.  No
one  could  jjossibly  have  got  into  the  room,  as  the  door
was  a  very  noisy  one,  close  to  the  foot  of  my  bed.  We
slept  in  the  room  for  some  time,  both  before  and  after,
but  never  saw  anjrthing  more.  As  my  cousin  and  I
both  saw  the  "  thing,"  I  am  at  a  loss  to  account  for  it,
but  I  should  be  extremely  sorry  to  sleep  in  that  room
that  day  ten  years.  Agnes  McCaskill.

In  another  unrecognised  but  vanishing  case  (G.  230,
Journal,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  22)  the  light  was  somewhat  better
apparently  than  in  those  so  far  described,  but  the  appari-
tion was  seen  out  of  doors  and  at  a  somewhat  greater
distance.  Mr.  Reginald  Barber  writes  :
(G.  230.)

24,  LORNB-GBOVE,  FaLLOWEIELD,  MANCHESTER,

January  2\st,  1891.
In  April  of  last  year,  while  the  hght  was  still  good,  I
was  returning  home  from  a  walk  with  my  wife,  and  when
within  a  few  yards  of  the  gate,  which  opens  into  a  straight
path  leading  to  the  house,  both  my  wife  and  I  saw  a
woman  pass  through  the  open  gate  and  walk  straight  to
the  house,  when,  on  reaching  the  door,  she  disappeared.
I  ran  to  the  door,  opened  it  with  my  latchkey,  and
expected  in  my  astonishment  to  find  her  inside,  for  she
seemed  to  have  walked  through  the  door.  It  all  seemed
so  real  that  I  at  once  searched  the  house,  but  in  vain.
We  were  the  only  two  people  in  the  street,  and  did  not
see  the  figure  until  she  entered  the  gate,  when  we  simul-
taneously exclaimed,  "Who  is  that?"  She  seemed  to
come  out  of  space  and  go  into  space  again  in  a  most


LXXXVI.]


Collective  and  Reciprocal  Cases.


373


marvellous  manner.  She  wore  a  plaid  shawl,  and  her
bonnet  was  a  grey-black  with  a  bit  of  colour  in  it.  We
could  not  remember  hearing  any  sound  as  she  walked,
but  otherwise  we  have  never  seen  anything  more  appar-
ently substantial.  It  is  impossible  for  us  to  conceive  how
she  could  have  disappeared  if  she  had  been  of  flesh  and
blood.

If  only  one  of  us  had  seen  this  figure,  I  should  have
thought  httle  about  it,  as  such  cases  of  hallucination
seem  sufficiently  common,  and  may  be  accounted  for  by
some  physical  or  mental  disturbance  ;  but  the  evidence  in
this  case  points  to  the  existence  of  something  exterior
to  ourselves.

We  are  neither  of  us  behevers  in  ghosts  or  the  like,  but
are  two  ordinary  matter-of-fact  people.

Reginald  Bahber.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Barber  wrote  as  follows  :

Deas  Sir, — I  received  your  letter  this  morning,  and
[wiU]  now  .  .  .  reply  to  your  inquiries.  "  Did  I  or  my
wife  see  the  figure  first  ?  "  My  wife  points  out  that  I
must  have  seen  the  figure  first,  for  she  did  not  see  it
until  it  was  well  inside  the  gate.  "  Was  there  any
expectation  of  a  visit  ?  "  Not  the  least.  "  Give  the
distance  of  the  apparition  when  it  disappeared."  A  few
yards,  I  could  not  say  exactly.  When  I  have  heard  Mrs.
Barber  telling  friends  of  our  experience,  I  have  noticed
that  the  figure  presented  to  her  mind  does  not  seem
to  have  been  exactly  the  same  as  that  which  was  evident
to  my  mind.  That  would  appear  to  support  your  theory
that  no  real  figure  existed.  Again,  Mrs.  Barber  is  sure
she  spoke  first  (though  I  thought  we  spoke  at  once),
and,  as  she  points  out,  I  saw  the  figure  first.  This
shows  that  the  figure  was  not  suggested  by  one  to  the
other  in  any  ordinary  manner.

Mrs.  Barber,  I  trust,  ^vill  send  you  an  account  of  our
experience  while  I  am  from  home.

I  shall  be  glad  to  answer  any  further  questions  if  you
think  the  case  caUs  for  them.  Eeginald  Barber.


374  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part


Mrs.  Barber  T\Tites  :

24,  LoRNE-GEOVB,  Fallowfield ,  January  30th,  1891.

I  shall  be  much  pleased  to  give  you  my  account  of
"  our  ghost."

I  may  begin  by  saying  that  Lorne-grove  is  a  very
quiet  thoroughfare  of  no  great  length.  During  April
last  year  the  road  was  being  paved,  and  consequently
in  a  very  chaotic  state — full  of  loose  stones,  etc.  The
pavement  on  the  opjiosite  side  to  our  house  was  already
laid,  so  on  returning  from  our  walk  on  the  19th  of
that  month  my  husband  and  I  kept  on  that  side  of  the
road  until  we  were  exactly  opposite  our  own  gate.  Up
to  this  time  we  had  seen  no  one  in  the  Grove.

My  husband  now  began  to  cross  the  road,  bidding  me
follow,  and  take  care  not  to  fall  on  the  loose  stones.  I
did  so,  naturally  looldng  down  at  my  feet,  until  a  httle
more  than  half  way  across  the  road,  or  about  6  yards
from  the  gate,  when  on  raising  my  eyes  I  saw  a  grey
figure  walking  up  the  path  to  the  door.  She  was  then
about  a  yard  inside  the  gate,  and  although  she  had
apjoeared  so  mysteriously,  I  felt  no  surprise,  she  looked
so  thoroughly  commonplace  and  substantial.  My  husband
saw  her  enter  the  gate,  so  there  can  be  no  question  as  to
which  of  us  saiu  her  first,  but  I  was  certainly  the  first
to  exclaim:  "Who  is  that?"  although  my  husband's
exclamation  followed  so  quickly  that  they  might  almost
be  considered  simultaneous,  as  indeed  I  beheve  Mr.  Barber
described  them  in  his  letter  to  you.  I  next  said  :  "  Stop
a  moment  and  let  us  see  who  it  is,"  but  he  answered,
"No,  it  is  no  good  letting  her  ring,"  and  hurried  forward
with  his  latchkey.  The  distance  from  the  gate  to  the
door  is  7|  yards,  and  when  I  first  saw  the  figure  I  should
be  about  6  yards  from  the  gate.

My  husband  would  be  at  least  a  couple  of  yards  in
front  of  me,  and  as  he  saw  the  figure  actually  turn  in
at  the  gate  he  had  a  better  view  of  her  shawl  and  bonnet.
I  only  saw  that  she  was  in  grey,  and  that  it  was  no
one  we  knew.  She  walked  quietly  up  the  path  and  then
up  the  two  steps  to  the  door,  and  I  always  fancy  I  saw


LXXXVI.]


Collective  and  Reciprocal  Gases.


375


her  raise  her  hand  as  though  to  ring  the  bell,  but  of  that
I  cannot  be  sure,  and  then  against  the  dark  door  she
vanished  completely,  certainly  not  more  than  4  yards
from  where  my  husband  was  standing.  We  were  expecting
no  visitor,  and  our  thoughts  were  far  away  from  the
supernatural,  for  just  before  crossing  the  road  we  had
been  saying  how  hungry  we  were,  and  how  we  should
enjoy  our  supper.

I  took  special  note  of  the  date  and  hour,  fully  expecting
we  should  hear  of  some  occurrence  which  nearly  con-
cerned us,  but  nothing  has,  so  far,  transpired.

Gertrude  Barber.

Mr.  Barber  wrote  later  :

24,  LORNE-GROVE,  FaJLLOWEIELD ,  MANCHESTER,

February  &h,  1891.

Mrs.  Barber  thinks  the  time  we  saw  the  apparition
would  be  as  nearly  as  possible  seven  o'clock ;  I  merely
remember  it  was  about  sunset.  I  am  sure  it  was  light
enough  to  see  to  read  outside,  and  within  there  was  no
artificial  Hght  burning.  I  remember  searching  the  house
by  dayhght  to  find  the  figure  we  had  seen.  It  was  a
beautiful,  clear,  calm  evening.  We  do  not  know  that
we  have  seen  anything  hallucinatory  before  or  since.  If
we  saw  a  figure  pass  by  in  the  street  hke  the  one  we
have  described,  its  naturalness  would  cause  us  to  make  no
observation.  Mrs.  Barber  says  she  has  often  thought
she  has  seen  a  cat,  though  perhaps  not  with  the  distinct-
ness of  nature.  Suddenly  seeing  an  object  resembling  a
cat  might,  of  course,  provoke  the  illusion.

Mr.  Barber  says  that  he  has  sometimes  experienced  an
auditory  hallucination — namely,  fancjdng  that  his  wife  was
calling  him  by  name  from  another  room  so  distinctly  that  he
rose  to  answer  it,  but  as  he  reached  the  door  fancied  he
heard  her  caUing  him  back  again.  He  has  heard  her  call
him  in  this  way  three  times,  but  has  had  no  other  visual
experience  besides  the  one  described  above.

Mr.  Myers  called  on  Mr.  Barber  on  August  1st,  1891,  and
gives  the  following  account  of  his  interview  :


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgiviclc.


[part


Aiigust  2nd,  1891.

I  saw  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Barber  yesterday,  and  inspected
the  scene  of  the  apparition.  It  is  quite  clear  that  there
was  no  real  person  on  the  step.  When  Mr.  and  ]\Irs.
Barber  tixrned  into  the  street,  a  very  short  and  quiet
one,  no  one  was  visible.  The  figure  appeared  suddenly,
entering  the  gate  through  which  you  pass  over  a  few  yards
of  flagged  walk  and  up  two  steps  to  reach  the  front  door.

The  figure  struck  Mr.  Barber  at  the  time  as  noiseless.
It  is  not  certain  that  the  figure  looked  the  same  to  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Barber.  Mr.  Barber,  who  was  in  front  and  saw
it  best,  noticed  a  check  in  the  shawl.  Mrs.  Barber  did
not  look  carefuUy  at  the  dress,  but  took  it  to  be  grey.
Both  thought  the  woman  a  beggar,  or  something  of  that  kind.

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Barber  have  been  about  seven  years  in
the  house.  No  servant  has  died  there,  nor  did  the  figure
resemble  the  previous  occupant.

Neither  of  them  has  ever  had  any  other  similar  experience.

F.  W.  H.  Myebs.

There  is  one  more  unrecognised  and  vanishing  case
(L.  827,  Journal,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  71),  and  in  it,  it  was  the
vanishing  which  startled  the  percipients  and  first  made
them  think  it  was  not  a  real  man  that  they  were  looking
at.  Certainly  its  vanishing  for  both  of  them  apparently
at  the  same  time  and  at  different  distances  is  difficult  to
reconcile  with  the  hjrpothesis  either  of  some  optical  illusion
or  of  mistaken  identity.  On  the  other  hand,  a  hallucina-
tion which  persists  for  twenty  minutes  and  "  throws  a
good  line  "  would  be  a  very  tmusual  one.  The  case  is
one  where  one  specially  regrets  that  the  interval  between
experience  and  record  was  so  long  as  four  years,  and
wonders  whether  any  error  of  memory  seriously  affecting
the  interpretation  has  crept  in.

Mr.  J.  H.  Wilkie  Ridley,  M.R.C.S.  Eng.,  writes  on
October  12,  1885  :

(L.  827.)

About the middle of September, 1881, between  five
and  six  in  the  evening,  whilst  it  was  quite  Hght,  the  Rev.


LXXXVI.]


Collective  and  Reciprocal  Cases.


■611


J.  Jones,  vicar  of  Dunston,  and  myself  were  fishing  the
North  Tyne,  at  the  junction  of  Blindburn  with  the  Tyne,
from  a  bank  of  shingle,  in  length  about  80  yards  and
about  10  wide,  sloping  from  a  grass  field  to  the  margin
of  the  river,  with  neither  trees  nor  bush  in  the  immediate
vicinity,  and  after  fishing  for  a  short  time  Mr.  Jones
came  up  to  me  to  ask  for  a  match  for  the  purpose  of
lighting  his  pipe.  As  we  were  thus  standing  together
Ughting  our  pipes  from  the  same  match,  I  said  to  him,
"  Do  you  see  that  man  fishing  down  there  ?  "  He  rc-
phed,  "  I  have  had  my  eye  upon  him  for  the  last  20
minutes,  and  as  it  may  be  Major-General  Allgood,  I
think  I  had  better  go  down  and  apologise  to  him  lor
the  hberty  we  are  taking,  as  I  have  not  yet  been  once
to  see  him  this  year  to  ask  his  permission  to  fish."

Accordingly  Mr.  Jones  left  me  for  this  purpose,  and
when  he  came  mthin  15  or  20  yards  of  the  supposed
fisher,  the  figure  suddenly  disappeared  and  seemed  to
pass  away  into  nothing,  whilst  we  were  both  looking  on.
Mr.  Jones  then  turned  round  and  looked  towards  me,  but
did  not  speak  until  I  advanced  to  A\ithin  a  few  paces  of
him,  when  he  said,  "  Ridley,  I  hope  nothing  has  happened
at  home." We  at  once  proceeded  to  take  down  our  rods.

Any  one  visiting  the  spot  would  at  once  see  that  no
human  being  would  be  able  to  get  away  without  being
seen  by  us.  Let  me  now  describe  the  figure,  as  it
appeared  to  us.  Ifc  was  dressed  ^^dth  felt  hat,  dark
pilot  jacket,  light  drab  fishing  stockings,  laced  boots.
We  never  saw  the  face.  The  rod  was  a  full-sized  salmon
rod,  painted  black,  large  brass  reel.  He  was  throwing  from
over  the  right  shoulder.  Mr.  Jones  remarked  that  he
was  throwing  a  good  hne.  I  might  add  that  Ave  left  a
Mr.  Bartlett  at  our  lodgings  that  evening  before  going
out  to  fish,  and  it  would  appear  that  during  our  absence
he  had  fallen  asleep,  as  he  informed  us  on  our  return.
When  questioned  what  he  had  been  doing,  he  (to  the
best of my recollection) replied he had been  sleeping.

John  Jones  (Vicar  of  Dunston,  Durham).
J.  H.  WiLKiE  Ridley,  M.R.C.S.  Eng.,

6,  CoUingwood  Terrace,  Gateshead.


378


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


[In  an  earlier,  but  second-hand  account  of  the  incident
sent  by  Mr.  Hartig  of  Gateshead,  it  was  stated  that  the  dress
and  rod  of  the  figure  seen  resembled  those  of  Mr.  Bartlett,
who  had  been  fishing  with  the  percipients  ear  her  in  the  day.]

§  3. Collective  Visual  Hallucinations  recognised.

In  the  collective  visual  cases  that  remain  to  be  described
the  apparition  was  recognised.  In  the  first  two  it  also
vanished  for  at  least  one  percipient.  In  the  first  (G.  275,
Journal,  Vol.  XI.,  p.  185)  the  recognised  apparition  was
that  of  a  dead  person.  We  received  it  through  the  Rev.
A.  Holborn,  who  knew  both  the  percipients.  The  account,
dated  Dec.  9,  1903,  printed  below  was  written  by  one  of
them  and  signed  by  both.  Their  names  and  the  address
of  the  narrator  were  given  fully,  but  with  a  request  that
they  should  not  be  printed.  The  second  percipient  pre-
ferred not  to  write  an  independent  account.

(G.  275.)

The  account  runs  :

A  little  friend  of  ours,  H.  G.,  had  been  ill  a  long  time.
His  mother,  who  was  my  greatest  friend,  had  nursed  her
boy  with  infinite  care,  and  during  her  short  last  ilhiess
was  full  of  solicitude  for  hun.

After  her  death  he  seemed  to  become  stronger  for  a
time,  but  again  grew  very  ill,  and  needed  the  most
constant  care,  his  eldest  sister  watching  over  him  a,s  the
mother  had  done.  As  I  was  on  the  most  intimate  terms
with  the  family,  I  saw  a  great  deal  of  the  invalid.

On  Simday  evening,  June  28th,  1903,  about  9  o'clock,
I  and  the  sister  were  standiiag  at  the  foot  of  the  bed,
Avatching  the  sick  one,  who  was  unconscious,  when  suddenly
I  saw  the  mother  distinctly.  She  was  in  her  ordinary
dress  as  when  mth  us,  nothing  supernatural  in  her  appear-  i
ance.  She  w^as  bending  over  her  boy  with  a  look  of
infinite  love  and  longing  and  did  not  seem  to  notice  us.
After  a  minute  or  tM'o  she  quietly  and  suddenly  was  not
there. I  was  so  struck  that  I  turned  to  speak  to  the  i


^1


LXXXVI.]


Collective  and  Reciprocal  Cases.


379


sister,  but  she  seemed  so  engrossed  that  I  did  not  think
it  wise  to  say  anything.

The  httle  patient  grew  gradually  worse,  iintil  on  Tuesday
evening,  June  30th,  I  was  summoned  to  go  at  once.
When  I  arrived  at  the  house  he  had  passed  away.  After
rendering  the  last  offices  of  love  to  the  dear  httle  bodj',
the  sister  and  I  agam  stood,  as  on  the  Sunday,  when  I

said, "  M  , I had a strange experience on  Sunday

evening  here."  She  quickly  rephed,  "  Yes,  mother  was
here  ;  I  saw  her."  The  young  girl  is  not  given  to
fancies  at  all,  and  must  have  been  impressed  as  I  was.

The  next  case  (L.  1169,  Journal,  Vol.  XIII.,  p.  210)
came  to  us  through  the  American  Branch,  from  a  member
of  it  of  some  years'  standing.  Mr.  E.  (one  of  the  per-
cipients) and  Mr.  R.  (whose  apparition  was  seen)  had
worked  in  the  same  office  with  him  for  a  number  of
years.  After  telling  us  a  little  about  tliem  in  a  letter
dated  December  7,  1900,  he  goes  on  :

(L.  1169.)

Mr.  R.  told  me  of  his  appearance  to  Mr.  and  IMrs.  E.
the  morning  after  the  occurrence,  having  heard  it  from
Mr.  E.  At  that  time  Mr.  and  Mrs.  E.  were  averse  to
giving  me  any  statement,  and  I  have  only  recently  over-
come their  scruples.  I  can  add  that  the  story  has  not
growii  any  since  it  was  first  told  me. — Sincerely  yours,
L.  T.

Mr.  E.  writes  :

Dec.  m.  1900.

About  two  years  ago,  one  Sunday  afternoon,  I  was
sitting  with  my  wife  in  the  back  parlour  of  the  flat  we
then  occupied.  At  that  time  Mr.  T.  R.  often  spent  his
Sunday  afternoons  with  us.  We  had  spoken  of  him  on
this  occasion,  and  of  the  probabihty  of  his  caUing,  but
were  not  siaecially  expecting  him  or  thinking  of  him.
Happening  suddenh^  to  look  up  I  saw  Mr.  R.  standing
in  the  front  parlour,  just  within  the  door  leading  to  the
passage. I  wondered  how  he  had  got  in  without  ringing


380


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


and  without  being  heard,  but  the  image  was  so  hfehke
that  I  did  not  for  an  instant  suspect  a  hallucination,
and  exclaiming  "There  is  T.  now,"  I  arose  and  went
to  meet  him.  The  figure  persisted  until  I  almost  reached
it  and  then  instantly  vanished.  At  my  exclamation  my
wife  also  looked  and  distinctly  saw  and  recognised  the
figure  and  also  saw  its  sudden  disa^^pearance.  Mrs.  E.
signs  this  statement  in  confirmation,  and  in  case  of
publication  we  request  that  our  names  be  withheld.

S.  P.  E.

J.  E.  E.

Mr.  E.  told  me  the  foregoing  circumstance  the  day
after  its  occurrence,  while  the  events  of  the  evening  were
fresh  in  my  mind.  I  can  therefore  say  positively  that  i
I  was  asleej)  at  the  time  of  the  occurrence,  and  have  no
recollection  of  dreaming  of  Mr.  or  Mxs.  E.  I  have  been
seen  "  in  the  double  "  on  other  occasions,  but  I  camiot  .
put  them  on  an  evidential  basis.  T.  R.

There  can  be  no  doubt,  I  think,  that  the  experience  in
this case  was  a  collective hallucination, but  it and  the
two  I  shall  next  quote  are  those  in  the  collection  which
are  most  open  to  the  suspicion  that  the  experience  of  the
second  percipient was due  to verbal  suggestion,  because
the  exclamation  of  the  first  was  just  what  might  have
produced  the  appearance  seen  if  verbal  suggestion  could
do  so. In  the  next  two,  moreover,  the  certainty  is  not
so  great  as  in  the  one  just  quoted  that  it  was  a  case  of
hallucination. The  characteristics  by  which  the  figure  was
recognised  were,  however,  in  both  cases  well  marked  and
the  light  was  good,  and  what  was  seen  was  certainly  not
the  person  or  animal  it  was  taken  for. Mistaken  identity
seems  therefore  the  only  possible  alternative  to  hallucina-  <
tion,  and  in  both  cases  it  is  not  an  easy  one  to  accept. ;
In  the  first  (G.  286,  Journal,  Vol.  XV.,  p.  249)  the  appari- 1
tion,  if  it  was  one,  was  of  a  cat. The  case  was  sent  to  ^
us  on  March  4th,  1912,  by  an  Associate  of  the  Society,  tO;
whom  the  principal  witnesses  are  personally  known.  The
names and  addresses of all  those concerned have  been
given,  to  us,  but  since  allusion  is  made  below  to  matters


Lxxxvi.]  Collective  and  Reciprocal  Cases.  381

of  private  family  history,  pseudonyms  are  used  here.  It
will  be  observed  that  the  case  was  recorded  within  a
week  of  its  occurrence.

(G.  286.)

July  \2th,  1909.

My  sister,  H.  L.  "  Green,"  had  a  very  favourite  cat
called  Smoky,  a  ]3ure-bred  blue  Persian  of  peculiar  shade
and  small.  There  was  no  other  cat  in  the  village  in  the
least  like  her.  This  spring  she  became  ill,  and  died  about
the  middle  of  June,  1909.  The  gardener  buried  her,  and
planted  a  dahha  over  her  grave.  Shortly  before  Smoky
died  she  had  been  worried  by  a  dog,  and  had  her  ribs
broken,  so  that  she  walked  quite  lame.  This  injury  was
the  final  cause  of  her  death.

On  Tuesday,  July  6th,  1909,  my  sister  and  I  were  at
breakfast,  and  I  was  reading  a  letter  aloud  to  her.  I
was  sittmg  with  my  back  to  the  window,  which  was  on
my  sister's  left.  Suddenly  I  saw  her  looking  absolutely
scared,  and  gazing  out  of  the  -window.  I  said,  "  What
is  the  matter?"  and  she  said,  "There's  Smoky,  walking
across  the  grass  !  "  We  both  rushed  to  the  window,  and
saw  Smoky,  looking  very  ill,  her  coat  rough  and  staring,
and  walking  lamely  across  the  grass  in  front  of  the
window,  three  or  four  yards  from  it.  My  sister  called
her,  and  as  she  took  no  notice,  she  ran  out  after  her,
calling  her.  I  remained  at  the  wndow,  and  saw  the
cat  turn  down  a  path  leading  to  the  end  of  the  garden.
My  sister  ran  after  her,  callmg  her,  but  to  her  surprise.
Smoky  did  not  turn  nor  take  any  notice,  and  she  lost
sight  of  her  among  the  shrubs.  About  ten  minutes
afterwards,  my  sister  and  a  friend  living  with  us  saw
Smoky  again,  going  through  a  hedge  in  front  of  the
window.  My  sister  again  went  out  after  her,  but  could
not  find  her.  She  was  next  seen  about  half-an-hour
afterwards  by  the  servant,  in  the  Idtchen  passage.  She
ran  to  get  her  some  milk  and  followed  her  with  it,  but
the  cat  walked  away,  and  from  that  moment  she  dis-
appeared completely.  We  made  every  enquiry  of  the
neighbours,  but  no  one  had  seen  her,  or  any  cat  Hlic  her.


382


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


Of  course  we  tliought  there  had  been  some  mistake  about
her  death,  though  our  friend,  the  gardener,  and  the  boy
had  all  seen  her  dead.  The  gardener  was  so  indignant
at  the  supj)osition  that  he  had  not  buried  the  cat,  that
he  went  to  the  grave,  took  up  the  plant,  and  dug  up
the  body  of  Smoky.

We  are  quite  mystified  at  the  occurrence,  which  was
witnessed  by  four  people,  namely  B.  J.  Green,  H.  L.
Green, IVIiss Smith, and Kathleen B. (servant).  When

last  seen  the  cat  was  walking  towards House,  next

door, where she had lived all the winter and  spring.

But  when  my  sister  went  over  there,  the  people  at

House  had  seen  nothing  of  her.  When  my  sister  first
ran  out  after  her,  the  cat  ran  away  in  front  of  her,
moving  fast,  but  on  one  side,  as  she  did  before  she  died.

B.  J.  [Green].

The  account  is  also  signed  by  jVIiss  H.  L.  Green  and  Miss
D.  W.  Smith.  Miss  B.  J.  Green  says  in  a  letter  :  "  We
did  not  ask  the  httle  maid  to  sign  it,  as  we  did  not  wish
her  to  dwell  on  the  occurrence.'"

The  pecuhar  apjoearance  of  the  cat  and  the  nature  of  the
surroundings  in  which  it  was  seen  make  it  improbable  that  in
a  small  country  place  a  real  animal  could  have  escaped  all
previous  and  subsequent  observation.  In  reply  to  our  enquiries
Miss  Green  writes  :

March  Qth,  1912.

Our  garden  is  a  fairly  large  one,  over  half  an  acre,
and  is  entirely  surrounded  by  a  wall.  The  high  road
runs  on  two  sides  of  it,  and  on  the  other  sides  are  our
own  house  and  two  houses  with  gardens,  both  belonging
to  relations.  Neither  of  these  houses  had  any  cat  in
the  least  like  ours,  nor  had  the  peoj)le  seen  one  in  their
gardens.  There  is  a  "  spinney  "  about  100  yards  uja  the
road,  but  none  nearer,  and  each  time  the  cat  was  seen  it
was  going  in  the  opposite  direction  to  this  wood — once
towards  the  end  of  our  own  garden,  where  it  seemed  to
go  into  a  beech  hedge  which  screens  the  stable,  etc.
(My  sister  examined  all  this  part,  but  could  see  nothing.)
The  last  time,  it  was  going  towards  the  wall  separating


LXXXVI.]


Collective  and  Reciprocal  Cases.


383


oiu"  garden  from  that  of House  (my  cousin's  house,

in  which  my  sister  had  lived  for  nine  months  wdiile  the
owners  were  away ;  they  had  lately  returned  to  it).  It
did  not  jump  upon  the  wall,  but  seemed  to  disappear  as
it  got  near  it.  A  tree  on  the  other  side  of  the  wall
shades  this  part  of  the  garden.  .  .  .

When  I  saw  it,  I  was  at  a  large  window,  which  reaches
\^dthin  half  a  foot  of  the  floor.  Outside  is  a  verandah,
with  glass  tiles,  about  two  yards  in  width ;  beyond  this
a  grass-plot  with  flower-beds.  When  my  sister  and  I
saw  the  cat,  she  was  on  the  grass,  just  beyond  the
verandah,  in  full  sight  from  the  window.  I  stood  at
the  window,  while  my  sister  ran  out  after  her,  and  I
saw  the  cat  wallc  slowly  across  the  grass  towards  a  path
which  bounds  the  grass-plot.  My  sister  says  she  ran
clown  this  path,  but  I  could  not  see  this,  as  a  holly-
hedge  hid  the  path  from  me.

I  may  add  that  I  have  never  in  my  life  seen  anything
supernormal,  nor  had  our  friend,  Mss  Smith ;  but  my
sister  has  twice  seen  curious  "  visions  "  or  apparitions,
though  she  is  the  most  practical,  "  common-sense,"  person
imaginable.  Our  father  was  Scotch  (Galloway),  our  mother
Enghsh.

I  have  wondered  sometimes  whether  my  sister's  sight
of  the  cat  could  have  been  conveyed  to  the  other  jier-
cipients  telepathically,  so  that  they  saw  what  was  present
to  her  vision.

The  interest  of  the  case  seems  to  make  it  worth  giving
a  further  account  of  her  sister's  visions  which  Miss  B.  J.
Green  was  kind  enough  to  send.

March  IZih,  1912.
In  reply  to  your  enquiry  about  my  sister's  experiences,
I  will  write  dovm  (from  her  dictation)  exactly  Avhat  they
were.

As  a  young  girl  of  eighteen  to  twenty  she  spent  two

or  three  years  with  cousins  at  C  . [The]  house  was

supposed  to  be  haunted  by  an  old  lady,  but  nothing  was
said  to  my  sister  about  this,  and  it  was  only  after  her
experience  that  she  was  told  of  the  supposed  haunting.


384


Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.


[part


My  sister  was  in  the  habit  of  sitting  up  late  in  her
room,  studying  or  reading.  One  night  when  she  was
doing  so,  she  heard,  as  she  thought,  her  cousin  coming
along  the  passage  to  her  door,  which  was  open.  She
liastily  blew  out  her  hght  and  kept  quiet,  fully  expecting
a  scolding !  But  the  steps  returned  down  the  passage
again.  Next  morning  she  said  laughingly  to  her  cousin,
"  You  nearly  caught  me  last  night ;  I  suppose  you  saw
me  blow  out  my  hght."  Her  cousin  said,  "  I  never
came  down  your  passage  at  all  "  ;  but  made  no  further
remark,  and  my  sister  supposed  it  must  have  been  a
servant,  but,  feehng  a  little  nervous,  she  took  care  to  go
to  bed  in  good  time.  Some  time  afterwards  she  woke
up  with  the  feehng  of  a  "  presence  "  in  the  room,  and,
looldng  up,  saw  a  figure  bending  over  her.  She  was
really  alarmed,  and  hid  her  face  in  the  bed-clothes.  When
she  looked  up  the  figure  was  gone.  This  time  my  sister
was  both  alarmed  and  angry,  and  at  breakfast  next
morning  she  told  the  story,  and  said  she  was  going  to
qi;estion  the  nurse  and  other  servants  about  it.  Then
our  cousin  begged  her  not  to  do  so,  and  told  her  that
the  house  was  said  to  be  haunted,  and  that  queer  things
had  often  been  heard  there.  After  this  my  sister  locked
her  door ;  but  she  was  a  very  sensible,  non-imaginative
girl,  and  she  heard  nothing  further  of  the  "  ghost."  At
the  end  of  two  or  three  years  she  came  home,  and  did

not  visit  C again  for  several  years. Then  she  stayed

in  the  same  house,  but  on  the  lower  floor,  and  though
she  remembered  the  story,  and  half  expected  to  see  the
old  lady,  she  saw  and  heard  nothing  whatever.

The  third  time  she  stayed  there  she  had  a  very  curious
experience.  This  was  two  years  later.  She  slept  on  the
upper  floor,  but  in  a  different  room,  and  as  she  had  seen
nothing  on  her  last  visit,  she  expected  no  apparition  at
all.  One  night  she  woke  up  quite  suddenly.  She  looked
up,  and  there,  over  her  shoulder,  against  the  wall,  was
a  man's  head — the  head  only.  It  was  quite  clearly  seen,
as  if  it  were  hghted  in  some  way,  though  the  room  was
dark.  It  was  a  young  face,  with  short  beard,  and  very
sad eyes, as if they had tears in them. She  Avas  so


LXXXVI.]


Collective  and  Beciprocal  Cases.


385


startled  that  she  called  out  "  Go  away,  go  away !  "  and
hid  her  face  for  a  moment.  When  she  looked  up  the
face  was  gone.

She  has  always  said,  since,  that  she  is  very  sorry  she
was  not  brave  enough  to  speak  to  the  apparition.

Her  next  (and  last)  experience  was,  I  think,  the  most
curious  of  all.

She  went,  a  year  or  two  later,  to  stay  with  a  married

half-sister near B who was in very great  trouble

and  in  some  personal  danger.  After  staying  with  her
about  a  month  my  sister  was  anxious  to  come  home,  and
had  almost  decided  to  do  so.  Early  one  morning  (it
was  getting  quite  light  enough  to  see  plainly)  she  woke
up  with  the  same  sensation  of  a  "  presence,"  and  saw
kneehng  by  her  bedside,  with  eyes  fixed  on  her  with  an
entreating  expression  and  hands  clasped,  a  woman's  figure.
She  recognised  the  hkeness  in  the  face,  partly  to  a  picture
of  my  half-sister"s  own  mother  (which  hung  in  another
half-sister's  house),  and  partly  to  my  eldest  half-sister
(not  the  one  she  was  staying  with).  She  felt  quite
certam,  in  a  sort  of  flash,  she  says,  that  it  was  my
half-sister's  own  mother  who  was  there,  and  asking  her  to
remain  with  her  daughter.  The  figure  disapj^eared  almost
directly  (my  sister  thinks  she  started  up,  or  put  her  hands
up,  she  is  not  quite  sure  which),  and  it  just  went.  Bat
she  took  it  as  a  real  request,  and  stayed  on  as  long  as
she  was  needed.  (The  reason  she  thought  of  leaving  was
because  her  presence  did  not  seem  to  benefit  my  half-
sister  as  she  had  hoped.)

These  are  all  the  things  she  has  seen.  But  please
do  not  imagine  that  she  is  hysterical  or  nervous.  She
is  a  trained  nurse,  very  accurate,  and  particularly  calm
and  quiet  in  manner.  She  is  the  only  one  of  our  family
who  has  "  seen  anything  "  (except  for  my  share  in
"  Smoky's  "  apparition),  and  I  think  any  one  who  knew
her  would  say  that  she  was  a  most  unlikely  "  ghost
seer."  But  she  is  a  person  of  strong  will  and  has  much
influence  over  others,  and  it  was  this  quality  which  made
me  think  that  my  vision  of  "  Smoky  "  might  have  been
telepathic  from  hers.


386  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.  [part

My  father's  first  wife  died  more  than  two  years  before
he  married  again,  and  about  six  j^cars  before  my  sister
was  born.  B.  J.  [Gkeen].

I  have  read  over  this  account  and  can  vouch  for  its
accuracy.  Helen  L.  [Green].

In  a  subsequent  letter  Miss  B.  J.  Green  writes  :

March  29th,  1912.
There  is  one  more  observation  I  should  hke  to  make
re  the  "  Smoky  "  story.  My  sister  is  not  sentimental
about  animals,  and  though  very  sorry  for  the  cause  of
Smoky's  death,  she  was  rather  reheved  when  the  suffering
was  ended,  as  she  knew  the  cat  could  not  recover  from
her  injuries.  She  had  certainly  not  fretted  over  her
death.  I  note  this  lest  any  one  reading  the  account
should  imagine  that  }ny  sister  was  in  any  hysterical  grief
over  the  cat's  death.


Miss  H.  L.  Green's  earlier  experiences,  whether  subjective  in
origin  or  not,  add  to  the  probability  that  her  vision  of  the  cat
was  hallucinatory,  since  they  show  that  she  is  subject  to  vivid
visual  hallucinations. It  should  be  noted  that  she  was  the
first  person  to  see  the  "  apparition  "  of  the  cat. The  three
subsequent  percipients  all  laiew,  when  they  saw  the  cat,  that
it  had  been  seen  by  her. The  same  explanation  does  not
necessarily  apply  to  each  of  the  three  appearances  of  the  cat.
The  hypothesis  that  what  was  seen  was  a  real  cat  mistaken
for  Smoky  is  most  plausible  in  regard  to  the  servant  and  least
plausible  in  regard  to  the  Misses  Green  ; inversely,  the  evid-
ence  for collective hallucination and suggestion is in  their
case strongest. It is difficult to think that two  persons,
having  good  normal eyesight, could be completely  mistaken
as to the identity of an animal  presenting several  marked
peculiarities,  with  which  they  were  perfectly  famihar  and  which
they  had  on  this  occasion  an  excellent  opportunity  of  observing.
On  the  other  hand  it  may  well  be  that  Miss  H.  L.  Green,
having  experienced,  as  on  previous  occasions,  a  vivid  subjective
hallucination,  was  able  to  convey  it  to  her  sister. The  case


Lxxxvi.]  Collective  and  Reciprocal  Cases.  387


gains  much  in  value  from  the  fact  that  those  concerned  are
thoroughly  competent  observers,  as  may  be  judged  from
their  reports.

It  is  worth  while  comparing  this  case  with  another
collective  apparition  of  a  cat  published  in  the  "  Eeport  of
the  Census  of  Hallucinations,"  Proceedings,  Vol.  X.,  p.  305,
and  also  in  Podmore's  book.  It  was  collected  for  us  by
Dr.  F.  C.  S.  Schiller.  In  that  case  a  white  cat  was
seen  by  two  ladies  together  on  two  different  occasions,
and  each  time  it  vanished  before  their  eyes.  The  account
was  not,  however,  written  till  about  five  and  six  years
respectively  after  the  occurrences.

The  next  case  (L.  959,  Joiirnal,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  131),
obtained  through  the  kindness  of  Mrs.  Shield,  relates  to
apparitions  of  the  Rev.  H.  Hasted  of  Pitsea  Rectory,
Essex,  which  were  seen  by  several  different  percipients,  in
two  instances  collectively.  The  first  account  is  given  by
two  of  Mr.  Hasted's  servants.

(L.  959.)

Pitsea  Rectory,
March  llth,  10.40  a.m..  [1892].
Yesterday, at half-past eleven, N., the  rat-catcher
came  to  see  master, who  was  out. We  looked  at  the

I clock  to  tell  N.  when  we  thought  he  could  see  master,

'  who  had  ordered  luncheon  at  12.15.  We  Avere  both
outside  the  door  when  N.  came.  He  was  in  a  cart  and
had  with  him  two  dogs.  He  drove  on,  and  Mrs.  Watts,
looking  down  the  road,  said,  "  Here  comes  the  master  !  "
Then  I  saw  him  too,  his  dog  with  him. N.  had  just  got

; below  the  front  gate. We  watched  to  see  them  nieet ;

'i  wondered  why  N.  did  not  stop  to  speak,  as  he  Avanted
to  see  master.  He  drove  right  on.  About  that  time  Ave
lost  master ;  couldn't  think  where  he  Avas,  but  fancied
he  must  have  gone  to  Wilson's  house.  Wilson  himself
Avas  standing  loAver  doAvn,  Avhere  the  roads  meet.  We
stiU  Avatched,  and  Avhen  we  couldn't  see  him  (master)
come  out  we  A\ent  indoors.


388


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwiclc.


[part


When  Mr.  Hasted  came  home  T  wasn't  going  to  say
anything,  but  Mrs.  Watts  asked  if  he  had  seen  N.,  who
wanted  to  tell  him  about  a  pupjiy.  He  said  he  had
been  at  Mr.  Williams's,  and  all  the  story  came  out.

Eliza  Smali,bone.

Jane  Watts.

Mrs.  Shield  writes  :

March.  \m,  10  jhrn.
This  forenoon  for  upwards  of  an  hour,  Mr.  Hasted
was  here  [at  Mr.  Williams's]  and  I  think  it  was  from
eleven  to  past  twelve.  He  Avas  witing  and  conversing.
...  Of  all  people  in  the  world  one  Avould  think  these
old  servants  are  the  very  least  likely  to  make  a  mistake,
and  the  road  is  straight  and  not  long,  nor  is  it  much
frequented.

After  maldng  inquiries  the  next  day,  Mrs,  Shield  wrote
further  ;

Mrs. Watts, the cook-housekeeper,  was not at  home.

Eliza  thought  it  quite  impossible  they  could  make  a
mistake  as  to  the  person  they  saw,  and  everyone  here
says  the  same.  No  one  would  expect  to  see  him  Avithout
his  dog,  but,  in  fact,  the  dog  AA^as  here  with  him.

I  omit  the  accounts  of  Mr.  Hasted's  other  appearances,
as  one  is  remote  and  the  other  at  second  hand,  and  aa^U
only  remark  that  there  are  cases  of  different  percipients
having  at  different  times  hallucinations  representing  the
same  person,  see  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  Chap.  XIV.,
§  5,  and  Human  Personality,  Vol.  I.,  pp.  263  and  4.
I  myself  visited  sites  of  these  appearances  of  Mr.  Hasted
and  saw  the  witnesses  of  two  of  them. I  wrote  :

April  4:th,  1892.
I  have  to-day  seen  Mr.  Hasted  and  the  site  of  three
of  his  appearances,  as  well  as  Miss  Florence  Williams,
who  Avas  one  of  the  percipients  on  the  first  occasion,
and  Mr.  Hasted's  two  servants  who  were  the  percipients
on  the  last  occasion — last  month.


LXXXVI.]


Collective  and  Reciprocal  Cases.


389


The appearance to Miss does not  appear  to  me

to  come  to  very  much,  on  account  of  distance  and  shnibs,
which  must  have  obstructed  the  view  not  a  httle.  Miss
— ■ —  is  said,  however,  to  have  recognised  the  liorse — •
a  hght-coloured  one,  unUke  any  others  in  the  neigh-
bourhood.

The  apj)earanco  to  the  servants,  thongli  oat-of-doors
and  at  a  considerable  distance,  is  certainly  remarkable.
They  stood  at  the  back  door  of  the  house,  looking  down
the  lane  after  the  rat-catcher.  The  lane  is  perfectly
straight  and  open,  and,  say,  100  yards  long  or  150,  to
where  it  joins  another  road  at  right  angles.  At  the  end
of  this  lane  the  cook  saw  Mr.  Hasted  and  his  dog  coming
towards  the  house,  and  almost  before  she  called  her
fellow-servant's  attention  to  him  the  latter  saw  him  too.
They  saw  him  pass  the  groom's  (Wilson's)  cottage,  which
is  near  the  end  of  the  lane,  and  anticipated  his  meeting
the  rat-catcher  and  the  latter  stopping  to  sj)eak  to  him.
The  rat-catcher's  cart  presently  hid  him  from  view,  and
when  he  should  have  appeared  on  their  side  of  the
cart  he  was  gone.  They  were  surprised,  but  supposed
he  must  have  turned  and  gone  into  Wilson's  cottage,
and  thought  no  more  of  it.  Wilson,  however  (whom  I
also  saw),  was  standing  all  the  time  at  the  end  of  the
lane,  and  he  is  quite  positive  that  there  was  no  one
whatever  in  the  lane  at  the  time  except  the  rat-catcher.
Mr.  Hasted's  peculiar  way  of  walking  and  swinging  his
stick  was  noticed.  His  dog  is  a  brown  and  white  spaniel,
and  there  is  no  other  like  it  in  the  neighbourhood  excei)t
one  kept  tied  up.  The  servants  say  they  noticed  this
dog  and  the  rat-catcher's  two  dogs  all  at  the  same  time.
They  struck  me  as  good  witnesses.  It  is  certain  that
it  could  not  have  been  Mr.  Hasted  himself  because  the
servants  had  noticed  the  time  just  before  (11.35)  in  order
to  teU  the  rat-catcher  when  they  thought  their  master
would  be  in,  and  at  that  time  Mr.  Hasted  was  with  Miss
F.  Williams  and  Mrs.  Shield  at  Bowers  Gifford,  and  they
also  noted  the  time.  Mr.  Hasted  Avas  hurrying  through
some  work,  wondering  whether  he  should  get  it  done  in
time  to  go  home  for  lunch  at  12.15.


390


Mrs.  Hennj  Sidgwick.


[part


When  Miss  F.  Williams  and  her  sister  (as  children)
saw  him,  he  was  also  coming  along  a  straight  road,  the
approach  to  the  Rectory,  towards  them.  They  watched
him  through  some  bushes  as  he  approached.  When  he
got  up  to  the  garden  gate,  they  withdrew  more  behind
the  bushes  that  he  might  not  see  them,  but  neither  he
nor  anyone  else  passed.  The  way  to  the  back  door
leads  off  from  the  garden  gate,  and  it  seems  just  possible
that  the  person  they  saw  was  not  Mr.  Hasted  and  was
someone  who  went  to  the  back  door.  Their  recognition
of  Mi.  Hasted  was,  however,  very  distinct.  They  do  not
remember  hearing  any  steps  going  towards  the  back  door  ;
they  believe  that  they  asked,  and  found  that  no  one  had
gone  there. It  was  a  good  many  years  ago.

Mr.  Hasted  was  also,  Ave  were  told,  supposed  to  have
been  seen  on  the  beach  at  Bournemouth  by  a  lady  friend
lately,  when  he  was  not  at  Bournemouth  at  all.

In  the  next  case  (L.  828,  Journal,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  72)  the
hallucination,  if  it  was  one,  was  very  unusual  in  character,
and  though  mistaken  identity  is  also  a  hypothesis  difficult
to  maintain,  I  think  it  is  the  easier  of  the  two.  Mr.
Maclclison  writes  from  Sunderland,  Feb.  6th,  1888  :

(L.  828.)

On  the  night  of  December  3rd,  1887  (Saturday),  I  was
serving  customers  in  the  bar,  together  with  my  daughter.
About  a  quarter  past  nine  (as  near  as  I  can  remember)
I  saw  William  Frazer  standing  at  the  private  door  of  the
bar  that  leads  into  the  house.  He  said,  "  Well,  how  are
you,  old  man  ?  "  I  rejjlied,  "  Hallo  !  is  that  you,  Frazer
— long  looked  for,  come  at  last."  My  daughter,  who  was
standing  near  me,  behind  the  counter,  turned  round  and
saw  him  also,  for  she  called  out,  "  Good  gracious  !
Wonders  never  cease."  I  had  a  tray  of  glasses  in  my
hand  at  the  time  which  I  was  just  about  to  carry  upstairs,
so  I  came  to  the  door  beside  Frazer,  took  him  along  to
the  smoke-room,  and  saw  him  enter.  As  he  stood  just
within  the  room,  Avith  his  back  almost  turned  to  me,  I
said,  "  Content  yourself  there. I'U  be  down  in  a  minute."


Lxxxvi.]  Collective  and  Reciprocal  Cases.


391


While  saying  this  I  remember  distinctly  I  stood  with  my
foot  on  the  bottom  step  of  the  stair.  I  also  remember
that  as  I  passed  the  smoke-room  door  I  saw  a  stranger
seated  in  an  armchair  near  the  fire.  I  took  the  glasses
upstairs,  and  returned  in  about  a  minute  and  a-half ;
but  on  entering  the  smoke-room  I  found  neither  Frazer
nor  the  stranger  there.  I  thought  Frazer  must  be  hiding
somewhere,  as  he  was  always  full  of  fun  and  "  up  to
larks,"  so  I  searched  all  over  the  house  for  him,  also
over  the  yard  and  outhouses,  as  I  thought  he  might  have
shpped  out  there  while  I  was  upstairs.  I  concluded  he
must  have  gone  home,  and  world  doubtless  return  the
next  day  (Sunday)  to  settle  up.  I  should  explain  that
the  "  Engineers'  Friendly  Society  "  meets  at  my  housa.
Frazer  is  a  member,  and  before  going  on  his  last  voyage
he  had  asked  me  to  keep  his  subscriptions  paid  up  while
he  was  away.  This  I  had  done,  so  that  when  I  saw  him
at  the  bar-door,  I  naturally  concluded  he  had  called  to
settle  with  me  about  his  society's  affairs.  He  did  not
call  on  the  Sunday,  and  some  days  later  we  saw  the
Collingwood  ss.  (Frazer's  vessel)  reported  in  the  newspapers
as  arriving  at  Antwerp.  When  Frazer  appeared,  he  was
dressed  much  as  usual,  with  the  exception  of  his  hat.
He  carried  a  black  leather  bag.  He  looked  tired  and
dejected,  and  he  did  not  look  me  straight  in  the  face.

On  the  night  of  December  19th  (Monday)  Frazer  did
actually  call  upon  us.  We  told  him  of  our  strange
experience.  He  told  us  that  on  the  night  of  the  3rd  the
Collingwood  ss.  sailed  from  Gibraltar  for  Antwerp.  He
didn't  say  what  he  was  doing  at  a  quarter  past  nine —
in  fact,  he  laughed  at  the  whole  affair.  They  had  had
some  very  rough  weather  on  the  voyage,  hence  their
detention.  I  settled  up  with  him  in  connection  with  the
Friendly  Society,  then  we  walked  out  together.  He  was
not  so  hvely  as  usual ;  he  didn't  feel  much  inchned  to
go  to  sea  again  at  once — he  thought  he  was  entitled  to
"a  bit  holiday."  He  asked  my  advice  about  it;  I
didn't  advise  him  either  one  way  or  the  other,  l)ut  left
it  to  himself  to  decide.  I  regret  now  that  I  didn't
advise  him  to  remain  ashore,  for  the  next  da\'  ho  sailed

2b


392


Mrs.  Henry  SidgioicJc.


[part


for  Savona  in  the  CoUingwood,  from  the  Tyne  (owners,
C.  TuUy  and  Co.).  His  vessel  has  not  been  heard  of
since  leaving  Gibraltar  ;  she  is  now  fully  a  month  overdue.
Frazer's  mother  has  not  given  up  hopes  of  his  safety  yet —
but  I  have,  so  has  the  owner.  The  mother  thinks  the  crew
may  have  been  picked  up  by  some  outward  bound  vessel.

Frazer  was  a  fine  young  fellow,  25  years  of  age,  un-
married,  second  engineer  on  board  the  CoUingwood  ss.

I  have  never  had  a  similar  experience  to  this  before.
My  daughter  and  I  are  certain  we  were  not  mistaken  in
our  man. We  know  no  one  else  at  all  resembling  Frazer.

George  Maddison.

Miss  Maddison  wrote  an  exactly  concordant  account  two
and  a  half  months  later,  giving  the  remarks  exchanged
almost  verbatim  as  her  father  did.

It  will  be  admitted  that  it  is  very  unusual  for  a  hallu-
cination to  affect  similarly  both  sight  and  hearing  of  two
percipients — I  do  not  think  we  have  another  instance  of
it — and  to  persist  while  one  percipient  "  took  him  along
to  the  smoke-room."  The  testimony  of  the  person  in
the  smoke-room  might  have  been  conclusive  on  the
c[uestion  whether  the  figure  seen  was  a  real  man  or  not,
but  Mr.  Nisbet,  at  that  time  Honorary  Associate  of  the
Society,  had  an  interview  with  Mr.  and  Miss  Maddison,
and  ascertained  that  Mr.  Maddison  did  not  know  who  this
person  was.

§  4. Collective  Auditory  Cases.

It  is,  generally  speaking,  more  difficult  in  the  case
of  purely  auditory  experiences  than  in  the  case  of  visual
ones  to  feel  sure  that  they  are  really  hallucinatory,
because  we  more  often  fail  to  interpret  real  sounds
correctly  than  real  sights.  This  is  especially  true  of
non-vocal  noises.  In  the  non-vocal  cases,  however,
in  our  collection  the  sounds  heard  were  regarded  by
the  percipients  as  probably,  or  at  least  possibly,  veri-
dical, being  associated  with  external  events,  and  they
already  have  been  or  will  be  dealt  with  under  appro-
priate heads. The cases that remain consist of  one


LXXXVI.]


Collective  and  Reciprocal  Cases.


393


in  which  the  sounds  were  musical — as  of  voices  singing —
and  two  in  which  names  were  called.  But  the  musical
one  and  one  of  the  others  seem  to  me  very  doubtfully
hallucinatory,  and  I  will  only  describe  them  briefly.

In  L.  1203  [Journal,  Vol.  XVII.,  p.  118)  we  have  the
evidence  of  four  members  of  a  family  who,  in  the  ruins
of  the  Abbey  of  Jumieges,  heard  for  a  few  seconds  sounds
as  of  monks  singing.  Their  efforts  to  discover  any
natural  cause  for  this  failed,  but  whether  the  possibilities
were  exhausted  may  perhaps  be  doubted.  \

In  the  next  case  (L.  960,  Journal,  Vol.  VI.,  p.  139)  the
percipients  were  again  out  of  doors,  in  a  street.  Mx.
U.  J.  da  Costa  Cabral  of  Rio,  together  with  a  number  of
schoolboys,  his  pupils,  heard  and  recognised  the  voice  of
his  sister  who  hved  with  him.  The  voice  called  two
names,  his  own  "  Ulysses  "  and  that  of  his  brother-in-law
"  Bittencourt."  His  sister  had  not  called  and  nothing
had  happened  to  her.  The  voice  seemed  to  come  from
the  comer  of  the  street,  but  when  some  of  the  boys  ran
there,  they  found  nothing.  The  case  was  sent  by  Pro-
fessor Alexander  of  Rio,  who  examined  the  witnesses.

The  third case (G.  247,  Journal, Vol. VII., p. 9)  is,

I  think,  more  remarkable.  It  was  received  through  the

Rev.  W.  S.  Grignon. We  are  not  permitted  to  print  the
names  of  the  percipients.

(G.  247.)

One  of  them,  Mr.  W.,  writes  :

August  6th,  1893.
On  the  1st  November,  1892,  soon  after  11  a.m.,  -^hile

seated  with  ]\Ir.  S  ,  m  the  office  room  of  his  house

at ,  Poona,  I  distinctly  heard  a  voice  with  which  I

was quite unacquainted call out in sharp clear  tones,

"]Mrs.  H  !  Mrs.  H  !"  (my  sister-in-law,  who  was

lost  in  the  Roumania  a  few  days  previously).  The
voice  seemed  to  be  that  of  someone  calhng  from  above
to  my  sLster-in-law  down  stairs.


394


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwiclc.


[part


My  age  was  36,  and  at  the  time  I  was  in  good  health,
though  in  grief  and  anxiety  about  the  loss  of  my  sister-
in-law  ; [I] was discussing an official I'eport of  mine,

which  JVIr. S  , who  is  the  head  of  my  Department,

was  reading  out.

Mr.  S distinctly  heard  the  same  voice,  and  we  both

started  up  and  went  outside  into  the  verandah  and  all
over  the  house,  but  there  was  no  one  about  except  the
peons,  who  declared  no  one  had  called  out.  The  ladies
of  the  house  were  in  one  of  the  back  bedrooms,  but  they
had  neither  heard  the  voice,  nor  had  they  been  calhng
out.

I  have  never  had  an  experience  of  this  kind  before.
Mr.  S.  writes  :

PooNA,  August  loth,  1893.

Mr. W  's statement is absolutely true. I  heard

the voice, clear and distinct, call out, "  Mrs. H  ,"

twice.  It  was  a  voice  not  belonging  to  my  household,
and  a  strange  voice, — the  voice  of  a  woman  alarmed ;
and  it  sounded  as  if  on  board  ship  calling  down  a  sky-
light. I  say  this  in  perfect  faith,  as  I  began  hfe  as  a
sailor,  and  served  seven  years  in  the  Indian  Navy,  and
have  had  personal  experience  of  the  ^Deculiar  sound  of
voices  calling  down  hatchways  and  skylights  on  board
ship  at  sea. The  voice  was  so  real, and  the  name  so

distinctly  uttered,  that  Mr.  W and  I  left  the  table  at

which  we  were  seated  and  ran  outside  into  the  verandah
of  the  bungalow  in  the  endeavour,  on  the  spur  of  the
moment,  and  on  natural  impulse,  to  discover  the  owner
of  the  voice  ;  but  there  was  no  one  at  all  near,  within
speaking  or  caUing  distance.  Two  peons,  or  native
messengers,  who  were  in  the  verandah,  informed  us  that
no  European  had  been  near,  and  these  peons  knew  no
English.

§  5. Seiiii-reciprocal  and  Reciprocal  Cases.

8o  far  the  simultaneous  psychical  experiences  described
in  this  chapter,  whether  dreams  or  hallucinations,  have
occurred  to  percipients  who  were  together  at  the  time.  In


LXXXVI.]


CoUecfive  and  Reciprocal  Casc!^.


305


the  cases  that  remain,  the  percipients  were  apart.  There  is
therefore  no  longer  any  question  of  suggestion  hy  word  or
gesture  ;  if  the  two  psychic  experiences  were  connected,
it  ahnost  mvist  have  been  telepathically.  There  seems  no
other  alternative.

In  the  first  two,  winch  are  in  some  ways  curiously
alike,  the  percipients  have  simultaneous,  but  not  similar,
hallucinations  of  each  other — A  seeing  an  apparition  of  B,
and  B  hearing  A  call.

The  first  (L.  1150,  Journal,  Vol.  XII.,  p.  193)  was
obtained  for  us  by  a  Member  of  the  Society,  Mr.  A.  W.
Orr,  of  15  Moorland  Road,  Didsbury,  Manchester,  who
collected  all  the  evidence  available.  It  will  be  observed
that  the  case  was  reported  to  us  within  a  few  weeks  of
its  occurrence. Mr.  Orr  writes  :

(L.  1150.)

July  26th,  1905.

I  enclose  an  account  of  a  hallucination  experienced  by
Mrs.  Ellen  Green  of  Manchester  during  a  recent  visit  to
Cardiff,  and  of  another  in  connection  therewith  experienced
by  a  Captain  Ward,  a  retired  master  mariner,  which  I  have
got  the  various  persons  concerned  to  sign  as  being  correct.

Mrs.  Green  is  a  trance -speaker  on  spirituaUstic  platforms
and  is  a  natural  clairvoyante,  but  not  by  any  means  a
credulous  person.  .  .  .

The  account  enclosed  was  as  foUows  :

I  had  been  staying  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Ward,  a  retired
Master  in  the  Mercantile  Marine,  who  resides  at  North-
wood  House,  Llanishen,  near  Cardiff,  and  on  Tuesday,
June  20th  [1905],  he  drove  me  over  to  Whitchurch  (about
two  miles  from  Llanishen)  where  I  was  to  spend  a  couple
of  days  with  friends,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Berwick.  He  left  me
there  at  about  eleven  o'clock  in  the  forenoon  and  returned
to  his  home.  On  the  following  afternoon  at  about  half-
past  three  I  was  sitting  alone  in  the  drawing-room,  Mrs.
Berwick  being  in  her  own  room,  and,  on  happening  to
look  up,  I  saw  Mr.  Ward  standing  at  the  bay  mndow  and
looking  in  at  me  as  though  he  desired  to  speak  to  me.


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgvnch.


[part


He  was  in  liis  usual  dress  and  is  not  a  man  to  be  easily
mistaken  for  any  one  else.  Thinldng  he  had  brought
some  letters  for  me,  I  rose  hastily  and  went  towards  the
window  calling  to  hiin  and  waving  my  hand  to  him,
partly  in  greeting  and  partly  as  a  sign  for  him  to  go  to
the  hall  door,  but  when  I  reached  the  window  I  was
surprised  not  to  see  him.  I  concluded,  however,  that  he
must  have  gone  to  the  door  without  my  noticing  and  so
I  hurried  to  the  door  to  let  him  in.  I  was  exceedingly
surprised  and  alarmed  when  I  opened  the  hall-door  to
see  nobody  there,  nor  Eniywhere  about  the  house.  Later
when  Mrs.  Berwick  came  down  I  told  her — and  also  Mr.
Berwick — of  my  experience,  and  like  myself  they  felt
extremely  anxious  lest  some  harm  had  happened  to  Mr.
Ward,  for  whom  we  all  felt  a  strong  regard.

Next  morning,  however,  soon  after  eleven  o'clock  Mr.
Ward  arrived  in  his  trap  according  to  arrangement  to
take  me  to  the  railway  station  to  join  the  train  for
Manchester.  He  was  in  a  very  weak  state  and  suffering
from  severe  injuries  to  his  ankle,  neck,  and  shoulders,  and
he  remarked  to  us,  "It  is  a  wonder  I  have  been  able  to
come  to  you  in  the  body."  It  seemed  that  whilst  driving
home  on  Tuesday  the  horse,  which  was  a  very  nervous
animal,  upset  the  trap  and  caused  him  to  be  thrown  out
and  badly  bruised  and  shaken.  The  next  afternoon,
whilst  Ipng  on  a  couch  in  his  sitting-room,  he  was  wonder
ing  what  Mrs.  Gi'een  would  think  if  she  knew  of  the
occurrence,  when  he  suddenly  heard  her  voice  outside  the
house.  There  being  only  an  elderly  woman  in  the  house
he  managed  with  great  difficulty  to  get  to  the  haU-door
to  admit  Mrs.  Green,  and  was  greatly  amazed  not  to  see
her.  The  time  was  between  three  o'clock  and  four,
just  about  the  time  when  Mrs.  Green  saw  his  form  at
Whitchurch.

We  certify  that  this  account  of  the  hallucinations  seen
and  heard  by  Mrs.  Green  and  Captain  Ward  is  correct.

Ellen  Green.
Frederick  Ward.
John  Berwick.
Fanny  A.  Berwick.


Lxxxvi.]  Collective  and  Reciprocal  Cases.  397

In  rejjly  to  enquiries  about  this  case,  Mr.  Orr  wrote  :

July  28th,  1905.

In  reply  to  your  questions  re  Mrs.  Green's  experience  in
South  Wales,  I  may  say  that  when  she  told  me  the
circamstances  I  asked  her  to  repeat  the  account,  and  I
took  a  shorthand  note  of  it  which  I  transcribed  and  sent
to  her  to  get  the  signatures  of  the  other  people  affixed
to  it,  so  that  I  coiild  send  it  then  to  you.  For  some
reason  Mr.  Green  re-wrote  the  narrative  (copied,  I  beUeve,
from  my  note)  and  his  copy  was  sent  [to]  and  signed  by
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Berwick  and  Captain  Ward ;  Mrs.  Green
handed  it  to  me  and  I  posted  it  to  you.

I  have  written  to  the  other  persons  asking  them  to  let
me  have  their  individual  statements,  ...  I  know  nothing
of  them  personally.

Mrs.  Green  is  a  trance  speaker  and  is  engaged  for
Sunday  services  all  over  the  country  ...  I  have  known
her  for  some  years  and  have  the  fullest  confidence  in  her
integrity  .  .  .  She  has  had  many  very  remarkable  experi-
ences during  her  life,  but,  as  is  so  frequently  the  case,
no  note  was  made  of  them  at  the  time,  and  so  they  are
lost  for  all  practical  purposes.  .  .  .

Mr.  Orr  obtained  later  the  following  statements  from  the
other  mtnesses  in  the  case  :

(1)

From  Mr.  J.  Berwick.

10,  Windsor  Terrace,  Penarth,
4ih  August,  1905.
...  I  am  quite  wiUing  to  do  what  is  reasonably  possible
to  confirm  the  statement  made  by  Mrs.  Green,  but  you
have  evidently  overlooked  the  fact  that  the  original
document  is  an  attested  one  and  was  signed  while  the
incident  was  fresh  in  our  memories  ;  but  to  sit  down  now
and  write  an  accurate  account  of  what  was  said  and  done
last  June  is  an  impossible  task  for  a  very  busy  man.  I
really  do  not  remember  the  details  sufficiently  clearly  to
make  a  statement  which  [could]  be  used  for  comparison


•^^^  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.  [part

witli  one  made  two  months  ago,  but  you  are  quite  at
liberty  to  use  our  names  in  so  far  as  they  relate  to  the
statement  already  in  your  possession.  I  am  sorry  I
cannot  do  more.  John  Berwick.

From  Ca]-)tain  Ward.

NORTHWOOD,  BlRCHGROVE,  CARDIFF,

2nd  August,  1905.

I  have  pleasure  in  reply  to  your  letter  to  give  you  here
the  facts  of  the  incident  as  it  actually  happened.  On
the  20th  June  last  I  drove  Mrs.  Green  in  my  pony  trap
to  Mr.  Berwick's  house  in  Whitchurch,  Cardiff,  and  on
returning  home  to  above  address,  met  with  an  accident,
being  thrown  out  of  my  trap  backwards,  hurting  my
neck  and  ankle.  On  the  following  day  the  21st  inst.
I  was  unable  to  leave  the  house,  and  lay  on  the  sofa
in  my  dining  room,  when  between  the  hours  of  3  and
4  p.m.  I  distinctly  heard  Mrs.  Green's  voice  outside  the
front  door  calhng  me.  I  managed  to  rise  from  the  couch
and  look  out  through  the  window  to  call  her  in,  but
found  no  person  there  ;  the  time  would  exactly  agree
with  that  when  Mrs.  Green  saw  my  form  at  Whitchurch.

This  I  found  out  on  speaking  to  Mrs.  Green  on  Thursday
the  22nd  inst.  I  had  not  seen  her  between  the  20tli
and  22nd. The  above  are  the  facts  of  the  case.

Frederick  Ward.

The  second  case  (L.  1187,  Journal,  Vol.  XV.,  p.  259)
was  communicated  to  us  by  Mr.  W.  W.  Baggally.  Both
Miss  Emma  Steele  and  Mr.  Claude  Burgess,  the  lady  and
gentleman  concerned  in  the  case,  are  Imown  personally  to
Mr.  Baggally.

(L.  1187.)

Miss  Steele  writes  as  follows  :

16  &  17,  SiLLWOOD  Place,
Brighton,  March  13th,  1912.
Mr.  Claude  Burgess,  who  is  an  invahd,  had  been  staying
at my private hotel, at the above address, for  some


LXXXVI.]


Collective  and  Reci'procal  Cases.


399


months.  He  left  on  February  15th  to  take  up  his  resid-
ence at  No.  10,  Belgrave  Place,  Kemp  Town,  Brighton.
In  the  interval  between  the  date  of  his  leaving  and  the
night  of  the  5th  inst.,  when  I  had  the  remarkable  dream
(if  it  can  be  caUed  a  dream)  which  I  am  about
to  relate,  I  had  not  seen  Mr.  Burgess  and  nothing
had  occurred  to  cause  me  to  think  particularly  about
liim.

On  the  above  night  I  retired  to  rest  at  my  usual  time.
I  awoke  finding  myself  standing  in  the  middle  of  my
room  and  answering,  "All  right,  I'm  coming,"  to  Mr.
Burgess,  who,  I  thought,  called  three  times  :  "  Miss
Steele  !  Miss  Steele  !  Miss  Steele  !  "

By  the  time  I  had  put  on  my  dressing  gown  and
lighted  the  gas  I  was  fully  awake.  I  then  remembered
Mr.  Burgess  was  no  longer  in  the  house.  I  looked  at
the  clock  and  noticed  it  was  exactly  3  a.m.  When  I
came  downstairs  next  morning,  I  told  my  cook  my  dream,
and  remarked  I  hoped  nothing  had  happened  to  Mr.
Burgess.  During  the  next  day,  Wednesday,  6th  March,
in  the  afternoon,  a  man  called  while  I  was  out  and  left
a  note  from  Mr.  Burgess,  which  I  enclose.  I  was  much
surprised  by  its  contents.  It  struck  me  most  forcibly
getting  it  from  him,  as  he  is  paralysed  and  has  to  \^Tite
with  great  difficulty  with  his  left  hand.  He  very  seldom
writes  now,  so  it  must  have  made  a  great  impression  on
him  seeing  me  as  he  relates  in  his  letter.

Emma  M.  Steele.

The  letter  from  Mr.  Burgess  to  Miss  Steele  referred  to
above,  which  is  now  in  our  possession,  was  as  follows  :

10,  Belgrave  Place,  Brighton.

My  dear,  Emma,

I had a funny dream about you last night.  I
dreamed that you ajjpeared at about 3 a.m. Just  a
ghmpse  of  you. It's  funny,  isn't  it  ?
,  ■  Yours,

Claude  Burgess.


400


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.


[part


Miss  Steele's  cook  made  the  following  statement  to  Mr.
Baggally  :

March  I3th,  1912.

On  Wednesday  morniag,  the  6th  March  last,  Miss
Emma  Steele  came  down  from  her  bedroom  at  8.30.
I  saw  she  was  looking  pale.  I  asked  her  if  she  were  not
well.  She  rephed  that  she  had  had  a  strange  dream.
She  heard  Mr.  Burgess  call  her  three  times.  She  told  me
that  she  suddenly  jumped  up  and  put  her  dressing  gown
on.  By  the  time  she  had  put  on  her  dressing  gown
and  Ut  the  gas  she  remembered  Mr.  Burgess  had  left  the
house.  She  said  it  was  about  3  o'clock  a.m.  when  she
heard  Mj.  Burgess  call.

(Signed) Sarah  Pollard.

The  following  statement  was  written  by  Mr.  Baggally  on
March  13th,  1912,  from  Mr.  Claude  Burgess's  dictation  :

On  Tuesday  night,  5th  March,  1912,  I  woke  up  at
about  3  a.m.  with  a  start.  I  saw  Miss  Emma  Steele
standing  at  the  door  of  my  bedroom.  I  had  closed  the
door,  but  she  appeared  to  have  opened  it.  She  was
attired  in  her  ordinary  dress.

I  was  much  surprised.  It  was  an  absolutely  distinct
apparition.  I  had  not  been  thinldng  of  her  the  previous
day  and  I  cannot  tell  why  she  appeared  to  me. ■  .

The  apparition  lasted  about  five  seconds.  I  was  not
at  all  frightened  and  went  to  sleep  immediately  after.

I  was  so  struck  by  what  I  had  seen  that,  next  morning,
the  6th  March,  at  about  11  o'clock,  I  wrote  a  letter  to
Miss  Steele  which  I  handed  to  Mr.  WiUiam  Watkins,  the
proprietor  of  the  estabhshment  where  I  now  reside,  for
him  to  send  to  Mss  Steele.  In  this  letter  I  told  Miss
Steele  that  I  had  dreamed  that  she  had  appeared  to  me
on  the  previous  night.

(Signed) Claude  Burgess.

In  reply  to  Mr.  Baggally's  jDersonal  enquiries,  Mr.  Claude
Burgess  stated  that  it  was  the  first  tune  that  he  had  had  a
hallucination  of  this  Idnd,  and  he  had  not  had  one  since.


LXXXVI.]


Collective  and  Reciyrocal  Gasef^.


401


Stafem,ent  by  Mr.  William  Watkins.

10,  Belgeave  Place,
Bkighton,  March  ISth,  1912.

Mr.  Claude  Burgess  delivered  to  me  a  letter  which  he
had  written  to  Miss  Steele,  at  about  11  a.m.  on  March
fith,  which  I  handed  to  a  man  of  the  Church  Army
Labour  Home  to  take  to  Miss  Steele.  The  same  morning
at  8  a.m.  Mr.  Burgess  told  me  he  had  dreamt  of  Miss
S^^ele.  William  Watkins.

'  Statement  by  Mr.  Baggally.

I  called  on  the  afternoon  of  the  13th  March,  1912,  at
the  offices  of  the  Church  Army  Labour  Home,  St.  James
Street,  Brighton,  and  saw  the  Secretary,  who  showed  me
an  entry  in  their  books  confirming  the  fact  that,  at  the
request  of  Mr.  Wilham  Watkins,  a  man  in  their  employ
had  dehvered  a  letter  to  Miss  Emma  Steele  of  16,  Sill-
wood  Place,  Brighton,  in  the  afternoon  of  6th  March,
1912.

I  have  interviewed  all  the  persons  connected  with  this
case  and  they  confirmed  their  respective  statements.

W.  W.  Baggally.

In  reply  to  our  further  questions  as  to  whether  Mr.  Burgess's
experience  was  a  dream  or  a  waking  hallucination,  Mr.  BaggaUy
wrote  to  us  on  April  1st,  1912  :

I  had  an  interview  with  Mr.  Burgess  to-day,  and  the
following  is  the  information  I  received  from  him  respecting
the  points  you  raise. He  said  to  me  :

"  (1)  I  used  the  word  dream  in  my  letter  to  Miss
Steele  for  want  of  a  better  word.  (2)  I  woke  up  and
then  had  the  vision  of  Miss  Steele.  (3)  I  did  not  notice
anything  in  the  room  at  the  time  I  had  the  vision.  The
room  appeared  dark.  (4)  Miss  Steele  appeared  to  me  in
a  bright  light,  not  self-luminous  or  phosphorescent,  but
just  as  she  would  have  appeared  in  dayhght.  She  ap-
peared to  me  in  the  part  of  the  room  where  the  door
was."


402


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwich.  [part


Mrs.  Baggally  sends  us  the  following  statement  enclosed  in
a  letter  dated  April  27tli,  1912  :

I  was  in  the  di'awing-rooni  of  Miss  E.  Steele's  sister
on  the  evening  of  Wednesday,  March  6th,  when  IVIiss
Emma  Steele  came  in,  saying  in  an  excited  manner,
"  Where  is  Mr.  Baggally  ?  He  will  be  so  interested  in
this."

She  held  in  her  hand  a  letter  from  Mr.  Burgess,  and
proceeded  to  tell  me  that  the  previous  night  she  had
heard,  as  she  thought,  Mr.  Burgess  fall  on  the  floor  of
the  bedroom  over  her  own.  She  sprang  out  of  bed.
Finding  herselE  in  the  middle  of  the  room  she  heard  him
call  "  Miss  Steele  "  three  times.  She  then  suddenly
remembered  that  Mr.  Burgess  was  no  longer  hving  in  her
hotel.  She  struck  a  hght,  looked  at  the  clock  and  found
it  was  3  o'clock.  The  following  morning  she  felt  so
tired  that  when  giving  orders  to  her  cook,  the  latter
noticed  her  fatigue  and  commented  upon  it.  She  told
the  cook  the  reason  was  that  she  heard  Mr.  Burgess
apparently  caUing  her  at  3  o'clock.

Miss  Steele  proceeded  to  say  that  Mr.  Burgess  had,
curiously  [enough],  sent  her  that  afternoon  the  note  which
at  that  moment  she  held  in  her  hand  and  in  which  he
told  her  that  he  dreamt  she  had  appeared  to  him  at
3  a.m.  the  previous  night.

Miss  Steele  appeared  much  impressed  and  wondered  if
anything  had  happened  to  Mr.  Burgess.  I  informed  my
husband  that  same  night  on  his  return  home,  [of]  what
Miss  E.  Steele  had  told  me.  Laura  E.  Baggally.

On  my  return  home  on  the  evening  of  March  6th  my
wife  related  to  me  what  appears  m  her  statement  above.

W.  W.  Baggally.

In  the  first  of  these  cases  (Mrs.  Green  and  Captain
Ward)  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  both  experiences
were  waking  hallucinations.  In  the  second  this  is  less
certain,  for  both  experiences  occurred  at  the  moment
of waking. It seems pretty certain, however, that  ,


Lxxxvi.]  Collective  and  Reciprocal  Cases.  403

Mr.  Burgess  was  awake  when  he  saw  Miss  Steele's  phan-
tasm, though  m  Miss  Steele's  case  the  hearing  of  the
call  seems  more  like  the  end  of  a  dream,  and  it  is
not  quite  clear — probably  was  not  clear  to  herself  at  the
time — whether  she  awoke  from  it  or  to  it.  It  is  not  a
question  of  much  importance,  for  in  both  cases  the
experiences  were  evidently  of  a  markedly  impressive
character.

Neither  of  these  cases  was  exactly  reciprocal  in  the
fullest  sense,  for  there  is  no  evidence  of  the  percipients
participating  in  each  other's  experiences,  or  realising  each
other's  surroundings  and  circumstances  or  ideas  in  any
way.  I  think  it  is  very  likely  that  there  was  reciprocal
telepathic  action  and  reaction — each  party  being  both  agent
and  percipient.  But  there  is  little  or  no  internal  evidence
of  this.  The  utmost  that  can  be  said,  I  think,  is  that
Miss  Steele's  intention,  before  she  was  fully  awake,  to  go
to  Mr.  Burgess's  assistance  may  have  caused  the  appear-
ance to  him  of  her  phantasm,  and  that  Mrs.  Green's  call
to  the  phantasmal  Captain  Ward  may  have  been  the
cause  of  the  hallucinatory  call  heard  by  him.  But  this
is  highly  conjectural,  as  the  details  do  not  correspond ;
and  if  it  was  so,  it  would  indicate  one-sided  rather  than
reciprocal  influence.  The  evidence  for  telepathy  depends,
as  it  does  in  death-coincidences,  on  a  phantasm  of  A
being  seen  or  heard  by  B  at  the  time  that  an  miusual
event  was  occurring  to  A — that  event  being  death  in  the
case  of  a  death  coincidence,  and  the  perception  of  a
phantasm  of  B  in  the  two  cases  we  are  discussing.

In  the  next  case  (L.  1122,  Journal,  Vol.  IX.,  p.  331) — ■
a  case  of  two  dreams  dreamt  in  different  rooms  of  the
same  house  on  the  same  night  and  probably  at  the  same
hour — the  element  of  possible  reciprocity  is  somewhat
more  marked ;  for  in  both  dreams  the  husband  was
believed  to  be  examining  the  supposed  injury  to  the  leg,
and  the  half-awake  thought  that  followed  the  dreams
corresponded.  Nevertheless  the  evidence  scarcely  carries
us  beyond  thought-transference,  not  necessarily  involving


404


Mrs.  Henry  SidgwicJc.


[part


reciprocal  action,  and  this,  it  will  be  observed,  is  the  view
taken  of  it  by  the  dreamer  who  sent  it  to  us.  He  is
an  Associate  of  the  Society  who  has  long  been  actively
interested  in  psychical  research  and  was  well  known  to
Mr.  Myers,  as  he  is  to  other  Members  of  the  Council.
In  estimating  the  evidential  value  of  the  case,  due  weight
must  of  course  be  given  to  the  probability  that  the  pre-
occupation of  the  dreamers  with  the  main  subject  of  the
dreams  may  have  helped  to  produce  them,  at  least  in
part.  But  this  would  not  account  for  the  correspondence
in  detail (as  far  as  it  goes)  nor  for  the  coincidence  in

time. Mr. ,  who  prefers  that  his  name  should  not

appear  in  connection  with  this  case,  writes  :  1

(L.  1122.)  j

October  Uth,  1900.
I  beg  to  send  you  a  small  but  rather  definite  experience
of thought-transference, which has just occurred  to  us.
I  have  collected  a  number  of  other  people's  cases,  but
never  had  one  of  my  own  till  now.

The  account  enclosed  is  as  foUows  :

Sunday,  October  1th,  1900.

I  woke  abraptly  in  the  small  hours  of  this  morning
with  a  painful  conviction  upon  me  that  my  wife,  who
was  that  night  sleeping  in  another  part  of  the  house,
had  burst  a  varicose  vein  in  the  calf  of  her  leg,  and  that
I  could  feel  the  swelled  place,  three  inches  long.  I
wondered  whether  I  ought  to  get  up  and  go  down  to  her
room  on  the  first  floor,  and  considered  whether  she  would
be  able  to  come  up  to  me  ;  but  I  was  only  partly  awake
though  in  acute  distress.  My  mind  had  been  suddenly
roused,  but  my  body  was  still  under  the  lethargy  of
sleep.  I  argued  with  myself  that  there  would  sure  to  be
nothing  in  it,  that  I  should  only  disturb  her,  and  so
shortly  went  off  to  sleep  again.  '

On  going  to  her  room  this  morning  I  said  I  had  had  a  ■
horrid  dream,  which  had  woke  me  up,  to  the  effect  that
she  had  burst  a  varicose  vein,  of  which  just  now  care  has


LXXXVI.]


Collective  and  Reciprocal  Cases.


405


to  be  taken.  '"'  Why,"  she  repUed,  "  I  had  just  the
same  experience.  I  woke  up  at  2.15  feelmg  sure  the  calf
of  my  leg  was  bleeding,  and  my  hand  seemed  to  feel  it
wet  when  I  put  it  there.  I  turned  on  the  light  in  alarm,
noticing  the  time,  and  wondered  if  I  should  be  able  to
get  up  to  thee,  or  whether  I  should  have  to  wake  the
housekeeper.  Thou  was  in  the  dream,  out  of  which  I
woke,  examinmg  the  place."

Though  I  did  not  note  the  hour,  2  o'clock  is  about  the
time  I  should  have  guessed  it  to  be  ;  and  the  impression
on  my  mind  was  vivid  and  terrible,  Imowing  how  dangerous
such  an  accident  would  be.  It  is  the  first  certain  case
of  thought-transference  I  have  had.  My  wife's  account  is
being  written  independently  of  this.  I  regard  her  as  the
agent,  myself  the  percipient,  and  some  pain  in  the  leg
the  original  source  of  the  impression.

The  other  witness  concerned  in  the  case  writes  :

[On  the]  night  of  October  6th,  1900,  I  went  to  bed
about  11.0  ;  the  veins  of  my  left  leg  which  are  varicose
were  rather  more  painful  than  usual,  and  the  whole  calf
felt  and  looked  lumpy.

I  felt  twinges  of  pain  in  it  off  and  on  in  my  sleep
without  being  entirely  roused  till  about  2.15  a.m.  Then,
or  just  before,  I  dreamt  or  had  a  vivid  impression  that
a  vein  had  burst,  and  that  my  husband,  Avho  was  sleeping
m  another  room  up  another  flight  of  stairs,  was  there
and  called  my  attention  to  it.  I  thought  it  felt  wet
and  trickling  down  the  leg  as  if  bleeding,  passed  my  hand
down  and  at  first  thought  it  seemed  wet,  but  on  gaining
fuller  consciousness  found  aU  right,  and  that  it  was  not
more  painful  than  often  when  I  got  out  and  stood  on  it.
Thought  over  the  contingency  of  its  actually  bursting
and  whether  I  could  so  bandage  it  in  that  case  as  to  make
it  safe  to  go  up  to  my  husband's  room,  and  thought  I
could  do  so.

Looking  at  my  watch  found  it  about  2.20.

Almost  immediately  on  my  husband's  coming  do\^'n,
about  7.30  a.m.,  he  told  me  that  he  had  Avakened  early
in  the  night  (about  same  time  would  be  early  to  him)


406  Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwiclc.  [part

with  an  impression  that  the  vein  in  my  leg  had  burst
and  was  bleeding ;  that  he  had  wondered  if  he  should
come  down  and  thought  over  whether  I  should  be  able
to  bandage  it  and  go  up  to  him,  had  decided  I  could.
"  It  was  just  here,"  he  said,  pointing  on  his  own  left
leg  to  the  exact  spot  at  the  top  of  the  calf  where  I  have
the  most  trouble.

In  answer  to  a  question  as  to  the  accuracy  of  Mrs. 's

recollection  that  he  had  at  the  time  debated  within  himself
whether  she  would  be  able  to  bandage  her  leg  (a  detail  not
mentioned  in  his  own  account),  Mr.  writes  :

October  22nd,  1900.
In  response  to  your  query,  I  certainly  thought  of  my
wife  coming  up  with  her  leg  bandaged. It  was  part  of
my  idea  of  her  difficulties.

In  the  next  case  (L.  1149,  Journal,  Vol.  XII.,  p.  173)
the  percipients  were  again  in  two  separate  rooms  of  the
same  house.  It  is  distinctly,  at  least  to  some  extent,
reciprocal — one  sister  being  aware  of  the  other's  pain  and
of  her  answer  to  a  cpiestion,  and  the  other  sister  dreaming
of  the  first  sister's  enquiry.  The  experiences  of  both
sisters  were  odd  and  clifificult  to  define,  but  probably  those
of  Miss  Isabelle  Pagan  occurred  while  she  was  really
asleep,  and  thus  were  dreams  though  of  an  unusual  kind  ;
and  that  while  the  experience  of  Miss  EHzabeth  Pagan
began  as  a  dream,  the  dream  figure  of  her  sister  per-
sisted for  a  moment  or  two  as  a  waking  hallucination
after  the  dreamer  had  waked  herself  by  replying  to  the
enquiry  heard  in  the  dream.  It  is  a  pity  that  an  account
of  so  interesting  a  case  was  not  written  down,  like  the
two  last,  immediately  after  it  occurred.  t !.

(L.  1149.)

The  first  account  was  written  by  Miss  I.  M.  Pagan,  of  24,
Newbattio  Terrace,  Edinburgh.

May  8lJi,  1905.
On  the  night  of  Wednesday, 17th  of  March, 1904  (as
nearly  as  I  can  remember  the  date),  I  was  sleeping  in  my


LXXXVI.]


Collective  and  Reciprocal  Cases.


407


own  room  at  the  top  of  this  house,  my  sister  EHzabeth
being  in  the  room  next  mine.  In  the  middle  of  the  night
— at  what  hour  I  do  not  know — I  was  awakened  by  a
curious  sensation  of  pressure  from  above,  as  of  a  weight
resting  gently  but  firmly  on  me,  and  looking  up  saw  my
sister  Ehzabeth  suspended  in  some  way  above  me  in  the
air.  She  was  lying  with  her  eyes  shut,  covered  with  a
quilt  as  if  in  bed,  and  looked  very  pale  and  ill.  I  felt
no  surprise  but  only  concern  for  her  evident  suffering,  and
a  strong  impulse  to  get  up  and  minister  to  her.  (She
is  subject  to  occasional  attacks  of  severe  pain,  and  I
have  nursed  her  through  them  very  frequently.)  How-
ever, as  soon  as  I  tried  to  rise  I  found  myself  too  heavy
with  sleep  to  do  so.  My  eyes  would  not  open,  and  my
shoulders  seemed  as  if  held  down  by  their  own  weight.
Yet  I  had  felt  quite  wide  awake  and  fully  conscious  of
where  I  was,  of  the  furniture  in  the  room,  etc.  It
seemed  as  if  I  gave  up  the  attempt  to  rise,  partly  because
she  made  me  understand  that  she  did  not  need  my
help,  but  only  wanted  to  be  near  me.  So  I  put  out  my
arm — half  sitting  up,  and  without  effort — and  guided  her
to  a  place  beside  me  on  the  bed,  falling  asleep  again  as
soon  as  she  was  comfortably  settled.  She  seemed  to
float  through  the  air  much  as  a  child's  india-rubber  balloon
would  do,  and  was  quite  easily  moved  when  I  touched  her.
After  a  while  I  woke  again  with  a  start  and  a  feeling
of  distress  at  my  own  laziness,  and  again  made  an  effort
to  rise,  thinking  remorsefully  that  she  had  been  in  pain
and  I  ought  to  have  got  up  and  made  a  poultice,  but  had
done  nothing  for  her.  There  was  again  a  difficulty  in
rousing  myself,  and  then  came  the  recollection  that  she
was  beside  me,  so  that  I  didn't  need  to  rise.  I  sat  up
(once  more  with  ease)  and  asked,  "Are  you  all  right
now  ?  "  I  heard  her  answer,  "  Yes,  I  am  all  right,
thank  you,"  and  went  to  sleep  again.

In  the  morning  I  was  wakened  by  my  youngest  sister
HUda,  who  came  into  the  room  saying,  "  Betty  sent  me
to  teU  you  that  you  came  to  her  in  your  astral  body
last  night."  "No  I  didn't!"  I  exclaimed,  "she  came  to
me. Was  she  in  pain  ?  " "  Yes."

2c


408


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivick.


[PAET


I  went  to  my  sister's  room  and  found  she  had  been
suffering  during  the  night,  had  thought  of  calling  me,
but  decided  she  wasn't  ill  enough  to  need  any  treatment.
After  lying  awake  for  about  half-an-hour  she  feU  asleep,
and  was  awakened  by  my  voice  asking,  "  Are  you  aU
right  now  ?  "  and  looldng  up  saw  me  near  the  door  of  her
room — rather  a  shadowy  figure  enveloped  in  bed-clothes,
even  the  head  being  partially  covered.  She  answered,
"  Yes,  I  am  all  right,  thank  you,"  and  went  to  sleep
again  with  the  impression  that  I  had  somehow  ministered
to  her.

As  a  matter  of  fact  I  was  lying  much  muffled  up,  as
I  had  felt  cold  and  drawn  the  clothes  well  up  over  my
ears.  I  am  perfectly  certain  I  did  not  get  out  of  bed
aU  night,  and  I  have  never  done  anything  in  the  sleep-
walking line.  This  is  my  only  "  psychic  experience  "
worth  recording.  I  once  previously  had  the  same  strong
impression  of  a  friend  having  come  to  me  in  the  night,
but  have  no  corroborative  evidence.  .  .  .  My  attention
was  not  directed  to  these  subjects  at  the  time,  and  I
dismissed  the  incident  as  a  curiously  vivid  dream  ;  but
though  I  dream  a  good  deal,  these  two  experiences  stand
out  from  other  dreams  as  difi'erent.  I  feel  that  whatever
the  state  of  consciousness  may  have  been,  I  was  awake
and  alive  to  my  physical  surroundings  in  a  way  quite
unusual  in  ordinary  dreams.

A  cousin  (Mrs.  Young)  came  to  hve  with  us  on  the  15th
March,  and  recalls  that  it  was  after  she  arrived  that  the
incident  took  place.  I  left  home  on  the  22nd,  so  the
"  vision "  came  to  me  between  these  two  dates,  I  beheve
on  the  17th.  Isabelle  M.  Pagan.

E.  H.  C.  Pagan.

G.  Hilda  Pagan.

In  reply  to  enquiries  and  a  request  for  separate  statements
from  the  two  sisters,  whose  signatures  were  added  to  hers,
Miss  I.  M.  Pagan  wrote  :

June  20th,  1905.
.  .  .  The sleep-walking theory would naturally  suggest
itself,  but  I  do  not  think  it  is  a  possible  explanation  in


i


Lxxxvi.]  Collective  and  Reciprocal  Cases.


409


this  case.  You  mil  note  my  sister's  very  momentary
impression  of  my  presence  and  how  it  faded  away,  and
also  the  fact  that  it  never  for  an  instant  occurred  to  her
that  it  could  be  myself.  Now  the  room  she  slept  in  is
very  small,  18  ft.  6x10  ft.,  and  the  bed  was  quite  near
the  door — within  6  ft.,  and  her  hearing  is  exceptionally
quick  and  her  sight  good  (except  that  she  wears  glasses
for  reading).  If  I  had  reaUy  been  there  she  would  have
heard  me.  On  one  or  two  occasions  when  I  have  felt
poorly  I  have  gone  to  her  room  to  boil  some  water  on
her  gas  fii'e,  and  she  always  heard  me  the  moment  I
entered  and  asked,  "  What  is  it  ?  "  I  have  never  walked
in  my  sleep  nor  have  I  heard  of  any  grown-up  member
of  our  huge  connection  doing  so.  Various  httle  children
among  dozens  of  cousins  and  nieces  have  got  out  of  bed
occasionally  and  wandered  into  their  mother's  room,  or
I  crossed  the  floor  to  the  nurse's  bed,  etc.,  etc.  One  of  my
own  sisters  did  so  twice  or  thrice  when  she  was  about
five.  ...  Of  course  there  may  have  been  cases  of  older
sleep-walking  in  the  family ;  for  my  mother  had  100
first  cousins  on  one  side  of  the  house  alone,  and  we  have
relatives  by  the  score  whom  we  scarcely  Imow ;  but  on
the  whole  we  are  a  healthy  and  normal  set,  and  if  there
had  been  anything  striking  in  that  line  I  should  probably
have  heard  of  it.  I  see  in  my  sister's  account  she  says
she  felt  iU  on  going  to  bed.  None  of  us  had  any  idea
of  that. It  never  even  struck  me  she  looked  jDOorly.

Miss  Ehzabeth  Pagan  writes  :

24,  Newbattle  Terrace,  Edinburgh,  June  20th,  1905.

My  sister,  Isabelle  Pagan,  teUs  me  you  wish  to  have  a
statement  from  me  relating  to  the  curious  sort  of  dream
she  and  I  seemed  to  experience  in  common  some  months
ago.  My  recollection  of  the  incident  is  that  while  retiring
for  the  night  I  felt  far  from  well,  but  I  did  not  mention
the  fact  to  any  one  lest  one  of  my  sisters  should  think
of  sitting  up  with  me  or  at  least  staying  awake  on  the
chance  of  being  wanted.  IsabeUe  s  room  is  next  to  mine
and  I  knew  I  could  summon  her  if  necessary  by  Imocking
on  the  wall. After  two  or  three  somewhat  painful  hours


410


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgioick.


[part


I  fell  asleep  ;  and  towards  morning,  though  the  room
was  still  very  darlc,  I  woke,  as  if  from  a  dream,  hearing
myself  say,  "  I  am  all  right  now,  thanks.  Belle."  At
the  same  time  I  seemed  to  see  a  shadowy  form  which
I  somehow  knew  to  be  Belle,  though  she  was  unrecognis-
ably muffled  up  in  white  drapery.  The  whole  vision
vanished  UteraUy  in  the  winking  of  an  eye,  for,  as  I
winked  myself  awake  to  look  again  at  the  puzzhng  appari-
tion, it  was  gone.  When  my  sister  Hilda  entered  my
room  before  brealdast,  the  first  thing  I  said  to  her  was,
"  How  is  Belle  ?  Please  ask  her  why  she  paid  me  a
visit  in  her  astral  body  last  night."  Belle's  answer  to
this  message  was,  "  Indeed  I  didn't !  Tell  her  she  came
in  her  astral  body  to  me\  "

Then  Hilda  heard  details  of  the  two  dreams ;  and  we
all  felt  convinced  that  Belle  had,  by  some  sort  of  tele-
pathy, been  conscious  that  I  was  in  pain  and  been  able  to
make  me  aware  of  her  s3Tnpathy.

Neither  of  us  has  ever  been  known  to  sleep-walk  and  as
we  have  generally  shared  a  room  with  a  sister — often  in
fact  roomed  with  one  another — it  is  hardly  possible  we
could  have  done  so  withoat  its  being  known.  The  doors
were  not  locked,  but  we  both  beUeve  them  to  have
remained  shut  all  night.  There  was  no  one  near  enough
to  have  heard  if  we  did  move  about.

Isabelle  and  I  have  very  frequently  dreamt  like  dreams  ;
that  is  to  say,  we  have  both  dreamt  of  the  same  scene
or  the  same  people  on  the  same  night ;  but  this  is  the
onlv  case  of  any  sort  of  communication  being  recollected
by  us  both  on  waldng.  The  report  already  sent  you  of
this  incident  was  written  by  my  sister  Isabelle  and  signed
by  her  as  well  as  by  Hilda  and  myself.  ...  i

Elizabeth  H.  C.  Pagan  (M.A.  Edin.).

Miss  Hilda  Pagan  wrote  as  follows  :

24,  Newbattle  Terrace,  Edinburgh,  July  20th,  1905.

One  morning  in  March  1904  my  sister  Elizabeth  told
me  when  I  went  to  her  room  before  breakfast,  that  she
had  been ill  in the night  and had dreamt  our  sister


Lxxxvi.]  Collective  and  Heciprocal  Case^.


411


Isabelle  had  been  in  the  room,  standing  near  the  door,
and  had  asked,  "  Are  you  all  right  now  ?  "  On  the  invalid
saying  "  Yes,"  Isabelle  had  disappeared,  and  indeed  she
had  hardly  been  really  recognisable  according  to  outward
appearance  ;  Ehzabeth  had  rather  recognised  her  intuitively,
and  spoke  to  me  of  the  dream  as  probably  an  "  astral
experience,"  an  explanation  I  readily  beheved.  I  went
to  waken  our  sister  in  the  next  room  and  said,  "  Betty
says  you  visited  her  in  your  astral  body  last  night."

"  Oh  no,  I  didn't,  she  visited  me,"  Isabelle  answered.
"  I  was  wakened  by  her  on  my  bed  ;  she  was  ill,  and  I
tried  to  sit  up  and  make  her  comfortable,  but  I  slept,
and  only  woke  once,  when  I  asked,  '  Are  you  aU  right
now  ?  '  and  she  answered  '  Yes.'  " G.  Hilda  Pagan.


The  case  I  have  next  to  quote  (L.  1106,  Journal,  Vol.
VIII.,  p.  319)  we  owe  to  Mr.  Andrew  Lang,  who  was
acquainted  with  the  family  concerned.  In  form  it  is  a
good  reciprocal  case,  and,  moreover,  the  experience  at  one
end  of  the  chain  was  collective.  For  these  reasons  it
greatly  interested  Mx.  Myers,  who  read  it  and  commented
on  it  at  a  meeting  of  the  Society  on  November  4,  1898
(see  Journal,  loc.  cit.).  It  has,  however,  certain  evi-
dential weaknesses  to  which  I  will  refer  after  quoting  it.

We  have  four  statements  from  witnesses,  namely  :

(L.  1106.)

(1)  Narrative  of  Mary  B.,  cook,  attested  by  Isabella  C,  house-
maid, and  Jane  D.,  parlourmaid.  Taken  down  by  J.  L.  B.
from  M.  B.'s  narration.

On  Friday  night,  December  11th,  1896,  about  11
p.m.,  we  were  all  sitting  by  the  fire  in  the  kitchen.  We
heard  steps  in  the  passage,  coming  from  the  hall  and  going
along  by  the  nursery  door.  Jane  looked  up  and  asked
if  I  heard  anything.  I  said,  "  Yes,  I  thought  I  heard
Mrs.  Blaikie  walking  along  with  her  skirts  rustling,  from
the  front  door  along  by  the  nursery."  We  had  all  heard
it.  I  said  I  thought  it  was  like  a  warning,  and  I  said,
"  I  hope  Mrs.  Blaikie  isn't  dead." Then  we  rose  and  went


2


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgivich.


[part


to  the  door  leading  from  the  kitchen  to  the  nursery
passage,  but  saw  nothing.  Miss  Frances  heard  our  steps,  '
and  came  out  and  asked  what  on  earth  was  the  matter.
Miss  Frances  said  she  had  heard  it  too,  and  thought  it
was  one  of  us.  Then  we  went  upstairs  to  Miss  Jeanie's
room.  She  had  heard  it  and  said  she  hoped  there  were
no  burglars  about.  We  went  all  over  the  house  and
looked  everywhere  but  there  was  nothing  to  be  seen.
We  then  went  to  bed  and  have  never  heard  it  again.
We  all  thought  Mrs.  Blaikie  must  be  dead.

(Signed) Mary  B.

Isabella  C.

December  \ltli,  1897.  Jane  D.

(2)  On  Friday  night,  December  11th,  1896,  about  11
o'clock,  I  was  Avriting,  alone,  in  my  bedroom — the  first
room  at  the  top  of  the  staircase,  which  is  a  low  one.
The  house  was  quite  quiet,  and  I  fancied  the  servants
had  gone  to  bed,  so  that  I  was  surprised  to  hear  footsteps
coming  along  the  passage  do\TOstairs.  I  heard  the  steps
come  from  the  hall,  past  the  foot  of  the  staircase,  and
along  the  passage  known  as  "  the  Nursery  Lobby."  There
they  died  away,  and  I  heard  no  more.  It  was  rather  a  \
heavy,  quick,  decided  step,  accompanied  by  the  rustle
of  a  silk  dress,  and  was  so  exactly  like  my  mother's  that
if  I  had  not  laiown  her  to  be  in  Edinburgh,  ill,  at  the
time,  I  should  not  have  had  two  doubts  about  it.  I
wondered  which  of  the  servants  it  could  possibly  be,
thought  I  should  ask  in  the  morning,  and  went  on  writing.
In  a  few  minutes  there  was  a  knock  at  my  door,  and  I
opened  it  to  find  three  scared  and  white-faced  maids.
They  asked  me  if  I  had  been  downstairs,  and  looked
more  scared  when  I  said  no.  They  then  asked  if  I
had  heard  steps,  and  when  I  said  "  Yes,  they  sounded
exactly  like  Mrs.  Blaikie's,"  they  told  me  they  had  heard
them  as  they  sat  in  the  kitchen,  had  gone  to  look  in
the  hall  and  passage,  and  had  seen  no  one.  They  then
went  to  the  "'  Nursery,"  the  room  to  which  the  passage
where  the  steps  were  heard  led,  and  asked  my  sister,
whose  bedroom  it  was,  if  she  had  left  her  room.  She


LXXXVI.]


Collective  and  Reciprocal  Cases.


413


said  No,  but  had  heard  the  steps.  It  was  very  evident
they  thought  they  had  heard  a  ghost,  and  as  my  mother
was  rather  seriously  ill  at  the  time,  of  course  they  con-
eluded  it  was  hers.  We  did  not  discuss  this,  however,
and  I  suggested  burglars,  took  my  poker,  and  went  with
them  in  a  procession  all  round  the  house.  We  looked  in
every  room  and  closet,  in  every  wardrobe,  in  the  bath,
and  under  every  bed,  and  found  nothing.  The  only
other  person  in  the  house  at  the  time,  besides  my  sister,
three  maids,  and  myself,  was  my  elder  brother,  who  slept
in  a  room  upstairs  not  far  from  mine.  I  went  to  his
room,  and  found  him  fast  asleep.  On  being  roused  up
he  said  he  had  not  heard  anything  at  all.  In  the  letter
I  was  writing  at  the  time  I  mentioned  that  I  had  broken
off  to  have  a  burglar  hunt,  and  my  correspondent  kept  it,
so  that  we  have  in  writing  the  date  and  hour.

(Signed) Jeanie  Lang  Blaikie.
HoLYDEAN,  December  nth,  1897.

(3)  About  11  o'clock  on  Friday  night,  December  11th,
1896,  while  undressing  in  my  room  I  heard  footsteps
coming  along  the  lobby  towards  the  door.  They  were
heavy  and  rather  quick  ;  exactly  like  my  mother's,  but
not  resembling  those  of  any  of  the  servants.  I  thought
it  must,  however,  be  one  of  the  maids,  and  paid  no
attention  to  them  untU  the  three  servants  came  in  a
great  state  of  panic  to  ask  if  it  had  been  me.  It  did  not
strike  me  as  being  anything  supernatural.

(Signed) F.  M.

(4)  On  Thursday  (December  10th,  1896),  while  visiting
my  niece.  Miss  L.,  19,  M.  Terrace,  Edinburgh,  I  was  seized
with  an  acute  attack  of  larjmgitis.  The  evening  of  the
next  day  (Friday,  December  11th),  about  11  o'clock  I
had  such  a  sensation  of  being  suffocated  that  I  felt  as
if  I  were  dying,  and  would  never  see  my  home  again.
I  was  suddenly  filled  with  an  overpowering  longing  to  be
at  home,  and  whether  I  feU  asleep  for  a  few  moments
and  dreamed  I  do  not  know,  but  it  seemed  the  next
minute  as  if  my  desire  was  granted,  and  I  felt  I  was


414  Mrs.  Henry  Sufgwick.  [pARf

actually  there.  I  was  conscious  of  walking  along  the
passage  past  the  dressing-room  door,  and  towards  the
room  we  call  the  nursery,  but  I  had  hardly  time  to
realise  my  own  joy  and  relief  when  I  found  myself  still
lying  in  bed,  and  the  feeling  of  suffocation  from  which  I
had  had  such  a  happy  respite  for  a  few  moments,  again
tormenting  me.  When  I  returned  home  a  week  later  I
was  told  by  Jane  D.  of  the  curious  occurrence  at  Holydean
on  the  evening  of  Friday,  the  11th.

(Signed) H.  B.

The  foUowing  are  what  seem  to  me  evidential  weak-
nesses in  this  case.  Mrs.  Blaikie's  dream  (as  it  pre-
sumably was)  was  not  apparently  a  very  striking  one,  and
it  does  not  seem  to  have  been  either  recorded  at  the
time  or  spoken  of  to  any  one  till  she  heard  of  the  ex-
perience of  the  percipients  at  the  other  end.  One  wonders
if  she  would  have  remembered  it,  or  thought  anything  of
it,  without  this.  Then  again,  as  to  the  collective  hearing
of  supposed  footsteps — it  is  a  rather  common  collective
experience,  e.g.  in  so-called  haunted  houses,  but  I  re-
member no  instance  of  footsteps  being  heard  by  one
percipient  only  when  others  were  present.  This  of  course
suggests  real  sounds  misinterpreted,  and  indeed  from  the
nature  of  the  case  the  interpretation  of  a  sound  like
footsteps  unsupported  by  other  evidence  must  generally  be
somewhat  doubtful.  In  the  present  case  there  seems  no
doubt  that  five  people  in  three  different  rooms  heard
sounds  which  more  or  less  resembled  Mrs.  Blaikie's  foot-
steps, and  at  least  four  of  them  also  heard  a  sound  like
the  rustling  of  her  dress.  But  out  of  these  five  Mrs.
Blaikie's  two  daughters  attached  no  importance  at  the
time  to  the  sounds  and  did  not  attribute  them  to  their
mother ;  and  though,  on  the  other  hand,  the  three
servants,  who  were  together  and  may  have  worked  them-
selves up  imaginatively  by  talking,  feared  the  sounds
portended  her  death — were,  in  fact,  produced  by  her
ghost — do  not  think  they  can  in  themselves  have  been
very  striking.  For  these  reasons  the  case  does  not  seem
to me  to carry  great weight as evidence of  recij)rocal


Lxxxvi.]  Collective  and  Reciprocal  Cases.  4i5


influence,  but  it  is  interesting  nevertheless.  A  case
described  above  with  tlie  death  coincidences,  L.  1141,  see
p.  242,  should  be  compared  with  it.

I  will  conclude  this  analysis  of  our  collection  with  two
cases  of  reciprocal  dreams.  In  both  the  dreamers  were
in  separate  houses,  and  in  both  the  reciprocality  seems  to
have  been  very  complete  ;  the  dreamers  dreamt  together
as  it  were,  the  dream  drama  the  same  for  both  and  each
in  his  own  dream  playing  his  own  part.

A  letter  giving  a  short  account  of  the  case  I  will  first
quote  (L.  1188,  Journal,  Vol.  XV.,  p.  262),  and  also  of  a
dream  quoted  above,  p.  301  (L.  1189),  appeared  in  Light
on  March  16,  1912.  The  Editor  kindly  forwarded  a  letter
of  enquiry  addressed  by  us  to  his  correspondent,  with  the
result  that  we  received  more  detailed  reports  of  the
incidents  together  with  some  corroborative  statements.
The  names  of  those  concerned  have  been  communicated  to
us,  but  by  their  request  pseudonyms  are  used  here.

Mrs.  "  Barnard "  writes  on  February  21,  1912,  in  a
letter  to  a  friend,  which  has  been  sent  to  us  :

(L.  1188.)

Francis  and  George  have  had  measles  at  school.  I
was  anxious  about  them.  .  .  .  On  Sunday,  February  11,
we  were  up  nearly  all  night  ;  Grace,  aged  three,  had
croup  and  Baby  Betty  had  influenza.  D.  [jVIrs.  Barnard's
husband]  looked  after  Grace  and  I  the  baby.  My  thoughts
were  often  with  Francis  ;  twice  during  the  night  I  lay
down  on  my  bed  and  slept  a  httle ;  each  time  I  woke
up  teUing  Francis  to  be  careful  of  Betty.  I  thought  he
could  not  sleep  and  wanted  to  put  his  head  on  my
shoulder  and  could  not  because  of  Betty.  To-day  [Feb.
21  ^]  he  WTites,  "  I  only  had  two  nights  when  I  could
not  sleep.  You  seemed  quite  close  aU  night,  oifly  Betty
would  come  between.  You  would  not  put  her  down.
Do  tell  me  what  you  did  aU  Sunday  night.  You  and
Betty  were  with  me  aU  night.  Were  you  thinking  of
me  ? You  ought  to  have  been  asleejD."

1  The  letter  was  received  on  February  21,  1912.


416


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgtvick.


[part


Upon  the  evidence  of  this  letter  alone,  it  might  seem  that
the  date  referred  to  by  Francis  Barnard  was  Sunday,  Feb.
18,  not  Feb.  11,  but  his  statement,  printed  below,  makes  it
clear  that  the  earher  date  is  meant,  when  his  illness  was  at
its  height.

In  reply  to  a  request  for  his  corroboration  of  Mrs.  Barnard's
statement,  Mi".  Barnard  writes  in  a  communication  received  by
as  on  April  2,  1912  :

On  Feb.  11  we  were  both  up  with  sick  children  the
greater  part  of  the  night.  L.  [Mrs.  Barnard]  had  Baby
Betty  in  her  arms  all  night,  sometimes  in  bed.  We
were  both  worried  about  the  two  boys  at  school  with
measles.  L.  was  under  the  impression  that  Francis'
head  ached.  She  wanted  him  to  put  his  head  on  her
shoulder,  but  was  afraid  he  would  hurt  the  baby.
Francis'  next  letter  said  that  his  mother  was  with  him
all  night,  but  the  baby  was  in  the  way.  I  am  very
sorry  we  burnt  the  letter  for  fear  of  infection  of  measles.

Francis  Barnard  (aged  13)  writes  as  follows  :

April  15,  1912.

In  February,  1912,  George  and  I  had  measles  at  school ;
on  Sunday,  Feb.  11th,  I  felt  very  bad  and  worse  as  night
came  on,  and  whether  sleeping  or  waking  I  felt  my  mother
was  close  beside  me  and  Baby  B.  was  in  her  arms  and
much  in  the  way.  Afterwards  I  found  she  had  been  up
all  night  with  baby,  who  was  ill,  and  thought  and  dreamt
of  me  all  night.  Slie  thought  I  wanted  to  put  my
head  on  her  shoulder  and  could  not  because  of  B.  She
woke  Daddy  up  saying,  "  Mind  B.  you  Avill  hurt  her."
When  I  came  home  I  was  very  surprised,  for  this  was
just  what  had  happened.  The  second  thing  that  sur-
prised me  was  that  mother  knew  that  I  was  in  the  big
dormitory  the  third  bed  from  the  door.  This  was  just
where  I  was.  No  one  could  have  told  her.  I  could  not
write,  and  no  one  else  did.  I  was  moved  when  I  was
ill  in  there  and  was  not  in  my  own  room.

[Signed, Fbancis  Barnard.]


LXXXVI.]


Collective  and  Beciprocal  Cases  ^


417


In  regard  to  the  last  part  of  Francis  Barnard's  statement
Mrs.  Barnard  wrote  on  April  15,  1912  :

No  one  told  me  he  [Francis]  was  not  ill  in  his  own
room.  I  all  the  same  knew  he  was  in  the  big  Dormitory
and  his  bed  was  the  third  on  the  door  side.  This  I  told
him  the  day  he  returned  and  he  was  astonished.  I
knew  his  own  room  so  weU  and  I  have  only  once  been
in  the  big  Dormitory.

It  is  perhaps  of  some  interest  that  Mrs.  Barnard  had
another  veridical  dream — the  one  quoted  above,  p.  301 —
five  days  after  this  one.  Perhaps  the  anxiety  and  agita-
tion she  had  gone  through  had  rendered  her  specially
telepathically  susceptible  at  the  time.

The  other  case  (L.  986,  Journal,  Vol.  VII.,  p.  104)  was
sent  to  Dr.  Hodgson  through  Dr.  M.  L.  Holbrook,  who
was  acquainted  with  both  the  percipients.  The  first
account  is  from  Dr.  Adele  A.  Gleason.

(L.  986.)

The  Gleason  Sanitakium,  Elmira,  N.Y.  [February,  1892].

The  night  of  Tuesday,  January  26th,  1892,  I  dreamed
between  two  and  three  o'clock  that  I  stood  in  a  lonesome
place  in  dark  woods.  That  great  fear  came  on  me  ;
that  a  presence  as  of  a  man  well-known  to  me  came  and
shook  a  tree  by  me,  and  that  its  leaves  began  to  turn  to
flame.

The  dream  was  so  vivid  that  I  said  to  the  man  of  whom
I  dreamed  when  I  saw  him  four  days  later,  "  I  had  a
very  strange  dream  Tuesday  night."  He  said,  "Do  not
tell  it  to  me  ;  let  me  describe  it,  for  I  know  I  dreamed
the  same  thing."

He  then  without  suggestion  from  me  duphcated  the  dream,
which  he  knew,  from  time  of  waldng  from  it,  took  2^1ace
at  the  same  hour  of  the  same  night.

Adele  A.  Gleason.


418


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


The  account  of  the  second  dreamer,  written  at  about  the
same  time,  is  as  follows  :

From  Air.  John  R.  Joslyn,  Attorney-at-Law.

208,  East  Water-street,  Elmira,  N.Y.

On  Tuesday,  January  26th,  1892,  I  dreamed  that  in  a
lonely  wood  where  sometimes  I  hunted  game,  and  was
walking  along  after  dark,  I  found  a  friend  standing  some
ten  feet  in  the  bushes  away  from  the  road,  apparently
paralj'sed  with  fear  of  something  invisible  to  me,  and
almost  completely  stupif'jd  by  the  sense  of  danger.  I
went  to  the  side  of  my  friend  and  shook  the  bush,  when
the  falUng  leaves  turned  into  flame.

On  meeting  this  friend,  a  lady,  some  days  aftei-ward,
she  mentioned  having  had  a  vivid  dream  on  Tuesday
morning, 1  and  I  said,  "  Let  me  teU  you  mine  first,"  and
without  suggestion  I  related  a  duplicate  of  her  dream.  I
was  awakened  soon  after  and  noted  the  time  from  a
certain  night  train  on  a  railroad  near  by,  and  so  am
certain  that  the  dreams  took  place  at  same  hour  of  same
night.  J.  R.  Joslyn.

In  reply  to  Dr.  Hodgson's  enquiries.  Dr.  Gleason  writes  :

Gleason  Sanitarium,  Elmira,  N.Y.,  February  21th  [1892].

Dear  Sir, — In  reply  to  yours  returned,  I  am  sorry  to
say  that  Mr.  Joslyn  has  no  notes  of  the  dream,  but  he
is  sure  of  being  waked  from  said  dream  by  the  scream  of
the  R.  R.  whistle  of  the  D.  L.  and  W.  train  passing
here  at  three  o'clock  a.m.  I  am  in  the  country  and  was
not  waked  by  the  train  but  by  the  vividness  of  the
dream,  and  hghted  a  candle  and  noted  time  by  watch.

I  send  page  from  my  note-book  written  next  a.m.
The  occurrence  noted  has  "J.  R.  J."  by  the  word  "dream."

There  is  really  no  doubt  of  the  duphcate.

(Dr.)  Adele  a.  Gleason.

[In  answer  to  Dr.  Hodgson's  question,  sent  March  3rd,
viz.,  Am  I  right  in  understanding  that  the  record  "  night

1  No  doubt  a  slip  for  Tuesday  night.  January  26th,  1892,  was  a
Tuesday.


LXXXVI.]


Collective  and  Reciprocal  Cases.


419


of  dream  "  and  also  the  initials  "  J.  R.  J."  were  written
the  next  morning  ? Dr.  Gleason  writes  :]

Yes,  they  were  written  at  the  time  before  I  saw  J.  R.  J.
The  reason  they  are  crowded  in  is  because  I  had  marked
down  the  dates  on  the  note-book  previously,  ready  for
experiment  in  day-time,  so  I  had  to  crowd  the  night
event  unexpected  in.  .  .  .  Adele  Gleason.

[The  note  referred  to  above  reads,  "  Night  of  dream.—
J.  R.  J."]

The  phrase  "  experiment  in  day-time,"  in  the  extract
from  Dr.  Gleason's  letter,  refers  to  experiments  in  thought-
transference  which,  as  Dr.  Holbrook  informed  us,  Dr.
Gleason  was  carrying  on  with  Mr.  Joslyn  during  the  time.
It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  we  have  no  record  of
these  experiments  or  information  as  to  their  success  or
otherwise.  It  seems  not  unlikely  that  the  fact  that  they
were  being  carried  on  facilitated  the  dreaming  in  common.

It  was  realised  by  Gurney  and  those  who  worked  with
him  in  compiling  his  book  that  reciprocal  cases  are  rare —
so  much  so  that  he  says,  "  the  number  of  these  reciprocal
cases  is  ...  so  small  that  the  genuineness  of  the  type
might  fairly  enough  be  called  in  question."  They  are
rare  in  our  present  collection  also,  but  I  nevertheless
venture  to  think  that  those  we  have,  not  only  add  to  the
evidence  for  the  genuineness  of  the  type  by  adding  to
the  number  of  cases,  but  that  they  help  materially,  taken
in  connection  with  other  evidence  in  our  collection,  to
throw  light  on  the  whole  process  of  telepathic  com-
munication. Dream  cases  though  they  be,  I  am  disposed
to  regard  the  last  two  cases  quoted,  and  to  which  I  have
worked  up  as  a  kind  of  climax,  as  the  fullest  manifesta-
tions we  have  in  the  collection  of  telepathic  communica-
tion. In  other  words,  I  think  the  kind  of  union  of
minds,  the  thinking  and  feeling  together,  here  shown
may  be  regarded  as  the  type  or  norm  of  telepathic  com-
munication to  which  all  other  cases  conform  in  varying
degrees.


420


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwiclc.


[part


It  is  in  collective  cases  that  this  can  perhaps  be  most
clearly  seen.  Take  for  instance  the  collective  crystal
vision  described  on  p.  48,  where  there  is  movement  in  the
picture.  The  percipients  here  have  ideas  and  images  in
common  within  the  limits  of  the  crystal  vision,  though
the  personal  element  with  its  emotions  and  sensations,  as
exhibited  in  the  last  two  reciprocal  cases,  is  absent.  It
is  generally  easiest,  I  think,  to  explain  the  cases  of
collective  hallucinations  and  corresponding  dreams  de-
scribed in  the  present  chapter  as  reciprocal — as  instances
of  the  two  minds  working  together.  And  this  may  still
be  so  when  the  process  is  aided  by  verbal  or  other
suggestion,  or  when  some  third  mind,  living  or  dead,
shares  in  the  process,  influencing  one  or  both  percipients.^

If  this  partial  merging  of  the  two  minds  is  the  true
type  of  telepathic  communication,  the  degree  to  which  it
takes  place  in  different  instances  evidently  varies  enor-
moixsly,  or  at  least  its  manifestation  does.  Thus,  unlike
the  dreams  last  quoted,  the  two  dreams  in  L.  1162  (p.  357,
above)  were  very  different  from  each  other,  meeting
apparently  only  in  the  one  point  of  drowning  and  rescue
of  the  wife.  I  have  already  pointed  out  that  in  the
semi-reciprocal  cases  of  Mrs.  Green  and  Captain  Ward
(L.  1150,  p.  395,  above),  and  of  Miss  Steele  and  Mr.
Burgess  (L.  1187,  p.  398,  above),  the  evidence  carries  us
little  beyond  simultaneous  hallucinatory  impressions  of  each
other  experienced  by  the  two  percipients  with  (at  least
on  one  side)  hallucination -producing  force  ;  and  that  in
apparitions  at  the  time  of  death  the  impression  received
by  the  percipient  is  usually  nothing  more  than  a  vivid
idea  of  the  presence  of  the  dying  person.  There  are  two
stages  in  the  process  of  manifestation  of  telepathic  com-
munication at  which  failure,  that  is  incompleteness,  may
occur.  There  may  be  incomplete  contact  between  the
two  minds  concerned  ;  and  when  that  contact  is  sub-
liminal, as  I  imagine  is  generally  the  case,  there  may  be

^  This  intervention  of  a  third  mind  must  of  course  occur  in  veridical
collective  cases,  e.g.  the  dreams  of  the  brother's  fatal  accident  (L.  1138,
p.  271  above).  And  it  may  have  happened  in  e.g.  G.  275  (p.  378),  or
L.  1169  (p.  379)  in  the  present  chapter,  though  we  have  no  evidence
of  it.


Lxxxvi.]  Collective  and  Reciprocal  Cases.  421

i  incomplete  emergence  in  either  mind  from  the  subliminal
to  the  supraliminal  consciousness.  The  contact  could  not
be  really  complete — it  could  not  extend  to  the  whole
content  of  either  mind — without  loss  of  individual  per-
sonality, but  short  of  this  it  may  presumably  vary  in
completeness  through  all  possible  degrees.  Emergence  into
the  conscious  again  varies  probably  in  degree.  It  cer-
tainly varies  in  method,  as  it  may  occur  through  re-
membered dreams,  through  waking  hallucinations,  through
motor  automatism  such  as  automatic  writing,  or  through
conscious  but  non-externalised  waking  impressions  of
various  degrees  of  definiteness,  such  as  those  described
in  Chapter  II.  above.  It  probably  often  happens  that
there  is  telepathic  communication  which  does  not  emerge
into  the  normal  consciousness  at  all.  We  cannot  there-
fore tell  where  failure  occurs,  nor  why  or  how  any
particular  case  differs  from  the  normal  type.  But  this
is,  of  course,  equally  true  whether  we  think  of  the  process
as  transmission  of  thought  or  as  merging  together  of
minds — what  we  might  perhaps  call  transfusion  of  thought.

In  regarding  the  merging  or  transfusion  as  the  normal
type  of  telepathic  process  no  new  theory  is  involved — nor
any  idea  not  already  expressed  by  other  students  of  the
subject.  It  is  only  looking  at  the  subject  from  a  some-
what different  angle  from  that  suggested  by  the  experi-
ments with  which  our  investigations  almost  inevitably
began.  In  those  experiments  there  is  obviously  an  agent
and  a  percipient — the  agent  consciously  trying  to  transmit
an  idea  to  the  percipient  who  is  trying  to  receive  it.  The
physical  analogy  suggested  by  this  is  some  force  in  the
agent  causing  something  to  be  transferred  through  space  to
the  percipient — we  compare  the  process  to  radiant  energy
like  light  or  heat  or  sound.  Of  course  we  soon  realise  that
it  is  not  radiant  energy — that  the  analogy  must  not  be
pressed  so  far  ;  but  the  idea  of  transmission  fits  many
spontaneous  cases  {e.g.  simple  death  coincidences)  as  well
as  experimental  ones,  and  we  get  into  the  habit  of  think-
ing in  terms  of  this  analogy.

Analogy  is  a  dangerous  instrument  in  reasoning,  for  the
very  reason  that  it  is  difficult  to  keep  its  limitations  in


422


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


mind  when  using  it.  But  in  speaking  of  psychical  matters
its  use  is  almost  a  necessity.  We  can  hardly  think  of
concrete  things  except  in  terms  of  the  world  of  space
matter  and  motion  in  which  we  live,  and  are  driven  to
express  ourselves  in  metaphor  and  by  analogy.  Something
may  be  gained,  however,  by  using  different  analogies  and
so  looking  at  things  from  different  points  of  view ;  and
that  is  what  I  am  trying  to  do  in  speaking  of  minds
being  in  more  or  less  complete  contact  with  one  another.
Contact  or  transfusion  is  a  physical  idea  just  as  much  as
transference  or  transmission,  and  probably  represents  what
actually  occurs  almost,  if  not  quite,  as  imperfectly.  But
it  has  the  merit  of  eliminating  the  idea  of  distance  and
false  analogies  depending  on  that.  And  the  habit  of
thinking  of  what  occurs  from  the  point  of  view  the
contact  analogy  suggests,  may,  I  think,  be  more  fruitful —
lead  us  further  towards  the  truth — than  that  produced  by
the  transmission-through-space  analogy.  For  one  thing  it
seems  to  fit  more  cases.  While  applicable  to  all  the  cases
which  the  transmission-through-space  analogy  fits,  it  also
fits  cases  where  the  idea  of  direct  transfer  presents  diffi-
culties. For  instance,  take  the  case  (L.  1127,  p.  147,
above)  where  Miss  F.  dreams  veridically  her  brother's
place  in  an  examination — there  was  no  known  connection
between  the  examiner  and  the  dreamer,  or  reason  why  an
idea  should  be  transferred  from  one  to  the  other.  But
the  sister's  mind  may  well  have  been  in  contact  with  the
brother's  and  the  examiner's  with  that  of  the  examinee
whom  he  had  just  examined  and  placed.  Thus  through
the  brother,  in  whose  own  mind  the  idea  never  emerged
into  consciousness,  the  examiner  and  the  sister  might  be
in  touch.  It  fits,  too,  cases  of  unconscious  leakage  where
the  idea  is  so  trivial  that  one  does  not  see  why  it  should
reach  the  percipient  at  all,  unless  some  common  content
of  the  two  minds,  such  as  might  be  produced  by  their
staying  in  the  same  house,  puts  them  in  contact  (see,  for
example,  L.  1228,  p.  315).  It  fits  cases  of  seeming  tele-
pathic clairvoyance,  such  as  Mrs.  D.'s  mental  vision  of
Mrs.  H.  (L.  1152,|'p.  58),  where  any  activity  was  on  the
side  of  the  percipient. It  at  least  makes  more  compre-


.^1


LXXXVI.]


Collective  and  Reciprocal  Cases.


423


hensible  the  apprehension  by  the  percipient  of  pubhc
events  of  general  interest,  but  not  special  private  interest
(see,  for  example,  M.Aut.  104,  p.  73),  and  other  cases
where  we  cannot  trace  a  particular  agent.  The  mental
contact  analogy  seems,  in  fact,  more  elastic  than  the
transference  analogy,  and  lends  itself  better  to  any  case
where  the  relation  of  agent  and  percipient  is  not  simple
and  obvious.  Moreover,  I  may  add,  though  it  is  outside
our  present  province,  that  if  we  may  assume  telepathic
communication  with  the  dead,  the  contact  analogy  seems
to  fit  the  case  of  communications  through  mediums.  For
the  communicator  in  mental  contact  with  his  friend  the
sitter  may  through  him  get  into  contact  with  the  mind
of  the  medium — the  medium  being  a  person  through  whom
the  communication  can  be  brought  out  into  consciousness.
Some  such  hypothesis  to  account  for  the  relation  of
medium,  sitter  and  communicator  seems  to  be  required.
It  is  probably  only  some  sitters  who  are  capable  of  acting
as  a  telepathic  link  in  this  way,  which  may  account  for
the  more  satisfactory  communications  received  by  some
sitters  than  others.

What  I  have  been  saying,  and  indeed  this  whole  paper,
shows  what  need  there  is  of  further  evidence  to  throw
light  on  the  subject  of  telepathy.  And,  as  we  all  know,
a  further  accumulation  of  well-evidenced  cases  is  required
to  convince  the  scientific  world  of  its  existence.  So  I  will
conclude  with  an  appeal  to  Members  and  Associates  of
the  Society  to  send  us  all  well-evidenced  cases,  recorded
soon  after  their  occurrence,  which  they  can  hear  of.  If
all  our  Members  took  as  much  pains  as  some  of  them  do
to  look  out  for,  and  report  fully,  interesting  cases,  our
collection  of  well-evidenced  and  convincing  telepathic
incidents  would,  I  feel  certain,  increase  more  rapidly  than
it  does,  and  our  knowledge  of  telepathy  would  grow  with
it.  I  believe  too,  that  if  more  people  would  only  try,
we  should  find  that  the  number  who  are  capable  of
obtaining  telepathic  impressions  through,  for  example,
crystal  gazing  is  greater  than  we  know  ;  and  likewise
that  experiment  would  reveal  more  people  capable  of
producing  impressions  on  others  telepathicaUy.

3©


424


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


LIST  OF  CASES  QUOTED  OR  DESCRIBED
IN  THE  ABOVE  PAPER.

Dreams  are  marked  tvith  a  D.
Cases  which  are  described  but  not  quoted  are  enclosed  in  square  brackets.

CHAPTER  I.
Experimental  and  Semi-experimental  Cases.


No.  of  Case.


Volume  and
page  in
Journal.


Interval

between
experience
and  record.


Remarks.


Page


§  1. Experimental  Cases.

A  list  of  10  sets  of  unpublished  experiments  in  thought-transference  is  given
with  their  places  in  the  .Journal  on  pp.  31-32.

There  are  also  two  experimental  crystal  visions  as  follows,  viz. :


M.  CI.  97


IX.  78
VIII.  71


Crystal  vision


§2.


M.  CI.  93
L.  1215
L.  1216
L.  1134
L.  1126


L.  1208
G.  267
[M.  CI.  22
L.  11.52


L.  1164
M.  CI.  96


A  fortnight
9  days

Semi-experimental  Cases. Percipient  experimenting.
Crystal  Visions.
3  weeks  ------

1  year  -------

1  day

6  weeks -  Spontaneous
At  the  time  Collective  -


VII.  124
XVIII.  191
XVIII.  192
XI.  157
X.  134


XVII.  235
X.  170
V.  73
XII.  307


XIII.  130
VIII.  227


Visions  not  in  a  Crystal.

Next  day  Appearance  in  room  -

About  a  month  At  a  seance

2  yrs.  8  mon.  Do.  do.

Same  day  Distant  scene  perceived

Non-externalised  Impressions.

Various  A  series  of  impressions

2  days  Place  of  lost  object  -

Table-tilting,  etc.


33
35


40
41

43
45
48


50
64
57]
58


63
71


M.  Aut.  104

XIII.  35

At  the  time

Table  tilting

73

[M.  Aut.  105

XIII.  211

3  months

Ouija  board

76]

§  3. Semi-experimental  Cases.

Agent  experimenting.

[

VIII.  90,  99

Next  day

Hypnotisation  at  a  distance

78]  '

L.  996

VII.  193

I  year

Willing  percipient  to  come

78

Do.

Do.

8  months

Do.  do.

79

[

VII.  299,  311

At  the  time

Mrs.  S.'s  diary  of  telepathic

L.  851

IV.  323

impressions  -

81]

1  yr.  8  mon.

Apparition  of  agent  -

83

L.  1056

VII.  250

?  4  years

Apparition  of  agent  -

85

LXXXVI.]


List  of  Cases  Quoted  or  Described,


425


CHAPTER  II.

Spontaneous  Cases  in  which  the  Pbrcipient's  Impression  is  not


L.  1157
L.  1172
L.  1102


L.  1103
L.  857
L.  858
L.  859
L.  898
L.  1196
[L.  1192


L.  831
L.  1213


L.  893
L.  1131


[L.  990
L.  1142
P.  285


Volume  and
page  in
Journal.


XITI.  79
XIII.  284
VIII.  298


XIII.  120
IV.  341
IV.  342

IV.  342

V.  191
XVI.  76
XV.  339


XV.  188
V.  192
XIX.  173


IV.  179
XVIII.  56


V.  172
XI.  80


V.  137


VII.  120
XI.  323
XVI.  29


externalised.

Interval
between

experience  Kemarks.
and  record.

)  1. Pain  transferred.

In  same  room  -
Do.  do.


6  day.s  -
Next  day
10  months


§  2. Phrases  transferred.

Nearly  2  years
1  week
Recently
About  3  years
Next  day
3  weeks


Teacher  to  pupil
Talking  in  sleep
Percipient  recovering  from
concussion  ...


§  3. Emotion  transferred.
1  month  Child  percipient


2  years
About  4  yrs.


One  of  a  number  of  experi-
ences of  percipient


4. Idea  from  distant  agent.


2|-  months
About  6  days


Proposal  -

Sending  for  percipient


5. Motor  Impulse.


4  yrs.  9  mon.

5  years

A  few  months


Impulse  to  fetch  a  shawl  -
Impulse to play a  par-
ticular piece  of  music
Do.  do.


6.


Vague  impressions  of  danger.

A  few  months  .  .  .  .
A  few  months  Animal  agent  ?  -
Next  day,  etc. Landslip  in  quarry


7. Vagiie  hut  insistent  thought  of  agent.


Page


91

92
94


95
96
97
97
98
99

100]


101
103]

103]


104
107


109

110
115]


116]

116

119


L.

972

VI.  212

About  a  year

Perhaps  reciprocal

124

L.

1199

XVI.  203

9  days

Agent  dying

126

XIX.  175

A  few  months

Do.  -

128]

§8.

Thought  of  agent

and  his  condition.

L.

1125

X.  79

Same  evening

Agent  dying

129

P.

262

IX.  79

2  days

Do. - .  .

131

L.

1217

XVIII.  193

4  months

Agent  dying  or  dead.  Child

percipient

133

L.

1176

XIV.  99

5-|  weeks

Illness . - -  .

1.35

L.

1103

VIII.  308

Next  day

Alarm  of  fire

137

L.

1144

XII  21

4  years

Animal  agent

139

L.

1158

XIII,  80

8  days

D  Animal  agent  -

141

426


Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick.


[part


No.  of  Case.


G.  237
P.  269
L.  1127


L.  1160


Volume  and
page  in
Journal.

§9.

VI.  105
X.  28
X.  140


Interval
between
experience
and  record.


Remarks.


True  impression. Doubtful  agent.

1  yr.  9  mon. D  Brother  dead

I  yr.  10  mon.  D  Brother's  appomtment

II  months D Brother's  place  in  examin-

ation . . -  .


§  10. Mental  vision  nf  complicated  event.
XIII.  116 3  weeks  Carriage  accident


Page


142
144

147


149


CHAPTER  III.

Waking  Hallucination.s  and  Dreams  of  the  Same  Character.

§  1. Death  Coincidences,
(a)  Visual  realistic — like  a  real  person  in  percipienC s  surroundings.
L.  1226 XIX.  76


L.  1146
L.  980
L.  1223


fL.  1130
L.  834
[L.  1121

L.  1224
L.  1087


[L.  947
L.  1204

[L.  1159
L.  1179
L.  1147
L.  1220


L.  977
L.  974
L.  979
L.  991
[L.  839


L.  978
L.  973
[L.  1108
[L.  1124
L.  1139
rL.  1166
[L.  1175


FL.  1153
L.  1211
[L.  1115


XII.  59
VII.  8
XIX.  39


XI.  58
IV.  213
IX.  306

XIX.  47
VIII.  41


VI.  9
XVTI.  204

XIII.  103

XIV.  295
XII.  99
XIX.  3


Fortnight
11  weeks
Fortnight
9J  months


14  months

4  years
About  3  years

1  month
1|-  years


Next  day

3  weeks

4  months
4  months
3  weeks

3  months


D
D
D


Apparition  speaks

Do.  do.
Child  percipient
Appearance  and  impression
to different  percipients
apart - . .  .
Do.  do.
Seen  by  hallucinatory  light
Perhaps influenced  by
place - . .  .
Do.  do.
Perhaps influenced  by
place. A  second  figure
seen  but  not  recognised.  -

Percipient  ill  -
Collective  - - -  -


Request  to  communicate


(6)  Appearance  not  realistic.


VI.  368

VI.  280

VII.  7
VII.  121
IV.  268


13  months

1  year

4J  months

2  months
Nearly  4  yrs.


Promise  to  communicate

Do.  do.
Threefold  figure
Shadowy,  recognised  -
Shadowy,  unrecognised


(c)  Visual  with  veridical  or  symbolic  adjuncts.


VI.  308
VI.  249
Vni.  328

X.  33

XI.  278

XIII.  140

XIV.  75


3J  years
13  months
A  week
2  yrs.  2  mon.
1  week
22  days
5  weeks


D  Vision

D

D

D

D  Animal  agent
D  Symbolic  -
D.  Do


(d)  Appearance  of  relative  of  dying  person.

XII.  317 3  days  Twofold  appearance

XVIII.  35 Same  day D  - - -  -
IX,  127  AVithin  a  week  D  -


152
160
166


167

177]

177

179]
180


183

189]

190

194]

195

196

199


203
205
208
210


213

216

218]

219]

219

231]

231]


231]

232

235]


LXXXVI.]


List  of  Cases  Quoted  or  Described.


427


Volume  and
page  in
Journal.


L.  929
L.  1180
M.  CI.  88
L.  1141
L.  1151


Interval
between

experience  Remarks,
and  record.

(e)  Symbolic  experiences.

VI.  181  About  4  years

VIII.  130  A  few  days  .  _  .  .  .
VIII.  134 At  once  D

(/)  Auditory  death  coincidences.

V.  204  4J  years  Voice  announcing  death
XIV.  327 10  days D Death  of  friend's  brother

VI.  293  1  month D Carnot's  murder

XI.  320  10  months  Footsteps  and  knocks

XII.  196 11  days  Knocks  -

§  2. Coincidence  with  illness  of  or  accident  to  agent.
Agent  ill.


Page


235]
235]
235]


236
237
241
242
242


L.  1207

XV  111.  ^60

3|-  years

Vision.  Repeated

243

L.  1209

XVIII.  19

3  months

Apparition.  Misrecognition

at  first  - - -  -

z49

L.  1088

VIII.  78

2  years

Apparitioii  on  waking

zoo

L.  1129

X.  263

6  weeks

D

Of  agent  with  swollen  face  -

ZO  /

[L.  964

VI.  168

2|  years

D

260]

L.  1195

XVI.  41

4  days

D

Telegram  seen,  etc.,  -

260

L.  937

V.  251

4  months

D

Symbolic  funeral

262

G.  234

VI.  83

A  few  days

D

Do. - -  -

263

[L.  994

VII.  176

16  days

D

Do. - -  -

263]

[L.  967

VI.  183

11  months

Unrecognised call.  Some

local  connection

264]

[L.  987

VII.  106

1  week

D

Unrecognised. Rap  and

announcement  of  a  death

264]

L.  820

III.  356

2^  years

Two percipients,  apart.

Apparitions  -

265

L.  1210

XVIII.  25

4J  months

D

Two percipients,  apart.

Dreams

268

Accident

to  agent.

L.  1138

XI.  269

5  months

D

Two  percipients,  together.

Simultaneous  dreams

271

L.  1221

XIX.  7

?  6  weeks

Agent's  voice  heard  -

276

L.  1193

XV.  342

3  days

Vision - - .  -

278

[L.  989

VII.  108

7  months

279]

L.  992

VII.  125

2  days

D

Dream  of  accident,  but  to

280

wrons  sister  -

L.  1165

XIII.  136

15  months

D

Two  dreams

282

[L.  1113

IX.  104

7  days

D

285]

[L.  1118

IX.  151

6  weeks

D

2861

[L.  1178

XIV.  155

1  year

D

286]

§  3. Coincidence  with

idea  or  wish  connected  by  the  agent  ivith  the  percipient.

L.  1227

XIX.  83

3  months

Apparition  summoning  per-

cipient - - -  -

287

L.  1143

XII.  14

4  days

Call

292

L.  1177

XIV.  143

Same  day

Do.

293

[L.  993

VII.  162

4  years

Bell. ?  Collective  -

295]

L.  1222

XIX.  30

9  months

Voice. Arrival  case  -

295

L.  1225

XIX.  56

2  days

D

Repeated.  Do.

296

L.  1135

XI.  177

2  days

D

Letter  case

298

L.  1189

XV.  263

5  days

D

Do.  ...

301

428


Mrs.  Hewy  SidgioicJc.


[part


No.  of  Case.


Volume  and

page  in
Journal.


Interval
between
experience
and  record.


Remarks.


Page


§  3.  Coincidence  with  idea  or  xoish  connected  by  the  agent  with  the  -percipient. — contd.

302
305
307
308]
308]
309
310
312


L.  1133

XI.  138

3  days  D

Letter  case

L.  954

VI.  103

1  yr.  5  mon.  D

Do.

I..  936

V.  246

About  2\  yrs.D

Newspaper  case

[G.  268

X.  232

10  days  D

Do.

[L.  in--*

XIV.  72

1  month  D

Do.

L.  1)37

XI.  227

About  3  mon.D

Letter  case

L.  895

V.  173

Next  day  D

Do.

L.  1218

XVIII.  225

3  months  D

Do.

§4.


L.  1219
L.  836
L.  1228
L.  1191
[L.  1182
L.  1184
L.  1185
[L.  1096
[L.  1098
L.  1168
L.  1173
L.  1183
[L.  1197
[P.  286


Coincidence  with  idea  of  agent  not  connected  by  him  with  percipient.
Unconscious  telepathic  leakage.


XVIII.  227
IV.  221

XIX.  138
XV.  337

XIV.  383

XV.  87
XV.  107

vm.  141

VIII.  145
XIIL  153
XIII.  328

XV.  17
XVL  118

XVI.  51


Nearly  3  mon.  D

A  fortnight  D

Same  day  D

12  days  D

2  months  D

2  months  D

17  months  D

9  months  D

9  weeks  D

Next  day  ?  D

Next  day  D

Next  day  D
14  months
About  5  mon.D


No  emotion  of  agent -  313

Do. - - -  314

Do. . - .  315

Do. ...  317

Do. ...  318]

Do. ...  319

Do. ...  320

Do. ...  321]

Do. ...  321]

Repeated. Agent  agitated  322

Agent  trying  for  vision .  323

.\gent  agitated  - . .  325

Vision. Agent  agitated -  329]

Premonition  or  telepathy  -  330]


§  5. Ambiguous  Cases.  • •  .

Coinciding  event  insufficiently  marked,  or  time  coincidence  unce:rtain.


L.  1109

VIII.  329

5  months

Realistic. Three  senses

affected

333

L.  1200

XVI.  205

4  days

Realistic. Two  senses

335

L.  896

V.  174

b\  weeks

Realistic.  Do.

336

[L.  1073

IV.  2.53

2  days

Realistic.  Do.

337]

L.  950

VI.  29

About  1  year

Apparition  unrealistic

338

[L.  962

VL  165

4  months

Apparition

339]

[L.  1198

XVI.  149

3  days

Vision  ....

339]

L.  1156

XIIL  27

2  days

Apparition. Perhaps  dog

co-percipient

340

L.  844

IV.  289

Next  day

Dog  agent  ?  Auditory

342

[G.  277

XII.  54

2  yrs.  and  6  weeks  Bang  on  door. Collective  -

343]

[L.  1190

XV.  289

15  months

?  Collective  apparition

343]

Agent  doubtful.


L.  1212

XVIIL  51

11  months

D

Concerning  son's  death

344

L.  1206

XVII.  212

4  days

Place  of  picture  perceived

on  waking

349

[L. 1119

IX.  227

1  yr.  8  mon.

D

Place  of  lost  bo.x

351]

M.  CI.  87

VI.  264

1  month

Explosion  heard  on  waking

352

[L.  1201

XVI.  306

At  time

Two  impressions  of  sinking

ships  ....

352]

[L.  1214

XVIIL  92

Within  day

or

Two dreams of  air

two

D

raids  ....

353]

Lxxxvi.] List  of  Cases  Quoted  or  Described.  429


CHAPTER  IV.

Collective  and  Reclprocal  Cases  with  no  Evidence  of  Agency
external  to  the  percipients.


Interval

Volume  and  between  B  -marks.  Page

No.  of  Case. page  in  experience
Journal.  and  record.

§  1. Similar  and  Simultaneous  Dreams.

L.  835  IV.  220  1  month D 355

L.  965  VI.  169  About  2  yrs.  D 356

L.  1162 XIII.  119 2  years  D 357

L.  1161 XIII.  118 2  days  D 3-58

L.  1181  XIV.  381  Same  day  Child  dreams.  Mother  sim-
ultaneously sees  appari-
tion ....  359

§  2. Collective  Visual  Hallucinations.  Unrecognised.

[G.  200  V.  221  About  3  yrs. Out  of  doors  at  dusk  - -  362]

[L.  1148 XII.  121 Next  day  Out  of  doors  in  mist  - -  362]

G.  241  VT.  145  1|-  years  At  night - - - -  363

L.  842  IV.  286  8  weeks  ,, . . - -  364

G.  201  V.  223  If  years  Poor  Ught - - -  367

G.  239  VI.  135  1  year  At  night - - - -  371

G.  230  VT.  22  9  months  Fading  Ught - - -  372

L.  827  IV.  71  4  years  Man  seen  fishing - -  376

§  3. Collective  Visual  Hallucinations.  Recognised.

G.  275  XI.  185  6  months  Mother  seen  at  bedside  of

dying  child - - -  378

L.  1169 XIII.  210 About  2  years Indoors,  good  light - -  379

G.  286  XV.  249 6  days  Apparition  of  a  cat - -  .581

L.  959  VI.  131  Next  day  Out  of  doors,  good  light  -  387

L.  828  IV.  72  2  months  Apparition  speaks - -  390

§  4. Collective  Auditory  Cases.

[L.  1203 XVII.  118 ?  2  years  Music ... -  393]

[L.  960  VI.  139  Within  month Recognised  voice - -  393]

G.  247  VII.  9  9  months  Unrecognised  voice  393

§  5. Semi- Reciprocal  and  Reciprocal  Cases.

L.  1150 XIT.  193 5  weeks  One  visual,  one  auditory  •  395

L.  1187 XV.  259 8  days  Do. do. - -  398

L.  1122 IX.  331  4  days  Dreams  in  different  rooms  -  404

L.  1149 XII.  173 14  months  Dream  &  Apparition  - -  406

L.  1106 VIII.  319 1  year  Dream  &  footsteps  heard

collectively - - -  411

L.  1188 XV.  262  10  days  Dreams  in  different  houses  415

L.  986  VII.  104 1  month  Do.  do. . ■  417


430


J.  C.  Fliigel.


[part

i


REVIEWS.

I. The  Psychology  of  Medicine. By  T. W. Mitchell,  M.D.
Pp.  vii  +  187. Methuen  &  Co.  6s.

"  This  book,"  says  the  author,  "  is  intended  primarily  for
those  readers  who  have  no  professional  training  in  either
Medicine  or  Psychology,  but  who  are  anxious  to  keep  them-
selves abreast  of  modern  thought  in  these  departments  of
knowledge.  At  the  same  time  I  hope  it  may  prove  serviceable
to  professional  students  of  these  subjects  as  a  preliminary
survey  of  the  ground  they  will  have  to  cover  should  they
desire  to  specialize  in  i^sychotherapeutics  or  in  the  psychology
of  the  abnormal."  To  this  statement  the  reviewer  may  add
immediately  that  it  is  admirably  adapted  to  both  of  its  two
main  purposes  ;  it  is  indeed — within  the  limits  necessarily
imposed  by  its  relatively  small  size — probably  the  best  work  on
its  subject  existing  in  the  English  language.  Readers  of  the
Proceedings  are  already  familiar  with  the  qualities  that  dis-
tinguish Dr.  Mitchell's  writings — above  all  their  lucidity  and
their  impartiality — and  will  recognise  with  pleasure  that  he  has
employed  these  by  no  means  too  common  gifts  to  great
advantage  in  the  present  volume.

In  the  exposition  of  his  subject  Dr.  Mitchell  deals  first  with
the  theory  of  dissociation,  as  illustrated  by  the  facts  of
hypnotism  and  hysteria,  the  treatment  of  these  subjects  being
historical  in  form.  In  his  third  chapter  on  Repression  he
begins  to  deal  with  the  concepts  introduced  by  the  psycho-
analysts and  throughout  the  remainder  of  the  book  (i.e.  from
p.  42  onwards)  the  thought  proceeds  pretty  closely  along
psycho -analytic  lines  :  in  fact,  were  it  not  for  the  relatively
narrow  scope  necessitated  by  a  strict  adherence  to  the  medical
point  of  view,  this  portion  of  the  book  could  be  confidently
recommended  as  one  of  the  most  accurate  and  illuminating
(but  at  the  same  time  one  of  the  most  concise)  introductions
to  this  subject  that  are  at  present  in  existence.  Apart  from
the  advantages  accruing  from  Dr.  Mitchell's  special  gifts  of
exposition,  the  treatment  of  psycho-analysis  is  more  instructive
than  that  to be  found  in many other books, in  that  the


LXXXVI.]


Reviews.


431


psycho-analytic  discoveries  and  theories  are  here  seen  in  their
proper  historical  and  scientific  settings,  and  thus  appear  far  less
strange  and  far-fetched  than  when  presented,  so  to  speak,  in  vacuo.

The  nature  of  the  subjects  treated  and  the  order  of  the  exposition
will  be  readily  seen  from  an  enumeration  of  the  chapter  headings,
which  (from  Chapter  IV.  onwards)  are  as  follows  :  the  Un-
conscious, Psycho-analysis  (in  which  stress  is  very  properly
laid  on  the  distinction  between  psycho-analysis  as  a  psycho-
logical method,  psycho-analysis  as  a  body  of  doctrine,  and
psycho-analysis  as  a  therapeutic  instrument),  Dreams,  the
Neuroses,  Psycho-therapeutics,  the  Prevention  of  Neurotic
Illness.  The  reader  will  find  much  of  interest  and  importance
in  all  these  chapters,  but,  in  the  opinion  of  the  reviewer,  two
of  them  are  of  quite  outstanding  usefulness,  namely,  those
on  the  Unconscious  and  on  the  Neuroses  respectively.  It  is
especially  in  dealing  with  these  difficult  and  complex  matters
that  Dr.  Mitchell's  power  of  clear  thinking  stands  him  in  good
stead.  With  admirable  lucidity  the  reader  is  introduced  to
the  different  views  that  have  been  held  concerning  the  nature
of  the  Unconscious,  Subconscious,  Co-conscious,  Subliminal,  etc.,
and  the  relation  of  these  concepts  to  each  other  is  clearly
indicated.  A  proper  assimilation  of  this  chapter  on  the
Unconscious  should  save  the  student  much  misconception  and
confusion.  It  is,  too,  a  chapter  which  may  be  read  with
pleasure  and  profit  by  the  advanced  psychologist  as  well  as
by  the  beginner.  Much  the  same  applies  to  the  chapter  on
the  Neuroses — a  subject  that  has  been  rendered  obscure  by
varying  classifications  and  by  the  varying  use  of  the  same
terms  as  employed  by  dilJerent  writers.  Here  also  Dr.
Mitchell  proceeds  to  set  our  mental  house  in  order  in  an
altogether  exemplary  manner,  and  the  reader  emerges  from  the
spring-cleaning,  feehng  not  only  that  the  cobwebs  have  been
effectually  removed  but  that  the  actual  process  of  purification
has  been  a  pleasure  rather  than  a  drudgery.

As  is  to  be  expected  from  the  nature  of  the  work  and
from  Dr.  Mitchell's  detached  methods  of  treatment,  the  work
of  "  post-Freudian "  Avriters  such  as  Jung,  Adler,  Silberer  and
Maeder  is  reviewed  in  an  impartial  and  on  the  whole  non-
committal manner.  Dr.  Mitchell,  indeed,  rather  tantahzingly
refrains  from  any  direct  expression  of  his  personal  opinion  on


432


J.  C.  Fliigel.


[part


the  questions  here  at  issue,  though  (especially  when  taken  in
connection  with  his  pronouncements  elsewhere)  an  indication  |
of  the  nature  of  his  own  views  is  perhaps  afforded  by  the  fact
that  he  thinks  it  necessary  to  forestall  a  possible  criticism
as  to  the  inadequate  pi'esentation  of  the  post- Freudian  schools  |
by  reminding  his  readers  that  "  the  work  of  Freud  is  the
foundation  on  which  all  subsequent  analytical  doctrines  and
methods  are  based  ;  and  that  psycho-analysis  differs  from  some
forms  of  analytical  psychology  in  that  it  adheres  strictly  to
the  principles  of  science  and  does  not  pose  as  an  ethical
system or  as an esoteric  religion  " (p.  179).

The  only  serious  criticism  that  can  be  raised  against  the
book  is  that  it  has  the  defects  of  its  merits.  Written  as  it
is  in  Dr.  Mitchell's  broad,  calm  and  somewhat  cautious  manner,
it  is  of  necessity  somewhat  less  stirring,  trenchant  and  immedi-  '
ately  arresting  than  some  similar  treatises  written  from  a
narrower  point  of  view.  But  what  it  may  jjerhaps  lack  in  j
vividness  or  picturesqueness,  it  amply  makes  good  by  its
tolerance,  clearness  and  conciseness.  It  is  a  book  to  be  con-
fidently recommended  to  all  who  are  interested  in  the  contribu-
tions of  Medicine  to  the  science  of  the  mind. J.  C.  Flxjgel.

II.  Introductory  Lectures  on  Psycho- Analysis.  By  Pkof.  Sigm.
Freud.  Authorised  English  Translation  by  Joan  Riviere.
With  a  Preface  by  Ernest  Jones,  M.D.  Pp.  395.
Allen  &  Unwin.  18s.

With  the  possible  exception  of  the  Traumdeutung,  this  book
is  likely  to  be  the  most  generally  read  of  any  of  Prof.  Freud's
works,  and  its  translation  into  English  by  Mrs.  Riviere  is  a
very  welcome  event.  It  differs  in  two  principal  respects  from
most  of  the  author's  other  works  :  first,  in  that  (as  the  title
indicates)  it  consists  of  lectures  delivered  before  an  audience
who  were,  it  is  assumed,  receiving  their  first  initiation  into
psycho-analysis  ;  secondly,  in  that  it  covers  a  wider  field  than
that  of  any  single  previous  work  of  Freud's.  These  two  facts
make  it  eminently  suitable  as  a  introduction  to  Freud's
writings,  and  there  cannot  be  the  slightest  doubt  that  those
who  are  approaching  the  study  of  this  author  for  the  first
time  will  be  well  advised  to  start  with  this  volume  rather
than  with any  of  the monographs devoted  to  more  special


i


LXXXVI.]


Revieivs.


433


subjects.  Not  that  this  book  makes  any  pretence  of  covering
the  whole  field  of  psycho-analysis  ;  indeed,  it  professes  to  deal
with  three  aspects  of  the  subject  only — the  Psycho-pathology
of  Everyday  Life,  Dreams  and  the  Neuroses  ;  but  in  treating
these  matters  it  affords  interesting  sidelights  into  the  other
fields  of  psycho -analytic  application,  so  that  the  careful  reader
will  be  well  equipped  to  proceed  to  the  other  developments
which  are  not  dealt  with  (or  are  at  most  only  touched  upon)
in  this  volume.

Prof.  Freud,  as  his  readers  have  now  come  to  recognise,
commands  several  distinct  styles  of  writing.  Sometimes  he
writes  concisely  but  yet  with  admirable  clearness.  Occasionally
it  appears  as  if  the  desire  for  clarity  and  ease  of  exposition
had  so  triumphed  over  the  desire  for  brevity  that  the  treat-
ment becomes  somewhat  lengthy  in  proportion  to  the  matter
it  contains — any  disadvantages  accruing  from  this,  however,
being  largely  compensated  by  a  charming  intimacy  and  per-
suasiveness of  manner  and  an  altogether  delightful  lucidity  of
expression.  But  sometimes,  again,  it  is  the  ojjposite  that
happens  ;  ease  of  exposition  is  ruthlessly  sacrificed  to  concise-
ness, and  when  this  mood  is  on  him  Prof.  Freud  gives  the
impression  that  he  has  condensed  into  one  page  of  this  kind
of  writing  what  would  have  occupied  him  for  at  least  ten
pages  of  his  easy-flowing  style — with  a  result  that  makes
considerable  demands  upon  the  reader's  powers  of  concen-
tration. All  three  of  these  styles  are  to  be  found  in  the
present  book.  The  middle  section  on  Dreams  is  wonderfully
clear  and  convincing,  and  is  in  many  ways  a  far  more  polished
presentation  of  the  subject  than  is  the  Traumdeutung  itseH.
The  first  section  on  the  errors  and  mistakes  occurring  in
daily  life  is  in  our  author's  most  simple  and  persuasive  style  ;
the  reader  is  led  easily  along  by  the  "  sweet  reasonableness "
of  the  argument  untU  he  almost  forgets  to  shudder  at  the
dreaded  abysses  of  the  Tiefenpsychologie  that  lie  ahead  of  him.
In  the  third  part,  however,  the  easy  methods  of  exposition
are  discarded  in  favour  of  the  condensed  style.  Nevertheless
this  section  well  deserves  the  careful  study  that  it  demands.
An  adequate  assimilation  of  it  wfil  carry  the  reader  a  long
way  towards  a  mastery  of  the  more  difficult  and  often  mis-
understood parts  of  psycho -analytic theory. Furthermore,  it


434


F.  0.  S.  Schitier.


[part


will  be  of  almost  as  much  interest  to  the  advanced  student
as  to  the  beginner,  for  nowhere  else  has  Freud  given  such  a
complete  and  consistent  exposition  of  his  attitude  towards  the
problems  of  the  neuroses.

All  three  sections  give  ample  evidence  of  that  wonderful
gift  of  perspicacity  into  the  obscure  places  of  the  mind  that
has  enabled  Prof.  Freud  to  throw  a  brilliant  light  upon  so
many  hitherto  dark  and  insoluble  problems  of  human  thought,
emotion  and  behaviour.  This  authorised  translation  (an
unauthorised  and  in  many  respects  inaccurate  translation  has
already  been  on  the  market  in  America)  of  this  most  important
exposition  of  Freudian  doctrine  from  the  pen  of  the  Viennese
master  himself  should  undoubtedly  mark  an  epoch  in  the
study  and  understanding  of  psycho-analysis  among  English-
speaking  peoples.  J.  C.  Fltjgel.

III.  Die  Besessenheit. By  Tratjgott  Konstantin  Oesterreich.
Langensalza,  Wendt  &  Klauwell. 1921. Pp.  vii  +  403.

It  is  something  of  a  new  departure  in  German  philosophy
that  a  professor  thereof  (even  though  Tubingen  is  not  one  of
the  major  universities)  should  be  found  to  concern  himself
so  seriously  and  elaborately  with  the  problems  of  psychical
research  as  Prof.  Oesterreich  does  in  this  monumental  study
of  Possession.  In  other  respects,  however,  it  is  a  work  tyj)ical
enough  of  German  academic  procedure.  It  is  enormously
learned,  and  must  pretty  nearly  exhaust  the  literature,  '  das
gesamte  Material,'  culled  from  classical,  religious  and  anthro-
pological sources,  with  admirable  diligence  and  fullness.  It
arranges  this  material — after  a  fashion — under  headings  such
as  these  :  '  Part  I.  The  Nature  of  the  State  of  Possession —
the  identity  of  Possession  throughout  the  ages — its  outward
appearance — the  subjective  condition  of  the  possessed — the
origin  and  cure  of  Possession — exorcism.  Part  II.  The  distri-
bution of  the  phenomena  of  Possession  and  their  import  for
the  psychology  of  religion — Spontaneous  Possession  among
primitive,  and  more  civihzed,  peoples — artificially  induced
states  of  Possession  among  Savages — North  Asiatic  Shamanism
in  relation  to  Possession — artificially  induced  Possession  among
the  civilized,  in  the  past  and  present.'  It  takes  up  a  con-
sistently psychological attitude towards this material  and


LXXXVI.]


Reviews.


435


rightly  emphasizes  the  possibilities  of  autosuggestion,  and  the
need  for  more  detailed  and  psychologically  competent  observa-
tion on  the  part  of  anthropologists.  It  admits  the  occurrence
of  parapsychical  phenomena,"  and  even  of  '  parapsychophysical  '
(p.  379).  But  it  propounds  no  constructive  theory  of  the
phenomena  as  a  whole,  argues  no  thesis,  and  arrives  at  no
conclusion,  beyond  remarking  that  a  purely  and  simply  negative
attitude  towards  the  phenomena  is  no  longer  possible.  And
it  has,  alas,  no  index,  a  fact  which  detracts  seriously  from
the  usefulness  of  its  compilation.

English  psychical  researchers  will  be  gratified  to  note  how
closely  Prof.  Oesterreich's  general  attitude  coincides  with  their
own,  and  how  ready  he  is  to  recognize  the  work  of  their
Society.  He  declares  (p.  379)  that  in  the  Piper  Case,  the
occurrence  of  parapsychic  phenomena  has  been  established
beyond  question,  and  quotes  at  some  length  from  Sir  Oliver
Lodge's  sittings  with  Mrs.  Piper.  Among  his  other  citations
the  most  curious  and  interesting  case,  perhaps,  is  that  narrated
on  pp.  369-70  of  a  Bohemian  sculptor,  who  gives  an  account
of  his  possession  by  the  spirit  of  a  Cu'cassian  woman,  of  the
(voluntary)  extrusion  of  his  own,  and  of  the  return  of  his
normal  self.  It  is  one  of  the  rare  but  valuable  cases  that
enable  us  to  apprehend  what  '  multiple  personality  '  feels  like
from  the  inside,  and  is  comparable  with  the  Rev.  Mr.  '  Hanna's  '
classic  description  in  Sidis  and  Goodhart's  book,  of  how  he
re-synthesized  his  dissociated  personalities.  Altogether  then
Prof.  Oesterreich's  work  is  a  competent  and  valuable  contri-
bution to  the  subject  of  which  it  treats. F.  C.  S.  Schiller.

IV.  Einjuhrung  in  den  Okkultismus  und  Spiritismus .  By  Rudolf
TiscHNER.  J.  F.  Bergmann,  Munich  and  Wiesbaden.  1921.
Pp.  viii+142.

This  book  is  precisely  what  it  calls  itself,  viz.  an  intro-
ductory survey  of  the  whole  field  of  '  occultism,'  a  term  which,
as  Dr.  Tischner  explains,  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  best  German
equivalent  of  '  Psychical  Research.'  It  is,  moreover,  written
in  an  entirely  scientific  and  critical  spirit  from  a  standpoint
closely  akin  to  that  of  the  S.P.R.  ;  the  author  is  thoroughly
acquainted  mth  the  Proceedings  of  the  Society,  and  quotes
from  them  extensively  and  appreciatively. Altogether  his  book


436


F.  C.  8.  Schiller.


[part


forms  an  excellent  introduction,  though,  being  as  such  com-
posed largely  of  summaries  and  citations  from  the  primary
authorities,  it  does  not  aim  at  novelties,  either  of  fact  or  of
interpretation.  Nevertheless,  references  are  found  to  a  certain
number  of  interesting  cases,  which  have  not  yet  been  reported,
or  at  any  rate  have  not  yet  got  into  the  English  literature.
Thus  on  pp.  33-4  Dr.  Tischner  tells  a  story,  of  his  own
knowledge,  about  a  middle-aged  official  who  is  liable  to  be  disso-
ciated into  '  F  I  '  and  '  F  II.'  '  F  II,"  who  appears  to  be  the
analogue  of  '  Sally  '  Beauchamp  and  '  Margaret  '  Fischer,  gave
a  very  ingenious  and  conclusive  proof  of  his  '  co-consciousness  '
with  '  F  I.'  He  was  usually  enabled  to  come  to  the  surface
by  the  intervention  of  a  friend,  who  was  going  away  :  never-
theless he  promised  to  communicate  with  his  friend  through
the  letters  of  '  F  I.'  Accordingly,  when  these  arrived,  it  was
found  that  certain  letters  were  thicker  than  the  rest,  which
'  F I  '  explained  by  the  badness  of  the  ink  :  nevertheless,
when  these  letters  were  put  together,  it  was  found  that  they
made  sense  and  conveyed  a  message  from  '  F II  '  !  One
would  be  glad  to  have  from  Dr.  Tischner  a  full  account  of
this  singular  case.  The  same  remark  applies  to  a  trance-
composer  (p.  42),  who  appears  to  be  possessed  by  '  Beethoven,'
'  Schubert,'  '  Wagner,'  etc.,  and  to  be  identical  with  the
'  M.  R.'  of  Dr.  Tischner's  Telepathy  and  Clairvoyance,  and  the
hero  of  his  '  psychoscopic  '  experiments.  His  account  also  of
the  experiments  undertaken  by  him  to  confirm  A.  de  Rochas's
account  of  the  '  exteriorization  of  sensibility '  is  very  striking
(p.  91-2).  Only  one  failure  to  get  the  right  reaction  in  a
series  of  fifty  experiments  is  evidently  far  beyond  the  possi-
bilities of  chance  ;  but  a  fuller  account  of  the  conditions  would
be  desirable.  A  fully  documented  account  of  the  Grierson
case  (p.  76)  would  also  be  valuable.

As  regards  theoretical  interpretation,  Dr.  Tischner  is  cautious
and  not  spiritistic,  though  he  will  not  dogmatically  deny  the
possibility  of  spiritism.  He  is  sceptical  about  spirit  photo-
graphy, without  denying  the  evidence  for  other  '  physical  '
phenomena  (p.  104),  and  he  thinks  it  possible  that,  in  spite
of  telepathy  and  clairvoyance  and  the  disproof  of  materialism,
there  may  be  no  individual  immortahty,  because  the  psychic
individual  may  merge  at  death  into  the  general '  ocean '  of


LXXXVI.]


Reviews.


437


psychic  being  (p.  89).  It  may  be  so,  of  course,  so  far  as  our
present  knowledge  goes,  though  it  is  hardly  an  alluring  or
ennobling  theory  ;  it  makes  the  universal  '  psyche  '  something
not  higher  but  lower  than  the  individual  soul,  and  has  no
explanation  of  the  persistent  tendency  of  psychic  being,  alike
in  '  dissociations  '  and  in  quasi- spiritual  phenomena,  to  take
on  a  personal  form.  F.  C.  S.  Schiller.

V.  Ueber  Telepathic  und  Hellsehen,  experimentell-theoreiische  Unter-
suchungen.  By  Rudolf  Tischner.  Munich  and  Wiesbaden,
J.  F.  Bergmann. 1921. 2nd  ed. Enlarged. Pp.  iv  +  122.

It  is  not  surprising  that  Dr.  Tischner's  book,  which  first
appeared  towards  the  end  of  1919,  has  rapidly  reached  a
second  edition.  For  it  is  a  lucid  and  impressive  account  of
experiments  in  telepathy  and  clairvoyance  by  a  competent  and
clear-headed  medical  man  who  is  free  from  metaphysical
prejudices  and  aware  that  it  is  only  upon  an  adequate  basis
of  empirically  ascertained  fact  that  theorizing  is  worth  while.
The  book  consists  of  a  brief  introduction  defining  his  terms,
and  illustrating  the  present  state  of  opinion  in  Germany  on
the  subject,  of  a  clear  and  concise  account  of  some  180
experiments,  Avith  a  number  of  mediums,  followed  by  a  tabula-
tion and  discussion  of  their  results,  and  by  a  moderate  amount
of  theoretic  discussion,  mainly  critical  and  intended  to  bring
out  that  the  various  physical  explanations  suggested  are  vague
and  inadequate,  and  that  a  psychic  explanation  (of  some  sort)
can  alone  do  justice  to  the  facts.  The  centre  of  gravity  of
Dr.  Tischner's  book  is  thus  definitely  situated  in  the  account  of
his  experiments,  and  this  account  inspires  confidence  and  seems
an  important  addition  to  the  body  of  experimental  evidence.

The  foUowing  points  seem  particularly  worthy  of  note.  Dr.
Tischner  defines  '  telepathy  '  in  the  same  way  as  the  S.P.R.,
and  distinguishes  it  from  '  clairvoyance  '  as  involving  the
intervention  of  two  minds,  instead  of  one  mind  and  an  object.
'  Clairvoyance  '  he  treats  as  a  generic  term,  covering,  1.  '  crypto-
scopy,'  i.e.  perception  of  normally  invisible  objects  in  the
medium's  proximity ;  2.  '  seeing  at  a  distance  '  in  space,  or
3.  in  time  (past  or  present).  He  distinguishes  further  '  psycho-
scopy  '  (  = '  psychometry  ' )  as  the  insight  into  the  past  history
and  associations  of  objects,  though,  as  the  objects  were  usually


438


F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


[part  lxxxvi.]


more  or  less  elaborately  wrapped  up,  it  is  not  clear  Avhy  this  !
should  not  have  been  regarded  as  a  combination  of  the  first  j
and  third  form  of  '  cryptoscopy.'  He  also  admits  (p.  76)  that
in  one  case,  that  of  Ludwig  Aub,  to  which  he  has  devoted  a
separate  study,  the  medium  exhibits  a  mixture  of  telepathy
and  clairvoyance,  and  that  in  some  of  the  cases  here  reported
telepathy  is  an  alternative  interpretation  to  clairvoyance.
Subject  to  these  reservations,  he  tabulates  his  results  as
follows  :  (1)  telepathic,  5  experiments  (with  2  subjects),  all
successful  ;  (2)  purely  clairvoyant,  74  experiments  (with  4  I
subjects),  of  which  32  can  be  regarded  as  completely,  and
6  as  partly,  successful,  36  as  failures  (either  to  answer  at  all
or  to  answer  correctly)  ^  ;  (3)  '  psychoscopic,'  103  experiments,
with  3  subjects,  and  50  successes.  Altogether  6  subjects  were
emj)loyed,  all  of  them  amateurs,  with  one  exception,  a  paid
professional,  with  whom  70  experiments  are  recorded.  The
longest  series,  however,  was  with  an  amateur,  '  Herr  H.,'  who
was  subject  to  multiple  personality  (or  '  possession  '),  and  at  60
of  the  97  experiments  performed  with  this  gentleman,  one  or
more  members  of  a  commission,  which  had  been  appointed  by
a  Munich  medical  society  at  Dr.  Tischner's  request,  were  present,
and  kept  the  record  of  the  proceedings.  Five  of  these  gentle-
men are  quoted  as  expressing  their  conviction  of  the  genuine-
ness and  supernormal  character  of  what  they  had  witnessed.

It  is  evident  from  this  summary  that  Dr.  Tischner  has  been
remarkably  successful  in  obtaining  results  which  offer  no  very
obvious  handle  to  hostile  criticism.  At  the  same  time,  he  also
has  to  confess  the  waywardness  of  the  phenomena  and  the
impossibility  of  discovering  what  are  the  conditions  of  success
or  failure.  His  experiments  stand  as  well-attested  but  un-
comprehended  facts,  and  yield  no  clue  by  which  real  experi-
mental control  of  the  phenomena  would  seem  to  be  attainable.
And  so  long  as  the  phenomena  remain  uncontrollable  and
cannot  be  exploited,  they  will  not  appear  truly  real  to  the
practical  man,  while  the  ordinary  man  of  science  will  continue
to  cherish  a  strongly  hostile  bias  against  things  so  elusive
and  so  subversive  of  the  prejudices  which  his  training  fosters.

F.  C.  S.  Schiller.

^  Of  these  31  occurred,  however,  in  a  series  of  34  experiments  with  the  chief
medium,  when  he  waf?  in  bad  health.


PROCEEDINGS

OK  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

I'ART  LXXXVII
MARCH,  1923.


FORECASTS  IN  SCRIPTS  CONCERNING  THE  WAR.i

By  J.  G.  PiDDINGTON.

Ne  belli  terrere  minis  ;  tumor  onmis  et  irae
Concessere  deum.

Introdttction.

Mes.  Vebrall,  her  daughter  Mrs.  Salter,  Mrs.  Willett,
Mrs.  Holland,  the  Macs,  Mrs.  King  and  Mrs.  Stuart  Wilson,
have  had  the  goodness  to  allow  a  small  group  of  intimate
friends  to  make  a  study  of  the  scripts  ^  which  they  have
produced  at  various  dates  between  March  1901  and  the
present  time.  As  a  result  of  the  study  which  we  have
devoted  to  them  we  have  contributed  to  the  Proceedings
of  the  Society  a  considerable  number  of  papers,  in  which
we have set forth and discussed many instances  of

1  Parts  of  this  paper  were  read  at  two  meetings  of  the  Society  held  on
November  14  and  December  12,  1922.

2  I  use  the  convenient  word  "  script  "  in  this  paper  to  cover  not  only
automatic  writing,  but  table-tilting,  planchette  writing,  clair-audience,
and  any  other  sort  of  impression  or  experience  duly  recorded  at  the
time.

2  s


440


J.  0.  PidcUngtori.


[part


coincidence  between  the  scripts  of  these  different  auto-
niatists,  some  of  them  of  a  very  ehxborate  kind.  The
more  elaborate  of  these  coincidences  or  cross-correspond-
ences have  iisnally  been  of  a  literary  character,  and,  so
far  as  I  can  remember,  have  never  been  treated  as  having
for  their  subject  a  current  event.  A  few  cases  will  be
found  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  Report  on  her  own  automatic
writing  ^  where  knowledge  of  some  event  in  the  near  past
or  future  unknown  to  the  automatist  has  apparently  been
disj)layed  in  a  script  ;  and  here  and  there  in  our  Pro-
ceedings or  Journal^  will  be  found  cases  where  a  script
has  manifested  a  degree  of  coincidence  with  some  event
sufficiently  marked  to  make  it  worth  while  to  question
whether  chance  can  properly  be  held  to  account  for  it.
Two  of  these  cases  only  appear  to  me  to  be  really  strik-
ing :  one  in  which  knowledge  of  Sir  Michael  Foster's
death  seems  to  have  emerged  in  a  table-tilting  before  it
had  reached  the  filters  in  a  normal  way  ;  the  other,  in
which  a  script  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  exhibits  curious  coinci-
dences with  something  which  Mr.  Edward  Marsh  did  ten
weeks  later.  Even  if  all  the  coincidences  are  regarded  as
beyond  what  chance  may  produce, — and  I  certainly  do
not  so  regard  them — the  events  with  which  the  scripts
show  coincidence  are  generally  of  a  trivial  character,^  or
at  least  of  no  great  or  permanent  interest.  Moreover,  the
events  with  which  scripts  now  and  then  have  shown,  or
have  been  thought  to  show,  coincidences  are  the  subject
of  only  passing  and  so  to  speak  casual  allusion  ;  and  they
do  not  form  the  subjects  of  cross-correspondences  :  in
other  words,  references  to  them  are  confined  to  the  scripts
of  a  single  automatist.

Now  the  event  which  I  believe  to  be  the  theme  of  the
scripts  to  be  discussed  in  this  paper,  namely  the  Great
War,  was  an  event,  to  put  it  mildly,  neither  trivial  nor

^Proc,  Vol.  XX.

2  See  e.;/.  Proc,  Vol.  XXVI.,  pp.  44-46,  48-51;  Journal,  Vol.  XIII.,
pp.  35-40.

^  I  do  not  mean,  of  course,  that  the  triviality  of  the  event  deprives
the  coincidence  of  value  as  evidence  of  the  supernormal.  Far  from  it  :
the  very  triviality  may  increase  the  evidential  value.


LXXXVII.]


Introduction.


441


of  transient  interest  ;  and  the  references  to  it  in  the
scripts  are  not  casual,  nor  are  they  confined  to  the  scripts
of  a  single  automatist  ;  and  it  forms,  moreover,  if  one
may  be  permitted  to  put  it  in  that  way,  the  subject  of
an  extensive  'cross-correspondence.

At  the  same  time  the  references  to  the  War  come  out
most  persistently  and  most  explicitly — that  is  to  say,  least
cryptically — in  the  scripts  of  a  single  automatist.  Before
I  set  forth  the  evidence,  then,  I  had  better  state  who  this
automatist  is,  and  say  something  of  the  circumstances  in
which  her  phenomena  started,  and  something  of  the
character  of  her  automatism.  And  when  that  is  done,
I  must  also  say  a  good  deal  about  the  methods  employed
in  scripts  ;  for  without  a  general  idea  of  what  these
methods  are,  the  reader  would  often  find  it  difficult  to
understand  how  the  interpretation  of  scripts  is  arrived  at.

The  automatist  in  whose  scripts  the  references  to  the
War  come  out  most  clearly  is  the  lady  hitherto  known  to
the  Society  by  the  pseudonym  of  Mrs.  King.  Her  real
name,  the  Hon.  Mrs.  Alfred  Lyttelton,  she  now  allows  to
be  disclosed  ;  but  I  shall  continue  to  sj)eak  of  her  as
"  Mrs.  King  "  for  convenience'  sake,  since  in  all  our
records,  indexes,  and  so  forth,  the  pseudonym  and  not  the
real  name  has  been  used.  Not  much  has  hitherto  been
published  about  her  phenomena.  The  earliest  reference  to
them  will  be  found  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIX.,  pp.  1-45,
and  the  next  and,  I  think,  last  detailed  reference  in  an
Appendix  to  Mr.  Gerald  Balfour's  paper  on  The  Ear  of
Dionysius  in  the  same  volume,  pp.  239-243.  She  has
been  a  member  of  the  Society  for  many  years,  but  had
never  tried  to  do  script  ^  until  some  six  or  seven  weeks
after  her  husband's  death,  which  took  place  early  in  July
1913,  when  at  Mr.  Balfour's  suggestion  she  began  to  try
to  get  impressions.  Mr.  Balfour  made  the  suggestion  on
hearing  from  her  that  she  felt  herself  to  be  in  touch  with
her  husband.  She  started  the  experiment  with  no  par-
ticular object  in  view. She  did  not,  for  instance,  make

1  Very  little  of  Mrs.  King's  output  is  in  the  strict  sense  automatic
script.  She  receives  impressions,  chiefly  of  a  visual  or  auditory  kind  ;
find  these  gbe  either  records  herself,  or  else  dictates  to  a  recorder.


442


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


any  special  effort  to  obtain  communications  from  her
husband.  Although  in  the  course  of  her  experiments  she
has  not  infrequently  experienced  the  sense  and  conviction
of  her  husband's  presence  and  of  his  co-operation  in  her
phenomena,  her  script  affords  little,  if  any,  evidence  of
his  identity.  But  from  the  very  first  it  has  displayed
coincidences  with  the  scripts  of  the  other  automatists,
these  coincidences  being  of  a  kind  which  her  acquaintance
with  scripts  printed  in  the  Proceedings  or  Journal  will  not
account  for.  After  the  first  three  or  four  weeks  had
passed,  she  showed  the  results  to  Mr.  Balfour.  He
encouraged  her  to  persevere  ;  and  she  has  continued  to
produce  script  at  frequent  intervals  down  to  the  present  I
time.  She  has  handed  either  her  original  records  or
facsimiles  at  regidar  intervals  to  Mr.  Balfour,  in  whovse
keeping  they  have  since  remained.

Her  early  script,  like  that  of  all  automatists  known  to
me,  is  very  sketchy  and  halting  and  broken,  and  these
characteristics  have  not  diminished  with  increasing  practice
to  the  same  extent  that  they  have  diminished  in  other
cases.  I  believe  this  is  largely,  if  not  entirely,  due  to  her
being  less  dreamy,  and  more  distinctly  conscious  of  what
impressions  she  is  receiving,  than  are,  or  were,  the  other
automatists.  Much  of  her  script  is  cryptic  in  character  :
by  which  I  mean  that  it  consists  of  broken  phrases  or
single  words,  each  in  themselves  intelligible  perhaps,  but
not  intelligible  as  a  whole  ;  so  that,  if  the  whole  really
has  a  meaning,  it  is  concealed  in  such  a  way  that  he  who
runs  will  not  read  it.

Fortunately,  however,  all  Mrs.  King's  script  is  not
cryptic  ;  and  many  of  the  passages  from  it  which  I  shall
have  occasion  to  quote  in  this  paper  are  couched  in
language  which,  though  not  wanting  in  a  certain  oracular
vagueness,  is  on  the  whole  fairly  explicit.  These  passages
were  written  before  the  War  began,  and,  as  I  think,
predict  the  War.  Yet  though  the  language  employed
was  ,  as  I  have  just  said,  on  the  whole  fairly  explicit,
and  Avas  sometimes  even  quite  explicit,  neither  the  auto-
matist  herself  nor  those  of  us  who  saw  the  scripts  in
question  took  them  seriously  at  the  time  as  predictions


LXXXVII.]


Introduction.


443


of  war.i  It  was  only  after  the  Great  War  had  begun
that  their  import  and  importance  were  reaUsed.  How
then,  it  may  be  asked,  can  I  be  justified  in  asserting  that
the  language  of  these  scripts  is  sometimes  quite  explicit  1
I  think  that  when  the  reader  has  seen  some  of  the
extracts  from  Mrs.  King's  script  he  will  not  quarrel  with
my  description  of  it  ;  and  that  if  he  will  take  into  con-
sideration the  tendency  of  automatists  to  indulge  in
warnings  of  catastrophes  and  horrors  he  will  not  be
surprised  at  our  paying  but  little  attention  to  the  gloomy
vaticinations  of  this  modern  Cassandra.  Moreover,  the
strength  of  the  evidence  very  largely  depends  upon  the
putting  together  of  passages  in  which  the  same  phrase,
quotation,  or  topic  occurs  ;  and  before  this  sort  of  syn-
thesis can  be  satisfactorily  performed,  it  is  necessary  to
make  a  careful  index  of  all  distinctive  words,  phrases,
quotations  and  topics  ;  and  this  work  was  not  undertaken
until  long  after  the  War  began.

This  last  reason  for  our  failure  to  read  the  signs  of  the
times  leads  me  on  to  the  second  subject  about  which
I  said  it  would  be  desirable  to  speak  before  dealing  with
the  new  evidence  :  namely,  the  methods  employed  in  the
scripts.

The  scripts  produced  by  our  group  of  automatists  are
very  numerous,  amounting  in  all  to  over  3000.

Are  these  3000  scripts  entirely  independent  of  each
other  ?  If,  as  I  believe  to  be  the  case,  there  are  coin-
cidences between  the  scripts  that  cannot  properly  be
attributed  to  chance  or  to  normal  knowledge  :  in  other
words,  if  what  we  call  cross-correspondences  exist,  then  it
cannot  be  said  of  these  3000  or  more  scripts  that  they
are  entirely  independent  of  each  other.

The  published  cases  of  cross-correspondence  are  not,
however,  very  mxmerous  ;  and  even  if  the  far  more
numerous  unpublished  cases  were  taken  into  account  as
well,  it  might  yet  be  urged  that  after  all  they  establish

^  As  a  matter  of  fact  before  the  War  began  Mrs.  King  took  many  of
what  later  proved  to  be  references  to  the  War  to  be  references,  though
absurdly  exaggerated  ones,  to  the  linancial  dillicuUies  in  which  sjrr.e
friends  of  hers  were  involved  at  the  time.


444


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


only  occasional  and  spasmodic  connexions  between  the
scripts  of  the  various  automatists.  That  argument  would
have  considerable  force  if  each  script  of  each  individual
automatist  were  really  a  separate,  isolated  thing.  But
that  is  not  the  case.  Already  in  papers  published  in
Proceedings  plenty  of  instances  will  be  foimd  where  two
or  three,  or  half  a  dozen  or  more  scripts  of  a  single
automatist  have  been  shown  to  form  one  connected
group  ;  and  now  that  we  have  had  time  to  make  a
more  thorough -going  study  of  the  scripts,  we  can  assert
with  confidence  that  the  scripts  of  each  automatist  are
not  independent  units,  or  fall  now  and  again  into  small
inter-connected  groups,  but  that  the  entire  output  of  each
automatist  is  made  up  of  long  series  of  connected  groups.
These  groups  may,  or  may  not,  be  in  turn  interconnected  :
on  that  question  I  am  not  touching  for  the  moment  ;
nor  am  I  now  claiming  even  that  these  long  inter-
connected groups  form  intelligible  wholes.  The  point
I  am  stressing  at  the  moment  is  this  :  namely,  that
whether  one  of  the  automatists  has  produced  50  or  1000
scripts,  these  scripts  are  not  50  or  1000  isolated  units,
but  fall  into  large  groups.  This  being  so,  it  follows  that
while  a  cross-correspondence  between  a  single  script  of
A's  and  a  single  script  of  B's  on  the  face  of  it  establishes
a  connexion  between  these  two  scripts  only,  in  fact  it
may  involve  a  connexion  between  a  large  group  of  A's
and  a  large  group  of  B's.  And  so  it  comes  about  that
a  comparatively  small  number  of  cross-correspondences  may
effect  very  far-reaching  links  between  the  scripts  of
different  automatists,  and  create  between  them  a  far
deeper  unity  than  the  evidence  published  so  far  might
suggest.

The  elements,  i.e.  the  separate  scripts,  that  form  a
group  are  not  necessarily  found  close  together  in  time  :
they  may  be  separated  from  each  other  by  months  or
years.  What,  then,  constitutes  the  connecting  link  be-
tween one  script  and  another  ?  There  are  different
kinds  of  links.  The  clearest  and  most  certain  links
are

(a)  the  repetition  of  a  topic  : e.g.  the  story  of  Siegfried  ;


LXXXVIT.]


Introduction.


445


(b)  an  explicit  reference  back  to  an  earlier  script.^
The  next  clearest  link  is  the  repetition  of  distinctive
words,  names  or  phrases.  These  are  sometimes  quite
meaningless,  mere  nonsense  words  or  names,  such  as
"  Name,"  "  Overton  Charlie,"  "  Memrint,"  "  Smerincon,"
"  Thringle."  But  many  are  not  of  this  unintelligible
character  :  e.g.  "  More  suo  quisque  agat,"  "  Beneath  an
alien  sky,"  "  The  everlasting  snows,"  "  Spissa  cohors,"
"  Per  tenebras,"  "the  bended  knee."  Finally,  a  link  is
often  made  between  two  or  more  scripts  by  the  repetition
of  a  quotation,  or  by  the  quotation  of  some  phrase  or
line  from  some  poem  or  literary  passage  from  which  a
different  quotation  has  been  made  before.  But  this  form
of  link  presents  difficulties,  because  quotations  from
literary  passages  are  not  used  in  a  consistent  manner.
They  are  made  to  serve  more  than  one  purpose.  Thus,
although  there  are  many  quotations  from  Tennyson's  Ode
on  the  Death  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington  which  are  no
doubt  meant  to  be  read  together  and  to  be  taken  as
references  to  the  subject  of  that  Ode,  it  does  not  follow
that  every  quotation  from  the  Ode  should  be  put  together,
for  if  the  communicators  wanted  to  make  an  allusion  to
the  Pyrenees  and  could  not  effect  the  allusion  otherwise,
they  would  not  hesitate  to  use  the  line  in  the  Ode

"Beyond  the  Pyrenean  pines"

for  that  purpose.  Obviously  this  double  use  of  literary
quotations  is  likely  to  mislead,  aiid  one  cannot  therefore

1  Cf.,  for  instance,  "  Now  you  have  it—part  was  said  last  night  "  in
M.V.  419  ;  "  Peace  on  high  summits  look  back  at  tliat  "  in  M.V.  535,
the  reference  being  to  a  phrase  in  a  script  written  ten  years  earlier  ;
"  Some  time  back  I  said  you  wanted  a  four-leaved  clover  "  in  M.V.
694  ;  "  What  was  the  date  of  the  first  script  which  responded  to
Helen's  remark  about  the  thread  and  the  spinning — The  web  of  our
life  is  your  Vjirthday  motto — Look  back  at  that  "  in  iM.V.  351  ;  "  far
from  the  madding  crowd  look  back  to  that  in  H.V.  267  ;  "  a  suminer's
night — we  spoke  of  that  before"'  in  H.V.  333;  "this  |is]  part  of  the
same  story  that  we  wrote  before — it  will  all  be  jslaitr  in  time  "  in
H.V.  345  ;  passages  where  there  is  one  pine  should  be  distinguislied
from  passages  where  there  are  two  or  more  "  in  H.V.  491  ;  "  when  it
was  written  flames  of  fire  that  meant  the  fire  on  the  hearth  ''  in  H.V.
494.


446


J .  G.  Piddington.


[part


rely  on  what  may  be  called  "  quotation-links  "  with  as
much  confidence  as  on  the  other  kinds  of  links  previously
mentioned.  Single  lines  are  occasionally  taken  from  a
poem  merely  because  they  express  a  particular  idea  or
introduce  some  particular  words,  and  the  immediate
context  of  these  lines  and  the  rest  of  the  poem  are  to
be  disregarded.  Thus,  for  instance,  Mrs.  Salter's  scripts
have  repeatedly  quoted

"  The  night  in  her  silence.
The  stars  in  their  calm  "

from  Matthew  Arnold's  Empedocles  on  Etna  ;  and,  as
there  had  been  other  quotations  from  this  poem  in  Mrs.
Salter's  scripts  and  also  an  explicit  mention  in  Mac
scripts  of  "  Empedocles  who  gazed  in  the  seething  crater,"
one  was  naturally  inclined  to  connect  therewith  the
various  occurrences  of

"The  night  in  her  silence.
The  stars  in  their  calm."

Yet  this  synthesis  would  have  been  wrong,  as  is  shown
by  the  following  extract  from  a  script  of  Mrs.  Salter's  in
which  "  The  night  in  her  silence  "  appeared  for  the
eighth  time  :  ■  ,

the  paths  of  glory  [lead  but  to  the  grave] — the  darkness
of  the  grave — we  have  used  the  Elegy  [i.e.  Gray's  Elegy
hi  a  Country  Churchyard]  as  one  of  the  keys — we  find
that  in  this  case  [i.e.  in  Mrs.  Salter's  case]  at  least  we
can  get  nearer  what  we  want  by  drawing  on  very  familiar
passages  of  Hterature — sometimes  the  context  is  relevant
&  sometimes  the  words  are  merely  words — it  is  not  easy
always  to  make  it  clear  which — Now  with  the  night  in
her  silence  etc.  the  important  words  are  silence  &  calm —
nothing  else  matters  much — the  chief  point  is  silence.

"  The  night  in  her  silence,"  then,  is  not  to  be  taken  either
as  a  reference  to  the  story  of  Empedocles  or  to  the
immediate  context  in  which  the  words  occur  in  Matthew
Arnold's  poem. Nevertheless  in  a  very  large  number  of


LXXXVIT.]


Introduction.


cases  a  quotation  from  a  passage  in  literature  is  meant
to  imply  its  context  as  well.

I  said  above  that  one  of  the  two  clearest  links  between
scripts  is  the  repetition  of  a  topic,  and  I  gave  as  an
example  the  story  of  Siegfried.  But  here,  too,  it  is  not
always  plain  sailing  ;  for  it  is  often  exceedingly  difficult  to
recognise  a  topic  when  it  is  repeated.  Of  course  if
Siegfried's  name  or,  say,  Fafner's,  or  the  name  of  some
other  character  prominent  in  the  story  is  mentioned,  the
reference  to  the  Siegfried  story  is  easily  recognised.  But
the  problem  is  often  not  so  simple  as  that,  for  allusion
may  be  made  to  some  detail  in  the  Siegfried  story  mthout
any  exphcit  mention  of  Siegfried  or  of  anything  likely  to
suggest  Siegfried.  This  is  the  kind  of  thing  that  happens  :
First  there  will  be  a  plain  mention  of  the  sword  of
Siegfried  ;  then  a  month  or  two  later  wiU  come  a  reference
to  the  divine  armour  of  Achilles  ;  next  a  year  or  so
later  the  script  will  say  that  the  shield  of  Achilles  is  to
be  compared  with  the  sword  of  Siegfried ;  then  some
years  later  a  reference  to  Achilles'  armour  will  be  followed
by  a  reference  to  "  Unter  den  linden  "  and  the  rustling
of  leaves  ;  and  then,  finally,  will  come  a  reference  to
Siegfried  listening  to  the  voice  of  the  bird  which  tells
him  of  the  fire-guarded  Brynhilde.  Now  clearly  the
Achilles  and  the  Siegfried  stories  are  combined,  and  the
combination  is  natural  enough  ;  but  why  the  rustling  of
leaves  is  combined  with  Achilles  remains  obscure  until  one
is  led  perhaps  by  the  last  reference  to  Siegfried  listening
to  the  bird  in  the  depths  of  the  forest  to  look  up  Wagner's
Opera  and  to  find  that  before  Siegfried  listens  to  the
bird  he  listens  also  to  the  rustling  of  the  leaves  as  he
lies  beneath  the  linden  trees.  If  that  kind  of  thing  hap-
pened now  and  again,  chance  or  ingenuity  would  no  doubt
be  a  sufficient  explanation  ;  but  as  a  matter  of  fact  it
happens  again  and  again,  and  far  too  often  for  either
explanation  to  hold  good.

There  is  one  other  difficulty  attaching  to  what  may  be
called  "  topic  links."  The  earliest  emergences  of  a  topic
are  often  very  obscure  or  sketchy.  One  instance  has  been
quoted  by  Mr.  Bayfield  in  Proc,  Vol.  XXVII. ,  pp.  479-480  ;


448


J .  G.  Piddingiou.


[part


and  I  repeat  it  here  because  it  is  typical  and  easy  to
set  forth.  Three  of  the  automatists  have  independently
quoted  from  a  Nursery  Rhyme  or  Poem  called  The  Fairy
Ship.  The  references  to  it  in  Mrs.  Salter's  scripts  eventu-
ally came  out  quite  unmistakeably  ;  but  her  first  two
attempts,  which  I  give  below,  were  very  wide  of  the
mark :  ^

A  fairy  boat  in  the  moonlight  &  a  star  at  the  prow  and  a
mast  of  silver  but  the  sails  are  furled  (Dec.  16,  1907)  ;

and

A  knife  a  carving  knife  three  l>lind  mice  a  single
thread  (Dec.  15,  1908).

Tlie  topic  is  then  dropped  completely  for  over  five  years,
when  it  reappears  in  the  following  manner  :

a  golden  boat  {drairiiu/  of  a  crescent  7)ioon)  there  is  a
poem — somtthing  about  the  moon  &  a  golden  boat  (Jan.
21,  1914)  ;

the  golden  boat — something  about  tlie  masts  being  of
silver — it  is  an  EngUsh  poem — we  have  tried  to  quote  it
twice  before — to  sail  on  the  sea — last  night  the  moon  had
a.  silver  rim — three  blind  mice — yes  wi'ite  it  down — I  wish
you  could  find  that  poem  (Jan.  28,  1914)  ;

the  masts  were  all  of  silver — the  crew  were  mice  (Feb.  4,
1914).

These  later  indications  enabled  me  to  trace  the  poem,
which  is  about  a  Fairy  8hip  with  sails  of  satin  and  a
mast  of  gold,  and  a  crew  of  fifty  little  white  mice.  I  told
Mrs.  Salter  that  I  had  identified  the  poem,  and  her  script
accepted  the  identification  and  explained  that  the  mice
were  mentioned  merely  in  order  to  identify  the  ship.
Now  as  there  is  no  mention  in  the  poem  either  of  the
moon  or  of  a  star  or  of  three  blind  mice,  it  will,  I  think,
be  admitted  that  the  first  emergences  of  this  topic  of  the
Fairy  Ship  were  both  obscure  and  sketchy,  and  that  but
for  the  subsequent  additions  would  have  remained  un-
intelligible. The  case  is  very  far  indeed  from  being  an
isolated  or  excej)tional  one  ;  the  scripts  are  full  of  similar


LXXXVII.]


Introchiction.


449


instances,  and  nothing  is  to  my  mind  more  remarkable
in  the  scripts  of  the  avxtomatists  than  the  persistency
with  which  obscure  and  embryonic  allusions  are  followed
up,  modified  and  added  to,  the  wrong  points  eliminated
and  the  right  ones  emphasised,  until  at  long  last  the  topic
originally  aimed  at  but  at  first  imperfectly  represented
emerges  in  a  clear  and  unmistakeable  form.  This  process
may  extend  over  many  years,  and  is  evidence  of  amazing
patience  and  perseverance  on  somebody's  part.  It  like-
wise illustrates  the  remarkable  tenacity  of  the  script
memory,  for  it  often  involves  the  repetition  of  little
catch-words  from  a  script  written,  it  may  be,  many  years
earlier  and  perhaps  never  seen  again  by  the  automatist.
The  script-memory  is  not  absolutely  faultless,  but  it  is
nearly  so.

As  I  have  just  used  the  phrase  "  the  script -memory,"
I  may  at  this  point  remark  in  passing  that  I  shall  speak
in  this  paper  of  "  communicators  "  and  "  communications."
I  adopt  these  terms  partly  because  I  really  beheve  that
the  scripts  are  influenced  by  the  group  of  dead  persons
who  profess  to  be  the  communicators  ;  but  chiefly  for
convenience'  sake  :  it  being  so  much  simpler  to  use  these
simple  terms  than  to  use  cumbrous  non-committal  peri-
phrases like  "  the  inteUigence  responsible  for  the  script."
At  the  same  time  it  must  be  understood  that  what  I  have
said  about  the  methods  employed  in  scripts  and  the
system  of  linking  one  script  to  another  and  about  the
script -memory  is  not  affected  by  the  question  of  the
provenance  of  the  scripts.  What  I  have  said  on  these
subjects  holds  good  whether  the  scripts  are  influenced  by
the  dead,  or  whether  they  are  solely  the  work  of  some
stratum  of  the  automatist 's  consciousness,  or  whether  they
are  a  joint  product.

What  Mrs.  Willett  has  called  "  cribbing "  is  another
method  that  requires  mention.  By  cribbing  "  is  meant
the  repetition  by  one  automatist  of  some  phrase  or  quota-
tion which  she  has  come  across  in  the  script  of  another
automatist.  In  accordance  wdth  the  instructions  of  "  the
communicators,"  most  of  Mrs.  Verrall's,  most  of  Mrs.
Salter's,  and  all  of  Mrs.  Holland's  scripts  have  from  time


450


J.  G.  Piddingion.


[part


to  time  been  shown  to  Mrs.  Willett,  who  has  also  been
supplied  with  translations  of  the  Greek  and  Latin  words
or  sentences  that  occur  in  them.  Mrs.  Verrall  saw  many
of  Mrs.  Salter's  scripts,  and  Mrs.  Salter  has  seen  a  good
number  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  ;  and,  of  course,  all  the  auto-
matists  have,  or  may  have,  seen  such  scripts  as  have
been  printed  in  the  Proceedings  or  the  Journal.  Mrs.
Sidgwick  has  drawn  up  with  great  care  a  complete  list
in  tabular  form  of  all  the  scripts  seen  by,  or  accessible
to,  each  automatist,  with  the  dates  at  which  they  were
seen  or  became  accessible.  By  reference  to  this  list  one
can  tell  at  a  glance  when  distinctive  coincidences  between
the  scripts  of  different  automatists  are,  or  may  have  been,
due  to  normal  causes.

It  is  only,  I  think,  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  Willett  that  the
scripts  of  other  automatists  were  shown  on  the  instructions
of  the  "communicators."  In  the  other  cases,  the  "com-
municators "  may  or  may  not  have  approved  ;  but  at
any  rate  they  raised  no  objections.  Their  object  in
getting  the  scripts  of  other  automatists  shown  to  Mrs.
Willett  was  to  save  effort.  Instead  of  having  laboriously
to  instil  into  her  mind  by  supernormal  means  many  of
the  literary  allusions,  quotations,  and  phrases  which  form
the  symbolic  apparatus  of  the  other  automatists,  they
adopted  the  easier  method  of  letting  her  become
acquainted  with  them  in  a  normal  manner.  At  first
sight  this  proceeding  might  appear  to  be  a  risky  one
from  an  "  evidential  "  point  of  view  ;  but  though  I  do
not  claim  that  it  has  no  disadvantages,  it  is  far  less
risky  than  might  be  supposed  ;  for,  thanks  to  the  sym-
bolic and  cryptic  character  of  the  scripts,  in  the  huge
majority  of  cases  a  script  can  be  shown  with  impunity
to  the  most  intelligent  person  without  the  smallest  risk
of  its  hidden  meaning  being  revealed  to  him,  unless  he
possesses  the  clue  to  its  symbohsm.  A  few  of  Mrs.  King's
scripts  were  known  to  Mrs.  Verrall,  but  with  that  excep-
tion none  but  the  few  King  scripts  pubhshed  in  Proceed-
ings have  been  seen  by  the  other  automatists.

The  "  cribbing  "  method  has  been  fairly  often  used  to
effect  a  link  between  scripts. Thus,  if,  while  automatist


LXXXVII.]


Introduction.


451


A  is  writing  a  script,  AZ,  it  is  desired  to  make  a  link
between  AZ  and  a  script  of  5's,  BY,  which  has  been
seen  by  A,  the  Unk  is  made  by  the  introduction  into
AZ  of  a  distinctive  phrase  out  of  BY.

On  one  further  point  I  must  touch  before  coming  to
the  new  matter  which  I  have  to  set  forth  ;  and  that  is
the  question  of  why  the  cryptic  method  is  employed  at
all.  Why,  for  instance,  if  the  scripts  want  to  talk  about
a  coming  war,  don't  they  talk  about  it  in  plain  terms
that  would  be  understood  by  any  one  at  first  sight?
Or  what's  the  point  of  referring  to  legendary  characters
like  Achilles  and  Siegfried  ?  Or  why,  in  the  sacred  name
of  common  sense,  should  reference  be  made  to  a  Nursery
poem  about  a  Fairy  Ship,  whose

"  Captain  was  a  duck
With  a  jacket  on  his  back  ;
And  when  the  ship  set  sail,

The  Captain  he  said  Quack,  Quack,  Quack  "  ?

I  suggest  that  the  cryptic  and  symbolic  methods  of  the
communicators  are  due  in  the  main  to  two  causes  :  one
being  that  they  could  not  usually  be  explicit  even  if
they  wanted  to  be  ;  the  other,  that  they  wish  to  conceal
their  meaning  from  the  automatists  and  to  conceal  it  at
any  rate  for  a  time  from  those  who  study  the  scripts.

As  regards  the  first  cause,  I  think  it  is  practically
certain  that  except  on  rare  occasions,  and  then  only  in
the  case  of  some  of  the  automatists  and  not  in  that  of
all,  it  is  not  possible  to  communicate  in  plain,  direct
language.  There  is  abundant  evidence  to  show  that  in
a  large  number  of  cases  the  communicators  reach  their
desired  goal  by  making  use  of  associations  of  ideas  that
exist  in  the  minds  of  the  automatists.  They  cannot,  of
course,  entirely  control  these  associations  ;  but  on  the
whole  they  do  succeed  in  directing  them  into  such
channels  as  best  serve  their  ends.  This  method  obviously
involves  a  good  deal  of  tmsting  and  turning  ;  and  there
is  necessarily  a  residuum  of  mere  transitional  phrases
which  has  to  be  eliminated.  In  these  circumstances  it
is evident that plain statements cannot be  expected.


452


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


I  do  not  mean  either  that  the  whole  process  can  be
observed  in  every  script,  or  that  every  idle  and  un-
essential association  of  ideas  gets  written  in  the  script.
Bnt  the  process  can  be  inferred  from  what  is  observable
in  certain  cases.  Let  me  suppose  that  the  communicator
has  been  wanting  to  introduce  into  a  script  a  preliminary
reference  to  the  Scene  in  the  First  Part  of  Faust  called
the  Witches'  Kitchen.  He  knows  that  in  all  probability
he  will  not  be  able  to  do  so  in  a  direct  fashion,  and
so  bides  his  time  till  he  shall  chance  to  find  present  in
the  automatist's  normal  consciousness  some  idea  which
by,  so  to  speak,  a  slight  jjush  he  will  be  able  to  deflect
into  the  desired  channel.  One  day  he  discovers  the  idea
of  "  Devil's  Kitchen  "  in  an  automatist's  mind,  this
particular  automatist  having  recently  read  in  the  news-
paper of  the  death  by  accident  of  Mr.  Arthur  Reid  at
the  Devil's  Kitchen,  near  Bethesda  in  Wales.  The  result
of  the  communicator's  push  can  be  seen  in  the  first
script  written  by  the  automatist  after  she  had  seen  the
report  of  the  accident  in  the  newspaper. It  opens  thus  :

Cosham.  Bethesda.  Witches — Witches  Hitchin  Kitchen —
Read — Wales — Reid.

Tliat  is  an  extract  from  one  of  Mrs.  Holland's  scripts,  and
it  is  the  only  script  of  hers  which  mentions  Witches.
This,  the  first  and  only  reference  in  Holland  script  to
Witches,  has  another  interest,  for  it  occurred  in  the  first
script  written  by  Mrs.  Holland  after  the  first  reference  to
Witches  had  occurred  in  Mrs.  Salter's  scripts.  The  way
in  which  the  reference  in  Mrs.  Salter's  script  emerged
will  serve  as  a  good  example  of  a  slightly  different  form
of  the  indirect  approach  to  a  desired  idea  common  to  all
the  scripts  and  especially  frequent  in  Mrs.  Salter's.  It
emerged  in  this  way  :

Toadstools  green  and  yello\\'  ou  a  mossy  bank  the
witches"  brew.

Here,  so  far  as  I  know,  there  is  no  reason  for  supjjosing
that  Mrs.  Salter's  thoughts  had  recently  been  bent  upon
toad-stools. They  may  have  been,  of  course ; but  toad-


LXXXVII.]


Introduction.


453


stools  may  have  appeared  in  her  script  either  as  the
result  of  direct  suggestion  from  the  communicator,  who
found  himself  able  to  impress  this  idea  vipon  her  mind
and  thought  he  could  easily  lead  her  on  from  it  to  the
idea  of  witches  ;  or  "  toadstools  "  may  be  the  first  im-
perfect apprehension  by  the  automatist  of  the  idea  of
Witches  with  which  the  communicator  was  seeking  to
impress  her.

I  began  my  first  illustration  of  the  process  by  which
ideas  attain  expression  in  the  scripts  by  supposing  that
the  communicator  wanted  to  work  in  a  preliminary,
embryonic  reference  to  the  Witches'  Kitchen  in  Goethe's
Faust,  and  showed  how  in  my  opinion  he  did  this  in  a
script  of  Mrs.  Holland's.  Let  me  now  suppose  that  the
communicator  wishes  to  continue  the  Faust  topic  and  to
introduce  it  into  the  script  of  an  automatist  who  has  had
no  previous  allusion  to  that  topic.  He  proceeds  in  this
instance  on  the  same  lines  as  he  did  when  he  made  use
of  Mrs.  Holland's  reading  of  the  newspaper  account  of  the
accident  at  the  Devil's  Kitchen.  Mrs.  Willett  has  recently
been  reading  the  volume  of  Myers's  poems  called  The
Renewal  of  Youth.  Nothing,  of  course,  could  afford  an
easier  transition  to  the  story  of  Faust  than  the  words
"  the  Renewal  of  Youth  "  :  so  easy  indeed  is  the  tran-
sition that,  as  will  be  seen  when  I  quote  the  relevant
extract  from  Mrs.  Willett's  script,  the  automatist  at  first
appears  to  have  arrived  at  the  Faust  topic  per  saltuvi,
and  only  on  second  thoughts  retraces  her  course  and
leaves  a  record  of  the  bridge  whereby  she  made  the
crossing. The  extract  from  Willett  script  is  as  follows  :

Mephistof No The  ReneAval  of  Youth Yes  Faust.

It  is,  of  course,  possible  that  the  automatist  got  the  idea
of  Mephistopheles  first  of  all,  and  that  it  was  the  thought
of  Faust's  compact  Avith  Mephistopheles  that  brought  back
to  her  mind  .the  title  of  the  volume  of  poems  she  had
been  reading  ;  but  there  are  enough  analogous  cases  in
the  scripts  where  the  transitional  idea  has  got  recorded
out  of  place — that  is  to  say,  after  instead  of  before  the
idea  to  which  it  had  led — to  make  me  fairly  confident


454


J.  G.  Piddington.


[PABT


that it was the recently read Reneival of Youth  that
suggested  Faust  and  Mephistopheles  and  not  vice  versa.

So far I have illustrated only how a single  desired
topic may be reached. But scripts do not as a  rule
consist  of  a  single  topic  ; they  usually  consist  of  a  com-
bination of  two  or  more  topics. The  second  topic  is,  or
appears to be, very often introduced fer saltum,  and
without  any  transition  by  means  of  associations  of  ideas.
I  think  it  really often is so, and  that when once  an
automatist  is  under  way  it  is  easier  for  the  communicator  |
to  go  ahead  and  impress  his  ideas  directly  on  her. But  j
often too, I suspect, the ideas that have served  as  a
means of transition, though they have really  passed
through  the  automatist's  mind,  have  not  got  recorded ; —  j
the automatist possibly realising  in some vague  fashion
that they were not deserving of record.  Nevertheless
these  "  bridges,"  if  I  may  so  call  them,  do  often  appear
in  the  record. Let  me  illustrate  what  takes  place  by  an  j
imaginary  example. The  communicator,  we  will  suppose,
wants  to  combine  the  Faust  topic  with  the  topic  of  Dido
and  Aeneas. He  will  very  likely  achieve  his  purpose  by
means  of  literary  associations  somewhat  in  this  wise  :

The  witches'  brew — spells  and  potions — Faust — the  en-
chanted herbs  that  did  renew  old  Aeson  ^ — In  such  a  night
the  moon  shines  Ijright — In  such  a  night  stood  Dido  with
a  willow  in  her  hand  ^ — That's  better.

And  then  let  us  suppose  that  he  wants  to  go  on  to
combine  with  the  Faust  and  with  the  Dido  and  Aeneas
topics  the  Siegfried  topic.  In  that  case  the  script  will
continue  something  like  this  :

In  such  a  night  stood  Dido  with  a  willow  in  her  hand — •
That's  better — The  willow  tree — under  the  shade  of  the
willow — and  the  linden  shade  too — Who  lay  under  the
linden  trees  ?

But,  it  may  be  objected,  in  your  first  instance  where  you
combined the Faust topic with the Dido and Aeneas  I

1  Shakespeare,  Merchant  of  Venice,  Act  V.,  Sc.  i.

^  See  above,  p.  447,  for  Siegfried  lying  under  the  linden  trees,


LXXXVII.]


Introduction .


455


topic,  you  had  to  introduce  the  allusion  to  Medea  renewdng
old  Aeson,  and  how  is  one  to  tell  that  the  Medea  and
Aeson  story  is  not  only  an  unimportant  but  an  entirely
irrelevant  excrescence  ?  An  answer  to  this  objection  has
been  given  in  the  scripts,  not  in  response  to  our  enquiries
but  spontaneously.  It  is  to  this  effect  :  that  the  essential
topics  are  distinguished  by  emphasis  and  by  reiteration,
and  that  the  unessential  and  irrelevant  associations  and
transitional  phrases  can  be  recognised  by  their  not  being
emphasised  or  repeated.  Thus  in  my  imaginary  instance
the  idea  that  was  really  wanted,  namely  "  In  such  a
night  stood  Dido  with  a  willow  in  her  hand,"  is  not  only
emphasised  by  the  addition  of  the  words  "  That's  better,"
but  it  would  be  repeated  at  least  once  in  a  later  script,
and  very  likely  much  oftener  than  once  ;  whereas  the
idea  that  was  not  really  wanted,  except  in  so  far  as  it
served  as  a  means  of  transition,  namely  "  the  enchanted
herbs  that  did  renew  old  Aeson,"  is  not  emphasised  and
would  not  reappear  in  later  scripts.

If  such  methods  as  these  are  largely  employed,  and  I
have  no  doubt  that  they  are,  it  almost  inevitably  follows
that  the  communications  are  of  a  cryptic  character,
whether  the  communicators  wish  them  to  be  or  not.  But
I  have  already  suggested  that  the  communicators  intended
the  communications  to  be  in  the  main  cryptic.  We  do
not  pretend  to  understand  all  the  scripts,  but  we  do  under-
stand enough  to  realise  that  they  contain  matter  of  so
private  a  character  that  it  cannot  be  published  for  a  long
time  to  come  ;  and  we  understand  enough  to  appreciate
why  the  communicators  may  have  thought  it  wise  to
conceal  tlieir  meaning  for  a  considerable  period  from  the
investigators  and  essential  to  conceal  it  from  the  auto-
matists  until  their  task  is  completed.  In  deciding  now
to  divulge  something  of  the  contents  of  the  scripts  we
have  been  guided  by  the  consideration  that  the  matter
divulged  is  not  of  a  private  character  but  concerns  public
events.

My  surmise  that  the  communicators  wished  to  hide
their  meaning  for  a  time  from  the  investigators  as  well
as  from  the  automatists  is  not,  so  far  as  I  can  remember,


456


J .  G.  Piddington.


[part


supported  by  any  explicit  assertion  in  the  scripts  them-
selves, though  there  is  a  good  deal  to  suggest  that  they
did  so  desire.  That  they  meant  to  hide  their  meaning
from  the  automatists  is  undoubted  ;  and,  besides  the  con-
fidential nature  of  a  great  part  of  the  communications,
they  had  the  best  of  reasons  for  keeping  the  automatists
in  the  dark.  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  though
some  of  the  automatists  sometimes  go  into  trance,  the
great  bulk  of  the  scripts  has  been  produced  when  they
have  been  in  a  state  little  removed  from  the  normal.
Although  there  is  probably  always  some  degree  of  dis-
sociation, the  cleavage  is  generally  of  too  slight  a  nature
to  prevent  them  from  being  put  on  the  alert  if  the  name
of  someone  known  to  them  emerges,  or  tries  to  emerge,
in  the  script  ;  or  if  something  is  said  which  would  seem
to  them  when  in  a  normal  state  improbable  or  incredible.
It  is  certain  that  the  automatists  inhibit,  some  more  and
some  less,  but  all  to  some  extent.  Several  jib  in  par-
ticular at  the  mention  of  real  persons.  Others,  Mrs.
Verrall  particiilarly,  fight  shy  of  anything  that  seems  like
an  attempt  at  prophecy.  Mrs.  Salter  on  one  occasion-
having  apparently  shown  reluctance  to  write  down  a
particular  quotation  in  a  particular  context  is  reproached
by  the  communicator  in  the  folloAving  terms  :

never  mind  if  you  don't  see  the  connexion — put  down
everything  you  sometimes  let  your  literary  tastes  hamper
— this  is  not  a  book  of  the  hundred  best  quotations.

Mrs.  Willett  is  told  not  to  keep  on  saying  to  herself
"  what  awful  bosh  this  is,"  and  similarly  to  Mrs.  Verrall
are  addressed  the  words  :  "no  don't  say  '  obvious  non-
sense.' "  From  these  examples  it  is  clear  that  the  auto-
matists are  reluctant  to  set  down,  not  only  what  appears
to  them  to  be  improbable  or  incredible  or  of  the
nature  of  a  prophecy,  but  also  what  strikes  them  as
nonsensical.  Nor  are  these  inhibitions  to  be  wondered
at,  for  the  automatists  whose  scripts  I  am  discussing  are
people  of  rather  exceptional  intelligence,  not  in  the  least
credulous  or  silly,  but  well-educated,  sensible,  critical
and  sceptical,  and  distrustful  of  their  powers — not  always


LXXXVII.]


Introduction.


457


distrustful,  of  course,  because,  if  they  were,  they  would
probably  never  produce  anything  of  value,  but  apt  to  be
beset  -with  misgivings  as  to  the  genuineness  or  value  of
their  scripts.

The  communicators  would,  I  am  convinced,  have  failed
grievously  had  they  attempted  as  a  general  rule  to  convey
their  messages  in  plain  language  through  siich  automatists
as  these. ^  As  a  general  rule,  I  say ;  for  that  they  can
sometimes  with  some  of  the  automatists,  if  not  all,  employ
very  plain  language  is  certain.  But  in  the  main,  as
I  have  said  and  repeat,  their  chief  method  of  com-
munication is  symbolic  and  cryptic.

The  point  in  these  introductory  remarks  on  which
I  wish  to  lay  the  chief  stress  is  the  one  about  the  linking
together  of  scripts  by  means  of  the  repetition  of  topics
and  of  distinctive  words,  phrases  and  quotations.  And
on  this  subject  I  have  one  more  word  to  say  in  order  to
forestall  an  objection  which  is  almost  certain  to  suggest
itself  to  many  readers.  Is  there  any  reason  for  supposing
these  so-called  links  to  be  purposive  ?  May  they  not  be
merely  vain  repetitions  without  purpose  and  design  1
I  cannot  here  produce  the  evidence,  the  very  voluminous
and  detailed  evidence,  on  which  I  rely  to  meet  this
objection  ;  and  must  confine  myself  to  stating  the  con-
clusion at  which  we  have  arrived  after  long  study  of  the
scripts.  Not  once  or  twice,  but  again  and  again  it  has
been  found  that  if  scripts  containing  common  hnks  are
put  together,  although  on  the  face  of  them  they  have
nothing  in  common  except  these  links,  they  make  sense
when  the  proper  clue  is  found.  And  here  I  must  define
what  I  mean  by  "  make  sense,"'  and  by  "  the  proper
clue."  By  "  they  make  sense  "  I  mean  one  or  both  of
two  things  :  various  phrases,  names  of  persons  or  places,
quotations,  drawings,  etc.,  found  in  a  group  of  linked
scripts,  which  are  apparently  but  a  mere  jumble,  will  be
found  united  in  some  literary  passage,  the  coincidences
with  the  passage  being  far  too  exact  and  distinctive  to
be  due  to  chance.  If  that  happened  once  or  twice,
chance might be a sufficient explanation  ; but when  it

^  See  King  46,  on  p.  466  helow.


458


J .  G.  Piddington.


[part


happens  scores  of  times,  and  when  the  longer  the  study
of  the  scripts  is  pursued  the  larger  grows  the  number  of
such  coincidences,  design  becomes  a  certainty.  Or,  if  a
group  of  linked  scripts  does  not  find  its  interpretation  in
a  literary  passage,  then  it  may  find  it  in  real  events
unknown  to  the  automatists  but  known  to  the  investi-
gators. But  often  there  is  a  twofold  applicability  :  that
is  to  say,  the  disjecta  viemhra  found  in  a  group  of  linked
scripts  prove  to  be  fragments  of  a  literary  passage,  and
this  literary  passage  proves  to  have  meaning  when  applied
to  real  events  unknown  to  the  automatists.  Sometimes
it  happens  that  we  realise  the  applicability  of  the  united
fragments  to  the  real  event  before  we  realise  that  they
also  fit  a  literary  passage.  Sometimes,  and  more  fre-
quently, we  discover  the  literary  passage  without  seeing
to  what  real  event  it  applies.  Thus  one  of  the  most
frequently  repeated  links  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  is  the
Greek  letter  Sigma,  often  united  with  a  reference  of  one
kind  or  another  to  a  spiral.  These  "  Sigma  "  scripts  had
long  puzzled  us,  and  it  was  not  till  1914  that  I  found
an  explanation — a  partial  explanation,  that  is  to  say — of
them.  They  are  based  upon  two  literary  passages  :  one
a  passage  in  Fors  Clavigera  and  the  other  a  Fragment  of
one  of  the  Greek  dramatists.  That  these  two  literary
passages  do  lie  behind  these  "  Sigma  "  scripts  is  certain  ;
but  why  the  commiuiicators  should  have  wished  to  refer
to  these  two  passages  was  an  entire  mystery  to  us  all
until  a  year  or  more  later,  when,  for  the  first  time,  we
were  informed  of  a  fact  known  to  only  a  very  small
number  of  living  persons.  Of  the  few  to  whom  the  fact
was  known  Mrs.  Verrall  was  most  certainly  not  one.  In
other  cases  Avhere  the  literary  basis  of  the  allusions  in
scripts  has  been  traced,  the  inner  meaning  remains  un-
intelligible ;  but  from  our  past  experience  we  feel  con-
siderable confidence  that  they  are  not  mere  literary
conundiiims,  but  are  generally  intended  to  have  a  bearing
on  the  subject  of  the  communications.  I  say  "  generally  "
because  there  are  exceptions  to  this  rule.  An  important
exception  is  the  "  Ear  of  Dionysius  "  case.  Here  we
have  an  instance  of  a  literary  conundrum  which  has  no


LXXXVII.]


Introduction.


459


bearing  on  the  general  subject  of  the  communications ;
though  even  so,  it  is  not  a  hterary  conundrum  pure  and
simple,  because  one  of  the  objects  of  the  conundrum  is
to  furnish  evidence  of  the  identity  of  the  professing
communicator,  A.  W.  Verrall.

It  must  not  be  thought  that  all  the  literary  passages  of
which  use  is  thus  made  in  the  scripts  are  drawn  from
works  so  well  known  and  easily  accessible  as  Ruskin's
Fors  Clavigera  or  Gray's  Elegy  or  Tennyson's  Ode  on  the
Death  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington.  Many  such  well-known
works  are  utilised  ;  but  some  are  taken  from  out-of-the-
way  books,  or  from  little-known  passages  of  writers  who
may  not  be  obscure  but  who  are  little  read.  It  is  often
by  pure  chance  that  we  come  upon  these  last,  it  not
being  possible  apparently  for  the  communicator  in  most
cases  to  indicate  the  name  of  the  avithor  or  of  the  work.
Some  of  these  passages  are,  I  am  convinced,  unknown  to
the  automatist  or  automatists  whose  scripts  contain  refer-
ences to  them.  Study  of  the  "  Ear  of  Dionysius  "  case
will  reveal  how  references  to  literary  passages  unknown  to
an  automatist  can  be  introduced  into  her  scripts.

Foreign  readers,  unacquainted  with  the  enormous  in-
fluence that  the  Authorised  Version  has  had,  since  its
publication  in  1611,  not  only  on  our  literature  but  on
our  everyday  speech,  may  be  astonished  at  the  large
number  of  Biblical  quotations  and  allusions  to  be  found
in  the  scripts  of  all  the  automatists.  It  may  accordingly
be  as  weU  to  explain  that  the  use  to  which  the  Bible  is
put  in  the  scripts  is  purely  literary,  and  in  no  way
dogmatic.  It  is  used,  in  fact,  exactly  as  is  Vergil,  or
Shakespeare,  or  Euripides,  or  Goethe,  or  Victor  Hugo.
The  Bible  may  be  quoted  in  order  to  convey  a  moral
lesson  ;  but  then  so  too  are  the  writings  of  pagan  and
secular  authors.

The  only  abbreviations  used  in  this  paper  that  need
explanation  are  the  following  : — •

M.V.=Mrs.  Verrall ;

H.V.=Mrs.  Salter,  formerly  Miss  Helen  Verrall;
W.=Mrs.  WiUett;
K.  =Mrs.  King.


460


/.  G.  Piddington.


[part


To  decide  what  to  admit  into  the  extracts  from  pre-
War  King  scripts  that  follow,  and  what  to  exclude  from
them,  has  been  a  task  of  no  small  difficulty.  It  would
have  been  easy,  but  misleading,  to  exclude  all  the  rubbish
and  all  the  dubious  or  irrelevant  matter.  It  would  have
been  equally  easy  to  include  everything,  had  I  been  in-
different to  the  reader's  feelings.  In  my  attempt  to  give
a  fair  idea  of  what  Mrs.  King's  scripts  are  like,  I  have
deliberately  left  in  a  good  deal  of  what  I  feel  sure  is
really  rubbish,  and  a  good  deal  of  what  may  not  be
rubbish  but  has  probably  no  relevance  to  the  War  or  its
sequel.

In  conclusion,  I  would  ask  the  reader  not  to  form  an
opinion  of  the  value  of  Mrs.  King's  pre-War  scripts  until
he  has  acquainted  himself  with  the  scripts  of  the  other
automatists  discussed  in  this  paper.


T.xxxvii.] War  References  in  Pre-War  King  Scripts.  461


WAR  REFERENCES  IN  PRE-WAR  KING  SCRIPTS.

Oct.  18,  1913  ...  Tell  Gerald  that  Behemoth  was

what  I  meant. ^

Oct.  25,  1913  (29) .  .  .  The dawn is coming  ^ — White

robes  herald  it  Yon  haven't  got
what  I  want  a  bit  Try  once  more
Come  thou  from  yon  great  dawn  to
me  From  battles  vanquished  con-
quests 3  Not  quite  right  but  the
idea  is  there  .  .  .

Oct.  26,  1913  (30) .  .  .  Now  about  the  Dawn — the  dawn

of  knowledge  is  here,  the  dawn  of
deeper  understanding — no  it  is  not
aU  joy — joy  only  to  those  who  can
renounce  and  aspire  .  .  .

Mercy and  truth  * fortitude  .  .  .

Oct.  27,  1913  (31) .  .  .  Blue dawn— The dawning  of

love — the  dawning  of  desire  the
dawn of knowledge — the dawn  of

1  Possibly  cf.  "Leviathan"  in  K.  119;  but  see  under
"  Behemoth  and  Leviathan,"  pp.  510-513  below.  By  "  Gerald  "
Mr.  Gerald  Balfour  is  meant.

2  For  "Dawn"  see  K.  30,  31,  33,  34,  65,  66,  71,  121,  161,
165,  174  ;  and  see  all  quotations  from  Clough's  poem  Say  not
the  struggle.

3  From  a  poem  called  A  Woman's  Voice  by  A.  E.  :

"  Come  thou  from  yon  great  dawn  to  me
From  darkness  vanquished,  battles  done."

The  poem  as  a  whole  has  no  relevance.  "  Out  of  the  van-
quished darkness  comes  joy  "  m  K.  34  is  another  allusion  to
these  two  lines.

*  Cf.  K.  64,  164,  204  ;  and  perhaps  "  be  merciful  to  the
stricken  hind  "  m  K.  184.  For  the  meaning  of  this  topic  see
pp.  528-534  below.


462


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


nearness — the  dawn  of  success — the
dawn — the  dawn — the  dawn  ^  .  .  .
Golden  dawn — The  heroes  of  old — the
conquests  of  new  worlds — that's  the
point.  Asgard  the  heroes  of  ^ — -
that's  right.  The  heroes  show  the
way  ...

^  Probably  reminiscent  of  Tennyson,  In  Memoriam,  xcv.  :

"  And  suck'd  froin  out  the  distant  gloom
A  breeze  began  to  tremble  o'er
The  large  leaves  of  the  sycamore


and  said

'The  dawn,  the  dawn,'  and  died  away;

And  East  and  West,  without  a  breath,
Mixt  their  dim  lights,  like  life  and  death,
To  broaden  into  boundless  day."

Cf.  H.  V.  173  quoted  on  p.  507  below  under  "  AU  is  well."

^  The  Heroes  of  Asgard  is  the  name  of  a  book  by  A.  and  E.
Keary.  Mxs.  King  knew  the  book  by  name,  but  has  never
read  it.  Cf.  K.  38.  See  the  following  passage  in  Matthew
Arnold's  Balder  Dead,  where  Balder,  the  Sun  God,  is  speaking
to  Hermod,  the  deity  who  welcomes  to  Valhalla  all  heroes  who
fall  in  battle  :

"Tor  I  am  long  surce  weary  of  your  storm
Of  carnage,  and  find,  Hermod,  in  your  life
Something  too  much  of  war  and  broils,  which  make
Life  one  perpetual  fight,  a  bath  of  blood.
Mine  eyes  are  dizzy  with  the  arrowy  hail  ;
Mine  ears  are  stunn'd  with  blows,  and  sick  for  calm.
Inactive  therefore  let  me  lie,  in  gloom,
Unarm'd,  unglorious  ;  I  attend  the  course
Of  ages,  and  my  late  return  to  light,
In  times  less  alien  to  a  spirit  mild,  .  .

In  new-recover'd  seats,  the  happier  day.'

He  spake  ; and  the  fleet  Hermod  thus  replied  : —

'  Brother,  what  seats  are  these,  what  happier  day  ?
Tell  me,  that  I  may  ponder  it  when  gone.'
And  the  ray-crowned  Balder  answer'd  him  : —

'  Far  to  the  south,  beyond  the  blue,  there  spreads
Another  Heaven — the  boundless — no  one  yet
Hath  reach'd  it  ;  there  hereafter  shall  arise
The  second  Asgard,  Avith  another  name.
Thither,  when  o'er  this  present  earth  and  Heavens
The  tempest  of  the  latter  days  hath  swept,


T.xxxvii.] War  References  in  Pre-War  King  ScripU.


463


Oct.  29,  1913  (33) .  .  .  Take  your  mind  your  will  your

heart  and  turn  them  towards  the
dawn,  desire  the  dawn — think  of  it
now — think  of  the  steahng  of  light
over  the  darkness — how  slow  it  is
and  gradual

Now  grows  the  hght  of  coming  day
— jocund  day  ^ — you  can  hardly  guess
how  we  long  for  you  all  to  under-
stand more — we  know  how  it  will
help  everything — there  is  a  big  pur-
pose behind  which  we  serve  blindly
yet  knowing  we  serve  .  .  .

Oct.  30,  1913  (34) .  .  .  Out  of  the  vanquished  darkness

comes  joy — and  joy  not  alone  for
you  but  for  many  others.  It  is  not
a  mere  question  of  knowledge  but  of
new  life — new  practice — a  new  leap
of  the  spirit " — slowly  slowly  the  new
light  will  dawn  upon  you  ^ — some  of
you  are  nearly  ready  I  think — we
have  waited  many  many  years  trying
here,  trying  there,  failing  over  and
over  again  I  am  hopeful  now  but
there  are  a  lot  of  mischances  to
reckon  with  .  .  .

And  they  from  sight  have  disappear'd,  and  sunk,
Shall  a  small  remnant  of  the  Gods  repair  ;
Hoder  and  I  shall  join  them  from  the  grave.
There  re-assembUng  we  shall  see  emerge
From  the  bright  Ocean  at  our  feet  an  earth
^Nlore  fresh,  more  verdant  than  the  last,  with  fruits
Self-springing,  and  a  seed  of  man  preserved,
Who  then  shall  live  in  peace,  as  now  in  war.'  "

There  are  several  allusions,  not  only  in  King  but  in  M.V.,  H.V.,
and  Wilson  scripts,  to  the  Twihght  of  the  Gods.

'  First  emergence  of  Clough's  Say  not  the  struggle.  See
footnote  (2)  above,  and  footnote  (28)  below.

^Shakespeare,  Romeo  and  Juliet,  Act  III.,  Sc.  5.


9Cf.  K.  125.


464


/.  0.  Piddington.


[part


Nov.  1,  1913  (37)  .  .  .  How  beautiful  upon  the  moun-
tains Come  forth  ye  beloved  of
the  Lord  Make  ready  the  way
make  straight  the  path  Out  of  the
great  darkness  comes  the  great  light
Cast  off  your  burdens  Prepare
prepare ye the way of  the  Lord

Nov.  3,  1913  (38) He  [i.e.  Mr.  Gerald  Balfour]  is  now

between  high  rocks  and  afraid  men-
tally to  leave  the  stream  whereas  if
he  would  but  climb  the  high  banks
and  believe  he  would  see  a  new
Asgard  .  .  .  .  The  world  needs
more  light  now — the  mind  of  man  is
awaking  and  it  is  more  afraid  than
it  need  be.  It  does  not  realise  its
own  power  how  it  can  transform  the
world  for  itself .  .  .  .

Nov.  6,  1913  (42) .  .  .  France — the French  — let  him

^°  Isaiah  lii.  7  :  "  How  beautiful  upon  the  mountains  are  the
feet  of  him  that  bringeth  good  tidings,  that  publisheth  peace."
Cf.  K.  182.

11  Not,  I  think.  Biblical.

12  Isaiah  xl.  3  :  "  The  voice  of  him  that  crieth  in  the
wilderness,  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord,  make  straight  in
the  desert  a  highway  for  our  God."

1^  Probably  reminiscent  of  Isaiah  ix.  2  :  "  The  people  that
walked  in  darlmess  have  seen  a  great  light  :  they  that  dwell
in  the  land  of  the  shadow  of  death,  upon  them  hath  the  light
shined."

1*  Cf.  "  Lay  down  the  burden  "  in  K.  177.

1^  For  the  New  Asgard  see  footnote  (6)  above.  I  do  not
think  there  is  any  poiat  at  all  in  mixing  up  Mr.  Balfour  with
the  topic  of  the  new  Asgard.

1^  This  is  probably  reminiscent  of  the  passage  in  Romans  xiii.
quoted  in  footnote  (21)  below.

"  Cf.  "  the  Roman  toga — the  transformation  "  in  K.  182  ;
and  for  the  meaning  of  the  Roman  toga  see  pp.  556-559  below.

18  Cf.  "the  French  army"  in  K.  128.


Lxxxvii.] War  References  in  Pre-War  King  Scripts.


465


not  forget  nearer  comes  the  -  -  -  -is
[sic]  Ah  you  are  tired,  we  must
stop  .  .  .

do  not  fear  ^° — be  steadfast  and  re-
member Love Love  is  the  Lawgiver.

Nov.  6,  1913  (43) .  .  .  There  is a  song  of  most  glad

new  cheer  coming  but  it  will  not
be  understood  except  by  a  few — a
very  few — we  few — we  band  of
brothers  — We  must  lay  the  founda-

19  (~i£  Faint  intimations  of  a  coming — (can't  get  the  word).
The  flight  in  winter  "  in  K.  100.

20  Qf "  ]?ear  not  the'  all  about  you  should  crumble  "  in  K.  64.

"  Fear  not — be  not  afraid — all  is  well  "  in  K.  107.
"  Be  not  dismayed  "  in  K.  72.

"  You  must  not  fear — never  fear  or  flinch  "  in  K.  125.
"  Do  not  be  in  the  least  afraid all  will  be  well — you

need  not  fear  "  in  K.  136.
"  Be  not  afraid— all  is  well  "  ua  K.  182.
"  Be  afraid  of  nothing  "  in  K.  202.
"  The  lurid  dawn— but  be  not  afraid  "  in  K.  206.  >
"  Let  not  famine  or  war  affright  thee  "  in  K.  207.

Rom.  xiii.  8-12  :  "  Owe  no  man  anything,  but  to  love  one
another  :  for  he  that  loveth  another  hath  fulfilled  the  law  .  .  ,
Love  worketh  no  ill  to  his  neighbour :  therefore  love  is  the
fulfilling  of  the  law.  And  that,  Imowing  the  time,  that  now
it  is  high  time  to  awake  out  of  sleep  :  for  now  is  our  salvation
nearer  than  when  we  believed.  The  night  is  far  spent,  the
day  is  at  hand  :  let  us  therefore  cast  off  the  works  of  darkness,
and  let  us  put  on  the  armour  of  light."

Cf.  "  The  world  needs  more  light  now — the  mind  of  man  is
awaking "  in  K.  38,  "  buckle  on  the  armour  of  hght "  in
K.  121,  "  Put  on  the  armour  of  light — buckle  on  the  shield  "
in  K.  206  ;  and  see  K.  185.

^^Shakespeare,  King  Henry  V.,  Act  IV.  Sc.  3:  part  of  King
Henry's  speech  before  the  battle  of  Agincourt :

"  This  story  shall  the  good  man  teach  his  son  ;
And  Crispin  Crispian  shall  ne'er  go  by.
From  this  day  to  the  ending  of  the  world.
But  we  in  it  shall  be  remembered, —
We  few,  we  happy  few,  we  band  of  brothers."

This  is  not,  I  think,  a  War  allusion.  By  "  we  band  of
brothers "  I  understand  the  communicators  to  be  meant.  In
K.  128  "the  band  of  brothers"  is  probably  used  as  a  War
reference. See  pp.  508-509  below.


466


J .  G.  Piddi7igt07i.


[part


tions very sure — no high  reaching
temples yet but long and  patient
setting of the corner stones — the
fabric  must  stand  secure  .  .  .
Nov.  10,  1913  (46) .  .  .  (After advice about  conditions

favourable  to  the  reception  of  im-
pressions) Now  let  us  have  another
try.

Drake — the drum — and  danger
.  .  .Why  were  you  so  afraid  ?
(Mrs.  King  answers  mentally  :  "It's
so queer, and I am afraid of  my
own  suggestibility.")
Yes I suppose you are right — ^We
always  tend  to  forget  the  difficulties.
You  see  you  are  beginning  to  under-
stand why we never — or rarely —
venture to say things directly  .  .  .

2^  "-Drake — the  dram,"  etc.,  alludes  to  the  story  that  Sir
Francis  Drake's  drum  is  heard  when  danger  of  invasion
threatens  England.  Cf.  Sir  Henry  Newbolt's  poem  Drake's
Drum  :

"'Take  my  drum  to  England,  hang  et  by  the  shore,
Strike  et  when  your  powder's  runnin'  low  ;
If  the  Dons  sight  Devon,  I'll  quit  the  port  o'  Heaven,
An'  drum  them  up  the  Channel  as  we  drummed  them  long
ago.'

Drake  he's  in  his  hammock  till  the  great  Armadas  come,

(Capten,  art  tha  sleepin'  there  below  ?),
Slung  atween  the  round  shot,  listenin'  for  the  drum.

An'  dreamin'  arl  the  time  o'  Plymouth  Hoe.
Call  him  on  the  deep  sea,  call  him  up  the  Sound,

Call  him  when  ye  sail  to  meet  the  foe  ;
Where  the  old  trade's  plyin'  an'  the  old  flag  flyin'

They  shall  find  him  ware  an'  waldn',  as  they  found  him
long  ago  !  "

I  have  inserted  the  context  of  "  Drake — the  drum  "  partly
because  of  Avhat  is  said  about  the  necessity  of  circumventing
the  automatist's  suggestibility,  and  partly  to  illustrate  how  a
phrase  possessing  evidential  value  is  sometimes  slipped  in
between  unevidential  matter.  A  similar  instance  will  be  found
in  K.  92  where  "  the  crossed  swords  "  turns  up  for  the  first
time  sandwiched  between  unevidential  talk.


Lxxxvii.] War  References  in  Pre-War  King  Scripts.  467


we  must  not  be  too  definite  and
suggestive  or  off  you  all  go  sailing
along  on  your  own  breezes  instead
of  ours  .  .  .

Nov.  12,  1913  (48) .  .  .  Leave  off  now  we  shall  not  do

much  more — There  is  only  one  thing
— Lest  we  forget  ^* — the  drums  and
fifes  -5  a  bog  of  stars  ~^  In  Ireland
there  is  bloodshed  under  the  moon —

2*  Kipling,  Recessional.  Cf.  K.  71,  and  "the  far  flung
foam  "  in  K.  72,  which  the  automatist  herself  took  to  be  an
incorrect  reminiscence  of  Kipling's  "  our  far-flung  battle  line."
This  poem  is  once  quoted  in  Mrs.  Willett's  script  before  the
War  ;  and  after  the  outbreak  of  war  six  times  in  Mrs.  Salter's
script.  Mrs.  Salter's  first  quotation  appears  in  the  form  "  the
far-flung  line  "  ;  and  curiously  enough  this  exact  misquotation
of  "  our  far-flung  battle  line  "  had  occurred  earlier  in  King  209,
of  Oct.  6,  1914,  in  the  following  context  :

"  the  flight  in  winter — the  far  flung  line,  the  fancied
superiority — none  of  you  understand  the  deeper  significance,
the  ^^•ar  of  spiritual  forces — the  regeneration  of  a  nation,
the  German  nation."

Even  apart  from  the  help  given  by  this  extract,  one  would
naturally  have  assumed  that  quotations  from  Kipling's  Reces-
sional are  used  to  intimate  that  sjoiritual  forces  are  greater
than  anything  in  the  realm  of  physical  force  :

Non  tali  auxilio  nec  defensoribus  istis
Tempus  eget.

25  "The  sound  in  your  ears  of  drums  and  fifes  and  hosts
marching  to  battle  "  ui  K.  130  ;  and  "  the  pomj)  and  panoply
of  War  .  .  .  Din  of  battles  Mortals  in  contest  .  .  .  Sound
the  trumpets  Beat  the  not  ploughshares  [i.e.  "  Beat  the
drums  "  from  Dryden's  Alexander's  Feast]  One  crowded  hour
of  splendid  life  [i.e.  "  Sound,  sound  the  clarion,  fill  the  fife.
One  crowded  hour  of  glorious  life  "  etc.  from  the  lines  that  we
must  no  longer  call  Walter  Scott's]  "  in  WiUett  225,  of  Nov.
13,  1910.

For  other  references  to  Drums,  see  "  Drake — the  drum  "  in
K.  46,  "listen  to  the  drums  roUmg  rolling"  in  K.  111.  "The
drums  were  not  there  really,"  following  a  War  reference  in
K.  99,  may  mean  that  the  drums  are  to  be  understood  sym-
bolically and  not  literally.

2^  "  A  bog  of  stars  "  is  the  title  of  an  Irish  story  by  Standish
O'Grady. It  has  jorobably  no  relevance  except  in  so  far  as  it


468


G.  Piddingion.


[part


In  Ireland  the  souls  of  men  are
swaying  restlessly  gathering  and
gathering  in  pace — there  will  be
much  distress  and  misery.  Out  of
it  comes  nothing  worthy — Consider
how  good  a  thing  it  is  Brethren  to
dwell  together  in  unity — Unity — the
precious  ointment  .  .  .
Nov.  22,  1913  (58) Far off through creeks and  inlets

making

Comes  silent  flooding  in  the  main.
You  seem  no  painful  inch  to  gain
but  all  the  time  we  are  gaining —
slow  how  slow,  but  the  light  is
coming  not  through  Eastern  windows
only — see  the  West  is  bright. Keep
up  a  good  heart .  .  .

serves  to  introduce  an  allusion  to  Ireland.  During  the  Avhole
period  covered  by  the  King  pre-War  scripts  the  Irish  situation
was  critical.  Tiae  prediction  in  the  script  has,  no  doubt,
proved  true  enough  ;  but  a  gloomy  prophecy  about  the  course
of  Irish  politics  is  so  likely  to  prove  true  that  little — though
I  do  not  say,  no — importance  can  be  attached  to  it.  If,
however,  I  am  right  in  regarding  "  Lest  we  forget  "  and  "  the
drums  and  fifes  "  as  belonging  to  the  references  to  the  War,
I  think  it  is  significant  that  they  should  be  followed  by
references  to  the  disturbed  condition  of  Ireland,  for  beyond
doubt  we  were  hampered  in  our  conduct  of  the  War,  and  in
other  respects  as  well,  by  the  existence  of  open  or  covert
rebellion  in  Ireland.  In  K.  136  will  be  found  another  possible
or  probable  allusion  to  the  Irish  crisis.
Psalm  cxxxiii.  1,  2.

^^Clough,  Say  not  the  struggle  naught  availeth.  See  footnotes
(2)  and  (7)  above  ;  and  cf.  K.  64,  128,  144,  165.  Quotations
from  this  poem  occur  at  least  eight  times  in  King  scripts
subsequent  to  the  outbreak  of  war.  The  poem  has  been  much
quoted  in  the  scripts  :  five  times  in  Mrs.  Salter's  pre-War
scripts,  and  three  times  subsequently  ;  twice  in  Mrs.  Verrall's
pre-War  scripts  ;  twice  in  Mrs.  Willett's,  and  three  times  in
Mrs.  Holland's.  Whether  it  is  always  used  with  reference  to
the  War  or  to  the  eventual  outcome  of  the  War,  I  cannot
say  ;  but  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  as  a  general  rule  the
first  two  verses  with  their  military  metaphors  are  used  in  a
more  or  less  literal  sense to suggest  a  long-drawn  struggle


Lxxxvii.] War  References  in  Pre-War  King  Scripts.  469


Nov.  23,  1913  (59) .  .  .  Light  your  lamps  while  there  is
(12.55  a.m.)  yet  time."" Bugles  blow  ^°

ending  in  victory  after  things  had  seemed  almost  desperate,
and  that  the  last  two  verses  are  ajjjDlied  to  the  gradual  advent
of  a  happier  era,  to  which  the  War  is  a  necessary  prelude,  and
are  used  in  the  same  sense  as  "  the  Dawn." Cf.  for  instance,

"  Far  back  through  creeks  and  inlets  making  comes  silent
flooding  in  the  main.  U^d  to  the  hilt  war  war  without
truce  or  pity  there  is  no  reconciliation  possible  between
those  whose  lives  are  parted  by  a  stream  of  slaughter
vendetta that  is  the  thought  "

in  H.  V.  141,  of  Dec.  2,  1908  ;  and

"  progress  by  trial  cross  currents  yet  the  tide  rolls  in
...  he  strikes  with  all  his  strength Fight  on,  he  said  "

in  H.  V.  162,  of  March  22,  1909.  See  also  H.  V.  31,  quoted
and  discussed  under  "  Lay  not  up  for  yourselves  treasures  "  on
p.  519  below.

The  poem  is  as  follows  ;

"Say  not  the  struggle  naught  availeth.

The  labour  and  the  wounds  are  vain,  *
The  enemy  faints  not,  nor  faileth.

And  as  things  have  been  they  remain.

If  hopes  were  dupes,  fears  may  be  liars  ;

It  may  be,  in  yon  smoke  conceal'd,
Your  comrades  chase  e'en  now  the  fliers.

And,  but  for  you,  possess  the  field.

For  while  the  tired  waves,  vainly  breaking.

Seem  here  no  painful  inch  to  gain.
Far  back,  through  creeks  and  inlets  making,

Comes  silent,  flooding  in,  the  main.

And  not  by  Eastern  A^indows  only.

When  daylight  comes,  comes  in  the  light ;

In  front  the  sun  climbs  slow,  how  slowly  !
But  westward,  look,  the  land  is  bright  !  "

An  allusion  to  the  Parable  of  the  Ten  Virgins  {Matt.  xxv.
1-13).  The  phrase  "  while  there  is  yet  time  "  recurs  in  K.  79
in  the  form  : "  Hearken  while  there  is  yet  time."

^°  Bugles,  I  think,  have  two  different  connotations  in  King
scripts  :  there  are  the  bugles  which  herald  Avar,  and  the  bugles
that  herald  the  Dawn. For  the  former  cf.

"  the  trumpets  blow the  bugles  sound and  all  the  world
is  in  the  war  "
in  K.  161  ;


470


./.  G.  Piddingfon.


[part


Nov.  30,  1913  (64) Mercy and truth have kissed  each

other  Twenty  milhon —  Fear  not  I
tho'  all  about  you  should  crumble
—  Follow  follow  the  light  always
and  for  ever.  Marvellous  are  thy
works  and  greatly  to  be  praised.
The  ship,  the  ship  ploughing  its  way
through  deep  waters  .  .  .  Far  off
through  creeks  and  inlets  making
That's  the  point  in  all  sorts  of
ways  and  in  all  kinds  of  places  the
light  is  beginning. ^3  You  will  hear
of  it  now.  Fret  not  thyself  ^* — be
calm  .  .  .

"  When  the  bugles  blow  "
in  K.  204,  and

"  Twice  have  the  bugles  called the  third  time  is  enough  "
in  I^.  207.

For  the  Bugles  that  herald  Dawn,  see  K.  65  below.  Here
the  preceding  reference  to  the  Parable  of  the  Ten  Virgins
suggests  that  the  Bugles  are  heralds  of  War,  because  this
Parable  relates  to  the  Second  Coming  which  was  to  be  pre-
ceded by  "  Wars,  and  rumours  of  wars."  This  suggestion  will,
however,  not  seem  plausible  to  the  reader  until  later,  when  he
realises  how  frequent  and  marked  are  the  references  to  the
Eschatological  Discourses  in  pre- War  King  scripts.

Psalm  Ixxxv.  10:  "Mercy  and  truth  are  met  together;
righteousness  and  peace  have  kissed  each  other."  See  foot-
note (4)  above,  and  pp.  528-534  below.

3^  See  footnote  (20)  above.

See  footnote  (28)  above.

Psalm  xxxvii.  1,  2,  7-11:  "Fret  not  thyself  because  of
evil-doers.  .  .  .  For  they  shall  soon  be  cut  down  like  the
grass  .  .  .  fret  not  thyself  because  of  him  who  prospereth  in
his  way,  because  of  the  man  who  bringeth  wicked  devices  to
pass.  Cease  from  anger,  and  forsake  wrath  ;  fret  not  thyself
in  any  wise  to  do  evil.  For  evil-doers  shall  be  cut  off  :  but
those  that  wait  upon  the  Lord,  they  shall  inherit  the  earth.
For  yet  a  little  while,  and  the  Avicked  shall  not  be  ;  yea,  thou
shalt  diligently  consider  his  2:)lace,  and  it  shall  not  be.  But
the  meek  shall  inherit  the  earth,  and  shall  delight  themselves
in  the  abundance  of  peace."


Lxxxvii.] IVar  References  in  Pre-War  King  Scripts.  471

Dec.  1,  1913  (65) Let not your heart be  troubled^''

Out  of  great  tribulation  cometh
great  peace,  for  when  the  waters
have  been  troubled  an  angel  stilleth
.  them  2'  .  .  .  Do  you  know  that  not
one  of  us  cares  for  hegemony  — we
are  all  brothers  in  love — there  is  no
hate  among  us .  .  .

Open  wide  your  casements  to  the
dawn  ^8  Blow  bugles  blow  Usher
in  the  happy  morn.  .  .  .

Dec.  2,  1913  (66) Fly before the storm— Pray  that

your  flight  may  not  be  in  winter.'"'
Mens Sana in corporis san  l*'^'^]
TiU  the  day  dawn  and  the  shadows
flee  away

Dec.  12,  1913  (71) .  .  .  the  harbinger  of  dawn. Let  us

pause  a  little  while. The  flowers  of

John  xiv.  1,  27:  "Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled:  ye
believe  in  God,  believe  also  in  me.  .  .  .  Peace  I  leave  with
you,  my  peace  I  give  unto  you  :  not  as  the  world  giveth,  give
I  unto  you.  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled,  neither  let  it  be
afraid."

Cf.  K.  71,  84,  118,  128,  175  ;  and  see  130.  See  also  next
footnote,  and  pp.  534-535  below.

3«Cf.  K.  202;  and  see  Matt.  xxiv.  6,  20,  21:  "And  ye
shall  hear  of  wars,  and  rumours  of  wars  :  see  that  ye  be  not
troubled  :  for  all  these  things  must  come  to  pass,  but  the  end
is  not  yet.  .  .  .  But  pray  ye  that  your  flight  be  not  in  the
winter,  neither  on  the  sabbath-day  :  For  there  shall  be  great
tribulation,  such  as  was  not  from  the  beginning  of  the  world
to  this  time."

37  See  pp.  534-538  below  under  "  The  Pool  of  Bethesda."
3*  See  pp.  523-527  below  under  "  Had  Zimri  peace  ?  "
3^  See  footnote  (30)  above.

*»See  footnote  (36)  above.  Cf.  K.  80,  85,  100,  104,  121,
161,  and  "  the  blight  of  winter  "  in  72.

With  "  fly  before  the  storm "  cf.  "  Let  not  your  heart  be
vexed  with  the  storm  "  in  K.  130.

*^  This  Latin  tag  reappears  in  K.  177.

42  Canticles  II.  17  ;  IV.  6. One  of  the  "  Dawn  "  aUusions.


472


J .  G.  Piddingfon.


[PART


the  forest  —  Lest  we  forget  .  .  .
(Some  talk  about  devising  new  ex-
periments) .  .  .

Moth  and  rust — treasure,  lay  it  not
up.*^  The  last  impediment  of  noble
minds  *®  Let  not  your  heart  be
troubled  — the  mouse  in  its  little
hole  can  see  the  dawn  if  it  looks
Dec.  13,  1913  (72) .  .  .  The far flung foam  The

blight  of  winter  *^  Be  patient — try  and
be  passive — and  clear  your  brain — -you
will  be  surprised  soon  Shall  I  tell  you
something — When  the  woods  arc  green.

"  Jane  Elliot,  A  Lament  for  Flodden  :  "  The  Flowers  of  the
Forest  are  a'  wede  away."  Of  the  great  slaughter  at  the
Battle  of  Flodden  the  writer  on  the  subject  in  the  Enc.  Brit.
says  :  "  Among  the  ten  thousand  Scottish  dead  were  all  the
leading  men  in  the  kmgdom  of  Scotland,  and  there  was  no
family  of  importance  that  had  not  lost  a  member  in  this
great  disaster."

"See  footnote  (24)  above.

Matt.  vi.  19-21  :  "  Lay  not  uji  for  yourselves  treasures
upon  earth,  where  moth  and  rust  doth  corrupt,  and  where
thieves  break  through  and  steal  :  But  lay  up  for  yourselves
treasures  in  heaven,  where  neither  moth  nor  rust  doth  corrupt,
and  where  thieves  do  not  break  through  nor  steal  :  For  where
your  treasure  is,  there  wUl  your  heart  be  also."

Cf.  K.  79, 121, 176. For  the  meaning  of  this  four-times
repeated  text  see  pp.  514-522  below.
Milton,  Lycidas  :

"  Fame  is  the  spur  that  the  clear  spirit  doth  raise
(That  last  infirmity  of  Noble  mind)
To  scorn  delights,  and  hve  laborious  days."
See  footnote  (35)  above.
See  footnote  (24)  above.

"  The  bhght  of  whiter "  seems  to  be  a  kind  of  punning
variation  of  "  the  flight  in  whiter."  Except  for  the  intervening
advice  to  the  automatist  "  the  blight  of  winter "  is  followed
here  by  "  When  the  woods  are  green  "  ;  and  in  K.  100  "  Li
summer  when  the  woods  are  green  "  is  followed  after  an
interval  by  "  The  flight  m  winter."  It  seems  just  conceivable
that  there  is  an  attempt  made  in  these  two  scripts  to  intimate
that  "  the  flight  in  winter,"  i.e.  the  War,  wih  begin,  not  in
winter,  but  in  summer.


Lxxxvii.] War  References  in  Pre-War  King  Scripts.  473

Be  not  dismayed the  music  of  the
spheres  — the  trend  of  thought  .  .  .
Dec.  17,  1913  (79) .  .  .  Fire and sword  Hearken

while  there  is  yet  time  — sweetness
and  Ught  ^* —  Rust  and  moth  do
corrupt .  .  .

Dec.  18,  1913  (80) .  .  .  The  flight  in  winter  ^S— have  you

understood  it  is  not  far  have  you
not  seen  things  about  snow  and
blood — Look  back  a  little  "...

Isaiah  xh.  10-12  :  "  Fear  thou  not ;  for  I  am  with  thee  :
be  not  dismayed  :  for  I  am  thy  God  :  I  wiU  strengthen  thee.
.  .  .  Behold,  aU  they  that  were  incensed  against  thee  shaU  be
ashamed  and  confomaded  :  they  shall  be  as  nothing  ;  and  they
that  strive  with  thee  shall  perish.  Thou  shalt  seek  them,  and
shall  not  find  them,  even  them  that  contended  with  thee  :
they  that  war  against  thee  shall  be  as  nothing,  and  as  a
thing  of  nought."

See  '■'  be  not  dismayed  "  in  H.  V.  172  quoted  under  "  Ven-
geance is  mine  "  on  p.  560  below.

See  pp.  550-554  below.

See  under  "  Lay  not  up  for  yourselves  treasures "  p.  519
below.

See  footnote  (29)  above.

^*  Swift,  Battle  of  the  Books,  of  the  Bees  (the  Ancients)  who
have  furnished  mankind  "  with  the  two  noblest  of  things,
which  are  sweetness  and  light."  It  is  from  this  passage  in
Swift  that  Matthew  Arnold  derived  his  definition  of  culture  as
"  the  passion  for  sweetness  and  fight."

^5  See  footnote  (45)  above.

See  footnotes  (36)  and  (40)  above.

"  The  only  previous  phrase  simfiar  to  this  occurs  in  K.  62,
of  Nov.  26,  1913,  where,  however,  the  context  is  not  filuminat-
ing.  Possibly  both  here  and  in  K.  62  aUusion  is  intended  to
CampbeU's  Hohenlinden  :

"  On  Linden  when  the  sun  was  low
AU  bloodless  lay  the  untrodden  snow

But  redder  yet  those  fires  shall  glow
On  Linden's  hfils  of  crimsoned  snow,
And  bloodier  yet  shall  be  the  flow
Of  Iser  rolling  rapidly


474


J .  G.  PidcUngton.


[part


Dec.  25,  1913  (84) The  lapse  of  time — let  not  your  heart

be  troubled — all  is  well .  .  .

Dec.  26,  1913  (85) Nerve  yourself  6o_flight  in  winter  ^6—

Render  unto  Caesar  the  things  that
are  Caesar's .  .  .

Jan.  1,  1914  (90) .  .  .  Turn  the  weeping  into  joy  —

pierce  all  darkness  with  a  shaft  of
light  disperse  matter  with  spirit.
The  Titan  mighty — magnificent — the
travail — all  the  long  striving  of  man,
his  pain  and  his  agony  here  and
there  those  who  could  see  and  hear — ■
always  there  have  been  such — but
soon  there  will  be  many  more  and  in
time  the  world  will  be  a  happier  place.

The  terrible  cry  of  the  wounded
The  hot  breath  of  the  war  The
blending  of  many  tears  .  .  .

Few,  few  shall  part  where  many  meet !

The  snow  shall  be  their  winding-sheet."
Campbell's poem on Avhat he calls this battle  between
"  furious  Frank  and  fiery  Hun  "  has  certainly  been  employed
in  Mrs.  Salter's  script  (see  p.  586  below)  and  in  Mrs.  Willett's
as  a  War  reference.

58  See  footnotes  (35),  (36),  and  (40)  above.

59  Cf.  K.  107,  125,  136,  176,  182,  203  ;  and  see  pp.  506-507
below.

Cf .  "nerve  yourself  for  the  coming  trial"  in  K.  172;  and
see  footnote  (180)  below.

^1  Matt.  xxu.  21.  Possibly  the  meaning  is  "  You  will  have
to  do  your  duty  to  the  State."  If  so,  cf.  "There  are  many
things  going  to  happen  in  Avhich  you  will  have  a  part.  .  .  .
There  is  nothing  to  dread — you  are  well  guarded  but  you
will  have  a  difficult  time,  a  time  of  trial  "  in  K.  194.  During
the  War  Mrs.  ICing  did  render  valuable  service  to  the  State —
service  which  met  with  recognition  from  the  State.

Jer.  xxxi.  13:  "For  I  will  turn  their  mourning  into  joy."
Cf.  "  all  tears  shall  be  wiped  away — there  shall  be  no  more
sighing  "  {Rev.  xxi.  4,  and  Isaiah  xxxv.  10)  in  K.  130.

I  think  man  is  here  regarded  as  a  sort  of  Prometheus.
Though  Titan  is  not  a  common  description  of  Prometheus  in
classical  writers,  Shelley  in  his  Prometheus  Unbound  frequently
applies  the  epithet  to  him.


TiXXXVii.] War  References  in  Pre-War  King  Scripts.  475

Jan.  2,  1914  (92) .  .  .  (Some  talk  about  the  best  time

for  getting  impressions)

The  crossed  swords
I  want  you  to  listen  for  a  moment
to  someone  else  .  .  .

Jan.  9,  1914  (99) The  righteous  souls — far  far  was  the

strife  when  in  the  afternoon  the
smoke  went  straight  up  into  the  sky
look  he  said  we  shall  have  peace
now.^^

The  nimbus,  now  think  what  that
means  The  flying  squad  — the
transport  waggons — his  job — no  lark-
ing there — he  was  anxious
(Mrs.  King  says  mentally  :  "I  must
stop,  I'm  afraid.")

Just  one  word — put  this —  The
drums  were  not  there  really."^

«*Cf.  K.  176;  and  see  footnote  (23)  above.  I  take  "the
crossed  swords  "  to  mean  the  sign  with  which  cartographers
mark  the  site  of  a  battle.

"  When  in  the  afternoon,"  etc.,  I  take  to  be  a  dramatised
reference  to  Peace  ;  and  "  the  transport  waggons — his  job,"
etc.,  to  be  a  dramatised  reference  to  War.  With  the  latter
cf.  the  passage  in  K.  104  beginnmg  "  he  was  not  afraid "
down  to  "  the  woman  in  the  Manse,"  and  the  passage  in,
K.  Ill  beginnmg  "  he  was  not  quite  young  "  and  ending  "  Is
Drummond  tlie  name  1  "  Whether  the  dramatisation  is  the
communicator's  or  solely  the  automatist's,  it  is,  of  course,
impossible  to  pronounce.  But  I  strongly  suspect  that  it  is
the  automatist's  ;  and  this  view  is,  I  think,  supported  by  the
sentence  following  the  mention  of  the  name  Drummond  in
K.  Ill  :  "  Leave  this  now  or  your  brain  wUl  invent."  The
use  of  the  future  tense,  "  will  mvent,"  instead  of  "  has  in-
vented," was,  I  should  imagine,  diplomatic.

Possibly  "  nimbus "  stands  for  the  storm-cloud  of  War,
and  is  contrasted  with  the  still  weather  in  which  the  smoke
goes  up  straight  and  presages  Peace.

Cf.  "  the  flying  squadi'ons  "  m  K.  104.  A  flying  squadron
usually  means  a  squadron  of  ships  equipped  for  rapid  cruismg  ;
but  I  suspect  that  both  by  "  the  flying  squad "  and  "  the
flying  squadrons  "  are  meant  troops  in  flight.

®8  See  footnote  (25)  above.


476


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Ja7i.  10,  1914  (100) In summer when the woods  are

green  —  The  birds  of  the  air —
when  the  flowers  come  up  .  .  .
Lifted  on  the  wings  of  destiny  The
old  heroic  courage  of  unquestioning
trust  Faint  intimations  of  a  coming
— [sic]  (can't  get  the  word) The
flight  in  winter .  .  .

Jan.  20,  1914  (104) ...  The flight in winter.^i  many

frozen rivers — many broken  bridges
all  the  meadows  flooded — not  a  sign
of  hfe the  grey  and  heavy  sky  —
he was not afraid only  tired  only
■  weary  and  the  way  was  long.  Then
came  the  doom  he  was  caught  in  the
drift — pinioned  under  the  horse — and
the  cold  caught  him — but  before  he
died he understood — everything — &
he  forgave  everything — tell  her  that
{Mrs.  King  : "  Who  am  I  to  tell  ?  ")
TeU  the  woman  in  the  Manse  '^^ — (Don't
bother  about  it more  will  come)
Now  I  want  you  to  prepare  yourself
for  a  new  development —
{Mrs.  King  : "  How  ?  ")
Go on practising and trying,  keep
well  and  calm — the  fl3dng  squadrons  ^*
the battle cries — Tewkesbury  '^^ —
Armageddon .  .  .

69  See  footnote  (49)  above.  ggg  footnote  (19)  above.

''^  See  footnotes  (36)  and  (40)  above.

''^The  words  from  "many  frozen  rivers"  down  to  "heavy
sky  "  may  be  the  automatist's  own  embroiderj^ ;  but  even  so
they  suggest  that  subUminally  she  understood  "  the  flight  in
winter  "  to  mean  real  warfare.

See  footnote  (65)  above.  See  footnote  (67)  above.

''^  In  view  of  the  context  the  reference  is  clearly  to  the
Battle  of  Tewkesbury,  fought  on  May  4,  1471,  at  which
Edward  IV.  defeated  Margaret  of  Anjou.  It  was  one  of  the
decisive  battles  of  the  Wars  of  the  Roses.

Rev. xvi. 14, 16  : "  they  are the spirits  of  devils  .  .  ,


Lxxxvii.] War  Beferences  in  Pre-War  King  Scrvpts.  477

Jan.  23,  1914  (107) ...  Harvard— not  Yale— Harvard—

the  true  explorer — over  the  broken
ridges  Fear  not — be  not  afraid  " —
all  is  well .  .  .

Jan.  27,  1914  (111) .  .  .  Now  listen listen  to  the  drums

roUing  roLHng the  gates  of  Egypt
— ^futile  it  seemed — the  striped  tents,
the long ribbed sand he was  not
quite young, he had lived  and
learned  much yet  he  did  not  want
to  die,  specially  not  to  die  hke  that.
For  a  long  time  he  could  not  forget
— but  now  he  is  happy  and  at  peace
only he asks for some message  to
Clara  so  that  she  may  wait  for  him.
Also  tell  her  to  watch  over  Edward —
he  would  have  hked  to  help  him
[Mrs. King : "  You know I  never
can  find  these  people  on  so  little.")
Is  Drummond  the  name  ?
[Mrs.  King  : "  I  do  not  know.")
Leave  this  now or  your  brain  will
invent  ^°  .  .  .

Feb.  12,  1914  (114) .  .  .  esto  nobis — pardon  and  peace

— the strife ended — the warfare  ac-
compUshed^i — the uplifted  hands — If
■  in  the  storm  the  shelter  falls— stop.

Feb.  13,  1914  (115) Furens,  lente, Lay  down  the  arms.

Fugitives,  the  bandoliers.  In  the
cool  of  the  morning—  Clear  your
brain The caves of Fingal — the

which  go  forth  unto  the  kings  of  the  earth  and  of  the  whole
world,  to  gather  them  to  the  battle  of  that  great  day  of
God  Almighty.  .  .  .  And  he  gathered  them  together  mto  a
place  called  m  the  Hebrew  tongue  Armageddon."

"  See  footnote  (20)  above.  See  footnote  (59)  above.

See  footnote  (25)  above.  See  footnote  (65)  above.

81  Isaiah  xl.  2  :  "  Speak  ye  comfortably  unto  Jerusalem,  and
cry  unto  her,  that  her  warfare  is  accomphshed,  that  her
iniquity  is  jjardoned."


J.  G.  Piddington.  -  [part

splurge  The  cross,  Many  are  called
but  few  few  are  chosen  ^2  the
travelling  showman.  A  boy,  a  boy,
a  boy—  The  tenderness  of  the
inanimate  little  understood —  When

the  sound  of  the  grinding  is  low ■

Fear  stalks  the  land  ...  j  ^^^t
to  say  this  to  you — be  attentive  now
The  diapered  pattern  on  the  walls —
we  are  trying  all  sorts  of  tests  with
you,  don't  be  afraid  of  them — you
have  a  hard  time  before  you  but
all  will  be  lit  for  you —

Onward  Christian  soldiers  Marching
as  to  war

With  the  Cross  of  Jesus  Carried
on  before. 8^

82Jfo«.  XX.  16  (Parable  of  the  Labourers  in  the  Vineyard)
and  xxu.  14  (Parable  of  the  Marriage-feast).

s^This  may  be  the  first  emergence  of "the  tenderness  of
mute  msensate  thmgs in  K.  146.
Ecclesiastes  xii.  4.
«5  Cf.  M.  V.  239,  of  April  2,  1908  :

"  Fiat  terror  et  omnes  tremuere  no  begin  again  He
said  let  there  be  light-&  there  was  light-and  no  more
dread  of  the  terror  that  walketh  in  the  night  time  No
somethmg  about  Pestilence  that  stalks  in  the  noonday
what  I  want  is  some  word  like  Vast  a  or  Waste
d  e  V  a  s  t  a  t  e— and  the  desert  shall  blossom  as  the  rose  "  '
H.  V.  116,  of  Sept.  23,  1908:

"Hannibal  and  another  devastator  vae  victis  the
pestilence  that  walks  by  day,"

and  M.  V.  424,  of  July  11,  1911  :

"Swifter  than  the  arrow  that  flieth  by  day  more
sudden  than  the  pestilence  that  stalketh  in  the  noontide-
Wait  and  sec  &  surely  it  will  be  inteUigible.  Magnus  erat
clamor. From  all  the  land  a  cry  went  forth."

"  Stalks  "  in  M. V. 239  and  "  stalketh  "  in  M V 424  are

misquotations  for  "  walketh."

pp^586^^?87^^' """"^  ^'  ^^^^  '"^""^

See  footnote  (180)  below. Hymns  Ancient  and  Modern,  391.


Lxxxvii.] War  References  in  Pre-War  King  Scripts.  479

(Mrs. King is here told to go  to
sleep,  and  not  to  overwork.)
Follow the gleam The  violet
crown This is all scrappy  but
never  mind. Stop  now
Feb.  20,  1914  (118) Pax  nostra,  pax  eternam  [sic],  let  not

your  heart  be  troubled  oh  ye  of
little  faith. The  light  is  growing
more  than  you  any  of  you  know  or
realise  the  livery  of  sin — servitude
not  service  Be  near  me  when  my
light  is  low  0  wondrous  love — all
other  love  excelling,^^  never  destroy
faith — guard  it,  foster  it.  Lusitania,^*
foam  and  fire — mest  [sic]  the  funnel
— in  broken  arcs —

Mental  attitude,  that  matters,  In
silence  there  is  rest — and  in  rest
there  is  peace — and  in  peace  there  is
vision — the  three  stages  Come  from
the  East  The  sons  of  the  morning — ■
the  stars  sang  together Be  joyful

Tennyson,  Merlin  and  the  Gleam.  See  j)p.  539,  542  below.
The  words  occur  three  times  previously  and  once  subsequently
in  pre-War  King  scripts,  but  in  contexts  too  much  broken  to
make  them  worth  quoting.

89  Cf.  K.  157  ;  and  see  pp.  539-549  below.
9°  See  footnote  (35)  above.

9^  These  words  occur  three  times  in  Matthew's  Gospel  :  first
in  vi.  30,  next  in  viii.  26,  and  lastly  in  xvi.  8.  See  also
Luke  xii.  28.  I  believe  the  reference  here  and  in  other  scripts
is  always  to  Matt.  viii.  26  :  "  And  behold  there  arose  a  great
tempest  in  the  sea  .  .  .  And  his  disciples  came  to  him,  and
awoke  him,  saying,  Lord,  save  us  :  we  perish.  And  he  saith
unto  them,  Why  are  ye  fearful,  0  ye  of  little  faith  ?  Then
he  arose,  and  rebuked  the  winds  .and  the  sea  :  and  there  was
a  great  calm."

Cf.  K.  182  ;  and  see  pp.  512-513  below.

®^  Tennyson,  In  Memoriam  L. The  thnd  verse  begins  :
"Be  near  me  when  my  faith  is  dry."

93  Hymn.  Cf.  K.  167  ;  and  see  pp.  499-500  below.

^^Job  xxxviii.  7. See  pp.  550-553  below.


480


J.  G.  Piddington.


[PAET


all  ye  lands  Hail,  Ave,  we  greet
the  heroes.

Feh.  21,  1914  (119) .  .  .  Write this now carefully.  The

fugitive  gleam  and  the  myrtle
bough  and  all  the  waves  of  the
ocean —  In  no  land  is  peace  ^® — the
frenzy —  We  want  to  use  you  very
much — we  will  use  you — you  must
persevere — things  will  be  easier  for
you  in  time — just  go  on  faithfully —

Leviathan  in  the  waters  — the
[sic\

Feb.  23,  1914  (121) Let's  try  and  put  the  coping  stone

on  one  thing  anyway — write  without
understanding  or  question —

In  the  morning  there  shall  be
light  — fugitive  gleam  — mystery —
and  he  was  not  forgetful  he  had  no
fever — he  was  not  involved,  feeble
but  firm. You  are  not  yet  ready —

Psalm  c.  1  (Prayer  Book  version).  Cf.  128,  164  ;  and  see
p.  553  below.

Cf .  K.  119.  "The  fugitive  gleam"  is  almost  certainly  the
same  as  "  FoUow  the  Gleam,"  for  which  see  footnote  (88)
above. See  also  pp.  539,  542  below.

88  Cf.  "  all  the  world  is  in  the  Avar  "  in  K.  161.

88  See  footnote  (1)  above.

100  Presumably  an  intentional  inversion  of  Zechariah  xiv.  7  :
"  at  evening  time  it  shall  be  Kght."

The  context  is  as  follows  :  "  Behold,  the  day  of  the  Lord
cometh  .  .  .  For  I  will  gather  all  nations  against  Jerusalem
for  battle  ;  and  the  city  shall  be  taken  .  .  .  and  half  of  the
city  shall  go  forth  into  captivity,  and  the  residue  of  the  people
shall  not  be  cut  off  from  the  city.  Then  shall  the  Lord  go
forth,  and  fight  agamst  the  nations,  as  when  he  fought  in  the
day  of  battle  .  .  .  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,
that  the  light  shall  not  be  clear,  nor  dark  :  But  it  shall  be
one  day,  which  shall  be  Imown  to  the  Lord,  not  day,  nor
night  :  but  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  at  evening  time  it  shall
be  light.  And  it  shall  be  in  that  day,  that  Uving  waters  shall
go  out  from  Jerusalem  .  .  .  And  the  Lord  shall  be  king  over
all  the  earth."


Lxxxvii.] War  ffeferences  in  Pre-War  King  Scripts.  481

flight  in  winter  ^""^ — buckle  on  the
armour of hght — Now  ...  be

"1  See  footnotes  (36)  and  (40).

See  footnote  (21)  above.  Note  that  Eom.  xiii.  21  forms
part  of  the  Ej)istle  for  the  First  Sunday  in  Advent,  and  that
the  Collect  for  this  Sunday,  which  is  repeated  on  the  other
Advent  Sundays,  borrows  from  Eom.  xiii.  12  the  words  "  cast
away  the  works  of  darloiess,  and  put  upon  us  the  armour  of
light."  "  Buclde  on  the  armour  of  hght "  may  also  refer  to
tlie  paraUel  passage  in  Ephesians  vi.,  and  the  words  in  K.  185,
"  in  the  armoury  of  faith  there  are  many  weapons  .  .  .  The
mighty  power  of  evh  must  be  matched  with  power,"  as  also
"  buckle  on  the  shield  "  in  K.  206,  certainly  point  to  Ephesians
rather  than  Romans.  The  Ephesians  passage  is  as  follows  :
"  Finally,  my  brethren,  be  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the
power  of  his  might.  Put  on  the  whole  armour  of  God,  that
ye  may  be  able  to  stand  against  tlie  wiles  of  the  devil.  For
we  wrestle  not  against  flesh  and  blood,  but  against  princi-
palities, against  powers,  against  the  rulers  of  the  dai-kness  of
this  world,  against  si^iritual  wickedness  m  high  places.  Where-
fore take  unto  you  the  whole  armour  of  God,  that  ye  may  be
able  to  withstand  in  the  evil  day,  and,  having  done  aU,  to
stand.  Stand  therefore,  having  your  loins  girt  about  Avith
truth,  and  having  on  the  breast-plate  of  righteousness  ;  And
your  feet  shod  with  the  preparation  of  the  gospel  of  peace
[cf.  K.  37,  182]  ;  Above  all,  takmg  the  shield  of  faith,  where-
with ye  shall  be  able  to  quench  all  the  fiery  darts  of  the
wicked.  And  take  the  helmet  of  salvation,  and  the  sword  of
the  Spirit,  which  is  the  word  of  God." [Eph.  vi.  10-17.)

To  this  passage  Mrs.  Whlett's  scripts  twice  refer :  once
before  the  War,  once  in  the  middle  of  it. Thus  :

"  There  are  more  dechnes  and  more  falls  in  the  fates  of
men  than  in  any  Empires  .  .  .  Olympic  .  .  .  contests  not
of  the  physical  but  of  the  spiritual  For  we  wrestle  not
against  flesh  and  blood  the  contest  wages  elsewhere  "
(W.  195,  of  June  14,  1910).

"  The  forts  of  folly  fall  There  is  a  blow  that  is  more
sure  than  anything  in  the  realm  of  physical  force  it  is
the  blow  dealt  by  thought  upon  the  citadel  of  ignorance
the  blow  dealt  by  truth  upon  the  citadel  of  error

We  fight  not  with  men  but  with  prmcipalities  &  powers
I  want  that  idea  though  you  have  not  selected  that  part
of  it  which  fits  m  best  with  my  train  of  thought

I  want  to  emphasise  that  great  victories  are  won  in  the
realm  of  ideas  &  that  it  is  in  the  realm  of  ideas  that
blows  must  be  dealt  upon  that  which  produces  evil  i.e.
spiritual  unsoundness


482


J.  Q.  Piddington.


[part


sure  Lay  not  up  for  yourselves
treasures.

March  1,  1914  (125) ...  On  the  high  shelf  of  destiny—

0  mutinous  mind  of  man — reaching
after  the  stars  so  far  beyond  his
reach,  the  leap  of  the  spirit  into  the
unknown.^"*  You  must  not  fear — •
never  fear  or  flinch  — ^.11  will  be
well jn  the  mind  of  God  .  .  .

March  3,  1914  (126) Joy  BeUs— the  pleached  alleys— non

non  il  ne  vient  pas — mon  ami  est  a
la guerre  fut-ce Dieu  qui

Fenvoit  [sicl —  Les  murs  qu'on
grave  sont  ecroules  That's  more
or  less  right  .  .  .

March  5,  1914  (128) Question  : "  Of  old  sat  freedom  on

the  heights."  Has  this  quotation
any  special  significance  ?

It  is  always  the  spirit  of  man  that  is  first  corrupted  &
then  comes  the  externaUsation  of  that  corruption

and  in  the  same  way  you  cannot  get  the  New  World
Utopia  until  the  sphit  of  man  comes  again  as  a  little
child  ...

always  and  everjrwhere  it  is  spiiit  that  is  ultimately  the
thing  that  counts  .  .  .

You  are  thinking  this  rather  a  lugubrious  Sc[ript]  but
it  isn't  so  at  all  quite  the  contrary — it  claims  victory  for
the  thmgs  of  the  spkit'~over  the  blind  forces  of  might
And  it  is  in  that  victory  that  Man  is  seen  as  made  in  the
Image  of  God  "  (W.  382,  of  Dec.  26,  1916).
See  footnote  (45)  above.
"4  For  "  leap  of  the  spirit  "  see  K.  34.

"5  See  footnote  (20)  above.  See  footnote  (59)  above.

Of.  "  Rendez  le  moi c'est  mon  ami "  m  K. 176.  The
words  "  mon  ami  "  do  not  occur  elsewhere  in  King  scripts.

"8 Mrs.  King  tells  me  that  "les  murs  qu'on  grave"  suggested
to  her  at  the  time  the  Writiiag  on  the  Wall  of  Belshazzar's
palace  ;  and  "  sont  ecroules  "  tiie  ruin  of  Belshazzar.  Cf.  per
contra  "  tried  in  the  furnace — and  not  found  wanting  "  in
K.  182.

These  two  questions  had  been  put  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  to
Mrs.  King  by  way  of  an  experiment.


Lxxxvn.] War  References  in  Pre-War  King  Scripts.  483


A7iswer.

Gold,  gold,  gold,  the  refiner's  art.^^'-
The  French  army  — the  darkness  of
the  grave.

"  Of  old  sat  Freedom  on  the  heights  "  had  been  fhst  quoted
in  H.  V.  308,  of  Feb.  23,  1913,  and  had  then  appeared  again
in  the  first  script  written  by  Mrs.  VerraU  after  the  date  of
H.  V.  308  :  namely,  in  M.  V.  518,  of  March  3,  1913,  Mrs.
Verrall  not  having  seen  H.  V.  308.  It  had  then  reappeared
agam  ui  H.  V.  344,  of  Feb.  25,  1914.

"  Old,  unhappy,  far-off  things,  and  Battles  long  ago,"  a
quotation  from  Wordsworth's  Solitary  Eea2Kr,  had  appeared
once  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  in  1905,  and  afterwards  three
times  in  Mrs.  Salter's  :  first  in  1908,  and  then  in  close  succes-
sion on  Jan.  6  and  Feb.  9,  1914.

Both  quotations  were  chosen  for  this  experiment  simply
because,  being  unable  to  imagine  what  significance  they  could
have,  we  thought  some  hght  might  be  obtamed  by  asking
questions  about  them.

1"  Cf.  "  the  cleansing  fire  "  in  K.  176,  and  "  In  the  furnace
tried  in  the  furnace — and  not  found  wanting  "  in  K.  182.

"iCf.  "France the  French"  in  K.  42.

Perhaps  cf .  the  foUowing  :

"  a  ring  of  fire — thrice  purified — the  darkness  of  the  grave
— Selah  [probably  only  an  instruction  to  the  automatist  to
repeat  the  last  phrase] — the  darlaiess  of  the  grave — the
narrow  grave — dig  the  grave  deeper — these  all  belong
together  "

in  H.  V.  460,  of  March  8,  1916  ;  and  so

'■  The  grave — dig  the  grave  deej)er — the  paths  of  glory
[lead  but  to  the  grave] — the  darkness  of  the  grave  "

in  H.  V.  460,  of  Jan.  21,  1916;

"  fire  the  purifier  fire  and  death  palUda  mors  aequo
pede  pauperum  tabernas  pulsat  regumque  turres  "

m  H.  V.  66,  of  Jan.  27,  1908  ;  and  so

"  PaUida  mors  .  .  .  The  pulsation  of  Death  that  comes  to
aU  is  only  one  aspect  of  the  universal —  No  you  can't
get  it  aequo  pede  and  for  the  equality  it  is  worth
paymg  a  price  "  in  M.  V.  637  of  Aug.  22,  1914.

For  the  importance  of  this  last  extract  in  relation  to  the
War  see  pp.  544,  547  below  ;  and  see  the  extract  from  W.  225
on  pp.  522-523  below  for  the  employment  of  "  the  paths  of
glory  lead  but  to  the  grave  "  as  a  reference  to  War.

From  these  extracts  it  looks  as  if  the  War  may  be  regarded


484  J.  G.  Picldington. •  ■  [part

Question  : Do  you  wish  to  say  any-
thing about  "  Battles  long  ago  "  ?
Answer.

Yes  it  IS  important,  The  banded
(or,  band  of)  brothers. Mycenae.
The  banners  float  on  high,  No,
The  sUver  boat — write  this — that  no
good  will  come  of  it  for  the  motive
is  not  quite  pure — at  least  so  it
seems.  The  Httle  stories —  Knock
and  knock — that  is  the  way — de-
mand, question,  command.  Lend
your  mind.  Not  a  star  in  the  sky.
Clap  your  hands  and  be  joyfiil  all
ye  people. In  the  far  hills  lies
the  lake — pale  knight  loitering  —
that's  it — all  kinds  of  battles — clear
your  brain  now  for  another  side.
The  nails  in  his  coffin  fastened  down
by  sin — the  Bird  of  Destiny.  Say
not the struggle naught  availeth.^i®

in  the  scripts  as  a  purifying  experience,  a  fiery  trial  that  must
first  be  gone  through  before  Freedom  m  its  highest  develop-
ment  can be revealed to man. I merely throw out  the
suggestion  tentatively,  and  in  no  way  insist  on  it.
See  footnote  (22)  above.

A  mixture  of  Psalm  xlvii.  1  and  c.  1. See  footnote  (96)  above.
11^  Keats,  La  Belle  Dame  Sans  Merci.  Cf.

"  alone  and  palely  loitering — armed  cap  a  pie  a  sable  shield"

in  H.  V,  181,  of  Sept.  3,  1909  ;

"  alone  and  palely  loitering  .  .  .  the  sword  and  the  scab-
bard to  draw  the  sword  is  easier  than  to  sheathe  it
armed  cap  a  pie  the  temple  doors  stand  open  [i.e.  the
doors  of  the  Temple  of  Janus,  open  in  time  of  war]  "

in  H.  V.  250,  of  Jan.  31,  1912  ;  and

"  mailed  fist  Knight  at  arms  ["0  what  can  aU  thee,
Iviaight-at-arms,  Alone  and  palely  loitering  ?"]...  Toll
for  the  brave  ["  The  brave  that  are  no  more  !  "]  "

in  H.  V.  299,  of  Jan.  18,  1913. Why  Keats'  poem  should  be

thus  connected  both  in  King  and  H.  V.  scripts  with  battles

and  war  is  not  clear.

ii«  See  footnote  (28)  above.


Lxxxvn.] War  References  in  Pre-War  King  Scripts.  485


Every  struggle  helps — defeat  is  not
death — there  is  only  delay —  Let
not  your  heart  be  troubled  — and
here  stop  now.

March  8,  1914  (130) Let  not  your  heart  be  vexed  with

the  storm  — there  is  peace  in  the
midmost  place  (Interrupted)  .  .  .
Courage — be  of  a  good  heart  — the
stress  is  for  a  little  while  The  sound
in  your  ears  of  drums  and  fifes  and
hosts  marching  to  battle  —

The  Nazarene,  the  healer  of  wounds
— all  tears  shall  be  wiped  away —
there shall be no more sighing  ^"^

March  17,  1914  (136)  The  printed  order  of  going— and  an

the  North  no  hint  of  command — the
futile  efiort  of  the  fleet  i"__the  stone,

"■^  See  footnote  (35)  above.  gge  footnote  (40)  above.

Cf.  "Keep  up  a  good  heart"  in  K.  58,  "Courage  he
said  and  pointed  to  the  dawn  "  in  K.  174,  "  Courage,  courage,
in  the  long  game  aU  will  be  well  "  in  K.  176,  "  The  last  lap-
Courage  "  in  K.  184,  and  "  take  courage  for  your  staff  "  in
K.  207.

120  See  footnote  (25)  above.  ^^i  gge  footnote  (62)  above.

122  Until  I  looked  up  the  facts  for  the  purpose  of  writmg
this  footnote,  I  had  always  supposed  that  the  words  from  "  The
printed  order  "  down  to  "  the  fleet  "  were  an  allusion  to  what
was  called  the  "  Ulster  Plot  "  and  the  ordermg  of  the  Thnd
Battle  Squadron  to  Lamlash.  I  had,  however,  wrongly  assumed
that  the  naval  movements  were  public  property  by  the  time
this  script  was  written,  and  that  "  the  futile  effort  of  the
fleet"  was  Mrs.  King's  comment  on  the  matter.  The  words
in  question  may  be  an  allusion  to  these  incidents  ;  but  if  they
are,  they  cannot  be  attributed  to  Mrs.  King's  normally  acquired
knowledge  of  them,  for,  so  far  as  I  can  discover,  the  earliest
date  on  which  rumours  of  the  naval  movements  got  about  was
March  21,  or  22,  1914.  I  give  below  the  relevant  facts  and
dates,  my  authority  being  either  the  Annual  Register  for  1914
or  the  Times  :

MarcJi  11,  1914.

The Cabinet decides to station a battle-squadron  at
Lamlash  (Arran). Se©  Mr.  Winston  Churchill's  statement


486


J .  G.  Piddington.


[part


the  great  stone  do  not  be  in  the
least  afraid all  will  be  well  —

in  the  House  of  Commons  on  March  25,  1914,  and  Annual
Register,  pp.  60  and  86.
March  14,  1914.

Mr.  Winston  CharchiU  in  a  speech  at  Bradford  said  that
if  the  Government's  conciliatory  offer  to  Ulster  were
rejected,  "  it  can  only  be  because  they  [i.e.  the  people  of
Ulster]  prefer  shooting  to  voting."  See  Times  of  March  16,
1914.

March  17,  1914  {St.  Patrick's  Day).

At  9.15  p.m.  Mrs.  King  records  script  as  above.
March  21,  1914.

The  Prime  Minister,  Mi.  Asquith,  learns  for  the  first
time  of  the  orders  to  the  Third  Battle  Squadron,  and
causes  them  to  be  countermanded.  See  statement  in
House  of  Commons  on  April  22,  1914  {Aymtial  Register,
p.  82),  and  Mr.  Asquith's  speech  in  the  House  on  April  29,
1914  (ib.  p.  89).

March  22,  1914.

Mr.  Asquith  authorises  the  Times  to  state  that  the  naval
movements  merely  consisted  in  sending  troops  to  Carrick-
fergus  by  two  small  cruisers. See  Annual  Register,  p.  57.
■  March  23,  1914.

The  Times  publishes  the  statement  authorised  by  Mr.
Asquith.

The  Times  of  this  date  contains  the  first  mention  I  have
traced of the movements of the fleet ; but from  the
authorised  statement  it  would  appear  that  rumours  had
been  circulating  earlier, and  may  have  appeared  in  the
Sunday newspapers of March 22, and possibly in  the
evening  papers  of  March  21,  1914.
In  reply  to  my  enquiries  Mrs.  King  informed  me  on  August
18, 1922,  that  she  had  never  connected  the  opening  phrases
of  K. 136  with  the "  Ulster  plot,"  or  with  Ireland  at  all.
After  the  war  began  she  thought "  the  futile  effort  of  the
fleet  "  might  possibly  be  an  obscure  reference  to  some  attempt
of  the  German  fleet. And  she  states  that  she  does  not  for  a
moment  believe  that  she  heard  any  rumours  of  the  fleet  being
ordered  to  Lamlash  before  they  were  mentioned  in  the  news-
papers.

If  the  coincidence  between  K.  136  and  the  orders  given  to
the  Third  Battle  Squadron  is  not  fortuitous,  the  only  certain
conclusion  that  I  feel  justified  in  drawing  is  that  Mrs.  King
did  not  extract  her  information,  either  in  a  normal  or  a
supernormal  manner,  from  the  Prime  Minister.

See  footnote  (20)  above.  gee  footnote  (59)  above.


Lxxxvii.] War  References  in  Pre-War  King  Scripts.  487


you  need  not  fear  0  love  0  life
0  time. Coming  events  cast  their
shadows  before  never  will  the
land  remain  [.sic]  .  .  .

March  28,  1914  (144)  .  .  .  Say  this, that  the  petals  were

torn — ^far  far  away  the  storm  clouds
hung,  luUed  to  sleep  by  dropping
streams —  Tremendous  issues — and
in  the  light  of  common  day  no  hope,
but  unseen  forces  are  moving  to  the
light — the  banners  are  torn  but  the
legend  survives — the  spirit  of  man  is

taught  and  no  [sic]  joyousness

is  in  the  vision — be  patient — long
long  have  we  suffered — lived  in  dark-
ness but  westward  see,  the  land  is
bright .  .  .

March  30 1914  (146)  .  .  .  Now  that  you  may  believe  me — ■

say  this —  No  light  upon  the  moun-
tain tops —  The  riven  gloom  and  in
all  her  folded  valleys  there  is  peace
The tenderness of mute  insensate

1  thought  this  was  probably  a  misquotation  of  Shelley's
"  Oh,  world  !  oh,  life  !  oh,  time  !  "  ;  but  Mrs.  Kmg  thinks  it
is  a  reminiscence  of  a  hne  in  a  Sonnet  of  Keats',  which  she
quoted  to  me  as

"  Life,  time,  and  fame  to  nothingness  do  sink  "  ;

but  the  actual  quotation  is

"  then  on  the  shore
Of  the  wide  world  I  stand  alone,  and  think
Till  Love  and  Fame  to  nothingness  do  smk."

In  any  case  the  source,  if  any,  of  the  phrase  is  probably
immaterial,  as  the  sole  purpose  of  it  seems  to  be  to  bring  in
the  idea  of  Time,  and  thence  to  pass  to  "  Coming  events,"
etc.

T.  Campbell,  Lochiel's  Warning  :

"  'Tis  the  sunset  of  life  gives  me  mystical  lore.
And  coming  events  cast  their  shadows  before."

See  footnote  (28)  above.


488


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


things. Hanging  wreaths  of  mist
and —  Let  not  the  manner  of  the
tale  oiiencl — we  say  not  what  we
wish  but  what  we  can.  ...

April  5 1914  (150) Write  this. Non  est  supern

[sic]  long  in  the  churchyard — motto
the  bard  teuton  Malpertuis,  Ful-
gens — Foi'th  stalled  ox .  .  .

April  13,  1914  (154) Fenchurch — Sweet mistress  of

the  hour — the  chiming  clock  .  .  .

April  14,  1914  (155)  Crossing  the  Bar.^^"  Some  are  cross-
ing now  —  Fenchurch  St.^^^  The
underground.  In  the  boat  are  many
— ^the  Teuton,  the  bandaged
eyes .  .  .

April  17,  1914  (157) .  .  .  The violet crown  — the  seven

hills  .  .  .

April  25,  1914  (161) ...  My God, my God, why  hast

thou  forsaken  mc^^*^  This  cry  de
profundis  is  the  cry  of  the  world
now,  it  is  the  dark  moment  before
new  light — the  purple  shadows  of  the
dawn  come  first  then  the  rose  red
rays — and then the Sun of Day  ^^"^

128  Wordsworth,  "  Three  years  she  grew  "  :

"  the  sUence  and  the  calm
Of  mute  insensate  thmgs."
See  footnote  (83)  above.  129  Qf  k.  155.

Chaucer,  Truth  (misquoted) :  "  Forth,  beste,  out  of  thy  stal !  "
See  pp.  500-501  below  ;  and  cf.  K.  174.
13-  Tennyson,  Crossing  the  Bar.

133  Probably  a  misquotation  of  a  line  in  Charles  Wesley's
Hymn,  "  Let  Saints  on  earth  "  :

"  Part  of  the  host  have  ci'oss'd  the  flood,
And  part  are  crossing  now."

^ 134  Cf.  "the  blindness— the  holden  eyes"  m  K.  182.

135  See  footnote  (89)  above.  "^^^  Psalm  xxii.  1.

13^  See  pp.  523-527  below  for  reasons  for  referring  these
phrases  to  a  passage  in  Ruskin's  Modern  Painters.


Lxxxvn.] War  Beferences  in  Pre-War  King  Scripts.  489


lift  up  your  eyes  0  ye  daughters  of
men  heed  not  the  clamour  of  the
world — wield  aloft  the  mighty  arms
of  your  wondering  spirit  (Inter-
rupted)

The  Pathfinder.  Die  Pfadfin-
derin  cut  out  a  new  way  for  the
spirit

The  flight  "9_take  heed  to  that,
take  heed  Many  waters  cannot
quench  love  nor  the  floods  drown
iti4o_  The  dark  (lost  the  next
words  through  inattention)  Now
— the  trumpets  blow  the  bugles
sound  and  aU  the  world  is  in
the  war.^*^

138  Title  of  a  story  by  Paul  Heyse  about  a  woman  of  uncou-
ventional  character.  ]VIi\s.  King  had  translated  the  story  into
Enghsh. See  pp.  502-503  below.

"9  See  footnotes  (36)  and  (40).

1*"  Canticles  vui.  7.  I  think  this  quotation  has  no  relevance,
and  is  introduced  merely  in  order  to  lead  on  to  a  poem
quoted  almost  immediately  afterwards,  about  a  flood  which
dro\nied  many  people  :

"  That  flow  strewed  Avrecks  about  the  grass,
That  ebbe  swept  out  the  flocks  to  sea  ;
A  fatal  ebbe  and  flow,  alas  !

To  man  ye  more  than  myne  and  mee."

See  footnote  (142).  See  footnote  (30)  above.

"  And  all  the  world  is  in.  the  war."  These  words  are  a
very  remarkable  variation  of  a  line  in  a  poem  by  Miss  Jean
Ingelow,  called  The  High  Tide  on  the  Coast  of  Lincolnshire.
Mrs.  King  at  the  time  recognized  the  source  of  the  phrase,
and  was  greatly  surprised  by  the  substitution  of  "  war  "  for
"sea."

"So  farre,  so  fast  the  eygre  [i.e.  large  tidal  wave]  drave,

The  heart  had  hardly  time  to  beat.
Before  a  shaUow  seething  wave

Sobbed  m  the  grasses  at  our  feet  :
The  feet  had  hardly  time  to  flee
Before  it  brake  agamst  the  Imee,
And  all  the  world  was  in  the  sea^

Note  the  alteration  of  the  tense  : ''is  in  the  war,"  not


490

May  2,  1914  (164)

May  8,  1914  (165)

May  14,  1914  (167)

May  29,  1914  (172)


J .  G.  Piddington.


[part


.  .  .  I  am  close  to  you  and  have
something  to  tell  you.  I  shall  slip
it  in  somehow.  You  must  not  try
too  hard  be  easy  and  uncritical
The  belted  earl,  oh  be  joyful  all  ye
lands  — the  troubled  times,  Eveleen
— the  hot  potatoes —  Mercy  and
truth  1"  .  .  .

.  .  .Say  not  the  struggle  naught
availeth.^*^  Faint  beginnings  of  the
dawn .  .  .

.  .  .  Open your heart to the  un-
known— fear is the arch  enemy.
Lusitania  ^''^  .  .  .

Yes it  is w^orth  while, never  think

it  is  not — all  the  pain  and  the

\sic\  Remember  that  all  stars  are
pointed — nerve  yourself  for  the  com-
ing trial  — the  terrible  striving  of
the  rich  [The  word  "  rich,"  though
clearly  written,  was  queried  by  Mrs.
King.]  The  light  is  dim — yoM  are
suffering  .  .  .


"  was."  "  The  dark  "  may  represent  an  attempt  at  the  next
verse  :

' '  Upon  the  roofe  we  sate  that  night,

The  noise  of  bells  went  sweeping  by  ;

And  awsome  bells  they  were  to  mee.
That  in  the  dark  rang  '  Enderby.'  "

Cf.  M.  V.  697,  of  June  18,  1915  :

"  Bells  ringing  in  the  darloiess  of  the  night — ringing  till
the  grey  dawn  rises  .  .  .  the  beUs  of  Enderby."

i"See  footnotes  (96)  and  (114)  above.

1**  See  footnote  (4)  above.

"5  See  footnote  (28)  above.  See  footnote  (2)  above.

14'' See  footnote  (162)  below.  ^^s x 118  above.

149  Qf  "Nerve  vourself  "  in  K.  85  above;  and  see  footnote
(180)  below.


Lxxxvii.] War  References  in  Pre-War  King  Scripts.  491


Jtine  4,  1914  (174) .  .  .  Fenchurch  Street — the  deluge

— the  noisome  pestilence  that  walketh
by  night  —  Courage  he  said  and
pointed  to  the  dawn  .  .  .  The
frightened  feathers  in  the  wind  blown
here  and  there —  Shelter  0  God
shelter  .  .  .  this  is  a  bad  business —
if  we  can  do  anything  we  will  but
it's  a  bad  business.

June  6,  1914  (175) ...  Let  not  thy  heart  be  troubled  "3

— ev6n  if  thou  walk  through  the
valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  I  am
with  thee .  .  .

Ju7ie  8,  1914  (176) The  healing  wings  of  grace —  The

merciless  downpour  Never  say  die —
for  there  is  hope  always — the  cleans-
ing fire  — no  other  way — futile
efforts  the  fear  is  spent — lay  not
up  for  yourselves  treasure  upon
earth  — the  last  flicker  Courage,
courage/^^  in  the  long  game  all  will
be  well.^^^  The  crossed  swords
Publish it not in Gath —  Say

Cf.  K.  154  and  155  above  ;  and  see  pp.  500-501  below.

Psalm  xci.  3,  5,  6  :  "  Surely  he  shall  dehver  thee  from
the  snare  of  the  fowler,  and  from  the  noisome  pestilence  .  .  .
Thou  shalt  not  be  afraid  for  the  terror  by  night,  nor  for  the
arrow  that  flieth  by  day.  Nor  for  the  pestilence  that  walketh
in  darlmess,  nor  for  the  destruction  that  Avasteth  at  noon-day."
See  footnote  (85)  above,  and  p.  501  below.

Tennyson,  The  Lotos-Eaters.  "  Dawn  "  is  substituted  for
"land." See  footnote  (119)  above.

See  footnote  (35)  above.  Psalm  xxiii.  4.

155  Possibly  cf.  the  extract  from  Rusldn's  Unto  This  Last,
quoted  on  p.  575  below  under  "  Vengeance  is  Mine."

See  footnote  (110)  above.  See  footnote  (45)  above.

See  footnote  (119)  above.  See  footnote  (59)  above.

See  footnote  (64)  above.

2  Sam.  i.  20  :  part  of  David's  Lament  over  Saul  and
Jonathan.  For  another  quotation  from  David's  Lament  see
K.  202:  "How  are  the  mighty  fallen."  See  also  pp.  514,  555,
563,  587  below.


492  J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

this — that the  worst  is  the  best
do you understand the worst  is
better than you think Rendez  le
moi c'est  mon  ami  ^"•'^  .  .  .

June  10,  1914  (177) .  .  .  tell  them  not  to  despair  there

is  much  to  be  suffered  and  gone
through,  but  out  of  strife  will  come
peace  — and  future  \sic]  and  in  the
end  beauty —

Devereux — no  no —  Devolution —
oh  you  are  a  stupid — the  price  must
be  paid — it  must  be — there  wiU  be
humiliation  and  bitter  bitter  pain —
but  in  the  end  a  guerdon  for  the
fighter  — • Fiend  voices  that  rave.^^^

162  Browning,  Prospice  :

"  Fear  death  ? — to  feel  the  fog  in  my  throat.

The  mist  in  my  face,
When  the  snows  begin,  and  the  blasts  denote

I  am  nearing  the  place,
The  power  of  the  night,  the  press  of  the  storm.

The  post  of  the  foe
Where  he  stands,  the  Arch  Fear  in  a  visible  form,

Yet  the  strong  man  must  go  :


Though  a  battle's  to  fight  ere  the  guerdon  be  gained.

The  reward  of  it  all.
I  was  ever  a  fighter,  so — one  fight  more,

The  best  and  the  last  !
I  Avould  hate  that  death  bandaged  my  eyes,  and  forbore.

And  bade  me  creep  past.

For  sudden  the  worst  turns  the  best  to  the  brave,

The  black  mmute's  at  end,
And  the  elements'  rage,  the  fiend-voices  that  rave,

Shall  dwindle,  shall  blend.
Shall  change,  shall  become  first  a  peace  out  of  pain,

Possibly  cf.  "  fear  is  the  arch  enemy  "  in  K.  167  ;  and
certainly  cf.  "  out  of  pain  will  come  peace — fear  Death  "  in
K.  193.


i«3  See  footnote  (107)  above.


Lxxxvii.] War  Beferences  in  Pre-War  King  Scripts.  493


Lay  down  the  burden  Write
that  this  is  no  abiding  city  (A
question  of  a  purely  personal  char-
acter was  here  asked  by  Mrs.  King,
and  a  brief  answer  given.)  Mens  sana
in  corporis  [sic]  sano  Now  stop
June  21,  1914  (182) ...  0 ye of little faith  i««  the

blindness — the  holden  eyes  ^^'^ — you  are
too  eminent  (word  queried  by  auto-
matist)  clean  your  heart  and  mind
{Mrs.  King  :  "  Clean  them  of  emo-
tion and  thought,  you  mean  ?)
Yes  that's  it —  In  the  furnace
tried  in  the  furnace  ^'^^ — and  not
found  wanting  —  The  Roman
toga  "° — the  transformation  i'^" —  The
living  fountain  of  grace — drink  from

163'  Cf.  "  Cast  off  your  burdens  "  in  K.  37  above.

Hebrews  xiii.  14  :  "  For  here  have  we  no  continuing  city,
but  we  seek  one  to  come."
Cf.  M.  V.  674  :

"  I  have  tried  before  to  represent  the  .  .  .  Creation  of
a  new  heaven  &  a  new  earth.  TUl  I  have  built  Jeru-
salem In  England's  green  &  pleasant  land.  There  is
still  much  buhding  to  be  done  ...  for  the  City  that  wiU
be  an  abidmg  City  the  true  Eternal  City  "  ;
and  see  under  "  The  Violet  Crown,"  pp.  539-548  below.

The  misquotation,  common  to  K.  177  and  M.  V.  674,  of
"  abidmg  "  for  "  continuing  "  may  be  due  to  a  recollection  of
1  Chron.  xxix.  15  :  "  For  we  are  strangers  before  thee,  and
sojourners,  as  were  all  our  fathers  :  our  days  on  the  earth  are
as  a  shadow,  and  there  is  none  abiding."  With  this  cf.  Hebreivs
xi.  9,  10  :  "By  faith  he  [Abraham]  sojourned  in  the  land  of
promise,  as  in  a  strange  country,  dwelling  in  tabernacles  .  .  .
For  he  looked  for  a  city  which  hath  foundations,  whose  builder
and  maker  is  God."

i«5Cf.  K.  66  above.  i««  See  footnote  (91)  above.

See  footnote  (134)  above. ^^See  footnote  (110)  above.
The  expression  is  borrowed  from  Dan.  v.  27  : "  Tekel  :
Thou  are  weighed  in  the  balances,  and  art  found  wantmg."
See  footnote  (108)  above.

See  pp.  556-559  below  for  the  meanmg  of  the  Roman  Toga ;
and  cf.  "the  seven  bills "  in  K.  157. See  footnote  (17)  above.


494


J.  0.  Piddington.


[part


it — How  lovely  are  the  messengers

that  bring  us  the  tidings  of  peace.

Long long strife and struggle  and

then  peace — be  not  afraid,  all  is
well  "3  _  _  _

.  .  .  The  last  lap —  Courage  — the
challenge  and  the  shield — the  broken
wa,ys — the  finger  of  destiny — keep
not  the  tidings  to  yourself  be
merciful  to  the  stricken  hind at
the  end  the  baying  will  cease
and  on  all  the  hills  there  will  be
peace  .  .  .  the  Miltonic  metaphor
Blest  pair  of  Sirens .  .  .

.  .  .  The  multitudinous  seas  incarna-
dine."'' Leo  the  Lion — the  Scorpion
...  be  brave  there  is  trial  coming

"1  Ro7n.  X.  15  :  "  as  it  is  written  [i.e.  in  Isaiah  lii.  7],  How
beautiful  are  the  feet  of  them  that  preach  the  gospel  of  peace,
and  bring  glad  tidings  of  good  things."  The  variation  from
the  original  given  in  the  script  is  due  to  an  imperfect  recol-
lection of  the  Enghsh  version  of  the  words  of  a  Chorus  in
Mendelssohn's  St.  Paul :  "  How  lovely  are  the  messengers  that
preach  us  the  gospel  of  peace." See  footnote  (10)  above.

See  footnote  (20)  above.  ggg  footnote  (59)  above.

"*See  footnote  (119)  above.

"^Cf.  per  contra  "  Publish  it  not  in  Gath  "  in  K.  176.

Mrs.  Sidgwick  suggests  that  there  is  a  reminiscence  here  of  a
Chorus  in  the  Bacchae  of  Euriijides  (U.  862 If.).  This  would  suit
"in  the  end  the  baying  will  cease"  very  well.  In  any  case  "be
merciful  to  the  stricken  hind  "  probably  belongs  to  the  topic  of
Mercy.  See  the  Section  called  "  Mercy  and  Truth,"  pp.  528-533
below.

177  "  xhe  baymg "  seems  to  mean  the  baying  of  "  the  dogs
of  war."

"•^  Milton,  At  a  Solemn  Musick.  See  under  "  the  Music  of
the  Spheres,"  pp.  550-554  below.

™  Shakespeare,  Macbeth,  Act  II.,  Sc.  2,  1.  62.

180  (2;f  "you  have  a  hard  time  before  you"  in  K.  115;
"nerve  yourself  for  the  coming  trial"  in  K.  172;  "you  will
have  a  difficult  time,  a  time  of  trial  "  in  K. 194 ; "  Great


June  22,  1914  (184)


June  24,  1914  (185)


Lxxxvii.] War  References  in  Pre-War  King  Scripts.  495

—  the  little  ear  of  corn  —  Lend
yourself  to  me  now  for  I  want
to  say  this,  that  in  the  armoury  of
faith  there  are  many  weapons.  No
man  is  to  be  despised  for  his  weapon.
The  mighty  power  of  evil  must  be
matched  with  power.

July  10,  1914  (193)  .  .  .  Linked  up  sounds  of  woe,  never-
theless out  of  pain  will  come  peace —
fear  Death — no .  .  .

July  12,  1914  (194j .  .  .  There  are  many  things  going  to

happen  in  which  you  will  have  a
part.  The  links  are  being  forged.
There  is  nothing  to  dread — you  are
well  guarded  but  you  have  a  diffi-
cult time,  a  time  of  trial. Pre-
pare yourself  by  quiet  thought  and
by  much  aspiration  and  striving  to
attain.  (The  script,  after  passing
explicitly  to  another  subject,  ends  as
follows  :)

Here  is  [name  of  Mrs.  King's
husband].  Darling  I  am  very  near
Tell  her  not  to  faint — tell  her  your
hand  is  about  her  (Interrupted).

trial  and  tribulation  "  in  K.  202.  and  "  the  trial  time,  the
testing  ground "  in  K.  207,  though  they  have  a  general  and
not  a  particular  apphcation,  should  also  be  compared.

In  view  of  the  preceding  references  to  Leo  and  the
Scorpion,  it  is  not  unlikely  that  "  the  httle  ear  of  corn  "  may
mean  another  of  the  Signs  of  the  Zodiac,  namely  Virgo,  whose
emblem  is  a  spike  of  corn.  She  is  identified  with  Astraea,  to
whom  there  are  several  references  in  the  scripts.  See  pp.  551,
563,  564,  595  beloAv.

See  footnote  (102)  above.
It should be noted that this is the last extract  before
June 28, 1914  : the date of the murder  of the  Archduke
Francis  Ferdmand  at  Serajevo. This  murder  was  the  osten-
sible casus  belli.

See  footnote  (162)  above.
i^*See  footnote  (180)  above;  and  also  footnote  (61).


496


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


{Dictated  to  Mrs.  Verrall.)
The  dispute  is  not  ended  though  in
the end there will be peace  —
festina  lente  .  .  .

.  .  .  Peace  had  Zimri  peace  who
slew  his  master  —  Be  afraid  of
nothing  your  part  is  prepared
for  you  and  for  others  only  be
calm  and  listen  and  attend.  Great
trial  and  tribulation  but  in
the  end  peace  and  light —  How  are
the  mighty  fallen  and  the  proud
brought low  the Lords  of

Heaven  are  not  asleep  Work  while
it  is  yet  day  for  the  night  cometh

It  must  be  admitted  that,  coming,  as  it  does,  at  this
point,  this  phrase  is  rather  unfortunate.  Nevertheless  it  cannot
be  held  to  outweigh  the  repeated  warnmgs  contained  in  the
preceding  scripts.  Moreover,  the  language  is  in  any  case
oracularly  ambiguous,  for  though  the  more  natural  meaning  is
that  the  dispute  will  end  peacefully,  it  can  be  read  to  mean
that  the  dispute  is  not  ended,  and  that  only  in  the  end  will
there  be  peace.  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  it  was  not
till  July  24,  1914,  that  news  reached  this  country  of  the
I^eremptory  and  arrogant  ultimatum  addressed  to  Serbia  by
Austria.  Had  it  been  Imown,  two  days  earlier,  it  might  have
been  held  to  liave  mfluenced  this  script.  If  King  198  was
influenced  at  all  by  the  automatist's  normal  knowledge  of  any
current  events,  I  should  be  rather  inclined  to  look  for  that
influence  in  the  Buckingham  Palace  Conference  on  the  Irish
crisis.  The  second  meeting  of  the  Conference  was  held  on  the
mornmg  of  July  22,  1914  (the  date  of  K.  198),  and  when  it
was  over  the  outlook  was  regarded  as  "  most  critical "  (see
the  Times  of  July  23,  1914).

186  2  Kings  ix.  31  :  "  And  as  Jehu  entered  in  at  the  gate
she  [Jezebel]  said,  Had  Zimri  peace,  who  slew  his  master  ?  "

For  reasons  for  referring  this  quotation  to  a  passage  in
Rusldn's  Moderri  Painters  see  pp.  523-527  below.  See  footnote
(38)  above.

IS''' See  footnote  (20)  above.  ^^^See  footnote  (180)  above.

See  footnote  (36)  above.

i^**  See  footnote  (161)  above.  The  quotation  from  David's
Lament  over  Saul  and  Jonathan  has  been  joined  with  language
reminiscent  of  Hannah's  Song  and  of  the  Magnificat.


July  22,  1914  (198)
(10.25  p.m.)


July  27,  1914  (202)

{Afternoon)


Lxxxvn.] War  References  in  Pre-War  King  Scrvpts.  497

when  no  man  can  work  —  Ven-
geance is  mine  saith  the  Lord  I  will
repay  Be  steady  and  incite  not
to  violence  .  .  .

July  27,  1914  (203) All is  well .  .  .  do  not  doubt,  it
{Midnight)  is  a  weakness

{Mrs.  King  :  "  I  do  not.  I  only
long  and  yearn  sometimes.^®*)
be  assured  by  me  that  the  time  is
not  long.  Now  I  want  you  to  carry
a  difficult  thing.  The  war  of  the
worlds —  Destiny

July  29,  1914  (204) .  .  .  Only a moment When  the

bugles  blow  Mercy — mercy  and
truth  i***^ — rent  asunder  .  .  .

?  July  31,  1914  (206)  Put  on  the  armour  of  light— buckle

on  the  shield  ^^'^  the  lurid  dawn —
but  be  nob  afraid

John  ix.  4  :  "I  must  work  the  works  of  him  that  sent
me,  while  it  is  day  :  the  night  cometh,  when  no  man  can  work."

Romans  xii.  17-21:  "Recompense  to  no  man  evil  for  evil
.  .  .  If  it  be  possible,  as  much  as  heth  in  you,  Uve  peaceably
mth  aU  men.  Dearly  beloved,  avenge  not  yourselves  :  but
rather  give  place  unto  wrath  :  for  it  is  written,  Vengeance  is
mine  ;  I  will  repay,  saith  the  Lord.  Therefore  if  thme  enemy
hunger,  feed  him  ;  if  he  thhst,  give  him  drink :  for  in  so
doing  thou  shalt  heap  coals  of  fire  on  his  head.  Be  not
overcome  of  evil,  but  overcome  evil  with  good."

St.  Paul  is  quotmg  from  Deut.  xxxii.  35  :  "  To  me  belongeth
vengeance,  and  recompense  ;  their  foot  shall  slide  in  due  time  :
for  the  day  of  their  calamity  is  at  hand,  and  the  things  that
shall  come  upon  them  make  haste."

See  below  under  "  Vengeance  is  mine,"  pp.  554-570  ;  and
see  also  the  extract  from  Ruskin's  Modern  Painters  quoted  on
p.  524  below.

See  footnote  (59)  above.

i^*It  looks  as  if  the  communicator  meant  to  assure  Mrs.
King  that  she  had  no  cause  to  doubt  but  that  all  would  be
well  as  regards  the  coming  War  and  its  outcome,  and  as  if
the  automatist  misunderstood  and  took  the  words  "  do  not
doubt  "  to  be  a  reflexion  on  her  scepticism.

See  footnote  (30)  above.  See  footnote  (4)  above.

See  footnote  (102)  above.  gee  footnote  (20)  above.


498


./.  G.  Pidclington.


[part


Aug.  2,  1914  (207) The  potter's  vessel  i^^*— ten  thousand

thousand — Jet  not  famine  or  war
affright  thee  ^oo — stand  by — the  time
is  not  yet  201  ..  .  Twice  have  the
bugles  caUed  the  third  time  is
enough —  The  trial  time,  the  testing
ground  -"^  The  burning  iron — take
courage  for  your  staff  ^os —  j  ^jgj^
that  I  could  give  you  comfort  I
can  only  promise  you  strength  .  .  .

"3  Psalm  ii.  1-5,  9  :  "  Why  do  the  heathen  so  furiously  rage
together :  and  why  do  the  people  imagine  a  vain  thing  ?
The  kings  of  the  earth  stand  up,  and  the  rulers  take  counsel
together  :  against  the  Lord,  and  against  his  Anointed.  Let  us
break  their  bonds  asunder  :  and  cast  away  their  cords  from  us.
He  that  dweJleth  in  heaven  shall  laugh  them  to  scorn  :  the
Lord  shall  have  them  in  derision.  Then  shall  he  speak  unto
them  in  his  wrath  :  and  vex  them  in  his  sore  displeasure.  .  .  .
Thou  shalt  bruise  them  with  a  rod  of  non  :  and  break  them
in  pieces  hke  a  potter's  vessel."

See  under  "  Vengeance  is  mine,"  pp.  554-570  below.
See  footnote  (20)  above.

The  allusion  here  I  take  to  be  to  Matt.  xxiv.  6-8:  "And
ye  shall  hear  of  wars,  and  rumours  of  wars  :  see  that  ye  be
not  troubled  :  for  all  these  things  must  come  to  pass,  but  the
end  is  not  yet.  For  nation  shall  rise  agamst  nation,  and
kingdom  against  kmgdom  :  and  there  shall  be  famines,  and
pestilences,  and  earthquakes,  in  divers  j)laces.  AH  these  are
the  beginning  of  sorrows."

Cf.  W.  225,  of  Nov.  13,  1910  ;  at  the  end  of  a  passage  full
of  references  to  War  :

"  there  were  Black  Clouds  too  and  much  pestilence  Cap-
tain my  Captain  [Walt  Whitman's  poem  on  the  death  of
Lincoln] But  the  end  was  not  yet."

There  are  several  other  references  to  "  the  end  is  not  yet  "
in  the  scrij^ts.  I  take  their  meaning  to  be  that,  though  the
War  bulks  largely  in  the  scripts,  it  is  not  "  the  conclusion  of
the  whole  matter,"  but  the  sign  of  the  end  of  an  old  world
and  of  the  beginniiig  of  a  new.

See  footnote  (180)  above. 203  gg^  footnote  (119)  above.


Lxxxvii.] Note  on  "  Lusitania,'"  "  Fenclmrch  Street,'"  etc.  499


NOTE  ON  "LUSITANIA,"  "  FENCHURCH  STREET,"
AND  "PATHFINDER."

LUSITANIA.

The  name  "  Lusitania  "  occurs  twice  in  Mrs.  King's  pre-
War  scripts  :  in  K.  118  of  February  20,  1914,  and  K.  167
of  May  14,  1914.  The  immediate  context  of  "  Lusitania  "
in  K.  118,  viz.  "foam  and  fire — mest  [s^c]  the  funnel,"
shows  conchisively  that  it  is  the  vessel  of  that  name  that
is  meant.  It  is  the  only  name  of  a  ship,  except  "  The
Pathfinder "  (for  which  see  later),  that  occurs  in  the
pre-War  King  scripts.  It  will  be  generally  admitted,
I  think,  that  the  appearance  of  the  name  twice  in  these
scripts,  which  certainly  seem  to  contain  predictions  of  the
coming  War,  is  very  odd.  But  is  it  more  than  "  very
odd  "  ?  Is  there,  in  other  words,  more  than  a  chance-coin-
cidence between  the  two  appearances  of  "  Lusitania "  in
Mrs.  King's  scripts  of  Feb.  20,  and  May  14,  1914,  and
the  sinking  of  the  Lusitania  on  May  7,  1915  ?  I  find
myself  unable  to  come  to  any  conclusion.  The  reasons
against  regarding  the  coincidence  as  accidental  seem  to  me
to  be  these  :

(a)  "  Lusitania  "  occurs  twice  in  a  series  of  scripts  which
for  various  reasons  appear  to  contain  a  good  many
predictions  of  the  Great  War,  in  which  the  sinking
of  the  Lusitania  was  an  event  of  outstanding
importance  :

(6)  "  Lusitania "  occurs  first  in  a  script  containing
several  phrases  ("let  not  your  heart  be  troubled,"
"  the  hght  is  growing,"  "  the  stars  sang  together,"
"  Be  joyful  all  ye  lands  ")  which  form  part  of  a
group  of  references  predictive  of  a  Utopia  to  follow
the  War  ;

(c)  the  second  occurrence  of  "  Lusitania  "  is  immediately
preceded  by  a  phrase—"  fear  is  the  arch  enemy  "—
which, for reasons given in footnote (162)  on


500


J.  G.  Piddington.


[PAKT


pre-War  King  scripts,  may  be  reminiscent  of  the
first  verse  of  Browning's  Prospice  and  especially  of

"  The  post  of  the  foe
Where  he  stands,  the  Arch  Fear  in  visible  form,"

and  this  literary  allusion,  if  really  intended,  would
not  be  inapj^ropriate  to  the  sinking  of  the  Lusitania.

Of  these  three  reasons  the  first  appears  to  me  to  be  by
far  the  strongest.

The  reasons  for  regarding  the  coincidences  as  accidental
I  should  summarise  as  follows  :

(a)  the  a  priori  improbability  of  foreseeing  such  an
event  as  the  sinking  of  the  Lusitania  a  year  before-
hand (For  further  observations  on  this  point  see
pp.  601-603  below.)  ;  and

(6)  there  is  nothing  in  the  context  of  either  "  Lusitania  "
reference  to  suggest  destruction  by  an  enemy.
"Foam  and  fire"  in  King  114,  in  so  far  as  it
suggests  anything  definite,  suggests  rather  a  fire
breaking  out  on  board,  and  the  ship  sinking  and
awash  in  the  waves  as  a  result  of  the  fire.  If  "fear
is  the  arch  enemy "  is  reminiscent  of  Prospice,  it
could  be  perfectly  well  applied  to  the  passengers
and  crew  aboard  the  burning  ship  having  to  meet
death.

Fenchtjech  Street.

The  references  to  Fenchurch  Street  occur  in  the  following
scripts  and  contexts  :

King  154. Fenchurch  .  .  .

King  155.  ...  Fenchui'ch  St.  The  underground.  In  the
boat  are  many — the  Teuton,  the  bandaged  eyes.

King  174.  ...  Fenchurch  Street — the  deluge — the  noisome
pestilence  that  walketh  by  night  .  .  .  Shelter  O  God
shelter  .  .  .

These  are  the  only  references  in  all  Mrs.  King's  scripts  to
Fenchurch  St.,  and  there  is  no  other  reference  to  "  The
underground."


Lxxxvii.] Note  on  "  Lnsitania,"  "  Fenchurch  Street,"  etc.  501

In  the  summer  of  1917  the  worst  German  Air-Raids  on
London  took  place.  I  have  not  been  able  to  obtain
detailed  information  about  them,  but  certainly  much
damage  was  done  on  one  occasion — and,  I  fancy,  on  two
occasions — to  Leadenhall  St.  and  Fenchurch  St.  and  the
small  streets  lying  between  them.  The  stations  and
passages  in  the  Underground  Railways  were,  of  course,
much  used  as  shelters  during  Air-Raids.  I  am  nearly
certain  that  the  Air  Raid  (or  Raids)  that  caused  damage
to  Fenchurch  St.  and  its  neighbourhood  took  place  in  the
daytime,  and  not  at  night.  Accordingly  "  the  noisome
pestilence  that  walketh  by  7iight "  could  not  be  strictly
applied  to  a  daylight  Raid ;  but  if  ''  the  noisome  pesti-
lence "  etc.  is  regarded  as  an  allusion  to  the  context  of
these  words  in  Psalm  xci.  6,  this  context  would  not  be
inappropriate  :

Surely  he  shall  deliver  thee  .  .  .  from  the  noisome  pesti-
lence .  .  .  Thou  shalt  not  be  afraid  for  the  terror  by
night,  nor  for  the  arrow  that  flieth  by  day,  nor  for  the
pestilence  that  walketh  in  the  darkness,  nor  for  the
destruction  that  wasteth  at  noon-day.

I  I  am  not  for  one  moment  claiming  that  these  three
"  Fenchurch  St."  scripts  do  relate  to  Air-Raids  on  the
City.  I  confine  myself  to  pointing  out  coincidences
between  phrases  in  these  scripts  and  facts  (or  what  I
believe  to  be  facts)  connected  with  German  Air-Raids  on
the  City,  and  I  leave  each  reader  to  form  his  own  opinion.
Should  any  reader  think  the  coincidences  too  close  to  be
attributed  to  chance,  he  may  be  inclined  to  see  in  the
words  "  In  the  boat  are  many — the  Teuton  "  an  attempt
to  combine  a  prediction  of  the  sinking  of  the  Lusitania
with  a  prediction  of  Air-Raids  on  the  City.  "  The
Teuton  "  occurs  in  King  150  and  155  only.

The  Pathfindek.

On  September  5,  1914,  the  light  cruiser  H.M.S.  Path-
finder was  struck  by  a  torpedo  and  foundered.  This  was
the  second  disaster  in  the  War  that  had  befallen  the  British


502


J .  G.  Piddington.


Fleet  up  to  that  date  :  the  first  being  the  loss  of  H.M.S.
Amphion  on  August  6,  1914.^

In  King  161  occurs  the  following  :

The  Pathfinder  Die  Pfadfinderin  cut  out  a  new  way  for
the  spirit.

These  words  are  sandwiched  between  what  I  regard  as
a  certain  reference  to  the  passage  from  Ruskin's  Modern
Painters  quoted  on  pp.  523-527  below,  and  one  of  the
clearest  predictions  of  the  War.  If,  then,  the  coincidence
between  King  161  and  the  disaster  to  H.M.S.  Pathfinder
is  not  accidental,  the  context  on  both  sides  is  markedly
suggestive  :  much  more  suggestive  than  are  the  contexts
of  "  Lusitania  "  and  "  Fenchurch  St."

A  strong — but  not,  I  think,  a  conclusive — argument
against  the  coincidence  being  due  to  foreknowledge  can  be
based  on  the  fact  that  "  The  Pathfinder "  is  followed  by
"  Die  Pfadfinderin  "  :  the  latter  being  the  original  title  of
a  story  by  Paul  Heyse,  which  Mrs.  King  had  once  trans-
lated into  English.  When  I  asked  her  about  the  story,
she  coidd  not  remember  it  in  detail,  but  she  did  remember
that  it  was  about  a  woman  of  unconventional  type  ;  and
she  thought  that  the  words  that  follow  "  Die  Pfad-
finderin," viz.  "  cut  out  a  new  way  for  the  spirit,"  might
represent  her  vague  recollection  of  the  story.  In  any
case  "  cut  out  a  new  way  for  the  spirit  "  seems  to  carry
on  the  idea  expressed  in  the  phrases  that  immediately
precede  "  The  Pathfinder. Die  Pfadfinderin,"  viz.  :

lift  up  your  eyes  0  ye  daughters  of  men  heed  not  the
clamour  of  the  world — wield  aloft  the  mighty  arms  of  your
wondering  spirit.

The  occurrence  of  "  The  Pathfinder "  may  consequently
be  accounted  for  on  normal  hues  ;  and  such  an  explana-
tion  will  doubtless satisfy  many, particularly  those  who

1  See  Journal,  Vol.  XVI.,  pp.  306  ff.  and  Proc.  Vol.  XXXIII.,  pp.  352-
353,  for  two  dreams  of  a  sinking  ship,  experienced  by  the  same  percipient,
the  first  occurring  13  lionrs  after  the  sinking  of  H.M.S.  Amphion,  and  the
second  near  the  time  that  H.M.S.  Pathfinder  sank.  Since  the  accoimt
of  these  dreams  was  published  in  Proceedimjs  we  have  been  informed
that  the  Pathfinder  was  torpedoed,  and  not  sunk  by  a  mine.


Lxxxvii.]  Nvte  on  "  Lusitania,"  "  Fenchurch  Street,'"  etc.  503

have  made  no  study  of  automatism.  But  those  famiUar
with  the  mental  processes  displayed  in  scripts  will  recog-
nise that  the  contents  of  an  automatist's  normal  conscious-
ness often  serve  to  give  expression  to  an  idea  that  is
trying  to  emerge  from  a  subconscious  stratum.  If,  then,
some  subconscious  stratum  of  Mrs.  King's  mind  was
endeavouring  to  exj)ress  the  idea  of  H.M.S.  Pathfinder,  it
is  by  no  means  improbable  that  the  nearest  approach  to
successful  expression  would  be  a  reference  to  a  story
normally  known  to  the  automatist  and  bearing  the  same
title  as  the  ship.  Moreover,  if  some  vague  connexion
existed  in  the  subconscious  stratum  between  H.M.S.
Pathfinder  and  the  Germans,  a  reference  to  a  German
story  bearing  the  same  name  as  the  ship  might  all  the
more  readily  be  evoked.


It  may  be  that,  about  the  dates  that  "  Lusitania,"
"  Fenchurch  St.,"  and  "  The  Pathfinder "  appeared  in
Mrs.  King's  scripts,  there  were  prominent  allusions  to  the
ship,  or  the  cruiser,  or  the  street  in  the  newspapers  or
elsewhere.  I  know  of  none  ;  but  should  any  of  my
readers  come  across  any,  I  hope  he  will  inform  me.
There  must,  of  course,  have  been  announcements  of  the
sailings  of  the  Lusitania  ;  and  Fenchurch  St.  must  have
been  mentioned  in  the  newspapers,  and  H.M.S.  Pathfinder
may  have  been.  To  references  of  this  kind,  however,
I  am  not  asking  to  have  my  attention  drawn,  for  they
would  hardly  be  likely  to  help  in  the  solution  of  the
problem.  The  kind  of  reference  I  mean  is  such  as  could
reasonably  be  supposed  to  have  excited  Mrs.  King's
interest.  Mrs.  King  herself  is  not  aware  of  havmg  had
her  notice  drawn  at  or  about  the  dates  in  question  either
to  the  Lusitania,  or  to  H.M.S.  Pathfinder,  or  to  Fenchurch
Street.


2i


504


J.  G.  Pidclington.


[part


COMPARISON  OF  PRE-WAR  KING  SCRIPTS  WITH
THE  SCRIPTS  OF  OTHER  AUTOMATISTS.

In  the  footnotes  appended  to  the  pre-War  King  scripts,
although  a  certain  number  of  cross-references  have  been
given  to  the  scripts  of  the  other  automatists,  attention
has  been  mainly  directed  to  recurrences  of  the  same
phrase  or  topic  in  the  King  scripts  themselves.  I  now
proceed  to  make  a  more  detailed  and  systematic  com-
parison between  the  pre-War  King  scripts  and  the  scripts
of  the  other  automatists.

The  simplest  way  of  doing  this  is  to  take  a  topic  found
in  the  King  scripts,  to  ascertain  whether  it  appears  in  the
other  scripts,  and,  if  so,  in  what  kind  of  context  ;  and
then  to  see  whether  this  context  suits  its  context  in  the
King  script.

It  must  be  clearly  understood  that  in  making  these
comparisons  I  am  not  pretending  to  deal  with  all  the
occurrences  in  other  scripts  of  a  topic  found  in  the
pre-War  scripts.  If  I  were  to  do  that,  this  paper  would
attain  inordinate  dimensions,  and  the  reader  would  be
bewildered  by  the  mass  of  evidence.  I  am  pretending
only  to  give  illustrations  of  how  a  topic  found  in  the
King  scripts  is  treated  in  the  other  scripts.

Before,  however,  starting  on  this  task,  I  must  remind
the  reader  of  what  I  said  in  the  Introduction  to  this
paper  :  namely,  that  the  pre-War  King  scripts  are  more
explicit  than  the  great  generahty  of  the  other  automatists'
scripts.  He  must  therefore  not  be  surprised  when  he
finds  that  the  corresponding  references  in  the  other  scripts
require  more  comment  than  do  the  simpler  references  in
King  scripts.  The  communicators  do  not  pretend  as  a
general  rule  to  be  able  to  make  definite  statements.
What  they  claim  to  do  is

"  to  get  a  sequence  of  associated  ideas  grouped  in
the  automatist's  mind  in  such  a  way  as  to  suggest


Lxxxvn.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


505


a  certain  train  of  thought  or  events  normally  un-
known"  (H.  V.  325).

Note  the  words  "  to  suggest,"  because  they  very  exactly
describe  what  really  happens. With  this  suggestive  method

!  one  cannot  expect  the  matter-of-factness  of  a  legal  docu-
ment or  of  an  auctioneer's  catalogue.  The  effect  produced
is  not  unhke  that  produced  by  poetry.  A  poem  may
create  an  impression  which  could  not  fairly  be  described
as  obscure  ;  and  it  may  create — and  a  good  poem  will
usually  create — a  more  vivid  impression  than  a  piece  of
prose  dealing  with  the  same  subject.  But  though  the
impression  may  be  vivid  and  not  obscure,  it  will  probably

I  not  be  definite. Were  one  to  try  to  reduce,  let  us  say,

I  Shelley's  Cloud  to  matter-of-fact  prose,  the  result  would  be

I  deplorable  or  laughable.  I  do  not  suggest  that  the
scripts  soar  to  such  heights  as  The  Cloud  reaches  :  their

i  imagery  may  not  scorn  the  ground  quite  so  airily  as  that  ;
but  nevertheless  it  is  sufficiently  poetical  to  make  the
task  of  reducing  its  meaning  to  plain  prose  a  hard  matter  ;
and  so  the  reader  must  not  complain  if  I  do  not  dot  all
the  i's  and  cross  all  the  fs,  and  if  I  leave  it  to  him  to
do  some  of  the  interpretation  for  himself.  To  understand
any  but  the  simplest  poems  it  is  usually  necessary  to  read
them  with  care  several  times  at  least.  So  also  with
these  symbolic  scripts. If  a  reader  will  take  the  trouble

t  to  go  through  them  carefully  several  times,  I  believe  with
each  successive  reading  he  will  acquire  a  deeper  insight
into  their  meaning  ;  but  if  he  has  only  patience  enough
for  one  reading,  then,  I  fear,  they  will  leave  on  him  but
a  faint  and  confused  impression.

The  topics are  not all  of  ec|ual  interest or  of  equal
evidential  value. Those  that  come  first  are  less  interest-

j  ing  than  the  later  ones.  But  the  earlier  sections  should
not  be  skipped,  because  I  have  tried  to  arrange  the  topics
in  a  sort  of  logical  sequence,  so  that,  as  a  rule,  one  leads

'  on  to  the  next,  and  so  on.  The  evidence,  in  fact,  is  to
a  great  extent  cumulative.


506


/.  G.  Pidclington.


[part


"  ALL  LS  WELL."

See  King  84,  107,  125,  136,  176,  182,  203.

The  phrase  "  all  is  tvell  "  appears  in  King  scripts
without  any  literary  association.  In  H.  V.  129,  of
Nov.  14,  1908,  "  all  is  well  "  occurs  as  part  of  a  quotation
from  Tennyson,  In  Memoriam,  CXXVII  :

Ah sorrow aiXivov aiXwov enre toS' ev I'lKarw  [Aesch.,

Ag.  121,  139,  159:  "Alas  and  welladay,  said  he,  but  let
the  good  prevail ! "]  and  aU  is  Avell  tho'  faith  and  form
seem  sundered  in  the  night  of  fear  the  union  of  good
and  evil  that  is  the  thought  the  evil  is  null  is  void
there  is  the  same  thought  here  too  .  .  .  The  mountains
gleam  with  a  great  light  not  the  light  of  dawn  Kings
shall  tremble  and  great  potentates  be  amazed.

The  passage  in  In  Memoriam  from  which  this  script
quotes,  and  of  which  it  is  also  reminiscent,  is  as  follows  :

And  hear  at  times  a  sentinel

Who  moves  about  from  place  to  place,
And  whispers  to  the  worlds  of  space,

In  the  deep  night,  that  all  is  well.

And  all  is  well,  tho'  faith  and  form

Be  sunder'd  in  the  night  of  fear  ;

Well  roars  the  storm  to  those  that  hear
A  deeper  voice  across  the  storm,

Proclaiming  social  truth  shall  spread.

And  justice,  ev'n  tho'  thrice  again

The  red  fool-fury  of  the  Seine
Should  pile  her  barricades  with  dead.

But  ill  for  him  that  wears  a  crown,
And  him,  the  lazar,  in  his  rags  :
They  tremble,  the  sustaining  crags  ;

The  spires  of  ice  are  toj)pled  down,


Lxxxvn.]


Comparisoyi  of  Scripts.


507


And  molten  up,  and  roar  in  flood  ;
The  fortress  crashes  from  on  high,
The  brute  earth  hghtens  to  the  sky,

And  the  great  ^on  sinks  in  blood.

And  compass'd  by  the  fires  of  Hell  ;

While  thou,  dear  spirit,  happy  star,

O'erlooks't  the  tumult  from  afar,
And  smilest,  knowing  all  is  well.

To  this  passage  there  are  other  direct  references  in  the
scripts  ;  and  besides  these,  the  following  extract  from
H.  V.  173,  of  July  29,  1909,  has  obviously  been  influenced
by  the  In  Mem.  passage  :

Victory  with  justice  and  Truth  ^  .  .  .  and  what  shall  be
hereafter  ^  .  .  .  The  darkness  grows  the  shadows  lengthen
and  night  comes  with  silent  stride — the  night  of  terror '
is  also  the  night  of  rest  and  healing  for  those  whose  face
is  turned  towards  the  dawn. The  dawn — the  dawn  *  .  .  .

"AiXivov, u'lXiroi'  eiTre, etc., which immediately  precedes
\  the quotation from In Mem. cxxvii. in H. V.  129,
appears  in  M.  V.  47,  of  Sept. 17, 1905,  in  the  following
context  :

at'Aii'o;' at'Aii'oi' etVe to 8' ev vikcltm  ... It is  Unhappy

in  the  telhng  but  good  will  come  in  the  end.
And  old  unhappy  far  off  things  .  .  .

For  "  old  unhappy  far  off  things  " — which  is  a  quotation
from  Wordsworth's  The  Solitary  Reaper — see  the  next
section.

^  Cf.  "Proclaiming  social  truth  shall  spread,

And  justice."

Rev.  iv.  1  :  "Come  up  hither,  and  I  will  shew  thee  things  which
must  be  hereafter."

The  slight  misquotation  of  the  original  is  probably  traceable  to  a
recollection  of  the  English  version  of  a  solo  in  Spohr's  Last  Judgment,
where,  in  order  to  fit  the  music,  the  original  is  altered  to  "  and  I  will
shew  thee  what  shall  he  hereafter."

^  Cf.  "  tho'  faith  and  form

Be  sunder'd  in  the  night  of  fear."

*  Tennyson,  In  Mem.  xcv. Cf.  King  31.


508


J .  0.  Piddington.


[part


"WE  BAND  OF  BROTHERS."
See  King  43,  128.

This  quotation  from  the  famous  "  Crispin-Crispian  "
speech  before  Agincourt  in  Shakespeare's  Henry  V.  is
found  also  in  Holland,  M.V.,  and  Willett  scripts.  It
seems  to  be  used  in  more  than  one  sense,  and  is  some-
times applied  to  the  commimicators  themselves  ;  but  on
March  5,  1914  (see  King  128),  when  the  question  "  Do
you  wish  to  say  anything  about  [old,  unhappy,  far  ofi
things,  and]  '  battles  long  ago '  ?  "  was  put  by  Mrs.
Sidgwick  to  Mrs.  King,  the  response  opened  with  the
words  :

"  The  banded  {or,  band  of)  brothers."

We  may  assume,  I  think,  that  on  this  occasion  at  any
rate  "  the  band  of  brothers "  stands  for  the  Battle  of
Agincourt,  and  was  suggested  by  the  question  about
"  battles  long  ago."  I  should  attach  no  importance  to
that,  if  it  stood  alone  ;  but  this  phrase  in  Mrs.  King's
answer  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  question  becomes,  perhaps,
more  significant  when  compared  with  the  four  following
extracts  from  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts,  the  first  of  which  was
written  the  day  after  the  anniversary  of  St.  Crispin's  Day,
1901,  and  the  fourth  on  St.  Crispin's  Day,  1915  :

31.  V.  3072  {Oct.  26,  1901).

.  .  .  Grasp  it  now  Graspian — and  another  like  the
first  .  .  .  s.  Crispin's  day  recently  that  is  a  date —
not  for  you  .  .  .

M.  V.  3114  {March  27,  1902).

.  .  .  Everlasting  snows  and  birds  of  prey  gathered
together  .  .  .  Crispin  Crispian  was  right  you  wiU  see
some  day  ...


LXXX\TI.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


509


"  Everlasting  snows "  occurs  only  once  again  in  Mrs.
Verrall's  scripts,  as  follows  :

31.  V.  3043  {June  30,  1901).

...  in the everlasting snows — you cannot fail  to
note. Peace  and  a  sword  .  .  .

M.  V.  710  (Oct.  25,  1915).

Ye  band  of  brothers  .  .  .

This  last  script  was  written  on  an  impulse  just  after
jNIrs.  VerraU  had  read  the  "  Crispin-Crispian  "  speech  in
the  Times  of  Oct.  25,  1915.

It  is  not  necessary,  I  suppose,  to  produce  evidence  of
the  frequent  references  to  the  Crispin-Crispian "  speech
during  the  War,  especially  during  the  months  of  October
1914  and  1915.

"Birds  of  prey  gathered  together"  in  M.  V.  3114  is
almost  certainly  reminiscent  of  Matthew  xxiv.  28  :

For  wheresoever  the  carcase  is,  there  ^vilI  the  eagles  be
gathered  together  ;

or  of  Luke  xvii.  37  :

Two  women  shall  be  grinding  together  ;  the  one  shall  be
taken,  and  the  other  left.

Two  men  shall  be  in  the  field  ;  the  one  shall  be  taken,
and  the  other  left.

And  they  answered  and  said  xmto  him,  ^Vhere,  Lord  ?
And  he  said  unto  them,  ^\^leresoeve^  the  body  is,  thither
^viIl  the  eagles  be  gathered  together.

The  "  Crispin-Crispian "  reference  in  M.  V.  3114,  then,
is  combined  with  a  phrase  that  is  almost  certainly  reminis-
cent of  a  passage  in  one  of  the  Eschatological  Discourses
which  is  very  intimately  connected  (see  Luke  xvii.  31  and
Matthew  xxiv.  17,  18,  20)  with

"  Pray  ye  that  your  flight  be  not  in  the  winter,"

which  occurs  no  less  than  seven  times  in  the  pre-War
King  scripts.


510


J.  0.  Piddington.


[part


BEHEMOTH  AND  LEVIATHAN.
See  King  script  of  Oct.  18,  1913.

"  Tell  Gerald  that  Behemoth  was  what  I  meant  "  in  King
script  of  Oct.  18,  1913,  was  written  shortly  after  Mr.
Balfour  had,  unknown  of  course  to  Mrs.  King,  been
puzzhng  over  the  following  reference  to  Leviathan  in
Willett  281,  of  Feb.  16,  1912  :

.  .  .  thou  great  Leviathan  not  Jonah  Thou  great
Leviathan  men's  hearts  failing  them  for  fear  but  the
waves  sank  like  a  little  child  to  sleejD  the  angry  billow
ceased  to  leap At  thy  will  .  .  .

I  believe  that  Mrs.  Willett's  "  Leviathan "  which  is
"  not  Jonah,"  and  Mrs.  King's  "  Behemoth  "  are  allusions
to  two  companion  pictures  of  Blake's. They  are  num-
bered respectively  I.  and  II.  in  Blake's  Descriptive  Cata-
logue, from  which  I  quote  the  titles  given  them  by  Blake  :

NUMBER  I.

The  Spiritual  Form  of  Nelson  guiding  Leviathan,  hi  tvhose
writhings  are  infolded  the  Nations  of  the  Earth.

NFMBEB  II. — ITS  COMPANION.

The  Spiritual  Form  of  Pitt  guiding  Behemoth ;  he  is  that
Angel  who,  pleased  to  pe^rform  the  Almighty's  orders,  rides  on
the  ivhirlwind,  directing  the  storms  of  ivar :  He  is  ordering
the  Reaper  to  reap  the  Vine  of  the  Earth,  and  the  Ploughman
to  j)lough  up  the  Cities  and  Towers.

I  presume  that  Blake's  titles  were  suggested  to  him  by
Hobbes'  Leviathan  and  its  companion  work  Behemoth
rather  than  by  the Book  of  Job. Part of  Blake's  de-

1  There  are  many  allusions  in  the  scripts  to  Blake's  pictures  and  poems.


LXXXVII.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


511


scription  of  Behemoth  is  based  on  Addison's  poem  on  the
Battle  of  Blenheim

'Twas  then  great  Marlborough's  mighty  soul  was  proved,

That,  in  the  shock  of  charging  hosts  unmoved,

Amidst  confusion,  horror,  and  despair,

Examined  all  the  dreadful  scenes  of  war  :

In  peaceful  thought  the  field  of  death  surveyed.

To  fainting  squadi'ons  sent  the  timely  aid,

Inspired  repulsed  battalions  to  engage,

And  taught  the  doubtful  battle  where  to  rage.

So  when  an  Angel  by  divine  command,

With  rising  tempests  shakes  a  guilty  land

(Such  as  of  late  o'er  pale  Britannia  passed).

Calm  and  serene  he  drives  the  furious  blast  ;

And,  pleased  the  Almighty's  orders  to  perform.

Rides  in  the  whirl wuid  and  directs  the  storm. ^

In  describing  Pitt  as  "  ordering  the  Reaper  to  reap  the
Vine  of  the  Earth,"  Blake  is  borrowing  his  imagery  from
Rev.  xiv.  18-19  :

And  another  angel  came  out  from  the  altar,  .  .  .  and
cried  with  a  loud  cry  to  him  that  had  the  sharp  sickle,
saying.  Thrust  in  thy  sharp  sickle,  and  gather  the  clusters
of  the  vine  of  the  earth  ;  for  her  grapes  are  fully  ripe.

And  the  angel  thrust  in  his  sickle  into  the  earth,  and
gathered  the  vine  of  the  earth,  and  cast  it  into  the  great
wine-press  of  the  wrath  of  God.

"  Thou  great  Leviathan  "  in  W.  281 — which  is,  so  to
speak,  corrected  by  King  script  to  "  Behemoth  " — is
immediately  followed  by  a  quotation  from  Ltike  xxi.  26  :

And  there  shall  be  signs  in  the  sun,  and  in  the  moon,
and  in  the  skies  ;  and  upon  earth  distress  of  nations,  with
perplexity  ;  the  sea  and  the  waves  roaring  ;  Men's  hearts
failing  them  for  fear,  and  for  looldng  after  those  things
which  are  coming  on  the  earth.

If  "  thou  great  Leviathan  "  means,  as  I  suggest,  Blake's

1  Mrs.  Salter's  scripts  contain  -what  I  believe  to  be  several  attempts
— ^none  quite  successful — to  quote  this  last  line.


512


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Behemoth,  which  Blake  associated  with  the  passage  in
Bev.  xiv.,  it  is  not  difficult  to  see  why  it  is  immediately
followed  by

"  Men's  hearts  failing  them  for  fear  "  ;

because  both  Bibhcal  passages  are  concerned  with  the
signs  of  the  coming  of  God's  Judgement  upon  the  earth.

In  W.  281  "  Men's  hearts  failing  them  for  fear " — ^the
immediate  context  of  which  is  "  the  sea  and  the  waves
roaring  " — is  immediately  followed  by  a  quotation  from
the  well-known  Hymn  on  the  subject  of  Christ's  calming
of  the  storm  on  the  Sea  of  Galilee.  If  we  consider  that
"  the  sea  and  the  waves  roaring  "  immediately  precedes  in
the  original  "  Men's  hearts  failing  them  for  fear,"  and  that
the  latter  is  immediately  followed  in  the  script  by  a
reference  to  the  Calming  of  the  Storm,  we  can  easily
understand  how  Leviathan,  the  sea-monster  guided  by
Nelson,  might  be  given  in  mistake  for  Behemoth,  the
land-monster  guided  by  Pitt.

The  context  in  St.  Luke's  Gospel  of  "  Men's  hearts
failing  them  for  fear  "  is,  of  course,  parallel  to  the  passage
in  Matthew  xxiv.  about  the  signs  of  Christ's  second  coming
and  the  end  of  the  world,  in  which  occur  the  words,  so
often  quoted  in  pre -War  Bang  scripts  :

"  But  pray  ye  that  your  flight  be  not  in  the  winter."

With  the  topic  of  the  Calming  of  the  Storm  we  shall  meet
several  times  again  later  on  (see  pp.  514,  554,  592,  594,  595).
What  its  precise  meaning  may  be,  is  not  clear.  I  do  not
think  that  it  means  the  end  of  the  War  :  that  is  to  say,
the  cessation  of  military  operations  in  November  1918.
The  Calming  of  the  Storm  appears  to  be  connected  in  the
scripts  with  Christ's  walking  on  the  water,  and  also  with
the  passage  in  the  first  book  of  the  Aeneid  where  Neptune
calms  the  storm  for  Aeneas.  If  I  had  to  make  a  guess
as  to  the  meaning  of  these  associations,  I  should  con-
jecture that  they  pointed  to  a  sudden  and  grave  political
crisis  to  end  as  suddenly  as  it  arose.  Some  such  meaning
as  this  would  explain  why  the  two  incidents  in  the
Gospels are connected with the passage in Aeneid  I.,


LXXXVII.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


513


where  Neptune  calming  the  sudden  storm  is  compared  to
a  statesman  appeasing  a  turbulent  outburst  of  the  ignobile
valgus  (cf.  Hobbes'  use  of  "  Leviathan,"  and  Blake's  use
of  "Behemoth").

Should  some  readers  feel  a  certain  unfittingness  in  the
apphcation  of  Christ's  calming  of  the  storm  and  of  his
walking  on  the  sea  to  political  alfairs,  I  would  point  out
that  it  has  at  least  the  authority  of  Tennyson,  whose
Lady  of  the  Lake

"  dweUs

Down  in  a  deep  ; calm,  whatsoever  storms

May  shake  the  world,  and  when  the  surface  rolls

Hath  power  to  walk  the  waters  hke  our  Lord."


"THE  CROSSED  SWORDS."
See  King  92,  178.

The  phrase  "  the  Crossed  Sivords,"  which  presumably
means  the  sign  used  to  mark  on  maps  the  scene  of  a
battle,  occurs  elsewhere  than  in  King  script  only  once,
namely  in  H.  V.  448,  of  October  31,  1915,  and  in  this
form  :

Crossed  swords — the  sword  in  the  scabbard.

The  only  other  reference  in  H.  V.  scripts  to  a  sword
and  scabbard  is  in  H.  V.  250,  of  January  31,  1912  :

the  sword  and  the  scabbard  to  draw  the  sword  is
easier  than  to  sheathe  it  armed  cap  a  pie  ^  the  temple
doors  stand  open.

That  "  the  temple  doors  " here  mean  the  doors  of  the

^  See  footnote  (115)  on  pre-War  ELing  scripts.


514


j .  G.  Piddington.


[part


Temple  of  Janus,  which  stood  open  in  time  of  war,  is
shown  by  H.  V.  463,  of  Feb.  24,  1916  :

how  are  the  mighty  fallen  [cf.  King  176,  202]  .  .  .
hinges — open  wide — the  temple  ot  Janus.

With  this  compare  an  extract  from  W.  231,  of  January
18,  1911,  never  seen  by  Mrs.  Salter  :

Pax  Vobiscum  .  .  .  Victories  other  tlian  those  of  War
.  .  .  go  on  .  .  .  the  angels'  song  in  terra  [pax]  Bub  why
brealc  off  Janus  the  gates  thereof  closed  or  open  they
stand  and  stood  very  long  ago  many  years  their  hinges
did  not  revolve  the  Olive  Branch  that  too  the  Plough-
shares the  quiet  hours  the  quiet  the  great  calm  .  .  .
All  her  paths  are  Peace.

"  The  great  calm  "  here  is  a  reference  to  the  Calming  of
the  Storm  on  the  Sea  of  Galilee.  Cf.  W.  230,  of  January  5,
1911  :

say  too  there  was  a  great  Calm the  waves  sank  to  sleep

and  compare  also  the  passage  already  quoted  above
(p.  510)  from  W.  281,  of  February  16,  1912  :

[the  sea  and  the  waves  roaring]  men's  hearts  failing
them  for  fear  but  the  waves  sank  like  a  little  child  to
sleep the  angry  billow  ceased  to  leap At  thy  will.


"LAY  NOT  UP  FOR  YOURSELVES  TREASURES
UPON  EARTH."

See  King  71,  79,  121,  176.

This  quotation  from  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  occurs
four  times  in  pre-War  King  scripts,  and  would  be  unin-
telligible  if I^ng scripts stood alone. Fortunately  the


LXXXVII.l


Comparison  of  Scripts.


515


scripts  of  other  automatists  come  to  our  assistance,  and
show  that  the  quotation  is  used  as  a  reference  to  passages
in  Ruskin's  Sesame  and  Lilies.

It  will  be  remembered  that  Sesame  and  Lilies  forms  the
subject  of  a  marked  Cross-correspondence  set  forth  by
Mrs.  Verrall  in  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIV.,  pp.  270-294.
Moreover,  extensive  use  has  been  made  in  the  scripts  of
Ruskin's  writings,  especially  of  Sesame  and  Lilies,  Fors
Clavigera,  Unto  This  Last,  and  Modern  Painters.'^  It  would
lead  me  too  far  afield,  indeed  it  would  require  a  small
monograph,  if  I  were  to  attempt  to  produce  all  the
evidence  for  my  assertion  that  "  Lay  not  up  for  your-
selves treasures  "  is  used  as  a  reference  to  passages  in
Sesame  and  Lilies.  But  after  first  quoting  the  passages
in  question,  I  will  append  a  few  extracts  from  scripts  as
specimens  of  the  kind  of  evidence  on  which  my  assertion
is  based.

Extracts  from  Ruskin's  "  Sesame  and  Lilies."

§  43.  But  I  have  no  words  for  the  wonder  with  which  I  hear
Kinghood  still  spoken  of,  even  among  thoughtful  men,  as  if
governed  nations  were  a  personal  property,  and  might  be
bought  and  sold,  or  otherwise  acquired,  as  sheep,  of  whose
flesh  their  king  was  to  feed,  and  whose  fleece  he  was  to  gather  ;
as  if  Achilles'  indignant  epithet  of  base  kings,  "  people-eating,"
were  the  constant  and  proper  title  of  all  monarchs  ;  and  the
enlargement  of  a  king's  dominion  meant  the  same  thing  as  the
increase  of  a  private  man's  estate  !  Kings  who  thinlt  so,
however  powerful,  can  no  more  be  the  true  kings  of  the  nation
than  gadflies  are  the  kings  of  a  horse  ;  they  suck  it,  and  may
drive  it  wild,  but  do  not  guide  it.  They,  and  then  courts,
and  their  armies  are,  if  one  could  see  clearly,  only  a  large
species  of  marsh  mosquito,  with  bayonet  proboscis  and  melo-

^  I  think  that  one  reason  why  Ruskin's  writings  have  been  so  often
drawn  upon  is  that  his  books  are  so  full  of  quotations,  especially
Biblical  ones,  that  references  to  passages  in  his  works  can  be  more
easily  made  by  quoting  his  quotations  than  would  be  possible  in  the
case  of  most  other  prose -writers.  His  qviotation -habit  makes  him  almost
as  quotable  as  a  poet.

Only  one  of  the  automatists  is  specially  familiar  with  Ruskin's  writings.


516


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


dious,  band-mastered  trumpeting,  in  the  summer  air  .  .  .  The
true  kinds,  meanwhile,  rule  quietly,  if  at  all,  and  hate  ruling  ;
too  many  of  them  make  "  il  gran  rifiuto  "...

§  44.  Yet  the  visible  king  may  also  be  a  true  one,  some  day,
if  ever  day  comes  when  he  will  estimate  his  dominion  by  the
force  of  it, — not  the  geographical  boundaries.  It  matters  very
little  whether  Trent  cuts  you  a  cantel  out  here,  or  Rhine
rounds  you  a  castle  less  there.  But  it  does  matter  to  you,
king  of  men,  whether  you  can  verUy  say  to  this  man,  "  Go,"
and  he  goeth  ;  and  to  another,  "  Come,"  and  he  cometh.
Whether  you  can  turn  your  people,  as  you  can  Trent — and
where  it  is  that  you  bid  them  come,  and  where  go.  It
matters  to  you,  king  of  men,  whether  your  people  hate
you,  or  love  you,  and  live  by  you.  You  may  measure  yoiir
dominion  by  multitudes,  better  than  by  mUes  ;  and  count
degrees  of  love-latitude,  not  from,  but  to,  a  wonderfully  warm
and  infinite  equator.

§  45.  Measure  ! — nay,  you  cannot  measure.  Who  shall  mea-
sure the  difference  between  the  power  of  those  who  "  do
and  teach,"  and  who  are  greatest  in  the  kingdoms  of  earth,  as
of  heaven — and  the  power  of  those  who  undo,  and  consume —
whose  power,  at  the  fullest,  is  only  the  power  of  the  moth
and  the  rust  ?  Strange  !  to  think  how  the  Moth-kings  lay  up
treasures  for  the  moth  :  and  the  Rust-kings,  who  are  to  their
peoples'  strength  as  rust  to  armour,  lay  up  treasures  for  the
rust  ;  and  the  Robber-kings,  treasures  for  the  robber ;  but
how  few  kings  have  ever  laid  up  treasures  that  needed  no
guarding — treasures  of  which,  the  more  thieves  there  were,  the
better  !  Broidered  robe,  only  to  be  rent  ;  helm  and  sword,
only  to  be  dimmed  ;  jewel  and  gold,  only  to  be  scattered  ; —
there  have  been  three  kinds  of  kings  who  have  gathered  these.
Suppose  there  ever  should  arise  a  Fourth  order  of  kings,  who
had  read,  in  some  obscure  writing  of  long  ago  \Joh  xxviii.],
that  there  was  a  Fourth  kind  of  treasure,  which  the  jewel  and
gold  could  not  equal,  neither  should  it  be  valued  with  pure
gold.  A  web  made  fan*  in  the  weaving,  by  Athena's  shuttle  ;
an  armour,  forged  in  divine  fire  by  Vulcanian  force  ;  a  gold
to  be  mined  in  the  very  sun's  red  heart,  where  he  sets
over  the  Delphian  cliffs  ; — deep-pictured  tissue  ; — impenetrable
armour  ; — potable gold  ! — the three great Angels of  Conduct,


Lxxxvii.]  Comparison  of  Scripts.  -  517

Toil,  and  Thought,  still  calhng  to  us,  and  waiting  at  the  posts
of  our  doors,  to  lead  us,  with  their  winged  power,  and  guide
us,  with  their  unerrmg  eyes,  by  the  path  which  no  fowl
knoweth,  and  which  the  vulture's  eye  has  not  seen  !  Suppose
kings  should  ever  arise,  who  heard  and  believed  this  word,  and
at  last  gathered  and  brought  forth  treasures  of — Wisdom — for
their  people  1

§  46.  Think  what  an  amazing  business  that  would  be  !  How
inconceivable,  in  the  state  of  our  present  national  wisdom  !
That  we  should  bring  up  our  peasants  to  a  book  exercise
instead  of  a  bayonet  exercise  ! — organise,  drill,  maintain  with
pay,  and  good  generalship,  armies  of  thinkers,  instead  of
armies  of  stabbers  ! — find  national  amusement  in  reading-rooms
as  weU  as  rifle-grounds  ;  give  prizes  for  a  fair  shot  at  a  fact,
as  well  as  for  a  leaden  splash  on  a  target.  What  an  absurd
idea  it  seems,  put  fairly  in  words,  that  the  wealth  of  the
capitalists  of  civihsed  nations  should  ever  come  to  support
literature  instead  of  war  !

§  47.  Have  yet  patience  with  me,  while  I  read  you  a  single
sentence  out  of  the  only  book,  properly  to  be  called  a  book,
that  I  have  yet  wTitten  myself,  the  one  that  will  stand  (if
anything  stand),  surest  and  longest  of  all  work  of  mine.^

"It  is  one  very  a-\vful  form  of  the  operation  of  wealth
in  Europe  that  it  is  entirely  capitalists'  wealth  which
supports  unjust  wars.  Just  wars  do  not  need  so  much
money  to  support  them  ;  for  most  of  the  men  who  wage
such,  wage  them  gratis  ;  but  for  an  unjust  war,  men's
bodies  and  souls  have  both  to  be  bought ;  and  the  best
tools  of  war  for  them  besides,  which  make  such  war
costly  to  the  maximum  ;  not  to  speak  of  the  cost  of
base  fear,  and  angry  suspicion,  between  nations  which  have
not  grace  nor  honesty  enough  in  all  their  multitudes  to
buy  an  hour's  peace  of  mind  with  ;  as,  at  present,  France
and  England,  purchasing  of  each  other  ten  millions  sterling
worth  of  consternation,  annually  .  .  .  And,  all  unjust  war
being  supportable,  if  not  by  pillage  of  the  enemy,  only  by
loans  from  capitalists,  these  loans  are  repaid  by  subsequent

^  Ruskin  means  Unto  This  Last.  The  passage  quoted  is  a  footnote  in
the  chapter  in  that  work  called  "  Ad  Valorena."


518


J .  G.  Piddington.


[part


taxation  of  the  people,  who  appear  to  have  no  will  in  the
matter,  the  capitalists'  will  being  the  primary  root  of  the
war ;  but  its  real  root  is  the  covetousness  of  the  whole
nation,  rendering  it  incapable  of  faith,  frankness,  or  justice,
and  bringing  about,  therefore,  in  due  time,  his  own  sepa-
rate loss  and  punishment  to  each  person."  ^

§  48.  France  and  England  literally,  observe,  buy  panic  of
each  other  ;  they  pay,  each  of  them,  for  ten  thousand-thousand-
pounds'-worth  of  terror,  a  year.  Now  suppose,  instead  of  buy-
ing these  ten  millions'  worth  of  panic  annually,  they  made  up
their  minds  to  be  at  peace  with  each  other,  and  buy  ten
millions'  worth  of  knowledge  annually  ;  and  that  each  nation
spent  its  ten  thousand  thousand  pounds  a  year  in  founding
royal  libraries,  royal  art  galleries,  royal  museums,  royal  gardens,
and  places  of  rest.  Might  it  not  be  better  somewhat  for  both
French  and  English  ?

§  49.  It  wUl  be  long,  yet,  before  that  comes  to  pass  .  .  .

§  50.  I  could  shape  for  you  other  plans,  for  art-galleries,  and
for  natural  history  galleries,  and  for  many  precious — many,  it
seems  to  me,  needful — things  ;  but  this  book  plan  is  the
easiest  and  needfullest  ^  .  .  .  You  have  got  its  [England's]
corn  laws  repealed  for  it  ;  try  if  you  cannot  get  corn  laws
established  for  it,  dealing  in  a  better  bread  ; — bread  made  of
that  old  enchanted  Arabian  grain,  the  Sesame,  which  opens
doors  ; — doors  not  of  robbers',  but  of  Kings'  Treasuries.

The  preceding  extracts  come  from  the  first  part  of
Sesame  and  Lilies,  which  is  called  "  Sesame.  Of  Kings'
Treasuries,"  and  deals  with  the  duties  of  men.  From  the
second  part,  which  is  called  "  Lilies.  Of  Queens'  Gardens,"
and  deals  with  the  duties  of  women,  I  add  an  extract
because  of  its  connexion  with  the  passages  quoted  from
the  first  part  :

§  90.  But,  alas  !  you  are  too  often  idle  and  careless  queens,
grasping  at  majesty  in  the  least  things,  while  you  abdicate  it

^  I  do  not  for  one  moment  suppose  that  the  communicators  wish  us
to  understand  them  as  endorsing  in  detail  the  views  expressed  by
Ruskin  in  this  passage  and  in  other  j^assages  of  his  to  which  the  Scripts
have  referred.  I  take  it  that  the  stress  is  laid,  not  on  the  letter,  but
on  the  spirit  of  Rusldn's  writings.


LXXXVII.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


519


in  the  greatest ;  and  leaving  misrule  and  violence  to  work
their  will  among  men,  in  defiance  of  the  power  which,  holding
straight  in  gift  from  the  Prince  of  all  Peace,  the  wicked
among  you  betray,  and  the  good  forget.

§91.  "Prince  of  Peace."  Note  that  name.  Wlien  kings
rule  in  that  name,  and  nobles,  and  the  judges  of  the  earth,
they  also,  in  their  narrow  place,  and  mortal  measure,  receive
the  power  of  it.  There  are  no  other  rulers  than  they  ;  other
rule  than  theirs  is  but  misrule  ;  they  who  govern  verily  "  Dei
Gratia "  are  all  princes,  yes,  or  princesses  of  Peace.  There  is
not  a  war  in  the  world,  no,  nor  an  injustice,  but  you  women
are  answerable  for  it  ;  not  in  that  you  have  provoked,  but  in
that  you  have  not  hindered.

With  these  passages  compare  the  following  extracts
from  scripts  :

King  79  {Dec.  17,  1913).

.  .  .  Fire  and  sword —  Hearken  while  there  is  yet
time — sweetness  and  light —  Rust  and  moth  do
corrupt  .  .  .

This  is  the  only  occurrence  of  "  Fire  and  sivord  "  in
King  script.  The  only  previous  occurrence  of  the  phrase
in  any  of  the  scripts  is  in

H.  V.  31  {March  17,  1907).

.  .  .  with  fire  and  sword  to  purge  the  altar  not
Avithout  grief  laurel  leaves  are  emblem  laurel  for
the  victor's  brow  Say  not  the  struggle  naught
availeth Sesame  and  Lilies  .  .  .

Note  the  appearance  here  of  "  Say  not  the  struggle,''
which  is  quoted  no  less  than  seven  times  in  pre-War
King  scripts  ; and  see  footnote  (28) thereon  above.

H.  V.  91  {June  1,  1908).

,  .  .  Lay  not  up  for  yourselves  treasure  upon  earth
something  about  moth  and  corruption  and  the  worm
shall  devour  it Vanitas  vanitatum  .  .  .

Howbeit  when  they  came  to  the  edge  of  the  hill
and  looked  down  into  the  vale  beneath  they  saw
before  them a  goodly  stretch  of  cornland  and  vine-,

2  K


520


J .  0.  Piddington.


[part


yards  but  all  uncared  for  and  desolate  the  plough
yet  standing  in  the  field  but  none  to  guide  and
I  said  to  my  companion  Avhat  is  the  reason  of  this
desolation  and  he  said  it  is  the  ruin  of  a  land  of
promise  for  the  rude  and  savage  hordes  have  swept
down  destroying  all  in  then*  path  the  men  they  slew
old  and  young  warriors  and  husbandmen  and  the
women  they  bore into  captivity Vae  victis.

"  Vae  victis  "  is  specially  associated  (see  Livy,  v.  48,  9)
with  the  tribute  imposed  by  Brennus  when  he  sacked
Rome  in  390  B.C.  I  shall  deal  with  two  other  occurrences
of  the  phrase  later  on.

i¥ac.  10  {July  27,  1908).

.  .  .  Sesame  and  lilies — lotus  the  flower  of  repentance
.  .  .  vanity  of  vanities all  is  vanity  .  .  .

The  point  to  remark  here  is  that  the  Macs,  who  when
they  wrote  the  above  had  seen  neither  H.  V.  31  with  its
reference  to  Sesame  and  LiKes  nor  H.  V.  91  (of  June  1,
1908)  which  has  "  Vanitas  Vanitatum,"  combine  these  two
things.

I  next  turn  to  Willett  script  for  confirmation  of  there
being  a  close  connexion  between  "  Lay  not  up  for  your-
selves treasures  "  and  Sesame  and  Lilies.

W.  300  {Jtdy  14,  1912).

.  .  .  where  the  heart  is  no  where  the  treasure  is
.  .  .  Treasures  Queens'  treasuries  .  .  .  sound  the
mysteries  and  the  deep  places  in  them  lie  the
richest  treasures  It  is  not  in  the  obvious  but  in  the
exoteric  [clearly  a  slip  for  '  esoteric  ']  that  the  best
things  lie  .  .  .  Sesame  and  Lilies  sesame  ...  If
any  man  have  two  loaves  let  him  sell  one  and  buy
lilies There  is  no  wealth  but  life

"  Where  the  treasure  is  "  belongs,  of  course,  to  the
context  of  "  Lay  not  up  for  yourselves  treasures  :  For
where  your  treasure  is,  there  will  your  heart  be  also,"

"  Queens'  treasuries  "  is  obviously  reminiscent  of  the  title
of  the  first  part  of  Sesame  and  Lilies  :  "  Of  Kings'
Treasuries."


LXXXVII.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


521


"  There  is  no  wealth  but  Kfe  "  is  a  quotation — printed  in
capital  letters  in  the  original — from  Ad  Valorem.

"  Ad  Valorem "  is  the  name  of  the  fourth  Essay  in
Ruskin's  IJyito  This  Last,  and  it  is  from  Ad  Valorem  that
Ruskin  in  §  47  of  Sesame  and  Lilies  quotes  the  passage
beginning  "It  is  one  very  awful  form  of  the  operation  of
wealth  in  Europe  that  it  is  entirely  capitalists'  wealth
which  supports  unjust  wars."  Reference  to  Ad  Valorem
will  show  how  intimate  the  relation  is  between  this
passage  and  the  context  of  "  there  is  no  avealth  but
LIFE,"  which  will  be  found  on  the  page  immediately
following.

The  last  reference  to  "  Lay  not  up  for  yourselves
treasures  "  which  we  need  consider  is  in  one  of  ]\Ii-s.
Verrall's  scripts  :

M.  V.  540  {Aug.  20,  1913).

.  .  .  Silver  and  gold  have  I  none  {Acts  m.  6.] —
Ave  Roma  Immortalis  Why  should  a  man  lay  up
treasure  on  earth  where  thieves  break  through  and
steal — Neither  moth  nor  rust  .  .  .

Here  I  take  "  Silver  and  gold  have  I  none  "  to  be
connected  with — though  not  to  refer  directly  to — Job
xxviii.  15-17  :

It  \i.e.  Wisdom]  cannot  be  gotten  for  gold,  neither  shall
silver  be  weighed  for  the  price  thereof.  It  cannot  be
valued  with  the  gold  of  Ophir,  with  the  precious  onyx,  or
the  sapphire.  The  gold  and  the  crystal  cannot  equal  it :
and  the  exchange  of  it  shall  not  be  for  jewels  of  fine
gold.

It  is  these  verses  that  Ruskin  paraphrases  in  §  45  of
Sesame  and  Lilies  :

Suppose  there  ever  should  arise  a  Fomth  order  of  kings,
who  had  read,  in  some  obscure  writing  of  long  ago,  that
there  was  a  Fom'th  kind  of  treasure,  which  the  jewel  and
gold  could  not  equal,  neither  should  it  be  valued  with  pure
gold.

"  Ave  Roma  Immortalis "  is  a  reference  back  to  the
Cross-Correspondence  on  the  subject  of  Raphael's  picture


522


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


of  the  meeting  between  Attila  and  Leo  the  Great  {Proc,
Vol.  XXI.,  pp.  297-303),  when  Leo,  relying  solely  on
spiritual  force,  saved  Rome  from  the  invading  Huns.

The  evidence  for  the  connexion  of  "  Lay  not  up  for
yourselves  treasures  upon  earth,  where  moth  and  rust  doth
corrupt  "  with  Sesame  and  Lilies  may  be  thus  tabulated  :

King  79.  Fire  &  Sword  Rust  &  Moth

H.  V.  31.  Fire  &  SworJ Sesame  &  Lilies

H.  V.  91. Rust  &  Moth Vanity  of  Vanities

Iliac.  10. Sesame  k  Lilies  Vanity  of  Vanities

W.  300. Rust  &  Moth  Sesame  &  Lilies ■

It  will  be  remembered  that  in  the  first  script — H.  V.  91
— containing  the  text  "  Lay  not  up  for  yourselves  trea-
sures "  there  follows  a  description  of  a  scene  of  desolation
caused  by  the  invasion  of  "  rude  and  savage  hordes,"  the
description  ending  with  the  words  "  Vae  Victis,"  "  Woe  to
the  Vanquished."  These  words,  spoken  by  Brennus  at
the  sack  of  Rome,  appear  once  again  in  Mrs.  Salter's
script  in  the  following  context  :

H.  V.  116  {Sept.  23,  1908).

Atrox  incubitans  Poenus  Hannibal  and  another
devastator  vae  victis  the  pestilence  that  walks  by
day  .  .  .

"  Fae  victis "  occurs  in  its  EngUsh  form  in  a  script
written  on  Nov.  13,  1910,^  by  Mrs.  Willett,  who  by  that
date  had  seen  both  the  H.  V.  scripts  in  which  "  Vae
victis  "  occurs.  Note,  however,  the  new  apphcation  which
Mrs.  Willett  gives  to  the  phrase.  She  refers  neither  to
Brennus  nor  to  Hannibal,  but  to  that  other  enemy  of
Rome,  Attila  the  Hun,  and  to  War  generally  :

W.  225  {Nov.  13,  1910).

...  I want the thought conveyed of  Multitudes

Marching  to  glory  and  to  death  AuUa  Attila  let
the  Avord  stand Let  the  words  come  to  you  a  Blank

1  "  Woe  to  the  vanquished "  occurs  once  again  in  Willett  script  :
namely,  in  one  of  the  scripts  relating  to  the  Ear  of  Dionysius.  It  is
there  introduced  simply  as  a  way  of  getting  an  allusion  to  the  slave-
workers  in  the  stone -quarries  of  Syracuse.


Lxxxvn.]


Comfarisoyi  of  Scripts.


523


but  of  others  understandable  War  the  pomp  and
panoply  of  War  .  .  .  yes  I  want  the  sound  of  clash
Din  of  Battles  Mortals  in  contest  .  .  .  They  will
sift  the  gold  from  the  di-oss  don't  mind  dross  so
long  as  I  mix  my  gold  Avith  it  Captives  and  Slaves
Victus  .  .  .  Macedoine  de  fruit  the  fruit  was  bitter
to  some  Sound  the  trumpets  Beat  the  not  plough-
shares One  crowded  hour  of  splendid  life  the  Way
to  highest  glory  leads  but  to  the  grave  Woe  to  the
vanquished  How  sleep  the  Brave  [who  sink  to  rest
By  all  their  country's  wishes  blest !]  .  .  .


"  HAD  ZIMRI  PEACE,  WHO  SLEW  HIS  MASTER  ?  "
See  King  202.

The  original  source  of  this  text  is  2  Kings  ix.  31  ;  but
it  is  used,  I  believe,  in  Iving  202,  not  as  an  allusion  to
the  story  of  the  death  oi  Jezebel,  but  as  one  of  several
allusions  to  the  following  passage  in  the  last  chapter  of
Ruskin's  Modern  Painters,  entitled  "  Peace  "  :

Extracts  from  the  Chapter  entitled  "  Peace  "  in
Ruskin's  Modern  Painters  (Part  IX.,  Ch.  XII.).

§  16.  Blind  from  the  prison-house,  maimed  from  the  battle,
or  mad  from  the  tombs,  their  souls  shall  surely  yet  sit,
astonished,  at  His  feet  Who  giveth  peace.

§  17.  Who  giveth  peace  ?  Many  a  peace  we  have  made  and
named  for  ourselves,  but  the  falsest  is  in  that  marvellous
thought  that  we,  of  aU  generations  of  the  earth,  only  know
the  right ;  and  that  to  us  at  last, — to  us  alone, — all  the
scheme  of  God,  about  the  salvation  of  men,  has  been  shown.
"  This is the light in which  we are walking. Those  vain


524


./.  G.  Piddingfon.


[PABT


Greeks  are  gone  down  to  their  Persephone  for  ever — Egypt
and  Assyria,  Elani  and  her  multitude, — uncircumcised,  their
graves  are  round  about  them — Pathros  and  careless  Ethiopia —
filled  with  the  slain.  Rome,  with  her  thirsty  sword,  and
jjoison  wine,  how  did  she  walk  in  her  darkness  !  We  only
have  no  idolatries — ours  are  the  seeing  eyes  ;  in  our  pure
hands  at  last,  the  seven-sealed  book  is  laid ;  to  our  true
tongues  entrusted  the  preaching  of  a  perfect  gospel.  Who
shall  come  after  us  ?  Is  it  not  Peace  ?  The  poor  Jew,
Zimri,  who  slew  his  master,  there  is  no  peace  for  him  :  but,
for  us  ?  tiara  on  head,  may  we  not  look  out  of  the  windows
of  heaven  ?  "

§  18.  Another  kind  of  peace  I  look  for  than  this  .  .  .

I  do  not  know  v/hat  my  England  desires,  or  how  long  she
will  choose  to  do  as  she  is  doing  now  ; — with  her  right  hand
casting  away  the  souls  of  men,  and  with  her  left  the  gifts
of  God.

In  the  prayers  which  she  dictates  to  her  children,  she  tells
them  to  fight  against  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil.
Some  day,  perhaps,  it  may  also  occur  to  her  as  desirable  to
teU  those  children  what  she  means  by  this.  What  is  the
world  which  they  are  to  "  fight  with,"  and  how  does  it  differ
from  the  world  which  they  are  to  "  get  on  in "  ?  The  ex-
planation seems  to  me  the  more  needful,  because  I  do  not,  in
the  book  we  profess  to  five  by,  find  anything  very  distinct
about  fighting  with  the  world.  I  fuid  something  about  fighting
with  the  rulers  of  its  darkness,^  and  somethmg  also  about
overcoming  it  ;  but  it  does  not  follow  that  this  conquest  is  to
be  by  hostility,  since  evil  may  be  overcome  with  good.^  But
I  find  it  written  very  distinctly  that  God  loved  the  world,  and
that  Christ  is  the  light  of  it.

§  19.  What  the  much-used  words,  therefore,  mean,  I  cannot
tell.  But  this,  I  believe,  they  shoidd  mean.  That  there  is,
indeed,  one  world  which  is  full  of  care,  and  desire,  and  hatred  :
a  world  of  war,  of  which  Christ  is  not  the  light,  which  indeed
is  without  light,  and  has  never  heard  the  great  "  Let  there
be."  3 Which  is,  therefore,  in  truth, as  yet  no  world ;  but

^  E'phes.  vi.  12. See  footnote  (102)  to  pre-War  King  scripts  above.

Rom.  xii.  21. See  footnote  (192)  to  pre-War  King  scripts  above.
3  Gen.  i.  3. See  below  (pp.  545-547)  under  "  The  Violet  Crown."


Lxxxvn.]


Comparison  of  ScrijAs.


525


chaos,  on  the  face  of  which,  moving,  the  Spirit  of  God  yet
causes  men  to  hope  that  a  world  will  come.  The  better  one,
they  call  it  :  perhaps  they  might,  more  wisely,  call  it  the  real
one.  Also,  I  hear  them  speak  continually  of  gomg  to  it,
rather  than  of  its  coming  to  them  ;  which,  again,  is  strange,
for  in  that  prayer  which  they  had  straight  from  the  lips  of
the  Light  of  the  world,  and  which  He  apparently  thought
sufficient  prayer  for  them,  there  is  not  anything  about  going  to
another  world  ;  only  something  of  another  government  coming
into  this  ;  or  rather,  not  another,  but  the  only  government, —
that  government  which  will  constitute  it  a  world  indeed.  New
heavens  and  new  earth  ^  .  .  .

§  20.  "  Thy  kingdom  come,"  we  are  bid  to  ask  then  !  But
how  shall  it  come  ?  With  power  and  great  glory,  it  is  written;
and  yet  not  with  observation,  it  is  also  written.  Strange
kingdom  !  Yet  its  strangeness  is  renewed  to  us  with  every
dawn.

When  the  time  comes  for  us  to  wake  out  of  the  world's
sleep,  why  should  it  be  otherwise  than  out  of  the  dreams  of
the  night  ?  Singing  of  birds,  first,  broken  and  low,  as,  not
to  dying  eyes,  but  eyes  that  wake  to  life,  "  the  casement
slowly  grows  a  glimmering  square  "  ;  and  then  the  gray,  and
then  the  rose  of  dawn  ;  and  last  the  light,  whose  going  forth
is  to  the  ends  of  heaven.

This  kingdom  it  is  not  in  our  power  to  bring  ;  but  it  is,
to  receive.  Nay,  it  is  come  aheady,  in  part  ;  but  not  re-
ceived, because  men  love  chaos  best  ;  and  the  Night,  with  her
daughters  .  .  .  With  pains  it  may  be  shut  out  still  from  many
a  dark  place  of  cruelty  ;  by  sloth  it  may  be  stUl  unseen  for
many  a  glorious  hour.  But  the  pain  of  shutting  it  out  must
grow  greater  and  greater  : — harder,  every  day,  that  struggle  of
man  with  man  in  the  abyss,  and  shorter  wages  for  the  fiend's
work.  But  it  is  stUl  at  our  choice  .  .  .  The  choice  is  no
vague  nor  doubtful  one.  High  on  the  desert  mounbam,  full
descried,  sits  throned  the  tempter,  with  his  old  promise— the
kingdoms  of  this  world,  and  the  glory  of  them.  He  still  calls
you  to  your  labour,  as  Christ  to  your  rest  ; — labour  and
sorrow,  base  desire,  and  cruel  hope.  So  far  as  you  desire  to
possess,  rather  than  to  give  ;  so  far  as  you  look  for  power  to
1  See  below  under  "  The  Violet  Crown,"  p  546.


526


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


command,  instead  of  to  bless ;  so  far  as  your  own  prosperity
seems  to  you  to  issue  out  of  contest  or  rivalry,  of  any  kind,
with  other  men,  or  other  nations  ;  so  long  as  the  hope  before
you  is  for  supremacy  instead  of  love  ;  and  your  desire  is  to  be
greatest,  instead  of  least ; — so  long  you  are  serving  the  Lord
of  all  that  is  last,  and  least ; — ^the  last  enemy  that  shall  be
destroyed — Death  ;  and  you  shall  have  death's  crown,  with
the  worm  coiled  in  it ;  and  death's  wages,  with  the  worm
feeding  on  them  .  .  .

I  leave  you  to  judge,  and  to  choose,  between  this  labour,
and  the  bequeathed  peace ;  these  wages,  and  the  gift  of  the
Morning  Star  ...

There  are,  I  believe,  allusions  in  the  scripts  of  some
of  the  other  automatists  to  this  passage  ;  but  I  shall  in
this  instance  depart  from  the  plan,  elsewhere  observed  in
this  part  of  my  paper,  of  comparing  pre-War  King  scripts
with  the  scripts  of  the  other  automatists,  and  compare
the  Ruskin  passage  with  extracts  from  King  scripts  only.

Whereas  it  was  necessary  to  go  outside  King  scripts  to
discover  the  significance  attaching  to  "  Lay  not  up  for
yourselves  treasures,"  this  course  is  vmnecessary  in  the
case  of  "  Had  Zimri  peace  ?  "  ;  for  if  King  202  be  read
in  connexion  with  King  65  and  161,  these  three  scripts
in  combination  present  coincidences  with  the  passage  in
Modern  Painters  too  marked,  it  seems  to  me,  to  be
attributed  to  chance.

In  considering  these  three  scripts,  the  reader  should
bear  in  mind  the  repeated  use  in  King  scripts  of  the
Dawn  as  a  symbol  of  a  happier  era  ;  and  should  further
observe  that  the  topic  of  Peace  coming  out  of  great
tribulation  is  common  to  the  first  and  third  scripts,  and
the  Dawn  topic  to  aU  three  (for  "  light  "  in  Iving  202  is
equivalent  to  the  "  new  light  "  of  King  161).

King  65  {December  1,  1913).

Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled  Out  of  great
tribulation  cometh  great  peace,  for  when  the  waters
have  been  troubled  an  angel  stOleth  them  .  .  .

Do  you  know  that  not  one  of  us  cares  for  hegemony —
we  are  aU  brothers  in  love — there  is  no  hate  among  us  .  .  .


Lxxxvn.]


Cow,parison  of  Scri'pts.


527


Open  wide  your  casements  to  the  dawn  Blow
bugles  blow Usher  in  the  happy  morn  .  .  .

King  161  {April  25,  1914).

.  .  .  This  cry  de  profundis  is  the  cry  of  the  world
now, it  is  the  dark moment before  new  light — the
purple  shadows  of  the  dawn  come  first then  the  rose
> red  rays — and  then  the  Sun  of  Day  .  .  .

King  202  {July  27,  1914).

.  .  .  Peace  had  Zimri  peace  who  slew  his  master
.  .  .  Great  trial  &  tribulation  but  in  the  end  peace
&  hght

The  passage  in  Modern  Painters  combines

(a)  "Is  it  not  Peace  ?  The  poor  Jew,  Zimri,  who  slew
his  master,  there  is  no  peace  for  him  : but,  for  us  ?  "  ;

{b)  "  Singing  of  birds,  first,  broken  and  low,  as,  not  to
dying  eyes,  but  eyes  that  wake  to  life,  '  the  casement
slowly  grows  a  glimmering  square  '  "  :  i.e.  partly  a  para-
phrase and  partly  a  quotation  from  "  Tears,  idle  tears,"
one  of  the  songs  in  Tennyson's  Princess  ;

(c)  "  and  then  the  gray,  and  then  the  rose  of  dawn  ;
and  last  the  light,  whose  going  forth  is  to  the  ends  of
heaven  "  ;  and

{d)  "  so  long  as  the  hope  before  you  is  for  supremacy
instead  of  love  ;  and  your  desire  to  be  greatest,  instead
of  least,"  "  so  far  as  you  look  for  power  to  command,
instead  of  to  bless."

King  65,  161,  and  202  combine

(a)  "  Peace had  Zimri  peace  who  slew  his  master  ?  "  ;

{b)  "  Open  wide  your  casements  to  the  dawn  "  followed
by  "  Blow,  bugles  blow,"  which  is  meant,  no  doubt,  for
"  Blow,  bugle,  blow,"  the  refrain  of  another  of  the  songs
in  Tennyson's  Princess  ;

(c)  "  the  purple  shadows  of  the  dawn  come  first  then
the  rose  red  rays — and  then  the  Sun  of  Day  "  ;  and

{d)  "  not  one  of  us  cares  for  hegemony — we  are  all
brothers  in  love — there  is  no  hate  among  us."


528


J .  G.  Piddington.


[part


"  MERCY  AND  TRUTH."  j
See  King  30,  64,  164,  184,  204.

As  is  shown  by  King 64,  the  reference  is  to  Psalm
Ixxxv.  :

Shew  us  thy  mercy,  0  Lord,  and  grant  us  thy  salvation,  j
I  wUl  hear  what  God  the  Lord  wiU  speak :  for  he  will
speak  peace  unto  his  people,  and  to  his  saints  :  but  let
them  not  tm-n  agam  to  folly  .  .  .  Mercy  and  truth  are
met  together  :  righteousness  and  peace  have  kissed  each
other.  Truth  shall  spring  out  of  the  earth  ;  and  righteous-  J
ness  shaU  look  down  from  heaven.

To  the  best  of  my  belief  this  verse  about  Mercy  and
Truth  is  not  quoted  by  any  other  automatist.  At  the
same  time  there  are  clear  references  to  the  need  for  Mercy
in  other  scripts,  especially  in  Mrs.  Salter's.  Before  quoting
these,  however,  I  will  cite  from  a  post-War  script  of
Mrs.  Kling's  a  passage  in  which  the  quotation  from  Psalm
Ixxxv.  reappears  :

Ki7ig  555  {Jaymary  12,  1921).

.  .  .  Bind  up  the  broken  limbs,  pour  oil  into  the
wounds  in  faith,  slowly  slowly  comes  the  dawn  of
better  things  (Long  pause.)  .  .  .  ring  out  wild  beUs —
Mercy  &  truth  have  kissed  each  other  .  .  .

"  Ring  out,  wild  bells "  are  the first  words  of  Section
CVI.  of  Tennyson's  In  Meinoriam  :

Ring  in  the  love  of  truth  and  right,
Ring  in  the  common  love  of  good.

Ring  out  old  shapes  of  foul  disease  ;

Ring  out  the  narrowing  lust  of  gold  ;

Ring  out  the  thousand  wars  of  old,
Ring  in  the  thousand  years  of  peace.

It  may  be  urged  that  by  January  1921,  Mrs.  King  had
had  plenty  of  time  in  which  to  think  over  her  pre-War


LXXXVII.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


529


scripts,  and  interpret  them  in  the  light  of  actual  events.
I  would  not  deny  the  possibility,  but  I  would  point  out
that  Mrs.  King  could  not  have  known  that  in  two  pre-
War  scripts  Mrs.  Verrall  had  already  connected  the  In
Memoriam  passage  with  the  idea  of  Clemency  and  Pity.
Thus  :

M.'V.  513  [February  4,  1913).

Oranges  and  lemons — and  the  rhyme  is  St.  Clemens
— San  Clemente  with  the  mosaics  No  wait — you
have  it  wrong

Clementia  et  misericordia  .  .  .

M.  V.  601  {April  5,  1914).

Oranges  &  lemons  say  the  bells  of  St  Clements  St
Clements  Danes

Don't  stop  because  you  thuik  you  understand  You
wiU  find  you  have  not  fully  understood.
Write  again St  Clements  Danes.
Rmg  out  wild  bells
Ring  out  the  thousand  years  of  wars
Ring  in  the  NEW Print  that  large  NEW...

I  will  now  Illustrate  how  the  topic  of  Mercy  is  dealt
with  in  the  scripts  of  automatists  other  than  Mrs.  King.

M.  V.  448  {March  6,  1912).

.  .  .  Now  write  another  sentence  which  has  its
meaning  too  The  quality  of  Mercy  is  not  strained
.  .  . Let  go,  let  go — Mittere in  its  proper  sense —

And  Remittere,  as  weU  as  Remit,  means  only  letting
the  thing  go,  not  always  back,  but  to  its  proper  shape
&  place — Peccata  remitto,  I  let  go  the  error  .  .  .

H.  V.  278  {SejJt.  23,  1912).

the  trumpet  shah  sound — the  last  trump  the  day
of  judgement dies  irae the  angel  of  death  Behold

I tell you a miracle judgement judge not  the

quahty  of  mercy  is  not  stramed The  judgement  seat

on  high — on  the  right  hand  of  God — the  sheep  and
the  goats — the  sinner  that  repenteth  .  .  .

In  connexion  with  the  repeated  references  in  this  script
to  the  Day  of  Judgement,  I  may  remind  the  reader  of


530


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


what  has  been  stated  earher,  namely,  that  the  Eschato-
logical  Discourses  in  the  Gospels  have  been  largely  drawn
upon  by  the  communicators,  who  represent  the  Great
War  as  the  end  of  a  world,  a  Day  of  Judgement,  and
the  beginning  of  a  Millennium.

"  Judge  not,"  as  the  context  in  the  script  shows,  is  a
reference  to  Luke  vi.  37  rather  than  to  Matt.  vii.  1 ':

But  love  ye  your  enemies,  and  do  good,  and  lend,
hoping  for  nothing  again  ;  and  your  reward  shall  be  great,
and  ye  shall  be  the  children  of  the  Highest ;  for  he  is
kind  unto  the  unthankful,  and  to  the  evil.  Be  ye  there-
fore merciful,  as  your  Father  also  is  merciful.  Judge  not,
and  ye  shall  not  be  judged :  condemn  not,  and  ye  shaU
not  be  condemned  :  forgive,  and  ye  shall  be  forgiven.

"Be  ye  therefore  merciful  " — ^unexpressed,  but  implicit
in  "  judge  not  " — has  evidently  led  on  to  "  the  quality  of
mercy  is  not  strained  "  :  the  first  line  of  Portia's  famous
speech  in  Act  IV.,  Sc.  1  of  The  Merchant  of  Venice.

H.  V.  419a  {June  12,  1915).

The  last  days — the  end  of  Time  .  .  .  the  pool  of
Bethesda  &  the  Garden  of  Gethsemane — rain  from
Heaven  .  .  .

"  The  last  days "  may  be  compared  with  the  references
to  the  Last  Judgement  in  H.  V.  278.

On  July  9,  1915,  Mrs.  Salter  told  me  that  she  was
inclined  to  connect  "  rain  from  Heaven  "  with

"  The  quality  of  mercy  is  not  strain'd,
It  droppeth  as  the  gentle  rain  from  heaven,"

which  she  remembered  had  been  quoted  in  one  of  her
previous  scripts  {i.e.  in  H.  V.  278).  In  support  of  this
suggestion  she  remarked  that  since  her  script  was  written
she  had  discovered  that  "  Bethesda "  is  interpreted  by
some  authorities  to  mean  "  House  of  Mercy."

Before  passing  on  to  the  next  script,  I  would  ask  the
reader  to  bear  in  mind  the  reference  here  to  "  the  Pool
of  Bethesda,"  as  it  is  a  topic  found  also  in  pre- War  King
scripts. I  shaU  deal  with  it  in  the  next  Section.


LXXXVII.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


531


H.  V.  535  {Dec.  17,  1919).

...  a  golden  chest  areopagite  a  shower  of  gold
Galhleo  [sic]—  You  are  wandering— gold  golden  rain
from  heaven — the  just  &  unjust  ...

In  view  of  the  succeeding  "  golden  rain  from  heaven,"
"  A  golden  chest  "  is  clearly  an  approach  to  the  subject  of
Shakespeare's  play,  The  Merchant  of  Venice.  Portia's
lovers  had  to  make  their  choice  of  three  chests  or  caskets,
one  of  gold,  one  of  silver,  and  the  other  of  lead.  A
similarly  odd  approach  to  the  play  occurs  in  H.  V.  516,
which  has  "  Mercator "  :  it  being  explained  in  the  next
script,  H.  V.  517,  that  by  "Mercator"  The  Merchant  of
Venice  was  meant  :

Merchant —  Mercator— the  merchant  of  Venice  was  meant
■ — not  merely  the  play  but  the  idea.

By  "  the  idea "  is  meant,  no  doubt,  Portia's  plea  for
mercy  in  opposition  to  Shylock's  insistence  on  the  letter
of  the  law.  This  interpretation  is  confirmed  by  "  areo-
pagite," which  is  an  allusion  to  the  Court  of  the
Areiopagus,  and  is  one  of  many  allusions  in  the  scripts  to
the  Eumenides  of  Aeschylus.

"  Eumenides,"  the  Kindly  Ones,  was  the  name  given  to
the  Erinyes,  or  Avenging  Goddesses,  after  Athene  had  by
gentle  persuasion  softened  their  pitiless  spirit.  The  follow-
ing passage  in  Jebb's  Introduction  to  his  edition  of  the
Oedipus  Coloneiis  of  Sophocles  not  only  gives  in  succinct
form  the  story  of  the  Eumenides  of  Aeschylus,  but  it  wall
Hkewise  serve  to  explain  what  is  meant  by  "  areopagite "
here  and  by  the  many  allusions  in  the  scripts  to  Aes-
chylus' play  :

The  ancient  rigour  which  required  that  bloodshed,
whether  dehberate  or  not,  should  be  expiated  by  blood,
was  expressed  by  the  older  idea  of  the  Erinyes,  the
implacable  pursuers.  The  metamorphosis  of  the  Erinyes
into  the  Eumenides  corresponds  with  a  later  and  milder
sense  that  bloodshed  is  compatible  with  varying  degrees  of
guilt,  ranging  from  premeditated  murder  to  homicide  in
seH-defence  or  by  accident. Athenian  legend  claimed  that


532


J .  G.  Piddington.


[part


this  transformation  of  the  Avengers  took  place  in  Attica,
and  that  the  institution  of  the  court  on  the  Areiopagus
marked  the  moment.  The  claim  was  a  mythical  expres-
sion of  qualities  which  history  attests  in  the  Athenian
character,  and  of  which  the  Athenians  themselves  were
conscious  as  distinguishing  them  from  other  Greeks.  It
was  Athenian  to  temper  the  letter  of  the  law  with  con-
siderations of  equity  [Tov-n-itLKe.^)  ;  to  use  clemency ;  ^  to
feel  compassion  (alSm)  for  unmerited  misfortune  ;  to  shelter
the  oppressed  ;  to  restrict  the  sphere  of  violence  ;  and  to
sacrifice, — where  no  other  Greeks  did, — at  the  altar  of
Persuasion.  This  character  is  signally  impressed  on  the
Oedipus  Coloneus,  and  is  personified  in  Theseus.^  The
first  session  of  the  tribunal  on  the  Hill  of  Ares  {i.e.  the
Areiopagus,  the  "  Mars'  Hill  "  of  Acts  xvii.  22]  was,  in  Attic
story,  ^  the  first  occasion  on  which  this  humane  character
asserted  itself  against  a  hitherto  inflexible  precedent.
Orestes  slew  his  mother  to  avenge  his  father,  whom  she
had  slain  ;  and  the  Erinyes  demanded  his  blood.  He  is
tried,  and  acquitted, — but  not  by  the  Erinyes  ;  by  Athene
and  her  Athenian  court.  The  Erinyes  are  the  accusers,
and  Apollo  is  counsel  for  the  prisoner.  Then  it  is, — after
the  acquittal  of  Orestes, — that  Athene's  gentle  pleading
effects  a  change  in  the  defeated  Avengers.  They  cease  to
be  the  Erinyes  :  they  become  the  '  Benign  '  or  '  Majestic  '
goddesses  ('  Eumenides,'  '  Semnae  '),  and  are  installed,  as
guardian  deities  of  Attica,  in  a  shrine  beneath  the  Areio-
pagus.

"  Areio'pagite  "  is  followed  by  "  Gallileo  "  ;  but  this,  as
the  comment — "  you  are  wandering  " — shows,  is  a  mistake.
The  script  goes  back  to  "  gold,"  and  thence  passes  to
"  golden  rain  from  heaven."  These  words,  like  the  earlier
"  rain  from  heaven  "  in  H.  V. 419a,  are  an  allusion  to

1  See  M.  V.  513  and  601,  p.  529  above  ;  and  the  comments  on  M.  V.
3099  under  "  Vengeance  is  mine,"  p.  559  below.

2  After  reading  the  Section  entitled  "  The  Violet  Crown,"  cf.  H  V.  222,
of  Oct.  17,  1910  :  "  Theseus  King  of  Athens  Atliens  the  golden  violet
crowned."

^  This  is  the  story  on  which  the  Eumenides  of  Aeschylus  is  based.


LXXXVII.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


533


Portia's  speech  in  Act  IV.,  Scene  1  of  The  Merchant  of
Venice  :

The  quahty  of  mercy  is  not  strain'd, — •
It  droppeth  as  the  gentle  rain  from  heaven
Upon  the  place  beneath  : it  is  twice  bless'd, —
It  blesseth  him  that  gives,  and  him  that  takes  :
"  'Tis  mightiest  in  the  mightiest  : it  becomes

The  throned  monarch  better  than  his  crown  ;
His  sceptre  shows  the  force  of  temporal  power,
The  attribute  to  awe  and  majesty,
Wherein  doth  sit  the  dread  and  fear  of  kings  ;
But  mercy  is  above  this  sceptred  sway, —
It  is  enthroned  in  the  hearts  of  kings.
It  is  an  attribute  of  God  himself  ;
And  earthly  power  doth  then  show  likest  God's
When  mercy  seasons  justice.

"  The  just  mid  unjust "  comes  from  the  Sermon  on  the
Mount  (Matt.  v.  45). I  quote  the  context  :

Ye  have  heard  that  it  hath  been  said,  Thou  shalt  love
thy  neighbour,  and  hate  thine  enemy  :

But  I  say  unto  you,  Love  your  enemies,  bless  them  that
curse  you,  do  good  to  them  that  hate  you,  and  persecute
you  ;

That  ye  may  be  the  children  of  your  Father,  which  is  in
heaven  :  for  he  maketh  his  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and  on
the  good,  and  sendeth  rain  on  the  just  and  on  the  unjust.

With  the  last  words  compare  the  words  in  Luke  vi.
quoted  under  H.  V.  278  above  (p.  530)  :

"  for  he  is  kind  unto  the  unthankful  and  to  the  evil."

It  must  not  be  supposed  that  these  few  scripts  exhaust
what  may  be  called  the  Mercy  topic.  They  touch  merely
the  fringe  of  it,  and  are  given  by  way  of  illustration  only.
Another  development  of  it,  as  already  stated,  will  be
found  under  the  heading  of  "  Vengeance  is  mine  "  (pp.
554-570  below).

I  drew  attention  above  to  the  connexion  in  H.  V.  419a
of  "  The  quality  of  mercy  "  with  "  the  pool  of  Bethesda,"


534 J.  G.  Piddington.  [part

because  there  is  a  reference  to  the  latter  in  a  pre-War

King  script.  It  will  accordingly  be  convenient  to  deal
with  the  topic  of  the  Pool  of  Bethesda  next.


THE  POOL  OP  BETHESDA.

The  reference  to  the  Pool  of  Bethesda  in  a  pre-War
King  script  is  as  follows  :

King  65  (December  1,  1913).

Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled  Out  of  great
tribulation  cometh  great  peace,  for  when  the  waters
have  been  troubled  an  angel  stilleth  them  .  .  .  not  one
of  us  cares  for  hegemony — we  are  all  brothers  in
love — there  is  no  hate  among  us  .  .  .

Open  wide  your  casements  to  the  dawn  Blow
bugles  blow Usher  in  the  happy  morn  .  .  .

With  the  latter  part  of  this  script,  from  "  not  one  of
us  cares  for  hegemony  "  down  to  the  end,  I  have  already
dealt  above  (pp.  523-527),  and  shown  that  it  is  one  of
several  allusions  to  a  passage  in  the  last  chapter  of
Modern  Painters.

"  Let  not  your  heart  he  troubled  "  are  the  opening  words
of  Johii  XXV.,  and  are  repeated  in  v.  27  of  the  same
chapter  :

Peace  I  leave  with  you,  my  peace  I  give  unto  you  :
not  as  the  world  giveth,  give  I  unto  you.  Let  not  your
heart  be  troubled,  neither  be  afraid.

Perhaps  compare  the  last  words  of  the  extract  given
above  (p.  526)  from  §  20  of  Ruskin's  chapter  "  Peace  "  in
Modern  Painters  :

I  leave  you.  to  judge,  and  to  choose,  between  this  labour,


LXXXVII.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


535


and  the  bequeathed  peace  ;  these  wages,  and  the  gift  of
the  Mornmg  Star.

But  the  reference  is  not  only,  I  think,  to  John  xiv.
In  view  of  the  fact  that  "  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled  "
is  immediately  followed  by  "  Out  of  great  tribulation  cometh
great  peace,''  there  seems  to  me  to  be  a  reference  as  weU
to  Matthew  xxiv.  6,  20,  and  21  :

And  ye  shall  hear  of  wars,  and  rumours  of  wars  :  see
that  ye  he  not  troubled  :  for  all  these  things  must  come  to
pass,  but  the  end  is  not  yet  .  .  .

But  pray  ye  that  your  flight  be  not  m  the  whiter,
neither  on  the  sabbath-day :  For  then  shall  be  great
tribulation,  such  as  was  not  from  the  beginning  of  the
world  to  this  time,  no,  nor  ever  shall  be.

"  When  the  ivaters  have  been  troubled  an  angel  stilleth
them.'" In  John  v.  we  read  :

Now  there  is  at  Jerusalem  ...  a  pool,  which  is  called
in  the  Hebrew  tongue  Bethesda,  having  five  porches.  In
these  lay  a  great  multitude  of  impotent  folk,  of  bhnd,
halt,  withered,  waiting  for  the  moving  of  the  water.  For
an  angel  went  down  at  a  certain  season  into  the  pool,  and
troubled  the  water  :  whosoever  then  fij'st  after  the  troub-
ling of  the  water  stepped  in,  was  made  whole  of  whatso-
ever disease  he  had.

Although  the  script  reverses  the  metaphor,  and  makes
the  angel  calm  the  troubled  waters,  it  can  hardly  be
disputed  that  a  reference  is  intended  to  the  Pool  of
Bethesda.

With  King  65  compare  the  following  script  of  Mrs.
Salter's  :

H.  V.  419a  {June  12,  1915).

The  last  days — the  end  of  Time — ^the  water — across
the  water — &  he  walked  upon  the  water — the  pool  of
Bethesda  &  the  Garden  of  Gethsemane— raui  from
heaven  ...

Here  "the  pool  of  Bethesda"  is  preceded  by  a  reference

2l


536


J .  G.  Pidclington.


[part


to  Christ's  walking  on  the  water.  I  quote  from  the
account  in  Mark  vi.  :

And  straightway  he  constrained  his  disciples  to  get  into
the  ship,  and  to  go  to  the  other  side  before  unto  Beth-
saida,  while  he  sent  away  the  people.  And  when  he  had
sent  them  away,  he  departed  into  a  mountain  to  pray.
And  when  even  was  come,  the  ship  was  in  the  midst  of
the  sea,  and  he  alone  on  the  land.  And  he  saw  them
toiling  in  rowing  ;  for  the  wind  was  contrary  unto  them  :
and  about  the  fourth  watch  of  the  night  he  cometh  unto
them,  walking  upon  the  sea,  and  would  have  passed  by
them.  But  when  they  saw  him  walking  upon  the  sea,
they  supposed  it  had  been  a  spirit,  and  cried  out  .  .  .
And  immediately  he  taUved  with  them,  and  saith  unto
them.  Be  of  good  cheer  :  it  is  I  ;  be  not  afraid.  And  he
went  up  unto  them  into  the  ship  ;  and  the  wmd  ceased.

With  H.  V.  419a  and  with  King  65  compare  the  following
script  of  Mrs.  Stuart  Wilson's  :

Wilson  12  [July  5,  1915).

...  A  pool  of  troubled  water  at  the  foot  of  a
cataract,  with  people  apparently  drowning  in  the
eddies.  To  my  surprise  I  see  by  the  angel  whose
wings  are  half  dipped  in  the  water  it  is  meant  for
Bethsaida  [s?'c].

The  valley  of  Jehoshaphat,  which  I  have  reaUy
seen,  and  the  impression  that  what  you  reaUy  want
is  an  allusion  to  the  dry  bones  that  were  brought  to
life.  I  cannot  remember  the  story.  Of  course,
according  to  both  Jew  and  Mussulman  the  valley  of
Jehoshaphat  wiU  be  the  scene  of  the  Last  Judgement

At  the  time  this  script  was  produced  Mrs.  Wilson  was
carrying  on  experiments  in  telepathy  between  herself  and
Mrs.  Salter  ;  ^  and  this  explains  the  words  "  the  imqiression
that  what  you  want  "  :  "  you  "  meaning  Mrs.  Salter.  Mrs.
Wilson  had  not  seen  H.  V.  419a  of  some  three  weeks
earlier  with  its  successive  allusions  to  Christ's  walking  on
the  water  and  to  the  Pool  of  Bethesda.

1  See  Proceedings,  Vol.  XXIX.  pp.  306-349.


Lxxxvn.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


537


The  very  curious  slip  in  Wilson  12  of  "  Bethsaida  "  for
"  Bethesda "  looks  like  a  confusion  between  the  Pool  of
Bethesda  and  the  account  of  the  walking  on  the  water  in
Mark  vi.,  where  it  is  said  that  Christ  constrained  his
disciples  "to  go  to  the  other  side  before  unto  Bethsaida."

There  is  an  odd  analogy  between  Mrs.  Wilson's  reference
to  the  Pool  of  Bethesda  and  Mrs.  King's  :  in  Mrs.  Wilson's
script  the  pool  of  troubled  water  is  one  in  which  men  are
drowned,  not  healed ;  while  in  Mrs.  King's  script  the
troubled  waters  are  hkewise,  not  waters  of  healing,  but
stormy  waters — waters  of  tribulation — which  an  angel  has
to  calm.

Mrs.  Salter  connects  the  Pool  of  Bethesda  with  "  The
last  days^ — the  end  of  time  "  ;  Mrs.  King  connects  it  with
the  "  great  tribulation  "  that  is  to  precede  the  end  of  the
world  ;  Mrs.  Wilson  connects  it  with  the  Last  Judgement
in  the  VaUey  of  Jehoshaphat.

The  Judgement  in  the  Valley  of  Jehoshaphat  is  a
reference  to  Joel  iii.  Parts  of  the  chapter  must  be
quoted  in  order  to  bring  out  the  close  analogy  between
it  and  the  Eschatological  Discourses  in  the  Synoptists  :

For,  behold  in  those  days,  and  in  that  time,  when
I  shaU  bring  again  the  captivity  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem,
I  will  also  gather  all  nations,  and  ^\all  bring  them  down
into  the  vaUey  of  Jehoshaphat,  and  "will  plead  with  them
there  for  my  people  and  for  my  heritage  Israel,  whom
they  have  scattered  among  the  nations,  and  parted  my
land  .  .  .

Proclaim  ye  this  among  the  Gentries ;  Prepare  war,
wake  up  the  mighty  men,  let  all  the  men  of  war  draw
near ;  let  them  come  up  :  Beat  your  plowshares  into
swords,  and  your  pruning-hooks  into  spears  .  .  .  Assemble
yourselves,  and  come,  aU  ye  heathen  .  .  .  Let  the  heathen
be  wakened,  and  come  up  to  the  valley  of  Jehoshaphat  ;
for  there  will  I  sit  to  judge  all  the  heathen  round  about.
Put  ye  in  the  sickle  ;  for  the  harvest  is  ripe  :  come,  get
you  down  ;  for  the  press  is  full,  the  fats  overflow  ;  for
theh  wickedness  is  great.  Multitudes,  multitudes  in  the
valley  of  decision  : for  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  near  in  the


538


J.  0.  Piddington.


[part


valley  of  decision.  The  sun  and  the  moon  shall  be
darkened,  and  the  stars  shall  withdraw  their  shining.

The  prophecy  ends  by  declaring  the  destruction  of  the
enemies  of  Israel,  and  the  return  of  peace  and  prosperity
to  Jerusalem.

With  the  Joel  passage  and  the  Pool  of  Bethesda  Wilson
script  unites  Ezekiel's  vision  "  in  the  midst  of  the  valley
which  was  full  of  bones"  {Ezek.  xxxvii.).  The  burden,  of
this  vision  is  the  revival  of  the  whole  house  of  Israel  and
the  reunion  of  the  disunited  kingdoms  of  Judah  and
Ephraim. It  is  the  promise  of  the  healing  of  a  nation.

The  last  reference  made  by  any  of  the  automatists  to
the  Pool  of  Bethesda  is  in  a  script  written  by  Mrs.  King,
who,  it  must  be  borne  in  mind,  had  seen  neither  H.  V.
419a  nor  Wilson  12  :

King  328  {Dec.  26,  1915).

...  Be  content — &  wait — for  the  end  cometh
gather  up  your  loins  for  the  coming  of  the  dawn
The  Palatinate  Be  assured  that  all  is  weU — ■  The
healing  of  the  nations  in  the  Pool  of  Bethesda —
Mary  is  more  needed  than  Martha  ...

Here,  it  will  be  observed,  it  is  the  healing  of  the
nations,  not  the  healing  of  a  nation,  that  is  promised  ;
and  this  healing  of  the  nations  is  connected  with  the
Coming  of  the  End  and  the  Coming  of  the  Dawn,  and
wdth  the  reiteration  of  the  phrase  "  All  is  well "  that  is
found  no  less  than  7  times  in  pre-War  King  scripts.

The  phrase  "  the  healing  of  nations  "  comes  from
Revelation  xxii.  2,  part  of  the  description  of  John  the
Divine's  vision  of  "  the  holy  city,  new  Jerusalem,  coming
down  from  God,  out  of  heaven,  prepared  as  a  bride
adorned  for  her  husband."


Lxxxvn.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


539


"  THE  VIOLET  CROWN."
See  King  115  and  157.

This  phrase  "  the  Violet  Crown "  occurs  twice  in  the
pre-War  King  scripts  :  first  in  King  115,  wliere  it  is
immediately  preceded  by  "  Follow  the  gleam,"  and  sec-
ondly in  King  157,  where  it  is  immediately  followed
by  "  the  seven  hiUs,"  i.e.  the  seven  hills  of  Rome.  After
the  outbreak  of  war  it  occurs  three  times,  as  follows  :

Parmenides  The  violet  crown — Cast  thy  net  into  the
sea — Creon  The  city  of  God

(King  237,  of  March  16,  1915)  ;

The Lesbian—  Creon — the mantle of  snow  Hermettus
[sic,  in  obvious  error  for  "  Hymettus  "],  the  violet  crown

(Kmg  293,  of  July  30,  1915)  ;
Over  the  blue  Ionian  Sea — the  sails  are  set  to  HeUas
The  fallen  Kings The  barge  upon  the  river — &  the  swans
flying  overhead  &  Archelion The  crown the  violet  crown

(King  347,  of  April  23,  1916).

These  extracts  place  it  beyond  doubt  that  "  the  Violet
Crown  "  in  King  script  means  Athens  :  Pindar's

w  Tui  XtTrapai  Koi  ioa-T€<pavoi  Kai  aolSijULoi,
EXXa^o?  epeicr/uLay  /cXetJ/ai  ^AOavai,  ^aL/j-oviov  TTToXleQpov,^

and  Swinburne's

Dear  city  of  men  without  master  or  lord
Fair  fortress  and  fostress  of  sons  born  free

A  wonder  enthroned  on  the  hiUs  and  sea,

A  maiden  crowned  with  a  fourfold  glory

That  none  from  the  pride  of  her  head  may  rend,

Violet,  and  olive-leaf  piu-ple  and  hoary.

Song-wreath  and  story  the  fahest  of  fame,

^  For  a  translation  of  these  lines  see  footnote  on  p.  546  below.


540


J .  G.  Piddington.


[part


Flowers  that  the  winter  can  blast  not  or  bend  ;

A  light  uj)on  earth  as  the  sun's  own  flame,
A  name  as  his  name,
Athens,  a  praise  without  end.

The  combination  of  "  the  violet  crown "  with  "  Follow
the  gleam"  in  King  115,  and  with  "the  city  of  God"  in
King  237,  may  be  reminiscences  of  similar  combinations  in
scripts  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  which  have  been  published  in
Proceedings ;  but  no  script  known  to  Mrs.  King  through
publication  or  otherwise  can  have  suggested  to  her  the
combination  in  King  157  of  "  the  violet  crown  "  of  Athens
with  "  the  seven  hills  "  of  Rome.

The  first  mention  of  the  City  of  the  Violet  Crown
occurs  in

M.  V.  148  {March  11,  1907).i

Violet  and  olive  leaf  purple  and  hoary  The  city  of
the  violet  and  olive  crown.  News  will  come  of  her.
of  Athens  ^

The  next  mention  comes  in

J/.  V.  171  (Ajjril  29,  1907).3

Victor  in  Poesy  Victor  in  Romance  and  Lord  of
Human  Tears  .  .  .  pro  patria  .  .  .  But  I  mean  a
wider  thmg,  a  universal  country,  the  mother  of  us  all,

Not  '  0  fair  city  of  Cecrops,'
but Oh  fan-  city  of  God.

That  gives  one  clue — I  have  long  wanted  to  say
that —  I  tried  before —  I  spoke  of  Athens  [i.e.  in
M.  V.  148],  but  you  did  not  complete.

Golden  City  of  God.  The  city  of  Cecrops  is  violet
and  hoary — look  back  at  that  [see  M.  V.  148].  The

1  For  chief  references  to  this  script  in  Proceedings,  see  Vol.  XXII.,
pp.  145,  177  ; Vol.  XXVII.,  p.  99.

2  A  good  instance  of  how  an  automatist's  normal  thoughts  may
intrude  and  deflect.  Mrs.  Verrall's  friend  Miss  Jane  Harrison  was  at
Athens  at  the  time  this  script  was  written.  Hence  the  words  :  "  News
will  come  of  her."

3  For  chief  references  in  Proceedings  to  this  script  see  Vol.  XXII.,
p.  178,  and  Vol.  XXVI.,  pp.  182  ff.


Lxxxvn.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


541


Universal  City  is  all  colours  and  no  colour,  but  best
described  as  a  golden  GLEAM.

"  Victor  in  Poesy  \sic,  in  error  for  "  Drama  "],  Victor  in
Romance  "  are  the  opening  words  of  a  short  poem  of
thanks  addressed  by  Tennyson  to  Victor  Hugo.  If  the
references  to  "a  universal  country  "  that  foUow  are  taken
into  consideration,  I  think  it  will  be  admitted  that  it  is
the  first  five  of  the  following  lines  in  this  short  poem  of
14  Unes  that  are  aimed  at  :

Stormy  voice  of  France  !
Who  dost  not  love  our  England — so  they  say  ;
I  know  not — England,  France,  aU  man  to  be
Will  make  one  people  ere  man's  race  be  run  :
And  I,  desiring  that  diviner  day.
Yield  thee  fuU  thanks  for  thy  full  courtesy
To  younger  England  in  the  boy  my  son.

"  The  mother  of  us  all,''  though  ]\Irs.  VerraU  herself  did
not  recognise  the  source  of  it,  is,  I  have  no  doubt,  from
Galatians  iv.  26. I  quote  the  context  :

Which  things  are  an  allegory :  for  these  are  the  two
covenants  ;  the  one  from  the  mount  Sinai,  which  gendereth
to  bondage,  which  is  Agar.

For  this  Agar  is  mount  Sinai  m  Arabia,  and  answereth
to  Jerusalem  which  now  is,  and  is  in  bondage  with  her
children.

But  Jerusalem  which  is  above  is  free,  which  is  the
mother  of  us  all.

"  Not  '  0  fair  city  of  Cecrops  '  "  is  from  the  Meditations
of  Marcus  Aurehus  :

AU  thmgs  are  harmonious  to  me  which  are  harmonious
to  thee,  0  Universe  ...  AU  is  fruit  to  me  which  thy
seasons,  O  Nature,  bear.  From  thee  are  aU  things,  and
in  thee  aU,  and  aU  return  to  thee.  The  poet  says,  '  Dear
city  of  Cecrops  '  ;  shaU  I  not  say,  '  Dear  city  of  God  '  1

Probably  this  quotation  from  the  Meditations  was
selected  not  only  because  it  serves  to  hnk  the  city  of
Cecrops {i.e. Athens  the  city  of  the  violet  crown)  with


542  J,  G.  Piddmgton.  [p^rT

the  Golden  City  of  God  {i.e.  the  New  Jerusalem  of  John's
vision),  but  also  because  of  Marcus  Aurelius'  Cosmopoli-
tanism. For  the  Roman  Philosopher-Emperor  thus  speaks
in  his  Meditations  :

Man,  a  citizen  of  the  supreme  city,  of  which  aU  other
cities  in  the  world  are  as  it  were  but  houses  and  famihes  ;

(Book  III.  2)

and

If  reason  is  general,  then  is  there  that  reason  also,
which  prescribeth  what  is  to  be  done  and  what  not,
common  unto  all.  If  that,  then  laAv.  If  law,  then  are
we  fellow-citizens.  If  so,  then  are  we  partners  in  some
one  commonweal.  If  so,  then  the  world  is  as  it  were
a  city  ;

(Book  IV.  4)

or  again  :

And  my  nature  is,  to  be  rational  in  all  my  actions  and
as  a  good,  and  natural  member  of  a  city  and  common-
wealth, towards  my  fellow  members  ever  to  be  socially
and  kindly  disposed  and  affected.  My  city  and  country,
as  I  am  Antoninus,  is  Rome  ;  as  a  man,  the  whole  world.

"The  Golden  Gleam;'  like  Mrs.  King's  "Follow  the
gleam,"  is  a  reference  to  Tennyson's  poem  Merlin  and  the
Gleam,  and  doubtless  stands  for  the  pursuit  of  an  ideal,
and  the  ideal  in  this  case  must  be  that  of  universal
brotherhood.

I  pass  on  now  to  the  next  reference  in  Mrs.  Verrall's
script  to  the  City  of  the  Violet  Crown.  It  comes  in  a
script  written  on  the  day  that  England  declared  war  on
Germany,  August  4,  1914  :

M.  V.  632  (August  4,  1914. 10.30  p.m.).

There  is  a  connexion  which  you  have  not  seen
between  the  message  in  the  mountains  whence
came  h  e  1  p — remember  that,  and  your  present  feel-
ing—  Don't  investigate  or  take  this  too  literally —
And  remember  that  you,  you  yourself  gained  some-
thing from  the  writing  there —  There  is  a  phrase  in
one  of  [Mi's.  Willett's]  scripts  which  may  help  you  to
understand The  afterglow  on  the  Soul's  sm-face  .  .  .


LXXXVII.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


543


rest  in  the  thought  that  care  and  love  prevails  and
that  beyond  these  voices  there  is  peace  .  .  .

Dear  city  of  God — be  a  citizen  of  that  city  and  of
no  lesser —

Dear  City  of  men  without  master  or  lord That  is
the  city  of  us  all  if  we  will  make  it  so — And  the
city  of  Cecrops  is  also  the  wearer  of  the  olive  crown —
The  first  part  of  this  script  relates  to  an  incident  that
took  place  in  Switzerland. Mrs.  Verrall  went  to  Switzer-
land early  in  June  1914,  and  visited  Zermatt,  Saas-Grund,
and — for the last five days — Vermala. On her  return
journey she wrote to me, from Lausanne, on July  1,
1914,  a  letter  about  her  stay  at  Vermala,  which  is  unlike
any  other  of  the  many  letters  I  have  received  from  her
in  connexion  with  her  scripts. It  ran  thus  :

You  must  have  been  overwhelmed  with  my  Vermala
scripts,  such  long  things  too  ...

I  can't  now  remember  much  what  they  were  all  about,
but  I  have  a  strong  impression  that  something  of  iiuport-
ance — in  the  S.P.R.  line,  I  mean — took  place  in  those
5  days  :  it's  very  odd,  and  I  think  my  impression  may  be
derived  from  a  script — or  rather  that  a  script  may  record
the  impression.  Nor  can  I  say  what  happened, — only  (it
sounds  absurd,  but  I  feel  as  if  I  ought  to  make  a  note
of  this)  something  was  radically  altered  between  Friday,
June  26,  and  the  morning  of  Tuesday,  June  30  !  I  think
it  is  something  in  me,  but  I  am  not  quite  sure  !  Anyhow
I  woke  on  Tuesday  with  the  strong  feeling  that  the
purpose  for  which  '  they  '  wanted  me  to  come  to  Switzer-
land was  now  accomplished  :  for  a  long  time  I  have,  as
I  may  have  told  you,  felt  that  '  they  '  wanted  me  to  go
to  the  Alps,  but  tOl  Tuesday  last  (yesterday)  I  have  had
no  special  sense  of  anything  going  on  either  in  me  or
about  my  script.  I  was  in  places  very  familiar  to  me,
both  Zermatt  and  Saas-Grund  being  old  friends.  .  .  .
Vermala  is  not  a  place  with  any  special  associations,  and
I  really went  there for no special  reason, except  that

when my friend, , left me I wanted to  be

somewhere,  and  Vermala  was  a  good  place  for  the  few
days  that  I  meant  to  stay  on.


544


J.  G.  Pidclington.


[part


But  the  moment  I  got  there,  I  felt — as  Mrs.  W[illett]
says  when  she  spots  a  quotation — that  '  this  was  it,'  and
the  impression  grew  and  grew  till  it  left  the  feeling  I  have
described, — or  tried  to  describe — I  don't  know  how  to  put
it,  but  I  send  this,  broken  as  it  is, — so  that  if  I  am
wrecked  in  a  fog  on  the  way  home,  you  may  know  that
'  they  '  have  been  satisfied  with  me  somehow  !

I  am  not  sure  that  I  shall  write  any  more  script  for
the  present,  as  one  part  of  the  sensation  is  that  something
is  finished  (and  the  something  may  be  my  power  of  writing
automatically  !),  but  I  shall  try  again  presently,  after  I  am
home  again,  and  of  course  at  once  if  I  have  any  impulse

> • .  9

There  is  a  subsequent  reference  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script
of  Aug.  22,  1914,  to  her  experience  at  Vermala,  which
discloses  what  the  incident  was  to  which  M.  V.  632  makes
obscure  allusion  :

M.  V.  637  [Aug.  22,  1914).

Pallida  mors  but  remember  the  permanent  .  .  .  The
pulsation  of  Death  that  comes  to  all  is  only  one
aspect  of  the  universal —  No  you  can't  get  it  aequo
pulsat  pede  and  for  the  equality  it  is  worth  paying  a
price — ■

But  now  I  want  you  to  remember  and  keep  a  firm
grasp  of  the  peace  that  came  in  the  Alps  remember
what  I  said  then  The  afterglow  has  a  real  significance
and well  keep  this  next  for  yourself

it  was  not  for  nothing  that  you  and  the  German
mother  and  the  French  girl  looked  at  the  glow  to-
gether on  the  great  peak.

I  have  set  my  bow  in  the  clouds.

It  will  be  remembered  that  Mrs.  Verrall  in  her  letter
about  her  Vermala  scripts  spoke  of  her  having  for  a  long
time "felt that '  they '  ^ wanted " her "to go to  the

^  By  '  they  '  Mrs.  Verrall  meant,  of  coiirse,  the  communicators.  But
it  should  not  be  understood  that  she  had  a  fixed  and  firm  belief  in
the  reality  of  her  '  communicators,'  for  her  feeling  on  the  subject
wavered  constantly.  When  she  wrote  of  '  them  '  and  '  they,'  she
always  put  the  words  between  inverted  commas.


LXXXVII.]


Covfifarison  of  Scripts.


545


Alps."  Evidence  of  the  existence  of  this  feehng  is  to  be
found  in  the  following  scripts  :

M.  V.  608  (May  6,  1914).

Out  of  the  mountains  whence  cometh  help.  Re-
member that — a  quite  definite  piece  of  help  ought  to
come  when  next  you  are  above  the  plains  And
Jaman  takes  the  sunset  .  .  .

M.  V.  613  (3Iay  18,  1914).

.  .  .  There  is  a  special  message  to  be  given  you  in
the  Alps  .  .  .

31.  V.  614  {3iay  19,  1914).

.  .  .  Remember  the  promise  for  the  mountains  .  .  .

M.  V.  622  {J^me  26,  1914. At  Vermala.).

.  .  .  Write  now  for  a  few  days,  and  not  only  in  a
serene  sky  and  setting — storm  has  its  function,  too,
and  you  may  take  the  message  better  then.

And  the  evening  &  the  morning  were  the  thud
day — And  there  was  light

To  return  now  to  M.  V.  632  of  Aug.  4, 1914,  written
when  Mrs.  Verrall  was  home  again  at  Cambridge.  This
script  begins  by  saying  that  there  is  a  connexion  between
"  the  message  in  the  mountains  whence  came  help  "  and
Mrs.  Verrall's "  present  feeling." It  may  be  confidently
assumed  that  her  "  present  feeling  "  was  about  the  war,
and  the  then  inevitable  extension  of  it  to  this  country.
It  goes  on  to  allude,  obscurely — but,  I  think,  unmistake-
ably — to  the  occasion  when  she,  the  German  mother,  and
the  French  girl  '  lifted  up  their  eyes  to  the  hills  '  and
' watched  the  afterglow  together  on  the  great  peak.  The
script  ends  with  references  to  the  City  of  God,  and  to
i Athens  the  City  of  the  violet  and  olive  crown,  and  with  a
'i clear  reference  back  to  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  of  April  29,
.i 1907  (M.  V.  171),  which  opens  with  a  quotation  from  the
poem  to  Victor  Hugo  in  which  Tennyson  looks  forward
to  "  that  diviner  day  "  when

I  "  England,  France,  all  man  to  be

WiU  make  one  people."

Before quoting the last occurrence of "  the  violet


I


546


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


crown "  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script,  I  would  remind  the
reader  of  two  things  :

(a)  that  a  reference  to  "  the  message  in  the  Alps "  is
immediately  followed  in  M.  V.  622  by  one  to  the  first
and  third  days  of  Creation  ;

(6)  that  in  King  157  of  April  17,  1914,  a  script  never
seen  by  Mrs.  Verrall,  "  The  violet  crown "  is  immediately
followed  by  "  the  seven  hills,"  i.e.  the  seven  hills  of  Rome.

The  last  reference  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  to  the  City
of  the  Violet  Crown  is  as  follows  :

M.  V.  674  {February  4,  1915).

Glory  to  God  in  the  highest  and  on  Earth  Peace
on  earth  Peace —

A  new Heaven and a  new  earth
And  he  saw  that  it  was  good.

I  have  tried  before  to  represent  the  days  of  Creation
— the  Creation  of  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth.

Till  I  have  built  Jerusalem  In  England's  green  &
pleasant  land. [Blake,  Preface  to  Milton.']

There  is  still  much  building  to  be  done — building
without  hands — for  the  city  that  will  be  an  abiding
City  the  true  Eternal  City  crowned  with  the  olive
leaf  Fortress  and  fostress  of  sons  born  free  ^  Com-
bine those  ideas —  The  Roman  Imperial  City  and
the  free  Athens —

Xiirapai  'A6?p'aL  [Pindar,  Fragment  76.]  ^

^  Swinbiime,  Erectheus.  Cf.  M.  V.  148,  171,  above.  This  quotation
from  Swinburne's  Chorus  in  praise  of  Athens  is  probably  meant  to  form
a  link  with  the  context  of  the  quotation  made  in  M.  V.  171  from
Gal.  iv.  26,  where  St.  Paul  contrasts  the  children  of  the  Old  Dispensa-
tion, "  children  of  the  bond-woman,"  with  the  children  of  the  New
Dispensation  who  are  "  sons  bom  free."

^  For  the  Greek  lines  see  above,  p.  .539.  Sir  J.  E.  Sandys  thus
translates  them  :

"  Oh  !  the  gleaming,  and  the  violet-crowned,  and  the  sung  in  story ;
the  bulwark  of  Hellas,  famotis  Athens,  city  divine  !  "

Some  suppose  that  the  epithet  "  violet-crowned  "  alludes  to  the  extra-
ordinary purple  glow  on  Hymettus  at  sunset.  Cf.  accordingly  "  Her-
mettus  [sic],  the  violet  crown  "  in  King  293  above.  This  view  as  to
the  source  of  the  epithet  is  not  favoured  by  most  scholars  ;  but  anyone
who  has  seen  Athens  transfigured  by  this  purple  glow  must,  I  fancy,
find  it  hard  to  believe  that  it  did  not  influence  the  choice  of  epithet.


Lxxxvn.]


Comparisoyi  of  Scripts.


547


You  have  partly  seen  the  meaning  of  the  Roman

allusions  but  the  Greek  have  escaped  you  I  think —
Put  them  together —

The  city  of  the  violet  &  olive  crown  .  .  .

Here,  as  in  King  157,  we  get  the  union  of  Athens  and
Rome  ;  and  this  union  is  in  turn  connected  with  the
Days  of  Creation,  with  which  again,  as  we  have  seen,
"  the  message  in  the  Alps  "  is  connected  in  M.  V.  622.
For  reasons  already  explained,  this  "  message  in  the  Alps  "
appears  to  be  closely  associated  with  the  occasion  when
Mrs.  Verrall  watched  the  afterglow  on  the  great  Alpine
peali  m  the  company  of  a  German  mother  and  a  French
girl  ;  and  when  this  incident  is  explicitly  mentioned  in
M.  V.  637,  it  is  immediately  followed  by  the  comment :

"I  have  set  my  bow  in  the  cloiid  s."

No  one,  I  venture  to  think,  can  dispute  the  general
meaning  of  these  "  linked "  scripts.  Their  language  is
symbolic,  it  is  true,  but  it  can  hardly  be  called  cryptic.
On  the  day  that  England  declares  war  on  Germany,  Mrs.
Verrall's  script  makes  another  declaration.  It  declares  the
coming  of  a  world-wide  Peace.  And  other  scripts — some
earlier,  some  later — assert  that  the  Great  War  is  but  the
Chaos,  "  earth  without  form  and  void,"  out  of  which  the
Spirit  of  God,  moving  in  mysterious  ways,  will  create  a
new  order  of  things.^

If  this  forecast  were  confined  to  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts,
it  might,  perhaps,  be  dismissed  as  a  fantastic  dream
cleverly  woven  by  some  part  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  conscious-
ness out  of  threads  selected  from  her  pre-War  scripts.
But,  as  will  be  seen,  when  I  come  to  deal  (pp.  580-598
below)  with  the  last  scripts  written  by  Mrs.  Willett  and
Mrs.  Salter  before  the  outbreak  of  war  and  the  first
scripts  written  by  them  after  its  outbreak,  their  scripts,
too,  share  the  view  that  the  War  is  the  prologue — not  to
a  catastrophe,  nor  to  a  mere  victory  over  enemies,  nor
to  a  Peace  of  exhaustion,  but — to  the  healing  of  nations.

1  See  Ruskin,  Modern  Painters,  "  Peace,"  §  19,  quoted  under  "  Had
Zimri  peace  ?  "  on  pp.  524-525  above.


548  J .  G.  Piddington.  [part

This  consensus  of  prophecy — and  Mrs.  King's  scripts
share  in  it — cannot  be  so  Ughtly  explained  away.


The  symbolism  employed  in  these  "  Violet  Crown "
scripts  was  probably  suggested  by  the  closing  passage  of
Gilbert  Murray's  Introductory  Essay  to  his  Euripides  :

The  old  devotion  to  Fifth  Century  Athens,  to  that
Princess  of  Cities,  who  had  so  fearfully  fallen  and  dragged
her  lovers  through  such  blood-stained  dust,  lived  on  with
a  kind  of  fascination  as  a  symbol  in  the  minds  of  these
deeply  individual  philosophers  of  later  Hellenism  and  Early
Christianity.  But  it  was  no  longer  a  city  on  earth  that
they  sought,  not  one  to  be  served  by  military  conquests,
nor  efficient  police,  nor  taxes  and  public  education.  It
was  '  the  one  great  city  in  which  all  are  free,'  or  it  was
the  city  of  Man's  Soul.  '  The  poet  has  said,'  wites  a
late  Stoic,  who  had  a  pretty  large  concrete  city  of  his
own  to  look  after,  '  The  poet  has  said :  O  Beloved  City
of  Cecrops  :  canst  thou  not  say  ;  O  Beloved  City  of
God  ?  '

But  though  this  passage  may  have  supplied  the  imagery
of  the  scripts,  the  application  of  the  imagery  is  quite
different,  as  M.  V.  674  alone  is  sufficient  to  show.  "  It
was  no  longer  a  city  on  earth  that  they  sought,"  says
Gilbert  Murray  of  the  philosophers  of  later,  Hellenism  ;
"  here  have  we  no  continuing  city,"  said  the  author  of
the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  "  but  we  seek  one  to  come."
The  communicators,  on  the  contrary,  affirm  the  approach-
ing realisation  of  the  hopes  expressed  in  the  last  Chorus
of  Shelley's  Hellas  (quoted  more  than  once  in  the
scripts  ^)  :

"  The  world's  great  age  begins  anew.
The  golden  years  return,

iln  W.  326,  of  Feb.  28,  1914,  and  H.  V.  536  of  Jan.  14,  1920.  See
also  H.  V.  191,  of  Dec.  4,  1909,  where  "  in  the  days  of  Saturn.  the
golden age Satumia regna iam redibunt " is probably a  composite


LXXXVII.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


549


The  earth  doth  like  a  snake  renew
Her  winter  weeds  outworn  .  .  .

Another  Athens  shall  arise,

And  to  remoter  time
Bequeath,  like  sunset  to  the  skies.

The  splendour  of  its  prime."  ^

That  is  the  constant  theme  of  the  scripts  ;  the  estab-
Ushment  "  here  on  earth "  of  a  universal,  abiding,  "  con-
crete city "  :  home  of  Freedom  and  Clemency,  as  was
Athens  ; home  of  Law  and  Order,  as  was  Rome.

reference  to  Shelley's  Hellas  and  to  Vergil's  Messianic  Eclogue.  "  Hellas
bright  Hellas  "  in  K.  443,  of  Sept.  1,  1917,  and  "  Hellas  divinely  clear  "
in  King  305,  of  Sept.  4,  1915,  are  probably  also  attempts  at  the  second
verse  of  Shelley's  Chorus.  •  ■

1  See  my  remarks  at  the  end  of  this  paper  (pp.  603  below)  on  the
far  greater  improbabiUty  of  the  fulfilment  of  Utopian  prophecies  than
of  the  fvdfihnent  of  prophecies  of  wars.  These  remarks  were  written  in
ignorance,  or  at  any  rate  in  complete  forgetfulness,  of  Shelley's  own
note  on  the  Chorus  in  Hellas,  which  runs  thus  :

"  The  final  chorus  is  indistinct  and  obscure  as  the  event  of  the
living  drama  whose  arrival  it  foretells.

"  Prophecies  of  wars,  and  rumours  of  wars,  etc.,  may  safely  be  made
by  poet  or  prophet  in  any  age  ;  but  to  anticipate,  however  darkly,  a
period  of  regeneration  and  happiness,  is  a  more  hazardous  exercise  of
the  faculty  which  bards  possess  or  feign.  It  will  remind  the  reader,
'  magno  nec  proximvis  intervallo,'  of  Isaiah  and  Virgil,  whose  ardent
spirits  saw  the  possible  and  perhaps  approaching  state  of  society  in
which  '  the  lion  shall  lie  down  with  the  lamb.'  and  '  omnis  feret  omnia
tellus '  [Vergil,  Ed.  iv.  39].  Let  these  great  names  be  my  authority
and  excuse."


550


J .  G.  Piddington.


[part


"  THE  MUSIC  OF  THE  SPHERES."
See  King  72.

This  creation  of  a  new  order  out  of  chaos  is  represented
in  different  ways  in  the  scripts  :  sometimes  in  Bibhcal
language  ;  sometimes  by  imagery  drawn  from  Norse
mythology  (see  e.g.  "  a  new  Asgard  "  in  King  31  and  38)  ;
and  sometimes  in  terms  borrowed  from  classical  writers  or
from  English  poets.  Thus  in  King  72  occurs  "  the  music
of  the  spheres,"  in  King  118  "the  stars  sang  together,"
and  in  King  185  "  the  Miltonic  metaphor  Blest  pair  of
Sirens."  With  these  phrases  compare  the  following  extract
from  a  King  script  written  after  the  outbreak  of  war  :

King  210  {Oct.  27,  1914).

.  .  .  Mercy  &  justice  shall  prevail  The  music  of
the  spheres  wHl  be  heard  Far,  far  it  comes,  faintly
at  first  then  swelling  into  majestic  [here  a  word  is
apparently  omitted]  summoning  the  souls  of  men.
Prepare  ye  the  way  Lift  up  the  hearts  lift  them  to
the  dawn  wh.  is  even  now  showing  beyond  the  hUls

But  Mrs.  King  is  not  alone  in  using  this  simile  of  the
Music  of  the  Spheres.  It  occurs  in  the  scripts  of  other
autoniatists  as  well  :  for  instance  in  the  following  H.  V.
scripts,  where  it  is  combined  with  another  simile  bearing
the  same  significance,  namely  the  return  of  the  Golden  Age  :

H.  V.  191  {Dec.  4,  1909).

...  in  the  days  of  Saturn — the  golden  age  Saturnia
regna  iam  redibunt  something  like  that — look  for  the
reference —  I  wish  I  could  make  things  clearer  .  .  .
visions  of  light — this  is  confused  wings  saffron
coloured — the  angelic  hosts.  Blest  pair  of  Sirens  that
is  nearer  to  the  thought

H.  V.  298  {Jan.  12,  1913).

The  slow  unyielding  sequence  of  the  years  aeon
unto  aeon the  ages  of  man — the  golden  age  .  ^  .  lo


LXXXVII.]


Com'parison  of  Scripts.


551


the  bright  seraphim  that  belongs  though  you  may  not
think  so  .  .  .

H.  V.  360  {Atig.  29,  1914).

.  .  .  astraea reddux [sic] — per ardua sors  futura
manet — [gloria]  in  excelsis  .  .  .
H.  V.  481  {Jmie  16,  1916).

Blest  pau'  of  sirens — heavenly  harmonies — something
about  return — reddux  [sic]  .  .  .

"  The  golden  age  Saturnia  regna  iam  redibunt "  in
H.  V.  191,  "  astraea  reddux  "  in  H.  V.  360,  and  "  some-
thing about  return — reddux  "  in  H.  V.  481  are  all  allusions
to  Vergil's  Fourth  Eclogue.  This  Eclogue,  which  has  been
called  Vergil's  Messianic  Eclogue  because  of  '  its  many
resemblances  to  Messianic  passages  in  the  Old  Testament,
foretells  the  renewal  of  the  Golden  Age  and  the  advent  of
a  reign  of  universal  peace  :

Ultima  Cumaei  venit  iam  carmrnis  aetas  :
Magnus  ab  integTO  saeclorum  nascitutr  ordo.
Jam  redit  et  Virgo,  redeunt  Saturnia  regna.

(Ed.  iv.,  4-6.)

Now  is  come  the  last  age  of  the  Cumaean  prophecy :
the  great  cycle  of  j)eriods  is  born  anew.^  Now  returns
the  Maid,  returns  the  reign  of  Saturn.

(Mackail's  Translation.)

"  The  Maid  "  (Virgo)  is  Astraea,  goddess  of  -Justice,  who
fled  from  earth  in  the  age  of  bronze.  Particular  attention
should  be  paid  to  the  appearance  of  "  Astraea  reddux  "
in  H.  V. 360.^  for  this  was  the  first  script  written  by

^  This,  of  course,  is  the  source  of  Shelley's  :  "  The  world's  great  age
begins  anew."

-  The  misspelling  "  reddux  "  for  "  redux  "is  a  strange  one  for  a
classical  scholar  like  Mrs.  Salter  to  make.  It  has  at  any  rate  this
advantage,  that  when  it  occurs  a  second  time  in  H.  V.  481  it  emphasises
the  reference  back  to  H.  V.  360.

The  phrase  "  Astraea  redux  "  is  taken  from  the  title  of  Dryden's
poem  On  the  Happy  Restoration  and  Return  of  His  Sacred  Majesty
Charles  II.,  1660.  Dryden  prefixed  as  a  motto  to  this  poem  the  line
frona  Vergil's  Foui-th  Eclogue  :

-'  Jam  redit  et  Virgo,  redeunt  Saturnia  regna."

231


552


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Mrs.  Salter  after  the  outbreak  of  war  (see  pp.  595-596
below).  It  is  there  combined  with  "  in  excelsis,"  which
unquestionably  refers  back  to

gloria  in  excelsis on  earth  peace  goodwill  towards  men

in  H.  V.  168  of  May  11,  1909.

"Blest  pair  of  Sirens"  in  H.  V.  191  and  481,  and  "  lo
the  bright  Seraphim "  in  H.  V.  298  are  quotations  from
Milton's  At  a  Solemn  Musick  :

Blest  pair  of  Sirens,  pledges  of  heaven's  joy,

Sphere-born  harmonious  sisters,  Voice  and  Verse,

Wed  your  divine  sounds  .  .  .

And  to  our  high-raised  phantasy  present

Tliat  undisturbed  song  of  pure  concent.

Aye  sung  before  the  sapphire-coloui''d  throne

To  Him  that  sits  thereon.

With  saintly  shout,  and  solemn  jubUee,

Where  the  bright  Seraphim  in  burning  row

Their  loud  uplifted  angel-trumpets  blow


That  we  on  earth  with  undiscording  voice  /

May  rightly  answer  that  melodious  noise  ;

As  once  we  did,  till  disproportion'd  sin

Jarr'd  against  nature's  chime,  and  with  harsh  din

Brolie  the  fair  music  that  aU  creatures  made

To  their  great  Lord,  whose  love  their  motion  sway'd

In  perfect  diapason,  whUst  they  stood

In  first  obedience,  and  their  state  of  good.

O  may  we  soon  again  renew  that  song,

And  keep  in  tune  with  Heav'n  ...

Just  as  in  Vergil's  Fourth  Eclogue  it  is  the  return,  and
not  the  coming  for  the  first  time  of  the  age  of  gold  that
is  foretold,  so  here  Milton  prays  not  for  the  first  advent
on  earth  of  the  heavenly  harmony  (the  Music  of  the
Spheres)  but  for  its  return.  The  analogy,  no  doubt,  helped
to  facilitate  the  combination  in  the  scripts  of  "  Astraea
redux  "  with  "Blest  pair  of  Sirens."  With  the  idea
expressed  in  Milton's  poem  that  at  the Creation  of  the


Lxxxvn.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


553


world  the  "  melodious  noise "  was  audible  by  earthly
ears  and  remained  audible  till  the  Fall  of  Man,  compare
King  118  :

the  sons  of  the  morning — the  stars  sang  together  Be
joyful  aU  ye  lands,

where  the  allusion  is  to  Job  xxxvlii.  4,  6,  and  7  :

Where  wast  thou  when  I  laid  the  foundations  of  the
earth  1  declare,  if  thou  hast  understanduig  .  .  .  Where-
upon are  the  foundations  thereof  fastened  ?  or  who  laid
the  corner-stone  thereof  ?  When  the  morning-stars  sang
together,  and  aU  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy  ?

"  Be  joyful  all  ye  lands,"'  which  follows  the  reference  to
the  Job  passage,  is  from  Psalm  c,  and  is  important
because  its  context  introduces  the  topic  of  "  Mercy  and
truth,"  verse  4  being  :

Tor  the  Lord  is  gracious,  his  mercy  is  everlasting  ;  and
his  truth  endureth  from  generation  to  generation.

Cf.  accordingly  King  164  :

Oh  be  joyful  all  ye  lands — the  troubled  times  .  .  .
Mercv  &  truth.

There  is  another  quotation  in  the  scripts  from  this  short
Psalm  of  only  4  verses,  and  it  occurs  in  a  passage  the
immediate  context  of  which  there  has  already  been  occasion
to  discuss  in  connexion  with  the  topic  of  "  Behemoth  and
Leviathan  "  (pp.  510-513  above). Thus  :

W.  281  {Feb.  16,  1912).

.  .  .  He  hath  made  us  and  not  we  ourselves  all
thmgs  in  heaven  and  earth  and  beneath  thou  great
Leviathan  not  Jonah  Thou  great  Leviathan  men's
hearts  falling  them  for  fear  but  the  waves  sank  like
a  little  chUd  to  sleep  the  angry  billow  ceased  to
leap At  thy  wQl  .  .  .

"  He  hath  made  us,"  etc.,  is  from  verse  2  of  Psalm  c.  :

0  be  joyful  m  the  Lord,  aU  ye  lands  :  serve  the  Lord
with  gladness,  and  come  before  his  presence  with  a  song.


554


J.  G.  Picldington.


[part


Be  ye  sure  that  the  Lord  he  is  God  ;  it  is  he  that  hath
made  us,  and  not  we  ourselves  :  we  are  his  people,  and  the
sheep  of  his  pasture.

So  it  will  be  seen  that  while  King  scripts  connect  this
Psalm  with  the  stars  singing  together  at  the  creation  of
the  world  and  with  "  the  troubled  times,"  Willett  281
connects  it  with  the  "  Behemoth  and  Leviathan  "  topic,
with  "  men's  hearts  failing  them  for  fear "  and  with  the
Calming  of  the  Storm.


"  VENGEANCE  IS  MINE  "  AND  ASSOCIATED  TOPICS.

In  King  202,  written  in  the  course  of  the  afternoon  of
July  27,  1914,  the  words  "  Vengeance  is  mine  saith  the
Lord I  wall  repay  "  occur  in  the  following  context  :

Peace  had  Zimri  peace  who  slew  his  master  ?  .  .  .
Great  trial  &  tribulation  but  in  the  end  peace  &  lights-
How  are  the  mighty  fallen  &  the  proud  brought  low  .  .  .
Vengeance  is  mine saith  the  Lord I  will  repay.

By  the  afternoon  of  July  27,  1914,  though  War  was  not
yet  certain,  it  was  probable  ;  and  consequently  it  might
be  thought  that  Mrs.  King's  own  imagination  will  afford
a  sufficient  explanation  of  this  script.  So  I  think  it
might,  if  it  stood  alone  ;  but  if  it  be  considered  in  con-
junction with  phrases  occurring  in  nearly  contemporaneous
Kang  scripts,  and  if  these  again  be  compared  with  the
contexts  of  identical  or  similar  phrases  in  the  scripts  of
other  automatists,  so  simple  an  explanation  will  not,
I  fancy,  commend  itself  to  most  minds.

For the purpose of this comparison I will begin  by


LXXXVII.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


555


putting  together  a  few  extracts  from  four  King  scripts
written  between  July  27  and  August  2,  1914  :

King  202  {July  27  ,  1914).

.  .  .  How  are  the  mighty  fallen  [2  Sam.  i.  25,  27  :
"  How  are  the  mighty  fallen  in  the  midst  of  the
battle  !  .  .  .  How  are  the  mighty  fallen,  and  the
weapons  of  war  perished  !  "]  .  .  .  Vengeance  is  mine
saith  the  Lord  I  wDl  repay  {Romans  xii.  19,  where
St  Paul  is  quotmg  from  Deut.  xxxii.  35  :  "To  me
belongeth  vengeance,  and  recompense  ;  their  foot  shall
slide  in  due  time  :  for  the  day  of  their  calamity  is  at
hand,  and  the  things  that  shall  come  upon  them
make  haste."]  .  .  .

King  204  {July  29,  1914).

Mercy — mercy  &  truth  [Psalm  Ixxxv.  10  :  "  Mercy
and  truth  are  met  together  ;  righteousness  and  peace
have  kissed  each  other."]

King  206  {July  31,  1914).

Put  on  the  armour  of  light — buckle  on  the  shield
{Romans xiii. 12  ; and Ephes. vi. 11, 16  : "  Put
on  the  whole  armour  of  God  .  .  . Above  all,  taking
the  shield  of  faith."]
King  207  {August  2,  1914).

The  potter's  vessel  [Psabn  ii.  1,  9  :  "  Why  do  the
heathen  so  furiously  rage  together  ?  .  .  .  Thou  shalt
.  .  .  break  them  in  pieces  like  a  potter's  vessel."]  .  .  .

These  four  scripts,  then,  either  explicitly  contain,  or
else  imply,  the  following  themes  :

A  "  How  are  the  mighty  fallen  in  the  midst  of  the
battle  !  .  .  .  and  the  weapons  of  war  perished  !  "  ;

B  "  Vengeance  is  mine  ; I  will  repay,  saith  the  Lord  "  ;

C  "  Mercy  and  truth  are  met  together ;  righteousness
and  peace  have  kissed  each  other  "  ;

D  "  Let  us  put  on  the  armour  of  light,"  and  "  Put  on
the  whole  armour  of  God  .  .  .  Above  all  taking  the
shield  of  faith  "  ;  and

E  "  Why  do  the  heathen  so  furiously  rage  together  ?
.  .  .  Thou  shalt  .  .  .  break  them  in  pieces  like  a  potterV.
vessel."


656


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Let  us  start  by  comparing  with  Theme  E  a  connected
group  of  extracts  from  Mrs.  Verrall's  scripts  :
M.  V.  30951  {January  13,  1902).

Nephelecoccygua  [sic]  and  other  such  .  .  .  Three
Latin  words  .  .  .  would  give  the  clue.  Quid  fre-
muerunt  gentes  ?  gentes  seems  right — gens  togata
rapit.  Non  possumus  plurima  hodie  ["  We  can  do  no
more  to-day  "]  .  .  .
M.  V.  3097  {January  29,  1902).

.  .  .  gentile no gentes gens togata  vocat,
Romam — Romanam condere gentem Gens  togata
manet  .  .  .
M.  V.  3099  {February  3,  1902).

.  .  .  Gennata  no  Gens  nata  togae  those  are  the
three  words  [cf.  M.  V.  3095] — there  are  more  clypeum
rapit,  and  somethmg  else.  Duo  rapit  pro  toga,
gladium  chpeumque  re-

But  the  other  words  are  the  test. Gens  nata  togae.
In  inverted  commas  single  thus
'  Gens  nata  togae  '
In  ink  on  a  little  piece  of  white  paper  that  has
been  folded  in  the  middle

Chpeum  recondit  et  ensem
that is better but it is not so important.  Keep
this it  will  be  wanted —

F  W  H  Myers
M.  V.  512  {February  3,  1913).

Nej)helecoccygia and  other  Utopias  or  lost  Atlan-
tides — far  m  the  Western  seas  ...
Something  about  a  Sargasso  sea  .  .  .
I don't think you have understood. But  never
mind — more  wiU  come — write  tomorrow.
M.  V.  513  {February  4,  1913).

Oranges  and  lemons — and  the  rhyme  is  St.  Clemens
— San  Clemente  with  the  mosaics  No  wait — you
have  it  wrong —

Clementia  et  misericordia  ...

1  Mrs,  Verrall's  Scripts  between  March  5,  1901  (when  they  began)  and
Dec.  30,  1904,  are  numbered  3000  to  3307;  those  between  Jan.  4,  1905,
and  June  24,  1916  (when  they  ended),  are  numbered  1  to  739.


Lxxxvii.]  Comparison  of  Scripts.


"  Nephelecoccygia"  occurs  in  M.  V.  3095  and  512  only.
It  means  "  Cloud-Cnckoo-City,"  and  is  the  name  given  by
Aristophanes  in  the  Birds  to  the  City  built  by  birds  in
mid-air.  Sir  Richard  Jebb,  in  his  article  on  Aristophanes
in  the  Enc.  Brit.,  writes  as  follows  :

Some  have  found  in  the  Birds  a  complete  historical
allegory  of  the  Sicilian  expedition;  others,  a  general  satire
on  the  prevalence  at  Athens  of  headstrong  caprice  over  law
and  order  ;  others,  merely  an  aspiration  towards  a  new  and
purified  Athens — a  dream  to  which  the  poet  had  turned
from  his  hope  for  a  revival  of  the  Athens  of  the  past.

From  M.  V.  512  it  is  absolutely  clear  that  it  is  the
third  of  these  views  that  is  taken  in  the  scripts  ;  and  that
Nephelecoccygia  stands  for  "a  new  and  purified  Athens."

"  Quid  fremuenmt  gentes  1  "  is  the  Vulgate  version  of
Psalm  ii.  1  :  "  Why  do  the  heathen  so  furiously  rage
together  ?  "  except  that  quid  is  used  instead  of  the
Vulgate's  quare.

"  Gens  togata;'  "  the  race  that  wears  the  toga,"  means
the  Romans.  The  toga  was  the  national  garb  of  the
Roman  citizen.  The  word  is  used  by  classical  writers  as
a  symbol  of  Peace,  as  the  weU-known  saying  "  Cedant
arma  togae "  sufficiently  shows.  "The  Roman  toga"  in
King  182,  no  doubt,  bears  the  same  meaning  as  "  gens
togata."

Romanam  condere  gentem,"  "to  found  the  Roman
race,"  is  part  of  a  famous  hne  in  Vergil's  Aeneid  :

"  Tantae  mohs  erat  Romanam  condere  gentem,"

{Aen.  i.  33)

which  means  "  So  hard  a  matter  was  it  to  found  the
Roman  race."  This  line  Myers  imitated  in  his  Promise  of
Immortality  :

"  So  hard  a  matter  was  the  birth  of  Man."
He  again  made  use  of  it  in  a  passage  of  his  Presidential
Address  to  this  Society; and  to  this  passage  it  is  clear
that  M.  V.  3095,  3097,  and  512,  when  read  together,  allude  :
Out  of  the  long  Stone  Age  our  race  is  awakening  into
consciousness  of  itself. We  stand  in  the  dawn  of  history.


558


J .  G.  Piddington.


[part


Behind  us  lies  a  vast  and  unrecorded  waste — the  mighty
struggle  hmnanam  condere  gentem.  Since  the  times  of  that
ignorance  ^  we  have  not  yet  gone  far  ;  a  few  thousand
years,  a  few  hundred  thinkers,  have  barely  started  the
human  mind  upon  the  great  aeons  of  its  onward  way.
It  is  not  yet  the  hour  to  sit  down  in  our  studies  to  eke
out  Tradition  with  Intuition  .  .  .  The  traditions,  the
intuitions  of  our  race  are  themselves  in  their  infancy  ;
and  before  we  abandon  ourselves  to  brooding  over  them
let  us  at  least  first  try  the  upshot  of  a  systematic  search
for  actual  facts.  For  what  should  hinder  ?  If  our
enquiry  lead  us  first  through  a  jungle  of  fraud  and  folly,
need  that  alarm  us  "?  As  well  might  Columbus  have
yielded  to  the  sailors'  panic,  when  he  was  entangled  in  the
Sargasso  sea.^

In  the  original  Tantae  ynoUs  erat  Romanam  condere
gentem  is  a  comment  on  the  hardships  imposed  by  Juno's
jealousy  and  anger  on  Aeneas  and  his  followers  during
their  prolonged  wanderings  in  search  of  their  destined
home  in  Italy.

The  combination  in  M.  V.  3097  of  "  Romanam  condere
gentem  "  with  "  gens  togata "  points  certainly  in  my
opinion  to  another  famous  line  ^  in  the  Aeneid  :

Quin  aspera  Juno,
Quae  mare  nunc  terrasque  metu  caelumque  fatigat,
Consilia  in  melius  referet,  mecumque  fovebit
Romanos,  rerum  dominos,  gentemque  togatam.

(Aen.  i.  279-282.)

These  lines  form  part  of  Jupiter's  consoling  reply  to
Venus, when alarmed by the storm which Juno  had

1  The  allusion  is  to  Acts  xvii.  30,  31  :  "  And  the  times  of  this  ignor-
ance God  winked  at  ;  but  now  commandetli  all  men  everywhere  to
repent  :  Because  he  hath  appointed  a  day,  in  the  which  he  will  judge
the  world  in  righteousness."

2  Cf.  also  Myers,  The  Reneival  of  Youth,  11.  107-158.  In  the  passage
in  his  Presidential  Address  Myers  is  to  a  large  extent  only  repeating  in
prose  what  he  had  already  said  here  in  verse.

3  Macrobius  says  that  Vergil  borrowed  the  line  from  an  earlier  poet  ;
and  Suetonius  records  an  occasion  on  which  Augustus  quoted  it.


LXXXVII.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


559


raised  against  Aeneas'  fleet, ^  she  implores  him  to  maintain
his  decree  that  the  Trojans  should  become  the  masters  of
the  world.  Jupiter  begins  his  reply  with  a  general
assurance

Parce  metu,  Cytherea,  manent  inmota  tuorum
Fata  tibi,

(with  which  compare  "  Gens  togata  manet "  in  M.  V.
3097),  and  then  later  repeats  his  assurance  more  specifi-
cally, in  the  lines  quoted  above,  with  the  added  promise
of  Juno's  eventual  benevolence  :

Nay,  harsh  Juno,  who  in  her  fear  now  troubles  earth
and  sea  and  sky,  shall  change  to  better  counsels,  and
with  me  shall  cherish  the  lords  of  the  vmrld,  the  goivned
race  of  Rome.  (Mackail's  Translation.)

"  Clipeum  recondit  el  ensem "  Mrs.  Verrall  herself  trans-
lated "  He  puts  away  the  shield  and  sword."  "  Ensem  "
and  "  gladium  "  (both  words  are  used  in  M.  V.  3099)
mean  exactly  the  same  thing,  and  "  recondere  gladium  in
vagina,"  or  "in  vaginam,"  is  classical  Latin  for  "  to  put
up  a  sword  again  into  the  sheath "  ;  but  as  one  cannot
speak  of  "  sheathing  a  shield,"  some  more  general  term
like  "puts  away"  must  be  used  to  render  "recondit."

The  end  of  M.  V.  512  implies  that  the  next  day's
script  will  carry  on  the  subject.  Since  the  virtue  on
which  the  Athenians  specially,  and  with  justice,  prided
themselves  was  Clemency  (see  pp.  532,  549  above),  there
is  no  difficulty  in  understanding  how  M.  V.  513  carries
on  the  subject  of  M.  V.  512,  for  M.  V.  513  alludes  to
"  Clementia  et  misericordia "  (Clemency  and  Pity),  while
M.  V.  512  had  referred  to  a  "  new  and  purified  Athens  "
by  means  of  the  word  "  Nephelecocyggia."

Observe  that  M.  V.  3095,  3097,  and  3099  give  us  this
New  Athens  in  combination  with  Roman  Law  and  Order,
the  Parents  of  Peace  ;  for  that  is  what  is  meant  by  ge^is
togata  and  gens  nata  logae  (a  race  destined  by  nature  to  a
peaceful  career),  as  well  as  by  clipeum  recondit  et  ensem.
These  five  scripts  of  Mrs.  Verrall's  combine,  in  fact,
Athenian  Clemency  with  the  Pax  Romana.

1  For  other  references  to  this  storm  see  pp.  512,  513,  558,  559,  571.


560


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


Next  Jet  us  compare  Theme  E  with  a  script  of  Mrs.
Salter's,  ana  with  a  group  of  other  scripts  of  hers
associated  therewith  :

H.  V.  16  (November  20,  1906).

.  .  .  ubi  ius  ubi  reipublicae  salus  .  .  .  why  do  the
heathen  so  furiously  rage  Colomel  Calomel  and
tansy  .  .  .

"  Ubi  ius  ubi  reipublicae  salus "  means  "  Where  is
Justice  ? where  is  the  safety  of  the  State  ?  "

"  Tansy  "  is  an  aromatic  herb,  often,  I  believe,  used  in
old  medical  prescriptions.  For  "  Calomel "  see  next
extract.

H.  V.  158  [March  9,  1909).

.  .  .  Calomel  Can  you  not  understand  what  that
means  1  hyssop  and  balm  repentance  and  forgive-
ness .  .  .

This  extract  gives  the  clue  to  the  meaning  of  the
mysterious  "  Calomel  and  tansy "  of  H.  V.  16.  "  Calo-
mel "  is  an  approach  to  the  idea  of  a  purge,  whence
transition  can  be  made  to  "  Purge  me  with  hyssop,  and
I  shall  be  clean  :  wash  me,  and  I  shall  be  whiter  than
snow  "  {Psalm  li.  7).

H.  V.  172  {July  22,  1909).

.  .  .  scarlet  and  hyssop  repentance  let  not  the
sun  go  down  upon  jo\xr  wrath  Justice  holds  the
scales  .  .  .  another  day  and  other  hopes  be  not
dismayed  ...

"  Scarlet  and  hyssop  repentance  "  is  a  combined  allusion
to  Psalm  li.  7,  and  to  Isaiah  i.  16,  18  :

Wash  you,  make  you  clean  ;  put  away  the  evil  of  your
doings  from  before  mine  eyes  ;  cease  to  do  evil  .  .  .

Come  now,  let  us  reason  together,  saith  the  Lord :
Though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white
as  snow  ;  though  they  be  red  lilie  crimson,  they  shall  be
as  wool.

Accordingly  compare  the  following  script  :

H.  V.  72  {February  18,  1908).

.  .  .  though  their  skms  [sic]  be  as  scarlet  yet  shall


LXXXVII.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


561


they  be  white  as  snow thus  spake  the  prophet  Isaiah
The  reference  to  Isaiah  was  important,
now  describe  the  scene

A  winding  valley  amid  rocky  peaks.  A  green  strip
where  the  river  flows  and  groups  of  darkleaved  trees  chest-
nuts I  think  and  at  the  bottom  a  town  with  white
houses  and  many  towers  nestling  close  together  and
the  rude  invader  from  the  north  shall  destroy  them
coming  down  the  pass  with  many  men  and  horses  and
the  tread  of  armed  men  shall  echo  in  the  hills  around  .  .  .

This script must be read in connexion with  another
..  group of scripts referred to elsewhere (see pp.  519-523
* above  and  pp.  588-589  below). Here  it  will  suffice  to  say
that the quotation from Isaiah is followed by one  of
jj several  descriptions  to  be  found  in  the  scripts  of  Barbaric
Invasions,  of  which  the  note  is Vae  Victis  ! Woe  to  the
Vanquished  ! The  topic  of  Barbaric  Invasions  I  take  to
belong  to  the  same  group  of  ideas  as  is  represented  by
"  Why  do  the  heathen  so  furiously  rage  together  ?  "

Let  us  now  go  back  to  H.  V.  172,  where  "scarlet  and
hyssop  repentance "  is  followed  by  "  let  not  the  sun  go
down  upon  your  wrath.''  This  quotation  from  Ephesians,
iv.  26  occurs  in  the  following  context :

That  ye  put  off  .  .  .  the  old  man.  .  .  .  And  be  renewed
in  the  spirit  of  your  mind  ;  And  that  ye  put  on  the  new
man,  which  after  God  is  created  in  righteousness  and  true
holiness.  Wherefore  puttmg  away  lying,  speak  every  man
truth  with  his  neighbour :  for  we  are  members  one  of
another.  Be  ye  angry,  and  sin  not  ;  let  not  the  sun  go
doijon  upon  your  wrath :  Neither  give  place  to  the  devil.
.  .  .  Let  all  bitterness,  and  wrath,  and  anger,  and  clamour
and  evil-speaking,  be  put  away  from  you,  with  all  malice  :
And  be  ye  kind  to  one  another,  forgiving  one  another.

(Ephes.  iv.  22-32.)

"  Let  not  the  sun  go  down,"  etc.,  occurs  twice  again  in
pre- War  scripts,  and  once  in  a  script  written  during  the
War. Thus  :

Table-Tilting  by  Mrs.  Salter  and  Miss  Noel  {Dec.  15,  1910).
...  a  voice  of  wrath O  let  not  the  sun  go  down


562


J.  G.  Picldington.


[part


upon  your  wrath  .  .  .  sympathy  for  the  fallen  is  at
once  the  strength  and  the  weakness  of  civiUsed  men
the  cross  by  the  wayside
H.  V.  354  {May  11,  1914).

.  .  .  Something  about  the  Star  of  Peace  returns  .  .  .
the  setting  sun — another  day — let  not  the  sun  go  down
upon  your  wath — fathers  «fc  sons  to  the  fourth
generation

Note  that  here  "  another  day,''  as  well  as  the  quotation
from  E2)hes.  iv.,  is  repeated  from  H.  V.  172,  and  that
both  are  combined  with  "  the  star  of  peace  returns  "  from
Campbell's  Ye  Mariners  of  England  :

The  meteor  flag  of  England

Shall  yet  terrific  burn  ;
Till  danger's  troubled  night  depart

And  the  star  of  peace  return.

"  Fathers  &  sons  to  the  fourth  generation  "  is  an  allusion
to  the  Second  Commandment  :

for  I  the  Lord  thy  God  am  a  jealous  God,  visiting  the
iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon  tlie  children  imto  the  third
and  fourth  generation  of  them  that  hate  me  ;  And  showing
mercy  unto  thousands  of  them  that  love  me,  and  keep  my
commandments.

M.  V.  672  (January  25,  1915).

...  In  the  lost  battle — borne  down  by  the  flying
[Scott,  Marmion.] —  How  are  the  mighty  fallen  .  .  .
Let  not  the  sun  go  down  upon  your  wrath  .  .  .

Observe  that  "  Let  not  the  sun  go  down,"  etc.,  which
elsewhere  is  combined  with

"  scarlet  and  hyssop  repentance,"
"Justice  holds  the  scales,"
"  the  Star  of  Peace  returns,"  and
the  Vengeance  and  Mercy  of  God,

is  here  combined  with  Theme  A,  "  How  are  the  mighty
fallen  !  "  ;  and  that  Theme  A  is  combined  in  the  first
of  the  four  King  scripts  under  discussion  with  "  Vengeance
is  mine  saith  the  Lord I  will  repay,"  i.e.  with  Theme  B.


Lxxxvn.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


563


"  Hoiv  are  the  mighty  fallen  "  (Theme  A)  is  from  David's
Lament  over  Saxil,  from  which  comes  also  "  Tell  it  not  in
Gath,  publish  it  not  in  the  streets  of  Askelon  "  (2  Sa7n.  i.
20,  25).  Hence  compare  the  following  script  of  Mrs.
Verrall's  :

M.  V.  537  {July  23,  1913).

.  .  .  Astraea  redux  redeunt  Saturnia  regna  .  .  .  and
there  should  be  an  examination  of  astronomical  points
— '  The  sun  in  Libra  ' — that  has  a  meaning  here —

Tell  it  not  in  Gath,  Proclaim  it  not
in  the  streets  of  Ascalon

Ascalon — salo — no  scalone  no  but  something  like
that scales  is  more  like — the  balance  and  the  scales

Here  "  Tell  it  not  in  Gath,^'  etc.,  from  the  Lament  over
Saul,  is  combined  with  the  return  of  the  Golden  Age
{redeunt  Saturnia  regna),  and  with  the  return  of  Astraea.
Astraea,  Justice,  is  the  constellation  Virgo

(Jam  redit  et  Virgo,  redeunt  Saturnia  regna),

and  she  is  here  associated  with  Libra,  the  Sign  of  the
Zodiac  that  follows  Virgo.  In  H.  V.  172,  as  we  have
seen,  and  elsewhere  in  the  scripts.  Justice,  i.e.  Virgo,
whose  proper  emblem  is  a  spike  of  corn,  is  given  the
emblem  of  Libra :

"  Justice  holds  the  scales."

This  phrase  is,  I  believe,  an  attempt  at  a  line  in  Pope's
Messiah,  A  Sacred  Eclogue.  In  Imitation  of  Virgil's
Pollio  :  1

All  crimes  shall  cease,  and  ancient  fraud  shall  fail ;
Returning  Justice  lift  aloft  her  scale  ;
Peace  o'er  the  world  her  olive  wand  extend,
And  white-rob'd  Innocence  from  Heaven  descend.

1  By  Vergil's  "  Pollio,"  the  Fourth  or  so-called  "  Messianic  "  Eclogue
is  meant. It  is  from  this  Eclogue  that  the  words

"  Jam  redit  et  Virgo,  redeunt  Saturnia  regna  "

come.

Pope,  as  he  himself  explains,  imitated,  as  did  Shelley  in  the  last
Chorus  of  Hellas,  not  only  Vergil  but  Isaiah.


564


J .  0.  Piddington.


[PAET


For  the  subject  of  "  Astraea  redux,"  see  p.  551  above
and  pp.  588,  595  below.

If  the  reader  will  now  turn  bacli  to  the  Table-Tilting
of  December  15,  1910,  he  will  see  that  "  let  not  the  sun
go  down,"  etc.,  was  there  followed  by

"  the  cross  by  the  wayside.'"

The  topic  of  the  Wayside  Cross  is  very  clearly  con-
nected with  Theme  B,  "  Vengeance  is  mine,"  as  the
following  extracts  from  Mrs.  Salter's  scripts  show  :

H.  V.  365  {October  26,  1914).

.  .  .  (i  fxaTep  I'v^,  Vengeance,  saith  the  Lord  .  .  .
a  pilgrim  by  the  way — the  wayside  cross — the  pilgrim's
way  .  .  .

//.  V.  509  {June  19,  1917).

...  he  said  to  me  Oh  Maeldune  .  .  .  the  pilgrim's
way  ...
//.  V.  548  {December  7,  1921).

.  .  .  He said to me  —  this purpose  of

thine Tennyson The towers & a hermit  The
armour  of  God  .  .  .
H.  V.  435  {Jidy  22,  1915).

.  .  .  the  eagle  &  the  lUy — the  carven  flowers  .  .  .

'^Q  fxfxrep  vl)^  ("0  Mother  Night  ")  is  from  the  Eumenides
of  Aeschylus  (11.  321-322  ;  see  also  11.  745  and  845).  It
comes  from  the  Chorus  in  which  the  Erinyes  invoke  their
Mother,  Night,  to  do  vengeance  on  the  guilty.  There  are
a  great  many  references  in  the  scripts  to  this  play  of
Aeschylus',  and  they  all,  I  believe,  belong  to  the  topic  of
Vengeance  and  Mercy.  I  have  already  (see  pp.  531-532
above)  dealt  with  this  subject  at  length,  and  so  need  here
say  no  more  than  that  the  Eumenides  references  stand  for
the  supersession  of  the  Old  Dispensation  of  Vengeance  by
the  New  Dispensation  of  Mercy  :  the  Erinyes,  whose  code
is  "an  eye  for  an  eye,  and  a  tooth  for  a  tooth " — the
code  of  Shylock — being  finally  won  over  by  the  "  younger,
kindlier  Gods  "  to  a  code  which  tempers  Justice  with
Mercy. The  play  is  a  eulogy  of  the  Clemency  of  Athens.

"  The  jnlgrirn's  way,"  which  in  H.  V.  365  is  immediately


Lxxxvn.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


565


preceded  by  "  the  ivayside  cross,"  in  H.  V.  509  follows
"  he  said  to  me  Oh  Maeldune  "  ;  and  these  last  words
reappear  in  H.  V.  548  in  the  form

He said to me  this purpose of  thine

Tennyson.

H.  V.  548  was  not  written  automatically,  but  was
spoken  by  Mrs.  Salter  when  in  trance.  The  recorder,  Mr.
Salter,  failing  to  catch  some  of  the  words  spoken  repre-
sented them  by  dashes.  But  in  spite  of  the  missing  words
the  allusion  is  absolutely  certain.  It  is  to  Tennyson's
The  Voyage  of  Maeldune,  of  which  the  theme  is  an  Irish
blood-feud.  I  wiU  summarise  or  quote  the  essential  parts
of  the  poem  :

Maeldune's  father  had  been  killed  by  a  man  the  day
before  Maeldune  himself  had  been  born,  and  to  escape
vengeance  the  man  had  fled  to  "an  isle  in  the  ocean."
When  Maeldune  arrives  at  manhood,  he  sets  forth  mth  a
band  of  faithful  followers  to  track  down  and  take  ven-
geance on  his  father's  murderer  :

And  we  came  to  the  isle  in  the  ocean,  and  there  on  the  shore
was  he.

But  a  sudden  blast  blew  us  out  and  away  thro'  a  boundless
sea.

Maeldune  and  his  men  continue  the  pursuit,  tdl  at
length  after  many  a  strange  adventure  they  come  to  the
Isle  of  the  Double  Towers  :

And  we  came  in  an  evil  time  to  the  Isle  of  the  Double  Towers,
One  was  of  smooth-cut  stone,  one  carved  all  over  with  flowers,
But  an  earthquake  always  moved  m  the  hollows  under  the
dells,

And  they  shock'd  on  each  other  and  butted  each  other  with

clashing  of  bells.
And  the  daws  flew  out  of  the  Towers  and  jangled  and  wrangled

in  vain.

And  the  clash  and  the  boom  of  the  beUs  rang  into  the  heart
and  the  brain,

TiU  the  passion  of  battle  was  on  us,  and  aU  took  sides  with
the  Towers,


566


J .  G.  Piddington.


[part


There  were  some  for  the  clean-cut  stone,  there  were  more  for

the  carven  flowers,
And  the  Avrathful  thunder  of  God  peal'd  over  us  all  the  day,
For  the  one  half  slew  the  other,  and  after  we  sail'd  away.

And  we  came  to  the  Isle  of  a  Saint  who  had  sail'd  with  St.

Brendan  of  yore,
He  had  lived  ever  since  on  the  Isle  and  his  winters  were  fifteen

score,

And  his  voice  was  low  as  from  other  worlds,  and  his  eyes  were
sweet,

And  his  white  hair  sank  to  his  heels  and  his  white  beard  sank
to  his  feet.

And  he  spake  to  me, '  0  Maeldune,  let  be  this  purpose  of
thme  !

Remember  the  words  of  the  Lord  when  he  told  us  "  Vengeance
is  mine  !  "

His  fathers  have  slain  thy  fathers  in  war  or  in  single  strife.
Thy  fathers  have  slain  his  fathers,  each  taken  a  life  for  a  life,
Thy  father  had  slain  his  father,  how  long  shaU  the  murder  last?
Go  back  to  the  Isle  of  Finn  and  suffer  the  Past  to  be  Past.'
And  we  kiss'd  the  fringe  of  his  beard  and  we  pray'd  as  we

heard  him  pray,
And  the  Holy  man  he  assoil'd  us,  and  sadly  we  sail'd  away.

And  we  came  to  the  Isle  we  were  blown  from,  and  there  on

the  shore  was  he.
The  man  that  had  slain  my  father. I  saw  him  and  let  him  be.
O  weary  was  I  of  the  travel,  the  trouble,  the  strife  and  the

sin.

When  I  landed  again,  with  a  tithe  of  my  men,  on  the  Isle  of
Finn.

In  H.  V.  548  the  reference  to  the  scene  between  Mael-
dune and  the  aged  Saint  is  immediately  followed  by
"  The  armour  of  God,''  which  corresponds  with  Theme  D
of  the  four  King  scripts  ;  and  all  the  Maeldune  references
correspond,  of  course,  with  Theme  B  "Vengeance  is  mine!"

In  H.  V.  435  "the  carven  flowers  "  refers  to

the  Isle  of  the  Double  Towers,
One  was  of  smooth-cut  stone,  one  carved  all  over  with  flowers,


LXXXVII.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


567


and  to

There  were  some  for  the  clean-cut  stone,  there  were  more  for

the  carven  floivers}-

In  H.  V.  435  "  the  carven  flowers "  is  immediately  pre-
ceded by  "  the  eagle  S  the  lily."  "  The  eagle  &  the
lily "  is  a  reference  to  a  passage  in  Dante's  Paradiso,^
of which  I  will  quote  Edmund  G. Gardner's  summary :

^  It  must  not  be  supposed  that  "  the  carven  flowers  "  of  H.  V.  435
is  a  merely  accidental  coincidence  with  the  words  in  the  poem.  It  is
an  absolutely  certain  reference  to  them,  as  is  shown  by  three  earlier
references  in  Mrs.  Salter's  scripts  of  March  18,  24,  and  31,  1914 — all
pre-War  scripts,  be  it  noted.

"  He  said  [sic,  in  error  for  "  spake  "]  to  me  Oh  Maeldime  "  occurs
for  the  first  time  in  Mrs.  Salter's  script  on  April  9,  1913.  It  will  be
seen,  then,  that  it  was  not  the  War  that  suggested  the  "  Vengeance  is
mine  "  passage  in  The  Voyage  of  Maeldime  to  the  automatist.

The  first  reference  to  the  poem  in  all  the  scripts  is  in  M.  V.  136,  of
February  12,  1907  :

"  The  voyage  of  Maeldune faery  lands  forlorn."
With  this  compare  King  166,  of  May  9,  1914  :

"  faery  lands  forlorn — the  bent  twigs,  the  carven  stone,"
and  H.  V.  508,  of  June  18,  1917  :

"  Maeldune — that  too — fairy  seas."

Mrs.  Salter  had  seen  M.  V.  136,  and  Mrs.  King  may  have,  because  it
has  been  published  in  Proceedings  :  but  though  their  knowledge  of  M.  V.
136  may  explain  why  they  both  connect  the  Maeldime  poem  with  "faery  /
lands  forlorn,"  it  does  not  explain  why  Mrs.  Salter  should  select  "  the
carven  flowers,"  and  Mrs.  King  "the  carven  stone"  from  the  Termyson
poem  rather  than  some  of  the  other  scores  of  phrases  in  it.

^  The  way  in  which  the  references  to  this  Dante  passage  emerged  is  so
interesting  that  I  quote  them  in  full  :

H.  V.  380  {January  11,  1915).

.  .  .  the  floating  beam — floating  in  hght — a  shower  of  stars — &  the
flight  of  a  bird — the  stretch  of  the  wings — poised  motionless —
something  about  an  eagle  something  in  Dante — it  is  a  passage  in
Dante  I  want  to  get,  but  she  does  not  understand  &  that  makes  it
very  difficult  .  .  .

H.  V.  435  {July  22,  1915).

.  .  .  flight — the  eagle  &  the  lily  .  .  .

H.  V.  471  {March  30,  1916).

.  .  .  The  eagle  &  the  lily — there  is  a  passage  in  literatm-e  about  an
eagle  with  a  lily  in  its  beak  but  she  does  not  Imow  it  &  we
cannot  get  the  thing  clear  .  .  .

The  mention  of  Dante  in  H.  V.  380  is  one  of  the  comparatively  rare

2?f


568


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


The  Heaven  of  Jupiter. — The  silvery  white  sphere  of
Jupiter,  the  sixth  heaven,  is  ruled  by  the  Dominations,
the  Angelic  order  who  are  '  an  express  image  of  the  true
and  archetypal  dominion  in  God  '  .  .  .  Their  function  is
to  draw  all  things  to  imitate  this  dominion,  so  that  rulers
may  bear  true  lordship  in  God  and  men  may  imitate  this
dominion  by  subjection  and  obedience.  This,  then,  is  the
sphere  of  ideal  government,  the  heaven  of  the  planet  that
effectuates  justice  upon  Earth  {Par.  xvni.  115-117).  The
souls  of  faithful  and  just  rulers  appear  as  golden  lights,
singing  and  flying  like  celestial  birds.  They  first  form  the
text  Diligite  iustitiam  qui  iudicatis  terrain,  '  Love  justice
you  that  are  the  judges  of  the  Earth'  {Wisdorn  i.  1,
Vulgate),  tracmg  successively  the  letters  until  they  rest  in
the  final  golden  M,  the  initial  letter  of  Monarchy  or
Empire — the  Empire  under  which  alone  can  justice  be
paramount  on  earth.  Next,  those  higher  form  the  head
and  neck  of  an  Eagle ;  while  those  below  first  form  a
hly  upon  the  M,  and  then  peacefully  follow  the  higher
spirits  in  forming  one  complete  imperial  Eagle  {Par.  xviii.
100-114).  The  Gueh  powers  who  foUow  the  standard  of
the  hly  must  thxis  submit  to  the  universal  Monarchy,  the
form  of  government  ordained  by  God,  and  coming  down
directly  from  the  fountain  of  universal  authority.  In  the
varied  details  of  these  three  transformations  the  three
great  doctrines  of  the  De  Monarchia  are  shown  step  by
step  :  the  necessity  of  the  Empire  for  the  well-being  of
the  world,  the  Roman  acquisition  of  the  Monarchy  by
right,  the  direct  dependence  of  the  imperial  authority  upon
God. (Edmund  G.  Gardner,  Dante,  pp.  130-131.)

Dante  does  not  actually  speak  of  "an  eagle  vnth  a  lily

in  its  beak,"  but  this  phrase  in  H.  V.  471  is  evidently

meant  as  an  allusion  to  the  spirits  of  the  Just  Rulers
who  "  enlily  the  M,"

"  ingigliarsi  all'  emme."

cases  where  the  communicators  have  named  the  author  of  an  out-of-the-
way  passage  in  hterature.  Had  Dante  not  been  mentioned,  the  passage
might  never  have  been  identified.  Even  as  it  was,  it  needed  a  long
hunt  before  it  was  traced.


Lxxxvn.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


569


Moreover,  should  any  doubt  be  felt  about  the  identifica-
tion of  the  phrases  in  the  H.  V.  scripts  with  the  Dante
passage,  a  comparison  of  the  extract  from  H.  V.  380
(quoted  in  footnote  (2)  on  p.  567)  with  Paradiso  xviii.  34-36,
73-81,  97-105,  and  xix.  1,  will  probably  remove  it.  And
that  "  the  eagle  &  the  lily "  does  mean  this  passage  in
the  Paradiso  is  further  confirmed  by  a  comparison  of
H.  V.  435  with  H.  V.  538  :

H.  V.  435.  the  eagle  &  the  lUy — ^the  carven  flowers
[=The  Voyage  of  Maeldune]

H.  V.  508.  Birds — the  bird  droves  of  God — wings  beating
— birds  &  angels — ayyeAot —  I  do  not  think  that  has
been  quite  understood  yet — partly  understood  but  not
all —  Maeldune — that  too — fairy  seas.

The  angelic  birds  of  H.  V.  508  correspond  to  "  the
souls  of  faithful  and  just  rulers  .  .  .  singing  and  flying
like  celestial  birds  "  who  form  themselves  into  the  text
Diligite  iustitiam  qui  iudicatis  terram.

The  combination  in  the  scripts  of  The  Voyage  of  Mael-
dune with  the  Paradiso  passage  represents,  then,  the
tempering  of  Justice  with  Mercy,  the  forgiveness  of
enemies,  and  the  reign  of  Justice  on  earth.

Let  us  go  back  now  to  the  four  King  scripts  from
which  we  started,  and  compare  them  with  Mrs.  Salter's
"  Maeldune  "  scripts.  For  the  purpose  of  this  comparison
I  consider  myself  entitled  to  include  the  original  context
of  a  quotation  :

Four  King  Scripts.  H.  V.  "  Maeldune  "  Scripts.

Vengeance  is  mine,  saith  And  he  spake  to  me,  '  0
the  Lord.  Maeldune, let be  this

purpose  of  thine  !
Remember  the  words  of  the
Lord  when  he  told  us
"  Vengeance  is  mine  !  "  '

Mercy  and  truth  are  met  Wherefore  take  upon  you
together ;  righteousness  and  the  whole  armour  of  God
peace  have  kissed  each  other. .  .  .  having  your  loins  girt


570

Put  on  the  armour  of
light.


Thou  shalt  .  .  .  break
them  in  pieces  hke  a
potter's  vessel.

Be  wise  now  therefore,  0
ye  Kings  :  be  learned,  ye
that  are  judges  of  the  earth


[part

with  truth,  and  having  on
the  breast  plate  of  righteous-
ness ;  And  your  feet  shod
with  the  preparation  of  peace.

The  discarnate  souls  of
Faithful  and  Just  Rulers,
whose  function  is  to  inspire
earthly  rulers  to  imitate  the
Divine  Justice,  and  who,
wheeling  like  birds,  form
themselves  into  the  words
Diligite  iustitiam  qui  judi-
catis  terram  ("  Love  right-
eousness ye  that  be  judges
of  the  earth  ").


J.  G.  Piddington.


The  mamier  in  which,  in  this  and  other  cases,  I  am
obliged  for  the  sake  of  simplicity  of  exposition  to  take  a
small  part  out  of  what  in  reality  is  a  very  complex  and
extensive  network  of  topics,  isolate  it,  and  treat  it  as  if
it  were  an  entire  and  self-contained  pattern,  may  naturally
cause  the  reader  to  be  surprised  at  the  trouble  taken  to
work  in  the  allusions  to  Paradiso  xviii.  in  Mrs.  Salter's
scripts.  Surely,  he  might  say,  the  topic  of  Just  Govern-
ment might  have  been  represented  much  more  simply
than  by  reference  to  a  recondite  passage  in  Dante's
Paradiso.  No  doubt  it  might  have  been,  if  the  com-
municators had  wanted  merely  to  say  "  Love  righteousness
ye  that  be  judges  of  the  earth."  But  they  may  have
had  other  objects  as  well.  They  may,  for  instance,  have
wan  ed  to  suggest  that  the  reign  of  Justice  on  earth  will
not  be  achieved  without  the  help  of  the  Angelic  Birds,
the  Church  militant  of  heaven  :

0  milizia  del  ciel,  .  .  .
adora  per  color  che  sono  in  terra
tutti  sviati  retro  al  malo  esemplo

{Par.  xviii.  124-126)  ;


Lxxxvii.]  Comparison  of  Scripts.  571


and  they  may  have  wanted  to  introduce  the  subject  of
Justice  on  earth  in  such  a  way  that  it  could  be  fitted
on  to  other  topics.  Thus,  for  instance,  the  passage  in
the  Paradiso  appears  to  be  fitted  on  to  the  incident  in
the  first  Book  of  the  Aeneid  where  Venus  in  disguise
meets  her  son  Aeneas,  who,  after  having  been  driven  by
the  storm  on  to  the  coast  of  Libya,  is  wandering  dis-
consolately along  the  shore,  and  bids  him  be  of  good
cheer  and  betake  himself  to  Dido's  court  at  Carthage  ;
assures  him  that  his  fleet  is  not  lost,  and  points  in  con-
firmation of  her  words  to  twelve  swans  who  have  escaped
from  the  attack  of  a  bird  of  prey  and  are  now  joyously
beginning  to  settle  on  the  shore.  The  connexion  between
the  Angelic  Birds  of  the  Paradiso  and  the  Swans  of  the
Aeneid  is  effected  in  the  following  way  :

H.  V.  332  {October  17,  1913).

Pars  celeris  ^  .  ,  .  winged  sandals — -the  messenger  of
the Gods. iftixoirofXTros [an  epithet  of  Hermes,  who
was  identified  by  the  Romans  with  Mercury] — there  is
a  thought  behind  this  which  is  not  yet  clear  .  .  .
H.  V.  406  {May  5,  1915).

Pars  celeris  ^ — something  about  swans — -  Virgil — the
simile — some in  the  aii-  wheeling — the  beating  wings

H.  V.  395  {April  3,  1915).

The  wiUow  tree —  Dido  with  a  willow  in  her  hand
— &  waft  her  love  to  come  again  to  Carthage —
Tantae  molis  erat  [Romanam  condere  gentem]  ^ —  A
bird  among  the  bird-droves  of  God — white  wings
beating  ...  &  out  of  lamentation  cometh  hope  .  .  .

^  Pars  celeris,  as  Mrs.  Salter  herself  pointed  out,  is  simply  an  attempt
at  Vergil's  description  of  the  twelve  swans,  some  of  whom  are  actually
settling  on  the  ground,  and  some  still  circling,  or  wheeling,  in  the  air
preparatory  to  settling.  See  Aen.  I.  396  :  ''  Aut  capere  aut  captas,"
etc.

^  "  Tantae  molis  erat,"  etc.,  is  very  definitely  connected  with  the
siifferings  that  Jimo  inflicted  on  Aeneas  by  sea  :  "  she  drove  all  over
ocean  the  Trojan  remnant  .  .  .  and  held  them  afar  from  Latium  ;  and
many  a  year  were  they  wandering  driven  of  fate  aroimd  all  the  seas.
Such  work  was  it  to  found  the  Roman  people."  (Mackail's  Translation  of
Aen.  I.  29-33.)


572


J.  0.  Picldington.


[part


H.  V.  500  {April  \,  1917).

.  .  .  fluttering  wings — {drawing  of  two  birds  in  down-
ward flight)  descending  .  .  .  angelic  messengers — there
is  a  train  of  thought  running  through —  Iris  &
Mercury  &  Gabriel — others  too  but  those  chief — all
messengers  .  .  .

H.  V.  508  {Ju7ie  18,  1917).

Birds — the  bird  droves  of  God— {drawing  of  a  bird)
wings  beating — birds  &  angels—  ayyeAot  —  I  do  not
think  that  has  been  quite  understood  yet — partly
understood  but  not  aU — Maeldune — that  too  .  .  .

H.  V.  515  {November  22,  1917).

.  .  .  Swans —  Aphrodite  wings — the  beating  of
their  wings many  together — the  sacred  song  .  .  .


I  had  written  the  whole  of  this  Section  as  it  stands
before  I  happened  to  Light  upon  a  reference  to  the  Para-
diso  passage  in  Rusldn's  Unto  This  Last}  The  reference
in  Ruskin  goes  to  confirm  the  view  expressed  above  that
the  Dante  passage  was  preferred  to  other  simpler  ways  of
representing  the  subject  of  Just  Government  because  it
could  be  conveniently  fitted  on  to  other  topics  which  the
communicators  wanted  to  introduce.  I  do  not  imagine
just  because  Ruskin  happens  to  have  a  reference  to  the
Paradise  passage  that  therefore  the  scripts  intend  a  refer-
ence to  the  Rusldn  passage.  It  would  be  utterly  unsound
to  argue  in  that  way.  The  grounds  on  which  I  base  my
conjecture  that  the  scripts  intend  a  reference  both  to  the
original  passage  in  the  Paradise  and  to  the  passage  in
which  Ruskin  makes  use  of  it  are  two.  The  first,  and
weaker,  ground  is  that  while  in  H.  V.  380  the  passage  is
said  to  be  "  in  Dante,"  in  H.  V.  471  it  is  called  "  a
passage  in  literature  "  ; and  it  seems  to  me  odd  to  speak

1  It  is  not,  however,  from  Ruskin  that  the  automatist  can  have
gleaned  the  detail  about  the  lily  in  the  eagle's  beak  ;  for  Ruskin  does
not  mention  the  lily.


Lxxxvn.]


Comparison  of  Scri-pts.


573


of  it  as  "a  passage  in  literature  "  after  definitely  assigning
it  to  Dante  unless  the  passage  in  question  is  to  be  found
somewhere  else  than  in  Dante.  The  second,  and  far
stronger,  ground  is  that  the  scripts  contain  a  good  number
of  references  to  Ruskin's  Unto  This  Last,  and  some  of
these,  which  I  append  in  a  footnote,'-  show  connexions
with  topics  already  met  with  in  this  paper — namely,  The
Dawn,  The  Return  of  the  Golden  Age,  The  armour  of
God,  Forgiveness  of  enemies  and  Mercy — which  may
obviously  be  in  unison  with  the  topic  of  Just  Government
on  earth.

Ruskin's  reference  to  the  Paradiso  passage  comes  in  the
chapter  of  Unto  This  Last  entitled  "  Qui  Judicatis  Ter-
ram,"  and  this  title  is  part  of  the  text  from  the  Book  of
Wisdom,

Diligite  iustitiam  qui  judicatis  terram,

iH.  V.  536  (January  14,  1920).

.  .  .  the  dawn  the  dawn — not  unto  these — another  race  &  other
times — the  golden  age  begins  anew  [Shelley,  Hellas] — the  cycle  of
time  wheels  revolving  vmto  this  last — round  &  round — bidden
to  the  feast  .  .  .  the  labourer  the  vineyard — measure  pressed
down  &  overflowing — for  as  much  as  ye  have  done  it  to  the
least  of  these —

H.  V.  545  {November  28,  1921).

.  .  .  the  last  \mtil  the  day  dawn  .  .  .  Between  the  lilies  The
helmet  of  faith  [Ephes.  vi.  :  "  Put  on  the  whole  armour  of  God,"
etc.]  .  .  . Unto  this  last The  lilies  .  .  .

H.  V.  570  {May  20,  1922).

.  .  .  Again  &  again  Unto  this  last  .  .  .  Full  measure  meted
out  .  .  .

Ruskin's  title  "  Unto  This  Last  "  is  taken,  of  course,  from  the  Parable
of  the  Labourers  in  the  Vineyard.  "  Measure  pressed  down  and  over-
flowing "  and  "  fuU  measure  meted  out  "  refer  to  Luke  vi.  35-38  :  "  But
love  ye  your  enemies,  and  do  good,  and  lend,  hoping  for  nothing  again  ;
and  your  reward  shall  be  great,  and  ye  shall  be  the  children  of  the
Highest  :  for  he  is  kind  unto  the  imthankful,  and  to  the  evil.  Be  ye
therefore  merciful,  as  your  Father  also  is  merciful.  Judge  not  [see
H.  V.  278  under  "  Mercy  and  Truth,"  p.  529  above],  and  ye  shall  not
be  judged  :  condemn  not,  and  ye  shall  not  be  condemned  :  forgive,  and
ye  shall  be  forgiven  :  Give,  and  it  shall  be  given  unto  you ;  good
measure,  pressed  down,  and  shaken  together,  and  running  over,  shall
men  give  into  your  bosom.  For  with  the  same  measiire  that  ye  mete
withal,  it  shall  be  measured  to  you  again."


674


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


into  which  the  spirits  of  the  Faithful  and  Just  Rulers
form  themselves. It  is  as  follows  :

'  The  rich  and  the  poor  have  met.  God  is  their  maker.'
[Prov.  xxii.  2.]

'  The  rich  and  the  poor  have  met. God  is  their  light.'

They  '  have  met '  :  more  literally,  have  stood  in  each
other's  way  (obviavenint) .  That  is  to  say,  as  long  as  the
world  lasts,  the  action  and  counteraction  of  wealth  and
poverty,  the  meeting,  face  to  face,  of  rich  and  poor,  is
just  as  appointed  and  necessary  a  law  of  the  world  as  the
flow  of  stream  to  sea,  or  the  interchange  of  power  among
the  electric  clouds  : — '  God  is  their  maker.'  But,  also,
this  action  may  be  either  gentle  and  just,  or  convulsive
and  destructive  .  .  .  And  which  of  these  it  shall  be
depends  on  both  rich  and  poor  knowing  that  God  is  their
light ;  that  in  the  mystery  of  human  life  there  is  no  other
hght  than  this  by  which  they  can  see  each  other's  faces,
and  live  ; — light,  which  is  called  in  another  of  the  books
among  which  the  merchant's  maxims  have  been  preserved,
the  '  sun  of  justice,'  of  which  it  is  promised  that  it  shall
rise  at  last  with  '  healing  '  (health-giving  or  helping,  mak-
ing whole  or  setting  at  one)  in  its  wings. ^  For  truly  this
healing  is  only  possible  by  means  of  justice

I  have  just  spoken  of  the  flowing  of  streams  to  the  sea
as  a  partial  image  of  the  action  of  wealth.  In  one
respect  it  is  not  a  partial,  but  a  perfect  image.  The
popular  economist  thinks  himself  wise  in  having  dis-
covered that  wealth,  or  the  forms  of  property  in  general,
must  go  where  they  are  required  ;  that  where  demand  is,
supply  must  follow.  He  farther  declares  that  this  course
of  demand  and  supply  cannot  be  forbidden  by  human
laws.  Precisely  in  the  same  sense,  and  with  the  same
certainty,  the  waters  of  the  world  go  where  they  are
required  .  .  .  The  course  neither  of  clouds  nor  rivers  can
be  forbidden  by  human  will.  But  the  disposition  and
administration  of  them  can  be  altered  by  human  foresight.
Whether  the  stream  shall  be  a  curse  or  a  blessing,  depends
upon man's labour, and administrating intelligence  .  .  .


1  Malachi  iv.  2.


Lxxxvn.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


575


In  like  manner  this  wealth  "  goes  where  it  is  required."
No  human  laws  can  withstand  its  flow.  They  can  only
guide  it :  but  this,  the  leading  trench  and  limiting  mound
can  do  so  thoroughly,  that  it  shall  become  water  of  life —
the  riches  of  the  hand  of  wisdom  ;  or,  on  the  contrary,
by  leaving  it  to  its  own  lawless  flow,  they  may  make  it,
what  it  has  been  too  often,  the  last  and  deadliest  of
national  plagues  :  water  of  Marah — the  water  which  feeds
the  roots  of  evil.

The  necessity  of  these  laws  of  distribution  or  restraint
is  curiously  overlooked  in  the  ordinary  political  economist's
definition  of  his  own  '  Science.'  He  calls  it,  shortly,  the
'  science  of  gettmg  rich.'  .  .  .

I  hope  I  do  not  misrepresent  him  by  assuming  that  he
means  his  science  to  be  the  science  of  '  getting  rich  by
legal  or  just  means.'  In  this  definition,  is  the  word
'  just,'  or  '  legal,'  finally  to  stand  1  For  it  is  possible
among  certain  nations,  or  under  certain  rulers,  or  by  help
of  certain  advocates,  that  proceedings  may  be  legal  which
are  by  no  means  just.  If,  therefore,  we  leave  at  last  only
the  word  '  just '  in  that  place  of  our  definition,  the  in-
sertion of  this  solitary  and  small  word  will  make  a  notable
difference  in  the  grammar  of  our  science.  For  then  it
will  follow  that  m  order  to  grow  rich  scientifically,  we
must  grow  rich  justly  ;  and,  therefore,  know  what  is  just ;
so  that  our  economy  will  no  longer  depend  merely  on
prudence,  but  on  jurisprudence — and  that  of  divine,  not
human  law.  Which  prudence  is  indeed  of  no  mean  order,
holding  itself,  as  it  were,  high  in  the  air  of  heaven,  and
gazing  for  ever  on  the  light  of  the  sun  of  justice  ;  hence
the  souls  which  have  excelled  in  it  are  represented
by  Dante  as  stars  forming  in  heaven  for  ever  the  figure
of  the  eye  of  an  eagle  :  they  having  been  in  life  the
discerners  of  light  from  darkness  ;  or  to  the  whole  human
race,  as  the  light  of  the  body,  which  is  the  eye  ;  ^  while-
those  souls  which  form  the  wings  of  the  bird  (giving  power
and  dominion  to  justice,  '  healing  in  its  wings  ')  trace  also


1  The  reference  is  to  Matt.  vi.  22  :  "  But  lay  up  for  yourselves
treasures  in  heaven.  .  .  .  For  where  your  treasure  is,  there  will  your
heart  be  also. The  light  of  the  body  is  the  eye."


576


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


in  light  the  inscription  in  heaven :  '  diligite  justitiam
QUI  JUDiCATis  TERRAM.'  '  Ye  who  judge  the  earth,  give  '
(not,  observe,  merely  love,  but)  '  diligent  love  to  justice,'

Now,  if  by  "  the  lily  and  the  eagle  "  the  communicators
do  intend  this  double  reference  to  Ruskin  and  to  Dante,  and
if  the  Dante  passage  is  associated  with  '  Vengeance  is  mine,'
a  topic  that  seems  to  relate  to  the  international  situation
resulting  from  the  War,  how  can  it  also  be  associated
with  the  Ruskin  passages  relating  to  political  economy  ?
The  answer  I  should  be  inclined  to  give  is  that  inter-
national politics  and  social  problems  react  on  each  other
so  powerfully  that  often  the  one  cannot  be  considered
apart  from  the  other  ;  and,  moreover,  that  the  diseases
which  poison  the  body  politic  and  international  relations
must  be  treated  in  the  same  spirit  of  Mercy  and  Justice,
if  they  are  to  be  healed.


Lxxxvn.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


511


SOME  SCRIPTS  OF  JULY  AND  AUGUST  1914.

I  can  imagine  a  critic,  who  has  reached  this  point  in
my  paper,  raising  some  such  objections  as  the  follomng  :

"  Granted  that  there  are  predictions  of  the  War  in  the
scripts,  and  that  different  automatists  express  these  pre-
dictions with  a  greater  degree  of  coincidence  in  symbolism
than  chance  will  explain,  but  which  telepathy  between
them  wiU  explain,  there  is  notliing  particvilarly  remarkable
in  the  fact  that  various  automatists,  especially  if  mutually
influencing  each  other  telepathicaUy,  should  unite  in  pre-
dicting a  great  European  War.  It  is  not  only  automatic
writers  who  have  made  such  predictions  :  other  quite
normal  people  have  made  them  too.  Since  1907  Sir
Henry  Wilson  was  convinced  that  Germany  was  bent  on
a  war  of  world-conquest  ;  many  diplomatists,  many
soldiers,  some  statesmen  and  journalists  and  novelists,
foresaw  what  was  coming,  and  some  of  them  devoted
time  and  energy  to  the  task  of  warning  the  world  of  the
fate  in  store  for  it.  One  could  almost  say  that  it  was  a
safe  prediction  to  make,  especially  if  the  prophet  were
wise  enough  to  refrain  from  naming  a  date  for  the  fulfil-
ment of  his  prophecy.

"  Had  Mrs.  King,  Uke  most  of  the  other  automatists,
been  producing  script  for  many  years  before  August  1914,
and  if  during  these  earher  years  her  script  had  maintained
silence  on  the  subject  of  the  War,  then  the  sudden
outburst  between  October  1913  and  July  1914  of  warnings
of  a  corning  catastrophe  would  have  suggested  that  the
event  was  near.  But  it  so  happens  that  Mrs.  Iving  did
not  begin  to  produce  script  till  1913,  and  consequently  the
nearness  in  time  of  her  predictions  to  the  event  has  Little
significance.  It  is  true  that  such  phrases  as  '  Hearken  while
there  is  yet  time  '  (King  79),  '  The  flight  in  winter  ...  it  is
not  far '  (King  80),  count  for  something  ;  but  terms  like
'  far  '  and  '  near  '  are  capable  of  very  wide  interpretation.

"  The  scripts,  then,  it  would  seem,  leave  the  date  of


678


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


the  outbreak  of  the  threatened  catastrophe,  which,  unhke
the  bare  fact  of  the  catastrophe,  was  a  difficult  thing  to
foresee,  entirely  vague."

Although  this  criticism  takes  no  account  of  the  prob-
ability that  no  long  interval  would  separate  the  warnings
repeatedly  addressed  to  Mrs.  King  to  prepare  herself  for  a
coming  trial  from  the  occiirrence  of  the  trial,  since  prema-
ture warnings  are  apt  to  lose  their  force,  I  should  not
regard  it  as  wholly  unreasonable.  So  with  a  view  to
meeting  it  in  part,  should  it  be  made,  I  propose  to
discuss  a  few  scripts  written  hy  Mrs.  Willett,  Mrs.  Verrall,
and  Mrs.  Salter  during  the  month  of  July  1914,  which
appear  to  me  to  imply  that  War  is  immediately  imminent.
At  the  same  time  I  should  reply  to  my  imaginary  critic
that,  though  I  know  of  nothing  in  the  scripts  which  can
be  held  to  fix  the  precise  time  when  the  War  would
begin,  the  whole  language  of  the  scripts  in  my  view  does
suggest  that  the  events  which  form  the  subject  of  much
of  the  scripts  are  not  far-distant  and  are  to  begin,  if  not
to  end,  during  the  lifetime  of  the  automatists  themselves
and  of  those  who  study  the  scripts.

The  Scripts  of  July  1914.

In  considering  the  scripts  of  July  1914,  there  is  one  date
and  hour  which  it  is  important  to  keep  in  mind ;  and
that  is  6  o'clock  on  the  evening  .of  July  23,  1914.  It
was  at  that  hour  on  that  day  that  the  Austrian  Minister
at  Belgrade  presented  his  Government's  ultimatum  to
Serbia.  That  ultimatum  made  War — not  a  certainty,
because  the  extreme  moderation  of  Serbia's  reply  brought
a  short  gleam  of  hope — but  so  great  a  probability,  that  a
prediction  of  an  immediate  outbreak  of  war  made  after
July  23,  1914,  would  deserve  comparatively  little  attention.
Between  Jvxly  9  and  July  23,  1914,  however,  so  far  as  the
general  public  was  concerned — and  our  automatists  are
members  of  the  general  pubUc — there  was  no  stronger
reason  for  anticipating  an  immediate  outbreak  of  War  than
there  had  been  at  many  other  times  durmg  the  preceding
three  or  four  years  or  more  ; and  when  I  say  this  I  am


LXXXVII.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


579


not  forgetting  the  murders  at  Serajevo  on  June  28,  1914.
The  first  Morocco  crisis  of  1905  and  1906,  still  more  the
Agadir  crisis  of  1911,  might  well  have  prompted  the
avitomatists  to  indulge  in  prophecies  of  an  immediate
outbreak  of  war ;  and  yet  I  see  no  trace  of  such  pro-
phecies in  the  scripts  written  about  these  periods.

It  must  not  be  imagined  that  our  automatists  were  in
possession  of  "  inside  "  information  ;  and  it  should  further-
more be  borne  in  mind  that  a  great  European  War  was
by  no  means  universally  anticipated  even  by  those  who
may  be  supposed  to  have  had  the  advantage  of  "  inside  "
information.  Thus,  both  in  1908  and  1911,  the  then
First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty,  Mr.  McKenna,  was  engaged
in  an  acute  controversy  with  a  section  of  the  Cabinet  who
thought  the  moment  opportune  for  reducing  expenditure
on  the  Navy  ;  ^  and  "  Mr.  Lloyd  George,  in  an  interview
published  on  the  first  day  of  1914,  declared  that  Liberahsm
would  be  false  to  its  trust  if  it  did  not  seize  the  oppor-
tunity of  what  he  asserted  to  be  the  improvement  in
Anglo-German  relations  to  diminish  expenditure  on  arma-
ments." ^  Moreover,  in  1912  and  1913  there  was  a  much-
advertised  movement  in  progress  for  bettering  our  relations
with  Germany  :  a  movement  which  found  its  chief  in-
spirers  and  supporters  among  people  of  Liberal  politics.

I  recall  these  facts,  need  I  say?  with  no  desire  to  arouse
political  feeling,  and  only  because  they  serve  to  show
that,  while  war  was  sinticipated  by  some,  this  anticipation
was  not  shared  by  aU,  and — I  do  not  think  this  will  be
disputed — that  Liberals  were  less  inchned  to  believe  m  the  war-
like designs  of  Germany  than  were  their  political  opponents.

^  "  He  [Mr.  M'Kenna]  entered  on  his  new  duties  [as  First  Lord,  in
1908]  when  the  country  was  profoundly  stirred  by  the  rapid  increase  of
the  German  fleet,  and  was  in  doubt  whether  the  preparations  of  the
Admiraltjf  were  on  a  sufficiently  extensive  scale.  At  the  same  time  a
large  portion  of  the  Liberal  party  was  disposed  to  belittle  the  danger
and  to  call  a  halt  to  building-schemes  in  the  interest  of  peace  and
economy.  Mr.  M'Kenna  .  .  .  resisted  the  section  of  the  Cabinet,  repre-
sented by  the  powerful  figures  of  Mr.  Lloyd  George  and  Mr.  Churchill,
who  took  this  last  view." (Enc.  Brit,  Vol.  XXXI.,  s.v.  "  M'Kenna.")

"  Enc.  Brit.,  Vol.  XXXI.,  s.v.  "  Lloyd  George."  The  interview  in
question  appeared  in  the  Daily  Chronicle  of  January  1,  1914.


580


J.  G.  Piddington.


[PART


Now  it  so  happens  that  the  three  automatists  whose
scripts  I  am  about  to  discuss  were  Liberals.^  Mrs.
Verrall  was  an  ardent  Liberal ;  Mxs.  Salter  is  a  Liberal
(I  leave  her  to  supply  a  qualifying  epithet)  ;  and  Mrs.
Willett  is  a  more  than  ardent  Liberal.  This  being  the
case,  and  judging  also  from  my  personal  knowledge  of
them,  I  should  not  hesitate  to  say  that  these  three  ladies,
in  their  normal  state  at  any  rate,  had  no  marked  tendency
to  anticipate  that  Germany  would  provoke  a  great  Euro-
pean War  at  the  end  of  July  1914.  Moreover,  there  is
almost  proof  that  during  at  least  the  early  summer  of
1914  Mrs.  Verrall  felt  no  serious  anxieties  about  the
international  situation,  for  she  spent  most  of  June  in
Switzerland  ;  and  Mrs.  Salter  was  actually  in  France  when
the  War  broke  out.  None  of  the  three  ladies  were
disciples  of  Mr.  Leo  Maxse,  and  I  think  the  reader  may
take  it  for  certain  that  the  mind  of  none  of  them  was
preoccupied  with  a  menace  of  war.^

The  extracts  from  scripts  written  during  July  1914
which  seem  to  me  to  indicate  knowledge  of  the  fact  that
War  was  to  be  declared  within  a  few  days  are  as  follows  :

W.  342  {JuUj  9,  1914).
.  .  .  Farewell

A  final  word Thou  shalt  stand  in  thy  lot

E.  G.

H.  V.  359  (Juhj  17,  1914. 5.30  pjn.).

Spearheads many together that was written —
spissa  cohors — along  the  plain  .  .  .

Mrs.  King  is  a  Unionist.  She  tells  me,  however,  that  she  did  not
feel  any  keener  anxiety  about  the  international  situation  in  1913-1914
than  did  the  ordinary  run  of  educated  people.

^  After  reading  this  paper  in  proof  Mr.  Salter  wrote  me  as  follows  :
"  I  can  cori'obora.to  the  statemeiit  that  neither  Mrs.  Verrall  nor  Helen
[i.e.  Mrs.  Salter]  in  the  summer  of  1914  had  any  apprehension  of  war.
About  the  end  of  the  first  week  in  July  I  remember  talking  to  Helen
about  a  tour  she  and  Mrs.  Verrall  were  intending  to  take,  after  Helen's
holiday  in  France,  in  the  Tyrol.  For  the  purpose  of  this,  she  borrowed
some  maps  of  the  Tyrol  from  ray  brother.  Clearly,  therefore,  they  did
not  regard  the  Austrian  situation  as  serious,  even  as  late  as  that."


Lxxxvii.]  Comparison  of  Scripts.  581

M.  V.  626  {Wednesday,  Jtdy  17,  1914. 11  jj.m.).

There  will  be  a  message  for  [Mrs.  Willett]  early  next
week — take  care  that  it  is  sent  .  .  .
M.  V.  628  {Saturday,  July  20,  1914. 10.15  p.m.).

It  is  important  to  wite  this  now —  Put  it  down —
This  is  a  message  not  for  you  and  it  is  not  easy  to
put  it  in  a  Avay  that  you  will  not  understand

(Various  phrases  are  then  given  as  forming  part  of
the  message  "  not  for  you."  At  this  point  the  com-
municator evidently  realises  that  a  message  "  not  for
Mrs.  Verrall,"  which  "it  is  important  to  write  now,"
might  be  assumed  to  be  the  message  for  Mi's.  Willett
spoken  of  three  days  earlier.  Hence  to  prevent  such
a  misunderstanding  he  says  :)

This  is  not  the  message  of  which  I  spoke  before

(The  previous  topic  is  then  resumed.)  .  .  .
M.  V.  629  {Sunday,  July  21,  1914. 11.20  p.tn.).

.  .  .  Now  take  this  message  to  [Mi's.  Willett] —

The  last  words  that  we  have  given  her  have  a
double  meaning,  one  general  one  special —  She  has
only  seen  one — let  her  look  for  the  other  .  .  .

EXPLANATOEY  NOTES  ON  W.  342,  H.  V.  359,

M.  V.  626,  628,  629.

W.  342,  of  July  9, 1914,  was  the  last  script  written  by

Mrs.  Willett  before  the  War  began.
M.  V.  626,  of  July  17,  1914,  was  the  first  script  written

by  Mrs.  Verrall  after  the  date  of  W. 342. (It  was

also the first script written after her return  from

Switzerland.)

M.  V.  629,  of  July  21,  1914,  was  written  less  than  48
hours  before  the  Austrian  Minister  at  Belgrade  pre-
sented his  Government's  ultimatum  to  Serbia.

H.  V.  359,  of  July  17,  1914,  was  the  last  script  written
by  Mrs.  Salter  before  the  War  began.
There is no previous parallel in all Mrs.  Willett's

scripts to the expression in W. 342 "  A final  word."

This  emphatic  phrase  marks  ofi,  then,  and  defines  beyond

question  what  is  called  in  M.  V.  629  "  The  last  words


582


J.  G.  Pidclington.


[PAET


that  we  have  given  her"  ("her"  meaning  Mrs.  Willett).
"  Thou  shalt  stand  in  thy  lot,"  moreover,  is  marked  off
from  what  precedes  not  only  by  the  phrase  "  A  final
word,"  but  also  by  a  complete  change  of  subject  :  for
the  rest  of  the  script — a  long  one — is  almost  entirely
taken  up  with  hterary  references  to  Fire  and  Dew.
"  Thou  shalt  stand  in  thy  lot "  appears  for  the  first  and
only  time  in  any  of  the  scripts  in  W.  342  of  July  9,
1914.  It  comes  from  the  last  verse  of  the  last  chapter
of  the  Book  of  Daniel.  To  bring  out  the  full  significance
of  the  appearance  of  this  quotation  at  this  date  for  the
first  time  in  any  of  the  Scripts,  it  will  be  necessary  to
give  the  context  of  it  :

Behold  a  certain  man  clothed  in  linen  .  .  .  said  unto

me  .  .  .  {Dan.  x.  5,  11.)

...  at this time shaU Michael stand up, the  great

prince  which  standeth  for  the  children  of  thy  people  ;  and

there  shaU  be  a  time  of  trouble,  such  as  never  was  since

there  was  a  nation  even  to  that  same  time  : and  at  that

time  thy  people  shall  be  delivered.  .  .  .

But  thou,  0  Daniel,  shut  up  the  words,  and  seal  the

book,  even  to  the  time  of  the  end  .  .  .

Then  I  Daniel  looked,  and, behold,  there  stood  other

two  .  .  .

And  one  said  to  the  man  clothed  in  linen,  .  .  .  How
long  shall  it  be  to  the  end  of  these  wonders  ?

And  I  heard  the  man  clothed  in  linen,  .  .  .  when  he
held  up  his  right  hand  and  his  left  hand  unto  heaven,  and
sware  by  him  that  liveth  for  ever,  that  it  shall  be  for  a
time,  times,  and  an  half  ;  and  when  he  shall  have  accom-
plished to  scatter  the  power  of  the  holy  people,  all  these
thmgs  shall  be  finished.

And  I  heard  but  I  understood  not  ;  then  said  I,  0  my
Lord,  what  shall  be  the  end  of  these  things  ?

And  he  said.  Go  thy  way,  Daniel  ;  for  the  words  are
closed  up  and  sealed  tUl  the  time  of  the  end  ...

And  from  the  time  that  the  daily  sacrifice  shaU  be
taken  away,  and  the  abomination  that  maketh  desolate
set  up,  there  shall  be  a  thousand  two  hundred  and  ninety
days.


Lxxxvn.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


583


Blessed  is  he  that  waiteth,  and  cometh  to  the  thousand
three  hundred  and  five  and  thhty  days.

But  go  thou  thy  way  till  the  end  be,  for  thou  shctlt  rest>
and  stand  in  thy  lot  at  the  end  of  the  days.

[Dan.  xii.  1-13.)

When  the  disciples  came  to  Christ  privately  as  he  sat
on  the  Mount  of  Olives  and  asked  him  :  "  When  shall
these  things  be  ?  "  ("  these  things  "  meaning  the  destruc-
tion of  the  Temple)  "  and  what  shall  be  the  sign  of  thy
commg,  and  of  the  end  of  the  world  ?  ",  he  made  reference
to  this  passage  in  Daniel  :

When  ye,  therefore,  shall  see  the  abomination  of  desola-
tion, spoken  of  by  Daniel  the  prophet,  stand  in  the  holy
place,  (whoso  readeth  let  him  understand  :)

Then  let  them  which  be  in  Judea  flee  into  the  moun-
tains :

Let  him  which  is  on  the  house-top  not  come  down  to
take  any  thing  out  of  his  house  : .  .  .

And  woe  unto  them  that  are  with  child,  and  to  them
that  give  suck  in  those  days  !

But  pray  ye  that  your  flight  be  not  in  the  winter,
neither  on  the  Sabbath  day :  For  then  shall  be  great
tribulation,  such  as  was  not  from  the  beginning  of  the
world  to  this  time,  no,  nor  ever  shall  be.

{Matt.  xxiv.  3-21.)

The  immediate  context,  then,  of  Mrs.  Willett's  "  Thou
shaft  stand  in  thy  lot  "  falls  into  line  with  the  seven -fold
repetition  of  "  Pray  ye  that  your  flight  be  not  in  the
winter  "  in  pre- War  King  scripts.

I  pass  over  for  the  moment  H.  V.  359,  which  comes
next  m.  chronological  order,  and  take  M.  V.  626  of  July  17,
1914,  M.  V.  628  of  Jixly  20,  and  M.  V.  629  of  July  21.

In  M.  V.  626  comes  the  first  mention  of  the  message
for  Mrs.  WiUett.  It  is  to  be  given  "  early  next  week  "  ;
and  Mrs.  VerraU  is  enjoined  to  take  care  to  send  it  ;
though  why  there  should  be  any  particular  hurry  about
its  reception,  or  why  any  particular  care  about  com-
municating it,  is  not  explained.

2q


/


584  J.  G.  Piddingto7i.  [pakt

Three  days  later,  on  July  20,  it  is  incidentally  men-
tioned again — in  M.  V.  628  ;  and  then  "  early  next  week,"
in  fact  as  early  as  possible  next  week,  namely  on  Sunday,
July  21,  1914,  the  message  is  given — in  M.  V.  629.  It
seems  in  itself  an  ordinary  enoiigh  kind  of  message,  not
deserving  of  being  led  up  to  with  such  careful  pre-
liminaries ;  and  on  the  face  of  it  there  seems  no  special
reason  why  it  should  be  communicated  "  early  next  week."
Before  Mrs.  Verrall  acted  on  the  instructions  given  in  her
script,  she  wrote  to  ask  me  whether  I  saw  any  objection
to  her  sending  the  message  to  Mrs.  Willett.  Before
answering  her  I  consulted  Mr.  Balfour  ;  ^  and  on  July  25,
1914,  I  wrote  to  tell  her  that  neither  he  nor  I  saw  any
objection  to  the  message  being  sent.  After  receiving  my
answer  Mrs.  Verrall  sent  the  message  to  Mrs.  Willett  on
July  29,  1914,  and  it  reached  her  the  next  day.

If,  as  I  assume,  the  last  words  written  automatically  by
Mi's.  Willett,

"  A  final  word Thou  shalt  stand  in  thy  lot  ",

are  premonitory  of  the  coming  War,  the  reason  why  the
communicators  were  anxious  to  get  a  reference  to  them  in
Mrs.  Verrall's  script  early  in  the  week  beginning  July  21,
1914,  seems  plain  enough.  They  wanted  to  show  by
means  of  a  supernormal  cross-reference  that  they  realised
the  importance  of  these  "  last  words  "  before  their  true
significance  could  be  known  or  guessed.  Before  July  23,
1914,  the  day  on  which  Austria's  viltimatum  to  Serbia  was
presented,  their  significance  was  not,  and  hardly  could
have  been,  divined.

The  last  words  given  to  Mrs.  Willett  are,  as  M.  V.  629
asserts,  capable  of  bearing  "  a  double  meaning,  one  general
one  special  "  ;  for  they  may  readily  serve  as  a  message  of
assurance  for  the  nation,  as  well  as  for  the  individual.
The  reader  will  find  a  close  parallel  to  this  in  Mrs.  King's
scripts  (see  especially  King  33,  34,  64,  85,  130,  185,  194),
where  messages  of  encouragement  to  the  automatist  herself

1  I  consulted  Mr.  Balfour,  not  because  I  attached  any  importance  to
the  matter,  but  simply  because  Mr.  Balfour  was,  so  to  speak,  in  charge
of  Mrs.  Willett's  scripts.


LXXXVII.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


585


are  interspersed  with  similar  messages  with  a  wider
application.

I  go  back  now  to  H.  V.  359,  which  was  written  four
and a halt hours earlier than the first of the  three
;  M.  V.  scripts  which  have  to  do  with  the  message  to  Mrs.
Willett.

Its  opening  phrase  "  Spearheads  many  together "  is  im-
I  mediately  followed  by  "  that  was  written  "  :  words  which
naturally  mean  that  "  Spearheads  many  together "  had
been  written  before  in  Mrs.  Salter's  script,  and  which,
I  do  not  doubt,  were  used  to  link  the  present  script  on
to  the  one  in  which  "  Spearheads  many  together "  had
previously  occurred.  This,  however,  is  one  of  the  rare
cases  where  the  script-memory  is  slightly  at  fault,  for
"  Spearheads  many  together  "  had  never  before  appeared
in  that  exact  form  in  Mrs.  Salter's  script.^

I  will  now  quote  all  the'  pre-War  occurrences  of  "  Spear-
head "  and  "  Spear  "  in  Mrs.  Salter's  scripts  :

H.  V.  61  {January  6,  1908).

.  .  .  The  harvest  moon  with  a  halo  round  it  and  a
starless  sky  Spikes  clustered  together  yellow  spears
A  bird  with  outstretched  wings  a  bird  of  prey
I  think that  completes  the  picture  .  .  .

1  In  December,  1921,  I  told  Mrs.  Salter  that  the  last  script  she  had
written  before  the  War  contained  a  prediction  of  it. I  began  to  write

:,  this  paper  at  the  end  of  June,  1922,  finished  the  first  draft  of  it  on
July  21,  and  completed  the  revision  on  August  8,  1922.  Mrs.  Salter
knew  I  was  writing  a  paper,  and  knew  it  was  about  predictions  in  the
scripts  of  the  War,  but  notliing  else. In  the first  script  written  by

i  Mrs.  Salter  after  I  had  written  the  above  passage  about  the  slip  on  the
part  of  the  script-memory,  namely,  on  August  21,  1922,  the  following
occurs  :

"  Sowing  the  seed  the  dragon's  teeth  men  in  armour  All  the
hills  cried  aloud  The  clashing  of  arms  The  earth  shall  groan
beneath  their  feet The  tramping  of  feet many  together."

Mrs.  Salter  did  not  know,  and  cannot  have  known,  that  I  had  com-
mented in  my  paper  on  the  fact  that  "  Spearheads  many  together  "
had  not  actually  been  written  except  in  H.  V.  359.  It  loolis  as  if  the
communicator  knew  of  my  comments  on  the  difficulty,  and  was  seeking
to  remove  it  by  the  suggestion  that  "many  together"  in  H.  V.  359
had  been  meant  to  apply,  not  to  the  spearheads,  but  to  the  "  armed
feet." Compare  H.  V.  107  (p.  588  below).


586


J .  G.  Piddington.


[PABT


H.  V.  97  {Augiist  10,  1908).

.  .  .  the tough ashen spear the quivering shaft  !
the  arrow  that  flieth  by  day [cf.  H.  V.  469  below.]  I
Douglas what  of  that it  is  all  the  same  story  the
battlecry  of  old

H.  V.  121  {October  29,  1908).

.  .  .  {drawing  of  a  spear)  a  spearhead seeds  sown  !
the  dragon's  teeth [Cf.  H.  V.  408  below.]  .  .  .

H.  V.  165  {Maij  3,  1909).

...  {drawing  of  a  spearhead)  spearheads  {drawing  of  [

spearheads) thus clustered  golden  spears a  flash  of

light Beware  the  evU  eye

by  force  and  not  by  right  shall  they  be  ruled
In  tribulation  shall  their  hearts  be  schooled  ^

H.  V.  198  {February  23,  1910).

.  .  .  the  tough  ashen  spear  [Cf.  H.  V.  97  above.]  [

8o\(.x(><rKi<>y  eyxos  [long-shafted  spear.  Cf.  H.  V.  469  i,
below.]  war — the  rivals  face  to  face  .  .  .

H.  V.  228  {February  1,  1911).

.  .  .  La  mort  ne  chome  pas  On  Linden  when  the
sun  was  low  a  battlefield  that  is  the  picture
flashing  swords — at  the  spear's  point  [Cf.  H.  V.  399
below.]  .  .  .

This  is  the  last  reference  to  "  spear "  or  "  spearhead "
in  Mrs.  Salter's  scripts  before  July  17,  1914.

I  cite  next  four  instances  of  "  spear "  or  "  spearhead "
from  scripts  written  by  Mrs.  Salter  after  the  outbreak  of
War  :

H.  V.  399  {April  22,  1915).

.  .  .  the  iron  hedge  {illegible  word)  the  spear's
point. [Cf.  H.  V.  228  above.]  .  .  .

H.  V.  400  {April  23,  1915).

.  .  .  the  iron-hedge that  belongs  to  the  spears — a

^  This  script  should  be  contrasted  with

H.  V.  157  (March  1,  1909).

...  an  ear  of  barley  the  yellow  spike  .  .  .  the  ploughshare
sons  of  the  plough  the  patient  oxen  beneath  the  yoke  by
kindness  shall  they  be  ruled  .  .  .


LXXXVII.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


587


hedge  of  spears — bristling  points  but  there  is  some-
thing left  out  here  .  .  .

H.  V.  408  {May  10,  1915).

.  .  .  the  hundred  headed  snake — the  dragon's  tooth —
they  shall  spring  up  armed — bristling  spears — m  close
array — -armed  men  springing  from  the  ground

H.  V.  469  {March  19,  1916).

.  .  .  arrows — brazen-tipped — -the  arrow  by  day  [Cf.
H.  V.  97  above] — darkening  the  sun  [An  allusion
to  the  Battle  of  Thermopylae.  Dieneces  the  Spartan,
when  told  by  a  man  of  Trachis  that  so  numerous
were  the  Persian  bowmen  that  their  arrows  hid  tne
sun,  said  that  in  that  case  they  would  have  the
advantage  of  fighting  in  the  shade,  instead  of  in  the
glare  of  the  sun.  See  Herodotus,  VII.  226] — the
spearheads  weapons  of  war  [Cf.  2  Sam.  i.  27  :  "  How
are  the  mighty  fallen,  and  the  weapons  of  war
perished  !  "] — SoAixoctkioi'  eyx"^  [Cf.  H.  V.  198  above]  .  .  .

"  Spearheads,"  I  think  it  wili  be  admitted,  even  if  the
pre-War  references  alone  are  taken  into  account,  symbolize
War  in  Mrs.  Salter's  scripts.  I  drew  attention  in  a
footnote  to  the  contrast  between  H.  V.  165  and  H.  V.
157  in  order  to  illustrate  a  double  use  of  the  "  Spear "
or  "  Spike  "  metaphor.  There  are  two  lia,rvests  in  the
scripts.  One  is  the  Harvest  of  War  symboKzed  by
clustered  spears,  and  by  the  crop  that  sprang  from  the
sowing  of  the  Dragon's  teeth. ^  The  other,  symbolized  by
spikes  or  spears  of  yellow  corn,  is  the  Harvest  of  Peace,

^  How  fittingly  the  symbolism  of  the  dragon's  teeth  can  be  applied  to
the  circumstances  of  the  Great  War  may  be  judged  from  the  following
passage  in  the  Oedipus  Coloneus  of  Sophocles,  where  the  dying  Oedipus
bids  Theseus  keep  secret  the  site  of  his  tomb  :  "  that  so  it  may  ever
make  for  thee  a  defence,  better  than  many  shields,  better  than  the
succouring  spear  of  neighbours.  .  .  .  And  t?ius  shalt  thou  hold  this
city  [i.e.  Athens]  unscathed  from  the  side  of  the  Dragon's  blood  [awapTQn'
air'  avSp^v,  i.e.  the  Thebans,  between  whom  and  the  Athenians  was  a
long-standing  feud]  ;  full  many  States  Ughtly  enter  on  offence,  e'en
though  their  neighbour  Uves  aright.  For  the  gods  are  slow,  though
they  are  sure,  in  visitation,  when  men  scorn  godliness,  and  turn  to
frenzy." (Jebb's  translation  of  Oed.  Col.,  11.  1524  ff.)

See  in  this  connexion  Proc,  Vol.  XXX.,  pp.  204-205.


588


J.  0.  Piddington.


[part


when  Virgo  (Astraea)  with  her  emblematic  spike  of  corn
shall  return  to  earth,  and  men  "  shall  beat  their  swords
into  ploughshares,  and  their  spears  into  pruning  hooks,"
and  "  nation  shall  not  lift  up  sword  against  nation,  neither
shall  they  learn  war  any  more."  This  bifurcation  of  the
metaphor  has  possibly  been  the  cause  of  slight  confusion
in  H.  V.  61  and  165.

I  take  now  the  words  that  follow  "  Spearheads  many  i
together "  in  H.  V.  359  of  July  17,  1914  :  o  "  Spissa  \
cohors — along  the  jdain.''  "  Spissa  cohors  "  may  be  trans-
lated "  the  close-packed  cohort."  ^  The  phrase,  which  has
never  occurred  since  in  Mrs.  Salter's  scripts,  had  occurred
once  before,  and  once  only,  nearly  six  years  previously,  in
the  following  context  :

H.  V.  107  (Se2)t.  3,  1908).

The hedgehog's spiny covering  is  not  more  dense

spissa  cohors and  tramp  of  armed  feet  on  the  high

road [Cf.  H.  V.  script  of  August  21,  1922,  p.  585

above.] and  the  dew  is  scattered  from  the  grass  all

the  silvery  gossamers  that  twinkle  into  green  and  gold
but  here  there  is  no  calm  .  .  .

The  spiny  covering  of  the  hedgehog  no  doubt  serves
here  as  an  easy  means  of  transition  to  the  "  spissa  cohors";
but  I  think  it  is  not  introduced  merely  as  a  transitional
phrase,  but  also  serves  as  a  link  with  "  Spikes  clustered
together "  in  H.  V.  61,  "  a  hedge  of  spears — bristling
points  "  in  H.  V.  400,  and  "  l^ristling  spears  "  in  H.  V.
408.

With  "  tramp  of  armed  feet "  compare  the  following
script  of  Mrs.  Salter's,  which  we  have  already  had  occasion
to  discuss  under  "  Vengeance  is  mine  "  (pp.  560-561
above)  :

H.  V.  72  {Feb.  18,  1908).

.  .  .  thoiigh  theu"  sins  be  as  scarlet  yet  shall  they
be white as snow thus spake the prophet  Isaiah
The  reference  to  Isaiah  was  important.
Now  describe  the  scene.

1  The  Roman  cohort  was  the  tenth  part  of  a  legion,  and  the  size  of  a
legion  varied  between  4200  and  6000  men.


LXXXVII.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


589


A  winding  valley  amid  rocky  peaks.  A  green  strip
where  the  river  flows  and  groups  of  darkleaved  trees  ».
chestnuts  I  think  and  at  the  bottom  a  town  with
white  houses  and  many  towers  nestling  close  together
and  the  rude  invader  from  the  north  shall  destroy
them  coming  down  the  pass  with  many  men  and
horses  and  the  tread  of  armed  men  shall  echo  in  the
hUls  around  ...

The  quotation  in  H.  V.  107  about  "  the  silvery  gossa-
mers "  comes  from  the  description  in  In  Memoriani  xi.  of
a  calm  autumn  morning.  I  rather  suspect  that  it  slipped
in  by  mistake,  and  was  really  an  irrelevant  association
aroused  in  the  automatist's  mind  by  the  preceding  refer-
ence to  armed  men  scattering  the  dew  from  the  grass.
If  this  was  so,  the  communicator  saved  the  situation  by
adding  the  comment  : "  but  here  there  is  no  calm."

The  words  "  spissa  cohors  "  in  H.  V.  359  are  followed
by  "  along  the  plairi."  In  view  of  their  context  they  are
an  almost  certain  reference  back  to  a  passage  in  H.  V.
183,  of  Sept.  9,  1909.  At  any  rate  when  I  was  annotat-
ing H.  V.  359  within  a  day  or  two  of  its  being  written,
and  when  I  had  no  idea  at  all  that  the  scripts  contained
references  to  the  coming  war,  I  gave  a  cross-reference  to
"  across  the  plain  "  and  its  context  in  H.  V.  183  :

H.  V.  183  {Sept.  9,  1909).

The  mjrriad  hosts  the  sword  of  Gideon  the  sword
shall  smite — the  god  of  battle  with  chariots  and  with
horsemen.

Across  the  plain  the  dust  of  their  coming  is  seen
afar — ^they  that  have  lived  by  the  sword  by  the
sword  shaU  they  perish,  the  mills  of  God  grind
slowly  .  .  .

Here  a  contrast  is  obviously  drawn  between  "  the
myriad  hosts  "  of  the  Midianites  and  the  Amaleldtes  that
"  lay  along  in  the  valley  like  grasshoppers  for  multitude  "
and  what,  perhaps,  the  Midianites  regarded  as  Gideon's
"  contemptible  little  army  "  of  300  men.  The  Spartans  at
Thermopylae  likewise  (See  H.  V.  469  on  p.  587  above)
numbered  only  300.


590


J .  G.  Piddington.


"  They  that  have  lived  by  the  sword,"  etc.,  is  slightly
misquoted  from  Matt.  xxvi.  52,  where  Jesus  says  to  one
of  his  followers  who  had  cut  off  the  ear  of  the  high
priest's  servant  :  - .  .

Put  up  again  thy  sword  into  his  place  : for  all  they
that  take  the  sword,  shall  perish  with  the  sword.

See  in  this  connexion  "  Crossed  swords — the  sword  in
the  scabbard"  in  H.  V.  448,  and  parallel  passages,  dis-
cussed above  on  pp.  513-514.

"  The  mills  of  God  grind  slowly "  is  from  Longfellow's
Retribution.^

When,  then,  on  July  17,  1914,  "  Spearheads,"  and
"  spissa  cohors— along  the  plain  "  were  written,  I  assume
that  the  intention  was  to  refer  back  to  these  earher
scripts  in  which  these  phrases  had  appeared.  The  date  on
which  "  spissa  cohors  "  was  repeated  for  the  first  and  only
time  for  nearly  six  years  was,  it  must  be  admitted,
singularly  opportune  ;  and  the  actual  phrase  itself,  spissa
cohors,  could,  moreover,  be  applied  with  propriety  to  the
dense  masses  of  German  troops  that  were  to  be  employed
in  the  invasions  of  Belgium  and  of  France  a  fortnight
later.

Was  it,  I  ask,  by  chance  that,  six  days  before  Austria
addressed  her  ultimatum  to  Serbia  and  in  the  last  script
which  Mrs.  Salter  wrote  before  the  outbreak  of  war,  these
suggestive  phrases,  "  Spearheads  many  together "  and
"  spissa  cohors,"  made  their  reappearance  1

Was  it  by  chance  that  on  the  very  same  day  the  first
reference  emerged  in  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  to  "the  last
words  "  given  to  Mrs.  Willett  ?

And  was  it  by  chance  that  the  last  words  of  the  last
script  written  by  Mrs.  Willett  before  the  War  were  "  Thou
shalt  stand  in  thy  lot  "  ?

iJebb  in  his  comments  on  the  passage  in  the  Oedipus  Coloneus  to
which  I  have  referred  above  (see  footnote  on  p.  587),  compares
"  Though  the  mills  of  God  grind  slowly,  yet  tliey  grind  exceeding  small  "
with  Sophocles'

deal  -yap  eC  /xev  oxj/e  o'  eiaopuia'
("  For  the  gods  are  slow,  though  they  are  sure,  in  visitation  ").


LXXXVII.]


Comparison  of  Scripts.


591


The  Scripts  of  August  1914.

I  now  proceed  to  deal  with  the  hrst  scripts  written
after  the  outbreak  of  the  War  by  these  same  three
automatists  : Mrs.  VerraU,  Mrs.  Willett,  and  Mrs.  Salter.

I  shall  treat  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  dated  10.30  p.m.  on
August  4,  1914,  as  the  first  written  by  her  after  the
outbreak  of  war ;  for  though,  technically,  war  between
England  and  Germany  was  not  due  to  begin  till  half  an
hour  later,  by  the  time  she  started  writing  it  had  become
a  moral  certainty,  and  anyhow  Germany  was  already  at
war  with  France  and  Russia,  and  the  invasion  of  Belgium
was  in  progress.

For  convenience'  sake  I  give  the  text  of  this  script
again,  but  I  need  not  enter  into  detailed  comment  on  it,
for  that  I  have  already  done  when  dealing  with  the  topic
of  The  Violet  Crown  (see  pp.  542-548  above).  Its  burden,
it  will  be  remembered,  is  a  universal  brotherhood  of  man,
a  free  commonwealth  of  nations,  "  Earth  at  last  a  warless
world,  a  single  race,  a  single  tongue,"  a  very  Ci vitas
Dei.

M.  V.  632  {August  4,  1914. 10.30  pjn.).

There  is  a  connexion  which  you  have  not  seen
between  the  message  in  the  mountains  Whence
came  h  e  1  p — remember  that,  and  your  present
feeling —  Don't  investigate  or  take  this  too  literally —
And  remember  that  you,  you  yourself  gained  somethmg
■  from  the  writing  there —  There  is  a  phrase  in  one  of
[Mrs.  Willett's]  scripts  which  may  help  you  to  under-
stand The  afterglow  on  the  Soul's  surface  .  .  .

rest  in  the  thought  that  care  and  love  prevails  and
that  beyond  these  voices  there  is  peace  .  .  .

Dear  city  of  God — be  a  citizen  of  that  city  and  of
no  lesser —

Dear  City  of  men  without  master  or  lord  That  is
the  city  of  us  all  if  we  wiH  make  it  so —  And  the
city  of  Cecrops  is  also  the  wearer  of  the  ohve
crown —

The  first  script  written  by  Mrs.  Willett  after  the  out-


592  J .  G.  Piddington.  [part

break  of  war  bears  the  date  of  August  14,  1914,  and  runs
thus  :

W.  343  (August  14,  1914).

Pax  vobiscum  the  old  Latin  greeting  Latium  the
ancient  city  The  walled  city  As  a  Bride  descending
John's  vision  this  is  disconnected  but  I  want  to
get  you  into  the  swing  The  fleshy  tablets  of  the
heart  rose  veined  red  at  the  ripe  core  of  it  writ
not  in  water And  last  an  amethyst that  is  better

There  is  a  word  of  good  cheer  to  be  said  from  this
side  All  Stands  &  shall  stand  Be  of  good  cheer
that  is  to  be  said  It  is  the  promise  of  Joy  in
unimagined  bower  &  tree  in  wavs  not  fulfilled  &  in
paths  yet  untrodden  the  promise  of  Joy  remember
that  Have  faith  for  it  shall  not  fail  Henry  Sidg-
-  wick  is  in  this  thing  &  his  message  is  one  of  Hope
An  anchor  &  a  Rainbow  &  a  Promised  Land  They
shall  go  in  &  possess  it  they  shall  .  .  .  taste  of  the
fruit  of  their  travail  &  be  filled  Put  on  thy  strength
oh  Zion  It  is  the  idea  of  triumph  which  is  wanted,
&  Reward,  &  gladness,  &  Guidance — all  these  are
wanted  in  this  Sc as  our  message  Farewell

With  "  Pax  Vobiscum  "  compare  W.  231,  of  January  18,
1911,  which  there  has  already  been  occasion  to  quote
above  (p.  514) :

Pax  Vobiscum  .  .  .  Victories  other  than  those  of
War  ...  go  on  yes  now  the  angels'  song  in  terra
[pax]  But  why  break  off  ?  Janus  the  gates  thereof
closed  or  open  they  stand  and  stood  very  long  ago
many  years  their  hinges  did  not  revolve  the  Olive
Branch  that  too  the  Ploughshares  the  quiet  hours  the
quiet  the  great  calm  .  .  . All  her  paths  are  Peace.

"As  a  Bride  descending  "  refers,  of  course,  to  John  the
Divine's  vision  of  "a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth,"  and
of  "  the  holy  city,  new  Jerusalem,  coming  down  from
God,  out  of  heaven."  Compare  M.  V.  674  on  p.  646
above.

"  The  fleshy  tablets  of  the  heart  .  .  .  writ  not  in  water "


LXXXVII.]


Comparison  of  Scrijds.


593


points  the  contrast  between  the  Old  and  the  New  Dis-
pensation :

Forasmuch  as  ye  are  manifestly  declared  to  be  the
epistle  of  Christ  ministered  by  us,  wi-itteu  not  with  ink,
but  with  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God  ;  not  in  tables  of
stone,  but  in  fleshy  tables  of  the  heart  .  .  .

But  if  the  ministration  of  death,  written  and  engraven
in  stones,  was  glorious,  so  that  the  children  of  Israel  could
not  stedfastly  behold  the  face  of  Moses  for  the  glory  of
his  countenance  ;  which  glory  was  to  be  done  away  ;

How  shall  not  the  ministration  of  the  Spirit  be  rather
glorious  ?  (2  Cor.  iii.  3,  7,  8.)

"  A7id  last  an  amethyst.''  The  ultimate  source  of  this
is,  of  course,  Rev.  xxi.  20,  "  the  twelfth  an  amethyst,"  of
the  precious  stones  wherewith  the  foundations  of  the  wall
of  the  Holy  City  were  garnished  ;  but  the  immediate
reference  is  to  the  last  line  of  Mrs.  Browning's  Aurora
Leigh,  of  the  final  scene  in  which  "  rose  veiyied "  "  red  at
the  ripe  core  of  it"  are  imperfect  reminiscenses  :

'  First  God's  love,'
'  And  next,'  he  smiled,  '  the  love  of  wedded  souls,
Which  still  presents  that  mystery's  counterpart.
Sweet  shadow-rose,  upon  the  water  of  life.
Of  such  a  mystic  substance,  Sharon  gave
A  name  to  !  human,  vital,  fructuous  rose.
Whose  calyx  holds  the  multitude  of  leaves.
Loves  filial,  loves  fraternal,  neighbour  loves
And  civic — all  fair  petals,  all  good  scents.
All  reddened,  sweetened  from  one  central  Heart  !  '


'The  world's  old,
But  the  old  world  waits  the  time  to  be  renewed.
Towards  which,  new  hearts  in  individual  growth
Must  quicken,  and  increase  to  multitude
In  new  dynasties  of  the  race  of  men  ;
Developed  whence,  shall  grow  spontaneously


594


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


New  churches,  new  oeconomies,  new  laws

Admitting  freedom,  new  societies

Excluding  falsehood  :  he  shall  make  all  new.'

My  Romney  ! Lifting  up  my  hand  in  his,

As  wheeled  by  Seeing  Spirits  towards  the  East,

He  turned  instinctively,  where,  faint  and  far.

Along  the  tinghng  desert  of  the  sky,  '

Beyond  the  circle  of  the  conscious  hills,

Were  laid  in  jasper-stone  as  clear  as  glass

The  first  foundations  of  that  new,  near  Day

Which  should  be  builded  out  of  heaven  to  God.

He  stood  a  moment  with  erected  brows

In  silence,  as  a  creature  might  who  gazed, —

Stood  calm,  and  fed  his  blind,  majestic  eyes

Upon  the  thought  of  perfect  noon  :  and  when

I  saw  his  soul  saw, — Jasper  first,'  I  said,

'  And  second  sapphire  ;  third,  chalcedony  ;

The  rest  in  order, — last,  an  amethyst.'

"  All  stands  <h  shall  stand."  This  refers  back  to  "  Thou
shalt  stand  in  thy  lot  "  in  Mrs.  Willett's  script  of  July  9,
1914.  On  July  30,  1914,  Ms.  WiUett  had  received  the
message  sent  her  through  Mrs.  Verrall's  script,  in  which
she  was  told  that  the  last  words  of  her  last  script  bore  a
general  as  well  as  a  special  meaning.  They  are  here
given  a  general  meaning ;  but,  of  course,  in  view  of
Mrs.  Willett's  knowledge,  I  make  no  claim  that  the
modification  was  due  to  supernormal  agency.

''Be  of  good  cheer''  This,  I  believe,  is  one  of  several
allusions  to  Christ's  walking  on  the  sea  :

But  the  ship  was  now  in  the  midst  of  the  sea,  tossed
with  waves  :  for  the  wind  was  contrary.  And  in  the
fourth  watch  of  the  night  Jesus  went  unto  them,  walking
on  the  sea.  But  when  the  disciples  saw  him  walking  on
the  sea,  they  were  troubled.  But  straightway  Jesus  spake
unto  them  saying.  Be  of  good  cheer ;  it  is  I ;  be  not
afraid.^

^  As  stated  above  (p.  512),  I  believe  that  Christ's  walking  on  the  sea
is  combined  in  the  scripts  with  His  calming  of  the  storm  : a  combina-


Lxxxvn.]


Com'parison  of  Scripts.


595


"  The  anchor  "  is  the  symbol  of  Hope.
With  "  ihe  Raiiihoiv  "  compare

it  was  not  for  nothing  that  you  and  the  German  mother
and  the  French  girl  looked  at  the  glow  together  on  the
great  peak I  have  set  my  bow  in  the  clouds

in  M.  V.  637,  of  August  22,  1914  (seo  above,  pp.  544-547).

Last  comes  the  first  script  written  by  Mrs.  Salter  after
the  oiitbreak  of  war.  It  bears  the  date  August  29,  1914,
and  runs  as  follows  :

H.  V.  360  {August  29,  1914).

.  .  .  astraea  reddux  [sic] — per  ardua  sors  futura
manet — in  excelsis — the  western  sea — the  thundering
noises  .  .  .

As  already  explained  (see  pp.  551,  563  above),  "Astraea
redux "  is  an  allusion  to  Vergil's  Messianic  Eclogue,  and
stands  for  the  return  of  Justice  (Astraea  or  Virgo)  when
the  Age  of  Gold  returns.  Compare  H.  V.  229,  of
February  10,  1911  :

[Jam  redit  et  Virgo,  redeunt]  Saturnia  regna  the  land
flowing  with  milk  and  honey the  promised  land  :

and  with  this  compare  in  turn  W.  343,  of  August  14,
1914  :

An  anchor  &  a  Rainbow  &  a  Promised  Land  They
shall  go  in  &  possess  it.

"  Per  ardua  sors  futura  manet "  means  "  Through  diffi-
culties the  future  lot  (or,  destiny)  stands  firm."  Compare
"  Thou  shalt  stand  in  thy  lot "  in  the  last  pre- War
WiUett  script.  Sors  is  the  actual  word  used  in  the
Vulgate  version  of  the  last  verse  of  the  Book  of  Daniel  :

et  stabis  in  sorte  tua  in  finem  dierum.

tion  made  familiar  to  English  ears  by  the  lines  in  the  well-known
hymn  "  Eternal  Father,  strong  to  save  "  :

"  O  Christ,  Whose  voice  the  waters  heard
And  hush'd  their  raging  at  thy  word,
Who  walkedst  on  the  foaming  deep,
And  calm  amid  the  storm  didst  sleep."


596


J.  G.  Piddington.


[PAET


"  In  excelsis,"  as  already  stated  above  (p.  552),  goes
back  to  H.  V.  168,  of  May  11,  1909  :

gloria  in  excelsis on  earth  peace  goodwill  towards  men.

"  The  toestern  sea — the  thtmdering  noises "  is  an  illumi-
nating example  of  "  cribbing "  (see  pp.  449-451  above).
It  is  a  "  crib  "  from  M.  V.  136,  of  February  12,  1907,
which  opens  thus  :

The  voyage  of  Maeldvuie faery  lands  forlorn  and  noises
of  the  wester]!  sea thundering  noises  of  the  western  sea.

This  script  was  perfectly  well  known  to  Mrs.  Salter,  as
not  only  had  it  been  shown  to  her  on  May  19,  1907,  but
it  had  been  printed  in  Proceedings  no  less  than  three
times  (Vol.  XXII.,  p.  113;  Vol.  XXVI.,  p.  182;  Vol.
XXVII.,  p.  88).  The  Voyage  of  Maeldune,  as  we  have
already  seen  (pp.  565-669  above),  is  used  in  the  scripts  to
represent  the  abandonment  of  revenge  and  the  forgiveness
of  enemies.  I  think  it  possible  that  the  commimicators
preferred  to  effect  their  reference  to  this  poem  by  means
of  a  "  crib  "  from  M.  V.  136,  rather  than  by  repeating
"  And  he  said  to  me  Oh  Maeldune "  from  a  previous
H.  V.  script  (H.  V.  323,  of  April  9,  1913),  in  order  to
suggest  that  they  had  long  foreseen  the  approach  of  a
crisis  in  the  world's  history  when  men  would  have  to  ask
themselves  the  same  question  that  the  Saint  asked  Mael-
dune :

"  How  long  shall  the  murder  last  ?  "
and  obey,  if  they  were  wise,  the  Saint's  command.

It  will  be  thought,  perhaps,  that  these  three  scripts  of
Mrs.  Verrall's,  Mrs.  Willett's,  and  Mrs.  Salter's,  with  their
concordant  allusions  to

a  universal  commonwealth  of  man,
the  Holy  City  descending  bride,
the  return  of  Justice,

peace  on  earth,  goodwill  towards  men,  and
the  renunciation  of  a  blood-feud,

are  merely  reflexions  of  a  phase  of  feeling  prevalent  in


LXXXVII.]


Comfarison  of  Scripts.


597


this  country  soon  after  War  began.  But  apart  from  the
fact  that  Mrs.  Verrall's  script  preceded  this  outburst  of
feehng,  even  if  Mrs.  Willett's  and  Mrs.  Salter's  did  not,
a  fatal  objection  to  this  supposition  is  that,  for  years
before  the  War  broke  out,  the  scripts  were  full  of  what
T  may  for  brevity  call  these  Utopian  topics,  and  these
had  again  and  again  been  placed  in  juxtaposition  to  the
War  topic.

Moreover,  if  the  scripts  were  liable  to  reflect  popular
feehng,  one  would  expect  to  find  m  them  at  or  about  the
time  of  the  Armistice  expressions  of  jubilation,  and  during
the  past  year  or  more  expressions  of  disillusionment  ;  but
of  neither,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  is  there  any  trace.

To  my  mind  one  of  the  striking  things  in  the  scripts
is  the  sobriety  of  their  language.  Wherever  it  has  been
possible  to  check  it, — that  is  to  say,  wherever  what  is
said  about  an  event  can  be  compared  with  the  event
itself,  the  language  appears  to  me  to  be  temperate,  even
restrained,  and  certainly  without  exaggeration  :  such,  in
fact,  as  might  be  expected,  if  the  communicating  group  in
reality  includes,  as  ostensibly  it  does,  Henry  Sidgwick  and
Edmund  Gurney  among  its  members.  But  it  is  not
always  possible  to  compare  the  event  with  what  is  said
about  it.  We  cannot,  for  instance,  compare  the  promised
Utopia  with  the  forecast  of  it.  If  in  time  to  come  the
world  show  no  improvement,  then  the  forecast  is  false.
And  if  it  show  only  some  moderate  degree  of  improve-
ment, again,  I  should  say,  the  forecast  is  false  ;  for  the
terms  of  the  forecast  are  emphatic,  and  nothing  short  of
a  very  thorough-going  and  lasting  change  for  the  better
in  international  and  social  conditions  could  be  held  to
fulfil  them.  At  the  same  time,  the  scripts  fix  no  date  for
the  fiilfilment,  and  it  would  be  unreasonable  to  expect  so
great  a  revolution  as  they  portend  to  come  about  "in  a
moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye."  The  whole  trend
of  the  communications,  moreover,  is  against  any  such
expectation,  endorsing,  as  it  does,  the  old  view  that
progress  is  achieved  only  by  long-continued  effort.  Never-
theless, if  I  may  hazard  an  opinion,  the  communications
do  not  seem  to  me  to  convey  the  impression  that  the


598


J .  G.  Piddingfon.


[part


predicted  Utopia  is  to  be  looked  for  only  in  a  dim  and
distant  future,  centuries  hence.  If — and  it  is  a  gigantic
"if" — if,  I  say,  there  is  truth  in  the  forecast,  then  "there
may  be  some  standing  here,  which  shall  not  taste  of  death,
till  they  see "  "  the  fair  beginning  of  a  time,"  and  the
old  order  yielding  place — slowly  yielding  place — to  new.


LXXXVII.]


Concluding  Remarks.


509


n

CiONCLUDING  REMARKS.

In  conclusion  I  have  a  few  observations  to  offer  on  the
evidence  for  prevision  to  be  found  in  the  scripts  discussed
in  this  paper.  For  this  purpose  it  will  be  convenient  to
divide  the  predictions  into  four  classes  :

(1)  Predictions  in  general  terms  of  an  event — the  War —

that  was  also  foretold  by  persons  who  arrived  at
their  forecast  by  ordinary  processes  of  thought  ;

(2)  Predictions  of  the  approximate  date,  or  ratlier  of  the

close  imminence,  of  the  War  ;

(3)  Predictions  of  a  particular  incident — e.g.  the  sinking  of

the  Lusitania — seemingly  beyond  the  range  of
ordinary  human  forecast  ;

(4)  Predictions  in  broad  outline  of  the  future  of  the  world.

(i)  As  regards  the  first  class,  prevision  of  the  coming  of
a  great  European  War  is  not  necessarilj^  evidence  of
supernormal  faculty  ;  for  many  people  with  no  pretensions
to  supernormal  powers  predicted  the  War.  I  am  not
overlooking  the  circumstance  that  at  least  five  of  the
automa.tists  made  the  prediction.  That  consensus  is,
indeed,  a  very  remarkable  thing  ;  but  it  does  not  alter
the  fact  that  prevision  of  the  War  is  not  in.  itself  a  proof
that  the  prophet  acquired  his  information  in  a  super-
normal manner.  Nor  am  I  losing  sight  of  the  circum-
stance that  the  predictions  in  the  scripts  go  back  at  least
to  the  year  1907,  and  may  very  likely  prove,  when  we
have  had  time  to  complete  the  study  of  the  scripts,  to  go
back  as  far  as  1901.  But,  as  I  have  already  observed,
by  1907  Sir  Henry  Wilson  was  convinced  of  Germany's
designs,  and  it  may  well  be  that  others  reached  the  same
conclusion  earlier  still.  The  predictions  included  under
heading  (1)  contain  no  indications,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,
of  the  precise  or  approximate  time  when  the  War  was  to
begin.  All  that  can  be  said  is  that  the  scripts  do  convey
the impression that the War will affect the  present


600


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


generation.  That,  however,  was  Kkewise  the  constant
burden  of  those  who  normally  predicted  it.

(2)  By  the  predictions  of  the  approximate  date  of  the
outbreak  of  the  War  I  mean  those  contained  in  what
I  have  called  "  Some  Scripts  of  July,  1914."  I  think
these  scripts  may  be  fairly  interpreted  as  meaning  that
the  War  is  imminent.  If  this  interpretation  be  accepted,
some  might  be  disposed  to  clann  that  in  this  instance
at  any  rate  the  scripts  transcended  the  limits  of  human
foresight.  Yet  such  a  claim  can  hardly  be  substantiated
in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  late  Sir  Cecil  Spring-Rice
placed  on  record  his  conviction  that  Germany  would
make  war  shortly  after  the  completion  of  the  Kiel
Canal. 1  It  was  on  June  23  and  24,  1914,  that  the
deepened  and  widened  Canal  was  formally  reopened.^
Five weeks later Europe was at war, and Sir  Cecil

^  How  easy  it  is  to  be  prescient  after  the  event  is  shown  by  tlie  first
of  the  two  following  extracts  from  Mr.  James  W.  Gerard's  My  Four
Years  in  Germany  (published  in  1917),  and  how  easy  to  forget  one's
retrospective  prescience  by  the  second  extract  :

"  If  the  Germans"  long  preparations  for  war  were  to  bear  any
fruit,  countless  facts  pointed  to  the  summer  of  1914  as  the  time
when  the  army  should  strike  that  great  and  sudden  blow  at  the
liberties  of  the  world.  It  was  in  June,  1914,  that  the  improved
Kiel  Canal  was  reopened,  enabling  the  greatest  war  ships  to  pass
from  the  Baltic  to  the  North  Sea (p.  61).

Yet,  in  spite  of  these  "  countless  facts,'"  Mr.  Gerard  can  write  later
thus  :

"  After  my  return  from  Kiel  to  Berlin  a  period  of  calm  ensued.
No  one  seemed  to  think  that  the  murders  at  Serajevo  would  have
any  effect  ujDon  the  world.  The  Emperor  had  gone  North  on  his
yacht,  but,  as  I  believe,  not  imtil  a  certain  line  of  action  had  been
agreed  upon.  Most  of  the  diplomats  started  on  their  vacations.
Sir  Edward  Goschen,  British  Ambassador,  as  well  as  the  Russian
Ambassador,  left  Berlin.  This  shows,  of  course,  how  little  war  was
expected  in  diplomatic  circles  '"  (p.  86).

2  The  exact  date  of  the  completion  of  the  Kiel  Canal  cannot  be  stated
for  the  reasons  given  in  the  following  extract  from  the  Times  of  June  25,.
1914  :

"  The  Emperor's  passage  through  the  Canal  to-day  [June  24]  was
of  symbolical  leather  than  practical  significance,  because,  on  the  one
hand,  even  the  latest  German  Dreacbioughts  long  ago  used  the
widened  passage  experimentallj'  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  it  will
be  a  long  time  before  all  the  work  is  finished."


Lxxxvii.]  Concluding  Remarks.  601


Spring-Rice's  prediction  was  fulfilled  to  the  letter.  I
am  not,  of  course,  arguing  that"  the  autoniatists  arrived
at  the  approximate  date  of  the  outbreak  of  war  by  the
same  method  as  did  Sir  Cecil  Spring-Rice.  My  point
is  that  since  it  was  possible  for  Sir  Cecil  Spring-Rice
to  divine  the  date  by  normal  processes  of  reasoning,  it
would  be  hopeless  to  attempt  to  prove  that  the  auto-
matists'  forecasts  were  not  arrived  at  in  the  same  way.  It
is  all  a  question  of  degree.  If,  for  instance,  the  scripts
had  predicted  years  before  that  the  War  Avould  begin  on
or  about  Aug.  1,  1914,  and  that  an  armistice  would  be
signed  on  Nov.  11,  1918,  that  would  have  settled — for
most  people,  at  any  rate — the  question  of  whether  the
limits  of  normal  insight  and  inference  had  been  passed  or
not.  But  the  scripts  of  July  1914,  in  intimating  that  the
War  is  imminent,  do  not  begin  to  approach  such  a
standard  of  definiteness  as  this.

(3)  The  evidence  for  the  third  class  of  prevision,  i.e.
prevision  of  a  particular  incident  not  predictable  seemingly
by  ordinary  processes  of  thought,  is  immensely  inferior
both  in  quantity  and  quahty  to  the  evidence  for  the  first
class  of  prevision,  and  is  inferior  in  quality  to  the  evidence
for  the  second  class  of  prevision.  It  consists  of  the
"  Lusitama,"  the  Fenchurch  Street and  the  "  Path-
finder "  cases.  The  coincidences  between  these  particular
references  in  Mrs.  King's  scripts  and  certain  incidents  in
the  War  may  be  fortuitous  :  in  which  case  there  is  no
question  of  prevision.  Different  people,  no  doubt,  will
form  different  views  on  the  subject,  as  always  happens  in
cases  where  no  mathematical  theory  of  probabilities  can
be  applied.  Speaking  for  myseK,  however,  although  I
entertain  a  strong  prejudice  against  the  possibihty  of  this
kind  of  prevision,  I  do  not  feel  that  I  can  honestly
dismiss  these  three  cases  from  my  mind  for  good  and  aU
as  mere  chance-coincidences.  I  do  not  mean  that,  because
I  cannot  dismiss  them,  I  accept  them  as  exa,mples  of
prevision.  I  mean  only  that,  much  as  I  should  like  to
play  the  esprit  fort,  I  feel  bound  to  suspend  judgment.

But  let  us  for  a  moment  assume  that  the  references  in
King script to the Lxisitania, for instance, are  really


602


J.  G.  Piddington.


[part


evidence  of  prevision.  I  presume  it  is  scarcely  necessary
to  point  out  how  vastly  greater  are  the  theoretic  diffi-
culties in  the  way  of  believing  in  the  possibility  of  fore-
seeing such  an  event  as  the  sinking  of  the  Lusitania  than
are  the  difficulties  in  the  way  of  believing  in  the  possi-
bility of  foreseeing  the  War.  To  suppose  that  a  particular
event  like  the  sinking  of  the  Lusitania  can  be  definitely
foreseen  more  than  a  year  before  it  occurs,  seems  almost
to  commit  us  to  a  system  of  rigid  determinism  ;  and
though  determinism  may  be  acceptable  to  some  philo-
sophers and  many  Orientals,  to  most  Europeans  it  is
repugnant.  But  for  the  sake  of  argument  proceeding
still  on  the  assumption  that  the  sinldng  of  the  Lusitania
was  predicted  in  Mrs.  King's  script,  let  me  venture  to
suggest  a  possible  way  out  of  the  dilemma  :

It  may  be  very  difficult  for  the  communicators  to  get  a
reference  to  a  particular  subject  inserted  in  the  scripts  ;
but  once  inserted,  there  seems  to  be  little  or  no  difficulty
in  getting  it  repeated.  Now  there  are  only  two  "  Lusi-
tania "  references.  Accordingly,  if  the  comnumicators
really  foresaw  the  future  fate  of  the  Lusitania,  and
intended  to  furnish  evidence  of  their  foreknowledge  by
means  of  these  references,  it  is  strange  that  they  failed  to
emphasise  them  by  frequent  repetition,  as  they  do  in  the  !
case  of  other  important  topics  ;  for  they  must  have  i
recognized  that  evidence  of  this  kind  of  prevision  is  most
rare  and  of  supreme  interest.  If,  then,  they  really
possessed  foreknowledge  of  this  future  event,  why  did  they
thus  restrict  their  references  to  it  1  It  seems  to  me
worth  suggesting  that  the  reason  for  their  reticence  may
have  been  that  although  in  February  1914  they  foresaw
the  sinldng  of  the  Lusitania  as  a  possibility  or  probability,
they  recognized  that  circumstances  might  yet  intervene  to
prevent  the  contingency  becoming  a  reality  ;  and  con-
sequently thought  it  wiser  to  refrain  from  laying  too
much  stress  on  their  prophecy.  In  the  event  of  the  -i
thing  predicted  not  happening,  their  slight  references  to  it
would  present  no  great  stumbling-block,  for  they  would  be
readily  passed  over  as  part  of  the  dross  from  which  the  ^
gold of the scripts has to be sifted. Prediction of  a


LXXXVII.]


Concluding  Remarks.


603


coming  War  stands  on  a  different  footing.  In  this  case
they  may  have  recognized  that  the  forces  tending  to  bring
it  about  were  of  such  a  character  as  to  prechide  the
possibihty  of  their  being  interfered  mth,  and  had  already
rendered  the  War  a  moral  certainty.  But  recognizing
that  the  sinldng  of  the  Lusitania  was  problematical,  they
may  have  preferred  not  to  risk  a  full-blown  prophecy
about  it.

If  chance-coincidence  be  ruled  out,  another  explanation
might  be  that  the  communicators  were  aware  of  the
design  or  desire  of  certain  persons  in  Germany  to  attack
England's  mercantile  marine  in  the  coming  war,  and  that
they  chose  the  Lusitania  as  a  type  or  symbol  of  this
designed  attack  ;  and  that  the  tj^e  happened  to  l^ecome
one  of  the  realities.  Other  hypotheses  could  be  invented,
no  doubt  ;  but  meanwliile  the  best  course  appears  to  me
to  suspend  judgment  and  to  await  fresh  evidence  of  this
kind  of  prevision.

(4)  I  turn  now  to  the  fourth  class  of  prediction.  Each
of  us  can  compare  the  script  references  to  the  War  and
to  the  Lusitania  with  the  events  ;  but  none  of  us  can
compare  what  the  scripts  predict  about  the  eventual
outcome  of  the  War  with  the  event.  In  the  first  three
cases  we  may  or  not,  as  we  choose,  suspend  judgment  ;
in  the  fourth  case  we  must.  It  is  for  this  reason,  in
part  at  any  rate,  that  I  have  placed  the  ''  Utopian  "
predictions  in  a  class  by  themselves.  We  may  be  im-
pressed by  them,  or  we  may  smile  at  them  ;  but  we
cannot  judge  them  by  the  light  of  events.  I  have
separated  them,  however,  from  the  other  three  classes  for
other  reasons  as  well.  They  differ  from  the  "Lusitania"
class  of  prediction  in  two  respects  :  by  their  general
character,  and  by  the  fact  that  they  form  the  subject  of
repeated  and  long-continued  references.  They  differ  from
the  predictions  of  the  War  by  their  far  greater  improb-
ability.^  The  history  of  mankind  is  largely  a  history  of
wars  ;  but  the  history  of  mankind  contains  no  instance
of  the  realisation  of  a  Utopia.

^  See  footnote  (1)  on  p.  649  above  re  Shelley's  note  on  the  last  Chorus
in  his  Hellas.


604


J .  G.  Piddington.


[part


Utopias  have  been  the  theme  of  poets  and  thinkers  in
all  ages.  Nevertheless,  and  though  "  many  prophets  and
kings  have  desired  to  see  these  things,"  they  "  have  not
seen  them  "  :  their  aspirations  have  not  been  realised,
their  dreams  have  not  come  true.  The  only  test  of  the
truth  of  such  foreshadowings  is  the  future  ;  and  so  far
the  future  has  always  given  them  the  lie.  I  am  not,  of
course,  denying  the  advance  of  civilization  ;  but  that
advance  is  painfully  slow,  and  neither  a  continuance  of
this  slow  advance,  nor  even  a  slight  quickening  of  its
pace,  could  be  held  to  fulfil  the  predictions  in  the  scripts.
Nor  can  we  escape  the  difficulty  by  assuming  that  the
communicators  are  merely  portraying  an  ideal  vision
designed  to  inspire  men  to  noble  efforts,  but  destined
never  to  be  achieved  in  practice  ;  for  that  is  not  the
natural  meaning  of  the  scripts.  Cryptic  though  much  of
them  is,  full  of  symbolism  though  they  are,  sophistry
alone  could  thus  whittle  down  their  meaning,  or  could
extract  from  them  anything  short  of  this  :  namely,  that
the  War  is  the  first  act  of  a  drama  which  is  to  culminate
in  an  unparalleled  improvement  in  the  condition  of
mankind.

The  scripts  in  general  terms  predicted  the  War  :  so  did
many  people.  Some  half-dozen  scripts  written  between
July  9  and  21,  1914,  predicted  that  the  War  was  close  at
hand  :  so  a,lso,  and  earlier,  had  Sir  Cecil  Spring-Rice.
The  scripts  predict  that  the  War  will  eventually  lead  to  a
great  improvement  in  international  relations  and  social
conditions  :  so  too  tens  of  thousands  of  ordinary  citizens
throughout  the  British  Empire  believed  or  hoped  that  the
Great  War  was,  as  the  phrase  went,  "  a  war  to  end  war."

But  this  last  parallel  between  the  predictions  in  the
scripts  and  the  beliefs  or  aspirations  that  declared  them-
selves with  such  strange  ubiquity  and  intensity  when  war
broke  out,  is  in  truth  only  a  superficial  parallel  ;  for
whereas  the  wave  of  idealism  that  swept  over  the  Empire
followed,  or  at  best  synchronised  with,  the  beginning  of
the  War,  for  many  years  before  August  1914  the  scripts
had  repeatedly  combined  predictions  of  a  Utopia  with
predictions  of  war, and  had  combined  them  in  such  a


LXXXVII.]


Conchiding  Bemarks.


605


manner  as  to  imply  that  the  one  is  to  be  the  outcome  of
the  other.  I  know  of  no  parallel  to  that.  The  writers,
the  soldiers,  the  diplomatists,  and  the  politicians  who
forewarned  us  of  the  War,  preached  its  dangers  and  its
horrors,  but  they  did  not  tell  us  that  this  perilous  and
horrible  tragedy  would  yet  prove  to  be  the  birth-throes
of  a  happier  world.  Nor  did  the  propagandists  of  Hague
Conferences  and  other  schemes  for  allaying  international
rivalries  warn  us  that  a  World-War  must  precede  the
attainment  of  their  desires.  All  alike  predicted  or  feared
a  coming  Chaos  : the  scripts  alone,  so  far  as  I  know,

"  spoke  of  a  hope  for  the  world  m  the  coming  Avars,"

and  hailed  the  approaching  Chaos  as  the  prelude  to  a
new  Kosmos.

The  predictions  of  the  War  m  the  scripts  cannot  be
separated  from  tlie  predictions  of  an  eventual  IHopia.
The  scriiots  do  not  say:  "there  will  be  a  war,"  stop
there,  and  then  start  afresh  and  say  :  "  there  will  be  a
Utopia."'  They  clearly  imply  that  the  Utopia  v/ill  result
from  the  War.  Yet  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  two  com-
ponent parts  of  the  whole  prophecy  stand  or  fall  together,
because  the  predictions  of  War  have  been  fulfilled  ;  but
the  fulfilment  or  the  failure  of  the  Utopian  predictions
must  eventually  influence  opinion  as  to  the  source  of  the
War  predictions.  Should  the  Utopia  foreshadowed  in  the
scripts  be  translated  into  fact,  it  would  be  very  difficult
to  attribute  the  prediction  of  it  as  an  outcome  of  the
War  to  ordinary  human  prescience  ;  and  a  strong  case
would  arise  for  admitting  the  claim  made  m  the  scripts,
and  for  giving  the  credit  of  the  prediction  to  discarnate
beings.  And  if  the  Utopian  predictions  were  held  to  be
the  work  of  discarnate  minds,  in  all  probabihty  the  pre-
dictions of  the  War,  which  are  so  closely  bound  up  A\ith
them,  would  be  assigned  to  the  same  source.


June — August,  1922.


606


Element  of  Chance  in  Book-Tests.


[PAET


ON  THE  ELEMENT  OF  CHANCE  IN  BOOK-TESTS.

Editorial  Note.  ■

In  discussions  and  criticisms  of  the  various  Reports  on
"  book-tests,""  obtained  at  sittings  with  Mrs.  Osborne
Leonard,  whicli  have  aj)peared  in  the  Proceedings  and
elsewhere^,  the  question  has  more  than  once  been  raised
as  to  how  far  the  results  obtained  might  be  attribut-
able to  chance-coincidence.  In  view  of  the  fact  that
book-tests  are  by  no  means  always  successful  and  that
even  where  some  measure  of  success  is  attained,  the
success  is  not  always  of  a  precise  and  definite  kind,  but
such  as  to  leave  a  good  deal  of  scope  for  individual
interpretation,  this  question  of  chance-coincidence  appears
to  be  deserving  of  careful  enquiry.  Probably  most  people
who  have  themselves  received  a  successful  book-test  have
carried  out  that  kind  of  rough  and  ready  method  of
enquiry  which  consists  in  searching  for  relevant  matter
upon  a  given  page  of  some  dozen  or  twenty  books  taken
at  random  from  their  shelves,  and  have  in  consequence
formed  the  opinion  that  if  the  indications  as  to  the
matter  contained  in  the  given  passage  are  sufficiently
precise,  chance  %\ill  give  only  a  very  small  measure  of
success.  But  these  rough  and  ready  methods  will  not
take  us  far  where  the  cj[uestion  is  one  of  statistics  and
percentages.  The  enquiry  must  be  conducted  more
systematically  and  over  a  wider  field.

It  was  with  this  object  that  the  experiments  with  which
we  are  here  concerned  were  devised,  and  we  take  this
opportunity  of  thanking  those  of  our  members  who
participated  in  them. We  have  also  particularly  to  thank

1  See,  e.g.,  Proc.  S.P.E.,  Vol.  XXXI.,  p.  241  ff.  ;  The  Earthen  Vessel,
by  Pamela  Glencomier ;  Some  New  Evidence  for  Human  Survical,  by
the  Rev.  Charles  Drayton-Thomas.


LXXXVII.]


Element  of  Chance  in  Book-Tests.


607


Colonel  C.  E.  Baddeley,  C.B.,  C.M.G.,  who  undertook  the
considerable  labour  of  analysing  the  results  and  drawing
up  a  table  of  percentages  indicating  the  degree  of  success
or  failure  which  was  obtained.

It  has  to  be  observed  that  the  statistical  method  as
applied  to  such  experiments  as  these,  presents  certain
obvious  limitations  and  diliiculties.  We  have  no  absolute
standard  by  which  success  can  be  measured,  as  we  have,
for  example,  in  the  guessing  of  numbers  or  cards  from  a
pack.  A  comparison  of  the  various  records  sent  in  to
us  by  experimenters  showed  considerable  variations  in  the
standard  by  which  the  results  had  been  judged.  In  one
record,  for  example,  a  result  would  be  tabulated  as  a
"  complete  success  "  and  in  another  a  very  similar  result
would  be  tabulated  as  only  a  "  partial  success."

One  of  the  tasks,  therefore,  which  fell  to  Colonel  Baddeley' s
lot  was  that  of  approximating  all  the  records,  so  far  as  might
be,  to  one  standard,  and  with  a  view  to  comparing  the
resrdts  obtained  in  these  experiments  with  those  obtained
at  sittings  with  Mrs.  Leonard  it  was  important  to  know
whether  his  standard  had  been  the  same  as  that  adopted
by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  in  judging  the  Leonard  book-tests.  We
therefore  submitted  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick  Colonel  Baddeley's
tabular  analysis  together  wdth  a  number  of  representative
specimens  selected  from  the  records  sent  in  by  our
members  and  asked  for  her  opinion  as  to  how  the  method
followed  by  Colonel  Baddeley  compared  with  her  own.
l^pon  this  point  Mrs.  Sidgwick  writes  as  follows  :

I  have  gone  through  the  "  sham  ""  book-tests  you  sent  with
care.  My  impression  is  that  I  agree  very  much  with  Colonel
Baddeley's  estimates  and  generally  think  his  revision  sound  on
the  whole,  though  he  tends  to  allow  things  to  count  too  much.
This,  however,  is  a  fault  on  the  right  side  for  our  present
purpose.  ...  I  have  tried  to  compare  the  standard  here
with  the  one  on  which  I  made  my  calculations  in  the  real
book-tests.  It  is  not  very  easy  because  the  things  one  has
to  judge  of  vary  so  much,  and  the  real  tests  include  so  many
rather  indefinite  things  ;  but  on  the  whole  I  think  my  standard
was  higher  than  that  we  have  applied  here. But,  as  before


608


Element  of  Chance  in  Book-Tests.


[part


remarked,  that  is  a  fault  on  the  right  side  [since  it  tends  to
increase  the  efficacy  of  mere  chance  in  giving  positive  results].

It  will  be  seen  from  this  statement  of  Mrs.  Sidgwick's
that  since  her  standard,  as  she  tells  us,  was  rather  higher
than  that  of  Colonel  Badcleley,  we  might  expect — if  the
results  in  both  cases  were  attributable  to  chance  alone —
that  the  percentage  of  success  recorded  in  her  report  on
the  Leonard  book-tests  would  be  rather  smaller  than  the
percentage  of  success  in  the  records  now  under  considera-
tion. But,  as  the  figures  which  we  give  below  (p.  614)
will  indicate,  this  was  not  the  case.

Mrs.  Sidgwick  refers  in  the  paragraph  quoted  above  to
another  difficulty  which  meets  us  in  our  enquiry.  In  the
Leonard  book-tests  the  indications  given  as  to  the  nature
of  the  message  to  be  looked  for  vary  greatly  in  precision,
and  therefore  the  degree  of  success  easily  attributable  to
chance  varies  also.  In  the  present  experiments  we  tried
to  meet  this  difficulty  to  some  extent  by  giving  three
tests  of  varying  degrees  of  precision.  The  first  test  was
such  as  to  leave  considerable  scope  for  individiial  inter-
pretation ;  the  second  left  less  to  interpretation,  but  was
of  such  a  nature  that  a  good  many  passages  might  be
found  which  in  one  way  or  another  would  fulfil  the
specified  requirements  ;  the  third  test  was  definite  in
character  and  not  such  as  would  be  easily  fulfilled.  As
was  to  be  expected,  the  percentage  of  success  was  con-
siderably lower  in  the  third  test  than  in  either  of  the
other  two.

Detailed  Report  of  the  Experiments  on  Chance.

The  following  instructions  were  sent  to  all  who  took
part  in  the  experiment,  together  with  a  short  covering
letter  (not  printed  here)  setting  before  them  the  object  of
the  experiment.

Instructions.

Choose  ten  books  at  random,  and  enter  their  names  on  the
attached  form.


I


Lxxxvii.] Element  of  Chance  in  Book-Tests.  609

Then  open  the  enclosed  cover,  in  which  you  will  find  the
three  messages  chosen,  together  mth  the  page  and  position
on  the  page  on  which  the  messages  are  to  be  sought.

Against  each  book,  and  in  a  separate  column  for  e^ch  test,
enter  the  result  as  : "  success  "  ; "  partial  "  ; or  '•  nil."

In  the  case  of  success,  or  partial  success,  wite  under
"  remarks  "  such  portion  of  the  test  and  such  brief  explanation
as  will  serve  to  elucidate  the  success.

Enclosed  in  a  separate  envelope  with  the  above  in-
structions were  the  three  tests.  Experimenters  were
particularly  requested  not  to  open  this  envelope  until  they
had  selected  their  books,  so  that  they  might  not  be
influenced  in  this  selection  by  any  conscious  or  sub-
conscious knowledge  concerning  the  contents  of  the  books
and  the  likelihood  of  references  to  the  subjects  of  the  tests.

The  list  of  tests  was  as  follows  :

Test  1.  A  passage  which  is  particularly  relevant  to  your
father.

Toj)  quarter  of  pacje  60  in  each  hook.

Test  2. An  allusion  to  circles  of  some  kind.

Bottom  half  of  page  35  in  each  book.

Test  3. Frost  and  snow,  or  a  passage  conveying  that  idea.
The  top  ten  lines  of  page  84  in  each  book.

Sixty  people  took  part  in  the  experiment,  and  it  will
be  noted  that  they  were  asked  to  choose  ten  books  and
to  search  for  each  of  the  three  tests  in  a  specified  part
of  each  book.  In  aU  therefore  eighteen  hundred  passages  ^
were  examined,  six  hundj-ed  for  each  test.

The  table  which  is  given  below  indicates  the  percentage  of
successes  (complete  or  partial)  and  of  failures  which  were
obtained  with  each  of  the  three  tests.  The  figures  given
here are in accordance with Colonel Bacldeley's  revised

1  In  giving  this  number  we  do  not  take  into  accomit  that  in  six  cases
the  same  book  was  chosen  by  two  persons  and  in  one  case  by  three
persons,  a  circumstance  which  does  not  affect  calculations  as  to  the  degree
of  success  attributable  to  chance.


610  Eleinent  of  Chance  in  Book-Tests.  [part


estimate  which — as  is  indicated  above — differed  in  some
cases  from  the  estimate  of  the  experimenters  themselves.
In  particular,  experimenters  sometimes  reckoned  as  com-
plete successes  results  which  according  to  Colonel  Badde-
ley's  standard,  and  still  more  according  to  the  standard
apphed  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  to  the  Leonard  book-tests,  can
only  be  reckoned  as  partial  successes.  In  the  Appendix
to  this  paper  we  have  given  some  of  these  results  in
detail,  showing  the  effect  of  Colonel  Baddeley's  revision,
so  that  readers  may  judge  this  matter  for  themselves.

Table  of  Percentages.

For  the  purpose  of  calculating  these  percentages  the
results  were  divided  into  four  classes  :  (1)  Comj^lete
success,  (2)  partial  success,  (3)  slight  success,  (4)  failure.
The  table  shows  the  percentages  obtained  (a)  of  complete
successes  (S),  (b)  of  complete  and  partial  successes  (S  -hP),
(c)  of  complete,  partial  and  slight  successes  (S-t-P+P?).

The  figures  are  given  first  for  each  test  separately  and
then  for  the  average  of  the  three  tests  taken  together.


Test  I.

(A  passage  which  is  'particularly  relevant  to  your  father.)


Number  of  passages  examined.

Results.

Percentages.

600

S - -  9

1-5

S+P  - -  27

4-5

S+P  +  P  I  -  50

8-33

Test

11.

{An  allusion,  to  circles  of  some  hind.)

Number  of  passages  examined.

Results.

Percentages.

600

S - -  15

2-5

S+P  - -  41

6-83

S+P  +  P  'I  -  66

110

Lxxxvii.] Element  of  Chance  in  Book-Tests.  611

Test  III.


(Frost  and  snoiv,  or  a  passage  convey itig  that  idea.)


Number  of  passages  examined.

Results.

Percentages.

600

S -~ -  10
S+P  - -  17
S+P  +  P  ?  -  22

1-  67

2-  83

3-  67

Tests  L,  II.  and  III.  combined.

Nximber  of  passages  examined.

Results.

Percentages.

1800

S - -  34

S+P  - -  85
S+P+P?  -138

1-89
4-72
7-67

There  are  certain  peculiarities  in  these  results  to  which
it  seems  worth  while  to  call  attention.  In  the  first  place
it  will  be  seen  that  all  the  percentages  are  higher  in  the
case  of  the  second  test.  This  can  be  explained  by  the
fact  that  there  are  many  things  which  in  one  way  or
another  convey  the  idea  of  a  circle.  The  reference  may
be  explicit  as,  e.g.  "  a  small  circular  mirror,"  "  encircled
.  .  .  the  circular  shield,"'  and  such  passages  are  reckoned
as  full  successes.  But  there  may  also  be  allusions  to
circular  objects,  such  as  signet  rings  and  cogwheels,  and
these  are  reckoned  as  partial  successes.

In  regard  to  the  third  test  two  points  may  be  noted.
Firstly,  it  is  the  only  one  of  the  three  tests  in  which
the  effect  of  Colonel  Baddeley's  revision  has  been  to
increase  (in  a  very  slight  degree)  the  percentage  of  suc-
cesses (S). The  relevant  figures  are  given  below  :


Percentage  as  received.

Revised  percentage.

Test

I.  -

2-5

1-6

Test

II.  -

3-63

2-5

Test

III.

1-17

1-67

612


Element  of  Chance  in  Book-Tests.


[part


This  increase  in  the  percentage  is  due  to  the  circum-
stance that  in  three  cases  (see  Appendix)  Colonel  Baddeley
reckoned  as  full  successes  results  which  experimenters  had
reckoned  only  as  partial  successes.  ;

Secondly,  the  percentage  of  partial  and  slight  successes
(P  +  P  ? )  is  very  mucli  less  in  the  case  of  the  third  test
than  in  either  of  the  other  two.  The  relevant  figures  are
given  in  the  table  below  :


Percentage  as  received.

Revised  percentage.

Test

I.  -

717

6-83

Test

II.

8-17

8-5 '  ■

Test

III.

2-83

2-0

This  circumstance  can  be  explained  by  the  fact  that
the  idea  of  frost  and  snow,  being  of  a  quite  definite
character,  hardly  admits  of  such  vague  and  doubtful
references  as  were  reckoned  "  slight  successes  "  in  the
case  of  the  other  tests.  We  have  here  a  good  example
of  how  much  the  evidential  value  of  book-tests  may  vary
in  proportion  to  the  precision  with  which  the  subject  of
the  message  has  been  indicated.

We  may  now  turn  to  a  comparison  between  the  results
observed  in  the  present  experiments  and  those  of  the
Leonard  book-tests,  as  examined  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  ;  but
in  making  this  comparison  one  peculiarity  of  the  Leonard
results  must  l)e  taken  into  account.  Ostensibly  these
results  come  from  a  considerable  number  of  different
communicators  (over  thirty),  and  some  communicators
appear  to  have  a  much  greater  success  in  carrying  out
l^ook-tests  than  others.  Consequently  the  percentage  of
success  will  be  found  to  be  considerably  lower  if  we  take
all  the  book-tests  into  account  than  if  we  consider  only
those  which  i^urport  to  come  from  particularly  siiccessful
communicators .

This  individual  element  is  one  which  must  be
reckoned  with  in  any  comparison  we  make  between  the


LXXXVII.]


Element  of  Chance  in  Book-Tests.


613


Leonard  tests  and  the  present  experiments  in  chance -
coincidence,  because  if  chance  were  the  only  factor  in  the
Leonard  results  also,  there  would  be  no  reason  why  one
communicator  should  have  more  success  than  another.
To  make  a  fair  comparison  it  will  be  best  to  give  figures
showing  the  percentage  of  success  obtained  (a)  by  taking-
all  the  tests,  {h)  by  taking  only  those  which  came  from
certain  particularly  successful  communicators.  We  need
not  here  concern  ourselves  with  the  problem  as  to  whether
book-tests  do  in  fact  derive  from  the  purporting  com-
municators, or  whether  they  might  be  explained  in  some
other  way,  e.g.  by  clairvoyance  on  the  part  of  the  medium.
The  important  point  for  our  present  purpose  is  that
tests  given  in  association  with  one  supposed  communicator
show  a  much  higher  percentage  of  success  than  those
given  in  association  with  another.

In  a  footnote  to  her  paper  on  book-tests  {Proc.  S.P.R.,
Vol.  XXXI.,  pp.  245,  246)  Mrs.  Sidgwick  writes  as
follows  :

There  were  34  sitters  whose  book-tests  were  verified  .  .  .
These  sitters  had  amongst  them  146  sittings  at  which  book-
tests  were  given,  and  at  these  sittings  about  532  separate
book-test  items  occurred  .  .  .  Tliese  532  items  may  be  classed
as  92  successful  ;  100  approximately  successful  ;  204  complete
failures  ;  40  nearly  complete  failures  ;  96  dubious.  Taking
the  first  two  classes  together  we  may  say  that  almost  36  per
cent,  of  the  attempts  were  approximately  successful.

"  The  first  two  classes  "  referred  to  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick
may  be  taken  as  corresponding  with  those  results  in  the
present  experiments  which  have  been  classed  as  S  (success)
and  P  (partial  success).  From  the  table  given  above
(p.  611)  it  will  be  seen  that  taking  the  combined  results
of  the  three  tests  the  percentage  of  S  4-P  was  4-7,  so
that  the  whole  number  of  book-tests  examined  by  Mrs.
Sidgwick  show  a  percentage  of  complete  or  partial  suc-
cesses very  considerably  greater  than  the  percentage
obtained  in  the  present  experiments,  36  per  cent,  as
compared  with 4-7 per  cent. But the balance is  even


614


Element  of  Chance  in  Book-Tests.


[part


more  definitely  in  favour  of  the  Leonard  results,  if  we
consider  the  tests  given  by  certain  individual  communi-
cators. The  following  table  gives  the  percentage  of
success  obtained  (a)  in  the  three  experimental  tests,  (b)  in
the  tests  given  by  three  successful  communicators  whom
we  will  call  X,  Y  and  Z.


No.  of  Results
examined.

S.

S  +  P.

S  +  P  +  P  ?

[a)  Experimental

tests.

(Aggregate  Results)

1800

L89

4-72

7-67

{b)  Leonard  tests.

Communicator  X  -

283

L5-5

37-9

56-1

r  -

64

20-3

47-0

70-0

z  -

22

63-6

68-2

77-2

All  communicators  -

532

17-2

36

54- 1

To  make  the  test  still  more  crucial  it  would  doubtless
have  been  an  advantage  if  we  could  have  had  a  larger
number  of  Leonard  tests  submitted  to  us.  But,  as  it  is,
the  net  was  spread  fairly  ^vdde.  The  total  number  of
results  examined  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  532,  is  not  far  short
of  the  number  of  results  examined  in  regard  to  each  of
the  three  experimental  tests,  600,  and  the  percentages
given  in  the  table  above  show  that  even  if  we  include  in
our  reckoning  a  considerable  number  of  comparatively
unsuccessful  communicators,  the  percentage  of  success  is
much  higher  in  the  Leonard  tests  than  in  the  chance
experiments.


Lxxxvii.] Element  of  Chance  in  Book-Tests.


615


0

APPENDIX.

We  give  below  five  specimen  results  together  with  the
remarks  made  by  the  experimenters  and  Colonel  Badde-
ley's  comments,  so  that  the  readers  may  judge  of  the
standard  applied.

I.


No.

Name  of  Book.

Test  I.

Test  II.

Test  III.

1

Gibbon's  Roman  Em-
pire, Vol.  2  (Frowde)

Nil

Nil

Nil

2

Leacock's  Literary
Lapses

Partial  (1)

Partial  (3)

Nil

3

Wm.  M'Dougairs  Body
and  Mind

Nil

Nil

Nil

4

Darwin's  Descent  of
Man

Nil

Nil

Nil

5

Matthew  Arnold's
Poems

Nil

NH

Nil

6

Emerson's  English
Traits  and  Repre-
sentative Men

Success  (2)

Nil

Nil

7

Macaulay's  Essays  and
Lays  of  Ancient  Rome

Nil

Nil

Nil

8

Swift's  Battle  of  the
Books

Nil

Nil

Nil

9

Plato's  Works,  Vol.  3
(Bohn)

Nil

Nil

Nil

10

Sir  Ohver  Lodge's
Electrons

Nil

Nil

Success  (4)

Remarks  by  the  Experimenter.

(1)  Reference  to  illness  and  "  October,  1910."  My
father  died  in  October  (1897).

(2)  Reference  to  Mme  de  Stael,  Bonaparte  and  Welling-
ton's Peninsular  Campaign.  My  father  read  a  good  deal
of  French  history  and  literature.

(3)  Reference  to  signet  rings  which  are  circular.

(4)  Reference to C. T. R. Wilson's experiment,  pre-


616


Element  of  Chance  in  Book-Tests.


[part


cipitating  "  a  definite  and  known  quantity  of  aqueous
vapour  in  a  visible  form."  But  "  fog  "  or  "  rain  "  would
have  been  more  apposite  than  frost  and  snow.

Comment  by  Colonel  Baddeley.

Test  I.,  Book  2.  Quotes  illness  and  October,  1910.
Experimenter's  father  died  in  October,  1897.  A  very
doubtful  "partial."

Test  I.,  Book  6.  About  Mme  de  Stael,  Bonaparte  and
the  Peninsular  Campaign.  His  father  used  to  read  a
good  deal  of  French  literature  and  history.  Given  as  a
"  success,"  allusion  too  remote,  I  revise  as  "  partial."

Test  III.,  Book  10,  "  precipitating  a  definite  and  known
quantity  of  aqueous  vapour  in  a  visible  form."  Given  as
a  "  success." I  retain  it,  but  I  consider  it  very  doubtful.


II.


No.

Name  of  Book.

Test  I.

Test  11.

Test  III.

1

Quee7i  Victoria,  by
Lytton  Strachey

Nil

Nil

Nil

2

Simon  the  Jester,  by
W.  J.  Locke

Nil

Partial  (1)

Nil

3

Naval  Occasions,  by
Bartimaeus

Nil

Nil

Nil

4

Life  of  R.  L.  Steven-
son, by  Graham  Bal-
four

Nil

Nil

Nil

5

Septimus,  by  W.  J.
Locke

Nil

Success  (2)

Nil

6

Psychic  Phenomena,
by  T.  J.  Hudson

Nil

Nil

Nil

7

Mrs.  Marden,  by
Robert  Kitchens

Nil

Nil

Nil

8

John  Charity,  by
H.  A.  Vachell

Nil

Nil

Nil

9

The  Vital  Choice,  by
D.  Forster

Nil

Nil

Not  84  pages
in  this  book

10

In  Quest  of  an  Ideal,
by  E.  Holmes

Nil

Nil

Nil

Lxxxvii.] Element  of  Chance  in  Book-Tests.  617

Remarks  by  Experimenter.

(1)  Rather  more  than  half-way  clown  the  page  are  the
words  "  the  lady  of  the  circus."

(2)  "  To  have  cogwheels  instead  of  corpuscles  must  be
very  trying."

Go7nment  hy  Colonel  Baddeley.

Test  11.,  Book  5.  "To  have  cogwheels  instead  of
corpuscles,"  I  revise  as  "  partial."


III.


No.

Name  of  Book.

Test  I.

Test  II.

Test  III.

1

The  Reluctant  Lover,

Uy IVl  iVclllia.

Nil

Success  (2)

Nil

■2

Herodotus.  Oxford
Texts

Nil

Nil

Nil

3

English  Monastic  Life,
by  Gasquet

Nil

Nil

Success  (4)

4

Short  Fiscal  History
of  England,  by  Read

Partial  (1)

NU

5

Uncensored  Celebrities,
by  Raymond

NU

Nil

NU

6

Niimberg.  Mediaeval
Towns  Series

Nil

Nil

NU

7

English  Utilitarians,
by  Leslie  Stephen

NU

Nil

Success  (5)

8

English  Historical
Literature  of  15th
Century,  by  Kings-
ford

Nil

Nil

NU

9

Notes  on  a  Cellar  Book,
Saintsbury

NU

Success  (3)

NU

10

Poems  and  Ballads,
2nd  Series,  by  Swin-
burne

Nil

Nil

NU

618


Element  of  Chance  in  Book-Tests.


[part


Remarks  by  Experimenter.

(1)  "In  moving  for  a  Committee  of  the  Lords,  Lansdowne
ventured  to  indicate  ..."  My  father,  while  official  short-
hand writer  to  the  House  of  Lords,  attended  many  of  their
Committees,  but  not,  of  course,  the  one  referred  to  (1821).

(2)  "  They  were  to  found  a  brotherhood  of  Samurai,
and  their  mission  should  be  to  offer  the  example  of  a
new  way  of  life." Undoubtedly  "  a  circle  of  some  kind."

(3)  "  Back  vintages  from  70  onwards,"  the  o  being  a  circle.

(4)  In  describing  the  duties  of  kitchen  servers  it  is  said
"  if  there  were  a  frost  they  had  to  provide  basins  of  hot  water."

(5)  Line  2,  "to  say  that  snotv  is  white  .  .  .  simply  means
that  certain  sensations  of  colour  are  excited  in  us  by  snow."

Comment  by  Colonel  Baddeley.

Test  I.,  Book  4.  Sent  in  as  "  partial,"  but  I  think  it
good  enough  to  count  as  a  "  success."

Test  II.,  Book  1.  This  is  returned  as  a  "  success,"  but
the  allusion  to  a  circle  is  very  indefinite  and  I  have  revised
it  as  "  sUght."

IV.


No.

Name  of  Book.

Test  I.

Test  II.

Teat  III

1

The  Rescue,  by  Conrad

P.  60  blank

Success  (1)

Nil

2

Oxford  Book  of  Eng-
lish Verse

Nil

NH

Nil

3

The Voyage  Out,  by
Woolf

Nil

Partial  (2)

Nil

4

Mommsen's  Rome,
Vol.  IV.

Nil

Nil

Nil

5

Vorlesungen,  by  Freud

Nil

NU

Nil

6

Elf Einakter,  by
Strindberg

Nil

Nil

Nil

7

Life's Handicap,  by
Kipling

Nil

Nil

Nil

8

Revolte  des  Anges,  by
France

Nil

Nil

Nil

9

Creevey  Papers,  Vol.  I.

Nil

Nil

NU

10

Blindman, E.  Col-
burne  Mayne

Nil

Blank  page

Nil

Lxxxvii.] Element  of  Chance  in  Book-Tests.  .  619

Remarks  by  the  Experimenter.

(1)  Test  II.  '■  The  semi  circular  couch  "  .  .  .  "  en-
circled "  .  .  .  "  the  circular  shield."

(2)  Test  II. "  a  ball  of  thistledown."

The  Conrad  passage  is  really  remarkable.  The  first  of
the  three  circles  is  exactly  half-way  down  the  page,  the
next  about  three-quarters  and  the  last  6  lines  from  the
bottom.


V.


No.

Name  of  Book.

Test  I.

Test  II.

Test  III.

1

Cousin  Trix,  by
Georgina  Craik

Nil

Nil

Nil

2

Fair  Maid  of  Perth,
by  Scott

Partial  (1)

Nil

NU

3

Lost  Empires  of  the
Modern  World,  by
W.  F.  Lord

Nil

Nil

Nil

4

Strand  Magazine,  Vol.
XVI.

Nil

Success  (5)

Nil

5

The  Making  of  Eiig-
land

Nil

Nil

Nil

6

Catalogue of  the
London  Library,
A-K

Partial  (2)

Nil

Nil

7

Grove's  Dictionary  of
Music,  T-Z

Nil

Nil

Nil

8

Transactions  of  the
Monumental  Brass
Society,  Vol.  V.

Success  (3)

Nil

NU

9

Practical  Astronomy,
by  CampbeU

Nil

Partial  (6)

Nil

10

The  Royal  Readers,
No.  4

Partial  (4)

Nil

Nil

Remarks  by  the  Experimenter.

(1)  "  He  has  too  early  lost  a  father."

(2)  1899,  the  date  of  my  father's  death,  occurs  three  times.


620  Element  of  Chance  in  Book-Tests,  [part  lxxxvii.]

(3)  Description  of  brass  monument  with  4  shields,  one
in  each  corner,  and  marginal  inscription  round  slab.  My
father's  gravestone  has  a  brass  which  is  similar  in  these
respects.  The  brass  described  was  to  a  man  with  4  sons
and  3  daughters.  My  father  had  three  daughters,  but
only  2  sons.

(4)  Description  of  pearl  fishing  ;  my  father  was  a  keen
fisherman.

(5)  "  a  small  circular  mirror."

(6)  Allusions  to  zenith,  distance  and  seconds  of  arc.

Comment  by  Colonel  Baddeley.

Test  I.,  Books  6  and  10,  returned  as  "  partial,"  but
revised  "  slight."


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

PART  LXXXVIII.
JULY,  1923.


AN  EXPERIMENTAL  STUDY  OF  THE  APPRECIATION
OF  TIME  BY  SOMNAMBULES.

By  Sydney  E.  Hoopee,  M.A.

It  is  now  well  known  that  certain  subjects,  after  passing
out  of  the  hypnotic  state,  do  not  remember  anything
that  they  have  done  or  that  has  been  said  to  them
during  their  trance.  Notwithstanding  this  amnesia,  how-
ever, they  will  in  their  waking  state,  and  sometimes
during  their  normal  sleep,  carry  out  suggestions  made  to
them  in  the  trance  with  remarkable  fidelity,  fulfilling
them  at  the  correct  time  with  surprising  accuracy.  The
interestmg  thing  about  such  achievements  by  some
nambules  is  that  at  first  sight  they  appear  to  have  the
faculty  of  appreciating  the  passage  of  time  without  the
aid  of  the  perception  of  changes  in  the  external  world.
For  example,  one  of  Dr.  Bramwell's  patients  was  told
whilst  in  the  hypnotic  state  to  make  a  cross  and  write
down  what  she  judged  to  be  the  time  after  the  expira-
tion of  a  certain  number  of  minutes  without,  or  at  least
before,  consulting  a  time-piece.  The  time-intervals  m
the  experiments  varied  from  320  minutes  to  21,434
minutes.  Out  of  a  total  of  55  experiments,  26  were
fulfilled  in  the  waking  state,  15  in  hypnosis,  13  in  natural

2e


622


Sydney  E.  Hooper,  31. A.


[PABT'


sleep,  only  one  being  doubtful.  Discrepancies  occurred  in
9  instances,  but  the  errors  ranged  from  1  to  5  minutes
only.  When  asked  in  hypnosis  how  these  achievements
were  effected,  the  subject  informed  Dr.  Bramwell  :  ^

(1)  That  when  the  suggestions  were  made  in  hypnosis

she  did  not  calculate  when  they  fell  due.

(2)  That she did  not calculate them any  time  after-

wards during  hypnosis.

(3)  That  she  had  no  recollection  of  them  when  hypnosis

terminated.

(4)  That  no memory of them ever  afterwards  awoke

in  her  waking  state.

(5)  That shortly before their fulfilment she  always

experienced  a  motor  impulse — i.e.  her  fingers  moved
as  if  to  grasp  a  pencil  and  to  perform  the  act  of
writing.

(6)  That  this  impulse  was  immediately  followed  by  the

idea  of  making  a  cross  and  writing  certain  figures.

(7)  That  she  never  looked,  at  clock  or  ivatch  until  after

she  had  made  her  record.

Now,  normally,  it  is  by  means  of  certain  changes
regularly  occurring  in  the  world  in  which  we  live,  such
as  the  Earth's  revolution  roinid  the  sun,  the  rotation  of
the  Earth  on  its  axis,  the  revolution  of  the  moon  round
the  Earth,  that  we  are  able  conventionally  to  divide
'  time's  continuous  flow  '  into  years,  months,  days.  We
also  employ  for  our  convenience  certain  mechanisms  like
the  clock  or  watch,  which  are  devised  in  such  a  way  as
to  produce  movements  over  tracts  of  space  at  a  constant
velocity,  to  assist  us  in  subdviding  the  passage  of  time
into  smaller  intervals.  There  could  be  no  apprehension  of
what  we  call  '  Time  '  were  it  not  for  the  fact  of  change.
The  cycle  of  the  seasons,  the  alternation  of  the  phases
of  the  Moon  from  new  to  full  and  its  subsequent  decline,
the  alternation  of  day  and  night,  the  movements  of  the
hands  of  the  clock,  all  fiirnish  examples  of  the  changes
taking  place  in  the  world,  through  which  we  apprehend

^  J.  Miine  BramwelFs  Hypnotism,  its  History,  Practice  and  Thewy^
pp  122-123.


Lxxxvni.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnamhules  623

the  passage  of  time.  Days,  hours,  mimites,  seconds,  are
devices  for  measuring  the  number  of  sensory  chaiages
experienced  in  succession,  and  "  Time  Psychological
datum  is  but  a  quality  of  our  sensations  and  feelings."
Thus,  awareness  of  change  in  our  sensory  presentations  is
a  necessary  condition  of  our  perception  of  time.

If,  then,  no  calculations  as  to  when  the  suggestions
fell  due  were  made  by  Dr.  BramwelFs  subject,  and  if,
further,  no  watching  or  noting  of  the  regular  planetary
movements  and  the  movements  of  clocks  or  watches
took  place  to  measure  the  passage  of  time,  then  it  would
seem  that  a  somnambule  possesses  what  might  be  called
an  ■  intuitive  '  knowledge  of  the  flight  of  time,  and  is
not  dependent,  as  normally  we  are,  upon  changes  takmg
place  in  the  world  and  upon  mechanisms  for  measuring
such  changes.

It  will  be  admitted  that  if  this  is  the  case,  then  it  is
a  very  remarkable  mental  endowment,  and  its  discovery
of  great  interest  to  the  Science  of  Psychology  ;  con-
sequently, in  the  hope  of  learning  the  truth  of  the  matter,
I  began  an  experimental  investigation  in  the  winter  of
last  year.  Fortunately,  in  the  course  of  my  professional
work,  I  became  acquainted  with  two  somnambules,  who
were  kind  enough  to  submit  themselves  to  a  series  of
experiments.  One  of  the  subjects,  "  Miss  E.,'"  is  em-
ployed as  a  clerk  in  the  City,  and  during  the  time  covered
by  the  investigations  w"as  a  student  in  a  class  studying
Psychology,  of  which  I  am  the  Tutor.  The  other  subject,
"  Mrs.  L.,"  who  Hves  in  the  country  not  far  from  my
home,  is  a  lady  of  keen  intellectual  interests,  endowed
mth  considerable  powers  of  literary  imagination  and
expression.

I  began  my  investigations  with  experiments  on  "  Miss
E.,"  the  nature  and  results  of  which  I  now  proceed  to
give.

Subject  1. ''Miss  E."

The  first  two  experiments  I  regard  as  a  test  :  these
proving  satisfactory,  the  work  was  continued  at  regular
intervals.


624


Sydney  E.  Hooper,  M.A.


[part


Miss  E.  showed  herself  to  be  a  genuine  somnambule,
having  no  remembrance  in  her  normal  waking  state  of
suggestions  made  to  her  during  hypnosis.  Two  points
should  be  noted  at  the  outset  :

1.  That  all  the  suggestions  were  made  when  the  subject

was  in  the  hypnotic  state.

2.  That  she  was  not  told  the  exact  time  at  which  the

suggestions  were  given.

No.  1.  "Just  before  getting  into  bed  Avrite  down  the  time
without  looking  at  your  watch."

Result.  Correct.  The  following  week  when  the  Class
met  Miss  E.  told  me  she  felt  an  impulse  to  do
this  at  two  minutes  to  eleven,  and  handed  me  a
piece  of  23a];)er  on  which  this  time  was  Avritten.
By  comparing  this  ^\'ith  her  A\'atch  she  found  that
it  agreed  exactly.

No.  2.  Tue.sday,  February  1st,  1922.

"  Draw  a  triangle  and  a  square  at  11.45  a.m.  on
Wednesday."

Result.  Correct.  Miss  E.  brought  me  the  following
Tuesday  a  piece  of  paper  with  the  figures  duly
drawn  and  11.45  a.m.  written  underneath.

No.  3.  February  7th,  1922. Suggestion given at 8.5  p.m.
Due  11  p.m.

"  At  the  expiration  of  175  minutes  write  down  the
time  Avithout  looking  at  a  clock  or  watch."

Result.  Miss  E.  wrote  "  I  felt  I  had  to  find  out  a
time,  and  just  shrugged  my  shoulders  and  said
five  past  eleven.  Then  some  time  after  a  noise
arrested  my  attention,  and  on  looking  at  my
watch  I  found  it  was  five  minutes  past  eleven."

Remarks.  If  the  suggestion  was  given  exactly  at
8.5  p.m.  there  is  an  error  of  five  minutes.  It
is  interesting  to  note,  however,  that  Miss  E.
'  shrugged  her  shoulders  and  said  five  minutes
past  eleven,'  '  some  time  '  before.  She  told  me
she  meant  by  this  a  few  minutes.


Lxxxviii.] The  Ajypreciatioii  of  Time  by  Somnamlndes  625


No.  4.  Tuesday,  February  14th,  1922. 8.9  p.m. Due  11  a.m.,
February  15th.
"  At  the  expu-ation  of  891  mimites  draw  a  diamond
and  put  down  the  time."

Result.  Miss  E.  -wrote,  "  I  decided  to  write  dowTi
the  time  three  minutes  to  eleven,  and  on  looking
at  my  watch  the  actual  time  A\'as  two  minutes
to  eleven  o'clock."

Remarks.  By  my  watch  the  suggestion  should  have
been  fulfilled  exactly  at  eleven  o'clock.  The
diamond  was  not  drawn.  I  think  we  may
say  that  the  difference  between  the  subject's
decision,  '  three  minutes  to  eleven,'  and  the  actual
time,  two  minutes  to  eleven,  may  be  ignored  if
allowance  be  made  for  the  slight  variations  in
'  clock  time.'  The  only  question  of  importance
is  why  she  decided  to  write  '  three  minutes  to
eleven  '  instead  of  eleven.  Did  she  '  guess  '  it
was  8.6  p.m.  instead  of  8.9  p.m.  when  the  sug-
gestion was  given  ?

No.  5.  Wednesday, February 15th, 1922. 6.30 p.m.  Due
10.30  a.m.,  February  16th.
"  At  expiration  of  960  minutes  draw  a  diamond
and  write  down  the  time."

Result.  Correct.  A  piece  of  paper  with  a  diamond
on  it  and  the  time  10.30  a.m.  was  handed  to  me
on  the  following  Tuesday.

No.  6.  Tuesday,  February  21st, 1922. 10.7  p.m. Due  10.7
p.m.,  February  23rd.
"  At  expiration  of  2880  minutes  draw  a  square  and
write  the  time  in  it."

Result. Square  drawn  with  10.2  written  inside.

Note.  An  error  of  five  minutes  was  made  in  this
instance,  if  my  entry  of  the  time  was  strictly
accurate.  I  am  not,  however,  certain  on  this
point.  Again,  the  question  whether  the  time  at
which  the  suggestion  was  given  was  '  guessed  '
wTongly  is  relevant.


626


Sydney  E.  Hooper,  M.A.


[part


No.  7.  Tuesday,  February  28th,  1922. 8.10  p.m. Due  8.10
p.m.,  March  3rd.
"  At  expiration  of  4320  minutes  draw  a  diamond  and

put  down  the  time."
Result. Error  of  three  minutes. Diamond  drawn  with
8.13 p.m. written inside. Here, again, did  she
guess  the  time  at  which  the  suggestion  was  given
as  8.13  p.m.  instead  of  8.10  ?

No.  8.  Tuesday,  March  7th,  1922. 9.5  p.m.

"  At  expiration  of  420  luinutes  put  down  the  time.

Due  4.5  a.m.,  March  8th.
"  At  expiration  of  1860  minutes  put  down  the  time.

Due  4.5  a.m.,  March  9th.
"  At  expiration  of  3300  minutes  put  down  the  time.

Due  4.5  a.m.,  March  10th.
"  At  exjiiration  of  4740  minutes  put  down  the  time.

Due  4.5  a.m.,  March  11th.

Remarks.  No  result.  All  these  suggestions  fell  due
when  Miss  E.  would  normally  be  asleep.

No.  9.  (a)  Tuesday, March 14th, 1922. 8.15 p.m.  Due

Friday,  March  17th,  8.15  p.m.
(6)  Tuesday, March 14th, 1922. 8.15 p.m.  Due

Sunday,  March  19th,  8.15  p.m.
(a)  At  expiration  of  3600  minutes  write  down  time.
{b) „  „  6480

Result.  The  subject  was  correct  in  carrying  out
suggestion  (ff),  no  attempt,  however,  was  made  to
perform  (6).

No.  10.  Wednesday,  April  5th, 1922. 7 p.m. Due 7  p.m.,
April  10th.

"  At  expiration  of  7200  minutes  write  down  the  time
inside  a  square."

Result.  Miss  E.  wrote  me  a  letter  on  April  11th
enclosing  a  piece  of  paper  with  a  square  drawn  on
it  and  7.10  p.m.  written  by  the  side.  She
remarked  :  "'  I  actually  drew  the  square  at
7.10  p.m. I  distinctly  had  the  inclination  to  do


0

ixxxvni.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambiiles  627

so  at  6.45  p.m.,  but  I  was  washing  up  at  the  time
and  simply  had  to  finish."

Remarks.  If  6.45  be  taken  as  the  time  when  the
impulse  was  '  virtually  '  fulfilled,  there  is  an  error
of  15  minutes,  but  Miss  E.  did  not  actually
fulfil  the  suggestion  until  7.10  p.m.  In  this  case
there  would  be  an  error  of  10  minutes,  but  I  am
not  quite  certain,  within  ten  minutes,  when  the
I  suggestion  was  made, as  it  was a long  sitting,

during  which  I  performed  several  other  experi-
ments. It  is  to  be  noted  that  this  is  the  only
experiment  in  which  there  is  any  appreciable
discrepancy  between  the  actual  time  at  which  she
felt  the  impulse  and  the  time  written  down.

There  was  a  break  of  three  months  before  further
experiments  dealing  with  any  considerable  periods  of
time  were  conducted  on  Miss  E.  Up  to  April,  I  covild
not  boast  of  having  obtained  any  insight  into  the  actual
mental  processes  involved  in  the  fulfilment  of  the  sug-
gestions. I  was  profoundly  puzzled.  I  had  frequently
asked  Miss  E.  in  hypnosis  whether  she  made  calculations,
and  she  assured  me  on  each  occasion  in  the  negative.
When  requested  to  say  how  she  did  the  tasks  set  her,
she  replied  that  she  did  not  know.  All  she  could
say  was  that  when  the  figures  were  given  to  her,  she
"'  saw '  them  very  clearly  and  that  she  wrote  down  the
time  when  she  felt  an  impulse  to  do  so.  So  far,  then,
I  had  evidence  only  of  subliminal  mental  activity.  But
of  its  nature  and  modus  operandi,  neither  I  nor  the
subject  knew  anything.  Could  it  be  that  somnambules
possessed  a  super-normal  power  of  apprehending  the
passage  of  time  '  intuitively  '  ? I  coidcl  not  say.

It  was  at  this  juncture  that  your  President,  Dr.
Mitchell,  kindly  lent  me  his  -  illuminating  paper  to  this
Society  on  the  subject,^  which  stimulated  me  to  make
iurther  investigations.  About  this  time  also  I  met  my
second  subject, Mrs. L., and began a  series of  experi-

1 T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.  :  The  Appreciation  of  Time  hy  Somnambules.
Froc.  S.P.R.  Vol.  XXI.,  pp.  2-59.


628


Sydney  E.  Hooper,  31. A.


[part-


ments  with  her.  Profiting  by  the  valuable  work  already
accomplished  by  Dr.  Mitchell,  I  was  able  to  glean  in
hypnosis  from  Mrs.  L.  information  which  helped  me  con-
siderably when  I  resumed  my  experiments  in  September
with  Miss  E.  I  will  deal  with  these  later  experiments
now  before  proceeding  to  the  other  work  which  I  had.
done  in  the  interim.

There  seemed  at  this  stage  to  be  two  problems  demand-
ing, if  possible,  a  solution.

1.  If  no calculations were  made, how  was  it  possible

for  the  subject  to  know  when  a  period  of  time
represented  by  so  many  hundreds  or  thousands  of
minutes  would  elapse  ?

2.  The second problem is closely related to,  though

different  from,  the  first.  Assuming  that  the  subject,
though  unknown  even  to  a  certain  stratum  of  her
hypnotic  consciousness,  calculated  that  a  suggestion
to  be  performed  in  (say)  7670  mimites  fell  due  at
9.10  p.m.  on  such  and  such  a  date,  the  question
still  remained  how  the  subliminal  mind  knew  when
this  time  had  arrived,  unless  it  made  use  of  the
normal  waking  mind  to  watch  and  '  tich  off,'  as  it
ivere,  the  hours  and,  mimites  as  they  passed.

It  was  in  the  hope  of  clearing  up  these  two  problems
that  I  conducted  two  further  experiments  on  Miss  E.
in  September  of  this  year.  In  these  two  experiments
I  told  Miss  E.  the  time  when  I  gave  her  the  suggestion.
In  the  earlier  ones  I  had  not  done  this,  and,  as  has
already  been  said,  I  am  inclined  to  think  this  omission
was  responsible  for  such  small  errors  as  occurred.

No.  11.  Monday, September 11th, 1922. 7 p.m. Due  3.30
p.m.,  September  13th.

Suggestion  in  hypnosis.  "  At  the  expiration  of  2670
minutes  make  a  cross  and  put  down  the  time
before  looking  at  any  time-piece."

I  then  asked  her  the  time.  She  replied,  "  Ten
past  seven."  I  told  her  she  was  wrong,  and  that
it  was  seven  o'clock. This  seems  to  bear  out  the


.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambides  629


theory  that  Miss  E.  guessed  the  times  at  which
suggestions  were  given.

Result.  Miss  E.  called  on  me  on  Thursday,  September
14th,  and  handed  me  a  piece  of  paper  with  3.30
on  it.  She  had  wTitten  it  on  feeling  an  impulse
at  3.25  p.m.  on  the  Wednesday.  vShe  informed  me
that  she  was  in  the  office  checking  a  column  of
figures  when  suddenly  she  said.  "  3.30  Mr.
.  Hooper."  She  did  not  look  at  the  clock  until
some  seconds  later.  It  was  then  just  3.25  p.m.
In  reply  to  some  further  questions,  she  \vrote  :
"  You  see  I  felt  I  had  to  tell  you  something,  but
it  was  such  a  blank,  vague  feeling  :  a  feeling
that  I  had  forgotten  to  come  to  you,  and  I
couldn't  recollect  when  I  Avas  to  tell  you,  and
looked  at  the  clock,  expecting  to  find  it  too  late
to  keep  our  appointment.  This  feeling  could
only  have  lasted  a  few  seconds,  so  that  it  must
have  happened  some"\A"here  near  five-and-twenty
past  three."'

Remarks.  If  the  ofiice  clock  were  right,  there  is  an
error  of  five  minutes  in  her  estimate  of  the  time
that  had  elapsed.

Further,  I  should  like  to  say  a  word  about
the  '  vague  ^  feeling  that  lasted  for  a  few  seconds
only.  I  cannot  but  surmise  that  this  was  caused
by  the  momentary  emergence  of  the  hypnotic
consciousness  at  the  time  she  said,  '"  Three-thirty
Mr.  Hooper."  We  should  expect,  if  this  were
the  certain  temporary  confusion  of  mind.

Moreover,  I  think  this  explains  her  feeling  that
"  I  had  forgotten  to  come  to  you,"  and  the  fact
that  "  I  couldn't  recollect  when  I  was  to  tell  you."
When  I  gave  her  the  suggestion  in  hypnosis  on
September  11th,  I  told  her  that  next  time  she
saw  me  she  would  be  able  to  tell  me  something
of  her  mental  processes  in  fulfilling  the  suggestion,
and  also  that  she  would  want  to  come  and  tell
me. This, I think, has something  to do  with


630


Sydney  E.  Hooper,  M.A.


[part


her  looking  at  the  clock  and  expecting  to  find  it
too  late  to  keep  her  appointment.  Although  her
hypnotic  consciousness  would  know  exactly  Avhat
was  said  to  her  during  the  previous  sitting,  her
normal  waking  consciousness  would  not.  Hence
a  state  of  anxiety  and  confusion.

I  was  eager  to  try  if  I  could  discover  any  genuine
information  concerning  the  method  adopted  by  the  subject
in  fiilfilling  the.  suggestion  given  in  this  experijuent,  and
following  a  hnit  contained  in  Dr.  Mitchell's  paper,  I  put
her  into  a  deeper  state  of  hypnosis  than  usual.  It  will
be  remembered  that  on  all  previous  occasions  she  had
told  me  that  no  calculations  were  made,  and  that  she
did  not  know  how  she  was  able  to  fulfil  the  suggestions
(for  the  most  part)  at  the  correct  time.  On  this  occasion,
however,  when  I  asked  her  how  she  did  this  particular
sum,  she  replied  :

"  I  remember  making  the  calculation  immediately  after
the  suggestion  was  given."

By  this  she  meant  during  the  time  she  was  in  hypnosis
on  September  the  11th.  This  I  regarded  as  an  important
statement.  If  a  calculation  were  made  in  this  case,  why
not  in  the  others  1  The  performances  of  my  somnambule
were  assuming  a  less  miraculous  guise.  I  then  told  her
that  when  I  piit  my  hand  on  her  forehead  she  woiilcl  be
able  to  tell  me  exactly  the  steps  she  took  in  making  the
calculations.  She  at  once  told  me  she  '  saw  '  the  figures
she  had  employed,  and  I  asked  her  to  write  them  down.
She  wrote  as  follows  :

60/2670

44  30

Here,  then,  we  have  the  actual  mental  process.  The
subject  divided  the  number  of  minutes  given  in  the  sug-
gestion by  60,  which  gave  her  in  hours,  viz.  44i,  the  time
when  the  act  was  to  be  done.  Thus,  some  level  of  her
subliminal  mind  knew  soon  after  the  suggestion  was
given  that  it  fell  clue  in  forty-four  and  a  half  hours.
This  is  c^uite  correct.  Whether  she  actually  carried  the
calculation  one  step  further,  viz.  that  44  hours  30  minutes


I.XXXVIII.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnamhules  631

from  7  p.m.,  September  11th,  fell  due  at  3.30  p.m.,
September  13th,  I  did  not  discover.

I  then  asked  her  how  she  had  known  when  the
terminal  minute — i.e.  the  precise  time  for  the  performance
of  the  act — arrived.  She  replied  at  first,  "  It  just  came
up."  Pressed  to  tell  me  how  she  knew  when  it  fell
due,  she  replied,  "  I  counted  :  I  began  counting  from
7  o'clock  when  you  gave  me  the  number."  When  asked
what  she  counted,  she  replied,  "  Spaces."  In  reply  to
the  question  as  to  the  size  of  the  spaces,  she  said,  "  Not
very  big."  Asked  how  she  knew  when  a  minute  or  an
hour  had  passed,  she  replied,  "  By  a  certain  space."
Again  asked  to  say  how  she  knew  when  the  terminal
minute  had  arrived,  she  said,  "  I  simply  went  on  counting
nntil  it  came  to  an  end,  and  then  I  did  it."  Questioned
as  to  whether  the  co^^ntulg  interfered  with  her  waldng
mmd,  she  replied,  "  No,  it  seemed  separate  from  my  waking
mind."  She  further  emphatically  denied  making  use  of
any  clocks  or  watches  in  determining  the  correct  time  the
act  was  to  be  performed.

The  result  of  this  experiment  I  deemed  of  great  value.
At  least  it  seemed  clear  that  in  this  instance  calculation
was  the  method  employed  by  the  subliminal  mind  for
discovering,  at  any  rate  so  far  as  the  hours  were  con-
cerned, '  when '  the  suggestion  fell  due.  I  was  still,
however,  uncertain  as  to  what  was  involved  in  her  method
of  '  counting  spaces.'  What  did  a  space  stand  for  ?  A
minute,  an  hour,  or  what  ?  Again,  if  she  counted  60
spaces  to  the  hour,  how  was  she  able  to  be  so  accurate
in  her  judgment  of  the  intervals  between  her  one,  two,
three,  etc.,  so  that  they  corresponded  with  the  actual
minutes  of  the  clock  1  Another  possibility  suggested
itself  to  my  mind.  The  counting  of  spaces  may  have
been  her  way  of  '  ticking  off '  the  44  hours  30  minutes
that  she  had  already  calculated.  Her  sul)hminal  mind
may  have  made  use  of  her  normal  waking  consciousness,
which  would  be  in  contact  with  the  time  of  day,  to
inform  it  of  the  hours  and  minutes  as  they  passed,  just
as  the  old-world  watchmen  informed  the  inmates  of
dwelling-houses  in  the days  of  yore. At  this sitting  I


632


Sydriey  E.  Hooper,  M.A.


[part


could  not  decide  these  points  to  my  satisfaction,  and
I  therefore  determined  to  have  a  further  meeting.

No.  12.  Tuesday,  September  26th. 9.15  p.m. Due  11.15  a.m.,

Thursday.  September  28tli.

Suggestion.  "  At  the  expiration  of  2280  minutes  make
a  cross  and  put  down  the  time.  Then  compare
what  you  have  put  down  with  a  cloclv."

Result.  Miss  E.  handed  me  a  piece  of  paper  on  the
evenmg  of  September  28tli,  on  whicli  was  written  :
"  11.15  Thursday.  11.14  by  the  Oifice  clock."
The  cross  was  omitted.  We  may  take  this
experiment  as  correctly  fulfilled,  assuming  that
the  Office  clock  might  be  one  minute  slow.

Remarks.  Although  I  considered  the  results  of  experi-
ment No.  11  had  all  but  solved  the  '  mystery  '  of
these  time  achievements,  I  was  still  in  doubt  on
one  or  two  important  items,  and  I  hoped  to  be
able  to  clear  up  these  questions  at  this  sitting  if
I  could  penetrate  sufficiently  deeply  into  the
mental  processes  of  my  subject's  hyj)notic  con-
sciousness. I  therefore  requested  her  to  go  into
a  deep  stage  of  hypnosis.  Whilst  she  was  in
this  state  I  asked  her  if  she  remembered  the
suggestion  I  had  given  her  on  Tuesday  evening.
After  some  hesitation,  she  said.  "  I  see  the
mimber."

"  Tell  me  what  it  is."'

Very  slowly,  and  with  apparent  difficulty,  she
replied,  "  2270.

(The  number  actually  given  was  2280.)

I  then  asked  her  what  this  number  reiDresented.

She  replied,  "  Minutes."

I  next  made  her  tell  me  exactly  how  she  had
carried  out  my  suggestion.  She  said,  "  I  found
out  the  hours."  Asked  to  show  me  in  writing,
she  wrote  down  :

60/  2270
38


xxxxviii.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules  633


It  is  clear,  then,  that  she  arrived  at  the  number
of  hours,  thirtjj-'eight,  by  division  of  2280  by  60.
Thirty-eight  hours  is  correct,  and  I  feel  confident
that  she  obtained  this  result  hy  dividing  22S0  by
60,  and  not  2270.  For  this  reason  :  the  subject
had  some  difficulty  in  actually  "  visualising  '  this
number  when  in  deep  hypnosis  I  asked  her  to
recall  it  ;  and  it  is  obvious,  I  think,  that  she
must  have  substituted  seven  for  eight  in  the
revival.

So  far,  then,  we  have  confirnied  the  information  obtained
in  the  last  experiment  as  to  the  method  employed  by  the
subliminal  mind.  I  was  assured  on  both  occasions  that
the  calculations  were  made  as  soon  as  the  number  was
given,  i.e.  when  the  subject  was  in  hypnosis.  It  does
not,  however,  follow,  I  thmk,  that  in  all  the  previous
experiments  the  calculations  were  made  immediately  the
numbers  were  given.  Perhaps  the  more  difficult  cues
may  have  been  made  at  some  later  time.

I  now  endeavoured  to  discover  how  my  subject  knew
when  thirty-eight  hours  had  elapsed,  and  how  she  cleter-
minea  the  arrival  of  the  crucial  minute  when  the  act
was  to  be  performed.  Whilst  she  was  still  m  deep
ihypnosis,  I  told  her  she  would  be  able  to  tell  me  how
she  knew  when  a  minute  and  an  hour  had  passed.  She
said,  "  I  started  to  count  up  to  sixty."  In  reply  to  my
question  as  to  what  sixty  represented,  she  said,  "  A
minute."  "  Well,  then,  Avhen  you  reached  sixtj',  v/hat
did  you  do  ?  "  She  replied,  "  I  did  it  again."  What
then  1  "  "I  did  it  again,"  and  so  on.  She  then
informed  me  that  she  went  on  counting  in  this  way
until  she  reached  an  hour,  i.e.  sixty  times  sixty,  when
she  began  over  again  until  she  reached  another  hour,  and
so  on.  "  After  I  had  done  it  thirty-eight  times,  I  made
a  cross." (The  cross  was  in  reality  omitted.)

"  Do  you  mean  that  you  went  on  counting  all  the
time  ?  "  I  asked.  She  replied,  "  Yes."  "  During  the
time  when  you  were  asleep  ?  " "  Yes."

Asked  how  she  knew  that  the  intervals  of  her  counting


634


Sydney  E.  Hooper,  M.A.


[part


corresponded  exactly  to  a  second,  she  replied,  "  It  just
feels  like  that."

In  reply  to  my  query  as  to  whether  she  ever  checked
her  counting  by  the  clock,  she  answered  emphatically,
"  Never  until  after  I  have  put  it  down."

I  asked  if  this  counting  in  any  way  interfered  with
her  normal  waking  life  ;  she  replied,  "  No."  Again
asked  when  she  did  the  calculations,  she  said,  "  At  once  "
and  "  I  find  it  quite  easy.""

Whereupon  I  gave  her  a  test.  "  If  you  find  the
calculations  quite  easy,  write  down  when  5000  minutes
falls  due  from  now,  6.15  p.m.,  Thursday  28th  September."
The  result  of  this  was  to  disclose  the  fact  that  '  they
were  not  so  easy  '  after  all — at  least  not  all  of  them.
She  wrote  down  :

5000
888 .  20

Then  hesitated,  and  finally  said,  "  I  don't  loiow  when
it  would  fall  due,"  and  gave  up  the  attempt.  It  will
be  observed  that  the  subject  started  to  divide  the  5000
by  60,  but  at  once  began  to  make  mistakes.  The  answer
is  83  hours  20  minutes.  Her  failure  in  this  test  suggests
strongly  to  my  mind  that  the  success  of  her  achieve-
ments in  performing  the  acts  at  the  right  time  was  not
dependent  upon  her  making  the  correct  calculation  m
hours  immediately  after  the  number  of  minutes  was  given.
In  those  cases  where  the  number  was  easily  mampulated
by  the  divisor  60,  it  may  have  been  done  at  once.  In
other  cases  the  determination  of  the  number  of  hours  in
a  given  number  of  minutes  was  probably  done  at  leisure
at  some  subsequent  time.

After  Miss  E.  had  said,  "  I  don't  know  when  it  would
fall  due,"  I  said,  "  What  would  you  do  if  I  told  you
now  to  make  a  cross  at  the  end  of  5000  minutes  ?  "  To
this  she  rephed,  "  I  should  start  counting."  "  Well,  what
then  ?  "  "I  should  go  on  counting  until  I  had  nothing
left."

It  seemed  clear,  then,  that  counting  from  the  moment
the  suggestion  is  given  is  the  heart  of  her  method.  This


Lxxxviii.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnamhules  635


entails  in  long-time  experiments  a  continuous  counting
day  and  night  into  many  thousands  ;  in  the  last  experi-
ment. No.  12,  it  meant  counting  136,800  intervals.

But  how  did  Miss  E.  know  that,  in  this  last  experiment,
11.15  a.m.  was  the  correct  time  for  fulfilling  the  sug-
gestion ?  Neither  the  knowledge  that  the  act  was  to  be
done  at  the  end  of  38  hours  nor  the  laborious  work  of
counting  up  to  136,800  woiild  supply  her  with  this
information. Two  methods  were  at  her  disposal  :

(1)  Some  level  of  her  subliminal  mind  might  have
carried  the  calculation  a  stage  further,  determining  that
38  hours  fell  due  at  11.15  a.m.  on  Thursday,  September
the  twenty-eighth.  In  this  event,  when  she  had  finished
accurately  counting  out  her  thirty-eight  hours,  she  would
know  it  was  eleven-fifteen.

(2)  The  method  of  '  addition  "  may  have  been  employed.
I  mean  by  this  that  after  an  hour  had  been  counted.
through  it  could  be  added  to  the  time  at  which  the
suggestion  was  given,  viz.  9.15  p.m.,  e.g.,  at  the  end  of
one  hour  10.15,  two  hours  11.15,  and  so  on.  This
process  would  have  to  be  repeated  at  regular  intervals
until  the  thirty-eight  hours  had  been  completed.  Her
mind  wovdd  thus  know  the  time  throughout  the  period
of  her  counting.  When  she  had  counted  out  her
thirty-eight  hours,  she  woidd  then  discern  it  was
eleven-fifteen,  or  indeed  might  even  know  this  earher  by
anticipation.

Feeling  somewhat  amazed  that  Miss  E.  performed  these
experiments  by  what,  m  the  normal  waking  life,  would
be  a  very  unreliable  measure  of  the  flow  of  time,  viz.
counting,  I  gave  her  a  few  tests  in  hypnosis,  both  on  the
evening  of  the  14th  September  and  the  28th  September,
as  follows  : —

1.  Time  6.44  p.m.

Suggestion. "  At  the  end  of  six  minutes  hold  up  your
right  hand."

Result. Hand  held  up  at  6.53|  p.m.
Error  3i  minutes  too  long.


636


Sydney  E.  Hooper,  M.A.


[part


2.  Time  7.20  p.m.

Suggestion. "  At the end of five minutes hold  up
left  hand."

Result. Act  pei'formed  at  7.27  p.m.

Error,  2  minutes  too  long.
In reply to my question, "  Did you  count
spaces  ?  " she  rej)lied, "  Yes." "  How  many  ?  "
"  Five."

'  Spaces  '  are  apparently  minutes  here  instead
of  seconds.

3.  {a)  1  minute  test. Error,  10  seconds  over.
(6)  2  minute  test. Error,  1  second  over,
(c)  3  minute  test. Error,  10  seconds  over.

4.  Time  6.29  p.m.

Suggestion. "  Tell me  exactly  when  six  minutes  have
elaj)sed."

Result. At  6. 40'. 40",  she  said,  "  six  minutes."
Error,  20  seconds  short.

5.  Time  6.35  p.m.

Suggestion. "  Wlien  three  minutes  have  gone."

Result. At  6.37  Miss  E.  said,  "Now."
Error,  1  minute  short.

6.  Time  6.38  p.m.

Suggestion. "  When  four  minutes  have  elapsed."

Result. At  6.41  Miss  E.  said,  "  Four  minutes."
Error,  1  minute  short.

Asked  to  illustrate  by  counting  aloud,  she
proceeded  to  count  up  to  60.  Each  interval  on
this  occasion  was  certainly  meant  to  be  a  second.
These  few  experiments  yielded  a  mean  error  of
61 '4  seconds.  Whether  if  a  sufficient  number  of
these  tests  had  been  made  the  plus  and  minus
results  would  have  eventually  neutralised  each
other,  I  am  not  sufficient  mathematician  to  be
able  to  say.


Lxxxviii.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules  637

Notwithstanding  the  errors  in  these  few  short  tests,
I  am  compelled  to  accept  the  subject's  statement,  given
in  deep  hjrpnosis,  that  she  performed  the  long-time
■experiments  by  the  method  of  counting,  although  I  am
unable  to  say  why  she  should  have  been  so  accurate  m
the  long  intervals,  whilst  making  discrepancies  in  the
short  tests.  I  observe  that  Dr.  Mitchell  also  found  a
tendency  to  slight  errors  in  the  tests  of  short  periods
made  by  him.  In  a  series  of  60  observations  on  various
subjects,  with  periods  varying  from  one  minute  to  half
an  hour,  the  mean  error  was  "89  minute.

Concluding  Remarks  on  Subject  1.

It  seems  patent  from  the  answers  elicited  from  jVIiss  E.
in  deep  hj^pnosis  that  calculation  of  the  number  of  hours
represented  by  a  given  number  of  minutes,  together  with
rhythmic  counting  from  the  moment  the  suggestion  was
given,  was  the  method  adopted  in  fulfilling  them.  This
involved  that  the  process  of  counting  should  continue
both  during  normal  sleep  and  diiring  the  performance  of
ordinary  everyday  work.  In  this  connection  it  is  interest-
ing to  note  that  on  one  occasion  the  counting  of  Miss  E.'s
subliminal  mind  came  to  an  end  whilst  she  was  adding
up  a  column  of  figures  with,  her  supraliminal  mind,  the
latter  in  no  way  disturbed  by  the  former.  Another
feature  that  strikes  me  as  remarkable  is  what  may  be
called  the  unruffled  patience  of  the  subliminal  level  of
the  mind,  wliich  went  on  rhythmically  counting  136,800
intervals  m  the  last  experiment  Avithout  complaint  or
even  boredom,  showing  a  persistency  of  purpose  worthy
ot  a  greater  cause.

Still  another  feature  to  arouse  v/onder  is  that  of  the
accuracy  of  the  counting.  It  is  no  mean  performance  to
count  continuously  for  thirty-eight  hours,  in  such  a  manner
that  the  intervals  between  the  digits  one,  two,  three,  etc.,
exactly  correspond  with  the  '  second  '  intervals  as  recorded
by  the  clock.  And  yet  this  is  implied  in  the  informa-
tion supplied  to  me  by  Miss  E.  in  deep  hypnosis.

When  after  the  experiments  were  over  Miss  E.  was
informed  that  this  seemed  to  be  her  method,  she  expressed


638


Sydney  E.  Hooper,  31. A.


[part


great  amazement,  saying  :  "I  could  never  count  accurately
like  that  with  my  waking  mind."  Indeed,  I  do  not
think  she  could,  nor,  I  think,  could  anyone  else.

Are  we  then  to  conclude  that  the  subhminal  mind  of
Miss  E.  reveals  a  supernormal  faculty  of  measurmg  the
passage  of  time  ?  I  do  not  see  how  we  can  reply  in
any  other  way  than  by  saying  that  at  least  the  accuracy
of  counting  of  the  subhminal  mind  as  disclosed  by  these
experiments  is  supernormal  when  compared  with  the
fiuprahminal.  Few,  I  think,  will  disagree  with  this  con-
clusion. We  must  be  on  our  guard,  however,  against
confusing  the  term  '  supernormal  '  with  supernatural.
There  is  nothing  in  the  experiments  to  suggest  that  the
achievements  of  Miss  E.  were  performed  by  any  other
powers  than  those  which  belong  to  the  domain  of  the
human  mind.  But  '  how  '  such  precise  correlation  be-
tween the  second  as  measured  by  the  clock  and  the
counting  by  the  mind  prevails,  is  not  revealed.  My
subject  could  only  say  when  asked  how  she  knew  that
the  intervals  between  each  count  corresponded  to  a
second  as  measured  by  the  clock,  was  :  "  It  just  feels
like  that."

It  is  on  this  point  that  Dr.  Mitchell  has  made  an
interesting  suggestion. ^  He  says  :  "It  seems  probable
that  the  lower  strata  of  consciousness  can  take  cognisance
of  various  organic  processes  which  are,  or  may  be,  un-
perceived  or  generally  unattended  to  by  the  waking  self.
And  if  a  correlation  has  been  subconsciously  estabUshed
between  such  phases  of  organic  Ufe  and  our  artificial
divisions  of  time,  the  subconscious  watcher  is  pro-
vided with  an  objective  time-measurer  which  is  liable  to
only  slight  variations  of  regularity.  Such  variations  as
normally  take  place  in  the  rate  of  the  heart-beat,  or  of
respiratory  movements,  are  just  such  as  would  account
for  the  inaccuracies  exhibited  by  somnambules  in  their
estimates  of  short  periods.  In  longer  periods  of  true
time-watching  the  organic  rhythm  will  usually  average  ite
normal rate, and consequently the amount of error  in

1  The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules,  hy  T.  W.  aiitchell.  M.D.,
Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXI.,  p.  58.


Lxxxviii.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Som'immhides  639

the  time-estimation  of  the  subject  is  not  hkely  to  be
greater  for  half  an  hour  than  for  five  minutes."

Whether  this  ingenious  hypothesis  is  the  true  explana-
tion of  the  achievements  of  Miss  E.  recorded  in  the  above
experiments,  I  do  not  know.  All  one  can  say  is,  that
some  correlation  between  the  rate  of  counting  and  the
clock  second  obviously  existed  in  the  subliminal  mind.
In  what,  however,  the  correlation  exactly  con^sisted,  I  am
unable  to  surmise.

Subject  No.  2. "  Mrs.  L."

The  experiments  on  Mrs.  L.  were  begun  in  the  Spring
of  this  year,  and  continued  throughout  the  Summer.

At  each  sitting  the  subject  was  told  the^j^time  when
the  suggestion  was  given.

No.  1.  7.15  p.m. Friday, March 10th. Due 10.15  a.m.,
Saturday,  Marcli  11th.

Suggestion.  "  At  the  expiration  of  900  minutes  write
the  time  on  a  piece  of  paper  before  looking  at
time-piece."

Result.  Mrs.  L.  picked  up  her  paper  and  pencil  at
9.30  a.m.,  but  said  to  herself,  "  The  time  due  for
it  to  be  done  is  10.15  a.m."

Remarks.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  three-quarters  of  an
hour  before  the  act  was  due  to  be  carried  out.
the  subject  Itnew  the  time  at  which  it  was  due.

No.  2.  7.15 p.m. Friday, March 10th. Due 7.15  p.m.,
Monday,  March  13th.

Suggestion.  "  At  the  expiration  of  4320  minutes  put
down  the  time  without  looking  at  a  time-piece."

Result.  A  piece  of  paper  was  handed  to  me  with
"1.55  p.m.,  Monday,"  Avritten  on  it.  This  is  the
wrong  answer  ;  but  1.55  p.m.  is  correct  for  4000
minutes.  The  subject  evidently  preferred  round
figures,  and  ignored  the  odd  320,  for  when  asked
later  in  hj^jnosis  the  number  that  had  been
given  to  her,  she  rephed,  "  4000."


640


Sydney  E.  Hooper,  M.A.


[part


No.  3.  In  hypnosis.

"It  is  now  12.30  p.m.,  June  8th.  You  will
tell  me  the  answer  to  this  sum  immediately  you
wake  up.  How  many  hours  are  there  in  450
minutes  and  when  do  they  expire  as  from  now  ?

I  immediately  woke  the  subject  up.

Bephj. "  Eight  hours. Falls  due  10.30."

Remarks.  Both  details  are  wrong.  The  correct  answer
is  7 1  hours,  falls  due  8  ji.m.

I  then  re-hypnotised  the  subject,  and  asked,
"  Were  the  replies  to  the  sum  correct  ?  "  She
replied,  "  No,  I  gave  half  an  hour  too  much.  It
is  1\  hours."  Asked  how  she  came  to  make  the
mistake,  she  replied,  "  I  calculated  to  the  next
12.30.  Twelve-thirty  to  twelve-thirty  would  be
twelve  hours  :  two  houi:s  back  would  be  10.30."
I  then  asked,  "  Is  10.30  right  ?  "  She  rephed,
"No,  it  falls  due  at  7.30."  (Wrong,  it  should  be
8  p.m.)  I  then  said,  "  How  did  you  come  to
make  the  mistake  ?  "  Reply  :  "I  had  not
calculated  completely."

I  am  not  sure  whether  this  sum  was  worked
out  in  hypnosis  or  after  subject  had  been
awakened.

No.  4.  June  8th. 12.40  p.m. Due  June  12th,  5.16  a.m.

Suggestio7i.  "  At  expiration  of  5316  minutes  make  a
diamond  and  put  down  the  time."

Result.  Paper  handed  me  dated  June  11th,  on  which
a  diamond  and  9.50  were  written.  Wrong.  In
hj^onosis  she  said,  "  I  don't  think  it  is  right.
I  believe  I  worked  it  out  just  before  going  to
sleep  last  Saturday  night."

Remarks.  Subsequent  to  the  time  of  giving  this
suggestion,  but  before  it  fell  due,  I  asked  the
.subject  in  hypnosis  if  she  had  any  instructions
to  follow  out.  She  replied,  "  Yes,  in  5325
minutes."  (Note  this  is  wrong,  the  number
being  5316.) "  Do  you  know  when  the  time  falls


Lxxxviii.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnamhules  641

due?"  "No."  Obviously  the  latter  reply  shows
that  no  calculation  had  been  made  up  to  then.

No.  5.  June  8th. 12.25  p.m. Due  June  13th,  2.25  p.m.

Suggestion. "  In  7320  minutes  write  down  the  time."

Result.  On  June  11th  Mrs.  L.  wrote  on  a  piece  of
paper  "  2.25  p.m."  This  is  correct,  as  sub-
sequent enquiry  revealed  that  "  2.25  p.m.,  June
13th  "  was  meant.  It  is  clear  that,  since  the
result  was  written  down  two  days  before  the
time  fell  due,  a  calculation  must  have  been  made.

Remarks.  Questioned  in  hypnosis  the  day  after  the
suggestion  was  given,  subject  replied  that  she
did  not  know  when  the  time  of  this  particular
suggestion  fell  due.  On  June  Uth,  however,  in
hypnosis  she  said,  "  It  falls  due  on  Tuesday  "
(correct),  "  but  I  don't  knoAV  what  time."  She,
however,  some  time  later  in  the  day  wrote  on  a
piece  of  paper  2.25  p.m. — the  correct  time.

No.  6.  June  9th. 3.8  p.m. Due  8.28  p.m.,  June  10th.

Suggestion.  Sum  given  in  hypnosis,  to  be  written
down  as  soon  as  answer  found.  "  When  will  1760
miQutes  fall  due  from  now,  3.8  p.m.  ?  "

Result.  Mrs.  L.  handed  me  a  piece  of  paper  on  the
mornmg  of  June  10th,  upon  which  she  had
written  the  previous  evening,  "8.15  p.m.  to-
morrow "  (June  10th).  Wrong,  it  should  be  8.28
p.m.,  June  10th.

Remarks.  It  is  not  unusual  for  the  subject  to  sub-
stitute another  number  for  the  one  actually  given,
and  calculate  this  instead.

No.  7.  June  12th. 9.10  p.m. Due 11.50  p.m.,  June  19th.
Suggestio7i. "  At  expiration  of  10.240  minutes  make  a

cross  and  put  down  the  time."
Result. Mrs  L.  handed  me  a  piece  of  paper  on  the
morning of June 20th on which was  written
+2.55."


642


Sydney  E.  Hooper,  M.A.


[part


Wrong  for 10,240, but practically right  for
10,420.

She  tolcl  me  at  the  time  that  she  thought  she
woke  up  sometime  about  da^wn  to  do  this,  but
was  not  certain  that  she  wote  it  then.
Remarks.  On  June  16th  in  hypnosis  I  asked,  "  Have
you  any  suggestions  to  fall  due  in  the  future  ?  "
"  Yes."  "  What  is  it  ?  "  "  10,420."  "  When  does
it  fall  due  ?  " "  Monday  night."

I  then  told  her  to  go  into  a  deeper  stage  of
hypnosis  and  tell  me  how  she  did  these  sugges-
tions. She  replied,  "  I  calculate  how  many  days
there  are  and  do  the  details  at  some  other  time."

It  will  be  observed  that  subject  has  again
substituted  another  number  for  the  one  given  her,
viz.  10,420  in  the  place  of  10,240.  Even  here
there  is  an  error  of  five  minutes,  since  10,420
minutes  from  9.10  p.m.,  June  12th,  falls  due  at
2.50  a.m.,  June  20th — not  at  2.55  a.m.

No.  8.  June  16th. 5.20  p.m. Due  7.5  a.m.,  June  27th.

Suggestion. "  At expiration of 15,225 minutes  make

a  square  and  put  the  time  inside."
Result. A piece of paper  was duly  handed  to  me,

upon  which  was  written  :


Correct.


7.5  a.m.
June  27th


Subject  wrote  regarding  this  experiment :  "  Last
Saturday  evening  I  seemed  to  have  a  dim  idea
of  calculating  something  just  as  I  was  going  to
sleep  (very  vague).  The  next  morning  this
thought  came  into  my  head  as  I  awoke — '  Train-
time,  that's  easy.'  '  What  is  ?  '  I  asked  myself.
Oh,  of  course  it  is  easy  to  get  up  at  the  right
time  because  of  the  train  (7  a.m.).  If  it  weren't
for  that  I  should  not  wake."


Xixxxvin.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnamhules  643


Remarks.  This  is  rather  iateresting.  The  subcon-
scious mind  seemed  to  know  that  the  suggestion
fell  due  about  the  time  of  the  early  morning
train.  The  waking  mind  to  explain  to  itself  the
meaning  of  its  waking  thought  Train-time,  that's
easy,"  apparently  used  the  device  of  '  rationalisa-
tion '  by  saying,  Of  course,  it  means  it's  easy
to  get  up  at  the  right  time,  because  of  the  7  a.m.
train.  If  it  weren't  for  that  I  should  sleep  on."
The  mind  is  uneasy  unless  it  can  give  due  reasons
for  its  impulses  and  thoughts.

No.  9.  Jime  30th,  8.50  p.m. Due  July  14th,  9.55  p.m.

Siiggestion.  "  At  expiration  of  20,225  minutes  you
will  make  an  oblong  and  put  the  time  inside
it."

Result.  Subject  wrote  on  the  15th,  "  Just  as  I  was
going  to  bed  on  Friday  14th,  I  was  moved  to
go  and  get  a  jDaper  and  pencil  and  put  it  under
my  pillow."  When  she  woke  up  the  paper  had
1.35  or  11.05  written  on  it  (it  was  almost  illeg-
ible), but  she  woke  up  with  9.55  in  her  head.

In  hyp)nosis  three  days  later,  she  said  iia
response  to  my  questions  :  "I  wrote  1.35  down
during  the  night,  but  I  calculated  it  wrongly.
It  ought  to  be  9.55.  I  did  9.55  later  during  the
night ; it  is  right." And  so  it  is.  (Correct.)

It  will  be  observed  in  one  of  my  experiments  (No.  6)
I  endeavoured  to  find  out  how  long  the  subliminal  mind
would  take  to  work  out  a  simple  sum  wdthout  hurrying
the  process  in  any  way.  The  sum  was  given  at  3.8  p.m.
on  June  9th.  It  was  not,  however,  until  the  evening  of
the  same  day  that  the  answer  to  the  sum  was  written
down.  Thus  the  subliminal  mind  on  this  occasion  took
several  hours  to  work  out  the  simple  sum,  "  When  will
1760  minutes  fall  due  from  noAv,  3.8  p.m."  Of  course
it  might  have  performed  the  operation  in  a  much  shorter
time  had  it  chosen  to  do  so.  It  certainly  did  the  calcula-
tions  involved in the next set of experiments "  How


Sydney  E.  Hooper,  31. A.  [part

many  ?  "  much  more  rapidly.  On  another  occasion  I
gave  the  following  sum  : —

No.  10.  "  How  many  inches  are  there  m  2f  miles  ?  "  (Given
3.40  p.m.,  August  3rd.) I  asked  that  the  subject
should  begin  to work  this  out as  soon  as  she
came out of hypnosis, and should record  the
time  when  the  answer  had  been  found.
Eesulf. My  wife  mforms  me  that  at  6.20  p.m.  the
same  evening,  whilst  subject  and  she  were  sittmg
down  chatting,  Mrs.  L.,  apmpos  of  nothing,  sud-
denly asked, "  How  many  inches  are  there  m  a
mile  ?  "  ; to which she replied, '•  At any  rate
there are 1760 feet." (Evidently both  had
forgotten then- long measure tables learnt  at
school.) Then Mrs. L. began to wonder  why
she  wanted  to  luiow. Later,  the  number  20,120
came  into  her  mind  with various  other  iigures,
as if she were trying to calculate  something
without  loiowmg  what. At  7.15  p.m. the  same
evening she wrote down 55,330 ms., with  the
time  and date. The  following  mornmg  (August
4th) she awoke with the number  58,080  fnmly
planted  in her  mind, which  remamed  there  and
thoroughly  annoj^ed  her  until  she  had  written  it
down, when it ceased from troubling. On  the
evening of  August 4th, Mrs. L. handed me  a
piece  of  paper  contamuig  the  remarks  above.  I
immediately hypnotised her, and she told  me
that  the  58,080  represented  the  number  of  inches
in  2f  miles. I  then  asked  her  to  show  me  how
she  did  this  sum,  and  she  proceeded  to  write  on
the  paper  the  following  details  :

]760  X  ]2  =  21120

S  2  S  0

=  58080

Remarks. The  correct  answer  is  174,240  mches.

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  subject  has  evidently
taken  1760  x  12  to  represent  the  number  of  inches


Lxxxvili.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnmnbules  645


in  a  mile.  This  is  a  mistake.  She  has  omitted
to  reduce  the  yards  (1760)  to  feet  before  multiply-
ing by  twelve.  In  hypnosis  I  told  her  this,
and  she  said,  "  Your  wife  told  me  there  were
1760  feet  in  a  mile."  She  further  informed  me
that  she  found  the  sum  very  difficult  (as  indeed
it  is  to  perform  mentally),  and  said  that  it
troubled  her  considerably.  Asked  when  she  did
it,  she  said,  "  I  began  to  do  it  about  6.20  p.m.,
and  finished  it  about  7.30  p.m.  I  did  it  wrongly
at  first,  and  corrected  it  just  as  I  was  going  to
sleep."

It  is  further  to  be  noted  that  although  the
suggestion  was  given  at  3.40  p.m.,  the  subliminal
mind  did  not  apparently  begin  operations  until
6.20  p.m. — (Was  it  because  of  the  difficulty  over
the  long-measure  table  1) — and  that  the  answer,
— correct  on  the  assumption  that  there  were  1760
'  feet '  in  a  mile, — was  not  accurately  arrived  at
until  "  Just  as  I  was  going  to  sleep."

It  would  appear,  then,  that  four  to  five  hours
were  taken  to  work  the  sum.  Whether  the
normal  waking  mind  of  the  subject,  without  the
assistance  of  ^\■riting,  A\"ould  have  taken  as  long,
I  do  not  know  ;  but  from  this  experiment  it
would  seem  that  the  sublimmal  mind  takes  its
own  time  over  its  problems  when  there  is  no
need  for  an  immediate  solution.

General  Remarks.

I  do  not  think  there  can  be  any  doubt  that  in  all  the
above  experiments,  without  exception,  the  answers  were
obtained  by  calculation  in  the  intervals  between  the  time
the  suggestions  were  given  and  the  time  at  which  they
fell  clue.  Indeed,  the  subject  in  deep  hypnosis  acknow-
ledged that  this  was  so.  She  said,  "  When  you  give  the
suggestion  to  me  first,  I  just  see  how  many  days  there
are,  and  do  the  details  later."

"  Do  you  calculate  them  ?  "

"Yes."


646


Sydney  E.  Hooper,  31. A.


[part


"  How  ?  "

"  You  cannot  do  them  if  your  mind  is  absorbed  in
something.  It  must  be  when  you  can  take  some  of
your  attention."

On  another  occasion  she  said  in  hypnosis  :  "  I  think  I
generally  do  them  just  as  I  am  going  to  sleep."

In  these  first  ten  experiments,  the  suggestions  were
fulfilled  correctly  on  four  occasions  ;  one  performance  was
entirely  Avrong  ;  five  were  erroneous  owing  to  carelessness
or  misunderstanding.  Mrs.  L.  informs  me  that  whilst  at
school  she  often  spoiled  her  mathematical  work  by  little
careless  blunders.  Mrs.  L.  also  wrote  with  reference  to
the  calculations,  in  automatic  script,  "  They  worry  me,"
which  is  in  curious  contrast  to  the  unruffled  calm  of  my
other  subject,  Miss  E.,  in  her  long  periods  of  steady
counting,  although  even  the  latter  complained  to  me  on
several  occasions  of  feeling  very  tired.

The  question  as  to  how  the  subject  fulfilled  some  of
them  at  the  right  terminal  minute  was  also  investigated.
On  several  occasions  I  asked  Mrs.  L.  in  deep  hypnosis
how  she  knew  when  the  actual  minute  had  arrived  for
performing  the  act.  She  replied  when  I  first  made  the
enquiry,  "  You  just  keep  a  general  idea  of  the  passage
of  time  and  check  it  by  the  clock."  A  similar  explana-
tion was  given  in  slightly  different  words  when  the
question  was  repeated  from  time  to  time.

First,  then,  a  calculation  was  made  as  to  when  a  given
suggestion  fell  due  ;  then  the  subconscious  mind  kept  a
watch  on  the  time  to  enable  it  to  fulfil  the  suggestion
at  the  right  moment.

In  the  ten  experiments  just  described  there  seems  no
ground  for  thinking  that  the  subject  revealed  any  remark-
able faculty  of  appreciating  the  passage  of  time  without
the  aid  of  objective  conventional  measures  such  as  days,
hours,  etc.,  as  recorded  by  the  clock.  All  that  took
place  was  a  subconscious  calculation  of  when  so  many
hundreds  or  thousands  of  minutes  from  a  given  specified
time  would  expire.  When  the  time  actually  fell  due,  an
impulse] ^was  given  to  the  normal  waking  mind  to  write
down the result of the calculation in accordance  with


Lxxxviii.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnamhules  647

the  suggestion.  I  agree  with  Dr.  Mitchell,  who  says  in
his  paper  :  "So  far  there  is  evidence  only  that  a  sub-
conscious calculation  is  made  soon  after  the  suggestion  is
given,  and  if  the  date  so  arrived  at  is  some  weeks  ahead,
the  subconscious  mind,  having  noted  the  time  at  which
the  act  is  to  be  performed,  seems  able  to  go  off  dutj'  as
it  were  and  simply  watch  for  the  arrival  of  the  proper
day."  These  remarks  were  generally  true  in  reference  to
the  method  adopted  by  Mrs.  L.,  except  that  in  her  case
she  seemed  to  make  a  more  or  less  rough  calculation  at
first,  leaving  the  accurate  details  to  be  worked  out  at  leisure.

My  next  care  therefore  was  to  devise  experiments  to
eliminate  the  possibility  of  a  direct  calculation.  Con-
sequently I  adopted  Dr.  Mitchell's  method,  which  was  to
make  the  subject  tell  the  number  of  days,  hours  or
minutes  which  had  elapsed  between  the  giving  of  the
suggestion  and  a  pre-arranged  signal.  Dr.  ]\'Iitchell
thought  it  was  possible  in  this  way,  where  the  answers
were  correct,  to  show  that  it  was  due  to  a  contimious
subconscious  watching  of  time  as  it  flowed.

I  will  now  give  this  series  of  experiments  with  their
results  : —

No.  11.  June  9th. 3  p.m.

Suggestion.  "  The  next  time  I  see  you  and  put  a
paper  into  your  hands  and  a  pencil,  you  will
write  down  the  number  of  minutes  that  have
elapsed  from  now."

Result. On  June 11th  at  3  p.m. I  put  paper  and
I  pencil  in  Mrs.  L.'s  hand,  and  tokl  her  to  sit  in

a  chair  and  let  the  pencil  rest  hghtly  on  the
paper.  My  wife  then  gave  her  a  letter  to  read,
in  the  contents  of  which  she  was  interested.
About  four  mmutes  later  I  asked  her  if  she  had
written  anything.  She  replied,  "  No,  unless  there
is  anything  on  the  paper."  I  looked,  and  there
were  two  figures,  one  being  a  four  and  the  other
an  incompleted  eight,  written  in  a  scrawly  auto-
matic script.


648


Sydney  E.  Hooper,  M.A.


[part


I  then  hypnotised  her,  and  asked  her  if  she
remembered  the  above  suggestion.  She  did,  and
repeated  it  correctly.  I  then  asked  why  she  had
not  carried  it  out  when  I  gave  her  the  paper
and  pencil.  She  replied  :  ''  I  did  :  it  is  48
hours."  {Note. — This  is  correct  as  far  as  the
hours  are  concerned,  but  the  answer  should  have
been  given  in.  minutes.)  I  then  said,  "  When
did  you  do  it  ?  "  She  replied,  "  I  calculated
whilst  I  was  readmg  the  letter  : just  two  days."

Bemarks.  In  this  experiment,  then,  we  have  another
example  of  calculation.  There  had  been  no  con-
tinuous watching  of  the  passage  of  time.

No.  12.  June  11th. 3.8  p.m.

Suggestion.  "  The  next  time  I  give  you  paper  and
pencil,  you  will  tell  me  the  number  of  hours  and
minutes  that  have  elaj)sed  from  now."

Result.  On  June  12th  at  8.48  p.m.  I  saw  Mrs.  L.,
and  handed  her  paper  and  pencil.  After  a  few
mmutes  I  took  the  paper  away,  and  on  it  was
written  :

38  2840.

I  then  hypnotised  her,  and  she  said  2840  was
the  time  since  3.8  yesterday  afternoon.  I  then
asked  her  to  write  on  a  piece  of  paper  the  way
she  arrived  at  the  answer.  The  followmg  was
then  written  in  hypnosis  :

(to)  3.8  to-day  is  24  hours.

3 to 9 is 6 hours. 30 hours less  20
minutes.

12  minutes  to  9. 28  hours  40  minutes.

The  subject  was  careless  m  the  last  item,  the
correct  ans\\er  being  29  hours  40  mmutes.

Remarks.  Although  I  did  not  in  this  case  ask  her
when  she  did  this  sum,  I  am  inclined  to  think
that  it  was  done  whilst  readmg  a  book  I  had
given  her  to  read  during  the  time  she  was  holding


Lxxxviii.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules  649

the  pencil,  and  that  there  had  been  no  time-
watching  during  the  interval.

No.  13.  June  16th. 5.15  p.m.

Suggestion.  "  The  next  time  I  hand  you  a  pencil
and  a  piece  of  paper  you  will  write  down  the
number  of  minutes  that  have  elapsed  from  now."

Result.  At  10.40  a:m.  on  June  17th  I  hypnotised
subject  and  handed  her  a  pencil  and  paper.  Her
hand  wrote  out  in  automatic  script  1030.  I  then
asked  her  to  what  this  referred.  She  replied
it  was  the  answer  to  the  above  suggestion — 1030
minutes.  I  then  said  :  "  How  did  you  do  it  ?  "
\o  which  the  subject  replied,  "  I  calculated  it
just  now." "  Show  me  how." She  then  wrote  :

5.20-  5.20  =  12  hours.
5.20-10.20=  5  hours.
17  hours  =  1020  +  10  minutes
=  1030.

Remarks.  Here,  agam,  we  have  a  calculation  made
between  the  time  of  the  pre-arranged  signal  and
the  actual  automatic  response.  Note  also  a
shght  error.  The  subject  made  the  calculation
from  5.20  p.m.  (mstead  of  5.15)  up  to  10.30  a.m.
the  next  day  (instead  of  10.40) — resultuag  in  an
error  of  15  minutes.  I  surmise  that  when  she  was
hypnotised  to  give  the  ans\\er  she  made  a  mistake
in  guessing  the  time,  fixmg  on  10.30  instead  of
10.40.

No.  14.  June 19th. 9.10  p.m.

Suggestion.  "  When  I  say  to  you  at  some  future
time;  '  How  many  ?  '  you  will  tell  me  the  number
of  minutes  that  have  elapsed  from  noAV."

Result.  On  June  20th  at  12.50  p.m.  I  called  on  Mrs.
L.,  and  after  biddmg  her  good-morning,  said,
"  How  many  ?  "  She  looked  puzzled,  and  said,
"  What  do  you  mean  ?  "  Then  she  went  into
her  kitchen  for  about  half  a  minute,  to  do  nothing


650


Sydney  E.  Hooper,  M.A.


[part


in  particular  as  I  discovered  later.  When  she
returned  I  asked  her  agam,  "  How  many  ?  "
She  did  not  reply.  Then  I  said,  "  Does  any
number  come  into  your  head  ?  "  She  repUed,
"'■'Nine  hundred  something."  But  a  second  later
amended  "  940  "  (correct).  I  hypnotised  her  and
asked  her  when  she  had  done  it.  She  repUed,
after  I  had  asked  •  her  the  question,  "  How
many  ?  ""  Then  I  made  her  write  down  in
hyjonosis  the  way  she  had  worked  it  out.  She
wrote  as  follows  : —

9.10-  9.10  =  12  hours.
9.10-12.10=  3  hours
=  15  hours.

15  x60=900  m.
+  40

940  minutes'  time.

She  also  told  me  in  hypnosis,  in  I'eply  to  a
question  as  to  when  she  did  the  calculation,  "  I
don't  think  anythitag  more  about  it  from  the
time  you  make  the  suggestion  until  you  give  the
signal."

Remarks.  Again  it  must  be  said  that  there  was  no
continuous  watching  of  the  passage  of  time  in
this  test.

No.  15.  June  20th. 1  p.m.

Suggestion.  "  The  next  time  I  say  to  you,  '  How
many  1  '  you  will  tell  me  the  number  of  minutes
that  have  elapsed  from  now."

Result.  On  June  22nd  at  1.15  p.m.  I  called  to  see
Mrs.  L.,  and  after  makuig  one  or  two  conven-
tiona  remarks,  said,  "  How  many  ?"  She  replied,
"  Oh,  is  it  '  How  many  '  again  ?  "  and  laughed.  "  I
don't  know."  Then  she  turned  and  went  into
her  sitting-room — (Was  it  to  give  herself  a  minute
undisturbed  ?) — and  reaj^peared,  saying,  "  903."


Lxxxvni.] The  Api^reciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules  651

I  then  hypnotised  her,  and  the  following  are
the  notes  of  a  conversation  that  took  place  : —

Did  you  give  me  some  figures  iust  now  ?  "
"  I  don't  remember."

"  Is  there  anything  I  told  you  to  do  when  last
in  hyi3nosis  ?  "

"  I  don't  remember."

"Go  deeper,  then  you  will."'

She  said  :  "  How  many  minutes  have  elapsed
from  now  "  (the  day  before  yesterday)  "  up  to
the  time  I  next  say  '  How  many  ?  '  I  believe
I  gave  you  903,  and  I  ought  to  have  given  you
1903."

"  Why  did  you  not  give  me  1903  ?  "
"  I  forgot  the  figure  one."
"  When  did  you  do  it  ?  "

"Just  now  when  you  asked  me.  I  had  kept
note  of  the  fact  that  it  was  two  days  since  I
saw  you.  At  one  o'clock  to-day  I  just  noticed
it  was  two  days."  Then  suddenly — "  I've  got  it
\vrong  ; it  ought  to  be  2880  minutes."

"  How  do  you  Imow  that  ?  "

"There  are  1440  in  one  day."

"  When  did  you  do  this  ?  "
When  you  asked  me,  '  How  many  ?  ' I  just
had  to  add  15,  because  it  was  1.15  p.m."

"  What  is  your  process  in  doing  these  experi-
ments ?

"  Note  the  number  of  days  and  add  the
minutes."

'"  What  you  have  just  said  does  not  agree  with
what  you  told  me  the  last  time  I  asked  you
about  these  particular  experiments."

"  The  last  one  was  under  a  day,  so  I  had  to
calculate,  and  the  one  before  that.  I  did  not
keep  the  day  for  the  last  two  experiments."

"  Why  do  you  make  mistakes  ?  "

"  Sometimes  the  right  number  seems  to  get
lost,  or  I  translate  it  wrongly."


652


Sydney  E.  Hooper,  M.A.


[part


"  "What  do  you  mean  by  translate  ?  "
"  I  mean  into  words."  »

Remarks.  I  did  not  discover  why  the  subject  gave  me
903  at  first,  and  subsequently  1903,  finishing  up
her  efforts  with  2880,  in  which  she  forgot  to  add
the  extra  15  minutes.  This  experiment  is  interest-
ing in  that  it  shows  that  my  subject  did  not  sub-
consciously watch  the  time  unless  it  was  more  than
a  day.  Then,  however,  she  did.  She  Imew  there
were  1440  minutes  in  a  day,  so  that  all  she  had
to  do  in  experiments  whose  time-interval  exceeded
a  day  was  to  add  the  additional  minutes.  This
experiment,  then,  agrees  with  the  results  of
those  of  Dr.  Mitchell  on  "  F.D.",  regarding
which  he  says  :  "I  think  there  was  a  continuous
sub-watchmg  of  the  time  as  it  passed,  and  I
believe  that  the  only  calculation  employed  was
the  mental  addition  which  took  place  at  regular
or  irregular  intervals."

No.  16.  9.30  p.m. Friday,  July  7th.

Suggestion.  "  Next  time  I  see  you  and  say  to  jon,
'  How  many  ?  '  you  will  tell  me  the  number  of
minutes  that  have  elapsed  from  now."

Result.  I  called  on  Mrs.  L.  at  9.10  p.m.  on  July  9th,
and  after  greetmg  her,  said,  "  How  many  ?  "

After  a  little  hesitation  she  said,  "  1233."  This
is  wrong  :  it  should  be  2860  minutes.  I  then
hypnotised  her,  and  asked  what  the  number  she
had  given  to  me  re^jresented.  She  replied,  "  It
is  the  number  of  minutes  from  9.30,  July  7th,  to
the  time  I  saw  you  on  Saturday  evening."  (Note.
— I  did  call  on  Saturday  evening  about  three
minutes  to  six,  but  did  not  then  say,  "  How
many  ?  ")

"  I  thought  you  meant  me  to  give  you  the
number  of  minutes  that  had  j^assed  from  9.30
p.m.,  July  7th,  '  till  I  saw  you  next.'  "  was  the
explanation  given  by  my  subject  for  her  mistake.


Lxxxviii.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules  653


Remarks.  The  subject  was  premature  iii  this  experi-
ment. The  mimber  1233  is  correct  for  the  time
from  9.30  p.m.,  July  7th,  until  5.58  p.m.,  July
8th.

In hypnosis I asked the subject to  write
down  hoAv  she  arrived  at  this  solution.
She  wrote  as  follows  : —

From  9.25-9.25=720  minutes,
to  5.25=480
+  33

1233  minutes.

Further  asked  when  she  did  it,  she  replied.  I
did  it  when  you  Avere  talking  {i.e.  yesterday
evening,  July  8th).  I  did  it  when  you  came  in.
I  think  it  was  two  minutes  to  six."  This  is
merely  another  case  of  calculation  being  made,
not  as  in  the  other  ones  after  the  pre-arranged
signal  had  been  given,  but  at  the  time  the  signal
was  anticipated.

No.  17.  August  1st. 5.46  -p.m.

Suggestion.  "  The  next  time  I  give  you  a  pencil  and
piece  of  paper,  but  not  before,  you  will  write
down  at  once  the  number  of  minutes  that  have
elapsed  from  now."

Result.  At  9.28  p.m.  on  August  4th  I  handed  Mrs.  L.
pencil  and  paper  while  she  was  engaged  in  a
conversation  which  demanded  attention. At  9.35

•  .  p.m.  I  took  the  paper  out  of  her  hand,  and  on
it  was  written  in  automatic  script  4730.  I
immediately  hypnotised  her,  and  asked  her  what
4730  represented.  She  rephed,  The  time  from
which  I  saw  you."  Wliat  exactly  do  the
figures  represent,  and  what  was  the  suggestion  ?  "
She  repeated  the  suggestion  correctly,  and  said,
"  The  figures  represent  the  number  of  minutes."
"  men  did  you  do  it  ?  "  ■•  Just  now."  "  Write
down exactly how you arrived at 4730."  She

.  .  ■ proceeded to wTite as follows, but it ^\\\\  be


654


Sydney  E.  Hoojjer,  M.A.


[part


noticed  that  in  the  act  of  writing  she  arrived  at
a  different  answer,  viz.  4560  :

6  x720=4320
+  4  hours  =  240

4560

She  told  me  that  the  figures  720  stood  for  the
minutes  in  twelve  hours  ;  and  that  the  six  repre-
sented  the  number  of  periods  of  twelve  hours
that  had  passed  since  the  suggestion  had  been
given.  On  handing  me  the  paper  with  these
figures  on  it  (written  in  hypnosis),  she  remarked,
"  I  generally  keep  it  in  this  way,  i.e.  every  twelve
hours."  By  this  she  obviously  meant  that  she
kept  count  of  every  twelve  hours  as  it  passed.
"  For  several  days,"  she  wrote  on  the  morning  of
August  4th,  "  there  has  been  a  series  of  figures
coming  into  my  thoughts  without  connection —
1 — 2 — 3,  as  if  keeping  a  reckoning.  It  has  now
reached  5  (12  o'clock,  August  4th).  This  is
accompanied  by  a  sense  of  expectation,  as  if
there  were  something  to  be  done,  which  is  not
yet  accomplished.  ■■  I  asked  the  subject  (in
hypnosis)  how  she  knew  the_  answer  was  six
times  twelve  hours  plus  something.  She  replied,
"  I  kei3t  the  number  every  twelve  hours.  By
the  time  you  handed  me  the  paper  I  had  kept
six.  I  just  had  to  multiply  720  by  6  and  add
4  hours."

Remarks.  Here  we  have  an  example  of  subliminal
watching  of  periods  of  twelve  hours  and  adding
them  up.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  actual
calculations  were  not  performed  until  the  paper
was  handed  to  her  at  9.28  p.m.  There  was  an
error  in  her  calculation  of  18  minutes,  the  correct
answer  being  4542.  I  asked  her  in  hy|inosis  how
she  had  come  to  make  this  error.  She  replied,
"  I  thought  it  was  9.46  ^.m.  when  you  gave  me
the  paper."  As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  was  only
9.28,  but  I  discovered  later  in  the  evening  that


Lxxxviii.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnmnbules  655

Mrs.  L.'s  clock  had  been  ten  minutes  fast  all  day,
which  accounts  for  ten  minutes  of  the  18  minutes'
error.

It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  the  subconscious
mind  must  apparently  in  some  circumstances
attempt  to  '  guess  '  the  right  time.  On  this
occasion  it  failed  in  the  same  way  that  we  often
do  in  the  normal  waking  life.  There  is  no
indication  of  clairvoyance  or  abnormal  gift  revealed
by  these  experiments.

Although  this  second  batch  of  experiments  (11-
17)  were  devised  with  the  object  of  ensuring  a
continuous  watching  of  the  passage  of  time  and
of  eliminating  the  possibility  of  calculations,  they
did  not  have  this  effect.  With  the  exception  of
Exi:)eriments  Nos.  15  and  17,  in  which  periods  of
twelve  hours  were  watched  and  added  together,
calculation  \ya,s  merely  postponed.  It  a^spears
that  in  all  the  others  a  rapid  calculation  was
made  during  the  interval  between  the  time  the
pre-arranged  signal  was  given  and  the  automatic
response  in  writing  or  speech.  Seeing  that  the
.  subject  lme^^'  the  time  at  which  a  suggestion  had
been  given  and  had  more  or  less  accurate  loiow-
ledge  of  the  time  when  the  signal  occurred,  it  is
clear  that  in  these  operations  we  have  nothing
but  ordinary  mental  arithmetic.

In  writing  on  the  subject  of  the  appreciation  of  time
by  somnambules,  Dr.  Mitchell  has,  it  seems  to  me,  rightly
said  that  ^  True  time-appreciation  is  the  power  of  mark-
ing the  passage  of  time  without  any  guidance  either
supra-lirainal  or  sub-liminal,  which  can  by  any  possibility
be  referred  to  changes  going  on  in  the  external  world."'
In  his  paper  read  to  this  Society  he  records  a  case  of
one  of  his  patients  to  whom  he  had  had  to  recommend
a  forty-eight  hours"  sleep  with  but  short  intervals  for
the  taking of  nourishment. He  is of  the opinion  that

1  The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules,  by  T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.,
Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  XXI..  p  51.


656  Sydney  E.  Hooper,  M.A.  [pabt  '  i:

this  lady  showed  a  true  appreciation  of  the  passage  of  si
time  throughout  the  whole  period  of  sleep,  and  considers  j  ii
that  the  watching  of  the  time  was  done  by  the  hypnotic  j  «
consciousness,  and  that  the  knowledge  of  the  time  of  day  i
so  obtained  was  in  the  possession  of  the  hypnotic  con-  |  '
sciousness  alone.  '

In  order  to  discover  if  somnambules  have  the  power  of
'  true  '  time  appreciation  as  defined  above,  experiments  must
be  devised  to  ensure  that  the  subject  is  debarred  from  !  ;
gaining  any  information  as  to  the  passage  of  time  '
from  changes  taking  place  in  the  world  around  them.
This  precaution  is  necessary  because  impressions  received
through  the  eye  or  ear  which  give  information  as  to  the
time  of  day  to  the  waking  consciousness  will  be  also  at
the  service  of  the  hypnotic  consciousness,  and  the  alert
hypnotic  consciousness,  intent  on  performing  its  task
correctly,  will  be  on  the  look-out  for  such  information.
This  will  be  the  case  even  when  the  waking  mind  is  so  ^
fully  occupied  on  other  matters  as  apparently  to  preclude  5
all  time-watching.  Seeing,  however,  that  it  is  possible
that  subconscious  perception  has  the  extended  range
which  characterises  perception  during  hypnosis  under  the
influence  of  suggestion,  the  difficulty  of  devising  experi-
ments to  ensure  that  the  subconscious  mind  does  not
glean  information  through  the  ordinary  channels  _  of  sense,
is  greatly  increased.  Moreover,  even  after  suitable  experi-
ments have  been  thought  out,  it  is  not  easy  to  carry
them  through,  since  ordinary  subjects  cannot  normally  be
asked  to  go  to  sleep  for  three  or  four  days  or  to  remain
in  a  dark  room  for  any  considerable  length  of  time.

I  was  therefore  unable  to  carry  out  experiments  of  this
nature  in  respect  of  periods  of  time  of  veiy  great  length.
I  endeavoured,  however,  to  discover  if  Mrs.  L.  had  the
power  of  '  true  '  time  appreciation  for  short  intervals  of
time  varying  from  five  to  sixty  minutes.  During  these
experiments  the  subject  was  carefully  kept  away  from
clocks  and  watches,  so  that  she  had  no  means  of  gleaning
information  as  to  the  passage  of  time  from  this  source.  ,
Care  was  taken  to  ensure  that  the  suggested  acts  were
of  a  very  simple  nature,  in  order  that  the  waking  mind


Lxxxviii.] The  Apjjreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules  657

should feel no reluctance  in executing them when  the

imjDulse  was  felt.  All  the  suggestions  were  fulfilled  in  the
waking  state.

No.  IS.  Sugr/estion. At  the  expiration  of  13J  minutes  exactly,

you  will  take  a  book'  from  the  window-sill  in  the

diaing-room  and  hand  it  to  my  wife."'

Result. Act  fulfilled  Ih  minutes  too  soon.

No.  19.  Suggestion. "  7^  minutes  from  no\^'  put  up  your  right
arm."

Result. Act  fulfilled  1  minute  too  soon.

No.  20.  Suggestion. "  At  the  expiration  of  2S  minutes  shake
hands  with  my  wife."
Result. Act  foilfiUed  5  minutes  too  soon.

No.  21.  Suggestion. "  Thirty-five  minutes  after  you  meet  my
wife  for  your  daily  walk,  shake  hands  with  her."
Result. Correct. Act  fulfilled  at  right  time.

No.  22.  Suggestion. "  Exactly 45 minutes after joining  my
^^■ife  to-night  you  will  shake  hands  with  her."

Result. Act  fulfilled  8  minutes  too  soon.

No.  23.  Suggestion. Exactly  50  minutes  after  you  meet  my
wife  to-day  you  will  shake  hands  with  her."

Result. Act  fulfilled  IJ  minutes  too  soon.

No.  24.  Suggestion. As  above,  but  time-mterval  53  minutes.
Result. Act  fulfiUed  2  minutes  too  soon.

No.  25.  Suggestion. Same,  in  one  hour.

Result. Act  fulfilled  10  minutes  too  late.

No.  26.  Suggestion. Same  in  57  minutes.

Result. Act  fulfilled  3  minutes  too  late.

No.  27.  Suggestio7i. Same  in  47  minutes. .

Result. Act  fulfilled  2  minutes  too  soon.

No.  28.  Suggestion. Same  m  18  murutes.
Result. 7  minutes  too  late.


658


Sydney  E.  Hooper,  M.A.


[PABT


No.  29


Suggestion. Same  in  28  minutes.


Result.  Act  fulfilled  5  minutes  too  soon.


No.  30


Suggestion. Same  in  46  minutes.


Result. Act  fulfilled  1  minute  too  late.


No.  31


Suggestion. Same  in  57  minutes.

Result. Act  fulfilled  3  minutes  too  soon.


No.  32.  Suggestion. Same  in  50  miniites.

Result. Act  fulfilled  4  minutes  too  late.

Remarks. It  will  be  observed  that  only  on  one  occa-


sion, viz.  Experiment  No.  21,  was  Mrs.  L.
absolutely  correct  ;  in  all  the  others  there  were
errors  ranging  from  one  and  a  half  to  ten  minutes;
in  the  majority  she  Avas  premature.

In  most,  if  not  all,  of  the  tests  Mrs.  L.  was,
I  think,  unaware  of  the  exact  time  from  which
the  estimates  had  to  be  made.  It  would  there-
fore have  been  no  aid  to  accuracy  of  fulfilment
to  have  attemjited  to  make  calculations.  More-
over, although  in  the  long-time  experiments  Mrs.
L.  admitted  she  made  calculations,  she  assured  me
in  hypnosis  that  she  did  not  do  so  in  the  short-
time  experiments.  It  would  seem,  therefore,  that
here  we  have  genuine  instances  of  subconscious
time-watching  and  time-estimation.


Thinking  that  it  might  prove  fruitful  if  a  comparison
of  the  above  results  with  estimates  of  short  intervals  by
the  waking  mind  could  be  made,  I  asked  Mrs.  L.  to  make
a  series  of  observations  on  herself.  She  found,  however,
that  owing  to  the  tendency  of  the  waking  mind  to  forget
these  self-imposed  tasks,  such  observations  were  far  from
easy  to  carry  out  for  any  but  very  short  intervals.  With
no  little  difficulty  she  completed  a  series  of  15  tests.  In
these  tests  the  mean  error  proved  to  be  4-2  compared
with  a  mean  error  of  3  6  made  by  the  hypnotic  con-
sciousness. The  latter  thus  showed  a  superiority  of  '1  in
estimating  short  periods  of  time.


Lxxxvin.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnamhules  659


Mrs.  L.  did  not  show  the  same  degree  of  accuracy  in
her subliminal time-estimates as some somnambules,  as
observed  by  other  investigators. For  instance.  Dr.  Mitchell's
subject •'  F.D.," in her estimates of periods of  time
varying  from 1 to 15  minutes,  committed  a  mean  error
of 1-009 minutes in thirty-one tests. In  fifteen  obser-
vations on "  Mrs.  C," with periods varying from  two
to ten minutes, the mean error was -78 minute.  In
a series of sixty observations made by Dr.  Mitchell
on  various  subjects,  with  periods  varying  from  one  minute
to half an hour, the mean error was -89  minute.
Whether  the  fact that  my  experiments  tested  estimates
for  a  longer  period than  half an  hour, viz.  up  to  one
hour,  is  responsible  for  the  greater  mean  error  in  Mrs.  L.'s
case,  I  cannot  say. I  am  unable  to  discern  any  principle
governing  her  errors. In  several  instances  the  errors  for
periods  of  from  50-57  minutes  were  less  than  for  a  period
of  28  minutes. Thus,  in  No.  28,  an  eighteen-minute  test,
there  was an  error of 7 minutes, whilst  in  No. 26,  a
fifty-seven  minute  test,  the  error  was  only  three  minutes.
The  maximum  error  of  ten  minutes  occurred  in  No.  25,
where  the  period  was  sixty  minutes.

Dr.  Mtchell  noted  in  his  investigations  that  there  was
an  apparent  limitation  of  the  amount  of  error,  no  matter
what  the  suggested  time  interval  might  be.  He  found
that  an  error  of  one  minute  was  just  as  likely  to  be
made  when  the  suggestion  was  for  fifteen  minutes  as
when  it  was  for  three.  In  the  great  majority  of  his
experiments  for  the  estimation  of  periods  up  to  half  an
hour,  the  maximum  error  was  not  more  than  one  or  two
minutes.

I  endeavoured  to  find  out  by  qiiestioning  Mrs.  L.  in
hypnosis  the  method  employed  by  her  in  fulfilHng  these
short-time  suggestions.  .She  informed  me  that  she  did
not  make  calculations,  but  that  she  knew  when  the  right
time  had  come  to  perform  the  act  from  a  '  sense  of
rhythm.'  I  tried  to  obtain  more  accurate  information
about  this  sense  of  rhythm,  but  I  fear  that  what  she
said  on  these  occasions  was  rather  vague.  On  one
-occasion  in  hypnosis,  in  response  to  my  request  that  she


660


Sydney  E.  Hooper,  31. A.


[part


should  write  as  accurately  as  possible  a  description  of
this  rhythmic  sense,  she  wrote  : —

"Just  as  a  delicate  balance  is  made  inaccurate  by
disturbance,  so  the  sense  of  rhythm  is  temporarily  upset
by  agitation  "  ;  and  again,  on  a  subsequent  occasion,  she
wrote  : —

"  The  sense  of  rhythm  or  balance  is  always  active  and
constantly  being  checked  or  measured  against  the  clock
time.  Suppose  you  speak  of  a  minute.  This  has  come
to  mean  a  definite  measure  of  rhythm,  though  it  is  not
measured  in  any  exact  terms."

Towards  the  end  of  my  experiments,  I  one  day  asked
Mrs.  L.  in  deep  hypnosis  how  she  knew  that  a  certain
'  piece  of  rhythm  '  corresponded  to  a  minute  of  clock
time.  She  replied  :  "  It  just  feels  as  if  it  were  a  minute."
Asked  if  she  counted  at  all,  she  replied  :  "In  a  way  I
do  ;  one  stays  in  my  head  until  it  seems  to  turn  into
two  ;  two  until  it  turns  into  three,  and  so  on."  This
fragment  of  information,  furnished  by  my  subject's
hypnotic  mind,  is,  I  think,  of  value  in  shedding  light  on
the  mental  processes  involved  in  achievements  of  the
kind  we  are  considering.

Concluding  Remarks.

At  first  sight  the  question  as  to  how  the  hypnotic
consciousness  is  able  to  estimate,  frequently  with  surpris-
ing precision,  these  various  periods  of  time  without
assistance  from  any  mechanical  time-measurer,  appears
very  baffling.  I  do  not,  however,  think  it  is  necessary,
in  seeking  for  an  explanation,  to  endow  the  hypnotic
level  of  the  mind  with  any  transcendental  power.  Rather
it  would  seem  to  be  more  promising  to  look  for  a  clue
in  the  mental  processes  of  the  normal  waking  mind  when
making  similar  estimates.  Now,  we  have  seen  that  it  is
also  possible  for  the  waking  mind  to  make  estimates  of
the  passage  of  periods  varying  from  five  minutes  to  an
hour,  with  more  or  less  accuracy.  True,  there  are  often
considerable  errors,  and  oftener  still  the  self-imposed  tasks
are  quickly  forgotten  in  consequence  of  other  interests
taking hold of the mind. Nevertheless, as Mrs.  L.'s


Lxxxviii.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules .  661

experiments  on  herself  show,  estimates  can  sometimes  be
made  with  very  small  errors.  We  are  justified  then,  I
think,  in  assuming  that  in  these  estimates  the  same,  or
a  very  similar  mental  process  is  operating  on  both  levels
of  the  mind.  That  is  to  say,  there  is  no  difference  in
'  kind  '  between  the  mental  process  when  estimates  are
being  made  by  the  hypnotic  consciousness,  and  when
they  are  being  made  by  the  waking  consciousness.

What,  then,  is  the  method  of  the  waking  mind  in
estimating  short  periods  of  time  ?  If  a  subject  is
requested  to  close  his  eyes  and  judge  when  five  or  ten
minutes  have  passed,  he  may  adopt  the  method  of
rhythmic  counting.  He  knows  more  or  less  perfectly  the
rhythm  of  the  ticking  of  a  clock,  and  proceeds  to  count
at  a  similar  rate,  and  in  this  way  succeeds  in  approxi-
mating to  accuracy.  When  counting  is  not  consciously
employed,  the  subject  judges  on  the  basis  of  experience
that  a  certain  slice  of  duration  filled  with  a  number  of
events  is  equal  to  a  period  of  clock  time.  It  is  admitted
that  this  latter  procedure  is  liable  to  gross  error,  and  it
is  unlikely  that  the  accurate  power  of  estimating  time
displayed  by  many  somnambules  is  to  be  accounted  for
by  any  rough  judgment  of  the  latter  kind.

What,  now,  is  the  method  employed  by  the  hypnotic
level  of  the  mind  in  order  correctly  to  carry  out  post-
hypnotic suggestions  1  Although  it  is  by  no  means
certain  that  aU  somnambules  employ  the  same  method,
we  discovered  from  our  investigation  into  Miss  E.'s
achievements  that  she  used  the  method  of  counting  even
for  periods  as  long  as  44 1  and  38  hours.  Mrs.  L.  also
stated  in  hypnosis  that  she  carried  out  these  short-time
experiments  from  a  '  sense  of  rhythm  '  ;  that  a  minute
possessed  for  her  a  '  definite  value,'  and  that,  as  she  was
watching  the  passage  of  time,  the  minutes  seemed  each
at  a  constant  rate  automatically  to  flow  into  its  successor,
one  merging  into  two,  two  into  three,  three  into  four,
and  so  on.

Here,  then,  at  any  rate,  in  regard  to  two  somnambules,
we  seem  to  have  subliminal  counting  and  sul^liminal
equating  of  periods  of  duration  with  clock  time,  similar


662


Sydney  E.  Hooper,  M.A.


[part


to  that  attempted  by  the  waking  consciousness.  If  this
analysis  be  sound,  then  it  would  appear  that  in  the
estimates  of  short  periods  of  time  there  is  no  essential
difference  in  the  mental  processes  of  the  waking  and  hypnotic
levels  of  the  mind.

There  remains,  however,  the  apparent  fact  of  the
'  superiority  '  displayed  by  the  hypnotic  over  the  waking
consciousness.  Although  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  L.  this
superiority  is  not  very  marked,  in  results  published  by
other  investigators  the  approximation  to  accuracy  of
estimation  by  the  hypnotic  consciousness  is  much  more
striking.  And  if  my  own  subject.  Miss  E.,  were  able  to
perform  the  suggestions  in  many  instances  at  the  correct
time,  solely  by  a  process  of  rhythmic  counting,  there  can,
I  think,  be  no  doubt  that  her  hypnotic  consciousness
displayed  considerable  superiority  over  her  waking  mind
in  this  respect.  It  would  appear  then  necessary  to  admit
this  superiority. Can  we  suggest  any  explanation  for  it  1

I  submit  that  one  important  factor  making  for  superiority
is  the  capacity  of  the  hypnotic  consciousness  to  con-
centrate upon  its  task  to  the  exclusion  of  all  else.  It
apparently  watches  the  passage  of  time  without  cessation
until  the  suggested  act  has  been  carried  out.  It  is
absorbed  in  its  work,  refusing,  with  praiseworthy  per-
sistency, any  temptation  to  diversion.  The  waking  mind,
on  the  other  hand,  when  making  similar  estimates,  is
unable  normally  to  think  continuously  of  its  undertaking
or  to  watch  the  flow  of  time  with  the  same  degree  of
attentive  concentration.  Thus,  in  place  of  the  simple
absorption  characteristic  of  the  liypnotic  consciousness,
the  waking  mind  displays  but  fitfid  interest  and  spas-
modic attention.  The  tranquil  patience  possessed  by  the
hypnotic  consciousness,  together  with  its  capacity  for
undivided  attention,  would  appear  to  give  it  an  advantage
over  the  waking  mind  in  its  rhythmic  counting.  Whether,
however,  this  is  the  sole  explanation  for  its  superiority,
I  am  unable  to  say.  There  may  be  other  contributory
factors.

It  is  conceivable,  to  refer  again  to  Dr.  Mitchell's  specula-
tion, that  on  the  subliminal  level  of  the  mind  some  cor-


Lxxxviii.] The  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somna^nbules  663


relation  exists  between  certain  rhythmic  organic  processes
and  our  conventional  divisions  of  time,  so  that  when-
the  subconscious  mind  is  shut  off  from  contact  with
clocks  and  watches  it  still  has  at  hand  an  objective  time-
measurer.  Some  such  hypothesis  would  seem  to  be
necessary  to  explain  the  time  accuracy  exhibited  by
certain  somnambules  in  performing  post-hypnotic  acts
under  these  conditions.

There  is,  however,  one  other  possibility.  The  pendular
rhythm  of  the  clock  may  be  so  perfectly  inscribed  on  the
subconscious  memory,  and  its  faithful  reproduction  be  so
easy  a  matter,  that  the  postulation  of  other  factors  is
superfluous.

One  concluding  remark  may  not  be  altogether  irrelevant.
Experimental  psychology  has  shown  that  in  estimating  very
short  periods  of  time — of  a  second  or  less — there  is  a
certain  period  for  whiclv  the  mean  of  a  number  of  estimates
is  correct.  It  is  suggested  that  this  period— called  '  in-
di.Tference-time  '—represents  the  time  occupied  in  fixing
attention.  Did  Miss  E.'s  counting  correspond  with  this
'  indifference-time  '  ?

TABLE  OF  EXPERIMENTS.

Nos.  1-12,  with  "  Miss  E."


No.
of
Ex.


Suggestion  made
on  at


10

11

12


1922
.Jan.  31st
.Jan.  31st
Feb.  7tli
Feb.  14th
Feb.  15th
Feb.  21st
Feb.  28th
Mar. 7  th


Mar.  14th

April  5th
Sept.  11th
Sept.  26th


Interval
suggested.


Suggestion  due.


Result.


Just  before  getting  into  bed  write  down  time.
Draw  a  triangle  and  square  at  11.45,  Feb.  2nd.
8.5  p.m.

8.9  p.m.
6.30  p.m.

10.7  p.m.

8.10  p.m.
9.5  p.m.


8.15  p.m.

7.0  p.m.
7.0  p.m.
9.15  p.m.


175  min.

891  min.

960  min.
2880  min.
4320  min.

420  min.
1860  min.
3300  min.
4744  min.
3600  min.
6480  min.
7200  min.
2670  min.
2880  min.


7th  Feb.,  11  p.m.

loth  Feb.,  11  a.m.

16th  Feb.,  10.30  ;i.m.

23rd  Feb.,  10.7  p.m.

3rd  Mar.,  8.10p.m.


8th  Mar.,
9th  Mar.,
10th  Mar.,
11th  Mar.,
17th  Mar.,
19th  Mar.,


4.5  a.m.
4.5  a.m.
4.5  a.m.
4.5  a.m.
8.15  p.m.
8.15  p.m.


10th  April,  7.0  p.m.
13th  Sept.,  7.30  p.m.
28th  Sept.,  11.15  a.m.


Correct.
Correct.

Error  5  min.  over.
Error  3  min.  short.
Correct.

Error  5  min.  short.
Error  3  min.  over.
Not  done.


Correct.
Not  done.

Error  10  min.  over.

Correct.

Correct.


664  Sydney  E.  Hoojm-,  M.A.  [part


Table  of  Experiments— wiii'wnfecf!.

Nos.  1-10,  with  "  Mrs.  L."


IN  U.

of
Ex.

Sug-gesti<
on

311  made
at

Interval
suggested.

Suggestion  due.

Result.

1

Mar.

10th

7.15  p.m.

900  min.

11th  Mar.,  10.15  a.m.

Correct.

Z

Mar.

10th

7.15  p.m.

4320  min.

13th  Mar., 7.15  p.m.

Wrong  number
caleulated.

•>

.3

June

8th

12.30  p.m.

450  min.

7i  lirs. 8  p.m.

Wroni;.

4

June

8th

12.40  p.m.

5316  min.

12th  June, 5.16  a.m.

Wrong.

.3

June

8th

12.15  ij.m.

7320  min.

13th  .Tune, 2.25  ji.m.

Correct.

6

June

9th

3.8  p.m.

1760  min.

10th  June, 8.28  p.m.

Error  13  min.  short.

7

June

12th

9.10  p.m.

10,240  min.

19th  June,  11.50  p.m.

Wrong  number
calculated.

8

.June

16th

5.20  p.m.

15,225  min.

27th  .Fune. 7.5  a.m.

Correct.

0

.June

30tb

8.50  p.m.

20,225  min.

14th  .luly, 9.55  p.m.

Correct.

10

To  test  how  long  subliminal  miad  takes  to  work  sum.

Took  4  or  5  hours.

Nos.  11-17,  with  "Mrs.  L."


11

.June

9th

3.0

p.m.

11th  June,

3 p.  m.

Correct. '

12

June

11th

3.8

]3.m.

No  deKnite

12th  June,

8.48  p.m.

Error.  -

13

•lune

16th

5.15

p.m.

interval

17th  June,

10.40  a.m.

Slight  error.'

14

J  une

19th

9.10

p.m.

suggested —

20th  .June,

12.50  p.m.

Correct.

15

June  20th

1.0

l).m.

'  To  await

22nd  June,

1.15  p.m.

Wrong.

16

July

7  th

9.30

p.m.

signal.'

9th  July

9.10  p.m.

Correct.*

17

A  ug.

1st

5.46

p.m.

4th  Aug.,

9.28  p.m.

Error.  5

Nos.  18-32,  OTth  "Mrs.  L."


18

134

min.

Error  14-  min.  short.

19

min.

1

20

28

min.

>?

5

21

35

min.

0

22

45

min.

»j

8

23

50

min.

»,

1

24

53

min.

)t

2

25

60

min.

>?

10  min.  over.

26

57

min.

,»

3

27

47

mir.

? ,

2  min.  short.

28

18

min.

>5

7  min.  over.

29

28

min.

5  min.  short.

30

46

min.

1  min.  over.

31

57

min.

3  min.  short.

32

50

min.

4  min.  over.

Mean  Error - - 3-6  min.


1  Given  in  hours  instead  of  minutes.  -Slip  in  calculation  resulting  in  error  of  I  hour.
3  Error  in  '  guessing  '  time.  ^Subject  anticipated  signal.

5  Error  corrected  when  subject  wrote  down  calculation  in  hypnosis.


ijxxxvni.] Possibility  of  Deception  with  Eva  C.


665


CONCERNING  THE  POSSIBILITY  OF  DECEPTION  IN
SITTINGS  WITH  EVA  C.i

By  Dr.  Freiherr  von  Schrenck-Notzing  (of  Munich).

In  Proc.  S.P.R.,  Vol.  LXXXIV.,  Mr.  E.  J.  DingwaU  has
criticised  the  author's  experiments  with  the  medium
Eva  C.  in  terms  which  in  several  particulars  are  neither
fair  nor  accurate.  Since  the  publication  of  this  report
(June,  1922),  Mr.  Dingwall  has  become  acquainted  with
the  present  writer's  manner  of  working  and  his  experi-
mental method  by  taking  part  in  three  sittings  with  the
medium  Willy  Sch.  at  his  laboratory  in  Munich.  Probably,
therefore,  Mr.  Dingwall  might  now  view  my  conduct  in
another  light  than  he  did  before  we  were  personally
acquainted.

Mr.  Dingwall  asks  what  is  the  extent  of  my  knowledge
of  methods  of  deception  and  hoAV  far  I  am  in  a  position
to  discover  fraudulent  manipulations  before  or  after  the
sittings.  To  this  I  may  reply  that  in  my  experiences
with  physical  mediums,  which  have  extended  over  a
period  of  more  than  thirty-five  years,  I  have  never  yet
met  with  conjuring  proper."  In  this  respect  conditions
upon  the  continent  are  different  from  those  in  the  Anglo-
Saxon  countries  England  and  America,  where,  in  con-
sequence of  the  extraorchnarily  widespread  belief  in
spiritualism,  mediumship  has  been  c^uite  shamelessly  put
to  professional  uses.

Moreover,  a  fraudulent  appearance  in  the  phenomena
is  often  extremely  marked  where  we  have  to  do  with  a
genuine  mediumistic  performance.  I  will  mention  here
only  the  imj)robable  appearance  of  many  teleplastic
productions  observed  at  Madame  Bisson's  sittings  with
Eva  C,  at  my  own,  and  at  Dr.  Geley's,  and  also  at  the

^  Translated  from  the  German.


666


Dr.  Freiherr  von  Schrenck-Notzing.  '  [part


sittings  of  the  English  Committee.  It  needs  but  a  Kttle
in  such  cases  to  confound  these  rare,  and  in  appearance
fraudulent  sports  of  Nature  with  the  conjurer's  sleight  of
hand,  in  spite  of  their  supernormal  origin.  In  particular,
the  range  of  so-called  "  mediumistic  apports  "  is  marked
by  a  particularly  close  analogy  with  the  deceptions  of  the
"  magician  which  depend  upon  speed  and  misdirection.
Towards  that  particular  branch  of  mediumistic  phenomena,
at  all  events,  a  very  sceptical  attitude  is  appropriate.
The  psychological  foundations  of  the  conjurer's  art  are
well  known  both  to  myself  and  to  the  other  continental
investigators  into  the  physical  branch  of  parapsychie
phenomena.  I  do  not  think  that  upon  this  point  we
have  anything  new  to  learn  from  Mr.  Dingwall.

It  should  be  noted  that  famous  conjurers  such  as
Bosko,  Houdin,  Hermann,  Bellachini,  Jakolis,  Hamilton,
etc.,  have  acquitted  the  mediums  whom  they  have  ob-
served of  any  suspicion  of  conjuring  tricks,  just  as  Mr.
Dingwall  would  now  hardly  venture  to  assert  that  the
phenomena  of  Eva  C.  and  Willy  Sch.  are  founded  upon
conjuring.  For  nothing  is  easier  than  to  deprive  a
medium  of  the  use  of  his  limbs  by  observation  and  by
holding  the  extremities.  Subjects  who  are  not  able  to
endure  such  controlled  experiments  should  be  ignored  by
scientific  enquirers.  An  accomplice  or  abettor,  such  as
a  conjurer  needs,  can  only  be  in  question  where  the
persons  included  in  the  circle  are  not  reliable.  But  if
the  circle  consists  solely  of  doctors  or  well-known  men  of
science,  and  if,  moreover,  the  grouping  of  the  circle  is
changed  between  one  sitting  and  another,  this  objection
also  falls  to  the  ground.

All  things  considered,  the  physical  phenomena  of  medium-
ship  cannot  be  counterfeited,  if  such  experimental  con-
ditions as  will  exclude  fraud  are  rigorously  maintained
at  the  sittings.

On  the  other  hand,  I  can  corroborate  Mr.  Dingwall's
statement  that  when  Eva  C."s  hands  are  given  the  necessary
freedom,  she  sometimes  uses  them  to  increase  the  tendency
of  the  phenomena  to  deceive  the  observers'  senses,  because
she seizes the teleplasma  in her  hands, works  upon  it.


Lxxxviii.] Possibility  of  Deception  with  Eva  C.


667


and  sets  out  her  picture-like  productions  so  that  they
can  be  easily  seen  by  the  circle  of  onlookers.  But  this
arrangement  for  optical  effect  has  nothing  whatever  to  do
with  the  source  of  the  psychoplastic  objects.  But  I
must  at  this  point  emphasise  the  fact  that  during  the
latter  part  of  the  period  covered  by  my  experiments,
1913-1914,  the  possibility  of  the  hands  being  brought  into
play  was  ruled  out  by  the  conditions  under  which
these  experiments  took  place.

Mr.  Dingwall  goes  on  to  express  his  surprise  that  at
a  sitting  held  with  Eva  C.  during  the  period  of  experi-
menting at  Munich  (August,  1912),  I  did  not  myself
discover  some  unquestionable  pin-holes  in  the  curtain,  but
that  these  were  observed  by  Dr.  A.  That  there  were,
in  fact,  a  few  pinholes  in  the  curtain  just  before  this
unjustifiably  exaggerated  discovery  does  not  depend,  as
Mr.  Dingwall  suggests,  upon  the  author's  "  assertion,'"  but
upon  the  written  testimony  of  the  photographer  who
took  part  in  the  arrangement  of  the  apparatus  (see
Kampf  urn  die  Materialisazions-jjhdi^omene,  p.  26).  Before
judging  this  matter  readers  shovild  take  into  account  the
following  letter  received  from  my  photographer  :

Dear  Baron,

In  reply  to  your  enquiry  I  gladly  inform  you  that
on  one  occasion  certainly  (when  I  had  no  assistance  at
hand)  I  fixed  a  piece  of  newspaper  with  a  pin  to  the
curtain  of  the  cabinet  with  a  view  to  setting  up  the
cameras  correctly.  It  is  probable  that  I  may  have  fixed
a  similar  sheet  with  the  same  pin  to  the  back  wall  of
the  cabinet  also,  and  to  the  stool,  but  my  recollection  is
not  clear  on  this  point  owing  to  the  long  interval  of
time.

I  remain.

Yours  very  truly,

Georg  Haitberrisser,  Dr.
(Head  of  the  Hauberrisser  Photographic
11/11/1914.  Institute.)

We  are  therefore  concerned  in  this  case  neither  with  an
"  assertion " on the part of the author, nor with  the


668  Dr.  Freiherr  von  Schrenck-Notzing.  [part

discovery  of  an  entirely  neAv  fact  by  Dr.  A.,  since  the
existence  of  several  pin-holes  was  already  known  to  the
experimenters.  As  Mr.  Dingwall  saw  when  he  took  part
in  the  Munich  experiments,  it  is  my  habit  to  give  my
scientific  guests  a  free  hand  in  examining  the  laboratory,
with  a  view  to  the  attainment  of  objective  conclusions.
Moreover,  I  was  myself  present  when  the  pin-holes  were
found.  The  examination  of  the  cabinet  which  had  been
moved  from  its  position  was  carried  out  jointly  by  Dr.
A.  and  myself.  There  was  therefore  no  question  of
anything  having  been  previously  overlooked,  and  equally
no  reason  for  Dr.  A.  to  claim  the  special  merit  of  having
discovered  some  omission  on  my  part,  or  of  having
opened  my  eyes.

Undoubtedly  the  existence  of  a  row  of  pin-holes  remains
a  riddle,  and  so  dees  the  English  Committee's  discover}^
of  fragments  of  paper  at  four  separate  sittings.  But
these  observations,  pointing  to  a  negative  conclusion,  do
not  afford  us  any  complete  explanation  ;  they  do  not,  for
example,  explain  the  passing  of  the  teleplastic  substance
through  the  veil  which  was  observed  by  the  English
Committee,  as  well  as  by  others.  The  value  of  our  posi-
tive observations  cannot,  therefore,  be  destroyed  by  a  few
mysterious  occurrences  of  an  apparently  suspicious  nature
for  which  up  to  the  present  we  have  no  explanation.

For  time  and  again  the  mysterious  world  of  mediumship
puts  forward  phenomena  which  come  as  a  shock  to  our
accustomed  trains  of  thought.  May  we  not  find  in  this
employment  of  pins  an  instance  of  an  apport,  the  more
that  it  has  been  demonstrated  in  the  case  of  the  medium
Frau  Silbert  that  the  engraved  marks  upon  articles  of
jewelry  have  been  produced  by  means  of  pins  super-
normally  introduced.  Moreover,  in  the  case  of  three
mediums,  between  whom  there  was  no  connexion,  the
writer  has  been  able  to  observe  the  fixing  up  of  tele-
plastic  products  by  means  of  pins  which  were  probably
introduced  in  supernormal  ways,  and  the  observations
were  to  some  extent  corroborated  by  the  camera.  This
occuiTence,  therefore,  in  the  case  of  Eva  C.  is  not  isolated,
but  is  typical  of  a  certain  phase  of  mediumship.


Lxxxviii.] Possibility  of  Deception  with  Eva  C.


669


Eva  C.'s  stockinette  costume  and  her  clothing  were
regularly  held  up  to  the  light  of  a  hand-lamp  before  the
sittings  and  especially  searched  for  defective  places.  During
the  many  years  covered  by  the  period  of  experimentation
only  once,  at  the  sitting  of  the  29th  May,  1912,  were
holes  found  in  the  stockinette,  and  these  were  noted  in
the  record.

In  spite  of  the  monotonous  repetition  year  after  year
of  the  same  process  of  examination,  our  attention  never
flagged  ;  for  we  were  convinced  of  the  value  and  necessity
of  examining  the  seance-costume.  Had  it  not  been  for
this  careful  control,  those  minute  paper  particles  could  not
have  been  discovered  on  August  30th,  1912.

Rectal  and  vaginal  examinations  have  repeatedly  been
carried  out,  many  of  them  during  the  later  period  by  the
present  writer  himself.

With  regard  to  the  pieces  of  paper  found  in  Paris  and
in  London,  we  have  no  occasion  to  doubt  that  even
paper-like  substances  can  be  materialised,  as  can  sub-
stances of  the  nature  of  gauze  veiling  and  cotton,  including
the  morphological  structure  of  the  weft,  folds  sewn  in,
etc.

Just  as  traces  have  repeatedly  been  left  of  the  pure,
organic -teleplastic  substance,  so  may  similar  fragments  of
the  materialised  products,  textile  or  cellular,  have  been
left  behind.

We  have  far  too  little  knowledge  at  the  present  time
of  the  way  in  which  these  teleplastic  creative  processes
work,  and  we  do  not  know  that  this  materialising  process
is  not  capable  of  including  m  its  scope  all  the  objects  of
our  sensory  world,  and  tricking  us  with  representations
of  them.  In  any  case  it  appears  inadmissible  according
to  our  present  experience  to  found  a  suspicion  of  fraud
upon  the  improbability  in  the  appearance  of  these  tele-
plastic products  and  upon  their  material  characteristics,
merely  because  these  phenomena  are  inconsistent  with  our
preconceived  ideas.  The  habitual  trend  of  our  associative
thought  compels  us,  whenever  a  medium  produces  pheno-
mena such  as  those  described  above,  to  think  at  once  of
similar  appearances  in  the  world  of  our  experience.  Clearly

2u


670  Dr.  Freiherr  von  Schrenck-Notzing.  [paet

the  creative  efforts  of  this  unknown  psychic  force,  when
it  embodies  itself  for  our  senses,  expresses  itself  in  the
shape  of  appearances  known  to  us  in  the  world  of  our
experience,  in  order  to  be  generally  intelligible  to  us.

If  the  working  of  an  unknown  law  of  nature  consisted
in  presenting  to  our  vision  appearances  at  one  time  in
two  dimensions,  at  another  plastic,  at  one  time  in  the  rough,
at  another  finished  in  every  detail,  at  one  time  with  all
the  characteristics  of  life,  at  another  without  them,  we
should  have  to  conform  our  ideas  to  these  phenomena,
however  strange  each  of  them  might  individually  seem.
So  long  as  we  continue  to  be  wholly  ignorant  of  the
process  at  work,  as  we  are  to-day,  we  have  no  right  to
repudiate  a  phenomenon  because,  for  example,  its  two-
dimensional  appearance  is  not  consistent  with  the  hypo-
thesis upon  which  our  presentation  of  the  case  rests,  in
other  words,  with  our  preconceived  ideas.

The  teleplastic  reproduction  of  a  portrait  from  the
'  Miroir  '  by  a  combination  of  ideoplastic  force  and
cryptomnesia  is  not  in  itself  more  wonderful  and  also  not
more  suspicious  than  the  appearance  of  the  letters  '  Miro.'
In  judging  the  suspicions  expressed  by  Mr.  Dingwall,
suspicions  which  it  is  not  easy  to  dispel,  the  decisive
factor  can  only  be  the  experimental  conditions  of  control
imposed  at  the  sittings  under  consideration  ;  it  can  in
no  wise  be  the  mere  appearance  of  olijects  seen.  Now,
the  experimental  conditions  were  such  as  to  be  absolutely
free  from  any  objection,  and,  moreover,  the  mysterious
emergence  of  these  objects  and  their  sudden  disappearance,
leaving  no  trace,  supports  in  this  instance  the  hypothesis
of  materialisation  .

When  in  conclusion  Mr.  Dingwall  asserts  that  at  the
sitting  of  August  11,  1911,  it  was  by  a  photograph
developed  after  the  sitting  that  the  writer  was  first
made  aware  of  Eva  C'.'s  manipulating  of  the  phenomena
with  her  right  hand,  while  in  place  of  the  real  hand  three
lay  a  flat,  glove-like  form,  in  open  imitation  of  the  hand
supposedly  under  control,  in  this  case  the  present  writer's
statement  has  been  misunderstood  and  wrongly  quoted.

The  exact  wording  of  the  passage  is  as  follows  {Material-


Lxxxviii.] Possibility  of  Deception  with  Eva  C.


671


isazions-phdnomene,  p.  172,  Eng.  trans.,  p.  lOS)  :  "  x\fter
a  photograph  had  been  taken  (Exposure  No.  1  at  this
sitting)  the  sitting  continued.  Out  of  the  elemental  sub-
stance which  was  changing  its  position,  there  was  built  up
in  her  lap  a  third  flat  hand.  At  the  same  time  I  also
observed  about  thirty  centimetres  above  her  head  another
better  formed  hand.  Since  the  phenomenon  was  repeated
several  times  and  again  manifested  itself  over  her  head,
I  made  another  exposure  (No.  2  flashlight  photograph  at
this  sitting)."

Mr.  Dmgwall's  incorrect  citation,  arising  out  of  a
mistake  on  his  part,  was  given  in  the  course  of  a  corre-
spondence otherwise  private,  but  it  must  nevertheless  be
published  in  this  present  connection,  lest  the  reader
should  deduce  from  an  inaccurate  reference  a  defect  in
the  writer's  powers  of  observation.  The  flaws  and  im-
perfections referred  to  by  Mr.  Dingwall  in  the  experiments
with  Eva  C.  have  been  discussed  in  detail  in  the  present
writer's  works,  so  that  what  Mr.  Dingwall  has  put  forward
does  not  introduce  any  new  objections.  But  it  should
not  be  forgotten  that  against  these  isolated  observations
of  a  negative  character  we  have  to  set  an  altogether  com-
pelling mass  of  evidence  drawn  from  hundreds  of  successful
experiments,  so  that  these  negative  observations  possess
in  reality  but  little  force.

As  to  the  question  of  the  part  played  by  regurgitation
in  the  experiments  with  Eva  C,  an  explanation  which,
so  far  as  the  English  experiments  are  concerned,  is  dis-
missed by  every  member  of  the  Committee,  the  second
German  edition  of  Mater ialisazions-phdnomene,  now  in  print,
enters  into  an  exhaustive  discussion  of  this  matter,  which
once  and  for  all  makes  a  clean  sweep  of  this  "  old  wives'
tale."  The  layman  has  no  justification  for  his  tendency
to  regard  the  stomach  of  mediums  of  this  type  as  a
kind  of  conjurer's  property-bag,  out  of  which  he  can  at
his  pleasure  select  any  article  he  happens  at  the  moment
to  require.

Moreover,  Mr.  Dingwall  himself  admits  that  his  only
reason  for  going  so  thoroughly  into  the  possibility  of
fraud  in  the  experiments  with  Eva  C,  is  in  order  to  set


672  Dr.  Freiherr  von  Schrenck-Notzing.  [part

clearly  before  the  reader's  eyes  the  impossibility  and
absurdity  of  this  hypothesis.

Now,  as  regards  the  technique  of  investigation,  experi-
ence shows  that  better  results  are  obtained  if,  in  spite  of
the  most  rigorous  system  of  control  in  regard  to  observa-
tion of  the  medium,  one  tries  to  establish  good  psycho-
logical relations  with  her,  and  at  the  same  time  to  attain
a  sympathetic  understanding  of  her  mentality,  and  if
during  the  actual  sittings  one  does  not  concern  oneself
either  in  thought  or  in  conversation  with  possibilities"  of
deception  and  methods  of  control.

For  these  phenomena  have  their  origin  in  the  life  of
the  unconscious  mind  and  arise  from  an  instinctive  impulse
in  the  medium,  who  for  her  part  can  yield  herself  up
completely  to  this  impulse  only  upon  condition  that  her
conscious  attention  is  not  brought  into  play  by  psycho-
logical resistances,  or  by  doubt  of  her  honesty  on  the
part  of  the  observers.  The  frequent  ignoring  of  this  most
important  consideration,  especially  in  scientific  investi-
gations, is  a  cause  of  negative  sittings  even  in  the  case
of  mediums  who  in  other  circumstances  give  good  results.

Belief  in  the  actuality  of  parapsycho-physical  phenomena
gains  new  adherents  in  Germany  every  day.  The  remark-
able occurrences  observed  with  Eva  C.  have  opened  the
way  and  are  gaining  an  ever-increasing  recognition  as
a  result  of  the  observation  of  similar  occurrences  in
experiments  with  other  subjects.


LXXXVIIl]


Review


673


REVIEW.

Medical Psychology and Psychical Research. By T.  W.
Mitchell. (London  :  Methuen  &  Co.  1922.  Pp.  vii,  244.)

It  was  an  excellent  idea  of  Dr.  Mitchell's  to  republish  in
book  form  the  remarkable  studies  on  the  problems  of  multiple
personality  and  hysteria  which  he  has  been  contributing  to  the
Proceedings  of  our  Society  ever  since  1907.  For  m.  their  new
form  they  are  much  more  likely  to  reach  both  the  general
and  the  medical  pubhc  which  does  not  read  our  Proceedings,
but  which  it  is  vitally  important  to  interest  in  our  researches,
and  to  which  the  moderation  and  caution  of  Dr.  Mitchell's
statements  is  sure  to  appeal.  It  is  also  commendable  that  the
somewhat  scanty  English  hterature  on  abnormal  states  of
personaUty  should  be  enriched  by  a  work  worthy  of  being
mentioned  by  the  side  of  the  great  French  and  American
classics  on  the  subject.  Not  that  Dr.  Mitchell  has  had  the
good  fortune  to  come  across  subjects  of  an  excellence  comparable
with  that  of  '  FeUda,'  '  Leonie,'  '  Miss  Beauchamp,'  the  '  Rev.
Mr.  Hanna,'  or  '  Doris  Fischer  '  ;  it  is  rather  in  the  handling
of  his  (less  sensational)  cases,  and  in  the  judiciousness  of  the
conclusions  drawn  that  he  excels.  As,  moreover,  it  is  precisely
in  elaborations  of  the  ^theoretic  conclusions  that  the  new
material  (found  in  chapters  iv.  and  vi.)  chiefly  consists,  it  is
to  their  consideration  that  this  review  will  be  chiefly  devoted.

Dr.  Mitchell  throughout  employs  the  sound  method  of
explaining  the  abnormal  developments  of  mental  Ufe  by  their
analogy  with  normal  processes  of  which  they  may  be  regarded
as  the  exaggerations.  He  therefore  points  out  that  the  lapses
of  memory  which  are  common  in  everyday  life,  the  changes  of
mood  which  accompany  changes  in  the  bodj^  and  its  functional
activity,  the  aberrations  of  conduct  to  which  most  men  are
liable  to  in  some  degree,  are  the  same  in  kind  as  those  that
are  met  with  in  more  pronounced  form  in  multiple  personaUty
(p.  103).  He  also  deprecates  "  the  tendency  of  some  modern
psychologists  lightly  to give  up belief  in the  unitary  char-


674


F.  C.  S.  Schiller


[part


acter  of  man's  being "  (p.  44),  would  rather  "  speak  of  the
hypnotic  stratum  of  consciousness  than  of  tlie  hypnotic  self  "
(p.  45),  and  distinguishes  between  disruption  of  "  the  unity  of
consciousness  and  of  the  higher  unity  which  is  implied  in  the
conception  of  personaUty  "  (p.  147).  By  combining  these
criteria,  he  is  enabled  to  make  the  valuable  suggestion  that
the  '  Jekyll-and-Hyde  '  tyjje  of  dissociation,  in  which  there  is
a  marked  moral  difference  between  the  two  '  selves,'  is  "a
pathological  development  of  a/c^acr/a,"  '  incontinence,'  as  described
by  Aristotle  (p.  159),  and  conversely,  that  "  in  uKparria  we.  have
an  incipient  doubling  of  personality  "  (p.  155).  Whenever
incompatible  interests  come  into  conflict  in  an  imperfectly
integrated  moral  character,  there  may  be  a  yielding  to  '  temp-
tation,' and  this  will  be  facilitated  by  a  ])rocess  of  self-so-
])histication  or  '  rationalization,'  which  causes  temporary  amnesia
rf  considerations  which  would  run  counter  to  tlie  desire,  and
forges  reasons  for  indulging  in  it  (p.  156-7).  The  reason  why
Jekyll-and-Hyde  dissociations  are  so  rare  is  probably  that,
thanks  to  the  '  rationalization  '  of  the  desire,  complete  amnesia
does  not  grow  up,  and  "  a  double  life  may  be  led  without
discovery  "  (p.  158).  Nevertheless  there  may  be  a  sort  of
"  amnesia  of  the  interests,  purposes  and  ideals  "  of  the  moral
self  (p.  106).  This  analysis  of  incontinence  appears  to  me  to
be  well  worthy  of  the  attention  of  moralists,  who,  no  doubt
from  ignorance  of  psychology,  have  not  been  very  hapjoy  in
their  dealings  with  the  '  moral  struggle.'

Much  the  same  might  be  said  of  philosoiihers  generally,  as
regards  their  treatment  of  the  self  and  the  body-soul  relation.
In  his  final  chajDter  on  Body  and  Soul  in  Multiple  Personality
Dr.  Mitchell  treats  the  magniloquent  obscurities  in  which  they
have  involved  the  subject  with  more  respect  than  they  prob-
ably deserve.  But  he  is  very  explicit  in  exposing  the  vague-
ness which  underlies  physiological  attempts  to  conceive  the
unity  of  consciousness  (as  also  its  '  dissociation  ')  in  merely
neural  terms.  He  rightly  prefers  to  interpret  the  variations  of
personality  in  terms  of  shiftings  in  the  '  threshold  '  of  consci-
ousness, and  he  holds  that  the  soul  as  "a  psychical  being
beneath  or  behind  the  phenomena  of  consciousness  "  is  by  no
means  antiquated.  As  for  its  dissociations,  "  one  unitary  soul
may  persist  behind  all  dissociations  of  consciousness,  but  it  will


lxxxviii]


Review


675


be  unable  to  appear  as  a  unity  and  its  manifestations  may '  be
fragmentary  and  discordant.  Its  unity  will  be  marked  by
the  imperfection  of  its  instrument."  (p.  236).

Here  I  am  tempted  to,  not  to  controvert  Dr.  Mitchell,  but
to  dot  a  few  i's  and  to  cross  a  few  i's,  in  order  to  reinforce
his  conclusion.  In  the  first  place,  it  should  be  observed  that
no  discussion  of  the  relation  of  body  and  soul  can  claim
completeness  which  neglects  to  consider  what  William  James
has  called  the  transmission  theory,  which  is  jirecisely  the  one
for  which  the  body  is  the  normal  instrument,  and  often  the
hindrance,  of  the  soul's  manifestation,  and  Avhich  is  ca^Jable
of  interpreting  all  the  facts  usually  held  to  point  to  the
(materialistic)  j^'^oduction  theory.  Secondly,  it  should  be  made
quite  clear  that  the  soul  must  not  be  conceived  as  a  thing-like
entity,  after  the  fashion  of  the  old  metaphysics.  Conceived  as
a  thing,  it  was  perfectly  useless,  as  its  critics  perceived,  and
explained  nothing.  It  is  not  a  '  substratum  '  for  its  qualities
to  '  inhere  '  in,  but  an  activity  that  reveals  itself  in  its
manifestations.  Thirdly,  we  should  beware  of  assuming  that
the  problem  to  be  accounted  for  in  '  multijile  personality  "  is
how  an  original  unity  can  be  '  dissociated,'  and  a  soul  can
fall  to  pieces.  As  Dr.  Mitchell  acutely  remarks  (p.  214)  "  in
order  to  explain  how  consciousness  can  be  split  in  two,  we
must  first  be  able  to  explain  how  it  ever  comes  to  be  one."
The  unity  of  a  '  soul  '  manifesting  through  a  '  body  '  must
necessarily  be  an  achievement,  not  a  datum.  For  the  body  is
not  a  unity,  but  an  incredibly  complex  association  of  vast
multitudes  of  cells  that  has  grown  together  under  natural
selection  to  meet  the  various  requirements  of  organic  life.
Nothing,  therefore,  is  more  probable  than  that  its  various
organs  and  activities  should  not  always  function  together  in  a
perfectly  harmonious  way.  And  if  they  are,  in  addition,  the
more  or  less  recalcitrant  instruments  of  a  being  that  strives
to  manifest  through  them,  it  is  not  astonishing  that  its  self-
expression  should  frequently  fall  short  of  unity  and  harmony.
Nor  is  it  unreasonable,  with  such  a  theory  of  psychic  structure,
to  keep  one's  eyes  open,  and  to  look  for  evidences,  ahke  in
the  normal  and  in  the  abnormal  functionings  of  the  '  soul,'
of  supernormal  processes  transcending  our  present  jDlane  of
evolution,  F.  C.  S.  Schiller.


FORMER  PRESIDENTS  OF  TEE  SOCIETY  FOR  PSYCEICAL  RESEARCH.


PitiOFESsoR  Henry  Sidgwick,  -  1882-84.
PiiOFEssoR  Balfour  Stewart,

F.K.S., 1885-87.

Professor  Henry  Sidgwick,  -  1888-92.
The  Right  Hon.  The  Eakl

Balfour,  K.G.,  F.ll.S., - -  1893.
Professor  William  James,  - -  l894-9o.
Sir  William  Crooke':,O.M.,F.R.S.,  1896-99.
Frederic  W.  H.  Myers,-  -  1900.

Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.  -  1901-03.

Sir  William  Barrett,  F.R.S., -  1904.
Professor  Charles  Richet,  -  .  -  1905.
The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour,-  1908-07.
Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  - - -  1903-09.


H.  Arthur  Smith,  - -  -  1910.

ANDREW  Lang.  1911.

Rt.  Rev.  Bishop  W.  Boyd  Car-
penter, D.D., - - . -  1912.

Professor  Henri  Bergson,  - -  1913.

F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc, - -  1014.

Professor Gilbert  Murray,

LL.D..  Litt.D,. - - -  191.5-in.

L.  P.  Jacks.  LL.D.,  D.D.. - -  1917-18.

THE  Rt.  Hon.  Lord  Rayleigh,

0  M.,  F.R.S., - - - .  1919.

W.  McDougall,  F.R.S.,  .M.Sc,

M.B., 1920-21.

T.  W.  Mitchell,  M.D.,  - - -  1922.


OFFICERS  AND  COUNCIL  FOR  1923.

PRESIDENT.

M.  Oamille  Flammariox.


VICE-PRESIDENTS.


Rt.  Hox.  the  Earl  of  B.\lfour,

KG.,  F.E.S.
Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.
Sir  WiLLiAJi  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.
George  B.  Dorr.
L.  P.  Jacks,  LL.D.,  D.D.
Sir  Lawrence  Jones,  Bart.
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.,  D.Sc.


Professor  Gilbert  Murray,  LL.D.,
Litt.  1).

J.  G.  PiDDINGTON.

F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.
Sydney  C.  Scott.

Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  D. Litt.,  LL.D.
Sir  J.  J.  Thomson,  O.M.,  F.R.S.


W.  W.  Baggally.
The  Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour.
Sir  William  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.
Sir  George  Beilby,  F.R.S.,  LL.D.
Captain  Krnest  N.  Bennett.
W.  Brown,  M.D.,  D.Sc.
The  Hon.  Everard  Feilding.
L.  P.  Jacks,  LL.D.,  D.D.
Sir  Lawrence  Jones,  Bart.
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.
W.  McDougall,  F.R.S.,  M.Sc,  M.B
T.  W.  Mitchell,  RI.D.


COUNCIL.

Prof.Gilbert  Murray,  LL.D., Litt.D.

J.  G.  PiDDINGTON.

Miss  M.  Radclyffe-Hall
W.  H.  Salter.
Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter.
F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc.
Sydney  G.  Scott.

Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  D.Litt.,LL.D.
W.  Whately  Smith.

V.  J.  WOOLLEY,  M.D.

M.  B.  Wright,  M.D.


EON.  TREASURER.
W.  H.  Salter,  31  Tavistock  Square,  London,  W.C.  L

EON.  SECRETARIES.
Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  Fishers  Hill,  Woking,  Surrey,
v.  J.  WooLLEY,  M.D.,  St.  Thomas's  Hospit.\l,  London,  S.E.

EON.  EDITOR.

Mrs.  W.  H.  Salter,  31  Tavistock  Square,  London,  W.C.  1.

RESEARCE  OFFICER.
E.  J.  Dingwall,  31  Tavistock  Square,  London,  W.C.  1.

SECRETARY  AND  LIBRARIAN.

Miss  I.  Newton,  31  Tavistock  Square,  London,  W.C.  1.

AGENTS  FOR  AMERICA.

The  F.  W.  Faxon  Co.,  83  Francis  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

2x


678


Members  and  Associates.


[part


MEMBERS  AND  ASSOCIATES.

November,  1923.
President — M.  Camille  Flammabion.

Vice-Presidents.

The  Right  Hon.  the  Earl  of  Balfour,  K.G.,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  4  Carlton

Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.
The  Right  Hon.  G.  W.  Balfour,  Fishers  Hill,  Woking,  Surrey.
Sir  William  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  31  Devonshire  Place,  London,  W.  1.
George  B.  Dorr,  18  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
L.  P.  Jacks,  LL.D.,  D.D.,  Shotover  Edge,  Headmgton,  Oxford.
Sir  Lawrence  Jones,  Bart.,  39  Harrington  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  7.
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  F.R.S.,  Normanton,  Lake,  Nr.  Salisbury.
Professor  Gilbert  Murray,  LL.D.,  Litt.D.,  Yatscombe,  Boar"s  Hill,

Oxford.

J.  G.  Piddington,  Fishers  Hill,  Woking,  Surrey.
F.  C.  S.  Schiller,  D.Sc,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.
Sydney  C.  Scott,  92  Westbourne  Terrace,  Hyde  Park,  London,
W.  2.

Mrs.  Henry  Sidgwick,  D.Litt.,  LL.D.,  Fishers  Hill,  Woking,  Surrey.
Sir  J.  J.  Thomson,  O.M.,  F.R.S. ,  Trinity  Lodge,  Cambridge.

Honorary  Members.

Su-  William  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  31  Devonshhe  Place,  London,  W.  1.

Madame  Curie,  Faculte  des  Sciences  de  Paris,  Laboratohe  de
Physic|ue  Generale,  12  rue  Cuvier,  Paris.

Miss  Alice  Johnson,  Meadowside,  Grantchester  Meadow^s,  Cam-
bridge.

Count  Perovsky-Petrovo-Solovovo,  Neue  Rossstr.,  16,  bei  Levy,
Berlin,  S.  14.

Sir  Joseph  J.  Thomson,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  Trinity  Lodge,  Cambridge.


LXXXVIII.]


Members  and  Associates.


679


Corresponding  Members.
Professor  A.  Alexander,  Caixa  906,  Rio  Janeii-o.
Professor  Henii  Bergson,  32  Rue  Vital,  Paris.

President  Nicholas  M.  Butler,  Columbia  University,  New  York,
U.S.A.

Dr.  Max  Dessoir,  Speyererstrasse  9,  Berlin,  W.
M.  CamiLle  Flammarion,  Directeur  de  I'Observatoire,  Juvisy,  S.
et  O.,  France.
\ Professor  Dr.  Freud,  Berggasse  19,  Vienna.

;'■ President  Stanley  Hall,  Clark  University,  Worcester,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
\.  .  Professor  Pierre  Janet,  54  Rue  de  Varenne,  VII%  Paris.
" Dr.  C.  G.  Jung,  Seestrasse  228,  Kusnacht,  E.  Zurich,  Switzerland.
Severin  Lauritzen,  Holte,  Denmark.

M. Maurice Maeterlinck, Villa des Abeilles, Avenue  des

Baumettes,  Nice.
Professor  Wm.  Romaine  Newbold,  Ph.D.,  Univ.  of  Pemisylvania,

Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Dr.  Morton  Prince,  458  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Dr.  Walter  F.  Prince,  c/o  The  American  Society  for  Psychical

Research,  44  East  23rd  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Professor  Charles  Richet,  15  Rue  de  I'Universite,  Paris.
Dr.  Freiherr  von  Schrenck-Notzing,  3  Max  Joseph  Strasse,  Munich.
Dr.  Rudolf  Tischner,  Dietlmdendenstr.,  16,  Munich.

Honorary  Associates.

Alrutz,  Dr.  Sydney,  Upsala,  Sweden.
Dallas,  Miss  H.  A.,  InnisfaU,  Crawley,  Sussex.
Falcomer,  Professor  M.  T.,  Regio  Institute  Tecnico  e  Nautico,
Venice.

Fryer,  Rev.  A.  T.,  63  Newbridge  Road,  Bath,
jr Gow,  David,  5  Queen  Square,  Southampton  Row,  London,  W.C.  1.
\ Grubb,  Edward,  9  SoUershott  West,  Letchworth,  Herts.
I Hill,  J.  Arthiu?,  Claremont,  Thornton,  Bradford.
\. Muirhead,  Professor  J.  H.,  The  Rowans,  BalsaU  Common,  Nr.
1  Coventry.

I Sage,  M.,  33  Rue  de  Coulmiers,  XIV^  Arrt.,  Paris.

I StaweU,  Miss  F.  Melian,  45a  Arundel  Gardens,  Ladbroke  Grove,.

'  London,  W.  11.

Tuckey,  C.  Lloyd,  M.D.,  21b  SiLverdale  Road,  Eastbourne.

van  Eeden,  Frederik,  M.D.,  Walden,  Bussum,  Holland.


680


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Members  and  Associates.

An  asterisk  is  prefixed  to  the  names  of  Members.

Abernethy,  Mrs.,  Hotel  Rosat,  Chateau  d'Oex,  Switzerland.
Acland-Hood,  Lady  Helena,  41  Cadogan  Street,  London,  S.W.  3.
Adair,  Desmond,  Little  Flixton,  Forest  Road,  Worthing.
Adamson,  T.,  16  Dommion  BuUdings,  Edmonton,  Alberta,  Canada.
*Adshead,  N.  R.,  Larch  wood,  Hammerfield,  Hemel  Hempstead,
Herts.

*Agar,  Mrs.  J.  S.,  c/o  Messrs.  Agar,  Cross  &  Co.,  Carlton  House,

11d  Regent  Street,  London,  S.W.  1.
Agelasto,  Michael  A.,  Armstead  Bridge  Court,  Apt.  206,  Armstead

Bridge  Road,  Norfolk,  Va.,  U.S.A.
Aglen,  F.  A.,  Inspectorate  General  of  Customs,  Peking,  China.
Albree,  John,  Swampscott,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Alexander,  Professor  S.,  Victoria  University,  Manchester.
Allan,  Miss  J.,  Torrance,  East  Kilbride,  Lanarkshire.
Allan,  Percy,  M.D.,  Crogdene,  Croham  Road,  South  Croydon,

Surrey.

Allen,  Professor  H.  J.,  c/o  The  National  Bank  of  India,  26  Bishops-
gate,  London,  E.C.  2.
Allen,  William,  M.B.,  20  Sandyford  Place,  Glasgow.
*Allgood,  Guy  H.,  Nun  wick,  Humshaugh,  Northumberland.
*Anderson,  Lady,  Ballydavid,  Waterford,  Ireland.
Anderson,  Mrs.,  Brackenboro',  Bramliall,  Cheshire.
Anderson,  Brig. -General  A.  T.,  R.A.,  Low  HUl  House,  Spetchley,
Worcester.

Anderson,  Mrs.  Henry  C,  20  Hermitage  Drive,  Edinburgh.
*Andersson,  C.  R.,  Koping,  Sweden.

Andrews,  Dr.  Marion  B.,  73  Shrubbery  Avenue,  Worcester.
Anstey,  Lieut. -Colonel  E.  C,  R.A.,  c/o  Messrs.  Cox  &  Co.,  16

Charing  Cross,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Appleby,  Joseph,  Farnley,  Great  Crosby,  Liverpool.
Armstrong,  Charles  W.,  Caixa  196,  S.  Paulo,  Brazil.
Armstrong,  Miss  M.  M.,  57  Redington  Road,  Hamj)stead,  London,

N.W.  3.

Arnold,  Mrs.  A.  E.,  98  Masbro'  Road,  London,  W.  14.
*Arnold-rorster,  Mrs.  H.  0.,  Basset  Down,  Swindon,  Wilts.


LXXXVIII.]


Members  and  Associates.


681


Ashcroft,  Mrs.,  Ladies'  Athenaeum  Club,  32  Dover  Street,  London,
W.  1.

*Ashcroft,  Rev.  Harold,  Burwood,  Waterford  Road,  Oxton,  Birken-
head.

*Aspland,  George  D.,  10  Elsworthy  Road,  London,  N.W.  3.
*Assheton-Smith,  Lady,  30  Queen  Anne's  Gate,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Atcherley,  J.  R.,  c/o  Mrs.  Howling,  White  Horse  Road,  Croydon,
Victoria.

Atwater,  Horace  G.,  Norfolk,  St.  Lawence  Co.,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
*Auden,  Harold  A.,  Studley,  Whitehedge  Road,  Garston,  Liverpool.
Austen,  Harold  W.  C,  M.D.,  2  Freeland  Road,  Ealing,  London,
W.  5.

Bacon,  Mrs.  Sewell,  Gate  House,  Northwood,  Middlesex.

Baddeley,  Miss  Florence  A.,  Cathedral  House,  Gloucester.
*Baggally,  Wortley  W.,  7  SUlwood  Place,  Brighton.

Baggally,  Mrs.  W.  W.,  7  Sillwood  Place,  Brighton.
*Baha,  M.,  c/o  Librairie  Ikbal,  2  Sublime  Porte,  Constantinople,
Turkey.

Bailde,  W.  S.,  Redroof,  Stromness,  Orkney  Islands.

Bailey,  Cyril,  Balliol  College,  Oxford.

Bailey,  Hon.  Mabel,  Hay  Castle,  Hay,  by  Hereford.

Baker,  Alfred  L.,  141  S.  La  Salle  Street,  Chicago,  III,  U.S.A.
*Baker,  Mrs.  Charles,  39  Markham  Square,  London,  S.W.  3.
*Baker,  Miss  Mabel,  21  Lansdowne  Avenue,  Slough,  Bucks.
*Baldwin,  Mrs.,  1  Gloucester  Place,  London,  W.  1.
*Balfour,  Miss,  4  Carlton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Balfour,  Right  Hon.  the  Earl  of,  K.G.,  O.M.,  F.R.S.,  4  Carlton

Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.
*  Balfour,  Mrs.  E.  W.  S.,  65  Cadogan  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  3.
*Balfour,  Right  Hon.  G.  W.,  Fishers  HUl,  Woking,  Surrey.
*Bandon,  Countess  of,  12  Queen's  Gate,  London,  S.W.  7.
*Banks,  Rev.  AKred  J.  Gayner,  D.D.,  Eagle  Pass,  Texas,  LT.S.A.

Banner,  Mrs.,  Bishop's  Court,  Rochester,  Kent.
*Barcellos,  A.  M.  S.,  77  Fort  Street,  Georgetown,  British  Guiana.

Barclay,  Edwyn,  6  Egerton  Place,  London,  S.W.  3.
*Barclay,  Mi's.  Edwyn,  6  Egerton  Place,  London,  S.W.  3.
*Barker,  Mrs.  C.  F.,  Gladstone  Hotel,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
*Barkley,  Dr.  M.,  Box  162,  Carlyle,  111.,  U.S.A.

Barkworth,  Mrs.,  Ladies'  Carlton  Club,  8  Chesterfield  Gardens,
Mayfair,  London,  W.  1.


682


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*Barlow,  Miss  Katharine,  4  Maid  of  Honour  Row,  Richmond,  Surrey.
Barrett,  Lady,  M.D.,  31  Devonshire  Place,  London,  W.  1.
*Barrow,  J.  R.,  c/o  Grindlay  &  Co.,  54  Parliament  Street,  London,
S.W.  L

Baruch,  Edgar,  563  I.  W.  Hellman  Building,  Los  Angeles,  CaL,
U.S.A.

Basden,  Miss  Isabel  K.,  21  The  Drive,  Hove,  Sussex.
*Basu,  N.  K.,  Calcutta  High  Court,  12  Pataldanga  Street,  Calcutta.
*Batchelor,  E.,  I.C.S.,  c/o  Lloyds  Bank,  9  Pall  Mall,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Bates,  J.  Edwin,  M.B.,  55  Murray  Road,  Wimbledon,  London,
S.W.  19.

*Battersea,  The  Lady,  Aston  Clinton,  Tring,  Herts.
*Batty,  Mrs.  V.  Roy,  40  Harley  House,  Regent's  Park,  London,
N.W.  1.

*Bayley,  Weston  D.,  M.D.,  1724  Spruce  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,

U.S.A.
Bayfield,  L.  Arthur.

*Bazett,  Miss  L.  Margery,  The  Firs,  Redhill,  Surrey.
*Beadon,  Mrs.,  at  11  Cheyne  Walk,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.
*Beattie,  Ivor  Hamilton,  44  Bedford  Court  Mansions,  London,  W.C.  2.
*Beckett,  W.  N.,  D.S.C.,  Lieut.  R.N.,  H.M.S.  Ramilles,  c/o  G.P.O.
*Beenhouwer,  J.,  16  Sarphatistraat,  Amsterdam,  Holland.
*Behrens,  CajDtain  Clive,  Swinton  Grange,  Malton,  Yorks.
Behrens,  Noel  Edward.

*Beilby,  Sir  George,  F.R.S.,  LL.D.,  11  University  Gardens,  Glasgow.
IBelaribi,  Mrs.

Bell,  Miss  Alison  H.,  Traquair,  Chorley  Wood,  Herts.
*Bell,  Dr.  Mary  C,  3  Albany  Terrace,  London,  N.W.  1.
*Benedict,  Professor  H.  Y.,  3401  Guada  Cupe  Street,  Austin,  Texas,
U.S.A.

Bennett,  Colin  N.,  Escot,  Penzance,  Cornwall.

*Beimett,  Captain  E.  N.,  12  Prince  Arthur  Road,  Hampstead,
London,  N.W.  3.

*Bennett, Captain John  G., 25  Panmuir  Road,  Wimbledon,

London,  S.W.  20.
Benson,  Miss  A.  M.,  M.D.,  c/o  Messrs.  H.  S.  King  &  Co.,  65  Cornhill,
London,  E.G.  3.

Benson,  Arthur  C,  C.V.O.,  The  Old  Lodge,  Magdalene  College
Cambridge.

*Benson,  E.  F.,  25  Brompton  Square,  London,  S.W.  3.


Lxxxviii.]  Members  and  Associates.


683


Benton,  Dr.  J.  R.,  1436  West  University  Avenue,  Gainesville,

Florida,  U.S.A.
*Bentley,  W.  P.,  4214  Swiss  Avenue,  Dallas,  Texas,  U.S.A.
*Berens,  Mrs.,  30  Chester  Square,  London,  S.W.  1
*Berestord,  J.  D.,  1  St.  James'  Terrace,  Regent's  Park,  London,

N.W.  8.

Berrington,  Rev.  Leslie  G.,  Churchover  Rectory,  Rugby.
*Berry,  Mrs.  F.  M.  Dickinson,  M.D.,  21  Wimpole  Street,  London,
W.  1.

*Bertie,  L.  W.  H.,  M.A.,  The  Nook,  110  Woodstock  Road,  Oxford.
*Best,  C.  S.,  13  Queen  Square,  Leeds.

Betton,  C.  Steuart,  28  The  Drive,  West  Worthing,  Sussex.

Bevan,  Ai'thur  O.,  Townsend  House,  Nantwich,  Cheshire.

Bevan,  Mrs.  Robert,  131  Gloucester  Road,  London,  S.W.  7.

Bevan,  Hon.  Mrs.  R.  Yorke,  9  Rutland  Gate,  London,  S.W.  7.

Bidder,  George  P.,  Cavendish  Corner,  HUls  Road,  Cambridge.
*Bigg,  Miss  Louisa,  18  Acacia  Road,  St.  John's  Wood,  London,
N.W.  8.

*Binney,  Rev.  Maximilian  F.  B.,  The  Vicarage,  Ringwood,  Hants.
*Bird,  Mrs.  Francis  William,  East  Walpole,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Black,  Mrs.,  24  Abbey  Buildings,  Tower  Bridge  Road,  London,
S.E.  1

Bla^ckburn,  A.  J.,  Ai'uba  House,  The  Leazes,  Burnopfield,  Durham.
Blacklock,  Miss  C,  Lewie,  Ditchling,  Hassocks,  Sussex,
Blane,  Miss  Edith  H.,  18  Blenheim  Road,  St.  John's  Wood,  London,
N.W.  8.

Blathwajrt,  W.,  Eagle  House,  Batheaston,  Bath.
Bligh,  Stanley  M.,  28  Grosvenor  Road,  London,  S.W.  1.
Bloemfontein,  The  Right  Rev.  the  Lord  Bishop  of,  Bishop's  Lodge,

Bloemfontein,  O.R.C.,  S.  Africa.
Bois,  H.  G.,  c/o  Messrs.  Robertson  Bois  &  Co.,  12  Fenchurch
Street,  London,  E.C.  3.
*Bolam,  J.  G.,  21  Affleck  Street,  Gateshead,  Durham.
*Bolton,  Edward  J.,  Wood  Bank,  Oakamoor,  N.  Staffs.
*Bond,  F.  Bligh,  F.R.I.B.A.,  39  York  Terrace,  London,  N.W.  1.
*Bond,  Major  W.  C,  O.B.E.,  Shalesbrook,  Forest  Row,  Sussex.

Bond,  Mi's.  W.  C,  Shalesbrook,  Forest  Row,  Sussex.
*Bonus,  A.  R.,  Oxford  and  Cambridge  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,
S.W.  1.

Bosanquet,  Miss  Theodora,  38  Cheyne  Walk,  London,  S.W.  3.


684


Meynbers  and  Associates.


[part


*Boustead,  Mrs.  J.  M.,  c/o  Messrs.  Boustead  Bros.,  5  Fenchurch
Street,  London,  E.G.
Bouwens,  B.  G.,  Old  Manor  House,  Littleton,  Shepperton,  Middlesex.
Bouyalsky,  Jean  de,  25  Rue  Jules  Franqui,  Brussels,  Belgium.
Bowden-Smith ,  Mrs.,  Careys,  Brockenhurst,  Hants.
Bowen,  Miss  Anna  C,  210  E.  Main  Street,  Batavia,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
*Bowen,  O.  H.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Gwynant,  Peak's  Hill,  Purley,
Surrey.

Bower,  James  Garton,  Earlham  House,  Norwich.
*Bowyer,  Lieut-Colonel  W.  G.,  Weston  Manor,  Olney,  Bucks.
*Bowyer,  Mrs.  W.  G.,  Weston  Manor,  Olney,  Bucks.

Box, Alfred  Marshall,  c/o Lancashire and  Yorkshire  Bank,
Huddersfield.

Boxer,  Miss  Cecile  F.,  Firwood,  Alum  Chine,  West  Bournemouth.

Boxer,  Major  H.  C,  Firwood,  Alum  Chine,  West  Bournemouth.

Brabrook,  Sir  Edward  W.,  C.B.,  Langham  House,  Wallington.
*Bracht,  Federico,  Cangallo  466,  Buenos  Aires,  Argentine  Republic.
*Bradley,  Miss  A.  A.,  Bradley  Hill,  Hingham,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Bradley,  Professor  A.  C,  54  Scarsdale  Villas,  Kensington,  London,
W.  8.

Bradley,  F.  H.,  Merton  College,  Oxford.

*Braithwaite,  Lieut.-General  Sir  Walter  P.,  K.C.B.,  c/o  Messrs.

Cox  &  Co.,  16  Charing  Cross,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Brandt,  Rudolph  E.,  4  Fenchurch  Avenue,  London,  E.G.  3.

Bray,  F.  E.,  21  Evelyn  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  7.

Brewster,  Bertram,  59  Madeley  Road,  Ealing,  London,  W.  5.

Bridges,  Mrs.,  8  Sloane  Terrace  Mansions,  London,  S.W.  1.

Brierley,  Mrs.  D.  F.,  21  Woodville  Gardens,  Ealing,  London,  W.  5.
*Brinton,  R.  S.,  Croft  House,  Kidderminister.

Bristowe,  The  Hon.  L.  S.,  Le  Chalet,  Fermain  Bay,  Guernsey.
*Broad,  C.  D.,  Litt.D.,  The  University,  Bristol.

Bromberg,  Frederick  G.,  Mobile,  Alabama,  U.S.A.

Brooke,  Colonel  C.  K.,  Army  and  Navy  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,
S.W.  1.

Brooke,  E.  G.  de  C,  Brushford,  Dulverton,  Devonshire.
*Brooke,  Mrs.  Hastings,  28  Collingham  Place,  London,  S.W.  5.
*Brooke,  John  R.,  1  Mitre  Court  Buildings,  Temple,  London,  E.C.  4.
*Brooks,  R.  Birkett,  R.N.,  Glendale,  49  Surrey  Road,  Bournemouth.

Brown,  Captain  A.  D.  Burnett,  M.C.,  Greenliurst,  Beaconsfield,
Bucks.


Lxxxvm.]


Members  and  Associates.


685


*Brown,  Miss  A.  M.,  13  Beaufort  Road,  Clifton,  Bristol.

*Brown,  B.  G.,  10  St.  Paul's  Road,  Cambridge.

*Brown,  B.  H.  Irmess,  226  West  59th  Street,  New  York,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Brown,  Charles,  M.B.,  Tinto  Bank,  Kirkcaldy.

Brown,  Mrs.  Frank  Clifton,  Stanford  Place,  Faringdon,  Berks.
*Brown,  Haydn,  L.R.C.P.,  30  Cavendish  Square,  London,  W.  1.
*Bro^vn,  Wm.,  M.A.,  M.D.,  D.Sc,  M.R.C.P.,  80  Harley  Street,
London,  W.  1.

*Brown,  W.  Forster,  Tlie  Grove  House,  Caversham,  Readmg,  Berks.
Browne,  Professor  Edward  G.,  M.B.,  Pembroke  College,  Cam-
bridge.

*Browne,  Rev.  Geoffrey  E.,  Clergy  House, Khartoum  (Sudan),
Egypt.

*Browne,  O.  H.,  Hyderabad,  Deccan,  India..
*Bruce,  Rev.  F.  D.,  The  Vicarage,  Penryn,  Cornwall.
*Bryans,  G.,  Court  Royal,  King's  Clilfe,  Brighton.
*Bubb,  Henry,  J.P.,  UUenwood,  near  Cheltenham.
*Buchan,  Mrs.  J.,  Elsfield  Manor,  Oxford.
*Buist,  Mrs.,  Swalcliffe  Lea,  Banbury,  Oxon.

BuUard,  Dr.  W.  N.,  89  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
BuUer,  Professor  A.  H.  Regmald,  University  of  Manitoba,  Wmnipeg,
Canada.

*Bulley,  IMrs.  Arthur,  Ness,  Neston,  Cheshire.
*Bullough,  Edward,  6  Huntingdon  Road,  Cambridge.

Burnett,  Miss  Ethel,  Crathes  Castle,  Crathes,  N.B.

Burnham,  Mrs.,  23  Church  Road,  Southbourne,  Hants.

Burns,  Nesbitt,  M.B.,  The  Lodge,  Highbridge,  Somerset.

Burrard,  Mrs.  Charles,  c/o  Lloyds  BanJc,  Ivnightsbridge  Branch,

Brompton  Road,  London,  S.  W.  1.
*Burt,  Mrs.  William  G.,  1501  Asbury  Avenue,  Evanston,  111.,  U.S.A.

Burton,  Mrs.  Harry,  25  via  dei  Bardi,  Florence,  Italy.
*Bury,  Henry,  The  Gate  House,  Alumdale  Road,  Bournemouth.

Bury,  Mrs.  Henry,  The  Gate  House,  Alumdale  Road,  Boiirnemouth.
*Bush,  E.,  Wnisill,  Patelej^  Harrogate,  Yorks.

Bushell,  Miss  S.  D.,  The  Hermitage,  Harrow-on-the-Hill.
"Busk,  ]\Irs.,  6  Wadham  Gardens,  London,  N.W.  3.

Butler,  Mrs.  Charles,  Rocke  House,  Exmouth,  Devon.
*Butt,  Lady,  c/o  London  Joint  City  and  Midland  Bank,  South
Kensington  Branch,  Gloucester  Road,  London,  S.W.  7.

Buttemer,  Robert  Wm.,  St.  Mary's,  Godalming,  Surrey.


686


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Butterworth,  Miss  A.  M.,  9  Husldsson  Street.  Liverpool.

Caccda,  Major  A.  M.,  7  Norham  Gardens,  Oxford.

Cadell,  Mrs.  Lewis,  Brae  Lodge,  Murrayfield,  Edinburgh.

Caird,  Mrs.  Henryson,  34  Woronzow  Road,  St.  John's  Wood,
London,  N.W.  8.

Cairns,  Rev.  David  S.,  D.D.,  62  Hamilton  Place,  Aberdeen.
*Campbell,  Lady  Archibald, Coombe  HUl  Farm,  Kingston-on-
Thames,  Surrey.

Campbell,  Mrs.  Burnley,  Ormidale,  Glendaruel,  Colintraive,  Argyll-
shire.

*Campbell,  Mrs.,  Arduaine,  Lochgilphead,  N.B.

Campbell,  Colin  E.,  9  Lower  Belgrave  Street,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Campbell,  Mrs.  E.  Kenneth,  Millfield,  Wittersham,  Kent.

Campbell,  Rev.  R.  J.,  Christ Church Vicarage,  Westminster,
London,  S.W.  L
*Campbell-Lang,  Miss,  Craig  Lora,  Connel,  Argyllshire.

Candler,  H.  A.  W.,  37  Commercial  Road  East,  London,  E.  L

Candler,  Miss  M.  I.,  37  Commercial  Road  East,  London,  E.  L
*Carden,  W.  A.,  M.R.C.S.,  Bothaville,  O.F.S.,  S.  Africa.
*Carleton,  Mrs.  F.  M.,  Westmeads,  Butler's  Marston,  Kineton.
*Carpenter,  Mrs.,  43  Teignmouth  Road,  Cricklewood,  London,
N.W.  2.

Carrington,  Hereward,  Ph.D.,  504  West  111th  Street,  New  York
City,  U.S.A.

Carruthers,  Mi's  W.,  c/o  Bank  of  Montreal,  9  Waterloo  Place,  Pall
Mall,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Carter,  Mrs.  H.  A.,  Mena  House,  St.  Erth,  Hayle,  Cornwall.
Case,  Miss  A.  J.,  35 Elm  Bank Mansions,  Barnes,  London,
S.W.  13.

Cathels,  Rev.  David,  The  Manse,  Hawick,  Scotland.

Cave,  Captain  A.  L.,  Sherwood,  Newton  St.  C3n:'es,  Devon.
*Cave,  Charles  J.  P.,  Stoner  Hill,  Petersfield,  Hants.

Chadwick,  Mrs.  Ellis,  St.  Moritz,  Parkstone,  Dorset.
-Chadwick,  Miss  M.  W.,  6  Guildford  Place,  London,  W.C.  1.
*Chambers,  John,  Mokopeka,  Hastings,  Hawkes  Bay,  New  Zealand.
*Chance,  Colonel  H..  Army  and  Navy  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,
S.W.  1.

*  Chapman,  C.  F.,  Sussex  Lodge,  Kmgston  HUl,  Surrey.
Chapman,  E.  G.,  Belsize,  Friern  Watch  Avenue,  N.  Finchley,
London,  N.  12.


LXXXVIII.]


Members  and  Associates.


687


*Chapman,  Captain  R.  V.,  Junior  Army  and  Navy  Club,  Horse

Guards'  Avenue,  Whitehall,  London,  S.W.  1
Charles,  Clifford  P.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.

Charlton,  Miss  Frances  M.,  23  Kensington  Square,  London,  W.  8.
Chattock,  Arthur  P.,  D.Sc,  Heathfield  Cottage,  Crowcombe,  Nr.

Taunton,  Somerset.
Cheney,  Dr.  Frederick  E.,  64  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,

Mass.,  U.S.A.

Childe-Pemberton,  Miss  A.  H.,  The  Wyche  Cottage,  Malvern.
Chitty,  Hubert,  M.S.,  M.B.,  46  Pembroke  Road,  Clifton,  Bristol.
Chubb,  Mrs.  C.  A.,  Longforgan,  The  Ridgway,  Wimbledon,  London,
S.W.  19.

Clapham,  J.  H.,  King's  College,  Cambridge.

Clark,  Mrs.  Cecil.
*  Clark,  Captain  C.  C,  Kilrie,  North  Berwick,  N.B.

Clark,  Rev.  F.  H.  H.,  Magdalene  College,  Cambridge.
*Clark,  Major  Stanley,  SO  Bishopsgate,  London,  E.C.  2.
*Clarke,  Eno  E.,  3  Prince's  Gardens,  Ealing,  London,  W.  5.

Clarke,  Ronald  Stanley,  The  Ship  Hotel,  Crediton,  Devon.

Clarkson,  Mrs.  St.  John,  8  Milner  Street,  Cadogan  Square,  London,
S.W.  L

Clay,  The  Hon.  Mrs.,  11  Tite  Street,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.
Clive,  Hon.  Hem'ietta  Windsor,  Oakly  Park,  Bromfield,  Salop.
Closson,  Miss  Olivia  T.,  2200  Nineteenth  Street,  N.W.,  Washington,
D.C.,  U.S.A.

*Clwyd,  Lady,  Bryngwenallt,  Abergele,  N.  Wales.
*Cochrane,  Miss  Jessie,  Aban  Court  Hotel,  Ashburn  Place,  London,
S.W.  7

Cockle,  Rev.  Francis  T.,  The  Rectory,  Swinford,  Co.  Mayo,  Ireland.
*Coggin,  Rev.  F.  E.,  White  Lodge,  Meads,  Eastbourne.

Collins,  Miss  M.,  29  Glenluce  Road,  Blacldaeath,  London,  S.E.  3.
*Collis,  Miss  Beatrix,  74  Walton  Street,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.

Colquhoun,  Daniel,  M.D.,  1  Holland  Villas  Road,  London,  W.  14.

Compton,  Henry,  1709  SUls  Street,  Fort  WUliam,  Ontario,  Canada.
*Conn,  Emmett  Higbee,  M.D.,  807  North  Mariposa  Avenue,  Los

Angeles,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
*Connor,  Rev.  John  M.,  D.S.O.,  St.  Andrew's  Scottish  Soldiers'

Club,  Aldershot.
*Constable,  F.  C,  GrenvUle,  Lansdown,  Bath.

Conway,  Lady,  47  Romney  Street,  London,  S.W.  1


688


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*Cook,  A.  G.  H.,  The  Villa,  Washington,  Co.  Durham.
Cooper,  Rev.  F.  W.,  Prestwich  Rectory,  Manchester.
Cooper,  Mrs.  P.  H.,  283  South  Street,  Morristown,  N.J.,  U.S.A.
*Coote,  J.  F.,  The  White  House,  Coltishall,  Norwich.
Cornford,  Rev.  Bruce,  43  Havelock  Road,  Portsmouth.
Cornish,  J.  Easton,  The  Water  Works,  Alexandria,  Egypt.
*Corry,  Miss  Lucy,  13  Argyll  Road,  Campden  Hill,  London,  W.  8
Cort  van  der  Linden,  P.  W.  A.,  Councillor  of  State,  59  Koning-

innegracht.  The  Hague.
Cotesworth,  Miss  Lilias  E.,  45  Westminster  Mansions,  Great  Smith

Street,  London,  S.W.  L
*Cotterell,  Miss  Alice,  1g  Montagu  Mansions,  Portman  Square,

London,  W.  L
*Courage,  Mrs.,  The  Mount,  Ifield,  Crawley,  Sussex.
*Cowan,  Sir  W.  H.,  M.P.,  The  Crow's  Nest,  Fairwarp,  Uckfield,
Sussex.

Cox,  Mrs.  Rowland,  310  West  7th  Street,  Plainfield,  N.J.,  U.S.A.
Coxe,  Henry  R.  H.,  Osendyke,  Watlington,  Oxon.
Cozens,  J.  C,  Brigus,  Conception  Bay,  Newfoundland.
Craufurd,  Commander  Quentin  C.  A.,  R.N.,  c/o  Admiralty,  London,
S.W.  1.

*Creasy,  Mrs.  L.,  144  Gloucester  Terrace,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.  2.
*Creasy,  Mrs.,  23  Pembridge  Mansions,  Moscow  Road,  London,  W.  2.
*Cromer,  Katharine,  Countess  of,  29  Marlborough  Place,  London,
N.W.  8.

Crook,  A.  H.,  4  Torres  Buildings,  Kowloon,  Hong  Kong.
*Crosfield,  J.  J.,  13  Melbury  Road,  London,  W.  14.
*Crosfield,  Miss  M.  C,  LTndercroft,  Reigate,  Surrey.

Crouch,  H.  N.,  Summerfield,  Weston  Park,  Bath.
*Cunliffe,  Walter  R.,  34,  The  Grove,  Boltons,  London,  S.W.  10.
*Curnow,  Leslie,  Hampden  Club,  London,  N.W.  1.
*Currie,  Mrs.,  c/o  Messrs.  Grindlay  &  Co.,  54  Parliament  Street,
London,  S.W.  1.

*Curtois,  Miss  Margaret  A.,  53  Romney  Street,  Westminster,  London,
S.W.  1.

Curzon  of  Kedieston,  The  Earl,  Hackwood,  Basingstoke,  Hants.

Dale,  J.  Gilbert,  68  Holland  Park,  Kensington,  London,  W.  11.

Daniell,  Mrs.  Averell.
*Danson,  F.  C,  74  Bidston  Road,  Birkenhead.
*D'Arcy,  Rev.  G.  J.  A.,  The  Vicarage,  Worksop,  Notts.


LXXXVIII.]


Members  and  Associates.


689


*Davies,  Benjamin,  Wiiford,  Chase  Green  Avenue,  Enfield,  Middlesex.
*Davies,  D.  Berrington  G.,  J. P.,  Parcygors,  Llechryd,  Cardiganshire.
Davies,  Mrs.  G.  R.,  Glenlaggan,  Parton,  N.B.

Davies,  Miss  M.  H.  Lloyd,  Lynton,  Curzon  Road,  Hoylake,  Cheshire.
*Davies,  Vincent,  9  Mervyn  Road,  West  Ealing,  London,  W.  13.
*  Davis,  Mrs.  Kennard.

Davis,  Romney  R.,  Old  Grove  House,  The  Grove,  Hampstead,

London,  N.W.  3.
*Davis,  Mrs.,  46  Sussex  Gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.  2.
Davison,  Miss  Annie,  4  Ranelagh  Grove,  Pimlico  Road,  London,

S.W.  L

*Davison,  Miss  R.,  Milverton,  Wilmslow  Road,  Alderley  Edge,
Manchester.

Davys,  Lieut. -Colonel  G.  I.,  O.B.E.,  I.M.S.,  c/o  Messrs.  Grindlay

&  Co.,  Hornby  Road,  Bombay,  India.
Dawes,  Mrs.  Frank,  11a  Portland  Place,  London,  W.  1.
Dawson,  Lt. -Colonel  Henry  P.,  Hartlington  Hall,  Skipton.
Day,  Rev.  Dr.  E.  H.,  Newton  House,  Belmont,  Hereford.
Day,  Miss  Mabel  K.,  15  Elgin  Court,  Elgin  Avenue,  London,  W.  9.
Dearmer,  Rev.  Dr.  Percy,  9  Embankment  Gardens,  Chelsea,  London,

S.W.  3.

De  Gramont,  Comte  A.,  179  Rue  de  I'Universite,  Paris,  France.
*De  Grave,  Miss  D.  M.,  Pioneer  Club,  12  Cavendish  Place,  London,
W.  1.

*De  Gravelles,  C.  C,  M.D.,  Belanger  Building,  Morgan  City,  La.,
U.S.A.

Deichmann,  Baroness,  Abbey  Lodge,  Regent's  Park,  London,
N.W.  1.

De  Jong,  Dr.  K.  H.  E.,  Beeklaar,  356,  The  Hague.
*De  Koven,  Mi's.  Anna  F.,  1025  Park  Avenue,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Deland,  Mrs.  Lorin  F.,  35  Newbury  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Delap,  Alfred  D.,  Priorsland,  Carrickmines,  Co.  Dublin,  Ireland.

Denny,  Rev.  H.  L.  L.,  St.  Mark's  Vicarage,  66  Myddelton  Square,
London,  E.G.  1.

De  Trafford,  Mrs.  Galfrid.
*Dewar,  Lady,  The  Old  Farm,  Havant,  Hants.

*Dewar,  Rev.  Peter,  The  Manse,  North  Bute,  Rothesay,  Scotland.
De  Wyckoff,  Joseph,  Aiiena  Towers,  Ramsey,  N.J.,  U.S.A.
Dickie,  H.  Elford,  British  Consulate-General,  Louren^o  Marques,
Portuguese  East  Africa.


690


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Dickinson,  Miss,  Trebrea  Lodge,  Tintagel,  Cornwall.

Dickinson,  Miss  A.  J.,  3a  Clareville  Grove,  London,  S.W.  7,  and

Poultry  Court,  Pains  wick,  Gloucestershire.  >
Dickinson,  G.  Lowes,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
Dicksee,  Frank,  R.A.,  3  Greville  Place,  London,  N.W.,  6.
*Dingv/all,  E.  J.,  73  Corringham  Road,  Hampstead  Garden  Suburb,

London,  N.W.  IL
*Dingwall,  Mrs.  E.  J.,  73  Corringham  Road,  Hampstead  Garden

Suburb,  London,  N.W.  IL
*Diver,  Mrs.,  7  Leinster  Square,  Bayswater,  London,  W.  2.
*  Dixon,  Edward  T.

Dixon,  Hugh  N.,  17  St.  Matthew's  Parade,  Northampton.
*Dixon,  Professor  W.  Macneile,  LL.B.,  Litt.D.,  2  South  Park

Terrace,  HilUiead,  Glasgow,  W.
Doane,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  Burlington,  New  Jersey,  U.S.A.
Doe,  George  M.,  Enfield,  Great  Torrington,  N.  Devon.
Donne,  Mi-s.,  c/o  Messrs.  Holt  &  Co.,  3  Wliitehall  Place,  London,

S.W.  L

Douglas,  Rev.  Dr.  G.  W.,  5  East  88th  Street,  New  York,  N.Y.,
U.S.A.

*Dove,  J.  S.,  R.N.,  Hale  House,  Ockley,  Surrey.

Dowson,  Mrs.,  Landhurst  Wood,  Hartfield,  Sussex.
*Doyle,  Sir  A.  Conan,  M.D.,  Windlesham,  Crowborough,  Sussex.

Drew,  Ruigrose  C,  Tampin,  Negri  Sembilan,  Federated  Malay
States.

Drewry,  Mi-s.  George,  4  Calverley  Park,  Tunbridge  Wells.

Driesch,  Professor  Dr.  Hans,  ZoUnerstrasse  1,  Leipzig.
*Duff,  J.  R.  K.,  100  Sunningfields,  Hendon,  London,  N.W.  9.
*Duncan,  Harold  M.,  The  Chestnuts  House,  Parkside,  Wimbledon

Common,  London,  S.W.  19.
*Duncan,  Mrs.,  Earlston,  Epsom  Road,  Guildford,  Surrey.

Dunne,  D.  P.,  Yetholme,  Liverpool  Road,  Birkdale,  Southport.
*Dutton,  Miss  A.,  Somerdon,  Sidmouth,  Devon.
*Earle,  Hon.  Mrs.  Maxwell,  24  Lower  Sloane  Street,  London,
S.W.  1.

*Eckstein,  Mrs.,  18  Park  Lane,  London,  W.  1.

Edelsten,  Colonel  John  A.,  8  Beach  Lawn,  Waterloo,  Nr.  Liverpool.
Edie,  H.  S.  Ker,  c/o  Messrs.  Thos.  Cook  &  Son,  Ludgate  Circus,

London,  E.C.  4.
*Elder,  Frederick,  21  Essex  Villas,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.


LXXXVIII.]


Members  and  Associates.


691


Eldred,  Paymaster-Captain  E.  H.,  R.N.,  Myrtle  Cottage,  Port-

chester,  Fareham,  Hants.
*Ellersha\v,  Major  Hemy,  R.A.F:,  124  Pembroke  Eoad,  Clifton,
Bristol.

*Ellerton,  Mrs.  B.,  Cleve  Hall,  Champion  Hill,  London,  S.E.  5.

Elliot,  Miss  A.  I.  M.,  Women's  University  Settlement,  44  Nelson
Square,  Blackfriars  Road,  London,  S.E.  1.

Elliot,  IVIrs.  Gilbert,  10  Regent's  Park  Terrace,  London,  N.W.  1.
*Engall,  John  S.,  62  Goldsmith  Avenue,  Acton,  London,  W.  3.
*Engelbregt,  P.  A.  L.,  c/o  Shell  Co.  of  California,  343  Sansome
Street,  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  LT.S.A.

Eno,  H.  L.,  Princeton,  New  Jersey,  U.S.A.

Entee,  Professor  B.  A.,  Samaldas  College,  Bhavnagar,  India.
*Enthoven,  Mrs.  F.  V.,  33  Cambridge  Square,  London,  W.  2.

Everard,  Captain  H.  N.,  R.A.M.C.

*Farrer,  The  Dowager  Lady,  Idlerocks,  Stone,  Staffordshire.
*Farrer,  H.  M.,  81  Eaton  Terrace,  London,  S.W.  1.
Faulkner,  W.  B.,  52  South  Molton  Street,  London,  W.  1.
*Faustuius,  F.,  Sondre  Fasanvej  97",  Valby,  Copenliagen,  Den-
mark.

*Feilding,  Hon.  Everard,  5  John  Street,  Mayfair,  London,  W  1.

Felkin,  Llrs.,  119  Grosvenor  Road,  London,  S.W.  1.

Fergusson,  Rev.  A.  W.,  The  Manse,  Dundee.
*Fernald,  Mrs.  C.  B.,  4  Marlborough  Road,  London,  N.W.  8.
*Fforde,  Hon.  Mr.  Justice,  High  Court,  Lahore,  Punjab,  India.
*Findlay,  J.  Arthur,  Stansted  Hall,  Stansted,  Essex.
*Fisher,  Mrs.  C.  D.  Corbett,  8  Heathgate,  London,  N.W.  11.

Fisk,  Rev.  George,  c/o  The  Kailan  Mming  Admmistration,  Cliin-

wangtao,  Chihli,  N.  China.
*Fitch,  Hugh  B.,  31  Campden  Grove,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.
*Fleetwood-Hesketh,  Major  C.  H.,  Stocken  Hall,  Stretton,  Oaldaam,
Rutlandshire.

*Fletcher,  L.  S.,  3  Dr.  Johnson's  Buildmgs,  Temple,  London,  E.C.  4.
*Flint,  Mrs.,  Baynards,  Watford,  Herts.

Fliigel,  J.  C,  11  Albert  Road,  Regent's  Park,  London,  N.W.  1.

Footner,  Mrs.,  187  Ebury  Street,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Ford,  Mrs.,  126  Cheyne  Walk,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.
*Forman,  Josef,  c/o  American  Express  Co.,  11  rue  Scribe,  Paris.

Forman,  Colonel  R.  H.,  36  Fitzjohn's  Avenue,  Hampstead,  London,
N.W.  3.


692


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Fortescue,  Miss  Francis,  Canada  Cottage,  Ipplepen,  Newton  Abbot,
S.  Devon.  ^

Foster,  Mrs.,  Garland,  Nelson,  B.C.,  Canada.
^Foster;  Nevile,  134  Wigmore  Street,  Portman  Square,  London,  W.  1.

Fotheringham,  W.  B.,  17  Upper  High  Street,  Worthing.
*Foulger,  Howson  R.,  26  Hyde  Park  Square,  London,  W.  2.
*Foxcroft,  Miss  H.  C,  Hinton  Charterhouse,  Bath.
*Francis,  Mrs.  Francis.

FranJslin,  The  Hon.  Mrs.,  50  Porchester  Terrace,  London,  W.  2.
Franks,  Mrs.,  51  Dacre  Hill,  Rock  Ferry,  Birkenhead.
Freeman,  Miss  Adelaide  C,  Queen  Anne's  Mansions,  London,  S.W.  1.
Freeman,  Rev.  H.  B.,  The  Vicarage,  Burton-on-Trent,  Staffs.
*French,  Major  Alexander  W.,  T.D.,  M.R.C.S.,  Medical  Officer's

House,  Princetown,  Dartmoor.  ,
*Frith,  Mrs.,  19  Philbeach  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  5.
Frost,  Lowell  C,  M.D.,  1905  Vista  Street,  Hollywood,  Los  Angeles,
Cal.,  U.S.A.

Frostick,  J.  A.,  C.B.E.,  381  Papanui  Road,  Christchurch,  New
Zealand.  .

*Fry,  Miss  Agnes,  FaUand  House,  Failand,  near  Bristol.
*Fry,  Lewis  George,  Stonycroft,  Limpsfield,  Surrey.

Fryer,  Mrs.  F.,  9  St.  Peter's  Grove,  York.
*Fulton,  Mrs.  Hamilton,  35  The  Close,  Salisbury.

Gabb,  F.  B.,  at  70  Avondale  Road,  South  Croydon,  Surrey.

Gage,  Lyman  J.,  Point  Loma,  Cal.,  U.S.A.

Gantz,  Mrs.,  3  South  Place,  Letchworth,  Herts.

Gardiner,  Professor  H.  N.,  187  Maui  Street,  Northampton,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

Garfit,  Mrs.  E.  C,  Renardia  Farm,  Gadzema,  S.  Rhodesia.
*GaskeU,  Mrs.  J.  B.,  Roseleigh,  Woolton,  Liverpool.

Gatliff,  H.  E.  C,  The  Treasury,  Whitehall,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Geiger,  P.  J.,  643  Land  Title  Buildmg,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

Gellert,  J.  W.,  c/o  Box  396,  G.P.O.,  Adelaide,  S.  Australia.
*George,  Mrs.,  Cottage  on  the  Linlcs,  Hindliead,  Surrey.
*George,  H.  Trevelyan,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  33  Ampthill  Square,

London,  N.W.  1.
*Gibbes,  Miss  Beatrice,  170  Brompton  Road,  London,  S.W.  3.
*Gibbins,  Mi's.  C.  E.,  61  Montpelier  Road,  Brighton.

Gibson,  Professor  W.  R.  Boyce,  D.Sc,  Ennerdale,  Tower  Street,
Surrey  Hills,  Melbourne,  Australia.


LXXXVIII.]


Members  and  Associates.


G93


*Gillett,  J.  A.,  Woodgreen,  Banbury.
Gilson,  R.  Gary,  King  Edward's  School,  Birmingham.
*Ginwala,  F.  J.,  373  Hornby  Road,  Fort,  Bombay,  India.
*Gu"dlestone,  IVIrs.  Frank,  The  Bridge  House,  Sible  Hedingham,
Essex.

Girod,  Madame,  4  Avenue  Hoche,  Paris.

*Glasgow  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  58  Renfield  Street,
~  Glasgow.

Glasson,  J.  W.,  I.C.S.,  Glanusk,  Soy,  Kenya  Colony.
Gledstone,  Miss  May,  73  Gleneldon  Road,  Streatham,  London,
S.W.  16.

Glenny,  Mrs.  G.  C.,  Old  Croft,  Stanwix,  Carlisle.
Glover,  Cedric  H.,  35  Albert  Road,  Regent's Park,  London,
N.W.  8.

Goedliart,  P.,  Koningen  Maria  Straat  18,  The  Hague.
*Goldschmidt,  Mrs.  Beni  de,  Clarefield,  Pinkney's  Green,  Maiden-
head, Berks.

■^GoUedge,  V.  F.  Hedworth,  Hazlewood  Lodge,  Enfield.
Gooch,  G.  P.,  South  Villa,  Campden  Hill  Road,  London,  W.  8.
*Goodden,  Mrs.  Robert,  5  Kingsgate  Street,  Winchester.
*Goossens,  Mrs.  F.  W.,  14  Aynsley  Court,  Winnipeg,  Manitoba,
Canada.

*Gordon,  Dr.  Mary,  c/o  National  Provincial  and  Union  Bank  of

England,  55  High  Street,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.
Gough,  A.  B.,  Ph.D.,  23  Bazham  Road,  Sevenoaks,  Kent.
*Gould,  Miss  v.,  28  St.  James's  Road,  Tunbridge  Wells.
*Goulden-Bach,  Mrs.,  2  Elsham  Road,  Kensington,  London,  W.  14.
*Gover,  J.  M.,  K.C.,  LL.D.,  5  New  Square,  Lincoln's  Lm,  London,
W.C.  2.

*Gowan,  Commander  C.  H.  B.,  R.N.,  Brackenwood,  Ivy  Hatch,
Nr.  Sevenoaks.
Graham,  J.  W.,  Dalton  Hall,  Victoria  Park,  Manchester.
C4rahame,  Miss  Helen,  p. a.  Col.  Franz  Fluck,  Muzeum  Koriit  18,
III  emelet,  Budapest,  Hungary.
*Grant-Suttie,  Major  H.  F.,  R.A.,  The  Staff  College,  Camberley,
Surrey.

Green,  Mrs.  Alan  B.,  Riviere  House,  Phillack,  Hayle,  Cornwall.
Green,  JMrs.,  Northcott,  Chesham  Bois,  Bucks.
*Greenwood,  L.  H.  G.,  Emmanuel  College,  Cambridge.
Grenfell,  Prof.  B.  P.,  Queen's  College,  Oxford.


694


Members  and  Associates.


[part


*Gienfell. Field-Marshal  Lord, G.C.B., G.C.M.G., St.  Rode,
Bournemouth.

Grew,  J.  C,  c/o  American  Legation,  Berne,  Switzerland.

Grey,  E.  H.,  Windermere,  Belmont  Avenue,  Wickford,  Essex.
*Grey,  R.  C,  Ballycogoran,  Killaloe,  Co.  Clare,  Ireland.
*Grey,  Viscountess,  4  Buckingham  Street,  London,  S.W.  1.

Grignon,  Miss  A.  E.,  41  FUton  Avenue,  Horfield,  Bristol.

Grottendieck,  W.  G.,  Charlotte  de  Bourbon  Str.  8,  The  Hague.
*Grubbe,  Hubert  H.,  Southwold,  Suffolk.

*Gunnell,  A.  Mortimer,  F.R.A.I.,  F.R.Met.Soc,  Broomfield  Park

College,  New  Southgate,  London,  N.  IL
*Guttwoch,  Charles,  c/o  Ewing  House,  Chiswell  Street,  London,

E.C.  L

*Gwyn,  W.  J.,  8  Netherhall  Gardens,  South  Hampstead,  London,
N.W.  3.

*Hackett, James T., c/o Bank of  Adelaide, 11  Leadenhall
Street,  London,  E.C.

Haldar,  Professor  Hiralal,  56a  Beadon  Street,  Calcutta.
*Hall,  Alexander  F.,  Tettenliall  College,  Staffs.
*Hall,  Captain  Basil,  R.N.,  96  Beaufort  Mansions,  London,  S.W.  3.

Hall,  Wilfred,  9  Priors  Terrace,  Tynemouth,  Northumberland.

Hambro,  Lady,  4  Norfolk  Street,  Park  Lane,  London,  W.  1.
♦Hamilton  and  Brandon,  The  Duchess  of,  Hamilton  Palace,  Lanark-
shire.

Hamilton,  J.  J.

Hamilton,  W.  Bernard.

Hammond,  Miss  Wmifred  B.,  386  East  51st  Street,  Portland,
Oregon,  U.S.A.

Hannes,  Mrs.,  48  Bedford  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.
Hanson,  Mrs.,  Pleasaunce  Cottage,  Dormans  Park,  Siurey.
*Hare,  Dr.  A.  W.,  59  York  Road,  Birkdale,  Lanes.
Harper,  Miss  E.  K.,  The  Apple  Gate,  Coombe  Hill  Farm,  Nr.

Kingston-on-Thames,  Surrey.
Harriman,  T.  G.,  M.D.,  2500  East  2nd  Street,  Long  Beach,  Calif.,
U.S.A.

*Harrington,  E.  J.,  55  Capel  Street,  Forest  Gate,  London,  E.  7.
Harris,  Alan  C,  c/o  Messrs.  Morgan,  Harjes  &  Co.,  14  Place  Vendome,
Paris.

*Harris,  Lady,  98  Gloucester  Terrace,  London,  W.  2.
Harris,  Mrs.  W.  F.,  The  Willows,  Westbourne  Avenue,  Hull.


LXXXVIII.]


Members  and  Associates.


695


Harrison,  William,  17  Tiiiemont  Road,  Croydon,  Surrey.
*Hart,  Mrs.  H.  Burcham,  Eshott,  Eastbury  Road,  Northwood,
Middlesex.

Hart,  Mrs.  H.  H.,  H.B.  "  Zephyr,"  Srinigar,  Kashmir,  India.
Hart,  General  Sii-  Reginald  Clare,  V.C.,  K.C.B.,  K.C.V.O.,  39  West

Cliff  Road,  Bournemouth.
Harvey,  G.  H.,  P.O.  Box  254,  Quebec,  Canada.
*Haslam,  Oliver  H.,  Cairngill,  Nr.  Dalbeattie,  Kirkcudbrightshire,

N.B.

Hassan,  Princess  Aziza,  139  Mahmoudia,  Alexandria,  Egypt.
Hastings,  Rev.  J.  H.,  The  Manor  House,  Halton,  Lancashire.
Hauxliurst,  Mrs.  W.,  c/o  Morgan,  Harjes  &  Co.,  14  Place  Vendome,
Paris.

Hawker,  Mrs.  George,  9  Thurloe  Square,  London,  S.W.  7.
Hawker,  Miss  Elizabeth,  9  Thurloe  Square,  London,  S.W.  7.
Hawley,  Miss  Zoe,  129  Church  Street,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.
*Hay, Miss Cecilia  E. C, 30  Tite Street,  Chelsea,  London,
S.W.  3.

Hayes,  Rev.  Joseph  W.,  Towerville,  Dalcot  Crescent,  Loughton,
Essex.

*Hayley,  Guy  W.,  17  Cleveland  Square,  London,  W.  2.
Head,  Miss  Alice  L.,  42  Aldridge  Road  Villas,  Westbourrie  Park,
London,  W.  11.

*Heape,  Mrs.  Walter,  Manor  Lodge,  Bishop's  Down,  Tunbridge
Wells,  Kent.

Heard,  G.  H.,  Percy  Villa,  Front  Street,  Tynemouth.
Heath,  George  H.,  5  Roughdomi,  Boxmoor,  Herts.
Heaton,  Guy,  51  Westcliff  Road,  Bournemouth.
Hedley,  Dr.  E.  P.,  Pretoria,  S.  Africa.
*Heijer,  Dr.  J.  C,  61  Stadhouderskade,  Amsterdam,  Holland.
Heller,  Rabbi  James  G.,  3634  Readmg  Road,  Cincinnati,  Ohio,
U.S.A.

Hemenway,  Mrs.  Augustus,  Readville,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Henderson,  J.  J.,  811  President  Street,  Brooklyn,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Henderson,  Miss  Lilian,  The  Sesame  Club,  29  Dover  Street,  London,
W.  1.

Henrici,  Jacob,  201-203  Chestnut  Street.  Meadville,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Henry,  Miss  Eva,  1  Argyll  Villas,  Cheltenliam.

*Herberstein,  Count  J.  Hemy  of,  10  Kecskemeti  utcza,  Budapest,
Hungary.


696  Members  and  Associates.  [part

Herriot,  Miss  E.  ¥.,  2  Sunningdale  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,
W.  8.

*Herrmann,  Oscar,  215  West  90th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
Hesketh,  Thomas,  42  Castle  Hill  Avenue,  Folkestone,  Kent.
*Hichens,  Mrs.  Cyril,  The  Almners,  Lyne,  Chertsey,  Surrey.
*Hichens,  Mrs.  W.  Lionel,  15  Buckingham  Palace  Gardens,  London,
S.W.  1.

*Hicks,  Rev.  F.  E.,  St.  Anne's  Vicarage,  Birkenhead.
Hildyard,  F.  W.,  14  Lambridge,  Bath.

Hillman,  E.  Haviland,  Haus-am-Muhlbach,  Wettersteinstrasse.

Partenkirchen,  Germany.
*Hillman,  Hugh  H.,  White  Cross,  Banwell,  Somerset.
Hills,  Miss  H.  D.,  58  Lupus  Street,  St.  George's  Square,  London,

S.W.  1.

Hoare,  Fred  H.,  37  Fleet  Street,  London,  E.G.  4.
Hoare,  Mrs.  Henry,  20  Montagu  Street,  Portman  Square,  London,
W.  1.

Hobart-Hampden, Rev. A. K.,  6b Roland  Houses,  London;
S.W.  7.

*Hobson,  Walter  D.,  Tan-y-Bryn,  Bangor,  N.  Wales.
*Hockliffe,  Mrs.  Ernest,  15  Ridgmount  Gardens,  London,  W.C.  1

Hodding.  Miss,  28  The  Close,  Salisbury.
*Hodson,  L.  J.,  LL.B.,  The  Mil]  House,  Robertsbridge,  Sussex.

Hoernle,  Professor  R.  F.  Alfred,  The  LTnlversity  of  the  Witwater-
sand,  Johannesburg,  S.  Africa.
*Hogg,  Henry  R.,  23  Hornton  Street,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8

Hoggan,  Mrs.  Frances,  M.D.,  22  Harrington  Road,  London,  S.W.  7.
*Hole,  Rev.  Donald,  St.  James'  Lodge,  Fulham  Palace  Road,  Loncion,
S.W.  6.

Holder,  Henry  L.,  Monkbarns,  Wheatlands  Road,  Harrogate.

Holding,  Sam,  Columbia,  Tenn.,  U.S.A.

Holland,  Miss,  1a  Holland  Park,  London,  W.  11

Hollander,  Bernard,  M.D.,  57  Winipole  Street,  London,  W.  1.
*Hol]ick,  Captain  A.  J..  Kelsall  Lodge,  Sunninghill,  Ascot,  Berks.
*Hollick,  Mrs.  A.  J.,  Kelsall  Lodge,  Sunninghill,  Ascot,  Berks.
*Hollins,  Miss  H.  M.  M.,  J. P.,  Melton  Lodge,  Great  Malvern.

Hollins,  Mi-s.  A.  E.,  Dunsfold  Rectory,  Godalming,  Surrey.

Holme,  Strachan,  Bridgewater  Offices,  Walkden,  Manchester.

Holmes,  Miss  Lilian,  Critchfield,  Bosham,  Sussex.
*Holms,  A.  Campbell,  23  Sefton  Drive,  Liverpool.  ■


Lxxxvm.]


Members  and  Associates.


697


*Holmyard,  R.,  5  Hedgerow  Lane,  Clifton,  Cincinnati,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
*Holt.  Henry,  19  West  44th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
*Holt,  IVIiss  M.  D.,  Bryans'  Ground,  Presteign,  Radnorshire.

Homan,  C.  H.,  12  Sogaden,  Christiania,  Xorway.

Home,  Mss  Georgina,  Halcj-on  Club,  13/14  Cork  Street,  London,

! w.  1.

Home,  MLss  Mary  M.,  34  Victoria  Road,  London,  W.  8.
*Home,  jNIrs.  Robert,  Leyton,  Grassington  Road,  Eastbourne.

Home,  Walter,  CLE.,  34  Victoria  Road,  London,  W.  8.
■ Hookham,  Philip,  Shottery  Cottage,  Shottery,  Stratford-on-Avon.

Hopkinson,  ]\Irs.,  EUerslie,  Adams  Road,  Cambridge.

Hoppin,  J.  C,  26  Central  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Hornberger,  J.  B.  L.,  5413  Stanton  Avenue,  Pittsburgh,  Pa.  U.S.A.

Horridge,  jMiss  J.  G.,  43  Alexandra  Road,  Southport.
*Horsfield,  H.,  108  Everton  Road,  Chorlton-on-Medlock,  I\Ian-
ch  ester.

*Horwood,  C.  Baring,  D.Sc,  F.C.S.,  Royal  Automobile  Club,  Pall
MalL  London,  S.W.  1.

*Hoseason,  A.  G.,  The  Bungalow,  Tanworth-in-Ai'den,  Nr.  Bir-
mingham.

Hotblack,  Frank  A.,  Kaslo,  3  Burton  Villas,  Hove,  Sussex.
Howden,  Mrs.,  11  Eton  Terrace,  Edinburgh.
*Howe]l,  Mis.,  Ethy,  Lostwithiel,  Cornwall.

*Howell,  ]\Irs.  PhUip,  5  Carlyle  Square,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.
Hov^-grave-Graham,  Captain  A.  H.,  M.C.,  Box  59,  Randfontein,
Transvaal.

Hubbard,  IMrs.  Cyril,  New  Lodge,  Coleman's  Hatch,  Sussex.
Hudson,  Miss  Alice,  Meads  Court,  Eastbourne.
Hudson,  Miss  Katie  E.,  Meads  Co;irt,  Eastbourne.
*Hudson,  Morris,  St.  Cuthbert's,  Bathampton,  Somerset,
Hughes,  Professor  Alfred,  Eastnor  House,  Malvern  Link.
Hume-Rothery,  J.  H.,  Mendip  House,  Headtngton  Hill,  Oxford.
Humphreys,  E.  Noel,  Caerycaee,  Hoole,  Chester.
Humphreys,  T.  H.  A.

Hunkin,  Rev.  J.  W.,  M.C.,  C.F.,  126  Huntmgdon  Road,  Cambridge.

Hur^vitz,  W.  A.,  PhD.,  Cornell  University,  Ithaca,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Hutchinson,  F.  W.  H.,  Grove  Lawns,  St.  Albans,  Herts.
*Hutchmson,  W.  D.,  Chesa  Rocco,  Celerina,  Engadine,  Switzerland.
*Hyland,  C.  W.,  Ph.C,  300  Commissioner  Street,  Johannesbiirg
East,  Transvaal.


698  Members  and  Associates.  [part

*Hyslop,  George  H.,  M.D.,  143  Twenty-Second  Street,  Jackson

Heights,  Long  Island,  New  York,  U.S.A.
Imaruura,  Prof.  Shinkichi,  Clinic  for  Psychiatry,  Imperial  Univer-
sity, Kioto,  Japan.
Ince,  Miss  Gladys,  P.O.  Box  No.  14,  Madras,  S.  India.
*Ingham,  Charles  B.,  6  Addison  Crescent,  Kensington,  London,
W.  14.

Innes,  C.  E.,  31  Randolph  Crescent,  London,  W.  9.
Innes,  Miss  H.  K.,  4  Greycoat  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Irving,  Rev.  W.  S.,  Oxenhall  Vicarage,  Newent,  Glos.
Isaac,  Miss  Edith,  The  Lodge,  Kempsey,  Worcester.
Jacks,  L.  P.,  LL.D.,  D.D.,  Shotover  Edge,  Headington,  Oxford.
James,  Brig. -General  C.  H.  L.,  C.B.,  United  Service  Club,  London,
S.W.  1.

*James,  Major  E.  A.  H.,  Newtown,  Newbury,  Berks.

James,  Henry,  10  East  10th  Street,  New  York,  U.S.A.

James,  IMrs.  Joseph,  Southwood,  Barnt  Green,  Birmingham.
*James,  Miss  S.  Boucher,  2  Whitehall  Court,  London,  S.W.I.
*Jameson,  David,  New  Castle,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

*Janson,  E.  W.,  11  Eaton  Mansions,  Eaton  Square,  London,  S.W.  1.

Jaye,  William  R.,  Moray  House,  Ryde,  I.W.
*Jeboult,  F.  M.,  19  Edith  Villas,  West  Kensington,  London,  W.  14.
*Jekyll,  Miss  D.,  17  Nevern  Mansions,  Earls  Court,  London,  S.W.  5.

Jenkmson,  W.  E.,  Lower  Willow  Hall,  Sowerby  Bridge,  Yorks.

.Jennings-Bramly,  Mrs.,  Hampton  Court  Palace,  Middlesex.

Jennings-Bramly,  Mrs.,  Boarstall  Tower,  Brill,  Bucks.
*Jephson,  Miss  S.,  35  Richmond  Road,  London,  W.  2.

Jeschke,  H.

Johnson,  Charles  R.,  340  Main  Street,  Worcester.  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Johnson,  Miss  F.  C,  25  York  Street  Chambers,  Bryanston  Square,

London,  W.  1.
Johnson,  Mrs.,  Abbot's  Bay,  Nr.  Keswick.
*Johnstone,  Hon.  Gilbert,  43  Wilton  Crescent,  London,  S.W.  1.
Johnston,  R.  F.,  The  Forbidden  City,  Peking,  China.
*Johnston,  Dr.  William  B.,  5  Garden  Terrace,  Cambridge,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

*  Jones,  Miss  F.  E.,  89  Marylebone  High  Street,  London,  W.  1.
*Jones,  Mrs.  Gordon,  54  Stratford  Road,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.
Jones,  J.  Herbert,  Wallasey  Villa,  Mount  Street,  Menai  Bridge,
Anglesea.


Lxxxvin.]


Members  and  Associates.


699


*Jones,  Sir  Lawence  J.,  Bart.,  39  Harrington.  Gardens,  London,
S.W.  7.

*Jordan-Smitli,  Benjamin,  Orchardlea.  Grosvenor  Road,  Caversham,

Reading.
*Judah,  Noble  B.

Judd,  IV'Irs.  Sylvestre  Dwight,  163  Maple  Street,  Maiden,  Mass.,
U.S.A.

*Kellet,  Mi's.  Kelsall,  Hurst,  Burwash,  Sussex.

*Kellogg,  Mi's.  Branton,  45  Carlton  Street.  Brookline,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Kellj^.  Miss  Eleanor  B.,  Vv^indy  Harbour,  Ash  well,  Baldock,  Hert;-:.
*Kelso,  Captain,  R.N.,  Horkesley  Park,  Colchester,  Essex.

Kenneth,  H.,  Lindley,  BycuUah  Park,  Enfield,  Middlesex.

Kenway,  Mrs.,  Mendip  View,  Winscombe,  Somerset.

Ker,  Miss,  Napier  Lodge,  Strathblane,  Glasgow.
*Kerans,  Lieut. -Colonel  G.  C.  L.,  St.  Kilda,  Birr,  Ireland.
*Kerr,  George,  M.B.,  6  St.  Colme  Street,  Edinburgh.

Kerr-Clark,  Lady,  Moore  Abbey,  Monasterevan,  Ireland.
*Ker-Seymer;  Mrs.,  12  St.  Leonard's  Terrace,  Chelsea,  London,
S.W.  3.

Kershaw,  IMi's.  Ronald  H.,  Seacourt,  Hayling  Island,  Hants.
*Kimber,  J.  F.  C,  The  Gate  House,  Eashing,  Godalming,  Surrey.
*King,  Louis  M.,  c/o  British  Consulate-General,  Ichang,  Chma.

King,  Miss  R.  Estelle,  19  Highfield  Road.  Edgbaston,  Bii'mingham.
*King,  H.  F.  Locke,  J. P.,  Brooklands,  Weybridge,  Surrey.
*King,  Dr.  W.  A.  D.,  1  Bishop's  Place,  Paignton,  Devon.
*Kingscote,  Mrs.,  4  Southwick  Crescent,  London,  W.  2.
*Kmgsford,  Miss  S.  M.,  Esher  Cottage,  Rickett's  Hill,  Tatsfield,

Westerham,  Kent.
*Kingsley,  Mrs.,  14  Belsize  Avenue,  London;  N.W.  3.

Ku-kham,  T.  A.,  38  Bedford  Row,  London,  W.C.  1.

Kittermaster,  Rev.  Digby  B.,  Dame  Armstrong  House,  Harrow-
on-the-Hill,  Middlesex.

Knight,  Charles  N.,  7  Marlborough  Buildings,  Bath.
*Knoblock,  Edward,  G2,  The  Albany,  Piccadilly,  London,  W.  1.
*Konig,  Mrs.  F.  A.,  44  Rutland  Gate,  London,  S.W.  7.
*Korenchevsky,  Professor  V.,  Lister  Institute  of  Preventive  Medi-
cine, Chelsea  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.

Laing,  R.  M.,  "  Ogilvie,"  Cashmere  Hill-.,  Christchurch,  New
Zealand.

Lamb,  Charles  George.  D.Sc,  65  Glis'~;on  Road,  Cambridge.


700


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Lambert,  G.  W.,  86  Chester  Square,  London,  S.W'.  1.
*Langford,  J.  C.  C,  St.  Bartholomew's  Hospital,  London,  E.G.  L
*Larken,  E.  P..  98  Warwick  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.  14.

Latshaw,  Allen,  Berwyn,  Penn,  U.S.A.

Leaf,  Arthur  H.,  Woodcroft,  Oxted,  Surrey.

Leaf,  Mrs.  A.  H.,  Woodcroft,  Oxted,  Surrey.

Leaf, Miss E. M., 4 Barton  Street, Westminster,  London,
S.W.  L

*Leaf,  F.  A.,  Lincoln  House,  Harrow- on -the -Hill,  Middlesex.
*Leaf,  Walter,  Litt.D.,  6  Sussex  Place,  Regent's  Park,  London,
N.W.  L

*Leaning,  Mrs.  S.,  Elmstead,  Epsom  Lane,  Tadworth,  Surrey.
*Le-Apsley,  James  H.  M.,  M.D.,  1835  Makiki  Street,  Honolulu.
*Leconfield,  Lady,  Petworth  House,  Petworth,  Sussex.

Ledyard,  Mrs.  R.  F.  H.,  Cazenovia,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Lee,  Blewett.  c/o  Illinois  Central  Railroad  Co.,  32  Nassau  Street,

New  York,  U.S.A.
*Lee,  Dr.  H.  D.  C,  Technical  College,  Huddersfield.
*Lees,  Norman A.I.C.,  Norton  Hall,  Norton-on-Tees,  Co.  Durham.
*Legg,  W.  A.,  14  Victoria  Street,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Leigh,  Lord,  Stoneleigh  Abbey,  Kenilworth,  Warwickshire.
*  Leigh -Pemberton,  Mrs.  Percy,  28  Chelsea  Park  Gardens,  London,
S.W.

Lenon,  J.  W.,  Wellington  Club,  Grosvenor  Place,  London,  S.W.  1.
Leon,  Mrs.  Philip,  4m  Montagu  Mansions,  Portman  Square,  London,
W.  1.

*Leonard,  Miss  Margaret,  Oakley  House,  Bromley  Common,  Kent.
Leonard,  Thomas,  223  W.  School  Lane,  Germantown,  Philadelphia,
Pa.,  U.S.A.

Le  Patourel,  Miss  M.  L.,  26  Walpole  Street,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.

Leslie,  Rev.  G.  Lindsay,  The  Manse,  Eddleston,  Peeblesshire.

Leslie,  James,  1029  Corydon  Avenue,  Winnipeg,  Canada.
*Lethbridge,  Alan  B.,  Stockwood  House,  Nr.  Keynsham,  Somerset.
*Leverson,  Mrs.  Louis  J.,  82  Hamilton  Terrace,  London,  N.W.  8.

Lewin,  Rev.  C.  H.,  St.  John's  Parsonage,  Keswick.

Lewis,  David  J.,  LTnited  States  Tariif  Commission,  Washington,
D.C.,  U.S.A.

Librarian.  Public  Library  of  Adelaide,  Australia.

Librarian,  Adelbert  College  of  Western  Re-erve  University,  Cleve-
land, Ohio,  U.S.A.


LXXXVIII.]


Members  and  Associates.


701


Librarian,  Amsterdam  Free  Library,  Amsterdam,  New  York,
U.S.A.

Librarian,  Binghampton  Public  Library,  Binghampton,  New  York,
U.S.A.

Librarian,  Birmingham  Public  Libraries,  Reference  Department,

Ratcliff  Place,  Birmingham.
Librarian,  Boston  Athenaeum,  10|  Beacon  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,

U.S.A.

Librarian,  Bowdoin  College  Library,  Brunswick,  Maine,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Public  Library,  etc..  Church  Street,  Brighton.
Librarian,  Public  Library  of  the  District  of  Columbia,  Washington,
D.C.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Library  of  Congre.-js,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
Librarian (Hon.)  of  the  Constitutional  Club,  Northumberland

Avenue,  London,  W.C.  2.
Librarian.  The  John  Crerar  Library,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Dublin  Local  Section,  16  St.  Frederic  Street,  Dublin.
Librarian,  Enoch  Pratt  Free  Library  of  Baltimore  City,  Baltimore^

Md..  U.S.A.

*Librarian,  General  Theological  Seminary,  Chelsea  Square,  New
York,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  The  Grosvenor  Library,  Buffalo,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Guildhall  Library,  London,  E.G.  2.
Librarian,  Harvard  College  Library,  Ca.mbridge,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Imperial  Library,  Metcalfe  Hall,  Calcutta,  India.
*Librarian,  Iowa  State  Library,  Des  Moines,  Iowa,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Jamsetjee  Nesserwanjee  Petit  Institute,  Hornby  Road,
Bombay.

Librarian,  Free  Public  Library  of  Jersey  City,  New  Jersey,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Leeds  Library,  Commercial  Street,  Leeds.
Librarian,  Leland  Stanford  Junior  University,  Calif.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Library  Association,  Portland,  Oregon,  LT.S.A.
Librarian,  Meadville  Theological  School,  Meadville,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Mercantile  Library,  St.  Louis,  Mo.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Minneapolis  Athenaeum,  Minneapolis,  Minn.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Natal  Society  and  Central  Library,  Pietermaritzburg,

Natal,  S.  Africa.
Librarian,  Newberry  Library,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Literary  and  Philosophical  Society,  Newcastle-upon-

Tyne.


702  Members  and  Associates.  [part

Librarian,  Public  Library,  New  Bridge  Street,  Newcastle-upon-
Tyne.

Librarian,  New  Hampshire  State  Library,  Concord,  N.H.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Public  Library  of  New  South  Wales,  c/o  Messrs.  Truslove

&  Hanson,  153  Oxford  Street,  London,  W.  L
Librarian,  New  York  Public  Library,  c/o  Messrs.  Stevens  &  Brown,

4  Trafalgar  Square,  London,  W.C.  2.
Librarian,  Ohio  State  Library,  Columbus,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
^Librarian,  Omaha  Public  Library  and  Museum,  19  and  Harvey

Streets,  Omaha,  Nebraska,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Peimsylvania  State  Library,  Harrisburg,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Public  Library,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Seattle  Public  Library,  Seattle,  Washington,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Norsk  Selskap  for  psykisk  Forskning,  Pilestradet  63,

Christiania,  Norway.
Librarian,  Selskabet  for  psykisk  Forskning, Graabrodretorv  7,

Copenhagen,  Denmark.
Librarian,  Theological  Seminary,  Rochester,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  Theosophical  Society,  23  Bedford  Square,  London,

W.C.  1.

*Librarian,  Legislative  Library,  Toronto,  Canada.
Librarian,  The  University,  Aberdeen.

Librarian,  General  Library  of  the  LTniversity  of  Chicago,  Chicago.

111.,  U.S.A.
Librarian,  University  Library,  Glasgow.
*Librarian,  University  of  Iceland,  Reykjavik,  Iceland.
Librarian,  University  of  Minnesota  Library,  Minneapolis,  Minne-
sota, U.S.A.

Librarian,  University  of  Pennsylvania,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  University  of  Sydney,  New  South  Wales,  Australia.

Librarian,  Victoria  Public  Library,  Melbourne,  Australia.

Librarian,  Wellesley  College,  Wellesley,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Librarian,  Dr.  Williams'  Library,  Gordon  Square,  London,  W.C.  1.

Librarian,  Yale  University  Library,  New  Haven,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
*Llewellin,  Mrs.  W.,  Upton  House,  Nr.  Poole.  Dorset.
*Lloyd,  Miss  Edyth  M.,  10  Francis  Road,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.

Lloyd,  Judge  Frank  T.,  Camden,  N.J.,  U.S.A.

Lloyd,  Miss  Julia,  Hillside,  Berkswell,  Nr.  Coventry.
*Loder,  J.  de  V.,  31  Lennox  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Loder,  Mrs.  J.  de  V.,  31  Lennox  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.


LXXXVIII.]


WI embers  and  Associates.


703


Lodge,  Miss  E.  C,  Lady  Margaret  Hall,  Oxford.
*Lodge,  Sir  Oliver,  F.R.S.,  Normanton,  Lake,  Nr.  Salisbury.

Lodge,  Robert,  Compton  Wood,  28  Carlisle  Road,  Eastbourne.

Lubbock,  Mrs.  Geoffrey,  Glenconner,  North  Berwick.

Lucy,  Miss  Mabel,  1  Laurence  Mansions,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3-
*Lumsden,  Mrs.  W.  F.,  43  Curzon  Street,  London,  W.  1.

Lunn,  Arnold,  Palace  Hotel,  Montana,  Sur  Sierre,  Switzerland.

Lyall,  Mrs.,  16  York  Street  Chambers,  Bryanston  Square,  London,
W.  L

*Lyall,  Major  Edward,  D.S.O.,  19  Victoria  Road,  Darlington.
Lyell,  Major  A.  G.,  68  Upper  Richmond  Road,  London,  S.W.  15.
Lyttelton,  Hon.  Mrs.  Alfred,  16  Great  College  Street,  Westminster,
London,  S.W.  1.

*Macau]ay,  Miss  Gertrude  F.,  Cairnbrae,  109  The  Boulevard,  West-
mount,  Montreal,  Canada.
Macdonald,  Prof.  Duncan  Black,  Hartford  Theological  Seminary,

Hartford,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
Macdonald,  Miss  Isabelle  M.,  M.B..  47  Seymour  Street,  Portman

Square,  London,  W.  1.
*Macfarlane,  Mrs.  Scott  B.,  c/o  Lieut. -Comdr.  S.  B.  Macfarlane,

U.S.S.  Camden,  c/o  Postmaster.  New  York,  LT.S.A.
Mackay,  N.  Douglas,  M.D.,  Dall-Avon,  Aberfeldy,  Perth.
*Mackenzie,  Lieut. -Colonel  H.  G.  G.,  D.S.O.,  M.D.,  29  Pitzjames

Avenue,  West  Kensington,  London,  W.  14.
Mackenzie,  Lady  Muir,  25  Pelham  Place,  Thurloe  Square,  London,

s;w.  7.

*Mackie,  Dr.  John.  Ockbrook,  Nr.  Derby.

Macklin,  Miss  Helen  E.,  141  Liverness  Terrace,  London,  W.  2.
*MacLellan,  Mrs.,  5  Langham  Street,  London,  W.  1.
*Mactavish,  Mrs.  A.  M.  E.,  Moray  Park,  Island  Bank  Road,  Inverness.

Madders,  Mrs.  H.  F.,  87  Hampstead  Way,  London,  N.W.  4.
*Magrane,  Mrs.  Victor,  Woodsford  Rectory,  Nr.  Dorchester,  Dorset.

Mahler,  Mrs.  John,  Bronygartli,  Oswestry,  Salop.

Mainwaring,  Mrs.,  11  Wilton  Crescent,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Malmesbury,  Susan,  Countess  of,  34  Wilton  Place,  London,  S.W.  L
*Mander,  Geoffrey  Le  Mesurier,  Wightwick  Manor,  Wolverhampton.

Mann,  Rev.  Frederic,  Coombe  Dale,  Coombe  Road,  South  Croydon,
Surrey.

*Manning,  Miss  H.  T..  102  Central  Avenue,  Plainfield,  New  Jersey,
U.S.A.


704  Members  and  Associates.  Tpart

L.

Mansell,  Andrew  Evans,  Mount  Vernon,  Melton  Mowbray,  Tasmania.
Mantell,  Colonel  A.  M.,  10  Sion  Hill,  Bath.

Marriott,  Mrs.,  30  Roland  Gardens,  S.  Kensington,  London,  S.W.  7.
*Marsden-Smedley,  Mrs.,  Lea  Green,  Matlock,  Derbyshire.
Marsden,  E.,  12  Ellerdale  Road,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.  3.
Marsh,  Edward  H.,  5  Raymond  Buildings,  Gray's  Inn,  London,
W.C.  1.

Marston,  Charles,  J. P.,  Afoot,  Comi^ton,  Nr.  Wolverhampton.

Marten,  Miss  A.  R.,  Osbornes,  Liphook,  Hants.
*Marten,  Rev.  G.  H.,  St.  Mark's  Vicarage,  Surbiton,  Surrey.
*Martin,  E.  Le  Breton,  Red  Lion  House,  Red  Lion  Court,  London,
E.C.  4.

Martin,  Mrs.  J.  Biddulph,  Norton  Park,  Bredon's  Norton,  Nr.
Tewkesbury.

*Martin,  T.  B.,  Woodlands,  Siiaresbrook,  London,  E.  18
*Martindale,  Miss  B.,  4  Piazza  Paganica,  Rome,  Italy.

Martineau,  Alfred  Edward,  22  Racecourse  Road,  Lahore,  India.
*Mason,  Miss,  211  Commonwealth  Avenue,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Mason,  Miss  M.  H.,  Morton,  Eureka  Road,  Rondebosch,  Cape  Town,
S.  Africa.

*Mason,  Miss  Ida  M.,  1  Walnut  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Mather,  Rev.  Herbert,  Royal  Automobile  Club,  Pall  Mall,  London,
S.W.  1.

*Mathews,  Dr.  F.,  Welsh  Row  House,  Nantwich.

Maxwell,  Dr.  Joseph,  37  rue  Thiac,  Bordeaux,  France.
*Maxwell,  Sir  John  Stirling,  Bart.,  PoUok  House,  PoUokshaws,  N.B.

Mayor,  R.  G.,  11  Campden  Hill  Square,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.

M' Alpine,  Sir  Robert,  Knott. Park,  Oxshott,  Surrey.
*McCarthy,  Justin  Huntly,  19  Elm  Park  Mansions,  Park  Walk,

Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  10.
*M'Carthy,  Mrs.,  22  De  Pary's  Avenue,  Bedford.
*M'Connel,  D.  R.,  M.A.,  115  Santa  Cruz  Avenue,  Menlo  Park,  Cali-
fornia, LT.S.A.

M'Connel,  H.  W.,  M.B.,  M.R.C.S.,  Matlaske  Hall,  Norwich.
M'Connel,  Mrs.,  Matlaske  Hall,  Norwich.

*M'Dermott,  Captain  F.,  The  Old  Mill,  Tregoose,  St.  Columb,
Cornwall.

M'Dougall,  William,  F.R.S.,  M.Sc,  M.B.,  Emerson  Hall,  Cambridge,
Mass.,  U.S.A.

*M'Farland,  Van  E.,  M.D.,  Eagle  Pass,  Texas,  U.S.A.


Lxxxviii.]  Members  and  Associates.


705


M'Gusty,  G.  A.,  Granville,  Broadstone,  Dorset.

M'Keever,  Buell,  The  Chicago  Club,  Michigan  Ave.  and  Van  Buren

Street,  Chicago,  111.,  U.S.A.  •
M'Lauchlan. G. M., 49 Oberon Street, Randwick,  Sydnej^

Austraha.

*M'Xeil,  Dr.  Mary  L.,  Scottish  Mission  Hospital,  Bhandara,  Central

Provinces,  India.
Mead,  G.  R.  S.,  19  Evelyn  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  7.
Meek,  Maximilian  de,  2  rue  des  Lilas,  Monte  Carlo  (Monaco).
Meebold,  Alfred,  Heidenlieim,  Wurtemberg.
Megson,  Albert,  Fern  Villa,  Headlands,  Ossett,  Yorks.
Mehrji,  Munchershaw  Hormusji,  M.D.,  3  Batlivala  Villa,  Sleater

Road,  Bombay,  India.
Meissner,  Mrs.  de,  1524  31st  Street,  Washington,  D.C.,  U.S.A.
*Menon,  Dr.  M.  P.  K.,  50  West  End,  Queensbury,  Nr.  Bradford,

Yorks.

*Merrington,  A.  J.,  Lieut.  R.N.,  R.N.  College,  Greenwich,  London,
S.E.  10.

*Merton,  Gerald,  Coton  End,  Grange  Road,  Cambridge.
*Micklethwait,  Richard  K.

*Mikuska,  Professor  Viktor,  Masarykova  303,  Pardubice,  Czechoslav
Republic.

*Miles,  Miss,  59  Egerton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  3.

*]Mil]ard,  J\Irs.  Almira  B.,  c/o  The  F.  W.  Faxon  Co.,  83  Francis  Street,

Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*MiIls,  J.  P.,  I.C.S.,  c/o  King,  Hamilton  &  Co.,  4  and  5  Koila  Ghat

Street,  Calcutta,  India.
*Mitchell,  T.  V\\,  M.D.,  Hoath  Cottage,  Hadlow,  Nr.  Tonbridge.
*Moncrieff,  Captain  M.  M.,  The  Cliffs,  Nelson,  New  Zealand.
*Montague,  Mrs.,  Penton,  Crediton,  Devon.

*Montgomerie,  C.  W.,  Woodleigh,  Aldershot  Road,  Fleet,  Hants.

Monypenny,  Mrs.  A.  E.  G.,  5  Talbot  Square,  London,  W.  2.
*Moore,  His  Honour  Judge,  22  North  Baile^v,  Durham.

Morier,  Mrs.,  65  Hamilton  Terrace,  London,  N.W.  8.
*Morley,  Mrs.  Evelyn,  7  Green  Street,  Park  Lane,  London,  W.  1.

Morris,  Mrs.,  Corner  House,  Laleham-on-Thames,  Middlesex.
*Morse,  Major  John,  1  Norfolk  Terrace,  Jersey,  C.I.

Morton,  Miss  Mary,  12  TanlverviUe  Terrace,  Newcastle-on-Tpie.

Moses,  E.  J.,  c/o  Messrs.  E.  D.  Sassoon  &  Co.,  4  IVIission  Row,
Calcutta.


Members  and  Associates.


[fart


Moss-Blundell,  F.  B.,  29  Lancaster  Park,  Richmond,  Surrey.
*Muir,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  Rowallan,  Haslemere,  Surrey.
MuMiead,  Mi-s.  James  F.,  12  Campden  Hill  Square,  London,  W.  8.
*Mullens,  Mrs.,  31  Lowndes  Square,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Mullins,  Colonel  W.  B.,  Ambersham  House,  Midhurst,  Sussex.
Murphy, Gardner, Ph.D., Dept. of Psychology,  Columbia

University,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
Murphy,  Miss  Imogen  H.,  23  Somerset  Terrace,  Duke's  Road,
London,  W.C.  1.

Murray,  Professor  Gilbert,  LL.D.,  Litt.D.,  Yatscombe,  Boar's  Hill,
Oxford.

Murton,  Miss  Josephine,  Critchfield,  Bosham,  Sussex.
*Musgrave,  Geoffrey,  Selukwe,  S.  Rhodesia,  S.  Africa.
*Myers,  Mrs.  F.  W.  H.,  12  Cleveland  Row,  St  James's,  London,
S.W.  1.

*  Myers,  L.  H.,  Twyford  Lodge,  East  Grinstead.
*Myers,  Miss  M.  A.,  15  Oxhey  Road,  Watford.
*Nash,  Miss  Diana,  Tryon,  N.  Carolina,  U.S.A.

*Nation,  Captain  Cecil,  R.E.,  Ettrick  Cottage,  S.  Farnborough,
Hants.

*Naylor,  M.  C,  35  Priory  Road,  Bedford  Park,  London,  W.  4.

Neustadter,  Louis  W.,  Hotel  Hollywood,  Hollywood,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
*Newbold,  Eric,  11  Oak  Hill  Road,  Surbiton,  Surrey.
*Newcastle,  The  Duke  of.  Clumber,  Worksoj),  Notts.

Newton,  Miss  F.  E.,  156  Sloane  Street,  London,  S.W.  1.

Newton,  Heber,  Oamaru,  New  Zealand.

Newton,  Miss  I.,  31  Tavistock  Square,  London,  W.C.  1.

Nicholson,  Lady,  6  Kensington  Court,  London,  S.W.  7.
*Nicoll,  Mrs.  DeLancey.

*Nicolls,  Brig.-General  E.  G.,  C.B.,  Fir  View,  13  Culverden  Park

Road,  Tunbridge  Wells,  Kent.
*Nisbet,  E.  T.,  Birnieknowes,  CuUercoats,  Northumberland.

Noel,  Miss  Frances,  Becket  House,  Thaxted,  Nr.  Dunmow,  Essex.

Noel-Cox,  H.  L.,  M.D.,  F.R.A.S.,  2  Clifton  Gardens,  Warwick

Avenue,  London,  W.  9.
*Norlind,  Ernst,  12/13  Upper  Bedford  Place,  London,  W.C.  1.

Nott,  William  F.,  24  Chancery  Lane,  London,  W.C.  1.

Nutter,  Miss  H.  G.,  6  Acacia  Road,  Norbury,  London,  S.W.  16.
*0'DeU,  A.  E.,  10  Knight's  Park,  Kingston-on-Thames,  Surrey.
*0gden,  James  R.,  38  James  Street,  Harrogate,  Yorks.


Lxxxviii.]  M.einber-'s  and  Associates.  707

Ogilvie,  IMis.  Robert,  c/o  R.  G.  Ross,  Esq.,  11  St.  Colme  Street,
Edinburgh.

Ogle,  Lieut.-Colonel  N.,  c/o  Grindlay  &  Co.,  P.O.  Box  93,  Bombay.
*01dfield,  Miss  F.,  24  Grimthorpe  Street,  Ash  Road,  Headingiey,
Leeds.

*01dham,  Mrs.,  11  Albany  Villas,  Hove.
Oldham,  G.  F.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  Dunelm,  Haden  Road,  Old

Hill,  Staffs.
*0'Neill,  E.  E.,  26  CromweU  Road,  Belfast.
Osborne,  Miss  H.,  2  Northcote  Mansions,  Heath  Street,  Hampstead,

London,  N.W.  3.
*Osmaston,  ]\Irs.,  Beacon  Crag,  Porthleven,  CornAvall.
*Owen,  A.  S.,  Keble  College,  Oxford.
Owen- Williams,  Mrs.,  Wellington  Hotel,  Wellington  College  Station,
Berks.

Oxenliam,  Mrs.,  3  Baring  Crescent,  Exeter.

Pack-Beresford,  Denis  R.,  J. P.,  Fenagh  House,  Bagenalsto-wn,  Co.
Carlo  w.

Pagan,  Mrs.  G.  L.,  5  Belgrave  Place,  Edinburgh.
*Pagenstecher,  G.,  M.D.,  Av.  Veracruz  102,  Mexico  City,  Mexico,
D.F.

Paget,  Sir  Richard,  74  Strand,  London,  W.C.  2.

Paley,  G.  A.,  Melton  Wold,  Victoria  West,  CP.,  S.  Africa.
*Palmer,  C.  G.,  CLE.,  Duncan,  Vancouver  Island,  British  Columbia.
*Palmer,  Mark,  B.A.,  33  Fitzjames  Avenue,  West  Kensmgton,

London,  W.  14.
*Parkin,  John,  Blaithwaite,  Carlisle.
*Parr,  F.  C,  San  Toy,  Shoreham  Beach,  Nr.  Brighton.

Parsons,  Ambrose,  Said  House,  Chiswick  Mall,  London,  W.  4.

Parsons,  Karl,  Speedwell.  Northwood,  Middlesex.
*Parsons,  IMiss  Llewellyn,  525  Park  Avenue,  New  York,  LT.S.A.

Parsons,  N.  M.,  64  Chelsea  Park  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  3.

Patel,  F.  J.,  L.R.C.P.,  4  New  Queen's  Road,  Bombay.

Paterson,  Miss  Mary  N.,  Royal  Marme  Hotel,  Ventnor,  Isle  of
Wight.

Paul,  J.  Rodman,  505  Chestnut  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.,  U.S.A.
*Peake,  C.  W.,  Masonsbridge  House,  Earlswood,  Surrey.

Pease,  Mrs.  J.  R.,  Sesame  Club,  29  Dover  Street,  London,  W.  1.
*Peck,  Miss  Charlotte  L.,  Maidencombe  House,  St.  Mary  Church,
S.  Devon.


708


Members  and  Associates. _


[part


Peckham,  Orville,  1320  N.  New  Jersey  Street,  Indianopolis,  Ind.,
U.S.A.

*Pennington,  Mrs.  Henry,  279  Trinity  Road,  Wandsworth  Common,
London,  S.W.  12.
Perceval,  Hon.  Mrs.  Dudley,  153  Church  Street,  Chelsea,  London,
S.W.  3.

*Perdicaris,  Ion,  The  Manor  House,  Chislehurst,  Kent.
Perkins,  Miss  S.  R.,  c/o  Dr.  Perkins,  57  Harley  Street,  London,
W.  1.

Perrott,  F.  D.  M.,  2  Francis  Street,  Strangeways,  Manchester.

Perry,  Sir  E.  Cooper,  M.D.,  3  Albert  Court,  Kensington  Gore,
London,  S.W.  7.

Perry,  Horace  H.,  Court  Royal,  111  King's  Cliff,  Brighton.

Perry,  T.  S.,  312  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Perry,  Mrs.  T.  S.,  312  Marlborough  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Pfau,  A.  R.,  Junr.,  Mankato,  Minnesota,  U.S.A.
*Phillimore,  Hon.  Mrs.  Kendals  Hall,  Radlett,  Herts.
*Phillips,  F.,  B.Litt.,  Hall  Street,  Waun  Wen,  Swansea.
*Pickard,  Mrs.  Fortescue,  41  Hertford  Street,  Park  Lane,  London,
W.  1.

*Piddington,  J.  G.,  Fishers  Hill,  Woking,  Surrey.
*Piercy,  Major  B.  H.,  94  Piccadilly,  London,  W.  1.
*Pigott,  Percy,  416  Hessle  Road,  Hull.

Pigou,  Professor  Ai-thur  Cecil,  King's  College,  Cambridge.
*Pilcher,  Giles  T.,  Treen,  Frith  Hill,  Godalming,  Surrey.

Piper,  John  E.,  LL.B.,  10  Herondale  Avenue,  Wandsworth  Common,
London,  S.W.  18.

Pithapuram,  The  Rajah  of,  Pithapuram,  Godavari  Dist.,  Madras
Presidency,  India.

Place,  Rev.  C.  A.,  Lancaster,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Plowden,  Mrs.,  6  Westcliffe,  St.  John's  Road,  Eastbourne.

Pollard,  J.  EUery,  L.R.C.P.  '  '

*Pollock,  A.  N.,  M.B.,  1  Princes  Street,  Durham.
*Pollock,  Mrs.  Hugh,  13  Cresswell  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  5.

Ponsonby,  Hon.  Mrs.  C.  B.

*Pontifex,  Dudley  D.,  73  Alleyn  Park,  West  Dulwich,  London,
S.E.  21.

*Poole,  H.  J.,  9  Millerfield  Place,  Edinburgh.
Pooley,  H.  F.,  Scotter,  Well  Walk,  Hampstead,  London,  N.W.  3.
*Poore,  Mrs.  J.  B..  17  Rosemount  Road,  Bournemouth  West.


Lxxxvm.]


Members  and  Associates.


709


*Porta],  Mrs.  Spencer,  Bere  Hill,  Whitchurch,  Hants.
Portsmouth,  The  Countess  of,  Hurstbourne  Park,  Whitchurch,
Hants.

*Potter,  John  Wilson,  219  Ashley  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.

Powell,  C.  Berkeley,  J.P.,  283  Metcalfe  Street,  Ottawa,  Canada.
*PoAve]l,  Llrs.,  Ashdown  Place,  Forest  Row,  Sussex.

Powles,  Lewis  Charles,  Rother  Cliff,  Rye,  Sussex.
*Prebhle,  Mrs.,  Fairhaven,  Upper  Strickland  Avenue,  Hohart,
Tasmania.

*Preedy,  Kenelm,  77  Warwick  Road,  London,  S.W.  5.
*Preston,  E.  M.,  The  Warren,  Hayes,  Kent.

*Price,  H.,  Royal  Societies'  Club^  63  St.  James's  Street,  London,
S.W.  I.

*Proctor,  Major  G.  Norman,  c/o  Messrs.  Cox  &  Co.,  16  Ciiaring  Cross,

London,  S.W.  1
*Pugh,  H.  W.,  38  Bedford  Square,  London,  W.C.  1.
*Pullen-Burry,  Miss  B.,  F.R.G.S.,  Forum  Club,  6  Grosvenor  Place,

London,  S.W.  1.
*Pumphrey,  Mrs.,  Hindley  Hal),  Stockfield-on-Tyne.
*Putman,  Miss  Irene,  328  Walnut  Avenue,  San  Diego,  Cal.,  U.S.A.
Pye,  W.  A  ,  Priest  Hill,  Limpsfield,  Surrey.
*Quinby,  Rev.  John  W.,  East  Bridgewater,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
.  *Racine,  F.  J.,  Rosebank,  161  Devonshire  Road,  Forest  Hill,  London,

S.E.  23.

*Radcliffe-Whitehead,  Ralph,  Woodstock,  Ulster  Co.,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.
*Radclyffe-Hall,  Miss  M.,  10  Sterlmg  Street,  Montpelier  Square,
London,  S.W.  7.

Rae,  J.  Burnett,  M.B.,  61  Harley  Street,  London,  W.  1.

Raikes,  Mrs.,  The  Mill  House,  Burford,  Oxon.
*Raines,  Lady,  46  Sussex  Gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.  2.
*Rampling-Rose,  Major  W.,  Llyndir  Hall,  Rossett,  Nr.  Wrexham.

Ramsden,  Miss,  16  Incognito  Gade,  Christiania.
*Randell,  Rev.  J.  Mickley,  3  Park  Mansions,  Vauxhall  Park,  London,
S.W.  8.

*Ransom,  Francis,  Newlands,  Hitchin,  Herts.
*Rashdall,  The  Very  Rev.  Hastings,  The  Deanery,  Carlisle.
*Rashleigh,  John  C.  S.,  M.D.,  Tbrowleigh,  Okehampton,  Devon.
*Rawsthorn,  Mrs.,  Yew  Trees,  Ashton-on-Ribble,  Preston.
*Rayleigh,  The  Dowager  Lady,  65  Cadogan  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  3
*Rea,  Miss  E.  A.,  Sewickley,  Pennsylvania,  U.S.A.


710


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Reade,  Herbert  V.,  C.B.,  Ipsden,  Wallingford.

Ready,  Miss  E.  A.,  74  Regent  Road,  Leicester.
*Reeves,  IVIrs.  M.  S.,  31  Pembroke  Square,  London,  W.  8.

Regina  Madre,  S.  M.  La,  Palazzo  Margherita,  Rome.

Reid,  INIrs.,  Crescent  House,  Effingham  Road,  Surbiton.

Rendall,  Rev.  Dr.  G.  H.,  Dedham  House,  Dedham,  Essex.
*Rhondda,  Sybil  Viscountess,  Llamvern,  Newport,  Mon.

Richardson,  Frederick  W.,  County  Analyst's  Office,  Hustlergate,
Bradford.

'•'Richmond,  Kenneth,  Vv^ittersham  House,  Wittersham,  Kent.
Rickman,  John,  M.B.,  11  Kent  Terrace,  London,  N.W.  1.
*RiddIe,  Mrs.,  Hillstead,  Farming]ton,  Conn.,  U.S.A.
*Ridley,  Henry  N.,  F.R.S.,  C.M.G.,  7  Cumberland  Road,  Kew,
Surrey.  .

Ridley,  M.  Roy,  11  Percival  Road,  Clifton,  Bristol.
*Ridley,  Miss,  Stagshaw,  Daleham  Gardens,  London,  N.W.  3.
*Ritchie,  A.  J.,  Oriental  Club,  Hanover  Square,  London,  W.  1.
*Rivett,  Miss  D.  Mary,  M'Litosh  Street,  Gordon,  Sydney,  New  South
Wales.

Riviere,  Mrs.  Eveljm,  10  Nottingham  Terrace,  York  Gate,  London,
N.W.  1.

Rix,  Rev.  A.  H.,  The  Vicarage,  Shelf  near  Halifax,  Yorks.
*Roach,  O.  A.,  401  Cedar  Street,  San  Antonio,  Texas,  U.S.A.

Robertson,  Mrs.  J.  G.,  90  Regent's  Park  Road,  London,  N.W.  1.

Robinson,  George  R.,  25  Water  Street,  Liverpool.

Robson,  Hon.  Kathleen,  26  Eaton  Square,  London,  S.W.  1.

Rogers,  Rev.  F.  C,  St.  John's  Vicarage,  Colchester,  Essex.
*Rogers,  George  F.,  M.D.,  4  King's  Parade..  Cambridge.

Rogers,  T.  Percival,  Friezewood,  Rudgeway,  Bristol.

Ross,  Samuel,  68  Willis  Street,  New  Bedford,  Mass.,  U.S.A.
*Rothschild, Mrs. S., 20 York Buildings, Adelphi,  London.
W.C.  2.

*Russell,  Mrs.,  c/o  Barclay's  Bank  Ltd.,  The  Broadway,  Ealing,
London,  W.  5.

*Russell,  Mrs.  E.  S.,  Bryans'  Groimd,  Presteign,  Radnorshire.
*Rust,  Dr.  Montague,  Bojmdie,  West  Newport,  Fife.
*Ryan,  Mrs.  E.,  51  Hallam  Street,  London,  W.  1.

Ryder,  Miss  M.  L.,  Little  House,  Bristol  Street,  Brighton.

Ryves,  Miss  Evangeline,  Damory  Cottage,  Walton-on-the-Hill.

St.  Hill,  IVIi's.,  Thimble,  Littlewick  Green,  Berks.


LXXXVIII.]


Members  and  Associates.


711


*St.  John,  Brig. -General  G.  F.  W.,  C.B.,  Picton  House,  Llando\vror,

St.  Clears,  Carmarthenshire.
*Salter,  F.  R.,  Magdalene  College,  Cambridge.
*Salter,  W.  H.,  The  Crown  House,  Newport,  Essex.
*Salter,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  The  Crown  House,  Newport,  Essex.
*Saltmarsh,  H.  F.,  Woodcote,  Lynton,  N.  Devon.

Samaldas,  Hon.  Lalubhai,  99  Apollo  Street,  Fort,  Bombay,  India.
*Sassoon,  Mrs.  AKred,  Weirleigh,  Matfield  Green,  Kent.

Savill,  Mrs.,  M.D.,  7  Devonshire  Place,  London,  W.  1.
*Savory,  Ernest  J.  C,  61  Carey  Street,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,
w!c.  2.

*Savory,  H.  J.,  7  Shamrock  Street,  Napier,  New  Zealand.
*Scatcherd,  Miss  F.  R.,  14  Park  Square,  Regent's  Park,  London,
N.W.  1.

Schaaf,  Albert  E.,  2034  East  83rd  Street,  Cleveland,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
*Schiller,  F.  C.  S.,  D.Sc,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford.

Schofield,  Mrs.,  30  Argyll  Road,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.
*Schoff,  Wilfred  H..  110  Montgomery  Avenue,  Cynwyd.  Pa.,  U.S.A.

Scott,  Miss  A.  D.,  60  Hornsey  Lane,  Highgate,  London,  N.  6.
*Scott,  Arthur  P.,  Faculty  Exchange,  University  of  Chicago,  Chicago,
- 111.,  U.S.A.

Scott,  Rev.  D.  D.,  C.F.,  The  Manse,  Onehunga,  Auckland,  New
Zealand.

Scott,  Captain  J.  E.,  Chelsfield,  Sneyd  Park,  Bristol.
*Scott,  Sydney  C,  92  Westbourne  Terrace,  Hyde  Park,  London,
W.  2.

*Scott,  Mrs.  W.  E.,  44  Westminster  Palace  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Searle,  W.  C,  38  Bedford  Row,  London,  W.C.  1.

Sedgwick,  Mrs.  H.  D.,  120  E.  22nd  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.
*Selborne,  The  Earl  of,  K.G.,  Blackmoor,  Liss,  Hants.

Sellers,  Miss  R.  A.,  Wellesley  Girls'  High  School,  Naini  Tal,  India.
*Sempill,  Captain  the  Master  of,  12  Gardner  Mansions,  Church  Row,
Hampstead,  London,  N.W.  3.

Seton-Karr,  Captain  H.  W.,  8  St.  Paul's  Mansions,  London,  W.  6.
*Sewell,  Mrs.  C.  H.,  Towerhurst,  Leigh  Woods,  Bristol.
*Seymour,  Miss  E.  F.,  21  St.  George's  Square,  London,  S.W.  1.

Shackleford,  Hon.  Thomas  M.,  Room  313/314,  Citrus  Exchange
Building,  Tampa,  Florida,  U.S.A.

Shafto,  Miss  W.  A.,  Normanhurst,  Minnis  Bay,  Birchington,  Kent.

Shakespear,  Mrs.,  12  Brunswick  Gardens,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.


712


Members  and  Associates,


[part


Shand,  Alexander  F.,  1  Edwardes  Place,  Kensington,  London,  W.  8.

Shastri,  B.  G.,  Secretary,  State  Council,  Udaipur  (Mewar),  India.

Shaw,  Arnold  E.,  Grove  House,  Aspley  Guise,  Beds.
*Shaw,  Mrs.  Bernard,  10  Adelphi  Terrace,  Strand,  London,  W.C.  2.

Shaw,  Lady,  10  Moreton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  1.

Sheldon,  Miss  M.,  The  High  School,  Bargate,  Grimsby.
*Shewan,  R.  G.,  c/o  Shewan,  Tomes  &  Co.,  Hong  Kong,  China.
*Shove,  Miss  E.,  M.B.,  30  York  Street  Chambers,  Bryanston  Square,
London,  W.  1.

*SibIy,  F.  Arthur,  LL.D.,  Flook  House,  Taunton,  Somerset.
*Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Henry,  Fishers  Hill,  Woking,  Surrey.
Silver,  Mrs.  Kingston,  33  Marsham  Street,  Westminster,  London,
SW.  1.

*Sime,  J.  Boyd,  Dean  Mills,  Hawick,  N.B.

*Simmonds,  Miss  C.  E.,  33  Clarence  Gate  Gardens,  London,  N.W.  1.
Simpson,  Miss  Price,  Beech  Barns,  Alton,  Hants.
*Sinclair,  Miss  May,  1  Blenlieim  Road,  St.  John's  Wood,  London,
N.W.  8.

Singh,  Amar,  Hoshiarpur.  Punjab,  India.
*Slight,  L.,  Carson  Cottage,  Kemieth  Street,  Inverness.

Sloggett,  Lieut.-General  Sir  Arthur,  K.C.M.G.,  K.C.B.,  6s  Bicken-
hall  Mansions,  London,  W.  1.

Smith,  Adolphe,  12  Crooldiam  Road,  Fulliam,  London,  S.W.  6.

Smith,  Miss  Beatrice  E.,  Lea,  Grange-over-Sands,  Lancashu'e.

Smith,  G.  Albert,  Rosedene,  7  Melville  Road,  Hove.
*Smith,  Harrison  B.,  c/o  The  George  Washington  Life  Insurance  Co.,
Charleston,  W.  Va.,  U.S.A.

Smith,  J.  Lloyle,  S]Dring  Banli,  Eccles,  Lancashire.

Smith,  Rev.  Sidney  M.,  Holy  Trinity  Vicarage,  Halifax,  Yorkshire.

Smith,  Rev.  William  J.,  St.  Marnock's  Manse,  Kilmarnock.
*Smith,  W.  S.  Montgomery,  138  Sloane  Street,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Smith,  W.  Whately,  The  Turtons,  Hayes  Common,  Hayes,  Kent.
*Smithson,  Mi's.,  42  TUehouse  Street,  Hitchin,  Herts.
*Soal,  S.  G.,  Scratton  Lodge,  Brook  Road,  Prittlewell,  Essex.

Soley,  Mrs. ,^66  Holbein  House,  Sloane  Square,  London,  S.W.  1.

Southern,  H.,  24  Carholme  Road,  Forest  Hill,  London,  S.E.  23.
*Spanlde,  W.  M.,  40  Lombard  Street,  London,  E.G.  3.
*Sparrow,  J.,  34  Hamilton  Square,  Birkenhead.

Spens,  William,  Corpus  Christi  College,  Cambridge.
*Spranger,  John  A.,  4  Via  Micheli,  Florence,  Italy.


LXXXVIII.]


Members  and  Associates.


713


Stacey,  F.  C,  5  Fulready  Road,  Leyton,  London,  E.  10.
Stanton,  Rev.  Horace  C,  Ph.D.,  D.D.,  1818  Arch  Street,  Phila-
delphia, Pa.,  U.S.A.
*Steane,  G.  A.,  22  Little  Park  Street,  Coventry.
*Steel,  Mrs.,  Beaufort,  Marie  Hill,  Cheltenham.
Stephens,  Mrs.,  41  Harrington  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  7.
Stephens,  W.  F.,  Malie,  Seychelles,  via  Bombay.
*Stephenson,  F.  W.,  Winter  Field,  Melbury  Abbas,  Shaftesbury,
Dorset.

*Sterling,  Miss  F.  M.,  Home  Wood,  Hartfield,  Essex.

Stevenson,  A.  Creery,  Streeve,  Church  Circle,  Farnborough,  Hants.

Stewart,  Mrs.  C.  A.,  Larghan,  Coupar  Angus,  N.B.

Stewart,  Miss  M.  A.,  Queen  Anne's  Mansions,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Stobart,  Mrs.  St.  Claii%  7  Turner's  Wood,  Hampstead  Garden
Suburb,  London,  N.W.  4.

Stoehr,  Miss,  Hotel  Belvedere,  Bordighera,  Italy.

Stout,  Professor  George  F.,  Craigard,  St.  Andrews,  N.B.

Strachan,  W.  M.,  Strood  Park,  Horsham,  Sussex.
*Strachey,  John  St.  Loe,  Spectator  Office,  13  York  Street,  London,
W.C.  2.

Stratton,  F.  J.  M.,  Gonville  and  Caius  College,  Cambridge.
Streatfeild,  W.  H.  R.,  M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  42  Ovington  Square,
London,  S.W.  3.

Strutt,  Captain  Hon.  A.  C,  R.N.,  Terling  Place,  With  am,  Essex.
*Strutt,  Hon.  Richard,  Rayleigh  House,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.
*Stuart,  Lady,  10  Cleveland  Gardens,  Hyde  Park,  London,  W.  2.
*Sturdy, Edward T., Norburton, Burton  Bradstock,  Bridport,
Dorset.

*Summerson,  F.  C,  222  South  NorAvood  Hill,.  London,  S.E.  25.
*Suringar,  Dr.  J.  Valckenier,  Wageningen,  Holland.

Swaine,  Mrs.  R.  C,  Letchworth  Lane,  Letchworth,  Herts.

Swainson,  Miss  F.  J.,  29  Trevor  Square,  Knightsbridge,  London,
S.W.  7.

*Swainson,  Miss  M.,  23  Warrmgton  Crescent,  London,  W.  9.

*Swayne,  Mrs.  Noah  Haynes,  Junr.,  Drawer  N.,  Ardmore,  Penn-
sylvania, U.S.A.
Swinburne,  Mrs.,  The  Manor  House,  Soiithwick,  Sizssex.

*Swinton,  Mrs.  George,  107  Gloucester  Place,  Portman  Square,
London,  W.  1.

*Symington,  Howard  W.,  The  Paddocks,  Market  Harborough.
%


714


Members  and  Associates.


[part


Tait,  Mrs.,  St.  Andrew's  House  Club,  31a  Mortimer  Street,  London,
W.  1.

Tait,  Mrs.  W.  J.,  LismuUen,  Arthur  Road,  Wimbledon  Park,

London,  S.W.  19
*Talbot,  Mrs.  Hugh,  Wessobrum,  Meran,  South  Tirol,  Italy.
*Talbot,  Mrs.  I.  M.  B.,  26b  Kildare  Terrace,  London,  W.  2.
*Talbot,  P.  Amaury,  c/o  The  Secretary,  Lagos,  Nigeria.
*Tartaruga,  U.,  Gentzgasse  132,  Wien,  XVIII,  Austria.
*Tatham,  A.  T.,  Mountain  Rise,  Pietermaritzburg,  S.  Africa.

Tatham,  Hon.  Justice  F.  S.,  D.S.O.,  Parkside,  Alexandra  Road,

Pietermaritzburg,  S.  Africa.
*Taylor,  Miss  E.  Warmg,  23  Warrington  Crescent,  Maida  Hill,

London,  W.  9.
*Taylor,  H.  Dennis,  Stanciiffe,  The  Mount,  York.
*Taylor,  Mrs.  Lewis  S.,  11  Belle  Vue  Road,  Exmouth,  Devon.
*Te]ling,  W.  H.  Maxwell,  M.D.,  29  Park  Square,  Leeds.

Temple,  Reginald  W.

Thatcher,  Mrs.  G.  R.,  20  Alexandra  Road,  Kingston  Hill,  Surrey.
*Thaw,  A.  Blair,  c/o  Brown,  Shipley  &  Co.,  123  Pall  Mall,  London,
S.W.  1.

*Thesiger,  Mrs.  Ernest,  6  Montpelier  Terrace,  London,  S.W.  7.
*Thomas,  Rev.  C.  D.,  South  Hill  Lodge,  Bromley,  Kent.

Thomas,  Miss  Edith  J.,  Mynydd  Ednyfed,  Criccieth,  N.  Wales.

Thomas,  Ernest  Seymour,  Quinney's,  Shottery,  Stratford-on-Avon.
*Thomas,  Miss  S.  E.,  368  Alexandra  Park  Road,  Wood  Green,
London,  N.  22.

'Thompson,  Sir  Matthew  W.,  Bart.,  39  Steeles  Road,  Haverstock

Hill,  London,  N.W.  3.
*Thompson,  Owen,  K.C.,  4  New  Court,  Lincoln's  Inn,  London,
W.C.  2.

*Thomson,  Edward  J.,  6  Windsor  Terrace  West,  Kelvinside,  Glasgow.

Thornley,  Miss  P.  J.,  36  Downleaze,  Stoke  Bishop,  Bristol.

Thorp,  Richard,  Colenso  Avenue,  Napier,  New  Zealand.

Thrupp,  T.  C,  Claremont,  Woodlands  Road,  Redhill,  Surrey.
*Thurn  and  Taxis,  H.I.H.  The  Princess  Mary  of,  Loucen,  Nymburk,
Czecho-Slovakia.

Thurston,  Rev.  Herbert,  S.J.,  114  Mount  Street,  Grosvenor  Square,

London,  W.  1.
Tipping,  Miss  K.,  7  Lansdowne  Circus,  Leamington.
*Todd,  Miss  C.  E.,  Down  Cottage,  Magham  Down,  Hailsham,  Sussex.


9


LXXXVIU.]


Members  and  Associates.


715


Torkildsen,  ViUielm,  Bergen,  Norway.
*Tossizza,  Baron  M.  A.,  8  Rue  de  I'Echelle,  Paris.
Tottenham,  Miss  Mary  T.  A.,  Ballycurry,  Ashford,  Co.  Wicklow,
Ireland.

*Trethewy,  A.  W.,  Artillery  Mansions,  Victoria  Street,  London,
S.W.  1.

Trevor,  The  Lady  Juliet,  16  Upper  Brook  Street,  London,  W.  1.
*Trotter,  Mrs.,  Chatley,  Norton  St.  Philip,  Bath.
*Troubridge,  Lady,  10  Sterling  Street,  Montpelier  Square,  London,
S.W.  7.

*Tubby,  Miss  G.  Ogden,  5  West  47th  Street,  New  York  City,  U.S.A.

Tudor,  Owen  S.,  Friday's  Hill,  Haslemere,  Surrey.
*Tugwell,  Mrs.  Arthiu-,  c/o  HanJiinson  &  Co.,  Richmond  Chambers,

The  Square,  Bom-nemouth.
*Turner,  Miss  J.,  B.A.,  14  Endsleigh  Street,  London,  W.C.  1.

Tuson,  K.  H.,  Lieut.,  R.E.,  Blackdown  Camp,  Surrey.
*TyTone,  The  O'Neill  de,  59  rua  das  Flores,  Lisbon,  Portugal.
*T3TTell,  G.  N.,  Torbay  House,  Parkstone,  Dorset.
*Tyrwhitt,  Rev.  H.  M.,  19  The  Glebe,  Blackheath,  London,  S.E.  3.

Ulman,  Mrs.  Jacob  A.,  Brooldandville,  Baltimore  County,  Md.,
U.S.A.

*Van  Loon,  Dr.  F.  H.,  c/o  Hoofdbureau  B.G.D.,  Weltevreden,
Java.

Van  Rcnterghem,  A.  W.,  M.D.,  1  Van  Breestraat,  Amsteixlam.
*Vatcber,  Mrs.,  21  St.  Leonard's  Road,  Ealing,  London,  W.  13.
*Venancourt,  Comte  de,  7  Rue  Duperre,  Paris.
*Verney-Cave,  Hon.  Mi's.,  Stanford-on-Avon,  Rugby.

Verrall,  Miss  M.  E.,  The  Lydd,  West  Hoathly,  Sussex.
*Vett,  Carl,  Strandvej  6  Str.,  Copenhagen,  Denmark.
*Vigor,  G.  St.  V.  J.,  4  Walpole  Street,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.
*Vincent,  Miss  G.  H.  M.  M.,  Carisbrooke  Road,  Leicester.

Vyvyan,  Mrs.  T.  C.  Poldhu,  Richmond,  Natal,  South  Africa.

Wagner,  W.  Q.,  St.  John  Street,  Melrose,  Johannesburg,  S.  Africa.
*Wales,  Hubert,  Homewood  Heath,  Hindhead,  Surrey.
*Waley,  S.  D..,  18  The  Green,  Kew,  Surrey.

Walker,  Mrs.  Claude,  12  South  wood  Court,  Hampstead  Garden

Sub^u'b,  London,  N.W.  4.
*Walker,  Mrs.  J.  P.,  26  St.  Andrew's  Mansions,  Dorset  Street,
London,  W.  1.

Walker,  Miss  Madeline  J.,  107  Queen's  Gate,  London,  S.W.  7.


716


Members  mid  Associates.


[part


Walker,  Miss  May  C,  National  Provincial  Bank,  Llandudno,
N.  Wales.

*Walker,  Miss  Nea,  13  York  Road,  Edgbaston,  Birmingham.
*  Walker,  Lieut. -Colonel  P.  L.  E.,  Great  House,  Chipping  Sodbury,
Glos.

Walker-Munro,  Mrs.,  Rhinefield,  Brockenhurst,  Hants.

Walker,  II.  A.  RoUeston,  Stretton,  Cromer  Road,  Bournemouth.
*Wallace,  Abraham,  M.D.,  Wendela,  Harrow-on-the-HUl,  Middlesex.

Wallace,  C.  A.,  1  Adelaide  AA-enue,  Belfast,  Ireland.

Walsh,  Correa  M.,  Belleport,  Long  Island,  N.Y.,  U.S.A.

Wanderley,  E.  M.,  Corumba,  Matto  Grosso,  BrazU.

Wang,  C.  Y.;  Rue  de  Paris  Extension,  Hankow,  China.
*Warburton,  A.  P.,  c/o  A.  Scott  &  Co.,  Rangoon,  Burma,  India.

Ward,  Hon.  Kathleen,  Moorings,  Menai  Bridge,  N.  Wales.
*Warner,  Rev.  D.  V.,  1370  Greene  Avenue,  Westmount,  Montreal,
Canada.

*Warner,  Mi's.  W.  W.,  56  Onslow  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  7.

Warren,  Mrs.  Fiske,  8  Mount  Vernon  Place,  Boston,  Mass.,  U.S.A.

Warrender,  Miss  Margaret.  50  Vl^Hton  Crescent,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Warrick,  F.  W.,  6  Raymond  Buildings,  Gray's  Inn,  London,  W.C.  1.

Wastell,  ]\Irs.,  The  Rowans,  Crowborough,  Sussex.

Watson,  Mrs.  Milne,  73  Eccleston  Square,  London,  S.W.  1.

Watson-Taylor,  Mrs.,  Dibleys,  Blewbury,  Didcot.

Webster,  Mrs.  Julia  C,  Swanton,  Vermont,  LT.S.A.

Weinberg,  Dr.  A.  A.,  Helperoostsingel  2,  Groningen,  Holland.
*Weldon,  Arthur,  27  Arlmgton  Road,  Eastbourne,  Sussex.
*Wellesley,  Victor  A.  A.  H.,  C.B.,  20  St.  Loo  Mansions,  St.  Loo
Avenue,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.

Wemyss,  Countess  of,  62  Cadogan  Square,  London,  S.W.  1.

Western,  F.  J.,  Cambridge  Mission,  Delhi,  India.

Weston,  Miss  Lena  E.,  57  Whitwell  Road,  Plaistow,  London,  E.  13.
*Westray,  Mrs.,  25  Cavendish  Road  West,  St.  John's  Wood,  London,
N.W.  8.

*Wetterstad,  Dr.  S.,  Bondernes  hus,  Christiania,  Norway.
*Wheeler,  Post,  Litt.D.,  Rayleigh  House,  Chelsea,  London,  S.W.  3.
Whitaker,  Joseph  J.  S.,  Villa  Malfitano,  Palermo,  Sicily.
*Wliitehead,  Miss  Mercia  D.,  St.  Mary's,  Trumpington,  Cambridge.
*Whitfield,  A.  Stanton,  F.R.Hist.S.,  Bentley  Moor,  Walsall,  Staffs.
*Whitmee,  A.  C,  Homelands,  Fortis  Green,  London,  N.  2.
*Wigan,  Mrs.  C.  Rookhurst,  22  Chesham  Place,  London,  S.W.  1.


Lxxxvin.]


Members  and  Associates.


717


Wigan,  W.  L.,  Clare  Cottage,  East  dialling,  Maidstone,  Kent.
WiJd,  IVIiss  Ida,  Old.  Larkshayes,  Dalwood,  Kilmington,  S.  Devon.
Wilkins,  ]\Irs.,  c/o  E.  C.  Jameson,  182  Great  Brunswick  Street,
Dublin.

Wilkins,  C.  E.,  c/o  Messrs.  H.  S.  Iving  &  Co.,  9  Pall  Mali,  London,
S.W.  1.

*Wilkins,  Rev.  H.  J.,  D.D.,  Redland  Gi-een.  Bristol,  Glos.

Wilkinson,  IMiss  Marian  S.,  Ford  Cottage,  Water  End,  York.
*Wilkinson,  Miss  MHisent  A.,  c/o  The  Australian  Bank  of  Commerce,
37  Tlireadneedle  Street,  London,  E.C.

Willett,  S^ss  Cicely,  at  42  Drayton  Gardens,  London,  S.W.

Williams,  Mrs.  Glymie,  7  Berkeley  House,  Hay  HUl,  London,  W.  1.

Williams,  Mrs.  S.  R.,  12  Lome  Road,  Oxton,  Cheshire.

Williamson,  JVIrs.,  The  Copse,  Brook,  Godalmmg,  Surrey.
*Wllliami!on,  John,  M.D.,  Heathfield,  18  College  Road.  Epsom,
*WiUiamson,  The  Very  Rev.  Dr.  Wallace,  44  Palmerston  Place,
Edinburgh .

WiUiams-^Valker,  Dr.  A.,  25  Belchers  Lane,  Birmingham.
Willis,  Grant  B.,  168  W.  Third  Street,  Mansfield,  Ohio,  U.S.A.
*Willock,  ]\'Irs.  C.  J.,  Elderton  Lodge,  Thorpe  Market,  Norwich.

*  Wills,  Miss  Mary  Tappan,  c/o  Brown,  Shipley  &  Co.,  123  Pall  Mall,

London,  S.W.  1.

*  Wilson,  Colonel  C.  E.,  Longcross  House,  Chertsey,  Surrey.
*WLlson,  Mrs.  A.,  O.B.E.,  Queen  Anne's  Mansions,  London,  S.W.  1.
*Wilson,  Mrs.  C.  Stuart,  Gresham  House,  Sharia  Sulieman  Pasha,

Caho,  Egypt.

Wilson,  Mrs.  H-  J-,-  Braemar  Royal,  West  Southbourne,  Hants.
*Wilson,  J.  S.,  24  Chapel  Street,  London,  S.W.  1.

Wilson,  Percy,  48  Clarendon  Road,  Putney,  London,  S.W.  15.
*Winby,  Lieut. -Col.  L.  P.,  83  Cornwall  Gardens,  London,  S.W.  7.

Wingham,  T.  H., 174  Aberdeen  Avenue,  Hamilton,  Ontario,
Canada.

Wise,  IVIiss  A.  Stewart,  16  West  Kensington  Gardens,  London,
W.  14.

Witherby,  Arthur  George,  NewtoAvn,  Newbury,  Berks.
*Wodehouse,  The  Lady  Isabel,  Kimberley  House,  Wymondham.
*Wolf,  Franciso  Eugene  de,  P.O.  Box  269,  Bristol,  Rhode  Island,
U.S.A.

*Wood,  Richard,  Coolculitha,  Innishannon,  Co.  Cork.

*Wood,  T.  Eugene,  Redcliffe,  14  Chine  Crescent  Road,  Bournemouth.


718


Members  and  Associates. [part  Lxxxviii.


*Woodliouse,  Mrs.  R.,  48  Antrim  Mansions,  Haverstock  Hill,  London,
N.W.  3.

Woodhull,  Miss  Zula  M.,  Norton  Park,  Bredon's  Norton,  near

Tewke.^bury,  Gloucestershire.
Woods,  Miss  Alice,  St.  Ives,  Radlett,  Herts.

Woods,  Miss  C.  E.,  13  Cowley  Street,  Westminster,  London,  S.W.  1.
Woollett,  Lieut.-Colonel  W.  Charles,  F.S.A.,  4  The  Ridges,  Farn-
boro',  Hants.

*Wool]ey,  F.  Duke,  M.D.,  2  Palace  Court,  London,  W.  2.

WooUey,  V.  J.,  M.D.,  18  Freta  Road,  Bexley  Heath,  Kent.
*Worsfold,  Mrs.  Basil,  3  Plowden  Buildings,  Temple,  London,  E.C.  4.

Wrangham,  W.  H.,  78  Barmouth  Road,  Wandsworth,  London,
S.W.  18.

*Wriford,  Mrs..  21  BuUingham  Mansions,  Kensington,  London,  W.
*Wright,  Captain  A.  F.,  M.C.,  Trent  Valley  House,  Lichfield.
*Wright,  G.  E.,  5  Queen  Square,  Southampton  Row,  London,  W.C.  1.
*Wright,  Maurice  B.,  M.D.,  86  Brook  Street,  London,  W.  1.

Wynn,  John,  Widney,  Solihull,  Warwickshire.

Yaroschenko,  Madame,  La  Cava,  Bordighera,  Italy.
*Yardley,  R.  B.,  The  Birches,  London  Road,  Worcester  Park,
Surrey.

Yeats,  W.  B..  82  Merrion  Square,  DubKn.

*  Yeoman,  IVIrs.,  Hampden  House,  Highgate  Hill,  London,  N.  6.

*  Yeoman,  Miss  I.  V.,  Hampden  House,  Highgate  Hill,  London,  N.  6.
*Yerburgh,  Rev.  W.  H.  B.,  The  Rectory,  Bredon,  Tewkesbury.

Younghusband,  Sir  Francis,  3  Buckingham  Gate,  London,  S.W.  1.
Zeehandelaar,  Dr.  I.,  39  Sarphatistraat,  Amsterdam,  Holland.


PROCEEDINGS

OF  THE

Society  for  Psychical  Research

INDEX  TO  VOL.  XXXIII

(PARTS  LXXXV-LXXXVIII)


A.

A.,  Mr.,  Case  communicated  by  - -  321

Adam,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  66-70

Adler,  A.,  Work  of - - - -  431

Aeschylus,  Script  references  to ----- - 531-5.32,  564

Aksakoff,  Alexander  N.,  Case  communicated  by  210

Alexander,  Professor  A.,  Supernormal  Phenomena  observed  during

Hypnotic  Treatment,  Reference  to  "8

„ Cases  collected  by 160,  177,  219,  286

American  Branch  of  the  Society,  Cases  from  the 63-70,  76-77,  78,
82,  97,  98, 142, 148,  216,  231,  2.35,  260,  264,  282,  310,  321,  .322,  351.

355-359,  379,  417

"  Angus,"  Miss,  Crystal  vision  experiences  of  32-34

Animal  Agents,  Possible  219,  231,  342

Animal  Magnetism - - - -  7-9

Animals,  Apparitions  of  - 381,  387

„ apparently  affected  by  psychical  phenomena - - -  340
„ Dreams  coinciding  with  danger  to  or  death  of - - 141,  219
„ Impression  coinciding  -with  danger  to - - - - 116,  139
Apparitions,  Instances  of. See  Phantasms  of  the  Living.

Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnambules,  Experiments  on - - -  14

Aristophanes,  Script  reference  to  557

Arkwright,  Miss  E.,  Case  communicated  by  295

Ai'mstrong,  H.,  Case  contributed  by  356


720  Index  to  Vol.  XXXIII.  [parts

Ainold,  Matthew,  Script  references  to 446,  462,  464

Asliley,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  276

Atkins,  A.  H.  and  Miss  Edith,  Case  communicated  by - . .  302

Aub,  Luch'S'ig  438

AureHus,  Marcus,  Script  references  to  .....  541-542
Automatic  Messages  (Table-Tilting,  Writing,  etc) 73,  76,  439,  561-562,  564

See  also  Crystal  Visions.
Automatic  Scripts. See  Forecasts  of  the  War.

Automatic  Writing,  On  the  physiological  and  psychological  significance

of  11-12,  15

B.

B.,  Lady,  Case  contributed  by ------- -  363

B.,  H.,  Case  contributed  by ........  257

B.,  Miss,  Case  confirmed  by ........  52

B.,  Miss  M.  L.,  Case  contributed  by ------ -  271

B.,  R.  T.,  Case  contributed  by  40

Baddeley,  Colonel  C.  E.,  On  the  Element  of  Chance  in  Book-Tests  - -  607

BaggaUy,  W.  W.,  Cases  collected  by 54-57,  139,  398

Baggally,  Mi-s.  W.  W.,  Case  confirmed  by  402

Balfour,  Rt.  Hon.  G.  W.,  with  reference  to  Mi-s.  King's  scripts

441-442,  510,  5S4

Barber,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by -------  96

Barber,  Reginald  and  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  - - - - -  372

Barcellos,  Dr.  A.,  Supernormal  Phenomena  observed  during  Hypnotic

Treatment,  Reference  to - -  78

Barkworth,  T.,  Case  communicated  by -  363

"  Barnard,"  Mr.  and  Mrs.  D.,  Cases  contributed  by  -  -  -  301,  415
Barrett,  Sir  William,  Cases  communicated  by  -  -  -  -  -  41,  43
Baxter,  Mi's.,  Case  contributed  by - - - - - - -  190

Bayfield,  Rev.  M.  A.,  Case  contributed  by 73-76,  423

Beauchamp,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by ----- -  342

Beavis,  Dr.  C,  Evidence  contributed  by ----- -  278

Beilby,  Sir  George,  Case  communicated  by  - - - -  -  243

Benecke,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by - - - - - - -  183

Bermck,  J.,  Case  confirmed  by  - ...... 396,  397

Blaikie,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  411

Blake,  W.,  Script  references  to  510,  546

Blum,  Dona  Maria  do  Carmo,  Case  contributed  by  -  -  -  -  286
Book-Tests,  On  the  Element  of  Chance  in  606

Editorial  Note  606

Leonard  book-tests.  Comparison  between  and  the  experiments  on

chance 607-608,  610,  612-614

Report  on  the  experiments  608
Instructions  to  experimenters . - . . .  608-609


Lxxxv.-Lxxxviii.] Index  to  Vol.  XXXIII.


721


^ooA:  Tests,  On  the  Element  of  Chance  in —

Tests 609

Specimen  results  615-620

Successes  and  failures.  Percentages  of - - - -  609-612
Book-Tests,  Various  Reports  on,  reference  to - - - 606  (footnote)

Booth,  llrs..  Case  contributed  by  76

Bowj'er-Bower,  Mrs.,  Evidence  contributed  by - - - 169,  172-176
Braid,  References  to  the  work  of ....... 6,  8

Bramwell,  Dr.  J.  Mhie,  Hypnotic  Experiments  of - -  14.  621-622,  623

Bridge,  G.  E.  W.,  Case  communicated  by  249

Bridge,  JMrs.  G.  E.  W.,  Evidence  contributed  by  -  -  -  250-251,  252-254
Brierley,  J.  A.,  Case  contributed  by ------ -  308

Brompton,"  Father,  Case  contributed  by  287

Broussilofi,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  183,  210

Browett.  Mrs.  Walter,  Case  contributed  by  - - - - - -  232

Bro^Tn,  H.  T.,  E^^dence  contributed  by  325

Browning,  R.,  Script  references  to  - 492,  500

„ Mi-s.,  Script  reference  to ------ -  593

Burgess.  Claude.  Case  contributed  by  - 398.  420

Buxton,  Sir  T.  Fowell,  Case  recorded  by,  reference  to  - - - -  189

C.

C,  Jlrs.,  Case  contributed  by ------- -  61-62

^-  C,  Mrs.,"  Cases  contributed  by  312,  313

Cabral,  U.  J.  da  Costa,  Case  contributed  by  393

Campbell,  Script  references  to  -  -  -  473-474  (footnote),  487,  562
Campbell,  Miss  C.  M.,  Experiments  in  telepathy  by,  reference  to  -  -  31
Campbell,  Captain  R.  E.  W.,  Case  contributed  by - - - -  183

Carbery,  Lady,  Case  contributed  by  139

Carey,  Major-General  W.  D.,  Case  communicated  by  - - - -  194

Carnarvon,  Lord,  Case  confirmed  by - - - - - - -  204

Cai-ter,  Miss  Ellen. See  Nichols,  Mrs.  E.

Castle,  ill's..  Case  contributed  by  94
Caulfield,  F.  W.,  Case  contributed  by  -------  95

Challacombe,  J.  P.,  Case  contributed  by ----- -  333

Chance  in  Book-Tests,  On  the  element  of  606

Chase,  G.  V.,  Case  communicated  by  -------  64

Chase,  J.  C,  Case  confirmed  by  --------  70

Chater,  Mrs.,  E^^dence  contributed  by  172

Chattock,  Professor  A.  P.,  Reference  to  experiments  in  Telepathy  by  -  31
Chaucer,  Script  reference  to  488

Chenoweth,  iNIi's.,  Case  recorded  by - -  79-80

Child  Percipients - 96,  98,  101,  133.  166,  167,  171,  236,  285.  333,  359,  416

Clairvoyance,  experiments  in  437,  438

On  the  evidence  for - - - - - 10.  11.  14,  16


722  Index  to  Vol.  XXXIII.  [paets

Clapham,  J.  H.,  Case  communicated  by ----- -  Si^Q

Clarkson,  IVIrs.,  Case  contributed  by  280

Clissold,  E.  M.,  Case  contributed  by  292

Clough,  A.  H.,  Script  references  to  -  -  -  -  461,  463,  468-469
Coad,  Miss  Catherine,  Experimental  Telepathy  with . - - -  48-50

Coghill.  Colonel  Kendal,  Case  collected  by  -  141

"  Compact  ■'  Cases 203,  205

Comyn,  Mrs.  J.  S.,  Case  contributed  by,  reference  to - - - -  231

Concerning  the  Possibility  of  Deception  in  Sittings  with  Eva  C. By  Dr.

Freiherr  von  Schrenck-Notzing -------  665

Constable,  F.  C,  Cases  communicated  by - - - - - 276,  297

Cowpland,  Miss  M.,  Case  contributed  by ----- -  267

Cox,  Miss  Charlotte,  Case  contributed  by ----- -  195

Cox,  Miss  Julia,  Evidence  contributed  by ----- -  299

Cross-Correspondence,  Phenomena  of —

"  Communicators'  "  apjDarent  intention  to  hide  their  meaning  from

the  Automatists - - - 455-457

Scripts,  Connecting  links  between ... - -  444.459

Cribbing 449-451

Cryptic  or  Symbolic  -----  450,  451-457
Repetition  of  a  topic,  words,  names,  phrases  or

quotation 444,  445-449,  457-459

„ Memoi  y  in 449

„ Methods  employed  in 443-459

,, Persistency  with  which  obscure  allusions  are  followed  up  -  449

„ shoAvn  to  other  Automatists 449-450

,, State  of  Automatists  when  producing ....  456
Crystal  Visions,  Telepathic —

Experimental 33,  35,  40,  41,  43,  48

Collective, 48.  420

Spontaneous ..........  45


D.

D.,  Mrs.,  Cases  contributed  by  58-63

D.,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by ..... 357,  420

D.,  Mi-s.  M.  C,  Case  contributed  by -  97-98

Dante,  Script  references  to  - - - - - - - -  567-576

Davidson,  Professor  Thomas,  Cases  contributed  by - - - 310,  336
Delboeuf,  Professor,  Experiments  in  Post-Hypnotic  Appreciation  of

Time,  reference  to .........  14

Despard,  Miss  E..  C,  Reference  to  experiments  in  Telepathy  by - -  31
Dicldnson,  G.  Lowes,  Cases  communicated  by - - - 92,  107,  241
Dickinson,  Harry,  Evidence  contributed  by .....  108

Dickinson,  J.,  Case  contributed  by,  Reference  to  .  -  29  (footnote)
Dickinson,  Miss  Janet,  Case  contributed  by  107


Lxxxv.-Lxxxviii.] Index  to  Vol.  XXXIII.  723

Die  Besessenheit,  Review  of --------  434

Ding\vall,  E.  J.,  The  Hypothesis  of  Fraud  in  the  case  of  "  Eva  C."

Reply  by  Dr.  Schi-enck-Notzing  to  -  665

Dissociation  and  automatic  writing - - - - - - 11,  15

„  clairvoyance  14

„  hypnotic  phenomena ----- 13-15,  430

hysteria  - - 13,  14-15,  430

„  supernormal  phenomena - - - -  11-12,13-16,17

„  thought-transference ------  14

Dodd,  Miss  C.  A.,  E\'idence  contributed  by - - - -  276-277

Dove,  J.,  Case  contributed  by - -  -  208

Dreams,  Phenomena  of —

,, Embroidery  in,  compared  with  the  same  tendency  in  auto-
matic script  and  trance  speech -----  29

Freud  on  _ - . -  433

Jlitchell,  Dr.  T.  W.,  on  431

„ Psychological  identity  of,  with  "  Borderland  "  and  Waking

Hallucinations  27-29

,, Reciprocal,  value  of  as  throMing  light  on  the  process  of  tele-
pathic communication -------  419


Telepathic  -  90,  92,  99,  103.  141,  142,  144.  147,  195,  196,
199,  213-231,  232,  235,  237,  241,  256,  257-
264,  268-275,  280,  282-286,  296-^29,  330,
344, 351,  .352-353,  354-360, 404-411, 413-414,

415-419,  420

„  „ Evidential  advantage  of,  over  most  sensory  hallu-

cinations -------  28-29

„  „ Evidential  weakness  of,  as  furnishing  more  scope

for  chance-coincidence  -----  28

„ „ Rareness  of,  -n-ith  no  element  of  sensorj^  hallu-
cination  90  (footnote)

Dryden,  Script  references  to  551

Du  Cane,  The  Misses,  Case  contributed  by  367

Dufferin,  Marchioness  of.  Case  recorded  hy  - - - - - -  218

Duke,  Dr.  T.,  Cases  communicated  by  81


E.

E.,  Miss,  Expei-iments  with,  on  the  Appreciation  of  Time  by  Somnam-

bules 623-639,646,661,662-663


E.,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by 85

E.,  Ml',  and  Mrs.  S.  P.,  Case  contributed  by 379

Edmunds,  Miss  Lucy,  Case  contributed  by 323

Einf  uhrung  in  den  Okkultismus  unci  Spiritismus,  Review  of - -  435

EUiot,  Jane,  Script  reference  to  ------- -  472

Elliott,  Miss  E.  M.,  Case  confirmed  by  309


724


Index  to  Vol.  XXXIII.


[parts


Ellwood,  W.  M.,  and  M.  J.,  Case  contributed  by 364

Euripides,  Script  references  to 494

"  Eva  C,"  Concerning  the  Possibility  of  Deception  in  sittings  with -  665

Everyday  Life,  Psychopathology  of 433

F.

F.,  Miss  A.  C,  Case  contributed  by ------ -  147

F.,  Miss  E.  H.,  Case  contributed  by - - - - -  - -  237

F.,  Mrs.  E.,  Case  contributed  by  307

Fairy  Ship,  The,  Script  references  to ------ -  448

Farquharson,  Miss  F.,  Case  confirmed  by ----- -  206

Fawkes,  Miss  Ethel,  Evidence  contributed  by  108

Fisher,  J.  A.,  Evidence  contributed  by - - - - - -  126

'¥\nge\,  S.  G.,'RQvi&w  oi  The  Psychology  of  Medicine . - - -  430
„  ,, Iiitroductory  Lectures  on  Psycho- Analysis  - -  432

Forecasts  in  Scripts  concerniyig  the  War —

Introduction  439
Comparison  of  pre- War  King  Scripts  with  the  Scripts  of  other

Automatists  ---------  504

"  All  is  Well  "  -  -  474,  477,  482,  486,  491,  494,  497,  506-507
Behemoth  and  Leviathan . . . -  461,  510-513,  553-554

Crossed  Swords 475,  491,  513-514

Had  Zijjari  peace,  who  slew  his  master  ?  -  -  496,  523-527
Lay  not  up  for  yourselves  treasures  upon  earth -  472,

473,  482,  491,  514-523

Mercy  and  Truth  - - - -  461,  470,  490,  494,  497,  528-534

Music  of  the  Spheres 473,  550-554

Pool  of  Bethesda 471,  530-538

Vengeance  is  Mine,  and  Associated  Topics  -  497,  533,  554-576
Violet  Crown .... -  479,  488,  532,  539-549,  591

We  Band  of  Brothers 465,  484,  508-509

Note  on  "  Lusitania,"  "  Fenchurch  Street  "  and  "  Pathfinder  " -  499
On  the  evidential  quality  of  the  three  Incidents - -  601-603

Script  references  :  "  Lusitania  " 479,  490

"  Fenchurch  Street " - - - 488,  491

"Pathfinder"  489

Prediction  of  Utopia 603-605

Prevision,  On  the  evidence  for 599-605

Scripts  of  July  and  August  1914  -  577

War  references  in  pre-War  King  Scripts  .....  461
Foster,  Sir  Michael,  Case  relating  to ----- - 73,  440

Fotheringham,  W.  B.,  Case  communicated  by  179

Freud,  Professor  S.,  Introductory  Lectures  on  Psycho- Analysis  -  -  432
Freud,  On  the  work  of,  and  of  "  post-Freudian  "  schools - - 6,  431-432

Fryer,  Rev.  A.  T.,  Cases  collected  by 104,  242

Fuller-Maitland,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  349


Lxxxv.-Lxxxviii.] Index  to  Vol.  XXXIII.  725

G.

G.,  Mss,  Case  contributed  by - - - - - - -  213

G.  ,  Mss,  Case  contributed  by ------- -  286

Gale,  Professor  Harlow,  Case  collected  by - - - - - -  93-94

Garner-Smith,  Gerard,  E\ddence  contributed  by  - - - - -  158

Grernet,  Miss  N.,  Experiments  in  crystal  vision  35-39

Glardon,  Rev.  Aug.,  Reference  to  experiments  in  Telepathy  by  - -  32

Gleason,  Dr.  Adela  A.,  Case  contributed  by - - . . -  417

Glynn,  R.,  Case  contributed  by  ------- -  141

Gough,  A.  B.,  Case  collected  by 110

Gray,  Elegy  in  a  Country  Churchyard,  Script  reference  to - - -  446

"  Green,"  Misses  B.  J.  and  H.  L.,  Cases  contributed  by  -  -  -  381
Green,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  ...  -  395,  402,  403,  420
Grieve,  Miss  B.  H.,  Cases  contributed  by - - - - 32,  48,  340.  342

Grignon,  Rev.  W.  S.,  Case  communicated  by - - - - -  393

Gurney,  Edmund,  Hypnotic  researches  of ------  14

,, ,, Phantasms  of  the  Living. See  Phantasms.

H.

H.  ,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  -  97

H.,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  355

H.,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  - -  45

H.,  Mi's.,  Case  contributed  by  59-61

H.,  Sir  R.,  Case  contributed  by 237,  332

Haggard,  Sir  Rider,  Cases  contributed  by  138,  219

Hall,  WiKred,  Case  communicated  by  309

Hallucinations,  Waking,  Appearance  of  more  than  one  figure - -  189

Auditory - 152,  160,  236,  237,  241,  242,
264,  276,  292,  293,  295,  342,

352,  390,  395,  398
Collective - - - 343,  393,  411
„  „  „ Induced .... 41-42,  44

Cases  of ----- -  152-353

„  ,,  ,, Brief  description  of - - -  426-427

„  ,, Mode  of  development -----  89

„  ,, Psychological  identity  of,  \^dth  dreams  and

"  borderland  "  cases ....  27-29

„  ,, Rareness  of  veridical  cases  of - - -  151

„  ,, Repetition  after  an  interval  - - - -  248

„  Telepathic,  Meagreness  in  the  content  of,  as

compared  vidth.  dreams . - - -  28-29

„  „ Visions  29  (footnote)

Ham,  J.,  Evidence  contributed  by ------ -  207

Hanson,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  296

3a


'^26  Index  to  Vol.  XXXIII.


[parts


Hasted,  Rev.  H.,  Phantasms  of  • . .  .387

•Hauberrisser,  Dr. Georg,  Evidence  contributed  in Dr.  Schrenck-

Notzing's  investigation  of  "  Eva  C."  667

Head,  Miss  Alice  L.,  Case  communicated  by  278

"  Henderson,"  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  '  278

Hicks,  Alfred,  Case  contributed  by - -  335

Highett,  Miss  A.,' Cases  contributed  by - - . .  168,175-176

Hill,  J.  Arthur,  Case  collected  by  -120

Hillman,  R.  Mowat,  Evidence  contributed  158

Hippocrates,  Teaching  of - -  - 4,  5  6  20

Hodgson,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  '  -'  '  351

Hodgson,  Richard,  LL.D.,  Cases  collected  by -  63-70,  76-77,  78,  82,

97,  98,  142,  148,  216,  231,  235,' 260,  264,  282,'

310,  321.  .322,  351,  356,  357,  358,  379,  417

Hoi  born.  Rev.  A.,  Cases  commurucated  by  378

Holbrook,  Dr.  M.  L.,  Cases  communicated  by  -  -  -  .  358,  417
"Holland,"  Mrs.,  Scripts  of - - - 439-441,  452,  468  (footnote)

Holt,  Miss  Mary  D.,  Evidence  contributed  by  I35

Hooper,  Sydney  E.,  An  Experimental  Study  of  the  Appreciation  of  Time

by  So7nnariibules  g9j

Hope,  Mrs.  R.  H.,  Case  contributed  by  298

Hutchinson,  Dr.  Donald,  Case  contributed  by  101

Hypnotic  phenomena,  compared  with  mediumistic  trance  phenomena  -  13,  14

"  j> and  dissociation  430

Hypnotisation  at  a  distance.  Case  of -  77-78

Hysteria  and  dissociation  43Q
Hysterical  somnambulism,  compared  with  mediumistic  trance  pheno-

'"•^"^  13,14

I.

Ingelow. The  High  Tide  on  the  Coast  of  Lincolnshire,  Script  reference

*°  489

Introductory  Lectures  on  Psycho- Analysis,  by  Freud,  Review  of  - -  432


J.

Janet,  Pierre g

Johnston,  Dr.  George,  Case  contributed  by  344

"  Jones,"  Miss  Anne,  Case  contributed  by.  Reference  to 100,  317,  330,  352

Jones,  Mrs.  S.,  Case  contributed  by  '  . '  . '  249

Jones,  Rev.  John,  Case  contributed  by  375

Jones,  Sir  Lawrence,  Cases  contributed  by  3O7  349

Jordan-Smith,  B.,  Case  communicated  by  '  315

Joslyn,  J.  R.,  Case  contributed  by  4I8

Jumieges,  Abbey  of.  Case  of  Auditory  hallucination  in  -  -  .  393
Jung,  C.  G.,  Work  of  43^


Lxxxv.-Lxxxviii.] Index  to  Vol.  XXXIII.


727


K.

Keats,  Script  references  to  - - - - - - - - 484,  487

■"  King,"  Mrs.,  Automatic  Scripts  of —

Character  of  the  automatism,  and  circumstances  in  which  it

started 441-443

Correspondence  with  the  Scripts  of  other  Automatists.  See
Forecasts  in  Scripts  Concerning  the  War.

Kingston,  Dr.  H.  D.  R.,  Case  communicated  by  367

KipUng,  Script  reference  to  467
Kitchener,  F.  E.,  Case  collected  by - - - - - - -  126

Kitching,  Miss  E.  H.,  Case  contributed  by  142

Klado,  Miss  M.,  Case  confirmed  by - -  37

Knight,  Mrs.  Henrietta,  Case  contributed  by  -  -  -  -  -  235
Krekel,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  264

L.

L.,  Miss  M.,  Evidence  contributed  by  - - - - - - -  41

L.,  Mrs.,  Experiments  with,  on  the  appreciation  of  Time  by  Som-

nambules - - -  623,  627-628,  639-655,  656-661,  662,  664

Lang,  Andrew,  Cases  contributed  by - - -  40,48,308,340,342,411
Larkin,  J.  J.,  Case  contributed  by - - - - - - -  152

Latham,  Dr.  H.,  Evidence  contributed  by - - - - -  192-193

Lauritzen,  Severin,  Case  communicated  by  - - - - - -  293

"  Lawson,"  C.  W.,  Case  contributed  by ----- -  268

Lee,  Rev.  A.  H.  E.,  Case  collected  by  - - - - - - -  45

Lee,  Mrs.  M.  Holland,  Case  contributed  by  - - - - - -  78

Leir-Carleton,  The  Hon.  Mi's.,  Case  contributed  by - - - -  131

Leitrim,  Countess  of,  Case  contributed  by - - - - - -  135

Leonard,  Mrs.,  Reference  to  the  mediumship  of  - - - - 9,  291

Lewds,  Rev.  W.  M.,  Case  contributed  by ----- -  305

Liebeault,  Reference  to -------- -  6

Lodge,  Sir  0.,  Cases  commimicated  by  -  -  -  91,119,152,232,260
Logue,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by -------  57

Longfellow,  Script  reference  to  590

Lost  Objects,  Finding  of  through  dreams,  Cases  of - - - -  70-73

Luke,  Miss,  Cases  contributed  by -------  321

Lyttelton,  The  Hon.  Mrs.  Alfred. See  "  King,"  Mrs.

M.

M.,  E.,  Case  contributed  by  104

Mac  Scripts,  The 439-441,  446,  520

Macdonald,  Rev.  J.  A.,  Case  communicated  by  166

Macklin,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by - - - - - - -  199


728


Index  to  Vol.  XXXIII.


[parts


MacLellan,  Miss  Alice,  Report  of  various  psychical  experiences,  refer-
ences to  - - 103-104,  128

McCaskill,  Miss  A.,  Case  contributed  by  371

McCuUoch,  T.  F.,  Case  contributed  by ------  260

M'Dougall,  Dr.  Wm.  2,  18-19

M'Connel,  D.  R.,  E\idence  contributed  by  - - - - -  152-155

M'Connel,  Dr.  H.  W.,  Cases  collected  by  147,  148

Maddison,  George,  Case  contributed  by ----- -  390

Maeder,  A.  E.,  Work  of  431

Mallou,  Miss  L.  A.,  Case  confirmed  by ------  84

Malpress,  Mrs.,  Evidence  contributed  by ----- -  191

Mann,  Mi's.,  Case  contributed  by  - - - - ' - - - -  196

Marldiam,  Dr.  R.  G.,  Case  contributed  by - - - - - -  320

Marsh,  E.  H.,  "  Marmontel  "  Incident,  reference  to - - - -  440

Mattiesen,  Dr.  Emil,  Case  communicated  by - - - - -  329

Medical  pirofession  and  Psychical  Research  ------  19-20

Medical  Psychology  and  Psychical  Research,  by  Dr.  T.  W.  Mitchell -  673
Medicine,  Occultism  and  Psychical  Research,  Relations  between.  See

Dr.  Mitchell's  Presidential  Address.
Mediumistic  trance  and  the  supernormal  acquisition  of  knowledge -  8-18
Discussion  on  the  source  of  such  knowledge  and  the

ways  in  which  it  is  acquired - - - -  10-13

,,  „ Medical  psychology  as  thro\ving  light  on - -  13-18

Mesmer,  References  to  6,  7,  9

Michell,  J.  J.,  and  Mrs.,  Evidence  contributed  by  -  -  -  .  166
Millner,  Mi-,  and  Mrs.  Le  Roy,  Case  confirmed  by - - 282-283,  285

Milton,  Script  references  to 472,  494,  552

Mitchell,  Dr.  T.  W.,  Hypnotic  Experiments  and  researches  of  627,  628,

630,  637,  638-639,  647,  655-656,  659,  662-663,

673-675

,,  Medical  Psychology  and  Psychical  Research  - -  673

„  Presidential  Address  1

,,  The  Psychology  of  Medicine - - - -  430

Morse,  J.  F.,  Case  contributed  by ------ -  235

Motor  Automatism,  Cases  of - - - - - - -  73,  76,  440

See  also  Automatic  Writing.

Motor  Impulses  - - 109,  110,  115

Multiple  Personality. See  Personality.-

Munro,  L.  S.  M.,  Case  contributed  by  339

Murray,  Professor  Gilbert,  Script  reference  to  Essay  by  -  -  -  548
Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  Human  Personality,  Cases  of  phantasms  of  the  Living

published  in 24  (and  footnote  24-25),  29  (footnote),  32,  321,  388
„ References  to - -  137,  208,  214,  235,  236,  312  (footnote),  376,  411


Lxxxv.-Lxxxvni.] Index  to  Vol.  XXXIII.


729


N.

Xelson,  Major  A.,  Case  contributed  bj^
Neuroses,  Problems  of  the  - - -  -
XewaU,  Professor  and  ilrs..  Case  confirmed  by
Xewbolt,  Scrii^t  reference  to - -  -
Newton,  Miss  I.,  Case  collected  by
Nichols,  Mi-s.  E.,  Case  contributed  by  -
Nichols,  W.,  Case  contributed  by
Niederhauser,  MUe.  S.,  Case  confirmed  by  -
Norse  Mythology,  .Script  reference  to  -

0.

O'Grady,  .4  Bog  of  Stars,  .Script  reference  to
On  the  Element  of  Chance  in  Book-Tests
Orchard,  Laurence,  Case  contributed  by
Orr,  A.  W.,  Case  collected  by - -  -
Orr,  jNIiss  Ada,  Case  contributed  by
Osterreich,  T.  K.,  Die  Besessenheit,  by.  Review  of
Ouija  board  -------

Owen,  John  V.,  Case  contributed  by  -


P.

Pagan,  Miss  I.  M.,  Case  contributed  by

 406

 242

"  Parker,  Rev.  T.,"  Case  contributed  by

-  126

Paterson,  Miss  Mary  M.,  Case  contributed  by

 243

Patteson,  Lewis  W.,  Case  confirmed  by

 70'

Pease,  E.  R.,  Case  communicated  hy  -

 242

Pederson,  Rev.  Soren,  Case  contributed  by  -

-  338

Peebles,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by

-  263

Perry,  W.  E.,  Case  contributed  by

-  260

Personal  Control  in  mediumistic  trance

-  13,  14

PersonaUty,  Multiple,  Cases  of  -

435,  436,438-

„ Phenomena  of,  compared

with  those  of  medium-

istic  trance  -

 IS

,, „ Problems  of

 673

Pfirshing,  ]\Irs.,  Case  contributed  by  -

 103

Phantasms  of  the  Living.  An  Examination  and  Analysis  of  Cases  of
Telepathy  between  Living  Persons  printed  in  the  '"Journal"  since
the  publication  of  "  Phantasms  of  the  Living,"  by  Gurney,  Myers
and  Podmore. By  Mi-s.  Henry  Sidg^ack —

Definitions  and  explanations  -  -  -  -  23-30,  31,  39,  151
Period  covered - - - - - - - 23  (footnote)


-  325
431,  433,  434

-  101

-  466

-  190

-  183

98

-  303

-  550


467-468

-  606

-  335
395,  402,  403

-  180

-  434

76

-  263


730


Index  to  Vol.  XXXIII.


[parts


Phantasms  of  the  Living —

Cases  excluded 24-27,  31-32

included  : —

Collective  and  Reciprocal  with  no  evidence  of  Agency  external

to  the  Percipients 354-419

Auditory 392-394

Semi-Reciprocal  and  Reciprocal . . . .  394-419
Similar  and  Simultaneous  Dreams  - - - -  354-360
Visual  Hallucinations,  Recognised  - - - -  378-392
,, Unrecognised - - -  360-378

Experimental  :  Crystal  Visions  31-39

Semi-experimental  :

Agent  experimenting ------  77-89

Pei'cipient  experimenting - - - 39-44,  47-77
Crystal  Visions ------  40-50

Non-externaliscd  Impressions - - - •  63-73

Table-tilting,  etc.  73-77

Visions  not  in  a  crystal -----  50-63
Spontaneous,  in  which  the  Percipient's  Impression  is  not

externalised  90-150

Emotion  transferred  100-104

Idea  from  distant  Agent  104-109

Impressions  of  danger ------  116-123

Menial  Vision  of  complicated  event - - -  148-150

Motor  Impulse  109-116

Pain  transferred -  - -  90-94

Phrases  transferred ------  95-100

Thought  of  Agent  and  his  condition - - -  128-141
True  Impression. Doubtful  agent - - -  142-148
Vague  but  insistent  thought  of  Agent - - -  124-128
Spontaneous,  in  which  the  Percipient's  Impression  is  exter-
nalised as  a  Waking  Hallucination. Also  Dreams  of  the
same  character --------  151

Ambiguous  cases -------  332

Agent  doubtful 344-353

Coinciding  event  insufficiently  marked,  or  time

coincidence  uncertain - - -  333-344
Coincidence  with  ideas  not  connected  with  perciijient.

Unconscious  telepathic  leakage - -  313-331
Coincidence  with  ideas  or  wishes  connected  by  the

Agent  with  the  percipient - - -  287-313
Coincidence  with  illness  or  accident - -  243-286

Accident  to  Agent 271-286

Illness  of  Agent 243-271

Death  Coincidences -----  151-243
Appearance  of  relative  of  dying  person -  231-235


Lxxxv.-Lxxxviii.] Index  to  Vol.  XXXIII.


731


Phantasms  of  the  Living —

Auditory 235-243

Symbolic  experiences  235
Visual  realistic — Uke  a  real  person  in  percijjient's

surroundings - - - . .  152-203
Appearance  not  realistic - - - -  203-213

Visual  Avith  veridical  or  symbolic  adjuncts -  213-231
Telepathy,  Phenomena  of —

Agent  affecting  two  or  more  percipients  in  different  places  176-177
,, Conscious  activity  of,  not  necessary. See  Semi-experi-
mental Cases  :  Percipient  experimenting,
experimenting --------  78-89

,, Special  capacity  in  the,  Evidence  which  suggests - -  176
See  also  Sections  connected  witli  Agent  in  tabulated  list
of  Cases.

Collective  and  Reciprocal  Cases,  Value  of  as  evidence  -  419-420
Deferment  of  latency  in  telepathic  impressions  -  223  (footnote)
LocaUty,  Experiences  suggesting  the  influence  of  -  -  182-183
Percipiency —

Capacity  for  receiving  impressions  not  always  available  -  176

Collective 275-276

Percipient  the  active  party ------  39-77

Two  or  more  percipients  affected  in  different  places  by

the  same  Agent  167-177

Process  of  telepathic  communication,  True  type  of - -  419
,, regarded  as  transfusion  of  minds,  as  compared  with

transmission  of  thought  -  -  .  .  419-423
Reciprocal  and  Collective  Cases,  Value  of  as  evidence  -  419-420
True  type  of  telepathic  communication.  Two  cases  suggesting

the  415-419

Phantasms  of  the  Living,  by  Gurney,  Myers  and  Podmore  23-24,  27-28,

39,  89,  90,  91,  94,  96,  189,  212,  240,  275,  323,  361  (footnote).  362,  419
Phillips,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by ----- -  179-180

Piddington,  J.  G.,  Cases  collected  by 58-63,  144

,, Forecasts  in  Scripts  concerning  the  War - . . .  439
Piper,  Mrs.,  Mediumship  of  - - - - - - - - -  9,  435

Podmore,  Frank,  "  Apparitions  and  Thought-Transference,"  Refer-
ence to  cases  published  in - - -  24  (and  footnote  24-25)
Pollard,  Miss  Sarah,  Case  confirmed  by ----- -  400

PoUey,  F.  G.,  Evidence  contributed  by - - - - - -  55-56

Polley,  John,  Case  contributed  by -------  54

Pool,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by,  reference  to - - - - -  231

Pope,  Messiah,  Script  reference  to ------ -  563

Porter,  Mrs.  K.  B.,  Case  contributed  by  282

Dr.  W.  G.,  Case  confirmed  by 284,  285

Possession,  The  phenomena  of ------- -  434


732  Index  to  Vol.  XXXIII.  '  [parts

Potyguara,  T.,  Evidence  contributed  by ----- -  162

Poupard,  Miss  G.,  Case  contributed  by - - - - - -  319

Powles,  L.  C,  Cases  contributed  by - 50,  84-89

Powles,  Mrs.  L.  C,  Evidence  contributed  by  51

Presidential  Address,  by  Dr.  T.  W.  Mitchell  .  .  .  .  .  1
Proceedings,  Reference  to  cases  of  Phantasms  of  the  Living  published

in  _ . 24  (and  footnote  24-25)

Psychical  Research  and  Medical  Psychology  -  -  -  6,  11,  16-18,  673
On  the  attitude  of  medical  men  to  .  .  .  18-20
on  the  work  of  the  Society  for - 18,  19,  20,  435-436

Psycho-analysis 430-431,  432

,,  as  a  method  of  investigation  in  psychical  research -  17-18

Psycho-Analysis,  Introductory  Lectures  on.  Review  of - - - -  432

Psychology  of  Medicine,  Review  of ------ -  430

Psychometry,  Experiments  in - - - -  ■ - - - 437,  438

Psychopathology  of  Everyday  Life -------  43.3

Purdon,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by ------ -  292

R.

R.,  Miss,  Case  contributed  by - - - - - - - -  231

R.,  T.,  Case  confirmed  by -------- -  380

Raleigh,  Miss  K.,  Case  collected  by  271

Raper,  R.  W.,  Case  communicated  by ------  208

Rayleigh,  The  Dowager  Lady,  Case  communicated  by - - -  135
Reeves,  Edward,  Evidence  contributed  by  - - - - -  207-208

Rendall,  Vernon  H.,  Case  contributed  by ----- -  109

Repression  430

Reviews 430,  432,  434,  435,  437,  673

Richet,  Professor  Charles,  Cases  contributed  by  - - - - 137,  262

Ridley,  J.  H.  Wilkie,  Case  contributed  by  -  376

Rieken,  Frau,  Case  contributed  by ------ -  160

Rix,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Herbert,  Case  contributed  by  - - - - -  242

Robinson,  E.  E.,  Case  contributed  by  - - - - - - - .  91

Robinson,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  ------ -  149

Robson,  Miss  M.,  Case  contributed  by  - - - - - - -  309

"  Rooke,"  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  -------  99

Rose,  F.  W.,  Case  contributed  by ------ -  86-88

Ruskin,  Script  references  to - 458,  488,  491,  496,  497,  516,  521,

523-527,  534,  572-576

Russell,  Mrs.  E.  S.,  Case  contributed  by  133

s.  ■

S.,  Mrs.,  A  Diary  of  Telepathic  Impressions  81

Salis,  Geoffrey,  Evidence  contributed  by ----- -  43-44

Salis,  Mrs.,  Cases  contributed  by  41,  43


Lxxxv.-Lxxxviii.] Index  to  Vol.  XXXIII.


733


Salter,  Mrs.  W.  H.,  Automatic  Scripts  of  -  439-441,  445  (footnote)
446,  448,  4^9-450,  452-453,  456,  459,  463  (footnote),  467
(footnote),  468-469  (footnote),  473  (footnote),  474  (foot-
note),  478  (footnote).  483,  484.  503-504,  506,  507,  511
(footnote),  513-514,  519-520,  522,  52c',  529,  530,  531,
532,  533,  535,  537,  547,  548  (footnote),  550-551,  552,  560-

562,  563,  564,  571-573.  580,  581,  585-590,  595,  596-597
„ Cases  contributed  by ------- 71-76,  317

Saunders,  James,  Case  contributed  by 295,  297

Sch.,  Willie,  Reference  to  the  mediumship  of - - - - 665,  666-

Schiller,  Dr.  F.  C.  S.,  Case  collected  by ----- -  387

„ Reviews  :

Die  Besessenheit  434

Einfuhrung  in  den  OH-idtisinus  und  Siyiritisiiius - -  435
Medical  Psychology  and  Psychical  Research - - -  673
JJeher  Telepathie  und  HeUsehen,  experimentell-theoretische

Untersuchungen -------  437

Schrenck-Notzing,  Dr.  Freiherr  von,  Reply  to  criticisms  on  his  in-
vestigation of  "  Eva  C."  665

Telepathic  experiments  by  82

Scott,  Script  reference  to  - - - -  562

Scott,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  205

Script  References  and  Reminiscences —

A.  E. A  Woman's  Voice  461

Aeschylus,  Eumenides  ------- 531-532,  564

Aristophanes,  Birds  557

A  nold.  Balder  Dead -  462,  464

„ Empedocles  on  Etna  - -  446

Aurelius,  Meditations  - -  541-542

Blake,  Descriptive  Catalogve -------  510

„ Preface  to  Milton - - -  546

Browning,  Prospice -------- 492,  500

Browning,  Mrs.,  Aurora  Leigh  - -  593

Campbell,  Hoheyilinden 473-474  (footnote)

,, LochieVs  Warning -------  487

,, Ye  Mariners  of  England ------  562

Chaucer,  Truth  -  488

QloMgh,  Say  not  the  Struggle  -  -  -  -  -  461,463,468-469
Dante,  Paradiso  ---------  567-576

Dryden,  Alexander's  Feast - 467  (footnote)

,, On  the  Happy  Restoration  551

Elhot,  Jane,  A  Lament  for  Flodden ------  472

Euripides,  Bacchae ---------  494

Fairy  Shij),  The - - - -  448

Gray,  Elegy  in  a  Country  Churchyard ------  446

Hymns -----------  488


734


Index  to  Vol.  XXXIII.


[parts


Script  References  and  Reminiscences —


T n  (Tf»  1  r\ \ \,' v^/) H  i nh 1  i n P  nyi  i h p  (  nn  Qf  rii T .i -ti /Til i}  an i 'vd
iiigCiu  vv  J  J.  it<^  ixiyit  _i  iut;  L/it  fc/te  \^unov  uj  j^t  /cvui'/ioftit

- - -  4rOJ

Tv  (i£i'i"a T ,rf ripllc Ttn 'iti p  QHYt  c IviPim  -

- - -  '*o'±

T  ,r\T\  fTTf^  1 1  r^TiT" h  P Ivf  1 11 Q  ni  %-rf\fi  nfi  yi  ft  qI  ninJ}  i
ijuxi^icinj  vv ,  J.  /to  ±y±  ihijo  UJ  \jruu.'  yt  i/tii  oiuwiy

IVli  1  ■^TiTi /\  f  n  Qnlp m Ji/iit  <i'i  fl"

Murray,  Introductory  Essay  to  Euripides

-  548

Newbolt,  Drake  s  Drmn - - - _  _

-  466

Norse  Mythology  -------

-  550

O'Grady,  ^  Bog  of  Stars  -----

467-468

Pope,  Messiah  -------

-  563

Ruskin,  i^ors  Clavigera - - _ .  .

-  458

ilfocZer/i  Painters - - - .  488,  496,  497,  523-527,  534

Sesame  and  Lilies  -----

-  515

Unto  this  Last  ------

491,  521,  572-576

Scott,  Marmion  -------

-  562

Scriptures  :  Old  Testament - 464,  468,  470,  473,  474,  477,  478,

479,  480,  484,  488,  489,  491,  493,
494,  496,  497,  498,  528,  537,  538,


553,  555,  557,  560,  562,  563,  582
New  Testament  - 464,  465,  469,  471,  472,  474,  478,
479,  481,  493,  494,  497,  498,  507,
509,  511,  512,  514,  521,  530,  533,
534,  535,  538,  541,  555,  558,  561,


590,  592,  593

Shakespeare,  Henry  V.  - - - - - - - - 465,  508

Macbeth  - - - -  494

Merchant  of  Venice 530,  531,  533

,, Romeo  and  Juliet -------  463

Shelley,  Hellas 548-549  (footnote)

Swift,  Battle  of  the  Books  473

Swinburne,  Erectheus ---------  546

Tennyson,  In  Memoriam, - - - 462,  479,  506,  507,  528,  529
,, Lotus  Eaters,  The .......  491

„ Merlin  and  the  Gleam 479,  542

„ Ode  on  the  Death  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington  - - -  445
,, Victor  Hugo ........  541

,, Voyage  of  Maeldune,  The ......  565

Virgil,  Aeneid 557,  558,  571

„ Fourth  Eclogue  551

Wordsworth,  Solitary  Reaper ...... 483,  507

,, Three  Years  she  Grew ......  488

Scriptures,  Script  references  to. See  above,  Script  References.

Selous,  Edmund,  Experiments  in  telepathy  by,  Reference  to - -  31


Lxxxv.-Lxxxviii.] hidex  to  Vol.  XXXIII.


735


Sesame  and  Lillies,  Cross-Correspondence,  reference  to  -  .  .  515
Shakespeare,  Script  references  to - -  463,  465,  494,  508,  530,  531,  533

Sharpe,  J.  W.,  Telepathic  Impression  50-53

Shelley,  Script  references  to . . . - . 548-549  (footnote)
Shield,  Mrs.,  Cases  contributed  by - - - - - - 31,  387

Shi'ubsole,  W.  H.,  Case  contributed  by ------  279

Sidgwick,  Mrs.  Henry —

Evidence  collected 178,  197,  368-370,  388

Phantasms  of  the  Living. An  Examination  and  Analysis  of  Cases

of  Telepathy  printed  in  the  Journal -----  23
Question  put  in  connexion  with  Mrs.  King's  script - 482,  484,  508
Standard  in  examination  of  Mrs.  Leonard's  Book-Tests  as  com-
pared with  Colonel  Baddeley's  in  the  pseudo  book-tests  607-

608,  610,  612,  613

Silberer,  H.,  Work  of  - - -  431

Silbert,  Frau,  Reference  to  the  mediumship  of - - - - -  668

Silva,  Dr.  C.  H.  da,  Case  contributed  by  219

Sims,  George  R.,  Case  contributed  by,  reference  to - - - -  235

Singh,  Prince  Victor  Duleep,  Case  contributed  by - - - -  203

Smith,  H.  Arthur,  Case  communicated  by - - - - - -  335

Society  for  Psychical  Research,  Work  of  the - - 18,  19,  20,  435-436
Somnamhules,  Appreciation  of  time  by  - - - - - - -  621

Somnambulism,  Hyfinotic  and  hysterical,  as  throwing  light  on  medium-

istic  trance  phenomena - - - - - - - -13,  14

Spearman,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  - - - - - -  168-171

Spears,  Miss  Elsie,  Case  contributed  by ----- -  236

Spruit,  Miss  Lily,  Case  contributed  by ------  285

Steele,  Miss  Emma,  Case  contributed  by - - - - - 398,  420

Stratton,  F.  J.  M.,  Cases  collected  by  - - _ ifji,  196,  319,  320

Sturge,  Miss  E.,  Case  communicated  by  213

Supernormal  acquisition  of  knowledge  in  mediumistic  trance  and  other

dissociated  states - - - - - - - - -  9-18

Swdft,  Script  reference  to - - -  473

Swinburne,  Script  reference  to ------- -  546

T.

T.,  Miss  S.,  Experiments  in  crystal  vision ------  35-39

T.,  ]\Irs.  S.,  Case  contributed  by  - - -  57

Table-tilting  - 73,  76.  561-562,  564

Taylor,  Miss  E.  M.,  Crystal  visions  41-44

Taylor,  Colonel  G.  Le  M.,  Case  communicated  by - . _ _  292

Telepathy,  Experimental 437,  438

,, in  relation  to  the  supernormal  acquisition  of  knowledge
exhibited  in  mediumistic  and  other  trance  states  10,

11,  12,  14-16


736


Index  to  Vol.  XXXIII.


[parts


Telepathy,  Need  of  more  experimental  evidence  on - 10,  26,  28,

89,  423,  438

See  also  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  by  Mrs.  Henry
Sidgwick.

Tennyson,  Script  references  to - 445,  462,  479,  491,  506,  507,  528,

529,  541,  542,  565


Thelemann,  Miss  M.,  Case  contributed  by 212

Thomas,  Miss  Ethel,  Case  contributed  by - 315

Thompson,  Mrs.  E.,  Case  communicated  by 351

Time,  Appreciation  of,  by  Somnambules,  An  Experimental  Study  -  -  621
Tischner,  Dr.  R.,  Einf  ukrung  in  den  OkJcultismus  imd  Spiritismus,  by.

Review  of 435

,, Ueber  Telepathie  itnd  Hellsehen,  experinientell-theoretische  Unter-

snchungen ----------  437

Trance  Phenomena —

Compared  -with  the  phenomena  of  hypnosis,  hysterical  somnam-
bulism, and  multiple  personality 13-17

"  Control,"  On  the  12-13,14

Spirit  hypothesis - - - - - - - - -  12-13

Treloar,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by ------ -  265

Tyrrell,  G.  N.,  Case  communicated  by ------  268

U.

U.,  Frau  M.,  Case  contributed  by - - - - - -  -110

Ueber  Telepathie  und  Hellsehen,  experimentell-theoretische  Untersuch-

ungen.  Review  of ---------  437

Unconscious,  Theories  of  the - -  431

V.

Van  Helmont,  References  to - - - - - - - - 6,  7

Vavin,  Madame,  Case  contributed  by  -  262

Verrall,  Miss  H.  de  G. -See  Salter,  Mrs.  W.  H.

Verrall,  Mrs.,  Automatic  Scripts  of  439-441,  445  (footnote),  449-450,
456,  458,  459,  463,  468-469  (footnote),  478  (foot-
note), 483,  490,  493,  507,  508-509,  521,  529,  532
(footnote),  540-548,  556-559,  562-564,  567  (foot-


note), 581,  583-584,  691,  595,  596-597
„ Cases  contributed  and  evidence  collected  by  - 258-259,  317

Virgil,  Script  references  to 551,  557,  558,  571

Visions, - 29  (footnote),  50,  53,  54,  57,  58,  148,  213,  243,  248,  278,  339

W.

Wait,  Marshall,  Case  communicated  by ----- -  282

Wales,  Hubei't,  Case  collected  by -------  167

„  Report  on  Experiments  in  Telepathy  - - 40  (footnote)


Lxxxv.-Lxxxviii.] Index  to  Vol.  XXXIII.  737

Walker,  Miss  Agnes  E.,  Case  contributed  by - - - - 144,  237

Walker,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  124

War  references  and  forecasts  in  Scripts  439

Ward,  Captain  F.,  Case  confirmed  by  -  -  -  -  395,402,403,420
Ward,  The  Hon.  Kathleen,  Cases  contributed  by  - - - - 255,  256

Warner,  Mr.,  Case  contributed  by  ^2

Watson,  Mrs.,  Case  contributed  by  -  173

Westminster  Cathedral  Chronicle,  Case  recorded  in - - - -  287

White,  E.,  Case  contributed  by  ^37

Whiting,  Miss  L.,  Case  communicated  by ----- "  216

Wiliiinson,  Miss  M.  S.,  Case  contributed  by  353

Willett,  Mrs.,  Case  communicated  by  - - - - - - -  180

"  Willett,"  Mrs.,  Automatio  Scripts  of  -  439-441,  453,  456,  459,
467  (footnote),  468  (footnote),  474  (footnote),  481-
482  (footnote),  508,  510,  511,  512,  514,  520,  522-

523,  542,  547,  580,  581-583,  591-595,  596-597

Williams,  John  A.  A.,  Case  contributed  by  119

Williams,  Miss  M.  H.,  Case  contributed  by  - - - - - -  235

Williams,  S.  P.,  Case  contributed  by - - - - - - -  352

Wilhams,  Mi-,  and  Mi-s.  Thornton,  Cases  contributed  by  -  -  92,  241
"  Wilson,  Miss  A.  E."  (Mrs.  Markham),  Case  confirmed  by  - - -  320

Wilson,  D.  H.,  Case  contributed  by  '^0-'^3

Wilson,  Mrs.  J.  H.,  Case  collected  by,  Eeference  to  -  -  48  (footnote)
Wilson,  Mrs.  Stuart,  Scripts  of  -  -  439-441,  463  (footnote),  536,  537,  538
Wiltse,  Dr.  A.  S.,  Experiments  in  telepathy  by,  reference  to - -  31-32

Woollacott,  Mrs.,  Case  communicated  by  319

Wordsworth,  Script  references  to  483,  488,  507

Y.

Young,  J.  F.,  Cases  contributed  by - - - - 116,  128-131,  242

Z.
